잡지명	개벽 제26호
발행일	1922년 08월 01일
기사제목	獨逸地方의 二週間 (Two Weeks in the German Regions)
필자	朴勝喆
기사형태	기행문 (Travelogue)

Two Weeks in the German Regions
						By Pak Sŭngch'ŏl

A Stroll Along the Banks of the Rhine River

In Germany, on the 13th, one of the three famously cold "Ice Saints" days in May, I left Potsdam to visit some ten places. The travelling party consisted only of Mr. Kim Chunyŏn and myself.
From morning on this day, it rained, and the weather, true to its reputation (名不虛傳), was a bit cool. We naturally took the 3rd class train. As there were no seats, we stood in the aisle for over an hour before barely managing to find seats. Well past 5 PM, we arrived at a place called Goettingen (꾀틘겐). There are three Korean students here, and it's a university town. This university is the alma mater of Bismarck (삐스막), the Iron Chancellor of the former German Empire, and with 4,000 students, it makes up one-tenth of the total population of 40,000. It seemed as though the entire city streets were filled only with university students. Perhaps because the city was founded long ago, it lacked a fresh feeling, was untidy (不整齊), and relatively unclean (不潔). After spending two nights here, we headed for Cologne (쾨른). On the way, we stopped for lunch (點心) in a place called Cassel (카셀), famous for its good scenery and where an imperial detached palace (離宮) is located. There aren't many historical sites (古蹟) or special things to see here, but the city streets were orderly like Berlin (伯林).
Around 5 PM that day, we arrived at the Cologne in question. The first thing that surprised me was the huge iron bridge spanning the Rhine River (라인江). Trains, trams, people, and horses all travelled together on it. This place was originally a Roman colony and the territory of a Bishop (僧正). The name Cologne, as it's called now, is said to share the same origin as the English word "colony." The population of this city is 670,000, making it the third largest city in all of Germany and second only to Berlin within Prussia (普魯西國), they say. The only university is a commercial college, but there are three museums. Among them, <41> the art museum displayed Western and Japanese items in roughly equal halves (切半 切半), and in one room, Japanese woodblock prints were being copied (謄寫). Anyone arriving at the train station in Cologne will first notice the cathedral soaring high into the sky (中天). This cathedral is Gothic (꼬틱) style. Originally, a small church stood on the site, but reconstruction began in 1248 AD and was completed in 1880. The time taken was over 630 years, the construction cost (役費) was 50 million Goldmarks (金馬克), the tower height is 157 meters, and the area is 6,166 square meters. Its interior facilities (設備) are identical to the Notre Dame (노트담) Cathedral in Paris (巴里), with only a difference (差) in size. This cathedral is said to be the foremost among those in Europe (歐羅巴). After eating supper, we strolled along the banks (江畔) of the Rhine and walked across the iron bridge that Germany reportedly completed in two years during the war. Its total length is 260 kan (間, approx. 473m), and the span over the water is 150 kan (approx. 273m). Of course, countless iron bridges are built across the Rhine. Speaking of the city streets, they were entirely orderly, and I saw large cafés here that I hadn't seen in Berlin. The ceilings and four walls were brilliantly (燦然) golden, and electric lights shone dazzlingly (輝煌). This place has not only been famous as a commercial city since ancient times, but it is now part of the Rhineland (라인州) administered by the Allied Powers (聯合國). Therefore, the British Army (英軍) headquarters is located here, and British soldiers in yellow uniforms constantly come and go on the streets. Of all the commercial centers I've seen along the way since Shanghai (上海), this place seemed the most orderly and settled (安頓).

The Rhine River, Long Yearned For

The next day, we took a tram to Bonn (뽄). The tram running between Cologne and Bonn was like the Keihin Electric Railway (京濱電車) in Tokyo (東京). A 40-minute ride along the verdant (錄陰) banks of the Rhine brings you to Bonn. Along the way, you see chairs set up on the riverbank, and young men and women strolling hand-in-hand (携手散步), indulging (耽) in the river scenery, walking then sitting, sitting then walking, seeming like people from an "Age of Poetry." Bonn is a small city on the banks of the Rhine, and all its facilities are quite well-organized. There is also a university here; in the former German Empire era, many imperial family members attended, and both Wilhelm II (뷜헬름 2世) and the Crown Prince were alumni. Another famous thing is that it is the birthplace of the musician Beethoven (뻬토판스). From here onwards, it is the domain of the French Army (佛軍). Wherever you go, green uniforms stride confidently (大濶步), and dark-faced African soldiers and Annamese (安南) soldiers who followed the French Army jostle about arrogantly (억개짓).
The following morning (翌朝), we decided to take a boat to a place called Mainz (마인쓰). They said if we boarded at 10 AM, we would arrive around 9 PM. At the wharf (埠頭), there were many <42> passengers waiting for the boat. The Rhine River is navigable by decent-sized steamships from its uppermost reaches to its lowest point. Therefore, transport ships, and especially recently, excursion boats, are constantly connected. Switzerland (瑞西), where the Rhine originates, is said to be planning to open a port recently. For this country to have a port on this Rhine River is truly a rare (稀貴) thing. Switzerland is a country on the European continent with absolutely no connection to the ocean. However, seeing how frequent (頻煩) the traffic on the Rhine is, the idea of establishing a port on the upper Rhine and having Swiss steamships reach the ocean seems to have some logic.
Even when we look at newspapers and magazines published in our home country, we can see how much young men and women yearn for (憧憬) the Rhine River and express it in poetry or writing. Not only that, but people from Western nations (歐米列國) also greatly desire to see it once. The British (英國) poet Longfellow (롱펠로우) praised (讚美) the Rhine, saying (가르되) that the pride of the German people is this noble Rhine River, and that among all the beautiful rivers on this beautiful earth, there is none as beautiful as this. Of course, the Rhine is not only world-renowned for its beautiful scenery, but it also holds the most important position for Germany itself (自軆), like the yolk of an egg. The cradle (發祥地) of German culture is centered here, the hub of German industrial development is also centered here, and the power of the Rhine was indispensable in realizing the declaration of "From the rock to the sea" by the former German Emperor Wilhelm II. Not only is it so important to Germany itself, but the European powers, realizing its utmost importance in a political sense, continuously pay attention (着目不已) to this region.
Traveling by boat on the Rhine, because ships can easily enter and exit from the uppermost to the lowermost reaches, the water surface seems covered with ships (恰然히 水面은 船舶으로 업힌 것 가트며), and prosperous-looking riverside villages stand close together (櫛比) on both banks, while trains constantly come and go. Also, the vineyards, known as a sight along the Rhine banks, are there. They say the best time for sightseeing is autumn when the grapes ripen and are harvested. At that time, the mountain slopes are dotted with grape pickers, and the grape-harvesting songs are worth hearing. Besides that, the most prominent (有表) sights are the numerous ancient castles with histories (由來) on the mountaintops. Around 4 PM, dark clouds covered the blue sky, and a shower came down. Of course, the boat had rain protection, so looking outside, the scenery was truly indescribable (形言할 수 업나이다). I had seen such things depicted in paintings, but seeing the actual scene today – rain encountered on the river and rainy scenes of riverside villages – was truly delightful (질겁더이다). After the rain stopped, we came below the Lorelei (로레라이), the most widely known spot along the Rhine to people worldwide, which especially became a focal point <43> yearned for (憧憬不已) by poets and writers through the introduction of the poet Heine (하이네), who gladly used it as material for his own poems and writings. Generally, the course of the Rhine River is extremely long (長遠). It's a river that starts in Switzerland, passes through (一貫) southern Germany to northern Germany, goes through the Netherlands, and enters the sea, but its current is quite swift, and moreover, the water is muddy (濁水). This is the Rhine's drawback. How much more excitement (興) would it add if it were clear water (淸水) like the Taedong River (大同江) in P'yŏngyang (平壤) or the Han River (漢江) in Kyŏngsŏng (京城)? I lamented (恨歎) this. The Rhine's water, being so swift and muddy, becomes even more extreme below the Lorelei. It turns into fearsome rapids. Why is the Lorelei famous? I will write down its legend.

The Legend of the Lorelei

I don't know when the story began, but it's said that when merchant ships passed below the Lorelei, they would generally be wrecked. Why was that? Because the Lorelei is a sheer cliff, and right below it are rapids. On that cliff, a beautiful maiden (處女) stands and sings sweetly with a lovely voice (美音), they say. Then the sailors, losing their senses to her beautiful face (花容) and lovely voice, become careless and end up wrecking their ships. Merchant ships traveling the Rhine all try to be cautious of the Lorelei, but once they come here, they inevitably succumb, it's said. Hearing this, the son of a certain count took a boat and went right below it. Indeed, living up to its reputation (名不虛實), a lovely lady appeared and sang with a clear, elegant voice. This count's son intended only to see the lady and listen to her song, being very careful, but it was so wonderful that he lost his wits and also wrecked his ship, becoming a water spirit (水魄). Hearing this urgent report, the count became furious and ordered his soldiers to capture the maiden. As soon as the order was given, the soldiers went to the Lorelei and surrounded the area. At that moment, the maiden recited some incantation to the water spirit (水伯), and the count's son emerged from the water riding a white horse, they say. Thinking about this legend, first, it suggests that beautiful women are abundant in various places along the Rhine, and second, that the Rhine's water flows swiftly. Besides these two points, the things to consider are the water spirit (水伯) and the white horse; this seems to be a point consistent with our ancient people.
In ancient Korean history (朝鮮古史), it is said that when the allied forces of Silla (新羅) and Tang (唐) fought against Paekche (百濟), they threw a white horse into the Ungjin River (熊津江, present-day Kŭm River) as an offering (祭) to the water spirit (水伯).
Passing the Lorelei and going a little further, there is a small island in the river, and on that island stands a small two-story pavilion. This was formerly a place where taxes were collected from ships passing through this river, they say. In my opinion, the entire scenery of the Rhine is like a single scroll painting (畵幅). <44> No matter how skilled a master painter of landscapes might be, it would be a difficult task (難事) to create such a masterpiece scroll, placing trees where trees should be, letting the stream flow where it should flow, putting bridges where bridges should be, placing houses where houses should be, and drawing mountains and fields where mountains and fields ought to be. Anyone, during the spring or autumn seasons, should try taking an excursion boat along the Rhine instead of the train; you will surely feel the same way I do. Going by train would take the minimum time, and the travel expense (浮費) would be only one-fifth. However, coming to the Rhine and running off by train without taking a boat would be, I believe, the most tasteless journey. Although we boarded at 10 AM and disembarked around 8 PM, I didn't feel the slightest bit weary (실징) and wondered if 10 hours had already passed.
It felt entirely like traveling by boat through a painting. It has been said since old times that Chinese people (中國人) wished, "May I be born in the Koryŏ Kingdom (高麗國), to see Kŭmgangsan (金剛山) once." It wouldn't be a reckless remark (妄言) to say that Westerners had the thought, "May I be born in Germany, to see the Rhine River (萊茵江) once." Looking just at the boat we were on, Germans were the smallest group, while foreigners were the majority, and among them, many spoke English and French (佛語). It's likely not just this boat; how many foreigners must there be on the countless excursion boats constantly connecting? Speaking of guidebooks, there are a great many types available in English, French, and German. While enjoying such luxury, I thought that there is indeed a reason why the Rhine River stirs the hearts and souls (心血) of young men and women in our home country. I also thought this: when will I be able to enjoy this kind of outing on the Han River or the Taedong River and reminisce (回想) about the Rhine?

Recalling Akpakgol in Seoul

Around 9 PM, braving a light rain, we found lodging. This place was Wiesbaden (뷔스빠덴), famous for its hot springs and medicinal waters. The night here also seemed very prosperous thanks to the French (佛蘭西) soldiers. A cup of Kaffee for 70 Marks was truly surprising. The city streets were very modern and looked quite refreshing (爽快). The Kurhaus (遊樂舘) had a pond, a fountain, and a garden, making it extremely convenient (至便) for strolling, and inside there were large and small music rooms, conversation rooms, reading rooms, and game rooms. Admission tickets were issued, with different fees (料金) for morning and afternoon even on the same day. The place with the medicinal water was not far from the Kurhaus. This place also charged admission, had a music hall in the garden, and the medicinal water was pooled in a large basin (웅뎅이) indoors. It was, of course, a hot spring. They serve it one glass cup at a time. Perhaps because it's called medicinal water, people wanting to drink just one more cup were just like <45> the water carriers/sellers (물軍) at the water source in Akpakgol, Seoul. Though not as crowded (분비지) as Akpakgol, among them, many women and elderly people had cup after cup, then another cup. This medicinal water tasted like lukewarm water and had a yellowish salty taste. Therefore, they precipitate (沈澱) this water to make white salt. We went to bathe (沐浴) in the hot spring. This place was managed by the city, and the bathing fees ranged from 3 Marks to 55 Marks. Since we had no equipment (諸具), we bought the 55 Mark option. Speaking of the room interior, it was entirely made of marble and fine wood, and the bathing area had two rooms. One was the bathing room, and the other was a room with a bed to lie down and rest for a while after coming out of the bath. They gave three large towels, and everything was extremely conveniently arranged. Washing off the dust after many days felt very refreshing (썩가든 하외다). It's said that hundreds of thousands of foreigners come to this city annually for bathing, and there are dozens of hot spring establishments. On the roofs of the City Hall and the palace here, the French flag flew. That afternoon, we took a tram to Mainz (마인쓰), briefly looked around the museum there, and then took a train to a place called Worms (보름스).

Luther's Bronze Statue, Completed After 13 Years

This place has deep connections with Luther's (루터) Reformation. At that time, Luther strongly denounced the corruption of the Church and its deviation from the will of the Heavenly Father, raising the beacon of religious reform and advocating new doctrines. The German Imperial Diet (獨逸帝國議會) convened here and resolved that if Luther did not renounce his new doctrines, he would be placed outside the national law. However, Luther remained unyielding, so a prince in Wittenberg (뷔텐베륵) took him in, they say. When I visited Wittenberg last March, I saw the church door where the 95 Theses were posted, so now the connection is almost complete. This is an old-fashioned city, and the Diet building from that time still remains, seemingly telling of former days. In the city center stands Luther's bronze statue, said to have taken 13 years to complete. Here too, soldiers in green uniforms swaggered about. The next morning, we went to a place called "Darmstadt."
Darmstadt (따름쉬타트) is the capital of the Grand Duchy of Hessen (헷센). As the Grand Duchy of Hessen was originally one of the smaller states in the federation, its capital is not very large, and from here onwards, foreign troops were not visible. The population is only about 85,000, and the only school is a higher technical school. However, the city's facilities and roads are orderly, there is a park, and everything else adequately fulfills the role of a city. It looked quite pleasing and elegantly simple (雅淡). I thought of P'yŏngyang and Taegu (大邱). The Grand Duchy of Hessen became famous after Grand Duke Ludwig (루드뷕) <46> IV achieved great merit during the Franco-Prussian War (普佛戰爭).

Goethe's Former Residence in the City Center

After lunch that day, we arrived in Frankfurt (푸랑크푸르트), famous as a commercial center. The population here is 480,000, there is a higher commercial school, and the city's facilities and everything else, compared to Berlin, may differ in size but are the same in scale. Of course, not just here, but whichever city you visit, the scale is identical. This point is a characteristic of Germany. This city is famous not only for commerce but also as an industrial center, attracting many foreigners. Furthermore, historically, it is counted as one of the most famous places. When the Holy Roman Empire (神聖로마帝國) was founded, Karl the Great (카-을 大帝, Charlemagne) was crowned here. In modern times, during the Franco-Prussian War, it sided with Austria (墺太利), was defeated, lost its status as a free city, and came under the direct administration of the German Empire. The two inventors of the telegraph and telephone also lived here, and the house where the Poet Sage Goethe (꾀테) was born is also here. Goethe's house is located in a back alley slightly off the city center. Just by looking at the residence, one can tell at a glance how affluent Goethe's life was at that time. Going inside and seeing the appearance of his daily life, looking at the stationery and even the utensils arranged in the kitchen, one can know for sure. Compared to the luxurious lives of modern people, it might seem like nothing, but considering the general standard of the time, it cannot be denied that it was an extremely prosperous life. Going to the attached museum, manuscripts of Goethe and Schiller (쉴러) are displayed, and one can tell that Goethe was not only a Poet Sage but also had considerable knowledge of painting. This is clearly evident from the paintings attributed to Goethe. Other things that catch the eye are that Goethe's parents were handsome and beautiful, and looking at the strands of hair from Goethe and Schiller placed there, Goethe's has a blackish tint, while Schiller's has a yellowish tint. Seeing especially that Goethe's parents possessed beautiful faces, I wondered if there wasn't some connection to Goethe becoming the Poet Sage. The guide here asked us if we had seen the City Hall (議事堂). We said we hadn't, and he replied, "If you weren't going to see the City Hall, you shouldn't have come to Frankfurt." We immediately asked for the location of the City Hall and went there. I had never seen a City Hall of such grand (宏大) scale before. This was where the Holy Roman Emperor stayed, and on both walls of the Emperor's Hall (皇帝室), portraits of successive emperors hung. The adjacent room was where the seven Electors gathered to elect the Emperor, and the room next to that was the current City Council chamber. It was crafted with the utmost skill and extreme splendor (華麗). Not far from there <47> was the hotel where the representatives of Prussia and France gathered on May 10, 1871, to conclude (締結) the peace treaty; it has now become a movie theater (活動寫眞舘). Staying here for half a day, we then went to a place called Wurzburg (뷔르쓰부륵).

Over 20 of Our Brothers, Eating Korean Food and Talking About Korean Affairs

Wurzburg is a city in the south with a population of 100,000 and 5,000 university students, situated next to the Main (마인) River, a tributary of the Rhine. However, the city streets are old-fashioned, and it's quite an unremarkable city. Compared to Wiesbaden or Darmstadt, the difference is like clouds and mud (雲泥之差). There are vineyards along the banks of the Main River as well, small ferry boats are tied up along the riverside, and its width is only about that of the Pujang (芙江) River in Ch'ungch'ŏng Province (忠淸道). Over 20 of our brethren are here; considering there are just over 40 in all of Germany, half are here.
The inn we checked into happened to be a place frequented by many of our brethren, and they even knew some Korean, speaking a few words. Here, I met many fellow students I hadn't seen in years and new ones, playing enjoyably and pleasantly (滋味잇고 愉快하게). Also, through the arrangement (斡旋) of several people, I ate a delicious meal that tasted like real Korean food. Eating Korean food and asking about and hearing (問聞) Korean affairs in Korean was exceptionally pleasant amidst the enjoyment. Here, I experienced the most dreadful heat. When I left, judging by Berlin weather standards, I set out wearing winter clothes with thin underwear, but the weather was so hot that the thermometer outside showed 32 degrees Celsius. I also suffered greatly from the heat, but my companion, Mr. Kim, wore winter clothes both inside and out and suffered even more. After playing well with several brethren for two days, we went to Munich (뮨헨).
Munich is the capital of the Kingdom of Bavaria (빠이에른 王國) and strictly controls (嚴重히 取締) the entry and exit of foreigners. This is based on the viewpoint (見解) that if foreigners bring their expensive foreign currency and stay here where prices are low, it would harm the entire nation. They charge foreigners a residence tax, and two of our fellow students who previously visited Munich said they paid 1,500 Marks. Therefore, from the beginning, we decided to adopt the formality of leaving Munich within 24 hours to avoid running afoul of the regulations. We arrived in Munich around 5 PM. Upon entering the inn, the attendant showed us a police notice printed in English, French, and German. According to the notice, to go to any city in Bavaria, one must report to the police station with a travel permit to get permission, and the tax ranged from 10 Marks to 10,000 Marks. It was a fearsome notice stating that if one stayed over 24 hours <48> and exceeded that period without obtaining permission, the penalty was one year of imprisonment (禁錮). However, we planned to quickly leave Bavaria without going through this procedure.
The following morning, we sought out Mr. S at the St. Otilien (싼트·오틔리엔) monastery, about a two-hour train ride from Munich. We originally didn't know Mr. S, but when leaving Berlin, Mr. L, who is very close to him, entrusted (付託) us with the request to look him up. Also, since that monastery is the headquarters for the ones in Paektong (白洞) inside the East Small Gate (東小門, Hyehwamun) in Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul), and those in Taegu and Wŏnsan, we wanted to visit and see it anyway. Getting off at the station and walking for about 20 minutes brings you to the monastery, and unexpectedly, we met Mr. S right in front of the monastery gate. He greeted us warmly, saying he had been expecting our arrival due to Mr. L's letter, and expressed indescribable joy at meeting fellow countrymen for the first time in a year. After lunch, Mr. S guided us around the monastery. This monastery is situated on a plain, forming its own village without other settlements. There are 300 monks (僧侶) alone, and 100 school students, totaling 400 people. It has mountain forests and fields, and all necessities for life are self-produced and self-sufficient (自作自給). It's said that many Germans become monks due to family troubles. As for its facilities, there are ironworks and carpentry workshops, a tailor shop, a printing house, a bakery, a hospital, a dining hall, a bathhouse, a fire brigade, a power plant, a bookstore (冊肆), and even a museum. This museum housed many Korean and African items, and ours didn't look particularly shabby. Although there is a bathhouse, even the abbot can only bathe four times a year. There is a used clothing market within the precincts (境內); when laypeople come here to become monks, they sell the clothes they wore and put on monk's robes (僧服), which consist of a black robe (黑周衣) tied with a red belt. Next, there was a botanical garden cultivating rare flowers and grasses, and also a ranch. On the ranch, cattle, horses, sheep, pigs, chickens, ducks, and all sorts of livestock were raised using the most advanced methods. Recently, I saw in the Dong-A Ilbo (東亞日報) newspaper that Germans were setting up a ranch in Sep'o (洗浦), [near] P'och'ŏn (抱川), Wŏndo (原道?); they will surely use this method. Therefore, it is extremely important (緊) for people in our home country to learn it, I believe. I had heard that the innate nature (天性) of Germans is organizational, and I had seen glimpses of it myself, but I believe there is nothing as organizational as the management of this monastery. Around 3 PM, we bid farewell to Mr. S and returned to Munich.
We had to leave on the night train tonight, and it was already around 6 PM. It would have been nice to see the museums here, but circumstances forced us to leave. Since this city has long encouraged art, there are said to be many artworks worth seeing, but we couldn't stay too long. So, we decided to take the 9 PM train to Jena (예나) <49>, spent the night on the train, arrived at 7 AM the next morning, checked into an inn, and took a nap before breakfast. The population here is about 50,000, there is a university, the city streets are quite well-developed, and it looks very elegantly simple. We went to look for brothers Mr. L and Mr. W who were here. We met them gladly and heard stories about what had happened since parting ways in Berlin. After spending two days strolling and relaxing, we went to Weimar (바이마). This is the capital of the state of Thuringia (튜린겐國), where Goethe and Schiller lived at the time of their deaths (臨終), and a place frequented by many writers and philosophers. The city looked extremely quiet and secluded (淸閒), seeming most suitable for such people, especially contemplative scholars. The houses of Goethe and Schiller are not far apart. However, the comparison between the two houses shows a world of difference (天壤之差). Goethe rented an entire house, used several rooms, and lived a splendid life, whereas Schiller lived in poverty in an attic room (天井 밋層). There wasn't much to see, but perhaps because Goethe was a minister of Thuringia and had wealth, he had many writing implements and books. Goethe was not only a Poet Sage but also had his own views on color theory and also had an interest in mineralogy, which can be sufficiently known by looking at all the displayed items. Overall, Goethe was born a nobleman, studied without any lack of financial resources, collecting everything he wanted to read and see, and lived a most aristocratic life in all aspects. Schiller, in contrast, was born into a poor family, faced death (臨終) in an attic room, couldn't even buy a single book freely, and was merely a poor scholar who studied hard, one might say. That afternoon, heading back to Berlin, we saw countless factories. Among them, seeing one company with 13 smokestacks was a first. We arrived back home at 12 midnight. Opening this door with the key twice and entering, four or five letters awaiting me were on the desk, and I fell into a deep sleep (昏夢) lying on the bed.
Calculating from the day I left Berlin to the day I returned, it was two weeks in duration, and the cost per person came to about 6,000 Marks. Neither the duration nor the travel expenses greatly exceeded the budget (豫算 超過). Wherever we went, we looked for inns that seemed cheap. It was very difficult at first, but after the second time, we gained more experience, and just by looking at the entrance (門間) of an inn, we could guess (推測) how much a night's lodging would cost. Of course, even going to cheap inns, the bedding was definitely not unclean. The only issue was whether the stationery or bedding was good or not. The way we managed was to get one room with two beds. The most expensive place we paid was 280 Marks (2 Yen 80 Sen in Japanese currency), which was a mistake on the first day. However, the cheapest we paid was 70 Marks (70 Sen in Japanese currency) sleeping in an attic room. <50> These were the highest and lowest, but normally, 150 Marks (1 Yen 50 Sen) was the average (平均), and breakfast (朝飯) was separate. Food prices were generally the same everywhere. We established a policy (方針) from the start that meals should be good, so we couldn't try cheap places, but Munich offered the same quality food at slightly lower prices.

Vast Plains Wherever You Go

If you ask why Germany is rich and strong, the answers might vary from person to person, but I believe the reason lies in this point. This trip lasted two weeks, heading west from Berlin, circling south, and then heading north. Although I couldn't go directly north, it feels like I've almost circled Germany. However, wherever I went, it was vast plains and fields (平原廣野). I didn't see a single magnificent mountain (壯山) like those seen in my home country. Large mountains, about the size of Namsan (南山) in Kyŏngsŏng, appeared occasionally like beans in a drought. It would not be an exaggeration to say that all of Germany is mountainless plains. Not only Germany, but the magnificent mountains of Europe are mostly in the south. Therefore, green grass carpets the land everywhere, and there are many pastures on hillsides and fields where streams flow. Everywhere looks fertile; this is truly a rich land stretching for a thousand li (沃野千里). Consequently, during the journey, there were only two or three tunnels (隧道). And those were only passed on the way from Goettingen to Cologne. Since almost the entire country is like this, laying railway tracks requires less human effort, so it's clear why Germany has so many railways. And it's clear as day (明若觀火) that transportation would become frequent.
The convenience of a nation's transportation is a measuring instrument (測定器) for its rise and fall (興亡盛衰). No matter how organized, contemplative, and diligent the national character of the German people may be, if the mountains and rivers were rugged (險惡) and the geography unfavorable, Germany's present situation would be questionable, I believe. Traveling by train, one sees that the fields and plains are well-suited for cultivation. Dry areas are made into fields, and areas that would be turned into rice paddies (起畓) in our country are made into pastures. They feed livestock牧草 (pasture grass) to obtain meat for consumption, they say. They not only manage the fields and plains so well but also pay attention to tree planting (植木), so wherever you go, the mountains and fields are uniformly green. Not only that, they plant many flowers and grasses along roadsides and in front of gates, bringing pleasure to themselves and delighting the eyes of passersby. Altogether, May in Germany is full of enjoyable and pleasant things wherever you go. I reckon that even if a rich person in Chosŏn spends tens of thousands of Won to beautifully decorate their house and garden, they probably couldn't compare by several factors to these people who live so neatly and cleanly (淸楚), even if they eat black bread. This is not just to praise (謳歌) Germany, but their ability to use a small amount of expense for the right purpose in the right place (適處適用), rather than spending considerable funds haphazardly only to cause displeasure (蹙目), allows one to judge the clarity (明晳) of their minds. Speaking of the whole, one might say that in Germany, people do not live within nature, but rather nature lives within people. <51>

**Summary**

This travelogue by Pak Sŭngch'ŏl, a Korean student, recounts his two-week journey through various German cities in May 1922, shortly after World War I. Accompanied by Kim Chunyŏn, he visits places like Goettingen, Cologne, Bonn, Wiesbaden, Worms, Frankfurt, Wurzburg, Munich, Jena, and Weimar. He describes the landscapes, particularly the Rhine River and its legends (Lorelei), cities, universities (Goettingen, Bonn), historical sites (Cologne Cathedral, Luther sites, Goethe and Schiller houses), and cultural aspects. He notes the presence of Allied occupation forces (British in Cologne, French in Bonn and Wiesbaden), comments on German efficiency and organization (e.g., St. Otilien monastery), reflects on German infrastructure (railways, lack of mountains), and contrasts German living standards and aesthetics with those in Korea. The trip highlights post-war Germany, interactions with other Korean students abroad, and the author's admiration for German culture and nature, albeit with critiques like the Rhine's muddy water.

From a historical perspective, the article offers a valuable glimpse into the experiences and perceptions of a Korean intellectual traveling in Europe during the colonial period. His observations about German recovery, infrastructure, cultural pride (Goethe, Schiller, Luther), and the lingering presence of Allied occupation forces provide context for post-WWI Europe through a Korean lens. His comparisons between Germany and Korea (e.g., landscape, cleanliness, rivers like Han and Taedong, recalling Akpakgol) and his yearning for similar developments in his homeland underscore the aspirations and frustrations felt under Japanese rule. The detailed account of interactions with fellow Korean students in Germany also sheds light on the small but present Korean diaspora network seeking education abroad.

**Named Entities**

獨逸	독일	Germany
朴勝喆	박승철	Pak Sŭngch'ŏl
라인江	라인강	Rhine River
金俊淵	김준연	Kim Chunyŏn
폿스담	폿스담	Potsdam
꾀틘겐	괴팅겐	Goettingen
삐스막	비스마르크	Bismarck
쾨른	쾰른	Cologne
카셀	카셀	Cassel
伯林	베를린	Berlin
普魯西國	프로이센국	Prussia
巴里	파리	Paris
노트담	노트르담	Notre Dame
歐羅巴	유럽	Europe
聯合國	연합국	Allied Powers
라인州	라인주	Rhineland
英軍	영군	British Army
上海	상하이	Shanghai
뽄	본	Bonn
東京	도쿄	Tokyo
京濱電車	게이힌 전차	Keihin Electric Railway
뷜헬름 2世	빌헬름 2세	Wilhelm II
뻬토판스	베토벤	Beethoven
佛軍	불군	French Army
아푸리카	아프리카	Africa
安南	안남	Annam (Vietnam)
마인쓰	마인츠	Mainz
瑞西	스위스	Switzerland
歐米列國	구미열국	Western Powers
英國	영국	Britain
롱펠로우	롱펠로	Longfellow
하이네	하이네	Heine
로레라이	로렐라이	Lorelei
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
大同江	대동강	Taedong River
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul)
漢江	한강	Han River
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
新羅	신라	Silla
唐	당	Tang Dynasty
百濟	백제	Paekche
熊津江	웅진강	Ungjin River (Kŭm River)
中國	중국	China
高麗國	고려국	Koryŏ Kingdom
金剛山	금강산	Kŭmgangsan
萊茵江	라인강	Rhine River
佛語	불어	French language
뷔스빠덴	비스바덴	Wiesbaden
佛蘭西	프랑스	France
악박골	악박골	Akpakgol
보름스	보름스	Worms
루터	루터	Luther
獨逸帝國議會	독일 제국 의회	German Imperial Diet
뷔텐베륵	비텐베르크	Wittenberg
따름쉬타트	다름슈타트	Darmstadt
헷센	헤센	Hessen
루드뷕 4世	루트비히 4세	Ludwig IV
普佛戰爭	보불전쟁	Franco-Prussian War
푸랑크푸르트	프랑크푸르트	Frankfurt
神聖로마帝國	신성로마제국	Holy Roman Empire
카-을 大帝	카를 대제	Karl the Great (Charlemagne)
墺太利	오스트리아	Austria
꾀테	괴테	Goethe
쉴러	실러	Schiller
뷔르쓰부륵	뷔르츠부르크	Wurzburg
마인江	마인강	Main River
忠淸道	충청도	Ch'ungch'ŏng Province
芙江	부강	Pugang River/area
뮨헨	뮌헨	Munich
빠이에른 王國	바이에른 왕국	Kingdom of Bavaria
싼트·오틔리엔	장크트 오틸리엔	St. Otilien
東小門	동소문	East Small Gate (Hyehwamun)
白洞	백동	Paektong
大邱	대구	Taegu
元山	원산	Wŏnsan
東亞日報	동아일보	Dong-A Ilbo
抱川	포천	P'och'ŏn
原道	원도	Wŏndo (?)
洗浦	세포	Sep'o
예나	예나	Jena
바이마	바이마르	Weimar
튜린겐國	튀링겐국	Thuringia
南山	남산	Namsan (in Seoul)

**Glossary**

기행문	기행문	travelogue
-나이다	-나이다	polite archaic sentence ending
-외다	-외다	polite archaic sentence ending
-더이다	-더이다	reporting past observation ending (archaic)
日氣	일기	weather (archaic, now 날씨)
名不虛傳	명불허전	fame is not unfounded/lives up to its reputation (Hanja idiom)
艱辛히	간신히	barely, with difficulty
嶄新하다	참신하다	novel, fresh
不整齊하다	부정제하다	untidy, disordered
不潔하다	불결하다	unclean, dirty
向하다	향하다	head towards
離宮	이궁	detached palace
點心	점심	lunch (older usage, now generally 점심)
古蹟	고적	historical site/relic
切半	절반	half
謄寫하다	등사하다	transcribe, copy
中天	중천	mid-heaven, zenith
役費	역비	construction cost
金馬克	금마르크	Goldmark (German currency)
設備	설비	facilities, equipment
差	차	difference
江畔	강반	riverside
竣工하다	준공하다	complete construction
間	간	unit of length (approx. 1.8m) or space
燦然하다	찬란하다	brilliant, radiant
輝煌하다	휘황하다	brilliant, dazzling
安頓되다	안돈되다	settled, stable
錄陰	녹음	green shade, verdure
携手散步	휴수산보	walking hand-in-hand (Hanja idiom)
耽하다	탐하다	indulge in, be absorbed in
大濶步	대활보	striding confidently/arrogantly
억개짓	어깻짓	jostling with shoulders, acting arrogantly
翌朝	익조	next morning
埠頭	부두	pier, wharf
稀貴하다	희귀하다	rare, precious
頻煩하다	빈번하다	frequent
憧憬하다	동경하다	yearn for, long for
讚美하다	찬미하다	praise, extol
가르되	가로되	saying, speaking (archaic verb form)
自軆	자체	itself, oneself
發祥地	발상지	birthplace, cradle
着目不已하다	착목불이하다	keep paying attention to (Hanja idiom)
恰然히	흡연히	just like, as if (archaic adverb)
櫛比하다	즐비하다	stand closely together like teeth of a comb
有表하다	유표하다	notable, prominent (archaic)
由來	유래	origin, history
暇量	가량	approximately (older usage)
질겁더이다	즐겁더이다	it was enjoyable/pleasant (older spelling of 즐겁다)
焦點	초점	focal point
長遠하다	장원하다	long, far-reaching
一貫하다	일관하다	penetrate, pass through
興	흥	excitement, fun
恨歎하다	한탄하다	lament, deplore
處女	처녀	virgin, maiden
花容	화용	beautiful face
美音	미음	beautiful voice
水魄	수백	spirit of a drowned person
祭하다	제하다	perform a ritual offering
畵幅	화폭	scroll painting, canvas
難事	난사	difficult matter
浮費	부비	travel expenses (archaic term, now 여비)
실징	싫증	boredom, weariness (likely older spelling/form of 싫증)
妄言	망언	reckless remark, falsehood
心血	심혈	heart's blood, utmost effort
回想하다	회상하다	recall, reminisce
爽快하다	상쾌하다	refreshing, bracing
至便하다	지편하다	extremely convenient
料金	요금	fee, charge (Sino-Japanese term)
웅뎅이	웅덩이	puddle, pool (older spelling)
물軍	물군	water carriers/sellers (archaic term)
분비지는	붐비지는	not crowded (older spelling of 붐비다)
沈澱시키다	침전시키다	precipitate, settle
沐浴	목욕	bathing
諸具	제구	various tools/utensils (archaic)
썩가든 하외다	시원하외다	it feels very refreshing (archaic/dialectal)
臨終하다	임종하다	face death, be on one's deathbed
宏大하다	굉대하다	grand, vast
華麗	화려	splendor, magnificence
締結하다	체결하다	conclude (a treaty)
滋味있다	자미있다	interesting, tasteful (archaic)
斡旋	알선	arrangement, good offices
問聞한	문문한	asked and heard (archaic)
隔阻하다	격조하다	be separated for a long time (archaic)
取扱하다	취급하다	handle, manage (Sino-Japanese term)
見解	견해	viewpoint, opinion
滯留하다	체류하다	stay, sojourn
禁錮	금고	imprisonment
付託	부탁	request, entrustment
自作自給	자작자급	self-production and self-sufficiency (Hanja idiom)
僧侶	승려	Buddhist monk
周衣	주의	monk's robe (inferred from context)
冊肆	책사	bookstore (archaic)
境內	경내	within the boundaries/precincts
培養하다	배양하다	cultivate
緊하다	긴하다	important, urgent
天性	천성	innate nature
昏夢	혼몽	confused dream, stupor
豫算	예산	budget, estimate
超過	초과	excess, surplus
門間	문간	doorway area, appearance of entrance
推測	추측	guess, conjecture
平均	평균	average
朝飯	조반	breakfast (archaic term, now 아침)
方針	방침	policy, course of action
平原廣野	평원광야	vast plains and fields (Hanja phrase)
壯山	장산	magnificent/large mountain
隧道	수도	tunnel (older term, now 터널)
明若觀火	명약관화	clear as watching a fire (Hanja idiom)
興亡盛衰	흥망성쇠	rise and fall, vicissitudes (Hanja idiom)
測定器	측정기	measuring instrument
險惡하다	험악하다	rugged, perilous
起畓	기답	creating rice paddies (archaic agriculture term)
植木	식목	planting trees
享樂하고	향락하고	enjoying pleasure
淸楚히	청초히	neatly and cleanly, elegantly
謳歌하자는	구가하자는	intending to praise/sing eloquently of
適處適用	적재적용	right place, right application (similar to 적재적소)
蹙目케	축목케	causing to frown upon/look askance at (archaic)
明晳함	명석함	clarity, lucidity
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제26호
발행일	1922년 08월 01일
기사제목	獨逸地方의 二週間
필자	朴勝喆
기사형태	기행문

獨逸地方의 二週間
						朴勝喆
라인江岸에 散步
獨逸서는 5月로서는 第一 치웁기로 有名한 三氷日 中에 1日인 13日에 폿스담을 떠나서 10餘 處 다니기로 하엿나이다. 一行은 金俊淵君과 余와 두 사람뿐이외다.
이날은 아츰부터 비가 오고 日氣도 名不虛實로 조곰 선선하더이다. 汽車는 無論 3等을 탓습니다. 坐席이 업서서 通路에 한時間이나 넘게 서서 가다가 艱辛히 坐席을 어더서 안게 되엇나이다. 午後 5時가 훨석 넘어서 꾀틘겐(Goettingen)이라는 곳에 왓나이다. 이곳에는 우리 留學生이 3人이나 잇스며 大學이 잇는 곳이외다. 이 大學은 舊獨逸帝國의 鐵血宰相 삐스막의 母校이며 學生數가 4,000이라 하는 故로 全 人口 40,000에 比하면 10分之 1이외다. 全市街에 大學生만 다니는 것 갓더이다. 市街는 創設된 年數가 오래되어 그러한지 嶄新한 맛은 업고 不整齊하며 比較的 不潔하더이다. 이곳에서 두 밤이나 지나고 쾨른(Koeln)으로 向하게 되엇나이다. 途中에 皇帝의 離宮이 잇고 山水가 조키로 有名한 카셀(Cassel)이라는 곳에 내려서 點心을 먹게 되엇나이다. 이곳은 古蹟이라든지 별로 볼 것은 업스나 市街는 伯林과 가티 整齊하더이다.
이날 午後 5時나 되어서 問題의 쾨른에 왓나이다. 첫번 보고 놀라인 것은 라인江(Rhein)에 걸처노흔 그 큰 鐵橋이외다. 汽車, 電車, 人馬가 함끠 단이게 되엇더이다. 이곳은 古代 로마人의 殖民地로서 僧正(Bishop)의 領地이엇나이다. 至今 불으는 쾨른이라는 것도 영어의 콜로늬(Colony)와 語源이 同一하다 하나이다. 이 都會의 人口는 67萬이며 全獨逸內에서는 셋재 都市이며 普魯西國내에서는 伯林 다음가는 곳이라 하나이다. 大學은 商科大學뿐이고 博物館이 세 곳이나 잇스며 그 中에＜41＞ 美術博物館에는 西洋 것과 日本 것을 切半 切半 陳列하엿스며 한쪽 房에서 日本木版畫를 謄寫하더이다. 누구든지 쾨른가서 停車場에 내리면 처음 얼는 보이는 것은 中天에 놉히 솟도록 지은 敎堂일 것이외다. 이 敎堂은 꼬틱(Gothic)式이외다. 元來 조고마한 敎堂이 잇든 곳에 西曆 1248年에 改築을 始作해서 同 1880年에 完成하엿다 하나이다. 時日은 630餘年 役費는 5,000萬金馬克, 塔高는 157메터, 面積은 6,166平方메터이외다. 그 內部設備는 巴里에 잇는 노트담 敎堂이나 同一하고 다만 大小의 差가 잇슬뿐이러이다. 이 敎堂이 歐羅巴에 잇는 것 中에 第一이라 하나이다. 夕飯을 먹고는 라인江畔에 散步도 하며 獨逸이 戰時에 2年만에 竣工하엿다는 鐵橋上에 걸어단여 보앗나이다. 全長으로 말슴하면 260間이며 水面은 150間이나 되더이다. 勿論 라인江에는 無數한 鐵橋가 架設되어 잇나이다. 市街로 말슴하여도 全部 整齊되어잇고 伯林서 못보든 큰 카페집을 이곳에서 보앗나이다. 天井과 4璧에는 金色이 燦然하고 電光이 輝煌하더이다. 이곳은 古來 商業都市로 有名하얏슬 뿐 아니라 至今은 聯合國이 管理하는 라인州의 一部이외다. 그럼으로 이곳에는 英軍의 司令部가 잇고 路上에는 黃色 服裝 입은 英軍의 往來가 不絶하더이다. 上海서부터 沿路에 보든 商業紙로서는 이곳이 가장 秩序가 잇서 보이고 安頓된 것 갓더이다.

언제부터 憧憬하던 라인江
그 이튼날은 電車로 뽄(Bonn)까지 가게되엇나이다. 쾨른서 뽄까지 단이는 電車는 東京에 잇는 京濱電車와 갓더이다. 錄陰이 무르녹은 라인江畔으로 40分쯤 가면 뽄이 되나이다. 中途에 보면 江畔에 交椅를 맨들어 노핫스며 携手散步하는 靑年男女들은 江色을 耽하야 것다가 안고 안다가 것는 것은 「詩의 時代」의 사람인 것 갓더이다. 뽄은 라인江畔의 한 小都市이며 모든 設備가 꽤 整齊하더이다. 이곳에도 大學이 잇는데 이 大學에는 舊獨逸帝國時代에 皇族들이 만히 단엿스며 뷜헬름 2世와 皇太子도 이곳 出身이외다. 또 한가지 有名한 것은 음악가 뻬토판스(Beethovans)의 出生地이외다. 이곳부터는 佛軍의 天下이외다. 어대를 가든지 綠色 軍服이 大濶步이며 佛軍을 딸하와서 잇는 얼굴 검은 아푸리카 병정과 安南士卒이 억개짓을 하나이다.
翌朝에는 배를 타고 마인쓰(Mainz)라는 곳까지 가기로 定하엿나이다. 午前 10時에 타면 午後 9時에나 到着한다 하나이다. 埠頭에는 배를 기대리는 船客들이 만히＜42＞ 잇더이다. 라인江은 最上流서부터 最下流까지 여간한 汽船은 通行이 됩니다. 그럼으로 運送船이며 더욱이 近日에는 遊覽船이 連絡不絶이외다. 라인江의 發源地되는 瑞西서는 近日에 일르러 開港을 하겟다 하나이다. 이 나라 이 라인江에 開港地를 둔다는 것은 참으로 稀貴한 일이외다. 瑞西로 말슴하면 歐羅巴大陸에 잇는 나라로 조금도 海洋과는 交涉이 업는 나라이외다. 그러나 라인江의 交通이 저와가티 頻煩한 것을 보면 라인江 上流에 開港地를 두고 瑞西汽船이 大洋에 나오겟다는 것도 一理는 잇는 것이외다.
우리가 本國서 發行하는 新聞 雜誌를 보든지 하드래도 靑年男女가 얼마나 라인江을 憧憬하며 또 그것을 詩나 文으로 發表하는 것을 알 수 잇나이다. 그뿐 아니라 歐米列國人들도 한번 보기를 원하야마지 안흐며 英國의 詩人 롱펠로우(Longfellow)는 라인江을 讚美하야 가르되 獨逸人의 자랑은 이 高貴한 라인江이며 또 아름다운 地上에 잇는 모든 江中에 이와가티 아름다운 江은 업다고 하엿나이다. 勿論 라인江이 風景 조키로 世界에 이름이 놉핫슬 뿐 아니라 獨逸自軆에 가장 重要한 地位를 가지고 잇스며 鷄卵으로 말슬하면 노른자라 하겟나이다. 獨逸의 文化 發祥地도 이곳이 中心이며 獨逸의 産業振興地도 亦 이곳이 中心이며 또 舊獨逸 皇帝 뷜헬름 2世가 宣言한 「바위로서 바다에」를 實現케 하는데도 亦 라인江의 힘이 만치안타 할 수 업나이다. 獨逸自軆에만 이러케 重要할 뿐아니라 歐羅巴列國들은 政治的 意味에 잇서서 가장 重要한 意味 잇슴을 깨닷고 이 地域에 着目不已하나이다.
라인江에 배를 타고 가면서 보면 最上流로부터 最下流까지 船舶의 出入이 便한 故로 恰然히 水面은 船舶으로 업힌 것 가트며 左右 兩岸에는 殷盛해 보이는 江村들이 櫛比하고 不絶히 往來되는 것은 汽車이더이다. 또 그러고 라인江畔의 求景거리로 일러오는 葡萄園이외다. 葡萄가 익어서 따게되는 秋節에 오면 가장 求景 할만하다 하나이다. 그때에는 山등성이에 葡萄 따는 사람이 널렷스며 또 포도 따는 노래가 들을 만하다 하나이다. 그 外에 가장 有表히 보이는 것은 山上에 由來가 잇는 無數한 古城들이외다. 午後 4時 暇量이 되여서 靑天에 黑雲이 덥히더니 소내기가 한줄기 오나이다. 無論 배에는 防雨設備가 잇는 故로 밧갓을 내다보니 實로 그 景致를 形言할 수 업나이다. 그림으로는 이러한 것을 덜어보앗스나 今日 實景을 보니 江上遭雨와 江村雨景이 참으로 질겁더이다. 비가 거친 後에는 라인江 沿岸 中에 가장 世界사람에게 널리 알리고 더구나 詩人 하이네의 紹介로 詩人文士들의 憧憬不已하는＜43＞ 焦點을 맨들엇스며 질겨 自己의 詩文의 材料를 삼는 로레라이(Lolerey) 밋에 왓나이다. 大軆 라인江은 流水거리가 大端長遠합니다. 瑞西에서 始作하야 南獨에서 北獨을 一貫하야 和蘭을 거처서 入海하는 江이지마는 水流는 썩 急하며 그뿐 아니라 濁水이외다. 이것이 라인江의 缺點이외다. 平壤大同江이나 京城漢江처럼 淸水가 되엇드면 얼마나 더 興을 도드겟습니까. 나는 이것을 恨歎하엿나이다. 이와가티 急流이며 濁水이든 라인江水는 로레라이 미테와서는 더욱. 大端 甚하외다. 무서운 여울목이 되고 말엇나이다. 로레라이는 어째서 有名한가 그 傳說을 쓰려하나이다.

로레라이의 傳說
어늬때부터 始作된 말인지는 모르나 商船들이 로레라이 밋을 지내면 大槪는 破船이 되고 만다고 일러왓다 하나이다. 그것은 왜 그런고 하니 로레라이는 깍거질른 듯한 絶壁이오 바로 그 밋은 여울이외다. 그 絶壁에는 아리따운 處女가 서서 조흔 音聲으로 듯기조케 노래를 한다하나이다. 그러면 船人들은 그 花容과 美音에 精神을 일코 조심을 아니하다가 고만 破船을 하고 만다 하나이다. 라인江을 지나단이는 商船들은 모도 로레라이를 조심조심하자 하지마는 이곳에만 오고 보면 어쪌 수 업시 녹고 말엇다 하나이다. 이 말을 들은 어떠한 伯爵의 아들이 배를 타고 그 밋까지 갓다하나이다. 과연 名不虛實로 어엿분 색시가 나와서 淸雅한 목소리로 노래를 하엿다 하나이다. 이 伯爵의 아들은 색시보고 노래만 듯고 오려고 조심조심하엿것마는 어찌나 조튼지 넉을 일코잇다가 亦是 破線이 되야서 水魄이 되고 말엇나이다. 이 急報를 들은 白灼은 大怒하야 軍士를 풀어 그 處女를 잡으라 하엿다 하나이다. 軍士들은 令이 내리자 곧 로레라이로 가서 그 周圍를 에워싸핫나이다. 그때에 處女는 水伯에게 무슨 呪文을 읽으니까 伯爵의 아들은 水中에서 白馬를 타고 나왓다 하나이다. 이 傳說을 가지고 생각해보면 첫재 라인江 沿岸 各地에는 美人이 多産이라는 것과 둘재 라인江水는 急流라는 것이외다. 이 두가지외에 생각할 것은 水伯과 白馬이니 이것은 우리 古代人과도 一致되는 點인 줄 아나이다.
朝鮮古史에 보면 新羅와 唐의 聯合軍이 百濟와 싸울 때에 水伯에게 祭하노라고 熊津江에다가 白馬를 느헛다 하는 것이외다.
로레라이를 지나서 조금 가면 江中에 小島가 잇고 그 섬에는 조그마한 2層 樓閣이 잇더이다. 이것은 前日에는 이 江으로 通行하는 船舶의 稅를 밧든 곳이라 하나이다. 내 생각건대 라인江의 全景은 1張의 畵幅이라 하나이다.＜44＞ 아모리 山水畵의 名手巨匠이 잇드래도 이와가* 나무 세울 대에 나무 세우고 내가 흐를 대에 내를 흐르게 하고 다리가 잇슬 곳에 다리를 노코 人家가 잇슬 곳에 人家를 잇게하고 山野가 잇서야 할 만한 곳에 山野를 그려서 1幅의 名畵를 맨들기는 難事이라고 하나이다. 누구든지 春秋 兩節期 中 汽車를 타지 말고 游覽船을 타고 라인江을 지내보시요 나와 同感일줄 아나이다. 汽車로 간다하면 時間도 最少 時間이 될 것이며 浮費도 5分之 1 밧게 되지 안나이다. 그러나 라인江에 와서 배를 타지 안코 車를 타고 다라나는 것은 가장 無味한 旅行인줄 아나이다. 午前 10時에 타가지고 午後 8時에나 上陸하엿지마는 조금도 실징이 나지 안흐며 벌서 10時間이나 되엇든가 생각되더이다.
都是가 그림 속으로 배를 타고 지내는 것 갓더이다. 古來에 일려오기를 中國人은 願生高麗國, 一見金剛山이라드니 歐米人들은 願生獨逸國, 一見萊茵江이라는 생각이엇다 해도 妄言이 아닌 줄 아나이다. 우리가 탄 배에만 보드래도 獨逸人은 最少數이고 外國人이 最多數가 되며 그 중에도 英語와 佛語를 말하는 사람이 만터이다. 이 배에만 그럴 것이 아니라 連絡不絶하는 그 만흔 游覽船에는 얼마나 만흔 外國人들이 잇겟습니까. 案內書로 말슴해도 英, 佛, 獨 3國語로 된 것이 그 種類가 大端 만슴니다. 내가 이런 호강을 하면서 생각해 보니 라인江이 本國에 잇는 靑年男女의 心血을 鼓動케하는 것도 確實히 理由가 잇는 줄 아나이다. 나는 또 이러케 생각하엿나이다. 언제나 漢江이나 大同江에서도 이 노리를 하면서 라인江을 回想하게 되나 하엿나이다.

서울의 악박골을 聯想하다
밤 9時나 되어서 細雨를 마지면서 旅館을 차자 들엇나이다. 이곳은 溫泉과 藥水로 有名한 뷔스빠덴(Wiesbaden)이라는 곳이외다. 이곳의 밤도 亦是 佛蘭西 士卒로 해서 大端繁昌한 것 가트외다. Kaffee 한잔에 70 馬克은 참으로 놀래엇나이다. 이 市街는 매우 新式이며 퍽 爽快해 보이더이다. 遊樂舘(Kur-haus)에는 연못도 잇스며 噴水도 잇고 庭園도 잇서서 散策하기에 至便하며 室內에는 大小 音樂室, 談話室, 讀書室, 遊戱室들이 잇스며 入場券을 發行하야 1日에도 午前과 午後가 그 料金이 다르외다. 藥水잇는 곳은 遊樂舘에서 머지 아니하외다. 이곳도 入場料를 바드며 庭園에는 音樂室이 잇스며 藥水는 室內 큰 웅뎅이에 괴여 잇더이다. 無論 溫泉이외다. 유리잔으로 한잔式 떠주나이다. 藥水라 해서 그러하는지는 몰라도 한잔이라도 더 먹겟다는 서울 악박골 물터의 물軍이나＜45＞ 一樣이외다. 악박골가티 분비지는 아흐나 그 中에도 婦女들과 老人들은 1盃1盃 復1盃를 하는 이가 만터이다. 이 藥水는 미지근한 물가트며 黃色鹽味가 잇나이다. 그럼으로 이 물을 沈澱시켜서 白鹽을 맨들더이다. 溫泉에 沐浴하러 갓나이다. 이곳은 市에서 經營하는 것으로 沐浴料는 3馬克으로서부터 55馬克까지 잇는데 우리는 아모 諸具도 업슴으로 55馬克자리를 삿나이다. 室內로 말슴하면 全部가 大理石과 高貴한 木材를 썻스며 沐浴湯에는 房이 둘이 잇나이다. 하나는 沐浴湯이오 또 하나는 沐浴湯에서 나와서 寢臺에 누어서 얼마동안 休息하는 房이외다. 큰 手巾을 세個나 주며 모도가 大端 便利하게 되엇더이다. 여러날만에 몬지를 씨서보니 썩가든 하외다. 이 市街에는 1年에 沐浴하러오는 外國人이 몃 10萬名이나 된다하며 溫泉場도 數十處 된다 하나이다. 이곳에  잇는 市會와 離宮 屋上에는 佛國旗가 날리더이다. 이날 午後에는 마인쓰(Meinz)까지 電車로 가서 그곳서 博物館을 暫間 求景하고 보름스(Worms)라는 곳까지 汽車로 왓나이다.

13年만에 竣功된 루터의 銅像
이곳은 루터(Luther)의 宗敎改革과 因緣이 깁흔 곳이외다. 當時의 루터는 敎會의 腐敗와 天父의 뜻에 어그러짐을 痛論하고 宗敎改革의 烽火를 들어 新說을 主張하매 獨逸帝國議會는 이곳에 모여서 決議하기를 만약 루터가 新說을 버리지 안흐면 國法외에 置한다 하얏나이다. 그러나 루터는 조금도 不屈하엿슴으로 뷔텐베륵(Wittenberg)에 잇는 諸侯가 데려갓다 하나이다. 去 3月 뷔텐베륵에 갓섯슬 때에 95個 條文 걸엇든 寺院 門도 보앗슴으로 이제 連絡이 거의 되엇나이다. 이곳은 舊式 都會이며 當時 議會도 그저 남아잇서 前日을 말하는 것 가트며 市 中央에는 13年만에 竣功하엿다는 루터의 銅像이 서서 잇스며 이곳 亦是 綠色服의 兵卒이 橫行하더이다. 翌日 午前에 「따름쉬타트」라는 곳으로 갓나이다.
따름쉬타트(Darmstadt)는 헷센(Hessen) 太公國의 首府이외다. 헷센 太公國이 本來 各 聯邦中 작은 나라인 故로 首府도 그리 크지는 못하며 이곳부터는 外國軍隊가 아니 보이더이다. 人口라야 85,000 밧게 되지안코 學校라야 高等工業學校가 잇슬 뿐이외다. 그러나 市街의 設備와 道路가 整然하며 公園이 잇스며 그 外 모든 것이 도시 노릇을 꽤 하엿더이다. 꽤 탐탁해 보이며 雅淡해 보이더이다. 나는 平壤과 大邱를 생각하엿나이다. 헷센 太公國이 有名해지기는 普佛戰爭 時에 太公 루드뷕(Ludwig)＜46＞ 4世가 大功을 세운 後이외다.

市 中央의 괴테 故舍
이날 點心 後는 商業地로 有名한 푸랑크푸르트(FRankfurt)에 왓나이다. 이곳은 人口가 48萬이나 되며 高等商業學校가 잇스며 市街의 設備라든가 모든 것이 伯林에 比하야 大小의 次는 잇슬지언정 規模는 每一樣이외다. 無論 이곳 뿐 아니라 어떠한 都市에 가보든지 規模는 同一합니다. 이 點이 獨逸의 特色이외다. 이 都市는 商業으로만 有名할 뿐 아니라 工業地로서 有名하야 外國人의 出入이 만흔 곳이외다. 그뿐 아니라 歷史上으로 보아서 가장 有名한 곳의 하나로 꼽나이다. 神聖로마帝國이 創立되쟈 카-을(Karl)大帝가 이곳에서 卽位하엿스며 近世에 와서 普佛戰爭 時에는 墺太利에 加擔하얏다가 戰敗하야 自由市의 資格을 일코 獨逸帝國의 直接 管理를 밧게 되엇스며 電信, 電話를 發明한 두 사람도 이곳에 살엇스며 또 詩聖 꾀테(Goethe)의 出生한 집도 이곳에 잇나이다. 꾀테의 집은 市 中央에서 조금 뒤골목에 잇나이다. 當時에 꾀테 生活이 어떠케 裕足햇든가는 그 住宅만 보아도 一見에 알겟나이다. 內部에 들어가서 日常生活하든 模樣을 보면 文房具라든지 甚至於 廚房에 器皿을 늘어 노흔 것을 보드래도 確實히 알겟나이다. 現代人의 奢侈로운 生活에 比하면 아모것도 아니지마는 當時의 一般 程度를 생각해보면 極히 豊足한 生活이라 아니할 수 업나이다. 附屬 博物館에 가보면 꾀테와 쉴러(Schiller)의 筆蹟이 노혀잇스며 꾀테는 詩聖 뿐 아니라 그림에 對한 素養이 相當히 잇든 줄 알겟나이다. 그것은 꾀테가 그렷다는 그림을 보아도 歷歷히 알 것이외다. 그 外에 눈에 띄우는 것은 꾀테의 父母가 美男美女이엇든 것이며 괴테와 쉴러의 毛髮을 노흔 것을 보면 꾀테의 것은 검은빗이 잇고 러의 것은 누른빗이 나더이다. 나는 特히 꾀테의 父母가 美顔의 所有者임을 볼 때에 꾀테가 詩聖된 것에 因緣이나 업지 안흔가하고 생각하엿나이다. 이곳에 案內者는 우리에게 議事堂을 보앗는냐고 뭇더이다. 우리는 못보앗다 하니 그는 말하기를 議事堂을 아니보려거든 푸랑크푸르트에 오지말라 하더이다. 우리는 그 길로 議事堂 所在地를 물어서 갓나이다. 議事堂의 規模가 이러케 宏大한 것은 보든中 처음이외다. 이곳은 神聖로마皇帝가 잇든 곳이며 그 皇帝室이라는 곳의 兩壁에는 歷代의 皇帝의 畵像이 걸려잇스며 그 엽房에는 7選擧候가 모여 皇帝를 選擧하든 방*며 또 그 엽방은 現在의 市議事堂이더이다. 가장 人工을 다하야 華麗를 極하엿더이다. 그곳서 머지안흔 곳에＜47＞ 西歷 1870年 5月 10日 普佛兩國 代表者가 모여서 講和條約을 締結하든 旅館이 잇스며, 至今은 活動寫眞舘이 되엇더이다. 이곳서 한낫은 되어 뷔르쓰부륵(Wurzburg)이라는 곳으로 갓나이다.

20餘人의 우리 兄弟 朝鮮밥을 먹으며, 朝鮮事情을 말하다

뷔르쓰부륵은 南方에 잇는 都市이며 人口가 10萬이나 되며 大學生이 5,000名이나 된다하며 라인江의 支流되는 마인(Main)江을 엽헤끼고 잇는 都市이외다. 그러나 市街는 舊式이며 아모 보잘 것 업는 都市이외다. 뷔스빠덴이나, 따름쉬타트에 比하면 雲泥之差가 잇더이다. 마인江 沿岸에도 葡萄園이 잇스며 江邊에는 조그마한 나루배들이 매여잇고 넓히는 忠淸道 芙江만 밧게 아니되더이다. 이곳에는 우리 兄弟가 20餘人이 잇스니 全 德國에 40餘人잇는데 比하면 切半이 이곳에 잇나이다.
旅館에 든다는 것이 우리 兄弟가 만히 단이든 곳이 되어 朝鮮말도 안다고 單語 몃 마듸式 말하더이다. 이곳서 多年 隔阻하엿든 學友들과 새 學友들을 만히 맛나서 滋味잇고 愉快하게 잘 놀앗스며 또 여러분의 斡旋으로 朝鮮밥다운 밥을 맛잇게 먹엇나이다. 朝鮮밥을 먹으며 朝鮮말로 朝鮮事情을 問聞한 것은 愉快한 中에도 더욱 愉快한 것이외다. 이곳에 와서 가장 무서운 더위를 맛낫나이다. 떠날 적에는 伯林日氣標準만 하고 冬服에 앏은 內衣를 입고 나섯더니 日氣가 어찌 더운지 室外에 잇는 寒暖計는 攝氏 32度를 가르치나이다. 나도 더워서 大端 괴로웟지마는 同行 金君은 內外를 全部 冬服을 입고 가서 더한層 애를 썻나이다. 여러 兄弟들과 2日이나 잘 놀고 뮨헨(Munchen)으로 갓나이다.
뮨헨은 빠이에른 王國(Bayern)의 首府이며 가장 外國人의 出入을 嚴重히 取締하나이다. 그것은 外國人들이 自國의 빗싼 돈을 가지고 物價가 廉한 이곳에 와서 잇게되면 國民 全軆의 損害가 되겟다는 見解로서 外國人에게는 居留稅를 밧는다 하며 前番 뮨헨 갓다온 우리 學友 두 사람도 1,500馬克을 내엿다 함으로 처음부터 規則에 걸리지 안케 24時間 內에 뮨헨을 떠나는 形式을 하기로 定하엿나이다. 午後 5時나 되어서 뮨헨에 到着하엿나이다. 旅館에 들쟈 下人은 英佛獨 3國語로 박힌 警察署의 注意書를 보이더이다. 그 注意書에 보면 빠이에른國의 어떠한 都市를 가려든지 반듯이 警察署의 許可를 마트러 旅行券을 가지고 出頭하되 그 稅金은 10馬克으로부터 10,000馬克이라 하엿스며, 萬若 24時間 以上을 滯留하면서＜48＞ 그 期間이 經過하도록 許可를 맛지 안핫스면 禁錮 1個年이라는 무서운 注意書이외다. 그러나 이 手續을 하지안코 얼는 빠이에른을 버서나려 하얏나이다.
翌朝에는 뮨헨서 汽車로 約 두時間이나 되는 싼트·오틔리엔(St, otilien)이라는 修道院에 S君을 차젓나이다. S君은 우리가 本來부터 모르나 伯林을 떠날 적에 그이와 切親한 L君이 부대 차저보라는 付託과 그 修道院은 本國 京城 東小門내 白洞에 잇는 修道院과 大邱, 元山에 잇는 것들의 本部이라는 故로 어쩃든 한번 가서 求景하려 하엿나이다. 停車場에 내려서 20分이나 가면 修道院이 되는데 그 修道院 門압헤서 意外에 S君을 맛낫나이다. 大端 반기며 L君의 便紙로서 우리 올 것을 기대렷다하며 1年만에 本國人을 처음 맛낫다고 어찌 깃버하는지 形言할 수 업더이다. 點心을 먹은 後에는 S君의 案內로 修道院을 求景하엿나이다. 이 修道院은 平野에 노혀서 다른 村落은 업시 自作一村을 일우엇스니 僧侶만 해서 300名이며 學校 生徒가 100名이니 合해서 400名이외다. 山村과 田地가 잇스며 萬般 生活의 必須品은 自作自給이외다. 獨逸人들도 僧侶되는 多數의 理由는 家庭의 風波로 그리된다 하나이다. 그 施設로 말슴하면 鐵工, 木工場이 잇스며 洋服, 印刷所가 잇스며 燒餠室, 病源, 食堂, 沐浴室, 消火隊, 發電所, 冊肆, 博物館까지 잇더이다. 이 博物館에는 朝鮮物品과 아푸리카物品이 만히 모여 잇는데 우리 것은 그리 흉잡힐 것이 업더이다. 沐浴湯이 잇서도 僧正이라야 1年에 沐浴을 4次 밧게 못하며 境內에 古衣賣買所가 잇스니 俗界로서 僧侶가 되려고 이곳에 오면 입고 왓든 옷은 팔고 僧服을 입는데 그 僧服이라는 것은 黑周衣에 紅帶를 매는 것이더이다. 그 다음 奇花瑤草를 培養하는 植物園도 잇고, 牧場도 잇더이다. 牧場에는 牛, 馬, 羊, 猪, 鷄, 鴨 等 모든 家畜들을 가장 進步된 方式으로 길르더이다. 日前에 東亞日報를 보니 獨逸人이 抱�原道 洗浦에 牧場을 經營하게 되엇다 하니 그들이 必是 이 方法대로 할 것이외다. 그러면 本國人士들의 學得해 두는 것이 大端 緊하다 하나이다. 獨逸人의 天性은 組織的이라 하고 내가 그間 더러 보기도 하엿지마는 이 修道院 經營처럼 組織的은 업는 줄 아나이다. 午後 3時나 되어서 S君과 作別하고 뮨헨으로 왓나이다.
오늘 밤車에는 이곳을 떠나야 하겟고 時間은 6時나 되엇스니 이곳에 잇는 博物館들을 보앗스면 조켓스나 어쪌 수 업시 떠나게 되엇나이다. 이곳은 美術을 奬勵하야 오든 都市인 故로 볼만한 美術品이 만타하나 넘우 오래 잇슬 수는 업는 事情이라 밤 9時車로 예나(Jena)로 가기로＜49＞ 하고 車 中에서 밤을 지내고 翌朝 7時에 내려서 旅館에 들어 食前 잠을 잣나이다. 이곳은 人口가 50,000이나 되며 大學이 잇고 市街가 꽤 잘 되엇스며 썩 雅淡해 보이나이다. 이곳에 잇는 L君 兄弟와 W君을 차저 갓나이다. 반가히 맛나서 그간 伯林서 허여진 後에 이악이를 들엇나이다. 2日이나 散步도 하고 그렁저렁 놀다가 바이마(Weimar)에 갓나이다. 이곳은 튜린겐國(Thuringen)의 首府이며 꾀테와 쉴러의 臨終하든 집이 잇스며 文人 哲士가 가장 만히 往來하든 곳이외다. 시가는 大端 淸閒해 보여서 그러한 사람들 特히 思索하는 學者에게는 最適地인 줄 아나이다. 꾀테와 쉴러의 집은 얼마되지 안는 距離에 잇습니다. 그러나 두 집의 比較는 天壤之差이외다. 꾀테는 全채 집을 어더서 여러 房을 쓰며 華麗한 生活을 햇지마는 쉴러는 天井 밋層에서 貧窮한 生活을 하엿더이다. 아모것도 그리 볼 것이 업스나 꾀테는 튜린겐國 大臣이요 財産이 잇서서 그러한지는 모르나 文房具도 만흐며 書籍도 만흐며 꾀테는 詩聖일뿐만 아니라 色素學에 一家見이 잇섯고 礦物學에도 亦 趣味를 가젓든 것은 그 모든 陳列品을 보아서 넉넉히 알 수 잇나이다. 都大軆가 꾀테는 貴公子로 나서 硏學에 족음도 不足함 업시 財力을 들여가며 읽고 십흔 것 보고 십흔 것을 다 收集하야 모든 點에 잇서서 가장 貴族的 生活을 하엿고. 쉴러는 이와 反對로 貧家에 태여나서 臨終도 天井 밋層 房에서  하엿고. 마음대로 書冊 한券도 못사며 工夫한 寒士에 不過하다 하겟나이다. 이날 午後에 伯林으로 오면서 보면 無數한 工場이 잇더이다. 그 中에도 한 會社의 烟筒이 13個나 되는 것은 처음 보앗나이다. 집에 돌아오기는 밤 12時 이엇나이다. 이 門을 두 번 열쇠로 열고 들어오니 冊床에는 나를 기다리는 便紙 4, 5張이 잇스며 寢臺에 누어 昏夢 中에 들어갓나이다.
伯林을 떠나든 날부터 돌아오는 날까지 計算하면 日數로는 2週間이며 그 費用으로는 每人 下에 6,000馬克이나 들엇나이다. 日字라든지 旅費는 豫算 超過가 그리되지 안핫나이다. 어대를 가던지 旅館은 갑싼 듯한 곳만 차저 단이엇나이다. 처음에는 大難事로되 2次 以上 되니까는 經驗이 만하지며 旅館의 門間만 보아도 1夜 宿泊料가 얼마나 될지 推測이 되더이다. 勿論 廉價되는 旅館에 간다고 寢具는 決斷코 不潔하지 안습니다. 다만 文房具라든가 寢具가 조흐냐 조치 못하냐가 問題될 뿐이외다. 우리가 지내인 바는 寢臺 2個 잇는 房 하나를 어더서 자는데 第一 빗싸게 준 곳이 280馬克(日貨 2圓 80錢)이며 이것은 第1日에 失敗한 것이외다. 그러나 第一 싸게 주기는 天井 밋層 房에서 자고 70馬克(日貨 70錢)을＜50＞ 주엇나이다. 이것들은 最高와 最低이나 普通은 150馬克(日貨 1圓 50錢)이 平均이며 朝飯은 別費이외다. 食價는 到處가 一般이더이다. 食事는 잘해야 한다는 方針을 처음부터 세웟슴으로 低廉한 곳은 가보지 못하엿스나 뮨헨이 他處와 同質의 것을 주는데 食價는 족음 低廉하더이다.

어대 가던지 平原廣野
獨逸이 어쨰서 富强하냐 하고 그 理由를 물으면 10人10答이 될지 모르나 나는 이點에 잇다 하나이다. 이번 旅行은 일수로 2週日이며 伯林서 西方으로 나아가서 南方으로 돌아 北上하엿나이다. 正北만 못 가보앗지마는 獨逸國을 거의 一週한 세음이외다. 그러나 어대를 가보든지 平原廣野이외다. 本國서 보는 것과 가튼 壯山은 하나도 못 보앗나이다. 크다고 하는 山이 京城에 잇는 南山만한 것이 或間 가물에 콩 나듯 하엿더이다. 獨逸은 全軆가 無山平野라 해도 過言은 아닌 줄 아나이다. 獨逸 뿐 아니라 歐羅巴의 壯山은 南方에 만히 잇나이다. 그러함으로 處處에 芳草가 깔리우고 시내가 흘으는 언덕과 벌판에 牧場이 만흐외다. 어대를 보든지 기름저 보이니 이것이 沃野千里이외다. 딸하서 旅行하는 동안에 隧道라고는 2,3次 밧게 업섯나이다. 그것도 피틘겐서 쾨른 가는 길에 지냇슬 뿐이외다. 거의 全國이 다 이리하니 汽車를 깔기에 人力이 자주 덜 들 것이며 그러하니 獨逸에 鐵道가 만히 깔닐 것은 明確히 알지요. 또 交通이 頻繁해질 것은 明若觀火이외다.
國의 交通의 便不便은 그 國家의 興亡盛衰에 測定器이외다. 獨逸人의 國民性이 아모리 組織的이며 思索的이고 勤勉하다 하드래도 山川이 險惡하야 지리가 不利하엿드면 獨逸의 今日은 問題라 하나이다. 車를 타고 지내어 보면 田野開墾에는 得理하엿나니 乾燥한 곳은 밧을 맨들고 本國서는 起畓할 만한 곳에는 牧場을 맨들엇더이다. 그들은 家畜에게 牧草를 먹여서 肉類를 取食한다 하나이다. 그들은 田野만 그러케 잘 맨드는 것이 아니라 植木에 留意하야 어대를 가든지 山野가 一色이외다. 그뿐 아니라 路邊과 門前에 花草를 만히 심어 自己도 享樂하고 行人의 눈도 질겁게 맨드나이다. 都是 獨逸의 5月은 어대를 가든지 질겁고 조흔 것  뿐이외다. 나는 朝鮮서 富者가 몃 萬圓을 들여서 住宅과 庭園을 잘 꾸미고 산다고들 해도 비록 黑餠은 먹으나 이처럼 淸楚히 하여노코 사는 사람보담 몃 倍 못하리라고 합니다. 獨逸을 謳歌하자는 것도 아니지마는 그들은 少額의 經費를 가지고 適處適用하야 不少한 費用을 亂雜히 들여서 돌이어 蹙目케 하는 것보남 一層 頭腦의 明晳함을 判斷케 하며 全軆를 들어 말슴하면 獨逸서는 사람이 自然 속에서 사는 것이 아니라 自然이 사람 속에서 산다 하겟나이다.＜51＞
＜41-51＞