잡지명	別乾坤 第35號
발행일	1930년 12월 01일
기사제목	世界弱小民族의 三大反亂, 北淸大事變 淸國義和團大暴亂 (The Three Great Rebellions of the World's Weak Minorities, the Great North China Incident, the Great Rebellion of the Righteous Harmony Society in Qing China)
필자	車相瓚
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

The Three Great Rebellions of the World's Weak Minorities, the Great North China Incident, the Great Rebellion of the Righteous Harmony Society in Qing China
Cha Sang-chan

I. The Political World of Qing China After the Sino-Japanese War

After suffering a crushing defeat in the Sino-Japanese War (甲午日淸戰役) and enduring national humiliation that would be difficult to erase for all time, including the cession of vast territories and payment of huge indemnities, Qing China, starting with Emperor Dezong (德宗帝) <88>, fundamentally felt the need for reform of its national administration among a segment of patriotic intellectuals. At that time, the person who most vehemently called for radical reform was Kang Youwei (康有爲), the leader of the late Qing 保皇黨 (Protect the Emperor Society), a figure of emerging vigor, as everyone knows well. He was originally from Nanhai County (南海縣), Guangdong Province (廣東省), and his scholarship and insight were outstanding for his time. He had long held great aspirations for national reform and secretly gathered comrades to organize a reform party. On the one hand, he repeatedly submitted memorials to the Qing Emperor regarding national reform (seven memorials in four years). Finally, Weng Tonghe (翁同龢) (和's 古字), who served as the Qing Emperor's tutor, had known Kang's character since 평소, recommended him to the Qing Emperor, and had him appointed as an Imperial Censor (御史) (around January 1898). Kang Youwei had an audience with the Qing Emperor, passionately discussed the accumulated evils of the times and the need for self-strengthening through reform, and also presented his work, "Reforms in Japan and Russia" (『日本及露西亞의 改革』), praising the reforms of the Meiji Restoration in Japan and the imperial reforms in Russia. The Qing Emperor, who had originally intended to reform the national administration, approved of his opinions and immediately issued an imperial edict to reform the official system, education, military affairs, finance, communication, and other general administrative affairs at once. He also permitted freedom of speech and publication to broadly communicate public opinion. At the same time as employing radical figures like Wang Wenzhao (王文照) besides Kang Youwei, he dismissed all conservative figures who opposed this, even removing Li Hongzhang (李鴻章), then a Grand Secretary of the Zongli Yamen (總理衙門) whose achievements and prestige dominated the era. One can readily infer how drastic and harsh the means and methods of reform were at that time.

However, although this reform was initially successful, it was not based on an awakened populace, but rather a reform driven by the machinations of a few patriotic politicians. Therefore, like the Gapsin Coup (甲申時代) and the reform party of Kim Ok-gyun (金玉均) in Joseon, its fate was not long-lasting. That is, Empress Dowager Cixi (西太后), who was arrogant and indulgent at the time, though she had retired from the position of Regent, always monopolized the real power of the imperial government, openly disliking Dezong's expansion of imperial power. The ignorant and stubborn conservative powerful officials were all Manchus (滿人), so they envied the rise of Kang Youwei's faction of Han Chinese (漢族) and, at the same time, lost their positions and power as a result of the rapid reforms. The conservative party, centered on Empress Dowager Cixi, could not tolerate the reform party at all. Thus, Empress Dowager Cixi dispatched secret envoys to her confidants, such as Prince Duan (端郡王) (later the leader of the Righteous Harmony Society), to rapidly convene a meeting of the Imperial Family and nobles, plotting the deposition of Dezong and the extermination of the reform party. Dezong and the reform party, who knew this plot in advance, tried to take the initiative by secretly ordering Yuan Shikai (袁世凱), the Zhili (直隷) Intendant, whose prestige and virtue dominated the era, to arrest and execute Ronglu (榮祿), the Grand Coordinator of Zhili (直隷總督) and a leading figure of the conservative faction, in Tianjin (天津) and advance to Beijing (北京) to confine Empress Dowager Cixi. If things had proceeded smoothly, the reform of Qing China would have been a complete success. However, Yuan Shikai, who had grown up under Li Hongzhang and was unmatched in cunning and expediency, prioritized expediency over righteousness. At first, he tried to obey the emperor's orders, but seeing the great power of the Empress Dowager Cixi's faction, he abruptly changed his attitude and betrayed the trust and favor of Dezong, informing Ronglu of the secret. Ronglu was greatly alarmed and hurriedly met with Empress Dowager Cixi to report the change. Empress Dowager Cixi was furious and rebuked the Qing Emperor, calling him a great traitor who would destroy the nation. She declared that she would resume ruling and ordered the arrest and execution of Kang Youwei's reform faction. Kang Youwei escaped to Shanghai (上海) on a British warship <89> (receiving a secret edict from the Qing Emperor to flee at that time). Many other reform party members and more than 50 eunuchs who served the Qing Emperor were subjected to brutal beheadings, and the Qing Emperor also suffered the misfortune of being confined. The political world of Qing China returned to the conservative faction centered on Empress Dowager Cixi.

II. The Rise of the Reactionary Party and the Righteous Harmony Society Uprising

As the reactionary party regained power in this way, the ignorant and unenlightened general populace of Qing China at that time experienced a sudden surge of anti-foreign sentiment, sparking anti-foreign riots in various places. The primary target of these riots was the eradication of Catholic missionaries and their religion. Originally, Qing China, like Joseon, had a deep-rooted ideology of rejecting religions other than Confucianism as heresy. Moreover, the encroachment of Westerners on Qing territory and other rights and interests over the years was entirely led by missionaries, so they mistakenly believed that it was permissible to fundamentally eradicate missionaries and churches. Starting with Jiangsu (江蘇), riotous incidents such as the persecution of missionaries and the destruction of churches occurred daily in Anhui (安徽), Shandong (山東), and Zhili (直隷) provinces. Furthermore, the government not only did not prohibit this, but after unreasonably leasing Lüshun (旅順), Jiaozhou Bay (膠洲灣), Guangzhou (廣州), and Weihaiwei (威海衛) to England, France, Russia, and Germany after the Sino-Japanese War, it paid special attention to preserving its territory following their awakening. When Italy demanded Sanmen Bay (三門灣) on the Zhejiang (浙江) coast, it strongly refused. Taking this opportunity, the government issued instructions to the governors-general and governors of each province, stating, "If foreign enemies invade Chinese territory, repel them with military force without waiting for orders from the government." Moreover, Empress Dowager Cixi ordered *Yi (毅) to inspect various places and instruct on the necessity of military formations. As a result, Qing China, from top to bottom, became extremely fervent in its anti-foreign zeal.
At this time, a large riotous group called the Righteous Harmony Society (義和團) rose up in Shandong Province (山東省). This was originally a faction of the White Lotus Sect (白蓮敎派), advocating "Support the Qing, Destroy the Foreigners" (扶淸滅洋), and focusing solely on rejecting Christianity and expelling foreigners. Its followers practiced a type of martial art called Righteous Harmony Boxing (義和拳), claiming that proficiency in this art could defend against guns, cannons, swords, and halberds. Many people sympathized with them, so they were also called Boxer Bandits (拳匪). Originally, Qing China strictly prohibited public gatherings and associations, but secret societies were extremely cleverly developed. In the early 19th century, so-called Big Sword Societies (大刀會) arose, causing great disturbances in the country for a time. After order was restored, these types of rioters reorganized into militia groups, calling themselves Minbingdan (民兵團). By the summer of 1899, they had risen again under the name of the Righteous Harmony Society. So-called Big Sword Society, White Lotus Society, Minbingdan, or any kind of dan (團) were in fact riotous groups with different names but the same body. As mentioned above, taking advantage of the widespread anti-foreign zeal, they waved the banner of "Support the Qing, Destroy the Foreigners" and rose up everywhere, massacring foreigners on sight and wantonly persecuting Christians and destroying churches. Although their actions were violent, the general public recognized them as a group that saved the country and loved the people, responding in unison from east to west. Key figures in the government's conservative faction, centered on Empress Dowager Cixi, secretly communicated with them, ostensibly appeasing them while inwardly <90> assisting and encouraging them (although there was an exception in Shandong Province where Yuan Shikai suppressed and massacred the Righteous Harmony Society). Their power became extremely strong, and in Jinan (濟南), hundreds of Christians were massacred at one time, and the houses of church members that were burned down reached over 5,000 households. In the meantime, North China was suffering from an unprecedented famine, and public sentiment was greatly disturbed. The Righteous Harmony Society considered this a golden opportunity and sent proclamations in all directions to greatly incite the people. Poor people and rebel soldiers responded everywhere. By the spring of 1900, they had already entered Zhili Province as if it were an unpopulated area, destroying railways and bridges and cutting telegraph lines, severing transportation between Beijing and Tianjin and greatly killing foreigners. The legations of the great powers residing in Beijing repeatedly demanded that the Qing government suppress them, but there was no effect whatsoever. On the contrary, government troops supported the Righteous Harmony Society, and their violence increased daily. As a result, seven countries, including Japan, England, the United States, France, Russia, Italy, and Germany, had no choice but to protect their legations with about 400 naval officers and sailors from each country. However, the power of the Righteous Harmony Society was so great that this was not enough to protect the legations, so they requested reinforcements from the ground troops of each country in Tianjin. Commodore Seymour, commander of the British Far East Fleet, led about 2,000 ground troops and hurriedly departed from Tianjin towards Beijing. However, at that time, Qing troops had already blocked the middle of the road, and they could not dare to proceed. The legations of each country were trapped in a siege, and Sugiyama, a secretary at the Japanese legation, and Ketterer, the German minister, were killed by rebel soldiers, and many other foreigners were also persecuted.

III. The Allied Forces' Invasion of Beijing and the Treaty of Peace

As the situation became like this, Qing China thoroughly aimed to expel foreign enemies and avenge the national humiliation that had been accumulating for many years, and formally declared war on each country. They besieged and attacked foreign settlements in Beijing, Tianjin, and other places. The allied powers responded to this by first capturing the Dagu Forts (太沽砲臺), and then launching a general attack on Tianjin. On July 14, they finally captured Tianjin. On August 4, the combined forces, with General Alfred von Waldersee (『와루데루제』) of Germany as the commander-in-chief, consisting of 8,000 Japanese soldiers (日兵), 1,600 British soldiers (英兵), 1,600 American soldiers (米兵), 3,700 Russian soldiers (露兵), 800 French soldiers (佛軍), 200 German soldiers (獨兵), 60 Austrian soldiers (墺兵), and 20 Italian soldiers (伊兵), departed from Tianjin. The troops of Japan, England, and the United States advanced along the right bank of the Bai River (白河右岸), while the troops of the other five countries advanced along the left bank. However, the troops of Germany, Austria, and Italy returned to Tianjin (to protect Tianjin), and the French troops were stationed in Yangcun (楊村). The Allied forces of Japan, England, the United States, and Russia took advantage of the victory and pursued Beijing with irresistible force. Government troops and militia scattered and fled like a mob. The Qing Emperor and Empress Dowager Cixi fled to Xi'an (西安). The Allied forces occupied Beijing, rescued the legations, and dispatched troops to capture Shanhaiguan (山海關) and Beitang (北塘), and also seize Baoding (保定). The Qing court realized that it could not control the overall situation and dispatched Prince Qing (慶親王) and Li Hongzhang to Beijing to negotiate with the ministers of each country, declaring a truce. In December, they agreed on 12 articles, including sending an apology mission for the murder of the German minister and the Japanese secretary, punishing the leaders of the rioters <91>, paying an indemnity of 450 million dollars (approximately 900 million won), destroying the Dagu Forts, establishing protection troops for the legations, and stationing troops in key locations between Beijing and Tianjin. The protocol was signed in September of the following year, 1901, and this incident came to an end.
However, due to this Righteous Harmony Society rebellion, from 1899 to 1900, 188 Protestant missionaries and their families and 44 Catholic monks and nuns were massacred. During the siege of Beijing, 76 people were generally murdered. If we total the casualties of the first and second rescue teams, the losses of the allied powers are enormous. As for the casualties of Qing soldiers and civilians, they actually numbered over tens of thousands, and Beijing became a mountain of corpses and a sea of blood for a time. (Japanese soldiers were mainly at the forefront of this war.)
As a result, in July 1900, in Blagoveshchensk (『뿌라고비에스치엣스크』) on the banks of the Amur River (黑龍江畔), over 4,500 innocent Chinese immigrants were massacred by the Russian authorities on suspicion of being involved with the Righteous Harmony Society. Moreover, the fact that Russia, using this as an excuse, occupied various cities and villages in Manchuria (滿洲) and seized territory is also something that the Chinese people cannot forget and that created the cause of the future Russo-Japanese War is something that everyone remembers. <92>

**Named Entities**

甲午日淸戰役	Kabo Ilch'ŏng Chŏnyŏk
德宗帝	Tŏkchongje
康有爲	Kang Yuwi
南海縣	Namhae-hyŏn
廣東省	Kwangdong-sŏng
翁同龢	Ong Tonghŏ
御史	Ŏsa
王文照	Wang Munj'o
李鴻章	I Hongchang
總理衙門	Ch'ongni Amun
西太后	Sŏt'aehu
金玉均	Kim Okkyun
甲申時代	Kapsin Sidae
端郡王	Tuan Kunwang
袁世凱	Wŏn Sekye
直隷	Chikt’oe
榮祿	Yŏngnok
天津	Ch’ŏnjin
上海	Sanghae
江蘇	Kangso
安徽	Anhui
山東	Santong
毅	Yi
旅順	Ryosun
膠洲灣	Kyojuwŏn
廣州	Kwangju
威海衛	Wihwaewi
浙江	Chŏlgang
三門灣	Sammunman
白蓮敎派	Paengnyŏn Kyop'a
扶淸滅洋	Puch'ŏng Myŏlyang
義和拳	Ŭihwa Kwŏn
拳匪	Kwŏnp'i
大刀會	Taedohoe
民兵團	Minbyŏngdan
濟南	Cejam
杉山	Sugiyama
겟데레루	Ketdereru
太沽砲臺	T’aegu P’odae
와루데루제	Warudeureuje
慶親王	Kyŏngch'inwang
李鴻章	I Hongchang
黑龍江畔	Hŭngnyonggangp'an
뿌라고비에스치엣스크	Ppura-gobiesŭch'iettŭsŭk'ŭ
滿洲	Manju
西安	Sian
白河	Paekha
楊村	Yangch'on



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제35호
발행일	1930년 12월 01일
기사제목	世界弱小民族의 三大反亂, 北淸大事變 淸國義和團大暴亂
필자	車相瓚
기사형태	논설

世界弱小民族의 三大反亂, 北淸大事變 淸國義和團大暴亂
						車相瓚
一. 日淸戰爭후 淸國의 政界

甲午日淸戰役에 여지업는 慘敗를 하고 廣大한 領土의 割讓 巨金의 賠償 등 千古에 씃기 어려운 國恥를 당한 淸國은 德宗帝를<88> 爲始하야 一部 志士識者間에 근본적으로 自國의 국정 개혁을 痛感하게 되엿다. 그 때에 가장 급격한 개혁을 절규한 사람은 누구나 잘 아는 淸末 保皇黨 首領으로 당시 新進氣銳의 인물 康有爲엿다. 그는 원래 廣東省 南海縣 사람으로 학문 식견이 一世에 卓越하야 일즉부터 국정 개혁에 큰 뜻을 두고 비밀히 동지를 모와 한 改革黨을 조직하고 一方으로 淸帝에게 屢次 국정 개혁에 관한 상소를 하더니 (4년 간에 凡 7회 상소) 따마츰 淸帝의 師傳로 잇는 翁同龢(和의 古字)가 平素부터 康의 爲人을 알고 淸帝에게 薦하야 御史를 拜하게 되니(1898년 1월경) 康有爲는 淸帝를 面謁하고 時政의 積弊와 變法自强의 필요를 痛論하며 또 자기의 所著 『日本及露西亞의 改革』을 進하야 日本의 維新과 露國의 帝政改善한 사업을 극구 찬양하니 원래부터 국정 개혁에 뜻이 잇던 淸帝는 그 의견을 嘉納하고 즉시 勅令을 發하야 官制 敎育 軍務 財政 通信 기타 一般庶政을 일시 개혁하고 또 언론 출판 등 자유를 許하야 넓이 民意를 暢達하며 康有爲 이외 王文照 가튼 급진 과격파 人物을 登用하는 동시에 此에 반대 의견을 가진 보수적 인물을 일제 파면하야 심지어 당시 總理衙門 大臣으로 勳功威名이 一世를 傾倒하는 李鴻章까지 免官을 식히니 당시 개혁의 手段方法이 如何히 급격 신랄하엿던 것은 족히 推知할 수 잇는 것이다.
然而이 개혁은 비록 일시에 성공을 하얏스나 원래가 각성한 민중을 토대로 삼은 개혁이 안이요. 일시 몃몃 志士 政客의 책동적 개혁이 되기 때문에 맛치 甲申時代에 朝鮮의 金玉均改革黨과 맛찬가지로 그 운명이 그다지 오래지 못하게 되엿다. 卽 당시 驕侈遙佚한 西太后는 비록 攝政의 位를 退하얏스나 帝政의 實權을 항상 擅弄함으로 德宗의 帝權 擴張을 露骨로 실혀하고 暗眛頑迷한 守舊의 權臣은 擧皆 滿人임으로 康有爲 일파 漢族의 득세를 질시하는 동시에 급격 개혁의 결과로 그 지위 권세를 일허버리게 되니 西太后를 중심으로한 守舊黨은 도저히 개혁당을 용인할 수 업게 되엿다. 그리하야 西太后는 자기의 心腹인 端郡王(후일 義和團의 首魁가 된 인물) 등에게 密使를 파견하야 皇族及貴族會議를 급속히 열고 德宗의 폐위와 개혁당의 撲滅을 꾀하엿섯다. 이 음모를 미리 안 德宗과 개혁당 일파는 먼저 機先을 制하랴고 당시 威德이 一世를 風靡하는 直隷提督 袁世凱를 密命하야 수구파의 巨魁 直隷總督 榮祿을 天津에서 逮捕 斬殺하고 北京에 進軍하야 西太后를 幽閉하기로 하얏다. 일이 그와가티 順調로 진행이 되엿스면 물론 淸國의 개혁은 아주 완전한 성공을 하엿슬 터이나 원래 李鴻章 門下에서 장성하야 奇狡 權變이 무쌍한 袁世凱는 義理보다도 勢利를 먼저 살피게 되여 츰에는 황제의 명을 聽從하랴다가 다시 西太后 一派 수구당의 권세가 큰 것을 보고 태도를 忽變하야 遂히 德宗의 신임하는 恩義를 背하고 도로혀 그 機密을 榮祿에 고하매 榮祿은 대경실색하야 急히 西太后를 謁見하고 變을 告하니 西太后는 크게 노하야 淸帝를 불너 질책하되 국가를 멸망할 大賊이라 하고 자기가 다시 聽政을 할 事를 선언한 후 康有爲 일파의 개혁파를 일망타진으로 체포 처형을 嚴命하니 康有爲는 英國 郡艦으로<89> 도주하야 上海에 망명하고(그때 淸帝로부터 망명하라는 密詔를 受함) 其外 多數한 개혁당과 淸帝를 奉仕하던 50여 인의 宦官 등은 무참한 斬刑을 당하고 淸帝 또한 幽廢의 비운을 당하게 되니 淸國의 정계는 다시 西太后를 중심한 수구파로 도라가고 마럿다.

二. 反動黨의 得勢와 義和團 蜂起

如斯히 反動黨이 다시 세력을 엇게 되매 頑冥暗眛한 당시 淸國의 일반 인민은 外夷攘斥의 思想이 일시 격발하야 각지에서 배외 폭동을 이르켓스니 그 폭동의 第一目標는 天主敎의 선교사와 及其敎의 박멸이엿다. 원래 淸國은 朝鮮과 마찬가지로 儒敎 이외에 타종교를 異端으로 배척하는 사상이 根據가 깁흘 뿐 아니라 年來 西洋人의 淸國領土 其他利權侵害는 全혀 선교사의 선도로 된 것인즉 근본으로 선교사와 교회를 撲滅함이 可하다 오해하고 江蘇를 筆頭로 하야 安徽, 山東, 直隷, 各 省에서 선교사의 박해, 교회당의 破壞 등 폭동의 사건이 날로 이러나는 중 加之 政府는 此를 禁止하지 안을 뿐 아니라 往者 日淸戰爭後 英佛露獨에게 무리하게 旅順, 膠洲灣, 廣州, 威海衛 등을 租借한 후 그 覺醒을 따러서 영토 보전에 특별 유의하매 伊太利가 浙江海岸의 三門灣을 요구함에는 强硬히 거절하고 此를 기회로 하야 정부는 각 성 총독 巡撫에게 訓令하되 『만일 外敵이 중국의 국토를 침해하는 경우에는 정부의 명령을 待치 말고 兵力으로 擊退하라』하고 또 西太后는 *毅를 命하야 각지로 巡視하며 군대 편제의 필요를 訓示하니 이에 淸國은 상하 일치로 排外熱이 극도로 熾盛하게 되엿다.
이때를 타서 山東省에서는 義和團이라는 큰 暴動團이 또 蜂起하얏스니 此는 원래 白蓮敎派의 一派로 扶淸滅洋을 標榜하고 專혀 기독교 배척과 외국인 驅遂을 일삼으며 그 信徒는 義和拳이라 칭하는 일종의 拳術을 행하야 此에 熟達하면 능히 銃砲劍戟을 방지한다고 聲言하니 인민의 附和하는 者가 만코 따러서 拳匪라고도 칭하얏다. 원래 淸國은 인민의 공연한 集會結社를 嚴禁하는 반면에 秘密結社가 극히 교묘하게 발달되야 제 19세기 초엽에는 소위 大刀會라는 폭도가 이러나 일시 국내를 크게 소란케 하다가 그 뒤 질서가 회복됨에 따러서 此種의 폭도는 다시 民兵團을 조직하야 民兵團이라 칭하다가 1899년 여름에 이르러 또 이 義和團이란 명칭을 가지고 이러낫스니 소위 大刀會니 白蓮會니 民兵隊니 무슨 團이니 하는 것은 其實 異名同體의 暴動團體엿다. 그들은 상술함과 가티 일반의 排外熱이 熾盛한 기회를 타서 扶淸滅洋의 깃발을 흔날이며 도처에 봉기하야 외국인을 만나는 대로 학살하고 기독교 신자의 박해 교회당의 파괴를 함부로 하니 그 행동이 비록 난폭하나 일반 민중은 한 救國愛民의 단체로 인정하고 東西呼應하며 西太后를 중심으로 한 정부의 수구파 要路人物들은 暗暗裏에 氣脈을 상통하야 표면으로 此를 鎭撫하면서 내면은<90> 助長 鼓舞하니(山東省에서 袁世凱가 義和團을 討伐虐殺한 例外의 事가 잇섯지만은) 그 勢가 바로 熾省하게 되여 濟南에서는 一時 수백 명의 기독교 신자가 학살을 당하고 교회당 신도의 家屋 燒失된 者 5천여 戶에 달하얏다. 그런 중에 그 때 北淸 일대에는 前古 未曾有의 흉년으로 인심이 크게 흉흉하니 義和團은 此를 千載好機로 생각하고 四方에 傳檄하야 인민을 크게 선동하니 도처에 궁민과 亂兵이 望風呼應하야 1900년 봄에는 벌서 直隷省까지 無人之境과 가티 드러와서 철도 교량을 파괴하고 전선을 切斷하야 北京, 天津間 교통을 단절하고 外人을 크게 살해하니 北京에 在留하는 열강의 公使團은 淸國 政府에 그 鎭撫를 누차 요구하얏스나 하등 효과가 업슬 뿐 아니라 관병이 도로혀 義和團을 聲援하야 그 暴威가 日甚하니 이에 日英米佛露伊獨 七國은 不得已 각 국 水兵將校 4백여 인으로 列國公館을 보호하게 되엿섯다. 그러나 원래 義和團의 세력이 宏大하야 그것으로는 도저히 공관 보호가 불능함으로 다시 天津에 잇는 각국 陸戰隊에 應援을 請하니 英國 東洋艦隊 司令長官 『시-모아-』는 2천여 인의 陸戰隊를 引率하고 급히 天津을 發하야 北京에 向하얏스나 때에는 벌서 淸兵이 中路를 遮斷하야 감히 진행치 못하고 각국 公使館은 重圍에 빠저서 日本公使館 書記官 杉山과 獨逸公使 『겟데레루』는 亂兵에 살해를 당하고 기타 외국인도 다수한 迫害를 당하얏다.

三. 聯合軍의 北京侵入과 講和條約

사태가 이와가티 되매 淸國은 철저히 外敵을 구축하야 多年間 싸여오던 國恥를 雪하랴고 이에 正式으로 각국에 宣戰布告를 하고 北京, 天津 등지의 외국인 居留地를 포위 공격하니 列國은 此에 應戰하야 먼저 太沽砲臺를 함락하고 次에 天津總攻擊을 개시하야 7월 14일에는 遂히 天津城을 함락하고 8월 4일에는 總指揮官 獨逸元師 『와루데루제』 인솔 하에 日兵 8천人, 英兵 천6백人, 米兵 천 6백人, 露兵 3천 7백人, 佛軍 8백人, 獨兵 2백人, 墺兵 60人, 伊兵 20人의 總聯合軍은 天津을 출발하야 日,英,米 三國의 兵은 白河右岸으로 進軍하고 其外 五國의 兵은 左岸으로 進하다가 獨墺伊 3國兵은 天津으로 도라오고(天津保護를 위하야) 佛兵은 楊村에 留屯케 한 후 日英米露의 연합군은 乘勝長驅하야 破竹의 勢로 北京을 追擊하니 官兵과 民兵은 烏合의 衆과 가티 四散敗走하고 靑帝及西太后는 西安으로 蒙塵하니 연합군은 이에 北京을 점령하야 公使館을 구출하고 다시 軍을 派하야 山海關·北塘을 略하며 또 保定을 奪取하니 淸廷은 大勢의 엇지할 수 업슴을 깨닷고 慶親王과 李鴻章을 北京에 派遣하야 各國 公使와 협의하야 休戰을 선언하고 12월에 至하야는 獨逸公使及日本書紀官殺害에 대한 謝罪使의 파견 匪團首魁의 처벌<91> 賠償金 4억 5천만불(약 9억원)의 지불을 위시하야 太沽砲臺의 破壞, 공사관 보호병 設置, 北京天津間 要地駐屯兵 設置 등 범 12개조를 約하고 翌 1901년 9월에 議定書에 調印을 하니 이 사변은 이에 아주 終局을 結하얏다.
然而이 拳匪의 亂으로 인하야 1899년부터 1900년까지 외국인의 학살을 당한 자는 新敎宣敎師及基家族이 188人 舊敎僧尼 44人 北京包圍 시대에 일반 살해자 76명인 바 此에 제일 제이 兩回의 救援隊의 死傷者를 총계하면 列國의 손해도 막대하려니와 淸國 軍民의 사상자로 말하면 실로 수만 이상에 달하야 일시 北京 성내가 尸山血海가 되엿섯다.(此戰爭에는 주로 日兵이 先鋒이 되엿다.)
그리고 그 결과로 또 1900년 7월에는 黑龍江畔 『뿌라고비에스치엣스크』에서 중국의 移住民이 義和團과 관계하엿다는 혐의로 露國 官廳에게 4천 5백여의 무고한 사람이 2일간 대학살을 당하고 또 此를 구실로 하야 滿洲의 여러 도시 촌락을 陷沒하고 영토를 점령한 것은 또한 중국인의 잇지 못할 일이며 미래 日露戰爭의 원인을 지은 것도 누구나 기억되는 일이엿다. <92>
<88-92>