別乾坤 第35號
1930년 12월 01일
흡연실 (Smoking Room)
소식 (News)

At the Giseong Association (箕城券番) in P'yŏngyang, they are planning to establish a hospital exclusively for *kisaeng* (妓生) in commemoration of their 10th anniversary. In that case, the hospital's doctor should be a specialist in venereal disease (花柳病專門醫師), right?

Hanil Bank (韓一銀行) and Hosŏ Bank (湖西銀行) are merging this time, and they were going to name the new bank Hanho Cooperative Bank (韓湖協同銀行), but the authorities said the character "Han" (韓字) was unsettling, so they eventually renamed it Tongil Bank (東一銀行). At this rate, it would be easy to rename the Han clan (韓氏) as Chosŏn clan (朝鮮氏), and Hansan ramie (韓山苧) as Chosŏnsan ramie (朝鮮山苧).

Speaking of "an" being "an," right after the merger, a Japanese friend once sent Han Sang-nyong (韓相龍) of Hanŭn (漢銀) a New Year's card addressing him as Chosŏn Sang-nyong (朝鮮相龍).

The perpetrator of the assassination attempt on Prime Minister Hamaguchi, Sagoya Tomeo (佐鄕屋留雄), is said to have been born in Korea. I wonder if the blood of an unruly Korean (不逞鮮人) might have been inherited. If we were to give him a name, it would be "Unruly Korean-Produced Japanese Youth" (不逞鮮産日本靑年).

It's better to say "Prime Minister Assassination Attempt." Suzuki Toramatsu (鈴木虎松) from Akita Prefecture, a 27-year-old youth, is said to have been so saddened and indignant upon hearing this news that he committed suicide by hanging (悲憤自縊). Isn't he the top disciple of the school principal who lost his mind after hearing about the recent Taiwan Incident?

Looking at the comparative table of military expenditure budgets for major powers next year, Italy accounts for 24% of the total budget, France 22%, the United States 21%, the United Kingdom 15%, and Japan accounts for 24%, ranking first in the world.

However, in Korea, even infantry units of around 200 men are being completely disbanded, and their budget of 240,000 won is being cut. In that sense, Korea is the world's leader in military reduction, making it a perfect contrast for the world.

Because of the will of Namgang Yi Sŭng-hun (南岡 李昇薰氏) requesting that his remains be kept at the school, the matter became quite complicated. However, Han Kyu-sŏl (韓圭卨氏) requested in his obituary that there be no funeral notice and that only a simple four-person bier (四人밤상) be used, making the matter very simple. Even with the same will, does the judgment differ depending on the person and their hometown (京鄕)?

In Tokyo, a major strike (大盟休) occurred centered around Waseda University (早大). Perhaps it is because they did not conduct preemptive crackdowns (檢擧) like in Korea.

At the recent meeting of the Shinkanhoe (新幹會) Central Committee, a student was taken to the police station after eavesdropping (傍聽). He was treated that way just for eavesdropping; if he had joined (入會), he would have at least visited the prosecutor's office (檢事局).

In other places, problems like tax cuts (稅金減下) and teacher salary cuts (敎員俸給減下) keep arising, but Kyŏngsŏng-bu (京城府) is doing the opposite, deciding to increase household taxes (戶別稅) and school fees (學校費) by 30%.

Even if they are innately blessed individuals (天부지의 인물들) who sit comfortably and eat their fill, how can they be so unaware of the people's circumstances (民間事情)? Instead of increasing taxes (稅金增收), how about reducing the salaries of high-ranking, useless teachers (高級老廢物의 敎員俸給)? However, is that something that can even be said? Where do all the high-ranking teachers come from (高級 敎員이 다 어느 곳 사람들이기에)?

In Shizuoka Prefecture (靜靜岡縣), an earthquake occurred, causing immense damage, including deaths and injuries to people and livestock, and destruction of buildings. Still, it is fortunate that the damage was less than the Tokyo earthquake, and it is also fortunate for the fellow Koreans residing there (在留同胞의 多幸) that a self-defense corps (自警團) did not form.

Due to budget cuts, even the bean rice (콩밥) for prisoners (監獄囚) is being reduced. At this rate, they might even start slash-and-burn farming (火田起耕) on the backs of whetstones (벼루기 잔등에). <115>

**Named Entities**

箕城券番	Kisŏng Kwŏnbŏn
平壤	P'yŏngyang
韓一銀行	Hanil Ŭnhaeng
湖西銀行	Hosŏ Ŭnhaeng
韓湖協同銀行	Hanho Hyŏptong Ŭnhaeng
韓	Han
韓氏	Hanssi
韓山苧	Hansan Chŏ
朝鮮氏	Chosŏnssi
朝鮮山苧	Chosŏnsan Chŏ
漢銀	Hanŭn
韓相龍	Han Sang-nyong
朝鮮相龍	Chosŏn Sang-nyong
濱口	Hamaguchi
佐鄕屋留雄	Sagoya Tomeo
秋田縣	Akita-ken
鈴木虎松	Suzuki Toramatsu
臺灣	T’aiwan
南岡 李昇薰	Namgang Yi Sŭng-hun
韓圭卨	Han Kyu-sŏl
東京	Tōkyō
早大	Sōdai
新幹會	Shinkanhoe
京城府	Kyŏngsŏng-bu
靜靜岡縣	Shizuoka-ken
東京	Tōkyō



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제35호
발행일	1930년 12월 01일
기사제목	吸烟室
기사형태	소식

吸烟室
平壤箕城券番에서는 創立 10주년 기념으로 妓生專用病院을 設立하기로 計劃한다고. 그러면 그 病院醫師는 花柳病 專門醫師라야 되겟지.

이번에 韓一 湖西 兩銀行이 合同되는데 새 명칭을 韓湖協同銀行이라 하럇더니 當局에서 韓字가 不穩타 하야 결국 東一銀行으로 改稱하얏다지. 그러다가는 韓氏를 朝鮮氏, 韓山苧를 朝鮮山苧라고 改稱하기도 쉬울 것.

안인게 안이라 合倂 卽後에 漢銀의 韓相龍을 엇던 日本 친구가 朝鮮相龍이라고 年賀狀에 * 일도 잇섯지.

濱口首相의 狙擊犯人 佐鄕屋留雄은 朝鮮胎生이라고 한다. 不逞鮮人의 피가 或 遺傳이나 되지 안엇는지 그 名辭를 짓자면 曰 不逞鮮産日本靑年이다.

首相狙擊의 말이 낫스니 말이지. 秋田懸 鈴木虎松이란 當年 27세의 청년은 이 소식을 듯고 悲憤自縊하엿다지. 요전 臺灣事件의 소식을 듯고 놀나 失眞한 학교장의 首弟子이나 안인가?

明年度 列强國의 軍事費豫算 比較表를 보면 伊太利는 全豫算의 24%, 佛國은 22%, 米國은 21%, 英國은 15%, 日本은 24%로 世界首位를 占하얏다.

그런데 朝鮮에는 200명 내외의 步兵隊까지 아주 解散 식히게 되야 그 예산 24만원을 削除한다고. 그리고 보면 軍備縮少로는 朝鮮이 세계의 首位니 天下好對照로군.

南岡 李昇薰氏는 遺骨을 학교에 보관하라는 遺言이 잇슴으로 因하야 문제가 퍽 복잡하게 되더니 韓圭卨氏는 訃告도 말고 喪輿도 四人밤상을 쓰란 유언을 하야 일이 아주 간단하게 되엿다. 가튼 遺言이라도 인물과 京鄕을 따러 判異한가.

東京에서도 早大를 중심으로 하야 大盟休 사건이 발생하얏다. 아마 朝鮮에서처럼 미리 檢擧를 안이한 까닭이겟지.

이번에 열인 新幹會 中央委員會에는 학생이 傍聽을 하다가 警察署까지 불녀갓다가 왓다. 傍聽을 갓기에 그럿치 만일 入會를 하엿더면 적어도 檢事局은 갓다올 걸.

다른 곳에서는 稅金 減下니 敎員 俸給 減下니 하는 문제가 작구 이러나는 판에 京城府는 그와 正反對로 戶別稅 學校費를 3할 增收하기로 되엿다지.

아모리 배부르게 편이 안저 먹는 천부지의 인물들이기로 民間 事情을 그다지 몰은단 말인가 稅金 增收보다도 高級老廢物의 敎員 俸給을 減下함이 如何. 그러나 그런 말은 될 번이나 할 말이냐 高級 敎員이 다 어느 곳 사람들이기에.

靜靜岡縣에서는 震災가 이러나 人畜의 死傷 建物의 破壞 등 손해가 莫大하엿다. 그래도 東京 震災에 比하야 손해가 적은 것이 幸이어니와 自警團 안이 생긴 것도 在留同胞의 多幸이다.

예산 긴축하는 바람에 監獄囚의 콩밥까지도 줄게 되엿다 한다. 그러다가는 벼루기 잔등에 火田起耕도 할걸. <115>