잡지명 별건곤 제35호
발행일 1930년 12월 01일
기사제목 骨相學上으로 본 朝鮮의 役軍의 얼골(제4회) (The Faces of Joseon's Servicemen from a Physiognomical Perspective (Part 4))
필자 裵相哲
기사형태 잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

The Faces of Joseon's Servicemen from a Physiognomical Perspective (Part 4)
Bae Sang-cheol

Rich, Small, and Noble: Kim Yong-mu

Lawyers and doctors are treated with deference, addressed as "Teacher! Teacher!" with bows, but inwardly, everyone likely thinks, "I'll get my pockets picked by that fellow again," without genuine admiration! However, in Joseon, the lawyers that the Doctor thinks of, such as Kim Byeong-ro, Kim Yong-mu, and Lee In, are known as refined gentlemen who don't prioritize filling their own pockets for the sake of society. This is not just the Doctor's opinion but also the world's consensus, so there's no need to elaborate. I'll just assess their physiognomy! The first person who caught the Doctor's spiritual eye this time was our Mr. Kim Yong-mu (I call him "Teacher" not because I studied law under him, just for the sake of conversation). So, what is he like?

His heart and mind are pure, honest, and his temperament is a bit impatient. This can be discerned from his somewhat pointed hairline.

However, he seems to be a yangban (aristocrat) from Jeolla Province. One can guess this from his accent: "Hey, try doing it this way!" Even a small bit of his dialect gives it away. In face reading, there are different methods for Southerners and Northerners. Namely, those from Southern yangban families like in Jeolla Province <116> often have well-developed foreheads (天庭), which leads to high office. However, Mr. Kim's forehead isn't particularly well-developed. Looking from his hairline down to his midbrow (印堂), it's so far that it's like Gwanghwamun Street (oops, that was a slip of the tongue, I take it back). Anyway, it is quite broad, radiant, and powerful. However, because his hairline and temples (邊城) are rather pointed, he's not fit for a high-ranking official position. He probably just thought about becoming a good lawyer. And who said being a lawyer is worse than being a appointed official?

Let's put that aside, and his Saturn, that is, his nose, is certainly going to be a really great nose.
Namely, in face reading, it is considered to be the best nose. His face has no murderous aura at all and looks agreeable, and his eyes appear intelligent upon intelligent, and his judgement palace (nose) is abundant and upright so he is not only of a wealthy personality, but a figure that is good at judgements, so other than being a lawyer or a judge what else would he be? However, being a judge as I said earlier is less of a fit because of his hairline and temples.

I heard that Mr. Kim is several years old, but the Doctor who is always drunk with makgeolli (rice wine) often greets people repeatedly even after having just done so, so how would I have the ability to know his age? I don't know how old he is, but from 48 years old, he will become very wealthy. Can this poor scholar Doctor get some help? Hey, why is everyone else. In any case, adding one word to the Doctor's judgment, he will accumulate millions in wealth, have great fame, and also be benevolent and righteous, with his influence spreading far and wide. Moreover, if a son is born, he will receive great favor. How could one not envy the Doctor who doesn't know money?
Hey! Teacher! From now on, the Doctor will pray to God that you become a great man from 48 or 49 years old. Just like in the old days, Yu Tak-gi and Yu Jeong-seung said, "After praying for a daughter in the South, look at her face," haha.
No matter what kind of big incident may occur, he will proceed with honesty and a principle of integrity (oops, principle, color glasses), and will never do anything shady. This is why the Doctor cannot forget him among the many lawyers. Moreover, in Joseon, everyone knows that Kim Byeong-ro and Kim Yong-mu prioritize righteousness over money. But they wouldn't know how that came to be (how, in Jeolla dialect). So, the Doctor will tell you where that advantage of his comes from! It's because his Loyalty and Faith Academy (忠信學堂) and Inner Academy (內學堂) (including his mouth, teeth, and tongue) are very neatly contracted and also wonderfully (妙) done.

And if he was born in the era of White Tiger smoking, it would have been difficult for him to pass the civil service exam (登第) due to the relationship between his temples and forehead, and if he became a scholar, he would have lived in seclusion like a hermit, effortlessly holding important positions such as the Jeolla Governor, Censor-General of the Office of the Inspector General, and Rector of the Sungkyunkwan (성균관). Oh my, Arirang Arariyo. Oops, why is the refined Doctor suddenly singing wildly in the style of Pyeongan Province? I don't know why I'm doing this myself!
He is also born with a long lifespan. He will undoubtedly add 5 years to 70 years old (in Seoul dialect, "wenu-ri") and his wealth and fame in his later years will be very strong. This isn't an evaluation that skimps on the tail soup (鰍湯), so what more can I say? From the first month of next year, in the words of the elders of Yeongnam, <117> I'll stop if I can't be understood.

-Chungangja said, "What is the meaning of living in the world, experiencing bitterness and joy, having nothing and yet having everything?"

Clear Ambition: Ding Chil-seong

Three Unsuccessful Visits

The Doctor shined his shoes, brushed his Western suit, and shaved, all in preparation to observe the physiognomy of Ms. Ding Chil-seong, no less than three times. However, every time he knocked on her door, he was told that she had "gone to the Dong-A Ilbo," or "gone to the Chestnut Picking Contest hosted by the Chosun Ilbo," so he couldn't meet her. ("She seems to be from Yeongnam, so the Doctor will start in the Yeongnam dialect.)
I wonder if those people in Yu Prefecture (劉豫州) who were trying to see Sleeping Dragon Mister (臥龍先生) had a harder time meeting each other. (Don't get me wrong and think that this doctor sees himself as Liu Bei, this is just a joke.)
But I wasn't just being humble, I was determined to meet her even if it meant visiting her a hundred times. So, on my fourth visit I would get to meet her. What’s the difference? If I met Zhang Fei, we would be fighting, but when I meet people I do face readings! So let’s go!

Who Knows the Past Misfortunes?!

Because it was Ding Chil-seong, the doctor at first only knew him as a man. This autumn, one of my friends said that she was a woman, so I knew. You can see how wide the doctor's social network is. That is the doctor's job. The face reading of Ms. Ding Chil-seong has nothing to do with it, so there is no need to say anything unnecessary and let's get to the face reading!
"Hello! No, hello. Ms. Chil-seong, you have truly had many turbulent times in the past. If your heart wasn't so generous, I would write, 'Alas, this separation is like grass burned by fire. If there were no separation, you would sit alone in a widow's chamber.' Because your forehead is so developed and protruding. And your heart is truly a lady amongst ladies. You have the virtue of respecting superiors and caring for subordinates, and you have a generous forgiving nature. You also seem to have a slightly impatient side, but what does that matter.

And you have had so many past misfortunes. Who would know about your misfortunes? Only Bae-senji (僉知), the face reading expert, would know. Haha.

Beauty, Great Strength, and Literary Ability? <118>

Teacher (why is the doctor calling someone 'teacher' again) you are quite elegant and beautiful. From the fact that your face is a little pale and the bridge of your nose is straight, I know that you are honest, and as a woman, your eyes are big, so unlike men, you will have no misfortune. Your illness palace (the waist of your nose) is dead, so you will have some chronic illnesses. And your slim attitude and neat style really show the attitude of a female senior. But her writing "I don't know if she's good at writing, but if I knew she was a woman, I would have looked at the writing more carefully. What's going on, her name is like a man's name, so I don't know. But other people say she writes well." (Teacher, don't be angry. Are you playing with people? She sounds like she's speaking in Gyeongsang dialect. That's just the doctor's fundamental habit.)
Ms. Chil-seong is probably very strong. No matter how I look at it, she could easily carry about 15 liters of sesame seeds.
Ah! I forgot one thing. It's nothing special, but it's something the Doctor can't forget, so I want to write about it.
The Doctor met her after a long time, after many twists and turns, so he presented his business card.
Besides the three letters of Bae Sang-cheol, the Doctor's business card has a presumptuous title, that is, the two letters of Chun-gang on the left. (This was not the doctor's idea, but when I greeted Mr. Yang Baek-hwa the other day, I saw that his business card had a title written on it, and I thought, "That's right, Mr. Yang is tall (I made a mistake), the doctor is tall, Mr. Yang is a Chinese scholar, Mr. Bae is a Chinese scholar. (even if it's just to say to oneself) I have to imitate him somehow.")
So, when I gave her the business card, she looked at it carefully and asked, "What village is Chungang?"
At that moment, the doctor just said, "Oh my," that's all I wanted to say. Really, Teacher, too.

Rare in Ancient and Modern Times: Little Wealth, Great Fame

Ms. Ding's bone structure doesn't look rich at all. Her Earth House (土屋) isn't abundant, her Earth Treasury (地庫) is narrow and thin, and her Heavenly Granary (天倉) is sunken. All of this is telling her not to expect wealth. But she will probably have great fame in the future. Her Outer Academy (ear gate) is good, her Sun and Moon (日月) are shining, and her skin and hair show intelligence, so no matter how I look at it, she will almost monopolize the name of women in Joseon in the future. I'll only write this much!

That heaven sent you to this place (鰈域=Joseon) is not a coincidence.
Your slender neck
is getting thinner from the hibiscus blossoms you hold.
Getting even paler.

We see your pale face
and can shed tears of emotion.
But, but the hibiscus flowers clinging to your back
Unless those sweat droplets are taken in, will they not be revived?
Will they not be revived?

That heaven sent you to this place is not a coincidence.
With this one sentence, we hasten to add a drop of warm sweat to your sweating back,
Don't doubt the reward!
We will crown your head with hibiscus blossoms you support!

Fierce Tiger Hidden in the Forest: Cha Sang-chan

His forehead is balding, his eyes are bright, the outline of his face is clear, and he is flat-nosed. If he had sideburns, I think he would have looked exactly like Dr. Morishita, who was drawn on the cover of the Daigaku Mokuyaku. No, if Dr. Morishita shaved the beard on his face, he would look exactly like Cha Sang-chan (靑吾), the pen name.
The doctor, roaming through the capital and provinces to look for people, said "Eek!" without realizing it, like a fisherman who saw a carp in the river. The first time he saw Cha Sang-chan was when he entered the capital. So the doctor has wanted to introduce him by writing about him on paper for a long time, but he works for a magazine that he edits, so he declines with public excuses and asks me to leave him out. But "Whether to evaluate or not is up to me, whether to use or not is up to him," so let's write anyway! If he doesn't like it, he will "think of the doctor as less than dirt on his feet, and if he puts it on paper, he will lose face," so he will be in a difficult position (立場ガ苦シイ) in Busan dialect. Anyway, his face has excess yang. It is the Four Excesses: excess in form, excess in yang, excess in energy, and excess in blood. And he is skilled in writing, speaking, and adapting, and is cunning (don't get angry), and he is clumsy in dancing, singing, and swimming, and he will probably be clumsy in marathons as well. The points that the doctor wants to pick up on are not the three of dancing, singing, and swimming. It is in the three below.

1. Big Mouth

His mouth is incredibly big. When you see his mouth when he yawns, it seems to stretch from the corner of his left mouth to the corner of his right mouth.

2. Big Ambition

If our ambition is big, what do we do as a result? At best, we don't go to jail. The big one is big, though. Like they say in Yeongnam, "I have a small ambition," there’s no use saying that. Who would care? In a word, he has a heroic ambition, and it would be as easy as pie for him to cross the mountains and cross the sea.

3. Big Drinking Capacity

He can drink enough alcohol for a whole jug, although not as much as the doctor, so I can't say he drinks little. <120>
But the above is not what makes him the most important thing on his face. He has one really good thing.
"A swallow's chin and a tiger's head are destined to become generals and ministers." His chin is clearly a swallow's chin no matter how you look at it. And look closely at his forehead and head. You can see that it is likely to be a tiger's head. Moreover, look at his bright, sparkling inspector (eyes). Don't you see something that would allow him to have thousands of soldiers under his command and use them at will? But the general... if... oh... if he had taken the Joseon Infantry test a long time ago, it would have been good. However, what about a private? Face, Seung-sang, Mr. Cha, so it seems that he is related to the Cha Emperor. Why don't you go out there? Is the Gae-gwan Company anything like a sweet potato store? The doctor is talking nonsense because he is bored. I am very sorry. Now I will write in the Suyeol language and be very determined.
Mr. Cheong-o has escaped the calamity. If you put him in the seat of the president of a company, people will say, "Well, he's so handsome, that's why he's the president (don't push around the presidents, then). Those who are only smiling at other people, they're all alike!" If he was born in a country and (phew-) got close to the Prime Minister's table lately, he would say, "Prime Minister Cha is doing a great job. He has the looks and everything..." He would cheer him on without even swallowing his saliva. You guys (oh, I misspoke. Please forgive me.)
However, if he was born in the era of smoking White Tiger cigarettes, even if his last name was Cha, he would not be able to roll around like a wheelbarrow (車). If he didn't, he would be a meritorious subject of loyalty, righteousness, assistance, and praise, a meritorious subject of loyalty, energy, and enemy hatred, and would be promoted to the position of Great Governor, Supporter of the Nation, and Minister of the Uijeongbu (Oh, what a luxury!) and after his death, he would be the owner of a face that would undoubtedly receive the posthumous title of Munui-gong (文毅公), combining both literary and military skills. -Like they say in the Yeongnam dialect, why didn't you get born a little earlier!
But a dragon is a dragon. Why should it become a snake or an earthworm just because it doesn't have a chance to meet the times? His plump carrying tube nose and the arched Four Mountains are enough to indicate that he will become a millionaire in the future (if not a rich man, he may become the leader of the people), so "When a person becomes rich, benevolence and righteousness are attached to him," so if he becomes rich, that's it. What else is there to gain in this world?
"In early spring, the mountains are full of forest flowers," so it will probably be the time for the 48 or 49 year's of his luck to definitely arrive. "Cheong-o is loyal and upright, and his lonely sail crosses the sea ten thousand miles" (Oh, the doctor writes well. Let's praise ourselves.) will be the farewell to him from his younger generation when he "is tired of the world at a hundred years old, rides on the white clouds, and returns to the side of the Emperor."
His sixtieth birthday will be like a rat entering a warehouse and accumulating wealth. He will easily accumulate wealth. His rare fame will move the four neighborhoods, so he will probably end up playing the role of some kind of religious leader.

=How many times do people ask to be guests? The autumn moon and spring breeze are seventy-five immortals.=
The doctor says, "If there is a vessel, it must be used. If there is a person, there must be a time. Holding jade and waiting for the price, living in seclusion and waiting for the time." If there is a vessel but it is not used, if there is a person but there is no time, it is like Qian's ninth three. Wouldn't it be a great responsibility given to this person? Must first suffer his heart, labor his muscles, starve his body, and empty his body. <121>

**Named Entities**

金用茂	Kim Yong-mu
金炳魯	Kim Byeong-ro
李仁	I In
全羅道	Jeolla-do
光化門通	Gwanghwamun Street
俞拓基	Yu T'ak-ki
俞政承	Yu Chŏng-sŭng
嶺南	Yŏngnam
劉豫州	Yu Yŏju
臥龍先生	Oryong Sŏnsaeng
張飛	Chang P'i
丁七星	Ting Ch'il-sŏng
東亞日報	Tong-A Ilbo
朝鮮日報	Chosŏn Ilbo
裵相哲	Pae Sang-ch'ŏl
梁白華	Yang Paek-hwa
森下博士	Morishita hakase (Dr. Morishita)
車相瓚	Ch'a Sang-ch'an
釜山	Pusan
京鄕	Kyŏnghyang
全羅都事	Chŏlla Tosa
司憲府掌令	Sahŏnbu Changnyŏng
成均館祭酒	Sŏnggyunkwan Cheju
忠勤 節義 翊讚 功臣	Ch'unggŭn Chŏlŭi Ikchan Kongsin
精忠 出氣 敵愾 功臣	Chŏngch'ung Ch'ulgi Chŏkkae Kongsin
大匡 輔國 崇錄大夫	Taegwang Poguk Sungnoktaebu
議政府 領議政	Ŭijŏngbu Yŏngŭijŏng
文毅公	Munuigong



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제35호
발행일	1930년 12월 01일
기사제목	骨相學上으로 본 朝鮮의 役軍의 얼골(제4회)
필자	裵相哲
기사형태	잡저

骨相學上으로 본 朝鮮의 役軍의 얼골(제4회)
						裵相哲
富多貴小 金用茂

辯護士나 醫師라면 아수니까 선생님! 선생님!하며 고개를 숙이지만 누구나 內容으로는 「저 친구한테 또 주머니를 빨닌담」하며 眞心으로 感服던 못할 것이지 아마! 허지만 우리 朝鮮에 잇서는 博士가 생각하는 辯護士로는 金炳魯, 金用茂, 李仁氏 등이 가장 사회를 위하야 자기 주머니를 배불닐 줄 모르는 점잔하신 어른으로만 알고 잇다. 그것은 博士 뿐만 아니라 世上이 公認하는 것이니 더 말할 필요가 업ㅅ고 다만 나는 나 할 노릇으로 그들의 骨相이나 평해 보자! 이번에 먼저 博士의 靈眼에 비최인 어른이 우리 金用茂 선생(博士가 그한테 法律工夫를 해서 先生이라는 건 안이요, 거저 말하자니 말이지.)이엿다. 그러면 그는?
그는 心相이 醇厚正直하고 性品이 좀 急하다. 髮際가 좀 뾰족하게 된 것을 보아 알ㅅ수 잇다.
헌데 氏는 全羅道 兩班이신 듯하다. 「아그 이 사람아 헤보랭께 그리야-야 이리오니랴 늬도 헤보고」 요만-하신 나마리 앗차 사토리를 드러보아 짐작할 수 잇다. 그러면 相書에 南方人과 北方人의 相 보는 法이 다 다른 것이다. 卽 全羅道 가튼 南方 양반사람미들은<116> 첫재 天庭이 잘 發達하야 베슬도 잘하고 하는 것이다. 헌데 氏야말로 天庭이 如干 팬찬케 발달된 것이 안이다. 髮際에서 印堂까지 내려보면 아조 가마득-해서 미치 光化門通(앗치) 애고 失體외다 取消하겟슴니다. 엇잿든 퍽 넓ㅅ고 윤나고 유력함니다. 그러나 髮際와 邊城이 뾰족한데 近하야 高等官ㅅ짜리는 못된다. 거저 辯護士 참 잘 생각하셋지. 그리고 웨 辯護士가 다런 무슨 奏任官令監만 못해서.-
그건 그럿타고 하고 그의 土星 卽 코는 아조 가네못지가 될 코이다.
卽 相書에 第一 조흔 縣胆鼻이다. 얼골이 아모 殺氣가 업고 順順해 보이는 중 그의 눈이 聰明에 聰明을 거듭해 보이고 그이 審判官(鼻)이 豐厚端直하야 非但 富人格 뿐 외라 可謂 審判官得格의 相이니 그가 辯護士나 判事가 안되고 다시 무에 될 것인고? 그러나 判事는 압서 말한 바와 가티 髮際와 邊城의 관계로 緣分이 적은 것이다.
金先生이 몃 살이라고 하시더라만, 막걸니에 醉해서 깰 줄 모르는 博士는 今方 인사하고도 또다시 인사헤보자고 하는 때가 平平이니 더구나 남의 나히 쯤이야 아러먹을 才操가 잇서야지. 그가 몃 살인지는 모르되 48세부터는 巨富가 될 것이다. 이 푸로 書生의 博士 좀 안 살녀주실나나! 제 -기 참 남은 *왜. 엇잿든 박사-靈斷을 내려 一言을 加하면 富累百萬, 名聲赫赫, 更兼仁義, 千里相應, 若夫, 有子生甲, 恩覃重泉. -이러하니 그 엇지 돈 모르는 博士기로 부러워 안을 것인가.
여보! 先生! 博士가 선생 48, 9부터 巨富가 되라고 從今으로 하나님 아버지께 祈禱하오리다. 마치 옛날 兪拓基 兪政承이 「南有祈女以後相」이람과 한가지로, 呵呵.
氏는 아모리 무슨 큰 數 생길 사건이라도 정직과 淸白主義 (에크 主義라다 色 안경에-)를 써 나가지 결코 어둠 침침턴 안 하실 것이다. 이것이 써 博士가 여러 辯護士令監 중에서도 그를 잇치지 못할 點이다. 그뿐 안이라 朝鮮서 金炳魯, 金用茂 兩氏라면 돈 보담 義를 압세우는 이들도 알지 안는 이가 업ㅅ다. 그러나 그가 어-ㅅ치기 (엇더케, 全羅道語) 생겨서 그럿타는 것은 모르리라. 그러면 博士가 그이 그런 長點에써 나온 곳을 말해 볼께로 구먼! 忠信學堂과 內學堂(입ㅅ과 이뻘 혀까지)이 아조 꼭 얌전이 긴축되고도 묘(妙)-하게 된 까닭이다.
그리고 그가 만약 白虎喫煙時代에 나섯더면 邊城과 天庭關係로 登第는 어렵고 무름만 꿀어 學者가 된다면 累入道*에 隱逸로 全羅都事, 司憲府掌令, 成均館祭酒 등의 要職을 無難히 지내실 것이다. 어그머-니나, 아리랑 아라리요. 앗차 점잔찬은 博士가 또 무엇이 平安道 말마따나 섣운(서운)해서 狂歌를 發햇노? 내가 내지만 내맘 나도 모르네!
氏는 壽 조차 만히 타고 나섯다. 70세에 에누리 업시 (서울 친구의 사토리로는 외누리) 5歲를 加할 것이고 末年의 富와 名望이 아조 단단이 종거시다. 鰍湯한 꼬리 안 걸니는 評이니 더 써 멀하노. 明年 첫 正月부터는 嶺南 어르신네들 말씨 맛다나, <117> 내싸쑬루앵바더주닌싸람은 고만둘따.-
-春岡子曰, 苦而樂, 無而有, 人生於世, 又得何義.

志漑淸楚 丁七星

三訪不遇

丁七星女史의 觀相을 보려고 博士가 구두를 닥ㅅ고 洋服에 솔질을 하고 面刀질을 하기 무릇 三次엿섯다. 허나 그의 門前을 두다리기만 하면 번번이 「東亞日報싸에를 가섯다는둥, 朝鮮日報社主催 拾栗大會에를 가셋다는둥」캐서 함번 만나 볼 수 업섯다. 「氏가 嶺南胎生이신 듯하야 박사도 嶺南 말로 시작함.)
白雪이 紛紛한데 臥龍先生을 만나려고 三顧草廬하던 劉豫州인들이 이상 더 受苦햇슬나고 (그러면 또 박사가 劉備에나 自處하는 줄 誤認튼 마씨소이, 灰垣(재담) 좀 헤보니라고 그랫소.)
허지만 제가 제 몸 추는 게 안이라 워낙 찰그머리 가튼 박사라 놔서 百訪不遇가 되더라도 그여코 차저뵈려고 결심을 햇더니 결과로 제4차 尋訪에 가서는 맛나뵈게 되엿겟지! 머 別조잇나 張飛는 맛나면 싸홈일너라고 박사는 맛나면 觀相이지! 자- 그러면 응!

過去厄運有誰知?!

丁七星氏락 하기에 박사는 처음은 남자로만 알잔엇겟나. 올ㅅ가을에 어너 도모닷찌가 女子시라고 해서 비로소 알고 보니 고만하면 박사의 出入 넓은 건 알 수 잇슬 것이다. 아무 때나 그건 박사의 일이고 丁七星氏 觀相評에는 無關係한 일이니 잔소리 할 것 업시 相評이나 쓰자!
「여봅시요! 안이 여보세요. 七星氏 참 過去에 波瀾曲折이 참말 만흐섯소이다. 거저 말하자면 워낙 마음이 대범하시니까 그럿치 그럿차느면 참 『惜哉此別이여 火焚生草로다. 若無此別이면 獨坐孀闈로다.』하고 쓰고 십슴니다. 天庭이 그가티 너무 발달되시고 나오섯스니 말슴이외다. 그리고 心德은 참으로 女中君子시외다. 敬上撫下의 德이 게시고 寬厚한 容恕性이 게서 보임니다. 多少 急한 便도 보이지만 그 찜이야 무얼.-
그리고 과거에 여러 가지 자조 고레한 厄이 퍽이나 만소이다. 그 누가 잇서 당신의 厄이 잇섯슴으로 알으오릿가. 오직 相學에 박사인 裵센지(僉知)나 알겟지요. 呵呵.

美貌巨力兼能文?<118>

선생은 (박사도 누구보고 선생이라나) 퍽 端雅하시고 아름다워 뵈이셋다. 조금 파리한 얼골에 山根이 곳음을 보아 正直하심을 알겟고 女子로서 눈이 크시니 男子와 반대적으로 별로 劫이란 一錢어치도 업스실 것이요. 疾厄宮(코허리)이 죽엇스니 多少 잔 病도 게실 것이며 날신한 태도와 칼칼한 맵시가 정말 女선배의 態가 나타나 보엿다. 그러나 그의 글은 「잘 하는동 몬 하는동 내싸 모른다. 여자신 줄만 아럿더면 글루 (글을) 잘 삷혀 볼 걸, 우엔 일인 동 일홈ㅅ字허가 男字으(의) 일홈가티 되여서 내싸 암 보아 모른다. 허지만 남이 말을 잘 한닥 하드라」(先生님 怒여 마세요. 人チ遊バセルカ?하시고 겡상도 말 숭낸다고요. 박사란 놈이 근본 버릇이 고뿐 이람니다.)
七星氏는 긔운도 퍽 세이실 것이다. 아모리 보아도 들깨(荏) 서되 쯤은 無難이 드르실 것 갓드만.-
아차! 한가지 이젓다. 그것은 별다른 건 안이지만 박사로서는 이즐내야 이즐 수 업는 일이기에 쓰고저 한다
박사는 오래간만에 안이 여러 번 별너서 그를 만나게 되잔엇겟나. 해서 명함을 올녓겟지.
박사의 名刺는 裵相哲 3자 외에 주제넘은 號를 너허 卽 左便에는 春岡 2자를 박엇겟지. (이것도 박사 의견으로 한 것은 안이고 前日 梁白華氏와 인사할 때에 그의 명함에 號를 기입한 것을 보곤, 올타 梁氏도 키다리 (잘못햇슴니다) 박사도 키다리, 梁氏도 漢學者, 裵氏도 漢學者  (혼자 말슴일 망정) 어듸 흉내내잔을 수 잇서야지.)
그래서 그 명함을 드린즉 그는 仔細히 보더니 春岡이란 洞里가 어너 洞里인가요 하시잔켓나.
박사는 그 순간 거저 「에그머니」 소리를 차젓단, 말슴이다. 참 참, 先生님도.-

富小名大古今稀

丁氏의 骨相은 아모리 보아도 富는 적ㅅ다. 土屋이 不豐, 地庫가 尖薄, 天倉이 小陷, 이 모든 것이 그로 하여금 富는 바라지 맙시사 하고 豫告하고 잇는 것이다. 그러나 그의게는 當來할 功名 卽 聲名이 如干 크지 안을 것이다. 그의 外學堂(耳門)이 조와, 日月이 빗나, 皮髮에 智慧가 잇서 보여 하니 아모리 보아도 朝鮮 女子界의 일홈은 후일 거의 독점할ㅅ 것이다. 요만치만 쓰자!

하늘이 당신을 접역(鰈域=조선)에 보내심이 偶然한 일이 안이외다.
가느다란 당신의 홀목이
무궁화 붓돗기에 야위여 지이다.
보담 더 파리하여 지이다.

우리는 당신의 파리한 얼골을 보고
감격의 눈물을 흘닐 줄도 아나이다.
그러나 그러나 무궁화는 당신의 등에 매치는
피땀의 이슬을 밧어야 더욱 소생되지
안을 것이 옴닛가. 더욱 소생되지
안을 것이 옴닛가?

하늘이 당신을 접역에 보내심이 偶然한 일이 안이외다.
우리는 이 한마듸로 땀 흘니는 당신의 등에 더운 땀 한 방울을 더하게 재촉노니
보수를 의심 마소서!
당신의 머리에 당신이 붓도든 무궁화 송이로
주렁주렁 花冠을 씨워듸리오리다!

猛虎隱林 車相瓚

대머리가 버서지고 눈이 精彩가 떳고 얼골의 輪廓이 뚜렷하고 납다대하야 氏가 만약 구레나루가 낫더면 大學目藥의 껍데기에 그린 令監 森下博士와 똑 갓흘 번햇다고 생각한다. 안이 森下博士의 얼골에 수염만 면도질을 하면 靑吾(號) 車相瓚氏와 흡사하리라고 할 수 잇다.
박사-京鄕을 헤매고 인물을 차저 볼 새-江中에서 鯉魚를 본 어부처럼 「에키」 소리를 不知不覺 중에 발한 때가 京城에 드러와서는 車相瓚氏를 보고 처음이엿섯다. 그래서 박사는 그를 紙上에 評하야 소개코저 한 지 오래엿스나 그는 자기가 編輯하는 잡지래서 그래는지 공중 辭讓을 해 가며 자기만은 빼노아 달나고 한다. 허지만 「評不評은 在此하고 用不用은 在彼하니」 엇잿든 써나 보자! 싯지 아느면 그는 박사를 「足삿헤 垢만치도 못 思하는 것이고 또 紙上에 내자니 제면ㅅ적고」하야 그는 釜山越便語로 닷지바가 구루시이(立場ガ苦シイ)할 것이다. 엇잿던지-氏의 얼골은 陽이 有餘하다. 形有餘, 陽有餘, 氣有餘, 血有餘의 四有餘이다. 그리고 그는 筆能 舌能 變通能에 능청구럭이고 (乞勿大怒) 舞拙 歌拙 泳拙에 兼하야 마라손拙도 될 것이다. 아무따나 박사의 取코저 하는 點은 舞歌泳의 三者가 안이오. 左記 三大에 잇다.

一. 口大

그는 입이 엄청이 크다. 그가 하품을 할 때에 그의 입모습을 보면 左便口角에서 右便口角까지가 가마득-해 보인다.

二. 志大

뜻 크면 우리네로서 무얼 하나 깟댁하면 밧가운대나 出入하지. 허지만 큰 게야 크다고 하지. 嶺南 말 맛다나 「내사 뜻이 조맨-하 그만」하고 감초일 것 머잇나. 상말로 누가 배쨀텐가? 氏는 一言으로 말하면 영웅적 야심이 뭉치여 挾山超海도 시우정찬을 것이다.

三. 酒量大

박사만은 못하지만 백알되나 그대로 자시니 그만하면 적ㅅ다곤 못하겟기에 말이다.<120>
그러나 이상의 것이 相格에 上席을 점령케 된 것 안이로쉐, 정말 조흔 것이 한가지 잇너니.
「燕頷虎頭定登將相」이것이다. 그의 턱은 아모리 보아도 분명한 燕頷이다. 그리고 그의 이마와 머리를 잘 삷혀보아라. 그럴ㅅ듯한 虎頭임을 알 수가 잇슬 것이다. 더구나 電光閃閃한 그의 監察官(눈)을 보라. 千萬將卒을 麾下에 너코 任意使之할 무엇이 보이지 안는가? 허지만 將師가...잇...오.---일즉이 朝鮮步兵隊 시험이나 보면 조흘 걸 그랫슴니다. 다만 이등병은 어딈닛가? 相, 承相, 車氏니 만치 車天子와 親戚關係가 되실 듯하니 웨 그곳으로 나가 보시지. 開關社가 무슨 시고도가게 심닛가? 시럽슨 박사 시럽시 짓거려서 大端罪悚하외다. 이제는 水越말로 아조 단단이 마지메하게 쓰오리다.
靑吾氏는 脫刦이 된 上相이다. 그를 갓다가 무슨 社 社長의 坐席에 안처 노면 「흥, 저럿케 낫스니까 사장 노릇이라도 하지(이랜다고 사장 어른들 에라부리 마소들) 거저 남의 조고만 웃소임이라도 웃소임 노릇 하는 이는 닯다니까 그래!」 傍觀者의 評이 이쯤 될ㅅ 것이요. 그가 어너 나라에 태여나서 (후유-) 首相의 卓子에 近來 특이말로 고시(腰)를 가께루(かける)한다면 「참말 車總理 잘 나셋더군. 육긔가 똑뚝 덧고 하는 얼골에...」하며 침 하나 삼킬 것 업시 추어댈 것이 안인가. 이 사람네야 (아고- 말이 헛나왓소이다. 容恕를 해줍시요.)
그런데 그가 白虎 담배 자실 시대에 낫스면 姓ㅅ字가 車ㅅ字라고 툇자를 마저 구루마(車) 굴너 단이듯 하지만 안케 된다면 忠勤 節義 翊讚 功臣 안이 精忠 出氣 敵愾 功臣 大匡 輔國 崇錄大夫 議政府 領議政(아이고 호강아-)에다가 사후에 文武兼全인 文毅公 謚號까지 밧기에는 거츰업슬 骨相의 主人公일세만. -嶺南 말맛다나 앰쐐 진작나시지 그랫노!
그러나 龍이야 龍이지 왜 그놈이 (車先生께 辱하는 말은 안이요.) 때 못 맛난다고 배암이나, 지룡(蚯蚓)이 되는 法이 어데 잇다나? 그의 豐隆한 載筒鼻와 朝拱된 四岳은 족히 써 日後百萬長者(富者가 안이면 衆人의 長이 될지도 모르지)가 되리라는 것을 예시함인즉 「人富而仁義附焉」이라니 부자나 되면 고만이엇지 只今 世上에 무어더 取할 것 잇나.
「春初望山에 林花滿發」하니 아마 분명히 48, 9의 運에 相違無之候也-ㄹ 것이며 「靑吾全節首陽高, 萬里孤帆越海濤」 (에 박사 글 잘한다. 自畵自讚이나 하자.) 하니 氏의 「百歲厭世어든 乘彼白雲하고 歸干帝側」할 때에 後進들의 그를 挽하는 詞일 것이다.
六旬運命이 魯得水鼠入庫이니 쇠푼이나 모아 가지고 富累釣我地가 되기 쉬울 것이며 稀年功名이 四隣에 動하니 아마 무슨 敎主 노릇이라도 하고야 말 듯 하구려.

=人間爲客問幾何, 秋月春風七五仙.=
博士曰 有器必有用 有人必有時 蘊玉待價潛居待時此也 若夫有器不用 有人無時 正似乾之九三 靑吾居士其自玉豈不日天降生大任於此人也 必先苦其心志 勞其筋骨餓其體膚 空乏其身乎. <121>
<116-121>