Magazine Title	개벽 제67호
Publication Date	1926년 03월 01일
Article Title	文學의 階級性과 中間派의 沒落 (The Class Nature of Literature and the Downfall of the Middle Faction)
Author	梁明 (Yang Myŏng)
Article Type	문예평론 (Literary Criticism)

文學의 階級性과 中間派의 沒落 (The Class Nature of Literature and the Downfall of the Middle Faction)
						梁明 (Yang Myŏng)

Birds have feathers and beasts have no wings, but in the world, there exists the bat, which has wings but no feathers. Fish live in water and beasts live on land, but among animals, there are amphibians that live both on land and in water. Crows are black and herons are white, but among animals, there are those that change their color according to the time. Higher animals are all divided into two sexes, and the propagation of the species is achieved through their union, but when it comes to less evolved lower animals, the propagation of the species is achieved through the differentiation of single cells, and thus it is extremely difficult to know their sex.

The evolution of society has divided humanity into two great classes with conflicting interests. On one side, there are the propertied class, the exploiting class and oppressing class, and on the other side, the propertyless masses, the exploited class and oppressed class. Consequently, human consciousness and human thought, which are reflections of life and products of humanity, cannot help but be naturally divided into two great categories. On one side, there is bourgeois thought and bourgeois consciousness, which defends the exploiting class and affirms the current system. On the opposite side, diametrically opposed to it, there is proletarian thought and proletarian consciousness, which denies the current system and emphasizes class struggle. As long as the class confrontation in society is not a temporary, sudden change or a localized phenomenon, but an inevitable stage of social evolution and an inevitable phenomenon in human history, it is a fact that humans, being emotional animals, might have a neutrality leaning towards one side or the other, but cannot maintain a truly neutral stance. However, in human society, there are not a few elements who, either consciously or unconsciously, advocate a middle consciousness and take an opportunistic, fence-sitting attitude. Some dream of a nation that transcends class, while others dream of thought that transcends class, or interests that transcend class. Especially detestable is the phenomenon of those who clearly <98> defend the current system and stand on the footing of the propertied class, yet deliberately pretend to take a third stance, sending flirtatious glances towards the propertyless masses.

Literature is a product of society and the possession of humanity. It is the expression of human life, the action of life, and the product of real feeling. A writer is also a human being. Nothing more than a human, nothing less than a human. A human whose "social life determines consciousness, not the other way around." A human who cannot exist apart from class, who cannot live transcending class. Therefore, literature, the product of such humans, and literary thought, the reflection of such social life, will inevitably be divided into two great categories according to the class confrontation in society. There are only these two: either defending the current system from the standpoint of bourgeois consciousness and the bourgeois footing, or denying the current system from the standpoint of proletarian consciousness and the proletarian footing. Just as consciousness transcending class and interests transcending class cannot exist, literature transcending class cannot exist, and writers transcending class cannot exist. However, in human society, there are groups who, either intentionally or unintentionally, deny the social nature of literature, the class nature of literature, and dream of literature transcending class, art transcending class. Some dream of art detached from society, or art detached from real feeling, and some are superstitious about the absolute freedom of art.

Regardless of the era or society, possessors of such middle thought and middle consciousness have always existed, but especially in today's Korea, an economically backward country, such elements are extremely numerous. The theorist of Korea's first literary revolution, the advocate of free divorce, the representative of Tokyo students and drafter of the declaration during the March First Movement, a member of the Legislative Assembly and chief editor of the Independence Newspaper in the Shanghai Provisional Government, the author of the "Theory of Reforming National Character," former publisher of "Chosŏn Mundan" and current contributor to the "Tonga Ilbo" – Mr. Ch'unwŏn Yi Kwangsu is indeed likely the most powerful theoretical representative of such middle thought in Korea.

Mr. Yi Kwangsu, in his recent essay "Moderation and Thoroughness" - the literature Koreans want to have - serialized in the New Year's issue of the "Tonga Ilbo," stated the following:
『Everything has its constant and its variable aspects, and literature is no exception. There is literature that, like rice, like fresh air and water, like the sun's <99> rays, like a virtuous wife, seems ordinary because we see it often, yet we never tire of seeing it. And there is literature that, like a flashing meteor, like overly sweet honey water, like a seductive prostitute, flashes momentarily, fiercely stimulating our senses, but soon we tire of it.
The respectable Japanese critic, Mr. Kuriwaya Hakuson, said that when society is in a state of stagnation, radical revolutionary songs emerge, running from one extreme to the other, opening up new trends, but this is temporary. After the process of revolution ends, things soon return to the constant. He, like Mr. Arnold, mentioned that Byron was the revolutionary child of the English literary scene at the time, definitely not a poet who would permanently rule the English spirit. He also mentioned that Bernard Shaw, who receives criticism for being radical in the contemporary English literary scene, is, like Byron, a variable, revolutionary poet.
『Revolution is a disease. Even if it is sometimes unavoidable, it is a frightening disease like measles or smallpox. If possible, one would wish to live without revolution, where compatriots hate and kill each other. ...The Roman poet Horace called the middle way Aurea Mediocritas, comparing moderation to gold. Even better than the Romans at speaking of the virtue of moderation were the Confucian scholars of the East; Zisi used this as a theme to establish a philosophy of life. ...Words like "fervent" (熱烈), "thorough" (徹底), and "absolute" (絶對) are widely used among us, as if these words possess sacred and inviolable authority, as if they hold irrefutable truth. However, "fervent" burns out, "thorough" sinks to the bottom, and "absolute" eliminates the possibility of doing anything.
『I think literature is also like that. There is no need to seek literature that is fervent, profound, thrilling, literature that makes one's mouth drop open with amazement and strangeness, literature where fantastic ideas fall from heaven and make ghosts weep, nor is there a need to strive to create such things. It's not boring that such things exist, and they are fine in that they satisfy people with special nerves and tastes, but they are not the constant of literature, not the right path. They are heresy, illegitimate children, deformed children, monsters. Those who seek the obscure and practice the strange are rarely benevolent.』

People's minds change from morning to evening, they say, but Mr. Yi's thoughts seem to change at least with the spring and autumn. He, who declared "national self-determination" in Tokyo and cried for the "Seven Killables" in Shanghai, returned home and had a great awakening, <100> denouncing the March First Movement as "unplanned, barbaric behavior." Lamenting the lack of 10,000 specialists, he called for the Self-Cultivation Alliance (修養同盟) and planned a political association within the scope permitted by the Governor-General's rule. Yesterday, he declared revolution to be "variable, not constant," regarding it as a frightening disease like measles or smallpox. Saying, "'Fervent' burns out, 'thorough' sinks to the bottom, and 'absolute' eliminates the possibility of doing anything," he loudly proclaimed the Way of Moderation, positioning himself as a top disciple of Zisi, the third-generation direct descendant of the "Great Sage and Most Holy King Wenxuan" (Confucius). We cannot know what kind of literature makes one's mouth drop open or makes ghosts weep, but he came to advocate literature like rice, literature like water, calling revolutionary literature, fervent literature, profound literature "variable, heresy, illegitimate children, deformed children, monsters."

However - as mentioned above - Mr. Yi's characteristic is definitely not his anti-revolutionary or anti-passionate stance. It lies in his changeability, his fence-sitting, his amphibious nature. While it is true that he fears revolution like measles or smallpox, he definitely does not absolutely reject it. While it is true that he considers fervent literature and profound literature as monsters or heresy, it is not true that he feels absolutely no need for them. At times, he keenly feels the necessity of revolution and acknowledges the need for literature that provides passion and courage. This is especially true for today's Korea. Even in his masterpiece "Moderation and Thoroughness," there are passages like the following:

『Certainly, there are situations where society needs revolution. Just like in cases of chronic indigestion, there is a need to take a large dose of a strong purgative at once to sweep away the accumulated stagnation in the stomach and intestines! ...To hesitate using a strong purgative or intestinal surgery when necessary is foolishness and cowardice, that is a fact. Therefore, even if it is not constant, revolutionary literature is sometimes necessary. It is welcome. Perhaps today's Korea is in such a situation. No, it truly is in such a situation.
『The word 'power' has recently become prevalent in literary criticism. Indeed, power is necessary. Moreover, because what Koreans today need is power, passion, and courage, literature that provides power, passion, and courage is necessary.』

Also, more than anyone, he pities the situation of the Korean people <101> and loves the Korean people. His advocacy for literature like rice and literature like water truly stems from such noble patriotism (愛族心). To borrow his words, "Right now, we Koreans are like people recovering from a serious illness. We are weak not only physically but also mentally. Giving us strong stimulants is like force-feeding strong coffee to an insomnia patient. What we need more than any drastic medicine, more than alcohol, more than coffee, is fresh air, food, sunlight, and non-excessive activity."

It's just that his revolution, which he fears like measles or smallpox, must be different from the revolution ordinary people think of, and his revolutionary literature, which he considers heresy and monsters alongside fervent and profound literature, must be fundamentally different from the revolutionary literature ordinary people think of.

It is likely true that Mr. Yi loves the Korean people and pities their miserable situation. Also, judging from his arguments, it seems true that he feels the necessity for reform to some extent and senses the inevitability of revolution in today's Korea. However, he is the author of the "Theory of Reforming National Character" and a devout Christian. From his perspective, the reason Koreans have ended up in today's situation is truly because they possessed a nation-ruining disposition (亡國根性), lacked 12,000 specialists, and committed many sins against "Father Hanunim (God)." Koreans are lazy, full of falsehoods, and not brave, but especially, more than anything, they have committed many actions contrary to the holy teachings of Hanunim's only son, "Jesus Christ."
Jesus said, "Love your enemies!" but Koreans hate their enemies. Jesus said, "If someone strikes you on the right cheek, turn to him the other also!" but Koreans, even before being struck on the left cheek, turn around and try to strike the right cheek. Jesus said, "If anyone wants to sue you and take your tunic, let him have your cloak as well!" but Korea's tenant farmers, when the landlord demands ten mals of rent, say they will give only seven mals and start tenant disputes. Korea's laborers, when the capitalist insists on paying only seventy chŏn, demand it be raised to one wŏn and go on strike. Jesus said, "Do not worry about what you will eat or what you will wear!" but Koreans worry about just that every day. Jesus said, "Submit yourselves to the governing authorities!" but Koreans, far from submitting, endlessly resist. <102> Admonitions are useless to them, appeasement is useless, prison is useless, and the gallows are useless.
Such an extremely wicked nation truly cannot avoid hell after death, and even while living, they will not be able to escape heavenly punishment.
Here, he manifests great compassion and mercy, like a Bodhisattva, and comes to cry out for a revolution led by religious figures, a revolution led by moralists, a revolution led by poets. In his masterpiece "Moderation and Thoroughness," there is the following passage:

『In times when society demands revolution, pathological reasoning and emotions often dominate the popular mind. People tend to enlarge only the dark, i.e., pathological, aspects of nature and life. Base emotions such as hatred, slaughter, self-abandonment, despair, curses, jealousy, strife - these dominate the human heart. At such times, those who have the most power to guide the direction of the popular mind are politicians, thinkers, and poets, but among them, the one with the most power to move the hearts of the people, especially blood-boiling youth, is the poet.
『Therefore, if the poet at this time guides the popular mind with proper emotions, that revolution will become a revolution with proper ideals and methods, yielding proper results. But if not, if the poet exploits the pathological weaknesses of the popular mind to provoke and incite base emotions like hatred, strife, curses, slaughter, etc., then although it may have the power to hasten the explosion of revolution, it will have a fatal, evil influence on the ultimate, highest goal of the revolution.
『The duty of the poet lies in showing the masses the best he possesses. Or rather, it lies in showing the masses the best he can recognize, the best he can feel. In this respect, the poet is the teacher and leader of the masses. Poetry should be the highest spirit of the masses who gave birth to that poetry. This is true aesthetically and morally. Poetry shares a common function with religion in that it shows us the best, making us higher, cleaner, stronger, more beautiful, and loving towards each other.』

Thus, he who lamented the lack of activists in Tokyo, lamented the lack of six-shooters, bombs, troops, and cannons in Shanghai, and after returning home lamented the lack of 12,000 specialists, now laments the lack of poets, the lack of moralists, the lack of religious figures. <103> However, poets demand quality, not quantity. Specialists need to number at least 12,000, and troops must number tens of thousands, but one or two poets are sufficient. To borrow Mr. Yi's words, "The Han people after Yao and Shun must have been higher than the Han people before them; humanity after Sakyamuni and Jesus must have been better than humanity before them. This teaches the greatness of individual power through political edification. Similarly, the English people after Shakespeare and Milton must have been higher and more beautiful than the English people before them. The times make the hero, but the hero also makes the times."
Mr. Yi Kwangsu is the most famous poet, moralist, and religious figure in Korea. Especially unique is that he combines these three roles in one person. Truly, the Korean people after Yi Kwangsu will become higher, more beautiful, and better. In this respect, we can be optimistic about the future.

Mr. Yi has long denied the class nature of literature, rejecting profound and passionate literature while advocating literature transcending class, literature like rice, literature like water. However, regarding what constitutes literature transcending class, or literature like rice, literature like water, there has yet been no clear indication. The author has always wondered about this, and now, fortunately or unfortunately, its true identity has been revealed. What is literature transcending class? What is literature like rice, literature like water? To this, Mr. Yi has clearly answered: - It is "literature that shows the best to the masses," "literature that has a common duty with religion," "literature like the Four Books and Five Classics of the East and the Old and New Testaments of the West," "literature like the poetry of Li Bai and Du Fu, or the so-called Eight Great Prose Masters of the Tang and Song, or in the West, like Homer and Shakespeare's poetry."
Since Mr. Yi, one of the three geniuses of Korea and vastly learned, says "That's right!", there probably isn't much error. However, in the eyes of this poorly read and shallowly knowledgeable author, the Old and New Testaments and the Four Books and Five Classics are by no means scriptures that transcend class, nor are the writings of the Eight Great Prose Masters of the Tang and Song or Shakespeare's poetry literature that transcends class. Of course, Jesus said pleasing things. "It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God." However, looking at Jesus' teachings <104> as a whole, they are all mysterious things that cannot even be conceived of by anyone who is not well-fed and warmly clothed. Jesus said, "Look at the birds of the air: they neither sow nor reap nor gather into barns, and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not of more value than they? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow: they neither toil nor spin, yet I tell you, even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. But if God so clothes the grass of the field, which today is alive and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much more clothe you? Therefore do not be anxious, saying, 'What shall we eat?' or 'What shall we drink?' or 'What shall we wear?'" But today's Koreans cannot survive even worrying about food and clothing every moment, and even if they farm and weave for 360 days a year without a single day's rest, food and clothing do not readily appear. Jesus said, "If anyone would sue you and take your tunic, let him have your cloak as well!" But today's Korean farmers cannot survive even while fighting landlords to reduce tenant fees, and today's Korean laborers cannot get food and clothing even while fighting capitalists to raise wages.
What content do the Four Books and Five Classics hold? Their most fundamental ethic would be the "Three Bonds and Five Relations" (三綱五倫). "Subjects are bound to the ruler, sons are bound to the father, wives are bound to the husband, the young are bound to the old!" - this is their fundamental principle. Although it says, "Riches and honors acquired by unrighteousness are to me as a floating cloud" (不義而富且貴 於我如浮雲), their highest ideal is "Promotion and Wealth" (升官發財) - that is, attaining high office and amassing much money. Dividing humanity into numerous classes through the so-called "Rectification of Names" (正名), demanding absolute obedience from lower strata to neighboring strata, and flattering all power - this is their greatest characteristic. "There are not two suns in the sky" (天無二日), "A country does not have two rulers" (國無二君) is their assertion, and "A loyal minister does not serve two lords" (忠臣不事二君), "A virtuous woman does not remarry" (烈女不更二夫) is their morality.
Also, the writings of the Eight Great Prose Masters of the Tang and Song and Shakespeare's poetry - products of what era are they, and what content do they hold? One is a relic of the prosperous Tang and Song dynasties, and the other is a product of the flourishing Elizabethan era. Successful aggressive policies and interaction with foreign tribes brought a period of prosperity to China's monarchical rule. The general populace came to sing praises of the "peaceful and holy age" (太平世聖), and poets and writers wrote poems and stories to praise reality and boast of grandeur. Representative masterpieces are the poetry of Li Bai and Du Fu, and the prose of the Eight Masters. <105> The Industrial Revolution and the discovery of the New World created a golden age for England's capitalist system. The lives of the general populace improved, and a luxurious atmosphere swept through the upper class. Representing this golden age of English capitalism is the poetry and drama of Shakespeare. In the eyes of Mr. Yi, who advocates literature like rice and literature like water, their works must indeed be like the Pure Land for Buddhists or Heaven for Christians. However, unfortunately among misfortunes, born as a colonial subject during the period of the capitalist system's collapse, it is highly doubtful how Mr. Yi will construct such literature in the future.

Some time ago, when Kaebyŏk Publishing asked various writers for their opinions on class literature, Mr. Yi said he opposed class literature because "when a writer creates a work, they just spin it out like a spider spinning its web or a silkworm making its cocoon, so asking a spider to make a silkworm's cocoon would be unreasonable." This was truly the most straightforward expression of Mr. Yi's thoughts. Whatever one may say, Mr. Yi is, through and through, a possessor of capitalist thought, a possessor of bourgeois consciousness. He hopes for reform and does not entirely deny revolution either. However, the reform he desires, the revolution he demands, is definitely not a socialist reform against capitalism, nor a proletarian revolution against the propertied class. The gist of his advocated revolution by poets, revolution by religious figures, revolution by moralists, is truly for the people of the world to become one layer higher, one layer cleaner, one layer better through them, and for history to step backward so that today's Korea becomes the Italy of the Roman era, the England of the flourishing Elizabethan era, or the China of the Tang and Song dynasties.
Writers like Gorky, Hauptmann, or Bernard Shaw, who possess proletarian consciousness, write with the attitude of "a silkworm making its cocoon, a spider spinning its web," but their works always become proletarian literature and art of the oppressed class, defending the propertyless and inciting revolution. However, in stark contrast, Mr. Yi Kwangsu, possessing reactionary thought and bourgeois consciousness, writes with the exact same attitude, but his works always become bourgeois literature and anti-revolutionary literature, defending the propertied class and apologizing for the current system. - Asking such a Mr. Yi to create proletarian works would truly be an unreasonable order, like "asking a spider to make a silkworm's cocoon." <106>

In Romain Rolland's famous "The People's Theater," there is a passage with the following meaning:

『There are those who advocate an infinite and universal people's art, completely devoid of partisanship. But this is a splendid fantasy. If it could perhaps become possible in a future society, it would only be realized centuries later. In today's situation, we have no choice but to place eternity in the present moment and strive to live with the times. Art simply cannot be separated from the aspirations of its era. People's art cannot exist apart from the people's suffering, their hopes, and their struggles.』
『Art for stable times, stable art, is what everyone desires. But when the times are in turmoil and its people are in struggle, art cannot help but fight alongside the people, assisting them and rousing them. Breaking down the ignorance that hinders their actions and shedding prejudices will be the true purpose of art. Violence is by no means a necessary appendage of art. However, the purpose of art is to enrich life, make it stronger, greater, and more perfect. Then, if love and union are its goal, hatred might, for a certain period, perhaps be its weapon.』
『A worker from the Saint-Antoine suburb responded to a lecturer who claimed "All hatred is evil" by saying: - "Hatred is good; hatred is justice. It is this hatred that makes the oppressed revolt against the oppressor. If I see someone oppressing another, I resent it and hate that person. And I think it is right to resent and hate. One who does not hate evil is one who does not love good either. One who sees injustice and unrighteousness and has no thought of fighting is neither an artist nor a human being."』

The evolution of society has set humanity into opposition between two great classes with conflicting interests. On one side, there are the propertied, the exploiting class, the oppressing class, and on the other side, the propertyless, the exploited class, the oppressed class. As time passes, their class opposition deepens further, and their <107> class self-awareness, class consciousness, becomes ever clearer.
When we now consider the transitions of the times in society and observe the global trends, one of the most prominent phenomena is the downfall of the middle class and the decline of middle thought. The development of large-scale industry and the advancement of the capitalist system inevitably shake the social position of small capitalists, small entrepreneurs, and small landowners, pulling the interests among all elements constituting the proletariat down to the same level. The social and economic positions - and consequently the conflicts of interest - between skilled and unskilled laborers, manual and intellectual laborers, agricultural and industrial laborers are gradually disappearing.
The entire world is divided into two. On one side are the Soviet Socialist Federation and the Third International, and on the other side is the League of Nations of capitalist countries. In Britain, the decline of the Liberal Party has led to the confrontation between the Conservative Party and the Labour Party. In Italy, the National Fascist Party and the Communist Party are in opposition. In Germany, the Social Democratic Party held sway for a while, but its influence is gradually declining, while signs of confrontation between the National People's Party and the Communist Party are appearing. In America too, signs of the Democratic Party's decline are clearly visible. While the yellow unionists of the Second International languish, the non-compromising faction of the Third International is active everywhere with the force of the "rising sun." And while the "gray" Amsterdam International of trade unions gradually loses strength, Moscow's Red International of Labour Unions proportionally increases its momentum everywhere. Capitalism, having reached its final stage of development, becomes increasingly aggressive and reactionary, while conversely, the class self-awareness and class consciousness of the proletarian masses become clearer, and their class front becomes increasingly organized.
"Either the dictatorship of the proletariat or the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie - there can be no middle path between them." Before us lie only two paths. Either actively defend the propertied class and praise the current system, or else actively embrace proletarian consciousness and tread the path of class struggle - we cannot avoid choosing one of these two. Active XX and active XX, active struggle and active counter-revolution - there are only two paths forward before us. The task of art, the product of humans, and the artist, who is nothing more and nothing less than a human, also has only two options. Either actively possess bourgeois consciousness, praise the current system, and defend the ruling class, or actively possess proletarian consciousness, deny the current system, and promote class consciousness and class struggle. <108> There can be no middle path between them. Only the weak, who evade reality, verbally claim to stand in the middle.
Mr. Ch'unwŏn Yi! - What thought will you embrace in the future, and what path will you take? What consciousness will you possess, and what kind of art will you create? I hope, for your sake, that you do not become a weakling who evades reality, but if possible, become a fighter who confronts it head-on and battles bravely. Accordingly, I wish to offer friendly advice: abandon your current amphibious attitude as quickly as possible and choose one of the two. However, whether you heed this faithful advice or not is, of course, your freedom.

Towards Mr. Ch'unwŏn Yi Kwangsu, the author holds no personal or group grudges whatsoever. The author has only met him once at some gathering and has seen his photograph once in the "Photos We Want to See" section of the Tonga Ilbo. Among the author's close acquaintances, there are several who associate quite closely with him. Through them, the author has heard many favorable things about him. If he were only writing his "Travelogue of Kŭmgangsan" or "Rewriting the Spring and Autumn Annals," the author would certainly not waste precious time and effort writing such characters.
Even after reading his recent essay "Moderation and Thoroughness" serialized in the Tonga Ilbo, the author hesitated several times before picking up the pen. However, I could not bear to silently pass over his mistaken assertions - regarding "revolution as a frightening disease like measles or smallpox," completely denying "fervent," "thorough," and "absolute" by saying "fervent burns out, thorough sinks to the bottom, and absolute eliminates the possibility of doing anything," and absolutely rejecting fervent, profound, and revolutionary literature as "variable, not constant." Especially when considering the negative influence such mistaken assertions, appearing openly in newspapers, could have on general society, the author could not bear to stand by idly with folded arms. Therefore, under the principle of "limiting this to a simple theoretical debate and the pursuit of truth," I took up the pen to critique him. <109>
However, humans are emotional animals. Reading it after writing, there are not a few places that deviate from the initial plan. Emotional phrases have crept in here and there, and it seems even passages resembling personal attacks are not entirely absent. However, what the author has attacked here is his mistaken thought, definitely not his frail body. Accordingly, if he provides a reasoned and logical response to the author's current rebuttal, the author will never spare the labor of replying again. Generous and magnanimous Mr. Yi! I especially hope there is no misunderstanding regarding this point. (End)
(January 8, 1926, Drafted in Seoul)

Author's Note - My apologies that the publication is so late.
It is truly regrettable to publish a critique of a New Year's essay only now. However, to state the facts, the manuscript was completed on January 8th, and by the 12th, the fair copy was mostly done, but before finishing it, I became involved in a certain incident - actually having no relation to the incident itself - and spent twenty days of constrained time at Chongno Police Station and Sŏdaemun Prison, so this delay became unavoidable.*
- February 4th - <110>

**Summary**

Yang Myŏng argues forcefully against Yi Kwangsu's advocacy for a "middle way" (中庸) in literature and life, presented in Yi's essay "Moderation and Thoroughness." Yang contends that in the current era of inevitable class struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, neutrality or moderation is impossible and implicitly supports the ruling class. True literature, Yang insists, must reflect this class reality and actively engage in the struggle on the side of the proletariat, promoting revolution and class consciousness. He critiques Yi's examples of "transcendent" literature (Bible, Confucian classics, Shakespeare) as actually being products of and reinforcing specific ruling class ideologies. Yang urges Yi to abandon his "amphibious" stance and choose a side, preferably that of the proletariat.

This article is highly significant for historians studying colonial Korea as it vividly illustrates the intense ideological polarization among Korean intellectuals in the mid-1920s. It showcases the direct application of Marxist class analysis to critique a major nationalist figure like Yi Kwangsu, highlighting the clash between emerging socialist/proletarian ideologies and more established nationalist or moderate viewpoints. The author's explicit call for revolutionary literature reflects the growing influence of left-wing thought and the activities of groups that would form organizations like KAPF (Korea Artista Proleta Federatio).

**Named Entities**

梁明	양명	Yang Myŏng
蝙蝠	박쥐	Bat
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
東京	동경	Tokyo
上海	상해	Shanghai
上海臨時政府	상해임시정부	Shanghai Provisional Government
獨立신문	독립신문	Tongnip Sinmun (Independence Newspaper)
朝鮮文壇	조선문단	Chosŏn Mundan (Korea Literary World Magazine)
東亞日報	동아일보	Tonga Ilbo (Newspaper)
春園	춘원	Ch'unwŏn (Yi Kwangsu's pen name)
李光洙	이광수	Yi Kwangsu
日本	일본	Japan
廚川白村	구리야가와 하쿠손	Kuriwaya Hakuson
아놀드	아놀드	Arnold
바이론	바이런	Byron
바나드 쏘	버나드 쇼	Bernard Shaw
로마	로마	Rome
호라터우쓰	호라티우스	Horace (Horatius)
東洋	동양	East Asia/Orient
子思	자사	Zisi
基督敎	기독교	Christianity
예수	예수	Jesus
솔로몬	솔로몬	Solomon
堯舜	요순	Yao and Shun (Legendary Chinese Sage Kings)
漢人	한인	Han Chinese
釋迦	석가	Sakyamuni (Buddha)
쉑스피어	셰익스피어	Shakespeare
밀톤	밀턴	Milton
英人	영인	English people
李杜	이두	Li Bai and Du Fu
唐宋八家文	당송팔가문	Eight Great Prose Masters of the Tang and Song
西洋	서양	West/Occident
호머	호머	Homer
개벽社	개벽사	Kaebyŏk Publishing Company
고리키	고리키	Gorky
하푸트맨	하우프트만	Hauptmann
벤날, 쇼	버나드 쇼	Bernard Shaw (alternate transliteration)
로맨,로란	로맹 롤랑	Romain Rolland
센트·안토완	생탄투안	Saint-Antoine (referring to Faubourg Saint-Antoine, Paris)
소비에트 社會主義聯邦	소비에트 사회주의 연방	Soviet Socialist Federation
第三國際	제삼인터내셔널	Third International (Comintern)
國際聯盟	국제연맹	League of Nations
英國	영국	Britain/England
伊太利	이태리	Italy
獨逸	독일	Germany
米國	미국	America (USA)
第二國際	제이인터내셔널	Second International
암수텔탐 灰色職工國際	암스테르담 회색직공국제	Amsterdam International (International Federation of Trade Unions - "Gray")
모스크바 赤色職工國際	모스크바 적색직공국제	Moscow Red International of Labour Unions (Profintern - "Red")
鐘路署	종로경찰서	Chongno Police Station
西大門刑務所	서대문형무소	Sŏdaemun Prison
서울	서울	Seoul
金剛山	금강산	Kŭmgangsan (Diamond Mountains)
春秋傳	춘추전	Spring and Autumn Annals

**Glossary**

階級性	계급성	Class nature/character
中間派	중간파	Middle faction/centrists
沒落	몰락	Downfall/collapse/ruin
羽毛	우모	Feathers (older term)
蝙蝠	박쥐	Bat
兩棲類	양서류	Amphibian
禽獸	금수	Birds and beasts/animals
進化	진화	Evolution
搾取	착취	Exploitation
壓迫	압박	Oppression
有産者	유산자	Propertied person/bourgeoisie
無産大衆	무산대중	Propertyless masses/proletariat
必然的	필연적	Inevitable/necessary
騎墻的	기회적	Opportunistic/fence-sitting (lit. 'wall-riding')
擁護	옹호	Defense/support/advocacy
否認	부인	Denial/negation/disavowal
立脚地	입각지	Standpoint/footing/basis
文學革命論者	문학혁명론자	Literary revolution theorist
宣言書	선언서	Declaration/manifesto
民族性改造論	민족성개조론	Theory of Reforming National Character
中庸	중용	Middle Way/Golden Mean/Moderation
徹底	철저	Thoroughness/completeness
常	상	Constant/ordinary/normal
變	변	Change/variable/extraordinary
矯激	교격	Radical/extreme
革命歌	혁명가	Revolutionary song
憎惡	증오	Hatred/detestation
殺戮	살륙	Slaughter/massacre
詩人	시인	Poet
道德家	도덕가	Moralist
宗敎家	종교가	Religious figure/person of religion
異端	이단	Heresy
庶子	서자	Illegitimate child (son of a concubine)
畸形兒	기형아	Deformed child/monster
怪物	괴물	Monster
峻下劑	준하제	Strong purgative/laxative
愛族心	애족심	Patriotism/love for one's ethnic group
亡國根性	망국근성	Nation-ruining disposition/slave mentality
小作人	소작인	Tenant farmer
小作料	소작료	Tenant farm rent
勞働者	노동자	Laborer/worker (older spelling of 노동자)
資本主	자본주	Capitalist (older term for 자본가)
同盟罷業	동맹파업	Strike (lit. 'alliance strike')
屈從	굴종	Submission/subservience
菩薩心	보살심	Bodhisattva heart/great compassion
咀呪	저주	Curse/malediction
階級文學	계급문학	Class literature/proletarian literature
無産階級的	무산계급적	Proletarian (adjective)
有産階級的	유산계급적	Bourgeois (adjective)
反動的	반동적	Reactionary
獨裁	독재	Dictatorship
兩棲的	양서적	Amphibious/(fig.) two-faced/equivocal
辯駁	변박	Rebuttal/refutation
寛仁大度	관인대도	Magnanimous/generous and broad-minded
잇고	있고	And/is (older spelling)
업지만	없지만	Although there isn't (older spelling)
딸아서	따라서	Therefore/consequently (older spelling)
식히고	시키고	Make/cause (older spelling)
만타	많다	Many/much (older spelling)
갓다	같다	Like/as (older spelling)
업다	없다	Not exist/lack (older spelling)
녀기고	여기고	Consider/regard as (older spelling)
알코	앓고	Suffer from/be ill with (older spelling)
밧게	밖에	Only/outside of (older spelling)
니르키고	일으키고	Start/cause/raise (older spelling)
웃사람	윗사람	Superior/elder (older spelling)
업섯고	없었고	There wasn't/lacked (past tense, older spelling)
가젓는가	가졌는가	Possessed?/Had? (older spelling)
됫거럼	뒷걸음	Stepping back/regression (older spelling)
멧	몇	Some/several (older spelling)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제67호
발행일	1926년 03월 01일
기사제목	文學의 階級性과 中間派의 沒落
필자	梁明
기사형태	문예평론

文學의 階級性과 中間派의 沒落
						梁明

새는 羽毛가 잇고 짐승은 나래가 업지만 世上에는 나래는 잇으면서 羽毛가 업는 蝙蝠이 잇고 고기는 물에서 살고 禽獸는 陸地에서 살지만 動物中에는 육지에서도 살고 물에서도 사는 兩棲類가 잇다. 가마귀는 검고 해오리는 히지만 動物中에는 때를 딸아서 비츨 變하는 者가 잇고 高等動物은 모두가 兩性에 分立되어서 그의 交合으로 種의 繁殖이 成就되지만 進化가 未及한 下等動物에 이르면 單細胞의 分化作用으로 種의 繁殖이 成就되고 딸아서 그의 性別을 알기가 甚히 困難한 것이 잇다.
社會의 進化는 人類를 利害가 相反되는 兩大階級에 分離식히고 말엇다. 一面에 搾取階級이요 壓迫階級인 有産者가 잇고 反面에 被搾取階級이요 被壓迫階級인 無産大衆이 잇다. 딸아서 生活의 反映이요 人類의 産品인 人類의 意識 人類의 思想도 *然的으로 兩大分되지 아니 할 수 업다. 一面에 搾取階級을 擁護하고 現制度를 是認하는 有産階級的 思想 有産階級的 意識이 잇고 反面에 그와 正反對로 現制度를 否認하고 階級的 鬪爭을 高調하는 無産階級的 思想 無産階級的 意識이 잇다. 社會의 階級的 對立이 一時的 突變이나 局部的 그것이 아니요 社會進化의 必然的 階級이요, 人類史上의 必然的 現象인 以上 感情的 動物인 사람으로 그에 對하야 某一派에 가까운 中立은 잇슬 수 잇스러니와 眞正한 意味의 中立的 態度는 가질 수 업슬 것이 事實이다. 그러나 人類社會에는 或은 有意識的 或은 無意識的으로 中間意識을 標倣하고 騎墻的 態度를 取하고 잇는 份子도 적지 안타. 或은 階級을 超越한 國家를 夢想하고 或은 階級을 超越한 思想 階級을 超越한 利害를 꿈꾸고 잇다. 特히 가장 可憎한 現象의 하나는 明明白白히 ＜98＞ 現制度를 擁護하고 有産階級의 立脚地에서 잇스면서 故意로 第三的 態度를 取하는 것처럼 보이고 無産大衆에게 秋波를 보내는 그네들이다.
文學은 社會의 産品이요 人類의 所有物이다. 人類의 生의 表現이요 生의 作用이요 實感의 所産이다. 文學家도 사람이다. 사람 以上의 아모것도 아니요, 사람 以下의 아모 것도 아니다. 「意識이 生活을 決定하는 것이 아니라 그와는 正反對로 그의 社會生活이 意識을 決定하는」사람이다. 階級을 떠나서 存在할 수 업고 階級을 超越하야 生活할 수 업는 사람이다. 딸아서 이와가튼 사람의 生産品인 文學 이와가튼 社會生活의 反映인 文藝思想은 社會의 階級的 對立에 딸아서 必然的으로 兩大分되지 아니할 수 업슬 것이다. 有産階級的 意識 有産階級的 立脚地에서 現制度를 擁護하거나 또는 無産階級的 意識 無産階級的 立脚地에서 現制度를 否認하거나 다만 이 두 가지가 잇슬 뿐이다. 階級을 超越한 意識 階級을 超越한 利害가 存在할 수 업든 것과 마찬가지로 階級을 超越한 文學이 存在할 수 업고 階級을 超越한 作家가 잇슬 수 업슬 것이다. 그러나 人類社會에는 或은 故意 或은 非故意로 文學의 社會性, 文學의 階級性을 否認하고 階級을 超越한 文學 階級을 超越한 예술을 꿈꾸는 무리가 잇다. 或은 사회를 떠난 藝術 或은 實感을 떠난 藝術을 夢想하고 잇고 或은 藝術의 絶對自由를 迷信하고 잇다.
어느 時代의 어느 社會를 勿論하고 이와가튼 中間的 思想 中間的 意識의 所有者가 업지 안커니와 特히 經濟的 落後국가인 今日의 朝鮮에는 이러한 份子가 甚히 만타. 朝鮮最初의 文學革命論者 自由離婚論者요, 己未運動當時 東京留學生 代表兼 宣言書起草人이요, 上海臨時政府의 議政院議員兼 獨立신문 主筆이요, 「民族性改造論」의 執筆人이요, 前「朝鮮文壇」主宰 現「東亞日報」囑託인 春園李光洙君은 實로 朝鮮에서 이와가튼 中間思想의 가장 有力한 理論的 代表者가 될 것이다.

李光洙君은 「東亞日報」 新年號에 連載된 그의 最近論文 「中庸과 徹底」 - 朝鮮사람이 가지고 십흔 文學 -中에서 다음과 가티 말하엿다.
『무엇이나 常과 變이 잇거니와 文學에도 그것이 잇다. 밥과 가티 新鮮한 空氣와 물과 가티 太陽의 ＜99＞ 光線과 가티 賢淑한 안해와 가티 늘 보니 平凡한 듯하면서도 늘 보아도 물리지 아니하는 文學이 잇고 반작하는 流星과 가티 달듸단 꿀물과 가티 妖艶한 娼妓와가티 一時는 반작하야 우리의 感覺을 무섭게 刺激하나 얼마 아니하야 곳 물리고 마는 文學이 잇다.
日本의 尊敬할 만한 批評家 廚川白村氏는 말하기를 社會가 沈滯의 狀態에 잇슬 때에는 極端에서 極端으로 달아나는 矯激한 革命歌가 나와서 新機運을 열게 되거니와 그것은 一時的이요. 그 革命의 過程이 끗난 뒤에는 곳 常으로 돌아간다고 말하엿고 氏도 「아놀드」氏와 同樣으로 「바이론」은 當時 英文壇의 革命兒요 決코 永久히 英人의 精神을 支配할 詩人이 아니것을 말하고 또 現代의 英文壇에서 矯激의 評을 듯는 「바나드 쏘」도 「바이론」과 가튼 變的 革命的 詩人인 것을 말하엿다.
『革命은 病이다. 때로는 不可避의 것이라 하드래도 紅疫이나 마마와 가티 무서운 病이다. 될 수만 잇스면 同胞가 서로 憎惡하고 殺戮하는 革命은 업시 살기를 願할 것이다. ……로마의 詩人「호라터우쓰」는 Aurea Mediocritey라하야 中庸을 黃金에 비겻다. 로마人 보다도 中庸의 德을 가장 잘 말하기는 東洋의 儒者일 것이니 子思는 이것을 題目으로 하야 人生哲學을 세웟다. ……「熱烈」이라든지 「徹底」라든지 「絶對」라든지 하는 것이 우리中에 가장 愛用되어서 마치 이 말에는 神聖不可犯할 權威가 잇는 듯하고 不可抗할 眞理가 잇는 듯 하다. 그러나 「熱烈」은 타 버리고, 「徹底」는 미치 빠저 버리고, 「絶對」는 할 일을 업새 버리고 만다.
『文學도 그러타고 생각한다. 熱烈한 文學, 深刻한 文學, 자릿자릿한 文學, 神通하고 奇異하야 입을 딱버리게 하는 文學, 奇想이 天外에서 뚝 떨어저서 鬼神을 哭하게하는 文學을 차즐 必要가 업고 또 그런 것을 지을랴 애쓸 必要가 업다. 그것도 잇는 것이 심심치 아니하고 또 特種의 神經과 趣味를 가진 사람에게 滿足을 주는 點으로 조커니와 文學의 常은 아니요 正道는 아니다. 異端이요, 庶子요, 畸形兒요, 怪物이다. 索隱行怪는 仁한 者가 적다.』

人心은 朝夕變이라더니만 李君의 생각은 적어도 春秋變은 되는 것 갓다. 東京에서 「民族自決」을 宣言하고 上海에서 「七可殺」을 부르짓든 그는 歸國以後 侊然大悟하야＜100＞ 三一運動을 「無計劃한 野蠻的 行動이라」 排斥하고 一萬名專門家업는 것을 恨嘆하면서 修養同盟을 부르짓고 總督政治가 許하는 範圍內의 政治的 結社를 計劃하드니 어제는 또 革命을 「變的이요, 常的이 아니라」하야 紅疫이나 마마와 가티 무서운 病으로 알게 되엇다. 「熱烈은  타 버리고 徹底는 미치 빠저 버리고 絶對는 할 일을 업새 버리고 만다.」하야 中庸之道를 大唱하고 「大聖至聖文宣王」의 第三世直孫子思의 高足弟子로 自處하게 되엇다. 입을 딱 버리게하는 文學, 鬼神이 哭할 文學이 어떤 것인지는 알 수 업거니와 그는 革命的 文學, 熱烈한 文學, 深刻한 文學을 「變的 그것이요, 異端이요, 庶子요, 畸形兒요, 怪物이라」하야 밥과 가튼 文學, 물과 가튼 文學을 提唱하게 되엿다.
그러나  - 우에도 말한 바이지만 - 李君의 特徵은 決코 그의 反革命的이거나 反熱情的임에 잇지 안타. 그의 善變的 임에 잇고 그의 騎墻的 임에 잇고 그의 兩棲的 임에 잇다. 그가 革命을 紅疫이나 마마와 가티 무서워하는 것은 事實이지만 決코 그것을 絶對로 排斥지는 안코 熱烈한 文學 深刻한 文學을 怪物이나 異端으로 아는 것은 事實이지만 그의 必要를 絶對로 느끼지 안는 것은 아니다. 어떤 때에는 革命의 必要를 切實히 느끼고 熱情과 勇氣를 주는 文學을 必要로 안다. 特히 今日의 朝鮮에 잇어서 그러하다. 그의 傑作 「中庸과 徹底」中에도 아래와 가튼 句節이 잇다.

『確實히 社會에는 革命이 必要할 境遇가 잇다. 마치 오랜 滯症에 峻下劑를 多量으로 頓服하야 胃腸內의 積滯를 一掃해버릴 必要가 잇는 모양으로！ ……必要할 때에 峻下劑나 開腸手術을 끄리는 것은 愚요. 卑㤼인 것은 事實이다. 그럼으로 비록 常的은 아니라 하드래도 革命文學은 때로는 必要하다. 歡迎할 만하다. 아마 오늘 朝鮮에도 그러한 境遇에 잇슬는지도 모른다. 아니 진실로 그러한 境遇에 잇다.
『힘이라는 말이 近來文藝의 批評에 盛行한다. 果然 힘이 必要하다. 더욱히 오늘날 朝鮮人이 必要로 아는 바가 힘과 熱情과 勇氣이기 때문에 힘과 熱情과 勇氣를 주는 文學이 必要하다.』

또 그는 누구보다도 만히 朝鮮사람의 處地를 불상히 녀기고 ＜101＞ 朝鮮사람을 사랑한다. 그가 밥과 가튼 文學을 提唱하고 물과 가튼 文學을 提唱함도 實로 이와가튼 高潔한 愛族心에서 出發된 것이다. 그의 말을 빌어하면 「只今 우리 朝鮮人은 重病을 알코 난 사람과 갓다. 그는 肉體的으로도 虛弱하거니와 精神的으로도 虛弱하다. 그에게 强烈한 刺戟劑를 주는 것은 마치 不寐症患者에게 强烈한 珈琲茶를 대구 먹이는 것과 갓다. 그에게는 모든 劇藥보다도 술보다도 珈琲茶보다도 新鮮한 空氣와 飮食과 日光과 過激치 아니한 동작이 必要함」으로서다.
다만 革命을 紅疫이나 마마와 가티 무섭게 아는 그의 革命은 普通사람이 생각하는 革命과는 다를 것이고 熱烈한 文學, 深刻한 文學을 異端으로 알고 怪物로 아는 그의 革命文學은 보통사람이 생각하는 革命文學과는 判異할 것이다.

李君이 朝鮮民族을 사랑하고 그네들의 可憐한 處地를 불상히 녀기는 것은 事實일 것이다 .또 그의 論旨를 본다면 그가 今日의 朝鮮에 잇어서 어느 程度까지 改革의 必要를 느끼고 革命의 不可避를 感覺하는 것도 事實인 것 갓다. 그러나 그는 「民族性改造論」의 執筆者요 基督敎篤信者다. 그의 눈으로 본다면 朝鮮사람이 今日의 處地에 이르고 만 것은 實로 그네들에게 亡國根性이 잇섯고 壹萬二千人의 專門家가 업섯고 「한우님 아버지」에게 만흔 罪를 지엿슴으로서다. 朝鮮사람은 懶惰하고 虛僞가 만코 勇敢스럽지 못하기도 하거니와 特히 무엇보다도 한우님의 獨生子「예수 그리시도」의 聖訓에 違反되는 行動을 만히 하엿다.
예수는 「원수를 사랑하라!」하엿는데 朝鮮사람은 원수를 미워하고 예수는 「올흔 편 빰을 치거든 왼편 뺨까지 돌려 向하라!」하엿는데 조선사람은 왼쪽 빰을 맛기도 前에 돌이어 오른쪽 빰을 때리려고 덤빈다. 예수는 「속옷을 가시고저 하거든 것옷까지 가지게 하라！」하엿는데 朝鮮의 小作人은 地主가 열말 小作料를 달라하면 일곱말 밧게 안주갯다 하야 小作爭議를 니르키고 朝鮮의 勞働者는 資本主가 七十錢밧게 안주겟다는 품싹을 一圓으로 올리어 달라하야 同盟罷業을 한다. 예수는 「먹을 걱정, 입을 걱정을 하지 말라!」하엿는데 朝鮮사람은 每日 그 걱정만 하고 잇고 예수는 「權勢잇는 웃사람에게 屈從하라!」하엿는데 朝鮮사람은 屈從은 姑捨하고 끈힘업시 反抗한다. ＜102＞ 그네들에게는 訓戒도 所用이 업고 懷柔도 所用이 업고 監獄도 所用이 업고 絞首臺도 所用이 업다.
이와가티 極惡한 民族은 實로 죽어서 地獄은 避할 수 업거니와 살아서도 天罰을 免할 수 업슬 것이다.
여긔에 그는 大慈大悲한 菩薩心을 大發하야 宗敎家革命論, 道德家革命論, 詩人革命論을 부르짓게 되엇다. 그의 傑作 「中庸과 徹底」中에는 다음과 가튼 一節이 잇다.

『社會가 革命을 요구할 時代에는 흔히 病的인 推理와 感情이 民心을 支配하는 것이다. 아모조록 自然과 人生의 暗黑面 즉 病的部分만 擴大하여 보고 憎惡, 殺戮, 自暴, 自棄, 咀呪, 嫉妬, 爭鬪 - 이러한 劣等感情이 人心을 支配하는 것이다. 이 때에 가장 人心의 方向을 指導할 힘을 가진 者는 政治家, 思想家, 詩人이어니와 그 中에도 가장 民心 더욱히 血氣方壯한 靑年의 맘을 움지기게 하는 힘을 가진者는 詩人이다.
『그럼으로 이때에 詩人이 正當한 感情으로 民心을 引導하면 그 革命은 正當한 理想과 方法을 가진 革命이 되어 正當한 效果를 거둘려니와 그러치 아니하고 民心의 病的弱點을 利用하야 憎惡, 爭鬪, 咀呪, 殺戮 等의 劣等感情을 挑發하고 激勵한진댄 그것은 革命의 爆發을 速히 하는 힘은 잇슬지언정 革命의 最後最高의 目的에 對하여서는 致命傷인 惡影響을 주는 것이다.
『詩人의 義務는 그의 가진 最善을 民衆에게 보여줌에 잇다. 그가 가진 最善이라는 것보다도 그가 認證할 수 잇는 感覺할 수 잇는 最善을 民衆에게 보여줌에 잇다. 이 點에서 詩人은 民衆의 先生이요 指導者다. 詩는 그 詩를 生한 民衆의 最高精神이라야 할 것이다. 審美的으로나 道德的으로나 그러한 것이다. 詩는 吾人에게 最善을 보여 吾人을 놉게 하고 깨끗하게 하고 힘잇게 하고 아름답게 하고 서로 사랑하게 하여야 할 職分을 가진 點으로 宗敎와 共通한 것이다.

이러케 하야 東京에서 運動者업는 것을 恨嘆하고 上海에서 六穴砲업는 것, 爆發彈업는 것, 軍隊업는 것, 大砲업는 것을 恨嘆하고 歸國以後 一萬二千人의 專門家업는 것을 恨嘆하든 그는 이제는 詩人업는 것을 恨嘆하고 道德家 업는 것을 한탄하고 宗敎家 업는 것을 ＜103＞ 恨嘆하게 되엿다. 그러나 詩人은 質을 要求하고 量을 要求하지 안는다. 專門家는 적어도 一萬二千人이 되어야하고 軍隊는 멧 萬名이 잇서야 하겟지만 詩人은 한 사람이라도 조코 두 사람이라도 조타. 李君의 말을 빌어하면 「堯舜以後의 漢人은 以前의 漢人보다 놉핫슬 것이요, 釋迦 耶蘇以後의 人類는 以前의 人類보다 善하엿슬 것이니 이는 政治의 敎化로 個人의 힘의 偉大한 것을 가르친 말이어니와 쉑스피어 밀톤 以後의 英人은 以前의 英人보다 놉고 아름다웟슬 것이다. 時勢도 英雄을 지울려니와 英雄도 時勢를 짓는 것이다.」
李光洙君은 朝鮮서 가장 有名한 詩人이요 道德家요 宗敎家다. 特히 一身으로 이 세 가지를 兼한 것이 그의 가장 特異한 點이다. 實로 李光洙以後의 朝鮮사람은 以前의 朝鮮사람보다 놉하지고 아름다워지고 善하여 질 것이니 이 點에 잇어서는 우리는 未來를 樂觀하여도 조흘 것이다.

李君은 언제부터 文學의 階級性을 否認하고 深刻한 文學, 熱情的 文學을 排斥하면서 階級을 초월한 文學과 밥과 가튼 文學, 물과 가튼 文學을 提唱하여 왓다. 그러나 어떠한 것이 階級을 超越한 文學인지 또는 밥과 가튼 文學 물과 가튼 文學인지에 對하여서는 아지 아모러한 明白한 表示가 업섯댓다. 筆者는 恒常 이것을 궁금히 생각하여 왓드니 이번에야 幸인지 不幸인지 그의 正體를 알게 되엇다. 階級을 超越한 文學이 무엇이며 밥과 가튼 文學 물과 가튼 文學이 무엇인가? 이에 對하야 李君은 明白히 答覆하엿다. - 그것은 「最善을 民衆에게 보이여 주는 文學」이요 「종교와 공통한 직분을 가진 문학」이요 「東洋의 四書五經과 갓고 西洋의 新舊約과 가튼 文學」이요 「李杜의 詩나 所謂 唐宋八家文이나 西洋으로 보면 호머 「쉑스피어」의 詩가튼 文學」이다 라고.
朝鮮三才士의 一로 博學多聞인 李君 「그러타!」고 하는 以上 틀림은 別로 업슬 것이다. 그러나 寡聞淺識인 筆者의 눈으로 본다면 新舊約全書나 四書五經은 決코 階級을 超越한 經典이 아니오, 唐宋八家文이나 「쉑스피어」의 詩는 決코 階級을 超越한 文學이 아니다. 勿論 예수는 듯기 조흔 말을 하엿다. 「富者가 天國으로 들어가기는 駱駝가 바를 구멍으로 나가기 보다도 더욱 어러우리라」고. 그러나 耶蘇의 敎理를＜104＞  全體로 하야 본다면 모두가 배부르고 땃듯한 옷입은 사람이 아니고는 생각도 하여 볼 수 업는 玄妙한 그것이다. 예수는 「空中에 나는 새를 보라! 심으지도 안코 거두지도 안코 곡간에 모아들이지도 아니하되 天父께서 기르시나니 너희는 새보다 貴하지 아니하냐? 들에 百合花가 어떠케 자라는가를 생각하여 보라! 수고도 아니하고 길삼도 아니 하나니라. 그러나 「솔로몬」의 至極한 榮光으로도 입은 것이 이꼿하나만 갓지 못하엿나니 오늘 잇다가 來日 아궁지에 들풀도 한우님이 이러케 입히시거든 하물며 너희야 더욱 입히지 아니하랴? 그럼으로 무섯을 먹을가? 무엇을 마실가? 무엇을 입을가 염려하지 말라!」하엿지만 今日의 朝鮮사람은 時時刻刻히 밥걱정 옷걱정을 하여도 살아갈 수가 업고 一年 三百六十日동안 하로도 쉬지 안코 農事와 질삼을 하여도 먹을 것 입을 것이 잘 生기지 안는다. 예수는 「속옷을 가지고저 하거든 것옷까지 가지게 하라!」하엿지만 今日의 朝鮮農民은 地主와 싸와 가면서 小作料를 削減식히어도 살아갈 수가 업고 今日의 朝鮮勞働者는 資本主와 싸와 가면서 품싹을 올리어도 먹을 것 입을 것이 生기지 안는다.
四書五經은 어떠한 內容을 가젓는가? 그의 가장 根本的 倫理는 「三綱五倫」이 될 것이다. 「臣下는 임군에게 매이어 살고 아들은 아버지에게 매이어 살고 안해는 男便에게 매이어 살고 절믄이는 늘근이에게 매이어 살라!」는 것이 그에 根本原則이다. 「不義而富且貴 於我如浮雲」이라 하엿지만 그네들의 最高理想은 「升官發財」-즉 벼슬놉히 하고 돈 만히 모우는 것이다. 所謂 「正名」이라하야 人類를 數多한 階級에 난우아서 아래 階段 이웃 階段에 對하야 絶對服從하게 하고 一切權力에 獻諂하는 것이 그의 가장 偉大한 特徵이다. 「天無二日」 「國無二君」이라는 것이 그의 主張이요 「忠臣不事二君」 「烈女不更二夫」라는 것이 그의 道德이다.
또 唐宋八家文과 「쉑스피어」의 詩는 어떠한 時代의 産品이며 어떠한 內容을 가젓는가? 하나는 唐宋盛世의 遺物이요 또 하나는 「에리사베스」隆盛期의 産品이다. 侵略政策이 成功과 外族과의 교통은 中國의 君主政治에 한 隆盛期를 이루엇다. 一般民衆은 「太平世聖」를 구가하게 되고 詩人墨客은 現實을 讚美하고 豪勢를 자랑하기를 爲하야 詩를 쓰고 小說을 지엇다. 그의 代的 傑作이 李杜의 詩요 八家의 文이다. ＜105＞産業革命과 新大陸發見은 英國의 資本主義制度에 한 黃金時代를 創出하엿다. 一般民衆의 生活은 向上되고 豪華한 氣風은 上流社會를 風靡하엿다. 이와가튼 英國의 資本主義的 黃金時代를 代表하는 것이 「쉑스피어」의 詩와 劇이다. 밥과 가튼 文學을 提唱하고 물과 가튼 文學을 提唱하는 李君의 눈으로 본다면 그네들의 作品은 實로 佛家의 淨土와 가틀 것이고 基督敎徒의 天國과 가틀 것이다. 그러나 不幸中 又不幸으로 資本主義制度의 破滅期에 植民地 種族으로 태이어 난 李君은 將來 어떠케 이와 가튼 文學을 建設할는지가 甚히 疑問이다.

얼마前 개벽社에서 階級文學에 對한 文士諸氏의 意見을 물엇슬 때에 李君은 「作家가 作品을 만들때에는 다만 거미가 거미줄을 내이고 누에가 고치를 짓는 것처럼 짓는 것이니 거미더러 누에고치를 지오라 하드래도 無理갯슴으로」自己는 階級文學을 反對한다고 하엿다. 이것은 實로 李君의 생각을 가장 率直하게 表明한 것이엇다. 무어니 무어니 하여도 李君은 徹頭徹尾한 資本主義的 思想의 所有者요, 有産階級意識의 所有者다. 그는 改革도 바라고 革命도 全然否認치는 안는다. 그러나 그의 바라는 改革, 그의 要求하는 革命은 決코 資本主義에 對한 社會主義的 改革이 아니요 有産階級에 對한 無産階級的 革命이 아니다. 그가 主張하는 詩人革命論, 宗敎家革命論, 道德家革命論의 要旨는 實로 그네들에 依하야 世上 사람이 한 層 놉하지고 한層 깨끗하여 지고 한 層 善하여지고 歷史가 됫거럼을 처서 今日의 朝鮮이 로마시대의 伊太利가 되고 「에리사베스」隆盛期의 英國이 되고 唐宋時代의 中國이 됨에 잇다.
無産階級的 意識을 가진 「고리키」나 「하푸트맨」이나 「벤날, 쇼」는 「누에가 고치를 짓고 거미가 거미줄을 네이는 態度」로 쓰지만 그네즐의 作品은 恒常 無産者를 擁護하고 革命을 鼓吹하는 無産階級的 文學이 되고 被壓迫階級的 藝術이 된다. 그러나 이와 正反對로 反動的 思想과 有産階級的 意識을 가진 李光洙君은 그네들과 꼭 가튼 態度로 쓰지만 그의 作品은 恒常 有産者를 擁護하고 現制度를 辯護하는 有産階級的 文學 反革命的 文學이 된다. -이와 가튼 李君에게 無産階級的 作品을 지으라함은 實로 「거미에게 누에고치를 지으라」는 것과 가튼 無理한 注文이 될 것이다. ＜106＞

「로맨,로란」의 有名한 「民衆藝術論」中에 다음과 가튼 意味의 句節이 잇다.

『조곰도 黨派心이 업는 無限하고 普遍的인 民衆藝術을 主張하는 이가 잇다. 그러나 이것은 훌늉한 空想이다. 未來社會에서 或 그것이 될 수 잇다면 멧百年後에야 實現될 것이다. 今日의 處地로는 亦是 永遠을 現在의 瞬間에다 두고 時代와 가티 生活하기를 努力치 아니하니 할 수 업다. 藝術이란 到底히 그 時代의 渴望과 分離식힐 수 업는 것이다. 民衆藝術은 民衆의 苦痛과 그의 希望과 그의 鬪爭을 떠나서는 存在할 수 업는 것이다.』
『安穩한 時代의 安穩한 藝術은 누구나 願하는 바다. 그러나 時代가 混亂中에 잇고 그의 國民이 鬪爭中에 잇는 그때에는 藝術도 國民을 援助하야 싸우고 國民을 奮起식히지 아니할 수 업슬 것이다. 그네들의 行動을 毁妨하고 잇는 無知를 打破하고 偏見을 버서버리는 것이 藝術의 眞正한 目的일 것이다. 强暴는 決코 藝術의 必然的 附屬物은 아니다. 그러니 藝術의 目的은 生을 豊富히 하고 힘잇게 하고 더 偉大하게 하고 더 完美하게 함에 잇다. 그러면 萬若 愛와 結合이 그의 目的이라면 憎惡는 어느 時期까지는 或은 그의 武器가 될 것이다.
「센트·안토완」郊外의 一勞働者는 「一切 憎惡는 모두 惡이라」고 主張한 一講演者에게 對하야 이러케 말하엿다. - 「憎惡는 善이요, 憎惡는 正義다. 被壓迫者를 壓迫者에게 對하야 反抗케 하는 것은 이 憎惡다. 나는 누구가 다른 사람을 압박하는 것을 본다면 그것을 憤慨하고 그 者를 미워한다. 그리고 그 憤慨하고 憎惡하는 自身이 正當하다고 생각한다. 惡을 미워하지 안는 者는 善도 사랑하지 안는 者다. 不正不義한 것을 보고 싸와 보겟다는 생각이 업는 者는 藝術家도 아니요 사람도 아니다.」라고.

社會의 進化는 人類를 利害가 相反되는 兩大階級에 對立식히고 말엇다. 一面에 搾取階級이요, 壓迫階級인 有産者가 잇고 反面에 被搾取階級이요 被壓迫階級인 無産者가 잇다. 時日이 지내면 지낼수록 그네들의 階級的 對立은 더욱 濃厚하여지고 그네들의 ＜107＞ 階級的 自覺 階級的 意識은 더욱 鮮明하여 진다.
우리가 이제 社會의 時代的 推移를 고찰하고 世界大勢를 觀察할 때에 가장 顯著한 現象의 하나는 中間階級의 沒落이요, 中間思想의 不振이다. 大工業의 發達과 資本主義制度의 發展은 必然的으로 小資本家, 小企業家, 小地主의 社會的 地位를 동요식히고 無産階級을 搆成한 모든 要素間의 利害를 同一한 水平線에까지 끄집어 내리운다. 熟練勞働者와 非熟練勞働者 筋肉勞働者와 精神勞働者 農業勞働者와 工業勞働者 間의 社會的 地位와 經濟的 地位- 딸아서 그네들 間의 利害衝突은 漸次消滅되어 가는 中이다.
全世界는 兩大分되어잇다. 一面에 「소비에트」 社會主義聯邦과 第三國際가 잇고 反面에 資本主義國家의 國際聯盟이 잇다. 英國은 自由黨의 沒落으로 保守黨과 勞工黨이 對立하게 되엇고, 伊太利는 國粹黨과 共産黨이 對立되어 잇고, 獨逸은 한 동안 社會民主黨이 牛耳를 잡게 되더니 漸次 그의 氣勢가 不振하는 反面에 國權黨과 共産黨 對立의 兆가 보이고 米國도 民主黨 沒落의 兆가 顯著히 보이운다. 第二國際의 黃色主義者가 萎靡不振하는 代身에 第三國際의 非妥協派는 「旭日昇天」의 勢로 到處에 活躍하고 잇고 「암수텔탐」 灰色職工國際가 漸次 勢力하게되는 同時에 「모스크바」의 赤色職工國際는 그의 反比例로 到處에서 氣勢를 增長식히고 잇다. 發展의 最後階級에 達한 資本主義는 갈수록 侵略化하고 反動化하는 反面에 無産大衆의 階級的 自覺 階級的 意識은 갈수록 鮮明하여 지고 그네들의 階級戰線은 갈수록 組織化하여 간다.
「無産階級의 獨裁거나 有産階級의 獨裁거나 그 사이에 中間의 길은 잇슬 수 업다.」 우리의 압헤는 다만 두 가지 길이 잇다. 積極的으로 有産階級을 擁護하고 現制度를 讚美하거나 그러치 안흐면 積極的으로 無産階級的 意識을 가지고 階級鬪爭의 길을 밟거나 - 이 두 가지 中에 한 가지를 擇하지 아니할 수 업슬 것이다. 積極的 XX과 積極的 XX, 積極的 鬪爭과 積極的 反革命 - 우리의 압헤는 나아갈 수 잇는 다만 두 가지 길이 잇다. 사람의 生産品인 藝術, 사람 以上의 아모 것도 아니요, 사람 以下의 아모 것도 아닌 藝術家의 任務도 다만 두 가지가 잇슬 뿐이다. 積極的으로 有産階級의 意識을 가지고 現制度를 讚美하고 支配階級을 擁護하거나 또는 積極的으로 無産階級의 意識을 가지고 現制度를 否認하고 階級的 意識, 階級的 鬪爭을 ＜108＞ 鼓吹하거나 그 사이에는 中間의 길이 잇슬 수 업다. 다만 現實을 逃避하는 弱者뿐이 입으로만 中間에 서게 되는 것이다.
春園李君이여- 君은 將次 어떠한 思想을 가지고 어떠한 方路를 取할려는가? 어떠한 意識을 가지고 어떠한 藝術을 創作할려는가? 筆者는 君에게 對하야 現實을 逃避하는 弱者가 되지 말고 될 수만 잇다면 그와 直面하야 勇敢스럽게 싸우는 鬪士가 되기를 바란다. 딸아서 하로라도 急速히 現在의 兩棲的 態度를 버리고 兩者中 그의 一을 取하기를 好意的으로 勸告하고 십다. 그러나 이와 가튼 忠告를 듯고 안듯는 것은 勿論 君의 自由일 것이다.

春園 李光洙君에게 對하야 筆者는 個人的으로나 團體的으로 아모러한 私感이 업다. 筆者는 다만 어떤 席上에서 그를 한번 對面할 일이 잇고 東亞日報의 「보고 십흔 寫眞」中에서 그의 寫眞을 한번 본 일이 잇슬 뿐이다. 筆者의 親知中에는 그와 꽤 가까이 相從하는 분이 멧 분잇다. 필자는 그네들을 通하야 그에 對한 好意的 말을 만히 들엇다. 그가 萬一 그의 「金剛山遊記」나 쓰고, 「春秋傳改作」이나 하고만 잇다면 筆者는 決코 貴重한 時間과 努力을 虛費하야 이와 가튼 文字를 쓰지 안흘 것이다.
東亞日報에 連載된 그의 最近論文 「中庸과 徹底」를 읽고도 筆者는 붓을 들기 前에 멧번이나 躊躇하엿댓다. 그러나 「革命을 紅疫이나 마마와 가티 무서운 病」으로 알고 「熱烈은 타버리고 徹底는 미치 빠져버리고 絶對는 할 일을 업새 버린다.」하야 一切否認하고 熱烈한 文學, 深刻한 文學, 革命的 文學을 「變的 그것이요, 常的 그것이 아니라」 하야 絶對排斥하는 그의 錯誤된 主張에 對하여는 참아 黙過할 수가 업섯다. 特히 이와가튼 錯誤된 主張이 公公然히 新聞紙上에 나타나서 一般社會에 끼칠 惡影響을 생각할 때에 筆者는 참아 袖手傍觀할 수 가 업섯다. 그럼으로 「單純한 學理的 辨論에 그치고 眞理的 探究에 그치겟다.」는 主見下에서 그에 對한 批評의 붓을 들게 된 것이엇다. ＜109＞
그러나 사람이란 感情的 動物이다. 쓰고 나서 읽어보니 最初의 計劃과는 背趨되는 곳이 적지 안타. 군대군대 感情的 文句가 쓰이게 되고 甚至於 人身攻擊 비슷한 句節조차 全혀 업지안흔 것 갓다. 다만 筆者가 여긔에 攻擊한 것은 그의 錯誤된 思想이요, 決코 그의 病弱한 身體가 아니다. 딸아서 그가 萬一 筆者의 이번 辨駁에 對하야 理由잇고 條理잇는 答覆을 준다면 筆者는 언제든지 再答의 勞를 애끼지 안흘 것이다. 寬仁大度한 李君이여! 이 点에 對하야 特히 誤解가 업기를 바란다. (끗)
(一九二六, 一, 八, 서울서 稿)

筆者의 말 - 發表가 너머도 느저저서 未安하외다.
新年論文에 對한 비평을 이제야 내게 되는 것은 實로 遺憾이외다. 그러나 事實을 말슴들이오면 一月八日에 原稿가 完成되고 十二日까지에 淨寫도 太半이 되엇댓사오나 그것을 맞추기 前에 某事件 - 其實事件自體와는 아모 關係도 업시 -에 關聯되어서 二十日間을 鐘路署와 西大門刑務所에서 不自由한 歲月을 보내게 되엇슴으로 不得已* 이러케 됨이외다.
- 二月四日-＜110＞
＜98-110＞