**Header Section:**
Magazine Title: 동광 제18호
Publication Date: 1931년 02월 01일
Article Title: 內外大觀 解說과 批判, 세상은 어디로 가나(12월) (Overview of Internal and External Affairs: Commentary and Critique, Where is the World Headed? (December))
Author: 翰 (Han)
Article Type: 소식 (News/Report)

**Body Text Translation:**
Overview of Internal and External Affairs: Commentary and Critique, Where is the World Headed?

**Activism, Passivity, Merger, Dissolution**

The flames of the dissolution debate (解消論), ignited by the Pusan Branch of the Singanhoe (新幹會 釜山支會), have gradually begun to grow. On the 14th, the Iwŏn Branch (利原支會), due to this, finally saw the pro-dissolution and anti-dissolution factions hang separate signs, and on the 26th, the P'yŏngyang Branch (平壤支會) also saw the dissolutionist faction achieve a temporary victory.
At a time when the old disputes within Ch'ŏndogyo (天道敎) have been permanently resolved and unification completed, and the merger of the northern and southern Methodist churches was finalized with the establishment of the First General Assembly of the Korean Methodist Church held from the 2nd to the 12th, the Singanhoe's dissolution debate represents passivity against activism, a step backward against a step forward. One cannot help but feel that all worldly affairs are advancing and retreating unevenly (進退不齊).
Some might say that the Singanhoe dissolution debate is not a theory of passivity but an active dissolution (積極的 解消) based on the advancement of struggle forms. However, in the current situation of Chosŏn (朝鮮), what stronger form can possibly be created? Without an answer to this, the dissolution debate is merely an exercise in theory (理論の 遊戱).
From "Direction Change Theory" (方向轉換論) to "Faction Liquidation Theory" (派閥淸算論), "Bourgeois Democracy Acquisition Theory" (브르주와 民主主義獲得論), "Hegemony Seizure Theory" (헤게모니 戰取論), and "Special Circumstances Theory" (特殊情勢論), the movement theory in Chosŏn seems to have followed step-by-step in the footsteps of Japan's. This dissolution debate also seems to be a shadow of the dissolution debate of Japan's Labor-Farmer Party (勞農黨). Is it coincidence or imitation? If it's a coincidence, it's one thing, but if it's imitation, there is the danger of literally translating guidance for Chosŏn, whose situation is vastly different. The attitude of the Singanhoe Headquarters is opposition to dissolution, and the Kyŏngsŏng Branch (京城支會) seems to be in step, so it appears credible that there will be no major upheaval immediately. <1>

The world was surprised when the Kyŏngsŏng Branch declared its non-recognition of the newly appointed Central Committee members of the Headquarters. Meanwhile, at a conference held instead of the national convention by the Youth General Alliance (靑年總同盟), voices rejecting the newly appointed Central Committee members arose from the Inch'ŏn (仁川), P'yŏngyang (平壤), Chinnamp'o (鎭南浦), Suwŏn (水原), Yŏngdong (永同), Kwangju (光州) alliances, as well as the Kangwŏn (江原) and Kyŏngnam (慶南) federations. It is always true that such internal strife (內紛) has considerable reasons on both sides involved. However, one must not forget that what the people of Chosŏn desire is to conserve the energy spent on internal theoretical debates and channel it into vigorous external activities.
The National Convention of the Kŭnuhoe (槿友會) was also banned; they held an expanded committee meeting, selected new leadership, and decided on a new policy focusing on enlightenment movements such as illiteracy eradication and superstition breaking. Let's record the new lineups of various organizations:

Singanhoe Branch Heads (支會長): (Pusan) Im Yong-gil (任龍吉), (Taegu 大邱) Kim Kwang-jin (金光鎭), (T'ongyŏng 統營) Hwang Tŏk-yun (黃德允), (Haman 咸安) Yi Sŏk (李奭), (Kangnŭng 江陵) Yi Wŏn-jae (李元載), (Haeju 海州) No Sŏn-hyang (魯善享), (P'yŏngyang 平壤) Cho Man-sik (曹晩植)
Kŭnuhoe Executive Committee Chair (執行委員長): Cho Sin-sŏng (趙信聖); Standing Committee Members (常務委員): General Affairs Dept. (庶務部) Kim Chŏng-wŏn (金貞媛), Finance Dept. (財務部) Kim Su-jun (金繡準), U Pong-un (禹鳳雲), Propaganda Dept. (宣傳部) Kang Chŏng-im (姜貞任), An Chŏng-suk (安貞淑), Investigation Dept. (調査部) Pak Yŏng-hae (朴暎海), Chŏng Sil-hae (鄭實解), Political Affairs Dept. (政文部) U Pong-un (禹鳳雲), Sim Ŭn-suk (沈恩淑), Publications Dept. (出版部) Sim Ŭn-suk (沈恩淑), An Chŏng-suk (安貞淑); Executive Committee Members (執行委員): Hwang Ae-dŏk (黃愛德), Son K'wae-rye (孫快禮), Yun Sŏng-sang (尹聖相), Yi Kye-sun (李桂順), Kim On (金溫), Chin Kyu (陳奎), Yun Ch'i-jŏng (尹致貞), Kim Sŏn (金善), Ko Yŏn-u (高連宇), Chŏng Sŏn-hwa (鄭鮮華), Pak Yŏng-hae (朴英海), Yi Ch'un-su (李春壽), Kim Kwang-ho (金光浩), Ch'oe Suk-cha (崔淑子); Central Inspection Committee Chair (中央檢査委員長): Sin Chŏng-gyun (申貞均); Standing Members (同常務): Chŏng Chong-myŏng (鄭鍾鳴); Committee Members (委員): Chŏng Ch'il-sŏng (丁七星), Cho Sang-dal (趙上達), Kim Sang-sŏk (金常石)
Ch'ŏndogyo Great Leader (大領): Chŏng Kwang-jo (鄭廣朝); Vice Great Leader (副大領): Ch'oe Chun-mo (崔俊模); Sŏngdogwanjŏng (誠道觀正): O Sang-jun (吳常俊); Kyŏngdogwanjŏng (敬道觀正): Yi Chong-rin (李鍾麟); Sindogwanjŏng (信道觀正): Ch'oe Sŏng-nyŏn (崔碩連); Pŏpdogwanjŏng (法道觀正): Yi Kun-o (李君五); Chidogwanjŏng (知道觀正): Yi Ton-hwa (李敦化); Kamsagwanjŏng (監査觀正): Kim Chae-gye (金在桂). Additionally, elders like Kwŏn Tong-jin (權東鎭), O Se-ch'ang (吳世昌), Ch'oe Rin (崔麟) were recommended as Supreme Advisors (最高觀問).
Korean Methodist Church Superintendent Bishop (總理師): Yang Chu-sam (梁柱三)

**Chosŏn Budget: 240 Million Wŏn**

Since Chosŏn lacks a legislative body, the authorities should at least announce the budget figures in detail for public review. However, the budget summary released annually is practically useless. According to the budget summary for this year announced on December 26th, the total amount is 241 million wŏn, an increase of 1.24 million wŏn compared to last year's actual budget. Among these, the so-called new projects are approximately:
a. Poor relief local public works (窮民救助地方土木工事關係): 525,000 wŏn
b. Direct management of tobacco sales (煙草販賣直營): 3,328,000 wŏn
c. Dry-field farming promotion (田作獎勵): 108,000 wŏn
d. Pension contribution (恩給分擔): 2,816,000 wŏn
e. North Chosŏn development survey (北朝鮮開拓調査): 95,000 wŏn
f. Sugar beet cultivation subsidy (甛榮栽培補助): 87,000 wŏn
g. Disaster recovery expenses (災害復舊費): 581,000 wŏn
h. Private railway subsidy (私鐵補助): 400,000 wŏn
It is said that the budget for poor relief public works projects by various local organizations, including this subsidy, will amount to about 2.2 million wŏn for this year. Whether this can truly save the tragic state of the farming villages is doubtful, and furthermore, considering that the entire public works cost does not go to the poor, but there are contractors (請負業者) involved in the middle who benefit, isn't this truly like pouring water into a cracked pot? The cries of the Chosŏn people for cuts in police spending, reduction in personnel costs (like elimination of bonuses 加俸 全滅), and increases in education funding have had no impact whatsoever.

**Movement for Acquisition of Educational Rights**

The movement of the All-Chosŏn Elementary School Support Grand Alliance (全朝鮮普通學校後援會大聯盟), launched at the beginning of the New Year, will be a direct challenge (頂門의 一針) to the authorities' education policy. Implementation of compulsory education (義務敎育) - under the sincere intention to promote Chosŏn's culture, this should be demanded immediately, considering the current scale of the Chosŏn budget.<2> Nevertheless, the situation where only 30% of school-age children can be accommodated is truly pathetic. While the average annual tuition fee of 1 wŏn may not seem high by urban standards, looking at the reality of rural areas where dropouts are frequent and property seizures (差押) occur due to monthly tuition fees (月謝金), one can realize the further inappropriateness of the originally unreasonable monthly fee system for elementary education. If one plans for the future of Chosŏn, one must go beyond the complete abolition of tuition fees to providing textbooks and even food supplies. Though it always comes down to the budget, the financial resources are by no means difficult to find through cutting redundant expenses (冗費) and restructuring personnel costs (人件費).

**The Year of Prisons and Police**

This past year was also one where prisons and police had many customers. Just within the jurisdiction of the Kyŏngsŏng District Court (京城地方法院), 136 "thought criminals" (思想犯) witnessed the New Year's Day snow from behind bars. Across all of Chosŏn, the number likely exceeds 300. According to the authorities, the reason for the case backlog (事件 積滯) is a shortage of judicial personnel. For this reason, the Kyŏngsŏng District Court reportedly added two judges during the year-end judicial reshuffle. While this might provide some relief, although the reason for the case backlog should be investigated, isn't there also a need to examine why cases are emerging one after another (疊出)?
While public opinion was boiling in Tōkyō over the Metropolitan Police Department's detention of newspaper reporters, in Kyŏngsŏng, there was an incident where a detective from a certain police station assaulted a newspaper reporter.
The criminal who attacked the Changhowŏn police substation (長湖院 駐在所) and stole firearms, appearing under the guise of representing the current political situation (時局), prompted a full mobilization of police from three provinces. When caught, it turned out the political guise was false (假物), creating a year-end comedy.
The progress of various thought-related cases (思想關係 諸事件) during this month is as follows:
Fourth Communist Party Incident (第四次共産黨事件), case of Han Sang-ho (韓相鎬) and 45 others: Verdict on the 26th at Kyŏngsŏng District Court, maximum 5 years, pre-trial detention credit 150 to 500 days.
Kyŏngbuk Communist Party (慶北共産黨), Yi Hoe-sŭng (李會昇) and 16 others: Verdict on the 27th at Taegu District Court (大邱地方法院), maximum 2.5 years, 8 given suspended sentences.
Hamgyŏng North Province Communist Party Incident (咸北共産黨事件), Maeng Tu-ŭn (孟斗恩) and 11 others: Verdict on the 26th at Ch'ŏngjin District Court (淸津地方法院), maximum 2 years, 3 acquitted.
Cheju Island Anarchist Association Incident (濟州島無政府結社事件): Verdict on the 8th at Kwangju District Court (光州地方法院), maximum 5 years, 5 appealed.
Hamgyŏng North Province Federation Incident (咸北道聯事件): Verdict on the 23rd at Kyŏngsŏng Court of Review (京城覆<0x755C>), acquitted under the Peace Preservation Law (治維法), sentenced to 1 year 6 months under the Security Law (保安法) and Decree Violation (制令違反) (1st trial verdict 3 years, prosecutor appealed).
Sinŭiju High School Student Demonstration (新義州高普學生示威): 18 students, verdict on the 26th at Sinŭiju District Court (新義州地方法院), maximum 3 years, 8 given suspended sentences.
Kyŏngsŏng Student Manse Incident (京城學生萬歲事件): Sin Yong-u (申用雨) and 13 others, verdict on the 19th in Kyŏngsŏng, 1 year 2 months, 10 given suspended sentences.
Taejŏn Singan Branch Incident (大田新幹支會事件): Preliminary examination concluded on the 27th, referred to Kongju Court (公州法院) for public trial for violation of the Peace Preservation Law.
Chŏnbuk Communist Party Incident (全北共産黨事件): Ch'ŏn Pyŏng-wŏn (千炳元) and 37 others, preliminary examination concluded in Kyŏngsŏng on the 9th, 18 referred for public trial under the Peace Preservation Law.
Kando Communist Youth Pak Yu-dŏk Incident (間島共靑 朴有德事件): Verdict on the 24th in Kyŏngsŏng, maximum 5 years, 3 acquitted.
Han Pin Incident (韓斌事件): Preliminary examination concluded on the 13th, referred to Kyŏngsŏng Court for public trial under the Peace Preservation Law.
Hamgyŏng South Province Communist Party Incident (咸南共産黨事件): Preliminary examination concluded, only 32 out of 56 found guilty, referred to Hamhŭng Court (咸興法院) for violation of the Security Law and Publication Law (出版法).
Communist Youth Reconstruction Incident (共靑復興事件): An Sang-hun (安相勳) and 8 others on July 5th, Hong Sŭng-u (洪承祐) and 12 others on the 27th of this month, preliminary examination concluded in Kyŏngsŏng, news ban lifted simultaneously, referred for public trial under the Peace Preservation Law.

**Two Sides of the Farming Village**

Talk of famine amidst plenty (豊年飢饉) and rural destitution (農村窮况) grows louder as the spring hardship (春窮) approaches. Although a 10 million wŏn financing plan has been approved, and low-interest funds for rice (低利米資) are being distributed through the Financial Associations (金融組合), it seems this only benefits some landlords and rice merchants <3>, providing no benefit whatsoever to the general poor farmers. The phenomena we feared are gradually starting to materialize: (1) Due to the collapse of grain prices and the lack of effective countermeasures so far, both landlords and tenant farmers have fallen into hardship. Movements for postponement or reduction of water association fees (水利組合費) exist in various provinces, and the authorities, recognizing the unavoidable circumstances, seem to have internally decided to allow postponements and waive delinquency interest in unavoidable cases.
Associations where movements for water tax postponement or reduction occurred include Kangso (江西), Mirim (美林), P'yŏngan (平安), Tongin (同仁), Annyŏng (安寧), Chaesin (載信), etc. In Kyŏngnam, where the situation is most severe, a policy has been established to secure 1.5 million wŏn at a low interest rate of 5.7% to rescue various water associations within its jurisdiction.
(2) The impoverished peasant class, driven into dire straits, is manifesting this through a surge in nighttime escapes (夜間 逃出), (3) an increase in displaced people (流離民), (4) bankruptcy (破産), (5) an increase in forced executions (强制執行), and (6) it has also led to facts such as unpaid land taxes (地稅의 未收) and (7) delinquency in loan repayments to Financial Associations (金融組合의 貸付金滯收). Compiling all the aspects appearing in newspapers would paint too bleak a picture, so we must avoid it.
In such circumstances, one might expect tenant disputes (小作爭議) to erupt, but in reality, apart from the Land Tax Non-Payment Alliance (地稅不負擔同盟) in Ch'ilgok County (漆谷郡), Kyŏngnam, which had some momentum, and minor disputes in Chinyŏng (進永) and elsewhere, there have been no major disputes yet. This might be partly because tenant farmer organization is still underdeveloped, but on the other hand, perhaps the poverty is so severe that they lack even the will to protect their tenancy rights. However, statistics for tenant disputes in the 4th year of Shōwa (1929) reached 433 cases, more than double the 204 cases in the 14th year of Taishō (1925). In terms of participants too, the 5,400 in Shōwa 4 is more than double the 2,646 in Taishō 14. This speaks to the intensification of the rural problem and the awakening of the tenant farmer class.
On the other side of rural exhaustion (疲弊), movements to escape this exhaustion, besides tenant disputes, include supplementary cooperative movements (補急的 協同運動), movements for moral reform (矯風), and lifestyle innovation (生活革新), which are also quite intense. Perhaps this can be called the bright side (光明面) of the farming villages.

**Industrial Rationalization Revealed**

Slowly, 눈에 물 띄우도록 (in a tear-jerking manner?), the trend of industrial rationalization (産業合理化) blows into Chosŏn as well. Labor disputes (勞動爭議) in December occurred at Songdo Rubber (松都고무), Kunsan Rice Milling (群山精米), Kyŏngsŏng Sech'ang Western Shoes (京城世昌洋靴), T'ongyŏng Fishing Boat Crew (統營漁業乘組員), Kyŏngsŏng Ochi Printing (京城越智印刷), Hoeryŏng Western Shoes (會寧洋靴), Ch'aho Dried Pollack Workers (遮湖掛太業者), Yŏsu Harbor Construction Workers (麗水築港工夫), Ch'unch'ŏn Silk Reeling Workers (春川製絲工), among others. Thousands of unemployed (失業者) were produced at Inch'ŏn Shipbuilding (仁川造船), Yongjŏng White Bean Selection Yard (龍井白太精選場), Chosŏn Hydroelectric (朝鮮水電), P'yŏngyang Manufacturing Company (平壤製業會社), etc. The unemployed across Chosŏn are estimated at 230,000, but this does not include the rural population under conditions of permanent unemployment. As byproducts of the disputes, the P'yŏngyang Mutual Aid Production Cooperative (平壤共濟生産組合) and the Kyŏngsŏng Western Shoe Joint Workshop (京城洋靴共同作業所) were born.
The number of labor disputes in the 4th year of Shōwa (1929) was 102 cases, with 8,293 participants. This is according to Government-General statistics.

**Joy and Sorrow Intermingled in the Academic World**

Frequent school strikes (盟休), whatever their cause, are unfortunate incidents in the academic world. The flourishing of supplementary night schools for farmers (農民補習夜學) utilizing the winter slack season is one of the bright aspects (光明面) of Chosŏn. Regulations on private schools have been strictly enforced, leading eventually to the forced closure of several lecture centers (講習所). Joy and sorrow intermingle on the Chosŏn scene. Where lies the true cause of the school strikes? One cannot solely blame the students or find fault only with the school authorities. <4>
There is a need to distinguish between school strikes with an ideological background and those without. While there is no freedom to critique the former, regarding the latter, it seems there might be some path to resolution. Doesn't the fact that the strike at P'yŏngyang Sungin Commercial School (平壤崇仁商業) was resolved with tearful handshakes between teachers and students offer some suggestion for this issue?

**20 Million Chosŏn People within Chosŏn**

Preliminary results from the National Census (國勢調査) announcement:
Population within Chosŏn:
Chosŏn people: 20,965,145
Japanese: 527,904
Other Japanese registry: 22
Chinese: 91,466
Other foreigners: 1,338
Total: 21,057,969
It is said. The title "Twenty Million Compatriots" now refers only to those within Chosŏn; including those inside and outside, the number is estimated at 23 to 24 million. A detailed explanation of population phenomena will be deferred to the next issue.

**Northern Manchuria Situation Still Bleak**

Direct actions by communist factions in Kando (間島) and Northern Manchuria (北滿) continue unabated, and the crackdown by Chinese authorities also involves indiscriminate harm (玉石俱焚), causing much damage to unrelated compatriots. Reports are quite confused, stating things like the Northeastern Army starting subjugation of the Communist Army, or military police raiding communist bases, making it difficult to ascertain the true situation. The death of Mr. O Hae-ch'u (吳海秋氏) in prison and the release of Mr. Nam Hyŏng-u (南亨祐氏) after arrest are recent pieces of good and bad news.

**World Situation Outlook**

China: Having completed the final ratification of the tariff agreement on November 18th, China decisively implemented the abolition of the likin tax (釐金廢止) and the enforcement of national tariff rates (國定稅率 實施) from January 1st. For now, the abolition has only materialized in the nine provinces under direct central control and the Northeast, and it will take much more time to abolish it nationwide. In any case, the abolition of this internal tax, which plagued China's industrial development for 60 years, is a major political achievement of the Nationalist Government, and Chiang Kai-shek's (蔣介石) appeal that its implementation was the litmus test of the revolution was not unreasonable. Proposals for the recovery of the French and Japanese concessions in Hankou (漢口 佛日兩租界 回收), the relocation of foreign legations southward (外國公使館 南遷), the recovery of extraterritorial rights (領事裁判權回收), and the withdrawal of foreign troops stationed in China (駐中 外國軍隊撤回) suggest that a busy year lies ahead, facing 1931. Rumors of plans to steadily recover foreign concessions in the Yangtze (長江) and Manchuria (滿洲), and plans to construct railways competing with the South Manchuria Railway (南滿鐵道), have greatly frayed Japan's nerves, leading the Foreign Ministry to declare the rumors of a hardline stance against Japan baseless. There's talk of sending Tai Chi-t'ao (戴天仇) as an envoy to Japan, but ultimately, when the sharp edge of national rights recovery reaches Manchuria, it seems unavoidable that serious diplomatic problems will arise.

Japan: The movement for proletarian unity saw the Labor Party (勞働黨) approve unification while the Social Democratic Party (社民黨) rejected it. Thus, the situation seems poised to develop into a unification of the legal left centered around the Labor-Farmer Party (勞農黨) and the Mass Party (大衆黨), confronting the right wing. Ahead of the Diet session, there was opposition within the Minseitō (民政黨) to Acting Prime Minister Shidehara (幣原代理總理), causing some commotion <5>, but the elder statesmen's preference for avoiding trouble prevailed, and they decided to face the Diet as is. The Taiwan Incident (臺灣事件) has been suppressed, and there is talk of the Governor-General of Taiwan taking responsibility.
Elsewhere: While the British-Indian Round Table Conference in London dragged on indecisively, India saw independence declaration commemorative demonstrations on January 1st, and there were riots in Burma (緬甸).
In the United States, the number of bankrupt banks and companies reached 1,100 in one year, and there was a clash between communist demonstrators and police in New York. This year's budget includes a huge defense expenditure of $690 million, amounting to 5.5% of the total budget. The Soviet Union's Five-Year Plan has entered its third year, and the Chōsen Bank branch in Vladivostok (海蔘威) was ordered closed. Sino-Soviet negotiations were suspended, and the British and Chinese plenipotentiaries returned home, but there are rumors of the Soviet embassy in Beiping (北平) being revived.
Rykov (튀꼽氏 - likely Rykov) resigned as Premier, succeeded by Molotov (몰로톱氏), further consolidating Stalin's (스탈린) power. The Industrial Party (産業黨), which plotted to overthrow the Soviet Union, received death sentences but was granted special amnesty by the Communist Party Committee and had their sentences reduced to 10 years imprisonment.
In Germany, unemployment reached 3.48 million, and various cities faced financial crises. The financial reform plan faced difficulty passing the Reichstag and was enacted using the President's emergency powers.
The French cabinet fell after being defeated in the Senate over its policy towards Germany. After much difficulty forming a successor cabinet, Steeg (스티그 - Théodore Steeg) (Radical Socialist Party 急進社會黨) succeeded in forming a government.
In Spain, a rebellion broke out and was momentarily perilous but was suppressed. In Central America, revolutionaries overthrew the existing government in Guatemala (과테말라).
The League of Nations Disarmament Commission concluded after five years, with plans to hold the main conference in the new year.
In Austria (墺太利), Ender (엔더) formed a new cabinet, and in Switzerland (瑞西), Dr. Häberlin (헤벨린) was newly elected President. (Han 翰) <6>

**Summary**

This December 1930 report from "Tongkwang" magazine offers a critical overview of pressing issues in Korea and the world. Internally, it focuses on the contentious debate surrounding the potential dissolution of the nationalist organization Singanhoe, factionalism within activist groups, the dire economic state of rural Chosŏn exacerbated by falling grain prices and heavy taxes, inadequate government relief, and increasing peasant unrest and displacement. It also notes ongoing labor disputes driven by "industrial rationalization," suppression of dissent through widespread arrests of "thought criminals," challenges in education including demands for compulsory schooling and school strikes, and new population statistics. Externally, it surveys developments in China (tariff reform, rights recovery efforts), Japan (political maneuvers, proletarian party unification attempts), India, the US (economic woes), the USSR (Five-Year Plan, political shifts), and Europe (political instability in Germany, France, Spain). The article paints a picture of widespread social, economic, and political turmoil both within colonial Korea and internationally.

From a historical perspective, the article vividly captures the internal struggles and external pressures faced by the Korean nationalist and socialist movements in the early 1930s, particularly the divisive Singanhoe dissolution debate. It also provides valuable contemporary insight into the severe impact of the global depression on colonial Korea's rural economy, the nature of Japanese colonial governance (budget priorities, suppression tactics), and Koreans' efforts towards social mobilization (education rights, labor organization, peasant movements) amidst challenging circumstances.

**Named Entities**

新幹會	신간회	Singanhoe
釜山支會	부산지회	Pusan Branch
利原支會	이원지회	Iwŏn Branch
平壤支會	평양지회	P'yŏngyang Branch
天道敎	천도교	Ch'ŏndogyo
朝鮮監理敎第一回總會	조선감리교제일회총회	First General Assembly of the Korean Methodist Church
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
日本	일본	Nihon (Japan)
勞農黨	노농당	Labor-Farmer Party (Japan)
新幹本部	신간본부	Singanhoe Headquarters
京城支會	경성지회	Kyŏngsŏng Branch
靑年總同盟	청년총동맹	Youth General Alliance
仁川	인천	Inch'ŏn
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
鎭南浦	진남포	Chinnamp'o
水原	수원	Suwŏn
永同	영동	Yŏngdong
光州	광주	Kwangju
江原	강원	Kangwŏn
慶南	경남	Kyŏngnam
槿友會	근우회	Kŭnuhoe
釜山	부산	Pusan
任龍吉	임용길	Im Yong-gil
大邱	대구	Taegu
金光鎭	김광진	Kim Kwang-jin
統營	통영	T'ongyŏng
黃德允	황덕윤	Hwang Tŏk-yun
咸安	함안	Haman
李奭	이석	Yi Sŏk
江陵	강릉	Kangnŭng
李元載	이원재	Yi Wŏn-jae
海州	해주	Haeju
魯善享	노선향	No Sŏn-hyang
曹晩植	조만식	Cho Man-sik
趙信聖	조신성	Cho Sin-sŏng
金貞媛	김정원	Kim Chŏng-wŏn
金繡準	김수준	Kim Su-jun
禹鳳雲	우봉운	U Pong-un
姜貞任	강정임	Kang Chŏng-im
安貞淑	안정숙	An Chŏng-suk
朴暎海	박영해	Pak Yŏng-hae
鄭實解	정실해	Chŏng Sil-hae
沈恩淑	심은숙	Sim Ŭn-suk
黃愛德	황애덕	Hwang Ae-dŏk
孫快禮	손쾌례	Son K'wae-rye
尹聖相	윤성상	Yun Sŏng-sang
李桂順	이계순	Yi Kye-sun
金溫	김온	Kim On
陳奎	진규	Chin Kyu
尹致貞	윤치정	Yun Ch'i-jŏng
金善	김선	Kim Sŏn
高連宇	고연우	Ko Yŏn-u
鄭鮮華	정선화	Chŏng Sŏn-hwa
朴英海	박영해	Pak Yŏng-hae
李春壽	이춘수	Yi Ch'un-su
金光浩	김광호	Kim Kwang-ho
崔淑子	최숙자	Ch'oe Suk-cha
申貞均	신정균	Sin Chŏng-gyun
鄭鍾鳴	정종명	Chŏng Chong-myŏng
丁七星	정칠성	Chŏng Ch'il-sŏng
趙上達	조상달	Cho Sang-dal
金常石	김상석	Kim Sang-sŏk
鄭廣朝	정광조	Chŏng Kwang-jo
崔俊模	최준모	Ch'oe Chun-mo
吳常俊	오상준	O Sang-jun
李鍾麟	이종린	Yi Chong-rin
崔碩連	최석련	Ch'oe Sŏng-nyŏn
李君五	이군오	Yi Kun-o
李敦化	이돈화	Yi Ton-hwa
金在桂	김재계	Kim Chae-gye
權東鎭	권동진	Kwŏn Tong-jin
吳世昌	오세창	O Se-ch'ang
崔麟	최린	Ch'oe Rin
朝鮮監理敎	조선감리교	Korean Methodist Church
梁柱三	양주삼	Yang Chu-sam
北朝鮮	북조선	North Chosŏn
全朝鮮普通學校後援會大聯盟	전조선보통학교후원회대연맹	All-Chosŏn Elementary School Support Grand Alliance
京城地方法院	경성지방법원	Kyŏngsŏng District Court
東京	동경	Tōkyō
警視廳	경시청	Metropolitan Police Department (Tōkyō)
長湖院 駐在所	장호원 주재소	Changhowŏn Police Substation
第四次共産黨事件	제사차공산당사건	Fourth Communist Party Incident
韓相鎬	한상호	Han Sang-ho
慶北共産黨	경북공산당	Kyŏngbuk Communist Party
李會昇	이회승	Yi Hoe-sŭng
大邱地方法院	대구지방법원	Taegu District Court
咸北共産黨事件	함북공산당사건	Hamgyŏng North Province Communist Party Incident
孟斗恩	맹두은	Maeng Tu-ŭn
淸津地方法院	청진지방법원	Ch'ŏngjin District Court
濟州島無政府結社事件	제주도무정부결사사건	Cheju Island Anarchist Association Incident
光州地方法院	광주지방법원	Kwangju District Court
咸北道聯事件	함북도련사건	Hamgyŏng North Province Federation Incident
京城覆<0x755C>	경성복심법원	Kyŏngsŏng Court of Review (覆審法院)
新義州高普學生示威	신의주고보학생시위	Sinŭiju High School Student Demonstration
新義州地方法院	신의주지방법원	Sinŭiju District Court
京城學生萬歲事件	경성학생만세사건	Kyŏngsŏng Student Manse Incident
申用雨	신용우	Sin Yong-u
大田新幹支會事件	대전신간지회사건	Taejŏn Singan Branch Incident
公州法院	공주법원	Kongju Court
全北共産黨事件	전북공산당사건	Chŏnbuk Communist Party Incident
千炳元	천병원	Ch'ŏn Pyŏng-wŏn
間島共靑 朴有德事件	간도공청 박유덕사건	Kando Communist Youth Pak Yu-dŏk Incident
間島	간도	Kando
朴有德	박유덕	Pak Yu-dŏk
韓斌事件	한빈사건	Han Pin Incident
咸南共産黨事件	함남공산당사건	Hamgyŏng South Province Communist Party Incident
咸興法院	함흥법원	Hamhŭng Court
共靑復興事件	공청부흥사건	Communist Youth Reconstruction Incident
安相勳	안상훈	An Sang-hun
洪承祐	홍승우	Hong Sŭng-u
金融組合	금융조합	Financial Association
江西	강서	Kangso
美林	미림	Mirim
平安	평안	P'yŏngan
同仁	동인	Tongin
安寧	안녕	Annyŏng
載信	재신	Chaesin
慶南漆谷郡	경남칠곡군	Ch'ilgok County, Kyŏngnam
進永	진영	Chinyŏng
松都고무	송도고무	Songdo Rubber
群山精米	군산정미	Kunsan Rice Milling
京城世昌洋靴	경성세창양화	Kyŏngsŏng Sech'ang Western Shoes
統營漁業乘組員	통영어업승조원	T'ongyŏng Fishing Boat Crew
京城越智印刷	경성월지인쇄	Kyŏngsŏng Ochi Printing
會寧洋靴	회령양화	Hoeryŏng Western Shoes
遮湖掛太業者	차호괘태업자	Ch'aho Dried Pollack Workers
麗水築港工夫	여수축항공부	Yŏsu Harbor Construction Workers
春川製絲工	춘천제사공	Ch'unch'ŏn Silk Reeling Workers
仁川造船	인천조선	Inch'ŏn Shipbuilding
龍井白太精選場	용정백태정선장	Yongjŏng White Bean Selection Yard
朝鮮水電	조선수전	Chosŏn Hydroelectric
平壤製業會社	평양제업회사	P'yŏngyang Manufacturing Company
平壤共濟生産組合	평양공제생산조합	P'yŏngyang Mutual Aid Production Cooperative
京城洋靴共同作業所	경성양화공동작업소	Kyŏngsŏng Western Shoe Joint Workshop
總督府	총독부	Government-General
平壤崇仁商業	평양숭인상업	P'yŏngyang Sungin Commercial School
國勢調査	국세조사	National Census (Census)
中國人	중국인	Chinese people
北滿	북만	Northern Manchuria
吳海秋氏	오해추씨	Mr. O Hae-ch'u
南亨祐氏	남형우씨	Mr. Nam Hyŏng-u
中國	중국	China
釐金	이금	Likin tax
蔣介石	장개석	Chiang Kai-shek
漢口	한구	Hankou
南滿鐵道	남만철도	South Manchuria Railway
戴天仇	대천구	Tai Chi-t'ao
社民黨	사민당	Social Democratic Party (Japan)
大衆黨	대중당	Mass Party (Japan)
民政黨	민정당	Minseitō (Japan)
幣原	폐원	Shidehara (Kijūrō)
臺灣事件	대만사건	Taiwan Incident
臺灣總督	대만총독	Governor-General of Taiwan
倫敦	윤돈	London
英印圓卓會議	영인원탁회의	British-Indian Round Table Conference
印度	인도	India
緬甸	면전	Burma
米國	미국	United States (America)
紐育	뉴욕	New York
蘇聯	소련	Soviet Union
海蔘威	해삼위	Vladivostok
中蘇交涉	중소교섭	Sino-Soviet negotiations
北平	북평	Beiping (Beijing)
튀꼽氏	티코프씨	Rykov (Alexei)
몰로톱氏	몰로토프씨	Molotov (Vyacheslav)
스탈린	스탈린	Stalin (Joseph)
産業黨	산업당	Industrial Party (Soviet Union)
獨逸	독일	Germany
佛蘭西	불란서	France
스티그	스티그	Steeg (Théodore)
急進社會黨	급진사회당	Radical Socialist Party (France)
西班牙	서반아	Spain
과테말라	과테말라	Guatemala
國際聯盟	국제연맹	League of Nations
軍縮委員會	군축위원회	Disarmament Commission
墺太利	오태리	Austria
엔더	엔더	Ender (Otto)
瑞西	서서	Switzerland
헤벨린	헤벨린	Häberlin (Heinrich)
翰	한	Han (Author's pen name)

**Glossary**

內外大觀	내외대관	Overview of Internal and External Affairs
解說	해설	Commentary; Explanation
批判	비판	Critique; Criticism
積極	적극	Active; Positive
消極	소극	Passive; Negative
合同	합동	Merger; Combination
解消	해소	Dissolution; Resolution
支會	지회	Branch (of an organization)
解消論	해소론	Dissolution Theory/Debate
派	파	Faction; Group
完成	완성	Completion; Accomplishment
合一	합일	Unification; Merger
總會	총회	General Assembly; General Meeting
進一步	진일보	One step forward; Advance
退一步	퇴일보	One step backward; Retreat
世上萬事	세상만사	All worldly affairs
進退不齊	진퇴부제	Advancing and retreating unevenly; Irregular progress
鬪爭形態	투쟁형태	Form/Mode of struggle
積極的	적극적	Active; Positive
現下情勢	현하정세	Current situation/circumstances
強力的	강력적	Strong; Powerful
形式	형식	Form; Format
理論	이론	Theory
遊戱	유희	Game; Play; Exercise (used somewhat sarcastically here)
方向轉換論	방향전환론	Direction Change Theory
派閥淸算論	파벌청산론	Faction Liquidation Theory
民主主義	민주주의	Democracy
獲得論	획득론	Acquisition Theory
헤게모니	헤게모니	Hegemony
戰取論	전취론	Seizure Theory
特殊情勢論	특수정세론	Special Circumstances Theory
運動理論	운동이론	Movement Theory
一步一步	일보일보	Step-by-step
偶合	우합	Coincidence
模倣	모방	Imitation
判異	판이	Vastly different
指導	지도	Guidance; Leadership
直譯的	직역적	Literal translation
危險	위험	Danger; Risk
本部	본부	Headquarters
動搖	동요	Upheaval; Shaking; Agitation
新任	신임	Newly appointed
中央委員	중앙위원	Central Committee member
否認	부인	Denial; Rejection; Non-recognition
宣言	선언	Declaration; Proclamation
一方	일방	Meanwhile; On the one hand
全國大會	전국대회	National Convention/Congress
代身	대신	Instead of
懇談會	간담회	Conference; Discussion meeting
同盟	동맹	Alliance; League
聯盟	연맹	Federation
內紛	내분	Internal strife; Internal conflict
關係雙方	관계쌍방	Both parties involved
相當	상당	Considerable; Suitable
理論	이론	Reasoning; Theory (here context suggests 'rationale' or 'argument')
精力	정력	Energy; Vigor
發散	발산	To emit; To release; To channel
擴大委員會	확대위원회	Expanded Committee
新幹部	신간부	New leadership; New executives
文盲打破	문맹타파	Eradication of illiteracy
迷信打破	미신타파	Breaking of superstitions
啓蒙運動	계몽운동	Enlightenment movement
主力	주력	To focus on; Main effort
新方針	신방침	New policy; New direction
議決	의결	To decide; To resolve
團體	단체	Organization; Group
新陣容	신진용	New lineup; New formation
記錄	기록	To record; Record
執行委員長	집행위원장	Executive Committee Chair
常務委員	상무위원	Standing Committee Member
庶務部	서무부	General Affairs Department
財務部	재무부	Finance Department
宣傳部	선전부	Propaganda Department
調査部	조사부	Investigation Department
政文部	정문부	Political Affairs Department (Possibly an older term)
出版部	출판부	Publications Department
執行委員	집행위원	Executive Committee Member
中央檢査委員長	중앙검사위원장	Central Inspection Committee Chair
同常務	동상무	Standing Member (of the Inspection Committee)
委員	위원	Committee Member
大領	대령	Great Leader (Ch'ŏndogyo title)
副大領	부대령	Vice Great Leader (Ch'ŏndogyo title)
觀正	관정	High-ranking position/title within Ch'ŏndogyo
監査觀正	감사관정	Auditing Leader (Ch'ŏndogyo title)
此外	차외	Additionally; Besides this
元老	원로	Elder statesman; Senior figure
最高顧問	최고고문	Supreme Advisor
總理師	총리사	Superintendent Bishop (Methodist title)
豫算	예산	Budget
立法機關	입법기관	Legislative body
當局者	당국자	Authorities; Officials
詳細	상세	Detailed
發表	발표	Announcement; Publication
檢討	검토	Review; Examination
槪要	개요	Summary; Outline
總額	총액	Total amount
實行豫算	실행예산	Actual budget; Executed budget
增加	증가	Increase
新規事業	신규사업	New projects; New enterprises
稱	칭	To call; To name; So-called
大略	대략	Approximately; Roughly
窮民救助	궁민구조	Poor relief
地方土木工事	지방토목공사	Local public works projects
關係	관계	Related; Connection
煙草販賣	연초판매	Tobacco sales
直營	직영	Direct management
田作	전작	Dry-field farming
獎勵	장려	Promotion; Encouragement
恩給	은급	Pension
分擔	분담	Share; Contribution
開拓調査	개척조사	Development survey
甛菜栽培	첨채재배	Sugar beet cultivation (甛榮 used in text)
補助	보조	Subsidy; Assistance
災害復舊費	재해복구비	Disaster recovery expenses
私鐵	사철	Private railway
地方團軆	지방단체	Local organizations (older spelling of 단체)
果	과연	Indeed; Truly
農村	농촌	Farming village; Rural area
慘狀	참상	Tragic state; Misery
中間	중간	Middle; Intermediary
介在	개재	To be involved; To intervene
惠澤	혜택	Benefit
請負業者	청부업자	Contractor
깨진 독에 물 붓기	깨진 독에 물 붓기	Pouring water into a cracked pot (idiom: futile effort)
警察費	경찰비	Police expenditure
削減	삭감	Reduction; Cut
人件費	인건비	Personnel costs
節約	절약	Saving; Economizing
加俸	가봉	Bonus pay; Salary increase
全滅	전멸	Complete elimination; Annihilation
敎育費	교육비	Education expenditure
增額	증액	Increase (in amount)
反響	반향	Echo; Response; Impact
敎育權	교육권	Educational rights
獲得	획득	Acquisition; Attainment
新年劈頭	신년벽두	Beginning of the New Year
開市	개시	Start; Commencement
後援會	후원회	Support association
大聯盟	대연맹	Grand alliance
敎育方針	교육방침	Education policy
頂門一針	정문일침	Direct challenge; Pointed criticism (idiom: needle thrust at the crown of the head)
義務敎育	의무교육	Compulsory education
實施	실시	Implementation; Enforcement
文化	문화	Culture
增進	증진	Promotion; Enhancement
誠意下	성의하	Under sincerity; With sincere intention
程度	정도	Degree; Extent
卽時	즉시	Immediately
要求	요구	Demand; Request
今日	금일	Today; Nowadays (older form)
學齡兒童	학령아동	School-age children
收容	수용	Accommodation; Capacity
형편	형편	Situation; Circumstances
如何	얼마나	How (much)
年平均	연평균	Annual average
授業料	수업료	Tuition fee
標準	표준	Standard
退學者	퇴학자	Dropouts
續出	속출	Occurring frequently/in succession
月謝金	월사금	Monthly tuition fee
差押	차압	Seizure; Attachment (of property)
實狀	실상	Reality; Actual situation
元來	원래	Originally
不合理	불합리	Unreasonable; Irrational
初等敎育	초등교육	Elementary education
月謝制	월사제	Monthly fee system
不妥當	부당	Inappropriate; Unjust
將來	장래	Future
計劃	계획	Plan; Planning
全廢	전폐	Complete abolition
敎材配給	교재배급	Textbook distribution
食料供給	식료공급	Food supply
至	까지	To; Until
豫算	예산	Budget (mentioned again)
冗費	용비	Redundant expenses; Wasteful spending
整理	정리	Restructuring; Arrangement
財源	재원	Financial resources; Source of funds
決	결코	Never; By no means
監獄	감옥	Prison; Jail
依然	의연	Still; As before
顧客	고객	Customer; Client (used somewhat ironically for prisoners/police cases)
所屬	소속	Affiliation; Belonging to
思想犯	사상범	Thought criminal; Political prisoner
元旦	원단	New Year's Day
鐵窓	철창	Iron bars (of a prison cell)
全朝鮮	전조선	All of Chosŏn
넘을 것이다	넘을 것이다	Will likely exceed
事件	사건	Incident; Case
積滯	적체	Backlog; Accumulation
司法	사법	Judicial
人員	인원	Personnel; Staff
不足	부족	Shortage; Lack
年末	연말	Year-end
移動	이동	Transfer; Movement; Reshuffle
判事	판사	Judge
增員	증원	Increase in personnel; Reinforcement
若干	약간	Slightly; Somewhat
救濟	구제	Relief; Remedy
까닭	까닭	Reason; Cause
疊出	첩출	Emerging one after another; Frequent occurrence
所以	소이	Reason why; Cause
新聞記者	신문기자	Newspaper reporter
拘禁	구금	Detention; Confinement
問題	문제	Problem; Issue; Question
沸騰	비등	Boiling; Ferment (of public opinion)
某署	모서	A certain police station
刑事	형사	Detective
毆打	구타	Assault; Beating
駐在所	주재소	Police substation
襲擊	습격	Attack; Raid
銃器	총기	Firearms
奪取	탈취	Seize; Plunder
犯人	범인	Criminal; Culprit
時局	시국	Current political situation
標榜	표방	To advocate; To claim; Under the guise of
出沒	출몰	To appear and disappear; To frequent
三道警察	삼도경찰	Police from three provinces
總出動	총출동	Full mobilization
假物	가물	Fake; Counterfeit
判明	판명	To become clear; To be revealed
喜劇	희극	Comedy
今月中	금월중	During this month
思想關係	사상관계	Thought-related; Ideologically related
諸事件	제사건	Various incidents/cases
進行	진행	Progress; Proceedings
判決	판결	Verdict; Judgment
未決通算	미결통산	Pre-trial detention credit
執行猶豫	집행유예	Suspended sentence
無罪	무죄	Not guilty; Acquittal
結社	결사	Association; Society
控訴	공소	Appeal (legal)
覆<0x755C>	복심법원	Court of Review; Appellate court (覆審法院)
治安維持法	치안유지법	Peace Preservation Law (often abbr. 治維法)
保安法	보안법	Security Law
制令違反	제령위반	Decree Violation
言渡	언도	Sentencing; Pronouncement
示威	시위	Demonstration; Protest
豫審終結	예심종결	Conclusion of preliminary examination
公判	공판	Public trial
廻附	회부	Referral (to court)
出版法	출판법	Publication Law
復興	부흥	Reconstruction; Revival
記事解禁	기사해금	Lifting of news ban
兩面相	양면상	Two aspects; Both sides
豊年飢饉	풍년기근	Famine amidst plenty (paradoxical term for poverty despite good harvest)
農村窮况	농촌궁황	Rural destitution; Impoverishment
春窮	춘궁	Spring hardship (period before harvest when food runs out)
資金融通	자금융통	Financing; Lending money
承諾	승낙	Approval; Consent
低利	저리	Low interest
米資	미자	Funds for rice
一部	일부	Some; A part
地主	지주	Landlord
米穀商	미곡상	Rice merchant
利用	이용	Use; Utilization
一般	일반	General; Ordinary
貧農	빈농	Poor farmer
何等	하등	Any; Whatsoever
利益	이익	Benefit; Profit
憂慮	우려	Concern; Worry
現象	현상	Phenomenon
事實化	사실화	Materialization; Becoming reality
途程	도정	Process; Course
穀價	곡가	Grain price
暴落	폭락	Sharp fall; Collapse (in price)
對策	대책	Countermeasure; Policy
效果	효과	Effect; Result
水利組合費	수리조합비	Water utilization association fee
延納	연납	Postponement of payment
減下	감하	Reduction
運動	운동	Movement; Campaign
各道	각도	Each province
事勢	사세	Situation; Circumstances
不得已	부득이	Unavoidable; Inevitable
認	인정	To recognize; To acknowledge
延滯利子	연체이자	Delinquency interest; Overdue interest
內定	내정	Internal decision; Tentative decision
水稅	수세	Water tax
組合	조합	Association; Cooperative; Union
最	가장	Most
甚	심하다	Severe; Extreme
低利	저리	Low interest (repeated)
融通	융통	Financing; Circulation
管內	관내	Within the jurisdiction
救濟	구제	Relief; Rescue
方針	방침	Policy; Course of action
確立	확립	Establishment
窮境	궁경	Dire straits; Predicament
貧農階級	빈농계급	Poor peasant class
夜間 逃出	야간 도주	Nighttime escape; Fleeing by night
流離民	유리민	Displaced people; Refugees
破産	파산	Bankruptcy
强制執行	강제집행	Forced execution (legal seizure)
表面化	표면화	Surfacing; Becoming apparent
地稅	지세	Land tax
未收	미수	Uncollected; Unpaid
貸付金	대부금	Loan money
滯收	체수	Delinquency in collection/payment
綜合	종합	To synthesize; To aggregate
暗澹	암담	Bleak; Gloomy
避	피하다	To avoid
小作爭議	소작쟁의	Tenant farmer dispute
蜂起	봉기	Uprising; Eruption
實狀	실상	In reality; Actually
地稅不負擔同盟	지세부부담동맹	Land Tax Non-Payment Alliance
긔세	기세	Momentum; Vigor (older spelling of 기세)
小爭議	소쟁의	Minor dispute
團結	단결	Unity; Solidarity
發達	발달	Development
一面	일면	On the other hand; One aspect
貧窮狀	빈궁상	State of poverty
甚	심하다	Severe; Extreme (repeated)
小作權	소작권	Tenancy rights
擁護	옹호	To defend; To protect
맘	마음	Mind; Will (colloquial/older form)
昭和	소화	Shōwa era (Japan)
統計	통계	Statistics
件	건	Case; Item (counter)
大正	대정	Taishō era (Japan)
倍以上	배이상	More than double
躍進	약진	Rapid advance; Leap forward
人數	인수	Number of people
激化	격화	Intensification
小作人層	소작인층	Tenant farmer class
覺醒	각성	Awakening; Realization
疲弊	피폐	Exhaustion; Impoverishment
反面	반면	On the other hand; Flip side
補給的	보급적	Supplementary
協同運動	협동운동	Cooperative movement
矯風	교풍	Moral reform; Improving customs
生活革新	생활혁신	Lifestyle innovation; Reform
熾烈	치열	Fierce; Intense
光明面	광명면	Bright side; Aspect of hope
露現	노현	Revelation; Becoming apparent
눈에 물 띄우도록	눈에 물 띄우도록	In a tear-jerking manner (idiomatic/unclear intent here, possibly 'noticeably' or 'gradually but distressingly')
産業合理化	산업합리화	Industrial rationalization
勞動爭議	노동쟁의	Labor dispute
乘組員	승조원	Crew member
工夫	공부	Worker; Laborer (older term)
失業者	실업자	Unemployed person
恒久失業	항구실업	Permanent unemployment
算入	산입	Inclusion in calculation
副産	부산	Byproduct
共濟生産組合	공제생산조합	Mutual Aid Production Cooperative
共同作業所	공동작업소	Joint workshop; Cooperative workplace
件數	건수	Number of cases
參加人員	참가인원	Number of participants
喜悲交互	희비교호	Joy and sorrow intermingled
學界	학계	Academic world; Educational circles
頻發	빈발	Frequent occurrence
盟休	맹휴	School strike (often involving alliance between students)
原因	원인	Cause; Reason
不祥事	불상사	Unfortunate incident; Scandal
冬閑期	동한기	Winter slack season (in farming)
農民補習夜學	농민보습야학	Supplementary night school for farmers
興旺	흥왕	Flourishing; Prospering
私立學校	사립학교	Private school
取締	취체	Regulation; Control; Crackdown
嚴勵	엄려	Strict enforcement
終	마침내	Finally; Eventually
數個	수개	Several
講習所	강습소	Lecture center; Training institute
强制閉鎖	강제폐쇄	Forced closure
眞原因	진원인	True cause
責	책하다	To blame; To reproach
學校當局	학교당국	School authorities
흠 잡다	흠 잡다	To find fault with
思想的	사상적	Ideological
背景	배경	Background
區別	구별	Distinction; Differentiation
批判	비판	Critique; Criticism
自由	자유	Freedom
解決	해결	Resolution; Solution
師弟間	사제간	Between teacher and student
落淚握手	낙루악수	Tearful handshake
暗示	암시	Hint; Suggestion
國勢調査	국세조사	National Census
結果	결과	Result
速算	속산	Preliminary count; Quick calculation
人口	인구	Population
日本人	일본인	Japanese people
日本籍	일본적	Japanese registry/nationality
其他	기타	Other
其外國人	기외국인	Other foreigners
合計	합계	Total
同胞	동포	Compatriots
稱號	칭호	Title; Appellation
內外	내외	Inside and outside; Domestic and foreign
推想	추상	Estimation; Conjecture
人口現象	인구현상	Population phenomena
詳細	상세	Detailed (repeated)
解說	해설	Explanation; Commentary (repeated)
次回	차회	Next time; Next issue
北滿	북만	Northern Manchuria
風雲	풍운	Winds and clouds (fig. turbulent situation)
依然暗澹	의연암담	Still bleak/gloomy
在	재한	Existing in; Residing in
共産派	공산파	Communist faction/group
直接行動	직접행동	Direct action
繼續	계속	Continuation; Ongoing
對	대한	Regarding; Towards
中國官憲	중국관헌	Chinese authorities/officials
玉石俱焚	옥석구분	Jade and stone burned together (idiom: indiscriminate destruction/harm)
關係	관계	Unrelated; Connection (here 'unrelated')
被害	피해	Damage; Harm
東北軍	동북군	Northeastern Army (China)
討伐	토벌	Subjugation; Suppression
開始	개시	Start; Commencement
根據	근거	Base; Stronghold
報道	보도	Report; News
錯雜	착잡	Confused; Complicated
眞相	진상	True situation; Real facts
궁금하다	궁금하다	To be curious; To wonder (here implies difficulty in knowing)
獄死	옥사	Death in prison
被檢	피검	Arrest; Being investigated
放釋	방석	Release
這間	저간	Recently; In the meantime
喜悲兩消息	희비량소식	Both good and bad news
世界情勢	세계정세	World situation
展望	전망	Outlook; Prospect
關稅協定	관세협정	Tariff agreement
最終批準	최종비준	Final ratification
國定稅率	국정세율	National tariff rates
斷行	단행	Decisive implementation
中央直割	중앙직할	Direct control by the central government
東北	동북	Northeast (Manchuria)
九省	구성	Nine provinces
具體化	구체화	Materialization; Becoming concrete
全國的	전국적	Nationwide
歲月	세월	Time; Years
하여간에	하여간에	Anyway; In any case
產業發達	산업발달	Industrial development
荼毒	도독	To plague; To poison; To harm severely
內地稅	내지세	Internal tax; Inland duty (referring to Likin)
廢止	폐지	Abolition
國民政府	국민정부	Nationalist Government (China)
一大政績	일대정적	A major political achievement
實行	실행	Implementation; Execution
試金石	시금석	Litmus test; Touchstone
呼訴	호소	Appeal; Plea
無理	무리	Unreasonable
租界	조계	Concession (territory)
回收	회수	Recovery; Retrieval
提議	제의	Proposal; Suggestion
外國公使館	외국공사관	Foreign legation
南遷	남천	Move southward
領事裁判權	영사재판권	Consular jurisdiction; Extraterritoriality
駐中	주중	Stationed in China
外國軍隊	외국군대	Foreign troops
撤回	철회	Withdrawal
多事	다사	Busy; Eventful
豫想	예상	Expectation; Anticipation
長江	장강	Yangtze River
滿洲	만주	Manchuria
利權	이권	Concessions; Rights and interests
着着	착착	Steadily; Step-by-step
樹立說	수립설	Rumors of establishment (of plans)
競爭	경쟁	Competition
鐵道	철도	Railway
敷設	부설	Construction (of railways/roads)
計劃	계획	Plan; Scheme
神經	신경	Nerve
날카롭게 하다	날카롭게 하다	To sharpen; To make edgy/tense
外交部	외교부	Ministry of Foreign Affairs
對日强硬	대일강경	Hardline stance towards Japan
無根之說	무근지설	Baseless rumor
宣言	선언	Declaration; Statement
使	사하다	To send as an envoy
國權回收	국권회수	Recovery of national sovereignty/rights
銳鋒	예봉	Sharp point; Spearhead
及	미치다	To reach; To extend to
重大	중대	Serious; Grave
外交問題	외교문제	Diplomatic problem/issue
未免	미면	Unavoidable
無産派	무산파	Proletarian faction/group
可決	가결	Approval; Passage (of a resolution)
否決	부결	Rejection; Voting down
合法左翼	합법좌익	Legal left wing
統一	통일	Unification
右翼	우익	Right wing
對立	대립	Confrontation; Opposition
展開	전개	Development; Unfolding
議會	의회	Diet; Parliament; Assembly
代理總理	대리총리	Acting Prime Minister
反對運動	반대운동	Opposition movement
騷動	소동	Commotion; Disturbance
長老側	장로측	Elder statesmen's side
無事主義	무사주의	Principle of avoiding trouble; Playing it safe
臨	임하다	To face; To attend
鎭壓	진압	Suppression; Quelling
責任	책임	Responsibility
引責說	인책설	Talk of taking responsibility (by resigning)
其他	기타	Elsewhere; Others
지지부진	지지부진	Slow progress; Dragging on
獨立宣言	독립선언	Declaration of independence
記念	기념	Commemoration
示威	시위	Demonstration (repeated)
暴動	폭동	Riot; Uprising
破産	파산	Bankruptcy (repeated)
會社	회사	Company
數字	수자	Number; Figure
警官隊	경관대	Police force/squad
衝突	충돌	Clash; Collision
豫算	예산	Budget (repeated)
尨大	방대	Huge; Enormous
國防費	국방비	Defense expenditure
算出	산출	Calculation; Appropriation
總額	총액	Total amount (repeated)
五個年計劃	5개년계획	Five-Year Plan
第三年	제3년	Third year
支店	지점	Branch office
閉鎖命令	폐쇄명령	Closure order
當	당하다	To suffer; To receive (an order)
交涉	교섭	Negotiations
中斷	중단	Suspension; Interruption
全權	전권	Plenipotentiary; Full authority
回國	회국	Return to one's country
大使館	대사관	Embassy
復活說	부활설	Rumors of revival/reopening
首相	수상	Prime Minister; Premier
辭免	사면	To resign
뒤를 잇다	뒤를 잇다	To succeed; To follow
勢力	세력	Power; Influence
一層	일층	Further; More
堅牢	견뢰	Solid; Firm; Secure
轉覆	전복	Overthrow; Subversion
陰謀	음모	Plot; Conspiracy
死刑宣告	사형선고	Death sentence
委員會	위원회	Committee
特赦	특사	Special amnesty; Pardon
懲役	징역	Imprisonment with hard labor
減刑	감형	Reduction of sentence
失業者	실업자	Unemployed person (repeated)
諸都市	제도시	Various cities
財政的 危機	재정적 위기	Financial crisis
臨	임하다	To face; To be on the verge of
財政改革案	재정개혁안	Financial reform plan
國會通過	국회통과	Passage through the National Assembly/Reichstag
困難	곤란	Difficulty
大統領	대통령	President
獨裁權	독재권	Dictatorial power; Emergency powers
利用	이용	Use; Utilization
裁可	재가	Approval; Sanction
實施	실시	Implementation; Enforcement
內閣	내각	Cabinet
對獨政策	대독정책	Policy towards Germany
上院	상원	Upper house; Senate
敗	패하다	To be defeated
辭職	사직	Resignation
後繼內閣	후계내각	Successor cabinet
組織	조직	Formation; Organization
難澁	난삽	Difficult; Troubled
組閣	조각	Cabinet formation
成功	성공	Success
叛亂	반란	Rebellion; Revolt
勃發	발발	Outbreak
一時	일시	Temporarily; For a time
危殆	위태	Perilous; Dangerous
平定	평정	Suppression; Pacification
中米	중미	Central America
革命派	혁명파	Revolutionary faction
現政府	현정부	Current government
轉覆	전복	Overthrow (repeated)
終幕	종막	End; Conclusion
新春	신춘	New Year; Early spring
本會議	본회의	Main conference; Plenary session
新內閣	신내각	New cabinet
新選	신선	Newly elected


---------------------------


잡지명	동광 제18호
발행일	1931년 02월 01일
기사제목	內外大觀 解說과 批判, 세상은 어디로 가나(12월)
기사형태	소식

內外大觀 解說과 批判, 세상은 어디로 가나
積極, 消極 合同, 解消
新幹會 釜山支會가 던진 解消論의 불길은 점차로 커지기 시작햇다. 14일에는 利原支會가 이로 말미암아 마침내 解消非解消의 두派가 간판을 따루 걸게까지 되엇고 26일에는 平壤支會에서도 解消派가 일시의 승리를 얻게 되엇다.
天道敎의 舊紛이 永解되어 합동이 완성되고 남북 監理敎의 合一이 2일부터 12일까지 열린 朝鮮監理敎第一回總會의 성립으로 완성된 금일에 잇어서 新幹會의 解消論은 적극에 대한 消極, 進一步에 대한 退一步를 볼 것이니 世上萬事가 進退不齊한 느낌이 없지 아니하다.
혹은 말하기를 新幹會解消論은 消極論이 아니라 鬪爭形態의 進步에 의한 積極的 解消라 하리라. 그러나 朝鮮의 現下情勢에 잇어서 어떠한 보다 强力的인 形式을 낳을 수가 잇는가. 이 해답이 없이는 解消論은 한낯 理論의 遊戱에 불과할 것이다.
「方向轉換論」으로 「派閥淸算論」으로 「브르주와 民主主義獲得論」으로 「헤게모니 戰取論」으로 「特殊情勢論」으로 朝鮮의 運動理論은 一步一步 日本의 그것을 뒤밟아 온 것처럼 되엇다. 이번의 解消論도 日本의 勞農黨의 解消論의 그림자다. 偶合이냐 모방이냐. 偶合이라 하면 모르되 모방이라 하면 정세가 판이한 朝鮮의 指導를 直譯的으로 하는 危險이 없지 아니할 것이다. 新幹本部의 태도는 解消反對요 京城支會도 같은 步調인 듯하니 당장에 큰 動搖가 없을 것을 믿음즉하다.＜1＞
京城支會에서 新任된 本部中央委員을 否認한다는 선언을 하야 세상은 놀래엇으며 一方 靑年總同盟에서 전국대회 대신에 열린 간담회 석상에서 新任한 中央委員 否認의 소리가 仁川, 平壤, 鎭南浦, 水原, 永同, 光州 등 同盟 及 江原慶南聯盟에서 일어낫다. 이러한 內紛은 그 關係雙方에 다 상당한 이유가 잇는 것은 언제든지 사실이다. 그러나 朝鮮의 민중이 바라는 것은 안으로 이론을 찾는 정력을 아끼어서 밖으로 활발한 활동으로 발산하는데 잇는 것을 잊어서는 안된다.
槿友會의 全國大會도 금지가 되고 擴大委員會를 열고 新幹部를 選任하고 文盲打破, 迷信打破 등 啓蒙運動에 주력할 新方針을 議決햇다. 각 단체의 新陣容을 기록해 두자.
新幹會 支會長 (釜山)任龍吉 (大邱)金光鎭 (統營)黃德允 (咸安)李奭 (江陵)李元載 (海州)魯善享 (平壤)曹晩植
槿友會 執行委員長 趙信聖 常務委員 庶務部 金貞媛 財務部 金繡準
禹鳳雲 宣傳部 姜貞任
安貞淑 調査部 朴暎海
鄭實解 政文部 禹鳳雲
沈恩淑 出版部 沈恩淑
安貞淑 執行委員 黃愛德
孫快禮
尹聖相
李桂順
金溫
陳奎
尹致貞
金善
高連宇
鄭鮮華
朴英海
李春壽
金光浩
崔淑子 中央檢査委員長 申貞均 同常務 鄭鍾鳴 委員 丁七星
趙上達
金常石
天道敎 大領 鄭廣朝 副大領 崔俊模 誠道觀正 吳常俊 敬道觀正 李鍾麟 信道觀正 崔碩連 法道觀正 李君五 知道觀正 李敦化 監査觀正 金在桂 此外에 權東鎭, 吳世昌, 崔麟 등 원로는 最高觀問으로 추대되다.
朝鮮監理敎 總理師 梁柱三

朝鮮豫算 2億 4千萬
立法機關도 없는 朝鮮이매 當局者는 적어도 豫算數字를 상세하게 발표하야 民衆의 檢討를 받을 것이다. 그러나 년년 발표되는 豫算槪要는 잇으나 없으나 할 정도다. 12월 26일 발표의 금년도 豫算槪要를 보면 총액 2億 4千 10萬원으로 작년도 實行豫算에 비하야 124만원의 증가다. 그 중에 신규사업이라 칭하는 것은 대략
가. 窮民救助地方土木工事關係 525,000원
나. 煙草販賣直營 3,328,000원
다. 田作獎勵 108,000원
라. 恩給分擔 2,816,000원
마. 北朝鮮開拓調査 95,000원
바. 甛榮栽培補助 87,000원
사. 災害復舊費 581,000원
아. 私鐵補助 400,000원
등이라 한다. 窮民救濟 土木事業은 이 補助를 합하야 各地方團軆豫算이 금년도분 220萬원 가량 되리라고 한다. 이에 의하야 과연 農村의 참상은 구할 수 잇을는지 의문이어니와 더구나 그 土木費의 전부가 窮民에게로 가는 것이 아니요 중간에 介在하야 그 혜택을 입는 請負業者가 잇는 것을 생각하면 이야말로 깨진 독에 물 붓기가 아닐는지. 警察費의 삭감, 인건비의 절약(加俸 全滅등), 敎育費의 증액 등 朝鮮人의 부르짖음은 아무 反響을 끼침이 없엇다.

敎育權 獲得의 運動
新年劈頭에 개시된 全朝鮮普通學校後援會大聯盟의 운동은 당국의 敎育方針에 대한 頂門의 一針이 될 것이다. 義務敎育의 실시 - 이것은 朝鮮의 文化를 증진하려는 誠意下에서는 현재의 朝鮮豫算 정도에 비추어 즉시 실현을 요구할＜2＞ 것이다. 그럼에도 불구하고 금일까지 學齡兒童의 3할 수용이 빠듯한 형편이니 얼마나 한심한 일이냐. 年平均 1원의 수업료라는 것이 도시를 표준으로 하면 많다고 할 수 없으나 퇴학자 속출, 月謝金으로 差押이란 農村의 실상을 볼 때는 원래 불합리한 初等敎育의 月謝制의 더욱 不妥當함을 깨달을 수 잇다. 朝鮮의 장래를 계획한다하면 모름지기 修業料全廢에서 敎材配給, 食料供給에까지 가지 안으면 안될 것이다. 항상 豫算을 말하게 되거니와 冗費의 절약 人件費의 정리등 그 財源은 구하기 어려운 것이 결코 아니다.

監獄과 警察의 해
依然 이 한해도 또한 監獄과 警察만은 顧客이 많은 한해이엇다. 京城地方法院 소속으로만도 136명의 思想犯이 元旦의 눈 구경을 철창에서 하게 되엇다. 全朝鮮으로 치면 300명이 넘을 것이다. 사건이 積滯되는 이유는 當局者의 말을 들으면 司法人員의 부족이라고 한다. 그 까닭에 京城地方法院은 년말 司法官 이동시에 2人의 判事를 증원햇다 한다. 이로서 약간 구제가 되기는 하겟으나 사건이 積滯되는 까닭도 알아 볼 것이지마는 疊出하는 所以도 한번 돌아볼 필요가 없을 것이냐.
東京서는 警視廳의 新聞記者 拘禁問題로 여론이 沸騰하는 판에 京城서는 某署刑事가 신문기자를 구타한 사건이 잇엇다.
長湖院 駐在所를 습격하야 총기를 탈취한 범인이 시국을 표방하고 출몰함으로 三道警察이 총출동하야 잡고 보니 시국표방이 假物인 것이 판명되어 年末의 喜劇을 이루엇다.
금월중 思想關係 諸事件의 진행은 다음 같다.
第四次共産黨事件중 韓相鎬등 45인 사건 26일 京城地方法院에서 判決 최고 5년 未決通算 150일 내지 500일
慶北共産黨 李會昇등 16명, 27일 大邱地方法院에서 判決 최고 2년반 執行猶豫 8명.
咸北共産黨事件 孟斗恩외 11명 26일 淸津地方法院에서 判決 최고 2년 無罪 3명.
濟州島無政府結社事件 8일 光州地方法院에서 判決 최고 5년 5명 控訴
咸北道聯事件 23일 京城覆畜에서 判決 治維法은 無罪 保安法과 制令違反으로 1년 6월 言渡(1審判決 3년 檢事控訴)
新義州高普學生示威 18명 26일 新義州地方法院에서 최고 3년 判決 執行猶豫 8명.
京城學生萬歲事件 申用雨등 13인 19일 京城에서 1년 2월 판결 10명은 執猶.
大田新幹支會事件 27일 豫審終結 治安維持法違反으로 公州法院 公判에 附.
全北共産黨事件 千炳元이하 37명 9일에 京城에서 豫審終結 18명은 治維法으로 公判에.
間島共靑 朴有德事件 24일 京城에서 最高 5년 判決 無罪 3명.
韓斌事件 13일 豫審終結 治維法으로 京城法院 公判에 廻附.
咸南共産黨事件 豫審終結 56명중 32명만 有罪결정 保安法, 出版法違反으로 咸興法院에.
共靑復興事件 安相勳등 8명은 去7월 5일에 洪承祐등 12명은 이달 27일 京城서 豫審終決 同時에 記事解禁 治維法으로 公判에.

農村의 兩面相
豊年飢饉, 農村窮况의 소리는 春窮이 다가 올스록 더욱 높아간다. 1천만원의 資金融通案이 承諾되어 金融組合을 통하야 低利米資가 퍼저 나간다 하나 이는 일부 地主와 米穀商의＜3＞ 이용하는바 될 뿐이오. 일반 貧農에게는 하등의 이익이 없는 모양이다. 우리가 우려하든 諸現象은 점차로 사실화하기 시작하는 途程에 잇으니 (1) 穀價의 폭락과 아직까지 대책의 효과가 없음으로하야 地主와 小作人이 다 곤경에 빠지엇으니 水利組合費 延納 혹은 減下運動이 各道에 잇고 당국에서도 事勢의 부득이함을 認하야 부득이한 경우에는 延納을 인정하고 延滯利子도 아니 받기로 內定이 잇은 모양이다.
水稅延納 혹은 減下의 운동이 잇은 組合은 江西, 美林, 平安, 同仁, 安寧, 載信 등이 잇고 그 참상이 가장 심한 慶南에서는 150萬원을 5分 7厘의 低利로 융통하야 管內 各 水組 구제의 방침을 확립함에 이르럿다.
(2) 窮境에 들어간 貧農階級은 야간 逃出의 속출 (3) 流離民의 증가 (4) 破産 (5) 强制執行의 증가등으로 표면화햇고 (6) 또 地稅의 未收 (7) 金融組合의 貸付金滯收등의 사실을 나타냇다. 新聞紙면에 나타나는 諸般相을 종합함은 너무나 暗澹한 그림이 됨으로 이를 피할 수밖에 없다.
이같은 情勢에 잇어서 小作爭議가 蜂起할 듯 하다마는 실상인즉 慶南漆谷郡의 地稅不負擔同盟이 좀 긔세가 크고 進永 기타에서 小爭議가 잇은 외에 아직까지 大爭議가 없는 것은 小作人의 團結이 아직 발달 못 된 것도 원인이려니와 일면으로는 貧窮狀이 너무 심하야 小作權을 옹호할 맘조차 아니 생기는 것이 아닐는지. 그러나 昭和 4年度의 小作爭議 통계는 433件에 달하야 大正 14년의 204件의 배 이상으로 躍進되엇다. 人數에 잇어서도 大正 14년의 2,646과 昭和 4년 5,400은 배 이상이다. 이것은 農村問題의 激化와 小作人層의 각성을 말하는 것이다.
農村의 疲弊의 반면에는 그 疲弊에서 벗어나기 위한 운동이 小作爭議외에 補急的 協同運動, 矯風, 生活革新의 운동이 또한 매우 熾烈한 바 잇으니 이것은 農村의 光明面이라고 칭할 수 잇을까 한다.

露現되는 産業合理化
서서히, 눈에 물 띄우도록 産業合理化風은 朝鮮에도 불어 들어온다. 12월 중에 노동쟁의는 松都고무, 群山精米, 京城世昌洋靴, 統營漁業乘組員, 京城越智印刷, 會寧洋靴, 遮湖掛太業者, 麗水築港工夫, 春川製絲工 등이 잇엇으며 仁川造船, 龍井白太精選場, 朝鮮水電, 平壤製業會社 등에서 數千의 失業者를 내엇다. 全朝鮮의 실업자를 23萬으로 추산하나 이것은 恒久失業의 정세하에 잇는 農村人口를 算入지 아니한 것이다. 爭議의 副産으로 平壤共濟生産組合과 京城洋靴共同作業所가 출생하얏다.
昭和 4년도 勞動爭議件數 102건 참가 인원 8,293人 이것은 總督府統計다.

喜悲交互하는 學界
頻發하는 盟休는 그 原因이 어데 잇든지 學界의 不祥事다. 冬閑期를 이용하는 農民補習夜學의 興旺은 朝鮮의 光明面의 하나다. 私立學校 取締를 嚴勵히 하야 마침내 수개 講習所의 强制閉鎖에까지 이르럿다. 喜悲交互하는 朝鮮의 장면이다. 盟休의 眞原因이 어데 잇는지. 學生만을 責하거나 學校當局만을 흠 잡을 수 없다.＜4＞
思想的 배경이 잇는 盟休, 그러치 아니한 盟休 이 두 가지는 구별할 필요가 잇는 것이다. 前者에 대해서는 批判의 자유가 없거니와 後者에 대하야는 어떠한 해결의 방침이 잇을 듯 하다. 平壤崇仁商業의 盟休가 사제간의 落淚握手로 해결을 지엇다는 것은 이 문제에 대해서 암시를 주는 바 없을까.

朝鮮內 朝鮮人 2千萬
國勢調査의 결과 速算發表는
朝鮮內 人口로
朝鮮人 20,965,145
日本人 527,904
其他日本籍 22
中國人 91,466
其外國人 1,338
合計 21,057,969
라 하엿다. 二千萬同胞의 稱號는 朝鮮內만 가르키게 되엇고 內外를 합하면 2천 3,4백만이라고 推想된다. 人口現象에 관한 상세한 해설은 次回로 밀운다.

北滿風雲 依然暗澹
間島와 北滿에 在한 共産派의 직접 행동은 의연이 계속되고 이에 대한 中國官憲의 取締도 玉石俱焚으로 관계없는 同胞의 피해가 많다. 혹은 東北軍이 共産軍 討伐을 開始한다는 둥 軍警이 共軍根據를 습격햇다는 둥 보도가 자못 착잡하며 그 진상을 알기가 궁금하다. 吳海秋氏의 獄死와 南亨祐氏의 被檢後 放釋등은 這間에 들리는 喜悲兩消息이다.

世界情勢展望
中國 11월 18일로서 關稅協定의 最終批準을 마춘 中國은 1월 1일부터 釐金廢止 國定稅率 實施를 斷行햇다. 아직 中央直割 及 東北의 九省에서 廢止가 구체화됨에 불과하고 전국적으로 이를 폐지하기에는 앞으로 많은 세월이 잇어야 될 것이다. 하여간에 60年來 中國의 産業發達을 荼毒한 이 內地稅를 폐지하엿음은 國民政府의 一大政績으로 이를 실행하고 못함이 革命의 試金石이라 한 蔣介石의 呼訴도 무리가 아니다. 漢口 佛日兩租界 回收의 提議, 外國公使館 南遷의 提議, 領事裁判權回收의 提議, 駐中 外國軍隊撤回 提議 등 1931년을 앞두고 多事한 1년을 맞이할 것을 예상케 한다. 長江과 滿洲에 在한 外國의 利權을 착착 회수할 계획의 樹立說과 南滿鐵道와 競爭하는 鐵道의 敷設 計劃은 日本의 신경을 매우 날카롭게 한바 잇어 外交部는 對日强硬의 無根之說임을 宣言한 일도 잇으며 戴天仇를 日本에 使케하리라는 말도 잇거니와 결국 國權回收의 銳鋒이 滿洲에까지 및을 때에는 중대한 외교 문제가 일어날 것은 未免의 일일 것이다.

日本  無産派 合同의 운동은 勞働黨의 합동 可決과 社民黨의 부결로 이에 勞農黨과 大衆黨을 중심으로한 合法左翼의 統一, 右翼과의 대립으로 展開될 형세에 잇다. 議會를 앞두고 民政黨에서는 弊原代理總理反對運動이 잇어 한 騷動＜5＞ 낫섯으나 長老側의 無事主義가 勝하야 그대로 議會에 臨하기로 되엇다. 臺灣事件은 鎭壓되엇으니 그 책임으로 臺灣總督의 引責說이 잇다.
其他 倫敦에서 英印圓卓會議가 지지부진하는 사이에 印度에서는 1월 1일에 독립선언 기념시위가 잇고 緬甸에도 폭동이 잇엇다.
米國의 破産銀行會社가 1년간에 1,100이란 數字에 올라 갓으며 紐育에서 共産黨의 시위가 잇어 警官隊와 충돌햇다. 금년도 豫算에는 6億 9千萬弗의 尨大한 國防費가 산출되어 잇는바 총액의 5.5％에 달한다. 蘇聯의 5년계획은 제3년을 맞이하엿고 海蔘威의 朝鮮銀行支店은 閉鎖命令을 당하엿다. 中蘇交涉은 중단되어 英中國全權은 回國햇으나 北平의 蘇大使館은 復活說이 잇다.
튀꼽氏가 首相을 사면하고 몰로톱氏 뒤를 이으니 스탈린의 세력이 일층 堅牢해지다. 蘇聯轉覆을 음모한 産業黨은 死刑宣告를 받앗으나 共産黨 委員會에서 特赦하여 懲役 10년으로 減刑하다.
獨逸의 실업자는 348萬에 달하고 諸都市는 財政的 위기에 임햇다. 財政改革案은 國會通過困難으로 大統領의 獨裁權을 이용하야 裁可實施햇다.
佛蘭西內閣은 對獨政策으로 上院에서 敗하야 사직하고 後繼內閣 조직이 매우 難澁되다가 「스티그」(急進社會黨)가 組閣에 성공햇다.
西班牙에는 叛亂이 勃發하야 일시 위태햇으나 평정되엇고 中米 「과테말라」에서는 革命派가 現政府를 轉覆시켰다.
國際聯盟은 5년만에 軍縮委員會가 終幕되고 新春에 本會議를 열기로 하엿다.
墺太利에는 「엔더」가 新內閣을 조직하고 瑞西에는 「헤벨린」博士가 大統領으로 新選되엇다.(翰)＜6＞
＜1-6＞