Magazine Title: 삼천리 第六卷 第七號
Publication Date: 1934년 06월 01일
Article Title: 最近朝鮮의 轉變 25年間- (文學) 朝鮮文學의 發展, 庚戍以來 二十五年間 (Recent Transformations in Korea Over 25 Years - (Literature) The Development of Korean Literature, Twenty-Five Years Since Kyŏngsul)
Author: 李光洙 (Yi Kwangsu)
Article Type: 문예평론 (Literary Criticism)

Recent Transformations in Korea Over 25 Years - (Literature) The Development of Korean Literature, Twenty-Five Years Since Kyŏngsul
						Yi Kwangsu

If asked how much Korean literature has developed in the 25 years from the Kyŏngsul year (1910) until today, considering the number of writers is still small compared to foreign countries and the quality of works lacks truly great masterpieces, one couldn't call it a remarkable, leaping development. However, these 25 years have been a period of agony and growth for "Young Korea" (靑年朝鮮), striving to enter a new life by resisting existing conventions, old morals, and past authorities. Accordingly, literature, the flower of that life, has also repeatedly experienced infinite emotion and a history of creation in building the new.

Generally, for a nation in a period of political awakening, there inevitably follows an awakening literature, a creative art. In this respect, it is no exaggeration to say that although 25 years is by no means a long time in terms of years, Korean literature has been in an artistic activity period rarely seen in its 4,000-year history.

And if we were to point out the characteristics of the literature and art of this short 25-year period, unlike the past which was fantastical, poetic, and mystical, the literature of this era was more life-oriented, realistic, and prosaic. Even when depicting sorrow, it was a sorrow (哀愁) that permeated the body; even when depicting agony, it was the unique form of agony (苦悶) of the white-clad people (白衣人), undiscoverable in the literature of other nations (畢民族 lit. completed/other nations?).

Now, to trace the development of literature over the recent 25 years, I would like to first briefly touch upon the literature and art of ancient Korea (古朝鮮) as a whole before entering the main discussion.

Long ago, hundreds of years back, there was an era in Silla (新羅) when both literature and fine arts flourished. Even today, after countless wars and the erosion of time, excellent architecture and sculpture, speaking to one aspect of Silla culture, remain in Kyŏngju (慶州), the old capital of Silla, and elsewhere. Also, texts like *Samguk Yusa* (三國遺事) and *Kyunyŏjŏn* (均如傳) contain thousands of beautiful poems from that time. During the reign of Queen Chinsŏng (眞聖女王, 1045 years ago), <68> there was even an imperially commissioned song collection called "Samdaemok" (三代目).

However, after Koryŏ (高麗), as Chinese literature (漢文學) flourished in Chosŏn (朝鮮), literary figures and poets emerged who even received praise in China (支那) itself, the place of origin. But Korean literature in the Korean language was entirely neglected. Although the great Hangul script was invented during the reign of the 4th Yi Dynasty (李朝) King, Sejong the Great (世宗大王), allowing the Korean language to be written freely, and the King himself set a standard for Korean literature by composing great narrative poems like "Yongbiŏch'ŏn'ga" (龍飛御天歌) and "Wŏrin Ch'ŏn'gang Chi Kok" (月印千江之曲) purely in the vernacular script (純諺文), Koreans, engrossed in Chinese literature, merely left behind several hundred pieces of native-style poetry called "Sijo" (時調) and several dozen novels, plays, and stories (이야기), failing to produce a literature befitting a nation. These poems are collected in works like "Kagok Wŏllyu" (歌曲源流), "Ch'ŏnggu Yŏngŏn" (靑邱永完 - likely misprint for 永言), and "Haedong Kayo" (海東歌謠).

Among these novels are *Kuunmong* (九雲夢 - A Hanja translation exists, and Dr. Gale's English translation, titled *The Cloud Dream of the Nine*, was published in London), "Ch'unhyang Chŏn" (春香傳 - this is a love opera most widely recited by Koreans; English, French, and German translations exist. A Hanja translation also exists), and *Hong Kiltong Chŏn* (洪吉童傳), which are representative. Among them, "Ch'unhyang Chŏn," for better or worse, best reveals the Korean heart.

The beginning of modern literature is difficult pinpoint precisely by year, but it could be said to be around the end of the Russo-Japanese War (日露戰爭). As a result of the Portsmouth (포스마스) Treaty, Korea (韓國), as it was then called, first became a protectorate of Japan (日本) and was finally annexed (倂合) by Japan on August 29, Meiji 43 (1910). Only about 7 years passed in between, but these 7-odd years brought about more change in the Korean heart than 700 years.

What arose in this era was the so-called Patriotic Song (愛國歌) era. This is because hundreds, perhaps thousands, of lyrical poems and songs with patriotism as their theme appeared. (Omission - original text) Many were anonymous or pseudonymous, primarily circulated as manuscripts (寫本) or mimeographs (謄寫版), very rarely in letterpress printing (活字印刷), sweeping across all of Korea. Verses or melodies that were XX XX [censored] - (Omission) - such poems and songs are not left today, not even a single piece. (Omission) - Such poems and songs lost the chance to ever appear in print permanently. Moreover, it would be difficult even to quote them here.<69>

The favorite themes of poets of this kind were things like retrospection on the past glory of the homeland (祖國), longing for Manchuria (滿洲), Siberia, or the other side of the Pacific Ocean, XX [censored].

The power of such poems and songs to move the hearts of the people at the time, especially young students, was truly great. And the fact that many patriots (志士) and youths, reciting these poems and songs, actually became wanderers (漂浪의 客) in Siberia, Manchuria, or across the Pacific, can be counted in the tens of thousands.

Following this era of patriotic songs, or perhaps becoming the vanguard of the next generation, was the prose poetry (散文詩) era of Ch'oe Namsŏn (崔南善). Ch'oe Namsŏn was one of the first group of students sent to Tokyo (東京) by the Korean government (韓國政府), having studied at the First Prefectural Middle School (府立一中) and in the literature department of Waseda University (早稻田大學). Burning with patriotic fervor the year before annexation, he abandoned his studies, returned home, and launched a monthly magazine called "Sonyŏn" (少年, Youth). That was Meiji 41 (1908). At the time, he was an 18-year-old youth. He published many prose poems in that magazine. His poetic form was likely learned from Turgenev's (트르케녭흐) prose poems. However, the content was entirely original, dealing with things like love for the same race (同族愛), the power of hope (希望力), and self-sacrifice (自己犧牲). That is, he took the content of the patriotic song era, made it deeper, more complex, and refined (洗鍊), and placed it within the free form of prose poetry. From this Ch'oe Namsŏn-style prose poetry emerged the later New Poetry (新體詩) of Korea. In short, dissatisfaction with the simple 4-4 or 7-5 rhythm, monotonous patriotic songs led to Ch'oe Namsŏn's prose poetry, and dissatisfaction with the overly prosaic nature of that prose poetry led to the emergence of more organized, more constrained New Poetry.

There is one more important thing here. Though it happened a bit later, Ch'oe Namsŏn turned from prose poetry and adopted the Sijo (時調) form. He published dozens of works. As mentioned above, Sijo is the poetic form that forms the backbone (根幹) of classical Korean literature, but it was also Ch'oe Namsŏn who revived it as a form for new literature, pouring new content into the old form.

Through experiences like these, the foundations for Korea's new poetic forms, New Poetry and Sijo, were laid. In New Poetry, figures like Chu Yohan (朱耀翰), Kim Ansŏ (金岸曙), Pak Wŏlt'an (朴月灘), Kim Sowŏl (金素月), Kim P'ain (金巴人) emerged;<70> In Sijo, figures like Ch'oe Namsŏn (崔南善), Yi Kyŏngsan (李驚山), Yi Pyŏnggi (李秉歧), Chŏng Inbo (鄭寅普) emerged.

Chu Yohan once studied at Ichikō (一高) and received praise from Kawaji Ryūkō (川路流虹). He published poetry collections such as "Arŭmdaun Saebyŏk" (아름다운 새벽, Beautiful Dawn) and "Pongsakkot" (봉사꼿, Balsam Flower). He is a Christian (크스찬), professionally a newspaper reporter, characterized by his sharp intellect (明哲), sensitive emotions (銳敏), and clear conscience (良心). His poetry is extremely bright (明朗) and is an undeniable song of the young Korean heart.

Kim Ansŏ, associated with Kyŏngsŏng University (慶大), rendered a service by introducing the poetic styles of Baudelaire (뽀트레-르), Verlaine (뻬르레-느), etc., to the Korean literary world (文壇) around Taishō 9 (1920) with his translated poetry collection "Onno ŭi Mudong" (懊惱의 舞踏, Dance of Anguish). Furthermore, his own lyrical poems and beautiful prose made him a widely read poet for a time, one of the founders of the new Korean poetry scene.

Pak Wŏlt'an published a poetry collection called "Hŭkbang Pigok" (黑房秘曲, Secret Song of a Dark Room), and Kim Sowŏl published a collection titled "Chindallaekkot" (진달내꼿, Azaleas). Both have maintained complete silence for the past 10 years, but Kim Sowŏl's poems, tinged with the mournful tone (哀調) of folk songs (民謠風), were truly the vanguard (魁) and model for folk poetry and children's songs in Korea, so they have not lost their vitality even now.

And then there is Kim P'ain (金巴人). He was a poet who loudly raised a thick, strong voice of resistance against the decadent trends and "Flowers of Evil" (惡의 華) style poetry that had captivated the youth of all Korea since the XX Movement [likely March First Movement] of Taishō 8 (1919). His poetry collection "Kukkyŏng ŭi Pam" (國境의 밤, Night at the Border) created huge ripples in the Korean literary world. Thick lines, wild power, resistance – these aspects, in his spirit (精神) and technique (手法), could be seen, in a sense, as a return (廻前) to the pre-Ch'oe Namsŏn patriotic song era in contrast to the prevailing aesthetic (耽美派), art-for-art's-sake (藝術至上派) tendencies, or could be considered a forerunner (先驅) of the later proletarian poetry.

Yang Chudong (梁柱東) heightened national love (民族愛) with his poetry collection "Chosŏn ŭi Maekpak" (朝鮮의 脈膊, The Pulse of Korea).

Regarding Sijo, Ch'oe Namsŏn's "Paekp'al Pŏnnoe" (百八煩惱, 108 Agonies), Yi Kyŏngsan's "Kyŏngsan Sijip" (驚山詩集, Kyŏngsan Poetry Collection), and the works of Yi Pyŏnggi and Chŏng Inbo can all be seen as orthodox heirs to the patriotic song era, all having "nation" (民族) as their central idea (中心思想), albeit to a degree permissible by the censor (檢閱官). Especially Kyŏngsan's poetry can be called the pyramid of modern Sijo.<71>

Next is the novel (小說). In terms of quantity (量), quality (質), and the breadth (廣汎) of its readership (讀者), the novel can be called the master (主人) of today's Korean literary scene. In fact, for the past 4-5 years, New Poetry has produced few new writers and has shown almost no trace. Only Sijo continues to show progress through Yi Kyŏngsan, Yi Pyŏnggi, and a few others. However, Sijo, like Waka (和歌) in Japan, is appreciated only by the literarily trained class (階級). It is not of a nature to feed the general public (一般大衆). The food for the masses is always the novel.

Novels in the Western (歐米風) style began to appear in Korea more than 30 years ago with works like "Hyŏltoru" (血淚, Tears of Blood) and "Kwi ŭi Sŏng" (鬼의 聲, Voice of the Demon) by Yi Injik (李人植). He depicted contemporary Korean life purely in the Korean language, but lacked the background or basis of modern thought. Therefore, his works had no organic connection (有機的 關係) with the later new literature movement.

Novels awakened to a truly new national consciousness (民族意識) or Western thought (歐米思想) appeared around Taishō 5 (1916), when the Great European War (歐米大戰) was raging.

At that time, with the emergence of *Maeil Sinbo* (每日申報), Korea's only Korean-language newspaper, Ch'oe Namsŏn's "Ch'ŏngch'un" (靑春, Youth), "Hakchigwang" (學之光, Light of Learning) published by students in Tokyo, other magazines, and especially after the XX Movement [March First Movement] led to the shift from Terauchi's military rule (武斷政治) to Governor-General Saitō Makoto's (齋藤實大將) so-called cultural policy (文化政治), allowing 2-3 daily newspapers and over ten monthly magazines to be published, the new literature movement, like cultural movements in other fields, arose vigorously (蔚然). Most of the poets mentioned above also emerged around this time.

In fiction during this period, Kim Tongin (金東仁), Hyŏn P'ing'hŏ (玄憑虛 - likely Hyŏn Chin'gŏn), Yŏm Sangsŏp (廉想涉), Na Tohyang (羅稻香), and others appeared. They were no longer bound by national consciousness, but based their work on the then-global trend of humanism (人生主義), focusing on rebellion against convention, liberation of emotion centered on love (戀愛中心), exposure (暴露) of reality (現實), and adding elements of XX XX XX [censored] related to the Korean reality.

These novelists were all students who had studied in Tokyo (東京), and the influence of Japanese thought and literature (文藝) from before and after the Great War is significant. There is much influence from the so-called decadent (靡爛) thought prevalent before the Great Kantō Earthquake (大震災).

However, the youth intoxicated by the sweet taste of new literature (新文藝) at this time were in a state where they couldn't get through day or night without literature.<72>

Kim Tongin is the writer with the most outstanding skill (手腕) among these authors. He mostly writes short stories (短篇). Works like "Kamja" (감자, Potato) and "Palgoragi Talmŏtda" (발고락이 달멋다, The Toes Look Alike) are considered his best, and "Kamja" was even translated and published in *Shinchō* (新潮) several years ago. This author's observation (觀察) is strikingly clever (奇警), rich in wit (위잇트) and humor (유-모아), and unconcerned with convention, morality (道德), or public opinion (世評); he writes freely as he thinks, dazzling the reader's mind.

Hyŏn P'ing'hŏ published a short story collection called "Chisaenŭn An'gae" (지새는 안개, The Lingering Fog). His works are all truly well-balanced (均整), rich in common sense (常識), with a graceful (雅淡) writing style (筆致), and his prose, in particular, is said to be beautiful.

Yŏm Sangsŏp is primarily a novelist (長篇作家), but his works somehow give a rough (澁), pure (純* - unclear character, likely 純朴 simple/naive or 純粹 pure), and profound (深刻) feeling. His rough-hewn (텁텁한) aspect could even be called Dostoevskian. His works include "P'yobonsil ŭi Ch'ŏnggaeguri" (標本室의 靑蛙, Frog in the Specimen Room), "Manse Chŏn" (萬歲前, Before the Cheers of Manse), "Haebaragi" (해바라기, Sunflower), and "Samdae" (三代, Three Generations). He continues his life as a writer even now and is called the general (大將) of nationalist literature (民族主義文學) by the Proletarian (푸로) faction.

Na Tohyang died young. His "Hwanhŭi" (幻戱, Phantom Play) and "Pŏng'ŏri Samnyong'i" (벙어리 三龍이, Mute Samnyong) will ensure his name remains forever in the history of Korean literature. Especially "Pŏng'ŏri Samnyong'i" is cited as an example of his best work and has been made into a movie (映畵化). He had romanticist tendencies.

However, these writers lacked the kind of guiding ideology (指導的 思想) we speak of now. If anything, they had aesthetic (耽美派的), decadent (데카단的) tendencies akin to art for art's sake, lacking deep insight (洞察) into life or lofty ideals (高遠한 理想), those logical (論理的) or social (社會的) elements. It cannot be denied that their work was always playful (遊戱的). This is also true for the poetry scene (詩壇).

Emerging around this time in poetry was Kim P'ain's "Kukkyŏng ŭi Pam," mentioned earlier, and in novels, Ch'oe Sŏhae's (崔曙海) "T'alch'ulgi" (脫出記, Escape Log). Around the time of these works, the signal fire (狼火) of proletarian literature (푸로文學) was lit by Pak Yŏnghŭi (朴英熙) and Kim Kijin (金基鎭).

Ch'oe Sŏhae only finished elementary school (小學校), worked as a longshoreman (荷揚人夫), a woodcutter (樵夫), wandered in Manchuria (滿洲), and was even a Buddhist monk. His "T'alch'ulgi" is likely<73> based on himself. "T'alch'ulgi" depicts a slice of the lives of XX Movement [likely independence movement] activists in Kando (間島), but its solid (健實) style, powerful (强力的) style, and thick lines exert a certain pressure, like that received from Gorky's (꼬리키) works. Youths immersed in fin-de-siècle (世紀末的), love-story-like (變愛物的 - likely 戀愛物 'romance story') literature must have undoubtedly received a new literary thrill (感激) from this "T'alch'ulgi." It must have deeply instilled in young people the new literary view that literature is by no means play (遊戱); it must be a record of humanity's fierce struggles (惡戰苦鬪), written in blood.

Na Tohyang died, Hyŏn P'ing'hŏ laid down his novelist's pen, and the people still writing novels today are Kim Tongin of the so-called humanist school (人生派), Yŏm Sangsŏp, called the nationalist school (民族主義派), and Ch'oe Sŏhae, who could be called quasi-proletarian (準푸로派). Besides popular writers (大衆作家) like Yun Paengnam (尹白南) and Ch'oe Tokkyŏn (崔獨鵑), there are no other writers from that time who have preserved their vitality.

Then there is the newly rising proletarian literature. As briefly mentioned before, Pak Yŏnghŭi, Kim Kijin, and others, using the magazine "Kaebyŏk" (開闢) as their stronghold (牙城), started by introducing Henri Barbusse (안리 빠르삐스), introduced Marxist (맑쓰主義) literary theory, published works, and showed great vigor (氣勢) by denouncing the established literary world and writers as bourgeois (뿌르조아) literati. The newcomer Ch'oe Sŏhae was welcomed into their camp (陣營), and subsequently, Cho Myŏnghŭi (趙明熙) with poetry and Yi Kiyŏng (李箕永) with novels strengthened the offensive and defensive power (攻防力) of the proletarian camp. Through them, works by Japanese proletarian writers were also somewhat introduced.

Proletarian literature does not recognize the need for explanation strictly according to formula. The extent to which this was enthusiastically welcomed among Korean youth was truly astonishing (驚異). *Kaebyŏk*, which was like the official organ (機關紙然) of proletarian literature, saw a surprising increase in circulation, which eventually led to its publication being banned (發行禁止) by the authorities (當局). After *Kaebyŏk* magazine was banned, proletarian writers relied on the literary columns (文藝欄) of daily newspapers, but that too could not be abandoned (likely means 'was also suppressed' or 'could not be sustained'). And their last stronghold (堅壘), the magazine "Chosŏn chi Kwang" (朝鮮之光, Light of Korea), is now (Omission) emasculated (去勢). It seems to be in a state where continued publication is impossible.

There are organizations like the Proletarian Art League (푸로文藝同盟) and the KAPF Poets' League (캅푸詩人同盟) (Reporter - these two seem to be mistaken for the "Korea Artista Proleta Federatio" [朝鮮 푸로藝術同盟]), but proletarian literature is in a state of stagnation (停滯狀態) without much great literary harvest (收獲) (though there might have been an ideological harvest). However, this stagnation cannot necessarily be attributed solely to censorship's XXX [censored].<74> Responsibility must also lie with the writers' own capabilities (力量) and efforts (努力), and also with the excessively narrow teleological (目的論的) nature of the literary theory they adhered to. This is likely the same for proletarian literature in Japan. The Korean proletarian literature movement was merely a faction (一分派) of movements like "Bungei Sensen" (文藝戰線) and "Senki" (戰旗)-

However, the contribution (貢獻) of the proletarian literature movement to Korean literature, its stimulus (剌戟), its ideological (이데오로기-) influence (影響), will be indelible (不滅). Future literature will, in some sense, be formed through the filter (瀘過器) of proletarian literary theory. In this sense, Korean proletarian literature has already fulfilled its role (役割).

The strictly limited page count (紙數) is already used up. Let me conclude this manuscript (稿) by offering some general (槪論的) considerations (考察) on Korean literature as a whole. This might perhaps contain some hints (暗示) regarding the future trends (傾向) of Korean literature.

Generally, the Korean people (朝鮮民族), at least in their current state, are probably not very interested in literature. To them, literature or art are things that are fine whether they exist or not; they have not become essential conditions (必須條件) of life. Even young students, who should like literature most, seem not to have much demand (要求) for literature or art. How much less so for people over 40 in the leading classes (指導者階級) of various sectors of current society, for whom literature is nothing more than a kind of harmful luxury item (奢侈品).

That there is this much indifference (冷談) towards literature in Korea, supposedly the land of letters (文字의 나라), might feel somewhat strange (異常), but there are reasons (理由).

First, for the past 30 years, Koreans have not had the leisure (餘裕) to calmly appreciate (맛불만한) literature or art. They had to be excessively absorbed in political concerns regarding the rapid changes (急激한 變遷) in their national destiny (民族的 運命). Koreans are originally said to be political, but even if not, it is perfectly natural (當然 至極) for them, placed in such circumstances (環境), to hold deep political interest.

In such a state, for individuals with a patriotic spirit (志士的 氣魂), things like literature are the work of idle people (閑人) or a diversion (餘技), a minor skill (末技) to console boredom (無聊). Therefore, there is still no one who considers literature a lifelong profession (終身의 業). Literature is merely a kind of easy side job (副業).

Next, the economic impoverishment (經濟的 窮乏) of Korean life worsens year by year, day by day.
There is neither the mental余裕 (餘裕 - leisure/余裕) nor the economic余裕 to like literature or art. There is no money to buy even one magazine (雜誌) or one novel (小說), nor does the energy arise to buy them. In this state, no matter how many works poets or writers produce, there is no one to buy them. Thus, they cannot make a living from it. To live, one must become a clerk (書記) at a Credit Association (金融組合) or a township office (面所) and receive a monthly salary (月給) of 20 or 30 Won (圓).

Third is the censorship system (檢閱制度) in Korea. Unless one becomes a Korean,<75> one truly cannot imagine it. If we broadly classify the thoughts (思想) of Koreans today, they can be divided into nationalists (民族主義者) and XXists [likely socialists or communists] (XX主義者). Most recently, stimulated by the global trend (世界思潮) of Fascism (파시씀), an ideology like National Socialism (民族社會主義), which could be said to combine the two, is being formed at a rapid tempo (急速한 텐포), making three types if included. Therefore, what writers are most interested in and what the public most anticipates concerns the ideology (이데오로기-) stemming from these three types (中畧 - omission) completely - [censored]. When a writer, after gaining some inspiration (興), takes up the pen and faces the manuscript paper (原稿紙), the first thing that appears is (中畧 - omission) is not it. For a sensitive writer, wherever X and the manuscript are, he feels its (畧 - omission). There, the first inspiration and the second inspiration vanish, and (畧 - omission) seeking a theme, just like a sign painter (看板쟁이) designs to suit his master's (主人) taste (意匠), one must write with (畧 - omission) writing style (筆法). The literature written by Koreans today has come about this way.

Finally, the short history (歷史) of new literature, the lack of dissemination of culture in other fields, especially education (敎育), and the lack of emerging talent (人材) are also reasons. In any case, it is a fact (事實) that Korea today is unfortunate (福이 업는) concerning literature.

However, what is the future (將來) of Korean literature? It will likely be nationalistic (民族主義的). Perhaps more accurately, national socialistic (民族社會主義的). It will be this, plus the inherent humanitarian thought (人道主義思想) of the Korean people – mixed with their national characteristic (民族性) escapist optimism (逃避的 樂天主義) or desperate mournful tone (絶望的 哀調), infused with the smile (微笑) of Buddhist-style resignation (佛敎式 達觀). The power and glory (光榮) of a bright day, longing (憧憬) for it, and escapist, desperate resignation, mournfulness, and smile – these seem incompatible (인콘파디뿔갓흐나 - incompatible?) at first glance, but combining them is indeed the characteristic (特徵) of Korean literature throughout all ages (古今). It might be the influence (影響) of a long historical, national life process (生活過程).

Postscript (附記): I have decided not to write anything about my own role (役割) in Korean literature. Also, many passages in this manuscript (稿) were quoted directly from what appeared years ago in the magazine "Kaizō" (改造). One reason was the lack of time to revise the manuscript, but also because the meaning requested now by Samch'ŏlli Company (三千里社) regarding literature in the 25 years since annexation (合倂後) was not greatly different from that published in "Kaizō."

Samch'ŏlli Editor's Addendum (編輯者 添記):
Since the position of the author, Mr. Yi Kwangsu (李光洙氏), who made an absolutely immense contribution (絶大한 貢獻) to the history of modern Korean literature (朝鮮 新文學史上), is entirely omitted (全然 省畧) in this manuscript, we will publish a new article supplementing the discussion of Ch'unwŏn (春園 - Yi Kwangsu's pen name) on another occasion.<76>

**Summary**

Yi Kwangsu provides an overview of Korean literary development from 1910 to 1934. He traces its evolution from patriotic songs after annexation, through Ch'oe Namsŏn's influential prose poetry and revival of Sijo, the emergence of "New Poetry" and modern novels influenced by Western and Japanese trends (often characterized by aestheticism or realism exploring love, convention, and reality), and finally the rise and subsequent stagnation of proletarian literature influenced by Marxism. While acknowledging progress and key figures like Ch'oe Namsŏn, Kim Sowŏl, Kim Tongin, Yŏm Sangsŏp, and Ch'oe Sŏhae, Yi laments the lack of masterpieces, public indifference, economic hardship hindering writers, and severe censorship. He predicts the future direction will be nationalistic or national-socialistic, blending traditional Korean sentiments (humanism, escapism, mournfulness, Buddhist resignation) with a longing for a brighter future. For historians, the article offers a contemporary intellectual's perspective on literary trends under Japanese rule, explicitly details the stages of development, names key players and movements (including the often-censored proletarian movement), and frankly discusses the crippling effects of poverty and censorship (the "XXX" and omissions highlight this directly) on literary production and expression. His prediction of a national-socialist trend is also noteworthy given the global context of the 1930s.

**Named Entities**

李光洙	이광수	Yi Kwangsu
庚戍	경술	Kyŏngsul (1910)
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
靑年朝鮮	청년조선	Ch'ŏngnyŏn Chosŏn (Young Korea)
新羅	신라	Silla
慶州	경주	Kyŏngju
三國遺事	삼국유사	Samguk Yusa
均如傳	균여전	Kyunyŏjŏn
眞聖女王	진성여왕	Queen Chinsŏng
高麗	고려	Koryŏ
支那	지나	China
李朝	이조	Yi Dynasty
世宗大王	세종대왕	King Sejong the Great
龍飛御天歌	용비어천가	Yongbiŏch'ŏn'ga
月印千江之曲	월인천강지곡	Wŏrin Ch'ŏn'gang Chi Kok
時調	시조	Sijo
歌曲源流	가곡원류	Kagok Wŏllyu
靑邱永完	청구영완	Ch'ŏnggu Yŏngŏn (likely Ch'ŏnggu Yŏng'ŏn)
海東歌謠	해동가요	Haedong Kayo
九雲夢	구운몽	Kuunmong (The Cloud Dream of the Nine)
게-르博士	게일 박사	Dr. Gale (James Scarth Gale)
런던	런던	London
春香傳	춘향전	Ch'unhyang Chŏn
洪吉童傳	홍길동전	Hong Kiltong Chŏn
日露戰爭	일로전쟁	Russo-Japanese War
포스마스	포츠머스	Portsmouth
韓國	한국	Han'guk (Korea)
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
明治	명치	Meiji
滿洲	만주	Manchuria (Manchū)
太平洋	태평양	T'aep'yŏngyang (Pacific Ocean)
崔南善	최남선	Ch'oe Namsŏn
東京	동경	Tokyo (Tōkyō)
韓國政府	한국정부	Han'guk Chŏngbu (Korean Government)
府立一中	부립일중	Purip Ilchung (Prefectural First Middle School)
早稻田大學	조도전대학	Waseda University (Waseda Daigaku)
少年	소년	Sonyŏn (magazine, Youth)
트르케녭흐	투르게네프	Turgenev
朱耀翰	주요한	Chu Yohan
金岸曙	김안서	Kim Ansŏ
朴月灘	박월탄	Pak Wŏlt'an
金素月	김소월	Kim Sowŏl
金巴人	김팔인	Kim P'ain
李驚山	이경산	Yi Kyŏngsan
李秉歧	이병기	Yi Pyŏnggi
鄭寅普	정인보	Chŏng Inbo
一高	일고	Ichikō (First Higher School, Japan)
川路流虹	가와지 류코	Kawaji Ryūkō
아름다운 새벽	아름다운 새벽	Arŭmdaun Saebyŏk (poem collection title)
봉사꼿	봉선화	Pongsakkot (poem collection title, Balsam Flower)
慶大	경대	Kyŏngdae (Kyŏngsŏng University)
大正	대정	Taishō
懊惱의 舞踏	오뇌의 무도	Onnoe ŭi Mudong (translated poetry collection title)
뽀트레-르	보들레르	Baudelaire
뻬르레-느	베를렌	Verlaine
黑房秘曲	흑방비곡	Hŭkbang Pigok (poetry collection title)
진달내꼿	진달래꽃	Chindallaekkot (poetry collection title)
國境의 밤	국경의 밤	Kukkyŏng ŭi Pam (poetry collection title)
梁柱東	양주동	Yang Chudong
朝鮮의 脈膊	조선의 맥박	Chosŏn ŭi Maekpak (poetry collection title)
百八煩惱	백팔번뇌	Paekp'al Pŏnnoe (Sijo collection title)
驚山詩集	경산시집	Kyŏngsan Sijip (poetry collection title)
歐米	구미	Kumi (Europe and America)
李人植	이인직	Yi Injik
血淚	혈루	Hyŏltoru (novel title)
鬼의 聲	귀의 성	Kwi ŭi Sŏng (novel title)
歐米大戰	구미대전	Kumi Taejŏn (Great European War / WWI)
每日申報	매일신보	Maeil Sinbo (newspaper)
靑春	청춘	Ch'ŏngch'un (magazine)
學之光	학지광	Hakchigwang (magazine)
寺內	데라우치	Terauchi (Terauchi Masatake)
齋藤實大將	사이토 마코토 대장	Admiral Saitō Makoto
金東仁	김동인	Kim Tongin
玄憑虛	현빙허	Hyŏn P'ing'hŏ (likely Hyŏn Chin'gŏn 현진건)
廉想涉	염상섭	Yŏm Sangsŏp
羅稻香	나도향	Na Tohyang
大震災	대진재	Great Kantō Earthquake (Daishinsai)
감자	감자	Kamja (short story title)
발고락이 달멋다	발고락이 닮았다	Palgoragi Talmŏtda (short story title)
新潮	신초	Shinchō (Japanese magazine)
지새는 안개	지새는 안개	Chisaenŭn An'gae (short story collection title)
標本室의 靑蛙	표본실의 청개구리	P'yobonsil ŭi Ch'ŏnggaeguri (novel title)
萬歲前	만세전	Manse Chŏn (novel title)
해바라기	해바라기	Haebaragi (novel title)
三代	삼대	Samdae (novel title)
幻戱	환희	Hwanhŭi (novel title)
벙어리 三龍이	벙어리 삼룡이	Pŏng'ŏri Samnyong'i (novel title)
崔曙海	최서해	Ch'oe Sŏhae
脫出記	탈출기	T'alch'ulgi (novel title)
朴英熙	박영희	Pak Yŏnghŭi
金基鎭	김기진	Kim Kijin
間島	간도	Kando
꼬리키	고리키	Gorky (Maxim Gorky)
尹白南	윤백남	Yun Paengnam
崔獨鵑	최독견	Ch'oe Tokkyŏn
開闢	개벽	Kaebyŏk (magazine)
안리 빠르삐스	앙리 바르뷔스	Henri Barbusse
맑쓰主義	마르크스주의	Marxism
뿌르조아	부르주아	Bourgeois
趙明熙	조명희	Cho Myŏnghŭi
李箕永	이기영	Yi Kiyŏng
푸로文藝同盟	프로문예동맹	Proletarian Art League
캅푸詩人同盟	카프시인동맹	KAPF Poets' League
朝鮮 푸로藝術同盟	조선 프로예술동맹	Korea Artista Proleta Federatio (KAPF)
文藝戰線	문예전선	Bungei Sensen (Japanese magazine)
戰旗	전기	Senki (Japanese magazine)
金融組合	금융조합	Kŭmnyung Chohap (Credit Association)
面所	면소	Myŏnso (Township Office)
파시씀	파시즘	Fascism
民族社會主義	민족사회주의	National Socialism
改造	개조	Kaizō (Japanese magazine)
三千里社	삼천리사	Samch'ŏlli Company
春園	춘원	Ch'unwŏn (Yi Kwangsu's pen name)

**Glossary**

庚戍以來	경술이래	Since Kyŏngsul (1910)
發展	발전	Development
數爻	수효	Number, count (older term)
업스니	없으니	Because there isn't (older spelling of 없으니)
업겟스나	없겠으나	Although there might not be (older spelling of 없겠으나)
在來	재래	Conventional, existing
因襲	인습	Convention, old customs
녯	옛	Old, past (older form of 옛)
高悶期	고민기	Period of agony/anguish
生長期	생장기	Period of growth
꼿	꽃	Flower (older spelling of 꽃)
覺醒期	각성기	Period of awakening
藝術	예술	Art
過言	과언	Exaggeration
짜른	짧은	Short (older spelling of 짧은)
녜전은	예전은	In the past (older spelling of 예전은)
反하야	반하여	In contrast to (older spelling/form)
哀愁	애수	Sorrow, pathos
慘透	참투	To permeate deeply
苦悶	고민	Agony, anguish
白衣人	백의인	White-clad people (referring to Koreans)
獨特	독특	Unique, distinct
舊都	구도	Old capital
其他	기타	Others, etc.
當時	당시	At that time
勅選歌集	칙선가집	Imperially commissioned song collection
漢文學	한문학	Literature written in Classical Chinese
盛하다	성하다	To flourish, prosper
輩出하다	배출하다	To produce (people) in succession
朝鮮語	조선어	Korean language
發明	발명	Invention
自由自在	자유자재	Freely, without restriction
純諺文	순언문	Purely in the vernacular script (Hangul)
大敍事詩篇	대서사시편	Great epic poem
範	범	Model, standard
不拘하고	불구하고	Despite, notwithstanding
耽溺하다	탐닉하다	To be engrossed in, addicted to
國風詩歌	국풍시가	Native-style poetry/songs
戱曲	희곡	Play, drama
이약이	이야기	Story (older spelling of 이야기)
相應되다	상응되다	To correspond to, be suitable for
制作하다	제작하다	To produce, create
맛치엿다	마쳤다	Finished, ended (older spelling of 마쳤다)
愛誦	애송	Reciting with fondness
的確히	적확히	Precisely, accurately
年代順	연대순	Chronological order
講和條約	강화조약	Peace treaty
保護國	보호국	Protectorate
倂合	병합	Annexation
餘年	여년	-odd years
變化	변화	Change
愛國歌	애국가	Patriotic song
主題	주제	Theme, subject (테-마 is used)
叙情詩歌	서정시가	Lyrical poetry and songs
낫하낫슴으로	나타났으므로	Because it appeared (older spelling of 나타났으므로)
그럿타	그렇다	That is so (older spelling of 그렇다)
寫本	사본	Manuscript copy
謄寫版	등사판	Mimeograph
듬올게	드물게	Rarely (older spelling of 드물게)
活字印刷	활자 인쇄	Letterpress printing
風靡하다	풍미하다	To sweep over, dominate (a trend)
남어잇지 안타	남아있지 않다	Does not remain (older spelling/form)
이러버렷다	잃어버렸다	Lost (older spelling of 잃어버렸다)
質겨하는	즐겨하는	Favorite, enjoyed (older spelling of 즐겨하는)
갓흔	같은	Like, such as (older spelling of 같은)
回顧	회고	Retrospection, recollection
憧憬	동경	Longing, yearning
志士	지사	Patriot, man of high purpose
吟誦하다	음송하다	To recite, chant
事實上	사실상	In fact, actually
漂浪의 客	표랑의 객	Wanderer, drifter
헤알일	헤아릴	To count, estimate (older spelling of 헤아릴)
밧든	받든	Received, succeeded (older spelling of 받든)
魁	괴	Leader, chief, vanguard
散文詩	산문시	Prose poem
政府	정부	Government
派遺	파견	Dispatch, sending
留學生	유학생	Student studying abroad
學業	학업	Studies, academic work
抛棄하다	포기하다	To abandon, give up
歸國하다	귀국하다	To return to one's country
月刊雜誌	월간잡지	Monthly magazine
모름직이	모름지기	Naturally, indeed (older spelling)
同族愛	동족애	Love for the same race/people
希望力	희망력	Power of hope
自己犧牲	자기희생	Self-sacrifice
深刻하다	심각하다	Profound, serious
複雜하다	복잡하다	Complex
洗鍊하다	세련하다	To refine, polish
自由스럽다	자유스럽다	Free, liberal
新體詩	신체시	New Poetry (early modern Korean poetry form)
單純하다	단순하다	Simple
千篇一律的	천편일률적	Monotonous, uniform
不滿	불만	Dissatisfaction
整理되다	정리되다	To be organized, arranged
拘束的	구속적	Restrictive, constraining
重要하다	중요하다	Important
轉回하다	전회하다	To turn back, revert
形式	형식	Form, style
取하다	취하다	To take, adopt
發表하다	발표하다	To publish, announce
根幹	근간	Backbone, foundation
復活	부활	Revival, resurrection
經驗	경험	Experience
基礎	기초	Foundation, basis
싸어젓스니	쌓였으니	Because it was built/accumulated (older spelling of 쌓였으니)
나엇스며	낳았으며	Gave birth to, produced (older spelling of 낳았으며)
밧엇든	받았던	Received (older spelling of 받았던)
職業	직업	Occupation, profession
新聞記者	신문기자	Newspaper reporter
明哲	명철	Wisdom, sharp intellect
感情	감정	Feeling, emotion
銳敏	예민	Sharpness, sensitivity
良心	양심	Conscience
特色	특색	Characteristic, feature
明朗하다	명랑하다	Bright, cheerful
譯詩集	역시집	Collection of translated poetry
文壇	문단	Literary world/circles
紹介	소개	Introduction
功績	공적	Achievement, contribution
自身	자신	Oneself
文章	문장	Writing, prose
愛讀되다	애독되다	To be widely read with affection
創設者	창설자	Founder
沈黙	침묵	Silence
民謠風	민요풍	Folk song style
哀調	애조	Mournful tone, sadness
띄우다	띄우다	To have a tinge of, float
生命	생명	Life, vitality
波紋	파문	Ripple, stir, sensation
野生的	야생적	Wild, untamed
精神	정신	Spirit, mind
手法	수법	Technique, method
耽美派	탐미파	Aesthetic school
藝術至上派	예술지상파	Art-for-art's-sake principle adherents
傾向	경향	Tendency, trend
意味	의미	Meaning, sense
以前	이전	Before, previously
廻前	회전	Return, revolution (here, a return to)
先驅	선구	Forerunner, pioneer
高潮하다	고조하다	To heighten, rise to a climax
中心思想	중심사상	Central idea/thought
檢閱官	검열관	Censor
許하다	허하다	To permit, allow
程度	정도	Degree, extent
民族	민족	Nation, people, ethnic group
現代	현대	Modern times
量	양	Quantity
質	질	Quality
讀者	독자	Reader
範圍	범위	Scope, range
廣汎하다	광범하다	Wide-ranging, extensive
主人	주인	Master, main figure
事實上	사실상	In fact, actually
外	외	Besides, except for
進境	진경	Progress, advancement
和歌	화가	Waka (Japanese poetry form)
文藝的	문예적	Literary, artistic
訓練	훈련	Training
階級	계급	Class (social)
賞觀하다	상관하다	To appreciate, view (art)
一般大衆	일반대중	General public
食物	식물	Food
歐米風	구미풍	Western style
背景	배경	Background
根據	근거	Basis, grounds
有機的	유기적	Organic
關係	관계	Relation, connection
民族意識	민족의식	National consciousness
覺醒하다	각성하다	To awaken
唯一	유일	Only, sole
其他	기타	Other
武斷政治	무단정치	Military rule
文化政治	문화정치	Cultural policy
日刊新聞	일간신문	Daily newspaper
他部門	타부문	Other fields/sectors
文化運動	문화운동	Cultural movement
蔚然히	울연히	Vigorously, luxuriantly
拘泥되다	구니되다	To be bound by, adhere rigidly to
世界的	세계적	Worldwide, global
潮流	조류	Trend, current
人生主義	인생주의	Humanism (philosophy focusing on human life/values)
基本	기본	Basis, foundation
暴露	폭로	Exposure, revelation
現實	현실	Reality
加味하다	가미하다	To add flavor, incorporate
思想	사상	Thought, ideology
影響	영향	Influence
靡爛하다	미란하다	Decadent, corrupt
新文藝	신문예	New literature/arts
甘味	감미	Sweet taste
醉하다	취하다	To be intoxicated
優越하다	우월하다	Superior, outstanding
手腕	수완	Skill, ability
短篇	단편	Short story
觀察	관찰	Observation
奇警하다	기경하다	Strikingly clever, witty
豐富하다	풍부하다	Rich, abundant
世評	세평	Public opinion, reputation
關心	관심	Interest, concern
自由自在	자유자재	Freely, at will
讀者	독자	Reader
短篇集	단편집	Short story collection
均整되다	균정되다	To be well-balanced
常識	상식	Common sense
富하다	부하다	To be rich in
雅淡하다	아담하다	Graceful, elegant
筆致	필치	Writing style
長篇作家	장편작가	Novelist (writer of long works)
澁하다	삽하다	Rough, coarse; astringent (context suggests 'rough' or perhaps 'difficult')
純*	순*	Pure (unclear second character, maybe 純朴 simple/naive or 純粹 pure)
深刻하다	심각하다	Profound, deep, serious
텁텁하다	텁텁하다	Coarse, rough, unrefined
點	점	Point, aspect
作家的 生活	작가적 생활	Life as a writer
繼續하다	계속하다	To continue
大將	대장	General, leader
永久히	영구히	Permanently, forever
文學史上	문학사상	In the history of literature
映畵化되다	영화화되다	To be made into a movie
指導的 思想	지도적 사상	Guiding ideology
藝術을 위한 藝術	예술을 위한 예술	Art for art's sake
耽美派的	탐미파적	Aesthetic (tendency)
데카단的	데카당적	Decadent (tendency)
洞察	동찰	Insight, penetration
高遠하다	고원하다	Lofty, sublime
理想	이상	Ideal
論理的	논리적	Logical
乃至	내지	Or, ranging to
社會的	사회적	Social
要素	요소	Element, factor
缺하다	결하다	To lack
遊戱的	유희적	Playful
免하다	면하다	To avoid, escape
詩壇	시단	Poetry circles/scene
同一하다	동일하다	Identical, same
前後하다	전후하다	Around the same time, before and after
狼火	낭화	Signal fire, beacon
小學校	소학교	Elementary school
荷揚人夫	하양인부	Longshoreman, stevedore
樵夫	초부	Woodcutter
放浪하다	방랑하다	To wander, roam
健實하다	건실하다	Solid, sound, robust
强力的	강력적	Powerful
壓力	압력	Pressure
世紀末的	세기말적	Fin-de-siècle, end-of-the-century
感激	감격	Deep emotion, thrill, inspiration
記錄	기록	Record, document
人間	인간	Human being, humanity
惡戰苦鬪	악전고투	Fierce struggle, desperate fight
新文學觀	신문학관	New view of literature
삭이다	새기다	To engrave, imprint deeply (here, 새기여 주었을 것이다 -> instill)
新興	신흥	Newly rising
言及하다	언급하다	To mention
牙城	아성	Stronghold, citadel
理論	이론	Theory
既成文壇	기성문단	Established literary world
既成作家	기성작가	Established writer
罵倒하다	매도하다	To denounce violently, condemn
氣勢	기세	Vigor, spirit, influence
新進	신진	Newcomer, rising figure
陣營	진영	Camp, faction
迎入하다	영입하다	To welcome into, recruit
攻防力	공방력	Offensive and defensive power
公式	공식	Formula
說明	설명	Explanation
必要	필요	Necessity
認하다	인하다	To recognize, acknowledge (short for 認定하다)
如何히	여하히	How, to what extent
熱狂的	열광적	Enthusiastic, fervent
歡迎	환영	Welcome
驚異	경이	Wonder, astonishment
機關紙然	기관지연	Like an official organ (of a party/group)
發行部數	발행부수	Circulation (number of copies issued)
增加	증가	Increase
當局	당국	The authorities
發行禁止	발행금지	Publication ban
后	후	After (used like 後)
文士	문사	Literati, man of letters
文藝欄	문예란	Literature and arts column (in a newspaper)
堅壘	견루	Stronghold, fortress
去勢되다	거세되다	To be emasculated, castrated (figurative)
繼續	계속	Continuation
不能狀態	불능상태	State of impossibility/incapacity
錯誤	착오	Mistake, error
收獲	수확	Harvest, gains
主義的	주의적	Ideological
停滯狀態	정체상태	State of stagnation
力量	역량	Capability, capacity
努力	노력	Effort
把持하다	파지하다	To hold onto, maintain firmly
狹溢하다	협일하다	Narrow (likely 狹隘 협애 narrow/confined)
目的論的	목적론적	Teleological
責任	책임	Responsibility
一分派	일분파	One faction/branch
不過하다	불과하다	To be merely, only
貢獻	공헌	Contribution
剌戟	자극	Stimulus, impetus (modern 자극)
影響	영향	Influence
不滅하다	불멸하다	Indelible, immortal
今後	금후	Henceforth, in the future
瀘過器	여과기	Filter
透하다	투하다	To pass through
造成되다	조성되다	To be created, formed
役割	역할	Role
遂成하다	수성하다	To accomplish, fulfill
却銳	각예	(Unclear, possibly 却說 'now to return to the topic' or just filler?)
限하다	한하다	To limit
紙數	지수	Number of pages
全體	전체	The whole, entirety
槪論的	개론적	General, introductory
若干	약간	Some, a few
考察	고찰	Consideration, study
稿	고	Manuscript, draft
暗示	암시	Hint, suggestion
包含하다	포함하다	To include, contain
大體	대체	Generally, on the whole
狀態	상태	State, condition
關心	관심	Interest
生覺하다	생각하다	To think (older spelling)
必須條件	필수조건	Essential condition
要求	요구	Demand, requirement
指導者階級	지도자계급	Leading class
以上	이상	Above, more than
有害하다	유해하다	Harmful
奢侈品	사치품	Luxury item
文字의 나라	문자의 나라	Land of letters
冷談하다	냉담하다	Indifferent, cold
異常하다	이상하다	Strange, unusual
理由	이유	Reason
平安히	평안히	Peacefully, calmly
餘裕	여유	Leisure, room, composure
民族的	민족적	National
運命	운명	Fate, destiny
急激하다	급격하다	Rapid, drastic
變遷	변천	Change, transition
政治的	정치적	Political
沒頭하다	몰두하다	To be absorbed in, engrossed in
元來	원래	Originally
環境	환경	Environment, circumstances
當然 至極하다	당연 지극하다	Perfectly natural, quite reasonable
志士的	지사적	Patriotic, like a loyalist
氣魂	기혼	Spirit, mettle
人士	인사	Personage, figure
閑人	한인	Idle person, person of leisure
無聊	무료	Boredom, ennui
慰하다	위하다	To console, comfort
餘技	여기	Side diversion, hobby
末技	말기	Minor skill, trivial art
終身의 業	종신의 업	Lifelong profession/work
副業	부업	Side job, sideline
經濟的	경제적	Economic
窮乏	궁핍	Poverty, destitution
조와 하다	좋아 하다	To like (older spelling)
如何히	여하히	However much
밧어야 하다	받아야 하다	Must receive (older spelling)
檢閱制度	검열제도	Censorship system
想像하다	상상하다	To imagine
思想	사상	Thought, ideology
大分하다	대분하다	To divide broadly
民族主義者	민족주의자	Nationalist
世界思潮	세계사조	Global trend of thought
急速	급속	Rapid
構成되다	구성되다	To be composed, constituted
興味	흥미	Interest
大衆	대중	The masses, public
期待하다	기대하다	To expect, anticipate
興	흥	Inspiration, excitement
原稿紙	원고지	Manuscript paper
向하다	향하다	To face, turn towards
看板쟁이	간판쟁이	Sign painter (-쟁이 is a suffix for artisan/person)
主人	주인	Master, owner
마음에 맛도록	마음에 맞도록	To suit the taste/mind of (older spelling)
意匠	의장	Design, device
筆法	필법	Writing style, penmanship
歷史	역사	History
普及되다	보급되다	To be disseminated, spread
人材	인재	Talented person, human resources
福이 업다	복이 없다	To be unfortunate, unlucky (older spelling)
事實	사실	Fact, truth
將來	장래	Future
適實히	적실히	Accurately, appropriately
固有	고유	Inherent, innate
人道主義	인도주의	Humanitarianism
加하다	가하다	To add
民族性	민족성	National character/trait
逃避的	도피적	Escapist
樂天主義	낙천주의	Optimism
絶望的	절망적	Despairing, hopeless
哀調	애조	Mournful tone
佛敎式	불교식	Buddhist style
達觀	달관	Philosophical resignation, broad perspective
微笑	미소	Smile
밝는 날	밝은 날	Bright day
力	력	Power, strength
光榮	광영	Glory, honor
憧憬	동경	Longing, yearning
一見	일견	At first glance
인콘파디뿔갓흐나	인컴패터블 같으나	Seems incompatible (Korean transliteration of English)
合하다	합하다	To combine, unite
古今	고금	All ages, past and present
生活過程	생활과정	Life process
附記	부기	Postscript, addendum
筆者自身	필자자신	The author himself/herself
一切	일체	Entirely, all
箇所	개소	Passage, section (Japanese reading かしょ)
改하다	개하다	To revise, change
請하다	청하다	To request
合倂後	합병후	After the annexation
大差	대차	Great difference
編輯者	편집자	Editor
添記	첨기	Addendum, supplementary note
本稿	본고	This manuscript
新文學史上	신문학사상	In the history of new/modern literature
絶大하다	절대하다	Immense, absolute
地位	지위	Position, status
全然	전연	Entirely, completely
省畧되다	생략되다	To be omitted
補充하다	보충하다	To supplement, replenish
原稿	원고	Manuscript
機會	기회	Opportunity, chance


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제6권 제7호
발행일	1934년 06월 01일
기사제목	最近朝鮮의 轉變 25年間- (文學) 朝鮮文學의 發展, 庚戍以來 二十五年間
필자	李光洙
기사형태	문예평론

最近朝鮮의 轉變 25年間- (文學) 朝鮮文學의 發展, 庚戍以來 二十五年間
						李光洙


庚戍年 以後 오늘까지 25年 사이에 朝鮮文學이 얼마나 發展되어 왓슬가 뭇는다면 作家의 數爻로 보아 外國에 比하야 아직도 적고 作品의 質에 잇서 그러케 大成한 傑作이 업스니 括目할 飛躍的 發展이라고는 할 수 업겟스나 그러나 이 25年 동안은 「靑年朝鮮」이 在來의 因襲이나 舊道德이나 녯 權威에 反抗하야 새 生活에 入하려 하는 高悶期요 生長期인 것만치 그에 따라 그 生活의 꼿인 文學도 새것을 짓기에 無限한 感激과 創造의 歷史를 거듭하여 왓든 것이다.
무릇 政治的으로 覺醒期에 잇는 一民族에게는 반드시 그에 따라 覺醒의 文學, 創造의 藝術이 잇는 法이다. 이러한 點에서 朝鮮文學은 비록 햇수로 보아 25年 사이가 결코 긴 것은 아니로되 4,000年의 歷史上 일즉 보기 드문 藝術的 活動期에 잇섯다고 보아 조곰도 過言이 아닐 것이다.
그리고 짜른 이 25年間의 文學藝術의 特徵을 擧한다면 녜전은 空想的이요 詩的 神秘的임에 反하야 이 時代의 文學은 좀더 生活的이요 現實的이요 散文的이엇다. 哀愁를 그려도 몸에 慘透하는 「哀愁」요. 苦悶을 그려도 畢民族 文學에선 發見할 수 업는 白衣人的 獨特의 「苦悶」의 姿態엿다.
이졔 最近 25年間의 文學發展의 자최를 보기 위하야 몬저 古朝鮮의 文學藝術을 一括하야 簡單히 스처보고 本論에 入코저 한다.



멀니 數百年 前에 잇서서는 新羅에 文學도 美術도 發達한 時代가 잇섯다. 헤일 수 업슬만한 戰亂과 時間의 磨減을 지낸 今日에 잇서서도 新羅의 舊都 慶州 其他에는 新羅文化의 一面을 말하는 優秀한 建築彫刻이 남어잇고 또 三國遺事 均如傳 等에는 數千篇의 當時 아름다운 詩篇이 收錄되여 잇다. 眞聖女王(1045年 前) 時代에는<68> 「三代目」이라고 하는 勅選歌集까지 잇섯다.
그러나 高麗以後 朝鮮에 漢文學이 盛하게 됨으로 本處 支那에 잇서서 칭찬을 밧게까지 된 文人 詩人을 輩出하얏스나 朝鮮語의 朝鮮文學은 전혀 돌보지 안엇다. 李朝 第4代 世宗大王때 훌륭한 한글이 發明되여 自由自在로 朝鮮語가 記하게 되고 또 大王自身 純諺文으로 「龍飛御天歌」 「月印千江之曲」 等 大敍事詩篇을 지음으로 朝鮮文學의 範을 삼게 하얏는대도 不拘하고 支那文學에 耽溺한 朝鮮人은 겨우 「時調」라는 國風詩歌 數百 篇과 小說戱曲 이약이 等 數十篇을 남겨 노앗슬 뿐으로 一民族에 相應되는 文學을 制作치 못하고 맛치엿다. 이 詩篇들은 「歌曲源流」 「靑邱永完」 「海東歌謠」 等에 收錄되여 잇다.
이 小說이라는 것은 九雲夢(漢譯 게-르博士의 英譯이 잇다. THE clond Fpeam of THE NINE 라는 標題로 런던에서 發行되여 잇다. 「春香傳」 (이것은 朝鮮人에 가장 만히 愛誦된 戀愛歌劇으로 英譯 佛譯 獨譯이 잇다. 漢譯도 잇다. 또 洪吉童傳 等이 이 代表이다. 其中에서도 春香傳은 좃튼지 납브든지 가장 잘 朝鮮人의 마음을 낫하내엿다.



그리고 現代文學의 始作은 的確히 年代順으로 말하기 困難하나 日露戰爭이 끗난 때라 할 수 잇겟다. 포스마스 日露講和條約의 結果 當時의 韓國인 朝鮮은 첫재 日本의 保護國이 되고 드듸여 明治 43年 8月 29日 日本에 倂合되엿다. 그 사히 겨우 7年 그러나 이 7餘年은 朝鮮人 마음에는 700年보다도 더한 變化을 주엇다.
이 時代에 일어난 것이 所謂 愛國歌時代이다. 그것은 愛國올 테-마로 한 叙情詩歌가 몃百 몃千인지 낫하낫슴으로 그럿타. (中畧-원본) 만은 것은 아노님과 슈도님으로 主로 寫本 또는 謄寫版으로 극히 듬올게 活字印刷로 全朝鮮을 風靡한 것이다. XX XX한 詞나 調도 中畧-이런 詩歌는 지금은 한 篇도 남어잇지 안타. 中畧-그러한 詩歌는 다시 活字로써 나올 機會를 永久히 이러버렷다. 더구나 이곳에 引用하기까지 困難하겟다.<69>
이런 類의 詩人들의 가장 질겨하는 테마는 祖國의 녯 光榮에 대한 回顧. 滿洲나 시베리아 太平洋 저쪽의 憧憬 XX라 하는 것갓흔 것이다.
이런 詩歌가 當時 人心 특히 靑年學生의 맘을 움직이는 힘은 실로 큰 것이엿다. 또 만은 志士나 靑年들은 이런 詩歌를 吟誦하면서 事實上 시베리아나 滿洲나 太平洋 저쪽에도 漂浪의 客이 된 것은 그 數로 萬을 가지고 헤알일 것이다.



이 愛國詩歌時代에 뒤를 밧든 것은, 혹은 次代의 魁가 된 것은 崔南善의 散文詩 時代이다. 崔南善은 韓國政府가 東京에 派遺한 第1回 留學生中의 한사람으로 府立一中과 早稻田大學의 文科에서 배운 사람인 바 倂合되기 前前年 愛國的 熱情에 타올나 學業을 抛棄하고 歸國하야 「少年」이라는 月刊雜誌를 發行하얏다. 그것은 明治 41年이다. 當時 그는 18의 少年이엿다. 그는 그 誌上에 만흔 散文詩를 發表하얏다. 그의 詩形은 모름직이 트르케녭흐의 散文詩에서 배운 것일 것이다. 그러나 그 內容은 全然 오리디날한 것으로 同族愛, 希望力, 自己犧牲과 갓흔 것이다. 즉 愛國歌時代의 內容을 좀더 深刻하고 複雜하고 洗鍊한 것으로 自由스런 散文詩의 그 안에 담은 것이다. 이 崔南善式 散文詩로 後年의 朝鮮의 新體詩가 나온 것이다. 約言하면 單純한 4·4調나 7·5調의 千篇一律的 愛國詩歌에 대한 不滿으로 崔南善의 散文詩가 나오고 그 散文詩의 너무나 散文的 不滿으로 좀더 整理된 좀더 拘束的인 新體詩가 나왓다.
이곳에 더 한가지 重要한 것이 잇다. 그것은 좀 뒤에 일이나 崔南善이 散文詩로부터 轉回하야 時調의 形式을 取하얏다. 數十篇의 作品을 發表하얏다. 時調는 우에서 말한 것갓치 朝鮮 古文學의 根幹이 되는 詩形이나 그 녯形式에 새로운 內容을 담운 새 文學의 形式으로써 復活식힌 것도 역시 崔南善이다.
이와 갓흔 經驗을 지내 朝鮮에 새로운 詩의 形式 新體詩와 時調와의 基礎가 싸어젓스니 이 新體詩에 잇서서는 朱耀翰
金岸曙
朴月灘
金素月
金巴人 等을 나엇스며<70> 時調에 잇서서는 崔南善 李驚山
李秉歧
鄭寅普 等을 나엇다.
朱耀翰은 一高에 배운 적도 잇고 川路流虹에게 칭찬도 밧엇든 사람으로 「아름다운 새벽」 「봉사꼿」 等 詩集를 내엇다. 그는 크스찬으로 職業은 新聞記者이나 그 머리 明哲, 感情의 銳敏 良心의 맑음을 가진 것을 特色으로 하고 그의 詩는 극히 明朗하며 속일 수 업는 젊은 朝鮮의 마음의 노래다.
金岸曙는 慶大의 사람 大正 9年頃 「懊惱의 舞踏」라는 譯詩集을 내여 朝鮮文壇에 뽀트레-르 뻬르레-느 等의 詩風을 紹介한 功績이 잇고 또 그 自身의 叙情詩나 아름다운 文章은 一時만히 愛讀된 詩人으로 朝鮮新詩壇 創設者의 한사람이다.
朴月灘은 「黑房秘曲」이라는 詩集을 내고 金素月은 진달내꼿이라는 詩集을 내엿다. 두 사람 다-10年來 一切 沈黙을 직히고 잇스나 金素月의 民謠風의 哀調을 띄운 詩는 실노 朝鮮에 잇서 民謠詩나 童謠의 魁이며 模範도 되엿슴으로 지금까지도 生命을 일치 안는다.
그리고 金巴人이다. 그는 大正 8年의 XX運動以來 全朝鮮의 靑年을 風靡하든 데카단風潮나 「惡의 華」式 詩歌에 대하야 굵고 힘세게 反抗의 소리를 놉히 질은 詩人으로 그 「國境의 밤」이라는 詩集은 朝鮮文壇에 크다란 波紋을 그리엇다. 굵은 線 野生的 힘 反抗-이런 것은 그 精神이나 手法을 지금까지의 耽美派 藝術至上派的 傾向에 대하야 어느 意味로서는 崔南善  以前 愛國歌時代에의 廻前이라고 할 수 잇스며 또는 뒤에 푸로詩의 先驅가 되엿다고 할 수 잇는 것이다.
梁柱東은 「朝鮮의 脈膊」이라는 詩集을 내여 民族愛를 高潮하고 잇다.
그리고 時調의 이야기나 時調에 잇서서는 崔南善의 「百八煩惱」와 李驚山의 「驚山詩集」과 또 李秉歧 鄭寅普의 作 어느 것도 다 愛國詩歌時代의 올소독스라고 볼만한 어느 것이나 檢閱官에 許할만한 程度에 잇서서 「民族」을 中心思想으로 하고 잇다. 특히 驚山의 詩는 現代時調의 피라밋트라고 할 수 잇다.<71>



그리고 다음은 小說이다. 小說은 그 量에 잇서서나 質에 잇서서 또는 讀者의 範圍의 廣汎한데 잇서서 今日의 朝鮮文壇에 잇서서는 主人이라 해도 좃타. 事實上 4,5年來 新體詩는 몃 사람의 새 作家를 나은 外에는 거진 자최가 업다. 다만 時調만히 李驚山 李秉歧 外 數人에 의하야 進境을 보히고 잇다. 그러나 時調는 日本에 잇서 和歌와 갓치 文藝的으로 訓練된 階級만히 賞觀하는 것이다. 一般大衆에 먹일만한 性質의 것이 아니다. 大衆의 食物은 엇제든지 小說이다.
朝鮮에 歐米風의 形式의 小說이 일기 始作한 것은 지금으로 30年 以前에 李人植이라는 이의 「血淚」나 「鬼의 聲」 等의 作品이다. 그는 純粹의 朝鮮語로 現代의 朝鮮生活을 그린 것이나 단 現代的 思想의 背景이 根據를 가지지 못하얏다. 그럼으로 그의 作은 後年 新文學運動과는 何等 有機的 關係를 갓지 못하얏다.
참으로 새로운 民族意識이나 歐米思想에 覺醒된 小說의 낫하난 것은 歐米大戰이 한참 버러질 大正 5年頃이다.
當時 朝鮮 唯一의 朝鮮文新聞인 每日申報 崔南善의 「靑春」 東京學生들이 發行하든 「學之光」 其他雜誌 그리고 XX運動이 일어나 寺內武斷政治로부터 齋藤實大將의 所謂 文化政治가 잇게 되여 2,3의 日刊新聞과 十數個의 月刊雜誌가 發行하게 됨으로부터 새 文學運動은 他部門의 文化運動과 갓치 蔚然히 일어낫다. 우에 말한 詩人들도 대개 이때 나왓다.
이때에 小說에 잇서서는 金東仁
玄憑虛
廉想涉
羅稻香 等이 나왓다. 그들은 벌서 民族意識에 拘泥되지 안코 當時 世界的 潮流인 人生主義에 基本인 因襲에 대한 反抗戀愛中心의 感情의 解放 現實의 暴露 그리고 朝鮮의 現實에 대하야 XX XX XX 等를 加味한 것이다.
이 小說家들은 모두다 東京 留學生으로 大戰前後의 日本의 思想이 文藝에 影響된 것이 만타. 所謂 大震災前의 靡爛된 思想에 影響된 것이 만타.
그러나 이때에 新文藝甘味에 醉한 靑年들은 文藝에로 한때도 文藝가 아니면 밤도 낫도 새이지 못하는 狀態이엿다.<72>
金東仁은 이들 作家 中에서는 가장 優越한 手腕을 가진 作家다. 그는 만히 短篇을 쓴다. 그러나 「감자」 「발고락이 달멋다」 等은 가장 조흔 것이라고 하고 「감자」는 數年 前 新潮에 譯載되엿든 일도 잇다. 이 作者는 觀察이 奇警하며 위잇트와 유-모아에 豐富하고 因襲이나 道德이나 世評이나 그런 것에 關心치 안는 自由自在로 自己가 생각한 대로 써서 讀者의 머리를 엇질하게 한다.
玄憑虛는 「지새는 안개」라는 短篇集을 내엿는데 그의 作은 어느 것이나 실로 잘 均整된 常識에 富한 아담한 筆致로 특히 그 文章은 아름다웁다고 말들을 한다.
廉想涉은 주로 長篇作家이나 그의 作은 엇더케도 澁하며 純*하며 深刻한 늣김을 준다. 그 텁텁한 點까지도 떠스트엡스키式이라고 할 수 잇다. 그의 作은 「標本室의 靑蛙」 「萬歲前」 「해바라기」 「三代」 等이다. 지금도 作家的 生活을 繼續하고 잇서 푸로派에서는 民族主義文學의 大將으로 불은다.
羅稻香은 젊어서 죽엇다. 그의 「幻戱」 「벙어리 三龍이」는 그의 일홈을 永久히 朝鮮文學史上에서 머물게 한다. 특히 「벙어리 三龍이」는 가장 조흔 作으로 例로써 引用되며 映畵化되여 잇다. 그는 로맨티시즘의 傾向이 잇섯다.
그러나 이 作家들에게는 지금 말하는 것 갓흔 指導的 思想은 업섯다. 어느 쪽이냐 하면 藝術을 위한 藝術과 갓흔 耽美派的 데카단的 傾向이 잇서 人生에 대한 깁흔 洞察이나 高遠한 理想이라는 것 갓흔 論理的 乃至 社會的 要素가 缺하엿다. 언제든지 遊戱的이엿섯다는 것을 免할 수 업다. 이것은 詩壇에 대하야서도 同一하다.
이때에 나온 詩에 잇서서 우에서 말한 金巴人의 「國境의 밤」이고 小說에 잇서서는 崔曙海의 「脫出記」이다. 이런 作品과 前後하야 朴英熙
金基鎭 兩人의 푸로文學의 狼火가 잇섯다.
崔曙海는 小學校를 맛친 것 뿐으로 혹은 荷揚人夫도 되고 혹은 樵夫도 되며 혹은 滿洲에 放浪하며 혹은 중도 되엿든 사람으로 그 「脫出記」는 自身을 모델한 것일<73> 것이다. 間島에 잇서서 XX運動者들의 生活의 一片을 그린 것이 「脫出記」이나 그의 健實한 품 强力的인 품 線의 굵은 것은 꼬리키의 作品에서 밧는 것 갓흔 엇던 압력을 밧는 것이다. 世紀末的 變愛物的 文學에 빠젓든 靑年들은 이 「脫出記」에 잇서서 文學의 새로운 感激을 바덧슴에 틀님 업섯다. 文學은 결코 遊戱가 아니다. 그것은 피로 記錄한 人間의 惡戰苦鬪의 記錄이 아니면 안된다라는 新文學觀을 젊은 靑年에게 가슴 깁히 삭이여 주엇슬 것이다.



羅稻香 죽고 玄憑虛는 小說의 붓을 던지고 지금까지 小說을 쓰고 잇는 사람은 人生派라는 金東仁 民族主義派라고 부르는 廉想涉 그리고 準푸로派라 할 만한 崔曙海뿐이고 其外는 尹白南
崔獨鵑 等의 大衆作家들을 除하고는 當時 作家로 生命을 保存하고 잇는 사람은 업다.
그러면 新興의 푸로文學이다. 압헤서도 잠간 言及한 것 갓치 朴英熙 金基鎭 等은 雜誌 「開闢」을 牙城으로 안리 빠르삐스의 紹介로 始作되여 맑쓰主義의 文學理論을 紹介하며 作品도 내고 기성文壇 기성作家들을 뿌르조아 文士라고 하야 罵倒도 하며 큰 氣勢를 보혓다. 新進의 崔曙海도 그 陣營에 迎入되며 다음으로 趙明熙는 詩로써 李箕永은 小說로써 푸로陣營의 攻防力을 세웟다. 이들로 日本 푸로作家들의 作品도 多少 紹介되엿다.
푸로文學은 꼭 公式에 의한 것으로 說明할 必要를 認치 안는다. 이것이 如何히 朝鮮靑年間에 熱狂的으로 歡迎되엿다 한 것은 실로 驚異 그것이다. 푸로文學의 機關紙然이든 開闢은 놀날만한 發行部數가 增加되고 그것으로 말미아마 드듸여 當局으로 發行을 禁止 當하얏다. 開闢雜誌가 發行禁止된 后로 푸로派의 文士들은 日刊新聞의 文藝欄에 의하얏스나 그것도 버릴 수 업섯든 것이다. 그리고 最後의 堅壘인 雜誌 「朝鮮之光」도 지금(畧) 去勢되여 잇다. 繼續 發行도 不能狀態인 것 갓다.
푸로文藝同盟 캅푸詩人同盟 等 (記者-이 두 가지는 「朝鮮」 푸로藝術同盟의 錯誤인 듯) 이 잇스나 푸로文學은 그리 큰 文學的 收獲 (主義的 收獲은 잇섯는지 몰으나)이 업시 停滯狀態에 잇다. 그러나 이 停滯는 반다시 檢閱의 XXX 뿐이라고<74> 할 수 업다. 作家自身의 力量과 努力과 또 그들이 把持하고 잇는 文學理論의 너무나 狹溢한 目的論的이엇는 대도 責任이 잇다 할 것이다. 이것은 저 日本의 푸로文學에 잇서서도 갓흘 것이다. 朝鮮푸로文學運動은 「文藝戰線」 「戰旗」 等의 一分派에 不過하엿슴으로-
그러나 푸로文學運動이 朝鮮의 文學에 밧친 貢獻 그 剌戟 그 이데오로기-의 影響은 不滅할 것이다. 今後의 文學은 어는 意味에 잇서서는 푸로文學의 理論 瀘過器를 透하야 造成될 것이다. 이 意味에 잇서서 朝鮮의 푸로文學은 벌서 그 役割을 遂成하얏다고 할 것이다.



却銳 限한 紙數도 벌서 다 되엿다. 朝鮮文學全體에 대하야 槪論的 若干의 考察을 하고 이 稿를 맛치기로 하자. 그것은 혹은 朝鮮文學의 今後의 傾向에 대하야의 多少 暗示를 包含하얏는지도 몰은다.
大體 朝鮮民族은 적어도 今日의 狀態로는 文學에 그다지 關心을 갓게 못될 것이라고 生覺한다. 그들에게는 文學이나 藝術 等은 잇서도 업서도 조흔 程度의 것으로 그것이 生活의 必須條件으로는 되지 안엇다. 가장 文學을 조와 할 靑年學生들까지 文學이나 藝術에 대하야 그다지 要求를 갓지 안은 것 갓다. 하물며 現社會 各部門의 指導者階級에서 잇는 40歲 以上의 사람에게는 文學은 一種의 有害한 사치品에 不過하다.
文字의 나라라는 朝鮮에 잇서 이만큼이나 文學에 冷談하다고 하는 것은 좀 異常한 늣김을 늣길 것이로대 그것에는 理由가 잇다.
第一 朝鮮에는 이 30年來 平安히 文學이나 藝術을 맛불만한 그러한 餘裕를 갓치 못하얏섯다. 그들은 그들의 民族的 運命의 急激한 變遷에 대하야 너무나 政治的 관심에 몰두하지 안으면 안되엿다. 원래 朝鮮人은 정치적이라고 하나 그러치 못하고 그러한 環境에 잇게 된 그들노써는 깁흔 政治的 關心을 갓흔 것은 當然 至極한 일일 것이다.
이러한 狀態임으로 志士的 氣魂을 가진 人士들에 대하야서는 文學갓흔 것은 閑人의 일이나 無聊를 慰하기 위한 餘技 末技다. 그럼으로 아직 文藝를 가지고 終身의 業으로 生覺하는 사람은 업다. 文學은 一種의 손쉬운 副業에 不過하다.
다음에 朝鮮人의 生活의 經濟的 窮乏은 해를 따러 날을 따러 窮乏하야 진다.
文學이나 藝術를 조와 할 마음의 餘裕도 또는 經濟的 餘裕도 업다. 雜誌 一冊 小說 一冊도 살 돈이 업스며 살 힘이 나지도 안는다. 이러한 狀態임으로 詩人이나 文士가 如何히 作品을 지여도 살 사람이 업다. 그것으로 먹을 수 업게 된다. 살녀며는 金融組合 面所의 書記라도 되여 20圓 30圓의 月給이라도 밧어야 한다.
第三에 朝鮮의 檢閱制度이다. 이것은 朝鮮人이 되어 보지<75> 못하면 참으로 想像도 안된다. 今日 朝鮮人의 思想을 大分하면 民族主義者 XX主義者들노 논을 수 잇다. 가장 갓가운 近來에는 世界思潮인 파시씀에 剌戟되여 兩者를 合하얏다 할 民族社會主義갓흔 이데오로기-가 急速한 텐포로 構成되여 잇스나 이것을 合하면 三種이다. 그럼으로 作家가 가장 興味를 갓고 大衆이 가장 期待하고 잇는 것은 이 三種者의 이데오로기-에 오는 (中畧) 完全히 -되여 잇다. 作家는 엇던 興을 어든 뒤 폔을 들어 原稿紙에 向하면 첫재 낫하나는 것은 (中畧) 잇는 것은 아니다. 한 感作家에게 대하야는 X과 原稿의 잇는 곳 어느 곳에서든지 그의 (畧)을 늣긴다. 그곳에서 第一의 感興도 第二의 感興도 사라저 버리고 (畧) 테-마를 차저 맛치 看板쟁이가 그 主人의 마음에 맛도록 意匠을 하드시 (畧) 筆法으로 쓰지 안으면 안된다. 今日의 朝鮮人이 쓴 文學은 이리하야 된 것이다.
또 最後에 新文學의 歷史의 짤븐 것도 他 部門의 文化 특히 敎育의 普及되지 아는 것도 또한 人材가 나오지 안는 것도 理由는 된다. 어느 便이든지 朝鮮의 今日은 文學에 잇서서 福이 업는 것은 事實이다.
然이나 朝鮮文學의 將來는 엇더한 것인가. 그것은 民族主義的일 것이다. 혹 더 適實히 民族社會主義的일 것이다. 그것은 朝鮮人 固有의 人道主義思想를 加한 더-그 民族性인 逃避的 樂天主義나 絶望的 哀調속에 佛敎式 達觀의 微笑를 석근 것이다. 밝는 날의 力과 光榮에 대한 憧憬과 逃避的 絶望的 達觀哀調와 微笑 이것은 一見 인콘파디뿔갓흐나 이것들을 合한 것이 실로 古今을 싸고 돈 朝鮮文學의 特徵이다. 그것은 오래 동안의 歷史的 民族的 生活過程의 影響인지 몰은다.
附記 朝鮮文學에 대한 筆者自身의 役割은 一切 쓰지 안키로 하얏스며 또 本稿는 年前 雜誌 「改造」에 낫든데서 그냥 引用한 箇所가 만헛다. 그것은 다시 稿를 改할 틈이 업섯슴도 一理由이겟지만 今에 三千里社에서 請하는 合倂後 25年間 文學이 또한 「改造」에 發表한 그 意味와 大差업섯든 까닭이다.

三千里 編輯者 添記
本稿에는 朝鮮 新文學史上 絶大한 貢獻을 한 筆者 李光洙氏의 地位가 全然 省畧되엿슴으로 春園에 대한 稿를 補充하는 새로운 原稿를 다른 機會에 실켓슴니다.<76>
<68-76>