Magazine Title: 개벽 제19호
Publication Date: 1922년 01월 10일
Article Title: 海東의 后稷===文益漸先生, 十大偉人 紹介의 其 六 (Hou Ji of Haedong===Master Mun Ikchŏm, Introduction to Ten Great Figures, Part Six)
Author: Not Specified
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/Essay)

Hou Ji of Haedong===Master Mun Ikchŏm, Introduction to Ten Great Figures, Part Six
The Master's Life, Woven with Worry and Tears

The Master's first name was Ikcham (益瞻), his courtesy name was Ilsin (日新), and his style name was Samu Tang (三憂堂). He was born 592 years ago from today, on the 8th day of the 2nd month of the Sinmi year, the first year of King Ch'ungsuk's restoration in Koryŏ, in Kangsong County, Chinju. The Master had a benevolent, detailed, upright, and rigid character. From childhood, his filial piety was extreme, and he never neglected his duty of visiting his parents morning and evening, even in severe cold, scorching heat, or rain. At age 8, he entered school; at 12, he went to Yi Kajŏng's (李稼亭) place and studied together with his son Mogŭn (牧隱) (Saek, 穡); at 16, he performed the marriage ceremony; at 20, by the recommendation of his hometown, he entered the Kyŏngdŏkchae (經德齎) of the National Academy (國學); at 30, he passed the state examination in the same cohort as Chŏng P'oŭn Mongju (鄭圃隱夢周). From this time, the Master became considerably known in the world for his conduct and literary works.

From then on, the Master threw himself into the sea of officialdom. Starting as a Chikkan (直講) in the Yemungwan (藝文舘), he was successively promoted, and in the 12th year of King Kongmin (恭愍王), the Kye'myo year (癸卯) (age 33), he rose to Chwa Chŏng'ŏn (左正言) in the Saganwŏn (司諫院). Because he clearly stated the merits and demerits of the royal court, he earned the reputation of being diligent in his duties. In the same year, he was again sent as an envoy to Yuan (元) China. Regarding the Tŏkhŭng Kun (德興君) incident at that time, he repeatedly received threats from the Yuan ruler (Emperor Shunzong, 成宗), but between life and death, he was able to fulfill the duty of a subject with uprightness and inflexibility. (Detailed elsewhere) Due to this, the Master was again imprisoned and banished. After fully 3 years had passed, in the 9th month of the Pyŏngo year (丙午), he was pardoned and returned from his place of exile, Kyoji (交趾 - Cochinchina/Vietnam). In the 2nd month of the following Chŏngmi year (丁未), he returned to his country. At that time, all scholars praised the Master's loyal integrity. In the winter of that year, he went to court as an academic official of the Sŏnggyun'gwan (成均館). The following year, he became Sasŏng (司成) of the Sŏnggyun'gwan. When lecturing on scholarly principles, he thoroughly investigated the subtle and profound, leaving no principle unaddressed. The Tae Sasŏng (大司成) of the time, Yi Mogŭn (李牧隱), admired the penetrating power of his research and said it was fitting to esteem him as the patriarch of Eastern Neo-Confucianism (東方理學). <94> At age 39, he resigned from office due to his father's death. At 43, he was appointed Tae Sasŏng, but did not take office due to illness. Later, at 45, he went to court as Chehak (提學) of the Umun'gwan (右文舘), but after submitting a memorial with Chŏng P'oŭn and two others to expel the Yuan envoy, which failed, he was demoted to Magistrate of Ch'ŏngdo County (淸道郡事). From age 49, he claimed illness and did not serve. At that time, during the reign of King U (王禑) at the end of Koryŏ, wicked officials usurped authority, and Buddhist monks and nuns ran rampant, the general situation already having gone wrong. The Master, perceiving his own powerlessness to save the times, directed his will towards saving the world (society) and thus hid himself.

From then on, the Master closed his door, sat deeply within, and did not inquire about external affairs. Calling himself Saŭn (思隱 - Thinking Hermit), he solely lectured on the books of Chŏng-Chu (程朱 - Cheng Yi, Cheng Hao, and Zhu Xi) and considered teaching later scholars as his duty. In the autumn of his 53rd year, he built a thatched cottage of several bays east of the county, below Chiphyŏn Mountain (集賢山). He hung a plaque reading "Samu" (三憂 - Three Worries) and called himself Samu Kŏsa (三憂居士 - Layman of the Three Worries). These were supposedly: (1) Worrying about the kingdom's lack of vitality, (2) Worrying about the Holy Learning (聖學 - Neo-Confucianism) not being transmitted, and (3) Worrying about his own Way (道) not being established. From this, one can sufficiently infer the Master's state of mind. At age 58 (first year of King Ch'ang's reign), responding reluctantly to a summons from the court, he went and discussed the Way of learning. Later, in the Kyŏngo year (庚午) (age 60), he again submitted a sealed memorial, presenting Eight Articles on Current Affairs (時務八條). In the 11th month of the same year, he requested retirement and returned to his hometown. At age 62, in the Imsin year (壬申), when the ancestral rites of the home country, Koryŏ (高麗), were discontinued (due to the founding of Chosŏn), the Master finally closed his door and withdrew from the world.

The Eight Articles on Current Affairs are: (1) Build academies in districts, establish local schools (鄕校) in towns to promote customs and education. (2) Establish shrines and set up ancestral tablets to rectify the rites of mourning and sacrifice. (3) Reform barbarian clothing to follow the Chinese system. (4) Rectify discipline and rules to establish the national structure. (5) Weed out redundant and idle officials to promote the talented and good. (6) Lighten taxes and levies to please the people's hearts. (7) Establish righteous granaries (義倉) to relieve the destitute. (8) Set up water transport stations (水站) to facilitate grain transport (漕運).

Prior to this, from the Kyŏngsin year (庚申年) (7th year of King U), the Master was melancholic and unhappy. Even if his children and disciples welcomed guests every time and did their utmost to entertain, his sorrow was not relieved. If someone asked the reason, he would just say, "Observing the celestial phenomena at night and examining human affairs by day, how could there be no worries?" and tears would stream down profusely. When he heard of Chŏng P'oŭn's death, he repeatedly cried, "Heaven is destroying [us]! Heaven is destroying [us]! What can be done? What can be done?" He then took to his mat, neglecting to get up or sit down. When the national ancestral rites were finally discontinued, he wailed incessantly for several days. He secluded himself deeply behind closed doors and did not go outside, nor did he receive guests, for a total of 9 years until he departed the world.

When Yi T'aejo (李太祖) ascended the throne, he summoned him repeatedly, but he did not rise. On the 8th day of the 2nd month of the Kyŏngjin year (庚辰), the 2nd year of King Chŏngjong (定宗), he departed this world, his age being 70. At the time, the king ordered a state funeral (禮葬), granted memorial land (祭田), and built a tomb shrine (墓祠). Later, King Sejong (世宗) posthumously awarded him the title of Chief State Councilor (領議政) and treated his descendants <95> with kindness and compassion. Later generations also built Confucian academies (書院) in several locations to hold rites for the Master's spirit.

Chosŏn's Cotton and the Master

1.  Originally No Cotton in the East
    Today in Chosŏn, there is likely no one who does not know cotton, and no one who does not benefit from cotton. Those who wrap themselves in silk clothes or wear Western clothes might think they do not benefit from cotton, but no matter how much one wears only silk, the "padding" (솜) inside those clothes is surely a gift of cotton. Also, no matter how much one wears Western clothes, the inside of the bedding (衾具) they cover themselves with surely contains cotton padding (綿絮). In fact, recently, there is some tendency to become somewhat less connected to cotton, but for us several decades ago, it was thought that besides cotton textiles, there were almost no other textiles. That is, silks like nŭng, ra, ch'u, and tan (綾羅綢緞) were not commonly used as they are today; although textiles from silkworm silk (蠶絲) existed, they were not for everyday use; ramie cloth (苧布) could only be worn outside of the summer season, so naturally, cotton textiles became commonly used.

    In this way, cotton, which was generally worn and is the material for the cotton textiles currently worn, did not even have its species name in Chosŏn before 556 years ago from today. Not only in Chosŏn, but it also did not exist throughout China. People only had hemp cloth (麻布) and cocoon silk (繭絲) to cover their bodies and protect themselves from heat and cold. Therefore, at that time, the wealthy might have indulged in extreme luxury within their fine clothes, but the poor must have frozen and shivered in hemp clothes even in the severe cold of winter snow. Otherwise, they might have barely preserved their lives by wearing skins (皮) and learning from beasts (獸).

    Cotton, speaking from today's botanical perspective, is a type of plant in the Malvaceae family (葵科植物) that grows in warm regions (暖地). It was once produced in places like Wŏllam (越南 - Vietnam) and Kyoji (交趾), where the locals wove cloth from it, calling it Kilbae (吉貝). It is said that when woven, it naturally forms a shell pattern (貝文). What is called "Southern barbarians, their baskets contained woven shell patterns" (南夷, 厥篚, 織貝) in the Tribute of Yu (禹貢) also refers to this. In China, its propagation began with Hwang Si (黃始), a man from Guangzhou who went to the southern countries as an envoy (蕃使) at the end of the Song dynasty. Only upon entering the Yuan dynasty was its use finally understood. In our Chosŏn, it was first spread through the propagation efforts of Mun Ikchŏm of Chinju, the protagonist of this article, Master Mun, at the end of the Koryŏ dynasty. <96>

2.  The Story of Cotton Transplantation
    This happened in the 9th month of the Pyŏngo year (丙午) (15th year of King Kongmin), when the Master, having obtained the understanding of the Yuan Emperor, was pardoned and returned from his place of exile, Kyoji. At this time, as the Master received the farewells of the locals upon leaving the border and headed towards Yanjing (燕京 - Beijing), he suddenly saw something "with flowers like snow" in the fields. Feeling it was very strange in his heart, he had his attendant Kim Yong (金龍) pick it. Then, an old woman (老嫗) came chasing after them with a stern voice (勵聲), saying, "What country are you from that you dare to take away this forbidden item (禁物)? If the officials find out, both you and I will be punished. Return it quickly!" Her manner was very stern, but suddenly seeing the Master's dignified appearance, the old woman restrained herself and said, "This is called cotton flower (木棉花). My country's prohibition is very strict, and exporting it to other countries is not allowed. If you truly desire it, hide it secretly (秘藏) so that it is not found during searches (搜索)." The Master then put several seeds into his brush handle tube (筆管) and returned. This is the path through which cotton was introduced to Chosŏn.

    In the spring of the following Chŏngmi year (丁未), he planted the cotton seeds on the flower terrace (花階). Not knowing what kind of soil was suitable, he preemptively chose both dry and moist places, planted them, and cultivated them in a hundred ways. However, still not fully understanding the technique, they would initially grow but later wither and die. In the first year, he barely managed to keep one plant alive to pass on its seeds. After doing this for a total of 3 years, the seeds proliferated (蕃衍), and people from near and far came to admire them. They competed to propagate them, and suddenly, from one village, it spread throughout almost the entire country. However, people still did not know how to utilize it, merely removing the seeds (核) by hand for miscellaneous uses. Coincidentally, a Yuan monk named Chiang (蔣) was traveling through the Eastern Country (Korea). Seeing the proliferation of cotton flowers, he thought it strange that a product of the Southern Country was planted everywhere here. He ended up staying at the house of the Master's maternal uncle, Chŏng Ch'ŏnik (鄭天益), and built a seed-removing machine (去核車) (today's cotton gin - 트리개), teaching the method of making cotton. This opened the way for utilization. Later, the Master's grandson Mun Nae (文萊) built a reeling machine (繅絲車) to draw thread, and Mun Yŏng (文英) devised the method of weaving, thus roughly completing its application. Later generations called the machine 'Munnae' (문내) and the finished woven fabric 'Mun'yŏng' (문영), which eventually became words in the national language (國語).

    Furthermore, the Master's eldest grandson, Sŭngno (承魯), became the magistrate of Ŭisŏng County (義城郡守). He separately bought a plot of land to teach the method of planting and cultivation (種耘) and had the subordinate officials (屬官) continue cultivating that field. It is said that Ŭisŏng cotton is famous even today. <97>

3.  Cotton Transplantation and Its Influence
    As briefly mentioned in the previous section, cotton originally did not exist in the East; there were only mulberry (桑) and hemp (麻). Regarding clothing, the rich and noble used ramie, kudzu cloth, and silk, padded (絮) with fur (毛毳), while the poor generally used hide clothing (被服). The suffering they actually received from their livelihood was indeed great. Of course, their outward appearance (外樣) was very inconsistent and also coarse (麤粗). Consequently, the class distinctions arising from material culture were severe. Due to the severity of this class division, the gap between the upper and lower, noble and common, became extremely wide. Because of this alienation, the elite class flowed daily towards degeneracy (渝薄), while the commoner class became increasingly ignorant (貿貿), truly not knowing how to remedy the situation. Then, as cotton came into general use, from high officials and scholars to the poor people in deep mountains, it brought about a renewal of clothing, caps, and material culture (衣冠文物). Through this renewal of clothing, caps, and material culture, the opportunity for interaction (相交) among the various classes—scholars and commoners, rich and poor—was first created. Its influence, in turn, greatly contributed to the promotion (促進) of general culture.

4.  The Master's Position in the Chosŏn Industrial World
    Regarding the Master's introduction of cotton planting, one could say much like this: That the introduction of cotton planting brought absolute benefit (利澤) to the lives of our Chosŏn people and had an immense (莫大) influence on the culture of Chosŏn people is an undeniable fact. However, this is ultimately just a fact manifested as a result. As for the motive (動機), it was nothing more than the activation (發動) of temporary curiosity, and thus it cannot be considered so great—furthermore, one might say that based on this, one cannot determine the Master's position in Chosŏn industry.

    However, the reporter does not want to speak so easily. The reporter first wants to believe, judging from the Master's character, that the acquisition of cotton seeds did not stem merely from temporary curiosity, but from a great heart concerned for the utilization and welfare of the general populace and from his meticulous (緻密) observation. That is, the Master's nature was extremely considerate (仔詳) and meticulous. As manifestations of his nature, from childhood, when studying, he lectured on principles; when investigating things (格物), he sought knowledge; when observing the ways of the world and human minds, he devised countermeasures. Moreover, seeing that among the Eight Articles on Current Affairs presented in the sealed memorial of the Kyŏngo year, the two articles "Establish righteous granaries to relieve the destitute" and "Set up water transport stations to facilitate grain transport" were included, one can imagine how much the Master, even in his daily life, thought (念) of the people's utilization and welfare. How could the introduction of cotton planting have stemmed merely from temporary curiosity? <98>

    Furthermore, if one wishes to speak of the Master's position in industry, one cannot help but observe it through the accomplishments of his descendants, his later embodiments. Contemplating matters such as teaching cultivation methods, creating reeling machines, or devising cotton weaving methods, one can say that the Master's contribution (寄與) to the Chosŏn industrial world was truly great, and his position truly important. How much more so when considering the renewal of a nation's material culture and the promotion of harmonization (融化) between classes, leading unknowingly to the improvement (向上) of general culture!

    The reporter feels something deeply in his heart while drafting this section. That is, due to the recent changes in our national situation (國情) and the great opening of global transportation, the number of our brothers entering and leaving foreign lands is large, and the regions they visit are extremely wide-ranging (廣範), not comparable to traveling to Kyoji or Wŏllam in the past. The things they see and hear are incomparable to the ancient times (古昔) of 500 years ago. However, brothers! You! For the utilization and welfare of the homeland, what have you seen and heard? What have you brought back? Is it not you who, apart from dragging back hats, clothes, and outer shells (껍덕이), have not properly brought back even one type of fragrant (香氣로운) flower seed? Brothers entering and leaving foreign lands! Brothers residing in foreign lands! Even in moments of haste and difficulty (造次顚沛), do not forget to think and worry (用慮) for the homeland. If you cannot even do that, then hear the Master's example, hold a cotton towel, and let there be a self-resolution from your conscience.

The Master's Loyalty, Which Cannot Be Seen As It Is

Regarding the Master's loyalty and integrity (忠節), I will briefly write as follows.
This concerns the reign of King Kongmin. The nature of official relations (官契) between Koryŏ and Yuan after the mid-reign is generally understood (槪認). At this time, the Yuan Empress Ki (奇氏) resented (怨) King Kongmin's handling of Ki Ch'ŏl (奇轍) and his faction and was watching for an opportunity for revenge (報仇). Coincidentally, Tŏkhŭng Kun Hye (德興君 媤), an illegitimate son (庶子) of King Ch'ungsŏn (忠宣王), fled (奔入) to Yuan, changed his name to T'apsat'emur (塔思帖木兒), and joined forces with Ch'oe Yu (崔濡) and others who had come from the home country, harboring treacherous plans. The Empress, gauging this, immediately slandered (讒誣) King Kongmin to the Yuan ruler, arranging to depose him and install Tŏkhŭng Kun. From then on, not a single envoy entering Yuan from the home country returned east. Internal and external communication was obstructed (阻絶), and the situation was difficult to fathom (回測). Furthermore, when border reports (邊報) arrived from the northwest stating that Yuan was installing T'apsat'emur as King of Koryŏ, the entire court was filled with suspicion and fear (滿朝疑懼). It was decided that the best strategy was to dispatch an envoy capable of handling the situation (該事可堪) to resolve the crisis, and the Master became that envoy. <99>

Thus, the Master entered Yuan in the 12th year of King Kongmin, Kye'myo (癸卯). The Yuan ruler, also following precedent, detained (抑留) the Master with the rank of Vice Minister of Rites (禮部侍郞).

At this time, the plot of Tŏkhŭng Kun and Ch'oe Yu was already ripe (已熟). They determined their plan with the Yuan ruler and, directly through an imperial edict (詔) from the Yuan ruler, confiscated the seal (印章) of the King of Koryŏ, made Tŏkhŭng Kun king, and appointed Ch'oe Yu as Left State Councilor (左政丞), having all Koryŏ people residing in Yuan sign their names (署名) to these illegitimate positions (僞官). Among them, the Master alone refused (不肯). The Yuan ruler summoned the Master and confronted (臨) him with authority (威), saying:
"Your king has misgoverned (失政), and the people have fallen into mire and embers (塗炭). I am now carrying out a deposition and installation. What is your opinion?"
The Master immediately replied (應聲):
"There are not two suns in the sky, nor two rulers on earth."
The Yuan ruler angrily said:
"The edict has already been proclaimed. Do you dare to disobey (拒逆)?"
He then immediately imprisoned (拘囚) the Master in Tŏkhŭng Kun's side room for 42 days. At this time, the Yuan ruler, thinking that the Master could be persuaded (諭) by reason but not made to submit (屈) by force, temporarily released him from confinement. However, having already made Tŏkhŭng Kun king and dispatched the Yoyang (遼陽) troops, he could not just let things drift (因循). So he again summoned and persuaded (召諭) the Master, saying:
"Your king lacks principle (無度), so I have already deposed him. Why do you talk so much?"
The Master replied:
"Even the words of a madman (狂夫), the sage selects (擇). I, a newcomer from a foreign land, have suddenly trod upon (踐) the court of the Son of Heaven. Even if Your Majesty (陛下) were to relax your sternness and grant a kind face (霽威賜顔) to listen, I would still not dare to shrink back. How much more so when pressed with the unexpected force of thunder (雷霆)? Your Majesty has listened too readily (過聽) to the words of slanderers (讒人) and seeks to depose an innocent (無辜) ruler. If I cannot now state the true situation (情實) and obtain Your Majesty's understanding and approval (允諒), I will harbor resentment and endure pain (舍怨忍痛) to the extreme, not knowing even where I might die. I wish Your Majesty would not spare the head of one slandering traitor (讒賊) and thereby incur the ridicule (譏) of the world and later generations."
At this, the Yuan ruler composed his expression (歛容) and said:
"Your words are indeed (固) loyal, but my decision is already made. What can be done? You should say no more." <100>
The Master replied:
"Even the will of a common man (匹夫), no one can dare to seize (奪). Even if I were to submit, the number of those in my home country who share my will is not just hundreds or thousands. If they should once defy the order, even if Your Majesty wished to rest peacefully, would it be possible?"
The ruler, suddenly changing expression in anger (勃然作色), said: "How dare (敢) you be like this!" He then gave an order (號令) to forcefully press the edict into the Master's hand. The Master, touching the ground with his hand, said:
"The righteousness between ruler and subject—its distinction is like that of Heaven and Earth. To turn one's back on one's ruler and follow a traitor is a great evil in Heaven and Earth. Even if I die, I cannot receive this edict."
The ruler, greatly angered, said:
"You, a petty official of a vassal state (藩國小臣), do not obey (不遵) my command! Even if you wish to live, how could you?"
The Master, in a forceful voice (勵聲), said:
"Righteousness dictates not serving two masters—this is the warning of the ancients. In the past, King Wu (武王) was a sage, and T'aegong (太公) was a worthy man. Yet when they were about to attack the despot Zhou (獨夫紂), Paegisukche (伯夷叔齊) stopped their horses and remonstrated (叩馬而諫). Later generations praised their loyal integrity. Now, my king has committed no great evil like King Zhou of Shang (商紂). Yet Your Majesty, solely deluded by the words of rebels and traitors, wrongfully (枉) seeks to depose him. I wish to roam the underworld with Paegisukche rather than coexist (竝立) in the same world with rebels and traitors. I wish Your Majesty would first execute (戮) me to apologize (謝) to the world."
The ruler, becoming even angrier, was about to carry out the extreme penalty, but due to the intervention (沮止) of those around him, he instead threw him into prison and again banished him to Kyoji.

At this time, among the Koryŏ people, those moved by the Master's righteousness who turned their backs on Tŏkhŭng Kun emerged one after another. All the scholars of the Yuan court admired the Master's loyalty, lamenting for him, saying, "Though men may not know Duke Mun, Heaven surely knows. Chongŭi (鍾儀) did not die in his southern cap, and Su Wu (蘇武) returned alive from the North Sea. How could the Southern Wasteland lack spirits?" They secretly prayed (暗祝) for the Master's safe departure and return.

Leaving Yanjing in the 11th month of Kye'myo, his body barely reached the place of exile in the 2nd month of the following year. The heat and humidity (炎熱薰蒸) of the Southern Wasteland were not something a northerner could bear (堪居). The locals, moved by the Master's dignified appearance, prepared medicine and food (藥餌) and urged the Master to take care of himself (自重). The Master laughed and said, "I was unable to serve my country well, so living is already a disgrace. How could I seek to prolong my life?" He passed the time (自遣) by reading books every day. Suddenly, a sweet spring <101> gushed forth beneath his veranda, which not only kept the Master healthy but, it is said, the entire region benefited and remained healthy.

Later, when the Yoyang troops were defeated and the matter of Tŏkhŭng Kun was finished, the Yuan ruler felt regret. In the Pyŏngo year (丙午) (from Kye'myo to Pyŏngo), he finally pardoned and returned the Master, allowing him to go back to his home country, as already mentioned above. Afterwards, sometimes serving in court, sometimes hiding in the countryside, his path varied with the times, but his sincerity for the country and the world remained consistent throughout. He worried about the kingdom's lack of vitality, lamented the misfortune of loyal ministers, and then, when the times were unfavorable and Heaven's will was not aligned, upon the discontinuation of the home country's ancestral rites, he prostrated himself on the ground and wailed (伏地號哭) for several days. Until his death, for a total of 9 years, he did not step outside his gate. Not only did he himself refuse summonses (召徵) from the different dynasty (異朝 - Chosŏn), but he even left instructions (遺言) for his sons (羣子) not to eat the stipend (祿) of the different dynasty. Thinking about such matters, the Master's loyalty and integrity for his country are truly sufficient to make disloyal people of all ages die of shame (愧死).

The Master's Dao Learning and His Filial Piety

The Master's meticulous (孜詳) nature naturally led him to love learning, and he particularly focused his efforts on diligent study and research (硏鑽). As generally described above, from an early age, he excelled in literature and received the recommendation of his neighbors. After entering the Sŏnggyun'gwan, he devoted himself even more earnestly to clarifying scholarly principles, and his insights often touched upon points not previously revealed (未發處) by earlier scholars. The Tae Sasŏng of the time, Yi Mogŭn, also spoke of him becoming the patriarch of Eastern Neo-Confucianism.

In the culture of Koryŏ's early period, Confucianism (儒) and Buddhism (佛) existed almost side-by-side (竝立), as stated in the History of Koryŏ. However, from the mid-period onwards, the general populace equally fell into the erroneous ways (迷流) of Buddhism, while some scholar-officials (士林) fell deeper into degeneration (墮落), and moral transformation (敎化) greatly slackened (大弛). Especially after adopting Yuan reign names (年號), clothing, caps, and material culture completely followed (遵) the Yuan system, making it impossible to discern any trace (面影) of ancient ways in any aspect. Later, towards the end of Koryŏ, as Yuan's power declined daily and the failures (破綻) of Buddhist adherents became rampant, a reaction arose in the form of a flourishing (蔚興) trend of revering Confucianism. Amidst this, literary stars like Yi Saek (李穡), Kwŏn Pu (權溥), Chŏng Mongju (鄭夢周), Kim Kuyong (金九容), Pak Sangch'ung (朴尙衷), and Yi Ch'am (李詹) joined sleeves and bustled about. Kwŏn Pu proposed to the court to publish (刊行) Zhu Xi's Four Books (朱子四書) and distribute (頒布) them to the Five Classics Four Study Halls (五經四齋). In the winter of the 15th year of King Kongmin, the Sŏnggyun'gwan was established (刱置), large numbers of students (生員) were trained (大養), and local schools (鄕校) were set up in the provinces, causing the literary wind to greatly revive. However, at that time, related (係) to the founding period, though the forms were generally prepared (盖備), those who actually studied the essence (精髓) of morality were <102> few. Especially concerning the books of Chŏng-Chu, those who clearly understood their meaning were rare (鮮少). The Master, feeling lament (慨然) about this, engaged in lecturing on Neo-Confucian principles (性理) with Yi Mogŭn and Chŏng P'oŭn. He diligently read books alone and, in his later years, completely retired to the countryside, teaching students himself and taking the elucidation (闡明) of the Holy Learning and the invigoration (振作) of customs and education as his own duty (己任). This can be understood just by seeing that among the meanings of the Master's self-chosen name, Samu (Three Worries), worrying about the Holy Learning not being transmitted was the second, and worrying about his own Way not being established was the third, revealing the state of mind the Master devoted to the aspect of Dao Learning. What is regrettable (可惜) is that the Master's published theories and other writings have not been transmitted, so we cannot grasp the full picture (全容) now. However, in any case (如何間), it is certain that the Master spent the greater part of his energy on Dao Learning and that his attainment (造詣) was correspondingly profound. In a memorial by the later scholar Chŏng Chaegyŏng requesting the Master's enshrinement (從享) in the Confucian Temple (文廟), there is a phrase: "If it were not for the rectitude and greatness of his everyday learning and the firmness of his maintained principles (存操), how could his establishment of himself and his actions have been so outstanding (卓卓)?" As seen here, the merit and loyalty the Master left behind can also be viewed as the revelation (發露) of the essence of his Dao Learning. Yi T'oege (李退溪) and Song Uam (宋尤菴) also praised the Master's Dao Learning:

Yi T'oege said: "The Duke had virtuous conduct, and was also renowned in the world for his learning and writing."
Song Uam said: "After Chŏng-Chu passed away, only in our East did the two worthies, Mun Sŏnggong An Yu (文成公安裕) and Ch'ungsŏn'gong Mun Ikchŏm (忠宣公文益漸), manage to receive their transmission. Our Way brightly shone again."

Furthermore, the Master, who was loyal (忠) in the state (國), was filial (孝) in the home (家). There is an old saying that filial piety is the source of all conduct (百行), and all the Master's actions can be seen as an expansion (擴大) of this filial heart. I do not intend to speak much regarding this, but the nature of the Master's filial heart can be glimpsed from the following (左) example.

It was the 3rd year of King U, Chŏngsa (丁巳). At this time, Japanese pirates (倭寇) invaded, committing massacres wherever they passed. Everyone fled, and the area became completely empty. At that time, the Master had previously suffered the loss of his mother and was living in a mourning hut (廬) by the tomb. Regardless of the Japanese pirate invasion, he solely guarded the tomb, wailing just as on ordinary days. The pirates, ultimately (畢竟) moved by his sincerity, erected a wooden post (木) marked (標) with the four characters "Do not harm the filial son" (勿害孝子) as a warning (戒) to each other and did not enter that area again. The entire region remained peaceful thanks to this (賴安).

Conclusion <103>

The Master, in his character, was benevolent, meticulous (孜詳), and uprightly rigid. As a manifestation of his character, he was filial to his parents, profound in Dao Learning, keen in observation, and loyal to the state. Before us, historians and various worthies have already correctly evaluated the Master:

The Biographies section of the History of Koryŏ (高麗史列傳) states:
"Mun Ikchŏm not only contributed through the benefit of cotton, but he also studied diligently, advocated and clarified the correct Way, refuted heterodox doctrines, and always taught people with the learning of filial piety, fraternal duty, and human nature and principle (性理之學). He washed away the stains of the Three Han (Korea), the obscured Heavenly Principle became bright again, and the extinguished literary wind revived. He can be called the patriarch of Eastern Neo-Confucianism."

Cho Nammyeong (曹南溟) said (in a poem):
In Kangsŏng, loyalty and filial piety define Duke Mun,
Clothing the people, his achievement matches Hou Ji's.
If we don't see his descendants like Kim Hyŏllok,
How can Easterners further repay his merit?

Yi Yulgok (李栗谷) said:
Shennong taught the people agriculture, Hou Ji taught the people grain cultivation.
Ch'ungsŏn'gong [Mun Ikchŏm] clothed our people, his abundant merit surpasses the ancients.

Appendix: I wish to append one poem and one prose piece each that allow a glimpse into the Master's state of mind, and then put down my rough brush (粗筆).

Three Poems Written on Being Exiled to the Southern Wasteland and Parting (謫南荒叙別三首)
It's hard to face this time compared to other times,
How can I remain well with mountains and water separating us?
Heaven moves humans, making horse horns grow (impossible things happen),
Gentlemen, know that I wish to return alive.

Secretly (潛潛) tears sprinkle like dismal rain (凄凄),
Ten thousand li to the Southern Wasteland, the road ahead is lost.
When others doubt, I hold faith,
Youthful heroic spirit is level with the mountains.

Driver, don't rush the ten-thousand-li packing,
My soul (心魂) never ceases returning home.
The place where I part from you under the autumn moon with three sighs,
Await me there in spring wind with a smile.

Court Response During the Yuan Dynasty (元朝奏對)
Even the words of a madman (狂夫), the sage selects (擇焉). I wish Your Majesty would pay attention and adopt them. I, a newcomer from a small country (小國之新進), have narrowly trod upon the court of the Son of Heaven (狹踐天子之庭). Even if Your Majesty were to relax your sternness and grant a kind face (霽威賜顔) to listen, I myself would not dare to shrink back. How much more so when pressed with the unexpected force of thunder (雷霆)? Your Majesty has listened too readily (過聽) to the words of slanderers (讒人之說) and wishes to depose an innocent ruler (無辜之主), preventing him from stating his feelings and showing his loyalty (陳情見悃). I, until now, harbor resentment and endure frustration (含寃忍鬱), not even knowing where I might die (不知死所). I wish Your Majesty would not spare the head of one slandering traitor (讒賊一人之頭) and thereby incur the ridicule (譏) of the world and later generations. Righteousness dictates not serving two masters (義不事二主)—this is the warning of the ancients (古人之戒也). In the past, King Wu (武王) was a sage, T'aegong (太公) was a worthy man. When they were about to attack the despot Zhou (獨夫紂), Paegisukche (伯夷叔齊) stopped their horses and remonstrated (叩馬而諫). Later generations praised them (後世稱之). Now, the king has committed no great evil like King Zhou of Shang (今王未有大惡如商紂) (one phrase missing here). Your Majesty, excessively deluded by the words of rebels and traitors (亂人賊子之言), wrongfully (枉) wishes to depose him. I wish to roam the underworld with Paegisukche rather than stand together (立於天下) with rebels and traitors. I wish Your Majesty would first execute me (先戮臣) to apologize to the world (以謝天下). <104>

**Summary**

This 1922 article from *Kaebyŏk* magazine profiles Mun Ikchŏm, a late Koryŏ scholar-official, as one of Korea's "Ten Great Figures." It details his life, emphasizing his introduction of cotton seeds from Yuan China (via Kyoji/Vietnam), which revolutionized clothing for the Korean populace. The article also highlights his unwavering loyalty to the Koryŏ dynasty despite threats and exile by the Yuan court during the Tŏkhŭng Kun incident, his dedication to Neo-Confucian scholarship alongside contemporaries like Yi Saek and Chŏng Mongju, and his profound filial piety. Mun Ikchŏm is portrayed as a figure whose actions stemmed from deep concern for the nation's well-being and moral rectitude, ultimately earning him the title "Hou Ji (god of agriculture) of Haedong (Korea)." The piece concludes with poems and prose attributed to Mun, reflecting his sentiments during exile and his defiance against Yuan pressure.

From the perspective of Korean colonial history, the article is significant for its promotion of a national hero whose key achievement directly improved the lives of common people, bolstering national pride and historical consciousness under Japanese rule. The final paragraph is particularly revealing; it directly admonishes contemporary Koreans traveling abroad, contrasting their perceived failure to bring back useful knowledge or materials for the homeland ("fragrant flower seeds") with Mun Ikchŏm's patriotic act, urging them to contribute meaningfully rather than just adopting foreign appearances ("hats, clothes, and outer shells"). This reflects the nationalist discourse of self-strengthening and practical contribution to the nation prevalent in intellectual circles during the colonial period, using historical exemplars to inspire contemporary action.

**Named Entities**

文益漸先生	문익점선생	Mun Ikchŏm Sŏnsaeng
李稼亭	이가정	Yi Kajŏng
牧隱	목은	Mogŭn
穡	색	Saek
鄭圃隱夢周	정포은몽주	Chŏng P'oŭn Mongju
恭愍王	공민왕	Kongmin Wang
元	원	Won (Yuan Dynasty)
德興君	덕흥군	Tŏkhŭng Kun
成宗	성종	Sŏngjong (Yuan Emperor Shunzong)
交趾	교지	Kyoji (Cochinchina/Vietnam)
李牧隱	이목은	Yi Mogŭn
王禑	왕우	King U
程朱	정주	Chŏng-Chu (Cheng-Zhu School)
集賢山	집현산	Chiphyŏn San
三憂居士	삼우거사	Samu Kŏsa
高麗	고려	Koryŏ
李太祖	이태조	Yi T'aejo
定宗	정종	Chŏngjong
世宗	세종	Sejong
越南	월남	Wŏllam (Vietnam)
黃始	황시	Hwang Si
金龍	김용	Kim Yong
鄭天益	정천익	Chŏng Ch'ŏnik
文萊	문래	Mun Nae
文英	문영	Mun Yŏng
承魯	승로	Sŭngno
義城	의성	Ŭisŏng
奇氏	기씨	Ki ssi (Empress Ki)
奇轍	기철	Ki Ch'ŏl
忠宣王	충선왕	Ch'ungsŏn Wang
媤	혜	Hye (Tŏkhŭng Kun's personal name)
塔思帖木兒	탑사첩목아	T'apsat'emur
崔濡	최유	Ch'oe Yu
遼陽	요양	Yoyang
武王	무왕	Mu Wang (King Wu of Zhou)
太公	태공	T'aegong (Jiang Ziya)
紂	주	Chu Wang (King Zhou of Shang)
伯夷叔齊	백이숙제	Paegisukche
商紂	상주	Sang Chu (King Zhou of Shang)
鍾儀	종의	Chongŭi
蘇武	소무	So Mu
倭寇	왜구	Waegu (Japanese pirates)
權溥	권부	Kwŏn Pu
李穡	이색	Yi Saek
金九容	김구용	Kim Kuyong
朴尙衷	박상충	Pak Sangch'ung
李詹	이첨	Yi Ch'am
朱子	주자	Chu Cha (Zhu Xi)
李退溪	이퇴계	Yi T'oege
宋尤菴	송우암	Song Uam (Song Siyŏl)
曹南溟	조남명	Cho Nammyeong
李栗谷	이율곡	Yi Yulgok
晉州	진주	Chinju
江城縣	강성현	Kangsŏng County
藝文舘	예문관	Yemungwan (Office of Royal Decrees and Drafts)
司諫院	사간원	Saganwŏn (Office of the Censor-General)
成均館	성균관	Sŏnggyun'gwan (National Confucian Academy)
右文舘	우문관	Umun'gwan (Hall of Right Literature - likely typo for 藝文館 or similar)
淸道郡	청도군	Ch'ŏngdo County
燕京	연경	Yŏn'gyŏng (Yanjing/Beijing)
東國	동국	Tongguk ("Eastern Country," Korea)
義城郡	의성군	Ŭisŏng County
三韓	삼한	Samhan (Three Han; Korea)
文廟	문묘	Munmyo (Confucian Temple)
江城	강성	Kangsŏng

**Glossary**

海東	해동	"East of the Sea," an old name for Korea.
后稷	후직	Hou Ji, legendary Chinese minister of agriculture.
先生	선생	Master, Teacher, Mr. (honorific).
初名	초명	First name/given name at birth.
字	자	Courtesy name.
號	호	Pen name/style name.
距今	거금	From now; ago.
하얏스며	하였으며	Did and... (Older spelling/form of 하였으며).
定省	정성	Paying respects to one's parents morning and evening.
登第	등제	Passing the state examination.
累遷	누천	Promoted successively.
故로써	고로써	Therefore, because of (Older form, 고로 + -써).
有하얏스며	유하였으며	There was and... (Older spelling/form of 유하였으며).
奉使如元	봉사여원	Sent as an envoy to Yuan China.
威嚇	위혁	Intimidation, threat.
下獄	하옥	Imprisoned.
竄謫	찬적	Banished, exiled.
듸엇다가	되었다가	Became and then... (Older spelling/form of 되었다가).
赦還	사환	Pardoned and returned.
가티	같이	Like, together with (Older spelling).
翌年	익년	The following year.
업스매	없으매	As there was not, because there was not (Older spelling/form of 없으매).
嘆賞	탄상	Admire, praise.
棄官	기관	Resign from office.
赴朝	부조	Go to the royal court.
䟽	소	Memorial to the throne (variant Hanja for 疏).
左轉	좌천	Demoted.
稱病不出	칭병불출	Claimed illness and did not go out/serve.
擅命	천명	Usurp authority.
己非	기비	Already wrong/not right.
救時	구시	Save the times/era.
救世	구세	Save the world/society.
己任	기임	One's own responsibility/duty.
數椽	수연	Several rafters; a small house.
草堂	초당	Thatched cottage.
扁額	편액	Framed signboard/tablet.
憂	우	Worry, concern.
龜勉	구면	Reluctantly, making an effort despite reluctance.
封事	봉사	Sealed memorial/report to the throne.
時務八條	시무팔조	Eight Articles on Current Affairs.
乞骸歸鄕	걸해귀향	"Beg for one's bones," request retirement to one's hometown.
祀	사	Ancestral rites, lineage.
杜門自廢	두문자폐	Close one's door and withdraw from the world (similar to 두문불출).
乾象	건상	Celestial phenomena.
涕淚滂沱	체루방타	Tears streaming down profusely.
禮葬	예장	Funeral conducted with state honors.
祭田	제전	Land granted for ancestral rites.
墓祠	묘사	Shrine by a tomb.
追贈	추증	Posthumously awarded (a title).
優恤	우휼	Treat kindly and compassionately.
書院	서원	Private Confucian academy.
木棉	목면	Cotton plant, cotton.
업슬지며	없을지며	There will not be and... (Older spelling/form of 없을 것이며).
비단	비단	Silk.
如何히	여하히	However much, no matter how (Older form of 아무리).
솜	솜	Cotton padding, stuffing.
衾具	금구	Bedding, quilt.
綿絮	면서	Cotton padding, cotton wool.
嫌	혐	Suspicion, inclination (used like 경향).
不無하나	불무하나	Is not non-existent, i.e., there is some...
苧布	저포	Ramie cloth.
잇섯스나	있었으나	Although there was (Older spelling).
업섯다	없었다	Did not exist (Older spelling).
麻布	마포	Hemp cloth.
繭絲	견사	Cocoon thread, silk.
치위	추위	Cold weather (Older spelling).
嚴冬雪寒	엄동설한	Severe cold of midwinter with snow.
아느면	않으면	If not (Older spelling/form of 않으면).
僅保	근보	Barely maintain/preserve.
暖地	난지	Warm region.
吉貝	길패	Old name for cotton/cotton cloth (possibly kapok).
利殖	이식	Propagation, cultivation for benefit (here, introducing a plant).
顚末	전말	The whole story, from beginning to end.
녀겨	여겨	Thinking, considering (Older spelling).
老嫗	노구	Old woman.
敢히	감히	Daringly, boldly.
秘藏	비장	Secretly keep/hide.
搜索	수색	Search.
筆管	필관	Brush handle (tube).
徑路	경로	Path, route.
花階	화계	Flower bed/terrace.
培養	배양	Cultivate, nurture.
曉치	효치	Understand (Older verb ending).
말나	말라	Wither, dry up (Older form of 말라).
살니여써	살리어서	Kept alive and then... (Older spelling/form of 살리어서).
蕃衍	번연	Proliferate, spread widely.
다토아	다투어	Competing (Older spelling).
核	핵	Seed, pit, kernel.
舅	구	Maternal uncle.
트리개	트리개	Cotton gin (native Korean term).
繅絲車	소사차	Reeling machine.
문내	문내	Term for the reeling machine (from Mun Nae's name).
문영	문영	Term for cotton cloth (from Mun Yŏng's name).
國語	국어	National language, native word.
種耘	종운	Sowing and weeding, cultivation.
屬官	속관	Subordinate official.
仍繼	인계	Inherit, take over.
桑	상	Mulberry tree.
麻	마	Hemp.
毛毳	모취	Fur, downy hair.
絮	서	Padding (for clothes).
被服	피복	Clothing (here likely referring to hides/skins).
尙矣	상의	Was great, was extreme (Classical Chinese phrase).
麤粗	조조	Coarse, rough.
渝薄	유박	Degenerate, frivolous.
貿貿	무무	Ignorant, dull.
公卿士庶	공경사서	Nobles, officials, scholars, and commoners.
衣冠文物	의관문물	Clothing, caps, and cultural institutions/products; civilization.
相交	상교	Interact, associate.
促進	촉진	Promotion, acceleration.
利澤	이택	Benefit, boon.
莫大	막대	Immense, enormous.
動機	동기	Motive.
發動	발동	Activation, starting.
緻密	치밀	Meticulous, detailed.
仔詳	자상	Meticulous, considerate (same Hanja sound as 孜詳 used later).
格	격	Investigate (as in 격물치지).
念	염	Think of, be mindful of.
如何히	여하히	How, in what way (Older form).
可想할지라	가상할지라	It is imaginable that... (Older sentence ending).
寄與	기여	Contribution.
融化	융화	Harmonization, blending.
向上	향상	Improvement, advancement.
國情	국정	National situation.
變轉	변전	Change, transition.
廣範	광범	Wide-ranging, extensive.
比	비	Comparison.
古昔	고석	Ancient times.
껍덕이	껍데기	Shell, husk, outward appearance (colloquial/older form).
꼿씨	꽃씨	Flower seed (Older spelling).
造次顚沛	조차전패	In haste and difficulty; critical moments.
用慮	용려	Consider, be concerned about.
닛지	잊지	Forget (Older spelling).
엇지	어찌	How (Older spelling).
忠節	충절	Loyalty and integrity.
官契	관계	Official relations (older term for 관계).
槪認	개임	Generally recognize/understand.
怨	원	Resent, bear a grudge.
報仇	복구	Revenge.
窺	규	Spy, watch for an opportunity.
庶子	서자	Son of a concubine.
奔入	분입	Flee into.
讒誣	참무	Slander, falsely accuse.
阻絶	저절	Obstructed, cut off.
回測	회측	Fathom, guess.
邊報	변보	Report from the border.
滿朝疑懼	만조의구	The entire court was suspicious and fearful.
該事可堪	해사감당	Suitable for the task/matter.
派	파	Dispatch, send.
抑留	억류	Detain.
已熟	이숙	Already ripe/ready.
詔	조	Imperial edict.
印章	인장	Seal.
僞官	위관	False/illegitimate official position.
署名	서명	Sign one's name.
不肯	불긍	Unwilling, refuse.
威	위	Authority, might, intimidation.
臨	임	Face, confront.
失政	실정	Misgovernment.
塗炭	도탄	Mire and embers; extreme suffering.
應聲	응성	Immediately reply.
拒逆	거역	Disobey, defy.
拘囚	구수	Imprison, confine.
諭	유	Persuade, instruct.
屈	굴	Bend, yield, submit.
因循	인순	Follow convention, procrastinate, let things drift.
召諭	소유	Summon and persuade.
無度	무도	Unprincipled, lacking propriety.
狂夫	광부	Madman.
擇	택	Choose, select.
踐	천	Tread upon, enter.
陛下	폐하	Your Majesty.
霽威賜顔	제위사안	Relax your sternness and grant a kind face (show favor).
雷霆	뇌정	Thunderclap; imperial wrath.
讒人	참인	Slanderer.
過聽	과청	Listen too readily, believe too easily.
無辜	무고	Innocent.
情實	정실	True situation, facts.
允諒	윤량	Understand and permit/approve.
含寃	함원	Harbor resentment.
忍鬱	인울	Endure depression/frustration.
讒賊	참적	Slandering traitor.
譏	기	Ridicule, criticism.
歛容	염용	Compose one's expression, look serious.
固	고	Indeed, certainly.
匹夫	필부	Common man.
奪	탈	Seize, snatch away.
勃然作色	발연작색	Suddenly change expression in anger.
號令	호령	Command, order.
敢	감	Dare.
藩國小臣	번국소신	Petty official of a vassal state.
不遵	불준	Not obey.
勵聲	여성	Strained/forceful voice.
獨夫紂	독부주	The despot Zhou (last ruler of Shang).
叩馬而諫	고마이간	Stop the horse and remonstrate.
竝立	병립	Stand side-by-side, coexist.
謝	사	Apologize; thank; decline.
沮止	저지	Stop, prevent.
暗祝	암축	Secretly pray for/wish well.
炎熱薰蒸	염열훈증	Hot and steamy/humid.
堪居	감거	Bearable to live in.
藥餌	약이	Medicine and food.
自重	자중	Take care of oneself.
自遣	자견	Divert oneself, pass the time.
伏地號哭	복지호곡	Prostrate on the ground and wail.
異朝	이조	Different dynasty (i.e., Chosŏn).
召徵	소징	Summon (to court).
羣子	군자	Sons (Older usage).
遺言	유언	Last words, will.
祿	록	Salary, stipend (from office).
愧死	괴사	Die of shame.
孜詳	자상	Meticulous, considerate.
硏鑽	연찬	Diligent study, research.
往往	왕왕	Often, frequently.
未發處	미발처	Points not yet revealed/discussed.
儒	유	Confucianism.
佛	불	Buddhism.
竝立	병립	Stand together, coexist.
迷流	미류	Erroneous ways, superstition.
均陷	균함	Equally fall into.
如干	여간	Somewhat, certain (Older usage, similar to 약간).
士林	사림	Scholar-officials, literati.
墮落	타락	Degeneration, corruption.
敎化	교화	Moral transformation, civilization.
大弛	태이	Greatly slackened.
年號	연호	Reign name.
遵	준	Follow, abide by.
面影	면영	Trace, vestige, image.
破綻	파탄	Failure, breakdown, bankruptcy.
蔚興	울흥	Flourish, rise vigorously.
袖	수	Sleeve.
刊行	간행	Publish.
頒布	반포	Distribute, promulgate.
刱置	창치	Establish, found (Older form of 창설).
生員	생원	Holder of the lower licentiate degree.
大養	대양	Greatly nurture/train.
鄕校	향교	Local state school.
係	계	Relate to, involve.
盖備	개비	Generally prepared/equipped (older form).
精髓	정수	Essence, quintessence.
鮮少	선소	Rare, few.
慨然	개연	Sighing with emotion, lamenting.
闡明	천명	Elucidate, clarify.
振作	진작	Rouse, invigorate.
可惜	가석	Regrettable, pitiful.
全容	전용	Full picture, entirety.
如何間	여하간	In any case, anyhow.
造詣	조예	Attainment, mastery.
發露	발로	Revelation, expression.
從享	종향	Enshrinement (in the Confucian temple).
存操	존조	Maintaining one's principles/integrity.
卓卓	탁탁	Outstanding, distinguished.
百行	백행	All conduct/actions.
擴大	확대	Expansion, enlargement.
	께	To, towards (honorific particle, older form).
廬	려	Hut built beside a tomb for mourning.
恣行	자행	Act willfully/arbitrarily.
畢竟	필경	After all, in the end.
標	표	Mark, signpost.
戒	계	Warn, admonish.
賴安	뇌안	Become peaceful thanks to.
粗筆	초필	Rough brush; humble writing.
擱	각	Put down, cease.
潛潛	첨첨	Secretly, stealthily.
凄凄	처처	Dreary, desolate.
魂	혼	Soul, spirit.
枉	왕	Wrongfully, unjustly.
戮	륙	Kill, execute.
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제19호
발행일	1922년 01월 10일
기사제목	海東의 后稷===文益漸先生, 十大偉人 紹介의 其 六
기사형태	논설

海東의 后稷===文益漸先生, 十大偉人 紹介의 其 六
憂와 淚로 經緯된 先生의 一生

先生의 初名은 益瞻이오, 字는 日新이오, 號는 三憂堂이니, 距今 592年前 高麗 忠肅王復位元年 辛未 2月 8日에 晋州 江城縣에 나다. 先生은 姿性이 慈詳剛直하며 自幼時로 孝誠이 至極하야 비록 祈寒署雨라도 定省의 職을 廢치 아니 하얏스며, 8歲에 入學하야 12歲에는 李稼亭의 所에 나아가 其子 牧隱(穡)과 더부러 同學하얏스며, 16歲에 醮禮를 行하고 20歲에 鄕中의 推擧로써 國學 經德齎에 入하얏스며, 30歲에는 鄭圃隱夢周와 同榜으로 登第하앗는데 先生은 이 때부터 그 行誼와 文章으로써 相當히 世間에 알니엇다.
이로부터 先生은 宦海에 身을 投하야 藝文舘 直講으로부터 累遷하야 恭愍王 12年 癸卯(33歲)에는 司諫院 左正言에 陞하야 朝廷의 得失을 明言한 故로써 盡職의 稱이 有하얏스며, 是年에 다시 奉使如元하얏는데 當時의 德興君事件에 關하야 累次로 元主(成宗)의 威嚇을 受하얏스나 死生의 間에서 能히 剛直不屈하야써 臣子의 職을 盡하얏다. (別項詳錄) 이로 因하야 先生은 다시 下獄이 되고 竄謫이 듸엇다가 滿 3年을 지내인 丙午 9月에 謫所되는 交趾로 부터 赦還되어 越 丁未 2月에 歸國하니, 當時의 學者-다- 가티 先生의 忠貞을 稱嘆하얏다. 是歲의 冬에 成均館 學官으로 朝에 赴하얏스며, 그 翌年에 成均館 司成이 되어 學理를 講論할새 微奧를 究明하야 里에 當치 아니함이 업스매, 時의 大司成 李牧隱이 그 講究力이 透徹함을 嘆賞하고, 東方理學의 宗으로 推함이＜94＞ 맛당하다 하얏다. 39歲에는 父喪으로써 棄官하얏스며, 43歲에는 大司成의 除授가 有하얏스나, 病으로써 不就하고, 其 後 45歲에 右文舘 提學으로 赴朝한 事가 有하얏스나 鄭圃隱外 二人과 共히 元使郆斥의 䟽를 上하다가 不果하야 淸道郡事로 左轉하얏스며, 49歲부터는 稱病不出하얏다. 時- 麗末 王禑의 朝를 際하야 邪臣이 擅命하고 僧尼- 橫行하야 大勢- 己非한 바 先生은 스스로 救時에 無力함을 察하고 救世에 其 意를 致하야 이에 其身을 藏한 것이다.
이로부터 先生은 閉戶深坐하야 外事를 不問하며, 스스로 思隱이라 號하야 單히 程朱의 書를 講하며, 後學을 敎導함으로써 己任을 삼앗섯다. 53歲 되던 秋에는 縣의 東, 集賢山下에 數椽의 草堂을 搆하고, 扁額하야 曰 三憂라 하고, 自稱 三憂居士라 하얏나니, 盖 (1) 王國의 不振을 憂함이며, (2) 聖學의 不傳을 憂함이며, (3) 己道의 不立을 憂함이라 함이니, 先生의 心情을 이로써도 足히 推察할 수 잇다. 58歲(王昌 元年)에 朝廷의 召命으로 龜勉赴朝하야 爲學의 道를 論하얏스며, 그 後 庚午(60歲 時)에는 다시 封事를 上하야 時務八條를 陳하고, 同年 11月에 乞骸歸鄕하얏스며, 62歲 되든 壬申에 宗國인 高麗의 祀가 絶하매 先生은 드대여 杜門自廢하얏다.

時務8條라 함은 (1) 部建學堂 邑置鄕校 以振風敎 (2) 立廟設主 以正喪祭之禮 (3) 革胡服 以遵華制 (4) 整紀綱 以立國軆 (5) 汰冗散 以登俊良 (6) 薄稅歛 以悅民心 (7) 建義倉 以賑窮乏 (8) 說水站 以便漕運
이에 先하야 先生은 庚申年間(王禑 7年)으로부터 隱憂不樂하야 子弟가 每樣賓客을 迎하야써 歡娛를 盡할지라도 其憂를 解함이 無하얏다. 사람이 或 其故를 問하면 但曰, 「夜에 乾象을 觀하고 晝에 人事를 察하매 어찌 憂慮가 無하리요」하고 涕淚滂沱하얏스며, 鄭圃隱의 死를 聞할 時에는 「天亡 天亡 奈何 奈何.」를 連呼하고, 드대여 席에 臥하야 起居를 廢하얏스며, 國祀- 遂絶함에 及하야는 數日을 號哭不絶하고, 杜門深處하야 世上을 버릴 때까지 凡 9年間에 門外를 나지 아니하고, 賓客을 接치 아니하얏다.
李太祖- 位에 登하며, 屢徵하얏스나 不起하고 定宗 2年 庚辰 2月 8日에 世를 棄하니, 享年이 70이엇섯다. 當時上으로서는 禮葬을 命하고, 祭田을 賜하고 墓祠를 建하얏스며, 그後 世宗은 領議政을 追贈하고 그 子孫을 ＜95＞ 優恤하얏스며, 後人이 更히 數個所에 書院을 建하야써 先生의 靈을 祭하얏다.

朝鮮의 木棉과 先生

1. 東方에 初無木棉
今日의 朝鮮으로 木棉을 모르는 者- 업슬지며, 木棉의 利를 입지 아니하는 者- 업슬 것이다. 비단 옷을 감는 者이나 洋服을 입는 者들로서는 或 木棉의 利를 입지 아니하는 것 가티 생각할는지 모르나, 如何히 비단옷 뿐을 입는 사람일지라도 그 옷 속의 「솜」은 반듯이 木棉의 所賜일 것이며, 또 如何히 洋服을 입는 사람일지라도 그 덥는 衾具의 속에는 반듯이 綿絮가 들엇슬 것이다. 도로혀 近來에는 얼마큼 木綿과 因緣이 薄하야가는 嫌이 不無하나 數十年 前의 우리로서는 거의 綿織物을 除之하고는 다른 織物이 업는 것 가티 생각하얏다. 即 綾羅綢緞은 今日가티 常用되지 못하얏고, 蠶絲의 織物은 잇섯스나 平常의 所用이 되지 못하고, 苧布는 夏節이외에는 着用할 수 업는 바 스스로 綿織物을 常用하게 되얏다.
이와 가티 一般으로 着用하얏스며, 또 着用하는 綿織의 資料되는 木棉도 自今으로 556年 以前에는 朝鮮에 그 種名도 업섯다. 朝鮮뿐 아니라 中國 全土에도 업섯다. 다못 麻布와 繭絲 뿐을 가지고 서로 몸을 가리우고 치위를 막아 왓섯다. 그래서 그때에도 잇는 사람은 明細옷속에 豪奢가 極하얏슬지 모르나, 업는 사람은 嚴冬雪寒에도 베옷으로써 얼고 떨엇슬 것이며, 그러치 아느면 皮를 衣하고 獸를 學함으로써 其生을 僅保하얏슬 것이다.
木棉은 今日의 植物學上으로 말하면, 葵科植物의 一種으로서 暖地에 産하는 것이다. 일즉이 越南 交趾 等地에 産하야 土人이 此로써 布를 織하고 名曰 吉貝라 하얏스니, 此를 織하면 스스로 貝文을 成한다 함이라. 禹貢에 所謂 「南夷, 厥篚, 織貝」라 함도 이를 니름이다. 이것이 中國에 잇서서는 宋의 末에 南國에 蕃使로 갓던 廣州人 黃始의 利殖으로 始하야 元朝에 入하여 겨우 그 用途를 理解하얏고, 우리 朝鮮에 잇서서는 高麗말에 晋州인 文益漸 即 本題의 主人公되는 先生의 利殖에 依하야 始로 其 流布를 보앗다.＜96＞

2. 木棉移植의 顚末
先生이 비롯오 元帝의 諒解를 어더 謫所되는 交趾로부터 赦還되던 丙午 9月(恭愍王 15年)의 일이다. 이때 先生이 土人의 出境送別을 바드며 燕京을 發向할새 문득 田中에 「有花如雪」함을 보고 마음에 甚히 奇히 녀겨 從者 金龍으로 하야금 그를 摘取케 한 즉, 한 老嫗- 잇서 勵聲으로 追來하야 曰, 「너는 어떤 나라 사람인대 敢히 이 禁物을 取去하느냐. 官에서 만일 알면, 너와 내가 다- 가티 罪를 當할 것이니, 速히 返還하라.」하며 其勢- 甚勵하다가 문득 先生의 容儀端正함을 보고, 老嫗- 스스로 抑損하야 曰, 이것이 木棉花라는 것인대 本國의 法禁이 甚嚴하야 他國에 移出함을 不許하오니, 당신이 正말로 이를 願하면 모르미 秘藏하야써 搜索됨이 업게 하라」 하는지라. 先生이 이에 그 種子의 幾粒을 筆管에 入하야써 還하니 이곳 朝鮮 木棉移入의 徑路이라.
越丁 未春에 그 木棉子를 花階에 植하되 그 如何한 土質에 適할 것을 不知하야 미리 燥濕兩處를 擇하야 種하고 百方으로 培養하얏스나, 오히려 其術을 盡曉치 못하야 처음은 자라다가도 나종은 말나 죽고, 첫해에 겨우 한 本을 살니여써 其 種을 傳하얏는대 이러케 하야 凡 3年을 지난 後는 其種이 蕃衍하야 遠近이 來賞하며 다토아 利殖을 行하매, 문득 一里로부터 거의 全國에 通하얏다. 그러나 오히려 利用할 術을 아지 못하야 겨우 手로써 其核을 去하야 雜用에 供하더니, 마츰 元의 僧, 蔣이라는 人이 東國遊覽의 旅를 作하얏다가 木棉花의 蕃衍을 보고, 南國의 産이 此地에 遍植된 것을 奇하게 생각하야 듸디어 先生의 舅 鄭天益의 家에 留하며 去核車(今日의 트리개)를 지여써 作棉의 法을 敎하얏다. 이로써 利用의 端을 開하야 其後 先生의 孫 文萊는 繅絲車를 지여써 絲를 引하고 文英은 織造의 法을 考出하야써 그 用途- 槪成하니, 後人이 其車를 稱하야 문내(文萊)라 하고, 成匹된 그 織物을 稱하야써 문영 (文英)이라 하야 이에 國語를 成함에 至하얏다.
그리고 先生의 長孫 承魯는 義城郡守가 되며, 別로 田一段을 買하야써 種耘의 法을 敎하고 其田을 屬官에게 仍繼케 한 바 義城棉花는 只今까지 有名하다 한다. ＜97＞

3. 木棉의 移植과 그 影響
前項에도 暫述한 바와 가티 東方에는 本來 木棉이 업고 다못 桑與麻가 잇섯슬 뿐인 바 衣服에 至하야도 富人이나 貴人은 苧麻와 葛布와 紬를 用하야 毛毳로써 絮하고 窮民은 大槪로 被服을 用하야 其實 生活上으로부터 受하는 苦痛은 尙矣라. 勿論, 그 外樣이 甚히 不一하고 또 麤粗하며, 딸아서 文物上으로 來하는 貧富의 階級이 甚하고 그 階分이 甚함으로 由하야 上下 貴賤의 間이 甚히 疎隔되고 그 疎隔으로 因하야 選民階級은 날로 渝薄에 流하고 細民階級은 스스로 貿貿하게 되어 實로 其 救할 바를 不知하더니 이 木棉이 一般에게 利用되며, 公卿士庶로부터 深山窮民에 至하기까지 그 衣冠 文物의 一新을 致하고 衣冠文物의 一新으로 由하야 始로 士庶, 貧富 等 各 階級間에 在한 相交의 機를 作한 바 그 影響은 轉하야 一般 文化의 促進에 大與함이 有하얏다.

4. 朝鮮産業界에 在한 先生의 地位
先生의 木棉 移種에 關하야는 만히 이러케 말할 수가 잇다. 即 木棉의 移種이 우리 朝鮮人의 生活에 絶大한 利澤을 及하고 朝鮮人의 文化에 莫大한 影響을 及한 것은 더 말할 것 업는 事實이나 이는 結局 結果로써 나타난 事實 뿐이오. 그 動機에 至하야 一時的 好奇心의 發動에 不過한 것이엿는 바 그것으로써 그러케 크다할 수 없스며- 더욱 이로써 先生의 朝鮮産業에 在한 地位의 如何를 말할 수는 업는 것이라 하리라.
그러나 記者는 그러케 쉽게 말하고 십지 아니하다. 記者는 먼저 先生의 性格으로써 보아 木棉種의 購入이 單히 一時的 好奇心에서 나온 것이 아니오. 一般人의 利用厚生을 慮하는 큰 心情 及 其 緻密한 觀察에서 나온 것을 밋고저 한다. 即 先生의 性質은 甚히 仔詳하얏스며 緻密하얏섯다. 그 性의 發現으로는 自幼時로 學을 修하면 理를 講하얏스며 物에 格하면 知를 求하얏스며 世道人心을 察하면 그 對策을 謨하얏스며 더욱이 庚午 封事를 上하야 8條의 時務를 陳한 中 「建義倉 以賑窮乏, 設水站 以便漕運」의 2條가 含有된 것을 見하면 先生이 平素에 在하야도 如何히 國民의 利用厚生을 念한 것을 可想할지라 木棉의 移種이 어찌 一時의 好奇心에서 뿐 나온 것이리요.＜98＞
그리고 先生의 産業上 地位를 말하고저 하면 다시 先生의 後身인 그 後孫의 事功을 通하야 觀察치 아니할 수 업나니 或은 栽培의 法을 敎하며 或은 繅絲의 車를 作하며 或은 織綿의 法을 考案한 等 事를 竊想하면 先生의 朝鮮産業界에 寄與한 바 實로 크다 하며 그 地位- 實로 重하다 할지라 더욱 一國 文物의 一新을 致하고 階級 階級間의 融化를 促하야 不知中 一般 文化의 向上을 見함에서리요.
記者-이 項을 草하며 甚히 마음에 느끼는 일잇도다. 即 近來에 우리 國情의 變轉과 世界的 交通의 大開로 우리 兄弟 中에도 外地에 出入하는 者- 其 數- 多하며 그 出入하는 地域도 甚히 廣範하야 其 比-交趾 越南에 遊하는 類 아니며 그 見聞하는 바- 500年以前의 古昔에 비할바 아니라. 그러나 兄弟여. 그대들이여. 故國의 利用厚生을 爲하야 그 무엇을 見聞하얏스며 그 무엇을 移來하얏는가? 그 帽子와 그 옷과 그 껍덕이를 끄러 오는 以外에 香氣로운 꼿씨 한 種도 변변히 移來하지 못한 것이 그대들이 아닌가. 外地에 出入하는 兄弟여. 外地에 在留하는 兄弟여. 비록 造次 顚浦의 間 일지라도 故國을 爲하야 用慮할 것을 닛지 말아라. 만일 그도 못하겟거든 先生의 風을 聞하고 또 木棉의 手巾을 안고 그대들의 良心으로써 自決함이 잇스라.

그대로 보지 못할 先生의 忠節

先生의 忠節에 對하야는 簡單히 아래와 가티 적으리라.
恭愍王朝의 事이다. 中葉以降의 高慮와 元과의 官契가 如何한 것은 一般이 槪認하는 바이여니와 이때에 잇서 元后(成宗의 后) 奇氏는 恭愍王의 奇轍 等 一味에 對한 處置를 怨하고 報仇의 機를 窺하던 中 마츰 忠宣王의 庶子 德興君 媤가 元에 奔入하야 塔思帖木兒라 變名하고 本國으로부터 來留하는 崔濡 其他의 者와 一味가 되야 異謀가 有하엿는바 이를 斟量한 后는 곳 元主에게 讒誣하야 恭愍王을 廢하고 德興君을 立키로 하야 一玆以後로는 本國으로부터 元에 入하는 使節에 1人의 東還者가 無하고 中外가 阻絶하야 事情이 回測하얏스며 또 西北으로부터 元이 塔思帖木兒를 立하야 高麗王을 삼는다는 邊報가 至함에 及하야는 滿朝疑懼하야 最善의 策으로써 該事 可堪의 使者를 派하야 其 局을 解하기로 한 中 先生이 그 使者가 되엇섯다.＜99＞
이와가티 하야 先生이 元에 入하기는 恭愍王 12年 癸卯이엇스며, 元主는 또한 例에 依하야 禮部侍郞으로써 先生을 抑留하얏다.
이 때에 德興君과 崔濡의 謀는 其機-已熟하야 元主와 더부러 其策을 定하고 直히 元主의 詔로써 高麗王의 印章을 收하고 德興君으로 王을 삼으며 崔濡로 左政丞, 其他 本國人 在元者로 다-가티 僞官에 署名케 하는 中 先生이 獨히 不肯하얏다. 元主-이에 先生을 불너 威로써 臨하야 曰
「汝王이 失政하야 生民이 塗炭에 入한지라. 朕이 只今 廢立을 行하노니 汝意에 如何오.」
先生이 應聲曰
「天無二日이요, 地無二主니이다.」
元主- 怒曰
「詔旨- 已宣하얏거늘 汝敢拒逆乎아.」
하고 곳 先生을 德興君의 挾室에 拘囚하야 42日을 經하얏다. 이 때에 元主-先生을 可히 理로써 諭할지언정 威로써 屈케 못할 것을 생각하고 一時 其囚를 解하얏스나 旣히 德興君으로 王을 삼고 遼陽兵을 發送한 以上, 그대로 因循할 수도 업다 하야 다시 先生을 召諭하야 曰
「爾王이 無度하야 朕이 일즉 廢立하얏거늘 爾何多言고.」
先生이 對曰,
「狂夫의 言을 聖人도 擇하나니 臣이 外邦新進으로써 문득 天子의 朝廷을 踐하오매 陛下-비록 霽威賜顔할지라도 臣이 오히려 不敢하겟거던 하물며 雷霆의 威로써 壓함이릿가. 陛下-讒人의 說을 過聽하야 無辜의 主를 廢코저 하니 臣이 이제 그間의 情實을 陳하야 廢하의 允諒를 엇지 못하면 舍怨忍痛의 極에 그 죽을 바를 모르겟나이다. 願컨대 陛下는 讒賊一人의 頭를 아끼어써 天下의 譏를 取함이 업게 하소서.」
이에 元主- 歛容하야 曰
「言固忠矣나 朕志已決에 何오. 爾其無辭여다.」＜100＞
先生이 對曰
「匹夫의 뜻은 누구라도 敢히 奪치 못하나니 臣이 비록 屈한다 할지라도 本國에 臣의 뜻과 가튼 者-그 數-百千이 아니올지니, 그들이 만일 한 번 命을 拒하면 陛下-비록 安枕코저 한 들 그 可히 能하리잇가.」
主- 勃然作色曰 「네가 敢히 이러할 수가 잇느냐.」하며 곳 號令하야 억지로 詔書를 손에 쥐이게 한 즉 先生이 손으로써 땅을 집흐며 가로되,
「君臣의 義-그 分이 天地와 가튼지라 君을 背하고 賊을 從함은 이 天地間의 巨惡, 臣이 비록 죽을지라도 이 詔를 밧지 못하겟소.」
主- 大怒曰
「네가 藩國小臣으로 朕命을 不遵하니 네가 살고져한덜 그- 能하겟느냐.」
先生이 勵聲曰
「義不事二主는 古人의 所戒라. 昔에 武王이 聖人이요 太公이 賢人이로되 獨夫紂를 치려할 새 伯夷叔齊- 叩馬而諫하니 後世-그 忠節을 稱하얏나니 이제 吾王이 商紂와 가튼 過惡이 업거늘 陛下-單히 亂賊의 言에 惑하야 그릇 廢立을 行코져 하니 臣이 맛당히 伯夷叔齊와 더부러 地下에 놀기를 願할지언정 亂人賊子와 더부러 한 世上에 竝立하기를 願치 아니하노니 陛下는 먼저 臣을 죽이여써 天下에 謝하라.」
主- 益怒하야 곳 極刑을 行코져 하얏스나 左右의 沮止로 因하야 이에 獄에 下하고 다시 交趾에 謫하다.
이 때에 本國人 中 先生의 義에 感하야 다시 德興君을 背하는 者- 續出하얏스며 元朝의 諸士-다-그 先生의 忠節을 愛하야 爲하야 嘆하되 「文公을 사람이 비록 모르나 한울이 반듯이 알지라. 鍾儀-南冠에 죽지 아니하얏스며 蘇武-北海에서 生還하얏거니 南荒인덜 엇지 靈이 업스리요.」하며 先生의 去平來平을 暗祝하얏다.
癸卯 11月에 燕京을 떠난 몸이 겨우 翌年 2月에 謫所에 至하니 南荒의 炎熟薰蒸이 北人의 堪居할 바가 아니라. 土人이 先生의 儀容에 感하야 藥餌의 備儲로써 先生의 自重을 勸한즉 先生은 우스며 가로되 「내가 能히 나라를 爲하지 못한지라 살음이 이 辱이거늘 하물며 生을 求하리요.」 하며 每樣書를 讀하야 自遣하더니 문득 甘泉이 ＜101＞잇서 陛下에 湧하야 先生의 身을 健康케 한 것은 勿論 一境이 賴健하얏다 한다.

그 後 遼陽兵이 敗하고 德興君의 事- 已하매 元主- 後悔함이 잇서 丙午의 年(癸卯至丙午)에 그만 先生을 赦還하야 本國에 歸케 한 것은 右에 旣述한 바이거니와 그 後 或 朝에 立하며 或 野에 隱하야 出處는 때로 갓지 아니함이 잇섯스나 國을 爲하고 世를 爲하는 衷誠은 終始를 一貫하야 或 王國의 不振을 憂하며 或 喬臣의 遭亂을 哭하다가 밋 其時-利치 못하고 天이 願치 아니하는 一朝 宗國이 絶祀함에 及하야는 伏地號哭 數日에 身이 終하기까지 凡 9年間을 門外에 나지 아니하얏스며 自己 自身이 異朝의 召徵에 不應함은 勿論, 그 羣子에게까지 遺言하야 異朝의 祿을 食치 아니하게 함과 가튼 等 일에 想及하면 先生의 爲國忠節은 實로 萬古의 二心者流를 愧死케 함에 足하도다.

先生의 道學과 그 孝行

先生의 그 孜詳한 性質은 스스로 學을 好하얏스며 더욱 硏鑽의 方面에 力을 注하게 되엇섯다. 右에도 槪述함과 가티 일즉히 幼時로부티 文學에 長하야 四隣의 推戴를 바닷스며 成均館에 入한 後로 더욱 學理의 講明에 苦心하야 그 見解가 往往 先人의 未發處에 觸한 바 時의 大司成 李收隱도 東方理學의 宗이 될 것을 말하얏다.
高麗의 初代 文化에 잇서 儒와 佛이 거히 竝立의 勢를 가지엿던 것은 麗史의 말하는 바이나 中葉以降으로 一般 民衆은 佛敎의 迷流에 均陷하고 如干 士林은 墮落에 墮落을 重하야 敎化-大弛하얏스며 더욱 元의 年號를 用함으로 부터는 衣冠文物에 全혀 元制를 遵하야 어느 方面으로나 古來의 面影을 窺할 수가 업섯다. 其後 麗末에 至하야 元의 勢力이 日縮하고, 信佛者流의 破綻이 百出하매 이에 對한 反動으로 崇儒의 風이 蔚興할새 李穡, 權薄, 鄭夢周, 金九容, 朴尙衷, 李詹 等의 文星이 袖를 連하야 奔走하는 中, 權溥은 朝廷에 建議하야 朱子四書를 刊行하야 五經四齋에 頒布하며, 恭愍王 15年 冬에는 成均館을 刱置하고 生員을 大養하며 地方에는 鄕校를 設하야써 文風이 大振하얏다. 그런대 時- 刱設에 係하야 形式은 盖備하얏스나 實際로 道德의 精髓를 講究하는 者는 ＜102＞ 少하며 더욱이 程朱의 書에 至하야는 그 意義를 明曉하는 者- 鮮少하얏다. 先生은 이에 慨然함이 有하야 李牧隱, 鄭圃隱으로 더부러 性理의 講論을 行하며 호올로 讀書하기를 不怠하야 晩年에는 아조 田野에 乞歸하야 스스로 生徒를 敎授하며 聖學의 闡明과 風敎의 振作으로써 己任을 삼앗섯다. 이는 先生의 自號인 三憂의 意義 中에 聖學의 不傳을 憂함이 其二이오. 己道의 不立을 憂함이 其三이라 한 것만 見할지라도 先生이 道學의 方面에 注한 心情이 果如何한 것을 알 수 잇다. 可惜한 것은 先生의 發表한 學說 其他에 傳함이 無하야 이제 그 全容을 窺할 수 업스나 如何間 先生이 그 精力의 大部를 道學 方面에 費하얏스며 費한 그만큼 造詣가 深하얏던 것은 確實하다. 後人 鄭在慶이 先生으로써 文廟에 從享하기를 請한 疏에 「平日 學問의 正大와 存操의 堅固가 아니엇스면 그 立身行事가 엇지 그러탓 卓卓하엿겟느냐.」한 文句가 잇슴과 가티 先生이 그만한 功德과 그만한 忠義를 남긴 것은 그 道學의 精의 發露로 볼 수도 잇다. 李退溪와 宋尤菴도 또한 先生의 道學을 稱하얏스니
李退溪는 曰 「公有行誼, 又以學文著於世」
宋尤菴은 曰 「程朱旣沒 惟我東方 文成公安裕 忠宣公文益漸二賢 能得其傳 吾道燦然復明矣」

그리고 國에 在하야 忠한 先生은 家에 在하야 孝하얏다. 孝는 百行의 源이라는 古語도 有하거니와 先生의 모든 行誼는 이 孝心의 擴大로 볼 수도 잇다. 이에 關하야 多言코저 아니하거니와 先生의 孝心의 如何는 左의 一例로써 可窺할 수가 잇다.
王禑 3년 丁巳이라. 이 때에 倭寇가 侵入하야 所過에 殺戮을 恣行한 바 人皆逃難하야 境內가 一空하얏다. 當時에 先生은 일즉 母喪을 遭하야 墓에 廬할새 倭寇의 侵入 如何를 不關하고 惟獨히 墓를 守하야 號哭하기를 平日과 가티 하얏는대 賊이 畢竟 其誠에 感하야 木을 立하야,「勿害孝子」의 四字로써 標하야 서로 戒하고 更히 其境에 入치 아니한 바 一境이 賴安하얏다.

結論＜103＞

先生은 그 性格에 잇서 仁慈하며, 孜詳하며, 剛直하얏다. 그 性格의 發露로써 父母 孝하얏스며, 道學에 精하얏스며, 觀察에 敏하얏스며, 國家에 忠하얏다. 우리에 先하야 史家와 諸賢이 먼저 先生을 正評하얏스니,
高麗史列傳에는 曰
「文益漸 非徒有功於木棉之利也, 嘗力學, 倡明正道, 詆斥異端, 敎人必以孝悌性理之學, 䟽洗三韓之染, 天理之晦復明, 文風之熄復振, 可謂東方理學之宗也.」
曹南溟은 曰 (詩)
江城忠孝是文公 衣被生民后稷同 不見雲仍金顯祿 東人何以更酬功

李栗谷은 曰
神農敎民耕 后稷敎民稼 忠宣衣我民 豐功倍前昔

附記 先生의 心情을 窺할 만한 詩와 文 各 一篇式을 附記하야써 粗筆을 擱코저 한다
謫南荒叙別三首 (詩)
他時難對此時顔 安得平存水隔山 天感人生生馬角 諸君知我好生還
潛潛淚灑雨凄凄 萬里南荒去路迷 人不疑時吾有信 少年豪氣如山齊
御者莫催萬里裝 心魂無日不還鄕 別君秋月三嘆地 待我春風一笑場
元朝奏對 (文)
狂夫之言 聖人擇焉 願陛下留神採納 臣以小國之新進 狹踐天子之庭 陛下雖霽威賜顔而聽之 臣自不敢畏縮 况壓之以雷霆徑出不意者乎 陛下過聽讒人之說 欲廢無辜之主 使不得陳情見悃 臣至于今 含寃忍鬱 且不知死所 願陛下毋惜讒賊一人之頭 以貽天下後世之譏 義不事二主古人之戒也 昔武王聖人也 太公賢人也 將伐獨夫紂而 伯夷叔齊 叩馬而諫 後世稱之 今王未有大惡如商紂(此間一句逸) 陛下過惑亂 人賊子之言 枉欲廢之 臣願與伯夷叔齊 遊於地下 不願與亂人賊子立於天下 願陛下先戮臣以謝天下＜104＞
＜94-104＞