Magazine Title: 개벽 제19호
Publication Date: 1922년 01월 10일
Article Title: 小說 闇夜 (未定稿), 어제 밤 편지를 밧고 S·K 氏에게 바치나이다. (Novel: Dark Night (Unfinished Draft), Dedicated to Mr. S.K. upon receiving your letter last night.)
Author: 廉想涉
Article Type: 소설 (Novel)

小說 闇夜 (未定稿), 어제 밤 편지를 밧고 S·K 氏에게 바치나이다.
						廉想涉
"Please don't take a nap today, try to visit the second house."
As he came down into the yard, shuffling along after eating breakfast, his mother, watching his retreating figure with worried eyes, reminded him once more.
"This is already the third time..." Thinking this inwardly with some displeasure, he was about to reply but silently slipped into his room.
Though it wasn't particularly cold, he shut the sliding door firmly. As if pondering some deep matter, he clasped his hands behind his back, lowered his gaze, and paced around the room for about ten minutes before plopping down at his desk. He recalled the black bear (黑熊) he had seen in the iron cage (銕窓) at the zoo during a visit to Ch'anggyŏngwŏn the other day. Frowning unpleasantly, he let out a sigh like a yawn, "Ah—ah," as if exasperated, stretched out his legs, and leaned against the wall. In that instant, whatever he thought, a sharp, cold smile (辛竦한 冷笑) flitted across his lips (脣邊). Had someone been watching beside him, they might have thought he was deep in thought (思索) or perhaps suffering from a heart-wrenching lovesickness (러―브·씩), but in reality, no image was reflected in his mind. He wasn't thinking of anything, nor trying to think; he had become a captive (捕虜) of a state of complete mental blankness (失神 狀態). Like a man out of his wits, he threw his left arm onto the dusty desk and sat there vacantly (멀거―니) for half an hour. Then, as if needing to do something<53>, he startled himself awake, faced the desk squarely, and settled down. But again, like a fossil (化石), he placed both arms on the desk and sat holding his head (훔켜 싸고). He truly (大關節) didn't know what he should do. His mind merely buzzed like a burnt-out place, and he felt inexplicably (空然히) restless (조비비듯). Yet, the thought that he *must* do something never left him for a moment. After sitting for some time, clutching his head and just blinking, he finally seemed to make a decision, took out manuscript paper (原稿紙), wiped the dust from his hands on the ink bottle (잉크甁) cap (막애), and picked up his pen. It had been almost three or four months (朔) since he had last put pen to manuscript.
Even after dipping the pen in ink, he hesitated for a while, then meticulously wrote, as if drawing each character, "O Seeker of Truth," stared at it for another moment, then frowned and vigorously scratched it out (글거 버렷다). He thought the tone too shallow (淺薄) and exaggerated (誇張). After scratching out three or four lines, he first filled the space with an oval (楕圓形) of black ink, then eventually (乃終) drew a star shape (별 貌樣), threw down the penholder (鐵筆대), and immediately (足其) pulled a cigarette (卷烟) from his pocket (호주먼이) and lit it (피어 무럿다). He sucked hard until his cheeks hollowed and watched the smoke (煙氣) curl upwards (꿉을꿉을), then, still unable to shake it off (못이진 듯이), picked up the pen again. This time, he wrote, "O So-called Seeker of Truth." Adding the two characters "So-called" (所謂) didn't add much different meaning, but he continued writing anyway.

"O So-called Seeker of Truth! How magnificent (壯美) is your name, and how solemn (嚴肅) is your task. Your spirit (氣槪), your effort (努力), not knowing satisfaction even when risking life (生命), how brave (勇敢) and how moving (感激) it is.
But seeking for what? Just as seeking is said to be meaningful (有意義), cannot not seeking also be meaningful? And just as not seeking is meaningless (無意義), cannot seeking also be meaningless..."
To one who lacks even the desire (慾求), whose yeast (酵母) of impulse (衝動) has withered (枯死)—one who has lost (燒失) the revered image (尊影) of love, one for whom all the fire of passion (情火) has left only the remains (殘骸) of embers and ash (燼灰)—what could have meaning or power? What could seem magnificent or solemn?..."
He managed to write this far, then sat staring, pen poised as if to pierce a hole (군영) in the paper (조희). He pulled out another cigarette and lit it.<54> As if he had urgent business, he began searching (찻기) for something. He rummaged through the documents (書類) scattered messily (亂雜히 허트러진) on the desk. He was looking for the matchbox (成陽桶) he had just used. He looked around where he sat (안즌 자리), but it wasn't there either. Again, he urgently searched the desk. In the process (사픔에), the manuscript paper and his sleeve caught the ink bottle, and it tipped over (걱굴어 젓다) before he could grab it. The thick, dark blue fluid (靑黑色의 고름 가튼 濃汁) gurgled onto the manuscript paper he had just put his pen down from.
Having finally lit his cigarette, he stared for a moment at the ink spreading across the page, then began to deal with it... He stopped wiping the ink and picked up the soaked (저진) manuscript, read it silently (黙讀) once, then crumpled it tightly (똘똘 부벼서) with both hands, threw it into the ashtray (재털이), stood up abruptly, leaned against the window (들窓) facing the street, looked outside (밧글), and stood there puffing hard on his cigarette (섯섯다).
The high sky, just a few days after Ch'usŏk (秋夕), was cloudless, blue, and clear. In the quiet valley (호젓한 골작이), only a child guarding the tobacco leaves (苦草) drying (말니는) in the empty lot (비인 터) on the other side (건너 便) sat listlessly (無聊히) at the edge of the straw mat (멍석). It was the lame child (절둑바리 兒孩) from the house behind. Seeing his face, the child, as if catching the scent of a person on a deserted island, stood up awkwardly (엉거주춤) on his impaired legs, greeted him cheerfully (반기우며). He smiled faintly (빙긋) and returned the greeting. He glanced over at the kite reel (얼네) lying (노힌) where the child had been sitting.
"Are you flying a kite (연 紙鳶) already (날니니)?" he asked.
"Of course! Ch'usŏk is over," the child replied with a lonely smile, then picked up the reel and fiddled with it. Curious (好奇心) about how the child managed to fly it, he was about to ask him to try, but instead said,
"You need a friend (同侔) to fly a kite, can you fly it alone (날니지)?" and smiled meaninglessly. The boy, as if insulted,
"Why not? It's fun (滋味잇서요)," replied coolly (冷冷히 對句) with a lonely expression (낫빗), hobbled (절늠절늠) down to level ground, launched the kite about two *kan* (間) away, let out the reel (얼네를 솔솔 돌니우며), stumbled backward (뒤거름질을 처서) up the slope, and then began to quickly wind the string (糸) back in. The palm-sized shield kite (방패연), pulled by the force of the rapid retrieval, rose about two or three feet, then spun (팽그르를) around and smacked (화닥닥하며) onto the ground (地面). The lame boy frowned (찝흐리고), stumbled backward (절늠절늠 뒤거름을 치며)<55> about one *kan* further, and swung his short, weak arm. This time it rose a bit higher (놉히) than before, but again spun, tail up, and crashed (걱구루 박혓다) into the ground. The pitiful (可憐한), lonely (孤寂한), disabled (病身) boy, looking a bit awkward (어색한), still wearing that lonely smile (如前히 호젓한 微笑를 띄우며), glanced up (힐근 치어다 보고) at him standing there watching blankly (우득헌히). He wound in the string, pulled the kite to his feet, then changed position, coming towards the window where he stood. Again, straining (안가님을 끙끙 쓰며), he rapidly wound the string. But in the calm weather (穩靜한 天氣) with no wind, there was no way a small shield kite would rise. The poor (불상한) lame boy (절늠뱅이 少年), growing increasingly agitated (焦悶症이 생긴 듯이), held the reel high in his right hand, glanced back repeatedly (힐근힐근 돌아보며), and hobbled (절늠절늠 절늠절늠하고) deeper into the valley. Unconsciously (不知中에), the kite rose to his own height, but again spun (휙 휙 돌아서) and fluttered down. He watched the child's heels (발굼치) and the kite's tail (연꼬리) follow each other for some time, seeming absent-minded, then let out a long sigh (휘익 쉬이며), turned from the window, and went back to sit at his desk.
He rested his cheek on his left hand, leaning sideways against the desk.
"...Essentially (大軆), what distance (距離) exists between people?..." he thought inwardly, his gaze falling on the ink-stained crumpled manuscript (잉크에 뒤발닌 原稿 수셉이) in the ashtray.
"A kite rising a foot or two, then falling; a manuscript written a character or two, then torn up (찌저 버리는). The lame boy who cannot bear the boredom unless he tries to fly the kite that won't fly... But don't I lack even that happiness? Even that effort... In trying to fly the kite that won't rise—no, precisely because it doesn't rise easily (容易히), doesn't one feel infinite agony (無限한 苦悶) and happiness (幸福)... No, no, this is logic. If you reason it out, you can say anything. But... the thought that I have the right (權利) to pity that child is already wrong (틀닌)."
As if lacking the strength to continue his thoughts, he lay down flat, using the doorsill (門지방) as a pillow (베이고). But due to some faint sound (細音) or disturbance, he couldn't find peace (沈靜). His head felt like it was rotting. Occasionally, it felt as if a millstone (매ㅅ돌) was pressing down (짓눌느는) on his head. It felt heavy (찟부드듯), like sleep was coming. "Sleeping again!" he thought, asking himself. He sat up abruptly, gathered his Western clothes (洋服 주서 입고), and as he was about to put the cigarette case (卷煙匣) into his pocket (포케트 너흐랴다가), he pulled a slender photo frame (寫眞틀) from his jacket pocket (저고리 주먼이), stared at it for a while, then propped it up (버테 노코) in a corner of the desk<56> and paced around the room. In the photo frame (寫眞匣), a young woman (處女) with slender eyes (걀죽한 눈) stared back wide-eyed, seemingly watching his movements, enclosed within the small frame. It was a photo of his fiancée (約婚者), N, which he always carried in his wallet (紙匣). An intellectual ('rational' 理性) friend (親舊) had put it in her own photo frame for him, and he carried it like that.
"Love (러―브), engagement (엥게이지멘트),... hmph, too much (過分한) for a guy like me (나가튼 놈)..."
With the front of his Western jacket open and both hands thrust into his trouser pockets, he paced back and forth two or three times, muttering this inwardly (이가티 부르지진 後). He came to the photo, looked down at it blankly, then thought, "Poor thing! (가엽게!)... You'll end up being nothing more than the kite of my life (一生의 연 밧게 안되겟고나)... Essentially (大體), do I love N?... If I do, for what reason (理由)?... Oh! They say true love has no reason!... But can I still say I have the capacity (能力) and right (權利) to love? Trembling (부르를 떠는) before reason (理性), like a spiritual prostitute (精神的 賣春婦) radiating passion (情熱) towards a pure virgin (純潔한 處女) who remains just as she was when separated from her mother's breast (젓꼭지)! A cold-hearted person (冷돌이) whose eyes of intellect (理智) have opened coolly (푸르게 뜬) upon the blazing heart (奔焰과 가튼 初戀의 가슴) of first love, facing a bleak future (암길際)... Ah—I will weep... Ah—it's fraud (詐欺)! The ultimate moral crime (最高 道德의 罪惡)!"
His mind drifted through these disjointed thoughts like a dream (꿈속가티 니여 나가다가). Suddenly (急작시리), feeling sorry (불상한 症이 나서) for the innocent (無邪氣한) N, he picked up the photo, gazed at it for a moment, kissed it (키쓰를 하고), and put it down again. Lately, another agony (苦痛) for him was that he couldn't love someone without conscious effort (意識的). She was a pitiful woman; he felt he had to love N, even as compensation (代償) for the crime (罪惡) of tainting her purity (純潔) with his own impurity (不純). Without this consciousness or condition (條件), being unable to love someone was both an agony and a sorrow (悲哀) for him. Art (藝術)? Love (戀愛)? For him, neither could be completely denied (全然히 否定), nor completely affirmed (全然히 肯定). He couldn't choose one and abandon the other. Here lay his dilemma (띄―렌마).—He too had nothing but a kite, like the lame boy's kite.
As he went inside to put on his shoes (구쓰 신으랴), he suddenly thought of his friend who had given him N's photo frame, Ms. Y (Y 女史). —
"Essentially (大體), what is the distance between Y and me? In the end (結局), isn't it just the difference (差異) between having obtained (어덧다는) a kite and trying to obtain (어드랴) one?...<57> Why do I worry (念慮) about Y's future (將來)..." He recalled once giving Y advice (忠告 비젓한 말) akin to, "The constant (不斷의), excessive (濫用的) radiation of passion (情熱) only leads to dissipation (放縱). Shouldn't you choose a truly new lover now and lead a settled (靜沈한) life?" and chuckled bitterly (苦笑).
"Wilde was wise (賢明한 者). — He said presumption (專擅) is not interfering (干涉) in people's lives, but forcing (强要) others to be like oneself. An apt (適切한) saying... Even if Y finds a so-called true lover, it will be nothing more than a kite... Advice or whatever, it's meddlesome (주저넘은), foolish thinking." He tied his shoelaces, his mind wandering aimlessly like a man out of his wits.
Hearing a rustling sound (부스럭 부스럭) at the edge of the wooden floor, his mother, who had half-opened (半開) the sliding door, opened it wide (활작).
"Are you going now?" she asked, again bringing up the matter (件) of visiting the second house (訪問 件을 提議하얏다). "It's a major human event (人間 大事), and if you don't visit when you're so close (咫尺), there will be trouble (是非)."
"I'll go see them (가 뵙죠)," he replied weakly. He glanced (힐근 돌녀다 보며) at his younger sister, who was sitting arranging scraps of plain-colored old cloth (무色 헌겹 조각을 벌녀 노코) for the gift money (부조) for their cousin's (四寸兄) wedding (婚姻).
"When will you have your 'major human event' (人間大事를 치르랸)?" he teased, half smiling coldly (半쯤 冷笑). Then, mockingly (嘲弄),
"I'll go out now and pick one out for you. Better looking than Oppa (업바), rich (돈 만코), handsome (人物 조흔)... and eloquent... hahaha, uh-huh, hand me the hat (帽子) there."
"Hahaha, are you going to pick up a half-mute (반벙어리) new groom (새 書房) like in your songs! Hahaha," his mother laughed. The pale (해끔으래한) 17- or 18-year-old girl, blushing, suppressed her laughter, looked away (外面), stood up, and took the hat out of the chest (檅안). As he took the hat (바드며), he said,
"Why? Don't you like it (실흐냐)? Hmph."
"I don't want to hear it (듯기 실혀요). Who said I was getting married (시집 간답듸까)?... Oppa, just hurry up... needlessly holding up some other family's girl..."<58>
"Oh— so you intend to play matchmaker (仲媒 行勢) properly!... Don't worry about useless things, just hurry and urge her on. Hahaha."
N was his sister's schoolmate (學校 同侔). Leaving the sound of the mother and daughter's (母女) laughter flowing from the inner room (안房) behind him, he went out into the street, feeling somewhat cheerful (多少 和氣를 띄우며).

二

Leaving the house in a slightly brighter mood (若干 明快한 氣分), he found himself frowning again as he pushed through the swarming crowd near Yachohyŏn Market (夜照峴市場 附近).
Head tilted down to the right, one hand thrust in his trouser pocket, shoulders slumped slightly to the left (左便) as if carrying something, he slowly navigated the bustling crowd (와글와글 하는 속을 가만 가만히여서) onto the main street, finally lifted his head, and let out a sigh (숨을 휘―쉬엿다). Even now, out on the busy street (雜遝한 往來), he had no sense of being in the world of living people (人間界). It felt like wading through a murky cloud where the ugliest ghouls (醜惡한... 魍魎), seemingly about to collapse at any moment, writhed (蠢動), drifting aimlessly (定處 업시 흘너 가는). Every time he saw faces stamped with the brand (烙印) of life, labeled cunning (狡猾) and greedy (貪婪), he felt like striking them all down at once (대번에 모다 때려 누이고 십다고) with the short cane (短杖) in his hand.
"Essentially (大體), why do you all rush back and forth (奔走히 왓다 갓다) like this? How long will you continue this before collapsing (꺽구러지랴느냐)?" he wanted to shout (버럭 지르고도 십헛다). Heading absentmindedly (精神 업시) towards Taehanmun (大漢門) for a block or two (一二町), a thought struck him. He turned towards Kwanghwamun (光化門) and muttered inwardly, "A tomb (무덤)." Crossing the tram lines (電車 線路), he reached the Post Office (遞信局). He was about to turn into the alley behind the former Kongjo building (工曹 뒤골) when he thought, "What 'major human event'! If they asked me to attend a funeral (吊喪), I might go!" Spitting out the thought like phlegm (痰) stuck in his throat, he passed the alley leading to the second house.
"...What's so celebratory (慶事) about a man and woman (男女) who've never even seen each other's faces (彼此에 코빽이도 못 본), don't know if they're dog bones or horse bones (개 뼉다귄지 말 뼉다귄지), pronouncing the final, adulterous verdict (姦淫的 最後 決斷을 宣告) on their lifelong fate (一生의 運命)? Finding joy and welcome in a gamble dirtier than the Inch'ŏn rice and bean futures market (仁川 米豆 以上의 더럽은 賭博)..." Thinking this inwardly, unable to contain his anger (忿怒), he pouted his lips (입술을 뿌루퉁), walked on muttering "hmph hmph" (흥흥 코소리를 내며) to himself like a madman. Remembering a quiet path (호젓한 길) leading to Sabok Stream (司僕開川) through a gap between government residences (官舍 틈박우니) on the right (右便),<59> he crossed the main street and sought out the secluded alley (으슥한 골목) enclosed by black plank walls (左右 壁을 검은 板墻으로 돌너 막은). Of course (勿論), it wasn't that he had a destination (向方) in mind. He just wanted to walk alone (單獨히 거러 보랴는 것) on a street devoid of people. No sooner had he wished this path would continue forever (永遠히 連續 되엇스면) than he reached the stream bank (川邊). He hesitated (멈읏멈읏 망서리다가) for a moment, wondering where to go. Feeling reluctant (실흔 症이 나서) to turn back home, he decided to visit A and crossed the bridge...
A happened to be coming out of his studio (畵室) and stood at the edge of the sun-drenched wooden floor. Seeing him approach stealthily (자최 업시 감안감안 기여 들어오는), A greeted him gladly, as if he had arrived at just the right moment during a quiet spell (寂寞한 때 마츰 잘 왓다는 듯이), and led him to his room. On the way in, he exchanged a few words of greeting with B, who was sitting inside his own room with the door closed. He then opened B's door. Seeing two young women (妙齡의 두 女子) sitting opposite B across a desk, who paused their writing and nodded (目禮) at him, he closed the door again and turned towards A's room.
"What have you been doing? Why haven't you visited at all..." A asked, looking at his gloomy face (沈鬱한 얼굴).
"Doing what... Ah! Ah," he sighed like yawning. "Looking at the same faces every day gets tiresome (구치 안어서)..."
"Not 'One leaf falls, and the world knows autumn' (一葉落而天下知秋), but 'One leaf falls, and life knows ugliness' (一葉落而人生知醜)? Hahaha, no, 'A friend's face knows ugliness' (友容知醜), right?" A laughed.
On the lid of the paint box (繪具상자 뚝게) was a portrait (肖像畵) sketched on a drawing board (寫生板).
"Now *this* is an ugly face (醜面)... Isn't it Mr. B? But what's with the ear?" he asked, thinking of B's ear ailment (귀를 알는 것), rubbing the blank space (餘白) where the ear should have been drawn (거릴대가) with his finger.
"Ah, the 'teacher' has become deaf (귀먹어리) lately," A said with a faint smile.
"You just saw, right? The 'teacher' got students (弟子) the day before yesterday, and since he started teaching 'Like you, do you like me?' (아니 라이크 유, 뚜유 라이크 미―?), his ailing ear seems to be getting progressively deafer (點點 더 머러 가는 貌樣이야), aha... he seems to be softening up (軟化) already, so by now (只今 쯤은), it must have gotten this bad (이만츰은 되엿겟지)." A burst into laughter again (破顔大笑), grabbing his hand which rested on the edge of the desk, mimicking B.<60>
He laughed heartily (깔깔) along with A.
"Autumn is at its peak (秋色이 方闌), and my heart is restless (마음이 싱숭생숭), so I need at least this kind of fun (滋味).... In the end (結局), humans are animals (動物) that can only live by deceiving themselves (自身을 속여야만)!" He thought of the lame child, "D's kite must be his Kisaeng student (妓生弟子)," and sneered inwardly (憫笑). After the students left, B also came to A's room. They chatted pointlessly (無用의 雜談) about the students for 20-30 minutes, then he left for home. On the way (途中), he met (맛낫다) C and D. As soon as C saw him, he asked, "Found a wife (색시 求햇서)?" Lately, C had developed a habit (버릇) of telling everyone he wanted to get married and asking them to find him a match (求婚하야 달나고 付托). But C himself knew it was empty talk (實 업슨 弄談), and listeners treated it as such (귀가로 들엇다). He jokingly replied, "May you get stabbed (칼침을 맛게!) by E!" and then turned to D.
"How are things (셈평이 좃소?) lately?" he asked.
"Things? Whether things are good or bad isn't the issue (問題); it's a matter of life or death (죽겟느냐 살겟느냔 問題).... Mr. X, haven't seen you at all lately, wondered if you were dead or alive (죽엇나 살앗나 하얏더니), but you're still alive (살아 잇섯구먼), hahaha..." D's laughter held a hollow yet profound, painful depth (空虛하면서도 沈痛한 深刻味). D, who had failed in stock speculation (京取에 失敗한), had an indescribable shadow (表現할 수 업는 陰影) cast over his face. He bid farewell (作別) to the two men heading towards A's house and turned back. He walked towards the Sabok Stream bank (司僕開川 川邊), dragging his cane (短杖을 득득 끌면서) with his head bowed.—
"...Could there be anything as shallow (淺薄한) as us today?... A crowd of foolish things (怜悧한 듯한 愚物의 무리) who cannot be satisfied (滿足) unless they mock (愚弄) even themselves... " Feeling unbearably disgusted (不快하야 못 견듸겟다는 듯이), he clenched his teeth (입을 악물엇다가), snorted "Het..." (헷...), clicked his tongue once, and continued his thoughts inwardly.—
"...Take away the playful attitude (遊戱的 氣分), what's left of them (彼等에게 무엇이 남는다)! Playing with life, playing with love, mocking friendship (交情을 愚弄하고), even approaching marriage (結婚問題) with a playful attitude... Aren't they the dregs (末種) who treat so-called art itself with a playful attitude? Sincerity (眞摯), seriousness (眞劍), earnestness (眞面目), honesty (誠實), effort (努力)—they deny (否定) all these adjectives (形容詞) and charge ahead, these pseudo-decadents (似而非 떼카댄쓰)... Agony?! (苦惱?!) Human suffering?! (人間苦?!)—How could such things exist! A, B, C, D, E... all cut from the same cloth... Hmph!...<61> But essentially (大體), who are 'they' (彼等)? Isn't the self who condemns them, calling them 'they', already one of them (그 한 分子가 안인가)!? Not 'isn't it?' It *is*. The ringleader (首魁)... Ah! Ah!..." He had somehow reached Sukchugam Bridge (숙주감다리). About to turn at Tongshipcha Pavilion corner (東十字角을 돌처 서려다가), wanting to walk a quieter road, he turned towards Samch'ŏngdong (三淸洞) and stepped onto the main street. Reaching the Chongch'inbu bridge (宗親府 다리), he looked down at the gently flowing stream (潺潺히 흘느는 開川 속), then sat down on the lawn (잔디 밧) in front of the Chongch'inbu main gate (宗親府 大門 압), drawing his knees up (무릅을 세우고 안젓다). The sunlight (해빨), hurrying the sunset (夕陽), was still hot (뜨거웟다). Having missed his nap (낫잠), his eyes felt heavy and blurred (눈이 암울암울하야 오고), his eyelids itchy (눈찌가 간즈럽게), stiff (꼿꼿하고), and sore (압핫다). As his mind grew increasingly hazy (漸漸 濛濛하야 오는), he continued his thoughts again.
"...Art or whatever, in the end, one becomes nothing but a slave (奴隷) to material life (物質生活). Isn't so-called 'agony' (苦惱) ultimately something that arises from lack of means (판이 不足하야서 나오는 것)? Human suffering (人間苦) that burns from within (內部에서 타는), rooted deep (깊혼데 根底를 둔), is non-existent, not even for medicine (藥에 쓰랴도 업다)... When they lament (恨歎) how their free expression (自由롭은 發顯) of individuality (個性) is unreasonably suppressed (無理하게 抑壓), groaning 'suffering, suffering,' and prattling on about life issues (人生問題) or pessimism (厭世主義), it's merely ornamentation (美裝한 粧具에 不過한 것) disguising their plea (哀訴) that their means are insufficient. Aren't they pseudo-artists (似而非의 藝術家) who leap out of their studies (書齋에서 뛰여 나오는) when their pockets (주먼이) become heavy (묵직하면)?.. D's gloomy, sorrowful shadow (沈鬱한 悲痛한 陰影) too, is like morning dew on a summer day (夏日의 朝露) if his stocks (株券) soar (暴騰)... Hmph, a matter of life and death (生死의 問題)! Because the bottom of the rice chest is being scraped (뒤주 밋이 글키니까), it's not that it isn't a matter of life and death, but have we ever once cried out 'It's a matter of life and death!' for our life's work (一生涯의 事業), for the palace (宮殿) of our art, for love that reveals (發露) life's beautiful and pure emotions (人生의 아름답고 純潔한 情緖), for the deep and eternal agony (深刻하고 永遠한 苦惱) of our troubled souls (悶悶한 心靈)?... Everything is a kite. It doesn't exceed the lame child's kite... Self-deception (自己 欺瞞), self-mockery (自己 愚弄)... What else was there (以外에 무엇이 잇섯는가)?!"
Drowsiness (조름) had faded, but his limbs (四肢) felt heavy and stiff (찟부드듯 하야 진다). He stood up abruptly (벌떡 이러나), crossed the bridge again, and came out onto the main street.
"But there is one redeeming point (取할 點). Not being vulgar (속되지 안타는 것)! Not assimilating (同化치 안는다는 것) with the vulgar masses (俗衆)! That's all (이것 뿐이다)..."
Muttering this inwardly (이가티 속으로 부르지즈며), he headed home (집으로 向하엿다).
Entering the house, he quietly (감안감안히) took off his shoes (구쓰를 벗고), went straight to his room, threw off his clothes (옷을 버서 던지고), and lay down (들어 누엇다). He closed his eyes, trying to invite sleep (잠을 請하야 보다가), then sat up again. From the irregularly piled stack of books (不規則하게 싸아 논 冊덤이), he pulled out Arishima Takeo's (有島武郞) short story collection (短篇集) "The Agony of Being Born" (出生의 苦惱)<62> and lay down again.

三

After reading five or six pages (페―지) in one breath, tears welled up (글성글성 하얏다) in his eyes for no reason (까닭 업는). He made no effort (일부러) to wipe them away (씨서 버리랴고도 아니 하고), but lay facing the wall (壁을 向하야 누은 채) and reread (再讀) from the first page. His tears still hadn't dried (마르지 안엇다). Around page 10 or 20, he gently placed the open book beside him (겻에 노코) and lay with his tear-dried eyes shut tight (눈물이 말는 눈을 꼭 감고 누엇다). These were tears unlike any he had experienced (經驗) in his life (一生). He had shed tears moved by human kindness (人情美에 感激한 눈물) in a train compartment (車間) during travels (旅行 中). He had also wept, trembling, overcome by righteous indignation (義憤) or fervent anger (熱憤). Conversely, there were times when his tear ducts (淚線) were so dry (沽渴한) that he could turn away coldly (冷然히 도라설) even while holding the hand of a young woman (處女) shedding tears (눈물 짓는) mourning a farewell (離別을 哀惜) under the moon (月下). But these tears... even he himself (自己 自身도) couldn't understand them... He fell asleep (잠이 들어다) like that.
—He was shaken awake (흔들려 깨인) to be told dinner (床 바드라고) was ready; the room was growing dark (어둑어둑 하얏다). Waking from a light sleep (선잠을 깨인), the fatigue (疲勞) in his limbs (四肢) seemed gone (풀닌 모양이나), but his energy (氣力) felt even heavier (더 한層 묵업엇다). Opening his eyes, he sat up abruptly (깜작 놀라서 벌떡 이러 안는). In his mind, the hazy thought (濛濃한 意識), "Why do I live so wretchedly (苟苟히) like this?" flashed like lightning (電雷와 가티 반작하다가) with utmost speed (敏速하게) and vanished (스러젓다). His head, weary from tobacco (烟草에 疲勞한 머리 속), felt heavy (묵업고) and tormented (괴로웟다), as if a lead weight (납덩어리) was lodged in his throat (목에나 걸닌). He sat blankly (얼 업시 가만히 안젓다가), startled (소스라처) as the light flashed on (불이 번적 켜지는 데에), and glanced around the room (房안을 휙 도라 보앗다). The photo on the desk (冊床에 노힌 寫眞) still stared back (如前히 눈을 말둥말둥 뜨고), coldly observing (冷然히 마조 보고) his every move (一擧一動). When his gaze met the photo's (寫眞과 視線이 마조칠 때), he was startled (깜작 놀낫다). —"This person is staking her entire life (全生涯), her entire fate (全運命), on me!... On me! In this world (世上), there is no one else who looks up to me like the heavens (한울가티 치여다 보는 사람도 이 사람 밧게는 업다)..." As he thought this, looking at the photo, he felt cold sweat (식은 땀) run down his back (가타얏다). At the same time (同時에), he felt shame (羞恥) and insult (侮辱) (가타얏다).
He was called inside (안으로 껄려 들어가) and received his dinner tray (저녁 상을 바닷다). Today, for some reason, he asked for the rice wine (飯酒) he had stopped drinking (끈흔) for some time. After finishing his meal (食事를 마치고), wanting to feel the evening air (확근확근 얼굴에 바람을 쐬려고) on his face, he went out onto the street aimlessly (定處 업시 나왓다). The autumn evening breeze, gently licking (솔솔 뺨을 할고 가는) his cheeks,<63> was pleasant (愉快하얏다). Turning at Sŏsipcha Pavilion corner (西十字角을 돌처서서), he looked towards Kyŏngbok Palace (景福宮) and walked slowly down (느럭느럭 나려왓다). As each tram reached the terminus (終點에 와서 닷는 電車마다) and disgorged (吐하야 내이는) its passengers, the staggering footsteps (빗슬빗슬하는 발자최가) of the writhing crowd (蠢動), weary with hunger, thirst (饑渴), and fatigue (疲勞), retreated one by one, two by two (하나 둘式 물너처 감을 따라). Night gradually fell upon the long tomb (긴 무덤) of Yukcho Avenue (六曹大路). The sparsely scattered, high-strung electric lights (듬은듬은 놉히 달닌 電燈 불빗은) flickered shimmeringly (어룽어룽 번적어리엇다) in the thin evening mist (엷은 저역 안개) like will-o'-the-wisps (독개비 불가티) before a grave (墓前). He swung his cane forcefully (短杖을 힘것 휘저흐며), gazed up at the stars in the distant sky, and walked on. Feeling an urge (症이 나서) to thrash about and weep (몸부림을 하며 울고 십흔), he stood stock-still (웃득 섯다) in the middle of the dark street... Fantasy (空想) once again occupied (占領) his mind.—He cried out inwardly.
"...Ah—, shall I prostrate myself on the earth (大地에 업들어저), suck (쪽쪽 빨며) with these red lips (이 붉은 입슐로) the bitter, salty tears (쓰고 짠 눈물을) flowing (흘너 떠러지는) from these eyes, embrace (抱擁) the earth, and rub my cheek against it (뺨을 문즈를가)!?... Shall I bind (에워 매우고) my whole body (全身) with the strong (굿센) gold and silver threads (金銀의 실 糸) of the myriad stars (뭇 별), like night-shining pearls (夜光珠 가튼) strung forever (永遠히 끈어지지 안는) above my head, kneel (무릅을 꿀코) before 'Eternity' (永遠), and offer a prayer (祈禱를 바치고 십다): ('Eternity! Grant strength (힘을 내리소서) to this pitiful (可憐한) small life (生命). If not, never let this small, weak (蒻하고), and ugly (醜한) shadow be reflected (永遠히 비추이지 마소서).')—" he thought to himself.
Tears welled (그렁그렁 괴이고) in his eyes, and his heart (心臟) felt torn (미여저서) with earnest (懇切하고) and sorrowful (哀痛한) feelings, seeming to constrict (壓搾하는 듯 하얏다) all his blood vessels (血管)...
—His footing uncertain (確實치 못한 발끗), he walked cautiously (操心하며) along the seemingly endlessly stretching (無限히 뻐친 듯한), wide, long Kwanghwamun Avenue (光化門通) and T'aep'yŏng Avenue (太平通), step by step (뚜벅뚜벅 거러 나갓다).
... (19, 10, 26 作)...<64>

**Summary**

This unfinished story, "Dark Night," portrays the profound ennui, alienation, and existential angst of an unnamed intellectual protagonist in colonial Seoul. He struggles with apathy, unable to find meaning in writing, relationships (including his engagement to N), or social interactions. He observes the world—a lame boy struggling with a kite, his friends' cynical attitudes, the bustling city—with detached bitterness and self-loathing, seeing superficiality and self-deception everywhere, including within himself. A brief moment of emotional release comes while reading Arishima Takeo, but it quickly dissolves back into despair and a sense of being trapped. The story ends with him wandering the dark city streets, overwhelmed by a desire for connection with something eternal or obliteration. From a historical perspective, the story vividly captures the intellectual paralysis and disillusionment felt by some educated Koreans under Japanese colonial rule. The protagonist's inability to act, his critique of both societal norms (like arranged marriage) and his peers' pseudo-decadent escapism, alongside his own crippling self-awareness and feelings of impotence, reflect the stifling atmosphere and limited avenues for meaningful self-expression or contribution available to Korean intellectuals during this period. His internal conflict regarding love, art, and life mirrors the broader struggle for identity and purpose within a colonized reality.

**Named Entities**

廉想涉	염상섭	Yŏm Sang-sŏp
昌慶苑	창경원	Ch'anggyŏngwŏn
N	N	N
Y	Y	Y
A	A	A
B	B	B
C	C	C
D	D	D
E	E	E
夜照峴市場	야조현시장	Yachohyŏn Sijang
大漢門	대한문	Taehanmun
光化門	광화문	Kwanghwamun
遞信局	체신국	Ch'esinkuk
工曹	공조	Kongjo (Former Ministry of Public Works)
司僕開川	사복개천	Sabok Kaech'ŏn (Sabok Stream)
仁川	인천	Inch'ŏn
三淸洞	삼청동	Samch'ŏngdong
宗親府	종친부	Chongch'inbu (Office of Royal Genealogy)
有島武郞	아리시마 다케오	Arishima Takeo
西十字角	서십자각	Sŏsipchagak (West Cross Pavilion Corner)
景福宮	경복궁	Kyŏngbokkung (Kyŏngbok Palace)
六曹大路	육조대로	Yukcho Taero (Avenue of the Six Ministries)
光化門通	광화문통	Kwanghwamun T'ong (Kwanghwamun Avenue)
太平通	태평통	T'aep'yŏng T'ong (T'aep'yŏng Avenue)

**Glossary**

밧고	받고	Receiving (older spelling of 받아)
낫잠	낮잠	Nap
둘재집	둘째 집	Second house (likely referring to a relative's house)
어슬넝 어슬넝	어슬렁어슬렁	Shufflingly, aimlessly
貌樣	모양	Appearance, shape, manner
慬心슬어운	근심스러운	Worried, anxious (older form combining 慬心 'anxiety' + 스럽다)
물그럼히	멀거니	Blankly, vacantly (older spelling/form)
對答	대답	Answer, reply
칩지	춥지	(Isn't it) cold (older spelling of 춥다)
미다지	미닫이	Sliding door
窮理	궁리	Pondering, deep thought
뒤짐	뒷짐	Hands clasped behind the back
冊床	책상	Desk
銕窓	철창	Iron bars (of a cage/window)
黑熊	흑웅	Black bear
찝흐리다	찌푸리다	To frown, scowl (older spelling)
선하픔	하품	Yawn (older form)
辛竦한	신랄한	Sharp, biting, sarcastic
脣邊	순변	Around the lips
思索	사색	Contemplation, thinking
알는	앓는	Suffering (from an illness) (older spelling)
實相	실상	Reality, true state
失神 狀態	실신 상태	State of fainting, mental blankness
捕虜	포로	Captive, prisoner
몬지	먼지	Dust (older spelling)
멀거―니	멀거니	Vacantly, blankly (older spelling)
소스라처	소스라쳐	Startled (older spelling)
化石	화석	Fossil
훔켜 싸고	움켜 싸고	Clutching, holding (head in hands) (older spelling)
大關節	대관절	Essentially, truly, on earth (emphatic adverb)
空然히	공연히	In vain, needlessly, without reason (older spelling)
조비비듯	조바심하듯	As if restless or anxious (likely meaning)
原稿紙	원고지	Manuscript paper
잉크甁	잉크병	Ink bottle
막애	마개	Cap, stopper (older spelling)
씨슨 後	씻은 후	After washing (older spelling of 씻다)
朔	삭	Month (used as a counter)
글거 버렷다	긁어 버렸다	Scratched out (older spelling)
넘우	너무	Too, very (older spelling)
淺薄	천박	Shallow, superficial
誇張	과장	Exaggeration
句調	구조	Tone, turn of phrase
글근	긁은	Scratched (older spelling)
楕圓形	타원형	Oval shape
깜아케	까맣게	Blackly, darkly (older spelling)
乃終	내종	Eventually, in the end
鐵筆대	철필대	Penholder (metal pen)
足其	즉기	Immediately (likely Hanja rendering of 즉시)
호주먼이	호주머니	Pocket (older spelling)
卷烟	권연	Cigarette (rolled tobacco)
피어 무럿다	피워 물었다	Lit (a cigarette) and held in mouth (older spelling)
메이도록	메도록	Until hollowed (cheeks) (older spelling)
빠라	빨아	Sucking (older spelling)
煙氣	연기	Smoke
꿉을꿉을	꾸불꾸불	Windingly, curlingly (older spelling)
못이진 듯이	못 이긴 듯이	As if unable to overcome (older spelling)
慾求	욕구	Desire
衝動	충동	Impulse
酵母	효모	Yeast
枯死	고사	Withered and died
尊影	존영	Revered image, portrait
燒失	소실	Lost by fire, destroyed
燼灰	진회	Embers and ash
殘骸	잔해	Remains, wreckage
조희	종이	Paper (older spelling)
군영	구멍	Hole (older spelling)
뚜러질	뚫어질	To be pierced (older spelling)
찻기	찾기	Searching (older spelling)
書類	서류	Documents
亂雜히	난잡히	Messily, disorderly
허트러진	흩어진	Scattered (older spelling)
成陽桶	성냥통	Matchbox
안즌	앉은	Sitting (older spelling)
차젓다	찾았다	Found (older spelling)
사픔에	사품에	In the process, in the midst of action
걱굴어 젓다	거꾸러졌다	Tipped over, fell down (older spelling)
濃汁	농즙	Thick liquid, concentrate
떼운	뗀	Removed from, finished with (older spelling)
꿀걱꿀걱	꿀꺽꿀꺽	Gulping, gurgling (sound) (older spelling)
번저나가는	번져나가는	Spreading out (older spelling)
훔치든	훔치던	Wiping (older spelling)
저진	젖은	Wet, soaked (older spelling)
묵讀	묵독	Silent reading
똘똘 부벼서	똘똘 비벼서	Crumpled tightly (older spelling)
재털이	재떨이	Ashtray (older spelling)
들窓	들창	Window opening outwards/upwards
밧글	밖을	Outside (accusative) (older spelling)
섯섯다	섰었다	Was standing (older spelling)
秋夕	추석	Chuseok (Korean harvest festival)
호젓한	호젓한	Quiet, secluded, lonely
골작이	골짜기	Valley (older spelling)
건너 便	건너편	The other side
비인 터	빈 터	Empty lot
苦草	고초	Tobacco (lit. bitter grass)
말니는	말리는	Drying (older spelling)
兒孩	아해	Child (older term)
멍석	멍석	Straw mat
無聊히	무료히	Listlessly, tediously
절둑바리	절뚝발이	Lame person (often derogatory) (older spelling)
마튼 듯이	맡은 듯이	As if smelled (older spelling)
반기우며	반기며	Welcoming gladly (older spelling)
빙긋	빙긋	With a faint smile
얼네	얼레	Kite reel
노힌	놓인	Lying, placed (older spelling)
연(紙鳶)	연	Kite
날니니	날리니	Are you flying? (older spelling)
同侔	동무	Friend, companion (older term, later associated with North Korea)
날니지	날리지	Fly (it)? (older spelling)
滋味	자미	Taste, fun, interest (older usage for 재미)
낫빗	낯빛	Facial complexion, expression (older spelling)
對句	대구	Reply, answering phrase
절늠절늠	절름절름	Hobbling, limping (older spelling)
間	간	Kan (unit of space/distance, between pillars)
솔솔 돌니우며	솔솔 돌리우며	Gently letting out/turning (reel) (older spelling)
뒤거름질	뒷걸음질	Walking backward (older spelling)
처서	쳐서	Striking, making (a movement) (older spelling)
糸	실	Thread, string
감기	감기	Winding (older spelling)
방패연	방패연	Shield kite (rectangular Korean kite)
껄니어서	걸려서	Caught, pulled by (older spelling)
팽그르를	핑그르르	Spinning around (onomatopoeia) (older spelling)
화닥닥하며	홱닥닥하며	Suddenly, abruptly (sound/manner) (older spelling, likely meaning)
부디첫다	부딪쳤다	Crashed into, bumped (older spelling)
찝흐리고	찌푸리고	Frowning (older spelling)
물너서서	물러서서	Stepping back (older spelling)
놉히	높이	Highly, high up (older spelling)
올랏스나	올랐으나	Rose, but (older spelling)
걱구루	거꾸로	Upside down, backward (older spelling)
박혓다	박혔다	Stuck into, embedded (older spelling)
可憐한	가련한	Pitiful, pathetic
孤寂한	고적한	Lonely, solitary
病身	병신	Disabled person (often derogatory)
어색한	어색한	Awkward
如前히	여전히	As before, still
微笑	미소	Smile
띄우며	띠우며	Wearing (an expression) (older spelling)
우득헌히	우두커니	Blankly, motionlessly (older spelling)
힐근	힐끗	Glancing sideways (older spelling)
안가님	안간힘	Utmost effort, straining
끙끙	끙끙	Groaning sound (from effort)
穩靜한	온정한	Calm, tranquil
족으만	조그만	Small (older spelling)
올늘	오를	To rise (older spelling)
불상한	불쌍한	Pitiful, poor (older spelling)
절늠뱅이	절름뱅이	Lame person (often derogatory) (older spelling)
焦悶症	초민증	Restlessness, agitation (lit. scorching-suffocation symptom)
추켜 들고	추켜들고	Holding up high
기어 들어갓다	기어 들어갔다	Crawled in, went deeper (older spelling)
발굼치	발꿈치	Heel (older spelling)
연꼬리	연꼬리	Kite tail
쪼차	쫓아	Following, chasing (older spelling)
휘익	휘익	Whizzing sound (sigh, wind)
괴이고	고이고	Propping up (cheek on hand) (older spelling)
비스듬히	비스듬히	Slantwise, leaning
大軆	대체	Essentially, generally, on the whole
距離	거리	Distance
뒤발닌	뒤범벅된	Mixed up, stained (with ink)
수셉이	수제비	Crumpled thing (here, paper)
찌저 버리는	찢어 버리는	Tearing up (older spelling)
견디겟다는	견디겠다는	That one will endure (older spelling)
容易히	용이히	Easily
無限한	무한한	Infinite, limitless
苦悶	고민	Agony, anguish
幸福	행복	Happiness
權利	권리	Right, privilege
틀닌	틀린	Wrong, mistaken (older spelling)
繼續	계속	Continuation, continuing
門지방	문지방	Doorsill
베이고	베고	Using as a pillow (older spelling)
沈靜	침정	Calmness, quietude
매ㅅ돌	맷돌	Millstone (older spelling)
짓눌느는	짓누르는	Pressing down (older spelling)
찟부드듯	찌뿌듯	Heavy, sluggish (feeling) (older spelling)
洋服	양복	Western-style clothes
주서 입고	주워 입고	Picking up and putting on (clothes) (older spelling)
匣	갑	Case, box
포케트	포켓	Pocket (loanword)
너흐랴다가	넣으려다가	While trying to put in (older spelling)
갸름한	갸름한	Slender, oval
寫眞틀	사진틀	Photo frame
끄내	꺼내	Taking out (older spelling)
버테 노코	버텨 놓고	Propping up (older spelling)
걀죽한	갸름한	Slender, oval (older/dialect spelling)
치여다	쳐다	Looking up at (older spelling)
約婚者	약혼자	Fiancé(e)
理性	이성	Reason, intellect (here implies 'modern' or 'intellectual')
親舊	친구	Friend
나가튼	나 같은	Like me (older spelling)
過分한	과분한	More than one deserves, excessive
이가티	이같이	Like this (older spelling)
부르지진	부르짖은	Cried out, lamented (older spelling)
가엽게	가엾게	Pitifully (older spelling)
밧게	밖에	Other than, outside of (older spelling)
理由	이유	Reason
能力	능력	Ability, capacity
부르를 떠는	부르르 떠는	Trembling, shivering
젓꼭지	젖꼭지	Nipple
떠러진	떨어진	Fallen, separated (older spelling)
純潔한	순결한	Pure, chaste
處女	처녀	Virgin, maiden
精神的	정신적	Spiritual, mental
賣春婦	매춘부	Prostitute
情熱	정열	Passion
放射者	방사자	Radiator, emitter
奔焰	분염	Blazing fire, intense passion
初戀	초련	First love
理智	이지	Intellect, reason
冷돌이	냉랭이	Cold person (older term)
암길際	앞길	Future prospects, path ahead (likely meaning)
詐欺	사기	Fraud, deception
最高	최고	Highest, ultimate
道德	도덕	Morality
罪惡	죄악	Sin, crime, evil
定處 업는	정처 없는	Aimless, wandering
니여 나가다가	이어 나가다가	Continuing on (older spelling)
急작시리	갑작스레	Suddenly, abruptly (older spelling)
無邪氣한	무사기한	Innocent (Hanja spelling of 무사하다 'safe' + 気 'spirit', used for innocence)
불상한 症	불쌍한 마음	Feeling of pity (lit. pitiful symptom/thought)
키쓰	키스	Kiss (loanword)
意識的	의식적	Conscious(ly)
不純	불순	Impurity
相對者	상대자	Counterpart, the other person
代償	대상	Compensation, price
條件	조건	Condition
同時에	동시에	At the same time
悲哀	비애	Sorrow, sadness
藝術	예술	Art
戀愛	연애	Love, romance
全體히	완전히	Completely, entirely (older usage)
否定	부정	Denial, negation
肯定	긍정	Affirmation, confirmation
띄―렌마	딜레마	Dilemma (loanword)
以外	이외	Other than, except for
구쓰	구두	Shoes (Western style) (loanword)
신으랴	신으려	While trying to put on (shoes) (older spelling)
女史	여사	Ms., Madam (term for educated/respected woman)
結局	결국	In the end, ultimately
어덧다는	얻었다는	That one obtained (older spelling)
어드랴	얻으려	Trying to obtain (older spelling)
差異	차이	Difference
將來	장래	Future
念慮	염려	Worry, concern
不斷의	부단의	Constant, incessant
濫用的	남용적	Excessive, abusive (use)
放縱	방종	Dissipation, debauchery
結果밧게	결과밖에	Nothing but the result (older spelling)
가저오지	가져오지	Bring about (older spelling)
擇하야	택하여	Choosing (older spelling)
靜沈한	정침한	Quiet, settled, calm
生活	생활	Life, living
忠告	충고	Advice, counsel
비젓한	비슷한	Similar (older spelling)
苦笑	고소	Bitter smile, wry smile
賢明한	현명한	Wise, sagacious
專擅	전천	Arbitrariness, presumption, acting solely on one's own authority
干涉	간섭	Interference, meddling
强要	강요	Coercion, forcing
適切한	적절한	Appropriate, suitable
엇드래도	얻더라도	Even if one obtains (older spelling)
주저넘은	주제넘은	Presumptuous, meddlesome (older spelling)
부스럭 부스럭	부스럭부스럭	Rustling sound
半開	반개	Half-opened
활작	활짝	Wide open
訪問 件	방문 건	Matter of the visit
提議	제의	Proposal, suggestion
人間 大事	인간 대사	Major human affair (often euphemism for marriage or death)
咫尺	지척	A short distance, close by
是非	시비	Trouble, dispute, right and wrong
가 뵙죠	가 봬요	I'll go see (them) (polite) (older spelling)
四寸兄	사촌 형	Male cousin (older brother generation)
婚姻	혼인	Marriage
부조	부조	Monetary gift (for wedding/funeral)
무色	무색	Plain color, colorless
헌겹	헝겊	Old cloth, rag
벌녀 노코	벌여 놓고	Spreading out, arranging (older spelling)
누의 동생	누이동생	Younger sister
힐근	힐끗	Glancing sideways (older spelling)
돌녀다 보며	돌려다 보며	Turning to look (older spelling)
치르랸	치르련	Will you hold/carry out (a ceremony)? (older spelling)
嘲弄	조롱	Mockery, ridicule
업바	오빠	Older brother (for a female) (older spelling)
골라 오마	골라 오마	I'll choose and bring (older spelling)
만코	많고	Many, much (older spelling)
人物 조흔	인물 좋은	Good-looking, handsome (older spelling)
帽子	모자	Hat
떼다오	떼어 다오	Take off and give me (older spelling)
반벙어리	반벙어리	Half-mute
書房	서방	Husband, groom (older term)
주서 오랸	주워 오련	Will you pick up? (older spelling)
해끔으래한	해끄무레한	Pale, wan (older spelling)
外面	외면	Turning away one's face
니러나서	일어나서	Standing up (older spelling)
檅안	궤 안	Inside a chest/box
바드며	받으며	Receiving (older spelling)
실흐냐	싫으냐	Do you dislike it? (older spelling)
듯기	듣기	Hearing (older spelling)
실혀요	싫어요	I don't like it (older spelling)
시집 간답듸까	시집 간답디까	Who said I'm getting married? (older rhetorical question form)
잔득	잔뜩	Fully, extremely (older spelling)
붓들어 노코	붙들어 놓고	Holding onto (older spelling)
仲媒 行勢	중매 행세	Acting as a matchmaker
톡톡히	톡톡히	Properly, soundly
졸라라	조르라	Urge, press (imperative) (older spelling)
學校	학교	School
同侔	동무	Classmate, friend (older term)
안房	안방	Inner room (main room of a house)
흘너	흘러	Flowing (older spelling)
母女	모녀	Mother and daughter
多少	다소	Somewhat, a little
和氣	화기	Harmony, cheerfulness
띄우며	띠우며	Showing, wearing (an expression) (older spelling)
若干	약간	Slightly, somewhat
明快한	명쾌한	Clear, cheerful
氣分	기분	Mood, feeling
附近	부근	Vicinity, neighborhood
들끌는	들끓는	Swarming, bustling (older spelling)
틈박우니	틈바구니	Gap, crevice, crowd (older spelling)
뚤코	뚫고	Pushing through (older spelling)
빗드름히	비스듬히	Slanted, askew (older spelling)
찌른	찌른	Thrust into
비슷이	비스듬히	Slanted, askew (older spelling)
左便	좌편	Left side
끼우러진	기울어진	Leaning, tilted (older spelling)
억개	어깨	Shoulder (older spelling)
올녀 노흔	올려 놓은	Placed upon (older spelling)
緩漫한	완만한	Slow, leisurely
步調	보조	Pace, step
가만 가만히여서	가만가만 헤쳐서	Slowly pushing through/apart (older construction)
휘―쉬엿다	휘― 쉬었다	Let out a (long) sigh (older spelling)
雜遝한	잡답한	Crowded, bustling
往來	왕래	Coming and going, traffic
人間界	인간계	Human world
족음도	조금도	Not even a little (older spelling)
업섯다	없었다	Did not exist (older spelling)
醜惡한	추악한	Ugly, hideous
걱구러질	거꾸러질	To collapse, fall down (older spelling)
魍魎	망량	Goblins, evil spirits
蠢動	준동	Wriggling, stirring (of insects, implies base activity)
뿌연	뿌연	Hazy, murky
휘저면서	휘저으면서	Stirring, wading through (older spelling)
定處 업시	정처 없이	Aimlessly, without destination
흘너 가는	흘러 가는	Flowing, drifting (older spelling)
烙印	낙인	Brand, stigma
狡猾	교활	Cunning, sly
貪婪	탐람	Greed, avarice
찍힌	찍힌	Stamped, imprinted
短杖	단장	Short cane, walking stick
대번에	대번에	At once, immediately
모다	모두	All, everyone (older spelling)
때려 누이고	때려 눕히고	Strike down (older spelling)
십다고	싶다고	Wanting to (older spelling)
奔走히	분주히	Busily, hurriedly
꺽구러지랴느냐	거꾸러지려느냐	Will you collapse? (older spelling)
버럭	버럭	Suddenly (in anger), shouting
십헛다	싶었다	Wanted to (older spelling)
向하야	향하여	Towards (older spelling)
精神 업시	정신 없이	Absentmindedly, frantically
一二町	일이정	One or two chō (unit of distance, approx 109m)
돌처 서며	돌쳐 서며	Turning around (older spelling)
무덤	무덤	Grave, tomb
부르지젓다	부르짖었다	Cried out, exclaimed (older spelling)
電車	전차	Tram, streetcar
線路	선로	Track, line
건너서	건너서	Crossing (older spelling)
遞信局	체신국	Post Office (older term)
뒤골	뒷골	Back alley
吊喪	조상	Mourning visit, funeral attendance
목에 걸닌	목에 걸린	Stuck in the throat (older spelling)
痰	담	Phlegm
토하듯이	토하듯이	As if spitting out
배 속으로	배 속으로	Inwardly (lit. into the stomach)
지나첫다	지나쳤다	Passed by (older spelling)
彼此	피차	Each other, both sides
코빽이도	코빼기도	Not even a glimpse (lit. tip of the nose) (older spelling)
뼉다귄지	뼈다귀인지	Whether it's a bone (older spelling)
男女	남녀	Man and woman
一生	일생	Lifetime
運命	운명	Fate, destiny
姦淫的	간음적	Adulterous
最後	최후	Final, last
決斷	결단	Decision, resolution
宣告	선고	Declaration, sentence
慶事	경사	Auspicious event, celebration
米豆	미두	Rice and beans (often refers to the speculative futures market)
賭博	도박	Gambling
질거우니	즐거우니	Joyful, pleasant (older spelling)
반가우니	반가우니	Welcoming, glad (older spelling)
忿怒	분노	Anger, rage
뿌루퉁	뿌루퉁	Pouting, sullen
흥흥	흥흥	Hmph hmph (sound of displeasure/muttering)
것다가	걷다가	While walking (older spelling)
右便	우편	Right side
官舍	관사	Official residence
틈박우니	틈바구니	Gap, crevice (older spelling)
通한	통한	Leading to, connected
左右	좌우	Left and right
壁	벽	Wall
板墻	판장	Plank wall, fence
으슥한	으슥한	Secluded, shadowy
차저	찾아	Seeking, looking for (older spelling)
勿論	물론	Of course
向方	향방	Direction, destination
單獨히	단독히	Alone, solely
거러	걸어	Walking (older spelling)
永遠히	영원히	Eternally, forever
連續	연속	Continuation, succession
되엇스면	되었으면	If it became (older spelling)
川邊	천변	Streamside, riverside
나섯다	나섰다	Came out, stepped forward (older spelling)
멈읏멈읏	머뭇머뭇	Hesitantly (older spelling)
망서리다가	망설이다가	Hesitating (older spelling)
실흔 症	싫은 마음	Feeling of dislike, reluctance (lit. disliking symptom)
決心	결심	Decision, determination
마츰	마침	Just then,ちょうど (older spelling)
畵室	화실	Artist's studio
해빗	햇빛	Sunlight (older spelling)
쨍쨍히	쨍쨍히	Blazingly (sunlight)
자최 업시	자취 없이	Without a trace, stealthily (older spelling)
감안감안	가만가만	Quietly, gently (older spelling)
기여	기어	Crawling, approaching slowly (older spelling)
寂寞한	적막한	Quiet, desolate, silent
引導	인도	Guidance, leading
沈鬱한	침울한	Gloomy, melancholic
들려다 보며	들여다 보며	Looking into (older spelling)
구치 안어서	귀찮아서	Because it's bothersome/tiresome (older spelling/form)
一葉落而天下知秋	일엽락이천하지추	One leaf falls, the world knows autumn (Chinese idiom)
醜面	추면	Ugly face
엇전 셈이야	어쩐 셈이야	What's the deal? What's happened? (older spelling)
거릴대가	그릴 데가	Place to draw (older spelling)
餘白	여백	Blank space, margin
문대면서	문대면서	Rubbing
귀먹어리	귀머거리	Deaf person (older spelling)
弟子	제자	Disciple, student
점점	점점	Gradually, increasingly
머러 가는	멀어 가는	Becoming deaf (lit. ear becoming distant) (older spelling)
軟化	연화	Softening
只今	지금	Now (older form)
쯤은	쯤은	About, around (emphatic)
이만츰은	이만큼은	This much (emphatic) (older spelling)
되엿겟지	되었겠지	Must have become (older spelling)
破顔大笑	파안대소	Breaking into a broad smile and laughing loudly
떠러털인	떨어뜨린	Dropped (older spelling)
붓잡으며	붙잡으며	Grabbing, holding (older spelling)
흉내	흉내	Imitation, mimicry
내엿다	내었다	Made, did (older spelling)
깔깔	깔깔	Sound of hearty laughter
秋色	추색	Autumn colors, autumn atmosphere
方闌	방란	At its height, in full swing
싱숭생숭	싱숭생숭	Restless, fidgety (heart/mind)
妓生弟子	기생 제자	Kisaeng student
憫笑	민소	Pitiful smile, sneer
中心	중심	Center, focus
無用	무용	Useless, pointless
雜談	잡담	Idle chat, gossip
途中	도중	On the way
맛낫다	만났다	Met (older spelling)
색시	색시	Young woman, bride (colloquial)
求햇서	구했어	Did you find/seek? (older spelling)
近日	근일	Recently, these days
장가를 가겟다고	장가를 가겠다고	Saying he will get married (older spelling)
뭇 사람더러	뭇 사람더러	To many people (older spelling)
求婚	구혼	Marriage proposal
달나고	달라고	Asking for (older spelling)
付托	부탁	Request, asking a favor
本人	본인	The person himself/herself
實 업슨	실없는	Empty, frivolous, nonsensical (older spelling)
弄談	농담	Joke, jest
듯는	듣는	Hearing, listening (older spelling)
귀가로	귓가로	By the ear (i.e., not taking seriously)
들엇다	들었다	Heard (older spelling)
칼침	칼침	Knife stab
맛게	맞게	To be hit/stabbed (older spelling)
셈평	형편	Circumstances, situation (dialect/older form)
좃소	좋소	Is it good? (older spelling/politeness level)
언쨘흔	언짢은	Unpleasant, disagreeable (older spelling)
죽겟느냐	죽겠느냐	Will you die? (older spelling)
살겟느냐	살겠느냐	Will you live? (older spelling)
보이지 안키에	보이지 않기에	Because (you) were not seen (older spelling)
죽엇나	죽었나	Died? (older spelling)
살앗나	살았나	Alive? (older spelling)
살아 잇섯구먼	살아 있었구먼	You were alive after all! (older spelling)
空虛	공허	Emptiness, void
沈痛한	침통한	Sorrowful, grievous
深刻味	심각미	Profoundness, seriousness (with nuance of depth/pain)
京取	경취	Speculation (often refers to 米豆 market in Kyŏngsŏng/Seoul)
失敗	실패	Failure
表現	표현	Expression
陰影	음영	Shadow, shade
가리워	가리어	Covered, obscured (older spelling)
作別	작별	Farewell
도라섯다	돌아섰다	Turned back (older spelling)
득득	득득	Sound of dragging
끌면서	끌면서	Dragging
숙이고	숙이고	Bowing (head)
淺薄한	천박한	Shallow, superficial
滿足	만족	Satisfaction
怜悧한	영리한	Clever, smart (sometimes with negative nuance of cunning)
愚物	우물	Foolish thing, blockhead
不快	불쾌	Displeasure, discomfort
못 견듸겟다는	못 견디겠다는	That one cannot endure (older spelling)
악물엇다가	악물었다가	Clenching (teeth) (older spelling)
헷	헷	Sound of scorn/disgust (like tsk)
혀를 차고	혀를 차고	Clicking one's tongue
彼等	피등	They, those people (formal/literary)
남는다	남는다	Remains
交情	교정	Friendship, friendly relations
愚弄	우롱	Mockery, making a fool of
結婚問題	결혼 문제	Marriage issue
態度	태도	Attitude
末種	말종	Lowest kind, dregs (derogatory)
眞摯	진지	Sincerity, earnestness
眞劍	진검	Seriousness (lit. real sword)
眞面目	진면목	True character, earnestness
誠實	성실	Sincerity, faithfulness
努力	노력	Effort
形容詞	형용사	Adjective
덤비는	덤비는	Charging at, challenging
似而非	사이비	Pseudo-, sham
떼카댄쓰	데카당스	Decadence (loanword)
苦惱	고뇌	Anguish, agony
人間苦	인간고	Human suffering
잇슬	있을	To exist, to be (older spelling)
分子	분자	Member, element (of a group)
首魁	수괴	Ringleader, chief criminal
아ㅅ	앗	Ah! Oh! (sound of realization/pain)
틈에	틈에	In the meantime, interval
숙주감다리	숙주감 다리	Sukchugam Bridge (unclear location, maybe near Sukch'ŏn stream area)
東十字角	동십자각	Tongshipchagak (East Cross Pavilion)
돌처 서려다가	돌쳐 서려다가	About to turn (older spelling)
거러	걸어	Walking (older spelling)
向하고	향하고	Heading towards (older spelling)
떼여 노앗다	떼어 놓았다	Stepped onto (older spelling)
潺潺히	잔잔히	Gently flowing, murmuring (water)
흘느는	흐르는	Flowing (older spelling)
開川	개천	Stream, brook
드려다 보다가	들여다 보다가	Looking down into (older spelling)
大門	대문	Main gate
잔디 밧	잔디밭	Lawn, grass field (older spelling)
무릅	무릎	Knee (older spelling)
안젓다	앉았다	Sat down (older spelling)
夕陽	석양	Evening sun, sunset
재촉하는	재촉하는	Hurrying, urging on
해빨	햇발	Ray of sunlight (older spelling)
아즉도	아직도	Still, yet (older spelling)
뜨거웟다	뜨거웠다	Was hot (older spelling)
암울암울하야	아물아물하여	Blurrily, dimly (vision) (older spelling)
눈찌가	눈시울이	Eyelids, corner of the eye (likely meaning) (older spelling)
간즈럽게	간지럽게	Itchily (older spelling)
꼿꼿하고	꼿꼿하고	Stiffly
압핫다	아팠다	Hurt, was sore (older spelling)
漸漸	점점	Gradually
濛濛하야	몽몽하여	Hazily, dimly (older spelling)
物質生活	물질 생활	Material life
奴隷	노예	Slave
판이 不足하야서	판이 부족하여서	Circumstances/means being insufficient
깊혼데	깊은데	Deep place (older spelling)
根底	근저	Root, basis, foundation
內部	내부	Inside, interior
藥	약	Medicine
쓰랴도	쓰려도	Even if trying to use (older spelling)
괴로워	괴로워	Suffering, agonizing
個性	개성	Individuality
自由롭은	자유로운	Free (older spelling)
發顯	발현	Manifestation, revelation
無理하게	무리하게	Unreasonably, forcedly
抑壓	억압	Oppression, suppression
恨歎	한탄	Lamentation, deploring
人生問題	인생 문제	Life issues, problems of life
厭世主義	염세주의	Pessimism (Weltanschauung)
떠드는	떠드는	Making noise, chattering about
哀訴	애소	Plea, appeal
美裝한	미장한	Adorned, decorated
粧具	장구	Ornament, decoration
不過한	불과한	Nothing more than, merely
주먼이	주머니	Pocket (older spelling)
묵직하면	묵직하면	When heavy
書齋	서재	Study room
뛰여	뛰어	Jumping, leaping (older spelling)
株券	주권	Stock certificate, share
暴騰	폭등	Sudden rise, soaring (prices)
夏日	하일	Summer day
朝露	조로	Morning dew
生死	생사	Life and death
뒤주 밋	뒤주 밑	Bottom of the rice chest
글키니까	긁히니까	Because it is being scraped (implies poverty) (older spelling)
生涯	생애	One's life
事業	사업	Work, enterprise, undertaking
宮殿	궁전	Palace
아름답고	아름답고	Beautiful
情緖	정서	Emotion, sentiment
發露	발로	Revelation, expression
悶悶한	민민한	Troubled, anguished (heart/mind)
心靈	심령	Spirit, soul
深刻하고	심각하고	Deep, profound, serious
永遠한	영원한	Eternal, everlasting
부르즈즌	부르짖은	Cried out, shouted (older spelling)
잇섯나	있었나	Was there? (older spelling)
欺瞞	기만	Deception, deceit
잇섯는가	있었는가	Was there? (older spelling)
조름	졸음	Drowsiness, sleepiness
스러젓스나	스러졌으나	Faded, disappeared, but (older spelling)
四肢	사지	Limbs
찟부드듯 하야 진다	찌뿌듯하여 진다	Becomes heavy/sluggish (older spelling)
벌떡 이러나	벌떡 일어나	Standing up abruptly (older spelling)
건너	건너	Crossing
取할 點	취할 점	Point to take, redeeming quality
속되지 안타는	속되지 않다는	Not being vulgar (older spelling)
俗衆	속중	The vulgar masses, common crowd
同化치	동화치	Not assimilating (older spelling)
안는다는	않는다는	That one does not (older spelling)
뿐이다	뿐이다	Only, merely
이가티	이같이	Like this (older spelling)
부르지즈며	부르짖으며	Crying out (older spelling)
向하엿다	향하였다	Headed towards (older spelling)
감안감안히	가만가만히	Quietly, gently (older spelling)
벗고	벗고	Taking off
버서	벗어	Taking off (clothes) (older spelling)
던지고	던지고	Throwing
누어서	누워서	Lying down (older spelling)
請하야	청하여	Requesting, inviting (sleep) (older spelling)
이러나서	일어나서	Getting up (older spelling)
不規則하게	불규칙하게	Irregularly
싸아 논	쌓아 놓은	Piled up (older spelling)
冊덤이	책더미	Pile of books
出生의 苦惱	출생의 고뇌	The Agony of Being Born (book title)
短篇集	단편집	Short story collection
빼서	빼서	Pulling out
누엇다	누웠다	Lay down (older spelling)
페―지	페이지	Page (loanword)
읽은	읽은	Read (past participle)
까닭 업는	까닭 없는	Reasonless, groundless
글성글성 하얏다	글썽글썽 하였다	Welling up (tears) (older spelling)
일부러	일부러	Intentionally, on purpose
씨서	씻어	Wiping (tears) (older spelling)
버리랴고도	버리려고도	Even trying to throw away/wipe off (older spelling)
누은 채	누운 채	While lying down (older spelling)
再讀	재독	Rereading
마르지 안엇다	마르지 않았다	Did not dry (older spelling)
겻에	곁에	Beside (older spelling)
노코	놓고	Placing, putting down (older spelling)
말는	마른	Dried (older spelling)
감고	감고	Closing (eyes)
經驗	경험	Experience
人情美	인정미	Human warmth, kindness
感激	감격	Being deeply moved
旅行 中	여행 중	During travel
車間	차간	Train compartment
흘녀	흘려	Shedding (tears) (older spelling)
義憤	의분	Righteous indignation
熱憤	열분	Fervent anger, passion
못 이겨서	못 이겨서	Unable to overcome
떨며	떨며	Trembling
운 일도	운 일도	Times when one cried
月下	월하	Under the moon
離別	이별	Farewell, separation
哀惜	애석	Sorrow, regret
눈물 짓는	눈물 짓는	Shedding tears
붓들고도	붙들고도	Even holding onto (older spelling)
冷然히	냉연히	Coldly, indifferently
도라설	돌아설	To turn away (older spelling)
淚線	누선	Tear duct, lacrimal gland
沽渴한	고갈한	Dried up, exhausted
들어다	들었다	Fell (asleep) (older spelling)
床	상	Table, dinner tray
바드라고	받으라고	To receive (dinner) (older spelling)
흔들려 깨인	흔들려 깨인	Shaken awake (older spelling)
어둑어둑 하얏다	어둑어둑 하였다	Was growing dark (older spelling)
선잠	선잠	Light sleep, doze
깨인	깬	Awakened (older spelling)
풀닌	풀린	Released, resolved (fatigue) (older spelling)
모양이나	모양이나	Seems like, but
氣力	기력	Energy, vitality
한層	한층	Even more, further
묵업엇다	무거웠다	Was heavy (older spelling)
깜작	깜짝	Startled (older spelling)
벌떡 이러 안는	벌떡 일어 앉는	Sitting up abruptly (older spelling)
이 가티	이 같이	Like this (older spelling)
苟苟히	구구히	Wretchedly, miserably, somehow managing
濛濃한	몽롱한	Hazy, dim, vague
意識	의식	Consciousness
敏速하게	민속하게	Swiftly, quickly
電雷	전뢰	Thunderbolt, lightning
가티	같이	Like (older spelling)
반작하다가	반짝하다가	Flashing (older spelling)
스러젓다	스러졌다	Vanished, disappeared (older spelling)
烟草	연초	Tobacco
납덩어리	납덩어리	Lump of lead
목에나 걸닌	목에나 걸린	As if stuck in the throat (older spelling)
묵업고	무겁고	Heavy (older spelling)
괴로웟다	괴로웠다	Was painful, tormented (older spelling)
얼 업시	얼 없이	Blankly, dazedly (lit. without spirit)
안젓다가	앉았다가	Sitting (older spelling)
번적	번쩍	Flash (of light) (older spelling)
켜지는	켜지는	Being turned on (light)
데에	데에	At the point/moment
휙	휙	Quickly, whizzing sound
도라 보앗다	돌아 보았다	Looked around (older spelling)
노힌	놓인	Placed (older spelling)
말둥말둥	말똥말똥	Wide-eyed, staringly (older spelling)
뜨고	뜨고	Opening (eyes)
一擧一動	일거일동	Every move, every action
마조 보고	마주 보고	Facing each other
視線	시선	Gaze, line of sight
마조칠	마주칠	To meet (eyes) (older spelling)
놀낫다	놀랐다	Was surprised, startled (older spelling)
全生涯	전생애	Entire life
全運命	전운명	Entire fate
걸고 잇고나	걸고 있구나	Is staking/hanging! (older spelling)
世上	세상	World
한울가티	하늘같이	Like the heavens (older spelling)
치여다 보는	쳐다 보는	Looking up at (older spelling)
밧게는	밖에는	Other than, except for (older spelling)
식은 땀	식은땀	Cold sweat
흐르는	흐르는	Flowing
가타얏다	같았다	Seemed like, was like (older spelling)
羞恥	수치	Shame, humiliation
侮辱	모욕	Insult
껄려	끌려	Being pulled, dragged (older spelling)
저녁 상	저녁상	Dinner table/tray
바닷다	받았다	Received (older spelling)
끈흔	끊은	Stopped, cut off (older spelling)
飯酒	반주	Drink accompanying a meal
차젓다	찾았다	Sought, asked for (older spelling)
食事	식사	Meal
마치고	마치고	Finishing
확근확근	화끈화끈	Flushing, hot (feeling)
쐬려고	쬐려고	To bask in, be exposed to (air, sun) (older spelling)
솔솔	솔솔	Gently (wind blowing)
뺨을 할고 가는	뺨을 핥고 가는	Licking the cheek (wind) (older spelling)
愉快하얏다	유쾌하였다	Was pleasant, cheerful (older spelling)
돌처서서	돌쳐서서	Turning (older spelling)
느럭느럭	느릿느릿	Slowly, leisurely (older spelling)
나려왓다	내려왔다	Came down (older spelling)
終點	종점	Terminus, end point
닷는	닿는	Reaching (older spelling)
吐하야 내이는	토하여 내이는	Vomiting out, disgorging (older spelling)
饑渴	기갈	Hunger and thirst
허덕이는	허덕이는	Struggling, gasping
빗슬빗슬하는	비슬비슬하는	Staggering, tottering (older spelling)
발자최가	발자취가	Footsteps, tracks (older spelling)
둘式	둘씩	Two by two
물너처 감을	물러쳐 감을	Retreating (older spelling)
따라	따라	Following
次次	차차	Gradually, bit by bit
듬은듬은	드문드문	Sparsely, here and there
달닌	달린	Hung, attached (older spelling)
電燈	전등	Electric light
불빗은	불빛은	Light (from lamp/bulb) (older spelling)
墓前	묘전	In front of a grave
독개비 불	도깨비 불	Will-o'-the-wisp (goblin fire)
엷은	엷은	Thin, pale
저역 안개	저녁 안개	Evening mist (older spelling)
어룽어룽	어룽어룽	Shimmering, flickering
번적어리엇다	번쩍거리었다	Was flickering, glittering (older spelling)
힘것	힘껏	With all one's strength (older spelling)
휘저흐며	휘저으며	Swinging (cane) (older spelling)
치여다 보고	쳐다 보고	Looking up at (older spelling)
몸부림	몸부림	Struggling, writhing
울고 십흔	울고 싶은	Wanting to cry (older spelling)
症이 나서	증이 나서	Feeling an urge (lit. symptom arising)
캄캄한	캄캄한	Pitch-dark
中턱	중턱	Middle part, halfway up/down
웃득	우뚝	Standing tall, abruptly still (older spelling)
空想	공상	Fantasy, daydream
占領	점령	Occupation, possession
大地	대지	Earth, ground
업들어저	엎드러져	Prostrating oneself (older spelling)
흘너 떠러지는	흘러 떨어지는	Flowing and falling (tears) (older spelling)
쓴	쓴	Bitter
짠	짠	Salty
붉은	붉은	Red
입슐	입술	Lips (older spelling)
쪽쪽	쪽쪽	Sound of sucking/kissing
빨며	빨며	Sucking
抱擁	포옹	Embrace, hug
뺨을 문즈를가	뺨을 문지를까	Shall I rub my cheek? (older spelling)
기리	길이	Lengthily, forever
나리운	드리운	Hung down, cast down (older spelling)
夜光珠	야광주	Night-shining pearl, luminous gem
가튼	같은	Like (older spelling)
뭇 별	뭇 별	Myriad stars
끈어지지	끊어지지	Not breaking (older spelling)
金銀	금은	Gold and silver
굿센	굳센	Strong, firm (older spelling)
全身	전신	Whole body
에워 매우고	에워 매고	Encircling and binding (older spelling)
永遠	영원	Eternity
압헤	앞에	Before, in front of (older spelling)
꿀코	꿇고	Kneeling (older spelling)
내리소서	내리소서	Please grant/bestow (archaic imperative)
그러치 안으면	그렇지 않으면	If not so (older spelling)
蒻하고	약하고	Weak (using rarer Hanja 蒻)
醜한	추한	Ugly, hideous
그림자	그림자	Shadow
비추이지 마소서	비추이지 마소서	Please do not let it be reflected (archaic negative imperative)
祈禱	기도	Prayer
바치고 십다	바치고 싶다	Want to offer (prayer) (older spelling)
그렁그렁	그렁그렁	Welling up (tears)
괴이고	괴고	Welling up (tears) (older spelling)
心臟	심장	Heart (organ)
懇切하고	간절하고	Earnest, fervent
哀痛한	애통한	Sorrowful, mournful
미여저서	미어져서	Being torn, bursting (heart) (older spelling)
血管	혈관	Blood vessel
壓搾	압착	Pressure, compression
하얏다	하였다	Did, was (older spelling)
確實치 못한	확실치 못한	Uncertain
발끗	발끝	Tiptoe, end of the foot (older spelling)
操心하며	조심하며	Being careful
無限히	무한히	Infinitely
뻐친	뻗친	Stretched out (older spelling)
뚜벅뚜벅	뚜벅뚜벅	Sound of steady steps
거러 나갓다	걸어 나갔다	Walked out/along (older spelling)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제19호
발행일	1922년 01월 10일
기사제목	小說 闇夜 (未定稿), 어제 밤 편지를 밧고 S·K 氏에게 바치나이다.
필자	廉想涉
기사형태	소설

小說 闇夜 (未定稿), 어제 밤 편지를 밧고 S·K 氏에게 바치나이다.
						廉想涉
「오늘은 부듸 낫잠 자지 말고, 둘재집 좀 가 보렴으나.」
아츰을 먹고 어슬넝 어슬넝 뜰로 내려오는 彼의 뒤 貌樣을, 慬心슬어운 눈으로 물그럼히 내려다 보든 彼의 母親은, 또 한번 注意를 하얏다.
「이 番이, 벌서 세번재로군...」 속으로 좀 不快한 듯이 생각하며, 彼는 무엇이라고 對答을 하랴다가 잠자코 自己의 房으로 소리업시 몸둥아리를 숨겻다.
別로 칩지는 안으나 미다지를 꼭 닷고, 彼는 무슨 窮理나 하는 것처럼 뒤짐을 쥐은 채, 눈을 내리 깔고 10分 동안쯤이나, 房 안을 빙빙 돌아단이다가, 冊床 압헤 털석 주저 안젓다. 彼는 日前에 昌慶苑에 놀러 갓다가 動物園에서 본, 銕窓안의 검은 곰(黑熊)이 생각나서, 不快한 듯이 눈쌀을 찝흐리다가, 기가 막힌 듯이 「아―아」 선하픔가튼 한숨을 쉬고, 두 발을 내던지며 壁에 기대엇다. 그 瞬間에 彼는 무엇을 생각하얏는지 辛竦한 冷笑가 脣邊에 살작 지나갓다. 누가 겻헤서 보는 사람이 잇더면, 彼는 只今 깁흔 思索에 히염치거나, 或은 뼈에 매친 러―브·씩이나 알는 사람이라고 생각하얏슬지 모르나, 實相은 彼의 머리 속에는, 아모 그림자도 비추이지 안어섯다. 무엇을 생각하는 것도 아니요, 생각하랴는 것도 아닌 完全한 失神 狀態에 捕虜가 된 것이다. 얼빠진 사람처럼, 왼팔을 몬지 안즌 冊床에 던저 노코 半時間 동안이나, 멀거―니 안젓다가, 그래도 무엇을＜53＞ 해야 하겟다는 듯이, 몸을 소스라처 精神을 차리고, 冊床에 正面하야 도사리고 안젓다. 그러나 또 化石가티 두 팔쭉지를 冊床 우에 집고 머리를 훔켜 싸고 안젓다. 彼는 大關節 무엇을 해야 조흘지 몰랏다. 다만 머리 속이 불난 터 貌樣으로 와글와글하며, 空然히 마음이 조비비듯 할 뿐이엇다. 그리면서도 무엇이던지 하여야 하겟다는 생각은 한 時를 떠나지 안엇다. 어느 때까지 머리를 위어 싸고 눈만 껌벅어리고 안젓던 彼는, 겨우 決心한 듯이 原稿紙를 꺼내 노코, 잉크甁 막애에서 손에 무든 몬지를 씨슨 後 펜을 들엇다. 彼가 原稿에 펜을 든 것은 거의 3,4朔 만이엇다.
펜에 잉크를 찍어 가지고 나서도 한참 꾸물꾸물 하다가, 「眞理의 探求者여」라고 그리듯이 한 字式 똑똑하게 박아 써 노코, 또 한참 드려다 보고 안젓다가, 눈쌀을 찝흐리며 박박 글거 버렷다. 넘우 淺薄하고도 誇張한 句調라고 생각함이다. 석줄 넉줄 북북 글근 뒤를, 처음에는 楕圓形으로 깜아케 잉크칠을 하다가, 乃終에는 별(星) 貌樣을 그려보더니, 鐵筆대를 던지고, 足其 호주먼이에서 卷烟을 끄내 피어 무럿다. 볼이 메이도록 힘껏 빠라 내뿜는 煙氣의 꿉을꿉을 흘러 오르는 貌樣을 말뚱말뚱 치어다 보다가, 그래도 못이진 듯이 다시 펜을 들엇다. 이번에는 「所謂 眞理의 探求者여.」라고 써 노앗다. 「所謂」 二字를 노핫다고, 別다른 意味가 생긴 것은 아니나, 하여간 붓대를 繼續하얏다.

「所謂 眞理의 探究者여! 그대의 이름은 얼마나 壯美하고, 그대의 事業은 얼마나 嚴肅한가. 生命을 賭하야도 아즉 足함을 깨닷지 못하는 그대의 氣槪, 그대의 努力은, 얼마나 勇敢하고 얼마나 感激한 일인가.
그러나 무엇을 爲한 探究인고? 探究함이 有意義하다 함과 가티, 探究치 안음도 亦是 有意義하다고는 못할가. 또 探究치 안음이 無意義함과 가터 探究함이 또한 無意義하다고는 못할가...」
그 慾求조차 업는 者, 衝動의 酵母가 枯死된 者― 愛의 尊影을 燒失한 者, 一切의 情火가 燼灰의 殘骸만을 남겨 준 者에게, 그 무엇이 意義잇고 힘 잇스리요. 그 무엇이 壯美하고 嚴肅히 보이리요...」
彼는 겨우 여긔까지 써 노코, 조희에 군영이 뚜러질 만치 붓을 든 채, 드려다 보고 안젓다가, 또 卷烟을 끄내 물고＜54＞ 急한 볼 일이나 잇는 것 가티 무엇을 찻기 始作하얏다. 書類가 亂雜히 허트러진 冊床 우를 이리저리 휘저어 보앗다. 今方 쓰고 난  成陽桶을 찻는 것이엇다. 안즌 자리를 휘둘러 보아도 亦是 업다. 또 다시 躁急히 冊床 우를 휘저며 차젓다. 그 사픔에 原稿紙와 소매 자락에 걸리운 잉크甁은, 붓잡을 새 업시 걱굴어 젓다. 靑黑色의 고름 가튼 濃汁은 方今 붓을 떼운 原稿紙 우에 꿀걱꿀걱 吐하야 젓다.
겨오 담배를 피어 문 彼는 紙面에 번저나가는 잉크를 暫間 노려보고 안젓다가, 處置하기 始作하얏다...잉크를 훔치든 손을 멈추고, 彼는 저진 原稿를 들어 한번 黙讀하야 본 後, 그대로 두 손으로 똘똘 부벼서 재털이에 던지고, 벌떡 일어나서 길로 난 들窓에 기대어 밧글 내다보며, 담배를 뻑뻑 빨고 섯섯다.
秋夕을 지낸지 며칠 안되는 놉흔 한울은 구름 한 點 업시 프르고 맑앗다. 호젓한 골작이에는 건너 便 비인 터에 긴장 苦草 말니는 것을 지키는 兒孩가, 苦草 멍석 끗에 無聊히 안젓슬 뿐이엇다. 뒷집 절둑바리 兒孩다. 내 얼굴을 본 그 兒孩는, 無人島에서 사람 냄새나 마튼 듯이, 不自由한 두 발을 엉거주춤 세우고 艱辛이 일어나서, 반기우며 人事를 하얏다. 彼는 빙긋 웃으며 人事 對答을 하고, 그 兒孩 안젓든 자리에 얼네가 노힌 것을 물그럼히 건너다 보다가,
「너, 벌서 연(紙鳶) 날니니?」 하며 무럿다.
「그럼요! 秋夕이 지낫는데요.」 하고 그 兒孩는 호젓한 웃음을 띠우고 섯다가, 얼네를 들어서 이귀 저귀 만적이며 섯다. 彼는 「저 兒孩가 엇더케 날니우누」 하는 好奇心이 나서, 좀 날려 보라고 하랴다가,
「연은 同侔가 잇서야 날니지, 너 혼자 날니겟니?」 하고, 意味 업시 빙긋 웃엇다. 그 少年은 무슨 侮辱이나 當한 듯이,
「왜요, 滋味잇서요.」 호젓한 낫빗으로 冷冷히 對句를 하고, 平地로 절늠절늠 나려 와서, 두어 間 통 떼어서 연을 올리고, 얼네를 솔솔 돌니우며, 절둑절둑 뒤거름질을 처서 언덕으로 올라가다가, 다시 실(糸)를 急히 감기 始作하얏다. 손바닥만한 방패연은 速히 감어 들이는 引力에 껄니어서, 2,3尺 쯤 뜨다가, 다시 팽그르를 돌아서, 地面에 화닥닥하며 부디첫다. 절둑바리 少年은 눈쌀을 찝흐리고, 또다시 절늠절늠 뒤거름을 치며＜55＞ 한 間 쯤 물너서서 힘 업는 짜른 팔을 휙휙 돌렷다. 이番에는 앗가보다는 좀 놉히 올랏스나, 亦是 팽팽 돌아 꼬리를 쳐들고, 땅바닥에 걱구루 박혓다. 可憐한 孤寂한 病身 少年은, 좀 어색한 듯이 如前히 호젓한 微笑를 띄우며, 우득헌히 내려다보며 섯는 彼를 힐근 치어다 보고, 줄을 감아서 연을 발밋까지 끌어다 노코 이番에는 位置를 變하야 彼가 서 잇는 窓 밋으로 오더니, 亦是 안가님을 끙끙 쓰며 急速히 실을 감앗다. 그러나 元來 바람이 업는 穩靜한 天氣에, 족으만 방패연 쯤올늘 理가 업다. 불상한 절늠뱅이 少年은, 더욱 더욱 焦悶症이 생긴 듯이 오른 손에 얼네를 추켜 들고 힐근힐근 돌아보며, 절늠절늠 절늠절늠하고 골작이 속으로 기어 들어갓다. 不知中에 연은 自己 키만큼 올랏스나, 또다시 휙 휙 돌아서 펄펄 나려 안젓다. 彼는 어느 때까지 無心한 듯이, 그 兒孩의 발굼치와 연꼬리를 쪼차 보며 섯다가, 긴 한숨을 휘익 쉬이며, 窓 압흘 떠나, 다시 冊床 머리로 와서 안젓다.
彼는 왼손으로 뺨을 괴이고, 冊床에 비스듬히 기대 안젓다가
「...大軆 사람과 사람 사이에는, 얼만한 距離가 잇는가?...」 속으로 생각하며 재털이에 노힌 잉크에 뒤발닌 原稿 수셉이에 시선을 던젓다.
「한자, 두자 오르다가 떨어지는 연과 한 字 두 字 그리다가 찌저 버리는 原稿. 다리를 절며 오르지 안는 연이라도 올니지 안으면, 심심해 못 견디겟다는 절늠바리 少年과...그러나 나에게는 그런 幸福도 업지 안은가. 그런 努力조차...오르지 안는 연을 올니랴는 데에, ―아니, 容易히 오르지 안키 때문에, 無限한 苦悶과 幸福을 感하지 안는가...아니 아니, 이것은 論理다. 理致를 따지면 아모 말이라도 할 수 잇지. 그러나...나에게 저 兒孩를 불상하다고 할 權利가 잇다고 생각하는 것이, 벌서 틀닌 수작이다.」
彼는 想念을 더 繼續할 힘도 업는 것가티, 門지방을 베이고 반듯이 들어 누엇다. 그러나 왼 細音인지 沈靜할 수가 업다. 머리 속이 썩는 것 갓다. 間或, 매ㅅ돌 가튼 것으로 머리를 짓눌느는 것 갓기도 하다. 찟부드듯 하야 잠이 올 것 갓다. 「또 자나!」 혼자 뭇듯이 생각하다가, 벌덕 이러나서 주섬주섬 洋服을 주서 입고 나서, 卷煙匣을 포케트에 집어 너흐랴다가, 저고리 주먼이에서 갸름한 寫眞틀을 끄내 들고, 한참 드려다 본 後, 冊床 한 구석에＜56＞ 버테 노코, 房 안으로 빙빙 도라 단엿다. 寫眞匣에는 어떠한 處女가 걀죽한 눈을 말둥말둥 뜨고, 彼의 거동을 치여다 본 듯이 마조 보며, 조고마한 匣속에 끼여 잇섯다. 그것은 彼가 늘 紙匣 속에 너어 가지고 단이던 彼의 約婚者인 N의 寫眞을, 어떠한 理性의 親舊가, 自己의 寫眞틀에 끼여 준 것을 그대로 너코 단이던 것이엇다.
「러―브, 엥게이지멘트,...흐흥, 나가튼 놈에겐 過分한 일이다...
洋服 저고리 압흘 헤치고, 바지 포케트에다가 두 손을 찔은 채, 두 세番 빙빙 돌며 속으로 이가티 부르지진 後, 寫眞 압헤 와서 물그럼히 나려다 보다가, 「가엽게!...너도 내 一生의 연 밧게 안되겟고나...大體 내가 N을 사랑하는가...사랑한다면 무슨 理由로?...응! 理由 업는 것이 眞正한 사랑이래!...그러나 아즉 사랑할 能力과 權利가 남앗다 할 수 잇슬가? 理性 압헤서 부르를 떠는, 어머니 젓꼭지에서 떠러진 채 그대로 잇는 純潔한 處女에 對한 精神的 賣春婦와 가튼 情熱의 放射者! 奔焰과 가튼 初戀의 가슴에, 理智의 눈이 푸르게 뜬 冷돌이 암길際,... 아― 울 것이다...아― 詐欺다! 最高 道德의 罪惡이다!」
彼는 定處 업는 이런 생각을 꿈속가티 머리 속에 니여 나가다가, 急작시리 無邪氣한 N이 불상한 症이 나서, 寫眞을 들어 한참 드려다 보다가, 키쓰를 하고, 다시 노핫다. 요사이 彼의 또 한가지 苦痛은, 意識的이 아니고는 사람을 사랑할 수 업는 것이다. 불상한 女子다, 自己의 不純으로 相對者의 純潔을 더럽히는 罪惡의 代償으로라도, N을 사랑하여야 하겟다는, 意識이나, 條件이 업고는, 사람을 사랑할 수 업는 것이, 彼에게는 一種의 苦痛인 同時에 悲哀이엇다. 藝術이냐? 戀愛냐? 彼에게 對하야는 이 두 가지를 全然히 否定할 수도 업고, 全然히 肯定할 수도 업다. 그  一을 取하고 그 一을 버릴 수도 업다. 여기에 彼의 띄―렌마가 잇는 것이다.― 彼에게도 연, 절뚝바리 少年의 연 以外에는 아모 것도 업다.
彼의 머리 속에는 구쓰를 신으랴, 안으로 들어가며, 문득 N의 寫眞을 끼여준 彼의 親舊, Y 女史의 일이 생각낫다.―
「大體 나와 Y間의 距離가 얼마나 되나? 結局은 연을 어덧다는 것과 어드랴 한다는 差異 밧게 업지 안은가...＜57＞ 무슨 까닭에 Y의 將來를 念慮하는가...」 언젠지, Y더러, 「情熱의 不斷의 濫用的 放射는 放縱이라는 結果밧게 가저오지 안는다. 眞正한 새로운 戀人을 擇하야 가지고 인제는 靜沈한 生活을 하여야 하지 안느냐」고 忠告 비젓한 말을 한 것을 생각하고, 혼자 苦笑하얏다.
「와일드는 賢明한 者이다.―專擅이란 것은 사람의 生活에 干涉한다는 것이 아니라, 他人에게 自己와 가티 하라고 强要하는 것이라 하얏다. 適切한 말이다...Y가 所謂 眞正한 戀人을 엇드래도, 亦是 연 以上은 못 될 것이다...忠告인지 무엇인지, 주저넘은 되지 못한 생각이다.」 彼는 구쓰 끈을 매면서도 얼빠진 사람처럼 이 생각 저 생각, 꼬리를 니여 나갓다.
마루 끗에서 부스럭 부스럭 하는 소리에, 彼의 모친은 半開하얏던 미다지를 활작 열고,
「只今 가니?」 하며, 또 둘재 집 訪問 件을 提議하얏다. 「人間 大事를 當하얏는데, 咫尺에 잇스면서 안 가 뵈면, 是非난다.」
「가 뵙죠.」 彼는 힘 업는 對答을 하고 나서, 四寸兄 婚姻의 부조 일을 하느라고, 무色 헌겹 조각을 벌녀 노코 안진 누의 동생을 힐근 돌녀다 보며,
「너는 언제나 人間大事를 치르랸?」 半쯤 冷笑하더니, 嘲弄 한 마듸 하고,
「只今 나가서, 하나 골라 오마. 업바보다 잘 나고 돈 만코, 人物 조흔,...그리고 말 잘하는... 핫핫핫, 으―ㅇ, 거긔 帽子좀 떼다오.」
「하하하 너희들 노래에 잇는 것처럼 반벙어리 새 書房을 주서 오랸! 하하하.」 어머니는 우섯다. 얼굴이 빨개진 17, 8歲의 해끔으래한 處女는, 나오는 우슴을 참고 外面을 하며. 니러나서, 檅안의 帽子를 끄내 주엇다. 彼는 帽子를 바드며,
「왜? 실흐냐? 흐흥.」
「듯기 실혀요. 누가 시집 간답듸까?...업바나, 어서,...空然히 남의 집 게집애를 잔득 붓들어 노코...」＜58＞
「응― 仲媒 行勢를 톡톡히 하랴는 구나!...쓸데 업는 걱정 말고, 어서 졸라라. 하하하.」
N은 彼의 妹의 學校 同侔이엇다. 彼는 안房에서 흘너 나오는 母女의 우슴 소리를 뒤에 두고, 多少 和氣를 띄우며 길에 나왓다.

二

若干 明快한 氣分으로 집을 나선 彼는, 夜照峴市場 附近에 들끌는 사람 틈박우니를 뚤코 나오느라고, 또 다시 눈ㅅ 살을 찜흐리게 되엇다.
오른便 압흐로 고개를 빗드름히 숙이고, 한 손은 바지 포케트에 찌른 채, 비슷이 左便으로 끼우러진 억개 우에, 무엇이나 올녀 노흔 듯이, 緩漫한 步調로 와글와글 하는 속을, 가만 가만히여서 큰 길로 나와, 겨우 고개를 들고, 숨을 휘―쉬엿다. 彼는 只今 雜遝한 往來에 나와서도, 自己가 사람 사는 人間界에 잇는 것 가튼 생각은 족음도 업섯다. 가장 醜惡한 今時로 걱구러질 듯한 魍魎들이, 蠢動하는 뿌연 구름 속을 휘저면서, 定處 업시 흘너 가는 것 가타얏다. 生活이란 烙印이, 狡猾과 貪婪이라는 이름으로, 찍힌 얼굴들을 볼 때마다, 彼는 손에 들엇던 短杖으로, 대번에 모다 때려 누이고 십다고 생각하얏다.
「大體 너희들은 무슨 까닭에, 이다지 奔走히 왓다 갓다 하느냐? 어느 때까지 이것을 繼續하다가 꺽구러지랴느냐?」고, 소리를 버럭 지르고도 십헛다. 彼는 大漢門으로 向하야 精神 업시 一二町 가다가, 무슨 생각이 낫던지 光化門을 바라 보고 돌처 서며, 「무덤이다」 라고, 혼자 속으로 부르지젓다. 電車 線路를 건너서 遞信局까지 온 彼는, 工曹 뒤골로 들어서려다가, 「무엇이 人間大事다! 吊喪이나 하라 가라면 가지!」 목에 걸닌 痰이나 토하듯이, 배 속으로 한마듸 吐하고, 둘재 집 들어가는 골목을 지나첫다.
「...彼此에 코빽이도 못 본, 어떤 개 뼉다귄지 말 뼉다귄지도 모르는 男女가, 一生의 運命에 姦淫的 最後 決斷을 宣告하는 것이 무에 그리 慶事란 말인가. 仁川 米豆 以上의 더럽은 賭博을 하면서도 질거우니 반가우니...」 彼는 속으로 이가티 생각하며, 忿怒를 못 이기는 듯이, 입술을 뿌루퉁 내밀고, 미친 사람처럼 혼자 흥흥 코소리를 내며 것다가, 右便 어느 官舍 틈박우니에, 司僕開川으로 通한, 호젓한 길이 잇는 것을＜59＞ 생각하고 큰 길을 건너서, 左右 壁을 검은 板墻으로 돌너 막은 으슥한 골목으로 차저 드러섯다. 勿論 어대를 가랴는 向方이 잇서 그런 것은 아니엇다. 사람 그림자 업는 길을 單獨히 거러 보랴는 것이엇다. 이 길이 永遠히 連續 되엇스면 하며, 생각할 새도 업시 벌서 川邊에 나섯다. 彼는 어대로 向할가 暫間 멈읏멈읏 망서리다가 도로 집으로 向하기도 실흔 症이 나서, A를 가보기로 決心을 하고 다리를 건너섯다...
A는 마츰 畵室에서 나와서, 해빗이 쨍쨍히 비치는 마루 끗에 섯다가, 자최 업시 감안감안 기여 들어오는 彼을 보고, 暫間 寂寞한 때 마츰 잘 왓다는 듯이, 반기우며 自己 房으로 引導하얏다. 彼는 A를 따라 들어가는 길에, 自己 房 속에 門을 닷고 들어 안젓는 B와, 두어 마듸 人事를 하고 나서, B의 房門을 열어 보앗다. B와 冊床을 隔하야 업드려 무엇을 쓰고 잇던 鉛筆을 쉬이고 도라다 보며, 目禮를 하는 妙齡의 두 女子를 본 彼는, 그대로 房門을 닷고 A의 房으로 돌처 섯다.
「그 동안에 무엇햇소? 왜 한번도 안 왓서...」 A는 彼의 沈鬱한 얼굴을 들려다 보며 무럿다.
「하긴 뭘 해... 아! 아.」 彼는 선하픔을 쉬이며, 「가튼 얼굴을 每日 쳐다보는 것도 구치 안어서...」
「一葉落而天下知秋가 아니라, 一葉落而人生知醜인가. 하하하 아니, 友容知醜로군.」 하며 A는 우섯다.
繪具상자 뚝게에는 寫生板에 그리다 둔 肖像畵가 끼여 잇섯다.
「이거야 말로 醜面이로군...B君이 아닌가. 그러나 귀는 엇전 셈이야?」 彼는 B가 귀를 알는 것을 생각하며, 귀를 거릴대가, 餘白대로 남아 잇는 것을, 손가락으로 문대면서 무럿다.
「응, 요사이 先生, 귀먹어리가 되어서.」 A는 빙긋 우스면서,
「지금 보앗지? 先生, 그제부터 弟子가 생기여서, 벌서, (아니 라이크 유, 뚜유 라이크 미―?)를 가르치기에, 알는 귀가 點點 더 머러 가는 貌樣이야, 아하..., 벌서 軟化하야 가는 貌樣이니까, 只今 쯤은, 이만츰은 되엿겟지.」 A는 또다시 破顔大笑하며, 冊床 끗에 떠러털인 彼의 손등을 붓잡으며, 흉내를 내엿다.＜60＞
A도 따라서 깔깔 우스며,
「秋色이 方闌이라, 마음이 싱숭생숭 하는데 그런 滋味라도 잇서야지....結局 사람은 自己가 自身을 속여야만 살 수 잇는 동물이야!」 彼는 절뚝발이 兒孩를 생각하고, 「D君의 연은 妓生弟子로군」 하며, 속으로 憫笑하얏다. 弟子가 돌아간 後, B도 A의 房으로 와서, 弟子들을 中心으로 한 無用의 雜談을 2,30分間이나 하다가, 彼는 집으로 向하야 나왓다. 途中에서 C, D 兩人을 맛낫다. C는 彼를 맛나는 길로, 「색시 求햇서?」하고 무럿다. 近日 C에게는 장가를 가겟다고 뭇 사람더러 求婚하야 달나고 付托을 하는 一種의 버릇이 생기엇다. 그러나 本人도 實 업슨 弄談이려니와, 듯는 사람도 귀가로 들엇다, 彼는 E에게 칼침을 맛게!」 하며 弄談의 對答을 하고 나서, D에게 向하야,
「요사이 셈평이 좃소?」 하고 무럿다.
「셈평? 셈평이 조코 언쨘흔 것이 問題가 안이라, 죽겟느냐 살겟느냔 問題요....X君, 요사이 조금도 보이지 안키에, 죽엇나 살앗나 하얏더니 그래도 살아 잇섯구먼 하하하...」 D의 웃음에는 空虛하면서도 沈痛한 深刻味가 잇섯다. 京取에 失敗한 D의 얼굴에는, 表現할 수 업는 陰影이 가리워 잇섯다. 彼는 A의 집으로 向하는 兩人을 作別하고 도라섯다. 彼는 短杖을 득득 끌면서, 고개를 숙이고 司僕開川 川邊으로 나왓다.―
「...오늘날의 우리 가티 淺薄한 것들이 또 잇슬가...自己 自身까지 愚弄하지 안으면 滿足할 수 업다는 할 수 업는 怜悧한 듯한 愚物의 무리다...」 彼는 不快하야 못 견듸겟다는 듯이 입을 악물엇다가, 헷... 하며 혀를 한 번 차고, 또 다시 속으로 생각을 繼續하얏다.―
「...遊戱的 氣分을 빼노으면, 彼等에게 무엇이 남는다! 生活을 遊戱하고, 戀愛를 遊戱하고, 交情을 愚弄하고, 結婚問題에도 遊戱的 態度...所謂 藝術에까지 遊戱的 氣分으로 對하는 末種들이 안인가. 眞摯, 眞劍, 眞面目, 誠實, 努力이란 形容詞는, 모조리 否定하고 덤비는 似而非 떼카댄쓰다...苦惱?! 人間苦?!―그런게 잇슬 리가 잇나! A두, B두, C두, D두, E두... 모다 한 씨다...엣!...＜61＞ 그러나 大體 彼等이란 누구다? 彼等이라 하며 罵倒하는 自己 自身이, 벌서 그 한 分子가 안인가!? 안인가가 안이다. 그 首魁다...아! 아ㅅ!.」 彼는 어느 틈에 숙주감다리까지 왓다. 東十字角을 돌처 서려다가 좀 더 호젓한 길을 거러 보랴고, 三淸洞을 向하고 큰 길로 발을 떼여 노앗다. 宗親府 다리까지 와서 潺潺히 흘느는 開川 속을 드려다 보다가, 宗親府 大門 압 잔디 밧에 무릅을 세우고 안젓다. 夕陽을 재촉하는 해빨은, 아즉도 뜨거웟다. 낫잠을 못 잔 彼彼는 눈이 암울암울하야 오고, 눈찌가 간즈럽게 꼿꼿하고 압핫다. 漸漸 濛濛하야 오는 머리 속에, 彼는 또다시 想念을 繼續하얏다.
「...藝術이니 무엇이니 하야도, 結局은 物質生活의 奴隷밧게 되고만다. 所謂 「苦惱」라는 것도 結局 판이 不足하야서 나오는 것이 안인가. 깊혼데 根底를 둔 內部에서 타는 人間苦라는 것은 藥에 쓰랴도 업다...彼等이 괴로워 괴로워하며, 個性의 自由롭은 發顯이 無理하게 抑壓되는 것을 恨歎하며, 人生問題니, 厭世主義니 떠드는 것은, 판이 不足하다는 哀訴에 美裝한 粧具에 不過한 것이다. 주먼이가 묵직하면, 書齋에서 뛰여 나오는 似而非의 藝術家가 안인가. ..D君의 그 沈鬱한 悲痛한 陰影도 株券만 暴騰하면 夏日의 朝露다...흥 生死의 問題다! 뒤주 밋이 글키니까, 生死의 問題가 안인 것은 안이지만, 우리가 한번이라도 一生涯의 事業을 爲하야, 自己의 藝術의 宮殿을 爲하야, 人生의 아름답고 純潔한 情緖를 發露하는 戀愛를 爲하야, 悶悶한 心靈의 深刻하고 永遠한 苦惱를 爲하야, 生死의 問題다! 라고 부르즈즌 일이 잇섯나?...모든 것이 연이다. 절뚝발이 兒孩의 연에서 넘치지 안는다...自己 欺瞞, 自己 愚弄... 以外에 무엇이 잇섯는가?!」
조름은 어느덧 스러젓스나 四肢가 찟부드듯 하야 진다. 彼는 벌떡 이러나 다리를 다시 건너, 큰 길로 나오며,
「그러나 取할 點은 한아 잇다. 속되지 안타는 것! 俗衆과는 同化치 안는다는 것! 이것 뿐이다...」
彼는 이가티 속으로 부르지즈며, 집으로 向하엿다.
집에 들어 온 彼는 감안감안히 구쓰를 벗고 自己 房으로 바로 들어가서, 옷을 버서 던지고, 들어 누엇다. 눈을 감고 누어서 잠을 請하야 보다가, 다시 이러나서, 不規則하게 싸아 논 冊덤이에서, 有島武郞의 「出生의 苦惱라는＜62＞ 短篇集을 빼서 들고 다시 누엇다.

三

5,6페―지쯤 한 숨에 읽은 彼의 눈에는, 까닭 업는 눈물이 글성글성 하얏다. 彼는 일부러 씨서 버리랴고도 아니 하고, 그대로 壁을 向하야 누은 채, 다시 첫 페―지부터 再讀을 하얏다. 彼의― 눈물은 아즉도 마르지 안엇다. 10페―지, 20페―지쯤 가서, 彼는 손에 들엇던 冊을 편 채, 가만히 겻에 노코, 눈물이 말는 눈을 꼭 감고 누엇다. 彼의 一生에 처음 經驗하는 눈물이엇다. 人情美에 感激한 눈물은 旅行 中 車間에서도 흘녀 본 적이 잇섯다. 義憤이나 熱憤에 못 이겨서, 몸을 떨며 운 일도 잇섯다. 그와 반대로 月下에 離別을 哀惜하야 눈물 짓는 處女의 손을 붓들고도, 冷然히 도라설 만큼 淚線이 沽渴한 때도 잇섯다. 그러나 이 눈물은 自己 自身도 알 수 업는 눈물이엇다...彼는 그대로 잠이 들어다.
―床 바드라고 흔들려 깨인 때는, 房안이 어둑어둑 하얏다. 선잠을 깨인 彼는, 四肢의 疲勞는 풀닌 모양이나, 氣力이― 더 한層 묵업엇다. 눈을 뜨며, 깜작 놀라서 벌떡 이러 안는 彼의 머리 속에는, 「이 가티 苟苟히 무슨 까닭에 사느냐?」 濛濃한 意識이, 가장 敏速하게 電雷와 가티 반작하다가, 스러젓다. 烟草에 疲勞한 머리 속은, 납덩어리가 목에나 걸닌 듯이 묵업고 괴로웟다. 彼는 얼 업시 가만히 안젓다가 불이 번적 켜지는 데에 精神을 소스라처 房안을 휙 도라 보앗다. 冊床에 노힌 寫眞은, 如前히 눈을 말둥말둥 뜨고, 彼의 一擧一動을 冷然히 마조 보고 안젓다. 彼는 寫眞과 視線이 마조칠 때, 깜작 놀낫다. ―「이 사람이 全生涯를, 全運命을, 나에게 걸고 잇고나!...이, 나에게! 이 世上에서 한울가티 치여다 보는 사람도 이 사람 밧게는 업다...」 寫眞을 마조 보며, 이런 생각을 할 때, 彼의 등에서는 식은 땀이― 흐르는 것 가타얏다. 同時에 羞恥와 侮辱을 當한 것 가타얏다.
彼는 안으로 껄려 들어가 저녁 상을 바닷다. 오늘은 무슨 생각이 낫던지, 얼마 동안 끈흔 飯酒를 차젓다. 食事를 마치고 확근확근 얼굴에 바람을 쐬려고 길거리로 定處 업시 나왓다. 솔솔 뺨을 할고 가는 가을 저녁 바람은＜63＞ 愉快하얏다. 西十字角을 돌처서서, 景福宮을 바라보고 느럭느럭 나려왓다. 終點에 와서 닷는 電車마다 吐하야 내이는. 饑渴과 疲勞에 허덕이는 蠢動의 빗슬빗슬하는 발자최가, 하나 둘式 물너처 감을 따라, 六曹大路의 긴 무덤에는 次次 밤이 들어가고 듬은듬은 놉히 달닌 電燈 불빗은, 墓前의 독개비 불가티 엷은 저역 안개에 어룽어룽 번적어리엇다. 彼는 短杖을 힘것 휘저흐며, 먼 한울의 별을 치여다 보고 것다가, 몸부림을 하며 울고 십흔 症이 나서, 캄캄한 길 한 中턱에 웃득 섯다...空想은 또 彼의 머리를 占領하얏다.―彼는 속으로 부르지젓다.
「...아―, 大地에 업들어저, 이 눈에서 흘너 떠러지는, 쓰고 짠 눈물을, 이 붉은 입슐로 쪽쪽 빨며, 大地와 抱擁하고 뺨을 문즈를가!?...머리 우에 기리 나리운 夜光珠 가튼 뭇 별의 永遠히 끈어지지 안는 金銀의 굿센 실(糸)로, 이 全身을 에워 매우고, 「永遠」의 압헤 무릅을 꿀코 (「永遠」이시여! 이 可憐한 작은 生命에게 힘을 내리소서. 그러치 안으면, 이 작고 蒻하고 醜한 그림자를, 永遠히 비추이지 마소서.)―祈禱를 바치고 십다」 하고 彼는 혼자 생각하얏다.
彼의 눈에는 눈물이 그렁그렁 괴이고, 彼의 心臟에는 懇切하고 哀痛한 마음이 미여저서, 全 血管을 壓搾하는 듯 하얏다...
―彼는 確實치 못한 발끗을 操心하며, 無限히 뻐친 듯한 넓고 긴 光化門通 太平通을, 뚜벅뚜벅 거러 나갓다.
... (19, 10, 26 作)...＜64＞
＜53-64＞