別乾坤 第49號
1932년 03월 01일
滄海力士(第三回) (The Strong Man of the Sea, Part 3)
月明山人(述), 金奎澤(畵) (Wolmyeongsanjin (narrator), Kim Gyutae (Illustrator))
文藝其他 (Literature etc.)

Seo Bok, intoxicated by the wild ginseng energy, lay on a rock for a year.

After eating the wild ginseng, Seo Bok suddenly became disoriented and lay down on a rock. In a dreamlike state, his body floated high into the air, crossing the Amnok River in an instant, passing Liaodong, and entering Xianyang. The children on the street pointed and said that the Western scholar (Seobangsa 西方士) had returned from Gamsimsan (感心山) on a cloud. Knowing that he couldn't hide his tracks, he hurriedly entered the Ebang Palace (阿房宮) and prostrated himself before the throne. At that time, Emperor Qin (Sihwang 始皇帝) had narrowly escaped death after being stabbed by the Yan assassin Hyungga (荊軻). Although he had survived, he was so terrified that he was drenched in sweat at night and suffered from alternating chills and fever during the day, making him very anxious. The court physician Hamujeo (下無且) diagnosed that only wild ginseng from the Korean Changhae Kingdom (朝鮮 滄海國) could cure him. Emperor Qin had been eagerly waiting for Seo Bok and summoned the diviner Mumagi (無馬긔) to inquire about Seo Bok's news. The divination read:

A native points the way; a white deer has red tracks. Beneath Gwajong Rock (挂鍾岩), one root is three feet long.

Interpreting the divination, it meant: "A native guides the way, following the tracks of a white deer. Dig up a root beneath Gwajong Rock, and its length will be three feet." Emperor Qin became even more curious and eagerly awaited Seo Bok's arrival. Suddenly, Seo Bok prostrated himself before the throne, and Emperor Qin was overjoyed. He rushed down barefoot, took Seo Bok's hand, and led him to the throne, offering him three cups of wine and saying:

"After suffering such an unexpected misfortune, I contracted such a difficult disease. I have been waiting for you every day, and Mumagi's divination foretold that your arrival was near. Indeed, it has come to pass."

He showed Seo Bok Mumagi's interpretation. Seo Bok was greatly surprised and didn't know what to do. He knelt and said:

"Indeed, Mumagi's divination is accurate. I went to Odaesan (五臺山) in Changhae Kingdom, where a native guided me to follow the tracks of a white deer. Beneath Gwajong Rock, I found a wild ginseng that was three feet long. The native said that after finding the wild ginseng, I should offer a sacrifice to the mountain spirit. After bathing and preparing all the rituals, I completed the ceremony. Suddenly, a strong wind arose, and with a whistling sound, the wild ginseng flew into the air and disappeared. I was extremely frustrated and wanted to report this to Your Majesty. If I could find the wild ginseng again, I would bind it with chains and present it to Your Majesty without fail."

As Emperor Qin listened, he carefully looked at Seo Bok's face. His formerly wrinkled face was now radiant, and his once half-gray hair had turned black again. Emperor Qin suddenly became furious and said:

"It is clear that you ate the wild ginseng you found at Gwajong Rock. Since you have already taken the elixir, you should spend your days with immortals like Angisaeng (安期生) and Jeoksongja (赤松子) in Bongraebangjangbyeolyucheonji (蓬萊方丈別有天地). What are you seeking by deceiving me with such a scheme?" <26>

He summoned General Jucheong (周淸) and ordered him to execute Seo Bok. Jucheong obeyed and dragged Seo Bok to the marketplace to carry out the execution. His limbs were tied to four horse-drawn carriages, and a loud proclamation was made: "The traitor Seo Bok, guilty of deceiving the ruler, will be torn apart by carriages!" The sound faded, and the four horses were whipped at once. Seo Bok was startled and woke up, realizing it was all a dream on the rock. He opened his eyes and looked around, finding himself lying on the rock, soaked in sweat. His four children were holding his limbs, trying to carry him. He barely regained his senses and asked his children what had happened. They replied:

"After you went into the mountains, Father, you didn't return for a year. We became worried and searched for you, finding you lying on a rock like a drunkard. You were still warm, but you didn't respond when we called you. We were trying to carry you home."

Seo Bok then realized that he had fallen after being intoxicated by the wild ginseng energy. He washed his face in the stream and regained his composure. He followed his children home, feeling as light as if he were flying. He looked at his face in the mirror and saw that he had indeed become a young man with rosy cheeks and black hair. He quietly pondered the dream and couldn't help but feel terrified.

Seo Bok finds true wild ginseng, but a hunter steals it.

After obtaining the wild ginseng once and having a strange dream after eating it, Seo Bok was extremely anxious and sought to find more wild ginseng. He heard that there was a wild ginseng cave in Yedudong (禮斗洞) in Odaesan and performed a seven-day fast. In the middle of the night, he entered Yedudong and sat on a rock, looking around. The bright moonlight was like snow, and white dew fell in the air. A boy of about four or five years old came out of the cave, bowed to the moon, and prayed to the Big Dipper (Chilseong 七星). His hair was thick, and his entire body was like yellow jade. Seo Bok was overjoyed and thought to himself that this was the true form of wild ginseng. After returning, the next day, he took over a hundred men with him and placed nets around the area and ambushed them under the bushes, waiting for the wild ginseng to appear. Soon, the boy came out again and bowed to the moon as he had the night before. Seo Bok had his men place a medicine called Oryeongji (五靈脂) at the entrance of the cave and on all sides of the path, leaving only one place where they burned sandalwood and kept a lamp lit high. Then, he shouted loudly, threatening the boy. The boy was greatly surprised and tried to enter the cave, but the smell of Oryeongji was extremely foul. He turned back and retreated, but the foul smell of Oryeongji was everywhere. Only the smell of sandalwood remained in one place, so he went towards it but got caught in the net and was captured. Seo Bok was overjoyed and tied his limbs with ropes and put him in a wicker cage, covering him again with Oryeongji. The wild ginseng could no longer move and only screamed. It was the wild ginseng, who had transformed into a boy and came out every night, being subjected to such humiliation by unexpected thugs.

As the boy was screaming in the cage, a hunter happened to pass by Yedudong and saw the scene. He scolded them, saying:

"What kind of bandits are you to dare capture a child?"

He shouted loudly. Seo Bok's men were furious and tried to chase the hunter, but Seo Bok was worried that the wild ginseng would be startled and stopped his men. He politely said to the hunter:

"This is not a human child but the spirit of plants. You should ignore it and go."

At that moment, the wild ginseng stopped crying and cried out:

"Please save me, Father the Warrior!"

The hunter questioned him again, saying:

"If it is the spirit of plants as you say, then it must be wild ginseng. But what kind of group are you to dare dig up a treasure that is thousands of years old?"

Seo Bok laughed loudly and said:

"You are truly a mountain rustic. Have you not heard? I am the royal physician (Taeuigyeong 太醫卿) of the Qin Dynasty, and I have come to your country to seek wild ginseng under the order of the sacred emperor (Seongcheonja 聖天子). Your king has built a separate residence in Geumnan-dong (金蘭洞) and ordered local officials to protect me with utmost care. If I say a word to the local officials, your life will be in great danger. Do not dare speak disrespectfully and leave quietly."

The hunter laughed at his words and said:

"Is the sacred emperor you speak of not Yeo Buwi's (呂不韋) illegitimate son Yeojeong (려정), also known as King Jeong? What connection does a single King Jeong have with our country that he dares to allow your group to seek wild ginseng?"

Before he could finish speaking, Seo Bok's third son, Wonsamrang (元三郞), and third daughter, Hugangja (后康子), drew their swords and rushed at the hunter. The hunter swung his wooden club once, breaking Samrang and Gangja's right arms, and they both fell to the ground, spitting blood. Seo Bok was furious and ordered his men to surround the hunter and kill him with their weapons. The hunter snatched the wild ginseng cage with one hand and swung his wooden club with the other, fighting against the crowd. He moved like lightning, like a tiger entering a flock of sheep, rampaging through them. Finally, he released the wild ginseng, and a whistling sound echoed in the air as it flew away. The hunter dragged his wooden club and fled like the wind, and Seo Bok's men did not dare to chase after him. <29>

**Named Entities**

西王母	Seowangmo
압록강	Amnokkang
요동	Yodong
함양	Hamyang
西房士	Seobangsa
感心山	Gamsimsan
阿房宮	Ebang-gung
始皇帝	Sihwang
荊軻	Hyungga
下無且	Hamujeo
朝鮮 滄海國	Chosŏn Ch'anghae-guk
無馬긔	Mumagi
掛鍾岩	Kwajong-am
五臺山	Odaesan
安期生	Angisaeng
赤松子	Chŏksongja
蓬萊方丈別有天地	Pongnae-bangjang-byeollyuch'ŏnji
周淸	Chucheong
禮斗洞	Yedudong
七星	Ch'ilseong
五靈脂	Oryŏngji
金蘭洞	Kŭmnan-dong
呂不韋	Yŏ Buwi
려정	Yŏjŏng
元三郞	Wŏnsamrang
后康子	Hugangja


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제49호
발행일	1932년 03월 01일
기사제목	滄海力士(第三回)
필자	月明山人(述), 金奎澤(畵)
기사형태	문예기타

滄海力士
						月明山人(述), 金奎澤(畵)
서복이 산삼긔운에 취하야 일해동안을 바위우에 눕다.
서복이 산삼을 먹고난 후 벼란간 혼돈하야 바위ㅅ우에 드러누엇더니 홀연 비몽사몽간에 몸이 공중에 노피 떠올라가지고 얼는 압록강을 건너 순식난에 요동을 지나고 함양으로 드러가니 길거리의 아이들이 다투어 손으로 가르치며 서방사가 구름을 타고 감심산으로부터 도라온다 하거늘 자긔종적을 감추지 못할줄알고 급히 아방궁으로 드러가 궐하에 업드리니 그때는 마침 시황이 연나라자객 형가에게 불의의 변을 맛나 비수에 찔니어 죽을번하다가 다행이 몸을피하야 생명은 보존하엿스나 일차 그일을 당한뒤로는 간담이 놀래어 밤이면 허한이 전신을 적시고 나지면 한열이 왕래하야 심신이 심이 불안하든 끗치라 국의 하무저가 진찰해보고 조선 창해국의 산삼이 아니면 그증세를 낫게 할수업다하므로 시황이 서복오기를 눈이빠지게 기다리다가 술사 무마거를 불너 서복의 소식을 점처보니 점꽤에 하엿스되.
토인9土人)이 지로(指路)하니 백록(白鹿)이 유적(有赤)이라 괘종암하(挂鍾岩下)에 일근삼척(一根三尺)이로다.
하엿스니 그점꽤를 해석하고보면 「토인이 길을 가르처주니 흰사슴의 발자취가 잇도다. 괘종암바위 아래에 한뿌리를 캐여어드니 그기리가 석자러라.」하는 뜻이므로 시황이 더욱 궁금하야 서복오기를 목이마르게 기다리든 차에 벼란간 서복이 궐하에 업드리는 것을 보고 대희하야 버선발로 뛰여나려와 손을잡고 가치 전상으로 올나가 어주삼배를 권하고 반기어말하되
「짐이 그간에 여차여차한 불의지환을 당한 후 여차여차한 병을어더 가위난치이므로 날마다 경을 기다리다가 무마긔의 점꽤를 어드매 경의올날이 머지아니하믈 아럿더니 과연이로다.」
하고 무마긔의 점꽤해설을 내여보이거늘 서복이 그것을 한번 보고 마음에 심이놀래여 한출첨배 엇지 할줄을 모르다가 업대여 아뢰되
「과연 무마긔의 점꽤가 올토소이다. 소신이 창해국 오대산중에 가서 토인의 지로로 흰사슴의 자취를따라 패종암아래에서 석자기리되는 동삼을 어덧삽더니 토인의말에 산삼을 어드면 맛당이 산신령에게 치성을 해야한다 하옵기로 목욕재개하고 모든례식을 가추운 후 치성을 마치자 홀연광풍이 이러나며 휘파람한소리에 동삼이 공중으로 향하야 간곳이 업스므로 소신이 지극히 분통하와 페하전에 그사연을 아뢰옵고 다시가서 동삼을 엇게되오면 이번은 항쇄족쇄를 해서라도 노치지아니하고 페하께 바치겟나이다.」
하니시황이 그말을 드르면서 서복의 얼골을 자세이 처다본즉 전에는 느르든 얼골에 화색이 넘처흐르고 반백이나 되엿든 머리털이 다시 거문지라 시황이 문득 대로하야 가로대
「괘종암 알에서 어든 동삼을 네놈이 먹은줄 분명한지라 네 이미 선약을 먹엇스면 봉래방장별유천지에서 안긔생적송자가튼 신선을 따라 세월을 보내는 것이 가하겟거늘 또 무슨 흉게로 와서 짐을 속임은 무엇을 구함이뇨?」＜26＞
하고 대장군 주청을 불러서 서복을 극형에 처하라하니 주청이 명을듯고 서복을 끄러내려 저자에가 사형을 시행할새 그의 사지를 사마수레에 실코 크게 외우처가로되 대역부도긔군망상지죄인 서복은 수레로 찌저 조루를 돌린다하는 소리끈어지며 사마를 일제이 채질하는지라 서복이 마음에 앗찔하야 깜짝놀나 깨이니 바위우에 한마당 꿈이라 눈을 떠서 엽흘살펴보니 더운땀에 저진몸이 바위우에 누어잇고 자녀사인이 팔다리를 잡고 운반하거늘 정신을 겨우차려가지고 괴이하야 자녀에게 무른즉 자녀들이 대답하기를
「부친께서 산중으로 드러오신 후 일헤가되여도 도라오시지 아니하므로 저이들이 괴상하야 차저와서 이곳까지 와보온즉 부친께서 술이 취한 사람과 가치 바위우에 누어게시고 몸에 온기는 잇스나 불러도 아모 대답이 업스시무로 사지를 운반하야 가랴든 길이로소이다.」
하거늘 서복이 그제야 산삼긔운에 취하야 넘어진줄을 알고 시냇물에 세수를 하고 정신을 차린후 자녀를 따라 집으로도라오니 몸이가벼웁기 나는듯하고 거울을 드러 얼골을 보니 과연 홍안흑발의 갱소년이라 가만이 꿈일을 생각하고 황공한 마음을 금치못해하더라.

서복이 참동삼을 구해 어드니 포수역사가 그를 빼앗도다.
서복이 한번 산삼을 어덧다가 자긔가 먹고 괴상한 몽사를 본후로는 마음에 극히 불안하야 다시 동삼을 널리구할새 오대산중 예두동에 동삼굴이 잇다는 말을 듯고 칠일재게하고 밤중에 예두동에 들어가서 반석우에 안저 사방을 바라보니 명랑한 달비츤 눈과 갓고 흰이슬은 공중에 빗겻는데 사오세쯤된 동자가 굴로부터 나와 달보고 절하며 칠성에 예하니 머리덜이 다복다복하고 전신이 누른 옥가튼지라 서복이 대희하야 혼자말하되 원래 동삼의 모양이 저러하도다하고 도라온후 그이튼날에 다시 군중 백여인을 거느리고가서 사방에 츩그물을 처노코 수풀미테 매복하야 동삼의 나오기를 기다리더니 이윽고 과연 동자가 또나와 어젯밤과가치 달을 보고 절하는지라 서복이 군중으로 하야금 굴압과 사면길 초에 오령지라는 약을 허처노코 오직 한곳에만 자단향을 피우고 등불을 놉히 다라논후 크게 소리를 질노 동자를 위협하니 동자- 의외에 대경하야 굴로 드러가고저하다가 오령지의 냄새 극히 괴악한지라 즉사 몸을 피하야 다시 물러나오니 사면팔방에 모다 오령지의 악한 냄새뿐이요. 오직 한곳에 자단향 냄새가 날뿐이라 그곳을 향하야 가다가 츩그물에 걸니어 사로자핀바되니 서복이 대희하야 숙미노끈으로 사지를 동여매여서 싸리치룽에 너코 오령지로 다시 우를 덥흐매 동삼이 다시 움직이지못하고 오직 비명을 칠뿐이니 그는 동삼이 동자로 화신하야 밤마다 나오다가 뜻하지아니한 흉한들에게 그와가치 욕을당하미러라.
동자가 치룽속에서 한참 비명하는 판에 문득 한포수가 예두동을 지나다가 그 광경을 보고 꾸지저가로되
「너의들은 엇더한 강도로서 감이 어린아이를 사로잡느뇨.」
하고 고성대갈하니 서복의 군중이 대로하야 그포수를 따리려하니 서복이 동삼놀랠까 염녀하야 군중을 말니고 포수에게 공손이 일러가로되
「이것은 정작 인간의 아이가 아니라 초목의 정긔니 그대는 아는채 말고가라.」
하니 이때 동삼이 우름을 그치고 부르지저 가로되
「역사아버지는 가련한 저를 구해주소서.」
하거늘 포수! 다시 힐문하야 가로되.
「너의말과 가치 그것이 초목의 정긔라 하면 그는 반듯이 동삼이로다. 그런데 너이는 엇던무리로서 감히 수천년된 보화를 무란이 캐여가랴 하느냐.」
서복이 대소하며 가로되.
「네진실로 산곡우맹이로다. 네가 귀잇다하면 엇지 듯지 못하얏느냐. 내- 진나라 태의경으로 성천자의 명을 밧드러가지고 너의 나라로 동삼 구하러 드러왓스매 너의 나라왕이 금난동에 별관을 성하야 주접케 하고 지방관으로 하야금 극진이 보호하는중이니 내- 한마듸말로 지방관에게 부탁을 하는날이면 너의 생명이 극히 위험할것이니 불공한 말을 감히 하지말고  고히 물러가라.」
포수- 그 말을 듯고 도로혀 우스며 가로되
「너의 말하는바 성천자는 여불위의사생자여정을 이름이 아니냐. 일개여정이 우리나라에 무슨 관게 잇서서 감히 너의 무리로하야금 동삼을 구한단말이냐.」
말이 맛지못하야 서복의 셋재아들 원삼랑과 셋재딸 후강자- 일제이 칼을 들고 포수에게 달녀 들거늘 포수- 목봉을 한번휘두르니 삼랑과 강자의 오른팔이 부러지며 모다 땅에 업드러서 입으로 피를 토하는지라 서복이 대로하야 다리고온 군중으로하야금 포수를 에워싸고 병긔로써 처죽이려하니 포수- 한손으로는 동삼치룽을 빼아서들고 또한손으로는 목봉을 휘두루며 군중을 대항할새 동에가 번뜻 서에가 번뜻 좌충우돌하야 양의 떼가운데 호랑이 드러간것가치 횡행하는지라 마침내 동삼을 푸러노흐니 휘파람 한소리가 공중에 나며 나라다라나는 지라 포수- 목봉을 끄을고 몸을 빼처 비풍가치 다라나니 서복의 군중이 감히 쪼차따르지못하더라.＜29＞
＜26-29＞