잡지명	別乾坤 第18號
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮史上 風波만흔 七十一己巳錄 (Seventy-One Gisareuk Records of Tumultuous Events in Korean History)
필자	車相瓚
기사형태	문예기타 (Literature and Other)

Seventy-One Gisareuk Records of Tumultuous Events in Korean History
						Cha Sang-chan

1. Gisareuk and Political Changes in Korea

From the year Gisa, omitting four characters, up to the year Gisa in the 6th year of King Gojong of the Yi Dynasty, the Gisa year in the sexagenary cycle occurs 71 times in 4201 years. During that time, the political sea of the Korean Peninsula experienced turbulent changes, with many tragic and heartbreaking events, as well as many magnificent and exhilarating ones. While the ancient times of Dangun are too distant to discuss, even in the early days of the Three Kingdoms, in the year Gisa of 2342, the two fortresses of Wonsan and Geumhyeon in Mahan were annexed by Baekje, and Gija's successor, the final king of Mahan, Hag, was forced to move to the sea, shedding tears of national ruin. Everyone cannot help but feel immeasurably moved at the beginning of the history of Gisa. (In the 28th year of King Onjo of Baekje, King Hag of Mahan surrendered to Baekje.) Later, in the 11th year of King Munseong of Silla, the Gisa year, Ichan Kim Sik-daeshin and others revolted but failed and were executed, which was only a minor change. However, in the Gisa year of the 13th year of King Shindeok, General Wang Geon (later Taejo of Goryeo) of the newly rising Taebong Kingdom captured Jindo County and Yeolildo Island through military prowess, which can be described as a major storm in the declining mountains and rivers of Gyerim. As a result, Silla weakened further, and Wang Geon gained great fame, laying the foundation for the later founding of Goryeo, which is also noteworthy. Three hundred years passed like flowers falling and water flowing. In the 5th year of King Huijong of Goryeo, the Gisa year, a servant of Cheonggyo Station attempted to assassinate Choi Chung-heon and his son, who were powerful officials at the time, but the plot was discovered beforehand, and nine people, including Han Gi, were unjustly executed, making it a great tragedy. In the 10th year of King Wonjong, the Gisa year, the powerful official Lim Yeon and his associates deposed the king and enthroned An Gyeong-gong Chang, which can be considered a major upheaval even in the Goryeo kingdom, where the rise and fall of the throne was uncertain. Now, to discuss the outline of the rebellion, Lim Yeon was originally from Jincheon. He was once sentenced to death for a crime, but was saved by Kim Jun, a powerful official at the time. Yeon remembered his kindness and served Jun as a servant, and Jun's younger brother, Chung, as an uncle. When Yeon became a Privy Council Officer for his merit in killing Choi Eui, a powerful official, he competed with Kim Jun for power, and viewed Jun as a snake. In December of the 9th year of Wonjong, he conspired with the eunuchs Choi and Kim Gyeong to kill Jun's brothers and their clan. Yeon and the eunuchs Kim Gyeong and Choi were favored by the king for their merit in killing Kim Jun, and their power tilted the court and the country. Yeon also hated that Imperial Censor Jang Gyeol and General Gi Un were trusted by the king, and after exiling them to remote areas, he conspired with Minister of War Gye Jangg-yong and summoned the Sambyeolcho (Initially, Choi Woo, concerned about the rampant banditry in the country, had brave soldiers patrol every night, calling them Yabyeolcho (Night Special Forces). This was divided into two units, left and right, and those who returned to the country from Yuan were recruited to form the Shinui Division, which is the so-called Sambyeolcho.) and the six divisions of Dobang, and finally imprisoned the king in a separate palace and enthroned An Gyeong-gong Chang, the younger brother of Wonjong. This was in June of Gisa. At that time, Wonjong's crown prince was in Mongolia (i.e., Yuan). When he arrived at Baseo-bu (present-day Jiuliancheng, Manchuria) on his way back, he heard of the rebellion in his country and went to Yanjing again to request the Mongol king to punish Lim Yeon's crimes. The Mongol Emperor Sejo sent Black Deer, a vice minister of the Ministry of War, to question the reasons for the deposition of the king and intervened in various ways to restore Wonjong to the throne. Lim Yeon was summoned, and fearing that misfortune would befall him, he died of carbuncles. The king went to Mongolia again, and returned with the crown prince under the protection of Mongol soldiers. In May of the following year, Lim Yeon's son, Yimo, was beheaded in the marketplace, and Yimo's father-in-law, Lee Eung-yeol, was also exiled. The king finally regained his power, and the political upheaval came to an end.

The next political upheaval was in November of the first year of King Chang of Goryeo, when Yi Seong-gye deposed King Chang of Goryeo and enthroned Jeongchang-gun Yo (the 7th generation descendant of King Sinjong, i.e., King Gongyang). This was less of a temporary political change and more of a preparatory action for Yi Seong-gye to usurp the throne of the Goryeo dynasty. In the previous year (Muin), Yi Seong-gye turned his army back from Wihwa Island, executed Choi Yeong, the cornerstone of Goryeo and his political enemy, and exiled King U to Ganghwa, enthroning U's son, Chang (Chang was the 9th generation descendant of Geun in that year). In that year, when U was relocated from Ganghwa to Yeoju, he became even more dissatisfied and conspired with heavy ministers such as Byeon An-yeol, Lee Rim, and Woo Hyeon-bo to assassinate Yi Seong-gye. When the plot was discovered, Seong-gye exiled the aforementioned individuals to remote areas and also sought to eliminate the deposed King U and the current King Chang. He gathered a large army at Heungguksa Temple and threatened the court officials, saying, "U and Chang are not of the Wang clan, but actually of the Sin clan (claiming to be descendants of the wicked monk Shin Don). Not only are they unfit to perform ancestral rites, but also the Ming Emperor has ordered the abolition of the false and the establishment of the true. It is natural to obey this." He then deposed King Chang, made him a commoner, and enthroned Jeongchang-gun.
(In December of the same year, U was killed in Gangneung, and Chang in Ganghwa at the same time.) This question of whether U and Chang were truly of the Wang clan or not is a major mystery in history. Yi Seong-gye's claim that they were of the Sin clan certainly had some basis, but we must examine the hidden, sinister plot behind it. Although the world guessed that Choi Yeong was branded as a traitor and killed because Yi Seong-gye's ambition lay elsewhere, the claim that King U and King Chang were of the Sin clan was an even bigger and more sinister scheme. At that time, no matter how great Yi Seong-gye's power was, the heavy ministers of Goryeo still held power, and the hearts of the general public had not yet turned to the Yi clan. Moreover, the newly rising Ming Dynasty in neighboring China was watching the Korean Peninsula with fierce eyes. If Yi Seong-gye had not used the claim that U and Chang were of the Sin clan as an excuse and had dared to depose the king as he did, not only would the Yi clan have been branded as usurpers, but also the pro-royalist faction at the time would have risen up and launched a movement to denounce the Yi clan's crimes. If they had reported the facts to the Ming Dynasty, and if a foreign intervention issue had arisen, as when Lim Yeon deposed King Wonjong of Goryeo, it would have been a major problem, and it is uncertain what would have happened to the Yi clan's royal enterprise. However, the insightful Yi Seong-gye foresaw this and successfully raised this issue, achieving his goal. However, it is pitiful and unjust for King U and King Chang, who were heads of state even for a short time, to become wronged spirits who died in remote border regions, and even their surnames have become obscured, making it difficult for others to know the truth. Although there is a story in *Dam Yasa* about a golden dragon on the left side (legend has it that the Wang clan is of dragon lineage, so those who would become king must have dragon scales, and there are many records that these two, U and Chang, also had dragon scales on their left sides), the so-called official history still refers to them as Sin U and Sin Chang, so how can they not shed tears of injustice even after a thousand years underground?

Descending to the Yi Dynasty, in the 15th year of King Sukjong, the Gisa year, a major upheaval occurred in the political world due to the so-called designation of the Crown Prince and the Deposition of the Queen. Originally, behind Queen Min of Sukjong were the Westerners (Seoin) such as Song Si-yeol, Kim Su-heung, and Kim Su-hang, and behind Consort Jang were the Southerners (Namin) such as Lee Hyeon-gi, Nam Chi-hun, and Yun Bin, who competed with each other for power. When Queen Min had no children and Consort Jang gave birth to Prince Yun (later King Gyeongjong), the Southern faction advocated for Yun to be designated as the Crown Prince, while the Western faction advocated that it was too early to establish an heir. Eventually, Sukjong followed the Southern faction's advice and sealed Yun as the Crown Prince and promoted Jang So-ui to Hee-bin (Royal Noble Consort), and at the same time, he exiled Song Si-yeol, the leader of the opposition faction, to Jeju Island and later had him executed (at the age of 83). Others, such as Kim Su-heung and Kim Su-hang, were either exiled or killed, and the Southern leaders Kwon Dae-un, Mok Rae-seon, and Kim Deok-won were appointed to important positions. The Gyeongsin Persecution was reversed, which is the so-called Gisa Hwan-guk (Gisa Change of Power). Subsequently, in May of that year, the king also deposed Queen Min and promoted Consort Jang to queen. More than 80 Westerners, including Oh Du-in, Park Tae-bo, and Lee Se-hwa, submitted memorials opposing this, and all were subjected to cruel torture. Park and Oh died on their way to exile. This was a major tragedy of Sukjong's reign, and the details are quite complex, but they will be discussed in detail in another article, so they are omitted here. One more thing to mention is that in the 25th year of King Gyeongjong, the Gisa year, the king, due to illness, allowed Crown Prince Yeongjo to rule on his behalf. This is the last record of the Gisa year in the history of the Yi Dynasty.

2. Gisa and International Relations

The first year in the history of Gisa in which there was an international issue was the 3rd year of King Jeomhae of Silla (Dangi 2582), the Gisa year. Silla had been communicating with Japan (then called Wae) and sending envoys back and forth, but they had always looked down on Wae. In that year, a Wae envoy came, but Seok U-ro, the son of King Naehae, rejected him and jokingly said, "Sooner or later, Silla will make your king a salt slave and your queen a cooking maid." The king of Wae was greatly angered by this and raised an army to invade. U-ro went to the king and said, "Today's chaos is due to my slip of the tongue, so I will take responsibility." He went to the Wae army and apologized for his previous joke, but the Wae did not listen and captured U-ro and burned him to death before retreating. Later, when the Wae envoy came again, U-ro's wife requested the king to avenge her husband, and while hosting the Wae envoy at her home, she took advantage of their intoxication and burned them to death. This fact was a major issue to be specially noted in the diplomatic history of Silla. Later, in the Gisa year of the 77th year of King Jangsu of Goguryeo (11th year of King Soji of Silla), Goguryeo especially made peace with Wei of China, a neighboring country bordering them, and envoys traveled back and forth three times. In the 14th year of King Jinheung of Silla, the Gisa year, Emperor Liang sent Buddha relics. Goguryeo sent envoys to Eastern Wei, and Baekje sent envoys to Liang to establish friendly relations. In the 9th year of King Munmu, the Gisa year, Kim Chun-ryang sent a map to Tang. This was because Silla was increasingly invading Baekje's territory, and they were concerned that there might be a misunderstanding from Tang, so they sought their understanding. Then, in the Goryeo Dynasty, what is especially noteworthy is the 20th year of King Hyeonjong, the Gisa year. In March of that year, pirates from Eastern Jurchen invaded Myeongju (present-day Gangneung) but were repelled by Kim Hu, which was not a big deal. However, the fact that the Gangwon area was temporarily in turmoil at that time is a fact. Also, the fact that the Khitan envoy Yelyu Yeon-nyeong and the crown prince of Tamna, Go-cho-no, came to offer all kinds of goods is something that cannot be left out of diplomatic history. One thing that stands out among them is that the envoy of Heungryo (The Restored Liao) Kingdom, Go Gil-deok, came to report the founding of the country and also requested reinforcements. King Tae Yeon-ju of Heungryo was originally the 7th generation descendant of Dae Jo-yeong, the founder of the Balhae Kingdom, and became the Commander of Donggyeong of Khitan. However, he had always been resentful that his homeland, Balhae, had been destroyed by Khitan, and he had harbored a great ambition to restore it. In this year, he raised the flag of rebellion, established the new Heungryo Kingdom, named the era Cheonheung, and notified Goryeo, his compatriot, of the facts, requesting reinforcements to fundamentally destroy Khitan. However, the Goryeo rulers and ministers, who were complacent and singing of peace in the small Korean Peninsula, disregarded his words and did not respond. When Heungryo joined forces with the Northeastern Jurchen to attack Khitan for the second time, Tae Yeon-jeong, the Grand Master of Heungryo, came to the court again to request reinforcements, but it was also rejected, and Heungryo was eventually destroyed by Khitan in the following year, Gyeong-o. This is a major regret in the diplomatic history of Goryeo. If Goryeo had cooperated with Heungryo at that time and attacked Khitan from both inside and outside, they could have sufficiently destroyed Khitan and restored the former territory of Balhae, that is, the territory of Goguryeo, and become a great power in the East. Next, in the 5th year of King Huijong, the Gisa year, the fact that Sa Hong-gi was sent to the Jin Dynasty as a condolence envoy (when King Xian Zong of Jin died) and the fact that Sun Geo-gwan, the envoy of the Jin Dynasty, came to inform of the death is a simple fact, so there is no particular problem. However, in the 10th year of King Wonjong, the Gisa year, the powerful official Lim Yeon deposed King Wonjong, which is complicated. However, it was briefly introduced when discussing the political upheaval above, so it is omitted here. Later, in the 16th year of King Chungsuk, the Yuan envoy came to inform of the enthronement of their emperor.
In the Gisa year of the first year of the deposed King Chang (first year of King Gongyang), an envoy was sent to establish friendly relations with the newly rising Ming Dynasty, but it was unsuccessful. An envoy came from Ryukyu (Okinawa) to offer tribute, so a return envoy was sent. What is especially noteworthy in this year is that Park Wi, the commander of Gyeongsang Province, led 100 warships to conquer Tsushima Island, greatly burning it down. At that time, even though Goryeo's national fortune was already declining, the fact that there was such a magnificent act shows how great Goryeo's military power was. Two hundred and forty years later, in the 7th year of King Injo of the Yi Dynasty, the Gisa year, an envoy from Ryukyu came to the court to offer gifts. In this year, one more thing to mention for reference is that the Ming general Yuan Chonghuan executed Commander Mao Wenlong for his crimes. Wenlong was originally from Shandong, China, and lived in Qiantang, Zhejiang Province, leading an extremely poor life. In the 33rd year of Wanli (38th year of King Seonjo), he suddenly became the Liaodong Commander. In February of the first year of Tianqi (13th year of King Gwanghae), when Liaoyang fell to the Qing army, he escaped and took refuge in Uiju, Korea. He killed the general and then established a garrison on Chulsan Dando (in the South Sea of Chulsan County, which the Chinese call Pidao) in the following year. This was called the Donggang Garrison, and at the same time, garrisons were established in Chulsan Saryang and Sinmido (also known as Unchongdo). He summoned the scattered soldiers of the Ming Dynasty and contacted Dengzhou in Shandong to transport goods and provisions. His fame spread both internally and externally. The Ming Emperor especially awarded him the title of Commander-in-Chief and the Left Imperial Censor, and even bestowed upon him the Shangfang Sword and the Imperial Seal. However, Wenlong was arrogant and boastful. He repeatedly suffered defeats along the Yalu River and Ansan Station (Southern Manchuria), but he completely covered them up to boast of his achievements, always reporting victories and bribing powerful officials to receive generous rewards. In the 5th year of King Injo (6th year of Tianqi of Ming), when the Qing army invaded Korea in the year of Ding-myo, they also attacked Dando. Wenlong fled to Sinmido. Realizing the gravity of the situation, he secretly communicated with the Qing Dynasty, acting disloyally to his own country. He sometimes even secretly informed the enemy of Korea's national situation, and his tyranny against Koreans was so severe that the Pyeongan Governor reported the matter to the Ming Dynasty. Yuan Chonghuan, the Liaodong Military Commissioner of Ming, lured Wenlong to Shuangdao in Lushun, proclaimed his 12 crimes, and executed him. (June of the 2nd year of Chongzhen) Later, in the 9th year of King Sunjo, the Gisa year, an official was sent to Tsushima Island to discuss the establishment of friendly communication. This Gisa marked the end of international negotiations in the Gisa years of the Yi Dynasty.

3. Gisa and Korean Culture

Turning our eyes back to the cultural aspect, when examining the Gisa years of the past dynasties, first of all, in the Three Kingdoms period, in the 27th year of King Onjo, the founder of Baekje, the Gisa year, Baekje built the Daedusan Fortress, which is a fact that cannot be omitted in architectural history. Later, in the 24th year of King Geunchogo, the Gisa year (14th year of King Naemul of Silla), the king held a flag inspection ceremony, in which all kinds of flags were made yellow, which was a unique spectacle. Also, in the 13th year of King Nulji of Silla, the Gisa year (17th year of King Jangsu of Baekje), the new construction of the Sajetijeong embankment, which was 2270 steps long, was a great public work. In the 11th year of King Soji of Silla, the Gisa year, all the wandering people of the country were gathered and made to return to farming, which shows how much Silla emphasized agriculture at that time. And in the 10th year of King Jinheung, the Gisa year, the high monk Gakdeok of Silla realized the Buddhist law in Liang, China, and returned home with the Liang envoy, carrying Buddha relics. This was the first time that relics came to the Eastern Country, so the king ordered all officials to prepare rituals and greet them in front of Heungnyunsa Temple. In the 9th year of King Munmu, the Tang monk Sinhye was appointed to the position of Minister of the Great Secretariat, participating in state affairs, and this was the first time that a monk was appointed as an official. In the same year, the Tang monk Beopan requested two boxes of magnets from Silla at the request of Emperor Gaozong of Tang. Also, Nuso Gu Jincheon (He used the 1000-step crossbow, but Gu Jincheon thought that teaching it to foreign countries would be detrimental to the country, so he did not teach it). In addition, one more thing to introduce is that National Preceptor Uisang Daesa realized the Buddhist law and returned home. He was of the Kim clan by birth. He once went to Tang with Wonhyo at the age of 29 to learn Buddhist law, but was captured by the Sulla soldiers in Liaodong and imprisoned. After several months, he was released and returned. He took another Tang ship and arrived at Jisangsa Temple on Mount Zhongnan in Yangzhou, where he received the true secret of this path from Zen Master Zhiyan. In this year, he returned home and resided in Chu-dong, Sobaeksan Mountain. His disciples reached 3,000, among whom Ojin, Jitong, Pyohun, Jinjeong, Jinjang, Doyung, Yangwon, Sangwon, Nengin, and Uijeok were the so-called 10 Virtuous Ones of the Sang School, who were famous in this field. Three hundred and sixty years passed, and in the 20th year of King Hyeonjong of Goryeo, the Gisa year, Lee Geo-do built the Gyeongju Naseong by royal order. In the 6th year of King Seonjong, the Gisa year, the National Academy was repaired, and in January, the king released the grain from the New Heunggok Warehouse and distributed it to the temples in the capital, holding a memorial service to pray. In October, a 13-story golden pagoda was newly cast and enshrined in Hoenyeong Hall, holding a celebratory meeting. After lecturing on the Inwanggyeong in Hoenyeong Hall, he gave food to 30,000 monks, and the Queen Mother created Gukcheongsa Temple in the western suburbs. At this time, the Goryeo Buddhism was at its peak, and its influence on general culture was also significant. And in the first year of the deposed King Chang, the Gisa year, it became a custom to record historical drafts and send them to the Historical Archives, which is also something that cannot be omitted in historical studies. Next, in the 31st year of King Sejong of the Yi Dynasty, the Gisa year, the king ordered Choi Hang to translate the Hongmu Jeong-eun and named it Dongguk Jeong-eun, and also ordered Shin Suk-ju to select the Saseong Tonggo, which shone a light on Korean literary history. In the 2nd year of King Seonjo, the Gisa year, the famous scholar and politician Yulgok Lee I presented the Dongho Mundap to the king. In the 7th year of King Injo, the Gisa year, the Elementary School Saseo Chosi Jeje, Hapje, and Sinmyeonghui Gilgang were established. In the 25th year of King Yeongjo, the Gisa year, the Gunggwan Gong-sang Jeong-rye, Guk-hon Jeong-rye, Gaksa Jeong-rye, and Sang-bang Jeong-rye were published and named Dodo-bu Jeong-rye. Finally, in the 6th year of King Gojong, the Gisa year, I will briefly introduce Kang Wi's treatise on the decomposition of Korean alphabets.

4. Gisa and Natural Disasters

Which year would be without natural disasters over thousands of years, but this Gisa year seems to have had uniquely more. Now, to speak of the outline, firstly, in the last days of Mahan - the first year of King Jongtong, the Gisa year, there was a great famine under heaven, and many people starved to death. Descending to the Three Kingdoms period, in the 3rd year of King Biyu of Baekje, the Gisa year (13th year of King Nulji of Silla), there was an earthquake in Baekje. In the 31st year of King Jinpyeong of Silla, the Gisa year, a great fire broke out under Mojigeok, burning from spring to winter. Not only was there damage to forests and fields, but there were also many injuries to people and livestock. In the 5th year of King Wonseong, the Gisa year, there was a severe famine near Hansan, so relief was provided. In the Goryeo period, in the 16th year of King Chungsuk, the Gisa year, there was a severe drought, so in May, the king ordered female shamans to gather and perform rainmaking rituals for six days. Later, in the 25th year of King Yeongjo of the Yi Dynasty, the Gisa year, a great epidemic of cattle disease broke out in the country, so by royal order, an altar was built at Jeonchun Bridge (commonly known as Salgoji Bridge) and a livestock sacrifice was performed. In the 9th year of King Sunjo, the Gisa year, the drought was extreme, so the king personally performed a rainmaking ritual at Namdan. Also, in that year, a famine broke out, so relief was provided with national grain. Finally, in the 6th year of King Gojong, the Gisa year, there was an earthquake, and in some places, even doors and windows shook. This was a rare event in Korea.

**Named Entities**

馬韓	Mahan
圓山	Wonsan
錦峴	Geumhyeon
箕子	Kija
學	Hag
百濟	Paekche
溫祚王	Onjo-wang
伊飡 金式大昕	Ichan Kim Sik-taeshin
新羅	Silla
文聖王	Munseong-wang
神德王	Shindeok-wang
泰封國	T'aep'ongguk
王建	Wang Kŏn
麗太祖	Yŏ T'aejo
珍島郡	Chindo-gun
裂夷島	Yŏrildo
鷄林	Kyerim
熙宗	Hŭijong
崔忠憲	Ch'oe Ch'unghŏn
韓琦	Han Ki
元宗	Wŏnjong
林衍	Im Yŏn
安慶公 淐	An Kyŏng-gong Ch'ang
鎭川	Chinch'ŏn
金俊	Kim Chun
崔誼	Ch'oe Ŭi
樞密府使	Ch'umilp'usa
蛇蝎	sagyŏl
金鏡	Kim Kyŏng
張季烈	Chang Kye-yŏl
奇蘊	Ki Un
季藏用	Kye Chang-yong
三別抄	Sambyŏlch'o
崔瑀	Ch'oe U
夜別抄	Yabyŏlch'o
神義部	Sinŭibu
別宮	Pyŏlgung
蒙古	Monggo
元國	Wŏn-guk
婆娑府	P'asa-bu
燕京	Yŏn-gyŏng
蒙古世祖	Monggo Sejo
兵部侍郞 黑的	Pyŏngbusirang Hŭktŏk
惟茂	Yu-mo
李應烈	I Ŭng-nyŏl
王昌	Wang Ch'ang
李成桂	I Sŏng-gye
定昌君 瑤	Chŏngch'ang-gun Yo
恭讓王	Kongyang-wang
麗朝	Yŏjo
威化島	Wihwa-do
崔塋	Ch'oe Yŏng
江華	Kanghwa
驪州	Yŏju
邊安烈	Pyŏn An-yŏl
李琳	I Rim
禹玄寶	U Hyŏn-bo
興國寺	Hŭngguksa
辛氏	Sin-ssi
妖僧 神吨	Yosŭng Sin-don
明帝	Myŏngje
姜陵	Kangnŭng
*談野史	*Tam Yasa
左脇金鱗	Chwagyŏp Kŭmrin
李朝	Ijo
肅宗	Sukjong
閔氏	Min-ssi
宋時烈	Song Si-yŏl
金壽興	Kim Su-hŭng
金壽恒	Kim Su-hang
禧嬪張氏	Hŭibin Chang-ssi
李玄紀	I Hyŏn-gi
南致薰	Nam Chi-hun
尹彬	Yun Bin
王子 昀	Wangja Yun
景宗	Kyŏngjong
建儲尙早	Kŏnch'u Sangjo
張昭儀	Chang So-ŭi
濟州	Cheju
權大運	Kwŏn Tae-un
睦來善	Mok Rae-sŏn
金德遠	Kim Tŏk-wŏn
庚申	Kyŏngsin
吳斗寅	O Tu-in
朴泰輔	Pak T'ae-bo
李世華	I Se-hwa
栲刑	k'ohyŏng
英祖	Yŏngjo
沾解王	Chŏmhae-wang
檀紀	Tan-gi
倭	Wae
奈解王	Naehae-wang
昔于老	Sŏk U-ro
長壽王	Changsu-wang
炤智王	Soji-wang
魏	Wi
眞興王	Chinhŭng-wang
梁帝	Yangje
文武王	Munmu-wang
欽純良圖	Hŭm Sun-ryang-do
唐	Tang
顯宗	Hyŏnjong
溟州	Myŏngju
江陵	Kangnŭng
金後	Kim Hu
契丹	Khitan
耶律延寧	Yelyul Yeon-nyeong
耽羅	Tamnra
孤鳥弩	Ko-cho-no
興遼國	Hŭngnyo-guk
高吉德	Ko Kil-tŏk
太延珠	T'ae Yŏn-ju
渤海國	Palhae-guk
太祖 大祚榮	T'aejo Tae Cho-yŏng
東京將軍	Tonggyŏng Changgŭn
天興	Chŏnhŭng
太師太延定	T'aesa T'ae Yŏn-jŏng
吊慰使	Chowisa
金主憲宗	Kŭmjuhŏnjong
孫居寬	Son Kŏ-gwan
忠肅王	Ch'ungsuk-wang
後廢王 昌	Hup'yewang Ch'ang
琉球	Ryukyu
慶尙道	Kyŏngsang-do
元師 朴葳	Wŏnsa Pak Wi
對馬島	Taemado
仁祖	Injo
袁崇煥	Wŏn Ch'onghwan
毛文龍	Mo Munryong
山東	Shandong
浙江省 錢塘	Chŏlgyangsŏng Ch'ŏnt'ang
萬曆	Manryŏk
宣祖	Sŏnjo
遼東都司	Yodongdusa
天啓	Ch'ŏn'gye
光海朝	Kwanghaejo
遼陽	Yoyang
義州	Ŭiju
鐵山 椴島	Ch'ŏlsan Tando
蛇梁	Saryang
身彌島	Sinmido
雲從島	Unch'ongdo
東江鎭	Tonggangjin
登州	Tŭngju
總兵左都督	Ch'ongbyŏng Chwado-dok
尙方釢	Sangbangnal
璽書	saesŏ
押綠沿岸	Aplyok Yŏnan
鞍山驛	Ansannyŏk
平安監司	P'yŏngan Kamsa
遼東經略 猿崇煥	Yodong-kyŏngnyak Wŏn Ch'onghwan
旅順	Ryosun
雙島	Ssangdo
崇禎	Sungjŏng
純祖	Sunjo
始祖 溫祚王	Sijo Onjo-wang
大豆山城	Taedusan-sŏng
近肖古王	Kŭnch'ogo-wang
奈勿王	Naemul-wang
訥祗王	Nŭlchi-wang
矢堤岸	Saje-an
眞平王	Chinp'yŏng-wang
毛只獄下	Moji-ŏk-ha
元聖王	Wŏnsŏng-wang
漢山	Hansan
覺德	Kaktŏk
支那梁	Chinaraeng
興輪寺	Hŭngnyunsa
唐僧 信惠	Tangsŭng Sinhye
政官大書省	Chŏnggwan Taesŏsŏng
唐僧 法案	Tangsŭng Pŏpan
高宗	Kojong
弩師仇珍川	Nusa Kujinch'ŏn
義湘大師	Ŭisang Taesa
元曉	Wŏnhyo
遼東	Yodong
戌邏卒	sullachol
楊州	Yangju
終南山 至相寺	Chongnamsan Chisangsa
智儼禪師	Chiŏm Sŏnsa
小白山 錐洞	Sobaeksan Ch'widong
悟眞	Ojin
智通	Chit'ong
表訓	P'yohun
眞定	Chin-jŏng
眞藏	Chinjang
道融	Toyung
良圓	Yangwon
相源	Sangwon
能仁	Nŭngin
義寂	Ŭijŏk
湘門	Sangmun
李可道	I Kŏ-do
開京 羅城	Kagyŏng Nasŏng
宣宗	Sŏnjong
國學	Kukhak
新興倉	Sinhŭngch'ang
金塔	Kŭmt'ap
會寧殿	Hoenyŏngjŏn
慶讚會	Kyŏngch'anhoe
仁王經	Inwanggyŏng
國淸寺	Kukch'ŏngsa
史草	Sacho
史館	Sagwan
世宗	Sejong
崔恒	Ch'oe Hŭng
洪武正韻	Hongmu Chŏng-un
東國正韻	Tongguk Chŏng-un
申叔舟	Sin Suk-chu
四聲通攷	Sasŏng T'onggo
栗谷 李珥	Yulgok I I
東湖問答	Tongho Mundap
小學四書初試製, 合製, 申明熙 訖講	Sohak Sasŏ Chosi Cheje, Hapje, Sinmyŏnghŭi Kilgang
各宮殿 供上定例, 國婚定例, 各司定例, 尙方定例	Kak Kungjŏn Kongsang Chŏng-rye, Kukhon Chŏng-rye, Kaksa Chŏng-rye, Sangbang Chŏng-rye
度支部 定例	Tojibu Chŏng-rye
姜瑋	Kang Wi
擬定國文字母分解	Ŭijŏng Kugmungja-mo Punhae
末季宗統王	Malgye Jongtong-wang
毗有王


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제18호
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮史上 風波만흔 七十一己巳錄
필자	車相瓚
기사형태	문예기타

朝鮮史上 風波만흔 七十一己巳錄
						車相瓚
1. 己巳와 朝鮮의 政變

우으로 (4자 삭제-원문)己巳를 비롯하야 아래로 李朝 高宗 6年 己巳에 이르기까지 4201年동안에 己巳年이란 干支는 凡71回를 헤이게 되엿다. 그 새이에 半島의 政海는 千波萬瀾으로 變動이 激甚하야 혹은 痛絶悲絶한 일도 만코 혹은 壯絶快絶한 일도 만타. 上古檀箕時代는 遙矣莫論이어니와 삼국의 초엽으로 말해도 (2자 삭제-원문) 2342년 기사에 馬韓의 圓山錦峴 2성이 백제에 幷呑되고 箕子의 전통인 馬韓의 最終王 學이 海上에 遷徒하야 亡國의 淚를 흘리게 된 것은누구나 己巳史上에 劈頭로 感慨無量의 懷를 禁치 못할 것이다. (百濟 溫祚王 28년에 馬韓王 學이 百濟에 降함) 其後 新羅 文聖王 11년 己巳에 伊飡 金式大昕등이 반란을 이르키다가 失敗伏誅한 것은 一時小變에 불과하나 神德王 13년 기사에 新興한 泰封國의 장군 王建(卽 麗太祖)이 武功으로 珍島郡과 裂夷島를 攻取한 것은 黃落한 鷄林山河에 一大暴風이라 안이 할 수 업다. 그로 인하야 신라가 더윽 쇠약하야지고 王建은 一大 威名을 어더서 후일 고려 건국한 토대가 된 것은 또한 주목할 일이다. 花謝水流 300년을 經하야 高麗 熙宗 5년 己巳에 靑郊驛吏가 당시 權臣 崔忠憲의 父子를 謀殺하다가 未然에 事가 發覺되야 韓琦등 連累者 9人이 一時 寃血을 흘인 것은 慘劇중 大慘劇이오. 元宗 10년 己巳에 權臣 林衍輩가 왕을 廢하고 安慶公 淐을 옹립한 일은 아모리 왕위의 存廢가 무상한 고려의 국가에 잇서서도 一大怪變이라 안이 할 수 업다. 이게 그 變亂의 大槪를 논할진대 원래 林衍은 鎭川사람으로일즉 이 罪를 得하야 죽게 되엿섯는데 당시 權臣 金俊의 救護로 得免하매 衍이 其德을 思하야 俊을 부로 事하고 俊의 弟 沖은 叔父로 事하더니 衍이<2> 權臣 崔誼를 誅한 功으로 樞密府使가 됨에 及하야는 金俊과 세력을 서로 닷투다가 間隙이 생겨서 俊을 蛇蝎가타 視하던 바 元宗 9년 12월에 遂히 宦者 崔* 金鏡 等과 相謨하고 俊의 형제와 其 族黨을 盡滅하얏섯다. 衍이 宦者 金鏡과 崔*이가 金俊을 誅한 功으로 王에게 寵幸하야 세력이 朝野를 傾하니 衍은 그것을 또한 忌惡하야 別抄로 *鏡을 殺害하야 市에 梟首하고 또한 御史大夫 張季烈 將軍 奇蘊이 王께 親信함을 惡하야 遠地에 流竄한 後侍中 季藏用과 陰謀하고 三別抄(初에 崔瑀가 國中盜患을 憂하야 勇士로 每夜巡察케하니 名曰 夜別抄라 此를 左右 2部로 分하고 右 國人의 自元歸國者를 募하야 神義部라 名하니 此 所謂 三別抄다.)와 六番의 都房을 召集하야 遂히 王을 別宮에 廢囚하고 元宗의 弟 安慶公 淐을 立하니 때는 己巳 六月이엿다. 때의 元宗의 世子는 蒙古(즉 元國)에 잇다가 귀국하던 此婆娑府(今 滿洲 九連城)에 至하야 本國의 變亂을 듯고 다시 燕京에 가서 蒙古王에게 林衍의 罪를 討할 事를 請하니 蒙古世祖가 兵部侍郞 黑的을 遣하야 廢王한 事由를 詰問하고 여러 가지로 干涉하야 元宗을 다시 復位케하고 林衍을 召하니 衍이 자신에 禍가 及할가 恐하야 憂慮하다가 등창이 나서 죽고 王은 다시 蒙古에 往하얏다가 世子와 共히 蒙兵의 護衛로 歸國하고 其翊年 5월에 林衍의 子 惟茂를 斬市하고 惟茂의 妻父 李應烈도 또한 流竄하니 王은 비로소 政權을 확실하게 찻고 그 政變은 이에 段落이 낫섯다.
其기其次의 政變은 王昌 元年 11월에 李成桂가 高麗王 昌을 廢하고 定昌君 瑤(神宗 7世孫이니 是卽 恭讓王이라)를 立한 것이니 이것은 一時的 政變이라는 것보다도 李成桂가 麗朝의 王位를 簒奪하랴는 한 準備行動이다. 前年(戊辰)에 李成桂는 威化島에서 攻遼의 긔빨를 돌이여 高麗의 柱石臣이오 自己의 政敵인 崔塋을 원통이 죽이고 王禑를 江華에 放逐하고 禑의 子 昌(昌의 是年이 槿 9世)을 立하엿더니 이해에 禑가 江華로서 驪州로 遷都되매 더욱 不平을 품고 邊安烈. 李琳, 禹玄寶 등 重臣과 陰謀하야 李成桂를 陰殺코자 하다가 事가 發覺되야 上記諸人은 成桂가 遠地로 流竄식히고 또 廢王 禑와 現王 昌을 根本으로 除之코자 하야 이에 興國寺에 大兵을 陳하고 廷臣을 威脅하야 曰하되 禑及昌은 王氏가 안이요 실은 辛氏인즉(妖僧 神吨의 자손이라 稱함) 宗祀를 奉하기 不適할 뿐 안이라 明帝가 또한 廢假立眞하라는 命이 잇슨즉 此를 服從하는 것이 당연하다 하고 遂히 昌王을 폐하야 庶人을 삼고 定昌君을 立하엿다.
(同年 12월에 禑는 강릉, 昌은 강화에서 동시에 살해하얏다.) 이 禑昌의 姓王眞假問題는 歷史上 一大疑案이다. 이성계가 그를 辛氏라 主唱한 것도 물론 다소의 말거리가 잇섯겟지만은 그 裏面에는 무서운 陰計凶謀가 숨어 잇는 것을 살피지 안으면 안될 것이다. 向者에 崔塋가튼이를 간신으로 모라 죽인 것도 그의 野心이 那邊에 잇는 것을 世人이 다 짐작하는 바이지만은 王禑 王昌을 辛氏라 한 것은 더구나 큰 陰凶한 計策이다. 그 때에 李成桂의 勢力이 아모리 위대할지라도 高麗의 重臣이 依然이 勢力을 가젓고 일반의 人心이 아즉 李氏에 歸順치 안이한 중 加之隣邦支那에는 新興의 明國이 虎視耽耽으로 半島를 窺視하는 터이라.<3> 만일에 禑昌의 辛氏說을 구실치 안이하고 그대로 廢王의 擧를 敢行하얏스면 李氏가 簒逆者 허물을 씀은 물론이고 또 당시에 잇던 尊王黨一派가 蹶然이 이러나서 이씨의 罪逆을 聲討하는 運動兵을 이르키고 一方으로 明國에 그 事實을 말하야 맛치 林衍이 高麗元宗을 廢하던 때와 가티 외국의 干涉問題가 생긴다면 그야말로 큰 問題인 동시에 李氏의 王業이 또한 엇지 되엿슬지 알 수 업슬 것이다. 그러나 明敏한 李成桂는 그것을 먼저 看破하고 大勝히 이 問題를 이르켜서 其功을 이르럿다. 다만 불상하고 억울한 것은 王禑王昌이니 그는 暫時나마 一國의 元首의 몸이 되엿섯슴에 불구하고 海隅瘡鄕에 放死의 冤魂이 될 뿐 안이라 姓氏까지 남이 眞假를 잘 알지 못하게 되엿다. *談野史에 左脇金鱗(傳說에 王氏는 龍種이기 때문에 王이 될 사람은 반듯이 龍鱗이 이는데 이 禑昌父子도 左脇의 龍鱗이 잇다는 기록이 만히 잇다)의 설이 업는 바는 안이지만은 所謂 正史에는 안즉까지 의연히 辛禑 辛昌이라하니 千載地下인들 그네가 엇지 抑冤의 淚를 禁할 수 잇스랴.
降하야 李朝肅宗 15년 己巳에는 所謂 元子定號事件 及 廢妃事件으로 政界에 一大波動이 이러낫스니 元來 肅宗의 后 閔氏의 背後에는 宋時烈, 金壽興, 金壽恒 등 西人이 잇고 禧嬪張氏의 背後에는 李玄紀, 南致薰, 尹彬 等 南人이 잇서서 서로 勢力을 닷투던 중 閔氏가 無子하고 張氏가 王子 昀(卽 景宗)을 誕生하매 南人의 一派는 元子로 定할 議를 主唱하고 西人一派는 建儲尙早를 主唱하다가 結局 肅宗이 南人의 議를 좃차서 昀을 元子로 封하고, 張昭儀를 禧嬪으로 封하는 同時에 그 反對派인 宋時烈을 濟州에 流竄하얏다가 賜死하고(時年 83) 기타 金壽興 金壽恒 등은 或竄或殺하며 南人의 權大運, 睦來善, 金德遠 등은 다 要路의 大官을 삼고 往者 庚申의 獄事를 伸하니 此가 즉 所謂 己巳換局이다. 繼하야 그 해 5월에는 王이 또 閔妃를 廢하고 張嬪을 陞하야 王妃를 삼으니 西人의 吳斗寅, 朴泰輔, 李世華 등 80여인이 此를 反對上疏하다가 모다 慘酷한 栲刑을 當하고 朴吳兩人은 配所로 가다가 途中에서 死하얏다. 이것은 肅宗朝의 一大慘劇으로 내용이 자못 複雜하나 他記事에 詳論하얏기 玆에 略한다. 그 외에 또한가지 말 할 것은 景宗 25년 己巳에 王이 病으로 因하야 世子 英宗으로 聽政케 한 것이니 이것은 李朝史上 己巳年의 最後記錄이다.

2. 己巳와 國際關係

歷代己巳年中에 처음으로 國際問題가 잇섯던 해는 新羅 沾解王 3년(檀紀 2582) 己巳엿다. 新羅는 그 전부터 日本(당시에 稱倭)과 相通하야 使節이 서로 往來하얏스나 倭를 항상 賤視輕待하던 중 그 해에도 倭使가 來하얏는데 奈解王의 아들 昔于老가 그를 謝却하고 또 戱言하되 『早晩에 新羅가 汝王으로 鹽奴를 삼고 王妃로 炊婢를 삼겟다』 하엿더니 倭王이 듯고 크게 怒하야 兵을 이르케 入寇하니 于老가 王께 進하야 言하되 오눌의 亂은 臣의 失言한 所致인 즉 臣이 自當하겟다 하고 倭軍에 가서 前言의 戱言인 것을 謝하엿스나 倭가 듯지안코 于老를 잡아서<4> 燒殺한 후 退兵하더니 그 뒤에 倭使가 또 오매 于老의 妻가 其夫의 원수를 報復하기 爲햐야 王께 請하고 自宅에서 倭使를 饗應하다가 泥醉함을 타서 또한 燒殺하얏다. 이 사실은 新羅外交史上에 特記할 重大問題엿다. 그 후 高句麗 長壽王 77년 己巳年(新羅 炤智王 11년)에는 특히 接壤의 隣國인 支那의 魏와 和好하야 使節이 凡 3次나 往復하고 新羅 眞興王 14년 己巳에는 梁帝가 佛舍利를 보냇스며 高句麗는 東魏에 百濟는 梁에 使를 遣하야 修好하고 文武王 9년 己巳에는 欽純良圖를 唐에 使送하얏스니 이는 당시 新羅가 百濟의 領地를 날로 侵掠하매 唐의 誤解가 잇슬가 염려하야 그 諒解를 求코자함이엿다. 그다음 高麗時代에 이르러서 特記할 것은 顯宗 20년 己巳니 그 해 3월에 東女眞의 海賊이 溟州(今 江陵)를 侵掠하다가 金後에게 擊退된 것은 그다지 큰 일은 안이나 當時 關東一帶가 一時騷亂하얏던 것은 事實이오 契丹使 耶律延寧과 耽羅世子 孤鳥弩가 萬物을 獻하고 來朝한 것은 또한 外交史上에 빼지 못할 것이다. 其中에 한가지 異彩를 放하는 것은 興遼國使 高吉德이 來하야 건국한 事를 告하고 兼하야 援兵을 請한 것이니 興遼國王 太延珠은 元來 渤海國 太祖 大祚榮의 7대손으로 契丹의 東京將軍이 되엿스나 그 祖國인 渤海가 契丹에게 亡한 것을 항상 憤恨하야 匡復의 大志를 품고 잇다가 이 해에 反旗를 날이여 새로 興遼國을 建設하고 年號를 天興이라 하며, 自國과 同族인 高麗에 그 事實을 通告한 후 援兵을 請하야 契丹을 근본적으로 討滅코자 함이엿다. 그러나 손바닥만한 半島안에 만꿍처백혀서 滿足과 太平을 노래하는 高麗의 君臣은 그 말을 度外視하야 應치 안이하고 제 2차로 興遼가 東北女眞과 合力하야 契丹을 攻함에 際하야는 興遼의 太師太延定이 또 來朝하야 援兵을 請하얏스나 亦是 拒絶하야 其 翊年 庚午에 興遼가 遂히 契丹에게 亡하고 말게 되엿다. 이것은 高麗外交史上에 一大遺憾되는 일이다. 만일 그 때에 高麗가 興遼와 相應하야 거란을 內外夾攻하얏더면 契丹을 足히 破滅하고 발해의 故土즉 高句麗의 넷疆土를 回復하야 동방의 일대강국이 되엿슬는지 알 수 업다. 그 다음 熙宗 5년 己巳에 史洪紀를 吊慰使로 金에 보낸 것이라던지(其時 金主憲宗이 死함) 金의 告訃使 孫居寬이 來한 것은 事實이 單純하닛가 別로 問題될 것이 업지만은 元宗 10년 己巳에 權臣 林衍이 元宗을 廢하고 複雜하다. 그러나 그것은 우에 政變을 논할 때에 잠간 紹介하얏기에 玆에 略한다. 그 후 忠肅王 16년에는 元使가 來하야 그 帝의 卽位한 일을 告하얏다
後廢王 昌 元年(恭讓 元年)己巳에는 新興하는 明國과 交好코자 하야 使를 遣하얏다가 不果하고 琉球d서는 使가 來하야 方物을 貢함으로 回聘하얏다. 이해에는 特記할 것은 慶尙道 元師 朴葳*軍艦 100隻을 率하고 對馬島를 征討하야 크게 焚蕩한 것이니 때에 高麗는 國運이 이미 衰敗함에 不拘하고 이러한 壯擧가 잇는 것을 보면 高麗의 武力이 如何이 위대하엿던 것을 可想하겟다. 이로부터 240년을 經하야 李朝 仁祖 7년 己巳에는 琉球의 使가 來朝하야 禮幣를 獻하얏다. 이 해에 또 한가지 參考로<5> 말할 것은 明將 袁崇煥이 都督 毛文龍을 罪誅한 것이니 文龍은 원래 明의 山東사람으로 浙江省 錢塘에 居住하야 극히 貧寒한 생활을 하다가 萬曆 33년(宣祖 38년)에 一躍하야 遼東都司가 되엿더니 天啓 元年(光海朝 13년) 2월에 遼陽이 淸兵에게 陷落되매 身을 脫하야 朝鮮의 義州에 寄寓하다가 將을 殺하고 繼하야 翌年에는 鐵山 椴島(在 鐵山郡 南海中하니 支那人이 謂之皮島)에 鎭을 設하니 此를 東江鎭이라고 稱하고 鐵山 蛇梁 身彌島(一名 雲從島)에 分鎭을 置하는 同時에 明의 散兵을 召集하고 또 山東의 登州와 聯絡하야 物貨粮餉을 通하니 一時名聲이 內外에 振하야 明帝는 특히 總兵左都督의 官을 授하고 또 尙方釢及璽書까지 賜하얏다. 그러나 文龍은 驕傲多祚하야 押綠沿岸及鞍山驛(南滿洲)에 累次 敗績하얏스되 其功을 誇하기 爲하야 全然秘密에 붓치고 항상 戰勝의 報告를 하며 權臣에게 賂物을 興하야 厚賞을 坐受하더니 仁祖5년(明 天啓 6년) 丁卯에 淸兵이 朝鮮에 入寇할때에 또한 椴島를 襲하매 文龍이 身彌島로 逃避하더니 大勢의 그릇됨을 알고 暗暗이 淸國과 相通하야 自國에 不忠한 行動을 할 뿐 안이라 때로는 朝鮮의 國情까지 敵에게 密告하고 且又朝鮮人에게 對하야 橫暴가 甚多함으로 平安監司가 其事을 啓聞하야 明國에게까지 알게 되니 明의 遼東經略 猿崇煥이 文龍을 誘引하야 旅順의 雙島에서 其12罪를 聲言하고 斬殺하얏다. (崇禎 2년 6월) 그 뒤 純祖 9년 己巳에는 差員을 對馬島에 보내서 修好通信할 事를 講定하니 이 己巳로 李朝의 己巳年 國際的 交涉은 終幕이 되고 말엇다.

3. 己巳와 朝鮮의 文化

다시 눈을 돌이켜 文化方面으로 歷代의 己巳를 考察하면 첫재에 三國時代에 잇서서는 百濟 始祖 溫祚王 27년 己巳에 백제가 大豆山城을 싸흔 것이 建築史上에 빼지 못할 事實이오 其後 近肖古王 24년 己巳(新羅 奈勿王 14)에는 왕이 旗幟閱觀式을 行하엿는대 各種의 旗幟를 모도 黃色으로 한 것이 한 異彩이다. 또 新羅 訥祗王 13년 己巳(百濟 長壽王 17)에 2270보의 長이 되는 矢堤岸을 新築한 것은 큰 公私라 안이 한 수 업고 炤智王 11년 己巳에 全國의 遊食之民을 몰아서 歸農케 한 것은 當時 新羅가 如何히 농업에 힘쓴 것을 짐작하겟다. 그리고 眞興王 10년 己巳에 新羅의 高僧 覺德이 支那梁에서 佛法을 覺得하고 梁使와 가터 佛舍利를 가지고 貴國하얏스니 이 것은 舍利가 東國에 오기 처음이라 王은 百官을 命하야 禮儀를 가추어 興輪寺 前路에서 出迎케 하고 文武王 9년에는 唐僧 信惠로써 政官大書省을 拜하야 정사에 參與케 하니 僧侶로 拜官함은 이것이 嚆矢엿다. 그해에 또 唐僧 法案은 그 帝 高宗의 請에 依하야 新羅에서 磁石 2箱을 求去하고 또 弩師仇珍川(그가 1000步弩를 스나 仇珍川은 그것을 外國에 가르처 주는 것은 本局에 불리할가 생각하고 가르처 주지 안엇다. 其外에 또한가지 紹介할 것은 國師 義湘大師가 佛法을 覺悟하고 歸國한 일이니 그는 俗性 金氏로일즉<6> 이 唐의 佛法을 배우랴고 29세에 元曉와 가티 唐에 往하다가 遼東에서 戌邏卒에게 잡히여 幽囚가 되었더니 累月만에 免歸하야 다시 唐船을 타고 楊州의 終南山 至相寺에 이르러 智儼禪師에게 斯道의 眞訣을 밧고 是歲에 귀국하야 小白山 錐洞에 居하니 門徒가 3000인에 達하고 其中 悟眞, 智通. 表訓, 眞定, 眞藏, 道融, 良圓, 相源, 能仁, 義寂 등은 所謂 湘門 10德으로 斯界에 著名한 者이다. 其後 星移物換 360년을 經하야 高麗 顯宗 20년 己巳에는 李可道가 王命으로 開京 羅城을 築하고 宣宗 6년 己巳에는 國學을 修葺하고 正月에는 王이 新興倉의 粟을 發하야 京城諸寺에 施하고 齋를 設하야 祈禱케 하며 10월에는 13층 金塔을 새로 鑄造하야 會寧殿에 安置하고 慶讚會를 設하며 仁王經을 會寧殿에서 講한 후 3만의 僧徒에 飯을 施하고 王太后는 國淸寺를 西郊에 創建하얏스니 이 때 高麗佛敎의 全盛時期로 一般文化上에 影響이 또한 적지 안엇다. 그리고 後廢王 昌 元年 己巳에는 史草를 錄하야 史館에 보내기로 恒例를 삼엇스니 그것은 史學上에 또한 즐 수 업는 일이다. 그 다음 李朝 世宗 31년 己巳에는 王이 崔恒을 命하야 洪武正韻을 譯하고 東國正韻이라 命名하며 또 申叔舟를 命하야 四聲通攷를 選하니 이는 朝鮮文學史上에 一光彩를 내힌 것이다. 그리구러 宣祖 2년 己巳에는 彼有名한 學者요. 政治家인 栗谷 李珥가 東湖問答을 王께 進하고 仁祖 7년 氣象에는 小學四書初試製, 合製, 申明熙 訖講을 設하고, 英祖 25년 己巳에는 各宮殿 供上定例, 國婚定例, 各司定例, 尙方定例 등을 刊行하야 度支部 定例라 命名한다. 最後 高宗 6년 己巳에는 姜瑋가 擬定國文字母分解를 著한 것을 잠깐 紹介한다.

4. 己巳와 天災地變

어느 해인들 여러 千年동안에 天災地變이 업스리요 만은 이 己巳年은 惟獨 더 만흔 것 가튼 感이잇다. 이제 그 大槪를 말하자면 첫재로 馬韓의 末季-宗統王 元年 己巳에는 天下가 大饑하야 人民의 餓死한 者가 만엇고 三國時代에 降하야는 百濟 毗有王 3년 己巳(新羅 訥祗王 13년)에는 百濟에 地震이 有하고 新羅 眞平王 31년 己巳에는 毛只獄下에 大火가 起하야 春秋로부터 冬季까지 燃燒하얏는데 林野의 피해는 勿論이고 人畜의 傷害가 또한 만엇스며 元聖王 5년 己巳에는 漢山附近에 饑饉이 甚하야 賑恤하고 高麗時代에는 忠肅王 16년 己巳 旱魃이 甚하야 5월에 王命으로 巫女를 聚하야 범 6일간 禱雨굿을 하고 其後 李朝 英宗 25년 己巳에는 國內에 牛疫이 大熾하야 御命으로 箭串橋(俗稱살꼬지다리)에 壇을 築하고 牧祭을 行하고 純祖 9년 己巳에는 旱災가 極하야 王이 南壇에서 친히 祈雨祭를 行하고 또 그 해에 凶年이 드러서 國穀으로 구휼하얏스며 最後로 高宗 6년 己巳에는 地震이 잇서서 엇던 곳에서는 門戶가 흔들이기까지 하얏다. 이것은 朝鮮에서 稀有한 일이엿다.<7>
<2-7>