잡지명	別乾坤 第18號
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	新聞記者 昨年中 第一 記憶되는 事件 (A Newspaper Reporter's Most Memorable Incident of the Past Year)
기사형태	회고·수기 (Recollections and Essays)

A Newspaper Reporter's Most Memorable Incident of the Past Year
The time I was deceived by a mysterious beauty

Dong-A Ilbo, Kim Du-baek

1928 (Mujeon) was a disastrous year for Korea. It was an unlucky year for me. Privately, I experienced only sorrowful events, and publicly, I was just busy. This year, too, passed heartlessly, leaving many memories that I will never forget in my life. Thinking about adding another year to my worthless age makes me endlessly sad. However, the fact that the disastrous 1928 has passed is a relief. What kind of reality will this year, 1929 (Gisa), bring to devastated Korea? That is not something to know by sitting down now. It has been ten years since the abundant harvest of 1919 (Gimi), so we should have hope for the new year in this famine-stricken land. From this year on, I hope that the news conveyed by my pen will be pleasant, joyful, full of hope, and shining with light. Since I received the question of what event remained in my memory during the year of 1928 (Mujeon), I will search through the corners of my mind for even the "incidents" of the past year, of which there was not a single auspicious one.

However, most of the incidents are related to political affairs, which are outside the scope of discussion on this page, so I have no choice but to put them aside as OO incidents. Looking at it this way, the remaining material is all trivial. If I have to say something out of regret, let me tell you about one "mystery solving incident" (수수격기 사건) among the trivial city affairs, which, although extremely worthless, has left strange, eerie, bizarre, and pathetic memories in my head until now <46>.

One late spring day last year. The then editor-in-chief, Mr. C, showed me a letter with a very gentle attitude, saying, "I received this tip." I intuitively sensed a major incident requiring secrecy from his voice and expression. The gist of the letter was as follows: "A woman named K, who graduated from Gaeseong (개성) Women's High School, divorced her husband and filed a lawsuit for alimony. While staying in Seoul prior to the lawsuit, she was threatened by Hong (홍) Police Inspector of C Police Station, who was friendly with her ex-husband, and eventually was even raped inside the police station in broad daylight." And it was even noted that to investigate this incident, you should go to OOO at XX Beonji (번지) in Namiki-cho (並木町) and meet the woman.

I went to that place. After 30 minutes, the owner came out and said that K had gone to the police department, so he would speak on her behalf. He admitted to all the facts written in the tip, saying that the police chief had called K in today because of this incident. I believed that this incident had definitely happened because of his voice trembling with indignation and his solemn facial expression. After learning the date, time, place, and other detailed circumstances necessary for the article, and even asking about the relationship between K and the owner, I left the house. From Mr. D and Mr. Y, who frequented the police department and C Station, I heard the conclusion that the facts were groundless. Mr. D said that such a woman had not shown her face at the police department not only yesterday but even within the past week, and Mr. Y said that there was a Go (고) Police Inspector at C Police Station, but no Hong (홍) Police Inspector. However, I was not satisfied with this. The tip came by mail from Geumchon (금촌), and when I went to the place I was told to go, there was indeed someone who explained the circumstances before and after without fail. I was rather resentful of Mr. Y and Mr. D, who said that these obvious facts were groundless. Since "Kōkeipu" (コウケイプ) in Japanese could be Hong (홍) Police Inspector or Go (고) Police Inspector, I asked them to go again. As a result, Mr. Y went out again. He soon notified me by phone that while investigating Go (고) Police Inspector's actions, a certain police officer showed him the characters for "alcohol" (酒) and "woman" (女). However, the person himself and the police chief denied knowing such a woman, of course.

The final strategy was to meet Miss K, who held the key to the secret of this incident. I heard that she might have gone to Sueun-dong (수은동) X Beonji (번지), so I rushed there. Several new women (?) with thick makeup on their faces came out and said, "K went to Japan the other day!" and gave me flirtatious glances with an affected expression. At this point, my sixth sense began to awaken. A suspicion that it was a den of "hermits" (隱君子) struck my head like lightning. "Miss K must be a 'hermit.' She must have created these rumors because she has a strong grudge against that police inspector at C Station." Thinking this way, my professional curiosity changed direction and made my activities even more intense.

I spent the whole day trying to solve this mysterious incident (수수걱기사건), searching all over Gyeongseong (경성) for this unidentified <47> woman. At a certain inn in Chaya-machi (茶屋町), I even felt insulted by the many gazes that seemed to say, "Are you her lover too?"

While searching like this, in the evening of that day, I met her, an anti-beauty-anti-American woman who looked around 20 years old, at the Namiki-cho (並木町) intersection. Together with the owner, I began to ask about the facts calmly. She talked about the circumstances before and after she was raped by Hong (홍) Police Inspector of C Station in an organized way, asking me not to publish it in the newspaper. However, in her voice and in her attitude, I discovered "a woman's unique expression when she is lying." When I sharply asked, "What does that police inspector look like?" she suddenly showed a look of panic as if she wanted to hide in a rat hole, saying that she had a headache and could not speak, so let's meet again at 8 a.m. tomorrow. Without saying another word, she went into the inner room. From this difficulty, I found out that this woman was the lover of the person who sent the tip. I went to find the woman at 8 a.m. the next day, but the owner said, "She left a letter saying that she was leaving aimlessly and disappeared." I turned around, thinking that my guess was correct.

Regarding this incident, which was mysterious from beginning to end, I made the following judgment at the time and closed my notebook.

"Miss K, a fallen woman, met the naïve young man from the countryside who sent the tip and wished to live with him, obtained his permission, and then, after the person who sent the tip left, she thought that her body was in danger, and she plotted a cunning scheme, thinking that the man who sent the tip would save her." I will not explain the basis for this judgment because the story is too long. It is invaluable as a "memorable incident," but considering that there are so many foolish men in the world who are deceived by such women, it is hard to forget.

The terrible great flood

Joseon Ilbo, Jeong Su-il

You're asking me to dig up the most unforgettable incident of last year as a reporter! It is hard for me, who brings this up, and I know that your company will have great difficulties because of the current publishing system in Korea, which does not have the power to record this. Let's put aside the small talk and gossip <48> and also exclude political incidents, so the one or two things that are just remembered in my head are from a few years ago.

It was July 16, 1925 (Eulchuk year). It was the time of the great flood of 1925 (Eulchuk year) that swept not only Gyeongseong (경성) but all of Korea. At that time, I was working at the Era Ilbo (시대일보) and was stationed in Incheon (인천) as a special correspondent, so I traveled between Gyeongseong (경성) and Incheon (인천) every day. The first flood was not without danger, but it was not a big deal. Then, when the second great flood struck on the 16th, I went down to Incheon (인천) and the Gyeongin Line (경인선) was cut off, so I couldn't go to Seoul. I sat in the branch office and listened to the state of Gyeongseong (경성) by telephone to the Seoul headquarters, and they said that it was getting more and more dangerous every moment. Then, at around 8 p.m., I received a notice from the Gyeongseong (경성) headquarters by telephone, saying that the Han River (한강) had exceeded 41 feet, and water had filled not only Shin Yongsan (신용산) and Gu Yongsan (구용산) but also the parade ground. And they said that they could not send down the newspaper, so I should take measures on my own. However, I could not publish an extra edition there, so I could not think of anything else. At around 9 p.m., I called the headquarters again and asked if they would take responsibility for entrusting the extra edition to the printing house and publishing it. They said they would take responsibility and told me to do whatever I wanted. So, I spent the night gathering all the facts and entrusted the extra edition to the Irin (二林) Trading Company Printing Department, keeping it top secret because of the competition with other companies, and finished printing the extra edition all night. On the other hand, Incheon (인천) and Bucheon-gun (부천군) were also flooded. So, I mobilized all the branch office staff to make relief supplies and send them out, and it was difficult to get supplies to feed the victims right away because they could not cook rice because the water filled their homes. So, I got some money from the branch office and made a special agreement with six Chinese Hu Bing (胡餠) stores and made 6,000 Hu Bing (胡餠). On the other hand, I dispatched the branch office to the disaster area of Bucheon-gun (부천군) to engage in relief activities and decided to send supplies by train. The next morning, the 17th, I delivered the urgent extra edition to the city, and the city of Incheon (인천) was turned upside down. Not to mention the fellow businessmen, the police were in an uproar. There was no train, so there was no way an extra edition could have arrived. When they looked at the extra edition, it was definitely the Era Ilbo (시대일보) extra edition. However, the police were furious when they discovered that the paper was not using a rotary press. The reason was that they were trying to accuse me of violating the publishing law and summoned me to the police station as the writing manager, but when I made that extra edition, I had received a clear answer from the headquarters, even if it was by telephone, so the headquarters was naturally responsible for it, and I was only exercising the delegation of the headquarters editor or publisher, so I strongly argued that I did not need to commit any crime of violating the publishing law. Anyway, I finished a simple interrogation and came out, but there are thousands of disaster victims, which is a big problem. So, I held an emergency meeting with each group and fellow businessmen and divided the city into ten teams to collect relief supplies from house to house. So, I would just send it by train to the place where the disaster victims were gathered. After that, I set out again to inspect the flood-stricken area of Bucheon-gun (부천군), but I spent the whole day in the rain, and I couldn't even get dinner, and I spent the night with the disaster victims. Not only that, but the place called Daejang-ri (大莊里), Ojeong-myeon (吾丁面), Bucheon-gun (富川郡) <49> was even worse, so I accompanied the then County Governor, Kang Won-dal (康元達), and took a boat, braving the rough waves, and barely arrived at the place where the disaster victims were gathered. The situation here was truly tragic, with even more people dying, crying and screaming.

There, I decided to take another adventure, which was that there was a boat going to Yeongdeungpo (영등포) carrying relief supplies, so I made a special deal and headed to Yeongdeungpo (영등포) thanks to the newspaper reporter. I almost died three or four times in the middle, but fortunately, I was able to save my insignificant life, but the situation in Yeongdeungpo (영등포) was more miserable than that. It was a tearful phenomenon. I felt that I was making the Korean people, who were suffering from all kinds of pain, even more miserable. After spending two days helping the victims to some extent, I was finally able to walk to Noryangjin (노량진), and it was even more frustrating that I could see Shin Yongsan (신용산) from there but could not cross over. So, I had no choice but to arrive in Yeongdeungpo (영등포) again on foot and decided to investigate the flood damage in Gimpo (김포) and other areas. After spending two or three days in this area, I heard that the train was connected and came to the Gyeongseong (경성) headquarters, but I lay down without moving for two days because I was overworked, and when I finally woke up, I had been sleeping for two days. Just reminiscing about that time now makes the tragic and desolate scene vividly appear in my eyes.

Perhaps this is one thing that is most deeply embedded in my brain in my life, apart from current affairs and politics. <End>

A Tragic Life Caused by the Flood: Pitiable Three Siblings

Maeil Shinbo, Go Yeong-han

The past year has been relatively uneventful in my life as a newspaper reporter. Throughout the year, I have not encountered any interesting incidents that would sharpen my sixth sense to the extreme, and at the same time, there have not been many incidents that would require me to exert my maximum ability and work hard, forgetting sleep and meals. I spent the year chasing after the inevitable daily tasks like a thousand others, feeling anxiety <50>, so there is no reason for any impressive facts to remain. However, I will try to fulfill my responsibility by recording one or two of the facts that I saw and heard when I went on a business trip to the flood damage in North Hamgyong Province last summer.

It was around early September of last year when I went on a business trip to Hamgyongnam-do (함경남도) and saw it while walking the 90-ri (리) dangerous road from Sinheung-gun (신흥군) to Hamheung (함흥). After passing through Hamheung (함흥) and visiting Sinheung-gun (신흥군), where the flood damage was the worst, I encountered the second flood and all the transportation in each region was cut off again, and Sinheung (신흥) fell into a state of isolation for the second time. Moreover, since even communication was cut off, I, as someone who went on a business trip to quickly inform the public of the flood damage, could not stay there indefinitely. I thought that I had to get out of here quickly, even if I died on the way, and left for Hamheung (함흥) with a guide who was familiar with the area. Mountains collapsed and fields were buried in sand and ravaged by turbid waves. The scenery was all devastated and miserable, but since I had been on a business trip here for several days, I was used to it and was not surprised. However, it was the second time in my life as a newspaper reporter that I risked my life by grabbing the roots and vines of trees on the mountainside, barely putting my feet on the ground, and breaking through about 3-ri (리) because the secondary road extending to the foot of the mountain was washed away by the storm. Even now, thinking about how if I had misplaced one foot, I would have fallen into the abyss and my body would have been swept away by the storm and I would not have been able to find it again, makes my hair stand on end.

This was the danger that I myself experienced, but the sight of young women sitting on the devastated fields, gathering the fallen ears of rice and millet, hugging them, and crying in despair, has not disappeared from my eyes until now. Moreover, when I was crossing a certain unknown stream, I saw a gruesome body with only the lower half remaining buried in the sand. The scene was so terrible and horrific that I could hardly breathe. It is said that the flood in the mountains is so rapid and terrible that the body was hit by rocks and caught on trees while floating away, so it was cut in half and then in half again. The lower half of the body tells how devastating the flood was there.

I arrived in front of a small village with an unknown name. Looking at the thatched-roof houses, which were no more than ten households, I could tell that it was a very poor mountain village. Seeing that the houses by the stream had either washed away, houses that had washed away or houses that had collapsed, and that most of the houses in the village were empty, with not many people in the village, I thought that this village had been almost wiped out. As I crossed the stream, I heard the sorrowful sound of a young woman crying. Under the acacia tree beyond the bridge, a pretty young woman, probably around twenty years old, was carrying a young child on her back, unaware that anyone was watching, and crying with the utmost sorrow. I could not just pass by this scene. When I went closer and asked what was wrong, at first she did not answer easily, as if she was wondering why a stranger was coming and bothering a young woman who was crying, but later she was impressed by my kind attitude and wiped away her tears and told me everything about herself. The woman's story was roughly as follows.

She was 18 years old this year. She was originally born in this village and married about 15-ri (리) away from here 4 years ago. During that time, her real father unfortunately died of illness, and her birth mother, without anything to do, remarried a man named M某 who lived in the village with her two young children from her marriage with her late father and was living together. After this flood, she was curious about the safety of her mother and two younger siblings, so she carried her two-year-old child on her back and came to visit her parents' house. To her surprise, her mother became a water ghost (水中故魂) and she did not know where her body was, and the house was in a terrible state, so she spent a few days starving together. Now she has no choice but to return to her in-law's house, but she cannot turn her back on her two younger siblings who are left under the care of her stepfather, who has no mother, and she is crying in despair. Her in-law's house is also very poor, so she cannot take her two younger siblings with her, which makes the woman cry even more. Soon, two boys in ragged clothes came running to the woman's side, panting, and cried, "Sister," in a tearful voice and collapsed in front of her. They are the woman's younger siblings. It seems that they heard from someone that their sister was crying here and ran over. The pitiful two boys and the young woman cry together in a huddle. I cried too. The guide cried too.

Even after returning from the flood-stricken area, that tragic scene did not disappear from my eyes or my mind for a long time.

Ah! The greatest tragedy of life caused by the flood!! How could the will of nature be so cruel! I am sad even now when I think about it. <52>

**Named Entities**

東亞日報	Dong-A Ilbo
金枓白	Kim Du-baek
開城	Gaeseong
並木町	Namiki-cho
洪警部	Hong Gyeongbu
C署	C Seo
金村	Geumchon
コウケイプ	Kōkeipu
高警部	Go Gyeongbu
授恩洞	Sueun-dong
茶屋町	Chaya-machi
鄭秀日	Jeong Su-il
時代日報	Sidae Ilbo
仁川	Incheon
京仁線	Gyeongin Seon
新龍山	Shin Yongsan
舊龍山	Gu Yongsan
二林商會	Irin Sanghoe
富川郡	Bucheon-gun
胡餠	Hu Bing
康元達	Kang Won-dal
吾丁面	Ojeong-myeon
大莊里	Daejang-ri
永登浦	Yeongdeungpo
金浦	Gimpo
老梁津	Noryangjin
高永翰	Go Yeong-han
咸鏡南道	Hamgyeongnam-do
新興郡	Sinheung-gun
咸興	Hamheung



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제18호
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	新聞記者 昨年中 第一 記憶되는 事件
기사형태	회고·수기

新聞記者 昨年中 第一 記憶되는 事件
正體모를 怪美人에게 속든 일

東亞日報 金枓白

戊辰은 조선의 災年이엿다. 나에게는 厄年이엿다. 私로는 슯흔 일만 당하면서 公으로는 밧부게만 지나게 된 이 해도 나의 일생에도 모지 잇처지지 안는 만흔 기억을 남겨두고 무정히 지내갓다. 갑업는 나희에 또 한살을 더하게 된 것을 생각하면 안타까웁기가 그지 업다. 그러나 災厄의 戊辰이 간 것만은 식원한 일이다. 己巳란 금년이 피폐한 조선에 엇더한 현실을 가저달 줄 것인지? 그것은 지금 안저서 알 일이 못된다 己未의 풍년도 간지가 십년이니 흉년든 이 땅에서 새해에 대한 희망이나 가저야 할 것이다. 금년부터는 나의 붓으로 전하는 소식이 반갑고 깃부고 희망에 넘치고 광명에 빗나는 그것이기를 바라거니와 기왕 戊辰의 일년간 기억에 남은 사건이 무엇이냐는 질문을 바닷스니 상서로운 일이라고는 한가지도 업든 작년 중의 『事件』이나마 머리 속이 구석 저 구석에서 더듬어 보기로 하자.
그러나 某某 사건은 모다 정치 시사에 관한 문제로 이 지면에서 논할 範園 이외의 일이닛가 그양 OO사건에 붓치고 말할 밧게 업다. 그리고보니 남은 재료라야 모다 시시하다. 아쉬운대로 말하자면 극히 무가치한 일이엿스나 아즉까지<46> 나의 머리 속에 이상하고 야릇하고 怪惡하고 한심한 기억을 남겨둔 市井雜事 중의 『수수격기 사건』 한 개를 들어보자.
작년 느즌 봄 어느 날. 당시의 편집국장 C씨가 매우 은근한 태도로 『이런 투서가 왓구려』하며 편지 한 장을 나에게 보엿다. 나는 그의 목소리와 안색으로 곳 비밀을 요하는 중대사건임을 直覺하고 투서를 보니 요지는 이러하얏다. 開城某高等女學校를 졸업한 K라는 여성이 자기 남편과 이혼을 하고 위자료청구소송을 제기할 次로 상경 체재 중에 그 本夫와 친분이 잇는 C경찰서 洪警部에게 가즌 위협을 다 밧다가 결국 백주 경찰서 내에서 강간까지 당하얏다』는 것이다. 그리고 이 사건을 조사하랴면 並木町 XX번지 OOO을 차자가서 그 여자을 맛나보라고까지 附記되어 잇섯다.
그곳을 차자갓다. 30분 후에 주인이 나와 K는 지금 경찰부로 갓슨즉 자기가 대신 말하겟다고 나를 안내하더니 투서에 쓰인 사실을 전부 시인하면서 경찰부장이 이 사실로 오늘 K를 불러갓다고 말을 한다. 나는 그의 의분에 떨리는 목소리와 엄숙한 얼골 빗으로 이 사건이 확실히 잇섯든 것을 미덧다. 나는 기사에 필요한 일시와 장소며 기타 세세한 경로를 알고 K와 주인과의 관계까지 물은 후 그 집을 나와서 경찰부와 C署에 출입하는 D·Y 양군에게서는 사실이 無根한 것갓드라는 斷案을 들엇다. D군의 말은 그런 여자가 昨日은 커녕 이 일주일 이내에 경찰부에는 그림자도 나타낸 일이 업다는 것이요 Y군의 말은 C경찰서 高警部는 잇서도 洪警部는 업다는 것이다. 그러나 나는 이에 不服이엇다. 투서는 金村서 우편으로 온 것인데 가라는 곳에 가보니 과연 틀림업시 전후 사실을 설명해주는 사람이 잇지 안흔가. 이 명백한 사실을 無根이라 하는 Y·D 양군이 도리혀 원망스러웟다. 일본어로 『コウケイプ』면 洪警部도 될 수 잇고 高警部로도 들될수 잇슨즉 한번 다시 가보아달라고 의뢰한 결과 Y군이 다시 출동을 하게 되엇다. 그는 미구에 전화로 고경부 소행을 조사 중 某警官이 『酒』字와 『女』字를 써보이더라고 통지를 하야 주엇다. 그러나 본인과 서장이 그런 여자는 알지도 못한다고 부인하는 것은 물론이다.
최후의 一策은 이 사건에 대한 비밀의 열쇠를 쥔 K女를 맛나는 것이다. 授恩洞 X번지로 갓슬지 몰른단 말을 듯고 달려갓더니 얼골에 분을 셋치式이나 발른 신여성(?) 몃사람이 나와 『K는 일전에 일본으로 갓는데요!』하며 증그러운 표정으로 나에게 추파를 보낸다. 이에서 나의 第六感이 눈뜨기 시작하얏다. 『隱君子』의 소굴이 아닌가하는 疑念이 번개가티 나의 머리를 따린다. 『K라는 여성이 隱君子인가보다. C署 그 경부에게 톡톡한 원한을 가지고 이러한 風說을 만들어 낸 것인가 보다』 이러케 생각하니 나의 직업적 호기심은 방면을 곳쳐가지고 나의 활동을 더욱 맹렬하게 맨드러 노앗다.
나는 그날 종일 이 수수걱기사건을 풀기 위하야 이 정체모를<47> 여성을 차자 京城全市로 헤매엿다. 茶屋町 某旅館에서는 『너도 그의 情夫더냐』 하는 듯한 여러 시선 중에서 모욕을 늣긴 일까지 잇섯다.
이러케 차자단이다가 그날 석양에 並木町 네거리에서 20전후로 보이는 反醜反美의 그를 맛나 그 주인과 한가지로 從容한 자리에서 이 사실을 뭇기 시작하얏다. 그는 C署 洪警部에게 강간당튼 전후 경로를 조리맑게 이약이하면서 부대 신문에는 내지말어달라고 부탁을 한다. 그러나 그의 語聲에서 그의 태도에서 나는 『거짓말할 때에만 가지는 여자의 독특한 표정』을 발견하엿다. 『그 경부 얼골이 엇더케 생겻드냐』고 쏘아뭇는 나의 말에 그는 갑작이 쥐구녕에라도 숨을 듯한 낭패의 빗을 보이면서 머리가 압허 말을 할 수 업스니 내일 오전 8시에 다시 맛나자고 하면서 두말도 업시 안방으로 드러가 버린다. 이 苦答 중에서 나는 이 여자가 投書人의 情婦인 것을 알아내엿다. 나는 그 익일 오전 8시에 그 여자를 차자갓스나 『정처업시 떠난다는 편지 한 장을 남겨놋코 어듸로 가버렷다』는 주인의 말에 역시 나의 추측이 틀이지 안엇구나 하고 돌아섯다.
自初至終으로 수수걱기인 이 사건에 대하야 나는 당시에 이러케 판단을 하고 수첩을 덥허버렷다.
『K라는 타락한 여성이 어수룩한 농촌청년인 투서인을 맛나서 가티 살기를 恨願하야 그의 허락을 어덧다가 투서인 一去後에 소식이 업슴을 보고 자기 몸이 危境에 빠젓다 하면 남자인 투서인이 구해주리라는 천박한 생각으로 간특한 譎計를 꿈인 것이겟다.』고.... 니야기가 길어저서 이 판단의 근거까지는 설명치 아니한다. 『기억에 남은 사건』으로는 넘어도 갑업는 것이다마는 요러한 여성에게 속아 넘어가는 어리석은 남성이 세상에 얼마든지 잇슴을 생각함에 얼른 이저버리기도 실흔 사건이다.

끔직끔직한 大洪水亂

조선일보사 鄭秀日

기자로서 작년 중 가장 잇지못할 사건을 들추어 내라고요! 이것을 들추어 내자면 제일 들추어내는 내가 어렵다는 것보다 이것을 기재할 힘이 업는 조선 現出版制度 그것때문에 貴社가 매우 어려울 줄 안다. 그까지 餘談閑話는 집어치우기로 하고 <48> 또 정치사건도 쑥 빼버리기로 하니 그저 머리에 기억되어 잇는 한두가지 일이나마 몃해전 것뿐이다.
지금으로부터 4년전인 乙丑年 7월 16일이다. 경성 천지뿐아니라 전조선을 엄습하든 을축년 홍수때이다. 이때 나는 시대일보사에 재근 중이엇섯는데 그때 仁川特派로 잇섯기 때문에 매일 경성에서 인천으로 왕래할 때이다. 첫번 홍수에는 위험하지 안흔 것은 아니지만 그다지 큰 야단은 아니 낫섯다. 그리다가 16일에 재차 대홍수가 몰려왓슬 때 인천에 내려갓다가 그만 경인선이 뚝 끈어지게 되어 상경할 길이 업서 지국에 안저서 경성 본사로 전화를 이용하야 경성 상태를 듯고 잇는데 시시각각으로 위험상태에 들어간다고 한다. 그러더니 오후 8시경에 지급전화로 경성 본사에서 통지가 왓는데 한강 增水가 41척을 돌파하야 신구 용산은 물론 물은 연병장 우까지 들어찻다 한다. 그리고 신문도 내려보낼 수 업스니 알어서 선후책을 강구하라는 것이다. 그러나 거기서 호외를 발행할 수도 업고 생각다 못하야 9시경에 다시 본사로 전화를 걸고 호외를 인쇄소에 맛겨 발행할 것이니 책임을 지겟느냐고 하얏더니 책임을 질 터이니 어떠케 하든지 임의로 하라는 승낙을 마텃다. 그래서 밤을 새워가며 모든 사실을 가추어 二林商會 印刷部에다가 호외를 위탁하얏는데 물론 타사와 경쟁관계가 잇스닛까 극비밀에다 붓처가지고 밤을 새워가며 호외인쇄를 마첫다. 그리는 일방 인천과 부천군 일대가 또 홍수로 물끌틋하게 되엇다. 그래서 지국원을 총출동을 식여가지고 구조품을 만드러 내보내고 또 물이 집에 채이기 때문에 밥을 못지으니까 불가불 당장에 이재민에게 먹일 물품을 엇자니까 어렵다. 그래서 지국에서 돈을 좀 어더 가지고 중국인 胡餠집 여섯 군데다가 특약을 하고 胡餠 6천개를 만들엇다. 그리는 일방으로 지국을 부천군 수해지로 출장케 하야 구호에 종사케 하고 기차편으로 물품을 송부하기로 하얏다. 그 익일 17일 早朝에 급작한 호외를 시내에 배달하얏더니 인천시내가 발근 뒤집혓다. 동업자들은 물론 경찰계가 야단이다. 기차편이 업는데 호외가 올 수도 업고 호외를 보니 꼭 시대일보 호외다. 그러나 그 조희가 윤전기 사용이 아닌 것을 발견하고 경찰이 빨근 뒤집히엇다. 엇재 그런고 하니 출판법 위반이라는 죄명을 씨우랴고 집필책임자로 나를 경찰서로 모서갓스나 내가 그 호외를 만들 때에 비록 전화로이지만 본사의 明答을 밧엇기때문에 그 책임은 본사가 당연히 지는 것이오 나는 본사 편집인이나 발행인의 위임행사밧게 아니되는 것이니 하등 출판법 위반의 죄를 질 필요가 업다고 강경한 주장을 내세웟다. 하여간 간단한 취조를 마치고 노혀나왓스나 이재민이 수천명인데 이것이 큰 문제이다. 그래서 각 단체와 또는 동업자들과 긴급회의를 열고 十隊로 分하야 시내 전부를 分하야 家家戶戶이 구조품을 모집하러 나섯다. 그래서 거치면 그저 기차편으로 이재민이 모혀잇는 곳으로 보내고는 하얏다. 그 다음에 나는 다시 부천군 一水害地를 답사코저 출발하얏는데 웬 종일 비를 맛고 저녁도 못어더먹고 이재민들과 가티 한데서 밤을 세웟다. 그뿐아니라 富川郡 吾丁面 大莊里라는<49> 곳이 더욱 尤甚하얏슴으로 당시의 군수 康元達씨와 동반하야 배(船)를 어더타고 荒浪을 무릅쓰고 겨우 이재민이 모혀잇는 곳을 당도하니 여기는 더욱 익사가가 만흔 까닭으로 울고 부르짓고 하는 景狀이란 실로 참담하다.
거기서 나는 다시 한 모험을 결행하게 되엇는데 그것은 때마츰 영등포로 구호품을 실고가는 船便이 잇슴으로 특별한 교섭을 하야 신문기자 덕분에 영등포를 향하얏는데 중도에 죽을 번하기를 무릇 3,4차나 하얏스나 그래도 앗갑지 안흔 생명은 다행히 구할수가 잇섯스나 영등포의 참상은 더욱 비참하다는 것보다 눈물날 현상이엇다. 모든 쓰라림에 부댁기든 조선사람을 또 이다지나 못살게 하는지 하는 늣김을 밧게 되엿다. 거기서 2일간이나 이재민의 구호에 다소 손을 보태고 난 뒤에 겨우 도보로 노량진을 갈 수가 잇게 되어 다시 그곳을 향하야 출발하얏섯는데 거기서는 신용산을 바라보기는 하지만 건너가지 못하는 것이 더욱 안타가웟다. 그래서 할 수 업시 나는 다시 도보로 영등포에 당도하야 김포 등지의 수해조사를 하기로 하얏다. 2,3일을 이 방면에서 보내고 인천에 돌아와 기차가 연락개통된 것을 듯고 경성 본사에 왓섯는데 2일간은 과로한 까닭인지 꼼작 못하고 누엇다가 바야흐로 깨어나니 나는 2일간이나 잠을 잣든 것이다. 그때를 지금 안저서 회상하기만 하야도 그 悽慘慌凉하든 광경이 눈에 선하게 비최인다.
아마 이것이 시사정치를 떠나서 나의 생활 중에 가장 심각하게 뇌에 백여잇는 한가지 닛지 못한 것인가 한다. <끗>

수해가 나흔 인생비극 可憐한 三男妹

매일신보 高永翰

작년 일년동안이라는 것은 나의 신문기자 생활에 잇서서는 비교적 평범무사한 해이엇섯다. 일년을 통하야 나의 제육감을 한번 극도로 첨예화케 할만한 무슨 흥미잇는 사건을 맛나본 적도 업섯고 동시에 또한 나의 최대능력을 발휘하야 고심노력 침식을 이저가며 활동을 해볼만한 사건도 별로 업섯다. 오즉 千篇萬律로 피할 수 업는 그날그날의 업무에 쫏기여서 위태를 늦겨가며 <50> 하로 또 하로 이러케 일년을 갓스니 무슨 인상깁흔 사실이 남어잇슬 이유잇스랴. 그러치만 昨夏 關北大水害 당시 그곳에 출장을 가서 보고 들은 몃가지 사실 중 아즉까지 나의 기억에 남어잇는 한두가지의 사실을 기록하야 塞責이나 하려한다.
그것은 작년 9월 상순경 함경남도에 출장을 갓다가 신흥군에서 함흥까지 90여리의 험로를 도보로 답파하든 때에 본 것이엿다. 함흥을 거쳐 수해가 가장 심하다는 신흥군에 들럿다가 제2차의 수해를 맛나 재차 각지의 교통이 두절되야 신흥은 두번재 고립무원의 상태에 빠지엿섯다. 더욱이 통신조차 막히고 보니 나는 수해의 소식을 일반에게 속히 알리고저 출장간 몸으로서 그곳에 언제까지던지 그러케 체류하고 잇슬 수는 업섯다. 가다가 죽는 한이 잇드라도 이곳을 속히 버서나지 안으면 안되겟다고 그곳 지리에 정통한 길잡이 한사람을 다리고 함흥을 향하얏 떠낫섯다. 산마다 이마빡이가 문허저 나리고 전답은 모래에 뭇치고 濁浪에 유린되야 눈에 보히는 것이 모다 황폐처참하지 안은 배가 없섯거니와 이갓흔 광경들은 임의 이곳에 여러날 출장와잇는 동안 익슥히 본 바어니 새삼으려히 놀랄 것도 업섯다만은 산밋흐로 뻐더잇는 이등도로가 격랑에 자최도 업시 유실되야 山腹危逕으로 풀뿌리나무줄기를 붓잡아가며 간신히 발을 붓치고 약 3里許를 돌파한 것은 나의 신문기자 생활중 두번재 당하는 생명을 賭하야서의 모험이엇다. 발 하나만 자칫하면 千仞萬丈의 아래에 떠러지어 시체는 격량에 휩쓸이여서 어대로 떠나려갓는지 다시 찻지못하게 되엿스리라 하는 생각을 하면 나는 지금도 毛骨이 疎立하여진다.
이것은 나 자신이 당한 危難이엇거니와 여긔저긔 황폐하여진 전답 우에 젊은 부녀들이 나와안저 쓰러지고 넘어진 벼이삭 조이삭을 글거모아 부등켜안고 긔가 막혀 울고잇든 정경은 아즉까지 그 형상이 나의 눈압헤서 사러지지를 안는다. 더욱이 일흠몰을 엇던 개천을 건늘 때에 동체의 하반부만 남은 慘屍 하나가 沙場에 뭇처잇는 것을 보앗다. 너무도 끔즉스럽고 참혹한 광경에 나는 숨이 막힐 지경이엿섯다. 원악 산간의 홍수는 물결이 무섭게도 급격하야 시체가 떠나려오는 동안 돌에 부듸치고 나무에 걸리여 그와갓치 兩斷又兩斷이 된 것이라 한다. 그곳의 수해가 얼마나 참담하엿다는 것은 그 하반부의 시체가 말하고 잇다.
나는 엇던 일홈몰을 조고만 마을압헤 이르럿섯다. 모다 십여호가 될가말가한데 오막사리 초가들임을 보아 몹시 빈한한 산촌임을 가히 할겟고 동리 압흐로는 개천이 흐르고 개천 우에 노혀잇든 상당히 큰 石橋가 중동이 끈허저 나려안즌 것을 보고 이곳에도 수해가 심하엿섯다는 것을 생각하엿다. 천변으로 잇든 집들은 몃호나 떠나려갓는지 떠나려가다 남은 집 혹은 문허지다 남은 집 其外에도 동리 전부가 濁浪에 유린되엿섯는 듯하고 또 동리에 사람들이 그리만치 안코 뷔인 집이 태반인 것을 보아 이 마을도 거의 전멸을 당하엿는 듯이 생각되엿다. 개천을 건너서니 젊은 여자의 처량한 울음소리가 들린다. 다리것너 아카시야 나무아래에 당연 스므살이 되엿슬가말가한 한 어엽분 <51> 색시가 등에는 어린 아해를 업고 남이 보는 줄도 모르고 비애가 그 극에 달하야 목을 노아 울고 잇다. 나는 이 정경을 그대로 보고 지내갈 수는 업섯다. 갓가히 가서 사정을 물엇더니 처음에는 웬 사람이 남의 젊은 여자가 우는데 와서 이러케 추군추군하게 구노 하는 듯이 容易히 대답을 안터니 나중에는 나의 친절한 태도에 감복을 하엿던지 눈물을 씨서가며 자기의 모든 사정을 하소한다. 그 여자의 말하는 바는 대개 이러하엿다.
자기의 나희는 당년 18세. 본시 이 동리태생으로 距今 4년전에 여긔서 약 15리 가량되는 곳에 출가하야 사는데 그동안 친정의 實父는 불행히 병사하고 生母는 할 일 업시 亡父와의 사이에 나흔 두 어린 자식을 다리고 동리 某에게로 改嫁를 하야 동거하는 중이엿섯다. 이번 수해 후 친정어머니와 두 어린 동생의 안위가 궁금하야 두살먹은 어린 자식을 등에 업고 친정이라고 차자와 보앗더니 천만의외에 모친은 水中故魂이 되야 시체도 간 곳을 모른다하고 집안은 말이 못되야 몃칠동안을 갓치 굶으며 먹으며 지내다가 할 일 업시 다시 시가로 떠나가는 중인데 어린 두 동생을 어미좃차 업는 義父밋헤 남겨두고 가니 발ㅅ길이 도라스지 안코 긔가 막혀서 운다는 것이엿다. 시가조차 몹시 구차하여서 그 두 동생을 다리고 갈 수도 업는 것이 그 여자의 더욱 긔막히는 울움이엿다. 이윽고 남루한 옷입은 두 소년이 헐덕어리며 여자의 엽흐로 달여오드니 금창이 메여지는 목소래로 『누이야』 한마대 부르고 그 압헤 쓰러저 운다. 그 여자의 동생들이다. 그들의 누님이 이곳에서 울고 잇다는 말을 누구에게 듯고 달여온 듯하다. 가련한 두 소년, 젊은 색시 세사람은 한데 뭉처 어우러저 운다. 나도 울엇다. 안내인도 울엇다.
나는 수해지에서 도라온 이후에도 오래오래 그 비극적 장면이 나의 눈과 또는 머리속에서 사라지지를 안앗다.
아아! 수해가 나흔 인생 최대의 비극!! 자연의 의지가 어이 그다지도 잔학하엿든고! 나는 지금도 그 생각을 하면 슯흐다. <52>
<46-52>