잡지명	별건곤 제18호
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	大京城回想曲 (Great Gyeongseong Recollection)
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Great Gyeongseong Recollection
Sad Flute and Brilliant Lights
Yu Gwang-ryeol

The first time I came to Seoul was in the late spring of 1907, twenty-one years ago from now.

Having been in a rural village where country girls picking plantain waved their baskets and leisurely strolled through the spring fields (春野), I was suddenly in Gyeongseong, and everything seemed miraculous (?).

Entering through Namdaemun (there was no western road like there is now), I walked for a while and entered a two-story house built in a Korean-Chinese compromise style, which was probably near the Japanese restaurants across from Meiji-cho (then Myeongdong). The name of the neighborhood at that time was Gong-dong, but now the name Samdong-ri is gone and the house is gone, so where can I find its traces?

◇

That two-story house was a cloth shop (布木廛) run by an uncle who was somehow related to us. There, for the first time in my life (at the age of eight or nine), I climbed the two-story stairs painted with blue dancheong, and saw a two-story room with silk curtains and black leaves drawn on a red background.

Going from that house to the inner house, it was quite a large house with a middle gate inside the main gate and another middle gate inside the middle gate. There was a newly built tile-roofed house with a small sarangchae (reception room) and a large sarangchae, and calligraphy and paintings were hung on the walls. Going inside and bowing to the lady of the house sitting properly in the inner room, the lady, who looked white and blessed and seemed to be only thirty-five or thirty-six years old, said,

"So, you came from the countryside. What do you think of sightseeing in Seoul?"

◇

When night came, they lit a lamp (there were no electric lights at that time). A servant brought out dinner. After dinner, when I shook the bell cord, a loud bell rang from inside the sarangchae, which was quite far away, and the female servants answered in unison with a long, drawn-out "Yes-" sound.

◇

There were three or four female servants in the house, a sewing mistress, a cooking mistress, a male cook, and even a young servant. Sometimes at night, they would put on a green long coat, have a child hold a lantern, and go out. However, his daughter, who was like an older sister to me, wore a long coat and went to some girls' school, and sometimes I saw her doing gymnastics with her hair flowing down, swinging her arms and saying, "One, two, one, two."

◇

During the day, when you went out on the street, the smell of guk (soup) being cooked and anju (side dishes) being grilled from the narrow alley restaurants tickled your nose, and in the pharmacies, which were full of only paper medicine packets, the gentlemen with gat (traditional Korean hat) leisurely played janggi (Korean chess). Toilets were all facing the street, and feces were made to be seen on the street. On the west side of the alley in front of the stores, yellow feces were piled up. Maggots wriggled in the yellow feces... Thinking about it now, in those days when there were no sanitation workers, the fertilizer sellers came and took away the feces as they pleased, so it seems they made it look like that so that it would be easily noticeable and taken away quickly. Anyway, you had to cover your nose to walk through the alley.

◇

During the day, you couldn't see a single car on the street, unlike now, and bicycles were rare. Carts were pulled by cows rather than horses. There was a lot of dust on the road, but in return, the road was not as wide as it is now, so it wasn't that bad. Even when the streetcar ran, it didn't run as frequently as it does now, and there weren't many people riding it. At that time, the Japanese did not operate the streetcar, but the Korean-American Electric Company operated it, and people wearing gat and white durumagi (overcoat) worked as conductors inside the streetcar.

◇

When night fell, the narrow alleyways that stretched endlessly became dark. Sometimes, the fire burning in the stove lit in one place looked like the pupils of a giant's eyes. If you sat in a room with a lamp lit, the sound of a flute blowing from afar, from somewhere, touched the hearts of those in the thousands of doors of Chang'an (the capital). Sometimes I could hear the sound of a janggu (Korean drum) being played during a gut (shamanic ritual) in someone's house, and if there were no such sounds, the sound of a dog barking from a distant house would be heard mournfully.

◇ <55>

There was an inn in the back of the house where I was staying, and there were forty or fifty horses tied up in the stable. They said they were merchants' horses. When I woke up early in the morning and lay down, the cries of various merchants sounded like the croaking of frogs. Among them, what I remember is that on one side, in a strong voice, someone would say,

"Fish - buy croakers -"

and draw it out, while on the other side, an old woman in her forties or fifties would say in a seductive voice,

"Buy red pepper powder or salt -"

◇

The Fourth of April (Buddha's Birthday) was approaching. In most houses, they hung carp. During the day, carp were in the sky, enjoying the wind and playing freely in the carefree sky, and at night, colored lanterns were hung on the streets. As the day got hotter, the sun shone down. As the Fifth of May (Dano) approached, boys with long hair walked around on the streets with bright red cherries in trays, saying,

"Cherries - buy some cherries here -"

and stretching their voices out.

◇

If you sat leisurely in a house with layered middle gates, Chinese people wearing blue clothes, a low hat, and hair down to their heels would come with a bundle of paintings, saying, "Buy paintings - buy paintings." When Japanese people and women came, we treated them as very special guests. Japanese men and women came to visit, and it was strange to see their hair cut short in the back. One of the old Japanese women had lacquer applied black to her teeth. It was funny to see her bright red teeth whenever she smiled.

◇

We played ttakji-chigi (paper flipping game) in the alley. The ttakji had pictures of famous people of the time, such as the Guangxu Emperor of Qing China, Li Hongzhang, U.S. President Roosevelt, and Itō Hirobumi of Japan. The sound of the cherry merchant was so enticing and the red cherries were so pretty that I went out to the main street, where soldiers in red-rimmed hats and black uniforms marched past to the sound of military music. I quickly went into the shop and said that many Japanese soldiers were passing by, but the servants laughed and said, "What Japanese soldiers - they are Korean soldiers." However, the life of these soldiers was not long.

◇

When you went out on the main street, you rarely saw Japanese or other foreigners. There were people wearing gat and white durumagi, people wearing yellow grass hats and pink durumagi, and young men with long hair and pink durumagi pulling rickshaws. Few Koreans wore hats. Public restrooms were first built, and the police prohibited people from urinating and defecating on the street. At that time, the police were assigned by the Police Department, and there were police stations on every street. It was somewhat eye-catching to see them standing on the street in white uniforms, swords, and hats.

◇ <56>

That year, they were installing water pipes for the first time, and I saw them burying water tanks. Korean families all found it strange. They couldn't believe that they were drawing water from the Han River into the city. So I wrote in my diary,

"費五百年來初見之事也 (It is the first time in five hundred years to see such a thing),"

as my father told me to write.

◇

As for newspapers, there were the Daehan Maeil Sinbo, Hwangseong Sinmun, and other various newspapers, but the most popular was the Daehan Maeil Sinbo, run by the British man, Bae Seol. It fearlessly exposed the mistakes of the government at the time and the changing state of affairs. Even old men wearing gat would sit in the sarangchae, click their tongues while reading the newspaper, and students from various schools would clench their fists and discuss it vehemently.

◇

The Fifth of May (Dano) came. I went sightseeing in Yongsan and Jingogae (present-day Honmachi). All I remember is that there were many Japanese people in Yongsan and many dolls displayed in Jingogae. I went up to Namdaemun. The current Namdaemun has a road to the west, allowing streetcars and automobiles to pass, and countless pedestrians pass through, but at that time, Namdaemun had high hills on both sides, connecting to the castle wall to the east towards the present-day Yashiro and to the west towards the present-day Izumicho. People only walked through Namdaemun, so the entrance to the gate was always crowded. There were many thatched houses under the castle wall next to the gate tower, and on the road now covered with asphalt, there was a high hill, and there were cabbage patches on the sloping hillside, and old men wearing tanggeon (horsehair hat) smoked long pipes and chatted leisurely.

--Old Namdaemun--

◇

I tried to go up to the gate tower, but a sign that said "禁雜人 (No Trespassers)" was posted on the small door leading to the gate tower. However, since many people were already inside, I went in as well. As before, there were many adults wearing gat, looking down at Chang'an and talking about something. From Chang'an, I could hear the sound of flutes and oboes playing for the holiday. Children in multicolored clothes flocked here and there. Even though the world was noisy, it seemed that these people were intoxicated with peace. There were a few soldiers in red-rimmed hats and red-striped uniforms. A child with long braided hair carried a tray with "bang" (rice cakes) on a seedbed and shouted, "Buy cotton rice cakes, buy glutinous rice cakes-" The hill where the gate tower was located had been dug out, and the cabbage patch that had been on the hill was gone without a trace, and the old men who had been smoking leisurely must have gone to the other world long ago. Most of the adults and soldiers who gathered at the gate tower would have died, and the boy with long hair and a pink jeogori (jacket) who shouted to buy cotton rice cakes would now be a middle-aged man close to forty, living somewhere with the name "Korean."

◇

One gloomy night in June, when the days were gradually getting hotter, a boy of fifteen or sixteen, slightly older than me, whispered,

"A Korean went to the International Court of Justice and spoke, but they didn't listen. A man named Yi Jun cut open his stomach, took out his intestines, threw them on the spot, and died spitting blood-"

"Now, chaos is about to break out,"

he muttered. The next morning, I woke up early and a young man, who was my seventh cousin twice removed and fifteen years older than me, came and talked to the adults. He said that all the ministers had changed overnight because of the Hague Secret Emissary Affair. When I went out on the street during the day, all the shops were closed. Only Japanese soldiers with guns showed off their power as they passed by, and the pedestrians on the street walked quickly. The streetcar passed by carrying a few people, looking uneasy. At night, people gathered in front of Daehanmun to give speeches, but the police dispersed them, and when they gathered again, they dispersed them again. All night long, people gave roadside speeches in various parts of the city, and the entire city was like a pot of boiling water. When people wearing gat walked down the street, one person would raise their hand and tell them to sit down there, and they would all kneel down on the ground. Then they would give a passionate speech. At dawn, the abdication of the Emperor was announced and the Daehan Maeil Sinbo extra edition was distributed. That evening, the sound of gunshots rang out like popping beans, because that day was the day the new emperor ascended the throne and the military was disbanded. I returned to the countryside during this time. The dog houses that stood side by side gradually disappeared and Western-style houses were built, and all the former images of Gyeongseong disappeared. Only Namdaemun remained in its old image, listening to the sound of steam whistles morning and evening, and the gate where people and horses never stopped became quiet, and on cold days when the wind blew and snow fell, it would spread its wings and embrace the Korean boy in a ramie shirt behind the gate, as if embracing him.

(End)
Following the Master, I Miss Gyeongseong Twenty Years Ago
Yi Gwang-su

<58>
One
Who would see Gyeongseong twenty years ago and today's Gyeongseong as the same Gyeongseong? The change is not just a slight change. First of all, the people have changed (one line deleted here). The place that now has a name that even the characters for "Honmachi" cannot understand was called "Jingogae" back then (fifteen characters deleted here). As for administrative offices, there was something called Hanseong Prefecture (漢城府) outside Seodaemun, and its head, the Hanyeong Panyun (漢城判尹), and below (ten characters deleted here). As for the police, there was something called the Police Department (警務廳), with all the officials such as the Gyeongmusa (警務使), Gyeongmugwan (警務官), Chongsungeom (總巡檢) (six characters deleted here). Even now, the elders call the front of Gwanghwamun "Yukjo ap" (六曹압; In front of the Six Ministries), but although there were no Six Ministries back then, there were government offices like the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (外部), Ministry of Education (學部), Ministry of Law (法部), Ministry of Finance (度支部), Ministry of Interior (內部), Ministry of Military Affairs (軍部), and Ministry of Agriculture, Commerce and Industry (農商工部), and inside them were various officials such as ministers (大臣), hyeoppan (協判), bureau chiefs (局長), chamseo (參書), and jusa (主事) (four characters deleted here). There were also military units like the Wonsubu Siwidae (元帥府侍衛隊) and Jinwiyeong (鎭衛營), with military officers such as bujang (副將), chamjang (參將), jeongnyeong (正領), buryeong (副領), chamnyeong (參領), chamwi (參尉), jeonggyo (正校), chamgyo (參校), and soldiers, as well as military bands and military music corps. Even now, among the plasterers, carpenters, and rickshaw drivers, some of those over fourteen years old are remnants of the Korean military who received training in Russian, Japanese, or Korean.

Also, back then, there were foreign consulates in Jeongdong. The current British Consulate was the British Legation, the Russian Consulate was the Russian Legation, and the American Consulate was the American Legation. The current Seodaemun Elementary School in Jeongdong was originally the French Legation. The diplomatic rights of Korea were transferred to Japan by the so-called Japan-Korea Treaty of 1907 (丁未七條約), and these legations were changed to consulates.

Two
The original name of Gyeongseong back then was Hanseong Prefecture (漢城府). I mentioned earlier that there was a Panyun (判尹) in Hanseong Prefecture. Hanseong Prefecture was divided into four districts: Dongseo (東署), Seoseo (西署), Namseo (南署), and Bukseo (北署). Below the districts were neighborhoods (坊), below the neighborhoods were units (統), and below the units were households (戶). For example, if you were writing an address, it would be in the form of Hanseong Prefecture, Seoseo, Cheongjinbang, Junghakdong, Otong, Samho (漢城府西署淸進坊中學洞五統三戶). Hanseong was often written as Hwangseong (皇城), meaning the capital where the Great Emperor resided. Back then, Gyeongseong did not yet have place names with characters that had never been seen in the ten thousand years of history, such as "machi" (町), "tong" (通), or "mok" (目). The place now called Gwanghwamuntong (光化門通) was "Hwangtohyeon" (黃土峴; Hwangto Hill), the place called "Hwanggeumjeong" (黃金町) was Donghyeon (銅峴; Copper Hill), the place called "Chayajeong" (茶屋町) was Sangchadong (上茶洞; Upper Tea House Village) and Hachadong (下茶洞; Lower Tea House Village), Jongno 1-chome was Sanjeonbyeongmun (샌전병문), Jongno 4-chome was Tong'an (통안) or Baeogaesbyeongmun (배오개ㅅ병문), Meijijeong (明治町) was Myeongdong (明洞), Wakakusajeong (若草町) was Chodong (草洞), Asahijeong (旭町) was Hoedong (會洞), and the vicinity of Hasegawajeong (長谷川町) was Daegongdong (大公洞) and Sogongdong (小公洞). All of them were names given by Koreans in this way. Because the names were inconvenient for the new owners, the Japanese, they changed them all to their own style, such as "Samzaka Street (三坂通)," "Uiju Street (義州通)," "Asahi Town (旭町)," and "Honmachi (本町)," and because they were new owners, even the old owners had to call them by the new names to be considered knowledgeable. Only the old women and "byeongmun friends (병문친구)" passed down the old place names.

Three <59>
(Three characters deleted here) The words "Obang Jaega (五房在家)," "W洋雜貨 (Western and Japanese goods)," and the character jeon (廛) in Bumokjeon (布木廛) and Jijeon (紙廛) became "商店 (Shōten; Store)," "Bohang Gaekju (步行客主)" became "Geshuk-ya Eeop (下宿屋營業; Boarding House Business)" or "Yoin Suk (旅人宿; Traveler's Inn)," and those who liked the new style very much even attached the character "Eo (御)," which could only be used inside the palace in Joseon, and wrote "Eo Geshuk (御下宿)," even putting double quotes around it. It was natural for "sangtu ssau (상투오; tie up the topknot)" to change to a barbershop (理髮舘), but did the fact that "ssi (氏; family name)" or "taek ibnap (宅入納; home delivery)" changed to "sama (樣)" and "dono (殿)," and "geunham (謹函; humble letter)" changed to "yori (より)" indicate a lack of autonomy or an abundance of assimilation among Koreans?

It is unbearable to hear people who know each other say "ya-" or "yo-" when they meet on the street without feeling nauseous. "Gwanrip Ji (官立旨; Official Decree)" became "Jeungmyeong (證明; Proof)," "Gwanchalsa (觀察使; Governor)" became Governor, losing his testicles, "Dandok (團束; Management)" became "Torishimari (取締; Control)," "Yeosang (如上; As Above)" became "Sano Tōri Sōi Muzukō ya (左之通相違無之候也; No Difference)," "Sae'eum (細音; Detailed Account)" became "Kanjō (勘定; Accounting)," and haggling became "Torihiki (取引; Transaction)," with everything changing like this, making it a world where you couldn't live without changing.

Four
I don't know how many schools there were back then. However, it is a fact that there were Paichai Hakdang (培材學堂) and Ewha Haktang (梨花學堂), as well as the government-run Foreign Language School (外國語學校) and Military Training Academy (陸軍硏成學校). Also, the Japanese Language School called Gyeongseong Hakdang (京城學堂) was quite famous. I will talk about the contents of one of them, the school that was established by Iljinhoe (一進會) at the time and later became Gwangmu Hakgyo (光武學校). Initially, the Iljinhoe members bought a house in Sogongdong and lived together with about forty or fifty people, learning Japanese. The person who was a Japanese language teacher at that time was the author. I memorized a book called "Japanese Language Self-Study (日語獨學)," made by a Japanese man named Koba Jūei (弓場重榮), by heart, without even a Japanese person seeing it and without a teacher, truly self-taught. The book was a conversation book comparing Japanese and Korean, written in kana but also in Hangul with the Japanese pronunciation.

Shall I give an example to make you laugh?

"Koaisa du adasimaso (ごあいさつをしましょう)" Let's greet each other
"Aisadu (あいさつ)" Greetings
"Hajimete omeni kakarimasu (初めてお目にかかります)" Nice to meet you
"Tonatadete suga (どちら様ですか)" Who are you?
"Watakushi wa Ri Soba te su (私は李書房です)" I am Mr. Yi
"Kin Soba te su (金書房です)" Mr. Kim
"Shogyo shisatsudu ni kimashita (商業視察にきました)" I came for a business inspection

It was like this. Some people over forty and at the very least people over twenty were having their pronunciation corrected by Koreans wearing Japanese clothes as they learned Japanese like this.

At this time, we only knew that studying meant Japanese, arithmetic, geography, and history, but even though there was someone like me for the Japanese language teacher, there was no way to find other teachers. At that time, a Japanese man came to the Sogongdong School begging. We welcomed him, saying that there was a chance to practice Japanese. When we asked him, he said that he had no capital, no job, and no place to go, so we immediately hired him as a Japanese teacher. His name was Gomi Seijō (五味成助), from Kai Province, and he said he had attended higher elementary school, but he was a short man of thirty-six years old with bulging eyes and a hairy face.

After a while, it was discovered that he knew arithmetic. I was so excited that I immediately learned the Arabic numerals 1234 and then learned addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division in order. In less than a week, I had learned division and said, "Is there no more arithmetic now?"

He said, "That's all for arithmetic." I thought arithmetic was something incredibly magical and terrifyingly difficult, but I was so happy to hear that it was just that. Anyway, I taught that much to the students. However, Gomi ran out of arithmetic skills and disappeared without saying a word.

I went to Tokyo the following year, but I learned much later that there were fractions and proportions in arithmetic, and that there were algebra and geometry, which were similar to but higher than arithmetic, and were very difficult and magical.

In this way, almost a year passed, and Gwangmu Hakgyo was established, and I, who had been a teacher until then, became one of the students. So I finally learned Japanese readers, geography, and also gymnastics and iron bars.

There was a reason why geography was valued so much. In the old days, it was said, "He who understands astronomy above and examines geography below," so geography was considered a very mysterious and unfathomable subject. We believed that if we only learned geography, we would be able to clearly know "where there is gold and where there is silver."

When Iljinhoe selected students to send to Japan, a cadre of the same association named Eom- came and gave a speech to the students of Gwangmu Hakgyo to encourage them to study abroad. I remember the following passage:

"There is a subject called chemistry. If you study that subject, you can become a high-class person wherever you go in the twelve countries, and you can ride fire-wheeled cars and fire-wheeled ships in the sky. There is no one in Japan who has studied that subject yet." It is clear that "chemistry" meant "化學 (Chemistry)," but when I heard it at the time, I didn't know what it was, so I firmly decided, "There is such a good subject, I will study chemistry if I go." Anyway, at that time, it was seen as a kind of mysterious and incomprehensible new civilization, and it was longed for in this way.

Five
It's all old stories, but the only railroads in Korea were the Gyeongbu Line and the Gyeongin Line, and according to the contract, the Gyeongeui Line railroad construction was proceeding in full swing, with the plan to sell it to the Korean government at cost in twenty years. However, there was a streetcar in Gyeongseong. In a joint venture with the Belgian company (骨佛安), and Emperor Gwangmu (光武帝), there was a streetcar line from Cheongnyangri to Old Yongsan and from Jongno to the Seodaemun Stop (now gone) in front. The streetcar was different from what it is now, with an upper-class room in the center and lower-class rooms in the front and rear, allowing passengers to get on and off freely on the left and right without walls. At this time, only a portion of the military, Christians, and members of Iljinhoe had cut their hair. Soldiers and police officers also tied their hair in a dotorigati (acorn-like) shape with a ganggeon (horsehair headband) and wore "sabbo (삽보)" on top of it, with the ganggeon pieces slightly visible under the military hat, which was stylish. However, before long, pictures of those wearing helmets with pointed ends became popular, and the popularity of topknots declined and they began to fall off.

-(Continued on page 52)- <61>
-(Continued from page 61)-

Recently, followers of Jeung San Do (普天敎) have begun to revere the topknot, prolonging the fate of the topknot, which had been dying out. In reality, Koreans cut their topknots too quickly. It would have been better to prepare clothes and hats to wear instead of the manggeon (망건; horsehair headband), gat (갓; traditional Korean hat), and gamtu (감투; hat), but they cut them off too quickly and became people who still cannot make their own clothes with their own hands. Koreans threw away all their old concerns and everything else along with their topknots, and became scarecrows who carried other people's rule and thoughts on their heads, just like wearing a hat made in Osaka. Among them, insignificant people like me long for and weep for the dark and smelly Seoul and Joseon of twenty years ago. But that is a past that cannot be returned. All that remains of my freedom is to shed tears of memory.

<52>

**Named Entities**

丁未年	Chŏngmi-nyŏn
南大門	Namdaemun
明治町	Meiji-chŏng
明洞	Myŏngdong
公洞	Kongdong
三洞里	Samdong-ri
韓美電氣會社	Hanmi Chŏnggi Hoesa
淸國	Ch'ŏngguk
光緖皇帝	Kwanghsŏ Hwangje
李鴻章	Li Hŏngjang
루스벨트	Nŭsŭbelt'ŭ
伊藤博文	Itō Hirobumi
龍山	Yongsan
現本町	Hyŏn Honmachi
英國人裵說	Yŏnggugin Pae Sŏl
大漢門	Taehanmun
신황뎨	Sinhwangdye
京釜線	Kyŏngbu Sŏn
京仁線	Kyŏngin Sŏn
韓國政府	Hanguk Chŏngbu
京義線	Kyŏngŭi Sŏn
法人骨佛安	Bŏbin Kolburan
光武帝	Kwangmuje
淸凉里	Ch'ŏngnyangni
舊龍山	Kuryongsan
普天敎徒	Pot'yŏnkyoto
弓場重榮	Koba Jūei
一進會	Iljinhoe
光武學校	Kwangmu Hakkyo
小公洞	Sogongdong
五味成助	Gomi Seijō
甲斐國	Kai Province
東京	Tōkyō
韓國軍人	Hanguk Kunin
漢城府	Hanseong-bu
漢城判尹	Hanseong Panyun
警務廳	Gyeongmuchaeng
警務使	Gyeongmusa
警務官	Gyeongmugwan
總巡檢	Chongsungeom
光化門	Gwanghwamun
六曹	Yukjo
外部	Oe-bu
學部	Hak-bu
法部	Beop-bu
度支部	Do-jibu
內部	Nae-bu
軍部	Gun-bu
農商工部	Nongsang-gong-bu
大臣	Dae-sin
協判	Hyeop-pan
局長	Guk-chang
參書	Cham-seo
主事	Ju-sa
元帥府侍衛隊	Won-subu Siwidae
鎭衛營	Jinwiyeong
副將	Bujang
參將	Chamjang
正領	Jeongnyeong
副領	Buryeong
參領	Chamnyeong
參尉	Chamwi
正校	Jeonggyo
參校	Chamgyo
貞洞	Jeongdong
英國領事舘	Yeongguk Ryongsa-gwan
英國公事舘	Yeongguk Gongsa-gwan
俄國領事舘	Aguk Ryongsa-gwan
俄國公舘	Aguk Gonggwan
美國領事舘	Miguk Ryongsa-gwan
美公舘	Miguk Gonggwan
法國公使舘	Beopguk Gongsagwan
丁未七條約	Jeongmi Chiljoyak
東署	Dongseo
西署	Seoseo
南署	Namseo
北署	Bukseo
淸進坊	Cheongjinbang
中學洞	Junghakdong
黃土峴	Hwangtohyeon
黃金町	Hwanggeumjeong
銅峴	Donghyeon
茶屋町	Chayajeong
上茶洞	Sangchadong
下茶洞	Hachadong
鍾路	Jongno
샌전병문	Sanjeonbyeongmun
배오개ㅅ병문	Baeogaesbyeongmun
明治町	Meijijeong
明洞	Myeongdong
若草町	Wakakusajeong
草洞	Chodong
旭町	Asahijeong
會洞	Hoedong
長谷川町	Hasegawajeong
大公洞	Daegongdong
小公洞	Sogongdong
三坂通	Samzakatong
義州通	Uijutong
旭町	Asahijeong
本町	Honmachi
五房在家	Obang Jaega
培材學堂	Paejae Haktang
梨花學堂	Ihwa Haktang
外國語學校	Oegugŏ Hakkyo
陸軍硏成學校	Yukgun Yŏnsŏng Hakkyo
京城學堂	Kyŏngsŏng Hakkyo
Iljinhoe	Iljinhoe
耶蘇敎人	Yesukyo-in
Seodaemun	Seodaemun
大阪製	Ōsaka-sei
骨佛安	Golburan
李俊	Yi Chun
海牙事件	Hae-ah Sageon
大韓每日申報	Taehan Maeil Sinbo
皇城新聞	Hwangseong Sinmun
裵說	Pae Sŏl
晉州	Chinju
朝鮮	Joseon
Osaka	Ōsaka



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제18호
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	大京城回想曲
기사형태	문예기타

大京城回想曲
凄凉한 胡笛과 燦爛한 燈불
柳光烈
내가 서울을 처음와보기는 지금으로부터 이십일년전인 丁未年 느진봄이엿다.
질경이 는 村處女가 바구미고 閑暇로히 봄들(春野)을 徘徊하는 鄕村에만 잇다가 별안간 京城을 오니 모든 것이 神奇(?)한 것 가티보히엇다.
南大門으로 들어와서(지금잇는 西側길은 업섯다)한참오다가 韓中折衝式으로지어 노흔 二層집으로 들어갓스니 그것이 아마 지금 明治町(當時는 明洞)건너편 日本사람이내인 食堂들잇는 곳 近處인 것이다. 그 洞名으로는 公洞이더니 지금은 三洞里일홈도업서지고 집도업서젓스니 어대가서 그자최를 자지랴
◇
그 二層집은 그우리 姻戚으로 엇지되는아저씨가 經營하는 布木廛이엇다 거긔서 生後처음으로(八九歲時)푸른단청칠한 二層層階를 올라가서 비단휘장들이고 붉은바탕에 검은닙새그린 뎐을 二層방을 보앗다.
그집에서 안집으로 들어가는데 엔간히 큰집으로 大門안에 中門이잇고 中門안에  中門이잇섯다 새로지은 기와집에 작은사랑 큰사랑이잇고 壁에는 書畵가 부텃섯다 안으로 들어가서 안방에 잘차리고 안진 아지머니에게 절을 하니 얼골＜54＞이 희고복성스러우며 나희는 삼십오륙세밧게 안되어 보히는 아지머니는
『그래 싀골잇가 서울와보니 서울구경이엇더냐?』
◇
밤이되니 람포불을 켓다(그는 電燈이업섯다)下人이 저녁상을 내왓다 저녁을 먹고나서 설렁줄을 흔드니 사랑에서 한참들어 가게되는 안에서 굵은 방울이 요란히 울리며 女下人아 雙으로 『네-』소래를 길게 아긴대답을 한다.
◇
그집에는 녀하인이 三四人이잇고 바느질하는 針母가 잇고 숙수하는 찬모가 잇고 사내숙수가 잇고 부리는 아이지잇것다 잇다금 밤이면 푸른장옷을 닙고 아이에게 초롱을 들리고 나간다 그러나 나에게 누님벌되는 그의 은 장옷을 쓴채로 어 女學校를 다니엇섯다고 각금 머리가 치렁치렁한채로『엣둘엣둘』하고 팔을 놀니며 體操를 하는 것을 보앗다.
◇
낮에길거리에를 나가면 좁은 골목 飮食집에서 국리는 냄새안주굽는 냄새가 코를 르고 조희약봉지만히단 藥局에서는 갓이 양반들이 閑暇로히 將碁를 둔다 便所는 모다 길가로 내이고 이 길가로 내보히게 만들엇는데 가게 린■■골목 西側으로는 누런이 -「널려잇다 누른에는 間間구덕이가 움실움실…지금생각하니 衛生人夫엄는 그에는 거름장사가 맘대로와서 을 퍼가든 이라 그러케보이게하여 노와야얼는 눈에 여퍼가리라고 그러케 하여논 것 갓다 하여간 골목길을 거르려면 코를 싸쥐어야 하엿다.」
◇
낫이면 길거리에는 지금만히 다니는 자동차는 한 대도 어더 볼수가 업섯고 間間自轉車가 다니어 도그리흔치못하엿다 荷車도 말보다도소가만히 엇다 길엣 몬지가 몹시 닐엇스나 그 代身 길이지금가치 널지 안이하엿슴으로 大段치는 안앗다 電車가 다니어도 지금가티 頻繁하게다니지 안이하고 타는 사람도 別로업섯다 그는 日本사람이 電車를 經營하는 것이 안이라 韓美電氣會社에서 米國사람들이 經營하고 電車內에는 갓쓰고 흰두루막이 입은 사람이 車掌놀릇을 하엿섯다.
◇
밤이되면 限이업시길게 린 좁은 골목은 캄캄하여진다 각금한데로 린 아궁이에 장작집혀놋코불는 것이 巨人의 눈 瞳子가티 렷이보히엿다 람포불을 켜고 房에 안젓스면 어대서 불어 오는지 멀리서 부는 호적소래가 長安萬戶千門근 심잇는 사람의 가슴을 두드린다 뉘집에서 굿을 하는지 증장구울리는 소리가 들려올도 잇고 그소래저소래엄스면 먼 집에서개짓는 소래가 청승로럽들려온다.
◇＜55＞
내가잇든 뒷집에는 려각이잇서 마구간에 말이 四五十匹씩매여잇섯다 商人의 말이라한다 아츰에 일즉이러나서누엇스려면 各色장사들의 외치는 소리가 악마구리틋한다 그中에 내 記憶에 남은 것은 한편에서 굿세인 소래로
『생선-조긔들사-』
하고 길게 으면 한편에서는 四五十歲먹은 老婆의 간드러진 목소래로
『고초가루나소곰사-오』
◇
四月八日이 次次다닥처왓다 왼만한 집에서는 모다 鯉魚를 하야단다 낫이면 中天에 鯉魚가 바람을 맛나한가로운 한울에서 제멋대로 놀고 밤이면 彩色燈이 길거리에 걸렷섯다 次次날이더우닛가 대낫에는 불볏이내리 인다 五月端午가 갓가워오닛가 길거리에는 머리 느린 少年들이 채반에 새간 櫻桃를 담아가지고 다니며
『櫻桃저-이리벗지드렁사-』.
하고 길게 목청을 는다
◇
中門이 첩첩한 집안에 한가히안젓스러면 푸른옷닙고 내리다지 帽子쓰고 머리가 발뒤굼치지 치렁치렁한 中國人이 그림을 한뭉텡이씩고들고와서 그림이사-그림이사-하엿다 알록옷 입은 日本人과 日女가 오면 우리는 몹시 珍客으로 待接하엿다 日本人하나와 日女들이 놀너왓는데 머리 뒤로 것만 보다가 머리를 우흐로  것이 珍奇하고 그 中의 老日女는 니에 옷칠을 마케하엿섯다 우슬 마다 샛안이가보히는 것이우수엇다.
◇
우리들은 골목길에서 지치기를하면서 놀앗섯다 그지에는 當時偉人으로 淸國의 光緖皇帝 李鴻章米國大統領 루스벨트 日本의 伊藤博文가튼 것이 그리어잇섯다 앵도장사의 소래가 하도 사람을 고 간 앵도가 너무 어엿버서 큰길거리지 나갓더니 붉은테모자 검은 洋服 총메인 兵丁이 軍樂을 맞추어지나간다 나는 얼른 廛으로들어가며 日本兵丁이 만히 지나간다고 하엿더니 하인들은 『웨 일본병뎡은-대한병뎡이지』하며 웃는다 그러나 이 兵丁도 그 壽命이 길지 못하엿다.
◇
큰길에를 나가면 日本人이나 其他外國人은 흔히 볼수가 업섯다 다만 갓쓰고 흰두루막이입은 사람 노란 草笠쓰고 粉紅두루막이은사람 머리느리고 粉紅두루막이입은 총각이 길이 메이게 당기고 朝鮮사람으로도 帽子쓴사람은 別로 업섯다 共同便所가 처음 생기고 巡檢들이 길가에서 大小便하는 것을 禁하엿다 그 巡檢은 警務廳이 매인 것으로 거리거리巡捕幕이잇섯다 白雪가튼 흰 洋服에 칼을차고 모자쓰고 거리에 웃섯는것이엔가히 지나가는 사람의 好奇心을 엇다.
◇＜56＞
그해에 水道를 처음놋는다고 水桶을 못는 것을 보앗다 朝鮮家庭에서는 모다 異常하게 알앗다 그머-」漢江물을 市內로 러들인다는 것이 고지들리지안이 하엿다 그래서나는 日記冊에
『費五百年來初見之事也』
라고 父親이 불르는 대로써 두엇다
◇
新聞으로는 大韓每日申報 皇城新聞 其他여러가지 新聞이잇섯스나 第一歡迎을 밧기는 英國人裵說이가 經營하는 大韓每日申報이엇다 當時政府의 잘못과 時局變動을 餘地엄시 曝露하엿다 冠쓴 老人도 사랑房에 안저서 新聞을 보면서 혀를 톡톡차고 各學校學生들은 주먹을 치며 痛論하엿다.
◇
五月端午가되엿다 龍山求景과 진고개(現本町)求景을 갓섯다 龍山에 日本人行人이만핫다는것과 진고개에 人形을 만히 느러노앗든것밧게 生覺이 안난다 南大門에를 올라갓다 지금의 南大門은 西便으로 길이나서 電車와 自働車가 다니게 되고 無數한 行人이 通行하나 그 南大門에는 兩便이모다 놉흔언덕으로 박히어 東便으로는 지금야시로(社)잇는곳으로 치어 城이싸히엇고 西便으로는 지금 和泉町으로 남아잇는넷 城과 連接하고 사람은  南大門안으로만 다니게 되엿슴으로 늘 門어구가 듯하게 다니엇다 門樓엽 城밋흐로는 草家집이 만히 잇고지금 『아스탈트』린길우에는 놉흔 언덕이 붓터잇고 그언덕에 비스드한 비탈에 白菜바시여긔저긔잇섯고그 白菜밧가에는탕건쓴 老人들이 긴장죽에 담배를 피여물고 閑暇로히 이약이를 하엿섯다.

――옛날의 南大門압――
◇
門樓에를 올라가려낫가 門樓들어가는 조고만 門에 『禁雜人』이라고 써붓치엇다 그러나 사람들은 亦是만히 들어가잇기로 나도 들어갓섯다 如前히 갓쓴어른이 만허서 長安을 내려다보며 무슨 이약이를 한다 長安에서 名節노리하는 피리소래 호적소래가 들려온다 무색옷입은 兒童이 이리저리 몰려다닌다 世上은 들어도 亦是 이백성들만 昇平에 醉한것가탓다 붉은테 帽子에 붉은줄난 양복을 입＜57＞은 兵丁이몃명잇섯다 머리 리느린 아이가 모판에다 지금 『방』을 담아가지고 『면봇덕사료 못지 사료-』하고 든다 門樓잇는데지앗든언덕을 파내이고 언덕에 잇든배 채밧이 흔적조차 업서지고 閑暇로히 담배먹든 老人은 저 世上에 간지가 오래엿슬 것이다 門樓에 모혓든어른과 兵丁도 大槪는 죽엇슬것이요 머리느리고 粉紅저고리입고 면보사라고 외치든 少年도 지금은 四十歲갓가운 中年이 되어 어대서 亦是 『朝鮮사람』이란 일홈을 가지고 살아갈 것이다.
◇
날은 漸漸 더워오는 六月의 어날 어둠침침한 밤이 엇다니보다 나희 좀더 먹은 十五六歲의 少年이 숙은 숙은 이약이를 한다.
『만국공판에 조선사람이가서 말을 하엿는데 들어주지를 안이하여리준이라는 사람은 배를 가르고 창자를 내 그 자리에 내던지고 피를 으며 죽엇대-』
『인제 亂離는나고만다』
하고 짓거리엇다 그 이튼날 아츰에 일즉닛가 우리 七寸再堂姪로나희는 나보다 十五歲나 우인 靑年이와서 어른들과 이약이하는데 海牙事件으로 하로밤동안에 各部大臣이모다가티엇다고한다 낫에 거리를 나가보니 廛房은 모다 門을 다 닷다 다만 길에는 총메인 日兵이 위엄을 보히고 지나가며 길에가는 行人도 急한 거름을 첫다 電車가 不安한 듯이 사람몇式을 싯고 지나갓다 밤에는 大漢門암헤서 演說을 한다고 사람이 모혀서면 巡査가 헷치고 모혀서면 헷치고 하엿다 밤이 새도록 市內各處에서는 路傍演說을 하고 왼 城中은 물듯하얏다 갓쓴사람들이 길에가다가 한사람이 손을 들며 거긔 안저라하면 모다에 가서 러안는다 그러면 비분한 연설을 한다 새벽이 되더니 양위조가내리고 大韓每日申報號外가 돌엇다 그날 저녁총소래가 콩복듯하엿스니 이날이 신황뎨즉위하시고 군대해산한날이엇다 이 中에나는시골로 도라갓다 櫛比하든개와집이 次次엄서지고 洋舘이들어서며 그 前에 잇든 모든 京城의 面影은 사라젓다 다만 南大門밧이 녯 面影대로 남아잇서 아츰저녁으로 汽笛소래를 들이며 人馬가 不絶하든 門은 寂寂하여지고 바람불고 눈오는 추운날이면 날개를 펴서 품어주듯이 그대문뒤에 람루를 입은 조선 少年을 안어줄이다.＜58＞
()
主人 좃차그리운 二十年前의 京城
李光洙
＜58＞
一
二十年前의 京城과 今日의 京城을 누가 가튼 京城ㅡ로보랴. 變하더라도 如干變한 것이 안이다. 첫재로는 사람이 變하엿다(此間一行削除)只今에는 『本町』이라는 文字도 알수업는일홈을지은대가 그에는 『진고개』(此間十五字削除)라하엿다. 行政官廳으로는 漢城府라는 것이 西大門外에 잇서서 그 長官인 漢城判尹以下(此間十字削除)엿썻고 警察로는 警務廳이라는 것이 잇서서 警務使, 警務官, 總巡權任巡檢等 모든 職員이(此間六字削除)엇섯다. 只今光化門압흔 只今도 老人들은 『六曹압』이라하거니와 그에는 六曹는 업섯지만은 外部學部法部度支部 內部 軍部 農商工部 衙門이잇고 그안에 大臣協判局長 參書 主事等百官이(此間四字削除)잇섯쓰며 元師府侍衛隊 鎭衛等營門이다잇서서 副將 參將 正領副領 參領 參尉 正校 參校等軍官과 兵隊가 잇섯고 憲兵도 軍樂隊도잇썻다. 只今西大門警察署北隣인 赤十字病院(前西大門刑務所出張所)통안 轉賣局煙草工場西大門內官舍等은다그 陸軍營門자리오 只今도미장이모군인력거군 中에 十四歲넘은 이 中에는 或은 俄語로 或은 日語로 或은 韓語로 敎鍊을 밧던 韓國軍人의 遺物이만타.
 그에 貞洞에 各國領事舘이 잇섯다. 只今英國領事舘은 英國公事舘俄國領事舘美國領事舘은 各各俄國公舘美公舘이엇섯고 貞洞잇는 西大門小學校는 본래 法國公使舘이다. 所謂丁未七條約으로 韓國의 外交權이 日本으로 넘어가게 되며 이 公使舘을 領事舘으로 變하고 말엇다.
二
그의 京城의 本名은 漢城府다 漢城府에 判尹이잇던것도 우에 말하엿다 漢城府는 東署 西署 南署 北署의 四署로갈렷섯다 署밋헤는 坊이 잇고 坊밋헤는 統이잇고 統밋헤는 戶가잇서서 假令엇던 住所를 쓰랴면 漢城府西署淸進坊中學洞五統三戶이모양이엇고 漢城은 흔히 皇城이라고 썻스니 大皇帝게신 都城이란 이다. 그에는 아즉 京城은 『町』이니 通이니 『目』이니 하는 萬古歷代에보지도 못하던 글字를 가진 地名은 업섯다 只今光化門通이라는데는 『黃土峴』(황토마루)『黃金町』이라는데는 銅峴(구리개)茶屋町이라는데는 上茶洞(읏다방ㅅ골)下茶洞(아랫다방ㅅ골)이오 鍾路一丁目은 샌전병문鍾路四丁目은 통안 는 배오개ㅅ병문 明治町은 明洞이오 若草町운 草洞이오 旭町은 會洞이요 長谷川町近傍은 大公洞小公洞이요 모도 이모양으로 朝鮮사람이 지은 일흠이엇다. 新主人인 日本人에는 그일홈이 不便하닛가. 『三坂通』『義州通』『旭町』『本町』이 모양으로 모도자긔네式으로 고처버리고말앗고 新主人이고치닛가 舊主人들도 新名으로불너야 有識하게 되엿고 겨오 老婆와 『병문친구』들의 입을 빌어 舊時의 地名이 傳할이다.
三＜59＞
(此間三字削除)『五房在家』는 『和洋雜貨』는 布木廛紙廛하는 廛字는 『商店』으로 『步行客主』는 『下宿屋營業』 『旅人宿』으로몹시 新式을 조와하는이는 朝鮮서는 大闕안에서 밧게 못쓰던 『御』字를 붓처서『御下宿』이라고지써부치고백호치고『상투오』가 理髮舘으로 變하는 것은 當然한 일이겟지만은 氏나 『宅入納』이『樣』『殿』으로 變하고 『謹函』이 『より』로 變하는 것가튼 것은 朝鮮人의 自主性엄는 票인가 同化性이 富한 票인가.
아는사람들리 길에서만나서 『야-』『요-』하는 것도 嘔逆안내고는 들을수업는일이다. 『官立旨』는 『證明』이되고 『觀察使』는 知事가되여불알이 러지고 『團束』은 『取締』가 되고 『如上』은 『左之通相違無之候也』가 되고 『細音』은 『勘定』이 되고 흥정은 『取引』居間은 仲買人看色은 見本이 모양으로 모도안變하고못사는 世上이되여버리고 말앗다.
四
그에 學校가 몃치나되엿는지알수엄다. 그러나 培材學堂梨花學堂과 官立으로 外國語學校陸軍硏成學校等이잇던 것은 事實이오  日語學校는 京城學堂이라는 것이  有名하엿다. 나는 그 中에 하나인 當時一進會에서 세웟다가 나종에 光武學校가 된 學校의 內容을 말해보랸다. 처음 小公洞에 一進會들이 집하나를 사 놋코 한 四五十名이나 合宿을 하면서 日語를 배왓다. 그에 日語敎師로잇든 者가 곳 筆者이다. 나는 弓場重榮이라는 日本人이맨든 『日語獨學』이란 冊을 日人도 구경하지못하고 敎師도엄시 그야말로 獨學으로 暗誦을하엿다. 그 冊은 日語와 韓語를 對照한 會話冊인대 假名으로도 썻스나 諺文으로 日語發音을 쓴 冊이라.
一例를 들어 諸位의 우승거리를 삼아볼가.
『고아이사두 아다시마서』인사합시다
『아이사두』인사
『하지메데오메니가가리마스』처음보입니다
『나다테수가』위댁이시오
『와다구시와리서버테수』나는이서방이오
『긴서버테수』김서방이오
『셔겨시사두니시다』상업시찰하러왓소
이모양이다 이러케배혼 日語를 엇던 日服입은 韓人에게 發音校正을 바다가면서 四五十이넘은이도 잇섯고 最下로는 아마 二十은 넘은이도 잇섯다.
이에는 工夫는 日語와 算術과 地理歷史인줄만아는 인데 日語敎師는 나가튼것이라도 잇지만은 其他敎師는 求할길이엄섯다. 그에 마츰엇던 日人하나가 거지을 하고 小公洞學校로차자들어왓다. 日語實習할 機會가 생겻다하야 우리는 그를 歡迎하엿다. 물어 본즉 그는 資本도 업고 職業도 엄씨갈곳이 엄노라함으로 곳 그를 日本敎師로 採用하엿다. 姓名은 五味成助甲斐國人으로 高等小學에지다녓노라는대나이는 三十六歲에 액구눈이 털보 키는 고만 사람이엇다.
얼마잇는동안에 그가 算術을 아는 것이 發見되엿다. 나는 깃＜60＞버서 當場으로 1234等亞剌比亞數字를배ㅎ고 加減乘除를 次例로배왓는데 一周月도다못되여서 除法지 배호고 말아사『인제는 算術더업소?』한즉
『이제는 算術다요』한다나는 算術이라면 펄 神通한 것으로 알앗고  무섭게 어려운것으로알앗는대 어것이라 하니 퍽 승거웟다. 아모러나 그만이라도 여러 學生들에게 그르첫다. 그러나 五味는 가지고 온 算術미천도 다 어저서 간다온단말도 업시 엄서저버리고 말앗다.
나는 그 翌年에 東京으로 갓거니와 算術에도 分數니 比例니 하는 것이 잇고  算術비슷하고 算術보다 놉흔것에 代數니 幾何니 하는 아주 어렵고 神奇한 것이 잇는줄을 안 것은 훨신 後엿다.
이 모양으로거의 一年이나 지나서 光武學校라는 것이 設立되여 只今지 敎師로 잇던나도 生徒의 一人이되엿다 그래서 비로소 日語讀本도 배호고 地理도 배호고  體操와 鐵棒도 배웟다.
地理를 重히 녁인 닭이잇다. 녯말에 『上通天文하고 下察地理』라고해서 地理란 무슨 甚히 神秘莫測한 學問으로 안 닭이엇다. 地理만배호면
『어되는 金이잇고 어듸는 銀이잇고』한 것이 환히 알수잇는 것으로 미덧다.
一進會에서 日本에 派遣한 留學生을 選擇할에 嚴-이라고 同會幹部가와서 光武學校學生이게 一場의 留學勸誘演說을하엿다. 그 中에 이러한 句節을 나는 記憶한다.
『화학 工夫라는 工夫가 잇는대 그 工夫를 하면 十二諸國어듸를 가도 上等人이 되어서 火輪車火輪船도 空中으로 타고다닌다. 工夫를 한사람은 日本에 모두 사람밧게아직업다』. 그 『화학』이라는 것이 分明히 『化學 』이란 이겟지만은 그에 들을 에는 그서이 무엇인지모름으로 『대체 조흔 工夫도잇지 나는 가면 화학 工夫를 하리라』하고 나는 굿게 決心하엿다. 아모러나 이처럼 當時에는 新文明으로 一種神秘不可思議한 것으로 보고  이처럼 憧憬하엿던 것이다.
五
모두 호랑이담배먹을적이약이나 朝鮮에 鐵道라고는 京釜線京仁線밧게 업섯고 二十年後에는 元價로 韓國政府에 賣渡한다고 契約으로 京義線鐵路工事가 한청 進行되엿다 그러나 京城에 電車는 잇섯다. 法人骨佛安과 光武帝와 合資로 淸凉里에서 舊龍山지와 鍾路서 西大門停留場(今無)前지의 電車線이 잇섯다 電車는 只今것과 달나 中央에 上等室이잇고 前後에는 下等이잇서서 壁도엄시 左右를 自由로 乘降하게 되엿다. 이에 머리를 근 것은 軍隊의 一部分과 耶蘇敎人과 一進會員이엇다. 兵丁과 巡査들도 綱巾을 도트리가티동여매고 그위에 『삽보』를 써서 軍帽遮陽밋흘 綱巾片子가 살작 보이는 모양이 韵致잇섯다. 그러나 얼마안이하야 그의(此間十字削除)시고 이 족한투구를 쓰신 寫眞이 坊間에 傳하게 되자 상투들이 勢를 일허나 날히 어저버렷다.
-(은 五十二頁에잇소)＜61＞
-(六十一頁에게속)-
近來에 普天敎徒들이 상투를 崇尙하게 되어 斷絶되여가든 상투의 運命이 얼마 길어지게 되엿다. 實狀 朝鮮人은 상투를 넘어 일즉 잘나버렷다. 網巾과 갓 감투 代身에 쓰고 다닐 衣冠이나 장만해노코 잘랏더면 조흘 것을 넘어도 急히 잘나버려서 아직도 제 衣冠조차 제손으로 만들지 못하는 百姓이 되여버리고 말앗다. 朝鮮人은 그 상투로 더부러 모든 녯 걱정 말 모든 것을 다 내어버리고 그가 마치 大阪製의 帽子를 머리에 이고 다니는 모양으로 남의 統治와 남의 思想을 머리에 이고 다니는 허수아비가 되여바리고 말앗다. 그중에 나가튼 못난이는 상투에 녯날 컴컴하고 구린내나던 二十年前의 서울과 朝鮮을 그리워하고 울게 되엿다. 그러나 그것은 돌아오지 못할 過去다. 다만 回憶의 눈물을 흘니는 것만이 나의 自由에 남앗다.＜52＞
＜52, 54-61＞