잡지명	別건곤 제18호
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	新春誌上 男女大討論, 現下의 朝鮮家庭 한집에 姑婦同居가 可한가 否한가 (New Year's Ladies' and Gentlemen's Discussion: In the current Joseon family, is it appropriate for a mother-in-law and daughter-in-law to live together?)
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

新春誌上 男女大討論, 現下의 朝鮮家庭 한집에 姑婦同居가 可한가 否한가
(New Year's Ladies' and Gentlemen's Discussion: In the current Joseon family, is it appropriate for a mother-in-law and daughter-in-law to live together?)

Appropriate

Oh Hwa-yeong

(Applause) A discussion topic is always one where both sides have enough power to fiercely clash, making the speakers passionate and the discussion flavorful. If we bring up something that everyone already agrees should be the case, the listeners won't be interested. The question is, should mothers-in-law and daughters-in-law live separately or together? Without a doubt, they should live together. I think you all agree. Of course, that's the intention of this question, but I want to make it clear that I am not advocating for the extended family system! Living together with two or three generations, taking in distant relatives just because they're related, letting them sit around for months or years just eating and relying on their fathers and grandfathers – this extended family system is a breeding ground for laziness and dependence, a terrible habit that you all know better than I do, so I won't say more. But I don't understand how anyone can say that mothers-in-law and daughters-in-law shouldn't live together. Let's examine the fundamentals of the mother-in-law and daughter-in-law relationship. It's not like fathers and sons live together while mothers-in-law and daughters-in-law live separately, right? If mothers-in-law and daughters-in-law have those titles and relationships because of their fathers and sons, doesn't that ultimately mean that fathers and sons shouldn't live together? So, even if we abandon customs and traditions and break all the old ways, can we really break human relationships and morals? But the young people who are soaked in new ideas and full of destructiveness say, "What are morals and laws? Aren't they just things we make up ourselves?" Even if we grant that about morals, can we really break human relationships too? Moreover, the morality and ethics of the East, which world history proves and all of humanity respects – especially in our Joseon, which is called the land of gentlemen – what makes us the land of gentlemen? Isn't it because we have steadfastly upheld ethics and morals? We have lost everything else. We have lost our homes and lands! But the only thing we still hold onto is this. Are we going to pluck this flower of ethics and morals, blooming alone in this devastated wilderness, with our own hands and trample it with our own feet? Are we going to give up even the cherished name of the Land of Courtesy in the East? Times are changing... but why try to revolutionize our beautiful and precious ethics and morals? Think about it! We value the bond between father and son more than the loyalty between ruler and subject. Should the son abandon his father and live separately? But the separation we're discussing here isn't about moving far away for work, or being forced to separate due to economic hardship, or fathers dividing their property and letting their sons live separately, or any other unavoidable circumstances. Instead, it's about young sons and daughters-in-law who can't stand their stubborn fathers and nagging mothers-in-law, whose conflicting thoughts, ideas, and ideals cause constant clashes and friction, so they bring up the question of separation. If they say that living with those stubborn parents would ruin their principles and ideals, so separation is the right thing to do, then there's no point in debating whether it's right or wrong, is there? But I think they bring up the question because they find it difficult to trample on our beautiful ethics and morals. But they should just forget about those stubborn old people and those troublesome ethics and morals and live separately as they please – but that's where the value of being human comes in. Humans, the masters of all creatures, have something that other animals don't. That's why we can't escape this question. But if we abandon humanity and trample on the very foundation of being human, then we are no longer human. But will this problem always exist, as it has in the past and will in the future? Absolutely not. It's a problem that we've never seen or heard of before, and one we won't hear of in the future. It's only a problem for this time, this transitional period! It's a problem only for the present, where new ideas and old ideas clash. But it's a problem that will naturally arise, because this is how generations change! But think about how your fathers and mothers have spent half their lives raising you and have turned gray! What's the joy of having a son and seeing him marry? It's not to use them. It's to forget their hardships of the past half-life and see their son and daughter-in-law live happily. Which mother-in-law would dislike and hate that? Don't blame your mother-in-law's stubbornness and lack of understanding. Blame the fact that you are in a transitional period. Don't complain about their nagging and lack of understanding. How long will that last? Don't reject your stubborn father or hate your nagging mother-in-law! There's plenty to learn from them. Don't just focus on their faults. Pick out their strengths and use them! Today's new things will become tomorrow's old things. Think about how the daughter-in-law who hates her mother-in-law will become a mother-in-law who is rejected! Think about how your ideas, which are new now, will be called stubborn by your daughter-in-law, and be patient! If you can't even endure that much, what are you talking about new ideas and businesses for! I hope you won't trample on the morality and human relations that we have held onto until now, and I will now step down from the podium. (Applause)

<62>

<63>

Inappropriate

Bang Jeong-hwan

Even if a son is 70 or 80 years old, in his parents' eyes, he's still a child who can't survive without their care, but once he marries and brings home a bride, a new, separate life begins for the two of them. It takes considerable effort for the bride and groom to match their minds and create a harmonious home. If even a subordinate interferes, it won't work, let alone if a superior who they can't control interferes, their home will be nothing.

"A family" should originally be formed around a couple, but if there are several couples in one house, it won't be A's house or B's house. Moreover, it's extremely absurd to have parents-in-law who demand absolute obedience living together. Now, I will roughly point out the harmful aspects.

First, what modern people demand from their families is rest and relaxation. The more exhausted they are from their busy social lives at the factory, office, or research institute, the more they seek absolute rest and relaxation in their homes. But in the traditional Korean extended family system, coming home means facing complex family relationships and dealing with more headaches than relaxation. The wife in the home should be considerate and dedicated to her husband so that she can understand his profession and strive to create a resting place that suits his professional needs. However, with parents-in-law and uncles-in-law above them and many family members, the housewife's attention must be evenly distributed in many directions, making it impossible for her to focus solely on her husband. Therefore, professional and family life are separated into different worlds, and after being exhausted from work all day, they come home and worry about family matters like a lodging manager worries about running a lodging house. Truly, a family with an extended family system is like a chaotic lodging house. Therefore, each family member suffers from two worlds and two people's hardships in their profession and family.

Second, it becomes unclear whether the center of the family is the parents-in-law, the young couple, the uncles-in-law couple, or the nephews-in-law couple, and therefore, unnecessary face-saving becomes common in the family, leading to many disadvantages. Among them, the most harmful is the child-rearing problem. Even if they have complaints about their parents-in-law, it is the children who suffer, and even if they have complaints about their younger siblings-in-law or guests, it is the innocent children who are scolded. There is nothing more harmful to a growing person than not understanding the reasons for rewards and punishments. The more filial a person is, the less they scold children in front of their parents. Occasionally, if there is a need to scold children to make them realize their mistakes, the elders will stop them or hug the punished child and soothe them with words of praise. In this way, the children are made to not understand whether they are being rewarded or punished. Meanwhile, several times a day, children are scolded and beaten for no reason based on old-fashioned ideas that do not suit their minds, without any regard for whether the children have done well or not, damaging the children's spirits completely. The biggest sacrifice in the extended family system is the children.

Third, everyone agrees that a common and significant harm is that whether the son and his wife rely on their parents or the parents rely on their son and his wife, dependent living arises, which drastically reduces the efficiency of the entire Korean nation, leading to the gradual and accelerated destruction of our economic life.

Only the lives of young people may lack experience, causing them to lose their composure and panic even when minor problems arise. For example, even if a young child is sick, they are quick to be frightened and panic, often making mistakes. This happens often, leading them to think that they need experienced elderly people in the house to deal with such situations. However, this is not a reason why parents-in-law must live together. For such times, they can hire a nanny or a seamstress with experience. If a mother-in-law lives with them, she must have a sufficient understanding and awareness of being a modern mother-in-law, not interfere in their lives, and only live with them with the qualification to give advice when asked about things they are unsure of. (Applause and great cheers)

<64>

Appropriate

Kim Mi-ri-sa

If I say these words, I don't know if the young women who are someone else's daughters-in-law will insult me for making outdated sounds. But I'm originally hard of hearing, so I won't be able to hear those insults no matter what. (Laughter) As the saying goes, "Selling a field to buy a rice paddy is because they want to eat this rice." People have children, cherish them, and rejoice because they hope that their children will grow up, inherit their family well in the future, and provide for them comfortably in their old age when they can't use their hands and feet. But if you raise your children with great effort and hardship, and then get a daughter-in-law, and can't even live with them in the same house, and they live separately saying "I'm me! You're you!" what's the difference between them and strangers? I don't know about Western countries where individualism is developed and the social structure is the same, but in the East, which is centered on familism, especially in our Joseon, where familism has been developed for hundreds of years and has become a custom and a social morality, other systems can't arise. If you just destroy those things and create problems like fathers and sons living separately and mothers-in-law and daughters-in-law living separately, that would be a big problem, wouldn't it? There are of course several disadvantages to mothers-in-law and daughters-in-law living together, but where in the world is there anything without any disadvantages? Even jade has flaws, and even on a clear day, it can hail. These days, young men and women mostly talk about the need for mothers-in-law and fathers-and-sons to live separately, and when you listen to their reasons, they always say that the opinions of the old and the young don't match, so the family is always uneasy, and because they are under the constraint of their parents, they have no freedom, and therefore, affection doesn't arise between husband and wife, and because they rely on each other, their spirit of independent living is destroyed, and the newly born children are infected with the old customs and habits of their old parents, so they can't become new people of the new era. But those are just the words of recent frivolous people. What parents would dislike their children doing well? The reason they constrain and nag is always because they are worried that their children might do something wrong. They say that affection doesn't arise between husband and wife because the mother-in-law and daughter-in-law live in the same house, but why do families without parents have domestic storms and even the sadness of divorce? Looking at the examples so far, the children have mostly squandered their parents' wealth, and where have the parents squandered their children's wealth? Looking at those things, the dependence is on the children themselves, not on the parents. It's the same with children's education. In houses where there are grandparents, the children are still well taken care of at home and study well, but in houses where there are no grandparents and only young parents, they don't even know when the child is sick and often panic, and they raise the child carelessly and without manners, and I've seen many cases of them becoming bad people. Nevertheless, I really can't understand why they only advocate for living separately. They talk about this and that, but in reality, isn't it because they don't like being nagged to get up early when they want to sleep in, it's difficult to play as they please between young couples, and it's difficult to eat whatever they want? It sounds too vulgar to say these words, but I'm saying them because there are people like that among the people I actually know. In conclusion, mothers-in-law and daughters-in-law living separately is destroying the ethics that are the source of Eastern morality and ignoring the family system, so I think that in the present Joseon, where a better new system hasn't arisen, it's absolutely unacceptable. (Applause)

<67>

Inappropriate

Park Ho-jin

It's a bit funny for me, who hasn't experienced living with a mother-in-law, to talk about this issue, but seeing my colleagues living with their mothers-in-law, I feel strongly that mothers-in-law and daughters-in-law must live separately. From ancient times, parents think of and love their daughters unconditionally, saying that bad things are right and right things are even more right, forgiving even minor faults and protecting them to the end, but for daughters-in-law, they don't forgive anything, magnifying even small things and blaming them for everything that goes wrong in the house. If the daughter-in-law is better than their own daughter in some way, they become jealous and try to find even the smallest fault, and if their daughter is better in some way, the daughter-in-law is inevitably mistreated. How can a mother-in-law who is soaked in old ideas understand a daughter-in-law who has new ideas? When they get a daughter-in-law, they want her to cook, wash clothes, and take care of the children so that they can rest comfortably and be waited upon, but how can a woman like me, who has work to do here and there and always has to go around, just wait on her mother-in-law? If I go out in the morning to a meeting or to the school to teach, I will naturally come back in the evening. How can I have time to be my mother-in-law's servant? Naturally, if I go out into society and interact with people, I will have many visitors, both men and women, morning and evening. If a man visits, they think something terrible has happened and scold not only the daughter-in-law but also the son, telling him to be careful about his wife's behavior. How can you not have relationships while living a social life? Also, if the husband speaks kindly or affectionately to his wife in front of his parents, they scold their son, saying that if he treats his wife like that, she will become rude and not respect her parents-in-law, giving instructions like "You have to beat your wife and foal," as the saying goes, and telling their son all the bad things about his daughter-in-law, even creating a rift in the couple's affection over small things. Also, it has a big impact on raising children. Children raised under grandparents are mostly rude and disorderly. However, they tell their son or daughter-in-law that their way of raising children is wrong and that they are teaching them without manners, so they try to teach them according to their own thoughts and opinions, which will have a big negative impact on child education. Next, they can't live together because of conflicting principles. Recently, there are some mothers-in-law who seem to understand that their son's and daughter-in-law's principles are different, but when it comes down to it, they still insist on their own way and interfere in even the smallest things. Perhaps the biggest conflict is that their principles don't match!

This may not be relevant to the question, but they also can't live together because of their sisters-in-law. It is the sisters-in-law who cause conflict and animosity between the mother-in-law and daughter-in-law. For these reasons, I think that mothers-in-law and daughters-in-law living together is impossible in modern life. They must be kept apart so that there is no direct interference, so that they can live according to their own principles and ideals, and even if they don't live far apart, it doesn't matter if they live nearby, but they must not be allowed to interfere in even the smallest details. In any case, mothers-in-law and daughters-in-law living together is impossible.

<68>

**Named Entities**

Oh Hwa-yeong	O Hwa-yeong
Bang Jeong-hwan	Bang Jeong-hwan
Kim Mi-ri-sa	Kim Mi-ri-sa
Park Ho-jin	Pak Ho-jin
Joseon	Joseon



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제18호
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	新春誌上 男女大討論, 現下의 朝鮮家庭 한집에 姑婦同居가 可한가 否한가
기사형태	논설

新春誌上 男女大討論, 現下의 朝鮮家庭 한집에 姑婦同居가 可한가 否한가
可便

吳華英

(滿場拍手) 討論問題라는 것은 항상 兩便이 어지간하게 뺏딍길 힘이 잇서야 말하는 사람이 열도 나고 滋味도 나는 것이지 의레히 그래야만 할 것을 꺼집어 내다가 討論을 한다면 亦是 듯는 사람도 흥미가 업슬 것임니다. 問題가 姑婦가 別居를 해야 올켓느냐? 同居를 해야 올켓느냐? 내가 말할 것도 업시 물론 同居를 해야 올치요. 아마 여러분도 그러케 생각하실 줄 암니다. 물론 이 문제의 本意도 그럿켓지만 내가 말하는 것이 또한 大家族制度를 주장하는 것이 아닌 것을 미리 아러 주십시오! 二代三代식 한집에서 들끌코 어서케 遠戚이라도 치(寸)수에 맛기만 하면 덤허놋코 두달 석달 일년잇해식 무조건하고 우둑허니 안저서 뜨더만 먹고 잇다든지 애비 할애비에게만 의로하고 지낸다든지 이 대가족제도라는 것은 惰怠를 기르고 依賴心을 북도다 주는 큰 惡習인 것은 내가 말하지 안어도 여러분이 더 잘 아실 것이 아닌가 더말 하고자 안슴니다만은 姑婦가 한집에서 사는 것이 올치 안타는 것은 어듸 當한 말인지 모르겟슴니다. 姑婦라는 것의 根本을 캐여봅시다. 父子는 한집에서 살고 싀어미와 며누리만 각각 산다는 것이 아니겟지요. 그러면 싀어미와 며누리는 애비와 아들에게 딸려서 그러한 名稱과 關係가<62> 잇는 것이 아님닛가 그러면 결국은 부자가 한집에서 사는 것이 올치 안타는 말이 되지 안슴닛가. 그러니-習慣도 고만두고 因襲도 고만두고 다 그까지 묵은 것은 깨트려버린다 하드라도 人倫과 道德을 깨트릴 수야 잇슴닛가 그러나 이새 新思潮에 젓고 破壞性을 가즌 靑年들의 말은 道德이란 무어며 法律이란 무엇이냐 저희끼리 저희마음대로 꿈이고 만든 것이 아니냐? 설사 道德은 그러타고 합시다. 그러면 人倫이란 것도 깨트려버리겟슴닛가. 더구나 世界歷史가 證明하고 世界人類가 崇尙하는 東洋의 道德과 倫理- 그 中에도 우리 됴선으로 말하면 君子의 나라라고 하지 안슴닛가. 무엇으로 君子의 나라라고 함닛가. 倫理와 道德을 꾸준히 직혀온 까닭이 아니고 무엇임닛가. 우리의 것이라고는 다-업서젓슴니다. 집도 터전도 다-업서젓서요! 그러나 웅켜쥐고 나려오는 것이알고는 이것밧게 업슴니다. 荒廢한 曠野에 다-씨려지고 부러진 그가 온대에서 한낫 홀로 피여잇는 이 倫理와 道德의 꼿마자 우리손으로 꺽고 우리 발로 밟아버리려고 함닛가? 東方의 禮儀之國이라는 그 알뜰한 일홈마자 떼여버리려고 함닛가? 時代가 時代이닛가...그러나 하고만흔 中에 아름다웁고 보배스러운 우리의 倫理와 道德에 革命을 이르키랴함닛가 생각해보십시오! 우리는 君臣有義보다도 父子有親이 한자리 上座에 잇지 안슴닛가. 그 아들이 그 아바지를 떼여버리고 따로 저희끼리 살어야을하요? 그러나 여긔에 問題삼는 別居라는 것은 職業을 따라서 먼 地方으로 가게 된다든지 經濟의 打拍 즉 生活活難으로 到底히 한집에서는 살 수가 업슴으로 눈물을 먹음고 東分西離한다든지, 아버지가 아들에게 財産을 分配해 주어서 分居를 식여준다든지, 其餘他의 할수업는 事情으로 別居할 수 밧게 업는 형편에 잇서서의 別居가 아니라 아버지는 頑固요 싀어머니는 잔소리꾼이요! 思想이 틀리고 주의가 맛지 안코 이상이 다른 까닭에 항상 衝突과 葛藤이 생김으로 도저히 한집에서는 살수가 업다하는 젊은 아들과 젊은 며누리가 끄을어 내어인 問題이라고 생각함니다. 그러면 그러한 頑固한 父母와 갓치 살다가는 일껏 가젓든 主義와 품은 理想이 헛것이 되겟슴으로 別居를 하는 것이 當然한 일이라고 하면 여긔에 올흐냐 글흐냐 問題삼을 것도 업슬 것이 아님닛가 그러나 그 문뎨를 끄을어 내인 그들이 亦是이 우리가 가지고 잇는 이 아름다운 倫理와 道德을 밟고 넘어 스기가 어려움으로 그런 것인가 생각함니다. 그러나 그까지 頑固뗑이-그까지 倫理道德다-골치압흔 것 생각치말고 자기 네마음대로 따로 살면고만이겟지만 여긔에서 사람이 사람된 갑이 이슨 것임니다. 만물의 영장이라는 사람에게는 다른 동물게서 차저 줄 수 업는 그것을 가젓기 때문이요. 여긔에 문뎨삼는 것도 버서나지 못할 그것이 잇는 까닭임니다.그러나 人道에 버서나서까지 사람된 근본문제를 짓밟아 바린다면 그는 벌서 사람이라는 사람이 아닐 것임니다. 그러나 이 문제가 예전브터이섯고 장래에도 끗끗내 잇슬 것이냐 하면 결코 안임니다. 前에는 물론 보지도 듯지도 못한 문뎨이고 압흐로도 들을 수 업슬 것이라고 생각함니다. 다만 요때! 요 過渡期대에만<63> 잇슬 것이고 現在에 잇는 문뎨임니다. 新思潮와 舊思想이 엇밧귀이는 요 現在에만 잇슬문제임니다. 그러나 당연히 잇슬 문뎨임니다. 세대가 이쯤되엿스닛가!그러나 당신네의 아버지와 싀어머니가 당신네를 기르기에 半平生을 虛費햇고 머리가 허-엿케 된 것을 생각해 보시오! 아들나서 좃타는 것이 무엇이고 며누리 보아서 좃타는 것이 무엇이겟슴닛가 아들 낫코 며누리 보아 부려먹자는 것이 아임니다. 長成한 아들을 짝을 맛추어 놋코 半平生의 苦生한 것도 이저바리고 아들 며누리가 滋味잇게 사는 것을 볼때에 어느 쉬어머니가 실혀하고 미워할 것임닛가. 싀어머니의 頑固와 沒理解한 것을 원망하지 말고 당신네가 過渡期에 處한 것을 恨하시오. 그들의 잔소리말고 당신네가 過渡期에 處한 것을 恨하시오. 그들의 잔소리와 沒理解가 얼마나 가릿가? 頑固한 아버지를 그 아들이 排斥하고 잔소리 만흔 싀어머니를 실혀하지마시오! 그 中에 도배흘 것이 만슴뉜다. 短處만을 집어내지 말고 長處뿐을 골나 쓰시오! 오늘의 새것은 내일의 현 것이 될것임니다. 싀어머니를 실혀하든 며누리가 排斥밧는 싀어머니가 될 것을 생각시오! 당신의 思想이 지금은 새것이지만 당신의 며누리때에는 다시 頑固소리를 들을 것을 생각해 보시고 참고 계십시오! 그만한 것을 못참고서야 무슨 新主義니 事業이니 하고 떠든단 말이요! 굿해여 우리가 이때껏 가지고 오든 道德과 人倫을 밟아바리랴고 마시기를 바라며 壇을 나려감니다.(박수)

否便

방정환

아들이 7,80을 먹어도 父母의 마음에는 自己가 돌아보아 주지 안으면 못사라갈 어린 사람으로 알지만은 결혼을 하야 新婦를 마지해왓스면 벌서 그 두 男女의 따로운 살림이 새로 생기는 것임니다. 新郞新婦뿐만이 자기 두사람의 뜻을 맞추어 調和된 家庭을 니루기에도 상당한 노력이 드는 터인 여긔에 다른 手下 사람이라도 개개면 안되겟는데 함을며 두사람의 마음대로 이러지도 저러지도 못할 웃사람이 개개인단하면 그 두 새사람의 家庭이란 아모것도 되지 안흘 것임니다.
『한집안』이란 원래 한패의 夫婦를 中心해서 니루어저야 할 것인대 한집 속에 여러 패의 夫婦가 잇다하면 그것은 甲의 집도 아니요 乙의 집도 되지 안흘 것임니다. 그런대 더구나 絶對服從을 强要하는 싀부모가 한데 잇다하는 것은 甚히 侫령된 것임니다. 이제 그 弊害되는 點을 대강 드러보겟슴니다.
첫재첫재 現代人이 그 家庭에 要求하는 것은 休養과 安息임니다. 工場에 가던지, 事務所에를 가던지, 또는 硏考所에를 가던지 劇繁한 社會일에 疲困하면 할스록 絶代의 休養과 安息을 그 家庭에서 구하게 되는 대 在來朝鮮式 大家族制의 家庭을 보면 집에 오면 집안의 繁雜한 關係에 休養은 커냥<64> 다시 머리 압흔 일을 만히 닥드리게 됨니다. 家庭에 잇는 안해가 男便 한사람을 爲하고 생각하게 되어야 男便의 職業을 理解하고 또 그 職業性에 맛는 休養處를 꿈이기에 努力할 것임니다. 그런대 위로 싀父母가 계시고 싀三寸이 잇고 , 食口가 만흔즉 主婦의 注意가 여러군데로 골고로 가야하는 關係상 到底히 男便 한 사람에게만 專一하지 못하게 됨니다. 그러니 職業과 家庭生活이 딴 世上에 떠러저 잇게 되는 고로 왼종일 職業에 疲困해 가지고 도라와서 집에 와서는 旅館속 가튼 家庭일을 걱정하느라고 旅館經營者와 가튼 걱정을 또 하게 됨니다. 참말 大家族制度의 家庭을 보면 요란한 旅館속 갓슴니다. 그러닛가 食口마다가 職業과 家庭과 두世上 두사람의 고생을 하게 되는 것임니다.
둘둘재로 그 家庭의 中心이 싀父母에게 잇는지 젊은 夫婦에게 잇는지 또는 쉬三寸夫婦에게 잇는지 쉬아자비 夫婦에게 잇는지 모르게 되고 따라서 家庭속에서는 쓸데업는 體面을 보게 되야 이것이 여러 가지로 손해가 만하되는데 그 중에도 제일 만히 해가 되는 것이 어린 사람양육문제임니다. 쉬부모에게 불평이 잇서도 어더맛는 것은 어린사람이요 동세나 사랑손님에게 불평이 잇서도 罪업는 야단을 맛나는 것이 어린 사람임니다. 상벌의 이유가 분명치 못하게 되는 것처럼 자라가는 사람에게 더 해로운 일이 업슴니다. 孝誠잇는 사람일스록 부모의 압헤서는 어린사람을 꾸짓지 안는 법이요. 간혹 꾸지즐 일이 잇서서 어린사람으로 하야곰 자기 잘못을 깨닷게 하려면 웃어른이 엽헤서 말니거나 그러치 아느면 罰밧는 아해를 덤썩 안어다가 쓰다듬어 주면서 충찬의 말로 달냄니다. 이러케 하여서 아해로 하여금 賞을 밧는 셈인지 罰을 밧는 셈인지 스사로 分間못하게 하면서 그러면서 하로도 몃번씩 어린애 자신은 잘햇거나 못햇거나 녯날식 자기마음에 맛지 안는다고 이유업는 꾸지람과 매를 나리여 어린사람의 긔운을 여지업시 傷해 놋슴니다. 大家族制의 제일 큰 犧牲이 어린사람임니다.
셋재는 누구나 다가치 말하는 바 공통한 큰 폐해니 아들 夫婦가 父母를 依賴하던지, 父母가 아들 夫婦에게 依賴하던지 依賴生活이 생겨저서 朝鮮民族全體로의 能率이 지극히 減少되고 거긔따라 우리의 經濟生活이 점점 加速度로 破滅되여가는 것임니다.
다만 젊은 사람만뿐만의 生活이면 經驗이 업서서 조고만한 일이 생겨도 平靜을 니러버리고 慌忙히 구러서 예를 들면 어린아기의 病이 잇서도 怯먼저 집어먹고 慌忙히 굴다가 그릇치 는 때가 만코 다른 일에도 그러한 때가 만호니 그런 일을 當할때마다 집안에 經歷만흔 老人이 계서야 한다는 생각을 하게 되는 모양임니다만 그러한 理由로 싀父母가 반듯이 同居해야 한다는 理由는 되지 못합니다. 그런 때를 爲하야 안잠자기나 針母를 經歷만흔 사람을 求해두면 될 것이요. 싀어머니가 同居한다면 現代的 싀어머니로서의 充分한 自覺과 이해가 잇슨 後에 살림에 干涉하지말고 막막해서 뭇는 것이 잇슬때에 議論해주는 資格으로만 同居하여야 할 것임니다.(拍手大喝釆)

可便

金美理士

내가 이러한 말슴을 하면 남의 며누리 되시는 여러 젊은이들은 나다려 時代에 떼려진 소리를 한다고 辱을 할는지 알수가 없슴니다. 그러나 나는 원래에 귀가 어두운 사람이닛가 그러한 辱은 암만하야도 들릴지 안슴니다. (滿場大笑) 속담에 말하기를 밧을 팔어 논 사는 것은 이 밥을 먹자는 탓이라는 말과 가치 사람이 자식을 나서 귀하다하고 조와하는 것은 그 자식이 자라서 장래의 자긔집 家門을 잘 繼承하고 또 老來에 自己가 手足이 업슬 때에는 그 子식에게 依託하야 餘生을 편안하게 잘 보내게 될 수가 잇는 까닭인가 함니다. 그런대 자식을 일건 애쓰고 고생스럽게 길너서, 며누리를 어든 다음에 한집에 다리고 잇지도 못하고 따로 사러서 저는저! 나는나!하고 남과 가치 산다면 그 무엇이 남보다 다를 것이 잇슴닛가. 西洋가치 個人제도가 발달되고 社會組織이 또한 그와 가치된 나라는 모르겟지만은 家族主義를 中心으로 한 東洋 더구나 우리 朝鮮과 가치 몃백년을 두고 家族主義가 발달되야 그로 慣習이 되고 그로 社會의 道德이 된 以上에 다른 제도는 생기지도 못하고 그런 것을 그저 파궤하야 父子別居니 姑婦別居니 하는 문제가 생긴다면 그것이야말로 참 큰일이 안임닛가? 姑婦가 同居하는데는 물론 여러 가지에 폐해가 업는 것은 안이지만은 세상에 엇지 조곰도 폐해엄는 일이 어듸잇슴닛가. 自玉속에도 틔가 잇고, 靑天白日에도 우박이 나리지 안슴닛가. 요새 이에 젊은 靑年男女간에는 대개가 姑婦=父子의 別居의 必要를 말하는 대, 그 이유를 드르면 言必稱 老少의 主義가 맛지 안아 항상 家庭이 不知하고 父母의 拘束하에 잇기 때문에 自由가 업고 따러서 夫婦間에 애틋한 사랑이 생기지 안으며 서로 依賴를 하는 까닭에 獨立生活할 精神이 말살되고 새로 나는 子女가 그 老父母의 舊習舊慣에 感染되야 新時代新人物이 될 수 업다고 합니다. 그러나 그것은 다 近來 輕薄者들의 말에 不過한 것임니다. 엇던 부모가 자기 子식의 잘되는 것을 시러할 사람이 어듸 잇겟슴니가 拘束을 하고 잔소리를 하는 것은 항상 그 자식이 행여나 무엇이 잘못될까 염려하는 까닭이이지요. 姑婦가 한집에 잇기 때문에 夫婦의 愛情이 생기지안는다 하지만은 父母 업는 夫婦간에는 엇지하야 家庭風波가나며 甚至於 離婚하는 悲哀까지 생김닛가. 이때까지의 例를 보면 자식이 대개는 父母의 財産을 업시하얏지 父母가 자식의 재산을 업시한 일이 어듸잇슴닛가 그런 것을 보면 依賴心도 자식자체가 가지고 잇지. 엇디 부모가 가지고야 잇슴닛가. 子女의 敎育도 그럿치요. 祖父母가 잇는 집에서는 아희들을 그래도 家庭에서도 잘 거두고 復習이라도 잘 식히지만은 祖父母가 업고 젊은 부모만 잇는 집에서는 아희가 病이 나도 잘 알지도 못하야 각금 狼狽를 하고 아희를 함부로 버릇업시 길너서 좃치못한 사람이 되는 것을 만히 보왓슴니다. 그럼에도 불구하고 작고 別居만 主唱하는 것은 참으로 알 수가 업슴듸다. 자긔들은 무엇시 엇덧코 엇덧타고 떠들지만은 실상은 늦잠을 자는 대 일즉이 이러나라고 잔소리하는 것이 듯기실코 어린 부부간에 마음대로 놀기가 어렵고 이것저것 군것질 하기가 어려워 그러는 것이 안일까요. 이런 말슴을 하기는 너무도 천박한 말슴갓슴니다만은 내가 실지로 아는 사람 中에도 그러한 사람이 잇기 때문에 하는 말슴이올시다. 폐일언하고 姑婦가 別居하는 것은 東洋道德의 根源인 倫理를 파궤하고 家庭制度를 무시하는 것이니 그보다더 좋은 새 제도가 생기지 안는 現下 朝鮮에서는 到底히 是認할 수 업는 일로 생각합니다.(拍手)

否便

朴昊辰

싀집사리를 해 보지 못한 제가 이 문뎨를 가지고 말을 한다는 것은 좀 우습지만 나의 동모의 싀집사리를 하는 것을 볼 것 갓흐면 반듯이 姑婦가 別居를 해야겟다고 절실히 생각합니다. 自來로 안부모가 그 딸을 생각하고 사랑하는 것은 무조건 하고, 글흔 것도 올코, 올흔 것은 더욱 올타하여, 여간한 허물은 다 용서하고 어대까지든지 擁護해 주지만 며누리게 대해서는 도모지 용서하는 것이 업고 些少한 일도 크다마하게 擴大를 하야서 덥허놋코 잘못하는 것으로 돌려보내고 집안에 잘못되는 일의 全責任과 過失을 며누리가 지는 것임니다. 가량 며누리가 자기딸보다도 나흔 곳이 잇스면 猜忌를 하야서 눈꼽만한 허물이라도 삷혀낼랴고만 눈을 부르뜨고 마냑에 딸이 좀 나흔 곳이 잇스면 다시말할 것도 업시 며누리는 구박을 밧는 것임니다. 녯날 思想에 저즌 싀어머니가 잇지 새 사상을 가진 며누리를 이해해 줄 것임니가. 며누리를 어더오면은 그 며누리에게 밥이나 짓게하고 옷이나 빨게 하며 어린아해나 잘 기르게 하여서 자기네는 편히 좀 누어서 부려나 먹겟다는 생각을 가즌 이들과 저와갓치 여긔도 일이 잇고 저긔도 일이 잇서서 늘 도라단여야할 여자가 엇서케 싀어머니의 수종만 들고 잇겟슴닛가. 아츰에 나아가서 무슨 會로 가든지 혹은 學校로 敎授하러 가든지 하면 自然히 저녁에나 도라올 것이 아임니가. 어느 겨를에 싀어머니의 종노릇을 하겟슴닛가 自然히 사회에 나아가서 이사람 저사람과  交際를 하게되면 아츰이나 저녁으로나 男子나 女子가 차자오는 사람도 만흘 것이 아님닛가. 만약에 차자온 손이 男子인 경우에는 큰 變怪나 난 줄로 녁이고 며누리는 고사하고 아들에게까지 야단을 하며 안해의 행동에 조심을 하라는 등 엇저라는 등 야단이 남니다. 男子이건 女子이건 社會生活을 하고 잇스면서 엇더케 交際를 안켓슴니가. 또 혹시 <67> 부모님 압헤서 남편이 안해에게 말이라도 다정스럽게 한다든지 정답게 군다든지하면 그 아들을 불너 세우고 안해를 그렇케 달으면 버릇이 업서지고 싀부모를 공대할 줄을 모르는 것이니 속담에 이르듯키 안해와 망아지는 때려야 한다는 이러한 訓示를 내리며 며누리의 흉을 잇는 대로 그 아들에게 말을 하야서 些少한 것으로브터 부부애의 破綻을 생게까지 됨니다. 또 子女를 敎育하는데 큰 影響이 잇슴니다. 祖父母아래에서 자라난 아해들은 대개가 버릇이 없고 無秩序하게 됨니다. 그러타고 아들이나 며누리에게는 아해 길으는 法이 틀렷느니 버릇이 업시 가르치느니 하며 自己네 생각과 주장대로 가르키랴하니 여긔에 子女敎育에 큰 惡影響을 줄 것임니다. 그 다음에는 主義의 衝突로 도뎌히 갓치 살 수는 업는 것임니다. 近來와서는 아들의 主義가 엇덧커니 며누리의 主義가 어덧커니-그저 그러려니하고 理解하는 듯한 싀어머니들이 잇스나 亦시 딱 닥처서는 自己流의 主唱과 頑强이 나오는 것이며 細細한 일에까지도 干涉을 하게 되는 것임니다. 아마 큰 衝突은 이 主義가 서로 맛지안은데 잇겟지요!
이것은 좀 문뎨에 끼우지 안는 것이나 싀누의 때문에도 갓치 살 수가 업슬 것임니다. 싀어머니와 며누리사이에 葛藤과 反目을 뭇치는 것이 이 싀누의일것임니다. 이러한 여러 가지 의미에 이서서 도뎌히 姑婦의 同居는 現代人의 生活에 잇서서는 不可한 것이라고 생각함니다. 반듯이 멀리하야서 直接干涉이 업도록 하야서 제 主義대로 제 理想대로 살어보도록 할 것이며 멀리 떠러지지 안는다 하드라도 좀 相隔한 近處에라도 상관은 업스나 直接細細한 일에까지 干涉을 하지 못하도록 하여야 할 것임니다. 하여간 姑婦의 同居는 不可함니다.<68>
<62-68>