잡지명	별건곤 제18호
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	男女討論 女子斷髮이 可한가 否한가 (Debate on Men and Women: Is Women's Short Hair Acceptable or Not?)
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

Debate on Men and Women: Is Women's Short Hair Acceptable or Not?

Acceptable

Kim Hwallan

Since I am a person who has cut her hair short, it is easy to imagine that I would say that short hair is good. However, I am by no means arguing for short hair simply because I have cut it short. Even if I had not cut my hair short now, I would still like to talk about the necessity of short hair. First, short hair is good from a hygienic point of view. Whether they are modern or old-fashioned, our women always braid their hair, which puts pressure on the brain and has a bad effect on their minds. Moreover, their hair is always dirty, which makes their clothes dirty and the smell is also bad, which is harmful to themselves and even to young children. However, if you cut your hair short, your hair is clean and light, and these harms disappear. Secondly, it is very economical in terms of time. According to the statistics of some busybodies, if a woman's life is 70 years, she spends 20 years crying, 20 years in love, and 30 years combing her hair. Of course, this is a manipulation by some mischievous men of our women, but generally speaking, how much precious time do our women waste every day combing their hair? However, if you cut your hair short, you only waste the time you spend cutting it once a month, and you don't have to spend as much time as you would braiding it. Thirdly, short hair is also good from an aesthetic point of view. Of course, this is not to say that it is aesthetically pleasing because people call you a short-haired beauty if you cut your hair short. I am saying this because short hair looks better than braided hair in terms of actual appearance. I cannot say that braided hair has no beauty, but overall, short hair looks better. Last year, on my way to Europe and America, I stopped by the capital of Annam, and when I saw the people of that country still not cutting their hair and working with it loose, I cannot tell you how unsightly it was. <128>

Our Korean women may not know this if they live above the middle class, but if you look at the women in the rural villages and the women in poor houses in Seoul who live below the middle class, who cannot comb their hair well and work covered in dust, how are they any different from the people of Annam? If they all cut their hair short instead of keeping it long, it would not look so bad outwardly. Fourth, short hair is in line with the trend of the world. In European and American countries, women's short hair is already an old story and not even a problem. In Northern Europe, they are even calling for the Amitabha Buddha and growing their hair long again. Speaking of the East, it is a fact that the trend of women cutting their hair is increasing every year in Japan, and in recent years, in places like China, even compulsory haircuts are being mandated by law, so it has become impossible for the world's women to not cut their hair. It is a strange phenomenon that Korean women who had cut their hair short are growing it long again. When you see that, who would not laugh at the many weaknesses of our Korean women, and who would not lament that those who were making a fuss about the so-called women's movement were all emotional rather than conscious? I think of these people as pioneers and also as cursers of our short-haired women. (Applause and cheers) Fifth, I think of short hair as the only condition for women's liberation. Until now, the distinction between men and women has been obvious because they have not cut their hair, and discrimination has arisen from there. Also, there is discrimination between women, such as new women, old women, virgins, and married women, which creates unequal relationships. However, if everyone cuts their hair short, men and women will all be the same. (Clothes are a separate issue.) There will be no conflict between old and new. For these five reasons, I strongly advocate for short hair.

Unacceptable

Chŏng Chongmyŏng

I am a person with a very pockmarked face. If I cut my hair now, I think I will immediately hear the title of short-haired beauty from you all. (Laughter from the audience) However, since I am a person who absolutely opposes short hair, I would rather play the role of a pockmarked person as I am than play the role of a short-haired beauty that has no substance. I am not opposing short hair because of old-fashioned moral concepts or customs, or because I cannot cut my hair because it is the inheritance of my parents, or because I cannot cut my hair because it is not the etiquette of the late king. I am opposing it because I have actually experienced it and because I have thought about the general situation in Korea. When I listen to the words of women who cut their hair short, the first reason is that if women are to engage in the liberation movement, they must first reform their appearance, so they must first cut their hair short. However, I think that they are only thinking about themselves and do not know the general situation in Korea at all. The general women of Korea are still confined to their homes, and if we are to bring them out and work together, we must first be close to them and understand them, mustn't we? But if the women who come out on our movement line cut their hair first, they will see us as people from a completely different world, and they will not be able to communicate with us, let alone be respectful of us. This is not something I am saying in order to debate, but I have realized that it is definitely the case based on many years of experience. Of course, I don't know if anyone cuts their hair short to look good as an individual or for other reasons, but at least if they cut their hair short for the sake of social work, that is a very wrong idea. I will not mention the names of anyone now, but I know that the reason why some of our colleagues have cut their hair and then grown it long again is because they have had that experience. Secondly, they say that short hair is very economical in terms of time. However, whether it is long or short hair, it depends on how you do it, and it is not necessarily the case that long hair wastes time and short hair saves time. If you look at the women who cut their hair short these days, they are mostly women who take good care of their appearance, so they comb their hair several times a day and wash and iron it once a week, and every time they work, their hands always go up to their hair, so how much time is actually wasted? In my opinion, short hair takes up more time. Thirdly, they say that short hair is good for hygiene. However, that is just an excuse, and what is so good about it for hygiene? Short hair is easier to scatter than braided hair, so if a short-haired woman makes food, hair or dandruff will inevitably get into the food, and because the hair is shorter, it will not be easily seen, so people will easily eat it as it is, which will be harmful to hygiene. Also, they say that braiding the hair presses on the back of the brain and is not good for the mind, but I think that is an exaggeration. There have been no female monks or female scholars so far, and there are famous women among braided housewives. (Applause and laughter) Fourth, they say that it is economically beneficial. However, if you cut your hair, you have to pay for haircuts several times a month, and you have to wear a hat or put on makeup, so what is the benefit of that? Moreover, Korean women have a special environment compared to women in other countries, so they will have to disguise themselves when doing something. If they do something wrong, they might even run away in disguise! (Attention!) In such cases, it is very convenient to have hair, but if you have short hair, it will be very noticeable and it will be very difficult to act. Look. When Kim OO did something (Inappropriate – Stopped!)

Acceptable

Pak Sajik

"Women cut their hair." Women who used to braid their hair, saying that even hair that reached their feet was too short, have cut their hair, and everyone is jumping up and down in surprise. Why are they so surprised? Why are newspapers making such a fuss about short-haired beauties and short-haired girls? In the past, only nuns who had left the secular world cut their hair, but now women who walk around in the secular world are cutting their hair, which is very <130> rough on the eyes and ears, but if there is anyone who criticizes this haircut, I would say that they are ignorant. Not only in the case of short hair, but also in all aspects of human life, as the times change, so do the cultural systems and lifestyles, and evolution is inevitable. Of course, if we see that short hair, which did not exist in the past, has become a trend today, we can see that it is one of the evolutions and that customs have definitely changed. So, if you say that this short hair is an addiction to Western style or that it is something that frivolous women do, then you are wrong. In today's world, where new ideas are flooding in and lifestyles are becoming more convenient, this is also an inevitable trend. Rather than looking at it objectively, I actually want to advocate for short hair and, if I could, I would cut off the stuffy braided hair. If you ask me why I advocate for short hair, I can give you the following answer. First, I think it makes you look twice as beautiful as long hair. It looks much better to have neat, curly hair than to have greasy, messy hair. <131> Next, in terms of economy (both material and time), first, you don't have to pay for oil or decorations, and it's easier to cut your hair and go than to fuss with braiding it. I also advocate for short hair because it is necessary for hygiene. I have discovered these many advantages, not because I am advocating for a trend or a new fashion. Isn't it the same reason that men wear Western clothes because they have taken advantage of convenience even if it means breaking the old system? Women's short hair is also the same. In this sense, I advocate for short hair.

Unacceptable

Kim Pyŏngjun

As the times change, thoughts change, and as thoughts change, customs and habits also change, but looking at our Korea today, this tendency seems to be a bit excessive. There is no reason why everything old is bad, and there is no reason why everything new is unconditionally good. People can see progress and improvement in taking what is new and abandoning what is old, but isn't there room for consideration for those who are soaked in new ideas these days and throw away everything old unconditionally, whether it is right or wrong?

However, I am not trying to uphold or advocate for old customs, but since the question is about women's short hair, I will only talk about that. Women's short hair is also one of the new trends. In the past, people would not even think of cutting their hair unless they were monks. I can only say that it is thanks to the new trend, but are all new trends good and right? I am not even in a position to talk about foreign countries here, but if I quietly watch Korean women these days who cut their hair and walk around like monks wearing monks' hats, saying that it is good and doing it alone, strutting around the big cities as if they are pioneers, of course they are new women. Among them, there seem to be many who are making a fuss about doing women's movements or having some kind of ideology. There is no reason why you have to cut your hair like a man to do a women's movement, and you don't have to cut your hair just because you have some kind of ideology or thought! If a woman cuts her hair, she must have some great determination and a firm mind. If someone who has cut their hair short hears this in this place, they may immediately argue with me, but if you look at it quietly, they don't have a firm mind, and if you ask them if they have a good reason or a plausible condition, they may have their own reasons and conditions, but none of them are valid. However, if you ask them if they have any great determination, they don't have that either. However, if you listen to their reasons, they say that it is to promote beauty, to save money and time, and to make it easier... They cut off their long hair, which they cannot buy even with a thousand gold coins. As you can see, have you found a beauty among the short-haired women? Is she a beauty because the world calls her a short-haired beauty? Where does a woman's beauty lie? <132> Isn't this hair, which can be changed this way and that way, the treasure of a woman, which can be twisted and turned in various ways? Is it beautiful to cut off this precious hair and walk around with a tail-less sparrow's butt flapping around? Who would call that beautiful? Have you ever heard poets praise a woman as beautiful with the head of a monk wearing a monk's hat? A woman's beauty lies in her hair. Also, they say it saves money. The world is busy, so are Korean women going to save time by combing their hair and do something big? You can just be a little more diligent. If you cut your hair to save time, aren't you acknowledging that you are lazy? They say it saves money, but you have to go to the barber shop once or twice a month! You have to style your short hair! What is economical? You have to buy a hat to match your clothes! It doesn't go well with Korean clothes, so you have to buy Western clothes with money you don't have? What are you calling economical? Also, they say it's easy, but isn't it more cumbersome to have your hair flapping around and covering your eyes and nose than to have it fall down?

I want to advise the new women who are soaked in new ideas and dyed in new trends these days who are advocating for gender equality and women's liberation, even if you hear criticism. There are many things to learn from foreign culture and many things to imitate in foreign trends, but please stop this short hair for now. Or, if Korea becomes America or China, I don't know, but please think deeply about it, our Korean women! No matter how much gender equality there is, it doesn't mean that a woman becomes a man! Then, shouldn't a woman keep her duty as a woman and a man keep his duty as a man? Don't make a big noise that you have cut your hair and gone directly to the front lines of the movement!

Looking at this issue today, women have become one of the social problems, haven't they? It doesn't mean that you will be successful if you cut your hair, and it doesn't mean that you will be successful if you don't cut your hair. Don't lose the characteristics of women, don't only make a difference in appearance, and strive for internal fulfillment. When I see people who used to have short hair grow their hair long again, I think they have thought about it very deeply. If you want to cut your hair, go to America or China. And when you come back to Korea, please think about it again. (Applause and cheers) <133>

**Named Entities**

Kim Hwallan	김활란
Chŏng Chongmyŏng	정종명
Pak Sajik	박사직
Kim Pyŏngjun	김병준
Annam	안남
Seoul	서울
Chosŏn	조선
Amerika	미국
Chungguk	중국



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제18호
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	男女討論 女子斷髮이 可한가 否한가
기사형태	논설

男女討論 女子斷髮이 可한가 否한가
可便

金活蘭

나는 斷髮을 한 사람이닛가 依例히 단발이 좃타고 말하는 것으로 상상하시기 쉽슴니다. 그러나 나는 결코 단발을 하엿기 때문에 단발을 주장하는 것은 안이올시다. 只今에 斷髮을 안이하엿다 하더라도 어듸까지던지 斷髮의 필요를 말하고 십슴니다. 第一에 단발은 위생상으로 보와 좃슴니다. 우리 女子들은 新式이나 舊式을 물론 하고 H다 머리를 쪽지는 까닭에 그쪽이 뇌(腦)를 눌너서 정신에 좃치 못한 影響을 줌은 물론이고 머리에 항상 때가 끼는 까닭에 衣服이 드럽기 쉽고 냄새가 또한 좃치 못하야 자기자신으로부터 幼兒에 가지 害롭게 되는 일이 만슴니다. 그러나 단발을 하면 머리가 깨끗하고 경쾌하야 그러한 페해가 업서지며 第二는 時間上으로 보와 퍽 經濟가 됨니다. 엇던 好事者의 統計表를 보면 女子의 一生을 70年이라 하면 20년은 눈물로 세월을 보내고 20년은 사랑으로 세월을 보내고 30년은 머리빗기에 세월을 보낸다고 하얏슴니다. 그것은 물로 엇던 짓구진 男子가 우리 女性들을 操弄한 말이라 하겟지만 대체로 보와서 우리 女子들은 날마다 그 머리빗는 것으로 貴重한 時間을 얼마나 허비함닛가 그러나 단발을 한다면 한달에 단발하는 그 시간만 허비할 따름이지 쪽진 머리처럼 그 허다한 時間을 消費할 것은 안임니다. 第三으로 단발은 美的方面으로 보와서 도 돗슴니다. 이것은 물론 只今의 流行하는 말로 머리를 깍그면 남들이 단발미인이라고 雅號를 붓치닛가 美的으로 좃타는 말은 안임니다. 실제 外形上으로 보와서 단발한 것이 쪽진 것보다는 보기에 조흔까닭에 하는 말슴이올시다. 쪽진 머리기로 엇지 美가 업다고야 하겟슴닛가만은 全體로 보면 깍근 것이 쪽진 것보다 美觀이 낫슴니다. 내가 昨年에 歐米에 가는 길에 安南의 서울에 들이엿섯는데 그 나라사람들이 아즉까지 머리를 깍지 안코 그양 풀어헷친 채로 일을 하는 것을 보닛가 엇지나 보기 실엿던지 알 수 업섯슴니다.<128>
우리 朝鮮女子들은 中流以上생활을 하는 사람은 모르겟지만은 中流以下의 생활을 하는 저 農村의 婦女나 서울에도 貧寒한 집 女子들이 머리도 잘 빗지 못하고 먼지투성이가 되야 일하는 것을 보면 그 安南사람과 조금이나 무엇이 다르겟슴닛가 만일에 長髮을 하지말고 일제히 단발을 한다면 外觀的에 그다지 보기실치는 안을 것이올시다. 第四는 단발은 세계 大勢에 순응하는 것임니다. 歐米各國은 여자의 단발이 벌서 녯적 이약이가터 問題가 되지도 안을 뿐안이라 北歐地方에서는 도로 아미타불까지 불너서 長髮을 다시 하는 일까지도 잇슴니다. 東洋으로 말하야도 日本도 여자의 斷髮風이 每年느러가는 것은 사실이고 근래에 中國가튼데는 法令으로 强制斷髮까지 하는 것을 보면 天下大勢가 女子까지도 단발을 안이하랴야 안이할 수 업게 되엿슴니다. 우리 朝鮮은 斷髮하엿던 女子들이 도로 長髮을 하니 도로혀 奇怪한 現狀이라 할 수 잇슴니다. 그것을 볼 때에 누가 우리 朝鮮女子의 弱點이 만흔 것을 嘲笑치 안이하며 所謂 여성운동이니 하고 떠들던 그이들이 모도 意識的이 안이고 氣分的이엿던 것을 痛歎치 안켓슴닛가 나는 이들은 우리 斷髮娘界의 先驅者인 同時에 또한 咀呪者라고 생각합니다. (拍手大喝釆) 第五 斷髮은 여성해방에 唯一한 조건으로 생각함니다. 지금까지는 머리를 깍지 안은 까닭에 남녀의 區別이 현저하야 대우의 차별도 거긔에서 생기고 또 女子와 女子간에도 新女子 舊女子 處女 旣婚者 등의 區別이 잇서 不平等關係가 생기게 됨니다. 그러나 일반이 단발을 하게 된다면 男女가 다 一切가틀터이오.(服色은 別問題) 長幼新舊의 충돌도 업서질 터이올시다. 이 우에 말슴한 다섯가지의 理由로 나는 斷髮을 絶代 주장함니다.

否便

鄭鍾鳴

나는 빡빡얼근 곰보올시다. 지금이라도 머리만 깍는다면 여러분에게 당장에 단발미인이라는 충호를 드를 줄로 암니다.(滿場大笑) 그러나 나는 근번으로 단발을 절대 반대하는 사람이닛가 찰아리 생긴 그대로 곰보노릇을 할지언정 그까진 실속 업는 단발미인노릇은 하고 십지 안슴니다. 내가 단발을 반대하는 것을 결코 케케묵은 녯날의 도덕관념이나 습관을 가지고서 머리털을 무슨 父母의 유체이닛가 깍글수가 업다던지 先王의 례법이 안이닛가 깍글수가 업다던지 하는 말은 안이올시다. 나는 실제로 경흠을 하야 보고 또 조선의 일반사정을 생각하야 그것을 반대하는 것이올시다. 단발하는 녀자들의 말을 드르면 첫째의 이유는 녀자가 해방운동을 하자면 먼저 형식부터 일신하게 개혁을 하여야 될 터이닛가 무엇보다도 먼저 단발을 하야 된다고 함니다. 그러나 그것은 自己만 생각하는 것이지 결코 조선전체의 사정을 모르는 것으로 생각함니다. 朝鮮의 일반 女性은 아즉까지도 家庭에 갯기여 잇는데 그들을 우리가 끌어내서 서로 손을 잡고 일을 하자면 먼저 그들과 친하고 리해가 잇서야 할 것이 안임닛가 그런데 만일에 우리운동선상에 나온 女子들이<129> 먼저 머리를 깍는다면 그들은 우리를 보기를 아주 딴세계의 사람과 가티 보와 서로 의사를 소통함은 고사하고 먼저 敬而遠之하랴고 함니다. 이것은 결코 내가 토론을 하기 爲하야 하는 말이 안이라 여러해 경흠상으로 보와 확실이 그러한 것을 깨다럿슴니다. 누구나 물론하고 만일에 自己와 箇人으로 모양을 보기 爲하야 단발을 한다던지 다른 관계로 머리를 깍는다면 모르겟슴니다만은 적어도 사회의 일을 爲하야 단발을 한다면 아주 잘못된 생각이올시다. 지금에 누구라고 姓名까지 말슴치 안슴니다만 우리 동모들 中에도 머리를 깍것다가 다시 長髮을 한 것을 보면 다 그러한 경흠이 잇는 까닭인 줄 암니다. 둘재에 단발은 時間이 퍽 經濟가 된다고 합니다. 그러나 그것은 長髮이나 단발이나 自己가 하기에 달이엿지 長髮을 한다고 꼭 시간이 랑비되고 단발한다고 꼭 時間이 경제되는 것은 안이올시다. 근래에 단발하는 女子들을 보면 대개가 모양을 잘 보는 女子이기 때문에 하루에 몃번식은 머리를 빗고 또 일주일에 한번식은 감고 지지며 일을 할 적마다 머리가 나러오는 까닭에 손이 항상 머리우으로 올나가니 그 時間이 과연 얼마나 랑비가 되겟슴닛가. 내가 보기에는 깍근 머리가 시간은 더 잡아먹는 것 갓습니다. 셋재로 단발은 衛生에 좃타고 함니다. 그러나 그것은 한 口實에 不過한 말이지 무엇이 그리 위생에 조흘 것이 잇슴닛가 쪽진 머리보다 깍근 머리는 흐티지기를 잘하닛가 단발 여자로 음식을 맨든다면 반드시 음식에 머리깡이나 머리때가 드러갈 것은 물론인 중에 더구나 털의길이가 짜르닛가 눈에 얼른 뵈지도 안어서 사람이 그대로 먹기가 쉬을 터이닛가 위생에 害롭울 것이요. 또 머리쪽을 찌면 뇌후(腦後)를 눌너서 정신에 좃치 못하다고 하나 그것은 억측으로 생각함니다. 이때까지 女道僧, 女學者 한사람도 업고 도로혀 쪽진 家庭婦人中에 有名한 女子들이 잇슴닛가.(拍掌大笑) 넷재는 경제상으로 利益이 된다고 함니다. 그러나 머리를 깍그면 한달에 몃번식은 理髮料가 들고 또 모자를 쓰너니 무슨 화장을 하너니 하니 그것이 무슨 이익이 되겟슴닛가 그 뿐안이라 우리 朝鮮의 女子들은 다른 나라 여자들과 환경이 특수한 까닭에 무슨 일을 하던지 변장도 할 일이 잇슬 것이요. 잘못하다가 그 변장을 하고 도망도 할 것임니다.(主意!) 그러한 때에 머리가 잇스면 아주 편리하지만은 단발을 하얏스면 별로 유표하야 行動이 퍽 어려울 것이올시다. 보시오. 金OO이 무슨 일을 할 때에(불온 중지!)

可便

朴思稷

『女子가 斷髮을 한다』 발이 넘는 머리도 짧다고 다리 꼭지를 봇대서 땃코 쪽지든 조선녀자들이 머리를 깍것다면 껑청뛰여 놀램니다. 무엇 때문에 놀랍니까. 무엇 때문에 新聞紙로도 斷髮美人이니 斷髮娘이니 떠들것이 무엇임닛가. 그야 前에는 俗世를 떠난 女僧이 안이면 머리를 깍는 법이 업다가 세속에 떠들고 다니는 녀편네들이 머리를 싹독싹독 거버린다는 것이 퍽<130> 눈에 거칠고 귀에 거슬여 들이겟지만 萬若 이 斷髮에 對하야 非難을 하는 이가 잇다면 그는 沒知沒覺한 사람이라고 할 것임니다. 非但 斷髮에 限해서뿐이 안이라 人類 모든 生活에 잇서서도 그 時代가 遷變함은 따라서 文物制度와 生活樣式이 變化되고 進化되는 것은 必然한 勢이라고 생각함니다. 勿論 斷髮이라는 것이 從來에 업다가 今日에는 이것이 한 風濕이 되어 온 것을 보면 그 亦 進化의 하나이라고 보는 同時에 確實히 風習이 變하여진 것이라고 봄니다. 그러면 이 斷髮을 洋風의 中毒이라든가 輕率한 女子의 하는 짓이라고 斷言을 한다면 그는 그릇하는 생각임니다. 新思想이 물밀이듯 드러오고 생활의 樣式까지도 簡便한 것을 取하는 오늘에 잇서서 이 亦 한 必然의 勢라고 볼 것임니다. 다만 客觀的으로 본다는 것보다도 實際에 드러가서 나는 斷髮을 主唱하고 내 마음대로 될 수 잇스면 답답하게 쪽지고 단이는 머리를 썩뚝썩뚝 깍거버렷스면 좃켓슴니다. 그러면 너는 무슨 理由로 斷髮을 主唱하느냐고 물어보시면 이러한 對答을 할 수가 잇슴니다. 첫대 容貌에 잇서서 美가 長髮한 것보다 倍나 낫다고 생각함니다. 번즐하게 기름칠하고 털털하게 틀어 붓친 것보다도 산듯하고 어엽부게 깍거서 고불고불하게 지저붓친 것이 틀어언진 것보다도 얼마나 나허 보임니다.<131> 그 다음에는 經濟=物質과 시간양방=로 보아서 첫대 기름갑이 안이들고 裝飾品갑이 안이들고 또 簡便한 편으로 보아서 비비트러 언진 머리를 털러 거리고 단이는 것보다 갓든하게 깍고 단이는 것이 좀 편하고 간단함니다. 衛生上으로 보아도 맛당히 斷髮이 必要하다고 主唱함니다. 決코 무슨 流行이나 새 風潮를 標榜하는 배가 안이나 이러한 여러 가지 이점을 발견하엿기 때문임니다. 男子들이 洋服을 입는 것도 녯制度를 깨트리고라도 便利를 취한 것 안임닛가 여자의 斷髮도 亦 그럿슴니다. 이러한 意味에 잇서서 나는 斷髮을 主張함니다.

否便

金秉濬

時代가 變함을 따라 思潮가 밧귀고 思潮가 밧귀움을 따라서 風俗과 習慣까지도 바귀는 것이지만 現下 우리조선을 삷혀보면 이 傾向이 좀 甚한 것 갓슴니다. 묵은 것이라고 다 낫불理가 업고 새것이라고 덥허놋코 조흘 理가 잇슴니까 사람이란 새것을 取하고 묵은 것을 바리는 데에서 進步와 向上을 볼 수가 잇지만 요새 新思潮에 인백인 사람들은 덥허놋코 올코 글코 간에 묵은 것은 다 차내버리는 것은 좀 생각할 여지가 잇지 안흔가 함니다.
그러나 내가 인습을 고수하자거나 그것을 주창하는 것이 안이나 問題가 여자의 斷髮에 대한 것이닛가 여긔 대한 말만 할여고 함니다. 女子의 斷髮이 亦是 新風潮의 하나이지요. 前에야 僧女가 안인다음에야 머리를 깍글 생각이나 하엿섯슴닛가 新風潮의 德이라고 할 수 밧게 업스나 그러나 新풍조라고 다 좃코 다 올흔가요! 그 까지껏 外國이약이는 여긔서 말할 배도 안이지만 요새 조선 여성 중에서 머리를 깍고 송락 쓴 중의 머리가티 거름것는 대로 나팔나팔 거리는 것이 좃타고 남안하는 것을 나혼자 하고 단이며 내가 先驅라는 듯키 大活步로 大都市를 橫行하는 이를 가만히 보면 물론 新女性이요. 그 中에도 女性運動을 하느니 무슨 主義를 가젓는 이 하고 떠드는 이들 中에 만흔 것 갓슴니다. 女性운동을 하는데 男子처럼 머리를 깍거야 될 이도 업겟고 무슨 主義와 思想을 가젓스면 반듯이 머리를 깍거야만 한다는 것도 안이겟지요! 여자가 머리를 깍는다면 그만한 무슨 偉大한 決心과 굿은 마음이 잇서야 할 것이 안이겟슴닛가 或 斷髮하신 분이 이 자리에서 들으신다면 당장에 시비를 들을는지 모르겟스나 가만히 볼 것가트면 斷髮한 그네들이 굿은 마음이 잇느냐하면 그것도 안이요 상당한 理由와 그럴 듯한 條件이 잇느냐하면 自己流의 리유도 잇고 조건도 잇겟지만 모도가 當치도 못한 것 뿐님니다. 그럿타고 무슨 큰 決心이나 잇느냐하면 그 역 업단 말임니다. 그러나 그 理由를 들어보면 一曰 美를 助長식히기 爲하야 二曰 돈과 時間經濟 三曰 簡便하기 위하야... 千金을 주고도 사지 못할 치렁거리는 머리를 쌍둥 잘라바림니다. 여러분이 보시다 십히 斷髮하 女子에게서 美人을 차자내섯슴닛가. 세상에서 부르기를 斷髮美人이라닛가 美人인가요? 女子의 美가 어데잇슴닛가. 길넘은 검은 머리를<132> 이리땃코 저리틀어서 아름다운 모양을 이리로도 變하고 저리로도 곳칠수 잇는 여성의 보배가 이 머리채가 아님닛가 이 貴重한 머리를 셍둥깍거서 꼬리빠진 참새궁둥이가티 납팔거리고 단이는 것이 美일까요! 누가 그것을 美라고 하겟슴닛가 녯날부터 시인들이 여성을 讚美할 제 송락 쓴 僧의 대가리를 아름답다고 한 것을 들어나 보섯슴닛가 女性의 美는 머리에 잇슴니다. 또 經濟가 된다고요. 밧분세상이닛가 時間을 경제한다고 아즉 조선 女性들이 이 머리빗는 시간까지 경제를 해서 무슨 큰 일을 할 것 갓슴닛가. 좀부지런하면 될 것이지여. 時間을 경제하기 위해서 머리를 깍겟다면 스스로 惰怠하다는 것을 일깨여 주는 것이 안임닛가 돈의 경제가 된다고 그러나 한달에 한번이고 두 번이고 理髮所에 가야지요! 각금머리를 지저야 하지요! 무엇이 경제임닛가 철맛추어서 모자도 써야 하지요! 조선옷에 어울니지 안으닛가 업는 돈에 양복을 해입어야지요? 무엇을 가지고 경제라고 함닛가 또 간편하다고 그러나 털석만 해도 넘펄거리며 눈을 덥고 코를 덥는 것이 도리혀 귀치 안치 간편할게 무엇임닛가.
요사히 男女平等을 主張하고 女性解放을 부르짓는 新思想에 젓고 新風潮에 물드른 新女性여러분께 是非를 듯드라도 忠告하고 십슴니다. 外國文化가 배홀 것이 만코 外國風潮에 번뜰 것이 만흐나 이 斷髮만은 아즉 고만 두십시요 혹은 조선이 미국이나 중국이 된다면 모르겟지만 우리 조선너성께서는 깁히 생각하십시요! 아모리 男女平等이 되엿다고 女子가 男子가되는 것은 안이지요! 그러면 女子는 女子로서의 本分이 잇고 男子는 남자로서의 本分을 직혀야 하는 것이 안임닛가. 斷髮을 하고 直接 무슨 運動의 戰線에 나섯다고 큰 소리를 마시요!
오늘 이 문뎨를 보아도 女性이 社會問題꺼리에 하나가 되여잇지 안슴닛가 머리를 깍는다고 되는 것이 안이며 머리를 안이 깍는다고 될 것이 안임니다. 女性의 特徵을 일치말고 外觀에 잇어서만 남달리 차리지 말고 內的 充實을 힘쓰시기 바람니다. 前에 斷髮햇든 냥반 중에서 다시 長髮로 되는 것을 보면 大端히 깁히 생각하신 배 잇는 것 갓슴니다. 만약 斷髮이 하고 십거던 米國이나 中國으로 가시요. 그리고 조선으로 돌아올 때는 다시 걸러가지고 오시기를 바랍니다.(拍手喝釆)<133>
<128-133>