잡지명 별건곤 (Byeolgeongon)
발행일 1929년 01월 01일
기사제목 新春誌上大會 텁석부리와 대머리 大品評會 (New Year's Symposium: Great Appraisal of Thick Beards and Bald Heads)
기사형태 잡저 (Miscellaneous Writings)

New Year's Symposium: Great Appraisal of Thick Beards and Bald Heads, Those who cannot laugh are not allowed to enter.
Part 1: Thick Beards

The 10 Virtues of a Thick Beard

1. A beard (鬚髥) signifies a true man (標丈夫), so firstly, it has good demeanor.
2. At banquets, the 술잔 (suljan, drinking vessel) comes first, so it's good.
3. When getting slapped, it protects you, so it's good.
4. In summer, it creates shade, cooling the neck.
5. In winter, you don't need a scarf, so you're not cold.
6. When the wind blows, dust doesn't get in, so it's good for hygiene.
7. When you don't have money for liquor, you can sell it to a 毛物廛 (momuljeon, hair shop) and make enough for a drink.
8. When bored, just stroking it is a way to pass the time (消日).
9. When hiding, just cover your face and stand in a corn (옥수수, oksusu) field, and no one will know (but this is limited to the elderly).
10. When acting, there's no need to worry about attaching a fake beard.

Six Things to be Careful of with a Thick Beard

1. Fire is dangerous, so be especially careful.
2. Don't go near houses where puppies have been lost (because you might be suspected of stealing the puppy).
3. Don't fight with others (because it can be grabbed and pulled).
4. Don't eat with others without a handkerchief.
5. Don't kiss in winter, because if it freezes, you won't be able to take care of business until spring.
6. Don't go to houses where they are 도배 (dobae, wallpapering), because if they pull it out with glue, that's also a worry.

Thick Beards from a Physiognomic Perspective

A curly beard (虯髥) is a noble sign (貴格). Many ancient emperors had curly beards. A dense beard indicates a fierce and 급 (geup, hasty) nature (like Jangbi's beard). A round shape supporting the chin is a sign of wealth (富格). A beard without luster, with only many 毛根 (mogeun, hair roots), is a sign of low status (賤格). If the philtrum (인中) is exposed and split only to the left and right, it is a 빈격 (bin-gyeok, guest position). A sparse beard indicates a picky nature, and if only the left and right sides are long <134> and the middle is short, it is said that the descendants will be noble. However, in an era where even beards are shaved, this is no longer applicable.

"Thick Beards" and Famous People

Although people say that those with thick beards lack manners, in fact, there are many famous people among those with thick beards. Leaving aside foreigners, even in our Joseon, An Munseonggong Yu of Goryeo, Yi Ikjae Jaehyeon, and Yi Mogeun Saek all had substantial beards. Among them, the one most famous for having the best beard was Kim Chwi-ryeo (Kim clan of Eonyang), who served as 병마사 (byeongmasa, military commissioner) during the reign of Gojong and 대파 (daepa, defeated) the Khitans. His beard was so long that even though he was 6尺5寸 (approximately 197 cm) tall, his beard reached his belly button. When he put on clothes, two maids would stand on either side to hold up his beard. The Mongol general Hachin admired his handsome appearance and sighed, saying that he had conquered six nations and seen all the noble people in the world, but he had never seen such a handsome person as him. He treated him like a brother and even helped him when he mounted his horse. In the early Joseon Dynasty, Hwang Pyochon Hui also had quite a beard, and because he was a very gentle elder, he would just laugh even when the maidservants pulled his beard. There is an anecdote that Ju Sepung, the founder of 서원 (seowon, private academies), had such a fierce beard that children would run away crying when they saw it. Jeong Gapsun (brother of Changsun), Jwachanseong (Left Chancellors) during the reign of Taejong, was also famous for his tall stature and beautiful beard, and it is said that his hair stood on end when he was angry. Heo Chong (Sangyudang), a famous prime minister during the reign of Seongjong, was also famous for his good beard, and even though he was 11尺2寸 (approximately 340 cm) tall, his beard reached his chest. Hwang Jeong-huk during the reign of Seonjo also received the nickname "Beautiful Beard Gong," and Song Uam during the reign of Sukjong had a considerable thick beard, and Kim Mungok Suheung Ilhaengse was remarkable. Yi Eommyeong among the Noron 사육신 (sayuksin, Six Martyred Ministers) during the reign of Yeongjo, as well as Hoam Kim Huiro, Byeongpan (Military Judge) Hong Nakseong (Hengjae), Yi Bong-sang (5th generation descendant of Yi Chungmu Gong), who died a noble death during the Yi In-jwa Rebellion as Chungcheong Byeongsa, O Myeong-heng, the 도원수 (dowonsu, supreme commander) who suppressed the Yi In-jwa Rebellion, and Right Minister Yi ? (Gyu?) were all famous Daheom Gongs (men with many beards). Kim Jeong-jip (Seokse) during the reign of Cheoljong and Choe Haewol, the second leader of 천도교 (Cheondogyo, religion), also had considerable beards.

These Days, This Party of Many Beards

These days, perhaps because people shave their heads, beards are also affected and seem very rare. Choe Yeongmuk of the Dong-A Ilbo is a representative of the "hairy public" in the journalistic world. Even if people don't know his name in 술집 (suljip, bars), they know him as the bearded man from Dong-A. Go Hui-dong's beard also qualifies him as a "president" among painters. It is unknown whether Kim U-haeng is still at the Chinese Consulate these days, but judging from his beard, he could compete with the Chinese men's hair. Yi Heon-gun's beard, from the perspective of long-haired socialists, could be considered a naturally born socialist, but it is a pity that he is not in Korea these days. After No Su-hyeon of the Jung-oe Ilbo, No Heon-yong's grandfather, and Kim Chang-ryeol of Pyeonggang (whose beard is about 1척 (cheok, approx. 30cm) or more) returned home, and after Yi Gyo-hong, a printer of the Cheondogyo Monthly, shaved his beard due to 풍증 (pungjeung, stroke), there was a "beard famine" in the Cheondogyo Church. After the death of Mukwon Palgun of Hwimun High School, there were concerns about the lack of beard specimens for teaching physiology in various academic circles. Since there are no Catholic priests without beards, it deserves the nickname "Hair Object Church," and Kim Yeon-guk of the Shicheon Church has the qualifications of 천자 (cheonja, emperor) <135> even if he doesn't go to Gyeryongsan. It is not surprising that Kim Seong-gi of the East-West Medical Research Association is called a Daebokpi advertising man, but it is no coincidence that Janggyo Yi Jong-seok harvests 거치렁베섬 (geochireongbeseom) or autumn crops. Oh, I forgot. After the death of Unyang Kim Yun-sik, there are no beard inheritors in his family, but after the death of Min Yeong-gi, the advertiser for Daehak Mokrak, Geon-sik inherited both the title and the beard. And Yi Gwan-yong's father, Yi Jae-gon, also has a noble air.

Part 2: Bald Heads

Bald Heads are a Characteristic of Great Men

It is not right to嘲弄 (joreung, ridicule) bald heads by calling them "watermelon head" (수박닥아리), "망건통 (manggeontong, manggeon container)" or anything like that. From the past, even in Joseon, bald heads were called "helmet bone" (감투골) and considered a noble characteristic. In modern times, bald heads are called "wisdom bald" (智慧禿), and people can tell whether a person's head is bald or not, whether their brain is sharp or not, and whether they have a research-oriented mind or not. Emperors like Napoleon and Bismarck, who are famous in the world, are also bald heads. Charles Darwin, an evolutionist, is also a bald head. Great writers, philosophers, and thinkers such as Tolstoy, Whitman, Kropotkin, Schopenhauer, and Spencer, and Lenin are also bald heads. And lately, anyone who is famous in any country is mostly a bald head. From any example, baldness is a characteristic of great men. However, if you want to become a 미인 (miin, beauty) and deliberately fall into the Han River or become like 断髮 (danbal, short hair) women, you should not rashly apply 탈모약 (talmoyak, hair loss medicine) or raise lice to make your hair a mess. You will be divorced by your own wife, let alone become a great man, so pay special attention.

There are No Bad People with Bald Heads

There is a saying in the Joseon language that people with bald heads are not narrow-minded, but people with bald heads are generally more open-minded because their heads are more round, and they are more 包容 (poyong, tolerant) and forgiving. Looking at the phrase "anger makes hair stand on end" (怒髮衝冠), it seems that people with a lot of hair are more likely to get angry like porcupines or 산황 (sanhwang, wild animals). But bald people do not have hair to stand on end, so they don't feel the need to get angry in the first place. In other words, they are good people who do not show喜怒 (huino, joy and anger) on their faces. However, just because they are good people does not mean they should worry too much about other people's affairs. It will be easier to become more bald.

Elegant Name is 空山明月 (Empty Mountain Bright Moon)

Bald heads have many elegant names. Words like "pumpkin head" (뒴박머리), "manggeon container" (망건통), "watermelon container" (수박통), "muksabal" (묵사발), "murupak head" (무루팍대가리) are already old-fashioned. But thanks to the popularity of 화투 (hwatu, Korean playing cards) in modern times, they have also earned the elegant name "Empty Mountain Bright Moon." In English, it's "bald head," in Chinese, it's "tuzi" (禿子), and in Japanese, it's "hageatama." Because Japanese fashion is so popular these days, even children sing the song "hageatama ni hai ga domatta," and "katsura (假面)" are also used in theaters, so the nickname "katsura box" has even been created for bald heads. However, it is 글자좃코 (geuljajotko, good letters), 시원시원해 뵈고 (siwonsiwonhae boe-go, looks refreshing), you can get 30 points as a sacrifice on the hwatupae, and because it is poetic and 시대적 (sidaejeok, timely), calling it "Empty Mountain Bright Moon" (空山明月) will be the most 適應 (jeogeung, appropriate). If Yukdang, who wrote 백두산관참기 (Baekdusan Gwanchamgi, Record of Observing Mt. Baekdu), sees it, he may 항의 (hang-ui, protest) why it's not called 백두산 (Baekdusan, Mt. Baekdu)... <136>

The 10 Virtues of a Bald Head

1. 理髮料 (ibeopryo, Haircut fees) are low.
2. You sit in the upper seat at banquets.
3. In winter, the sun shines well, so it's warm.
4. In summer, it's good for washing off sweat.
5. In houses without stone mirrors, it can be used as a substitute for a stone mirror.
6. Flies 낙성 (nakseong, falls), so you don't have to work hard to catch them.
7. There is no worry about dandruff or lice.
8. If you go to places like Jeju or Tongyeong, you can rent it out as a net container (網巾통), helmet container (감투통), and the income is considerable.
9. It's good for applying "ice packs" when you have a headache.
10. It is convenient for bathing or washing.

Bald Head and Sexual Desire

You will be greatly mistaken if you think that bald heads are just old people. It is not only true that bald heads are not necessarily old, but also, as mentioned above, there are many bald heads among great men. Comparing this with the saying that heroes are fond of women, it is theoretically reasonable to assume that bald people have a strong sexual desire, and in reality, it seems that they generally have a strong sexual desire. In the past, even now in China or in the countryside, women often plucked a lot of hair from their foreheads to become artificial bald heads. According to some ancient records, this was a way to express their strong sexual desire in primitive times rather than for appearance.

Bald Heads and Kisaeng

Kim Je, a famous painter during the reign of King Jungjong of the Joseon Dynasty, was also famous for his baldness. Once, when he went to Hongju, the county governor, who was close to him, recommended a kisaeng (妓生) to him. Because the kisaeng was young, he worried that she would dislike his bald head, so he wore his hat tightly and slept. In the morning, he picked a fight with the kisaeng, saying that kisaeng should be careful, but he heard that she liked old monks, which was not right. At that time, monks were looked down upon, so the kisaeng was shocked and angry and began to cry quietly. Only then did Kim take off his hat and say with a laugh, "If a person has no hair, he is a monk. Is there a separate person for monks?" The kisaeng also laughed and forgot about his bald head and just laughed and had fun.
In the past, there was a kisaeng (妓生) in Pyongyang named Rohwa, who was excellent in poetry, painting, song, and dance, and also good at 戱謔 (huigeok, humor). Anyone who played with her would inevitably be the target of her humor. On one occasion, a envoy (使臣) was on his way to China and stayed in Pyongyang. He ended up playing with Rohwa, and he was very bald. Rohwa tried to make fun of him and ate a peach (桃) and put it all in the envoy's bald hat. The envoy, not knowing anything,责 (chaek, blamed) her for it. Rohwa laughed and said, "What's wrong with putting peaches in a hat for 담는 (damneun, containing) watermelons?" Everyone laughed.

Bald People in Modern Society

It seems that bald heads are relatively increasing <137> instead of the rare beards of recent people. Speaking of people I know, Jang Du-hyeon of Heungilsa is so bald and shiny that when the sun shines into his office, his forehead and the glass window reflect each other, making the office unusually bright. Hong Myeong-hui of Singanhoe seems a bit excessive for his age, and stupid local members recognize his face even by looking at the back of his head and sometimes greet him from behind. Jang Ji-yeong of the Chosun Ilbo is also quite bald, and his colleagues sometimes嘲弄 (joreung, ridicule) him as a watermelon seller. Kim Sang-ok of the Trust Company originally had a 평안도풍 (pyeongan-do-pung, Pyeongan Province style) top of his head, but now that his hair is completely bald, it's just like a watermelon with a 꼭지단 (kkokjidan, stem stand). It's better to speak in the Pyeongan Province dialect. Kim An-bo, who is famous for his baldness in Anju, is now working in the General Affairs Department of Cheondogyo, so if he sits facing Yi Don-hwa, the office will have a great glow. Kuk Gi-yeol of the Dong-A Ilbo has already heard the title of 禿頭公 (bald head title), and Yi Seo-gu of Mae-sin also has considerable qualities. Oh, I can't leave out Yun Tae-heon of Jungdong High School and Yi Won-cheol of Yonhi College. <165>

**Named Entities**

安文成公裕	An Munseonggong Yu
李益齋齊賢	Yi Ikjae Jaehyeon
李牧隱穡	Yi Mogeun Saek
金就礪	Kim Chwi-ryeo
彦陽 金氏	Eonyang Kimssi
蒙古元帥 哈眞	Monggo Wonsu Hachin
黃彪村喜	Hwang Pyochon Hui
周世鵬氏	Ju Sepung
太宗	Taejong
鄭甲孫	Jeong Gapsun
昌孫	Changsun
成宗	Seongjong
許琮	Heo Chong
尙友堂	Sangyudang
宣祖	Seonjo
黃廷或	Hwang Jeong-huk
肅宗	Sukjong
宋尤菴	Song Uam
金文谷壽恒一行世	Kim Mungok Suheung Ilhaengse
英宗	Yeongjo
李㶊命	Yi Eommyeong
金希魯	Kim Huiro
洪樂性	Hong Nakseong
恒齋	Hengjae
忠淸兵使	Chungcheong Byeongsa
李麟佐亂	Yi In-jwa ran
李鳳祥	Yi Bong-sang
李忠武公	Yi Chungmu Gong
吳命恒	O Myeong-heng
李?(癯?)	Yi ? (Gyu?)
哲宗	Cheoljong
金鼎集	Kim Jeong-jip
石世	Seokse
崔海月先生	Choe Haewol seonsaeng
東亞報	Tong-A Ilbo
崔榮穆氏	Choe Yeongmuk
高羲東氏	Ko Hŭi-dong
金佑行氏	Kim U-haeng
李憲君	Yi Hŏn-gun
中外報	Chung-oe Ilbo
盧壽鉉君	No Su-hyŏn
盧憲容氏	No Hŏn-yong
平康 金昌烈氏	P'yŏnggang Kim Ch'ang-ryŏl
天道敎月報印刷人李敎鴻氏	Ch'ŏndogyo Wŏlbo Inswaein Yi Kyo-hong
徽文	Hwimun
墨源八君	Mŏgwŏn P'algun
金演局氏	Kim Yŏn-guk
侍天敎	Sich'ŏnkyo
鷄龍山	Kyeryongsan
東西醫學硏究會	Tong-sŏ Ŭihak Yŏn'guhoe
金性璂氏	Kim Sŏng-gwi
李鍾奭氏	Yi Chong-sŏk
雲養 金允植 老人	Un-yang Kim Yun-sik Norin
大學目樂	Taehak Mongnak
閔泳綺男	Min Yŏng-gi-nam
健植君	Kŏn-sik-kun
李鑵鎔氏	Yi Kwan-yong
李載昆男	Yi Chae-gŏn-nam
朝鮮	Chosŏn
漢江橋	Hangan-gyo
나포레온	Nap'oreon
비스막	Piseumak
찰쓰따윈	Ch'alssŭ Ttawin
톨스토이	T'ollsŭt'oi
화이트맨	Hwaiteŭmaen
크로포도킨	K'ŭrop'odok'in
쇼펜하우	Syop'enhau
스펜사	Sŭp'ensa
레닌	Lenin
李朝 中宗	Yi-jo Chungjong
金禔	Kim Je
洪州	Hongju
平壤	P'yŏngyang
蘆花	Rohwa
興一社	Hŭng-il-sa
張斗鉉氏	Chang Tu-hyŏn
新幹會	Sin-ganhoe
洪命熹氏	Hong Myŏng-hŭi
朝鮮日報	Chosŏn Ilbo
張志暎氏	Chang Chi-yŏng
信託會社	Sint'ak Hoesa
金尙沃	Kim Sang-ok
平安道	P'yŏngan-do
安州	Anju
金案寶氏	Kim An-bo
李敦化氏	Yi Ton-hwa
東亞報	Tong-A Ilbo
鞠琦烈君	Kuk Ki-yŏl-kun
毎申	Mae-sin
李瑞求君	Yi Sŏ-gu-kun
中東校	Chungdong-gyo
尹泰憲	Yun T'ae-hŏn
延專	Yŏn-jŏn
李源喆	Yi Wŏn-ch'ŏl



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제18호
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	新春誌上大會 텁석부리와 대머리 大品評會, 웃지안을 사람은 입장불허
기사형태	잡저

新春誌上大會 텁석부리와 대머리 大品評會, 웃지안을 사람은 입장불허
第1部 텁석부리

텁석부리의 10德

1. 수염(鬚髥)은 標丈夫라니 첫재에 風采가 좃코
2. 宴會席에서는 술잔이 먼저 오니 좃코
3. 뺌마질때에 들압푸니 조코
4. 녀름에는 웅달이 저서 목이 서늘하고
5. 겨울에는 목도리 업서도 춥지 안코
6. 바람불때에 먼지가 들드러가니 衛生에 좃코
7. 술갑업슬때에 毛物廛에다 비여 팔어도 해정거리는 되고
8. 심심한 때에는 그것만 맨저도 消日거리는 되고
9. 避身할때에는 얼골만 가리고 옥수수(玉薥藜)밧으로 가서 섯스면 만이 감족가티 모를 것이요(但 늙은이는 限함)
10. 演劇할때에 假수염부칠 念慮가 업다

텁석부리의 여섯가지 注意할 일

1. 火災가 危險하니 特別注意할 것
2. 강아지 일어버린 집 近處에 지내가지 말일 (강아지를 훔처서 안고 간다고 疑心밧기 수은 까닭)
3. 남과 싸홈을 하지 안을 것(잽혀 끄들이긔 수은 까닭)
4. 손手巾이 업시는 남과 飮食을 가티 먹지 말일
5. 冬節에 키슬ㄹ 말것이니 얼어부트면 翌年 봄철이 되기 前에는 볼일을 못볼 것이다.
6. 도배하는 집에 가지 말것이니 귀알로 뽑아가면 그것도 걱정일 것이다.

觀相學上으로 본 텁석부리

虯髥은 貴格이니 古代帝王中에는 대개 虯髥이 만코 다박수염은 성질이 慓悍하고도 急하며 (張飛의 수염가튼 것)圓形으로 턱을 밧처나면 富格이요. 光彩가 업시 毛根만 만흔 것은 賤格이요. 인中이 드러나고 左右로만 分裂한 것은 賓格이요. 틩수염은 性質이 까다랍고, 左右만 길고<134> 中間이 짜른 것은 子孫이 貴하다고 한다. 그러나 수염까지 깍는 時代에는 그럿도 말할 수 업게 되엿다.

『텁석부리』와 名人

텁석부리 사람된 데가 업다고 하지만은 事實에 잇서서는 텁석부리中에 名人이 만타. 外國은 그만두고 우리 朝鮮만 하야도 高麗의 安文成公裕, 李益齋齊賢, 李牧隱穡가튼 여러분도 수염이 다 相當이 잇섯다. 그 中에도 第一 수염이 조키로 乳名한 이는 高宗대에 兵馬使로 契丹을 代播한 金就礪니(彦陽 金氏) 그는 엇지나 수염이 길엇던지 6尺5寸이나 되는 그 큰 키에도 수염이 뱃곱까지 나려와서 衣服을 입을때이면 左右에 婢女가 한사람식 잇서서 수염을 갈너붓잡고야 옷을 입엇섯다. 蒙古元帥 哈眞이는 그의 수염 조흔 狀貌를 보고 歎服하야 갈오되 自己가 親히 六國을 征服하야 天下貴人을 다 보왓스되 당신가튼 풍채조흔 人物은 못보왓다 하고 兄으로 事하야 말을 탈때에 扶腋까지 하엿섯다. 李朝初에 黃彪村喜도 수염이 꽤 만헛섯는데 그는 性質이 퍽 溫厚한 長者인 까닭에 婢子가 수염을 끄드러도 그저 읏기만 하엿다는 逸話가 잇고 書院의 創設者 周世鵬氏는 엇지나 수염이 무섭게 낫던지 兒孩들이 보고는 dfn고 다러낫다는 이약이가 잇다. 太宗朝 左贊成 鄭甲孫(昌孫의 兄)도 長身美髥으로 有名하야 努할때이면 鬖髮이 倒立하엿다하고 成宗때 名宰相 許琮(尙友堂)도 수염이 조키로 有名하야 11尺2寸이나 되는 그 키에도 수염이 가슴까지 나려오고 宣祖때에 黃廷或도 美髥公의 雅號를 엇고 肅宗때의 宋尤菴은 相當한 덥석부리어니와 金文谷壽恒一行世는 할만하엿다. 英宗때에 老論 四六臣中 李㶊命이라던지 戶叅 金希魯라던지 兵判 洪樂性(恒齋) 忠淸兵使로 李麟佐亂에 節死한 李鳳祥(李忠武公 5代孫) 李麟佐亂을 平定한 都元帥 吳命恒, 右相 李?(癯?)가튼 이는 著名한 多髥公이오. 哲宗때에 金鼎集(石世)과 天道敎第二世 敎祖 崔海月先生도 相當히 수염이 만흔이다.

요새 이 多鬚黨

요새이는 머리를 깍는 까닭에 수염까지 그 連坐를 입어서 그런지 수염이 매우 貴한 모양이다. 東亞報의 崔榮穆氏는 言論界에 代表的 毛公으로 술집에서도 그의 姓名은 잘 몰라도 東亞의 수염난 양반이라면 잘 알고 高羲東氏의 수염도 畵家中에서는 大統領자격은 잇다. 金佑行氏가 近來에도 中國領事舘에 잇는지 그것은 알 수 업스나 수염을 땃고서 잇는 것을 보면 中國人의 머리꽁지와 伯仲을 닷툴만하다. 李憲君의 수염은 長髮하는 社會主義者눈으로 보면 先天的으로 타고난 社會主義者라 하겟지만은 近來朝鮮에 잇지 안은 것이 이 會에 遺憾이다. 中外報의 盧壽鉉君의 祖父 盧憲容氏와 平康 金昌烈氏(수염이 約1尺以上)가 歸鄕하고 天道敎月報印刷人李敎鴻氏가 風症으로 수염을 깍근 뒤로는 天道敎會에 수염 凶年이들고 徽文의 墨源八君이 作故한 뒤에는 各學界에서 生理學을 가르칠때에 수염 標本이 업서 걱정을 하게 되엿다. 天主敎信父치고는 수염 업는 사람이 업스니 毛物敎會라고 別名을 질만하고 侍天敎의 金演局氏는 鷄龍山에 안이가도 天子資格이<135> 잇다. 東西醫學硏究會의 金性璂氏더러 大腹皮廣告쟁이라고 하는 것도 無怪한 일이지만 長橋 李鍾奭氏가 거치렁베섬이나 秋收를 하는 것도 偶然한 일이 안이다. 올치 또 이젓구나 雲養 金允植 老人이 도라간 뒤에는 그 집에는 수염 相續者가 업지만은 大學目樂 廣告主 閔泳綺男이 죽은 뒤에 健植君은 襲爵兼襲髥도 하얏다. 그리고 李鑵鎔氏의 父親인 李載昆男도 貴族다운 風이 잇다.

第二部 번대머리

禿頭는 偉人의 特徵

머리가 버서젓다 해서 『수박닥아리』니 『망건통』이니 하고, 함부로 嘲弄할 것은 안이다. 녜로부터 朝鮮에서도 버서진 머리를 『감투골』이라 하야 貴格으로 친 것은 勿論이어니와 近代에도 버서진 머리를 『智慧禿』이라 하야 그 사람의 머리가 버서지고 안이 버서진 것을 보와 그 사람의 머리가 버서지고 안버서진 것을 보와 그 사람의 頭腦가 明敏하고 안이한 것을 알며 그 사람이 硏究性이 잇고 업는 것을 잘 안다고 하는 것이 안이냐. 세계에서 知名하는 『나포레온』 『비스막』 가튼 帝王家도 禿頭人이오. 進化學者 『찰쓰따윈』도 禿頭人이오. 톨스토이, 화이트맨, 크로포도킨, 쇼펜하우, 스펜사, 레닌가튼 大文學家, 大哲學家, 大思想家들도 또한 禿頭人이다. 그리고 近來에도 어느 나라던지 누구라고 知名하는 이는 대개가 禿頭家다. 어느 例로 보던지 禿頭는 偉人의 特徵이다. 그러나 美人이 되고 십허서 일부러 漢江橋에 떠러지거나 斷髮을 하는 시체 女子들 모양으로 偉人이 되랴고 함부로 脫毛藥을 바르던지 理髮虫을 올녀서 머리가 묵사발이 된다면 그것은 큰 일이다. 偉人은 커녕 自己마누라한테도 소박을 마질터이니 特히 注意

禿頭는 惡人이 업다

朝鮮말에도 머리버서진 사람은 속이 狹하지 안타는 말이 잇지만은 禿頭한 사람은 대개 頭部가 圓滿한 까닭에 마음이 또한 圓滿性이 만허서 남을 잘 包容하고 寬恕하는 일이 만타. 怒髮이 衝冠이란 文字를 보면 털만흔 사람이 고슴돗이나 山荒(獸名)모양으로 怒하기를 잘하는 모양인데 이 禿頭한 사람은 本來에 衝冠할 털이 업는 것을 보면 亦是 根本으로 怒할 必要를 늣기지 안는 것 갓다. 다시 말하면 喜怒를 不顯於色하는 善人이다. 그러나 善人이라 한다고 남의 일에 너무 걱정할 것은 안이다. 더 버서지기 쉬울 터이닛가.

雅號는 空山明月

禿頭는 雅號가 퍽만타. 뒴박머리, 망건통, 수박통, 묵사발, 무루팍대가리 이니 하는 말은 벌서 舊式이어니와, 近代에는 花투가 流行한 德分에 空山明月이라는 雅號를 또 어덧다. 英語로는 『뻘드헤드』 中語로는 『투쯔』(禿子) 日語h는 『하게아다마』 라 하는데 日風이 크게 流行하는 오눌에는 『하게다아다마니하이가도맛다』라는 노래까지 아희들이 하게 되고 劇場에는 『가쓰라(假面)』가 또한 사용되는 까닭에 버서진 머리를 『가쓰라박』이라는 別名까지 생겻다. 그러나 글자좃코 시원시원해 뵈고 花투판 가면 제물로 30끗을 가지게 되고 詩的이오, 時代的이닛가 雅號는 空山明月이라하는 것이 第一 適應할 것이다. 白頭山觀叅記를<136>를 지은 六堂이 보면 왜 白頭山이라고 안이지엇느냐고 抗議를 할지 모르지만은...

禿頭의 10德

1. 理髮料가 적게 들고
2. 宴會에서는 上座에 안고
3. 겨울에는 태양이 잘빗치니 따듯하고
4. 녀름에는 땀씻기가 좃코
5. 石鏡업는 집에서는 石鏡으로 代用하고
6. 파리가 낙성을 하니 파리 잡기에 힘이 안이 들고
7. 비듬이 끼거나 이(虱)가 꾀일 念慮가 업고
8. 濟州나 統營가튼데 가면 網巾통, 감투통으로 세를 주어도 收入이 相當하고
9. 頭痛날때에 『어름찜』하기 좃코
10. 沐浴이나 洗水할때에 便利하다.

禿頭와 性慾

禿頭라고 그저 늙은이라고만 알엇다가는 큰 코 다칠 것이다. 禿頭는 반듯이 늙은이만 되는 것이 안인 것은 勿論이어니와 우에 말한 것과가티 偉人中에 禿頭가 만흔 까닭에 英雄이 好色이란 말과 對照하야 보면 禿頭한 사람이 性慾이 强할 것은 三段論法으로 理論이 상당할 뿐안이라 實際로 보와도 대개는 性慾이 强한 것 갓다. 前日化粧法 안이 只今도 中國이나 또는 시골가튼데서는 女子들이 흔이 압머리를 만히 뽑아서 人工禿頭가 되랴고 하는데 엇던 古代記錄을 보면 그것은 모양보다도 이전 原始時代에 자기의 性慾이 强한 것을 表示한 것이라고 한다.

禿頭와 妓生

李朝 中宗 때에 畵家로 유명한 金禔은 머리 버서지기로도 또한 유명하엿는데 그가 한번은 洪州를 갓더니 그곳 郡守가 自己와 親한 까닭에 妓生한아를 薦枕하엿섯다. 그 妓生은 나히 어린 까닭에 自己의 머리버서진 것을 시려할가 념녀하고 감투를 잔뜩씨고 그대로 자고 나서는 아츰에 妓生에게 생트집을 잡어서 하는 말이 妓生은 그래도 處身이 좃즐하여야 하겟는데 드른즉 너는 늙은 중(僧)놈과 조와 한다니 그러할 법이 어듸 잇느냐 하니, 그때만하야도 僧侶를 퍽 賤視하던 때이라 기생이 그말을 듯고는 하도 긔가 맥히고 憤하야 그양 작고 우닛가 그제야 金氏는 감투를 벗고 읏서 갈오되 머리가 없는 사람이면 다 중이지. 중이 別사람이 잇느냐 하니 妓生도 또한 읏고는 머리버서진 것을 何暇에 생각도 못하고 그저 읏고 잘 놀기만 하엿섯다 한다.
전날에 平壤에 蘆花라는 妓生이 잇섯는대, 詩畵歌舞가 다 絶特할 뿐안이라 戱謔을 도한 잘하야 누구나가티 노는 사람이면 반듯이 戱謔을 밧게 되엿다. 엇던 때에 使臣 한아가 中國에 가는 길에 平壤에 들이여서 또한 蘆花와 가티 놀게 되엿는데 그는 머리가 매우 버서진이라. 蘆花는 그를 한번 嘲弄하랴고 복숭아(桃)를 먹다가 그 使臣의 버서걸은 감투속에 다 느헛섯다. 使臣은 멋도 모르고 그것을 責한즉 蘆花는 읏서갈오되, 수박담는 감투에 복사를 담기로 무슨 관계잇느냐 하니 滿座가 다 우섯다 한다.

現社會의 禿頭人

近來사람들이 수염이 稀貴한 대신으로<137> 번대머리는 比較的 늘어가는 것갓다. 나의 아는 사람으로 말하면 興一社 張斗鉉氏는 엇지나 머리가 벗서저서 번적거리는 지 그 社의 事務室에 해가 빗칠때에는 그의 이마와 琉璃窓이 서로 비치워서 유달이 사무실이 환하게 되고 新幹會 洪命熹氏는 年齡에 比하야 좀 過度한 것가튼데 스투른 地方會員은 그의 머리 뒤를 보고도 얼골도 알고 각금 뒤로 인사를 하며 朝鮮日報 張志暎氏도 상당이 버서젓는데 동모들이 각금 수박장수라고 嘲弄을 한다고 한다. 信託會社 金尙沃 君은 本來가 平安道風으로 정수박을 떳는데 요새 이머리가 아주 버서지고 보니 그야말로 꼭지단 수박과 갓다. 平安道말이 낫스니 말이지. 安州에서 禿頭로 有名한 金案寶氏가 요새이 새로 天道敎 庶務課일을 보게 되엿슨즉 李敦化氏와 가티 마주 안지면 事務室이 一大生光이 날 것이다. 東亞報의 鞠琦烈君도 벌서 禿頭公 稱號를 듯고 每申의 李瑞求君도 相當한 素質을 가젓따. 올치 中東校 尹泰憲, 延專 李源喆 그 兩氏도 뺄수는 업다.<165>
<134-137, 165>