별건곤 제18호
1929년 01월 01일
淸宮秘史 香妃哀話 (Secret History of the Qing Palace: The Sad Tale of Concubine Xiang)
梁建植
문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

The Qianlong Emperor of Qing himself claimed to be the "Ten-Complete" (十全) Son of Heaven and was a monarch who even caused the French writer Wal-Pel to offer words of praise. That such a monarch yielded to a woman from the Hui people (回回) is quite an interesting story, for even the most outstanding monarch seems insignificant in such a case. However, this story is famous, and there are many versions of it, so the writer does not know which is fact and how much to believe. However, compared to the "Secret Histories" (秘史) and "Anecdotes" (軼聞) that have been pouring out like bamboo shoots after rain in the Chinese publishing world recently and attracting many readers, I think it has much more historical value. Why is that? Most of the so-called "Secret Histories" and "Anecdotes" have been specially devised to cater to the licentious atmosphere of modern China or are rooted in the criticism of the revolutionary faction that was fostered by the anti-Manchu fervor at the end of the Qing Dynasty. In contrast, the anecdote of the Qianlong Emperor and Concubine Xiang (香妃) is relatively accurate, and it is also reliable because its source is Wang Kaiyun (王闓運), the only modern Chinese historian, who transmitted this anecdote in his writings.

(Above Omitted) When the Dzungar Hui (準噶爾回) were pacified, a woman who was brought to the palace was of extraordinary beauty, and the Emperor (Qianlong) favored her exclusively, giving her the title Huifei (回妃, Concubine Hui) (Concubine Xiang) <176>. However, the Dzungar woman thought of her country and resented its destruction, harboring a secret rebellious spirit. She startled the Emperor during her sleeping service (侍寢) several times, and when he pressed her for the reason, she replied that she was determined to avenge her parents with death. The Emperor was even more moved by her noble intention and intended to treat her kindly. The Empress Dowager (太后) found out about this. Whenever the Empress Dowager called Concubine Hui, the Emperor would be by her side. Once, when there was a social event and he went out, the Empress Dowager boarded her 평輦 (pyeongnyeon, sedan chair) and went to the upper palace, entering and closing the door. A eunuch ran to inform the Emperor, who hastily ordered his carriage to return and knocked on the door, but could not enter. He struck his forehead against the door and wept, which was heard inside and outside. The Empress Dowager sat in front of the door and urged Concubine Hui to hang herself. After her breath ceased, she felt her body and waited for it to become cold, and then she opened the door. The Emperor entered and wept, then suddenly realized and bowed his head before the Empress Dowager. The Empress Dowager also held the Emperor and shed tears, and everyone around was moved and wept. Those who heard of it within the country all sighed and said that there was a Sage Mother of the Son of Heaven.
(Below Omitted) (Xiangqilou Ji 湘綺樓集)

However, this description is too concise, and readers may feel that it is somewhat insufficient to understand the relationship between the Emperor and Concubine Xiang. There is also an account written by the writer Li Mengfu (李孟符), which gives us considerable interest. What Li wrote is as follows:

A certain concubine of the King of the Hui tribe (回部王妃 某氏) was born with extraordinary beauty and had a unique fragrance on her body, so the people of her country called her Concubine Xiang. Someone spoke of her beauty in the Central Lands (中土), and Emperor Gaozong Chun (高宗純皇帝, Qianlong) heard of it and inquired. During the Western Campaign (西師, the pacification of the Western Regions), General Zhao Hui (兆惠) took his leave, and the Emperor spoke leisurely about Concubine Xiang, ordering Zhao Hui to investigate the appearance of the concubine. After 回彊 (Hoigang, the Uyghur region) had already been pacified, Zhao Hui indeed obtained Concubine Xiang and wanted to send her to the capital, so he first sent a secret memorial to report this to the Emperor. The Emperor was greatly pleased and ordered the local officials along the way to take care of her needs and guard her, fearing that the wind and frost would damage her complexion and also to prevent her from killing herself. When she arrived, she was placed in the Western Garden (西苑). The concubine remained indifferent in the palace, as if she did not know the sorrow of a fallen country, but whenever the Emperor came, she was as cold as frost and snow, and she would not answer even one out of a hundred questions. Inevitably, the Emperor had a court lady who was good at persuasion convey his intentions, but the concubine resolutely took out a white blade from her sleeve and showed it, saying, "I have long been determined to die because my country is destroyed and my home is lost. However, the reason why I do not necessarily seek to die as a foolish woman is that I must obtain a chance to repay my former lord. If the Emperor forces me, he will violate my will." Those who heard this were greatly surprised and tried to take it away by force, but the concubine smiled and said, "Do not be rude. I still have dozens of such knives in my inner garment. How can you take them all away? Also, if you try to violate me, I will swallow the knife first. What can you do about it?" The court ladies did not know what to do and reported the facts to the Emperor in detail. The Emperor could do nothing but occasionally visit the palace in disguise, sit for a short time, and then leave again, hoping that her desire for revenge would gradually fade. He ordered all the attendants to guard her day and night. Since the concubine could not achieve her goals, she only thought of killing herself, but because the guards never left her side, she could not find an opportunity. After the concubine had been in the Central Lands for a long time, she often thought of the customs of her homeland during the seasonal festivals and secretly shed tears. The Emperor heard of this and built markets, shops, houses, and a prayer hall (禮拜堂) in the Western Garden outside the building where the concubine lived, in the Western style, to please her. Even now, that place is still untouched." (Below this section)

Although these are both accounts of Concubine Xiang, according to Wang's account, it is not clear whether Concubine Xiang was a Dzungar or a Hui, but in Li's writing, it is clearly stated that she was a concubine of the King of the Hui tribe. In that case, Concubine Xiang was a famous Turkish beauty, and it is conceivable that the Qianlong Emperor knew of her beauty even before his military campaigns in the Western Regions. It is possible that the Emperor's pacification of the Western Regions was for the purpose of obtaining Concubine Xiang. However, there is another important difference between Wang's and Li's accounts. According to Wang's account, Concubine Hui startled the Emperor during her sleeping service, which suggests that she had submitted to the Emperor. However, according to Li, the concubine never submitted to the Emperor, and the phrase "she would not answer even one out of a hundred questions" seems very plausible. There is reason to believe that the latter account is closer to the truth. First, even considering the Qing dynasty's family laws, in the Qing dynasty, the advancement and retreat of palace concubines were all managed by eunuchs. When an order to serve in bed was issued, a green-headed plaque (綠頭牌) would first be hung on their door, and palace concubines were not allowed to wear even a single thread on their bodies. They would enter the eunuch's carrying bag completely naked and be taken close to the Emperor's bedroom, and the same procedure would be followed when they declined to sleep with him, so that they could not act arbitrarily in the slightest. This was a custom in the palace that arose from the thought that they might harm the Emperor, and it is truly a dreary story, but everyone knows it as a common occurrence. If Concubine Xiang had submitted to the Emperor, it is unbelievable that she would have startled him. Although the Emperor was almost reckless in his dealings with Concubine Xiang, and there may have been special circumstances, and the eunuch's hands may not have reached everything, Wang's account seems to be incorrect in general.
In contrast, Concubine Xiang's attitude in Li's account is trustworthy in other respects. It is said that the Huifei (Concubine Hui) seemed to be a follower of the Hui religion, just like her name, and she did not treat the Chinese or the Manchus, who had the custom of eating pork, as human beings. In other words, although the Emperor was the Emperor, the antipathy of being a heretic must have been controlling Concubine Xiang's mind. According to Li's account, the Qianlong Emperor even built a Western-style prayer hall (禮拜堂) <178> close to the Xiyuan (西苑) where the concubine lived to please her. The prayer hall was that of the Hui religion, so it is sufficient to prove what the concubine's faith was. Li also added the note "Even now, it is still untouched," which is also true. Among the people who have traveled to Beijing, the story of the Turkish bathhouse (十耳古湯) that the Qianlong Emperor specially built for Concubine Xiang is still a topic of conversation. However, the main reason why Concubine Xiang wanted to kill the Qianlong Emperor was, of course, because of her fallen country and former lord. Now, I will introduce Li's account again.

At that time, Empress Xiaoshengxian (孝聖憲皇后, Qianlong's mother) was old and heard of this, and she warned the Emperor several times not to go to the Xinei (西內, Western Palace). She also said, "Since she does not enjoy and submit herself, why not kill her and prevent her from achieving her goals? If you cannot do that, why not send her back to her hometown according to her wishes?" The Emperor knew that she would not submit, but he could not bear to do so. After several years of this, there was a grand sacrifice to the State Altar (國丘) at the Winter Solstice (長至), and the Emperor went to the Jaegung (齋宮, Palace for Abstinence) earlier than usual. The Empress Dowager knew that the Emperor had already left and hurriedly ordered someone to summon the concubine to the Cining Palace (慈寧宮). When the concubine arrived, she ordered the palace gate to be guarded so that the Emperor could not enter even if he arrived. Then, she summoned the concubine forward and asked, "Since you do not enjoy and submit yourself, what are you going to do in the end?" The concubine replied, "I will only die." The Empress Dowager said, "Then I will give you death today." The concubine was greatly pleased and bowed her head twice, saying, "The Empress Dowager's heaven-like grace will finally allow me to achieve my long-cherished wish. The reason why I have endured insults for thousands of miles to come here is that I do not want to die in vain, but to seek revenge and wipe out the shame. Now that I have failed to achieve my goals, this body is truly defiled. I would rather close my eyes forever and attend to my former lord in the underworld. The Empress Dowager's heaven-like grace will finally allow me to fulfill my wish, and I will be grateful and immortal even in the underworld." After she finished speaking, tears flowed down her cheeks, and the Empress Dowager was also saddened by this. She ordered someone to lead her into a side room and hang her. At this time, the Emperor was in the Jaegung and heard this news. He hurriedly ordered his carriage to return, but when he arrived, the palace gate was locked and he could not enter, so he wept bitterly outside the gate. Suddenly, the gate opened, and the Empress Dowager's order was conveyed to allow the Emperor to enter. The concubine had already died, but her flesh was like that of a living person, and her face still had a smile on it. They gave her a generous coffin and mourned her with concubine rites. (A section of Chunyongsil Yaseung 春永室野承)
From this, it seems that both Wang's and Li's accounts say that the Empress Dowager's influence was absolute. Whether that is true or not, I do not know, but the Empress Dowager of the late Qing Dynasty separated the Emperor Tongzhi (同治帝), her son, from his empress because she did not like her, and as a result, both the Emperor and the Empress died in grief. Xue Fucheng (薛福成) seemed to be fixated on the idea that even emperors and kings could die for love, and it is amusing that the Emperor struck his forehead against the door and wept. Perhaps this was the first time such a thing had happened in that country. That such a great monarch ultimately failed to win the heart of this one woman shows that the sorrow of the strong is also profound. However, Li Mengfu gave Concubine Xiang the eulogy, "Who says that there are no Jing Ke (荊軻) or Yu Rang (豫讓) among the kerchiefs of the barbarians outside the city? The likes of Tie Muzhai (鐵牧齋) and Xi Zhilu (襲芝麓) should be ashamed to death," which I think is a matter of course. <179>

**Named Entities**

乾隆帝	Qianlong Emperor
佛蘭西	Peuranseu
월-펠	Wol-pel
回回	Huihui
秘史	Bisa
軼聞	Ilmun
中國	Chungguk
滿洲	Manju
革黨	Kyeokdang
王闓運	Wang Kaiun
湘綺樓集	Sanggiroojeup
準噶爾	Jungeol
回妃	Huifei
兆惠	Chohye
京師	Gyeongsi
西苑	Seowon
李孟符	I Maengbu
回部王妃	Hoibuwangbi
高宗純皇帝	Gojong Sunhwangje
孝聖憲皇后	Hyoseongheonhwanghu
慈寧宮	Janyeonggung
齋宮	Jaegung
同治帝	Dongjije
薛福成	Seol Bokseong
鐵牧齋	Cheol Mokjae
襲芝麓	Seup Jillok
荊軻	Gyeonggeo
豫讓	Yeorang
北京	Peking



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제18호
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	淸宮秘史 香妃哀話
필자	梁建植
기사형태	문예기타

淸宮秘史 香妃哀話
						梁建植
淸의 乾隆帝는 스스로가 10全의 天子라고 일커럿고 佛蘭西의 文學 월-펠에게까지 讚歎의 辭를 늘어놋케한 인군이다. 그러한 인군으로 한낫 回回의 女子에게 屈하고 말앗다는 것은 썩 興味잇는 이약이라고 할 수 잇스니 아모리 英傑한 인군일지라도 이쯤 되면 아주 하잘 것 업는 것이다. 그러나 이 이약이는 有名한 그만큼 또 여러 가지로 말도 잇서 어떤 것이라면 事實이며 얼마만큼 미들것인지 筆者는 모른다. 다만 昨今 中國出版界에 雨後의 竹筍과 가티 쏘다저나와 만흔 讀者를 끄을고 잇는 『秘史』니 『軼聞』이니 하는 따위에 比하면 훨신 史的價値가 잇는 것인 줄로 생각한다. 어째 그러냐 하면 所謂 『秘史』니 『軼聞』이니 하는 것의 大部分은 中國現代의 放縱淫佚한 氣分에 投合하기 爲하야 特히 案出해 낸 것과 또 淸末의 反滿洲熱에 醞釀된 革黨一派의 誹譏에 基因된 것이 太半을 占한 것임에 反하야 乾隆帝와 香妃와의 逸話는 比較的 正確할 뿐아니라 또 그 出處가 발음이니이는 中國近代의 唯一한 史家인 王闓運老人이 그 著書에 이 逸話를 傳한 까닭에 미덤즉하다는 것이다.

(上略) 準(準噶爾)回가 平定되자 宮中에 붓들려 온 女子가 잇스니 타고난 美色이라 皇帝(乾隆)가 專叢하야<176> 回妃(香妃)라 號하더라. 그러나 準女 그 國家를 생각하고 亡破를 恨하야 가만히 逆志를 품고 侍寢에 皇帝를 놀래게 하기 여러번이어늘 구지 물으니 必死로써 父母의 원수를 갑기로 對答하는 지라 皇帝 더욱이 그 뜻을 悲壯이 여겨 써 이를 恩養하랴고 생각하니 太后 알앗더라. 太后 매양 回妃를 불을때에 皇帝 문득 그 左右에 잇더니 마츰 交際 잇서 駕 나아가는지라 太后平輦을 타고 곳 上宮에 이르러 들어가 門을 닷거늘 宦侍가 달아가 告하니 皇帝 急히 駕를 命하야 돌아와 門을 두다리되 들어갈 수 업서 이마를 門에 부듸치고 號泣하니 內外에 들리더라. 太后 當門하야 안저 재촉하야 回妃를 불너 목매게 하야 그 숨ㅅ긔가 끈처 만처보고 차듸차짐을 기다려 그제야 門을 여니 皇帝 들어와 號泣하다가 별안간 크게 깨닷고 太后아페 머리를 쪼흐거늘 太后 또한 皇帝를 붓잡고 流涕하니 左右가 感動하야 울지 안는 者가 업섯스며 海內에 듯는 者 모다 歎息하야 서로 이르기를 天子 聖母가 잇다 하더라.
(下略) (湘綺樓集)

그러나 이 敍述은 넘오 幹略하야 帝와 香妃와의 關係를 알랴함에는 讀者로서는-좀 不足한 感이 잇다하겟다. 그런데 또 이에 文人 李孟符의 적어 노은 記事가 잇서 우리에게 적지 아니한 興味를 준다. 그 李氏의 적어논 것은 알에와 가탓다.

回部王妃 某氏는 國色으로 나면서 몸에 異香이 잇서 國人이 이를 불러 香妃라 하얏다. 어떤 사람이 그 美를 中土에 말한 者 잇서 高宗純皇帝(乾隆)가 이를 徵聞하얏다. 西師의 役(西域平定)에 將軍 兆惠가 辭陛하거늘 帝 從容히 말이 香妃에 미처 兆惠에게 命하야 한번 그 回妃의 姿色을 探知케 하얏다. 回彊이 이미 平하고 兆惠과 果然 香妃를 어더 이를 京師로 보내고자 하야 먼저 密疏하야 奏聞하니 帝 크게 깃거하야 沿途의 地方官吏에게 命하야 起居를 보삷히고 警戒케 하니 風霜跋涉에 顔色을 致損할가 염려하며 兼하야써 그 自殊를 防코자함이얏다. 이미 이르기늘 이를 西內(西苑)에 두니 妃 宮中에 잇서 意色이 素然하야 亡國의 恨을 알지 못하는 것 가트나 오즉 帝가 이르면 凜然히 霜雪가타야 터부러 말함에 百問에 一答을 아니하거늘 不得已 宮人의 善詞者로하야금 旨로써 諭케 하니 妃 慨然히 白刃을 袖中에서 끄으내여 이를 뵈며 갈오대 國破家亡에 死志를 둔지 이미 오래라 그러나 決코 兒女子의 汶汶徒死함을 구태여 아니함은 반듯이 한번 맛당히 故主에게 갑홉을 어들가함이니 帝가 만일 나에게 强逼하면 나의 뜻을 일우리라 하거늘 듯는 者 크게 놀라 무리와 말하고 함께 威脅하야 이를 빼앗으댜하니 妃가 웃어갈오대 써 無禮하지 말라 내 衵衣中에 오히려 이와 가튼 칼이 數十이 잇거늘 엇찌 能히 이를 다 빼앗스랴 또한 너의 무리가 만일 억지로 나를 犯할진대<177> 내 먼저 칼을 삼키리니 너의 무리 그를 어떠케 하랴는야 하거늘 宮人이 要領을 엇지 못하고 事實대로 帝에게 仔細히 살외니 帝도 또한 어찌 할수 업서 다만 때때 그 宮中에 微行하야 안젓기 족음하다가 곳 다시 나오며 그 오래되어 復仇의 念이 漸漸 엷어지기만 바라 모든 侍者로 하여금 日夜로 이를 遵守케 하니 妃가 이미 所志를 일우지 못하매 이에 自戕하기만 생각하나 다만 監者가 겨를 떠나지 아니하매 마츰내 틈을 탈 수 업서 못하얏다. 妃 中土에 이른지 오래매 매양 歲時佳節에 故鄕의 風物을 생각하야 문득 潛然히 눈물을 흘리거늘 帝 이를 듯고 西苑中妃의 居하는 樓밧게다가 市肆室廬禮拜堂을 세워갓추 西域式과 가티 하야 써 그 뜻을 깃겁게 하니 지금도 그곳은 아즉 아모일업다.(以下此項)

다 가튼 香妃의 記事로대 王老人의 글을 보면 香妃는 準噶爾人인지 回回인지 자세히 알수 업스나 李의 붓에는 分明히 回部의 王妃라고 하얏다. 그런즉 香妃는 世界에 有名한 土耳古種美人이니 그 聲色을 乾隆帝가 西域用兵以前부터 알앗스리라고 想像할수도 잇스니 帝의 西域平定은 香妃獲得이 目的이엇섯는지도 알수 업다. 그는 그러하거니와 또 王氏와 李氏의 記事사이에는 달은 重要한 點이 잇스니 王氏의 말에 依하면 回妃는 侍寢에 皇帝를 놀랫다 하얏는즉 이로보아서는 帝에게 許한 것 가트나 李에 依하면 妃는 끗끗내 帝에게 許하지 아니하얏스니 「더부러 말함에 百問에 一答을 아니하고」라 한 것은 참으로 그럴 듯한 말일뿐이다. 後說이 實事에 가깝다고 할 理由가 잇다. 첫재 淸朝의 家法만 가지고 생각해 보드래도 淸朝에서는 宮妃의 進退를 모다 宦官이 管掌하야 侍寢하라는 命이 나릴때에는 먼저 綠頭牌라는 召札이 그 門에 걸리고 宮妃에게는 몸에 片絲를 걸침을 許치 아니한다. 그리고 밝아버슨 알몸으로 宦官의 들이는 자루속에 들어가면 그대로 天子의 寢室가까히 갓다노코 침을 辭할때에도 맛찬가지로 하야 족음도 한만하게 擧行을 못한다. 이는 天子에게 或 危害를 加하면 어쩔가 하는 萬一의 念慮에서 나온 궁중의 習慣으로 實로 殺風景한 이약이이지마는 누구나 다 이를 尋常하게 아는 터인즉 만일 香妃가 帝에게 許하얏다고 하면 帝를 놀라게 하엿다는 것은 밋지 못할 말이다. 원악 帝는 香妃에게 對하야 거의 압뒤요량이 업섯는 것 가탓스니 特別한 境遇도 잇갯고 宦官의 손이 다 못밋친것도 잇겟지마는 普通으로는 王氏의 記事가 잘못된 것 갓다.
이와 反對로 李의 記事에 나오는 香妃의 態度야말로 別樣의 點으로 보아 미듬즉한 것이 잇다. 그럿켓지마는 回妃는 그 이름과 가티 回回宗인 듯 십흐니 中國人과 가튼, 또는 滿洲人사람과 가튼 도야지 먹는 風俗을 가진 人種들은 사람으로 대접을 아니하얏다. 換言하면 天子는 天子이지마는 異端者라는 反感은 반듯이 香妃의 頭腦를 司配하고 잇설슬 것이다. 李의 記事에 依하면 乾隆帝는 妃의 懽心을 살랴고 西域式의 禮拜堂까지도<178> 妃의 잇는 西苑內에다가 가까이 지어 두엇다 하니 禮拜堂은 卽 回宗의 그것이니 妃의 信仰이 어떳하얏든 것은 이로 넉넉히 立證할 수가 잇다. 李는 또 「지금도 그것은 아즉 아무일 업다」거 注를 해 노앗지마는 그것도 事實이다. 北京에 旅行한 外人의 好事者사이에는 乾隆帝가 香妃를 爲하야 特히 築造하얏다는 浴室이 十耳古湯을 가지고 지금도 相當히 이약이거리를 삼고 잇는 듯하다. 그러나 香妃가 乾隆帝를 殺害코자 한 主因이 亡國故君에 잇슴은 勿論이다. 이제마조 李氏의 記事를 紹介한다.

때에 孝聖憲皇后(乾隆母后)는 春秋가 노푼데 이를 微聞하고 여러번 帝에게 西內에 가지 말라고 경계하얏다. 또 갈오대 저것이 이미 종시 즐기어 自屈치 아니하니 엇지 하야 이를 죽이어 그 뜻을 일우지 안케 하며 할수 업거든 제 뜻대로 그 鄕里로 돌아보내지 아니하는가 하나 帝는 屈치 못할 줄을 알것마는 마츰내 참아버리지 못하얏다. 이와 가티 하기 數年에 마츰 長至(節名)國丘의 大祀가 잇서 帝가 때보다 먼저 齋宮으로 갓섯다. 太后가 帝의 이미 나아감을 알고 急히 사람으로 하야금 妃를 불러 慈寧宮으로 오게 하니 妃 이미 이르럿거늘 곳 命하야 宮門을 잡거 帝가 이르드래도 들어오지 못하게 하고 이에 妃를 불러 아프로 이르게 하야 물어 갈오대 네 즐기어 뜻을 屈치 아니하니 마츰내 맛당히 무엇을 하랴고 하는고. 對答하야 갈오대 죽을 뿐이니이다. 갈오대 그러면 곳 오늘 너에게 죽음을 내려볼가. 妃가 이에 크게 깃거하야 再拜頓首하야 갈오대 太后의 天地가튼 恩惠가 마츰내 즐기어 臣妾의 뜻을 일우게 하시는가. 妾이 間關萬里에 忍辱하야 이에 이른바는 오즉 徒死치 안코 한번 써 復仇雪恥하랴고 함이러니 이제 이미 所志를 일우지 못하매 이몸이 진실로 苟且한지라 차라리 一暝不視로 故主를 地下에 조침이 낫지 안사오릿가 太后의 天地가튼 恩惠가 마츰내 즐기어 申牒의 뜻을 일으네 하시니 臣妾이 地下에서도 感激不朽하겟나이다. 말을 마치고 두어즐 눈물이 흐르거늘 太后도 또한 爲하야 惻然하얏다. 이에 사람으로 하야금 旁室도 끄을고 들어가 이를 목매게 하니 이때 帝가 齋宮에 잇다가 이 消息을 듯고 蒼黃히 駕를 命하야 돌아오니 이르매 宮門이 잠기어 들어갈 수 업는지라 이에 門 밧게서 痛哭하얏다. 俄然히 門이 열리고 太后의 命을 傳하야 帝를 들어오게 하니 妃가 이미 絶命하얏는데 살빗은 산 것갓고 낫빗에 오히려 읏음을 먹음엇거늘 이에 그 棺斂을 두터이 하야 妃禮로써 이를 상사하얏다. (春永室野承의 一節)
이로보면 王氏의 記事나 모다 太后의 勸力이 絶對인 것 가티 말하얏다. 그래 그러함이든지는 모르거니와 晩晴의 西太后는 아들인 同治帝의 皇后가 마음에 들지안는다고 하야 相思하는 사이를 갈라논 탓으로 帝와 后는 모다 悶死까지 하얏다. 薛福成은 帝王의 情死라도하라들 執着이 잇섯든 모양이니 읏서운 것은 帝가 門에 이마를 부딋고 울엇다는 것이다. 아마 이것은 그나라에서도 처음되는 일일것이니 그만한 英主로 마츰내 이 한 女子의 마음을 빼앗지 못하얏다 하면 强者의 悲哀도 深刻한 것이다. 다만 香妃에 對하야는 李孟符가 「누가 城外遠夷의 巾*中에 이 荊軻豫讓 그사람이 업다고 이르는가 鐵牧齋, 襲芝麓의 무리는 可히 써 愧死하리라」하고 讚辭를 들엿스니 當然한 말로 생각한다.<179>
<176-179>