Magazine Title	別乾坤 제64호
발행일	1933년 06월 01일
기사제목	懸賞問題 (Prize Contest Question)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Notice/Post-editing)

Prize Contest Question
The previous prize question was easy yet difficult. However, that is because you all thought too deeply.

You all think of the prize questions as too difficult, so very obscure answers come out.

Now – this time, I will present an easy yet difficult question.
"What is the highest city in Joseon?"

How to Answer the Prize Question
★ Must arrive at this office by the 5th of next month (July).
★ Write the answer simply on a postcard-sized paper, and be sure to clearly write your address and name.
★ You must attach the reader's certificate located at the edge of this page to the answer sheet. If you do not attach it, it is invalid.
★ On the envelope, be sure to write 『京城開闢社別乾坤懸賞係』 [Gyeongseong Gaebyeoksa Byeolgeon-geon Hyeonsang Gye] and also write 『原稿在中』 [Wongojungjae] in red ink on the side, and seal the corner and attach a 2-jeon stamp. If you do not write 原稿在中, you will be fined (for insufficient postage).

Prizes
First Place (1 person): Special-made Art Table Clock
Runner-up (99 people): A selection of books each

Regarding the Answer to Last Month's Prize
The most common answer this time was "Bori-gogae" (Barley Pass) (麥嶺 or 麥秋). And besides that, there were various amusing answers—but many answers showed that you put a lot of effort into thinking. For example, the interpretation of the letters is one such example.
However, only four people answered correctly.

Look – isn't there the letter "gwa (과)" between spring…and…summer? How is it? Isn't it easy? The Korean letter "gwa (과)" is between spring and summer, right? Haha…
This time, unavoidably, we will draw lots from the four people to determine the first place and determine the remaining three people as second place.

First Place: Han Ryang-hui, Jecheon-eup Buri, Chungcheongbuk-do
Second Place: Ri Myeong-bok (Gyeongseong), Sin Myeong-gyun (Gyeongseong), and one other person
There is one other person, but because they did not write their address or name on the prize answer, we cannot know who it is, so, other than the three people written above, those who answered "gwa (과)" correctly, please inform us of your address and name immediately. <62>

Named Entities

韓良熙	Han Ryang-hui
忠北堤川邑部里	Chungcheongbuk-do Jecheon-eup Buri
李命福	Ri Myeong-bok
京城	Gyeongseong
申明均	Sin Myeong-gyun



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제64호
발행일	1933년 06월 01일
기사제목	懸賞問題
기사형태	사고·편집후기

懸賞問題
지난번 현상문제로 쉽고도 어려웟습니다. 그러나 그것은 여러분이 너우 깁히생각을 하시기 문입니다.
여러분은 현상문제를 넘우 어렵게 생각하니 궁벽스러운 대답이 만이 나오게됨니다.
자-이번도 쉽고도 어려운문제를 내이겟습니다.
「조선서 제일놉흔 도회지가 어데입니?」

현상해답하는법
★내달(七月)五日지 본사에 와닷도록되여야합니다.
★엽서만한 조회에다 대답을 간단히 적어보내되 반듯이자긔주소와 성명을 이써야합니니다.
★이페지(頁)한해잇는 독자증을 답안용지에다 반듯이 부처야합니다. 안부치면 무효입니다.
★피봉에는 반듯이 『京城開闢社別乾坤懸賞係』라쓰고 엽헤다 『原稿在中』이라고 안잉크로쓰고 한주둥이를 고 二錢우표붓처보내주십시오. 原稿在中이라고 안쓰면 벌금(不足)을 물게됩니다.

賞品
一等一人 特製 美術卓上時計
等外九十九人 書籍一部式

前月懸賞 解答에 對하야
이번 해답에는 「보리고개」(麥嶺或은 麥秋)라고 한 것이 제일만습니다 그리고 그밧게 별별우수운---그러나 생각을 하느라고 아주 애를 쓴 대답이 만이잇습니다 가령 글자푸리가튼 것은 그 一례입니다.
그러나 정말 올케 대답한분은 네분밧게 엄습니다.
자-보십시오 봄……과………여름 둘 사이에 「과」ㅅ자가 잇지 아니합니? 어습니? 쉽지안습니? 봄과 여름 사이에 「과」라는 언문글자가 잇지요? 하하………
이번에는 할수엄시 네분중에서 제비를 바 一등을 정하고 나머지세분을 二등을 정합니다.

一等 韓良熙 忠北堤川邑部里
二等 李命福(京城) 申明均(京城)外一名
이밧게 한분잇는데 현상답안에 주소도 성명도 쓰지아니하여 누구인줄을 알수가엄스니 우에쓴 세분외에 「과」로 정답하신분은 곳주소성명을 기별하십시오.＜62＞
＜62＞