잡지명	개벽 제61호
발행일	1925년 07월 01일
기사제목	The impression of Korean
필자	By Hugh Miller
기사형태	회고·수기

The impression of Korean
						By Hugh Miller
I think one of the first things that will strike a foreigner who comes to live among the Koreans is their hospitableness. The Best is none too good for the stranger. Over and over again have people moved out of their room in order that I might have the most comfortable room in the house for the night I was there. I have Known the women folks and children to go over to a neighbores house for the night. When one becomes a friend the hpspitality that is extended to him is embarrassing. What the home and its la bour had to offer often times not good enough and the village and even country side is scoured for something that will be a treat to the foreigner ahd something that he will like. Many times have I had complete strangers go to some distance to a well or stream in orber that I might have a drink of fresh water.
I have heard of a foreigner who moved into a town where it was difficult to buy land on which to erect his house. He tried in vain for some time and in desperation one day went to the owner of some land and told him that he had no house in which to live and could not buy any land on which he could build. and that in fairness he ought to have a house. To this the man agreed and later he sent for the foreigner and toid him that he could have what land he needed on his property for the erection of his house and this at time when the authorities did not look with favour upon such action.
Closely akin to this characteristic is the amiabeeness of the people. They are friendly. In Travelling over the country one asks Questions of this oe and the other and invariadly they are answered in a most friendly way. Sometimes a villager will go out of his way to show the foreigner a short cut or to make sure that he gets on to the right road.
I remember once, now a good many years ago, I was attacked with bleeding of the nose when travelling on the road alone. The first man that came up, a perfect stranger, without hesitation tore open the lining of his coat and handed me some of the cooton with which it was padded. The kind act has never been forgotten.
One soon learns that the Korean is devoted to literatue. One of the early inpressions I received was seeing the men who wore the Kwon having special deference paid to him. I learned thad the scholar was respected and honored although he made a precarious living and was very poor. That he had passed the Quagga and knew the Chinese characters was enough to secure for him the honor of the village and the obesiance of the stranger. One soon learned in travelling in the country that many villages had what amounted to reading cluds. A man had a book and brought it to a sarang where he or some other person who could read could sing it off to a roomful of people. This good custom seems to be on the wane and I am not sure that we are getting anything better in its place.
A stranger cannot help being impressed with the dignity of the dearing of the average Korean. There is the dignity and bearing of a entleman adout Yang Ban but take the peasant farmer or other worker and put a hat and coat on him and give him the needed leisure and he has the bearing of a gentleman. a dignity that is not often among people of his class in any other part of the world.
The last item I will mention is the Koreans innate seuse of justice, of right and wrong. He may wish the thing to be different to what it is but behind the bluff thfat may be on the surface there is always the sense of what is right. An appeal to what is right, the fitness of things, is not often made in vain.＜34＞