별건곤 第20號
1929년 04월 01일
弓裔의 部下로 三韓을 統合한 高麗太祖 建國秘史 (The Secret History of the Founding of Goryeo Taejo, Who Unified the Three Han as a Subordinate of Gungye)
壽春學人
문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

非凡한 그 人物 (That Extraordinary Person)

King Taejo Shinseong of Goryeo’s surname was Wang (王氏), his given name was Geon (建), and his courtesy name was Yakcheon (若天). He was the son of Wang Ryung (王隆), the Taesu of Geumseong. Ryung married a Lady Han and lived in Songak-gun (松嶽郡), Songgyeong (松京) (present-day Gaeseong) in Hanju. One day, the eminent monk Doseon (道詵) was resting outside the gate when he happened to say that a sage would surely be born in this land. Ryung was overjoyed to hear this and welcomed him in, treating him with great hospitality. Doseon gave him a sealed letter and said, "You will surely have a precious son next year. Give him this letter when he grows up," and then he left. Indeed, Taejo was born the following year, the third year of King Heongang of Silla, Ding-Yu year (1053 years ago). At the time of his birth, divine light and purple energy surrounded the room like a coiling dragon, which everyone found mysterious. Not only was he naturally intelligent from a young age, but he also possessed an extraordinary appearance with a dragon-like face, a sun-shaped horn, a broad forehead, and a square jaw. He also had a profound and heroic character with the capacity to save the world and comfort the people.<22> When he was 17 years old, Doseon came again and taught him the art of deploying troops and setting up formations, as well as the secret arts of astronomy and geography. With his intelligence of understanding ten things from hearing one, he understood everything. By the age of 20, his fame had already spread throughout the country. Gungye (弓裔), the King of Taebong, employed him, making him the lord of the fortress of Bogeocham (勃禦塹城) (near Guinu Gate in the eastern part of Gaeseong) (Wang Ryung returned to Gungye, and then advised Gungye to build this fortress). At the age of 22, he was given the important position of Commander of Elite Cavalry (精騎大監). Several years later, he fought against Gyeon Hwon’s (甄萱) army in Gwangju (廣州), Chungju (忠州), Cheongju (淸州), and other places, achieving great victories, and his prestige swept the world. He was skilled in both land and sea battles. Especially, because he had lived on the sea for generations (West Sea coast) and had learned the art of navigation, he was more adept at naval battles than anyone else. The fact that he destroyed the navy of Later Baekje in the southwestern sea, laying the foundation for his royal enterprise, was also due to his mastery of naval warfare. Taejo was also skilled in writing. The inscription he personally wrote for Heungbeop Temple (興法寺) (in Wonju, Gangwon Province) (the inscription was engraved by Choe Gwang-yun, using the calligraphy of Emperor Taizong of Tang) was praised by Yi Ik-jae Jae-hyeon as a masterpiece, saying that the words and meaning were grand and magnificent, like rulers paying respects in the royal court. The lines in his inspection poem, "Dragon Fortress, autumn moon is pale, Old fortress, white smoke, no sound of weapons, Barbarian children celebrate peace," overflowed with energy, showing the image of an emperor’s peaceful reign.

鏡讖文과 金塔夢 (Mirror Prophecy and Golden Pagoda Dream)

It is customary in any country that when a founder of a dynasty arises, prophecies and secret records circulate beforehand. In the era of King Taejo Wang Geon, a Tang merchant named Wang Chang-geun bought a mirror from an old man in the market. The inscription on the mirror read, "In the Three Waters, below the Four Dimensions, the Emperor’s son descends in the year of the Dragon-Horse, first strike the Chicken, then capture the Duck, in the Year of the Snake. Two dragons appear, one hidden in the green wood, one appearing in the black gold east." Later, the prophecy came true. "In the Three Waters, below the Four Dimensions" referred to the end of Silla. "The Emperor’s son descends in the year of the Dragon-Horse" meant that an emperor would be born in the region of Mahan and Jinhan. "First strike the Chicken, then capture the Duck" meant that King Taejo Wang Geon would first acquire the Chicken Forest of Silla (鷄林) and later occupy territory up to the Yalu River (鴨綠江). "Green wood" referred to pine (松), and "black gold" referred to iron (鐵). This meant that Gungye and King Taejo Wang Geon would rise together in the Year of the Snake, with Gungye establishing his capital in Cheorwon (鐵原) and King Taejo Wang Geon establishing his capital in Songak (松岳). And when Taejo was 30 years old, he dreamed that a nine-story golden pagoda (金塔) emerged from the sea and he climbed to the top of it. The diviner interpreted it as a most auspicious dream, meaning that he would ascend to the throne, and Taejo was secretly pleased and endlessly proud.<23>

艶福이 特多한 太祖 (Taejo with Extraordinary Romantic Fortune)

This was when Taejo was still a subordinate of Gungye. Once, on the way to an expedition, he passed through the land of Jeongju and rested, tethering his horse to a willow tree by the roadside. He saw a maiden standing by the river, her appearance elegant and her bearing exceptional. Taejo called her over and asked about her. She was the daughter of Ryu Cheon-gung (柳天弓) (later Samjungdaegwang), a wealthy elder of Dangju. Ryu also thought Taejo was extraordinary and invited him to his house, letting him stay overnight. Later, when news between them was cut off, Ryu cut her hair and became a nun to maintain her chastity. Taejo heard about this and brought her in to be his wife. She was none other than Queen Sin-hye (神惠王后) Lady Ryu. Not only was Lady Ryu exceptionally beautiful, but she also possessed great virtue and discernment, greatly assisting Taejo’s founding of the dynasty. Besides Lady Ryu, Taejo also had Queen Janghwa (莊和王后) Lady Oh (吳氏). She was originally from Mokpo (木浦), Geumseong (錦城, ancient name of Naju). When she was a maiden, she was washing clothes by the river when five-colored clouds surrounded her (later, the spring was named Wansacheon). She also dreamed that a dragon entered her womb. When she woke up, she told her parents, who also found it strange. Soon after, Taejo was on a southern expedition and saw Lady Oh washing clothes by the river in Mokpo. Pleased by her extraordinary beauty, he summoned her and favored her. However, because her family background was humble, she was worried about becoming pregnant, so she deliberately discarded his essence onto the bedding during intercourse. Lady Oh absorbed it, and she became pregnant and gave birth to a son. He was none other than King Hyejong (惠宗). Whether it was due to this reason or some other reason, Hyejong was born with markings on his face, so people called him Seol-wang (欇王). From a young age, he was extraordinarily brave and always followed Taejo on expeditions in all directions. When fighting against Gyeon Hwon’s army, he took the lead and achieved great victories. As Yun So-jong (尹紹宗) wrote in his poem, "On the day of unifying the Three Han, he first ascended Baekje Fortress" (题惠宗祀诗), and Jeompiljae Kim Jong-jik (佔畢齋金宗直) wrote in his poem, "By the Jakgeum River, the hometown of his maternal uncles, In Heungnyong Temple, auspicious light fills the air, Even now, the elders cherish his virtuous legacy, Playing flutes and singing, they celebrate the Great King" (興龍寺 is the place where Hyejong was born). Later, Taejo wanted to make Hyejong his crown prince, but he was worried that there would be objections among the royal relatives and officials because of his mother’s humble background. He put a yellow robe in an old chest and gave it to Lady Oh. Lady Oh showed it to Daegwang Bak Sul-hui (朴述熙). Sul-hui understood his intention and advised him to make Hyejong the crown prince. Taejo also had a third queen, Lady Kim (金氏), who was the daughter of Kim Eok-ryeom (金億廉), the uncle of King Gyeongsun of Silla. After King Gyeongsun surrendered to Goryeo, Taejo, as a matter of policy, married his eldest daughter, Princess Nakrang (樂浪公主), to King Gyeongsun, and he married Lady Kim. Lady Kim was also beautiful and virtuous. Among the emperors who founded dynasties throughout history, there were few who had as much romantic fortune as Taejo of Goryeo.

危機一髮의 公山大戰 (The Great Battle of Gongsan, a Moment of Crisis)

Taejo had rarely failed in hundreds of land and sea battles, but when he fought against Gyeon Hwon, the king of Later Baekje, at Gongsan Dongsu (Gongsan Tongsu) (located in the border of Yeongcheon-gun and Seodal-seong-gun), he suffered a crushing defeat. At that time, Gyeon Hwon stormed the capital of Silla, assassinated King Gyeonga (景哀王), raped the queen and concubines, and captured the king’s brother, Hyo-ryeom, and the prime minister, Yeong-gyeong. He also let loose his troops to plunder women and wealth. Taejo heard of this and was greatly angered. He personally led 5,000 elite troops to conquer Gyeon Hwon. (Originally, the King of Silla requested aid from Taejo, and while Taejo was on his way to rescue him, Gyeon Hwon invaded the capital first, so Taejo pursued him.) When he arrived at Gongsan, Gyeon Hwon’s large army suddenly attacked and surrounded Taejo’s army. The situation was extremely dire. (Taejo’s army was not only exhausted from a long and rapid march, but they were also unfamiliar with the terrain, leading to their defeat.) General Sin Sung-gyeom (申崇謙) resembled Taejo closely, so he imitated the story of Ji-sin (紀信) sacrificing himself for Liu Bang (漢沛公) in the Chu-Han Contention. He hid Taejo in Dongsu (桐藪), wore Taejo’s clothes, and sat on the chariot, fighting fiercely until he died.<24> The Gyeon army mistook him for Taejo and withdrew their troops, allowing Taejo to barely escape disaster. Taejo, remembering Sin Sung-gyeom’s virtue, made a golden replica of his skull and buried it (the tomb is in Chuncheon). Later, during the banquet celebrating the founding of the dynasty, he also honored him and General Kim Nak (who died at the same time), creating effigies and seating them among the officials. The effigies would rise, bow, and drink wine like living people, and then dance with the officials, which everyone found wondrous.

露積덤이 우에서 登極式 (Ascension Ceremony on a Pile of Accumulated Goods)

As Taejo’s prestige grew daily and the general populace was pleased and submitted, Gungye, the king of Taebong, relied on the strength of his nation and became arrogant and complacent. Moreover, his extreme devotion to Buddhism and superstitions in the theory of prophecy (such as the horse growing horns and the stone giving birth to insects) led to violent and suspicious behavior. He changed the country's name and era name morning and evening, indiscriminately killing innocent people, even his trusted subordinates and wives could not escape the cruel fate, and the people were greatly feared and difficult to stabilize.<25> Just then, Taejo conquered Naju and returned in triumph to Cheorwon. Gungye suspected Taejo and wanted to execute him on charges of treason, but he was spared thanks to the quick wit of Gungye’s courtier. One day, Hong-yu (洪儒), Bae Hyeon-gyeong (裴玄慶), and other generals secretly met at Taejo’s private residence to discuss enthroning Taejo. Taejo’s wife, Lady Ryu, was present at the meeting, and Taejo, thinking it inappropriate for his wife to know such important matters, told her to go pick melons in the melon field (苽田). The originally intelligent Lady Ryu understood his intention, pretended to go to the melon field, hid behind a curtain, and overheard their discussion. When she saw Taejo repeatedly declining the generals' proposal, she suddenly jumped out from behind the curtain and said, "To raise righteousness and punish tyranny has been done since ancient times. Now, listening to the generals' discussion, even I, a woman, am inspired. How much more so should a great man be!" With a resolute look, she personally brought armor and put it on Taejo. The generals protected Taejo, placed him on a pile of accumulated goods (露積섬우), and performed the rituals of ruler and subjects. Then, they immediately mobilized their troops, shouting and beating drums, and advanced towards the palace gate. Gungye was greatly surprised and fled in disguise (he was assassinated by rioters in Pyeonggang). Taejo entered the Boryeong Hall and ascended the throne, declaring the country's name as Goryeo and the era name as Cheonsu, announcing it both internally and externally. This was in the sixth month of the year Sul-in, the second year of King Gyeongmyeong of Silla (1012 years ago), and Taejo was 42 years old.

兵不血刃.新羅統一 (Unification of Silla Without Shedding Blood)

After Taejo overthrew Gungye and occupied his territory, he advanced southward and dealt a crushing blow to Later Baekje at Unju (present-day Hongseong), conquering over 30 fortresses north of the Ungjin River. Gyeon Hwon was defeated and also surrendered. (Gyeon Hwon's son, Sin-geom, started a revolt, seized his father's position, and imprisoned him in Geumsan Temple; Gyeon Hwon escaped.) At that time, Silla was so weakened that it was difficult to maintain itself, so King Gyeongsun wanted to surrender the country to Goryeo. None of the courtiers dared to object, except for the crown prince, Kim Jeon (俗稱 麻衣太子), who wept with grief and indignation, saying, "Even if we join forces with loyal subjects and righteous men and fight to the bitter end until death, how can we lightly hand over a thousand-year-old dynasty to others in one morning!" The king said, "It is the right thing to do, but given the situation, I cannot bear to have innocent people stain the ground with their livers and gallbladders." He decided to surrender and sent Sirang Kim Bong-hyu to write a letter requesting surrender to Taejo. The prince wept, left the palace, and entered Geolgulsan (Geumgangsan), where he spent his life eating hemp clothes and grass. Taejo received the king's letter and sent Daesang Wang Cheol and others to welcome him. The king led his officials, left the capital, and went to Gaegyeong, with carriages and horses stretching over 30 li, and onlookers on the roadside forming a sea of people. Taejo welcomed the king and housed him in Yuhwa Palace, marrying his eldest daughter, Princess Nakrang, to him and letting them live in Sinran Palace. He appointed Gwangwang Sunhwa Wiguk Gongsin Sangjukguk Nakrang Wangjeong Seung, placing him above the prince in rank, giving him 1,000 seok of salary, and appointing his entourage to appropriate official positions.

太祖의 政治와 外交策 (Taejo’s Politics and Diplomacy)<26>

Taejo's subordinates included many brave generals, but few were skilled in literary matters, so in the early days of the dynasty, he appointed Park Yu (朴儒), a former minister of Gungye, to establish the official system and participate in state affairs, and after unification, he also employed Silla scholars. In terms of politics, he established the Simgoksain (審穀使) to prepare for droughts and famines, reformed the land system to reduce taxes, and released cloth and grain from the royal treasury to rescue people who had become slaves. The official system was based on the old systems of Silla and Taebong, which were based on the Tang system, establishing the Three Ministries (Naeui, Gwangpyeong, Naebong), Six Ministries (Personnel, Military, Civil, Justice, Rites, Public Works), Nine Temples, and Six Guards to administer state affairs and entrust them to those who were prepared. In terms of religion, he greatly revered Buddhism, establishing the Palgwanhoe in the winter of his enthronement and making it the national event of the year. He built over ten large temples in the capital, including Beopwang Temple and Wangryun Temple, and built Gaetae Temple on Cheonhusan Mountain in Hwangsan-gun, where he defeated the Later Baekje army, to commemorate the soldiers who died in battle. In order to make his ministers aware of etiquette, he promulgated the Jeonggye 1 volume and the Gyebaeklyosueo 8 chapters to the central and outer regions, and ordered Daegwang Park Sul-hui to personally授 the Hunyo Ten Injunctions. In terms of diplomacy, he continued to use the policies of Silla, maintaining friendly relations with Later Tang, but strictly severing ties with Khitan. At the beginning of the dynasty, Khitan sent 50 camels as tribute and envoys to congratulate him, but he refused, exiled the envoys to an island, and tied the camels to Manbugyo Bridge, where they starved to death. In the fourth of the Hunyo Ten Injunctions, he said, "Khitan is a country of beasts, whose customs are different, and whose language, clothing, and systems are also different, so be careful not to imitate them." One reason for this was because Khitan betrayed its trust and destroyed Balhae, but a major reason was that Balhae was a nation founded by the remnants of Goguryeo, so it was based on a sense of national identity. From this, it can be seen how clumsy Silla's policy of uniting with Tang to destroy Goguryeo was compared to that of King Taejo Wang Geon.<27>

Named Entities

弓裔	Kungye
王隆	Wang Ryung
韓氏女	Lady Han
漢州	Hanju
松嶽郡	Songak-gun
松京	Songgyeong
開城	Gaeseong
異僧道詵	Doseon
新羅	Silla
憲康王	Heongang-wang
金城太守	Geumseong Taesu
金昌瑾	Kim Chang-geun
泰封王	Taebong-wang
勃禦塹城	Bogeocham Fortress
歸仁門	Guinu-mun
精騎大監	Jeonggi Daegam
廣州	Gwangju
忠州	Chungju
淸州	Cheongju
甄萱	Gyeon Hwon
後百濟	Later Baekje
興法寺	Heungbeop-sa
江原道	Gangwon-do
原州	Wonju
崔光胤	Choe Gwang-yun
唐太宗	Emperor Taizong of Tang
李益齋齊賢	Yi Ik-jae Jae-hyeon
龍城	Yongseong
鴨綠江	Amnok River
新羅鷄林	Silla Gyelim
鐵原	Cheorwon
松岳	Songak
貞州	Jeongju
柳天弓	Ryu Cheon-gung
三重大匡	Samjungdaegwang
神惠王后柳氏	Queen Sinhye, Lady Ryu
莊和王后吳氏	Queen Janghwa, Lady Oh
錦城	Geumseong
羅州	Naju
木浦	Mokpo
浣紗泉	Wansacheon
惠宗	Hyejong
欇王	Seol-wang
尹紹宗	Yun So-jong
佔畢齋金宗直	Jeompiljae Kim Jong-jik
興龍寺	Heungnyong-sa
金氏	Kim-ssi
新羅敬順王	King Gyeongsun of Silla
金億廉	Kim Eok-ryeom
樂浪公主	Princess Nakrang
公山桐藪	Gongsan Tongsu
永川郡	Yeongcheon-gun
西達城郡	Seodal-seong-gun
景哀王	Gyeongaewang
孝廉	Hyo-ryeom
英景	Yeong-gyeong
申崇謙	Shin Sung-gyeom
楚漢戰爭	Chu-Han Contention
紀信	Ji-sin
漢沛公	Liu Bang
春川	Chuncheon
金樂	Kim Nak
洪儒	Hong Yu
裴玄慶	Bae Hyeon-gyeong
柳氏	Ryu-ssi
新羅景明王	King Gyeongmyeong of Silla
布政殿	Bujeong Hall
運州	Unju
洪城	Hongseong
熊津	Ungjin
神釰	Sin-geom
金山寺	Geumsan Temple
金佺	Kim Jeon
麻衣太子	Ma-ui Taeja
侍郞金封休	Sirang Kim Bong-hyu
皆骨山	Geolgul-san
金剛山	Geumgang-san
柳花宮	Yuhwa-gung
神鸞宮	Sinran-gung
觀光順化衛國功臣上柱國樂浪王政承	Gwangwang Sunhwa Wiguk Gongsin Sangjukguk Nakrang Wangjeong Seung
慶州	Gyeongju
朴儒	Park Yu
審穀使	Simgoksa
契丹	Khitan
渤海	Balhae
高句麗	Goguryeo
黃山郡 天護山	Hwangsan-gun Cheonhusan
開泰寺	Gaetae-sa
政誡	Jeonggye
誡百寮書	Gyebaeklyosueo
朴述熙	Park Sul-hui
訓要	Hunyo



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	弓裔의 部下로 三韓을 統合한 高麗太祖 建國秘史
필자	壽春學人
기사형태	문예기타

弓裔의 部下로 三韓을 統合한 高麗太祖 建國秘史
						壽春學人
非凡한 그 人物

高麗太祖 神聖王의 姓은 王氏요 名은 建, 字는 若天이니 金城太守 王隆의 아들이다. 隆이 일즉이 韓氏女와 결혼하야, 漢州 松嶽郡(今 開城) 松京의 南에 주거하더니, 一日은 異僧道詵이 門外에서 休憩하다가 우연히 말하야 갈오되 이 땅에 반드시 聖人이 나겟다 하니 隆이 듯고 크게 깃버하야 그를 마저드러 優待하니 道詵이 一封의 글을 주고 갈오되  明年에 반듯이 貴子를 나흘 터이니 장성하거든 이 글을 주라하고 가더니 과연 其 翌年에 太祖를 誕生하니 때는 新羅 憲康王 3년 丁酉(距今 1053년前)엿다. 나흘때에 神光紫氣가 一室을 圍繞하야 蛟龍의 蟠旋하는 狀과 가트니 일반이 다 신기히 녁이엿다. 그는 어려서부터 天姿가 英明할 뿐 안이라 龍顔日角과 廣額方頣의 비범한 용모를 가지고 器度가 또한 雄深하야 濟世安民의<22> 大量이 잇섯다. 17세 때에 道詵이 또 와서 出師置陳의 法과 天文地理의 秘術을 가르치니 그는 聞十知百의 聰明으로 萬事를 通解하야 20세에는 벌서 名望이 國內에 藉藉하니 泰封王 弓裔가 그를 *用하야 勃禦塹城(開城東部 歸仁門 附近)의 城主를 삼고 (王隆이 弓裔에게 歸한 후 弓裔를 勸하야 此城을 築함) 22세 때에는 精騎大監의 重職을 授하고, 또 수년후에는 廣州 忠州  淸州 等地에서 甄萱의 軍과 戰하야 大功을 세우니 威名이 一世를 風靡하게 되엿다. 그는 水陸의  戰한 術이 모도 능한 중 특히 海上에 世居하야(서해안) 航海術을 傳習한 까닭으로 海戰은 누구보다도 特長이 有하얏다. 그가 서남해에서 後百濟의 水
軍을 擊滅하야 王業의 基礎를 이른 것도 이 海戰에 능한 까닭이엿다. 太祖는 其外文章에도 또한 능하얏스니, 그가 親製한 興法寺(在 江原道 原州) 碑文은(碑書는 崔光胤이 唐太宗의 書를 *刻함)
二載名文으로 李益齋齊賢이 評하야 日辭意가 雄深偉麗하야 玄圭赤舃 廊廟에 揖讓함과 如하다 하고 巡塞詩에 龍城秋月淡, 古戌白烟里無金革, 胡兒賀太平云云의 句는 氣橫溢하야 帝王의 天下泰平한 氣像을 示하얏다.

鏡讖文과 金塔夢

어느 나라던지 創業의 主가 이러날 때에는 반드시 讖書와 秘記가튼 것이 먼저 유행하는 것이 恒例이다. 이 王建太祖時代에도 唐의 商人 王昌瑾이 市中에서 엇던 老人에게 거울(鏡) 한 개를 삿섯는데 그 鏡文에 글자가 씨여 잇스되 『三水中, 四維下 上帝降子於辰馬, 先搡鷄, 後摶鴨, 巳年中. 二龍見, 一則藏辛靑木中, 一則現形黑金東』이라 하엿더니 그뒤에 그 讖書가 과연 마젓스니 즉 三水中 四維下는 新羅의 말년이란 말이요, 降子於辰馬는 馬韓辰韓의 地方에 帝王이 난다는 말이요, 先搡鷄後摶鴨은 王建太祖가 먼저 新羅鷄林을 엇고 후에 領地를 鴨綠江까지 占한다는 뜻이요, 靑木은 松이요 黑金은 鐵이니 즉 巳年에 弓裔와 王建太祖가 가티 출세하야 弓裔는 鐵原에 都하고 王建太祖는 松岳에 都한다는 뜻이엿다. 그리고 太祖는 30세 때에 또 꿈을 뀐 즉 9층의 金塔이 海中에서 湧出하고 太祖가 其上에 登하얏섯는데 卜者가 解하야 갈오되 그것은 寶位에 올을 貴不可言의 吉夢이라 하니 太祖가 마음에 홀로 깃버하야 自負함을 마지 안엇섯다.

艶福이 特多한 太祖

太祖가 아즉까지 弓裔의 部下에 잇슬 때엿다. 한번은 出征하는 길에 貞州 땅을 지내게 되엿섯는데 길가의 버드나무에 말을 매고 쉬너라닛가 엇던 處女 한아가 川邊에 섯는데 儀容이 端雅하고 姿態가 또한 絶特함으로 太祖는 특히 불너서 물은즉, 그는 當州의 富豪長者 柳天弓(後爲三重大匡)의 딸이엿다. 柳씨는 太祖를 보고 또한 非凡히 생각하고 自家로 청하야 留宿케 하엿섯더니 그 뒤에 彼此 消息이 끈어지매 柳는 節을 직히기 위하야 머리를 깍고 僧이 되엿더니 太祖가 듯고 그를 마저 부인을<23> 삼으니 그는 곳 神惠王后柳氏엿다. 이 柳氏는 姿色이 絶特할 뿐 안이라 厚德과 知鑑이 만어서 太祖創業의 功에 內助가 甚多하엿섯다. 太祖는 이 柳氏 이외에 莊和王后 吳氏가 또 잇섯스니 그는 본래 錦城(羅州古號)木浦의 여자엿다. 처녀때에 일즉이 川邊에서 빨래를 하는데 五色의 구름이 싸여 잇섯고(後에 名其泉曰浣紗泉이라 함) 또 꿈을 뀐 즉 용이 腹中으로 드러옴으로 깨여서 父母에게 말하니 父母가 또한 기이히 녁이더니 오라지 안이하야 太祖가 南征하다가 木浦의 川邊에서 吳氏의 빨래하는 것을 보고 그 姿色의 非凡한 것을 깃버하야 불너 寵幸하얏섯다. 그러나 그는 원래 門地가 寒微한 까닭에 妊胎가 될가 念慮하야 交合할 때에 精液을 특히 寢席에 注棄하니 吳氏는 그것을 吸入하고 遂히 胎氣가 잇서서 子를 生하니 그가 곳 惠宗이엿다. 그러한 관계로 그리 되엿던지 무슨 까닭으로 그리 되엿던지 惠宗은 生하매 面部에 席文이 잇슴으로 世人이 欇王이라고 칭하얏다. 그는 어려서부터 武勇이 絶倫하야 항상 太祖를 좃차 사방으로 出征하엿섯는데 甄萱의 軍과 싸울 때에도 그가 先頭에 서서 大功을 이르럿스니 尹紹宗 詩에 一統三韓日에 先登百濟城이라 云함과 (題惠宗祀詩) 佔畢齋金宗直 詩에 濯錦江邊舅氏鄕, 興龍寺裏藹祥光, 至今父老懷遺德, 簫歌歡娛皺大王이라 云함이 그것을 뜻함이다. (興龍寺는 惠宗의 출생한 地에 建한 것이다) 그 뒤에 太祖는 惠宗을 立하야 太子를 삼고자 하나 母家의 寒微한 까닭으로 宗戚羣臣間에 異議가 잇슬가 두려워하야 柘黃袍를 古笥속에다 너어 吳氏를 주니 吳氏는 그것을 大匡朴述熙에게 뵈엿더니 述熙가 그 뜻을 알고 遂히 建議하야 惠宗으로 太子를 삼엇섯다. 그리고 太祖는 또 第三王后 金氏가 잇섯스니 그는 新羅敬順王의 伯父 金億廉의 女니 敬順王이 高麗에 歸順한 후에 太祖가 政策上으로 自己의 長女 樂浪公主를 敬順王에게 妻하고 自己는 그 金氏를 娶한 것인 바 金氏 또한 姿色이 美麗하고 厚德이 甚多하엿스니 歷代 創業의 帝王중에 이 麗太祖와 가티 艶福이 만흔 이는 별로 업섯다.

危機一髮의 公山大戰

太祖는 水陸 屢百餘戰에 별로 실패한 일이 업섯스나 後百濟王 甄萱과 公山桐藪(永川郡 西達城郡境에 在함)에서 싸울 때에는 慘敗中 大慘敗를 당하얏섯다. 그 때 甄萱은 新羅의 國都를 뭇지르고 景哀王을 弑하며 王妃後宮을 强辱하고 王弟 孝廉과  宰臣 英景을 虜한 후 또 亂兵을 縱하야 婦女財貨를 掠奪하니 太祖는 그 變을 듯고 크게 노하야 친히 精兵 5천을 率하고 甄萱을 征討하더니(본래 新羅王이 太祖에 救援을 청하야 太祖가 往救하는 중에 甄萱이 먼저 國都를 侵入하얏슴으로 太祖가 追擊함이다.) 公山에 至하매 萱의 大兵이 猝至하야 太祖의 軍을 包圍 攻擊하니 勢가 심히 급한지라 (太祖軍은 長途의 急行으로 疲困할 뿐 안이라 地理에 또한 어두어 패하얏다.) 將軍 申崇謙은 마츰 容貌가 太祖와 恰似함으로 녯날 楚漢戰爭 때에 紀信이 漢沛公을 代死하던 故事를 모방하야 太祖를 桐藪中에 숨긴후 崇謙이 太祖의 服色을 하고 車上에 坐하야 力戰하다가 死하니 <24>甄軍이 太祖가 死한 줄로 誤認하고 兵을 해하야 去함으로 太祖는 僅히 禍를 면하얏다. 太祖는 崇謙의 德을 思하야 黃金으로 頭骨을 模造하야 葬하고(墓在春川) 그 뒤 開國宴을 할 때에도 또 그와 金樂(其時同死한 將軍의 功을 思하고 假像을 造하야 羣臣의 間에 列坐케하고 술을 부에 노니 그 假像이 生人과 가티 起拜하며 술을 마신 후에는 또 諸臣과 가티 起舞하니 일반이 모도 神奇히 녁이엇다.

露積덤이 우에서 登極式

太祖의 威德이 날로 성하야 일반의 人民이 悅服하는 반면에 泰封王 弓裔는 國力의 强함을 恃하고 氣高意驕하야 懈怠의 色이 滿滿한 中, 加之極端의 佛敎와 圖讖說(例如馬生角石生蟲說)의 迷信은 狂暴, 疑忌의 行動을 發露하야 國號 年號를 朝變夕改하고 無辜의 人民을 함부로 죽여 심지어 心腹의 部下와 妻子까지도 酷禍를 면치 못하게 되니 人心이 크게 <25>危懼하고 安定하기 難하얏다. 때에 마츰 太祖가 羅州를 攻拔하고 鐵原에 凱旋하니 弓裔는 太祖를 猜忌하야 叛逆의 罪名하에 誅殺코자 하더니 마츰 弓裔 侍臣의 奇智로 인하야 禍를 면하얏다. 一日은 弓裔의 部下 騎將 洪儒, 裴玄慶等 諸人이 密히 太祖의 私邸에 會하야 太祖의 推戴할 事를 論할새 마츰 太祖의 부인 柳氏가 座中에 잇슴으로 太祖는 夫人에게 大事를 知케하는 것이 不可하게 생각하고 참외밧(苽田)에 가서 참외를 따오라 하엿더니 원래 英慧한 柳氏는 그 뜻을 알고 그짓 참외밧에 가는 척하고 帳後에 숨어서 의논하는 말을 엿듯다가 太祖가 諸將의 推戴를 固辭함을 보고 돌연히 帳中으로 뛰어나오며 갈오되 義를 擧하야 虐을 伐함은 자고로 잇는 일이라 이제 諸將의 議를 드르매 女子인 妾으로도 오히려 發奮하거던 하물며 大丈夫리요 하고 奮然한 氣色으로 친히 甲冑를 끌어다가 太祖에게 입히니 諸將이 太祖를 擁護하야 露積섬우에 안치고, 君臣의 禮를 행한 후 즉시 兵을 動하야 鼓嗓吶喊하고 宮門으로 向進하니 弓裔가 크게 놀나 微服으로 逃走하니 (逃走中 平康에서 亂民에게 被弑함) 太祖는 布政殿에서 卽入하야 卽位式을 行하고 國號를 高麗라 하고 年號를 天授라 稱하야 內外에 宣布하니 따는 新羅 景明王 2년 戌寅 6월(距今 1012년前) 이오 太祖의 是年은 42세의 壯齡이엿다.

兵不血刃.新羅統一

太祖는 이와 가티 弓裔를 一蹴하야 其領土를 占領한 후 또 南進하야 運州(今洪城)에서 後百濟를 一擊大破하야 熊津以北 30여城을 征服하니 甄萱이 勢屈하야 또한 歸化하얏다. (萱의 子 神釰이 亂을 作하야 父位를 奪하고 金山寺에 囚하니 萱이 逃歸함) 때에 新羅는 國勢가 衰弱하야 도저히 維持하기 難함으로 敬順王은 國土를 擧하야 高麗에 歸化코자 하니 羣臣中에 누가 감히 異論하는 者가 업스되 오즉 太子 金佺(俗稱 麻衣太子)은 悲憤慷慨의 눈물을 흘니며 반대하야 갈오되 忠臣義士와 力을 합하야 最後까지 惡戰苦鬪하다 死할지언정 엇지 一千年 社稷을 一朝에 輕輕히 他人에게 與하리오 하니 王이 갈오되 義理로는 當然한 일이나 勢가 이와 가튼 이상에 無辜의 民으로 肝膽을 地에 塗케하는 것은 나의 참아 할 바 안이라고 하고 遂히 歸降을 決하고 侍郞 金封休로 하야금 書를 修하야 太祖에게 歸降을 請하니 王子는 哭泣하며 王宮을 辭하고 皆骨山(金剛山)에 드러가서 麻衣草食으로 一生을 終하얏다. 太祖는 王의 書를 受하고 大相 王鐵 등을 送하야 그를 迎하니 王은 百寮를 率하고 國都를 發하야 開京城에 赴하니 香車寶馬 30여리에 달하고 道傍에 觀光하는 者가 人山人海를 이르럿다. 太祖는 王을 迎하야 柳花宮에 館케하고 長女 樂浪公主로써 妻하야 神鸞宮에 居케하며 觀光順化衛國功臣上柱國樂浪王政承을 封하야 位를 太子의 上에 居케하고 一千石의 祿을 與하며 慶州로 其食邑을 삼고 隨員도 또한 相當한 官職에 叙用하얏다.

太祖의 政治와 外交策<26>

太祖의 部下에는 勇將猛卒이 만흐나 文事에 通한 자가 少함으로 開國初에 官制를 定하고 國政를 叅斷하는데는 專혀 弓裔의 遺臣인 朴儒를 用하고 또 統一後에는 新羅의 文士를 採用하얏다. 政治上으로 중요한 자는 審穀使를 置하야 水旱飢饉을 備하고 田制를 正하야 賦歛을 輕케 하며 혹은 內庫의 布穀을 發하야 人民의 奴婢가 되는 者를 救助하얏다. 또 官制는 唐制를 基礎로 한 新羅 泰封의 舊制에 의하야 三省(內議, 廣評, 內奉) 六尙書(選官, 兵官, 民官, 刑官, 禮官, 工官), 九寺, 六衛를 設하야 庶政을 裁決하고 無備에 任케 하얏다. 宗敎方面으로는 佛敎를 非常히 尊崇하야 卽位하던 冬에 八關會를 設하고 그것으로 國家의 年中行事를 삼엇스며 都城內에는 法王, 王輪등 10여의 大寺刹을 起하고 後百濟軍을 擊破한 黃山郡 天護山에 開泰寺를 建하고 戰後 將士를 祭하얏다. 그리고 臣子에게는 禮節을 明知케하기 위하야 政誡一卷, 誡百寮書八篇을 中外에 發布하고 또 大匡 朴述熙를 命하야 訓要十條를 親授하얏다. 外交方面으로는 역시 新羅의 政策을 仍用히야 後唐과 和好하얏스나, 특히 契丹과는 嚴格히 斷交하야 開國初에는 彼가 50匹의 槖駝를 貢하고 賀使를 보냇스되 此를 拒絶하야 其使行 30여人은 島中에 流配하고 槖駝에는 萬夫橋에 繫하야 餓死케 하얏스며 訓要十條중에도 其第四條에 契丹은 禽獸國으로서 風俗이 갓지 안으며 言語衣冠制度도 또한 相異한즉 愼하야 效치 말나고 하얏다. 그것은 전혀 契丹이 恩義를 背하고 渤海를 攻滅한 것을 鑑한 것도 한 理由이지만은 渤海가 高句麗의 遺民으로 創建된 國家인 까닭에  가튼 民族觀念으로 나온 것이 큰 理由이다. 이로 미루어 보면 新羅가 唐과 聯合하야 高句麗를 攻滅한 것은 이 王建太祖에 比하야 얼마나 拙劣한 政策인지 알 수 업다. <27>
<22-27>