잡지명	別乾坤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	絶處逢生 죽엇든 生命이 살아난 實談集, 王命으로 處斬拿致되다가 中途에 免死榮爵 (A Collection of True Stories of Being Rescued from the Brink of Death, Escaping Death and Gaining Glory Midway After Being Ordered to Be Executed by Royal Decree)
필자	桂山人
기사형태	문예기타 (Miscellaneous Literature)

A Collection of True Stories of Being Rescued from the Brink of Death, Escaping Death and Gaining Glory Midway After Being Ordered to Be Executed by Royal Decree
						Gyesan-in

During the reign of King Jungjong, there was a man named Jang Sun-son (張順孫) (his courtesy name was Ja-ho (子浩), and his posthumous title was Mun-suk (文肅); he was from the In-dong Jang clan (仁同人)). His face was so ugly that his friends always mocked him, calling him "Jang Pig-head (張猪頭)." At that time, Prince Yeonsan, not satisfied with all his tyrannical and lewd acts, gathered all the beauties in the world into the palace and indulged in revelry day and night. Among these beauties, a certain Hanga, a Gisaeng from Seongju, was the most beautiful and her singing and dancing were exceptional, so Yeonsan favored her especially. One day, after performing ancestral rites at the Jongmyo Shrine and bringing the sacrificial offerings into the palace to distribute to various officials, the Seongju Gisaeng saw a pig's head among the offerings and kept laughing. Yeonsan, finding it strange, asked her the reason for her laughter. The Gisaeng replied that it was not for any particular reason, but that there was a person named Jang Sun-son, who had passed the civil service examination (及第) in her hometown of Seongju. His face was like a pig's head, so people had nicknamed him "Jang Pig-head (張猪頭)." Now, seeing that pig's head, she suddenly thought of Mr. Jang and laughed. Yeonsan, hearing this, became very angry and said, "Sun-son (順孫) is originally your lover, so I cannot leave him be." He ordered that Sun-son's (順孫) head be brought to him and dispatched a Keum-bu Do-sa (禁府都事) (similar to a modern-day prosecutor) that very day. At that time, Sun-son (順孫) had passed the civil service examination (登科) and was at home. When the arrest order arrived, he had no choice but to say goodbye to his parents and relatives, resigning himself to death, and set off with the Do-sa (都事).

As they were traveling, they reached the Gonggeomji (恭儉池) pond in Hamchang. Suddenly, a cat appeared and crossed the road. Sun-son (順孫) asked the Do-sa (都事), saying, "For some reason, I have always had good fortune when I see a cat while traveling. When I went to take the civil service examination (科擧) the other day, I saw a cat on the way and passed. Now that I see another cat, it seems that good fortune will surely come. Moreover, if we go the way the cat went, it will be a shortcut, so let's go that way." The Do-sa (都事) agreed. <69> That day, the Do-sa (都事) and Sun-son (順孫) went to the county office and heard that Yeonsan had sent another propaganda official (宣傳官) to quickly execute Sun-son (順孫). He had stayed the previous night in Hamchang County and headed towards Sangju. Of course, if Sun-son (順孫) had not taken the fork in the road where the cat went and had taken the main road, his pig-like head would have fallen off midway by the propaganda official (宣傳官). When he and the Do-sa (都事) reached Joryeong Pass (鳥嶺), King Jungjong had already raised the banner of restoration (反正) and driven out Yeonsan, and the decree to pardon those who had been wrongly accused during Yeonsan's reign had been promulgated throughout the country. The Do-sa (都事) released Sun-son (順孫) on the spot, and Sun-son (順孫) went to Seoul with the Do-sa (都事) and entered the officialdom. His reputation filled the court, and in just a few years, he became Minister of War (兵判), then Right State Councillor (右相), and finally Chief State Councillor (領相).<70>

**Named Entities**

張順孫	Chang Sun-son
子浩	Cha-ho
文肅	Mun-suk
仁同	In-dong
燕山主	Yŏnsan-gun
星州	Sŏngju
禁府都事	Kŭmbu Tosa
咸昌	Hamch’ang
恭儉池	Koggŏmji
尙州	Sangju
鳥嶺	Choryŏng
中宗	Chungjong
兵判	Pyŏngp’an
右相	U-sang
領相	Yŏngsang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	絶處逢生 죽엇든 生命이 살아난 實談集, 王命으로 處斬拿致되다가 中途에 免死榮爵
필자	桂山人
기사형태	문예기타

絶處逢生 죽엇든 生命이 살아난 實談集, 王命으로 處斬拿致되다가 中途에 免死榮爵
						桂山人
中宗時代에 領議政까지 한 張順孫(字는 子浩, 謚은 文肅이니 仁同人이다)이라 하는 이는 얼골이 엇지나 못생겻던지 맛치 도야지상 가틈으로 친구들이 일상 嘲弄하야 張猪頭라고 불넛섯다. 그때 燕山主는 모든 虐政과 모든 淫蕩한 일을 하면서도 猶爲不足하야 천하의 미인이란 미인은 다 모와다가 궁중에 두고 밤낫으로 질탕하게 노는데 그 여러 미인 중에도 星州 妓生 한아가 제일 자태가 어엽부고 歌舞가 또한 絶特함으로 燕山이 특별 총애하엿섯다. 일일은 宗廟에 祭祀를 지내고 祭物을 궁중에 드러서 여러 신하에게 頒給하는데 星州妓가 그 祭物 중에 잇는 도야지를 보고 작구 우스닛가 燕山은 괴이히 녁여 그 웃는 이유를 물은 즉, 妓는 대답하되 다른 까닭이 안이라 저의 고향인 星州에 張及第順孫이라 하는 이가 잇는데 얼골이 猪頭와 가터서 여러 사람들이 張猪頭라고 별명을 지엿섯는데 이제 저-猪頭를 본즉 張氏의 생각이 문득 나서 우섯다고 하얏다. 燕山은 그말을 듯고 크게 노하야 갈오되 順孫은 원래 너의 愛夫인터인 즉 그대로 둘 수 업다하고 親命으로 順孫의 머리를 베허오라 하야  당일에 禁府都事 (지금 檢事와 如함)를 派送하얏다. 때에 順孫은 登科를 하고 집에 잇다가 拿命이 至하매 엇지할 수 업시 父母親戚에 죽기로  하즉하고 都事와 가티 길을 떠낫섯다.
그럭저럭 가는 것이 咸昌의 공갈못(恭儉池)개까지 이르럿는데 난데업는 고양이(猫) 한마리가 나와서 길을 건너갓섯다. 順孫은 都事에게 청하야 갈오대, 나는 웬일인지 자래로 길을 가다가 고양이를<69> 보면 吉事가 잇서서 前日에 科擧를 보러갈 때에도 路中에서 고양이를 보고는 及第를 하엿더니 지금에 또 고양이를 보니 필경은 吉事가 잇슬 듯 할 뿐 안이라 고양이 가는 길로 가면 길이 또한 捷徑인 즉 그리가자고 하니 都事가 또한 許하얏다. 都事와 順孫이 그날 縣에 가서 드른 즉 其間에 또 燕山이 順孫을 速斬하라고 다시 宣傳官을 보내섯는데 바로 그 전날 밤에 咸昌縣에서 자고 尙州로 향하얏다고 한다. 물론 그때에 順孫이 그 고양이가 가던 岐路로 가지 안코 大路로 갓섯스면 중도에서 宣傳官에게 그 도야지가튼 머리가 떠러젓슬 것이다. 그는 都事와 가티 鳥嶺에 이른즉, 때는 벌서 中宗이 反正의 旗를 드러서 燕山을 쫏차내고 前日 燕山 在位時에 寃枉한 죄를 赦하게 되야 그 令이 中外에서 布告된 지라 都事는 그 자리에서 順孫을 放釋하니  順孫은 그길로 都事와 가티 京城으로 올나와서 仕路에 나아가매 令名이 朝路에 가득하야 불과 몃해에 兵判이 되며 右相이 되고 최후에는 領相까지 하엿다.<70>
<69-70>