잡지명	別乾坤 第20號
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	不具者에게도 새로운 光明, 聾者도 啞者도 듯고 말할 수 잇다 (New Hope for the Disabled: The Deaf and Mute Can Also Hear and Speak)
필자	金東湜
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

New Hope for the Disabled: The Deaf and Mute Can Also Hear and Speak
						Kim Tong-shik

Alas! As one who is also deaf and mute, I cannot hold back my tears of sympathy for all the deaf and mute people in the world. Therefore, I want to share my experiences and save my fellow sufferers from this sea of suffering.

My fellow countrymen, why were you born with the misfortune of being deaf and mute? I am a pitiful deaf-mute person of 24 years. In my childhood, I could not communicate with others, and without hearing, I could not receive education, nor could I write. I could not communicate my feelings to others, not even to my parents, siblings, or relatives. Every day, I felt as if my heart would break. Time passed like flowing water, and before I knew it, I was over ten years old. My grandfather realized that I would not be able to function without considerable knowledge, so he taught me Chinese characters day and night. After eight years, I was able to manage simple written communication and could express my feelings to others, which was a stroke of luck in my misfortune. When I saw other children going to regular school, I could not help but envy them. At that time, a friend told me about the Cheisaengwon (濟生院) School for the Blind and Deaf in Kyŏngsŏng (京城). I was overjoyed and asked my father to enroll me in the school for the blind and deaf. He immediately agreed, and I entered the Cheisaengwon School for the Blind and Deaf outside Sŏdaemun (西大門) in Kyŏngsŏng. After completing four years there, I graduated from the advanced course at the Tokyo School for the Deaf in Japan. Now, I am delighted to be able to communicate with others in writing without difficulty. However, I regret that there is no institution in Korea that can employ the deaf and mute. If deaf and mute people do not receive education, they cannot fully explain their situation when they need to see a doctor, when they are robbed, or when they have any dealings with the police or the courts. The difficulty and frustration felt by the deaf person and their family are indescribable. It is truly pitiful and heartbreaking. I believe that many of my fellow sufferers regret not being able to attend school because they are already too old. It is so convenient to be able to express one's feelings in words, but we unfortunate deaf and mute people cannot hear sounds or speak words, making our free bodies unfree. How can we attain our own happiness? I believe it is essential to provide adequate education to enable written communication. Furthermore, while the blind cannot see objects, they can hear sounds. But even that is questionable, so the blind and the deaf are equally unfortunate. Therefore, I hope that you will enroll in a school for the deaf and mute as soon as possible and receive instruction in teaching methods for the deaf and mute. Strive to develop your knowledge in all things, remain silent, and dedicate yourself to learning. Work hard to become proficient in writing so that you do not suffer the ridicule of others. Mr. Pak Tu-sŏng (朴斗星), who is currently working at the Cheisaengwon School for the Blind and Deaf, has devoted himself to this cause for 16 years since the establishment of the school in 1912 (Taishō 1). He has shown compassion for the blind and deaf and has devoted himself to devising braille for the education of the blind, achieving great results. He is truly the founder of braille education in Korea. He has also put his heart and soul into finger spelling, studying hand gestures, and pronunciation for the deaf and mute, achieving excellent results. His graduates have engraved Mr. Pak's kindness in their bones and will never forget him. I express my sympathy to the Korean deaf and mute education community and the general public. To express my feelings of mutual sympathy, I visited Mr. Pak Tu-sŏng, a teacher at the Cheisaengwon School for the Blind and Deaf, immediately after returning to Korea last year to pay my respects.

According to a survey by the Internal Affairs Bureau of the Korean Government-General, the current statistics for deaf and mute Koreans are as follows:
Men - 7,272
Women - 3,032

When entering the Cheisaengwon School for the Blind and Deaf, those with financial means must pay 9 won per month at their own expense, while the poor are provided with meals at the expense of the school.

1. Length of Study:
- Blind Course: 3 years
- Deaf Course: 6 years
2. Locations of Schools for the Blind and Deaf in Korea:
Kyŏngsŏng (京城) = Government-run, established by the Korean Government-General in 1911.
P'yŏngyang (平壤) = Private, established by Westerners (Americans) in 1903.
3. Application Period: Every April
4. Eligibility: Ages 8 to 20

Referring to the above, I repeatedly hope that all of you unfortunate friends will seek new hope.

The above is the original manuscript that Mr. Kim Tong-shik brought with him when he visited our company, so we have published it as is without any additions or corrections. Mr. Kim is from Kaesŏng (開城), is skilled in written communication, and is currently working to establish a printing factory run solely by deaf and mute people. (Reporter) <81>

Named Entities

金東湜	Kim Tong-shik
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
西大門	Sŏdaemun
濟生院	Cheisaengwon
朴斗星	Pak Tu-sŏng
平壤	P'yŏngyang
開城	Kaesŏng



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	不具者에게도 새로운 光明, 聾者도 啞者도 듯고 말할 수 잇다
필자	金東湜
기사형태	잡저

不具者에게도 새로운 光明, 聾者도 啞者도 듯고 말할 수 잇다
						金東湜
嗚呼라. 필자도 聾啞의 一人인 바 滿天下 聾啞에 대하야 同情의 淚를 금치 못하노라. 고로 자기의 經歷한 바를 말하고저 하며 동시에 同病者를 苦海에서 救코저 하노라.
諸君이여. 何故로 不聞不言의 불행한 聾啞로 탄생되엿는가. 필자는 當年 24세의 可憐한 聾啞이다. 幼年時代에는 타인에 대하야 通話도 불능하고 聽覺이 無한 中, 교육을 受치 못하야 筆談도 불능하엿스니 타인의게는 물론 부모형제자매에게도 情을 通치 못하야 心腸이 破裂되는 듯 비참한 時가 매일 幾次式 되엿다. 세월은 流水와 如히 速하야 어언간 10여歲가 되매 祖父는 상당한 지식을 함양하야 주지 안이하면 不可한줄로 覺悟하시고  晝宵로 漢文을 敎授하시기를 于今 八箇星霜에 至한 바 如干 容易한 筆談은 不難하야 타인과 情을 叙할만한 편리를 得하엿스니 불행중 다행이다. 他幸福의 아동이 보통학교에 통학하는 것을 見하면 欽羨함을 不禁하엿다.  其時에 親友가 필자를 尋訪하야 京城에 濟生院盲啞部가 有함을 설명하여 주엇다. 필자는 手舞足蹈하면서 부친께 盲啞學校에 입학을 청하엿드니 즉시 허락을 하심으로 京城府 西大門外의 濟生院盲啞部에 입학하야 4년 修了하고 再次 일본에 東京聾啞學校高等部를 졸업하야 지금은 타인과 如何한 筆談이든지 용이함을 歡喜한다. 然이나 조선에서는 聾啞社會를 위하야 如何한 직업에 취직할 기관이 無함을 유감으로 아는 바요, 만일 聾啞者로써 교육을 不受하면, 의사의게 진찰을 受하든지 도난을 당할 時나 혹은 경찰서에 如何한 관계가 有하든지 裁判等이 有할 時에라도 實情을 타인의게 충분히 호소치 못하니 其 곤란과 실패를 感하는 啞 本人과 其親族의 心痛은 형언키 難하니 실로 가련하고 한심하다. 旣히 年齡이 多하야 학교에 입학치 못하고 후회하는 同病者도 不少할 줄노 信한다. 言語에 如何한 事情이든지 實情을 발표하는 편리가 有하거늘 불행한 우리 聾啞者 諸君은 음성도 不聞하고 言語도 不發하야 자유의 신체가 不自由하게 되니 如何히 하야 자기의 행복을 得할가. 상당한 敎育을 授하야 筆談의 便을 得하지 하니하면 不可한 줄노 信한다. 又 盲人은 物의 形色을 不見하나 音聲을 聞함이 편리하다 하겟지만 그것도 疑念이 深할 것이니 盲啞는 同樣의 不幸者다. 然則 諸君의게 희망하는 것은 一日이라도 속히 聾啞學校에 입학하야 聾啞敎育上 敎授方法의 『形容』을 受하야 何에든지 지식을 啓發하기 위하야 沈黙을 守하고 修養에 노력할지며 타인의 嘲笑을 受치 안이하도록 필담이 능통하도록 학문에 勉勵하라. 濟生院盲啞部 在職중인 朴斗星先生은 該校 設立 當時 즉 大正元年으로 在來 16星霜의 長久한 세월을 斯道에 盡瘁하야 盲啞의게 同情을 表하기 위하야 盲人敎育의 點字考案에 盡力하야 多大한 效力을 得하엿스니 실로 朝鮮文의 盲人 點子敎育의 始祖가 되며 且 聾啞者에게는 指文字의 공부 손흉내, 발음의 연구 등에 심혈을 注하야 斯道의 良果를 擧하니 其卒業生은 朴先生의 은혜를 骨髓에 刻하야 不忘하는 바라 필자는 朝鮮聾啞敎育界및 一般社會에 대하야 同情을 표하는 동시에 同病者相憐의 感을 叙하기 위하야 昨年에 귀국 즉시로 濟生院盲啞部 敎諭 朴斗星先生을 訪問하야 인사를 드렷다.

朝鮮總督府 內務局에서 조사한 바에 의하면 현재 朝鮮人側 聾啞者 統計는 左와 如하다.
男-7,272명
女-3,032명
濟生院盲啞部에 입학할 時는 有力者는 自費로 一箇月 九圓餘를 要하며 貧困者는 給費로 식사만 공급해준다.
1. 修業年限-盲科 3개년
-啞科 6개년
1. 朝鮮內 盲啞學校소재지는 左와 如함.
京城=관립, 조선총독부 1911년 창립.
平壤=사립, 서양인(미국인) 1903년 창립.
1. 입학기한은 매년 4월.
1. 입학자격= 연령 8세 이상, 20세 이내.
右記를 叅照하야 滿天下 不幸同友 여러분이 새로운 光明을 구하기를 거거듭 거듭 바란다.

이상은 金東湜君이 本社를 來訪할 때 써 가지고 온  原稿인 故로 특히 添削을 加하지 안코 그대로 揭載한 것이며 君은 開城人으로 筆談에 能하며 方今聾啞人만의 印刷工場 設立을 周旋중이다.(記者)<81>
<80-81>