잡지명	別乾坤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	地上縱覽 朝鮮 各地 꼿 品評會 - 요새에 피는 八道의 꼿 이약이 (A Tour of Korean Flowers - The Story of Flowers Blooming in the Eight Provinces)
필자	靑吾生
기사형태	문예기타 (Arts and Culture)

A Tour of Korean Flowers - The Story of Flowers Blooming in the Eight Provinces
청오생

The Azalea, Korea's Representative Flower

Although the Rose of Sharon is called Korea's representative flower, in reality, the azalea (杜鵑花) feels more like Korea's representative flower. The azalea is beautiful in color and has a pleasant fragrance, and it grows everywhere in Korea, so everyone knows it well and has affection for it. Therefore, when it comes to flowers in Korea, everyone thinks of the azalea first. If there were no azaleas in the spring of Korea, it would be more desolate and lonely than a moonless night or a sunless arctic region, and we would truly feel that "spring has come, but it doesn't feel like spring." When Koreans go abroad and encounter spring, they first want to see azaleas, and if they see azaleas, they feel as happy as if they had returned to their homeland, even if they are abroad. This is not just an abstract statement, but something everyone experiences in reality.

Koreans' affection for azaleas is by no means inferior to the Japanese's affection for sakura. This can be sufficiently proven by the many poems and songs from the past, without going into various explanations. The most famous azalea spot in Korea is probably Yŏngbyŏn's Yaksan Tongdae (寧邊의 藥山 東臺). The azaleas of Yaksan Tongdae are, of course, good, but more than that, it was widely promoted by the song "Yŏngbyŏn's Yaksan Tongdae - azalea flowers are in full bloom..."

It is like the fact that even today, when there are no weeping willows in Ch'ŏnan Samgari, people still think of Ch'ŏnan Samgari as a famous place for weeping willows because of the song "The weeping willows of Ch'ŏnan Samgari droop at their own will..." In Kyŏnggi Province, the azaleas of Suwŏn Hwasan (水原 花山) were famous. We can guess this from the fact that the mountain name has been Hwasan since ancient times, and that Hwasan Azaleas ranked first among the eight scenic views of Suwŏn. In Kyŏngsang Province, the azaleas of Puyongdae (芙蓉臺) in Hahoe, Andong County, are also famous. Hahoe is originally the hometown of Ryu Sŏ-ae (柳西厓) and the scenery is beautiful. In particular, Puyongdae is a cliff facing the river, with many azaleas, so when the flowers are in full bloom, the flowers are reflected on the river, creating a wonderful sight of so-called "azalea flowers filling the river with red," which can be said to be the best scenic spot in Yŏngnam.

In Hwanghae Province, Ansan (案山) in Changyŏn, Duguŏnsan (杜鵑山), is also a famous azalea spot. The reason why the mountain name is Duguŏn is because there were so many azaleas. In Kangwŏn Province, there are many azaleas everywhere, as an old poem says, "All four sides are green mountains, all azaleas," because there are many mountains. However, in my opinion, the azaleas of Ch'unch'ŏn's Samhaksan (三鶴山) seem to be the most worth seeing. The mountain is originally a magnificent mountain made of rock, facing the upper reaches of the Han River, and among the thickets of miscellaneous trees, there are especially many azalea trees, some of which are more than 10 feet tall. When the flowers bloom, the entire mountain becomes a flower garden, and when it is reflected in the river, the river also turns into a flower river, and the upper and lower parts of the city turn into a flower world, presenting a spectacle. However, it is a pity that it has not been widely promoted to the world because transportation is still inconvenient.

<146>

Myŏngsashimni Rose

When we say Myŏngsashimni (明沙十里), we usually think of the Myŏngsashimni of Wŏnsan Beach. However, there are not many roses to see in Myŏngsashimni in Wŏnsan. The place that has been famous at home and abroad as a rose mecca since ancient times, and where even the song "Myŏngsashimni Rose, don't be sad that the flowers are falling. When the bumblebees come in March next year, you will bloom again, but once a person gets old, they will never be young again..." was created, is Myŏngsashimni on the west coast. That Myŏngsashimni is located on the coast of Chŏn'gye-ri, Haean-myŏn, Changyŏn-gun, Hwanghae Province (about 2 hours by boat from Kumi浦). The beach is about 10 li long, but the sand is very different from ordinary sand. The sand grains are the same size and as fine as arrowroot flour, and the color is beautiful and white. When the wind blows, it is driven this way and that way, becoming mountains and valleys. When the morning sun rises or the sunset shines on the west sea, the golden light of thousands of hectares is brilliant, presenting a great spectacle. In addition, in the season of spring flowering, natural roses of light red color bloom everywhere, resembling a group of girls playing hide-and-seek on the beach, or a group of stars twinkling in the vast clouds, hiding and appearing in the sand following the wind. You will not be able to find that unique sight anywhere else in the world. This Myŏngsashimni has been famous for hundreds of years. From the end of the Koryŏ Dynasty to the middle of the Yi Dynasty (until the fall of the Ming Dynasty), transportation between Korea and China (Nanjing and Shandong routes) mostly passed through this Myŏngsashimni, and many wealthy merchants and high-ranking officials came and went, so they naturally toured and praised it, and the name was promoted at home and abroad. At that time, there was a huge temple called Wŏnsa (原寺) on the sand dunes of Myŏngsashimni, and all the passing guests stayed and played there, so the beach became a great amusement park.

However, now that things have changed, the temple has disappeared, and only ruined foundations and broken tiles are scattered in the sand, telling the story of a past history that is full of emotion. Since Sin'gosan (新高山) roared and the Kyŏngwŏn Line train began to run, and the big baby of old Kogoksan (高曲山) began to pack half a bundle, the rose of Myŏngsashimni on the west coast, which had been famous for hundreds of years, gradually lost its power. Now, when people say Myŏngsashimni, they usually mean Myŏngsashimni in Wŏnsan, and don't know about the original Myŏngsashimni on the west coast. If the rose had a flower spirit, it would be lamenting the hated Kyŏngwŏn Line train and shedding tears like beads. However, transportation is becoming more and more convenient. The day when the Flower Cave (花窟) of Changyŏn will roar to the sound of trains is not far off. The day when the rose of Myŏngsashimni will regain its old favor is not far off either. Don't be too sad that you have lost your power for a while.

Jade Valley Peach Blossoms, Ten Thousand Trees in Spring

The song "Jade Valley Peach Blossoms, Ten Thousand Trees in Spring, various spring colors" is often sung even by beggars. However, I don't know if that Jade Valley is still full of peach blossoms, since it is not Korean territory. There are peach blossoms in Okdong in Seoul, but there are quite a few peach blossoms in Jas-gol (紫ㅅ골), near Okdong (now Ch'ŏngundong). Going further, outside Ch'ang'ŭimun (彰義門), there are also many peach blossoms, as it is a specialty of the monk peach (僧桃). I don't know if Peach Blossom Village (桃花洞) outside Namdaemun is named Peach Blossom Village because there are many peach blossoms, or if there are many peach blossoms because it is Peach Blossom Village, but it is the best place near Kyŏngsŏng for peach blossoms. Peach Blossom Village (孔德里 外村) outside Sŏdaemun is just a good name, and there are not many peach blossoms in reality. The reputation of Suwŏn's peach blossoms has been gradually increasing recently, but the Kaesŏng Railroad Park is considered the best peach blossom spot in all of Korea. Every year during the peach blossom season, it is no wonder that the newspaper companies, which are quick to promote themselves, host peach blossom viewing parties, making the Railroad Bureau's treasury rich.

<147>

However, no matter how beautiful and numerous the peach blossoms in the city are, they are like courtesans in a brothel, and they lack a clean and elegant taste.

In reality, it is best to see peach blossoms in remote mountain areas. On a beautiful spring day, if you go into places like the Tongmun (洞門) of Chiri Mountain's Ssanggyesa (雙溪寺) or the Hongnyudong (紅流洞) of Kaya Mountain, and see ten thousand flowers of red peach blossoms blooming in various ways, hanging down and reflected on the water in a clear and wonderful place, it is like fairies from Yaochi (瑤池) bathing in the spring water, or Xi Shi (西施) from Ruoye washing clothes under the moonlight. Furthermore, when you see flower petals falling and floating on the water, you get a transcendent feeling of "red flowers flowing away on the water, another world, not in this world," like a fisherman entering Peach Blossom Spring (武陵), or Liu Lang ascending to Tiantai Mountain (天台). Only then can you see the true scenery of peach blossoms, and know the true meaning of calling peaches heavenly peaches (天桃) or immortal peaches (仙桃) since ancient times. However, how can those vulgar people who sing "East Garden Peach and Plum, a Fleeting Spring" to seduce the small wives of brothels, or write poems of "Peach Blossoms Still Smiling in the Spring Breeze" to admire their former lovers, know such a different and wonderful spring?

Yŏngyu Pear Blossoms, Ch'unch'ŏn Pear Blossoms

Hwangju, Pongsan, and Hamhŭng are naturally pear producing areas, so there are many pear blossoms. In recent years, orchards have been increasing every year, starting with Samnangjin, Ulsan, *Island (Koyang), and Suwŏn, so it is true that pear blossoms will also increase everywhere every year. However, the pear blossoms of Ihwa Pavilion (梨花停) in Yŏngyu, P'yŏngwŏn-gun, are historically famous. It is famous not so much for the flowers themselves, but because when King Sŏnjo (宣祖 太王) went to Ŭiju (義州) during the Imjin War and stayed there, he especially loved the pear blossoms and named the place Ihwa Pavilion, and gave the pear tree the honor of Yŏnggam (令監) by attaching a jade coronet. (In Yŏngyu, there is also a well with a jade coronet attached to it.) There are still quite a few pear blossoms there, so everyone in the Sŏsŏn (西鮮) area loves them, but the most pear blossoms in all of Korea are in Udup'yŏng (牛頭坪) and "Murŭndam" (『무른담이』) in Ch'unch'ŏn. In that place, each of the hundreds of households in the upper, middle, and lower villages has five to ten pear trees, so during the flowering season, the entire village turns into a pear blossom world, and the vast plain (about 30 li in circumference) is like the bright moon melting in the thousand-mile-long Yangtze River, and the white clouds shining brightly on the three thousand worlds, which is truly prosperous and pure. A poet said, "Pear blossoms in March, Udoo white," and the Ch'unch'ŏn folk song, "The 'Murŭndam' girl goes to sell pears, her face is white like pear blossoms..." also praised this.

Cherry Blossoms or Sakura?

The Korean word for cherry blossom (벗꼿) disappeared like a turtle's head when the new word sakura (사구라) was imported. Not to mention children and the uneducated, even the so-called educated class knows sakura but doesn't know cherry blossom well, and thinks of sakura only as a foreign product, not knowing that cherry blossoms also existed proudly in Korea. The sakura that is increasing every year in each city is of course newly transplanted sakura, but the sakura in remote mountain areas is the native cherry blossom that has lost its original name and gained a new name, just like Kim Sŏbang (金書房) changing his name to Kim T'aerang (金太郞), and Myŏngdong (明洞) changing its name to Meiji-cho (明治町). Whether the name is cherry blossom or sakura, there is nothing more to say about it here. I will just briefly mention the famous places for the flowers. The most famous place for newly created cherry blossoms in Kyŏngsŏng is probably Ch'anggyŏngwŏn (昌慶苑), followed by Waesŏngdae (倭城臺), Changch'ungdan (獎忠壇), and Samch'ŏngdong (三淸洞). The cherry blossoms of Ui-dong (牛耳洞) have been famous for hundreds of years (planted by Hong Ŏl-han-nyang and Ho during the reign of King Chŏngjong), and now they are a national specialty, but the cherry blossoms of Wŏlmi Island (月尾島) in Inch'ŏn are famous at home and abroad, and everyone wants to see them once during the flower season. In Kyŏngsang Province, Talsŏng Park (達城公園) in Taegu, Tongnae Hot Springs (東來 溫泉場), and New Masan (新馬山) are worth pointing out, and in Ch'ungch'ŏng Province, the Cherry Blossom Field (櫻馬場) in Ch'ŏngju, the Kŭmgang Street (錦江街道) in Kongju, and in Chŏlla Province, the cherry blossoms of Kwangju Park (光州公園) and Naju-Sunch'ŏn Street (羅州順天街路) are famous. <148> In Sŏdo (西道), the area around Pupyŏngnu (浮碧樓) in P'yŏngyang and the cherry blossoms of Sariwŏn (沙里院) on the Kyŏng'ŭi Line, and in Kangwŏn Province, the cherry blossoms of Ch'unch'ŏn Street are also famous and worth seeing.

Chinpong Rhododendron and Namhan Rhododendron

I briefly introduced earlier that peach blossoms are a specialty of Kaesŏng. However, that is a newly created specialty, and the flower that has actually been considered a specialty of Kaesŏng since ancient times is the rhododendron of Chinpong Mountain (進鳳山 躑躅). Rhododendrons, like azaleas, are found everywhere in Korea, but the rhododendrons of Chinpong Mountain in Kaesŏng are especially beautiful and numerous, so literary figures have praised them since the Yi Dynasty. In Ryangje Ryu Hye-bong's (冷薺 柳惠鳳) Songdo reminiscence poem, he also wrote, "The red rhododendrons in front of Chinpong Mountain bloom layer upon layer as spring comes," which is also naming it. The rhododendrons of Namhansansŏng (南漢山城) in Kwangju were also famous in the capital area like the rhododendrons of Chinpong, and the saying "spring Namhan, autumn Pukhan" (春南漢秋北漢) in Seoul since ancient times meant the spring rhododendrons of Namhan and the autumn maple leaves of Pukhan. However, as a result of indiscriminate felling, the famous rhododendrons are now facing hard times, and it has become difficult to see the old flower appearance well. Perhaps it is related to the dropping flower play (falling flower play) (줄 불노리) and flower play (꼿노리), the dropping flower play of Namhan has disappeared, and the flower play of rhododendrons has also decreased.

Magnolia and Apricot Blossoms

There are magnolia (莘荑花) (also called Yŏngch'unnyu (迎春柳), commonly known as forsythia) and apricot blossom (杏花) poems from ancient times, but the two flowers bloom around the same time. If we call the plum blossom (梅花) the vanguard of all flowers, then the magnolia is the right wing vanguard general of all flowers, and the apricot blossom is the left wing vanguard general. The magnolia flower does not have a very pleasant fragrance or a brilliant color, but it is a very welcome and lovely thing to bloom earlier than others, braving the spring cold, and delivering spring news to many people when all the flowers are silent. Its elegant appearance is like a pure mountain girl wearing a yellow jacket and fetching water from the stream, and its noble color is like the emperor's parasol or curtain. And the apricot blossom blooms a little later than the magnolia, but much earlier than peach blossoms or cherry blossoms. It is probably the first flower to bloom among the fruit trees that people eat. I don't know if it is because the place where the liquor store is located is called Apricot Blossom Village (杏花村), but when you happen to see that flower first when many flowers have not bloomed, it is as welcome as a thirsty person seeing a liquor sign while walking. It seems that it is more welcome because you see that flower when other flowers have not bloomed, rather than because the liquor store is called Apricot Blossom Village. Confucius (孔子) taught his disciples under the apricot tree, but even in Korea, which is steeped in Confucianism, apricot blossoms have not been given any special treatment, and based on the line "Where is the liquor store? The shepherd boy points to Apricot Blossom Village (杏花村)," it is just thought to be in the liquor store. Therefore, in the flower edition of Korean lyrics, apricot blossoms are disparaged as *hall. It seems that the general public has too little understanding of apricot blossoms.

<149>

In Seoul, there are many apricot blossoms on Nandaemun Mountain (蓮花峰) outside Namdaemun, and next to it in **dong, outside Ch'ang'ŭimun, and near Samsŏnp'yŏng (三仙坪) outside Tongsomun, and it seems that there is no place as full of apricot blossoms as Kyŏngsŏng throughout Korea. There are also magnolias everywhere, but the magnolias of Kyŏngsŏng's Changch'ungdan, Yangsadong, Sajikdong, and Samch'ŏngdong have been named since ancient times.

Halmi Flower, a Friend of Children

If we are talking about flowers in Korea, we cannot leave out the Halmi flower (白頭翁). Although the Halmi flower is a herbaceous flower, it is a special and famous flower of Korea (there are not many in foreign countries), and there have been many stories and songs about it since ancient times. This flower is the closest to children than adults. On a warm spring day, young children pick the flowers and make ttogttori (똑도리) and play house, singing "The Halmi flowers on the back hill are old or young, picked." How lovely is that? And recently, elementary school students sing and play, "What kind of flower couldn't be among the ten million flowers on the back hill, and became a Halmi flower with thorns and a hunched back? Haha, it's funny. A picked Halmi flower..." How innocent is that? Anyway, the Halmi flower is the most common and earliest blooming flower in the Korean wilderness, and it has been the closest friend to young people.

*The author said: When Gworyeon (屈原) wrote Lisaojing (離騷經), he included various kinds of plants and trees, but he left out the plum blossom (梅花), the chief of the flowers. Therefore, those who like to make trouble, poets, even wrote a poem titled "Hambaek in the Heavy Snow Laments Lisaojing" (大雪中 寒梅하야 怨離騷經). Here, of course, I have only talked about a few of the flowers that bloom these days, but I don't know if there is such an example. Reader, please understand.

**Named Entities**

杜鵑花	Duguŏnhwa
寧邊	Yŏngbyŏn
藥山東臺	Yaksan Tongdae
天安三街里	Ch'ŏnan Samgari
京畿道	Kyŏnggi-do
水原花山	Suwŏn Hwasan
慶尙道	Kyŏngsang-do
安東郡	Andong-gun
河回	Hahoe
柳西厓	Ryu Sŏ-ae
芙蓉臺	Puyongdae
黃海道	Hwanghae-do
長淵郡	Changyŏn-gun
案山	Ansan
杜鵑山	Duguŏnsan
江原道	Kangwŏn-do
春川	Ch'unch'ŏn
三鶴山	Samhaksan
明沙十里	Myŏngsashimni
元山	Wŏnsan
海水浴場	Haesu Yokchang
九味浦	Kumi-p'o
海安面	Haean-myŏn
專溪里	Chŏn'gye-ri
南京	Nankin
山東	Santō
松禾郡	Songhwa-gun
津江浦	Chin'gang-p'o
豊川	P'ungch'ŏn
原寺	Wŏnsa
新高山	Sin'gosan
京元線	Kyŏngwŏn Sŏn
高曲山	Kogoksan
花窟	Hwagul
玉洞	Ok-tong
紫ㅅ골	Chas-gol
靑雲洞	Ch'ŏngun-dong
彰義門	Ch'ang'ŭimun
僧桃	Sŭngto
南大門	Namdaemun
桃花洞	Tohwa-dong
西大門	Sŏdaemun
孔德里	Kongdŏngni
外村	Oech'on
水原	Suwŏn
開城	Kaesŏng
鐵道公園	Ch'ŏldo Kongwŏn
陽春佳節	Yangch'un Kajŏl
智異山	Chiri-san
雙溪寺	Ssanggyesa
洞門	Tongmun
伽倻山	Kaya-san
紅流洞	Hongnyudong
白石	Paeksŏk
淸溪	Ch'ŏnggye
瑤池	Yaochi
西施	Se Shi
若耶	Ruye
劉郞	Ryu Rang
天台	Chentai
東園桃李	Tongwŏn Tori
永柔	Yŏngyu
黃州	Hwangju
鳳山	Pongsan
咸興	Hamhŭng
三浪津	Samnangjin
蔚山	Ulsan
*島	*To
高陽	Koyang
平原郡	P'yŏngwŏn-gun
梨花停	Ihwa Chŏng
壬辰亂	Imjin Waeran
宣祖太王	Sŏnjo Taewang
義州	Ŭiju
*로	*ro
駐驛	Chu'yŏk
玉貫子	Okwanja
令監	Yŏnggam
西鮮	Sŏsŏn
春川	Ch'unch'ŏn
牛頭坪	Udup'yŏng
明洞	Myŏngdong
明治町	Meiji-chō
昌慶苑	Ch'anggyŏngwŏn
倭城臺	Waesŏngdae
獎忠壇	Changch'ungdan
三淸洞	Samch'ŏngdong
牛耳洞	Ui-dong
仁川	Inch'ŏn
月尾島	Wŏlmi-do
慶尙道	Kyŏngsangdo
大邱	Taegu
達城公園	Talsŏng Kongwŏn
東來	Tongnae
溫泉場	Onch'ŏnjang
新馬山	Sinmasan
忠淸道	Ch'ungch'ŏng-do
淸州	Ch'ŏngju
櫻馬場	Ōkabayama
公州	Kongju
錦江	Kŭmgang
街道	Gaido
全羅道	Chŏlla-do
光州	Kwangju
羅州順天街路	Naju Sunch'ŏn Gaero
西道	Sŏdo
平壤	P'yŏngyang
浮碧樓	Pupyŏngnu
京義線	Kyŏng'ŭi Sŏn
沙里院	Sariwŏn
江原道	Kangwŏn-do
桃花	Tohwa
進鳳山	Chinpongsan
麗朝	Yŏcho
柳惠鳳	Ryu Hyebong
松都	Songdo
廣州	Kwangju
南漢山城	Namhansansŏng
莘荑花	Sinyihwa
迎春柳	Yŏngch'unnyu
杏花村	Hwanghwachon
孔子	Kongzi
杏樹	Hyangsu
白頭翁	Paektuong
굴원	Gworyeon
離騷經	Lisaojing
梅花	Maehwa



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	地上縱覽 朝鮮 各地 꼿 品評會 - 요새에 피는 八道의 꼿 이약이
필자	靑吾生
기사형태	문예기타

地上縱覽 朝鮮 各地 꼿 品評會 - 요새에 피는 八道의 꼿 이약이
						靑吾生
朝鮮의 名花인 진달네

무궁화를 朝鮮의 名花라 하지만은 사실로는 진달래(杜鵑花)가 朝鮮의 代表名花와 가튼 감이 잇다. 진달네는 色態가 美麗하고 香臭가 조흘뿐 안이라 全朝鮮 어느곳이던지 업는 곳이 업서서 여러 사람이 가장 넓히 알고 가장 愛着心을 가지게 되는 까닭에 朝鮮에 잇서서 꼿이라 하면 누구나 먼저 진달네를 생각하게 된다. 朝鮮의 봄에 만일 진달네가 업다면 달업는 黑夜나 태양 없는 極地보다도 더 쓸쓸하고 적막하야 그야말로 春來不似春을 늣기게 될 것이다. 朝鮮사람으로 외국에 가서 봄을 만날 때에는 먼저 진달네가 보고 십고 또 진달네를 본다면 몸은 비록 외국에 잇서도 맛치 고국에 도라온 것과 가티 반가운 생각이 난다. 그것은 다만 抽象的말이 안이라 누구나 실지로 체험하야 보는 일이다.
朝鮮사람의 진달네에 대한 애착심은 결코 日本사람의 사구라에 대한 애착심에 못지 안타 그것은 여러 가지로 설명치 안코 네로부터 모든 사람의 만흔 시와 노래을 가지고도 족히 증명할 수 잇다. 朝鮮에서 진달네 명소는 아마 寧邊의 藥山 東臺로 제 1指를 屈할 것이다. 藥山東臺의 진달네는 물론 꼿이 좃키도 조치만은 그보다도 『寧邊의 藥山東臺- 진달 화초가 만발 하얏다...』 라는 노래로 하야 넓히 선전된 까닭이엿다.
그것은 맛치 『天安 三街里 능수버들은 제 멋에 지워서 척 느러젓다...』는 노래가 잇기 때문에 능수 버들 한주도 업는 오늘날까지도 天安三街里하면 의례 능수버들의 명소로 아는 것과 맛찬가지다. 京畿道에 잇서서는 水原 花山의 진달래가 저명하얏스니 自來에 山名을 花山이라 하고 水原 8景에 花山 杜鵑이 1위를 점한 것을 보와도 가히 짐작할 수 잇다. 慶尙道에는 安東郡 河回의 芙蓉臺 진달네가 또한 명성이 놉흐니 河回는 원래 柳西厓先臺의 本鄕으로 산수가 佳麗한 중 특히 芙蓉臺는 江上에 임한 절벽으로 진달네가 만히 잇서서 꼿히 만발할 때에는 그 꼿이 모도 江上에 빗처 소위 杜鵑花 發滿 江紅의 奇景을 이르니 참으로 영남의 제일 명소라 可謂하겟다.
黃海道에는 長淵의 案山인 杜鵑山이 또한 진달네 명소니 山名을 杜鵑이라 한 것도 이 杜鵑花가 만흔 까닭이엿다. 江原道에는 원래 산이 만흔 까닭에 엇던 녯 사람의 시에 四面 靑山  皆杜鵑 이라는 말과 가티 도처에 진달네가 만타. 그러나 나의 본 바로는 春川의 三鶴山 진달네가 가장 볼 만한 것 갓다. 그 산은 원래 암석으로 된 壯山으로 한강 상류에 임하야 잡목이 叢生한 중에 진달네 나무가 특히 만어서 큰 것은 高가 10여척식 되는 者가 잇는데 꼿이 필때이면 全山에 모도 꼿밧이 되고 그것이<146>또 강에 비치우면 강도 또한 꼿 강으로 변하야 상하가 도시 꼿 세계로 化하야 天下奇觀을 呈한다. 다만 아즉까지 교통이 불편한 까닭에 넓히 세상에 선전되지 못한 것이 한 유감이다.

明沙十里 海棠花

明沙十里라 하면 흔이는 元山 海水浴場의 明沙十里를 생각하게 된다. 그러나 元山의 明沙十里에는 실제 해당화가 별로 볼것이 업다. 自來로 해당명산지로 내외국에 이름이 놉고 또 『明沙十里 海棠花야 꼿진다고 슬어마라. 명년 삼월 봉이되면 너는 다시 피려니와 인생 한번 늙어지면 다시 젊지 못하리라...』는 노래까지 생긴 곳은 서해안의 明沙十里다. 그 明沙十里는 黃海道 長淵郡 海安面 專溪里 해안에 잇다.(九味浦에서 船路로 약 2시간을 간다.) 그 沙場은 延長이 약 10여리나 되는데 모래가 보통의 모래와는 아주 달너서 砂粒의 대소가 업고 맛치 말가루와 가티 간은 細砂로서 색채가 美麗潔白하야 바람이 불면 이리로 몰이고 저리로 불녀서 혹은 산도되고 谷도되며 아츰 해가 뜰때던지 서해낙조가 빗칠때에는 千頃萬解의 金光이 찬란하야 전하의 大奇觀을 呈하는 외에 陽春開花의 節에는 淡紅군연한 천연의 해당화가 곳곳마다 만발하야 맛치 해수욕장에서 숨박국질 하는 처녀의 무리와도 갓고 萬里雲漢에 명멸하는 성군과도 가터 바람을 따러 沙中에 숨엇다 나왓다 한다. 그 진기한 광경은 세계 어느곳에서 차저 보라야 볼 수 업슬 것이다. 이 明沙十里가 세상에 이름나기는 벌서 몇 백년 전부터엿다. 고려말엽으로 이조중엽에 이르기까지(明國이 망하기까지) 朝鮮과 中國間의 교통은(南京及 山東通路)대개가 이 明沙十里를 거처서 松禾郡 津江浦(구 豊川地)에서 승선하는 관계로 豪商大官의 내왕하는 자가 만코 따러서 자연 그것을 구경도 하고 찬미하게 되야 이름이 내외국에 선전되엿던 것이다. 그때에는 明沙十里의 沙丘上 **原寺라 하는 巨刹이 잇서서 통과하는 객이 모도 그 곳에서 宿泊하고 놀앗기 때문에 沙場이 일대 오락장이 되엿던 것이엿다.
그러나 物換星移한 지금에는 그 사찰도 다 업서지고 다만 敗礎殘瓦가 沙中에 산재하야 感慨無量한 녯 역사를 말할 뿐이엿다. 新高山이 우루루 울고 京元線車가 통행하며 구 高曲山의 큰 아긔가 반 봇짐을 싸기 시작하면서부터는 몃 백년간 이름이 놉던 서해안의 明沙十里 해당화도 점차 세력을 일케 되얏다. 지금에는 明沙十里라 하면 본래의 明沙十里인 서해안 것은 모르고 의례 元山의 明沙十里를 말하게 되엿다. 해당화가 花魂이 잇다면 원수의 京元線 기차를 稱寃하며 구슬가튼 눈물을 흘일 것이다. 그러나 교통은 점점 편리하야 간다. 長淵의 花窟도 기차소리에 울일 날이 몃 해 남지 안엇다. 明沙十里 해당화도 녯 寵愛를 다시 바들 날이 멀지 안엇다. 잠시간 세력을 이럿다고 그다지 슬어하지 말어라.

玉洞桃花 萬樹春

玉洞桃花 萬樹春에 가지가지 봄빗이라는 노래는 거지(乞人) 각살이 까지도 흔히 하는 노래다. 그러나 그 玉洞은 朝鮮의 땅이 안이닛가 지금에도 桃花가 만흔지는 알 수 업다. 서울의 玉洞에도 桃花가 업는 바는 안이지만은 그곳보다는 玉洞의 附近紫ㅅ골(지금 靑雲洞)에 桃花가 상당히 만타. 그리로 나아가 彰義門 밧건 僧桃 복사의 특산지이니만치 桃花가 또한 만타. 南大門 밧 桃花洞은 이름이 桃花洞이라 桃花가 만흔지, 桃花가 만어서 桃花洞인지 그것은 알 수 업스나 桃花만키로는 京城부근에서 제일이다. 西大門 밧 桃花洞(孔德里 外村)은 이름만 조와서 桃花洞이지 실상 桃花는 별로 업다. 水原의 桃花도 근래에<147> 명성이 점차 놉하가지만은 전 朝鮮에서 桃花명소로는 開城 鐵道公園을 제일로 친다. 해마다 桃花시절이면 自家선전에 눈이 밝은 신문사에서 觀桃會를 主催하야 鐵道局 金庫를 풍성풍성하게 하는 것도 무리가 안이다.
그러나 도시의 桃花는 아모리 곱고 수가 만터라도 유곽의 미인과 가타서 그리 깻긋하고 단아한 맛이 업다.
실제에 桃花는 山間僻地에서 보는 것이 眞味가 잇다. 陽春佳節에 智異山 雙溪寺 洞門이나 伽倻山 紅流洞 가튼 곳으로 드러가다가 白石 淸溪 奇絶한 곳에 萬朵의 紅桃花가 가지가지 만발하야 물우에 느러저 비치운 것을 보면 그야말로 瑤池의 선녀가 봄물에서 목욕하는 것도 갓고 若耶의 西施가 달아래 빨내하는 것도 갓다. 더구나 바라메 꼿송이가 떠러저서 물결에 흘너가는 것을 보면 『紅花流水 杳然去에 別有天地 非人間』이란 초인간적 생각이 나서 漁子가 무릉에 드러간 듯도 하고 劉郞이 天台에 올나간 것도 갓다. 거긔에 이르러서야 비로소 도화의 진경을 볼 수가 잇고 또 녜로부터 복사를 天桃니 仙桃니 한 진의를 알 수 잇다. 그러나 東園桃李 片時春을 노래하야 娼家小婦를 꾀여내며 桃花依舊 笑春風의 시구나 지여 전날의 연인을 감상하는 俗輩야 엇지 그러한 별유천지의 봄멋을 알 수 잇스랴.

永柔 배꼿, 春川 배꼿

黃州, 鳳山, 咸興은 自來 참배의 所産地 이닛가 배꼿이 만흔 것은 물론이어니와 근래에는 三浪津, 蔚山, *島(高陽), 水原을 爲始하야 각지에 과수원이 해마다 느러가게 되니 배꼿도 또한 도처에 해마다 느러갈 것은 사실이다. 그러나 역사적으로 이롬이 놉히 나기는 平原郡 永柔의 梨花停 배꼿이다. 그것은 꼿이라는 그것 보다도 녯날 壬辰亂때에 宣祖 太王이 義州로 播遷을 하얏가가 *로에 그곳에 駐驛하얏슬 때에 배꼿을 보고 특히 사랑하야 그곳을 梨花停이라 命名하고 배나무에 또 玉貫子를 부처주어서 令監의 尊號를 밧게 된 그 까닭으로 이름이 난 것이다.(永柔에는 또 우물까지도 玉貫子를 부친 것이 잇다.) 그곳에는 지금까지도 배꼿이 상당히 만어서 西鮮 一帶에서는 누구나 膾炙 하지만은 전 조선을 통하야 배꼿만키로는 春川의 牛頭坪과 『무른담이』일 것이다. 그곳은 上中下 三寸 數百餘戶에 집집마다 배나무가 五株 乃至 十餘株식 잇는데 개화시절이면 全村이 모도 이화세계으로 化하야 一望無際한 평야(주위 약 30리 평야)가 맛치 千里長江에 晧月이 溶溶하고 삼천 대지에 白雲이 皎皎한 듯 하야 실로 번화스럽고 순결스럽다. 엇던 시인이 梨花 三月 牛頭白이라 하고 또 春川民謠에 『무른담이』 처녀는 참배장사로 나아가니 얼골이 히여서 배꼿이라... 한 것도 이것을 찬미한 것이다.

벗꼿이냐 사구라냐

朝鮮의 벗꼿이란 말은 사구라라는 새말이 수입되는 바람에 자라목아지 모양으로 쑥 드러가고 말엇다. 아희와 무식계급은 그만 두고 소위 유식계급에서도 사구라라면 알어도 벗꼿이라면 잘 알지도 못할만하게 되고 또 사구라라면 의례 외래품으로만 알고 在來朝鮮에도 당당하게 잇던 벗꼿인 줄은 알지 못한다. 근래에 각 도회지에 해마다 늘어가는 사구라야 물론 새로 이식한 사구라지만은 산간벽지에 잇는 사구라는 재래의 벗꼿이 맛치 金書房이 金太郞으로 변명하고 明洞이 明治町으로 변명한 것고 맛친가지로 본 이름을 일코 새 이름을 어든 것이다. 이름이야 벗꼿이던 사구라 꼿이던 여긔에 그것을 더 말할 것은 업다. 다만 그 꼿의 명소를 잠간 말하랴 한다. 京城에서 새로 생긴 벗꼿의 명소는 昌慶苑이 제일일 것이요, 其次는 倭城臺, 獎忠壇, 三淸洞이다. 牛耳洞 벗꼿은 수백년전(正宗時 洪耳漢良 浩所植)부터 유명한 것으로 지금에 와서는 아주 전국의 명물이지만은 仁川 月尾島 벗꼿은 내외에 저명하야 꼿철이면 누구나 한번 보랴 한다. 慶尙道로는 大邱의 達城公園, 東來 溫泉場, 新馬山이 一指를 屈할만하고 忠淸道로는 淸州의 櫻馬場, 公州 錦江街道 全羅道로는 光州公園과 羅州順天街路의 벗꼿이 명성이 놉다.<148> 西道로는 平壤의 浮碧樓 부근, 京義線 沙里院 江原道로는 春川 街道의 벗꼿이 또한 유명하야 일각의 가치가 잇다.

進鳳躑躅과 南漢躑躅

桃花가 開城의 명물인 것은 이 우에 잠간 소개하얏다. 그러나 그것은 근래에 새로생긴 명물이오 실상 녯날부터 開城의 명물로 치던 꼿은 進鳳山 躑躅이다. 躑躅도 역시 진달네와 가티 朝鮮 각지에 업는 곳이 업지만은 특히 開城 進鳳山의 躑躅은 꼿도 곱고 수가 만키 때문에 麗朝以來 文人墨客들이 모도 찬미하야 왓다. 冷薺 柳惠鳳의 松都 회고시에도 『進鳳山 前 紅躑躅이 春來依自發層層』이라 한 것이 또한 그것을 이름이라, 廣州 南漢山城의 躑躅도 또한 進鳳의 躑躅과 가티 기내에 著名하햣스니 自來 서울에서 春南漢秋北漢이라 한 것은 南漢의 봄躑躅 北漢의 가을 丹楓을 의미한 것이다. 그러나 지금에는 濫伐의 결과로 그 저명하던 躑躅도 잠시 비운을 당하야 舊時花用을 잘 보기 어렵게 되엿다. 落花노리(줄 불노리)와 꼿노리와도 무슨 인연이 잇는지 南漢의 줄 불노리가 업서지면서 躑躅의 꼿노리도 減少하야젓다.

莘荑花와 杏花

莘荑花(일명 迎春柳니 속칭 개나리)荇荑花 *杏花飛는 녯 시에도 잇지만은 그 두 꼿은 서로 시기가 비슷하게 피는 꼿이다. 매화를 百花의 선봉장이라 할 것 가트면 莘荑花는 百花의 右翼 前衛隊將은 되고 杏花는 左翼 前衛隊將은 된다. 莘荑花는 꼿이 그리 향취가 좃타던지 色態가 번화 할 것은 업지만은 百花가 俱寂할 때 春寒를 무릅쓰고 남보다 먼저 피어 여러사람에게 봄 소식을 전하야 주는 것은 그 얼마나 반갑고 귀여운 일이냐. 단아한 품은 순결한 산간처녀가 노랑저고리를 입고 시나가에서 물 깃는 것도 갓고 고귀한 빗은 天子의 양산이나 장막과도 갓다. 그리고 杏花는 莘荑花보다는 다소 늣게 피지만은 桃花나 벗꼿보다 훨신 일즉이 핀다. 사람이 먹는 果木중으로는 아마 제일 먼저 피는 꼿일 것이다. 술집 잇는 곳을 杏花村이라고 하야 그런지 알수 업스나 여러 꼿이 피지 안은 그때에 우연히 그 꼿을 먼저 보게되면 맛치 목마른 사람이 길을 가다가 술燈을 본 것과 가티 반갑다. 그것은 酒村을 杏花村이라고 하야 그런것 보다도 다른 꼿이 잘 피지 안은때에 그 꼿을 보닛가 반가워 그런 듯하다. 孔子가 杏樹아래서 제자를 敎誨하얏건만은 유교에 저진 朝鮮에서도 杏花를 무슨 特待를 한 일은 업고 『借問酒家 何處在오 牧童遙指 杏花村』이란 시구에 의하야 행화는 그저 酒村에 잇는 것으로 생각한다. 그리하야 朝鮮歌辭의 花編에도 杏花는 *堂이라고 賤評하얏다. 그것은 일반이 杏花에 대하야 너무 沒理解한 것갓다.
서울에서 杏花가 만키로는 南大門 밧 蓮花峰과 其次는 **洞 彰義門 밧 東小門 外 三仙坪 부근이니 全鮮을 통하야 京城과 가티 杏花가 만흔 곳은 업는 것 갓다. 莘荑花도 각지에 다 잇지만은 京城의 獎忠壇, 養士洞, 社稷洞, 三淸洞의 莘荑花의 自來壇名 하얏다.

어린이의 동무인 할미꼿

朝鮮에서 꼿 이약이를 한다면 할미꼿(白頭翁)을 또한 뺄 수 업다. 할미꼿은 비록 草花나 朝鮮의 特産名花로(외국에는 별로 업다.) 네전부터 거긔에 대한 이약이도 만코 노래도 만타. 이꼿은 어른보다도 어린이들과 제일 각가운 꼿이다. 봄날 따뜻한 때에 어린 아회들이 그꼿을 뜨더서 똑도리를 만드러 가지고 각시 노름을 하면서 뒷동산의 할미곳은 늙으나 젊으나 꼽으라젓다. 라고 노래하는 것을 보면 그 얼마나 귀여우며 또 근래에도 소학교 학생들이 『뒷동산에 할미꼿 千萬가지 꼿 중에 무슨 꼿이 못 되여 가시 돗고 등 곱은 할미꼿이 되엿나. 하하하하 우습다. 꼽으라진 할미꼿...』 이라는 唱歌를 하고 노는 것을 보면 또한 얼마나 천진스러우냐. 엇지 하얏던 할미꼿은 朝鮮 原野에 제일 만코 일즉이 피는 꼿으로서 어린 사람에게는 제일 친한 동무엿다.
*者 曰 屈原이가 離騷經을 지을 때에 各色草木을 다 느헛스되 花中之魁인 梅花를 빼인 故로 好事者 詩人들이 大雪中 寒梅하야 怨離騷經이란 詩題까지 내힌 일이 잇섯다. 여긔에는 물론 요새이 피는 꼿 중에 몃가지 만을 이약이 한데 불과하나 또한 그러한 귀감이 업슬는지 알 수 업스니 讀者諒焉<149>
<146-149>