별건곤 제55호
1932년 09월 01일
지지할(齊齊哈爾)을 脫出한 馬占山은 果然죽엇는가?――疑雲中에 싸힌 그의 末路―― (Did Ma Chanshan, who escaped Tsitsihar, really die? -- His end shrouded in suspicion --)
楊相浩
문예기타 (Literature etc.)

"Ma Chanshan is dead."
This rumor suddenly spread throughout the world. Then came the news that "No, Ma Chanshan is not dead; they mistook another corpse for Ma Chanshan."

So, did Ma Chanshan truly become a handful of dust in the depths of the Hinggan Mountains forever, or is he still somewhere, twitching his shrewd eyes and lamenting his fate? Or perhaps he is gathering his defeated soldiers, looking for an opportunity? Let us find out the subsequent news of Ma Chanshan, the hero of North Manchuria who once shook the world, who keeps us wondering.

It has already been four months since Ma Chanshan, who was well-known in North Manchuria, escaped from Qiqihar in the dead of night, deceiving the eyes of many as if covering them, and arrived at Heihe, bordering the Soviet Union's "Blagoveshchensk," after ten days and nights, passing through the dense forests of the Hinggan Mountains, accompanied only by his companion, the Soviet Russian spy Avatto Ragun, listening to the lonely sound of horse bells.

Ma Chanshan, who was famous in North Manchuria, had escaped from Qiqihar, but upon arriving in Heihe, the five-colored flag of the new Manchukuo in Heihe City was replaced by the former Blue Sky White Sun flag (靑天白日旗), and the sound of people cheering was heard. There were troops, weapons, the advantage of terrain, and money sent. Ma Chanshan, who had stumbled once, felt happy as a bird spreading its wings, and his bitter sword cried again. He sent lengthy telegrams to major Chinese figures in Beiping, Luoyang, Shanghai, Nanjing, etc., boasting of his attitude and the path of his worries, and sternly occupying a strategic point on the border. His appearance was plausible, and the fact that an individual Ma Chanshan turned his back on the new Manchukuo and raised a rebellion caused considerable anxiety in the North Manchurian army and had a significant impact on the general sentiment of the people of the new Manchukuo.

Then, in early June, when the League of Nations investigation team dispatched from afar arrived in Harbin, Ma Chanshan felt the need to meet with them and secretly dispatched American newspaper reporter Mr. "Steel" and German newspaper reporter Mr. "Lind" without the knowledge of Japan and Manchukuo, who stayed for two or three days and met with Ma Chanshan. This was revealed, and Manchukuo was greatly angered, saying that they did not know why the two reporters secretly broke through the front lines without the consent of the authorities and met with the traitor Ma Chanshan, and that Ma Chanshan had entrusted the two reporters with important secret letters to Zhang Xueliang and the League of Nations investigation team, which was an insult to Manchukuo. However, on June 10, Ma Chanshan naturally sent a telegram to Wan Fulin in Beiping, saying, "The League of Nations investigation team dispatched Lind and Steel as secret envoys to this place, so I told them everything in detail about the necessary materials." This meant that Ma Chanshan, taking advantage of the League of Nations investigation team staying in Harbin around mid-May, came down south again from Heihe to Hailun on the Hu-Hai Line (呼海線海倫) and cleverly met with the two reporters in a place called Tongbei (通北).

However, for him, who had once surrendered at the beginning of the establishment of Manchukuo and even received the important position of Military and Political Governor-General and Governor of Heilongjiang Province (軍政總長兼黑龍江省長), to betray the new country overnight and act in such a way was a thorn in the side of the Japanese authorities and an unacceptable rebellion. Therefore, not only was an arrest warrant issued immediately, but the Japanese army devoted all its efforts to pursuing him. No matter how much he was a famous general who had once displayed his heroism, Ma Chanshan, who was attacked by air and land, had no way to resist and wandered around. In about two months, his troops numbered only about 4,000. He gathered his troops near Baichuan (拜泉), located between Hailun and Qiqihar, after retreating from the vicinity of Harbin. However, unable to withstand the Japanese army that was attacking him from all sides, on June 18, he retreated southeast from Baichuan with his defeated soldiers. In the battle near the Hulan River (呼蘭河) northwest of Suihua (綏化) on June 24, he lost another 1,000 of his troops. From there, he headed east and occupied Qincheng (慶城), but in the battle of Qincheng (慶城) on July 3, he was again defeated by the Japanese army and retreated south. After a major battle north of Bayan (巴彥) on July 8, he retreated northeast, and in the battle of Dongxing (東興) on July 10, he had only about 1,000 troops left. With no way out on all sides, Ma Chanshan attempted to escape northwest, broke through the Japanese army's encirclement, and fled back to the vicinity of Anguzhen (安古鎭) in the Hinggan Mountains. However, there he met the Japanese army that had been waiting for Ma Chanshan to flee, and from July 27 to 29, he staged a final desperate battle. Exhausted, Ma Chanshan suffered the Japanese army's fierce encirclement and attack, and his defeated soldiers left behind 200 bodies and scattered in disarray.

The reason why it was said that Ma Chanshan had died was that when the Japanese army searched the battlefield near Anguzhen afterward, they found Ma Chanshan's corpse among the many war dead. It was said that when he died, he hid in a civilian house and was hit by the Japanese army's fierce shooting, receiving dozens of bullets in his body and achieving a heroic end, according to the announcement by the Kwantung Army Headquarters at that time.

However, various rumors surrounded Ma Chanshan, who was once said to have died. It was said that the corpse found was not really Ma Chanshan but another war dead with a similar appearance to Ma Chanshan, so the military even called in people who were close to Ma Chanshan from Heihe to examine it. On the other hand, there were reports that although the Japanese army was pursuing Ma Chanshan, it was almost impossible to capture Ma Chanshan, who was familiar with the geography of North Manchuria and lightly equipped, in the endless wilderness on the left bank of the Songhua River. Furthermore, on August 2, the Chinese government in Nanjing suddenly denied Ma Chanshan's death and unofficially announced that he was still healthy and commanding the anti-Japanese army (抗日軍隊), but recently, on August 8, the Heihe (黑河) government, from which Ma Chanshan originally escaped, sent a telegram to Wan Fulin (萬福麟) in Beiping, saying that news of Ma Chanshan was unclear, causing anxiety and public unrest, and asking the central government and the Beiping authorities to instruct them on specific measures to reassure the people of the Northeast. This shows that the Heihe government also does not know the certainty of his life or death.

So, is Ma Chanshan really dead or alive? It is still somewhat difficult for us to know the truth, but if Ma Chanshan, who was once the hero of North Manchuria and China's only brave general, is indeed dead, did he die for Zhang Xueliang (張學良), or did he fall for the sake of China's hundreds of millions of people, or did he achieve a tragic end for his own beliefs and principles? It is also difficult for us to know the true meaning of his death. And if, fortunately, he is not dead and still alive, even so, it is difficult to see him pick up his sword and spear again and command the lands of North Manchuria, as he has lost his base and his troops. As a defeated general, he would have no face to cross the Yangtze River again, and even if he did cross it, would Zhang Xueliang welcome him, would Chiang Kai-shek treat him well, or would the elders of Jiangdong pity him? Therefore, would he bow his head again and surrender to the Manchukuo he once betrayed? He is a phenomenon in China that no one would hold a memorial service for even if he died, and he is an individual who has nowhere to return even if he lives—that is Ma Chanshan today.

Is Ma Chanshan dead...? Even if we cannot know for sure today, the day when it will be revealed is not far off, but whether he is dead or alive, his end as a lonely Ma Chanshan is only unfortunate and pitiful. <7>

**Named Entities**

馬占山	Ma Chanshan
齊齊哈爾	Chich'ihar
楊相浩	Yang Sangh'o
興安嶺	Hŭngan-ryŏng
아밧토라군	Avatto Ragun
블라고에쓰첸스크	Pulagoyŏssŭch'ensk'ŭ
黑河	Hŭkha
靑天白日旗	ch'ŏngch'ŏnpaegilgi
哈爾賓	Harbin
스틸	Sŭt'il
린드	Rindŭ
萬福麟	Man Pungnin
呼海線海倫	Hohaesŏn Haeryŏn
通北	T'ongbuk
軍政總長兼黑龍江省長	Kunjŏngch'ongjang kyŏm Hŭknyonggangsŏngjang
拜泉	Paech'ŏn
綏化	Suhwa
呼蘭河	Hohwanha
慶城	Kyŏngsŏng
巴彥	Payŏn
東興	Tonghŭng
安古鎭	Angujin
張學良	Chang Hyŏngnyang
蔣介石	Chiang Kai-shek



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제55호
발행일	1932년 09월 01일
기사제목	지지할(齊齊哈爾)을 脫出한 馬占山은 果然죽엇는가?――疑雲中에 싸힌 그의 末路――
필자	楊相浩
기사형태	문예기타

지지할(齊齊哈爾)을 脫出한 馬占山은 果然죽엇는가?――疑雲中에 싸힌 그의 末路――
						楊相浩
「마점산이가 죽엇다.」
이소문이 벼란간 세상에 퍼젓다. 그리자 「아니다 마점산이는 죽은것이아니요 다른시체를 마점산이로 잘못본 것이다」
하는 소식이  전하엿다.
그러면 마점산은 과연 영원이 흥안 산속의 한줌흙이 되어바리고마럿는가 혹은 아직도 어느곳에서 표용한두눈을 작거리며 신세한탄을하고 안젓는가 그러치안흐면 패잔한군병을 그대로 수습해가지고 무슨틈을 엿보고잇는가? 우리로하여금 궁금하게하기를 마지아니하는 북만의 효웅이라고 일시는 세상을 흔들든 저마점산의 그후소식을 알어나보자.
마점산이 북만의도시 지지할성중엣 컴컴한 밤중에 만인의 눈을 감가티 속이고 몸을 버서나서 오직한사람의 동반자인 쏘베트러시아의 밀정 아밧토라군을 뒤에 리고 랑랑 쓸쓸이 울리우는 말방울 소리를 들으며 이들어선 흥안령의 밀림속을 지나고지나서 밤낫열흘만에 쏘베트의 「부라고에쓰첸스크」와 지경을 접한 흑하(黑河)에 도착한지도 벌서 넉달이다.
북만에서도 이름이놉든 마점만이라 지지할을 버서나서 도망은 해왓슬망정 흑하에 도착하고보니 흑하성중에는 지금지달렷든 신만주국의 오색긔가 다시 전날의 청전백일긔로 박귀이고 인민의 환호하는 소리가 들리엇다. 거긔에는 군대가잇섯다. 무긔가 잇섯다. 지세의 험함이 잇섯다. 그리고 보낸 돈이 잇섯다. 한번 실족한 마점산은 다시 나는새가 날개를들어든드시 마음에깃브고 그의 쓰든 칼날은 다시울엇다. 가든바로 양양한의긔로 북평 낙양 상해 남경 등지에 잇는 중국요로대인에게 장문의 전보를 처서 자긔의 태도와 고심의 경로를 자랑삼어 보고하고 엄연히 국경의 요지를 웅거하고잇스매 그의의긔도 그럴듯하거니와 일개마점산이 신만주국을 등지고 반긔를 드럿다는 것은 북만군대에도 여간한불안이아니요 신만주국의 일반인심에도 막대한 영향을 주엇섯다.
그리자 지난 六月초생에는 멀리구미로부터 파견된 련맹조사단이 마침 할빈(哈爾賓)에 도착하자 마점산가 회견할필요를 느젓든지 일본과 만주국이 아지못하는 비밀리에 미국신문긔자 「스틸」씨와 독일신문긔자 「린드」씨를 파견하야 二三日간이나 머물러잇스며 마점산과 맛나게된 것이 발로되매 만주국에서는 두긔자가 무슨 닭으로 관현의양해도엄시 비밀히 전선을 돌파하고 역적마점산과 맛나본 것은 알수업는 일이요 는 마점산이가 두긔자에게 장학량과 련맹조사단에 중요한밀서를 부탁한형＜6＞적이잇스니 그것은 만주국을 모욕한짓이라하야 여간한노염을 사지아니하엿스나 마점산은 六月十日로써 천연스럽게 북평에잇는 만복림(萬福麟)에게 「국제련맹조사단은 린드와 스틸두긔자를 밀사로 이곳에 파견하엿슴으로 필요한재료에 대하야 일체를 자세히 말해주엇다」는전보를첫스니 그것은 마점산이 오월중순경에 련맹조사단이 할빈에 묵고잇는 것을 조흔귀회로하야 흑하로부터 다시 남으로 호해선해륜(呼海線海倫)가이 내려와서 통북(通北)이라는곳에서 그와가티 두긔자와 교묘히 맛난것이엇다.
그러나 만주국창설의 첫머리에 일단 귀순하야가지고 군정총장겸흑룡강생장(軍政總長兼黑龍江省長)의 중요한 관직지 바덧든그로서 하로아침에 새나라를 배반하고 그와가튼행동을 하는 것은 일만량당국에 연간눈의가시가 아니요 허락할수 엄는반역아이엇다. 그리하야 즉시 체포령을 내릴아니라 일본의 군대는 그를 추격하기위하야 전력을 다하니 아모리 한의 효용을 내두룬 전날의 명장이엇스나 항공전으로 륙상전으로 공격을맛난 마점산은 그를 당적할길이 업서서 이로저로 겨다니기 전후 二개월에 그의부하 병력은 겨우 四千에 내리지못하엿다 그리하야 할비부근으로부터 작고 몰려드러가서 해륜(海倫)과 지지할새이애잇는 배천(拜泉) 부근에 군사를 모핫스나 사면팔방으로 포위공격하여오는 일본군에게 견듸지 못하야 六月十八日에 패잔병을 거느리고 배천에서 동남으로 퇴각해가지고 六月二十四日유화(綏化)서북편 호란하(呼蘭河)부근의 싸움에서는 부하병이이믜 一千을 감하고 거긔서다시 동으로 향하야 경성(慶城)을옹거하고 잇섯스나 七月三日경성(慶城)싸움에서 다시 일본군에게 패하야 남으로 내려와가지고 七月八日파은(巴彥)북방에서 대격전을 한후 동북방으로 퇴각하고 七月十日동흥(東興)싸움에서는 그의 부하병이 겨우 一千박게 아니남엇섯다. 나갈길이 팔면으로 막힌 마점산은 거긔서 서북방으로 탈주하기를 도모하야 일본군의 포위선을 돌파하고 다시 흥안령산속 안고진(安古鎭)부근으로 다라낫스나 거긔서도 미리부터 마점산의 도망해오기를 기다리고잇든 일본군을 맛나 七月二十七日로부터 二十九日지 최후의 죽을힘으로 대격전을 연출하엿스나 게궁역진한 마점선은 일본군의 맹렬한포위와 공격을바더서 그의패잔병은 二百의 시체를 내여버리고 사산오렬로 허트러젓다한다.
그런데 마점산이가 죽엇다는것은 그후일본군이 안고진부근전장을수사할에 마점산의 사체로 그여러전사자중에서 발견하엿는데 그가 죽을에는 어느민가에 숨어잇다가 일본군의 맹렬한사격에 마저서 몸에 수십탄을밧고 죽엇스며 죽을에는 륙군중장의 군복에선지피를 물드리고 장렬한 최후를 이루엇다는 것이 그 관동군사령부의 발표이엇다.
그런데 일단죽엇다든 마점산에게는 그를싸고도는 의운중첨의 여러 가지소식이 도랏스니 마점산의 사체로 발견된 것은 정말 마점산이 가아니고 마점산과 체모가 가튼다른전사자라고하야 군부에서도 흑하로부터 마점산과 평소의 친지이든사람지 불러다가 검정도해다하며 한편으로는 일본군이 마점산을 추격하기는 하엿스나 북만의 지리에 정통하고  가벼운 행장을 차린 마점산을 송화강좌편언덕 업는 광원에서 포박하기는 거의 절망이라는 보도로 잇섯스며 지난 八月二日에 중국의 남경정부로부터는 돌언이 마점산의 전사를 부인하고 그는 아직 건강이사라엇서 여전이 항일군대(抗日軍隊)를 지휘하고잇다는 무선전보를 바덧다고 비공식발표를 한일지잇섯스나 최근 八月八日에는 원래마점산이 탈출해갓든 흑하(黑河) 정부로부터 북평잇는 만복린(萬福麟)에게 마점산의 소식이 불명하야 초조번민하며 인심이 동요중이니 중앙정부와 북평당국은 만주에 대하야 무슨 구체적방법으로 동북인심의 언정책을 지시하라는 전보를 첫다는 보도로보면 흑하정부로서도 아직 그사생의 확실여부를 모르는 것이 사시린듯하다.
그러면 마점산은 과연 죽엇는가 살엇는가 우리로서는 아직 그의 진부를 알기에 다소어렵거니와 일시는 북만의 효웅이요 중국유일의 용장이든 마점산그가 과연 죽엇다하면 그는 한낫장학량(張學良)을 위하야 죽음인가 는 중국사억만이나 인민을 위하야 넘어젓는가 는 자긔의 주의나주장을 위하야 비장한 최후를이룸인가 우리는 한 그의 죽엄의 진의를 알기도어렵거니와 는 다행이 그가 죽지안코 다시 살어잇다고 가정하자 그리더라도 지반을 일코 병력을 이른 그로서 칼과 창을 다시집고 이러나서 북만의 천지를 호령할긔개는 도저이보기도 어려울것이요 패군지장으로 강동을 다시건너갈면 목도업스려니와 설영 건너간다고 한들 장학량이 그를 반길것이냐 장개석이 그를 후대할것이냐 는 강동의 부형이 그를 불상히역일것이냐 그런지라 한번배반한 만주국에 재차 머리를 숙이고 귀순할 것이냐 죽어도 그를 제사해줄이 엄는 중국의 현상이요 사라도 도라갈데엄는 그의 일신이 오늘의 마점산이다.
마점산은 죽엇는가………그것을 오늘에잇서 확실이 알지못한다하더래도 다시 판명될날은 머지안커니와 죽엇든 사랏든 외로운 마점산이 된 그의 말로는 다만 불상한저 가련한저.＜7＞
＜6-7＞