별건곤 제55호
1932년 09월 01일
駭! 怪! 白日下에나타난 李寅鎔男爵家의 夫婦戰―거기에얼키인 不正輩의 亂舞― (Shocking! Strange! A couple's battle in the Baron Yi In-yong family, which appeared in broad daylight - a riot of dishonest people intertwined with it -)
一記者 (A Reporter)
소식 (News)

A strange thing has happened in the house of a nobleman. Or rather, a bizarre event has occurred in the home of a former high-ranking official. In the old days, it might have remained a family matter, concerning ancestral rites or genealogy registration. But thanks to the times, or perhaps because noblemen have declined and commoners have risen, what was once the home of a high-ranking official, the residence of Baron Yi In-yong (李寅鎔), is now the scene of a significant marital dispute. This has led to further complications, becoming a major topic of conversation in Seoul and the countryside.

Baron Yi In-yong, the son of a former minister, a millionaire, and an aristocrat, whether due to youthful indulgence at the age of thirty, or dissatisfaction with his wife, indulged in extravagant behavior and neglected her. As a result, his wife, Lady Cho Chung-in (趙重寅), filed a lawsuit for cohabitation (同居請求訴訟). In response, the Baron claimed his wife had committed adultery and refused to live with her, eventually initiating divorce proceedings. Both parties fought in court, each insisting they could not live with the other. The court ruled that there was insufficient evidence to support Baron Yi's accusations and ordered cohabitation, a victory for Lady Cho, a fact already known to many.

However, the story begins after that.

Lady Cho Chung-in won the lawsuit and received a cohabitation order, she had no choice but to return to Baron Yi's house. Thus, in July, after her victory, Lady Cho went to Yi In-yong's residence at 25 Ihwa-dong (梨花洞). Strangely, Yi In-yong was nowhere to be found, his whereabouts unknown, and a Japanese man named Taniwa Shōkichi (丹羽正吉) was renting the house. He closed the doors, preventing Cho Chung-in from contacting the outside world and illegally detaining her, not even caring that she was in the main room. Furthermore, when Cho Chung-in's mother, Kwak Ki-hyŏn (郭基鉉), concerned about her daughter's safety, visited the house, she was assaulted by a man named Kobayashi (小林), a Japanese man who had rented part of the house. Unable to bear their resentment, the mother and daughter submitted a complaint to the Seoul District Court, attaching medical certificates as evidence and naming Marquis Pak Yŏng-ho (朴英孝), Baron Yi In-yong, and lawyer Kim Si-du (金時斗) as witnesses.

Contents of the Complaint

(Omitted) "Plaintiff Cho Chung-in, taking advantage of a moment in mid-July, entered Yi In-yong's house with her two young children. Five or six unidentified women and alleged thugs prevented her from entering, but she forced her way in. Yi In-yong had disappeared, and the aforementioned villains, aware that they could not use legal means, began to directly oppress her, claiming to have been entrusted by Yi In-yong. They tightly shut the doors, forbidding entry and exit, and built fences around the walls to prevent even birds from passing through. They repeatedly subjected Cho Chung-in to abusive language and pressure, even expelling the children's nanny. Plaintiff Kwak Ki-hyŏn, hearing this urgent news and wanting to save her daughter, tried to enter the house, but defendant Kobayashi violently grabbed Kwak in the doorway and kicked her all over with his shoes, causing injuries that required three weeks of treatment.
Afterward, Kwak remained outside, worrying about her daughter's safety all night. As the wife of a noble family, she felt deeply resentful at being assaulted when visiting her daughter's house.
Also, the defendant Taniwa stayed in the room across from Cho Chung-in and, despite Cho Chung-in's strong refusal, undressed and pressured her, prohibiting all meetings and phone calls.
And on the 4th, they removed the pot used to cook Cho Chung-in's rice, forcing her to starve, and even turned off the lights, leaving Cho Chung-in crying in the dark with her young children.
She was not allowed to spend the night outside, and the illegal confinement was extreme, with countless other insults."
And further examining the details of the dispute between Baron Yi and his wife, as recorded in that region, reveals the following:

Cho Chung-in's mother, Kwak Ki-hyŏn, is the wife of Cho Pyŏng-sik (趙秉植), a Minister of State during the Korean Empire, and Cho Yun-hŭi (趙胤熙), magistrate of Hwangju. Cho Chung-in is their second daughter, who married Yi Chae-gŭk (李載克), the eldest son of Baron Yi In-yong, in May of Taishō (大正) 13 (1924), and had a son and a daughter.
After Baron Yi Chae-gŭk passed away on June 3, Shōwa (昭和) 2 (1927), Yi In-yong inherited the title. At the time, the Yi family had no debt, and their assets were worth tens of thousands of won.
However, Yi In-yong was unfamiliar with worldly affairs and unable to manage his own property. Relatives claimed to manage his assets and sold off approximately 200,000 won worth of real estate from Shōwa 2 (1927) until this year.

Seeing this, Cho Chung-in could not bear it and advised Yi In-yong, also demanding an accounting of the property and expenditures from the property management committee, headed by Marquis Pak Yong-ho. Especially this year, dishonest individuals around Yi In-yong became rampant, dragging Yi In-yong around Joseon entertainment districts, wasting tens of thousands of won, and even bringing prostitutes into the house. Cho Chung-in strongly opposed this, and the villains eventually ostracized her and even pushed Yi In-yong to drive her out.
Taking advantage of Cho Chung-in's temporary departure from the house, they treated her as if she had abandoned her home, refusing to allow Cho Chung-in and her two young children inside. Cho Chung-in rented a room in front of the house and filed a lawsuit for cohabitation with the Seoul District Court, winning the case and bravely entering the house with her two children in July.

Yi In-yong's expulsion of Cho Chung-in and the filing of a divorce counterclaim with the Seoul District Court were not Yi In-yong's free will but rather the instigation of the villains around him.
Therefore, whenever Yi In-yong had the opportunity to meet his wife Cho Chung-in, he would lament, "I am truly sorry to you. I am unable to do as I please, and none of this is my true intention."
As such, Yi In-yong and Cho Chung-in had never had a disharmonious relationship until now. If the couple ever had a moment to meet, the surrounding villains would always prohibit it.

Summarizing the above facts, Yi In-yong's rejection of his wife and waste of his property were not his own free will but entirely due to the actions of the surrounding dishonest individuals. While Lady Cho Chung-in was illegally confined, she was completely cut off from contact with the outside world. As a result, she could not even inform anyone of her confinement and sent her three-year-old son, Hae-sŏng (해성), out through a dog hole to deliver a secret letter to his maternal grandmother, Kwak Ki-hyŏn. When Kwak received the letter and rushed to save her daughter, she was assaulted, which sparked the fire and eventually led to the filing of a complaint in court, bringing the incident to light. However, the gangsters remained defiant and continued to confine Lady Cho, even refusing meetings with lawyers and journalists, causing much controversy. Now, changing their previously violent behavior, the thugs, including Taniwa, suddenly became friendly to Lady Cho, recommending that she use the master bedroom, which they had previously forbidden her from using outside of one small room. The very next morning, according to another secret letter brought out by her young son Hae-sŏng, the softened attitude of the villains had turned again, and they were inflicting all kinds of abuse.
In any case, Lady Cho, through her lawyer, has applied for a quasi-incompetence declaration (準禁治産宣告) against her husband Yi In-yong on the grounds of mental instability and property waste and has filed another complaint in court for illegal confinement. Surely, there will be a day when a fair resolution is reached. However, it is truly bizarre that evil spirits roam freely in the heart of the supposedly enlightened metropolis, and the path of decline of a once-noble, now aristocratic family is truly as tangled as a ball of yarn. <29>

Named Entities

趙重寅	Cho Chung-in
李寅鎔	Yi In-yong
梨花洞	Ihwa-dong
丹羽正吉	Taniwa Shōkichi
郭基鉉	Kwak Ki-hyŏn
小林	Kobayashi
朴英孝	Pak Yŏng-ho
金時斗	Kim Si-du
趙秉植	Cho Pyŏng-sik
趙胤熙	Cho Yun-hŭi
李載克	Yi Chae-gŭk
해성	Hae-sŏng



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제55호
발행일	1932년 09월 01일
기사제목	駭! 怪! 白日下에나타난 李寅鎔男爵家의 夫婦戰―거기에얼키인 不正輩의 亂舞―
필자	一記者
기사형태	소식

駭! 怪! 白日下에나타난 李寅鎔男爵家의 夫婦戰―거기에얼키인 不正輩의 亂舞―
						一記者
양반의집에 변이낫다. 아니 재상가ㅅ집에 괴변이생겻다 녯날가튼면 사당제참례 족보등록에 문제가되여 집안문제에 그치고말는지 모르지만 세상덕분이라할는지 양반이 망하고 상놈이 강성해서 그러타할는지 전날의 재상가ㅅ집자제요 리인용(李寅鎔) 남자댁에 심상치안흔 부부간문제가 버러지자 거기에잇대여서는 문제가 얼크러저이러나서 서울시골에 상당한 이야기ㅅ거리가되고 말엇다.
전날대신의 아들이요 백만장자요 귀족인 리인용남작이 방년 三十세도 못된 청년의 몸으로 오게에 방탕함서서 그랫든지 그부인이 마음에안듭서서 그랫든지는 모르나 박그로 부화방종한 생활만하고 그부인을 도라보지아니함으로 그부인조중인(趙重寅) 녀사로부터 동거청구소송(同居請求訴訟)을 제긔함에 이남작으로부터는 다시 부인에게 부정해위가잇스니 가티살수가엄다하야 이혼소송을 드디어 일으키여 양편은서로살자커니 가티 못살겟다커니하고 법정에서 투쟁을하게된바 법사로부터는 리남작의 고소사실은 증거불중분이라하야 동거가처분의 판결을 내리워 조여사가 승소를햇다는 것은 세상에서도 이미 아는 사람이 만흔 최근의 사실이다.
그러나 이야기는 그뒤부터 시작이다.
조중인녀사가 일단 그소송에 익이여가지고 동거처분을 밧게되엿스니 그는 다시 리남작의 집으로 도라가지아니할수업섯든 것이다 그리하야 조여사는 승소한 지난 七月중에 즉시 이남작의 저택이잇는 이화동(梨花洞)二十五번지로 차저갓섯스나 이상하게도 응당가티살어야할 이남작서는 간곳이엄시 종적이묘연하고 그집에는 단우정일길(丹羽正吉)이라는 일본사람이 빌어사용한다하며 조여사가 안방에드러잇는것도 상관아니하고 대문을 페쇄하야 조중인과 외부와의 연락을 허서 불법감금을하고 조중인의 친가어머니 곽기현(郭基鉉) 녀사가 의 신상을 염녀하야 그집을차저갓다가 역시 그집에 세드럿다는 일본인 소림(小林)이라는자에게 구타를 당하자 그들모녀는 분한을참지못하야 진단서를 증거로첨부하고 박영호(朴英孝)후작, 이인용남작, 김시두(金時斗)변호사를 증인으로하야 다음과가튼 고소장을 경성지방법원에 제출하엿다.

告訴狀의 內容

(전략)『고소인조중인은 지난 七월중순경 두어린아이와함 틈을타서 리인용의 집에 드러갓든바 정체모를녀자와 전긔피소인등 五六명의 불량배가 드러오지못하게하는 것을 억지로드러갓든바 리인용은 어대로나가버리고 전긔악배들은 법률상 정당한 수단으로 해볼수엄는줄을  직접압박을 하기시작하야 리인용의 위탁을바덧다고하면서 각대문을 굿게다더 그출입을 금하고 담장에는 나무를 싸어나는새도 드나들지못하도록한후 하로에도 몃번이나 조중인에게 폭언과 압박을 더할아니라 어린아이의 유모지 축출하엿다 고소인 곽기현은 이급보를듯고 의 위급을 구하고저 그집으로 드러가려 하엿스나 피고소인 소림(小林)은 난폭하게도 곽씨를 대문틈에 어노코 구두발로 전신을 처서 치료 三주일이나바들상해를 바덧다.
그후 곽씨는 다만 박게잇서서일야로 의 안부를 념려하는한편 적어도 명문가의 부인으로서 의집에를갓다가 이와가튼 구타를 당한 것은 분한이 골수에 사모친다.
피고소인 단우는 조중인이가잇는 마진편방에서 긔거하면서 조중인의 완강한 거절에도 불구하고 거벗고 조중인에게 압박을가하며 一체면회나 전화지 금지하엿다.
그리고 지난 四일에는 조중인의밥을 짓는솟을 어버려서 부득이절식을하고 전등지버려서 조중＜28＞인은 캄캄한밤중에 어린아이를 더리고 부르짓고잇다.
박게서 밤을차입하랴해도 허락되지못하야 불법감금도 심하기이업스며 기타 모욕은 일일이 말할수업다』
그리고 긔이외에 다시 그고장에 아을러 긔록되여잇는 이남작부부부간의 분규사건내용을 비처보면 이러하다.
조중인의 어머니곽씨는 구한국시대의 보국대신 조병식(趙秉植)의장 남인 황주목사 조윤희(趙胤熙)의처이오 조중인은 그의 둘재인데 지난대정 十三년五월 리재극(李載克)남작의장남 리인용과 결혼하야 一남一녀를낫앗다.
그러자 소화二년六월三일 리재극남작이 별세한후 리인용이 습작을 하얏는데 당시 리남작가에는 一전의부채도업고 가산은 수十만원이나되엿다.
그러나 리인용은 세상일에 암매하기문에 자긔의 재산처리도능력이엄서 친척되는자들이 그재산을 관리한다하고 지난소화二년이래 금년지 약 二十여만원의 부동산을 매각처분을 해바렷다.
이리하야 조중인은 이을보고참을수엄서서 리인용에게 충고햇스며 재산관리위원 박용효후작에대하야서도 재산의행방과 소비한게산을 요구할일도 잇섯다 특히 금년에이르러서는 리인용주위에잇는 부정배가환약을하야 리인용을 조선내각지로고돌아다니며 수만원금전을 랑비케하고 화류게 여자를 더려다가집에 출입지식혓다. 이에 조중인은 비록녀자이지만 이에크게 반대하얏든바 그악배들은 필경 조중인을 배척하얏스며 리인용을 추겨 조중인을 차내어 보내기지햇다.
조중인이가 一시집을나 나온 것을 긔화로 그들은 그집을 나 나온것다처버리고 조중인과 그의 어린두아이지 드려뇌 안헷기문에 조중인은 그집압헤방한간을 어더가지고 잇스면서 경성지방법원에 동거청구소송을하야 이에 승소하야 지난 七월에 두아이를더리고 감연히 그집으로 들어갓다는 것이다.
리인용남작이 조중인을 내어친일이나 는 경성지방법원에 리혼의반소를제긔한 것은 결코 리남작의 자유의사가아니요 보다 그주위에잇는 악배들의 지촉인 것이다.
그럼으로 리인용은 그의처조중인을맛나는 긔회만잇스면 『그대에게는 참으로미안하다 나도기실은 맘대로 하기불가능하니 모든 것은 나의 본심이아니라』고하면서 한탄을하얏다.
이와가티되어 잇슴으로 리남작과 조중인은 금일지 부부사이에 불화한일이엄시 지내어왓는데 만일부부가 단一분간이라도 대면을하는일이잇스면 주위의 악배들은 긔어히 이것을 금지하얏다고하얏다.
이상사실을 종합하여보면 리남작의 그부인을 배척한것이나 재산을 낭비한 것은 그의자유의사가아니요 전혀주위의부정배들의 소위로 돌려보낸바 조중인녀사가 불법감금을 당한 동안에도 전혀 박갓과 일체연락을 금지한결과 조여사는 자긔의 감금당한사실지 외게에 알닐길이엄서서 그의세살먹은 아들해서이를 개구멍으로 내여보내여 그 외조모곽씨에게 밀서를보낸것이라하며 곽씨가 그밀서를보낸것이라하며 곽씨가 그밀서를밧고 의위급을 구원하랴고달려갓다가 구타를 당한 것이 화약의 불이되야 필경법정에지 고소를 제기하며 사건은 점점 백일알에 드러나게 되엿스나 그부랑배들은 의연이완강한태도로 조여사의 감금을 게속하고 심지어 변호사와 신문긔자의면회지 거절하야 물의가 분분하매 지금 포악무쌍하든태도를 다시고처서 단우등협잡배들은 조여사를차저와서 별안간 친철히굴며 한간방박게 쓰지못하게하든 여사에게 마튼방지사용하라고 권면하엿다하든 것이 바로 그이튼날아침에 다시 어린아들해성이가 가지고나온 밀서에 의하야 그들의 일시완화되엿든 악당의태도는 다시돌변하야 가진학대를하고잇다고한다.
하여간 조여사는 변호사를 대리시키어 남편리인용에게 정신불완전재산남비등을 이유로하야 준금치산선고(準禁治産宣告)의 신청을 한한편 이번에 다시 불법감금등고소를 법정에제기하엿슨즉 하회는 맛당히 그의공평한처결의 내리울날이잇스려니와 소위 법이 밝다는대도회한복관에서 망량가튼 악배가 중간에서 횡행하는 것은 가위 기괴천만의일이라고아니할수도업거니와 녯날양반오늘귀족댁의 몰락하는경로도 가위난마와갓다고할만하다.＜29＞
＜28-29＞