별건곤 第55號
1932년 09월 01일
美貌와 捏造 (Beauty and Fabrication)
崔秉和
소설 (Fiction)

1.
If you say Dr. Chŏng in Seoul, there will be no one who doesn't know him. He is recognized by everyone as the best internal medicine doctor in Chosŏn, and as a lecturer at XX Medical School, he is very busy. Dr. Chŏng has a beloved only daughter, Paengnan (白蘭), who is eighteen years old this year. Her face is so beautiful that even flowers would blush, and she is a lovely and charming young woman. The doctor received comfort from his daughter's smiling face and beautiful voice after a hard day.

However, as they entered this July, a strange light suddenly began to wander around the peaceful and happy Dr. Chŏng's home.

2.
Dr. Chŏng is a self-taught scholar with deep research in internal medicine, and because he has gained the trust of young people, many medical students visit his home to pay their respects. Among them, the person who visits frequently these days is Kim Yŏng-su (金榮洙), a graduate of this year who works as an assistant in internal medicine. He is diligent in his studies and has a clear mind with proper conduct, so he is one of the disciples that Dr. Chŏng trusts the most. Because of that, he visits Dr. Chŏng's home as if it were his relatives' house, and Dr. Chŏng's wife also greets him with a good impression.

One day, Kim presented Paengnan with a watercolor painting (水彩畵). Whether he had any other intentions towards Paengnan, whether it was bait to fish for the heart of a beautiful and lovely innocent girl, or whether it was simply a social gift, it is not clear to that extent, but in any case, it was not a very significant thing to make an issue of.

Two days after this happened, a letter came to Kim Yŏng-su. The letter said the following:
I am neither a man nor a woman. I am neither a devil nor an angel. Rather than bringing happiness to humans, I would rather bring disaster.

I intend to take away Mr. Kim's and Dr. Chŏng's family's peace and happiness. I have already made several women fall into unhappiness. This is to give you a warning.

I advise you to have secret talks with Paengnan and for you to quickly leave Kyŏngsŏng for P’yŏngyang-.

In addition to this, there were chilling phrases, but in short, the meaning was clear: You want to get your hands on Paengnan, but I am first. I am a dangerous person, so it is best for you to take your hands off first. That is a wise method for you.

Kim, who received this letter, was very troubled and unpleasant, as if he had received a painful wound. Since the sender was anonymous, there would be no despicable person among his colleagues or friends who would startle people with anonymous letters, but Kim began to be surrounded by an increasingly uneasy atmosphere. And he carefully examined many colleagues one by one and marked a suspicious person.

If the sender of the letter is assumed to be a colleague - that's right. It can only be recognized as No Chae-sin (盧載信). Is Chae-sin the kind of person who would do that? No, no matter what, that person is suspicious - Kim thought to himself and decided.

There is a reason why Kim Yŏng-su suspects No Chae-sin. No Chae-sin is also one of the disciples who visits Dr. Chŏng's house, and his personality is mild, but somehow he lives with a woman, but that woman is not his legal wife. Every time this No Chae-sin visits Dr. Chŏng's house, he seems to talk without any reservations with Paengnan. But No is a man who cannot be trusted as he is not officially married and lives with a mistress - Kim thought again. <52>

3.
Kim met Paengnan on his way back from the XX Music Concert.
"Dr. Chŏng! Do you know that I am going to P'yŏngyang?"
"Yes, I know," Paengnan replied with a slightly embarrassed expression.
"Who did you hear it from?"
Paengnan had no answer to this.
"You heard it from No Chae-sin."
"Yes, that's right," Paengnan affirmed.
Since the fact that he was going to P'yŏngyang XX Hospital was kept absolutely secret, only Dr. Chŏng should know. No Chae-sin knows - as the incident has reached this point, Kim concluded that the anonymous sender must be No Chae-sin.

In the next two or three days, two more disturbing threatening letters arrived. One of them contained "R," the first letter of No Chae-sin's surname. In this letter, Paengnan was severely insulted, and he would do everything to harass Paengnan. He would use all means to make Paengnan unhappy and ruin the future of the girl.

The separate letter was written imitating Paengnan's handwriting. Show this forged letter to Paengnan's parents. Then they will imprison and abuse Paengnan. Isn't that delightful - it was written. The forged letter of Paengnan is a phrase in which a young woman desperately appeals for ardent love and is made as if Paengnan wrote it to her lover. Show it to Paengnan's father and make Paengnan suffer.

The bizarre letter initially said it was a big deal to adore Paengnan. I have Paengnan - meant, but from the second time, the direction changed completely, and I declared that I would do everything to harass Paengnan.

Kim thought it was necessary to inform Dr. Chŏng's wife first, so he told her the details of what had happened so far and showed her the forged letter.
"The handwriting is similar. But her handwriting is not so straight and slightly leans to the left," the wife said, not making a big deal out of it. Kim was somewhat dissatisfied with his wife's cold attitude and thought it was strange.

4.
However, a time of unease and fear came to Dr. Chŏng's house as well. That anonymous letter crept into Dr. Chŏng's house as well. The anonymous letter came out of nowhere without a trace. Whether it fell from the sky or sprang from the ground, sometimes it was left on Paengnan's organ and sometimes it flew in from the window of Dr. Chŏng's wife's bedroom. Sometimes it was left on Dr. Chŏng's desk. Of course, they strictly questioned the men and women who came in and out, but judging from their trembling and fearful expressions, it did not seem like their doing.

The contents of the anonymous letters varied in many ways. However, the story eventually had hostility towards Paengnan, and I - and my friend - would devastate Paengnan to ruin the happiness of Dr. Chŏng's family, and every letter was consistent with the same purpose. There was also a letter like this.
"Dr. Chŏng is a scholar with a noble character and abundant knowledge. His wife is a wise mother and good wife with a kind personality and full of love. But Paengnan is completely a poisonous woman (毒婦型)." The letter always ended by cursing Paengnan's future, and some of them praised and admired the wife so much, almost to the point of writing letters close to love, while severely attacking and criticizing Paengnan. By the way, the letter was written with the English letters C.S.R. No's name is Chae-sin, so it would correspond to the letters C.S.
Kim Yŏng-su had already guessed that No Chae-sin was the protagonist of the devil's letter that tormented Kim Yŏng-su, but the devil's letter that appeared in Dr. Chŏng's house was not only inferred from the clear English letters, but one day, the devil's letter predicted that I would wander around your neighborhood today, so as the people of Dr. Chŏng's house were guarding inside and outside, No Chae-sin seemed to appear, but immediately disappeared somewhere. Since it was certain that it was No Chae-sin, suspicion of him grew stronger day by day.

5.
The devil's letter also flew to Kim Yŏng-su. The letter gradually increased the degree of threat.
You seem cold to Paengnan, but Paengnan loves you ardently. Paengnan doesn't sleep even when the night is deep and only thinks of you. Anyway, I will only harass Paengnan. That girl is a pure virgin. But wait and see. I will take away that girl's purity and honor. Open your eyes wide and wait <53> - there was also a letter that said.
Take away Paengnan's purity and honor! Inflict an indelible humiliation on a girl who would blush even at flowers for the rest of her life. This is an unprecedentedly terrible announcement. It is something to grind your teeth and be furious just by hearing it. Now is not the time to hesitate.
Kim Yŏng-su took the letter and ran to Dr. Chŏng's house.

6.
It was a bright moonlit night. Pak Yŏng-ja, a nurse living in Dr. Chŏng's house, woke up from a deep sleep due to a strange noise. Her bedroom is right next to Paengnan's bedroom. These days, the inside and outside of Dr. Chŏng's house is noisy because of the devil's letter, and recently, a threatening letter about Paengnan's safety was sent to Kim Yŏng-su, so Dr. Chŏng's house is spending uneasy days guarding as if there were no gaps. Yŏng-ja, who is particularly brave and proud of her health, jumped up.
The strange noise, it was a sobbing sound - Paengnan's sound - it was Paengnan's voice groaning in the next room.
Pak Yŏng-ja tried to open the door to the next room, but the door was locked. The door that is not locked - with suspicion, Pak Yŏng-ja kicked the door open without realizing it and ran into Paengnan's bedroom.

Pak Yŏng-ja was startled. She saw what she shouldn't have seen. The tragedy finally appeared vividly. The prediction of the damned devil's letter has come true horribly. Paengnan has already lost everything - Yŏng-ja realized immediately. The glass window was wide open and only the indifferent moon was shining brightly, the shape of the terribly miserable bedroom! Paengnan was lying on the floor wearing only her nightgown. Her neck was tightly tied with a towel and blood was pooling on her.
With Yŏng-ja's care, Paengnan regained consciousness, but as soon as she saw Yŏng-ja, she suddenly hugged her tightly and burst into tears. And Paengnan spoke in a tearful voice.
When I heard the sound of breaking the window and opened my eyes, a man was standing next to my bed. It was a scary eye. The lower half of his face (下半部) was covered with a black cloth, but it was definitely No Chae-sin. The voice of "Revenge!" was also No Chae-sin's voice. I jumped out of bed in fright, but No Chae-sin first locked the door (the door to nurse Pak Yŏng-ja's room) and wouldn't let me go as he grabbed my nightgown tightly as I ran away. And suddenly he rushed at me, pressed down on my neck, and beat me as much as he wanted. He hit my head and chest. And he twisted my right arm and threw me to the floor. From then on, I don't know anything at all. But when No Chae-sin left, he said, "Look at this," and I think I saw him throwing something like a letter - the letter was stuck between the desks. I have admired you since a long time ago. It was unrequited love. You have thoroughly despised and insulted me. Everything you are suffering now is the reward for that. Now I am taking away the most innocent thing in this world. I have been suffering for a long time now. From now on, it is your time to suffer - it was written like this.
Yŏng-ja asked if she should inform the doctor's couple of the fact of the brutal act, but Paengnan hastily stopped it. I don't want to meet my parents right now. I will wait for dawn. Yŏng-ja sympathized with her poor heart and stayed in Paengnan's bedroom as it was. The twenty-four-year-old nurse hugged the twenty-year-old, as innocent as Paengnan could be, tightly and lay down on the same bed. The silence after the storm must have saved Paengnan from fear and fatigue to some extent. At dawn, Paengnan fell into a deep sleep. In the gradually disappearing moonlight, Yŏng-ja stared blankly at the sleeping face of the pitiful - lovely, now having lost the innocence of a virgin, Paengnan and shed tears.

7.
The next morning, a letter came to Dr. Chŏng by mail. The letter described in detail the events of the brutal act last night and said, "I took everything from Paengnan. Both purity and honor have now been taken away. The person who made your daughter a woman of humiliation is the writer of this."
A letter also came to Paengnan.
"I am feeling the greatest happiness right now. You have fallen into a miserable fate because of me. The act of putting you in a miserable fate is the so-called reason why I feel the greatest happiness," it was written hatefully.
A letter also came to Kim Yŏng-su. I have started everything to make you suffer. You seem to have told Dr. Chŏng about my work, but that is a cowardly act. If you have anything to say, come to me like a man. It was already written as No Chae-sin.
Kim Yŏng-su couldn't stand it anymore. So he took a friend with him and immediately ran to Chae-sin. When No Chae-sin heard Kim Yŏng-su's indignant and strong words, No Chae-sin said, "Even if you pour water into the ears of a sleeping person, there is a limit." Kim Yŏng-su was extremely angry at No Chae-sin's evil behavior, and the argument turned into a fistfight.
After this duel between the two, the anonymous letter incident spread so widely among their colleagues that everyone knew about it.

8.
No Chae-sin's friends advised No Chae-sin to apologize. The apology was only for sending the anonymous letter, and the brutal act against Paengnan had been kept secret between the victim's family and Kim Yŏng-su, so they were advising him to confess only to the anonymous letter incident.
No Chae-sin, of course, rejected the recommendation to confess. But No has something to show his weaknesses to others. It is No's own behavior. No is living with a mistress. And excessive extravagant life or following prostitutes - originally No, who has a weak heart, is afraid of what serious crime will come to him, and because he was previously suspended from school for unethical behavior, in order to prevent this issue from expanding again, in other words, in order to avoid being expelled - No wrote a letter to Dr. Chŏng admitting that all the anonymous letters were his doing and awaited the doctor's generous disposition.
And he went down to his hometown of Hwangju (黃州) under the reason of confinement. On the same day that No left, another anonymous letter immediately haunted Dr. Chŏng's house.
Since No is five hundred li away from Kyŏngsŏng, the protagonist of the devil's letter is in Kyŏngsŏng **** (one line missing below) The letter keeps coming. Whether the wind brings it or it comes down with the rain, that frightening letter is there without the family knowing. Of course, it doesn't come by mail.
The contents of the letter became even more violent, and among them were shameless words saying that he would even marry her if she said she would marry him, and a terrible phrase that misfortune would soon befall Paengnan and Dr. Chŏng's house was also listed.

9.
The silent and generous Dr. Chŏng could no longer bear this and immediately filed a complaint with the authorities. In this way, No Chae-sin, who was in Hwangju, was indicted and imprisoned in pretrial detention. But another strange thing is that even though No was living in a steel-barred life in pretrial detention, the devil's letter still haunted Dr. Chŏng's house.
One day, Paengnan suddenly fainted. When the family ran to support her, they were surprised to see that she was holding something in her right hand, and when they took it away, she was holding another letter. One day, when his wife and Paengnan were in a car, Paengnan suddenly shouted, "Ah! Someone touched my hand!" and something fell into the car. When they picked it up, it was another anonymous letter.
The assault and battery case (暴行被告事件) against No Chae-sin was revised in the Kyŏngsŏng District Court. It is a case of breaking into the bedroom of Dr. Chŏng's daughter and committing assault. The victim is the only daughter of a prominent medical scholar who is twenty years old, and the defendant is the eldest son of a wealthy man from Hwanghae Province. This case caused a sensation in the general public and became the focus of interest.
No Chae-sin was indicted as the principal offender (主犯), and one of the male and female servants of Dr. Chŏng's house was being tried in the same court as an accessory (幇助犯).
The fact that a flower-like girl, about to bloom, had been given an indelible humiliation for the rest of her life, greatly stimulated people of various classes. The majority of these people were convinced of No Chae-sin's guilt. Moreover, he is holding extremely unfavorable evidence, isn't he?
That is the confession regarding the anonymous letter. - If that confession is true - it will also be a confession of the assault that violated Paengnan's chastity. Whether it is true or false, No has confessed in writing.
The first person to appear as a witness is his classmate. According to the testimony of these witnesses, No's behavior was not very fragrant, and especially in his relationship with women, he had a past that was being criticized - of course, the women he was with were mostly prostitutes.
It goes without saying that the victim's testimony is the most important evidence in such a case. When the court (法庭) questioned Paengnan as a witness, the audience was tense to the extreme.
However, this evidence investigation was especially scheduled to be held at 12:00 p.m. That is because Paengnan was so caught up in hysteria that, taking into account the doctor's opinion, it was recognized that she could only withstand the court interrogation when all noise ceased at night.
At night, the courthouse soared high like a demon's castle. The courtroom was filled with judges, court members, lawyers, and spectators without any room, but the surroundings were very quiet.
A slightly emaciated flower-like girl quietly appeared in the witness stand. Clear, beautiful, and to give an example, her demeanor was as delicate as a white lily in early summer, but she cheerfully got up and bowed to the judge. In response to the judge's questions, the girl testified clearly and accurately to everything. The fact that No Chae-sin broke into her bedroom, grabbed her nightgown, and rushed at her, shouted "Revenge!", and struck her head and chest. In the end, she received the greatest and worst humiliation, something that was difficult for a woman to say, she testified clearly in order with a thin and trembling voice.
The judge repeatedly confirmed whether the villain was really No Chae-sin or not, but Paengnan clearly <55> affirmed that it was No Chae-sin, and while looking at No Chae-sin in the defendant's seat, she stated, "It is definitely this person."
However, the result of the next evidence investigation turned the *case around (轉化). The landlady of No Chae-sin's boarding house testified under oath that No Chae-sin never went in and out. The person who repaired the glass window of Paengnan's bedroom said that although both the glass and the window frame were broken, it didn't seem like it was broken from the outside, and it wasn't big enough for a man to come in and out. Even if the testimony of these two people cannot be trusted, amazing evidence was provided.
Four handwriting experts (筆跡鑑定人) testified in this court that all the problematic letters - 23 letters - were not No Chae-sin's handwriting, and that they were all confidently written by Paengnan. Oh my, the court was extremely tense. Was the girl, like a white dove, a cunning liar or not? That became the focus of the intense arguments of the legal profession on both sides (法曹). The prosecutor and the attorney for Dr. Chŏng's private prosecution (私訴) - (a claim for damages in a civil case incidental to a criminal case) - argued that Paengnan's testimony should be trusted, and the defense attorney shouted that Paengnan was the incarnation of the devil (權化).

10.
Neither the judge, the prosecutor, nor the audience had the leeway to doubt this flower-like Paengnan. It was unbelievable that that beautiful and gentle girl would have committed such a crime for any reason. In fact, there were not a few points that were insufficient to convict No Chae-sin of guilt. The route the letter came from, the fact that anonymous letters came even when he was in pretrial detention, the fact that the place where he broke into the bedroom was unclear, and the fact that the family did not know at all on the night of the brutal act, there were many contradictions, but Paengnan's beauty (美貌) solves everything. There is no reason for that girl to lie. - The judge thought. The court found No Chae-sin guilty and sentenced him to five years of imprisonment.
In response to this ruling, fierce attacks arose from various quarters. Even among the attorneys for Dr. Chŏng's side's private prosecution (私訴代理人) agreed that the answer was contrary to the truth of the case. Not long after this happened, No Chae-sin, who was serving his sentence, was acquitted.
The reason why No Chae-sin was acquitted was because it was revealed that everything was Paengnan's doing. The anonymous letters were written by Paengnan herself, and the fact of the assault was a realization of a scene from Paengnan's own novel (自作小說). Paengnan is a person with a dual personality (二重性格所有者), and did not hesitate to sacrifice No Chae-sin with a kind of cruelty hobby (慘虐趣味) and savored the development of the case as a kind of pleasure. After all, this is the result of hysteria, a specialist said. Anyway, it is a rare case. (The End) <56>

**Named Entities**

金榮洙	Kim Yŏng-su
白蘭	Paengnan
平壤	P’yŏngyang
盧載信	No Chae-sin
黃州	Hwangju



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제55호
발행일	1932년 09월 01일
기사제목	美貌와 揑造
필자	崔秉和
기사형태	소설

美貌와 揑造
						崔秉和
1.
서울서 정박사라면 누구나 모를 사람이 업슬 것이다. 그는 조선서 내ㅅ과의사로는 자타가 공인하는 제일인자이며 따라서 XX의학전문학교의 강사로 잇는 이만큼 그의 생활은 몹시 분잡하엿다. 정박사에게는 무남독녀인 백란(白蘭)양이 잇스니 나희는 금년 열여덜 살이오, 얼골은 꼿도 북그러위할 만치 아름답고 애교 잇는 처녀이엿다. 박사는 하로의 고뢰를 이 따님의 웃는 얼골과 고흔 목소리로 위로를 밧고 지내왓다.
그런데 이 칠월 달에 접어 드러서 평화스럽고 행복스러운 박사의 가정에는 별안간 한줄기 괴상한 빗치 떠돌기 시작하엿다.

2.
정박사는 내과에 대하야 연구가 깁흔 독학자이며, 또 청소년들에게서 신망을 어든 관게로 정박사댁으로 경의를 표하기 위하야 방문하러 오는 의학생도 그 수효는 적지 안엇다. 그들
중에서 요즈음 자조 방문하는 사람은 김영수(金榮洙)라는 금년 졸업한 학생으로써 내ㅅ과의 조수로 잇는 사람이다. 그는 공부에 부지런 하엿스며 품행방정 두뢰가 명석하야 박사가 가장 미덤직하게 역이는 제자중의 한 사람이엿다. 그런 관게로 박사의 가정을 친척집을 츨입하드시 드나들며 박사의 부인도 그를 조흔 인상으로 영접하여 주엇다.
어느 날, 김은 박사의 영양 되는 백란양에게 수채화(水彩畵) 한 장을 선사하엿다. 백란양에게 대하야 그 무슨 다른 뜻이 잇섯는지, 즉 아름답고 고흔 순정을 가지고 잇는 처녀의 마음을 낙시질하는 밋기인지 그러치 안흐면 단순한 사교적 증답품에 불과 하엿는지 거기까지는 확실치 못하나 하여튼 문제삼을 만치 대단한 물건은 아니엿다.
이러한 일이 잇슨지 이틀 후에 김영수에게로 한 장의 편지가 왓다. 그 편지사연은 다음과 갓다.
나는 남자도 아니고 녀자도 아니다. 악마도 아니고 천사도 아니다. 인간에게 행복을 전하는 것보다는 차라리 깃버이 재화를 끼처주기를 조와한다.
나는 귀씨와 밋 정박사 가정의 평화와 행복을 빼아스려고 한다. 나는 이믜 수명의 녀성을 불행한 가온대 빠지게 한 일이 잇다. 이것은 경고하기 위해서 주의를 주는 것이다.
나는 백란양과 밀담하고 귀씨가 속히 경성을 떠나 평양으로 갈 것을 충고한다-.
이외에도 소름이 끼치는 문구가 벌녀 잇섯스나 요컨데 너는 백란양에게 손을 대이고자 하나 내가 먼저다. 나는 위험인물이니 네가 미리 손을 떼이는 것이 상책이다. 그것이 너로서는 현명한 방법이다.-하는 취지가 명백하엿다.
이 편지를 바더 본 김은 압흔 상처를 마진 것 가티 몹시 괴롭고 불 유쾌하엿다. 발신인이 익명이니 동료 중에서 혹은 친우 중에서 익명의 편지로 사람을 놀나게 하여주는 비열한 사람은 업슬 터인데 김은 점점 불안한 공기에 싸혀 가기 시작하엿다. 그리고 그는 만흔 동료들을 일일이 점검하다 십히 하야 의심나는 사람을 점찍어 보앗다.
편지의 발신인이 동료라고 가정하면- 그럿타. 로재신(盧載信)이라고 인정할 수 박게 업다. 재신이가 그럴 사람인가. 아냐, 암만해도 그 사람이 수상해-하고 김은 혼자서 생각하고 결정하엿다.
김영수가 로재신이를 의심하게 되는 것은 리유가 잇다. 로재신이도 정박사댁을 방문하는 제자중의 한 사람인데 성격은 온화한 편이나 어듸인지＜52＞ 느녀자와 동거하고 잇스나 그 녀자는 정처는 아니다. 이러한 로재신이가 박사 댁을 방문할 때마다 백란양과 흉허물 업시 이야기하는 듯 하엿다. 그러나 로는 정식결혼도 아니하고 정부와 동거생활을 하는 이만치 마음놀 수 업는 남자이다-하고 김은 거듭 생각하엿다.

3.
김은 XX음악회에서 도라오는 길에 백란양을 맛낫다.
「정선생님! 제가 평양으로 가게 되는 것을 아십니까?」
「네 아러요.」하고 백란양은 약간 낭패한 표정을 하면서 대답을 하엿다.
「누구에게서 드르섯습니까?」
백란양은 이 말에는 대답이 업섯다.
「로재신이에게서 드르섯지요.」
「네 그럿습니다.」하고 백란양은 긍정하엿다.
자기가 평양XX병원으로 가게 되는 것을 아는 사람은 아즉은 절대 비밀히 하여 온 관게로 정박사외에는 알 사람이 업슬 터인데 로재신이가 아다니- 사건이 여기까지 이르고 보매 익명의 발신인은 로재신이가 틀님 업다고 김은 단정을 하엿다.
그로부터 이삼일 동안에 두 번이나 껴름직한 위협편지가 왓다. 그 한아에는 「R」이라는 로재신이의 성의 머리 이 편지에는 백란양을 몹시 모욕하고 자기는 어듸까지든지 백란양을 못살게 할 것이다. 백란양을 불행하게 하는 모든 수단을 다해서 그 녀자의 장내를 유린하겟다.
별봉의 편지는 백란양의 필치를 본떠서 내가 쓴 것이다. 이 위조편지를 백란양의 양친에게 보여라. 그러면 백란양을 감금하고 학대할 것이다. 그것이 통쾌하지 안흐냐- 하고 쓰여 잇다. 백란양의 위조편지라는 것은 처녀가 열열한 사랑을 애소하는 문구로 백란양이 그의 연인에게 보내기 위하야 쓴 것처럼 맨든 것이다. 그것을 백란양의 부친에게 보여서 백란양을 괴롭게 하여주어라 하는 것이다.
괴기한 편지는 처음에는 백란양을 사모하야서는 큰일난다. 백란양에게는 내가 잇다-는 의미의 편지이엿스나, 두 번째부터는 방향이 일전해서 나는 어듸까지든지 백란양을 괴롭게 하야 주겟다고 하고 선언하엿다.
김은 위선 박사부인에게 알녀 둘 필요가 잇다고 생각하고 지금까지의 경과를 자세히 이야기하고 그 위조편지를 보엿다.
「따는 글씨가 비슷하구료. 그러나 그 애의 글씨는 이러케 똑바르지가 못하고 약간 왼편으로 기우러지는데.」하고 부인은 별노 큰 문제로 삼지 안엇다. 김에게 잇서서는 부인의 냉정한 태도에 다소 불만을 늣기고 괴이하게 생각하엿다.

4.
그러나 정박사 집에도 불안과 공포의 때는 닥처왓다. 그 익명의 편지가 박사 댁에도 음습하여 왓다. 그 익명의 편지는 어느 곳에서 햇는지 자최도 업시 날너 드러왓다. 공중에서 떠러지는지 땅에서 솟는지 어느 때에는 백란양의 풍금 우에 노여 잇고 어느 때에는 박사부인 침실의 창으로부터 날너 드러왓다. 어느 때에는 박사의 책상우에 노여잇기도 하엿다. 물론 아래 사람들과 출입하는 남녀를 엄중하게 심문하여 보앗지만 그들 자신도 부들부들 떨면서 무서워하는 표정을 보아서 그들의 소행가티는 생각되지 안엇다.
익명의 편지 내용은 여러 가지로 변하엿다. 그러나 사연은 결국 백란양에게 적의를 가지고 잇고 자기는- 또 자기의 친우는-백란양을 참혹하게 하기 위하야 정박사의 가정의 행복을 각난식히는 것이다 하고 어느 편지나 가튼 취지로 일관하엿다. 그 중에는 이러한 편지도 잇섯다.
「정박사는 성격이 고결하고 학식이 풍부한 학자이다. 부인은 성격이 인자하고 사랑이 만흔 현모랑처다. 그러나 백란양은 전혀 독부형(毒婦型)이다. 편지는 언제든지 백란양의 장래를 저주하는 것으로써 종시하엿고 그 중에는 백란양을 참혹하게 공격 비난하는 반면에 부인을 극구찬미 경모하야 거의 연애에 갓가운 문자까지도 느러 논 것도 잇섯다. 그런데 그 편지에는 C.S.R이라고 영어글자가 쓰여 잇섯다. 로의 일흠은 재신이니깐 C.S자에 해당할 것이다.
김영수를 괴롭 핀 마의 편지의 주인공이 로재신이라는 것은 벌서부터 김영수가 추측한 것이지만 정박사 집에 나타나는 마의 편지도 그의 주인공이 로재신이라는 것은 서명한 영자로 해서 추측하게 될 뿐 아니라 어느 날 마의 편지 속에 오늘 나는 댁 근처를 배회 하겟다고 예고하엿슴으로 정박사집 사람들이 안박을 경게하고 잇스려니깐 과연 로재신이가 보이는 듯하더니 즉시 어대로인지 사라저 바리엿다. 확실히 로재신이가 분명하엿슴으로 그에 대한 혐의는 날이 갈 사록 농후하여 갓다.

5.
김영수에게도 의연 마의 편지는 날너 드러왓다. 편지사연은 점점 위협의 도수를 더하여 갓다.
너는 백란양에게 대하야 냉정하게 보이나 백란양은 너를 열열이 사랑하고 잇다. 백란양은 밤이 김허도 잠을 자지 안코 네의 생각만 골돌이 하고 잇다. 나는 하여튼 백란양을 괴롭게만 하여 주겟다. 그 녀자는 순결한 처녀다. 그러나 두고 보아라. 그 녀자의 순결과 명예를 빼아슬 것이다. 그대는 눈을 크게 뜨고 기다려＜53＞ 보아라-하는 편지도 잇섯다.
백란양의 순결과 명예를 빼앗는다! 꼿도 북그러워할 처녀에게 한평생 씨슬 수 업는 모욕을 가한다. 이우에 업슬 무서운 예고이다. 듯기만 하여도 절치 분노할 노릇이다. 지금은 주저할 때가 안이다.
김영수는 그 편지를 가지고 정박사 댁으로 뛰여 갓다.

6.
달 밝은 어느 날 밤이엿다. 정박사 집에 기식하고 잇는 간호부(看護婦) 박영자는 이상한 소리에 깁히 든 잠을 깨치고 마럿다. 그의 침실은 바로 백란양의 침실 엽히다. 박사 집이 요사이 마의편지로 인해서 내외가 소란하고 최근 김영수에게 보낸 것이지만 백란양의 신변에 관해서 전률 할만한 협박문자가 쓰여 잇는 관게로 박사 집은 그야말노 물샐 틈 업시 경게하면서 불안한 날을 보내는 때이다. 남 유달리 담녁이 잇고 그리고 근강을 자랑하는 영자는 벌떡 이러낫다.
이상한 소리, 그것은 울부지는 소리라-백란양의 소리다- 엽방에서 신음하는 듯한 백란양의 음성이엿다.
박영자는 엽방으로 통한 또어를 열냐고 하엿는데 문이 잠기엿다. 그 문은 잠그지 안는 문인데- 의심이 털컥 나 박영자는 자기도 모르게 문을 박차고 백란양의 침실노 뛰여 드러갓다.

박영자는 깜작 놀낫다. 보지 안을 것을 보앗다. 비극은 드듸여 여실하게 나타낫다. 저주할  마의 편지의 예언은 참혹하게 적중이 되엿다. 백란양은 벌서 모든 것을 빼앗겻구나- 하고 영자는 즉각적으로 깨다랏다. 유리창문은 활작 열녀 잇고 무심한 달만이 훤하게 빗처 드러와 너무나 무참한 침실의 모양! 백란양은 침의만 입은 채 방바닥에 너머저잇다. 목줄 띄는 수건으로 단단이 졸나 매여 잇서서 피가 맷처잇섯다.
영자의 간호로 백란양은 정신을 차리엿스나 영자를 보자마자 밧작 끼여안코 별안간 소리를 내여 우럿다. 그리고 백란양은 눈물석긴 음성으로 말을 하엿다.
창을 부시는 소리를 듯고 눈을 뜰 때에는 한 사람의 남자가 나의 침대 엽헤 서 잇섯다. 그것은 무서운 눈이엿다. 얼골의 하반부(下半部)는 검은 헌겁으로 가리엿는데 확실히 로재신이엿다. 「복수다!」하는 음성도 로재신이의 음성이엿다. 나는 겁결에 침대에서 뛰여 나리엿는데 로재신이는 먼저 문(간호부 박영자의 방으로 통한 문)을 잠그고 내가 도망가는 것을 침의를 꽉 잡고 노와 주지 안엇다. 그리고 별안간 덤벼드러 목을 내리 눌느고 실컨 때려주엇다. 머리도 때리고 가슴도 때리엿다. 그리고 내 바른팔을 비트러서 방바닥에 너머 트리엿다. 그로부터는 어떠케 되엿는지 나는 조곰도 몰으겟다. 그러나 로재신이가 나갈 때 「이것을 봐라.」하고 무엇인지 편지가튼 것을 내던지는 것을 본 듯하다- 그 편지는 책상사이에 끼여 잇섯다. 나는 당신을 일즉부터 연모하엿다. 그것은 외쪽 사랑이엿다. 당신은 철두철미 나를 경멸하고 모욕하엿다. 지금 당신이 당한 모든 것은 그것의 보수이다. 지금 나는 이 세상에서 가장 순결한 것을 빼앗는 것이다. 나는 이믜 오래ㅅ동안 고통을 바더왓다. 이로부터는 당신이 고통을 바들 때이다- 이러케 쓰여 잇섯다.
영자는 흉행의 사실을 박사부처에게 알닐냐고 하엿는데 백란양은 황망히 그것을 말니엿다. 나는 지금 부모님을 맛나고 십지 안타. 날이 밝기를 기다리겟다. 영자는 그의 가엽슨 심정에 동정하고 그대로 백란양의 침실에 머물너 잇섯다. 스물 네 살 된 간호부는 스무 살 된 란숙할 때로 란숙한 백란양의 육체를 폭 끼여 안고 한 침대 우에 드러 누엇다. 폭풍후의 정적은 얼마큼 백란양을 공포와 피로에서 건저 주엇슬 것이다. 새벽 녁에 백란양은 혼곤이 잠이 드럿다. 점점 사라저 가는 달빗에 가엽슨- 사랑스러운 지금은 처녀의 무량광을 이러바린 백란처녀의 잠자는 얼골을 물그럼이 드려다 보고 영자는 눈믈을 흘니엿다.

7.
이튼날 아츰, 정박사에게 우편으로 편지가 왓다. 그 편지에는 어제 밤 흉행의 경과를 상세히 진슬하고 「나는 영양의 모든 것을 빼아섯다. 순결도 명예도 지금은 다 빼앗기엿다. 귀 영양을 모욕의 녀자로 만든 사람은 즉 이 필자이다.」하고 씨여 잇다.
백란양에게도 편지가 왓다.
「나는 지금 최고의 행복을 늣기고 잇다. 그대는 나로 인해서 비참한 운명에 빠지엿다. 그대를 비참한 운명에 빠지게 하는 일이, 즉 내가 최고의 행복을 늣기는 소위이다.」하고 미웁게 쓰여 잇섯다.
김영수에게도 편지가 왓다. 나는 그대를 괴롭게 하기 위하야 모든 일을 착수하엿다. 그대는 나의 일을 정박사에게 고한 듯 하나 그것은 비겁한 행동이다. 만일 할 말이 잇스면 남자다웁게 나에게로 오너라. 하는 이미 로재신이라고 쓰여 잇섯다.
김영수는 더 참을 수가 업섯다. 그리하야 동무한 사람을 데불고 즉시로 재신에게 달녀갓다. 로재신이는 김영수의 분기만면한 강경한 말을 듯자 로재신이는 「깜작 놀나며 자는 사람의 귀에 물을 부어도 분수가 잇지.」하고 딱 자바 떼엿다. 김영수는 그간 악한 로재신의 행동에 극도로 분개하야 언쟁이 변해서 주먹싸흠이 되어 버렷다.
이 두 사람의 결투가 잇슨 후, 그들의 동료 가온데는 익명의 편지사건이 누구나 다 알 만치 널니 퍼지엿다.

8.
로재신이의 친구들은 로재신에게 사과하기를 권하엿다. 그 사과라는 것은 익명의 편지를 보냇다는 것 뿐으로 백란양에게 가한 흉행은 아즉 피해자의 가정과 김영수 간에 비밀을 직혀 왓슴으로 익명의 편지사건에 한해서 자백하기를 권고하든 것이엿다.
로재신이는 물론 자백의 권유를 일축해 버렷다. 그러나 로에게는 남에게  약점을 보이는 것이 잇다. 그것은 로 자신의 소행이다. 로는 정부와 동거하고 잇다. 그리고 정도에 넘치는 사치생활이라든지 우슴을 파는 게집을 따라단이는 일이라든지- 원래 마음이 약한 로는 자기에게 어떠한 중죄가 도라올가 전에도 부정행동으로 인해서 학교에서 정학처분까지 당한 일이 잇는 관게상 얼는 이 문제가 확대되는 것을 방지하기 위해서 다시 말하면 퇴학처분을 면하기 위해서- 로는 정박사에게 편지로써 익명의 편지는 모다 자기의 소행이라고 자백하고 박사의 관대한 처분을 기다립니다. 고 쓰여 잇다.
그리고 그는 근신을 리유로 삼고 고향인 황주(黃州)로 내려 가버렷다. 로가 출발한 당일 즉시 또 익명의 편지가 박사의 집을 지긋지긋하게 차저왓다.
로는 경성서 오백리나 떠러진 곳에 잇스니 경성에는 마의 편지의 주인공 ****(이하 한줄 누락)편지는 잇대여 왓다. 바람이 가지고 오는지, 그러치 안으면 비와 함께 내려오는지, 그 질겁을 할 편지는 집안사람이 몰으는 동안에 와 잇다. 물론 우편으로 오것은 아니다.
편지사연은 더 한층 격렬하야 그 중에는 결혼하겟다고 하면 결혼이라도 하겟다고 철면피 가튼 말이 쓰여 잇기도 하고 백란양을 비롯해서 박사의 집에는 근일 재화가 닥치리라하는 처참한 문구도 라렬하여 잇섯다.

9.
침묵 그리고 관대한 정박사도 이 우에 더 참을 수 업서 즉시 당국에 고소를 제기하엿다. 이리하야 황주에 잇든 로재신이는 기소를 밧고 미결감에 갓치게 되엿다. 그런데 또 괴상한 것은 로가 미결감에서 철창생활을 함에도 불구하고 역시 마의 편지는 박사 집을 또 차저 드럿다.
어느 날, 백란양은 돌연 졸도하엿다. 집안사람이 달녀가서 붓드러 이르키니깐 오른 손에 무엇인지 쥐고 잇슴으로 깜작 놀나서 빼서 보니깐 또 편지를 쥐고 잇섯다. 어느 날, 부인과 백란양이 자동차를 타고 잇슬 때 별안간 「아구! 누가 내 손을!」하고 백란양이 부르지즐 때는 무엇인지 자동차 안에 툭 하고 떠러지는 것이 잇섯다. 집어 보니깐 역시 그것도 익명의 편지엿다.
로재신에 대한 폭행피고사건(暴行被告事件)은 경성지방법원에서 개정되엿다. 정박사의 영양의 침실에 침입하야 폭행을 가하엿다는 안건이다. 피해자는 명문의학자의 무남독녀로 방년 이십 세, 피고는 황해도에서 굴지하는 부호의 장남이다. 이 사건은 일반사회에 센-세이슌을 이르키고 흥미의 초점이 되엿다.
로재신이는 주범(主犯)으로써 기소되고 정박사집 남녀하인이 한 명은 방조범(幇助犯)으로써 가튼 법정에서 심리를 밧게 되엿다.
이제 바야흐로 활작 피려는 꼿 가튼 처녀에게 씨슬 수 업는 한평생의 모욕을 끼처주엇다는 것이 여러 게급의 사람에게 몹시 자극을 주엇다. 그 사람들의 대다수는 로재신의 유죄를 확신하고 잇섯다. 그 우에로는 극히 불리한 증거를 붓들리고 잇지 안흔가.
즉 익명의 편지에 관한 자백이 그것이다.- 만약 그 자백이 진실한 것이라면- 동시에 백란양의 정조를 유린한 폭행의 자백도 될 것이다. 진부는 하여간에 로는 서면으로써 자백한 것이다.
최초 증인으로써 나타난 사람은 그의 동급생이다. 이들 증인의 공슬에 의하면 로의 소행은 그다지 향그럽지 못하고 특히 녀성 관게에 잇서서 그는 비난을 밧고 잇는 과거를 가지고 잇섯다.- 물론 상대 녀성은 거개 매소부의 류엿다.
이러한 사건은 피해자의 공슬이 가장 중요한 증거가 되는 것은 말할 것도 업다. 법정(法庭)이 증인으로 백란양을 심문하게 될 때 방청객들은 긴장할 대로 긴장하여 젓다.
그러나 이 증거조사는 특히 밤 열두시에 하기로 되엿다. 그것은 백란양이 히스테리에 절녀서 의사의 의견을 참작하야 야반 만뢰가 구적 할 때만 법정 취조에 견딜 수 잇스리라고 인정한 까닭이다.
밤 재판소는 악마의 성과 가티 놉히 소사잇다. 법정에는 판사이하 게원 변호사 방청인이 입추의 여지가 업시 드리 밀렷스나 주위는 몹시 고요하엿다.
약간 야웨인 꼿과 가튼 소녀는 조용히 증인석에 나타낫다. 깨끗하고 아름답고 례를 들면 첫녀름 힌 백합화가 가티 간얄핀 풍정이지만 쾌활하게 이러나서 재판장에게 묵례를 하엿다. 재판장의 심문에 대하야 그 녀자는 모-든 것을 명료하게 적확하게 공술하엿다. 로재신이가 침실에 침입한 일 침의를 붓잡고 자기에게 덤벼든 일 「복수다!」하고 부르지즈면서 두부와 흉부를 락타한 일 나종에는 자기는 최대최악의 모욕을 바든 일, 녀성으로써 말하기 거북한 일, 가느다란 그리고 떨니는 소리로 확실히 순서를 따라 여실하게 진술하엿다.
재판장은 흉한이 과연 로재신인지 아닌지를 거듭 다짐을 바덧는데 백란양은 로재신이란 것을 명백하게＜55＞ 긍정하며 피고석에 잇는 로재신이를 바라보면서 「확실히 이 사람입니다.」하고 단정하엿다.
그런대 다음 증거조사의 결과는 아*사건을 전화(轉化) 식혓다. 로재신의 하숙집 마나님은 갈제음에 당하야 로재신이는 결코 출입을 하지 안이 하엿다고 공술하엿다. 백란양 침실의 유리창을 수선한, 즉 공은 유리도 창틀도 부섯젓지만 박게서 부신거 갓지 안코 또 장정이 출입할 만치 크지도 못하다고 하엿다. 이 두 사람의 공술은 신용을 할 수가 업다고 하드라도 놀나울 증거가 제공되엿다.
네 사람의 필적감정인(筆跡鑑定人)이 이 법정에서 문제편지 전부-23통-가 로재신이의 필적이 안인 것, 그리고 이것은 모다 백란양의 손으로 된 것이라고 확신하엿다. 어시호 법정은 극도로 긴장이 되엿다. 흰 비닭이 가튼 처녀가 간악한 허언자인가 안인가? 그것이 쌍방법조(法曹)의 격렬한 변론의 초점이 되엿다. 검사와 밋 정박사의 사소(私訴)-(형사사건에 부대한 민사상의 손해배상청구)- 대리인은 백란양의 증언을 신용하라 하고 론단하고 변호사는 백란양을 악마의 권화(權化)라고 절규하엿다.

10.
재판장이나 검사나 방청석이나 이 꼿 가튼 백란양을 의심할 여유를 갓지 못하엿다. 그 아름답고 부드러운 처녀가 무슨 리유로 그 가튼 범죄를 지엿스리라고는 미더지지 안엇다. 사실 로재신이를 유죄로 판결하기에는 불충분한 점도 적지 안타. 편지가 온 경노라든지, 미결감에 잇슬 때에도 익명의 편지가 온 것이라든지, 침실에 침입한 곳이 명백치 안은 것이라든지 흉행당야 집안사람이 전혀 모르고 잇섯든 것이라든지, 모순된 점이 만엇지만 백란양의 미모(美貌)가 모든 것을 해결한다. 저 녀자가 거짓말할 리유가 업다.- 재판장은 생각하엿다. 재판소는 로재신이를 유죄를 결정하고 오년 증역을 언도하엿다.
이 판결에 대하야 여러 방면에서 맹렬한 공격이 이러낫다. 정박사 측 사소대리인(私訴代理人)중에서까지 그 답신은 사건의 진상과 상반된다는 것을 동의하엿다. 이런 일이 잇슨지 올마 안돼서 복역 중에 잇든 로재신이는 무죄석방이 되엿다.
로재신이가 무죄로 석방된 리유는 모든 것은 백란양의 소행임이 판명된 까닭이다. 익명의 편지는 백란양 자신이 쓴 것이고 폭행의 사실은 백란양의 자작소설(自作小說)의 한 장면을 현실화 식힌 것이다. 백란양은 이중성격소유자(二重性格所有者)로써 일종 참학취미(慘虐趣味)가 로재신이를 희생 식힐 것을 주저치 안코 감행하엿스며 사건의 전개 되여 가는 것을 일종 쾌락으로 음미한 것이다. 필경 이것은 히스테리의 결과라고 전문의사는 말하엿다. 하여간 진기한 사건이다. (끗) ＜56＞
＜52-56＞