잡지명	別건곤 제44호
발행일	1931년 10월 01일
기사제목	日中軍衝突 滿洲事變의 經過顚末―九月十八日부터 二十四日지― (Sino-Japanese Military Clash: The Whole Story of the Manchurian Incident - From September 18th to 24th)
필자	記者 (Reporter)
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellaneous Writing)

Sino-Japanese Military Clash: The Whole Story of the Manchurian Incident - From September 18th to 24th

Reporter

It has already been ten days since the Manchurian Sino-Japanese military clash, which started with the explosion of the South Manchurian Railway (滿鐵線) and caused a great shock to the world! Although it hasn't been long, in urban areas, there were days when the newspaper extra bells rang four or five times, or at least two or three times a day. Even in remote rural areas, the old, women, children, and servants, without knowing what was going on, spread rumors of "war, war" from place to place. Fortunately, we spent a pleasant Ch'usŏk (秋夕) in peace, and the tense attention of the world is gradually calming down. However, most people have only heard the outline of the events through newspaper articles, scattered extras, or rumors. It seems difficult to know the details, so our editorial department has decided to write a diary-like record of the events so far to provide a reference for our readers around the world. (Reporter)

-September 18th-

◇ Around 10:30 PM, Chinese troops stationed in Peitaikying (北大營) (where the Chinese Fengtien Army (奉天軍) was stationed), about ten li (朝鮮里敎) north of Fengtien (奉天) City, blew up a railway bridge on the South Manchurian Railway line between Fengtien and Ch'angch'un (長春), which ran west of Peitaikying, at a place called Liutiaokou (柳條溝). This was the first spark that led to an exchange of fire with Japanese railway guard troops who were guarding the area. This was the beginning of the Manchurian Sino-Japanese military clash that caused such a great shock to the world.

◇ The Japanese garrison in Fengtien immediately called for an emergency mobilization and, at the same time, dispatched some troops by military train to the Liutiaokou area to fight the Chinese troops in Peitaikying. By 1:30 PM on the 19th, they had occupied the entire Peitaikying.

Part of the force headed towards the Fengtien city (Chinese quarter) from around 12 o'clock and started shelling, advancing first from the west.

-September 19th-

◇ At 3:30 AM, Japanese troops who had advanced into the city occupied the Taishō (大小) and Seiheimon (西邊門) gates. Japanese troops who had occupied Peitaikying joined them, sweeping away Chinese soldiers and police in the city, disarming them everywhere. By 6:30 AM, the government and other government offices and financial institutions were all occupied by Japanese troops. The Japanese troops then advanced on the Tungtaikying (東大營) airfield and factories on the outskirts of the city, occupying them all between 10:00 AM and 2:00 PM.

During this time, the Japanese army suffered seven casualties, while the Chinese soldiers suffered approximately two to three hundred casualties. There were approximately 500 Chinese soldiers in the city, and there was only a small amount of fighting. The 470 soldiers in Tungtaikying surrendered with white flags.

◇ At midnight, the Liaoning Province (遼寧省) Negotiation Commissioner from the Chinese side first contacted Hayashi (林) Consul-General at the Japanese Consulate-General by telephone and then personally went to the consulate to plead for a ceasefire.

Chang Hsueh-liang (張學良) in Peiping (北平) telegraphed Tsang Shih-i (臧式毅), the chairman of Liaoning Province, to maintain a policy of absolute non-resistance.

◇ After occupying the city, the Japanese army stationed guards at the city gates and other key points and established the Military Police Headquarters in the Chinese Negotiation Office.

◇ The Japanese army dispatched the 2nd Division from Liaoyang (遼陽) to Fengtien and moved the Army Headquarters from Ryojun (旅順) to Fengtien as well.

◇ The Japanese army stationed in Ch'angch'un launched a surprise attack on Kuanch'engtzu (寬城子) (the Chinese Eastern Railway line leading to Harbin) to the north of Ch'angch'un and Nanling (南嶺) (the Chich'ang Railway line leading to Kirin) to the south, aiming to disarm them. Kuanch'engtzu was completely occupied around 4:00 AM, but the Nanling area faced a day-long hard battle due to the superiority of the Chinese army, and they returned to Ch'angch'un. Ch'angch'un city fell around 2:00 PM, during which the Japanese army suffered 28 war dead and 62 wounded.

◇ Japanese and Chinese troops exchanged fire in Fenghuangch'eng (鳳凰城) on the Antung (安奉) line, and Antung County (安東縣) was also occupied by the Japanese army, and the Chinese army was disarmed. <32>

◇ Yingk'ou (營口), a branch line of the South Manchurian Railway, was also occupied by the Japanese army.

◇ Fengtien City was completely blacked out due to the cutting of power lines.

◇ As the situation in Fengtien became urgent, a request for reinforcements was made to the Kwantung Army, and mobilization orders were issued to two divisions of the Korean Army. Under the leadership of Major General Kamura (嘉村), a mixed brigade of the Korean Army departed from the Yongsan (龍山) Station three times, and the P'yŏngyang (平壤) infantry and air force also mobilized, and the Taegu (大邱) army also mobilized.

◇ During the mobilization of the Korean Army, a hand grenade exploded due to the mishandling of laborers at the Han River (漢江) arsenal, resulting in 38 casualties.

◇ Mobilization also began from the Ranam (羅南) Division, and the Ŏnsŏng (穩城) garrison occupied twenty li across the Tuman River (豆滿江).

◇ Mobilization preparation orders were issued to the Sasebo (佐世保) Naval Base (military port).

◇ Chang Hsueh-liang telegraphed the Sino-Japanese military clash throughout the country.

◇ The Nanking (南京) National Government issued a first protest demanding Japan withdraw from the occupied territories.

◇ Representatives from Japan and China reported the outbreak of the Manchurian Incident to the League of Nations Council. The Council requested the Japanese representative to issue a statement on the spontaneous nature of the Manchurian Incident.

-September 20th-

◇ The Japanese 2nd Division Headquarters moved to Ch'angch'un.

◇ The Japanese army occupied Tungtaikying, occupied Nanling, and the two armies fought fiercely near Kungchuling (公主嶺), and the Japanese army occupied Ch'angt'u (昌圖).

◇ The advance party of the Korean Army arrived in Fengtien, and other Korean Army mobilization units were on standby in Ŭiju (新義州).

◇ It was decided to proclaim military administration in Fengtien.

◇ Municipal administration was implemented in Fengtien, and Japanese Colonel Doihara (土肥原) was appointed mayor.

◇ Various Chinese government and private organizations advocated economic severance with Japan and petitioned for a declaration of war.

◇ The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the National Government issued a second protest demanding Japan's immediate withdrawal.

◇ The Kwangtung (廣東) government also convened an emergency standing committee and decided to protest to Japan.

◇ The National Government sent a peace telegram to the Kwangtung government.

-September 21st-

◇ Arson and bombing incidents occurred frequently in the areas of Yongjŏng (龍井) and Kŭkcha-gai (局子街), and the Ranam Division finally mobilized.

◇ The Korean Army eventually mobilized to Manchuria, and the units that had been waiting in Ŭiju crossed the border and headed north.

◇ The Japanese army advanced into Kirin (吉林), completely occupied the city, disarmed the generals, and decided to operate the Kirin-Ch'angch'un line (吉長線) through the South Manchurian Railway. Fushun (撫順) city was also occupied.

◇ An order was issued to the P'yŏngyang Air Force to mobilize to Kando (間島) and head to Ranam.

◇ Bombs were thrown at Japanese institutions in Harbin.

◇ The Chinese government ordered the protection of Japanese residents and rejected Japanese relief goods for the flood.

◇ Chiang Kai-shek (蔣介石), in a hurry, gathered new key figures of the Southeastern Government (南東政府), held an emergency meeting on countermeasures for the situation, and decided to issue a statement to the outside world. The Central Party Headquarters also held an emergency meeting and encouraged the government.

◇ China formally requested the League of Nations to mediate the Manchurian Incident.

-September 22nd-

◇ The Japanese army issued orders to advance to the Eastern Railway line (東鐵線) to units in the Kirin-Ch'angch'un line area, issued mobilization orders to the Peking-Fengtien line (京奉線), occupied the Kirin-Ch'angch'un and Szet'ao lines (四洮線), and advanced further to Harbin.

◇ The Taegu army mobilized again.

◇ The Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement on the Manchurian Incident.

◇ The situation in the Hunch'un (琿春) area also became extremely dangerous, and people's hearts were agitated.

◇ The Japanese Prime Minister and Minister of the Army conferred to deal with the Manchurian Incident.

◇ The All-China Anti-Japanese Congress was held in Shanghai and resolved to petition the National Government to declare war on Japan.

◇ The Chinese army concentrated in Shanghai.

◇ At the League of Nations Council, Japanese and Chinese representatives engaged in mutual recriminations through their respective speeches.

◇ The League of Nations Council authorized Council President Lerdot (레돌) to request Japan and China to withdraw troops and cease disturbances.

◇ Russia (露國) could not simply stand by and watch the Sino-Japanese conflict, and General Boroshilov (보로실로픈), the Military and People's Commissar, departed by plane for the Far East.

-September 23rd-

◇ The commander of the Kwantung Army dispatched a special envoy to Chang Hsueh-liang, who was staying in Peiping, to resolve the situation.

◇ Japanese and Chinese troops clashed in T'ungliao (通遼), resulting in sixty Chinese casualties and no damage to the Japanese.

◇ The Chinese National Government issued an encouragement proclamation to the people.

◇ The Fengtien Chinese Chamber of Commerce organized an 8,000-member defense corps for self-defense security.

◇ The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the National Government issued a third protest demanding Japan's withdrawal.

◇ Anti-Japanese actions erupted in Hankow (漢口).

◇ Chiang Kai-shek summoned key government figures and decided to reject direct negotiations with Japan regarding the current incident, apply the Kellogg-Briand Pact, and make peace with Huang Tung (黃東).

◇ U.S. Secretary of State Stimson (스팀손) met with Japanese Ambassador Debuchi (出淵) and requested Japan to end its occupation regarding the Manchurian Incident, and exchanged unofficial memoranda.

◇ U.S. Senator Hiram Johnson (하이람쏜), a major anti-Japanese figure, delivered a sarcastic speech, saying, "What does the Kellogg-Briand Pact have to do with it?"

◇ A restaurant in Berlin, Germany, posted an anti-Japanese propaganda sign on its door that read, "Japanese not allowed."

◇ A secret meeting was held at the League of Nations Council regarding the Manchurian Incident, resulting in extreme confusion.

-September 24th-

◇ Foreign Minister Shidehara (幣原) issued a reply to the League of Nations notification, stating that the current Manchurian Incident was not a military action.

-(Written on the morning of September 25th) <33>

**Named Entities**

北大營	Peitaikying
奉天軍	Fengtien gun
柳條溝	Liutiaokou
奉天	Fengtien
長春	Ch'angch'un
大小	Taishō
西邊門	Seiheimon
東大營	Tongtaikying
遼陽	Liaoyang
旅順	Ryojun
寬城子	Kuanch'engtzu
南嶺	Nanling
吉林	Kirin
吉長線	Kichang-sŏn
鳳凰城	Fenghuangch'eng
安東縣	Antong-hyŏn
營口	Yingk'ou
關東軍	Kwantung gun
龍山	Yongsan
嘉村少將	Kamura shōshō
平壤	P'yŏngyang
大邱	Taegu
漢江	Han-gang
羅南	Ranam
穩城	Ŏnsŏng
豆滿江	Tuman-gang
佐世保	Sasebo
張學良	Chang Hsueh-liang
北平	Peiping
臧式毅	Tsang Shih-i
南京	Nanking
林總領事	Hayashi sōryōji
廣東	Kwangtung
龍井	Yongjŏng
局子街	Kŭkcha-gai
新義州	Ŭiju
蔣介石	Chiang Kai-shek
南東政府	Namdong chŏngbu
琿春	Hunch'un
出淵大使	Debuchi taishi
四洮線	Sat'ao-sŏn
幣原外相	Shidehara gaishō
哈爾賓	Harubin
土肥原大佐	Doihara taisa
李頓	Riton
博羅室洛夫	Poro sillopeu
米國務長官斯汀生	Miguk務長官斯汀生
海蘭孫	Haillan Son
韓口	Han gu
南滿鐵道線	Nammant'ŏldosŏn
黃東	Hwang Tong



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제44호
발행일	1931년 10월 01일
기사제목	日中軍衝突 滿洲事變의 經過顚末―九月十八日부터 二十四日지―
필자	記者
기사형태	잡저

日中軍衝突 滿洲事變의 經過顚末―九月十八日부터 二十四日지―
						記者
滿鐵線爆破로부터 불이 튀여서 마침내 世人의 耳目에 非常한 衝動을 준 滿洲日中軍衝突事件이 생긴지도 어느듯 十日間! 그동안이 얼마아니지마는 都會地에서는 하로에도 新聞號外의 방울이 四五次, 或은 二三次씩 아니울리운날이거의업섯고 궁벽한 시골의 老人 婦女子와 兒童走卒들지 멋도모르고「난리다 난리다」하는 풍설이 이곳에서 저곳으로 퍼저가는 중에 우리는 다행히 無事泰平으로 즐거운 秋夕을 보내고 한는 非常히 緊張되엿든 世人의 視聽도차차 가라안저가는 中이다. 그러나 대개는 다만 新聞記事나 或은 어지러이날느는 그의 號外나 는 傳傳으로 듯는 所聞을가지고 그의 대강을 드럿슬 엇지된갈피를 알수가업슬듯함으로 우리 編輯局에서는 그동안 經過를 日記的으로 摘記하야 滿天下愛讀者君에게 參考를 삼어주고저 이것을 쓴 것이다.(記者)

-九月十八日-
◇밤十時半頃 中國奉天城北約十里(朝鮮里敎로)되는 北大營(中國奉天軍이 駐在한곳)에잇는 中國軍이거기서 얼마 아니러진 柳條溝라는 곳에서 北大營의 西側을 通貫한 奉天ㆍ長春間南滿鐵道線의 鐵橋를 爆破한 것이 맨처음의 導火線이되야 역시 그 附近을 警戒하고잇든 日本鐵道守備兵과 交火케되니 그것이 이번 世人의 大衝動을이르킨 滿洲日中軍衝突事變의 發端이다.
◇그리자 奉天의 日本駐屯軍은 直時不時召集을하야 應急準備를 하는 同時에 一部는 軍用列車로 柳條溝方面에 赴援하야 北大營의 中國軍과 應戰케하야 十九日午後一時半頃에 北大營의 全部를 占領하고
一部는 十二時頃부터 奉天城內(中國人市街)로 向하야 砲擊을 開始할새 먼저 西편에서부터 進擊하다.
-十九日-
◇새벽세시반에는 城內를 進擊한 日本軍이 大小西邊門을 占領하고 北大營을 占領한 日本軍이 加勢하야 城內의 中國兵과 巡警을 一掃하고 到處에서 武裝解除를 하는 同時에 아침여섯時半에는 政府其他諸官署와 金融機關이 全部 日本軍에게 占領되고 日本軍은 다시 郊外의 東大營飛行場과 工廠等을 進迫하야 十時서부터 午後二時지에 全部 日本軍의 占領한바가되다.
그동안 日本軍의 死傷은 七名이고 中國兵의 死傷은 約二,三百名이엿스며 城內中國軍約五百名이 잇섯는데 若干의 조그만 交戰이잇섯슬이고 東大營의 四百七十名은 白旗를 달고 降服해버렷다.
◇午前零時에 中國側으로부터 遼寧省交涉委員이 日本總領事館의 林總領事에게 비로소 電話로 그리고 다음에는 領事館에 親히가서 攻擊中止하기를 懇請하고
北平에잇는 張學良氏는 遼寧省主席臧式毅氏에게 奉天軍으로는 絶對無抵抗主義를지키라고 電命하다.
◇日本軍은 城內占領後 城門과 其他各要所에 守備兵을 配置하고 中國交涉署內에 憲兵本部를두다.
◇日本軍은 遼陽第二師團이 奉天으로 出動하고 旅順의 軍司令部를 역시 奉天으로옴기다.
◇長春駐在日本軍은 長春北方에잇는 寬城子(哈爾賓으로나가는 中東鐵道線)와 南方에잇는 南嶺(吉林으로가는 吉長鐵道線)을 夜襲하야 武裝解除를하기로하고 寬城子는 午前네時頃에 完全占領하엿스나 南嶺方面은 中國軍의 優勢로 終日의 苦戰을하다가 長春으로도라왓스며 長春城은 午後二時頃에 陷落되엿는대 그동안에 日本軍의 戰死者二十八名과 負傷者六十二名을내다.
◇安奉線鳳凰城에서도 日中兵이 交火하고 安東縣도 日本軍에게 占領되엿스며 中國軍은 武裝解除를 當하다.＜32＞
◇南滿支線營口도 日本軍에게 占領되다.
◇奉天市는 電線斷切로 因하야 全部가 暗黑化하다.
◇奉天의 事態가 急迫하야 關東軍의 請援이 잇슴으로 朝鮮軍兩師團에 出動令이 내리어 嘉村少將引率下에 朝鮮混成一個旅團이 三次나 龍山驛에서 出發하고 平壤步兵隊와 飛行隊도 出動하고 大邱軍隊로 出動하다.
◇朝鮮軍出動의 際에 漢江通兵器庫에서 人夫의 失手로 手榴彈이 爆發되야 三十八名의 死傷者를 내다.
◇羅南師團에서도 出動이시작되야서 穩城守備隊가 豆滿江對岸二十里를 占領하다.
◇佐世保鎭守府(軍港)에도 出動準備令이내리라.
◇張學良氏가 日中軍衝突事件을 全國에 通電하다.
◇南京國民政府에서 第一次抗議로 日本에 對하야 占領地撤退를 要求하다
◇國際聯盟理事會에 日中代表로부터 이번 滿洲事變의 發端을 報告하고 同會에서는 日本代表에게 滿洲事變의 自發的聲明書發表를 要求하다.
-二十日-
◇日本第二師團司令部를 長春으로 移轉하다.
◇日本軍이 東大營을 占領하고 南嶺을 占領하고 公主嶺附近에서 兩軍이 激戰하야 日本軍이 昌圖를 占領하다.
◇朝鮮軍先發隊가 奉天에 到着하고 其他朝鮮軍出動部隊는 新義州에서 待機하다.
◇奉天에 軍政을 布告키로 決定한다.
◇奉天에 市政을 實施하고 日本土肥原大佐기 市長에 被任되다.
◇中國朝野各團體에서 日本과 經濟斷交를 提唱하고 宣戰布告를 請願하다.
◇國民政府外交部에서 第二次抗議로 日本에 卽時撤兵을 要求하다.
◇廣東政府도 緊急常務委員會를 召集한 後日本에 抗議키로 決定하다.
◇國民政府에서 廣東政府에 和平電을 發送하다.
-二十一日-
◇龍井과 局子街方面에 放火와 投彈事件이 頻頻함으로 羅南師團이 마침내 動員하다.
◇朝鮮軍이 畢竟, 滿洲에 出動하야 新義州에 待機中이든 各部隊가모다 越境北行하다.
◇日本軍이 吉林으로 進出하야 同城을 完全占領하고 武將을 解除하엿스며 吉長線도 占領하야 滿鐵에서 運轉키로 決定하다 撫順城도 占領하다.
◇平壤飛行隊에 間島出動命令이내리어 羅南으로 向發하다.
◇哈爾賓에서 日本各機關에 爆彈을 投下하다.
◇中國政府에서 在留日本人保護를 命令하고 日本의 水災慰問品을 拒絶하다.
◇■■한 蔣介石氏가 南東政府新要人을 集合하고 時局對策을 緊急會議한後 對外聲明發表를 決定하엿스며 中央黨部도 緊急會議를 開催하고 政府를 激勵하다.
◇中國이 滿洲事件調停을 國際聯盟에 正式으로 依賴하다.
-二十二日-
◇日本軍이 吉長線方面部隊에 東鐵線進出令을 내리고 京奉線에도 出動命令이 내리고 吉長, 四洮線도 占領하고 哈爾賓으로 更進하다.
◇大邱軍이 다시 出動하다.
◇外務省에서 滿洲事變의 聲明書를 發表하다.
◇琿春方面도 極히 險惡化하야 人心이 恟恟하게되다.
◇日本首相과 陸相이 滿洲事變을 措置하기 爲하야 協議하다.
◇上海에서 全中國抗日大會가 열리어 日本에 宣戰布告하기를 國民政府에 請願하기로 決議하다.
◇中國軍이 上海로 集中되다.
◇國際聯盟理事會에서 日中代表가 各其演說로 互相論難하다.
◇國際聯盟理事會에서는 軍隊撤退紛擾停止를 日中兩國에 要求할 權能을 理事長레돌氏에게주다.
◇露國도 日中衝突事件을 傍觀만할수엄다하야 軍事人民委員長보로실로픈 將軍이 飛行機로 極東을 向하야 나다.
-二十三日-
本土關東軍司令官은 事態收拾次로 北平滯在中인 張學良氏에게 特使를 派遺하다.
◇通遼에서 日中軍이 交戰하야 中軍死傷이 六十名이요 日本에는 損害가엄다.
◇中國國民政府에서 國民에게 激勵布告를 發하다.
◇奉天中國側商務總會는 自衛警備次로 八千名保衛團을 組織하다.
◇國民政府外交部에서는 第三次抗議로 日本에 撤兵을 要求하다.
◇漢口에 排日行動이 이러나다.
◇蔣介石氏는 政府要人을 召集하고 今番事件에 對하야 日本과의 直接交涉拒絶과 不戰條約適用과 黃東과 和平키를 決定하다.
◇米國務長官스팀손氏는 日本出淵大使와 會見하고 滿洲事件에 對하야 日本의 占領解除를 要望하고 非公式으로 覺書를 交附하다.
◇米國 上院議員으로 大排日家인하이람쏜氏가 「不戰條約기 何關이냐」는 議笑的演說을 吐하다.
◇獨逸伯林어느 食堂에는 「日本人不可入」이라는 排日宣傳紙가 門아페貼付 되다.
◇國際聯盟理事會에서는 滿洲事變에 對한 秘密會議가 얼리고 極히 混雜을 이루다.
-二十四日-
◇幣原外相으로부터 聯盟通告에 對한 回答을 發하고 이번 滿洲事變은 軍事的行動이아니라고 表明하다.
-(九月二十五日午前記)＜33＞
＜32-33＞