잡지명	별건곤 제26호
발행일	1930년 02월 01일
기사제목	開闢社創社十周年紀念計畫 (GaeByeok Publishing Company 10th Anniversary Commemoration Plan)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Notice/Post-Editing)

GaeByeok Publishing Company 10th Anniversary Commemoration Plan

1. New Sister Business Establishment
We will take the lead in starting a new business that is both the most urgently needed and has been neglected until now.

2. Reader Dispatch to Foreign Countries
We will select one or two people through a thesis competition through the three magazines and have them inspect emerging cities in foreign countries.

3. Increase Publication of One of the Three Magazines
In addition to the three magazines currently published, we plan to publish another new magazine and advance as a "big four" magazine publisher.

4. Commemorative Exhibition Held
In addition to holding a 10th-anniversary gathering every month throughout this year, we will hold a large exhibition that will be especially beneficial to the public.

5. Nationwide Reader Organization
We plan to organize reader groups for "Student" (學生) and "Children" (어린이) nationwide to build an even closer relationship.

6. Organization of a Touring Lecture Team
We will organize a touring lecture team from among our employees and commissioned speakers and dispatch them to local areas from time to time, focusing on reader groups, to strive for the improvement of local culture.

7. Establishment of a New Head Office Agency Department
We plan to establish a large agency department in the form of a consumer cooperative with over 200,000 readers to improve the convenience of their daily lives.

8. Commemorative Publication: Popular Tales of Korean History
The first of our 10th-anniversary publications, a modern Korean history written by Cha Sang-ch'an (車相瓚) in a way that anyone can easily understand.

9. Commemorative Publication: "The Origin of Civilization" (文明의 淵源)
A 10th-anniversary gift for students and young people, a detailed description of the path of human culture, translated by Ko Yŏng-hwan (高永煥).

10. Commemorative Publication: Popular Child-Rearing Talks
Pang Chŏng-hwan's (方定煥) child-rearing talks, which have been long-awaited in every home in every region!! We confidently assert that this book is essential for every household.

A Lone Rider Fighting a Thousand: A Fierce Battle, Another Fierce Battle - The New Road of the Eleventh Year
GaeByeok Publishing Company, which is celebrating its 10th anniversary this year, will first publish special features in each of the three magazines every month, and is also making steady progress in preparing the above ten major plans. <100>

We Earnestly Request the Support of Our Fellow Employees and Readers!!
We are endlessly grateful that we have been able to fight a hard battle for ten years as if each day was one, with meager strength, entirely thanks to the support of our readers, and at the same time, we earnestly request even more powerful support for a new advance in the eleventh year. <101>

Named Entities

車相瓚	Cha Sang-ch'an
高永煥	Ko Yŏng-hwan
方定煥	Pang Chŏng-hwan



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제26호
발행일	1930년 02월 01일
기사제목	開闢社創社十周年紀念計畫
기사형태	사고·편집후기

開闢社創社十周年紀念計畫
1 新姉妹事業創設
目下最新緊急을 要하는 일이면서 아즉지니저버려지고잇는 新事業에 率先着手함니다
2 讀者外國派遣
三雜誌를 通하야 論文募集의 方式으로 一人或二人을 選出하야 外國新興都市를 視察케함
3 三雜誌一種增判
現在發行하는 三雜誌外에 한가지 새 雜誌를 刊行하야 四大雜誌로 奮進하려함니다
4 紀念展覽會開催
十週年紀念集會를 今年中一年두고 每月開催하는 外에 特히 民衆에게 有益할 大展覽會開催
5 全國讀者會組織
『學生』과『어린이』의 讀者會를 全朝鮮的으로 組織하야 一層緊密한 關係를 지여나아가려는것임니다
6 巡廻講演班組織
本社社員及囑托中으로서 巡廻講演班을 組織하야 隨時地方에 出張하야 讀者會中心으로 地方文化向上에 努力
7 本社代理部新設
二十餘萬讀者와 더부러 消費組合式의 一大代理部를 設置하야 實生活의 便宜를 圖하기로함
8 紀念出版 通俗朝鮮史話
十週年紀念出版其一, 아모나 가장 쉽게 알수잇게 著述한 近代朝鮮史車相瓚氏著
9 紀念出版 「文明의 淵源」
學生級靑年級을 向해보내는 十週年紀念선물노 人類文化의 길을 細術한 高永煥氏譯著
10 紀念出版 通俗育兒講話
地方마다 집집마다에서 苦待한지 오래인 方定煥氏의 育兒講話!! 萬家必備할 著書임을 斷言한다

一騎當千 奮戰奮戰 十一年재의 새길
今年으로 十週年을 마지하는 開闢社는 우선 三雜誌부터 每月에 大大特輯을 하거니와 다시  上記十大計劃을 세워 그 準備가 着着進行되고 잇슴니다.＜100＞

社友諸氏 讀者諸位의 後援을 切願!!
하잘것업는 微力으로 十年一日가치 苦戰헤올수 잇는 것은 全혀 讀者諸氏의 後援힘인 것을 感謝하야마지아니하는 同時에 便히 十一年재의 새로운 進出을 위하야 一層의 힘잇는 聲援을 주시기 切願함니다＜101＞
＜100-101＞