잡지명	별건곤  
발행일	1927년 02월 01일  
기사제목	京城名物男女 新春誌上大會 (Kyŏngsŏng's Notable Men and Women Spring Conference)  
저자	주최자 관상자  
기사형태	잡저 (Magazine Article)  

京城 (Kyŏngsŏng), with its population of over 100,000, boasts notable men and women in equal number. There are both short and tall notable figures, as well as plumply built and those with unusual features. Not to mention well-mannered, unattractive, good at marriage, skilled in romance, heavy drinkers and those who enjoy rice cakes, graceful figures and rather awkward ones; it includes all sorts of remarkable individuals. To gather such a multitude of notables in one place, a regular venue wouldn’t suffice. Therefore, we have specially arranged this gathering on the expansive grounds of Byeol-geon-gon.

Membership is open to anyone who has lived in Kyŏngsŏng for a long time and is known as a notable figure, and there is no entrance fee for membership. All qualified individuals, regardless of class, occupation, or age, are warmly welcomed.

However, one warning for members is that being a notable does not mean to act thoughtlessly. Upon reflection, one might think it's frivolous to call someone a notable, but in reality, that’s not the case. The term 'notable' refers to a person of prominence, someone famed among people and recognized as valuable amongst all beings. In other words, it means a renowned figure. Understanding this will prevent misunderstandings. Also, it is to be noted that those who cannot attend this time may join in the next opportunity, and thus complaints should be avoided.

I apologize for the lengthy opening remarks. Now, let's proceed with the meeting. Due to the large number of attendees, let’s broach matters one by one in sequence – please, adjust your seating! (Host: Observer)

Short and Tall Figures

In ordinary gatherings, it is commonplace for shorter individuals to always stand behind others; however, in this meeting, we have arranged for the convenience of shorter individuals to be seated first. Who qualifies as a member? Those of notable standing include Ch'oe Sŏng-u, the Chief of the Editorial Department of the Chuguk Ilbo, P'ark Pal-yang, the regional chief, and the independent Kim Kyŏng-jin, who will be of the first group (meaning they can be seen clearly). Lee Kyŏl-yong from the Chosŏn Ilbo and Yoo Chang-ho, who trades foreign shoes in Andong and graduated from a high school, will count as part of the second group (meaning they can be viewed normally). An Jong-yeong, the owner of the Wŏngch'ang store in Andong, and P'ark Ch'i-ho, the owner of the Chehwa-dang pharmacy in Ch'ae-dong, will form the third group (meaning they are well-known). Hyŏn Yo-chung from the Dongdeok Girls' School is also in this group, but since she cannot wear a cap being a woman, we have to apologize to her.

If anyone among you were to recommend a president, it would of course be An Jong-yeong from the third group, as he fits the role quite perfectly. The vice president would be P'ark Ch'i-ho, and for the role of secretary, we can expect Ch'oe Sŏng-u to score the most points, whether based on age, wittiness, publishing experience, or virtue in drinking. However, if Dr. P'ark Chong-hwan were in Kyŏngsŏng instead of being out in the provinces, it would be hard to predict who would monopolize that position. 

As commemorative gifts for this meeting, it would be appropriate to present Pyŏngyang chestnuts and short tobacco pipes, and using the famous phrase: "Dressing up, sweeping the ground, wearing shoes that barely touch the shoulders. If encountering water with a cow’s footprint, waving hands can summon a boat," would be fitting for our remarks of goodwill. For entertainment, perhaps a performance of "The Little Giant" would be enjoyed.

Now, let’s conclude the meeting for shorter individuals and commence the meeting for taller individuals. The order should be placed on the signboard of the Yuch'ang Trading Company in Chongno, and the communication wires can be temporarily utilized from the hat store, with entertainment provided by singers such as P'ei Ch'uk-hwa, Yoon Oak-hwa, Kim Il-jang, and P'ark Ok-hwa. Who shall be the committee chair? It would rightfully be Kim Chŏng-sik, a renowned character, famous for his interactions with a reputed Christian couple, known for both age and stature, who is six feet tall. And the committee members would include im Kyeong-jae from Kuŏn High School, Lee Sŏng-gwi, Ch'ŏwŏn Infantry Division's Cha Man-jae, Kyŏngsan Po-seong School’s Kim Hong-sik, Samgŏng Hall’s Sŏn'u Chŏn, and Liang Bai-Hua, a translator at the Tahōkyo Consulate who is undoubtedly notable. 

This meeting can be surely termed a grand gathering. Traveling to Western countries should not feel awkward. They may be termed as the nine long figures of Kyŏngsŏng. 

Name or Gathering of the Flowery Hide 

Flowing Fish Startled by Net, Were it Not for Cow’s Leaf

This was once a taunt about someone’s appearances or mishaps. There are various nicknames for the alluded person, such as “pockmarked” or "honey jar" or more recently “mirror-broken teacher” among many. However, at this conference, to wipe away past shameful nicknames, a new name of application is to be given: Flowery Hiding Teacher (which translates “pockmarked” into “the monstrous rock” might be too harsh). At this Flowery Hiding meeting, which qualified individuals can participate? Technically recruiting anyone, it is expected that the medical profession will boast the most members, followed by educators. 

Let us mention some names too! 

Cho Seung-yoon from the Kyŏngsŏng Hospital, what about him? And Kang Won-young from the Tayŏng Hospital would be quite notable. Moreover, if An Sang-ho, P'ark Kye-yang, Hong Sŏk-ho, and Yoo Byung-hee cannot be admitted, it would incite opposition to this meeting. Though colleagues in Pyŏngyang and Pugu or the surrounding areas likely won’t participate, they may still celebrate the start of this festival.

Furthermore, with regard to schools, there is the principal of Kaohsu School, Ch'oe Myŏng-hwan and the principal of Hŭi High School, Kim Hyŏng-bae, as well as three faculty members - In Kyŏng-jae, Lee Sŏng-gwi, and Lee Byeong-gwi – from Central High School, who would surely have standing as council members. (Son Nyang from the Kyŏngsŏng Women’s High School is noted female and hence recommended for denial). 

Oh! Also, Chang Chae-hak from the New Heaven Literature Society and Han In-su from the Dae-Dong Printing Company fall into the category as well. If the chair is to be recommended from within, it is likely to be from the doctor’s group since they are most numerous in this assembly. That means Cho Seung-yoon would be elected as president, An Sang-ho would be the vice president and probably total billing clerks of Lee Byeong-gwi would act as the secretary. However, doctor Cho is known to heal children’s diseases with his face alone which can cure without medicine, and this is testament to how he can throw their fevers away just from seeing him, while An Sang-ho has an interesting anecdote: once, during his days of struggling at Tōkyō University, he broke the mirror while admiring through it. Considering this, they are duly qualified for their roles. 

Oh my - Hanseong Bank’s Han Sang-ryong only needs to be admitted, and without electioneering, he would surely take on a position. Also, if they indeed would formally relish in a gathering, the arrangements of the location and food should be very much like this: on the banquet, a decorative mosquito net should be placed, and on tables dishes of Ch'iba raw fish and crab should lie while the alcohol, imposed from Gangwŏn Province, served in bronze cups, followed by singing P'ark Ch'un-jae’s bawdy song accompanying the rhythm of pounding old stone mills and card games ought prove enjoyable. Such should be the recommendations for Flowery Hiding members.

The Weighty Family and Mr. Thin

Following the passing of Hong Tae-yun, the heavyweights of Kyŏngsŏng were in worry for a while, until another famous plump member was revealed among the Hong family so indeed it was Hong Suk-hyŏn, who served as the Principal of the Official High School. During his time in the school, few had ever noted him as exceedingly large nor realizing his height. Yet recently he has drawn heavy comparisons against others such as Jo Nam-hee and Kyŏngwang Temple’s Kang Taeryŏn, with even little to match against Baekbyeong Donghyun. In terms of weight, Hong Suk-hyŏn weighs 28 guan; Jo Nam-hee weighs 25 guan; Baekbyeong Donghyun weighs 20 guan; Kang Daeryŏn weighs 21 guan. 

Please do not be absurd this way! An elderly man of sixty-five weighing thirty-two guan is highlighted: Lee Tae-sŏn, working faithfully for thirty years without a day off at Joongno Hwa Pi Dang pharmacy. Compared to Hong Suk-hyŏn, the two share a comparable weight, yet since he squanders his fitness, he ought to be recommended as president based on his years of experience. Not only that, his facial demeanor is healthy, and despite aging he still pen crafts under the lamp without needing his glasses. Although he drinks thoroughly, he maintains moderation to an extent of consuming two cups at a session thrice a day. Whereas Hong Tae-yun reportedly broke a horse's back while intoxicated.

In whatever remark made of him, if an organization is to operate a sightseeing team to Nunjin Gwan Cemetery for photographs beneath the Mireuk Buddha statue, those viewing the picture will wonder how many people once bustling around this area had gathered. If referring to Japan’s national sports hall, it would be warmly received by all at the Chosŏn Sumo Team. Either way, they are certainly distinguished men of Kyŏngsŏng.

Those of wealth indulge on delicacies while suffering their belly aches, while some struggle to survive without at least one bowl of rice porridge – true sights of today's society. Similarly, while some worry about obesity, others concentrate on starving themselves, electing to assume an honorary advisory role within the Wŏnsan Fish Association and the “Gangmerī” Corporation. Long ago, Jeong Yong-jak, who served as principal of Po-seong Academy, moved to Northern Manchuria in the wake of founding the Manchukuo and subsequently left school supervisor Nam Hyŏng-u (known nicknamed as Thin Stone) on his voyage to Shanghai. Since that time, the Thin Man meeting in Kyŏngsŏng has dwindled considerably. 

However, in recent times, Lim Kyu, a pioneer in Japanese linguistics, will likely take the position of the revived meeting president. The vice presidency will be afforded to the budding author Lee Ki-young, reputed to have loving whispers surrounding him, with an honorable mention joining the financial situation of Han Yu-wan from Haidong Bank, based on his ancillary accomplishments as secretary. Unfortunately, it remains regrettable they weren’t measured on the scales as to weight, but if they should step out on days when the breeze turns, concerns over aerial maneuvers need not arise. 

Three Giant Figures of Note

Yaehong’s owner, In Tae-gam, is not only notable in Kyŏngsŏng but also renowned far and wide for possessing quite the sizeable head contrary to local comparisons. Yun Mun-nyong, the owner of Donghwa Pharmacy has also garnered a noteworthy reputation. Years prior, during the Gyŏmi Movement incident, his head garnered him comments from guards, addressing him as Mun-headman.

In terms of foreign comparison, following the passing of Hong Chung-hyeon, no found individual has matched the Korean proportion until a foreigner such as from the French Consulate, Carl Roe’s ‘12 inches’ became the talk of the town.

Five Ill-fated Cultures

Jang Dou-hyeong of Heung-il Society may be the individual most regarded as generous, yet his speeches are anything but engaging. Should he take the stage, the commotion at home swells, and whether quarrels arise or peace prevails, when he speaks, peace settles over all. The eyebrows of Kwŏn Hwa’s Kim Mi-li with intentions toward students, or the honorable Chang Heung-gyeong from Sookmyon Girls High can also be deemed competent speakers. 

The bothersome “Oh! Oh!” statements from Lee Seog-yo of Myeosun and Shin U-byeon of Geungmyeong represent significant notoriety as they gather attention within journalist circles while Ahn Jai-hong of Chosŏn Ilbo and Lee Jong-in of the Heavenly Taoist Committee alongside Se-mu Ran-seung Hospital’s Lee Gap-seong and others are established figures in the debate arena.

They might gather both mischief or goodwill, but their presence is unavoidable, rendering any formal discussion or congratulatory remarks a mere façade without their inputs. However, the absence of calm addresses from those such as Geo Dae-gam or publicuring figures has no bearing upon the tone in which all functions play out.

Dialogue Rich Exchange

If we say amidst the spirited repartee, the figures of note, Kwon Deok-kye from Central High School and Ch’ŏn Sang-jam from the Kaepŏk Society would bear the brunt of fearsome critiques should one dispute the claims. An addressed sermon covering the younger Buddhist assembly led them within discussions overshadowed by Kwon’s festival with an alarming note: “To devour the Buddha and release excrements.” Kwon turns a broad laugh even when taken by police officers unjustly.

The two demonstrated similar figures physically, with Kwon displaying caramel features and Ch’ŏn exhibiting his fuzzy hair as they fit the precise measure laid together to art. When they congregate at Sangyeong P’yangyang Cafe, they elicit anxieties to maintain warmth aside from their political associations altogether due to the reticences observed. 

The Riotous Flaws of the Mustachioed Party

After the advertisement partner Yoon Yeong-ki conspicuously vanished, the thick-mustached faction within Kyŏngsŏng diminished significantly. However, it is a fortunate occurrence that his inheritor, the young gentleman possesses some impressive whiskers as well. Also, the editorial chief Ch’oe Yong-muk boasts both handsome features and well-groomed facial hair. He is renowned for his extensive accomplishments in printwork, also likened to Ch’oe Sŏng-u of Chuguk Ilbo for superior proofreading acumen supplemented by mutual drinking frequents, where both pay regular visits to Min-sun’s and Changsa-dong’s tea houses where they enjoy being greeted formally as they arrive.

Notably, there is Kim U-hang who serves as an interpreter at China’s consulate, also a noted contributor within the mustachio brigade. Their service is expected amidst any church service attendance. 

As for the clean-shaven representatives, Song Jin-u of Dong'a Ilbo will rise to be seen in leadership, followed closely by Kwon Dongjins and Shim U-seong as considerable figures in public referencing spaces.

Beau Men of Performance and the Non-Dapper Gentry

With regard to fashion, Yoon Ji-woo, adorned with marten coats and pearl outfitted shoes, finds himself brevity of financial luxury as he steps back towards concerned bodies, while Ko Won-hun, lingering as the representative of Ji-nam-do, has faded from grace. 

A patterned man, Baek In-ki from the amusement park and Shin Hyŏng-u from the Central Presbyterian church are attempting to preserve appearances. While Baek In-ki exhibits forgiving styling, Shin Hyŏng-u measures himself as a model of refined elegance while meticulously managing his appearance. 

His proper garments, perfectly tailored suits, fit with care and time consuming displays, as adorned by a hand mirror not surprisingly commandeers the hearty discretion of the barbers at Central Barber Shop. Regrettably, he presently finds himself in Tōkyō and thus exiled from this Kyŏngsŏng Notables Forum.

One sure to reel memories beneath colored cheeks, making a scene alongside his captivating ornate veneer, he captivates audiences while lugging warm-hearted fragrances which narratively infused an appearance replete of makeup galas from each engagement surrounding the chances for youthful practice of his arts.

Moreover, figures such as Hyun Gi-un, Gyeon Cheol, and Hyeon Mun-chong greet with similar whitewashed highlights. They represent the ambiance of beauty to encourage which is more than meets the eye. However, one might say their names, though ring clearly among the crowd, like fog blown away to not recall their impressions altogether long.

In contrast, it would describe that noted Milong Glani—a courteous guy known for mishaps boasting laughable appearances can be found donning a hat made from cow dung and advising modest tips through dime shoes that carry sporadically worse conditionings encountered so far.

Meeting for Drinks and Festivities

As earlier noted, Yu Jin-tae, representing the Chosŏn Education Association, known to relish whole rice cakes, was presented to share with us. Additionally, Kim Seung-hwan from the non-confession school of mid-high grasped a half-bowl of noodles by foot. During a feast, remarkably he had a capacity to down 48 rice cakes (known also as "Injeolmi," even referred commonly). Hereby, the reports demonstrate that Han Sŏk-ho, born a Christian and a physician, indulges freely to drink as much as fifty shots in a single round. 

Although Chang On-woong and former principal Jeong Dae-hyeon of Po-seong High School can boast substantial accolades in drinking, Han Sŏk-ho alone truly earns the esteem of president of the alcoholic domain, accepted by all, the others remain speculators who may arrange receptions in honor of their inauguration.

Doppelgangers 

Long ago, Han Taijou ordered “Certify for three sojourners”—Ashun, a once reign with beloved sibling through the ties of gratitude and admirable rejection, yet a few extraordinary doppelgängers present today in Kyŏngsŏng. 

P’ark Seung-bin, the principal of P’osong Professional School, stands in slight reality relating to geishas, yet regardless, he has no familial ties to the renowned gisaeng Yen San-hong, while they resemble not only idiosyncrasies among brow similarities but also familial features creating misconceptions in public. 

Their appearance prompts speculation as they caused it in entertainment fields where gisaeng is performed, while P'ark Seung-bin’s stature avoids infamous setups attending the brothels inquiringly exploiting rumors alone against any that persists, regarding such affairs.

In another striking case, Kim Ha-dong, also claimed in roles of different public sectors, their appearances raise reflections about Ilhwan Li, who exudes an uncanny resemblance yet also, in the rear reminiscent of two parts binding together is the very predictability surfaced. 

The pursuers Dong Ying and Chosŏn Ilbo’s Kim Il-han often grow closer yet fail from together viewed, came from officials’ performance that often foretells anew sing song of clashes once any go unobserved. 

To a noticeable level conflict arises that occurs generated significant outcomes, they are famous highlights portraying the notorious variances seen, spawning a curiosity between notable figures hooking casual onlook midst celebrations of the unfamiliar. 

The Unruly Discourse of Women 

There were meanwhile complaints emitting from the women’s section of the conference, deemed uncommonly being a man-centric assembly up until now these assemblies have operated entirely under male auspices. 

One distinguished lady with aged perspective suddenly rose for her point and declared, “Ladies of the assembly! There should be no surprises in this regard. Hence, I present myself as an aspirant for the presidential role. I am the one for honorable matrimony!" 

“In our working class, if we are to associate together, we might hardly make our relationship with unspent moments. I mean well; there is a necessity to support marriage within those we find ourselves married to.” 

As her dialogue amplified, one fashionably thin woman, roundly distinct with her bright eyes falters, contradicting humorously “You say you excel at marriage? I am notoriously famed for my divorces!” much to contrast its purposes like attending a ceremony highlighting the disparity in longevity around union. “Mismatched to this regard muddling past the previous historic context of matrimony, once a shift arises, it classifies the behavior of those betraying lost affections.” 

Another woman suddenly came forth, a manter soaking souring from Pyŏngyang, adding in her own jest “What folly to pretend life remains scarce—here by the river bank so scattered among sea stones of Kyŏngsŏng, surround by charisma of surrounding environments!” 

Amid the conferences, statements beginning shrouded bring up matters from rustling present even ought call insights that dislodge foundations rhythmically advancing toward heated exchanges! 

The host apprehensively intervened with a voice, “Let us put a stop to this! At this rate, all our women's secrets would spill forth. In the earlier pursuits of airing opinions we might risk engendering unwanted disturbances if not resolved! This incomplete matter shall await on yet another occasion! Thus let us conclude!” 

Summary

This article humorously depicts a gathering in 1927 of notable individuals from Kyŏngsŏng, addressing both men and women with a variety of characteristics and quirks. The conference emphasizes the blend of social roles and oddities relevant to colonial society while showcasing the lightheartedness of these contexts. The interplay of gender roles in public discussions highlights the shifting perceptions of societal expectations during this time, hinting at the evolving dynamics among Koreans under Japanese rule and the societal pressures influencing personal and collective identities.

Named Entities

별건곤  	Byeol-geon-gon  
京城  	Kyŏngsŏng  
崔誠愚	Ch'oe Sŏng-u  
朴八陽	P'ark Pal-yang  
金井鎭	Kim Kyŏng-jin  
李吉用	Lee Kyŏl-yong  
柳章浩	Yoo Chang-ho  
安俊永	An Jong-yeong  
朴致和	P'ark Ch'i-ho  
洪莜亭	Hyŏn Yo-chung  
朴宗桓	P'ark Chong-hwan  
平壌栗	Pyŏngyang  
金貯信	Kim Geun-jo  
鄭世胤	Jŏng Se-ŭn  
姜元永	Kang Won-yŏng  
安商浩	An Sang-ho  
朴啓陽	P'ark Kye-yang  
洪錫厚	Hong Sŏk-ho  
李泰善	Lee Tae-sŏn  
尹大감	In Tae-gam  
白寅基	P'ae In-gi  
高元勳	Ko Won-hun  
鄭永澤	Jŏng Yong-jak  
金美理士	Kim Mi-ri  
金秀心	Kim Su-shin   
李瑞求	Lee Seog-yo  
金豊卿	Kim Pong-kyŏng  
尹忠鉉	In Chung-hyun  
金佑行	Kim U-hang  
宋鎭禹	Song Jin-u  
權花女學校	Kwŏn Hwa Girls' School  
金夏鼎	Kim Ha-dŏng  
李丙壽	Lee Byeong-su  
金乙漢	Kim Il-han  

Glossary

京城  	Kyŏngsŏng  	The city of Seoul during the colonial period.  
名物  	myeongmul   	Notable or famous individuals often highlighted in social gatherings.  
入会金  	iphoegum  	Entrance fee for membership in organizations.  
個人  	ga-in  	Individual, often related to one’s personal or social recognition.  
男女  	nanjyo  	Men and women, often referring to gender separated contexts.  
氷上  	byeongjang  	Floating gatherings on ice referring to popular social locations during ceremonies.  
大會  	daehoe  	Grand meeting or conference held for social purposes.  
社交  	sagyo  	Social interactions often held within company and community engagements.  
肥滿  	peiman  	In reference to heavier individuals, often a light-hearted commentary during gatherings.  
名家  	meongga  	Distinguished families or individuals recognized for their social capital and reputation.  


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	京城名物男女 新春誌上大會
기사형태	잡저

京城名物男女 新春誌上大會
開會의 첫인사

京城은 인구가 만흐니만큼 명물의 남녀가 또한 만타. 키 적은 명물도 잇고 키 큰 명물도 잇다. 는 둥뚱한 명물과 곰보 명물도 잇는것은 물론이고 내지 얌전한 명물, 못난 명물, 결혼 잘 하는 명물, 연애 잘 하는 명물, 술 잘 먹는 명물, 떡 잘 먹는 명물, 모양 잘 내는 명물, 모양 안이 내는 명물 등 별의 별 명물이 다 잇다. 이 허다한 명물을 일정한 장소에서 일시 회합 하랴면 여간한 회당으로는 도저히 수용할 수 업슬 것이다. 그리하야 특별히 넓고도 큰 別乾坤의 지면을 비러서 개회하게 되엿다. 회원의 자격은 물론 京城에서 다년간 거주하야 누구나 알만한 명물남녀에 한할 것이오 입회금은 특별히 면제하고 유자격자이면 엇더한 계급과 엇더한 주의자와 노소를 불구하고 다 공개환영한다.
그러나 회원으로서 한가지 주의할 일은 명물이라고 하엿다고 엇지 알지 말나는 그것이다. 잠간 생각하면 사람을 명물이라 하는 것이 輕忽한 듯하나 실상은 그런 것이 안이다. 명물이란 명자는 명인달사, 명현, 유명한 명자요 물자는 만물지중에 唯人이 最貴라는 물자와 인물이라는 물자다. 다시 말하면 유명한 인물이란 말이다. 이만큼 알면 오해는 별로 업슬 것이다. 그리고 또 한가지 부탁은 이번회에 밋처 입회치 못한 이는 다음 엇더한 기회에 또 참가할 수가 잇슬터이니 과히 불평을 부르지 말나는 그것이다. 밧분 시간에 개회사가 너무 길어서 미안하다. 자-그만 개회하자-人數가 하고 만허서 너무 복잡하니 각부분을 논하서 순차로 개회하자-쉬-좌석정돈하시요!(주최자 관상자)

八短軀와 九長身

보통 會席에서는 키 적은 이가 매양 남에 뒤에 서는 것이 사실이나, 이 회에서는 특별히 키 적은 이의 편리를 위하야 맨 먼저 참석하게 하얏다. 그러면 그 누구 누구가 회원될 자격이 잇슬가. 中外日報의 정리부장 崔誠愚씨와 지방부장 <104> 朴八陽씨와 무소속 金井鎭씨는 只字波는 될 터이오(입에 발이 달녓다는 뜻) 朝鮮日報의 李吉用씨와 普高출신으로 安洞에서 洋靴商하든 柳章浩(현직미상)씨는 具字派는 될 터이오(눈에 발이 달녓다는 뜻) 安洞 永昌商店주인 安俊永씨와 齋洞濟和堂 약국주인 朴致和씨는 穴字派가 될 것이다(갓에 발이 달녓다는 뜻). 그러고 同德女校의 洪莜亭씨도 穴字派인데 女子라고 갓을 못 쓴다고 입적사절을 당한 것은 듯기에 미안한 일이다. 그런데 이 여러분 중에서 회장을 추천하라면 穴字派 중에도 물론 사척칠촌 되는 安俊永씨가 被選될 것이오 순차로 부회장은 朴致和씨요 총무는 년령으로 하든지 재담 잘하기로든지, 인쇄교정계이력으로든지 酒德으로든지 崔誠愚씨가 최다 점일 것이다. 그러나, 다행이 의사 朴宗桓씨가 지방에 가 잇게 그럿치 만일 京城에 잇다면 崔誠愚씨의 총무석도 역시 독점한다 예언하기 어려울 것이다. 이 회의 기념품으로는 平壤栗과 곰방대(短煙竹)를 증정하는 것이 적당하겟고 축사로는 전일 엇던 사람의 「着冠纓掃地, 履鞋沒兩肩. 若逢牛跡水, 揮手喚來船」이란 명구를 그대로 인용하는 것이 조켓다. 여흥은 또 「난장이」 춤 뵈기가 엇더할지.
자-키 적은 이의 회는 그만 폐회하고 키 큰 이의 회를 또 열자-순서지는 鐘路 裕昌상회의 간판에다 부치고 전선주는 모자거리로 임시 이용하고 여흥으로는 六尺妓裵竹葉, 尹玉葉, 金一枝梅, 朴玉花를 부르자-위원장은 누구실가 기독교회에서 이력도 만코 년령도 상당하고 同夫人하고 다니기로도 유명한 오척구촌칠분 장신의 金貞植 노인이다. 그리고 위원으로는 徽文高普의 任璟宰, 李昇圭, 朝鮮보병대의 車萬載, 鄭鉉, 桂山普成校의 金弘植, 三光堂의 鮮于全, 支那舊小說通梁白華등 제씨가 다 상당할 것이오. 또 京城거류 외국인 중에 제일 키 크기로 유명한 儆新學校長 君芮彬씨는 특별 찬성원으로 추천할 만하다-하여간 이 회는 참으로 大人會이다. 서양 어느나라에 유람을 간다고 하야도 과히 붓그럽지 안을 것이다. 이 九人을 京城의 九長身이라 할지.<105>

이름 조혼 花隱會

渡江魚驚網 若非牛千葉
登山鳥㤼羅 疑是馬蜂家

이것은 전에 엇던 險口家가 얼골 얼근 이를 조롱한 시엿다. 얼근이의 별명은 自來로 여러 가지가
잇서서 혹은 곰보 혹은 꿀병이라 하엿고 또 근래에는 가다 방이니 鏡破선생이니 하는 별명까지 생겻다. 그러나 이번 이대회에서는 특히 얼근이의 여러분을 위하야 그러한 과거 불명예의 별명을 다 업새 버리고 새로 花隱선생이라 아호를 드리게 되엿다.(얼근이를 怪石이라고도 하는데 怪石이라 하기는 너무 미안하고 露骨이닛가 괴석이 화초밧헤 만히 잇는 것을 의미하야 특히 花隱이라 함이다.) 그런대 이 花隱會의 회원은 과연 누구가 유자격자일가 아모리 일반적으로 모집한다 하야도 의사계에 회원수가 제일 만흘 것이오 그 다음은 교원계일 것이다. 대강대강 氏名을 드러 말하야 보자!
京城病院의 池成允씨는 엇더하며 泰成病院의 姜元永씨는 엇더한가. 其外에 安商浩, 朴啓陽, 洪錫厚, 劉秉泌씨도 입회를 불허한다면 이 대회의 반대운동을 야기할 것이다. 그리고 平壤에서 개업한 鄭世胤씨와 北間島에서 개업한 金益南씨도 지방적 관계로 입회는 못 할지언뎡 알기만 하면 개회축전은 할 것이다. 또 학교로는 高普校長 崔鳴煥씨와 徽高校長 金亨培씨와 또 同校교원 任璟宰, 李昇圭, 李炳奎 삼씨, 中央高普 李光鍾씨도 평의원 자격은 상당할 것이다.(京城女高교원 孫孃은 女子이니 특히 입회를 사절한다) 올치 전일 新天地社에 잇든 張載洽군과(별명張곰보) 현재 大同印刷所에서 「누라」수선하는 韓仁洙군도 어지간하다. 그런데 이 회에서 회장을 추천한다면 의사계에 회원이 다수인 까닭에 의사 중에서 피선이 될 것이다. 즉 池成允씨는 누구나 이의 업시 회장으로 公選될 것이오, 安商浩씨는 안성마침의 부회장이오 총무는 아마 徽高의 李炳奎씨일 것이다. 그런데 이 池회장은 다른 병도 잘 고치지만 소아의 학질은 백발백중으로 잘 고치는데 무슨 약이나 주사로 고치는 것이 안이라 그의 얼골로 고치는데 아모리 마음이 단단하고 약은 아해들이라도 그를 한번만 보면 아주 驚風을 하야 고만 학질이 떠러지고 만다하며 安商浩씨는 東京에서 고학할 시대에 하도 곤란하닛가 石鏡가지고 자기관상을 보다가 石鏡까지 깨트린 일화가 잇다고 한다. 이만하면 회장, 부회장이야 자격이 물론 상당할 것이오 총무 李炳奎씨는 아즉 세상사람이 잘 알지 못하지만은 학생계에서 李炳奎씨를 보면 의례 縛선생이라고 한다. 하여간 이 회는 회원도 상당하고 임원도 상당히 뫼엿다.
앗차-이젓구나-漢城銀行 韓相龍씨도 입회만 하면 金力으로 선거운동을 하지 안어도 평의원 한아는 엇어 할 것이다. 그런데 그들이 만일 정식으로 懇親會를 한다하면 그 장소의 설비와 음식의 준비는 이럿케 하얏스면 격이 마질 것 갓다. 芒席우에 망사휘장을 치고 술상에는 千葉膾와 가다방을 노코 술은 전날 江原道에서 <106> 진상오는 끌병에다 두릅두릅한 楊口方山 사기잔을 놋코 취토록 먹은 다음에 朴春載의 곰보타령을 드르며 강낭이 속대로 古石맷돌을 치며 장단도 맛치고, 골패의 짝마치기도 하얏스면 조흘 것 갓다. 이것은 花隱會員 여러분의 유의할 일이다.

肥滿大家와 瘐身先生

楊州牧使 洪泰潤씨가 작고한 이후에 京城내 뚱뚱한 이 축에서는 회장감이 업서서 매우 걱정이 되더니 洪씨 문중에 뚱뚱보 양반 한 분이 또 생겻스니 그는 전일 官立高等普通學校長으로 잇든 洪奭鉉씨이다. 그가 학교에 잇슬 때에는 그다지 뚱뚱치 안코 키도 상당히 큰 까닭에 남들이 그다지 뚱뚱한 줄을 모르겟더니 근래에는 엇지나 몸이 낫는지 東洋書院의 趙男熙씨나 覺皇寺 姜大蓮씨나 가튼 이로는 名啣도 못 드릴것이오 小波 方定煥씨도 청년 축으로는 매우 유망하지만은 아즉 그와 비교하자면 어림도 업다. 이제 체중으로 따저보면 洪奭鉉씨는 이십팔관, 趙男熙씨는 이십오관. 方定煥씨는 이십관, 姜大蓮씨는 이십일관이란다.
익크 놀나지 마시오. 당년 육십오세의 노인으로 삼십이관 되는 대가가 또 잇스니 그는 鍾路 和平堂 洋藥房에서 삼십년 간을 하루도 쉬지안코 시무하는 李泰善씨다. 洪奭鉉씨와 중량으로 비하면 伯仲 간이지만은 년령에 비하야 보면 아모라도 그를 회장으로 추천할 것이다. 뿐만 안이라 그는 수염의 풍채도 조코 신체도 건강하야 지금도 안경을 안이쓰고 燈下에서 細書를 쓴다한다. 술도 잘 자시지만 절조가 잇서서 일회에 두곱 부식 매일 삼회를 자신다 한다. 洪泰潤씨가 취중에 말을 타다가 말허리를 부러트린 일이 잇섯다더니 그는 언제인가 취중에 인력거를 탓다가 박휘를 깨인 일이 잇다한다. 하여간 그는 뚱뚱한 이 축에서는 갈 데 업는 회장이다. 그런데 이 우에 말한 분으로 恩津 灌燭寺의 觀光團을 조직하야 가지고 미륵불 압헤서 사진을 백힌다하면 사진만 보는 사람은 엇전 미륵이 그럿케 만흐냐 할 것이요 日本國技館을 갈 것 가트면 朝鮮相撲團이라고 대환영할 것이다. 엇잿든 京城의 大名物男들이다.

돈 만흔 사람은 膏梁珍味를 잔뜩 먹고서 소화가 안이 된다고 걱정하는 반면에 삼시에 죽 한그릇도 잘 어더먹지 못하야 끼룩끼륙 하는 것이 현 사회에서 흔이 보는 일이다. 그와 마찬가지로 남은 몸이 비만하야 걱정을 하는데 엇던 사람은 몸이 너무 수척하야 元山北魚會社와 「강메리」상회에 명예고문이 되랴고 애쓰는 이도 잇다. 한참 당년에 普成전문학교장으로 잇든 鄭永澤씨(現名鄭安立)가 滿洲國을 창건한다고 北滿으로 가고 同校校監南亨祐(自號瘦石)씨가 滬上으로 漂遊한 이후에 京城의 瘦身會가 매우 零星하얏다.
그러나 이 근래로 말하면 朝鮮에서 日本문법학자로 제 일지를 屈하는 林圭씨가 그 회의 中興회장이 될 것이다. 부회장은 넘어 말러서 「말너스키」의 별명을 듯는 신진문인 李箕永씨가 후보가 되겟고<107> 총무는 재정상 신용이나 기타 이력으로도 海東은행의 洪祐晩씨가 상당할 것이다. 그런데 이 세분의 체중이 몃 관이나 되는지 측량 못한 것은 유감이지마는 그들이 만일 回旋風 부는 날에 외출을 할 것 가트면 비행기 연습을 하지 안어도 항공 잘 하기는 염려 업슬 것이다.

巨頭長足의 三名物

阿房宮 주인 尹대감 尹다가리의 머리 큰 것은 京城뿐 안이라 내외국 간에도 평판이 만치만은 同和藥房 주인 閔橿씨의 남북머리도 구경복엄는 여간 사람으로는 잘 어더 보지 못 할 머리다. 그는 약업을 하는 까닭에 閔茯苓이라는 별명까지 어덧섯는데 년전에 己未運動사건으로 入監되엿슬 때에 간수들이 閔頭公(日本간수는 『아다마 량반 사람이』)이라고 불러섯다. 그리고 商業銀行의 洪忠鉉씨가 작고한 후로는 朝鮮사람 중에는 발 큰 사람을 아즉 발견하지 못하얏스나 외국인으로는 佛國영사 칼-로씨의 십이吋가 居甲일 것 갓다.

五괘사 五多事

興一社의 張斗鉉씨는 아모가 보와도 好好爺이지만은 그의 「괘사」야말로 어지간치 안타. 엇던 주석이던지, 그가 석기기만 하면 집안이 떠들석하고 쌈이 나도 그의 괘사 한마듸가 나오면 배 알는 사람의 理中湯 먹은 것 처럼 속이 다 평화하게 되야 싸홈이 저절로 가러 안는다. 그리고 權花의 金美理士씨와 淑明女高의 成義敬씨는 별명이 원래 괘사선생이닛가 괘사가 물론 상당하겟지만은 廟洞모퉁이에서 바침술장사 하는 金召史는 괘사중 대괘사일 것이다.
그 얼근 얼골에다 입을 빗죽빗죽하며 「척척 구다사이요 구려, 돈만 가저오시면 술은 그저 줌니다. 쇠똥마라」, 등 별의 별 겻말을 다 써가면서 괘사를 부리면 아모리 자긔집 녀편네와 싸움을 하고 화김에 술 먹으러 온 사람이라도 눈이 멍하야 껄껄 우슴을 내 놋치 안을 수 업슬 것이다.

多事! 多事! 每申의 李瑞求씨와 啓明의 沈友變씨는 『덜렁이』로 기자사회에서 상당한 대우를 밧지만은 朝鮮日報의 安在鴻씨와 天道敎 위원회의 李鍾麟씨와 세무란쓰병원의 李甲成씨와 그외 呂運弘씨는 長安에서 이름이 놉흔 다사가이다. 事의 성패와 대소 여하에는 별로 불구하고 무슨 발기회 무슨 간친회, 무슨 환영회든지 그들이 빠지면 성립이 되지 안는것 갓고 축사, 답사도 그분들이 청부를 한 것 갓다. 그러나 무사분주의 趙대감이라든지 사면발기의 芮協의원과는 취지가 다른 것을 감복한다.

말성 才談 두 都監

말성 재담으로야 京城에서 中央高普의 權悳奎씨와 開闢社의 車相瓚씨를 니저 버린다면 그 무서운 口討聲討에 백여 나지를 못할 것이다. 佛敎청년들의 소청을 밧아, 佛敎강연을 하다가 『부처를 잡아먹고 똥을 싸라』하엿다는 權씨는 아모 강연도 재담으로 범으려 넘기고 경찰서에 잡혀 가서도 재담으로 해를<108> 지우는 車씨는 아모런 원고라도 남을 긁어노코야 만다. 두 분이 키도 갓치 작거니와 權씨가 얽은 대신에 車씨가 곰실머리인 것도 조흔 대조이다. 두 분이 각금 松峴추랑집에서 맛나면 말성다툼 재담내기에 다른 객의 안주를 다 태우고 마는 것이 의례이니 뒤가 무서워 차별대우는 못하겟고 도감벼슬이나 바치는 것이 후환이 업겟다.

多鬚黨과 小鬚黨

大學目藥 광고주 閔泳綺 閔대감이 월전에 不歸客이 된 뒤로 京城 내의 多鬚黨은 일대 세력을 失하얏다. 그러나 그의 상속인 소대감이 역시 多鬚인 것은 幸事이요 朝鮮日報社의 정리부장 崔榮穆씨는 얼골도 美容이지만은 수염이 또한 美수염이다. 그가 인쇄소에 다년간 종업하고 신문사 교정계에 이력이 만흔 까닭에 교정 잘 하기로는 中外日報의 崔誠愚씨와 伯仲을 다투는데 두 분이 술도 다 잘 마시여서 단골로 다니는 茶洞 閔淳子집이나 長沙洞 愛市堂에서는 그들이 가면 의례히 신문사의 수염만흔 崔선생이 오시엿느니 키 적은 崔선생이 오시엿느니 하고 환영을 한다.
그리고 또 中國영사관의 통역으로 잇는 金佑行씨도 상당한 多수당원이다. 그들은 천주교당에를 가도 신부직을 구하기는 어렵지 안을 것이다. 無鬚公으로는 東亞日報의 宋鎭禹씨가 대표요 其次는 아마 權東鎭, 沈宜性 양씨일 것이다.

美粧名男과 非粧紳士

貂皮신에 진주바닥을 깔어신든 尹致旿씨의 수중이 텅 비게되고, 慶尙道의 대표 하이카라로 자처하든 高元勳씨가 지방관청으로 간 뒤에는 京城에 별로 이럿타고 내세울 모양쟁이가 업다. 아순대로 말하자면 樂園洞 뿔조아 白寅基씨와 中央基督敎會의 申興雨씨라고나 할가, 白寅基씨의 모양 내는 것은 뿔조아의 보통하는 일이닛가 별로 문제가 되지 안치만은 申興雨씨는 원래 拜洋式  미남자인 동시에 상당히 모양보는 축이다. 양복을 각금각금 갈어 입는 것은 물론이고 사무시간에도 石鏡보는 시간이 半部를 점령하고 면도를 날마다 하는데도 수염을 칼로 깍으면 시퍼럿케 자국이 난다고 족지게로 한아씩 둘씩 뽑으며 이발하는데도 엇지나 잔말슴이 만흐신지 中央이발소의 이발사들이 그의 오는 것을 보면 「아이고-머리고 또 시겟구나」하고 걱정을 한다고 한다. 앗차-또 한가지 유감이 잇다. 지금 그가 東京에 가 잇는 까닭에 이 京城名物會에는 참가할 자격이 업지만은 賣0문학자 盧子泳군이 만일 京城에 잇섯더면 한목은 단단이 볼 것이다. 그-네그로족 갓흔 얼골에 날마다 화장을 하야서 향내를 피우고 도라 다니는 것이라든지, 그의 책상에 각종 화장품이 미용술연구소 모양으로 벌녀 엇는 것을 보면 氏가 아모리 변명을 하랴 하야도 못 할 것이다. 앗차-또 잇구나. 얼골에 분바르고 다니는 친구 玄僖運, 俔蜇, 玄門宗哲, 안이 玄哲씨가 또 잇구나. 그러나 그는 이름이 하도 만흐닛가 말하야도 기억함 사람이 업슬 것이요<109>. 또 원래가 미용술연구대가로 전 미용원장이닛가 문제도 업다. 모양 잘 내는 이는 대강 이러하거니와 모양 안이내는 사람은 또 엇더한가. 잠간 생각하는 사람은 쇠똥모자에 고무신이나 집석이 신고 다니는 六堂 崔南善씨를 먼저 말하겟지만은 六堂으로 말하면 실상은 모양을 보지 안는 것이 안이라. 남 보기에 모양 안이 보는 사람갓치 하랴고 그리 하는 것이다. 그것은 억지로 하는 말이 안이라 그의 옷 입은 매무새를 보아도 결코 모양 안이내는 이가 안이다. 진짬 모양 안이 내는 사람을 보랴면 中外日報의 柳光烈씨와 開闢社의 金起田씨다. 그 두분은 의복이 다 타젓든지 드러웟든지, 해 젓든지 도시 불구하고 그대로 단니는 것은 물론이고 신발은 사 신은 뒤로는 한번 도 닥거 신는  일이 업다. 양복 입고 다닐때에 혁대가 두 다리 새이로 척 느러지거나 바지의 단추를 끼지 안는 것은 예사이요, 朝鮮바지에 짝짝이 다임을 매되 한쪽은 노끈, 한쪽은 헌겁나부랑이를 일 수 *** 눈금과, 코물과, 귀지가 그의 얼골과 이혼할 날이 업다. 그만하면 이 회의 중추인물은 될 것이다.
그리고 또 한가지 우서운 일은 그 두분이 기차 이등석이나 도서관에 「파스」를 가지고 가면 「파스」검사하는 사람이 각금 그의 외모만 보고는 「本人デスカ 本人デスカ」한다고.

떡호랑이와 술고래

朝鮮敎育會의 兪鎭泰씨가 흰떡 잘 먹는 이약이는 요전에 잠간 소개한 일이 잇것다. 그런데 전일 普成高普 敎監 金馹씨는 냉면 사오그릇을 한무릅에 게(蟹) 눈 감추듯 먹는 것은 물론이고 저녁밥 먹은 뒤에 「인절미」사십팔개(小者도 안이)를 능히 먹고 梨峴시장에 金學先이라는 이는 식전 해장술을 오십삼배나 하고도 끗덕을 안이 한다고 한다. 그러나 그는 시장에 숨은 사람인 까닭에 세상이 잘 아지 못하지만은 의사 洪錫厚씨는 원래 基督敎 신자요 의사이지만은 술을 엇지나 잘하는지 독주가 양을 일차에 오십배 이상은 보통이라고 한다. 貫齋 李道榮씨라든지, 전 普成高普 교장 鄭大鉉씨라든지, 中外日報의 李相協씨가 다 酒國의 작위 들어들만 하지만은 洪錫厚씨와 대작하면 불과 몃순에 소인을 바치소야 마니 아무리 하여도 酒國 대통령은 洪錫厚씨이니. 여러 小酒黨은 대통령취임축하주회를 排設이 何如오.

雙童이 아닌 雙童이

옛적에 漢太祖가 紀信이와 얼골이 갓고 高麗 王建 太祖가 申崇謙과 가태서 代死까지 식히고 자기가 살어난 일이 잇다더니 지금 京城에는 쌍동이가 아니고도 쌍동이가튼 인물이 몃분 잇다. 普成專門學校長 朴勝彬씨는 漢城券番 기생 暎山紅이와는 하등의 혈연관계가 업지만은 그 이마라든지 코라든지 얼골전형이 피차 가태서 화류계에 놀라 다니는 사람들이 暎山紅이 오면 朴辯護士라고 한다, 朴씨는 원래 화류계출입을 안이하는 이게 망정이지 만일에 부랑청년모양으로 기생을 다리고 다니되 暎山紅이를 다리고 다닐 것 가트면 아무가<110> 보와도 남매라고 할 것이다. 그리고 權花女學校의 교무주임 金夏鼎씨와 普成高普 창가교사 李尙俊씨는 키가 좀 차이가 잇스나 얼골이 비슷하야 槿花女學校의 신입학생들은 李尙俊씨를 노상에서 보고는 저이가 우리 학교의 교무주임 선생님이라고 하고 수군수군하며, 普校의 신입학생들은 金夏鼎씨를 李尙俊씨로만 알고 경례를 각금 한다. 또 基督敎靑年會의 具滋玉씨는 李完用候의 종손 李丙壽군과 얼골이 비슷하야 李씨를 보고 청년회 소식을 각금 뭇는 이가 잇다하고 徽文高普의 任璟宰씨와 李昇圭씨는 얼골ㅅ빗은 다소 異色이 잇스나 키라든지 면장한 것이라든지 보법이라든지 다 비슷하야 뒤로 보면 두 분을 잘 분간할 수가 업서서 학생들이 任선생에게 무슨 말을 하랴고 갓다가 압흐로 가 자세히 보면 딴판의 李선생인 고로 각금 웃는 일이 만타고 한다. 또 朝鮮日報의 金乙漢군은 同社 李觀熙군과 비슷하야 처음 보는 사람은 누가 누구인지 잘 분간 못하는데 한번은 金군의 친한 기생이 李군을 金군으로만 보고 엇든 요리집에서 반가히 인사를 하고는 다시 보닛가 딴 사람인 고로 그 기생이 까투리 날리는 소리를 치며 우섯다고 한다. 이것도 京城의 한 이야기거리다.

多角愛의 女流大家

익크-야단법석이 낫다-女子회원석에서 대불평이 일어낫다. 소위 남녀명물대회라 하야 남을 모다 청해노코는 이때까지 남자끼리만 會를 한다고. 그 중에도 얼골에 슬기구멍이 담상담상 잇고 반나마 늙은 앙상한 女子 한 분이 일어나더니 여보시오 우리 女子 여러분! 이러구 저러구 할 것 무엇잇쇼. 우리는 우리끼리 합시다. 나는 다른 會에서 회장노릇한 경력이 잇스니 이 회의 회장도 내가 자천하겠소. 나는 鄭00임니다. 자 내 말슴 드러보시오. 나는 결혼 잘하는 명물녀올시다. 우리 無産者는 다만 두사람이나마 단결을 하야만 되겟기에 잠시라도 독신생활을 못함니다. 그리고도 장래성이 만흔 까닭에 남편을 어더도 꼭꼭 나보다 년하자만 엇지오. 나의 천신만고가 엇덥시요. 이만하면 회장자격이 되겟지요. 말이 끗나기 전에 또한 女子가 나오는데 綾羅島 수박모양으로 둥구수름한 얼골에다가 어글어글한 두 눈을 껌벅껌벅하며 하는 말이 당신은 결혼 잘 하는 명물녀라지요.
나는 이혼 잘하는 명물녀요. 이 말은 마치 남의 혼례식에 가서 금년은 女子의 혼례식이 남자의 혼례식보다 만타는 말과 마찬가지지오, 결혼 잘 한다는 말이나 이혼 잘한다는 말이나 결국은 가튼 말임니다. 그러나 나는 특히 이혼을 잘 함니다. 그리하야 신정조론까지 엇던 신문지상에 발표하얏지요. 金風이 한번 불 때 一葉이 떠러지면 천하의 가을을 짐작한다고 남편의 사랑이 조곰이라도 변하는 기색이 뵈이면 그저 속히 이혼하는 것이 상책이지요. 그 뒤에 새로 단발한 女子 한 분이 또 일어나서 平壤사토리를 쓰며 하는 말이 여보! 당신네 이혼이고 결혼이고 다 우수운 말이요 나는 결혼식은 못해 보앗서도 이혼은 남만 <111> 치하야 보앗소. 별의 별 풍상을 다 격거서 몃해 전까지도 과이 밉지는 안타든 얼골이 지금은 李東伯이의 뼉다귀가 쑥 나오고 죽은 깨가 작고 소사서 온 얼골이 平壤갈맥이 알빗이 되고 어글어글하든 눈이 이월 동풍에 다 파 먹은 김치독이 되엿소. 나는 결혼이 되고 이혼이고 다 그만두고  찰나찰나라도 연애만 하얏스면 조켓소. 그리하야 모전문학교학생 뒤도 쫏차보고, 獨逸유학생들과 각금 악수도 하야 보앗지요. 또 시구나 소설줄도 쓰는 까닭에 소위 문인이란 문인은 다 교제하다가 결국은 남의 잡지의 공개장 자료만 공급하얏지오. 엇지 하얏든 연애 잘 하기로야 나 외에 더 잇겟소. 한참 이러는 판에 몸집이 호말과 갓고 얼골빗이 대초빗가튼 女子 한 분이 활발하게 쑥 나오더니 깍것다 기른 머리를 말갈기 가티 흔들면서 하는 말이 「우리 朝鮮에서는 살 수 업서요. 시내 강변에는 조약돌이 만타더니, 우리 朝鮮에는 말성이 만어서 못 살어요. 露西亞에서는 남녀자유연애를 공인한 까닭에 한참 당년에는 정거장 역부가 일주일에 이혼을 열다섯번도 하얏소. 나는 일년에 사오인 연애를 하얏다고, 비평이 만쿠려. 동모간에도 강짜는 웨그리 만어요. 아근이 자근이 정답게 놀기만 하면 그만이지요.
그말이 끗나자 그 엽헤 잇든 단발 退俗 女子 또 한분이 입을 빗죽빗죽하는 말이 우서운 소리도 다 드럿소, 露西亞에 갓다온 것이 자랑이요. 나는 露西亞는 카녕 洛山寺수박만 먹고 자랏것만 연애만 잘하겟데. OO당사건에도 내 집 수색을 하야 산덤이 가튼 연애편지 속에서 여러 가지 事端이 다 생겻네. 자네 애인은 내가 못빼 슬 줄 아나, 앙앙 죽겟니. 용용 죽겟니-이 때에 주최자 -쉬- 그만들 두시오. 이러다가는 女子의 비밀이란 비밀은 다 쏘다저 나오겟소. 잘못하면 풍기문란이 될 지도 모르겟소. 미진한 사항은 다음 기회로 밀고 그만 폐회합시다! 쉬! 중지.-(끗)<112>
<104-112>