잡지명	別乾坤 제67호
발행일	1933년 11월 01일
기사제목	高句麗古墳 (Koguryo Tombs)
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellaneous Writings)

Koguryo Tombs

The so-called Kangso Three Tombs (江서 세무덤), the tomb of King P'yo˘ngwo˘n of Koguryo (高句麗平原王陵), located in Uhyo˘n-ri (遇賢里), Kangso-myo˘n (江서면), Kangso-gun (江서군), are a global point of pride as they express the brilliant culture of the Koguryo period through murals. Visitors to the historic sites of P'yo˘ngnam (平南), both domestic and foreign, invariably visit this place, and the murals of the ancient tombs are in danger of losing their original form due to being handled and touched. Therefore, a model of the mural was commissioned to Mr. Sojang (小場), a lecturer at Tokyo Art School, and the three sides of the Red Phoenix (朱雀), Blue Dragon (靑龍), and White Tiger (白虎) have been completed. Only the Black Tortoise (玄武) remains, but it is expected to be completed soon. It is said that the completed model will be displayed at the P'yo˘ngyang Museum, and the Kangso tombs will be permanently closed and buried.

The Ch'o˘nwanggwasin Tomb (天王四神塚) in Songgye-dong (松溪洞), Pukch'ang-myo˘n (北倉面), Sunch'o˘n-gun (順川郡), which is globally renowned for its architectural value, has recently been leaking rain and developing cornices to the point of losing its original appearance, so it has been decided to repair it, as it is said to be a priceless relic of the Koguryo period.

Tomb No. 8, located in Cho˘ngbaek-tong (桓栢洞), P'yo˘ngyang Taean Tomb Area, is currently being excavated by Mr. Sojang, a commissioned official of the Governor-General's office. A wooden coffin (木槨) was found, but it was completely rotten, and there were no burial goods (副葬品). There were five large and small wooden coffins (木棺). In the eastern coffin, five silver rings and one object resembling a black diamond were found.

Excavation has also begun on Tomb No. 13 and Tomb No. 17, and Tomb No. 221 has been excavated, revealing three lacquered objects (漆器) with gilt bronze, earthenware (土器), six rings, and glass earrings boasting ancient art and culture. In Tomb No. 219, five bottles with colored patterns, of great artistic value, were found. <53>

**Named Entities**

高句麗平原王陵	Koguryo P'yo˘ngwo˘n-wangnung
遇賢里	Uhyo˘n-ri
江서면	Kangso-myo˘n
江서군	Kangso-gun
平南	P'yo˘ngnam
小場	Sojang
東京美術学校	Tokyo Art School
朱雀	Red Phoenix
靑龍	Blue Dragon
白虎	White Tiger
玄武	Black Tortoise
平壌博物館	P'yo˘ngyang Museum
順川郡	Sunch'o˘n-gun
北倉面	Pukch'ang-myo˘n
松溪洞	Songgye-dong
天王四神塚	Ch'o˘nwanggwasin-ch'ong
桓栢洞	Cho˘ngbaek-tong
平壌大安古墳地帯	P'yo˘ngyang Taean Kobun Chidae
총독부	Cho˘ngdokbu



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제67호
발행일	1933년 11월 01일
기사제목	高句麗古墳
기사형태	잡저

高句麗古墳
강서군강서면 우현리(遇賢里)에 소재한전세게적 자랑인 고구려평원왕능(高句麗平原王陵)인 속칭 강서 세무덤은 고구려시대의 찬연한문화를 벽화로 표현하고 잇거니와 평남의 고적을 찾는자 내외국인을 물론하고 반다시 이곳을 구경하게되여 동고분의 벽화는 손삼변색하야 원형을 일허버일 지경임으로 몽고분의 벽화의 모형을 동경미술하교 소장(小場)강사에게 위촉하여 묘산중이든바 발서주작(朱雀) 청룡(靑龍) 백호(白虎)의 삼면은 준공되엿고 목하현무(玄武)만이 남어잇스나 근일전부 완성을고하게되엿다 준공된모형은 평양박물관에 진렬하고 강서고분은 영원히 열지안토록 무더버릴 때 정이라한다.
◇
건축상가치로서 세게적으로 자랑한다는 순천군북창면송게동(順川郡北倉面松溪洞)에잇는 천왕사신총(天王四神塚)은 최근에는 비가새고 귀렴이생기여 원상을일허버릴정도에 달햇슴으로 수선을하기로 되엿다는대 갑빗싼고구려시대의 유적이라한다.
◇
평양대안고분지대 정백동(桓栢洞)에잇는 제팔호고분은 소장총독부촉탁이 목하발굴중이든바 목관(木槨)이되엿스나 전부썩고 부장품(副葬品)은 업섯고 목관(木棺)이 대소다섯개가 잇섯다 동측남관에서는 은으로맨든빗 가락지다섯개 흑색「다이야」와 흡사한것한개가 잇섯다.
◇
십삼호분과 십칠호분도 발굴을개시햇고 이백이십일호분을 발굴하엿는대 금동을 올닌 칠긔(漆器) 토긔(土器)세개 가락지여섯개와 고대의 예술과 문화를 자랑하는 유리귀고리가 나타낫고 이백십구호고분에서는 색 채를가한 이잇는 미술가치만점의 병 다섯 개를어덧다고한다.＜53＞
＜53＞