잡지명	별건곤  
발행일	1932년 01월 01일  
기사제목	內外文壇雜錄 (Notes on Literature Circles Inside and Outside)  
기사형태	소식 (News)

內外文壇雜錄

The Dong-A Ilbo reports that Mr. Yeom Sang-seop is giving several lectures aimed at the public about literature, particularly centered on non-literary figures in the context of modern people and literature, as suggested by the subtitle. We have considerable expectations; however, the announced content seems filled with incomprehensible expressions that leave us questioning how exactly it relates to the public. Wouldn't it be better if they made it understandable for the masses?

Looking through the advertisement section of the 'Hyun-dae Gongron' (Modern Debate), it is announced that three female writers—Choi Jeong-hee, Song Gye-wol, and Lee Hye-gyeong—will respectively publish their novels. Unfortunately, it is regrettable that the 'Hyun-dae Gongron' could not be published in time, preventing us from seeing the works of these three ladies.

It is said that the poets from Cap·Pwin, who have endured hardships in prison, are re-emerging with a resounding momentum and will continue their activities. Recently, a new collection of poems by Cap·Pwin has been released. While it may not be an extraordinary anthology, it can certainly be regarded as a significant publication. They also report that they are publishing the magazine 'Jidwan,' but we have yet to receive any news regarding its current status.

In the Joseon Ilbo, where Park Young-hee is the head of the Academic and Artistic Section, it seems that proletariat literature and dissertations are being prominently featured. Viewed from any angle, that can be considered a positive trend; however, it is not a monthly magazine, but a daily newspaper that published the year-end summary in early December, which is quite extraordinary.

It appears that the overseas literary group, centered around Lee Ha-yun and Seo Hyeong-seok, is actively engaged in various activities. They seem to be organizing lectures on introducing overseas literature and have even formed a new Dramatic Arts Research Society to recruit researchers and actors. We hope their endeavors will thrive splendidly.

Trends in Overseas Literature

(1) In Japan, following the establishment of the Proletarian Cultural Alliance, the publication of the art association's journal 'Kap' has ceased, and a new journal named 'Proletarian Literature' is being released under the Writers' Alliance.

(2) In the United States, it seems that Middlebrow literature is on the decline while Far-Right literature and Far-Left literature are gaining prominence.

(3) In Soviet Russia, it appears that literature is also being subjected to the five-year plan.

(4) The German literary scene can identify some middle-ground writers like Ludwig, but overall, it appears that the power of Leftist literature is growing.

(5) In the UK, aside from writers like Hegai from the Leftist camp, the general tendency is that Humanist writers are gaining all the momentum.

(6) Modern literature in France is reportedly in a state of severe stagnation. 

Summary

This article discusses various trends in literature and cultural activities both domestically in Korea and internationally, reflecting the dynamic literary landscape during the early 1930s. It highlights the proactive efforts of figures in Korean literature, as well as the undercurrents of political influences affecting global literary trends at the time. Historians may find it significant as it illustrates the interaction between culture and politics during Japan's colonial rule over Korea, emphasizing the struggle and resilience of Korean artistic expression during this period.

Named Entities

東亞日報	 Dong-A Ilbo  
최정희	 Choi Jeong-hee  
송계월	 Song Gye-wol  
이혜경	 Lee Hye-gyeong  
박영희	 Park Young-hee  
캅·프원	 Cap·Pwin  
다각적극예술연구회	 Dramatic Arts Research Society  
해외문학파	 Overseas Literary Group  
일본	 Nihon  
미국	 Amerika  
소련	 So-ryeon  
독일	 Deog-il  
영국	 Yeong-guk  
프랑스	 Peurangseu  

Glossary

學藝	학예	Academic and artistic fields  
文壇	문단	Literary circle  
文藝	문예	Literature and art  
非文壇	비문단	Non-literary  
女流作家	여류작가	Female writer  
壁小說	벽소설	Serialized novel  
文化연맹	문화연맹	Cultural alliance  
出판	출판	Publication  
活동	활동	Activity  
總結算	총결산	Year-end summary


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제47호
발행일	1932년 01월 01일
기사제목	內外文壇雜錄
기사형태	소식

內外文壇雜錄
東亞日報 學藝攔에 廉想涉君이 現代人과 文藝라는 意味에서 특히 非文壇人을 중심으로 라는 副題까지 부처 가면서 大衆을 위하야 文藝講座를 여러 주신다기에 우리들은 사실 적지 아는 期待를 가젓건만 웬 일인지 발표된 강좌는 읽고 모를 말을 만히 느러 노앗스니 그것이 과연 대중과 무슨 관계가 잇스랴. 이왕이면 대중이 알도록 해주엇스면 어떨지!

「現代公論」豫告欄을 들추어 보니 거긔에는 최정희, 송계월, 이혜경 三君이 堂堂히 女流作家의 일홈으로 壁小說을 발표한다고 예고된 것을 보앗다. 불행히 時代公論이 나오지 못하여 三氏의 壁小說을拜見 못한 것이 遺憾千萬.

一時 獄中에서 시달림을 밧든 캅·프員들은 다시 捲土重來의 勢를 갓고 活動을 게속한다고 한다. 요즘은 새롭게 캅·프詩人集을 내인 것을 보앗다. 그것이 그러케 위대한 詩集은 못 되나 左右間에 기념이 되는 出版이라고 보지 아늘 수 업다. 그리고 그들은 機關誌 「集團」을 내인다 더니 아직도 소식이 업스니 엇더케 되엿는지?

朴英熙君이 學藝部長인 중앙일보 학예란에는 아닌게 아니라 푸로레타리아 문예와 논문이 주로 揭載되는 듯하다. 그것은 어떤 점으로 보던지 조흔 경향이라고 할 수 잇스나 월간잡지가 아니고 일간신문에다 12월 초순에 발서 31년도 총결산을 실어 노은 것은 超速度的이다.

異河潤, 徐恒錫氏등을 중심으로 한 海外文學派에서 요즘 맹렬한 활동을 하는 모양이다. 해외문학 소개등 강연회를 위시하야 요즘은 또 新興 劇藝術硏究會를 만들고 연구회원과 배우등을 모집한다니 그들의 일이 ＜24＞ 압흐로 잘 발전되기를 비어 마지안는다.

海外文壇傾向
(1) 日本서는 푸로레타리아 문화연맹이 편성된 후 예술협회 기관지 갑프는 업서지고 작가동맹 기관지로 새로히 「푸로레타리아文學」이 나온다고.
(2) 米國에는 中間派 문학이 衰殘하고 極右翼文學과 極左翼文學이 發盛해지는 모양.
(3) 쏘벳트 러시아에서는 文學도 5개년 計劃에 밧부다고.
(4) 獨逸文壇는 개인 작가로 보면 중간파에서는 루아르고물을 들 수 잇스나 大槪로 좌익문학의 셰력이 커 가는 모양.
(5) 英國은 左翼作家의 헤개-氏 등을 제외하고는 전반으로는 人道主義 작가가 全勢力을 갓고 잇다고.
(6) 佛蘭西의 현대문학은 아주 부진 상태.＜25＞
＜24-25＞