잡지명	別乾坤 第59號
발행일	1932년 12월 30일
기사제목	시골농군의 편지 (Letter from a Rural Farmer)
필자	徐炳點
기사형태	세태비평 (Critique of Society)

Letter from a Rural Farmer
						Sŏ Pyŏng-chŏm

Today, a clerk from the township office came to our village and gave a long speech.

We farmers don't know much, but he told many stories.

He kept saying, "Live on your own strength." There are many things in Chosŏn that involve living on one's own strength, but either we can't do them, or we're already doing them. For example, he said not to urinate carelessly on the roadside, but to urinate on the barley field. Have rural farmers ever urinated carelessly like that?

People in Seoul don't urinate on the street because they're afraid of fines, but because they can't afford to waste a single drop of urine.

Really, these days, ammonia is so incredibly expensive that we can't fertilize the barley.

It's not just ammonia that's expensive, but if things are so expensive, who would want to farm barley?

◇

These days, the price of rice has gone up a lot.

People say that because the price of rice and straw has gone up, the rural farmers must be happy.

That seems right. Last year, a sack of rice was only worth five won, but this year it's worth eight won.

So, a single bill comes into our pocket.

That seems right. It makes our mouths water.

But to receive ten won, we need to have rice. Are there any farmers who still have rice?

The farmers harvest in early autumn. After harvesting, they pay the tenancy fee (道租), settle the debt rice (長利ㅅ벼), pay for fertilizer, and repay debts, so they sell all their rice when it's worth six won per sack. Now they don't have a single grain left.

But what good does it do to raise the price of rice? Instead of being thankful, it makes things harder.

The prices of other things have risen several times more than the price of rice.

The price of cotton cloth has risen, the price of hemp has risen, and the price of millet, which farmers eat for three hundred days a year, has risen.

We sell cheap rice and have to buy expensive millet. Is there anything like this in the world?

◇

Because the price of rice is high, the interest on debt rice (長利ㅅ변) has also gone up.

Our landlord used to lend us rice at a rate of five mal per sack, but this year, because the price of rice has gone up, he's charging seven mal. Oh my, is there such a law in the world?

But if we don't want to starve, we have to borrow such debt rice. Who knows what will happen next year? A hungry beggar doesn't recognize a magistrate.

◇

They tell us to wear dyed clothes.

On market days, clerks from the township office carry a bottle of ink and stand at the entrances, and if a merchant wearing white clothes comes, they put ink on his clothes and stamp them.

Then they send him back, telling him to come wearing dyed clothes. So, these days, the market is not doing well.

But chasing away the merchants is still okay.

I went to the township office to pay taxes, but they sent me back.

Who knew that would happen? Even though I'm a farmer, I wore a cotton overcoat (唐木두루막이) when going to a government office.

But the clerk threw an ink pot at me, saying that anyone wearing white clothes would not be allowed in, no matter what.

I said I came to pay taxes, but he said that wasn't allowed either.

I had no choice but to throw away the overcoat and come back.

Then, because I didn't pay the taxes, a notice came demanding payment with a late fee (督促수수료).

It's good to wear dyed clothes, but it would be better to tell us to dye our clothes when the ones we have wear out, instead of putting ink on the clothes we're already wearing. What are we supposed to do right now?

Moreover, it's unfair to demand a late fee when they wouldn't accept the taxes I brought on the tax payment date.

◇

The end of the year is approaching, and there are too many places to borrow from, so it's hard to live. On top of that, my wife is sick in bed.

Even though I'm an ignorant fool, I sent my son to school for three years to avoid becoming one myself, but after going to school for three years, he can't even write his own name properly. And yet, the things he has to pay for are so many.

Because I couldn't keep up with the loan association's payment on the house for three months, they put it up for auction.

Well, what would a farmer do with his own house anyway? But the thought of losing it makes me feel wronged and sad.
<17>

---(From page 17)---

◇

I may be a nobody farmer now, but I wasn't always like this.

Thanks to my parents, I went to school and read the Tonggam (通鑑), and my hands and feet were so white that I was called "young master" (도령님) and lived quite well.

After my parents passed away, I couldn't study much. What else could I do but farm?

I had no choice but to start farming.

I'm not a great person, but I never drank alcohol and worked hard at farming.

But for some reason, my debts kept increasing, and the interest on those debts kept growing, until all the fields I inherited from my parents became someone else's.

And for the past ten years, I've been a tenant farmer.

People in the cities don't know the hardships of rural tenant farmers.

Newspapers and magazines say that rural areas are poor and need relief, but those are just theoretical arguments. No matter how much those people talk, the plight of the countryside remains the same.

I can't find the words to say. It's neither living nor dying. That's my situation, that's the situation of rural farmers. <33>

**Named Entities**

朝鮮	Chosŏn



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제59호
발행일	1932년 12월 30일
기사제목	시골농군의 편지
필자	徐炳點
기사형태	세태비평

시골농군의 편지
						徐炳點
오늘 면서기한분이 우리동리에와서 열설을 하엿소.
우리가튼 농군들이 무엇을 알겟소만은 여러 가지이야기를 만히합데다.
「제힘으로 살어나라」고이말을메번이고합듸다. 이제힘으로 살어나라는 조선가운데는 여러 가지가만히 잇는데 그것이모도가 우리가 할수어엄는것이아니면 임이우리가 하고잇는 것입듸다. 뭣 오좀한번을 누어도 길가에다 함부루누지말고 보리밧헤다누라든가요 글세시골 농군들이 언제그러케 오좀을 함부루누엇나요?
서울사람은 길에다 오좀을누다가 벌금이무서워서가 아니라 오좀이 악가워서 한방울이라도 흡히한적이업소.
정말이지 요새는 암모니아갑시엄청나게 빗사저서보리ㅅ거름을 주지못하오.
빗싸진 것이 암모니아 아니겟지만 정말이러케 빗싸고야 어느놈이 보리농사를 해먹을 장수가업겟소.
◇
요새는 쌀갑시 퍽올낫소.
말하기를 쌀갑볏ㅅ갑시올나서 시골농군들이 좃켓다고 들하고.
그럴한 말이겟지요. 작년에는 벼한섬에 오원밧게ㅏ니하든 것이 금년에는 원각가이가니.
그러니 지전한장이 주머니속에 들어오고.
참 그럴하지요 침이 넘어가지요.
그러나 십원을 밧고 팔자니 벼가잇서야지요. 대관절 지금지벼를 가지고 잇는 농군이잇소?
농군들은 발서초가을에 타작을하오 타작을하여서 도조를 물고 장리ㅅ벼를 감고 그리고 걸음갑을 물고 빗을 물고하느라고 벼한섬에 육원할에 다팔어바럿소 지금은 한톨도업소.
그러나 벼ㅅ갑시올는들 무엇이고맘겟소. 고맙기는커녕 되려어럽지요.
벼ㅅ갑시 올나간 멧갑절이나 달은 물건갑시올나갓소.
광당목이 올나가고 삼갑시올나가고무리농군이 일년치면 삼백날을 먹고사는 좁쌀갑시올나갓소.
헐한 벼를 팔어바리고 빗싼좁쌀을 사먹어야하니 세상에 이런노릇도 잇소?
◇
쌀갑시빗사다고 장리ㅅ변도 올낫소.
우리 지주댁에서는 전에는 한섬에 닷말씩단리ㅅ변을 노앗는데 금년은 벼ㅅ갑시 올낫다고 일곱말씩이라나든가요. 체-세상에 이런법도 잇는지요.
그러나 위선당잡 굴머죽지아니하랴니아 그런 장리라도 어더야지요. 명년에 어케될 것을 누가아니요 배곱혼호탱이가 원님을 알어볼리업지요.
◇
색복을 입으라고하오.
장날이면 면소서긔양반들이 먹물을한통씩가지고 물목골목에 지혀서서 힌옷입은장ㅅ군이오면 옷에 먹칠도하고 도장도 어주오.
그러고는 물감옷을 입고오라고 도루차보내오. 그래서 요새는 장이잘서지를못하오.
그러나 장ㅅ군을 두루는 것은 그래도 괜찬치요.
나는 세전을 밧치러 면소에갓다가 도루겨왓소.
그런줄을 누가알엇나요. 아모리농군이라도 관가출입이길네 당목두루막이나마 입고 그리고갓지요.
그랫더니 연서긔양반이 먹통을 좍언져주면서 흰옷을 입은 사람은 어한일이 잇든지 드리지아니한다고합듸다.
세전을 밧치러왓다고햇더니 그것도 아니된다고하고.
할수업시 두르백이 한 벌만 버리고 겨왓지요.
그랫더니 세전을 아니밧친다고 독촉수수료지서 독촉장이 나왓습데다.
물드린옷을 입는것도 조키는하지요 그러나 기왕해입은것이나 해여지거든 그에 다시 물감옷을 해입으라든지 할 일이지 입은옷에다 먹칠을해노니위선당장에는 어하란말이요.
더구나 납세기일에 가지고간 세전도밧지아니하고 도루구는 기한이지 멋다고 독촉수수료를 바드러들으니 참 억울하오.
◇
섣달금음이되니 졸나는 곳도 넘무만허 살수가업소. 그런데다가 녀편네는 알어누어잇지요.
지식놈은 그래도 나가든 온투산이를 아니만들녀고 삼년학교에 보냇지만 그놈이삼년이나 학교에라고가서 배운 것이 무엇인지 제성명삼ㅅ자도 변변히쓰지못하오 그러면서 노-상 밧치는 것은 어면 그러케도만흔지.
금늉조합에 집을 잽힌 것을 석달둘지못햇더니 경매에 붓쳣다든가요.
하기야 농투산이가 제집을지녀서는 무얼하겟소만은 그나마 길일을 생각하니억울하고 섭섭하오.
(三三頁에 繼續)＜17＞
―――(一七頁에서)―――
◇
나도지금은 이러케 명색업는 농루산이가되여 다즉게되엇지만그래도 옛날에는 이러치는 아니햇소.
부모덕택에 글방에 다니며 통감ㅅ권이나읽엇고 손발치 새하야서도령님 소리를 들으며 제법 호강을 한적도 잇섯소.
부모가 돌아기시고나니 그리큰공부도 못햇겟다. 농사밧게 지어먹을것이더잇나요.
할수엄시 바서붓치고 나섯지요.
사람이 본시 변변치못해서 그린지는모르되 술한잔흡히먹지아니하고 착실히농사만지엇지요.
그러나 웬일인지 해마다 빗이늘어가고 그빗의이자가불어가더니 부모 물녀바든 논섬지이나 되는 것은 다―남의것이되어바리고 말엇소.
그리고는 소작인으로 그새 십여년을 지내왓소.
대처도시(都市)에 잇는분드른 시골 소작이의 괴롬을 알리엄지요.
신문에 잡지에 모다 농촌이 구핍하엿네구제를해야하네 하지만 그것은 모다 지상공론이지요 그양반들이 아모리 들어도 농촌의 궁상은 그대로잇소.
어 말이 나오지를아니하오 죽지도살지도못하는 것이 내처지요 시골농군들의 처지요.＜33＞
＜17, 33＞