잡지명	別乾坤 第59號
발행일	1932년 12월 30일
기사제목	京城名人物新年觀相記 (A New Year's Fortune Reading of Famous Figures in Kyŏngsŏng)
필자	觀相者 (Fortune Teller)
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellany)

A New Year's Fortune Reading of Famous Figures in Kyŏngsŏng
						Fortune Teller

Ah-hem… It's been a while since I've done fortune readings, so many of the documents are unfamiliar. But I can't rummage through old papers in front of the guests like those fellows reading fortunes at T'apkol Park, that would be embarrassing. If I simply refuse, it would affect our years of friendship and people would think I'm being picky. Besides, with the new year, everyone is curious about their fortunes and businesses for the coming year. Among them, our Korean people, facing various difficulties, are even more eager to know if good luck will come their way in the new year. Given the circumstances, even if the documents are lacking and things are hectic on New Year's Day, I can't refuse to do the readings. Now, without further ado, come closer to this fortune teller. Whether it's accurate or not, only time will tell, but I will do my best to provide an honest reading based on my knowledge. The reading fee is free as before, but there's one condition: I won't read for those who don't smile. And I will absolutely not be responsible if someone's waist breaks from laughing, their navel string snaps, or their mouth tears… However, if there are those who can't afford treatment, I will provide a special referral to the newly established Kyŏngsŏng Affordable Treatment Center or the Chungang Affordable Treatment Center, so rest assured. Now, who should I see first among all these people? There's no particular order, but since everyone will be busy receiving guests on New Year's Day, let's start with the women so they can leave quickly! Saying this, the men might object, saying, "If the hen crows first, the household won't prosper," and that starting the New Year—especially the year of the rooster (酉年)—with a woman taking the lead is not auspicious. But if a fortune teller who doesn't charge a fee doesn't have that much freedom, then they can't function… Shhh… be quiet… whoever shouts first… whoever makes a sound first, come forward…

◈Kim Miri
Counselor: Have you been at peace?
Kim: It is very cold.
Counselor: Haha… your ears are still the same in the new year. Did you come to have your fortune read?
Kim: Yes, I ate rice-cake soup (떡국) and came! I am too full to do anything, please give me a quick reading. (At this moment, some people muttered, "How could that lady be ahead of us – how could she be so quick when shouting her name? It seems she has been blessed by the god of hearing and drinking (耳聰酒)…")
Counselor: Yes, I'll give you a reading. You had many troubles and rumors from school issues last year and the year before, but this year, you will not have such bad luck and things will be very good. You have always longed to meet your missing daughter (行方不明), whom you have never met in your life, and you will finally meet her in a dream sometime in the spring, summer, autumn, or winter, and your dull ears will gradually become sharper, so you will hear words that are beneficial to you. You have also contributed greatly to women's education and have long been nicknamed the "Copper Goblin" (구리귀신) by students, so it is likely that the education community or people in society will erect a bronze statue (銅像) in your honor this year. And this year, you will find your true self, so please restore your original surname (復姓). As a champion of women's rights, why do you keep using your dead husband's surname and pretending to be a fake Kim (金)? No matter how expensive gold (金價) becomes, people's value does not increase just because their surname is Kim (金).
I will tell you everything that will happen this year without a single mistake if you come back on New Year's Eve.

◈Shin Albert
With white hair and a ruddy complexion (白髮紅顔), she has such a good appearance that if she went to Pukan Mountain (北安山) or even just near her house wearing only a magoja (마고자) jacket, she would be mistaken for Magu the Immortal Woman (麻姑仙女). Why does she have so little luck in this human world? She has suffered until now, raising her young son and daughter as a widow. Unfortunately, her son suffers from a debilitating disease and cannot go outside, and even her beloved daughter followed her father to heaven. The Yanghyŏn Girls' School (養賢女學校), which she ran with selfless dedication throughout her life, was seized last autumn by Kim Miri because of that cursed money. But those are all temporary misfortunes of the past, so don't be too disappointed. This year will be a year of great fortune. If her husband had not passed away and she were younger, she would have had a noble son, but that is impossible, so perhaps one of her students will become a kind and filial adopted daughter. If she works hard, she will receive donations from benefactors and be able to continue the school project well. Since she originally shook her head well, she will be able to get rice cakes (떡) without paying if she goes to friendly rice cake shops.

◈Chu Kuk-kyŏng
His health is always poor, but if he takes his medicine well and exercises moderately, he will recover his health this year. More than anything else, that seems to be his greatest happiness this year. But please don't wear a suit in spring and summer. It's not good for his poor health, and it doesn't look good to others.

◈Yu Ok-kyŏng
"Holy God, either make me taller or blind the eyes of the people of the world when I go out…" He always prayed secretly, but this year a particularly big opportunity will arise, and from the dawn of New Year's Day, he will grow taller and taller and taller, and suddenly the giant Kim Pu-gwi (巨人金富貴) will go in and out under his armpits and be able to touch the signboard of Yuch'ang Store (裕昌商會) in Chongno (鍾路) at will, fulfilling his lifelong wish in one morning. But this is not a reading of his face but of his dreams, and if he, who is short, dreams this New Year, it will be easy for him to dream such a dream.

◈Song Chin-u's Second Wife, Miss Yu
The story of Song Chin-u is told every month in newspapers and magazines, but the story of his beloved Miss Yu has never been told, which is too cold for someone in a position to treat everyone equally. Because I feel so sorry, I will give her a special free reading this year. Because she has no son, she has been taking medicine and getting fortune readings, and she has been praying and making offerings with all her sincerity without Song Chin-u's knowledge, but perhaps the timing was not right, and she has not yet seen the effects. But this year, she will have a special blessing for a son, and she may have a son this year. However, because there is a sign of separation between her eyebrows, if she is not careful—or if she is too careful—Song may go abroad for a while, so she may be separated from him for a while. Therefore, if she does not prepare to have a son in advance from New Year's Day, she will not be able to avoid the right timing.

◈Son Chŏng-gyu
He deeply reflects on the evils of early marriage (조혼) in Korea and seems to have made a firm resolution that he will never marry until he is nearly forty, and he has been guarding the headquarters of the old maid party until now. This year, good fortune will enter every hole of his face, and there will be marriage talks from the beginning of the new year, and if the marriage talks go well, the wedding ceremony will be held in March or October. And the groom will be a very young, handsome, modern boy. This is more of a New Year's wish than a fortune reading. If he knows that I have such sympathy for him, he may not give me a reading fee, but he will give me a bottle of New Year's sake (新年屠蘇酒) as a thank you.

◈Pak In-dŏk
He heard a lot of gossip (구설) last year, and he will hear a lot of gossip this year as well. To avoid that misfortune, he should go all the way to the remote regions of Denmark (丁抹) and do rural research for ten years, or he should hold memorial services (고사) for newspaper and magazine reporters. But that is something he has to do himself, and it is difficult for others to advise him to do so.

◈Chŏng Chong-myŏng
It has been three years since he was imprisoned (철창) in connection with a case, and his preliminary hearing has not yet been concluded. This year, the preliminary hearing will finally be concluded, and if the result is insufficient evidence, he will be released, or he will suffer for a long time. Anyone who can't read fortunes can say such things, but if I had said that the preliminary hearing would be decided four years after he was first arrested, would you say that I was right?

◇
Hey—if I keep reading fortunes by separating men and women like this, I won't be able to read the fortunes of the men at all, so from now on, let's read the fortunes of men and women as they come to mind, without distinguishing between them.

◈Kim Tong-sŏng
Kim Tong-sŏng, who had been cut off from the newspaper world for a long time while running a farm, re-entered the newspaper world last winter. If the International Journalists' Conference is held this year and the Chungang Ilbo (中央日報) sends him to attend, his re-election as vice president is a foregone conclusion, and the Chungang Ilbo may fire another cannon, as the Tonga (東亞) did in the past to announce the fact nationwide. Mr. Ch'ŏlli-gu! How about holding a pre-celebration party at the Paekhap Club (百合圈) or somewhere similar in the new year and inviting this fortune teller as well?

◈Yŏm Sang-sŏp
Mr. Shin, who has been the assistant editor of the Chungang Ilbo since before the Lunar New Year, may get a promotion and become a driver (運轉手) if his luck turns out well this year. However, if he starts drinking again and drinks too much, he is likely to make a mistake and hurt someone, so be careful!

◈Pak P'al-yang
He went on a tour of rural Japan and even wrote a travelogue, and if the wind blows right, he may be able to go on a tour of rural Denmark (丁抹農村) without paying a penny, thanks to someone else's help. However, since he is unusually small, if he goes to Denmark (丁抹), I hope he will learn Danish gymnastics well and become a man of great stature, rather than just inspecting the countryside.

◈Shin Kyŏng-sun
He is nicknamed "Monkey," and this year—especially since it's the year of the Rooster—it seems like he will eat so much chicken that his throat will burst. But be careful, because if you don't eat it and suddenly eat a lot, your mouth will be surprised—Shin Kyŏng-sun (慎驚脣).

◈Yun Sŏng-sang
He used to be called "His Majesty Sŏng-sang" or "Madam" at the Chosŏn Ilbo, but what title has he earned at the Chungang Ilbo these days? If he is "Central Yun" (中央尹), he is the mayor of Kyŏngsŏng, so he is several levels lower than before, but instead, he can easily have a daughter or son, whichever he wants, this year to help increase the population of Kyŏngsŏng, so be happy alone.

◈Cho Man-shik
If the Chosŏn Ilbo is formally established as a corporation this year, he will be the publisher and chairman, so although he will be criticized for being "late" (晩時) like his name, he will be very happy. However, when you go around greeting people, be sure to leave your Chosŏn hurok coat (朝鮮후록코트) and Pilgong's book (筆工이책보는) at home. The responsibility will arise if the waists of the Seoul people, who are already weak, break off. Seoul people are also Korean products.

◈Cho Pyŏng-ok
If you haven't seen Cho Pyŏng-ok, look at the face of An Sang-ho (安商浩), who used to work as a doctor, when he was chubby, and if you haven't seen An Sang-ho, look at the face of Cho Pyŏng-ok when he was thin. Whether they are handsome or ugly is up to the third party to decide, but it is true that the two have similar faces. He has become the business director of the Chosŏn Ilbo, so Dr. Business Director is the first record in the history of Chosŏn newspapers. If he combines his doctoral knowledge with his face full of wisdom and operates the Chosŏn Ilbo well, he will have a considerable effect. In particular, everyone is paying attention to his activities this year. And his hometown is Ch'ŏnan, so… he will also be good at singing the "Hŭng…" "Hŭng…" "Ch'ŏnan Samgŏri Hŭng… Nŭngsu Willow…" "Hŭng…" "Hŭng T'aryŏng," so… Hŭng… the Chosŏn Ilbo will also be Hŭng (興)…

◈Chu Yo-han
He used to be nicknamed "Kanggaru" (강가루) at the Tonga, and he is still secretly active at the Chosŏn Ilbo. But no matter how busy he is—in other words, no matter how busy he is running around—don't try to ride the bicycle (自行車) you have your eye on. When it's in your eye, the glasses look bigger than your face, but it's actually just the glasses, so it will be absolutely difficult to ride.

◈Kim Hyŏng-wŏn
No matter how his pen name is Sŏksong—石松—his forehead, which is unusually bald, has become even more bald in the breeze of the Chosŏn Ilbo's assistant editor—no, the section chief. If his head becomes a little more bald this year, the Chosŏn Ilbo's editorial bureau will be able to work overtime without turning on the lights, thanks to his radiance, which will save a considerable amount of electricity bills for the company. Shiny… shiny… golden bald head shiny….

◈Yi Kwang-su
He is full of love and emotion, so he will be happy that the children are getting a year older in the new year, but when he thinks of his wife in Tokyo, how worried he must be. But it won't be long before the two of them meet again, which will be a consolation. And this year is the year of the Rooster, so he walks like a mother hen (씨암닭), and he will match the year and walk through the Korean literary world with a hen's walk, and he will hear a lot of gossip from the young writers who are full of controversy.

◈Sŏl Ŭi-shik
His nickname is Sŏl Nŏngt'ang (설넝탕), but he always looks pale, perhaps due to a lack of nutrition. He is already tired from being the chief of staff of the Shin Tonga (新東亞), but he will also start running "Shin Kajŏng" (新家庭) this year, so he will be eating less and working more. I hope he will eat a lot of Sŏl Nŏngt'ang and become much healthier this year, even if he borrows his brother-in-law Kim Tu-baek's nickname, "Ttokbaegi" (뚝백이).

◈Hyŏn Chin-gŏn
He combines good rocks outside Ch'angŭi Gate and even chicken farming (養鷄業), and his body is bigger and sturdier than the Sŏrim Temple (小林寺) stone statue of the Goddess of Mercy (石觀音). This year is the year of the Rooster (癸酉), so how much more fun will he have with chicken farming and how much chicken and eggs will he eat alone? In the old days, two eggs ruined the potential of a general (耀枓以二卵으로 棄干城之才), but he doesn't seem to be creating anything because of that fun. However, if he gets too interested in chickens and falls in love with a hen and even engages in chicken mating (鷄○), he is likely to be scratched by the feet of an angry rooster, so even when drunk, he should be especially careful—hahaha…….

◈Yun Paek-nam
Since his name is from the teachings (敎重), he leads a double life in many ways. He works at the broadcasting station and writes comic novels in the newspaper, so his work is double. He wears suits and Korean clothes at will, so that is also double. He does Korean comedy and Japanese comedy, so that is also double. Moreover, he will be doing double broadcasting from this year, so how heavy will his burden be? No… no, I didn't mean to compare him to a cow (牛) because I said "burden." I meant that his burden == responsibility is doubled, so please don't misunderstand.

◈Yang Paek-hwa
He has a lot of research in Chinese literature, so this year his name will be especially famous in China, and a Chinese woman will come to Korea to meet him. However, because she happens to be short, and he is unusually tall, they will not be able to meet in a regular seat, but will be seated on the upper floor of the Maeshin Naech'ŏnggak (每申來靑閣), and he will stand on the floor and have a conversation. If that's the case, he will write a novel called "A Record of a Beauty's Conversation on the Rooftop" (樓上美人對話記) in the vernacular style (白話軆―白華軆).

◈Kim Ki-jŏn
He has been spending his years in bed for several years, but more than anything else, his health will be restored this year like the clear sky after the rain, and he will be able to fight for church work as before. Everyone will be happy to wait for him.

◈Cho Ki-gŭm
Because his vocal cords are not good, he always feels awkward when he speaks, but if he takes good medicine this year, his vocal cords will be very clear, and he will not only give speeches on the podium, but will also host alumni associations from time to time and receive applause from many people.

◈Yi Ton-hwa
Even though he has a clear sign saying "Tonhwa Gate (敦化門)," he is afraid of the guards and cannot enter, and he lives in a thatched house in Samch'ŏng-dong (三淸洞). This spring, he will be able to enjoy the flowers in Ch'angdŏk Palace (昌德宮) without worry, so he should prepare flower-viewing sake (꽃노리술) in advance.

◈Shin Sŏk-u
He suffered an unexpected funeral last year, wore a yellow hat, and even became the P'yŏngyang magistrate (平壤監司) thanks to the leading cartoonist (第一線漫畵子). This year, he will be in mourning (守喪), so he will be the An'ak county magistrate (安岳郡守), and (he belongs to page 13)＜27＞

**Named Entities**

金美理	Kim Miri
塔골공원	T'apkol Kongwŏn
車氏	Ch'a ssi
申알베트	Shin Albert
金剛山	Kŭmgangsan
北安山	Pukan Mountain
麻姑仙女	Magosŏnnyŏ
養賢女學校	Yanghyŏn Yŏhakkyo
朱珏卿	Chu Kuk-kyŏng
兪鈺卿	Yu Ok-kyŏng
鍾路	Chongno
裕昌商會	Yuch'ang Sanghoe
金富貴	Kim Pu-gwi
宋鎭禹	Song Chin-u
柳氏	Yu ssi
孫貞奎	Son Chŏng-gyu
朴仁德	Pak In-dŏk
丁抹	Tingmak
鄭鍾鳴	Chŏng Chong-myŏng
金東成	Kim Tong-sŏng
中央日報	Chungang Ilbo
東亞	Tonga
千里駒	Ch'ŏlli-gu
廉想燮	Yŏm Sang-sŏp
朴八陽	Pak P'al-yang
申敬淳	Shin Kyŏng-sun
尹聖相	Yun Sŏng-sang
曺晩植	Cho Man-shik
趙炳玉	Cho Pyŏng-ok
安商浩	An Sang-ho
朱耀翰	Chu Yo-han
金炯元	Kim Hyŏng-wŏn
李光洙	Yi Kwang-su
薛義植	Sŏl Ŭi-shik
金枓白	Kim Tu-baek
玄鎭健	Hyŏn Chin-gŏn
小林寺	Sorimsa
尹白南	Yun Paek-nam
梁白華	Yang Paek-hwa
金起田	Kim Ki-jŏn
趙基琹	Cho Ki-gŭm
李敦化	Yi Ton-hwa
申錫雨	Shin Sŏk-u
平壤	P'yŏngyang
安岳	An'ak



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제59호
발행일	1932년 12월 30일
기사제목	京城名人物新年觀相記
필자	觀相者
기사형태	잡저

京城名人物新年觀相記
						觀相者
애-헵…오래간만에 관상을보랴니 여러 가지문서가 모도서투루다 그러나 탑골공원에서 당사주보는 친구들모양으로 창피스럽게 소님압헤서 묵은문서를 뒤적뒤적차저서 볼수도엄고 그냥 못보겟다고 사절을 하면 여러해친한정분에 한섬섬하게 생각할 것이다. 더구나 새해가되면 누구나 그일년동안에 자긔의신수나 사업이 어떠케될가하고 궁금하야알고십허한다 그중에도 여러 가지의 곤난을 당하는 우리조선사람은 새해에는 행여-조흔운수나 도라을가하고 다른나라사람보다 더 알고십허한다 사정이 이와가트니 정월초하루날에 문서가 아모리어하고 여러 가지가 분주하시지만은 안어보와줄수엄다. 자-여러말말고 이관상자 압흐로 밧삭닥어오십쇼 맛고아니맛는 것은 지내보와야 알겟지만은 나의아는것지 정성지는 보아드리리다. 관상료는 전과가티 무료이지만은 다만조건은 웃지안는사람은이관상을 아니보와준다는 그것입니다. 그리고 웃다가 허리가 불어지거나 벳곱불이 어지거나 입이찌저지거나…거긔에대한 책임은 절대로지지안켓습니다. 그러나 그중에돈이엄서서 치료하기가 곤난한분은 이사람이 특별소개를 하야 새로설입되는 경성부실비치료원이나 그럿치안으면 중안실비치료원가튼곳으로 보내드릴터이니 그것만은 안심하십시오. 그러면 이허다한사람에 누구를 먼저볼가 순서야물론 엄는것이지만은 정월초하루날에 손님대접하기도 매우 밧부실터이니 여자를 먼저보와서 속히가시도록하자! 이럿케 말하면 남자측에서 이의하기를 암탉이먼저울면 집안이아니된다는데 이신년벽두―――그중에도 유년(酉年)=즉닭의해에 방스리게 여자가압장을 서게된다면 자미가엄다고 하기쉬울것이나 그러나 돈아니밧고보는 관상자에게 그만한 자유지도 엄다면 행세를할 수가 엄슬터인…쉬…아모말도마시고 잠잠하게기시요…누구…누구…하거던…아무나-냐…소리를 먼저하는분이들오십시오―――.

◈金美理士
勸, 과세안녕이하섯습니?
金, 날이매우 춥습니다.
勸, 하하하…새해에도 귀는 여전하시구먼-관상보러오섯습니?
金, 네-국먹고 왓습니다! 지금은 배가불너서 아모것도 시려요 엄핏관상이나 보와주십시오(이 여러사람들중에서는 저런량반이악가-누구나……소리를할에는 엇지그럿케 남보다먼저 드렷슬가 지금은 귀발긔술(耳聰酒)이 다인  모양잊…하고 야지를 하엿다)
勸, 네-보와트리지요…작년-재작년은 학교문제로 공연한 구설을 만히드르섯지만은 금년은 아주 그런액운도 엄스시고 매우조시겟습니다 평생에만나보지를 못하야 항상그리워하시는 행방불명(行方不明)의 님도 봄이나 여름철이아니면 가을혹은겨울철에 몽중이라도 한번 만나보실드실듯하고 어두신귀도 차차밝어저서 자신에 利로운말슴은 잘드르시겟스며 여자교육에 공현도 만으시고 학생들에게 구리귀신이란별명도 드르신지 이미오라시니 엇지되면 금년중에 교육게에서나 사회사람의 발긔로 동상(銅像)도 해세워드릴듯합니다 그리고 금년에는 본성을 차질운수이니 복성(復姓)을 하십시오 녀권을 주장하시는 당신으로 당당한본성의 차씨(車氏)를 두고 왜 죽은남편의 성을 따러서 가김씨노릇만 하시겟습니 금감(金價)이 아모리빗싸저도 성이금씨라고 사람의 감이 올르는 것은 아닙니다.
그 외다른것은 이해일년을지내보고 섣달금음날자정에 차저오시면 금년일은 한아도틀니지안케 다말슴하야드리겟습니다.

◈申알베트
백발홍안(白髮紅顔)에 조흔풍채를 가진그느 금강산(金剛山)은 그만두고 북안산댁이 가튼데라도 마고자웃옷만입고 가서잇다면 마고선녀(麻姑仙女)로 의심을바들만하다 그는우리인간에서는 엇지그리 복이적으신지 소년과수로 어린남매 두사람을 다리고 이지 고생사리를하엿＜24＞는데 불행이 아드님은 불구의 병으로 항상 박갓출입을 못하고 사랑하던 따님조차 자긔아버지를 따러서 천당길을 가게되엿스며 평생에 희생적자업으로하던 양현녀학교(養賢女學校)도 그놈의원수의 돈한가지가엄서서 작년가을에 동지가 김미리사씨에게 차압을당하얏다. 그러나 그것은 다 과거의 일시적액운이니 부대낙심하시지마십시오 금년부터는 대통운입니다 남편이기시고 나히 젊무섯스면 귀자도 나실터이지만은 그것은 그것은 사실 될수엄는일이니 어쩌면 학생중에서 마음성조코 효성스러운 수양따님한분이라도 생기실것갓고 열성으로 활동만잘하면 독지가의긔부금이라도 드러와서 학교사엄을 잘게속하게될것이요 본래에 체머리를 잘흔드시는터이니 친한집에를 가시면 돈아니내시고도 은잘어더자실팔자입니다.

◈朱珏卿
몸이 항상 불건강하신그는 약을잘자시고 운동만 적당히하시면 금년에는 건강이 쾌복되실듯하다 무엇보다도 그에게는 그것이 금년에큰행복일것갓다 그러나 봄과 여름철에 제발 양복은입지마섯스면 조켓다. 불건강하신몸에 리로울 것도 엄거니와 남보기에 그럿케 얼리지도안는다.

◈兪鈺卿
거룩하신 하누님이시여 저를 키를크게하야 주시거나 그럿치안으시면 제가출입할이면 세상사람의눈을 가리워라도주십시요……하고 남모르게 항상긔도를하시던그는 금년에 특별이 큰보기터저서 정월초하날새벽부터 자라고자라고 자라서 별안간에 거인김부귀(巨人金富貴)가 그의저드랭이밋흐로 들낙날낙하게되고 종로유창상회(裕昌商會) 간판을 손으로 마음대로 만지게되여 평생의 소원을 하루아츰에 시원이풀게될 것이다 그러나 이것은 그의얼골관상이아니라 그의 관상이니키가적은 그로서 신년에만일 을 다면 그러한 을 기쉬울것이란 말이다.

◈宋鎭禹氏 第二婦人柳氏
송진우씨의 이약이는 별의별소리를 신문으로 잡지로 달마다울겨멱지만은 그의 사랑하는 류씨마마이약이는 이지 한번도 아니하는 것은 일시동인하는 공평한 처지에잇서서 넘우도 냉정한 일이다 그런 것이 넘우도 미안하니 금년에는 특별이 무료관상이나 보와드리기로하자 그는 이지 아들이업는 닭에 약도상당이 자시고 사주관상도 보고 송진우씨모르게 불공, 긔도, 뭇구리가진정성을 다드려보왓스나 연가맛지못하야 그랫던지 아즉지 그효과를 못본듯하다 그런데 금년에는 특별이 아들복이터저서 엇저면 금년중에 아들을날듯하다 그러나 량미간에 이별수가 운탓으로 잘못하면―――아니 잘하면 송씨가 양행을 하야 잠시서로 러저잇기가 쉬울터이니 시긔를 일치안토록 정월초하루날부터 미리미리 아들나흘준비 행동을 하지안으면 아니될것갓다.

◈孫貞奎
조선의 조혼페풍을 통절하게 생각하고 나는 근四十이되지안으면 절대로 결혼을 안이하겟다고 구든결심을 가진 듯이 이지 로처녀당의본영을 직히고잇는 그는 금년에 그얼골의 슬기구멍마다 행운이드러서 신년벽두부터 혼담이잇고 그혼담이 잘진행만된다면 양춘삼월이나 그럿치안으면 구시월에 결혼식을 거행하게될듯하다 그리고 신랑되는 사람은 아주나히가 젊은 미남자 모던이일 것이다 이것은 관상이란 것보다 신년의 축원이다 미상불 그가나의 그만한동정심이 잇는 것을 안다면 관상료금은 아니줄지라도 감사하다는 으로 신년도소주라도 한병선사할 것이다.

◈朴仁德
작년일녀내 남의구설을 만히듯던 그는 금년에와서도 역시구설을 만히듯게될 것이다 그액을 면하랴면 아주고비원주하야 정말(丁抹)가튼데 가서 농촌연구를 한십년하고 오던지＜25＞그럿치안으면 신문잡지긔자들에게 고사를 잘지내는수박게 엄슬 것이다 그러나 그것은 자긔자신이할일이지 남이권하기는 어려운일이다.

◈鄭鍾鳴
모사건으로 철창에 드러간지 삼년이되도록 아즉예심종결도 나지안은 그는 반듯이 금년중에는 예심이라도 이날것이요 그결과 증거불충분이라면 곳나오게 될것이요 그럿치안으면 한참 고생을 더하게 될 것이다 이런말이야 관상못보는 보통사람도 누구나 할말이지만은 처음에 검거될에 사년후에야 예심결정이되리라고 내가말을하얏다면 마젓다구할것이니냐.
◇
얘―이럿케 남녀를 루루구별하야 관상을 보다가는 남자의 관상은 한아도못볼터이니 지금부터는 남녀를 구별할것엄시 생각나는대로보자.

◈金東成
한참동안 농장경영을 하너라고 신문계와는 아주교통차단을 하엿던 金東成씨―작년겨울부터 다시 신문계로 출각을하엿스니 금년에 만일 만국긔자대회가열니고 중앙일보에서 그를출석식힌다면 부회장재선은 여노흔당상이요 러서 중앙일보에서는 전날동아에서 그사실을 전국적으로 선건하듯이 한번 대포를놀지도 모를 것이다 철리구(千里駒)선생! 신년에 백합권가튼데서 미리자축연이나 한번열으시고 이관상자지도 초대나한번하시면 어할실!.

◈廉想燮
세전부터 중앙일보편줌차장이되 신씨는 금년에 운수가 잘터지면 한자리여서 운전수(運轉手)가 될듯하다 그러나 엇던 술을 다시 시작한그가 넘우과음을 한다면 잘못실수하야 사람을상하기 쉬울터이니 주의!

◈朴八陽
일본의 농촌시찰을하고 긔행문지쓴그는 바람이 잘만불게되면 돈아니드리고 남의 덕분에 정말 농촌(丁抹農村)의 시찰지 하게될지모른다 그러나 체격이 남유달니 적은 그는 만일정말을 가게된다면 농촌시찰보다 정말체조를 잘배워서 장대한체격의 소유자가 되기바란다.

◈申敬淳
원숭이의 별명을 듯는그는 금년―특히 닭의해를 맛낫스니 닭고기 잘자실목이 터질것갓다 그러나 아니자시다가 별안간만히자시면 입이놀날터이니 주의하시오 신경순(愼驚脣)―――

◈尹聖相
조선일보에서 성상페하― 는 귀부인의 충호를 듯던그는 요즘중앙일보에서는 무슨 충호를 어덧나― 중앙윤(中央尹)이면 경성부윤셈이니 전보다 지위가 몃층러젓다고할터이나 그대신으로 경성부의 인구증식을 식히기위하야 금년에 ―아들중 무엇이던지 마음대로 하나 나시기 쉬을터이니 혼자깃버하십시오.

◈曺晩植
금년에 조선일보가 주식회사만 정식으로 성립이된다면 발행인은 물론이요 회사장지 겸하게 됨터이니 그이 이름와가티 만시(晩時) 지탄은 잇스나 매우깃부실 것이다 그러나 그인사를 다니실에 부대조선후록코트와 필공(筆工)이책보는 두고다니십시오 갓득이나 체질약한 사울사람의 허리가 다어지게 된다면 책임문제가 생깁니다 서울사람도 역시 조선국산이니요.

◈趙炳玉
조병옥씨를 못보왓거던 전날에의사(醫師)노릇하던 안상호(安商浩)씨의 살슬의 얼골을 보고 안상호씨를 못보왓거던 이조병욱씨의 파리한의 얼골을 보라 잘 생기고 못생긴 것은 제삼자의 볼탓이어니와 두분의 얼골이 비슷한 것은 사실이다 그가 조선일보의 영엄국장이되엿스니 박사영엄국장은 조선신문사상에 최초긔록이다 그슬기구멍만흔얼골에다 박사지식을 겸하야 조선일보를 잘운전한다면 상당한 효과를 내일 것이다 특히 금년중에 그의 활동은 누구나 주목하는바이다 그리고 고향이 천안(天安)이시니 흥……흥……천안삼거리흥……능수버들……흥하고……흥타령도 잘하실걸―――러서 흥(興)……조선일보도흥(興)

◈朱耀翰
동아에서 『강가루』의별명을 듯던 그는 조선일보에서도 여전이 남모르게 잘활략을 한다 그러나 아모리 밧부게활략―――다시말하면 밧부게 더라도 눈에거러둔 자행거(自行車)를타고 가랴고하지는 마시오 눈에걸엿슬대에는 아모리얼골보다 안경이커서 자전거가티뵈지만은 사실은 그대로안경이니 절대로 탈수는 어려울 것이다.

◈金炯元
아호는 아모리 석송―石松―이라도 남유달니버서진 그의 이마는 조선일보편즘운전수―아니 차장바람에 더버서지게되엿다 그의 머리가 금년에 좀더 버서질것가트면 조선일보편즘국은 전등을 아니켜고도 그의 광채로 야근은 넉넉히할＜26＞터이니 그사의 전등료에 상당한 절략이될 것이다 번적……번적……금광대머리번적…….

◈이광수
사랑과 감회가만흔그는 새해를 당하야 어린이들의 한 살더먹는것도 반갑겟지만은 동경에잇는 그부인을 생각하면 그얼마나섬섬하랴 그러나 오라지아니하야 두분이 다시 만나게됨터이니 적이나 위안이됨것이다 그리고 금년은 닭의해라 씨암닭모양으로 행행하게 거름을 것는그는 더구나 년를 맛치여서 암탉거름으로 조선문단을 잘걸어갈듯하고 러서 말성만흔 젊은 文人들에게 구설도 상당하게 들을 것이다.

◈薛義植
별호는 설넝탕이라도 영양부족이라할지 얼골이항상 파리해보이는 그는 신동아참모장되시기도 몸이피곤하신터에 새해에는 겸하야 「신가정」사리지  하시게되니 가위식소사번이안일가 그의 매부되시는 金枓白씨의 백이별명을 좀빌어서라도 금년에는 설넝탕가튼 것을 만히자시고 몸이훨신 건강하시기바란다.

◈玄鎭健
창의문박조흔수석에 양계엄(養鷄業)지겸하야 백주황계로 몸짐이 소림사(小林寺) 돌관음(石觀音)보다 더 하게부대한 그는 금년이 닭의해(癸酉)라 얼마나 양계엄에 더자미를 눗치고 닭고기와 계란을 혼자자시랴누 녯날에는 계란두개로 장수될인물을 버렷다더니(耀枓以二卵으로 棄干城之才)그는 그자미에 창작(創作)도내지 안는모양인가 그러나 닭에 넘우취미를 붓치다가 암탉과 사랑이생겨계○(鷄○)지 하다가는 산아운 수탉의 발에 할퀴기가 쉬울터이니 아모리 술취한중이라도 특별주의할일―――하하하…….

◈尹白南
그는 이름부터 교중(敎重)씨인지라 여러가질 이중생활을한다 방송국일을 보시고 신문에 만담소설을 쓰시니 보시는 일도 이중이요 양복과 조선옷을 임으시니 그것도 이중이요 조선어만담 일번어 만담을 겸해하시니 그것도 이중이다 더구나 금년부터는 이중방송지 하시게되니 그짐이 얼마나 묵어우실가 아니……아니 짐이라고 하엿다고 그를 소(牛)에비하야 하는 말은 아니요 부담==책임이중하시다는 말이니 부대부대 오해는 마십시오.

◈梁白華
중국문학에 연구가 만흐신그는 특별이 금년에 중국지 성명이 나서 중국녀자가 그를 한번 만나보랴고 조선지 차저오게 될 것이다 그러나 하필 키적은 녀자이기 문에 남유달니 키가큰그는 보통좌석에서 가티만나보지 못하고 매신의래청각(每申來靑閣)상층에다 안치고 그는 그사에서서 정담을하게될 것이다 사살이 그럿케만 된다면 그는  백화체(白話軆―白華軆)로 루상미인대화긔(樓上美人對話記)란소설을 쓰시게될걸.

◈金起田
수년래로 병석에서 세월을 보내는 그는 무엇보다도 금년에 운권청천가티 건강이회복되야 여전하게 교회일에 대분투를하게될 것이다 누구나 반갑게 기다리라.

◈趙基琹
성대가 좃치못하야 자긔부터도 말할에 항상 각감한 것을 느는 그는 금년에 조흔약을 먹게되면 성대가 아주탁터저서 단상의연설은 그만두고 각금동창회를 주죄하야 여러사람의 갈채를 밧게될 것이다.

◈李敦化
돈화문(敦化門)이라고 렷하게 문패지부처놋코도 파수병정이무서워서 트러가지도못하고 삼청동에서 초가사리를하는 그는 금년봄에 창덕궁구경이라도 안심하고 하게됨터이니 미리미리 노리술이나 준비할일―――.

◈申錫雨
작년중에 외간상을 당하야 노랑감투를쓰고 제일선만화자(第一線漫畵子) 덕분에 평양감사지하신 그는 금년에는 수상(守喪)하시너라고 안악군수는 하실터이요 그(一三頁에게속)＜27＞
＜24-27＞