잡지명	별건곤 제59호
발행일	1932년 12월 30일
기사제목	金ㆍ金ㆍ金ㆍ金ㆍ金 海洋金이야기 (The Story of Marine Gold)
필자	鄭五星
기사형태	잡저 (Essay)

The Story of Gold, Gold, Gold, Gold, Gold: Marine Gold
						Jeong O-seong

A way for all fifteen hundred million people on Earth to become wealthy, each with 40,060,000 won—

If I were to say this, you'd laugh and think I'm crazy, but not at all.

Really—

Really—

It's absolutely true.

"How can that be?"

Be patient and listen to this story.

The amazing discovery that gold and silver are dissolved in seawater was made in 1872 when a British man named Harcourt analyzed the seawater of Ireland and found that one cubic meter of seawater contained thirteen milligrams of gold, which is called marine gold (海洋金). Marine silver (海洋銀) was discovered a little earlier by a French chemist, Maragjimou.

Once, while repairing a ship that had been traveling around the Pacific Ocean for seven years, they accidentally saw that the ship's copper plate had completely turned silver, and they realized that silver was dissolved in seawater.

As a result, scholars from various countries began to desperately analyze seawater, and in some places, one cubic meter contained five milligrams (worth one jeon at the time), and in others, twice that amount. The record for the most contained was in a section of the Atlantic Ocean, where one cubic meter of water contained 267 milligrams (53 jeon 4 rin) of gold.

So, someone calculated how much gold and silver were dissolved in the seawater that occupies three-quarters of the Earth's surface, and the result was 40 billion tons of gold and 13 billion tons of silver. Aren't you yawning?

Then, how much would that marine gold (海洋金) and marine silver (海洋銀) be worth? It's enormous. If we convert 40 billion tons of gold and 13 billion tons of silver into Japanese yen, which we use now, it would be an almost infinite price.

If we divided it among the fifteen hundred million people living on Earth, each person would get twenty-eight tons of gold and nine tons of silver. If we calculate that in money, it would be 40 million won for gold and 160,000 won for silver, totaling 40,060,000 won.

Therefore, if we could completely extract the gold and silver dissolved in the sea, everyone in the world could have 40,060,000 won worth of gold and silver. The extraction methods are currently being researched by famous university scholars. We are waiting for success along with you. Now, seawater is not just salt water, but gold and silver water.

"Golden waves, silver waves, so calm!" is not a false expression.

How much gold is there on Earth right now? Even if we emptied all the banks and shook out their vaults, there would only be about 30,000 tons of gold and 300,000 tons of silver.

This is nothing compared to marine gold (海洋金) and marine silver (海洋銀).

If we collected all the marine gold (海洋金) in the sea and used it to build a pyramid like the ones in Egypt, it would have a volume of 22,000,000,000 cubic meters. If we collected the marine silver (海洋銀) and made a pyramid, it would have a volume of 12,900,000,000 cubic meters. If we compared the Eiffel Tower in Paris or even a real pyramid to these, they would be as small as a fingernail. And if we put all the gold currently in circulation together, it would be so small in comparison that it would be barely visible, only 1,670 cubic meters. If we drew a picture of it, you wouldn't even be able to see it with your eyes. Silver would have a volume of 30,000 cubic meters.

In this world where people go crazy for gold and silver, this can't just be a fantasy. Since long ago, so-called entrepreneurs have started companies like ×× Marine Gold Collection Company (××海洋金採集會社) based on the interim reports of scholars who haven't even completed their research, hoping for luck, but they all ended up failing. Instead of buying shares in companies like Yeuewa, just look at the endless waves of the sea and think, "Will this water become silver or gold?" and have a pleasant thought.

Rather than planning such things, study and research further and complete the extraction method as soon as possible to make that inexhaustible gold ours.

But, I'm sorry to say, even if we succeed, there will be difficult points.

What is it? If gold and silver become so common, the price of gold will naturally fall sharply, and prices will rise so much that a bag of rice might cost tens of won, or even a single grain of rice might cost hundreds of won.

Who would care about toilet doors made of yellow gold or garbage cans made of gold?

Haha! Don't you think so? <45>

Named Entities

鄭五星	Jeong O-seong
아일랜드	Aillaendeu
英國	Yeongguk
太平洋	Tae Pyeongyang
不蘭西	Bullanseu
巴里	Pari
埃及	Aegup



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제59호
발행일	1932년 12월 30일
기사제목	金ㆍ金ㆍ金ㆍ金ㆍ金 海洋金이야기
필자	鄭五星
기사형태	잡저

金ㆍ金ㆍ金ㆍ金ㆍ金 海洋金이야기
						鄭五星
지구(地球)우에사는 十五億의전인류(全人類)가 한사람 남지안코 제각각 四千十六萬圓의 부자가되는 방법―
이런말을하면 밋친놈다보겟다고비웃겟스나 어림도엄시
정말―
정말―
참정말입니다.
「어케해서 그러케되나!」
급하지만 좀참고 조용히 이이야기를 들어보십시오.
해수(海水)에 금(金)과 은(銀)이녹아잇다고하는 굉장한일이 발견되기는 一八七二年 영국(英國) 사람 「하코트」가 「아일랜드」의바다ㅅ물을 분석해보고 일임방(一立方)에틀의 해수속에 십삼미리그람의 황금(黃金)이 들어잇다는 것을 알게되엿는대 이것을 해양금(海洋金)이라고 부르며 해양은(海洋銀)은 그보다 조금전 불란서(佛蘭西)의 화학자(化學者)「마라그지무」가 발견하엿습니다.
한번은 태평양(太平洋)을 칠년간이나 도라다닌 배를 수선하랴고 하다가 우연히도 배밋동판(銅版)이 전부은색(銀色)으로 변하여진 것을 본대로 바다ㅅ물속에 은이풀어저잇다구하는 것을 알수가잇섯습니다.
이러구보니 각국의 한다하는 학자(學者)양반들은 긔를쓰고 싸다니며 해수분석에 전력을하엿는바 어곳에서는 일임방메틀에 다섯미리그람(時價一錢强) 어곳에서는 그두배 제일만히 포함되여잇는 레코드는 대서양(大西洋) 한구통이 일입방메틀의 물속에 二百六十七미리그람(五十三錢四厘)의 금이 들어잇는것이엿습니다.
그래서 어사람이 지구표면(地球表面)의 四分의 三이나 차지하고잇는 바다ㅅ물속에 얼마만치나 금과은이 녹아저잇나를 게산해본결과 금은 四百億噸 은은 百三十億噸 여러분하품나오지안습니?
그러면 그해양금 해양은의 가격은얼마나되느냐하면 대단합니다 四百億噸의금과 百三十億噸의 은을 우리가지금쓰는 일본(日本)돈원(圓)으로환산을한다면 그것은 거의 무한한 가격에 가운것입니다.
그것을 지구에 살고잇는 전인류 十五億人에게 난호아준다면 한사람암헤올목이 금 二十八噸 은 九噸 이것을 돈으로 저본다면 금갑 四千萬圓은갑 十六萬圓 합게四千六萬圓也라입니다.
그러키문에 만일에 완전히 바다에서 물속에 풀려저잇는 금은을 채취하게 된다면 전세에의 온인구가 누구든지 四千六萬圓也의금은을 난호아가질수가잇는대 그채취방법(採取六法)은 목하 유명한대학자들이 전력연구중이올시다 여러분과함어서리 성공이되기를 기다리고잇습니다 이리되고보니 바다ㅅ물은 소곰물이아니라 금물은물이요.
「금파(金波)은파(銀波)잔잔한데!」하는말은 엉터리엄는 형용사(形容詞)가아닙니다.
지금 우에 금덩이가얼마나만치나잇는가하면 은행(銀行)이란은행은 다뒤저다가 금고(金庫)를톡톡덜어보아도 금은겨우 三萬噸 은은三十萬噸이라는―
요짓것을가지고는 해양금 해양은에다는 비교할수도엄습니다.
바다에잇는 해양금을 전부채취하여다가 애급(埃及)에잇는 피라밋드형(型)으로 싸는다면 체적(體積)二二○○○○○○○○립방메틀 해양은을 채취하여다가 피라밋드형으로맨든다면 전체적 一二九○○○○○○○립방메틀 파리(巴里)에잇는 엡헬탑(塔)이나 정말피라밋드는 예다가갓다댄다면 손톱만치박게는 안된다는 것입니다 그리고 지금현세에서 류통(流通)되는 금덩이의 전부를 뭉처놋는다면 이것은 정말 예다가비교하야 알만콤박게는 안됩니다 겨우一六七○립방메틀 그림으로그려놋는다면 여러분의육안(肉眼)으로는 인식(認識)할수도엄슬만할 지경입니다. 은은 체적三○○○○립방메틀―
금덩이 은덩이라면 두눈이뒤집어지는 이세상인지라 이것이 결단코 공상으로만은 존재할수가엄지요 벌서옛적부터 소위긔엄가(企業家)라고하는 친구들이 아직완성도 안된 학자들의 중간적보고(中間的報告)를긔초로하야 만일의 요행을 바＜44＞라가지고는 ××해양금채집회사(海洋金採集會社)가튼 것을 엿다가 급기야에는 모다중절(中絶)을하고 마텃지마는 여러분은 바다의 천파만파(千波萬波)를 바라다보시며
「이물이 은이되느냐 금이되느냐?」하고 마음유쾌한생각만하실이지아 예우에와가튼 회사의주(株)를산다든지 그런 것을 조직한다든지하는 것은 아직중지하시기바라는것입니다.
이런 것은 게획하시는것보다는 더욱더공부를하고 연구를거듭하여 어여 채취방법(採取方法)을 완성하여 가지고 그무진장(無盡藏)한 금을우리인류의것으로 맨들기를 목적하십시다.
그러나  실레이지마는 정말로 성공을해도 곤난한점이 엄지안하잇슬것입니다.
그것은 뭐냐하면 세상에 금과은이 그러케지 흔하고보면 자연히 금갑은 함부로 러지고 물가(物價)는 올를대로올라 닥하다가는 석냥하게에 수十圓 는 쌀한톨에 수百圓을하게될는지드몰으고
변소(便所) 문도 누런황금으로 씨러기통도 그을누가봅니.
하하! 여러분 그러치안습니?＜45＞
＜44-45＞