잡지명	별건곤  
발행일	1930년 07월 01일  
기사제목	유모어·넌센스·아이로니 現代漫文集, 文字로 그린 漫畵 (Collection of Modern Prose: Humors, Nonsense, and Irony, Illustrated with Words)  
저자	方定煥 (Bang Jeong-hwan)  
기사형태	문예기타 (Miscellaneous Literature)  

I write about my own affairs. It's not good for others to write about my affairs, and it's not good for me to write about others' affairs, so if I write about my own affairs, there's nothing more certain than this in the world. - However, ironically, the result is that "writing about my own affairs isn't such an astute act," which is regrettable. 

Yet, I am told to write a lighthearted (漫談) piece, and though I know it will become a foolish task, I have nothing else to write about that relates to me. But regardless, it is a foolish act, yet it is indeed a sure thing that I write about my own affairs.

I'm not quite sure about what to say, but people these days often refer to this era as the age of propaganda. Propaganda isn't something that has never existed, but the fact that it is especially referred to as the propaganda age implies that "propaganda itself takes precedence over reality" and "as long as the propaganda is good, that's all that matters." This seems to give rise to a lot of absurdities, and perhaps that's why, with both either laughter or disbelief, there are entirely absurd propagandists who create funny circumstances that are hard to swallow.

Once, there was a gathering planned to exchange opinions regarding children's literature, so many people were supposed to meet at a certain place at a certain time. Despite the fact that the organizer made triple calls asking everyone to come, only the person I was talking to and a friend of theirs showed up, while I and just one other person waited. Even if all had come as called, about thirty people would have attended, but after waiting for more than an hour, no one else arrived, and only three friends were urging, "Aren't you going to open the meeting?" So, we ended up dispersing without starting.

I regretted that I should have been aware of the organizer's unreliable character from the start and didn't go there in the first place. That evening, when I opened the newspaper, there it was, boldly printed in large letters: "This afternoon at a certain place in the city, about thirty researchers on children's literature gathered to hold a discussion and decided to organize an association for children's literature, with so and so among others elected as founding members.” 

If one falls for the hype, this is how ridiculous it gets. I called the newspaper the next day to find out about it: "We simply received a note saying that someone else had orchestrated the whole event and we were just following that along." And that person had been the very one who was discussing it with me earlier. In the end, the actions of this single individual just amounted to taking others' work and promoting it as their own, yet I still wondered what kind of expressions those who absurdly believed in the newspaper's report held on their faces.

"Teacher, when will you be leaving to the countryside?" 

The guest who had arrived said out of the blue. When I asked, "What countryside?" the guest seemed puzzled.

"I heard from XX that you will be giving a lecture there." 

"Yes- yes, XX indeed. A letter came asking me to give a lecture, but I replied that I couldn't go due to scheduling conflicts."  

"The newspaper reported that you would be giving a lecture at XX today." 

That day the letter arrived, and now that it has reached the newspaper, they say I must go for sure... 

Inviting someone who is bound by schedules to insist they come at a specific time they declared, and then having that appear in the newspaper as well, one would think it necessary to definitely respond to that. 

This kind of meticulous arrangement made for that day announced that the speaker, Mr. Bang Jeong-hwan, promised to come, but then boldly announced the urgent matter that arose which prevented him from attending. Pushing the situation to their advantage, this group could manage to escape responsibility by declaring the accepted invitation while failing to actually appear. What could I make of this?

At last, "I went all the way from twenty-five ri away just because they said you were going to be there, but I heard at last that you could not come due to a sudden matter." Those who gathered to hear me must have been deeply disappointed, for thousands had turned up that day just hearing me mention the lecture.

Letters began to flood in with two or three at a time. The replies I had written would bring yet more letters demanding that "I see from the newspaper that you had come to speak in OO District on that day, and since it is only ten ri to visit here, could it not have been a brief visit?” from relatives expressing their displeasure and reproach.

But readers shouldn't be surprised. The point is that it was wrong only to write letters of this nature in advance, and I, living in Gyeongseong, remember that no one, whether they were debating or exchanging greetings, had notified anyone about who the invited speaker was or what any committee had been established for.

Here the types of people in Seoul seem to have multiplied, and getting deceived by such types becomes harder; it seems that people who live in Seoul are becoming increasingly estranged. 

Could it be acceptable to promise something one never accepted and then publicize that beforehand? 

Ah, if one had a sudden illness preventing attendance that day, that would be another matter... If they hadn't accepted initially but only relied on advertisements, how would that suffice?

The propaganda age? This so-called propaganda age seems to be birthed by these kinds of special individuals, and whether the newspapers become an easy vehicle for these people is a matter that both sides must reflect upon. 

Thus ends this half-hearted light chatter.

In the following section, the narrative shifts to female vanity, specifically detailing a newlywed couple's comedic tragedy surrounding a stolen diamond necklace.

Women are indeed the deities of vanity- 

Although I rarely wander into night streets, I don't hesitate to present such unpleasantness. But no matter how one looks at it, it's a factual observation that these excessive vanity traits manifest more in women than in men. 

"Hey!" 

The moment the husband came home after resigning from his job, he happened to see her fidgeting like someone who had just handed over five or six telegrams. 

"What's wrong?" 

"Look at this! An invitation has arrived!" 

That invitation requested that on a certain date, a gala will be held and hopes for their presence were conveyed, signed by a well-known entrepreneur of that time. 

"Darling, you will have to mingle at this event with various eminent individuals. Oh my, how did we receive such a wonderful invitation? Who could have introduced us?" 

While the invitation stirred excitement, the wife was troubled, thinking, "I have only one dress suitable for going out, but knowing that the event will have prominent ladies, I should wear at least a necklace.” 

This newlywed couple, despite having entered into a love marriage not long ago, were already stuck in financial disputes due to current economic issues. At such times, the husband, feeling a pang of shame as "what now?” did know that none of this was their fault but was now pained by his wife's query about needing a necklace.

"What's your idea of suddenly setting out for a necklace? We have no money..." 

Without considering their dinner completely, the two debated how they could get ready to attend the gala without losing face.

After a frantic discussion, they hit on the idea of borrowing a diamond necklace from a wealthy widow who lived next door. 

The widow was a millionaire who owned at least five of those necklaces, and she kindly lent them just the diamond necklace worth fifty thousand won without hesitation.

The wife, feeling triumphant, eagerly counted the days until the gala, practically flipping through her calendar. 

The long-awaited night of the gala arrived. They attended with high spirits, feasting, eating, and dancing. 

As the night flowed beautifully, Mrs. XX got carried away drinking and ended up so intoxicated that she decided to step outside for some fresh air and leaned against the balcony railing, eventually falling asleep. 

When her husband came looking for her later, he found his wife sound asleep and snoring softly. 

"Dear, what are you doing sleeping here? This is embarrassing." 

Jarring her awake, he curiously asked, "So, where’s the necklace?" 

Startled, she sat up from her slumber. 

"Eh? Oh no! What’s happening?" 

Her face instantly turned pale, and her husband was left agitated and bewildered. The diamond necklace had clearly been lost. 

Both of them were left in despair, returning home deeply crestfallen. 

"What do we do now?" 

"Five thousand won- five thousand won- Oh dear, it seems our life has come to an end," both lamented into the long night pondering about their plight, but it seemed there was no way out. 

At long last, they decided to pack their belongings and flee to their hometown that very night.

Ten years sped by- 

One stormy evening, the couple stood once again in front of the front door of the widow's house, much like they did ten years ago on that fateful night of the gala. 

"Who are you? I can’t quite remember." 

"That might be right. We are the couple who borrowed the necklace ten years ago and ran away." 

"Oh- I remember! But why did you run away that night?" 

The couple then began speaking in tears, sharing their poignant tale, explaining, 

"That banquet night, we stole the necklace. But for what intentions could this have happened? Of course, we didn’t have money enough to compensate for fifty thousand won... The two of us discussed and decided to leave that very night while starving for just ten years, trying to save up to compensate, and all we managed to gather was only twenty thousand won." 

Although they could not reach the five thousand won target, they humbly begged for forgiveness, presenting the two thousand won they had saved in a bag.

Witnessing the couple, the widow remained silent while looking at them, tears welling in her eyes, before she suddenly burst into sobs. 

"Why are you crying?" 

"No, it's because I must beg for your forgiveness. The necklace wasn’t worth fifty thousand won; it was merely worth a few won at most! Thinking that my little vanity could cost the precious ten years of a young couple’s life fills me with guilt. What can I do to atone for it?" 

Now it was simply their fate that she desired for them to decide. 

No matter the circumstances behind this incident, both sides embraced and wept bitterly together.

Understanding in advance the information of a thief's identity 

The world is filled with surprises lurking in the most unexpected places. 

Anyone engaging in conversation without prevarication must dreadfully acknowledge how absurd this world is forming, especially when it's crammed with ironies that seem inescapable. 

In a dormitory of a girls' school in Seoul, a student was trying to retrieve her funds for a school trip that she had wrapped securely and kept in her belongings, but when she reached to take out her purse, it was nowhere to be found. 

In panic, she rushed to the dormitory supervisor, explaining the situation, but the supervisor, too baffled, chastised her instead by stating, "Why didn’t you inform me the moment you lost it? Why are you only saying something now?" 

How absurd it is when she’s being scolded. If one knew the moment to report it, they wouldn’t have lost it in the first place, right? 

Those residing securely often lay unreasonable demands on those in distress. With not a thought that they might cause damage to the people around them, they continue to merrily navigate through life, never hesitating for a moment. 

For example, suppose a poor elder was strolling past a house when a ferocious dog lunged at him, biting his ankle and even his sleeve. 

When the elder pleaded, "Would you kindly call off this dog? There's no reason the passerby should be tormented by a wild animal," the owner's reaction, while somewhat apologetic, was to say, "Oh, it’s no concern; it didn't even harm you." 

But while making a mockery of the poor elder, he gave in to his pet saying affectionately, "Oh you rascal, how dare you scare a poor old man." 

It’s a bit absurd, given the nature of these circumstances. The old man thought to himself that he’d rather die than endure turmoil on behalf of the rich. 

Pleased to die, yet a poor man is still not allowed to have a bit of dignity—even if the dog nipped with teeth not causing any harm, the owner’s reaction still appeared as thoughtless amusement rather than an apology.

Once home, bitterness swelled within the old man and thus, he began explaining the incident describing his unfortunate encounter to every acquaintance he met, and most responded with an understanding sentiment, claiming that "Those dogs might act that way, you should report this to the police." 

After those conversations, he recalled the dog clearly being the owner's, yet he didn't know the name or number which led to complications when he went to the police to register a complaint. 

When he arrived at the police station, they simply asked, “What is the address of the house? What is the number?” Even if the old man knew the neighborhood's name well enough, he couldn't recall the street number or the homeowner's name. 

With that, he ended up only leaving with a bunch of rebukes from the authorities after failing to report the issue correctly. 

Undeterred by his bad luck, he knew he should catch that very dog to gather proof about the owner's identity to present to the police. 

As days went by, upon passing near that house thrice, he noticed the dog peering by the front gate and was able to stay near enough to observe the house number. 

Finally armed with the information, he went back to the police station again holding the house's details. 

After taking out the documents containing the address and names while he was there, the police pointedly advised, “If there’s a dog, we would have to file a complaint, but looking at these papers, it seems there is none.” 

The old man was bewildered and as he gazed out of the window, feeling the folly of his situation, he only returned home despondently.

However, though this situation ended trivially, the implications left behind through this narrative were anything but lighthearted. 

Dear reader! Do you not find this world becoming remarkably absurd? 

Even in the case of robbery, before reporting, one ought to make sure to note the thief’s address and name first lest all becomes a futile endeavor... 

Hurry, be cautious and wait, for at any moment, a robber might come charging in! Before your valuables are snatched away, ensure you accurately gather that thief’s address first! 

Thus ends this commentary on bedbugs. 

A house burning down may not compare, but the plight of bedbugs is real and affects me. 

Oh! Bedbugs! You come every night, like thick sheets of blank paper extending such intimacy to my sleeping space, torturing me! 

If I were Nero, I’d rather write verses about a burning Rome than pen a terrible tale about these wretched bedbugs. - After all, perhaps Nero was a bit out of his mind as well.

Night after night tormented by bedbugs, I found myself unable to sleep; by the second or third hour, I awoke dismally, giving out sighs of discontent for enduring such troubles!

Despite my turmoil, there is a point to considering writing about bedbugs, as there might be many readers in Korea undergoing the same affliction. The extremely relatable experiences are what might be drawing the sympathy of others, much like one suffocated from the same circumstance.

However, I had the hubris to believe that I am able to write something exquisite.

Mosquitos are loathsome, fleas are fickle. Lice are ugly, and bedbugs are deplorable. 

Observing a black suit crawling with these critters is as painful as watching a hapless child stumble on a bamboo mat.

Bedbugs might be twofold nuisances for humans: they suck blood at night, making it impossible to have peaceful sleep and, in turn, they are small enough to cause rashes on our skin from their bites.

If God truly created the world, He must have not been aware of what He was doing when He made the bedbug. Forgive me...

Bedbugs always remind me of the landlady from the boarding house I stayed at during high school, who was back then a total nuisance. 

The very first night I stayed at her house, the bedbugs burst forth and bit me all night, preventing me from sleeping at all. 

The following morning while washing my face, I complained to the landlady saying, "I couldn't sleep at all because of the bedbugs," and in an unexpected tone, she retorted sternly, "You young people!" 

"Excuse me?" 

"When the bedbugs come out, you should just crawl under the blanket!" 

Ah! Dear readers, do you understand the classic nature of that exchange? 

At that moment, I had not a word to say but quickly moved to a different place that night.

Only a few days ago—on the night of moving into my new room— 

Previously, I had no bedbug issue, barely thinking about them while working at my desk, but suddenly I raised my head only to find a creature the size of a leather shoe mounting an idle wall in a tangle as if all that's been waiting for were the scent of human blood. 

Recognizing their presence, I knew I must have a few bedbugs and began preparing a clean sheet of paper to declare mutual war against them. 

Sensing my awareness, it awkwardly bowed its head and slithered back into retreat. 

I was filled with a sense of duty! 

I could not allow that creature to get away scot-free, and with swift precision, I crushed it between two layers of paper. 

If the bedbug had any scruples, it should have insisted on a fair trial... 

Having taken out one, I scanned for more, but lo! 

The house was crawling with what seemed like at least twenty-five of them! With little sense of fear or remorse for the existence of bedbugs, I resolved myself to keep an air of bravery while entering a battlefield.

With determination, and being careful not to spill my delicious dinner, I engaged in a full siege against each of these creatures. 

After dispatching several, I found myself so reviled that what little dinner remained liar in the gutter. 

Realizing that during my fight against these pests I was burning calories unknowingly, I had done a great deal of exercise involving the blood-sucking bedbugs.

After a considerable number had been dealt with, I began to find solace in bed only to be disrupted as yet another invader came upon me. 

I further discovered an entire host gathering just outside beneath the threshold of the door, beneath the guise of safety.

They rested on the steps where none of the daylight's shine could penetrate; a perfect ambush point where they laid in wait as if they had schemed the perfect trap.

I lit a torch and inspected the corners! The flames illuminated a whole army of them, in absolute horror, galloping without discretion in their phantom kingdom!

As I kicked them around, I felt a rush of exhilarating victory, yet too shaky to remain in one spot for too long. 

Eventually, I amassed enough to eliminate but still found it impossible to rest with them still linger beyond the walls. 

Finally, I had enough of chasing after them in the dead of night, opting to awaken to the reality they’d delivered.

At least five days of sleeplessness swarmed around my mind in cumulative anguish from even lost sleep during the summer months pistoning outwards of my thoughts. 

I hate this arrangement. I hate bedbugs. 

When stately ignorance could go beyond its ground with it comes no return, consumed by either victory or defeat, leaving thoughts of whether heroic applause warranted calls enough for existence.

I implore the reader to ridicule me; indeed, I have to letter carefully swarmed amidst the fabric of more whispers than memory.

As much as this prose might have benefited collectors of knowledge, my struggle in dealing with the lowly bedbug sparks mirthful glances, not to be confused with genuine sense.

Regardless of any dormant attempts to rationalize one’s efforts futile in the morning light, eventually, it is but grand composition.

For I find there’s no other solace greater than consuming the world around me like these bedbugs while I pen the adventures of a sleepless night.

Summary

The article presents a collection of humorous and ironic observations on social behavior during the 1930s in Korea, notably revolving around the absurdity of propaganda. It recounts how misleading claims proliferated amongst societal figures and organizations, showcasing an event where many were anticipated to gather yet only few appeared, leading to broader societal commentary about miscommunication and deceit—common threadsmaking appearances more influential than truth. 

Historians might find it illuminating as it reflects the tendency towards performative social behaviors within the colonial context, revealing how societal pressures and propaganda influenced personal relationships and public expectations during that era. Additionally, the indecisiveness in bureaucratic processes, such as reporting incidents to authorities, mirrors the frustrations common in colonial governance.

Named Entities

방뎡환		Bang Jeong-hwan  
XX		(unspecified character)  
경성		Gyeongseong  
某명사		(some eminent person)  
某부인		(some lady)  

Glossary

유모어		유머		Humor  
넌센스		넌센스		Nonsense  
그림		그림		Picture or illustration  
선전		선전		Propaganda  
아동		아동		Children  
문헌		문헌		Literature  
할머니		할머니		Grandmother  
변장		변장		Disguise  
변명		변명		Excuse  
기회		기회		Opportunity  
부인		부인		Lady  
불만		불만		Dissatisfaction  


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제30호
발행일	1930년 07월 01일
기사제목	유모어·넌센스·아이로니 現代漫文集, 文字로 그린 漫畵
기사형태	문예기타

유모어·넌센스·아이로니 現代漫文集, 文字로 그린 漫畵
宣傳時代?
方定煥

내가 내 일을 쓴다. 남이 내 일을 쓰는 것이 안이고 내가 남의 일을 쓰는 것이 안이라 내가 내 일을 쓰는 것이면 세상에 이보다 더 확실 분명한 일이 업슬 것임니다. -그런대 천만 뜻밧게 이 결과는 『제가 제 일을 쓰고 안젓는 것은 그리 영악한 일이 안이다』하게 되는 것은 유감임니다.
그러나 나에게는 동에 닷지도 안는 만담(漫談)을 쓰라 하니 이것저것 맨들어 꿈일 줄은 모르고 어리석은 일인 줄 알면서도라도 내게 관한 일이나 한 가지 써 볼 밧게 업슴니다.
그러나 이것은 어리석은 일일망정 내 일을 내가 쓰는 것이니 확실한 일인 것만은 사실임니다.

무슨 말인지 자세는 모르겟스나 지금 세상을 사람들은 흔히 선전 시대라고 함니다. 선전이란 것은 어느 때라고 업섯든 것이 안이것만은 특별히 일흠지여서 선전 시대라고 하는 바에는 『실지보다도 선전』 『내용보다도 선전만 잘하면 그만이다』하는 투가 안인가 하고 잘못 생각되기도 쉬웁슴니다.
그래 그런지 웃재 그런지 모르겟스나 전혀 밋도 뿌럭지도 업는 헛 선전을 하는 사람이 만허 갓금 웃지도 못할 희극이 생겨남니다.
한번은 아동 문뎨에 관한 의견 교환을 하기로 여러 사람이 모이기로 하엿스니 아모 날 몃 시에 아모 곳으로 꼭 와 달나는 뎐화를 세 번이나 밧고 그 날 그 시간에＜126＞ 밧분 일을 제쳐놋코 갓섯더니 뎐화하던 사람과 그이 친구 한 사람뿐이고 참석하러 온 사람은 나하고 또 한사람하고 단둘밧게 업섯슴니다. 부른 대로 다 모히면 한30명 될 터이라는데 시간이 한시간이 넘도록 더 기다려도 더 오는 사람은 업고 형사만 세 사람이 와서 개회 안하느냐고 독촉하듯 성화를 댈 뿐인 고로 그냥 흐터저 도라와 버렷슴니다. 주최자가 그리 신용하기 어려운 인물인 줄 알엇스니 아초에 가지도 말엇드 조왓슬 것을 공연히 갓다고 후회하고 잇노라닛가 이게 웬일이겟슴닛가. 저녁에 배달된 신문을 펴 보닛가 활자도 커다랏케 큰 뎨목으로 오늘 오후 몃 시 시내 모처(우리가 모이려든 그 시간과 그 장소)에 방뎡환 외 아동 문뎨 연구자 30여인 모여서 간담회를 열고 원만히 의견 교환이 되야 아동 무슨 협회를 조직하기로 되어 방뎡환 외 누구누구가 그 창립위원으로 선뎡되엿다고 긔사가 실려잇섯슴니다.
독갑이에게 홀니면 이러케 황당한가 십허서 그 잇흔날 신문사로 뎐화를 걸고 알아보닛가 『우리야 누가 아오. 그 일을 처음부터 주선하엿다는 아모가 적어보냇기에 그대로 내엿슬 뿐이지요.』하는대 아모개라는 그 아모개가 나에게 뎐화를 하던 그 아모개엿슴니다. 결국 아모개라는 그 한 인물이 남의 일홈을 끌어다가 자긔 일홈 팔자는 작난에 지나지 못하엿지만은 싀골서 그 신문긔사만 절대로 밋고 잇는 사람들은 엇던 얼골을 하고 잇는지 궁굼하엿슴니다.

『선생님 시골 어느 날 떠나심닛가』
차자온 손님이 딴청의ㅅ말을 뭇슴니다. 『시골은 무슨 시골요』하고 내가 되물으면 손님은 어리둥절하면서
『XX말슴이올시다. 강연하러 안가심닛가』
『네-네 XX요. 강연 와 달나고 편지가 왓습데다만은 밧바서 못 간다고 발서 답장한 지도 오랫슴니다.』
『오늘 저녁 신문에 아모 날 XX서 강연하신다고 낫던대요』
그 잇흔날 편지가 왓스되 『신문에 나기까지 하엿스니 꼭 와야 한다』고... ... . 밧분 시간에 매여서 꼼짝 못하는 사람을 자긔네가 지정한 시간에 꼭 오라 해노코 이편에서 그 날 신문에 발표해노코 신문에까지 낫스니 꼭 오라함니다.
이러케 점잔흐신 처단을 해놋코 그 날 당일 가서는 연사 방뎡환씨는 꼭 오신다고 승낙하섯는대 마츰 공교한 사정이 생기서서 못 오시게 되엿슴니다고 대담하게 말함니다. 자긔들은 대담한 뱃심으로 그 당장 경우를 피하지 만은 승낙하고도 안 왓다고 군중이 밋게 되엿스니 나는 엇저라는 것이겟슴닛가?
긔어코 『선생이 오신다고 하엿기에 25리 밧게서 제백사하고 OO읍으로 드러갓섯는데 급기야 못 오시게 되엿다고 반포하는 말을 듯고 읏지 락망하엿는지 모름니다. 그 날 선생 말슴을 드르려고 모엿든 사람이 수천 명이나 되는대 모다 몹시 섭섭히 녁이고 헤여젓슴니다.＜127＞
이런 편지가 두 장씩 석 장씩 드러오게 됨니다. 그래 그 답장을 쓰고 안젓스면 또 뒤를 대여 드러오는 편지
『신문을 보니 네가 아모 날 이곳 OO읍에 와서 강연을 하고 갓다 하니 이곳까지 왓다 가면서 단 10리 밧기니 잠간 다녀갈 일이겟지. 그냥 지나갓단 말이냐』하는 친척댁 어른에게서의 원망과 책망 편지임니다.
그러타고 독자는 미리 놀나서는 안 됨니다. 이것은 미리 편지라도 해 본 일이 잇스니 용서한다고 치고 경성에 잇는 엇던 사람들은 의론도 인사도 뎐화로도 통지 한마듸업시 연사니 혹은 무슨 위원이니 써서 발표해노코 안저 지내는 사람이 생겻슴니다. 이따위 인종이 서울에는 만히 생겨나기 때문에 이런 종자들게 속아넘어가지 안차니 서울 사는 사람들은 점점 더 까투리가 되는 것인가 봄니다.
승낙도 안 밧고 광고 먼저 하여서 당일 가서 읏저나?
앗-다 그 날 가서 급한 병이 생겨서 못 오게 되엿다면 그만이지... ... 아초에 그이가 승낙할니는 업고 광고에만 우려먹으면 그만인가.
선전 시대? 소위 이 선전 시대가 나오노은 특수 인종들이 이런 것들이라 하겟거니와 신문지란 것이 이따위들에게 편한 기관이 되게 되는 것은 피차에 생각해야 할 문뎨인 줄 암니다.
만담 되지 못하는 만담 이것으로 끗임니다.

목거리
尹白南

녀자는 허영의 신이외다-
밤ㅅ길을 다니지 안이하는 필자는 이런 밉살을 서슴지안코 내놋는다. 그러나 어째떤 허영심이 만키는 남자보다 녀자이니 이 엄연한 사실이야 뉜들 어쩔 수 잇스랴.
『여봐요』
회사에서 사퇴해 도라온 남편의 얼골을 보자마자 지금 뎐보를 대여섯 장이나 겁허 바든 사람가티 허겁을 해서 남편을 부른다.
『왜 그리우』＜128＞
『이걸 좀 보서요. 초대ㅅ장이 왓다우』
그 초대ㅅ장에는 요는 XX날 야회를 열겟사오니 동부인하서서 래림하시기를 바란다는 뜻이 적혀 잇고 당시 사회에서 이름이 놉흔 모실업가의 이름으로 서명이 되어잇다.
『여보 이런 긔회에 당신도 여러 명사들과 지면을 해 두어야 하오. 참 어쩌면 이런 조흔 찬쓰가 왓슬가. 대관절 누가 우리를 소개햇슬가. 고마운 일야... ... 그러나 난』
하고 XX자는 어엽분 얼골에 눈ㅅ살을 잡으며 난처한 빗을 띄웟다.
『난 어째』
『옷은 한 벌 출입건이 잇지만은 야회라 하면 명류부인들이 올텐데 목거리라도 하나 걸고 가야지오. 그러치 안소』
신혼한 지 얼마 안이되는 이 한 쌍 부부는 련애 결혼임에도 불구하고 잇다금 경제 문뎨로 하야 족으만 다툼이 각금 이러나는 터이다. 그럴 때마닥 남편 되는 위인의 가슴은 미상볼 찌리- 한 적이 만은대 지금 또 『목거리』 말을 드르매 눈압히 일순간 캄캄해젓것다.
『그러타고 지금 별안간 안이 별안간이 안이라. 우리 살림에 무슨 수로 『목거리』를 산단 말요』
내외는 저녁밥 먹을 생각도 제처노코 엇지하면 남에게 빠지지 안는 차림차림으로 야회에 참석할 수 잇슬가 하는 문제에 업는 지헤를 짜내러 본 결과 - 두 사람은 바로 이웃에 사는 XX부인을 차저갓다.
XX부인은 백만장자 미망인으로 『목거리』가튼 것도 대여섯 개 잇는 것은 보앗스닛까 렴치 불고하고 하나 어더보려는 작정이엇다.
과연 XX부인은 동정을 햇다. 그래서 눈이 부신 따이아몬드 목거리 갑시 오만 원이라는 것을 두 말 안코 빌여주엇다.
XX자는 그것을 빌어가지고 와서 일력(日曆)을 하로도 몃 번씩 뒤집어 보며 야회ㅅ날이 오기를 기대렷다.
고대하던 야회ㅅ날은 왓다-.
내외는 의긔양양해서 그 연회에 참석하고 마시고 먹고 춤추기 시작햇다.
XX자는 깃분 김에 먹지 못하는 술을 다량으로 마시고 정신이 오락가락하게 되고 나서야 비로소 부끄럽기도 해서 발코니-로 찬바람을 쏘이러 나가서 그 란간에 기대여 안잣다가 잠이 들엇다.
남편이 차자서 나온 때에는 XX자는 가느다란 코를 골고 잇섯다.
『여보 이게 무슨 잠요. 창피하게』
XX자의 억개를 흔들며 남편은 나즈막히 꾸지젓다. 안해가 깜짝 눌내서 눈을 떳다.＜129＞
『아 그런데 여보 목거리는 엇쨋소』
남편은 안해의 목에 목거리가 업는 것을 보고 눌내서 무럿다.
『네? 에구머니나. 이게 웬 일요』
XX자의 얼골은 금시에 새파라케 질리고 남편의 얼골은 칠면조뻔으로 야릇한 빗치 오르락 내리락햇다. 따이아몬드 목거리는 확실히 도적마젓다-.
내외는 망연자실해서 제집으로 돌아왓다.
『이일을 엇찌면 좃소』
『5만원- 5만원- 아아 우리의 생활은 끗치 왓나보우』
내외는 밤이 깁도록 의론을 햇지만 별도리가 업섯다. 둘은 여간 보ㅅ짐을 싸가지고 그 밤으로 고향을 도망해 나왓다.

십 년이 지낫다-.
비바람 치는 날 마츰 그 날은 십 년 전에 야회가 잇섯던 날 저녁이다-.
탁씨-를 탄 허푸수수한 남녀가 백만장자 미망인의 집 문압헤서 나렷다.

『누구신지 생각이 안이 남니다』
『그럴런지도 모르겟슴니다. 십 년 전에 목거리를 비러간 채로 도망해 간 내외올시다』
『오-참 그럿슴니다그려...... 그런데 어째 그 밤으로 도망을 하섯드란 말요』
그 내외는 눈물과 함께 아래와 가튼 이약이를 시작햇슴니다.
『그 만찬회ㅅ날 밤에 목거리를 도적마젓슴니다. 그러타고 무슨 염의로 이러버렷다고 하겟슴니다. 물론 5만원을 보상할 돈은 업고...... 내외가 의론한 결과 부부가 그 밤으로 이곳을 떠낫슴니다. 그래서 오늘까지 십년ㅅ동안을 먹는 것 입는 것을 절약해가며 일ㅅ단 그 돈을 갑흘 결심으로 모으고 모앗다는 것이 겨우 2만 원밧게 못됨니다. 5만원은 못되오나 우리의 성심에 용서하서서 우리의 죄를 더 책하지 마십시오』
하며 가방 속에서 2만원을 내노앗다.
미망인은 돈과 내외를 격금내기로 물끄럼이 보고 잇더니만은 고만 그 자리에 업대서 통곡을 하기 시작햇슴니다.
『왜 이러심닛가』
『안이오. 내 죄를 용서해주서요. 그 목거리는 오만원 가치가 잇는 것이 안이라 실상은 몃 원ㅅ자리의 가ㅅ자 따이야올시다. 나의 족으마한 허영심이 그런 말을 엿줍지 안케 헤서 앗가운 청춘 남녀의 금가티 귀한 십 년 세월을 허비케 한 일을 생각하니 내야말로 당신 발아래 업대서 사죄해야만 올슴니다. 나는 무엇으로 이 죄를 갑하야 올슴니까.＜130＞ 인제는 나는 당신네 내외의 처분만 바랄 수밧게 업슴니다』
어떠한 뜻이엇던지 그 내외는 역시 미망인에게로 달녀들어서 세 사람이 서로 엉크러저서 통곡을 햇다 함니다.

미리 알어둘 盜賊의 住所姓名
蒼石生

세상일을 자미잇다고 생각하면 뜻밧게 생각지도 안턴 곳에서 자미잇는 일이 만히 튀여나오는 것이다.

누구던지 추호도 롱담(弄談)긔 업시 정당하게 밋으면 저하는 말이 엽헤서 드를 때에 어처구니 업시 우습게 들니는 경우가 꼽으면 꼽아볼스록 만흐니 대톄 이 세상이란 별스럽게 생겨진 것이다.

서울 어느 녀학교 긔숙사에서 한 학생이 수학려행비를 내이려고 미리부터 꼭꼭 싸서 고-리(行利)짝 속에 깁히 간직해 두엇던 돈주머니를 꺼내려닛가 어느 때 업서젓는지 업서지고 말엇다.
창황하야 사감(舍監) 선생에게 말하닛가 사감 선생님 차저 볼 길이 망연한지라 도리혀 화증을 내면서
『어느 때 니저버렷는지 니저버린 그때 즉시 말을 하지 안코 왜 인제 말을 하느냐』고 꾸지즈섯다.
엽헤서 드를 때에 이것은 조곰 당치안은 꾸지람이다. 니러버리는 때를 알고 곳 말할 수 잇스면 아초에 니저버리지도 안을 것이 안이냐 말이다. 그 사감 선생님 가트면 니러버리는 때 니러버리는 줄을 알고도 선생님에게 계출(届出)하기 위해서 가만히 니러버리고 잇겟다는 말인가.
안전(安全)한 위치에 잇는 사람이란 흔히 비상 경우에 처한 사람에게 이따위 무리한 주문을 하는 것이다. 그러면서도 조곰도 터럭만치도 자긔 말이 당치 안은 말이라고는 생각하시지 안는 곳에 이 세상에 살아잇는 맛이 잇는 것이다.＜131＞

배가 곱하 죽겟다고 애소(哀訴)하는 불상한 사람보고 『그놈 미련한 놈! 밥을 먹으면 그만이지』하엿다는 태평 세대의 량반하고 이 거룩하신 사감 선생님하고 독자 제씨여 그 어느 편 두뇌(頭腦)가 더 명석하신지 판단해 보시라.

푸로레타리아가 무언지 드러본 적도 업스나 가난한 덕택에 늙도록 복덕방 가쾌노릇을 하야 살어가는 노인이 한 분 잇섯다.
하로는 이 늙은 푸로레타리아가 어느 집 대문 압흘 지나노라닛가 그 집 문ㅅ간에 잇던 사나운 개 한 마리가 와락 뛰여들어서 발목을 물고는 그래도 부족하던지 들맥이 자락을 물고 느러젓다. 그래 한참 쩔쩔매다가 그 집 사랑문에서 나오는 그 집 주인인 듯 십은 남자를 보고 『이 개를 좀 불너 드려 주시오. 웃재서 이러케 사나운 개를 붓들어매두지 안코 지나가는 사람을 곤란케 하시요』 하엿더니 그 주인이 『워리 워리』하고 불너서 뜨더노키는 하엿스나 늙은 푸로레타리아의 안탁갑게 앗기는 모시 둘맥이는 그냥은 다시 못 닙게 버려젓다.
발목을 물니고 옷을 버리고 하엿것만은 그 집주인은 『과히 물니지도 안코 상처(傷處)가 나지도 안엇는대 무얼 그러느냐』고 입으로 말까지는 안이하나 그러나 그런 얼골로 껄껄 우스면서 『허허 지나가시다가 아조 혼이 나섯구료』 해던지고는 미안하다는 말한마듸업시 도라스면서 이번에는 그 개를 보고 아조 정답고 부드러운 말로 『이놈아 바둑아 너 그러케 아모나 물으면 안 된다. 아조 지나가는 늙은이를 혼을 내엇고나』하고 개의 머리를 쓰다듬어 주고 잇섯다.
이 어처구니가 업는 것은 늙은이엿다.
『흥흥 자살을 할지언정 가난방이 노릇을 못할 것이란 참말 올흔 말이지...... 돈 업는 놈은 개에게 물녀도 상처만 안나면 괜찬코 물어뜨든 개는 도리혀 부드러운 말로 위로를 밧는다......』
한참 한울을 처다보면서 분개하엿스나 별 도리가 업서서 그냥 도라왓섯다.
도라와서 생각하니 암만해도 그냥 니저버릴 수 업시 분한지라 아는 사람 맛나는 사람마다 보는대로 그 이약이를 하엿더니 듯는 사람마다 『그런 사나운 개면 밋친 개이기 쉽고 또 다른 사람에게도 달녀들어 물 것이닛가 그런 것은 경찰에다가 말을 해야 할 것이라』고 한다. 듯고 보니 말 안이하고 잇는 자긔가 못난 편이 되는 것 가타서 벌덕 니러나서 경찰서에 가서 그 말을 하엿다.
경찰서에서는 판에 박은 듯이 『어느 동리 몃번지 누구의 집이냐』고 뭇는대 이 늙은이 그 동리는 알고 그 집도 알지만 번지수와 그 집 문패까지는 알아두지 못햇섯다. 그래 거긔서도 핀잔만 잔뜩 어더먹고 그 동리＜132＞ 그 집을 차저갓더니 그놈의 와수의 『개』가 또 문깐에 잇서서 갓갑게 가지를 못하고 그 근처에서 한 세 시간 동안이나 기다리고 잇다가 간신히 틈을 어더 그 집 문패를 보아 가지고 다시 경찰서로 갓다.
경찰서에서는 그 번지수와 성명을 가지고 장 속에 잇는 문부를 내여 한참 뒤적거리더니 『그 집에는 개가 업다. 개가 잇스면 반듯이 계출을 할 터인데 이 문부에 업는 것을 보닛가 계출이 업는 것이 분명하고 계출이 업는 것을 보면 그 집에 개가 업는 것이 분명하다』고 아조 분명한 말을 하엿다. 어처구니가 업서서 늙은이가 다시 한울을 처다보고 분개를 하닛가 보기에 딱하던지 친철히 일너주는 말이
『아마 그 집 문깐에 다른 집 개가 와서 잇섯든 것이 분명하니 어느 집 개인지 분명히 알아°€지고 오시요』하는지라.
『안이 그 집 주인이 그 개를 불너 다리고 드러갓는대 그 집 개가 안이여요?』 하닛가
『글세 암만 그러트래도 문부에 업스닛가 업는 것이 확실하지 안으오? 다시 가서 어느 집 개인지 자세 알아 가지고 오시오. 어느 집 개인지 분명히 아는 법이 잇슴닌다. 그 『개』 목덜미에 주소 성명이 달녀 잇슬 터이니 그것을 보면 알 것 안이요』하고 친절히 아르켜 주엇다.

딴은 그럴 일이다. 지금 세상에는 개를 기르면 그 『개』 목에다가 목도리를 감어주고 그 목도리에다가 주소 성명을 색이는 법이닛가. 그것을 보면 어느 집 개인지 알 수 잇는 것이다. 그것을 아르켜 준 친절은 고맙지만은 누가 그것을 몰낫나...... 처음부터 잘 알고 잇지만은 무서워서 근처에도 가지 못하는대 엇더케 그 목덜미를 드려다 볼 수 잇는가 말이지...... .
그 『개』를 갓갑게 불너서 그 고개를 처들고 거긔 색여잇는 적은 글자를 드려다 볼 수 잇스면 아초에 경찰서에 이 말을 가지고 왓슬 까닭도 생기지 안엇슬 것이 안인가 말이다.
결국 늙은이는 세 번째 한울을 처다보고 그냥 도라와 버리고 말엇다.

그러나 말이다. 이 이약이는 이러케 승겁게 끗이 나고 말엇지만 이 이약이가 남겨놋는 문뎨는 그러케 승겁기만 할 수 업는 것이다.
독자 제씨여! 세상이 제법 거북살스럽게 되지 안엇소? 도뎍을 맛드래도 나종에 계출을 하랴거던 미리 그 도뎍의 주소와 성명을 알아두어야 할 것이니......
항혀 닛지 말고 계시오. 어느 때던지 강도(强盜)가 달겨들거던 물건을 빼앗기기 전에 그 놈의 주소와 성명을 무러노코 빼앗길 일이지 결코 결코 주소 성명을 알기 전에는 물건을 빼앗기지 마시오. -(끗)-＜133＞

빈대考
浩然堂人

三間草堂이 다타도 빈대 타는 맛이라는 말이 잇다. 삼간 초당은 업스나마 浩然堂은 잇스니 만일 빈대의 착취를 면할 수가 잇다면 내 호연당을 불질으기에 인색치 안이하리라.
아! 빈대! 白紙ㅅ장가티도 두터운 정으로 밤마다 밤마다 나의 잠ㅅ자리를 차저와 주는 지겁게 다정한 빈대!
내 만일 『네로』엿드라면 로-마에 불을 질으고 개 방귀 가튼 시를 읆느니 차라리 빈대가 타 죽는 漫文을 썻슬 것이다. - 하기야 네로도 꽤 天痴엿스닛가 -.
밤마다 빈대에게 시달녀 잠을 못 자고 두세 시에 청승맛게 일어나 언저 長歎太息으로 지내는 사람더러 하필 빈대考를 쓰라는 心情이 알 수가 업다. 그야말로 불난 집에 키질이오 우는 애기 꼬집기가 안인가?
그러나 原稿 注文者의 心鏡을 다시 한번 생각하여 볼 때에 빈대에 관한 것을 여실히 잘 써 노흐면 지금 조선 안에서 만도 빈대에 봇채어 머리를 쩔쩔 내 두루는 독자가 수업시 만흘 터이닛가 어느 한 사람의 넉두리를 빌어 그 독자들로 하여곰 자기 속과 꼭 가튼 감정의 표현이나 동감이나 주려는대 잇는 듯 하다.
그러나 또 그것도 실수인 것이 내가 웬걸 그리 名文을 쓸 줄 알어야지.

모기는 얄밉고 벼룩은 경망스럽다. 이(虱)는 醜하고 빈대는 지겁다.
새깜안 양복 에리로 이가 슬슬 긔여나오는 것이 觀朱라면 帽子 속에서 빈대가 곰틀거리는 것은 그 친누가 자고 나온 방의 벼람ㅅ박이 - 대ㅅ닙(竹葉)을 처노앗슬 그 벼람ㅅ박이 연상된다.
사실 빈대는 두 가지로 사람에게 페로운 손님이다. 밤에 물어서 피를 빨고 고단한 잠을 못 자게 하는 것이 하나요. 말속한 벼람ㅅ박에 대ㅅ닙을 그리게 하는 것이 달은 하나다.
만일 하나님이 세상천지에 만물 만들엇다면 빈대를 만들은 것만도 외누리 업시 망녕이다. 맙시사...... .
빈대를 보면 언제든지 중학 시절의 어느 하숙집 노파가 생각킨다.＜134＞
처음으로 하숙을 옴겨갓더니 그날 밤에 빈대가 엇지도 만히 나와 물어떼는지 그야말로 한잠도 자지를 못하엿다.
이튿날 아침에 세수를 하면서 마나님더러
『빈대 때문에 한잠도 못잣슴니다』 하닛가 흥 마나님 시침이를 뚝 따고 하는 말슴이엿다.
『젊은 사람안이구려!』
『웨요?』
『갈보가 나오거든 이불 속으로 불너드리지......』
자- 독자 제군 엇더소? 마나님과 밋 그 말이 걸작이지요?
나는 그 자리에서 다시 두말도 못하고 그날 밤에 달은 곳으로 집을 옴겨바렷다.

바로 멧칠 전에다 - 방을 새로 옴긴 날 밤 -.
그때까지는 빈대가 업는 방에 잇섯스닛가 뭐 빈대에 관한 생각은 업시 책상 압헤 안저 무엇인지 하고 잇다가 문득 고개를 들고 보닛가 거짓말은 하나도 안 보태고 가죽 신짝만한 친구가 한 분 무슨 그닥지 긴장된 일이 계신지 고개를 밧작 처들고 바람ㅅ벽 중턱에 나와 계시다. 생각건대 오래ㅅ동안 주린 판에 人肉의 향기를 맛고 회가 동하엿든 모양이다.
나는 비로소 익크 이 방에 약간의 빈대가 게신가부다고 종이 조각을 備準하여 가지고 當者 압흐로 갓가히 갓다.
눈치를 채인 모양인지 처들엇든 고개를 폭 숙이고는 고깐에 최대 스피드를 내어 퇴각을 개시한다.
얼마나 잘 퇴각을 하는지 좀 노아두고 보느라닛가 가다가 말고 납작 부터바린다.
군자는 遠庖廚라 하엿는데 하물며 浩然堂人이 살생을 할 수야 잇슬고만은 그래도 내 피가 한 방울이면 비타민 A가 얼마라고? 될 수가 잇나 兩指를 이용하야 종이쪽에다 壓刑을 집행하고 말엇다. 빈대가 만일 반항 의식이 잇다면 하다 못해 정식 재판이라고 요구햇겟지만...... .
하나를 처치하고 다시 사방을 휘휘 둘너보닛가 웬걸! 그야말로 하나님 이상으로 無所不在다. 얼는 세여보아도 20마리는 넉넉 된다. 늙으니 배ㅅ가주락 가티 홀ㅅ족한 허리에 頭上을 胡馬와 가티 용기잇게 처들고 곳곳에 늘어선 품은 내가 어터케 八門 검사陣에 들어온 듯도 하고 총 뿌리 압헤 나선 듯도 하다.
대대적 용기를 내여 나온 놈을 다 처치하느라닛가(벽에다 익개 죽이기는 뒤ㅅ일이 창피해서) 먹은 저녁이 휠구덩 내려버린다. 빈대잽이 소화 불량한 사람에 가장 조흔 실내운동이라는 것을 발견하엿다.
대강 처치를 하고 다시 책상 압헤 안저 일을 시작하느라닛가 일에는 정신이 가지 안이하고 또 어데 한 마리나 나오지 안이햇나 십허 마음이 노이지 안이한다.
안인게 안이라 그동안에 발서 멧 분이 나와게시다.＜135＞
이번에는 잡어서 봉투에 너엇다. (지금도 보관해두엇스닛가 아직 빈대 외입을 못한 독자가 잇다면 그대로 우표를 부처 보내드리지요.)
한두 마리를 잡고 나서 잠간 안지면 또 멧 마리가 나와 잇다. 나오는 곳은 창지ㅅ문 속이다.
이번에는 水刑이다. 빈대와 물은 그야말로 상극이닛가.
책상 우에 잇는 큼직한 유리 화병에 물을 손 끗테 찍어 가지고는 꼭 눌너서 도루 갓다가 톡 통기면 발서 水面上에서 발발 떨고 잇다.
물론 큰놈은 그와가티 용이하지만 쟌 친구는 잡기가 신이 붓지 안키도 하고 곤란하기도 하다.

한 두어 시간이나 밋친 놈 날뛰듯 하고 나닛가 조곰 넛금하여진다.
때는 왓다고 얼핏 자리를 펴고 누어 잠이 들엇다.
자느라닛가 웬일인지 까슬까슬하고 섭섭거린다. 깨이면서 이불을 벗석 들으닛가 문자 그대로 시컴엇타.
굴군 놈은 훠훠 달어나고 쟌놈의 대부분는 배지가 터지게 빨어먹고는 내 몸동이에 눌여서 빨어먹은 피를 색히지도 못하고 애무한 홀애비의 옷요만 싯뻘것케 물을 드려 노앗다.
또 어느 놈은 중년쯤 되는 놈인데 氣ㅅ것 마음ㅅ것 빨어먹엇든지 배가 불으다 못하여 허리가 죽 늘어저 가지고는 달어난다고 달어나다가 언덕 비탈에서 밋그러저 뒤집어저 가지고는 일어나지를 못해서 발만 쌀쌀 내 둘은다. 허허허허.
손에 잽히는 대로 水刑을 하고 나니 그러치 안해도 불면증이 잇는 놈이 잠이 30리나 달어나고 눈이 새별가티 말거온다.
금년 녀름을 두고 이 고생을 할 일을 생각하니 한숨이 제절로 나오고 압히 아득하다.
이러케 수심이 겨워 안젓는데도 불구하고 또다시 덤벼든다. 자세히 보닛가 문 아래ㅅ턱 미테 다수 잠복하여 잇는 모양이다.
불빗츤 그곳까지 빗치지 안이하고 임시 숨어잇다가 다시 나오기에 아주 適所다.
석냥불을 확 켜대고 보닛가 안이나 달을가! 우수수한다. 그은 석냥불로 그대로 지저대이닛가 바르르 떨다가 그대로 허리가 늘신하게 쪽 늘고는 톡 터저바린다. 빈대 타는 맛이라는 게 아마 이 재미를 일을 것인 듯하다.

독자는 욕하리다. 사서삼경 다 읽어야 쫄쪼리 문자는 처음 듯고 아모리 별건곤이라도 『빈대考』라는 글은 넘우하다......』고
그러나 정말 빈대에게 시달녀 본 이는 허허 허긴 그래......하고 고개를 끄덕거릴걸? ＜136＞ ＜126-136＞