잡지명	別乾坤 第70號
발행일	1934년 02월 01일
기사제목	4000년 史外史 (4000 Years of Unofficial History)
필자	壽春山人(車相瓚)
기사형태	문예기타 (Literature and Other)

4000 Years of Unofficial History
						Suseongsanin (Cha Sang-chan)

Secret History of King Kungye of Taebong

Kungye, An Awkward Figure

The brilliant golden age of Silla had already passed, and a lonely autumn wind began to blow on the yellow leaves of Gyerim (鷄林). From the time of Queen Jinseong (眞聖女皇時代), the 51st monarch, corrupt officials seized power, and the nation's discipline deteriorated daily. Coupled with successive years of famine, the people scattered, and swarms of thieves arose everywhere. Taking advantage of this time, two great heroes (兩大怪傑) arose in Silla, dividing the land into north and south and fighting each other. One was Gyeon Hwon, the king of Later Baekje (後百濟王甄萱), and the other was Kim Kungye, the king of Taebong (泰封國王金弓裔), about whom I will speak here. Kungye (弓裔, or 躬乂) was the illegitimate son of King Heonan (憲安王誼靖), the 47th king of Silla (or the son of King Gyeongmun (景文王應廉), the 48th). He was born on the day of Dano, the 5th day of the 5th lunar month, at his maternal relatives' house. When he was born, a white ray of light like a rainbow (虹) surrounded the roof, and he had a strange glow on his head. He also had teeth when he was born, so everyone in the family thought it was strange. When they asked a diviner (占者), the diviner said that a child born on the 5th day of the 5th lunar month was originally unlucky. In particular, this child was born with teeth and had a strange glow, so it would surely be disadvantageous to the country in the future, so it would be better not to raise him. King Heonan listened to this and sent a messenger to kill him. The messenger took him out of his swaddling clothes (襁褓) and threw him under the floor. The wet nurse felt sorry for him and secretly took him, accidentally poking one of his eyes with her hand and blinding him. She ran away and raised him in secret for over ten years.

A Dragon is No Ordinary Creature

As he grew, he greatly enjoyed mischief. His wet nurse warned him, saying, "When you were first born, the country abandoned you, but I couldn't bear to see it, so I secretly took you and raised you to this day. But you are not careful at all and go out and make mischief recklessly. If this is discovered by others, both you and I will suffer. What shall we do?" Kungye wept and said, "If that is the case, I will hide and go far away to reduce your worries," and that day he ran away and went to a temple called Sejon Temple (世尊寺, also known as Heunggyo Temple 興敎寺), shaved his head, and became a monk (僧), naming himself Seonjong (善宗). However, originally a man of extraordinary character, he was not bound by the trivial precepts of the Buddhist priesthood and always took free action.

One day, while going to perform a Buddhist mass (齋), a crow (烏) unexpectedly flew in the sky with a bookmark (牙籤) in its mouth and dropped it into the bowl (鉢) he was carrying. He found it strange and looked at it, and strangely enough, the character for "king" (王字) was clearly written on the bookmark. He was secretly pleased and did not tell anyone, always feeling proud. From then on, he harbored even greater ambitions and waited for a good opportunity to be active.

At that time, Silla's national affairs were chaotic, and thieves rose up everywhere and seized several prefectures. Kungye thought to himself, "It is not the work of a great man to accomplish nothing in these chaotic times and grow old in vain in the mountains." He burned his robes and wooden bell (木鐸), immediately went down the mountain, and went to find Jukju Jeok Gihun (竹州卽竹山賊箕蓂). (Fifth year of Queen Jinseong (眞聖王五年), Second year of Daesun of Emperor Zhaozong of Tang (唐照宗大順二年辛亥)). However, Gihun was originally an arrogant and self-important man, so he treated Kungye with arrogance and rudeness. Kungye was depressed and unable to settle his mind, only making friends with his subordinates Wonhoe (元會) and Sinseon (申煊) to discuss his thoughts. The following year, in the year of Imja (壬子), he went to find Yang Gil (梁吉), a thief from Bukwon (北原, present-day Wonju). Yang Gil treated him especially well, entrusting him with important tasks and dividing his troops to attack various places to the east. Kungye was greatly pleased and went to Seoknam Temple (石南寺) on Chiaksan Mountain (稚岳山) to set up camp and attacked several towns such as Jucheon (酒泉=present-day Wonju), Naeseong (奈城=present-day Yeongwol), Ul-o (*烏=present-day Pyeongchang), and Eojin (御珍=present-day Uljin). All the towns surrendered following the wind. The following year - that is, the eighth year of Queen Jinseong, Gapin (甲寅) - he also occupied Myeongju (溟洲=present-day Gangneung), and his troops reached 2,500 men. Kungye organized the army into 14 divisions, appointing Kim Dae (金太), Geommo (黔毛), Heunjang (昕長), Gwipyeong (貴平), and Jang Il (張一) as commanders (舍上=卽部長), sharing the hardships and comforts of the soldiers, and distributing even the most trivial items with extreme fairness. The people were all moved by him and elected him as their general. Kungye then attacked and captured places such as Jeojok (猪足=present-day Inje), Seongcheon (牲川=present-day Hwacheon), Suya (水若(音야)=present-day Chuncheon), Gimseong (金城), and Cheorwon (鐵圓=present-day Cheorwon). The bandits from all directions surrendered.

As things went so smoothly, Kungye thought to himself that with his power, he was worthy of establishing a nation and becoming a king. He established internal and external government positions, appointed Wang Geon (王建=卽高麗太祖), a native of Songak-gun (松嶽郡人), who had newly surrendered, as the governor (太守) of Cheorwon, and promoted Hongsul (弘述=洪儒), Baek Ok-sam (白玉三=裵玄慶), Neungsan (能山=申崇謙), Bok Sa-gwi (卜沙貴=卜智謙), and others as his subordinate generals. In the tenth year of Queen Jinseong, Byeongjin (丙辰), he captured the two counties of Seungnyeong (僧嶺=present-day Saknyeong) and Imgang (臨江=present-day Jangdan), and the following year, Jeongsa (丁巳), he also captured Inmulhyeon (人物縣). Kungye then said, "Songak-gun is a famous county in Hanbuk, with beautiful mountains and rivers, so it is worthy of becoming the capital." He established the capital there and attacked and occupied the fortresses of Gongam (孔巖=Yangcheon), Geompo (黔浦=Gimpo), and Hyeolgu (穴口=Ganghwa). At that time, Yang Gil (梁吉) was still in Bukwon (北原), occupying more than 30 counties including Gugwon (國原=Chungju). Seeing Kungye's wide territory and large population (地廣民多), he was jealous and angry, and selected 30 skilled soldiers to attack Kungye, but Kungye attacked him first and was greatly defeated. Kungye took over all of his 30-odd fortresses. Taking advantage of this momentum, in the second year of King Hyogong (孝恭王) Muo (戊午), Kungye built a fortress in Songak-gun and appointed Wang Geon as Jeonggidae-gam (精騎大監), attacking and defeating Yangju (楊州) and Gyeonju (見州=present-day Yangju). In the fourth year, Gyeongsin (庚申), he also conquered Gwangju (廣州), Chungju (忠州), Dangseong (唐城=present-day Suwon=Namyang), Cheongju (靑州 or 靑川=present-day Cheongju), and Goeyang (槐壤=present-day Goesan), and awarded Wang Geon the position of Achan (阿飡) for his services.

Establishment of the Taebong Kingdom

As Kungye's power grew in this way, his ambition to become king of the world became even more pronounced. In the fifth year of King Hyogong, Sinyu (孝恭王五年辛酉), he boldly declared himself king and announced domestically that Silla had requested aid from the Tang Dynasty in the past and recklessly attacked and destroyed Goguryeo, so Pyongyang (平壤) had become a desolate wasteland. He would surely avenge Goguryeo. The people of Goguryeo were all pleased and responded. (This declaration was, of course, intended to win over the hearts of the Goguryeo people, that is, the people of northern Joseon, and on the one hand, it stemmed from his resentment of the Silla dynasty's persecution of him. It can be inferred from the fact that he went to Buseok Temple (浮石寺) in Heungju (興州=Sunheung) and struck the portrait of the Silla king with his sword how much resentment he had.) In the eighth year of King Hyogong, Gapja (904 AD), he founded a new nation, naming it Majin (摩震), and named the era Mutae (武泰), and established a new system of government (官制). <9> (Details of the government system are omitted). In the seventh lunar month, he moved 1,000 households from Cheongju (靑州) to Cheorwon and made that city the royal capital (王京). He also attacked and seized more than 30 prefectures, including Sangju (尙州), and Gongju General Hong Gi (公州將軍弘奇) also came and surrendered. The following year (乙丑), he entered the new capital and built grand palaces and government offices, the splendor and magnificence of which surpassed the royal capital of Silla. He changed the era name of Mutae to Seongchaek (聖冊元年) and established 13 garrisons (鎭) in Paseo (浿西). Pyongyang Commander Geom Yong (平壤主將黔用) surrendered on his own due to his power, and the rebel leaders Hwang Ui-jeok (赤衣, 黃衣賊) and Myeong Gwi (明貴) of Jeungseong (甑城) also came and surrendered. Kungye then intended to annex Silla and had his people call Silla Myeoldo (滅都) and killed anyone coming from Silla. He ordered Wang Geon to attack and capture Geumseong (錦城) to the south and renamed it Naju (羅州). In the seventh year of Seongchaek, Sinmi (聖冊七年辛未), he changed the era name again to Sudeok Manse (水德萬歲) and changed the name of the country to Taebong (泰封).

Kungye and Buddhism

Kungye established a nation through military achievements and became king, but because he was originally a devotee of Buddhism (佛敎), his faith in and study of Buddhism was always diligent. He called himself Maitreya Buddha (彌勒佛), wore a golden crown (金幘) on his head, and wore a square robe (方袍). He called his eldest son Cheonggwang Bodhisattva (靑光菩薩) and his youngest son Singwang Bodhisattva (神光菩薩). When he went out, he rode a white horse decorated with colored silk, with young boys and girls carrying parasols and incense (香花) and 200 monks and nuns chanting Buddhist scriptures and following behind him. He also wrote more than 20 volumes of Buddhist scriptures, all of which were miraculous and strange, with many things not found in the original scriptures. Sometimes, when he gave lectures while sitting upright (正坐講說), if anyone opposed or criticized his lectures, he would immediately kill them with an iron club (鐵槌), so no one dared to disagree. In the fourth year, Gapsul (甲戌), he changed the era name of Sudeok Manse and renamed it Jeonggae (政開元年), appointing Wang Geon as General of a Hundred Ships (百船將軍) to destroy the fleet of Later Baekje (後百濟) on the sea off Naju, and his national prestige shook the world for a time. However, as a result of arrogance and self-conceit, his loss of virtue and misdeeds increased. His wife, Lady Gang (康氏), admonished him, but he was greatly angered and accused her of adultery, burning her genitals with a hot iron pestle (鐵杵) and killing her, and even killing her sons. From then on, he became even more mentally disturbed, suspicious of everyone, and easily angered, killing innocent officials and common people, so the people in the vicinity were all filled with fear and could not live in peace.

Strange Prophetic Inscription

It was the fifth year of Jeonggae, Muin (政開五年戊寅) - the fourth year of Zhenming of Tang (唐貞明四年). A Tang merchant, Wang Changgeun (唐商王昌瑾), lived and traded in Cheorwon. One day, he saw an old man with white hair who had a handsome appearance and strange clothes, holding a porcelain bowl (사긔사발) in his left hand and an old mirror (鏡) in his right hand, selling the mirror. Changgeun gave him rice and exchanged it. The old man gave the rice to the beggar children (乞兒) on the street and disappeared without a trace. Changgeun hung the mirror on the wall, and when the sunlight shone on the mirror's surface, faint characters appeared, similar to old poems (古詩).

『上帝降子於辰馬, 先操鷄後搏鴨, 巳年中二龍見, 一則藏身靑木中, 一則顯形黑金東』<10>

Changgeun did not know about the letters at first, but after discovering them late at night, he found them strange and reported them to King Kungye. The king ordered officials to find the owner of the mirror with Changgeun, but they could not find him. However, there was a statue of Jinseong (鎭星塑像) in the Buddha Hall (勃颯寺佛堂) of Balsapsa Temple (勃颯寺), and its appearance was similar to that of the old man, so the king felt strange and lamented for a while. He ordered his literary retainers Song Ham-hong (宋含弘), Baek Tak (白卓), and Heo Won (許原) to interpret the meaning. Ham-heung and others discussed and said: "Sangje Gangja Eo Jinma (上帝降子於辰馬) refers to Jinhan and Mahan (辰韓馬韓). Iryonggyeon-e Il-eun Jangsin Cheongmok-hago Il-eun Hyeonhyeong Heukgeum (二龍見一則藏身靑木, 一則現形黑金) means that Cheongmok (靑木) is pine tree, so it refers to Wang Geon (王建), the grandson of a person named Yong (龍) from Songak-gun (松嶽郡). Heukgeum (黑金) is iron, so it refers to the current capital, Cheorwon (鐵圓), meaning that the current king first prospered here but will eventually perish here. Seonjo Gyehubak-ap (先操鷄後搏鴨) means that Wang Geon will first obtain Gyerim (鷄林), that is, Silla, and later even obtain the Yalu River." However, if we tell the truth as it is now, not only will we be harmed immediately, but even Royal Secretary Wang (王侍中) will be harmed. So they made up a different answer. The king believed it without showing any signs of regret or fear, and his tyranny became even worse, so the general public was greatly frightened and did not know what to do.

Kungye's Lamentable End

It was June of that year. Generals Hong Yu (洪儒), Bae Hyeon-gyeong (裵玄慶), Sin Sung-gyeom (申崇謙), and Bok Ji-gyeom plotted a rebellion and went to Wang Geon's house in the middle of the night, saying, "The current ruler is tyrannical and kills people recklessly, and the people are in turmoil. Since ancient times, deposing a dark ruler and establishing a bright ruler is the great righteousness of the world. You should do what Tang and Mu (湯武) did in the past." Wang Geon initially refused, but at the insistence of his wife, Lady Ryu (柳氏), he eventually raised the banner of rebellion and marched toward the palace gate with the generals at the forefront, beating drums and blowing trumpets. The general public also responded, shouting cheers and rejoicing.

The king did not know the facts until then and was playing with the palace women in the palace when he suddenly faced a change. Not knowing what to do, he fled in disguise and hid in the mountains to avoid the rebellion. Suffering from severe hunger, he went down to the barley field of the people and ate barley ears when he was caught by a farmer from Buyang (斧壤=present-day Pyeonggang) and killed. Thus, the Taebong Kingdom came to an end after 18 years. - From the early Joseon Dynasty, the people of Pyeonggang were exiled for the crime of killing their king, but this was finally resolved during the reign of King Yeongjo of the Joseon Dynasty (李朝英祖時). <11>

**Named Entities**

鷄林	Kyerim
眞聖女皇時代	Chinseongnyŏhwang shidae
後百濟王甄萱	Hugpaekche Wang Kyŏnhwŏn
泰封國王金弓裔	T'aep'ongguk Wang Kim Kungye
憲安王誼靖	Hŏnanwang Ŭijŏng
景文王應廉	Kyŏngmunwang Ŭngnyŏm
世尊寺	Sejon sa
興敎寺	Hŭnggyosa
善宗	Sŏnjong
竹州賊箕蓂	Chukchu chŏk Ki-hŭn
唐照宗	Tang Chojong
北原賊梁吉	Pugwŏn chŏk Yang Gil
稚岳山石南寺	Ch'iaksan Sŏknamsa
酒泉	Chuch'ŏn
奈城	Naesŏng
蔚珍	Ŭljin
溟洲	Myŏngju
金太	Kim T'ae
黔毛	Kŏmmo
昕長	Hŭnchang
貴平	Kwip'yŏng
張一	Chang Il
麟蹄	Inje
華川	Hwach'ŏn
春川	Ch'unch'ŏn
金城	Kimsŏng
鐵圓	Ch'ŏrwŏn
松嶽郡	Songak-kun
王建	Wang Kŏn
高麗太祖	Koryŏ T'aejo
洪儒	Hong Yu
裵玄慶	Pae Hyŏn-gyŏng
申崇謙	Sin Sung-gyŏm
卜智謙	Pok Chi-gyŏm
朔寧	Sangnyŏng
臨江	Imgang
長湍	Changdan
孔巖	Kongam
陽川	Yangch'ŏn
黔浦	Kŏmpo
金浦	Kimpo
穴口	Hyŏlgu
江華	Kanghwa
國原	Kugwŏn
忠州	Ch'ungju
孝恭王	Hyogongwang
楊州	Yangju
槐山	Hoesan
摩震	Majin
武泰	Mut'ae
淸州	Ch'ŏngju
王京	Wanggong
順興	Sunhŭng
浮石寺	Pusŏksa
靑川	Ch'ŏngch'ŏn
聖冊	Sŏngch'aek
平壤	P'yŏngyang
浿西	Paeso
甑城	Chŭngsŏng
平壤主將黔用	P'yŏngyang Chujang Kŏmyong
赤衣賊	Chŏgŭijŏk
黃衣賊	Hwangŭijŏk
明貴	Myŏnggwi
滅都	Myŏldo
錦城	Kŭmsŏng
羅州	Naju
水德萬歲	Sudŏk Manse
泰封	T'aep'ong
彌勒佛	Mirŭkpul
靑光菩薩	Ch'ŏnggwang Posal
神光菩薩	Singwang Posal
政開	Chŏnggae
百船將軍	Paeksŏn Changgun
康氏	Kangssi
唐貞明	Tang Chŏngmyŏng
唐商王昌瑾	Tangsang Wang Ch'anggŭn
勃颯寺	Pŏlsapsa
宋含弘	Song Ham-hong
白卓	Paek T'ak
許原	Hŏ Wŏn
王侍中	Wang Sijung
柳氏	Ryussi
斧壤	Puyang
平康	P'yŏnggang
李朝英祖時	Ijo Yŏngjosi



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제70호
발행일	1934년 02월 01일
기사제목	4000년 史外史
필자	壽春山人(車相瓚)
기사형태	문예기타

4000년 史外史
						壽春山人(車相瓚)
泰封王弓裔秘史
弓裔는 어색한 人物
신라(新羅)의 찬란한 황금시대도 어느덧 다 지나가고 쓸쓸한 가을바람이 계림의 황엽(鷄林黃葉)에 불어들기 시작하야 제51대의 왕 진성녀황시대(眞聖女皇時代)에 이르러서 부터는 간신이 정권을 차지하야 나라의 긔강이 날로 문란하고 겸하야 흉년이 연겁허 드니 백성이 모두 유리분산하고 사방에 도적의 무리가 벌때가티 이러 낫섯다. 이러한 때를 타서 신라에는 량대괴걸(兩大怪傑)이 이러나 천하를 남북으로 분활하야 서로 쟁탈전을 하얏스니 한 사람은 후백제왕 진훤(後百濟王甄萱)이요. 또 한사람은 여긔에 말하랴는 태봉국왕 김궁예(泰封國王金弓裔)다. 궁예(弓裔, 혹은 躬乂)는 신라 제47대왕 헌안왕의정(憲安王誼靖)의 서자(혹은 48세, 景文王應廉의 子라 한다)니 5월 단오날에 그의 외가집에서 탄생하얏는데 날 때에 무지개(虹) 가튼 흰 광선(素光)이 지붕 우를 돌아싸고 머리에 이상한 광채가 잇스며 날 때부터 이(齒)가 잇스니 왼 집안사람들이 모도 긔괴하게 녁여 점쟁이(占者)에게 물은즉 점쟁이가 말하기를 오월단오에 나흔 아희는 원래 불길할 뿐 아니라 특히 이 아희는 나면서부터 이가 나고 또한 이상한 광채가 잇서서 장래에 반듯시 국가에 불리할 터인즉 양육을 하지 안는 것이 조켓다 하니 헌안왕이 그 말을 고지 듯고 사신을 보내여 죽이게 하매 사신이 그를 포댁이(襁褓) 속에서 끄내여 다락 밋헤다 던저 버렷더니 유모가 불상히 녁이고 비밀이 밧다가 잘못하야 손으로 그의 한편 눈을 찔너 실명케 하고 그대로 도망하야 십여 년 동안을 남모르는 중에서 양육하얏섯다.

龍非池中物
그는 자라매 작란을 몸시 조와하니 그의 유모가 경계하야 말하되 그대가 처음 낫슬 때에 나라에 버림을 바드매 내가 인정상 참아 볼 수가 업서서 비밀이 바더 길너 오늘날까지 이르럿섯는대 그대가 그와 가티 조곰도 조심을 하지 안코 함부로 나가 작란을 하니 만일 남에게 일이 발각된다면 그대와 내가 다 가티 화를 당하게 될 것이라 그 일을 장차 엇지 하리요 하니 궁예 울며 말하되 만일 일이 그러하다면 나는 종적을 감추고 멀리가서 유모님의 걱정을 더러 드리겟다고 하고 그날로 도망하야 세존사(世尊寺 一名은 興敎寺)라는 절을 차저가서 머리를 깍고 중(僧)이 되야 스사로 이름짓기를 선종(善宗)이라 하얏섯다. 그러나 원래에 인물이 비범한 그는 구구스러운 승가의 계명에 구속을 밧지 안코 항상 자유의 행동을 취하얏다.
하루는 재(齋) 올리러 가는 대 뜻밧게 가마귀(烏) 한 마리가 책대(牙籤)를 물고 공중으로 날어 가다가 그가 가지고 가는 바리(鉢) 속에다 떠러트림으로 괴상하게 녁여 본즉 이상하게도 그 책 대우에 임금왕자(王字)가 두렷하게 씨워 잇슴으로 그는 속으로 혼자 깃버하며 다른 사람에게는 말도 하지 안코 항상 자부(自負)하야 그 뒤부터는 더욱 큰 뜻을 품고 활약할 조흔 긔회가 도라오기만 기다리엿섯다.
그때에 맛츰 신라는 국정이 문란하야 사방에 도적이 이러나서 여러 주군을 점탈하니 궁예가 스사로 생각하되 이러한 란시를 타서 아모 공도 이루지 못하고 산중에서 헛되이 늙는 것은 대장부의 할 일이 안이라 하고 장삼과 목탁(木鐸)을 모도 불지르고 즉시 산에 나려가서 죽주적긔헌(竹州卽竹山賊箕蓂)을 차저 갓섯다.(眞聖王五年, 唐照宗大順二年辛亥) 그러나 헌은 원래 위인이 오만자과 하는 자인 까닭에 궁예를 대하는 대로 또한 오만무례한 일이 만흐니 궁예가 울울불평하야 마음을 안정치 못하고 다만 그의 부하 원회(元會), 신선(申煊)으로 벗을 삼어＜8＞ 심사를 서로 의론할 뿐이러니 그 다음해 임자(壬子)에 다시 북원적 양길 北原(今原州)賊 梁吉)을 차저가니 길이 특히 후대하야 큰일을 맥기고 또 군사를 논아주어 동으로 각지를 공략(攻略)케 하니 궁예 크게 깃버하야 치악산 석남사(稚岳山石南寺)에 나아가 숙소를 정하고 주천(酒泉=今原州地), 내성(奈城=今寧越地), 울오(*烏=今平昌地), 어진(御珍=今蔚珍地) 등 여러 고을을 습격하니 여러 고을이 모도 바람을 따러 귀항하얏섯다. 그 이듬해-바로 진성왕 8년 갑인(甲寅)에는 또 명주(溟洲=지금 江陵)를 점령하니 부하병이 2천5백여인에 달하얏다. 궁예는 천군을 14대로 편성하야 김대(金太), 검모(黔毛), 흔장(昕長), 귀평(貴平), 장일(張一) 등으로 사상(舍上=卽部長)을 삼고 사졸로 더부러 감고와 노일(勞逸)을 가티하여 지극히 사소한 물품을 분배하는대 까지도 극히 공평무사하게 하니 여러 인심이 모도 그에게 감복하야 그를 장군으로 추대하얏섯다. 궁예는 다시 제족(猪足=지금 麟蹄), 성천(牲川=今華川), 수야(水若(音야)=今春川), 김성(金城), 철원(鐵圓=今鐵原) 등지를 처서 취핊�니 사방의 적도가 모도 귀화하얏섯다.
일이 그와 순조로 잘 되여 가니 궁예는 스사로 생각하되 자긔의 세력이 그만한 이상에는 족히 국가를 건설하고 군왕도 될만하다 하고 이에 내외관직을 설치하고 새로 투항한 송악군 사람 왕건(松嶽郡人王建=卽高麗太祖)을 도러 철원 태수(太守)로 삼고, 홍술(弘述=洪儒), 백옥삼(白玉三=裵玄慶), 능산(能山=申崇謙), 복사귀(卜沙貴=卜智謙) 등 여러 인물을 드러서 부하장군을 삼엇다. 그리고 진성왕 10년 병진(丙辰)에는 승령(僧嶺=今朔寧地), 임강(臨江=今長湍地) 두 고을을 취하고 그 익년 정사(丁巳)에는 또 인물현(人物縣)을 취하얏는대 궁예는 또 말하되 송악군은 한북의 명군으로 산수가 긔려한즉 가히 국도가 될만하다 하고 이에 그곳으로 국도를 정하고 공암(孔巖=陽川) 검포(黔浦=金浦), 혈구(穴口=江華)등 성을 처서 점령하니 때에 양길(梁吉)은 아즉까지 북원(北原)에 잇서서 국원(國原=忠州)등 30 여군을 차지하고 잇스나 궁예의 지광민다(地廣民多)한 것을 보고 시긔분노하야 부하 30여명의 날랜 군사를 뽑아 궁예를 습격하다가 도로혀 궁예에게 먼저 습격을 당하야 크게 패하니 궁예가 그의 30여 성까지도 전부 차지하게 되엿섯다. 궁예는 다시 그 승세를 타서 효공왕(孝恭王) 2년 무오(戊午) 2월에는 송악군에 성을 쌋코 왕건으로 정긔대감(精騎大監)을 삼어 양주(楊州), 견주(見州=今楊州地)를 처서 파하고 4년 경신(庚申)에는 또 광주(廣州), 충주(忠州), 당성(唐城=今水原=南陽地), 청주(靑州 혹은 靑川=今淸州地), 괴양(槐壤=今槐山) 등을 토평하고 그 공으로 왕건에게 아손(阿飡)의 벼슬을 주엇다.

泰封國의 創建
궁예는 세력이 나로 그와 가티 커지니 천하에 왕이 되고 십흔 패심이 더욱 발발하게 되야 효공왕 5년 신유(孝恭王五年辛酉)에는 당당하게 왕이라 층호하고 국내에 선언을 하되 전날에 신라가 당나라의 원병을 청하야 무리하게 고구려를 처서 멸한 까닭에 그도 평양(平壤)이 덧업시 황무한 폐허가 되고 말엇슨즉 내가 반듯이 고구려를 위하야 그 원수를 갑겟다 하니 고구려의 유민이 모도 깃버하며 향응하얏섯다.(이 선언은 물론 고구려의 유토, 즉 북부 조선의 인심을 수습하고 일방으로 신라 왕조가 자긔 학대한 것을 원한하는 데서 나온 것이다. 그가 흥주(興州=順興) 부석사(浮石寺)에 갓다가 신라왕의 벽상(壁像)을 보고 칼로 친 것을 보와도 평소 그의 원한이 어떠하엿던 것을 짐작할 수 잇다) 이에 효공왕 8년 갑자(서기 904)에 나라를 새로 창건하되 이름을 마진(摩震)이라 하고 년호(年號)를 무태(武泰)라 하며 관제(官制)를＜9＞ 새로 정하고(官制의 상세한 것은 略함) 추7월에는 청주(靑州)의 인호(人戶) 1천을 철원에 이주 식히고 그 성으로 왕경(王京)을 삼으며 또 상주(尙州) 등 30여 주를 처서 빼스니 공주장군 홍긔(公州將軍弘奇)가 또한 와서 항복하얏섯다. 그리고 그 익년(乙丑)에는 신경에 드러가서 궁궐과 여러 관청을 크게 건축하니 그 화려 굉장함이 능히 신라의 왕경을 능가하고 무태의 년호를 곳처서 성책원년(聖冊元年)이라 층하고 패서(浿西)에 13진(鎭)을 설치하니 평양주장 검용(平壤主將黔用)이 그의 위풍에 눌려 스사로 항복하고 증성(甑城)의 적의 황의적(赤衣, 黃衣賊), 명귀(明貴) 등이 또한 와서 항복하얏섯다. 궁예는 이에 다시 신라를 병탄코자 하야 자긔나라 사람으로 하야금 신라를 부르되 멸도(滅都)라 하고 또 신 라에서 오는 사람이면 모주리 다 죽이며 왕건을 명하야 남으로 금성(錦城)을 처 어더서 라주(羅州)라 개층하고 7년 신미(聖冊七年辛未)에는 다시 년호를 곳치여 수덕만세(水德萬歲)라 하고 국호를 태봉(泰封)이라 곳치엿다.

弓裔와 佛敎
궁예는 이와 가티 무공으로 국가를 건설하고 왕이 되엿스나 원래 불교(佛敎)의 신도인 까닭에 불교에 대한 신앙과 연구는 항상 게으르지 안어서 자호 왈 미륵불(彌勒佛)이라 하고 머리에는 금책(金幘)을 쓰고 몸에는 방포(方袍)를 입으며 맛아들은 청광보살(靑光菩薩) 끗헤 아들은 신광보살(神光菩薩)이라 하고 외출할 때에는 채승으로 장식한 백마를 타되 동남동녀(童男童女)로 하야금 일산과 향화(香花)를 밧들고 압흘 인도하며 승니(僧尼) 2백여인으로 념불을 하고 뒤를 따르게 하얏다. 그리고 또 그는 불경 20여권을 저술하얏스니 그 말이 모도 신긔 괴이하야 원래 경전에 업는 것이 만코 또 어떤 때에는 정좌강설(正坐講說)을 하되 그 강설을 반대 비난하는 자가 잇스면 당장에 철퇴로 따려 죽이니 누가 감히 이론을 하지 못하얏다. 4년 갑술(甲戌)에는 수덕만세의 년호를 곳처서 다시 정개 원년(政開元年)이라 하고 왕건으로 백선장군(百船將軍)을 삼어 라주 해상에서 후백제(後百濟)의 함대를 처서 멸하니 국위가 일시 천하를 진동하얏섯다. 그러나 교사자만의 결과로 실덕과 비행이 만어서 부인 강씨(康氏)가 즉간하엿더니 그는 크게 노하야 그 부인을 간음죄로 모라 불에 뜨겁게 다른 쇠공이(鐵杵)로 그 외음부를 처서 죽이고 그의 아들 형제까지 다 죽엿섯다. 그후부터 그는 정신이 더욱 흥분 되야 아모에게나 의심을 만히 두고 또 조금하면 경노하야 부하 광료(官僚)와 일반 평민까지 무고하게 살해를 하니 그 부근의 백성들이 모도 공포에 쌔워서 안정한 생활을 하지 못하얏다.

奇怪한 鏡讖文
정개오년무인(政開五年戊寅)이엿다. -唐貞明四年- 당나라 상인 왕창근(唐商王昌瑾)이 철원에 우거하야 장사를 하더니 하루는 본즉 상모가 잘 생기고 의관이 긔괴한 어떤 백발 로인이 왼편 손에는 사긔사발을 가지고 오른편에는 녯날 거울(鏡)을 가지고 와서 거울을 사라고 함으로 창근은 쌀을 주고 바구웟더니 그 로인은 그 쌀을 갓다가 거리에 잇는 거지 아희(乞兒)들을 논아주고 어듸로 갓는지 종적을 감추고 말엇섯다. 창근은 그 거울을 벽상에 걸어 두엇더니 일광이 경면에 빗치며 아래에 긔록한 것과 가튼 가는 글자가 완연이 낫타낫는데 엇지보면 녯시(古詩)와도 비슷하얏다.
『上帝降子於辰馬, 先操鷄後搏鴨, 巳年中二龍見, 一則藏身靑木中, 一則顯形黑金東』＜10＞
창근은 처음에 그 글자 잇는 것을 알지 못하얏다가 야종에 발견하고 이상히 녁여 궁예왕에게 고하엿더니 왕은 관리를 명하야 창근과 가티 그 거울 임자를 찻게 하얏스나 맛츰내 찻지 못하고 다만 발삽사불답(勃颯寺佛堂)에 진성의 소상(鎭星塑像)이 잇는데 그 사람과 모양이 비슷일 뿐임으로 왕은 이상이 녁여 한참 개탄하다가 문인 송함홍(宋含弘), 백탁(白卓), 허원(許原) 등을 명하야 그 뜻을 해석하라 하니 함흥 등이 서로 론의하야 왈 상제강자어진마(上帝降子於辰馬)는 진한, 마한(辰韓馬韓)을 이름이요. 이룡견에 일은 장신청목하고 일은 현형흑금(二龍見一則藏身靑木, 一則現形黑金)이란 것은 청목은 소나무니 송악군 사람 중에 룡으로써 이름을 지은 사람의 손자 되는 왕건(王建)을 이름이요. 흑금은 철이니 지금의 국도 철원을 이름인데 지금 국왕이 처음에 이곳에서 흥하엿다가 야종에 이곳에서 망할 것을 뜻함이요. 선조계후박압(先操鷄後搏鴨)은 왕건이 먼저 게림(鷄林)=즉 신라를 엇고 뒤에 압록강까지 엇는다는 뜻이다. 그러나 지금에 주상이 이와 가티 산아 우니 우리들이 만일에 실상대로 그말을 한다면 당장에 우리만 화를 당할 뿐이 안이라 왕시중(王侍中)까지도 해를 입을 것이라 하고 이에 말을 달니 꾸며서 대답하니 왕은 그대로 밋고 조곰도 회오경구하는 긔색이 업시 흉포가 더욱 심하니 일반 신민이 크게 공구하며 엇지할 줄을 몰낫섯다.

可憐한 弓裔의 末路
그해 6월이엿다. 장군 홍유(洪儒), 배현경(裵玄慶), 신숭겸(申崇謙), 복지겸 등이 혁명의 음모를 하고 밤중에 왕건의 사택에 가서 말하야 왈 지금 주상이 무도 란폭하야 신민을 함부로 죽이고 생민이 도란속에 드른지라 자고로 어둔 임군을 폐하고 밟은 임군을 세우는 것은 천하의 대의(大義)니 공은 녯날 탕무(湯武)의 일을 행하라 하니 왕건은 처음에 사양하다가 그의 부인 류씨(柳氏)의 강권으로 결국 혁명의 깃발을 들고 여러 장군을 선두로 하야 북을 치고 나팔을 불며 궁성문 압흐로 돌진하니 일반 인민이 또 한향 응하야 만세를 부르며 환호하얏다.
왕은 그때까지 그 사실을 알지 못하고 궁중에 잇서서 여러 궁녀들과 노리를 하다가 졸지에 변을 당하매 엇지할 줄을 모르고 창황망조하다가 미복으로 도망하야 산중에 숨어 란을 피하던 중 긔갈이 심하야 인민의 보리밧헤 나려가 보리이삭을 따먹다가 부양(斧壤=지금 平康) 농민에게 붓잡히여 해를 입으니 이에 태봉국은 18년을 일긔로 하고 그만 멸망하얏다. - 평강 사람은 그때에 자긔 나라 임금을 죽인 죄로 려조 초부터 정배를 당하얏다가 이조영조때(李朝英祖時)에 비로소 해소 되엿다.＜11＞
＜8-11＞