別件坤 第70號
1934년 02월 01일
約婚女의 惡魔性 (The Devilish Nature of a Fiancee, Novel)
崔流帆

The Devilish Nature of a Fiancee
崔流帆

Evidence That Cannot Be Denied
The next day, Prosecutor M, along with the chief prosecutor, came to the temporary investigation headquarters. There, as a result of the detectives' activities overnight, truly significant evidence was laid out. This evidence made it seem as though the case would be resolved quickly and unexpectedly easily. The terrifying murderer was confirmed.

Before long, Kim Yeong-ho was summoned to the interrogation room table and sat facing Prosecutor M as he had the day before.

"Tell me the truth. You didn't go to Gyeongseong that day, did you? Even if you did go, you would have returned by seven o'clock and been somewhere in this village. Since you say you came home at twelve that night, you must have been wandering around under the ginkgo tree or in the woods." Prosecutor M, unlike the day before, began the interrogation with a confident and composed attitude.

"No matter how many times you ask, my answer is the same. I came straight home from Gyeongseong on foot. There's no reason for me to go under the ginkgo tree or in the woods." Kim Yeong-ho answered calmly, but he couldn't hide the worry and pain in his pale face. He had already discovered the evidence that Prosecutor M had. He was endlessly struggling with how to explain this undeniable evidence.

"Ah, there's something you should know." The prosecutor began from a completely different angle.

"Gyeong-suk was stabbed in the heart with a thin knife. Most likely a dagger. The autopsy confirmed it. That is, there was blood in this crime. The victim bled and died. Therefore, it's only natural to assume that the perpetrator's clothes might have blood on them, don't you think?"

"Yes, is that so? Then it's murder," Kim Yeong-ho muttered with a look of despair.

"Now, if the perpetrator had blood on their clothes, what would they do with them? What would you do, if you were the person?"

"What are you talking about?" Kim Yeong-ho shouted like a madman.

"Please stop asking such questions. I know. I saw a detective crawling out from under the floor of my house. I don't remember, but there must have been something under the floor. Show it to me."

"Hahaha... you're a good actor. You're saying you don't know what was hidden under the floor of your house? Then I'll show you. Here it is. Aren't these your pants? And what are these bloodstains? Are you saying this isn't Gyeong-suk's blood?" The prosecutor said sternly, presenting the crumpled pants to Kim Yeong-ho. It could be seen that there were black bloodstains dotted here and there on the pants.

"I have absolutely no idea. How could something like this be under the floor? The pants are definitely mine, but what blood is this—" I have no idea. Kim Yeong-ho, like a pheasant chased by a hunter, widened his eyes and barely managed to say this.

"Saying you don't know isn't an excuse," the prosecutor said in an even more composed tone.

"First, there's the letter with the signature K. Second, there's the instability of the bizarre alibi. Third, there are these pants. You haven't shown any counter-evidence that can explain any of these. If there is such evidence and no explanation is given, it is no exaggeration to say that the crime is confirmed beyond a doubt. I have no choice but to arrest you as a suspect in the murder of Gyeong-suk." As soon as the prosecutor finished speaking, two police officers rushed at Kim Yeong-ho at the chief's direction and grabbed his hands on either side.

"Wait," Kim Yeong-ho shouted, expressing extreme indignation. <58>

"The evidence you've gathered is merely circumstantial. Do you think you can catch me in the legal net with that? First of all, I have no motive. Why would I kill my fiancée out of spite?"

"Motive? Don't talk nonsense," the chief roared. "Don't you have a mistress? You've been postponing the wedding day after day because you didn't want to break up with that woman, haven't you? Now you've reached a point where you can't postpone it any longer...

Due to the complicated relationship between your house and Gyeong-suk's house, you've reached a state where you can't postpone this marriage any longer! If this marriage falls through, your house will be in a situation where it can't even show its face to Gyeong-suk's house, let alone the villagers." You were cornered. So you finally came up with the terrible idea of just getting rid of Gyeong-suk. Are you still claiming you have no motive? It has been investigated in detail here."

"Ah, it's a trap. I've fallen into a terrible trap," Kim Yeong-ho was so dumbfounded that he couldn't say anything and just twisted his body like a half-crazed man.

Testimony of Lover Yun Yeong-ae
"Yeong-ho! Pull yourself together. Now that things have come to this, tell the truth. You have a solid alibi, don't you? If you ask the woman in Gyeongseong to testify, that's all you need." Lee Man-se, who had been standing behind the prosecutor, jumped out and said this. He couldn't bear to see his friend in anguish.

"That's right, Prosecutor. Please investigate XXX-beonji, XX-jeong, Gyeongseong. There's a woman I know there. I was there the night the incident occurred. It's a lie that I took a spin around Jongno and Honmachi. The woman's name is Yun Yeong-ae. Please ask Yeong-ae." Yeong-ho had no choice but to reveal his lover's name.

"Hahaha... what are you talking about? Can we trust your mistress's testimony? That woman might be your accomplice," the chief said coldly.

"It shouldn't be that difficult to hear that woman's testimony. Since he's saying that, wouldn't it be better to notify the police station by police phone and have them investigate immediately and report back?" At the prosecutor's suggestion, it was decided to investigate the woman named Yun Yeong-ae anyway. Yun Yeong-ae was someone who had to be investigated at least once.

After an agonizing hour, a phone call came from the police substation, and a detective ran over. "Yun Yeong-ae said that Kim Yeong-ho never came to her house last night. Ah, you must be mistaken, she said. No matter how many times we asked, she gave the same answer,"

The detective reported this.

"And was Yun Yeong-ae at home all day that day?"

"As a result of asking the landlord, an old woman, it's confirmed that she was at home and didn't go out."

"If Yun Yeong-ae had gone out that night, she would also be suspected of the Gyeong-suk murder case. That woman also has the same motive as Kim Yeong-ho. However, considering that she didn't go out and gave the most unfavorable testimony for her lover, Kim Yeong-ho, it seems that Yun Yeong-ae doesn't know anything. In other words, it's safe to consider her an outsider to this case."

Prosecutor M called Kim Yeong-ho for the second time and made him stand in the interrogation room <59> and told him the report he had heard from the detective.

"Now, I've granted your request. There's no point in arguing anymore, is there? Since even your mistress won't verify your alibi, you should just give up."

"It's a lie. There's no reason for Yeong-ae to say that. Let me meet her. Aren't you trying to trap me by any means possible? Take me to Gyeongseong and let me confront Yun Yeong-ae." Kim Yeong-ho said, extremely agitated, shaking the window of the room.

"Don't worry. We'll let you meet her," the police chief said, giving a sharp order to his subordinate. Two police officers grabbed Kim Yeong-ho's hands, who was resisting and not trying to leave, and dragged him out the door.

Was Kim Yeong-ho, the son of the head of this township, really a terrible murderer? Or was he caught in an inescapable trap by someone? Where is the real culprit hiding?

The Detective Novelist's Detection
Kim Yeong-ho, the son of the head of S Township, was named as a suspect in the murder of his fiancée, Park Gyeong-suk, and was arrested. Kim Yeong-ho insisted on his innocence, but there was the difficult-to-deny evidence of blood-stained pants, his alibi for the day of the crime was not established, and, on top of that, he even had a motive to kill his fiancée.

Kim Yeong-ho disliked Park Gyeong-suk. He had a lover named Yun Yeong-ae, and his fiancée, who was coercing him to marry in order to continue that love affair, was a thorn in his side. Furthermore, Kim Yeong-ho's family had a painful obligation to Park Gyeong-suk's family that prevented them from breaking off the engagement.

If Kim Yeong-ho did not agree to the marriage, Yeong-ho's father would have to resign as township head and leave S Township. On the other hand, the Park family considered this their only opportunity and aggressively advocated for the marriage. It is a plausible fact that a young man engrossed in love, struggling in an unhappy situation, would hate and curse his fiancée and eventually even harbor murderous intent. This was the opinion of the prosecutors and police officers.

With a motive, evidence, and no alibi, Kim Yeong-ho's guilt could no longer be denied by anyone. However, besides Kim Yeong-ho's parents, there was one person who insisted on his innocence. That person was Lee Man-se, Kim Yeong-ho's friend and a detective novelist who had returned to his hometown in S Village and had been in contact with this case from the beginning.

He had been Yeong-ho's childhood friend since they were young, and he knew his feelings well. No matter how blindly in love he might have been, he could not believe that he would kill an innocent woman, no matter how much he thought about it.

He thought one thing about this case was strange. It was a truly bizarre fantasy that started with a straw figure (제웅) the size of a person being stabbed in the chest with a dagger and falling over in the same place five days before the murder. He knew that if he told the prosecutor about this, they would dismiss it as a novelist's fantasy, so he did not express any opinion about it.

Since Kim Yeong-ho had been arrested while insisting on his innocence, he decided to investigate this case based on that fantasy in order to help his friend.

Lee Man-se, not knowing where to start, felt at a loss, but he felt the need to go to Gyeongseong and visit Yun Yeong-ae above all else. Yeong-ho claimed that he was at Yeong-ae's house on the night of the crime, and Yeong-ae clearly denied it to the police. Where did this strange contradiction come from? He thought that solving that first was the most important issue.

The morning after Yeong-ho was arrested, Man-se went to Gyeongseong. Of course, it would be his first time meeting Yun Yeong-ae. This lover was kept completely secret by Yeong-ho from everyone, so no one knew her. Only when Yeong-ho confessed during the prosecutor's interrogation did they learn her address and name for the first time.

Lee Man-se visited Yun Yeong-ae's address, which was not far from the station. It was a small thatched house surrounded by small factories. When he asked to be shown in, an old woman over sixty years old came out, rubbing her eyes.

"I've come to see Yun Yeong-ae," he said, and she asked, "Yes, who is it?" a second time. She seemed to have poor eyesight and hearing.

"There's a woman named Yun Yeong-ae who rents a room in your house. I've come to see her." Lee Man-se spoke in a loud voice near the old woman's ear. Only then did the old woman seem to understand, and she went inside and came out after a while, telling him to come in.

Lee Man-se headed to a back room that was set apart.

"I'm sorry for coming so suddenly. I'm Lee Man-se, a friend of Kim Yeong-ho's from S Village," he said as he greeted her, and the woman said, "I'm Yun Yeong-ae," and lowered her head shyly and remained silent. Seeing her, Yeong-ae's appearance was somewhat unexpected. Since Kim Yeong-ho cherished her so much, he had imagined that she must be a beauty, but Yun Yeong-ae, who was sitting in front of him now, could not be called a beauty no matter how he looked at her, and she gave him the feeling of being like a prostitute.

Her hair was styled in a hisashigami, but the way it was combed was so clumsy that the hair dangling on her forehead fell far enough to cover her eyebrows, and she had haphazardly applied powder and rouge to her face, and she had a large plaster on her right cheek, as if her teeth were aching.

Lee Man-se, wondering what Kim Yeong-ho had fallen for in this woman, told her the whole story of Kim Yeong-ho's arrest and asked if he had really not visited Yun Yeong-ae on the day of the crime. Then, how cold of a woman was she? Yeong-ae showed no sign of grieving that her lover had been arrested and simply said that Kim Yeong-ho had not come at all that day.

As Lee Man-se spoke, he began to have strange thoughts. He wondered if the woman named Yun Yeong-ae was an emotionless artificial human or something else, and she looked suspicious to him. <60>

"Then, what do you think of this case, Ms. Yeong-ae? Do you think Yeong-ho is capable of murder?" Even when he spoke in a slightly indignant tone, the other party remained expressionless and said, "I don't think he would do such a thing, but..." which truly seemed to imply something. Was this woman suppressing her emotions because she was too shy? Or was she really a cold-blooded animal, or who knows? Was she the one who incited Kim Yeong-ho to kill Park Gyeong-suk, and was she acting like this out of fear of that crime? She was recognized as a completely mysterious and strange woman.

Because the back of the house was near the station, every time the sound of the train's whistle echoed endlessly, Yeong-ae flinched and was very startled. Yeong-ae seemed to be living as a working woman, renting a lower room in the old woman's house and living alone.

"Where do you work?" he asked.

"Yes, I worked at a department store until a couple of months ago. Now I don't work anywhere..." she mumbled from her mouth and stopped. He tried to find out her identity by asking this and that, but Yeong-ae was often silent, and even when she spoke, she did not look directly at Lee Man-se but answered with her head bowed.

In the end, Lee Man-se could not do anything about Yun Yeong-ae's silence, so he said goodbye and put on his shoes to leave the house, but Yun Yeong-ae only bowed her head in the room and did not come down.

When the landlord, an old woman, came out to the gate to open the door, Lee Man-se said to the old woman's ear, "Did a man come to see Yun Yeong-ae three or four days ago? About my age."

"Well, I don't know," was the answer. When he asked more and more details, he learned that a mother and daughter lived in this house, and the daughter was a worker at the Monopoly Bureau who went to work early in the morning and returned late in the evening, and only rented the lower room to Yun Yeong-ae. Guests who came to see her could enter and leave freely, and when guests returned late at night, Yeong-ae would go out and close the door, so she often didn't know who had come. Lee Man-se soon left the house without any success in his first investigation. And as he walked a few steps, he heard a voice from behind saying, "Ah, have you come too?" and he was surprised and turned around to see one of the police officers whom he had become familiar with in the S Village elementary school investigation room. There was no way to lie, and when he said that he had gone to see Yun Yeong-ae, the officer said, "She's home. That's perfect. I'm on my way to summon her because I'm going to interrogate her now. Then, excuse me." The officer said this and ran to Yun Yeong-ae's lodging with a flurry.

Lee Man-se was curious and couldn't just leave the spot, so he stood on the street and watched the officer enter the gate. He was waiting with a strange curiosity, wondering what kind of face Yun Yeong-ae, who was being dragged away by the officer, would have, but after a while, the door opened and the officer came out, but Yun Yeong-ae was not seen behind him. Not only that, but when the officer saw Lee Man-se still standing there, he said in an angry voice, "Where is Yun Yeong-ae? Are you making fun of me?"

"What? She's not here?" Lee Man-se was so dumbfounded that he couldn't speak.

"There's no way she's not here. I just saw her. There's no way she could have come out during that time. Is she really not here?" Lee Man-se said as if he couldn't believe it.

"She's really not here. I asked the landlord, an old woman, but she didn't know anything, and I opened the lower room, but there wasn't even a mouse. Maybe she went out through the backyard."

"The backyard is inside the station! Anyway, let's go and investigate together. There's no way she's not there," he said, and the two men opened the gate and entered the house. They asked the old woman and searched the whole house, but Yun Yeong-ae was not there.

"Could she have escaped through this window?" The officer opened the window and said.

"Escaped? Is there a reason for that person to escape?" Lee Man-se asked.

"If that woman is an accomplice, there's no way to be sure that she wouldn't run away when she heard the officer's voice. But..." the officer said and looked out the window.

"The outside is so high that a woman can't jump down, and there are workers working on the railroad tracks."

The outside of the window was very high, and it was inside the station, so several railroad tracks were laid out, and four or five workers were repairing one of them with pickaxes.

"Hey, has anyone jumped out of this window just now?" the officer shouted. The workers all looked this way and answered that no one had jumped out.

Even if Yun Yeong-ae had jumped out, there was no way she could have jumped out without being noticed by the workers, and if she had entered the station road, she would have been noticed by the workers.

Could that nymph-like woman, that monster with pale makeup, have turned into ether and evaporated? There was no other way to interpret it. - (To be continued in the next issue) - <62>

**Named Entities**

金영호	Kim Yeong-ho
朴경숙	Park Gyeong-suk
尹영애	Yun Yeong-ae
李만세	Lee Man-se
S촌	S Village
경성	Gyeongseong
종로통	Jongno-tong
본정통	Honmachi-tong
전매국	Jeonmae-guk



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제70호
발행일	1934년 02월 01일
기사제목	約婚女의 惡魔性
필자	崔流帆
기사형태	소설

約婚女의 惡魔性
						崔流帆
辨明할 수 업는 證據
그 잇튼날도 M검사는 검찰서장과 함께 임시수사본부에 왓슬 때 그 곳에는 하로밤 사이에 형사들의 활동한 결과로 실로 중대한 증거들이 벌려노여 잇섯다. 그 증거물로 해서 사건은 급전즉하 너무나 뜻박으로 용이하게 해결될 것 가티 보이엿다. 무서운 살인범은 확정된 것이다.
얼마 안되여서 심문실 테불 압헤는 김영호가 호출이 되여서 어적게와 가티 M검사와 마조 안저 잇섯다.
『사실대로 말슴하시오. 그날 당신은 경성에 간 일이 업지요. 가령 갓다고 하드라도 일곱시까지에는 도라와서 이 동리의 어듸인가 잇섯지요. 당신이 그날 밤 집에 도라온 것은 열두시라고 하닛간 은행나무 아래나 숩속으로 도라다니엿겟구료』 M검사는 어적게와 달너서 확신에 찬 침착한 태도로 취조를 시작하엿다.
『몃번 무러보시여도 가튼 대답입니다. 저는 경성에서 곳장 도보로 집에 도라왓습니다. 은행나무 밋치나 숩 속을 갈 까닭이 업습니다.』 김영호는 태연히 대답하얏지만 창백한 안색에는 번민과 고통을 숨길 수는 업섯다. 그는 벌서 M검사가 가지고 잇는 증거물을 발견한 까닭이다. 이 변명하기 힘드는 증거를 엇더케 변명하여야 조흘가 하고 심증으로 무한히 애쓴 것이엿다.
『아 당신에게 알닐 것이 잇섯소.』 검사는 전혀 다른 실머리로부터 드러갓다.
『경숙이는 가느다란 칼로 심장을 찔니엿소. 필경 단도이겟소. 해부해 본 결과 판명이 되엿소. 즉 이 범죄에는 피가 잇소. 피해자는 피흘니고 죽엇소. 따라서 가해자의 의복에 피가 무덧슬는지도 알수 업다고 생각하는 것은 극히 자연스러운 일이 아니겟소』
『네 그럿습니까? 그럼 타살입니다 그려』 김영호는 절망하는 표정으로 중얼거렷다.
『그런대 가해자는 본대 의복에 피가 무덧다고 하면 그것은 엇더케 처분하겟소. 당신이 과연 어떠케 하겟소』
『그게 무삼 말삼이십니까?』하고 김영호는 밋친 사람처럼 큰 소래로 부르지젓다.
『그러한 심문은 마러 주십시오. 저는 알고 잇습니다. 형사가 저의 집 마루 밋트로 기여나가는 것을 보앗습니다. 저는 긔억이 업지만 마루 밋테 무엇인가 잇섯지요. 그것을 보여주십시요.』
『하하하 ... 당신은 연극을 잘하는구료. 당신 집 마루밋테 감추어 둔 것을 당신은 몰는다고 하는 말이구료. 그러면 보여드리겟소. 자- 이것이요. 이것은 당신의 쓰봉이 아니요. 그리고 이 피흔적은 무엇이요. 이것이 경숙씨의 피가 아니라고 말하겟소.』 검사는 위엄잇게 말하면서 다-꾸겨진 쓰봉을 김영호 압헤 내노왓다. 보닛간 쓰봉에는 이곳저곳에 점점이 검은피 흔적이 잇섯다.
『저는 전혀 까닭을 알 수가 업습니다. 어떠케 해서 이가튼 것이 마루 미테가 드러가 잇는지? 쓰봉은 확실히 저의 것입니다마는 피는 무슨 피-』지 알 수가 업습니다. 김영호는 포수에게 쪼끼여 가는 김생과 가티 눈을 둥그러케 뜨고 겨우 이러케 말하얏다.
『알 수 업다고 변명이 되는 것은 아니요』 검사는 더한층 침착한 어조로
『첫재는 K란 서명이 잇는 편지. 둘재는 기괴한 현장 부재증명의 불확립. 셋재는 이 쓰봉이요. 당신은 어느 것 한아나 변명할 수 잇는 반증(反證)을 보이지 못하얏지요. 이러한 증거품이 잇고， 그리고 변명이 성립되지 안는다고 하면 두말 할 여지 업시 범죄는 확정되엿다고 하야도 과언이 안이요. 나는 당신을 경숙씨 살해의 용의자(容疑者)로써 구인 할 수 박게 업소』 검사의 말이 끗나자 서장의 지시로 경관 두사람은 김영호에게로 달녀드러서 좌우 손을 붓잡엇다.
『기다려주십시오』 하고 김영호는 극도로 분개한＜58＞ 표정을 하면서 절규하엿다.
『당신네들이 모아 온 증거품은 우연한 것에 불과한 것이요. 그런 것으로 법망에 걸녀들고 견딀 수가 잇겟소. 첫재 나에게는 동긔가 업습니다. 내가 무삼 원한으로 약혼한 처녀를 죽이겟습니까?』
『동기라니? 건방진 소리를 하지 마러라』 서장이 큰 소래로 호령을 하엿다. 『너는 정부가 잇지 안느냐. 그 녀자와 떠러지길 실혀서 결혼을 하로하로 연긔하야 온 것이 아니냐? 이제는 더 연긔할 수 업는 처지에 다닥드리엿지 ... ...
너희 집과 경숙이 집과의 복잡한 관게로 이 결혼을 하로 더 연긔할 수 업는 상태에 이르고 말엇지! 만일 이 결혼이 불확립으로 끗나면 너의 집은 경숙이 집은 물론 동리 사람에게 대하야도 얼골을 들 수 업는 사정이 잇는 것이다.』 너는 궁경에 빠지고 말엇다. 그래서 드듸여 경숙이만 업새 바리면 하고 무서운 생각을 이르킨 것이다. 이래도 동긔가 업다고 주장하겟느냐? 여긔서는 세밀히 조사가 된 것이다』
『아아 함정이다. 나는 무서운 함정에 걸녀들고 말엇다』 김영호는 하도 어이가 업서서 대답할 말도 못하고 반 밋친 사람가치 몸만 비비틀고 잇섯다.

愛人 尹英愛의 證言
『영호군! 정신을 차리게. 자네는 일이 이러케 된 이상 바른말을 하게. 자네의 확실한 아리바이가 잇지 안은가. 경성에 잇는 녀자에게 증언하야 달라고 하면 고만 아닌가』하고 검사 뒤에 섯든 리만세가 뛰여나오면서 이러케 말하얏다. 그는 친구의 고민하는 것을 참아 볼 수가 업섯다.
『그러히 검사 여봅쇼. 경성 XX정 XXX번지를 조사하야 주십시요. 그곳에는 제가 아는 녀자가 잇습니다. 저는 사건이 *발하든날 밤 그곳에 잇섯습니다. 종로통과 본정통을 한박휘 휘-도랏다는 것은 거짓말입니다. 그 녀자의 일흠은 윤영애(尹英愛)라고 합니다. 영애에게 무러봐 주십시요.』 영호는 할 수 업시 애인의 일흠을 불늘 수 박게 업게 되엿다.
『하하하 ... 무삼 말을 하고 잇느냐 너의 정부의 증언을 미들수가 잇느냐. 그 녀자는 너의 공모자인지도 몰느겟다』 하고 서장은 랭소하얏다.
『그 녀자의 증언을 드를수속은 그러케 어려울 것이 업겟지요. 저 사람이 그가티 말하닛간 경찰 전화로 번서에 통지하시고 지급 취조한 후 회답하라고 기별하시는 것이 엇더켓습니까?』 검사의 주장대로 하여간 윤영애라는 녀자를 취조하야 보기로 결정이 되얏다. 윤영애는 아모럿튼 한번은 취조하야 보지 안흐면 안될 인물임으로.
기다리기 어려운 한시간이 지나서 주재소로부터 전화로 회담을 듯고 한사람의 형사가 달녀왓다. 『윤영애는 그적게 밤 김영호는 한번도 집에 오지 안엇습니다. 아아 잘못 아신 것이지요. 하고 대답하엿다고 합니다. 몃번 무러보아도 가튼 대답을 하엿다고 합니다.』
형사는 이러케 보고하엿다.
『그리고 윤영애는 그날 종일 집에 잇고 업섯다는 것은?』
『그것은 그 집주인 로파에게 무러 본 결과 확실히 외출하지 안코 집에 잇섯다고 합니다.』
『만일 윤영애가 그날 밤 외출하엿다고 하면 그 녀자에게도 경숙이 살해사건에 혐의를 바들 것이다. 그 녀자도 또한 김영호와 가튼 동긔를 가진 까닭이다. 그러나 외출하지 안엇고 애인인 김영호에 잇서서는 가장 불리한 증언을 한 것으로 보면 윤영애는 아모것도 몰느는 것 갓다. 즉 당연히 이 사건의 국외자로 보아도 관게 업슬 것이다』
M검사는 두 번재 김영호를 면소에 불너 세우고＜59＞ 형사에게서 드른 보고를 말하얏다.
『자- 이만하면 당신의 요구한 것은 드러준 것이요. 이제 별로 의의는 업겟지. 당신의 정부까지도 아리바이를 증명하야 주지 안는 이상 그만 단렴하는 편이 낫겟소.』
『거짓말입니다. 영애가 그러케 말할 까닭이 업습니다. 맛나보게 하야 주십시오. 당신네들은 아모러케나 해서 나를 함정에 빠트릴랴고 하는 것이 아닙니까?. 나를 경성으로 데불고 가서 윤영애와 대면식혀 주십시오』 김영호는 몹시 격분이 되여서 마루 창을 울리면서 말하얏다.
『염녀마라. 만나게 해주마.』 하고 경찰서장이 이러케 말하고 날카로운 눈으로 부하에게 명령하엿다. 두명의 경관은 뻣틔고 안나가랴는 김영호이 손을 잇끄러서 문박으로 끄러내엿다.
이곳 면장의 아들인 김영호는 과연 무서운 살인범인이엿든가? 혹시 그는 엇더한 사람으로 말미암아 버서날 수 업는 함정에 떠러진 것이 안인가. 진범인은 대체 어듸 숨어 잇는가.

探偵小說家의 探偵
S면 면장의 아들인 김영호가 그 약혼한 녀자 박경숙 참살범인의 용의자로 지목을 밧고 구인이 되엿다. 김영호는 어듸까지 무죄를 주장하엿지만 제일 변명하기 어려운 피무든 쓰봉의 증거품이 잇고 범죄 당야의 현장부재증명이 확립이 못되고 그 우에 그에게는 약혼녀자를 살해하얏스면 할 동긔까지 잇섯든 것이다.
김영호는 박경숙이를 실혀하엿다. 그에게는 윤영애라는 연인이 잇고 그 연애를 게속하기 위하야 결혼하기를 강박하는 약혼녀자는 눈에 가시가튼 방해물이엿다. 그러고 김영호 집은 박경숙의 집에 대하야 이 약혼을 해소할 수 업는 괴로운 의리가 잇섯다.
김영호가 결혼을 승낙하지 안으면 영호의 부친은 면장을 사직하고 S면을 떠나지 안으면 안될 만한 사정이 잇섯다. 한편 박씨네 집에서는 이것을 유일한 긔회로 역이고 강압적으로 결혼을 주창하여 왔다. 따라서 영호의 부모는 울면서 영호에게 량해를 구하엿다. 연애에 열중한 젊은 사나이가 불행한 입장에서 헤매 일 때 그 약혼녀자를 증오하고 저주하고 나중에는 살의까지 품기에 이르게 된 것은 잇슴직한 사실이다. 이것이 검사와 경찰관들의 의견이엿다.
동긔가 잇고 증거품이 잇고 아리바이가 업고 이제는 김영호의 유죄는 누구나 부인치 못하게 되엿다. 그런데 여기 김영호의 부모 외에 그의 무죄를 주장하는 사람이 한사람 잇섯다. 그 사람은 김영호의 친구이고 S촌에 귀류 중에 잇는 처음부터 이 사건에 접촉한 탐정소설작가인 이만세이엿다.
그는 유년시대부터 영호와는 죽마고우로 그의 심정을 잘 알고 잇슴으로 아모리 연애에 맹목적이 되엿다고 하드라도 그가 죄도 업는 녀자를 죽이엿슬리는 암만 생각하야 보아도 미들수 업는 것이엿다.
그는 이번 사건에 대하야 한가지 이상스러운 것을 생각하얏다. 그것은 살인이 행하기 전 5일전에 거위 가튼 장소에 사람 만한 제웅이 단도로 흉부를 찔니우고 너머진 것을 출발점으로 한 진실로 긔괴천만한 환상이엿다. 이러한 것을 검사에게 이야기하면 소설가의 공상이라고 일소에 부치고 말 것을 알므로 그것에 대하야는 아모 의견도 말하지 아니하엿다.
김영호는 무리를 주장하면서 구인이 된 이상 친우를 구하야 주는 의미로 그는 그 외 환상을 기초로 하고 한번 이 사건을 탐정하야 볼냐고 결심하엿다.

그러면 어되서부터 착수하여야 조흘는지 알이 업는 리만세는 갈피를 잡지 못하엿스나 무엇보다도 우선 경성에 가서 윤영애를 방문하야 볼 필요를 늣기엿다. 영호는 범죄 당야 영애의 집에 잇섯다고 주장하고 영애는 경찰에 대하야 분명이 그것을 부정하엿다. 이 긔묘한 모순은 대체 무엇에서부터 온 것인가? 먼저 그것을 해결하는 것이 선결문제라고 생각하였다.
영호가 구인당한 이튼날 아츰 만세는 경성으로 갓다. 물론 윤영애와는 초대면이 될 것이다. 이 연인은 영호가 누구에게나 일체 비밀히 하여 왓슴으로 누구 한사람 아는 사람이 업섯다. 오즉 검사의 취조할 때 영호가 고백하엿슴으로 처음으로 그의 주소라든지 성명을 알게된 것이다.
리만세는 정거장에서 그리 머지안은 윤영애의 주소를 방문하엿다. 소 공장지대에 들녀싸은 조고마한 초가집이 그집이엿다. 안내를 청하닛간 륙십이 넘은 로파가 눈을 부비면서 나왓다.
『윤영애씨를 뵈오러 왓습니다.』하고 말을 하닛간 『네, 누구말입니까?』 하고 두번재 무러본다. 눈도 어둡고 귀도 먹은 듯 하엿다.
『댁에 세들고 잇는 윤영애라는 녀자가 잇지요. 그 녀자를 좀 보러 왓읍니다.』 하고 리만세는 로파의 귀 갓가히 대고 큰 목소리로 말하엿다. 그 로파는 그제야 아라듯고 드러 가드니 얼마 잇다가 나와서 드러오라고 하엿다.
리만세는 따로 뚝 떠러저 잇는 뒷방으로 향하얏다.
『별안간 이러케 와서 실례가 만습니다. 저는 S촌에 사는 김영호의 친구 되는 리만세라고 하는 사람입니다.』 하고 인사를 하닛간 그 녀자는
『저는 윤영애 라고 합니다.』 하고 붓그러운 듯이 고개를 숙으리고 잠잠하엿다. 보닛간 영애의 모양이 좀 의외이엿다. 김영호가 그가치 연모하는 녀자임으로＜60＞ 틀님업시 미인일 것이라고 상상하고 왓섯는데 지금 눈압헤 안저잇는 윤영애는 암만보아도 미인이라고는 볼 수가 업고 흡사히 매음부와 가튼 늣김을 갓게 하엿다.
머리는 히사시가미로 트럿는대 그 비슨 모양이 몹시 서툴너서 이마에 너털거리는 머리가 눈섭을 감출 만치 떠러저 잇고 얼굴에는 분과 베니를 함부로 발는데다가 이가 쑤시는지 오른편 빰에는 큰 고약을 부치엿다.
리만세는 김영호가 무엇에 반해서 이 녀자를 사랑하엿는지 의심을 내면서 하여간 김영호의 구인당한 전말을 들녀주고 범죄의 당일 그는 정말 윤영애를 방문하지 안엇느냐고 무러보앗다. 그러닛간 그 녀자 얼마나 냉정한 녀자이랴 영애는 자기 애인이 구인 당한 것을 슬퍼하는 눈치도 업고 간단하게 그 날 김영호는 한번도 온 일이 업다는 뜻을 말하얏다.

行方不明된 尹英愛
리만세는 말하야가는 동안 점점 이상한 생각을 갓게 되얏다. 윤영애라는 녀자가 감정을 조곰도 갓지 안은 인조인간이냐 그 외에 무어와 가티 생각이 드러서 께름직하게 보엿다.
『그러면 영애씨께서는 이번 사건을 어떠케 생각하십니까? 영호군이 살인을 할 수 잇는 사람으로 생각하십니까?』 약간 분개한 어조로 말하여도 상대자는 변치 안는 무표정으로
『그분이 그러한 일을 하시리라고는 생각지 안치만 ...』 하는 진실로 무엇을 암시하는 듯한 말이엿다. 이 녀자는 너무 붓그러워서 감정을 죽이고 잇는가. 그러치 안으면 정말 냉혈동물인지 그러치 안으면 누가 알냐? 김영호를 충동 식혀서 박경숙이를 살해 식힌 장본인인 까닭으로 그 죄의 공포로 말미암아 이러한 모양을 하고 잇슬가? 전혀 정체를 알 수 업는 괴상한 녀자가티 인정이 되엿다.
그 집 뒤가 정거장 근처임으로 끈이지 안코 긔관차의 왕래하는 긔적소래가 울녀올 때마다 영해는 깜작깜작 몸을 흔들면서 몹시 놀낫다. 영애는 로파의 집 아랫방을 비러서 혼자 살면서 직업부인의 생활을 하는 것 가타 보이엿다.
『어듸 단이십니까?』 하고 무르니까.
『네, 두어 달 전까지 백화점에서 일을 보앗서요. 지금은 아모데도 ...』 하고 입에서만 우물우물 하야 버렷다. 엇더케든지해서 정체를 알려고 이말 저말 무러보앗스나 영애은 침묵할 때가 만코 말을 할 때에도 리만세를 바로 보지 안코 고개를 숙으린 채 대답을 하는 것이엿다.
결국 리만세는 윤영애의 침묵을 어떠케 할 수가 업서서 우선 이 집을 떠나갈랴고 인사를 하고 신을 신고 마당에 내려 왓지만 윤영애는 방에서 고개만 숙으려 인사할 뿐으로 내려오지는 안엇다.
대문간까지 주인 로파가 문을 걸너 나왓슬 때 리만세는 어듸 하고 그 로파의 귀에다 대고
『한 사흘 전에 윤영애를 보라 왼 남자가 오지 안엇습니까. 제 나희쯤 되는』 하고 무러보앗다.
『글세요. 모르겟는데요.』 하는 대답이엿다. 점점 자세한 것을 무러 보니까 이 집은 모녀가 사는데 딸은 전매국 직공이라 아츰 일즉이 가서 저녁늣게 도라오고 아래방만 윤영애에게 빌녀주엇는데 그를 보러오는 손님은 마음대로 출입하고 밤늣게 손님이 도라갈 때는 영애가 나서서 문을 닷고 드러오닛간 손님이 누가 왓는지 전혀 몰늘때가 만타고 하는 것이다. 리만세는 첫번 탐정의 아모러한 수확이 업시 곧 집을 나와 버렷다. 그리고 몃거름 거러가는데 뒤에서
『아 당신도 오시엿습니까』 하는 소리가 들녓슴으로 깜작 놀나서 도라다보니깐 S촌 보통학교 취조실에서 낫치 닉어진 경관의 한사람이엿다. 거짓말 할 수도 업게 되고 윤영애를 보고 간다고 하닛간 『그녀자가 집에 잇서요. 맛침 잘되엿습니다. 그 녀자를 취조하게 되여서 지금 호출하려 가는 길입니다. 그러면 실례하겟습니다.』 경관은 이러케 말하면서 부리낫케 윤영애의 하숙으로 뛰여갓다.
리만세는 그냥 그 자리를 떠나가기가 궁금하야 가로에 서서 경관이 문안으로 드러가는 것을 보고 잇섯다. 경관에게 붓들려 가는 윤영애가 엇더한 ＜61＞얼굴을 가지고 나올가 하고 야릇한 호기심이 이러나서 기다리고 잇스려닛간 조곰 잇다가 문이 열니드니 경관이 나오는데 그 뒤에는 윤영애가 보이지 안엇다. 그뿐 아니라 경관은 리만세가 그곳에 아즉 서 잇는 것을 보고는 성난 음성으로
『윤영애가 어듸 잇습니까. 그러케 사람을 조롱하십니까?』 하고 말하엿다.
『무엇요. 업다니요?』 리만세는 어이가 업서서 말이 나오지 안엇다.
『업슬리가 업습니다. 지금 내가 막 보고 나온 길인데요. 고동안 박게 나올 시간도 못되고 정말 업습니까?』 하고 리만세는 미들 수 업다는 듯이 말하얏다.
『정말 업습니다. 주인 로파에게 무러보앗스나 요령부득이고 아래 방문을 여러 보앗스나 쥐색기 한 마리도 업슴되다. 아마 뒷겻으로 해서 외출하엿는지도 몰으겟습니다.』
『뒷겻은 정거장 속인데! 하여간 갓치 가서 조사하야 봅시다. 업슬니가 업는데』 이러케 말하면서 두 사람은 그 집 문을 열고 드러갓다. 로파에게 무러보기도 하고 왼 집안을 모조리 뒤저보앗스나 윤영애는 잇지 안엇다.
『이 창으로 해서 도망가지나 안엇슬가』 경관이 들창을 열고 말하엿다.
『도망을 하다니 그 사람이 도망갈 리유가 잇습니까?』 하고 리만세가 무럿다.
『만약 그 녀자가 공범자라고 하면 경관의 소리를 듯고 도망을 안가리라고는 단정을 할 수가 업스닛간. 그러치만 ...』 하고 경관은 하고 창박을 내다보앗다.
『박은 이가티 놉흔데 녀자의 몸으로 뛰여나릴 수도 업게 되고 그리고 선로(線路)에는 공부가 일들을 하고 잇는데』
창박근 몹시 놉고 정거장 구내가 되여서 긔차 선로가 여러 줄기로 깔녀 잇는데 그 중의 하나를 수선하느라고 사 오인의 공부가 곡광이를 가지고 일들을 하고 잇섯다.
『여보 지금 이 창에서 뛰여나린 사람이 업섯소?』 하고 경관이 큰소리로 무럿다. 공부들은 다가티 이쪽을 보면서 뛰여나린 사람이 업다고 대답하엿다.
윤영애가 뛰여나렷다고 하드라도 공부의 눈에 들키게 뛰여 나릴리도 업고 혹 정거장 도로 안으로 드러간다고 하면 공부의 눈엔 띄웟슬 것이다.
그 용궁아가씨가‹° 분을 하야케 바른 요괴와 가튼 녀자는 긔체로 화하야 증발한 것일가 하고 생각할 수 박게 달리 해석할 수가 업섯다.-(次號完)-＜62＞
＜58-62＞