**Header Section:**
Magazine Title: 삼천리 第七卷 第十號
Publication Date: 1935년 11월 01일
Article Title: 現代 『長安豪傑』 찾는(座談會) (Finding the Contemporary 'Heroes of Chang'an' (Roundtable Discussion))
Author: 白樂仙人
Article Type: 대담·좌담 (Interview/Roundtable Discussion)

**Body Text Translation:**

Finding the Contemporary 'Heroes of Chang'an'
						Paek Nak Senin

Topics
1. Who are Seoul's representative fine men and handsome men?
2. Who are the reputed beauties in Seoul?
3. Who are the generous spenders and chivalrous men?
4. What things would be good to have in Seoul?
5. Hidden talents in the 'Film and Theater' field and stories of tears and laughter during regional tours.

Attendees
Yi Sŏ-gu
Pok Hye-suk
Our company's Paek Nak Senin

Held on October 15th, a warm late autumn day, upstairs at "Ŭnbyŏkchang" (銀碧莊) in Sŏngbuk-tong, outside the city.
Introduction of Attendees
A brief word of introduction = Mr. Yi Sŏ-gu, whose pen name is Kohŏm (孤帆), worked for over 10 years as a reporter for various newspapers like Tong-A, Chosŏn, and Maeil Sinbo. He has written over 100 scripts performed by various theater troupes and penned lyrics for over 300 popular record songs. His footsteps have reached North and South Manchuria, Tokyo, Osaka, and every nook and cranny of Korea's 13 provinces. Not only is he eloquent and multi-talented, but few know the inner workings of Seoul society as well as he does. When he opens his mouth, harsh words, Bernard Shaw-esque humor (諧謔), and sarcasm (皮肉) pour out. He's an eccentric talent (怪才) who speaks over 30,000 words daily and has wide acquaintance (廣面), knowing and greeting perhaps ten thousand people, high and low, among Seoul's 400,000 residents.
Madam Pok Hye-suk - During her studies in Tokyo, she co-founded the "T'owŏrhoe" (土月會) with Pak Sŭng-hŭi and others, earning fame for playing Katusha as well as Matsui Sumako did. Afterwards, she spent 10 years in this field as a movie actress and stage protagonist. During that time, she also toured Shanghai, Tokyo, and Fengtian (奉天), traveling widely and striving to introduce this land's folk arts. She now runs the "Venus" (버-너스) coffee shop (喫茶店) in Insadong, Seoul. She is a lady with a rich history, having even been listed on the kisaeng register (妓籍) for a time due to financial hardship.

Who are the Chivalrous Men of Chang'an?
Paek Nak Senin - Who are the representative fine men of Seoul's Chang'an? Handsome, charming, gallant (호활하고), desirable, those kinds of fine men. Not just run-of-the-mill people, but social gentlemen whose reputation (선성) is known throughout the eight provinces of Korea. And let's agree not to use honorifics (경어) like Mr. So-and-so (氏) or Teacher So-and-so (先生) in this discussion. There's a greater sense of closeness (親愛) in speaking casually (훗두루).
Pok Hye-suk - It must be Yŏ Un-hyŏng (呂運亨). With his Kaiser mustache, Mussolini gait (뭇소리니 거름), resonant voice, eloquence, wherever you put him, he's radiant like the sun or moon (해 뜬듯, 달 뜬듯). A handsome figure (수링감), truly one against a hundred (일당백).
Yi Sŏ-gu - One against a hundred, yes, but he belongs in the category of fine men (好男子), not handsome men (美男子), no matter how you look at it. A handsome man should have the face of Valentino, the bearing of Du Mu (杜牧之), the literary talent of Li Bai (李太白)...
Paek Nak Senin - Literary talent can probably be omitted. <83>
Pok Hye-suk - Hearing that, it seems so. Yŏ Un-hyŏng is a fine man. And his character (인품) is good. At some gathering, perhaps a reception for some soccer team? I saw him speak then, and he was a very refreshing (시언 시언하고) and affable (서글 서글한) elder (어룬). He didn't seem to distinguish between high and low status, and didn't put on airs (젠체 빼지 안코). (Photo is Mr. Yi Sŏ-gu)
Yi Sŏ-gu - They say because of Yŏ Un-hyŏng, people like Song Chin-u, Pang Eung-mo, and Yi Sang-hyŏp feel embarrassed to act like newspaper presidents. A newspaper president is supposed to sit solidly, tucked away in a corner like a stone Buddha, rarely moving – that's how they were known, weighty and imposing. But look at this man! Every other day (하로 건너큼씩), he's officiating weddings for all sorts of people (된 놈 안된 놈의 결혼식 주례(主禮)). If there's an athletic meet somewhere, he rushes over to cheer. He mingles with young students like friends, running around with them. His social circle is wide, and he pops in and out of Chŏngno intersection four or five times a day. To us, he seems like an active, warm-hearted, and charmingly good (양증인 조흔) newspaper president, but in the eyes of other newspaper presidents who adhere to the gentlemanly virtues of the old 'wooden virtue' types (태고목덕씨), he must be an eyesore.
Pok Hye-suk - That's nice. That elder (어룬) sometimes comes to our Venus (비-너스) cafe and eats chocolate (쪼-고렛), like a child...
Senin - So, shall we ultimately count Yŏ Un-hyŏng as the heroic man (호걸남아) of the era? Since we mentioned newspaper presidents, couldn't Song Chin-u (宋鎭禹) be considered a fine or handsome man?
Yi Sŏ-gu - Regrettably, the lack of a mustache is his downfall. Without a mustache, his broad face just looks wide and long like a Chaeryŏng pear tree leaf (재령나무 리벌가치). That's the problem.
Pok Hye-suk - That's right. Because of the mustache, there's no focal point, no sense of refinement. That's a flaw even to our eyes.
Senin - What about Pang Eung-mo (方應謨) of the Chosŏn Ilbo?
Yi Sŏ-gu - His gaze (안광) has an iron color (鐵色). Not fair-complexioned (히여멀금 하지 못하고), his facial color is rather blunt (무둑둑한), so he's definitely not handsome. Too many wrinkles on his face, and his overall outline lacks brightness (陽明).
Pok Hye-suk - I saw him once from afar (먼- 발층에서), and his features weren't bright (환-하지 못하더구만). But even if not handsome or fine, he seems like a blunt but weighty elder (어룬) for a man.
Senin - Then what about Yi Sang-hyŏp (李相協)?
Pok Hye-suk - When he walks quietly with downcast eyes, looking demure, <84> he's the graceful lady (요조숙녀) type. How can he be so modest? Like a maiden with braided hair (머리따하드린 숫색씨).
Yi Sŏ-gu - Humph, his voice is chilly (쌀쌀하지), his face seems to carry a cold wind. That's the first impression he gives everyone, but once he starts to trust someone, there's no one who puts on such a kind (상양하고), affectionate, and gentle face. He's old now, but 10 years ago, he was definitely handsome. How many romances he must have had because of that.
Pok Hye-suk - Yes, he must have been handsome when young. He must have exuded a delicate and graceful (戀戀嫋嫋) charm like a weeping willow.
Yi Sŏ-gu - I wouldn't dare say he's *the* handsome man, but he's probably a fourth cousin (四寸同婿) to handsome men. Like the term ape (類人猿), he's a handsome-like type (類美男型), a handsome analogue (類似型).
Senin - Though he seems chilly, he appears to be loyal, and it seems he has many disciples (弟子) willing to offer up a piece of their lives for him.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Kim XX, Yu Kwang-yŏl, Chŏng In-ik are all like that.
Senin - You're also a fervent follower (子分 - kobun), aren't you?
Yi Sŏ-gu - I'm not in the orthodox faction (正統派). Maybe a collateral branch (傍系). In any case, he's my benefactor (恩人). I came from a rural corner, wearing a reed hat and leggings (삿갓쓰고 감발치고), looking for the Tong-A Ilbo office. I said I wanted to take the reporter's (긔자) test. Hearing my reputation (선성), he must have thought, how bold (대담한가). He recognized this country bumpkin and made me into a person.
Senin - The conversation keeps going astray (빗구로 가네). Please hurry and find Seoul's handsome men. How about Pak Yŏng-ch'ŏl (朴榮喆) or Min Tae-sik (閔大植)?
Yi Sŏ-gu - They're strangers to handsomeness. But Pak Yŏng-ch'ŏl seems weighty when you meet him. You feel a kind of pressure (威壓) from his round pillar-like (두리기둥 가튼) sturdy body. Min Tae-sik is neither handsome nor fine.
Pok Hye-suk - I saw Min Tae-sik just once from afar, and he's not handsome. His face is just long.
Senin - Among the eloquent lawyers? How about Kim Pyŏng-no? - Too talkative, way too talkative.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Sin T'ae-ak (辛泰嶽) is young and good-looking. Though his face lacks a bit of color.
Pok Hye-suk - Sin T'ae-ak is probably the best. Although his face has a slightly strained air. (Photo is Madam Pok Hye-suk) <85>
Yi Sŏ-gu - Who else is there? Go ahead and take a good look in the lawyers' waiting room (控室) at the courthouse. All the world's ugly men (不男 - futoko) are gathered there. Hahaha.
Senin - The lawyer community gets the lowest marks. Yet, lawyers are supposedly most welcomed at restaurants (요리점). Then how about the education world (敎育界)? Among principals like Hyŏn Sang-yun (玄相允), Ch'oe Kyu-dong (崔奎東), Yu Ŏk-kyŏm (兪億兼), Kim Yong-mu (金用茂), O Kŭng-sŏn (吳兢善), and other famous figures.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Don't even mention it. Not a single one. Not even a handsome man deserving a passing grade of sixty points (륙십점 급제끗).
Pok Hye-suk - Among them, Cho Tong-sik (趙東植) might be better.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Hmm, hearing that, it seems so. Cho Tong-sik is a bit short, but his gait and features are elegantly arranged, making him a handsome type. Especially in the old days, women would have called such a person handsome.
Senin - Everyone's rejected. Can there really be so few handsome men? How about Yi Kwang-su (李光洙)?
Yi Sŏ-gu - His yellowish eyes and soft voice attract people. But he's certainly not handsome.
Senin - Yang Chu-sam (梁柱三)?
Yi Sŏ-gu - A '曰' character face (갈曰字). Just radiant, that's all.
Senin - Chŏng In-kwa (鄭仁果), Yi Tae-wi (李大偉), Kim Ch'ang-je (金昶濟)?
Yi Sŏ-gu - Kim Ch'ang-je is the handsome type, definitely. If he were 20 years younger, he would have been called handsome.
Senin - Some time ago, a few women from the Kŭn'uhoe chose the 'Five Handsome Men of the Era' (當代五美男子). Do you remember who they were? The late Min T'ae-wŏn (閔泰媛), Dr. Yi Sŏng-yong (李星鎔) who went to Shanghai, Han Ki-ak (韓基岳) who was then the editor-in-chief of the Chosŏn Ilbo, and An Sŏk-chu (安碩柱), etc.
Yi Sŏ-gu - An Sŏk-chu is still handsome today. He's a handsome man unprecedented before and likely unsurpassed after in the newspaper world. But Han Ki-ak is no longer the handsome type. Nowadays, the world prefers the sports-man type...
Pok Hye-suk - An Sŏk-chu is the best among them. His face doesn't age easily. And although he sulks/drinks too much (쥐정), Hyŏn Chin-kŏn (玄鎭健) is also handsome. His complexion has faded (褪色) now, but Chŏng In-ik (鄭寅翼) also had a fine face. If it weren't for the curve in his nose, Ch'oe Tok-kyŏn (崔獨鵑) could also be considered a handsome analogue type.
Senin - Well, we've scanned that much. Now, let's do a final tally (총결산) <86> and pick one representative handsome man for Seoul.
Pok Hye-suk - There is one, there is! Pak Hŭng-sik (朴興植), it's him.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Right! Pak Hŭng-sik is number one this year. When he smiles and his pleasant nose and charmingly shaped lips part slightly, many beauties must follow him.
Pok Hye-suk - Among gentlemen, Pak Hŭng-sik is number one (남버원). His skin is fair, his features have clear outlines, not petty or fussy (오종종하지 안코), and especially his affectionate tone of voice. When I was on the kisaeng register (妓籍), I sometimes served him at banquets (좌석에 뫼신적 잇는데) in restaurants (료리점); he's a very likeable person.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Wait. If Pak Hŭng-sik is Grade A (甲), there's a Grade B (乙級) handsome man following him. That's Sin Hŭng-u (申興雨). Nowadays (요지간), he doesn't even wear red ties anymore.
Pok Hye-suk - That's right, Sin Hŭng-u. He really doesn't seem to age either.
Senin - There must be many among movie or stage actors?
Pok Hye-suk - Han Il-song (韓一松), who recently played Yi Toryŏng (리도령) in *Ch'unhyangjŏn*, is handsome, and Yi Kyŏng-sŏn (李慶善) also has a fine face.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Kang Hong-sik (姜弘植) also has a manly face. Na Un-kyu (羅雲奎) has strong facial lines, but he's not handsome or fine.
Pok Hye-suk - There's Paek Myŏng-kŏn (白命乾) with his fine physique. Though being a bit too tall is a flaw-.
(The section on Chivalrous Heroes (俠氣잇는 豪傑男兒) will be in another issue)

Who are Seoul's Representative Beauties?
Senin - We've scanned the men enough. Now, let's move to the women's side. Who is Chang'an's number one beauty?
Yi Sŏ-gu - I saw exactly one. Yi Tŏk-yo (李德耀). When the late Ch'oe Sŏ-hae (崔海曙) was ill at the Medical College Hospital (醫專病院), I went to visit him, and right in front of me stood this woman. I was so struck by her beauty that my heart stopped. Her fair skin glowing with an amber hue (琥珀色), her reddish, burning lips (입설), her deeply passionate eyes, her ink-black hair (먹장가튼 머리) – she was truly an unsurpassed beauty (절색) from every angle. It was as if Yang Guifei, Cleopatra (쿠레오파토라), and Dietrich (데-도릿히) were bundled together, boiled, all their flaws removed, and remade anew. A Greek Venus <87> goddess (女神).
As everyone knows, honestly, has anyone seen as many women as I have? Hundreds? Thousands? Among them, I discovered in Yi Tŏk-yo a beauty who radiates cultivation (敎養), intellect (理智), and intelligence (聰明), while also opening one's heart refreshingly like the clear wind and bright moon (淸風明月).
I only saw her once – later I heard she went with her husband Han Wi-kŏn (夫君韓偉健) to Beijing (北京) or somewhere and regrettably died away from home (客死).
Senin - Beauty meets misfortune (미인박명). Being so pretty, she died young. Yun Paek-nam (尹白南) also once mentioned Yi Tŏk-yo as the representative beauty, just as you said.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Unprecedented and unrepeatable. And then there was the late Song Kye-wŏl (宋桂月), she was also a beauty. Where did I first discover her? Was it spring some years ago? Cherry blossoms (사꾸라꼿) were starting to bloom in Ch'anggyŏngwŏn, and swallows returned from the south to the streets of Chang'an – it was the fourth summer month (하사월). I was passing by Chŏngjaok (丁子屋) with Ch'oe Tok-kyŏn (崔獨鵑) when this tall, slender young woman (묘령 녀성) with sparkling eyes, looking as refreshing and splendidly vibrant (시언하고 와자자하게 생긴) as a beach rose on Myŏngsasimni, walked towards us. At first, I just thought her face was quite pretty, but her appearance from behind (뒷맵시) as she walked was swift like a swallow full of water (물찬제비가치 샛듯한), truly entrancing (황홀하여지데). Especially the lines of her two legs (각선미), slender like a crane's (학두름의 다리), were truly a great work of art. So, mesmerized by her leg lines, step by step, I followed her all the way to Hansŏng Books (漢城圖書) near Andong intersection. Then I met a friend and asked; it was Song Kye-wŏl.
Pok Hye-suk - I saw Song Kye-wŏl when she worked at Kaebyŏk-sa. Being a woman from Hamgyŏng Province (함경도 녀자), her feet and hands were unattractively large (멋업시 커서), which was a flaw, but she was indeed a beauty. Though I'm a woman, I also like such women. Being affable, it feels like a cool breeze blows when you are near her.
Senin - So Song Kye-wŏl was also a case of beauty meeting misfortune. Weren't there any among the socialist women?
Yi Sŏ-gu - There were. Cho Wŏn-suk (趙元淑), who followed Yang Myŏng (梁明) to Shanghai (上海), had a child, and is now living with her husband's family on Cheju Island (濟州島), was attractive. A bit sensual (육감적), lacking a noble (노-불한) quality, though. Also, this was probably when I was a reporter for the Tong-A Ilbo. I went to the Pukp'unghoegwan (北風會館) <88> at 84 Chaedong for news gathering (긔사채집), and out came this woman – how could her skin be so fine? A girl of 17 or 18, looking almost like a transparent body (透明體) made only of milk (牛乳) and eggs, her face, arms, and legs radiating glossiness (윤택흐르는). It was the first time I saw such a thing in Korea. That was Kang Agŭnnia (姜아근니아). Later, she also frequented places like Yu Ch'i-jang (?) and suffered hardships here and there, and her once beautiful physique became unremarkable, but she truly had physical beauty.
Senin - Born in Russia (로서아), raised in Russia, she had a Western style (洋風). She was considered a top beauty for a time. Besides her, how were Chŏng Ch'il-sŏng (丁七星), Hŏ Chŏng-suk (許貞淑), Sim Ŭn-suk (沈恩淑), Hwang Sin-dŏk (黃信德)?
Yi Sŏ-gu - None were beauties. To force it, they were ladies who *almost* became beauties.
Pok Hye-suk - But if you look closely (뜨더 볼나치면) here and there, you could say there were many among the socialist women of the time who had pretty eyes (눈 한가지 엡분이), a pretty nose (코 한가지 엡분이), pretty individual parts (部分品이 엡분 이).
Yi Sŏ-gu - Back then, in the Kŭn'uhoe, there was a woman named Kim Chŏng-wŏn (金貞媛) from Ch'ŏngjin, Hamgyŏng Province. Her basic quality (바탕) was clearly that of a beauty.
Senin - During the Kŭn'uhoe era, there was a time when it seemed the contemporary beauties had gathered there. Take the public funeral for Yi Sang-jae (李商在社會葬) – on that day, among the tens of thousands in the crowd, the women with beautiful faces standing beside the bier were all from the Kŭn'uhoe group. Not just Kŭn'uhoe, but weren't there many beauties among the students studying in Tokyo (東京留學生)? Why?
Yi Sŏ-gu - Who says otherwise? Beauties of that time include Hwang Kuk-yŏng (黃菊榮), who became Yŏn Hak-nyŏn's wife, and Ms. Kang, who became Kim P'al-bong's wife – there were many. But now they've all had children, wear their hair in buns (떡게머리하여이고), and have all wilted (シタレ). You can't find their old appearances now.
Pok Hye-suk - Flowers don't stay red for ten days (화무십일홍), I suppose. When we were in Tokyo, there were many friends called beauties, quite the beauties indeed, but in just 7 or 8, or ten-odd years, all those fine faces withered away. It's a pity.
Senin - Not then – weren't there any among the very first group of students abroad?
Yi Sŏ-gu - The very first group included Hŏ Yŏng-suk (許英肅), Na Hye-sŏk (羅惠錫), Kim Myŏng-sun (金明淳), Yu Yŏng-jun (劉英俊). Even giving ten steps of leeway, there wasn't even a fourth cousin of Yang Guifei among them. Just that their style was novel back then, so they were called 'modern girls' (모던껄) in a good sense, and their fame was ten, twenty times greater <89> than their faces justified.
Pok Hye-suk - Among them, the one who stood out was probably Kim Myŏng-sun (金明淳). She wrote poetry and novels, ultimately making a literary name (文名) for herself as a female writer–
Senin - Aren't there any among the students who studied in America (아메리카)?
Pok Hye-suk - There's Pak In-dŏk (朴仁德). She's aged now, but if you just pushed back her prominent cheekbones (광대뼈) a bit, erased the wrinkles on her forehead with 'gold cream' (골드크림), and made her ten years younger, she could still reign as the unrivaled beauty (독판미인) of Chang'an. Her voice is smooth like a peeled pear (깍근 배갓치), and when she talks, her eye movements, nose gestures, those sophisticated gestures (췌스추어) make her very likeable.
Yi Sŏ-gu - That's right, Pak In-dŏk. Pak In-dŏk is cheerful, refreshing, and looks dignified. In her prime – say, before going to America, when she attended Ewha Haktang (梨花學堂) – wasn't her fame immense as 'eloquent Pak In-dŏk,' 'beautiful Pak In-dŏk,' 'songstress Pak In-dŏk'?
Senin - How about Kim Hwal-lan (金活蘭)? Of Ewha Women's College (이화전문)–
Pok Hye-suk - Perhaps because she hasn't married, she doesn't seem to age quickly.
Yi Sŏ-gu - She's short. Maybe to compensate for her short stature, she puffs out her chest when she walks these days (요지간은)–. But she's not a beauty. Short and with a narrow forehead.
Pok Hye-suk - When will they all get married–.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Speaking of something else, a hidden beauty is Kim Ch'an-yŏng's (金讚永) wife. Not the lawyer Kim Ch'an-yŏng, but the Kim Ch'an-yŏng who used to distribute films. She's a beauty. Her hometown is said to be Chinnamp'o (鎭南浦).
Senin - Nowadays (요지간), rather than the education world or the circle of prominent wives (영부인계), it seems there are many in the record industry (레코-드계) who are not only popular (인긔) but also have splendid faces.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Many, indeed. Na Sŏn-kyo (羅仙嬌) has a cute face, and Chŏn Ok (全玉) has a fine face too–
Pok Hye-suk - Chŏn Ok has a slightly ill-tempered look (암상구즌 데 잇지만), but overall, she's a well-put-together (잘 째인) beauty type. And the late Ch'oe Hyang-hwa (崔香花) was also a beauty, and Sŏnu Il-sŏn (鮮于一扇) has a simple (수수하게) and precious face.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Sŏnu Il-sŏn is decent. She lacks any mischievousness (얄구진 데가 업서), is straightforward (성큼하고) and honest, so–
Senin - How about Wang Su-bok (王壽福), who is said to be the most popular?
Yi Sŏ-gu - Sensual (肉感的), but not a beauty.
Pok Hye-suk - Kim Pok-hŭi (金福姬) is also famous, but not a beauty. And among actresses, Mun Ye-bong (文藝峰), who played Ch'unhyang in *Ch'unhyangjŏn*, is decent. Her head is a bit small, <90> so the parting line (가로마자리) is short, which is a flaw. Women look more elegant (上品) with a long parting line.
Senin - Alright, now let's move over to the kisaeng (긔생) category. Who are the famous kisaeng (명긔) of the era? Not those famous for dancing and singing, but flower kisaeng (花草妓生).
Yi Sŏ-gu - Many. Kim San-ho-ju (金珊瑚珠), now retired and running the Chosŏngwan (朝鮮舘) at Chinsŭn Kogae (즌고개), is also a Sŏdo (Western provincial) beauty with well-defined features.
Pok Hye-suk - There are hundreds of kisaeng in Chang'an, but Pak Ok-hwa (朴玉花), who used to be with Paek Myŏng-kŏn, was a bit too tall, but she was a crane-like beauty with fresh charm (新鮮味).
Yi Sŏ-gu - Also Kim Kŭm-do (金錦桃) was a beauty. Rather than her face being delicately pretty (아기자기하게 곱다기보다), her overall impression was pleasantly rustic (구수하게 조코). And she doesn't run out of conversation topics (話題) when sitting with guests. She knows about everything, and is polite (공순하고), so she's never tiresome to socialize with at banquets (宴會席).
Pok Hye-suk - Shall I chime in too? Yi Hwa-sŏn (李花仙), Sin Myŏng-ju (申明珠), Pang Wŏl-sŏn (方月仙) are also beauties.
Senin - Yu Kŭm-do (柳錦桃)?
Yi Sŏ-gu - A prima donna (푸리마돈나). Never seems to age, always surrounded by the fragrance of youth (靑春의 香氣). The "eternal maiden."
Pok Hye-suk - Ch'oe Ok-hŭi (崔玉嬉) is also a beauty, though her face looks a bit impoverished, which is a shame.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Song Yŏn-hwa (宋蓮花) is certainly famous. Good entertainer, good at pleasing guests (손님 비유 잘 마추고) – refreshing, and quite an experienced hand (老將) too. Generally, although there are 300-400 kisaeng in various guilds (권번) in Seoul now, the ones who are constantly called by guests for their looks and talent number only about twenty.

Who are the Patrons? And Who are the Generous, Chivalrous Men Who Spend Well?
Senin - For musicians (音樂家) or actresses (女俳優), who provides money, the protectors of art (藝術保護者) in a good sense, or 'patrons' (파토론) as they say nowadays – who can we count in Seoul's Chang'an? <91>
Yi Sŏ-gu - There was the rich man Yi Yong-mun (李容汶) for Yun Sim-dŏk (尹心悳). During the T'owŏrhoe (土月會) period, he helped Yun Sim-dŏk a bit. But it was different in nature from, say, Ōkura Kihachirō (大倉喜八郞) funding Fujiwara Yoshie (藤原義江) to study in Paris. However, if you look for someone who donated a large sum of clean (깨긋한) money for the arts in Korea, it's Pak Sŭng-hŭi (朴承喜). He cleanly put up 20,000 won at that time for T'owŏrhoe. 20,000 won back then is more than 80,000 won now. He was a thankful person.
Pok Hye-suk - As for someone who spent money on music, when Paek In-ki's son Paek Myŏng-kŏn returned from studying in Germany and formed the "Korean Jazz Band" (코리안째스뺀드), he spent money in a good sense. And perhaps Mr. Yi Sŏ-gu, sitting here, giving 500 hours' worth (오백시간) all at once for a beauty named Pak Yŏng-sŏn or someone, that might be the "patron record" (파도론레코-드). Hoho.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Let's not talk about such embarrassing things. Let's agree to cover up our personal matters (신변관게) here and just proceed with other people's stories. Hahaha.
Pok Hye-suk - According to recent rumors, Kim XX bought a 7,000 won house for Chŏn XX, and a 3,000 won jewel ring – the rumors were quite noisy.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Ch'oe X-hak also recently took in Ch'oe X-yŏn, and supposedly gave her 10,000 won...
Senin - There must be many patrons who put up money for the motion picture (活動寫眞) business?
Yi Sŏ-gu - Of course, many. Even when Na Un-kyu produced several works, sponsors (후원자) provided the money. When Yi Ku-yŏng (李龜永) or others released works, it was all because hidden sponsors put up the money. If you look for such people, there are tons.
Pok Hye-suk - However, in the past, there were few who put up money with a purely clean heart, truly meaning to protect music or theater. Almost all patrons (파도론) had ulterior motives. For example, if someone gave money to a certain theater troupe, it was often because they were infatuated with one of the actresses in that troupe and wanted to win her favor. Like Mine Kingo (峯吟子) of Nikkatsu (日活) receiving 800 yen (800圓) monthly from some Kansai businessman (關西實業家) – things like this happen not just in Korea, but everywhere, <92> it seems patrons expect compensation (보수) for their patronage.
Senin - When you were acting in theater troupes or motion pictures back in the day, Ms. Pok Hye-suk, did you ever have such a patron?
Pok Hye-suk - I did. To be honest. But I declare it firmly: I never offered my virtue (정조). I can't name the troupe, but there was such an incident once. The person in charge of the troupe (극단주무하는 이) whispered (귀ㅅ속말로) to me, "That rascal (놈팽이) keeps following you, just answer him nicely until he gives the money," he'd say. When I turned away and that person cut ties, the troupe had no choice but to collapse. So, inevitably (허릴업시), when that patron bothered me annoyingly (구찬게 굴길내) while touring the countryside, I deceived him with continuous (연해연방) smiles, saying let's meet quietly in Seoul.
Senin - And then in Seoul?
Pok Hye-suk - I feigned ignorance (시침이 뚝 따고) and just came back to my house. After that, all ties were cut. It's funny when I think about it. If there are patrons in Korean society now, eight or nine out of ten are probably using it as a means of courtship (求愛手段) towards some actress (女俳優).
Yi Sŏ-gu - That's right. Spending money, swaggering (웃줄거리며), and trying to get some woman (게집) into their hands – that's the mentality of most patrons. Korean society still has a long way to go.
Senin - Then who are the people who spend money well? Those with a good spirit (긔마에 - kimae) who readily spend when needed?
Pok Hye-suk - Was it this spring? One day, a dignified gentleman came to our Venus coffee shop (茶팁店), had one cup of coffee (고-히), and left a 10-won bill (지전) as a tip. When asked, they said he was from Tianjin (天津). It was the first time I met someone like that.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Perhaps he missed his homeland (故土) and visited Seoul after many years, his heart stirred by old sentiments (情調). That's probably why he left a 10-won tip for a 15-jeon cup of tea. I heard that even at places like Nakwŏn Cafe (樂園 갑페), guests have been seen tossing 20-won tips.
Senin - How much have you given?
Yi Sŏ-gu - When I went to Tokyo (東京), I gave 10 won at some restaurant (레스토란) in Ginza (銀座). That was probably the most for me. Hearing stories, artists like Yokoyama Taikan (橫山大觀) or Kikuchi Kan (菊池寬) apparently show up at Ginza cafes and frequently give 3-400 won tips, so talk of big industrialists (실업가) worth millions or tens of millions tossing 1-2,000 won <93> doesn't seem like lies (거진말).
Pok Hye-suk - I also heard from waitresses that some ship nouveau riche (船成金 - funanarikin) in Kobe (神戶) threw down 2,000 won. Without any sexual demands (性的要求)! Surprising, isn't it?
Senin - Who in Korea spends money refreshingly?
Pok Hye-suk - Probably Paek Myŏng-kŏn. When he spends, he spends splendidly.
Senin - Do big industrialists like Min Tae-sik, Han Sang-yong, or Pak Yŏng-ch'ŏl sometimes go to places like cafes?
Pok Hye-suk - I don't know.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Even if they go, it wouldn't be in a way that catches our eye. I heard there's an oden restaurant (오뎅집) near Namsanjang (南山莊) that only big industrialists go to. Apparently, they go there sometimes, eat just one piece of oden, and leave 10 or 20 won behind.

Are there Promoters in Seoul? Which Actors are Promising?
Senin - Are there promoters (興行師) in Seoul? People who could be called promoters or managers (마네-자)? For example, like Yoshimoto (吉本) handling the promotion (興行) of Pae Ku-ja (裵龜子), or Kobayashi Ichizō (小林一三) managing Nichigeki (日劇) and Toho (東寶) – are there managers or promoters like that?
Yi Sŏ-gu - They say Wakeshima (分島) funded "Ch'unhyangjŏn" (춘행전) this time.
Senin - How much?
Pok Hye-suk - There's talk that it cost around 7-8,000 won altogether.
Yi Sŏ-gu - For theater or motion pictures in any country to develop well, a good manager must emerge first. It's a great lament that such figures are absent in Korea. Currently, the rights for film distribution (映畵配給) are held by Im Su-ho (林秀湖) (a former theater person), Yodo (淀) (the person who took over Yewŏnsa 藝苑社), and Sonoda (園田), these three people. Most films made among us, like Na Un-kyu's past hits "Arirang" (아리랑) or "Goldfish" (금붕어), Kim Yŏng-hwan's (金永煥) "Falling Flowers, Flowing Water" (落花流水), and others, mostly end up in the hands of these three. <94>
Senin - End up in their hands?
Yi Sŏ-gu - Because they're pressed for money (밧부니까), they mortgage (저당잡히고) the completed work and borrow money. Then, when they can't repay the money, the distribution rights (판권) go to them. If you're talking about promoters in Korea, it's probably just those three I mentioned.
Senin - "Ch'unhyangjŏn" reportedly made 1,500-1,600 won per day for the first few days at Tan'sŏngsa (團成社). Given such profitable business (장사치고), why do Korean film producers (제작업자) collapse after producing just one work at most?
Pok Hye-suk - That's a sad question. You have to consider the character, discernment (식견), and financial resources (자력) of Korean promoters. First, the lack of deep (깁혼) understanding (理解) of art. Second, an insincere (眞實스럽지 못한) attitude towards producing artwork. Third, the inability to spend money manfully (사내답게). These three things. As hinted earlier, the investors (出資主) in the early days weren't really interested in making motion pictures (활동사진 맨드는데); they set up troupes and funded films with the intention of seducing girls (게집애나 후릴 작정으로). After that, because they provided the money, they acted arrogantly (자세하고), brought in their close but absurd (뚱딴지 가튼) acquaintances, gave them lead roles (主役) and directing (監督) jobs. So there's no way a decent (성한 것) work could come out. Third, even when spending 2,000 or 3,000 won, the way they spend it is worse than a loan shark (고리대금업자) – giving 3 won, 5 won, never giving a lump sum. So the recipients just get frustrated, the money spent doubles, but the work doesn't get done. And then, after making one work, they just collapse (나가 잣바지지요).
Yi Sŏ-gu - Lack of conviction (信念). In a word, without conviction, how can the enterprise succeed? If a firm conviction arose, thinking "This business will truly succeed," then even if the first work lost money (밋젓다해도), a plan (게획) to recoup with the next work would form, but they just get discouraged. Not just films, but all promising businesses like records are collapsing for this reason. That's why, in my view, the greatest manager or benefactor (恩人) of the theater world (극게) so far was Pak Sŭng-hŭi (朴承喜). Spending over 20,000 won of his own fortune, acting as stage director (舞臺監督), writing scripts himself, scrambling around, he sincerely nurtured the theater world. Without a second Pak Sŭng-hŭi emerging, the future of Korea's theater and film world is bleak, one must say. <95>
Senin - Isn't Na Un-kyu (羅雲奎) making a comeback (再起)?
Yi Sŏ-gu - He was a great contributor (공로자) in the early (초긔) film world, and the bold, northern style (北國人的線) in his works was welcomed by many, but now he's hit a dead end (유끼쯔마리 - ikizumari).
Pok Hye-suk - "Arirang" was his representative work. After Arirang, there was no further progress. Recently, he's been working as a director (監督) rather than acting or staging (연출). But works directed by him all become Na Un-kyu style – just running around, with a rough (우락부락한) feel, so the actors also seem to be made to act in the same type as Na Un-kyu.
Yi Sŏ-gu - As a technician (긔사 - cinematographer), Yi Ch'ang-yong (李創用) is better.
Pok Hye-suk - Recently, watching the filming of An Sŏk-chu's "Spring Breeze" (春風), there was a director named Yi. This person seemed to have very skilled (숙련한) ability (수완).
Senin - Who are the actors expected to grow further in the future (압흐로)? How about Han Il-song (韓一松) from Ch'unhyangjŏn?
Pok Hye-suk - He's good. His facial type is good, and he seems to genuinely understand (理解) art.
Yi Sŏ-gu - He's promising. And Hwang Ch'ŏl (黃鐵) and Yi Kyŏng-sŏn (李慶善) also have future prospects.
Senin - Among women—
Yi Sŏ-gu - Mun Ye-bong (文藝峯).
Pok Hye-suk - That's right. If you give Mun Ye-bong the lead role in a classic drama (古典劇), it won't fail.
Senin - When they appear in a production for a month or two, how much do they receive (밧나뇨) in total? As payment (보수).
Yi Sŏ-gu - They can get 150-160 won if they do well.
Pok Hye-suk - No way. It's probably 100 won, or maybe even less, around 50-60 won.
Senin - Among Western actors, which types do you like?
Pok Hye-suk - For men, Valentino, Clark Gable (쿠락케-불) from "It Happened One Night," Gary Cooper (케리-, 쿠-바) from "The Bengal Lancer" (벵갈槍騎兵).
Senin - Between the Douglas Fairbanks (닥크라스) type and the Charlie Chaplin (촤푸링) type, which do you prefer?
Pok Hye-suk - I prefer Chaplin, who always seems filled with sorrow (哀愁). Chaplin truly seems to have philosophy (哲學) and poetry (詩), but Douglas Fairbanks (딱크라스) is frivolous (경박하고) and insensitive (鈍感) –
Yi Sŏ-gu - Chaplin peaked with "The Gold Rush" (黃金狂時代). I like Dietrich (데도릿지). Her eyes <96> as if lost in a dream, her deep voice as if ripening (익그는) in some secret room (密室), truly wonderful. And Norma Shearer (노-마, 샐라-) and Claudette Colbert (구로뎃, 골-벨) are also good.
Pok Hye-suk - They don't seem as good as the actors of old. It seems there haven't been great stars with masterful performances (명연긔) like Lillian Gish (리리앙깃쉬) or Clara Bow (크라라보) since then.
Yi Sŏ-gu - When I went to Kyoto (京都) and visited a film studio, I met Oka Jōji (岡讓二). His facial features and acting (演技) were good. Takada Minoru (高田稔) is also good. For period dramas (時代劇), it's Ōkōchi Denjirō (大河内).
Pok Hye-suk - I also once visited a studio and saw Irie Takako's (入江たか子) acting. How insensitive (鈍感) she was! They reshot one scene seven times – Fushimi Naoe (伏見直江) is definitely better, and among men, Kataoka Chiezō (片岡千惠藏) is better. I'm also charmed by Kosugi Isamu's (小杉勇) acting.
Senin - Ch'oe Sŭng-hŭi (崔承喜) and Pae Ku-ja (裵龜子) seem incredibly popular. Please give us some critique of them.
Yi Sŏ-gu - Both are masters (大家), so they are already beyond criticism (批評圈外). Moreover, Ch'oe Sŭng-hŭi now holds an unrivaled (獨步) position in the Tokyo dance scene, with no one following her. Look, Ishii Konami (石井小浪) from Ishii Baku's (石井漠) school has retired, Hara Nobuko (原信子) has also retired, who is left? Only Ch'oe Sŭng-hŭi.
Pok Hye-suk - In terms of performance (演技) too, they are truly top-class now. Both have fine faces – and boiling (끌코) passion (情熱) for art.

Have You Encountered Trouble Following Theater Troupes? Do Rural Tours Make Money?
Senin - When theater troupes tour the countryside (시골로 극단이 순희흥행다가), if they get cornered (몰니면) for meal costs (밥갑), they say actresses are held as pawn (전당). Have you ever been held hostage (인질)?
Pok Hye-suk - Why wouldn't I have? Numerous times. Truly, I've traveled thoroughly (삿삿치) through every valley of Korea's eight provinces, and between Manchuria (滿洲), Tokyo, Osaka (東京大阪), traveling dozens of times over several years, I've experienced unspeakable hardships more than once or twice. Truly, few young women have shed as many tears of blood <97> as I have.
Senin - How so?
Pok Hye-suk - Once, I joined the Minjung Kŭktan (民衆劇團) led by Yun Paek-nam (尹白南) and toured the three southern provinces. We arrived in Masan (馬山). It was cherry blossom season, but it rained continuously, audiences didn't come, and after staying ten, fifteen days, we had suddenly incurred (덜컥 지엇지) 1,300 won in lodging and meal costs (려관집에 밥갑). What to do? The owner kept pestering (졸느고) for money – the leaders were frantic, constantly sending telegrams (전보질) to Seoul and Taegu asking for money. Good grief, the telegram fees (전보료) alone cost 80 won. It was absurd... So eventually, a few people were left behind (떠러지고) (including me), and the others left, managed to send 1,000 won, and we got out alive.
Senin - That's a masterpiece (걸작이구만). And anything else?
Pok Hye-suk - I'll tell one more. We went to P'yŏngyang (平壤), and the box office results (興行成績) were poor, so we racked up meal costs like a mountain (산뎀이가치 젓지요). What the owner said was priceless. He said everyone else could leave as they pleased, but Pok Hye-suk alone should stay behind (깃트라고). What could I do? Deciding I had no choice but to rely on nerve (뱃심), I sent everyone else up to Seoul. Then, finding myself left alone, I fought fiercely day and night with the owner fellow (주인 녀석), calling each other 'this punk, that punk' (이놈 저놈). I got so angry, such coarse curses I didn't even know I had poured out (쏘저다 나오는지). After one big fight, I found it funny and sat alone laughing.
After doing this for five or six days (대엿새), the owner fellow must have seen his expectations (예산) were wrong and the situation was hopeless (꼴이 틀렷다고). In the end (나종에는), he threw the bag, parasol, skirt, jacket, and shoes he had confiscated (빼앗아 두엇든) into the yard, shouting, "Here—you scary woman, take them and go!" So I gathered them up (주섬주섬 거더) and came up (올너 왓지요) to Seoul. Hohoho, that inn (녀관) was the KyŏngX Inn (경X여관).
Senin - How much profit (이익) can be made from one tour?
Pok Hye-suk - Well, if it just hits right (드러맛기만 하면), you can make good money. You can come back with several thousand won in hand. It was many years ago, during the T'owŏrhoe (土月會) time, we took plays like "Katusha" (가주사) and "Sacrifice" (犧牲) to Taegu (大邱) for performances. Ticket prices were all expensive (빗사게), like 1 won 50 jeon, 1 won, 80 jeon, but the audience flocked in (쓰러드는지) so much that we made 800 won in one night. It was amazing. And long, long ago, I went on tour to Kando (間島) with Kwŏn Il-ch'ŏng (權一淸) and others. There happened to be a product exhibition (品評會) or something, <98> so an unusual number of people gathered (모히지 안어서), and we made big money there too. So we also received shares (배당) of 100, 200 won at once.

What Would Be Good to Have in Seoul?
Senin - What things would be good to have in modern Seoul?
Li Sŏ-gu - Dance halls (딴스, 홀).
Pok Hye-suk - I agree. Because there isn't a single dance hall in Seoul, guests traveling from Tokyo/Osaka (東京大阪) to Manchuria (滿洲) find no appeal in stopping in Seoul. They just get off briefly for a day and then go straight (직행하여 버려요) to Fengtian (奉天) or Xinjing (新京). Truly, the amount of money lost to Seoul because of this, even calculated monthly, could be tens or hundreds of thousands of won, who knows.
Li Sŏ-gu - When I went to the famous Floridita dance hall in Tokyo, there wasn't even a hair's breadth (터럭끗만치도) of the notion (관렴) that it was lewd (음탕하다거나) or sordid (추악하다는). And though the world regards (녁이지만) people who frequent dance halls as simply idle women (有閑婦人 - yūkan madamu) or delinquent youths (부량소년) playing love games (戀愛遊戱), when I actually went, dignified gentlemen and ladies all came. Especially salarymen (샐라리만), cooped up (업듸어 잇다가) depressingly in buildings (삘딩) all day fiddling with abacuses and pens, finally liberated (해방) at dusk (석양), come out and wash away their day's fatigue (疲勞) there. It seemed to have become more than entertainment (오락), an essential subject of life (生活必須科目). If it becomes like this, 'dance' is not just something done by frivolous people (경박재자).
Pok Hye-suk - It depends on how you look at it. It's all a matter of degree. In Seoul, they initially permitted things like private lessons, but dance is now strictly prohibited (엄금).
Senin - Will it be difficult (어러울가) for dance halls to be established in Seoul?
Li Sŏ-gu - It will be difficult. As long as Governor-General Ugaki (우원총독) is in Korea—
Senin - Why? Would the Governor-General really decide such a minor (소소한) issue as permitting a dance hall? The Police Chief (경찰부장) would probably decide based on his own opinion.
Li Sŏ-gu - No. Governor-General Ugaki once stated (언명한) to the newspaper reporters' group (新聞記者團) that "in this time of national emergency (국가비상 시대), <99> lewd, nation-ruining (망국적인) dance halls absolutely cannot be permitted." So, as long as the Governor-General's policy is this, there's no possibility of dance halls being established (서질) in Korea.
Pok Hye-suk - It will be difficult. Recently, the police were cracking down severely (몹시 취체하더구만) on rumors (풍설) about dance halls opening in the city.
Li Sŏ-gu - Even supposing (섬치드라도) it's impossible in Korea proper, maybe somewhere like Andong Prefecture (安東縣 - Dandong) would be okay.
Senin - And what else is lacking?
Li Sŏ-gu - Amusement parks (遊園地). It would be nice to have an amusement park in the suburbs (郊外) of Seoul where even young children can be taken for a respectable family stroll (산보), spending a whole day pleasantly. Currently, the Han River (漢江) has become vulgarized (野俗化하여 젓고), and Ttukseom (뚝섬) or Nodeul (鷺梁津 - Noryangjin) have also become desolate (살풍경화하엿고)–
Pok Hye-suk - That's right. The only place we have is Ch'anggyŏngwŏn (昌慶苑), but on days like Sundays, it's so crowded and bustling that there's no quiet charm, which is needed to enjoy oneself (놀 자미가 잇지요).
Li Sŏ-gu - For example, just as there is Takarazuka (寶塚) in the Osaka suburbs (大阪郊外), it would be nice to have a place with hot springs, a park, and musical revues (歌劇), where a family can spend the whole day happily and return.
Senin - Osaka and Tokyo have populations of 4-5 million, 7-8 million, so such facilities arise. But what can Seoul do with just 400,000? For the time being (당분), it's probably right (올흘 걸) to assume large-scale amusement parks like that aren't possible. What else is missing?
Li Sŏ-gu - When I went to Tokyo this time, a sport (競技) called 'fencing' (페인싱), dueling (決鬪) with swords like German university students (獨逸大學生), was popular. I think it won't be long before it sweeps into (쓸려올) Korea. Boxing (박씽 - 拳鬪) hasn't gained mass appeal (大衆性), and things like Mahjong (麻雀) are purely entertainment. Something in between, like this 'dueling sport,' seems likely to be welcomed in Korea.
Senin - And is there anything else needed?
Li Sŏ-gu - 'Messenger boys' (멧센자, 뽀이), meaning boys who will run errands (심부름) anywhere for just 10 jeon. It would be nice to have them. They are really numerous and convenient in Tokyo and Osaka.
Pok Hye-suk - There is one! In Yeongnak-jeong (永樂町) or somewhere in Seoul. But what the messenger boys say is funny. They say the most frequent errand is 'to call a hidden gentleman (隱君子) at night.'
Senin - 'Hidden gentleman' is a masterpiece (걸락이구만). Well, thank you for speaking for so long. Now let's go out there, stroll in the garden, and appreciate (완상합시다) the yellow chrysanthemums and autumn maples. (End) <100>
<82-101>

**Summary**

This 1935 roundtable discussion features Yi Sŏ-gu (journalist/writer), Pok Hye-suk (actress/cafe owner), and Paek Nak Senin (author/moderator) identifying Seoul's ('Chang'an') prominent figures. They debate the most handsome/distinguished men (Yŏ Un-hyŏng, Pak Hŭng-sik named top contenders), most beautiful women (deceased Yi Tŏk-yo, Song Kye-wŏl highly praised, Pak Hŭng-sik, Mun Ye-bong noted among contemporaries), generous patrons ('patolons,' often with ulterior motives towards actresses), and popular entertainers (kisaeng, actors like Han Il-song, dancers Ch'oe Sŭng-hŭi, Pae Ku-ja). Pok Hye-suk recounts hardships touring with theater troupes. Finally, they lament the lack of amenities like dance halls (prohibited by the Governor-General) and family-friendly amusement parks in Seoul, suggesting fencing might become popular.

Historians might find the candid discussion on contemporary figures, social hierarchies, and the cultural scene (film, theater, kisaeng, cafes) in colonial Seoul particularly interesting. The commentary on the nascent film and theater industries, including financial struggles, the role of 'patrons,' distribution issues, and critiques of specific actors/directors (like Na Un-kyu), offers valuable insight into artistic life under Japanese rule. The mention of Governor-General Ugaki's personal stance affecting public entertainment (dance halls) highlights the direct impact of colonial authority on daily life and culture.

**Named Entities**

呂運亨	여운형	Yŏ Un-hyŏng
朴勝喜	박승희	Pak Sŭng-hŭi
土月會	토월회	T'owŏrhoe
松井須磨子	마쓰이 스마코	Matsui Sumako (Hepburn)
上海	상해	Shanghai
東京	동경	Tokyo
奉天	봉천	Fengtian
仁寺洞	인사동	Insadong
버-너스	비너스	Venus (Cafe name)
長安	장안	Chang'an (referring to Seoul)
白樂仙人	백낙선인	Paek Nak Senin
李瑞求	이서구	Yi Sŏ-gu
卜惠淑	복혜숙	Pok Hye-suk
城北洞	성북동	Sŏngbuk-tong
銀碧莊	은벽장	Ŭnbyŏkchang
孤帆	고범	Kohŏm (Yi Sŏ-gu's pen name)
東亞	동아	Tong-A (Newspaper - likely Tong-A Ilbo)
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Newspaper - likely Chosŏn Ilbo; also refers to Korea)
每申	매신	Maeil Sinbo (Newspaper)
滿洲	만주	Manchuria
大阪	대판	Osaka
杜牧之	두목지	Tu Mu
李太白	이태백	Li Bai
宋鎭禹	송진우	Song Chin-u
方應謨	방응모	Pang Eung-mo
李相協	이상협	Yi Sang-hyŏp
鍾路	종로	Chŏngno
朴榮喆	박영철	Pak Yŏng-ch'ŏl
閔大植	민대식	Min Tae-sik
金炳魯	김병노	Kim Pyŏng-no
辛泰嶽	신태악	Sin T'ae-ak
玄相允	현상윤	Hyŏn Sang-yun
崔奎東	최규동	Ch'oe Kyu-dong
兪億兼	유억겸	Yu Ŏk-kyŏm
金用茂	김용무	Kim Yong-mu
吳兢善	오긍선	O Kŭng-sŏn
趙東植	조동식	Cho Tong-sik
李光洙	이광수	Yi Kwang-su
梁柱三	양주삼	Yang Chu-sam
鄭仁果	정인과	Chŏng In-kwa
李大偉	이대위	Yi Tae-wi
金昶濟	김창제	Kim Ch'ang-je
槿友會	근우회	Kŭn'uhoe
閔泰媛	민태원	Min T'ae-wŏn
李星鎔	이성용	Yi Sŏng-yong
韓基岳	한기악	Han Ki-ak
安碩柱	안석주	An Sŏk-chu
玄鎭健	현진건	Hyŏn Chin-kŏn
鄭寅翼	정인익	Chŏng In-ik
崔獨鵑	최독견	Ch'oe Tok-kyŏn
朴興植	박흥식	Pak Hŭng-sik
申興雨	신흥우	Sin Hŭng-u
韓一松	한일송	Han Il-song
李慶善	이경선	Yi Kyŏng-sŏn
姜弘植	강홍식	Kang Hong-sik
羅雲奎	나운규	Na Un-kyu
白命乾	백명건	Paek Myŏng-kŏn
李德耀	이덕요	Yi Tŏk-yo
崔曙海	최서해	Ch'oe Sŏ-hae
醫專病院	의전병원	Ŭijŏn Pyŏngwŏn (Medical College Hospital)
韓偉健	한위건	Han Wi-kŏn
北京	북경	Pukkyŏng (Beijing)
尹白南	윤백남	Yun Paek-nam
宋桂月	송계월	Song Kye-wŏl
昌慶苑	창경원	Ch'anggyŏngwŏn
丁子屋	정자옥	Chŏngjaok (Shop name)
漢城圖書	한성도서	Hansŏng Tosŏ (Bookstore name)
안동 네거리	안동 네거리	Andong Intersection
開闢社	개벽사	Kaebyŏk-sa
咸鏡道	함경도	Hamgyŏng Province
梁明	양명	Yang Myŏng
趙元淑	조원숙	Cho Wŏn-suk
濟州島	제주도	Cheju Island
齋洞	재동	Chaedong
北風會館	북풍회관	Pukp'unghoegwan
姜아근니아	강아근니아	Kang Agŭnnia
로서아	로서아	Russia
丁七星	정칠성	Chŏng Ch'il-sŏng
許貞淑	허정숙	Hŏ Chŏng-suk
沈恩淑	심은숙	Sim Ŭn-suk
黃信德	황신덕	Hwang Sin-dŏk
金貞媛	김정원	Kim Chŏng-wŏn
淸津	청진	Ch'ŏngjin
李商在	이상재	Yi Sang-jae
黃菊榮	황국영	Hwang Kuk-yŏng
金八峰	김팔봉	Kim P'al-bong
許英肅	허영숙	Hŏ Yŏng-suk
羅惠錫	나혜석	Na Hye-sŏk
金明淳	김명순	Kim Myŏng-sun
劉英俊	유영준	Yu Yŏng-jun
아메리카	아메리카	America
朴仁德	박인덕	Pak In-dŏk
梨花學堂	이화학당	Ihwa Haktang
金活蘭	김활란	Kim Hwal-lan
이화전문	이화전문	Ihwa Chŏnmun (Ewha Women's College)
金讚永	김찬영	Kim Ch'an-yŏng
鎭南浦	진남포	Chinnamp'o
羅仙嬌	나선교	Na Sŏn-kyo
全玉	전옥	Chŏn Ok
崔香花	최향화	Ch'oe Hyang-hwa
鮮于一扇	선우일선	Sŏnu Il-sŏn
王壽福	왕수복	Wang Su-bok
金福姬	김복희	Kim Pok-hŭi
文藝峰	문예봉	Mun Ye-bong
긔생	기생	Kisaeng
金珊瑚珠	김산호주	Kim San-ho-ju
즌고개	진고개	Chin Kogae (Former name for Chungmuro area)
朝鮮舘	조선관	Chosŏngwan (Restaurant name)
朴玉花	박옥화	Pak Ok-hwa
金錦桃	김금도	Kim Kŭm-do
李花仙	이화선	Yi Hwa-sŏn
申明珠	신명주	Sin Myŏng-ju
方月仙	방월선	Pang Wŏl-sŏn
柳錦桃	유금도	Yu Kŭm-do
崔玉嬉	최옥희	Ch'oe Ok-hŭi
宋蓮花	송연화	Song Yŏn-hwa
권번	권번	Kwŏnbŏn (Kisaeng guild)
尹心悳	윤심덕	Yun Sim-dŏk
李容汶	이용문	Yi Yong-mun
大倉喜八郞	오쿠라 기하치로	Ōkura Kihachirō (Hepburn)
藤原義江	후지와라 요시에	Fujiwara Yoshie (Hepburn)
朴承喜	박승희	Pak Sŭng-hŭi
白寅基	백인기	Paek In-ki
코리안째스뺀드	코리안재즈밴드	Korean Jazz Band
林秀湖	임수호	Im Su-ho
淀	요도	Yodo (likely Yewŏnsa 藝苑社 owner/alias)
藝苑社	예원사	Yewŏnsa
園田	소노다	Sonoda (Hepburn)
아리랑	아리랑	Arirang
금붕어	금붕어	Kŭmbungŏ (Goldfish - Film Title)
金永煥	김영환	Kim Yŏng-hwan
落花流水	낙화유수	Nakhwa Yusu (Falling Flowers, Flowing Water - Film Title)
團成社	단성사	Tan'sŏngsa (Theater)
日活	닛카쓰	Nikkatsu (Hepburn)
峯吟子	미네 긴코	Mine Kingo (Hepburn)
關西	관서	Kansai
李龜永	이구영	Yi Ku-yŏng
分島	와케시마	Wakeshima (Hepburn)
李創用	이창용	Yi Ch'ang-yong
春風	춘풍	Ch'unp'ung (Spring Breeze - Film Title)
黃鐵	황철	Hwang Ch'ŏl
바렌티노	발렌티노	Valentino
쿠락케-불	클라크 게이블	Clark Gable
벵갈槍騎兵	벵골 창기병	Bengal Lancer (Film Title)
케리-, 쿠-바	게리 쿠퍼	Gary Cooper
닥크라스	더글러스 페어뱅크스	Douglas Fairbanks
촤푸링	찰리 채플린	Charlie Chaplin
데도릿지	디트리히	Dietrich
노-마, 샐라-	노마 시어러	Norma Shearer
구로뎃, 골-벨	클로데트 콜베르	Claudette Colbert
리리앙깃쉬	릴리언 기시	Lillian Gish
크라라보	클라라 보	Clara Bow
京都	경도	Kyōto (Hepburn)
岡讓二	오카 조지	Oka Jōji (Hepburn)
高田稔	다카다 미노루	Takada Minoru (Hepburn)
大河内	오코치 덴지로	Ōkōchi Denjirō (Hepburn)
入江たか子	이리에 다카코	Irie Takako (Hepburn)
伏見直江	후시미 나오에	Fushimi Naoe (Hepburn)
片岡千惠藏	가타오카 지에조	Kataoka Chiezō (Hepburn)
小杉勇	고스기 이사무	Kosugi Isamu (Hepburn)
崔承喜	최승희	Ch'oe Sŭng-hŭi
裵龜子	배구자	Pae Ku-ja
石井漠	이시이 바쿠	Ishii Baku (Hepburn)
石井小浪	이시이 고나미	Ishii Konami (Hepburn)
原信子	하라 노부코	Hara Nobuko (Hepburn)
民衆劇團	민중극단	Minjung Kŭktan (Theater Troupe)
馬山	마산	Masan
大邱	대구	Taegu
평양	평양	P'yŏngyang
경X여관	경X여관	KyŏngX Yŏgwan (Inn Name)
權一淸	권일청	Kwŏn Il-ch'ŏng
間島	간도	Kando
吉本	요시모토	Yoshimoto (Hepburn)
小林一三	고바야시 이치조	Kobayashi Ichizō (Hepburn)
日劇	니치게키	Nichigeki (Hepburn)
東寶	도호	Toho (Hepburn)
후로리다	플로리다	Floridita (Dance Hall name)
宇垣	우가키	Ugaki (referring to Gov.-Gen. Ugaki Kazushige)
安東縣	안동현	Andong County (referring to Dandong, China)
漢江	한강	Han River
뚝섬	뚝섬	Ttukseom
鷺梁津	노량진	Noryangjin (Nodeul)
寶塚	다카라즈카	Takarazuka (Hepburn)
橫山大觀	요코야마 다이칸	Yokoyama Taikan (Hepburn)
菊池寬	기쿠치 간	Kikuchi Kan (Hepburn)
神戶	신호	Kobe (Hepburn)
南山莊	남산장	Namsanjang
永樂町	영락정	Yeongnak-jeong (Old name for Jeo-dong area)

**Glossary**

座談會	좌담회	Roundtable discussion
好男子	호남자	Fine man, good man (implies more than just looks)
美男子	미남자	Handsome man, beautiful man (focus on appearance)
俠氣	협기	Chivalry, gallantry, generosity
映畵	영화	Film, movie (older term using Hanja)
劇	극	Drama, play
巡業	순업	Performance tour
諧謔	해학	Humor, jokes
皮肉	피육	Sarcasm, irony
怪才	괴재	Eccentric talent, genius
喫茶店	깃사텐	Tea house, coffee shop (Japanese reading 'kissaten' often used)
妓籍	기적	Kisaeng register (official list of licensed entertainers)
女史	여사	Madam, Ms. (respectful term for accomplished women)
호활하고	호활하고	Gallant, magnanimous (likely 豪闊하다)
선성	성명/성문	Reputation, fame (likely 聲名 or 聲聞)
훗두루	후뚜루	Casually, informally (older spelling)
카이젤 수염	카이저 수염	Kaiser Wilhelm mustache
뭇소리니 거름	무솔리니 걸음	Mussolini gait/walk (older spelling)
일당백	일당백	One against a hundred (outstanding person)
시언 시언하고	시원시원하고	Cool and refreshing (personality) (older spelling)
서글 서글한	서글서글한	Affable, genial (older spelling)
어룬	어른	Adult, elder (older spelling)
젠체 빼지 안코	젠체하지 않고	Without putting on airs (older form)
된 놈 안된 놈	된 놈 안된 놈	This guy and that guy, riff-raff (derogatory)
主禮	주례	Wedding officiator
양증인	앙증맞은	Charming, winsome (older form/spelling)
쪼-고렛	초콜릿	Chocolate (older transliteration)
호걸남아	호걸남아	Heroic man, great man
려운형	여운형	Yŏ Un-hyŏng (older spelling)
안광	안광	Gaze, the look in one's eyes
鐵色	철색	Iron color (implying stern or dark complexion/gaze)
히여멀금 하지 못하고	허여멀끔하지 못하고	Not fair-complexioned (older spelling)
무둑둑한	무뚝뚝한	Blunt, sullen (older spelling)
陽明	양명	Bright, cheerful (in reference to appearance)
먼- 발층에서	먼발치에서	From afar (older form)
요조숙녀	요조숙녀	Graceful and virtuous lady (classic Sino-Korean expression)
머리따하드린 숫색씨	머리 땋아 늘어뜨린 숫처녀	Maiden with braided hair (older spelling/form)
쌀쌀하지	쌀쌀맞지	Chilly, cold (personality) (older spelling)
상양하고	상냥하고	Kind, amiable (older spelling)
戀戀嫋嫋	연연뇨뇨	Delicate and graceful (literary expression)
類美男型	유미남형	Handsome-like type (analogy)
子分	고분	Follower, disciple (from Japanese 'kobun')
正統派	정통파	Orthodox faction
傍系	방계	Collateral line, side branch
삿갓쓰고 감발치고	삿갓 쓰고 감발 치고	Wearing a reed hat and leggings (implying rustic traveler)
긔자	기자	Reporter, journalist (older spelling)
빗구로 가네	빗나가네	Going astray, digressing (older spelling)
두리기둥	두리기둥	Round pillar (metaphor for sturdy build)
威壓	위압	Pressure, intimidation
不男	부오도꼬	Ugly man (likely from Japanese 'futoko' 不男)
控室	공실	Waiting room
륙십점(六十點)	육십 점	Sixty points (passing grade)
급제끗	급제 끝	Barely passing grade level
갈曰字	갈 자	Character '曰' shape (referring to face shape)
쥐정	주정	Bad habit, drunken fit, sulking (older usage/spelling)
褪色	퇴색	Fading (of color/complexion)
총결산	총결산	Final accounting, summary
남버원	넘버원	Number one (English loanword)
오종종하지 안코	오밀조밀하지 않고	Not intricately/finely featured (older spelling/usage)
좌석에 뫼신적	좌석에 모신 적	Occasion of serving (a guest) at a table (older polite form)
요지간	요즈음	Recently, nowadays (older form)
리도령	이도령	Yi Toryŏng (character from Chunhyangjeon)
미인박명	미인박명	Beauty meets misfortune (proverb: beautiful women often die young or suffer)
입설	입술	Lips (older spelling)
먹장가튼	먹장 같은	Like an ink stick (very black hair)
絕色	절색	Unsurpassed beauty
히랍	희랍	Greece (older transliteration)
女神	여신	Goddess
理智	이지	Reason, intellect
淸風明月	청풍명월	Clear wind and bright moon (metaphor for purity, refreshing presence)
夫君	부군	Husband (formal term)
客死	객사	Dying away from home
사꾸라꼿	벚꽃	Cherry blossom (older spelling/loan word from Japanese 'sakura')
하사월(夏四月)	음력 4월	Fourth month of the lunar calendar (early summer)
묘령(妙齡)	묘령	Marriageable age, young womanhood
와자자하게	화사하게/활짝	Splendidly, brightly, vibrantly (older expressive word)
뒷맵시	뒷모습	Appearance from behind, figure from behind
물찬제비	물찬제비	Swift swallow (metaphor for grace and speed)
샛듯한	새뜻한/빠른	Swift, quick (older form)
황홀하여지데	황홀해지데	Became entranced (older ending)
학두름	학두루미	Crane (older spelling)
脚線美	각선미	Beauty of leg lines
멋업시	멋없이	Without style, clumsily (older spelling)
육감적(肉感的)	육감적	Sensual
노-불한	노블한	Noble (English loanword)
긔사채집	기사 채집	News gathering (older spelling)
牛乳	우유	Milk
透明體	투명체	Transparent body
윤택흐르는	윤택 흐르는	Glossy, lustrous (older form)
로서아	러시아	Russia (older transliteration)
洋風	양풍	Western style
다 치든	다 치던	Acknowledged by all, pointed out by everyone (older form)
뜨더 볼나치면	뜯어 볼라치면	If one examines closely (older spelling)
엡분이	예쁜이	Pretty one (older spelling/dialect)
部分品	부분품	Parts, components (metaphor for facial features)
만햇다고	많았다고	Were many (older form)
바탕	바탕	Foundation, basic quality, innate nature
留學生	유학생	Student studying abroad
웨	왜	Why (older spelling)
떡게머리하여이고	쪽진 머리 하고	Wearing hair in a chignon/bun (traditional married woman's style)
シタレ	시들다	To wilt, droop (Japanese 'shidare-ru', implying loss of youth)
화무십일홍(花無十日紅)	화무십일홍	No flower stays red for ten days (proverb about fleeting beauty)
모던껄	모던 걸	Modern girl (English loanword)
광대뼈	광대뼈	Cheekbones
골드크림	골드 크림	Gold cream (cosmetic)
독판미인	독보적 미인	Unrivaled beauty
깍근 배갓치	깎은 배같이	Like a peeled pear (metaphor for smooth/pleasant voice)
췌스추어	제스처	Gesture (English loanword)
영부인계(令夫人界)	영부인계	Circle of prominent wives/first ladies
레코-드계	레코드계	Record industry
인긔(人氣)	인기	Popularity (older spelling/Hanja use)
암상구즌	앙심 품은/심술궂은	Ill-tempered, spiteful (older word: 암상궂다)
째인	짜인	Well-put-together, trim (older form)
수수하게	수수하게	Plainly, simply, modestly
얄구진 데가 업서	얄궂은 데가 없어	Without mischievousness/oddness (older spelling)
성큼하고	성큼하고/성글고	Frank, straightforward, unhesitating (contextual meaning)
긔생(妓生)	기생	Kisaeng (female entertainer)
명긔(名妓)	명기	Famous kisaeng
화초긔생(花草妓生)	화초기생	Flower/Grass Kisaeng (prized for beauty/youth over talent)
은퇴(隱退)	은퇴	Retirement
즌고개	진고개	Chin Kogae (area in Seoul, now Chungmuro)
서도미인(西道美人)	서도미인	Beauty from the Western Provinces (P'yŏngan/Hwanghae)
신선미(新鮮味)	신선미	Fresh beauty, freshness
아기자기하게	아기자기하게	Charmingly, delicately
구수하게	구수하게	Pleasantly rustic, heartwarming, charmingly simple
공순하고	공손하고	Polite, courteous (older spelling)
연회석(宴會席)	연회석	Banquet seat/gathering
푸리마돈나	프리마돈나	Prima donna (loanword)
향긔(香氣)	향기	Fragrance, scent (older spelling)
비유 잘 마추고	비위 잘 맞추고	Good at pleasing/humoring people (older spelling)
노장(老將)	노장	Old general (metaphor for experienced person)
파토론	패트런	Patron (loanword)
깨긋한	깨끗한	Clean, pure (older spelling)
째스뺀드	재즈 밴드	Jazz band (loanword)
신변관게	신변 관계	Personal matters (older spelling)
후원자(後援者)	후원자	Sponsor, backer
가할만치	가할 만큼	Almost, nearly (older form)
日活	닛카쓰	Nikkatsu (Japanese film company)
關西	간사이	Kansai region (Japan)
實業家	실업가	Businessman, industrialist
보수(報酬)	보수	Compensation, reward
정조(貞操)	정조	Chastity, virtue
극단주무하는 이	극단 주무르는 이	Person in charge of the theater troupe
귀ㅅ속말로	귓속말로	In a whisper (older spelling)
놈팽이	놈팡이	Rascal, bum (derogatory)
허릴업시	하릴없이	Helplessly, inevitably (older form)
구찬게	귀찮게	Annoyingly (older spelling)
연해연방	연해연방	Continuously, repeatedly (older form)
낫츠로	낯으로	With a face (older spelling)
시침이 뚝 따고	시치미 뚝 떼고	Feigning ignorance (idiom)
구애수단(求愛手段)	구애 수단	Means of courtship
웃줄거리며	우쭐거리며	Putting on airs, swaggering (older spelling)
게집	계집	Woman (derogatory/archaic)
너차는	넣으려는	Trying to put into (older spelling/form)
긔마에(氣前)	기마에	Generosity, spirit (from Japanese 'kimae')
고-히	커피	Coffee (older transliteration)
지전(紙錢)	지전	Paper money
갑페	카페	Cafe (older transliteration)
레스토란	레스토랑	Restaurant (older transliteration)
거진말	거짓말	Lie (older spelling)
후네나리깅(船成金)	후나나리킨	Ship nouveau riche (from Japanese 'funanarikin')
성적요구(性的要求)	성적 요구	Sexual demand
오뎅집	오뎅집	Oden restaurant/stall
흥행사(興行師)	흥행사	Promoter, impresario
마네-자	매니저	Manager (loanword)
映畵配給	영화 배급	Film distribution
밧부니까	바쁘니까	Because busy/pressed (older spelling)
저당잡히고	저당 잡히고	Pawning, mortgaging
판권(版權)	판권	Copyright, distribution rights
장사치고	장사치고	For a business (older form)
엇재서	어째서	Why (older spelling)
제작업자(製作業者)	제작업자	Producer
식견(識見)	식견	Knowledge, discernment
자력(資力)	자력	Financial resources
깁혼	깊은	Deep (older spelling)
理解	이해	Understanding
眞實스럽지 못한	진실스럽지 못한	Not truthful/sincere
사내답게	사내답게	Manfully
맨드는데	만드는데	In making (older spelling)
게집애나 후릴	계집애나 후릴	To seduce a girl (older/crude)
자세하고	자세 부리고	Putting on airs, posturing (older usage)
갓가운	가까운	Close (older spelling)
뚱딴지 가튼	뚱딴지 같은	Out of place, absurd (idiom)
主役	주역	Main role
監督	감독	Director
성한 것	성한 것	Proper, decent thing
고리대금업자(高利貸金業者)	고리대금업자	Usurer, loan shark
잣바지지요	자빠지지요	Fall down flat (older spelling)
信念	신념	Belief, conviction
밋젓다해도	밑졌다 해도	Even if losing money (older spelling)
게획	계획	Plan (older spelling)
舞臺監督	무대 감독	Stage director
극게	극계	Theater world (older spelling)
再起	재기	Comeback, resurgence
초긔	초기	Initial period (older spelling)
公勞者	공로자	Person of merit
北國人的線	북국적인 선	Northern country-like line (referring to rugged/bold style)
유끼쯔마리	이키즈마리	Dead end, impasse (from Japanese 'ikizumari' 行き詰まり)
연출(演出)	연출	Direction, staging (in theater/film)
우락부락한	우락부락한	Burly, rough, rugged
긔사(技師)	기사	Technician (likely cinematographer here)
숙련한(熟練-)	숙련한	Skilled, experienced
수완(手腕)	수완	Skill, ability, dexterity
압흐로	앞으로	Forward, in the future (older spelling)
古典劇	고전극	Classic drama
보수(報酬)	보수	Pay, remuneration
밧나뇨	받나요	Receive? (older question form)
애수(哀愁)	애수	Sorrow, pathos
포엣트(詩)	포이트/시	Poet/Poetry (loanword)
경박하고(輕薄-)	경박하고	Frivolous, superficial
둔감(鈍感)	둔감	Insensitive, dull
밀실(密室)	밀실	Secret room
익그는	익는	Ripening, maturing (older spelling)
명연긔(名演技)	명연기	Masterful performance (older spelling)
대가(大家)	대가	Master, authority
批評圈外	비평권 외	Beyond criticism
獨步	독보	Unrivaled, unique, walking alone
演技	연기	Acting, performance
끌코	끓고	Boiling (older spelling)
순희흥행다가	순회흥행하다가	While touring for performances (older spelling/form)
밥갑	밥값	Meal cost (older spelling)
몰니면	몰리면	If cornered/driven (older spelling)
전당(典當)	전당	Pawn
인질(人質)	인질	Hostage
삿삿치	샅샅이	Thoroughly, meticulously (older spelling)
인솔한(引率-)	인솔한	Led by
려관(旅館)	여관	Inn, hotel (older spelling)
덜컥 지엇지	덜컥 지었지	Suddenly incurred (debt) (older phrasing)
졸느고	조르고	Pestering, nagging (older spelling)
전보질(電報-)	전보질	Sending telegrams repeatedly (somewhat derogatory nuance)
전보료(電報料)	전보료	Telegram fee
떠러지고	떨어지고	Being left behind (older spelling)
산뎀이가치	산더미같이	Like a heap/pile (older spelling)
젓지요	졌지요	Incurred (debt) (older spelling)
깃트라고	있으라고	Telling someone to stay (dialect/older form)
뱃심	배심	Guts, nerve, courage
녀석	녀석	Fellow (derogatory)
세차게	세차게	Fiercely, strongly
쏘저다 나오는지	쏟아져 나오는지	Pours out (older spelling)
대엿새	대엿새	Five or six days
예산(豫算)	예상	Expectation, calculation (here means expectation)
꼴이 틀렷다고	꼴이 틀렸다고	Saw it was hopeless/wrong (idiom: the situation looked wrong)
나종에는	나중에는	In the end (older spelling)
빼앗아 두엇든	빼앗아 두었던	Had confiscated (older spelling)
주섬주섬 거더	주섬주섬 거둬	Gathering things up one by one (older spelling)
올너 왓지요	올라왔지요	Came up (to Seoul) (older spelling)
이익(利益)	이익	Profit
드러맛기만 하면	들어맞기만 하면	If it just hits right/succeeds/goes well
빗사게	비싸게	Expensively (older spelling)
쓰러드는지	쏠려드는지	Flocked in, thronged (older spelling/usage)
품평회(品評會)	품평회	Product exhibition/fair
모히지 안어서	모이지 않아서	Gathered (older spelling/grammar)
배당(配當)	배당	Dividend, share
딴스, 홀	댄스홀	Dance hall (loanword)
직행하여 버려요	직행해 버려요	Go straight through without stopping
음탕하다거나	음탕하다거나	Lewd or...
추악하다는	추악하다는	Ugly, sordid...
관렴	관념	Idea, notion (older spelling)
터럭끗만치도	터럭 끝만치도	Not even a hair's breadth (older spelling)
연애유희(戀愛遊戱)	연애 유희	Love games, dalliance
유한매담(有閑婦人)	유한마담	Idle woman, lady of leisure (Japanese 'yūkan madamu')
부량소년(不良少年)	불량소년	Delinquent youth
녁이지만	여기지만	Although regarded as (older spelling)
샐라리만	샐러리맨	Salaryman (loanword)
삘딩	빌딩	Building (loanword)
업듸어 잇다가	엎드려 있다가	Lying face down/cooped up (older spelling)
석양(夕陽)	석양	Evening sun, dusk
해방(解放)	해방	Liberation, release
왼종일	온종일	All day long (older spelling)
오락(娛樂)	오락	Entertainment
生活必須科目	생활 필수 과목	Essential subject of life
경박재자	경박한 자	Frivolous person (likely '경박자')
허하더니	허하더니	Used to permit (older form)
엄금(嚴禁)	엄금	Strict prohibition
어러울가	어려울까	Will it be difficult? (older spelling)
우원총독(宇垣總督)	우가키 총독	Governor-General Ugaki
소소한(些少-)	소소한	Trifling, minor
경찰부장(警察部長)	경찰부장	Police chief
좃차서	좇아서	Following (older spelling)
허부(許否)	허부	Permission or refusal
언명한(言明-)	언명한	Declared, stated
국가비상 시대(國家非常時代)	국가 비상사태	Time of national emergency
망국적(亡國的)	망국적	Nation-ruining
서질	설	To be established (older spelling/form)
풍설(風說)	풍설	Rumor
취체하더구만	단속하더구만	Was cracking down (using Japanese 'torishimari' 取締)
섬치드라도	친다 하더라도	Even supposing (older spelling/form)
遊園地	유원지	Amusement park, recreation ground
산보(散步)	산보	A walk, stroll (from Japanese 'sanpo')
郊外	교외	Suburbs
야속화(野俗化)하여 젓고	야속화해졌고	Became vulgar/rustic (older verb form)
살풍경화하엿고	살풍경화하였고	Became desolate/bleak (older verb form)
자미	재미	Interest, fun (older word)
歌劇	가극	Opera, musical revue
당분	당분간	For the time being (older spelling)
올흘 걸	옳을 걸	Be right (older spelling)
페인싱	펜싱	Fencing (loanword)
獨逸大學生	독일 대학생	German university student (older Hanja for Germany)
決鬪	결투	Duel
경긔(競技)	경기	Match, competition (older spelling)
쓸려올	쏠려올/쓸려올	Sweep in, surge in (older spelling)
박씽(拳鬪)	복싱	Boxing (loanword, 拳鬪 is Sino-Korean for boxing)
大衆性	대중성	Popular appeal
麻雀	마작	Mahjong
멧센자, 뽀이	메신저 보이	Messenger boy (loanword)
심부름	심부름	Errand
隱君子	은군자	Hidden gentleman (euphemism, likely for prostitute or secret lover here)
걸락이구만	걸작이구만	Masterpiece/curiosity (older spelling)
완상합시다(玩賞-)	완상합시다	Let's appreciate/enjoy (viewing)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제7권 제10호
발행일	1935년 11월 01일
기사제목	現代 『長安豪傑』 찾는(座談會)
필자	白樂仙人
기사형태	대담·좌담

現代 『長安豪傑』 찾는
						白樂仙人
話題
1. 서울 대표적 好男子, 美男子는 누구누구일가?
2. 서울서 한다하는 美人들은 누구누구일가?
3. 돈 잘 쓰고 俠氣잇는 사람은 누구누구일가?
4. 서울에 잇서스면 조흘 것이 무엇무엇일가?
5. 「映畵와 劇」 방면의 숨은 인재와 지방순회 때 울고 웃든 이약이

출석자
李瑞求
卜惠淑
本社 白樂仙人

10월 15일의 따듯한 深秋 1일 시외 성북동의 「銀碧莊」 樓上에서 개최
出席 諸氏 紹介
잠간 紹介하는 말슴=李瑞求씨는 號를 孤帆이라하야 일즉 東亞 朝鮮 每申  諸신문기자로 10여 년을 잇섯고 각 극단에 상연한 각본 100여 편을 썻고 市井에 흐르는 레코-트 가요를 300여 편 썻고 또 그의 足跡은 南北滿洲, 東京, 大阪 등지와 朝鮮 내 13道의 방방곡곡에 미첫다. 多辯多才함은 물론 서울 裏面社會를 氏만치 잘 아는 분이 드물다. 입을 열면 險口요 빠너드 쇼-類의 諧謔과 皮肉이 쏘다저 나오는 每日 3만어 이상을 말하는 怪才이요 또 서울 입구 40만 중 上下 萬名은 서로 인사하고 지내는 廣面이다.
卜惠淑女史-女史는 東京 유학시대에 朴勝喜씨 등과 함께 「土月會」를 조직하여 가지고 나와서 「松井須磨子」만치 갓쥬샤를 잘하기로 일홈을 떨첫고, 그 뒤 영화배우로 극의 주인공으로서 이 방면의 運動에 10년 보낸 이다. 그사이 上海, 東京, 奉天 등지로 巡業도 나서서 각지로 周遊하며 이 땅 향토예술 소개에 盡力하다가 지금은 서울 仁寺洞에서 喫茶店 「버-너스」를 경영 중, 그동안 생활에 쪼들너 妓籍에 몸을 둔 적도 잇는 역사 만흔 女史타.

長安안 豪俠男兒는 누구 누구일가?
白樂仙人-서울 장안의 대표적 호남자는 누구 누구일가요? 잘 생기고, 어엽부고, 호활하고, 탐나고, 그런 호남자말이지. 되두룩 무처잇는 사람말고, 조선 팔도 사람들이 다 그 선성을 아라드를 그런 사회적 신사급(紳士級)에서 골느자면 말이지요. 그리고 우리 이 좌석에선 일체 아모개씨(氏) 아모개선생(先生)이라고 하는 경어(敬語)는 쓰지맙시다. 훗두루 이약이하는 속에 더 친애(親愛)하는 맛이 나는 터이니까요.
卜惠淑- 여운형(呂運亨)일걸, 카이젤 수염에 뭇소리니 거름에, 성대조코 말 잘하고 어듸 내어 노아도 해 뜬듯,  달 뜬듯, 훤-하고- 수링감이고 아무튼 일당백이지요.
李瑞求- 일당백은 일당백이지만 그 분은 호남자(好男子) 축에 들지, 아모리 봐도 미남자(美男子)는 아니야, 미남자란 「바렌티노」의 얼골에 두목지(杜牧之)의 풍채에 리태백(李太白)의 문장에...
白樂仙人- 문장은 빠저도 조켓지요.＜83＞
卜惠淑- 듯고 보면 그러치요, 여운형은 호남자지요. 그리고 인품이 조터구만, 어느 좌석에서든가, 아마 무슨 축구단 환영회 석상이든지요? 그 때 말슴하는 모양을 보앗는데 시언 시언하고 서글 서글한 어룬이더구만, 상하 구별할 줄 모르고, 젠체 빼지 안코.(사진은 李瑞求氏)
李瑞求- 여운형이 때문에 송진우고 방응모고 이상협이 신문사장노릇을 창피해서 못해먹겟다고 한다데. 신문사장이란 의례 떡 버틔고, 쑥 구석에 드러안저 돌부처 모양으로 좀처럼 움지기지 말고-그러케 무게잇고, 버틔는 것으로 아라오든 터에, 자아- 이 분을 보게, 하로 건너큼씩 된 놈 안된 놈의 결혼식 주례(主禮)를 하지, 어듸 운동회 잇다- 하면 달려가서 응원하지, 나어린 학생들과도 동무모양으로 어울너 뛰어다니고, 교제가 넓고 하로에도 네대섯번을 종로 네거리로 들낙날낙 하지. 우리 보기에는 이러케 활발하고 인정잇고, 양증인 조흔 신문사장이 업건만, 태고목덕씨 때 군자도덕을 직히는 다른 신문사장 눈에는 눈꼴에 나기도 할게야.
卜惠淑- 조와요. 그 어룬이, 우리 비-너스(喫茶店)에도 각금 오서서 「쪼-고렛」을 잡숫지, 어린애들처럼...
仙人- 그럼 결국 당대 호걸남아는 려운형이로 칠가요? 어듸 신문사장 말이 낫스니 송진우(宋鎭禹)는 호남자나 미남자측에 못들가요.
李瑞求- 앗갑게도 수염이 업서서 탈이야. 수염이 업스니까 그 너른 얼골이 재령나무 리벌가치 넓고 길게만 보여 탈이데그려.
卜惠淑- 그래요. 수염때문에 매친 데가 업서서, 결곡한 데가 업단 말이지요. 그것이 우리 뵙기에도 흠이야요.
仙人- 조선일보의 방응모(方應謨)는?
李瑞求- 안광이 철색(鐵色)이야, 히여멀금 하지 못하고, 얼골 빗갈이 무둑둑한 것이 첫재 미남자론 아니고,  얼골에 주름살이 너무 만코, 전체의 윤곽이 양명(陽明)하지 못한 데가 잇더구만.
卜惠淑- 나두 먼- 발층에서 한번 뵈엇는데 인물은 환-하지 못하더구만. 그러나 미남자, 호남자는 아니라해도 무뚝뚝하여 남자치고는 무게잇는 어룬가태요.
仙人- 그러면 리상협(李相協)은?
卜惠淑- 눈을 내리깔고 새침하고 고요히 거러갈 때는＜84＞ 요조숙녀 타입이지요. 엇저면 그러케도 얌전할가요. 머리따하드린 숫색씨 격이야요.
李瑞求- 흥, 말소리도 쌀쌀하지, 얼골에도 찬바람도는 것 갓지, 누구에게나 첫인상은 그러케 주지만, 누구 한번 탁 밋기 시작하면 그러케 상양하고 다정하고 부드러운 얼골을 짓는 분이 업지. 지금은 다 늙엇지만 10년 전은 확실이 미남자엇서. 그 통에 오직 로만스가 만하엿나.
卜惠淑- 그래, 젊엇슬 때는 미남자엇겟서요. 수양버들가치 연연작작(戀戀嫋嫋)한 맛이 흘넛겟서요.
李瑞求- 한다하는 미남자라고는 언감(言敢)히 말못하겟지만 미남자의 사촌동서(四寸同婿)쯤은 갈걸. 유인원(類人猿)이란 문자모양으로 유미남형(類美男型)이야, 미남자 유사형(類似型)이엇지.
仙人- 그러케 쌀쌀한 듯 하면서도 의리에는 두터운 양하여, 목숨 한귀통이 쯤 떼여 바치려는 제자(弟子)가 만흔 듯 하데나구려.
李瑞求- 김XX, 류광열, 정인익이 다 그러치.
仙人- 자네도 열열한 고분(子分)이지.
李瑞求- 나는 정통파(正統派)는 아니야. 방게(傍系)쯤 되겟지 엇잿든 내게는 은인(恩人)이야. 내가 시골 촌구석에 잇다가 삿갓쓰고 감발치고 동아일보사를 차저갓네그려. 긔자시험을 보인다니까, 그 선성을 듯고서 오직 대담한가 그랫더니 이 시골뚝이를 그분이 알어주어 나를 사람을 만들어 주엇서.
仙人- 말이 작고만 빗구로 가네 그려. 어서 서울 미남자를 찻어주게나. 박영철(朴榮喆)이나 민대식(閔大植)은 엇던가.
李瑞求- 미남자 허구는 타관사람이야. 그러나 박영철이는 대해 보면 묵직하데그려. 그 두리기둥 가튼 묵직한 몸에서 일종 위압(威壓)을 밧어지데. 민대식이는 미남자도 호남자도 아니지.
卜惠淑- 민대식은 나도 먼 발치에서 꼭 한번을 뵈엇는데 미남자는 아니야요. 얼골이 길기만하고.
仙人- 말잘하는 변호사측에는? 김병노는 엇덜가. -말나서, 너무도 말나서.
李瑞求- 신태악(辛泰嶽)이 젊고 입부지. 좀 얼골에 핏기가 업지만.
卜惠淑- 신태악이가 그래 아마 제일일 거야요. 얼골에 좀 여유업는 긔운이 돌기는 하지만.(사진은 卜惠淑氏)＜85＞
李瑞求- 그 밧게 누가 잇나. 자네 한번 속시원히 재판소 변호사 공실(控室)로 차저가 보게나. 천하 「부오도꼬」(不男)는 거기 다 모엿데그려. 하하하.
仙人- 변호사 사회가 제일 낙제일세그려. 그래도 요리점에선 변호사가 제일 환영을 밧는대. 그러면 교육게(敎育界)는 엇던가? 교장축으로 저 현상윤(玄相允)이나 최규동(崔奎東)이나 유억겸(兪億兼)이나 김용무(金用茂) 오긍선(吳兢善) 등 제제 명사말이야.
李瑞求- 말말게. 하나업데. 륙십점(六十點) 급제끗을 줄 미남자도 업데나.
卜惠淑- 그 중 조동식(趙東植)이 낫겟지요.
李瑞求- 응, 그말 드르니 그러하구만. 조동식이 키가 조곰 적어 그러치 그 거름거리라든지 이목구비가 얌전하게 노인 것이 미남자타입이지, 더구나 녜전 시대에는 그런 분을 녀자측에서 미남자라고 햇서.
仙人- 모도 퇴자일세그려. 이려케도 미남자가 업단 말인가. 리광수(李光洙)는 엇대.
李瑞求- 노-란 눈동자와, 부드러운 그 말소리가 사람을 끄을지. 그러나 미남자는 천만에 아니야.
仙人- 양주삼(梁柱三)은?
李瑞求- 갈曰字야. 그저 훤-할 뿐이지.
仙人- 정인과(鄭仁果) 리대위(李大偉) 김창제(金昶濟)는?
李瑞求- 김창제는 미남자 타입이야, 확실히. 만약 20년만 젊엇든들 미남자라고 햇슬걸.
仙人- 녜전 근우회 몃몃 녀성들이 당대 오미남자(當代五美男子)라 하여 골눈 일 잇지. 누구 누구인고 하면 죽은 閔泰媛 상해로 가 버린 李星鎔博士 그 때 조선일보 편집국장으로 잇든 韓基岳 그리고 安碩柱 등등을.
李瑞求- 안석주는 지금도 미남자지. 신문게에 잇서 전에 업고 다시 뒤에 업슬 미남자야. 그러나 한긔악이는 이제는 미남자형(型)이 아니야. 현대는 스포츠, 맨타입을 조와하는 세상이거든...
卜惠淑- 안석주가 그 중 낫지요. 쉬 늙지도 안는 얼골이고 그리고 쥐정을 너무하여 그려치 현진건(玄鎭健)이도 미남자고. 지금은 살결이 퇴색(褪色)햇지만 정인익(鄭寅翼)이도 조흔 얼골이엇고. 코가 굴곡이 잇서 그려치 최독견(崔獨鵑)이도 미남자 유사형 측에 들만한 분이지.
仙人- 자- 그만치 훌터보앗스니까, 인제 총결산으로＜86＞ 서울대표 미남자를 한 분 골너 뽑습시다.
卜惠淑- 잇지, 잇지요. 박흥식(朴興植) 그이지요.
李瑞求- 올치. 올해 박흥식이 일등이야. 그 우슬 때 상금한 코와 어엽부게 담겻든 입이 방긋이 열닐 적에는 만흔 미인이 따르겟데.
卜惠淑- 신사급에서는 박흥식이 남버원이지. 살결이 히고, 이목구비의 윤곽이 분명하고, 오종종하지 안코, 더구나 그 다정스운 말소리. 내가 妓籍에 잇슬 때 각금 료리점에서 좌석에 뫼신적 잇는데, 호감주는 분이지요.
李瑞求- 가만잇게 박흥식을 갑(甲)이라 하면 그 다음 가는 을급(乙級) 미남자가 잇지, 그이가 신흥우(申興雨)야. 요지간은 빨간 넥타이도 아니하고.
卜惠淑- 그러치 신흥우지. 그이도 참 늙을 줄을 몰느시더구만.
仙人- 영화배우나 무대배우 속에는 만흘걸요.
卜惠淑- 요전 춘향전에 리도령으로 나왓든 한일송(韓一松)이도 미남자고, 리경선(李慶善)이도 조흔 얼골이지요.
李瑞求- 강홍식(姜弘植)이도 남자다운 얼골이지. 라운규(羅雲奎)는 얼골윤곽의 선(線)은 굵지만 미남자 호남자는 아니야.
卜惠淑- 풍채조흔 이론 백명건(白命乾)이 잇지요. 키가 좀 커서 흠이지만도요-.
(俠氣잇는 豪傑男兒篇은 다른 號에)

서울 代表的 美人은 누구 누구인가
仙人-남성들을 그만치 훌터 보앗스니. 자아, 인제 녀자측으로 가봅시다. 누가 장안 일등미인일가요.
李瑞求- 나 꼭 한 분을 보앗네. 리덕요(李德耀)야. 그 때 죽은 최서해(崔海曙)가 의전병원(醫專病院)에서 아를 적에 내가 문병을 갓는데, 바로 나와 정면 한 곳에 웬-녀자가 하나 섯는데, 엇더케 잘생겻는지 그만 가삼이 꽉 막히데. 호박색(琥珀色) 윤이 흐르는 그 힌 살결, 붉으레 타오르는 입설, 어듸까지든지 정열적인 그 눈 먹장가튼 머리, 어듸로 보아도 참 절색이데. 양귀비와 쿠레오파토라와 데-도릿히를 한데 묵거서, 한데 삶아서 미운 점 다 골나 빼버리고 새로 만든 듯 하더구만. 히랍의 비-너스＜87＞ 녀신(女神)이야.
세상이 다 아는 말이지만, 말이야 바른 대로 나 만치 녀자를 만히 본 사람이 잇는가. 수 백명이랄가, 수 천명이랄가. 그 중에서 교양(敎養)과 리지(理智)와 총명(聰明)이 밧갓헤 나 끌으며 그러면서 청풍명월(淸風明月)인 듯 남의 가슴을 훤-니 열러주는 가인은 나는 리덕요에게서 발견하엿네그려.
꼭 한 번을 보앗는데-그 뒤에 드르니 부군 한위건(夫君韓偉健)이를 따라서 북경(北京)인가 갓다가 앗갑게도 객사(客死)하엿다데그려.
仙人- 미인박명이야요, 그러케 입부니까, 빨니 죽지. 언젠가 윤백남(尹白南)이도 자네 말가치 이덕요를 대표적 미인으로 치데그려.
李瑞求- 전무후무할걸. 그리고는 죽은 송게월(宋桂月)이 또 미인이엇지. 내가 어듸서 처음 발견하엿는가 하면, 그게 멧 해 전 봄이든가, 창경원에 사꾸라꼿이 피기 시작하고 장안거리 거리에는 강남제비 차저드는 하사월(夏四月)이야. 최독견(崔獨鵑)이와 가치 정자옥(丁子屋)압흘 지나는데 웬- 키 후리후리 크고 눈이 이글이글하고, 바로 명사십리 해당화 꼿가치 시언하고 와자자하게 생긴 묘령 녀성이 우리 압흐로 거러간단 말이야. 처음에야 얼골이 참조쿠나 햇슬 뿐인데 거름것는 뒷맵시가 물찬제비가치 샛듯한 양이 참으로 황홀하여지데. 더구나 학두름의 다리가치 간듯한 두다리의 각선미(脚線美)는 참으로 큰 예술품이데그려. 그래서 한 거름 두 거름 각선미에 취해 따른다는 것이 안동 네거리 한성도서(漢城圖書) 압까지 왓겟지. 그 때 어느 친구를 맛나 무르니 그가 송계월이엇서.
卜惠淑- 송계월이는 개벽사에 다닐 적에 나도 본 적이 잇는데 함경도 녀자가 되어 발과 손이 멋업시 커서 흠이지 미인은 미인이더구만. 나는 녀자지만 역시 그런 녀자가 조와요. 서글서글하여 그겻헤 가면 시언한 바름이 돌 것 갓해서요.
仙人- 역시 송계월이도 미인박명이로구만. 사회주의 녀성 가운데는 업섯든가.
李瑞求- 잇섯지, 양명(梁明)이를 따라 상해(上海)로 갓다가 애기 나어가지고 제주도 시가에 가 잇는 조원숙(趙元淑)이 조왓지. 조곰 육감적이 되어 노-불한 맛은 업섯지만. 그러고, 그게아마 내가 동아일보긔자 다닐 적 일이야. 재동 84번지 북풍회관＜88＞ (北風會館)으로 긔사채집을 갓는데 웬- 녀자가 쑥 나오는 것이, 엇저면 살결이 그러케 고을가. 우유(牛乳)와 계란만으로 만든드시 얼골이고 팔과 다리가 그양 투명체(透明體)로 보일드시 윤택흐르는 17, 8나는 녀자가 잇겟지. 조선서는 처음 보는 이야, 그가 강아근니아(姜아근니아)엇서. 그뒤 류치장도 각금 다녀나오고, 이리저리 고생사리하면서 그만 그 곱든 육체가 보잘 것 업게 되엇지만 참으로 그이는 육체미가 잇섯서.
仙人- 로서아 태생으로 노서아에서 자라서 양풍(洋風) 맛이 돌앗지요. 한때는 다 치든 미인이야. 그 밧게 정칠성(丁七星), 허정숙(許貞淑), 심은숙(沈恩淑), 황신덕(黃信德)이는 엇더튼가.
李瑞求- 다 미인은 아니엇지. 억지로 말하자면 미인될 번 댁이엇지.
卜惠淑- 그러나 이리저리 조용히 뜨더 볼나치면 눈 한가지 엡분이, 코 한가지 엡분이 하고 부분품(部分品)이 엡분 이는 당대 사회주의 녀성속에 만햇다고 할걸요.
李瑞求- 그 때 철에 근우회에 함경도 청진잇다든 김정원(金貞媛)이란 분이 잇섯는데 바탕은 분명 미인이엇서.
仙人- 근우회 당철에 한참은 당대 미인이 거기 모힌 듯한 때가 잇섯서. 저 리상재 사회장(李商在社會葬)- 그날만해도 수 만 군중 속으로 상여엽헤 서서 나가든 얼골 잘생긴 녀성이란 모도가 근우회패들이엇서. 근우회도 그러치만은, 동경 류학생(東京留學生)들 속에 「미인」이 만치안엇나, 웨?
李瑞求- 누가 아니래. 그 당절 미인으로 연학년 부인이 된 황국영(黃菊榮) 김팔봉 부인이 된 강씨, 두루두루 만치. 그러나 이제는 모다 아히낫고, 떡게머리하여이고, 다 シタレ를 햇서. 인제는 옛날 모습이라고 차즐 길 업데그려。
卜惠淑- 화무십일홍이든 게지요. 그 때 우리 동경(東京)에 잇슬 철 미인이라면 꽤 미인이라고 불니우든 동무들이 만햇는데, 그저 7, 8년, 십수년 지내는 사이에 모다 그 조튼 얼골이 쓸어지더구만. 앗가운 일이지요.
仙人- 그때 말고- 맨처음 류학생패에는 업섯나?
李瑞求- 맨처음이라면 허영숙(許英肅) 라혜석(羅惠錫) 김명순(金明淳), 유영준(劉英俊)들이엇는데 열거름 양보하고 보아도 양귀비 사촌도 업섯서. 다만 그 당시는 스타일이 참신하니까, 조흔 의미로 「모던껄」이라하야, 일홈이 얼골보다 열갑절, 스무갑절＜89＞ 더 올나 갓섯지.
卜惠淑- 그 중에 나슨 것은 그래도 김명순(金明淳)이 엇슬가. 시도 쓰고, 소설도 쓰더니 끗끗내 녀류문사로 문명(文名)도 날니고-
仙人- 아메리카 류학생 중에는 누가 업슬가요.
卜惠淑- 박인덕(朴仁德)이가 잇지, 그 분은 지금은 늙어서 그러치만 광대뼈 나온 것을 조곰 도로 밀어너코, 이마의 주름쌀을 「골드크림」으로 지워버리어, 십년만 더 젊어지게만 한다면 아직도 장안안 독판미인 노릇할걸요. 말소리도 깍근 배갓치 서근서근하고, 이약이할 때에 눈짓콧짓 그 세런된 췌스추어로 퍽으나 호감을 주는 분이여요.
李瑞求- 그러치 박인덕이야. 박인덕은 쾌활하고 시언하고 무게잇서 보이데. 한참 당년- 말하자면 미국가기 전 저 이화학당(梨花學堂)에 단닐 때에는 「말 잘하는 박인덕」 「얼골 잘난 박인덕」 「노래 잘하는 박인덕」이라 하여 명성이 오죽하엿든가.
仙人- 김활난(金活蘭)이는 엇던가. 이화전문의-
卜惠淑- 시집을 안가서 그런지 쉬 늙지안터구만.
李瑞求- 키가 적어서. 키적은 보충을 가슴으로 하랴는지 가슴을 쑥 내밀고 다니데 요지간은-. 그러나 미인은 아니야. 키가 적고 이마가 좁고.
卜惠淑- 다들 언제 시집을 가노-.
李瑞求- 딴말이지만 숨은 미인은 김찬영(金讚永) 마누라야. 변호사 김찬영 말고, 영화배급하든 김찬영이 말이야. 미인이지. 고향이 진남포(鎭南浦)라데만은.
仙人- 요지간은 교육계나 영부인계(令夫人界)보다 레코-드계에 인긔(人氣)도 잇슬 뿐더러 얼골 훌융한 이들이 만흔 것 갓더구만.
李瑞求- 만치 만하. 라선교(羅仙嬌)도 귀여운 얼골이고 전옥(全玉)이도 조흔 얼골이고-
卜惠淑- 전옥이는 조곰 암상구즌 데 잇지만 전체로 보아 잘 째인 미인타입이지요. 그러고 죽은 최향화(崔香花)도 미인이엇고, 선우일선(鮮于一扇)이도 수수하게 귀한 얼골이지요.
李瑞求- 선우일선이 괜찬치, 얄구진 데가 업서 성큼하고 순직하고 해서-
仙人- 제일 인긔가 만타는 왕수복(王壽福)이는 엇던가.
李瑞求- 육감적(肉感的)이지만 미인은 아니야.
卜惠淑- 김복희(金福姬)도 일홈은 놉지만 미인은 아니지요. 그리고 녀배우에 춘향전에 춘향이로 나왓든 문예봉(文藝峰)이 괜찬치. 조곰 머리가 적어서＜90＞ 「가로마」자리가 쩌른 것이 흠이지요. 여자란 가르마자리가 길어아 죠힝(上品)하게 보이는 법인데요.
仙人- 자아, 이제는 긔생축으로 올며 갑시다. 당대 명긔는 누구인가. 당대 명긔라고 춤 잘 추고 소리 잘 하는 패가 아니라 화초긔생(花草妓生)으로 말이지요.
李瑞求- 만하, 지금은 은퇴하여 즌고개서 조선관(朝鮮舘)을 경영하는 김산호주(金珊瑚珠)도 윤곽이 번듯한 서도미인이고.
卜惠淑- 장안 안에 수백명 긔생이 잇지만 백명건이와 가치 지내든 박옥화(朴玉花)가 키가 너무 커서 그러치 학두룸가튼 신선미(新鮮味)잇는 미인이엇고.
李瑞求- 또 김금도(金錦桃)도 미인이엇지. 얼골이 아기자기하게 곱다기보다 전체가 구수하게 조코 그러고 손님허고 마조 안저 화제(話題)가 궁하지안치. 무엇이든 잘 알고, 또 공순하고 그래서 연회석(宴會席)에서 함께 놀아도 언제든지 실치안는 이지.
卜惠淑- 나도 주서대일가요. 리화선(李花仙) 신명주(申明珠), 방월선(方月仙)이도 미인이고.
仙人- 유금도(柳錦桃)는.
李瑞求- 「푸리마돈나야. 언제든지 늙을 줄 모르고 청춘의 향긔(靑春의 香氣)가 떠돌지. 「영원한 처녀」야.
卜惠淑- 최옥희(崔玉嬉)도 미인이지, 얼골이 좀 가난하게 보여 탈이지만.
李瑞求- 일홈이 놉기야 송연화(宋蓮花)지. 잘 놀고 손님 비유 잘 마추고-시언시언하고, 원체 노장(老將)이기도 하지마는, 대체로 지금 서울안에 여러 권번에 3, 400명 긔생들이 잇다하지만, 늘 손님들에게 불니워다니는 인물 잘 나고, 소리 잘 하는 긔생은 불과 이십명 내외야.

파토론은 누구인가 또 돈 잘 쓰는 豪俠男兒는 누구인가
仙人- 음악가(音樂家)나, 녀배우(女俳優)를 위하여 돈을 대주는, 조흔 의미의 예술보호자(藝術保護者), 시체말로 하면 「파토론」이라면 서울 장안에 누구누구를 헤일가요.＜91＞
李瑞求- 윤심덕(尹心悳)에 대한 부자 리용문(李容汶)이 잇섯지. 토월회(土月會) 때에 윤심덕에게 좀 도와준 적이 잇섯지. 그러나 가령 대창희팔랑(大倉喜八郞)이 후지하라·요시에(藤原義江)를 파리로 돈대주어 공부식히는 것과는 성질이 달넛지. 그러나 조선서 가장 깨긋한 큰 돈을 예술을 위하여 바친 이를 찻자면 그는 박승희(朴承喜)지. 토월회를 위하여 그 때 돈 2만원을 깨긋하게 내노앗지요. 그 때 돈 2만원이라면 지금 돈 8만원도 더 되네. 감사한 사람이엇지.
卜惠淑- 음악을 위하여 돈 쓴 사람으로는 백인기 아들 백명건이가 독일 류학하고 도라나와서 「코리안째스뺀드」를 만들엇슬 적에, 조흔 의미로 돈을 썻지요. 그러구는 아마 이 좌석에 안즌 리서구씨가 박영선인가 하는 미인 위해, 오백시간(五百時間)을 한꺼번에 다라주엇다 하는 것이 아마 「파도론레코-드」일걸요. 호호.
李瑞求- 그런 몸 괴로운 소리는 하지마우다. 우리 피차에 신변관게 일은 이 좌석에선 덥퍼버리기로 하고, 남의 이약이만 진행합시다. 하하하.
卜惠淑- 요지간 들니는 말에 김XX이가 전XX이를 위해서 7,000원짜리 집 사주고, 3,000원짜리 보석반지 사주고-소문이 와자작 하드구만.
李瑞求- 최X학이도 요지간 최X연이를 떼어드려갓는데 일만원인가 주엇다고...
仙人- 활동사진(活動寫眞) 사업을 위하여 돈을 내노흔 빠토론이야 만흘걸요.
李瑞求- 그야 만치. 라운규가 멧가지 작품을 내노앗대도 모다 후원자가 돈을 대엇고, 리구영(李龜永)이나 누구누구가 작품을 내노흔 것이 모다 숨은 후원자가 잇서서 돈을 내어 노앗지. 그런 사람을 찻자면 수두룩 하지요.
卜惠淑- 그러나 순수한, 깨긋한 마음으로, 정말 음악이면 음악, 연극이면 연극을 보호하자는 의미로 돈내어 놋는 이가 과기에는 적엇지요. 거기에는 전부라고 하여도 가할만치 파도론들이 모다 목적이 잇섯지요. 가령 어느 극단에 돈을 내어 노앗다면, 그 사람은 그 극단 배우 중 어느 녀자에게 반하여서, 그 녀자의 환심 사기 위하여 그러는 경우가 태반이지요. 일활(日活) 잇는 미네, 킹고(峯吟子)가 관서 어느 실업가(關西實業家)로부터 매달 800원(800圓)을 밧고 잇섯다는 등, 이런 일은 조선 뿐이 아니고, 어듸던 다＜92＞ 보수를 바라고야 파도론 노릇을 하나보더구만요.
仙人- 녯날 극단에나 활동사진 배우로 다닐 적에 복헤숙씨는 그런 파도론을 업어본 적이 잇서요.
卜惠淑- 잇섯지요. 정직하게 말하면. 그러나 나는 단언해요. 나는 내 정조를 제공한 일은 절대로 업서요. 어느 극단이라고 일홈까지 대일 수는 업지만은 언제든가 그런 일 잇섯지요, 극단주무하는 이가 귀ㅅ속말로 「저 놈팽이 당신따라 작고 다니니, 돈 낼 때까지는 조토록 대답해달나고 하겟지. 내가 도라저서 그 사람이 발을 끗는 날이면 극단은 망하는 수박게야 업섯스니까. 그래서 허릴업시 그 파토론이 시골 도라다닐 때에 구찬게 굴길내 서울가서 조용히 맛나자고, 연해연방 웃는 낫츠로 속여 왓지요.
仙人- 그래서 서울 와서는요?
卜惠淑- 시침이 뚝 따고 나는 내집에 와버렷지요. 그런 뒤는 모든 관게가 다 끈어젓지요. 생각하면 우습지. 지금 조선사회의 파도론이 잇다면 십중팔구는 모다 어느 녀배우(女俳優)에 대한 구애수단(求愛手段)일걸요.
李瑞求- 그 말이 올치, 돈 써가며 웃줄거리며, 그러면서 어느 게집을 제 손에 너차는 그런 심리가진 파토론이 대부분이야. 아직도 조선사회는 멀엇서.
仙人- 그러면 돈 잘 쓰는 사람은 누구누구일가요. 선선하게 쓸데 척척 쓰는 그런 긔마에(氣前)가 조흔 사람이라면?
卜惠淑- 금년 봄이든가요. 우리 비너스 기차점(茶팁店)에 하로는 점잔은 신사 한 분이 오서서 「고-히」 한 잔 자시고 팁으로 10원짜리 지전 한장 두고 나가겟지요. 무르니까 천진(天津)잇는 분이래요. 나 처음 그런 분을 맛낫습니다.
李瑞求- 아마 그 이는 고토(故土)가 그리워 여러 해 만에 서울로 차저왓다가 녯 정조(情調)에 가슴이 설네든 게지요. 그래서 15전짜리 차 한 잔에 10원 팁을 내엇슬걸. 락원(樂園) 갑페 가튼 데서도 팁으로 20원까지. 내던지는 손님을 보앗다고 하더구만.
仙人- 자네는 얼마나 내본 적 잇는가.
李瑞求- 동경(東京)갓다가 은좌(銀座) 엇든 「레스토란」에 가서 10원 준 일이 잇는데 아마 이것이 나로서는 최상이엇네. 이약이 드르면 횡산대관(橫山大觀)이나 국지관(菊池寬) 가튼 예술가들도 은좌 갑페에 나타나서 3, 400원 팁 주는 일이 수두룩하다니 몃백만원, 몃천만원하는 큰 실업가측들이 1, 2천원 내던진다는＜93＞ 말도 거진말 아닌상 십데.
卜惠淑- 나도 녀급들 헌테서 드른 말이지만 신호(神戶) 엇든 후네나리깅(船成金)은 2천원을 던저주더래요. 아모 성적요구(性的要求)가 업시! 놀납지요.
仙人-조선서 돈을 시언시언하게 쓰는 이가 누굴가.
卜惠淑- 백명건일걸. 쓸데는 빗나게 쓰지요.
仙人- 민대식이나 한상용, 박영철 등 큰 실업가는 각금 갑페 가튼데로 가는가요.
卜惠淑- 몰느지요.
李瑞求- 간대도 우리 눈에 띠우도록은 아니갈 터이지. 드른즉 큰 실업가축들만 가는 오뎅집이 남산장(南山莊) 부근에 잇서 그리로 각금 간단 말이 들니는데, 게 가서야 오뎅하나 집어먹고도 10원 20원을 노쿠 온다더구만.

서울에 흥행사가 잇나뇨 배우로는 누가 유망한가요
仙人- 서울에 ¥행사(興行師)가 잇나뇨. 흥행사, 혹은 마네-자라 할 사람이. 가령 동경의 요시모도(吉本)가 배구자(裵龜子)의 흥행를 도마터 하드시 또는 소림일삼(小林一三)이 일극(日劇) 동보(東寶)를 경영하 듯하는 마네-쟈, 혹은 흥행사라 할 사람들이.
李瑞求- 「춘행전」을 이번에 와께지마(分島)가 돈을 대어하엿다데.
仙人- 얼마나?
卜惠淑- 이럭저럭 약 7, 8천원 들엇단 말이 잇더구만요.
李瑞求- 어느 나라 연극이나 활동사진이든 반드시 그 사업이 절 발달되자면 조흔 마네-쟈가 첫재로 나서야 하는 법인데, 조선에는 그런 인물이 업는 것이 큰 탄식이야. 지금은 영화배급(映畵配給)의 권리를 가지고 잇는 것은 림수호(林秀湖) 녯날 극단에 다니든 사람) 도요(淀=藝苑社를 인수하여 하는 사람) 소노다(園田)이 세 사람이지. 녜전 라운규가 박혓든 「아리랑」이나 「금붕어」나 김영환(金永煥)의 「落花流水」나 그 박게 우리 사이에서 만드러진 영화의 대부분은 이 세 사람들 손으로 모다 흘너 드러가 잇는＜94＞ 형편이지.
仙人- 흘너 들어가다니?
李瑞求- 돈에 밧부니까, 완성된 작품을 저당잡히고 돈을 빌어쓰지. 그러구는 돈을 못갑게 되니까 판권이 거기 가벼리지. 조선서 흥행사라 하면 아마 앗가 말한 세 사람 뿐일걸.
仙人- 「춘행전」도 이번 단성사(團成社)에서 처음 멧 날은 일천오륙백원씩 빠젓다하니, 그러케 남는 장사치고 엇재서 조선사람측 영화제작업자는 기껏해야 한 작품을 내고 쓰러질가요.
卜惠淑- 딱한 말슴도 하시네. 조선흥행업자의 인격과 식견과 자력을 생각해야 하지요. 첫재는 예술에 대한 깁혼 리해(理解)가 업는 것, 둘재는 예술품을 제작하는 태도가 진실(眞實)스럽지 못한 것, 셋재는 돈을 사내답게 쓰지 못하는 것, 이 세 가지지요. 앗가도 잠간 비첫지만, 녜전 초창시대의 출자자(出資主)란 사람은 실상 목적이 활동사진 맨드는데 잇섯든 것 아니고, 게집애나 후릴 작정으로 극단도 만들고, 영화에 돈도 내노앗지요. 그런 뒤는 제가 돈을 낸다고 자세하고 제와 갓가운 뚱딴지 가튼 사람들을 끄으러다가 주역(主役)도 맛기고 감독(監督)도 식히니, 그 작품이 성한 것이 나올 리가 업고 셋재는 돈은 결국은 2천원이요, 3천원이요 하고 쓰면서도, 그 쓰는 태도가 고리대금업자 이상이어서 3원도 주고, 5원도 주고, 도모지 한 덩어리로 탁 주지 안어서 밧어 쓰는 사람은 애만 나고, 돈은 갑절이 들면서 일은 안되지요. 그러구는 한 작품을 만들고는 그만 나가 잣바지지요.
李瑞求- 신염(信念)이 업지. 한마듸로 말하면 신염이 업스니까 그 일이 될 까닭이 잇나뇨. 「정말로 이 사업은 성공하고마는 사업이다」하는 굿은 신염이 생긴다면 첫 작품에는 밋젓다해도, 그 다음 작품으로 보충할 게획이 설 터인데, 그만 낙심하고 말지요. 비단 영화 뿐 아니라, 레코-드라든지 모든 빗나는 사업이 다 쓸어저 가는 까닭이 거기 잇단말이야. 그러기에 내가 보기에는 지금까지의 마네-쟈, 혹은 극게의 은인(恩人)으로는 박승희(朴承喜)가 제일인자엇지. 제 재산 2만여 원을 써가면서 제가 무대감독(舞臺監督)을 하고, 제가 각본 쓰고, 갈팡질팡하면서 진심껏 극게을 성장식힌 사람이엇지. 다시 제2 박승희가 나오지 안코는 조선의 극게나 영화게는 암담하다 할박게 업네.＜95＞
仙人-라운규(羅雲奎)는 다시 재긔(再起)하지 안나?
李瑞求- 그 사람이 초긔 영화게에 잇서서는 큰 공로자엿고 그 작품에 북국인적선(北國人的線)이 굵은 점이 여러 사람의 환영을 밧엇섯는데, 이제는 「유끼쯔마리」(行き喆り)를 햇단말이야.
卜惠淑- 그 사람에게는 「아리랑」이 대표작이엇지. 아리랑 이후에는 더 진전이 업섯서요. 최근에는 배우로서 연출은 아니하고 감독(監督) 방면에 몸을 옴기는데, 그 사람이 감독하는 작품은 모다 라운규식이 되야 그저 뛰어다니고, 우락부락한 맛이 돌아서 배우들도 모다 라운규와 가튼 타입으로 동작하게만 하는 듯 하더군요.
李瑞求- 긔사(技師)로는 리창용(李創用)이 낫지.
卜惠淑- 요지간 안석주의 「춘풍」(春風) 촬영하는 것을 보니까, 감독에 리(李)라고 하는 분이 잇는데, 이 사람이 퍽으나 숙련한 수완을 가지고 잇더구만요.
仙人- 압흐로 더 자랄상 십흔 배우는 누구누구들인가요. 춘행전의 한일송(韓一松)이는 엇던가요.
卜惠淑- 조와요. 얼골타입이 조코, 예술을 진실로 리해하는 듯 십고.
李瑞求- 그 사람이 유망하지. 그러고 황철(黃鐵)이도 리경선(李慶善)이도 다 장래가 잇다고 볼 일이야.
仙人- 녀자로는―
李瑞求-문예봉(文藝峯)이야.
卜惠淑- 그러치요. 문예봉에게 고전극(古典劇)의 주역을 맛기면 실패가 업슬걸요.
仙人- 한 작품에 한 달이고 두 달동안 출연하면 모다 얼마나 밧나뇨. 보수로는.
李瑞求- 150, 60원은 잘하면 밧지.
卜惠淑- 웬걸요. 100원일가, 더 떠러지면 5, 60원 정도일걸요.
仙人- 서양배우로는 누구와 가튼 타입을 조와해요.
卜惠淑- 사내로는 바렌티노, 「엇던 밤에 생긴 일」에 나왓든 「쿠락케-불」, 「벵갈槍騎兵」의 「케리-, 쿠-바」.
仙人- 닥크라스型과 촤푸링型의 두 가지 잇다면 어느 쪽을 조와해요.
卜惠淑- 언제보아도 애수(哀愁)에 차고 잇는 듯한 촤푸링이 조와요. 촤푸링에게는 정말로 철학(哲學)이 잇고 포엣트(詩)가 잇는 듯하지만 딱크라스야 경박하고 둔감(鈍感)하고―
李瑞求- 촤푸링은 황금광시대(黃金狂時代)가 절정이엇지. 나는 「데도릿지」가 조와. 그의 꿈속에 무친 듯한＜96＞ 눈동자 어느 밀실(密室) 속에 익그는 듯한 그윽한 말소리, 정말 조테나. 그러고 「노-마, 샐라-」도 「구로뎃, 골-벨」도 조와.
卜惠淑- 녯날 배우만 못한 것 갓더구만. 녯날의 「리리앙깃쉬」 「크라라보」 가튼 명연긔(名演技)를 가진 큰 스타-는 그 뒤에 업는 듯 하더구만요.
李瑞求- 경도(京都)갓다가 촬영소에 들너 강양이(岡讓二)를 맛낫는데, 그 사람의 얼골 윤곽이며 연긔(演技)가 조테나, 고전염(高田稔)도 조치. 시대극(時代劇)에는 대하내(大河內)이야.
卜惠淑- 나도 언젠가, 촬영소에 들넛슬 적에 入江たか子 연긔를 보앗는데 엇더케 둔감(鈍感)이든지요. 한 장면을 일곱 번이나 다시 박이더구만―역시 복견직강(伏見直江)이 낫고, 남자로는 편강천헤장(片岡千惠藏)이 낫지요. 소삼용(小杉勇)의 연긔에도 반해저요.
仙人- 최승히(崔承喜)와 배구자(裵龜子)의 인긔가 굉장한 모양인데, 그 분들의 비평을 좀 하여주게나.
李瑞求- 두 분 다 대가(大家)들이니까, 벌서 비평권외(批評圈外)에 잇네. 더구나 최승히는 지금 동경무용게에서 독보(獨步)하는 지위를 가지고 잇서, 따르는 사람이 업네. 보라구 석정막문하에 잇든 석정소랑(石井小浪)이 은퇴하고, 원신자(原信子) 또한 은퇴하고, 누가 잇나, 최승히밧게.
卜惠淑- 연긔(演技)로 보아도 이제는 정말 당대 일류지요. 두 분 다 얼골이 조코―, 예술을 위한 정열(情熱)이 끌코.

劇團을 쪼차 다니다가 逢變한 일 업는가. 시골 興行은 돈을 버으는가
仙人- 시골로 극단이 순희흥행다가 밥갑에 몰니면 녀배우를 전당으로 잡혀둔다는데 어듸 인질(人質) 당한 일이 업서요.
卜惠淑- 웨 업서요, 수두록하지요. 정말 그동안 조선안 팔도는 골골이 삿삿치 도라다녓고 만주(滿洲)요 동경 대판(東京大阪)이요 몃 해를 두고 여러 십차레를 도라다니는 사이에 말 못할 고생을 격근 일이 한 두 번이 아니지요. 정말 젊은 녀자의 몸에 피눈물도＜97＞ 나만치 흘녀본 이가 드물걸요.
仙人- 엇더케요?
卜惠淑- 한번은 윤백남(尹白南)이 인솔한 민중극단(民衆劇團)에 끼어서 삼남 각지를 도라다니다가 마산(馬山)왓는데, 그 때는 한창 사꾸라 철이엇지만 련일 비가 오고 손님은 아니드러오고, 열흘, 보름 묵는 사이에 려관집에 밥갑은 1,300원어치나 덜컥 지엇지. 자 엇더케 해요. 주인은 돈 내라고 졸느고― 인솔자들은 속이 달아서 연해연방 서울이요 대구요 하고 돈보내라고 전보질하여, 글세 전보료만 80원이 들엇지요. 기가 막혀서... 그래서 결국 몃몃사람이 떠러지고(그 속에 나도) 딴 사람들은 떠나서 돈 1,000원을 하여다 주고, 살아나왓지요.
仙人- 걸작이구만. 그러구는 또 업서요?
卜惠淑- 또 한 가지 더 말하지요. 평양(平壤)갓다가 흥행성적(興行成績)이 조치 못하여 밥갑을 산뎀이가치 젓지요. 주인놈 하는 말이 걸작이지요. 다른 사람들은 다 제 마음대로 떠나도 조흐니 복헤숙이만 깃트라고 하지요. 그래 할 수 잇서야지. 이제는 뱃심이나 부릴밧게 업다하야 다른 사람들은 다 서울까지 올려 보내노코는, 그제는 나 한몸만 떠러저 잇게 되자, 밤낫 주인 녀석과 이놈 저놈하고 세차게 싸홈을 햇지요. 화가 나서, 저도 생각지 못하든 걸직한 욕이 엇더케 몹시 쏘저다 나오는지 한바탕 싸우고는 우스워서 혼자 두러안저 우섯지요.
이러기를 대엿새 하엿더니, 주인녀석도 제 예산이 다 틀니고, 꼴이 틀렷다고 보앗든지 나종에는 빼앗아 두엇든 가방이고 양산이고 치마고 저고리고 구두를 마당에 내던지면서 「예―이 무서운 년, 어서 가지고 가거라」하겟지. 그래 주섬주섬 거더 입고 서울 올너 왓지요. 호호호, 그 놈이 녀관이 경X여관이엇지요.
仙人- 한번 흥행에 얼마나 이익이 나는가요.
卜惠淑- 글세 드러맛기만 하면 돈을 잘 버을지요. 몃천원씩 손에 쥐고 도라오게 되지요. 벌서 여러 해 전인데 토월회(土月會) 때에  「가주사」 「犧牲」 등의 연극을 가지고 대구(大邱)로 가서 공연을 하엿는데 입장료도 1원 50錢, 1원, 80錢 이러케 모다 빗사게 밧엇건만 엇더케 손님이 쓰러드는지 하로밤에 800원이 낫서요, 놀나웟지. 그러고 썩―그전 일인데 권일청(權一淸)들과 함께 간도(間島)로 흥행을 갓는데 마츰 품평회(品評會)든가 무에든가 잇서서＜98＞ 여간 사람들이 만히 모히지 안어서, 거기서도 큰 돈을 모앗지요. 그래서 우리도 100원, 200원씩 한꺼번에 타본 적이 잇지요, 배당(配當)을요.

서울에 잇섯스면 조흘 것이 무엇일가.
仙人- 모던 도시 서울에 잇섯스면 조흘 것이 무엇무엇일가요.
李瑞求- 딴스, 홀이야
卜惠淑- 나도 동감이야요. 서울에 딴스 홀 하나도 업기 까닭에 동경 대판(東京大阪)서 만주(滿洲)로 가는 손님들이 서울에 들 맛이 업다하여, 하로만 잠간 내렷다가 그냥 봉천(奉天) 신경(新京)으로 직행하여 버려요. 실로 그 때문에 한 달 잡고도 서울에 떠러질 돈으로 손해 밧는 금액이 몃 만원, 몃 십만원인지 모르지오.
李瑞求- 동경서 유명한 딴스홀 후로리다에 가보니 음탕하다거나 추악하다는 관렴은 터럭끗만치도 업고 또 딴스홀에 출입하는 사람들을 세상서는 함부로 연애유히(戀愛遊戱)나 하는 유한매담(有閑婦人)이나 부량소년으로 녁이지만 정작 가보니까, 점잔은 신사숙녀가 모다 오드구만. 더구나 샐라리만들이 종일 주판과 펜을 잡고 삘딩속에 우울스럽게 업듸어 잇다가, 석양에 겨우 해방이 되어 나와선 왼종일 피로(疲勞)를 거기에서 씻데그려. 오락을 지나 생활필수과목(生活必須科目)으로 되어 지나보데. 이러케 되면 「딴스」라고 함부로 경박재자들이 하는 짓만이 아니야.
卜惠淑- 보기에 달녓지요. 모다 정도 문제지요. 서울서도 처음엔 개인교수 가튼 것을 허하더니 딴스는 지금은 엄금이더구만.
仙人- 서울에는 딴스홀이 되기 어러울가.
李瑞求- 어려울걸, 우원총독이 조선에 잇는 한에는―
仙人- 엇재서? 「딴스홀」 허가여부야, 설마 그러한 소소한 문제를 총독이 결정할나구. 아마 경찰부장이 제 의견에 좃차서 허부를 결정할 걸.
李瑞求- 아니야, 언젠가 우원총독이 신문긔자단(新聞記者團)에게 언명한 일이 잇는데 즉 「이런 국가비상 시대에＜99＞ 음탕한 망국적인 「딴스홀」은 절대로 허락할 수 업다고 하엿거든. 그러니까, 총독의 방침이 이런 이상, 조선안에는 딴스홀이 서질 가능성이 업서.
卜惠淑- 어려울걸요. 요지간 시내에 「딴스홀」된다는 풍설이 도라 다니는 것도 경찰이 몹시 취체하더구만.
李瑞求- 조선안에는 안된다 섬치드라도 안동현(安東縣) 쯤되면 괜찬을걸.
仙人- 그리고는 또 무엇이 부족한가요.
李瑞求- 유원지(遊園地)야. 어린 아해들까지 다리고 점잔케 일*족이 산보도 하고, 하로 유쾌하게 놀 遊園地가 서울 교외(郊外)에 잇섯스면 조켓서. 지금은 한강(漢江)은 야속화(野俗化)하여 젓고, 뚝섬이나 노들(鷺梁津)도 살풍경화하엿고―
卜惠淑- 그러치요. 겨우 잇다는 것이 창경원(昌慶苑) 뿐인데 일요일날가튼 때에 가 보면 너무 사람이 만해서 북적북적하여 한적한 맛이라고 잇서야 놀 자미가 잇지요.
李瑞求- 말하자면 대판교외(大阪郊外)에 다까라쯔까(寶塚)가 잇드시 온천도 잇고, 공원도 잇고, 가극(歌劇)도 잇서, 하로종일을 한가족이 유쾌하게 놀고 올 곳이 잇섯스면 조켓데.
仙人- 대판이나 동경은 인구 4, 5백만, 7, 8백만을 끼고 잇스니까 그런 시설이 생기지만 서울은 이제 겨우 40만을 가지고 무얼하겟나. 당분은 그런 대규모의 유원지는 될 가능성이 업다고 보는 것이 올흘 걸, 그 밧게 무에 업슬가.
李瑞求- 이번에 동경(東京) 가 보니 「페인싱」이라 하야 칼을 가지고 독일대학생(獨逸大學生) 모양으로 결투(決鬪)를 하는 경긔(競技)가 성하데. 나는 그것이 얼마 잇지 안어 조선에 쓸려올 줄 아네. 지금 박씽(拳鬪)야 대중성(大衆性)을 띄지 못햇고 마장(麻雀) 가튼 것은 순오락이니까. 그 중간을 가는 것으로, 이러한 「결투경긔」가 조선서 환영을 밧을상 십흐데.
仙人- 그러고는 무에 필요한 것이 업슬가요.
李瑞求- 「멧센자, 뽀이」 즉 10전만 주면 어듸든지 심부름을 가 주는 그런 멧센자뽀이가 잇섯스면 조켓데. 동경, 대판에는 참으로 만해서 편리하데.
卜惠淑- 잇저, 서울에도 영낙정(永樂町)인가 어듸에 잇는데, 멧센자, 뽀이의 말이 우습지. 제일 심부름이 만흔 것이 「밤에 은군자(隱君子) 부르러 가라는 심부름이래요.
仙人- 은군자는 걸락이구만. 자, 너무 오래 말슴하여 주어 감사함니다. 이제는 우리 저리 나가 정원이나 산보하며 황국단풍(黃菊丹楓)을 완상합시다.(끗)＜100＞
＜82-101＞