Magazine Title: 삼천리 제7권 제10호
Publication Date: 1935년 11월 01일
Article Title: 世界文學講座, 三千里文藝講座(第1回 開講) (World Literature Lecture Series, Samch'ŏlli Literary Lecture Series (1st Session Opening))
Author: 金珖燮
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/Essay)

World Literature Lecture Series, Samch'ŏlli Literary Lecture Series
						Kim Kwangsŏp (金珖燮)
An Outline of Irish Literature
Author Introduction
Mr. Kim was born in Kyŏngsŏng-gun, Hamgyŏngpukto, and is 31 years old this year. After attending Kyŏngsŏng Chungdong School, he graduated from the English Literature Department of Waseda University (早大) in Tokyo. Currently, he is a teacher at Kyŏngsŏng Chungdong School, a member of the Theater Research Society (劇硏究會), and has published numerous research papers on English literature.

Separated by two or three straits, Ireland (愛蘭) is located west of old England (老英國), and the waves of the Atlantic Ocean (大西洋) wash its shores.
Its area is not very large, its population is merely one-fifth of 20 million, and considering its topography and soil quality, it is not particularly blessed. Yet, for a long time, external pressures have been incessant, and furthermore, the hand of the British Empire (大英帝國) has reached out extremely often.
Originally, Ireland had many marshes (沼地) and lacked coal, iron, etc., so industry could not flourish. Agriculture and animal husbandry are primary, and the people subsist on potatoes (馬鈴薯) as their staple food, from which one can easily infer their national poverty. Tracing back the history of that poverty, there were many times when their ancestors could not even eat these potatoes due to lack, and the starvation was severe and frequent, so much so that we can read stories of young children clinging to the hands of their starved-to-death mothers.<246>
Conversely, regarding their national character—that is, the unique imagination, meditation, emotional wandering nature, etc., inherent to the Celtic people (켈트族)—they possess a peculiar character incomparable to other peoples. This manifested as the disposition of Irish writers, concretely shaping the specificity of Irish national literature. This Irish literature, having formed its own typicality as literature, is thus inseparable from Ireland's political course and history. Therefore, in a way, Irish literature can be said to be an embodiment of their sorrowful lamentations and history.

300 B.C. - 2,200 years ago from now. A man from Assyria (앗시리아), Pytheas (피아테스), circumnavigated this fateful island. 300 years later, around 55 A.D., there was a conquest by the Britons (부르타니아人) on this island, followed by an invasion by the Danes (丁抹人) around the 10th century A.D. In 1541, when Henry VIII (헨리 8세) assumed the throne, he declared the propagation of Protestantism (新敎), leading to conflict with the Irish people's adherence to Catholicism (舊敎). The clash between English Protestantism and Irish Catholicism—this conflict between the new and old faiths—was markedly manifested through emotion (情), and consequently driven to that point. Here, we can see how a nation's emotion, rather than its reason, becomes the fuse leading down its path. The promulgation of the Catholic Emancipation Act in 1829 was a victory in one aspect.

Since the Celtic people, who once showed their power across Europe (歐洲) before the Common Era, were driven to this island, they have had almost no peaceful times.<247>
To detail that story here is something to avoid, but I intend to focus particularly on the recent era spanning the late 19th and 20th centuries, centering on the literary renaissance (文藝復興) that appeared among the Irish people. I aim to examine how a nation interacted with literature and what role that interacted literature played in its current emergence. However, as I have already discussed this in magazines under four or five headings such as "Establishment of National Drama," "Re-recognition of National Myths, Legends, and Primitive Peasants," or "Mother Tongue Revival Movement" (母語復活運動), I will avoid repetition here. Instead, I wish to focus more on works previously treated lightly (疎히) to investigate the Irish literary movement and its general characteristics or specific qualities.
= (Continued in next issue) =<248>
<246-248>

**Summary**

This article by Kim Kwangsŏp introduces Irish literature as the first topic in a new literary lecture series for the magazine *Samch'ŏlli*. Kim outlines Ireland's geographical position, historical poverty, and long history of subjugation, particularly by Britain. He contrasts this hardship with the unique Celtic spirit (imagination, emotion) which he argues defines Irish national character and literature. He highlights key historical moments like the conflict between Catholicism and Protestantism and intends to focus, in subsequent installments, on the Irish Literary Revival of the late 19th/early 20th centuries as an example of how literature intertwines with national identity and struggle, referencing concepts like national drama, folklore, and language revival. For historians of colonial Korea, the article is significant as it implicitly draws parallels between Ireland's struggle against British rule and Korea's situation under Japan. Kim's focus on literature as a tool for national consciousness and revival, emphasizing national character, historical grievances, and cultural elements like language and myth, reflects common themes among Korean intellectuals seeking cultural and national self-assertion during the colonial period. The choice of Ireland, a small nation resisting a large empire, was a common point of reference and inspiration for colonized peoples globally, making this essay a subtle commentary on Korea's own aspirations.

**Named

---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제7권 제10호
발행일	1935년 11월 01일
기사제목	世界文學講座, 三千里文藝講座(第1回 開講)
필자	金珖燮
기사형태	논설

世界文學講座, 三千里文藝講座
						金珖燮
愛蘭文學의 輪廓
筆者紹介
氏는 咸北 鏡城郡출생으로 今年 31세다. 京城 中東學校를 나온 뒤 東京 早大 英文科를 졸업. 현재는 京城 中東學校 敎師, 劇硏究會員, 英文學에 대한 硏究論文의 발표가 허다하다.

2, 3의 海峽을 끼고 愛蘭은 老英國의 서편에 位하야 잇서서 大西洋의 물결이 그 국토의 해안을 싯처 준다.
面積도 그다지 크지 못하고 인구도 2천만의 5분지 1에 불과하며 지형이나 地味로 보아 그닥지도 못하거늘 장구한 시일을 두고 밧갓 거름이 不絶하엿스며 더군다나 大英帝國의 손길은 지극히도 각금 와 다엇다.
원래 愛蘭은 沼地가 만코 석탄, 철 등의 缺乏으로 공업이 떨칠수 업고 農牧을 주로 하며 백성들은 馬鈴薯를 常食으로 하고 잇스니 그 민족적 貧의 소식은 가히 알 수가 잇다. 그 貧寒의 역사를 스처 올라가면 그들의 祖先은 이 馬鈴薯조차 업서 못먹을 때 만코 그 饑餓는 심하고 瀕하여서 饑死한 어머니의 손에 업데여 잇는 어린아이의 이약이를 우리는 읽을 수가 잇다.＜246＞
그와 반대로 그 民族的 性質에 잇서서는 다시 말하면 켈트族의 고유한 상상, 瞑想 혹은 정서 放浪性 - 등에 잇서서는 다른 민족에 比키 어려운 특이한 성격을 갓추어서 그것이 愛蘭文學者의 禀質로 나타나면서 愛蘭 民族文學의 특수성을 구체적으로 형성화하엿다. 이 형성된 그의 문학으로서의 一典型性을 가진 愛蘭 文學은 따라서 愛蘭의 政治的 經路와 履歷과 떠날 수 업다. 그러므로 엇지보면 愛蘭 文學은 多恨한 그네의 悲歎과 歷史가 表象된 것이라 할 수 잇다.

紀元前 300年 - 이제로부터 2,200년 전이다. 앗시리아의 한 사람 피아테스가 이 宿命의 섬을 廻航하엿다. 300년후 紀元 55년쯤하야 이 섬에는 부르타니아人의 征伐이 이섯고 그 후 丁抹人의 침략이 紀元 10세기경에 이섯고 1,541년에는 헨리 8세가 왕의 位를 차지하자 新敎의 布敎를 宣하엿스니 거기에 愛蘭人의 舊敎 信奉과의 葛藤이 나타나게 되엿다. 英國의 新敎와 愛蘭의 舊敎 - 이 新舊敎의 衝突은 - 의 情으로써 顯著케 하엿스며 따라서 거기에까지 推進되엿다. 여기에서 한 민족의 이성보다 그 감정이 그네의 길에의 도화선이 됨을 볼 수 잇다. 1,829년 舊敎 解放令의 發布는 그 一端에의 승리이엇다.

紀元前 歐洲의 천하에 勢를 보이던 켈트族이 이 섬에 쫏겨온 뒤로 그들에게는 거진 평화한 시일이 업섯다.＜247＞
여기에서 그 이약이를 細錄함은 스스로 避할 일이거니와 나는 그 과정에서 특히 갓가운 年代를 취하야 즉 19세기말 20세기에 亘하야 愛蘭民族에 나타난 文藝復興을 중심으로 하야 한 민족이 文學과 엇더케 교섭하면서 또한 그 교섭된 文學이 현재의 출현에 엇더한 役割을 하엿는가를 考究하려 한다. 그러나 이것은 임이 혹은 잡지에서 「民族劇의 樹立」, 「國民的 神話傳說과 原始 農民에의 再認識」 혹은 「母語復活運動」 등 4, 5의 항목으로 論한 바 잇슴으로 여기서는 그 重復을 피하면서 전에 疎히 한 작품을 좀더 중심삼아 愛蘭 文學運動과 그 一般性 乃至 特質을 究明해 보고저 한다.
= (次號續) =＜248＞
＜246-248＞