Magazine Title	別乾坤
Publication Date	1929년 12월 01일
Article Title	(무제-국편) (Untitled Poem)
Author	김종서, 이순신, 김수장, 김두성 (Kim Jong-seo, Yi Sun-sin, Kim Su-jang, Kim Du-seong)
Article Type	시 (Poem)

The north wind howls relentlessly, and the bright moon is cold in the snow. Holding a long sword on the desolate border, a great laugh in the long wind knows no bounds.
(Kim Jong-seo)

Planted the flag on Changbai Mountain (長白山), watered the horse in the Tumen River (豆滿江). You rotten scholars, are we not real men? Why would our portraits be painted in the Lingyan Pavilion (凌烟閣上)?
(Kim Jong-seo)

On Hansan (閒山) Island, on a bright moonlit night, I sit alone on the watchtower, a great sword at my side, deeply troubled. From where does the sound of a barbarian flute (一聲胡笳) sever my heart?
(Yi Sun-sin)

Feed the red devil horse (赤鬼馬) well, wash it in the Tumen River (豆滿江). Draw the Dragon Spring sword (龍泉釰) sharply, and try a man's ambition for fame!
(Kim Su-jang)

A ten-year-old sword weeps in its scabbard (匣裏). Gazing at the mountain pass, I polish it from time to time. When will I make known a man's meritorious service to the nation?
(Kim Su-jang)

The heroic general of the Han family (韓門奱將) has a majestic spirit, seven feet tall, with a phoenix-winged saber (偑■刀). Hunting in the Yinshan mountains (陰山) through three zhang (丈) of snow, returning to the tent, drinking green grapes (碧葡萄)! Drunk, I look down on the southern barbarians as if they were mere weeds!
(Kim Du-seong)

Named Entities

金宗瑞	Kim Jong-seo
長白山	Changbai Mountain
豆滿江	Tumen River
凌烟閣	Nŭngyŏngak
李舜臣	Yi Sun-sin
閒山	Hansan
一声胡笳	Hojŭ
赤鬼馬	Chŏkkwima
龍泉釰	Yongch'ŏn Geom
金壽長	Kim Su-jang
匣裏	Hapri
韓門奱將	Hanmun Byŏnjang
陰山	Ŭmsan
金斗性	Kim Du-seong



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	(무제-국편)
기사형태	시

朔風이나 무헤불고 明月은 눈속에 찬데 萬里邊城에 一長釰집고서서 긴바람큰한소리에거칠것이업서라.
(金宗瑞)
長白山에 旗를 고 豆滿江에 말씃기니 썩은저선비야 우리안이사나이냐 엇덧타 凌烟閣上에 뉘얼골을 그릴고.
(金宗瑞)
閒山섬달밝은밤에 戌樓에 온자안저 큰칼을엽헤차고 깁흔실음하는차에 어데서 一聲胡笳은 斷我腸을하는고
(李舜臣)
赤鬼馬살지게먹여 豆滿江에 씻겨세고 龍泉釰드는 칼을 선듯서들어메고 丈夫의 立身揚名을 試驗할가하노라
(金壽長)
十年갈든칼이 匣裏에우노메라 關山을 바라오며로마저보니 丈夫의 爲國功勳을 어늬에들리울고.
(金壽長)
韓門奱將이 氣雄豪하니 七尺長身에 偑■刀라 大獵陰山三丈雪하고 帳中에 歸飮碧葡萄라 大醉코 南蠻을 헤아리니 草芥런가하여라.
(金斗性)
別乾坤
創刊三週年紀念號＜1＞
＜1＞