別乾坤 第24號
발행일 1929년 12월 01일
기사제목 鷄鳴山秋夜月-張子房의 風流陳 (Gyemyeongsan Autumn Night Moon - Jangjafang's Elegant Formation)
필자 西湖學人
기사형태 문예기타 (Literature Miscellaneous)

The autumn night at the foot of Guryusan Mountain deepens with the sound of rustling fallen leaves. The flickering fire of the hwatu cards (화투) in the seemingly endless encampment sounds as if blown by the wind, disappearing into the terribly quiet night air. Han Sin (한신), the Great General of the Han Dynasty, was lost in deep thought. At that moment, someone stomped and pushed open the tent flap; it was his strategist, Yi Ch'a (이좌차).

Yi Ch'a, seeing Han Sin's pale face looking strangely dejected, wore a worried expression and asked,
"What are you thinking about, General?"
"Me?"
Han Sin looked up as if startled, then lowered his head again, not even bothering to remove his arms from his chest.
"The generals and soldiers in the encampment are all gathered around the hwatu fires like me, waiting only for your command.
If we are to destroy the Ch'u (초) and decide on a great plan, there will be no other time than tonight. Even if Xiang Yu (항우) is so brave, his forces are only eight thousand, and we have a hundred thousand. If we surround Guryusan (구리산) from all directions, isn't it clear that we can subdue them in one fell swoop? Furthermore, the enemy is exhausted from the protracted battle, and even Xiang Yu won't be able to come to his senses tonight. According to the prisoners <85>, the enemy is planning to break through our formation at dawn and return to Gangdong (강동). If that happens, it will be like releasing a tiger into the fields. With such a critical moment of life and death before us, what are you thinking about, General?"

Han Sin, who had been silently listening to Yi Ch'a's urgent words, suddenly stood up as soon as he stopped speaking.
"Ah-no. I was thinking of securing victory without fighting."
"Without fighting...?"
"That's right. I want to capture Xiang Yu alive."
He tapped Yi Ch'a's shoulder.
"Come now, quickly go to Elder Zhang Liang (장량). Tell him that Great General Han Sin has come to seek wisdom that he could not think of himself. Hurry- it's urgent. To decide the great affairs of the nation, we must borrow the teachings of a wise elder- hurry, it's extremely urgent."
Yi Ch'a, not knowing what was going on, left to fulfill the Great General's command.

An instant later, Han Sin heard the sound of hooves breaking the silence of the still night and hurriedly went out to greet Elder Zhang Liang with his generals. Zhang Liang, getting off his horse, stroked his slender beard with a vigorous voice, greeted Han Sin, and disappeared into the tent.
"I have disturbed you at this late hour because I wish to capture Xiang Yu in one move, but the enemy is hiding in the mountains of Guryusan with eight thousand elite soldiers. It would be easy enough to defeat them with a hundred thousand soldiers, but if we were to miss Xiang Yu, wouldn't it be a disgrace even if we won the battle? I wonder if there is a way to demoralize the Ch'u army and disperse their formation, but my wisdom is lacking. Please, with your heart that values the nation, teach me a plan."
"-If it's just that,"
Zhang Liang said, approaching Han Sin and smiling <86>.
"Leave it all to me. In less than three days, I will surely dismantle the Ch'u army."
Zhang Liang whispered something in Han Sin's ear, then immediately got back on his horse and left.

One day passed, and then two days. The two armies faced each other for three nights. Xiang Yu waited for a chance to escape by taking advantage of a gap in the enemy's attack, but supplies were running low, and the generals and soldiers, exhausted from the long battle, were eager to return home. Xiang Yu became increasingly anxious. Finally, it was decided that they would break through the enemy lines at dawn the next day and escape.

It was after the first watch that night. Under the bright moonlight, the generals and soldiers gathered in small groups of three or five, sitting around the roots of trees, talking about their longing for their hometowns. Every time the autumn wind brushed against the treetops and chilled them to the bone, they were reminded of the desolate past of the long military journey, of sleeping on the dew at night and gazing at the rising clouds during the day, and of the longing for their wives and children in their hometowns.

At that moment, the distant sound of a bamboo flute echoed from Gyemyeongsan (계명산) across a valley. The hearts of the Ch'u soldiers, which had been filled with sadness, became increasingly absorbed in the sound of the flute. The sound, sometimes high and sometimes low, shook the hearts of the weary soldiers. It sounded as if the sorrow of their distant wives was being conveyed directly to them. Let's go! Let's go back! Even if we face the shame of being unmanly, let's return alive to the arms of our beloved wives! The melody of the sad song floated in the air as if filled with boundless resentment.

One person, then two, rose to their feet, wandering towards the foot of the mountain, lost in thoughts of their hometowns. The soldiers, who had once been the elite and unmatched soldiers of the Ch'u, were now nothing more than countless travelers who had lost their will to fight.

It goes without saying that the sound of the Gyemyeongsan (계명산) flute came from Zhang Liang's (장량) plan, and the Ch'u camp simply disintegrated. This is what is known as Zhang Liang's "Elegant Formation" (風流陳). <87>

**Named Entities**

九里山	Kuryusan
韓信	Han Sin
李左車	Yi Ch'a
項羽	Hang'u
江東	Kangdong
張良	Chang Liang
鷄鳴山	Kyemyŏngsan
張子房	Changjafang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	鷄鳴山秋夜月-張子房의 風流陳
필자	西湖學人
기사형태	문예기타

鷄鳴山秋夜月-張子房의 風流陳
						西湖學人
九里山麓 가을밤은 蕭蕭한 落葉聲에깁허간다. 이안보이게 빌려잇는 陣營에서여노을 화투불이 바람에 튀는소리가 무섭도록고요한 夜氣에사러질제 漢나라 大將軍韓信은 호울노 깁흔생각에잠기어잇섯다. 그때에 발소리가쿵쿵거리여 帳幕門을제치고 들어오는이는 그의한팔로치는 謀士李左車이엿다.
李左車는 이상슬업게 아부러저보이는 韓信의새파란얼골을보고 근심술어운빗을 우며
『將軍께서는 무슨생각을 하시고계십닛가?』
『나말이냐』
韓信은놀내는듯이 치어다보드니 그대로머리를숙이고 가슴에이인두팔을 떼러고도안이하엿다.
『陣營의 將卒은 모다 저와갓치 화투불을 피여노토 大將軍의 命令만긔다리고잇습니다.
楚나라들 滅하야 大事들 決斷할때는 오즉오늘밤말고는 업겟슴니다. 項羽가제아모리 勇猛하다하여도 手軍은 不過八千名이요, 우리는 十萬大軍, 九里山을 八方으로올너치면 一擧에 못질을것이 明明白白하지안슴닛가. 더구나 敵軍은지리한 싸흠에 疲困하야 오늘밤만은 이러타는 項羽도 정신못차리고 잇슬것입니다. 捕虜＜85＞들의니야기를들으면 적군은 明朝밝기를 기다려우리의 陳을 뜰코서 江東으로 돌아갈 計劃이라함니다. 萬一그러타면 범을들에놋는것과갓슴니다. 이러한 危急存亡한때를 압해두시고 大將軍께서는무슨생각을 그리하십닛가?』
李左車가 한숨에나리드는 소리를잠자코 듯든 韓信은 말이끈어지자 급히닐어나면서
『아-니. 나는싸호지안코서 익일수를 생각하고잇든터이다』
『싸호지안코서요…………?』
『그러타, 나는 項羽를 그대로 사로잡고십단다.』
그리며 李左車의억개를두드리엿다.
『자-그러니, 너는 니 張良大人께로갓다오너라. 大將軍韓信이가 생각다못한 知慧를 어드려고왓다고 가서엿주어라. 자-急하다. 나라의 大事를 決斷하는데는 機略이만흔 長老의가르침을 빌어야한다 자-大至急이다.』
李左車는무슨영문도모르지만 大將軍의 命令을다하기 爲하야 밧그로나왓다.
一刻이나 지나서 肅然히고요한밤의 寂寞을 트리는 말굽소리를들은 韓信은 急히밧그로나와서 여러 將士로더브러 長老張良大人을 마지하엿다. 말에서나리는 張良은 元氣充滿한소리로 細髯을쓰다듬으면서 韓信과인사를하고 帳幕속으로 몸을감추엇다.
『夜陰을 不願하고 先生을엿자움은 一擧에 項王을 사로잡르려는생각이오니 그러나 敵은 八千의 精銳를고서 九里山中에 뭇처잇습니다. 十萬의 軍卒로 이것을 當한다면 뭇질느기야 容易하오나 萬一에라도 項羽를놋친다면 가령 싸홈에는 익엿다하여도 耻辱이안이겟슴닛가. 엇더케든지하야 楚軍의 士氣을 沮喪식히여 楚軍의 陣營을 分散씩힐가 업지나안을가하오나 知慧가모자라오니 나라를 重히넉이시는맘으로 저엑 를가르쳐주십쇼』
『-고것이면』
하고 張良은 韓信의 겻흐로 갓가히가서 빙긋우섯다.＜86＞
『그것이야 萬事를나에게 맷겨두시오 사흘이안되여서 반드시 楚軍을해트리어 노흘터이니.』
張良은 韓信의귀에무엇인지 속살거리드느 바로말을되잘되어타고돌아갓다.
하로가지나고 잇흘이점으러 兩軍은 서로마주보는채로 사흘밤을마졋다. 項羽는 敵軍이 처들어오는틈을타서 逃亡하려는배심으로기다리지만 兵糧은 缺乏하게되고 將士들은 오래동안싸흠에시달니여 모다 故鄕으로 돌아가기를 急히서둘느니 項羽는 점점 애를태우게되엇다. 그리하야 結局에내일아츰 밝기를기다려서 敵陣을트리고 脫出하기로 計劃이 作定되엿다.
그날밤 初更이지나슬때이다. 皎皎한 月色에 끄을니어 將士들은 三三五五 나무밋바퀴리 생각나는대로 걸터안저 그립은 故鄕이야기에 떼지어잇섯다. 나무 흘싯치는 가을바람이 뼈에사모칠적마다 지리한 軍旅의 荒凉한지난자최와함께 밤이면 이슬을자리삼고 낫이면 오르는구름을치어다보며 오래동안두고 故鄕의 妻子를그립허에태우든생각이 새삼슬어젓다.
바로그때이다. 골작문이하나건너잇는 鷄鳴山우에서 ■遠한 통수소리가 울리여들니엿다. 갓다가나 마음이 슮흐든 楚나라 陣營의 將士의마음은 점점통수소리에 믹을닐케되엿다. 한소래놉고 한소래나저 울니고울니는소리는 疲困한 將士의가슴을 恨업시 흔들엇다. 멀니멀이 떨어저잇는 妻子의 슮흠이 고대로 傳하는듯하게들닌다 가자! 가자! 돌아가자! 설사 丈夫의 부그러움을 當하드라도 그리운안헤의품속으로 살아서돌아가자! 슮흔노래의 音律은 無限한 怨恨을품은듯이 날녀들어온다.
한사람! 두사람 닐어스고닐어서서 山밋창으로 故鄕그리운생각에 해매이며 將卒들은 밀니어나려갓다. 어데지도 精銳無比하다고 자랑하든 楚나라의 將卒도 지금에는 戰意를닐은 가이업슨나그네에 지나지안엇다.
鷄鳴山퉁수소리가 張良大人의에서나온것은 물을것도업지만흔 楚나라 陣營은 그대로허터저바렷다. 이것이 傳하는바의 張良의『風流陳』이라는것이다.＜87＞
＜85-87＞