잡지명 別건곤 제24호
발행일 1929년 12월 01일
기사제목 藝術家의 奇癖 (Eccentricities of Artists)
기사형태 잡저 (Miscellany)

Eccentricities of Artists

When an artist produces his work, he concentrates all his energy in his head. It is from this concentration that inspiration is squeezed out. Therefore, Buffon defined inspiration as semen squeezed out from patience and diligence.

Artists strive to be free from any mental or physical constraints in order to obtain this inspiration. As this accumulates, it becomes a habit when it reaches the extreme. That is the eccentricity of an artist. Here is a list of some famous artists and scholars who had peculiar eccentricities.

Tolstoy wrote his works wearing the rough clothes worn by serfs. Originally, serf's clothing is loose, so when worn, no part of the body feels constricted.

Balzac wore a nightgown and wrote novels only at night, and if he had to write during the day, he would close all the doors and light two large candles on either side of the desk before writing a novel.

Anatole France wore clothes similar to those worn by policemen, but he wore a small, bright red hat like those worn by Catholic monks, and he wore overshoes while working.

Rousseau went out to the fields and buried his head in the grass to meditate, while, in contrast, Montesquieu studied his great work, "The Spirit of the Laws," while sitting in a palanquin, which was the only means of transportation at the time.

Fox would soak a white cloth with acid and water and wrap it tightly around his head before entering his study, and then he would work in his study for more than ten hours.

Montaigne would climb up the old tower in his village and sit on the stone wall to think.

Silesius sat on ice while writing poetry.

When an idea came to Maturin, he would stick a small piece of paper between his eyebrows.

Jeremy Bentham also wrote down any ideas that came to him and strung them on a thread, and Linnaeus, a famous botanist, collected materials in the same way as Bentham.

When Napoleon had no political business to attend to, he would always talk casually with his secretary in his study, sing, and use a knife to make sheaths on chairs or desks, doing things that seemed like childish pranks, gradually entering into meditation. Once a plan was formulated, he would immediately call out to the secretary sitting next to him to write it down. <86>

Milton never wrote during the day, only at night. When meditating, he would sit comfortably in a large armchair, tilt his head back slightly, and think quietly as if he were sleeping.

When Leonardo da Vinci painted his masterpiece, "The Last Supper," he often forgot to eat, and then he would not even look at the painting he was working on for four or five days, as if he had forgotten about it.

Guido Reni painted wearing splendid clothes, and Salieri, a famous musician, always composed in a dark room.

Salva, on the contrary, could not compose unless he was in a noisy place.

Vaisey could not compose unless he was covered in blankets in bed.

Sacchini could not compose unless the cat next to him was jumping around.

Besides these, there are Chinese poets:

Xue Daheng got angry when men and women made noise while he was thinking about poetry.

When Chen Houshan was writing poetry, all the family members would go to another house and stay there all day.

Wang Wei sat inside a large flower pot and struggled to write poetry.

Luo Gongji climbed to the top of a large tree to think about writing. <87>

**Named Entities**

톨스토이	Tolstoi
븃폰	Buffon
팔삭크	Palssak'ŭ
아나톨ㆍ푸랜쓰	Anatol P'ŭraen'sŭ
룻소-	Russo-
몬테스규	Montesk'yu
폭스	P'ok'sŭ
몬테뉴-	Montenyu-
실렙	Sillep
마츄란	Mach'yuran
제레미-펜삼	Cheremi-P'ensam
린네-	Linne-
나폴레온	Nap'olleon
밀톤	Millt'on
레오날ㆍ도ㆍ뷘치	Leonar.do.Ttwibwinch'i
기도우ㆍ래니-	Kidou.Raeni-
살치	Salch'i
시바로사	Sibarosa
바이새로	Baisaero
사키니-	Sak'ini-
薛道衡	Sŏl Tohyŏng
陳后山	Chin Husan
王維	Wang Wi
羅公己	Na Konggi



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	藝術家의 奇癖
기사형태	잡저

藝術家의 奇癖
藝術家가 自己의 作品을 製作할때는 滿身의 精力을 머리에 集中식힌다. 集中을식혀가지고 그곳에서싸내는것이 인스피레-순이다. 그럼으로 븃폰은 인스피레-순을 忍耐와 勤勉에서짜내인 精液이라고 定議를내엇다.
藝術家들은 이인스피레순을 엇기 爲하여는 精神上으로나 身體上으로 아모러한 拘束이나 걸니우는곳이업도록하느라고 애를쓴다. 그것이 漸漸싸여가지고 極端에일으면버릇이된다. 藝術家의 奇癖이라는것이 즉 그것이다. 다음에 맷사람의 有名한 藝術家와밋 學者로야릇한 氣癖이잇든사람을 列擧한다.
톨스토이는 農奴들이입는 허수룸한옷을입고 作品을썻다. 元來 農奴의옷은 쿨넝~하여서 입고잇스면 全身의어느 部分이고 죠곰도 거리석거리지가아니하기 때문이다.
팔삭크는 자리옷을입고 언제든지밤에만 小說을 쓰고 或 나제라도 써야할경우이면방문을모다 쳐닷고 冊床우에 큰초를 兩便으로한개씩켜노코 小說을썻스며
아나톨ㆍ푸랜쓰는 옷은 警通우리＜85＞가입는 洋服을입으나 케도릭敎의 僧侶들이 쓰는것가치생긴 새간적은 帽子를쓰고 발에는 덧신을신고 일을하엿다.
룻소-는 들판에나아가서 풀밧페머리를쳐박고 瞑想을하엿는데 그와 反對로 몬테스규는 그 當時에 唯一한 交通機關이든가마를타고안져서 그의 大著『法의 精神』을 硏究하엿다.
폭스는 書齋에들어가랴면 酸과물을적신 흰헌겁으로 머리를친친동이고그래가지고는열 時間以上이나 書齋에서일을하엿스며
몬테뉴-는 洞里의 古塔에 올나가서 돌벽에안져 생각을하엿고
실렙은 얼음에다 말을졍그고안져서 詩를썻다.
마츄란은 무슨생각이 올으면 兩眉間에 젹은죠각을붓치고
제레미-펜삼은 역시무슨생각나면 그것을 박~적어서 실에뀌여두엇스며 植物學者로 有名한
린네-도 펜삽과가튼 方法으로 材料를모엇다.
나폴레온은 政治上 볼일이업슬때에는 언제든지 自己書齋에서 秘書와 普通이약이를하고 노래도불으고 칼을가지고 椅子나 冊床가튼데 칼집도내이고 맛치어린애들의 작난가튼짓을하면서 漸漸瞑想을 해들어가다가게획이 作定되면바로엽헤안즌 秘書에게 그것을바더쓰도록불너쥬엇다.＜86＞
밀톤은 나제는 도모지 쓰지를아니하고 밤에만썻스며 瞑想을할때는 큼직한 安樂椅子에 푸군히걸어안져 고개를조곰뒤로처치고는 자는듯이고요히생각하엿다.
레오날ㆍ도ㆍ뷘치는 그의 名作『最後聖餐』을그릴때에는 밥먹기를이즌때도만혓고 그러다가도 四五日間은 그리든 그림을 이져바린듯이 치어다보지도아니하엿다.
기도우ㆍ래니-는 華麗한옷을입고 그림을그렷스며 音樂家로 有名하든 살치는언집든지 어둠컴컴한 방에서 作曲을 하엿고
시바로사는 그와 反對로 요란한소리가나는곳이아니면 作曲을하지못하엿다.
바이새로는 寢臺에서 이불을 뒤집어 쓰지안니하면 作曲을하지못하엿고
사키니-는 엽헤잇는고양이가 훌훌여다니지아니하면 作曲을하지못하엿다
이밧게 中國의 詩人으로는
薛道衡이는 詩를생각하는데 남녀요란히굴면 성을내엇고
陳后山은 詩를쓰자면 집안식구는 全部달은집에가서 읜종일잇다오고하엿다.
王維는 커다란 동이속에 들어안져 苦吟을하엿고
羅公己는 큰 나무꼭대에 올나가서 文章을 생각하엿다.＜87＞
＜85-87＞