별건곤 제24호
1929년 12월 01일
馬賊의 巢窟인 滿洲의 槪觀 (An Overview of Manchuria, the Den of Bandits)
金一烈 (Kim Il-lyeol)
소식 (News)

An Overview of Manchuria, the Den of Bandits
Kim Il-lyeol

Manchuria includes the three northeastern provinces of China: Bongcheon (奉天), Gillim (吉林), and Heukryonggang (黑龍江). Its area is roughly 64,700 square ri, which is more than four and a half times the size of Korea. The cultivated land in Manchuria is 13 million jeongbo, with 12 million jeongbo of uncultivated land, totaling 25 million jeongbo. This shows how vast it is compared to the cultivated land in Korea. The yield is roughly estimated at 27 million seok of millet, 32 million seok of soybeans, 14 million seok of corn, 7 million seok of wheat, and 35 million seok of other grains, totaling 120 million seok. In the primeval forests of the Amnok River (鴨綠江) and Songhwa River (松花江) basins, a peaceful atmosphere of idle clouds and wild cranes flows. The amount of gold, iron, and coal buried throughout Manchuria forms a vast treasure trove that is difficult to measure. The climate has extreme temperature differences between summer and winter. In winter, one cannot even go to the bathroom without wearing fur clothing. The saying, "In Manchuria, the head splits from the cold" is close to the truth, or rather, it is the truth. The first snow falls around September 10th, and snow continues until mid-spring. In sunny areas where the snow melts, vegetation flourishes, creating the spectacle of white snow amidst green shade. Transportation is relatively convenient near the railways, but mostly dangerous roads elsewhere. Since there are no bridges over rivers, there is the convenience of carts during the freezing season. However, in spring, summer, and autumn, carts cannot pass through most areas, and there are sparsely populated or uninhabited areas of three to four hundred li in dense forests. As such, Manchuria has many dense forest areas, and transportation is inconvenient because the land is vast, bandits are one of Manchuria's specialties (of course, I do not deny social shortcomings). The rampant banditry throughout Manchuria sometimes creates an uneasy state, as we hear from the news from time to time. In North and South Manchuria, they set administrative districts for bandits and collect money regularly, like collecting household taxes. Dongman (간훈지방 - Ganhun region) is not as severe, but the damage from bandits is not insignificant. Manchuria is famous for its cheap grain prices. During the harvest season, one dou of millet costs 30 to 40 jeon. The price of other grains is even lower. <93> Daily necessities are generally more expensive than in Korea, and the price of salt is unparalleled in the world. One hundred me of salt costs 15 to 25 jeon. Salt is a monopoly of the Chinese government, and the insecure monopoly system increases the consumption of the general public. Exports are mostly grains and industrial raw materials (iron, coal, building materials, hides, etc.), and imports are cotton fabrics, sacks, tobacco, machinery, wheels, etc. As such, the production goods (exports) are cheap, and other daily necessities (imports) are expensive, so the lives of the farming class (especially poor farmers) must be miserable. There is no room for doubt.

What is the current state of life for Koreans in Manchuria? Koreans began migrating to Manchuria a long time ago (it is said that it was Korean territory in the past), but mass migration began in the last ten years. Anxious lives, politically and economically, inevitably increased the number of migrants. Now, it has reached the astounding number of one million, and the problem of Koreans in Manchuria is one of Korea's problems. They are mostly engaged in agriculture. In Dongman, the history of migration is relatively long, so there are many self-cultivating farmers (自作農) and their economic lives are somewhat stable. However, in the North and South Manchuria regions, almost all are tenant farmers (小作農). (There is land owned by the Ganminhoe (墾民戶會) around Ningguta (寧古塔) in the North Manchuria region, but that is a very small exception.) Among the tenant farmers, those who have migrated for a long time do not matter, but those who enter for the first time borrow all the necessities of life from landlords, companies (會社), or local magnates (土豪). Even if farming goes well, after paying back what they borrowed, there is not much left. Somehow, they borrow and eat what is lacking, but if there is a famine, they even have their daughters or, in severe cases, even their beloved wives taken away due to the debt they borrowed. "If you can't live in Korea, go to Manchuria!" At first glance, Manchuria seems like the only paradise for Koreans, but in reality, it is the opposite. The bitter life in that isolated foreign land is difficult for those without actual experience to imagine. Amidst this overwhelming difficulty of life, the enthusiasm for education, which has increased sharply since the March 1st Movement (三一運動), has spread to Manchuria. There are elementary schools in almost every village throughout Manchuria. There are eight secondary education institutions (中等敎育機關) for Koreans in all of Manchuria. Regionally, there are six in Dongman (Ryongjeong - 龍井), two in South Manchuria (Ryuhwa - 柳河). Four are run by Koreans, two by British (Presbyterian Church), and two by Japanese. Four are co-educational, two are girls' schools, and two are boys' schools. All Korean-run schools are co-educational, and students have complete freedom in school. Therefore, unlike in Korea, there are relatively few alliance strikes. Even then, they are merely based on political "sensationalism" with a different meaning. It goes without saying that the facilities are incomplete, reflecting the hardships of life. Recently, according to the National Government's education policy, foreign-run educational institutions are being reclaimed. All Korean-run schools are being incorporated into public schools, and some have already started to make secondary schools provincial. If this is fully realized, the impediment to the development of Koreans in Manchuria will be significant. Manchuria is Chinese territory, but due to the various conditions of unequal treaties, Koreans in Manchuria are governed by China on the one hand and controlled by Japan through the Japanese consulate. - Continued on page 92 - <94>
- Continuation from page 94 -
Japan's administrative and police power is limited to open ports, but even in places like Dongman, they manage areas outside the open ports. This is the so-called dual political control situation for Koreans in Manchuria. The lack of protection due to economic insecurity and political overlap inevitably promotes the massive development of social movements. The social movements throughout Manchuria are now consolidating their camps. The main groups are the Old Hwanseonghoe (舊桓省會), Geunbukhoe (槿北會) Boys' Brigade, Dongman Cheongchong (東滿靑總), Old Labor Federation (舊勞働同盟), Geunwoo (槿友) Ryongjeong Branch, Cheondogyo (天道敎) Youth Party Manchuria Unified Department, Dongman Gongri Company (東滿共利社), etc., and South and North Manchuria Cheongchong (靑總), etc.
Japan has leased Lushun (旅順) and Dalian (大連), using them as bases for activities in Manchuria. The South Manchuria Railway (南滿洲鐵道), which runs like a winding snake across the Manchurian plains, exists. Along the railway line, Japanese settlements are thriving everywhere. Furthermore, Japan maintains the right to station troops and police to maintain the security of these areas. The amount of Japanese investment accumulated after the Russo-Japanese War has reached hundreds of millions of dollars, and all of this constitutes Japan's so-called "special interests" (特殊權益). Manchuria is currently under the watchful eyes of the world under the name of Manchukuo (滿家). Look, isn't the world's contradiction raging around Manchuria? (End) <92>
<92, 93-94>

**Named Entities**

奉天	Pongch'ŏn
吉林	Killim
黑龍江	Hŭkryonggang
鴨綠江	Amnok-kang
松花江	Songhwa-gang
간훈지방	kanhunjibang
寧古塔	Nyŏnggota
墾民戶會	Kŏnminhohoe
三一運動	Sam-il Undong
龍井	Ryongjŏng
柳河	Ryuhwa
舊桓省會	Kuhanseonghoe
槿北會	Kŭnbukhoe
東滿靑總	Tongman Ch'ŏngchong
舊勞働同盟	Kurodong Tongmaeng
槿友	Kŭnu
天道敎	Ch'ŏndogyo
東滿共利社	Tongman Kongnisa
旅順	Ryojun
大連	Dairen
南滿洲鐵道	Nammanshu Ch'ŏldo
滿家	Man-ga



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	馬賊의 巢窟인 滿洲의 槪觀
필자	金一烈
기사형태	소식

馬賊의 巢窟인 滿洲의 槪觀
						金一烈
滿洲는 中國東北部에잇는 奉天 吉林 黑龍江三省을 包括하고 面積槪算六萬四千七百方里로우리 朝鮮에 比하면 四倍半이되고도남는다 滿洲의 農作地는 一千三百萬町步未墾地一千二百萬町步合計二千五百萬町步라하니 우리朝鮮의 農作地보다 如何히 廣大한것을알것이다 收穫高는 粟二千七百萬石 大豆三千二百萬石 玉蜀黍千四百萬石 小麥七百萬石 其他三千五百萬石合計一億二千萬石으로 槪算한다 鴨綠江流域及松花江流域의 千古處女林에는 閑雲野鶴의 平和로운 氣分이흘너넘치고 滿洲一帶에파무처잇는 金 鐵 石炭量은 容易히 測定할수업는 世界的大寶庫를 形成하고잇다 氣候는 寒暑의 差가 極甚하야 冬節에는 毛皮로써옷을해서입지안코는 便所라도가지못한다「滿洲치우에소대구리(頭)가터진다」는것은 事實에 近似한말이다 안이 事實이라는편이 至當할것이다 初雪은 九月十日頃으로부터 春月中旬지 눈이옴으로 눈녹은 陽地쪽에는 草木이 茂盛하야 綠陰에도 白雪이나는 奇觀을 呈하고잇다 鐵道附近은 比較的交通이 便利하나 그박게는 大槪險路며 河川에는 橋梁이업슴으로 結氷期에는 馬車의 便이잇스나 春, 夏, 秋三絶에 馬車도 通行하지못하는 地方이 多部分이며 三四百里의 密林地帶無人地境이 뜨문뜨문잇다 이와가티 滿洲는 密林地帶가만코 交通이 不便하여 土地가 廣大함으로 馬賊은 滿洲名物의 하나로(勿論社會缺陷을 否認함은안니다)滿洲一帶에서 馬賊의 橫行으로때때로 不安한 狀態에잇다는것은 新聞을 通하야서로때때로듯는말이다 北滿南滿에서는 馬賊의 行政區域을 設定하고돈을 定期的으로 戶稅바다가듯이한다 東滿(間琿地方)은 그러케 甚하지는안으나 馬賊에게 被害되는일은적지안하다 滿洲는 穀價가눅기로 有名하다 收穫期에잇섯서는 小米一斗에 四十錢乃至三十錢을하니그담 穀物의 價格＜93＞은더말할것도업다 日用品은 朝鮮보다 大槪高價이고소금(鹽)갑은 그 類가 世界에업슬것이다 소금 百匁에 十五錢으로 二十五錢지한다소금은 中國政府의 專賣品인바 不安全한 專賣制度로 一般民衆의 消費를 增加케한다 輸出品은 大槪가 穀物類工業原料品 (鐵, 石炭建築材料皮物等) 이고 輸入品은 綿織物 麻袋 煙草 機械 車輪等이다 이와가티 生産物品(輸出品)은 廉價이고 其他日用品은(輸入品) 高價임으로 農民階級(구中에도 貧農民)의 生活이 慘慘할것은 疑心할 餘地가업다
在滿同胞의 生活現狀은 엇더한가? 朝鮮人이 滿洲에 移住를 始作한지는임이 歷史가오랫스나(昔日에는 朝鮮領土라고한다) 大部隊的으로 移住를 開始한지는 最近十年間이라하겟다 政治的經濟的으로 不安한 生活은 必然的으로 移住民의 數를 增加케하야 至今에와서는 一百萬이란눌나운 數에 達하야 在滿同胞의 問題는 朝鮮問題의하나이다 그들은 大槪農業에 從事하고잇는바 東滿는 比較的移住의 歷史가오램으로 自作農도만코 經濟的으로 生活에 多少의 安定을어덧스나 南北滿地方은 全部가 小作農이다(北滿地方寧古塔附近一帶의 墾民戶會의 所有地가잇기는하나 그는 極小部分의 例外라하겟다) 小作農中에도 移住의 時日이오란사람은관게치안으나 처음드러가는사람은 生活의 全需要品을 地主인 公司(會社)나 土豪에게서어옴으로 多幸히 農事가잘된다고하야도어온것을갑고나면 별로남는것이없스나 그럭저럭 不足한것은 어다먹으면서라도 지낼수잇지만 凶年만들면 어다먹은 負借로말미암아 딸이나 甚하아서는사랑하는 妻지빼앗기는일지잇다『朝鮮에서 살지못하면 滿洲로가지!』얼른 生覺하면 滿洲는 朝鮮사람의 唯一한 樂土가티 生覺키우나 事實은 正反對로 異域孤土의 그 辛酸한 生活은 實際體驗이업는사람으로서는 想像하기도어려울만한 程度다 이와가튼 生活難의 過中에서도 三一運動以後急激히 增加하는 敎養熱은 滿洲에 波及되야 全滿洲地方어느 村을 莫論하고 初等學校는다잇다 全滿朝鮮人中等敎育機關은 合八個所인데 地域別로보면 東滿(龍井)에 六, 南滿(柳河)에 二, 요 經營은 朝鮮人經營이 四 英人經營(長老敎會)二, 日人經營二며 男女共學이 四, 女學校二, 南學校二인대 朝鮮人經營은 全部가 男女共學制 인 同時에 學校에서 學生自由는 完全히 獲得되야잇다 그럼으로 朝鮮과가치 同盟休學은 比較的적다잇대야 意味를달니한 政治的「센새이슌」에 基困된데서 不過하다 生活의 反映으로 設備의 不完全한것은두말할것도업다 最近에와서는 國民政府의 敎育政策에 依하야 外人의 敎育機關回收로 朝鮮人經營인 學校는 全部公立으로 編入하고 中等學校도 省立으로하기 爲하야발서 着手한곳도잇다한다이것이 萬若全部實現된다면 在滿朝鮮人發展에그 支障은 甚大할것이다 滿洲는 中國領土이나 不平等條約의 諸條件으로 在滿朝鮮人은 中國의 統治를밧는 一面日本領事館을거처서 日本의 支配를밧게된다. -以下九二頁에 씀-＜94＞
-九四頁의 績-
日本의 行政警察權은 開放地에만 限한것이나 그中에도 東滿과가튼데는 開放地外지 管理를하고잇다 이것이이른바 在滿朝鮮人의 二重政治的支配現狀이다 經濟的不安과 政治的重壘에 依한 保護의 缺乏은 必然的으로 社會運動의 巨大한 發展을 促進케하야 全滿洲의 社會運動은 바야흐로그 陣營을 革故히하고잇는바이제그 主要한 團體는 東滿에 舊桓省會, 槿北會少年總隊, 東滿靑總, 舊勞働同盟, 槿友龍井支會, 天道敎靑年黨滿洲統一部 東滿共利社等이고 南北滿靑總等이다.
日本은 旅順 大連을 租借하야 滿洲活躍의 近處地를삼고잇다 滿洲大平野를 蜒蜿長蛇와가티닷는(走) 南滿洲鐵道가잇다 鐵道沿線에는간곳마다 日本의 附屬地가 繁榮하고잇다 此等의 治安을 維持하기 爲하야 日本은 軍隊와 警察의 駐屯權을 保持하고엇다 日露戰役後쌋코(積)싼 日本의 投資額은 累億의 富에 達하야이모든것은일은바 日本의「特殊權益」을 構成하얏다 滿洲는 現下滿家이라는일홈으로 世界人의 環視中에잇다보라 世界의 矛盾은 滿洲를 中心으로 跳梁하고잇지안는가?(完)＜92＞
＜92, 93-94＞