별건곤 (Byeolgeongon)
1929년 12월 01일
創作 산젹 (Changjak Sanjeok) (Creative Skewers)
蔡萬植 (Chae Manshik)
소설 (Soseol) (Fiction)

Creative Skewers
Chae Manshik

I

It is a cheap liquor house in the back alley of Jongno.

The outside is dark and the cold wind seems to pinch and tear off the ears, but the inside of the bar is brightly lit and cozy.

If you look from the entrance, there is a furnace with two towering doors as big as Namdaemun on the foreign side, and next to it, the liquor seller sits nobly on a high chair like a judge of the local court, pouring liquor. A little distance away from him, there is a food preparation area. Turning around from there, there is a cutting board like a feeding trough in a stable (though it's a bit different from a feeding trough because it's flat?), and on top of it are knives, soy sauce, vinegar, red pepper paste, salt, and various other ingredients in bowls. The grill for cooking the side dishes is placed facing the furnace.

The dinginess of the cheap liquor house, which is all the same no matter where you go, is not so obvious because it is night.

Because it is still early in the evening, there are not many drinkers. A few people are standing, grilling side dishes while holding a pair of salted fish, their red lips worn white from frequent contact. Others are drinking, slurping the steaming hot soup. <106>

…Three cups of refined rice wine.
…Oh, is that so?
…Yes! Long life.
…Three cups of refined rice wine have been served.
…One bowl of soup, please.
…Just one more drink.
…This is too much.

Next to the entrance, a temporary worker, as dingy as the liquor house, starts grilling skewers on a brazier with glowing white charcoal.

Sizzle, sizzle…

White smoke billows up and a delicious smell stings the nose.

Cheap liquor house (commoner atmosphere + savory smell + dinginess) = ○

The savory smell makes one salivate, and the newly rising smell of grilling meat makes one's heart race.

II

I sent my wife to pawn something to get money and calculated the time in my head.

Ten minutes to get there, five minutes to dawdle because of her shabby clothes, fifteen minutes to go around to a few places because she won't be able to get it done at the first place she tries, and fifteen minutes to come back with the money to buy rice, so thirty-five minutes in total.

Thirty-five minutes! Thirty-five minutes felt as long as thirty-five days to me.

And that's not all. It would take forty minutes to cook the rice when she got back. So, seventy-five minutes.

The thought of having to wait seventy-five minutes to get a bite of rice made me feel hopeless and, at the same time, happy at the prospect of eating steaming hot white rice.

It might sound like the words of a glutton, but anyone who has gone without food for a whole day and night would say the same thing.

If someone says, "How can a healthy man who has eaten starve?" I would reply, "Because I lost my job."
If they say, "Lost your job?" I would reply, "For writing and publishing a rebuttal, full of insults, against someone doing a liberal movement."
If they say, "Why can't you get another job?" I would reply, "Because I have nothing but common sense, and not even a crab's worth of that."
If they say, "So?" I would reply, "So...?…"
If they say, "What about the future?" I would reply, "I'm trying to find a way not to starve to death..."
If they say, "Hmph," <107> I would reply, "Hmph."

The truth is, some people would be happy if someone like me just died, but look at me, still alive and well, saying these annoying things.

And in the future too... uh uh...

But all that is just talk.

I was really struggling to wait those thirty-five and forty minutes.

I tried to forget about it and lie down and read a book, but the book looked like a rice bowl and soup.

My empty stomach was making a pathetic rumbling sound, and every time it did, I felt a burning pain as if my intestines were being cut.

I managed to get through about thirty or forty minutes, but my wife didn't come back.

An hour passed and she still didn't come back.

I thought all sorts of things. Had she gotten tired of me and run away? Had she been hit by a train? Had she been unable to pawn it and was wandering around, trembling with shame? Maybe she was with some other guy…?

In the meantime, I heard footsteps outside the door and my wife's welcome voice saying, "Honey."

I jumped up and opened the door, asking, "Did you get it?"

My wife closed the gate and came in. Since it was a rented room in someone else's house, it was very easy to come and go.

Standing in the dark, my wife grumbled, "You couldn't even light the brazier while I was gone."

"What for?" I asked.

"To grill skewers, what else?"

"Skewers?"

"Yeah."

My wife came into the room holding something wrapped in newspaper.

But I couldn't see that she had sold the rice and brought money back with her.

"What is that, for heaven's sake?"

"It's meat!"

"Meat? What meat?"

"To grill skewers."

"Skewers?"

"What about the rice? The rice?"

"Rice?... Oh my goodness... I forgot..."

I had lived with her for three years, and I had never seen her so surprised, so dumbfounded, so sad as she was then. <108>

Her face was flushed with surprise, dumbfoundedness, and sadness all at once, and she sat there blankly, muttering to herself, before tears streamed down her face.

"What's going on? What's wrong?"

"What am I going to do?"

"What?"

"I forgot to sell the rice and only bought meat..."

I was speechless and laughed.

"Fool."

My wife hung her head and couldn't say anything more.

"Tell me what happened. How much did you get for it?"

"Fifty jeon."

"And then?"

My wife looked up at me, lowered her head, and snickered. Women's tears are indeed cheap. Still, she's lived with me for three years, so she probably feels like she can get away with it. Or maybe she's trying to be cute, relying on her feminine instincts. She tilted her head and just snickered.

I guessed that she must have wanted to eat meat.

"So? You wanted to eat meat so much that you spent all fifty jeon on it? Fool! You should have sold just two doe of rice and bought only twenty jeon worth of meat, shouldn't you have?"

"No."

"Then?"

"While..."

"So?"

"I pawned it and was passing by a cheap liquor house..."

"So?"

"People were grilling side dishes and slurping hot soup while drinking..."

"So, you wanted to have a drink too, is that it?"

"No."

"Then?"

"The savory smell... it was so good... and they were grilling skewers on a brazier with glowing embers."

"Yeah."

My "yeah" was also spoken because I was tempted.

"And that smell came into my nose and it was just... hee hee."

"Heh heh heh... so?"

"So I went to the butcher shop and bought the meat..."

My wife hung her head and fidgeted with her fingers.

I laughed out loud. <109>

"It's okay. Let's grill these skewers and eat them," I said, and rolled up my sleeves and got up.

My wife still hesitated, looking embarrassed.

"I'm going to go back and get a refund," she said, picking up the meat.

"No, what are you doing? They won't give you a refund now, and you wanted to eat it so badly, so let's just cook it."

"What about tomorrow?"

"What are you going to do tomorrow?... Heh heh heh."

I laughed heartily. I was actually happy.

My wife laughed too.

Even though the seasoning wasn't great, the skewers tasted very good.

October 29, 1929 <110>

**Named Entities**

종로	Chongno
남대문	Namdaemun



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	創作 산젹
필자	蔡萬植
기사형태	소설

創作 산젹
						蔡萬植
一
종로 행랑뒷골 어느선술집이다.
밧갓이 컴컴어둡고 찬바람끄치 귀때기를 꼬집어떼는듯이 치운대신 술청안은불이환하게밝고 안옥하게 드수-하다.
드나드는문압해서보면 바로외인편에 남대문만한 솟을둘이나 걸은아궁이가잇고 그다음으로슬아범 이재판소의판사영감처럼 목노우에놉직히안져 련해 술을치고 그엽헤가 조곰사이를두고 안줏장이벌어져잇다. 그러고 그리로돌아서 마방깐의마죽구시가튼(평평하니 마죽구시와는 좀달 올가?) 선반도마가잇고 그우에가 식칼 간장초장 고초장 소곰무엇무엇담긴 주발이죽노혀잇다. 안주굽는화로는 목노에서 마주보이게노혀잇다.
어데가보나 다맛치한가지인 선술집의 싯컴헌때국이 그래도 밤이라그런한지 그다지완연하게 들어나보이지는안는다.
술ㅅ군은 밤이아직일으기 때문에 그다지만치안코 두어패가 들어서서 제각기 경경이미공동용의 붉은-입이다는곳은 하야케버서진 젓갈한쌍씩을들고 안주를구어가며 혹은김이물억물억올으는술국을 훌훌마서가며 술들을먹는다.＜106＞
……약주 석쟌노우
……아 그러챤수?
……네! 긴생입쇼
……약주석쟌 낫슴니다
……국한그릇 뜨우
……한잔만 더해요
……이건 과헌걸요
드나드는문엽헤다 새로 백탄불이 이글이글하는 화로하나를 가져다노코 선술집모양과 똑가티 때국이흘으는 더부사리가 산적을굼기시작한다.
피-지글지글……
흰연긔가 물신소사나며 만난냄새가 코를 콕찔은다.
선술집(평민뎍긔분+구수한냄새+때국)=○
구수-한냄새가 침이넘어가게하는데다가 새로 일어나는 고기익는냄새는 회가동하게한다.
二
나는 안해를식혀 뎐당을 잽히러보내노코 속으로시간을 계산하여보앗다.
가기에십분, 누더기니 뇌작거리느라고오분, 밧차단번들어가는데서는 안될것이고 멧군데 다니느라면그것이 한십오분 쌀을팔어가지고 오느라면십오분 그래서 삼십오분.
삼십오분! 삼십오분이 나에게는 설흔닷새나 되는것가티아득하엿다.
그뿐인가 돌아와서밥을짓느라면 사십분을 걸닌텐데. 그러면칠십오분.
칠십오분을지나야 입에밥이 들어가겟거니 생각을하니 한심하기도하면서 한편으로는 김이몰억몰억나는 허-연 더운밥을먹을일이 깃부기도하엿다.
나의하는소리가 허천이낫놈갓기도하겟지만 밤낫하로를꼽박굴머보면 누구나 하염직한소리다.
『쉐 묵신이 멀정한놈이 굶어?』하면
『직업을 일키문에』
『쉐 직업을일어?』
『자유주의운동을하는놈더러 욕지거리로 반박을써서 발표햇다고』
『왜 다시 취직을못해?』
『게(蟹) 꼬리만한 보통상식밧게 가진것이업기 때문에』
『그래서?』하면
『그래서?……?』
『압흐로는?』하면
『굶어죽쟌흘도리를 차려가면서……』
『흥』하면＜107＞
『흥』
사실나가튼놈은 그대로 죽어나바리면 고수하게녁일놈도 잇겟지만 그러나 굶어죽지안코 이러케 버젓하게살어가며 이러케 얄미운소리만 하고잇는것만보아라.
그러고이압흐로도……응 응……
그러나 그럿은 모다군말이고.
나는 그 삼십오분과 사십분을기다리기가 정말 괴로웟다.
이져바리고 누워서 책이나볼가하엿스나 책이밥그릇으로보이고 국으로보엿다.
아모것도엄슬뱃속에서는 무엇인지 청승맛게 꼬르륵꼬르륵소리가나고 그럴때마다 창자가 끈치는것가티 속이쓰렷다.
겨우겨우 어터케해서 한 삼사십분 보낸듯한데 여편네는 오지를아니하엿다.
한시간가량이나지나도 오지를아니하엿다.
속으로별의별생각을 다하여보앗다. 그만나에게 실증이나서 달어나바렷나? 뎐차에나치엇나? 못잽히고 여기저기 창피를보며 덜덜 떨고다니나? 혹어느놈에게……………?
그러는동안에 문압헤서 발자국소리가나며
『여보-』하는 안해의 반가운소리가들녓다.
나는 얼핏일어나 방문을열며
『되엿소?』하고물엇다.
한해는 대문을닷고 들어섯다. 남의집행랑방이라출입은 아쥬 간편하엿다.
안해는 컴컴어둔데선채
『그새 화롯불이나좀 피워두지』하고 바가지를글것다.
『화롯불은 해무얼해?』
『산적구어먹지 무얼해?』
『산적?』
『응』
안해는 손에 신문지에다조고마케 린것을들고 방으로 들어왓다.
그러나 쌀은 팔어가지고온것이 보이지아니하엿다.
『그건뭐요대관절?』
『고기지뭐야!』
『고기? 웬고기?』
『산적구어먹으려구』
『산적?』
『쌀은? 밥은?』
『밥?……어이구머니……참……』
나는 그와 삼년이나 가티살엇서야 그때처럼놀내고 그때처럼 무렴해하고 그때처럼 슯허하는것을 본적이＜108＞업섯다.
그는 놀나움과 무렴함과 슯흠이 한거번에얼골로확치켜올나 멍하니 끄먹끄먹하고안젓다가 두눈에서 줄기가튼눈물이 쏘다져내렷다.
『대관절 웬셈이요? 무엇쮸에그래?』
『이걸 어턱허우?』
『무얼?』
『쌀팔것을 못생각허구 고기만……』
나는 기가막혀 픽 우섯다.
『바보』
안해는 고개를숙이고 말을 더하지못하엿다.
『대관절 웬셈인지 이약이나 좀허구려, 잽히기는 얼마에잽혀수?』
『오십전』
『그래서?』
안해는 나를 치어다보고 고개를숙이며 쌕 우섯다 게집의눈물이란 과연갑시헐타. 그래도 삼년이나가티살은남편이라고 허물이업대서, 고꼴에 여자의본능으로 애교쳇것을부라는지 고개를꺄옷꺄옷하고 쌕쌕웃기만하엿다.
나는 고기가먹고십허 그랫나부다고 짐작만하엿다.
『그래? 고기가 먹고십허서 오십전엇치를 다삿단말이지? 바보! 쌀을 두되만팔구 이십전엇치만사두 졸텐데 그래?』
『아니야』
『그럼?』
『엇다적……적……』
『그래서?』
『뎐당을잽혀가지구 선술집압흘지나는데……』
『그래서?』
『안주를굽고 더운국을 흘흘마서가먼서 술들을먹는데……』
『그래, 당신두 한쟌 생각이나드란말이지?』
『아니야』
『그럼?』
『구수한냄새가……나는데……맛침 산적을-불이 이글이글현화로에다 석수를노쿠 산적을 답북굽겟지』
『응』
이『응』하고대답한것은 나도 솔깃하여서 한소리엇서다.
『그런데 그냄새가 코로들어오는데 아주……호호』
『허허허허……그래서?』
『그래서 얼핏푸주깐에가서 고기를……』
여편네는 고개를 푹 숙이고 손가락만질그질그질물엇다.
나는 소리를내어우섯다.＜109＞
『괜찬소, 자그럼우리 이거로 산적구어먹읍시다』하고
나는 팔을것고일어섯다.
여편네는 그래도 민망한듯이 머뭇거리다가
『가서 물너가지구올테야』하고 고기를 집어들엇다.
『헛-다 뭘그래 지금가지구가야 물너주지도안쿠  그러케 먹고십든거니 해먹지뭘』
『내일은?』
『내일은어터케헐셈치구……허허허허』
나는 뱃속것 유괘하게우섯다. 사실 유괘하엿다.
여편네도 가티우섯다.
양념도 변변치못하건만 산적맛이 퍽도맛이잇섯다.
一九二九ㆍ一○ㆍ二九＜110＞
＜106-110＞