잡지명 別乾坤 제24호
발행일 1929년 12월 01일
기사제목 連作講談 아츰 第七回 痛快한 꿈 (Serial Story Achim Episode 7: An Exhilarating Dream)
필자 鄭大鉉
기사형태 문예기타 (Literature, Other)

The outline of Episodes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6: A young man named Kim Ka-ji (金可之) was from Changsengpo (長生浦), Ulsan-gun (蔚山郡), Gyeongnam (慶南). Born with both loyalty and courage, and with the ambition to become a great hero, he mastered all martial arts and military strategies. At the age of twenty, he left home and traveled around. He obtained the secret "Northwest Territory Map" (『西北對地圖』) of Admiral Yi Chung-mu (李忠武公) from Yi Chung-mu's (李忠武公) descendant. He conspired with Pak Yop (朴曄), the Pacification Commissioner of P'yŏngan (平安監司), a favorite subject of King Kwanghae (光海主) at the time and the only military strategist in Joseon, to plan the conquest of Manchuria and North China. He explored the land, but unfortunately, he encountered the Incident of the Westerners (反正의 變). King Kwanghae (光海主) was dethroned, and Pak Yop (朴曄) was also executed. Helpless, he returned home, disguised himself as a wandering monk, and roamed the desolate mountains, looking for a good opportunity. He accidentally met General Aisin (愛親將軍), the third son of the King of the Jurchens (女眞國王). Originally, the Jurchens had a grand ambition to conquer the Ming Dynasty and become the Emperor of China, but they lacked a general with both wisdom and courage. Therefore, by royal command, they dispatched General Aisin (愛親將軍) to find such a person in Joseon. After searching for seven years, he was overjoyed to see Kim Ka-ji (金可之) and persuaded him to go to Jurchen. Kim Ka-ji (金可之), after much consideration, went to the Jurchen kingdom with General Aisin (愛親將軍). The King of Jurchen greatly trusted him at first sight and appointed him as the Chief of General Staff and issued a mobilization order for the conquest of the Ming (征明軍) army. <120> However, on the way the army invaded the Ming territory, Nurhaci (노라치) unfortunately died of illness. The eighth prince, Taizong (太宗), who originally had ambitions, inherited the throne with a false will. At the same time, he returned to the capital, changed his father's conquest-of-Ming policy, and imprisoned Chief of Staff Kim Ka-ji (金可之). Kim Ka-ji (金可之) met Kang Hong-rip (姜弘立), a Joseon defector, while imprisoned. He also had an audience with Qing Taizong (淸太宗), but with no hope of being released, he suffered extreme torment. One day, on the occasion of Taizong's (太宗) enthronement banquet, when the rulers and subjects were all drunk, Ka-ji's (可之) lover, the Seventh Princess (第七皇妹), secretly stole a military seal (兵符한 個) and gave it to Ka-ji (可之), urging him to escape. Ka-ji (可之) took the military seal, pretended to be rushing to Fus順 (撫順) by imperial order, deceived the gate guards, and escaped at night. When he reached the Jungbong (中峯) of Mt. Paektu (白頭山), he collapsed due to fatigue and sorrow.

Kim Ka-ji (金可之), who had collapsed to the ground, lay unconscious due to extreme fatigue. Gradually, he fell asleep, and his wandering spirit entered the mystical dreamland again. Whether Ka-ji (可之) transformed into a butterfly or the butterfly transformed into Ka-ji (可之), like Zhuang Zhou (莊周) on a lacquer pillow, he fluttered and flew to the peak of Mt. Paektu (白頭山). The heavenly lake (天池) with its shimmering five-colored clouds! He heard the leisurely cry of the divine deer (神鹿) at the lake and watched the lively heavenly fish (天魚) swimming in the lake (there are fish with five-colored patterns in the heavenly lake, commonly called heavenly fish). Sometimes, he heard the fierce hissing of tigers and bears (大虎猛熊) along with the sound of the wind blowing from the Manchurian fields. At other times, he heard the sound of the leaves of cambe (감베), bombae (봄베) (coniferous plants), Itka trees (익가나무) (larch), and reeds falling like autumn rain in the alpine regions, and the mournful cries of thousands of geese (기럭이). Kim Ka-ji (金可之), who was usually consumed with resentment and indignation due to misfortune, felt even more discontent in his dream amidst this environment. Especially when he looked at the clear autumn sky of Manchuria to the northwest, he was reminded of the past when he conspired with Pacification Commissioner Pak Hwa (朴嘩) of P'yŏngyang (平壤監司) to strategize and explore the Manchurian continent, only to have it fail halfway due to the so-called Incident of the Westerners (反正). He was also reminded of going to the Jurchen kingdom to become the commander-in-chief of the conquest of the Ming army (征明軍), where he temporarily displayed his martial prowess, but it also failed halfway, and he was imprisoned by Qing Taizong (淸太宗). And he was reminded of how his lover, the Seventh Princess (第七皇女) of the Jurchen kingdom, rescued him. All these thoughts swirled in his head like clouds gathering in the summer sky, preventing him from finding peace. He, who was temporarily consumed with failure and despair, became so agitated that he decided to commit suicide. He drew the three-foot long sword (三尺의 長劍) he had been wearing and offered a final silent bow to the sky. Suddenly, from the forest across from him, he heard a voice loudly reciting the poem of General Nami (南怡將軍) of old:
"The stone of Mt. Paektu will be exhausted by a sword, the water of the Tuman River will be drunk dry by horses. If a man of twenty cannot pacify the country, who will call him a great man in later generations?"
A gallant warrior (一員壯士) on a silver-saddled white horse and wearing a red hat and golden armor came rushing out. He snatched the general's sword and said, "General! What kind of foolishness is this? Victory and defeat are common in military affairs. Even though you have failed temporarily, the future is <121> vast. If you wait for a suitable opportunity with your wisdom and courage and plan a comeback (捲土重來), how can you not achieve great success? It is natural for a man to die bravely in unfavorable circumstances, but so-called despair-induced suicide is something that only mediocre people can do as a last resort. It is certainly not something a great man should do. If one has the determination to commit suicide, what is there that one cannot do? Moreover, for a hero of your caliber to be born into this world and commit suicide in this desolate mountain without achieving any great success is simply a meaningless death, and your precious body will only rot with the plants and trees. What benefit is there in that? Please think carefully and follow me to a better place."
×
Kim Ka-ji (金可之) was startled and looked closely, and the gallant warrior was none other than Vice-Marshal Yi Kwal (李适), whom he had met before. At the height of his excitement, Kim Ka-ji (金可之) became even more enraged upon seeing Yi Kwal (李适) and rebuked him loudly, saying, "You traitorous villain, what face do you have to come looking for me?" Yi Kwal (李适) calmly took Ka-ji's (可之) hand, smiled, and said, "Even a great revolutionary like you calls me a traitor? Of course, the Injo faction (仁祖派) would call me a traitor, but what reason would the Joseon people (朝鮮民衆) have to call me a traitor?" Ka-ji (可之) said, "The reason I call you a traitor is not because you raised a revolt against Injo (仁祖), but because you raised a revolt against the Kwanghae court (光海朝). As you know, was the Kwanghae court (光海朝) really a sinful ruler? In fact, wasn't he a ruler with greater ambition and strategy than any previous king? My plot with Pak Hwa (朴嘩), the Pacification Commissioner of P'yŏngyang (平壤監司), to conquer Manchuria was also done under the inner command of the Kwanghae court (光海朝). At that time, the so-called Westerners faction (反正黨), such as Yi Kwi (李貴), Kim Ryu (金■), and Chang Yu (張維), did not think about the nation's long-term plans at all, but were only obsessed with party interests and the desire for fame. They overthrew the Northern faction government (北人波政府) and carried out the unlawful act of deposing even the Kwanghae court (光海朝) under the pretense of the so-called Righteous Restoration (反正). You, too, despite having received the grace of Kwanghae (光海) and even becoming the Northern Army Commander (北兵使), were induced by the Righteous Restoration faction (反正派) and participated in the Righteous Restoration movement (反正運動) for temporary fame, weren't you? Although there were certain figures at the time, most of them were nothing more than corrupt Confucian scholars (腐儒) and mediocre fools (庸輩). If it weren't for a warrior like you, the Righteous Restoration against Kwanghae (光海의 反正) would never have succeeded. The fact that the Righteous Restoration (反正) dethroned the king, Pak Hwa (朴嘩) was executed, and our Manchurian management plan (滿洲經營策) went to waste is largely your responsibility. That is why I call you a so-called traitor. If you had foresight, you would not have joined the Righteous Restoration faction (反正派), but you would have reported the rebellion to Kwanghae (光海), rounded up the Righteous Restoration faction (反正派), and the three of us, Pak Hwa (朴嘩), you, and I, would have united to manage state affairs. Manchuria would already be part of our Joseon territory, and we would have become a powerful nation in East Asia, like the old Goguryeo (高句麗). Despite all that, you were blinded by immediate glory and became a hunting dog (獵狗) for Yi Kwi (李貴) and Kim Ryu (金■). After achieving the merit of the Righteous Restoration (反正), you ended up not even becoming a first-class meritorious subject (一時功臣) and were demoted to Vice-Marshal (副元帥) in the remote area of Nyŏngbyŏn (寧邊). Dissatisfied with that, you caused the so-called Kapcha Rebellion (甲子의 亂) <122> and temporarily occupied Hanyang (漢陽) for three days. But you were utterly defeated in the battle of Anhyŏn (鞍峴) with Chang Man (張晩) and fled to Ich'ŏn (利川), where you were killed by your subordinates on the way to Mŏktong (墨洞). Even then, if you were going to start a rebellion, you should have contacted people like us first, allied with the Jurchens (女眞) externally, and allied with many people internally before raising an army. You wouldn't have suffered such a disastrous defeat. What more do you have to say, you reckless traitor?" he scolded loudly.
×
Upon hearing Kim Ka-ji's (金可之) rebuke, Yi Kwal's (李适) face turned ashamed, and he was silent for a moment. Then, he spoke to Kim Ka-ji (金可之) again, saying, "General, your words are truly wise. I have always regretted it in my heart, but since that was the situation at the time, what could I have done? When I was the Northern Army Commander (北兵使), I met the General several times and surmised that you were an extraordinary person, but how could I have imagined that you had such great ambitions? It is all because I was incompetent and untrustworthy, but if the General had trusted me even a little and told me about those plans, and if you had also allowed Pak Hwa (朴嘩) and me to communicate, I certainly would not have participated in the Righteous Restoration movement (反正運動), nor would I have had to endure being disliked by Kim Ryu (金■) and the others. General, you blame me as a traitor, but in reality, the General is not without mistakes. After all, a hero must be good at judging the timing above all else. By the time the General met with me, the atmosphere of the Righteous Restoration movement (反正運動) was already strong in the court and the countryside, but the General did not properly assess this and was only engrossed in the continental management (大陸經營) in alliance with Pak Hwa (朴嘩), which ultimately led to failure, didn't it? In any case, when it comes to matters of the state, one must first strengthen oneself before embarking on foreign conquests. If one tries to conquer foreign lands without strengthening oneself, everything will end in failure. Even the General should have taken that into account and first allied with Pak Hwa (朴嘩) so that Pak Hwa (朴嘩) could hold the military power in the provinces and I could hold the military power in the central government. Then, if you had deliberated on the Manchurian management plan (滿洲經營策), no one in the central government would have dared to start a Righteous Restoration movement (反正運動), and thus you could have planned great things. However, it all depends on the fate of the nation and the individual. What is the use of regretting it now, and who can you blame?" Kim Ka-ji (金可之) listened to Yi Kwal's (李适) words, sighed deeply for a long time, and then changed his expression again, took Yi Kwal's (李适) hand, and spoke respectfully, saying, "Marshal (元帥), listening to your words, there is also some truth to them. Marshal (元帥), you and I are both unlucky, so what can we do? My previous words came from a moment of intense anger, please forgive me and do not take it to heart." Then, continuing, he asked Yi (李), "I had no choice but to come here, but why did you come to this desolate mountain, and how did you know I was here?" Yi Kwal (李适) replied, "Since you know my story well, General, I have always considered that defeat a lasting regret, and even as a dead soul, I have always thought of trying to do something again. A month ago, I heard that Yi Ch'ŏng-ok (李澄玉), the Pacification Commissioner of Hamgil Province (咸吉道節度使) who rebelled (反) in protest against King Sejo's (世祖) unreasonable actions and tried to build the Great Jin Dynasty (大金國), but failed halfway, had gathered the remaining forces again and was planning a second nation-building project (再次建國의 大計劃) in Taehwaldong (大活洞) near Mt. Paektu (白頭山). Overjoyed, I gathered three thousand troops and came here from afar. He was indeed as I had heard, a great hero (大英傑) who loved and treated his subordinates well, and at first sight, he entrusted me with the heavy responsibility of General Manager of Military Affairs (軍務總長). Besides me, heroes like General Nami (南怡將軍), Yi Si-ae (李施愛), and Pak Hwa (朴嘩) are all gathered there, and the elite troops under our command number about 500,000. In addition, Chang Ch'ŏn-ung (長天雄), the famous Manchurian bandit leader (滿洲馬賊巨魁), recently surrendered with over 50,000 troops, and his power is truly impressive. We are planning to raise a large army soon to conquer the Jurchens (女眞) and the Ming Dynasty at once, and then merge Joseon to build a great kingdom (大王國), a great nation in the East. However, we lack a military advisor, so we have been looking for someone. Pak Hwa (朴嘩) also recommended you, General, but we did not know your whereabouts. While searching in all directions, I accidentally had a dream last night (This is the so-called dream within a dream). An old man with white hair, calling himself the Mountain God of Mt. Paektu (長白山神人), appeared and said, 'If you go to the Heavenly Lake (天池) of Mt. Paektu (白頭山), you will meet a remarkable person (天下의 奇人), so go quickly.' I was so strange that I came here alone on horseback and indeed met the General."
×
Upon hearing those words, Kim Ka-ji's (金可之) thoughts of failure and despair, which had led him to the point of suicide, suddenly changed like a clear sky after rain. With a happy expression, he took Yi Kwal's (李适) hand and said, "I have long heard of Yi Ch'ŏng-ok's (李澄玉氏) fame, and Pak Hwa (朴嘩), my acquaintance, is also there. How can I refuse your words, Marshal?" He carefully checked the Northwest Territory Map (西北對地圖), which he had kept hidden in his heart even in his dreams, and left that place, following Yi Kwal's (李适) instructions toward Taehwaldong (大活洞). After passing through a large forest area of about five li (里), they arrived at a cave entrance. Several hundred soldiers, carrying bird guns (鳥銃), stood in formation to greet them with military honors. They were, of course, Japanese mercenary soldiers (下降倭兵) under Yi Kwal's (李适) command. The General (將軍) entered the military camp (軍幕) under Yi Kwal's (李适) guidance, received a welcoming feast (酒食의 響應), and passed through the cave entrance with the protection of the Japanese mercenary soldiers (降倭兵), arriving at the second cave entrance. That place was Taehwaldong (卽活洞). The inside of the cave appeared to be vast, with a circumference of about 40 to 50 li (里). There were large houses like large factories (大工廠) and large military barracks (大兵營), and the sound of warhorses was disturbing. Ka-ji (可之) was pleased on one hand, but also surprised and couldn't help but be suspicious. He thought to himself, "How can there be such a wide area in this deep mountain like Mt. Paektu (白頭山), and even if Yi Ch'ŏng-ok (李澄玉) is a hero of the world, where did he find such a base? If I had known about this sooner, I would have come here and achieved great success without going to the Jurchen kingdom (女眞國) and suffering in vain." He followed Yi Kwal (李适) into the village, arriving at a place where a house built grandly with good timber from Mt. Paektu (白頭山) was more magnificent than Seoul's Kunjŏngjŏn Hall (서울의 勤政殿). On the gate was inscribed "Temporary Military Government of the Great Jin Dynasty" (大金國臨時軍政府) in large letters. Judging from the calligraphy, he guessed it was Yi Kwal's (李适) handwriting (Yi Kwal (李适) was originally a renowned calligrapher). Entering the gate, thousands of soldiers were lined up on the left and right, and flags, banners, spears, and swords stood tall in front and behind, the majesty was truly impressive. Ka-ji (可之) went up to the main hall with Yi Kwal (李适), and Pak Hwa <124> (朴嘩) had already recognized him and rushed out with joy to take Ka-ji's (可之) hand and lead him in. Yi Ch'ŏng-ok (李澄玉) also heard that it was Kim Ka-ji (金可之), rushed out of the room to welcome him, and Nami (南怡), Yi Si-ae (李施愛), and others all shook his hand. Ka-ji (可之) received such a great welcome for the first time in his life, and he was very pleased that the people there were all heroes of Joseon.
×
After the hosts and guests settled down, Ch'ŏng-ok (澄玉) faced Ka-ji (可之), bowed, and said, "I have long heard of the General's fame, but I have been thinking of the great regret for not seeing you until now. Fortunately, with the introduction of Marshal Yi Kwal (李适), I am able to see you, General, and this is heaven making our great task come true. Those of us here have sworn to share life and death as comrades, so even if we say anything, it doesn't matter. General, please teach us well by revealing your innermost thoughts without any hesitation." Kim Ka-ji (金可之) was silent for a moment, then slowly began to speak, saying, "I have not only heard of the General's fame but also known of your great ambition and have always admired you, so how can I not speak my mind? As you know, General Pak Hwa (朴嘩) there also knows, I have been in the Jurchen kingdom (女眞國, 淸) for a long time, so I am not very familiar with the situation in Joseon, but I know the national situation of the Jurchens and the national situation of the Ming well. The rulers of Joseon only have a little morality and etiquette and are close to the Ming and despise the Jurchens, but in reality, the great root of Joseon's misfortune is the Jurchens. The Jurchens have an ambition to conquer the Ming Dynasty and annex Joseon from Taejo Nurhaci (太祖노라치) and become the king of the world. First, they conquered the Ming Dynasty, but Nurhaci (노라치) died of illness on the way, and the eighth son, Taizong (太宗), took charge of the national affairs. He is a great hero (大傑物) whose wisdom and military strategy are unparalleled in the world. His foreign policy is also different from his father's. He has an ambition to conquer Joseon before the Ming and has long been preparing for war. If it is fast, he will invade Joseon in the middle of this winter, taking advantage of the frozen Yalu River (鴨綠江), or if it is delayed, he will invade in the spring or winter of next year, which is a clear fact. However, the Ming Dynasty has already reached a state of decline and is barely preserving its own life. Therefore, like during the Imjin War in the past, it will not be able to rescue Joseon at all. Also, although Joseon has a famous general like Im Kyŏng-ŏp (林慶業), the court is full of treacherous subjects (奸細輩) who only pursue their own private interests and engage in factional strife, while also having the bad habit of envying others. They do not give Im Kyŏng-ŏp (慶業) military power but only give him a small number of soldiers with a false title and make him defend a desolate fortress, so he is a hero with no place to use his skills. How can he defend against the great enemy as he pleases? In Joseon, now is truly a time of critical crisis. If the General is for the sake of the fatherland (祖國) and for the sake of the Joseon people (朝鮮의 民族), you should not dream of the throne or be drunk on the pleasures of the moment while holding a large army in this remote valley. Instead, you should pay attention to conquering the Jurchens and make all kinds of preparations. If they invade Joseon, take the opportunity to directly attack the Jurchen capital (國都). With no more than 50,000 to 60,000 soldiers, you will be able to capture the capital. Also, if you send a message to Im Kyŏng-ŏp (林慶業) in Ŭiju (義州) to cut off the Jurchen army's return route, not a single soldier will be able to return to their homeland, and they will be eradicated (根滅). (Continued on page 119) <125>
-Continued from page 125-
Taking this opportunity, if the General (將軍) leads the victorious army (戰勝의 大軍) and approaches the Ming border (明의 國境), the Ming Dynasty, on the verge of death, will surrender without a fight. Joseon is originally our fatherland, so you can either conclude a friendly defensive alliance (攻守同盟) or, if it is not agreeable, lead the large army (大兵) and directly enter Seoul (서울) of Joseon. Protect the general population to the best of your ability and sweep away the aristocratic lords (兩班貴族놈) who engage in factional strife. Then, if you combine this Manchuria and Joseon to build a great nation like the old Goguryeo (高句麗) and the General reigns as king, wouldn't that be great?" When Yi Ch'ŏng-ok (李澄玉) heard those words from Kim Ka-ji (金可之), he suddenly seemed to gain new inspiration (새 精神). He jumped up, bowed to Ka-ji (可之), and said, "You are truly a great teacher of the world!" (天下의 良師라). He immediately seated him on the upper seat and appointed him as a military advisor (軍師). That day, he ordered the entire army to pay their respects to the military advisor (軍師의 相見禮). After holding a great feast with wine and meat, Ch'ŏng-ok (澄玉) and several important figures gathered together and feasted all night long. The next morning, when he gathered the troops and held a military parade (閱兵式), Ka-ji (可之), protected by several generals, rode his horse side-by-side with Yi Ch'ŏng-ok (李澄玉). Suddenly, Yi Ch'ŏng-ok's (李澄玉) horse fell to the ground, and he screamed loudly and ran away. Startled, Ka-ji (可之) woke up to find that it was all a dream (一場의 꿈). The horse that had been tied up next to Ka-ji (可之) had gnawed through its reins and was eating something above Ka-ji's (可之) head.
Although Ka-ji (可之) felt the most pleasant while dreaming, he actually felt more complicated and lonely after waking up. Who knows what path Ka-ji (可之) will take in the future? <119>

**Named Entities**

金可之	Kim Ka-ji
慶南	Kyŏngnam
蔚山郡	Ulsan-gun
長生浦	Changsengpo
李忠武公	Yi Ch'ungmu-gong
西北對地圖	Sŏbuk Taejido
朴曄	Pak Yŏp
平安監司	P'yŏngan Kamsa
光海主	Kwanghae-ju
反正의 變	Panjŏng ŭi Pyŏn
愛親將軍	Aech'in Changgun
女眞國王	Yŏjin Gukwang
노라치	Norachi
第八皇子太宗	P'al Hwangja T'aejong
淸太宗	Ch'ŏng T'aejong
姜弘立	Kang Hongnip
第七皇妹	Ch'il Hwangmae
撫順	Pusun
白頭山	Paektusan
中峯	Chungbong
莊周	Chuang Zhou
天池	Ch'ŏnchi
神鹿	Sinrok
天魚	Ch'ŏnŏ
平壤監司朴嘩	P'yŏngyang Kamsa Pak Hwa
李适	Yi Kwal
仁祖派	Injo p'a
李貴	Yi Kwi
金■	Kim Ryu
張維	Chang Yu
北人波政府	Puginp'a Chŏngbu
甲子의 亂	Kapcha ŭi Nan
張晩	Chang Man
鞍峴	Anhyŏn
利川	Ich'ŏn
墨洞	Mŏktong
咸吉道節度使	Hamgildo Chŏltosa
世祖	Sejo
李澄玉	Yi Ch'ŏng-ok
大金國	Tae Gŭmguk
大活洞	Taehwaldong
南怡	Nami
李施愛	Yi Si-ae
長天雄	Chang Ch'ŏnung
滿洲馬賊巨魁	Manju Majŏk Kŏk'oe
鴨綠江	Amnokkang
林慶業	Im Kyŏng-ŏp
義州	Ŭiju
高句麗	Koguryŏ
勤政殿	Kŭnjŏngjŏn


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	連作講談 아츰 第七回 痛快한
필자	鄭大鉉
기사형태	문예기타

連作講談 아츰 第七回 痛快한
						鄭大鉉
一, 二, 三, 四, 五, 六回의 梗槪〓金可之라는 靑年은 慶南蔚山郡長生浦사람이엿다. 生來로부터 忠勇이 兼備하고 天下偉傑이되겟다는 雄志가잇서서 모든 武藝와 兵略을 習得하고 二十歲때에집을나 四方으로 周遊하다가 李忠武公遺孫에게 忠武公의 秘藏한『西北對地圖』를어더가지고 當時光海主의 寵臣이오 朝鮮唯一의 武略家인 平安監司朴曄과 相謀하야 滿洲와 北支那一幅의 攻略을 計劃하고 그땅을 實地探査하다가 不幸히 反正의 變을 當하야 光海主가 廢位되고 朴曄이 한 被誅하니 그는할수업시 歸國하야 巡禮僧으로 變裝하고 寂寞한 山中으로도라다니며 조흔 機會를엿보다가 偶然이 女眞國王의 第三子인 愛親將軍을만낫섯다 元來女眞은 明國을 征服하고 漢土의 天子가되랴는 大雄圖를가젓스나 다만 智勇이 兼全한 大將이업는닭에 朝鮮에서 그러한 人物을 求하랴고 王命으로愛親將軍을 派遣하야 凡七年間을 物色하던 中에 金可之를보고 크게깃버하야 女眞으로다리고가랴고 勸誘하엿다 金可之는두루생각다못하야 愛親將軍과가치 女眞國으로갓섯는대 女眞國王은 一見에 그를크게 信任하야 參謀總長을삼고 征明軍動員令을나리＜120＞엿다. 그런데 征明軍이 明境을 侵入하는 中途에 不幸히 노라치가 病死하매 本來野心을가지고잇던 第八皇子太宗은 虛僞의 遺詔로 王位를 繼承하는 同時에 國都로도라가서 父王의 征明策을 變하고 參謀金可之를 監禁하얏다. 金可之는 監禁中에잇서서서 朝鮮의 降將인 姜弘立도만나보고  淸太宗과도 面談하얏스나 到底히 出獄할 可望이업서 極度의 苦悶을하던中 一日은 太宗의 卽位宴을 當하야 君臣上下가모도 沉醉婚姻한틈을타서 可之의 戀人인 第七皇妹가 兵符한 個를 窃取하야 可之를주고 脫走를 勸하니 可之는 그 兵符를가지고 皇命으로 撫順에 急行한다 假稱하고 門守衛兵을속히고 乘夜脫走하야 白頭山의 中峯지이르러서는 疲困과 悲痛이 왼몸에부댁기여 탁씰어지고말엇다.

땅에탁씰어젓던 金可之는 왼몸이 極度로 疲困하야 精神업시누엇더니 그럭져럭잠이드러 황홀한 神魂은다시 神秘의나라로드러가게되엿다. 可之가나븨로化하얏는지 나븨가 可之로化하얏는지 맛치 漆■의벼개우에 莊周의몸과가티 펄펄날아서 白頭山上上峯지올나갓섯다. 五雲이 玲瓏한 天池! 못가에서 幽閒하게우는 神鹿의울음소리도둣고못속에서 潑溂하게노는 天魚 (天池中에 五色紋이잇는고기가잇는데 俗稱天魚라한다) 의구경도하얏다. 엇던때에는 滿洲벌판에서불어드러오는바람소리와함께 大虎猛熊의무시무시한쉿바람소리도듯고엇던때에는 高山地帶의 植物인감베, 봄베(松柏科植物), 익가나무(落葉松), 갈대의입이가을비와가티우수러지고 數千數百의기럭이때가구슬피우는소리도드럿다. 平素에 不平不遇로 悲慣慷慨에싸엿던 金可之는 속에도 이러한 環境을 當하니 心懷가더욱 不平하얏다. 더구다나 西北으로 해맑은 滿洲의가을하눌을바라볼때에는 前날에 自己가 平壤監司朴嘩과 相謀하고 滿洲大陸을 政略하야고 實地로 踏査하다가 所謂反正의 內亂으로因하야 中途失敗하던일과  女眞國에가서 征明軍의 總指揮將이되야 一時武勇을날니다가 그 亦中途失敗되야 淸太宗에게 監禁되엿던일과  自己의 愛人인 女眞國의 第七皇女가 自己를 救出하던그모든생각이 맛치여름하눌에구름덩이모혀들듯이머리속으로돌아서 마음을 暫時도 安定치못하얏다 失敗-落望에 一時悲慣한그는 神經이 極度로 興舊되야그만 自殺를하랴고 決心하고 허리에찻던 三尺의 長劍을빼여둘고 하늘을 向하야 最後의 黙禮를하너라닛가 忽然히건너편 森林속에서
『白頭山石碧刀盡, 豆滿江水飮馬無. 男兒二十未平國 後世誰稱大丈夫.』
녯날 南怡將軍의 詩歌를 高聲浪吟하는소리가들니며 銀鞍白馬에 紅帽金甲을한 一員壯士가달러나오더니 將軍의칼을뺏고하는말이여보 將軍! 이것이 무슨 庸劣한일이요 勝敗는 兵家의 常事라 將軍이비록 一時失敗를하얏스나 아즉 前途가＜121＞遼遠한지라 將軍의 智謀와 武勇으로 相當한 機會를다시기달여 捲土重來를 圖한다면 엇지큰成功을하지말날 法이잇겟슴닛가 男兒가 不如意한경우에 한번 快하게죽는것도 當然한일이지만은 所謂落望의 自殺이라는것은 凡庸의무리가할수업서서 最後의하는일이오 決코 大丈夫의 取할바가안이라누구나그 自殺할 決心을가지고 다시무슨일을한다면 무엇이어려울것이잇겟슴니다 더구나 將軍과가튼 盖世의 英雄으로 이세상에나서 마모런큰 成功도업시 이와가치 無人空山에서 自殺을한다면 그야말로 一個虛死로 貴여운몸만 與草木同腐할뿐이니 무슨 利益이잇스겟슴잇가 다시김히행각하야그가치라르시고 나를러서 조흔곳으로가자고한다.
×
金可之는감작놀나살펴보니 그 壯士는 前日에 서려 面分이잇던 副元帥李适이엿다. 金可之는興奮한헤 李适을보고더욱 怒憤하야 크게소리처서지적갈오되 이놈 逆賊놈이무슨 面目으로나를차저왓느냐고하니 李适이 徐徐이 可之의손을삽고우스며말하되 將軍과가튼 大革命家로서도 나다러 逆賊이라하시오 無論仁祖派에서야 나를 逆賊이라하겟지요만은 朝鮮民衆으로서나다려 逆賊이랄것이무엇이겟소 可之갈오되 내가너더러 逆賊이라하는것은 仁祖에게 反旗를 드렷다는그것이아니이라 그보다도 光海朝에 對하야 反旗를 드렷다는그것이다너도짐작하거니와 光海朝야 事實 무슨 罪惡이잇는 人君이냐. 그로말하면도로혀 抱負와 經略이 歷代어는님금보다도 갸륵한 人君이아이냐. 나와 朴嘩과 滿洲攻略을 圖謀한것도 亦是光海朝의內命을 承한것이다. 그때에 所謂反正黨이란 李貴, 金■, 張維輩들은 國家百年의 大計는조금도생각지안이하고 다만 黨派心과 功名心에 熱中하야 當時北人波政府를들너업고 自己西人派勢力을 挽回하랴고 所謂反正이라는 美名下에 光海朝지 廢黜을하는 不軌의짓을 敢行한것이아니냐. 너는 亦是光海의 恩祿을입어 北兵使지됨에 不拘하고 反正派에 誘引되야 一時的功名을爲하야 反正運動을한놈이안이냐아모리그때에 某某人物이잇다하지만은 擧皆는 腐儒庸輩에 不過한것들이라 만일너와가튼 武勇家가안이엿드면 光海의 反正은 決코 成功을못하엿슬것이다 反正가 退位하고 朴嘩이 被誅하며러서 우리의 滿洲經營策이 水泡에도라가게된것은 실상 重大한 貢任이너에게잇지안으냐. 이것이내가너에게 所謂逆賊이라하는것이다 네가만일에 先見의 明이잇섯더라면 그反正派過重에드러가지안코 그 變을 光海에게 告하야 反正派를 一網打盡하고 朴嘩과너와나 三人이 合心하야 國事를 料理하얏스면 滿洲는벌서우리 朝鮮의 版圖에드러와서 녯날 高句麗와가티 堂堂한 東亞大强國이되엿슬것이다. 그럼에 不拘하고 너는 但只目前의 功心에팔니여서 李貴, 金■輩等의 한 獵狗가되야 反正의 功을이른다음에는 結局一時功臣도못되고 寧邊一隅에 副元帥로 左遷되엿다가 그것을 不滿히생각하고 所謂甲子의 亂＜122＞을 일으키여 三日天下로 漢陽을 一時占領하얏다가 張晩과 鞍峴一戰에 一敗塗地하고 利川으로 逃走하다가 墨洞途中에서 部下에게 被害하지안엇느냐. 그때에도만일 反亂을이르키랴거던 먼저우리가튼사람을 連絡하야 박그로 女眞과 結好하고 안으로만흔 民衆과 結托을한다음에 擧軍하얏더면 그럿케 慘敗는안이하얏슬것이다. 無謀逆賊놈이나에게무슨말을하느냐고 大叱하얏다.
×
李适은 金可之의 叱責을드르매 顔色이 差愧하야 一時沈黙하더니 다시 金可之에게말하야갈오되 將軍의말슴은참으로 至當한말슴이올시다. 小將도항상마음이 後悔를하는바이지만은 그때에 事勢가그리되엿스니 小將인들엇지하엿겟슴닛가 小將이 北兵使로잇슬때에 將軍을몃번 面會하야 將軍이 非凡한 人物인줄이야 짐작하얏지만은 그러한큰 抱負가기실줄이야 엇지짐작하얏겟슴닛가. 都是 小將이 不敏하고 信望이엄는탓이지만은 그때에 將軍이 小將을 多少라도 信任하야 그러한 內容을말하고  朴嘩과도 서로 聲氣를 相通케하얏다면 나도 勿論反正運動의 參加도안니하고 그진 金■輩에게안이꼬운꼴도보지안엇슬것임니다. 將軍은 小將더러 逆賊놈이라고 責하시지만은 實은 將軍도 失策이업는바는안이임니다, 대체 英雄이란것은무엇보다도 時機를잘살펴야하는것인데 그때 將軍이나 나를 面會할때만하야도 벌서 反正運動의 氣分이 朝野에 濃厚하얏것만은 將軍이그것을잘살피지못하고 但只朴嘩과 結托하야 大陸經營에만 沒頭하엿다가 結局失敗한것이안임닛가 언제이나 國家의일이란것은먼저 내 自體를튼튼히한다음에 外征을 하야만 成功을하는것이지 自體를튼튼치못하게하고 外征을힘쓴다면 擧皆는 失敗하고만은것임니다. 그때에 將軍만하야도 그것을잘살피여서 먼져 朴嘩과하야 地方의 兵權은 朴嘩이가지고 中央의 兵權은 小將에게맷긴다음에 滿洲經營策을 講究하얏스면 中央에서누가 敢히 反正運動을 일으키지도못하얏슬것이오 러서 大事를가히 可히 圖할것이안이엿슴닛가 그러나 亦國家와 個人의 運命에돌여보내고만은것이지 只今에와서 後悔한들 所用이잇스며 누구를 責하면별수가잇슴닛가. 金可之는 李适의그말을듯고 한참 長歎息을하더니 다시금 顔色을곳치고 李适의손을잡으며 말은 尊敬하야 曰 元帥의말슴을드르니 한그럴듯함니다다 元帥나나나 都是不運兒이니엇지하겟슴닛가 前의말은다나의 一時激憤한데서나온말이니 厚怒하시고엇지생각지마르십시요하고 말을이어 李다러물어가로되 나는 事情이 엇지할수엄서서 이곳지왓지만은 元帥는엇지하야 無人窮山에지왓스며 엇지하야 내가여긔에잇는것을알엇느냐고한즉 李适이대답하되 將軍이 나의일을잘알으시니말이지 나는그때 失敗한것을 千古遺恨으로생각하고 비록죽은 魂이라도다사한번일을하랴고 항상생각하던中 月前에 消息을드른즉 前날에 咸吉道節度使로 世祖의 無理한 處置를 憤慨하야 反＜123＞旗를들고 大金國을 建設하랴다가 中途失敗한 李澄玉이 捲土重來로다시 餘衆을모와가지고 白頭山밋 大活洞에서 再次建國의 大計劃을 한다하기에 喜不自勝하야 三千의 部下兵을거나리고 不遠千里하고자쳐왓더니 그는 果然듯던바와가티 天下의 大英傑로 愛人下士하야 一見에나를 軍務總長의 重任을맷기여주엇슴니다. 나 以外에도 南怡將軍과 李施愛朴嘩가튼 天下의 豪傑들이모도모혀잇고 手下精兵이 約五十萬에 達하는데 加之日前에는 滿洲馬賊巨魁로 有名한 長天雄이 手兵五萬餘名을다리고 自願投降하야 其勢가 實로 堂堂한바 不日에 大兵을이르키여 女眞과 明國을 一時征服하고  朝鮮을한데 倂合하야 東方一大國家인 大王國을 建設하랴고 計劃하나 다만 軍事顧問이업여서 人物을 物色하엿더니 朴嘩이한 將軍을 薦하얏스나 踪跡을알지못하야 四方으로 探問하던中 어제밤에 偶然히을뀐즉 (此所謂夢中夢)엇던 鶴髮老人이 自稱長白山神人이라 稱하고 현연이말하되 白頭山天池가를차져가면 天下의 奇人을만날터이니 速히가보라하기에 하도이상하야 單身匹馬로이곳지왓더니 果然將軍을만낫다고하엿다.
×
그말을들은 金可之는 악가지 失敗落望으로 自殺지하랴던생각이 맛치 雨後晴天과가티 突變하야 滿面의 喜色을 李适손을잡으며갈오되 李澄玉氏의 英名은 나 亦드른지오랫고 兼하야  朴嘩은나의 知己인데 亦是그곳에잇다하니 내가엇지 元帥의말을져바리리오하고 속에도몸에 深藏하엿던 西北對地圖를 다시잘간즉하고 그곳을나 李适의 指揮하는대로 大活洞을 向하야갓섯다. 略五里되는 大森林地帶를지내서 한 洞口에 當頭하니 數百의 兵卒이 鳥銃을메고 整列하야섯다가 軍禮로 迎接한다. 그것은 勿論李适의 手下降倭兵이엿다. 將軍은 李适의 案內로 軍幕中에드러가서 酒食의 響應을밧고 降倭兵의 擁衛로 그 洞門을지나 第二洞口에다다르니 그곳은 卽活洞이엿다 그 洞里는 周圍가 略四五十里나되게 廣濶하야뵈이는데 大工廠大兵營가튼 큰집이질비하게잇고 軍馬소리가 擾亂이들이엿다. 可之는한쪽으로깃버하면서도 한쪽으로놀나며 疑心치안이치못하얏다. 혼자생각에 이 白頭山가치깁흔 山속에 이러한넓은 地帶가엇지잇스며 아모리 李澄玉이 天下英雄이라할지라도 어느질을에져와가티 根據를삽앗슬가 내가만일에이런 일을벌서알엇스면 女眞國에가서 空然한고생을할것업시 여긔에와서벌서 大成功을하얏슬것이다하며 李适의뒤를러서 마을달여 洞中에드러갓다 한곳에 當到하니 白頭山의조흔 材木으로 宏大하게지은집이 서울의 勤政殿보다도더 雄大하고 門額에는 大金國臨時軍政府라 大書特書하야붓첫는데 그글씨는 筆法을보다 李适의 手筆인것을 짐작하얏다. (李适은 本來名筆이다)대문에드러서니 千兵萬卒이 左右에 羅列하고 旗幟槍劍이 前後森立하야 威風이 實로 堂堂하엿다. 可之는 李适과가티 堂上을 向하야올나가니 朴嘩＜124＞은벌서앓아보고 欣然히나러와서 可之의손을잡으며마져드리고 李澄玉도 金可之라는말을듯고 床에나러 歡迎하며 其他南怡, 李施愛等이모도 握手를한다 可之는 平生에첨으로큰 歡迎을밧고 거긔에잇는 人物이모도 朝鮮의 豪傑인것을짐작하매 마음이퍽이나반가웟섯다.
×
主客이자리를 定한 後에 澄玉은 可之에게 向하야 禮하고말하야갈오되 내가 將軍의 高名을드른지는벌서오랫스나 이때지 機會가업셔서 만나뵙지못한것을큰 遺憾으로생각하얏더니 이제 多幸히 李适元帥의 紹介로 將軍을뵙게되니 이는하눌이우리의 大事를이르게함이라 只今이자리는 同志로 死生을가티하기로맹서한사람들인즉 비록아모말을하야도상관이업사오니 將軍은조금도거릿김이업시 肝膽을 披露하야 잘가르처달나고하얏다. 金可之는한참침묵하다가 徐徐히말을끄내갈오되 나도 將軍의 高名을익히들를뿐안이라 將軍의큰뜻을이미알어서 항상흠모하던터인즉 엇지아는대로말슴치안켓슴닛가 져긔에기신 朴嘩將軍도 알알으시는바와가티 나는그동안 女眞國(淸)에오래잇섯기 때문에 朝鮮의 事情은 多少자서치못한 點이잇스나 女眞이 國情과 明의 國情은 잘알고잇슴니다. 朝鮮의 爲政者들은 다만 些少한 義理와 禮節을가지고 明과 親近하고 女眞을 賤視하나 실상 朝鮮의 큰 禍根은 女眞임니다 女眞은 太祖노라치로부터 明國을 征服하고 朝鮮을 倂吞하야 天下에 王 코자하는 野心을 가지고 第一着으로 明國을 征服하다가 中途에 病死하고 第八子太宗이 國政을 執하게되엿는데 그는 智謀軍略이 天下에 其比가업는 大傑物로 그 對外政策에잇셔서도 其父와달너서 明보다도먼저 朝鮮攻略할 野心을가지고 이미 出兵의 準備를한지오래슨즉 早速하면 今年겨울中에 鴨綠江의 結永時期를타서 朝鮮을 侵略하거나 그럿치안으면 遲緩하야도 明年春期或은 冬期에 侵略할것은 明確한 事實임니다. 그러나 明國은이미 衰亡의 境이르러서 自國의 生命도억지로 保存하는터인즉 過去壬辰때와가티 到底히 朝鮮을 救援치못할것이오 朝鮮은 비록 林慶業가튼 名將이잇스나 奸細輩가 朝廷에가득하야 다만 自己의 私利私腹들채우기와 黨爭을 일삼는 同時에 남을 嫉忌하는 惡習이잇셔서 慶業에게 兵權을주지안코 다만 色名으로 孤軍弱卒을주어 白馬孤城을직히게하니 이는 英雄이 無用武之地라 엇지마음대로 大敵을 防禦할수잇슴닛가 朝鮮에잇셧서는 只今이야말로 참으로 危急存亡의 秋이니 將軍이만일에 祖國을 爲하고 朝鮮의 民族을 爲한다면 이와가튼 深山窮谷에서 大兵을 擁하고 王位를뀌거나 目前의 享樂에 醉하지말고 全혀 女眞攻略에 留意하야 萬般의 準備를하얏다가 彼가 萬一朝鮮을 侵略하거던 그틈을타서 女眞의 國都를 直襲하면 不過五六萬의 軍兵을가지고도 能히 그 國都를 陷落할것이오  義州의 林慶業에게 傳檄하야 女眞軍의 歸路를 斷絶하면 片甲도다시저의 本國으로도라오지못하고 根滅할터이니(以下一一九頁에 續)＜125＞
-一二五頁에서 續-
이틈을타서 將軍이 戰勝의 大軍을고 明의 國境에 臨하야 한번 號令하면 濱死에 臨한 明國은 不戰自服할것이오 朝鮮은 本來우리 祖國인즉 好諠的을 攻守同盟을 締結하거나 不如意하면 大兵을고 朝鮮의 서울을 直入하야 一般의 人民은 極力保護하고그놈의 黨爭으로일을삼는 兩班貴族놈을 一打掃盡한다음에 이 滿洲와 朝鮮을한데 合하야 녯날 高句麗가튼 大國家를 建設하고 將軍이 君臨한다면 그안이좃슴닛가. 李澄玉은 金可之의그말을듯더니 별안간에새 精神이나는듯시 벌덕일어나서 可之에게절하고갈오되 先生은참 天下의 良師라하고 直時上座에마저서 軍師를삼도 當日에 全軍隊를 號令하야 嚴肅하게 軍師의 相見禮를 行한 後 酒肉을 大設하야 크게 敲軍하고 澄玉과여러 重要人物들이한데모혀 밤이새도록 大宴을하고 翊朝에 各軍을모와 閱兵式을 行할 새 可之는여러 將官의 擁護로 李澄玉과가티말을사즈런이타고 巡視를하더니 별안간에李澄玉의말이 땅에걱구러지며 크게소리를지르고다러나는바람에 깜작놀나니 웬걸이오그것이다 一場의이오 可之의엽헤는 매여두엇던 말이 곱비를쏠어먹고 可之의머리우로와서 무엇을먹고잇는中이엿다.
可之는 그을뀔때에는 平生에 第一愉快하얏스나실상고보니덕욱삼섬하고 쓸쓸할뿐이엿다 未知커리 可之는 以後에 果然엇더한길을 取할가?＜119＞
＜119, 120-125＞