잡지명	別건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	編輯室落書 (Editor's Notes)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Editorial/Postscript)

Editor's Notes

◇ It feels like just yesterday we were editing the New Year's issue, and now we're already editing the year-end issue, making us feel the swift passage of time even more than others. If we could publish the magazine regularly every month, it might be less regrettable, but our circumstances haven't allowed it, and we've only managed to put out seven issues this year, and now we're about to eat another bowl of rice cake soup (떡국), which is truly frustrating.

◇ However, starting from the New Year, we plan to publish daily on a regular basis and greatly expand and refresh the magazine. We've already started preparing for this, and Ch'ae Man-shik and Pak No-a, who are fully equipped with talent and skill, as well as female reporters Sŏng Sŏn-hŭi and Kim Wŏn-ju, have joined the company. We hope that our readers will have high expectations from the start. (Ch'a)

◇ This issue is a special edition for both the third anniversary of the magazine's founding and the year-end issue. In addition to featuring unprecedented essays, academic lectures, and literature, it is also filled with unique Pyŏlgŏn'gon-style articles, making it a truly valuable read for the end of the year. We simply hope that everyone will enjoy reading it. (Pak Tol-i)

◇ This is my first time in charge of editing, so everything is unfamiliar. However, I believe that if I take it step by step, I will do well in the end. I hope for much encouragement from our readers. (Ch'ae)

◇ In any company, it is actually uncomfortable to have only one woman working among men. However, now that we have another female reporter in our company, I cannot express in words how much better I feel and how much more efficient we become. I sincerely hope that our female employees will increase even more in the future, so that we can produce the magazine with just our hands. (Sŏng)

◇ This is my first time working as a reporter, and I am in charge of outside assignments, so there are many awkward things. However, as a result, my social circle has widened, and I have learned a lot about society, which I think is a great learning experience for me. From now on, I will do my best to ensure that our women also play an active role without falling behind men. (Kim)

◇ Starting from the New Year, we will greatly expand the pages and include a literature section in every issue, which we haven't had for years. We plan to publish works by not only established writers but also by newcomers with fresh energy. When I think that the poems published in our literature section will move you to tears, stir you to righteous indignation, and give you inspiration, and that the famous novels will enhance your taste and give you a new awareness of life, I already feel excited. I hope that this will be a sacred excitement emanating from the true spirit of the Korean people and that it will merge with our readers. (Pak)

◇ Since Mr. Pang, who is so famous for being overweight, left for Tokyo, the general affairs department seems much brighter. I hope he takes good care of the company's business in Tokyo, and I wonder how much sushi and candy he is eating. I wish he would bring some back for me when he returns... (Clerk) <126>

Named Entities

蔡萬植	Ch'ae Man-shik
朴露兒	Pak No-a
成善喜	Sŏng Sŏn-hŭi
金源珠	Kim Wŏn-ju
朴돌이	Pak Tol-i
方先生	Pang sonsaeng
東京	Tōkyō



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	編輯室落書
기사형태	사고·편집후기

編輯室落書
◇新年號를 編輯한지가 어제와가튼데 벌서 送年號를 編輯하고나니 세월의 른것을 남보다 더욱늣기게된다. 그나마 維誌나달달이 定期發行을하엿스면 오히려들섭섭하겟지만 우리 事情은 如意히되지못하고 一年中겨우 七回를내여놋코 떡국한그릇의 신세를 짓게되니 너무도억울한일이다.
◇그러나 新年부터는 每日定期로 發行하고 誌面을 大擴張大刷新하랴고 벌서부터 그 準備로 才藝手腕이다 具備한 蔡萬植, 朴露兒 兩君과  女記者成善喜, 金源珠兩氏가 入社하게되엿다. 讀者여러분은미리부터만흔 期待가잇기를바란다.(車)
◇이번 號는 本誌創刊三週年紀念號兼하야 送年號로 特輯이기 때문에 前에업던 論文, 學術講座, 文藝等을 特載한 外에 別乾坤式獨特의 記事를 滿載하얏스니 實로 歲暮의 大讀物이될 價値갓잇는것이다 누구나 한번 재미잇게읽어주기만바란다.(朴돌이)
◇첨으로 編輯을맛트니 여러 가지가 모다 生疎하다 그러나 眞所謂첫술에배부르랴고 차차하야가면잘될줄로밋는다. 讀者여러분의만흔 鞭撻이잇기를바란다.(蔡)
◇어느 社에나 男子틈에 女子한사람만끼여일하기는 事實上거북한일이다. 그런대우리 社에는동모 女記者가한분이잇게되니 얼마나 마음성이좃코 能率이 增進되는지알수업다. 나는이압흐로도우리 女社員이더늘어서 단순한우리의손으로도 雜誌가되여나가기를 心祝한다.(成)
◇첨으로 記者生活을하는 中에 外勤을맛치맛게되니섬억섬억한일이만타. 그러나 그代로 交際가넓어지고 社會事情을만히알개되니 그것이나의 큰공부인가한다 이압흐로 最善의 努力을하야 우리 女子도 男子에지게안는 活躍을하랴한다.(金)
◇新年부터는 紙面을 大擴張하야 엿해아지 업섯든 文藝欄을 每號마다 두기로하고 各大家는 勿論이요 氣銳가 斬新하 新進들의 作品도만히실을한다. 將次우리 文藝欄에실니는 詩가 여러분을울니게하고 義憤에게하는 感激을주고 名作小說들이여러분의 趣味를 向上하여 새로운 生活意識을가지시게할것을 생각하면 발서부터 興奮이되여 감삼이논다. 못조록 이것이 朝鮮사람의 참된 精神에서 울여나오는 거룩한 興奮이되야 讀者諸氏와한가지 合流되기를바란다.(朴)
◇뚱뚱하기로 有하신 方先生님이 東京을나시더니 庶務部가 아주훤한것갓다 東京에가서 社의일도잘보시려니와 그잘자시는 스시와사탕을얼마나잘자시는지 도라오실때애나도 좀갓다 주섯스면……(給仕)＜126＞
＜126＞