별건곤 제24호
1929년 12월 01일
個體生活과 團體生活 (Individual Life and Group Life)
李敦化 (I Dun-hwa)
잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

Individual Life and Group Life
by I Dun-hwa

I.
One friend asked me,
"What taste do you live for in this world?"
I felt very sad that I couldn't answer him. In fact, the question of why humans are born into this world and why they die is a separate matter, but when it comes to the difficult question of what taste we live for in this short time, I don't think anyone has an exact answer. Of course, I think there are many tastes to living. The taste of eating rice, the taste of wearing clothes, the taste of sleeping, the taste of sexual desire, and, in a more luxurious way, the taste of eating honey, the taste of indulging in pleasure, board games, chess, dominoes, gambling, and other high-class games, entertainment, and art, are all a synthesis. Just as the human body is not just the eyes, not just the mouth, not just the ears, not just the other various parts, but a synthesis of all of them, the taste of living is also a mixture of this and that, a creation of all sorts of things in this world. Among all these syntheses, some people have more, and some have less. However, among them, the common taste of life for ordinary people is in these three things: sex, food, and sleep. This is because they are innate and natural functions. In other words, these three tastes of life are the basic conditions for human life. Therefore, anyone who has only these three conditions will have a common taste of life.

II.
The philosopher Seneca joked about the question of why people die:
"People die because they hate repeating the same things."
This saying is very simple and seems funny, but it expresses a very heavy truth. "Life is rare at seventy since ancient times" has been a lament for the short lifespan of human life since ancient times. However, according to Seneca's words, seventy years of life is a short but long time. Whether one lives for seventy years or a thousand years, one can see that people die repeating the same things. Eat, work, sleep, then eat, work, sleep again. Today is like this, tomorrow is like this, this year is like that, next year is like that, and then one gets old and dies. If this is the case, whether one lives for a thousand years or seventy years, one is repeating the same things, and it is no exaggeration to say that one dies because one hates repeating the same things.
<174>
Thinking like this, one can say that humans are animals that seem noble but are extremely tedious. But what good is it to live well, and what good is it to live poorly? What good is it to succeed, and what good is it to fail? Once one dies, that's it, and wouldn't repeating the same things be the same? Frustration and spite arise. Let's just say, "Break everything!" and take a nap. But after sleeping, a headache arises, and after playing, curiosity arises again. Sitting down, one wants to stand up, and standing up, one wants to sit down again. Drinking alcohol makes the body tired, and excessive indulgence in sex weakens the body and makes it unbearable. So, let's just commit suicide, but one doesn't have the courage to commit suicide, and somehow, one only wants to live in this world. This is something that everyone experiences. So, if one is going to live, whether one repeats the same things or dreams of new things, one has no choice but to move, whether one likes it or not. Moving is the inescapable taste of a living person. How one moves is how one can see moving as the essence of a person. In other words, if one asks, "What taste do people live for in this world?" the conclusion is, "People are animals that live to move." This answer is not obtained consciously, nor is it obtained ideally, nor is it a statement made out of obligation or face. It is a natural course that arises spontaneously from an unconscious, inevitable, and innate promise.
Once one has obtained the answer that humans represent the entirety of the taste of living through movement, like "if it's the same price, choose the pink skirt (同價紅裳이면 분홍치마)," it is a natural principle of the universe that one moves towards the direction necessary for oneself. That is, without necessity, one cannot move.

III.
What is necessity? In general, a thing that exists in the universe has four conditions that must be met for it to exist: an objective material condition, a subjective automatic condition, the time when the thing was created, and the necessity for the condition to exist, that is, a necessary condition. For example, if there is a desk here, there must be an objective condition to make this desk, that is, wood, and a subjective condition, that is, a carpenter to make the desk, and the time of the year, month, day, and hour when this desk was made, and the motive for making this object is the necessity to use this desk. In this way, there will be no condition of existence in the universe. Therefore, it can be said that necessity is the original force that makes all existence move.
<175>
However, there are various levels of necessity: great necessity, small necessity, absolute necessity, relative necessity, selfish necessity, altruistic necessity. In choosing which necessity to take from among the necessities, the path of life diverges.
What kind of necessity is most appropriate for the taste of living? The genius Kim Sŏng-t'an (金聖嘆) represented this theory of necessity with the word "soshwibŏp (消遺法)" [method of diversion], and bitterly argued that the words, actions, rebellions, and behaviors of ancient and modern sages, virtuous men, heroes, talented men, and beautiful women were all methods of diversion for their time. Confucius taking three thousand disciples and traveling around the world was also a method of diversion for his time, and Chu-ko K'ong-ming (諸葛孔明) lying in a thatched cottage in Nanyang (南陽) and then emerging into the Three Kingdoms was also a method of diversion for his time. Looking at it this way, a method of diversion for a time does not go beyond expressing the taste of life of people in that time by taking the necessity of that time. Therefore, the method of diversion to take and the theory of necessity to seek will be different through each era. If that is the case, how can the method of diversion be singular? However, regardless of what era or what method of diversion it is, abstractly speaking, I have one thing to teach. What is it?

IV.
One day, after hearing that a woman in my neighborhood had had an abortion, I thought:
"Does a person have value as an individual?" If a person definitely has value as an individual, then what value theory should one speak of to a life that dies in the womb without even seeing the world? They couldn't believe in Jesus, so they couldn't go to heaven or be sent to hell, and they had no actions, so they couldn't be called good or evil, ordinary or heroic. What necessity were they born into the world for, and what necessity did they leave the world for? If there is a god in the universe, then surely god's play is extremely malicious, and if there is a Buddha, then surely Buddha's mercy is also a cause for mischief. What necessity were they born for, and what necessity did they die for? There are not just one or two examples of this. Even among the humans who have already been born into the world, how many die young in childhood, adolescence, or youth without doing anything or making any achievements? What necessity were they born for, and what necessity did they die for? Therefore, even if one dies in old age, if one's birth does not benefit the world and one's death does not harm the world, what is the difference between the life and death of all the masses and a fetus aborted in the womb? Even more ridiculous is the phenomenon of hundreds or thousands of beautiful young soldiers dying miserably in war under the wild desires of a general, or the phenomenon of tiny animals invisible to the eye being born in the morning and dying in the evening—what mischief and what pranks are these? The more I think about it, the more ridiculous and endlessly absurd it is. The thought that arises from this point is the question of whether a person has value as an individual. That is, neither a person nor anything in the universe should seek value as an individual, but only in the overall phenomenon can one seek value. The value of a person being a person is not in the individual but in the whole. One can only find the great qualifications of a person and the great reason for the existence of the universe in the overall temporal and spatial sense. For example, if we grab just one pillar from the entire house and think about why it is standing here, no matter how many days and nights we think about it, we will not be able to find the reason why that pillar is there. In other words, with just one pillar, there is no room to discuss the value of the pillar. The value of the pillar is not in the one pillar but in thinking about the entire house that one can first understand the reason why the pillar became a pillar. What necessity is the entire house here for, and therefore, what necessity does the pillar have to be in this place to build the house? <176> If one extends this principle and thinks about the existence of all things in the entire universe, one will not be able to find the necessity of the existence of an individual with just that individual. The meaning of an individual is established only when one thinks about the whole. Therefore, the value of one individual person is not in that one individual person, but only when one thinks about the abstract whole through the entire temporal and spatial sense of the person, one can express the value of the person. A person, when viewed as the whole of humanity, is said to embody a non-born, non-dying entity.
Truth is broad but can be condensed. There is no limit to these words. However, the main thing we need to learn is that while we live in this world, the so-called human flavor is in the inevitable movement itself, and in moving, one should seek the most superior necessity and move, and in seeking necessity, one should not seek it in the individual but find it in the whole of humanity. That is, one can first find the human flavor in sacrificing one's body and mind for human society. That is how the lives of heroes and great men have been in the universe and throughout heaven and earth for all eternity.

<177>

**Named Entities**

金聖嘆	Kim Sŏng-t'an
諸葛孔明	Chu-ko K'ong-ming
南陽	Nanyang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	個體生活과 團體生活
필자	李敦化
기사형태	잡저

個體生活과 團體生活
						李敦化
一
엇든 親故가내에게
「자네는무슨맛으로이 世上을사나」
하고뭇기에 나는 그 對答을무엇이라 할수업슴에 甚히 설어하엿다 其實사람이라하는 動物이무슨닭으로 이世上에 낫다 무슨닭으로죽는것인가하는 問題는 로두고라도 우리가살아잇는이짜른 時間이라도 무슨 滋味로사너냐하는 이 難問에이르러는 누구든지 무엇이라 對答할말이 正確히업슬줄로안다 勿論사람이살아가는맛이라는것은 여러 가지가잇슬줄로생각한다 밤먹는 滋味 옷입는滋味 잠자는滋味 性慾의 滋味 其外에 豪奢的으로말하면 꿀먹는滋味淫樂하는 滋味 박둑장긔골패투전 其他高等한 ■戱娛樂藝術等모든것의 總合體라볼수잇다 맛치사람의 身體라는것은 눈도안이오 입도안이오 귀도안이오  其他■■百體도안이오  그모든것의 總合體인것과갓치 사람의 살아가는맛도 이위 저위가 한데석겨 이 世上의 ■■일어노흔그것바께될수업다 그모든 總合體가운데서 엇던사람은만히가지고 엇던사람은작게가진區別이잇슬뿐이다 그러나 其中에서 一般사람에게한가지로 共通되는 生活味라하는것은 性 食 睡이세가지에잇다 그는 先天的이며 自然的性能인 故로써이다 말하자면이세가지 生活味라는것은 사람의 生活에 基礎的條件이된다는말이다 그리하야이세가지가 條件뿐는 사람이면 共通으로 살아가는 滋味일것이다.
二
哲人세네카는사람은훼-죽너냐하는 問題에 對하야이러한 弄談을하엿다.
「임이한일을 다시거듭하기실혀서죽는것이다」
라고. 이말은 甚히 簡單하며 는우수운말갓흐면서도 極히 무거운 眞理를 表示한것이다「人生七十古來稀」이것은예로부터 人生의 짜른 生命을 嘆息하야하는말이엇다 그러나 세네카의말에쪼차보면 人生七十은 짜르면서도긴 歲月이라할수잇다 七十年을사든지 千年을사든지 사람은하든＜174＞일을 다시거듭하다가죽는다고 볼수잇다 밥먹고 일하고 잠자고-밥먹고 일하고 잠자고 오늘그러하고 내일그러하고 今年이그럿코 明年이그럿코 그리다가늙고늙어서는죽는것이다 이러타하면 千年을사나 七十年을사나 한가지로 하는일을거듭하다가 하든일을다시거듭하기실혀서 畢竟은죽는다하야도 過言이안이다.
이러케생각하고보면 사람이라는 動物은 놉흔것갓흐나 심겁기가 짝이업는 物伴이라할수잇다 그러나잘살면무엇하며못살면 무엇하드란말이냐 잘되면무엇하고 못되면 무엇하드란말이냐 죽어지면 그뿐이요 하든일을거듭하기는맛창가지가 안일것이냐 하는짜증과심술이조사난다 破除萬事에라고만두어라하고 낫잠이나 실컨자보자하고자고나니 頭痛이생기고 놀아보자놀아보니 궁금증이다시나고 안즈니이러서고십고 이러서니 다시아고십다 술먹으니몸이곤하고 過色하니몸이 弱하야견딀수업다 그러타하야에라 自殺를하자하니 自殺할 勇氣도나지안하고엇전지하로하도 世上에살고십흔 생각만난다 이것은누구든지 한가지로다-經驗하야보는일이다 그러니말이다 己往살자고보면 하든일을다시거듐하드래도 는새일을이드래도 실튼지 조튼지 動할수박게업시된다 動하는것이살아잇는사람의 업지못한 滋味라할수박게업다 어더케 動하든지 動하는것이 사람의 本分으로볼수잇다 다시말하자면「사람은무슨맛으로이 世上를사너냐」하면이에그 結論에「사람은 動하기 爲하야사는 動物이라」하는 答案을어덧다 이 答案은 意識的으로어든것도안이오 理想的으로엇은것도안이오 는 義務的體面的으로하는말도안이라 無意識的이며 必然的이며 先天的約束으로부터 스스로생겨난 自然의 行路일것이다.
사람은임이 動으로써 사는맛의 全體를 代表한것이라하는 答案을어느 以上, 同價紅裳이면 분홍치마라고 動함에는스스로 必要한 方面으로 向하야 動하게되는것이 天地萬有의 自然한 理勢라할수잇다 卽必要가안이면한 動할수업시된다.
三
必要란무엇인가 大槪이 宇宙의 間에 存在한 物件이라는 것은 그 存在하게된 原因이반다시 네가지 條件이갓추워잇는것이다 客觀的으로본 物的條件 主觀的으로본 自動的條件 그 物件이생겨난 時間 그리햐야그 條件 이잇서야할 必要卽必要條件그것이엇다 例하야말하면 여기에한 書案이잇다하면 이書案를만들만한 客觀的條件 卽木材하나하고 書案를반근 木手卽主觀的條件하고 이書案를만든 年月日時의 時間하고 그리하야 이書案를쓸 必要가잇다하야 이 物件을만들게된 動機가그것이다 이 方法으로 天地萬有의 存在條件은하나도업슬것이다 그리하야 必要라하는것이무엇보다 萬有存在를 成動케한 元力이되얏다 할수잇다.＜175＞
그러나 必要에도여러가지 階梯가잇다 큰必要적은必要絶對的必要 相對的必要 利己的必要 利他的必要에 必要 저必要 必要와 必要도가지간에서 어느必要를 取할가하는데서 人生의 行路가스스로갈너지게된다.
엇더한必要를 取하는것이 살아가는맛에 가장 適當■가 天才金聖嘆은 이必要論을 消遺法이라하는말로서 代表하야 古今聖賢君子 英雄豪傑才子佳人들의 하든말하든 作亂하든 行爲가 도모지 한 時代 自己네들의 消遺法이엇다고 痛論하엿다 孔子가되야 三千弟子를 거늘이고 周遊天下를 한것도 한 時代의 消遺法이며 諸葛孔明이■야 南陽草堂에누엇엇다가 三國風雲에 出脚함도 亦是한 時代의 消遺法이라는 例이엿다 이러고보면 한 時代의 消遺法은 한 時代의 必要를 取한 한 時代人生의 自己네의 맛을 發揮한데서 지내지안이하겟다 그리하야 時代에는 各時代를 通하야 取할바 消遺法이다르며 求할배 必要論이 다를것이엇다 그러타 消遺法이엇지 單一하랴만은 그러나엇더한 時代에든지 엇더한 消遺法이든지를 勿論하고 抽象的으로보아서 나는한가지 가라칠말이잇다 그는무엇일가?
四
나는엇던날 洞內婦人한분이 落胎하엿다는말을듯고나서 이런생각을하엿다.
「사람은 個體로써 價値가잇슬가업슬가?」라고, 萬若사람이 한 個體로도 確實히 價値가잇다하고보면 胎中에서만 世上求景도못하고 죽는 生命에게는 무슨 價値論를 말해야올흘가 그에게는 耶蘇를미들수업섯스니 天堂에갈수도 地獄에보낼수도업는일이오 그에게는 行爲가업섯스니 善人이라할수도업고 惡人이라할수도업슬것이오 凡人이라할수도업고 英雄이라할수도업는일이다 그는무슨 必要로 世上에낫다가 무슨 必要로 世上를나는가 萬若宇宙의 間에 神이잇다하면 神의 作戱도 果然心術굿기가짝이업고 佛이잇다하면 佛의 慈悲라는것도 한 作亂꺼리가안일가 그는 무슨 必要로낫다가 무슨 必要로죽을가이러한 例 는 한두가지가안이엇다 임이 世上에나온 人間中에도 幼年 少年靑年時期에 한일 한 業도하야보지못하고 中間에서 夭折하는이는얼마나될가그것은무슨 必要로낫다가 무슨 必要로죽을가 그리하야 設使老年이라야 죽는다할지라도 生하야 世에 益함이업고 死함에 世에 損함이업는 모든 大衆의 生死-엇던의미로보면 한가지로 腹中에서 落胎란 胎兒와 무엇이달을것이잇겟는가? 그보다더우스운것은 갓흔 靑年兵士가 戰爭에서 幾百幾十名이 一將의 野慾아래서 無慘히죽버어리는 現象이라든가 눈에보히지도안는 微小動物이아츰에낫다저녁에죽는 現象-그는무슨 作亂이며 무슨 惡戱일가 생각하면 생각할사록 우습기도짝이업고 싱겁기도 限이업는일이다 이 點으로부터울어나는생각이곳사람은 個體로서 價値가잇슬가업슬가하는 疑問에잇다 곳사람은 안이 宇宙萬有는무엇이든지 個體로서 價値를 求할것＜176＞이업고 오즉 全體的現象에서뿐 價値를 求할수잇겟다하는 말이다 사람이사람된 價値는 個體에잇는것이안이요 全體에잇다함이다 사람은 時間上全的, 空間上全的에서사람의 偉大한 資格과 宇宙의 偉大한 存在理由를차즐수잇슬것뿐이라 假令우리가집 全體에서 기동하나뿐을붓잡고 이것이 무슨 必要로 이곳에 서 잇슬가하고 생각하야본다하면 千百날생각하야본다할지라도 그기동이 그곳에서잇는닭을알아낼 道理가업슬이리 다시말하면 그기동하나뿐으로는기동의 價値를 論할 餘地가업다 기동의 價値는 기동하나에잇는 것이안이오 집全體를 생각할때에 처음으로 기동이기동된 所以릉알아낼수잇슬이라 잡全體는 무슨 必要로 이곳에잇게되엿스며 그리하야 그집을짓기 爲하야는 기동이 이곳에서질 必然性을가진것을알아낼수잇슬■■ 함이엇다 이 理致를밀루어 宇宙全體의 萬有存在를생각하야본다하면 萬有는 그 個體로뿐은 個體의 存在必要를알아낼 道理가업스리라 個體는 全體를생각할때에처음으로 그 意義가 成立되는것이다 그럼으로 사람한 個人의 價値도 한사람한 個人에잇지안이하고 사람이라하는 時間上空間上  全體를通한 抽象的  全體를생각하야볼때에처음으로 사람의 價値를 表現할수잇겟다하는말이다 사람은사람全體上으로보아서 不生不滅의 本體를일러진것이겟다.
眞理는 博하되 約할수잇는것이라 이말저말 말이엇지 限定이잇스리오 다만 要하는배우는우리가 이 世上에살아잇는 동안에 所謂人間味라는것은 必然的한 動 그 自體에잇슬것이오 그리하야 動함에는 가장보다 以上의 必要를 求하야 動하라함이오 必要를 求함에는 個體에서 求하지말고 人間全體의우에서 그것을 차즐수잇다함이다 卽人間社會를 爲하야 몸과마음을 犧牲하는곳에서 처음으로 人間味라는것을차자낼수잇다함이엇다 乾坤天地宇宙間에 天下萬古億萬古에 豪傑男兒大丈夫의 살님살이가 다그러하고 그러하다는말이다.＜177＞
＜174-177＞