잡지명	別乾坤 第19號
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	一張書로 天下의 不平客을 니르킨 平西 大元師 洪景來檄文 (Hong Gyeong-rae's Proclamation as Grand General of Pyeongseo, Announcing Dissatisfied People of the World with a Single Letter)
필자	桂山人 (Gyesanin)
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Hong Gyeong-rae's story is generally known to everyone and has been published several times in this magazine, but his proclamation has not yet been widely published to the world. (It was introduced somewhat in this magazine's No. 15.) However, the day he raised the revolt and circulated the proclamation throughout the entire Gwanseo Province, December 22nd of Sunjo 11th year, Sinmi (118 years ago from now), corresponds to February 1st in the Gregorian calendar. Moreover, his capture of Jeongju Fortress was on January 2nd of the following year, Imshin, which is February 11th in the Gregorian calendar. Coincidentally, this February 11th is the same day that Emperor Gojong took refuge in the Russian legation (Agwan Pacheon). Now, at the end of publishing the article on the refuge in the Russian legation that occurred in February, the story of Hong is also remembered. Therefore, we would like to provide the full text of his proclamation and the proclamation order for general reference. However, the saying "文不過持平掌令하고 武不過萬戶僉使 云云," which is commonly passed down, is not in this original proclamation, so it is unknown whether a busybody added it later.

1. Proclamation
(Published on December 20th, Sunjo 11th year, Sinmi)

Grand General of Pyeongseo issues this urgent proclamation. All fathers, elders, officials, and commoners of Gwanseo Province, listen to this proclamation. Gwanseo is the ancient territory of Gija (箕聖古域) and the old nest of Dangun (壇君舊窟). Its attire and culture are splendid. During the Imjin War (壬辰之亂), it already had the merit of reconstruction, and again during the Byeongja Horan (丁卯胡亂) of Injo, it was the first to offer loyal support. The learning of Dunaam (遯菴之學) and the talent of Wolpo (月浦之才) are also products of the Western lands. However, the court treats the Western lands as if they were no different from dung and dirt (朝廷之等棄西土를 不異糞土), to the extent that even servants and slaves say "Pyeonghan (平漢)" when they see people from the Western lands. How can those from the Western lands not feel wronged and suppressed (豈不寃抑哉)? When things are relaxed, they rely on the strength of the Western lands, and when it is time for the civil service examination, they rely on the writing of the Western lands. What fault have the Western people committed against the court in the past 400 years (西人이 有何負於朝廷哉)? Now, with the young King (冲王) on the throne, treacherous officials are rampant, with the likes of Kim Jo-sun and Park Jong-gyeong stealing and manipulating the state affairs (金祖淳朴宗慶輩가 竊弄國柄). Heaven sends down disasters, and earthquakes and thunder occur almost every year (仁天이 降災하야 同雷地震이 殆無虛歲). As a result, great misfortunes abound, starving people fill the roads, the old and weak are in misery, and the complete destruction of the people is almost imminent (生民이 盡劉함이 幾乎在卽). Fortunately, a sage who can save the world was born under Ilwolbong Peak of Mt. In in Cheongbuk Seoncheon, at Gunwangpo above Gaya-dong, Hongui Island (濟世之聖人이 誕降于 淸北宣川仞山日月峰下君王浦上伽倻洞紅衣島). He was born divine and entered China with a divine monk at the age of five (五歲에 隨神僧入＜11＞ 中國). After growing up, he lived in seclusion in Ganggye Four Counties for five years, leading the descendants of loyal subjects of the Ming Dynasty, with 100,000 iron horsemen (統領皇明之世臣遺孫하니 鐵騎十萬이라). While having the will to purify the Eastern country (澄淸東國之志), this Gwanseo is the old home of Fengpei (卽 豐沛故鄕). Unable to bear to tread upon it, he first makes the heroic figures of Gwanseo raise an army to save the people. Wherever the righteous flag arrives, none will be unsurprised to come back to life (義旗所到에 莫不*蘇). ... ...(24 characters deleted-original text)... ... open the castle gates to welcome our army (洞開城門하야 以迎我師하라). If there are any who resist stubbornly, we will use 5,000 iron horsemen to eliminate them without a trace (當以鐵騎 5000으로 *之無遺矣). It is appropriate to quickly seek orders and act accordingly. This proclamation is sent to the Anju Military Commander, *Hu, the Magistrate, the Sukcheon Governor, the Sunan Magistrate, the Pyongyang Governor, the Middle Army, the Secretary, the Gangseo Magistrate, the Samhwa Governor, the Hamjong Governor, the Jeungsan Magistrate, and the Yeongyu Magistrate. Grand General's drawing fan seal (大元師著抽蹯印). Seoncheon Governor Kim Ik-sun is to receive the surrender document, and after taking the seal, he is to be severely imprisoned for the crime of exploiting the rich. Gasan Military Supply Officer Jeong Seo is to be executed after taking the seal for the crime of embezzlement. Boseong Governor Im Seong-go is to be severely imprisoned after taking the seal for the crime of using public funds. If this proclamation is not communicated to the district, on the day the army arrives, the headmaster and local officers of that district will be subject to military law (此檄文을 若有*傳之邑則兵到之日에 該邑首校鄕憲은 斷當軍律施行事).

2. Proclamation Order

Burrowing creatures know the rain, and nesting creatures know the wind. Can a person who does not know the times be called a person (以人으로 不知天時者는 可謂人乎)? Burrowing and nesting creatures are foolish. Your name is not Hae-gu (海愚), but truly Ha-gu (下愚). You sent an assassin to harm me secretly (遺剌客陰害하니 井蛙之所跳梁이로다). Do you want to learn from Gongsun Ziyang (公孫子陽)? If you wanted to send an assassin, why not send someone from the same court (欲遺剌客이면 何不遺同朝之人), but instead, you sent a low-ranking soldier, and it was revealed (乃遺小卒하야 如是見洩也)? Even the soldiers under your command are also people of our Gwanseo (帳下之卒도 亦吾關西之民이니 豈有致誠盡心哉아). General Yi In-bae and others have been executed out of necessity (全大*李仁培 등은 不得已處斬하니). If there are any conspiracies, do not involve the people of Gwanseo (如有陰謀여든 勿遺關西之人). And if you want to defend the fortress and resist the order, do not place the people of Gwanseo inside the fort and on the walls (且欲堅壁抗命이어든 營內城上에 勿置關西之民). Rather, gather your own wives, children, servants, and slaves and organize them into units to be of one mind (卽招自家之妻妾子弟奴婢하야 編伍同心이 可也니라). You are a hereditary official and a general of the outer regions (子則世祿之臣이오. 外곤之將이라). Given your sense of integrity, although you know the will of heaven and the hearts of the people, you cannot make a pact under the castle (廉恥所在에 雖知天命人心이나 不可城下之盟이니). On the day the great army takes the castle, I will grant you the name of Daebu (大夫) (大軍拔城之日에 請遂子大夫之名하리라). Recently, Jeong Seo of Gasan, Governor Im Seong-go of Boseong, Magistrate Yi Geun-wi of Jeongju, Governor Yi Yeong-sik of Gwaksan, Governor Kim Ik-sun of Seoncheon, Governor Yi Jang-gyeom of Cheolsan, Governor Gwon Su of Yongcheon, Magistrate Jo Heung-jin of Uiju, and Governor Yun Min-dong of Sakju have naturally followed the wind (近日에 嘉山 鄭著와 博川郡守 任聖皐와 定州牧使 李近胃와 郭山郡守 李永植과 宣川府使 金益淳과 鐵山府使 李章謙과 龍川府使 權琇와 義州府尹 趙興鎭과 朔州府使 尹敏東은 *然從風하니). Although these people know the will of heaven and the hearts of the people, they are sinners of Daebu (此輩-雖知天命人心이나 子大夫之罪人也로다). Even if you exclude the people of Gwanseo and include hereditary officials when defending the castle, and if heaven and men together persuade you not to resolve it, even the hereditary officials will collapse like tiles (假令守城之時에 却關西之人하고 納世祿之臣則固當不解而天人이 共諭하야 世祿之輩도 猶此瓦解하니). Why is it necessary to wait for Gan Shi to observe the heavens and invite Mu Ham to divine the people (何必待甘石而觀天하며 .招巫咸而筮人乎)? I hope that the curvaceous-browed, plump-cheeked gisaengs (曲眉豊頰之妓) in the Seoryu camp (細柳營中) – even if there is affection in the blanket (雖是被中之情), they are products of Gwanseo (此乃關西之産). How do you know they are not enemies in the boat (安知非舟中之敵乎)? And the ten thousand bowmen holding white silk under Baeksang Pavilion (百祥樓下에 擁紈萬弓之士) – they are also products of Gwanseo (此赤關西之産). How do you know they are not Qiang under the valley (安知穀下之羌乎)? Then, what kind of armor do you have to sit alone in the midst of ten thousand cliffs (有何曾中之甲하야 以兀然獨坐于萬仞之中)? The fall of your head is already long overdue (首級之落이 日已久矣로다). Why do you not consider yourself (何不自諒也오)? Understand this and choose to live or die. This is the teaching of 'Balsi Tuhyeong' in the Spring and Autumn period (春秋拔施投衡之敎也-니라).
(This proclamation order was sent by Hong to Anju Military Commander Yi Hae-gu, after Yi's attempt to assassinate Hong was discovered.)＜12＞

**Named Entities**

洪景來	Hong Gyeong-rae
關西	Gwanseo
純祖	Sunjo
辛巳	Sinmi
定州城	Jeongju Fortress
壬申	Imshin
李太皇	Yi Taehwang
俄館播遷	Agwan Pacheon
持平掌令	Jipyeong Jangnyeong
萬戶僉使	Manho Cheomsa
箕聖	Gija
壇君	Dangun
壬辰之亂	Imjin War
丁卯胡亂	Byeongja Horan
仁祖	Injo
遯菴	Dunaam
月浦	Wolpo
金祖淳	Kim Jo-sun
朴宗慶	Park Jong-gyeong
淸北	Cheongbuk
宣川	Seoncheon
仞山	In San
日月峰	Ilwolbong Peak
君王浦	Gunwangpo
伽倻洞	Gaya-dong
紅衣島	Hongui Island
中國	China
江界	Ganggye
海愚	Hae-gu
李仁培	Yi In-bae
嘉山	Gasan
鄭薯	Jeong Seo
博川	Boseong
任聖皐	Im Seong-go
定州	Jeongju
李近胃	Yi Geun-wi
郭山	Gwaksan
李永植	Yi Yeong-sik
宣川府	Seoncheon-bu
金益淳	Kim Ik-sun
鐵山府	Cheolsan-bu
李章謙	Yi Jang-gyeom
龍川府	Yongcheon-bu
權琇	Gwon Su
義州府尹	Uiju Buyun
趙興鎭	Jo Heung-jin
朔州府	Sakju-bu
尹敏東	Yun Min-dong
安州	Anju
李海愚	Yi Hae-gu
公孫子陽	Gongsun Ziyang
甘石	Gan Shi
巫咸	Mu Ham
細柳營	Seoryu camp
白祥樓	Baeksangnu
春秋	Chunqiu
拔施投衡	Balsi Tuhyeong
清北宣川仞山	Cheongbuk Seoncheon In San
海愚	Hae-gu
海愚	Hae-gu
豊沛	Pungpae



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제19호
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	一張書로 天下의 不平客을 니르킨 平西 大元師 洪景來檄文
필자	桂山人
기사형태	문예기타

一張書로 天下의 不平客을 니르킨 平西 大元師 洪景來檄文
						桂山人
洪景來의 사실은 누구나 대개 알고 본지에도 누차 발표하얏스나 그의 檄文은 아즉까지 세상에 널리 발표된 일이 업섯다. (본지 제15호에 다소 소개되엿지만)그런데 그가 반기를 들고 關西 全道에 檄文을 轉하든 純祖 11년 辛巳(距今 118년전) 12월 22일은 양력으로 2월 1일이고 그가 定州城을 함락하기는 또한 그 익년 壬申 정월 2일 즉 양력 2월 11일인 바 이 2월 11일은 공교히 李太皇 俄館播遷하던 날과 한날이라. 이제 2월 중 발생한 俄館播遷의 기사를 揭載하는 끗헤 또한 洪씨의 일이 생각되기에 그 檄文의 全文과 또 傳令을 발표하야 일반의 참고에 供코자 한다. 然而 世에 전하는 소위 文不過持平掌令하고 武不過萬戶僉使 云云의 句는 이 元檄文 중에는 업슨 즉 후에 好事者가 添入한 지도 不知하겟다.

1. 격문
(純祖 11년 辛未 12월 20일 發布)
平西 大元師는 爲急急馳檄事라. 我關西父老公私之賤은 咸聽此棜하라. 蓋關西는 箕聖古域이오. 壇君舊窟이라. 衣冠이 岌濟하고 文物이 炳烺이라. *在 壬辰之亂에 已有再造之功하고 又於  丁卯(仁祖 丁卯胡亂)之變에 先輸襄武之忠하고 有如遯菴之學과 月浦之才-又是産於西土호대 而朝廷之等棄西土를 不異糞土하야 심지어 甚門奴婢가 見西土之人 則 必曰平漢이라 하니 其爲西土者-豈不寃抑哉아. 若當緩則必賴西土之力하고 且當科時則必賴西土之文하니 400년來에 西人이 有何負於朝廷哉아. 見今冲王이 在上에 權奸이 日熾하야 如金祖淳朴宗慶輩가 竊弄國柄하니 仁天이 降災하야 同雷地震이 殆無虛歲하고 由此로 大無存臻하야 餓*가 載道하고 老弱이 塗炭하며 生民이 盡劉함이 幾乎在卽이로다. 何幸濟世之聖人이 誕降于 淸北宣川仞山日月峰下君王浦上伽倻洞紅衣島하니 生而神靈이라. 五歲에 隨神僧入＜11＞ 中國이러니 旣長에 隱居于江界四郡地閭延五載하야 統領皇明之世臣遺孫하니 鐵騎十萬이라. 隊有澄淸東國之志而維此關西는 卽 豐沛故鄕이라. 不忍感踏하야 先使關西之豪傑輩로 起兵救民하니 義旗所到에 莫不*蘇-ㄹ새 ... ...(이하24字削-원문)... ... 洞開城門하야 以迎我師하라. 若有*爾頑拒者하면 當以鐵騎 5000으로 *之無遺矣리니 宜速請命學行宜當者라. 右檄文은 下安州兵使, *侯, 牧使, 肅川府使, 順安縣令 平壤監司, 中軍, 庶尹, 江西縣令, 三和府使, 咸從府使, 甑山縣令, 永柔懸令하고 大元師著抽蹯印. 宣川府使 金益淳에게는 受降書하고 奪印符後에 推用富民錢罪로 嚴囚하고 郭山郡守 李永植과 定州牧使 李近冑는 棄印符逃元하고 嘉山軍需 鄭薯는 貪濫罪로 奪印符處斬하고 博川郡守 任聖皐는 以庫錢犯用罪로 奪印符嚴囚 하얏스 니 此檄文을 若有*傳之邑則兵到之日에 該邑首校鄕憲은 斷當軍律施行事라.

2. 傳令
穴者는 知雨하고 巢者는 知風하나니 以人으로 不知天時者는 可謂人乎아. 穴者巢者之下愚也로다. 子名은 非海愚오, 正是下愚也라. 遺剌客陰害하니 井蛙之所跳梁이로다. 而子-欲學公孫子陽乎아 欲遺剌客이면 何不遺同朝之人하고 乃遺小卒하야 如是見洩也오. 帳下之卒도 亦吾關西之民이니 豈有致誠盡心哉아 全大*李仁培 등은 不得已處斬하니 如有陰謀여든 勿遺關西之人하고 且欲堅壁抗命이어든 營內城上에 勿置關西之民하고 卽招自家之妻妾子弟奴婢하야 編伍同心이 可也니라. 子則世祿之臣이오. 外곤之將이라. 廉恥所在에 雖知天命人心이나 不可城下之盟이니 大軍拔城之日에 請遂子大夫之名하리라. 近日에 嘉山 鄭著와 博川郡守 任聖皐와 定州牧使 李近胃와 郭山郡守 李永植과 宣川府使 金益淳과 鐵山府使 李章謙과 龍川府使 權琇와 義州府尹 趙興鎭과 朔州府使 尹敏東은 *然從風하니 此輩-雖知天命人心이나 子大夫之罪人也로다. 假令守城之時에 却關西之人하고 納世祿之臣則固當不解而天人이 共諭하야 世祿之輩도 猶此瓦解하니 何必待甘石而觀天하며 .招巫咸而筮人乎아 願磨細柳營中에 曲眉豊頰之妓는 雖是被中之情이나 此乃關西之産이니 安知非舟中之敵乎며 百祥樓下에 擁紈萬弓之士도 此赤關西之産이니 安知穀下之羌乎아 然則子大夫-有何曾中之甲하야 以兀然獨坐于萬仞之中고 首級之落이 日已久矣로다. 何不自諒也오. 以此知悉하야 欲生則生하고 欲死則死하라. 春秋拔施投衡之敎也-니라.
(이 傳令은 安州兵使 李海愚가 剌客으로 洪을 暗殺하랴다가 發覺된 후 洪이 李에게 送한 것이다.)＜12＞
＜11-12＞