Magazine Title	別乾坤 제19호
Publication Date	1929년 02월 01일
Article Title	兩性問題 男女關係의 史的 考察, 亂交時代로부터 平等時代까지 (A Historical Examination of Gender Issues and Male-Female Relationships, From the Era of Promiscuity to the Era of Equality)
Author	梁明 (Yang Myŏng)
Article Type	논설 (Essay)

A Historical Examination of Gender Issues and Male-Female Relationships, From the Era of Promiscuity to the Era of Equality
						Yang Myŏng
1. The Earliest Male-Female Relationships in Human History
What was the earliest male-female relationship in human society like?
It is extremely difficult to speak of definite proof regarding this. However, based on the specialized research of numerous archaeologists and the present facts of savage societies, we cannot help but generally accept that there was a period of "unlimited sexual intercourse" (性交 無制限) in human society before recorded history, and that it further evolved to form a period of "group marriage" (群婚). In response to this, moralists, religious figures, Confucian scholars, etc., will say, "Even animals of a somewhat higher order do not do that, so it is simply unimaginable that humans, the masters of all things, would have engaged in 'promiscuity' (亂交) without any restrictions, even in a savage era." However, no matter how unpleasant or shameful it may be, we cannot avoid the facts that <13> prove it. While we cannot speak of accurate proof regarding the fact of "unlimited sexual intercourse" (性交 無制限) because of the era, we possess undeniably strong evidence regarding "consanguineous group marriage (血族群婚), semi-consanguineous group marriage (半血族群婚)" which is not far from it. "Morgan," a famous American archaeologist and author of "Ancient Society," spent a long time among the Iroquois tribe (「이로카」族) of New York State to study savage societies. At the time, the male-female relationship of the "Iroquois" (「이로카」種) could be described as a temporary monogamous system, or an era of occasional marriage (偶婚時代), but strangely, the "Iroquois" man called his own sons and the sons of his brothers all "sons," while calling the sons of his sisters "nephews" (族下), and the "Iroquois" woman called her own sons and the sons of her sisters all "sons," while calling the sons of her brothers "nephews." This fact was not limited to the "Iroquois" (「이로카」種) alone, but was also present among the entire American Indian population and among the Indian natives of the Eastern Hemisphere, and even more significantly, there was a similar fact in Australia and Africa. - So what caused this? Finally, the reason was discovered. In the Hawaiian Islands, until the mid-19th century, there existed an actual relationship exactly like the kinship relationship mentioned above. The Hawaiian natives formed a group of several sisters, cousins, second cousins, etc., and took several men as common husbands, excluding only their own biological brothers, and they called them "Punarya" (「쀼나리야」), and conversely, several brothers, cousins, second cousins, etc., formed a group and took several women as common wives, excluding their own biological sisters, and that was also named "Punarya" (「쀼나리야」). "Punarya" (「쀼나리야」) meant friend (親友). What is even more strange is that in Hawaii, family titles were completely consistent with actual relationships. That is, they called the children of their brothers and sisters all "sons and daughters" and the children called each other brothers and sisters. - If, as in the case of the "Iroquois" (「이로카」種) mentioned above, this type of kinship title came from past actual relationships, then we cannot help but acknowledge that there was an era of "consanguineous group marriage system" (半血族群婚制度) before the Hawaiian natives' marriage system, that is, the "semi-consanguineous group marriage system" (半血族群婚制度), in which there were no restrictions on sexual intercourse even between biological brothers and sisters, and therefore, we can generally agree that before that, there was an era of "unlimited sexual intercourse" (性交無制限) in which there were no restrictions whatsoever on sexual intercourse between women, or between mothers and sons.
Humans gradually restricted sexual intercourse between women and between mothers and sons in the "vague animal group" (막연한 動物群) where sexual intercourse was initially unrestricted, and several brothers and sisters became a group of couples to form a "consanguineous group marriage" (血族群婚) family, and it changed into a "semi-consanguineous group marriage" (半血族群婚) family by restricting sexual intercourse between biological brothers and sisters again. However, this "semi-consanguineous group marriage" (半血族群婚) system did not last that long. First, even within the group marriage family, relationships like real husband and wife arose over time due to convenience, compatibility of personality, or compatibility of feelings, and a certain man designated a certain <14> woman as his "real wife" (本妻) and took others as "secondary wives" (副妻), and as women did the same, the traditional group marriage system gradually underwent new changes; and second, the prohibition of sexual intercourse between blood relatives gradually expanded in scope, making it difficult to maintain the group marriage system. Here, the group marriage system inevitably gradually disappeared, and the "temporary monogamous system" (一時的 一夫一婦制), occasional marriage system (偶婚制), replaced it.
The difference between the male-female relationship of the occasional marriage system (偶婚制度) and the current monogamous system is that it was temporary, and therefore divorce was completely free, and in particular, the social status of women was far superior to that of men.

2. Matriarchal Era
Archaeologists, sociologists, etc. call the "group marriage era (群婚時代), occasional marriage era (偶婚時代)" before recorded history the "female-dominated era (女系時代)" or "matriarchal era (母系時代)." In all aspects, the social status of women was far superior to that of men, and in particular, the controller of family life was usually the oldest woman. Just as all systems in current society are formed around men, society at that time was all formed around women.
In the group marriage era (群婚時代), many parents and many children formed a family and lived in one house, so the relationship between father and son was very unclear. It was impossible to know clearly who one's true father was and who one's true son was. Only the relationship between mother and child was clear, so it was known who was born directly from one's own body, so kinship naturally became standardized based on the mother, and children inevitably followed their mother's surname and obeyed their mother's orders rather than their father's. - Therefore, even in family life, maternal authority was always superior to paternal authority, and the social status of women always overwhelmed that of men.
Even after the group marriage system (群婚制度) changed to the occasional marriage system (偶婚制度) and the relationship between father and son became clear, this type of family relationship remained unchanged for some time. According to "Morgan's" records, the "Iroquois" (「이로카」族) gathered several couples in occasional marriages (偶婚) in one place and lived in communal housing, and the head of the household was usually an elderly woman, and it was entirely their mother's authority to determine the spouses of young men and women. Once an engagement was established, the man had to offer gifts to the other party's mother, and if a formal marriage was established, the man usually entered the woman's house to live. In general, female authority was always superior to male authority, and men were subject to female restraint in all aspects, and in particular, in the event of a divorce, they were in a pitiful situation where they could only be kicked out of the communal dwelling with only their fishing and hunting equipment. Also, the "Huron" (「휴-론」) tribe of North America was divided into 11 clans, and their tribal council was formed by selecting 4 female and 1 male representatives from each clan, resulting in 44 women and 11 men. Among the "Basque" (「바스크」) people, there is a saying that "a husband is a military supervisor serving women," and the social status of men in the matriarchal era (母系時代) was truly significantly different from that of women in all aspects.
However, as the hunting and gathering era (漁獵時代) evolved into an agricultural and pastoral era (農牧時代) and the private property system was established in human society, and at the same time the slavery system newly arose, the matriarchal society, a female-centered society, inevitably had to transition to a patriarchal society, a male-centered society. In the hunting and gathering era (漁獵時代), men only possessed hunting and fishing equipment, and houses, clothing, and furniture were all owned by women. And even after the work of farming gradually emerged, the land was mostly cultivated by women. Looking at the example of the North American Indians, housework and agriculture were entirely in the hands of women, so the economically weaker men merely provided the fruits of their hunting and fishing to the women to try to win their favor. As this pastoralism greatly developed, rapid wealth was achieved in society, and as the communal system between clans gradually changed to a communal system between families, and as captives of the enemy were enslaved to manage livestock, men naturally became the owners and managers of these, and therefore, the social status of these economic strongmen rose with the force of the "rising sun," and eventually overwhelmed the social status of women. The family of female clan leaders changed into a family of male clan leaders, paternal authority oppressed maternal authority, and in all aspects, women could not help but stand in an inferior position to men.
This type of change in male-female relationships was truly a great historical event, and for thousands of years thereafter, women could not help but groan continuously under the tyranny of men, and submission, flattery, and weakness became his second nature. According to "Lafargue's" (「라프알그」) "Evolution of Property" (財産進化論), this reversal of female power caused no small amount of commotion everywhere, and women took up arms and waged a great war with men to defend their privileges. Similar traces can be found everywhere in Greek mythology and history.

3. Male Authority's Tyranny
As the matriarchal society changed into a patriarchal society and the female clan leader family changed into a male clan leader family, male authority became more and more established and female authority became more and more reduced, so that plunder marriage (掠奪婚) and buying and selling marriage (賣買婚) became prevalent, and polygamy was temporarily realized in the families of clan leaders and other powerful families. The family system of "Rome" (「로마」) is truly a good example of this, and the word family (Failia) of those people does not include the meaning of friendship or harmony, but only means the slaves belonging to one family. The wife became a term used in conjunction with slaves, and just like slaves, she became a kind of possession of the man, so the man could kill his wife freely at any time.
The characteristics of male-female relationships in the three eras of ignorance, barbarism, and civilization are the three types of group marriage (群婚), occasional marriage (偶婚), and monogamy. The group marriage system gradually restricted sexual intercourse between close relatives and changed into the occasional marriage system, which in turn evolved into the monogamous system according to the economic changes of society. However, it was only monogamy in name, and <16> from the man's point of view, he could always abandon his wife freely, take as many concubines as he wanted, and at the same time, he was free to play with other women besides his wife and concubines. It is said that Greek men forced their wives to be chaste and always had female servants accompany them when they went out, or even had eunuchs to supervise them. Some even raised hounds to prevent adulterers. But they could always freely enjoy the pleasures of sex with "Hetairai" (「헤데-레」) (courtesans) without any restrictions. Female prisoners of war were always the comfort women of the victorious warriors, so if you look at Greek records, when drawing generals and brave warriors in ancient poems, there is always a beautiful female prisoner who serves in the camp. Women's freedom of love and freedom of marriage were completely ignored, and they were simply used miserably as valuable property, either for the sake of family lineage, or for the sake of personal political status, or as a means of enticing enemies and praising subordinates.
In modern times, as the agricultural and pastoral era (農牧時代) evolved into the industrial and commercial era (工商時代) and the feudal society changed into a capitalist society, the social status of women also improved to some extent. The capitalist system inevitably requires countless wage laborers who can be hired and fired freely for its maintenance and development. It requires not only male laborers, but also many female laborers who are easy to manage and have low wages. Here, they formally liberated the slaves of men, and at the same time, formally liberated women. They were free to go out, receive higher education, find jobs freely, associate with men to some extent, and freedom of love and freedom of marriage were also largely realized in theory. In addition, in some developed European and American countries of capitalist "democracy" (「데모크라시」), women have recently been granted the right to vote and the right to be elected. They can now legally become members of parliament, ministers of state, and diplomats. -But in fact, are women under the current system truly free, truly happy, and truly equal?
Just as power dominated people in feudal society, money dominates people in capitalist society. In today's society, where everything is established through buying and selling relationships, people must sell something in order to live. Selling goods, selling land, selling labor, selling sex - they are forced to choose among these. However, under the current system, economic power and industrial power are completely in the hands of men, and women are always governed by unequal customs and unequal laws in their inheritance and management. In particular, they have the physiological disadvantage of being unable to work during pregnancy, and they suffer from not receiving the same amount of wages even if they do the same amount of work. Here, they inevitably sell their sex, which is relatively perfect and relatively expensive, to maintain their lives. Or they openly become prostitutes (賣淫婦), selling women (賣笑婦), selling laughter <17> selling songs, selling dances, selling flesh, or under the pleasant false names of love, marriage, and wife, they must spend their entire lives in submission, endurance, cursing, and sorrow with men who do not suit their tastes.
The only question here is the future male-female relationship and the future social status of women. -If the current form of marriage and the status of women are by no means fixed from the beginning of human society, but are merely temporary products that appeared in the course of historical change according to the trends of the times and the changes in social systems, then what will the male-female relationship of future society and the social status of women in future society be like?

4. Physical and Mental Differences Between Men and Women
According to research announced by expert scholars, the most notable physical and mental differences between men and women are roughly as follows. The average height of a man is 5 feet 6 inches, and the average height of a woman is 5 feet 3 inches. The average weight of an adult is 60 kilograms for men and 54 kilograms for women. Women have relatively longer torsos than men, and women's arms are much shorter than men's. Women's skeletons are generally thinner and finer than men's, their structure is elegant, and their surface is smooth, and women's muscles are weak, soft, and relatively watery. The brain volume of most men is 1250 to 1550 grams, and the brain volume of most women is 1000 to 1450 grams, so their average is said to be 1388 grams for men and 1255 grams for women.
The most important issues here are brain volume, height, and weight. However, since women are smaller than men, brain volume must be compared according to body weight, and the relative ratio of their body weight to brain volume is 21.6 grams of brain volume per 1 kilogram of body weight for men and 23.6 grams for women, so according to this ratio, the relative brain volume is heavier for women. In addition, as a result of comparing and studying civilized people and savages, it was found that the difference between men and women is not so great in savages than in civilized people. According to the research and announcement of anthropologist "Manbrier" (「만브리에」), the skull of a "Parisian" (「파리」) man averages 1560, and a woman averages 1338 cubic centimeters, so their difference is 222, but the savage of the Stone Age averages 1544 for men and 1422 for women, so their difference is only 122. Height and weight are also the same. Women of savages are generally larger in physique than women of civilized people, rural women are generally larger than urban women, and working women are generally larger than women of the intellectual class. In particular, if we look at the Jeju female divers (海女) (haenyŏ) of Jeju, the most unique professional women in Korea, their physique is no less impressive than that of ordinary men.

5. Women's Progressive Activities
The current differences between men and women will by no means be immutable <18>. They are merely a temporary result of being oppressed for thousands of years, completely deprived of all opportunities to improve and develop physically and intellectually. The relationship between a healthy social state and individuals is like the relationship between plants and soil and sunlight. A person's life, education, and leisure give either beneficial or harmful influences to his constitution and his psychology, causing changes that are completely different from other races, not only in content but also in appearance. Then it is inevitable that those who have been confined to their homes for thousands of years and have only lived unnatural lives will have some physical and mental differences compared to men. See how great the power of practice and skill is in those female circus performers! Aren't they performing excellent movements that men can also admire in terms of courage, daring, skill, and physical strength?
Of course, women have the physiological weakness of pregnancy. However, if the existence of mankind is as absolutely necessary as maintaining life, then a rationally organized society must devise special protective measures. According to statistics from experts, from 1816 to 1876, the number of women who contracted childbed fever was 320,800 in "Prussia" (「푸로시아」) alone, and in "England" (「잉그랜드」) from 1847 to 1901, the number of women who died from childbirth reached 210,000, which is much higher than the number of men who lost their lives in various wars during the same time. Women who give birth to children are like revolutionary soldiers who take up guns and swords and go to the battlefield, serving society. This is a reason for gender equality, not a reason for its inequality.
Therefore, "Bebel" (「베-벨」) said the following in his famous book on women. "The argument that taking care of the house and having children is the only vocation of women is a contradictory statement that is no different from the argument that since kings have always existed since the beginning of human history, kings will never disappear. Excluding women from the owners of equal rights because they are not men, but were born as women, is an unfair fact that is no different from not giving the rights and privileges that everyone should have regardless of religious and political opinions. It is an unreasonable theory that is no different from the fact that because two specific people happen to be born into different races, they cannot help but become irreconcilable enemies from birth."

6. Abolition of Male Superiority
"When all the conditions under which women have no choice but to choose between celibacy and prostitution disappear, men will no longer be able to dominate women. Once a drastically changed social condition has many effects on the current marriage life, it will surely eliminate all obstacles and harmful forces that hinder its full development or make its development impossible." The old society, where class exploits class and <19> sex dominates sex, will be permanently abolished, and women will stand in a completely equal position with men in all aspects, including politics and education. They will live in a healthy social state, so they will be able to fully demonstrate and fully use their physical and mental abilities. "They will be able to freely choose occupations suitable for their hopes, nature, and abilities, and will become complete professional women working under the same conditions as men. While working industrially in any sector, they will become nannies in the first and second hours, study science and art in the third hour, and devote themselves to administrative affairs in various fields in the fourth hour.
Household labor will be socialized and pregnant women will receive special protection. Women will be able to profitably spend time that they had been spending uselessly on domestic chores such as washing, sewing, and cooking in the past on reading, recreation, art, education, industry, and politics, and in particular, they will be able to receive a fixed period of leave and obstetric hospitalization and special food distribution without the risk of unemployment before and after childbirth. Looking at the example of Labor-Peasant Russia (勞農 로시아), female laborers receive 2 months of leave before childbirth and 2 months of leave after childbirth, during which time they continue to receive their salary as usual, and the insurance bureau gives relief money equivalent to 1 month's salary in addition. During the childcare period (9 months), they receive relief money equivalent to 1/4 of their monthly salary, and there are pregnancy consultation centers and childcare consultation centers everywhere, so pregnant women can receive free health checkups, advice on childcare, and distribution of medicines at any time. At the time of childbirth, they can be hospitalized in maternity hospitals and receive special food distribution, and there are also daycare centers everywhere to specially protect the children of laborers while the mothers are working. At the time of the November Revolution, the number of organizations aimed at protecting mothers and children was only 34 in total, but in 1925, the number of organizations aimed at that purpose was 1600, daycare centers 658, mother and child recreation centers 440, childcare consultation centers 171, and pregnancy consultation centers 40.

7. Equality of Status Between Men and Women
In particular, they will have complete freedom without any restrictions in choosing a lover. Love is free, marriage is free, and divorce is free, so they will be able to combine with the opposite sex without any restrictions other than their own feelings. They will become fully equal personalities with men, and they will court and receive proposals themselves, and they will have completely equal parental rights over their children. Male-centered ethics and morals will be completely abolished, and chastity will truly become an expression of love, so men will protect themselves from women and women will protect themselves from men only during the period when affection continues.
And what we can say most happily about the future male-female relationship is that first, there will be no prostitutes or selling women; and second, unnatural singles will be reduced. In this society, since poverty will disappear and men and women will be governed by completely equal ethics and morals, all kinds of prostitutes will naturally disappear, and although those who choose to be single due to special circumstances or tastes will of course be a separate issue, singles who spend their lives in loneliness and anguish will naturally disappear. <20>

**Named Entities**

몰간	Morgan
紐育州	New York-chu
이로카	Iroka
濠洲	Hoju
아프리카	Ap’ŭrika
하와이	Hawaii
라프알그	Rap’ŭalŭgŭ
로마	Roma
헤데-레	Hede-re
베-벨	Be-bel
푸로시아	P’urosia
잉그랜드	Ingŭraendŭ
勞農 로시아	Ronong Rosia
제주	Cheju



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제19호
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	兩性問題 男女關係의 史的 考察, 亂交時代로부터 平等時代까지
필자	梁明
기사형태	논설

兩性問題 男女關係의 史的 考察, 亂交時代로부터 平等時代까지
						梁明
1. 인류의 최초 남녀관계
인류사회의 최초의 남녀관계가 어떠하엿는지?
이에 대하여는 확실한 증거를 말하기가 심히 곤란하다. 그러나 多數한 고고학자의 전문적 연구와 野蠻사회의 현재한 사실에 의하야 우리는 有史 이전의 인류사회에 「性交 무제한」 의한 시기가 잇섯다는 것과 그것이 다시 진화되여서 「群婚」의 일시기가 형성되엿다는 것을 대체로 승인하지 아니할 수 업다. 이에 대하야 도덕학자, 종교가, 유학선생 등은 말할 것이다.『동물도 좀 高等한 것은 그러치안는데 적어도 만물의 영장인 인류가 아모리 野蠻시대라고 아모러한 제한이 업는 「亂交」를 하얏스리라고는 도저히 상상할 수 업다.』라고. 그러나 아모리 不愉快하고 아모리 수치스럽드래도 사실이＜13＞ 증명하는데야 하는 수 업다. 우리는 물론 「性交 무제한」의 사실에 대하여는 시대가 시대임으로 정확한 증거를 말할 수 업거니와 그와 相距不遠한 「血族群婚, 半血族群婚」에 대하여는 도저히 부인할 수 업는 유력한 재료를 소유하고 잇다. 「太古社會」의 저자로 米國의 유명한 고고학자인 「몰간」은 野蠻人의 사회를 연구하기 위하야 장구한 시일을 紐育州의 印度人 「이로카」족의 사이에서 보낸 일이 잇섯다. 당시 「이로카」種의 남녀 관계는 「일시적 一夫一婦制」라 할 수 잇는 偶婚時代에 잇섯댓스나 이상하게도 「이로카」의 남자는 자기 아들이나 자기 형제의 아들은 다 가티 「아들」이라 하면서 자기 姊妹의 아들은 「족하」라 하엿고 「이로카」의 부인은 자기의 아들이나 姊妹의 아들은 다가티 「아들」이라 하면서 자기형제의 아들은 「족하」라 하엿다. 그런데 이와 가튼 사실은 비단 「이로카」種에게 뿐이 아니고 아메리카 印度人 전체와 동반구의 印度土人間에도 잇섯고 더욱히 濠洲와 「아프리카」에도 거슝� 가튼 사실이 잇섯다. - 그러면 이것은 무엇으로 인하여선가?? 마츰내 이유는 발각되엇다. 「하와이」 群島 중에는 19세기 중엽까지 우에 말한 친족 관계와 꼭 가튼 실제관계가 존재하엿섯다. 「하와이」 土人들은 數人의 姊妹, 從姊妹, 再從姊妹등이 一團이 되어서 자기네의 친형제만은 제외하고 數人의 남자를 공통의 남편으로 삼앗는데 그네들은 그를 「쀼나리야」라고 불넛고 그와 반대로 數人의 형제, 종형제, 재종형제 등이 一團이 되여서 자기네 친자매 이외의 수인의 여자를 공통의 부인으로 삼기도 하엿는데 그도 역시 「쀼나리야」라고 이름하엿다. 「쀼나리야」란 親友라는 의미엿다. 그런데 또 이상한 것은 「하와이」에서도 가족간의 칭호는 실제 관계와 완전히 부합된게 만헛섯다. 즉 그네들은 자기네 형제 자매의 자녀를 다 가티 「아들딸」이라 불넛고 자녀들끼리는 서로 형제 자매라 하엿다. - 우에 말한 「이로카」種의 전례와 如히 이와 가튼 친족간의 칭호가 과거의 실제 관계에서 온 것이 사실이라면 우리는 「하와이」 토인의 혼인제도 즉 「半血族群婚制度」 이전에 육신의 형제 자매간에도 성교의 무제한하엿든 一時代 즉 「血族群婚時代」가 잇섯든 것을 승인하지 아니할 수 업고 딸아서 그 이전에 부녀간의 성교, 모자간의 성교까지도 아모러한 제한이 업섯든 一時代 즉 「性交無制限」의 시대가 잇섯스리라는 것까지 대체로 시인하지 아니할 수 업슬 것이다.
인류는 최초 성교의 무제한한 「막연한 동물군」에서 점차 부녀간의 성교와 모자간의 성교를 제지하고 數人의 형제 자매가 一群의 부부가 되어서 「血族群婚」의 가족을 이루게 되엿고 그것이 다시 친형제 자매간의 성교를 제지하게 되여서 「半血族群婚」의 가족으로 변하엿섯다. 그러나 이와 가튼 「半血族群婚」의 제도도 그처럼 오래ㅅ동안 계속되지는 못하엿다. 첫재는 군혼제의 가족간에 잇서서도 혹은 편의상 혹은 성격의 합치, 혹은 감정의 합치 등으로 시일이 지냄을 딸아 本夫本妻와 가튼 관계가 생기게 되여서 어떠한 남자는 어떠한＜14＞ 여자를 「本妻」로 정하고 그 이외는 「副妻」로 삼게 되고 여자도 역시 그러케 됨을 딸아 종래의 군혼제도에 점차 새 변화를 주게 되엿슴으로서요. 둘재는 혈족간의 성교금지가 점차 그의 범위가 확대됨을 딸아 군혼제도의 유지가 곤란하게 되엿슴으로서다. 여긔에 군혼제도는 필연적으로 점차 소멸되고 「일시적 一夫一婦제」인 偶婚制가 그를 대신하게 되엿다.
偶婚制度의 남녀관계가 현재의 일부일처제와 상이한 점은 그의 일시적임과 따라서 이혼이 완전히 자유요, 특히 부녀의 사회적 지위가 남자의 그것에 비하야 심히 우월하엿섯슴에 잇다.

2, 母系時代
有史이전의 「群婚時代, 偶婚時代」를 고고학자 사회학자, 등은 「女系時代」 또는 「母系時代」라고 이름한다. 모든 방면에 잇서서 부녀의 사회적 지위는 남자의 그것보다 심히 우월하엿섯고 특히 가족생활의 統御者는 대개는 가장 연로한 부녀가 되엿섯다. 현재 사회의 모든 제도가 남자를 중심으로 하야 형성된 거와 가티 그때의 사회는 모든 것이 부녀를 중심으로 하야 형성되엇섯다.
群婚時代에 잇서서는 다수한 부모와 다수한 자녀가 한 가족을 이루어서 한집에 살게 되엇슴으로 부자간의 관계는 심히 분명치 못하엿섯다. 누구가 진정한 자기의 아버지고 누구가 진정한 자기의 아들인지를 분명히 알 수 업섯다. 다만 모자간의 관계만은 명료하야서 누구가 직접 자기 몸에서 낫는지 알 수 잇섯슴으로 친척 관계는 자연히 어머니를 표준하게 되어서 자녀들은 반드시 어머니의 성을 딸으게 되고 아버지보다는 어머니의 명령에 복종하게 되엇다.- 따라서 가족 생활에 잇서서도 모권은 부권에 비하야 항상 우월하엿섯고 부녀의 사회적 지위는 항상 남자의 그것을 압도하엿섯다.
群婚制度가 偶婚制度로 변하야 부자간의 관계가 명료하게 된 이후도 이와 가튼 가족관계는 얼마동안 변함이 엄섯섯다. 「몰간」의 기록에 의하면 「이로카」족은 偶婚의 멧 부부가 한곳에 모이어서 공동가옥에 주거하고 잇댓는데 그의 頭領은 대개는 연로한 부녀로 젊은 남녀의 配偶를 정하는 것은 전혀 그네들 모친의 권한이엇섯다. 한번 혼약이 성립되면 남자쪽에서 對方의 모친에게 예물을 들이어야 하고 정식 결혼이 성립된다면 대개는 남자가 여자의 집으로 들어가서 살앗섯다. 일반적으로 여권은 항상 남권보다 우월하야 남자는 모든 방면에 잇서서 부녀의 절제를 밧게 되엇섯고 특히 이혼시에는 漁獵의 기구만을 가지고 공동 住屋에서 쪼기어나지 아니할 수 업는 가련한 처지에 잇섯섯다. 또 북미의 「휴-론」족은 11의 씨족으로 난우어 잇섯댓는데 그의 족장 회의는 각 氏族에서 여자 4인 남자 1인式의 대표자를 선출하야 여자 44인 남자 11인으로 성립하게 되엇섯다한다. 「바스크」族간에는 『남편이란 부녀의 侍從軍監督이니라』는 속담이 잇다 하거니와 모계시대의 남자의 사회 지위는 여자의 그것에＜15＞ 대하여 모든 방면에 잇서서 실로 不少한 차등이 잇섯다.
그러나 漁獵時代가 農牧時代도 진화되고 인류 사회에 사유재산제도가 확립되는 동시에 奴隷제도가 새로히 발생됨을 따라 모계의 사회, 여성 중심의 사회는 필연적으로 부계의 사회, 남성 중심의 사회로 변천되지 아니할 수 업섯다. 漁獵時代의 사회에 잇서서는 남자는 다만 漁獵의 기구를 소유하엿슬 뿐이엇고 가옥 의복 가구 등은 모두 부녀의 소유이엇섯다. 그리고 농경의 업이 조곰式 발생된 이후도 토지는 대개 부녀의 손으로 경작되엿섯다. 北米 印度人의 예를 본다면 가사와 농업은 전혀 부녀의 수중에 잇섯슴으로 경제적 약자인 남자는 단지 漁獵의 수획물을 부녀에게 제공하야 그네들의 환심을 살려고 노력하엿슴에 불과하엿섯다. 이것이 목축업의 대발달도 사회에 급속한 부의 증가가 성취되고 씨족간의 공유 제도가 점차 가족간의 공유제도로 변천되는 동시에 적의 포로를 奴隷로 삼아서 가축의 관리를 맷기게 되자 종래의 관계상 남자는 자연히 그의 소유자, 그의 관리자가 되지 아니할 수 업섯고 딸아서 경제적 강자인 그네들의 사회적 지위는 「旭日昇天」의 勢로 향상되여서 마츰내 부녀의 사회적 지위를 압도하게 되엿다. 여족장제의 가족은 일변하야 남족장제의 가족이 되고 부권은 모권을 압박하게 되고 모든 방면에 잇서서 여자는 남자보다 열등한 지위에 서지 아니할 수 업게 되엿다.
남녀관계의 이와 가튼 변화는 실로 역사상의 대사변으로 그 이후 수천년동안 여성은 계속적으로 남성의 專制下에서 신음하지 아니할 수 업섯고 굴복, 獻諂, 柔弱은, 그의 第二 천성이 되고말엇다. 「라프알그」의 「財産進化論」에 의하면 이와 가튼 여권의 顚覆은 도처에서 적지 안흔 소동을 惹起하야 부녀들은 그의 특권을 옹호할려고 무기를 들어 남자와 일대 전쟁을 니르키엇다한다. 希臘의 신화와 역사 중에도 그 비슷한 形跡이 도처에 잇다.

3, 男權의 橫暴
모계의 사회가 부계의 사회로 변하고 여족장제의 가족이 남족장제의 가족으로 변하게 됨을 딸아 남권은 갈수록 확립되고 여권은 갈수록 축소되어서 掠奪婚, 賣買婚이 성행하게 되고 족장 기타의 권력 가문에는 일부다처제가 일시적으로 실현되게 되엇다. 「로마」의 가족제는 실로 그의 조흔 표본으로 그네들의 가족(Failia)이라는 말에는 조곰도 친*라든지 和樂이라는 의미가 포함되지 안코 단지 한 가족에 소속되는 奴隷를 의미함에 불과하엿다. 처는 奴隷와 倂稱되는 언사가 되엇고 奴隷와 꼭 가티 남자의 일종 소유물이 되여서 남자는 언제든지 자유로 그의 처를 죽일 수 잇섯다.
朦眛, 野蠻, 文明 三時代의 남녀관계의 특점은 群婚, 偶婚, 일부일처의 삼종으로 群婚制가 점차 육친간의 성교를 제한하게 되어서 偶婚制로 변하고 그것이 다시 사회의 경제적 변천에 딸아 일부일처제로 진화되엇다. 그러나 일부일처란 말뿐이엇고＜16＞ 남자편으로 본다면 언제든지 자유로 그의 처를 버릴 수 잇섯고 얼마든지 첩을 들 수 잇는 동시에 妻妾 이외의 다른 여자를 희롱하는 것도 자유엿섯다. 希臘의 남자들은 자기네 처의 정절을 강박하기 위하야 외출시에는 반드시 여종을 동행케하엿고 혹은 거세한 남자를 두어서 그를 감독케 하엿다 한다. 심지어 臘犬을 길러서 간통자를 막으려한 자까지 잇섯다. 하지만 자기네들은 언제든지 아모 기탄업시 자유로 「헤데-레」(藝妓)와 성의 쾌락을 취할 수 잇섯다. 전쟁시의 여자 포로는 반드시 戰勝용사의 위안물이 되엇섯슴으로 希臘의 기록을 본다면 古詩중에 맹장용사를 그릴 때에는 반드시 陣中에서 侍從하는 포로의 미인이 쓰이어 잇다. 부녀의 연애자유, 결혼 자유는 완전히 무시되고 그네들은 단순히 귀중한 재물이 되어서 혹은 가족간에 문벌을 위하야 혹은 개인의 정치적 지위를 위하야 혹은 적을 유인하고 부하를 칙면하는 수단으로 비참하게 이용되엇섯다.
근대에 이르러서 農牧時代가 다시 工商時代로 진화되고 봉건제도의 사회가 자본제도의 사회로 변천됨을 딸아 부녀의 사회적 지위도 어느 정도까지는 향상되엇다. 자본제도는 그의 유지 그의 발전상 필연적으로 자유로 고용할 수 잇고 자유로 해고할 수 잇는 무수한 임금노동자를 요구한다. 비단 남자 노동자를 요구할 뿐 아니라 부리기 조코 임금 헐한 다수한 여자노동자를 요구하게 된다. 여긔에 그네들은 남자의 奴隷를 형식적으로 해방하는 동시에 여자까지 형식적으로는 해방하엿다. 외출도 자유하게 되고 고등교육도 바들 수 잇게 되고 직업도 자유로 구할 수 잇게 되고 남자 교제도 어느 정도까지는 자유하게 되고 연애자유, 결혼자유도 이론적으로는 대체로 실현되게 되엿다. 또 자본주의 「데모크라시」의 발전된 歐米의 몃 국가에서는 최근에 이르러 부녀들에게 선거권, 피선거권까지 許與하게 되엿다. 그네들도 이제는 법리상으로 보아서 국회의원도 될 수 잇고 국무대신도 될 수 잇고 외교관도 될 수 잇게 되엿다. -그러나 사실에 잇서서 현 제도하의 부녀들은 참으로 자유롭고 참으로 행복되고 참으로 평등한가?
봉건제도의 사회에 잇서서 권력이 사람을 지배한 것과 가티 자본제도의 사회에 잇서서는 돈이 사람을 지배한다. 모든 것이 매매관계로 성립된 오늘 사회에 잇서서는 사람은 살기 위하야 무엇이든지 팔어야 한다. 상품을 팔거나 토지를 팔거나 勞働을 팔거나 性을 팔거나-이 멧가지 중에 取捨를 강박하게 된다. 그런데 현 제도하의 경제권, 산업권은 완전히 남자의 수중에 잇고 여자는 그의 상속, 그의 관리 등에 잇서서 항상 불평등한 관례와 불평등한 법리에 지배된다. 특히 그네들에게는 생리적으로 勞働 불가능한 임신기가 잇고 가튼 기간의 노동을 하고도 가튼 금액의 임금을 밧지 못하는 고통이 잇다. 여긔에 그네들은 필연적으로 비교적 완전하고 비교적 고가인 性을 팔아서 그의 생활을 유지하지 아니할 수 업게 된다. 혹은 공공연히 賣淫婦 賣笑婦가 되어서 우숨을＜17＞ 팔고 노래를 팔고 춤을 팔고 살을 팔거나 그러치 안흐면 듯기 조흔 연애, 결혼, 부인이라는 허명하에서 뜻에 맛지 안는 남자와 가티 일평생을 굴복, 忍辱, 咀呪悲痛 중에서 보내어야 한다.
다만 여긔에 문제되는 것은 미래의 남녀관계 미래의 부녀의 사회적 지위가 될 것이다. -현재한 결혼의 형식과 부녀의 지위가 결코 인류 사회의 최초부터 그러하엿든 고정적 그것이 아니요 시대의 추이와 사회 제도의 변천에 딸아 역사적 변천의 도중에서 나타난 일시적 산물에 불과한 것이 사실이라면 미래사회의 남녀관계, 미래사회의 부녀의 사회적 지위는 장차 어떠케 될 것인가?

4, 男女의 心身上 差異
전문학자의 연구 발표한 바에 의하면 남자와 여자의 가장 현저한 심신상 차별은 木槪 다음과 갓다고 한다. 남자의 키는 평균 5척 6촌이요 여자의 키는 평균 5척 3촌이다. 장성한 사람의 평균 체중은 남자가 60「키로그람」이요 여자가 54「키로그람」이다. 여자는 남자보다 胴部가 비교적 길고 여자의 팔은 남자의 그것보다 훨신 쩌르다. 여자의 골격은 남자의 그것보다 일반적으로 쩌르고 가늘며 그의 구조가 우아하고 그의 표면이 미끄럽고 여자의 筋肉은 약하고 柔하며 비교적 수분이 만타. 대다수 남자의 腦量은 1250 내지 1550「그람」이요 대다수 여자의 腦量은 1000 내지 1450「그람」으로 그네들의 평균은 남자가 1388「그람」이요 여자가 1255「그람」이라 한다.
여긔에 가장 문제되는 것은 腰量과 키와 몸, 중량이 될 것이다. 그러나 여자는 남자보다 그 몸집이 적은 이상 반드시 몸 중량에 따라 腦量을 비교하여야 겟는데 그네들의 몸 중량과 腦量의 상대적 비례는 남자는 체중 1「키로그람」에 腦量21,6「그람」이요 여자는 23,6그람으로 이 비례로 본다면 상대적 腦量은 여자가 돌이혀 무겁다. 또 문명인과 야만인을 비교 연구한 결과 야만인은 문명인보다 남녀간의 차별이 그처럼 심하지 안타는 것이 판명되엇다. 인류학자 「만브리에」의 연구 발표에 의하면 「파리」 남자의 두개골은 평균 1560, 여자는 평균 1338立方 「센지메돌」로 그네들의 차이는 222가 되는데 석기시대의 야만인은 남자가 평균 1544, 여자가 평균 1422로 그네들의 차이는 122에 불과하다고 한다. 키와 몸 중량도 역시 이와 갓다. 야만인의 여자는 문명인의 여자보다 시골여자는 도시 여자보다 근로 부인은 지식계급 부인보다 일반적으로 체격이 위대하다. 특히 조선의 가장 특수한 직업부인의 제주의 해녀를 본다면 그네들의 체격은 일반남자와 비교하야 조곰도 손색이 업다.

5, 女子의 向上的 活動
남녀간의 현재와 가튼 차별은 결코 언제든지 변함이 업슬것이＜18＞ 아니요. 다만 그네들이 수천년동안의 被壓服者로 신체와 지식이 진보 발전될 모든 기회를 완전히 빼앗기게 되엿든 일시적 결과에 지내지 안는다. 건전한 사회 상태와 개인과의 관계는 마치 식물과 토지 일광의 관계와 갓다. 사람이 생활과 그의 교육 여가는 그의 체질과 그의 심리에 혹은 유리한 영향을 주고 혹은 유해한 영향을 주어서 내용에 잇서서는 물론이요 외면적으로까지 전연 다른 인종과 가튼 변화를 가지게 하는 것이다. 그러면 수천년 동안 집안에만 침목되여서 부자연한 생활만 하여 온 그네들이 남자들에게 비하야 심신상 다소간 차등이 잇는 것은 피치못할 당연한 일일 것이다. 연습과 숙련의 힘이 얼마나 위대한 지는 저 여자 곡마사를 보라! 그네들은 용기 대담 숙련 체력 등에 잇서서 남자로도 可鰲할만한 훌늉한 동작을 하고 잇지 안는가?
물론 부녀에게는 생리상 약점인 임신기가 잇다. 그러나 인류가 존속되는 것이 생활을 유지하는 것과 가티 절대로 필요한 것이 사실이라면 합리적으로 조직된 사회에 잇서서는 반드시 특별한 보호책을 강구하여야 할 것이다. 전문가의 통계에 의하면 1816년부터 同76년까지 산신열에 걸린 부인의 수는 「푸로시아」만으로 32만8백인이 되고 「잉그랜드」에서는 1847부터 1901년까지 생산으로 사망한 부인의 수가 21만인에 달하야 가튼 시간에 각 방면의 전쟁으로 생명을 일흔 남자의 수보다 훨신 만헛다 한다. 자녀를 낫는 부녀들은 총과 칼을 들고 전지로 나아가는 혁명군과 가티 사회를 위하야 봉사하는 자들이다. 이것이 남녀평등의 이유는 되려니와 그의 불평등의 이유는 되지 못할 것이다.
그럼으로 「베-벨」은 그의 유명한 부인론 중에서 다음과 가티 말하엿다. 『집안 일을 돌보고 아이를 낫는 것이 부인들의 유일한 천직이라는 주장은 마치 인류의 역사가 시작된 이후 늘 국왕이 존재 하엿섯슴으로 언제까지던지 국왕은 업서지지 아니 하리라는 주장과 조곰도 다름이 업는 모순된 말이다. 남자가 아니라는 즉 여자로 태이여낫다는 사실로 인하야 부인을 평등한 권리의 소유자에서 제외하하려함은 종교와 정치상의 의견 여하로 만인이 꼭 가티 가저야 할 권리와 특권을 주지 아니하려는 것과 조곰도 다름이 업는 불공평한 사실이다. 그는 마치 어느 특정한 두사람이 우연히 다른 종족으로 태이어 난 까닭에 그들은 그 출생시로부터 不共載天의 구적이 되지 아니할 수 업다는 것과 조곰도 다름이 업는 불합리한 이론이다.』라고.

6. 男子의 優越權 消滅
「부인들이 독신과 매음 두가지 중에서 그의 한가지를 택하지 아니할 수 업는 모든 조건이 소멸되는 때에는 남자는 발서 부인을 지배할 수 업슬 것이다. 한번 격렬하게 변한 사회 상태는 현재의 결혼 생활에 만흔 영향을 주어서 그의 충분한 발달은 방해하고 혹은 그의 발달을 전혀 불가능하게 하는 모든 장해와 유해한 힘을 반다시 업시할 것이다.」 계급이 계급을 搾取하고＜19＞ 성이 성을 지배하는 날근 사회는 영구히 소멸되고 여자는 정치 교육 등 모든 방면에 잇서서 남자와 완전히 평등한 지위에 서게 될 것이다. 그네들은 건전한 사회 상태하에서 생활하게 됨으로 그의 육체상 정신상의 능력을 충분히 발휘할 수 잇고 충분히 사용할 수 잇슬 것이다. 「그늘은 그의 희망과 천성과 능력에 적당한 직업을 자유로 택할 수 잇고 남자들과 동일한 조건 하에서 로동하는 완전한 직업부인이 될 것이다. 어떤 부문에서든지 산업적으로 활동하면서 제1 제2의 시간에는 보모로 되고 제3의 시간에는 과학과 예술도 연구하고 제4의 시간에는 각 방면의 행정 사무에 진력하기도 할 것이다.
가정 노동은 사회화되고 姙婦는 특별한 보호를 밧게 될 것이다. 부녀들은 과거에 세탁, 재봉, 요리 등 가정내의 잡역으로 무익하게 소비하여 오든 시간을 독서, 오락, 예술, 교육, 산업, 정치 등에 유리하게 소비할 수 잇슬 것이고 특히 산전 산후에는 조곰도 실업의 위험이업시 일정한 기간의 휴가와 산과입원과 특별한 食料의 분배를 바들 수 잇슬 것이다. 勞農 로시아의 예를 본다하면 부녀 노동자는 산전 2箇月 산후 2箇月의 휴가를 밧는데 그동안은 평생시의 급료를 그대로 계속하여 밧는 이외에 보험국에서는 1箇月 급료에 상당한 구제금을 준다. 보육기간(9개월)에는 달마다 급료의 1/4에 상당한 구제금을 밧고 곳곳마다 임부상담소와 육아 상담소가 잇서서 임부는 언제든지 무료로 건강 진단과 육아에 대한 조언과 약품의 분배를 바들 수 잇다. 해산시에는 産兒院에 입원하야 특별한 식품의 분배를 바들 수 잇고 또 곳곳마다 탁아소가 잇서서 모친이 일하는 동안 勞働者의 자녀를 특별히 보호하여 준다. 11월 혁명 당시에는 모친과 어린아이의 보호를 목적하는 조직은 전부 34에 불과하엿든 것이 1925년에는 그를 목적하는 조직이 1600, 탁아소가 658, 모친과 어린아이 휴양소가 440, 육아상담소가 171, 임부상담소가 40에 달한다고 한다.

7, 男女의 地位平等
특히 애인 선택에 잇서서 그네들은 아모러한 구속이 업는 완전한 자유를 가지게 될 것이다. 연애가 자유한 동시에 결혼이 자유하고 결혼이 자유한 동시에 이혼이 자유하게 되여서 그네들은 자신의 가진 감정 이외에는 아모러한 구속이 업시 이성과 결합할 수 잇슬 것이다. 그네들은 남자와 완전히 평등한 인격자가 되여서 스스로 구혼하기도 하고 청혼을 밧기도 하며 자녀에게 대하야 완전히 평등한 친권을 가지게 될 것이다. 남성 중심의 윤리와 도덕은 완전히 소멸되고 정조는 참으로 愛의 표현이 되어서 애정이 계속되는 기간에서만 남자는 여자에게 대하야 여자는 남자에게 대하야 스스로 지키게 될 것이다.
그러고 우리가 미래의 남녀 관계에 대하야 가장 깃븜으로 단언할 수 잇는 것은 첫재는 매음부, 매소부가 엄서지고 마는 것이요. 둘재는 부자연한 독신자가 감소되는 것이다. 이 사회에서 빈궁이라는 것이 엄서지고 남녀가 완전히 평등한 윤리와 도덕에 지배되게 되는 이상 모든 종류의 매음부는 자연히 소멸될 것이고 또 특별한 사정 또는 취미로 독신을 택하는 분은 물론 별문제이겟지만 적막한 늣김을 가지고 번민 중에서 일생을 보내게 되는 독신자는 자연히 엄서지고 말 것이다.＜20＞
＜13-20＞