잡지명	別乾坤 제19호
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	酒國憲法 (Constitution of the Nation of Alcohol)
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

酒國憲法

In order to increase the drinking fortune of the general populace, to promote the prosperity of the liquor price, and to eternally maintain world peace, I hereby promulgate the Constitution of the Nation of Alcohol.

The 1st of February in the 1929th year since the birth of alcohol.

The Emperor of the Great Nation of Alcohol, The Humble One, Yu Myeong.
*Signed by each minister.

1. Anyone who violates this Constitution shall be exiled to the Prohibition Nation for one year.
2. This Constitution shall be enforced from the date of promulgation.

Article 1: The Nation of Alcohol shall be eternally maintained by the general populace.

Article 2: The territory of the Nation of Alcohol shall be the entire world, but Prohibition Nations like America shall be special colonies.

Article 3: The Nation of Alcohol has no emperor or great general (based on the saying, "In drunkenness, there is no emperor; in alcohol, there is no great general").

Article 4: Those with mental or physical disabilities, underage men and women, and Christians are not allowed to be registered in the Nation of Alcohol.

Article 5: The capital of the Nation of Alcohol shall be Iron Wall Fortress (鐵甕城).

Article 6: Anyone who is qualified to drink more than three cups and has paid taxes (liquor fees) to the Nation of Alcohol shall become a citizen with drinking rights (酒權者).

Article 7: Those who are registered in the Nation of Alcohol shall be granted honorary ranks and elegant titles such as Alcohol Emperor (酒天子), Alcohol President (酒大統領), Alcohol General (酒大將), Alcohol *Governor (酒*知), Brewing Soldier (謀酒兵丁), Alcohol Doctor (酒), Li Bai of Alcohol (酒太白), depending on their degree.

Article 8: The peerage of the Nation of Alcohol shall be divided into five ranks: Empty (空), Generous (厚), Hundred (百), Self (自), and Reckless (濫). Those who empty their glasses well shall be called Duke (公爵), those who drink generously from large glasses shall be called Marquis (厚爵), those who can drink a hundred cups shall be called Count (百爵), those who pour their own drinks shall be called Viscount (自爵), and those who pour recklessly shall be called Baron (濫爵).

Article 9: The populace has the duty to empty bottles (蒸甁).

Article 10: The populace has the duty to compensate for drinking someone else's alcohol.

Article 11: The number of cups of alcohol shall always be an odd number based on the principle of "alcohol does not protect cups" (酒不護盃), with one being insufficient, three being a little, five being appropriate, seven being acceptable, and nine being sufficient. Anything beyond this shall be at the discretion of the individual's constitution, financial ability, and preferences.

Article 12: Appropriate times for drinking are determined as follows:
1. When meeting a friend in a distant land
2. On an evening with slanting wind and drizzling rain
3. When bored in a cold, dimly lit inn <160>
4. On a moonlit, snow-white night
5. When flowers bloom and leaves fall
6. When feeling melancholic or sad
7. When feeling exhilarated or excited
(However, drinking with meals and hangover cures shall be practiced at any time.)

Article 13: Ensure that people drink alcohol, but alcohol does not consume people.

Article 14: Those with many whiskers must thoroughly clean their mouths with a towel each time they finish a glass.

Article 15: Those who have lovers must brush their teeth well after drinking and "kiss".

Article 16: Those who do not pour alcohol shall be charged with the crime of not pouring (不傾罪).

Article 17: Those who privately sell alcohol without permission shall be banned from participating in joint drinking parties indefinitely. However, this may be reduced if there is evidence of repentance.

Article 18: Those who disturb the public safety of the Nation of Alcohol or act against it by arguing or fighting after drinking, or who disturb public sanitation, shall be immediately ordered to leave the drinking party.

Article 19: Those who are late to a drinking party shall be punished according to the customary law of "three cups for latecomers." However, the so-called Goksal (谷山) son-in-law punishment practiced in special regions is too harsh and is abolished from the date of promulgation of this law. (In Goksal (谷山), latecomers are given three cups each by every person present.)

Article 20: Those who sing, dance, or otherwise play well after drinking shall be rewarded with a large cup.

Article 21: The following are recognized as the Ten Unwelcome Behaviors (十不出) of the Nation of Alcohol:
1. Those who don't drink well and only eat side dishes.
2. Those who take credit for other people's alcohol.
3. Those who only talk nonsense while holding a glass.
4. Those who go to other seats while drinking.
5. Those who don't know how to pour after drinking.
6. Those who sing at a funeral gathering.
7. Those who cry at a celebratory gathering.
8. Those who only drink other people's alcohol and don't offer their own.
9. Those who bring their friends to other people's drinking parties.
10. Those who give long congratulatory speeches at banquets.

Article 22: Members of the Alcohol Populace Party (麴民黨) may walk in a "之" or "玄" pattern, but shall not obstruct public traffic.

Article 23: Even if the hats of the Nation of Alcohol's populace are tilted to the left, they will not be specially cracked down upon.

Article 24: Even if the faces of the Nation of Alcohol's populace become red, they will not be cracked down upon.

Article 25: Members of the Alcohol Populace Party (麴民黨) should prepare at least one won and fifty jeon in their pockets (because they are likely to be punished for public urination).

Article 26: For the sake of cultural refinement, the populace of the Nation of Alcohol shall recite Jangjinju (長進酒), Drinking Eight Immortals Song (飮中八仙歌), and Eulogy to Alcohol's Virtue (酒德頌) once a day.

Article 27: The old interpretation of "alcohol is a crazy medicine that destroys human nature" (酒者는 伐性之狂藥也) shall be changed to "alcohol is crazy, but it is medicine" (酒者는 伐性之狂하니 藥也다). Those who do not approve of this shall be considered rebellious traitors.

Article 28: Only the Alcohol Populace Party (麴民黨) and the Alcohol Water Party (麴水黨) are allowed to be established as political parties in the Nation of Alcohol.

Article 29: This law cannot be changed unless it is approved by a majority vote of the members of the Alcohol Populace Party (麴民黨). <161>

**Named Entities**

鐵甕城	Ch'ŏrwŏngsŏng
谷山	Koksan
長進酒	Changjinjoo
飮中八仙歌	Ŭmjungp'alsŏn'ga
酒德頌	Judŏksong
麴民黨	Kungmindang
麴水黨	Kungsoodang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제19호
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	酒國憲法
기사형태	잡저

酒國憲法
余가 一般麴民의 飮福을 增進하고 麴價의 隆昌을 圖하며 世界平和를 永遠維持하기 爲하야 玆에 酒國憲法을 發布하노라.
酒降生一千九百二十久年二月一日
大酒國賤者御酩
*務各大臣署名

1. 이 憲法에 違反하는 者는 一年間 禁酒國에 流配함.
1. 이 憲法은 發布日로부터 施行함.

第1條 酒國은 一般麴民으로 永遠維持함.
第2條 酒國의 영토는 전세계로 하되 米國과 가튼 禁酒國은 특별식민지로 함.
第3條 酒國은 天子, 大將이 無함(醉中無天子, 酒無大將이라는 由來語에 의하야).
第4條 심신에 故障이 잇는 자, 미성년 남녀, 기독교 신자는 酒國에 입적을 불허함.
第5條 酒國의 國都는 鐵甕城으로 정함.
第6條 三盃以上을 먹을 자격이 잇는 자로 酒國에 세금(酒代)을 납입한 자는 누구나 酒權者가 됨.
第7條 酒國에 입적한 자는 그 정도여하를 따라서 酒天子, 酒大統領, 酒大將, 酒*知, 謀酒兵丁酒, 알콜박사, 酒太白 등 榮位, 雅號를 與함.
第8條 酒國의 爵位는 空, 厚, 百, 自, 濫 5等으로 하야 술잔을 잘 비도록 먹는 사람은 공작(公爵), 큰잔으로 두둑히 먹는 사람은 후작(厚爵), 百盃를 능히 먹는 사람은 백작(百爵), 자기 손으로 부어 먹는 사람은 자작(自爵) 함부로 부어 먹는 사람을 람작(濫爵)이라 칭함.
第9條 麴民은 蒸甁(술병)의 의무가 有함.
第10條 麴民은 남의 술을 먹고 반듯이 보상할 의무가 有함.
第11條 술의 盃數는 酒不護盃의 원칙에 의하야 반듯이 奇數로 하되 一不若, 三小, 五宜, 七可, 九足으로 하고 此 以上은 麴民의 체질, 金力, 嗜好에 의하야 자유방임함.
第12條 음주의 適宜한 시기는 左와 如히 정함.
1. 千里他鄕逢友時
2. 斜風細雨夕陽天
3. 旅館寒燈無聊時＜160＞
4. 月白雪白夜
5. 花開葉落時
6. 憂鬱悲哀時
7. 痛快興奮時
(단, 飯酒 及 解酲은 隋時 실행함.)
第13條 사람이 술을 먹되 술이 사람을 먹지 안케 할 事.
第14條 수염이 만흔 사람은 잔을 畢한 때마다 반듯이 수건으로 口頭 大淸潔을 할 事.
第15條 애인이 잇는 사람은 酒後에 반듯이 양치를 잘하고 『키스』할 事.
第16條 술을 붓지 안는 사람은 不傾罪에 처함.
第17條 술을 혼자 밀매음한 자는 無期로 공동 酒會에 참가를 불허함.
단 改悛의 事가 잇는 때에는 酌量減輕함을 得함.
第18條 술을 먹은 뒤에, 언쟁, 결투를 하야 酒國의 공안을 방해하거나 *逆케을 하야 공중위생을 방해하는 자는 즉시 酒會席에서 퇴장을 명함.
第19條 酒會에 遲參한 자는 後來者三盃란 관습법에 의하야 처벌함.
단, 특수 지방에 시행하는 소위 谷山 사돈복이 이法은 너무 가혹함으로 본 법 발포일로부터 폐지함.(谷山에서는 後來者에게 座客마다 三盃식을 주는 일이 잇다.)
第20條 酒後에 노래나 춤 기타 작란을 잘하는 자는 大盃를 賞與함.
第21條 左記에 해당한 자는 酒國의 十不出로 認함.
1. 술 잘 안먹고 안주만 먹는 자.
2. 남의 술에 제 생색내는 자.
3. 술잔 잡고 잔소리만 하는 자.
4. 술 먹다가 딴 좌석에 가는 자.
5. 술 먹고 따를 줄 몰으는 자.
6. 상가집 술 먹고 노래하는 자.
7. 잔치집 술 먹고 우는 자.
8. 남의 술만 먹고 제 술 안내는 자.
9. 남의 酒席에 제친고 다리고 가는 자.
10. 宴會酒席에서 축사 오래하는 자.
第22條 麴民黨員의 步法은 之자 혹은 玄자 식으로 하야도 무방하되 공중 교통을 방해치 말 事.
第23條 酒國麴民의 모자는 左傾하야도 특별히 取締치 안이함.
第24條 酒國麴民의 顔面은 赤化하야도 取締치 안이함.
第25條 麴民黨員은 少하야도 懷中에 一金 五十錢也를 준비함이 可함.(소변 濫放의 科料 처벌을 당하기가 쉬우닛가)
第26條 酒國麴民은 교양의 필요상 長進酒, 飮中八仙歌, 酒德頌 등을 一日一回式 낭독할 事.
第27條 酒者는 伐性之狂藥也라는 녯 해석을 곳치여서 酒者는 伐性之狂하니 藥也다 解하되 此를 不準하는 者는 斯門亂賊으로 認함.
第28條 酒國의 정당은 麴民黨麴水黨 이외에 他黨의 설치를 불허함.
第29條 본 법은 麴民黨員의 다수결의가 안이면 변경함을 不得함.＜161＞
＜160-161＞