잡지명	별건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮歷史上 가장 光輝잇는 페ㅡ지- 高句麗의 武威가 發揚된 곳 (The Most Glorious Page in Korean History - Where the Military Power of Koguryŏ Was Displayed)
필자	金道泰
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

The Most Glorious Page in Korean History - Where the Military Power of Koguryŏ Was Displayed
Kim Do-t'ae

(7 lines deleted - original text)
In our current state, speaking of the most glorious "page" of history feels like telling a dream within a dream.

2
Looking at the 4000-year history of our Korea, it cannot be helped but to see that the situation of our ancestors was truly unfortunate. The reason for this is that the geographical position of our Korea is adjacent to China in the west and separated from Japan by a narrow strip of water (一葦水) in the east. In other words, it is caught between the great Chinese nation to the west and the great Japanese nation to the east. Being caught between these two nations, today facing China, tomorrow facing OOOOOO, they had to flee here and there, enduring the hardships of wind and dew (風餐露宿), and this was not a rare occurrence. Then, somehow, they managed to hold them off, but were always fearful of another invasion, and at the same time, they exhausted every means to win their favor. If this were the entirety of Korean history, it might be an exaggeration, but it seems to be more than half. Like this, unable to freely express their genius between two powerful neighbors, it was also difficult to manage any great undertaking.
Even with our unfortunate ancestors like that, they still labored to the best of their ability whenever there was an opening. This is a great lesson for us descendants, and not only is it not inferior to the work of other nations in the world, but it can even be said to be superior, so I would like to introduce the most glorious "page" below.

3
It can be said that Koreans could only live freely like others until the early Koryŏ period. The ancient history has few records, so we cannot know in detail, but the Three Kingdoms period to the early Koryŏ period can be said to be the most golden age in our peninsula.
The military prowess of Koguryŏ and the culture of Silla would not be inferior to any "page" in world history.
Among them, I want to write about the military power of Koguryŏ as the most glorious "page" in our history.
The reason for this is, as I said before, being caught between two powerful countries, and as the weaker of the two, displaying such military power is something that no one can help but admire.
Even reading Western history, is it not the military power of the Spartans that prevented the powerful enemy of Persia from invading the small peninsula of Greece?
If they had been subjected to the trampling of the Persians at that time, the name of Greek culture as the origin of world culture would not have remained. Because of that military power, Greek culture existed, and world culture was born.
The fact that we remain as we are today is also due to the power of Koguryŏ's military might. Why did Silla's culture arise? It was safely developed because Koguryŏ's military power blocked the strong enemy of China.
Therefore, I now write one "page" of the most glorious *Samguk Sagi* (三國史記).
"In the 23rd year of King Yŏngyang, the Sui emperor Xin arrived south of Yodong Fortress in the sixth month, and observed the form of the fortress and summoned his generals and rebuked them, saying, 'Do you think you can treat me with incompetence because of your high official positions and noble families? When I was in the capital, you all did not want me to come, fearing that you would be defeated. Now that I have come here, I intend to see what you are doing and execute you all. Do you fear death and not do your best, thinking that I cannot kill you?' The generals were all ashamed and lost color. The emperor then stayed several *li* west of the fortress and oversaw Yukkapsŏng (六合城). Our fortresses firmly defended and did not surrender. <16>
The great general of the left, Lai Huer (來護兒), led the Jianghuai (江淮) naval forces, hundreds of *li* of ships, and advanced first across the sea, entering from the P’aesu (浿水) River, sixty *li* from P’yŏngyang, and encountered our army, attacking and defeating them greatly. Huer wanted to take advantage of the victory and proceed to the city, but the deputy commander Zhou Fashang (周法尙) stopped him. The generals and armies all arrived and advanced together, but Huer did not listen and selected tens of thousands of elite troops and went straight to the city. Our general ambushed troops in the empty temple in the outer city, and sent out troops to fight Huer and pretended to be defeated. Huer pursued them into the city, looting without any formation. The ambush broke out, and Huer was greatly defeated, barely escaping. Of the soldiers, no more than several thousand returned. Our army pursued to the ships, and Zhou Fashang prepared his formation to meet them. Our army then retreated, and Huer led his troops back to Haep’o (海浦), not daring to stay and meet the other armies.
The great general of the left, Yuwen Shu (宇文述), went out from Puyŏ (扶餘), the great general of the right, Yu Zhongwen (于仲文), went out from Nangnang (樂浪), the great general of the left, Jing Yuanheng (荊元恒), went out from Yodong (遼東), the great general of the right, Xue Shixiong (薛世雄), went out from Okchŏ (沃沮), the general of the right, Xin Shixiong (辛世雄), went out from Hyŏnto (玄菟), the general of the right, Zhang Jin (張瑾), went out from Yangp’yŏng (襄平), the prefect of Yo郡, Cui Hongsŭng (崔弘昇), who supervised the general of the left, went out from Swisŏng (遂城), and Wei Wensŭng (衛文昇), who supervised the *hŏbŏn nangjang* of the right, went out from Chŭngji (增地). All met west of the Amnok (鴨綠) River. Shu and others were given one hundred days of provisions for the people and horses from the two garrisons of Nohan (瀘河) and Hwaryŏn (懷遠), and also given armor, spears, and tents, with each person receiving more than three *sŏk* of firewood, rice, and chestnuts, which was too heavy to carry. An order was issued in the army that anyone who abandoned a leaf, rice, or chestnut would be executed. The soldiers all dug pits under their tents and buried them. <17>
When they reached the middle of the road, their provisions were almost exhausted. The king sent the great minister Ŭlchi Mundŏk (乙支文德) to their camp, feigning surrender, but in reality to observe their weaknesses. Yu Zhongwen had previously received a secret order that if he encountered the king or Mundŏk, he should capture them. Zhongwen wanted to arrest him, but the Right Vice Minister of the Ministry of Rites, Liu Shiling (劉士龍), who was the envoy of consolation, firmly stopped him. Zhongwen then listened to Mundŏk. Mundŏk left, and Zhongwen regretted it and sent a man to deceive Mundŏk, saying, 'If you have anything more to say, you can come again.' Mundŏk did not heed him and crossed the Amnok River. Zhongwen and Shu were uneasy after losing Mundŏk. Shu wanted to return because the food was exhausted. Zhongwen discussed pursuing Mundŏk with elite troops, saying that it would be a meritorious deed. Shu firmly stopped him. Zhongwen said angrily, 'General, with an army of 100,000 men, you cannot defeat a small bandit, how can you face the emperor? Moreover, Zhongwen knew that this journey would be unsuccessful. In the past, generals who were successful had decisions made by one person in the army, but now everyone has their own intentions, how can we defeat the enemy?' At that time, the emperor ordered Zhongwen to consult with the generals and control the degree, so he had these words. Because of this, Shu and others had no choice but to follow him and cross the river to pursue Mundŏk. Mundŏk saw that Shu's soldiers were hungry, so he wanted to tire them out. Every time they fought, he would run away. Shu won seven battles in one day. Having won and being pressed by the crowd, they then advanced east and crossed the Salsu (薩水) River, thirty *li* from P'yŏngyang, and made camp on the mountain. Mundŏk again sent an envoy to Shu, feigning surrender, saying, 'If you withdraw your army, I will serve the emperor in the capital.' Shu saw that the soldiers were tired and could not fight again, and that P'yŏngyang was a strong and difficult city to capture suddenly, so he asked for peace and returned. Shu and others marched in a square formation.
Our army ambushed and attacked Shu and others from the west, fighting and marching. In the seventh month of autumn, when they reached the Salsu River, half of the army had crossed when our army attacked the rear guard, and the general of the right, Xin Shixiong, was killed in battle. Thereupon, all the armies collapsed and could not be stopped. The brave soldiers fled, traveling one hundred and fifty *li* west to the Amnok River in one day and one night. General Wang Ingong (王仁恭) of Ch’ŏnsu (天水) covered the retreat and repelled our army. Lai Huer heard of Shu's defeat and also withdrew. Only Wei Wensŭng's army was completely intact. In the beginning, the nine armies arrived at Yo (遼), totaling 305,000 men, but when they returned to Yodong Fortress, there were only 2,700 men."

**Named Entities**

高句麗	Koguryŏ
新羅	Silla
高麗	Koryŏ
浿水	P'aesu
平壤	P'yŏngyang
乙支文德	Ŭlchi Mundŏk
薩水	Salsu
沃沮	Okchŏ
玄菟	Hyŏnto
鴨綠	Amnok
遼東	Yodong
嬰陽王	Yŏngyang Wang
金道泰	Kim Do-t'ae
扶餘	Puyŏ
樂浪	Nangnang
襄平	Yangp’yŏng
遂城	Swisŏng
增地	Chŭngji
來護兒	Lai Huer
江淮	Jianghuai
周法尙	Zhou Fashang
宇文述	Yuwen Shu
于仲文	Yu Zhongwen
荊元恒	Jing Yuanheng
薛世雄	Xue Shixiong
辛世雄	Xin Shixiong
張瑾	Zhang Jin
崔弘昇	Cui Hongsŭng
衛文昇	Wei Wensŭng
劉士龍	Liu Shiling
王仁恭	Wang Ingong
天水	Ch’ŏnsu



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮歷史上 가장 光輝잇는 페ㅡ지- 高句麗의 武威가 發揚된 곳
필자	金道泰
기사형태	논설

朝鮮歷史上 가장 光輝잇는 페ㅡ지- 高句麗의 武威가 發揚된 곳
						金道泰
(7行 削除-原文)
이러한 現狀에 잇는 우리로서 가장 光輝잇는 歷史의「페지」를 말하는 것이 맛치 꿈속에 꿈이야기 하는 것과 가튼 늣김이 업지 안타.

2
우리 朝鮮의 4000년 歷史를 一括하건대 우리 祖先들의 處地가 참말로 불상하다고 볼 수 밧게 업다. 그 理由로 말하면 우리 朝鮮의 地理上 位置가 西으로 支那와 相接하고 東으로 日本과 一葦水를 격하야 잇다. 다시 말하면 西으로 支那의 大民族과 東으로 日本의 大民族과의 틈에 끼여 잇다. 그 두 民族의＜15＞ 틈에 끼여 잇서 今日엔 支那의 明日엔 OOOOOO當하야 이리로 避하고 저리로 몰녀 風餐露宿의 괴로운 운명이 그들을 나리누루게 된 일이 한두 번이 안이엇다. 그러다가 엇지 엇지하야 그를 막아 놋코도 또다시 침입하지나 안을가 하야 恐懼의 염려를 가지는 동시에 그들의 歡心을 사기 위하야 온갓 수단을 다하엿다. 이 사실이 朝鮮史의 전부라면 좀 과언일 것 가트나 아마 過半은 된 것 갓다. 이와가티 兩個 强隣의 틈에서 마음대로 자기네의 天才를 發揮하여 보지 못하엿스며 또한 무슨 큰 事業을 經營하기가 곤란하엿섯다.
그와 가티 불상한 우리 祖先들이 그래도 틈이 잇스면 自己네의 힘 자라는 데까지는 勞力하여 노은 것이엇다. 이것이야 말로 우리 後生에게 주는 큰 교훈이며 세계 다른 민족들의 한 일에 비하야도 조곰도 遜色이 업슬 뿐 아니라 도리여 우수하다 할만한 즉 가장 光輝잇는 「페ㅡ지」를 아래 소개코저 한다.

3
우리 朝鮮 사람으로 남과 가티 맘 노코 살아보기는 高麗초 까지라고 볼 수 밧게 업다. 上古史는 記證이 적으닛가 仔細히 알 수 업지만은 三國時代로부터 高麗初까지는 우리 半島에 가장 黃金時代엿다고 할 수 잇다.
高句麗의 무위라든지 新羅의 文化는 世界史上에 어느「페ㅡ지」에 비교하더라도 손색이 업슬 것이다.
그 중에도 나는 高句麗의 武威를 가지고 우리 歷史上에 가장 光輝잇는「페ㅡ지」라고 쓰려 한다.
그 理由로 말하면 몬저 말한 것과 가티 兩强國의 틈에 끼여 잇스면서 그 중에서 弱者로서 그만한 武力을 발휘하엿다는 것은 누구나 歎服안을 수 없는 것이다.
西洋史를 닑더라도 그리쓰의 적은 半島에서 波斯의 强敵을 막아 쪼츤 것은 오즉 스파르타人의 무력이 아니고 무엇이냐?
만일 그 당시에 波斯사람의 蹂躝을 당하엿다 하면 그리쓰의 文化가 世界文化의 始朝라는 일흠이 남아 잇슬 수가 업섯다. 그 무위가 잇섯기 때문에 希臘의 文化가 잇섯고 世界文化가 생겨난 것이다.
오늘날 우리들이 이와가치 나마 殘在한 것도 高句麗의 무위의 힘이 잇섯기 때문이다. 新羅의 文化가 무엇 때문에 생겻는가? 高句麗의 무위로 支那의 强敵을 막엇기 때문에 안전하게 발달된 것이다.
그럼으로 지금 가장 광휘잇는 三國史記의 한「페ㅡ지」를 적는다.
嬰陽王二十三年六月己未隋帝辛遼東城南, 觀基城池形勢, 因召諸將詰責之曰,公等自以官高侍家世欲以暗懦待我耶在都之日公等皆不願我來恐見病敗耳我今來此正欲觀公等所爲斬公輩爾公今畏死莫盡力謂我不能殺公耶諸將咸戰愧失色帝因留止城西數里御六合城我諸城堅守不下.＜16＞
佐翊衛大將軍. 來護兒帥江淮水軍舳艫數百里浮海先進入自浿水去平壤六十里與我軍相遇進擊大破之護兒欲乘勝趣其城副摠管周法尙止之諸候諸軍至俱進護兒不廳簡精甲數萬直造城下我將伏兵於羅郭內空寺中出兵與護兒戰而僞敗護兒逐之入城縱兵俘掠無復部伍伏兵發護兒大敗僅而獲兔士卒還者不過數千人我軍追至船所周法尙整陣待之我軍乃退護兒引兵還屯海浦不敢復留應接諸軍.
左翊衛大將軍宇文述出扶餘道右翊衛大將于仲文出樂浪道佐驍衛大將軍荊元恒出遼東道右翊衛大將軍薛世雄出沃沮右屯衛將軍辛世雄出玄菟道右禦衛軍張瑾出襄平道右武候將軍趙孝才出碣石道𣵠郡太守檢敎左武衛將軍崔弘昇出遂城道檢校右.
禦衛虎賁郞將衛文昇 出增地道 皆會於鴨綠水西 述等兵自瀘河懷遠二鎭 人馬皆給百日糧又給排甲槍矟, 幷衣資戎具火幕人別三石己上, 重莫能勝致下令軍中遺葉米栗者斬士卒皆於幕下掘抗埋之*行及中路糧己將盡王遺大臣乙支文德詣其營詐降實欲觀虛實于仲文先奉密旨若遇王及文德來者心檎之仲文將執之尙書右丞劉士龍爲慰撫使固止之仲文遂廳文德遠旣而悔之遺人紿文德曰更欲有言可復來文德不顧濟鴨綠水而去仲文與述等旣失文德內不自安述以糧盡欲還仲文議以精銳追文德可以有功述固止之仲文恕曰將軍仗十萬之衆不能破小賊何顔以見帝且仲文此行固知無功何則古將能成功者軍中之事決在一人今人各有心何以勝敵時帝以仲文有計劃令諸軍諮稟節度故有此言由是述等不得己而從之與諸將渡水追文德文德見述軍士有饑色故欲疲之每戰輒走述一日之中七戰皆捷旣 *勝又逼群議於是遂進東濟薩水去平平壤三十里因山爲營文德復遺使詐請於述曰若施師者當奉 王朝行在所述見士卒疲弊不可復戰又平壤城險固度難猝拔遂因基請而還述等爲方陣而行.
我軍西面鈔擊述等且戰且行秋七月至薩水軍半濟我軍自後擊基後軍右屯衛將軍辛世雄戰死於是諸軍俱潰不可禁止壯士奔還一日一夜至鴨綠水行西百五十里將軍天水王仁恭爲殿擊我軍却之來護兒聞述等敗亦引還唯衛文昇一軍獨全初九軍到遼凡三十萬五千及還至遼東城唯二千七百人云. ＜17＞
＜15-17＞