잡지명	별건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	내가 자랑하고 십흔 朝鮮 것-現代文明의 産母, 活字의 發明은 朝鮮이 首位 (Things I am proud of about Korea - The Mother of Modern Civilization, Korea is the First in the Invention of Movable Type)
필자	李允宰
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

The degree to which a society is civilized is evidenced by the quantity of books published within it. Today's civilization, in reality, stems from the widespread dissemination of knowledge and the popularization of learning through books, and the widespread distribution of books is attributed to the invention of movable type, which facilitates printing. Therefore, we can understand the immense contribution of movable type to modern civilization.

Let us first examine the origins of movable type in the West. It is known that the Dutchman Laurens Coster created movable type using wood and lead in 1428 AD, but the widely recognized figure is the German Johann Gutenberg, who used wooden movable type in 1438 AD. However, in 1452 AD, Johann Fust and Peter Schöffer, through their joint efforts, greatly improved the existing movable type and began using metal movable type. The completion of movable type in the West can be said to have truly begun at this time.

It is said that our Chosŏn (朝鮮) had been using movable type since the time of ancient Silla (新羅), but there is no definitive evidence to support this. However, in the mid-Goryeo (高麗) period, in a text by Yi Kyu-bo (李奎報),

"The most important aspect of a ruler's governance is the establishment of rites, adapting and modifying them based on historical changes to set a standard, refine the people's hearts, and harmonize customs. How can we neglect this by simply following old practices and failing to establish permanent norms, causing confusion and discord? Since our nation became independent, the modifications of our rites have varied, causing problems for a long time. During the reign of King Injong (仁廟), he ordered Chief Councilor Ch’oe Yun-ŭi (崔允儀) and seventeen other officials to gather historical records, discuss and reconcile differences, and compile fifty volumes, titled ‘Detailed Regulations of Rites’ (詳定禮文), to be circulated in the world. Only then could rites be standardized and people no longer feel lost. This book, spanning many years, contained omissions and missing characters, making it difficult to examine. My late father supplemented and compiled it into two copies, one given to the Ministry of Rites and one kept at home, demonstrating his farsightedness. Indeed, during the relocation of the capital, the officials of the Ministry of Rites were too hurried to bring it, and it was almost lost, but the home copy was saved. I then further understood his intention and was fortunate it was not lost, so I cast type and printed twenty-eight copies, distributing them to various offices for safekeeping. All officials must carefully preserve and not discard them, and not betray my father's painstaking efforts."

In this text, we find the word "chujja (鑄字)" (i.e., movable type) for the first time. <58> Whether it was wooden or metal movable type is difficult to definitively determine, but the presence of the word "chujja (鑄字)" strongly suggests that it was metal. According to the Goryeosa (麗史), this was in the 21st year of King Gojong (高宗) of Goryeo, or 1234 AD. King Gojong, having moved the capital to Gangdo (江都) (present-day Ganghwa (江華)) to escape the Mongol invasions, worried about the destruction of our rites due to the war and printed 28 copies of the Detailed Regulations of Rites (詳定禮文) using cast type. This indicates that the cast type was not invented hastily to print it at that time, but rather that existing cast type was used. It must have been created several hundred years before this, and I, lacking sufficient reasoning power, cannot know who the original creator was. Even if we assume that the invention of movable type occurred during the reign of King Gojong, it still predates the West by almost 200 years, which cannot be concealed.

Prior to this, during the Gyeongnyeok (慶歷) era of the Song (宋) Dynasty, a man named Bi Sheng (畢昇) created movable type using clay, but this was only a temporary <59> trial and did not lead to continuous development, so no significant achievements resulted. During the reign of Emperor Kangxi (康熙帝) of the Qing (淸) Dynasty, copper movable type was first used when publishing the Complete Collection of Illustrations and Writings (圖書集成), and during the reign of Emperor Qianlong (乾隆帝), wooden movable type was used when publishing the Complete Library of the Four Treasuries (四庫全書). It can be seen that movable type in China only developed from this time. Furthermore, the Jibong Yuseol (芝峰類說) states, "Casting type for printing originated in our nation, not in China (鑄字印書, 倉自本朝, 非中國所有)," which confirms that the invention of movable type was purely our original creation. When movable type printing was flourishing in our Chosŏn (朝鮮), they had not even dreamed of it yet. Based on this, it is no exaggeration to say that we were 400 or 500 years ahead of China.

Now, I will briefly discuss the path of development of movable type in our country. Casting type printing undoubtedly continued to develop after King Gojong (高麗 高宗) of Goryeo. However, the documented records show that a Book Bureau (書籍鋪) was established during the reign of King Gongyang (恭讓王), and later, in the 4th year of King Gongyang, a Royal Library (書籍院) was established to oversee the production of movable type and books, and even official regulations were established for it. Then, during the Yi (李) Dynasty, it saw even greater development. In the 3rd year of King Taejong (太宗) (1403 AD), a Casting Type Office (鑄字所) was established, and 100,000 copper movable types were cast using internal funds, named "Dinghai Type (丁亥字)." Thereafter, continuous improvements and developments were made, including the Gyeongja Type (庚子字) and Gapin Type (甲寅字) during the reign of King Sejong (世宗), the Imsin Type (壬申字) during the reign of King Munjong (文宗), the Eulyu Type (乙酉字) during the reign of King Sejo (世祖), the Sinmyo Type (辛卯字) and Gy 축 Type (癸丑字) during the reign of King Seongjong (成宗), and further improvements were made during the reign of King Yejong (睿宗), resulting in the Saengsaeng Type (生生字) and Jeongni Type (整理字). There have been many developments even recently, but I cannot list them all. This shows that the nation considered movable type printing as a major aspect of governance and focused on the widespread distribution of books, which is a noteworthy event in world cultural history.

Looking at this, was not the originality and inventiveness of our ancestors unmatched by any other nation in the world? However, today we have fallen behind in civilization to the point where we do not even have a proper printing facility and must always rely on others for even the smallest tasks. If we had truly maintained our originality and inventiveness, what would have prevented us from surpassing the so-called material civilization of the West? But now, we cannot even imitate what others are doing, which can be attributed to laziness or a spirit of abandonment. We can only feel ashamed of ourselves. Moreover, when we realize that the invention of movable type, this tool of civilization, originated in our Chosŏn (朝鮮) earlier than anywhere else in the world, we cannot help but feel a sense of national pride and boast about this great achievement that has left an indelible mark on world history. (The End) <60>

**Named Entities**

李允宰	Yi Yun-jae
朝鮮	Chosŏn
新羅	Silla
李奎報	Yi Kyu-bo
高麗	Goryeo
仁廟	Injong
崔允儀	Ch'oe Yun-ŭi
詳定禮文	Sangjŏng Yemun
高宗	Kojong
江都	Kangdo
江華	Kanghwa
慶歷	Kyŏngnyŏk
宋	Song
畢昇	Pil Sŭng
淸	Ch’ŏng
康熙帝	K’anghŭi-je
乾隆帝	Kŏnllyong-je
芝峰類說	Chibong Yusŏl
書籍鋪	Sŏjŏkp’o
恭讓王	Kongyang-wang
書籍院	Sŏjŏgwŏn
李朝	Yijo
太宗	T’aejong
鑄字所	Chujaso
丁亥字	Tinghae-ja
世宗	Sejong
庚子字	Kyŏngja-ja
甲寅字	Kapin-ja
文宗	Munjong
壬申字	Imsin-ja
世祖	Sejo
乙酉字	Ŭlyu-ja
成宗	Sŏngjong
辛卯字	Sinmyo-ja
癸丑字	Kyechuk-ja
睿宗	Yejong
生生字	Saengsaeng-ja
整理字	Chŏngni-ja



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	내가 자랑하고 십흔 朝鮮 것-現代文明의 産母, 活字의 發明은 朝鮮이 首位
필자	李允宰
기사형태	논설

내가 자랑하고 십흔 朝鮮 것-現代文明의 産母, 活字의 發明은 朝鮮이 首位
						李允宰
한 社會의 文明이 發達되고 못됨은 그 사회에 刊書의 만코 적은 것으로 徵證하게 된다. 오늘날의 문명이란 것도 그 실상은 知識을 傳播하며 學問을 普及케 하는 書籍의 廣布에 말미암음이요 서적의 광포는 다만 印刷에 편리를 주는 活字의 創製에 잇다 할 것이다. 그런 즉 근세문명에 대한 활자의 공덕이 얼마나 큰 것임을 알 것이다.
활자가 어느 때부터 발명되엇는가 먼저 西洋의 것부터 말해보자. 和蘭人 라운렌트·코스타르씨가 木과 鉛으로 활자를 제작한 것이 西紀 1428년이나 세상에 만히 이름이 들어나기는 西紀 1438년에 木製活字를 製用한 독일인 요한·구텐벨흐氏로써 다 안다. 그러나 西紀 1452년에 이르러 요한·파우쓰트 及 페테르·쇄페르 兩氏의 共力으로 종래의 활자를 크게 개량하여 金屬製 활자를 製用하엿스니 西洋에서 활자의 완성은 실상 이때로써 비롯이라 할 것이다.
우리 朝鮮은 녯적 新羅 적부터 이미 활자를 製用하엿다 하나 이에 대한 確的한 考證을 볼 수 업고 다만 高麗中葉에 이르러 李奎報文에
夫帝王之政, 莫先於制禮, 基沿革也損益野, 宣一定之, 以淑人心, 以齊風俗矣, 安可因循姑息, 불卽立常典, 使之紛然異同哉, 本朝自由國以來, 基禮制之損益, 隨制靡一, 病之久矣, 至仁廟, 始勅平章事崔允儀等十七臣, 集古今同異, 商酌折中, 所書五十卷, 命之曰詳定禮文, 流行於世, 然後, 禮有所歸, 而人之不感矣, 是書跨歷年*, 簡脫字缺, 難於考審, 予先公迺今補緝, 遂成二本, 一付禮官, 一藏于家, 基志遠也, 果於遷都之際, 禮官遑遽未得*來, 則幾若已發, 而有家藏一本得存焉, 予然後, 益暗基志, 且幸基不失, 用鑄字, 印成二十八本, 分付諸司藏之, 凡有司者謹傳之勿替, 勿負予意之痛勤也
라 한 것을 보면 이 글 가운대에 처음으로 鑄字(곳 活字)라는＜58＞ 말을 보게 된다. 그것이 木製活字엿던지 혹은 金屬活字엿던지 꼭 단정하기 어려우나 鑄字라는 글자를 보면 반듯이 金屬製活字인 것이 의심업다. 그러고 이때는 麗史를 보아 高麗 高宗 21년 곳 西紀 1234년으로 알 것이니 高宗이 蒙古의 侵寇를 피하여 江都(곳 江華)에 遷都하고 우리의 禮文이 兵禍로 인하여 湮滅된 것을 걱정하며 鑄字版으로써 詳定禮文 28본을 인쇄하엿다는 것인대 이를 보면 그때에 그것을 인쇄하기 위하여 倉卒히 鑄字를 발명한 것이 아니요. 이미 잇던 鑄字를 사용하엿슴에 不過한 것일지니 이 以前으로 幾百年前에 된 것이며 또 그 倉志者가 엇떠한 사람인지는 아직 思索力이 부족한 나로서 잘 알 수가 업다. 활자의 발명이 假使 高宗 때에  된 것으로 친다 하더라도 西洋보다 거의 200년이나 압선 것은 숨길 수는 업는 일이다.
이보다 좀 먼저로 宋의 慶歷年間에 畢昇이란 사람이 膠泥로써 활자를 제작한 일이 잇섯스나 이는 다만 一時的＜59＞ 試用에 불과한 것이요 계속적 발달이 잇지 아니하얏스매 무슨 功績이라고 나타난 일이 업섯다. 淸朝 康熙帝적에 이르러 圖書集成을 出版할 때에 처음으로 銅字活版을 쓰고 乾隆帝적 四庫全書를 출판할 때에 鋟木活字를 쓰게 되엇스니 支那는 겨우 이때부터 활자가 발달된 것으로 알 것이다. 또 芝蜂類說에 『鑄字印書, 倉自本朝, 非中國所有』라 함을 보아도 활자의 발명은 단순히 우리의 獨創的인 것이 의심업고 우리 朝鮮에 活版印刷가 한창 盛行할 때에 그네들은 아직 꿈도 꾸지 아니 하엿던 것 갓다. 이에 의지한다면 우리가 支那보다도 오히려 4, 500년이 압섯다하야도 과언이 아닐 것이다.
이제로 우리 나라 활자발달의 經路에 대하여 간단히 말하겟다. 鑄字 印刷는 高麗 高宗 이후에도 물론 계속적으로 발달되엇슬지요. 다만 文獻에 실리어 잇는 것으로는 恭讓王朝에 書籍鋪鑄字를 설치한 것이고 그후 恭讓王 4년에 書籍院을 설치하여 活字製作과 書籍의 일을 맛게 하며 또 거긔에 官制까지 制定한 일이 잇섯다. 그러고 李朝에 이르러 더욱 발달을 보게 되엇스니 太宗 3년(西紀 1403년)에 鑄字所란 관서를 설치하고 內帤金을 내어 銅製鑄字 10만개를 鑄成하여 丁亥字라 이름하엿스며 其後에도 자꾸 개량과 발전을 힘써서 世宗朝에 庚子字, 甲寅字이며 文宗朝에 壬申字이며 世祖朝에 乙酉字이며 成宗朝에 辛卯字, 癸丑字가 잇섯고 英宗朝에 또 개량을 가하여 生生字, 整理字라는 이름이 잇섯고 최근에 이르기까지도 만은 발달이 잇섯스나 다 들 수 업다. 이와가티 활자인쇄로 한 國政의 大要를 삼아서 書籍의 廣布에 注力하엿슴은 世界文化史上에 한 特筆할 만한 일이 아닌가.
이를 보건댄 녯날 우리 민족의 독창력의 이럿틋 만핫슴과 발명력의 이럿틋 컷슴은 세계에 엇더한 민족이라도 따르지 못할만하지 아니하엿는가. 그러나 우리는 오늘날 도리어 이러케도 문명에 뒤떠러저 잇서 똑똑한 한 개의 印刷機關의 설비도 잇지 못하게 됨으로 요만한 것이라도 항상 남의 손을 빌리지 아니할 수 업게 된다. 우리가 진실로 그 獨創力, 發明力을 그대로 發揮하엿더면 오늘날 西洋의 소위 物質文明이란 것을 壓頭하기엔들 무엇이 부족하엿스랴마는 지금와서 남들이 다하는 온갓 것을 흉내도 내지 못하니 이를 한 懶惰의 습관이라 할 가 혹 暴棄의 心性이라 할가. 한갓 스스로 한심할 뿐이로다. 그러고 저러고 이 문명의 利器인 활자의 발명이 우리 朝鮮으로써 세계에 가장 먼저 되엇다는 것을 알게되는 때에 우리는 이것이 한 民族的 大矜耀요 世界的 大功績이 된다는 그 千古不朽의 偉功을 끼치어 노흔 點에서 자연히 자랑의 말이라도 나오지 아니할 수 업게 된다. (끗) ＜60＞
＜58-60＞