잡지명	別건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	佛敎와 朝鮮文化 (Buddhism and Korean Culture)
필자	李能和
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

Buddhism and Korean Culture
						I Neunghwa

Since I stopped teaching at school in the autumn of the year Gyeongsul, I decided to study the religious aspects and social conditions of Korea from that time, and after putting in 10 years of effort, I wrote the History of Korean Buddhism (朝鮮佛敎通史), albeit worthless, and continued my research. I have written one book on the History of Korean Taoism (朝鮮道敎史) (unpublished), one book on the Records of Korean Shinto (朝鮮神事誌) (unpublished), one book on Korean Ancestor Worship (朝鮮祖先敎) (unpublished), one book on the History of Korean Superstition (朝鮮迷信思想史) (unpublished), the History of Korean Buddhist Sects (朝鮮佛敎分流史) (materials available, not compiled), the History of Korean Confucian Thought (朝鮮儒學思想史) (materials available, not compiled), and the Korean Christian and Diplomatic History (朝鮮基督敎及外交史), Upper and Lower Volumes, 500 pages in 5-point type, currently being published (above are the religious part). I have written one book on Korean Women's Customs (朝鮮女俗考) (published), one book on the History of Korean Courtesans (朝鮮解語花史) (published), one book on Korean Shamanic Customs (朝鮮巫俗考) (published), (above is the women's part of social history), and now I have started drafting the Korean Social History (朝鮮社會史) (General Social History), which has already been going on for a year and a half, but has not yet been completed, and I am planning to finish the work of editing it this summer. While I was so busy, I suddenly received a visit from Mr. Shin Yeongcheol, a reporter for the magazine Byeolgeonkon (別乾坤), which has been contributing greatly to our society and academia with abundant literature and proper discourse in response to the times, following the banned magazine "Gaebyeok (開闢)". He asked me to write an article with the title "Korean Buddhism (朝鮮佛敎)", and I think it is an unparalleled honor and, at the same time, as a member of the sociological community, I cannot refuse this request, so I try to fulfill my responsibility with worthless rough arguments, and I ask for the generous understanding of the readers.

Our Korea has always absorbed the culture of the Chinese continent due to its geographical location. The order in which Buddhism entered the peninsula is as follows. 1,556 years ago (2nd year of King Sosurim of Goguryeo, Imshin), the Indian high priests Sundo and Ado came to Goguryeo with scriptures and images from Fujian and preached the Buddhist law, which is the beginning of Buddhist worship in Korea. After 13 years, the Indian high priest Marananta came to Baekje from the Jin Dynasty, and the court and the public believed in Buddhism, which was the first year of King Chimnyu. After 143 years, Buddhism flourished in Silla, which was the 15th year of King Beopheung. I will now describe the history of how Korean Buddhism contributed to the nation and society in each era.

Goguryeo Buddhism and Military Relations

Goguryeo's national character expressed the strength of the north, and they generally revered bravery and enjoyed warfare, which was their strength, and history proves this without saying. The Sui Yang Emperor and Tang Taizong repeatedly tried to fight against Goguryeo by driving millions of soldiers to the vast plains of Liaodong, but the Sui and Tang armies were all defeated in one battle, suffering the tragedy of not returning with a single piece of armor. Sui Yang Guang lost his country because of this, and Li Shimin lost one eye and fled in panic. Contrary to the common criticism that Buddhism is a pessimistic death religion, the activities of monks in the military affairs of Goguryeo contributed to the country beyond imagination. Briefly, it is as follows:

1. When King Jangsu of Goguryeo tried to attack Baekje, he used the spy of the monk Dorim to exhaust Baekje, and then invaded the capital of Baekje (now Hanseong) with a large army and killed the King of Baekje. This historical fact is shown in the Baekje Annals of King Gaero in the Dongguk Tonggam (東國通鑑).

2. During the Three Kingdoms period, Silla was invaded by Baekje, and the royal family Kim Chunchu was dispatched to Goguryeo to beg for reinforcements, but Goguryeo held Chunchu and did not allow him to return home. Silla was angry and ordered the famous general Kim Yushin to lead the army and cross the Han River. When they arrived at the border of Goguryeo, the Goguryeo military detective, Monk Deokchang, reported this to the Goguryeo court, and as a result, Chunchu was released and war was avoided. This historical fact is shown in the Goguryeo Annals of King Bojang in the Dongguk Tonggam (東國通鑑).

3. According to internal and external historical records, when the Tang army invaded Goguryeo, a Goguryeo general named On Samun fought with the Tang general Xue Rengui. It is uncertain whether this On Samun was a monk or not, but considering the example of the monk general Sinseong, who opened the gate and let the enemy in at the Pyeongyang capital at the end of King Bojang's reign, it is thought that On Samun was also a monk general.

4. To show an example of a student monk in China during the Three Kingdoms period who reported on military espionage and enemy information, Great Master Uisang of Silla, while studying in Tang China, detected a plan by the Tang army to invade his country and reported it to the country, so Silla completed preparations for defending against the Tang army and avoided war. During the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang, the governor of Laizhou warned the court that the monks of the Three Kingdoms of Goryeo were entering China under the guise of studying Buddhism, but the content was to detect the reality of the country.

Buljo Tonggi (佛祖統紀) says: In the sixth year of Zhenguan in the Tang Dynasty, Laizhou reported that the monks of the Three Kingdoms of Goryeo entered China to learn Buddhism in order to spy on the truth, and Wei Zheng said: If Your Majesty does good, it will be enough for the barbarians to follow, and if you do evil, what good will it do to the country even if you resist the barbarians? The emperor allowed it.

5. The historical fact that Goguryeo used 30,000 monk soldiers when repelling Tang Taizong is revealed in General Choi Young's instructions to the monk army during the reign of King Sinwu of Goryeo, as follows:

Goryeosa (高麗史) Choi Youngjeon (崔瑩傳). In the eighth year of King Sinwu, Young wanted to build warships, so he dispatched troops from various provinces and recruited monks. He summoned the monk registrar and said, "Do you monks also want to defend against the enemy?" He said, "The reason why monks are at peace is because the country is free from worry. If the country is in trouble, how can the monks alone be at peace?" Young said, "I want to rebuild the warships, but it is not possible to use the people during the busy month, so I will use the monks for the labor." When Tang Taizong conquered this country, this country sent 30,000 monks to defeat him. If we build warships and defend against the enemy this time, how small will the merit be?"

Baekje Buddhism and Artisan System

1. System of Baekje Buddhist Artisans and Temple Artisans. Among the Three Kingdoms, the kingdom of Baekje was located in the southern part of the peninsula, where products were abundant and technical arts were relatively <80> developed earliest, especially the technical origins of Buddhist artisans and temple artisans inherited the traditions of the Southern Dynasties of China. In the Samguk Sagi (三國史記) Baekje Annals,

In the nineteenth year of King Seong, the king sent an envoy to Liang to request the Nirvana Sutra and other scriptures, as well as artisans and painters, and they followed his request.

There is an article that says. In short, in this era, Baekje's belief in Buddhism reached a high level, and they felt the need for the construction of temples and the solemnity of statues, so they were eager to imitate the style of China. This is because the people of Baekje had unique interests in art and technology. The origin of Baekje's Buddhist artisans came from the Liang Dynasty of China, and the tradition of their technology spread to neighboring countries. In the 12th year of Queen Seondeok of Silla, they planned to build the nine-story pagoda of Hwangnyongsa Temple, but since there were no skilled artisans in Silla, they invited the famous artisan Abi of Baekje to finally achieve their goal. The evidence is as follows:

In the Hwangnyongsa Temple Nine-Story Pagoda article of the Samguk Yusa (三國遺事), in the year Gemyo, the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, the Silla monk Jajang returned to the country from Tang and reported the matter of building the pagoda to the king. Queen Seondeok consulted with her ministers, and the ministers said, "Please invite artisans from Baekje, and then it will be possible." So they invited Abi, an artisan from Baekje, with treasures and silk. Abi received the order and came and managed the wood and stone. Igan Yongtap managed the work and led 200 small artisans and completed the base of the pagoda.

It says. In addition, the fact that Baekje transmitted Buddhism to Japan at the same time as Buddhist artisans and temple artisans is recorded in various Japanese records, as follows:

In the Brief History of Japanese Buddhism (日本佛敎略史), the King of Baekje (King Seong) first sent Buddhist statues and scriptures to Japan and also sent a national letter saying, "This law is the most excellent of all laws, and even Zhou Gong and Confucius could not know it. It can produce immeasurable blessings and achieve supreme enlightenment." This is the beginning of Japanese Buddhism.

The same book also says: In the sixth year of Emperor Minatsu (24th year of King Wideok of Baekje), Baekje sent Buddhist artisans, temple artisans, etc., and an imperial order was issued to build the Nanba Taibetsu Temple.

The Wakan Sansai Zue (和漢三才圖會) says: In the sixth year of Emperor Minatsu, Buddhist artisans and temple artisans came from Baekje for the first time, and it also says that Prince Shotoku built the Dai-ji Temple and summoned earthworkers, tile workers, and earthworkers from Baekje to various temples. The tile workers of Osaka in Settsu Province today are its tradition. It also says that in the second year of Emperor Yomei (34th year of King Wideok of Baekje), the three people, Tera Taira Matsuta Monka Koji, and the painter Byakujo entered Japan from Baekje.

Silla Buddhism and Cultural Development

Due to the separation of the Silla kingdom on the peninsula by Ye and Je, traffic to and from the Chinese continent was almost impossible, and Silla always trailed behind Ye and Je in absorbing Chinese culture. What is particularly noteworthy about Silla's belief in Buddhism is that many students went to Tang China, absorbed the essence of Chinese culture, and developed the culture of their own country. This mission will forever shine brightly in the history of the peninsula. Briefly,

The first is the use of letters. It seems that complete Chinese characters were imported into our country during the Four Commanderies period. Before the Silla period, that is, before the introduction of Buddhism, the use of Chinese characters was very difficult, and they used the sounds or meanings of characters to express the dialects of their own country. Seeing the form and nature of the characters in Silla's Hyangga and Hyangchal, which are the blueprint for Japan's Manyogana, <81> it is enough to imagine the level of culture at that time. However, since the belief in Buddhism, the use of Chinese characters has progressed rapidly. In the 26th year of King Jinheung, the monk Myeonggwan, who sought the Dharma, brought more than 2,700 volumes of Buddhist scriptures from the Jin Dynasty. This was the first book in Silla and was also related to Buddhism, so it is clear that those who studied it must have been monks. Therefore, the high priests of the time always occupied the position of role models in the country and society and were respected. Here is an example: In the time of King Jinpyeong, there were two virtuous men named Gwisan and Chuhang, and when they wanted to obtain a role model, they heard that Monk Wongwang had finished studying abroad in the Sui Dynasty and returned home. The two made offerings to the master's door and asked for a word that would be a lifelong warning. The master gave the two the Five Secular Precepts (1. Serve the lord with loyalty, 2. Serve parents with filial piety, 3. Associate with friends with trust, 4. Do not retreat in the face of battle, 5. Be selective in killing). The two reverently kept the precepts throughout their lives. During the war on the border of Baekje, the two did not retreat in the face of defeat and bravely remained unyielding, which is recorded in the Samguk Sagi (三國史記). (1 example) Also, at the time of King Jinpyeong, the two countries of Ye and Je often invaded the border, so the king was worried about this and wanted to ask the Tang Dynasty for reinforcements, so he ordered Monk Wongwang to prepare a petition for reinforcements, and as a result, he obtained 300,000 soldiers and defeated the enemy country. This is recorded in the Dongguk Tonggam (東國通鑑). (2 examples) These two incidents are enough to infer the status of monks in the country and society at that time.

Second, the emergence of famous writers. The complete development of Silla Buddhism can be glimpsed from the writings of famous monks. Most of the writings of Silla Buddhists have been lost, but we are confident that the manuscripts alone, which have been arranged, organized, and copied by the Korean Buddhist Association with the intention of collecting and publishing them, exceed 40 volumes, and there are at least twice as many.

Goryeo Buddhism and Sangha Jewel Dharma Jewel

1. Status of Monks. In the Goryeo Dynasty, as in the Silla Dynasty, if a high priest was fully equipped with learning and virtue, he occupied the position of national and social role model. According to the explanation in the Royal Decree of the National Preceptor Wonjin of Goryeo in the Dongmunseon (東文選), "The royal preceptor is a model for one king, and the national preceptor is a resource for one country." There was no time when there was no national preceptor or royal preceptor in the courts of the Goryeo kings. And those who were in the highest class in Korean society, that is, the Confucian scholars and yangban (兩班), were equal to the Brahmins of India, but the Confucian scholars and yangban of the Goryeo Dynasty always learned letters from monks. The evidence is as follows:

Goryeosa Yeoljeon (高麗史列傳) Min Ji (閔頔) (time of King Chungnyeol)'s character was Nakjeon (樂全). He was born with an extraordinary appearance. His maternal grandfather Yu Cheon met him and admired him, saying, "This child will surely be noble in the future." His aunt's husband, the former minister Kim Wi, heard his words and raised him in his home. According to the customs of the country, children must learn reading from monks. When Ji was ten years old, he went to Seunggasa Temple to study. He was quick-witted and understood the meaning of the books he received.
Goryeosa Yeoljeon (高麗史列傳). King Chungseon asked Yi Jaehyeon, "Our country was once called a country of culture comparable to China, but now all its scholars learn chapters and sentences from monks."

2. Carving of Sutra Blocks. The Tripitaka Koreana (大藏經板) stored in Haeinsa Temple (81,240 blocks made of camphor wood, varnished, 8 inches long, 2 feet 23 inches wide, and 1 inch 23 minutes thick) is an unparalleled treasure recognized by the world and is a relic of Goryeo Buddhism. There is no greater project than this. In the reign of King Hyeonjong, the first Tripitaka Koreana was carved and stored in Buinsa Temple, but it was destroyed during the Mongol invasion. During the reign of King Gojong, the second Tripitaka Koreana was carved with the prayers of the garrison, and the Tripitaka Koreana in Haeinsa Temple is that one. The articles about the two Tripitaka Koreana are as follows:

Goryeo Yi Sang-guk Gyu-bo selected the Great Tripitaka Carving Board, King and Ministers' Prayer Text (Omitted - Original Text) The cruelty and violence of the Tatars is beyond words... From that time on, all the Buddhist statues and Sanskrit books that passed through were burned to ashes... Therefore, the Sutra boards stored in Buinsa Temple were also swept away without a trace... In the second year of King Hyeonjong, the Khitan chief invaded with a large army, and King Hyeonjong fled south to take refuge. The Khitan soldiers still remained in Songak Fortress and did not retreat. So he and his ministers made a supreme vow to carve the Tripitaka Koreana, and then the Khitan soldiers retreated on their own.
Goryeosa (高麗史). In the 38th year of King Gojong, Sinhae, on the 9th day of the 9th month, Im-o, he visited the Daeganggyeongbandang outside the Seoseong Gate (Ganghwa) and performed incense with all the officials. The original edition from the time of King Hyeonjong was destroyed by the Mongol soldiers in Imjin. The king and his ministers made a new vow to establish a Dogam (都監), and the work was completed in 16 years.

Joseon Dynasty Buddhism and Social Work

1. Building temples along the roads to make travel easier. In ancient Korea, they did not use money, but used rice and cloth as currency. Therefore, there were no inns in the provinces, and the suffering of travelers was indescribable. It was impossible not to carry food, firewood, charcoal, and other necessities for travel on horseback or on one's back. There is an article by an old man saying that a traveler with riding equipment needed 4 or 5 horses for one person. In the Goryeo Dynasty, they built Wongwoo (院宇) in places where there were no people and wild animals were rampant, and they prepared food, fodder, and other necessities to provide lodging for travelers. Most of the Wongwoo belonged to the business of monks. This can be known by the new creation of Gwangnok Tonghwa Won (廣綠通化院) (Moksan), Hyeonjong Won (懸鍾院) (South), and Yongbo Won (龍寶院) (South). In the Joseon Dynasty, Hyeriwon (惠利院) in Gyeongju-bu was first founded by the head monk Yeon Sangin of Cheonwangsa Temple (shown in Ha Ryun's preface), and Taetanwon (太灘院) in Mungyeong-hyeon was rebuilt by Hwaeom sect master Jin Gong (shown in Kwon Geun's record). The four major Won (四大院) near the capital (1. Bojewon (普濟院) outside Dongdaemun, 2. Hongjewon (弘濟院) in Sajhyeon Bukgyo, 3. Jecheon Hyang (濟川享) on the north bank of the Han River, 4. Sapyeongwon (沙平院) in Sagyosouth of the Han River) were also led by monks. This is shown in the Sejong Sillok (世宗實錄) and Yongjae Chonghwa (慵齊叢話).

2. Monks who built bridges. During the reign of King Taejong, a compassionate monk named Jangwonsim repaired roads and bridges (shown in the Taejong Sillok). The Jeban Bridge on the way to Jamdo, the Yongdo Bridge in Wangsimni, and the Sosa Plank Bridge were all built by monks. The evidence is as follows:

Yongjae Chonghwa (慵齊叢話) has a story about a compassionate monk repairing bridges, roads, and wells... Also, the Arrow Stream Bridge (箭串橋) was also built by a monk. He felled ten thousand stones and crossed the great river to make a bridge. The bridge was over 300 steps long and as safe as a house, so pedestrians could walk on it as if they were on flat ground.
Yi Gyu-gyeong selected the Byeonjeungseol (辨證說) of the Two Stone Bridges Outside Heungin Gate (興仁門). He said, "The Arrow Stream Bridge (箭串橋) and the Pyeongyang Bridge in Wangsimni outside Heungin Gate are the names given by the king." According to Seongmyo 13th year Gemyo, a monk built the Arrow Stream Bridge (箭串橋) outside Heungin Gate, and the king named it Jeban, and he also built it in a place not far from Wangsim, so that those who stepped on it were intertwined, but no one knew it was a bridge ordered by the king. Therefore, the story is obscured in many ways. Therefore, I will clarify it.
Kim Ik-hee Cangju Yugyoga (滄洲遺橋稿). The Sosa Plank Bridge was newly built, and the monks gathered to celebrate it, and the people of several counties came. At that time, they said, "Gifu's wheels and hooves meet. A hundred steps of the long stream are flooded. People used to lift their skirts and wade through, but now they can fell trees and come and go. The shadow of the merciful clouds of the three realms. The high priest repays the merit of saving people. The place where the altar is completed is the same as the great world."

3. Monks' disease relief project. In the time of King Taejo, the monk Jongnim devoted himself to building bridges and saving people from disease, which was seen in the Veritable Records. The facts are as follows:

In the fifth year of the Taejo Sillok (太祖實錄), the Chief Monk Jongnim of Jaeun Sect (慈恩宗) often made plank bridges, and when people who went to and from the castle were sick, he asked doctors to diagnose them, prescribed medicine to save them, and provided food and drink. When those who recovered from the disease were given food, the Right Minister Kim Sa-hyeong heard about it and reported it to the king, and the king ordered him to give rice, beans, salted seafood, and medicine.
The fact that monks were placed in charge of the Dongseo Hwalinseo (東西活人署) is seen in the Seongjong Sillok (成宗實錄), as follows:
In the summer of the first year of Gyeong-in, the sixth month, Mu-sin, the Ministry of Taxation reported that the material for the workers for the monks in charge of the Dongseo Hwalinseo and the patients would be removed after the autumn of next year, and it was followed.

In Jeju Island, a monk nursed a leprosarium. 69 lepers were isolated and treated, and 45 of them fully recovered. This is a proportion of charitable work that cannot be seen even in the most civilized countries today.

In the 27th year of King Sejong, Eulchuk, the 10th month, Jeongsa, the Uijeongbu presented to the Yejosa that the Jeju Anmusa reported that leprosy was prevalent in the state and Jeongui Daejeong. If there are people who get sick, they hate the transmission and place them in uninhabited places by the sea, and they cannot help but fall off the cliff and end their lives. It is truly pitiful. I ordered the monks to collect the bones and bury them. Each of the three towns set up a place to treat the sick, gathered the sick, gave them clothes, food, and medicine, and also set up bathing facilities, and made medical monks兼掌治療. Among the 69 lepers, 45 were cured, 18 were not yet cured, and 14 died. However, the three monks originally had military service, so I asked each of the three monks to be exempted from their service and to specialize in saving and treating people with doctors. It was also allowed to recruit doctors to encourage them, and the Byeongjo was also allowed to do so.

4. Monks who were in charge of coffins and burial tools. According to the record of Jeong I-oh of the Gwihuseo (歸厚署) in Yongsan in the Yeojiseungnam (與地勝覽), Gwihuseo was built in Yongsan and the monks Jongnim and Haeseon were put in charge of coffins and burial tools to meet the needs of the people. The history is as follows:

Seongjong Sillok (成宗實錄). In the summer of the 12th year of Sinchuk, the 6th month, Im-sul, the Daesaheon Cao Gan reported that there was a Gwihuseo at the end of King Sejong's reign. A monk founded a temple on the Han River in Yongsan and privately prepared coffins for sale. <84> Those who saw off the dead relied on him... The king consulted with his attendants, and the Governor Hong Eung replied, "This is true." In the time of King Taejong, there was a monk named Singye who privately prepared coffins and traded them. The state appointed the monk as the manager and paid the tribute of the various villages to support his materials. Later, Gwihuseo was established and the manager monk was ordered to manage private trade.

5. Burial Monks. In the fall of the 9th year of King Sejong, Jeongmi, the Ministry of Rites agreed with the Hanseong-bu and reported the Burial Monk Horyeoksamok (埋骨僧効勵事目), which is as follows:

1. The previous ten monks were too few, so six more were added. Each of the eight people in the Dongseo Hwalinwon was assigned to five parts and ten li from the bottom of the castle, and they were given monthly salary and salted seafood. 1. The Hwalinwon was ordered to examine their diligence, and one person who buried the most would be given a position every year. The Syaheonbu and Hanseongbu were ordered to examine the diligence of one burial and the ability of the hospital officials to examine. It was followed.
In the Nenisildgiseol (練黎室記述), it says that in the 10th month of Seonjo Gyemi, the king returned to the capital from Euiju and recruited monks to collect and bury the people who died in the war and plague famine and set up an altar to worship them. Also, Yakpa Manrok (藥坡漫錄) says that in the 27th year of Seonjo, Eulmi, the hungry people slaughtered and ate each other in broad daylight, and the dead piled up like mountains outside the Sugumun Gate, higher than the castle by several feet. Monks were recruited to bury them. In Eulmi, it stopped. <85>

**Named Entities**

高句麗	Goguryeo
小獸林王	Sosurim-wang
順道	Sundo
阿道	Ado
符奏	Pujo
摩羅難陀	Marananta
晉朝	Jinjo
百濟	Baekje
枕流王	Chimnyu-wang
新羅	Silla
法興王	Beopheung-wang
庚戌	Gyeongsul
申瑩澈	Shin Yeongcheol
支那	China
高句麗	Goguryeo
隋煬帝	Sui Yangdi
唐太宗	Tang Taizong
遼東	Yodong
隋楊廣	Sui Yanggwang
李世民	I Semin
島淋	Dorim
漢城	Hanseong
金春秋	Kim Chunchu
金庾信	Kim Yushin
漢江	Han-gang
僧德昌	Seung Deokchang
麗廷	Ryeojeong
寶藏王	Bojang-wang
溫沙門	On Samun
唐兵	Tangbyung
薛仁貴	Seol In-gwi
僧將 信誠	Seungjang Sinseong
義湘大師	Uisang Daesa
箂州刺史	Naeju chasa
魏徵	Wei Zheng
辛禑王	Sinwu-wang
崔瑩將軍	Choe Yeong Janggun
聖王	Seong-wang
梁	Ryang
涅槃	Nirban
阿非知	Abi
善德女王	Seondeok Yeowang
皇龍寺	Hwangnyongsa
慈藏法師	Jajang Beopsa
伊干龍塔	Igan Yongtap
敏達天皇	Minatsu Tenno
百濟威德王	Baekje Wideok-wang
難波太別王寺	Nanba Taibetsu-ōji
和漢三才圖會	Wakan Sansai Zue
用明天皇	Yomei Tenno
威德王	Wideok-wang
太良末太文賈古子	Taira Matsuta Monka Koji
白如	Byakujo
麗濟	Ryeoje
四郡時代	Sagun Sidae
貴山	Gwisan
箒項	Chuhang
圓光法師	Wongwang Beopsa
隋朝	Suijo
眞平王	Jinpyeong-wang
僧寶法寶	Seungbo Beobbo
圓眞國師	Wonjin Guksa
穆山	Moksan
南方	Nambang
河崙	Ha Ryun
然上人	Yeon Sangin
權近	Kwon Geun
華嚴宗師 眞公	Hwaeom Jongsa Jin Gong
聞慶縣	Munyeong-hyeon
普濟院	Bojewon
東大門	Dongdaemun
弘濟院	Hongjewon
沙峴	Sajhyeon
濟川享	Jecheon Hyang
漢江	Han-gang
沙平院	Sapyeongwon
沙郊	Sagyo
世宗實錄	Sejong Sillok
慵齊叢話	Yongjae Chonghwa
太宗王	Taejong-wang
長遠心	Jangwonsim
蠶島	Jamdo
往十里	Wangsimni
素沙板橋	Sosa Ban-gyo
李圭景	Yi Gyu-gyeong
興仁門	Heunginmun
濟盤	Jeban
金益熙	Kim Ik-hee
滄洲遺橋稿	Cangju Yugyoga
慈恩宗都僧統宗林	Jaeun Jong Do Seungtong Jongnim
太祖實錄	Taejo Sillok
右政丞金士衡	U Jeongseung Kim Sa-hyeong
東西 活人署	Dongseo Hwalinseo
成宗實錄	Seongjong Sillok
濟州島	Jeju-do
禮曹	Yejosa
濟州安撫使	Jeju Anmusa
旌義	Jeongeui
大靜	Daejeong
三邑僧	Sameup Seung
丁未	Jeongmi
丙戌	Byeongseul
漢城府	Hanseongbu
漢城	Hanseong
練黎室記述	Nenisildgiseol
宣祖	Seonjo
義州	Uiju
乙未	Eulmi
藥坡漫錄	Yakpa Manrok
水口門	Sugumun
鄭以吾	Jeong I-oh
龍山	Yongsan
歸厚署	Gwihuseo
海宣	Haeseon
辛丑	Sinchuk
大司憲 曹幹	Daesaheon Cho Gan
知事洪應	Jisa Hong Eung
信戒	Sin Gye
與地勝覽 龍山	Yeojiseungnam Yongsan
埋骨僧効勵事目	Maegul Seung Hyoryeoksamok



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	佛敎와 朝鮮文化
필자	李能和
기사형태	논설

佛敎와 朝鮮文化
						李能和
拙者는 去 庚戌년 秋間부터 학교의 敎鞭잡기를 쉬고 其時부터 우리 朝鮮의 宗敎方面과 社會事情을 좀 연구하야 보기로 心算을 정하야 10년의 積功을 들이며 無價値하나마 朝鮮佛敎通史를 저술하고 연구를 계속하야 朝鮮道敎史 一冊(未出版), 朝鮮神事誌 一冊(未出版), 朝鮮祖先敎 一冊(未出版), 朝鮮迷信思想史 一冊(未出版), 朝鮮佛敎分流史(有材料未編纂), 朝鮮儒學思想史(有材料未編纂), 朝鮮基督敎及外交史, 上下編 五號 활자 500頁 假量 方在出版中(以上은 宗敎部), 朝鮮女俗考 一冊(已出版), 朝鮮解語花史 一冊(已出版), 朝鮮巫俗考 一冊(已發表), (이상은 社會史의 女子部)을 저술하고 現今은 朝鮮社會史(一般社會史)의 起草에 착수하야 이미 1개년 반이 되얏스나 아직 脫稿가 못되야 今夏 이내에는 編摩의 役을 完畢할 예정으로 좀 忙殺한 중에 在한데 忽然히 多年以來 時代에 順應하야 豊富한 文藝와 正堂한 言論으로써 우리 사회, 우리 학계에 貢獻이 다대한 제일류의 잡지『開闢』의 금지된 뒤를 니어 나온 『別乾坤』잡지의 기자 申瑩澈君의 방문을 受하야『朝鮮佛敎』라는 命題로 一編의 원고를 써달나하는 盛囑에 대하야 拙者는 無上한 光榮으로 思하는 동시에 拙者도 역시 社會學界의 一分子된 의무로 보아서 此를 거절키 불능하야 무가치한 荒設로써 塞責하면서 讀者 諸氏의 海諒을 祈求하는 바이다.
우리 朝鮮은 지리상 관계로 항상 支那 대륙의 문화를 흡수하야 왓다. 그런데 佛敎가 반도에 들어온 次第는 아래와 갓다. 距今 1,556년 전(高句麗 小獸林王 2년 壬申)에 印度 高僧 順道, 阿道 2人이 符奏으로부터 經像을 가지고 高句麗에 來하야 佛法를 宣傳하니 이것이 즉 朝鮮의 佛敎 崇奉의 嚆矢다. 其後 13년만에 印度 高僧 摩羅難陀가 晉朝로부터 百濟에 來하야 朝野가 佛敎를 崇信하니 즉 枕流王 元年이요. 其後 143년만에 新羅에서 佛敎를 興行하얏스니 즉 法興王 15년이다. 余는 朝鮮佛敎가 각 시대에 在하야 國家, 社會에 貢獻한 역사를 좀 陳述하랴 한다.

高句麗 佛敎와 軍事關係
高句麗는 그 民族性이 北方之强을 표현한바 대개 剛勇을 崇尙하며 전투를 嗜好함이 그네들의 長所이엇스니 그는 말할 것도 업시 역사가 此를 증명한다. 隋煬帝 唐太宗 등이 幾回에나 瓦하야 백만의 雄兵을 驅來하야 高句麗로 더부러 遼東의 大野에서 雌雄의 결전을 試하얏스나 그러나 隋軍 唐兵은 모다 一場 敗北하야 片甲不回의 慘事를 當하야 隋楊廣은＜79＞ 此로 因하야 國家를 喪失하고 李世民은 一目을 일허 버리고 狼狽逃走하얏다. 그런데 一般 世人이 佛敎에 대하야 壓世的 死宗敎라 하는 批評과 相反하야 高句麗 前後 軍事에 僧人의 활동으로 국가에 공헌한 바는 실로 想像 이상에 在하니 此를 略說하면 卽 左와 如하다.
1. 高句麗 長壽王이 百濟를 侵擊코저 할 새 僧人 島淋의 間諜을 이용하야 百濟를 疲弊하게 한 然後에 大兵으로써 百濟都城(今 漢城)에 침입하야 百濟王을 살해한 史實은 東國通鑑 百 濟本紀 蓋鹵王條에 보임.
2. 三國時代에 新羅가 百濟의 侵害를 被하야 王族 金春秋를 句麗에 파견하야 援兵을 乞請하얏더니 句麗에서 春秋를 抱留하야 返國을 不許함에 新羅가 怒하야 名將 金庾信으로 하야금 군대를 인솔하고 漢江을 旣渡하야 句麗國境에 當到할 際에 句麗의 軍事偵探 僧德昌은 此事를 麗廷에 보고한 결과 遂히 春秋를 放還하야 兵戈相見을 免한 史實이 東國通鑑 高句麗 本紀 寶藏王元年條에 보임.
3. 內外史籍에 의하면 唐兵이 高句麗에 침입한 時에 溫沙門이라는 我將은唐將 薛仁貴와 더부러 전투를 위한 事 有하니 此 溫沙門은 과연 僧人지 안인지 그 確證은 無하나 寶藏王 末年에 平壤都城에서 開門納賊한 僧將 信誠의 類例로 推하야 溫沙門도 역시 僧將의 1人으로 思惟되는 바이다.
4. 三國時代에 支那에 留學僧으로 軍事偵探 敵情報告한 그 1例를 示하면 新羅 義湘大師가 入唐留學中에 唐兵이 將且 本國을 侵伐하랴는 計畫을 探知하야 歸國報告하얏슴으로 新羅는 唐兵防禦의 준비가 완성되야 兵禍를 免하얏다. 唐太宗時에는 箂州刺史는 高麗三國의 僧侶는 佛法學習을 口實로 하야 中國에 入來者 多하나 그 내용은 국가의 虛實을 探偵코자 함에 在하다고 朝廷에 경고한 事 有하다.

佛祖統紀云. 唐貞觀六年에 萊州奏호대 高麗三國之僧이 入中國學佛法은 欲覘虛實耳라하야 늘 魏徵曰. 陛下所爲-善이면 足爲夷狄法이요 所爲-不善이면 雖拒夷狄인들 何益於國이릿가 詔許之하다.

5. 高句麗가 唐太宗을 擊退할 時에 僧兵 3만을 用한 史實이 高麗 辛禑王時 崔瑩將軍의 僧軍에 대한 訓辭中에 낫타낫스니 즉 左와 如하다.

高麗史 崔瑩傳. 辛禑八年에 塋이 欲造戰艦하야 發諸道軍하고 又募僧徒하야 召語僧錄曰. 僧亦欲禦매乎아 曰僧所以安은 以國家無虞也-니 國有燮이면 僧何獨安이릿가 瑩이曰. 吾欲改造戰艦이나 然이나 方濃月에 不可使民일새 浴役以僧徒하노라. 唐太宗이 征本國에 本國이 發僧軍 三萬하야 擊破之하얏스니 今番에 造戰艦禦寇면 功豈細哉아.

百濟佛敎와 工匠系統
1. 百濟佛工及寺匠의 系統. 三國의 中에 百濟國은 반도의 남부에 在하야 物産이 풍부하고 工技藝術도 比較的＜80＞ 最先發達하얏는데 특히 佛工寺匠의 技術淵源은 支那 南朝의 傳統을 바덧다. 三國史記 百濟本紀에

聖王 十九年에 王이 遺使 入梁하야 請涅槃등 經義 及 工匠畵師하니 從之하다.

云云 등 記事가 잇다. 요컨대 이 시대에 百濟는 佛敎의 信仰이 高度에 達하얏슴으로 寺刹의 建築, 像設의 莊嚴 등의 필요를 感하야 支那의 風을 模倣함에 汲汲하얏스니 是는 百濟人이 工術思想上 特異한 旨趣를 有한 所以다. 百濟의 佛工은 그 淵源이 支那 梁朝로부터 來하야 그 技術의 傳統은 隣國에까지 普及하얏다. 新羅 善德女王12년에 皇龍寺 九層塔을 건조하기로 계획하얏스나 新羅 本國에는 良工이 無함으로 百濟의 明匠 阿非知를 請聘하야 비로소 그 목적을 달하얏스니 그 증거는 左와 如하다.

三國遺事 皇龍寺 九層塔條에 貞觀十七年 癸卯에 新羅 慈藏法師 自唐 還國하야 以建塔之事로 聞於上이어늘 善德王이 議於群臣한대 群臣이 曰. 請工匠於 百濟 然後에 方可함으로 乃以 寶帛으로 請於百濟하니 匠名阿非知受命而來하야 經營木石하고 伊干龍塔이 幹蠱하야 率小匠二百人하고 畢成基塔하다.

云云하얏다. 又 百濟로부터 日本에 佛法을 傳하는 동시에 佛工寺匠까지 그 系統을 並傳한 事는 日本諸記錄에 載在하니 즉 左와 如하다.

日本佛敎略史에 百濟王(聖王)이 始送佛像經券於日本하고 且致國書曰. 是法은 諸法中 最殊勝하야 周公孔子도 尙不能知라 能生無量福德하고 成就無上菩提 云云이라 하니 是卽 日本佛敎之嚆矢더라.

同書에 又云. 敏達天皇六年에 (百濟威德王二十四年) 百濟-送佛工寺匠等이어늘 詔置難波太別王寺하다.

和漢三才圖會云. 敏達六年에 始自百濟로 佛工寺匠이 來라하고 又云聖德太子爲造大王寺하야 處處伽藍에 召土木瓦土於百濟國하니 今攝州大坂瓦工이 基傳統也라고. 又 云用明二年에(百濟威德王 三十四年)百濟國寺土太良末太文賈古子三人과 畵工白如入日本하다.

新羅佛敎와 文化發展
半島의 新羅국은 麗濟의 間隔으로 因하야 支那大陸과 交通往來는 殆히 不可能의 狀勢에 在하야 支那文化를 吸收함에 항상 麗濟의 後塵을 追躡하얏는데 佛敎의 신앙도 역시 최후에 在하얏다. 新羅가 불교를 신앙하는 동시에 특별히 기록할만한 事는 第一入 唐留學僧이 多數히 出하야 支那文物의 精華를 吸收하야다가 本國의 문화를 발전식힌 그 使命은 半島 歷史上에 영원히 光彩를 放하는 것이다. 此를 略說하면
제1은 문자의 運用이니 대개 완전한 한문이 我東에 수입되기는 四郡時代에 在한 듯한바 新羅上代 즉 佛敎入來 이전까지는 한문의 운용이 매우 艱澁 困難하야 혹은 子音을 혹은 字訓을 假借하야써 本國의 方言을 形容하얏스니 新羅의 鄕歌及鄕札 그 문자의 형식又성질이 日本의 萬葉假名의 藍本인＜81＞ 見하야도 당시 문화의 정도를 推想키 足하다. 然而 佛敎信仰 以來는 漢文의 行用이 速步로 진행되얏다. 眞興王 26년에 求法 高僧 明觀이 陣朝로부터 釋氏 經論 2,700여권을 持來하니 是는 新羅初有의 書籍이오 역시 불교에 관한 者인즉 그것을 攻究한 者도 亦必 僧師에 在함은 暸然한 事이다. 故로 당시의 高僧은 국가에나 사회에나 항상 師表의 지위를 점령하야 존경을 受하얏다. 玆에 그 예를 示하면 眞平王時에 貴山, 箒項이라는 賢士 2人이 有하야 師表를 得코저 할 際에 圓光法師가 隋朝로부터 遊學을 맛치고 귀국하얏다 함을 聞하고 2인은 師의 門下에 造恭하야 終身之誡 될만한 一言을 請한대 師는 2인에게 世俗五戒(一曰君事以忠, 二曰事親以孝, 三曰敎友以信, 四曰臨戰無退, 五曰殺生有擇)을 授하니 2인은 과연 그 戒言을 平生 敬守하는 중 百濟國境의 戰場에 臨陳하얏다가 兵敗함에 當하야 2인은 退後치 안코 용감스럽게 死節不屈한 事蹟이 三國史記에 載在하얏다. (1例) 又眞平王 當時에 麗濟 兩國이 항상 국경을 침범함으로 王은 此를 憂慮하야 唐朝에 向하야 援兵을 乞코저 하야 圓光法師로 하야금 乞兵表를 製進하야 그 결과로 30만 兵을 得하야 敵國을 退治한 事-東國通鑑에 載在하얏다. (2例) 此 兩件事에 徵하야 당시 국가사회에 僧師의 지위를 推知할만하다.
第2는 名䟽家 輩出. 新羅佛敎의 완전발달은 名僧의 저술에 徵하야 一斑을 窺知키로 足하다. 新羅 佛家의 著述의 대부분은 遺失不傳한 바 우리 朝鮮佛敎會에서 蒐集發刊할 계획으로 定理 淨寫하야둔 原稿만으로도 40책을 초과하고 此 이외에도 그 一倍는 더 존재할 줄로 확신한다.

高麗佛敎와 僧寶法寶
1. 僧師의 地位, 高麗時代에도 新羅時代와 가티 만일 高僧으로 學德이 俱備하면 국가적, 사회적 師表地位를 占領하얏다. 東文選 高麗 圓眞國師 敎書官誥에「王師者는 特一王之攸範이요 國師者는 迺一國之所資라」한 설명에 의하야 그런 줄을 알겟다. 高麗列王의 朝에 國師一人. 王師一人이 無한 時는 無하얏다. 그리고 우리 朝鮮社會에 最上階級에 在하든 者는 즉 儒士兩班으로 印度의 婆羅門族과 比等한데 高麗時代의 儒士兩班은 반듯이 僧師를 從하야 문자를 학습하얏스니 그 증거는 左와 如하다.

高麗史列傳閔頔의(忠烈王時) 字는 樂全이니 生而姿相不凡이라. 外王父兪千遇見而奇之. 曰兒-他日必貴라하야늘 姨夫故相金頵이 聞基言하고 養于家할새 國俗에 幼必從僧習句讀라 頔十歲에 出就勝舍學하니 性이 敏悟하야 受書에 旋通基義터라.
高麗史列傳. 忠宣王이 問於李齊賢曰 我國이 古稱文物이 侔於中華러니 今基學者-皆從釋子하야 以習章句云云.

2. 經板의 雕造. 現今 海印寺에 藏置한 大藏經板(縱8寸 내외. 橫2尺23寸, 厚1寸23分. 樟木에 塗漆한 板數 8만 1,240枚)은＜82＞ 世界가 認定하는 無雙한 珍寶라 高麗佛敎의 遺物로 그 偉大한 사업에 대하야 업다. 그런데 顯宗王代에 제1차 大藏經板을 雕造하야 符印寺에 藏置하얏다가 蒙古兵亂에 毁滅을 당하고 高宗王時에 鎭兵의 祈願으로 제2차 大藏經板을 雕板하얏스니 海印寺의 經板이 즉 그것이다. 兩次 經板에 대한 기사는 左와 如하다.

高麗李相國奎報選大藏刻板君臣祈告文(前略-原文)韃靼之爲患也애 基殘忍兇暴之性이 己不可勝言矣라……由時로 凡所經由에 無佛像梵書히 悉焚滅之하니 於是에 符印寺之所藏經板이 亦掃之無遺矣라……昔顯宗二年에 契丹主-大擧兵入寇어늘 顯祖-南行避難하니 丹兵이 猶屯松岳城不退라 於是에 乃與群臣으로 發無上大願하야 誓刻成大藏經板本然後에 丹兵이 自退하다.
高麗史.高宗三十八年辛亥九日壬午에 幸城西門外(江華)大藏經板堂하야 率百官行香할새 顯宗時板本이 燬於壬辰蒙兵이라 王이 與群臣으로 更願立都監하야 十六年而功畢하다.

李朝佛敎와 社會事業
1. 路上에 院寺를 建設하야 行旅를 편케한 事. 朝鮮古昔에 錢鈔를 쓰지안코 米布로써 貨幣를 代하얏다. 그럼으로 地方에 旅店이 無하야 行路者의 고통은 이기어 말할수 업섯다. 旅行用의 糧食과 柴炭과 기타 一應 諸具를 馬駄 人負하지 안이하면 안이 되얏다. 騎具 잇는 旅行者이면 1인 行에 馬卜 4, 5駄를 要하엿다는 故人의 記事가 有하다. 高麗時代에 人煙이 隔絶하고 萑苻가 滿野한 處에는 院宇를 建하고 糧資芻秣을 備置하야써 行路者의 宿泊所를 供한 制度가 잇섯는데 大抵 院宇는 僧人의 事業에 속한 것으로 廣綠通化院(穆山), 懸鍾院(南方) 龍寶院(南方) 등의 新創事蹟에 徵하야 知키 足하다. 李朝에 至하야는 慶州府의 惠利院은 天王寺의 堂頭然上人의 初創이요(河崙序에 보임) 聞慶縣의 太灘院은 華嚴宗師 眞公의 重創이요(權近記에 보임) 京城附近의 四大院(一曰普濟院在東大門外 二曰弘濟院在沙峴北郊 三曰濟川享在漢江北岸 四曰沙平院在漢江之南沙郊)도 역시 僧人이 主幹하얏스니 此는 世宗實錄 及 慵齊叢話에 보임.
2. 僧人이 橋梁을 造成한 事. 太宗王時에 長遠心이라 하는＜83＞ 慈悲僧이 道路橋梁을 修治한 事(太宗實錄에 보임) 蠶島통로의 濟盤橋와 往十里의 永渡橋와 素沙板橋 등은 皆 僧人의 造成에 屬한 者-니 그 증거는 左와 如하다.

慵齊叢話有慈悲僧이 有修橋梁路井等事하고…… 又箭串橋亦僧所構라 伐萬石越大川作橋하니  橋過三百餘步요 安如屋宇하야 行人이 如履平地러라.
李圭景選興仁門外兩石橋辨證說에 云, 興仁門外箭串橋,往尋里平壤橋는 迺是御賜其名者也라 按成廟十三年癸卯에 僧이 構興仁之門外箭串橋어늘 上이 命名濟盤하시고 又構往尋師不遠之地하야 踐躡者絡繯호대 無人知基爲御命之橋하니 故事之湮晦一每多如是也라 故爲之辨하노라
金益熙滄洲遺橋稿. 素沙板橋新成하니 群僧이 大會落之하고 數郡氓俗이 畢至라 時曰. 畿服輪蹄會. 長川百步洪. 褰裳跋涉病. 伐木往來通. 三界慈雲影. 高僧報濟功. 齋壇落成處. 還興大千同

3. 僧人의 救病事業. 太祖時에 宗林이라는 僧師가 造橋救病에 盡力한 事가 實錄에 보엿스니 그 사실은 左와 如하다.

太祖實錄五年에 慈恩宗都僧統宗林이 嘗作板橋하고 及築에 城人往還有疾病者를 請醫診脈하야 劑藥救療하고 且供飮食하며 疾癒者는 給糧遺之어늘 右政丞金士衡이 聞之以聞한대 上이 命賜米豆醢醫하시다.
東西 活人署에 僧人의 幹事를 置한 事가 成宗實錄에 보엿스니 左와 如하다.
元年庚寅夏六月戊申. 戶曹啓東西活人署 幹事僧 及 病人의 作人料를 限明年秋成權除어늘 從之하다.

濟州島에서 僧人이 癩病院의 看護한 사실이 잇섯는데 癩病者 69인을 隔離治療하야 45인이 全差를 得하얏스니 이것은 現今의 最文明國에라도 그러한 慈悲事業의 比例를 볼 수 업는 것이다.

世宗實錄二十七年乙丑冬十月丁巳. 議政府據禮曹呈申에 濟州安撫使啓호대 州及旌義大靜에 癩疾이 興行이라 若有得病者면 惡其傳染하야 置于海邊無人之地하면 不勝其若故墮岸以隕其命하니 誠可憐憫이라 臣이 令僧人으로 拾骨埋之호이다. 三邑에 各置治病之所하고 聚病人하야 給衣糧藥物하고 又設沐浴之具하며 使醫僧人으로兼掌治療러니 見在癩病六十九人內에 四十五人은 差癒하고 十八人은 時未癒하고 十四人은 物故로소이다. 但三邑僧이 本有軍役이러니 請三邑僧各一人하야 除其役하고 常與醫生으로 專事救療하니 醫生을亦許錄用以勸이라하야 늘 下兵曹하다.

4. 僧人이 棺槨葬具를 主掌한 事. 與地勝覽 龍山歸厚署 鄭以吾의 記文을 見하면 歸厚署를 龍山에 건설하야 僧師 宗林 海宣 兩人으로 하야금 棺槨葬具를 主掌하야 民間需要에 應케 하얏스니 그 歷史는 左와 如하다.

成宗實錄. 十二年 辛丑夏六月壬戌. 大司憲 曹幹이 啓曰 世宗朝 末에 有歸厚署하니 有一僧人이 創寺龍山江上하고 私備棺槨以賣하니＜84＞ 送終者-賴之하야늘…… 上이 顧問左右한대 知事洪應이 對曰. 此事誠然이로소이다. 太宗朝에 有僧名信戒者-私備棺槨이貿易이어늘 國家定其僧爲幹事하야 代納諸邑貢物하야 以贍其材러니 厥後에 置歸厚署하야 令幹事僧으로 幹私貿易云云.

5. 埋骨僧. 世宗實錄 九年 丁未 秋九月 丙戌에 예조가 漢城府로부터 동의하야 埋骨僧効勵事目을 계달하얏스니 그 事目은 左와 如하다.

一. 前定僧 十名이 數小일새 今加定六名하야 屬東西活人院 各 八人하야 分掌五部 及 城底十里하고 給朔料 醢醬하고 1. 令活人院으로 考其勤慢하야 其中掩埋最多者는 每年 一人授職하고 一掩埋勤慢 及 院官檢擧能否를 令司憲府漢城府檢覈이어늘 從之하다.
練黎室記述에 云 宣祖癸巳十月에 大駕自義州로 還京都하사 民之死於亂 及 癘疫饑饉者를 募僧收瘞하고 設壇祭之라 하고 又 藥坡漫錄云 宣祖 二十七年 乙未에 時飢民이 白畫에 屠箭相食하고 重以疫癘하야 死者相枕하니 水口門外에 積屍如山하야 高於城數丈이라. 募僧徒埋瘞之訖하고 乙未에 乃止하다. ＜85＞
＜79-85＞