별건곤 제12·13호
1928년 05월 01일
東亞天地를 號令하는 녯날의 朝鮮海軍 (The Old Korean Navy Commanding the World of East Asia)
一記者 (A Reporter)
논설 (Essay)

The Old Korean Navy Commanding the World of East Asia
						一 기자 (A Reporter)

Korea is a Naval Power of the Orient
I heard that a certain Frenchman, after seeing Korea, said that Korea is the most peaceful country in the world, so the general public does not have a single knife, but only the Kisaeng in the world of flowers and willows have knives when they dance. I don't need to argue whether his words came from praise or sarcasm, but now we Koreans have no weapons at all, just as he said. The only knife is a pocket knife for fingernails or paper cutting, and the only bow is the one that old playboys shoot as a pastime at places like Paekho Pavilion (白虎亭) and Ch'ŏngnyong Pavilion (靑龍亭). The only gun is a paper gun that children play with on the first day of the new year. Even that is not made by Korean hands, but bought from the hands of Chinese coolies. Even martial arts items like Changmuho (場武號) are sold to Japanese merchants and given a new name called Kyŏngsŏng Maru (京城丸), becoming a merchant ship carrying passengers and goods back and forth to Wŏnsan (元山) sea. There are only a few OO troops carrying empty guns as toys with cigarette cases in their bullet pouches, so it is like a dreamer talking in their sleep to boast about our army or navy, and we might only earn laughter from others. However, even a tiger in a cage will not forget its past courage when it once subdued all beasts with a fierce whistle in the deep mountains and valleys, and even an old horse lying down in a corner will still have the will to roam thousands of miles a day. Even if today's Koreans are so weak in military power, how can we forget the glorious history of flying high in East Asia for the past half-century, and who would dare to object even if we boast about it? In the past, Korea's <96> military power was truly magnificent. Both the army and navy were fully equipped without any regrets, and especially the navy was the most developed in the Orient. If England is called the naval power of the West, then Korea in the past was the naval power of the East. Not only were the soldiers brave and good at fighting, but also weapons and warships were the first to be developed in the Orient. In some respects (for example, ironclad ships), it was developed earlier than any other country in the world.

Reasons for the Development of the Korean Navy and Naval Battles of Past Dynasties
Then, for what reason did our Korea develop the navy earlier than others? Of course, a major reason lies in the spirit of our Korean people in the past who admired martial arts, but another reason lies in the natural geographical relationship. As everyone knows, our Korea is a peninsular country surrounded by the sea on three sides, with two great enemies, Japan in the east and China in the northwest, who sometimes invade our country like pirates. Therefore, on a small scale, we had to defend against them, and at other times, we had to take a step forward and subjugate the enemy countries, so we inevitably put effort into the navy and, as a result, it also developed. In ancient times, in the era of Tangun (壇君), Tangun sent three princes to build a castle in Hyŏlgu (穴口, present-day Kanghwa/江華), a strategic point in the West Sea, and appointed Pae Changsaeng (裵長生) as the General of the South Sea. This shows that they were already focusing on naval defense at that time. When Wiman Korea (衛滿朝鮮) faced the invasion of Emperor Wu of Han (漢武帝), Ugo's army (右渠軍) defeated Yang P'obuk's (楊僕) army (50,000 navy) of the Han Dynasty, causing Yang P'obuk to flee into the mountains for more than 10 days (Wiman was of course a man of Yan, but his soldiers were Koreans). In the 38th year of King Yŏngyang (嬰陽王) of Koguryŏ (高句麗), when the Sui invaders came, the enemy's ships were connected for thousands of miles, but they were completely destroyed by Koguryŏ, and not a single ship could return. In the 23rd year of the same king, when Emperor Taizong (唐太宗) of Tang China, Li Shimin (李世民), invaded, he specially commanded the great artisan Yan Lide (閻立德) to build 500 new warships, commanding the three provinces of Hong (洪), Rao (饒), and Jiang (江). In the second attack, he summoned the artisans of the 12 states of Jiangnan (江南) and built hundreds of large ships to launch a major invasion, but under the order of Yŏn Kaesomun (淵蓋蘇文), eventually 700 Tang ships were scattered and disappeared like fish scales. In the 10th year of King Munmu (文武王) of Silla (新羅), Naval Admiral Tang Chŏn (當千) and Mun Hun (文訓) destroyed over 100 Tang ships, causing Tang General Xue Rengui (薛仁貴) to be defeated and flee. Paekche (百濟) also occasionally invaded Liaoxi (遼西), Jinping (晋平), and Lu (魯) in China with its navy (see Naval Defense Examination). Later, in the Koryŏ (麗朝) Dynasty, Taejo Ch'ŏnsu Taewang (太祖 天授大王) became Kungye's (弓裔) General of a Hundred Ships, subjugating all enemies at sea in Chŏlla (全羅) and other regions. In the 23rd year of King Kongmin (恭愍王), General Ch'oe Yŏng (崔瑩) drove away the Wokou (倭寇) with 2,000 warships. In the first year of King Sejong (世宗) of the Yi Dynasty (李朝), Ch'oe Yundŏk (崔潤德) led 227 warships and 17,200 sailors to conquer Tsushima Island (對馬島), capturing 129 enemy ships. During the Imjin War (壬辰時代), the famous Admiral Yi Ch'ungmu (李忠武公), called the God of the Korean Navy, shattered over 600 Japanese ships with 13 turtle ships (龜船).<97>
These few facts are prominent in history, so I will not go into detailed explanations, but the navy of old Korea was truly admirable. Wherever a flag fluttered, the mountains and rivers trembled, and every time the drum sounded, the sea waves surged. Even the giant ships of the most powerful enemy army fled at the sight of the wind, so how could sea bandits and petty thieves even dare to move?

Development of Warships and Their Authority
As mentioned above, Korea's navy was powerful, and at the same time, the warships necessary for this were also developed. Of course, there were considerable warships even in the ancient Three Kingdoms period, and they further progressed in the Koryŏ Dynasty. When Taejo Ch'ŏnsu Taewang (麗太祖天授大王) of Koryŏ built 100 warships in the military ports of Chŏlla (全羅) and other regions as the General of a Hundred Ships of T'aebong (泰封), the system was extremely grand and solid. Among them, more than 10 large ships were 16 steps in each direction, and horses could run inside the ship. Later, in the first year of King Hyŏnjong (顯宗), 75 Yi boats (弋船) were built, which were as light and fast as flying birds. In the 12th year of King Wŏnjong (元宗), the Warship Directorate (戰艦都監, similar to today's shipyard) was established and devoted itself to the production of warships. In the 15th year of the same king, 300 ships were built. At that time, Koryŏ's shipbuilding technology was famous in the world, so there were many orders from foreign countries. For example, the Yuan (元) Dynasty ordered 100 warships, so timber was harvested from Puan (扶安), Chŏlla Province (全羅道), and 35,000 artisans completed and sent them in about 5 months. Also, in the 5th year of King Ch'ungyŏl (忠烈王), 900 warships were built and sent to Yuan after receiving 3,000 ingots of paper money (楮鏹). In the first year of King Ch'ŏnsŏn (忠宣王), 100 warships were built with timber from Mount Paektu (白頭山) and sent to Yuan. In addition, in the 8th year of King U (禑王), 130 giant ships were built and deployed in key coastal areas to defend against the Wokou. In the early Yi Dynasty, the system was further developed, and during the reign of King T'aejong (太宗), 250 ships were built on the recommendation of Im Chŏng (林整), Yi Sukpŏm (李淑蕃), Hong Yuyong (洪有龍), Yu Sanŭn (柳思訥), Hwang Chahŭ (黃子厚) (made by Im Chŏng), and a grand launching ceremony was held in Sŏgang (西江). Afterwards, the number of warships in each province was increased based on the deliberations of the State Council (議政府會議). The number of warships at that time was roughly as shown in the table below.

Province / Capital / Chŏlla / Kyŏngsang / Hwanghae / Kangwŏn / Ch'ungch'ŏng / P'yŏngan / Hamgyŏng / Total
Original Number / 51 / 81 / 137/ 26 / 16 / 47 / 40 / 30 / 428
New Number / 25 / 30 / 50 / 20 / 10 / 30 / 15 / 5 / 185

In addition, each province built 10 more light and fast ships to be used for chasing and capturing enemy ships, searching, scouting, and sweeping the sea (according to the State Council's report). Based on Yi Sukpŏm's (李淑蕃) proposal, lime was applied to the bottom of the ship to prevent it from rotting. During the reign of King Sejong (世宗), further progress was made, and all the warships of Jiangnan, Ryukyu, Namban, and Japan were compared and tested to remodel the warships. At this time, a new invention was made, with the stern having two ends to prevent capsizing in wind and waves, decorated with iron nails, and several Pigu swords ships (鼻居刀船, light and fast small ships) were loaded onto large ships to respond to emergencies. In addition, Pak Hŭijung (朴熙中), the Chŏlla Governor (全羅監司), invented an armored ship. Later, during the reign of King Sejo (世祖), Shin Sukchu (申叔舟), the Director of the Military Standard Office (典艦司提調), <98> referred to the warships of Tang, Japan, Ryukyu, and other countries and built three classes of warships: large, medium, and small. The large one carried 81 people, the medium one 60 people, and the small one 30 people. The ship's hull was decorated with paint, and it was used for military purposes during wartime, and the paint was removed during peacetime to be used for transportation. During peacetime, it was called a transport ship (運漕船), and during wartime, it was called a fierce ship (猛船). After completely remodeling the warships of the whole country using this method, a launching ceremony and fleet review were held at Yanghwa Island (楊花島), and the king personally came to watch. At that time, Korea's fleet system was truly the best in the Orient, and foreign viewers all praised it endlessly. Later, during the Imjin War, the turtle ship (龜船) invented by Admiral Yi Sunsin (李舜臣), was the world's first ironclad ship and is still praised by the naval community in the East and West (invented 59 years before the West). After the Imjin War, during the reign of King Yŏngjo (英祖), Chŏn Unsang (田雲祥), the Chŏlla Naval Commander (全羅 水使), invented the Sea Gull Ship (海鶻船), and Yu Jipil (兪集一), the Hwanghae Governor (黃海監司), also invented the Wheel Ship (輪船). Now, to briefly describe the system:

The Turtle Ship Created by Yi Ch'ungmu
1. The turtle ship has its deck covered with large planks, and on the planks are placed cross-shaped and narrow lines to facilitate passage, and outside of that, awl-shaped knives are spread out so that there is no place to put a foot or hand. The front is like the head of a dragon, the back is like the tail of a turtle, and the hull is made entirely of wood and covered with iron armor. Gun holes are drilled on all four sides to place guns. In terms of structure, the bottom plate is made by joining 10 pieces, with a length of 68 feet 4 inches, a head width of 12 feet, a waist width of 14 feet 4 inches, and a tail width of 10 feet 6 inches. The left and right side panels are each made by joining 7 pieces, with a length of 113 feet. The deck plate is made by joining 4 pieces, with a height of 4 feet, and gun holes are drilled on the left and right sides of the second plate. A hole with a diameter of 1 foot 2 inches is drilled in the center of the 6th plate of the stern plate to insert the rudder (舵, *ch'i*). The left and right cover plates each use 11 plates, with a ridge of 1 foot 5 inches. The turtle head is 4 feet 3 inches long and 3 feet wide, and inside it, sulfur, saltpeter, etc., are placed to emit smoke to confuse the enemy. There are 10 oars on each side, 22 shields on each side, 12 gun holes and 12 gates, and 2 gun holes on the turtle's head, and 2 gates below it, and 1 gun hole on each side, and 12 gun holes on each of the left and right covering plates. Below the left and right deck plates, there are <99> 12 compartments to store ironware, cannons, spears, swords, bows, and arrows, and for soldiers to rest. The ship's captain and officers reside in 2 compartments on the upper roof of the left and right deck plates. There are cross-shaped and narrow lines on the planks for people to pass through, and awl-shaped knives are placed on the outer planks. The turtle-shaped flag (龜字旗) is hoisted on the ship, and when fighting the enemy, thatch is placed on the planks to cover the awl-shaped knives. When encountering the enemy, cannons are fired from the gun holes, and if the enemy tries to board the ship, they are stabbed by the awl-shaped knives and cannot board. (See Photo)

2. Sea Gull Ship (海鶻船): The head is low, the tail is high, the front is big, and the back is small, like the shape of a sea gull. Protective planks are placed on the left and right sides above the gunwale like the two wings of a bird, so there is no worry even if there are wind and waves, and it is as light and fast as a flying gull. From the inside, one can see the outside, but from the outside, one cannot easily see the inside.

3. Wheel Ship (輪船): Wheels are placed in the front and rear, and rudders are installed at the bow and stern. By agitating the water with the wheels, it is easy to advance and retreat, and the bow becomes the stern and the stern becomes the bow, allowing for free navigation like a flying bird.

4. Warship (戰船): There is a 3-story watchtower in the center, and ramparts are placed on the front, rear, left, and right sides. The armaments include 4 cannons, 3 breech-loading swivel guns (佛狼器), and various flags, banners, spears, and swords. Two wheels are placed on the left and right sides, and when soldiers kick them, the ship moves forward. Sometimes the watchtower is removed, making it look like a castle on the water from the outside.

5. First Class Command Ship (第一號座船): This is the main general's ship, which is the same as a warship, but there are no ramparts or watchtowers on the upper level. The height of the left and right railings is only up to the knees, and 65 cannons are arranged.
There are a total of 19 types of warships, but there are still no reference materials for the system of the other 5 types mentioned above. Later, during the reign of King Sukjong (肅宗), the naval system reform plan proposed by Yun Kŭnsu (尹根壽), Chang Yu (張維), and Cho Ik (趙翼) after the previous Imjin War was implemented (Immediately after the Imjin War, there was a naval system reform plan by Yu Sŏngnyong (柳成龍), Yun Kŭnsu, etc., but it was not implemented due to the post-war national financial difficulties. This plan was implemented based on Park Sechae's (朴世采) memorial during the reign of King Sukjong). Five things were reformed: 1. Warships were modified, increased, and rebuilt, and the lifespan of the ships was determined, with one replacement every 3 years and one remodeling every 5 years. 2. The naval forces of the mountain counties were completely disbanded, and naval forces were recruited from coastal residents who were accustomed to maritime life. 3. Coastal fortresses were increased, and regular large-scale exercises were conducted twice a year in spring and autumn. 4. The armor worn by the former naval forces was abolished (due to the need to save expenses, facilitate movement, and reduce ship weight). 5. The naval forces also practiced land warfare, enabling them to be used in both naval and land battles. In addition, the types of warships were not distinguished according to their mission performance before the Imjin War, but were distinguished only by the strength of their combat power, such as Large Fierce, Medium Fierce, and Small Fierce. After the Imjin War, they were distinguished into 5 types according to their mission performance: warship, troop ship, defense ship, patrol ship, and miscellaneous ship. Among the miscellaneous ships, there were exploration ship, divination ship, navigation ship, alarm ship, water-carrying ship, observation ship, flank ship, chasing ship, supply ship, rudder ship, and special ship. Comparing the warships before and after the Imjin War is like the table on the left.<100>

Looking at the above, one can see how advanced the warships of old Korea were. Compared with China (支那), a neighboring powerful country at the time, the system and organization method were much superior (at that time, China's warships were only 4 or 5 types, such as blue ships and eagle ships, and the number was also only 4 or 500). One can also know that it was much better than England (英國), a country famous for its navy in the West (the British naval record states that Korea's ironclad ship was the first developed in the world). One can also guess how great its authority was. However, it is a great regret that the number of soldiers in the naval forces of each dynasty has not yet been investigated in detail, but the standing naval soldiers in the Koryŏ Dynasty were about 50,000, and in the Yi Dynasty, there were 112,400 people.
Much of the material for the above article was taken from An Chasan's (安自山氏) collected draft of the Korean Naval History, and I would like to express my deep gratitude to him for providing the material. (Reporter) <101>

**Named Entities**

壇君	Tan'gun
穴口	Hyŏlgu
江華	Kanghwa
裵長生	Pae Changsaeng
衛滿朝鮮	Wiman Chosŏn
漢武帝	Han Wudi
右渠軍	Ugo-gun
楊僕	Yang P'obuk
高句麗	Koguryŏ
嬰陽王	Yŏngyang Wang
隋寇	Suiku
唐太宗	T'ang T'aejong
李世民	Li Semin
閻立德	Yŏm Niptŏk
洪	Hong
饒	Rao
江	Kang
江南	Kangnam
淵蓋蘇文	Yŏn Kaesomun
新羅	Silla
文武王	Munmu Wang
海軍大將	Haegun Taejang
當千	Tang Chŏn
文訓	Mun Hun
薛仁貴	Sŏl In'gwi
百濟	Paekche
遼西	Yosi
晋平	Chin P'yŏng
魯	No
麗朝	Ryŏjo
太祖天授大王	T'aejo Ch'ŏnsu Taewang
弓裔	Kungye
全羅	Chŏlla
恭愍王	Kongmin Wang
崔瑩	Ch'oe Yŏng
倭寇	Wokou
李朝	Ijo
世宗大王	Sejong Taewang
崔潤德	Ch'oe Yundŏk
兵船	Pyŏngsŏn
對馬島	Taemado
壬辰時代	Imjin Sidae
李忠武公	Yi Ch'ungmu Kong
龜船	Kuisŏn
京城丸	Kyŏngsŏng Maru
元山	Wŏnsan
白虎亭	Paekhojŏng
靑龍亭	Ch'ŏngnyongjŏng
場武號	Changmuho
顯宗	Hyŏnjong
弋船	Iksŏn
元宗	Wŏnjong
戰艦都監	Chŏn ham dogam
高麗	Koryŏ
扶安	Puan
忠烈王	Ch'ungyŏl Wang
忠宣王	Ch'ŏnsŏn Wang
白頭山	Paektusan
禑王	U Wang
太宗	T'aejong
林整	Im Chŏng
李淑蕃	Yi Sukpŏm
洪有龍	Hong Yuyong
柳思訥	Yu Sanŭn
黃子厚	Hwang Chahŭ
議政府會議	Ŭijŏngbu Hwoeŭi
朴熙中	Pak Hŭijung
世祖	Sejo
典艦司提調	Chŏnhamsa T'ijo
申叔舟	Shin Sukchu
楊花島	Yanghwado
李舜臣	Yi Sunsin
英祖	Yŏngjo
全羅水使	Chŏlla Susă
田雲祥	Chŏn Unsang
海鶻船	Haegolsŏn
黃海監司	Hwanghae Kamsa
兪集一	Yu Jipil
輪船	Yunsŏn
肅宗	Sukjong
尹根壽	Yun Kŭnsu
張維	Chang Yu
趙翼	Cho Ik
柳成龍	Yu Sŏngnyong
朴世采	Pak Sechae
全羅道	Chŏllado
安自山	An Chasan
西江	Sŏgang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	東亞天地를 號令하는 녯날의 朝鮮海軍
필자	一記者
기사형태	논설

東亞天地를 號令하는 녯날의 朝鮮海軍
						一記者
朝鮮은 東洋의 海軍國
엇던 불란서 사람(佛人)이 朝鮮의 구경을 하고 가서 하는 말이 朝鮮은 세계에 제일 평화를 조와하는 나라이기 때문에 일반 인민이 칼 하나를 가지지 안코 다만 花柳界에 잇는 기생들이 춤을 출 때에만 칼을 가진다고 하더라는 말을 나는 들엇다. 그의 말이 칭찬에서 나온 말인지 빈정대는데서 나온 말인지 그것은 따저 말할 필요도 없거니와 지금에 우리 朝鮮 사람은 그의 말과 가티 과연 아무 무기도 업다. 칼이라야 손톱이나 종희비는 주머니 칼밧게 업고 활이라야 白虎亭, 靑龍亭가튼 데서 묵은 오입장 이들이 소일거리로 쏘는 활밧게 업스며 총이라고는 정월 초생에 아희들이 장란하는 닥총밧게 업다. 그것이나마 조선사람의 손으로 맹긴 것이 안이요 中國의 머리 딴 총각놈의 손으로서 사오는 것이다. 場武號가튼 무용의 장물이나마 日本 상인에게 팔니여서 京城丸이라는 새 이름을 어더가지고 元山바다 우으로 오락가락하는 行人과 물건을 실고 다니는 장사ㅅ배가 되고 탄알주머니에 권연깍댁이나 늣코 빈총만 작란감 모양으로 메고 다니는 OO隊兵丁 좃차 몃명 되지 안으니 우리로서 陸軍이 엇더니 海軍이 엇더니 자랑을 한다는 것은 맛치 꿈뀌는 사람이 잠꼬대를 하는 것과 가터서 도로혀 남의 우슴을 살는지도 알수 업다. 그러나 함정속에 잇는 호랑이라도 전날 深山大谷에서 맹렬한 쉿바람 한번에 百獸를 섭복(慴服) 식히던 녯날 용맹은 이저버리지 안을 것이요 마구 구석에 침복해 누은 늙은 긔마(驥馬)라도 평소에 千里萬里를 하루 橫行하든 뜻은 그대로 남어 잇슬 것이다. 오늘의 朝鮮 사람이 아모리 이와가티 武力이 빈약할지라도 過去 半萬年동안에 東亞에서 雄飛하든 그 光彩나든 歷史야 엇지 이즐수 잇스며 또 자랑을 한들 어느  누가 敢히 異義할 수 잇스랴. 과거 朝鮮의＜96＞ 軍備야말로 참으로 훌륭하얏다. 陸軍과 海軍이 다 유감업시 完備한 중에 특히 海軍은 東洋에서 제일 발달되엿섯다. 지금의 英國을 西洋의 海軍國이라 할것 가트면 과거의 朝鮮은 東洋의 海軍國이다. 軍士가 용맹스럽게 싸우기를 잘한 것은 물론이고 兵器, 軍艦도 東洋에서 제일 먼저 발달되엿다. 안이 엇던 點으로는 (例如鐵甲船) 世界 어느 나라보다도 먼저 발달되엿섯다.

朝鮮海軍의 發達된 理由와 歷代의 海戰
그러면 우리 朝鮮이 무슨 까닭으로 남 류달니 海軍이 그와 가티 먼저 발달되엿슬가. 그것은 물론 과거 우리 朝鮮 民族이 武藝를 숭상하는 氣風이 잇는데 큰 원인이 잇겟지만은 또 한가지 원인은 天然의 地理的 關係에 잇는 것이다. 누구나 다 아는 바와 가티 우리 朝鮮은 三面으로 바다가 들녀잇는 半島國으로 東에는 日本 西北에는 支那의 두 큰 强敵이 잇섯서 때때로 海賊과 가티 國士를 침략하는 고로 소국뎍으로는 그것을 막기도 하고 또 엇더한 때에는 한 거름 나아가서 적국을 토벌하기 위하야 必然上 海軍을 힘쓰게 된 것이오 따라서 발달도 된 것이다. 上古 壇君시대에 壇君이 王子 3인을 보내여 西海의 要地인 穴口(今江華)에 城을 쌋코 裵長生으로 南海 上長을 삼은 것을 보면 그때에 벌서 海防에 힘을 쓴 것은 물론이어니와 衛滿朝鮮이 漢武帝의 來侵을 바들 때에 右渠軍이 漢의 樓船將軍 楊僕의 軍(海軍) 5만을 처익여서 楊僕으로 하야곰 10여일동안이나 山中에 逃避케 하고(衛滿은 물론 燕人이나 그 軍士인즉 朝鮮人이다) 高句麗 嬰陽王38년에 隋寇가 來侵할 때에는 敵의 舳艫가 千里를 相連하얏스나 高句麗에 全滅을 당하야 片船도 도라가지 못하고 同王23년에 唐太宗 李世民이 來寇할 때에는 특히 大匠 閻立德으로 洪, 饒, 江 三州를 指揮하야 戰船 500艘를 새로 짓고 제 2회로는 王波利로 江南 12주 工人을 다 불너서 大船數 100艘를 새로 지여 가지고 大擧 入寇하얏스나 淵蓋蘇文의 一令之下에 필경 700여艘의 唐船이 고기 비눌과 가티 散散히 바서저서 업서지고 말엇스며 新羅 文武王 10년에는 海軍大將 當千과 文訓等이 唐船 100여艘를 破蕩하야 唐將 薛仁貴가 대패 도주하고 百濟는 또 해군으로  支那의 遼西, 晋平, 魯등지를 간간히 侵伐하얏다(海防考參照) 그 뒤 麗朝에 잇서서는 太祖 天授大王이 弓裔의 百船將軍이 되야 全羅 등지에서 해상의 모든 적을 慴伏식히고 恭愍王 23년에는 崔瑩장군이 2,000의 군함으로 倭寇를 처물리치고 李朝 世宗大王元年에는 崔潤德으로 兵船 227艘와 舟師 1만7200인으로 對馬島를 討伐하야 敵船 129艘를 捕獲하고 壬辰時代에는 朝鮮海軍의 軍神이라 稱하는 彼 유명한 李忠武公이 龜船 13隻으로 600여隻의 日艦을 破碎하얏다.＜97＞
이 몃가지 事實은 歷史上 현저한 사실이 닛가 자서한 설명은 하지 안커니와 녯날 朝鮮의 海軍이야 참으로 갸륵하얏섯다. 긔ㅅ발 한번 날니는 곳에 山河가 빗을 움즉이고 북소리 한번 날때마다 海波가 들끌엇다. 天下莫强한 敵軍의 巨艦艨艟이라도 바람을 바라고 도망하엿거든 하물며 海寇 小賊이야 꿈쩍이나 하얏스라.

軍艦의 發達과 그 權威
우에 말한 것과 가티 朝鮮은 海軍이 强大한 동시에 此에 必須하는 軍艦이 또한 발달되엿스니 往古 三國時代에도 상당한 戰船이 잇섯슴은 물론이고 麗朝에 이르러서는 일층 진보되야 麗太祖天授大王이 泰封의 百船將軍으로 全羅등지 軍港에서 100여戰艦을 지을때에는 制度가 極히 雄大하고 堅固하야 其中 大船 10여척은 各方이 16步로 배 안에서 能히 말을 달니엿고 그 뒤 顯宗 元年에는 弋船 75艘를 지엇는데 輕快하기 飛鳥와 가텃스며 元宗 12년에는 戰艦都監(今의 造船工廠과 如함)을 두고 軍艦製造에 專力하야 同 15년에는 300艘를 지엇섯다. 當時 高麗의 造船術은 세계에 이름이 놉핫슴으로 외국으로부터 주문을 한일이 만헛스니 즉 元나라에서는 군함 100척을 주문함으로 全羅道 扶安의 木材를 採伐하야 3만500인의 工匠으로 凡 5개월만에 완성하야 보내고 또 忠烈王 5년에도 元에서 3,000錠의 楮鏹을 밧고 군함 900艘를 지어보내고 忠宣王 元年에는 白頭山의 재목을 取하야 전함 100艘를 지어서 元에 보냇섯다. 뿐만 안이라 禑王 8년에는 巨艦 130艘를 지어서 海邑要地에 논하두고 倭寇를 막엇섯다. 李朝初에 이르러서는 그 制가 더욱 발달이 되야 太宗때에는 林整, 李淑蕃, 洪有龍, 柳思訥 黃子厚 등의 建議로 250艘를 지어(林整, 所製) 西江에서 壯大한 進水式을 행하고 그 뒤에 또 議政府會議에 의하야 各道 兵船을 增造하얏스니 그때의 兵船數는 大略 下表와 가텃다.

道別 / 京 / 全 / 慶 / 黃 / 江 / 忠 / 平 / 咸 / 계
元數 / 51 / 81 / 137/ 26 / 16 / 47 / 40 / 30 / 428
新數 / 25 / 30 / 50 / 20 / 10 / 30 / 15 / 5 / 185

이밧게 各道에는 다시 輕快船 10척식을 지어 敵船의 追捕, 搜索, 哨探, 掃海 등에 任用케 하고(依議政府啓) 李淑蕃의 議로 船底에 石灰를 발너서 썩지 안케 하얏스며 世宗때에는 更 一層 진보하야 江南, 琉球, 南蠻, 日本의 모든 戰艦을 비교 시험하야 戰船을 改造하얏스니 이때에 새로 발명된 것은 船尾를 兩端으로 하야 風浪에도 傾覆치 안케하고 鐵釘으로 裝飾을 하며 數隻의 鼻居刀船(輕快小船)을 큰 배에 실어서 臨機應變케 한 것이다. 그리고 全羅監司 朴熙中은 또 裝甲船을 발명하얏다. 그 뒤 世祖때에는 典艦司提調 申淑舟로＜98＞ 唐, 日, 琉球 등 國의 戰船을 참조하야 大, 中, 小 3등의 戰船을 지엇스니 大는 81인, 中은 60인, 小는 30인을 載하고 船體에는 上粧을 施하야 戰時에는 軍用에 쓰다가 平時에는 그 上粧을 버리고 運漕에 兼用케 하얏스니 평시는 曰運漕船이오, 전시는 曰猛船이엇다. 이 法으로 全國의 兵船을 一新하게 改造한 뒤에 楊花島에서 進水式 及 閱艦式을 행하야 王이 親臨觀賞하얏스니 당시 朝鮮의 艦制는 실로 東洋에는 冠絶하야 外人의 보는 者가 다 稱歎함을 마지 안엇섯다. 그 뒤 壬辰때에 忠武公 李舜臣이 발명한 龜船은 世界 最先의 鐵甲船으로 지금까지 東西 海軍界에서 稱歎하고(西洋보다 59년전에 發明되얏다) 壬辰以後 英祖때에는 全羅 水使 田雲祥이 海鶻船을 발명하고 黃海監司 兪集一은 또 輪船을 발명하얏다. 이제 그 制度를 略言하면

李忠武公의 創制한 龜船
1. 龜船은 船上을 大板으로 덥고 板上에는 十字細字를 두어 通行에 용이케 하며 그 밧게는 송곳칼을 펴노와서 발이나 손대일 곳이 업게 하며 압흔 龍의 머리 뒤는 거북의 꼬리가티 하고 船體는 全혀 木으로 하고 그 우에 鐵甲을 입혓스며 銃 구멍은 四方에 뚤니어서 銃을 놋케 되얏는데 그 構造로 말하면 底板은 10개를 聯하얏스니 長이 68尺 4寸, 頭廣이 12尺, 腰廣이 14尺 4寸, 尾廣이 10尺 6寸이오 左右 舷板은 各히 7개로 聯하얏스니 長이 113尺이오 荷板은 4개로 聯하얏스니 高 4尺이고 제2판 左右에 砲穴을 各 1개식 穿하고 舳板은 7개로 聯하야 제6板 正中에 穴을 穿하고 徑 1尺 2寸의 舵(치)를 揷하고 蓋板 左右에는 各히 11板을 用하얏스니 其 脊이 1尺 5寸이오 龜頭는 長이 4尺 3寸 廣3尺이니 그 중에 硫黃 焰硝 등을 느어서 煙氣를 吐케 하야 敵이 不知케 하고 左右 櫓는 各 10, 左右 牌는 各히 22砲穴과 12門이 잇스며 龜頭上에는 2砲穴이 잇고 基下에는 또 2門이 잇고 傍에는 各히 1砲穴이 잇스며 左右 覆板에도 各히 12砲穴이 잇고 左右 舖板下에는＜99＞ 12間의 尾이 잇서서 鐵物, 火砲, 槍劍, 弓矢의 藏置와 兵士 休憩에 用하고 左右 舖板上屋 2間에는 船長及將校가 居處하며 板上에는 十字細字가 잇서서 사람이 通行케 되고 그 外板上에는 다 錐刀를 布設하고 船上에는 龜字旗를 꼿고 적과 싸울 때에는 板上에 編茅를 덥허  錐刀를 가리웟다가 적을 遇하면 砲穴로 砲를 放하고 적이 船에 登코자 하면 錐刀에 刺傷되야 登치 못하게 하엿다.(寫眞 參照)

2. 海鶻船 머리는 낫고 꼬리는 놉흐며 압흔 크고 뒤는 적어서 鶻새의 形像가티 되고 舷우의 左右에는 賻板을 두어 새의 두 나래 가티 하매 아모리 風波가 잇서서도 근심이 업고 또 輕快하기 飛鶻과 가트며 안에서는 밧을 보돼 밧게서는 안을 잘못 보게 되엿다.

3. 輪船 전후에 輪이 잇고 首尾에 舵를 設하야 輪으로 水를 激하면 진퇴가 용이하고 首가 尾도 되고 尾가 首도 되야 飛鳥와 가티 자유 漕行하게 되엿다.

4. 戰船 中央에 3層 望臺가 잇고 前後 左右에 女墻이 잇스며 兵器는 大砲4門, 佛狼器 3座 各旗 幟鎗刀 등 器械를 設하고 左右에는 車輪 2개가 잇서서 戰士가 蹴動한 즉 船體가 進行하고 혹시는 望臺를 撤廢하니 外見하면 水上에 1城郭이 잇는 것과 같다.

5. 第一號座船 이것은 主將船이니 戰船과 가트나 上層에 女墻과 望臺가 업스며 左右 欄干의 高가 겨우 膝에 불과하고 大砲는 65位를 列架하얏다.
兵船의 종류는 凡 19種이나 右記 5종 외에 制度上 參考材料는 아즉 업다. 그 뒤 肅宗때에 이르러서는 前日 壬辰役 後 尹根壽, 張維, 趙翼 등의 建議한 海軍制改革案을 實施하야(壬辰後 卽時에 柳成龍, 尹根壽 등의 海軍制改革案이 잇섯스나  戰後 國財困乏으로 실시치 못하얏다가 肅宗時 朴世采上䟽에 의하야 此案이 실시되다) 다섯가지를 改革하얏스니, 1. 戰艦을 變改增造하고 船齡을 定하되 3년에 1改槊, 5년에 1改造로 하고 2. 山郡의 水軍을 一切 解散하고 海上生活에 한숙한 海邊民으로 水軍을 募集하고 3. 海岸要塞을 增設하고 1년 春秋 2次로 定期 大練習을 行하고 4. 前者 水軍이 着用하든 甲胃를 廢止하고(經費節約, 運身便利, 船重減少의 必要로) 5. 水軍도 陸戰을 兼習하야 水陸 兩戰에 通用케 함이엿다. 且 兵船의 種類도 壬辰前에는 그 任務性能에 의하야 구별치 안코 오즉 戰鬪力의 强弱으로 標準하야 大猛, 中猛, 小猛으로 구별하엿더니 壬辰後에는 그 任務性能을 따라서 戰船, 兵船, 防船, 伺候船, 雜役船 등 5종으로 구별하고 雜役船 중에는 探船, 卜物船, 航舠船, 報警船, 汲水船, 曢望船, 挾船, 追捕船, 軍需船, 舵船, 別船 등이 잇섯다. 이제 壬辰 以前의 軍艦과 壬辰 以後의 軍艦을 비교하면 左表와 갓다.＜100＞

以上에 揭載한 바를 보면 녯날 朝鮮의 軍艦이 여하히 進步된 것을 可히 알녀니와 이것을 當時 接隣의 强國인 支那와 比하면 그 制度라던지 編成方法이 훨신 優秀한 것은 물론이고(當時 支那의 軍艦은 蒼船, 鷹船 등 4, 5종에 불과하고 隻數도 또한 4, 500에 불과하얏다) 彼 西洋에 海軍國으로 유명한 英國보다도 더 훨신 우수한 것을 可知하겟고(英國海軍記錄에 云하되 朝鮮의 鐵甲船은 世界에 最先 發達한 것이라 云함) 그 權威의 如何한 것도 可히 짐작할 수 잇다. 然而 歷代 水軍의 兵數는 아즉 상세한 조사가 업슴으로 발표치 못하는 것이 큰 유감이나 麗朝에는 常備 水兵이 약 5만이오 李朝에는 11만2400人이엿다.
右記事의 재료는 安自山氏의 수집한 朝鮮海陸軍史草稿에서 취한바 만흔데 특히 재료 供給한 氏에 대하야 감사를 마지 안는다. (記者) ＜101＞
＜96-101＞