別건곤 제12·13호
1928년 05월 01일
外國人과 競爭하야 익인 事實談-大洞江上에서 米艦을 燒破하든 崔蘭軒 事件의 顚末 (A True Story of Competition with Foreigners - The Story of the Choi Ran-heon Incident of Burning a U.S. Warship on the Daedong River)
翠雲生
잡저 (Miscellany)

The True Story of Competing with Foreigners - The Full Story of the Choi Ran-heon Incident of Burning a U.S. Warship on the Daedong River
						翠雲生

The Initial Relationship Between Korea and the United States

It is said that the initial relationship between Korea and the United States began with competition in the ginseng trade in the Chinese market. Korea had monopolized huge profits by exporting its specialty, ginseng, to the Chinese market. However, starting in the mid-18th century, when Dutch merchants began to travel to China, cheap ginseng abundantly produced along the "또손" (Hudson) River in the United States overwhelmed Korean ginseng, affecting trade. This was when Koreans and Americans first became aware of each other. Later, China initiated the Opium War with Britain, leading to the Nanjing Treaty, which opened several ports. At that time, the United States sent Representative "뿌랏트" (Pratt) to Korea and Japan to seek trade markets in East Asia. Subsequently, when Admiral "페리" (Perry) urged Japan to establish relations 76 years ago in the Gyechuk year (癸丑年) of the Japanese Kaei 6 (嘉永六年) era, he also learned somewhat about the situation in Korea. Later, as Japan and China agreed to trade with Europe and the United States, the number of foreign ships passing through Korean waters increased daily, leading coastal officials to be constantly vigilant, anticipating their potential entry into Korean ports. Then, in May of King Gojong (李太王) 3 (1866) (July 1866), the U.S. warship "사푸라이" (Surprise) was wrecked off the coast of Cheolsan Seonsapo (宣沙浦沖). Korea treated the crew and several others with special hospitality and handed them over to Chinese authorities from Uiju (義州). This can be considered the first contact between Americans and Korean officials.

The Arrival of the General Sherman

Shortly after, the sailing ship "쩨네랄 서어맨" (General Sherman), owned by American "푸레스톤" (Preston), loaded with goods favored by Koreans, such as silk, glass, and clocks (自鳴鐘), and demonstratively armed, departed from Tianjin, passing through Zhifu (芝罘) and heading towards Korea. The ship's crew consisted of 5 Westerners, including the shipowner Preston, Captain Page (巴使), and interpreter Thomas (so-called Choi Ran-heon) <109>, along with 19 Chinese and "鳥鬼子" (Malaysian natives).
The party cruised along the coasts of Hwanghae (黃海) and Pyeongan (平安) provinces, and on July 11, they sailed up the Daedong River (大洞江) and reached the vicinity of Pyongyang (平壤). At that time, the Pyeongan Central Military Camp (平安中營) sent officials such as Igyo (吏校) Kim Nak-su (金樂洙) to the American ship to inquire about the reason for their arrival. The General Sherman responded through the interpreter Choi Ran-heon, explaining their purpose of entering Korea, proposing the opening of trade, and requesting provisions.

Humiliation of the Pyongyang Central Army

It was July 18. The American ship traveled back and forth near Manyeongdae (萬景臺) and Hanse Pavilion (閒似亭) in Pyongyang. In the evening, they recklessly sailed up the Daedong River in a small boat. Yi Hyeon-ik (李玄益), the commander of the Pyongyang Central Army (平安中軍), was constantly monitoring the movements of the foreign ship. Seeing the foreign ship speeding on the river, he boarded a small boat to investigate. Suddenly, they attacked Yi Hyeon-ik's boat, captured Yi and his crew, and impolitely insulted them, even forcibly seizing their badges, official uniforms, and seals. At that time, Governor Park Gyu-su (朴珪壽) sent the Magistrate of Pyongyang (平壤府尹) Shin Tae-jeong (申泰鼎) to the enemy ship to demand their release, but they stubbornly refused, only declaring that they would meet with the Governor and come to an understanding on all matters.

Park Chun-gwon's Daring Act of Approaching the Enemy by Boat

However, the authorities at the time not only did not know the enemy's internal situation, but also could not easily act because the Central Army commander was on the enemy ship. The general public simply gathered by the riverbank, shouting for the release of the Central Army commander and throwing stones. Upon hearing this, Officer Park Chun-gwon (朴春權) was filled with righteous anger and boldly charged towards the enemy ship with a dagger and a small boat, rebuking their rudeness and demanding the release of the Central Army commander. The enemies were also taken aback and released the Central Army commander after some arguing.

The Violent and Brutal Actions of the Americans

When the Sherman first sailed up the Daedong River, the river was quite deep due to continuous heavy rains. Unaware of the local geography, they mistakenly believed that the river was always that deep and recklessly sailed the large ship upstream. However, within a few days, the river level gradually decreased, making it impossible to move the heavy ship. The surrounding situation became increasingly dangerous, and with no prospect of reaching an agreement with the Koreans, they ran out of food. In desperation, they resorted to desperate measures, acting like pirates, raiding people's homes, killing people indiscriminately, plundering property, and even raping women.

The Daedong River Transforms into the Red Cliff

Prior to this, Governor Park Gyu-su had reported the foreign atrocities to the government and was awaiting orders. When the situation reached this point, he was greatly outraged and resolved to exterminate them, consulting with Baek Nak-yeon (白樂淵), the magistrate of Cheolsan (鐵山府使). They decided that the best way to eliminate them was to burn their ship, their nest. Reusing the ancient strategy that Zhuge Liang (諸葛武侯) used to defeat Cao Cao's (曹操) million-strong army at the Red Cliff (赤壁江), they loaded numerous small boats with flammable materials such as gunpowder and firewood, set them on fire, and floated them downstream. The boats drifted towards the stranded foreign ship, causing it to burst into flames. The fire instantly soared into the sky, transforming the Daedong River into a sea of fire. Meanwhile, the officials and the people worked together, beating drums, firing cannons, and even using the skilled stone-throwing techniques of Pyongyang. The intense and dangerous situation was enough to make even ghosts and gods weep in terror.
The Americans, like rats trapped in a bag, lost all their former arrogance and brutality. They came to the bow of the ship, begging for their lives with their hands clasped together. But it was too late for such tactics. The entire group was inevitably captured by the Korean army and became wandering spirits of a foreign land at the mouth of the Daedong River, slain by countless swords. Park Gyu-su and other important officials received special rewards from the government for their achievements.

The Beginning of the Sinmi Western Disturbance

At that time, Americans residing in China became suspicious when the return of the General Sherman was delayed. Soldiers from the French fleet who had been defeated and returned from Korea reported rumors that the American ship had been burned in Pyongyang. The U.S. minister asked the Qing Dynasty's Foreign Affairs Ministry (外務衙門) about the truth of the matter. The Qing Dynasty inquired with the Korean government and immediately learned the truth but, fearing that it would become an international issue, vaguely concealed the matter. Later, in December of King Gojong (李太王) 3, the United States sent the steamship "와치세트" (Watchusett) to Korea to investigate the fate of the Sherman. However, the ship came as far as Oujin (五又鎭) near Hwanghae Province but gained no information and returned empty-handed. In the fifth year of King Gojong (戊辰), the steamship Shenandoah (시에난드아號), commanded by Febiger (페비가), cruised along the coasts of Hwanghae and Pyeongan provinces and finally reached the mouth of the Daedong River, directly questioning local officials about the whereabouts of the Sherman. The officials not only did not answer but also had the translator Hong Myeon-jo (洪勉租) tell the Americans that the Daedong River was originally too shallow for such a large ship to enter. Although the Americans were outraged, they could do nothing and sailed out to the open sea. However, as a result of this incident, Americans in China passionately advocated for the need for Korean-American trade, and the U.S. Minister in Beijing, "로오" (Low), and the Commander of the Asiatic Fleet, Rear Admiral "로-저스" (Rodgers), conveyed their intention to invade Korea with a fleet to the Qing Dynasty's Ministry of Rites (禮部). This became the starting point of the so-called Sinmi Western Disturbance (辛未洋擾) in the eighth year of King Gojong (李太王).

Sixty Years of Dramatic Change

Over the 60 years of flowering and ebbing, the era has dramatically changed. The smoke of cannons that once characterized the interaction between the two countries has dissipated like a misty rain in a dense forest. Flocks of white gulls, celebrating the spring of peace, flutter over the Daedong River, where flames once soared. In the city, brick buildings of schools, hospitals, and churches managed by Americans stand tall. Korean children in white and yellow clothes and American children with blue eyes and purple hair hold hands and walk shoulder to shoulder, actively going east and west. Looking back on the past, one cannot help but feel a sense of bewilderment.

Appendix

In Korean and Chinese records, the General Sherman incident is commonly referred to as the Choi Ran-heon incident, making it difficult to immediately discern whether he was a Westerner or a Chinese. However, according to another record where the English missionary Thomas claimed to be Choi Ran-heon, it is clear that he was an Englishman. He had lived in the East for a long time, was well-versed in Eastern affairs, and identified himself as Choi Ran-heon when communicating with Koreans and Chinese through writing. Furthermore, Korean records identify Choi Ran-heon and Zhang Jun-bong (張浚奉) (a Chinese) as the key figures in the Sherman incident, but in reality, both were merely in charge of negotiations. <111>

**Named Entities**

朝鮮	Chosŏn
美國	Miguk
和蘭	Hwaran
南京條約	Namgyŏng Joyak
뿌랏트	Ppŭrat'ŭ
페리	P'eri
嘉永	Kaeiyŏng
李太王	Yi T'aewang
鐵山	Ch'ŏlsan
宣沙浦	Sŏnsap'o
義州	Ŭiju
普來屯	P'ŭraet'ŏn
芝罘	Chibu
崔蘭軒	Ch'oe Nanhŏn
平安中營	P'yŏngan Chungyŏng
金樂洙	Kim Naksŏ
萬景臺	Man'gyŏngdae
閒似亭	Hansajŏng
李玄益	Yi Hyŏn'ik
朴珪壽	Pak Kyusu
申泰鼎	Sin T'aejŏng
朴春權	Pak Ch'unkwŏn
白樂淵	Paek Nangyŏn
諸葛武侯	Chegal Muho
赤壁江	Chŏkbipyang
曺操	Chojo
辛未洋擾	Sinmi Yangnyŏ
黃海道	Hwanghaedo
五又鎭	Oujin
費米日	P'ebimiri
시에난드아號	Sienandŭaho
北京	Peking
魯籍	Nojŏk
張浚奉	Chang Chunbong
洪勉租	Hong Myŏnjo



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	外國人과 競爭하야 익인 事實談-大洞江上에서 米艦을 燒破하든 崔蘭軒 事件의  顚末
필자	翠雲生
기사형태	잡저

外國人과 競爭하야 익인 事實談-大洞江上에서 米艦을 燒破하든 崔蘭軒 事件의  顚末
						翠雲生
朝鮮과 米國과의 最初關係
朝鮮과 米國과의 最初關係는 中國市場에서 人蔘貿易의 競爭으로부터 비롯하얏다 한다. 즉 朝鮮은 自來特産인 인삼을 中國시장에 수출하야 막대한 이익을 독점하다가 18세기 중엽에 和蘭상인이 中國에 來往함을 비롯하야 米國의「또손」河畔에서 許多하게 산출하는 廉價의 인삼이 朝鮮의 인삼을 壓倒하야 貿易上 影響을 及하게 되매 朝鮮人과 米國人間에 關係上 비로소 서로 알게 되엿다. 그 뒤 中國에서는 英國과 阿片戰爭을 개시하야 소위 南京條約이 체결되면서 여러 港口를 開放하게 되니 그때에 米國은 代議員「뿌랏트」를 朝鮮과 日本에 보내서 貿易시장을 東亞에 구하랴고 하얏섯고 繼하야「페리」提督이 距今 76년 전 癸丑年間(日本 嘉永 6년)에 日本에 通交를 促할 시기에도 朝鮮의 사정을 다소 알게 되얏다가 그 뒤 日本과 中國이 歐米와 通商을 約함에 及하야 洋舶의 朝鮮 近海를 통과하는 자가 날로 증가되매 따러서 그들이 점차 朝鮮入港할 생각을 두고 沿海의 守備官僚는 날로 그 警戒에 放心치 못하얏섯다. 그러다가 李太王 3년 5월(서기 1906년 7월)에 米艦(사푸라이)號가 鐵山 宣沙浦沖에서 難破됨매 朝鮮에서는 船員 이하 數名에게 특별한 우대를 하고 義州로부터 中國官憲에게 인도하얏섯다. 이것이 米人과 朝鮮官憲간에 최초 접촉이라 하겟다.

쩨네랄 서어맨號의 來朝
그런지 未久에 米人「푸레스톤」(普來屯)의 所有한 帆船「쩨네랄」서어맨號는 朝鮮 사람의 嗜好하는 비단, 琉璃, 自鳴鐘 等屬의 貨物을 積載하고 또 示威的으로 各色의 武裝을 하고 天津에서 출발하여 芝罘를 經하야 朝鮮에 향하얏다. 그 배의 船員은 艦主 푸론테, 船長 페지(巴使) 通譯 도마스(소위 崔蘭軒)＜109＞ 등 5인의 洋人과 中國人 及 鳥鬼子(馬來土人)을 並하야 19인이엿다.
그 일행은 黃海 平安 兩道의 沿海를 回遊하다가 7월 11일에는 大洞江을 溯하야 平壤 境內까지 도달하얏다. 그때 平安中營에서는 吏校 金樂洙 등을 米船에 보내서 그 到來한 이유를 질문하니 제네랄 서어맨號에서는 通譯 崔蘭軒으로 對應하야 入朝의 목적을 說示하고 또 通商開始와 食量要求를 하얏섯다.

平壤中軍의 被辱
7월 18일이엿다. 米船은 平壤의 萬景臺 閒似亭 附近으로 來往하다가 夕刻에는 短艇으로 傍若無人하게 大洞江 上流로 遊弋하얏다. 平壤中軍 李玄益은 항상 洋船의 動靜을 감시하다가 洋船이 江上에 疾走함을 보고 小船을 타고 그 蹤迹을 追探하얏섯더니 彼等은 돌연히 李玄益의 乘船을 來襲하야 李氏와 船人 一同을 자기의 船中에 拘禁하고 무례하게도 辱을 뵈며 佩物 官服 印信까지 다 强奪하얏섯다. 그때에 監司 朴珪壽는 平壤府尹 申泰鼎을 敵船에 보내서 그 放還하기를 요구하얏스나 彼等은 頑然히 請許지 안코 但히 監司와 會見하고 萬事를 諒解하겟다고 揚言하얏섯다.

朴春權의 艇身赴敵
그러나 當時 官憲은 敵의 內情 如何를 알지 못할 뿐 안이라. 中軍이 敵船 중에 잇슴으로 容易히 下手치도 못하고 일반의 民衆은 그저 江邊에 雲集하야 中軍을 보내라고 叫號하며 亂石을 投할뿐이더니 退校 朴春權이 그 말을 듯고 憤氣가 衝天하야 短刀 短艇으로 용감히 敵船에 突進하야 그 失禮를 詰責하고 中軍의 放還을 요구하니 敵等도 또한 엇지하지 못하고 理屈하야 中軍을 放還하얏섯다.

凶暴殘虐 米人의 行動
처음에 서어멘號가 大洞江을 溯上할 때에 그 江은 連日의 大雨로 인하야 水深이 相當함으로 地理를 모르는 그 자들은 평소에도 수심이 그러한 줄로만 알고 大船을 끌고 함부로 上航하얏섯스나 두류한 지 불과 수일에 江水는 점점 減落하야 重船을 도저히 移動하기 不能하얏섯다. 周圍의 형세는 刻刻으로 위험하게 되고 朝鮮사람과 合意的으로 交易을 할 길이 漠然한 중에 食糧좃차 끈어진 彼等은 소위 窮拘咬主의 격으로 최후 發惡을 하야 海賊떼처럼 民家에 나려가서 함부로 사람을 죽이며 재산을 약탈하고 심지어 婦女子까지 凌辱을 하얏섯다.

大洞江化赤壁江
이에 先하야 監司 朴珪壽는 洋人의 暴狀을 정부에 上啓하고 명령이 나리기만 기다리더니 일이 이에 이르매 크게 憤慨하야 彼等을 剿滅하기로 결심하고 鐵山府使 白樂淵과 가티 計를 論하얏다. 彼等을 根滅하는 데는 무엇보다도 먼저 彼等의 巢穴인 船舶을 燒滅하는 것이 得策이라 하고 諸葛武俟가 赤壁江에서＜110＞ 曺操의 100만 大軍을 擊破하든 8인의 古計를 다시 써서 多數한 적은 배에다 火藥, 薪炭 등의 燃料를 적재하고 불을 지른 다음에 上流로부터 네리띄우니 그 배가 가는 쪽쪽 坐礁된 洋船에 부듸처서 洋船이 連燒되니 火光이 일시에 衝天하야 大洞江이 불바다로 化하고 一方으로 官民은 合同하야 북을 치고 放砲를 하며 솜시 좋은 平壤의 돌팔매질까지 하니 그 猛烈하고 危險한 勢가 비록 鬼神이라도 哭泣을 하고 驚惶失色하게 되엿섯다.
주머이 속에 들은 窮鼠와 가튼 洋人들은 그 凶暴 頑慢하든 氣色이 다 어듸로 가고 船頭에 나서서 두 손을 싹싹 빌며 殘命을 구하얏다. 그러나 그때가 어느 때라고 될 번이나 한 수작이냐. 彼等 일행은 속절업시 모다 朝鮮군에게 捕縛되야 亂刀之下에 大洞江口의 異域孤魂이 되고 말엇다. 朴珪壽외 重要 官吏는 그 功으로 政府의 特殊한 褒賞을 바덧섯다.

辛未洋擾의 發端
그때 中國에 在留하는 米人들은 쩨네랄 서어맨號의 歸期가 遲延되는 것을 보고 疑念을 가지더니 朝鮮에서 敗歸한 佛國艦隊의 士卒이 米船의 平壤에서 燒破된 風說을 傳하매 米國 公使는 淸國 外務衙門에 그 陳狀의 如何를 물엇섯다. 그때 淸國은 朝鮮政府에 照會하야 즉시 그 陳狀을 알엇스나 國際問題가 돨가 念慮하야 또한 有耶無耶 中에 감추어 두고 말엇다. 그 뒤 李太王 3년 12월에 米國은 다시 汽船「와치세트號를 朝鮮에 派送하야서 서어맨號船 行衛를 調査하얏스나 同船은 黃海道五又鎭附近까지 왓다가 아모 要領도 엇지 못하고 空歸하고 또 李太王 5년 戊辰에는 페비가(費米日)를 司令官으로 한 汽船 시에난드아號가 黃平 兩海岸을 遊弋하다가 遂히 목적한 大洞江口까지 得達하야 직접으로 地方官憲에게 서어맨號 踪跡을 詰問하니 官憲은 그것을 대답치 안을 뿐안이라 譯士 洪勉租로 하야금 米人에게 말하되 大洞江은 본래 水深이 엿터서 그러한 大船은 오지도 못한다고 斷言하니 米人은 비록 憤慨하얏스나 엇지하지 못하고 外洋으로 出帆하얏섯다. 그러나 此 事件의 發端으로 在中의 米人 등은 韓美通商의 필요를 熱唱하고 北京駐在 同國公使「로오」와 亞細亞艦隊司令官 海軍小將「로-저스」(魯籍)로 하야금 艦隊를 率하고 朝鮮에 侵入할 意를 淸國禮部에 傳達하게 하엿섯다. 이것이 後日 李太王 8년의 소위 辛未洋擾의 發端이 되엿섯다.

滄桑一變六十年
花謝水流 60여 년간에 時代는 아주 滄桑과 가티 격변하얏다. 往時 兩國人의 相交하든 砲烟은 萬樹長林의 실안개와 가티 흐터지고 平和의 봄을 깃버하는 白鷗의 무리들은 당시 火焰이 衝天하든 大洞江上으로 翩翩이 날아들다. 市街中에도 米人의 경영하는 學校 病院 敎會堂의 벽돌집이 웃득 웃득 소사잇고 白衣 黃色의 朝鮮兒와 碧眼紫髮의 米人兒가 서로 손을 잡고 억개를 마주치며 東馳西走로 活步한다. 지금에 잇서서 녯일을 생각하면 누구나 자못 수수격기 가튼 감이잇다.

附記
쩨네랄 서어맨號 사건을 朝鮮及中國의 기록에는 보통으로 崔蘭軒사건이라 稱하야 그것이 西人인지 中國人인지 얼는 알기가 어려우나 英人 牧師 도마스가 自稱 崔蘭軒이라고 한 딴 기록을 보면 그가 英人인 것은 물론이다. 그는 東洋에 오래 잇서서 東洋의 사정을 잘 아는 동시에 朝中인과 筆談할 때에 崔蘭軒이라고 自稱하얏다. 그리고 朝鮮기록에는 서어맨號 사건의 張本人을 崔蘭軒
張浚奉(中人)으로 地目하얏스나 실상 兩人은 交涉의 任에 當한 者에 불과한다.＜111＞
＜109-111＞