잡지명	別乾坤 第12·13號
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	花草動物자랑-世界的 特産物, 天下靈藥 高麗人蔘 (Boasting of Flowers, Plants, and Animals - World-Class Specialties, The Divine Medicine of the World, Goryeo Ginseng)
필자	三神山人
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

Empty boasting of general specialties

Boasting! Boasting! Korea's pride! Among the many things to be proud of, specialties will also be a source of pride. The abundant fish in the sea surrounding it on three sides is something to boast about, and the dense forests in the mountains stretching 3,000 li (里) and the rare birds and animals living there, as well as the gold, silver, copper, and iron buried there, are also something to boast about. It has been a long time since Korean tiger skins occupied the thrones of the Chinese and other foreign royal families, but recently, even Pyongyang dog skin is said to be embracing the necks of American women in passionate death. (Recently, Americans in Pyongyang have been trading dog skins for women's scarves, and each one has become as expensive as several tens of won.) The fat and strong cattle of Kwandong and Kwanbuk are capable of stabbing and defeating Spanish bullfighters, and the fertile rice of Kimje and Mankyeong fills the hungry stomachs of the Japanese. The coal from Hamheung and Pyongyang expels Fushun coal every year, and the silk from Gyeongsang and Chungcheong gradually eats into Japanese and French silk weaving. The Jeonju Taegeuk fan makes the purple beards of Westerners flutter, and the feathers of white cranes from Saeun-deul (彩雲들) (in Tangjin) dance on the hats of Western beauties. This should not be seen as merely coming from a kind of curiosity. The lacquerware from Tongyeong and Suncheon and the bamboo crafts from Damyang and Naju gradually conquer foreign household appliances. Even Su Dongpo (蘇東坡), a biased writer who often insulted Goryeo people as the author of the Red Cliff Rhapsody (赤壁賦), praised Goryeo cocoon paper so much that his mouth ran dry. How much more would ordinary Chinese people, who called Korea the Land of Eastern Courtesy (東方禮義之國) or the Land of Eastern Gentlemen (東方君子國), have praised Korean paper? Not only that, but now people all over the world unanimously value Korean paper. Cheonan walnuts have not only been particularly popular in the Chinese culinary world, but recently they have also been greatly welcomed in the Japanese music world. Just hearing the name of the precious Baekja (寶佰子) of Geumgangsan makes foreign children stop crying, and just smelling the fragrance of yellow tobacco from Chungju moves the taste buds of world smokers. The "deuljuk (들죽)" of Hamgyeong Province (near Pungsan) and the soybean meju (大豆黃卷) of Hwanghae Province (Jangyeon) have special names, and the deer antlers and bear gall of Gangwon and Hamgyeong are the best of the best medicines. There is talk that the sugar of Gwanseo will surpass that of Taiwan in the future, but it would not be a absurd statement like the Jeunggammok (鄭鑑錄) to say that the cotton of southern Korea will soon compete with India. Apples from Daegu, Jinnampo, and Deokwon filled the hungry stomachs of the Allied forces during the European war, making them admire Korean apples more than a savior, and chestnuts from Yangju, Pyongyang, and other places were exhibited as gifts in international social gatherings. If it weren't for the timber of the Amnok River, the people of Japan and China would only be able to take naps in caves, and if it weren't for the charcoal of Gangwon Province, the bare hands and feet of the Japanese would turn into duck feet in the severe winter cold. There are truly so many Korean specialties to boast about, but how can I mention them all in the limited time and space of this paper? I will leave the rest and introduce ginseng, which can be said to be the most representative of Korean specialties, as something to be proud of.

What kind of plant is ginseng?

Then, what kind of plant is ginseng and what is the origin of its name? It is a so-called perennial plant belonging to the Araliaceae family in botany, and its scientific name is "Panax Ginseng". The name has various distinctions depending on whether it is from the mountains, cultivation, or manufacturing. The ones that grow naturally in the deep mountains are called wild ginseng (山蔘) or mountain ginseng (野蔘), and the ones transplanted into fields are called cultivated ginseng (圃蔘) or domestic ginseng (家蔘). Among the cultivated ginseng, the ones irrigated with medicinal soil (compost) are called nurtured ginseng (養蔘) or nurtured straight ginseng (養直), and the ones planted directly in flat fields are called straight ginseng (直蔘) or soil straight ginseng (土直). And the steamed ginseng is called red ginseng (包蔘), the ginseng that has been dug out but not yet peeled and dried is called fresh ginseng (水蔘), and the dried ginseng is called white ginseng (白蔘), and the tail of the ginseng is called tail ginseng (尾蔘). In addition, the ginseng from Gaeseong is called Songsam (松蔘) after the place name, and the ginseng from Geumsan is called Geumsam (錦蔘), the ginseng from Ganggye is called Gangsam (江蔘) (in southern Korea, Gangsam refers to ginseng from Gangwon Province), and the ginseng from Girin (formerly Chuncheon territory, now belonging to Inje) is called Gisam (麒蔘). However, among all ginseng, wild ginseng is the most effective, so it has been considered the most precious in Korea and China. In the Compendium of Materia Medica (本草綱目), it is said, "The roots of those that have grown old and deep resemble human figures, so this is called ginseng."

The Origin of Ginseng

The origin of ginseng is still unknown, but according to the Dongguk Yeoji Seungnam (文獻備考), "A woman from Dongbok County (同福縣) in Jeolla Province obtained ginseng seeds in the mountains and planted them in a field. A person named Choi (崔氏) passed them on and planted them, which was the beginning of domestic ginseng." (According to folklore, a woman from Dongbok County, who had no children, always prayed to the sky. One night, an old man with white hair came to her bedside in a dream and said, "If you go to a certain mountain, you will surely have a precious son." The woman felt strange and happy, so she went to the mountain and found not a child, but ginseng leaves with red ginseng berries (蔘實). When she dug them up, the shape of the roots resembled jade children, so she took them home, planted the seeds, and gave the roots to her husband as medicine. In just one year, she gave birth to a son and the ginseng grew well, making her rich.) It also says, "Korean ginseng is prized throughout the world, so Choi took it in sacks to Qing (淸) and sold it. The Qing people, who used ginseng as medicine for those sick with opium addiction, regarded Korean ginseng as a great treasure. However, after eating it, they often became poisoned, so Choi steamed the ginseng and sold it again. The profit was so great that he became the richest man in the province, and this was the beginning of red ginseng." However, considering the historical fact that Emperor Yuan (元帝) asked the Goryeo court for ginseng earlier than this, it can be seen that Korean ginseng was already famous in China at the time of Goryeo. And the ginseng of Gaeseong also originated from Dongbok, but the year is unknown. It is said that a merchant from Gaeseong took the seeds when he traveled to and from Dongbok. Furthermore, it is said that the seedling planting method was first invented by Son Gyeong-in (孫景仁), a descendant of Son Bong-sang (孫奉祥), who is now called the Ginseng King of Gaeseong. (Approximately 100 years ago)

Worldwide Reputation of Ginseng

Since ancient times, Chinese people have regarded Korean ginseng as an elixir of immortality, valuing it highly. The story of Qin Shi Huang (秦始皇), who is called the hero of ten thousand ages, taking 5,000 boys and girls with the Taoist priest Xu Fu (徐福) to find the elixir of immortality on Samshin Mountain (三神山) is famous in history. In modern times, the Qing Dynasty regarded the bestowal of Korean ginseng as the only favor when a high-ranking official was seriously ill, and used it according to custom. Especially in the malaria-prone region of southern China, there is even a custom of going to a pharmacy and renting ginseng when one does not have the money to buy it for a parent's critical illness, displaying it at the bedside, and showing foreigners that one's filial piety is extreme. Another funny thing that happened recently was that when the Korean student soccer team went on an expedition to Shanghai to compete with the Chinese, the Chinese people who were watching were amazed by the tall and agile physiques of the Korean people, saying that it was because Koreans ate a lot of ginseng, and even wrote about it in the newspaper. Just by looking at these few things, you can see how valuable Korean ginseng is. Not only that, but recently, Eastern and Western medical authorities have been researching and announcing this ginseng in particular, causing a great wave in the world of medicine. If I reveal some of the research of these people, it is as follows.
<184>
1. Dr. "Mechnikov," the head of the Pasteur Institute in France and a master of bacteriology, said that continuous use of Korean ginseng essence slows down the rate of aging and retains vigorous energy even in old age.
2. Dr. "Epus Smith" of the same country said that Korean ginseng essence has a great special effect on weak bleeding, indigestion, women's permanent discharge, and the defervescence period of fever.
3. A Russian medical doctor announced the discovery of "Sverumin, Garueing, Goraning" as a result of chemical analysis. (Sverumin is what is called Esbesma, that is, the element of sexual desire, and its effect of inducing sexual desire is greater than Yohimbine, and Garueing and Goraning both have components of mental arousal.)
4. Professor of Medicine and Doctor of Pharmacy Heisaburō Konodō (根藤平三郞) of Tokyo Imperial University, Japan, reported to the Army Medical Corps Group Meeting and the Pharmaceutical Society of Japan that Korean ginseng contains a large amount of special effective ingredients. More recently, he conducted a detailed experiment in the laboratory of the Army Hygiene Material Factory at the request of the Governor-General and announced that the medical treatment effect was definitely remarkable.
5. Dr. Saeki Tadashi (佐伯矩) announced three types of components as a result of chemical analysis regarding the components of Korean ginseng, that is, the first component is called "Gomasin," which induces libido by causing metabolism, diuresis, and excitation through internal medicine and injection; the second component is glycoside, which has the effect of bitter taste phlegm; and the third component is called "Gomashol," which has a disinfection effect.
6. In the clinical experiments of Dr. Yoshimoto and Dr. Kajii of the Japanese Red Cross Hospital, it was said that (1) when ginseng is given to the human body, the effect on diuresis differs depending on whether the kidney is healthy or pathological, and (2) in the case of a diseased kidney (kidney disease), it significantly promotes the elimination of water and solid components, especially salt, in the urine, and inhibits the elimination of nitrogenous substances, which has a beneficial effect on the therapeutic aspect.

In addition, Saito Keihei (齋藤系平), the former director of Jeju Island Jahye Hospital, discovered that ginseng is a specific medicine for diabetes and obtained a doctorate degree with a long thesis of six articles entitled "Research on Korean Ginseng." It is difficult to enumerate such facts one by one, but if you look at the fact that even in the past herbal medicine books, that is, the Yakseongga (藥性歌), it was said, "Ginseng is sweet, greatly replenishes vitality, quenches thirst and generates body fluids!" it can be inferred what kind of reputation ginseng has in the Eastern and Western medical worlds.

Ginseng and Markets in Various Countries

As ginseng is so highly valued worldwide, its sales channels are gradually expanding, and it is crossing not only to the Chinese and Japanese markets but also to the distant South Sea Islands and the Americas, driving out cheap American ginseng. Red ginseng, in particular, is sold at a high price of 200 won per catty in the Chinese market, and the total production last autumn was 40,000 catties of red ginseng, 100,000 catties of white ginseng, and 30,000 catties of tail ginseng. Red ginseng belongs to the Monopoly Bureau and is exported to the Chinese market through Mitsui Company's sole sale. White ginseng is mostly consumed in Korea and exported to southern China, the South Sea Islands, and the Americas (mainly large products). Tail ginseng is mostly exported to Japan for use in manufacturing, so it is becoming more expensive every year. Exports have been increasing dramatically every year, and there is a lament of insufficient demand until the annual production period. It is clear that if we encourage cultivation more in the future, Korean ginseng will conquer the world market.

=Goryeo Ginseng Anecdote=

It is well known that Gaeseong Goryeo ginseng has a worldwide reputation, but the Gaeseong ginseng merchants should not forget that they have made many contributions to social projects without being too eager for profit. As an example, they bore a part of the expenses of Jeonghwa Girls' School (貞和女校) several years ago, and for several years, they organized the Goryeo Youth Hall (高麗靑年會舘) Construction Promotion Committee and collected 4 jeon (錢) per head for each after-ginseng (後蔘) (what comes out as a remainder after selecting red ginseng materials from the Monopoly Bureau) (for 3 years) to build a three-story Western-style house (reinforced concrete) made of granite, with a total price of about 40,000 won. It is said that they are trying to build not only the interior decoration but also the basic fund of the association. When you see the Goryeo Youth Hall, which stands in the eastern part of Gaeseong, you will know the power of Goryeo ginseng and the contribution of ginseng merchants to social projects.
<185>

**Named Entities**

別乾坤	Byeolgeongeon
三神山	Samshinsan
平壤	Pyeongyang
關東	Kwandong
關北	Kwanbuk
金堤	Kimje
萬頃	Mankyeong
咸興	Hamheung
撫順炭	Museuntan
慶尙	Gyeongsang
忠淸	Chungcheong
全州	Jeonju
太極扇	Taegeukseon
唐津	Tangjin
統營	Tongyeong
順天	Suncheon
潭陽	Damyang
羅州	Naju
蘇東坡	So Dongpo
高麗	Goryeo
天安	Cheonan
胡桃	Hodo
金剛山	Geumgangsan
寶佰子	Bobaekja
忠州	Chungju
咸鏡道	Hamgyeongdo
豐山	Pungsan
黃海道	Hwanghaedo
長淵	Jangyeon
江原	Gangwon
鹿茸	Nokyong
熊膽	Ungdam
關西	Gwanseo
臺灣	Taiwan
南朝鮮	Namjoseon
棉花	Myeonhwa
印度	India
伯仲	Baekjung
鄭鑑錄	Jeonggamnok
大邱	Daegu
鎭南浦	Jinnampo
德源	Deogwon
苹果	Pyeonggwa
楊州	Yangju
鴨綠江	Amnokgang
秦始皇	Chin Shi Huang
徐福	Seo Bok
高麗朝廷	Goryeo Jojeong
元帝	Wonti
開城	Gaeseong
麒麟	Girin
麟蹄	Inje
元春川	Wonchuncheon
孫奉祥	Son Bong-sang
孫景仁	Son Gyeong-in
佛蘭西	Beullanseo
파스트유-ㄹ 細菌硏究所	Paseuteuyu-l Sekyun Yeonguso
메지니고후	Mejinigohu
에푸스미스	Eposeu Miseu
露國	Roguk
스베루밍	Seuberuming
가루에잉	Garueing
고라닝	Goraning
東京帝國大學	Donggyeong Jeguk Daehak
根藤平三郞	Konodō Heisaburō
佐伯矩	Saeki Tadashi
赤十字社病院	Jeoksimjasa Byeongwon
吉本	Yoshimoto
梶井	Kajii
齋藤系平	Saitō Keihei
慈惠院	Jahye Won
漢方醫書	Hanbang Uiseo
藥性歌	Yakseongga
南洋羣島	Namyang Gundo
三井會社	Samjeon Hoesa
貞和女校	Jeonghwa Yeohyo
高麗靑年會舘	Goryeo Cheongnyeon Hoegwan
花岡石	Hwagangseok



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	花草動物자랑-世界的 特産物, 天下靈藥 高麗人蔘
필자	三神山人
기사형태	논설

花草動物자랑-世界的 特産物, 天下靈藥 高麗人蔘
						三神山人
一般 特産物의 헛튼 자랑
자랑! 자랑! 朝鮮의 자랑! 그 여러 가지 자랑 속에는 特産物도 또한 자랑거리가 만흘 것이다. 三面으로 들너 잇는 바다 속에 豐富한 魚族도 자랑할만하고 3000里를 뻐처 잇는 산악 속에 鬱蒼한 森林과 거긔에 棲息하는 珍禽奇獸, 거긔에 藏在하야 잇는 金銀銅鐵 등도 역시 자랑할 만하다. 朝鮮의 虎皮가 中國이나 기타 外國 皇室의 玉座를 점령한 것은 이미 歷史가 오랫지만은 近日에는 平壤의 개가죽까지도 米國女子의 목아지를 안고 情死하랴 한다.(근일에 平壤에서 米人이 女子 목도리 所用으로 狗皮를 貿易하는데 1個 數10圓까지 高貴하게 된 일이 잇다.) 關東 關北의 살지고 긋센 소는 西班牙의 鬪牛士를 능히 찔너 메트릴 만하고 金堤 萬頃의 기름진 쌀은 日本 사람의 주린 창자를 배불이 한다. 咸興과 平壤의 石炭이 撫順炭을 해마다 驅逐하고 慶尙, 忠淸의 繭絲는 날로 日本과 法蘭西의 絹織을 蠶食한다. 全州 太極扇이 西洋 코백이의 紫髥을 날니게 되고 彩雲들(在唐津)의 白鶴의 털이 西洋 美人의 모자우에서 춤을 추게 된 것은 一種好奇心에서 나온 것으로만 볼 것이 안이어니와 統營 順天의 螺漆工品과 潭陽 羅州의 竹細工品은 점차 外國人의 家庭 器具를 征服한다. 赤壁賦作 者로 高麗 사람을 侮辱 잘하든 偏見 文章 蘇東坡도 高麗 繭紙에는 입에 침이 마르게 嘖嘖稱誦하얏거든 朝鮮을 東方禮義之國이니 東方君子國이니 하는 보통 中國사람으로서야 朝鮮의 紙物을 여간 칭찬하얏슬가 부냐. 뿐만 안이라 지금에 와서는 世界사람이 다 일치하게 朝鮮의 紙物을 貴히 녁인다. 天安의 胡桃는 自來 中國 料理界에서 특별한 膾炙를 바덧슬 뿐안이라 近來에는 日本 樂學界에서 또한 만흔 歡迎을 반는다. 金剛山의 寶佰子는 이름만 드러도 外國  兒童들이 우름을 긋치고 忠州의 黃色 煙草는 香臭만 맛터도 世界 愛煙家의 비위가 動한다. 咸鏡道(豐山附近)의「들죽」과 黃海道(長淵)의＜182＞ 大豆黃卷은 이름부터 特別하거니와 江原 咸鏡의 鹿茸, 熊膽은 名藥 중 또 명약이다. 關西의 砂糖이 미래에 臺灣産을 능가하겟다는 평도 잇지만은 南朝鮮의 棉花가 未久에 印度와 伯仲을 닷투겟다는 것은 그리 鄭鑑錄 가튼 虛誕한 말은 안일 것이다. 大邱, 鎭南浦, 德源 등지의 苹果는 歐洲大戰時代에 벌서 列國軍隊의 주린 배를 채워주어 朝鮮 苹果를 救世主 이상으로 사모하게 되엿고 楊州, 平壤 등지의 栗은 國際社交場에 贈答物로 出品을 하게 디엿다. 鴨綠江의 목재가 안이면 日中 兩國의 사람들이 土窟이나 石窟 속에서 낫잠만 잘 터이오 江原道의 木炭이 안이면 嚴冬雪寒 때에 발가숭이 日人의 手足이 오리발이 되고 말 것이다. 이와 가티 朝鮮의 특산을 드러 자랑하자면 참으로 수가 만치만은 벗분 시간과 制限이 잇는 紙面에 엇지 일일이 다 말할 수 잇스랴. 여간 것은 이만하야두고 朝鮮 特産物 중에도 제일 대표적이라 할만한 人蔘을 드러서 자랑삼아 잠깐 소개하랴 한다.

人蔘은 엇더한 植物인가
그러면 人蔘은 과연 엇더한 植物이며 그 名稱의 久別은 또한 엇더한가. 그것은 植物學上에 所謂 宿根性 植物(즉 多年生 植物)로 五加科에 屬한 者이니 學名은 「파낙스긴센(Panaz Gin Seng)」이다. 名稱은 山地, 栽培, 製造 등의 것더한 것을 따러서 種種의 別이 잇스니 深山 중에서 自生自長한 것을 山蔘 또는 野蔘이라 하고 田圃에 移種한 것을 圃蔘 또는 家蔘이라 하며 圃蔘 중에 藥土(堆肥)로 灌養한 것을 養蔘 혹은 養直이라 하고 平田에 直種한 것을 直蔘 혹은 土直이라 한다. 그리고 蔘의 蒸造한 것을 紅蔘(包蔘)이라 하고 캐서 아즉 깍지 안코 말이지 안은 것을 水蔘이라 하며 乾製한 것을 白蔘이라 하고 蔘의 꼬리를 尾蔘이라 한다. 此外에 地名을 따러서 開城産을 松蔘이라 함과 가티 錦山産을 錦蔘, 江界産을 江蔘(南鮮에서 江蔘이라 하면 江原道産을 指稱함이다) 麒麟産(元春川屬地로 今에 麟蹄에 移屬함)을 麒蔘이라 稱한다. 然而 諸 蔘中 山蔘은 藥效가 最神한 者로 故로 朝鮮 及 中國에서 가장 貴重이 녁엿스니 本草綱目에 소위 「年深長成한 者는 根이 人形과 如함으로 此를 人蔘이라 위한다.」云함이 이것이다.

人蔘의 起源
人蔘의 起源은 그 年代가 아즉 未詳하나 文獻備考에 의하면 「全羅道同福縣女子가 山中에서 蔘子를 어더서 그것을 밧에 심어더니 崔氏라는 이가 傳하야 播植하니 이것이 家蔘의 始初라」云하얏고(俗傳에 同福縣의 한 婦人이 아들이 업서서 항상 하눌에 祈禱를 하엿더니 하루밤 꿈에는 엇떤 白髮老人이 枕頭에 와서 말하기를 네가 어느 山으로 오면 반듯이 貴한 아들을 어더리라 함으로 그 婦人이 이상이 녁기고 깃버하야 그 山中에 가서 차진 즉 아히는 업고 삼딸(蔘實)이＜183＞ 빨갓케 익은 蔘입이 뵘으로 그것을 캐서 본 즉 뿌리의 形狀이 玉童子와 가틈으로 가지고 와서 씨는 심으고 뿌리는 약으로 그 남편을 먹이엿더니 불과 1년에 아들을 낫코 또 蔘도 잘 되야서 富者가 되엿다 한다) 또 曰하되 「朝鮮의 蔘은 天下의 所貴인 故로 崔氏는 그것을 가마니 가지고 淸國에 가서 파니 淸人의 阿片에 病든 者가 人蔘을 藥으로 쓰는 故로 우리 朝鮮人蔘을 보고 甚히 珍寶로 思하얏다. 그러나 그것을 먹고는 往往히 中毒이 됨으로 崔氏는 다시 蔘을 蒸造하야 發賣한 바 그 利가 莫大하야 富가 一道에 冠하얏스니 이것이 紅蔘의 始初라」云하얏다. 그러나 이보다 先하야 元帝가 高麗朝廷에 請하야 人蔘을 어더간 史實을 보면 高麗 當時에 벌서 朝鮮의 人蔘이 中國에 著名하얏든 것을 알 수 잇다. 그리고 開城의 人蔘은 그 系統이 또한 同福에서 來하얏는데 그 年代는 또한 未詳하나 開城의 商人이 同福에 來往할 때에 取種한 것이라 하며 尙又苗蔘의 種植法은 現今 開城에서 人蔘大王이라 칭하는 孫奉祥씨의 族曾祚되는 孫景仁이라 하는 이가 츠음으로 발명하얏다 한다.(距今 約 100餘年前)

人蔘의 世界的 聲價
自來에 中國 사람들은 朝鮮의 人蔘을 不死藥이니 不老長生之劑이니 하야 특히 貴重히 녁이엿스니 彼 萬古 英雄兒라 칭하는 秦始皇이 方士 徐福으로 童男童女 5,000人을 거나리고 三神山 不死藥을 구하얏다는 것은 歷史上 유명한 이약이어니와 近世 淸朝에서는 大官의 病革한 時에는 朝鮮人蔘의 下賜를 唯一한 優遇로 생각하야 依例히 사용하고 특히 南支那 瘴癘之鄕에서는 父母의 병이 危急할 대에 人蔘을 買用할 돈이 업는 사람은 남의 藥舖에 가서 賃借를 하여 다가 病床에 陳列하야 놋코 外人에게 자기의 孝誠이 至極하다는 것을 뵈이는 習慣까지 잇다 한다. 近日에 또 한가지 우서운 일은 朝鮮 學生蹴球團이 上海에 遠征을 가서 中國人과 시합을 하는데 朝鮮 사람의 體格 長大한 것과 날낸 것을 보고는 觀光하는 中國 사람들이 嘖嘖稱歎하면서 하는 말이 朝鮮 사람은 人蔘을 만히 먹기 때문에 저럿타고 하고 심지어 신문에까지 그러한 말을 기재하얏섯다. 이 몃가지의 일만 보와도 漕船人蔘의 聲價가 엇더한 것을 알 수 잇다. 그 뿐이냐. 近來 東西醫學大家들은 이 人蔘을 특히 연구 발표하야 世界 醫學界에 일대 波文을 이르킨다. 이제 그 몃사람의 硏究한 것을 公開하면 이러하다.
1. 佛蘭西 파스트유-ㄹ 細菌硏究所長 細菌學 大家「메지니고후」博士는 曰하되 朝鮮人蔘精을 계속하야 服用하면 老衰의 度를 遲緩케 하고 老年에 至할지라도 尙히 *鑠한 원기를 보유한다 하고.
2. 同國 딱터 「에푸스미스」氏는 曰하되 朝鮮人蔘精은 虛弱的 出血, 消化不良 婦人의 永續的 排出物 及 熱病의 退熱期 등에 一大 特效가 잇다 하고.
3. 露國의 一醫學搏士는 化學分析의 結果 「스베루밍, 가루에잉, 고라닝」등을 發見한 旨를 발표하얏다. (스베루밍, 은스베스마 즉 情蟲의 素라 하는 것인데 情慾을 誘起함이 彼 요힝삥 以上의 作用을 有하고 가루에잉, 고라닝은 공히 精神興奮作用의 成分이 有함)
4. 日本 東京帝國大學 醫科大學 敎授 藥學博士 根藤平三郞氏는＜184＞ 曩者에 陸軍軍醫團集團會 及 日本藥學會에 朝鮮人蔘이 특수의 有效成分을 多量으로 含有한 事를 보고하고 更히 最近에 至하야는 總督府 依囑에 의하야 陸軍衛生材料廠의 實驗室에서 精細한 試驗을 遂하야 醫治效果의 確實顯著한 것을 發表하얏고.
5. 醫學搏士 佐伯矩씨는 朝鮮人蔘의 성분에 관하야 化學的 分析의 缺課 3種의 成分을 發表하얏스니 즉 제1成分은「고마싱」이라 稱하는 者로 內服 及 注射에 의하야 新陳代謝 作用과 利尿, 亢奮作用 등을 起하야 情慾을 誘起케 하고 제2成分은 配糖體니 苦味袪痰의 效가 有하고 제 3成分은「고마쇼-ㄹ」이라 하는 者이니 消毒作用을 한다 하얏스며
6. 日本 赤十字社病院의 吉本醫學搏士 及 梶井博士의 臨床的 實驗에는 曰하되 (1)人蔘을 人體에 與할 시는 腎臟이 健康한 경우와 病的인 경아를 따러서 利尿作用에 及하는 影響이 相異하고 (2)病的腎(腎臟病)인 경우는 尿의 水分 及 固形成分 특히 食鹽의 排除를 顯著히 促進식히고 含窒素體의 排除를 抑制하는 데에 治療的 方面에 유리한 영향을 준다고 認하겟다 하얏다.
此外에 元濟州島 慈惠院長 齋藤系平氏는 人蔘이 糖尿病의 特效藥인 것을 發見하고 「朝鮮人蔘에 관한 硏究」라는 6編의 長論文으로 博士의 學位까지 어덧섯다. 如斯한 事實은 이로 枚擧키 어렵거니와 過去 漢方醫書 즉 藥性歌에도「人蔘은 甘味하니 大補元氣하고 止渴生津!」이라 한 것을 보면 人蔘이 東西 醫學界에도 여하한 名價가 잇는 것을 推知할 것이다.

人蔘과 各國 市場
人蔘은 이와가티 聲價가 世界的으로 놉흠으로 그 販路가 점차 擴大하야 中國, 日本의 市場은 물론이고 근래에는 멀이 南洋羣島 米洲까지 건너가서 米國産의 廉價人蔘을 驅逐한다. 그런대 紅蔘과 가튼 것은 中國市場에서 1斤 200圓의 高價로 賣行하는 바 昨秋 總産量은 紅蔘 4만근, 白蔘 10만근, 尾蔘 3만근으로서 紅蔘은 專賣局에 屬하야 三井會社의 一手販賣로 中國시장에 수출되고 白蔘은 대부분 朝鮮에서 소비되는 외에 南支那 및 南洋羣島, 米洲등지에 수출되고(주로 片大品) 尾蔘은 대개 日本 방면으로 수출되야 제제용에 供함으로 年年이 騰貴한다. 이와 가티 輸出이 해마다 激增되야 每年 生産期까지 需用不足의 歎이 잇슨 즉 이 압푸로 재배를 더 장려하면 朝鮮의 人蔘이 世界市場을 征服할 것은 明瞭한 일이다.

=高麗人蔘 美話=
開城 高麗人蔘이 世界的으로 名聲이 놉품은 세상 사람이 周知하는 바어니와 開城蔘業者들은 營利에만 急急하지 안코 社會事業에도 만은 功勞가 잇슴을 니저서는 아니된다. 그 실례로는 수년 전에 貞和女校 經費 一部를 負擔한 일이 잇고 수년 전부터는 高麗靑年會舘 建築期成委員會를 조직하고 後蔘(專賣局에서 紅蔘材料를 선택하고 나마지로 나오는 것) 每次頭에 4錢式 醵出하야(3년간) 花岡石 3階(철근큰크리트) 洋屋을 建築하엿는대 총 가격 약 4만원이라 하며 내부장식은 물론 同會 基本金까지도 세워 느려고 노력 중이라 한다 開城 東部에 *立한 高麗靑年會舘을 볼 때에 高麗人蔘의 威力을 알 것이며 蔘業者들의 社會事業에 功勞잇슴을 알 수 잇슬 것이다.＜185＞
＜182-185＞