別乾坤 제12·13호
1928년 05월 01일
記者大增員!! 大大活躍六月號의 一部豫告 (Notice of Greatly Increased Reporters!! Partial Preview of the Greatly Active June Issue)
사고·편집후기 (Notice/Post-editing)

Partial Preview of This Magazine's June Issue, Overflowing with Novelty on the Early Summer Pages
The Way of New Conduct and New Self-Cultivation... Kim Ki-t'aek, Ryu Kwang-ryol
The world is changing day by day. In this rapidly changing world, this invaluable text indicates the way to behave and most kindly teaches new self-cultivation as a new member of society.

Modern Men and Women Hundred Idiots... Ch'a-dol-i, Pak-tol-i
If there is someone you usually dislike, read this article. The person you hate will surely be among these hundred people, a cathartic satire.

"The Great Kyŏngsŏng Mad Dance" (大京城狂舞曲)... SsangS-saeng, Sŏkhwa-saeng
This is a new article about the talk of the town in Kyŏngsŏng and the countryside! A great satirical article with the sharp pens of the bizarre reporters SsangS-kun and Sŏkhwa-kun!!!

Serial Story "Morning" (아츰)... First Installment, Ch'oe Nam-sŏn
A grand serial story starting its first page amidst the great expectations of ten million people! What will the content be... A special great read that all Koreans will read with their hearts.

Reader Jury On-Paper Trial... First Trial Opens
A factual true story more precious than a novel! Read this and become a judge to deliver a verdict, a beneficial new plan for the first time in Korea. <186>

If You Marry a Short-Haired Woman... Newspaper Reporters
If you cut your hair short and marry a modern girl who walks around with her buttocks, what will the family be like and what will the life of the husband be like...? Written by newspaper reporters.

Secret Occupation Exhibition... Rarest of the Rare, Most Secret of Secrets
As the world changes and material civilization flourishes, the secret occupations of young men and women increase. Readers, wait for the June issue and see this amazing article.

Visitation Log of Each School Principal's Wife... New Female Reporter
The first activity log of a newly joined female reporter! Visitation log of the wives of principals who act like tigers to students! What did she see? What did she write?

Twenty-Eight Sixteen Maiden Reader... Special Feature New Reader
Secret knowledge for maidens that cannot be learned at school or from parents! But knowledge that is absolutely necessary for everyone, an article that unmarried women must read.

Reporters' Total Infiltration into the Den of Demons... Tail Investigation Log
Five new reporters who have newly joined and old reporters skilled in investigation are all mobilized! A great investigation into the den of demons in a world full of sins. Students in the city should read it, and fathers and older brothers in the countryside should also read it.

Other Early Summer Articles Eighty-Plus... Order Quickly <187>

**Named Entities**

金起田	Kim Ki-t'aek
柳光烈	Ryu Kwang-ryŏl
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
雙S生	SsangS-saeng
石火生	Sŏkhwa-saeng
崔南善	Ch'oe Nam-sŏn



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	記者大增員!! 大大活躍六月號의 一部豫告
기사형태	사고·편집후기

記者大增員!! 大大活躍六月號의 一部豫告
初夏誌上 新味橫溢하는 本誌六月號의 一部
新處世ㆍ新修養의 道……金起田 柳光烈
世上은 나날이 變해간다. 이 急變해가는 世上에 處해가는길을 指示하고 새로운 社會人으로의 新修養을 가장 親切히가르키는 重寶文字
現代男女百멍텅……차돌이 박돌이
平素에밉살스럽던 사람이잇거던 이 記事를 닑으시오 당신의 미워하던 人物이 반듯이 이 百名中에잇슬것이니 痛快無比한 諷刺
『大京城狂舞曲』……雙S生 石火生
이거야말로 京鄕의이약이리될 興味잇는 新記事! 怪記者双S君과 石火君의 날카로운 붓으로되는 大大諷刺記事!!!
連作講談『아츰』……第一回 崔南善
千萬人士의 宏壯한 期待中에 첫페지를 始作하는 大連作講談!
內容이 무엇일가……朝鮮사람다갓치 마음녁여닑을 特別大讀物
讀者陪審誌上裁判……第一回 開廷
小說보다 珍奇한 事實奇話! 이것을 닑고 讀者가 判官이되야 審判을하라는 朝鮮서 처음되는 有益한 新計劃＜186＞
斷髮娘과 結婚하면……新聞記者諸氏
머리를 거던지고 궁등이로 거러다니는 모던과 結婚한다면 그 家庭이 엇덜고 그 男便의 生活이엇덜고……新聞記者諸氏執筆
秘密職業展覽會……珍中珍秘中秘
世上이 變해갈스록 物質文明이 곤댓짓할스록 나젊은 男女의 秘密職業이느러간다 讀者여 六月號를 기다려이놀나운 記事를보라
各校長夫人巡訪記……新入社女記者
新入社婦人記者의 第一回活動記! 學生들에게 호랑이 노릇하는 校長님들의 夫人巡訪記! 무엇을 보앗나 무엇을 적엇나
二八十六處女讀本……大特輯新讀本
學校에서도 父母에게도 배호지못하는 處女들의 秘密智識! 그러나 누구에게나 絶對必要한 智識 未婚女子 必讀記事
記者總出魔窟探査記……尾行記探査記
새로新入한 五人의 新記者와 探査의 손닉은 舊記者總出動! 罪惡만흔 世上의 魔窟大探査都會의 學生도 닑고 鄕村의 學父兄도닑으라
其他初夏記事八十餘…………注文을 速히＜187＞
＜186-187＞