잡지명	별건곤 제16·17호
발행일	1928년 12월 01일
기사제목	하로 時間을 엇더케 쓰나, 各方面名士의 一日生活, 職業따라 다른 生活
기사형태	설문

Magazine Title: 別乾坤 제16·17호
Publication Date: 1928년 12월 01일
Article Title: 하로 時間을 엇더케 쓰나, 各方面名士의 一日生活, 職業따라 다른 生活 (How Do You Spend Your Day? The Daily Lives of Celebrities in Various Fields, Different Lives According to Profession)
Article Type: 설문 (Questionnaire)

How Do You Spend Your Day? The Daily Lives of Celebrities in Various Fields, Different Lives According to Profession

Yun Ch'i-ho
Because I don't have a fixed job like others, I don't have to work for a certain number of hours. I used to read a lot every day, but after spending many years in prison, sleeping directly under intense lights and doing a lot of net-making work, my eyesight has deteriorated a lot, and now I can't read well. I get up at 6:30 in the morning, do indoor exercises and wash up, etc., and have tea at 7:30 (breakfast is abolished). Then, I protect the young children who go to elementary school and take them to school, spending the morning mostly at the school. At 12 o'clock, I come home and have lunch. In the afternoon, I take care of things at home or at the Changmun Society (彰文社) or other youth associations. Dinner is usually around 6 o'clock, and I go to bed early at 8 or 9 o'clock.

Hwimun High School Principal Yi Yun-ju
I usually get up at 6 o'clock in the morning, wash my face, and go up the mountain behind Ch'uiun Pavilion (翠雲亭) for exercise and a walk. After returning home, I finish preparing to go to school, finish my meal, and then come to school. As the person in charge of the school, I spend the whole day with the students, teaching my assigned courses (geography and history) until 5 p.m., while also overseeing the overall affairs of the school.
When I return home, I spend some time relaxing with the children. I rest my tired mind and body from work and give the children a pleasant time. When I spend time with the children, singing songs and playing games, I feel like my mind is purified and I become younger in a world without worries. After this time, I read newspapers or magazines before or after dinner, and I also look at Western geography and Western history, but mainly I study Eastern history and geography, and primarily research Korean classical geography and history. If I go out, it's a different story, but when I'm at home, I usually read until 11 p.m. and then go to sleep.

Chungang High School Principal Ch'oe Tu-sŏn
I get up at 7 o'clock in the morning, finish all the preparations for going to school, finish breakfast, and then come to school. Until 5 p.m., I teach the school work and moral education courses that I am assigned to students, and in my spare time, I read. Among the readings, I read a lot about philosophy and education, <50> and I am particularly interested in philosophy and do some research.
After 6 p.m., after finishing dinner, I visit friends or usually read newspapers and magazines, and then rest around 11 o'clock.

Kyŏngsŏng Girls' High School Vice-Principal Chang Ŭng-jin
I don't drink alcohol or smoke, and I don't particularly like socializing with others. Because my life is so simple, my daily life is relatively regular. At 6 a.m., I routinely get up and do a cold water rubdown, and immediately go to the mountain for about an hour of exercise. Then I come home and eat breakfast. I usually go to work at school at 8 a.m. and stay until 5 p.m., then go home and read the newspaper and take care of things at home. On Saturday afternoons and Sundays, there is no official work time, so I usually visit friends and do housework on those days. My interests are mainly in literature and philosophy, so I read a lot of books about those subjects.

Tongdŏk Girls' High School Principal Cho Tong-sik
For about 20 years, I have made it a point to get up at 6 a.m. Then, I exercise in the house for 30 minutes and also do cleaning. I clean not only my bedroom but also the garden with my own hands. After that, I think about what I will do that day, write it down in a notebook, and then carry out my school work or personal affairs according to the record every day.
For over 20 years, I have never been late, and I always leave for home around 6 p.m. For reading, I enjoy reading self-improvement books.

Girls' Commercial School Principal Yi Hyŏn-gyu
I usually wake up at 6 a.m. Every morning, I go up the mountain for exercise and wash up there. Then, I come home, eat breakfast, and come to school. From 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., I attend to the school's scheduled hours, and after work, I visit people and take care of other business, returning home between 5:30 and 6 p.m.

Tongdŏk Girls' High School Head Teacher Paek Nam-gyu
After getting up, I write down in my notebook all the things I need to do at school. Next, I prepare the content of the courses I am in charge of. And then I eat breakfast.
At school, I proceed as written in my notebook.
In the afternoon, I spend my time doing various things and then return home when the sun sets.
When I get home, I am so tired that I look through a few books, have a conversation with my family, or play games, and then go to bed around 10 o'clock.
I attend student gatherings or lectures regardless of the time. This is my habit.

Paichai High School Head Teacher Kim Tong-hyŏk
I usually get up at 5 a.m. After that, I help the children going to school with their review and preview until 7:30, finish washing up and eating, and come to school before 8:30. From 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m., I finish all the hours of the museum course that I am in charge of, as well as the school affairs, and sometimes I go straight home, but usually I visit people or take a walk and get home around 7 p.m. <51> At night, I read newspapers, magazines, or research books on the museum that I specialize in, and occasionally I read self-improvement books and the Bible. Around 10 o'clock, my daughter, who attends Sukmyŏng (淑明), starts playing the "p'unggŭm" (풍금) [organ], and the five children, including the one attending kindergarten, take turns dancing and singing, and the whole family laughs and enjoys themselves.

Chungdong School Physical Education Teacher Ch'oe U-dong
I usually go to bed at 10 p.m. and get up at 7 a.m. The school I currently work at has a morning and afternoon division, so there are more physical education hours than other schools. Also, I founded the judo club, tennis club, and soccer club and lead them, so the exercise I do at school makes my body tired. Therefore, I do not do any regular exercise at home.

Han Ki-ak, Editorial Director of the Chosun Ilbo: 8 hours of sleep, 7 hours of newspaper work, 1 hour of meals, 3 hours of reading, 2 hours of exercise, 1 hour of visiting and entertaining, 2 hours of other activities.

Mun Il-p'yŏng, Editorial Writer of the Chosun Ilbo
I get up around 5 a.m. and go to Sajik Park (社稷公園) without washing my face, where I do breathing exercises or take a walk for about 2 hours, and then come home and eat breakfast. When I don't have school hours early in the morning, I spend a few tens of minutes contemplating and reading, but when I have school early in the morning, I go straight to school. I have several hours a week at Paichai High School and the Girls' Commercial School, and recently I joined the Chosun Ilbo and go to work every day, even if I don't stay for many hours. However, since the hours at various places are mostly in the morning, I have a lot of free time in the afternoon, so I visit friends and read at home. In terms of hobbies, I have some interest in poetry, alcohol, and historical research. The happiest time is when I write a manuscript and think I wrote it well, and when I teach students and they understand well. The most difficult time is when creditors come to demand money.

Min T'ae-wŏn, Editorial Director of the Chungoe Ilbo
Because I am a newspaper employee, the time I get up in the morning and the time I eat are not fixed, and the time I go home for dinner is only a few times a month. The only thing I do regularly is sleep. Whether it's 10 o'clock or 8 o'clock, it's not that I always go to bed at that time, but I always sleep for about 7 hours, no matter when I go to bed. As it is my responsibility to do every day, I always look at various newspapers, telegrams, and communications, but recently I haven't done any special reading. This is a regret in my life.

Yi Ik-sang, Arts and Culture Editor of the Dong-A Ilbo
I get up around 6 a.m. and write manuscripts for about 2 hours, have breakfast around 8:30, and go to work at the company at 9:30. I usually work at the company until 3 p.m., and after that, I take a walk or visit friends, and in the evening, I always go to the theater and return home around 11 or 12 o'clock and go to sleep.

Hyŏn Chin-gŏn, Social Affairs Editor of the Dong-A Ilbo
I get up at 5 p.m., using my bedding as a study, and enjoy reading literature or ideological books. Around 7 o'clock, I go to the mountains or the riverside for a pre-dinner stroll, and have breakfast around 8 o'clock. Because the newspaper company and my home (outside Chang'ŭimun) are far apart, I leave at 8:30 and arrive at work at 9:30. Until 4:30 p.m., I am absorbed in editing the newspaper, and after the newspaper is finished, I go to the duty room and pass the time playing baduk (바둑) [Go]. I go home at dusk. After eating dinner, there is not much to do, so I make books my only friend. Because I originally have insomnia, I sometimes read until 3 a.m.

Pak Ch'an-hŭi, Local Affairs Editor of the Dong-A Ilbo
Before meals, I exercise by chopping firewood and fetching water, and I also drink a "cup" of cold water as a routine (so-called medicinal water). After eating breakfast, I go to work at the company around 9:30, and after finishing my work at the company around 3 p.m., I play baduk in the duty room, or if not, I go out to visit friends, and return home around 5 or 6 o'clock. I help my child who goes to school with their review and take care of the young children, and I usually go to bed around 10 o'clock. I regret that I don't have time to read, but I subscribe to the Kaizo magazine (改造雜誌) every month as a duty and read it from beginning to end without skipping a single page.

Yi Hang-jong, Manager of the Hanil Bank
Every day is just like a squirrel turning a wheel. I sleep soundly in the evening, wake up in the morning, eat breakfast, and go to work or leave work according to the bank's schedule. Since there are many kinds of newspapers at home, I read them all at night to relieve boredom and fall asleep. Other than that, I might call "billiards" my entertainment.

No Ki-jŏng, Manager of the Hansŏng Bookstore
I am in the company day and night, and I sacrifice all my time to the company continuously, not just at certain times, so I can't say that I do anything at a specific time. Therefore, I don't have time to exercise and not much time to read. It's really like a tteok (떡) [rice cake] seller only smelling the tteok and not being able to eat it. I see a lot of books at the company, but I don't have time to read their contents well. I only read some books while waiting for food when I go to eat. In terms of hobbies, I only have a hobby for books, and among them, I love to read self-improvement books and books on ethics and morality. <53>

Chang Tu-hyŏn, Hŭngil Company
It sounds like I'm boasting, but I think I'm the first person in Seoul to wake up, the first to go to bed, and the most regular in my daily life. Whenever, without fail, at 5 a.m., I open all the windows, doors, and gates with my own hands and wake up all the family members. Then, I go back to my bedroom, do a cold water rubdown, and clean the room. I always eat breakfast at 7:30, and leave the house around 8 o'clock. Since it's not yet time for work, I walk around Chongno or other city streets, and go to work at the company at 9 o'clock. At 12 o'clock, I go home to handle personal mail or other housework, and eat lunch at 1:30 p.m. After that, I take a nap for about 30 minutes, and then visit friends, drink alcohol with friends, or read at home. I always go to bed at 8 p.m. The fixed times I mentioned above are always carried out, no matter what day it is. This includes Sundays and even when I have a mild illness. I like cleanliness very much, so I always clean the room three times a day on a regular basis. My hobbies are alcohol, baduk, and reading. I have been reading classical Chinese books since I was young, and these days I read a lot of books such as Seojŏn (書傳) and Juyeok Gyesa (周易繫辭).

Yi Kang-hyŏn, Manager of the Kyŏngsŏng Textile Company
I wake up at 5:30 a.m. and help the children with their review for about half an hour. After having breakfast at 6:30, I leave for the factory (Yŏngdŭngp'o) around 7:00, where I work until 10:00. Then I return to Seoul to take care of company matters, and at 1:00 p.m. I go back to the Yŏngdŭngp'o factory. I suffer from the smell of smoke and the noise of machines there until 6 p.m., and at 6 p.m. I go back home.

Sŏhae, Ch'oe Hak-song
It was like this when I was only writing novels, but after becoming a newspaper reporter, my personal life has become even more pathetic. When I used to write novels, I often drank some alcohol in the early evening, went to bed early, and usually woke up at 1 or 2 a.m. to write. This is because drinking alcohol made me fall asleep early and wake up early, and even if I drank a lot, my head and body would feel refreshed after sleeping. But now, as you can see, three households live in one room, so I can't even find a place to sit with a book, let alone read or write.
I've become accustomed to waking up, so even now I wake up at 2 a.m. If I could read a book or write a manuscript at that time, it would be great, but if I turn on the light, the children will wake up, so I just lie down with my eyes open and grumble. I get out of bed around 7 o'clock, play with the baby for a bit, wash my face, and play with the baby again before eating breakfast - since the newspaper company starts at 9 o'clock - I leave the house around 8:30. Since the company work is internal, I finish my work around 3 or 4 p.m. and leave the company, but since there is no place to sit at home, I just walk around wherever my feet take me, meet anyone I come across, go to a drinking party, or go to a friend's house. And I sleep at a friend's house more often than in my own room. So, how can I write or even quietly read someone else's work? I started reading a work by a Russian woman a month ago, but I've only read half of it. One of the novels I recently wrote in the Maeil Shinbo (每日申報) was written with great difficulty after pretending to be sick and going to a temple outside the city for a week. "Ruin" is all I can say.

Yi Ŭn-sang, Kyemyŏng Club
I go to work at 9 a.m., lunch time is from noon to 1 p.m., and I go home around 4:30 p.m. During work, I do my usual assigned tasks, and during lunch, I pass the time playing baduk for a while. I usually wake up at 4:30 or 5 a.m., but it's not because I'm diligent, but because I can't help but wake up because of the children. My reading time is from 11 p.m. to 12 a.m. I have a lot of interest in reading and I think I can't abandon reading for my own development, but since there is no room and time to read, I forcibly find a quiet time in the middle of the night when everyone is asleep.

Son Chŏng-gyu, Teacher at Kyŏngsŏng Girls' High School
Because I live alone, I have complete freedom outside of school life. If I want to sleep in the evening, I just sleep, and if I wake up in the middle of the night, I just read a book, sew, or talk to my elderly mother. And the time I wake up in the morning is also not fixed. However, I never miss school or arrive late.

Pak Sŏng-hwan, Teacher at Tongdŏk Girls' High School
I am originally a heavy sleeper, and even though I want to sleep more, the young child wakes up before five o'clock, and I wake up at that time. While feeding the child milk, I look through the newspaper or something, finish washing up, and eat breakfast before going to school. From 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., I am absorbed in school work, and when I return home, I hug the child I have missed more than anything else, and every day as a routine, I give the child a bath. After taking care of some housework, I eat dinner. At night, the child sleeps well, so it would be good to read a book, but since there is a lot of sewing to do, I sew without being able to help it. I nod off under the electric light, reading the scriptures like a blind person, and sometimes I poke my face or hands with the needle I was holding.

Im Sun-bun, Teacher at Kyŏngsŏng Girls' High School
You call me the commander of the women's army? Far from being a commander, these days I'm so busy being a private that I don't have a moment to spare morning and evening. There is no one to work at home, and I only live with my elderly mother, so even though it's just two people, I'm very busy. When I wake up before meals, I have to chop firewood, cook rice, and prepare side dishes. And sometimes, if the water seller doesn't come early, I even play the role of a naval commander, so I can't read books at all. I come to school around 8:30 a.m. and am stuck there until 5 p.m. After returning from school, I change my clothes and am busy preparing dinner again. Sometimes I wash my face and give my beloved dog a bath. I only find time to look at books at night, and they are mostly textbooks for reference or books about physical education. I usually go to bed around 10 o'clock.

Kim In-sun, Physical Education Teacher at Tongdŏk Girls' High School
Because I do the housework with my own hands while attending school, there is not much to say besides school work and housework. I usually wake up around 6 a.m., cook and eat breakfast with my own hands, and come to school around 8:30 a.m. I go home around 4 p.m. When I get home, I take care of the housework and am busy preparing dinner. Since I am interested in physical education, I read books and magazines about it, and I am very interested in gymnastics and games. The happiest time of the day is when I finish all the school work and go home to eat dinner with my family, whom I have missed all day, and have fun conversations. The most difficult time is when I teach gymnastics for 3 or 4 hours in a row and my body is tired.

Chŏn Chi-ja, Dormitory Supervisor at Chinmyŏng Girls' School
Whether I am overworked or have some free time, I always wake up before the wake-up bell - the wake-up bell rings two hours before school starts - these days, I wake up around 5 o'clock. Therefore, I finish preparing for the morning earlier than the students. However, I am usually busy thinking about what to provide at the dormitory for the day or what to especially supervise the servants about that day, so I don't have much time to spare for waking up early.
Next, I make the students go to school all at once in time for the school bell, and after looking around the entire dormitory once, I also go to school busily.
As the hours come, I hold a arithmetic book or a science book and forget about the time passing on the podium, and if I have any spare time, I become absorbed in preparing for the next lesson. I spend the day like this without knowing how long it is, and these days I usually go back to the dorm around 4 o'clock. Dinner is at 6 o'clock these days, but I don't have even a minute to use my time until then. I look around the entire dormitory, talk to the merchants who come, and discuss with the students who will be going out that day. I spend my time like this until I finally face the dinner table.
Next, the students' self-study time, which continues from 7:30 to 9:30, is mostly the time when I finally have personal time. Organizing the dormitory's ledger every day is enough in 20 minutes. After that, I spend the remaining time shortly with my own contemplation and reverie, or with reading materials in the literary field.
I spend my days busily with fixed tasks at fixed times like this, and I have probably only been to the theater or concerts two or three times in several years.

Yi Myŏng-suk, Dŏkp'ung Kindergarten
Because I live together with another teacher (O Yŏng-jo) and cook for ourselves, I can't do other things in the morning besides cooking rice and combing my hair, and I come to school at 8:30. From then until noon, I play games with the children and sing songs. As you know, a kindergarten teacher has a lot of responsibilities. I am not only a teaching teacher but also listen to what the children are fighting about and judge the rights and wrongs, so I am also a police chief and a judge. If the children's clothes are torn or damaged while they are playing, I sew them up and apply medicine, so I am also a doctor and a seamstress. And sometimes I even play the role of a public health officer. Listen to this. When the children are studying or playing,
if they can't even go to the bathroom and just defecate or urinate, what do I do? I have to clean it all up with my own hands and wash it. In the afternoon, I go to a nearby place to read a book or visit a colleague, and then I return to my daily routine and am busy cooking dinner. And at night, I always find pleasure in reading newspapers and magazines. <57>

**Named Entities**

尹致昊	Yun Ch'i-ho
彰文社	Changmun Society
徽文高普	Hwimun High School
李潤柱	Yi Yun-ju
翠雲亭	Ch'uiun Pavilion
中央高普	Chungang High School
崔斗善	Ch'oe Tu-sŏn
京城女高普	Kyŏngsŏng Girls' High School
張膺震	Chang Ŭng-jin
同德女子高普	Tongdŏk Girls' High School
趙東植	Cho Tong-sik
女子商業學校	Girls' Commercial School
李顯奎	Yi Hyŏn-gyu
同德女高	Tongdŏk Girls' High School
白南奎	Paek Nam-gyu
培材高普	Paichai High School
金東爀	Kim Tong-hyŏk
淑明	Sukmyŏng
中東學校	Chungdong School
崔佑東	Ch'oe U-dong
朝鮮日報	Chosun Ilbo
韓基岳	Han Ki-ak
文一平	Mun Il-p'yŏng
社稷公園	Sajik Park
中外日報	Chungoe Ilbo
閔泰瑗	Min T'ae-wŏn
東亞日報	Dong-A Ilbo
李益相	Yi Ik-sang
玄鎭健	Hyŏn Chin-gŏn
彰義門	Chang'ŭimun
朴瓚熙	Pak Ch'an-hŭi
韓一銀行	Hanil Bank
李恒鍾	Yi Hang-jong
漢城圖書	Hansŏng Bookstore
魯基禎	No Ki-jŏng
興一社	Hŭngil Company
張斗鉉	Chang Tu-hyŏn
京城紡織株式會社	Kyŏngsŏng Textile Company
李康賢	Yi Kang-hyŏn
曙海	Sŏhae
崔鶴松	Ch'oe Hak-song
每日申報	Maeil Shinbo
啓明俱樂部	Kyemyŏng Club
李殷相	Yi Ŭn-sang
京城女高	Kyŏngsŏng Girls' High School
孫貞奎	Son Chŏng-gyu
同德女高	Tongdŏk Girls' High School
朴聖煥	Pak Sŏng-hwan
林順分	Im Sun-bun
金仁順	Kim In-sun
進明女校	Chinmyŏng Girls' School
全智子	Chŏn Chi-ja
德風幼雉園	Dŏkp'ung Kindergarten
李明淑	Yi Myŏng-suk
吳英祚	O Yŏng-jo
永登浦	Yŏngdŭngp'o



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제16·17호
발행일	1928년 12월 01일
기사제목	하로 時間을 엇더케 쓰나, 各方面名士의 一日生活, 職業따라 다른 生活
기사형태	설문

하로 時間을 엇더케 쓰나, 各方面名士의 一日生活, 職業따라 다른 生活
尹致昊
다른 이와 가티 일정직업이 업스닛가 몃 시간의 노동 하는 일도 업고 전일에는 독서도 상당히 하얏슴니다만은 다년간 감옥생활을 할 때에 강렬한 전등 밋헤서 그대로 잠을 자고 또 가는 그물 뜨는 작업을 만히 한 까닭으로 안력이 몹시 상하야 지금은 독서를 잘 할 수가 업슴니다. 오전 6시 반에 이러나서 실내운동과 세수 등 절을 하고 7시 반에 茶를 먹으며(조반은 폐지) 그리고는 보통학교에 다니는 어린 아희들를 보호해 다리고 학교에 가서 오전은 대개 그 학교에서 시간을 보내고 12시에는 집에 도라와 점심을 먹으며 오후에는 집의 볼 일이나 또는 彰文社나 기타 靑年會의 일 夕飯은 보통으로 오후 6시 경에 먹고 8시나 9시에 일즉이 취침을 함니다.

徽文高普校長 李潤柱
대개 아츰 6시에 일어나서 세수를 하고 翠雲亭 뒤 산에 올나가서 운동 겸 산보를 하고 집에 돌아와서는 학교에 갈 준비를 맛친 후 식사를 끗내고는 학교로 옴니다. 내 자신이 학교의 책임자니까 온 종일 학생으로 덜볼러 오후 5시까지는 학교에서 마튼 과정시간을-지리역사-교수하고, 一邊으로 학교전체에 관한 視務를 삷히게 됩니다.
집에 돌아가서는 아희들을 데리고 한참동안 쉽니다. 내 자신 事務에 피곤한 머리와 몸을 쉬이고 어린애들에게도 질거운 시간을 맨드러 줍니다. 동요, 唱歌遊戱를 하면서 아희들과 쉴 때엔 제 마음도 아모리 업는 어린애 세상에서 純化되는 것 갓고 젊어지는 것 갓튼 감을 가지게 됨니다. 이 시간을 지내선 저녁 전후에 신문이나 雜誌 等屬을 읽으며 서양지리 서양역사도 봄니다만은 주로는 동양역사와 지리며 朝鮮에 관한 고전의 地誌學이나 역사를 주로 연구를 하며 외출을 할 때는 별 문제이지만 집에 잇슬 때면 보통 오후 11시까지 독서를 하고 잠니다.

中央高普校長 崔斗善
아츰 7시에 일어나서 학교에 갈 제반준비를 마치고 조반을 畢한 후 학교로 옴니다. 오후 5시까지는 내가 맛튼 학교일과 修身課程을 학생에게 교수하며 여가에는 독서를 함니다. 讀物中에는 철학에 관한 것과 교육학을 만히 읽으며＜50＞ 그 중에도 철학에 그 中興味를 만히 늦기며 다소 연구도 함니다.
오후 6시를 지내서 저녁을 마친 후에 친구를 방문하거나 보통으론 신문잡지를 읽거나 하다간 11시 전후해선 몸을 쉼니다.

京城女高普副校長 張膺震
나는 술과 담배도 먹을 줄 모르고 다른 사람과 교제도 별로 조와하지 안슴니다. 생활이 그와 가티 아주 단순한 까닭에 매일의 시간생활도 비교적 규칙적임니다. 오전 6시면 의례히 이러나서 냉수마찰을 하고 즉시 산으로 가서 약 1시간동안 운동을 하다가 집에 와서 조반을 먹슴니다. 학교에는 보통 오전 8시에 出勤하야 오후 5시까지 잇다가 집에 가서는 신문도 보고 집의 일도 봄니다. 토요 오후와 일요일은 공무시간이 업는 까닭에 친구의 尋訪과 가사는 대개 그 날에 함니다. 취미는 문학과 철학방면이 비교적 만흔 까닭에 서적도 거긔에 관한 것을 만히 봄니다.

同德女子高普校長 趙東植
나는 약 20여 년 이래로 오전 6시에 이러나는 일은 꼭 실행함니다. 그러고 30분간은 가내에서 운동을 하고 또 掃除를 함니다. 나의 침실은 물론이고 家內 정원까지도 다 내손으로 掃除를 함니다. 그 다음에는 그날에 행할 일을 생각하야 手帖에 기록하고는 그 기록대로 매일 학교일이나 私事일을 행함니다.
20여 년을 두고 한번도 지각하야 본 일도 업고 집에 가기도 매양 오후 6시경에 나가게 됨니다. 독서로는 修養書類를 자미잇게 보고.

女子商業學校長 李顯奎
아츰에 움´러나기는 보통 6시요. 매일 아츰 산에 올나가서 운동을 하고 세수도 그곳에서 함니다. 그리고는 집에 와서 朝飯을 먹고 학교로 옴니다. 오전 9시로부터 오후 4시까지는 학교의 정한 시간을 보고 罷仕한 다음에는 방문과 기타 볼 일을 보고 5시 반 내지 6시에 집에 도라 감니다

同德女高敎務主任 白南奎
일어나서는 학교에 가서 실행할 일을 낫낫치 수첩에다 적슴니다. 다음에는 자기가 맟튼 교과의 안을 준비함니다. 그리고 됴반을 먹슴니다.
학교에 가서는 수첩에 적힌대로 진행하여 나감니다.
오후에는 그럭저럭하다가 해동무 해가지고 집에 도라옴니다.
집에 와서는 몸이 피곤한 남어지에 몃가지 書物을 빼보다가 가족담화 혹은 遊戱도 하다가 10시경에 취침함니다.
학생들의 집합이나 講演席에는 여하한 시기를 불문하고 출석함니다. 이것은 나의 습관임니다.

培材高普敎務主任 金東爀
이러나기는 대개 오전 5시 그 다음엔 학교갈 아희들의 복습과 예습을 7시 반까지 식힌후 세수와 식사를 맛치고 8시 반전에 학교로 나는 옴니다. 오전＜51＞ 8시 반으로 오후 5시까지는 내가 맛튼 박물과정의 모든 시간 그 외에 학교의 視務를 끗막고 집으로 발우 갈 적도 잇스나 常例론 방문이나 산보로 거진 오후 7시에나 집에를 감니다. 야간에는 신문잡지나 내가 專門하는 박물에 관한 연구서적들을 읽으며 간혹 수양의 관한 書類와 성경을 봄니다. 10시쯤해서 淑明에 단이는 맛딸애가 「풍금」을 치기 시작해서 유아원에 단이는 애까지 다섯이서 번갈나가며 舞蹈도 하고 창가도 불으며 가족전체가 웃고 질김니다.

中東學校體操敎員 崔佑東
나는 밤 10에 자고 아츰 7시에 니러나는 것이 보통이다. 내가 현금 맛하보는 학교는 오전부와 오후부가 잇서서 달은 학교보다 테조시간이 만흘 뿐만 안이라. 내가 유도부와 정구부와 축구부를 창설하여 가지고 이것을 지휘하여 나가는 까닭에 학교에서 하든 운동이 오히려 나의 몸을 피곤하게 하는 형편임으로 집에서는 일정한 운동을 하지 안는다.

朝鮮日報編輯局長 韓基岳 수면 8시간, 신문사일로 7시간, 식사 1시간, 독서 3시간, 운동 2시간, 방문 및 접대 1시간, 기타 2시간.

朝鮮日報論說部 文一平
오전 5시경에 이러나서 세수도 안이한 채 맨머리로 社稷公園에 가서 약 2시간은 호흡운동 혹은산보를 하고 집에 도라와서 조반을 먹슴니다. 학교시간이 일즉이 업는 때에는 몃 10분간 사색도 하고 글도 읽으나 일즉이 잇는 때에는 바로 학교로 감니다. 培材高普와 女子商業에 1주간 몃 시간식 잇고 근래에는 朝鮮日報에 입사하야 여러 시간은 가 잇지 안어도 매일 一次식은 꼭 출근하게 됨니다. 그러나 여러 곳의 시간이 대개는 오전이닛가 오후에는 틈이 만히 잇서서 친구의 방문도 하고 집에서 글도 읽슴니다. 취미방면으로는 詩, 酒, 역사연구에 다소 취미를 가지고 잇슴니다. 시간 중에 제일 깃븐 때로 말슴하면 무슨 원고를 써서 자기 마음에도 잘 썻다고 생각하는 그때와 학생을 가르처서 잘 알어드를 때이요 제일 곤란한 시간은 債鬼가 달녀와서 돈 督促할 때임니다.

中外日報編輯局長 閔泰瑗
신문사원인 때문에 아츰에 이러나는 시간, 밥 먹는 시간이 다 일정치 못함은 물론이고 집에 가서 저녁밥 먹는 시간은 한 달에도 불과 몃번임니다. 다만 규칙적으로 실행하는 것은 수면시간 뿐임니다. 그것도 10시면 10시, 8시면 8시에 꼭 취침을 하는 것이 안이라 어느 때에 취침 하던지 꼭 7시간 가령은 수면한다는 말슴임니다. 책임상 날마다 하는 일이닛가 각 신문, 전보, 통신등이 야무튼 늘 보는 것이지만은 특별한 독서라고는 근래에 와서는 별로 업슴니다. 이것이 나의 생활상에 한 유감이겟지요.

東亞日部學藝部長 李益相
오전 6시경에 이러나서 약 2시간＜52＞ 가령은 원고를 쓰고 8시 반쯤하야 조반을 먹으며 9시 반에 社에 출근하야 매일 예사로 오후 3시까지는 社務를 보고 그 뒤에 산보 혹은 친구의 방문을 하며 저녁에는 매양 극장에를 갓다가 11시 혹은 12시경에 집에 도라가서 11시 혹은 12시경에 집에 도라가 취침을 한다.

東亞日報社會部長 玄鎭健
오후 5시에 起寢 이불 속을 독서실로 삼어 문예나 혹은 思想書類를 자미잇게 보다가는 7시경 쯤하야 산으로 또는 川邊으로 食前巡禮를 하고 8시쯤 하야 조반을 먹는다. 신문사와 집(彰義門밧)이 원래 迢遠한 까닭에 8시 반에 떠나 9시 반에나 출근하게 된다. 오후 4시 반까지는 신문편집에 골몰하고 그 신문이 맛친 다음에는 宿直室에 가서 바둑으로 자미를 붓친다. 황혼이 될 때에 집에를 간다. 저녁밥을 먹고나면 별로 놀너 갈 곳도 업스닛가 冊으로 유일한 친구를 삼는다. 원래에 불면증이 잇는 까닭에 엇던 때에는 무리하게 오전 3시까지도 독서를 한다.

東亞日報地方部長 朴瓚熙
식전에는 운동 겸하야 집에서 장작도 패고 물도 길으며 또 일과처럼 냉수를 한 「컵」식 먹슴니다.(소위 약수) 그리고 조반을 먹은 다음에 9시 반쯤하야 社에 출근하고 오후 3시경에 社務를 맛친 다음에는 숙직실에서 바둑을 뒤거나 그럿치 안으면 出社하야 친구도 방문하며 5시나 혹은 6시에 집에 도라가서는 학교에 다니는 아희의 복습도 식히고 어린 아희를 보와도 주며 취침은 대개 10시 가령에 함니다. 시간 여유가 업슴으로 독서를 잘못하는 것이 한 유감이나 유독 改造雜誌만은 매월에 의무와 가티 購讀하는데 자초지종으로 1頁도 빼지 안코 다 읽슴니다.

韓一銀行支配人 李恒鍾
매일 행사라야 그저 다람쥐(栗鼠)의 체ㅅ 박퀴 굴리덧시 저녁에 곤히 자다가는 아츰에 이러나서 조반를 먹고 은행의 정한 시간대로 출근 또는 罷歸할 따름임니다. 집에 신문은 여러 종류가 다오닛가 밤이면 그것은 심심 破寢 겸하야 다 봄니다. 그외 오락은 『당구』라 할는지요.

漢城圖書支配人 魯基禎
나는 밤과 낫으로 회사 안에 잇고 사무도 시간적으로 보는 것이 안이라 계속적으로 하루의 전시간을 회사에 희생하닛가 특별이 몃 시 몃 시에 무엇을 한다고는 말슴을 할 수가 업슴니다. 따러서 운동할 시간도 업고 독서할 시간도 별로 업슴니다. 眞所謂 떡장사가 떡냄새만 맛고 먹지는 못한다는 세음으로 회사에서 책은 만히 구경을 하지만은 그 내용은 잘 볼 여가가 업슴니다. 다만 밥을 먹으러 가서 밥을 기다리는 동안에 얼마간 책을 봄니다. 취미로 말슴하야도 그저 서적에 대한 취미 뿐인데 그 중에 修養書類, 倫理道德에 관한 書類를 애독함니다.＜53＞

興一社 張斗鉉
나는 自誇하는 말슴 갓슴니다만은 서울 사람중에 제일 먼저 이러나고 제일 먼저 자며 제일 규칙적으로 시간생활을 하는 사람은 내인 것 갓슴니다. 언제이던지 오전 5시면 꼭 이러나서 내손으로 창문 분합문 대문등을 모도 여러놋코 집안사람을 다 깨워 이르키고 다시 침실에 드러가서는 냉수마찰을 하고 실내를 掃除함니다. 그리고 조반은 꼭 7시 반에 먹고 8시쯤하야 집을 떠나오면 아즉 회사의 출근시가 되지 아는 가닭에 鐘路나 기타 시가지를 한번 도라서 9시에 회사에 출근하고 12시가 되면 다시 집에 가서 私信處理나 기타 가사를 보고는 오후1시 반에 점심을 먹고 그 다음에 낫잠을 약 30분간 자고 나서는 친구의 방문을 하거나 그럿치 안으면 친구와 가티 술을 먹던지 또는 집에서 독서를 하며 밤에는 8시에 꼭 잠을 잠닏. 이우에 말슴한 정한 시간은 엇던한 날이던지 꼭 실행함니다. 일요일도 물론이고 여간한 병이 낫술 때에도 실행함니다. 나는 청결한 것을 매우 조와하는 까닭에 실내를 매일 三次식 꼭 정규로 掃除를 하고. 취미는 술, 바둑, 독서인데 서적은 한학서류를 청년시대부터 잘 읽엇섯는데 요사이는 書傳周易繫辭 등를 만히 읽슴니다.

京城紡織株式會社支配人 李康賢
오전 5시 반에 이러나서 약 반시간은 아희들의 복습을 식히고 6시 반에 조반을 먹은 다음에는 공장(永登浦)시간을 대여 7시에 출근하야 10시까지 그곳에서 視務하다가 서울에 도러와서 회사의 일을 보고 오후 1시가 되면 다시 永登浦 공장으로 감니다. 그리하야 오후 6시까지 그곳에서 연통냄새와 기계소리에 골머리를 알타가 6시에 집으로 도뛀¼ 감니다.

曙海 崔鶴松
소설만 쓰고 잇슬 때에도 그랫지만 신문기자 생활을 하게 된 후로 더욱 개인생활은 우수어젓슴니다. 전에 소설을 쓸 대는 흔히 초저녁에 술을 좀 마시고 일즉이 잠을 자고 의례 새벽 1시나 2시에 깨여서 집필을 하고 하고 하엿슴니다. 술을 마시여야 일즉 잠이 들고 또 일즉 깨이는 까닭이요 또 술을 조곰쯤 만히 마시여도 자고 나기만 하면 머리와 몸이 갓든해지는성질이닛가요. 그런대 지금은 보시는 바와 가티 세 구가 한방에서 지네노라니 책을 닑거나 원고를 쓰기는 고사하고 책들고 안즐 자리조차 업슴니다.
잠이 깨이기는 습관이 되여서 지금도 새벽 2시에 깨이닛가 그때에 책을 보거나 원고를 썻스면 조켓는대 불을 켜노으면 어린아해가 깨이닛가 그냥 눈만 뜨고 누어서 꿍얼꿍얼 하다가 맘니다. 자리를 닐어나기는 닐곱시 전후이고 아기와 조곰 놀다가 세수하고 다시 아기와 놀다가 아츰을 먹고-신문사가 아홉시 출근이닛가-여덜시 반쯤하야 집을 나슴니다. 社일은 내근이닛가 오후 세시나 느즈면 네시까지 보고 退社하게＜54＞ 되는대 퇴사해야 집에 안즐 자리가 업스닛가 그냥 아모데로나 발길 가는대로 아모나 맛나는 대로 산보를 하던지 酒席에를 가던지 아니면 친구의 집으로 감니다. 그러고 자기도 내방에서보다 친구의 집에서 더 만히 잠니다. 이러케되니 내가 집필하기는 커냥 남의 작품 하나도 종용히 닑을 수 잇슴닛가. 露國女子의 작품 하나를 닑는다고 月전부터 시작한 것이 인제 반쯤 밧게 못 닑엇슴니다. 요전에 매일 申報에 쓴 소설 하나도 알는다고 병 핑계를 하고 시외 절간에 나가서 1주일이나 밝혀가지고 간신히 쓴 것입니다. 『파멸』 외에 아모 것도 할 말이 업슴니다.

啓明俱樂部 李殷相
출근은 오전 9시, 점신시간은 午正부터 1시까지 집에 가기는 오후 4시반경임니다. 출근 중에는 例의 맛튼 일을 보고 점심 때에는 바둑으로 잠시 消遣을 함니다. 아츰에 이러나긔는 대개가 4시반 혹 5시경인데 그것은 내가 부지런하야 그런 것이 안이라 어린아희 등쌀에 엇저지 못하야 이러나는 것임니다. 독서시간이가고는 밤 11시로부터 12시경임니다. 평소에 독서의 취미도 물론 만히 가지고 내 자신의 開拓向上을 위하야도 독서를 廢치 못할 것으로 아나 독서할 방과 시간이 업서 억지로 종용한 시간은 맛난다는 것이 안해도 자고 아희도 자는 밤중이올시다.

京城女高敎員 孫貞奎
나는 독신생활인 고로 학교 생활 외에는 절대자유에서 저녁이라도 자고십흐면 그대로 자고 밤중이라도 잠만 깨면 그저 책을 보던지 바누질을 하던지 그렇치 안으면 늙은 어머님과 무슨 이약이를 하던지 함니다. 그리고 아츰에 이러나는 시간도 또한 일정치 안슴니다. 그러나 학교에 결근하거나 지각하는 일은 물론 업슴니다.

同德女高敎員 朴聖煥
나는 원래에 새벽잠이 만어서 더 자고 십허도 어린아희가 다섯시 전에 깨여서 그때에 깨여 가지고는 아희의 젓을 먹이면서 신문장이나 뒤저 보다가는 세수등 절을 맛치고 조반을 먹은 다음에 학교에 감니다. 오전 9시로부터 오후 네시까지는 학교일에 골몰하다가 집에 돌아가서는 무엇보다도 그리웁던 어린 아희를 끌어안고는 또 매일 한 과정으로 어린아희의 목욕을 식힘니다. 그리고 집일을 좀 보살피고 나면 저녁밥을 먹게 됨니다. 밤에는 어린아희가 잘 자닛가 책을 보와도 조켓지만은 바누질할 것이 밀녀노니 할 수 엄시 바누질을 하는대 전등 밋헤서 장임의 경 읽덧이 꺼덕거리며 졸고 잇다가 손에 드럿던 바눌로 각금 얼골이나 손 등을 찌름니다.

京城女高敎員 林順分
나더러 娘子軍大將이라고요. 대장은 커녕 요새이는 火兵노릇하기에 아츰저녁 눈코뜰새가 업슴니다. 집안에 부리는 사람도 업고 다만 늙은 어머니 한＜55＞ 분을 모시고 自炊생활을 하자닛가 만치안은 단 두식구이나마 퍽은 밧붐니다. 식전에 이러나면 장작 패랴, 밥 지으랴, 반찬 장만하랴 또 엇던 때에는 물장사가 일즉이 오지 안으면 내가 친이 水軍大將 노릇까지 하닛가 책은 도모지 볼 수가 업슴니다. 오전 8시 반쯤하야 학교에 오면 오후 5시까지는 꼭 거긔에 매여 달임니다. 학교에서 도라간 다음에는 옷을 좀 박구워 입고 또 저녁 밥짓기에 분주함니다. 엇던 때에는 세수도 하고 사랑하는 개(犬)의 모욕도 식힘니다. 서책 가튼 것은 밤에나 겨우 시간을 타서 보는데 대개가 교과서의 참고나 그럿치 안으면 체육에 관한 서적임니다. 취침은 대개 10시 가령임니다.

同德女高體操敎員 金仁順
나는 학교에 다니면서도 내 손으로 가정살임을 하는 까닭에 학교일과 가정일을 除하야 놋코는 별로 이럿타고 말슴할 것이 업슴니다. 매양 오전 여섯시경에 이러나서 내 손으로 밥을 지여 먹고는 8시 반쯤하야 학교에 오고 집에 가긔는 오후 너덧시쯤 됨니다. 집에 가서는 또 집안일을 보살피고는 저녁밥 준비에 분주함니다. 독서는 내가 체육에 유의하는 까닭에 거긔에 관한 서적과 잡지를 보고 취미도 體操遊戱方面에 만히 갓슴니다. 1일 중 제일 깃븐 시간은 학교일을 다 보고 도라가서 종일 그리웁던 가족들과 가티 저녁밥을 먹으며 자미 잇는 이약이를 할 때이요 괴롭기는 체조를 가르칠 때에 연속하야 3, 4시간이 되면 몸이 피곤한 그 때임니다.

進明女校寄宿舍監 全智子
과로 햇든때이든 좀 한가햇든 때이든 어느 때든지 나는 起床鍾-기상종은 등교시간 두시간 전에 침니다.-이 울니기 전에 요사히 갓흐면 5시경에 깨워짐니다. 그럼으로 아침 준비는 학생들보다 미리 맛초게 됨니다만 대개는 그날 하로동안 기숙사에서 구해 드릴 물건에 대해서 또는 하인들에게 특별히 그날에 단속할 것 갓흔대 대해서 새 精神쩍에 궁리를 해내게 됨으로 일즉히 이러나는 분수로는 여유가 업는 셈임니다.
다음에 등교종에 맛초아 학생들로 하여금 일제히 등교케한 후 한 차례 기숙사 전체를 살펴본 후에 나 亦 奔走히 학교에 나감니다.
시간시간이 오는대로 산술책 혹은 博物冊을 들고 교단 우헤서 시간 가는 줄 몰으다가 혹시 틈 날 때면 다음에 가라칠 준비에 골독하게 됨니다. 이와 갓치 하로를 긴줄 몰으고 보내다가 요새 갓흐면 대개 오후 네시쯤이면 舍로 근너 감니다. 夕飯은 요사히 6시이지만 그때까지 나의 시간으로 쓰는 동안은 1분이나마 업게 됨니다. 온 기숙사를 두루 살피랴. 차저오는 장사치들하고 이야기 하랴 그날그날에 특별 외출할 학생들과 말쓰림하랴 참 끗안나는 일노 한결가티 저녁밥상을 대할 때까지 그럭저럭 지내버림니다.
다음에는 7시반부터 9시반까지＜56＞ 계속되는 학생들의 자습시간이 겨우내 개인의 시간이 될 때까가 만음니다. 매일 舍의 장부정리하는 것 쯤이야 20분 동안이면 넉넉함니다. 그 후부터는 혼자서의 묵상과 공상으로 혹은 문학방면의 독서물 갓흔 것으로 남어지 시간을 짤게 보냄니다.
이러케 매일 일정한 시간에 일정한 일노 분주하게 지내노라 몃해를 두고 극장이나 음악회 갓흔 곳에 나가 본 적이 아마 두 세 번 밧게 아니 됨니다.

德風幼雉園 李明淑
가티 잇는 선생임 한 분(吳英祚)과 가티 자취생활을 하닛가 아츰에는 밥 짓고 또 머리 빗느라고 다른 일은 못보고 8시 반이 되면 학교에 옴니다. 그때부터 午正까지는 어린 아희들과 遊戱도 하고 창가도 하고 놈니다. 아시는 바와 가티 유치원 선생이야말로 직책이 퍽 만슴니다. 가르치는 선생노릇은 물론이고 아희들이 싸오는 것도 말이여 주고 시비도 심판을 하닛가 경찰서장에 兼 裁判長도 되고요. 어린 아희들이 작란을 하다가 옷이 찌이던지 상할 것 가트면 옷도 뀌여매 입히고 약도 발너주닛가 한편은 여의사인 동시에 재봉사도 됨니다. 또 엇더한 때에는 위생부 노릇가지 함니다. 드러보십시오. 어린 아희들이 공부를 하던지 놀다가
밋처 변소에를 가지도 못하고 그양 대소변을 싸면 그것을 엊지 함닛가 나의 손으로 다 치우고 씨서 두어야 하지 안슴닛가. 오후에 여관에 가서 책도 보고 또는 동모의 방문도 하다가 와서는 도로 아미타불로 저녁밥을 짓긔에 분주함니다. 그리고 밤에는 매양 신문과 잡지 보낸대 재미를 붓침니다.＜57＞
＜50-57＞