잡지명	別건곤 제16·17호
발행일	1928년 12월 01일
기사제목	壯觀壯觀!! 空前의 大特輯!! 本誌新年號!!! (Spectacular and Spectacular!! Unprecedented Grand Special Edition!! This Magazine's New Year's Issue!!!)
기사형태	소식 (News)

The editing of the New Year's issue is a competition in which magazines and newspapers rush in. A great melee of general mobilization of large and small newspapers and magazines!!

Like a winged horse running through the sky, how will the New Year's issue of "Byeolgeongon (別乾坤)," which has been walking alone in the magazine world, be? What will it be like…… Reporters and staff are being increased, and a new plan has been started for the New Year's special edition. We want to share with our readers that we can say in advance that it will be absolutely proud of the content that has already been put in place. Special edition never before seen! The contents of the eighty-odd new articles are kept top secret until the date of publication!! I'll just say that it wouldn't be a waste to pay four or five times the fixed price for this kind of article.

Special New Year's large supplement free presentation……Headquarters special presentation

Order Notice
This is the first gift that Byeolgeongon (別乾坤) gives to its readers. It is incomparably brilliant and cannot be bought with money. The book price is still only fifty-two jeon. It is safest to order in advance before the book runs out on December 30th. Before it runs out and you can't get it... Order now.

Urgent ㆍ Very Urgent
We always welcome and publish articles contributed to this magazine, so if you have any manuscripts to submit to the New Year's issue, please send them by December 12th so that they can be included in the printing.
We welcome anything for the New Year's article, from dormitory year-end talk and New Year's wishes and complaints to suitable legends or factual anecdotes for New Year's Eve stories.

Introduction of Local Specialties and Strange Customs
Every village has a specialty. There are specialties in products, people, and objects, so please write about them and send them to us. Also, every village has unique customs that are unknown in other places. There are even more in the New Year. If you write about them and send them to us, we will include them in the book.
<125>

**Named Entities**

別乾坤	Byeolgeongon



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제16·17호
발행일	1928년 12월 01일
기사제목	壯觀壯觀!! 空前의 大特輯!! 本誌新年號!!!
기사형태	소식

壯觀壯觀!! 空前의 大特輯!! 本誌新年號!!!
雜誌란 雜誌 新聞이란 新聞이 저마다 덤븨여 競爭을 하는 것이 新年號編輯이다. 大小新聞雜誌總動員의 一大混戰!!
天馬가 空中을 달니듯 誌界를 獨往獨來해은『別乾坤』의 新年號가 그中에엇더할것이냐 果然엇덜것이냐……記者 增員 一段의 嶄新한 方策으로 新年號特輯에 着手한지 旬餘 발서 太半이나니투어진 內容으로보아 絶對자랑일 것을 미리 斷言할수잇는 것을 讀者와 함깃거하고 십다. 前에 엄던 特別編輯! 八十餘題의 新記事內容은 發行日지 秘中의 極秘!! 이만한 記事면 定價의 四五倍를 낸다해도 앗갑지안흘것만을 말해둔다.
特製新年大附錄無料添呈……本社特製進呈
注文注意
이거야말로 別乾坤이 讀者처음드리는 선물 燦爛無比 돈주고도 못살 것 冊價는 그래도단 五十二錢 十二月三十日期於發行 冊이업서지기 前에 미리 注文해두는 것이 第一安全함니다. 업서저서 못 求하게되기 前에……只今注文해두십시오.

至急ㆍ大至急
本誌에 寄稿해주시는 것을 늘 歡迎하야 揭載해드리는터인바 新年號에던저주실 原稿가 잇스면 十二月十二日內로보내주서야 印刷에 너을수잇슴니다.
新年記事 무엇이던지 寄宿舍過歲談新年브터 各方面에 바라는 希望과 不平吐破新春夜話로 適合한 傳說 或 事實奇談等 무어든지 歡迎함니다.
地方各物及奇風俗紹介
싀골마다 名物이잇슴니다. 産物로도잇고 人物로 物件으로도 名物이잇슬것이니 그것을 적어보내주십시오 그리고시골마다다른곳에서 모르는 珍風俗이잇슴니다. 더욱 正月에 더만슴니다. 그것을 적어보내주시면고 冊에 긔여드리겟슴니다.
＜125＞