잡지명	別乾坤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	博士와 論文集 (Doctorates and Collections of Theses)
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

Doctorates and Collections of Theses
The Relationship Between Sociability and Morality

Kim Hyŏn-jun, Doctor of Literature

1. General Sociability

Society refers to the relationship between people. In other words, it refers to the collective group of people who have formed associations and gathered together. Therefore, society is the general form of human beings living together and general phenomena and realistic forms of life. Here, there are differences in basic societies, groups, and systems, but broadly speaking, there are differences between communal societies and purposeful societies. A purposeful society refers to the relationship between people who have a specific purpose. In short, society is something that arises from the relationship between people. However, the relationship between people is different from the relationship between wood and stone or cows and horses. The relationship between a desk and a book, or the relationship between wood and stone, is non-social, but the relationship between people is a conscious relationship, so it can be said to be social. Because an individual's conscious relationship is social, consciousness itself is bound. For example, a goose inherently possesses a socio-regulatory consciousness. Therefore, a goose cannot deviate from a flock of geese and act freely, and conversely, each individual's consciousness is linked to a restrictive social bond that prevents it from leaving the goose formation. The characteristic of society originates from human life and behavior. As such, the nature of human society tends towards unity. The meaning of unity originates from being bound oneself, and also from the power generated from within society. This relationship arises from the human spirit. The spirit is the source of social power. <42> When interpreted in a legal sense, it is similar to Montesquieu's The Spirit of the Laws (Montes-quieu, L'Esprit der Lois). When "Cole" criticizes "Rousseau" saying that society is nothing more than the relationship of human will, which is an explanation of genesis, this also proves that sociability is sought in the spiritual aspect.

When considering the mutual relationship between empirical human life and behavior regarding sociability, we can currently experience and are experiencing various phenomena being expressed. To give an example, when a large number of people enter or exit a fair or other gathering place at the same time, or when a large number of people try to buy tickets at a train station at the same time, they must form a line and wait for their turn. If someone disrupts the queue midway and tries to pass or buy a ticket before others, that person will be called crazy and must return to the end of the line. What does this mean? It proves that socio-regulatory rules are enforced within the train station or when entering and exiting a gathering place. This is not limited to train stations; social order and rules must also be followed in road traffic and transportation. That is, social beings consider the whole and impose restrictions on their freedom of action, and the behavior of social beings is called sociability.

The significance of "Socius" is as such for social beings, that is, social pressure against other-regarding aspects. Therefore, social beings can be said to be a form of behavior in which the cultivated individual consciousness in other-regarding aspects is expressed socially. Social beings define the relationship between people and are the correlative common consciousness of individual people, and a right to limit individuals. Then, I would like to comprehensively express the definition of society in the following sentences to clarify the meaning of sociability.

Society can be said to be the general environment and composition in which humans live peacefully together according to the principles of society. The relationship between the individual and society is not necessarily a binding association, but rather mutually separated. However, despite being mutually independent and separate, it has a certain form of united unity. The unified forms and relationships of individuals, families, nations, and states, classes, etc., exist in such a form.

2. Theories on the Nature of Society

When observing the essence of society as a social fact, it is possible to observe it by dividing it into social phenomena, the driving force of social cohesion, and social cohesion itself.

1. Organic Theory and Spiritual Totality Theory

What is society? We are members of society. But at the same time, we belong to a family, a hometown, a school, and a nation. Society is a unified organization or a unity organized by individual people. Society is composed of various parts, like the physiological structure of an individual, and has parts like the nerve center or the brain. However, the name "organism" has been passed down from the observation that society is not an aggregate of individual people, but is like a unified, independent life. Here, it has been said that society is also a type of organism. The social organism theory is compared to the biological organism theory, even though they are dissimilar. <43> Since Spencer, various scholars have equated the social organism with the biological organism. Spencer, in the Principles of Sociology, Part 1, Chapter 2, compared and studied this, saying, "The constitution of human society and the organization of animal bodies are relatively similar, like parallel lines." The social organism theory has also been widely used in ethics and psychology. "Stephen" discussed the moral life problems of human beings by comparing the social organism to the physiological organism theory in Ethics, page 126. "Muhabett" explained the social organism theory regarding various customs and systems in Logic Ladder, pages 165 to 172. In short, the social organism theory, as handled in the field of ethics, analyzes the tone and color created by society, various ideals, systems, and moral customs in human moral life, and explains its contents. The content is based on personality, and personality is not an isolated phenomenon but discusses the relationship that is not separated from the personalities of others.

Then, what exactly is the social organism theory? Is it considering society as something similar to a biological organism? A biological organism is when biological entities are combined and unified with individual cells, concentrated in the nerve center, and certain sensory organs perform organic functions. The social organism is said to be similar to this, and the Spencer school has gone so far as to equate the social organism with the biological organism. However, in today's world where social psychology theory occupies the majority, such a social organism theory is being disregarded.

Then, what are the opinions of the social psychology school regarding the organism theory? The representatives of the modern psychological school can be said to be Schäffle in Germany, Giddings in the United States, and Tarde in France. They have specially noted in the history of sociology by advocating the psychological interaction theory, the sympathy theory, the combination driving force theory, or the imitation theory, with the fundamental concept that society is formed by the combination of individuals. However, society is organically unified by the mutual association of each individual's thoughts, feelings, and will, and by the relationship between rulers and subjects, and is dominated by the division of labor or the state of unity between each institution. Organic unity is a new kind of unity, that is, a combination of thoughts, feelings, and will, through the combination of individuals in a society based on individual units. This is the spirit of society, social concern, and social consciousness. In this sense, there is a great difference between the social organism and the biological organism. (1) An individual who makes up society is at the same time a member of a family, a member of a hometown, and at the same time a member of a nation. Moreover, it is complexly related to the relationships of other groups. However, it is possible to withdraw from one party or other groups from within. However, this limit does not exist for each cell in the organization of a biological organism. (2) Individuals in the social organism are mutually isolated. (3) The consciousness of the biological organism is concentrated in the entire brain, and the consciousness of the social organism is scattered throughout the individual. Such a thing is called the super-organism theory (超有機體說). I state that this super-organism theory is greatly different from the physiological organism theory of the Spencer school.

I would like to add a few more words about the spiritual totality theory (精神全體說). The spiritual totality theory is a theory that considers all phenomena of society in the complete sense of social consciousness and spirit. "Othmar Spann," who was influenced by Romanticism, represents this theory. <44> He observes society as a comprehensive, unified body. That is, society is not a collection of individuals, but a unified body in which the existence of individuals is independent. It is a theory that considers the social organism theory spiritually, in the sense that an individual is a limb of society, like hands and feet. However, it is very difficult to unconditionally approve of this.
2. Imitation Theory and Interaction Theory: The imitation theory is what the French sociologist "Tarde" advocated, and imitation, according to "Tarde," is the same as suggestion (Suggession), and it is when unification is achieved through agreement in thoughts, feelings, or will. This theory aims to describe or reproduce the actions or demonstrations of others reflexively or consciously. In short, it refers to the imitation of thinking activities. It is possible that an individual or a part does not imitate, but this is generally in the state of "Limitasiou." Today, pointing out that 200-year-old Spanish women's clothing is in fashion in Paris, France, proves that Spanish civilization has been imported into France. This is imported through imitation. Ancient Chinese civilization was imported into Joseon, and Joseon's culture was imported into Japan (writing, architecture). Also, Chinese clothing was imported and is still in fashion today (proving that clothing from the Qing Dynasty is our current clothing, and that current Japanese material civilization is Western civilization, we can infer that social imitation is prevalent). In short, "Tarde's" imitation theory is different from the theories of scholars such as "Ross," "Giddings," and "Le Bon," and in the end, there is a tendency toward the social organism theory. One scholar comments that it approaches "Giddings's theory of consciousness of kind" or the theory of sympathy, which arises when others are conscious of themselves as the same kind.

To explain the gist of the interaction theory, it is as follows. The interaction theory is advocated by "Simmel," "Staggenborg," "Ellwood," etc., and interaction refers to mental interaction. This theory is based on the content of love, art, or scholarship, and the formal issues such as the relationship and action of external interaction, and it standardizes being together, coexisting, and opposing. In short, it is a theory that seeks to explain the general human communal life by regarding the relationship of mental interaction and mental combination as its essence. The theory that the essence of society is in mental interaction above the level of associative groups is considered the most appropriate.

3. Modern Ideological Problems and Social Recognition

Ideology is the unification of the value-based observation of social life. Even 20 or 30 years ago, the divisions of scholars, farmers, artisans, and merchants (士農工商) were hereditary. Until the end of the Korean Empire, baekjeong (白丁) were despised as baekjeong, commoners as commoners, and the yangban (兩班) were still treated preferentially as yangban. From the period after the end of the Korean Empire, the class divisions of the past began to be broken down, so that even the son of a commoner could become a millionaire (百萬長者) if he had talent and special skills, and could even become a councilor (參議), high-ranking official (高官), or nobleman (大爵). Therefore, the social system and its hereditary morality that "the son of a baekjeong or shaman (巫黨) is the son of a baekjeong or shaman" gradually disappeared. Here, the problem of ideology emerges.

An individual's life shares a part of social activity. And ideology is not the product of an individual. This is to prove that each individual's thoughts, feelings, and will are mutually associated, and that while there is a division of labor among various institutions and classes, there is also a conscious association or unified state. That is, this is the consciousness of society and common concern. This is usually called "ideology."

Thus, the world is not just for oneself, nor is it only for the happiness or benefit of others, but the so-called "social beings" share the products of society with each other. A social being is a social pressure against the restraint of other-regarding aspects. Therefore, the cultivated part is the phenomenon that arises from the socially cultivated behavior of the individual's socius, that is, individual consciousness. As such, the ideology of social beings is the sharing of social ideology. In other words, it is the product of the general environment of mutual communal life between humans. It is not a binding association, but mutually separated, and despite being mutually independent and separate, it is the product of sociality that has a certain form of associative unity. Therefore, ideology is not something that an individual thinks arbitrarily. Therefore, even if ideology is small, it must become the ideology of an era or a class. Marx's ideology is not the ideology of an individual, but it is the ideology of the proletariat, even if it is small, and it can be said to be expressed as the thought of a class.
1. Importance of Current Ideological Problems: The importance of current social ideology has been expressed especially since the World War, and a significant upheaval has been caused in our common life, social consciousness, and the life of social beings. This has led to various upheavals in cultural, political, and economic aspects. Conflicts have arisen between the Korean and other global minority ethnic movements and the world's leading capitalist countries. The fierce battles of Lanner and Verdun during the Great War resulted in the slaughter of people and animals and the immense waste of money, which had a significant impact on price fluctuations and social life, which is difficult for anyone to deny. As a result, material social unrest and changes have occurred. Politically, there was a minority ethnic movement, and the Russian Empire and the German Empire collapsed, and upheavals occurred in the Irish, Czechoslovakian, Egyptian, and other independence issues, as well as in India. Accordingly, significant changes have occurred in social policies, that is, labor issues and industrial policies. <46> Currently, issues such as industrial rationalization or socialization are arising. Consequently, not only have there been changes in ideology, but also our social consciousness and ideological views on social beings have changed. That is, the time has come when we must reflect.
2. Characteristics of Current Ideological Problems: Ideology is not individual, but social, which is its characteristic. And the characteristic is that ideological problems are considered to have the same meaning as social problems. The second characteristic is the problem regarding economic life. That is, the problem of social economy. Prices must be adjusted on average. If the price of rice plummets, wages must be reduced. If the price of rice plummets, wages must be reduced. Issues regarding economic life, such as not reducing public charges and tax payments. Here, ideological problems arise. Therefore, ideological problems are by no means proposed by scholars or empty-headed ideologues. Nor is it the result of the efforts of social activists. Here, social policy issues arise.
3. Oppression of Social Policy and Ideological Problems: Does the increase in extreme poverty in the world cause social problems? Then, if the extremely poor are rescued, will the problem be resolved? Even if all are rescued, the problem will not be easily resolved. Why? What is society? It is necessary to consider the fundamental problems of social economic life, that is, the fundamental problems of social production, consumption, and distribution. Ideology is an observation of value-based unity, and the unification of various observation methods regarding social life. If the government oppresses ideology, will it perish? This will still survive, like the underground stem of perennial grass. Since this is a social being and social consciousness, the solution must be expected by the joint responsibility of all people in the entire society. Here, the need arises to consider social policy issues that are adapted to the times.
4. Direction of Social Ideology: Socialism and Anarchism are the current directions of ideology. Socialism has various meanings, but among them, it means the sharing of economic institutions (society), that is, joint production. Like modern British guild socialism, it has two characteristics: anarchism and socialism. Anarchism is centered on individual absolute freedom and mutual assistance. According to the materialist dialectic, socialism is what Marx advocated, and anarchism is what Kropotkin advocated. There are three types of characteristics in socialism: First, social obligations are emphasized, and it is expressed with the slogan "He who does not work shall not eat." Second, it is expressed in the acceptance of social coercion, that is, severe punishment for those who avoid obligations. Modern Russia is, in a certain sense, an autocracy for the above reason. Third, it is a demand for formal equality for social beings. That is, it demands the same labor and demands the average distribution of food. Therefore, it excludes individualistic life and demands the unification of social life. "He who does not work shall not eat" is not ideal. There are sick people, old people, and weak people in the world. However, these people must also eat, so it is not truly democratic unless these people are able to eat. Marx and Lenin would not have been oblivious to this. <47> What are the characteristics of anarchism? Kropotkin demanded that each individual's personality be freely associated and combined through social freedom. Therefore, he denied coercive power. The sole purpose is for each person living in society to lead a true personal free life according to their abilities and needs. In short, the opposition between socialism, which emphasizes social obligation, and anarchism, which emphasizes social freedom, leads to the meaning of social coercion and the denial of coercive power.
5. The Truth of the Materialist History, That is, the Economic Historical View: The materialist historical view is an economic historical view, but this economic historical view is not separate from dialectics. The materialist dialectic is the change and trend of history that can be applied to the phenomena of life in the universe and human life. According to Marx, in the preface to his Critique of Political Economy, "The material forces and relations of production are the foundations of the social economy, and the political architecture becomes the superstructure, and human social existence and spiritual life are conditioned by this..." This means that the economy is the foundation, and human social existence and spiritual life are major conditions, which proves that ideas regarding spiritual life conditions, that is, social consciousness, have importance. And social life, especially social economic life, is emphasized. This is the starting point of the materialist historical view. In other words, Marx focused on the social characteristics of the 19th to early 20th centuries, in which social industrial revolutions were emphasized and home handicraft industries were transformed into factories, and it can be said that it is greatest achievement to have clarified economic social relations.

4. Morality Regarding Social Recognition

1. Starting Point of Social Morality: Society is a combination of individuals, and as stated above, the thoughts, feelings, and consciousness of each individual are mutually associated, and each institution cooperates and has a state of unity, and expresses the consciousness and common interest of society. The ethics of society starts from the common interest of society. Our common life is full of social consciousness. When walking in a security forest, we can see a sign saying "Caution: Forest Fire," and when strolling in the city, when taking a streetcar, there is a distinction and order of left-hand traffic or entrance and exit, and when taking a stroll in the park, we are usually aware that we should not break trees or catch birds. As such, this is a type of public morality related to forest protection under the Road Traffic Act. When comparing the fares between San Francisco, USA, and Yokohama, Japan, the fare between Yokohama and Tokyo is lower, and when comparing the fares between Shanghai, China, and Incheon, Korea, the fare between Incheon and Gyeongseong is rather more expensive, this will be observed as a commercial moral issue. <48> Or, the comparison between living in a hut on a mountain (living in an earthen cave) and living in a trendy cultural housing is a matter of moral life. However, regardless of public morals, commercial morals, or moral life issues, these are all social moral issues related to our common life. That is, this cannot but be a problem related to social concern regarding social meaning. Restricting the private desire to take the trees, fish, birds, and flowers in the park as personal property, or restricting the destruction of the rules of left-hand traffic, or restricting the taking of excessive profits with unreasonable fares regardless of the distance or time, is more subject to the restrictions of conscience, that is, social concern and social consciousness, than to external restrictions. This proves that social morality exists in our social life. However, such social morality is expressed in different habits and forms according to the times and the circumstances of each life environment and surroundings, or according to the location. In Japan and Korea, people drive on the left, but in Germany and Austria, they drive on the right, and in Germany and Austria, they drive on the right, but in England and France, they drive on the left. In Korea, people do not turn off the lights when sleeping or waking up, but in Germany, there is a habit of turning off the lights when going to bed. Also, in England and the United States, when passengers are crowded in streetcars or trains, men have the habit of yielding their seats to women, but this is not the case in Korea or Germany. Recently, English and American customs have been imported into Korea, and there are exceptional cases where young men yield their seats to beautiful women or female students, but this is a separate issue. The morality of lights or streetcars is a mutual demand for frugality or a socioeconomic requirement, or such social morality originates from the meaning of mutual assistance between the old and the young and the weak, and it is obvious that the meaning of communal life is expressed for fairness, peace, and order, but it has been proven that it differs depending on the living environment, location, and era.
2. Social Morality is Fairness: In Plato, the famous Greek philosopher's dialogue on sociology in the Republic, there is a sentence that says, "There is justice and morality even in a society of thieves." At first, I found this strange. Is there morality in the society of thieves? Is it not self-contradictory to steal while saying, "Don't steal stolen goods again?" However, upon closer examination, it has more than ordinary rules and social morality. The marauder group strictly adheres to the promise that their peers will not steal what they have stolen. In other words, I considered that it is the greatest associative condition for maintaining the marauder group to say that it is not permissible to steal what has been stolen. However, the moral concepts of the society of thieves are still unclear with just the statement that they cannot steal what has been stolen. Social morality is generated when combining, unifying, and associating to achieve a common goal, and organizing a society, that is, an association, with common cooperative concern. Therefore, even though the goal of the society of thieves is theft, morality is expressed in the honesty of not stealing from friends, or in strictly adhering to these rules and order. To put it more specifically, the first is the moral mind to honestly submit stolen goods to friends, that is, the autonomous morality to freely decide actions without receiving the sanctions or control of others, and the second is to prove that moral appropriateness is manifested from the conscience that they are uneasy with friends. As such, even in a society of thieves that can be said to be an extreme example, the morality of autonomous conscience is honest from social beings or from social or associative concerns.
3. Relationship Between Current Social Systems and Morality: The operation of collective organizations such as commercial and industrial companies and banks is governed by the interests of the main drivers and the concerns of its members. For example, the executives of the Gyeongseong Electric Company (京電) or the Gas Company should explain the company's situation to the shareholders so that the shareholders can understand, and the shareholders should reflect on and understand the nature of the monopoly business and not be greedy. Social policies for unemployment issues and general social policies should adopt a policy of industrial socialization, advocated by Renne, the president of the Austrian Social Democratic Party and Minister of the Interior, even if it is less than the poor relief project of Bismarck in Germany in 1848 or industrial rationalization, or even more than that.

What methods can be expected to solve the problem in a world where factories are fixed and the unemployed are increasing? If such current social pathological phenomena and unreasonable or immoral systems are to be reformed, the policies of Bismarck, Renne, etc., will be required, even if only a little. Since anyone is a child of God, there should be no one unhappy among all people. If this is not the case, we must reflect on whether the moral principles or the current social system are unreasonable, and at the same time, we must study the principles regarding social concerns from now on. (End)

On the Sex Education of Korean Women - Those with children must read this once.

Lee Kap-soo, Doctor of Medicine from Germany

In general, a person's sexual sensation (性的感覺) and sexual desire (性慾) are largely composed of two elements (要素): the first is heredity (遺傳) or natural endowment (天稟), and the second is external (外界) stimulation (刺戟) or custom (慣習). Among these, the first is a product of systematic (系統的) development, so it cannot be controlled through education (敎育上), but the second depends on the nature of the education. Therefore, it is necessary to guide the nature of hereditary (遺傳的) sexual desire (性慾) appropriately, well, or healthily as much as possible. If the nature of hereditary sexual desire is bad (惡), various abnormalities (異型) arise, causing harm from the individual to society (社會). That is, homosexuality (同性愛), transvestism (變性愛), or sexual inversion (色慾轉倒症) occur. Even if you do not have this type of abnormal (異型的) sexual (性的) heredity (遺傳), it is necessary to act within the scope (範圍) of education. Moreover, if you do not teach anything about sexual desire at all from a young age, when you reach a certain age (年齡期), your nerves will be troubled (煩悶) by questions (疑問) about sex (性), and you will either read bad (惡俗) books (書物) or desire to hear explanations (說明) through movies. At this time, the extremely dangerous thing is to fall into the demimonde (花柳界) and seek intimacy (交情) with prostitutes (賣春婦) or to engage in the bad habit of masturbation (手淫), which is extremely harmful. Therefore, the purpose (目뎍) of education is to protect the innate (先天的) temperament (性稟) of children and guide them in a good (善良) way to develop them fully. Therefore, we think that sexual education is extremely necessary, and at the same time, it is not a difficult thing. For young children, you should only let them know where they and their siblings (兄弟姉妹) came from, and as they get older, you should teach them that the reason why children are born is because the mother becomes pregnant (姙娠) inside her body (體內). There is an interesting "Mrs. Schmitt's Anecdote (經驗談)." This woman had a son (아들) of about 8 years old and two older (年長) daughters (딸). One day, these three children were playing and accidentally arguing (言爭) about chickens (닭) that the older sisters (누이들) said, "A rooster (숫닭) has never laid an egg (鷄卵), so it is useless." The younger brother, unable to suppress his anger (憤怒), said, "Why are you insulting (侮辱) a male (男性) like this? A rooster may not lay eggs, but it must have its own duty (天職)!" They argued (論爭) repeatedly and fiercely (劇烈). The three children came to their mother to ask for her judgment (質問). The mother replied that if there were no roosters, the hen's eggs could never hatch (孵化). Hearing this, the three children did not hesitate at all and asked, "Mother, if there were no father in our house, could we all not have been born (生기지 못하얏슬 것임니가)?" Then, the mother answered "Of course," and the children were finally satisfied, and their argument (言爭) ended peacefully. In this way, it can be easily explained using plants (植物) or animals (動物) as examples (例) as much as possible (可及的). However, parents (兩親) or educators neglect extremely necessary sex education, and as a result, they receive various harms through bad peers (同輩), movies, and books (書物) of bad influence (惡風). Fortunately, in recent years, sex education (性敎育) has become a major issue in the education field, and they are studying methods (方法). For reference, I would like to introduce the summary (要旨) of "Karl Grassman's" lecture (强論) on the issue of sex education (性慾敎育問題) at the meeting of the School Committee (學校委員會) of "Munich (뮨헨)" City (市) in Germany (獨逸) as follows: (一) The custom of masturbation (手淫) is prevalent among modern boys (少年), so the Juvenile Protection Law (少年保護法) must be perfected to prohibit this. At the same time, it is necessary to improve the morality (道德) of adults (成年者). (二) Individual education is the education of character (性格), and sex education can also be individual education. (三) It is necessary to strengthen (强固) the will (意志) of boys (少年), and sexual sensation (性慾感覺) is excessive, or ideas (觀念) and behaviors (行爲) related to it should be eliminated through physical protection (身體的保護) and exercise (運動). (四) Sexual life (性慾生活) and its phenomenon (現衆) must be done humanly (人的). (五) When explaining things related to sexual desire, the parents (兩親) or their representatives will be responsible for this at home. (六) However, since things related to sexual desire are neglected (等閑) at home, it is first necessary to explain the knowledge of sexual desire (性慾) to the parents (兩親), and the responsibility lies with the doctor (醫師) or teacher (敎師). (七) The scope (範圍) and timing (時期) of the sex explanation should be determined according to the individual. (八) In my humble opinion (愚見), it is necessary to forcibly teach sexual issues by setting up a certain course in school. (九) In schools, it is necessary to distinguish between students (生徒) who are vulgar (卑劣) in manners (風儀) and ordinary (普通) students (生徒). (十) It is said that it is necessary to explain the dangers of reproductive life (生植生活) to graduates (卒業生) above the level of middle school and vocational school. We Koreans (朝鮮사람들), who are still stubborn (완구한), jump twenty or thirty lengths (열 낄 스무길식 뛰며) at the mere mention of the word and call it heinous (흉악하고) and disruptive to morals (풍속괴란이라), but as mentioned above, this sex education (性敎育) is extremely necessary for our unmarried children (자녀) and will be formally realized in our Korea in the future in homes or schools. (End) <52>

Peculiar Phenomena of Living Things and Their Application

Yu Il-jun, Doctor of Medicine

All living things in this universe are in an extremely complex state in terms of their types and quantities. When these living things are observed morphologically, they have their own unique forms according to the differences in species, and they exhibit noticeable differences according to individuality. Humans have human forms, animals have animal characteristics, and plants have various properties as plants. Moreover, they create extremely strange phenomena in their life functions or in the relationships between living things. It is as if all living things were created under the control of some kind of consciousness.

However, when these living things are chemically observed, they are unexpectedly made up of simple components. If all the substances on this earth are analyzed, they consist of no more than 93 elements. Even complex living bodies like us humans are made up of no more than about ten types of chemical elements. Despite the fact that living things are formed from such simple chemical elements, it is an interesting question why their biological properties are each unique. Although the solution to this has not yet been completed, it is a fact that the mysterious synthetic action of the chemical elements that make up living things has an absolute influence on the nature of the living thing. The proteins that make up the bodies of horses or cows have almost the same chemical composition, but because the way the elements are synthesized is similar, their biological properties are also similar. Therefore, all living things exhibit their own unique individuality due to these morphological peculiarities and the peculiarities of the chemical element groups. Therefore, when we classify living things, we use these two peculiarities as standards.

However, if we compare these two points for humans and horses, when these two individuals have the complete form of their bodily organization, the two can be easily distinguished by their unique appearance, but if we partially decompose the bodily organization of these two individuals, especially when extracting and placing small amounts of blood from humans or horses, it will be difficult to distinguish the two types of blood by morphological means alone. However, if we investigate the chemical element groups of that blood, we can easily distinguish the two types of blood. Therefore, we can see that the morphological peculiarities of living things are comparative, while the peculiarities of the element groups are always absolute. <53> Therefore, even if a living thing loses its form due to some external force, the peculiarities of its chemical element group are preserved forever. So, we can distinguish all living things by applying this peculiarity of the element group. Then, I would like to write in order about what method is used to find this peculiarity of the element group, what effect the results caused by the peculiarity of this element group have on the general biological world, and what benefits they give to us humans.

1. How to Find the Peculiarity of the Chemical Element Group

The peculiarity of the element group that forms the body of a living thing, especially an animal, means the biological peculiarity of the protein, which is the main component of the animal's body.

Therefore, examining the peculiarity of the protein of an animal's body is the method of finding the peculiarity of the chemical element group that makes up the animal's body. When we think superficially, the chemical element group that makes up the body is the body's protein, so it would be most convenient to chemically analyze it to find out what atoms are gathered in what form to know the peculiarity of that protein, but our chemical knowledge has not yet reached the point of doing such a test. We only know that protein is synthesized from various "amino" acids, and we do not have more detailed knowledge than that. Therefore, even if we directly chemically analyze the protein, we cannot find the peculiarity of the element group. Then, we have no choice but to take another method here, and that method is based on the biological chemical method.

All living things have mysterious life functions, and they instinctively elicit a certain reaction to the stimuli that arise from the surroundings of the living thing. This is true for mechanical stimuli and chemical stimuli, and it is also true for biochemical stimuli. If we eat a certain kind of poison or protein from a different species, it is digested in the gastrointestinal tract and becomes a nutrient for the body. However, when this is injected subcutaneously or intravenously in a non-oral way, it causes a fierce reaction disturbance in the body. If we inject a small amount of horse serum into a rabbit, the rabbit's body has been invaded by a foreign protein that has properties similar to its own tissue, so it elicits a certain reaction to that protein. The form of the reaction is as follows. When we extract the serum from a rabbit injected with horse serum and add horse serum to that serum, the sera of both combine to form a kind of flocculent precipitate. If we add horse serum to the healthy rabbit serum that has not been injected with horse serum, no change occurs. This phenomenon is because the horse serum introduced into the rabbit is a foreign substance to the rabbit, so a kind of new substance is formed invisibly in the rabbit's body to eliminate that foreign substance. We call this newly created substance in the rabbit's body an immune body, and the phenomenon in which this immune body combines with horse serum to form a flocculent precipitate is called an immune reaction (precipitation reaction).

This type of immune reaction occurs not only when horse serum is injected, but also when serum from other species such as cows, dogs, and pigs is injected. The immune bodies formed by the injection of serum from cows, dogs, or pigs do not react with the serum of animals other than cows, dogs, or pigs. In other words, the immune body that appears due to a certain protein specifically acts only on that protein. It can be biochemically proven that this specific action of the immune body is caused by the peculiarity of the chemical element group of the protein that formed the immune body. Therefore, if we want to find the peculiarity of the chemical element group of an animal's body, it is most convenient to apply this immune reaction. To give another example, the immune body newly appeared after injecting human protein into a rabbit elicits an immune reaction only to human protein and absolutely does not react to proteins from other animals or plants. This is because the chemical element group that forms human protein has no difference in its composition from the element group of other animal proteins, but it is unique in its bonding method. As such, the immune phenomenon elicited by the immune body caused by protein made up of a certain element group only for the


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	博士와 論文集
기사형태	논설

博士와 論文集
社會性과 道德性의 關係

文學博士 金賢準

1.一般社會性

사회는 人과人의 관계를 云함이다. 환언하면 人과 人이 結社相集한 集會團體를 云함이다. 고로 사회는 인류가 결합하야 공동으로 생활하고 일반현상과 현실적 생활형식 일반의 형태다. 玆에 기본사회나 團體及制度의 別이 有하나 大體上으로 공동사회와 목적사회의 別이 有하다. 목적사회는 특정한 목적을 가진 人人의 관계를 云한다. 요컨대 사회는 人人의 관계로부터 발생한 者다. 然이나 人人의 관계는 木石이나 牛馬의 관계와 相異하다. 책상이나 책의 관계는 又는 木과 石의 관계는 비사회적이나 人과 人의 관계는 意識的關係인 故로 사회적이라 할 것이다. 개인의 의식적관계는 사회적인 故로 의식적 스스로가 구속된다. 一例의 기러기(雁)가 본능적으로 一社會的 규율적의식을 具備하엿다. 故로 一雁이 一例雁으로부터 이탈하야 자유행동하지 못하며 此 反面으로 個個의 의식 스스로가 雁列로부터 離去하지 못할 拘束的 社會紐帶에 계열되여 잇다. 사회의 특질은 인간생활과 행동에서 爲始되엿다. 右와 如히 인간사회의 본성은 통일적 경향이 有하다. 統一的意義는 자기가 구속되는 것은 又 社會內部로부터 발생하는 권력으로부터 爲始된다. 此關係는 인간의 정신으로부터 발생한다. 정신은 사회적 세력의 원천이다.<42> 법률적 의의로 해석할 時는 「몬테스귀-」 萬法精神(Montes-quieu, L'Esprit der Lois)와 如하다. 「콜」은 「루쏘」를 평하야 사회는 인간의 의지의 관계에 불과하다는 발생적 설명이라 하는 것도 亦然社會性을 정신적방면에서 구하엿다는 것을 玆에 證한다.
사회성에 대하야 實證的人間生活과 행동의 상호관계를 고찰하건대 種種의 事象에 표현되는 것을 吾人은 目下에 경험할 수 잇스며 又는 경험하면서 잇다. 一例를 擧하건대 博覽會나 其他集會場所에는 다수의 人人이 一時에 출입할 時나 혹은 定車場에서 一時에 다수의 人人이 乘車券을 買入하고저 할 時는 列을 지어 각기 자기의 순번을 期待 아니 할 수 업다. 만일 혹자가 中途에 其順列을 파괴하고 통행하거나 혹은 승차권을 타인보다 먼저 매입하고저 할 시는 此或者는 狂者라고 하고 順列의 최후에 戻立하지 안이하면 아니될 것이다. 如斯한 것은 何를 의미하는가. 一社會的 규율이 停車場內에서 又는 集合場所出入時에 시행된다는 것을 입증하는 것이다. 停車場에만 限한 것이 아니요, 도로의 왕래에나 交通物도 如斯한 사회적 질서와 규율을 행하지 아니하면 아니된다. 卽 此는 사회인은 전체를 고려하야 각기 자유행동에 억제를 가하며 사회인으로서의 행동을 사회성이라 명칭한다.
사회인은 如斯히 「소씨우스」(Socius)에 대한 意義가 有하다. 즉 他我的  방면의 자극에 대한 社會的威壓이다. 고로 사회인은 他我的方面으로 陶冶된 개인의식이 사회적으로 표현되는 행동의 형식이라 할 수 잇다. 사회인은 人과 人의 관계를 규정하여 상관적관계인 個個人人의 공동의식이오, 개인을 한정할 만한 권리다. 그러면 吾人은 如左한 文句로 사회의 정의를 총괄적으로 표시하야 사회성의 의의를 闡明케 하고저 한다.
사회는 사회의 원리에 의하야 인간은 평화적으로 상호공동생활하면서 잇는 일반의 환경과 구성이라 할 것이다 개인과 사회의 관계는 필히 구속적 연합이 아니오, 상호분리하엿다. 然이나 상호독립적분리인 것을 불구하고 일정한 연합통일의 형식을 구비하엿다. 개인과 가족 민족과 국가 계급 등의 통일적형식과 관계가 如斯한 형태에 在하다.

2. 社會本質에 관한 理論

사회의 본질을 사회의 사실로 관찰하건대 사회의 현상으로 사회결합원동력으로 사회결합 其 자체로 분립하야 관찰하기 가능하다.

1.有機體說과 精神全體說

사회는 무엇인가. 吾等은 사회의 일원이다. 然이나 동시에 가족, 鄕黨, 학교, 국민의 일원에 속하얏다. 사회는 통일적 조직이나 個個人人으로 조직된 통일이다. 사회는 일개인의 생리상구성과 如히 각 부분으로 조성되여 神經中樞나 首腦的部分으로 有하다. 然이나 사회는 個個人人의 집합으로 관찰할 者 아니오 통일된 獨立的一個生命과 如하다는 관찰로부터 유기체라하는 명칭이 傳來하엿다. 玆에 사회도 유기체의 일종이라 하엿다. 사회유기체설은 생물유기체설에 대립하야 無類似한 것은 比較한 것이다.<43> 스펜사-以來의 種種의 학자들은 사회유기체를 생물유기체로 동일시하엿다. 스펜사-는 社會學原理第一編第二章에 「人類社會의 구성과 동물체의 조직은 평행선과 如히 상대한 者라」하야 此를 비교연구하엿다. 社會有機體說은 倫理學이나 心理學上에서도 만히 취급하엿다. 「스테판」은 윤리학 제126頁에 사회적유기체를 生理的有機體설과 비교하야 인간의 도덕적 생활문제를 論하엿다. 「무하벳트」는 論理學階梯제165頁 乃至 172頁에 諸種의 風習과 제도에 관하여 사회유기체설을 解明하엿다. 요컨대 윤리학 방면에서 취급하는 사회유기체설은 인간의 도덕적 생활을 사회와 諸種의 理想, 制度道德的風俗 등에 의한 音調와 色彩를 分析하야 其內容을 설명한 것이다. 내용은 人格을 標準하고 인격은 孤立한 現象이 아니오 타인의 인격에 분리하지 아니한 관계를 論한 者다.
그런대 社會有機體說이라 하는 것은 果然 如何한 것인가. 사회를 생물유기체에 類似한 것이라 고찰하는 것인가. 생물유기체는 卽生物이 各各의 세포로 결합 통일되여 神經中樞에 集中하야 一定한 感覺器官은 有機的作用을 行하는 者니 사회유기체는 右에 유사하다 하여 스펜사-학파는 사회유기체를 생물유기체로 동일시함에 至하엿다. 然이나 此는 社會心理學說이 大勢를 점령하고 잇는 今日에 如斯한 사회유기체설은 度外視함에 至하엿다.
그리하면 사회심리학파의 유기체설에 대한 의견은 如何한가. 現代的心理學派의 대표자는 독일 쇠푸례, 米國 기팅스, 佛國 탈트 등이라 할 것이다. 彼等은 사회는 개인의 結合으로 성립하엿다는 根本槪念으로 心理的相互作用說 同情設 結合原動力說 又는 橫倣說 등을 주장하야 社會學史上에 特筆하엿다. 然이나 사회는 각개인의 사상 감정 及 의지가 상호 연합하고 지배자와 복종자의 관계에 의하야 유기적 통일을 지배하고 각 기관의 間에 分業的作用이나 통일의 상태에 지배되여 잇다. 유기적 통일은 개인 단위를 삼은 사회가 개인 결합에 의하야 新一種의 統一卽思想 감정 의지의 결합이다. 此는 卽社會的精神이오, 社會的關心이며 社會的意識이라 할 수 잇다. 如斯한 의미에서 사회유기체와 생물유기체의 間에는 多大한 差異가 有하다. (1)사회를 조성한 개인은 一時에 家庭의 일원이오, 鄕黨의 一員이며 동시에 國家의 一員이다. 그리하고 又他集團의 관계를 복합적으로 관련하여 잇다. 그러나 내부에서 一黨員이나 기타집단으로부터 탈퇴할수 잇다. 然이나 생물유기체의 조직에 대한 각각의 세포는 此限에 不在하다. (2)社會有機體에 대한 개인은 相互隔離하여 잇다. (3)생물유기체의 의식은 全體中의 一切頭腦에 집중이 되여 잇스며 사회유기체의 의식은 개인의 전체에 散布되여 잇다. 如斯한 者를 超有機體說이라 한다. 此超有機體說은 自來스펜사-流의 生理學的有機體說과는 多大한 차이가 잇는 것을 余는 言明한다.
社會精神全體說에 대하야 數言을 더 加하고저 한다. 精神全體說은 사회의 의식과 정신을 전적의미에서 사회의 一切事象을 고찰하는 학설이다. 此는 浪漫主義의 영향을 바든 「오토마-쉬판」이 <44> 대표하여 잇다. 彼는 사회를 一綜合的渾一體로 관찰한다. 卽사회는 개인의 집합이 아니요, 개인의 존재를 독립식인 渾一體다. 개인은 사회의 肢體卽手足과 如하다는 의미로 社會有機體說을 정신적으로 고찰한 학설이다. 然이나 此를 全然히 무조건으로 승인하기 는 심히 곤란하다.
2. 模倣說과 相互作用說, 모방설은 佛國社會學者「탈트」의 주장한 바인대 모방은 「탈트」에 의하건대 暗示(Suggession)와 同一한 의미로 사상이나 감정 又는 의지 등 一致에 의하야 통일적으로 결합하는 者다. 此說은 他의 行動 又는 範示를 반사적으로 又는 有意識的으로 묘사하거나 或은 재현하려고 하는 者다. 요컨대 思惟활동의 모방을 云함이다. 개인적으로 又는 일부분이 모방하지 아니하는 事도, 不無할 것이나 此는 大體上으로보아 「리미태시오-」(Limitasiou)의 상태에 在하다는 것을 言明하엿다. 今日에 佛國 巴里에서 200년전 스페인 여자 衣服이 유행한 것을 지목하야 「스페인」문명이 佛國에 輸入되엿다는 것을 입증하엿다. 此는 卽 모방에 의하야 수입된 것이다. 古支代那文明이 조선에 수입되엿고 조선의 문물이 일본에 수입되엿다. (文字, 建築) 又 支那衣服이 수입되여 現今까지 유행된다(淸나라 시대의 의복이 現今 우리 의복인 것, 現今 日本物質文明이 서양문명인 것을 證하야 사회적 모방이 盛行되는 것을 추측할 수 잇다. 요컨대 「탈트」의 모방설은 「롯쓰」 「지케례」 「루뽄」등 학자의 설과 相異하야 결국 사회유기체설의 경향이 不無하다. 某學者는 評하되 타인을 자기의 同類로 의식할 時에 因起하는 狀態 卽 기딍스 同類意識說이나 혹은 同情設과 접근하엿다 한다.
相互作用說의 요지를 설명하건대 如左하다. 상호작용설은 「심멜」 「스타겐베록 」 「엘윗트」등의 주장하는 바니 상호작용이라하는 것은 心的相互作用은 云함이다. 此는 戀愛와 藝術, 又는 학문 등의 내용과 外的相互의 관계와 작용 등의 형식문제에 잇서서 相爲, 相共, 並存, 대립 등을 표준한 학설이다. 요컨대 心的相互의 관계와 心的結合을 본질로 삼아 인간공동생활일반을 설명하고저 하는 학설이다. 사회가 結社的集團 以上 社會의 본질은 심적상호작용에 잇다 하는 이론이 가장 妥當的이라 할 것이다.

3. 現代思想問題와 社會認識

사상은 사회생활의 價値的觀察의 통일이다. 2,30년전까지도 士農工商의 分限은 世襲的이엇다. 韓末期까지는 白丁은<45> 白丁으로 상놈은 상놈으로 賤視하엿스며 兩班은 의연히 양반으로 優待하는 世襲的分限이 잇섯다. 韓末以後의 時期로부터 自來의 階級分限이 打破되기 시작하야 百姓의 자식이라도 才分과 特長만 잇스면 百萬長者도 될 수 잇고 參議高官大爵이라도 될 수 잇섯다. 고로 이전에는 「白丁 巫黨의 자식은 白丁巫黨의 子息」이 된다는 사회제도와 其 세습적 도덕은 漸次 소멸되고 마럿다. 玆에 사상문제가 現出된다.
一個人의 생활은 사회활중에 일부분을 分有하엿다. 그리하고 사상도 일개인의 소산이 아니다. 此는 각개인의 사상, 감정, 의지가 상호연합하야 各機關各階級間 分業作用이 有한 반면에 의식적 결합 又는 통일의 상태에 잇는 것을 입증함이다. 卽此는 사회의 의식이오 共同的關心이다. 故로 사상은 공동관심의 소산이다. 此를 通常 「이데올로기」라 명칭한다.
그리하야 세상은 自己만 爲한 세상이 아니요 又 他人의 행복이나 이익만 위하는 것이 목적이 아니요 소위「사회인」의 소산을 彼我가 各各分有하여 잇는 것이다. 사회인이라 하는 것은 他我的方面의 구속에 대한 사회적 위압이다.故로 陶冶된 부분은 개인의 소시우스의 卽 個人意識이 사회적으로 陶冶된 행위로부터 喚起하는 현상이다. 如斯한 사회인의 사상은 사회 이데올로기의 分有다. 환언하면 인간의 彼我相互共同生活一般環境의 소산이다. 구속적 연합이 아니요, 相互分離하여 잇스며 相互獨立分離한 것을 불구하고 일정한 연합적 통일의 형식을 구비한 사회성의 소산이다. 고로 사상은 一個人이 자의로 생각하는 것은 아니다. 고로 사상은 少할지라도 一時代에 少할지라도 一階級의 이데올로기가 되지  아니하면 아니된다. 맑스의 사상은 一個人의 사상이 아니요, 少할지라도 無産階級 이데올로기요 一階級的思想으로 표현된 것이라 할 것이다.
1. 現今思想問題의 重要性 現今社會思想의 중요성은 특히 세계대전 이후로 표현되여 吾人의 共同生活上이나 사회적의식상에 又는 사회인의 생활상에 頗大한 동요가 因起하엿다. 此는 문화적, 政治的 又는 경제적방면에 각종의 동요가 派起하엿다. 朝鮮及 세계약소민족운동과 세계의 열강 자본주의 국가의 충돌이 因起하엿다. 大戰中에 란넬, 벨단의 激戰은 人畜의 살해와 莫大한 금전의 虛費로 물가의 動搖及社會的 生活上에 지대한 影響을 及하엿다는 것은 何人이든지 부정하기 難하다. 따라서 물질적사회동요와 변동이 起하엿다. 정치상으로는 약소민족운동이 有하엿고 露西亞帝政과 독일 제국이 瓦解되고 愛蘭 초케슬로바키어 埃及 其他獨立問題印度 등의 動搖가 잇섯다. 따라서 社會政策卽勞働問題와 産業政策 등에<46> 多大한 변혁이 잇섯다. 只今은 産業合理化나 혹은 사회화니 하는 문제가 因起하는 중에 잇다. 從하야 思想上의 변동은 물론이요 吾人의 사회의식이나 사회인에 대한 이데올로기觀도 變하엿다. 卽反省하지 아니하면 아니 될 시기가 도래하엿다.
2. 現今 사상문제의 특색, 사상은 개인적이 아니요 사회적이라 하는 것이 특색이다. 그리하고 사상문제라 하면 사회문제와 동일한 의미로 고찰하는 것이 특색이다. 第二의 특색이라고 할만한 것은 경제적 생활에 관한 문제다. 卽사회경제의 문제다. 물가를 평균 조절하지 아니하면 아니된다. 米價가 폭락하니 減俸하지 아니하면 아니 된다. 米價가 폭락하니 減俸하지 아니하면 아니 된다. 公課金稅納을 減下하지 아니 하면 아니 된다 하는 諸等의 경제적생활에 관한 문제다. 玆에 사상문제가 발생한다. 故로 사상문제는 학자나 혹은 空思想理論家가 제창하는 것은 결코 아니다. 又 社會運動者가 노력한 결과가 아니다. 玆에 사회정책 문제가 발생한다.
3. 사회정책과 사상문제의 壓迫, 세상에 極貧者가 증가함으로 사회문제가 발생하는가. 그리하면 극빈자를 구제하면 문제가 종식될가? 全部를 구제한다 할지라도 용이하게 종식되지 아니하면 이유는 何에 在한가? 此는 사회가 무엇인가? 사회경제적 생활의 근본문제에 대하야 사회적 생산과 消費及分配의 근본적 문제를 고찰하지 아니하면 아니 될 것이다. 사상은 가치적 통일의 관찰이요 사회생활에 관한 諸觀察方法의 통일이다. 정부에서 압박하면 사상이 滅亡하는가? 此는 但多年草의 地下莖과 如히 의연히 생존하여 잇슬 것이다. 此는 사회인이요 社會意識인 以上은 社會全體 人人이 共同責任으로 其解決을 기대하지 아니하면 아니 될 것이다. 玆에 시대에 適應한 사회정책문제를 고려할 필요가 生한다.
4. 사회사상의 방향 소시아리슴스 아나기슴스는 現今 사상의 방향이다. 소시아리슴스는 種種의  의미가 잇겟지마는 就中에 經濟機關共有(社會)卽공동생산을 의미한다. 現代英國 낄드소시아리슴스와 如히 아나기슴 소시아리슴의 二種特色을 구비하엿다. 아날히슴스는 개인의 절대자유와 상호보조를 중심으로 삼을 者다. 唯物的辨證法에 의하면 맑스가 주장하는 바 소시아리슴스요, 구로포토킨 주장하는 바는 아날이슴스다. 소시아리슴스의 특색에 三種이 有하니 第一은 社會的義務性을 高調하야 「勞働하지 아니하는 者는 不食하라」하는 標語로 表現되엿스며 第二는 社會的强制의 容認卽義務를 피하는 者는 嚴罰한다는 것에 표현되여 잇다. 현대의 露西亞는 某意味에 잇서서 專制主義라 하는 것이 右의 이유에 잇다. 第三은 사회인에 대한 形式的平均性의 要求다. 卽同一히 勞働을 요구하고 평균히 食物分配를 요구한다. 고로 개인주의적생활을 배제하고 사회적생활의 통일을 요구한다. 「勞働하지 아니하는 자는 먹지 못한다」하는 것은 理想的이 아니다. 세상에는 病人과 老人과 弱者가 잇다. 然이나 此等人人도 亦然 먹지 아니하면 아니될 것이니 如斯한 人人도 먹을 만하게 되지 아니하면 진정한 데모크라시적이 아니다. 此에 대하야 맑스나 레닌이 相到하지 아니한 바는<47>아닐 것이다. 아날히슴스의 특색은 何에 在한가?
사회적 자유성에 의하야 各各 人格이 자유로 關聯組合을 作하여 잇는 것을 구로보토킨은 요구하엿다. 故로 强制的權力을 부정하엿다 할 것이다. 사회 내에 생활하는 各人은 능력과 요구에 따라서 眞人格的自由生活을 영위하는 것이 유일한 목적이다. 요컨대 사회적 의무성을 高唱하는 소시아리슴스와 사회자유성을 고창하는 아날히슴스의 대립은 사회적강제를 의미하고 又강제적권력을 부정하는 결과에 至하엿다.
5. 唯物史卽經濟的史觀說의 眞理
유물사관은 경제적사관인대 此 경제적사관은 변증법과 別物이 아니다. 唯物的辨證法은 宇宙人生萬般의 생활현상에 적용될 만한 역사의 변화와 추이다. 맑스에 의한 즉 其著經濟政治批判論序文에 「物質的生産諸力及關係는 卽社會經濟의 組立의 土臺는 政治的建築이 이 上層建物이 되고 인간사회적 존재와 정신적 생활을 일조건으로 삼고 잇다...云云하엿다.」 此는 경제가 토대가 되고 인간의 사회적 존재와 정신적 생활이 일대조건이 되엿다 함이니 精神生活條件卽社會意識에 관한 사상이 중대성을 가젓다는 것을 입증하엿다. 그리하고 사회적 생활은 특히 사회적 경제생활을 중대시하엿다. 此는 唯物史觀의 출발점이다. 환언하면 사회적산업혁명을 중대시하야 가내수공업이 공장으로 변한다는 것을 맑스는 제19세기로부터 제20세기초의 사회적특색에 착안하엿다는 것이며 경제적 사회관계를 闡明케 하고저 한 것이 가장 위대하다 할 것이다.

4. 社會認識에 關한 道德性

1. 사회도덕의 출발점, 사회는 개인의 결합이요 각개인의 사상이나 감정이나 의식이 상호연합하고 각기관은 協働하며 통일의 상태를 구비하야 於是乎社會의 의식과 사회공동관심에 표현된 者라 하는 것은 上論한 바와 如하다. 사회의 倫理는 사회공동관심으로부터 출발하엿다. 吾人의 공동생활상에는 허다한 사회의식이 충만하엿다. 保安林中에 步行할 時에 山火注意라 하는 牌가 걸여 잇는 것을 볼 수 잇스며 市街에 散步할 時에 電車를 탈 때에 左側通行 又는 入口 出口의 분별과 순서가 잇스며 公園에 散步할 時에 樹木을 꺽지 마라. 鳥類를 잡지 마라 하는 것은 통상 우리가 인식하는 바이다. 如斯한 것은 徒路取締法에 의한 山林保護에 관힌 一種의 公德이다. 米國桑港日本橫濱間의 運賃은 橫濱東京間의 운임보다 소액이요, 支那上海朝鮮仁川間의 운임은 仁川京城間의 운임이 오히려 多額이라는 비교를 볼 때에는 此는 商業上道德問題로<48>로 관찰할 것이다. 혹은 山上에 오막살임(土堀生活)하는 것과 유행성문화주택생활의 비교는 生活上道德의 문제다. 然이나 何者든지 公德이나 商業上道德이나 生活上道德問題나 何者를 물론하고 吾人의 공동생활에 관련된 사회도덕문제다. 卽此는 社會意義에 관한 사회적 관심에 관한 문제가 아니될 수 업다. 공원의 수목이나 魚鳥나 꼿을 개인의 소유로 取去하고저 하는 私慾을 制裁하는 것이나 좌측통행의 규율을 破壞하는대 制裁나 相距나 時日의 다소를 불구하고 무리한 운임으로 폭리를 취하는대 制裁하는 것은 외형적 제재보다 良心 卽 社會的 關心 사회적 의식의 제재를 밧게 되는 것이다. 此는 卽吾人의 사회생활상에 사회적도덕성이 존재하엿다는 것을 입증하는 것이다. 然이나 如斯한 사회도덕성은 시대와 各各生活의 環境周園의 형편에 따라서 혹은 장소에 따라서 各各相異한 습관과 상이한 형태에 표시된다. 日本이나 조선에서는 左側通行하지마는 독일이나 墺地利에서는 右側通行하고 獨逸墺國서는 右側通行하지마는 英佛에서는 左側通行한다. 조선에서는 전등을 잘 때나 깰 때나 켜두지마는 독일서는 就寢時는 必히 소등하는 습관이 잇다. 又 英米國에서는 전차나 기차 내에서 승객이 混雜할 時에 남자는 여자의게 자리를 사양하는 습관이 잇스나 조선이나 독일에서는 不然하다. 근래에 英米風이 조선에 수입되여 예외로 청년남자가 미인이나 여학생의게 자리를 사양하는 事가 有하나 此는 別問題다. 燈火의 도덕이나 전차도덕은 相互間儉約主義 혹은 사회경제상의 요구요, 혹은 老幼弱者의 相互扶助의 의미에서 如斯한 사회도덕이 출발하야 공동생활의 의의가 自明的으로 공정과 安寧秩序를 위하야 표시된 것은 물론이지마는 생활환경과 場所及時代에 의하야 상이하다는 것을 입증한 것이다.
2. 사회도덕은 공정, 유명한 希腦哲學者 풀라톤의 國家論의 사회학에 관한 對話篇에 「盜賊社會에도 정의와 도덕이 잇다」하는 句語가 잇다. 나는 이것을 처음에는 이상하게 역엿다. 도적의 사회에 도덕이 잇는가? 도적질하면서 혹은 盜賊한 물품을 다시 도적하지 마러라 하는 것은 自家撞着이 아닌가? 然이나 상세히 고찰하면 普通 以上의 규율과 사회도덕성이 구비되여 잇다. 馬賊團은 各其自己가 도적해온 것은 他同輩가 도적하지 안이할 것이다 라는 약속을 엄수한다. 卽 도적한 것을 도적하여서는 불가하다 하는 馬賊團이 維持되는 가장 큰 結社的條件이라 하는 것을 고찰하엿다. 然이나 도적한 것을 도적하지 못한다는 것만으로서는 도적의 사회도덕은 아즉 명확한 관념이 표시되지 못하엿다. 사회도덕성은 공동의 목적에 도달하기 위하야 結合하고 統一聯合하야 共同的協同的關心으로 社會卽結社를 조직할 時에 도덕성이 발생함으로 도적의 사회는 목적이 도적이라 할지나 友人 것을 도적하지 아니할 정직을 중심삼는대서 又는 此규율과 질서를 嚴守하는대서 도덕성이 표현된다. 更言하면 第一은 도적한 것을 정직히 友人의게 제출하는 道德心으로 卽他의 制裁나 지배를 不受하고 자유로 행동을 결정하는 자율적도덕성과 第二는 友人의게 未安하다는 양심으로부터 道德的妥當性이 現出되엿다는 것을 입증한다. 如斯히 極端의 例라고 할만한<49> 도적사회에서도 자율적 양심의 도덕성이 사회인으로부터 혹은 社會的 又는 結社的 關心으로부터 사회도덕성은 공정하다는 것을 입증한다.
3. 現社會制度와 도덕성의 관계, 商工業會社나 은행과 如한 집단조직의 운용은 其主動力者의 관심과 其成員의 關心 등이 左右를 지배한다. 一例를 擧할진대 京電이나 혹은 瓦斯會社의 폭리는 중역이 회사의 실정을 推察하야 株主를 諒解케 하고 株主들은 獨占事業의 성질을 反省諒解하야 貪慾하지 아니하여야 할 것과 如하다. 失業問題나 一般社會政策은 일부분의 빈민구제사업과 如한 方針보다 少할지라도 1848년 독일 비스맑 貧民救濟事業政策이나 혹은 산업합리화 아니 그것보다도 尙히 墺地利 社會民主黨 總裁요, 內務大臣으로 잇는 렌네의 주창하는 바 산업사회화의 방침을 취하지 아니하면 아니 될 것이다.
工場은 一定하고 失業者는 증가하는 世界上인대 如何한 方法으로 해결을 기대할가. 만일 如斯한 現社會病理的現象과 不合理的 又는 不道德한 제도를 개조하랴면 少할지라도 비스맑 렌네 등의 정책을 요구할 것이다. 何人이든지 神의 子인 以上은 萬人 중에 一人이라도 불행한 자가 업서야 할 것이다. 만일 不然하다 하면 도덕의 道理가 又는 現社會制度가 道理에 不合理하지 아니한가 한 것을 吾人은 反省하는 동시에 社會的關心에 관한 道理를 自今으로 연구하지 아니하면 아니 될 것이다.(了)


朝鮮女性의 性敎育에 對하야 - 子女를 두신 분은 반드시 한번 닑으십시요

獨逸醫學搏士 李甲秀

무릇 사람의 성적감각(性的感覺)과 성욕(性慾)은 대개 두 가지 요소(要素)로 성립되얏는바 첫재는 유전(遺傳) 또는 텬품(天稟)이요 둘재는 외계(外界)의 자극(刺戟) 또는 관습(慣習)이라 하겟슴니다. 그중에서 첫재의 것은 게통뎍(系統的)으로 발육된 산물임으로 교육상(敎育上) 이것을 엇지할 수 업스나 그러나 둘재의 것은 교육 여하에 따라가는 것입니다. 그럼으로 유전뎍성욕(遺傳的性慾)의 성질을 될 수 잇는대까지 뎍당히 선량히 또는 건전히 인도할 필요가 잇슴니다. 만일 유전뎍 성욕의 성질이 악(惡)한 때에는 여러 가지의 이형(異型)이 생기여 개인으로부터 사회(社會)에까지 해독을 끼치는 것이니 즉 동성애(同性愛) 변성애(變性愛) 또는 색욕전도증(色慾轉倒症) 등이 이러나는 것임니다. 이와 가티 이형뎍(異型的)인 셩뎍유전(性的遺傳)을 가지지 안이 하얏슬지라도 교육의 멈위(範圍)안에서 행할 필요가 잇다 하겟슴니다. 그뿐아니라 어렷슬 때부터 일절 성욕에 관한 하등의 지식을 가라처 주지 안이 하는 때에는 일정한 년령긔(年齡期)에 달하면 성(性)에 관한 의문(疑問)으로써 신경이 번민(煩悶)되야 혹은 악속(惡俗)의 서물(書物)을 보게되며 혹은 활동사진을 통하야 그 설명을 듯고저 욕망하는 것임니다. 이 때에 극히 위험한 것은 화류게(花柳界)에 빠지여 매춘부(賣春婦)의게 교정(交情)을 구하며 또는 수음(手淫)의 악습을 행하게 되는 것이니 이는 극히 해로운 것임니다. 그럼으로 교육의 목뎍은 아동의 선텬뎍 성품(先天的 性稟)을 보호하며 따라 선량(善良)히 인도하야 원만히 발육식히기 위함임니다. 그리하야 우리는 성뎍교육이 극히 필요한 것으로 생각하게 되고 동시에 이것이 그리 곤란할 일이 안인 바 처음 어린 아동의게는 다만 자긔 일신과 또 형제자매(兄弟姉妹)는 엇더한 곳으로부터 생기엿다는 것만 알게 하야 줄 것이요, 년령이 더 만하감에 따라 아해가 생기는 원인은 어머니의 톄내에 임신(姙娠)이 되는 까닭이라는 것을 가라처줄 것임니다. 이에는 자미스러운 「슈밋트 부인의 경험담(經驗談)」이 잇슴니다. 이 부인은 8세쯤 된 「아들」 一人과 이보다 좀더 年長한 「딸」 二人을 두엇는대 엇던 날 이 세 아해가 놀다가 우연히 「닭」(鷄)에 대하야 언쟁(言爭)하되 먼전 누이들이 말하기를 「숫닭」은 아즉까지 한번도 게란(鷄卵)을 낫치 못함으로 아모 소용이 업는 것이라한즉 이에 분노(憤怒)함을 참지 못하는 남자 동생은 말하되 남성(男性)을 이와 가티 모욕(侮辱)하나냐 하며 수탉은 게란만은 낫치 안이하나 필연 무삼 자긔의 천직(天職)이 잇슬 것이라 하야 누차 서로 닷토와 논쟁(論爭)이 심히 극렬(劇烈)하야지매 그 판결을 듯기 위하야 세 아해가 모다 어머니의 압호로 와서 이것을 질문(質問)하얏슴니다. 그 부인의 대답이 수탉이 업스면 암탉의 알은 결코 부화(孵化)되지 못한다한 즉 이 말을 듯고 섯던 세 아해는 조곰도 서슴지 안이하고 말하되 「어머니-그러면 우리집에도 만일 아바지가 업섯더면 우리들이 모다 생기지 못하얏슬 것임니가?」하고 무럿슴니다. 그때에 그 부인의 「물넌이라」는<51> 대답을 듯고 비로소 만족하야 그 아해들의 언쟁(言爭)은 평화되고 말앗다 함니다. 이와 가티 가급뎍(可及的) 식물(植物) 또는 동물(動物) 등을 례(例)로 하야 용이히 설명할 수 잇슴니다. 그러나 극히 필요한 성교육에 대하야 양친(兩親) 또는 교육자는 이를 등한히 함으로써 결국 불량한 동모, 활동사진 악풍(惡風)의 서물(書物) 등을 통하야 설명을 듯는 관계로 여러 가지 해독을 밧는 일이 비일비재합니다. 그리자 다행히 성교육(性敎育)은 근래에 이르러 교육게에 일대 대중문제가 되야 그 방법에 대하야 연구하는 중임니다. 그리고 참고로 독일(獨逸)나라 「뮨헨」시(市) 학교위원회(學校委員會)의 석상에서 성욕교육문뎨(性慾敎育問題)에 대하야 강논한 「칼-그라스만」씨의 요지(要旨)를 소개하면 다음과 갓습니다. (一)현대 소년간에는 수음(手淫)의 관습이 유행됨으로 이것을 금지케함에는 소년보호법(少年保護法)을 완비치 안이하면 안이될 것이다. 동시에 성년자(成年者)들의 도덕을 향상식힐 필요가 잇다. (二 개인교육은 그 성격(性格)의 교육이며 성교육은 역시 개인교육이 될 수 잇다. (三)소년의 의지(意志)를 강고(强固)케 할 필요가 잇스며 성욕감각(性慾感覺)이 과도하야지거나 또는 이에 관한 관념(觀念)과 행위(行爲)는 신톄뎍 보호(身體的保護)와 운동으로써 이것을 업시하여야 할 것이다. (四)성욕생활(性慾生活)과 그 현상(現衆)은 반다시 인뎍(人的)으로 행하여야 한다. (五)성욕에 관한 것을 설명하는 경우에는 가정에서는 그 양친 또는 그의 대리자가 이것을 담당할 것이다. (六)그러나 성욕에 관한 것은 가정에서 등한(等閑)함으로 위선 그 양친의게 성욕(性慾)의 지식을 설명하야줄 필요가 잇스니 그 책임은 의사(醫師)나 교사(敎師)의게 잇다. (七)성욕설명의 멈위(範圍)와 시긔(時期)는 개인에 따라 작정하여야 한다. (八)나의 우견(愚見)으로는 강제뎍으로 학교에 일정한 과정을 삼아 성적문뎨를 교수할 필요가 잇다 하겟다. (九)학교에서는 풍의(風儀)가 비녈(卑劣)한 생도와 보통의 생도를 구별할 필요가 잇다. (十)중학교 실업학교 이상 정도의 졸업생에 대하야는 생식생활(生植生活)의 위험에 대하야 설명할 필요가 잇다고 하얏슴니다. 아즉 완구한 우리 조선사람들은 말만 들어도 발서 열 낄 스무길식 뛰며 흉악하고 풍속괴란이라 할만한 이 성교육(性敎育)은 우에 말한 바와 가티 우리의 아즉 미혼한 자녀의게 극히 필요함으로써 장차 우리 조선에서도 가정이나 학교에서 정식으로 실현하여야 될 것임니다.(끗) <52>

生物의 特異現像과 그의 應用

醫學搏士 兪日濬

이 우주안의 모든 생물들은 그의 종류로나 수량으로 보아서 극히 복잡한 상태에 잇다. 이와 가튼 생물들은 形態學上으로 관찰하야 보면 種族의 差別을 따러서 고유한 형태를 가젓스며 個性을 따러서 현저한 차이를 낫하내고 잇다. 사람은 사람인 형상을 가젓고 동물은 동물인 특성을 가젓스며 식물은 식물로서 諸般性質을 구비하얏다. 그러고 그들의 생활기능에 잇서서 또는 생물과 생물사이의 관계에 잇서서 극히 기이한 현상을 이루고 잇다. 맛치 모든 생물들이 엇던 意識의 지배를 밧어서 창조된 것 모양으로 되어 잇다.
그러나 이 생물체를 화학적으로 관찰하야 보면 意外에 간단한 성분으로 되어 잇다. 만일 이 지구 위에 잇는 모든 물질을 분석하야 보면 93개의 원소에 지나지 안는다. 우리 인류와 가티  복잡한 신체구조를 가진 生活體라도 不過十種內外의 化學的元素의 합성에 지나지 안는다. 이와 가티 간단한 몃개의 화학적 원소로 형성된 생물들임에 불구하고 그의 생물학상 성질이 각각 특이함은 한 滋味스러운 문제이다. 이에 대한 해결은 아즉 완성치 못하엿다 할지라도 생물체를 구성한 화학적 원소의 기묘한 합성작용이 그 生物本態에 절대적 영향을 가진 것만은 사실이다. 馬나 牛의 신체를 구성한 蛋白質은 그의 화학적 성분이 거의 동일하나 원소의 합성된 방식이 서로 닯음으로 그의 생물학상 성질이 각각 닯은 것이다. 그럼으로써 모든 생물은 이 형태학상 특이점과 化學的元素群의 特異點으로 인하야 각각 고유한 개성을 낫하내고 잇는 것이다. 따라서 우리가 생물을 분류할 때에는 이 두 가지 특이점을 표준하게 되는 것이다.
그러나 이 두 가지 점을 사람과 馬에 對하야 비교하야 볼 것 가트면 이 두 가지 個體가 그 身體組織의 완전한 형태를 가젓슬 時는 그 고유한 形象에 의하야 兩者를 용이하게 구별할 수 잇스나 그러나 만일 이 두 個體의 신체조직을 부분적으로 분해하야 노흘 때에는 특히 사람이나 또는 馬의 血液을 少量式 뽑어 노흘 때에는 그 두 가지의 혈액을 형태학상으로만 구별키 어렵게 될 것이다. 그러나 그 혈액의 化學的元素群을 조사하여보면 容易히 이 두 혈액을 구별할 수 잇는 것이다. 그럼으로 생물의 형태학상 특이점은 比較性이오, 원소군의 특이점은 항상 絶對性임을<53>알 수 잇다. 따라서 생물체가 엇던 外力에 인하야 그의 형태를 消失할지라도 그 化學性元素群의 특이점은 영원히 보전하고 잇는 것이다. 그래서 우리는 이 원소군의 특이점을 응용하야 모든 생물을 구별할 수 잇는 것이다. 그러면 이 원소군의 특이점을 찻는 방법이 엇더하며 또 이 원소군의 특이성으로 인하야 낫하난 결과가 一般生物界에 무슨 영향을 주며 우리 인류의게 무슨 이익을 주는 것인가를 순서대로 써보고자 한다.

一. 化學的元素群의 特異性을 찻는 方法

생물 특히 동물의 신체를 형성한 원소군의 특이성은 그 동물체의 主成分인 단백질의 생물학상 특이성을 의미하는 것이다.
그럼으로써 동물체의 蛋白體의 특이성을 검사하는 것이 곳 그 動物體을 구성한 화학적원소군의 특이성을 찻는 법이 된다. 우리가 얼뜻 생각하면 신체를 구성한 화학적원소군이 곳 그 身體蛋白質임으로 그 단백질체의 특이성을 알야면 그것을 화학적으로 분석하야서 무슨 원자가 엇던 형식으로 모혀 잇나 차저 보앗스면 가장 편리할 것 갓흐나 우리들의 화학지식은 아즉 이와가튼 시함을 하기까지에 이르지 못하엿다. 단백체가 여러 가지의 「아미노」酸으로 합성된 것인 줄만 알 뿐이오, 그보다 더 자세한 지식을 가지지 못하엿다. 그럼으로 단백체를 直接化學的으로 분석할지라도 그 원소군의 특이성을 찻지 못하는 것이다. 그러면 우리는 여긔서 딴 방법을 取할 수 박게 업스니 그 방법이 卽 生物化學上 方式에 依한 것이다.
모든 생물들은 다 각기 奇妙한 생활기능을 가지고 잇는 가운대에 그 생물체의 周圍로부터 이러나는 자극에 대하야 본능적으로 일정한 반응을 이르키는 법이다. 機械的刺戟이나 化學的刺戟에 대하야 그러하고 生化學的刺戟에 잇서서 또한 그러하다. 만일 우리가 或種의 독물이나 이종족의 단백질을 먹을 때에는 腸胃內에서 消化가 되야 신체의 영양물이 되고 만다. 그러나 이것을 非經口的으로 皮下나 靜脈內에 注射할 때에는 신체내에서 맹열한 反應騷動을 이리키게 된다. 지금 馬血淸의 소량을 一首의 家兎의게 주사하여 보면 그 家兎體內에는 自己自體組織과 닯은 성질을 가진 異種蛋白體가 침입하엿슴으로 그 단백질에 대한 일정한 반응을 이리키게 된다. 그 반응의 형식은 이러하다. 馬血淸을 주사한 家兎의 혈청을 뽑아서 그 혈청에다가 馬血淸을 加하면 兩者의 혈청이 결합하야 일종의 雲絮狀沈澱物을 형성한다. 만일 馬血淸을 주사치 안은 健兎血淸에다가 馬血淸을<54> 加할 때는 아모 변화도 이러나지 아니한다. 이 현상은 다른 것이 아니라 兎機內에 輸入된 馬血淸이 兎에 대하야 한 異物임으로써 그 異物을 업새기 위하야 일종의 새로운 물질이 無形的으로 兎體內에 형성되기 때문이다. 이 兎 體內에 새로이 생긴 물질을 우리는 免疫體라고 부르며 이 면역체가 馬血淸과 결합하여 雲絮狀의 침전물을 형성하는 현상을 면역반응(沈降反應)이라 한다.
이와 가튼 免疫反應은 馬의 혈청을 주사할 時뿐이 아니라 他種동물 예컨대 牛, 犬, 豚 등의 혈청을 주사할 時에도 이러나는 것이다. 牛나 犬이나 豚의 혈청주사로 형성된 면역체는 牛나 犬이나 豚의 혈청이외에 다른 동물의 혈청과는 아모 반응을 이르키지 안는다. 다시 말하면 일정한 단백체로 因하야 出現된 면역체는 반다시 그 단백체에 對하야서만 특이적으로 작용하는 것이다. 이 면역체의 특이작용이 그 면역체를 형성식킨 단백체의 화학적원소군의 특이성에 由因되는 것을 생물화학상으로 증명할 수 잇는 것이다. 그럼으로 우리가 동물체의 화학적원소군의 특이성을 차즈랴면 이 면역반응을 응용하는 것이 가장 편리한 방법이다. 다시 한 例를 들면 사람의 蛋白體를 家兎에 주사한 후에 새로 출현된  면역체로 반다시 사람단백질에 한하야 면역반응을 이르키고 다른 동물이나 식물단백체에 대하야는 절대로 반응을 이르키지 안는다. 그것은 인체단백질을 형성한 화학적 원소군이 다른 동물성단백질의 원소군과 그 성분에 잇서서 차이가 업스나 그 결합방식에 잇서서 서로 특이하기 때문이다. 이와 가티 일정한 원소군으로 된 단백체로 인하야 생긴 면역체가 동일한 단백체에 한하야 이르키는 免疫現象을 生物學的反應이라 칭하며 이 반응이 동물의 종족을 따러서 특이함으로써 이것을 생물의 특이현상이라 부른다. 그럼으로 이 생물의 특이현상을 응용하면 모든 생물을 그의 형태에 依치 안코 능히 구별할 수 잇다.

二. 生物學的特異性과 一般生物界의 關係

이에 대한 말을 하자면 먼저 生物學的反應인 면역현상의 범위를 말할 필요가 잇다. 上述한 면역반응은 전혀 각종 동물의 단백질을 일정한 동물에 주사하야 형성된 면역체가 동일한 단백질을 雲絮狀으로 沈降식키는 種類이나 그 외에도 血淸을 溶解하는 면역체가 잇고 일정한 毒素을 中和식키는 면역체가 잇스며 細胞를 溶解하는 種類의 면역체가 잇다. 例를 들면 山羊血球를 家兎에 주사하면 그 家兎血淸內에는 山羊血球만을 용해하는 溶血素가 新生하며 「디푸데리」菌의 독소를 家兎에 주사하면 「디푸데리」菌毒素만을 中和하는 抗毒素가 출현되고 사람의 腎臟細胞를 家兎에 주사하면 그 세포만을 용해하는 細胞毒을 産出하게 된다. 細菌體와 가튼 微小한 생물를 동물에 주사할 時는 고등동물의 단백질과 닯어서 그 菌體全體에 相當한 면역체를 형성한다. 그래서 형성된 면역체는 菌體의 種類에 따러서 각각 특이성을 가지고 잇다. 例를 들면 腸窒扶斯菌으로 인하야 出現된<56> 면역체는 同菌에 한하야 殺滅作用을 이리킴과 가튼 것이다.
이와 가튼 면역체가 우리 一般生物界에 무슨 의의를 가지고 잇나를 생각하야 보면 此等 免疫反應 特히 단백질의 생물학적 특이현상은 생물개체의 고유성을 표시할 뿐 아니라 생물과 생물사이의 관계를 밝키는 유일한 표준이 되다고 볼 수 잇다. 그 이유는 각종 동물이나 細菌體의 단백질은 각각 특이한 생물학적 성질을 가젓기 때문이다. 그러나 이 특이성은 그 생물체를 구성한 화학원소군의 특이성에 기인되는 것이 그 생물의 형태의 특이점과 서로 일치하는 것이다. 형태가 닯은 생물 사이에는 생물학적 특이현상이 서로 닯고 형태가 가튼 동물 사이에는 이 특이 현상이 서로 공통되여 잇다. 예컨대 馬血淸으로 면역하야 어든 바 면역체는 馬蛋白體以外의 다른 단백체와는 절대로 반응치 안으나 馬와 형태가 近似한 驢의 血淸과는 强度의 반응을 이르키며 人體蛋白質로써 면역하야 어든 바 血淸은 人體 以外의 동물단백체와는 결코 반응치 안으나 인류와 형태가 近似한 猿의 단백질과는 특히 반응을 이리키는 것이다. 이 현상은 家兎와 山兎間에서도 볼 수 잇스며 羊과 山羊 狐와 犬, 猫와 狸의 사이에서도 볼 수 잇다. 이와 가티 형태가 흡사한 생물 사이에 이러나는 생물학적 특이현상이 서로 공통되는 때는 이것을 類屬反應이라 칭한다. 즉 이 類屬現象은 친족관계를 가진 동물체단백질이 그 원소군을 형성한 방식에 잇서서 서로 갓다는 뜻이다. 다시 말하면 이 면역현상이 가튼 동물간에는 서로 친족관계가 잇다는 것을 가르치는 것이다, 그럼으로 이 生物學上特異現象은 生物個體의 고유한 성질은 낫하내는 동시에 생물과 생물 사이의 관계를 발키는 한 표준이 된다.
따러서 이 생물학적특이현상은 生物進化論에 깁흔 관계를 가지고 잇다. 「따우인」이 진화론을 주창한 근거는 모든 생물을 형태학상으로 특히 比較解剖學的으로 연구하야 그 연구결과를 時間的으로 변천되여 가는 생물의 變易현상과 종합한 결과에 잇는 것이다. 그리하야 氏의 不朽의 업적인 種의 근원을 발표하게 된 것이다. 그러나 近世에 이르러서 이 생물학적특이현상인 免疫反應이 발견된 후로 더욱이 진화론의 근거가 견코케 된 感이 잇다.
上述한 바와 가티 모든 생물은 다 각각 특이한 생물학적 현상을 가젓슴으로 맛치 각종생물이 최초부터 특별히 창조된 것가티 보이나 그러나 이 생물학적 현상을 더 깁히 관찰하야 볼 때에는 생물과 생물 사이에 가장 기이한 관계가 잇는 것을 알 수 잇는 것이다. 이에 관한 實例을 듦에 當하야 先人의 例를 버리고<56> 특히 근년에 실험실 안에서 어든 바 두 가지 예를 들어서 讀者諸氏의 參考에 밧치고자 한다.
第一例. 鷄卵과 鷄의 관계. 鷄卵은 단일한 一個의 세포이며 鷄는 단세포인 鷄卵의 分裂된 一個의 複細胞群이다. 그럼으로 이 양자의 생물학적특이현상은 동일하여야 할 것이다. 그러나 양자간에는 서로 공통되는 특이점이 잇는 반면에 서로 고유한 相異性이 잇는 것을 면역학상으로 증명할 수 잇다. 그러면 이 상이성은 단세포인 卵子로부터 複細胞인 鷄에 이르기까지의 孵化時代에 새로히 부여된 성질로 볼 수 밧게 업다. 이 事實를 實際로 증명하자면 먼저 卵子의 단백질과 학의 혈청을 各各 一首式의 家兎에 면역하야 두 가지의 면역체을 제조하야 가지고 血淸學的方式에 의하야 두 가지의 면역혈청을 조사하여 보면 卵子로 면역하야 으든 바 혈청은 鶴血淸보다 卵子단백질에 대하야 강도의 반응을 發現하고 鷄혈청으로 면역하야  어든 바 혈청은 此와 반대로 卵子蛋白質보다 鷄血淸에 대하야 강도의 반응을 이르킨다. 卽 兩者의 면역체는 어느 정도까지 고유한 특이성을 낫하내는 것을 알 수 잇다. 다시 말하면 兩者의 단백질을 同一種임에 불구하고 그의 생물학상 반응이 서로 닯은 것을 알 수 잇다. 그러면 이 兩者의 생물학적특이성이 卵子로부터 鷄가 되는 동안에 부여된 성질인가 안닌가를 검사하기 위하야 동일한 雌鷄가 생산한 卵子十個를 孵化器內에 넛코 부화식키면서 十日間에 一日一個式 집어 내여서 그 卵子이 단백체가 엇던 면역혈청과 반응을 이리키나 검사하야보면 아즉 부화가 완전히 되지 못한 卵子의 단백체는 卵子로 면역한 血淸에는 강도의 반응을 이리키고 鷄血淸으로써 면역한 면역혈청에는 弱度의 반응을 겨우 이리킬 뿐이다. 이와 반대로 十日재의 卵子로서 殆히 雞子로 변한 단백질을 卵子 면역혈청에 대함보다도 鷄血淸면역혈청에 대하야 强度의 반응을 이리키는 사실을 보게 된다. 이 사실로 인하야 우리는 卵子와  鷄血淸이 가진 생물학상특이성은 본래부터 특히 고유한 것이 아니라 부화하는 동안 卽 卵細胞가 複細胞群으로 진화하는 동안에 基因됨인 줄 알 수 잇는 것이다. 이 실험은 나의 同僚인 한 사람의 實驗成績이다.
第二例. 變易性의 實驗. 細菌은 극히 작은 一個의 單細胞로 된 생물로서 그의 형태이나 생물학상성질이나 病原的作用이나 면역학상특이성이 그의 종족을 따러서 고유한 성질을 가진 者이다. 그뿐아니라 그의 成育期限이 十五分乃至二十分밧게 아니됨으로 菌體의 一日間生活은 人類의 수십년간의 생활기한에 상당한 것이다. 그럼으로 생물의 변이성을 연구함에는 장시간안에 生長하는 高等動物봐 생활기간이 짜른 菌體를 실험재료로 쓰는 것이 매우 유리할 것이다.
腸窒扶斯菌은 一個의 小桿菌으로서 勿論腸窒扶斯菌으로서의 고유한 성질을 가젓다. 그러나 일종의 液體培養基에 此菌을 배양한 후에 此菌과 異種族인 葡萄狀球菌을 또 배양할 時는 동일한 培養基안에 二個의 異種菌體가 생활을 영위함으로 不得己極烈한 생존경쟁을 이리키게 된다. 葡萄狀球菌은 腸窒扶斯菌보다 생활력이 왕성함으로 腸窒扶斯菌이 먼저 變易현상을 이리키여서<57> 맛치 他種菌體와 가티 변화하게 된다. 이 때에 불변한 腸窒扶斯菌과 변이된 菌體의 면역학적 반응을 조사하야 보면 兩者間에 서로 공통되는 성질이 적어지고 새로운 특이성을 가진 것을 알게 된다. 이 실험결과로 인하야 생물간에 이러나는 변이현상이 그 생물의게 遺傳되는 때에는 생물학상특이현상으로 보와서 맛치 他種의 생물과 가티 변화하게 되는 것을 알게 된다.
이 두 가지 사실로써 思考하야 볼지라도 생물학적특이현상은 생물의 고유성을 표시하는 同時에 그의 進化道途을 或은 그의 변이현상에 명백히 보이는 것이라고 밋는다.

3.生物의 特異現象인 免疫現象이 우리게 밋치는 影響

法律上應用. 法律上으로는 專허 法醫學에 응용이 된다. 只今 殺人한 혐의로 拘禁한 사람이 잇서서 그 사람의 의복에 血痕이 뭇어잇슬 때에 그 혈흔이 과연 人血인지 或은 동물이 혈흔인가를 鑑別함은 그 사람의 犯罪有無를 판단하는데 한 중요한 증거가 될 것이다. 이것을 鑑定하는 방법은 이러하다. 사람의 혈청을 家兎에 주사하야 어든 바 면역혈청은 사람의 단백체 이외에는 면역반응을 出現치 아니함으로 의심스러운 혈흔을 의복으로부터 떼어서 물에 씨서놋코 此에 면역혈청을 加할 時에는 人血인 때에는 沈降反應이 이러나고 動物血痕인 때는 아모 변화도 이르키지 아니한다(但猿血淸과는 반응한다). 그럼으로 그 의심스러운 혈흔이 何物인지를 容易히 알게 된다. 이외에도 各種食料品의 鑑別, 牛乳와 羊乳와의 鑑別등은 다 생물학상특이현상을 응용하는 것이다. 醫學上應用. 의학상으로는 먼저 치료방면에 응용이 된다. 한가지의 예를 들면 「디푸데리」병은 「디푸데리」菌의 侵入으로 인하야 발병되는 일종의 傳染病이다. 이 병을 치료코자 하면 「디푸데리」菌毒素를 馬에 주사하야 제조한 면역혈청을 환자의게 주사함에 잇다. 此菌毒素의 주사를 바든 馬體內에는 「디푸데리」菌毒素에 대한 抗毒素라는 免疫體가 多數히 産出함으로 馬의 免疫을 환자에게 주사할 時는 馬血淸內에 잇던 免疫體가 人體內에 드러가서 「디푸데리」菌과 그 毒素를 消滅식키여 버림으로 그 병은 卽時로 치료하게 된다. 이와 가튼 치료방법을 혈청법이라 부르며 이 혈청요법은 「디푸데리」병 이외에 他種傳染病에도 만히 응용이 된다.
다음으로 응용되는 곳은 疾病豫防方面이다. 天然痘를 一次經過한 사람은 다시 그 병에 신음하지 아니한다. 그 이유는<58> 一次天然痘를 경과하면 그 체내에 天然痘原體에 대한 특종의 면역체가 형성됨에 기인됨이다. 이와가튼 人體內에 天然痘病菌이 再次 侵入할 時는 그의 면역체의 작용으로 인하야 소멸되기 때문에 듸대여 발병치 아니하는 것이다. 이 현상을 응용하야서 種痘法을 발견한 사람이 영국인 제네이다. 종두의 원리를 간단히 쓰면 아래와 갓다. 天然痘病原體中에는 牛를 감염하는 것과 사람을 감염하는 두  種類가 잇스나 그 면역현상을 일키는 성질만은 兩者가 동일하다. 그럼을 牛種의 天然痘病原體을 사람에 接種(卽痘)할 時는 그 인체에게 면역성만을 줄 뿐이오 발병하는 법이 업다. 이로 인하야 진정한 인류의 천연두병원체가 侵入할지라도 그 體內에 형성되엿던 면역체가 그 病原體를 소멸식킴으로 결코 발병되는 일이 업다. 이와 가튼 면역현상은 천연두만에 한하지 아니하고 各種傳染病豫防에 응용이된다. 만일 腸窒扶斯를 예방코자 할 時는 腸窒扶斯의 病原菌의 死菌體의 少量을 신체에 주사한다. 그러면 身體內에는 同菌體에 대한 특이한 면역체가 출현하야 數日에 生菌이 體內에 侵入할지라도 그 菌體를 소멸시킴으로 듸대여 발병치 안케 되는 것이다. 腸窒扶斯뿐 아니라 他種傳染病 例컨대 虎列刺, 赤痢, 「디푸데리」, 猩紅熱, 狂犬病 등의 一般傳染病에 응용할 수 잇다. 그럼으로 우리는 될 수 잇는대로 時時로 各種傳染病菌의 예방주사를 마저서 此種傳染病으로 인한 불의의 돌변을 면치 안으면 아니될 것이다.
우리 인류가 一般傳染病으로 생명을 이러버리는 수를 통계학상으로 관찰하여 보면 千人死亡者中에 二十人이라는 수자를 보게 된다. 그러고 老衰로 인하야 사망하는 수를 보면 千人死亡者中에 15인밧게 아니된다. 다시 말하면 우리가 인공적으로 능히 예방할 수 잇는 傳染病에 죽는 수가 老衰로 죽는 수보다 四分의 一이나 더 만은 결과를 보게 된다. 이것은 우리들이 一般傳染病에 대한 상식이 적기 때문일 것이다. 實로 可惜한 일이다. (끗)

感氣와 肺炎에 對한 常識

醫學博士 任明宰

近日에 盛豊하게 유행되는 감기는 악성을 띄운 것 갓지는 아니하나 유행성 전염병의 常例로 流行末期를 당하면 대개는 악성으로 변화하는 법이니 今年冬期에는 각별한 주의를 하야 점차로 악성화하기 쉬운 감기에 걸니지 안토록 예방에 힘슬 거시요,<59> 불행히 감기에 걸닌다 할지라도 폐렴만 발생하지 아니하면 생명에 위험은 업는 거시니 폐렴에 대한 지식을 준비하야 만일의 경우에 이것을 예방하고 치료하는대 적절한 시기를 일치 아니하야 晩時의 歎이 업도록 할 거심니다.
감기의 발생은 기후의 영향이 만어서 寒冷과 濕氣와 强風을 겸한 기후에 우리가 감기에 잘 걸니는 거시니 이거슨 우리 신체의 전부나 일부가 非常하게 寒冷하야 長久한 시간을 連續하게 되면 寒冷된 局部組織細胞의 생활력이 減退되고 其外에 신경을 통하야 遠隔한 內部臟器의 기능을 손상케 하야 전신의 저항력이 弱하야지고 따라서 일반세균에 대한 방어작용이 감소하야지는 관계임니다. 그럼으로 우리는 신체가 寒冷하지 안토록 할 거시오, 寒冷한 경우를 당할지라도 長久한 시간이 계속되지 안토록 주의하야 속히 恢復이 되도록 할거심니다.
其外에  煤煙과 塵埃와 如한 거슨 直接으로 氣道를 刺戟하는 유독물질이니 此等 物質의 吸引을 피할 거시요, 또는 실내에 공기가 過熱하거나 過乾하야지면 氣道의 炎症을 발생하는 거시니 적당하게 조절을 하여야 할 거심니다. 그럼으로 온돌생활을 하는 우리로서는 특별히 此點에 주의하야 야간취침을 할 때에는 저진 수건이나 빨내가튼 것을 널어 노아 실내공기가 濕氣를 포함하도록 하야 咽喉나 鼻孔이 충혈되지 아니하도록 하는 거시 감기의 예방이 되고 치료가 되는 거심니다.
우리는 항상 冬季寒冷한 기후에 저항할 만한 체력을 養成하야 감기를 예방하도록 할 거시니 이거슨 기후가 寒冷하다 할지라도 바람과 濕氣가 업고 기온의 차가 심하지 아니하면 실외에서 활동하야 淸淨한 공기와 생활상 필요한 광선을 충분하게 공급하며 한기에 대한 피?의 저항력을 증진케 할 거심니다. 寒冷하고 乾燥한 기후는 흥분작용과 强壯的 作用이 有하야 일반신체의 기능을 활발하게하고 따라서 식욕을 증진케 하는 작용이 잇스니 이거슬 충분하게 이용하여야 함니다.
鼻孔感氣나 咽喉感氣가 심하게 되면 連接되여 잇는 氣道上部氣管에 염증이 전염되여 氣管炎이 되고 점차로 氣管炎과 毛細氣管枝炎이 발생되는 거시니 毛細氣管의 末端은 肺胞와 連接하야 잇슴으로 毛細氣管枝炎이 잇슬 때에는 반드시 肺胞의 염증을 倂發하게 되는 거심니다. 그럼으로 毛細氣管枝炎과 폐렴을 구별하야 잇스나 其치료에 對하야는 동등의 방법을 시행하는 거시니 특히 小兒는 大人보다 저항력이 약함으로 毛細氣管에 염증이 발하면 폐렴과 같은 症勢를 速히 나타나이게 됨니다.
폐렴의 증세를 紹介하면 惡寒, 發熱, 咳嗽, 호흡곤란, 胸痛, 맥박증가 등인대 其中에도 중요한 거슨 호흡곤란과 胸痛임니다.
그럼으로 우리가 감기라고 인정을 하고 알를 때에 여러 날이 되어도 退熱이 되지 아니하고 혹은 호흡이 곤란하야지거나 胸痛이 시작될 때에는 반드시 폐렴을 의심하야 곳 의사에게 진찰을 바들 거시오 말을 하지 못하는 乳兒가 감기에 걸녀서 아를 때에 鼻翼呼吸이라 하야 鼻孔으로 호흡하는 거슬 우리가 알 수 잇게 鼻孔이 커젓다 적어젓다 하면서 호흡을 하는 때는 반드시 폐렴을 생각해야 하는 거시니 곳 의사에게 문의하야 치료의 시기를 일티 안토록 할 거심니다. 그리하고 우리가 過勞하고 疲勞하는 거슨 諸病을 발생케 하는 중대한 誘因인 되는 거시니 우리가 감기에 걸닌 때에는 감기라 하야 輕하게 생각하지 말고 잠시 休養하야 速히 치료할 거시며 감기에 걸닌 때에 무리하게 활동하야 신체피로로 생명을 위험케 하는 폐렴이 續發되지 안토록 주의해야 할 거심니다.
그리하고 우리가 감기에 걸녀서 발열과 咳嗽가 날 뿐이요, 호흡곤란과 胸痛이 업다 할지라도 항상 폐렴을 예방하는 家庭的 치료를 하는 거시 良策이니 이거슨 온수에다 수건을 축여서 胸廓(가심) 전부에 溫水濕布를 행하는 거심니다. 근일에는 溫水濕布를 하는 대신에 濕布膏藥이 발명되여 藥店에서 판매를 하니 이거슨 「엑기호스」라고 하는 거신인대 이거슬 더운물에 녹게 하야 융과 갓튼 부드러운 布片에 발나가지고 가심에 대이면 溫水濕布를 하는 것보다 자주 갈지 아니하고 一日에 一次만 가라대면 충분함으로 제일 편리함니다. 그럼으로 폐렴이 된다 할지라도 미리부터 濕布를 하야 其 經過가 良好한 결과를 보게 되는 거심니다. 그리하고 우리가 폐렴에 걸닌다 할지라도 우리의 심장만 강하게 되면 승리를 어들 수 잇는 거시니 특히 此點에 주의를 하야 심장이 쇠약하야지는 거슬 피할 거심니다. 이거슨 신체를 안정하게 하는 거시 위대한 효과가 잇스니 신체를 搖動하면 心力이 消費되고 안정을 하면 心力이 貯蓄되는 관계임니다. 그리하고 신체적 안정을 하는 동시에 정신적 안정을 하면 其 효과가 현저한 거심니다.
그럼으로 우리는 發熱이 되고 咳嗽가 甚할 때에는 미리부터 안정을 하야 폐렴이 발생한다 할지라도 이거슬 對抗할 만한 심장의 餘力을 충분히 준비하야 장래의 위험을 예방할 거시며 현재의 질병을 치료하는 때도 良好한 결과를 보게될 거심니다.<61>
<42-61>