잡지명	別건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	辛未年과 朝鮮 (Sinmi Year and Korea)
필자	壽春山人
기사형태	문예기타 (Literature and Other)

Sinmi Year and Korea
						Sunchunsanjin

1. Sinmi and the Internal Strife of Korea

When examining the Sinmi years (辛未年) in our history of 4,254 years, there have been about 70 instances. Now, as we greet the new Sinmi year again, what suddenly comes to mind when reminiscing about the old Sinmi years is that there were many internal strifes in the successive dynasties of Korea. Even recently, 60 years ago, in the 8th year of King Gojong (李太王8年) in Sinmi (1871 AD), a civil disturbance arose in Yeonghae, Gyeongsangbuk-do, where they killed the magistrate Yi Han (府使李撖), who was famous at the time for his wicked government and oppression of the people. In Mungyeong, there was the revolt of Yi Pil (李弼), a key figure in the Donghak (東學) movement, which can be called the first cry of the Gabo Donghak Rebellion (甲午東學亂). For a time, the area around Gyeongsangbuk-do and Gangwon-do was greatly disturbed. This revolt of Yi Pil is written in detail by Yi Don-hwa in the special page on the Sinmi Rebellion, so I will not discuss it again here, but at the time, the court branded it as a riot by a heretical gang and suppressed and killed them. Because the people's intelligence was limited and stubborn, and they did not yet know what was what, there is no record of it and this story was not widely circulated, so his hidden history was lost like a wisp of cloud, but when exploring the actual facts, it must be said that he was the first in the modern Korean people's movement. The incident where the populace greatly disturbed by the sound of cannons that shattered the American ships on Ganghwa Island is outside of this discussion, but going back 60 years from that, on December 18th of the 12th year of King Sunjo (純祖12年) in Sinmi (1811 AD), the Hong Gyeong-rae Rebellion (洪景來亂) of the heroes of the Gwanseo region (關西) arose. This rebellion is also discussed in detail separately, so I will not rehash it here, but within only 12 days, 8 districts of Cheongbuk fell, and the rebellion lasted for 5 months or 119 days. Considering that over 10,000 soldiers were mobilized and nearly 2,000 people were beheaded in front of the military for their suspected participation in the people's army, one can imagine how large the rebellion was and how cruel the government forces were. Regardless of its success or failure, it is a fact that it openly exploded the great resentment of the Gwanseo people, who had been discriminated against regionally for 500 years, and it is also a fact that the court gradually abolished the discriminatory treatment of the Gwanseo people and appointed people to at least minor positions. Furthermore, much earlier, in the 12th year of King Wonjong of Goryeo (高麗 元宗 12年) in Sinmi (1271 AD), a civil disturbance arose in Milseong (密城, present-day Miryang), and the Gyeongsangnam-do area was temporarily disturbed. Also, in the spring of that year, the Sambyeolcho (三別抄), which had come from Ganghwa Island, attacked Joyang-hyeon, Jangheung-bu, Jeollanam-do, burned warships, plundered people's property and government goods, and advanced to occupy Jindo. Kim Bang-gyeong, along with the Mongol general Hong Da-gu (洪茶丘) (Da-gu was a Yuan Korean who became the Vice General of the Eastern Expedition of Yuan), suppressed them, killed the false king Seung-hwa-hu On (承化侯溫), and captured over 10,000 men and women and dozens of warships. The remaining forces fled to Tamna (耽羅, Jeju). Originally, the powerful minister Choe U (崔瑀) (son of Choe Chung-heon) selected brave men to patrol every night to prevent theft in the country, calling them Yabyeolcho (夜別抄), and later, as theft became more prevalent in each region, the number of Byeolcho also increased. They were divided into Left and Right Byeolcho, and conscripted young men returning from Mongolia, calling them Sineuigun (神義軍), which was the Sambyeolcho. At the time, the powerful ministers of the Goryeo court used this Byeolcho army as their private army, giving them generous salaries and extending private favors, and when there were criminals, they confiscated their property and gave it to them. They also used it when staging coups, so their power was very great and their tyranny was very severe. King Wonjong ordered General Kim Ji-jeo (金之氐) to abolish this, but Generals Bae Jung-son (裴仲孫) and No Yeong-hui (盧永禧) harbored rebellious intentions and revolted on Ganghwa Island in June of the 11th year of Wonjong (庚午) , killing Jikhaksa Jeong Mun-gam (鄭文鑑), supporting Seung-hwa-hu On as king, and causing this revolt. Defeated by the government forces on Ganghwa Island, they were driven to the sea islands of Jeolla-do and invaded Jangheung in this Sinmi year. 60 years before that, in the 7th year of King Huijong (熙宗) in Sinmi, the king, angered by the tyranny of Choe Chung-heon (崔忠獻), plotted with Wang Jun-myeong (王濬明) to execute Chung-heon, but was discovered and confined by Chung-heon on Ganghwa Jayun Island (江華紫鷰島). Also, during the Silla Dynasty, in the 7th year of King Wonseong (元聖王) in Sinmi (791 AD), Ichan Jegong (伊飡悌恭) plotted a rebellion and was executed. In the 16th year of King Naemul (奈勿王) in Sinmi (371 AD), King Gogukwon of Goguryeo (高句麗故國原王) (40th year) died from an arrow while confronting the Baekje invaders, which made Goguryeo and Baekje eternal enemies. At the time, it would have been seen as a war between two countries, but now it can only be seen as a struggle between siblings. There were some civil disturbances in the Sinmi years of the past, but as there weren't any major ones, I will omit them here. In summary, one characteristic of these Sinmi rebellions is that there were more civil disturbances. And whether it is a coincidence or intentional, what is particularly strange is that there are many disturbances in Korea in years other than Sinmi. Leaving the past aside, even in recent times, in the 32nd year of King Gojong (李太王) in Eulmi year (乙未), the assassination of Queen Min, also known as the August Incident (閔妃被弑사건 즉 八月之變), greatly disturbed the country. In the 4th year of Emperor Yunghui (隆熙) in Dingwei year (丁未), starting with the Hague Incident, the abdication of the Tae Emperor, the establishment of the Korea-Japan Treaty, the disbandment of the military, and the uprisings of righteous armies in various regions caused great chaos in the capital and countryside. Also, recently, in Gimmi (己未) year, the Mansae Incident (萬歲事件) occurred. Since ancient times, Mi (未) has been associated with the sheep, and because sheep are docile, they symbolize peace, but on the other hand, sheep can also symbolize sacrifice and bloodshed, so it is unknown whether the many disturbances in this Mi year have anything to do with the sacrificial sheep. Who knows what kind of disturbances there will be this Sinmi year. <69>

2. Sinmi and Korean Culture

Regarding the import of foreign culture into Korea in the Sinmi year, the first thing to mention is that in the 13th year of King Munseong of Silla (新羅 文聖王 13年) in Sinmi, Achan Wonhong (阿飡元弘) (Silla's sixth-ranked official) went as an envoy to Tang China and brought back Buddhist scriptures and Buddha's teeth. Buddhism first entered Korean soil in the 2nd year of King Soyeon of Goguryeo (高句麗 小獻王 2年) - the 17th year of King Naemul of Silla (新羅 奈勿王 17年壬申, 372 AD) - and Buddhism was practiced in Silla in the 15th year of King Beopheung (法興王 15年戊申, 528 AD), so even before this Sinmi year, Buddhist scriptures and relics were imported, but at this time, Buddhism had a great influence like a state religion of Silla, so the king himself went out to the suburbs to welcome it, so it is enough to infer how much influence the import of those Buddhist scriptures and Buddha's teeth had on Silla culture. Later, in the 15th year of King Sindeok of Silla (新羅 神德王 15年) in Sinmi, the late Silla eccentric Taebong King Gungye (泰封王弓裔) wrote over 20 volumes of Buddhist scriptures. At the time, Taejo Wang Geon's faction (高麗 太祖 王建) of Goryeo maliciously propagandized Gungye's misdeeds, calling them all demonic words and completely obliterating them, but judging from the fact that the number of volumes reached over 20, it can be guessed how much of a masterpiece it was, and also, judging from the fact that it was called demonic words, it can be inferred that it was a unique research presentation compared to existing Buddhist scriptures. Of course, it disappeared like a wisp of cold smoke with Gungye's demise, but it is important to note that such a work existed in the year of Sinmi.

And in the 22nd year of King Hyeonjong of Goryeo (高麗 顯宗 22年) in Sinmi (1931 AD), the Gukjagam (國子監) was first established, which was the first start of the Joseon civil service examination (朝鮮監試試驗). Later, in the 8th year of King Seonjong of Goryeo (高麗 宣宗 8年) in Sinmi, portraits of Confucius' 72 disciples were drawn and hung on the walls of the Gukjagam, which was a sign that Buddhism was losing its power and Confucianism was gradually gaining its power. And in this year, the Song Emperor personally ordered many ancient books from Goryeo to be requested, which is an example of Goryeo's culture being exported to China. Coming to modern Joseon, what is particularly noteworthy is the completion of Jeong In-ji's History of Goryeo (鄭麟趾의 高麗本史) and Seo Geo-jeong's Dongguk Byeonggam (徐居正의 東國兵鑑) in the first year of King Munjong (文宗元年) in Sinmi, which were originally compiled by the scholars of Jiphyeonjeon (集賢殿學士) such as Jeong In-ji and Seo Geo-jeong during the reign of King Sejong, and were finally completed in this first year of King Munjong. Later, in July of the 9th year of King Injo (仁祖9年) in Sinmi (4th year of Ming Emperor Yizong Chongzhen, 1631 AD), Jeong Du-won (鄭斗源), who went to Beijing as an envoy, imported Western cannons, gunpowder, telescopes (千里鏡, i.e. telescopes), self-ringing clocks (自鳴鐘, clocks), purple cotton flowers (紫木花, purple cotton), astronomical charts, and Western customs records. This was the first time that Western culture was imported into Joseon, and it should be specially recorded in the modern Korean cultural history. Now, I will briefly introduce the route of import. Originally, Western culture entered China during the reign of Ming Emperor Shenzong (朝鮮 宣祖時代) when a Jesuit missionary from Rome, i.e., Matteo Ricci (利瑪竇), came to Beijing from Macau, gained the trust of Shenzong, and engaged in missionary work for about 20 years. Thereafter, several missionaries continued to come to China and were very active until the era of the Qing Taizu and Taizong emperors, while transmitting Western culture such as geography, astronomy, calendar books, and cannon techniques. The emperors of the Ming and Qing dynasties were amazed by this and treated them generously. As Joseon envoys came and went to China during that time, Western culture disseminated in China was again imported into Joseon. <70> The document that Jeong Du-won brought these items with him and reported to the king is as follows.
The Western country is 90,000 li away from the Central Plains, and it takes about 3 years to reach the Imperial Capital (Beijing). Luk Ruohan (陸若漢) (i.e., Adam Schall von Bell) is a friend of Matteo Ricci and once manufactured cannons in his country to destroy the rebels of Hong-yi and Mao-yi. Furthermore, he is proficient in astronomy and calendar, and when he arrived in Guangdong, he requested to use Hong-yi cannons to defeat the Lu soldiers, so the emperor praised him and appointed him as a Janggwan and sent him to the Dengzhou army gate. One day, Ruohan came to see me, and at the age of 97, his spirit was so beautiful that he looked like a heavenly being in the middle of the air. I wanted to obtain a cannon and present it to the country, and Ruohan allowed it and gave me other weapons as well.
Furthermore, Jeong Du-won recorded the following about clocks and cannons:
A self-ringing clock rings automatically every 12 hours, and some cannons can be fired 4 or 5 times while our Korean muskets fire twice, and the speed is said to be like a ghost.
And in this Sinmi year, the publication of the collected writings of Choi Rip (崔岦), a literary official of the Seonjo era, by the Inner Cabinet by royal order is also briefly introduced. Later, in the 17th year of King Sukjong (肅宗 17年) in Sinmi, the court forbade ordinary people from wearing white clothes and ordered them to wear blue clothes of the old style. Today, it is admirable that the court knew about what is now called the "White Clothes Ruining the Country" or the "White Clothes Economy" at that time, and at the same time, it is embarrassing for everyone that the people still wear white clothes because there is no enforcement. Also, in the 27th year of King Yeongjo (英祖 27年) in Sinmi, the court ordered the compilation of Sok Oryeui Bo (續五禮儀補), and Hong Gye-hui (洪啓禧) wrote Samseong Hwi (三*聲彙) in 2 volumes. After that, there is nothing significant to record in the 11th year of King Sunjo (純祖 11年) and the 8th year of King Gojong (李太王 8年) in Sinmi.

3. Sinmi and Korea's International Relations

Korea is geographically connected to the mainland of China to the north and is adjacent to Japan across a sea to the east, so there have been many exchanges and conflicts since ancient times. Among them, according to historical records, this Sinmi year had the most international issues than any other year. The distant past is too vague to know in detail, but even if we start from Gija Joseon (箕氏朝鮮), in the 12th year of King Gyeongsun (慶順王 12年) in Sinmi, the chief of the Northern barbarians, Eoknicheogilhan (厄尼車吉汗), offered 200 horses as tribute and requested soldiers to jointly attack Yan. The king sent Daebu Shin Bul-sa (大夫申不死) to lead 20,000 soldiers to attack Yan and seize the city of Sangok (上谷城) in Yan. During the Three Kingdoms period, in the 8th year of Silla's founder Hyeokgeose (新羅始祖赫居世 8年), Japan invaded Silla's border, but after hearing of the king's admirable virtue, they withdrew. Later, in the 2nd year of King Gilhae (訖解王 2年) in Sinmi, Goguryeo (Goguryeo's King Micheon, 美川王13年) attacked Liaodong and took Anpyeong. In the 15th year of King Nulji (訥祗王15年) in Sinmi, the Japanese besieged Myeonghwalseong but were defeated. In the 33rd year of King Soji (炤智王 33年) in Sinmi, Goguryeo (Goguryeo's King Munja, 文咨王 79年) sent an envoy to Wei, and in the same year, when King Munja passed away, the envoy of condolence from Wei came. In the 12th year of King Jinheung (眞興王 12年) in Sinmi, Goguryeo (Goguryeo's King Yangwon, 陽原王 7年) sent an envoy to Northern Qi and greatly defeated the invading Turkic soldiers. In the 28th year of King Jinpyeong (眞平王 28年) in Sinmi, Goguryeo (Goguryeo's King Yeongyang, 嬰陽王 22年) Emperor Yang Guang of Sui (隋帝楊廣) personally led troops to invade Goguryeo and reached Zhuobu (涿部) (in the following year, Imshin, the Sui army was defeated by Eulji Mundeok). In the 11th year of King Munmu (文武王11年) in Sinmi, Tang invaded the former territory of Baekje, and after fighting back, they were greatly defeated at Seokseong. Also, Tang's commander Xue Rengui blamed Silla for occupying the land of Baekje, so the king falsely apologized and secretly defeated Seolgu Fortress. Continuing, Tang again invaded Daebang with mercenary soldiers, and the King greatly defeated their supply ships. Later, in the 30th year of King Seongdeok (聖德王 30年) in Sinmi, Japan invaded the eastern border, so they were also defeated. Coming to the Goryeo era, in the 22nd year of King Hyeonjong (顯宗 22年) in Sinmi, the envoy of condolence from Khitan (契丹) came to mourn the passing of the king. In the 7th year of King Huijong (熙宗 7年) in Sinmi, the Jin envoy Guan Yan-dui Fu (金使寬顔堆孚) came, and he tried to send Kim Yang-gi (金良器) to seek a new bride, but he was harmed by Mongol soldiers on the way. And in the 12th year of King Wonjong (元宗 12年) in Sinmi, Kim Ryeon (金鍊) was sent to Mongolia to request a marriage with the Crown Prince. On the other hand, he maintained good relations with Southern Song and Japan. Also, the Mongol envoy Zhao Liang-bi (趙良弼) came and requested to accompany him to Japan, so the government ordered Kang Yun-heung (康允興) to go with him and sent the Crown Prince to Mongolia to marry the Yuan Emperor's daughter (in this year, Mongolia changed its country name to Yuan). In the first year of King Chungryeol (忠惠王 元年) in Sinmi, a Yuan envoy came to demand young women, and Myeongjong summoned the Crown Prince, which was an inevitable disgrace that weak countries always faced. At the end of the Goryeo Dynasty, in the 3rd year of King Gongyang (恭讓王 3年) in Sinmi, Zhu Yuanzhang (朱元璋) of the rising Ming Dynasty strongly demanded 10,000 horses, so the anti-Ming faction of Choe Yeong's faction (崔瑩一派) resented and opposed it, leading to the advocacy of the conquest of Ming. Another notable event in this year is that Siam sent tribute and envoys. Coming to the Joseon Dynasty, in addition to sending a Joseon Tongsinsa (通信士) to Japan in the 11th year of King Sunjo (純祖11年) in Sinmi, in the 8th year of King Gojong (李太王 8年) in Sinmi, there was a battle with American soldiers on Ganghwa Island, which was the Sinmi Western Disturbance (辛未洋擾). This is briefly omitted as it is described in detail in the separate Sinmi Western Disturbance record.

4. Sinmi and Korea's Disasters

Looking back over thousands of years by the sexagenary cycle, there is no year without natural disasters, but this Sinmi year has relatively few such disasters. It is impossible to know about the ancient Dan'gun Joseon era due to lack of records, but speaking of Middle Joseon, i.e., Gija Joseon, in the 12th year of King Jeonggyeong (貞敬王 12年) of the 18th generation in Sinmi, there was a great famine in the country, but the king selected those among the merchants who were fluent in the language of Qi and Lu (齊魯, present-day Shandong Province in China), loaded ships with domestic fish, salt, iron, and copper, and traded for grain in that country to save the people. Also, because he reduced the salaries of the officials by half to save national expenses, the people did not suffer much hardship. Later, during the Three Kingdoms period, in the 20th year of King Jima (祗摩王 20年) of Silla in Sinmi, there was a flood that swept away many houses. In addition to that, in the 7th year of King Wonseong (元聖王 7年) of the 38th generation in Sinmi, there was an earthquake in the capital, but there was no major disaster. In Baekje, in the 13th year of King Dongseong (東城王 13年) of the 23rd generation in Sinmi - the 33rd year of King Soji of Silla - due to heavy rain, the waters of the Ungcheon River (熊川水) greatly overflowed, sweeping away about 200 houses in the capital. As a result, there was a famine that year, and about 600 starving households fled and migrated to Silla, which seems to be the biggest disaster in the Sinmi year in history. And in the Goryeo era, there was an earthquake in the 22nd year of King Gwangjong (光宗 22年) and another earthquake occurred three times in the third year of King Gongyang (恭讓王3年), the last king. In the near Joseon Yi Dynasty, there was a plague in Gyeonggi and Hwanghae provinces in the first year of King Munjong (文宗 元年) in Sinmi, but there was no other disaster. However, statistically, one characteristic is that there are many floods and earthquakes, and as with the annual events, it is a cause for concern whether there will be particularly many floods in this Sinmi year in Korea, and it is also unknown whether there will be another major earthquake in Japan, which has many earthquakes, and whether the aftershocks will affect Korea.

5. Sinmi and Korea's People

There is no year in which people are not born and die, but in this Sinmi year, there are particularly many births and deaths of great figures. Now, to mention as many as I can think of, in the 22nd year of King Hyeonjong of Goryeo (高麗顯宗 22年) in Sinmi, the Goryeo minister Gang Gam-chan (姜邯贊) passed away. He lived to the age of 84, and his rank reached its highest as a subject. Starting with the great victory at Guiju (龜州) in the Khitan War (契丹亂), he devoted himself to the country before and after and achieved the greatest merit, so although there was no regret for himself personally, it was a great loss for the Goryeo nation. Later, in the 5th year of King Uijong (毅宗 5年) in Sinmi, Kim Bu-sik (金富軾), famous as the author of the History of the Three Kingdoms (三國史) or as a meritorious subject who suppressed the Rebellion of Myocheong of Seogyeong (西京妙淸), passed away. He was also 77 years old and had done everything he could for the country and for himself, but it is also a fact that one of the great pillars of Goryeo at that time was lost, and I will briefly mention that Jeong Seung-myeong (鄭襲明), who knew about the court, committed suicide after being slandered in that year. 420 years later, in the 4th year of King Seonjo of the Joseon Dynasty (李朝宣祖4年) in Sinmi, Bukjeo Kim Ryu (北渚金瑬) (son of Kim Yeo-mul, a loyal subject of the Imjin War), who was famous as the first meritorious subject of the Injo coup during the Gwanghae era, and the great poet Dongak Yi An-neul (東岳 李安訥) were born. Also, in the 9th year of King Injo (仁祖 9年) in Sinmi, Seo Yakbong Seong (徐藥峯渻) passed away at the age of 74. He was a descendant of Saga Seo Geo-jeong (四佳徐居正). During the Imjin War, he suppressed the rebel Guk Gyeong-in (鞠景仁) of Hoeryeong (會寧) with Jeong Mun-bu (鄭文孚), and as one of the deceased ministers of Seonjo, he was exiled to Danyang (丹陽) during the Gwanghae era. After the Injo coup, he became a Ganpan and after the Gapja War, he also became a Byeongpan, reaching the rank of Ji Jungchu. In place of his death, two great Confucian scholars were born in that year: one was Sage Kim Jang-saeng (沙溪金長生), a disciple of Yi Yulgok and famous for Eastern etiquette studies, and the other was Hyeonseok Park Se-chae (玄石 朴世釆), a disciple of Cheongeum Kim Sang-heon, who was summoned to the Left State Councilor as a recluse in Sukjong Gapmu. Also, in the 7th year of King Sukjong (肅宗7年) in Sinmi, Park Mun-su (朴文秀), famous as an emissary, and Yu Tak-gi (兪拓基), Yu Jeong-seung (兪政承), and Panseo Yi Cheol-bo (李喆輔) were born, and Unpo Yeo Seong-je (雲浦 呂聖齊) (Right State Councilor) passed away. Later, in the 27th year of King Yeongjo (英祖 27年) in Sinmi, Byeongpan Yun Yang-rae (尹陽來) (Seongpyeong person, known as Hwoe) died, and in the 11th year of King Sunjo (純祖 11年) in Sinmi, Hong Gyeong-rae's group were all executed due to the failure of the revolution. The deaths of several government soldiers and righteous army generals are the same as those recorded in detail in the separate Hong Gyeong-rae rebellion record. The death of Eo Jung-gun Jae-yeon (魚中軍在淵) and others in the recent 8th year of King Gojong (李太王8年) in Sinmi is also detailed in the Sinmi Western Disturbance record, so it is omitted. I wonder how many promising figures of Joseon will be born this year in Sinmi. <73>

**Named Entities**

姜邯贊	Kang Kam-ch’an
金富軾	Kim Pu-sik
鄭襲明	Chŏng Sŭng-myŏng
北渚金瑬	Pukchŏ Kim Ryu
金汝吻	Kim Yŏ-mŭn
東岳 李安訥	Tongak Yi An-nŭl
徐藥峯渻	Sŏ Yakpong Sŏng
四佳徐居正	Saga Sŏ Kŏ-jŏng
鞠景仁	Kuk Kyŏng-in
鄭文孚	Chŏng Mun-bu
沙溪金長生	Sagyŏ Kim Chang-saeng
李栗谷	Yi Yulgok
淸陰金尙憲	Ch’ŏngŭm Kim Sang-hŏn
玄石 朴世釆	Hyŏnsŏk Pak Se-ch'ae
朴文秀	Pak Mun-su
兪拓基	Yu T’ak-ki
兪政承	Yu Chŏng-sŭng
李喆輔	Yi Ch’ŏl-bo
晦軒 趙觀彬	Hwoehŏn Cho Kwan-bin
雲浦 呂聖齊	Unp’o Yŏ Sŏng-je
尹陽來	Yun Yang-rae
洪景來	Hong Kyŏng-rae
魚中軍在淵	Ŏ Chung-gun Chae-yŏn
李太王	Yi T’ae-wang
慶北寧海	Kyŏngbuk Yŏnghae
府使李撖	Pusa Yi Han
聞慶	Mungyŏng
甲午東學亂	Kabo Tonghaknan
東學巨首 李弼	Tonghak Kŏsu Yi P’il
李敦化	Yi Ton-hwa
甲午	Kabo
李敦化氏	Yi Ton-hwa-ssi
李太王	Yi T’ae-wang
慶北	Kyŏngbuk
江原	Kangwŏn
李太王	Yi T’ae-wang
江華島	Kanghwado
純祖	Sunjo
關西	Kwanseo
洪景來	Hong Kyŏng-rae
淸北	Ch’ŏngbuk
關西	Kwanseo
高麗 元宗	Koryŏ Wŏnjong
密城	Milsŏng
密陽	Miryang
慶南	Kyŏngnam
江華島	Kanghwado
三別抄	Sambyŏlch’o
全南長興府兆陽縣	Chŏllam Changhŭng-bu Choyang-hyŏn
金方慶	Kim Pang-gyŏng
蒙古將洪茶丘	Monggo Chang Hong T’a-gu
元朝鮮人	Wŏn Chosŏnin
元	Wŏn
征東副元師	Chŏngdong Puwŏnsa
僞王承化侯溫	Wi Wang Sŭnghwa-hu On
男女	Namnyŏ
耽羅	Tamna
濟州	Cheju
崔瑀	Ch’oe U
崔忠獻	Ch’oe Ch’unghŏn
國中	Kukchung
盜難	tonan
壯勇	Changyong
每夜巡警	Mae-ya Sungyŏng
夜別抄	Yabŏlch’o
左右兩別抄	Chwau Yangbyŏlch’o
蒙古	Monggo
壯丁	Changjŏng
神義軍	Sinŭigun
麗朝	Yŏjo
權臣	Kwŏnsin
手兵	Subyŏng
俸祿	Pongnok
私惠	Sahoe
罪人	Choein
籍沒	Chŏngmŏl
政變	Chŏngbyŏn
元宗	Wŏnjong
將軍金之氐	Changgun Kim Chi-jŏ
將軍 裴仲孫	Changgun Pae Chung-son
盧永禧	No Yŏng-hŭi
元宗	Wŏnjong
庚午	Kyŏng-o
直學士鄭文鑑	Chikhaksa Chŏng Mun-gam
承化侯溫	Sŭnghwa-hu On
長興	Changhŭng
熙宗	Hŭijong
崔忠獻	Ch’oe Ch’unghŏn
王濬明	Wang Chun-myŏng
忠獻	Ch’unghŏn
江華紫鷰島	Kanghwa Chayŏndo
新羅時代	Silla Sidae
元聖王	Wŏnsŏngwang
伊飡悌恭	Ich’an Chegong
奈勿王	Naemulwang
高句麗故國原王	Koguryŏ Kogugwŏnwang
百濟	Paekche
麗濟	Yŏje
新羅 文聖王	Silla Munsŏngwang
阿飡	Ach’an
元弘	Wŏnhong
唐	Tang
佛經	Pulgyŏng
佛牙	Pulgŏ
高句麗 小獻王	Koguryŏ Sohŏnwang
新羅 奈勿王	Silla Naemulwang
新羅	Silla
法興王	Pŏphŭngwang
신라 神德王	Silla Sindeokwang
羅末 怪傑 泰封王 弓裔	Nammae Kwŏegŏl T’aepongwang Kungye
高麗 太祖 王建	Koryŏ T’aejo Wang Kŏn
弓裔	Kungye
失德	Sildeok
惡宣傳	Ŏksŏnjŏn
妖言	Yoyŏn
寒烟	Hanyŏn
高麗 顯宗	Koryŏ Hyŏnjong
國子監	Kukchagam
朝鮮監試試驗	Chosŏn Kamsi Sihŏm
高麗 宣宗	Koryŏ Sŏnjong
孔子	Kongja
麗朝	Yŏjo
宋帝	Songje
近代 李朝	Kŭndae Yijo
文宗	Munjong
鄭麟趾	Chŏng Injŏ
高麗本史	Koryŏbonsa
徐居正	Sŏ Kŏjŏng
東國兵鑑	Tonggukpyŏnggam
元來	Wŏnrae
世宗時代	Sejong Sidae
集賢殿學士	Chiphŏnjŏnhaksa
文宗	Munjong
仁祖	Injo
明 毅宗 崇禎	Myŏng Ŭijong Sungjŏng
陳穾使	Chin Hyusa
鄭斗源	Chŏng Tu-wŏn
北京	Peking
西洋	Sŏyang
火砲	Hwap’o
熖硝	Yŏmnos
千里鏡	Chŏnligyŏng
望遠鏡	Mangwŏnkyŏng
自鳴鐘	Chamyŏngjong
시계	Sigye
紫木花	Chamokhwa
天文圖	Ch’ŏnmundu
西洋風俗記	Sŏyang P’ungsokki
西洋	Sŏyang
近代朝鮮文化史上	Kŭndae Chosŏn Munhwasa-sang
明神宗	Myŏng Sinjong
朝鮮 宣祖時代	Chosŏn Sŏnjo Sidae
羅馬	Roma
쩨스이쓰트派	Tchesŭi-ssŭt’u-p’a
선교사	Sŏn’gyosa
마테오릿치	Mateo Ricchi
利瑪費	Yima-bi
澳門	Aomen
北京	Peking
神宗	Sinjong
布敎	Pogyo
淸	Ch’ŏng
太祖	T’aejo
太宗時代	T’aejong Sidae
地理	Chiri
天文	Ch’ŏnmun
曆書	Ryŏksŏ
火砲術	Hwap’osul
西洋	Sŏyang
歷代帝王	Yŏktae Tije
使臣	Sach’in
中國	Chunguk
中國	Chunguk
西洋	Sŏyang
西洋國	Sŏyangguk
中原	Chungyŏn
皇京	Hwanggyŏng
北京	Peking
陸若漢	Yuk Yohan
아담샤-투	Adam Scha-tu


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	辛未年과 朝鮮
필자	壽春山人
기사형태	문예기타

辛未年과 朝鮮
						壽春山人
一. 辛未와 朝鮮의 內亂

우리의 역사가 잇슨 지 4254년 동안에 干支의 辛未년을 고찰하면 凡70回엿다. 이제 다시금 새해 辛未를 마지하며 녯 신미를 回顧할 때에 머리속에 문득 생각키우는 것은 歷代朝鮮에 內亂이 만헛던 그것이다. 최근 60년전 李太王8년 辛未(西紀1871)만 하더래도 慶北寧海에서는 民擾가 이러나서 當時惡政虐民으로 유명하던 府使李撖을 죽이고 聞慶에서는 甲午東學亂의 第一聲이라 할만한 東學巨首 李弼의 亂이 이러나서 一時 慶北一帶와 江原一帶가 크게 騷亂하엿섯다. 이 李弼의 난은 別頁辛未亂題中에 李敦化氏가 자서히 썻스닛가 여긔에 다시 論치 안커니와 當時朝廷이 그것을 一個 妖徒亂黨으로 모라 討剿扶殺하고 民智가 固陃頑迷하야 아즉 무엇이 무엇인 줄을 알지 못하는 까닭에 이때것 그에 관한 아모 記錄한 아가 업고 이 약이 한아도 넓이 傳치 못하야 비장한 그의 역사가 一抹의 雲烟과 가티 소실되고 말엇지만은 실상 사실을 탐구하야 보면 近代朝鮮民衆運動에 잇서서 누구보다도 第一이라 안이 할 수 업다. 이해에 江華島上에서 美艦을 깨트리든 대포소리로 민중이 크게 騷擾하던 일은 題外라 論치안커니와 그로부터 60년을 다시 溯及하야 純祖12년 辛未(서기1811)12월 18일에는 關西豪傑兒洪景來亂이 이러낫섯다. 이 亂에 관한 것도 따로히 詳論하얏슴으로 여긔에 再論치 안커니와 불과 12일 동안에 淸北 8邑이 陷落이 되고 亂期가 달로 五箇月, 날로 119일 동안을 연속하고 官軍의 動員이 만여명에 達하고 인민의 洪軍에 참여한 혐의로 一時軍前梟首를 당한 자가 근2천에 達한 것만 보와도 그 난이 얼마나 컷스며 官軍의 殘虐이 얼마나 하엿던 것을 생각할 수 잇다. 일의 成敗는 고사하고 500년 동안 지방적 차별대우를 밧던 關西사람의 큰 憤恨을 여실히 폭발식힌 것은 사실이요 또 그로 인하야 조정에서 점차 關西 사람의 차별대우를 撤廢하고 外官末職이나마 인물을 多少官路에 進用한 것도 사실이엿다. 그리고 그보다 훨신 以前 高麗 元宗 12년<68> 辛未(西紀1271)에는 密城(卽密陽)에서 민란이 이러나서 一時慶南一帶가 소란하엿섯다. 또 그해 봄에는 江華島로서 드러온 三別抄가 全南長興府兆陽縣을 습격하야 戰艦을 불지르고 民財, 官物을 掠奪하며 進하야 珍島를 占據하니 金方慶이 蒙古將洪茶丘(茶丘는 元朝鮮人으로 元의 征東副元師가 됨)와 가티 토벌하야 僞王承化侯溫을 죽이고 男女 一萬餘人과 戰艦數10艘를 捕獲하니 餘衆이 耽羅(濟州)로 逃入하얏다. 이 三別抄는 원래에 權臣崔瑀(崔忠獻의 子)가 國中의 盜難을 방비하기 위하야 壯勇한 자를 뽑아서 每夜巡警하며 도적을 잡게 하고 이름을 夜別抄라 하더니 그 뒤에 각 지방에 盜難이 점점 盛함을 따러서 別抄의 수가 또한 만케되매 그것을 左右兩別抄로 分하고 또 蒙古로부터 도라온 壯丁을 뽑아서 神義軍이라 하니 이것이 곳 삼별초이엿다. 당시 麗朝의 權臣들은 이 別抄軍을 자기의 手兵으로 삼고 俸祿을 厚히 주며 私惠를 施하고 또 죄인이 잇스면 그 재물을 籍沒하야 그대로 주고 政變을 이르킬 때에는 또한 그것을 이용하니 그 세력이 매우 크고 따라서 橫暴가 심히 만흐매 元宗은 將軍金之氐를 명하야 此를 罷코자 하니 將軍 裴仲孫, 盧永禧 등이 反心을 먹고 元宗 11년 庚午 6월에 江華島에서 反하야 直學士鄭文鑑을 죽이고 承化侯溫을 밧드러 왕을 심고 이 난을 이르킨 것이엿는데 江華島에서 官軍에게 敗하야 全南海島로 몰녀오다가 이 辛未에 長興을 침범한 것이다. 그보다 60년 이전 熙宗 7년 辛未에는 왕이 崔忠獻의 跋扈함을 분개하야 王濬明등과 謀하고 忠獻을 誅하랴다 발각되야 忠獻에게 江華紫鷰島에 幽廢를 당하고 또 新羅時代에 잇서서는 元聖王 7년 辛未(西紀791)에 伊飡悌恭이 모반하다가 伏誅하고 奈勿王16년 辛未(西紀371)에는 高句麗故國原王(40년)이 百濟의 侵兵을 迎擊하다가 流矢에 마저 죽고 그로 인하야 麗濟가 더욱 世讎가 되엿다. 당시로 보면 그것이 물론 양국간 전쟁이라 하겟지만은 지금으로 보면 一個 骨肉의 相爭으로 볼 수 박게 업다. 그 以上 歷代의 辛未에도 多少 民亂이 잇섯스나 그다지 큰 것이 업슴으로 이에 略하거니와 統而言之하면 이 辛未의 내란중에는 민란이 더욱 만헛던 것이 한 특색이다. 그리고 우연이라할지 故然이라할지 특별이 이상스러운 것은 辛未 以外의 다른 未年도 조선에는 소란이 만흔 것이니 과거는 그만두고 最近代에 잇서서만 하야도 李太王 32년 乙未년에는 閔妃被弑사건 즉 八月之變으로 국내가 크게 소란하고 隆熙 4년 丁未에는 海牙사건을 爲始하야 太皇帝의 禪位 韓日協約의 성립, 군대의 해산, 各地 義兵의 봉기로 京鄕이 大擾亂하고 또 최근 己未에는 萬歲事件이 이러낫섯다. 自來로 未를 동물의 羊이라 하고 羊은 유순한 까닭에 평화를 상징하는 것이라 하엿지만은 一方으로 보면 羊은 犧牲으로 殺伐을 상징하는 것이라고도 할 수 잇스니 이 未年에 소란이 만흔 것도 희생의 羊과 무슨 緣이 잇는지도 알 수 업다. 아지못거라 今年辛未에는 과연 엇더한 소란이나 또한 업슬는지.<69>

二. 辛未와 朝鮮의 文化

辛未年에 잇서서 조선에서 外國文化의 輸入한 것으로 말하면 맨먼저 新羅 文聖王 13년 辛未에 阿飡(新羅第六等官名) 元弘이 唐에 使하얏다가 佛經과 佛牙를 가지고 온 그것이다. 佛敎가 조선땅에 츰으로 드더오기는 高句麗 小獻王 2년-新羅 奈勿王 17 년壬申, 西紀 372년-이엿고 신라에서 불법을 시행하기는 벌서 法興王 15년 戊申-西紀 528년-이엿슨즉 이 辛未 以前에도 물론 佛經과 佛骨 가튼 것이 수입되엿것지만은 이 때에는 불교가 신라의 한 國敎와 가티 큰 세력을 가젓기 때문에 王이 친히 郊外에까지 가서 迎入하얏슨 즉 그 때 그 佛經과 佛牙의 수입한 것으로 신라문화에 얼마한 영향을 밋친 것을 족히 推知하겟다. 그 뒤 신라 神德王 15년 辛未에는 羅末 怪傑 泰封王 弓裔가 불경 20여권을 著하얏는데 당시 高麗 太祖 王建 一派는 弓裔의 失德을 惡宣傳하야 爲하기 그것을 다 妖言이라 칭하고 全部 抹殺을 식헛스나 卷數가 20여에 達한 것으로 보아 그것이 얼마마한 力作인 것과 妖言이라고 한 것을 보와서 또한 재래 불경보다 무슨 獨特의 硏究 發表인 것을 짐작할 수 잇다. 그것은 弓裔가 亡함을 따러서 물론 一抹의 寒烟으로 消失되고 말엇스나 辛未란 그 해에 이러한 著作이 잇섯다는 것만이라도 特記치 안을 수 업다.
그리고 高麗 顯宗 22년 辛未-西紀 1931년-에는 國子監을 비로소 設始하얏스니 이것은 朝鮮監試試驗의 츰 始初요 그 후 高麗 宣宗 8년 辛未에는 孔子一派72賢의 像을 圖하야 國子監壁上에 掛하얏스니 그 때는 발서 佛敎가 세력을 빼앗기고 儒敎가 점차 그 세력을 차지하는 조즘이엿다. 그리고 이 해에 宋帝가 親命으로 高麗의 古書籍을 만히 請求하얏스니 이것은 麗朝의 문물이 중국으로 輸出된 著例이다. 近代 李朝에 이르러서 特記할 것은 文宗 元年 辛未에 鄭麟趾의 高麗本史와 徐居正의 東國兵鑑의 완성된 것이니 이것은 元來 世宗時代에 集賢殿學士 鄭麟趾, 徐居正 등을 命하야 編纂케 하엿던 것으로 이 文宗 元年에 비로소 완성된 것이엿다. 그 뒤 仁祖9년 辛未(明 毅宗 崇禎4년, 西紀 1631년)7월에는 陳穾使로 北京에 갓던 鄭斗源이 西洋의 火砲, 熖硝, 千里鏡(卽望遠鏡), 自鳴鐘(시계), 紫木花(紫色棉花) 등과 天文圖, 西洋風俗記 등을 수입한 것이니, 이것은 서양의 문물이 조선에 츰으로 수입된 것으로서 近代朝鮮文化史上에 大書特記할 것이다. 이제 그 수입의 경로를 잠간 소개한건대 元來西洋의 문물이 중국에 드러오기는 明神宗(朝鮮 宣祖時代)때에 羅馬의 쩨스이쓰트派의 선교사 즉 「마테오릿치」-卽利瑪費라 하는 사람이 澳門으로부터 北京에 와서 神宗의 신임을 엇고 約20여 년간 布敎에 종사하더니 其後여러 선교사가 續續 中國에 드러오기 始作하야 淸의 太祖 太宗時代에 이르기까지 만흔 活躍을 하는 동시에 地理, 天文, 曆書, 火砲術 가튼 西洋의 문물을 傳하니 明 淸朝의 歷代帝王은 此를 기이히 녁여 厚待하여섯고 그러한 시기에 조선의 사신이 중국에 내왕함을 따러서 중국에 傳播된 서양의 문물이<70> 다시 조선으로 수입되게 된 것이다. 당시 鄭斗源이 此等 문물을 가지고 와서 上啓한 文을 보면 아래와 갓다.
西洋國은 中原에서 去하기 九萬里인데 皇京(北京)에 達하랴면 略 3년이 된다. 陸若漢은 (卽 아담샤-투)卽利馬竄의 친구로서 일즉이 그 나라에 잇서서 火砲를 제조하야 紅夷와 毛夷의 作硬하는 者를 滅하얏고 더욱히 天文, 曆法에 精하야 廣東에 이르러서는 紅夷砲로써 虜師를 討하기를 請하니 帝가 此를 嘉尙히 녁이고 掌敎官을 삼어 登州軍門에 送하얏다 云한다. 一日은 若漢이 臣을 차저와서 보왓는데 때에 나희 97이나 정신이 秀麗하야 飄飄然神仙中의 人과 가텃다. 臣이 화포를 어더서 本國에 헌상할 것을 원하니 若漢이 此를 許하고 幷하야 다른 諸器까지 주엇다 云云하얏고.
尙又 鄭斗源은 시계와 火砲에 관하야 如左히 記하얏다.
自鳴鐘 일부 12시마다 저절노 울고 화포 일부, 火繩을 쓰지 안코 火石으로 此를 擊하면 불이 스사로 發하며 我國鳥銃 두 방을 논는 동안에 4,5차는 可히 놋는데 빠르기가 귀신과 갓다고 云云-
그리고 이 辛未年에 王命으로 宣祖朝 文臣 簡易齋 崔岦의 文集을 內閣에서 간행한 것도 잠간 소개한다. 그 후 肅宗 17년 辛未에는 朝令으로 일반 인민의 白衣를 禁하고 古定式의 靑衣를 입게 하얏스니 今日 所謂 白衣亡國이니 白衣經濟니 하는 것을 그 때 朝廷이 먼저 알게 된 것은 감탄함을 마지 안는 동시에 그 뒤 국민의 實行力이 업서서 아즉까지 白衣를 그대로 입고 잇는 것은 누구나 또한 붓그러운 일로 생각지 안이치 못하겟다. 또 英祖 27년 辛未에는 朝令으로 續五禮儀補를 纂하고 洪啓禧는 三*聲彙2卷을 撰하얏스며 그 뒤 純祖 11년 辛未와 李太王 8년 辛未에는 足히 이럿타고 記錄할 것이 업다.

3. 辛未와 朝鮮의 國際關係

조선은 地勢가 北으로 支那의 대륙과 接續하고 東으로는 一葦의 海를 隔하야 일본과 相隣하얏슴으로 自來로서 交際도 만코 衝突도 또한 만엇섯다. 그 중에도 歷代의 통계를 보면 이 辛未年은 어느 해보다도 가장 국제의 문제가 만헛섯다는 往古는 이미 漠然하야 자서히 알 수 업지만은 箕氏朝鮮으로부터 말한다 하더라도 慶順王 12년 辛未에는 北胡酋長厄尼車吉汗이 馬二百匹을 幣物로 獻하고 兵을 請하야 공동으로 燕을 攻하기를 願하매 왕은 大夫申不死로 二萬의 兵을 率하고 燕을 伐케 하야 燕의 上谷城을 빼아섯고 三國時代에 나러와 新羅始祖赫居世 8년에는 일본이 신라의 국경을 侵하다가 왕이 聖德이 갸륵함을 듯고 退去하엿스며 그 후 訖解王 2년 辛未에는 高句麗가 (美川王13년) 遼東을 襲擊하야 安平을 取하고 訥祗王15년 辛未에는 倭가 明活城을 攻圍하다가 敗歸하고 炤智王 33년 辛未에는 高句麗(文咨王 79년)가 魏에 使를 遣하고 그 해 또 文咨王이 昇遐함매 魏의 吊問使가 來하얏다. 眞興王 12년 辛未에는 高句麗(陽原王 7년)가 北齊에 使를 보내고 突厥兵의 來侵하는 것을 크게 擊破하얏고 眞平王 28년 辛未 高句麗<71>嬰陽王 22년에는 隋帝楊廣이 高句麗를 侵略하랴고 兵을 親率하고 涿部까지 至하얏스며 (그 翌年 壬申에 隋의 大兵이 乙支文德에게 大敗함) 文武王11년 辛未에는 唐이 百濟의 故地를 侵敗하매 마저 싸워 石城에서 크게 破하고 또 唐의 總管 薛仁貴가 新羅가 百濟의 토지를 차지함을 責하니 왕은 거짓 사과하고 가만히 舌口城 등을 격파하며 續하야 唐이 또 蕃兵을 率하고 帶方을 侵하니 王은 그 漕船을 크게 격파하얏다. 그 뒤 聖德王 30년 辛未에는 日本이 東邊을 侵하므로 또한 격파하고 高麗 때에 와서 顯宗 22년 辛未에 契丹의 吊問使가 來하야 왕의 昇遐함을 吊하고 熙宗 7년 辛未에는 金使寬顔堆孚가 來하니 金良器를 보내서 新聘고자하다가 中路에서 蒙兵에게 被害를 하얏다. 그리고 元宗 12년 辛未에는 金鍊을 蒙古에 보내서 世子와 결혼할 事를 請하고 一方으로 南宋과 日本으로 交好하얏스며 또 蒙古使 趙良弼이 來하야 日本에 同行하기를 請하니 정부에서는 康允興을 명하야 가티 가게 하고 世子를 蒙古에 보내여 元帝의 女와 결혼하엿스며(是年에 蒙古가 國號를 元으로 改하다) 忠惠王 元年 辛未에는 元使가 來하야 童女를 求하야 가고 明宗이 太子를 召還하얏스니 이는 弱國에서 언제이나 當하는 難洗의 差恥엿다. 麗末 恭讓王 3년 辛未에는 新興의 明國 朱元璋이 萬匹의 馬를 强求하니 崔瑩一派의 反明派가 憤慨反對하야 이어 征明論을 主唱함에 至하얏고 이 해에 또 한가지 特記할 것은 暹羅가 方物과 使를 遣하야 來聘한 것이다. 李朝에 이르러서는 純祖11년 辛未에 通信士를 日本에 보낸 外에 李太王 8년 辛未에는 江華島에서 米兵과 交戰하얏스나 此卽 辛未洋擾엿다. 이것은 別題 辛未洋擾亂에 詳載하얏기 略하고 그만둔다.

4. 辛未와 朝鮮의 災害

干支로 여러 千年을 따지고 보면 어던 해던지 天災地變가튼 災害가 업는 해가 업지만은 이 辛未年은 비교적 그러한 재해가 적은 것이다. 上古檀君朝鮮時代는 記錄이 업서 알 수  업거니와 中朝鮮卽箕氏朝鮮時代로 말하면 第18世 貞敬王 12년 辛未에 國內에 큰 凶年이 한번 드럿스나 왕이 商民中齊魯(今至那山東省)의 말에 능통한 자를 뽑아서 國産의 魚鹽鐵銅 등을 배에 실코 가서 그 나라에 粮米를 무역하야 인민을 구제하고 또 百官의 祿을 半減하야 國費를 절약한 까닭에 인민이 그다지 곤란을 밧지 안엇다. 그 후 三國時代에는 新羅 제6世王 祗摩王 20년 辛未에 홍수가 나서 人家가 만히 漂流한 外에 제38대 元聖王 7년 辛未에 國都에 地震이 한번 잇섯스나 무슨 큰 재해는 업섯스며 百濟는 제23대 東城王 13년 辛未-新羅 炤智王 33년-에 大雨로 熊川水가 크게 漲溢하야 그 國都의 民家가 200여호가 표류하고 因해 그해에 凶年이 드러 飢民 600여 호가 新羅로 도망 이주하얏스니 이것은 역사상 辛未年 재해로는 제일 큰 것갓다. 그리고 高麗 시대에는 제4대왕 光宗 22년 신미에 지진이 잇섯고 最後王 恭讓王3년 신미에 또 지진이 年3次나 잇섯스며 近朝鮮 李氏時代 文宗 元年 辛未에 京畿, <72>黃海 兩道에 惡疫이 잇슨 外에는 별로 재해가 업섯다. 그러나 통계로 보와서 水害와 지진이 만흔 것이 한 특색이니 例年行事와 가티 水害만흔 조선에 이번 辛未에도 특히 水害가 만흘는지 한 可慮할 일이요 地震 만흔 일본에 또 큰 지진이 잇서서  그 여진이 조선까지 영향을 밋칠는지도 알 수 업는 것이다.

5. 辛未와 朝鮮의 人物

어느 해인들 사람이 나지 안코 죽지 안은 해가 업지만은 이 辛未年에는 특히 큰 人物들의 출생과 사망이 만타. 이제 대강 생각나는대로 말하자면 高麗顯宗 22년 辛未에는 高麗侍中姜邯贊이 卒逝하얏스니 그는 壽가 84세에 至하고 爵位가 人臣으로 其極에 達하얏스며 契丹亂의 龜州大勝捷을 爲始하야 前後國家일에 盡忠竭力하고 최대의 공훈을 이르럿슨 즉 自己 個人으로는 비록 아모 유감이 업지만은 高麗國家에서는 一大損失이라 안이 할 수 업섯다. 其後 毅宗 5년 辛未에는 三國史의 著者로 또는 西京妙淸의 亂을 討平한 勳臣으로 유명한 金富軾이 卒逝하얏다. 그 亦 77세의 고령으로 於國於私에 힐 일을 다 하얏지만은 당시 고려의 一大柱石이 업서진 것은 또한 사실이요 그리고 그 해에 知奏事 鄭襲明이 讒言을 입고 自死한 것도 잠간 소개한다. 그 후 420년을 經하야 李朝宣祖4년 辛未에는 仁祖때 光海朝反正首功臣으로 유명한 北渚金瑬(壬亂節臣金汝吻의 子)와 大詩人 東岳 李安訥이 生하고 또 仁祖 9년 辛未에는 徐藥峯渻이 74세의 고령으로 卒逝하얏스니 그는 四佳徐居正의 從孫으로 壬辰當時에 鄭文孚와 가티 會寧賊 鞠景仁을 討平하고 宣祖 顯命 亡臣中 한 사람으로서 光海朝에 丹陽에 謫居하엿다가 仁祖反正 後에 刊判이 되고 甲子亂 후에도 또 兵判이 되어 官이 知中樞에 至하얏다. 그가 죽은 代로 그 해에는 또 큰 儒學者 두 분이 출생하얏스니 한 분은 李栗谷先生의 門人으로 東方禮學에 유명한 沙溪金長生이요 한 분은 淸陰金尙憲의 문인으로 肅宗甲戊에 遣逸로 左相에 招拜된 玄石 朴世釆엿다. 또 숙종7년 辛未에는 御史로 유명한 朴文秀와 兪拓基
兪政承, 判書 李喆輔, 晦軒 趙觀彬이 출생하고 雲浦 呂聖齊(右相)가 卒逝하얏다. 그 후 英祖 27년 辛未에는 兵判 尹陽來(城平人號晦窩)가 죽고 純祖 11년 辛未에는 洪景來의 일파가 혁명의 실패로 전부 被誅한 外官軍 及 義兵將이 몃몃 죽은 것은 別項 洪景來亂記에 자서히 기록한 것과 가트며 최근 李太王8년 辛未에 魚中軍在淵 등이 節死한 것은 또한 辛未洋擾亂記에 詳述되엿기에 略한다. 今年 辛未에는 朝鮮의 有爲人物이 또한 얼마나 誕生할는지.<73>
<68-73>