잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	各 團體에 보내는 新年劈頭의 督促狀, 社會的 責務를 時急히 履行하라 (A New Year's Admonition to Various Organizations: Swiftly Fulfill Your Social Responsibilities)
기사형태	논설 (Editorial)

A New Year's Admonition to Various Organizations: Swiftly Fulfill Your Social Responsibilities
An Admonition to the Chosŏn Education Association

Yu Tong-han

Already struggling, we Chosŏn people face an admonition at the start of the New Year! It's hardly an auspicious start. However, if we have idly spent the past hundreds or tens of years without any initiative (進取性) and have created the current situation, then there is a need to rush forward again. If there are things we have failed to do in the past, it is our duty to expedite them with new courage and new plans from the beginning of the New Year. If we send arrows of admonition to quickly resolve such unfinished business in the New Year, it wouldn't be so wrong, would it? In any case, in our current society, where everything is outwardly suppressed and internally corrupted, leading to stagnation and decline, simply taking an attitude of complacency will only result in falling further behind. It would be an honor if even this admonition from nameless people could serve as a stimulant for the business world.<90> The place I want to send an admonition to is the Chosŏn Education Association (朝鮮敎育協會)!

Due to my insignificant nature, I originally lacked the qualifications to even stick my head into the association since its founding. I never even considered joining them to discuss or work together. As much as I haven't participated, it is only natural that I don't know the internal workings or the progress of their projects in detail. However, since my home is in Seoul, I have had many opportunities to see the sign of the Chosŏn Education Association, and sometimes I even went inside to see someone I knew. Although it seems like nearly ten years have passed since the association's sign was hung, I often wonder what kind of work they have been doing and what the people there are generally up to. I, as an outsider, cannot know for sure whether it was initiated directly by the association or under another name, but the talk of a privately funded university (民立大學) that once seemed imminent was apparently championed by them. However, it vanished like frost melting under the sun, disappearing without a trace. After that, the association's building was offered as a dormitory for struggling students. Whether they studied well or not, I thought it was commendable that they at least provided a place for needy students to stay. Also, I remember with favor their launching of the Kyŏngbuk Famine Relief Association (慶北飢饉救濟會) last year, which was a great achievement. But what happened? When the exposition opened last year, the struggling students who had been staying there all left, and suddenly a hotel sign was put up. I was so surprised! In Chosŏn society, where anything goes, I was filled with suspicion and regret that even this association, which had at least preserved its name, was collapsing due to a lack of means of support and that even the building had fallen into the hands of a hotelier. However, on the other hand, I heard that the association's building was originally donated by the noble intention of the late Kang Sŏk, Han Kyu-sŏl (故江石韓圭卨氏), and that he had also donated land to be used for the association's projects, yielding over a hundred bags of rice annually. So, it seemed unlikely that such a large organization would face such significant maintenance difficulties. I couldn't say anything as an outsider. After about two months, the exposition ended, the hotel sign was removed, and the association's old sign was back up along with the new sign for the Chosŏn Language Dictionary Editorial Office (朝鮮語辭典編輯會事務所), which was a relief. Interpreting it in a positive light, I thought that providing accommodations for teachers and students from public and private schools during the exposition was also a meaningful thing for the education association to do.<91> Some people might say that such things should have been put on hold, but where in the world is there such a perfect person or organization? In my opinion, that matter doesn't seem to be a big deal.

Looking back over the past two or three years, I see that there is a printing press inside the association, and they are publishing the Labor Night School Textbook Series (勞動夜學敎科叢書), which is a very good thing. However, I heard that it is not directly managed by the association but by another individual. Recently, a hospital has also been established inside, which is also a good thing for widely saving the sick in the sea of suffering. Korean language classes (한글講習), Chinese language classes (漢語講習), and English language classes (英語講習) are also good things and should be done. However, if these are not projects or institutions directly managed by the association but are run by other individuals for their own purposes, then is the association just a place that rents out space? I don't know the details of its contents, so I hesitate to say anything, but anyway, the sign is good, and they have those kinds of institutions and some funds from the beautiful legacy of the deceased. I don't know about big projects, but surely your association has some founding principles and planned projects. If so, I humbly pray at the beginning of the New Year that you create something, whether small or large, this year and show it to the world.

An Admonition to the Mymyŏnghoe (無名會)

Kim Tong-jin

What can a member of the Mymyŏnghoe (無名會) expect from the Mymyŏnghoe? I don't know exactly when, but I don't recall ever applying to become a member. However, when the All-Chosŏn Newspaper Reporters' Convention (全朝鮮新聞記者大會) was held in April of Ŭlch'uk year (乙丑年), I participated as a full member in the various preparatory tasks necessary for holding the convention. Therefore, it is clear that I had the qualifications of a member before the convention was held.

Since I became a member without knowing, I couldn't have known the manifesto or anything like that clearly, and I don't remember it now. However, its mission was undoubtedly to bring together people engaged in journalistic institutions (it might not matter if it's called "writing to serve the nation" (文筆報國)), to promote harmony and cooperation, and to promote the powerful development of Chosŏn's journalistic institutions.

As such, the Mymyŏnghoe convened the All-Chosŏn Reporters' Convention, bringing together nearly a thousand writers (操觚人) in one place and holding a three-day conference. When a serious incident that made P'yŏngbuk (平北) tremble broke out, it dispatched member Yi Sŏk (李奭) to the scene to fight bravely, thereby fulfilling part of the responsibility of the Chosŏn journalistic world and making no small contribution to the people, which can be seen as a proud achievement. As an anonymous member of the Mymyŏnghoe, I had much respect for its existence.

However, as time has passed, the Mymyŏnghoe has become a "nameless society" (無名會) in the literal sense, not just a "society in name only" (虛名會). I, who do not know the exact date of its establishment, may not even know the date of its dissolution, which is why I might deserve to be scolded. However, I don't remember ever hearing that it was dissolved, perhaps because my memory is poor. Then, even a fragment of the musty memory of that time must remain somewhere, but is that really the case?

The question is not whether the Mymyŏnghoe exists, but how it is used. As a member of the Mymyŏnghoe, I am ashamed to criticize others' work, but I am writing down this complaint and hope because I cannot help but lament that those who advocated for the need for the society at the time were not diligent enough to achieve beauty from beginning to end. Some may criticize this as criticism that is not like criticism or as an unrealistic ideal, but I want to express my personal opinion on the causes that led the Mymyŏnghoe to see today and on the duties it should take in the future if its existence is necessary.

The Mymyŏnghoe's shortcomings are that its foundational work was weak. It was not founded by a majority of journalists (新聞人). It was founded by a few preparatory journalists and a small number of journalists who had nothing directly to do with newspapers. Therefore, when organizing it, they did not clearly recognize what to do or how to do it. At the time, the society, which had been stagnant since the year of Sa Mi (巳未年, 1917), was unusually tense. The General Federation of Labor and Peasant Unions (勞農總同盟) or the General Federation of Youth Associations (靑年總同盟) were launched, and popular rallies were convened. As a reactionary organization, a group called the Alliance of Patriotic People from Various Factions (各派有志聯盟) was also organized. It seemed that Chosŏn would not end until some kind of change occurred. As the general atmosphere was like this, it was a natural consequence that newspaper reporters also had the opinion that they should cooperate more closely and respond to the popular trend. Thus, a few journalists and people who could be called quasi-journalists launched the Mymyŏnghoe.

By the time the All-Chosŏn Newspaper Reporters' Convention was convened in April of Ŭlch'uk (乙丑 四月), most of the editorial bureau members of each daily newspaper in Kyŏngsŏng (京城), as well as the heads of the business bureaus, had joined. Even if they did not go through the joining process, editorial bureau members working for newspaper companies were recognized as members. As a result, even though it could be said that the Mymyŏnghoe was a society of newspaper reporters, its foundation was not solid because its launch and organization did not move under the consciousness of the entire newspaper industry.

At that time, the daily newspaper world was in a state of tripartite dominance (鼎立) between the *Sidae*, *Chosŏn*, and *Tonga*. As a result of a kind of secret struggle for the spread of each power, they were more concerned with catering to the public than with having a firm argument. External forces could easily control the newspaper companies. The fact that each newspaper joined under the umbrella of the Mymyŏnghoe without objection may have been due to skillfully seizing such an opportunity. Furthermore, the people who operated the Mymyŏnghoe did not understand how to manage it. High-sounding discussions are not unnecessary, and it is not acceptable to lack the ability to manage the country and save the world (經國濟世). However, because they made the occupational consciousness of newspaper reporters a secondary condition and occupying the position of politician, patriot, or leader of Chosŏn a primary condition, projects and plans that were too far removed from reality inevitably burdened the weak executives of the society. Then, what should the Mymyŏnghoe do if it is revived, and what should it do? The opinions of many seniors are important, but if I were to make an unreserved confession as a newspaper reporter, I would like to say the following: First, everyone will say that it is good to study ways to cultivate the spirit of cooperation among reporters. However, in today's situation, where newspaper companies have become like commercial companies and are competing with each other, and reporters have abandoned the spirit of the past and become like salaried workers, it is risky to demand common unity because their interests are different. Therefore, it is unlikely that a form like the reporters' alliance that is popular in the provinces these days will proceed smoothly. It would be better to leave such matters to each person's virtue and to make the improvement of real-world problems, that is, occupational advancement, the top priority.

1.  Hold newspaper lectures from time to time to develop the knowledge of colleagues.
2.  Organize article review meetings to research and announce the fairness of articles and the method of organizing articles.
3.  Publish a magazine that serves as an institution to promote the above projects and to establish contact with colleagues in the provinces.

If these various projects are first put on track, all the unfortunate events in the newspaper companies, such as valuing people over capital or the ugly relationships based on favoritism, will naturally disappear. At the same time, I believe that the newspaper industry will naturally improve and advance, and its authority will increase.

An Admonition to the Women's Athletic Association (女子體育會)

Puk-kkŭngsaeng (北熊生)

A society (會), being a collective of multiple people with a certain purpose, inevitably carries social significance. Even in individual actions, depending on how they impact society, one receives either welcome or rejection. Therefore, for a group that announces its actions and purposes to society, there is even less to say.

Considering this, as a member of society and, further, as someone who worries about society (though this may be a somewhat presumptuous statement), I believe it is not an overreach to engage with the Women's Athletic Association, which has broadly proclaimed its value and purpose in society.

It has been over two years since the Women's Athletic Association gathered numerous prominent figures from society and held a grand inaugural ceremony.

However, what is the reason for the complete lack of news, to the point where we cannot even ascertain whether the association exists, let alone see any actions it has taken? Two years is by no means a short time. Moreover, this is a time when Chosŏn society is declining and collapsing in various ways, and we are at a loss for how to rectify and remedy the situation. How can we tolerate gatherings or organizations that arise from a mere desire for fame or a passing trend, without any ideological basis, in the manner of clubs? The era of ostentatious displays, merely listing names on signs and being complacent, is long gone.

However, our Women's Athletic Association was neither an entertainment club nor a product of vanity driven by a desire for a signboard. Its stated purpose, as the name suggests, was to fulfill a socially significant task related to "women's athletics (女子體育)," which is significant from a eugenic perspective. We did not equate it with the fleeting trend of women's photography studios, women's shops, women's barber shops, and so on. Therefore, we did not engage in the senseless act of protesting that the president of the association was a man rather than a woman. Nor did we ever mistakenly view the association's legitimate charter, which was adapted to the needs of the times, as a cosmetics advertisement or a statement about the efficacy of some medicine.

The mission of the Women's Athletic Association is exceedingly clear (though it may not be an immediate pressing issue), and its supporters are either physical education teachers at middle schools or well-known athletes, or prominent figures and patriots of the time. We have truly opened our eyes with great expectations and have long been waiting with open arms to receive the contributions it will make to our women's society. But alas! There is complete silence! Does this mean that, given our objective special circumstances, they are engaging in underground activities?!

No! That would be paranoia, like the police. If you think about it, the Women's Athletic Association was by no means a ideological group or a secret society. If it were, the inaugural ceremony would have been prohibited, and the executives would have either gone into hiding or fled overseas!

In capitalist countries today, where sports fever is used as a narcotic like religion, that is absolutely impossible. So why?

Reaching this point, we cannot help but attribute the responsibility to the lack of conscience and sincerity of the Women's Athletic Association's executives. Esteemed male and female executives! Our hearts are filled with anxiety because we cannot find any achievements of yours in our women's society.

Even if you cannot send female athletes to the World Olympic Games like neighboring countries, shouldn't there be some movement or signs domestically? Isn't there a saying, "To lift a stone and see a beautiful face"...

Therefore, we will not pursue this further. We are not as afraid that you will attempt a defensive explanation like a cornered rat biting back as we are humanly respecting your honor and character and loving your intelligence to reflect.<95>

**Named Entities**

Yu Tong-han	유동한
Chosŏn	조선
Kyŏngbuk	경북
Han Kyu-sŏl	한규설
Kang Sŏk	강석
Seoul	서울
Kim Tong-jin	김동진
Ŭlch'uk	을축
Yi Sŏk	이석
P'yŏngbuk	평북
Kyŏngsŏng	경성
Puk-kkŭngsaeng	북웅생



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	各 團體에 보내는 新年劈頭의 督促狀, 社會的 責務를 時急히 履行하라
기사형태	논설

各 團體에 보내는 新年劈頭의 督促狀, 社會的 責務를 時急히 履行하라
朝鮮敎育協會에 督促함

柳東漢

갓득이나 쪼들리는 우리 조선사람 더구나 신년 첫머리에 독촉장! 장히 상서롭지 못한 말입니다. 그러나 우리가 지나간 몃 백년 몃 십년 동안에 아모런 進取性이 업시 지나다가 오늘가튼 현상을 만들고 마럿다면 지금 다시 突進猛進할 필요도 잇슬 것이요, 우리가 지나간 동안에 밋처 못다한 일이 잇다면 신년 첫머리부터 새 용기와 새 계획으로 그것을 하로 밧비 促成하는 것이 우리의 당연히 할 일인가 합니다. 그러면 새해에 當하여 未盡한 밀녀 나온 그런 일을 얼른 해달라고 독촉장의 화살을 보낸다고 그것이 그러케 허물되지는 안켓지요 아모러나 모든 것이 외적으로 눌림을 밧고 내적으로 좀이 들어 一切로 沈滯하고 衰頹만 하야 가는 現下 우리 사회에서 다만 因循姑息하는 태도만 취해 가지고는 落伍한 中에도 또 한층 더 떠러지는 길밧게는 아모 것도 보일 것이 업슬 것이니 이름 업는 인생들의 이 독촉장이나마 다행히<90> 이것으로 因하야 事業界에 한 興奮劑가 되야 준다면 얼마나 영광이겟습니까. 내가 독촉장을 보내랴는 곳은 朝鮮敎育協會!
나의 爲人이 변변치 못하야 元來 同協會刱役 以來 머리를 드리 밀어볼 자격이 업섯스니 직접 그곳에 몸을 던저 가티 일을 의논한다거나 일을 하여 볼려고는 念頭에도 두지 못한 일이어니와 거기에 參列치 못한 만큼 그곳의 內幕如何나 事業進行如何가튼 것은 물론 자세히 알 수 없는 것이 나로서는 당연한 일입니다. 그러나 집이 서울에 잇는 만큼 조선교육협회의 간판만은 눈에 띄울 기회가 만헛섯고 혹 어느 때에는 아는 사람을 차저 보러 그 안에 드러가 보게 된 때도 업지 안어 잇기는 잇섯습니다. 그래 협회의 간판이 걸린지도 거의 十個星霜이 갓가운 듯하지만 저간에 무슨 일을 經營하엿고 거기에 계신 여러분은 대개 무슨 일들을 하고 계신지 다른 때는 모르겟스나 그 간판을 대할 때이면 문득 그 생각이 납니다. 그것이 직접 협회의 名義로 發起되엿든지 딴 이름으로 發起되엿든지는 局外漢인 필자로서 자세이 알 수도 업스나 한창 當年에 금방 될 듯이 왓작 떠들든 民立大學의 소리도 하여간 그 집안에서 소리를 친듯한데 그만 그저 태양볏헤 봄서리 사라지듯 슬그먼히 有耶無耶中에 형용도 그림자도 업시 다가티 감추어저 버리고 그 후는 협회 안이 苦學生들의 寄宿所로 提供되야 공부야 잘하나 못하나 그래도 이름만이라도 어려운 학생에게 몸담을 곳을 빌려준 것만이 아모려나 고마운 일이라고 생각햇습니다. 그리고 작년에 慶北飢饉救濟會를 發起하야 一大 偉蹟을 나탄낸 것만은 필자의 기억에도 오히려 好感을 가지고 잇섯습니다. 그런데 웬일입니까. 작년 박람회가 열리자 寄宿해 잇든 苦學生들이 다 나가고 벼란간 여관의 간판이 달리기에 나는 얼마나 깜짝 놀란는지 몰랏습니다. 何如間 무엇이나 잡처드러가는 조선의 사회라 이름이나마 그래도 보존해 가든 이 협회조차 유지의 길이 업서서 그만 문어지고 건물조차 어느 여관업자의 손으로 넘어갓는가보다 하는 의심과 한탄이 일시에 아울러 이러낫섯습니다. 그러나 한편으로 이야기를 들어본즉 협회의 건물은 故江石韓圭卨氏의 갸륵한 뜻으로 元來 寄贈을 바든 것이고 그 외에도 同협회의 사업에 쓰라고 토지까지 寄贈한 것이 잇서서 매년 추수가 백여 석 꺼리 된다는 말도 잇스니 그러케 커다랴케 經營하야 나가는 일이 업는 거긔서 그러케 무슨 큰 維持難이 생길 리도 업는 일이라 퍽이나 궁금은 하지만 局外漢으로 이러니 저러니 말할 수도 업고 그럭저럭 한 2개월 지나다가 박람회도 끗나서 여관의 간판이 철거되고 협회의 옛 간판이 朝鮮語辭典編輯會事務所의 새 간판과 한가지 그대로 잇기에 적이 숨이 내쉬여지는 듯햇습니다. 그리고 다시 好意로 해석하야 박람회 가튼 때 사람이 만히 모혀서 숙박에 곤란할 줄 알고 특별히 公私立學校의 교원과 생도를 相對의 顧客으로 하야 편의를 보아준 것도 교육협<91>회로서는 역시 의미잇는 일이라고 생각하엿습니다. 或者는 그런 일쯤은 보류를 해 두어도 조다켓고 말하는 사람도 잇는 것이 유감이지만는 세상에 어대 그러케 完全無缺한 인격이 잇스며 단체가 잇겟습니까. 그만 일은 필자의 생각가태서는 그러케 큰 관계될 것은 업슬듯합니다.
그리고 한 2,3년내로 보니까 협회 안에 인쇄소가 잇고 勞動夜學敎科叢書를 發行한다니 대단히 조흔 일임니다. 그런데 그것이 직접 협회에서 경영하는 것이 아니라 그도 들은 즉 다른 개인의 經營이라 하고 近日에는 또다시 그 안에 병원이 施設되엿스니 苦海의 病든 인생을 廣濟하는 것도 조흔 일이요 한글講習 漢語講習 英語講習 가튼 것도 또한 조흔 일이요, 당연히 할 일임니다. 그러나 그런 것이 협회 직접 經營의 사업이나 기관이 아니고 딴 개인이 딴 營爲로 하는 것이라면 대체 협회에서는 집을 빌려주는 한 기관임니까. 그 내용 如何를 자세히 알수가 업스니 이래라저래라 말하기도 거북합니다마는 何如間 간판이 조코 그만한 기관들을 가지고 잇고 多少間 故人의 아름다운 遺物의 미천이 남어 잇스니 커다란 일은 모르겟습니다마는 무엇이나 貴協會에서 刱設한 趣旨와 計劃한 사업이 잇슬 것이 아닙니까. 잇다면 적으나 크나 금년 안에는 무엇하나를 좀 만드러 가지고 세상에 얼골을 처들고 나와 주시기를 신년 첫머리에 百拜祈願합니다.

無名會에 督促함

金東進

無名會員으로써 無名會에 대하야 무엇을 바랄가. 나는 언제부터엿는지 명확히 모르나 無名會員이되랴 입회신청을 한 일이 업는 줄로 기억하지마는 乙丑年 4월 어느날인가 全朝鮮新聞記者大會가 개최될 때에는 당당한 一個 會員으로 그 대회 개최에 필요한 諸般準備事務에 參干하얏슴으로 분명히 그 대회 개최 전에 會員의 자격을 가젓슴은 분명한 사실이다.
이와 가티 모르는 동안에 會員이 되얏슴으로 이 회에 대한 綱領가튼 것을 분명히 알엇슬 리가 업스며 또 지금 기억하지도 못하지만 그 사명이 언론기관(文筆報國이라고 하야도 관계치 안홀는지 모른다마는)좌우간 이러한 의미의 사업에 종사하는 사람들을 綱羅하야 서로 敦睦하며 서로 협력하야 조선의 언론기관으로 하야금 힘 잇는 발달을 도모하자는 것임은 틀림업는 사실일 것이다.
그럼으로써 無名會는 全朝鮮記者大會를 소집하야 천에 갓가운 操觚人들을 一堂에 會集하고 3일에 瓦한 회의를 개최하얏스며 또는 평북의 某戰慄할 중대 사건이 발발하매 각사를 대표하야 회원 李奭 군을 현장에 派遣하야 胃死奮鬪케 함으로써 조선언론계의 책임의 일부를 다하게 하는 등 민중을 위하야 不少한 공을 세운 것은 자긍할 만한 사업이라고 볼 수 잇다. 無名會의 一 無名會員인 나로서도 그 존재에 대하야 敬服한 바가 만헛섯다.
그런데 月移星換한 금일에 이르매 無名會는 문자 그대로의 無名會 아니라 虛名會가 되야버렷다. 그 설립의 日字를 분명히 모르는 나로서는 혹시 해산된 時日도 알지 못할 것이 괴이치 안흐니라 하는 꾸지람을 드러도 할 수 업는 일이겟지만 내 기억력이 둔한 所以인지는 모르겟스되 아직 해산되얏다는 말을 드른 기억은 업다. 그러면 어느 구석에든지 케케묵은 당시의 기억 조각이라도 남어 잇스련만 과연 그러한지.
無名會의 존속이 문제가 아니다. 문제는 그 활용여하에 잇는 것이다. 나도 無名會의 일원으로 남의 일을 흉보듯 함이 붓그러운 일이나 당시 그 會의 필요를 唱導한 이들이 넘어 성의업서 始終의 美를 거두지 못하얏슴을 慨歎하야마지 안는데서 이 불평과 희망을 기록하는 바이다. 비판답지 안흔 비판이라고 또는 실현성 업는 理想이라고 꾸지람할 이도 업지 안켓지마는 無名會로서 今日을 보게 한 원인을 탐구하는 동시에 萬一 존재가 필요하다할진대 장차 그 取해야 될 직분에 대하야 의 私見의 一端을 말하려 한다.
無名會의 缺點은 그 기초공사가 약하얏다. 新聞人의 多數가 主唱하야 창립된 것이 아니다. 직접 신문과는 관계가 업는 一部準備新聞人과 소수의 新聞人의 主唱으로 된 것이다. 그럼으로 그 조직에 際하야 무엇을 엇더케 할고 함을 명확히 인식치 못하얏다. 당시 巳未年以來 침체하얏든 사회는 異常히도 긴장하야 사회단체로서는 勞農總同盟 또는 靑年總同盟이 發起되며 민중대회가 소집되는 등 자못 활기가 잇섯스며 또 反動機關으로도 各派有志聯盟이라는 단체가 조직되야 조선은 方今 무슨 변혁이 잇고야 끗칠 형세이엿다. 一般의 분위기가 이러하얏슴으로 新聞人도 협동을 좀더 긴밀히 하야 민중적 趨向에 응하여야 되겟다는 의견을 가지게 된 것이 당연한 귀결일지니 이리하야 新聞人 一部와 準新聞人이라 할만한 人士 몃분이 發起하야 無名會를 發起하게 된 것이다.
乙丑 四月 新聞記者大會가 소집될 臨時까지에 경성시내의 각 日刊 新聞編輯局員은 물론 營業局首腦部들까지 대개 가입하얏고 또 가입수속을 밟지 안터라도 신문사에 在職하는 編輯局員은 회원으로 인정하게 되얏슴으로 결과에 잇서서는 新聞人의 無名會라고 할 수 잇섯다할망정 그 發起와 조직이 新聞人全體의 意識밋테 움직인 것이 아닌 것만큼 그 기초가 튼튼치 못하얏든 것이다.
當時 日刊新聞界는 時代, 朝鮮, 東亞의 鼎立의 형세이엇슴으로 各其 그 勢力普及에 一種暗鬪가 생긴 결과 확고한 주장보다 民衆迎合에 급급하야 외부의 세력이<93> 容易히 新聞社를 조종할수 잇섯스니 無名會의 傘下에 各新聞이 異議업시 모혀든 것도 실상은 그러한 기회를 교묘히 捕捉한 탓이엇슬는지도 모른다. 뿐 아니라 無名會를 運轉하는 사람이 요리하는 방법을 解得치 못하얏다. 高談峻論이 필요치 안흔 바 아니며 經國濟世의 襟度가 업서서 안될것이지만은 신문기자라는 직업적 의식을 第二義的 條件으로 하고 政治家 志士 조선의 지도자의 위치를 占함을 第一義的 條件으로 하엿기 때문에 현실과 넘어 떠러진 사업과 계획은 畢竟 힘 弱한 會의 幹部들로 하야금 안고 넘어가지 안이치 못하게 하얏다 그러면 無名會가 부활된다면 엇더케 하여야 하며 무엇을 하여야 될가 여러 선배의 의견이 重하려니와 一新聞人으로서 숨김업는 고백을 하랴면 이와 가티 말하고 십다. 몬저 기자의 협동정신을 배양케 할 도리를 講究함이 좃케다는 것은 누국나 다가티 말할 것이라 그러나 신문사라는 것이 一商事會社와 가티 되야 서로 경쟁을 하고 기자가 昔日의 志士之風을 버리고 一個 俸給 노동자 가티 된 今日에 잇서 이해가 서로 다른 以上 공동 일치하라는 것은 도로혀 破綻을 보게 할 불안이 잇다. 그럼으로 요새 지방에서 유행하는 기자동맹가튼 형식을 짜놋는대야 원만히 진행될 리가 업스니 그러한 문제는 각자의 德義에 맛기는 것이 좃켓고 오직 현실문제 즉 직업향상책을 선결문제로 함이 가장 적절할지니,
一. 신문강연회가튼 것을 수시로 개최하야 同人의 지식계발에 노력할 것.
一. 記事심사회가튼 것을 조직하야 기사의 공정 及 기사조직방법을 연구 발표할 것.
一. 以上의 사업을 진행하기 위할 兼기관잡지를 발행하야 地方同人들과도 連絡을 맷도록 할 것.
그런데 이 여러 가지 사업이 먼저 軌道로만 連行되면 지금과 가튼 신문사 내의 모든 不詳事인 인물본위보다도 자본본위 또는 醜劣한 情實關係가 업서지어 자연히 신문계의 向上進步가 잇게 되는 同時에 보다 더 권위 잇게 될 것은 물론이라고 밋는다.

女子體育會에 督促함

北熊生

會라 하면 그것이 발서 엇더한 목적을 가진 다수인의 집단체이니만치 사회적 의미를 띄게 된다. 개인의 행동에 잇서서도 그것이 사회에 파급되는 영향 여하에 따라서<94> 혹은 款待를 밧고 혹은 擯斥을 밧는 것이니 자기행동과 목적의 所在處를 널니 사회에 聲名하고 나오는 集團體에 잇서서는 더 말할 것도 업다.
그러고 보면 나도 사회의 일원이요, 나아가서는 (다소 주저 넙은 말이나)사회를 우려하는 사람으로 일즉 사회적으로 그 존재가치와 이유를 廣佈하고 나온 여자체육회를 붓들고 잠시 수작을 부처 보드라도 그다지 妄發은 안일 줄 안다.

여자체육회가 사회의 有數한 知名人士들을 모아 놋코 굉장한 發會式을 한지 해 數로 二年이 넘엇다.
그러나 우리들에게 보여주는 행적은 고사하고 이제는 會의 유무조차 알 수 업스리만치 消息이 杳然한 것은 무슨 까닭일가. 二年이라면 決코 짧은 시간이 아니다. 더구나 조선사회가 여러 가지 방면으로 나날이 쇠퇴해 가고 파멸을 당하야 整頓收拾할 길을 몰으고 잇는 이 때이랴. 그러하매 엇지 賣名的 流行心理에서 아모런 思想的 根據가 업시 俱樂部 格으로 생겨나는 집회나 단체를 容許할 수 잇스랴. 虛張聲勢로 간판만을 羅列하고 晏然自足하든 시대는 임이 지난간 지 오래이다.
그러나 우리 여자체육회는 결코 娛樂的 俱樂部도 아니요, 看板慾의 虛威的 所産도 아니엿다. 그 표방하는 바 목적은 會名과 가티 『여자체육』이란 優生學的으로도 의미심장한 사회적 한가지 임무를 수행하고자 하는 것이매 우리는 그것을 한때 유행이엿든 무슨 여자사진관이나 여인상회 부인이발관 等類와 동일시하지 안은이만치 그 회장이 여자가 아니고 남자라고 항의를 하는 몰상식한 짓도 하지 안엇스며 또는 그 會의 시대적 요구에 適應한 정정당당한 부르지즘인 趣旨書를 화장품 광고나 무슨 賣藥의 효능서로 잘못 본 기억은 꿈에도 업다.
여자체육회는 넘우도 그 사명이 뚜렷하고 (직접 當面의 急務는 안일지 몰나도)지지하는 인사들이 혹은 중등학교체조교사라든가 일홈 잇는 체육가가 아니면 명망이 藉藉한 당대의 名士志士들이매 우리는 실로 큰 기대의 눈을 뜨고 장차 우리 여성사회에 끼처주는 공적을 바더들이려고 두팔을 버리고 긔다린지 오래엿든 것이다. 그러나 웬걸! 감감무소식이 아니냐! 그러면 우리는 객관적 특수사정에 잇는 이만치 潛行運動을 하고 잇단 말인가?!
아니다! 그것은 경찰과 가튼 신경과민이다. 생각해보면 여자체육회는 결코 무슨 사상단체도 아니엿고 비밀결사도 아니엿다. 만일 그럿타면 발회식부터 금지가 되엿슬 것이고 간부들은 潛踪秘跡을 하든지 해외망명을 해바렷게!
스포-츠 熱을 당겨다가 종교와 가튼 마취제로 이용하려드는 오늘날 자본주의 국가에 잇서서는 절대로 그럴 법이 업다. 그럼 웨?
思到至此에 우리는 헐 수 업시 그 責을 여자체육회 간부들의 沒廉的 無誠意에 돌닐 수밧게 업다. 敬愛하는 남녀간부들이여! 우리 여성사회에서 君들의 業績을 하나도 차저 낼 수 업는 우리의 마음은 초조하기 짝이 업다.
인근의 나라와 가티 세계 오림픽대회에 여자선수를 내여 놋키까지는 못하드래도 국내적으로나마 무슨 動靜과 긔미가 보혀야 할게 아니냐. 擧石而紅顔이란 말이 잇지안흔가...
그럼 우리는 이 이상 더 추궁하고자 하지 안는다. 窮鼠反噬로 君들이 發惡的 辨明을 試할가 두려워하는 것보담은 君들의 名譽와 人格을 인간적으로 존중하며 반성할 줄 아는 총명을 사랑함으로써다.<95>
<90-95>