잡지명	別乾坤 第36號
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	京城 五十八雙童錄 (Seoul's Fifty-Eight Pairs - List of People with Similar Names)
기사형태	雜著 (Miscellany)

Seoul's Fifty-Eight Pairs

Gentlemen! Just because it says "Pairs" (雙童) don't misunderstand that they are necessarily twins from the same womb. The "pairs" here doesn't mean twins, but rather people with similar names gathered together. It might be rude to call distinguished and respectable gentlemen "pairs," but please take it as a New Year's greeting, as there's an old saying about having "crane hair and a childlike face." (Observer)

Mr. Song Chin-u (宋鎭禹) and Mr. Song Chinu (宋瑧禹) are fundamentally different and have no familial relation, but if Mr. Song Chinu (宋瑧禹) were to join the Dong-A Ilbo, people might mistake him for Mr. Song Chin-u's (宋鎭禹) younger brother, or some distant relative, due to their similar names.

If Mr. An Chae-hong (安在鴻) of the Chosun Ilbo were at the Dong-A Ilbo, or Mr. Yang Chae-hong (梁在鴻) of the Dong-A Ilbo were at the Chosun Ilbo, if those two were in the same company, it would truly be Yang Chae-hong (梁在鴻) = Two Chae-hong (兩在鴻) = a pair by the name itself.

Kim Ki-t’aek (金起田) of the Ch'ŏndogyo Ch'ŏngnyŏndang (天道敎靑年黨) and Kim Ki-jin (金基鎭) of the Chosun Ilbo, when their names are written out, appear unrelated, but because their sounds are similar, when they attend the same gathering, they say "Yes!" to each other during roll call and laugh. This is a pair in name sound.

Although Yi Sŏ-gu (李瑞求) and Sin Sŏg-u (申錫雨) have completely different names, because the sounds of Sŏg-u (錫雨) and Sŏ-gu (瑞求) are similar, if Yi Sŏ-gu (李瑞求) were to join the Chosun Ilbo now, and his close friend called him Sŏ-gu (瑞求) without saying his family name, Sin Sŏg-u (申錫雨) would prick up his ears in the president's office, wondering who was calling him. This is a pair in name sound.

Kim Ryeo-su (金麗受) and Kim Ryeo-sun (金麗順) also have similar names, so many who only see their names in magazines think they are siblings. However, Kim Ryeo-su (金麗水) is actually the pen name of Park Pal-yang (朴八陽) of the Chosun Ilbo, and Kim Ryeo-sun (金麗順) is the precious daughter of Elder Kim Byŏng-ch'an (金炳贊), who runs the Sinhang Inn (信行旅館).

In the past, there was an Yi Pong-su (李鳳洙) at the Dong-A Ilbo and an Yi Pong-su (李鳳洙) at the Chosun Ilbo, which caused confusion in various matters.

Years ago, coincidentally, both of them went to jail for a communist affair. When their families came to visit or brought items, the guards often mistook them, switching the people for visits or exchanging the items, and then laughing and repeatedly saying, "Thank you!"

In the Higher Common Civil Service Examination (徵文高普), there were three teachers with similar-sounding names: Yi Pyŏng-gyu (李炳奎), Yi Pyŏng-gyu (李炳圭), and Yi Pyŏng-gi (李秉岐). So even among colleagues, they would distinguish them as "Chinese character Yi Pyŏng-gyu (漢文 李炳奎)," "Korean Yi Pyŏng-gyu (國書 李炳奎)," and "Korean Language Yi Pyŏng-gi (朝鮮語 李秉岐)," otherwise, there would often be misunderstandings. These days, Yi Pyŏng-gyu (李炳圭) has transferred to Yangjŏng Higher Common School (養正高普), so such things are less frequent, but when outsiders call, Yi Pyŏng-gyu (李炳奎) and Yi Pyŏng-gi (李秉岐) are sometimes mixed up.

For a while, there was a misunderstanding that the actress Kim Myŏng-sun (金明淳) had become a female writer because the actress Kim Myŏng-sun (金明淳) and the female writer Kim Myŏng-sun (金明淳) had the exact same name.

Similarly, many people mistakenly believed that Hwawŏl Pak Yŏng-hŭi (懷月 朴英熙) was giving a lecture when Kŭn'uhoe member Pak Yŏng-hŭi (槿友會員 朴英熙) did, because they have the same name.

Speaking of having the same name, in the past, there was an Yi Chung-hwa (李重華) at Paejae Higher Common School (培材高普) and an Yi Chung-hwa (李重華) at Chungang Higher Common School (中央高普), so during the spring enrollment season, parents of students applying to Paejae would sometimes mistakenly find the Yi (李) at Chungang and plead with him to get their child admitted, and parents wanting to enroll their children in Chungang would mistakenly find the Yi (李) at Paejae and say the same thing. Furthermore, when there were faculty meetings at each school, they would call the Yi (李) at Paejae "chubby Yi Chung-hwa (뚱뚱한 李重華)" or "blotchy Yi Chung-hwa (얼근 李重華)" to distinguish them. (Yi (李) wasn't actually chubby, but his face was uneven, making it look blotchy). The Yi (李) at Chungang was sometimes called "small Yi Chung-hwa (자근 李重華)."

And because Ch'oe Tu-sŏn (崔斗善) of Chungang Higher Common School (中央高普) and Ch'oe Tu-sŏn (崔斗先), who was at the Chosŏn Farmers' Association (朝鮮農民社), had the exact same sound though one character was different, when Ch'oe Tu-sŏn (崔斗先) went on a business trip to the countryside for the Farmers' Association, people mistook him for the Ch'oe (崔) from Chungang and often asked about news from Chungang High School and stories about Germany.

There are occasional misunderstandings because Attorney Kim Ch'an-yŏng (金璨泳) and Kim Ch'an-yŏng (金燦泳) of Kisinyanghaeng (紀信洋行) have the same sound, and Kim Wŏn-ju (金源珠), who was a reporter at this company, and Kim Wŏn-ju (金元周), the wife of Ha Yun-sil (河允實), not only have the same sound but are also both from Chinnam-p'o (鎭南浦). Because Kim Wŏn-ju (金元周) originally wrote as well, there was a lot of talk for a while that Kim Wŏn-ju (金元周) had joined Kaebyŏksa (개벽사).

Anyone can easily make a mistake over the phone because Kim Tong-hwan (金東煥) of Samch'ŏlli-sa (삼천리사) and Kim Tong-han (金東漢) of the Russian Consulate (露國영사관) have similar sounds.

If newspaper or magazine proofreaders are a little careless, they can completely create different people by making Kim Yŏng-sun (金英順) of Chŏngsin Women's School (貞信여학교) into Kim Sun-yŏng (金順英) and Kim Sun-yŏng (金順英) of Hosuton Women's School in Kaesŏng (開城 호스돈여학교) into Kim Yŏng-sun (金英順).

Hearing only the sounds of Hŏ Chŏng-suk (許貞淑) and Hŏ Yŏng-suk (許英肅), they sound like siblings. Kang Chŏng-hŭi (姜貞熙) and Kang Chŏng-im (姜貞任) of Kŭn'uhoe (槿友會), former Chosun Ilbo reporter Ch'oe Ŭn-hŭi (崔恩喜) and female dancer Ch'oe Sŭng-hŭi (崔承喜), Kim In-sun (金仁順) of Tongdŏk Women's School (東德여교) and Kim Wŏn-[?] (金元@) of the former art school, and Chosun Ilbo reporter Yun Sŏng-sang (尹聖相) and Yun Sŏng-[?] (尹聖@) of Ewha Women's School (梨花여교), judging only by the characters, it would be easy to think they are relatives or siblings.

Nam Sang-ch'an (南相瓚) of Chinmyŏng Girls' High School (進明女高) and Ch'a Sang-ch'an (車相瓚) of this company joke that they are from the same clan with different surnames when they meet because they have the same name.

Because the pen names Yi Ch'un-wŏn (李春園) and Yi Tong-wŏn (李東園) resemble siblings and their writing sometimes appears in the same place, people often think they are siblings, and a certain country person is said to have told Tong-wŏn (東園) that his brothers were "incomparable (不可當)." However, Yi Kwang-su (李光洙) and Yi Il (李一) may be spiritual brothers but not blood brothers.

There are those who know that O Se-ch'ang (吳世昌) and O Yŏng-ch'ang (吾榮昌) are in the Ch'ŏndogyo (천도교) so there are some who think of the two as brothers, and in the past, there were also some who thought of the calligrapher Kwŏn Tong-[?] (權東@) and Kwŏn Tong-jin (權東鎭) as brothers. However, their family lines are different, so there is no relationship.

Some people often ask Pak Tal-sŏng (朴達成) of Sin'in'gan-sa (新人間社) if he is the older brother of Pak Tal-hyŏn (朴達鉉) of the Chosun Ilbo's Ch'unch'ŏn branch.

Because there is a nameplate with the exact same name, Yi Sang-hyŏp (李相協), on Hwadong Street (花洞길가), which is close to the Chungoe Ilbo (中外日報社), some people mistakenly think it is the house of Ha Mong (何夢) and visit it, but in fact, they are completely different people.

Sin Yŏng-ch'ŏl (申塋澈), a student at Shanghai Hujiang University (上海 扈江大學生) (now studying in the United States), has a name that is almost identical to that of Sin Yŏng-ch'ŏl (申塋澈), a former reporter at this company, so friends who know the Sin (申) at this company often send letters to Hujiang University, and friends of the Sin (申) at Hujiang often send letters to the Sin (申) at this company, causing laughter from time to time.

When it was being heavily publicized in the Dong-A Ilbo that Kim Tong-sŏng (金東成) had been dispatched as vice-chairman to the International Journalists' Conference (萬國記者大會), Kim Tong-ch'ŏl (金東轍), a reporter at that company, said that whenever he went somewhere, he was invariably asked if he was Kim Tong-sŏng's (金東成) younger brother, making it very difficult to answer.

Cho Tong-sik (趙東植), the principal of Tongdŏk Girls' School (東德여학교), and Cho Tong-sŏk (趙東奭), a master of Tansuk (短肅), also have the same surname and the character Tong (東), and the sounds of sik (植) and sŏk (奭) are similar. So, people ask the Cho (趙) of Tongdŏk which temple he studied Tansuk (短肅) at, and people also ask Cho Tong-sŏk (趙東奭) about Tongdŏk School.

Nam Sang-ch'an (南相瓚) of Chinmyŏng Girls' High School (進明女高) and Ch'a Sang-ch'an (車相瓚) of this company joke that they are from the same clan with different surnames when they meet because they have the same name.

李春園 and 李東園 are pen names resembling siblings and their writing sometimes appears in the same place, people often think they are siblings, and a certain country person is said to have told Tong-wŏn (東園) that his brothers were "incomparable (不可當)." However, Yi Kwang-su (李光洙) and Yi Il (李一) may be spiritual brothers but not blood brothers.

There are those who know that O Se-ch'ang (吳世昌) and O Yŏng-ch'ang (吾榮昌) are in the Ch'ŏndogyo (천도교) so there are some who think of the two as brothers, and in the past, there were also some who thought of the calligrapher Kwŏn Tong-[?] (權東@) and Kwŏn Tong-jin (權東鎭) as brothers. However, their family lines are different, so there is no relationship.

Some people often ask Pak Tal-sŏng (朴達成) of Sin'in'gan-sa (新人間社) if he is the older brother of Pak Tal-hyŏn (朴達鉉) of the Chosun Ilbo's Ch'unch'ŏn branch.

Because there is a nameplate with the exact same name, Yi Sang-hyŏp (李相協), on Hwadong Street (花洞길가), which is close to the Chungoe Ilbo (中外日報社), some people mistakenly think it is the house of Ha Mong (何夢) and visit it, but in fact, they are completely different people.

Sin Yŏng-ch'ŏl (申塋澈), a student at Shanghai Hujiang University (上海 扈江大學生) (now studying in the United States), has a name that is almost identical to that of Sin Yŏng-ch'ŏl (申塋澈), a former reporter at this company, so friends who know the Sin (申) at this company often send letters to Hujiang University, and friends of the Sin (申) at Hujiang often send letters to the Sin (申) at this company, causing laughter from time to time.

When it was being heavily publicized in the Dong-A Ilbo that Kim Tong-sŏng (金東成) had been dispatched as vice-chairman to the International Journalists' Conference (萬國記者大會), Kim Tong-ch'ŏl (金東轍), a reporter at that company, said that whenever he went somewhere, he was invariably asked if he was Kim Tong-sŏng's (金東成) younger brother, making it very difficult to answer.

Cho Tong-sik (趙東植), the principal of Tongdŏk Girls' School (東德여학교), and Cho Tong-sŏk (趙東奭), a master of Tansuk (短肅), also have the same surname and the character Tong (東), and the sounds of sik (植) and sŏk (奭) are similar. So, people ask the Cho (趙) of Tongdŏk which temple he studied Tansuk (短肅) at, and people also ask Cho Tong-sŏk (趙東奭) about Tongdŏk School.

<123>
<122-123>

**Named Entities**

宋鎭禹	Song Chin-u
宋瑧禹	Song Chinu
東亞日報	Tong-A Ilbo
安在鴻	An Chae-hong
朝鮮日報	Chosun Ilbo
梁在鴻	Yang Chae-hong
天道敎靑年黨	Ch'ŏndogyo Ch'ŏngnyŏndang
金起田	Kim Ki-t’aek
金基鎭	Kim Ki-jin
李瑞求	Yi Sŏ-gu
申錫雨	Sin Sŏg-u
金麗受	Kim Ryeo-su
金麗順	Kim Ryeo-sun
朴八陽	Park Pal-yang
信行旅館	Sinhang Inn
金炳贊	Kim Byŏng-ch'an
李鳳洙	Yi Pong-su
徵文高普	Civil Service Examination
李炳奎	Yi Pyŏng-gyu
李炳圭	Yi Pyŏng-gyu
李秉岐	Yi Pyŏng-gi
養正高普	Yangjŏng Higher Common School
金明淳	Kim Myŏng-sun
懷月 朴英熙	Hwawŏl Pak Yŏng-hŭi
槿友會員 朴英熙	Kŭn'uhoe member Pak Yŏng-hŭi
培材高普	Paejae Higher Common School
李重華	Yi Chung-hwa
中央高普	Chungang Higher Common School
崔斗善	Ch'oe Tu-sŏn
朝鮮農民社	Chosŏn Farmers' Association
崔斗先	Ch'oe Tu-sŏn
金璨泳	Kim Ch'an-yŏng
紀信洋行	Kisinyanghaeng
金燦泳	Kim Ch'an-yŏng
金源珠	Kim Wŏn-ju
河允實	Ha Yun-sil
金元周	Kim Wŏn-ju
鎭南浦	Chinnam-p'o
개벽사	Kaebyŏksa
삼천리사	Samch'ŏlli-sa
金東煥	Kim Tong-hwan
露國영사관	Russian Consulate
金東漢	Kim Tong-han
貞信여학교	Chŏngsin Women's School
金英順	Kim Yŏng-sun
開城 호스돈여학교	Kaesŏng Hosuton Women's School
金順英	Kim Sun-yŏng
許貞淑	Hŏ Chŏng-suk
許英肅	Hŏ Yŏng-suk
姜貞熙	Kang Chŏng-hŭi
姜貞任	Kang Chŏng-im
崔恩喜	Ch'oe Ŭn-hŭi
崔承喜	Ch'oe Sŭng-hŭi
東德여교	Tongdŏk Women's School
金仁順	Kim In-sun
金元	Kim Wŏn
尹聖相	Yun Sŏng-sang
梨花여교	Ewha Women's School
尹聖	Yun Sŏng
進明女高	Chinmyŏng Girls' High School
南相瓚	Nam Sang-ch'an
車相瓚	Ch'a Sang-ch'an
李春園	Yi Ch'un-wŏn
李東園	Yi Tong-wŏn
李光洙	Yi Kwang-su
李一	Yi Il
천도교	Ch'ŏndogyo
吳世昌	O Se-ch'ang
吾榮昌	O Yŏng-ch'ang
權東	Kwŏn Tong
權東鎭	Kwŏn Tong-jin
新人間社	Sin'in'gan-sa
朴達成	Pak Tal-sŏng
朝鮮日報 춘천지국	Chosun Ilbo's Ch'unch'ŏn branch
朴達鉉	Pak Tal-hyŏn
中外日報社	Chungoe Ilbo
花洞길가	Hwadong Street
何夢	Ha Mong
李相協	Yi Sang-hyŏp
上海 扈江大學生	Shanghai Hujiang University
申塋澈	Sin Yŏng-ch'ŏl
金東成	Kim Tong-sŏng
萬國記者大會	International Journalists' Conference
金東轍	Kim Tong-ch'ŏl
趙東植	Cho Tong-sik
東德여학교	Tongdŏk Girls' School
趙東奭	Cho Tong-sŏk
短肅	Tansuk



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	京城 五十八雙童錄
기사형태	잡저

京城 五十八雙童錄

여러분! 雙童이라고 하엿다고 꼭 同胎兄弟의 쌍동이로만 오해하지 마십시오 여긔에 상동이란 것은 동태쌍동이가 안이라 姓名이 비슷한이만 모와서 이름을 짓자니 쌍동이라 한 것입니다.장성하시고 점잔으신 여러분을 쌍동이란 것이 실례이지만은 鶴髮童顔이란 녯말도 잇스닛가 신년축어로만 드러주시면 감사하겟습니다.(觀相者)

宋鎭禹씨와 宋瑧禹씨는 근본이 아주 달러서 무슨 친족관계가 업지만은 宋瑧禹씨가 만일 동아일보에 입사를 한다면 그 성명이 비슷한 것으로 보와서 宋瑧禹씨를 宋鎭禹씨의 동생이 안이면 혹은 건건찝질한 먼寸일가라도 되는 줄로 오해하는 사람이 잇흘것이오

조선일보 安在鴻씨가 동아일보사에 잇던지 동아일보 梁在鴻씨가 조선일보에 잇던지 두분이 그럿케 만일 한 社에 잇게 된다면 그야말로 梁在鴻=兩在鴻=이름字로 쌍동-

天道敎靑年黨
金起田씨와 조선일보 金基鎭씨는 성명을 써놋코 보면 아모 관계가 업지만는 음이 비슷한 까닭에 엇던 會席에 가티 출석을 하면 點名을 할때 서로 네-소리를 하고는 웃는다 이는 姓名音으로 雙童格.

올치 李瑞求씨와 申錫雨씨는 성명이 아주 딴판이지만은 음으로 錫雨와 瑞求가 비슷한 까닭에 李瑞求씨가 지금에 만일 조선일보에 입사를 하야 그의 친한 친구가 그의 性을 불르지 안코 그양 瑞求하고 불르면 申錫雨씨는 나를 누가 불르지나 안나하고 사장실에서 귀를 기우릴것이다. 이는 이름의 음으로 쌍동

金麗受씨와 金麗順씨는 성명이 또한 비슷한 까닭에 잡지상에서 이름만 본이는 꼭 男妹로 아는 사람이 만타. 그러나 실상 金麗水는 조선일보 朴八陽씨의 號요. 金麗順은 信行旅館하는 金炳贊 장로의 귀동따님이다.

전날 동아일보사에도 李鳳洙가 잇고 조선일보에도 李鳳洙가 잇서서 무슨일에나 각금 혼동되는 일이잇섯다.
그런데 년전에 공교하게도 두 분이 또 가티 공산당사건으로 감옥에 드러갓삿는데 그 가족이 면회를 가거나 혹은 무슨 差入가튼것이 잇스면 간수들이 각금 오해를 하야 사람을 박궈서 면회를 식히거나 물품을 박귀주고 나서는 웃고 연해 「고맛다나!」소리를 쳣다고 한다.

徵文高普에는 李炳奎, 李炳圭, 李秉岐 音相似한 선생이 세분이 잇기때문에 가튼 직원간에도 한문 李炳奎, 國書 李炳奎-朝鮮語 李秉岐-이럿케 구분하야 부르지 안으면 각금 오해되는 일이 잇섯다. 요새에는 李炳圭씨가 養正高普로 전근을 하얏기 때문에 그런 일이 좀 적지만은 박게 사람이 전화를 할때에는 李炳奎씨와 李秉岐씨가 각금 혼합되는 일이 잇다고 한다.

여배우 金明淳과 여류문인 金明淳씨가 성명이 꼭 가튼 까닭에 한참동안은 여류문인이 여배우가 되엿다고 오해한 일도 잇섯다.

懷月 朴英熙씨와 槿友會員 朴英熙씨 역시 동성명이기때문에 근우회 박씨가 무슨 강연을 한다면 꼭 懷月이 하는 줄로 誤信하는 사람이 만타.

가튼 성명말이 낫스니 말이지 전날 培材高普에도 李重華가 잇고 中央高普에도 李重華가 잇기 때문에 춘기 입학시기가 되면 배재에 지원하는 학생의 학부형이 각금 中央의 이씨를 차저서 꼭 입학식혀 달나고 請하는 일도 잇고 中央에 입학 원하는 학생의 학부형이 培材의 이씨를 잘못차저 그런 말을 하는 일이 잇섯다. 그뿐아니라 각 학교교원회가튼 것이 잇슬때에는 서로 구별하기 위하야 培材 이씨더러는 뚱뚱한 李重華 또는 얼근 李重華라 하고 (이씨는 실상 억지 안엇지만 얼골이 웃툴두툴하야 얼근것 가틈으로 하는 말이다) 중앙의 이씨는 더러는 자근 李重華라고 하얏다.

그리고 中央高普의 崔斗善씨와 朝鮮農民社에 잇던 崔斗先씨는 글자가 한자 다르지만은 音이 꼭가튼 까닭에 崔斗先씨가 農民社 일로 지방에 출장을 가면 그를 중앙의 최씨로 알고 각금 중앙고보의 소식과 독일의 이약이를 뭇는 일이잇다.

변호사 金璨泳씨와 紀信洋行 金燦泳씨와도 음이 갓기때문에 각금 착오생기는 일이 잇고 본사 여기자로 잇던 金源珠씨와 河允實씨 부인된 金元周씨는 음이 가틀 뿐 안이라 가튼 鎭南浦 태생에다 金元周씨는 원래 글도 쓰고 하닛가 한참동안 金元周가 개벽사에 입사하엿다는 말이 만히 잇섯다.

삼천리사 金東煥씨와 露國영사관 金東漢씨가 음이 비슷한 까닭에 전화로는 누구나 誤錯하기가 쉽고.

貞信여학교 金英順씨와 開城 호스돈여학교의 金順英씨는 신문이나 잡지 교정 보는 사람들이 조금 부주의하면 貞信 김씨를 金順英 호스돈 김씨를 金英順으로 하야 아주 딴사람을 맨드러 논는다.

許貞淑씨와 許英肅씨를 음으로만 드르면 형제갓고 槿友會의 姜貞熙씨와 姜貞任씨, 전조선일보 여기자 崔恩喜씨와 여류무용가 崔承喜양, 동덕여교의 金仁順씨와 전미술학교 金元@씨, 조선일보 여기자 尹聖相씨와 이화여교의 尹聖@양은 글자만 보면 구@나 형제로 알기 쉬울것이다.

進明女高 南相瓚씨와 본사 車相瓚씨는 이름이 갓기때문에 서로 만나면 성 다른 일가라고 弄을 하고.

李春園과 李東園은 호가 형제와 가고 글도 가튼 지면에 나는 일이 각금 잇스니까 꼭 형제로 알고 엇던 시골 사람이 東園을 보고 先生家兄弟는 不可當이라고 한 일이 잇섯다고 한다. 그러나 李光洙씨와 李一씨는 性靈형제는 될지몰나도 육신형제는 안이다.

천도교에는 吳世昌과 吾榮昌씨가 잇기 때문에 그 두분을 형제로 아는 이가 더러잇고 전날 書家 權東@씨와 權東鎭씨를 또 형제로 아는 이도 혹 잇다. 그러나 家閥이 서로 달너서 아모 관계가 업고.

新人間社 朴達成씨더러 조선일보 춘천지국 朴達鉉씨의 형님이 안이냐고 각금 뭇는 사람도 잇다.

中外日報社와 거리가 각가운 花洞길가에는 何夢 이름과 꼭가튼 李相協이란 문패가 잇기 때문에 흔이는 그 집을 何夢집으로 알고 차저가는 사람이 잇스나 사실은 아주 천부당만부당의 딴 사람이다.

上海 扈江大學生(지금은 미국유학云) 申塋澈군은 전날 본사기자 申塋澈씨와 성명이 조금 틀림업는 까닭에 본사 신씨를 아는 친구가 扈江대학으로 편지하는 일도 만코 扈江 申씨의 친구가 본사 申씨에게 편지하는 일도 잇서서 각금 웃는 일이 잇섯다.

金東成씨가 萬國記者大會에 부회장으로 파견되엿다고 한참 동아일보에서 떠둘때에 그 社 기자 金東轍씨가 어듸를 가면 의례히 金東成씨의 弟씨냐고 물어서 대답하기가 퍽 곤란한 때가 잇섯다고 한다.

동덕여학교장 趙東植씨와 短肅名手 趙東奭군도 또한 성과 東자가 가틀뿐만 안이라 植과 奭의 음도 비슷한 까닭에 동덕 조씨를 보고 어느 절에 短肅공부를 그리하얏느냐고 뭇는 사람도 잇고 또 趙東奭군을 보고 同德敎이약이를 뭇는 사람도 잇다고 한다.<123>
<122-123>