잡지명	別乾坤 第36號
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	今年에 出獄할 人物들 (People to be Released from Prison This Year)
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellany)

People to be Released from Prison This Year

Chŏng Paek, who had lost his freedom due to the M L Party incident and had been living a prison life of many years, through preliminary examination, trial, or imprisonment, will be the first to receive the New Year's blessings, as he will be released on January 7th. His wife, in his hometown of Ch'ŏrwŏn, must be waiting with rice cake soup, longing for him.

Ri Chŏng-yun, who shared the same ideology as Chŏng Paek, belonged to the same Seoul faction, and entered prison due to the same incident, longing for his comrades and family for a long time, will also be released on January 7th along with Chŏng. Truly, they are brothers born in the same prison, on the same day, and in the same year (獄中生兄弟).

Kim Ch'ang-su, who was imprisoned with his uncle Ch'ŏn-su, as a counterpart to the two above-mentioned, due to the same incident, will also be released on this day, leaving his longing uncle behind. If we consider the time in prison as being in the womb, Ri, who is coming out before his uncle, might actually become the older brother.

Kim Yo-su, who was imprisoned for the first communist party incident, will be released on June 6th of Showa 6 (1931), a day easy for everyone to remember. Since the date is easy to remember, many comrades will likely come to welcome him.

Yu Chin-hŭi, who was involved in the first communist party incident and received a four-year sentence, working as a forced laborer in the prison factory, will be released in mid-February of this year.

Sŏ T'ae-sŏk, who was also imprisoned for the first incident and was famous for his good health and diligent study of Russian in prison, will be released in late October of this year.

Ri Yŏng, an elder of the Seoul faction, was imprisoned in the same incident as Pak Hyŏng-pyŏng, but because his sentence was shorter than Pak's, he will be released in July of this year. <134>

**Named Entities**

鄭柏	Chŏng Paek
M L당	M L Party
鐵原	Ch'ŏrwŏn
李廷允	Ri Chŏng-yun
金昌洙	Kim Ch'ang-su
金千洙	Kim Ch'ŏn-su
金若水	Kim Yo-su
昭和	Shōwa
兪鎭熙	Yu Chin-hŭi
徐邰錫	Sŏ T'ae-sŏk
李英	Ri Yŏng
朴衡秉	Pak Hyŏng-pyŏng



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	今年에 出獄할 人物들
기사형태	잡저

今年에 出獄할 人物들
鄭柏 M L당 사건으로 신체의 자유를 일어 預審으로 공판으로 또는 복역으로 만흔 星霜의 철창생활을 하던 鄭柏 - 누구보다도 신년의 새복을 먼저마저 1월 7일이면 만기출옥을 하게 된다. 鐵原鄕邸에서 그리우고 그리우던 그의 부인은 아마 떡국을 끄러놋코 기다릴 듯.

李廷允
鄭柏과 주의도 갓고 가튼 서울파요 事件아지가튼 사건에 드러가서 오래동안 철창에서 여러 동지와 가족을 그리워 하던 李廷允도 또한 1월 7일에 鄭과 가티 나오게 된다. 그야말로 동년동원동일 獄中生兄弟.

金昌洙 右의 두분과 가튼 사건으로 그의 伯씨 천洙와 쌍벽으로 入獄한 金昌洙도 그리운 형을 남겨두고 또한 이날에 나온다. 옥중을 胎中과 가티 본다면 伯씨보다 먼저 나오는 李씨는 도로혀 형이 될듯.

金若水 제일차 공산당사건으로 입감되엿던 金若水는 昭和6년 6월 6일 누구나 기억하기 쉬운 날에 나오다. 날짜 기억이 쉬우닛가 同志의 出迎도 만켓지

兪鎭熙 제1차 공산당 사건에 드러가 남 유달이 4개년 중형을 밧고 감옥공장에서 공천으로 잡역이 되얏던 兪鎭熙는 금년 2월 중순에 나온다.

徐邰錫 역시 제1차사건으로 입옥되야 신체건강하기로 유명하고 露語공부 열심하기로 옥중에서 명성이 자자하던 徐邰錫도 금년 10월 하순에 출옥된다.
李英 서울파의 원로 李英- 朴衡秉과 가튼 사건으로 드러갓스나 형기가 朴보다 짜른 까닭에 금년 7월이면 또 만기가 된다고. <134>
<134-134>