잡지명 別건곤 제36호
발행일 1931년 01월 01일
기사제목 넌센스 本位, 無題目座談會, 本社社員끼리의 (Nonsense Based, Untitled Roundtable Discussion, Among Our Company Staff)
기사형태 대담·좌담 (Dialogue/Roundtable Discussion)

Chae: If we have serious talk, this roundtable will fail.
Pak: We need to tickle Cha's forehead to get the conversation going.
Fang: What is the most bizarre thing in Korea right now?
Ch'oe: Gender issues.
Chae: That’s erotic.
Fang: To some extent, yes.
Chae: If you're looking for the grotesque, it's in haunted house stories...? But because modern Koreans generally have little interest in the grotesque or bizarre, they don't welcome haunted houses as grotesque, but rather feel fear and aversion due to traditional customs...
Fang: Then, instead of just talking about haunted houses from a journalistic perspective, let's just talk about it generally...
Pak: There are many stories about goblins and ghosts.
Chae: Anyway, if we're looking for the grotesque now, that's all we'll find.
Pak: There's a really strange ghost story... Hong No-sŏng said it's a direct and unquestionable story... At Hong No-sŏng’s cousin's maternal home, a young woman who was engaged to be married died, and she came out to the house every evening! <136>
Fang: Which house?
Pak: Her own house... wearing a red jacket and a blue skirt - dressed just like a bride, and then...
Yi: What's “sal”?
Pak: You don’t know “sal”?
Cha: You mean rice.
Pak: Yeah, yeah. (Barely) She comes out from behind the rice bin and laughs "Haha," and apparently, it's not just one or two people who see her, but everyone in the house. She goes around laughing "Haha" and playing all sorts of pranks. But she is apparently very afraid of her older brother. So, when her older brother scolds and yells at her, she goes up to the pine tree behind the house and laughs "Haha."
Fang: So you can see her whole body - even her feet?
Pak: Yes. She only plays pranks and doesn't say anything meaningful? Like she has no complaints...?
Pak: Nothing... But because the family was so bothered, they went to a fortune teller, and the fortune teller said that a ghost was attached to the pine tree...
So, they chopped down the pine tree, but now she sits on the stump and still laughs "Haha"...
All: Haha...
Pak: But the stranger thing is, when her older brother scolds and yells at her, she says, "I'm going to my younger brother's house," and goes to her brother's house in Kama-gol, which isn't far away, where they make cauldrons. Every time she goes, the cauldron explodes, and people die.
Ch'oe: Where do people die?
Pak: Did No-sŏng witness it directly?
Pak: No.
Cha: I have a similar story. There was a well near Pak-tong – on the way to Chungang High School… Well, it happened a long time ago, when I was in technical school… The well is gone now… But whenever a drunk person passed by the well!
Fang: You can’t trust the words of a drunk person?
Cha: No, it happened not only to drunk people but to sober people too… When people passed by on dark nights, a Koguryo (old kingdom in Korea) woman would be sitting there with a table of drinks, laughing and saying seductively, "Have a drink before you go." If you were lured in, the next day, a corpse would be floating in the well...
Fang: Then, everyone who experienced that would have died. So, who is telling the detailed story of the scene?
Cha: Well, a cousin of my friend from Poseong Professional School (普專) experienced it and almost died after falling into the well, but he was saved. <137>
Yi: I remember. When I was in elementary school, I saw someone fall into that well and die.
Fang: But everyone has a preconceived notion about well ghosts, so if even two people fall into a well and die, from then on, anyone who passes by will feel like a ghost is coming out, and they will be under self-hypnosis.
Ch'oe: (Hastily) That’s right. But I witnessed something with my own eyes.
Pak: What?
Ch'oe: Listen. When I was going to elementary school in Suwon, it was spring. I think it was around March... The weather was very... (Struggling) good. In such weather, the roofs of Korean thatched houses look strangely grayish-green. So, I was walking along, looking at it, and suddenly smoke burst out from the middle of the roof, and flames erupted, and soon a fire the size of a cushion was burning. Surprised, I shouted, "Fire!" and ran over, and the people in the house were also yelling, "Fire!"
Fang: In the daytime?
Ch'oe: Yes!
Fang: Were there any children in the house?
Ch'oe: There were no children, but there was a young, childless wife. But she wasn't home that day... But what was strange was that it was the twelfth fire that had broken out in that house that day. I was so curious that I climbed onto the roof and looked for the source of the fire, but I couldn't find any matches or scraps of paper.
Pak: But ghosts are either someone's delusion, or the person telling the story is adding strange details to make it more interesting.
Ch'oe: That’s true too. This also happened in Suwon. You know how they say goblins throw dirt and sand?
Cha: There are many stories like that.
Ch'oe: But it was actually a prank by a person, more specifically, a woman.
Fang: A woman?
Ch'oe: Yes, a young woman!
Fang: How old?
Ch'oe: Of marriageable age... She didn't just throw it once or twice, but every night, she would scatter dirt everywhere, and even though it was scary, the people in the house examined the scattered dirt carefully and saw that there were shells hidden behind the kitchen. Also, the dirt near there was very damp. It was that dirt and those shells. So, they investigated the direction she was throwing it for three or four days, and it turned out that a young woman living two or three houses away was doing it. <138>
Fang: That's not just a normal prank. There must be a reason.
Chae: For a young woman of marriageable age to play goblin pranks in a place where many men gather, there must be something behind it...
Cha: But we can't just assume it was malicious.
Fang: No, if it was just a meaningless prank, a woman wouldn't continue doing it persistently for three or four days and would quickly hint at the discovery to others.
Cha: It could be that the young woman was curious because men were gathering and doing things in that house. Or she might have been playing pranks out of jealousy... There was an incident where a married woman was having an affair in a remote house in the mountains, and another man, not her husband, threw a stone that hit the door. The man in the house thought her husband had come and died of shock on the spot...
Fang: (To Sŏng) Are there any stories about metal ghosts in Chinju?
Sŏng: I don’t know.
Fang: Some say that goblins are the creation of children's story writers. Since children's story writers can't find human beings who match their ideals, they create an ideal superhuman called a goblin and realize their ideals as children's story writers through it. That's why the goblins in children's stories are good at playing pranks, but they are never evil.
Chae: There are good goblins and bad goblins. Bad goblins are bad guys, and good goblins are good guys. So, if you meet a bad goblin, you become rich... Once upon a time, a widow married a bad goblin, and he brought her so many treasures and money that she suddenly became rich. Do you think she would want to live with him for a long time? So, one evening, she asked the goblin in bed, "What are you most afraid of in the world?" He said, "I'm most afraid of white horse blood." So, the next day, the widow caught a white horse, sprinkled its blood in all directions, put on the blood-soaked white horsehide, and sat down. When the goblin groom came that night and saw it, he was so surprised that he ran away. He ran away to the back mountain, sat with his legs stretched out, and said, "Oh, people of the world, don't tell your inner thoughts even if you're in love with your spouse. Don't tell your inner thoughts!" Then he said he would take away the rice paddies he had bought for her, and he hammered stakes into the corners of the paddies and chanted some words.
All: Hahaha!
Fang: Anyway, goblins are cute. To show off their talent, they put a pot lid in the pot and laugh "Haha" when people struggle to take it out.
Cha: Are goblins old dishrags or broken rain covers?
Sŏng: Don’t they say ghosts need to be smeared with blood? <139>
Fang/Pak: That story is everywhere!
Cha: That’s about goblins, not ghosts!
(At this point, some began to eat a snack.)
Cha: (Looking at them eating) Can't you live without eating?
Yi (Hak): You can't live without eating!
Cha: Well, there are more people who eat than people who starve to death... They say adults starve to death in famine, but children die full.
Fang: He's just saying that because he wants to eat.
Yi: (To Chae) Do you want to spit in your saliva and eat?
Chae: Why? Do you want to eat more?
Ch'oe: Ch'oe Chin-sun of Chungdong School is the best at spitting in his saliva when he eats!
Fang: Saliva must be a panacea... Even a small boil heals if you just apply saliva, right? Maybe in the future, when washing your face in the morning, you can collect the saliva scraped off your toothbrush and send it to a plaster company.
Cha: That’s when you’ll give an injection (注射) with saliva (唾).
All: Haha!
(After the snack ended)
Ch'oe: Were there no bathhouses in old Korea?
Fang: What do you mean were there bathhouses? Of course, there weren't.
Cha: Did women only bathe once a year?
Fang: They always bathed on ancestral rites day.
Pak: I've never seen a village woman bathe.
Ch'oe: How many women do you know?
Cha: I know two for sure... My mother, whom I've known since birth, and Mrs. In-gwi (Pak No-a's wife)... Oh, and there's another one, K'ap'iya... Do you know K'ap'iya? It means "Avoidable".
All: Hahahaha!
Fang: Pluck out all the people who just make jokes!
Ch'oe: Is there a collection of old Korean torture instruments? Those were on display at the recent exhibition.
Fang: Oh, right - the Hwanghae Province. Why is it that the daughters of that family were said to be unable to marry and grew old because their husbands would die within 3 years? How did it end?
Yi: I heard that many people applied for marriage through the township office.
Cha: I heard that Pae Sang-ch'ŏl, who writes about physiognomy for our Byŏlgŏn’gon, also applied.
Fang: So, what happened after that?
Yi: They say the family of the woman says it's a lie that they guarantee the life of the man who marries their daughter. Instead, they all refused marriage, saying they couldn't kill someone to trick someone's daughter.
Cha: If that's true, it would be great if there were thousands of such women!
Fang: Why?
Cha: If you gathered only such women and sent them to the country of your hated enemy to marry or set up a brothel, wouldn't that be more effective than using guns?
All: Big laugh! <140>
Fang: It's like Ch'ŏng-o style is coming out.
Pak: Those words are Ch'ŏng-o's trademark.
Fang: Let's turn the topic to current events... For example, why is the meal fee for female students lower than the meal fee for male students? Isn't that strange?
Yi (Hak): Someone said that they use more water, so they should pay more.
Fang: What exactly is the reason for charging female students less for meals?
Pak: They eat less, and they're all the same gender inside, so there's less formality, right?
Cha: There’s also sympathy.
Chae: That conceptual reason of sympathy doesn't hold.
Fang: Is it because they are quieter than male students?
Cha: Ha! Female students who are dating are louder because their boyfriends come to visit them!
Fang: Do they eat less?
Yi: No way!
Fang: Female students snack a lot. Mr. Sŏng, you probably know?
Sŏng: They eat a lot. They actually eat a lot of rice too.
Fang: No, I don't mean women who have children.
Sŏng: (Smiling) Male students sometimes skip meals because they go out, but female students eat every meal, and because they are close to other women, they can eat whenever they are hungry, so they end up eating more rice.
Fang: They definitely use a lot of water. And when you see them fussing with charcoal fires, it's scary how quickly they pull out their irons.
Cha: That's not all... You can give male students leftover side dishes, but you can't do that with female students because you know what's inside...
Fang: So, is there a way to go beyond the simple relationship of buying and selling meals between female students and boarding house owners and have them supervise the female students' lives on behalf of their parents in the countryside? For example, if male students visit their favorite female students all the time, it interferes with their studies, and those irresponsible men only try to gain favor by talking about actors, playing Hwatu (Korean card game), and luring them to see movies. In such cases, wouldn't it be good if the owner could send them away or refuse visits?
Pak: But if the female students accept such supervision willingly, it would be fine, but if they dislike it, they could just move to another boarding house.
Fang: Even so, wouldn't it be good if the general atmosphere of the boarding house was like that?
Pak: But in some cases, female students bribe the owner with money.
Fang: Those are exceptions.
Pak: In the end, it’s best to leave it up to the female students' own awareness. <141>
Cha: A certain parent asked someone in Seoul to supervise his daughter, but the young woman disliked being supervised by that person and slandered him... She wrote a letter to her father saying that he was using the money she received from the countryside and teaching her bad things...
Fang: A female school teacher went to a female student's boarding house, lay down, and even ate the food that the student was eating...
Cha: A certain female school principal visited female students day and night and asked them to buy her cold noodles to eat, so she even got the nickname "Cold Noodle Teacher."
Fang: By the way, do female students snack more than male students?
Pak: Because they know that, if a male student visits a female student, they will usually bring snacks.
Fang: That's because they're being treated, so it's not a problem, but anyway, they snack a lot. The types of snacks include sweet potatoes, soybeans, and hotteok (Korean pancake).
Sŏng: They don't eat hotteok anymore.
Fang: No way!
Pak: Hotteok is insulting.
Ch'oe: It's true, so what's insulting about it?
Fang: No, they eat a lot of hotteok. If it's a bit more high-end, it's chocolate ice cream.
Pak: Male students go out and enter hotteok shops, so it seems like they eat a lot, but female students sit inside and have it delivered, so it doesn't seem like they eat as much.
Fang: Anyway, women don't like to keep their mouths shut.
Cha: Women are useless because they only consume. Men work hard and buy rice, which they cook and get rid of, and if they buy firewood, they burn it, and if they bring fabric, they cut it up to make clothes.
Pak: That’s an old-fashioned saying.
Cha: Old or new, it's still true.
Ch'oe: Mr. Sŏn, aren't you protesting?
Fang: Leave it alone. If you refute a joke, the person making it will be upset!
Cha: You should have surrendered sooner!
Fang: That’s right! ... By the way, female students snack in the classroom. If the teacher's lecture is boring, the student in front writes a letter to the student in the back saying, "Hey, send me some chocolate."
All: Hahahaha!
Sŏng: If the professor is bad, it really gets boring.
Sŏng: When a young teacher comes to a girls' school, they just look at the ceiling or outside while lecturing, so you can't ask questions.
All: Hahahaha!
Cha: That's great... Even if you're uneducated, as long as you're young, you can be a teacher at a girls' school.
Fang: There is someone who has a crooked neck because she has been a teacher at a girls' school for eight years. Because she looks at the ceiling and the windows day and night while giving lectures!
Cha: There's nothing to look at if you look at the ceiling in a second-floor classroom. <142>
All: (Big laugh)
Fang: Listen to what they're saying again.
Chae: It's definitely 100% grotesque.
Fang: Yu Ok-sŏn is incredibly popular among female students, right? Because she lectures well.
Chae: Now he's gone, but No Wŏn-jŏng was popular at Chungang University. His teaching skills were very skillful, and he spoke entertainingly.
Ch'oe: Kim Tong-hyŏk of Paejae was also very famous as 'Tiger Dung'.
Chae: When I first entered Chungang High School, Yi Chung-hwa was talking about washing school uniforms... "There is a clear stream on the back mountain of our Chungang. On Sundays, pack a lunch, buy just 2 jeon worth of soap, take a book, and go up to the back mountain... Then, wash your uniform with the soap you brought, lightly starch it... Spread it out on the lawn, lie down next to it, look at the blue sky, listen to the birds, think, and read a book. While you're doing that, eat lunch when it's noon... Then, when it gets dark, your clothes will be dry... Wear them and come down... Don't give them to the laundryman, no, no..." And about snacking, he said, "...If you're bored, it's good to come out to the front and buy a piece of candy... But don't always, always eat snacks..."
Cha: (Looking at Pak) Your uncle, Pak Chung-hwa, was also famous... His nickname was "One-Second Accident"... Once, during an exam, they put all the desks in the playground to prevent cheating, and everyone was sitting there writing their answers... A student named Na Wan was trying to trick him by looking at something in his left hand while writing his answers. So, he ran over and grabbed the student's left wrist tightly and shouted, "Open your fist!" But the student acted innocent and said, "Why are you doing this? It's time to hand in the exam." "Don't talk back, open it." "Why are you doing this?" "Open it!"... When he opened his hand, it was empty.
All: (Big laugh)
Fang: When I think of Wŏn-dal, I still laugh... Or rather, what should I say... He just graduated from school and started lecturing at Poseong Professional School, and the students had all prepared new notebooks because he was talented and famous. But the first thing he said was "Gakkuno kodoku..." (Japanese: solitude of the study desk) and recited the book like he was memorizing it. The students were dumbfounded... Then, a student in the back asked, "Teacher, what does 'gakkuno kodoku' mean?" He realized he had failed and his face turned red, and he never regained his composure after that.
Ch'oe: Yi Chung-hwa of Baejae was also famous.
Cha: All three Chung-hwas were famous.
Pak: We had the Chinese teacher in our hands, but he was originally a bit ignorant, so if a school inspector came, he would memorize it in advance... So, when the inspector came to observe, he would say, "So-and-so, stand up and read what we are learning today," and he would read it perfectly. Because there was such a secret, if our grades were a bit bad, we would quietly meet the teacher, look him straight in the eye, and say, "Teacher, why were my grades bad this semester?" Then he would say, "Huh? Really? Then let's see next semester." And sure enough, our grades would be very good the next semester.
Cha: It's also a famous story that Yu Il-sŏn went into the classroom alone and solved a geometry problem on the first day of the lunar new year because the students didn't come, and then put it on the next exam.
Fang: It's also famous that when Yŏ Kyu-hyŏng was teaching Chinese at the First High School, a student drew a liquor table and a gisaeng (Korean female entertainer) on his exam paper and was expelled.
Cha: We've talked about student teachers, so now let's talk about gisaengs, since it's a three-lives connection.
Fang: Here it comes again... Is there anything bizarre or funny to talk about?
Pak: Koreans don't see such pranks as pranks, so they don't do them, and they're afraid to do them.
Fang: The Japanese competitively writing doorplates out of order is definitely a grotesque hobby... For Koreans, Yi Sŏ-gu using a Pyongyang photo from Yongampo during a fire is a brilliant prank.
Sŏng: In the female students' dormitory, they prank by blowing cigarette smoke through the gaps in the doors.
Pak: Shall we talk about "alcohol"?
Fang: Ch'ŏng-o's specialty is going to Chinkogae (a red light district) and breaking streetlights when he's drunk, right?
Cha: That's old news.
Chae: About stories about being drunk, Kim K'wa-baek of the Donga Ilbo has a great anecdote... This person got very drunk and went home to sleep, but he must have been thirsty because he clapped his hands and called out, "Hey boy, hey boy." He must have thought he was in a restaurant. But his father (who has now passed away), who was sleeping in the next room, woke up and opened the door and said, "Who is this kid calling?" And listen to this person, he yelled, "Hey boy, bring me a glass of cold water!"
All: Hahahaha...
Cha: It's also famous that Yŏm Sang-sŏp went to the British Consulate drunk.
Fang: That's truly an international drunken episode.
Cha: He got so drunk that he didn't know what he was doing, and for some reason, he took a rickshaw to the British Consulate that night and knocked on the door. So, the person at the gate came out and asked who he was, and he demanded a glass of cold water.
Pak: The other day, Yi Ŭn-sang got drunk and came with Sŏ Hae supporting him and lay down on the muddy ground, saying, "Let's rest for a bit, let's rest for a bit," and then he lay down... He said, "Ah, it's cool, it's good," in a rhythmical way.
Cha: Once, I woke up late at night and the moon was very bright, so I came out to the front of the door and saw someone grabbing Yi Chung-hwa's trash can and standing there bent over, saying, "Chung-hwa, Chung-hwa." When I went closer, it was Kim Sŏng-su, who was so drunk that he didn't know what he was doing, and he was looking for Yi Chung-hwa, grabbing the trash can.
All: (Big laugh)
Chae: The other day, Sŏ Ch'un was telling a story at a roundtable discussion... He said he had been drinking at Cafe Peppie. He went home and slept, but when he woke up the next day, he felt like he had made a big mistake, but no matter how much he thought, he couldn't remember... So, he asked the taxi company, but the taxi company said they hadn't taken him, and he asked Peppie, but they said he hadn't made any mistakes... But he still wasn't relieved, so he went to Peppie again the next day and asked, and the people there said that for the sake of their business, they didn't call a taxi that Sŏ often used but called another one... So, he unknowingly took a taxi and told the driver to come back tomorrow to get paid, but the driver refused and took him to the nearby police station... Sŏ entered the police station and urinated, and the police officer was so dumbfounded that he laughed.
All: (Big laugh)
Chae: So, the police officer asked why he didn't pay the taxi fare, and he took out his wallet from his pocket and showed that there was no money. Then a business card fell out. So, the police officer picked up the business card and looked at it and said, "This person is the editor-in-chief of the Donga Ilbo, so he wouldn't not pay the taxi fare," and scolded the driver and told him to take him back... At that time, the driver was so embarrassed that he dropped him off quickly and didn't even come to get the taxi fare for two days. Only after two days did he go to Peppie and tell the story, so Sŏ finally learned that such a thing had happened.
Cha: Hyŏn Chin-gŏn takes off his shoes and runs away when he's drunk... Sometimes he even takes off his suit.
Pak: Sŭng-bin smashes dishes when he's drunk... It's fun to see a woman drunk.
Pak: Disgusting!
Fang: She pees her pants.
Chae: Mr. Sŏng, have you ever seen someone drunk?
Sŏng: I've never been drunk. I once drank a glass of beer and got scolded.
Fang: A friend of Hong Sŏng-sa named Kim gets naked after drinking only three glasses... He says that's when the alcohol tastes good!
Cha: Like Paek Tae-jin!
Pak: I just sleep when I'm drunk... Mansik, you cry when you're drunk, right?
Chae: That's an old story.
Cha: I once paid 5 won for a rickshaw when I was drunk.
Fang: Cho Nam-hŭi is also famous for counting soju bottles.
Chae: Pak Ch'an-hŭi of the Donga Ilbo doesn't say anything when he's drunk and hits the window with a soju bottle from time to time.
Fang: Once, I was walking down the street with Cho Chae-ho, and because there was a car in front of him, he hung on to the back of it. As the car went ttururu-, he was clinging to it like a child with his big height.
All: (Big laugh)
Fang: As we followed him, we kept saying, "Fall off, fall off," and he fell off and was so embarrassed.
All: (Big laugh)
Cha: It's also famous that Pyŏn Yŏng-ro tried to enter his friend's wife's mosquito net while drunk and made a mistake.
Yi: That's why he quit drinking from then on.
Cha: Shim Tae-sŏp asked his father, "Why did you give birth to me?" when he was drunk, right?
Yi: Yes... Once, when he asked, "Why did you give birth to me?" his father was so dumbfounded that he said, "How would I know? How would I know?"
All: (Big laugh) <146>

**Named Entities**

洪露省	Hong No-sŏng
朴洞	Pak-tong
中央學校	Chungang Hakkyo
普專	P'ojŏn
裵相哲	Pae Sang-ch'ŏl
晉州	Chinju
李瑞求	Yi Sŏ-gu
羅元鼎	Na Wŏn-jŏng
金東赫	Kim Tong-hyŏk
李重華	Yi Chung-hwa
朴重華	Pak Chung-hwa
羅玩	Na Wan
元達	Wŏn-dal
呂圭亨	Yŏ Kyu-hyŏng
柳一瑄	Yu Il-sŏn
李殷相	Yi Ŭn-sang
曙海	Sŏ Hae
金性洙	Kim Sŏng-su
徐椿	Sŏ Ch'un
玄鎭健	Hyŏn Chin-gŏn
勝彬	Sŭng-bin
金科白	Kim K'wa-baek
廉想涉	Yŏm Sang-sŏp
白大鎭	Paek Tae-jin
趙南熙	Cho Nam-hŭi
朴瓚熙	Pak Ch'an-hŭi
曹在浩	Cho Chae-ho
卞榮魯	Pyŏn Yŏng-ro
沈大燮	Shim Tae-sŏp
崔진순	Ch'oe Chin-sun
玉璿珍	Yu Ok-sŏn
金東赫	Kim Tong-hyŏk
金性洙	Kim Sŏng-su
李重華	Yi Chung-hwa
별건곤	Byŏlgŏn’gon
仁貴	In-gwi
카피야	K'ap'iya
パクドン	Pakdong
ホンロソン	Hong No-sŏng
ジンジュ	Chinju
イソグ	Yi Sŏ-gu
ラウォンジョン	Na Wŏn-jŏng
キムドンヒョク	Kim Tong-hyŏk
イチュンファ	Yi Chung-hwa
パクチュンファ	Pak Chung-hwa
ナワン	Na Wan
ウォンダル	Wŏn-dal
ヨギュヒョン	Yŏ Kyu-hyŏng
ユイルソン	Yu Il-sŏn
イウンサン	Yi Ŭn-sang
ソヘ	Sŏ Hae
キムソンス	Kim Sŏng-su
ソチュン	Sŏ Ch'un
ヒョンジンゴン	Hyŏn Chin-gŏn
スンビン	Sŭng-bin
キムクワベク	Kim K'wa-baek
ヨムサンソプ	Yŏm Sang-sŏp
ペクテジン	Paek Tae-jin
チョナムヒ	Cho Nam-hŭi
パクチャンヒ	Pak Ch'an-hŭi
チョジェホ	Cho Chae-ho
ピョンヨンロ	Pyŏn Yŏng-ro
シムテソプ	Shim Tae-sŏp
チェジンスン	Ch'oe Chin-sun
ユオクソン	Yu Ok-sŏn



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	넌센스 本位, 無題目座談會, 本社社員끼리의
기사형태	대담·좌담

넌센스 本位, 無題目座談會, 本社社員끼리의
蔡 괘니 마지메한 이야기를 하다가는 이 좌담회는 실패함니다.
朴 차선생 이마(버서진 이마)를 건드려야 이야기가 나올걸.
方지금 조선서 제일 기괴-그로한게 무얼가?
崔 兩性問題
蔡 그건 에로요
方 어느정도까지는 그러겟지.
蔡 그로를 차사자면 흉가이야기에서나....? 그러나 지금 조선사람은 일반적으로 그로에 대한 엽기적 취미에 대해서 인연이 멀기때문에 흉가가튼것을 그로로 환영하기 보담 재래의 관습으로 공포를 늣기고 기피를 하니까.....
方 그러면 짜-나리즘으로의 흉가만 말할것이 아니라 그저 일반걱으로...
朴독개비 귀신가튼 이야기도 만히잇지.
蔡 엇잿거나 지금 우리가 그로를 구한다면 그런것밧게는 업겟지.
朴 귀신이야기가 썩 신긔한게 하나잇는데.... 洪露省이 즉접 보나달음업는 이야기라고....露省의 사촌의 외가집에서 처녀하나가 혼인을 정해<136> 노코 죽엇는데 그게 손간씩다 되여가지고 그 집에 나와서!
方 그집이라니?
朴 자기집이지.... 빨간저고리 파-란 치마를 입고 - 꼭 시잡가는 새색시처럼 차리고는 살...
李 살이 뭐야?
朴 살 살몰나?
車 쌀 말이구려
朴 응 응 (겨우) 쌀두주뒤에서 「하하」웃고 나온다나 그런데 그게 한사람이나 드사람의 눈에만 보이는게 아니라 왼집안사람의 눈에 다 보인대 그래 하하 웃고 도라 다니면서 별별 작란을 다하고. 그러면서도 저의 옵바는 퍽 무서워한다나. 그래 저의 옵바가 나물하고 호령하면 그 집뒤에 소나무가 잇는데 그 소나무우에 올나가서 하하 웃고.
方아-니 그런데 全身이-발까지 다뵈여.
朴 그럼 그러케 잔난만 하지 무슨 내용잇는 말은 업다? 가령 무슨 포원이 잇든지....?
朴 업서업서...... 그런데 그 집안에서 하도 귀챤으니까 점쟁이한테 점을 처보앗더라나 점을 처보니까 그 소나무에 귀신이 부터서 그런다고....
그래서 소나무를 비여 바렷더니 니제는 그 소나무 등걸억지 우에가 안저서 여전히 하하 웃고......
一同 허허......
朴그런데 더 이상한 것은 그 옵바되는 사람이 호령을 하고 야단을 하면 그게 「나는 적은 옵바집에 갈테야」하고 그곳에서 얼마 아니되는 가마ㅅ골이라는 곳에서 가마솟도가를 하는 동생네 집으로 간다나 그래서 가기만하면 역낙업시 가마가 터져서 사람이 죽엇다고 곳기별이 온다나.
崔 어데서 사람이 죽어요?
朴 露省도 그것을 目睹햇다오?
朴 아-니
車 나도 그것 비슷한 이야기가 잇는데 저-기 박洞 - 중앙학교가는길가에 우물하나가 잇섯는데...하기야 내가 전문학교에 다니든땨엿스니까 꽤 오래된 일이로군..... 지금은 그 우물도 메여업샛지만..... 그래 그 우물엽흐로 취한 사람이 지나가기만 하면!
方 술취한 사람의 말이란 종작할 수 업서?
車 아-니 비단 취한 사라뿐이 아니라 멀정한 사람도 여러번 당햇다우....그래 어둔밤에 지내가느라면 고흥게집이 술상을 버려노코 앉젓다가 웃고 일어서면서 「한잔 잡숫고 가시지요」하고 아양을 피우는 바람에 끌니기만 하면 그 이튿날은 그 우물에 송장이 하나씩 떠올으고....
方 그러면 그런일을 당한 사람은 다 죽엇슬텐데 그러케 그 현장의 광경을 자세하게 이야기하는 사람은 누구요?
車 그런데 그때 내가 다니든 普專小使의 사촌하나가 그 지경을 당해가<137>지고 우물에 빠저서 하마 죽을 번한 것을 살녀낸 일이 잇서요
李 올슴니다. 나도 소학교 다닐때에 그 우물에 사람이 빠저 죽은 것을 보앗서요
方그러나 우물 귀신에 대해서는 누구나 공공된 선입감을 가지고 잇기때문에 가령 한 우물에 두사람만 빠저 죽으면 그 당ㅁ부터는 누구든지 그 엽흘 지나가게되면 귀신이 나오는 듯 나오는듯해서 그야말로 자긔최면에 걸니는 수도 만하여
崔 (성급히)그러네요 그런데요 나는 내눈으로 目睹한 일이 잇서요.
朴 무얼?
崔 들어봐요 내가 수원서 보통학교에 다닐때데 봄이여요. 3월쯤되엿슬가...날이 퍽노고!」하고 아주 그 봄날이 퍽 (애를 쓰며) 조흔날이여요. 그런때면 조선초가집웅이 이상스런 연회색으로 보이쟌어요. 그래 나도 (손짓을 하면서) 그것을 그야말로 미도레데걸어오는데 그 집웅 한 가운데 쯤에서 갑작히 연긔가 폴삭을 나오고 불꼿이 폭소사 오르더니 금시에 매ㅅ방석만큼 불이 붓겟지요. 그래 깜작 놀나서 「불이야!」소리를 치고 쪼차가니까 그집에서도 역시 「불이야」하고 야단이 나드만요.
方 나제야?
崔 그럼요!
방 그집에 어린애가 업든가요?
崔 어린애는 업고 소박덱이 색시는 하나 잇대요. 그런데 그 날은 집에 업섯더래요.... 그런데 퍽 이상한 것은 그 날 그 집에서 그 불이 열두번째 나는 불이라고 그래요. 나도 하도 이상해서 집웅ㅇ로 올나가서 불부튼 자리를 아모리 살펴봣지만 성냥이나 종이쪽이 절너진 것은 안보여요.
朴 그러나 귀신이라는 것은 어느사람의 착각으로나 그러치 아니하면 이야기하는 사람이 될수잇스면 그 이야기를 자미잇게 하느라고 그런 신긔한 색시를 가미하는 수가 만흐니까.
崔 그런것이 업는 것도 아니예요. 이것도 수원서 생긴일인데 웨저-독가비가 흙이나 모래를 던진다고 안어요?
車 그런 이야기도 만히잇지.
崔그런데 그게 사람 더구나 녀자가 한 작난이여요.
方 여자가?
崔 네 처녀가!
方 멧살먹은?
崔 과년한 색씨지요.... 그것을 달니안 것이 아니라 밤이면 좍좍 흙을 끼트리고해서 무섭기는 하면서도 그 집사람이 그 끼트린 흙을 잘보니까 웨 저 부억뒤에다 조개껍질을 즉 - 덥허놋콧치 아니해요? 글고 그 근처 흙은 퍽 습기가 잇지요. 그 흙하고 그 조개껍질이더래요. 그래 그 놈을 가지고 한사흘동안 끼트리는 방향을 조사해봣더니 아닌게 아니라 그 집에서 두세집쯤 떠러저 잇는 집 처녀가 그짓을 햇더래요.<138>
方그게 보통 작난은 아니겟지 무슨의미가 잇겟지.
蔡 과년한 색시가 남자들이 만히 모혀노는 곳에 독개비 작난을 한다는 것은 아무튼 무슨 속이 잇는걸....
車 그러타고 무슨 악의나 그런걸러만 볼수는 업지.
方 아-니야 그저 무의미한 작난이라면 여자가 그런 짓을 3,4일이나 끈긔잇게 게속을 하지 못하고 제입으로 얼른 발각의 단서를 남에게 암시를 주는 법이야요.
車 그것도 과년한 게집애가 그집에 사내놈들이 모혀서 굼실굼실하니까 호긔심으로 그런게지. 또 공연한 시긔로 그런 작난을 하는 수도 잇고... 이런 일이 잇섯서요. 어는 사람이 산밋 외딴집에서 유부녀 간통을 하는데 本夫도 아닌 딴놈이 돌팔매을 하여서 그 돌이 이 문에 딱하고 마즈니까 그 사내는 本夫가 온줄 알고 그자리에서 긔절해 죽은 것 갓튼...
方 (成더러)晉州에서 쇠귀신이야기가 업나요?
成 전 몰름니다.
方 독개비는 일설에 동화작가의 창작이라고 함니다. 동화작가가 자긔의 理想에 마즌 인간적 존개는 사람에서 발견할 수가 업스니까 독갑비라는 이상적 초인을 만들어가지고 그것을 통해서 동화작가로의 이상을 실현한다는 말도 잇서요. 그러키때문에 동화에 나오는 독개비는 작난은 잘하지만결코 악하지는 안어요.
蔡 독개비에는 인독개비와 가독개비가 잇는데 인독개니는 낫뿐놈이요. 가독개비는 착한 놈이라는 말이잇서요. 그래서 인독개비를 만나면 뭐 부자가 된다나... 그래 옛날 어느 과부가 인독개비와 결혼을 햇는데 그놈이 보물이며 돈을 수태 만히 갓다주어서 갑작히 부자가 되엿더래요. 오래동안 살 생각이 잇겟서요. 그래 하로 저녁에는 이불속에서 독개비더러 「당신은 세상에서 무엇을 제일 무서워하시요?」하고 물으니까 「나는 白馬피를 제일 무서워합니다.」하더라나요. 그래 그 이튼날은 과부가 白馬를 잡어서 四方에다 피를 뿌리고 자긔는 피무든 백마가죽을 쓰고 안젓느라니까 밤에 독개비 낭군이 와서 그것을 보고는 그만 놀나서 달어낫대요. 달어나서 뒤ㅅ산에 가 두다리를 쭉 뻣고 안저서 「여보소 세상사람들아 부부간에 정좃타고 속사정말소 속사정말소」하고 울더라나 그리고는 제가 사준 논을 떤간다고 논네귀에다 말뚝을 박고 영칙영치기....하하
一同 하하하하!
方 엇잿거나 독개비는 그 놈이 애교가 잇는 놈이야. 제 재조를 보이려고 소ㅅ둑겅을 솟속에다 집어놋코 사람이 그것을 빼지 못해서 애쓴느것을 보고는 조아서 하하 - 웃고.
車 독개비는 도릭개나 모자라진 비가 된단 말이지?
成 귀신은 피가 무더야 된다고 <139> 안그래요?
方朴 그 이야기는 도처 일반이야!
車 피가 무뎌야 된다는 것은 귀신이 아니라 독개비 말이지!
(이때에 일부는 검심을 먹게 되엿다.)
車 (먹는 것을 바라보며) 안먹고는 못사나?
李(學) 안먹고야 못살지!
車 하기야 먹어주는 놈이 만치 안먹어 죽는 놈은 적어....흉년에 어른은 굶어죽지만 아희들은 배불너 죽는 단 말도 잇지안나.
方괘-니 지금 먹고 십흐니까 저래요.
李 (蔡더러) 침 배터가지고 먹쟌소?
蔡 왜? 좀더 먹을 생각이 잇소?
崔 먹을때 침 배터가지고 먹기는 中東學校 崔진순씨가 제일일걸!
方 침이 아마 靈藥인 모양이야...웬만한 부스럼은 침만 바르면 낫지 안소? 합으로는 아침에 세수할때 치솔로 글근 그 침을 모아가지고 고약회사로 보낼때도 잇슬걸.
車 그때야말로 침(唾)으로 침(注射)을 놀때지.
一同 허허!
(겸심이 끗난뒤에)
崔 옛날 조선에 목욕탕이 업섯나요?
方 잇슬게 어데잇어.
車 여자들은 일년에 꼭 한번씩 밧게는 목욕을 햇나 웬....
方 제사ㅅ날이면 꼭 햇지.
朴 나는 시골여자로 목욕하는 것 못보앗서.
崔 여자를 멧치나 안다고 그리시우?
車 둘은 꼭알겟지...... 날때부터본 자기 어머니하고 이번 仁貴씨(朴露兒씨 부인)하고 ....응 또 하나잇군 카피야...카피야 알어? 可避也란 말이야.
一同 허허허허!
方 재담만하는 사람은 핀셋트로 집어내여 집어내여!
崔 옛날 朝鮮形具를 모아둔게 업나요...그런것은 요전 박람회때도 진렬햇습듸다.
方 참 저- 요전에 황해도」지 왜 그 시집을 가면 남편이 죽는다는 말로 300년 동안 그집 처녀는 색시로 시집을 못가고 늙는단 말이 잇섯지요? 그뒤에 어터케 落着이 되엿나?
李 면사무소를 통해서 혼인을 신청한 사람이 만래지요
車 우리 별건곤에 관상이야기 쓰는 裵相哲씨도 신청을 해봣다드군요.
方 그래서 그 뒤에 어터케 되얏서?
李그 색시집에서 장가오ㅡ 사람에게 일생을 보장해 준다는 말은 거짓말이라고 해요. 되려 자기 딸을 여우기 위해서 남을 죽일수가 업다고 通婚을 모다 거절햇다지요.
車 만일 그것이 사실이라면 그런 여자가 멧천명만 잇스면 좃켓군!
方 왜?
車그런 져자만 모아가지고 어데든지 미운놈의 나라로 보내서 시집을 가게 하든지 유곽을 꾸미든지 하면 총아니못코 제쟁하게 될게 아니요?
一同 大笑! <140>
方 靑吾式이 나오는군.
朴 그런말은 靑吾의 전매특허야.
方 화두를 요지음 세상의 이야기거리로 돌녀서 ... 가령 지금 여학생 밥갑시 남학생 밥갑보담 헐하니 그게 무슨이유로 그러한지....이상하지 안흥가.
李(學) 어는 사람말에는 물도 더 쓰고하니까 더바더야 한다고 하던데.
方 대관절 무엇때문에 여학생밥갑슬 덜밧느냔 말이야?
朴 밥을 적게 먹고 또 안에서 同性끼리라 허물이 업다는 것이겟지?
車 동정심도 잇고.
蔡 동정심이라는 그런 관념적이유는 성립이 아니됨니다.
方남학생보담 조용한 편이 잇서서 그러가?
車흥 연애하는 여학생은 사내놈이 작고 차저오니까 더 싯그럽지!
方밥을 적게먹나?
이 왠걸요!
方여학생이 군것질은 만히 하지요 成선생이 아시겟군요?
成만히 먹슴니다. 밥도 되려 만히 먹지요.
方아-니 애기난 여자는 말고요
成(우스며) 남학생들은 밧게나가다니니까 때로 넘기는때가 만치만 여학생은 세끼면 세끼 꼭꼭 차저먹고 또 여자인 만큼 안 사람들과 친하니까 아모따라고 시장하면 먹을수가 잇서서 되려 밥을 더 먹는 셈이지요.
方물은 확실히 만히 써요 그리고 안에서 숫불만 다르는 것을 보면 보기가 무섭게 대리미 들고 나서고.
車 그뿐인가..... 남학생들에게는 반찬가튼 것도 먹든것을 그대로 줄 수가 잇지만 여학생을 두면 안속을 빤히 알고 잇스니까 그러지도 못하지....
方그런데 지금의 여학생과 하숙주인의 관계를 다만 밥을 사먹고 밥을 판다는 그러한 범위에서 좀더 나아가 地方의 父兄을 대신새허 그 여학생의 생활을 감독하도록 그러케할 무슨 도리가 업슬가? 가령 이러한게 잇서요. 남자들이 제눈에 드는 여학생이면 그저 無時로 차저다니고 해서 공부에도 방해가되고 또 그런 주책업는 사내들이란 얏토롬한 환심난 사려고배우이야기나하고 화투나치고 활동사진구경이나 꾀여가지고 그러니까 그런때는 그런 사람이 차저오더래도 주인이 말을해서 돌려보낸다든지 면회를 사절식힌다든지....하면 졸게 아니요?
朴 그러나 여학생들이 그런 감독을 달게 녁이면 모르거니와 도리어 실혀해서 하수글 옴겨바리면 헐수업지.
方그러타더래도 일반적으로 하숙집의 風度가 그러케되면 될게안이요?
朴그런데 그런대로 여학생이 물질로써 주인을 매수하는 수도 잇스니까
方그런 경우는 례외겟지만.
朴 결국 여학생들 자신의 자각에 맛긴는게 제일 좃겟지 <141>
車어느 학부형은 서울잇는 사람에게 자기 딸의 감독을 부택햇더니 그 색시가 그 사람의 감독을 밧기가 실혀서 이간질을 햇다는데.....그 사람이 작고만 시골서 오는 학비를 빼어서 쓰고 또 낫분데로 지도를 한다고저 아버지한테 편지질을 해서....
方어는 여학교 선생님은 여학생의 하숙을 차저와서를 들어누엇고 심지어 그애들이 먹는 바까지 빼서먹는다나....
車어는 여학교 교장은 밤낫 여학생을 차저다니며 냉면을 사달내서 먹기때문에 냉면선생이란 별명까지 어덧다는데.
方그런데 여학생이 남학생보담군것질을 만히 하지요?
朴그런줄을 아니까 남학생한테 여학생이 차저만 오면 의례히 과자를 내지.
方그거야 대접하느라고 하느게니까 문제가 안이되지만 엇잿거나 군것질은 만히해요 종류로는 고구마, 왜콩, 마메콩, 호떡.
成지금은 호떡은 안먹슴니다.
方천만에!
朴호떡은 모욕인걸.
최 사실이 사실인데 무에 모욕이야요?
方아-니야 호떡을 만히 억어요. 그게 좀 고급으로 가면 초코렛아이스크림 가튼 것이지만.
朴남학생은 밧게나와서 호떡집에도 쑥쑥드러가니까 만히 먹는것 갓고 여학생은 안저서 사다먹으니까 안이 먹는것 갓겟지.
方엇잿거나 여자는 입을 놀녀두기를 실혀해요
車여자는 소비만하는 아모테도 못쓸거야. 사내가 실컨 버러서 쌀을 사다주면 밥을 지어 업새지 장작을 사오면 불에 살워 업새지 옷감을 밧궈오면 옷을 만든다고 막도 잘너바리지.
朴그것은 케케묵은 소리요
車묵고 새롭고 간에 지금도 사실인걸.
최 선선생님 항의안이하십니까?
方두어두어요 재담을 반박하면 하는 사람이 글치!
車진즉 그러케 항복을 하지들!
方올소! ... 그런데 여학생들은 교실에서 군것질을 해요. 선생의 강의가 재미가업스면 저-압헤 안즌 애가 뒤에 안즌 애한테 편지를 하는데 「이애-초코렛하나만 보내라-」고.
一同 허허허허!
成교수잘못하면 정말 실ㅅ증이나요.
成여학교에 젊은 선생이새로오면 강의를 천정이나 밧갓만 바라보고 하기때문에 질문을 못해요
일동 허허허허!
車그것 좃켓군....무식해도 젊기만하면 여학교 선생질을 해먹겟스니까
方여학교 선생 8년에 목아지가 삐뚜러진 사람이 잇서요. 밤낫 천정하고 들창만 바라보고 가의를 가기때문에!
車2층에 잇는 교실은 천정을 바라보앗자 <142>별것엄슬걸.
일동 (대소)
方또 하는소리봐요
蔡 과연 그로100%로군
方玉璿珍여학생간에 인기가 놀랍다지? 가의잘해준다고.
蔡 지금은 도라갓지만 중앙에 羅元鼎씨가 인기가 조앗지 교수術이 아주 능난하고 말을 재미잇게해서.
崔 배재 金東赫씨도 호랭이 똥이라고 아주 유명햇서요
蔡 나 처음에 중앙학교에 입학햇더니 李重華씨가 교복빨어입는 이약이를 하시는데...우리 중앙 뒷산에느 맑은 시내물이 잇다. 일요일날 겸심을 꾸려가지고 풀을 꼭 2錢엇치만 사가지고 책을 한권들고 뒷산으로 올나와-...그래서 우아래를 가지고온 비누로 싹싹 뷔벼빨어서 풀을 살폿뭇처서....잔듸밧테 널어 노코 그 엽헤누어 푸른 한울을 바라보며 새소리도 들으며 생각도 하고 책도 본다. 그러는 동안에 오정이 떵치면 겸심을 먹어....다시 석양이 되면 옷이 말너.....그 놈을 .....입고 내려와 ....세탁쟁이 주면 못써 못써.....」그리고 군것질말난 말을 「....심심하면 압가가에 나와서 애하나 사먹는 것은 ㅁ조아.... 그러나 늘 - 주군주군 먹으면 못써못써....」
車(朴을 보고)당신 삼촌어른 朴重華씨 그이도 유명햇지....별명은 일순사고... 한번은 시험을 보는데 그 때는 칸닝을 할가바 책상을 모다 운동장에대 내어다노코 죽 안저서 답안을 쓰는데..... 羅玩이라고 하는 학생하나가 이 양반을 골녀주려고 답안을 쓰면서 외인편손에서 무얼 작고만 보면써 쓴다. 그러니까 이 양반이 불이나케 쪼차와서 그 사람의 외인손목을 꽉 훌트려잡고 「주먹펴라」하고 소리를 치니끼 아시람은 시침이를 뚝따고 「웨 그리십니까? 시간밧분데」「잔말말고 펴ㅅ」「왜 그리세요」「펴봐」....그리자 손을 쫙 펴니까 웬걸 맨손이지 하하.
일동 (大笑)
方나는 元達씨. 생각하면 지금도 우수어....우숩다는 것보담....무어라고 할가... 그 양반이 학교를 막졸업하고 나와서 普專에서 강의를 하게되엿는데 학생들은 그이가 多才하고ㅗ 또 유명하다니까 모다 필기장을 새로 작만해가지고 맛침 기다리고 잇는데 이 양반이 턱 한다느 말李 「가꾸노 고도꾸....」하면서 책을 외우듯이 죽내려간다. 학생들은 기가 맥히지....그리자 맨ㅈ뒤에서 학생 하나가 「선생님 무엇이 가꾸노 고도꾸란 말슴임니까?」하니까 이 양반이 그만 실패를 깨닷고 얼골이 빨개저서 그래 그 뒤로 영영 긔운이 펴지 못햇서요.
최 배재 李重華씨도 유명햇지요.
車三中華가 다 유명하군.
朴우리는 한문선생은 손아귀에 넛코 지냇는데 이 양반이 원래 좀 무식해요 그래서 視學이 온다면 미리서 <143> 배워둔다....그래 視學이 보는 자시에서 척 「아무개 일어나서 오늘 배울데를 읽어봐」하면 척척 일거내지. 그런 비밀이 잇스니까 우리가 성적이 좀 낫부면 그 양반을 조용히 만나서 눈을 똑바로 뜨고 「선생님 이번학기에 웨 내성적이 낫볏슴닛가?」하면 「응? 그래? 그러면 다음 학기에 보자」하지 그럼 안이나 다를가 그 다음학기는 성적이 아주 조아지군햇지.
車柳一瑄씨거 음력 정원 초하루 학생이 안이온다고 혼자서 교실에 들어가서 기하문제를 풀고는 그것을 그 다음시험문뎨에 내엿다는 것도 名談이지.
方呂圭亨씨가 제일고보에서 한문을 가르퀼때에 학생이 시험답안에다 술상과 기생을 그려갓다가 퇴학당한 이약이도 유명해.
車학생선생해서 두생 이약이를 햇스니 三生연분으로 인제는 기생이약이나 하지
方또 나온다.....뭣 기괴한 작난으로 이약이거리는 업나?
朴조선사람은 그런 작난을 작난으로 알지 안이하닛가 하지도 안코하기도 무서워.
方일본사람들이 문패 띄여쓰기가튼것을 경쟁적으로 하는 것은 확실히 그로 趣味야....조선사람으노는 李瑞求가 화재때에 평양사진을 용암포것으로 써먹은 것이 기발한 작난이고.
成여학생긔숙사에서는 작난하느라고 방문틈으로 담배연긔를 뿜어드려보내요.
朴『술』이약이나 해ㅗ지?
方靑吾는 술취하면 진고개에 가서 전등 깨트리는게 전문이라지?
車발서 그것도 녯날이요.
蔡 취중의 이약이로는 동아일보 金科白군이 굉장한 일화가 잇지.... 이사람 이담북취해가지고 집에 도라가서 자는데 渴症이 낫든지 손바닥을 딱딱치며 「이애 뽀-이 이애 뽀-이」하고 부른다. 지금 자기 생각에는 요리집애 잇느니라하는 생각으로 햇겟다. 그런데 엽해방에서 즈무시는 그 아버지(지금은 작고하섯지만)가 잠이 깨어서 문을 열고 「이 애가 누구를 불으노?」하닛가 이 사람좀 봐요 「이애 뽀-이 냉수한 그릇 떠오느라」하ㅗ 호령을 햇스니하하하하....
일동 허허허허.....
車廉想涉씨가 술취해가지고 영국영사관에 갓든것도 유명하지.
方그건 참 국제적 주정이군....
車술이 곤주가 되게 취해가지고 무슨 생각인지 인력차를 타고는 그 밤중에 영국영사관에를 가서 門을 뚜드렷다. 그러닛가 문간에 잇는사람이 나와서 웬 사람이냐고 하닛가 냉수 한 그릇 떠오라고 야료를 햇스니.
朴요전에 李殷相씨는 술이 취해 가지고는 曙海한테 부축을 바더가며 오다가 그 진흙바닥에서 「이 사람아 조곰만 자과자 조곰만 자고가자」하더니 그대로 눕더라나...눕더니 「어 - 시원해좃타」고 음율적으로 감탄을 햇다고.
車나는 한번 밤 늦게 자다가 깨닛가 달이 몹시 발거서 문압길로 나오닛가 웬 사람이 李重華씨 집 쓰레기통을 붓잡고서 꾸부리고 서서 「重華-重華-」하고 가보닛가 金性洙씨가 술이 곤주가 되게 취해가지고는 李重華씨를 찻는다는게 쓰레기통을 붓잡고서 그러는 거야
일동 (大笑)
蔡 요전에 좌담회때 徐椿씨가 자기가 이약이 하는데.....카페-뻬-삐에와서 술을 먹엇더라고 그래 도라가서 자슨데 이튿날 잠이 깨닛가 확실히무슨 큰 실수를 한것 가태서 마음에 몹시 걸니기는 하나 아모리 생각해도 긔억이 안이나더라고....그래 타고온 자동차부에서 물어보아도 도모지 그 자동자부에서는 자기를 태여다 준 일이 업다고 하고 뻬-삐에 가서 물어보아도 아모 실수는하지 안이햇다고 하고.... 그러나 그래도 마음이 안이 뇌야서 그 이튼날 다시 뻬-삐에 가서 물어보닛가 그 집에서는 자기네 영업의 이익상 徐씨가 불너 달나는 집의 자동ㅈ차를 안이 불러주고 딴데 것을 불너 주엇다나...그래 자동차도 무심코 타고가서 내일와서 바더가라닛가 운전수는 실타고 하면서 도루태워가지고 근체의 파출소로 가사다 노닛가 徐씨는 파출소에 들어서면서 오좀을 눈다 그것을 보고 순사가 하도 어이가 업든지 하하 웃더래요.
일동 (大笑)
蔡 그래 순사가 너는 웨 자동차삭슬 안이 주느내고 하닛가 포켓속에서 지갑을 끄내어 돈이 업다고 툴툴털어보이는 바람에 명함이 떨어젓다 그러닛가 순사가 명함을 집어가지고 보더니 웬일로 「이분이 동아일보 편즙국장인데 설마 자동차갑시야 안이주리라고 그랫느냐」고 운전수를 나물해서 도루 태워다 드리라고 햇다나....그때 운전수는 이키 뜨거워라 하고 얼핀 모서다 드리고는 무서워서 그 이튼날 자동차갑도 바드러 오지 못하고 겨우 이틀만에 뻬-삐에 가서 그 이약이를 햇기때문에 徐씨도 비로소 그러한 일이 잇섯든 줄을 알엇다고 해요.
車玄鎭健술을 먹으면 묵업다고 구두를 버서바리고 달어나셋다... 심하면 양복도 벗고.
朴勝彬씨는 취하면 그릇바수기가 일수지......술은 여자가 먹고 취한게 볼만해.
朴 더럽지!
方 소변흘니고.
蔡 成선생님 휘채보신일 잇슴닛가
成 술을 통 못먹어봣슴니다. 그때...저 맥주 한잔먹고서 혼은 낫서도.
方 홍성사는 金무어라는 친구는 석잔만 먹으며 발개버서요....그래야 술이 맛이 잇다나!
車 白大鎭씨와 갓군!
朴 나는 취하면 자닛가...만식이 자네는 취하면 울지?//
蔡 녯말일세.
車 나는 취해서 인력차삭 5원준 일은 잇지
方 趙南熙씨 술병 세는것도 유명하지
蔡 동아일보 朴瓚熙씨는 취해서 골이를니면 암말도 안코 안저서 각금 술병으로 유리창만 한씩깨지.
方 한번 曹在浩하고 가티 취해서 길에 나섯는데 이 양반이 압헤 자동차가 잇스닛가 그 꽁문이에 가 매달엿다. 그리다가 자동차가 뚜루루-가닛가 그 큰키에다 어린애들처럼 매달녀 가든것이라니.....
일동 (大笑)
方 그래 우리가 뒤딸어가면서 「떨어저라 떠러저라」하닛가 툭떨어저서 쩔쩔매든 꼴이라니
일동 (大笑)
車 卞榮魯씨가 취중에 친구의 부인이 자는 모기장에 드러가려다가 실수한 것도 名談이야.
李 그래서 그때부터 금주햇서요
車 沈大燮씨가 취해서 그 아버지한테 「왜 낫느냐」고 하엿다지?
李 네....언젠가 한번 「웨 낫느냐」고 하닛가 그 아버지가 하도 기가 키여 「낸들아니? 낸들아니?」하더라나!
일동 (大笑) <146>
<136-146>