별건곤 제36호
1931년 01월 01일
모던-福德房 (舊모던) (Modern Real Estate (Formerly Modern))
세태비평 (Social Commentary)

What is so-called sacredness? - A woman's statue expelled from the Japan Youth Hall -
It is said that the statue of a woman by Mr. Katō, which was specially selected for this year's Imperial Art Exhibition (帝展), was donated with the hope of the Japan Youth Hall (日本靑年館), but it was eventually rejected and returned to its owner because the work dealt with a woman's nude. The reason is said to be due to the tremendous protests from several dignitaries that it "defiles the sacredness of the Youth Hall." It is regrettable that such a thing happens publicly in a first-class country that boasts of having a different level of culture than Europe and the United States. Look at the representative masterpieces of ancient Greek or Roman art. Has it ever been rejected because it dealt with nudity! What does it mean to violate sacredness? Is it because it is a nude statue of a woman that it anticipates some animalistic impulse? Hahaha! If the Japanese youths who gather at the so-called Youth Hall are so ignorant of art and are mentally deficient perverted voyeurs, then they are already finished. Do they have any sense? Oh, ye sacred moralists who ruin the times!

Clumsy Old-fashioned Class Tactics
Seo Hong-chun (徐宖淳), an old farmer in his seventies living in Suwon, who had sincerely looked after the master's house of a wealthy nobleman in Seoul for twenty years, suddenly had his tenant land reduced by half without any reason. Because he could not live like that, he went to the wealthy man to ask for the previous situation and made a blood-spitting appeal, but it was useless. So, while staying at the landlord's house that night, he tossed and turned and could not sleep. At four o'clock in the morning, while resenting the landlord, he drank the pesticide he had brought with him and finally departed on the road to the afterlife. If he were a young man, he would have protested with his fists and started a tenant farming dispute in unity, but alas, he was old. What other changes could he have made other than tearful pleas? However, won't he leave a thousand years of resentment to his remaining children and nephews in front of the treacherous landlord, if not May frost (五月飛霜)? It is frightening what kind of power that thousand years of resentment will become and in what form it will explode. There is nothing as tragic and strong as the silent last words of an old father who died a wrongful death!

Elementary School Principal Teaches Middle School Principal a Lesson (One Seen in a Car)
Mr. Lee Yun-ju (李潤柱), a distinguished contributor to higher common school, was on a train when a Japanese man sat next to him. After traveling for a while, a passenger got off, and a seat across from them became empty, which is where the trouble started.
Japanese man: "Why don't you go sit over there?"
Lee: "Why?"
Japanese man: "I need to lie down for a bit. Isn't it the same thing? Go sit over there!"
Lee: "What law says that someone who is sitting should tell someone else to go here or there because they want to lie down? You are a person who doesn't know public morals!"
But the next words of the Japanese man are a masterpiece among masterpieces.
Japanese man: "You received an education and can even speak that much Japanese, do you know whose virtue it is? You should be grateful. It's because of people like you that Koreans are getting worse!"
Oh, how speechless! There is no need to write down Mr. Lee's reply.
Later, it turned out that the perpetrator was the principal of a rural common school. He is the type of person who would take away what others have and slap them and then say, "Hey, be grateful!" It would be a big problem if one were to carelessly entrust children to someone like that!

Drunkard's Wit (One Seen in a Car)
When the Busan-bound express train arrived at Yongsan, a drunk man, about fifty years old, hurriedly climbed on. As he got on, he grabbed everyone and said, "Excuse me, please look at this ticket. I'm supposed to go to Suwon, but I came to Yongsan. So, I got on again, but is it okay if I go like this? I have two sons studying in Seoul. I don't know Japanese, but is it okay if I go like this?" Everyone in the car said it was okay, so he found an empty seat and sat down first. Then, a man in a suit sitting next to him felt like giving him a nudge because he was bored, so he started talking to him.
"Where do you live?"
Drunkard: "I live in Joseon. Where do you live?"
Young man: "I live in Japan."
Drunkard: "Huh, you live in Japan? Just because you're wearing a suit, you're making fun of me as a country bumpkin. Why are you speaking Korean if you live in Japan!?"
Young man: "Who do you think you are talking to so disrespectfully!"
Drunkard: "Yes, it's okay to be disrespectful to someone who lives in Japan!"
Hahaha, heh heh heh. Laughter bloomed in the car. The students shouted "Hooray, hooray" and immediately sided with the old man. Still, the young man felt a considerable insult to his appearance in the suit and protested.
"No, people can live anywhere. There can be a house in the countryside and a house in Seoul, and you can live abroad. I live in Osaka, so I'm saying I live in Japan."
Drunkard: "Huh, listen to that frustrating talk! If your address isn't fixed, you're a thief! Is it because I can't speak Japanese that you think I'm an ignorant country bumpkin... In the late Lee Dynasty, even a Pungsan guy could pass the civil service examination, and nowadays, after three years as a township clerk, they don't even recognize their own grandfather."
The crowd burst into laughter again. Now the old man was very popular. Everyone held on to the car windows and pricked up their ears.
Young man: "You're drunk. Stop it. Did I ever say I was a township clerk? Why are you cursing at others for no reason like a bad old man!"
Drunkard: "What did you say? Where did you learn to talk like that? Joseon is the country of Eastern manners. You have to know etiquette. Do you know what etiquette is? It's not urinating in front of a woman!"
Everyone: "?" Hahaha, heh heh heh...

**Named Entities**

日本靑年館	Nippon Seinenkan
加藤氏	Katō ssi
徐宖淳	Sŏ Hong-ch'un
水原	Suwŏn
李潤柱	I Yun-ju
大阪	Ōsaka
龍山	Yongsan
釜山	Pusan



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	모던-福德房 (舊모던)
기사형태	세태비평

모던-福德房 (舊모던)
所謂神聖은 무엇?-日本靑年館에서 겨난 女人立像-
今年度帝展彫刻에 特選된 加藤氏의 婦人立像은 日本靑年館의 희망으로 寄贈하엿드니 그 作品이 女子의 裸體을 取扱한것이라하야 필경 겨나서 主人에게로 돌아갓단다. 그 理由는 여러점자느신분들의 「靑年館의 神聖을 더럽힌다」라는 굉장한 抗議가 잇섯기 문이라고……. 文化程度가 歐米와다른배업다고 자랑하는 一等國에서 公公然하게 이런 일이 생긴다는 것은 吾人슬업시 未安한 생각을 가지는 바이다. 녯날 希臘아니 羅馬美術이 代表的걸작품을보라 그것이 裸體를 取扱하엿다고 일즉이 擯斥을 바든일이잇섯든가! 대체 神聖을 犯한다는 말은 從那裸來耶 그것이 女子의 裸體像이닛가 무슨 獸慾的충동을 豫想하고 하는 말인가 하하하 所謂靑年館에 모혀드는 日本靑年들이 그럿케지 藝術에 몰리해하고 白痴的변태서옥 患者들이라면 발서볼일다보앗게 생각이잇느냐엄느냐 오오 時代를 망치는 神聖한 末流道德君子들이여!
拙劣한 舊式의 階級戰術
二十年來로서울원ㅅ골 某양반 富豪의 舍音을 진실히 보아오든 水原사는 徐宖淳이란 七旬老農은 거번에 아모 理由업시 小作地가 半減하엿습으로 그래서는 살수업스니 從前대로 헤달나고 부호를 차저와서 피를 吐하는 陳情을해보앗스나 소용이업슴으로 그날밤 地主집에서 묵으면서 輾轉反側하며 잠을일우지못하다가 새벽네時되어 地主를 원망하면서 품고간 양재물을 먹고드듸어 九泉의 길을 나가바렷다한다. 젊은사람갓흐면 주먹을 쥐고 抗議도해보고 團結하야 小作爭議도일으켜보앗스런만 嗚呼老矣라 눈물석긴 嘆願밧게야더무슨 變通이 잇섯스리요 그러나 背叛당한악 地主압헤서 원한을 품고죽을 한며누리가 아니라 五月飛霜은 못될망정 뒤에 남은 子與侄에게 千秋의 恨을 남기지야안으랴 그 千秋의 恨이잠차무슨힘이되여 엇더한 形態로 폭발될넌지가 무섭다. 非命에 죽은 老父의말업는 遺言처름 悲壯하고 强한것은업거던!
小學校長의 中學校長 敎訓(車中所見一)
徵文高普長李潤柱氏가 汽車를 탓는데 엽헤日人하나가 同坐하게되여 얼마를 가치가＜148＞ 다가 손님이나리고 마즌편자리가하나 뷔게되자 거긔서부터 말성이 생기게 되엿다.
日人「당신저리가서 안즈면 엇대?」
李「웨?」
日人「내가좀누어야겟서 맛찬가지아니야 저리가안저!」
李「제가 눕겟다고 안즌사람보고 이리가라 저리가라는 法이어태잇서 公衆道德을 몰으는 人士로군!」
그러나 그다음 日人의 말이 傑作中大걸작이다.
日人「당신이 敎育을밧고 그만한 日本말지하게 된 것이 다 누구의 德인줄알어 고마운줄을 알어야지 당신가튼 사람이 잇기 문에 朝鮮사람이 낫버지는게야!」
허허온긔가막혀! 李氏의 對答을쓸것도업다.
나종알고보니 작자가 어느 싀골 普通學校校長이 드라는데 그사람은 넉넉히 남의 가진 것을 앗고 을갈기고나서도 「이놈아 고맘다 그래라」할 爲人이안인가 ■者에게어린애들 함부로 막겻다가 큰일나겟서!
醉客의 才談(車中所見二)
釜山行急行車가 龍山에다엇슬 나희 五十가량된 醉客하나가 허둥지둥기여올넛다. 올너오면서부터 오만사람을 다붓들고한다는 소리가 「여보시오 이 車票를 좀보오 내가 水原갈 사람인데 龍山을 왓단말이요 그래 다시 타기는탓는데 괸찬을가요 내가 그래도 서울서 공부하는 아들의 둘이나잇소 나는 日本말을 몰나서 그럿치만 그래 이대로가도 괸찬탄말이요?」座中이 皆曰괸찬타는 바람에 뷘자리를 차저서 위선안젓겟다. 그러자 엽해안즌양복쟁이하나가 심삼한 판에 슬그머니 놀며주고십흔생각이나서 말을 부치엿다.
「당신어데사오?」
醉客「난조선사오 당신은 어데서사오?」
靑年「나는 일본사오」
醉客「흥 일본살어? 양복댁이나입엇스닛가 나를 촌놈이라고 놀여먹는모양이로군 일본사는사람이 왜 조선말을해!?」
靑年「이냥반이 누구더러 함부로 반말을하려고 들어!」
醉客「응 일본사는놈보고는 반말아니라해라를 해도조-와!」
하하하 허허허 座中에 웃슴이 띄엿다. 學生들은 히야히야 울소---하면서 대번에 老人便에 加擔하여바렷다 그래도 靑年은 洋服體面上적지안흔 侮辱을 늣기면서 抗議하엿다.
「아-니 사람이란 아무데서나살수잇자안소 싀골에도 집이잇고 서울에도 집이잇는수가잇고 外國에 가서 살수도잇지안나요 난 大阪서 사닛가 日本서산단말요」
醉客「허허답답한 말을좀보지! 住所가 一定하지못하면 도독놈이야 도독놈! 이건 뭐 내가 일본말도못하닛가 싀골무지랭인줄알어……李朝末年에 豐山놈도 進士하고 노랑페도 及第한다드니 요새는  面書記三年에 제할애비몰으는관장이」
좌중은  웃슴판이버러젓다 그제야 老人은 大人氣다. 모다들 車窓를 가지고 귀를 기우렷다.
靑年「취햇구료 그만둬요 내가 어제 面書記를 지냇단말이요 괸이웨남을 욕은 해 낫븐늙은이갓흐니!」
醉客「뭣이엇덧타고? 그런말버릇이어데가잇서 조선은 東方風儀之國이야 禮儀를 알어야해 禮儀가뭔지알어? 女子압헤서 자기내놋코 오줌안누는게 禮儀야!」
一同「?」하하하헛허허허……….＜149＞
＜148-149＞