別건곤 제36호
1931년 01월 01일
編輯落書 (Editor's Scribblings, Editorial Notes)
사고·편집후기 (Notice/Apology, Editor's Postscript)

Everyone! Did you have a peaceful passing of the old year? Thanks to your great support and encouragement in the past, our company has developed this much, but in the new year, please support and encourage us even more so that we can achieve our wishes.

◇

It feels like self-praise, but this New Year's issue is quite substantial in content, as all employees worked through the night for a month. In particular, the appendix of "Complete Book of Home Remedies" (家庭療法全書) is the first of its kind in the Korean magazine world and is a book that should be referenced in any household.

◇

Also, the Records of Hong Kyŏng-nae (洪景來) and Yi P’il’s (李弼) Rebellion in the History of the Sinmi Year (辛未史話中 洪景來와 李弼의 亂記) is the first record published in Korea. In particular, the fact that Hong Kyŏng-nae called the nation Yŏn (燕國國號) and the ages of his faction other than his poems are facts that no one knew at this time, so it will be a great reference for history, and the collection of papers by various experts also needs to be read. (Ch’a)

◇

There is no way that our surrounding circumstances will suddenly change just because it is the New Year, but it seems that many Koreans live vaguely without plans or goals, so let's fight again in the new year with new spirit and plans, forgetting the past that has flowed away with the years, whether it was good or bad.

◇

With that in mind, I believe that *Battlefront Three Thousand Miles* (戰線三千里), published in this issue, will serve as a new promise while conveying news of comrades scattered throughout the capital and provinces. (Pak)

◇

I divided a year into twelve months and spent each month without knowing how I was spending it, and now it is already the New Year. I am heartbroken that I don't know what I have accomplished to greet the New Year.

I hope you all have a fun New Year and achieve your wishes. For the magazine and for personal matters, I am filled with all sorts of emotions, but I have no way to express them. (Ch’ae)

◇

It seems that our Kaebyŏk Publishing Company (開闢社) was blessed with marriage last year. Mr. Pak Sŭng-jin (朴勝進先生) got married in the summer, Mr. Pak No-a (朴露兒先生) got married in the fall, and Mr. Min Sam-sik (閔三植先生) of the business department got married right before the end of the year. Now, Mr. Ch’oe Kyŏng-hwa (崔京化先生) is the only bachelor left. I wonder what will happen to him in the new year.

◇

It seems that the office is lonely even as we greet the New Year, as female reporter Ms. Kim Wŏn-ju (金源珠先生) has left the company and Mr. Sŏng (成先生) has gone to Chinju (晉州) due to illness. I feel happy because I am a year older. (Pak Kŭp-sa)

別乾坤第六卷第十一號

Printed December 25, Showa 5 [1930]
Published January 1, Showa 6 [1931]
88 Kyŏngun-dong, Kyŏngsŏng-bu
Editor and Publisher Ch’a Sang-ch’an
88 Kyŏngun-dong, Kyŏngsŏng-bu
Printer: Chŏn Chun-sŏng
3-6 Ipnap-chŏng, Kyŏngsŏng-bu
Printing Company: Chosŏn Printing Stock Company
Printing Office: 88 Kyŏngun-dong
Publisher: Kaebyŏksa
Transfer Account: Kyŏngsŏng 8106

Note When Ordering
When ordering this magazine, be sure to send the money in advance to Transfer Account Kyŏngsŏng 8106 and clearly state your address and name. We absolutely refuse cash on delivery. <164>
<164>

**Named Entities**

洪景來	Hong Kyŏng-nae
李弼	Yi P’il
車相瓉	Ch’a Sang-ch’an
朴勝進	Pak Sŭng-jin
朴露兒	Pak No-a
閔三植	Min Sam-sik
崔京化	Ch’oe Kyŏng-hwa
金源珠	Kim Wŏn-ju
成	Sŏng
田畯成	Chŏn Chun-sŏng
京城府	Kyŏngsŏng-bu
慶雲洞	Kyŏngun-dong
葉町	Ipnap-chŏng
晉州	Chinju
朴給仕	Pak Kŭp-sa
開闢社	Kaebyŏksa



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	編輯落書
기사형태	사고·편집후기

編輯落書
여러분! 過歲나 安寧히하시엿습닛가 過去에도 여러분의 만흐신 聲援과 鞭撻로 本社가 이만큼 發展이되엿지만은 새해ㅔ는 더욱 聲援하시고 鞭撻하시여서 우리의 所望을 이르게하야주십시오.
◇
自畵自讚갓습니다마은 이번 新年號는 全社員이 한달동안 밤을새워가며 活動하니만치 內容이 자못 充實하게 되엿습니다. 特히 『家庭療法全書』의 附錄은 朝鮮雜誌界에서 츰잇는 것으로 엇던 家庭에서 던지반듯시 參考로 볼만한 冊임이다.
◇
그리고 辛未史話中 洪景來와 李弼의 亂記는 朝鮮에서 츰으로 發表한 紀錄인中特히 洪景來의 燕國國號를 稱한것이라던지 景來의 詩以外그들 一派의 年齡가튼 것은 누구나 이 것모르던 事實인즉 史學上큰 參考가 될것이오 여러 專門學者의 論文集도 한 읽을 必要가 잇는것임니다.(車)
◇
새해라고우리들의 周圍事情이 갑자기 달너질 理야 萬無하겟스나 平素에 너무나 計劃과 目標가 업시 漠然하게살어오는 듯 氣風이 만흔 우리 朝鮮사람들이고보니 좃른언잔튼간에 세월과 함 흘너가버린 過去事는 勿論하고 이해를 새로운 意氣와 計劃을 가지고다시 싸워보십시다.
◇
그러한 窟味로이번號에실은 戰線三千里는 京鄕各處에 흣터저잇는 同志들의 消息을 傳하는 同時에 새로운 約束을 맷는이되리라고 밋습니다.(朴)
◇
一年을 열두달에 나누어가지고 그한달한달을 이 보내는지 모르게 보내고 나니 발서 新年이라고합니다 무엇을 해노코 新年을 마지하는지 寒心하여 말이아니나 옵니다.
여러분은 그래도 자미잇는 새해를 마지하섯겟지요 소원성취나 하소서 雜誌의 일로 個人의일로그야말로 萬感이 交至하것만호소할길조차업습니다.(蔡)
◇
우리 開闢社에는 昨年에 婚姻福이터진 것갓습니다. 여름에는 朴勝進先生임이 장가를 가시고 가을에는 朴露兒先生임이 장가를 가시더니 바로요 歲前에는 營業國閔三植先生임이 장가를 가섯답니다. 인제는 獨身總角은 崔京化先生한분임니다 새해에  엇지 되실는지요.
◇
女記者金源珠先生임이 社를 나가시고 成先生임이  病으로 晉州에가서기시니 새해를 마저도 事務室이 쓸쓸한것갓습니다. 저는 한 살을 더먹으닛가깃분것갓습니다.(朴給仕)

別乾坤第六卷第十一號

昭和五年十二月二十五日印刷
昭和六年一月一日發行
京城府慶雲洞八十八番地
編輯兼發行人 車相瓉
京城府慶雲洞八十八番地
印刷人 田畯成
京城府■葉町三ノ六一番地
印刷所 朝鮮印刷株式會社
印刷所慶雲洞八十八番地
發行所 開闢社
振替京城八一○六

主文하실의注意
本誌를 注文하실는 반듯시 振替京城八一○六으로 先金을 보내시고  住所와 姓名을 明記하십시오 外上과 代金引換은 絶對謝絶입니다＜164＞
＜164＞