잡지명	별건곤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	30만의 紅頭賊을 一擧掃蕩 高麗三元帥의 大勝捷 (The Great Victory of the Three Goryeo Generals in Sweeping Away 300,000 Red Turban Bandits)
필자	申湜
기사형태	문예기타 (Miscellaneous Literature)

The cruel power of time creates fragments of bloody history for insignificant lives and pushes forward relentlessly. Thus, in the course of a day, two days, a year, two years, ten years, a hundred years, these fragments of blood-soaked history are repeated again and again. It seems that as new impressions become clear, old impressions fade away, and as new memories become vivid, old memories become faint.

......Deletion of eight lines here (-original text)......

However, the Khitan and Mongol invasions of the mid-Goryeo period, less than a thousand years ago, must have been no less severe than the Imjin and Byeongja invasions, and the Red Turban bandit rebellion of the late Goryeo period was also significant, as historical records show.

Should it be called tragic? Or heroic? The tumultuous Red Turban rebellion of the late Goryeo period, after passing through three or four snow-filled, windy winters, was finally quelled by the hands of the three generals, An U, Kim Deuk-bae, and Yi Bang-sil, this spring when flowers bloomed and swallows returned. Let us take a moment to reflect on this fragment of blood-soaked history, 500 years later, in this spring season.

571 years ago - Goryeo Gongmin King 6, Winter, October!

More than two hundred years after Genghis Khan of the Mongol Empire, who had spread his power even to Europe, passed away, and also two hundred years after Kublai Khan, who inherited his ancestors' legacy as a leader of a northern nomadic tribe and eventually conquered and commanded the entire Central Plains, died! Perhaps it is the cycle of rise and fall in the order of nature. As the power of the Yuan dynasty, which had once dominated the world, suddenly faltered and its authority weakened, the entire country fell into chaos, and various heroes rose in rebellion. Among them, the Red Turban bandits Gwan Seon-saeng and Pa-du-pan rose in the north, and their military strength greatly increased. In the second month of the following spring, they issued a proclamation to the world, declaring that they would raise an army to restore the Central Plains. In the eighth month of that year, over 3,000 bandit soldiers crossed the Yalu River and engaged in pillaging. However, the Vice Commander-in-chief Kim Won-bong concealed this and did not report it to the court, so the court remained unaware. In any case, it was a time of peace and tranquility, both then and now.

However, eventually, in the twelfth month of that year, the leader of the bandit army, Mo Geo-gyeong, led 40,000 troops and crossed the frozen Yalu River in the depths of winter, capturing Uiju Fortress and killing Vice Envoy Ju Yeong-se and over a thousand residents. With unstoppable momentum, they ravaged the area south of Pyongyang. This was truly the beginning of the Red Turban rebellion, and the court, still haunted by the bloody memories of the Khitan and Mongol invasions, was once again shocked and sought to devise defense strategies. Yi Am, the Minister of Culture, was appointed as Supreme Commander, Gyeong Cheon-heung as Vice Commander, Kim Deuk-bae as Commander, Yi Chun-bu as Governor of Seogyeong, and Yi In-im as Governor of Seogyeong Prefecture to advance towards the northwest. However, they only managed to reach Anju and, fearing the bandit soldiers, retreated to Hwangju. Only An U encountered the bandit soldiers at the Cheongcheon River and fought fiercely to repel them. In the first month of the following spring, General Yi Bang-sil defeated the bandit soldiers at Cheolhwa County, and the various armies gathered at Yangsaeng Station, totaling over 20,000 soldiers. Although the military strength had greatly increased, the weather was severely cold at the time, and many soldiers suffered frostbite on their hands and feet and collapsed on the ground. They eventually advanced to Seogyeong, but the casualties on both sides were countless. When the bandit soldiers retreated to Yongmun and Hamjong, An U, Yi Bang-sil, and Kim Eo-jin advanced to Hamjong and fought fiercely. As a result, they beheaded over 20,000 enemies and captured the false Yuan general Hwang Ji-seon, greatly weakening the bandit forces, who retreated to Jaengsan County. Yi Bang-sil led 1,000 elite soldiers to pursue the enemy to Yeonju, and An U, Kim Deuk-bae, and others also led elite cavalry to join the pursuit. The bandit soldiers were in dire straits, and thousands drowned while crossing the river. Those who fled died of starvation and exhaustion along the way. Bang-sil pursued them as far as Goseonju, beheading hundreds of bandit leaders. Earlier, General Yu Tang of the Central Division had completely crushed the bandit soldiers who had fled from Sukcheon in Jeongju. The remaining 300 or so bandit soldiers fled to Uiju in one day and one night and crossed the Yalu River. The government army celebrated their victory and returned to the capital. In the summer of the fourth month, when the bandit soldiers invaded Hwangju, Yi Bang-sil was sent again to defeat them at Pungcheon. The bandit soldiers fled by boat. Upon his triumphant return, the court held a grand banquet to honor him and presented Bang-sil with a jade belt and jade tassel. Even the king's daughter suspected that the state was giving away its treasures, but the king did not begrudge it, saying, "The fact that the country's ancestral shrines have not been reduced to ruins and the people have not been turned into fish meat is all thanks to Bang-sil's merits. Even if I were to cut off my flesh and give it to Bang-sil, it would still not be enough. Why would I begrudge a mere jade belt and jade tassel?" From this, one can understand the extent of Bang-sil's contributions to the country. The Red Turban rebellion, which had plagued the northwest for two years, was thus brought to an end.

However, the Red Turban bandits, having suffered a major defeat in their first invasion, plotted a second invasion in the tenth year of King Gongmin's reign (1361), in the tenth month of winter. The false officials Pan Seong, Sa Yu, Gwan Seon-saeng, and General Ju, leading over 100,000 troops, crossed the Yalu River again and first invaded Sakju. Although the government army achieved some victories in various places, they were ultimately unable to repel the enemy due to their overwhelming numbers, and many soldiers were defeated and returned. They even requested reinforcements from the capital's soldiers. The vanguard of the bandit army approached the capital day by day, and the situation became dire. The court was shocked, and the people's hearts were in turmoil. Among the generals, there were strong demands from the young and vigorous faction, such as General Choe Yeong, who vehemently insisted that the capital must be defended. However, the cowardly and inactive ministers remained silent and reluctantly decided to flee south to avoid the chaos. The king finally left Songgyeong and fled south, and all the people scattered, with the old and young falling and mothers and children abandoning each other. Cries shook the rivers and mountains, and a murderous aura filled the heavens and earth. When the king arrived at Tongjigwon, he received a report that the bandit soldiers were already approaching, and the king's procession was quite miserable to behold. Still, as the king crossed the Imjin River, he looked around at the mountains and rivers and said to the civil officials Won Song-su and Yi Saek, "In such scenery, you should compose linked verses." Truly, the world was not at peace, but one could not help but say that the king was a wise and virtuous ruler with the magnanimity of Yao and Shun. However, the capital was eventually captured.

In December, the king fled south to Andong in Gyeongsang Province and appointed Jeong Se-un as Commander-in-Chief to encourage the various armies. At the same time, he issued a decree of mourning to console the people and mobilized righteous armies from various provinces to punish the enemy.

After capturing Songgyeong, the bandit soldiers committed all kinds of atrocities. The misery of their deeds makes even those who hear it 600 years later shudder in their arms, so I will refrain from recording them one by one. Whether it was due to divine providence or the stirring of the people's hearts, in the first month of the following spring, An U, Kim Deuk-bae, Yi Bang-sil, and Choe Yeong, Yi Tae-jo (Yi Seong-gye), and other prominent generals of the time led 200,000 troops and faced the enemy in front of Cheonsusa Temple in the eastern suburbs. The situation of the government army suddenly improved greatly. Commander-in-Chief Jeong Se-un encouraged the soldiers to besiege the capital and attack with drums and shouts. The bandit crowds were greatly surprised and at a loss. Yi Tae-jo, with 2,000 soldiers under his command, took the lead and fought fiercely, defeating the enemy and beheading the bandit leaders Sa Yu and Gwan Seon-saeng. The bandit soldiers were greatly confused and trampled on each other, with corpses filling the city. The number of beheaded was nearly 200,000, and they seized two Yuan emperor's jade seals, one gold treasure, and countless other gold, silver, bronze seals, weapons, and other items. Due to the accumulated resentment from the long period of plunder, they wanted to kill every last one of them, but they decided that it was inhumane to kill the fleeing bandit army, so they opened the Sungin and Tanhyeon gates to allow them to escape. The remaining members of the party, Pa-du-pan and others, led the remaining followers and fled across the Yalu River in a hurry, never to invade again. The government army also returned in triumph. The great Red Turban rebellion, which had shaken the entire country of Goryeo for five years, was thus quelled and brought to a close. However, An U, Kim Deuk-bae, Yi Bang-sil, and Jeong Se-un, who had worked together to defeat the bandit army in two campaigns, were all killed midway due to the jealousy of the treacherous minister Kim Yong.

Alas! Should we feel sorrow? Should we feel anger? The end of heroes and great men! It is often the case, but the performance of such an inhumane and unjust drama due to jealousy, envy, factional strife, and partisanship is rare even in the East and West.

It is said that afterwards, when the sons of the An and Yi generals, who were only ten years old, were seen playing in the streets, the people of the capital competed to give them food, saying, "The reason we can eat and sleep in peace now is all thanks to the merits of the three generals," and some people even shed tears of gratitude.

**Named Entities**

安祐	An U
金得培	Kim Deuk-bae
李芳實	Yi Bang-sil
高麗	Goryeo
契丹	Khitan
蒙古	Mongol
壬辰	Imjin
丙子	Byeongja
紅頭賊	Hongdujeok
恭愍王	Gongmin Wang
成吉思汗	Chinggis Khan
忽必烈	Kublai Khan
元	Won
紅頭賊關先生	Hongdujeok Kwan Sŏnsaeng
破頭潘	P'a-du-p'an
鴨綠江	Amnokkang
金元鳳	Kim Wŏn-bong
毛居敬	Mo Kŏ-gyŏng
義州城	Ŭiju-sŏng
朱永世	Chu Yŏng-se
平壤	P’yŏngyang
李嵒	Yi Am
慶千興	Kyŏng Ch’ŏn-hŭng
李春富	Yi Ch’un-bu
李仁任	Yi In-im
西京	Sŏgyŏng
安州	Anju
黃州	Hwangju
淸川江	Ch’ŏngch’ŏn-gang
李芳實	Yi Pang-sil
鐵化縣	Ch’ŏlhwa-hyŏn
陽生驛	Yangsaeng-yŏk
金於珍	Kim Ŏ-jin
龍閊咸從	Yongmun Hamjong
甑山縣	Chŭngsan-hyŏn
延州	Yŏnju
古宣州	Kosŏnju
肅川	Sukch’ŏn
柳塘	Yu T’ang
靜州	Chŏngju
豊川	P’ungch’ŏn
玉帶	oktae
玉纓	ogyŏng
潘誠	P’an Sŏng
沙劉	Sa Yu
朱元帥	Chu Wŏn-su
朔州	Sakchu
崔瑩	Ch’oe Yŏng
宰臣	Chaech’in
松京	Songgyŏng
慶尙道	Kyŏngsangdo
安東	Andong
鄭世雲	Chŏng Se-un
李太祖	Yi T’aejo
天壽寺	Ch’ŏnsu-sa
金鏞	Kim Yong
崇仁炭峴	Sungin Tanhyeon



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	30만의 紅頭賊을 一擧掃蕩 高麗三元帥의 大勝捷
필자	申湜
기사형태	문예기타

30만의 紅頭賊을 一擧掃蕩 高麗三元帥의 大勝捷
						申湜
얄구진 시간의 힘은 하잘 것 업는 人生에게 도막도막이 피의 歷史를 만드러 노코 압흐로 압흐로 다름질 친다. 그리하야 무덕무덕이 피무든 歷史의 토막도 하로 잇흘 1년 잇해 10년 百年 이러케 지나는 동안에 또다시 反覆되고 또다시 反覆되고 하야 새 印象이 또렷한만큼 무근 印象이 흩터저가고 새 記憶이 또렷한 만큼 녯 記憶이 얄버가는 것도 事實인가보다.
......此間 八行 削除 (-원문)......
그러나 천년이 다 못된 高麗中葉의 契丹亂 蒙古亂도 壬辰 丙子에 못하지는 안이햇슬 것이요 高麗末年의 紅頭賊亂離도 또한 컷던 것도 歷史上으로 보아 그짓이 안이다.
無慘하다 할까? 悲壯하다 할까? 高麗末年의 風雲이 험악하던 紅頭賊의 亂離도 또한 눈 날니고 바람차던 겨을을 세 번 네 번 이나 지나가지고 五個星霜만에 安祐, 金得培, 李芳實 三元帥의 손을 빌어 비로소 平定되기 꼿 피여오고 제비 날너오던 이 봄철이라 하니 애오라지 이 피무든 歷史의 한토막을 500년후 이 봄철에 생각이나 다시 한번 해보자.

지금으로 571년전 -高麗 恭愍王 6년 冬 10월!
歐洲天地까지 威嚴을 뜰치던 蒙古의 成吉思汗이 세상을 버린지도 二百餘年 北方의 一胡族으로 父祖의 뒤를 이어 中原一幅을 긔어코 席捲號令하던 나라의 忽必烈이 죽은 지도 역시 二百年! 一盛一衰는 天理의 循環일넌지, 그러케 천하를 威壓하던 元나라의 세력이 일시에 頓挫하야 威令이 서지 못하게 되매, 全國이 混亂하고 群雄이 蜂起하는 중에 紅頭賊關先生 破頭潘等이 北方에서 이러나게 되니 兵勢가 大振하는지라 翌年 春二月에 천하에 檄文을 돌니되 倡義擧兵에 中原을 恢復한다 自稱하고 그해 8월에 賊兵 3천 여명이 鴨綠江을 건너와서 剽掠하다가 갓스나<14> 都指揮使 金元鳳이 숨기고 上報를 올니지 안이하야 朝廷에서는 아지도 못하고 지낫스니 엇잿던 녜나 이제나 太平乾坤의 시대 일이엇다.
그러나 필경은 그해 12월에 賊軍의 魁首 毛居敬이 4만兵을 거느리고 때맛츰 기픈 겨을 어름 구든 鴨綠江을 거러 건너 義州城을 陷落하고 副使 朱永世와 주민 千餘名을  즉이고 破竹의 勢로 平壤以南을 蹂躪케 되니 이것이 정말 紅頭賊亂의 시초요 지금껏 契丹, 蒙古의 亂에 피비린내나는 기억이 아직도 사라지지 안흔 滿朝上下는 또다시 震驚하야 防禦의 策을 강구할 새, 門下侍中李嵒으로 都元帥, 慶千興으로 副元帥, 金得培로 指揮使, 李春富로 西京尹, 李仁任으로 西京府撫使를 삼어 西北으로 進軍케 하엿스나 겨우 安州까지 나간 후 賊兵을 두려워하야 나가지 못하고 黃州로 退屯할 뿐이요 오직 安祐가 淸川江에서 賊兵을 맛나 力戰退却식히고 그 이듬해 春正月에는 上將軍 李芳實이 鐵化縣에서 賊兵을 대파하고 諸軍이 역시 陽生驛에 모이게 되니 總히 2만여 兵이라. 軍勢는 大振하엿스나 때에 마츰 日氣가 大寒하야 士卒의 手足이 어러터지고 땅에 업드러지는 자 또한 만하얏섯다. 西京까지 드디어 進攻하엿스나 彼我에 死傷이 不知其數요 賊兵이 겨우 龍閊咸從에 退屯하거늘 安祐, 李芳實, 金於珍등이 咸從에 進軍하야 力戰한 결과, 2만여 級을 베히고 僞元帥 黃志善을 사로잡으니 賊勢가 크게 꺽기어 甑山縣에 退保하는지라, 李芳實이 精兵 1천으로 敵軍을 쫏차 延州까지 나가고 安祐, 金得培등이 또한 精騎를 거느리고 잇대여 당도하니 賊兵이 勢窮하야 江을 건너다가 빠저 죽은 자 거의 數千이요 逃亡하여 가는 길에 飢困을 못이기여 죽은 자-도로에 相連하엿다. 芳實이 古宣州까지 追至하야 數百級의 賊首를 베히고 그보다 먼저 肅川에서 도망하야 온 賊兵을 中部將 柳塘이 靜州에서 씨가 업지 격파하니 賊兵의 남은 무리 겨우 3백여人이 一日一夜에 義州까지 도망하야 鴨綠江을 건너 다라나고 말엇다. 이에 官軍이 凱歌를 부르며 京師로 還軍하고 夏4月에는 賊兵이 黃州를 侵掠하거늘 다시 李芳實을 보내여 豊川에서 격파하니 賊兵이 배를 타고 도주하는지라 드듸어 凱旋하매 朝廷에서 慰勞의 大宴을 베풀고 芳實에게 玉帶와 玉纓을 주니 나라의 公主까지 국가의 至寶를 주는 것으로 疑心하되 王은 그를 앗기지 안이하고 하는 말이 나라의 宗社가 丘墟를 이루지 안이하고 人民으로 魚肉이 되지 안이함은 다 芳實의 功이니 내가 살을 베여 芳實에게 주어도 오히려 부족하거던 다만 玉帶玉纓이야 앳길 것이 무엇이냐고 까지 하엿다. 이로써 芳實이 얼마만한 功勞를 국가에 낏친 지는 가히 알 수 잇는 일이요 2년간이나 西北에 騷擾하던 紅頭賊의 亂도 이로써 일단락을 짓고 마럿다.

그러나 一次入寇에 크게 失敗를 본 紅頭賊은 恭愍王 10년<15> 辛丑 冬10월에 再擧 入寇를 꾀할새 僞平章潘誠, 沙劉, 關先生, 朱元帥등이 十餘萬衆을  거느리고 鴨綠江을 다시 건너 먼저 朔州에 침입하니 官軍이 도처에서 다소의 勝捷은 잇섯스나 원래 衆寡不敵의 勢로 맛츰내 擊退치 못하고 敗還하는 將卒이 만케 되며 京兵에게 까지 救援을 청하게 되고, 賊兵의 先鋒은 날로 京師에 逼迫하야 갓가히 오니 일이 심히 급한지라 朝廷이 震驚하야 人心이 물 끌트시 洶洶한지라 諸將中에는 京城을 不可不守라고 痛憤大呌하는 崔瑩將軍가튼 少壯派의 極力主張도 잇섯스나, 懦弱無爲한 宰臣들은 相顧黙然할 뿐 不得已 南幸避亂키를 결정하고 大駕 드듸여 松京을 떠나 南幸케 되니 滿都人民이 互相離散하야 老幼가 顚伏하고 子母가 相棄하야 哭聲이 江山을 움지기고 殺氣天地에 가득하더라. 大駕! 通濟院에 이르자 벌서 賊兵이 이미 逼近함을 來報하며 大駕의 행색이 자못 悽慘하기 참아 볼 수 업스나 그래도 王은 臨津江을 건너면서 山河를 둘너보다가 文臣 元松壽李穡더러 말하기를 「如此風景에 卿等은 正宜聯句」라 하섯스니, 정말 세상이 태평치 못해 그럿치 임금님은 堯舜가트신 배포 裕하신 聖主님이라고 안이할 수 업다. 그러나 京城은 맛침내 陷落되고 마럿다.
12월에 王이 慶尙道 安東까지 南幸하야 鄭世雲으로 摠兵官을 삼어 諸軍을 督勵케 하고 哀痛詔를 내리여 민심을 위안케 하는 동시에 諸道의 義兵을 徵發하야 敵軍을 討伐케 하엿다.
賊兵은 松京을 함락한 후 가진 殘虐을 다하니 그의 慘狀은 600년후 오늘 사람으로도 오히려 붓드른 팔을 떨니게 하는지라 일일히 기록하기도 오히려 피하거니와 天道가 도라봄이 잇슴일넌지 人心이 激奮됨일넌지 그 이듬해 春正月에 安祐, 金得培, 李芳實 以下, 崔塋, 李太祖등 當代有數의 諸將이  20만兵을 통솔하고 東郊天壽寺前에서 對陣케 되니 官軍의 形勢가 일시에 大振케 되는지라 摠兵官 鄭世雲이 將卒을 督勵하야 京城을 進圍하고 鼓噪奮擊하니, 賊衆이 大驚하야 蒼黃罔措하는 판에 李太祖-麾下兵 2천人으로 선봉이 되야 力戰大破하고 賊魁 沙劉, 關先生의 무리를 베히니 賊兵의 徒衆이 크게 어지러워 서로 발고 깔고하야 僵尸가 滿城이요 斬首한 수효-거의 20만이오, 元帝의 玉璽 두뎅이와 金寶 한뎅이와 기타 金銀銅印兵器等屬을 획득한 것이 또한 그 수효를 알지 못하게 되엿다. 오래 蹂躪을 당한 寃恨으로는 한놈도 씨를 안이 남기고 殺戮을 할것이로되 窮한 賊軍을 다 죽이는 것은 人道에 不忍이라 하야 崇仁炭峴二門을 열어 도망할 길을 내여주니 餘黨破頭潘等이 남은 徒衆을 거느리고 뒤도 도라볼 사이가 업시, 급한 거름으로 鴨綠江을 건너 도망하야 간 후 다시 入寇치 안이하고 官軍이 또한 凱還하니 前後五個星霜을 두고 高麗 一國을 震駭케 한 紅頭賊의 大亂도 이것으로 平定이 되고<16> 幕을 맛추엇스나 前後 2회에 同心戮力하야 賊軍을 討平한 安祐, 金得培, 李芳實과 鄭世雲은 奸臣 金鏞의 猜忌로 중도에서 다가티 殺害를 맛나고 마럿다.
아! 痛타 할까? 憤타 할까? 英雄과 偉人의 末路! 대개 그럿타 하거니와 猜忌와 嫉妬, 黨爭과 派閥로 이와 가튼 不忍非道의 劇을 演出함은 東西에도 그 예가 만치는 못할 것이다.
그 후에도 安李二元帥의 아들이 나히 겨우 여남살된 아이들로 市街에 나와 노는 것을 보고는 滿都人士가 서로 닷호어 먹을 것을 주며 우리가 지금 입에 밥이 드러가고 자리에 누어 잠을 자게 된 것은 다 三元帥의 功이라 하고 뜨거운 눈물을 흘니며 感激에 넘치어 우는 사람까지 잇섯다 한다.<13>
<14-16, 13>