Magazine Title	別건곤 第20號
Publication Date	1929년 04월 01일
Article Title	痛快! 大痛快! 權慄都元帥 幸州大捷 - 宣祖 癸巳 三月 十三日 (Triumphant! Great Triumph! Grand General Kwon Yul's Great Victory at Haengju - King Seonjo's Gyesa, March 13th)
Author	李允宰
Article Type	문예기타 (Literature, Other)

The Battle of Haengju occurred on February 12th of the Gyesa year (26th year of King Seonjo's reign), 10 months after the start of the Imjin War (壬亂). (March 13th in the solar calendar). Kwon Yul (權慄), the protagonist of this battle, was serving as a special envoy to Gwangju (光州). After suffering a crushing defeat at Yongin (龍仁) the previous year, he returned to his hometown and gathered over a thousand young men from within the province (境內) and neighboring villages (近邑), focusing on their training. Later, for his achievement in fighting off Japanese soldiers entering Jeonju (全州) from Geumsan (錦山) at Ichi (梨峙), he was promoted to Governor of Jeolla Province (全羅監司). Even at this time, thanks to this victory, Honam (湖南) was able to avoid the enemy's widespread devastation. Receiving this gracious order, Yul (慄) went to Jeonju (全州), reorganized the military, and, considering the swift recovery of the capital (京城) the most urgent task, led twenty thousand soldiers and the monk general Cheo-yeong (處英) northward, devoting himself to aiding the king (勤王). Reaching Suwon (水原), he seized Dokseong Mountain Fortress (禿城山城), defeated the Japanese soldiers, advanced again, and established a camp at Haengju Mountain Fortress (幸州山城) in Goyang County (高陽郡) (30 li away from the capital). At this time, with the enemy's various routes of forces being surrounded by the Ming army's reinforcements and converging on the capital, the situation was quite dire. At dawn on the 12th, tens of thousands of Japanese cavalrymen came and besieged the mountain fortress. Yul (慄) issued an order to the troops to wait calmly. The Japanese soldiers attacked in three directions, and the situation became extremely pressing. Yul (慄) stood at the front lines to supervise the battle, and arrows and stones rained down, and the sound of cannons shook the heavens and the earth, creating a great battle. The Japanese soldiers poured fire on bundles of grass (束草) and sent them with the wind to burn the castle walls. Those inside the castle sprayed water to extinguish the fire, and the Japanese soldiers demolished the northwest corner of the castle walls. When the monk soldiers retreated slightly, Yul (慄) immediately beheaded several of those who retreated, and supervised the generals, greatly boosting morale. Shortly after, arrows ran out <17> and they could no longer fight. However, Naval Commander Yi Bin (李蘋) sent tens of thousands of arrows on ships, and without any setbacks, they fought even more fiercely. Like this, from sunrise to sunset, the enemy and our forces fought with all their might, and finally, the Japanese soldiers were greatly defeated. Corpses filled the mountains, and blood flowed like a river. As the Japanese soldiers fled in disarray, Yul (慄) led ten thousand men and pursued the Japanese soldiers. Fallen corpses were piled on the road, and the surviving soldiers wept and returned. The enemy's bows, arrows, helmets, armor, swords, spears, and other Japanese weapons (倭器) seized amounted to 727 items. The bodies were piled up in four piles, firewood was gathered, and they were burned, the smell of burning reaching ten li away. Yul (慄) moved his troops to Imjin (臨津) and encamped at Paju Mountain Fortress (坡州山城). The Japanese army heard the report of the defeat at Haengju (幸州) and were greatly surprised. In order to avenge this, Haengjang Kiyomasa (行長淸正) and others led 40,000 soldiers and rushed to Haengju (幸州). But Yul's (慄) soldiers had already moved to Paju (坡州), so they burned the mountain fortress and returned.

This Great Victory at Haengju (幸州大捷) was the most heroic land battle during the Imjin War (任亂). The day after this victory, Ming General Cha Da-su (査大受) came and, after seeing the actual battlefield, was surprised and said, "There is indeed a true general in Joseon!" The Ming Emperor, after hearing this victory report, said, "Joseon was originally called a strong country, but now, seeing Kwon Yul's (權慄) achievement in beheading enemies, the people of Joseon can indeed be uplifted!" Even Yi Yu-song (李如松), the aid general who had been defeated at Byeokjegwan (碧蹄館) and fled in panic to Pyongyang (平壤), after hearing this victory report, regretted returning his troops so hastily at the time and even returned to Gaeseong (開城) to devise a new plan.
(The following 3 lines deleted from the original) <18>

Named Entities

權慄	Kwon Yul
光州	Kwangju
龍仁	Yongin
錦山	Kŭmsan
全州	Chŏnju
梨峙	Ichi
全羅監司	Chŏlla Kamsa
湖南	Honam
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
處英	Ch'ŏ-yŏng
水原	Suwŏn
禿城山城	T'uksŏng Sansŏng
幸州山城	Haengju Sansŏng
高陽郡	Koyang-gun
臨津	Imjin
坡州山城	P'aju Sansŏng
任亂	Imnan
査大受	Cha Ta-su
碧蹄館	Pyŏkt'yegwan
平壤	P'yŏngyang
李如松	I Yŏ-song
開城	Kaesŏng
行長淸正	Haengjang Ch'ŏngjŏng
李蘋	I Pin



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	痛快! 大痛快! 權慄都元帥 幸州大捷 - 宣祖 癸巳 三月 十三日
필자	李允宰
기사형태	문예기타

痛快! 大痛快! 權慄都元帥 幸州大捷 - 宣祖 癸巳 三月 十三日
						李允宰
(......이상 22줄 삭제-원문......)
幸州役은 任亂이 시작된 지 10개월을 지난 癸巳年(宣祖 26년) 2월 12일이다. (陽 3월 13일)이 役의 主人公인 權慄은 光州特使로 잇스면서 지난 해에 龍仁에서 慘敗를 보고 자긔 고향에 돌아와 境內와 近邑의 子弟 千餘人을 어더서 훈련하기에 열중하더니 그후에 錦山으로부터 全州로 들어오는 日兵을 梨峙에 싸우어 물러치엇다는 功으로써 全羅監司로 陞進되엇다. 이때만 해도 이 勝捷으로 말미암아 湖南은 오로지 敵의 遍蹂를 면하게 된 것이다. 慄이 이 恩命을 밧고 全州에 가서 軍紀를 整頓하고 하로 밧비 京城을 收復함이 가장 急務라하여 군사 二萬과 僧將處英을 거느리고 곳 北上하여 勤王에 힘썻다. 水原에 이르러 禿城山城을 웅거하여 日兵을 破하고 다시 전진하여 漢江을 건너 高陽郡 幸州山城(京城을 距하기 30里)에 陳첫다. 이때는 敵의 諸路軍이 明軍의 來援에 둘려서 바양흐로 京城으로 集注하는 판이매 그 形勢가 자못 큰지라. 12일 새벽에 日兵 數萬騎가 와서 山城을 포위하엿다. 慄이 軍中에 令을 내리어 鎭靜히 待하라 하더니 日兵이 三路로 난우어 來攻하여 형세가 심히 逼切한지라 慄이 陳頭에 나서서 督戰하니 矢石이 비오듯 하고 砲聲이  천지를 움즉이어 一大激戰을 演하엿다. 日兵이 束草에 불을 붓치어 바람껼에 노아서 城柵을 살오려거늘 城中이 물을 뿌리어 이를 구하고 日兵이 城柵의 西北隅를 헐어버리니 僧軍이 조곰 퇴각하거늘 慄이 당장에 퇴각한 자 數人을 親斬하고 諸將을 督하니 士氣가 大振이라. 조곰 뒤에 화살이 다하여<17> 더 싸울수 업게 되더니 水使李蘋이 화살 數萬을 배에 실어 보내어 왓슴으로 조곰도 挫折되는 일이 업시 더욱 奮戰하엿다. 이와 가티 日出로부터 日沒까지 彼我力戰하여 드듸어 日兵이 大敗하니 死屍가 산에 가득하고 流血이 내를 일우엇다. 日兵이 潰走할 새 慄이 萬餘人을 거느리고 日兵의 뒤를 추격하니 伏屍가 길에 싸히고 殘兵은 통곡하고 돌아간지라 . 적의 弓箭盔甲刀銃倭器 등을 奪獲한 것이 모도 7백 27件이요 시체를 싸하 四堆로 난우고 柴草를 모아서 불에 살오니 타는 냄새가 十里박게까지 밋치엇다. 慄이 군사를 臨津으로 옴기고 坡州山城에 陳쳣더니 日陳이 幸州의 敗報를 듯고 크게 놀라서 이를 復讎하려고 行長淸正 등이 四萬兵을 거느리고 급히 달아 幸州로 들어온즉 慄의 군사는 이미 坡州로 옴기어간지라 山城을 燒火하고 돌아갓다.
이 幸州大捷은 任亂중에 陸戰으로 가장 壯烈한 것이다. 이 戰捷이 잇은 翌日에 明將査大受가 와서 실지로 戰蹟을 보고 놀래어 말하기를 朝鮮에 과연 眞將軍이 잇도다 하엿스며 明帝는 이 捷報를 듯고 말하기를 朝鮮을 본대 强國이라 일컬엇더니 이제 權慄의 斬獲한 功을 보니 朝鮮人民은 오히려 가히 振作하겟도다 하엿스며 碧蹄館에서 敗하여 혼이 나서 멀리 平壤으로 뛰엇던 援將 李如松도 이 捷報를 듯고 嚮時에 넘우 급거히 回軍하엿슴을 후회하고 빨리 開城으로 돌아와 再圖를 꾀하는 일까지 잇섯다.
(이하 3줄 삭제-원문) <18>
<17-18>