잡지명	별건곤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	東方 三大國 建設記 - 高句麗 亡國遺民으로 渤海國를 創設한 大祚榮 (Construction Records of the Three Great Eastern Nations - Dae Jo-yeong, who founded the Balhae Kingdom with the refugees of the fallen Goguryeo)
필자	申明均
기사형태	문예기타 (Arts and Literature, Other)

Construction Records of the Three Great Eastern Nations - Dae Jo-yeong, who founded the Balhae Kingdom with the refugees of the fallen Goguryeo
Shin Myeong-gyun

Thirty-one years after the 700-year Jongsa (宗社) of Goguryeo was trampled under the iron hooves of the Silla-Tang allied forces, a great nation was founded on its former territory, like a flower blooming on an old tree and the sun shining in the dark night. It was the Great Balhae, a famous powerful nation in not only Joseon history but also East Asian history. Taejo Gowang (太祖高王) of this Balhae, Dae Jo-yeong (大祚榮) (Dae is the surname), was originally the son of Geolgeoljungsang (乞乞仲象), a former general of Goguryeo. He was a great man with outstanding natural talents, bravery, and both literary and martial intelligence. In his youth, he became a soldier of Goguryeo and made meritorious contributions on the border. When Goguryeo fell, he and his father, Jung-sang, shed tears of sorrow and indignation and fled west to Yeongju (營州) (northwest of the Liao River), forming an alliance with the Khitans and plotting the restoration of their homeland. In 695 AD, when the Khitans raised an army and invaded Tang, Jo-yeong and his father seized the opportunity to gather the remaining soldiers of Goguryeo and, together with the Mohe chieftain Geolsabiwu (乞四比羽), migrated east to the vicinity of Taebaeksan (太白山) (Baekdu Mountain), built a castle on the banks of the Oru River (奧婁河) (tributary of the Songhua River), and began the construction of a nation. At that time, Silla and Tang clashed with each other, and Silla repelled Tang troops and occupied the former territories of Baekje and Goguryeo. The southern Goguryeo territory fell within the sphere of influence of Silla, but the northern Goguryeo territory (north of the Daedong River in Pyeongan Province and north of Deogwon in Hamgyeong Province) had already been driven out of Tang's power, and Silla's new power had not yet reached it, resulting in a virtually ownerless land. The warlords of Goguryeo each occupied their own territories. Hearing of Dae Jo-yeong's prestige, they all flocked to him, and the various tribes of the Mohe also submitted. (The Mohe were also a separate tribe of Goguryeo, located in eastern Manchuria, divided into six tribes during the Sui Dynasty. Among them, the Heuksu tribe was located near the Heukryong River, the Somal tribe was located along the Songhua River, a tributary of the Heukryong River, and the Baeksu tribe was located near Jangbaeksan.) Within a few years, the territory greatly expanded, becoming a formidable great power. At that time, China was in the era of Empress Wu Zetian of the Tang Dynasty. Hearing that Balhae had newly risen in the former territory of Goguryeo, she intended to destroy it, and in 699 AD, she sent Yi Haego (李楷固), Sok Gu (索仇), and others to lead a large army to invade. Taejo resisted the enemy together with his father Jung-sang and Geolsabiwu, but unfortunately, Jung-sang died of illness in the army, and Bi-u also died in battle, putting the Balhae army at a temporary disadvantage. Tang further increased its military pressure and pursued Balhae. Taejo then selected elite soldiers from Goguryeo and Mohe, ambushed them in the treacherous terrain of Cheonmunryeong (天門嶺) (northern Baekdu Mountain), and crushed the enemy, killing Sok Gu and pursuing them with irresistible force, annihilating the entire army. Hae-go barely escaped alone. Taejo, taking advantage of the victory, commanded a large army and issued orders in all directions. The Mohe people and the remaining people of Goguryeo were all frightened and submitted, and the former territory of Goguryeo was temporarily restored. Taejo finally founded the nation in 699 AD (8th year of King Hyoso of Silla), calling the nation Jin (震), or Jindan (震旦), and the year was called Cheontong (天統). He also built Holhanseong (忽汗城) (near Donhwa County, Jilin Province) on the Holhan River (忽汗河) (Horqa River, a tributary of the Heukryong River) as the capital and conquered the four directions, taking over more than 10 countries in the north, reaching an area of over 5,000 li. The east bordered the Canghai (滄海) (the so-called Sea of Japan), the south bordered the Nihae (泥海) (Deogwon) and the Daedong River, the west bordered the Liao River, and the north bordered the Heukryong River, with a standing army of hundreds of thousands. Fifteen years later, in 714 AD, Taejo renamed the nation Balhae, sent envoys to Silla to the south to request peace, repelled the Khitans to the west, and maintained diplomatic relations with Japan, Tang, and the Turkic nations. He also sent students to Tang to learn about its culture and institutions. The official system was based on the Tang system, establishing the Seonjojong (宣詔省), Jungdaejong (中臺省), and Jeongdangseong (政堂省), as well as Jwauisang (左右相) and Jwapyeongjang (左右平章). Military officials included Jwa-Uwi Daejanggun (左右衛大將軍). Clothing regulations included purple, scarlet, light scarlet, green geup-ya hol, and gold and silver fish, so the political, educational, and cultural achievements were just like seeing the prosperous era of Goguryeo again.

<21>After Taejo achieved such a monumental feat, he passed away in 619 AD, but his son King Mu (武王) (Mu-ye) was also an outstanding ruler no less than Gaozong, valuing martial prowess even more, conquering the Heuksu Mohe (the Heuksu originally submitted to Balhae but requested officials from Tang, so the King was angered and conquered them). He also crossed the sea, attacked and captured Dengzhou of Tang, and assassinated the governor Wei Jun, thus avenging the old shame of Goguryeo. His son King Mun (文王) also launched an invasion into Mongolia, achieving great success. His descendant, Wang In-su, was a fourth-generation descendant of Yabeol, a younger brother of Go-wang. He was a rare and outstanding ruler who further expanded the achievements of Go-wang, conquering various tribes and greatly expanding the territory, establishing Five Capitals (Sanggyeong Yongcheonbu, Junggyeong Hyeondeokbu, Seogyeong Apnokbu, Donggyeong Yongwonbu, Namgyeong Namhaebu), Fifteen Prefectures, and 62 Bus, and renewing the system and culture, thus becoming a prosperous nation in the East. Tang, Japan, and the Khitans were all terrified and sent tributes and requested peace. However, by the time of the 14th ruler, King Ae (哀王) In-chan (諲譔), the politics became chaotic and national defense became weak. The Khitan Emperor Taizu Abaoji led a large army to invade and captured the capital. The King eventually surrendered to the Khitans. The 214-year glorious history of Balhae, once a prosperous nation in the East, was stained by the Khitan's bloodbath, and the national name of Balhae was demoted to Dongdan Kingdom, and the capital Holhanseong was transformed into Cheonbokseong, becoming subordinate to the Khitans (3rd year of King Gyeong-ae of Silla, 9th year of Taejo of Goryeo, 10 years before the fall of Silla). Crown Prince Gwang-hyeon and General Shin-deok fled south and surrendered to Goryeo, and the territories of southern and northern Manchuria, which had been the territory of the Korean people for thousands of years since Goguryeo, permanently lost their owners and became a battleground for foreign tribes.

<22>The capital of Balhae was relocated several times, initially located in Holhanseong, then moved to Sanggyeong Yongcheonbu (東京城 near Ningguta, Jilin Province today) during the reign of King Mun, and soon after moved to Donggyeong Yongwonbu, before being returned to Sanggyeong during the reign of King Seong.

**Named Entities**

高句麗	Goguryeo
羅唐聯合軍	Na-Tang yeonhapgun
渤海國	Balhae-guk
大祚榮	Tae Cho-yŏng
乞乞仲象	Kŏlkŏljungsang
營州	Yŏngju
契丹	K'yŏltan
靺鞨	Malgal
乞四比羽	Kŏlsabiyu
太白山	T’aebaeksan
奧婁河	Oru ha
新羅	Silla
平安道	P'yŏngan-do
大同江	Taedong-gang
咸鏡道	Hamgyŏng-do
德源	Tŏgwŏn
黑水部	Hŭksu-bu
黑龍江	Hŭngnyong-gang
粟末部	Sommal-bu
松花江	Songhwa-gang
白山部	Paeksan-bu
長白山	Changbaeksan
女王 則天武后	Yŏwang Ch'ŭkt'yŏnmuhu
李楷固	Yi Hae-go
索仇	Sok Ku
天門嶺	Ch'ŏnmunryŏng
忽汗河	Holhan ha
忽汗城	Holhan sŏng
金吉林省 敦化縣	Kŭm Gillim sŏng Tonhwa hyŏn
滄海	Ch'anghae
泥海	Nihae
日本	Ilbon
唐	Tang
突厥	T'ulkyŏl
宣詔省	Sŏnjojong
中臺省	Chungdaejong
政堂省	Chŏngdangseong
左右相	Jwawi-sang
左右平章	Jwapyŏngjang
左右衛大將軍	Jwawi Taejanggun
紫緋	Chapi
淺緋	Chŏnpi
綠急牙笏	Nokgŭpyahol
金銀魚	Kŭm-ŭn-ŏ
武王	Mu-wang
武藝	Mu-ye
高宗	Ko-jong
登州	Tŭngju
韋俊	Wi Chun
文王	Mun-wang
王仁秀	Wang In-su
弟野勃	Teyabol
上京龍泉府	Sanggyŏng Yongch'ŏnbu
中京顯德府	Chunggyŏng Hyŏndŏkbu
西京鴨綠府	Sŏgyŏng Apnokbu
東京龍原府	Tonggyŏng Yongwŏnbu
南京南海府	Namgyŏng Namhaebu
哀王諲譔	Aewang Ĭnjŏn
契丹太祖 阿保機	K'yŏltan T'aejo Abogi
太子 光顯	T'aeja Kwanghyŏn
將軍 申德	Changkun Sin-dŏk
高麗	Koryŏ
景哀王	Kyŏng-ae wang
高麗太祖	Koryŏ T'aejo
東丹國	Tongdan-guk
天福城	Ch'ŏnbok sŏng
東京城	Tonggyŏng sŏng
寧古塔	Nigguta
吉林	Gillim
成王	Sŏng-wang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	東方 三大國 建設記 - 高句麗 亡國遺民으로 渤海國를 創設한 大祚榮
필자	申明均
기사형태	문예기타

東方 三大國 建設記 - 高句麗 亡國遺民으로 渤海國를 創設한 大祚榮
						申明均
高句麗의 700년 宗社가 羅唐聯合軍의 산아운 말발굽에 蹂躪을 당한지 31년이 되던 해에 그 故土에는 맛치 古木에 꼿이 피고 暗夜에 태양이 비치운 것과 가티 高句麗 亡國遺民의 뜨거운 피와 땀의 결정으로 一大國家가 創設되엇스니 그것은 朝鮮史上 안이 東洋史上에 유명한 强國 大渤海엿다. 이 渤海의 太祖高王 大祚榮은(大는 姓) 원래 高句麗 舊將 乞乞仲象의 아들이다. 天姿가 英傑驍勇하고 文武智德을 겸비한 偉人으로 少時에 일즉이 高句麗의 軍人이 되야 邊功을 세우더니 高句麗가 망하매 그는 其父仲象과 가티 悲憤慷慨의 눈물을 뿌리며 西으로 營州(遼河西北)에 亡命하야 契丹과 結托하고 祖國의 회복을 謀하더니 西紀 695년에 契丹人이 兵을 起하야 唐을 侵伐하매 祚榮의 父子는 그 기회를 타서 高句麗 殘兵을 거나리고 靺鞨尊長 乞四比羽와 가티 동으로 太白山(白頭山)부근에 이주하야 奧婁河(松花江 支流)畔에 城壁을 築하고 國家建設에 착수하니 때는 마츰 新羅와 唐이 서로 충돌이 생겨 新羅가 唐兵을 擊退하고 百濟의 故地와 高句麗의 故地를 占取하는 際이라 南部 高句麗의 地는 新羅의 세력범위에 入하얏스나 北部 高句麗의 地(平安道 大洞江 以北과 咸鏡道 德源 以北)에는 唐의 세력이 이미 驅逐되고 新羅의 新勢力이 아즉 未及하야 자못 無主의 地와<20> 如한 상태에 이르매 高句麗人의 群雄이 각각 割據하엿더니 大祚榮의 威名을 듯고 모도 望風歸順하고 靺鞨의 諸部가 또한 服屬하니 (靺鞨은 역시 高句麗의 別族이니 滿洲의 東部에 잇서서 隋時에 六部에 分하얏섯는데 其中 黑水部는 黑龍江 부근에 잇섯고 粟末部는 黑龍江 支流 松花江 沿岸에 잇섯고 白山部는 長白山 부근에 잇섯다)불과 數年之間에 영토가 크게 擴張되야 엄연히 一大强國이 되엿섯다. 당시 中國은 唐은 女王 則天武后 時代라 高句麗 故地에 渤海가 새로  이러남을 듯고 此를 파멸코자하야 서기 699년에 李楷固, 索仇等으로 大兵을 率하고 來侵하니 太祖는 父仲象과 乞四比羽로 더부러 敵을 逆擊하더니 불행히 仲象이 軍中에서 病死하고 比羽가 또한 전사하야 渤海軍이 일시불리하니 唐은 더욱 兵勢를 加하야 渤海를 추격하는지라 太祖는 이에 高句麗와 靺鞨의 精兵을 뽑아 天門嶺(白頭山北部) 險地에서 伏兵하얏다가 적을 대파하고 索仇를 擊殺하며 破竹의 勢로 敵을 追擊하야 全軍을 陷沒하니 楷固가 겨우 單身으로 逃走하얏다. 太祖는 戰勝의 세를 乘하야 大兵을 擁하고 사방에 號令하니 靺鞨人과 高句麗의 遺民이 다 恐慌歸化하야 高句麗 舊疆이 일시 回復되엇다. 太祖는 서기 699년 (新羅 孝昭王 8년) 己亥에 遂히 國을 建하야 國號를 震, 또는 震旦이라 칭하고 年號를 天統이라 칭하며 또 忽汗河(黑龍江 支流 湖爾喀河-호로하)상에 홀한성(금길림성 돈화현 부근)을 築하야 國都로 삼고 四方을 정복하야 北方 10여국을 또 취하니 地方이 5천여리에 달하야 東은 滄海(所謂 日本海) 南은 泥海, (德源)及 大同江, 西는 遼河, 北은 黑龍江을 接하고 常備兵이 數十萬에 달하얏다. 後15년 癸丑에 太祖는 다시 國號를 渤海라 改稱하고 남으로 新羅에 使를 遣하야 和를 청하고 西으로 契丹을 斥하며 또 日本과 唐, 突厥諸國과 國交를 修하고 唐에 遊學生을 遣하야 文物制度를 學하며 官制는 唐制를 依倣하야 宣詔省, 中臺省, 政堂省, 과左右相, 左右平章 등을 置하고 武官은 左右衛大將軍 등을 置하며 服章은 紫緋, 淺緋,綠急牙笏, 金銀魚의 制를 用하니 政敎文治가 恰然히 高句麗의 盛代를 復見함과 如하엿다.
太祖는 이와가티 曠世의 大業을 成한 後 서기 619년에 崩御하야스나  其子 武王(武藝)은 또한 高宗에 不下하는 英傑의 主로 더욱 武勇을 尙하야 黑水靺鞨을 征服하고 (黑水는 본래 渤海에 服屬하얏다가 支是에 朝唐請吏함으로 王이 怒하야 征伐하얏다.) 또 海를 越하야 唐의 登州를 攻陷하고
刺史 韋俊을 刺殺하야 高句麗의 舊恥를 快雪하고 其子 文王은 또 蒙古를 攻略하야 大功을 세우며 其後 王仁秀는 高王의 弟野勃의 四世孫이니 稀世英傑의 主로 高王의 業을 더욱 확장하야 諸部落을 征服하고 크게 國土를 開拓하야 五京(上京龍泉府, 中京顯德府, 西京鴨綠府, 東京龍原府, 南京南海府)十五府, 62府를 置하고 制度文物을 一新케 하야 遂히 海東의 盛國이 되니 唐과 日本 契丹등이 모도 恐怖하야 方物을 送하고 和를 청하얏다. 그러나 제14대 王哀王諲譔에<21> 至하야 政治가 紊亂하고 國防이 또한 微弱하니 契丹太祖 阿保機가  大兵을 率하고 來侵하야 國都를 陷落하매 王은 遂히  契丹에게 出降하니 당시 東方의 盛國이던 渤海의 214년간 찬란한 歷史는 契丹의 血刃에 드럽히게 되고 渤海의 國號는 降하야 東丹國으로 되며 國都 忽汗城은 또 天福城으로 변하야 契丹에 服屬되니 (新羅 景哀王 3년, 高麗太祖 9년이니 新羅 망하기에 10년을 先하얏다.) 太子 光顯과 將軍 申德은 南으로 亡命하야 高麗에 投하고 高句麗 以來 屢千年에 朝鮮族의 領地이던 南北滿洲는 영원히 그 주인을 일코 지금까지 異民族의 角逐場이 되고 말엇다. (渤海의 國都는 屢次 이전되엿스니 卽 最初에는 忽汗城에 잇다가 文王때에 上京龍泉府(今 吉林寧古塔 附近의 東京城)에 移都하고 未久에 또 東京 龍原府로 移하얏다가 成王때에 다시 上京에 還都하얏다.)<22>
<20-22>