잡지명 別건곤 제20호
발행일 1929년 04월 01일
기사제목 絶處逢生 죽엇든 生命이 살아난 實談集, 丙寅洋擾 때에 敵彈에 마저 죽엇다 살어난 이약이 (Miraculous Recovery: A True Account of a Life Resurrected, The Story of How One Survived Being Hit by Enemy Fire During the Pyongin Western Disturbance)
필자 楊平 崔仁壽
기사형태 문예기타 (Literature and Other)

I am now an old man of 87 years. Others may call me long-lived, but in reality, I am a man who already died 64 years ago, during the Pyongin Western Disturbance. At that time, I was only 23 years old, but my family had been a renowned family of marksmen for generations, and I was also quite skilled with a gun. Therefore, when the Daewongun conscripted hunters and marksmen, I was drafted into the P'yongch'on Garrison and set out for the capital. Back then, I didn't know what Westerners looked like, how tall they were, and I just thought of them as fearsome beings who wielded some kind of magical club. But I thought, "No matter how cunning those Western devils are, they can't be worse than tigers, and I can catch tigers at will, so why should I be afraid of them?" And I bravely went forward without any fear, but my family and the people in my village knew that I was going to die, and they were crying and making a fuss. But since it was the King's command, what could I do? I abandoned all personal feelings and emotions, and a group of 52 people became one team and left P'yongch'on under the leadership of Middle Army Commander Kim Kyong-hwi on September 23rd of the Pyongin year. We marched day and night, and arrived in the capital on the afternoon of the 25th. Our team joined the Kangwon Province marksmen (who had arrived 3 days earlier) at the Hadogam Garrison. Two days later <76> we were formed into a Special Marksman Unit and headed for Munsusan Fortress in T'ongjin. At that time, Left Vanguard General Yang Honsu and Field Commander Han Song-gŭn, Yi Chang-nyŏm, and other military officers were firmly defending the fortress and had exchanged fire with the enemy several times. When our Kanggyong marksmen and Kanggye marksmen temporarily came to support, our army's morale greatly increased, and the enemy, seeing this, landed their naval forces from each ship at once and organized a landing force to attack our army with cannons. However, not only were we outnumbered, but they were also unfamiliar with the terrain, so although they fought fiercely with cannons and guns, they could not resist our army and fled in great defeat. Our army, taking advantage of the victory, chased after the enemy. Suddenly, there was a ringing in my ears, and my head felt dizzy like a drunk person, and I fell unconscious. After some time, I felt small and cold, and when I regained consciousness, I found that my body, which had been fighting outside the fortress, had somehow been brought inside the fortress and was lying in the inner room of an inn. My whole body was covered in blood, and my head was wrapped several times with a thick towel. Some marksmen from my hometown who had gone to war with me were nearby. Until then, I didn't know why this had happened. Eventually, I found out that I had been hit in the crown of my head by an enemy stray bullet, but fortunately, it didn't damage the periosteum, only the outer skin was scratched, and all the hair from my forehead to the crown of my head had fallen out in a straight line, and I was bleeding. After applying various medicines and treatments there, I was cured in about 10 days and came to Seoul and soon returned to my hometown. And thanks to fighting bravely at that time and even being hit by an enemy bullet, I even received an official title and a reward of 50 nyang. As the saying goes, "A person's life is in Heaven," it was because my fate was originally long. If I had made a mistake at that time, I would have become a vengeful ghost from a Westerner's bullet. Maybe it was because I got rid of my bad luck at that time, but I haven't even caught a cold for over 80 years now. Even now, the bullet mark remains on my forehead. When I see Westerners coming and going to what is now called a church or a Jesus hall, the thoughts of that time always come to mind, and I am filled with boundless emotion. Although I was injured at that time, the battle was a victory, so even just talking about it makes me feel energized. <178>

Named Entities

金景輝	Kim Kyŏng-hwi
梁憲洙	Yang Hŏn-su
韓聖根	Han Sŏng-gŭn
李漳濂	Yi Chang-nyŏm
砥平營門	Ch'ip'yŏng Yŏngmun
下都監營門	Hado Kam Yŏngmun
通津文殊山城	T'ongjin Munsusan-sŏng
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
江原道	Kangwŏn-do
江界	Kanggye



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	絶處逢生 죽엇든 生命이 살아난 實談集, 丙寅洋擾 때에 敵彈에 마저 죽엇다 살어난 이약이
필자	楊平 崔仁壽
기사형태	문예기타

絶處逢生 죽엇든 生命이 살아난 實談集, 丙寅洋擾 때에 敵彈에 마저 죽엇다 살어난 이약이
						楊平 崔仁壽
나는 지금 87세의 늙은 몸이올시다. 다른 사람은 나다러 壽한다고 하지만은 실상은 64년전 바로 丙寅年洋擾때에 벌서 죽엇던 사람이올시다. 나는 그때 나히 불과 23세 엿스나 우리집이 대대로 이름난 砲手의 집 家庭이고 나 역시 총깨나 놋키 때문에 大院君이 獵戶砲手를 徵募할 때에 砥平營門에 召募되야 京城으로 출발하게 되엿습니다. 그때만 하야도 서양사람이 코가 엇더하게 생겻는지 키가 얼마마한지 도모지 알지도 못하고 그저 그들은 무슨 造化방맹이를 부리는 무서운 귀신가튼 무리로만 알엇습니다. 그러나 나의 생각에는 洋人놈이 제아모리 영악한 놈이라도 호랑이만은 못할것이니 호랑이를 마음대로 잡는 나에게야 그까진 것이 겁날 것이 무엇 잇겟느냐 하고 아모 두려움 업시 용감스럽게 나아갓지만은 일반 가족이나 洞里사람들은 아주 죽는 줄 알고 울며불며 야단이엿습니다. 그러나 君命이닛가 엇지하겟습닛가. 人情私情 다 버리고 一行 52명이 一隊가 되야 中軍 金景輝씨의 인솔하에 砥平을 떠낫스니 때는 丙寅年 9월 23일이엿습니다. 晝夜倍道하야 25일 오후에 京城에 도착하니 우리 一隊는 江原道 砲手(우리보다 3일 先着함)가 留屯하는 下都監營門에 가티 入營하게 되엿습니다. 그뒤 2일만에<76> 別字砲手隊로 편성되야 通津文殊山城으로 향하엿습니다. 그때 文殊山城에서는 左先鋒 梁憲洙와 遊擊將軍 韓聖根, 李漳濂 등 여러 武將이 城을 굿게 직히고 적과 누차 交火하던 터이다. 우리 江京砲手와 江界砲手가 일시 應援하야 我軍의 勢가 크게 뜰치니 적이 바라보고 各船의 水軍을 一時 下陸케하야 陸戰隊를 조직하야 가지고 我軍에게 砲를 放하며 仰攻하얏습니다. 그러나 원래에 我衆彼寡할 뿐 안이라 彼等은 또한 地理에 익지 못함으로 비록 대포와 총을 가지고 惡戰苦鬪하얏스나 감히 아군을 抵敵치 못하고 大敗逃走하얏습니다. 아군은 乘勝長驅하야 적을 追擊하는 중에 어느덧 귀빠귀에서는 맹소리가 나더니 내 머리는 맛치 술취한 사람모양으로 확근다로면서 정신업시 걱구러젓슴니다. 얼마인지 잇다가 몸이 작고 칩기로 정신을 차려본 즉 성밧그로 싸우러갓던 나의 몸은 不知中에 성안으로 드러와서 엇던 주막집 안방에 누어 잇섯습니다. 전신에는 流血이 浪藉하고 머리는 수건으로 몃번을 잔득 감어 잇섯습니다. 엽헤는 가티 출정하얏던 고향의 포수가 몃사람 잇섯습니다. 그때까지도 나는 무슨 까닭으로 그리되엿는지도 몰낫습니다. 야종에 알고보니 나는 적의 流彈에 바로 머리의 정수박을 마젓섯는데 대행이 骨膜까지는 傷치 안코 外面皮膚만 글처가서 압이마에서 정수박까지 일자로 머리털이 다 빠지고 流血이 되엿던 것이 올시다. 그곳에서 여러 가지의 약을 발느고 치료한 까닭에 약 10여일만에 치료되야 서울로 와서 곳 고향으로 도라왓습니다. 그리고 그때에 용감하게 싸우다가 敵彈까지 마진 덕분으로 先達까지 어더하고 또 상금 50兩을 拜受하얏습니다. 소위 人命은 在天이라고 내의 命이 원래 길엇기에 그럿치. 그때에 내가 잘못하얏더면 洋人의 탄환에 한 寃鬼가 되엿슬 것이올시다. 그때에 厄을 때서 그럿턴지 지금 80여세가 되도록 감기 한 번도 안이알코 지냇슴니다. 지금까지도 이마우에 그 탄환자리가 그대로 남어잇슴니다. 지금 예배당인가 예수당인가 하는데로 서양사람들이 왓다갓다하는 것을 보면 그때의 생각이 언제이나 소사나고 感慨無量함니다. 그때 나는 비록 부상하엿슬지나 싸홈인즉 勝捷을 하엿섯기 때문에 이약이만 하야도 기운이 저절로 남니다.<178>
<75-76, 178>