별건곤 제20호
1929년 04월 01일
就職 新作路 (New Paths to Employment, Survey)

New Paths to Employment
The place where new roads are being built and half-torn houses are is the new road. There are blind spots and places that are torn here and there on the new road. Decent people and rude people walk together on the new road. If there is a new road to employment in a world full of unemployment, wouldn't that be good? If the fact that things are not completely clear-cut is a characteristic of the new road, and if you see even this and think about something, it will be a welcome new road.

1. If we were to hire employees ...... Various Homes
2. If I were to engage in job-seeking activities ...... Various Gentlemen
3. Experiences in job placement ...... Various Gentlemen
4. Secrets to successful job-seeking ...... Cartoon
5. Hardships until getting a job ...... True Story
6. Side jobs for salaried workers' families ...... Various

If We Were To Hire Employees

Bank: A diligent and trustworthy person

Lee Hằng-jong, Branch Manager of First Bank

I believe it is the same at other banks and companies, but every year during the settlement period, due to personal reasons or certain circumstances of the bank, some employees change, so we hire new ones, usually about three to five people. However, due to the imperfect organization of economic institutions in our current society, and because there are few employment opportunities in industrial institutions that we can manage ourselves, while the number of people graduating from schools and entering the real world increases every year, employment problems will become even more difficult in the future. In the case of my bank alone, from December of the previous year, combining those introduced by school principals and those recommended from various quarters, the average is 50 to 60 people every year. However, we cannot hire just anyone indiscriminately, but neither can we administer tests of skills or academic ability. After all, hiring employees at a bank does not mean placing them in the ranks of executives right away; they will only be dealing with abacuses and ledgers, so a Ph.D. is useless. In the past, it was sufficient to have graduated from a higher common school or a commercial school of secondary level, but recently we hire people who have graduated from a specialized school at the very least. Most of the current employees are graduates of specialized schools. However, no matter how much knowledge and skill they have, they cannot increase efficiency at first, and in fact, for two or three years, they are worse than experienced office boys. However, no matter how experienced, learned, and skilled a person may be, we choose someone who is trustworthy and diligent, who does not work with the thought of being merely a salaried worker, but considers it their own work, and who believes that the bank's development is their own development. It may seem refreshing if someone does two days' worth of work in one day, but it is better to do one day's worth of work in two days clearly and without mishap. Therefore, we do not hire someone simply because the principal introduces them or because their school grades are good. Once we meet the person, we can usually tell about 70 to 80 percent of what they are like, and since there is a considerable amount of time between when the request or introduction comes in and when we hire them,<92> we investigate their usual behavior, family relationships, and various other necessary things during that time. Of course, the investigation is different from what the police do, but even if we hire them in this way, they do not become full employees from the beginning, but remain as temporary employees (囑託) for about a year. If we find them satisfactory during the initial hiring and the period as temporary employees, they become full employees, but if they are not interested or do not do their work well, we hire them with a contract (?) that says they can be asked to quit at any time. In other words, it can be said that we are giving them a thorough trial during that time!

School: Experience rather than qualifications

Lee Kŏn, Head Teacher, Changhun School

The main points in hiring teachers are almost the same at any school, but our private school does not have any particular method of hiring teachers, but the hiring policy has been like this in the past.
Since the students are children, there are many difficulties in various aspects. Therefore, it is no exaggeration to say that children have little or no reason and judgment, and they must have the inner qualifications to impart knowledge and virtue, but more than that, we seek people who can cultivate virtue rather than knowledge by respecting personality. Therefore, we do not unconditionally hire someone simply because they have considerable academic ability and are capable of teaching.
Even if they have graduated from a considerable school, it will be even more difficult if they do not have experience in it, so we hire people with experience. However, there is not much turnover of teachers, so we do not always hire teachers. Therefore, there are not many applicants, and when there is a vacancy, we take the initiative to find someone. However, we usually hire someone introduced by a reliable person, after learning in detail about their usual behavior, personality, and academic ability, as well as their experience and their performance at their previous job. However, the school's situation is not very affluent, and there are only six classes in a single grade, so there are only eight people including the principal and teachers, so there is not much turnover. In any case, when hiring teachers at this school, we hire them through a simple and somewhat complex procedure, as mentioned above. This may be the policy in the past, but I don't think we will be coming up with any special new policies in the future.<93>

Kindergarten: Looking at Practicum Grades During Enrollment

Kim Ch'ang-jun, Chungang Kindergarten

Some of us send our children to kindergarten but do not know the fundamental meaning of how kindergarten education affects children's future, and simply think of it as a playground for children from wealthy families, where they play games, learn easy songs, and keep them from crying all day, and think of the nanny (媬姆) as someone who plays with the children, keeps them from crying, and sends them home after a good day of playing. However, that is neither right nor wrong. The first step of national education, the first responsibility for the right and wrong of national character and, no, his entire life's emotions, should be borne by the kindergarten teacher. A kindergarten teacher is a more difficult educator than a Ph.D. lecturing on academics at a university. Therefore, it is very difficult to have sufficient qualifications as a kindergarten teacher. It is necessary to have at least a specialized school education and knowledge of everything related to child education, and in terms of personality, they must like children more than we usually adore them, and they must not be too hasty or too slow, and when they deal with children, they must be able to understand the psychology of the children and become the children themselves. However, I don't know if it's an exaggeration, but we haven't yet had a teacher who has all these qualities and sufficient qualifications, so in the end, this is only the highest ideal, and if we were to choose from among those who have finished nursery school, they must have finished at least the higher course and the nursery school course, and when they do their practicum during their enrollment, we can see how much the children like them and how welcomed they are by the parents of the children, so selecting and using them from among many people in this way is a relatively good plan in the current situation.

Newspaper Company: Quick Hands and Close Observation

Song Chin-u, President of the Tonga Ilbo

You probably know better than I do what a newspaper reporter should be like without even asking.
I believe it is the same at other newspaper companies, but at our company, the turnover is at most two or three people a year, or if not, only one or two people,<94> so that is all we hire. Thinking about the current unemployment and job shortage among Koreans, I would like to help even a small part of it and hire as many people as possible, but there are also limits to that story, and originally, the newspaper company is poorer in various aspects than other institutions, so in the end, it is impossible to do that. To solve this difficult problem, we must create everything with our own hands, whether on a small or large scale!
At our newspaper company, we receive a total of 70 or 80 resumes and letters of introduction every year, and I can't bear to deal with them because I feel sorry for them rather than having difficulty processing them. However, it is impossible to test and select them one by one, and in the end, the company's situation allows us to hire only two or three people, and it is impossible to test their usual conduct and various aspects of their character or to know them as they appear, so I feel sorry for them, but I often just put the many resumes away. Therefore, we usually hire someone after receiving an introduction from a considerable person and a responsible guarantee, but recently, it is different from 7 or 8 years ago, and we do not hire someone unconditionally simply because they have experience or because they were introduced by someone. As the times progress, the newspaper must also progress, and on the contrary, in reality, the newspaper has great power and responsibility in social education, so it must be a knowledgeable and virtuous person who can guide the people, and the newspaper must be the quick eyes and ears of the people, so it must be quick and agile, and have strong criticism and observation skills when seeing or hearing something, and as a newspaper reporter, you are dealing with the people with the writing drawn from the pen, so you must be good at writing. It is not a special method or way, but in this way, we receive many applicants and people who come with introductions, and we hire at most two or three people. It is difficult to hire, so once an employee joins the company, we cannot ask them to quit unless they have personal reasons that make it impossible to do otherwise, given the company's situation.

Company: Considering Character Rather Than Academic Ability

Chang Tu-hyŏn, President of Hŭngilsa

Here, we cannot hire many employees, nor do we need to, and there is not much frequent turnover, so we do not have a special method of hiring employees, but in any case, if we are going to hire someone, they must have specialized knowledge in that field, and of course, their virtue and personality must be upright, but I think like this. How much difference is there in academic intelligence? Whether they graduate with honors or barely graduate,<95> they both learned the same things. Some companies or banks require a guarantee from someone who is wealthy, has a reputation, and is trusted by the general public, but I cannot guarantee my own child, let alone someone else's child. I might be able to guarantee an iron bowl or a tin bowl, but how can I guarantee a person? If there is some dishonest act, you will have to pay for it if you rashly give a guarantee, so who will come forward to give a guarantee, and even if the person himself speaks, it would be difficult to find one such guarantor, let alone two or three. That is all the desire of the so-called capital side that manages the company or bank. However, if it were me, I would not look at the guarantor or anything else, nor would I look at the superiority or inferiority of academic ability, but I would only look at the person's character and carefully consider whether they would be able to do someone else's work as if it were their own. However, you cannot know a person's conduct after seeing them only once or twice, but you can infer their family background from their first impression and try to find out as much as possible about them in various ways, and if they are a suitable person, you can try to hire them, but you cannot give them an exam or check their physical condition as if you were recruiting students! I don't think other companies have any special methods, and I also don't have a particularly unique method.

Automobile Department: Women with Autonomous Determination

Komuki Yasue, Kyŏngsŏng Bus Department

The bus has only been around for a short time, and this is the first time that being a bus conductor is a job for women. The fact that the number of applicants is seven or eight times the recruitment quota shows the curiosity of young women, and also that some are forced to do so due to the difficulties of life, hoping to earn even a few pennies to maintain their livelihood. However, both will be different from what they expected. Those who come out of curiosity are discovered immediately at the test and discarded, and even if they are hired, they will never last long. Also, those who want to solve their livelihood problems to some extent may not be able to support even themselves, let alone their families, with that salary. Therefore, we require such people and test them in this way when we want to hire a conductor.
The test is not like taking a civil service exam or receiving a doctoral thesis, but the written test is only a simple arithmetic test and common sense at an easy level, and the main test will be the oral test.
However, the format of this test is not always fixed,<96> but can only be entrusted to the observation and feelings of the examiner at that time. By talking and asking questions, you can tell whether they applied out of curiosity or out of the difficulties of life, examine whether their constitution is suitable or unsuitable, and carefully and sensitively observe their actions and behavior at that time, and hire them if you think they are suitable. Naturally, by asking this and that, you can know the motive for their application, but we want women who have a self-sufficient determination above all else, who will be active as one person even with a small amount of money and a small job, and who will abandon the idea of relying on their husbands or parents, as in the old-fashioned women who have been soaked in the ancient ways, that women must be supported by their husbands, or they will starve to death, and who will do their part as one person. The biggest condition is age, which must be unmarried women between the ages of 16 and 20 - at the time of application - but it would be even better if they find their way after being hired and get married, and although it is not a very beautiful thing to others, it is also a good thing for conductors and drivers to marry each other if they think they are compatible. However, if there is something wrong with empty curiosity or playful feelings, it will never be forgiven for the sake of others. Also, this is one of the biggest conditions, but it would be a bit uncomfortable for people whose physique or appearance is not pleasing to others. This is also a business that deals with customers.<97>

**Named Entities**

李恒鐘	I Hang-jong
李건	I Kŏn
金昌俊	Kim Ch'ang-jun
宋鎭禹	Song Chin-u
張斗鉉	Chang Tu-hyŏn
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
古木保僑	Komuki Yasue
東亞日報	Tonga Ilbo
興一社	Hŭngilsa
中央幼稚園	Chungang Yuch'iwŏn
第一銀行	Cheil Ŭnhaeng
長薰學校	Changhun Hakkyo



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	就職 新作路
기사형태	설문

就職 新作路
새로짓는 집엽헤 반쯤 헐닌집에 있는곳이 신작로다. 브인터도 있고 이리저리 찟기는 곳도 신작로에잇다. 점잔흔 사람이나 雜스런 사람이나 가티 다니기도 신작로 失職만 만흔세상에 就職 신작로가 잇스면 조치안흘가. 具備히 째지못한 것도 新作路의 특색이라면 특색이니 이거라도 보고 생각키는 것 잇다면 고마운 신작로겟다.

1. 우리가 萬若 社員을 쓴다면 ...... 諸家
2. 내가 就職運動을 한다면 ...... 諸氏
3. 就職周旋 하여본 經驗談 ...... 諸氏
4. 就職運動 성공하는 秘方 ...... 漫畵
5. 就職하기 까지의 苦生談 ...... 實談
6. 月給生活人의 家庭副業 ...... 各種<91>

우리가 萬若 社員을 쓴다면

銀行 勤實과 信義잇는 사람을

제일은행지배인 李恒鐘

다른 은행이나 회사에서도 그럿켓지만 해마다 결산기에는 자기의 개인사정이라든지 혹은 은행의 엇더한 사정으로든지 대개 行員의 몃사람식은 변동이 생기닛가, 따라서 새로 채용하게 되는데 3,4인 내지 4,5인 가량은 됨니다. 그러나 現 우리 사회의 경제기관의 조직이 불완전한 까닭과 우리의 힘으로 하여나가는 산업기관 其餘他의 취직처는 업고 그 반비례로 해마다 학교를 졸업하고 實社會에 나아오는 사람은 만흠으로 더욱 압흐로 취직문제가 어려울 것임니다. 저의 은행으로만 하여도 그전年 12월부터 학교에서 교장이 소개하는 이들과 기타 각방면에서 請이 드러오는 것을 합하면 매년 평균 5,60명은 됩니다. 그러나 무턱대고 아모나 채용을 할 수는 물론 업는 것이지만 그러타고 기술이나 학력에 시험을 볼 수도 업는 것이고 결국 행원으로 채용을 한다면 당장에 重役列에 드려세우는 것이 안이라 다만 珠盤과 帳簿를 가지고 씨름을 하게 되닛가 學博士가 쓸 데 업는 것임니다. 그러나 종래에는 高等普通學校나 中等 程度의 商業學校를 맛친 사람이면 충분하엿지만 근래와서는 적어도 專門學校를 맛친 사람을 쓰게 됨니다. 현재에 잇는 行員들도 대다수가 다 專門學校를 맛친 사람들임니다. 그러나 아모리 지식과 기술이 잇다 하여도 처음에는 능률이 올라가지 못하고 도리혀 2,3년 동안 경험잇는 給仕만도 못한 때가 만슴니다. 그러나 어느 점으로 보든지 경험이 만코 학식과 기술이 훌륭한 사람을 쓰고 십지만 그보다도 信義가 잇고 勤實한 사람으로 다만 월급쟁이라는 생각을 가지고 일을 하지 안코 이것이 내 일이거니 녁이며 은행의 발전이 즉 자기의 발전이라는 생각을 가지고 일을 해줄 사람을 고름니다. 남보다  일을 빨니 하여서 이틀에 할 것을 하로에 해 노흐면 보기에는 시원하지만 하로에 할 것을 이틀에 하드라도 분명하고 탈업시 하는 이만 못한 것임니다. 그럼으로 교장이 소개한다고 곳 채용하거나 학교성적이 조타고 채용하는 것은 아님니다. 한 번 당자를 맛나보면은 대개 엇더할 것은 10분의 7,8 가량까지는 알 수가 잇스며 請이나 소개가 드러오는 때부터 채용할 때까지는 상당한<92> 시일도 잇스닛가 그동안에 그사람의 평소의 행동이라든지 가정의 관계라든지 여러 가지 필요한 것을 조사를 해 봄니다. 조사래야 경찰서에서 조사하는 것과는 물론 다르지만 이러케 해서 채용을 한다 하드라도 처음부터 아조 行員으로 되는 것이 안이라 한 1년 동안을 囑託으로 잇게 됨니다. 처음 채용할 때부터 囑託으로 잇는 동안에 충분하다고 인정할 때에는 물론 완전한 行員이 되지만 좀 자미가 업다든지 일을 잘못하든지 하면 언제든지 고만 두어 달라는 契約(?)을 하고 채용을 하닛가 말하자면 그동안에 충분한 시험을 본다고 하여도 되겟지요!

學校  資格보다도 經驗

장훈학교 교무주임 李건

어느 학교를 물론하고 교원을 채용하는 主眼點은 대개가 거의 갓겟지만 사립인 저의 학교는 교원을 채용할 때 이러한 방식이라고 할 만한 것이 별로히 업스나 그 채용방침이라면 在來에는 이러케 하엿슴니다.
被敎育者가 兒童이니만치 여러가지에 잇서 대단 어려운 것임니다. 그럼으로 理智와 判斷力이 거의 업다고 하여도 과언이 안일 아동에게 능히 知德을 너허줄만한 내적 자격이 잇서야 하겟스나 그보다도 인격을 존중히 하야 智보다도  德을 길러줄 만한 사람을 구함니다. 그럼으로 학력이 상당하야 능히 敎授에 부족할 것이 업다고 해서 무조건하고 채용은 안이함니다.
상당한 학교를 졸업하엿서도 그에 대한 경험이 업스면 더욱 어려울 것이닛가 경험이 잇는 사람을 채용함니다. 그러나 별로히 교원에 이동이 업슴으로 그럿케 늘 교원을 채용하게는 안이됨니다. 그럼으로 별로 지원하는 이도 업슴으로 결원이 잇는 때에는  도리혀 이편에서 나서서 구하게 됨니다. 그러나 대개는 신임할만한 이의 소개로 그의 평소의 행동과 인격과 학력은 물론이나 그보다도 경험이 잇는 사람을 골라서 그 전에 잇든 곳에서의 성적이 엇더하엿다는 것을 자세히 알게된 연후에 비로소 채용을 하게 됨니다. 그러나 원래 학교의 상황이 과히 풍요하지 못하고 학급이 單級으로  6학급 밧게는 업슴으로 현재 교장과 교원을 합하면 여덜ㅅ분 밧게 안이되닛가 별로 이동이 잣지 안케 되나 하여간 이 학교에서 교원을 채용할 때에는 우에 말슴한 것 가티 단순하고도 좀 복잡한 手續으로 채용을 함니다. 이것이 在來의 방침이라면 방침이겟스나 아마 압흐로도 별로히 특별한 방침을 새로 낼 것도 갓지 안슴니다.<93>

幼稚園  在學時 實習成績을 보아

중앙유치원 金昌俊

우리들 중에는 그 자녀를 유치원에 보내기는 하면서도 유치원에서 어린이의 교육을 하는 것이 어린이의 장래에 얼마나한 영향이 잇고 업는 근본의미를 아지 못하고 그저 돈잇는 가정의 어린이의 노리터로만 생각하야 유희나 식이고 쉬운 노래나 가르키고 종일 울지 안케 놀녀주는 곳으로만 녁이고 媬姆로 말하야도 어린이들과 작난이나 하고 울니지나 안이하야 하로 낫을 잘 다리고 놀다가 돌녀보내면 그들의 할 일을 다 하는 것으로만 녁이는 이가 역시 적지 안을 것임니다. 그러나 그도 안이오 저도 안임니다. 國民敎育의 第一步와 國民性, 안이 그의 일생을 통하는 감정의 善誤의 첫 책임은 유치원 보모가 가저야 할 것 임니다. 學博士가 대학에서 학술을 강의하는 이상에 어려운 교육자는 이 보모일 것임니다. 그럼으로 이 보모로서 충분한 자격을 가즈랴면 대단히 어렵슴니다. 적어도 專門學校 이상의 학식과 아동교육에 관한 모든 것의 지식이 잇서야 할 것은 물론이고 성격으로 말하여도 어린이를 보통 우리가 귀여워하는 이상 조와해야 하고, 한편으로 기우러저서 성질이 급해도 안되고 느려도 안될 것이며 그가 어린이를 대할 때 능히 그가 어린이의 심리를 이해하야서 자기가 곳 어린이가 되여야 할 것임니다. 그러나 過한 말일가 모르지만 아즉 우리는 이 모든 점이 구비하고 충분한 자격을 가진 보모를 갓지 못햇스닛가 결국 이것은 최고 理想뿐이고 현재 保育學校를 맛친 사람 중에서 골나내라고 하면 적어도 高等科를 마치고 保育學校의 과정을 맛처야 할 것은 물론이고, 그가 在學時 실습을 할 때에 어린이들이 그를 얼마나 조와하며 그 어린이들의 부형에게 얼마나 환영을 바덧는가를 삷혀보면 대개 그가 자격이 잇고 업는 것을 알 수가 잇스닛가 이러한 방식으로 만흔 사람 중에서 선택하야 쓰는 것이 비교적 지금 형편에 잇서서는 조흔 방책인가 함니다.

新聞社 敏捷한 手腕과 周密한 觀察力

동아일보 사장 宋鎭禹

新聞記者는 엇대야 하겟다는 것은 무러보실 것도 업시 도리혀 잘 아실 것임니다.
다른 新聞社에서도 그러하겟지만 우리 社에서는 한해동안에 이동이 잇다고 해야 고작 2, 3인 그러치 안이하면 한 두사람<94> 밧게는 업스닛가 역시 새로 채용을 한대야 그 밧게는 안될 것임니다. 現下 朝鮮사람의 失職과 就職難을 생각하면 그 한 부분이라도 도와주고저 될 수 잇스면  만히 채용하고도 십흐나 그 역시 제한이 잇는 이약이이고 원래가 딴 기관보다도 여러가지 방면으로 빈약한 신문사로 안저서 결국 그럿케 할 수도 업는 일이라 이러한 難問題를 해결하랴면 소규모이건 대규모이건 우리의 손으로 모든 것을 맨드러 노아야할 것이지요!
우리 新聞社에서도 매년 드러오는 履歷書와 紹介狀이 합하면 7, 80통이나 되니 처리에 곤란하다는 것보다도 딱해서 못 견듸겟슴니다. 그러나 그들을 일일이 시험을 하야서 선발을 할 수도 업는 일이고 결국은 社의 형편으로는 2, 3人 밧게 채용할 수 업스며 또 평상의 素行과 그 인물에 대한 여러가지 점을 시험을 보히거나 그대로 외관으로는 알 수가 업슴으로 딱한 줄은 알면서도 그저 그 만흔 履歷書를 덥하두는 수가 만슴니다. 그럼으로 대개는 상당한 사람의 소개와 책임잇는 보증을 바든 후에 비로소 채용을 하게 되는데 근래는요 7, 8년 전과도 또 달러서 그저 경험이 잇다거나 누구의 소개이닛가 무조건하고 채용하자는 일은 업슴니다. 시대가 진보하느니 만콤 新聞紙面도 진보하여야 할 것임으로 안이 그 반대로 실상에 잇서서는 신문지가 직접 社會敎化에 큰 힘과 책임을 가젓슴으로 민중을 지도해 나아갈만한  지식은 물론 人格者이라야 할 것이고 신문은 민중의 빠른 耳目이라야 하겟슴으로 민첩하고 機敏하고 무엇 하나를 볼 때에 들을 때에 그에 대한 비판과 관찰력이 강해야 할 것이며 신문기자라면 붓끄테서 그려지는 글을 가지고 민중에 대하는 것임으로 글을 잘 써야 할 것임니다. 별 특별한 방법이나 방식이 안이라 이럿케해서 만흔 志願者와 소개를 바더가지고 온 사람 중에서 만허야 2, 3人 밧게는 채용하지 못함니다. 채용하기에도 힘드려함으로 한 번 입사해서 사원이 된 이후에는 자기가 개인의 사정으로 엇지할 수 업서서 退社하기 전에는 社의 형편이 엇더하닛가 고만두어 달라는 말은 못함니다.

會社 學力보다도 素行을 삷혀

興一社 社長 張斗鉉

이곳에서야 사원을 만히 쓸 수도 업고 필요도 업고 별 이동이 빈번하게 업슴으로 이런 사람 저런 사람 할만치 사원채용에 대하야 自家特有의 별 방식이랄 만한 것이 업스나 하여간 사람을 채용해 쓰랴면 어느 사회에서고 물론 그 방면에 대한 전문지식이 잇서야겟고, 첫재 德行과 心性이 발러야 할 것은 말할 것도 업스나 나는 이럿케 생각을 하오. 學智의 優劣이 잇다면 얼마나 잇겟소. 優等卒業이나<95> 맨끄트로 졸업을 한 사람이나 배호기는 맛찬가지로 배호지 안이 하엿겟소. 혹 어느 사회나 은행에서 하는 것을 보면 상당히 돈도 잇고 일홈도 잇서 일반사회에서 신용을 할만한 사람의 보증이 잇서야 한다니  제가 나흔 자식도 보증을 할 수가 업는데 항차 남의 자식을 엇더케 보증을 하며 무쇠 그릇이나 양철그릇 가트면 혹 보증을 할른지도 모르지만 실상 말이지 사람을 엇더케 보증을 하겟소. 잘못해서 부정한 행위가 잇스면 섯뿔니 보증을 섯다가 그것을 물어놋케 되니 누가 나서서 보증을 스며 그 當者로 말을 하드라도 그런 보증인을 하나도 어렵겟는데 둘ㅅ식 세울 수가 잇겟소. 그것은 다 회사나 은행을 경영하는 소위 資本側의 제혼자의 욕심이라고 할 것임늰다. 그러나 나 가트면 그까지 보증인이고 무어고 다 일업시 학력의 우열도 보지 안코 다만 그사람의 如何를 보아서 능히 남의 일을 내 일 가티 해주겟느냐 안이 하겟느냐 하는 것을 잘 삷혀보아서 쓰겟소이다. 그러나 한번이고 두번을 보아서 능히 그 사람의 소행을 알 수는 업는 일이나 첫인상을 미루어서 그의 가정의 裏面을 드려다보고 될 수 잇스면 여러 방면으로 자세하게 알어본 연후에 합당한 사람이면 써보는 것이지 학생을 모집하는 것 가티 시험을 보히거나 체격을 검사하거나 할 수야 잇겟소! 다른 사회에서도 별달은 방식이 업슬 것갓고 나 亦 이러타는 특별한 自家獨流의 방식은 업소이다.

自動車部 自治的 決心이 잇는 婦人을

경성부 승합자동차계 古木保僑

乘合自動車(뻐스)라는 것이 생겨난 지가 아즉 날이엿고 이 乘合自動車의 車掌은 부인의 직업으로서는 처음이 되여 그 志願人 數가 募集定員의 7, 8배ㅅ식 되는 것을 보면 나희 젊은 부인들의 호기심이 식히는 것과 또 일방에는 생활난으로 엇지할 수 업서서 몃푼이나마 월급이라도 바더서 그것으로 생활을 유지하고저 하는 이도 물론 만흘 것임니다. 그러나 양자가 다 갱각햇든 배와는 딴판일 것입니다. 호기심으로 왓든 이는 시험 당장에서 간파되여 바리고 혹 채용이 된다 하드래도 결코 오래 가지를 못함니다. 또 생활문제를 얼마간 해결해보고저 하는 이는 그 월급을 가지고서 일가족은 고사하고 일신이나 감당할른지 모르겟슴니다. 그럼으로 우리는 차장을 채용하고저 시험할 때에는 이러한 사람을 요구하며 이러한 방식으로 시험을 함니다.
시험이라야 무슨 文官試驗이나 博士論文을 밧듯키하는 것이 안이라 필기시험은 다만 간단한 算術시험과 보통상식을 어렵지 안이한 정도에서 보아 바리고는 주요한 원시험이라면 口述試驗이 될 것임니다.
그러나 이 시험을 보는 형식이 늘 일정되여<96> 잇는 것이 안이라 그때 그때의 시험관의 관찰과 감정에 맛길 수 밧게 업는 것이나 말도 식혀보고 무러도 보면 호기심으로 원을 햇는지 생활난으로 지원을 햇는지 알 수가 잇스며 그의 체질이 적당한지 부적당한지를 검사하고 그때 그때의 동작과 행동을 자세하고 예민하게 관찰을 하야서 적당하다고 생각하면 채용을 함니다. 자연히 이말 저말 뭇노라면 그가 지원한 동기를 알 수 잇스나 우리는 무엇보다도 自活的 결심을 가지고 비록 적은 돈 적은 직업이나마 이것으로써 자기도 한사람의 활동을 하며 在來 古風에 저즌 婦女와 가티 여자는 반듯이 남편이 버러다 주어야지 그러치 안이하면 굶어죽는 수 밧게는 업다는 그러한 남편에게 의뢰하거나 부모에게 의뢰하는 사상을 바리고 자기도 한사람으로서의 할 일을 하겟다는 부녀들이기를 바람니다. 제일 큰 조건은 연령인데 16세로부터 20세-出願當時-의 未婚 女子라야 하지만 채용이 된 뒤에는 자기의 길을 닥거 나아가서 결혼을 한다면 더욱 조흔 일이고 남의 비평에는 대단 아름답지 못한 일이라고 하지만 될 수 잇스면 자긔네끼리 서로 맛당하다고 녁이는 사람들이면 차장이나 운전수 사이에 결혼을 하는 것도 또한 조흔 일임니다. 그러나 그 亦 헛된 호기심이라든지 遊戱的 기분을 가지고 좃치 못한 일이 잇다면 그것은 절대로 다른 사람을 위해서 용서치 안슴니다. 또하나 이것도 큰 조건의 하나이나 체격이나 용모가 남에게 호감을 주지 못하게쯤 된 사람은 좀 거북할 것임니다. 이 亦 客을 상대로 하는 한 영업이닛가.<97>
<92-97>