雜誌名	別乾坤 第20號
發行日	1929년 04월 01일
記事題目	編輯室 落書 (Editor's Notes)
記事形態	事故·編輯後記 (Notice/Post-Editing Notes)

Editor's Notes

Due to various heartbreaking circumstances, the March issue could not be published on time, and we are issuing a so-called combined issue (March, April), which is reluctant even to write about. I will omit the apology, as repeating it may cause further regret, and only ask that you understand our situation well.

This issue was originally edited with March as the standard, so the content of the articles is entirely in the spirit of March. As you all know well, March is a time of vernal equinox and renewal, when the sick recover, the dead live, and the scattered gather. It is filled with stories of creation and success, so that reading it once will make all disappointments disappear like spring snow.
As Koreans, we especially hope that everyone will read it carefully once.

The previous issue was a special issue on gender issues and a commemorative issue for exceeding 30,000 copies of this magazine. It has enjoyed great popularity and achieved a groundbreaking success that has surprised everyone. The editor is also very pleased, and we hope that our readers will also be pleased together.

However, there are some ignorant and stubborn individuals who seem to criticize the articles on gender issues. If they are doing this without reading the articles, it should be dismissed as mere frivolity. But if they are saying it after reading them, their brains need to be examined. It is ridiculous and regrettable that those who usually advocate for the need for sex education misunderstand the articles in this magazine, which handle sex education materials as carefully as possible, and talk about moral education and make irrelevant arguments. It is a pity that there are fools among intellectuals who say it is unsightly without even looking at the content just because it is about sex. Moreover, it is not even worth discussing that those who introduce obscene pictures advertisements from foreign merchants for a few pennies criticize others' careful sex education articles. If they act so ignorantly, they will watch a wedding and write a scathing denunciation of the disturbance of public morals with a headline such as "Youthful Men and Women in Broad Daylight Cohabitation in the Chapel," and go to someone's ancestral rites and, seeing the offering of wine, write "Household Ills Before One's Eyes*Wine" in large letters, vehemently calling for the necessity of prohibition. Tsk, tsk! Please do not make reckless arguments hereafter. (Ch'ŏng)

In the previous issue's notes, I mentioned that the editorial office was being expanded, and it was completed some time ago. However, as the saying goes, "Once you ride a horse, you want to be a jockey," I negotiated with the sales director to install another phone, but he immediately dismissed it, saying that we clearly didn't have enough money because we spent so much building the house this time, so what was the use of more phones. But since we are not the kind to be discouraged by that, as a result of active campaigning, we managed to get one installed in the editorial office, but it was still the same; they told us to get a desk phone, so we got a nice-looking one that could be heard well! When the phone was installed, we said that whoever answered this new phone first would have great luck that day, so we surrounded the phone. And wouldn't you know it, it rang! Is it me? Is it me? Each of us reached out, claiming it was for us! It was for Mr. Pang? Oh, everything's ruined? Mr. Pang (方先生), whose name is the same as the word square (方)! He was beaming as if he was going to have good luck tomorrow! Maybe it was because I didn't answer the first phone, but I skipped lunch that day and looked gaunt! However, we did everything we could, building a house and installing a phone, even though we didn't have the money, but I'm sorry that the editing is still slow. However, without making excuses, the editing was delayed because it was pushed back due to the mess of tearing down and building a house, but I guarantee that it will come out regularly from now on. (Pak) <179>

**Named Entities**

朝鮮	Chosŏn
方先生	Pang Sŏnsaeng
朴	Pak



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	編輯室 落書
기사형태	사고·편집후기

編輯室 落書
3월 호로 꼭 나와야만 될 冊이 가슴 쓰라린 여러가지 사정으로 인하야 제 때에 나오지 못하고 글자부터 쓰기 실은 소위 合倂號(3, 4월)를 발행하게 되엿다. 미안의 말슴도 여러 번 하면 도로혀 미안을 끼칠가 하야 謝禮를 略하고 다만 여러분에게 우리 처지를 잘 諒解하야 달나고 청할 뿐이다.

이번 호는 본래 3월을 標準하야 편집하기 때문에 기사의 내용이 전혀 3월의 기분이 만타. 3월은 여러분도 잘 알으시는 바와 가티 方春和時 萬物更生하는 時期임으로 病者蘇, 死者生, 散者合, 其外 創建, 成功등 갱생활약의 기사를 滿載하야 한 번만 읽으면 모돈 落心이 春雪과 가티 다 살아지게 되엿다.
특히 朝鮮사람 된 우리로서는 누구나 한번식 잘 읽어 주기를 바란다.

前號는 兩性問題의 특집호요 本誌 3만부 突破의 기념호이니 만히 만천하의 대인기를 꿀어서 누구나 크게 놀날만한 破天荒의 大成績을 보게 되엿다. 편집자도 스사로 깃버함을 마지 안커니와 독자 여러분도 또한 가티 깃버하야 주기를 바란다.

그러나 일부의 沒常識 頑冥의 패가 잇서 兩性問題 기사를 非難하는 듯한 바 그들이 기사내용을 닑어 보지 안코 하는 짓이라면 但히 輕妄에 돌니고 말 것이어니와 닑고서 하는 말이라면 그 頭顔를 檢診할 필요가 잇다 한다. 자기자신이 平素에 성교육의 필요를 주장하면서 本誌가 될 수 잇는데까지 鄭重하게 성교육 材料를 取扱한 기사를 沒理解하야 風敎上 云云하고 橫堅說去하는 것은 可笑라는 것 보다 寧히 可惜하다 할밧게 업다. 성문제라 하닛가 내용도 보지 안코 不美 云云하는 愚가 識者中에 잇다는 것이 딱한 일이요 더욱 돈 몃푼을 위하야 外國奸商輩의 春畵圖 廣告를 소개하는 이로서 남의 愼重한 성교육 기사를 論難하는 데 至하야는 그 愚 가히 논할 바도 못된다. 그럿케 몰상식하게 굴다가는 남의 결혼식 구경을 하고 『禮拜堂內에 靑春男女 白畫野合』이란 대제목으로 風紀紊亂을 痛論하고 또 남의 祭祀 집에 가서 獻酌하는 것을 보고 『家病前一門*酒』라고 大書特書하야 禁酒必要를 絶叫할 것이다. 咄咄! 此後幸勿妄論如何. (靑)

요 前號 낙서에는 편집실 增築을 하는 중이라고 한 것이요 얼마나 전에 落成이 되엿슴니다. 그러나 말타면 경마잡히고 십다고 전화 하나를 더 달자고 영업국장에게 교섭을 햇드니 이번에 집 짓느라고 돈이 만히 드러간 것으로도 자리가 뻔하게 낫는데 전화가 다 무엇이냐고 당장에 코를 떼엿섯스나 그러타고 낙망할 우리가 안이닛가 積極的으로 운동을 한 결과 편집실에도 하나 다라 매이게 되엿스나 50보 100보 상관이니 탁상전화로 하자고 해서 말 잘 들니고 모양존 놈으로 달아 매이게 되엿슴니다! 전화가 되게 된 때 누구든지 이 새 뎐화로 데일 먼저 밧는 사람은 그날 운수가 대통하리라고 하야서 전화통을 에워싸고 섯노라닛가 안이나 다를가 따르릉! 내냐? 네냐? 제각기 제게 온 것이라고 손을 내밀며 바더본 즉! 方先生 게서요? 익크 일은 다 틀녓군? 동굴동굴한 모 方字方 先生! 내일 운수 대통이란듯끼 벙글벙글! 첫 뎐화를 못 바더서 그랫는지 나는 그 날 은 점심을 굶고 눈이 퀭! 그러나 업는 돈 써가며 집 짓고 전화 매고 할 것은 다 햇지만, 편집은 그대로 늣는 것이 미안함니다. 그러나 변명하는 말슴은 안이지만 집 헐고 집 짓느라고 어수선한 판에 밀려진 편집이 즐다어서 느젓스나 이제부터는 또박또박 나올 것을 장담함니다. (朴)<179>