Magazine Title	동광 제23호
Publication Date	1931년 07월 05일
Article Title	李忠武公行錄(上) (The Deeds of Yi Chungmugong (Part 1))
Author	李芬(原著), 李光洙(譯) (Yi P'in (Original Author), Yi Kwang-su (Translator))
Article Type	회고·수기 (Memoir/Recollection)

The Deeds of Yi Chungmugong
						Yi P'in (Original Author), Yi Kwang-su (Translator)
The original author of this book, Yi P'in, is the nephew of Chungmugong Yi Sun-sin.

On the 8th day of the 3rd month, in the year Kapsin (1545), at the Hour of the Rat, the Duke [Yi Sun-sin] was born at the Kŏnch'ŏn-dong house in Hansŏng (Seoul). A fortune-teller said this destiny was to become a great general in the north at the age of 50, and in his mother's (Translator's note: Madam Pyŏn) dream, Vice Minister Yi [Chŏng] appeared and announced, "This child will surely become noble, so name him Sun-sin." Therefore, his mother told Prince Tŏgyŏn (Translator's note: The Duke's father, Chŏng), and thus the name was decided.
When playing as a child, during play-fights with other children, they would always make the Duke their commander. Initially, he studied Confucian texts with his elder brothers, Paek and Chung, and was known for his talent, but he always harbored the intention to serve in the military.

In the winter of Pyŏngin (1566), he first learned martial arts; his physical strength and skill in horse archery were unmatched among his peers. The Duke had a naturally upright character, so even though the warriors he associated with would joke and tease each other all day long, they could not speak informally ("you, me") to the Duke and always respected him.
In the autumn of Imsin (1572), while taking the special military examination at the Hullyŏnwŏn (Military Training Institute), he fell from his horse, breaking his left leg. People thought he had died, but the Duke stood up on one leg, broke off a willow branch, peeled its bark, and bandaged himself, astounding the entire assembly.
In the spring of Pyŏngja (1576) (age 32), he passed the regular military examination, third class. (Omission) By nature, he did not like to go out, so although born and raised in Seoul, few knew him, except for State Councilor Yu Sŏng-nyong (Sŏae), who was a childhood friend from the same village and always acknowledged his talent as a commander.
When Master Yi I (Yulgok) was Minister of Personnel, he heard of the Duke's name and, knowing they shared the same clan name (Tŏksu Yi), requested through Sŏae to meet him once. Sŏae encouraged the Duke to visit Yulgok, but the Duke said, "Since Yulgok and I share the same clan name, it might be worth visiting, but meeting him while he is Minister of Personnel is not right," and ultimately did not go.
In the winter of that year (Pyŏngja), when he became the Kwon'gwan (Commandant) of Tonggubi in Hamgyŏng Province, Yi Ch'ŏngnyŏnhubaek became the Provincial Governor. When the Governor toured the various garrisons, he tested the border generals' archery skills, and few escaped flogging. When he reached Tonggubi, the Governor, having already heard of the Duke's reputation, treated him very courteously. The Duke calmly remarked, "Governor, your use of the rod is quite severe; how can the border generals possibly move their limbs freely?" The Governor laughed and said, "Your words <2> are correct, but how could I act without reason?"
In the spring of Kimyo (1579), his term expired, and he returned to serve at the Hullyŏnwŏn. At that time, a certain official of the Ministry of War attempted to promote a person with whom he had private connections out of turn to become a Ch'amgun (Junior Military Officer).
(Image: Portrait of Chungmugong)
At that time, the Duke was the Saekkwan (personnel officer) and did not permit it, saying, "If someone below is promoted out of turn, those who are rightfully due for promotion cannot advance; this is not just, and furthermore, the law cannot be changed." The War Ministry official tried to pressure him with authority, but the Duke stood firm and refused to listen. The official became very angry but could not force the promotion. Everyone within the Hullyŏnwŏn said, "The Ministry of War official lost to a mere Hullyŏnwŏn Pongsa (Junior Officer)!" and that official deeply resented the Duke.
Also, while the Duke was at the Hullyŏnwŏn, Minister of War Kim Kwi-yŏng offered his daughter by a concubine to be the Duke's concubine. However, the Duke immediately refused, saying, "As I am just starting my official career, should I rely on connections with powerful families to get ahead?" <3> In the winter of that year, he became a military adjutant to the Ch'ungch'ŏng Provincial Army Commander. In his quarters, there was nothing besides clothes and bedding. When returning home for visits, he would call the person in charge of provisions and return any leftover food. Hearing this, the Army Commander respected and admired the Duke. (Omission - original text)
In the autumn of Kyŏngjin (1580), he became the Manho (Commander) of P'alp'o. The Left Naval Commander, Sŏng Pak, sent men to P'alp'o to cut down a paulownia tree in the guesthouse yard to make material for a kŏmun'go (zither). The Duke refused, saying, "This belongs to the state. How can something nurtured for many years be cut down in a single morning?" The Naval Commander was furious but could not cut it down.

When Commander Yi * [name unclear/omitted] came into power, he disliked the Duke for not readily obeying him and sought a pretext to punish him. He ordered a surprise inspection of the troops in the five subordinate ports. While the other four ports had a large number of "missing" soldiers (soldiers listed on the roster but not actually present), P'alp'o only had three. However, the Naval Commander only mentioned the Duke's name in his report to the throne, requesting punishment. Aware of this, the Duke had already obtained a draft document detailing the missing soldiers in the other four ports. The Naval Commander's subordinates reported to him, "P'alp'o has the fewest missing soldiers, and furthermore, Yi has obtained the draft list of missing soldiers from the other four ports. If he submits that report, there will be regrets." The Naval Commander agreed and hastily sent someone to retrieve his report.
The Naval Commander and the Provincial Governor met and discussed, determined to bring the Duke down. At that time, Cho Hŏn (Chŭngbong) was the Tosa (Provincial Inspector). He was reluctant to pick up his brush and write, saying, "I hear that Yi's command of troops and military discipline is the best in the province. Even if all other garrison commanders are demoted, Yi alone should not be," and the matter was dropped. In the spring of Im'o (1582), a Royal Inspector for Military Equipment came down to P'alp'o and dismissed the Duke from his post on the charge of "failure to maintain military equipment." That the Duke, who had maintained his equipment so meticulously, suffered such punishment was all due to the resentment stemming from his refusal to yield at the Hullyŏnwŏn earlier.
In the summer of that year, an appointment order came, allowing him to serve again at the Hullyŏnwŏn. In the autumn of Kyemyo (1583), he became the military adjutant to the Southern Army Commander Yi *. This was likely because Yi * regretted not having recognized the Duke's worth earlier. (Omission - original text)

In the winter of that year, he became the Kwon'gwan (Commandant) of Kŏnwŏn. At that time, the Jurchen leader Ulchinae was causing disturbances on the border, and the Royal Court was worried, unable to find a way to capture him. Upon arriving at his post, the Duke devised a plan to lure him in. When Ulchinae came with his subordinate Jurchens, the Duke captured them using an ambush. Army Commander Kim U-sŏ, resentful that the Duke had achieved a great victory alone, submitted a report stating, "He undertook a major action without reporting to the commanding general." The Court was about to impose a severe reprimand, but upon receiving the commanding general's report [presumably clarifying the situation or perhaps this is contradictory - the text is slightly ambiguous], they stopped the reprimand process.
On the 15th day of the 11th month of this year, Prince Tŏgyŏn passed away in Asan. Only in the first month of the following year did the Duke hear of the death and rush home for the mourning rites.
In the first month of Pyŏngsul (1586), after completing the mourning period, he immediately became Registrar (Chubu) at the Sabok-si (Office of Royal Stables). After serving for 16 days, he became the Manho (Commander) of Chosan. In the autumn of Chŏnghae (1587), he concurrently served as the Tunjŏn'gwan (military colony official) of Noktun Island. Noktun Island was isolated and distant, and its defense force was small. He repeatedly requested reinforcements from Army Commander Yi Il, but Il refused to listen. Then, in the 8th month, indeed, the enemy raised troops and surrounded the Duke's wooden stockade. Seeing several men in felt military coats standing at the front giving commands, the Duke drew his bow and shot, felling all those in red felt coats. As the enemy fled, the Duke, along with Yi Un-nyong, pursued and attacked, rescuing over 60 captured soldiers. On this day, the Duke was also wounded in the left leg by a Jurchen arrow, but fearing the soldiers would be alarmed, he removed the arrowhead himself.

The Army Commander, seeking to evade responsibility for his own fault, intended to have the Duke killed. When the Duke was summoned before the Army Commander, Military Officer Sŏn Kŏ-i, who was originally close to the Duke, took his hand, shed tears, and said, "Drink some wine before you go in." The Duke, with a stern expression, replied, "Life and death are decided by fate; why drink wine?" To Sŏn Kŏ-i's suggestion to at least drink water, <4> the Duke responded, "I am not thirsty; what use would drinking water be?" and went in. The Army Commander ordered the Duke to write a report admitting defeat, but the Duke refused. "I repeatedly requested reinforcements because my troops were few, but the commander did not grant it. The written requests are all here, so even if the Royal Court finds out, the fault does not lie with me. Furthermore, I fought hard, repelled the enemy, and rescued our men. How can this be called a defeat?" His voice and expression remained calm. The Commander was silent for a moment, then ordered him taken down and imprisoned. When news of this reached the king, he said, "Yi is not the type to be defeated; let him serve in the army without rank (as a common soldier) to achieve merit." That winter, he was pardoned due to his merits.
(Image: Turtle Ship)
In the spring of Kich'uk (1589), Chŏlla Provincial Inspector Yi Kwang appointed the Duke as his military adjutant and lamented, saying, "It is regrettable that a talent like yours suffers such injustice." The Duke recommended him [likely Yi Kwang recommended the Duke] to the throne as the Local Auxiliary Defense Commander (Yujobangjang) for the province. Upon arriving in Sunch'ŏn, the Magistrate, Kwŏn Chun, said to the Duke at a drinking party, "This magistracy is very fine; would you like to take my place?" displaying a boastful air, but the Duke merely smiled.
On the 11th day [month unclear, context suggests later in the year], he concurrently held the position of Sŏnjŏn'gwan (Royal Edict Transmitter) through military appointment and went up to the capital. In the 12th month, he became the Magistrate of Chŏngŭp. (Omission - original text) Shortly after, the Duke became the Ch'ŏmsa (Commander) of Manp'o; some said this was because the King favored the Duke's writing skills.
The Duke's second elder brother died young, and his children were all raised by the Great Madam [Yi Sun-sin's mother]. When the Duke became Magistrate of Chŏngŭp, the second brother's children all followed the Great Madam there. Someone criticized this as taking too many dependents (濫率). The Duke tearfully said, <5> "I would rather accept the blame for taking too many dependents than bear to abandon these helpless young children."
In the 7th month of Kyŏngin (1590), he was appointed Ch'ŏmsa (Commander) of Kosari. The Office of the Censorate argued that transferring a local magistrate was improper, so he remained in Chŏngŭp. In the 8th month, he was promoted to the senior official rank (Tangsang'gwan) and appointed Ch'ŏmsa of Manp'o. The Censorate again argued that the promotions were too frequent, so he remained [in Chŏngŭp]. (Translator's note: At this time, the Duke was 46 years old).
In the 2nd month of Sinmyo (1591), he was transferred to be the Magistrate of Chin-do. Before taking up the post, he was appointed Ch'ŏmsa of Karip'o. Again, before taking up that post, on the 13th day of the same month, he received the appointment as Naval Commander of the Chŏlla Left Province (Chŏlla Chwado Susa) and proceeded to his new post from Chŏngŭp. (Translator's note: This was through the recommendation of Left State Councilor Yu Sŏng-nyong.)
While the Duke was at the naval headquarters (Suyŏng), knowing the Japanese pirates (Waegu) would inevitably come, he completely renewed the war equipment of the main base and subordinate garrisons (Translator's note: 6 Eup, 7 Chin) and defense preparations, stretched iron chains across the water in the front sea, and also built the Turtle Ship. (Omission - original text)
When the Royal Court, listening to Sin Rip's (Translator's note: The one who was severely defeated at the Battle of Sangju) report, intended to abolish the navy (舟師) and concentrate on land warfare, the Duke submitted a report arguing that nothing surpasses the navy for blocking sea invaders and that neither the navy nor the army should be abolished. The Court deemed his words correct.
On the 16th day of the 4th month of Imjin (1592), upon hearing that the Japanese had captured Pusan, the Duke summoned all commanders to the main base. When discussing the battle plan, some said, "The navy of this province should rightly defend only this province; attacking the enemy in Kyŏngsang province is not our duty." However, Military Official Song Hŭi-rip argued, "A great enemy presses upon the borders; their momentum will surely extend here. If we sit and defend an isolated fortress, how can we possibly ensure safety alone? If we go out to fight and are fortunate enough to win, we will break the enemy's spirit. Even if we are unfortunate and die in battle, we will not be ashamed of our duty as subjects." Also, Nokto Manho Chŏng Un said, "As subjects who have received favor in times of peace, how can we dare to sit and watch at such a time instead of dying?" The Duke was greatly pleased and raised his voice, declaring, "The enemy's勢勢 is extremely fierce, and the nation is in imminent danger (岌岌). How can we, just because we are commanders of another province, retreat to defend only our own territory? I asked only to gauge the intentions of the commanders. Today's duty lies solely in advancing to fight and die! Anyone who dares suggest not advancing shall be beheaded!"

On the 1st day of the 5th month, commanders from near and far all gathered in the sea before the headquarters; there were 24 warships. Yŏdo Naval Commander Hwang Ok-ch'ŏn attempted to flee, but the Duke had him beheaded and his head displayed as a warning.
On the 4th day, he led the commanders to Tangp'o and sent men to find the location of Kyŏngsang Right Naval Commander Wŏn Kyun. At that time, Wŏn Kyun had lost all 73 warships to the enemy (Translator's note: According to Japanese records, Wŏn Kyun, seeing ships from his own country approaching, mistook them for enemy ships, abandoned his fortress, fled, burned his own warships, and escaped) and only had the single ships carrying Okp'o Manho Yi Un-nyong and Yŏngdŭngp'o Manho U Ch'i-jŏk remaining. Kyun himself was in a single small boat at Kŏlmangp'o. The Duke, thinking Kyun would be familiar with the Kyŏngsang sea routes, welcomed him, gave him a warship, and promised to work together.
On the 7th day, seeing about 30 Japanese ships arrayed at the entrance of Okp'o harbor, the Duke unfurled the flags and advanced. The commanders surged forward eagerly, boarded first, and captured and destroyed them all. Later, for this merit, he was promoted to Kasŏn Taebu (Senior 3rd rank official). On the 8th day, they reached Chusŏng Wŏlmyŏngp'o, made camp, and rested the troops. They received news from Chŏlla Provincial Inspector Ch'oe Ch'ŏl-gyŏn of the King's flight west (大駕西狩) and, facing west, wept aloud before returning the fleet to the main base.
On the 29th day, hearing reports that the enemy had reached Noryang, he led the commanders there. Indeed, enemy ships were present but retreated upon seeing the Duke. He pursued them to Sach'ŏn and destroyed 13 ships. (Omission - original text) On this day, the Duke was also hit by a bullet in the left shoulder, and blood flowed down to his heel, but he did not release his bow and arrow <6> and continued directing the battle all day. Only after the fighting ceased did he cut out the flesh with a knife tip and extract the iron ball, which had penetrated two or three inches deep. The army finally realized and was shocked, but the Duke's conversation and laughter remained natural. Before every battle, the Duke would instruct his commanders: "In the time it takes to cut off one head, you can shoot many enemy soldiers. Do not worry about the number of heads taken; focus only on hitting the target. I am watching with my own eyes whether you fight hard or not." Therefore, from then on, during battles, they only focused on shooting and killing countless enemies and did not compete for merit based on heads taken.
On the 1st day of the 6th month, they moved the formation to the sea behind Saryang Island. On the 2nd day, in the sea before Tangp'o, they encountered over 20 enemy ships. During the battle, they shot and killed the Japanese commander who was directing the fight from the upper deck of a ship, wearing a golden crown and brocade clothes. They captured a round fan sprinkled with gold; on the right side was written "Hashiba Chikuzen-no-kami (羽柴筑前守)," on the left "Kamei Ryukusho (龜井劉矩守)," and in the middle "6th month, 8th day, Written by Hideyoshi (秀吉書)."

On the 4th day of the 6th month, while encamped in the Tangp'o front sea, Chŏlla Right Naval Commander Yi Ok-ki arrived with 25 warships, hoisting sails and blowing trumpets. The officers and men, weary from consecutive days of battle, saw the reinforcements arriving, and the morale of the entire army rose. The Duke said to Ok-ki, "The enemy's arrogance (鴟張) is rampant, and the nation's peril is imminent (朝慕). Why is your arrival so late?"
(Battles of the 5th and 7th omitted)
On the 9th day, the Duke, Yi Ok-ki, and Wŏn Kyun led the commanders' ships to the areas of Ch'ŏnsŏng and Kadŏk to search, but the enemy had fled, showing no trace, so they returned.
On the 8th day of the 7th month, the Duke, along with Yi Ok-ki, Wŏn Kyun, and others, heard that the enemy intended to advance from Yangsan towards Honam (Chŏlla Province). They each led their forces to Kyŏnaeryang (Translator's note: Kyŏnaetto = the strait between T'ongyŏng Island and Kŏje Island) in Kosŏng. Indeed, about 30 enemy vanguard ships were there, and behind them, countless ships covering the sea could be seen approaching. The Duke decided this place was unsuitable for a naval battle due to the narrow and shallow waters and that it would be better to lure them into the open sea to destroy them. He ordered the commanders to feign defeat and retreat. The enemy, seizing the momentum, pursued them to the sea before Hansan Island. This area had a very wide sea surface, and all the enemy ships gathered in one place. The Duke unfurled the flags, sounded the drums, and ordered a turn to attack. All ships hoisted sails and charged straight forward, firing cannonballs and arrows like thunder. Smoke and flames reached the sky, and in an instant (頃刻間), blood flowed, turning the sea red. Not one of the 73 enemy ships returned; this was the so-called Great Victory of Hansan Island. (Omission) For this, he was promoted to Chŏnghŏn Taebu (Senior 2nd rank official).
Battle of An'golp'o on the 9th (Omitted)
On the 1st day of the 9th month, the Duke consulted with Yi Ok-ki, Wŏn Kyun, Auxiliary Commander Ting Kŏl, and others, saying, "Pusan is the enemy's base; let us destroy their stronghold." Together they went to Pusan. The enemy, having been defeated multiple times, feared our army's might and dared not come out, merely firing guns from high ground. Thus, they destroyed over 100 empty ships. In this battle, Nokto Manho Chŏng Un was shot and killed; the Duke personally composed a text and performed a memorial rite for him.
The Duke once gathered 500 sŏk (approx. 90,000 liters) of polished rice and stored it sealed in one place. When asked what it was for, the Duke replied, "His Majesty has fled to Yongman (Ŭiju area). If the enemy in P'yŏngyang advances further west, the royal carriage may have to cross into another country. As the commander of the navy, I must escort the royal barge (龍舟) by sea. If Heaven does not forsake our country, we can plan for recovery again. Even if misfortune strikes, it is right for the ruler and subjects to die together on the soil of our own country. Furthermore, as long as I live, the enemy will never dare to invade [Honam]."
(Battles of the 8th and 22nd of the 2nd month, Kyesa year (1593) omitted)
On the 15th day of the 7th month, the Duke requested to move the naval base to Hansan Island, arguing that the current base was too far biased towards Honam and inconvenient for command (控制). The Royal Court approved. Hansan Island is located 30 ri south of Kŏje Island; a mountain encircles a bay (continued on page 42) <7> allowing ships to be hidden inside, invisible from the outside. Japanese warships intending to invade Honam had to pass this way, so the Duke had always considered this a strategic location (形勝之地), and now the base was moved there.
In the 8th month, the Royal Court, stating that the Naval Commanders of the Three Provinces lacked unified command (統攝) and needed a supreme commander, appointed the Duke to concurrently hold the position of Naval Commander-in-Chief of the Three Provinces (三道水軍統制使), while retaining his original post. As Wŏn Kyun, being senior in service, felt ashamed to receive orders from the Duke, the Duke always treated him with deference.
While in the field, the Duke was always concerned about military provisions. He recruited people to encourage farming and fishing, and there was nothing he didn't do, including salt production and pottery making.
While in the field, the Duke never once kept female company nearby. When sleeping at night, he did not loosen his belt and slept only for one or two watches (2-4 hours) before calling his subordinates to discuss matters until dawn. Also, his meals consisted of only 5 or 6 hop (approx. 1 liter) for breakfast and dinner, so those close to him deeply worried about his eating little while having so many tasks (食少事煩).
On the 11th day of the 1st month of Kap'o (1594), when departing by boat to see his mother, she merely instructed him repeatedly to go to the field and wash away the great disgrace, showing no sign of sadness at parting.
In the 3rd month, an official named T'am Tosa came from Ming China to the Japanese camp at Ungch'ŏn regarding peace negotiations. He sent an official dispatch (牌文) to the Duke, stating, "The Japanese generals all wish to remove their armor and cease fighting. You should immediately return to your local area and not approach the Japanese camps to cause incidents (發端)." The Duke replied in writing, "There is no part of the southern coast of Kyŏngsang that is not our land; why tell me not to approach Japanese camps? And telling me to return immediately to my 'local area'—which place does 'local area' refer to? (Omission - original text)" <42>

**Summary**

This text, originally written by Yi Sun-sin's nephew Yi P'in and translated into Korean by Yi Kwang-su in 1931, recounts the life and deeds of Admiral Yi Sun-sin up to 1594. It details his early life, his integrity and defiance against corruption and incompetence in the military bureaucracy, his preparations for war after becoming Naval Commander, and his major victories during the Imjin War, including Okp'o, Sach'ŏn, Tangp'o, and the pivotal Battle of Hansan Island. The narrative highlights his strategic brilliance, leadership, personal bravery (being wounded but hiding it), and unwavering loyalty to the king and country, culminating in his appointment as Supreme Naval Commander and relocation of the naval base to Hansan Island. From a colonial history perspective, the publication of this heroic narrative about resisting Japanese invasion, translated by the prominent intellectual Yi Kwang-su during the Japanese occupation, is significant. It likely served to bolster Korean national pride and historical consciousness, subtly challenging colonial narratives, although Yi Kwang-su's later collaboration adds complexity to its interpretation. Historians might find the specific details provided (like the fan captured at Tangp'o or Yi's justification for supporting his deceased brother's family), the portrayal of Yi's character emphasizing incorruptibility and strategic foresight against Japanese forces, and the very act of its publication in 1931 particularly interesting for understanding cultural resistance and identity formation under colonial rule.

**Named Entities**

李舜臣	이순신	Yi Sun-sin
李芬	이분	Yi P'in
李光洙	이광수	Yi Kwang-su
漢城	한성	Hansŏng
乾川洞	건천동	Kŏnch'ŏn-dong
卞氏	변씨	Pyŏn-ssi (Madam Pyŏn)
德淵君	덕연군	Prince Tŏgyŏn
貞	정	Chŏng (Yi Chŏng, Yi Sun-sin's father)
訓練院	훈련원	Hullyŏnwŏn (Military Training Institute)
柳成龍	유성룡	Yu Sŏng-nyong
西厓	서애	Sŏae (Yu Sŏng-nyong's pen name)
李珥	이이	Yi I
栗谷	율곡	Yulgok (Yi I's pen name)
吏曹	이조	Ministry of Personnel
咸鏡道	함경도	Hamgyŏng Province
童仇非	동구비	Tonggubi
李靑蓮後白	이청련후백	Yi Ch'ŏngnyŏnhubaek
兵部	병부	Ministry of War
金貴榮	김귀영	Kim Kwi-yŏng
忠淸	충청	Ch'ungch'ŏng Province
鉢浦	팔포	P'alp'o
左水使	좌수사	Left Naval Commander
成鎛	성박	Sŏng Pak
趙憲	조헌	Cho Hŏn
重峰	중봉	Chŭngbong (Cho Hŏn's pen name)
李鎰	이일	Yi Il
宣居怡	선거이	Sŏn Kŏ-i
鬱只乃	울지내	Ulchinae (Jurchen leader)
金禹瑞	김우서	Kim U-sŏ
牙山	아산	Asan
司僕寺	사복시	Sabok-si (Office of Royal Stables)
造山	조산	Chosan
鹿屯島	녹둔도	Noktun Island
李雲龍	이운룡	Yi Un-nyong
全羅	전라	Chŏlla Province
李洸	이광	Yi Kwang
順天	순천	Sunch'ŏn
權俊	권준	Kwŏn Chun
井邑	정읍	Chŏngŭp
滿浦	만포	Manp'o
高沙里	고사리	Kosari
珍島	진도	Chin-do
加里浦	가리포	Karip'o
全羅左道	전라좌도	Chŏlla Left Province (Chŏlla Chwa-do)
柳成龍	유성룡	Yu Sŏng-nyong (mentioned again as recommender)
申砬	신립	Sin Rip
尚州	상주	Sangju
釜山	부산	Pusan
宋希立	송희립	Song Hŭi-rip
鄭運	정운	Chŏng Un
鹿島	녹도	Nokto
呂道	여도	Yŏdo
黃玉千	황옥천	Hwang Ok-ch'ŏn
唐浦	당포	Tangp'o
慶尚右水使	경상우수사	Kyŏngsang Right Naval Commander
元均	원균	Wŏn Kyun
玉浦	옥포	Okp'o
永登浦	영등포	Yŏngdŭngp'o
禹致績	우치적	U Ch'i-jŏk
傑望浦	걸망포	Kŏlmangp'o
嶺南	영남	Yŏngnam (Kyŏngsang Province)
周城月明浦	주성월명포	Chusŏng Wŏlmyŏngp'o
崔鐵堅	최철견	Ch'oe Ch'ŏl-gyŏn
露梁	노량	Noryang
泗川	사천	Sach'ŏn
蛇梁島	사량도	Saryang Island
羽柴筑前守	우시바 지쿠젠노카미	Hashiba Chikuzen-no-kami (Toyotomi Hideyoshi's title)
龜井劉矩守	가메이 류쿠노카미	Kamei Ryukusho (Japanese Daimyo)
秀吉	슈키치/히데요시	Hideyoshi (Toyotomi Hideyoshi)
全羅右水使	전라우수사	Chŏlla Right Naval Commander
李億祺	이억기	Yi Ok-ki
天城	천성	Ch'ŏnsŏng
加德	가덕	Kadŏk
固城	고성	Kosŏng
兄乃梁	견내량	Kyŏnaeryang
閑山島	한산도	Hansan Island
安骨浦	안골포	An'golp'o
丁傑	정걸	Ting Kŏl (Chŏng Kŏl)
龍灣	용만	Yongman (Area near Ŭiju)
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
巨濟島	거제도	Kŏje Island
三道水軍統制使	삼도수군통제사	Naval Commander-in-Chief of the Three Provinces
熊川	웅천	Ungch'ŏn
譚都司	담도사	T'am Tosa (Ming Envoy)
日本	일본	Japan
明	명	Ming (China)

**Glossary**

忠武公	충무공	Posthumous title of honor (for Yi Sun-sin)
行錄	행록	Record of deeds/biography
原著	원저	Original author
譯	역	Translator
嘉靖	가정	Jiajing era (Ming Dynasty reign period)
子時	자시	Hour of the Rat (11 PM - 1 AM)
卜者	복자	Fortune-teller
行年	행년	Age (in one's life)
大將	대장	Great General
母夫人	모부인	Mother (honorific)
參判公	참판공	Vice Minister (honorific title for Yi Chŏng)
반다시	반드시	Surely, certainly (older spelling)
일홈	이름	Name (older spelling)
나다	태어나다	To be born (older form)
노닐 새	놀 때	When playing (older expression)
將帥	장수	Commander, general
儒書	유서	Confucian texts
배화	배워	Learning (older spelling/form)
매양	매양/항상	Always, constantly
가졋다	가졌다	Had, possessed (older spelling)
배호니	배우니	Learning (conjunctive form, older spelling)
膂力	여력	Physical strength
騎射	기사	Horseback archery
同輩	동배	Peers, contemporaries
및을 자	미칠 자	One who could match/reach
천성	천성	Natural disposition, innate character
高亢	고항	Upright, lofty, unbending
同遊	동유	Associating with, playing together
武夫	무부	Military man, warrior
희롱하면서도	희롱하면서도	Even while joking/teasing
對하여서는	대하여서는	Towards, regarding
너, 나	너, 나	"You, me" (informal address)
존경하엿다	존경하였다	Respected (older spelling)
別科	별과	Special examination
折骨	절골	Broken bone
버드나무	버드나무	Willow tree
싸매니	싸매니	Wrapping/bandaging (conjunctive form)
滿場	만장	The whole assembly/place
壯히	장히	Valiantly, bravely
式年	식년	Regular (examination year)
丙科	병과	Third class (in examination results)
급제하엿다	급제하였다	Passed the examination (older spelling)
天性	천성	Natural disposition
드물엇고	드물었고	Was rare/few (older spelling)
同里少友	동리소우	Childhood friend from the same village
許하엿다	허하였다	Acknowledged, permitted (older spelling)
同姓	동성	Same surname/clan
통하야	통하여	Through (older spelling)
마츰내	마침내	Finally, eventually (older spelling)
權管	권관	Commandant (military post)
監司	감사	Provincial Governor
列鎭	열진	Various garrisons/posts
巡行	순행	Tour of inspection
試射	시사	Archery test
邊將	변장	Border general
면한 자	면한 자	One who avoided/was exempted from
적엇다	적었다	Was few (older spelling)
款待하엿더니	관대하였더니	Treated courteously (older spelling)
從容히	종용히	Calmly, quietly
使道	사도	Governor (term of address)
刑杖	형장	Flogging rod/punishment
자못	자못	Quite, considerably
엄하시니	엄하시니	Being strict (honorific, conjunctive)
수족	수족	Limbs (hands and feet)
놀릴 수가 잇소	놀릴 수가 있소	Can move (slightly archaic interrogative ending)
하겟느냐	하겠느냐	Will one do? (rhetorical question form)
낸들	나인들	Even I
시비	시비	Right and wrong, reason
瓜滿	과만	Expiration of term of office
도라와	돌아와	Returning (older spelling)
仕進	사진	To advance in government service
兵部郞	병부랑	Official of the Ministry of War
私情	사정	Private connection/feeling
越遷	월천	Promotion out of turn
叅軍	참군	Junior Military Officer
色官	색관	Personnel officer (at Hullyŏnwŏn)
許치 아니하야	허락지 아니하여	Not permitting (older spelling)
아레	아래	Below
뻑뻑이	뻑뻑이	Rightfully, in due course (meaning here)
公	공	Justice, fairness; Duke (title)
威	위	Authority, might
누르려	누르려	Trying to press/suppress
굳게 버티고	굳게 버티고	Standing firm
듣지 아니하니	듣지 아니하니	Not listening (conjunctive form)
一個	일개	A mere, single
奉事	봉사	Junior official title (at Hullyŏnwŏn)
졋고나	졌구나	Lost! (exclamatory, older spelling)
銜怨하엿다	함원하였다	Bore a grudge, resented (older spelling)
庶女	서녀	Daughter by a concubine
妾	첩	Concubine
仕路	사로	Path of official service
權門	권문	Powerful family/clan
托跡	탁적	To leave one's traces, associate with
쓰겟느냐	쓰겠느냐	Will one use/be employed? (question form)
당장에	당장에	Immediately, on the spot
兵使	병사	Army Commander (provincial level)
軍官	군관	Military adjutant/officer
의복	의복	Clothing
衾枕	금침	Bedding and pillow
아모 것도	아무 것도	Anything (older spelling)
覲省	근성	Visiting one's parents
도라갈 때에는	돌아갈 때에는	When returning (older spelling)
糧饌	양찬	Provisions, food supplies
所任	소임	Duty, responsibility; person in charge
도로 내어주엇다	도로 내어주었다	Gave back, returned (older spelling)
愛敬하엿다	애경하였다	Admired and respected (older spelling)
萬戶	만호	Commander (military rank/post)
客舍	객사	Guesthouse
오동나무	오동나무	Paulownia tree
찍어	찍어	Cutting down
琴材	금재	Material for a musical instrument (like kŏmun'go)
나라ㅅ물건	나랏물건	State property (older possessive form)
길운 것	기른 것	Thing that was raised/nurtured (older spelling)
一朝에	일조에	In a single morning, suddenly
버히려 하나냐	베려 하느냐	Intend to cut down? (older spelling/form)
그러타고	그렇다고	Even so, nevertheless
水使	수사	Naval Commander
만만하게	만만하게	Easily, readily (implying disrespect)
핑게	핑계	Pretext, excuse
소속	소속	Subordinate, belonging to
不意點軍	불의점군	Surprise troop inspection
闕	궐	Missing (soldiers on roster but absent)
대단히	대단히	Greatly, extremely
조사한	조사한	Investigated
草本	초본	Draft document
알외기를	아뢰기를	Reporting (to a superior, older spelling)
후회	후회	Regret
잇으리이다	있으리이다	There will be (deferential future tense, older form)
급히	급히	Hastily
狀啓	장계	Written report to the king
긔어히	기어이	At all costs, finally (older spelling)
떨어터리려	떨어뜨리려	Trying to bring down/dismiss
都事	도사	Provincial Inspector/Secretary
붓	붓	Brush
질겨하지 아니하야	즐겨하지 아니하여	Not liking to, not enjoying (older spelling)
御衆治軍	어중치군	Commanding the masses and governing the army
一道	일도	The entire province
冠한다	관한다	Is the best, tops
貶하더라도	폄하더라도	Even if demoted/dismissed
그쳣다	그쳤다	It stopped, ceased (older spelling)
軍器	군기	Military equipment
敬差官	경차관	Royal Inspector
不修	불수	Not maintained, unrepaired
罷職	파직	Dismissal from office
精嚴하게	정엄하게	Meticulously, strictly
修備	수비	Maintain and prepare
罰	벌	Punishment
屈치	굽히지	Not bending/yielding (older spelling)
叙命	서명	Appointment order
후회함이엇다	후회함이었다	Was regretting (older spelling)
乾原	건원	Kŏnwŏn (place name)
되	되	Barbarian (here, Jurchen)
국경	국경	Border
惹鬧	야뇨	Causing disturbance/trouble
朝廷	조정	Royal Court
근심하되	근심하되	Worried, but
척 잡을	잡을	To capture
到任	도임	Arriving at one's post
策	책	Plan, strategy
유인하야	유인하여	Luring (older spelling)
다리고	데리고	Bringing, leading (older spelling)
伏兵	복병	Ambush
사로잡앗다	사로잡았다	Captured (older spelling)
혼자	혼자	Alone
大功	대공	Great achievement/merit
미워하야	미워하여	Hating, disliking (older spelling)
不禀主將	불품주장	Without reporting to the commanding general
擅擧大事	천거대사	Arbitrarily undertaking a major action
責	책	Reprimand, punishment
次에	차에	At the point of, time when
중지하엿다	중지하였다	Stopped, suspended (older spelling)
捐舘	연관	Passed away (euphemism for death of a high official or parent)
명년	명년/이듬해	The following year
奔喪	분상	Rushing home for funeral rites upon news of parent's death
脫喪	탈상	Completing the mourning period
즉시	즉시	Immediately
主簿	주부	Registrar (official title)
行公	행공	Performing official duties
屯田官	둔전관	Official managing military land cultivation
兼하엿다	겸하였다	Held concurrently (older spelling)
외딸고	외따롭고	Being isolated (older spelling)
防守軍	방수군	Defense troops
더 보내어	더 보내어	Sending more
여러 번	여러 번	Several times
햇더니	했더니	Did so, and then (older spelling)
과연	과연	Indeed, as expected
賊	적	Enemy, bandit, pirate (here, Jurchens or Japanese)
木柵	목책	Wooden stockade/palisade
포위하엿다	포위하였다	Surrounded (older spelling)
兵氈	병전	Military felt (material for uniforms)
지휘하는	지휘하는	Commanding
활	활	Bow
다리어	당기어	Pulling (a bowstring, older form)
쏘아	쏘아	Shooting
거꾸러떠리니	거꾸러뜨리니	Causing to fall down (older spelling)
다라나는	달아나는	Fleeing (older spelling)
迫擊	박격	To pursue and attack
사로잡힌	사로잡힌	Captured
찾아왓다	찾아왔다	Retrieved, brought back (older spelling)
활살	화살	Arrow (older term)
傷하엿으나	상하였으나	Was wounded, but (older spelling)
놀랄 것을	놀랄 것을	That (they) would be alarmed
두려워하야	두려워하여	Fearing (older spelling)
살	살	Arrowhead; flesh
빼어버렷다	빼어버렸다	Pulled out (older spelling)
자기의	자기의	One's own
면키 위하야	면하기 위하여	In order to avoid
죽이려 하엿다	죽이려 하였다	Tried to kill (older spelling)
불려들어 갈	불려 들어갈	Being summoned to enter
厚한 지라	후한지라	Being close/generous, therefore
정색하야	정색하여	With a stern expression (older spelling)
死生	사생	Life and death
有命	유명	Is fated, depends on destiny
웨 먹느냐	왜 먹느냐	Why eat? (older spelling)
목이 마르지 아니하니	목이 마르지 아니하니	Not being thirsty
물인들	물인들	Even water
敗軍狀	패군상	Report admitting defeat
書目	서목	Written document/list
屢次	누차	Repeatedly
請호대	청하되	Requested, but (older spelling)
許치 아니하엿으니	허락지 아니하였으니	Did not permit (older spelling)
힘써	힘써	Strenuously, hard
싸와서	싸워서	Having fought (older spelling)
물리치고	물리치고	Repelled
敗軍	패군	Defeated army/defeat
聲色	성색	Voice and expression
不動하엿다	부동하였다	Was unmoved (older spelling)
한참이나	한참이나	For quite a while
나려가두라	내려가두라	Take down and imprison! (older command form)
白夜로 從軍	백의종군	Serve in the army without rank (as a common soldier)
宥하심을 입엇다	용서하심을 입었다	Received pardon (older spelling)
巡察使	순찰사	Provincial Inspector
軍官	군관	Military adjutant
因하야	인하여	Thereupon, consequently (older spelling)
탄식하기를	탄식하기를	Lamenting that
재조	재주	Talent, skill (older spelling)
이처럼	이처럼	Like this
抱屈	포굴	Suffering injustice/humiliation
可惜	가석	Regrettable, pitiful
本道	본도	This province
留助防將	유조방장	Local Auxiliary Defense Commander
奏薦	주천	Recommendation to the throne
府使	부사	Magistrate
자랑하는 빛	자랑하는 빛	An air of boasting
웃을 뿐이엇다	웃을 뿐이었다	Merely smiled (older spelling)
宣傳官	선전관	Royal Edict Transmitter
上京	상경	Going up to the capital (Seoul)
縣監	현감	County Magistrate
早世	조세	Died young
자녀	자녀	Children
어려서	어려서	Being young
大夫人	대부인	Great Madam (Yi Sun-sin's mother)
손에 길리더니	손에 길러지더니	Were raised by the hand of (older passive form)
따라갓다	따라갔다	Followed (older spelling)
濫率	남솔	Taking too many dependents
그르게 여기거늘	그르게 여기거늘	Considering it wrong (older spelling)
泫然히	현연히	Tearfully
차라리	차라리	Rather, preferably
無依	무의	Without support/reliance
바리지 못하노라	버리지 못하노라	Cannot abandon (older spelling/form)
除하	제수하	Appointing (older spelling)
臺諫	대간	Office of Censorate/Inspector General
守令	수령	Local magistrate
遷動	천동	Transferring (officials)
불가하다	불가하다	Is improper/not allowed
仍任	잉임	Remaining in the same post
堂上	당상	Senior official rank (3rd rank or higher)
陛次	폐차	Steps of rank/promotion
잦다	잦다	Frequent
轉任	전임	Transfer (to a different post)
부임하기 전	부임하기 전	Before taking up the post
水使	수사	Naval Commander (here, Chŏlla Chwado Susa)
水營	수영	Naval Headquarters
倭寇	왜구	Japanese pirates/invaders
반다시	반드시	Surely, inevitably (older spelling)
屬鎭	속진	Subordinate garrisons/bases
戰具	전구	War equipment
一新	일신	Complete renewal
수비하고	수비하고	Preparing defenses and
鐵鎖	철쇄	Iron chains
前洋	전양	Front sea/waters
건너 매고	건너 매고	Stretching across
거북선	거북선	Turtle Ship
지엇다	지었다	Built (older spelling)
舟師	주사	Navy, fleet
罷하고	파하고	Abolishing and
陸戰	육전	Land warfare
전력하려	전력하려	Trying to concentrate efforts
海寇	해구	Sea invaders/pirates
廢할 것	폐할 것	Thing to be abolished
옳이 여겻다	옳게 여겼다	Deemed it right (older spelling)
陷하엿다는	함락하였다는	That (they) had captured (older spelling)
諸將	제장	All commanders/generals
뫃힌 뒤에	모인 뒤에	After gathering (older spelling)
싸홀 일	싸울 일	Matter of fighting (older spelling)
本道	본도	This province
마땅하니	마땅하니	Being proper/right
지킴이	지킴이	Defending (noun form)
할 일이 아니라	할 일이 아니라	Is not something to do
형세	형세	Situation, momentum
뻗을지라	뻗을지라	Will likely extend
앉어서	앉아서	Sitting and (older spelling)
孤城	고성	Isolated fortress/castle
홀로	홀로	Alone
안보할 리가 잇으랴	안보할 리가 있으랴	How could safety be ensured? (older spelling/form)
나아가	나아가	Advancing
다행이	다행히	Fortunately
이기며	이기면	If winning
긔운	기운	Spirit, energy, morale (older spelling)
꺽을 것이	꺾을 것이	Will break
불행히	불행히	Unfortunately
人臣	인신	Subject of the king, official
義	의	Righteousness, duty
부끄럽지 아니할 것이라	부끄럽지 아니할 것이라	Will not be shameful
평일	평일	Ordinary times, peacetime
恩	은	Favor, grace
감히	감히	Daringly
앉어 보겟느냐	앉아 보겠느냐	Will (you) sit and watch? (older spelling)
짓버	기뻐	Being glad (older spelling)
소리를 높여	소리 높여	Raising one's voice
맹렬하니	맹렬하니	Being fierce/violent
岌岌하거늘	급급하거늘	Being in imminent danger
他道	타도	Another province
地境	지경	Territory, border
退守	퇴수	Retreat and defend
諸將	제장	Commanders
뜻	뜻	Intention, will
오직	오직	Only, solely
죽음	죽음	Death
斬하리라	참하리라	Will behead! (future declarative)
遠近	원근	Near and far
營前洋	영전양	Sea in front of the headquarters
뫃이니	모이니	Gathered (older spelling)
戰船	전선	Warship
도피하려	도피하려	Trying to flee
徇하엿다	순하였다	Beheaded and displayed head as warning (older spelling)
거느리고	거느리고	Leading, commanding
익으리라	익숙하리라	Would be familiar with
맞아서	맞아서	Welcoming (older spelling)
약속하엿다	약속하였다	Promised (older spelling)
海口	해구	Harbor entrance
버려선 것	벌여선 것	Arrayed, spread out (older spelling)
旗	기	Flag, banner
둘러	둘러	Unfurling, surrounding
進軍	진군	Advancing the army
踴躍	용약	Eagerly, enthusiastically
先登	선등	Boarding first
멸하고	멸하고	Destroying
嘉善大夫	가선대부	Senior 3rd rank official title
大駕西狩	대가서수	The King's flight west (to Ŭiju)
報	보	Report, news
西向	서향	Facing west
통곡하고	통곡하고	Wailing aloud
함대	함대	Fleet
돌렷다	돌렸다	Turned back, returned (older spelling)
퇴주하는	퇴주하는	Retreating (older spelling)
추격하야	추격하여	Pursuing (older spelling)
격파하엿다	격파하였다	Destroyed, crushed (older spelling)
左肩	좌견	Left shoulder
탄환	탄환	Bullet
맞아	맞아	Being hit
발뒤꿈치	발뒤꿈치	Heel
흘럿으나	흘렀으나	Flowed, but (older spelling)
弓矢	궁시	Bow and arrow
놓지 아니하고	놓지 아니하고	Not letting go
종일	종일	All day
督戰	독전	Urging troops into battle
罷한 뒤	파한 뒤	After finishing/ceasing
칼끝	칼끝	Tip of a sword/knife
베고	베고	Cutting
鐵丸	철환	Iron ball (bullet)
파내니	파내니	Digging out (conjunctive form)
깊이	깊이	Depth
두어 치	두어 치	Two or three chi (unit of length)
들어갓는지라	들어갔는지라	Had entered, therefore (older spelling)
軍中	군중	Within the army
비로소	비로소	For the first time
놀랏으나	놀랐으나	Were surprised/shocked, but (older spelling)
談笑	담소	Conversation and laughter
自若	자약	As usual, composed
약속하기를	약속하기를	Making a promise/agreement that
목아지	목	Neck/head (colloquial/older)
버히는	베는	Cutting (older spelling)
首級	수급	Severed head (as war trophy)
쏘아 맞히기를	쏘아 맞히기를	Hitting by shooting
위주하라	위주하라	Make it the main focus
力戰與否	역전여부	Whether one fights hard or not
눈으로 보고 잇다	눈으로 보고 있다	Am watching with (my) eyes (older spelling)
이로부터	이로부터	From this point on
수없이	수없이	Countlessly
쏘아 죽일 뿐	쏘아 죽일 뿐	Only shoot and kill
首功	수공	Merit for taking heads
다토지 아니하엿다	다투지 아니하였다	Did not compete/quarrel (older spelling)
陣	진	Military camp, formation
옴기고	옮기고	Moving (older spelling)
艘	소	Classifier for ships
싸와	싸워	Fighting (older spelling)
金冠	금관	Golden crown
錦衣	금의	Brocade clothes
船上層樓	선상층루	Upper deck/tower on a ship
倭將	왜장	Japanese commander
團扇	단선	Round fan
얻으니	얻으니	Obtained (conjunctive form)
右邊	우변	Right side
左邊	좌변	Left side
한가온데	한가운데	In the middle (older spelling)
書	서	Written by
援軍	원군	Reinforcements
돆을 달고	돛을 달고	Hoisting sails (older spelling)
라팔	나팔	Trumpet, horn
불고	불고	Blowing
연일	연일	Consecutive days
피곤하엿던	피곤하였던	Had been tired (older spelling)
一軍	일군	The entire army
긔운이 낫다	기운이 났다	Morale rose (older spelling)
다려 이르기를	에게 이르기를	Saying to (older form)
敵勢	적세	Enemy's strength/momentum
鴟張	치장	Arrogant, rampant
위급함	위급함	Urgency, critical danger
朝慕	조모	Morning and evening (imminent)
옴이 어찌 늦으뇨	옴이 어찌 늦으뇨	Why is the coming so late? (older spelling/question form)
搜撿	수검	Search and inspect
形影	형영	Form and shadow (trace)
回軍	회군	Returning the army
더부러	더불어	Together with
向하려한다	향하려한다	Intends to head towards
거늘이고	거느리고	Leading (older spelling)
海峽	해협	Strait, channel
先鋒	선봉	Vanguard
뒤를 따라	뒤를 따라	Following behind
수없이	수없이	Countlessly
덮어 오는 것	덮어 오는 것	Covering (the sea) and coming
좁고	좁고	Being narrow
물 옅어서	물 얕아서	Water being shallow (older spelling)
水戰	수전	Naval battle
大海	대해	Open sea, great ocean
깨트림이	깨뜨림이	Destroying (noun form)
옳다	옳다	Is right/correct
하여곰	하여금	Making (someone do something)
거즛	거짓	Falsely, feigning (older spelling)
敗하야	패하여	Being defeated (older spelling)
물러가게	물러가게	To make retreat
乘勢	승세	Seizing the momentum/opportunity
따라왓다	따라왔다	Followed (older spelling)
해면	해면	Sea surface
뫃엿다	모였다	Gathered (older spelling)
북	북	Drum
돌아서	돌아서	Turning around
싸호기를	싸우기를	To fight (older spelling)
令하니	영하니	Ordering (conjunctive form)
돆	돛	Sail (older spelling)
바로	바로	Straight, directly
포환	포환	Cannonball
활살	화살	Arrows (older term)
우레 같이	우레같이	Like thunder
發하니	발하니	Firing (conjunctive form)
불ㅅ길	불길	Flames (older possessive form)
하늘에 닿아	하늘에 닿아	Reaching the sky
頃刻間	경각간	In an instant
붉게 되고	붉게 되고	Became red and
大捷	대첩	Great victory
正憲大夫	정헌대부	Senior 2nd rank official title
*蕩	소탕 (掃蕩)	Mopping up, destroying (first Hanja likely 掃)
根據	근거	Base, stronghold
穴	혈	Hole, lair (here, stronghold)
저퍼하야	두려워하여	Fearing (older spelling/form)
높은데	높은데	High place
총	총	Gun
놓을 따름임으로	쏠 따름이므로	Only firing (guns)
空船	공선	Empty ship
깨트려 버렷다	깨뜨려 버렸다	Smashed and discarded (older spelling)
親히	친히	Personally
글	글	Writing, text
祭하엿다	제하였다	Performed a memorial rite (older spelling)
精米	정미	Polished rice
석	석	Sŏk (unit of volume, approx. 180 liters)
뫃아	모아	Gathering (older spelling)
한곧에	한곳에	In one place (older spelling)
封하는 것	봉하는 것	Sealing
播遷	파천	Fleeing (of the king/court)
對들어 가면	맞서 들어가면	If confronting and advancing
車駕	차가	Royal carriage/palanquin (the King)
他國	타국	Another country
건너가게	건너가게	To cross over
龍舟	용주	Dragon boat (royal barge)
모서야 할 것	모셔야 할 것	Must escort/serve (older spelling)
망하지 아니하시면	망하지 아니하시면	If (Heaven) does not destroy/forsake
회복	회복	Recovery, restoration
圖할 것	도모할 것	Will plan/seek
불행하게	불행하게	Unfortunately
君臣	군신	Ruler and subject
함께	함께	Together
결코	결코	Never
犯하지 못하리라	범하지 못하리라	Will not be able to invade
치우쳐 잇어서	치우쳐 있어서	Being biased/located too far to one side (older spelling)
控制	공제	Control, command
옴기기를	옮기기를	To move (older spelling)
청하니	청하니	Requesting (conjunctive form)
좇앗다	좇았다/따랐다	Followed, complied with (older spelling)
바다ㅅ구비	바닷굽이	Curve of the sea, bay (older possessive form)
숨길 수 잇고	숨길 수 있고	Can hide (older spelling)
엿볼 수 없이	엿볼 수 없이	Without being able to peek/spy
되엇으며	되었으며	Became, was made (older spelling)
倭艦	왜함	Japanese warship
지나게 됨으로	지나게 되므로	Because (they) must pass
形勝之地	형승지지	Place of strategic advantage
터이라가	터이다가	Was the place, and then
統攝	통섭	Unified command/control
主將	주장	Supreme commander
겸하게 하고	겸하게 하고	Making (him) hold concurrently
본직	본직	Original post/position
仍任	잉임	Retaining the same post
先進	선진	Senior (in service/rank)
節制	절제	Command, control
부끄러워 함으로	부끄러워하므로	Being ashamed, therefore
우대하엿다	우대하였다	Treated with deference/respect (older spelling)
軍糧	군량	Military provisions
백성	백성	Common people
모집하야	모집하여	Recruiting (older spelling)
농업	농업	Agriculture
어업	어업	Fishing industry
장려하며	장려하며	Encouraging
소곰 굽기	소금 굽기	Salt baking/production (older spelling)
질그릇 굽기	질그릇 굽기	Pottery making
이르기까지	이르기까지	Up to, extending to
아니하는 것이 없엇다	아니하는 것이 없었다	There was nothing (he) did not do (older spelling)
일즉	일찍	Once, ever (older spelling)
女色	여색	Female charms, women (sensual context)
가까히	가까이	Near (older spelling)
띄	띠	Belt, sash
그르지 아니하고	흐트러뜨리지 아니하고	Not loosening/disarranging (older spelling)
겨오	겨우	Barely, only (older spelling)
更	경	Watch (night time division, approx. 2 hours)
자고 나서는	자고 나서는	After sleeping
곳	곧	Immediately, right away (older spelling)
붍어	불러	Calling (older spelling)
의논하야	의논하여	Discussing (older spelling)
날이 밝기	날이 밝기	Dawn breaking
이르럿다	이르렀다	Reached (older spelling)
자시는 것	주무시는 것 / 드시는 것	Sleeping / Eating (honorific, context points to eating)
朝夕	조석	Morning and evening (meals)
合	홉	Hop (unit of volume, approx. 0.18 liters)
불과하므로	불과하므로	Being merely/only, therefore
친근한 이	친근한 이	Those close (to him)
食少事煩	식소사번	Eating little and having many tasks
깊이	깊이	Deeply
근심하엿다	근심하였다	Worried (older spelling)
곤욕	곤욕	Disgrace, humiliation
씻으라고	씻으라고	To wash away
재삼	재삼	Repeatedly
가르칠 뿐	가르칠 뿐	Only teaching/instructing
석별하는	석별하는/헤어지는	Parting (sadness)
講和	강화	Peace negotiations
牌文	패문	Official dispatch/notice
갑옷	갑옷	Armor
쉬이기를	쉬기를	To rest (older spelling)
원하니	원하니	Wishing/desiring (conjunctive form)
本處地方	본처지방	One's local area/place
가까지와	가까이 와	Coming near (older spelling)
發端	발단	Starting point, cause (of trouble)
이르키지 말라	일으키지 말라	Do not cause/start
答書	답서	Written reply
沿海	연해	Coast, coastal area
아님이 없으니	아님이 없으니	There is no place that is not...
어찜이며	어찜이며/어째서이며	Why is it? (older spelling/form)
가르침이뇨	가르침이뇨/가르치는 것이뇨	Is it pointing to/teaching? (older spelling/question form)


---------------------------


잡지명	동광 제23호
발행일	1931년 07월 05일
기사제목	李忠武公行錄(上)
필자	李芬(原著), 李光洙(譯)
기사형태	회고·수기

李忠武公行錄
						李芬(原著), 李光洙(譯)
本書의 原著者 李芬은 忠武公 李舜臣의 조카되는 사람이다.

嘉靖 乙巳 3월초 8일 子時에 公이 漢城의 乾川洞家에 나다. 卜者의 말이 이 命이 行年이 50에 北方에 大將이 되리라 하엿고 그 母夫人(譯者曰 卞氏)의 꿈에 叅判公이 告하야 가로대 이 아이가 반다시 귀히 될 것이니 일홈을 舜臣이라고 하라 함으로 그 母夫人이 德淵君(譯者曰 公의 父親 貞)에 告하야 그러케 이름을 지엇다.
어려서 노닐 새 아이들로 더부러 싸홈하는 작란을 할 제 아이들은 반드시 公으로 將帥를 삼앗다. 처음에 伯, 仲 兩兄과 함께 儒書를 배화 재조 잇다는 말을 들엇으나 매양 군대에 종사할 뜻을 가졋다.

丙寅 冬에 비로소 무예를 배호니 膂力이나 騎射가 同輩들 중에 및을 자가 없엇다. 公은 천성이 高亢해서 同遊하는 武夫들이 종일 농담으로 서로 희롱하면서도 오직 公에게 대하여서는 「너, 나」하지 못하고 항상 존경하엿다.
壬申 秋에 訓練院 別科에 나아가 말을 달리다가 떨어저 왼편 다리가 折骨이 되매 사람들은 다 말하기를 公이 죽엇다 하엿지마는 公은 한 다리로 일어나 버드나무 가지를 꺽어 껍질을 벗겨서 싸매니 滿場이 다 壯히 여겻다.
丙子 春(32)에 式年 丙科에 급제하엿다. (中略) 天性 나가 다니기를 좋아아니하야 비록 서울에 생장하엿지마는, 아는 이가 드물엇고 오직 西厓 柳相公(柳成龍)이 同里少友로 매양 그 將帥才 잇음을 許하엿다.
栗谷 李先生(珥)이 吏曹判書로 잇을 때에 公의 일홈을 듣고 또 그가 同姓(德水李氏)임을 알고 西厓를 통하야 한번 만나기를 청하엿다. 西厓는 栗谷에게 가기를 권하엿으나 公은 「栗谷이 나와 同姓이니 가볼 만도 하지마는 吏曹判書로 잇을 때에 보는 것은 옳지 아니하다」고 하야 마츰내 가지 아니하엿다.
이 해(丙子) 겨울에 咸鏡道 童仇非 權管이 되엇을 때에 李靑蓮後白이 監司가 되어 列鎭으로 巡行하면 邊將에게 試射를 하매 邊將치고 매를 면한 자가 적엇다. 童仇非에 이르러는 監司는 본래 公의 일홈을 들엇으므로 심히 款待하엿더니 公이 從容히 말하되 使道 刑杖이 자못 엄하시니 어디 邊將이 수족을 놀릴 수가 잇소 한즉 監司가 웃어 가로대 그대의 말이＜2＞ 옳거니와 낸들 어찌 시비가 없이 하겟느냐 하엿다.
己卯 春에 瓜滿이 되어 도라와 訓鍊院에 仕進할 때에 어떤 兵部郞이 그 私情잇는 자를 越遷하야 叅軍하게 하려하엿다.
충무공 초상
그때에 公이 色官으로 잇어 許치 아니하야 가로대 아레 잇는 자가 越遷하면 뻑뻑이 올라갈 자가 못 올라가나 이는 公이 아니며 또 법은 고칠 수 없는 것이라 하엿다. 兵郞은 威로써 누르려 하엿으나 公은 굳게 버티고 듣지 아니하니 兵郞이 비록 심히 怒하엿느나 또한 맘대로 올리지 못하엿다. 訓鍊院 內에서 다 말하기를 兵部郞이 一個 訓鍊奉事에게 졋고나 하야 그 兵部郞이 깊이 公을 銜怨하엿다.
또 公이 訓鍊院에 잇을 때에 兵曹判書 金貴榮이가 그 庶女를 公의 妾으로 주려 하엿으나 公은 내가 처음 仕路에 나가면서 權門에 托跡해서 쓰겟느냐 하야＜3＞ 당장에 거절하엿다. 이 해 겨울에 忠淸兵使의 軍官이 되엇다. 그 방에는 의복과 衾枕밖에는 아모 것도 없엇고 覲省하러 집에 도라갈 때에는 남은 糧饌을 糧饌맡은 所任을 불러 도로 내어주엇다. 이 말을 듣고 兵使가 公을 愛敬하엿다. (中略-원문)
庚辰 秋에 鉢浦 萬戶가 되엇다. 左水使 成鎛이 사람을 鉢浦에 보내어 客舍 마당에 잇는 오동나무를 찍어 琴材를 삼으려 하는 것을 公은 「이것은 나라ㅅ물건이다. 여러 해를 두고 길운 것을 어찌해 一朝에 버히려 하나냐」하고 許하지 아니하엿다. 水使가 크게 怒하엿으나 그러타고 찍어가지는 못하엿다.

李*이 水使가 되어 公이 만만하게 제 말을 듣지 아니함을 미워하야 무슨 핑게를 얻어 죄를 주려하야 곳 소속 5浦에 不意點軍을 하는데 다른 4浦에는 闕(명부에만 잇고 실제로는 없는 군사)이 대단히 많앗으나 鉢浦에는 다만 세 사람 뿐이엇다. 그러나 水使는 오직 公의 일홈 만을 들어서 啓를 올려 죄를 請하엿다. 公이 그런 줄을 알고 먼저 다른 4浦의 闕을 조사한 草本을 얻엇다. 水使의 부하들이 水使 앞에 알외기를 鉢浦에 闕이 제일 적고 또 李某가 다른 4浦의 闕調査草本을 얻엇으니 만일 그것을 啓하면 후회가 잇으리이다 함으로 水使도 그러케 생각하야 급히 사람을 따라 보내어 그 狀啓를 도로 찾아왓다.
水使와 監司와 서로 만나 이야기 한 끝에 긔어히 公을 떨어터리려 하엿다. 그때에 趙重峰憲이 都事로 잇어서 붓을 들고 쓰기를 질겨하지 아니하야 가로되 들으니 李某의 御衆治軍이 一道에 冠한다 하오니 비록 列鎭을 다 貶하더라도 李某만은 못하리이다 하야 그쳣다. 壬午 春에 軍器敬差官이 鉢浦에 나려와서 「軍器不修」라는 죄로 公을 罷職하니 公이 그러케 精嚴하게 器械를 修備하고 이러한 罰을 당한 것은 다 前日 訓鍊院에서 屈치 아니한 銜怨이엇다.
이 해 여름에 叙命이 잇어 다시 訓鍊院에 仕하게 하고 癸未 秋에 南兵使李*의 軍官이 되엇다. 대개 李*의 前日에 公을 알지 못함을 후회함이엇다. (中略-원문)

이 해 겨울에 乾原權管이 되엇다. 때에 되 鬱只乃가 국경에 惹鬧하야 朝廷이 근심하되 이를 척 잡을 길이 없엇다. 公이 到任하야 策으로써 유인하야 鬱只乃가 그 신하되는 되들을 다리고 오는 것을 伏兵으로써 사로잡앗다. 兵使 金禹瑞가 公이 혼자 大功을 세운 것을 미워하야 「不禀主將, 擅擧大事」라는 啓를 올리니 朝廷에서는 큰 責을 주랴던 次에 主將의 啓를 받고 責 주기를 중지하엿다.
이 해 11월 15일에 德淵君이 牙山에서 捐舘하엿다. 명년 정월에야 비로소 公이 喪을 듣고 奔喪하엿다.
丙戌 正月에 脫喪하고 즉시 司僕寺 主簿가 되어 行公한 지 16일 만에 造山 萬戶가 되고 丁亥 秋에 鹿屯島 屯田官을 兼하엿다. 鹿屯島가 외딸고 멀고 또 防守軍이 적으니 군사를 더 보내어 달라고 여러 번 兵使 李鎰에게 말하엿으나 鎰은 듣지 아니하엿다. 햇더니 8월에 과연 賊이 兵을 들어 公의 木柵을 포위하엿다. 兵氈 옷을 입은 자 數人이 앞에 서서 지휘하는 것을 보고 公은 활을 다리어 쏘아 그 紅氈 옷 입은 자들을 다 거꾸러떠리니 적이 다라나는 것을 公이 李雲龍과 함께 迫擊해서 사로잡힌 군사 60여 명을 찾아왓다. 이 날에 公도 되 활살을 맞아 왼편 다리를 傷하엿으나 군사가 놀랄 것을 두려워하야 혼자 살을 빼어버렷다.

兵使가 자기의 죄를 면키 위하야 公을 죽이려 하엿다. 公이 兵使에게 불려들어 갈 때에 兵使軍官 宣居怡가 본래 公에게 厚한 지라 公의 손을 잡고 눈물을 흘리며 「술을 먹고 들어가라」하거늘 公이 정색하야 가로대 「死生이 有命이니 술은 웨 먹느냐」하엿다. 그러면 물이라도 먹으라 하는 宣居怡의 말에＜4＞ 公은 목이 마르지 아니하니 물인들 먹어서 무엇하랴」하고 들어갓다. 兵使는 公에게 敗軍狀을 쓰라 하엿으나 公은 거절하엿다. 「내가 군사가 적으니 添軍하여 달라고 屢次 請호대 병사가 許치 아니하엿으니 그 書目이 다 여기 잇은 즉 朝廷에서 아시더라도 죄가 내게 잇는 것은 아니오, 또 나는 힘써 싸와서 적을 물리치고 우리 사람을 찾아 왓으니 敗軍이란 말이 되느냐」하고 聲色이 不動하엿다. 公은 한참이나 대답이 없다가 나려가두라 하엿다. 이 말이 들리매 왕은 「李某는 敗軍之類가 아니니 白夜로 從軍하야 공을 세우게 하라 하섯다. 그 해 겨울에 功이 잇어 宥하심을 입엇다.
龜船
己丑 春에 全羅巡察使 李洸이 公으로 軍官을 삼고 因하야 탄식하기를 그대와 같은 재조로 이처럼 抱屈하니 可惜하다고 하엿다. 公은 本道의 留助防將으로 奏薦하엿다. 順天에 이르매 府使, 權俊이 酒席에서 公더러 이르기를 이 府가 매우 좋으니 그대가 나를 대신하겟는가 하고 자못 자랑하는 빛이 잇거늘 公은 다만 웃을 뿐이엇다.
11일에 武로써 宣傳官을 겸하야 上京하엿다가 12월에 井邑 縣監으로 되고 (中略-원문) 얼마 아니하야 公의 滿浦 僉使가 되매 이것은 王이 公의 문필을 총애하시는 까닭이라고 말하는 자가 잇엇다.
公의 2兄이 早世하고 그 자녀가 다 어려서 大夫人의 손에 길리더니 公이 井邑 縣監이 되매 2兄의 자녀가 다 大夫人을 따라갓다. 어떤 사람이 濫率이라고 그르게 여기거늘 公이 泫然히 가로되＜5＞ 내 차라리 濫率의 죄를 받을지언정 참아 이 無依한 어린것들을 바리지 못하노라 하엿다.
庚寅 7월에 高沙里 僉使를 除하이매 臺諫이 守令을 遷動함이 불가하다 함으로 井邑에 仍任하고 8월에 堂上에 올려 滿浦 僉使를 除하이매 臺諫이 또 말하기를 陛次가 넘어 잦다하야 仍任하엿다. (譯者曰 이때 公이 46세다).
辛卯2月에 珍島 郡守로 轉任되고, 부임하기 전에 加里浦僉使에 任하 이고 또 부임하기 전 同月 13일에 全羅左道水使의 명을 받아 井邑으로부터 부임하엿다. (譯者曰 左議政 柳成龍의 薦으로 되엇다.)
公이 水營에 잇으매 倭寇가 반다시 올 줄 알고 本營과 屬鎭(譯者曰 6邑, 7鎭)의 戰具를 一新하게 수비하고 鐵鎖를 만들어 前洋 물 속에 건너 매고 또 거북선을 지엇다.(中略-원문)
朝廷이 申砬(譯者曰 尙州 쌈에 심겁게 패한 자)의 啓를 들어 舟師(海軍)를 罷하고 陸戰에 전력하려 할 때에 公은 啓를 올려 海寇를 막는 것은 舟師 만한 이 없으니 水軍陸軍에 어느 것도 廢할 것이 아니라 하니 朝廷이 그 말을 옳이 여겻다.
壬辰 4월 16일에 倭가 釜山을 陷하엿다는 말을 듣고 公이 諸將을 불러 本營에 다 모힌 뒤에 싸홀 일을 의논할 제 말하기를 本道舟師는 本道만 지킴이 마땅하니 嶺南의 賊을 치는 것은 할 일이 아니라 하되 오직 軍官 宋希立이 가로되 「큰 敵이 지경을 누르니 그 형세가 이리로 뻗을지라, 앉어서 孤城을 지킨들 홀로 안보할 리가 잇으랴. 나아가 싸화 다행이 이기며 敵의 긔운을 꺽을 것이, 불행히 싸화 죽더라도 人臣의 義에 부끄럽지 아니할 것이라」하고 또 鹿島萬戶鄭運이 가로되 人臣이 되어 평일에 恩을 받다가 이런 때에 죽지 아니하고 감히 앉어 보겟느냐」하거늘 公이 크게 짓버 소리를 높여 가로되 「敵의 형세가 자못 맹렬하니 국가가 岌岌하거늘 他道의 將帥라 하야 제 地境만을 退守할까보냐. 내가 물은 것은 諸將의 뜻을 보랴는 것이라, 오늘의 일은 오직 나아가 싸화 죽음에 잇을 뿐이니 감히 나가지 말자고 하는이면 斬하리라」하엿다.

5월 초1일에 遠近諸將이 다 營前洋에 뫃이니 戰船이 24척이엇다. 呂道 水軍 黃玉千이 도피하려 하거늘 斬하야 徇하엿다.
초4일에 諸將을 거느리고 唐浦에 이르러 사람을 시켜 慶尙右水使 元均이 잇는 곳을 찾으니 때에 元均은 戰船 73척을 다 敵에게 패함이 되고 (譯者曰 日本側의 기록을 보면 元均은 本國海船이 뜬것을 보고 敵船인가 하야 城을 버리고 도망하고 戰船은 自手로 태어버리고 도주하엿다고 한다)오직 玉浦萬戶 李雲龍과 永登浦萬戶 禹致績이 탄 배 각 1척이 잇을 뿐이오 均은 다만 小船 하나를 타고 傑望浦에 잇거늘 公이 均이 嶺南水路에 익으리라 하야 맞아서 戰船 한 척을 주어 같이 일하기를 약속하엿다.
초7일에 玉浦 倭船 30여 척이 海口에 버려선 것을 보고 公이 旗를 둘러 進軍하니 諸將이 踴躍하야 先登하야 다 잡아 멸하고 후에 이 공으로 嘉善大夫로 올랏다. 초8일에 周城月明浦에 이르러 陣을 치고 休兵할세 전라도사 崔鐵堅에게서 大駕西狩의 報를 듣고 西向하야 통곡하고 함대를 本營으로 돌렷다.
29일에 敵이 露梁에 왓단 報를 듣고 諸將을 거느리고 露梁에 가니 과연 敵船이 잇다가 公을 보고 퇴주하는 것을 泗川까지 추격하야 13척을 격파하엿다. (中略-원문) 이 날에 公도 左肩에 탄환을 맞아 피가 발뒤꿈치까지 흘럿으나 公은 弓矢를 놓지 아니하고 ＜6＞ 종일 督戰하다가 싸홈이 罷한 뒤에야 칼끝으로 살을 베고 鐵丸을 파내니 깊이가 두어 치나 들어갓는지라 軍中이 비로소 알고 놀랏으나 公은 談笑가 自若하엿다. 公은 싸홀 때마다 諸將과 약속하기를 「목아지 하나 버히는 동안에 여러 敵兵을 쏠 것이 首級이 많지 아니함을 근심하지 말고 오직 쏘아 맞히기를 위주하라. 力戰與否는 내가 눈으로 보고 잇다」 하엿다. 그래서 이로부터 싸홀 때에는 오직  수없이 쏘아 죽일 뿐이요 首功을 다토지 아니하엿다.
6월 초1일에 蛇梁島에 뒤ㅅ바다에 陣을 옴기고 초2일에 唐浦 앞 바다에서 敵船 20餘 艘를 만나 싸와 金冠을 쓰고 錦衣를 입고 船上層樓上에서 督戰하던 倭將을 쏘아 잡고 金을 뿌린 團扇 하나를 얻으니 右邊에는 「羽柴筑前守」 左邊에는 「龜井劉矩守」라고 쓰고 한가온데 「6월 8일 秀吉書」라고 서 잇엇다.

6월 4일에 唐浦前洋에 陣치고 잇을 때에 全羅右水使 李億祺가 戰船 25척을 거느리고 돆을 달고 라팔을 불고 오니 연일 싸홈에 피곤하엿던 將士들은 援軍이 오는 것을 보고 一軍이 긔운이 낫다. 公이 億祺다려 이르기를 「敵勢鴟張하야 국가의 위급함이 朝慕에 잇거늘 今公의 옴이 어찌 늦으뇨」하엿다.
(初 5일, 初 7일의 싸홈 略)
初 9일에 公과 李億祺와 元均이 諸將船을 거느리고 天城加德等地에 나아가 搜撿하엿으나 X은 도망하야 形影을 보이지 아니하므로 回軍하엿다.
7월 초8일. 公이 李億祺, 元均 等을 더부러 敵이 梁山으로부터 湖南으로 향하려한다 하는 말을 듣고 각각 諸般을 거늘이고 固城의 兄乃梁(譯者曰 겨내또=統營事島와 巨濟島가와의 해협)에 가니 敵의 先鋒 30여 船이 과연 와 잇고 그 뒤를 따라 배가 수없이 바다를 덮어 오는 것이 보엿다. 公은 이 곧이 바다가 좁고 물 옅어서 水戰할만하지 못하니 大海로 유인하야 깨트림이 옳다하야 諸將으로 하여곰 거즛 敗하야 물러가게 하니 敵은 乘勢하야 閑山島 앞 바다까지 따라왓다. 이 곧은 해면이 심히 넓어 敵船이 전부 한 곧에 뫃엿다. 公이 旗를 두르고 북을 올려 돌아서 싸호기를 令하니 諸船이 돆을 달고 바로 나아가 포환과 활살을 우레 같이 發하니 내와 불ㅅ길이 하늘에 닿아 頃刻間에 血이 흘러 바다가 붉게 되고 敵船 73척이 한 척도 돌아간 것이 없으니 이것이 이른바 閑山島의 大捷이다. (中略) 이로써 正憲大夫로 올랏다.
初9일 安骨浦戰(略)
9월 초1일 公이 李億祺, 元均, 助防將丁傑 等으로 더부러 상의하야 가로되 釜山은 적의 根據니 그 穴을 *蕩하리라 하야 같이 釜山에 이르니 敵은 여러번 패한 나마에 我軍의 威를 저퍼하야 감히 나오지 못하고 오직 높은데 올라가 총을 놓을 따름임으로 空船 100여척을 깨트려 버렷다. 이 싸옴에 鹿島萬戶 鄭運이 총을 맞어 죽으매 公은 친히 글을 지어 祭하엿다.
公이 때로 精米 500석을 뫃아 한곧에 封하는 것을 누가 무엇에 쓰느냐고 물은즉 公은 「主上이 龍灣에 播遷해 게시니 平壤의 敵이 또 西로 對들어 가면 車駕가 他國으로 건너가게 될 것이라, 내가 水軍의 將이 되어 마땅히 龍舟로써 바다로 모서야 할 것이니 하늘이 우리 나라를 망하지 아니하시면 다시 회복을 圖할 것이오 비록 불행하게 되더라도 君臣이 함께 내 나라 땅에 죽는 것이 可하다. 또 내가 살아잇는 동안 敵은 결코 犯하지 못하리라」하엿다.
(癸巳 2월 초8일 戰, 22일 戰 略)
7월 15일 公은 本營이 湖南에 치우쳐 잇어서 控制에 불편하다는 이유로 陣을 閑山島에 옴기기를 청하니 朝廷이 좇앗다. 閑山島는 巨濟島의 南으로 30里에 잇으니 한 山이 바다ㅅ구비를(제42頁에 續) ＜7＞ 싸서  안에 배를 숨길 수 잇고 밖에서는 엿볼 수가 없이 되엇으며 倭艦이 湖南을 犯하랴면 반드시 이 길을 지나게 됨으로 公은 매양 이곧을 形勝之地라고 하여 오던 터이라가 이제 陣을 옴기게 된 것이다.
8월에 朝廷이 三道水使가 서로 統攝이 못되니 主將이 필요하다 하야 公으로 三道水軍統制使를 겸하게 하고 본직을 仍任하게 하니 元均이 先進으로서 公의 節制를 받기를 부끄러워 함으로 公은 매양 그를 우대하엿다.
公은 陣中에 잇으매 매양 軍糧을 근심하야 백성을 모집하야 농업과 어업을 장려하며 소곰 굽기, 질그릇 굽기에 이르기까지 아니하는 것이 없엇다.
公은 陣中에 잇으매 일즉 女色을 가까히 한 일이 없고 밤에 잘 때에는 띄를 그르지 아니하고 겨오 1, 2更을 자고 나서는 곳 부하를 붍어 의논하야 날이 밝기에 이르럿다. 또 자시는 것도 朝夕 5, 6合에 불과하므로 친근한 이들은 그 食少事煩함을 깊이 근심하엿다.
甲午 正月 11일에 배를 타고 母夫人 게신데 떠날 때에 母夫人은 陣中에 나아가 크게 곤욕을 씻으라고 재삼 가르칠 뿐이오 조곰도 석별하는 뜻이 없엇다.
3월에 譚都司라는 자가 講和하는 일로 明나라로부터 熊川敵陣에 이르러 公에게 牌文을 보내어 가로대 「日本諸將이 다 갑옷을 벗고 싸홈을 쉬이기를 원하니 너는 곳 本處地方으로 돌아가서 日本營寨에 가까지와 發端을 이르키지 말라」하엿다. 公이 答書하야 가로대 「嶺南沿海가 우리 땅 아님이 없으니 나더러 日本營寨에 가까히 하지 말라 함은 어찜이며 나다려 곳 本處地方으로 돌아가라 하니 本處地方이란 어느 곧을 가르침이뇨 (中略-원문)」하엿다. ＜42＞
＜2-7, 42＞