잡지명	別乾坤 第31號
발행일	1930년 08월 01일
기사제목	나의 抗議 (My Protest)
기사형태	문예기타 (Literature etc.)

My Protest
To the Intellectual Class
Ayae-dong Person

For years in Korea, the sounds of "intellectual class" (知識階級), "intelligentsia" have been flying around, and I've heard it until my ears are sore. I even learned the new term "intelligentsia." But the intellectual class in Korea is pathetic. Some people even treated middle school students as the intellectual class some years ago. That's how precious the intellectual class is in Korea.

If you graduate from middle school, know how to read the Osaka Mainichi Shimbun (大阪每日新聞) fluently, and speak a few Japanese (日語) words, you're already a gentleman. And then you claim to be a leader of Korea.

If these people would study a bit more with genuine awareness and guide the Korean people, how great would that be, but they act like they've done something amazing just by graduating from middle school.

So, if you go to a specialized school (專門) or an Imperial University (帝大), you're practically arrogant (眼下無人).

They don't think even a bit about what they eat, what they wear, or what they use to study. They just assume they're studying because their grandfathers or fathers made a fortune and they're lucky.

In reality, they don't know at all that it's the result of the blood and sweat of farmers and laborers (農民勞働者). Even if they know a little, it's just scratching the surface.

After graduating from middle school, the first thing they do is go to "such-and-such society" (무슨會), starting with fancy restaurants ＜76＞. And then they think they've made it, and they make fun of the teachers who were teaching them just yesterday.

The intellectual class in Korea is just a fancy exterior.

Look at social movement (社會運動) groups and national movement (民族運動) groups. They wear nice suits, sneak around to gain fame (名譽), and go to fancy restaurants. That's the intellectual class in Korea. But when something big happens, they pretend to be the most enthusiastic and loyal, and when they see the glint in the eyes of the police authorities, they run away and disappear. And then, when they gather occasionally, they engage in brilliant and eloquent discussions (名論卓說). They talk about what Sun Wen (孫文) is doing, what Lenin is doing, and what Marx is doing. But even among these people, there are those who have thought deeply. The worst are the intellectual youths from wealthy families. They're too busy studying, studying, and going to America (米國), Germany (獨逸), France (佛蘭西), and England (英國) to get divorced first, then build cultural housing (文化住宅), and third, engage in high-class activities.

In reality, the intellectual class in Korea is not just a fancy exterior, but also second-rate human beings.

I've never heard of these people teaching for free at laborers' night schools (勞働者夜學) or farmers' night schools (農民夜學). If they do teach, it's either because they can't stand losing face or for fame. So, how can such night schools develop well?

Look at Seoul, the capital (首府) of Korea. Where is there a night school that thoroughly teaches laborers? There's only a middle school night school (中等夜學校) run by a Japanese person, far away at the foot of Namsan, borrowing someone else's hands. And there's the Central Youth Association Labor Night School (中央靑年會勞働夜學校) that teaches ordinary education. That's how grateful our intellectual class is. So, the intellectual class becomes distant from the people (民衆). I'll say even more. The intellectual class in Korea is, without a doubt, just a fancy exterior, selfish (利己主義), and fame-seeking (名譽探究者).

But do you think anyone recognizes these types? They strut around as they please. What's even more hateful is that private education business owners only know how to educate the children of the middle class, and they completely neglect the education of farmers and laborers (下略).

To Newspaper Operators
Seokchon Life

I am a newspaper subscriber without a title. It is really ridiculous for a mere subscriber without a title like me ＜77＞ to protest. A protest is effective when it is made by a celebrity or someone with rights, but if a nobody like me submits it, newspaper officials will probably not think of it as more than a dog fart. But I can't just let it go. It is up to them to decide what to think of it. I will just submit it honestly.

Newspapers claim to be the voice of the people (本鐸), and we also know them to be so. As the voice of the people, they work hard for our society, which is true. But sometimes they work so hard in vain that it is quite unpleasant.

They take something that happens in one part and shouldn't be known to the entire society and put a big headline on it and show it to the general public. I don't know why they do that, but as one of the people, I find it very unpleasant.

And newspapers are supposed to report on the world's events fairly every day, but they forget this mission and, if something happens on the side of a company or employee with whom they have bad feelings, they publish an unfair and biased article. I suppose they do this because the newspaper's own principles and arguments are different, but this cannot be seen as a public tool of the people, but only as an organ of a few employees or their friends' organizations or individuals.

Why do they like to publish ancient novels so much? When one newspaper starts publishing one, they all start publishing them, trying to outdo each other. I suppose it is a sales strategy. They publish things like Journey to the West (西遊記) to attract Buddhist monk (僧) readers, but what kind of readers are they trying to attract with things like Dream of the Red Chamber (紅樓夢)? Newspapers have a responsibility to break down superstitions and bad habits and establish a new culture, but by serializing such novels, they increase superstition and confusion among the general public who are awakening. What is their intention?

They take pictures from the island country across the water and print them as soon as they are distributed to the general readers. Even though we are living a translation life and the people are ignorant, aren't they even a little embarrassed to be so presumptuous? From now on, you should keep them for a while and use them after the general public has forgotten about them.

As for editorials, they are the most powerful tool for judging right and wrong in the world and attacking or praising, and I believe they are the life of the newspaper itself. And it is natural to comment on newly emerging real-world issues at that time and awaken or guide the general public.

But these days, the editorials in our private newspapers, whether they are the writer's writing practice or some kind of research presentation, why do they write without any principles that they advocate? This is probably because various circumstances do not allow it, but it would be more effective if you paid more attention to it. ＜78＞ And as for the pages, increasing it to eight columns is like giving our readers an extra sheet of toilet paper, which is grateful enough, but if you are going to spend money to increase the number of pages, please don't fill the pages with garbage articles like you do now, but select materials and publish them responsibly.

To Male Students
Kim O-suk

Is there anything a female student can protest about to male students? Only things like "Stop heckling!" (히야까시 마시오) and "Be more gentle!" I guess.

The question you asked is also a plea for this kind of "Why do you do that?"

But haven't we made these pleas too many times? In the past, they still didn't change their attitude, so it's like reading scripture to a deaf cow, so what's the point of saying anything more? But it's so frustrating that I'll say it again. You men, who are idols made of superiority, why are you so vile and callous?

There's a saying that you can know ten things from seeing one thing. Aren't you supposed to be promising young people, and aren't we supposed to be young people who will work together, men and women, to devote ourselves to this society?

There's a limit to humor. Why is your heckling so vile and malicious? Do you not feel anything when you hear such vile words and just let them flow by, as if your nerves are so dull, but do you know the pain we feel every time we hear such words? When we see you muttering such empty words like madmen, we just feel helpless and angry, but if we say even a word, those thick-skinned people only think of us as weak women in their rotten minds and immediately hurl abuse at us. So, like the saying that you clean up dog poop because you're afraid of it, but you sweep it away because it's dirty, we just pretend we didn't hear it and move on. But why do we have to put up with this baseless insult? And even if men themselves have made dozens of mistakes, if women do even the smallest thing wrong, they exaggerate it and spread it around to put the blame on us no matter what. Even though this is the age of male tyranny, how can such outrageous behavior exist?

Their mere playfulness has so much influence on women, both tangibly and intangibly.

You men, who are full of contradictions and shamelessness!

You pluck out and break the buds of young women who are growing up ＜79＞ and you don't feel any guilt at all! Shaking with a clear mind, you make mad, bizarre noises, saying, "Oh, goddess of love, without you I am a living corpse," and you follow and cling to them like venomous snakes, and when you finally come to an end, you don't feel any shame at all, and then from the next day you cross the bridge to woman B and woman C. Cleanse your mind's eye and look back on your actions.

In fact, our male students are so developed in this area that as soon as they put on their hats, it's habitual for them to hurl heckles and abuse at anything, even a stalk of sorghum dressed in women's clothes.

How can those who are supposed to play a major role in this society be so vile, untrustworthy, and frivolous?

Think about it. Of course, I'm not talking about everyone. I'm so sorry to those who aren't like that.

I've borrowed your valuable space to say a few humble words.

To My Mother-in-Law
Disrespectful Daughter-in-Law

Mother-in-law!

1. Why are you so suspicious of your daughter-in-law?
2. Why do you hate it so much when your daughter-in-law eats, even though you turn a blind eye to what the servants eat?
3. Your daughter-in-law is also a person, but why do you treat her like a cow and a horse and still think it's not enough?
4. You are both your children, but why do you keep such a distance?
5. Why do you hate me for respecting your son, my husband?
6. Why are you jealous of a good relationship between husband and wife?
7. It's your daughter-in-law's house, which is also your child's, but why do you speak ill of our family?
8. Why do you tell the neighbors bad things about your daughter-in-law, who is a member of your family?
9. Why do you take every opportunity to complain to your son, who doesn't even know what's going on and is away all day?
10. When my husband hates me and yells at me, oh, mother-in-law, what are you so happy about that you put your long smoking pipe in your mouth and wander from room to room, enjoying it so much?

To All Children
Dotage Old Man

That a father is protesting to his sons! Even if the world is going well and crazy, ＜80＞ it is still a world that has gone crazy in various ways. In the old days, there would be no such problem. But what's the point of being the only one standing firm in a world where only they are right? So, I'm trying to leave them alone, but still, as a father's heart, I can't just leave them alone. But even if I tell them, they don't listen, and even if I tell them, it's no use. So, what am I supposed to do? Just leave them alone as they are, and my heart won't rot and I'll be able to bear it?

You're telling me to talk about the heartache. So, you're telling me to complain to you about the heartache I'm suffering because of my children! Let's see. If I tell you everything, maybe my heart will be relieved...

Hey, wait a minute. What's the rush?

Listen slowly. I'm 70 years old and I had three sons, but I lost the first two years ago, and now I have only one left, the youngest, who is twenty-seven years old this year. I've raised him like a precious jewel. Of course, he's precious. I let him finish ordinary school and middle school, and because he wanted to go to university, I sold the two fields and even sold the tiled house to get the money, and now I live in a thatched house that I rent for 300 won. I sold everything I had to support him through university for several years. If he does well, it wouldn't be a waste to lose all that money, but, sigh, last year he said he was graduating and asked me to send him hundreds of won. So, I thought, now that he's doing well, he wouldn't leave his parents who worked so hard for him to starve, so I took the money I had saved for the rent on this house and rented this house on a monthly basis and sent all the money to him, wouldn't I? Sigh, listen while I smoke. But I'm revealing the detailed flaws of my own child to a friend I've just met. Maybe I'm getting senile, but you, sir, are about the same age as my son, so keep these stories in mind. But you're not like my son. You're so attentive to the world and work for such a famous paper company, which is something to be envied.

...Yes. Listen carefully. He said he graduated from Japan last spring and came back. So, I thought he would get a big job because he graduated from university, and I was so happy at the time that I can't even describe it in words. But there's such a frustrating thing...

When he was in Japan, there was a marriage proposal from a rich family, and the bride was also gentle, so he made a private arrangement and waited for the spring when he would graduate to get married quickly, but oh, have you ever seen a guy like this? He said he absolutely didn't like the old-fashioned bride who hadn't gone to school. So, there was nothing I could do, so he broke off the engagement, but what would my situation be? He broke off an engagement that had been in place for several years because he didn't like the bride. Look at what this guy is doing. He got a female student who supposedly graduated from school and goes around with her day and night without even having a wedding ceremony. I can't bear to see that sight. So, that girl is also ignorant. What does she like so much about that guy who can't earn a penny that she follows him around? That's called free love or something. My son is like that anyway, but that girl, even though she's the daughter of a poor farmer, doesn't know what's going on and follows him around because she likes him. It's pitiful. ＜81＞

Anyway, I can't just watch my son like that, and he graduated from university, but he's just loafing around, so I thought about our family situation and his own future, so I asked this person and that person to try to get him a job somewhere, but there's such an absurd thing. He sold his land and his house, leaving only two fists, and put everything into supporting his studies, but he came back without a diploma. So, who would hire that kind of guy who doesn't even have a diploma in this situation where he graduated but has nowhere to go? So, since that's how it is, there's nothing I can do, but if he would do anything, that would be great, but his eyes are too high, so he doesn't want to do any ordinary work. So, what is he going to eat and live on in the future? At my age, I can't earn money. There's no land left. I'm so frustrated that I can't say any more, because even feelings I didn't have are coming up from my stomach and I can't do it.

...So, he's also a person, so what face would he have to show to his relatives? He uses that as an excuse and cuts off contact with his relatives almost completely. The family is completely ruined.

What is he doing these days? - What is he doing?

In the morning, he eats the rice that his old mother cooks, and he wanders around somewhere until late at night, and only crawls in in the middle of the night. He doesn't even look after the family affairs, which are barely providing him with two meals a day, and he just drinks because he's angry. What money does he use to drink? If he's angry and drinking, I should take poison and die. In the future, who will take care of my family's affairs and who will rebuild my ruined house? Whether it rises or falls is up to him, but he's so oblivious that I can only think of sad thoughts.

He's still doing strange and outrageous things, but I've told you this much, so you can guess everything. There are so many people in the world who are better than my son, and there are so many sons who are worse. My son is like that anyway, but I hope that the sons of our Korea will abandon their empty ambition, laziness, and extravagant hearts and think and act sincerely, and work hard for their own family and their own Korea. I hope that you, sir, will also think and act more diligently.

Even though my son is like this now, when his time comes and when the time is right, he will take care of himself and his family's affairs. But I don't know if I'll see it before I die. What can I say, since I can't teach my own child? But I hope that all the sons of Korea will look at all the circumstances and do their own jobs completely and hope for glory in the future. This is the only request of this old man who is at the age of death. ＜82＞

**Named Entities**

大阪每日新聞	Osaka Mainichi Shinbun
孫文	Sun Wen
레-닌	Re-nin
맑스	Marx
米國	Miguk
獨逸	Togil
佛蘭西	Pŏransŏ
英國	Yŏngguk
西遊記	Sŏyugi
紅樓夢	Hongrumong
南山	Namsan
中央靑年會	Chungang Ch'ŏngnyŏnhoe



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제31호
발행일	1930년 08월 01일
기사제목	나의 抗議
기사형태	문예기타

나의 抗議
知識階級에게
亞鉛洞人

조선에도 년래로 『지식계급』(知識階級)이니, 『인테리켄챠』이니 하는 소리가 풀풀 날너단여서 나 역시도 귀가 젓도록 들엇슴니다. 또한 『인테리켄챠』라는 신술어(新術語)까지 배우고요. 그러나 조선에 지식게급이란 한심한 것이지요. 엇던 분은 년전에 중학생을 다 지식계급으로 취급하야 어느 곳에 쓰섯드군요. 이 만츰 조선에 지식게급은 귀한 것이니까요.
중학교나 졸업하고 대판매일신문(大阪每日新聞)이나 줄줄 닑을 줄 알고 일어(日語)마듸나 하면 벌서 이는 신사(紳士)외다. 그리고 조선의 지도자(指導者)라고 자처하고 나스게 됨니다.
그러면 이들이 진정한 의식(意識)으로 좀 더 공부하고 조선 민중을 지도하얏스면 그 얼마나 조흐릿가 만은 중학교 쯤 졸업한 것을 가지고 무슨 굉장한 무엇이나 한 것가티 역이지요.
그러니 전문(專門)이나 뎨대(帝大)쯤 가면 그야말노 안하무인(眼下無人)이지요.
이들이 무엇을 먹고 무엇을 입고, 무엇을 가지고 공부하얏는 지는 조금치도 생각지 안치요. 그저 할아버지나 아버지가 벌어서 노흔 재산으로 팔자 조하서 공부만 한 것가티 역이고 잇섯든지요.
실상은 농민, 로동자(農民勞働者)의 피와 땀의 결정인 것은 조금도 몰은단 말임니다. 약간 안다고 하야도 수박 것할기지요.
중학교를 졸업하고는 첫번재 가는 것이『무슨會』 『무슨會』하고 료리집 ＜76＞부터이지요. 그러고 이제는 되엿다하고 조금 물씬 물씬한 선생에게는 (작일까지 자긔를 가르첫건만)농(弄)비슷한 소리를 걸거든요.
조선에 지식게급이란 한개의 훌륭한 외입장이외다.
보십시요. 사회운동(社會運動)단테에도 그럿코 민족운동(民族運動)단테에도 그럿슴니다. 양복이나 훌륭이 입고 슬금슬금 명예(名譽)나 돗그고 료리집이나 가고요. 이것이 조선의 지식게급이지요. 그러다가도 무슨 큰 일이 나면 가장 렬심인 체 충성인체 하고 압흐로 나섯다가 어떡하다가 경찰 당국 가튼 곳에서 잡는 눈침만 보면 살살 피하야 벌서 어대로 도망가버리고 업단 말이지요. 그러고 각금가다가 모혀 안지면 그야말노 명론탁설(名論卓說)을 하지요. 손문(孫文)은 엇더코, 「레-닌」은 엇더코, 『맑스』는 엇더타고요. 그러나 이러니 저러니 하야도 이런 분들은 사상(思想)이 들엇다는 분이지요만은 제일 말재 가는 양반은 재산 잇는 집 지식청년이지요. 그들은 공부, 공부하고 미국(米國)이나 독일(獨逸) 불란서(佛蘭西) 영국(英國)등지를 단여와서는 첫재 리혼(離婚), 둘재 문화주택(文化住宅), 셋재 고등XX를 운동하기에 겨를이 업지요.
실상은 조선에 지식게급은 외입장이만 안이라. 뎨이호(第2號)인간들이지오.
그야말노 지식게급이란 그 분들이 어느 곳에 로동자 야학(勞働者夜學)이나 농민 야학(農民夜學)에 무료로 가르친단 말을 내가 듯지 못 하얏슴니다. 가르친다면 체면에 못익여서 그러치 안흐면 명예이지요. 그러니 그런 야학이 잘 발뎐할 수 잇나요.
보십시요. 조선에 수부(首府)이라는 서울에 로동자를 위하야 투철이 가르처주는 야학이 어대잇슴니까. 그것도 남의 손을 비러서 멀리 남산 밋 일인 경영에 중등야학교(中等夜學校)가 잇슬 뿐이지요. 그러고 보통 교육을 가르치는 중앙 청년회 로동야학교(中央靑年會勞働夜學校)가 잇군요. 이마만츰 우리 조선의 지식게급은 고마운 냥반이거든요. 이러니 지식게급은 민중(民衆)과 거리가 멀어지지요. 더 한말 하겟슴니다. 조선에 지식게급은 두 말할 것 업시 외입장이요. 리긔주의(利己主義)자이요, 명예탐구자(名譽探究者)이지요.
그러나 이 따위들을 누가 알아주기나 하는 줄 아십니까. 제멋에 껏덕어리고 단이지요. 더구나 가증한 것은 민간 교육 사업자들이 중산계급의 자제들만 교육 식힐 줄 알엇지 농민 로동자 교육은 여지 업시 등한하거든요.(下略)

新聞 經營者에게
石村生

나는 한 개의 名色업는 신문 구독자이다. 이와 가티 名色업는 한낫 독자로써＜77＞ 항의를 한다는 것은 참 우수운 일이다. 항의도 엇던 名士나 혹은 권리 잇는 사람이 하여야 효과가 잇지 나 가튼 無名之卒이 제출한다고 하여야 신문 당국자로서는 이 말을 개방귀 만치도 안이 역일 것이다. 그러나 그러타고 해서 그냥 둘 수는 업다. 무얼로 역이거나 그것은 그 사람들의 생각에 맛길 것이요. 나로서는 다만 솔직하게 제출하고야 말겟다.
신문이란 민중의 本鐸이라고 자처하고 우리도 또한 그러케 아는 바임니다. 本鐸인 만큼 우리 사회를 위하야 만히 애써주는 것이 사실임니다. 그러나 엇던 때에는 공연한 애를 써서 좀 꼴보기 실흔 때가 퍽 만히 잇습듸다.
일부에서 생겨나 전 사회에 알녀지지 안이 하야도 조흘 일을 가지고 크다란 활자로 제목을 부치어 일반 민중의 압헤 내 노으니 엇더한 심사로 그러는지 몰으나 민중의 한 사람인 나로서 볼때에는 대단히 아니꼬운 생각이 남니다.
그리고 신문이란 매일 세상에 생기는 일을 공정하게 보도하는 것이 그 사명이어늘 이 사명을 이저버리고 자기의 社로나 혹은 社員 間에 감정이 좃치 못한 편에서 엇더한 사실이 이러난다면 공정치 못하게 한편으로 치우친 기사를 내이니 신문 자체의 주의주장이 다른 까닭으로 그러케 한다고 하겟지 만은 이러케 하는 것은 민중의 公器라고 볼 수가 업고 다만 몃 社員이나 그 친지의 團體 혹 個人의 機關誌라고 볼 수 밧게 업게 됨니다.
소설 가튼 것은 엇지 그리 古代小說을 내이기 조와들 하는지요. 한 신문에서 내이기 시작하면 서로 압흘 닷토와 눈들이 별개서 따라 내이니 아마 판매 정책이겟지요. 기중 西遊記 가튼 것은 불교밋는 중(僧)독자나 엇으려고 하지만은 紅樓夢 가튼 것은 엇던 독자를 엇으려고 함닛가? 신문이란 미신 악습을 타파하고 新文化를 수립하는 책임이 잇거늘 그와 가튼 소설을 연재하야 일반 깨여가는 민중에게 더욱 미신과 昏迷를 늘여주니 그 엇전 心思란 말이요.
사진은 물 건너 섬나라에서 건너오는 것을 건너와 독자 일반의게 配付되는 날 곳 따서 내이니 아모리 번역생활을 하는 우리요 철 몰으는 민중이기로 낫도 안이 간지러운지 그러케 당장한단 말이요. 다음부터는 두어 두엇다가 일반 독자가 이저버린 다음에 써먹도록 하시오.
다음 논설로 말하면 세상 일의 是非와 曲直을 가려 공격 혹은 表揚하는데 잇서서 제일 유력한 기구이며 따라 신문 자체의 생명인 줄 암니다. 그리고 그때 그때에 새로 발생되는 현실 문제를 삼아 가지고 논평하야 일반을 각성 또는 지도 식히는 것이 당연할 것임니다.
그런데 이즈음 우리 민간 신문의 논설은 필자의 작문 연습인지 무슨 연구 발표인지 왜그리 자기네의 주장하는 바 主義가 업시 씀닛까. 이것도 여러 가지의 주위 사정이 허락치 안이하야 그럿케지 만은 좀 더 以上으로 주의를 하야주엇스면 효과가 만흘가 함니다.＜78＞ 그리고 지면으로 말하더래도 8항으로 늘인 것은 우리 독자로서는 휴지 한 장을 더 쓰게 되는 것만 하야도 感謝無地이지만은 기왕 업는 經費를 써가며 頁數를 늘이거든 지금과 가티 휴지통 기사로 함부로 지면을 채우지 말고 재료를 선택하야 책임잇게 揭載하얏스면 엇더할는지요.

男學生에게
金O淑

여학생이 남학생에 대한 항의하야 보일 것이 잇슴닛가. 『히야까시 마시오』『좀 더 점잔으시오』 소리 밧게야.
貴社에서 물으신 것도 역시 이 종류의 『웨 그러느냐 말어다고』의 애걸을 하라는 말슴이지요.
그러나 이런 구걸은 넘우도 만히 하지 안엇슴닛가. 과거에 그래도 그들은 여전히 태도가 변하지 안으니 소귀에 경 읽기지 또 말하여 무엇하겟슴닛가 만은  하두 긔 막히니 또 말슴들일가요. 우월감으로 만든 우상인 남자 분이시여 왜 그리도 비렬하고 양심이 무듸엿슴닛가.
한가지를 보아 열가지를 안다는 속담도 잇스니 당신네는 촉망밧는 청년이요 우리는 남자나 여자와 가티 힘과 마음을 모아 이 사회에 몸을 밧칠 젊은이들이 안임닛가.
유모어도 분수가 잇지 당신네들의 히야까시는 왜 그리도 비렬하고 惡합닛가. 당신네들은 그러한 야비한 소리를 듯고도 아모 감각도 업시 흘러보내고 말만치 신경이 무듸엿는지 몰으나 우리들은 그런 소리를 드를 때마다 밧는 압흠을 아심닛가. 그 허무맹낭한 소리를 정신병자처럼 태연히 중얼거리는 것을 볼 때에는 그만 가이 업고 분하기도 하여서 한마듸라도 대답을 하면 철면피의 그들은 약한 녀자라는 것만을 그 썩어진 머리에 두고 당장 욕설을 퍼붓지 안슴닛가. 그러니 속담에 맛치 개똥을 무서워서 치우나 더러워서 쓸어버린다는 격으로 들은 척 못드른 척하고 지나갈냐니 대체 근거업는 이 모욕은 무엇으로 인하여 밧슴닛가. 그리고 남자들 자신은 수 십번의 잘못이 잇섯고도 녀자들에게 사소한 무삼 일이 잇으면 이것을 과장하여 廣布하고 떠들어서 엇더케서라도 허물을 씨워놋코야마니 아모리 지금이 남성횡포시대인들 그런 막심한 행동이 어데잇겟슴닛까.
그들의 한갓 유희가 녀자들에게는 유형 무형한 영향이 얼마나 만흔지요.
모순 덩어리요, 무염치한의 남자 여러분이시여!
당신네들은 한참 자라나는 여자들의 순을 막 집어놋코 꺽거노아 망처치고도＜79＞ 아모런 양심의 가책도 업지요! 말정한 마음을 벌벌 떨며 『오-사랑의 여신이여 당신이 업는 나는 산송장이로소이다』하며 狂的 奇聲을 하며 악독한 배암가티 따라 단이고 휘감겨 단이다가 종래 결말을 보고는 아모런 붓그럼도 눗기지 안코 또 다시 그 잇흔날 부터 B여자 C여자 에게로 女橋를 건너 단이니 마음 눈을 맑히씻고 당신네들의 행동을 다시 돌아 보십시요.
사실 우리의 남학생들은 머리에 모자를 올녀놋키가 밧부게 이런 방면에만 발달이 되여서는 수숫대에라도 여자의 옷만  닙혀 노흐면 그들은 『히야가시』와 악담을 퍼붓는 것이 상습임니다.
장차 이 사회의 중대한 역할을 하여야 할 그네들이 그럿케도 야비하고 미듭지 못하고 경박하여 엇덕함닛가.
생각하여 보십시요. 물론 전부를 말한 것은 안이닛가요. 만일 그럿치 안은 분에게는 너무 미안함니다.
귀중한 지면을 빌녀 卑近한 말 두어 마듸 드렷슴니다.

媤어머니께
不孝婦

싀어머니시여!
1. 왜 그리 며나리를 의심하심닛가.
1. 하인 먹는 것은 묵시 하시면서도 며나리 먹는 것은 웨 그리 미워하심닛가.
1. 며나리도 사람이어늘 왜 그리 소와 말처럼 부리고도 오히려 부족해하심닛가.
1. 가튼 자식이어늘 왜 그리도 간격을 두심닛가.
1. 당신 아들이요 내 남편을 공대하는게 무엇이 잘못이라고 미워하심닛가
1. 부부 사이 조흔 것을 왜 시기 하심닛가.
1. 당신의 자식인 며누리의 집이어늘 우리 본가집 흉을 왜 그리 보심닛가.
1. 근처 집 남보고 왜 당신의 집안 사람인 며누리 흉을 말함닛가.
1. 종철도 몰으고 왼 종일 나아가 잇든 당신아들에게는 왜 그리 제의 홈담을 틈틈이 하심닛가.
1. 남편이 나를 미워하고 큰소리 칠 때 오- 싀머니시여 무엇이 즐거워서 긴 담배대를 물고 이방 저방 단이며 그리도 깃버하심닛가.

모던 子息에게
妄齡老爺

아비가 아들에 대한 항언이라니 세월이야 조와 젓다해도 망하긴 가지가지로 ＜80＞ 망한 세상이외다. 옛날 세상 가트면 이런 문제의 이야기가 날리가 잇겟소. 그러나 저희만 잘낫다는 세상에서 나 혼자가 꼿꼿한 체 하면 무얼 하겟소. 그러니 저희 하는 대로 내버려 두려 하지만 그래도 아비의 마음이라 그대로 바려 둘 수는 업고 그러나 일너도 둣지 안코 일너도 소용이 업소 그려. 그래 그저 제대로 내벼려 두랴니 속이 안썩고 견대겟소.
속 썩는 그것을 나더러 말하란 말이요. 그러고 보니 나다려 자식 때문에 썩는 속사정을 당신에게 하소연 하란 말이구려! 어듸 그래봅시다. 다 터러노코 이야기나 하면 속이 시원이나 해질는지......
여보 가만 잇소 그리 급할 게 무어요.
차차 드러보오. 내 나희 70에 아들이 3형제가 잇다가 맛놈 둘재놈은 년전에 이러버리고 올에 스물 일곱된 막내로 하나 남어서 이 놈을 금지옥엽가티 고히 고히 길너왓소.그려, 그러니 그게 오즉 귀할 니가 잇소. 보통학교 중학교 공부를 마처주고 제 원대로 논뛰어야기 두어 마직이 잇는 것을 파러도 모자라서 기와 집 한채 잇든 것을 파러서 지금 드러잇는 이 초가집을 300원에 전세를 어더 들드록 잇는 것이라고는 다 파러서 몃몃해 동안 대학교 공부 뒤ㅅ치닥거리를 햇소이다. 저 하나만 잘되면이야 그 까지 철냥쯤이야 다 업새 버린들 앗가울니가 잇겟소만은 휘- 그 놈이 작년에는 졸업을 하고 나온다고 돈을 몃 백원을 보내라기 이제야 저 잘되엿스니 설마 그러케 공 드려준 어미 아비를 버러 먹일 터이지 하고 이 집 전세돈을 도로 차저 가지고 이 집을 눌너 삭을세로 들고 그 돈을 몽탕 다 보내 주지 안엇겟소. 휘- 담배나 피우면서 들어시요. 그러나 초면 친구에게 내 집 자식의 세세한 험을 드러내이니 망녕이 들엇나보오만은 노형 나희도 내 아들 나희와 비슷하니 이런 이야기를 명심해 두시란 말이요. 그러나 노형은 내 아들 갓지안어 세상 일에 착심하야 그런 유명한 제지회사에를 단인다니 부러운 일이요.
......녜. 자세 드르시오. 그 놈이 작년 봄에 일본서 졸업을 햇다고 도라왓고려. 그래서 대학교를 졸업을 하고 왓스니까 무슨 큰 벼슬이나 할 줄 알고 그때 깃버햇든 것이야 이로 말노 엇지 하겟소. 그러나 이런 한심한 일이 잇소...
제가 일본 잇슬제 어느 부자집에서 통혼이 잇서서 신부깜도 얌전하기에 내정을 해놋코 졸업하는 봄을 기다렷다가 불야불야 혼인을 하자니까 아 이런 놈 보앗소. 학교 공부 못한 구식 색시라고 영 실타는구려. 그래 할 일 업시 파혼은 해버렷소만은 내 꼴이 무엇이 되엿겟소. 몃몃해 노앗든 혼처를 못 맛당하다고 파혼을 해바리고 이놈하는 짓 좀 보소. 소위 학교 졸업햇다는 녀학생 하나를 어더가지고 례식도 아니하고 밤낫으로 달고 단이니 참 그 꼴은 참아 못보겟습듸다. 그러니 그 게집애도 철 업는 것이지 돈 한푼 못버는 그 놈을 어느 구석이 조타고 따러 단이느냐 말이요. 그게 자유연애라든가 무에라든가 내 자식이야 기왕 그리 되엿스나 그 게집애야 부지 하허인의 딸이지만 속도 모르고 조타고 따르는 것이 가엽단 말이요.＜81＞
이러나 저러나 내 자식이나 그대로 보고만 잇슬수 업고 대학교라고 졸업을 하고 온 것이 펀둥펀둥 놀고만 잇스니 집안 살님도 살님이려니와 제전정이 딱해서 이사람 저사람에게 청을 대여서 어대든지 하나 너허보랴니까 이런 기막힐 일이 잇소. 땅 팔고 집 팔어 두 주먹만 남기고 제 공부 뒤ㅅ 밧치에 다 너은 이 늙은 아비 공이 업시 졸업장을 못 마터 가지고 왓구려. 그러니 졸업을 맛고도 갈 곳이 업서서 쩔쩔매는 이판에 누가 졸업장도 업는 그까짓 놈을 쓰랴고 합닛까. 그러니 이왕지사 그러케 되엿스니 할 일 업거니와 제가 제 생각을 하기로 아모 것이나 햇스면 조흐렷만 눈은 놉하서 왼만한 일은 아니 할냐는구려. 그러니 장차 무엇을 먹고 사라야 올소. 인제 내 나희에 돈버리를 할 수가 잇소. 남은 전장이 잇소. 참 긔가 탁 막혀서 더 말을 하랴니 업든 심정까지 북밧처 나와서 못하겟소.
......그래 저도 사람이지 일가친척에겐들 무슨 면목이 잇겟소만은 그 핑계를 하고는 영영 친척과도 상종을 끈타십히 하는구려. 집안이야 올케 망햇소이다.
요새는 무얼 하느냐-하긴 무얼해.
아침이면 늙은 어미가 끄려주는 밥을 먹고 밤까지 늣도록 어데를 도랴단이는지 밤ㅅ중에야 기여드니 이나마 겨오 조반석죽을 하는 집안 일이나 살피지 안코 소위 화가 난다고 술만 먹고 단이니 무슨 돈에 술을 먹는지. 제가 화가 나서 술을 먹을 냥이면 나는 독약을 먹어도 시원치가 안켓소. 장차에 내 집일을 누가 보삷혀주고 씨러진 내 집을 누가 이르키겟소. 흥망간에 제 손에 달녓는데 지각업시 저러니 비창한 생각만 나는구려.
아즉도 무에니무에니 제의 짓거리고 하는 짓이 해괴망측한 일이 만흐나 이만콤 이야기를 햇스니 모든 것을 아러 짐작해 보시요. 세상에는 내 아들보다 더 나은 사람이 얼마나 만켓스며 또 더 못한 아들들이 얼마나 만켓소. 내 아들은 긔왕 그러커니와 우리 조선의 아들들은 헛된 명예심과 게으른 마음과 부허한 마음들을 버리고 오로지 진실하게 생각하고 실행해서 제일 제 집안 일, 제 조선 일을 위해서 힘써 주기를 바라는 바요. 아모조록 노형도 더욱 더욱 착실히 생각하고 실행하시요.
내 아들이 비록 지금은 저래도 제 철나고 제 때가 오면 제 몸을 살피고 제 집일도 살필터이지요. 그러나 내 생전에 보고 죽을가 모르겟소. 내 자식 못가르키는 내가 무슨 말을 하릿가만은 모든 조선의 아들들은 모든 사정을 살펴보아 제각각 제 할 일을 온전히 하야 압날에 영화를 바람이 잇기를 죽엄의 나희의 잇는 이 늙은이의 오즉 한낫 부탁이요.＜82＞
＜76-82＞