잡지명	별건곤 제31호
발행일	1930년 08월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮各地 瀑布館 (Gallery of Waterfalls in Various Parts of Korea)
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Gallery of Waterfalls in Various Parts of Korea

Korea is a country of mountains. To exhibit all these numerous mountains would be most conveniently done by creating a model of the entire country and exhibiting it as is. However, this expo, unlike ordinary expos, does not aim to introduce the topography, products, or scenery of the mountains to the general public. As it is a "Cooling-Off Expo (納凉博覽會)," only the most refreshing parts of the mountains, those that make the summer heat disappear just by hearing about them, and those that send chills down the spine with just a glance at a photograph, should be selected and introduced to greatly welcome visitors. Speaking of cool places in the mountains, introducing Cheonwangbong (天王峰) of Jirisan (智異山), where white snow remains even in May and June, or the story of Cheonji (天地) on Baekdusan (白頭山), where cold hailstorms and freezing winds chill the bones even in the sweltering heat of summer, or the recently discovered so-called Underground Geumgang, the Rainbow Dragon Cave (蝀龍窟) of Yeongbyeon (寧邊), or Mujugucheondong (茂朱九天洞) outside of that, the Wind Cave (風穴) of Uiseong (義城), Seoraksan (雪악山) of Inje (麟蹄) with its cool name, Seolbongsan (雪峰山) of Anbyeon (安邊), Seolhanbong (雪寒峰) of Samsu (三水), or Seolmaeryeong (雪매령) would also be good.

However, it seems best to exhibit the waterfalls within the mountains, as they are even cooler. Now, visitors, please pay special attention. Even in this sweltering heat of summer, you might catch a cold. From now on, 25 famous waterfalls in the famous mountains of the eight provinces of Korea will appear in sequence. How refreshed are you all?

Parkyeon Falls (박연폭포) (Gyeonggi, Gaeseong)

"The flowing water of Parkyeon Falls circles around Beomsa Pavilion (泛槎亭)." This waterfall is so familiar from the songs of shepherd boys (草童牧竪)! This is a waterfall that everyone knows easily. It's 60 li (里) from Gaeseong, and you can get there in the blink of an eye by car, but to truly know the refreshing taste of the waterfall, you must wear straw shoes, carry a stick, pack a lunch, and search for this waterfall through the mountain paths, between the two mountains of Cheonma (天磨) and Seonggeo (聖居). To add a bit, it might be 3,000 cheok (尺), but in reality, the sight of water falling from a hundred-cheok-high hill, crashing into a deep stone pot-like basin, and swirling blackly is frightening to behold, and chills run down your spine, and your eyes will be startled. There is a story that a man named Bak Jin-chil (朴進七) played the flute here and seduced the dragon king's daughter, and there is also a legend that a man named Yi Yeong-gan (李靈幹) wrote a poem and whipped a dragon during the Goryeo dynasty, but to avoid being long-winded, let's leave that aside. In any case, the strange rocks and pine and maple trees harmoniously create a great scenic spot, and along with the historic sites of Songdo (松都), it is famous in the world, and that is because it bears that much value. Also, there is a reason why so many tourists (遊人行客) constantly visit this place in spring for the flowers, in summer for the greenery, and in autumn for the autumn foliage. <134>

Sinseung Falls (新增瀑布) (Chungbuk, Yeongdong)

If you take the Gyeongbu Line train and pass two or three small mountain villages past Daejeon, get off at the very small Simcheon (深川) rural train station and walk about 10 li (里) westward along a mountain path, you will find the famous Sinseungdongdae (新增東坮) in the mountains named Oksan (玉山), a place where layers of rock walls stand as if carved. You must seek it out, but you must not forget the place where this waterfall is, even though it is not as famous. The heartbreaking sight of the 60-cheok (尺) flight of water (飛流) between both shores of stone cliffs would be good. And there are so many strange flowers in that valley that many plant-collecting teachers gather there and dance. The rumor is that for some reason, it has even changed its name to Okgil Falls (玉吉瀑布) at the important point.
If you must seek out waterfalls in the mountains and streams of Chungnam, I ask that you visit the eastern and western waterfalls in the depths of Gyeryongsan (雞龍山) in the valley west of Seokgyeri (石溪里).

Baegyang Falls (白羊瀑布) (Jeonbuk, Jangseong)

When autumn comes and the ears of rice droop in the wide fields of Gimje (金堤) and Mangyeong (萬頃), the trains on the Gunsan (群山), Jeonju (全州), and Honam main lines are packed with passengers. Don't even ask. They are guests from Honam (湖南) who want to spend a day enjoying the autumn foliage of Baegyangsan (白羊山). Get off at Jangseong 4-gari Station (長城4街里驛) and go about 20 li (里) to the east, where the valley is deep and the old pine trees are dense, and the scenery is very beautiful. You should see the ancient plants of Baegyangsa (白羊寺) and Yeongmunam (靈門庵), but go a little further east of Yaksujeong (藥水亭) and find the place where this waterfall is. Don't underestimate it because it is small. Since there is a spring water (약수랭천) that cures all diseases there, what can you do? <135>

Yongmun Falls (龍門瀑布) (Jeonnam, Gwangyang)

Baegunsan (白雲山) in Gwangyang (光陽), where the clear waters of the Seomjingang River (纖津江) flow meandering from east to west in Jeollanam-do! The name is good, but the scenery is also excellent. To the west of Songcheon (송천) in Baegunsan (白雲山), this waterfall is hidden again. In other words, it is a maiden waterfall, a hundred-cheok flight (비류백척). The sight is truly a spectacle (奇觀) worthy of being a scenic spot (勝景), and it seems like it would not be out of place in a painting.

Jeongbang Falls (正方瀑布) (Jeju Island)

If you swim south, south across the sea, you will reach Jeju Island (濟州島), sitting alone! It has long been known that golden tangerines (黃金빗 橘) hang heavily, that groups of female divers (海女) who pick abalone and turban shells float like flocks of ducks in the water, and that there are many foals (말망아지) wandering around, snorting. But to say that there are no waterfalls on this island is the same as saying that there are no mountains on the island. If there is a high mountain like Hallasan (漢拏山) on Jeju Island, then it is believable that there is such a waterfall in Hallasan (漢拏山). There really is this waterfall in Mt. Jeong (正총 山), and it is considered one of the Ten Scenic Wonders of Jeju (濟州10勝). Keep this in mind and be sure not to miss it when visiting Jeju.

Cheonjiyeon Falls (天池淵瀑布)

While introducing Jeongbang Falls (正方瀑布), let's also introduce Jeju's Cheonjiyeon Falls (천지폭포) as being of the same value! If you go northwest from Seogwipo (西歸浦) for a while (about several blocks), there is a magnificent waterfall with a height of about 72 cheok (尺) and a width of 30 cheok (尺) on the old trees and dense hanging cliffs, which is the famous Cheonjiyeon Falls (천지연 폭포). This waterfall is famous not only for its waterfall, but also for the fact that silver fish (銀魚) and eels (鰻魚) are produced in the lower pond of the waterfall, so it is a place that anyone can visit to escape the summer heat and eat fish.

Yongdam Falls (龍潭瀑布) (Gyeongbuk, Mungyeong)

Mungyeong Saejae (聞慶새재) (Bird Pass)! Just hearing the name makes it sound rugged. This waterfall is located on the northwest side of Donghwa Temple (桐華院) at the foot of that mountain. The bottom of the pond is paved with stones, so its depth cannot be known. According to legend, a dragon ascended from here in the past, but whether the dragon ascended or not, it would be interesting to visit this waterfall while also picking pine mushrooms (송이버섯) at Saejae (새재).

Bipok (飛瀑) (Gyeongbuk, Cheongsong)

It would be a big mistake to think there is nothing in such a mountain village. If you go about 30 li (里) southeast from Cheongsong-eup (靑松邑), there is an unnamed waterfall that falls like thunder from a ten-jang cliff (十丈절벽). It is even colder in summer, so visitors escaping the heat have made a path in this secluded mountain.

Magam Falls (幕岩瀑布) (Gyeongbuk, Gunwi)

In the small, secluded town of Uiheung (義興), in the province of Gyeongsangbuk-do, 40 li (里) south at the foot of Palgongsan (八公山), there are rock walls standing tall on three sides, 30 cheok (尺) high, with a stone overhang on top, and inside is a space large enough for more than ten people to sit. Its shape is like a tent, so it is named Magam (幕岩), and next to it <136> is this waterfall, which is about 20 cheok (尺) high.

Naeyeon Falls (內延瀑布) (Gyeongbuk, Yeongil)

If you go 60 li (里) north from Pohang (浦項), there is Bogyeongsa Temple (寶鏡寺), and to the east is Cheongyeonam (청연암), and to the west is Seogungam (서궁암), where the forests and streams are abundant and the scenery is serene. If you go into the valley behind it, 12 waterfalls flow in turn among the protruding rocks, and among them, this Naeyeon Falls (내연폭포) plunges straight down for 40 cheok (尺), creating a magnificent and refreshing atmosphere that gives people the feeling of leaving the mundane world and entering a fairyland. Jungpok (중폭) is also one of the waterfalls in that area, and it forms a natural masterpiece along with the unique rocks and lush forests. It should be considered one of the must-see tourist destinations for those planning a trip to the east coast.

Yongchu (龍湫) (Gyeongbuk, Gyeongju)

This is where the Joseon scholar Yi Min-je (李敏濟) from Gyeongbuk once resided, and it is located under the apricot altar (杏坍) of Oksan Seowon (玉山書院). On the south side of the rock stone is Yi Min-je's calligraphy that reads "Sesimdae (洗心坮)" and on the west wall it reads "Yongchu (龍湫)". The stream that flows from the mountain valley falls over the round bedrock and becomes a waterfall, and below is a deep blue pool, which is what is called Yongchu (龍湫). The two sides are carved as if cut, with a length of 4 or 5 jang (丈), a width of over 10 jang (丈), and an unknown depth. In order to see the remains of the sages and appreciate the beauty of this place, spending a day here will not be a waste.

Seobong Falls (鼠峰瀑布) (Gyeongnam, Gimhae)

Get off after going up only three stops from Busan. However, if you are going down from Seoul, Gupo Station (龜浦驛) is almost there before Busan. If you ask someone there where Seobongsan (鼠峰山) is, they will probably tell you. If you go to that mountain and see this waterfall, you will see huge rocks facing each other in layers on the left and right hills, and the white waves scattering down are like crushed jade powder. In this kind of summer, who would deliberately eat ice and hurt their stomach?

Yonghwa Falls (龍華瀑布) (Gangwon, Cheorwon)

When taking the Gyeongwon Line train <137> and passing through Cheorwon (鐵原), there may be many who recite the old poems of the ancient capital of Taebong (泰封故都), but there probably aren't many who get off there and walk along the Wonsan Highway (元山街道) to deliberately find this Yonghwa Falls (龍華瀑布). Shouldn't we be saddened that this waterfall, which falls 1 or 2 hundred and 10 cheok (尺), is like this?

Geumgangsan Falls (金剛山瀑布)

Geumgangsan (金剛山) is truly a mountain of rocks, a mountain of trees, a mountain of relics, a mountain of streams, and also a mountain of waterfalls. Although Korea is a country with few waterfalls, and therefore we are not a people very familiar with waterfalls, once you break through the heat and enter Geumgangsan (金剛山), who would not be moved by the sound of waterfalls falling "쿵쿵" everywhere? It would be endless to list them one by one, but who wouldn't praise Manpokdong (萬瀑洞) in Inner Geumgang and Guryong Falls (九龍瀑) in Outer Geumgang, and who wouldn't want to see them? This has already been shown to the world a lot, so let's move on.

Banggok Gugok Falls (芳谷九曲瀑布) (Chuncheon-gun, Namsan-myeon, Banggok)

Oops! I almost forgot. Speaking of waterfalls in Gangwon-do, we cannot leave out Banggok Falls (芳谷瀑布) in Chuncheon (春川). We cannot leave out Banggok Falls (芳谷瀑布) in Chuncheon (春川). Chuncheon (春川) is the capital of Gwandong (關東) and the ancient capital of Maekguk (貊國), so among the many scenic spots, this waterfall is one of them. The direct drop is 12 jang (丈), and the width is 5 or 6 cheok (尺). Because the stream meanders nine times (凡九折), it is called Gugok Falls (九曲瀑布). The name of the valley is Banggok (芳谷), so the scenery of the mountain valley is good, and because the stream is also excellent, poets and scholars (詩人 韻客) compare it to the Wuyi Mountains (武夷九曲) in China. Also, Samhak Falls (三學瀑布) (also known as Gyeongcheon Falls (境川瀑)) in Deokseopwon (德十院) (Seo-myeon, Chuncheon) is not very magnificent as a waterfall, but its location is originally in Samhaksan (三學山), a famous mountain in Chuncheon (春川), so the valley is extraordinarily secluded and the top of the waterfall has Sangwonam (上元庵), an ancient temple from the Three Han period. Below the hermitage is mineral water, and near the hermitage is a large cave called Tongcheongul (通天窟), and if you pass through the cave, there is an ancient site called the South Gate Ruins of Ancient Maekguk (古昔貊國의 南門遺址), so tourists visit all year round, and especially in the summer, there are many visitors who come to escape the heat and recuperate.

Geumgangyeon (金剛淵) (Gangwon, Gangneung)

You shouldn't think of it as a waterfall in Geumgangsan (金剛山) just because it's called Geumgang (金剛). It's in Gangneung (江陵), in the alley next to Woljeongsa Temple (月精寺) on Odaesan Mountain (五臺山). The four sides are bedrock, and the waterfall is 10 cheok (尺) long. Below is a pond, and in the pond are fish. According to legend, a divine dragon (神龍) lives here, and when the weather is good in spring, thousands or hundreds of unnamed fish gather in the middle of the pond to drink water, wandering around, and some try to climb up the cliff (懸崖), and some fall back down halfway, making it a great spectacle.

Guwolsan Falls (九月山瀑布) (Hwanghae, An'ak)

It is said that the founder of Joseon (朝鮮), Dangun (檀君), entered this mountain for the last time and became a god, so Guwolsan (九月山) is a sacred mountain of Joseon. There is a fortress on the mountain, shaped like a large ship, but there are no roads in the north and south, and only the money road (錢道) in the east and west allows passage. All the water flowing from the valleys forms a stream, and when it comes to the west side of the fortress, the mountains on both sides stand tall like gates, and the stream goes out of the gate and becomes a waterfall. Although it is not very grand, visiting this place to pay homage to the relics of the founding ancestor is not meaningless. <138>

Dongnim Falls (東林瀑布) (Pyeongbuk, Seoncheon)

The county is Seoncheon (宣川), but as for the train station, Dongnim Station (東林驛) is right after passing Seoncheon (宣川), which is 6 or 7 stops before going to Sinuiju (新義州) on the Gyeonggi Line. Dongnim Fortress (東林城), with a width of 18,000 cheok (尺), was built by General Im Gyeong-eop (林慶業) to defend against the Qing army (淸敵). It is about 10 li (里) north of the train station, right next to the railroad tracks, arousing much sentiment from passersby. Within the fortress, there is a waterfall with a width of 6 cheok (尺) and a height of 3 jang (丈), which is this Dongnim Falls (東林瀑布). Strange rocks are naturally found around waterfalls, so there is no need to bring that up again, but the jade foam (玉沫) scattering and the rain and mist (雨煙) transforming truly make it a great place to escape the summer heat. The surroundings are secluded and the forests are dense, making it a famous place for viewing autumn foliage (觀楓). There are many fruits such as pears, apples, peaches, and chestnuts, so visitors will surely enjoy it, and especially since there are relics of General Im (林將軍).

Sambang Falls (三防瀑布) (Gangwon, Pyeonggang)

If you barely pass the highest places on the Gyeongwon Line, such as Geomburang (儉勿浪) and Sepo (洗浦), Sambang Station (三防驛) is in the mountains, and about 10 li (里) northwest of that station is Mt. Masang (馬上山). In that mountain, the sound of the Sambang Falls (삼방폭포) constantly echoes day and night, spring, summer, and autumn, with a consistent roar (轟). The length of the waterfall is over 140 cheok (尺)! Looking at it, it seems as if a silk of white lotus (白蓮의 絹絲) is hanging between the valleys, and the faint sound echoing in the valley is like thunder from a clear sky. The precipice is like a wall, and the stream hanging again in an inaccessible place is called Ungpok (雄瀑).

Goeum Falls (鼓音瀑布) (Hamnam, Anbyeon)

From Godae Mountain Station (高大山驛) on the Gyeongwon Line, go 20 li (里) south and you will find Jaecheondong (재천동). The waters of the Sambang Valley (삼방 골작이) all gather here, colliding with rocks to form rapids, and then falling again to form a pond. The clear stream, bending and turning for a distance of less than 10 li (里), gradually deepens, and the old pine trees cover the cliffs. The cool air creeps up on people, and the waterfall is located almost at the end of the stream, so the scenery is truly remarkable, but it has been hidden for so long that it has not been widely known to the world. However, since the creation of the Gyeongwon Line railroad, the footsteps of sightseers (探勝客) have begun to visit this Goeum Falls (고음폭포), along with the Sambang Falls (삼방폭포).

Unrim Falls (雲林瀑布) (Hamnam, Muncheon)

In the midst of the great mountains of Duryu (두류), with their vast and majestic terrain, there is a stone wall carved as if cut by a sharp knife, forming a grotto (一洞天), and inside, a waterfall that roars like thunder all year round has the chilling name of Unrim Falls (운림폭포). With a width of over 10 cheok (尺) and a height of over 30 jang (丈), the snow spray (비설) from the waterfall's mouth prevents the sweltering heat of summer from daring to invade, and the silvery waves hanging in the air are like a galaxy pouring down from the heavens. Near the waterfall, there is a large bedrock that has been washed and polished by the waves for thousands of years, covered with white sand like silver flakes, creating a natural gathering place where 3 or 4 hundred people can sit. The patterns on the bedrock form a chessboard (碁판) for the sages, and the crashing waves create the music of a zither (琴韻). The floating fallen flowers in spring and the reflecting red leaves in autumn are even more beautiful. Although the location is in a remote area and the road is somewhat difficult, that shouldn't be a problem for those seeking to explore. <139>

Named Entities

朴進七	Bak Jin-chil
李靈幹	Yi Yeong-gan
智異山	Jirisan
天王峰	Cheonwangbong
白頭山	Baekdusan
天地	Cheonji
寧邊	Yeongbyeon
蝀龍窟	Dongnyonggul
茂朱九天洞	Mujugucheondong
義城	Uiseong
風穴	Punghyeol
麟蹄	Inje
雪악山	Seoraksan
安邊	Anbyeon
雪峰山	Seolbongsan
三水	Samsu
雪매령	Seolmaeryeong
開城	Gaeseong
京畿	Gyeonggi
범사정	Beomsa Pavilion
天磨	Cheonma
聖居	Seonggeo
송도	Songdo
永同	Yeongdong
忠北	Chungbuk
大田	Daejeon
심천	Simcheon
玉山	Oksan
新增東坮	Sinseungdongdae
玉吉瀑布	Okgil Pokpo
雞龍山	Gyeryongsan
石溪里	Seokgyeri
長城	Jangseong
全北	Jeonbuk
金堤	Gimje
萬頃	Mangyeong
群山	Gunsan
全州	Jeonju
湖南	Honam
白羊山	Baegyangsan
長城4街里驛	Jangseong 4-gari Station
白羊寺	Baegyangsa
靈門庵	Yeongmunam
藥水亭	Yaksujeong
光陽	Gwangyang
全南	Jeonnam
纖津江	Seomjingang
白雲山	Baegunsan
송천	Songcheon
濟州島	Jeju-do
漢拏山	Hallasan
正총 山	Jeongchong San
西歸浦	Seogwipo
聞慶	Mungyeong
慶北	Gyeongbuk
鳥嶺	Saejae
桐華院	Tonghwa-won
靑松	Cheongsong
軍威	Gunwi
義興	Uiheung
八公山	Palgongsan
迎日	Yeongil
浦項	Pohang
寶鏡寺	Bogyeongsa
청연암	Cheongyeonam
서궁암	Seogungam
慶州	Gyeongju
李敏濟	Yi Min-je
玉山書院	Oksan Seowon
洗心坮	Sesimdae
金海	Gimhae
釜山	Pusan
龜浦驛	Kupo Station
鼠峰山	Seobongsan
鐵原	Cheorwon
江原	Kangwon
泰封	Taebong
元山街道	Wonsan Kaido
金剛山	Kŭmgangsan
春川	Chuncheon
芳谷	Panggok
春川郡南山面芳谷	Ch'unch'ŏn-gun Namsan-myŏn Panggok
關東	Kwandong
貊國	Maekguk
武夷九曲	Moui Gugok
德十院	Tŏksipwŏn
三學山	Samhaksan
上元庵	Sangwonam
通天窟	T'ongch'ŏnggul
五臺山	Odaesan
江陵	Kangnŭng
月精寺	Wŏljŏngsa
安岳	Anak
九月山	Kuwŏlsan
宣川	Sŏnch'ŏn
平北	P'yŏngbuk
東林驛	Tongnim Yŏk
新義州	Sinŭiju
林慶業	Im Kyŏng-ŏp
淸敵	Ch'ŏngjŏk
平康	P'yŏnggang
檢勿浪	Kŏmmullang
洗浦	Sep'o
三防驛	Sampang Yŏk
馬上山	Masangsan
咸南	Hamnam
安邊	Anbyŏn
高大山驛	Kodaesan Yŏk
재천동	Jaecheondong
文川	Munch'ŏn
斗流	Turyu



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제31호
발행일	1930년 08월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮各地 瀑布館
기사형태	문예기타

朝鮮各地 瀑布館
조선은 山國이다. 이 수 만흔 산악을 다 출품하자면 차라리 조선 전국의 모형을 만드러서 그대로 출품하는 것이 가장 편리할 것이다. 그러나 이 박람회는 보통 박람회와 가티 산악의 형세라던지 산물, 경치 등등을 일반에게 소개코자 하는 것이 안이요 이름이 납량박람회 이니만치 산악 중에 가장 시원하야 이약이만 드러도 삼복의 炎蒸이 저절로 살어저 업서지고 사진만 보와도 등골의 땀이 아주 숙 드러 갈 만한 부분만 드러서 소개하면 입장자에게 무엇보다도 대환영을 바들 것이다. 산악의 시원한 곳으로 말하자면 5,6월에도 백설이 皚皚한 지리산의 천왕봉 소개던지 삼복 중에 冷雹寒風이 뼈를 자리게 하는 백두산 천지가의 이약이라던지 근래에 신발견한 소위 지하 금강이란 영변의 蝀龍窟이라던지 其외 茂朱九天洞, 義城의 風穴, 이름 좃차 시원한 麟蹄의 설악산, 安邊의 설봉산, 三水의 설한봉, 설매령 가튼 것을 소개하는 것도 조흘 것이다.
그러나 보다도 더 시원한 것은 산악 중에 잇는 폭포를 출품하는 것이 제일 조흘 것 갓다. 자- 입장자 여러분 특별 주의하십시요. 아모리 이 찌는 듯시 더운 삼복중이라도 잘못하시면 감기가 드실 것이외다. 지금부터는 조선팔도 명산 중에 잇는 25대 폭포가 순차로 나옵니다. 여러분 얼마나 시원하십닛가.

朴淵瀑布(京畿 開城)
『박연폭포 흐르는 물은 범사정(泛槎亭)으로 감도라든다.』 草童牧竪의 노래에 까지 귀익은 폭포! 누구나 알기 쉬운 폭포가 이 폭포다. 개성에서 60리, 자동차로 가면 눈 깜작할 새이에도 갈 수 잇지만 정말 시원한 폭포 맛을 알랴하면 집신 신고 막대 들고 변또 싸가지고 산길로 산길로 天磨聖居 두 산 틈으로 이 폭포를 차즈라. 말을 좀 보태면 三千尺도 可겟지만 정말로는 한 백척되는 언덕에서 떠러지는 물이 웅성 깁흔 돌 항아리 가튼 속에 부드치여 시이커멋케 뒤집히는 광경은 보기에도 무시무시 소름이 제절로 끼치고 눈이 우리 수리하여 질 것이다. 녜전에 朴進七이라는 이가 여긔서 젓ㅅ대를 불어 용왕의 따님을 흘렷다는 니약이도 잇고 고려때에 李靈幹이라는 어른이 글을 지어 용을 종아리첫다는 전설도 잇지만 장황하니 그것은 그만두고 엇잿든 기암괴석과 솔나무 풍나무가 가티 어울리어 一大 名勝를 이룬 것도 송도의 고적과 아울러 세상에 擅名하는 것도 그만한 갑슬 질머지고 잇는 까닭이지만 봄꼿, 녀름 녹음과 가을 단풍에 이곳을 찻는 遊人行客이 끈칠새이 업시 만흔 것드 또한 까닭이＜134＞잇서 그러는 것이란다.

新增瀑布(忠北 永同)

경부선 차를 타고 대전을 지나 조그만 산골정 두셋을 것치면 아조 조그만 심천이라는 시골 정거장에서 나리어 한 10리쯤 서쪽으로 산길을 거르면 이름부터 고흔 玉山이라는 산 속에 層岩絶壁 깍가 세운 듯한 곳에 新增東坮라는 명소가 잇는 것도 차저야겟지만 그러케 이름나지 못한 폭포나마 이 폭포가 잇는 곳을 니저버려서는 아니될 것이다. 兩岸石壁60척을 飛流하는 悽絶한 광경도 조흐려니와 그 골작이에는 기이한 화초가 만해서 식물 채집하는 선생들이 만히  모혀 들어 춤을 흘리는 이가 만타는데 요점에는 웬 까닭인지 玉吉폭포라고 變姓名까지 햇다는 소문이다.
부득이 충남 산천에가 폭포를 차저보랴거던 수수꺽기 계룡산 속에 가서 동폭포, 서폭포의 勝景을 석계리 서쪽 山谷 중에 가 방문하기를 부탁한다.

白羊瀑布(全北 長城)
가을이 되야 김제 만경 넓은 들에 볏ㅅ목이 척척 느러지면 군산, 전주, 호남 본선의 기차 속이 톡 터지게 승객이 만흔데 그것은 뭇지도 마라. 백양산의 단풍을 차저 하로를 소일하려는 호남의 손님들이란다. 장성 4街里驛에서 내리어 동으로 한 20리만 가면 계곡이＜135＞ 깁숙하고 노송이 빽빽하야 풍광이 자못 佳麗한데 백양사, 영문암의 천고식물도 보기는 보아야하지만 약수정 동편으로 족금만 더 가서 이 폭포 잇는 곳을 차저보라. 적다고 깔보아서는 아니 될 것이다. 만병통치의 약수랭천이 거긔 잇는 바에야 엇지 하느냐.

龍門瀑布(全南 光陽)
전라남도 동서쪽으로 축츠저서 섬진강 맑은 물이 구비처 흘러 도라가는 광양의 백운산! 이름도 조타마는 풍광도 絶佳 백운산 송천 서쪽에는 또 다시 이 폭포가 숨어잇서 말하자면 처녀폭이니 비류백척 그 광경은 실로 용성다을 奇觀이 이곳 勝景 되기에 붓그림이 업슬듯.

正方瀑布(濟州島)
남으로 남으로 바다를 헤염처서 나가면 혼자 똑 떠러저 나안즌 제주도! 황금빗 橘이 듸례듸례 열리고 오리떼 모양으로 물 속에서 둥둥 떠도라 다니며 문어 전복을 따는 해녀의 무리가 덕실덕실하고 홍홍거리며 도라다니는 말망아지가 만흔 줄을 이믜 드른지 오래지만 이런 셤 속에 무슨 폭포가 잇스랴고 해서는 셤 속에 무슨 산이 잇스랴고 하는 것이나 맛참가지의 말이다. 한라산 가튼 놉흔 산이 이 제주도에 잇다하면 한라산 속에 이런 폭포가 잇다는 것도 미더둠직한 일이요. 正총 山속에 이 폭포가 정말 잇서 제주10勝중에 하나를 치게된 것으로 보아 한 번 구경할 것임을 말하여 두고 제주를 찻는 이는 특별히 이것을 빼여노치 말 일이라고 신신 부탁하여둔다.

天池淵瀑布
정방폭포를 소개하는 김에 同價紅裳이라고 제주의 천지폭포도 또 한 소개하자! 서귀포에서 서북으로 한참가면 (約數町)老樹가 울밀한 懸崖絶壁에서 高가 約72尺, 幅30尺에 달하는 장쾌한 대 폭포가 잇스니 이것은 유명한 천지연 폭포다. 이 폭포는 폭포로도 유명하거니와 폭포의 下池에는 銀魚, 鰻魚가 산출하기로 유명하니 피서도 할 겸 생선도 먹을 겸 누구나 한 번 가볼 만한 곳이다.

龍潭瀑布(慶北 聞慶)
문경새재(鳥嶺)! 듯기만 해도 험준해 보이는 그 산 밋 桐華院 서북쪽에 이 폭포가 잇단다. 서면 못 속이 모다 돌로 깔려서 그 깁히를 알 수가 업는데 전해 내려오는 말에는 녜전에 용 오른 곳이라고 하나 룡이야 올랏건 말엇건 새재의 송이버섯도 딸 겸 이 폭포를 한 번 찻는 것도 과연 흥미 업는 일은 아닐 것이다.

飛瀑(慶北 靑松)
이와 가튼 산골에 무엇이 잇으랴 하엿다 가는 큰 봉변. 청송읍내서 동남으로 한 30리만 나가면 이름 업는 폭포가 十丈절벽에서 우레 가티 떠러지는데 녀름에도 오히러 치운 맛이 잇서서 더위 피하는 손님들이 이 그윽한 산 속에 질을 내여 노왓단다.

幕岩瀑布(慶北 軍威)
경상북도치고도 조그만 무근 고을 의흥 읍내에서 남으로 40리 부르기 조흔 팔공산 알에 삼면에 웃둑 선 석벽은 놉히가 30척 그 우에 뚝경돌이 잇고 동알에는 十餘人이 안즌만 한데 그 형상이 천막갓다 하야 이름을 막암이라 하고 그겻헤＜136＞놉히 20여척의 폭포가 잇는 것이 즉 이 폭포다.

內延瀑布(慶北 迎日)
포항에서 북으로 60리를 가면 보경사가 잇고 동으로 청연암, 서으로 서궁암이 잇서 林泉이 유수하고 풍경이 淸閒한데 그 뒤 골작이로 드러 가서는 암석이 突兀한 속에 12폭포가 번가라 흐르고 그 중에서도 이 내연폭포는 40여척을 비류직하 하야 壯快淸酒한 기상이 사람으로 하야금 속계를 떠나 선경에 들어선 듯한 늣김을 준다하며 중폭 역시 그 곳의 한 폭포로서 기이한 바위, 莞蒼한 삼림과 아울러 자연의 절경을 이루엇스니 동해안의 여행을 계획하는 이로는 빼여노치 못할 유람지의 하나로 느어두자.

龍湫(慶北 慶州)
경북 출신의 조선대학자 이민제 선생이 일즉이 노으시던 곳으로서 옥산서원의 杏坍하에 잇서 바위ㅅ돌 남면에 『洗心坮』라 추의 서벽 상에는 『龍湫』라고 쓰신 민제 선생의 두 필적이 지금도 뚜렷한데 산곡에서 굴러흘러는 澗水는 盤石을 둥그러떠러저 폭포가 되고 알에는 새파란 深潭이 되니 이것이 이른바 용추란다. 양면이 깍가세운듯 기리는 4,5장 넓이는 10여장이요 깁히는 알 수 업는데 선인의 유적도 보려니와 이곳의 絶勝도 상주기 위해서는 하로 허비하는것이 또한 앗갑지 아니할 것이다.

鼠峰瀑布(慶南 金海)
부산서 세 정거장만 올라오다가 내리라. 그러나 경성서 내려간다면 부산 거의 밋처 가서 구포역이 잇다. 거긔서 서봉산이 어대냐 무르면 아르켜 줄 사람이 잇슬듯. 그 산 속을 차저 가서 이 폭포를 한 번 면대해보면 좌우 언덕에는 거암이 층층히 서로 대하고 섯는 속에 흰 물결이 훗터떠러지는 것은 옥가루가 그대로 뿌서진대도 올커니와 이와 가튼 녀름에 누가 일부러 어름을 먹고 배를 알을 가보냐.

龍華瀑布(江原 鐵原)
경원선 차＜137＞를 타고 철원을 지내랴면 泰封故都의 流古詩를 읍는 이는 적지 안흘넌지 모르나 거긔서 내리여 원산가도를 거러 가지고 이 용화 폭포를 일부러 찻는 사람은 아마도 만치 못하리라 그러면 1,2백10척이나 낙하하는 이 폭포가 엇저고 슬어하지아니하랴.

金剛山瀑布
금강산이야말로 바위의 산, 나무의 산, 사리의 산, 시내의 산인 동시에 폭포의 산이다. 아모리 조선은 폭포가 적은 나라라. 따라서 우리는 폭포와 그러케 친밀성이 만치 못한 백성이지만 옷짓을 뚤처 한 번 금강산에 들어가는 날이면 곳곳마다 『쿵쿵』하고 떠러지는 폭포소리에 감격의 가슴을 울리지 아니할 자가 그 누구이랴? 일일히 이름만 들자해도 한이 업거니와 내 금강의 만폭동과 외금강의 구룡폭이야 누구라 칭찬 아니하며 누구라 보고저 아니하랴. 이것은 이미 세상에 나터 난 바가 만흐니 그대로 넘어가자.

芳谷九曲瀑布(春川君南山面芳谷)
올치! 또 이젓구나. 강원도의 폭포를 말하자면 춘천의 芳谷 폭포를 또한 빼놀 수 업다. 춘천의 芳谷 폭포를 또한 빼놀 수 업다. 춘천은 관동의 首府요 貊國의 古都이니마치 명승고적이 만흔 중에 이 폭포도 그 곳 명승에 하나이다. 직하가 12장, 폭이 5,6척인데 溪流가 凡九折한 까닭에 구곡폭포라고 한다. 洞名이 芳谷이라 산곡의 경치도 좃커니와 溪流가 또한 기절한 까닭에 詩人 韻客들은 이것을 支那의 무이구곡에 비하야 말한다. 그리고 德十院(춘천서하면)의 삼학폭포(一名境川瀑)도 폭포로는 그다지 장쾌치는 못하나 위치가 원래 춘천의 명산인 삼학산 중에 잇서서 계곡이 奇絶幽邃하고 폭포의 直上에는 삼한의 고찰인 상원암이 잇고 암하에는 약수가 잇스며 암의 부근에는 통천굴이란 큰 암굴이 잇고 굴로 지나가면 古昔貊國의 南門遺址란 고적이 잇서서 四時유람객이 不絶하는 중 특히 녀름 철에는 피서요양의 객이 만타.

金剛淵(江原 江陵)
금강이라고 금강산 속의 폭포로 알어서는 안될 일이고 강릉이요 오대산 월정사 겻 골목에 따로히 잇는 폭포란다. 사면은 반석이요 10척은 瀑長인데 알에는 못이요 못 속에는 고기란다. 전설에는 神龍이 이곳에 산다고 하나 春和景明조흔때면 이름 모를 고기떼가 천 마리, 백 마리 물을 따러 못 가운데 와서는 배회 분답 하면서 懸崖우로 올라가는 놈도 잇고 혹은 반쯤 오르다가 도로 떠러지는 놈도 잇서 그것도 一大寄觀이란다.

九月山瀑布(黃海 安岳)
조선의 시조 단군께서 최후로 이 산에 드러 오시어 신이 되섯다 하니 구월산은 조선의 성산이다. 산 우에 성터가 잇스니 형상이 큰 배 모양으로 생겻스나 남북에는 길이 업고 동서에 다만 錢道가 잇서 길을 통할 뿐이요 모든 골작이에서 흐르는 물이 한 시내를 이루어 가지고 城西편에 와서는 양편에 잇는 산이 문과 가티 웃둑서고 시내물은 그 문 밧게 나가 폭포가 되엿스니 그리 웅대치는 못할 망정 성조의 유적을 참배키 위하야 이곳까지 歷訪한다는 것은 결코＜138＞무의미한 일 일 것 갓지는 안타.

東林瀑布(平北 宣川)
고을은 宣川이지만 정거장으로는 선천을 지나서 바로 다음 동림 역이 잇스니 경기선으로는 신의주를 못 밋처가기 6,7정거장이다. 임경업 장군의 淸敵을 막으랴고 싸흔 1만 8천 척 넓이의 동림성은 정거장에서 북으로 한 10리 , 선로겻헤 바로 잇서 지나는 사람의 감회도 만히 자아내지만 그 성안에 廣6척 ,高3장의 폭포가 즉 이 동림폭포다. 기암괴석은 의례 폭포에 따라다니는 물건이라 다시 들처 낼 것도 업지만 玉沫이 飛散하고 雨煙이 화생하는 것은 참으로 消夏의 호적지요 사경이 幽寂하고 삼림이 參差하니 觀楓에도 名所어든 배, 사과, 복사, 밤의 과실이 만히나니 심방객 맛에 비위가 안 당길 리 업고 더구나 임장군의 고적이 잇슴에랴.

三防瀑布(江原 平康)
경원선으로 최고대인 검불랑, 세포 등지를 간신히 지나면 三防역이 산중에 잇고 그 역에서 서북으로 약 10리 되는 곳에 마상산이 잇스니 그 산 속을 밤이나 낫이나 봄 녀름 가을 할 것 업시 한걸 가튼 소리로 轟히 울리고 잇는 것이 이 삼방폭포다. 내려 떠러지는 기리가 140여척! 그것을 처다보면 백련의 絹絲가 유림간에 느리운 듯 골작이에 은은히 들리는 것은 비 아니 오는 한울의 뇌성이다. 바름 벽 가튼 절정, 올나 갈 수 업는 곳에 다시 懸流가 잇는 것은 雄瀑이란다.

鼓音瀑布(咸南 安邊)
이것덀„ 역시 경원선 고대산 역에서 내리어 남으로 20리에 재천동이 잇스니 삼방 골작이 물이 모다 이곳으로 모여와서는 바위에 부듸처 여울이 되고 다시 떠러저 못이 되야 가지고는 분류하기 한 10리 채 못 가서 구비 구비 구부러저 도라 가는 청계는 차차 깁허가고 노송고풍이 암벽을 덥고 청냉한 긔운이 사람을 음습하야 오는 폭포는 시내가 거의 끗난 곳에 잇서서 그 景勝이 실로 기발하나 그것은 오래 숨기어 세상에 그러케 이름이 알려지지를 못하엿섯스나 경원선 철도가 생기면서부터 삼방폭포와 갓치 探勝客의 발자최가 들여 노키 시작한 것이 이 고음폭포이뉀¤.

雲林瀑布(咸南 文川)
두류의 큰 산이 磅礴雄盤한 속에 利刀로 베인듯한 석벽이 一洞天을 이르고 그 안에 轟然하게 四時에 雷霆을 울이는 폭포는 이름까지 서늘한 운림폭포다. 폭10여 척, 高30여장으로 瀧口의 비설은 삼복의 炎熱이 감히 침입하지 못하고 현공의 은파는 만해의 은하가 쏘다지는 듯하며 폭포부근에는 수 천년來물결에 씩히고 갈녀온 백사가 銀屑갓치 쌔인 속에 3,4백인이 가좌 할 일대 반석이 잇서서 천연의 會遊席이 되엿는데 종횡의 斑文은 선인의 碁판을 이루웟고 마주치는 격랑은 琴韻을 자성한다. 봄에는 낙화를 띄우며 가을에는 홍엽을 비치우는 소치야 더욱 멋이 잇다. 위치가 비록 벽지에 잇고 路途가 다소 험난하나 探勝하는 데야 그 까진 것이야 문제나 될 것이냐.＜139＞
＜134-139＞