잡지명	별건곤 제31호
발행일	1930년 08월 01일
기사제목	넌센스 特設館 (Nonsense Special Exhibition Hall)
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Nonsense Special Exhibition Hall
Poor! That Husband

Husband (enters the room, wearing a tuxedo): Honey, hurry up! It's already 7:30, aren't we going to be late?
Wife (standing in front of the vanity): Oh, why are you rushing me so much? I've never seen this before.
Husband: I've never seen this either. You haven't even put on your shoes yet – when are we going to leave?
Wife: I'm about to put them on...
Husband (annoyed and impatient): About to put them on? (Clasping his hands) Oh, dear God! My lifelong wish is that you would get ready quickly at times like these! Your makeup is fast enough. Why are you pouring on so much perfume? I just got another call, they said if we aren't there on time, we'll have to wait outside for 30 minutes until the first performance is over, so hurry up! Honey...
Wife: Why are you making such a fuss? You worry about everything. (Confidently) Even if that's the rule, they won't refuse to let me in.
Husband: Just stop already. Let's go quickly. If we're even a minute late, I'll feel bad for the theater manager who even sent us complimentary tickets.
Wife: I'm done with my makeup, but I'm still worried about wearing these shoes.
Husband: Why do you always buy small shoes just because they look good, and then make such a fuss when you wear them? Let's just buy ones that fit your feet.
Wife: That's what I'm worried about. Shoes that fit my feet are too big and don't look good, so how can I wear them?
Husband: Guanyin Bodhisattva! How can you wear small shoes on big feet?
Wife: Why are you so inflexible? You never think about how much I suffer. (Tries to put on the shoes) And shouldn't the shade of these stockings be a little darker?
Husband: Please, just don't do that.
Wife: Don't you know? I saw in some fashion magazine that the darker the shade of the stockings, the prettier the lines of the legs look, so I should buy and wear darker ones.
Husband (yelling): The fact that darker stockings make the leg lines look prettier is a trick that uses light to deceive the eye. I don't even want to hear that kind of nonsense.
Wife: But what can I do? It's not just me, everyone in the world deceives and is deceived... (Tries to put on the shoes, gets tired) Oh, damn it!
Husband: Should I put them on for you?
Wife: Why didn't you say that sooner? Okay, then kneel down in front of me. And first, take off your gloves.
Husband (silent! Takes off his gloves) And take off that tuxedo jacket. Only servants don't take off their tuxedo jackets when doing work. Otherwise, it will get crumpled while you're putting my shoes on.
Husband (silent! Takes off his tuxedo jacket)
Wife: Wait... take off that vest too. If your feet touch my chest while you're putting my shoes on, the buttons might fall off or something might get on it. Then who's going to fix it?
Husband (silent. Takes off his vest) Why would your feet touch my chest?
Wife: How else will the shoes go on? If you kneel down in front of me and put the shoe against your chest and push forward, I'll put my foot in and stretch out my leg, and it will go in. But I won't wiggle my leg until it goes in, so don't worry. It might be a little uncomfortable for you, but you have to bear it to get there on time.
Husband (kneeling down as instructed): Okay, hurry up and put them on.
Wife: Let's synchronize our signals... okay, one, two, three- (Suddenly kicks the husband's chest.)
Husband (falls backward)
Wife: Okay, get up quickly. It's getting late- okay- one- two- three-
This went on for ten minutes. Finally, when the small shoe was forced onto his wife's left foot, the husband had half lost consciousness and was lying on the armchair. The wife went to the mirror to put more rouge on her lips and picked up the phone receiver.
Wife (after dialing the number): Hello... is the manager there... it's me. I'm so frustrated. We're about to leave... I'm talking about my husband... what should I do... I'm already ready, but he hasn't even put on his tuxedo and is lying in the armchair!

Hypnotism

At a certain social gathering, there was an experiment with hypnotism. The lovely Miss H was to stand on the experimental platform. She was standing in a high place where people could see her well, and was entering a hypnotic state under the hands of the hypnotist.
The hypnotist said:
"Miss H! You must now reveal what we are thinking. Do you understand?"
"Yes!"
"Then what is this young man thinking?"
"That gentleman is thinking this:
'How pleasing it would be if she would come down here, and caress my fine head.'"
"Ah... is that right, sir?"
"Yes, that's exactly right."
"Yes! That's right. Miss H! What is that gentleman sitting over there thinking?"
"That gentleman is thinking how nice it would be to kiss my lips once."
"Is that so?"
"That's exactly what I was thinking."
"Then one more time..." <158>
The hypnotist looked around at the people and found a middle-aged gentleman with a goatee. The gentleman was sitting next to his very fat wife, staring intently at Miss H from the beginning.
"Then, Miss H, I really want to know what that gentleman is thinking."
Hearing that, the middle-aged gentleman suddenly turned pale and got up from his seat, looking at his wife's face as he cried out in alarm:
"Young lady! Please, don't say anything you shouldn't! Speak after I am gone!" <159>

Polly-chan

The bachelor Wellington Snaith was about to put an egg into boiling water when he noticed on the shell the name "New Jersey, Triggs Poultry Farm's Polly Pierson".
Wellington had heard of such things: a scullery boy marrying the millionaire's daughter and a poor seamstress becoming a rich man's daughter-in-law. The thought made Wellington so happy that he ran outside, dancing a jig.
"Polly! Polly! A lovely name with blushing cheeks and soft skin! Polly! Polly! What a cute girl! Polly!"
Three hours later, a shiny new car arrived at the entrance to Triggs Poultry Farm.
"It's a very nice day," said the middle-aged, gentlemanly farm owner, who was fixing the fence, greeting him kindly.
"Yes, it's a very nice day. Are you Mr. Pierson?"
"Yes, I am Pierson. What can I do for you?"
"Well... I came to meet Miss Polly." He blushed slightly as he forced the words out.
"What? You want to meet Polly? Are you serious?" He asked with a puzzled look. "What's your name?"
"Wellington Snaith."
"I see. If you really must meet Polly, I'll call her."
Pierson whistled towards the house. A dog barked and a chicken crowed. He whistled loudly a second time, and a flock of chickens came running out from behind the house, clucking.
"Mr. Snaith!" Pierson pointed to one of the hens and introduced her. "Please, meet my most beloved Polly. This hen has won awards at poultry shows three times. So, to spread the name of this lovely Polly to the world, I decided to write 'New Jersey, Triggs Poultry Farm's Polly Pierson' on the eggs she lays."

Minus? Plus?
Kim Yeong-pal

The night was very deep. It had been cloudy all day, so the thought of finding the moon was delusional <159>, but the room was so stuffy that I was angry even lying still, and the bedbugs were running a marathon on my stomach, so it seemed like they thought it was a track and field stadium if they didn't speak up politely. But I couldn't grab them by the collar and argue in good conscience.
I couldn't help but laugh at the absurdity.
"Aigo, aigo - aya, aya-"
Just as I was about to fall asleep, I suddenly heard my wife's murmuring. Why is she doing this while sleeping? Did she have indigestion? If not? As I was thinking that, something struck my head in an instant. Is it that? No way? If it's real? Ah, this is a disaster. There's no one here-'
The reason is that this month is my wife's month to give birth.
"Aigo, honey, I'm dying of pain, how can you be sleeping so soundly?"
"I've been awake since earlier-"
"Aigo, you have no sympathy. How can you not hear my groans?"
"I always say that my heart burns more when I don't say anything, but you still don't understand."
"I don't want to hear it- Aigo, aya, aigo, my stomach. Aigo, my stomach."
After a few words, my wife repeatedly cried out in pain, grabbed my hand tightly, and her face turned pale. And she shivers and lets go of my hand.
I stood there blankly like a pawnshop candlestick, staring down at my wife's face, and she looked no different from a crazy person. I started to get scared and all sorts of thoughts started to run through my head. What if she suddenly gets up and runs out the door? What if she dies when we get over this crisis, since she is jumping up and down in pain and saying she is sick. All sorts of absurd thoughts began to run through my head.
"Should I call a doctor?"
"Aigo, aya- aya- aigo, my stomach. I don't know."
"Can't you stand it at all?"
"Do you think I'm lying about being sick?"
"Just be quiet, I'm going to die- Aigo, aya. Aigo, my stomach-"
"Then take some of the Yeongsinhwan that I saved."
"Stop saying such stupid things-"
"Then should I call someone?"
"Get- my mother and bring her here- don't make too much noise, she'll be surprised-"
Hearing this, I wiped the sweat from my forehead and took a breath. I was so scared and anxious that I was so tormented that I couldn't stand it anymore. I don't know what else to describe this other than cold water in the scorching heat. As if everything was alright, "Uh! How can I leave you alone-"
After putting on a face, I carefully wake up the sleeping child (four years old this year). The young child cries-
"Shh- don't cry, Mommy is hurting-"
"Aya- aigo, my stomach. Aigo, I'm going to die-"
Several hours passed in this way. I walked along the road, thinking these thoughts.
"Plus? Or minus?"
A person comes out from inside a person. If something goes wrong, death is a common occurrence. At that time, I was also nervous. 4:13 AM.
"Uaaa-"
The second voice of suffering gave its first cry.

Kyongsong Weekly
Eleven o'clock at night

Standing blankly at the Chongno intersection west side bus stop, a streetcar roars in from Sodaemun. It's going to Tongdaemun. Two or three get off and three or four get on. Ding-ding, and then it rolls away.
This time, the Hwanggeumjeong line comes. And then it leaves.
Next, the Tongdaemun line, and then the Hwanggeumjeong...
Should I take the streetcar? Or should I walk somewhere? Should I go to Baron? Or to Kichiyak?
The Tongdaemun line comes. I get on.
There are still so many people coming and going on the streets. What are they all so busy with that they're running around like this, night and day?
After resting for a moment at Tongdaemun, it goes around Gwanghuijeong and heads to Hwanggeumjeong intersection, then changes direction and goes back to Chongno.
The conductor (old and kind) glances at me.
I hand him five jeon, and he tears off a ticket, holds it up with his scissors, and says with a smile, "Where are you going?"
"Where?...? I don't know... Let's just go wherever it goes."
The conductor looks at me strangely, smiles, and punches a hole in the ticket.
It passes in front of Gwanghwamun, goes to Sŏdaemun, over Pongnae Bridge, and to the front of Kyŏngsŏng Station, where it announces that everyone should get off.
Reluctantly, I get off and go to the bus stop across the street.
A car going to the Han River bridge comes. I get in. Because it's getting late, the speed is getting faster and faster.
It turns the car around on the river bridge. Because I don't get off and sit, the conductor gives me a warning that he came back.
Without a word, I boarded. Rumbling, it turns back towards the gate.
I got off again at that spot on Chongno intersection. As I get off, the conductor says to the back of my head,
"Hmm, cheerful fellow-"
Afraid of getting hit, I couldn't say it out loud, but I retorted to myself, "What if I'm not cheerful?!"
Even though I didn't want to, I moved my feet towards Baron. <161>

A Friend Walking the Asphalt

After eating dinner, S put on a suit and went out to the front street.
The people who were lined up on the street, as if they had made an appointment, were walking towards Jongno. S also joined the crowd.
In front of the C Theater is a long sign and, just like that, long-faced friends are gathered, staring at the long sign.
After escaping the gap where hundreds of friends, captured by the phonograph of D shop, were standing with their mouths wide open, S put his feet on the asphalt.
As if the soles of the feet are supporting the hard cement concrete as the blue leather <161> bottom touches it, the footsteps are moved like sapon-sapon.
A rural nobleman is led by a middle school first-year student, opening his mouth and using his eyes non-stop as he walks heavily.
A pair of kisaeng who haven't ridden a rickshaw in a month seem to be speeding up without being bound by elegance. They seem to be diligent students of cinema.
In the night market on the other side, tents reminiscent of an Arabian caravan are huddled together, and all the cheap sounds are combined to sound more than terrible.
The streetcars are roaring as if they are going to eat people, and the taxis are running away softly like petty thieves. Occasionally, large buses, without any grace, are running awkwardly.
A rickshaw carrying a kisaeng, with its short compass, is measuring the wide road.
S was a little sad. Because it's kisaeng-
Four or five thin college boys with pale faces go by, snickering. In front of them, a modern girl wearing a black bloomers skirt over her white underwear is walking-her legs seem to be twisted.
A group of Salvation Army soldiers carrying advertising leaflets are guiding people to heaven.
Friends wearing sailor pants, who left their hats at home, walk by shoulder to shoulder, glancing sideways at the store windows.
In front of Jijipa, women who came to the night market to buy provisions are lined up, feasting their eyes on gold and silver items.
S crosses the intersection and continues to walk on the asphalt. A fair-skinned face pops out and pops back in at Cafe-S.
Turning the road south at the entrance to Sujingbatgol, he turned around.
Coming back to the intersection, he crossed Gwanggyo Bridge, moving his feet to the South. A rickshaw carrying a kisaeng is coming to S.
Even after looking around, he nods his head. Because he can't see, but of course he gave a smile on his face. S's heart was delighted.
Without crossing Gwanggyo Bridge, he crossed the road again and turned back. He passed in front of Jonggak, wriggled through the night market, and went all the way to Donggwan.
After spending about 30 minutes at T Cinema to look at the billboard, he turned back and stepped on the asphalt.
At M, two rickshaws carrying kisaeng come out and four go in, for a total of six, of which two are people he knows and four are people he doesn't know.
If they are kisaeng that S doesn't know, they are insignificant to S.
In Tapgol Park, hungry people (有由階級) are still wriggling around.
He walked to the intersection and turned back to Donggwan. Again, he went to the intersection and then to Donggwan again. After going back and forth five times, he stopped in front of D shop.
S has been stepping on this asphalt several times every day for 10 years, and recently 10 times every night, but it's a mystery that the people he meets are all different people.
He caught a streetcar and went to Jingogae. Because he saw an advertisement this morning that the current issues of the two magazines 『Crime Science』 and 『New Youth』 had come out-. <162>

Chic Advertising Technique

In a streetcar heading for Pusan on an express train to Kyongsong Station...
"Hey! Hey! That's mine..." A semi-modern girl called out urgently to a gentleman who had just picked up a small basket and was about to get off at Hwanggeumjeong.
The gentleman, very naturally, took off his hat and said,
"What? I'm sorry. But this basket is mine."
"Oh, my goodness. Give it here. How shameless of you to take someone else's thing and say that!" She was very flustered and fidgety. But the gentleman remained calm. The people on the streetcar were excited about the spectacle, watching what was going on between the two men and women.
One of them, as if mediating, said, "Why don't you just guess what's inside, and the owner will naturally come forward?"
"But if I say what's inside, won't that person understand?" the girl objected.
"Then," said the gentleman. "I'll guess what's inside first. But if I guess one thing, you have to guess one thing too."
At these words, the girl thought to herself about what was inside. Meanwhile, the gentleman said, "A bloomers skirt." The girl was startled. It was true that there was a bloomers skirt inside, but how on earth did that guy know?
But helplessly, "A pair of silk stockings."
The gentleman, "A volume of Byron's poetry."
The girl, "A ramie undershirt."
The gentleman, "A set of Victorian bands."
Laughter erupted in the streetcar, and the girl's face turned red as she said, "A can of pineapple."
The gentleman, "The Sexual Life of Virgins and Wives."
Another burst of laughter, and the girl was so surprised and embarrassed that she couldn't speak.
As things turned out, a big problem had arisen. The same object had two owners claiming it, so how could they resolve it? The most difficult thing was the streetcar conductor.
At this time, the girl, being a woman, couldn't be more stubborn, so she pleaded with the gentleman to give it back because it was hers.
At this point, the gentleman looked around the streetcar once, cleared his throat, and began to speak in a story-telling manner as follows:
"Ladies and gentlemen, I'm sure you're all curious, so I'll tell you about this little commotion here. In fact, I'm clairvoyant. You all know that I'm clairvoyant because you saw me guess what was in this basket.... How? Yes... There's a way to see directly into this basket, but earlier I saw into this lady's mind when she was thinking about what was in the basket.
Ladies and gentlemen, what do you think? This clairvoyance method can be used in many ways, but especially for young people like this lady who are troubled because they don't know the heart of the man they love... If you come to me, I can show you in more detail and clearly than looking out of a window... Please use it a lot. Here's my address and office." He raised his hand and pointed to the Clairvoyant Master ad that was posted inside the streetcar.
Surrounded by the gazes of everyone with wide eyes, he bowed leisurely and got off the streetcar.

Hat and Overcoat

He hadn't eaten three meals, yesterday evening, this morning, and lunch, so he wore his old hat and overcoat and went outside. But he didn't really have anywhere to go.
If he went to a friend's house, they would be able to tell that he hadn't eaten because his eyes were sunken in... He went to the willow tree by the stream.
Under each of the willow trees that lined up, there were beggars, women carrying babies, and old people, occupying the seats.
He found an empty spot under a tree, took off his overcoat, hung it on a branch, and sat on the root of the tree.
His eyes were dizzy with hunger, but he couldn't figure out how to come up with even a few cents, and he was just upset.
Right in front of him, in the rice paddies, three or four farmers were weeding between the thick, dark green rice plants.
Occasionally, a farmer would sing a love song in a dreamlike way with the rhythm that matched the movements of the workers.
As he was standing there blankly watching, he suddenly heard a voice from behind him saying, "Eat!"
Just the charm of the sound of "eat" made him turn around. It was the servant of the owner of the rice paddy, bringing lunch for the farmers.
He put down the basket he was carrying on his back and took off the warm wrapping cloth. The sight of the generous portions of rice mixed with red beans in the large bowl grabbed his attention and wouldn't let go.
Under his molars, a sour saliva was welling up. Next to the rice bowl, there was a earthenware bowl containing a savory-smelling soybean paste stew, radish kimchi, chili paste, and grilled cutlassfish.
The mother who was picking mulberry leaves, drying them, and smoking them, with eyes that had gone ten miles into her face, the oldest child who had come back from school and couldn't say he was hungry, just sitting there pouting, the girl who had gone to a neighbor's house to get food and came back jumping for joy, the baby sucking on her mother's dry breasts and crying... 'You don't know if you miss one meal, but others know if you go without clothes,' he thought of gathering these people together and sharing the rice, and even the thought made him feel full.
After a while, the farmers came out of the rice paddy, wiped the sweat from their arms, and greeted him when they saw him. They sat down and took up their spoons.
"Have some lunch," they said, still looking at him somewhat awkwardly, as if they were conscious of his status.
"Yeah, eat," he replied, but the words came out as if he were squeezing oil.
He looked at the old hat and the ramie overcoat that was worn out but still decent that he had taken off and left next to him.
"I can't eat this rice because of that thing!" He lamented inwardly and stood up. <164>

**Named Entities**

新靑年	Sin Ch'ŏngnyŏn (New Youth)
黃金町	Hwanggeumjeong
蓬萊橋	Pongnae-gyo
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
東大門	Tongdaemun
西大門	Sŏdaemun
鐘路	Chongno
光熙町	Gwanghuijeong
漢江	Han-gang
金영팔	Kim Yŏng-p'al
李巴인	Li Pa'in
伊藤博文	Itō Hirobumi
廣橋	Kwang-gyo
진고개	Chin-gogae



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제31호
발행일	1930년 08월 01일
기사제목	넌센스 特設館
기사형태	문예기타

넌센스 特設館
可憐! 그 남편
夫 (방으로 드러온다. 연미복을 닙엇다.)여보 빨니하오 발서 일곱시 반인데 늣지 안켓소.
妻(경대 압헤 서서) 아-니 웬 재촉을 이리하시오 첨보겟구려-
夫 나도 첨보겟소. 이때껏 구두도 안 신고 잇스니- 언제 가잔 말이요.
妻 멀 인제 곳 신을텐데... ...
夫 (화가 나고 燥急해서)인제 신다니, (合掌을 하고)아이구, 하누님 맙시사! 내 평생의 소원이니 이런 때는 빨니 빨니 좀 차려주구려! 분도 그만콤 발느면 되지 안엇수. 향수는 웬걸 그리 드러 붓소. 글세 지금 또 전화가 왓는데 시간에 대여오지 안으면 처음 연주가 끗이 날 동안 30분이나 밧게서 기다려야하니 얼는 오라는데. 여보... ...
妻 글세 왜 이리 야단이시오. 그런게 다 걱정이란 말슴이요. (자신이 잇는 듯키)아모리 규칙이 그러키로 나야 안드려 줄나구.
夫 글세 그만하면 되엿소. 빨니 좀 갑시다. 만약 일분이라도 늣게 되면 일부러 초대권까지 보내 쥰 극장 지배인에게 미안하지 안소.
妻 화장이야 다 되엿지만 암만 생각해도 이 구두를 신을 일이 걱정이 안이야요
夫 글세 왜 모양만 본다고 적은 구두를 사 가지고 신을 때면 이 야단이냐 말이오 빨니 발에 맛는 것을 사옵시다.
妻 그게 걱정이란 말이야요. 발에 꼭 맛는 구두는 너무 커서 모양이 업스니 신을 수 가 잇서야지오.
夫 관세음보살! 큰 발에 적은 신을 신으랴니 될 말이오.
妻 엇재 사람이 그러케 매절 하단 말이오. 그러기에 내가 얼마나 고생으로 지내는 것을 조곰 생각해주지를 아느니(구두를 신으려한다) 그러고 이 양말 빗고 좀 더 짓터야 하지 안어요.
夫 제발 덕분에 이러지 좀 마오.
妻 이 때 그런 것도 모르시오. 어느 유행잡지를 보닛가 양말 빗이 짓트면 짓틀 수록 다리의 선이 고읍게 보인다고 그랫든데 좀더 짓튼 것을 사 신고 가야지오.
夫 (소리를 지른다) 양말 빗 짓튼 것이 각 선을 곱게 하는 것 사실이야. 그러나 그것은 광선관계를 이용해서 사람의 눈을 속이는 거야. 그 따위 소리는 듯기도 실소.
妻 그러치만 할 수 업지 안어요. 나혼자만 그런것이 아니고 세상샤람이 다 속이고 속아 사는데... ...(구두를 신다 신다 피곤하야) 아이구 비러먹을 것!
夫 내가 신켜줄가.
妻 왜 그런 말을 진작 못해주셧서요. 자 그럼 내 압헤 무릅을 꾸서야지오. 그러고 우선＜157＞ 장갑을 버스서요.
夫 (無言! 장갑을 벗는다) 그러고 그 연미복 저고리를 버스서요. 연미복 저고리를 닙고 일을 하는 것은 하인 안이고 업서요. 그러치 안키로 입은 채로 내 신을 신키는 동안에 구길 것이 아니요.
夫 (無言! 연미복 저고리를 벗는다)
妻 잠간... ... 그 족기도 버스서요. 당신이 내 구두를 싱키는 동안에 발을 당신 가슴에 대이면 단초가 떠러지거나 무엇이 뭇거나 하지오. 그러면 그걸 또 누가 손질을 해요.
夫 (無言. 족기를 벗는다) 내 가슴에 발을 대이다니 왜 발을 댄단 말이요.
妻 그러지 안코야 구두가 드러가나요. 당신이 내 압헤 꾸러 안저서 구두를 당신 가슴에 대이고 압흐로 밀면 나는 발을 집어 넛코 다리를 뻣퇴고 잇스면 드러 갈 것이 아니야요. 그러나 드러 갈 때 까지는 다리를 오고리지 안을 터이니 념려마서요. 당신이 좀 괴로우실터이나 좀 참으서야지 시간에 대여 가지요.
夫 (일느는 대로 꾸러안저서) 자- 아모리나 얼는 신기나 하오.
妻 신호를 마처서... ... 자- 하나- 둘- 셋- (별안간 발길노 남편의 가슴을 듸리질는다.)
夫 (뒤로 잡바진다)
妻 자- 얼는 이러나요. 시간이 늣지 안소- 자- 어서 하나- 두ㄹ- 세-ㅅ.
이 경기는 10분 간 이나 계속이 되엿다. 그래서 겨우 그 적은 구두가 그 안해의 왼발에 마저 신켜졋슬때 가연- 그 남편은 반이나 의식을 닐코 안락의자 우에 가로 누어 잇섯다. 안해는 거울 압흐로 가서 입술에 연지를 더 칠하고 전화의 수화기를 들엇다.
妻 (번호를 누른 후)여보서요... ...지배인이서요... 저올시다. 참 똑 속상해 죽겟서요. 곳 갈냐고 하는데... 제 남편 말슴이야요... 엇저면 조화요... 저는 발서 준비를 하고 잇는데 그이는 아즉 연미복도 안 닙고 안락의자에 누어잇답니다!

최면술
어느 某회석에서 최면술의 실험이 잇섯다. 실험대 우에는 꼿갓치 어엽분 H양이 스기로 되엿다. 그는 사람들을 잘 볼 수 잇는 놉흔 곳에 올나서서 術者의 손으로 최면상태로 드러가고 잇다.
術子는 말햇다.
「H양! 당신은 인제 우리들의 마음먹고 잇는 바를 아르케 내서야 함니다. 알엇슴니가」 「네!」「그럼 이 젊은 냥반은 지금 무엇을 생각하고 잇슴니가」
「그 냥반은 이러한 것을 생각하고 게심니다.」
「내 가슨이우로 또 차올나와서 내 고흔 머리를 쓰다듬어 주엇스면 얼마나 마음에 흡족하겟다.」
「아하...여보십시오 그럿슴니가」
「네. 바로 마젓슴니다」
「네! 그럿슴니다. H양! 그럼 이번에는 넙헤 게신 이 신사께서는 무슨 생각을 하고 게심니가」
「그 냥반은 나의 입을 한번 맛추엇스면 얼마나 조흐리라는 생각을 하고 게심니다」
「엇더심니가」
「아닌게 아니라 그랫슴니다」
「그럼 한번 더......」＜158＞
術者는 둘네의 여러 사람들을 돌나 본 후 염소수염을 기른 중년 신사를 발견하엿다. 그 신사는 몹시 뚱뚱한 안해 넙헤 안저서 처음부터 H양을 정신 업시 치여다 보고 잇섯다.
「그럼 H양 여기 게신 신사께서는 엇더한 생각을 하고 게심니가 꼭 알고십슴니다.」
그 말을 드른 그 중년신사는 별안가 얼골이 샛 밝애지며 자리에서 니러나서 자긔 안해의 얼골을 살펴보며 황망히 소래처 가로대
「아가씨! 여보십시요 무슨 말이고 해선 안됨니다 내가 가거든 말슴하십시요」＜159＞

포리孃
독신자 웰닝톤.스나이스는 펄펄 끌는 물 속에 계란을 집어 너으랴다 그 껍 줄에 「뉴-쟈스,따랙스의 그란삐리 농장의 포리-.뱌-손」이라고 쓴 일흠을 발견하엿다.
웰닝톤은 이런 말을 드른 일이 잇다. 이러한 인연으로 洗*집 구중 놈이 백만장자의 딸과 결혼을 하얏다는 말과 가난한 여직공이 부자 집 며누리가 되여 갓다는 이러한 일이 머리에 얼는 떠올낫다. 웰닝톤은 이런 일을 생각하니 엇지나 조흔지 밧그로 뛰여나오며 겅충겅충 춤을 추엇다.
「포리! 포리! 일흠도 어엽부거니와 불그레한 뺨과 그 보드라운 살결! 포리! 포리! 얼마나 귀여운 처녀! 포리!」
세 시간 후에 그란삐리 농장 입구에 번적 번적어리는 조흔 자동차 한 채가 와 서섯다.
「오늘은 날이 매우 좃습니다」 울타리를 고치고 잇든 중년의 신사 풍의 농장주인은 친절히 그를 마젓다.
「네 날이 매우 좃습니다. 뱌-손씨가 누구심니가.」
「네 . 내가 뱌-손이 올시다. 무슨 일노 차즈심니가.」
「저... ... 포리양을 잠간 맛나 뵈오러 왓슴니다.」 그는 약간 얼골을 불키며 억지로 말을 꺼냇다.
「네? 포리양을요? 정말이심니가」 그는 의아한 얼골을 하면서 「당신의 성함은?」        「웰링톤.스나이스라고 합니다.」
「네. 그러심니가. 포리를 꼭 맛나 보서야겟스면 불너 드리지요.」
뱌-손은 집안 쪽에 향하야 휘ㅅ파람을 부럿다. 개가 짓고 닭도 운다. 그는 두 번 째 휘ㅅ파람을 되-게 부르니가 집 뒤에서 닭 한 떼가 꼬꼬거리며 다라 나온다.
「스나이스씨!」 뱌-손은 그 중의 암탉 한 머리를 가르키며 그에게 소개하엿다.  「자- 내가 가장 사랑하는 포리와 맛나주십시요. 이 암 닭은 양계품평회에서 세 번이나 상을 바든 것입니다. 그래서 나는 이 사랑스러운 포리-의 일흠을 세상에 널니 알니기 위하야 이 암 닭이 나은 알에는 반듯이 「뉴-쟈스따랙스의 그란빼리 농장 포리-뱌-손」이라는 일흠을 쓰기로 하엿슴니다.

마이나스? 푸라스?
김영팔

밤이 대단이 깁헛다. 종일토록 날이 흐리엿스니 달을 차저 낼냐고 하는 생각은 ＜159＞망상이겟지 마는 방안은 엇지나 무더운지 가만이 누어잇서도 화가 불가티 치미는대 빈대란 놈이 배 위로 마라손을 하는 등 보다도 얼는 시럽시 말을 한다면 륙상 경기장으로 아는 것 가터 노니 그럿타고 멱살을 쥐고 체면상 시비할 수 가 업섯다.
기 막히는 우슴을 안이 우슬 수가 업섯다.
『아이그 아이그- 아야 아야-』
겨우 잠이 들낙 말낙 할 때 별안간 안해의 부르지즘이 어렵프시 들니엿다. 자다말고 왜 이럴가? 무엇이 체 하엿나? 그럿치 안으면? 하고 생각할 때에는 순간에 나의 머리를 따리는 것이 잇다. 그것이냐? 설마? 정말이면? 아하 큰일 낫다. 사람도 업는대-』
그것은 안해의 산월이 이 달인 까닭이다.
『아이그 여보 남은 압허서 죽겟는대 무슨 잠을 그리 자고 잇단 말이요』
『그리게 아까부터 속으로는 다 깨어서-』
『아이그 인정도 업소. 엇저면 알는 소리도 귀에 안이 드러 간단 말이요.』
『말 안이 하는 속이 더 탄다는 말을 늘 해주워도 못 아러둣는 구려-』
『듯기 실혀요- 아이그 아야 아이그 배야. 아이그 배야.』
몃 마듸를 안해는 거듭 압흐다고 부르짓드이 나의 손을 꼭 붓 잡고 얼골이 햇슥하여진다. 그리고 몸을 떨고 손을 뗀다.
나는 우두커니 뎌당 잡힌 초ㅅ대 모양으로 안해의 얼골을 물끄럼이 내려다 보니까 그는 맛치 실성한 사람과 조금도 다름이 업시 보이엿다. 나는 겁이 나기 시작하고 별의 별 생각이 다 나기 시작하엿다. 몸을 떨고 움지길 때마다 벌떡 이러나서 문 밧그로 뛰여 나가면 엇지하나-. 이러케 펄펄 뛰고 압흐다고 하니 요 고비를 더 넘길 때에 죽으면 엇지 하나 하는 등 별의 별 깜직한 생각이 다 나기 시작하엿다.
『의사를 좀 불너올까?』
『아이그 아야- 아야- 아이 배야. 나는 몰나.』
『아조 참을 수가 업소?』
『그럼 내가 그짓말노 압흐다는 줄 아우?』
좀 잠자코나 잇서요 사람 죽겟소- 아이그 아야. 아이 배야-』
『그럼 령신환 사 두엇든 것이라도 좀 먹어요.』
『그 주책업는 소리 좀 그만 두어요-』
『그럼 누구를 좀 불너올까?』
『저- 어머니를 옛주워가지고오- 너무 떠들지 말고 놀나시리다-』
이 말을 듯고 난 나는 이마에서 흐느는 땀을 씻고 숨을 돌니엿다. 도모지 겁이 나고 마음이 불안하여서 조금도 참고 견듸지 못할 만치 괴롭든 나는 푹푹 찌는 날의 랭수욕이지 별노 무엇이라고 형용하기가 힘이 든다. 올타 되엿다는 듯이 『응! 당신 혼자 엇더케 두고 가나-』
하고 한 번 체면을 차린 다음에 을히나 가다가 자는 어린 아해(금년 네 살 된)의 손을 발벗다. 어린 아해는 소리를 내 운다-』
『쉬- 우지마라 엄마가 아야아야 한단다-』
『아야- 아이 배야. 아이그 죽겟네-』
이럭저럭 몃 시간이 지낫다. 나는 길에서 건일면서 이러한 생각을 하엿다.
『푸라스냐? 마이나스냐?』
사람의 속에서 사람이 나온다. 그리다가 잘못하면 죽는 것이 항용 잇는 일이다. 그 때에는 나도 긴장이 되엿다. 4시 13분.
『으아-』
둘재 고초자지가 첫울음을 첫다.

京城一週記
밤 열한시
종路 네거리 西편 정류장에서 멍!하고 섯느라니까 西대문에서 전차가 으르렁거리고 달녀든다. 東大門 行이다. 두엇쯤 내리고 서넛쯤 탄다. 땡땡하더니 스르릉 달어난다.
이번은 黃金町行이 온다. 또 떠난다.
다음은 東大門行 그 다음은 黃金町...
전차를 탈가? 어데로 걸어갈가? Baron으로 갈가? クチ゛ヤク로 갈가?
東大門行이 온다. 올나탓다.
길로 오고 가는 사람들이 아직도 만타. 무슨 일이 그러케도들 잇섯서 밤이나 나제나 저리 분주하게 도라다니노?
東大門에서 잠ㅅ간 쉬여 光熙町을 돌아 黃金町 네기리로 가더니 방향을 밧구어 다시 鍾로로 간다.
車掌이 (늙스구레하니 好人으로 되엿다) 한번 치어다본다.
五錢 한푼을 내어주니까 표를 떼여 들고 가위로 겨누며 『어데로 가요?』하고 웃는다.
『어데로?...? 글세요... ...아무데나 가는대로 갑시다』
車掌君은 한번 마술너 보고 핏슥 웃더니 구멍을 뚤어쥰다.
光化門 압흘 지나 西門으로 해서 蓬萊橋로 京城역 압까지 가서는 다-내리라고 선언을 한다.
섭섭하지만 내려서 저편 정류쟝으로 간다.
한강 다리로 가는 차가 온다. 집어탓다. 시간이 느저감으로 점점 속력이 빨너진다.
강 다리 우에서 차를 돌으킨다. 내리지 안코 안젓느라니까 차장이 다 왓다고 주의를 식혀쥰다.
아모 말도 업시 언젓다. 드르렁거리며 다시 문안으로 향아야 돌아온다.
종로 네거리 악가 그 자리에서 다시 내렷다. 車掌君이 내리는 뒤ㅅ꼭기에다 대이고
『흥 승거운 친구-』한다.
매를 마즐가 무서워 소리를 내어서는 못하고 속으로 『안승거우면 엇절테야?!』하고 반항하엿다.
실코도 또 실치만 발뿌리를 Baron으로 향하야 옴겨노앗다.＜161＞

아스팔드를 것는 친구
저녁을 먹고 난 S는 양복을 거더 입고 문압 길거리로 나섯다.
길에 늘비하게 찬 사람들은 약속이나 한 것처럼 종로로 향하야 걸어가고 잇다. S도 그 틈에 끼엇다.
C극장 압헤는 너줄한 간판 그것과 꼭 가티 너줄한 친구들이 모여서서 너줄한 간판을 구경하고 잇다.
D상점의 축음긔에, 붓잡힌 백 여명의 친구가 입을 떡 버리고 섯는 틈을 빠저나와 S는 애스팔드의 발을 올녀노앗다.
구든 쎄멘트 콩크리트 우에 물은 靑皮＜161＞ 바닥이 다엇다가 떠밧치우는 것 가티 사폰사폰 발길이 옴겨 노아진다.
시골 양반이 中學校 一年級 학생에게 인도를 바더가며 입을 버린 채 두 눈을 쉴새 업시 이용하면서 터덕터덕 거름을 것는다.
한달 채 인력거를 타보지 못한 듯한 기생 한 쌍이 격에 얼니지 아니하게 스피드를 내어 걸어온다. 키네마의 精勤生인 듯하다
거느편 야시장에서는 아라비아의 개라반을 연상케 하는 천막이 옹기종기 늘어 잇고 싸구려의 모든 소리가 한데 합 하야 맹꼬이 이상으로 들네고 잇다.
전차는 사람을 잡어먹을 뜻이 으르렁거리고 택씨들은 좀도적 가티 살살 달어난다. 각금 가다가 귀인ㅅ성업시 큼직큼직한 뻐스가 어색한 달음질을 치고 잇다.
기생 태운 인력 차, 차 부가 짤분 콤파스로 넓운 길을 자(尺)질하고 잇다.
S는 좀 섭섭하엿다. 몰을 기생이기 따문에-
얼골이 햇슥헷슥한 칼네지 뽀이들이 네댓이나 한 뭉치가 되여가지고 시시닥거리며 지내간다. 그 압헤는 흰 속 외에 깜장 보일치마를 밧처 입은 모껄 하나가 걸어가고 잇다.-다리가 비비 꼬이는 듯하다.
선전 비라를 한 무텍이 안은 예수ㅅ군이 천당 안내를 하고 잇다.
모자를 집에 두고 나온 세일너 팬쓰 친구들이 억개를 나란이 하고 지나가며 쏘-윈도우를 겻눈으로 스쳐본다.
지찌파-트 압헤는 야시장으로 푸셩귀 사러 나온 여인네들이 그득 늘어서서 금은품에 대한 눈요기를 하고 잇다.
S는 네 거리를 건너 여전히 애스팔드를 밟는다. 카페-S에서 새해-얀 얼골이 쏙 나왓다가 쏙 들어간다.
수징밧골 어구에서 南便으로 길을 옴겨 돌으켯다.
네 거리까지 다시 와서 南便으로 발을 옴겨 廣橋를 건넌섯다. S로 가는 기생 인력차가 온다.
햇득 돌아다보고도 고개를 깟닥하여 보인다. 안보여서 그러치 얼골로는 몰론 우소주엇다. S는 마음이 유쾌하여젓다.
廣橋를 건너지 아니하고 길은 가루 건너 다시 걸음을 도르켯다 鐘閣 압흘 지나 夜市 속을 비버뚤고 東관 압까지 일으럿다.
T 키네마에 가서 간판을 구경하기에 약 30분을 보내고 다시 돌으켜 애스팔드를 밟엇다.
M에서는 기생 인력 차가 둘이 나오고 런겁허 넷이 들어간다. 도합 여섯 가운데 둘은 아는 놈 넷은 몰으는 놈이다.
S가 몰으는 기생이면 S에게는 한심한 존재다.
탑골 공원에서는 배곱흔 有由階級들이 여전히 구물거리고 잇다.
네 거리까지 걸어왓다가 또 돌으켜서 동관까지 왓다. 또 다시 네 거리까지 갓다가 또 다시 동관까지 왓다. 다섯ㅅ번을 왓다갓다 하다가 D상점 압헤 발을 멈추엇다.
S는 10년 동안을 두고 매일 멧 번씩 최근에는 밤마다 이 애스팔트를 10여 번씩 밟고 다니 것만 만나는 사람 사람은 다 달은 사람인 것이 알 수 업는 일이다.
그는 전차를 잡어타고 진고개로 갓다. 『범죄과학』과 『신청년』의 두 잡지가 이 달 것이 나왓다는 광고를 아침에 보왓기 때문에-.＜162＞

씨-크廣告術
경성 역으로 부산행 특급을 맛추어 나아가는 전차 속에서...
『여보세요! 여보세요! 그건 제 건데요...』하고 半 모껄 하나가 방금 조고만한 빠스켓을 집어들고 황금정에서 내리려고 하는 신사에게 황급히 부르지젓다.
신사는 아주 천연스럽게 모자를 버서들고
『네? 미안함나다. 그러나 이 빠스켓은 제 것이올시다.』하고 우겻다.
『원 참 별꼴을 다 보겐네. 이리 주어요. 염치 빠지게 남의 것을 집어 가지고 가면서 무슨 말이야!』하고 아주 엇절 줄을 몰나 덩둥거렷다. 그러나 신사는 어데까지든지 침착하엿다. 전차에 탄 사람들은 구경ㅅ거리에 흥이 나소 어터케 되어가나 하고 두 남녀를 바라보앗다.
그 중 한사람은 중재하는 양으로 『그럴 것 업시 그 속에 무엇이 들어 잇는지 알어 맛치면 주인은 제절로 나서지 아니하겟소?』하엿다.
『그러치만 내가 그 속에 들은 것을 이약이하면 저 사람이 알어들을 것이 아니야요?』하고 모껄은 반대를 하엿다.
『그러면』하고 신사가 말하엿다. 『내가 먼점 이 속에 들은 것을 알으켜 내지요. 그러나 내가 하나를 알으켜 내이면 당신도 하나를 알으켜 내어야 함니다.』
이 말에 모껄은 속으로 무엇 무엇 들어잇는 것을 생각을 하여 보앗다. 그러는 동안에 신사는 『보일 치마가 하나』하엿다. 모껄은 깜ㅅ작 놀낫다. 보일 치마가 하나 들어잇는 것이 사실인데 저 녀석이 대관절 엇더케 알엇슬가?
그러나 엇절 수 업시 『실크·스타깅 한 켜레』
신사는 『빠이론 시집 한 권』
厥女는 『모시 적삼 하나』
신사는 『빅토리아·뺀드 한 벌』
전차 속은 우숨이 와닥 터저 나오고 厥女는 얼골이 새빨개지며 『파인애플 한 통』
신사는 『처녀와 부인의 성생활』
또 수슴이 터저나오며 厥女는 넘우도 놀납고 붓그러워 말을 하지 못하엿다.
이리되고 보니 변은 큰 변이 되엿다. 가튼 물건을 노코 꼭 가튼 주인이 들이 생겨 싸흠이 일어낫스니 어터케 처지를 할가? 그 중에도 제일 난처한 것은 전차 차장 이엇섯다.
이때에 厥女는 여자인 만큼 더 뻣세려고 하지 못하고 신사를 향하야 제발 그것이 자기의 것이니 내어달라고 애원을 하엿다.
이때에 신사는 전차 안을 휙 한번 둘너 보고 나서 목을 가다듬어 가지고 다음과 가티 演調체로 이약이를 하엿다.
『여러분, 대단 궁굼하시겟스니 여긔서 이 조고만한 소동에 대하야 이약이를 해드리겟슴니다. 혐.....나도 실상 천리안이올시다. 그 천리안인 것은 여러분이 악가 내가 이 빠스켓 속에 들어 잇는 것을 알어 맛춘 것을 보섯스니까 충분히 아실것임니다....엇더한 방법으로? 네...직접 이 빠스켓 속을 투시하는 법도 잇겟지만 악가 이 부인께서 빠스켓 속에 『무엇 무엇이 들어잇느니라』고 생각하고 게실 그때의 이 부인의 생각을 투시한 것임니다.
여러분 엇덧슴니까? 이 천리안 법은 여러 방면으로 이용도 하겟지만 특별히 이 부인과 가튼 젊으신 이께서 혹 그...＜163＞그...사랑하시는 남자의 마음을 아지 못하여 괴로우실 때 가튼 때는 가티 제게로 오시면 아주 유리창으로 내어다 보는 것 보담도 더 자세하고 시원하게 보아드릴 수가 잇슴니다... 만히들 이용하십시요. 제의 주소와 사무소는 여긔 잇슴니다.』하고 그는 손을 들어 전차 안에 부친 千里眼師 廣告를 갈으켯다.
일동이 눈이 동그래 가지고 바라보는 시선에 싸혀 그는 한번 유유히 절하고는 전차에서 내려갓다.

帽子와 두루막이
어제 저녁과 오늘 아침과 점심해서 세끼 채 밥을 먹지 못한 그는 맥고 모자와 두루막이를 입고 밧그로 나왓다. 나왓스나 별로히 갈 곳은 업다.
친구의 집 사랑으로 가자니 눈이 쑥 들어가서 밥을 굶은 눈치가 나타나고...그는 그대로 그늘을 차저 내(川)가에 잇는 버드나무 미트로 갓다.
죽 늘어선 버드나무 밋마다. 거지와 아희 업은 게집 애와 로인들이 늘비하게 자리를 차지하고 잇다.
그는 한 나무 비인 곳을 차저 두루막이를 버서 가지에 걸고 나무뿌리에 안젓다.
눈이 아득하게 시장하나 어터케 다만 보라ㅅ되라도 변통해 볼 도리가 나서지 아니하고 다만 심난스럽기만 할 따름이다.
바로 그 압 논에서는 수북수북 검푸르게 자란 벼 폭이 사이로 농군이 세 넷 들어서서 김을 매고 잇다.
각금 가다 한 마듸 씩 일하는 사람의 그 동작과 꼭 마즌 선율로 어-여-어-아의 상사소리를 꿈속 가티 넘기고 잇다.
우둔하니 서서 보고 잇느라니까 등 뒤에서 갑작히 『밥을 먹으우-』하는 소리가 들닌다.
다만 『밥』이라 소리의 매력에 휙 돌아보니까 그 논의 주인ㅅ집 머슴이 농군의 점심 새참을 가지고 나왓다.
나무 밋헤 지게에 지고 온 광주리를 내려노코 덥흔 보잭이를 벗기는데 큼직한 자백이에 팟을 둔 불구수헤한 밥이 소담스럽게 담겨잇는 것이 그의 시선을 훌트려 잡고 아니 놋는다.
어금니 밋헤서는 신 침이 사뭇 고여 내린다. 밥 자백이 엽헤는 구수한 냄새를 사랑스리 발산하는 된장과 열무김치와 고초장에 갈치를 구운 토막 가튼 것을 담은 툭백이 접시 가튼 것이 제각금 노여잇다.
뽕닙홀 따서 말녀 가지고 담배를 피우고 누엇는 어머니의 십리나 들어간 눈 학교에 갓다가 와서 발서부터 어린애가 눈치만 발너 밥 달나는 말은 못하고 쭈루투툼 하고 안젓는 큰 놈, 이웃집에 가서 밥을 어더 먹고 와서는 조아라고 날뛰든 게집애 어미의 뵌 젓을 빨며 앙벗 우는 적멕이, 『한끼 묵는 것은 몰나도 한때 헐벗는 것은 남이 안다』고 하면서 휘휘 감기는 두루백이를 불시로 빠러 대려주느라고 곱흔 배에 허리를 곱으리고 기어다니든 안해...이 사람들을 모아 노코 저 밥을 나누어 먹엇스면 생각하니 생각만이라도 구수하고 배가 불은듯 하엿다.
조곰 잇다가 농군들이 칠부덕거리며 논에서 나와 팔둑으로 땀을 씨스며 그를 보고 인사를 한다. 척척 들어 안저 숫갈을 들고는 입입이
『새참 좀 잡수시지요』하며 그래도 소위 그의 체면을 보아 게면ㅅ적은 듯이 그의 얼골을 살핀다.
『응 어서들 먹게』하고 그는 대답하엿스나 그 말은 기름 짜듯이 째여 노으는 소리다.
그는 엽헤 버서노흔 맥고 모자와 올이 밀니기는 하엿스나마 말ㅅ속한 모시 두루맥이를 치어다 보앗다.
『저 놈 따문에 이 밥을 못 먹는구나!』 이러케 그는 속으로 탄식하고 일어섯다.＜164＞
＜157-164＞