별건곤 제31호	1930년 08월 01일	海洋博物館,	韓鐵舟	기행문

Magazine Title: 別乾坤 第31號
Publication Date: 1930년 08월 01일 (August 1, 1930)
Article Title: 海洋博物館, (Maritime Museum)
Author: 韓鐵舟 (Han Ch'ŏl-chu)
Article Type: 기행문 (Travelogue)

Departure from Kobe
The irregular ocean-going steamship X-maru, which shares its fate with me, has been decided to depart from Kobe, its home port, for a trip to South America via India and South Africa. Several weeks ago, the repair of the hull and the purchase of goods were almost finished, and the crew was engrossed in collecting their own belongings. As the departure was decided for the end of tomorrow, families and friends of the crew were bustling in and out from early this morning to say goodbye. After supper, only the on-duty crew remained, and they went ashore in groups of three or five to celebrate the final night in their homeland and wish for a safe voyage. The ship, which was like a marketplace, became quiet after sunset. I had no relatives or friends to visit me, and nowhere to go, so I tried to organize everything and go to bed early, but I was too nervous about the departure at dawn to fall asleep. After midnight, the sound of returning footsteps and drunken singing became louder, and at 3 a.m., the sound of the bell and the whistle of the first mate broke the silence of the night. The watchmen went around calling for everyone to line up on the deck for a headcount. After the headcount was finished, the sound of the gong shook the ship, and the shore workers were told to disembark. Soon after the mooring men boarded, the sound of the anchor winch roared like thunder, and the sound of footsteps running back and forth combined to create a symphony. Finally, the ropes were untied from the wharf, and the huge body quietly began to move away from the land. The sky began to turn blue, and only the large stars were visible, while the smaller stars hid their traces. Despite the cold morning temperature in early March, relatives and ship personnel gathered at the wharf and waved their hats and towels as the ship took off. One or two ships moved away, and as they moved ten or a hundred intervals apart, their faces became faint, and eventually even their shadows disappeared. Thinking about returning home even before leaving, the future seemed distant, and the magnificent three blasts of the ship's horn, which signified the departure, seemed to threaten Suwawasan and Sengo (another name for Kobe) and gave courage to the crew, who were weakened by their farewells.

Trip to Taiwan
Turning the bow south, the city gradually disappeared, and only the lights twinkled on the horizon before losing their traces. Only the shadows of the mountains remained dark. The first <165> port of call was Keelung, Taiwan. After sailing southwest for four or five days, we entered and anchored in Keelung. The port is narrow but a natural harbor. There is not much to see in Keelung, but Taipei is about an hour away by train through lush valleys. Taipei is said to be the most well-organized city in the Japanese Empire along with Dalian. Although Keelung and Taipei are not far apart, Keelung is cool and rainy due to the terrain, while Taipei is sunny and warm enough to wear summer clothes. Taipei is a quiet and clean tropical city. The scenery near the Taiwan Shrine is especially beautiful.

Taiwan Strait
After departing from Keelung and entering the Taiwan Strait, the sea was calm with no wind or waves. The surface of the sea was like a mirror, reflecting faces. As the flying fish jumped, they drew ripples on the surface of the sea. On the horizon, a fleet of sailing ships seemed to be arrayed, but as I looked closer, they were junks (中國木船) fishing boats. These fishing boats usually fish, but they turn into pirate ships when they see a ship in distress, so they are not to be taken lightly. Thinking about it, there is little joy. Who knows when a steamship might break down and lose its freedom? Like the Korean winter weather, where three cold days are followed by four warm days (三寒噀›溫), a few days of calm sea are always followed by a few days of stormy sea. The famous Taiwan Strait, which is wide but known for its rough waves and avoided by sailors, was too calm, which was suspicious. Sure enough, strange clouds appeared and swells (橫濤) began to form from the head (船首便). Although we were scheduled to arrive in Hong Kong tomorrow afternoon, the wind grew stronger and stronger, with gusts of 9 or 10 (50 or 60 li per hour), heavy rain, and waves as high as mountains or as flat as plains. The rolling and pitching (종횡요동) were even worse, and the empty ship without cargo was mercilessly shaking us so that we could not even walk properly. We could not cook rice or put food on the table, so we made sandwiches and ate them in our hands. The daily speed was only 5 nautical miles, compared to 230 or 40 nautical miles! It was too much. At this rate, I don't know how many days it will take to arrive in Hong Kong. Wireless telegraphs from the land kept warning of storms. Every time I saw the hull of a wrecked junk, I shuddered at the thought of the terrible scene!

Hong Kong
After several days of hardship, we arrived in the capital of Hong Kong. The waves were gone and we could see the houses, which made us feel refreshed. Seeing so many ships taking refuge in the capital, I knew that the storm had been severe. After passing through hundreds of sampans (小渡船) and junks and anchoring in the inner harbor, merchants gathered like swarms of bees, turning the ship into a market in an instant. Hundreds of merchants on sampans were on the side of the ship. The goods were various. Tropical fruits such as tangerines, bananas, papayas, coconuts (椰子實), Buddha's hands (佛手), longans, and lychees, ivory crafts, rattan chairs (등의자屬), and handicrafts such as rosewood crafts, as well as animals such as parrots, monkeys, Cantonese dogs, and various rare and exotic animals, and various medicines, including a mysterious medicine called reason (理性). Truly, Tang goods (唐貨) that were hard to see or even hear about in Joseon were spread out before my eyes, and the prices were cheap.
Although Hong Kong is a small island, it has no flat land, and the city is built in layers as if forcibly plowing the mountainside, making transportation extremely inconvenient. Electric streetcars and automobiles can run horizontally, but to go vertically, they have to make large detours or climb dozens of stone steps on foot, or use sedan chairs (박휘떼) carried by people. Although Hong Kong is a small island, it can prosper as a gateway to South China trade. However, the only obstacles are the small land area and the lack of drinking water. Several years ago, they built reservoirs on the mountainside to collect rainwater and leased the Kowloon Peninsula (越便九龍半島), which is part of the mainland, and are gradually prospering. Victoria Peak (빅토리아픽), the highest peak in the island, is 7 or 8 hundred feet above sea level and can be easily climbed by funicular. When you go up, the blue water of the harbor with countless large and small ships floating on it and the city look like toys scattered around. In the distance, the sailing ships coming and going between the large and small islands in the mist are like a painting. Also, the night view of Hong Kong is famous in the world, and it is true. The layered lights on one side of the mountainside are reflected upside down on the water, creating a magnificent spectacle.

South China Sea
Leaving the bustling and noisy Hong Kong, we headed for Singapore. The monsoon of the South China Sea (the direction of the low-pressure wind changes from time to time, so the monsoon blows in one direction for several months with a constant wind force) blows persistently and strongly. It was blowing from the south to the north. Southern natives (남양토인) in loincloths (河童) come in canoes and ask to be thrown money. When money is thrown, they chase after it as it falls into the water and sinks to the bottom of the sea, and they are 100% successful in catching it before it sinks. Their underwater movements are as agile as fish. They seem to like retrieving 백동화 (cupronickel coins) or silver coins because they are shiny and easy to find underwater <167> and the income is high, but they don't seem to be too desperate for copper coins. Singapore is a small island with a circumference of several tens of ri at the tip of the Malay Peninsula, but it is the throat of East-West transportation. Its military value goes without saying, and it is also convenient for transportation as a trading port, making it the center of South Asia. Rubber and coconut (椰子) produced in all of South Asia are collected in Singapore. I don't know where the Malay natives (馬支토인) do or what they do, but the major banks and companies are Westerners, and the other merchants and small farms are all Chinese. It is not much different from mainland China. The natives do some labor, but only a very small number, and almost all of the laborers are Chinese. Looking at the natives' residences, you can often see them living in stilt houses by the water rather than on land.
Their faces are dark, their eyes are dull, and they wear sarongs (싸론) instead of pants. Since there are no belts in all of South Asia, they just hold them tight and twist the front inward. Both men and women wear loose shirts similar to work shirts, and only men wear black 羽緞 hats like rice sacks. Only well-dressed people wear slippers on their bare feet. It seems that there are no socks in South Asia, no matter how rich you are. I wonder if there is even a word for socks in the South Asian languages. No matter how you look at them, they are an inactive race. From noon to 3 or 4 p.m., the heat is so intense that all activity temporarily stops. After a shower around 4 or 5 p.m., coolness is created and even the plants seem to revive. From this time on, all activity starts again and the market becomes bustling. If you have no work to do, driving along the beach and coconut palm-lined asphalt roads is truly refreshing and you will better appreciate the value of the automobile. Generally, the heat is so intense during the day that only people with urgent business come out, but at night it is cool, so it seems that all the citizens come out. The parks and beaches are always crowded with walkers, including white people, yellow people, gray Malay people, and Indian people with white, sparkling eyes. The famous botanical garden of the East is located there. Among the many tropical plants here, what catches our attention are the huge vines (藤덩굴) hundreds of feet long, the traveler's tree (旅人木) with leaves like banana leaves spread out like the bristles of a brush and reaching 40 or 50 feet in length. There are countless fragrant and beautiful orchids and other parasitic plants. Next, we were scheduled to go to Calcutta, India. After leaving Singapore and passing through the Singapore capital near the fortress, there was a desolate sandy island protruding to the right. I knew this was the southernmost tip of Asia, Cape Pulo (뿔루岬), and when I looked at the nautical chart, it was at 1 degree 16 minutes north latitude. As someone who lives in the Far East, I couldn't help but feel a strange emotion when I saw this southernmost tip.

Strait of Malacca
To the right is the Malay Peninsula. To the left is Sumatra Island. While sailing through the Strait of Malacca, the daily temperature does not fall below 90 degrees. In fact, there is no wind, but the ship's speed creates a considerable wind, which is very cool. Sailing calmly on the calm sea is like a summer outing. After bathing after sunset, the hardships of the waves on the deck or in a hammock are all forgotten. The solemn beauty of the sunset is more sentimental and artistic than the magnificent sunrise over the ocean <168>. Moreover, the cloudscapes created by the scorching heat of the Strait of Malacca in this perpetual summer region far surpass the many peaks of summer clouds. They resemble various shapes, mountains, and colors, not only white clouds, but also pale pink, tan, and nameless intermediate colors before and after sunset. The sky and the sea take on the same color, and at times they change like the backdrop of a stage. This mysterious scenery is probably the best in South Asia, especially in the Strait of Malacca, and to express even a part of it, you would have to be at least a painter or a poet. Also, to see such a sight, you would have to be a sailor who braves the dangers of the stormy ocean. After passing through the Strait of Malacca and entering the frightening Indian Ocean, the southwest monsoon and waves were as strong as if they had been waiting for us. The waves were pushing us from behind, so they did not have a big impact on the speed, but the wind force was only a slight breeze that reduced the speed. The scorching heat makes it seem like we have truly entered the Indian Ocean.

Calcutta, India
After traveling 1600 nautical miles unexpectedly quickly, we arrived at the river mouth early in the morning. The turbulent muddy water had clouded the seawater of the Indian Ocean for tens of ri. After sailing upstream for another 6 or 7 hours from the river mouth, we entered Calcutta, a large city of 1.5 million black people. The heat is truly murderous. Breathing is difficult. I had been suffering from excessive cold drinks and heatstroke since departing from Singapore, and I was scheduled to be hospitalized and treated while anchored in Calcutta. However, after the doctor came for a visit, he advised me that the recent heat wave was the worst in 50 years in India, and dozens of patients were dying from the heat in the hospital every day, so it would be better to be treated on board than at a local doctor. So, I had no choice but to follow his advice. The ship moved into the shipyard and was moored, so there was no wind at all. The smoke rose straight up as if to pierce the sky, and the hot sun heated the hull like sitting in a stove. The weather station announced that the temperature was 110 degrees! It was a temperature I had never even heard of. I couldn't see the sights I had been looking forward to and just lay in bed waiting for fate. Even ice and electric fans could not alleviate the heat. I heard that the Indian governor-general, who couldn't live there, had moved to the summer resort in the northern Himalayan foothills some time ago.
One day, before sunrise, I took advantage of the cool break and went to see the famous Eden Garden. There were coconut groves, palm-lined roads, palm bamboo groves, hundreds of banyan trees with feet, and various flower beds. I didn't have the strength to walk around and see how wide it was and what was there, so I sat weakly on a bench and watched white peacocks playing at my feet and unknown birds playing in the trees. In the distance, behind the bushes, I saw the round dome and pointed tower of an Indian temple, and I wondered if Solomon's Garden looked like this in the old days. While I was lost in thought, the red sun rose in the eastern sky and the heat became intense. I forced myself to walk to the road and called a carriage to return to the ship. It was still early and the shops were not open yet, so the roads were deserted. The sight of the poor sleeping in the doorways of Western-style houses was pitiful, and it was strange that it was not forbidden. When I came to the riverside road, it was a spectacle to see Muslims gathering, bathing, clapping, singing, and worshiping the sunrise.
Whether it was to save me, the rain started three days after anchoring, so the heat subsided and I recovered some energy. One day, I went to see the zoo <169>. There was nothing special about the other animals, but there was a reptile house with various reptiles and snakes, including snakes as thick as pillars, green snakes like cabbage butterflies, chameleons that changed color from moment to moment, and turtles the size of a room that were said to live on land, carrying one or two people and moving slowly. It was a sight to see. Looking up at the tall trees, it was also a sight to see large bats like kites hanging upside down in the trees. Due to illness during the anchoring, I could not see the sights and headed for Buenos Aires, the capital of Argentina, via South Africa.

Indian Ocean
First, we had to cross about 5,000 nautical miles of the Indian Ocean with southwest winds to get to Durban, South Africa, our next port of call. About 5 or 6 days after departure, one night I saw lighthouses with red and white lights to the right. When I looked at the nautical chart, it was the southern tip of Ceylon Island (錫蘭島). Two or three days later, when we crossed the equator, we held a ceremony for the Equator God. The equator is something we imagine, but when we cross this line, it feels like there is some kind of line there, but there is nothing, and it is just as flat as the Yellow Sea (黃海水), but with a slight feeling of dampness. Day and night, befriending clouds and water, running while only looking at the southwest, life is very monotonous. Although we are far away from the human world and cannot know the news, wireless telegraphy, an instrument of civilization, is a great comfort because we receive wireless newspapers broadcast by the German Nauen Bureau every day. About 10 days later, on a dark night, a tall mountain shadow appeared on the horizon, which was Mauritius Island (모리셧스嶋), a French territory. Two days later, we saw the southern tip of Madagascar Island (마다카스칼도) to the right. Three days after that, we entered Durban in the South African Union. Until a week ago, we were suffering from the scorching heat of the Bok, but after coming to the southern hemisphere for a few days, the climate changed completely and the autumn wind was chilly.

South Africa
The city of Durban is as grand as a major European and American city. The most bizarre thing among them is that I thought that the rickshaw (人力車), which was invented in Japan, was only available in the Orient, but it was also here. What surprised me was that the rickshaw itself was a large two-seater, and the rickshaw puller was a fierce native with bull horns on his bald head and feathers and bells mixed together, and his arms and legs were painted in color, which was truly strange. There are many whale groups in the seas near South Africa, and there is a whaling company in Durban, so several pairs of whaling ships come and go every day. Looking at a whale that had been caught and hauled in, there were places where it had been scooped out with a spoon like scooping out tofu, and when I asked about the many places that had been scooped out with a ladle, they said that it was where sharks (*(상어)) had eaten it while it was being dragged in.
After loading coal in Durban, we passed the southern coast of Africa and entered Cape Town (希望峯). South America has no coal production, so it imports it from far away South Africa or the United States, so it is incredibly expensive. Therefore, steamships going to South America usually prepare enough coal to cross the ocean again. Whenever I hear the name Cape of Good Hope, I can imagine the hardships and fears of the Portuguese and Dutch navigators (往昔葡萄牙人과 和蘭航海者들) at the time of the opening of the Eastern route. There is an old well in the city that the sailors of the past regarded as life and drew water from for their long voyages. Also, there are stone monuments in the vicinity that are now kept in the museum. It is said that sailors heading to the Orient left messages to sailors returning to the West, asking them to tell their families back home when they had safely passed this point. They would definitely come to this well and leave a letter of request <170>. To talk about the city of Cape Town, I cannot help but talk about the mountain behind it, Table Mountain (배산 테불마운텐). Table Mountain, or 卓山, is 3500 feet above sea level and has a steep cliff, with a climbing path only on one side, and the summit is wide and flat like a table, hence the name. I don't know how such a strange mountain was created. Also, in an inseparable relationship with Table Mountain, there is the Table Cloth (卓布 테불클로스), which is a white cloud covering only the summit. This is because, due to the weather conditions at certain times of the year, the moisture of the South Atlantic crosses the mountain and turns into white clouds when it collides with mountains with different temperatures. The small city at the foot of this Table Mountain is Cape Town (컵타운), the city of the Cape of Good Hope.

The Cape Town Museum has specimens of various races of Africa, various animals and plants that were secretly hidden in untouched places since the opening, and unique items that cannot be seen elsewhere, such as huge meteorites and fossils. Also, when it comes to Cape Town, we think of diamonds being produced in large quantities, and when it comes to diamonds, we cannot forget Cecil Rhodes (세실로-스卿), a great man of South Africa. When it comes to Cecil Rhodes, we think of his achievements and his famous last words, "So little done, so much to do" (할 일은 만은데 한 일은 적다.). We, who have done nothing, are ashamed to death. Not only in Cape Town but in South Africa in general, the absolute rejection of Orientals is severe, and the unprovoked disregard for Orientals is very unpleasant for us.

South Atlantic
After loading fuel coal in Cape Town, we cross the South Atlantic (南太西洋) straight west. It is August <171>, so it is winter in the southern hemisphere. The intense cold wind coming from the South Pole and the unique triangular waves of the South Atlantic jump over the deck, and sometimes water even enters through the smokestack. One day, we damaged the steering gear in a fierce storm and drifted all night, but we desperately repaired it and were able to continue sailing safely.

Buenos Aires, South America
After barely crossing about 4,000 ri in 20 days, the ship arrived at the great river of South America, Rio de la Plata (플라타) (Spanish for Silver River), and picked up a pilot to bring it to Buenos Aires (아이례스) (Clear Air) in a few hours. The facilities of the port and the splendor and vastness of the city are the best in South America and among the best in the world. The only subway in South America, the asphalted avenues, and the monuments, statues, and fountains, which are characteristic of the Latin race, are scattered everywhere. Among them, the splendor of Freedom Street and Independence Street and the statue of General San Martín (싼·말틴), a South American hero and the founding father of Argentina, and the Independence Monument are rarely seen even in Europe and America. In the countryside, there are endless vast farms and ranches where you cannot see any mountains or hills. Not only Argentina but all of South America has a climate and soil suitable for agriculture and animal husbandry, and its products sustain the Europeans. However, among the minerals, there is no production of coal and iron, so industry has not developed at all, and all daily necessities are imported from Europe, America, and even Japan, so prices are probably the highest in the world. There are many rich people among the civilians, but the government is poor, so they sell everything with stamps attached, and the country issues lottery tickets every day, with the issuance and announcement of new tables. If you win first prize with a ticket of 4 or 5 won, you get 3 or 400,000 won, which is tempting, but when you see the issue number, it says A150,000XX, 70,000X, which seems like there are millions of numbers, so it is too futile. Besides the lottery, there are major and minor horse races 2 or 3 times a week. South Americans all buy lottery tickets, so I don't know if they are very speculative or if they buy them as a national duty. Our ship is preparing to load European wheat.

Story of Iceberg Collision
Kim Tong-hyŏk

There is a saying that even the sound of a chick crying is annoying when you are sick. Lately, the mercury in the thermometer has been rising steadily, and the weather is so hot that it is suffocating. Food is medicine when you are hungry, and coolness is medicine when you are hot. Therefore, I will tell you a story about icebergs, the coolest of the cool, the biggest and scariest chunks of ice, to alleviate even a little of this sweltering heat.
When you think of a mountain, you think of it being made of earth or stone. Of course, there are earthen mountains and stone mountains. But in addition, there is also something called an iceberg. An iceberg is a mass of ice that is separated into several pieces when a glacier <172> flows into the sea and floats on the sea. Therefore, to talk about icebergs, it is difficult to talk about icebergs without first explaining glaciers, which are the source of icebergs, so I will talk about glaciers first.
The higher the mountain, the closer it is to the North and South Poles, the lower the temperature becomes gradually. The amount of snow that falls in a year is considerably large, so it does not melt not only in winter but also in summer, increasing in thickness every year. This is called perpetual snow, and the lower end of the perpetual snow is called the snow line. In areas above this snow line, there is perpetual snow that never disappears, even in temperate or tropical zones, not to mention frigid zones. Due to its own pressure, it solidifies and gradually forms a solid mass of ice, then flows down the slope of the mountains and gradually moves into the valleys. This state is similar to the flow of river water, so it is named a glacier.
The action of glaciers. Glaciers slowly descend down slopes, and this causes the earth's crust to form special shapes. This action is called glacial action. Like the action of rivers, seawater, and the atmosphere, it performs three actions: erosion, transportation, and deposition.
The movement of glaciers. The speed of movement of glaciers varies depending on the steepness of the slope, the curves of the cliffs, and the width of the valley, but in general it is very slow, and it is not easy to know whether the glacier is moving or not. However, the fastest time during the summer is 2 feet per day and night, and about 1 foot during the winter, so it is said that the average speed is about 500 feet per year. When a certain person climbed Mont Blanc (Mont Blande), he heard that he found a lost ladder and other food 4,000 meters downstream several decades later, which is clear evidence that glaciers move.
The principle of glacier movement. There are two reasons why glaciers exhibit liquid movement. That is, it is due to the high pressure and refreezing of meltwater that the ice mass receives. It is a physically clear fact that ice under high pressure flows like a substance with viscosity. To test this experimentally, if you fill a metal cylinder with ice and apply several atmospheres of pressure, you can see ice flowing out of the small hole in the cylinder, forming an paste-like substance. There are two reasons why this happens.
1. Ice is broken into many small pieces by pressure, not only changing the position between them, but also being able to form any shape.
2. Ice partially melts due to pressure, and the water fills between each piece of ice, making it easier for the ice mass to move.
Icebergs, as mentioned earlier, when glaciers flow into seawater, they are broken and form ice masses, which float on the sea and create what are called icebergs. Icebergs sometimes have a diameter of several ri and a height of more than 100 meters above sea level, creating the appearance of a small mountain in the sea. However, the part that appears above the surface of the water is only about one-eighth of the part that is submerged in the water.
The action of icebergs. Icebergs often carry huge rock masses and transport them over long distances. When they reach low latitudes, they melt, causing the sea to become shallower due to the deposited material. The shallows near Newfoundland (늬우파운드랜드) in North America are actually formed in this way. Theories of iceberg formation: There are three theories about how glaciers formed icebergs: the erosion theory, the weight theory, and the buoyancy theory.
1. Erosion theory: When a glacier flows into the sea, it is divided by the erosion of seawater and forms an iceberg mass.
2. Weight theory: When a glacier flows into the sea, it is separated from the main body by its own weight and forms an iceberg mass.
3. Buoyancy theory: When a glacier flows into the sea, it floats, so it is separated from the main body by its buoyancy and forms an iceberg mass.
Distribution of icebergs. The most icebergs are in the North Atlantic. They flow south from Greenland (Green land) west of Baffin Land (빠핀랜드) to the coast of Newfoundland (늬우파운드랜드). There are the most icebergs here, and sometimes they even reach Cuba Island (큐바島) in India. In general, you can see sea ice flowing down the western part of the North Pacific, but there are no icebergs at all on the east coast of the North Pacific. Also, the shape of icebergs coming from the Arctic region has jagged peaks, but those coming from the Antarctic region have a flat surface and form cliffs of 100 to 150 feet on the side walls and drift along the coastline of the Antarctic continent.
Iceberg collision. Icebergs flow along the ocean currents and collapse when they come to low latitudes. Therefore, if an iceberg collapses, it creates a large wave and can throw a steamship into the vortex. The British ship Titanic (타이타닉호) was wrecked off Newfoundland on April 16, 1912, is an example of this. Therefore, sailors are very afraid of icebergs approaching and are always on guard. In general, when an iceberg approaches, the temperature drops rapidly and a dense fog suddenly appears. Therefore, sailors know that an iceberg is approaching and change course in advance to avoid it. <174>

**Named Entities**

神戶	Kōbe
諏訪山	Suwawasan
扇港	Sengō
臺灣	Taiwan
基隆	Kirun
臺北	Taipei
大連	Tairen
臺灣神社	Taiwan Jinja
中國	Chūgoku
香港	Honkon
九龍半島	Kūryū hantō
新嘉坡	Shingapōru
馬來	Marē
馬來半島	Marē hantō
스마드라島	Sumatora-tō
印度洋	Indo-yō
錫蘭島	Seiran-tō
모리셧스嶋	Morishasutō
마다카스칼도	Madagasukaru-tō
南阿聯邦	Nan'a Renpō
떠밴	Dāban
希望峯	Kibōhō
葡萄牙人	Porutogaru jin
和蘭航海者	Oranda kōkaisha
테불마운텐	Teburumauten
卓山	Takusan
亞爾然丁	Aruzenchin
부에노스·아이례스	Buenosu Airesu
싼·말틴	Ssan Maltin
金東赫	Kim Tong-hyŏk
南北兩極	Nambuk yanggŭk
몽뿔랑	Mongppullang
英船	Yŏngsŏn
타이타닉호	T'aitanikhŏ
그린랜드	Kŭrinraendŭ
빠핀랜드	Papp'inraendŭ
늬우파운드랜드	Nyu P'aundŭraendŭ
큐바島	K'yuba-do



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제31호
발행일	1930년 08월 01일
기사제목	海洋博物館,
기사형태	기행문

海洋博物館,
世界周航記
韓鐵舟

神戶出帆
나와 운명을 갓치 하는 不定期遠洋航路汽船X丸은 금번 홈폿(定繫航)인 神戶를 출범하야 印度經由와 南阿經由南美行으로 결정되엿다. 수주 전부터 하는 선체의 수리와 물품구입도 거의 다 맛치고 선원들은 自用品을 모아 들리기 골몰하드라 출범이 明朝末明으로 결정되니 발서 그날 아참부터 선원의 가족들과 우인들이 작별로 출입이 번거럽다. 석반후에는 당직선원만 남기고 고국에서 최종야의 향락과 원항의 무사평안을 祝하다고 삼삼오오로 상륙하얏는데 장터 갓든 배 안이 일몰 후에는 고로하다. 나는 누가 차져올 친척과 우인도 업고 갈 데도 업서 모든 것을 정돈하고 일즉이 잘러고 하야도 未明 출범에 신경을 긴장되여 도모지 잠이 들지 못 하얏다. 12시 후부터는 귀선하는 발자최 소리 취흥에 노래 요란하더니 오전 3시에 종소리 나자 일등 운전사의 呼笛소리 야음에 정막이 깻치더니 인원 점검하러 전원 갑판 상에 정렬하라고 차수가 도라다닌다. 점검이 끗나자 銅鑼소리 배 안을 뒤집더니 내방외인을 퇴선하고 수선 안내인은 승선한지 未久에 雷聲갓튼 揚錨機의 운전하는 소리 다름박질로 왕래하는 발자최 소리 합하야 일대 교향악 갓다. 최후에 索을 埠頭에서 풀어노니 거체는 고요히 육지와 거리가 멀기 시작한다. 하늘은 푸릇하기 시작하더니 굵근 별만 보이고 잔별은 자최를 감추엇다. 3월 초순에 새벽 치위는 아직도 치운대도 불구하고 근친자와 선박관계자들은 埠頭에 모여잇다가 거체가 이륙하니 모자와 수건을 들으며 작별한다. 일척이척 떠나 십간 백간 상거가 되여저 얼골이 희미해지며 나종에는 거림자까지 희미해진다. 떠나기도 전에 귀항을 생각하니 압길이 아득할 제 출항의 의미인 웅장한 氣笛三聲은 諏訪山과 扇港( 神戶一名)을 威壓하난 듯 하고 惜別로 기력이 약해진 선원에게 용기를 내여준다.

臺灣行
船首를 돌여 남으로 향하고 다라나니 市街도 차차 아니 보이고 불빗만 수평선상에 반짝반짝하다가 그나마도 자최를 일코 다만 山 거럼자만 검숭하게 보인다. 第一次＜165＞ 寄港이 臺灣基隆이라 針路를 西南으로 항행 한지 4,5일만에 基隆에 入港投錨하얏다. 港內는 狹窄하나 천연의 良港이다. 基隆市街는 별로 볼 것 업스나 기차로 약 1쉀œ간 수목이 울창한 山谷을 지나면 곳 臺北市이다. 臺北은 大連과 함게 日本帝國領內에서 제일 整然한 市街이라 한다. 基隆과 相距가 不遠하나 地勢관계로 基隆은 陰凉한 雨期이나 臺北은 晴天에 夏服을 입을 더위 이다. 臺北은 한적하고 청결한 熱帶式 도시이다. 臺灣 神社부근에 風光은 더욱 수려하더라.


臺灣海峽
基隆을 출범하야 대만해협에 들어가니 해상에는 一點의 풍랑도 업시 해면이 참으로 鏡面갓치 얼골이 빗취여 비어가 뛸 절마다 해면에 일대 파문을 그리게 반반하다 수평선상에는 帆船에 함대가 陳을 친 것 갓다가 가만이 바라보니 戎克(中國木船)어선이다. 이 어선은 常時에는 어업을 하고 조난선을 보면 해적선으로 변한다니 업수이 녁일 수 엄는 배들이다. 생각하면 적윽이 滋味가 적다. 기선인들 어느 때 불행히 고장이 생기여 자유를 일을 지 뉘 알리오. 조선 冬節에 기후는 三寒噀›溫이란 것과 갓치 해상은 靜穩이 수일 연속되면 반다시 풍랑이 수일 뒤 밧친다. 넓지만 안으나 풍랑이 험악하야 難航處로 선원들이 경원하는 유명한 대만해협이 너무도 安穩한 것이 도로여 수상하더니 아니나 다를가 야릇한 구름이 뜨고 스왤(橫濤)이 헤드(船首便)으로부터 모더니 내일 오후이면 香港에 도착예정인대 풍력이 점점 심하야 9 내지 10(시속 5,60리)의 열풍과 폭우, 파도는 산 갓치도 되고 평원 갓치도 되니 로링과 핏치(종횡요동)는 더구나 積荷가 업는 空船을 인정업시 봅시도 흔드러 거름을 거를 수도 업고 밥도 질 수 업고 식탁에 버러 놀 수도 업서 쌘드윗취를 만드러 손에 쥐고 먹엇다. 매일 항속 230,40浬든 것이 다만 5浬여! 너무도 심하다. 이 모양이면 香港도착은 몃칠 후일지 예정도 못 하겟는데 무선전신으로 육지에서 連해 폭풍경보는 온다. 난파 戎克에 선체가 때때로 보일 적마다 당시의 참상을 연상하면 몸서리가 친다!

香港
갓가 수로 몃칠 만에 香港 수도에 당도 하니 풍랑로 업고 인가도 바라보이니 곳 산듯 십다. 수도내에는 피난선이 만히 모혀잇는 것을 보니 참으로 심한 풍랑인 것을 알겟다. 수백 수척의 쌈판(小渡船)과 戎克을 헹치고 내항에 投錯하자 행상인이 떼구름 가티 모여들어 배 안에는 졸지에 시장이 되고 선 측에는 쌈판에 실은 상인이 무려 수 백 명이다. 상품을 살펴보니 가지각색이다. 감귤, 빠나나, 파파야, 椰子實, 佛手, 용안, 荔枝 갓든 열대과실, 상아세공품, 등의자屬, 紫檀세공갓튼 공예품, 동물로도 앵무, 猿, 광동견 외 각종 珍禽奇獸 각종 약품 其中에는 理性호린다는 묘약까지도 잇다. 참으로 往時 조선서는 보기 커냥 듯기도 어러운 唐貨가 眼前에 질비한데 갑도 헐하다.
香港시는 一小島이나마 평지가 전무하고 山腹을 억지로 밧갈 듯기 하야 층층히 만든 시가이라 교통이 지극히 불편하다. 橫으로는 전차 자동차가 다닐 수 잇스나 縱으로 가랴면 전차 자동차는 대우회하지 아니하면 안되여 수십층의 石段을 도보가 안니면 사람이  메이고 다니는 박휘떼인 초안 갓튼 것이다. 香港은 비록 一小島이나 南支무역의 관문이라 얼마든지 번창할 수 잇스나 다만 支障은 지면이 협소하고 음료수가 업서 고생이더니  수년 전에 山腹에다 雨水를 溜하는 저수지를 만들고 또 대륙의 一端인 越便九龍半島를 租借하야 점점 번창해간다. 島中 최고봉 빅토리아픽은 해발 7,8백 척 인대 색인철도로 용이히 등산할 수 잇다. 올라보면 항내 紺碧한 수면에  대소선박이 무수히 떼여 잇는 것과 시가는 맛치 완구를 버려 논 것 갓고 멀리 바라보면 운무간에 대소군도가 벌려 잇는 사이로 범선이 왕래하는 것은 一幅의 그림 갓다. 또 香港의 야경이란 세계에 유명하다드니 참으로 그럿타. 山腹 일면의 층층한 燈火가 수면에 걱구로 빗취어 일대 奇觀을 일우엇다.

南支那海
구찬코 소란한 香港을 출범하야 新嘉坡로 향하게 되엿다. 남지나해의 계절풍(저기압의 풍향이 때때로 방향을 변하니 계절풍은 일정한 풍력로 수 월간 단일 방향으로 부는 것)은 지루하게도 한갈 갓치 강하게 분다. 남방에서 북으로 불게 되엿다. 남양토인의 河童이 獨木舟를 타고 와서 돈을 던져 달나고 한다. 돈을 던진즉 물에 떠러져 해저에 가라안는 것을 쫏차 드러 가서 가라안기 전에 잡아내기 백발 백중이다. 그들의 수중행동이 어류와 갓치 민첩하다. 백동화나 은전는 뻔쩍하야 수중에서 찻기도 쉽고＜167＞ 소득도 만어 조와 하지만 銅貨는 여간 궁하지 안은 모양이다. 新嘉坡는 馬來반도 끗테 잇는 주위 수 십리 되는 소도이지만 동서양 교통의 咽喉이라 군사상 가치는 다시 더 말할 것 업고 무역항으로도 교통이 편한 고로 南洋의 중심도시가 되여 全南洋에서 산출하는 護謨와 椰子는 新嘉坡에서 집산된다. 馬支토인은 어대서 무엇을 하는지는 모르나 대 은행회사 갓튼 것은 서양인이고 기타 소상인과 부근 소농원은 전부 支那人이라 宛內支那內地나 별로 다를 것 업다. 土人은 여간 노동도 좀 하는 모양이나 극소수고 노동자들도 전부가 거의 支那人이다. 土人들의 거주를 보면 육지보다도 수변에 수각을 짓고 사는 것을 흔히 마니 볼 수 잇다.
깜숭한 얼골, 때군한 눈에 싸론이라는 통치마 갓튼 것을 바지 대신으로 입고 허리띄란 全南洋에 업는 고로 밧짝 염여 가지고 압흘 비틀어 안으로 꼬자둘 뿐이다. 상의는 와이사쓰 비스름한 너벌 너벌한 적삼이 남녀가 갓고 남자 만은 종주머니 갓튼 흑색 羽緞 모자를 쓰고 맨발에다 모양 낸 사람이랴야 스리퍼를 신엇슬 뿐이다. 남양에는 암만 부자라도 버선은 업는 모양이니 대체 남양어로 버선이란 명사의 유무도 의문이다. 암만 보아도 그들의 모양이 비활동적 인종이다. 정오서부터 오후 3,4시까지는 暑氣가 심하야 모든 활동기관이 일시 정지상태에 잇다가 4,5시경에 驟雨가 一過한 후면 凉氣가 生하야 초목까지도 회생하는 듯 하야 이 때부터 모든 활동이 다시 시작되요 시중이 벅적거린다. 일 업는 사람은 자동차로 해변과 椰子並木에 아스팔트 보도로 질주하면 참으로 爽快無雙하고 자동차의 가치도 더 알게 된다. 서간은 대체로 暑氣가 심하야 긴히 일 잇는 사람만 나오나 야간은 시원한 고로 전 시민이 다 박그로 나오는 듯 십다. 공원과 해안에 산보 객이 늘 繁한데 其中에는 白人, 黃人, 회색의 馬來인, 눈만 하야코 빤짝 빤짝하는 印度人등 각색인종이 다 모엿다. 東洋에 유명한 식물원이 當地에 잇다. 여긔는 모든 열대식물이 만은 중에 우리의 주목을 끄으는 것은 수백 척의 큰 藤덩굴, 旅人木이라고 芭蕉갓튼 입사구가 붓쳐살 갓치 버러지고 丈이 4,50尺에 이르는 것이다. 향기러운 고흔 꼿 피인 각종 난초와 기타 별별 기생식물이 무수히 잇다. 다음은 印度 칼카타로 가게 되여 新嘉坡를 출범하야 砲臺 가까이 잇는 新嘉坡 수도를 지나가자 右便에 돌출한 쓸쓸한 砂洲가 잇는대 이것이 곳 우리 亞細亞 최남단 뿔루岬으로 알고 해도를 살펴보니 북위 1도 16분이라. 우리 극동에 거주하는 사람으로 이 極南端을 볼 때에 일종의 이상한 감상이 업지 안터라.

말라카海峽
右便은 馬來半島이오. 左便은 스마드라島인 말라카 海峽을 항해 중에 日中 기온이 90도에서 나리지 안는다. 실상은 無風이지만 다라나는 배는 자기 속력에 상당한 바람이 잇셔 대단히 시원하다. 평온한 해상을 서늘하게 항해하니 納凉노리 갓다. 일몰 후 목욕하고 갑판에서 藤의자나 함목 우에서 둥글 *면에서의 풍랑의 고생도 다 잇는다. 해양의 장엄한 일출의 景보다 비장한 日沒美는 더욱 감상적이고 예술적?＜168＞이다. 더구나 이 常夏의 지방 말라카 海峽의 찌는 듯한 더위로 이러난 雲景은 여간 夏雲多峯은 훨신 지나 각종 物形도 갓고 山岳도 갓고 또 색채도 白雲만이 아니라 일몰 전후이면 담홍색도 되고 등황색도 되고 이름 모를 間色도 되여 하늘과 바다와 갓튼 빗도 되고 어느 때에는 무대의 배경처럼도 변하는 신비의 이 경치는 南洋중에서도 말라카 海峽이 제일이겟고, 이것의 일단이라도 표현할랴면 적어도 화가나 시인이 아니면 안되겟다. 또 이러한 구경을 하랴면 풍랑이 심한 해양의 險을 무릅스고 다니는 船人이 아니면 어려울거라 말라카 海峽을 다 지나고 듯기에도 무서운 印度洋으로 드러가니 기다리고 잇든 것 갓치 서남의 계절풍과 파도가 심하니 카타로 가는데는 파도는 뒤로 밀러 속력에는 큰 영향이 업스나 풍력은 항속을 減한 差의 微風이라. 찌는 듯 더위는 참 印度洋에 들어온 듯 십다.

인도 칼캇타
1600海里를 의외에 速하게 와서 早朝河口에 도달하야 보니 滔滔한 濁水는 수 십리 外까지 印度洋의 해수를 흐려 노앗더라. 하구에서 6,7시간 다시 溯航하야 인구 150만이라는 흑인의 대도시 칼카타에 드러왓다. 暑氣는 참 살인적이다. 호흡이 곤난하다. 나난 신가파에서 冷物을 과음하고 兼하야 暑症으로 출범이래 신음하야 칼카타 정박 중에는 입원치료 예정이엿다. 그러나 의사가 來診 후 권고하기를 근일 酷暑는 인도 50년來 初有의 酷炎이라 연일 병원에서 환자가 數十名式 暑氣로 사망하니 시중 의원보다 船內에서 치료하는 것이 조타하야 읏지 할 수 업시 그대로 좃찻다. 배는 船渠안으로 옴기여 매이니 바람은 조금도 업서 연기는 꼿꼿히 올라가 하늘을 찌를 듯 하고 熱熱한 태양은 선체를 달그니 난로 속에 드러안진 것 갓다. 기상대 발표에 기온이 110도! 참 듯지도 못하든 기온이다. 기대하든 구경도 못하고 병상에 누어 천명만 긔다렷다. 여간 氷塊, 電扇쭘으로는 暑氣를 緩和 식힐 수 업섯다. 양반은 못 살 곳이라 햇더니 참 當地에 잇는 인도 총독부는 일전에 하계피서지인 북방 히마라야 山麓지방으로 옴겨 갓다더라.
어느 날 아참 일출 전에 서늘한 틈을 타서 유명하다는 에든공원에 구경을 갓다. 椰子林은
물론이고 棕櫚並木道, 棕櫚竹의 並木 또는 數百本의 발이 달린 大榕樹, 其外 가진 花奔가 다 만히 잇다. 주위는 을마나 넓고 무슨 것이 다 잇는지 보행할 기력이 업서 뻔취에 힘업시 거터 안지니 발 밋헤 白孔雀과 나무 우에 이름 모를 새가 놀고 수풀 뒤로 멀리 인도 사원의 둥근 집웅 뽀쪽한 탑이 보일 때 녯날 솔로몬의 정원이 이랫섯나 하고 명상에 빠져인는 동안에 붉근 해가 東天으로 올라오자 暑氣가 심해간다. 거름을 억지로 길가까지 옴기여 마차를 불러 타고 배로 도라왓다. 시간이 아직 일러 상가에 문을 열지 안어 도로는 한산하고 大洋屋玄關마다 빈민의 노숙하는 참상도 가련하고 禁하지 안난 것도 이상하다. 河邊도로에 나오니 회교도들이 모이여 목욕을 하고 박수와 노래하며 일출에 예배하는 것도 奇觀이다.
하늘은 나를 살리시려고 인지 정박 3일 만에 降雨가 시작되니 退署가 되어 다소 원기가 회복되엿다. 어느 날 동물원을 구경＜169＞갓더니 다른 것은 특이한 것이 업스나 다만 爬蟲관이 잇서 가진 爬蟲과 蛇類에도 기둥 갓튼 굴근 배암, 배추버레빗 갓치 푸른 배암, 시시각각으로 변색하는 카메레온, 육지에 서식한다는 한간만한 거북이 사람 한둘 태우고 스침이 뚝 떼이고 엉금-하는 것도 奇觀이다. 놉흔 나무 우를 치어다 보니 솔개 갓튼 큰 박쥐들이 식커먹케 꺼구루 매달린 것도 可觀이다. 정박 중에 병으로 인하야 구경도 못하고 南阿經由南美亞爾然丁 수도 부에노스.아이레스府로 향하게 되엿다.

印度洋
爲先 다음 기항할 南阿 떠밴항까지 약 5천浬 서남풍의 印度洋을 종단하여야겟다. 출범한지 5,6일 후 어느 날 밤에 右便으로 紅光과 白光의 등대가 보이기 해도를 살피니 이것이 錫蘭島의 南端이엇다. 다시에 2,3일 후를 赤道 건너갈 때 赤道神에게 祭禮를 행하얏다. 赤道란 우리가 가상한 것이지만 이 선을 넘을 때에 거긔 어듸 무슨 선이 잇슬 듯 한게 아무것도 업고 黃海水나 다름엇시 편편한 것은 조금 섬섬한 눗김이 잇더라. 날과 밤으로 구름과 물을 벗하며 서남만 바라보고 다라나니 생활이 퍽 단조럽다. 인간 세상을 멀니 떠나 소식을 알지 못 하겟지만 문명의 이기 무선전신이 잇서 매일 독일 나웬局에서 방송하는 무선 신문이 일대 위안이다. 10여 일 후 어느 暗夜에 놉흔 山影이 수평선상에 낫타낫스니 이것이 佛領 모리셧스嶋이다. 2일 후에는 마다카스칼도의 南端을 右便으로 바라보며 간지 3일만에 南阿聯邦에 떠밴에 입항하얏다. 일주일 전까지도 伏의 炎熱이 드니 남반구로 나러온지 수일이 되매 기후가 아주 변하야 秋風이 냉랭하다.

南阿
떠밴市난 歐美 대도시와 갓치 굉장하다. 其中에 제일 기괴한 것은 일본에서 발명되엿다는 人力車가 東洋 외에 업는 줄 알엇더니 여기도 잇는대 놀난 것은 차체가 모다 큰 二人乘이고 車夫는 獰猛한 土人인 대머리에는 쇠뿔을 꼿고 새털과 방울을 석거달고 팔과 다리에는 채색으로 그린 것이 참으로 야릇하더라. 南阿 近洋에는 鯨群이 만어 떠밴에는 捕鯨會社가 잇서 매일 數雙의 捕鯨船이 출입한다. 껄고 온 어느 고래를 보면 맛치 두부를 수가락으로 떠낸 자리처럼 함박 갓튼 것으로 떠 내인 자리가 만키에 무러보니 끌고 오는 도중에 *(상어)에게 멕히인 자리라더라.
떠밴서 석탄을 실코 출범하야 阿弗利加 南岸을 지나 希望峯에 입항하엿다. 南米에는 석탄외 産出이 업서 멀리 남아에서나 미국서 수입하는 고로 엄청나게 高價이라 남미에 가는 기선은 대개 다시 대양을 횡단할 만치 석탄을 준비하고 가는 것이 보통이다. 希望峯에 일음을 들을 때마다 往昔葡萄牙人과 和蘭航海者들의 東洋航路開拓 당시의 苦心慘膽을 연상할 수 잇는 것은 시중에 잇는 一古井이 往來 船人들이 遠航에 생명으로 알고 길어 가는 井水이엿고 또 其 부근에 石碑들이 잇는 것은 지금 박물관에 보관 되여 잇는대 그것은 東洋으로 향하는 船人이 西洋으로 귀항하는 船人에게 자기들이 어느 때에 이것을 무사히 지나갓다는 것을 고국에 남어잇는 가족에게 전하야 달라는＜170＞ 부탁 편지?를 반드시 이 우물 압헤 오리라하고 두고 간 것들이라더라. 희망봉의 市街를 말하랴면 먼저 배산 테불마운텐을 말 아니 할 수 업다. 테불마운텐 즉 卓山은 해발 3500척으로 깍근 듯한 절벽으로 겨우 一便으로만 登山道가 잇슬 뿐이고 山頂은 卓上과 갓치 廣濶平坦함으로 이러한 이름이 생긴 것인대 엇지하야 이런 기이한 산이 생겻는지는 모르갯다. 또 卓山과 떠날 수 업는 관계인 卓布 테불클로스라고 하야 山頂만을 덥는 白雲이 잇다. 이것은 어느 節候에만 기후관계로 南太西洋의 습기가 산을 넘다가 기온이 다른 산악에 부듸처셔 白雲으로 변하는 것이라더라. 이 卓山麓에 잇는 小市街가 컵타운 즉 희망봉 市街이다.

켑타운 박물관에는 阿弗利加 각 인종의 표본과 개척이래 人跡未 到處에 秘藏되엿다든 가진 동식물 등과 至於大隕石, 화석들 다른데서 보지 못 할 진품이 만이 잇다. 또 켑타운 하면 금강석이 다량으로 생산하는 것을 연상하갯고 금강석하면 南阿 偉人 세실로-스卿을 이즐 수 업고 세실卿하면 그의 위업과 그의 유명한 유언 So little done, so much to do.(할 일은 만은데 한 일은 적다.)가 생각나니 아모 것도 못한 우리는 붓그러 죽겟다. 켑타운만 안니라 南阿 一般으로 東洋人 절대 배척이 심하야 까닭 업시 東洋人을 무시하는 것은 우리로서 대단히 불유쾌하다.

南太西洋
켑타운에서 燃料炭을 적재하고 一路西으로 南太西洋을 횡단한다. 때 8월 인대 남반구에는＜171＞ 冬節이라 남극으로부터 오는 烈寒風과 南太西洋 특유의 三角波는 갑판을 넘어뛰고 때로 연통으로 물이 들어오기까지 한다. 어느 날 맹렬한 풍랑에 舵機를 파손하야 一書 夜間漂迫하며 결사적으로 수리를 하야 무사히 항해를 계속하게 되엿다.

南美부에노스아이레스
약 4천리를 이십 여일 만에 겨우 건너 배는 남미의 대하 리오라.플라타(서반아어로 銀河의 意)에 着하야 水先案內人을 來船식히여 가지고 수 시간만에 부에노스·아이례스(淸澄한 공기)에 投錨하얏다. 항구의 시설과 市街의 화려하고 광대한 것이 남미에 제일이오 세계에도 유수하다는 것이 사실 갓다. 남미에 유일한 지하철도 아스팔드의 大街路와 羅典민족의 特風인 기념비와 동상과 분수는 거리거리에 즐비하다. 其中에도 自由街와 獨立街의 화려와 남미 위인이오 亞爾然丁建國祖인 싼·말틴 장군의 동상과 독립기념비 갓튼 것은 구미에도 드물게 굉장하다. 시골에는 산도 언덕도 보이지 안는 無邊廣大한 농장과 목장이다. 亞爾然丁뿐만 아니라 全南米는 기후풍토가 農牧에 적당하야 그 생산품은 歐洲人을 살리나 礦物 중에도 第一 석탄과 철의 産出이 全無하야 공업이란 조곰도 발달치 못 하야 일용품 전부를 歐米와 日本서까지 수입하는 관계상 물가가 아마 세계서 제일 빗싸겟다. 민간에는 부자가 만으나 정부는 빈곤하야 무에든지 印紙를 붓처 팔고 또 국가가 富籤를 발행하야 매일 新表의 발행과 발표이다. 4,5원의 표로 일등을 타면 3,4십 만원이라니 참 욕심도 나는걸 그터나 발행번호를 보면 A15만원XX호 칠만X호 그러면 수백 만 호 갓트니 너무도 허무하다. 富籤외에 大小 競馬가 매 주일에도 2,3차 式이다. 南米人들은 모다 富籤을 잘들 사니 그는 射幸心이 만은지 혹은 국민의 의무로 사는지 모르겟다. 우리 배는 歐洲人의 양식 小麥을 실을 준비를 하고 잇다.

氷山衝突이야기
金東赫

속담에 일으기를 소징나는데 병아리 우는 소리만 들어도 적윽히 나흐다는 말이 잇다. 근일 한 난계의 수은주가 점점 昇騰하느니 만콤 일기가 심히 더워서 기막힐 지경이다. 배 곱흔데는 밥이 약이오 더운데는 시원한 것이 약이다. 그럼으로 시원한 것 중에 가장 시원한 어름 어름 중에도 가장 크고 끔직한 덩어리의 어름, 즉 氷山의 이야기나 하나 들녀드려서 이와 갓 치 찌는 더위의 얼마콤이라도 減하여 볼가 한다.
산이라 하면 흙으로 되엿거나 혹은 돌로 되엿거니 생각한다. 물론 土山이 잇고 石山이 잇다. 그러나 이외에 氷山이라 하는 것도 잇다. 빙산이라 하는 것은 氷河가＜172＞ 海中에 유입할
시에 다수한 氷塊로 분단 되여 해상에 浮漂하는 것을 가르친 말이다. 그럼으로 빙산을 이야기하자면 빙산의 出生源 되는 빙하를 먼저 설명하지 안코는 빙산을 이야기하기 어려움으로 빙하를 먼저 이야기 하고저 한다.
빙하 산은 놉흘수록 지구는 南北兩極에 갓가울 수록 기온이 次第로 低下하야 일년간에 降下하는 雪의 양이 상당히 多하야 冬節은 물론 夏節이라도 용해치 안코 年年 厚를 增하나니 이것을 소위 萬年雪이라 하며 만년설의 下端을 雪線이라 칭한다. 此 雪線 以上의 地에는 寒 帶 지방은 몰론이오 溫帶 又는 熱帶일지라도 萬古不滅의 萬年雪이 잇서 자기의 압력으로 말미암아 凝結하야 점차 견고한 大氷塊를 成한 후에 산악의 斜面을 流下하야 점차 계곡으로 이동한다. 此 상태가 흡사히 河水의 流下함과 방불함으로 氷河라 名을 付하엿다.
빙하의 作用. 빙하는 경사면을 서서히 하강함으로 此로 인하야 地殼에 종 종의 특별한 形을 成하는 일이 잇스니 如此한 작용을 빙하작용이라 云한다. 하수, 해수, 대기의 작용과 갓치 浸蝕운반, 堆積의 三作用을 행한다.
빙하의 운동. 빙하의 운동의 속도는 傾斜의 緩急, 兩崖의 굴곡, 계곡의 廣狹 등으로 인하야 차이를 生하나 대체로는 심히 遲緩하야 빙하가 운동하는지 안이 하는지 얼는 알기가 용이하지 안타. 그러나 夏節 중에 가장 속할 時는 一晝夜에 2척, 冬節 중에는 1척 내외로 진행하야 1년 간의 속도가 평균 5백 척 가량이나 된다고들 말하다. 某氏가 몽뿔랑(Mont Blande)산에 登한 際에 案內의 遺失한 梯子와 기타 식품을 수 십 년 후 4천 米나 되는 하류에서 발견하엿다고 하는 말을 들으면 빙하의 운동하는 것은 명확한 사실이다.
빙하운동의 理. 빙하가 액체적 운동을 行함은 두 가지의 이유가 잇다. 즉 氷塊가 受하는 高壓과 融解水의 再結氷으로 因함이다. 高壓下에 有한 氷이 粘氣가 有한 물질과 如히 流함은 물리학상 명백한 사실이다. 此를 실험에 徵할진대 금속제의 圓筒 중에 氷을 充하고 此에 數기압을 가하면 원통의 小孔으로 飴狀을 成한 氷의 流出함을 볼 수가 잇다. 如此히 되는 所以는 두 가지의 이유가 잇다.
1. 氷은 압력으로 말미암아 數多의 小片으로 破碎되야 상호간에 위치를 변할 뿐만 안니라 여하한 形이라도 成할 수 잇는 事
2. 氷은 압력으로 말미암아 일부 융해하야 水가 되면 此 水가 각 氷片간을 充하야 빙괴로 하야곰 動하기 용이케 하는 事
빙산, 먼저 이야기한 것과 갓치 빙하가 海水에 流入하면 破碎되야 氷塊를 成하고 海上에 浮流하야 소위 氷山을 생성한다. 빙산은 간혹 其直徑이 數里에 及하며 高가 해발 百米 이상에 달하야 완연히 海中一小山의 觀을 일우고 잇다. 然한대 수면 상에 現한 부분은 수중에 沈한 부분의 약 8분지 1에 불과하다.
빙산의 작용. 빙산은 흔히 거대한 巖塊를 載하고 원거리까지 운반하다가 低緯度 지방에 至하면 융해하는 고로 침적 물로 말미암아 海를 淺케하는 일이 잇스니 北米＜173＞늬우파운드랜드(New Foundland) 근해에 有한 淺瀨등은 실로 如此히 成한 것이다. 빙산의 생성설, 빙하가  如何히 빙산을 생성하엿나 하는데 관하야 三說이 有하니 즉 浸蝕說, 重量설, 浮力설이 시라.
1. 浸蝕說. 빙하가 海中에 유입할 時는 해수의 浸蝕으로 말미암아 분단되야 빙산괴를 成한다 함.
2. 重量說. 빙하가 海中에 유입할 時는 빙하 자신의 중량으로 말미암아 본체로부터 분리되야 빙산괴를 成한다 함.
3. 浮力說. 빙하가 海中에 유입할 時는 浮하는 고로 그 부력에 의하야 본체로 부터 분단되야 빙산괴를 成한다 함.
빙산의 분포. 빙산의 가쟝 만흔 곳은 대서양 북부인데 그린랜드(Green land)의 서방 빠핀랜드(Baffin Land)만으로부터 남하하야 늬우파운드랜드 沖에 달하기까지가 最多하며 간혹 인도의 큐바島(Cuba)에까지 달하는 예도 잇다. 대개 북태평양의 서부에는 海氷의 流下함을 볼 수 잇스나 북태평양의 東岸에는 빙산이 전혀 업다. 또는 북극 지방으로부터 來하는 빙산의 形은 蛾蛾한 尖峰을 有하엿스나 남극지방으로부터 유래하는 것은 표면이 평탄하고 측벽이 백 척 내지 백 오십 척의 절벽을 成하고 남극대륙의 沿岸 一面을 漂游한다.
빙산의 충돌. 빙산은 洋流에 從하야 流動하다가 저위도 지방에 來하면 붕괴한다. 그럼으로 만일 빙산이 붕괴한다 하면 大波를 捲起하고 기선을 渦中에 투입하는 예가 잇다. 彼英船 타이타닉호(Titanic)가 1912년 4월 16일 늬우파운드랜드에서 조난을 당한 것은 此例이다. 此로 항해자는 심히 빙산의 접근함을 두려워하며 항상 此를 경계한다. 대개 빙산이 접근할 時는 온도가 급강하고 濃霧가 돌연히 발생함으로 此로써 항해자는 빙산이 접근하야 來함을 알고 미리 針路를 轉하야 피한다.＜174＞
＜165-174＞