별건곤第73號
1934년 06월 01일
間島共産黨事件活動裏面記 (Secret Record of the Activities of the Gando Communist Party Incident)
東亞日報 金正實
회고·수기 (Memoir/Personal Account)

"Secret Record of the Activities of the Gando Communist Party Incident"
						Dong-A Ilbo, Kim Jeong-sil

"The Beginning"

The day I received the order to go to Gando (間島) was September 14th.

"Starting with the large-scale riot that broke out around Gando on May 31st, Showa 5, followed by the Autumn Harvest Riot (秋收暴動), the OO Commemoration Riot, the Guangdong OO Commemoration Riot (廣東OO記念暴動), etc., the so-called Gando Communist Party Incident, consisting of approximately 100 large and small incidents, resulted in the arrest of 264 defendants who were put on trial at the newly built grand courtroom of the Gyeongseong District Court. This is a major event in the history of trials, not only in Japan but also worldwide, in terms of both quantity and quality.
The purpose of this investigation is: 1. The cause of the riots, 2. The circumstances of the arrests, 3. The family situation of the arrested, 4. The situation after the acquittal of those found not guilty, 5. Collection of photos of related people and buildings/locations, 6. A glimpse into the ideological circles of Gando afterwards."

With the above purposes in mind, and with a five-day journey planned, when I boarded the Gyeongseong-bound express train to Sangsambong at Cheongnyangri Station at 5:25 PM, the sun was about to set.

Carrying my bag, I entered the second-class car and unexpectedly met Mr. Eo, a colleague from "Jungang (中央)," in an empty seat. Shushing, even while going on a business trip, I had to keep it a secret in this new Gando. I immediately thought, "Aha! Mr. Eo is also heading to Gando." Mr. Eo, equally surprised to see me, greeted me happily, and we exchanged our respective destinations.

When I learned that Mr. Eo was responsible for writing about the Yongheung Farmers' Union Incident Trial (永興農民組合事件公判記事) held at the Hamheung Court, I felt no need to hide my trip to Gando even from my close friend Mr. Eo.

I vaguely told him that the company had ordered me to rest at Jureul Hot Springs (朱乙溫泉) for 5 or 6 days before the trial, and I sat down. However, being someone who can't sit still when traveling far, I was restless and uneasy.

I wondered how this trip would turn out. I had been repeatedly warned to be especially careful during the journey and while gathering information, but with my curious and ambitious nature, even though I wouldn't actually face the terrifying flames in this wide world, I had a strong urge to experience something close to it. However, there were many things to worry about.

Looking back, I would dismiss it as nothing, but at the time, the most important thing was whether I would return unharmed, and the second concern was whether I could gather materials that would be worthwhile and not embarrassing as a journalist.

Things seemed to be going awry. A train derailment on the Gyeongwon Line completely disrupted the schedule. We were delayed for an hour or two at Yeoncheon, and then at Daegwangri, we were told that there was a derailment ahead.

Many people besides us were grumbling as they walked. I thought, "Even if I go to Gando, I can't miss this," and investigated and wrote it down for the telegram paper. However, train connections were not easily made. With an anxious heart, I arrived at Cheorwon at 11:30 PM. It was too late for telegram service, and no matter how hard I knocked on the door of the nearby post office, there was no response. Groaning, I boarded the northbound train.

Whether it was dawn or morning, I woke up to find that we had passed the Hamheung Station, where Mr. Eo was getting off. The feeling of seeing the morning sun sparsely coloring the white sand and pine forests and rising redly over the East Sea would have made me think of poetry and whistle songs, feeling the beauty of Gwanbuk, if I had been freer. However, it was a pity. A heavy burden pressed down on my mind, pulling it far away to the vast Manchurian plains.

"Night in Sangsambong (上三峰)"

I didn't want to listen to the conductor's suggestion to stay overnight in Hoeryeong and take the first train in the morning. As the train was delayed, I couldn't match the morning and lunch times, and since it wasn't a direct train, the dining car wasn't connected. The station bento, which had only two or three servings for the few customers, was not enough. After refusing the conductor's repeated offers to order for me, I finally got a bento, which was neither breakfast nor lunch, after 5 PM. I even thought that things were not going well.

After passing Hoeryeong, darkness covered the mountains and valleys. As the train struggled to climb the Taeryeong, I felt a chill, fearing that dozens of bandits would jump out and attack. In fact, seeing the small stations in the mountains trembling in the early autumn wind, and the menacing sight of six-hole cannons pointed at us, made me feel even more uneasy. The conductor, who had changed, seemed to be trying to comfort the only passenger in the second-class car, by giving me statistics from the previous year, telling me that armed groups like bandits and OO groups had appeared at the stations we had just passed or attacked the train on the upcoming hills. I couldn't bear to look at his face, which clearly didn't realize how scared I was. The darkness grew deeper, and the wind shaking the reeds and reeds was not a pleasant sound for a traveler passing through the dark mountains.

After a while, as we passed over a hill, a white light flashed and rushed towards us. My hair stood on end, and I learned that it was the upper reaches of the Duman River (豆滿江). I felt a strange sense of sentiment that I had finally reached the border and that this was the Duman River I had seen in textbooks.

I couldn't even tell where anything was, but I got off at Sangsambong. The feeling of walking the streets of a border town and dreaming of experiencing a border night was something only I could see. I was tired from the train ride, but I couldn't fall asleep easily. I heard that smuggling along the Amnok River (鴨綠江) prolonged the lives of poor people, and it was no different here. The owner of this Sambong Inn also told me stories of attacks that had been passed down since ancient times as a local specialty. Then, he locked the shutters and curled up like a shrimp, hoping to fall asleep. But sleep moved further away the more I tried.

There was no sound, like a heavy silence brought by someone trying to cause an incident. Only the sound of the wind beat against the windows and passed by. I wished the border would welcome those trying to cross it more gently, but I could sufficiently sense the rough scent of the northern Manchurian plains even in this growling wind.

"The Basement of the Consulate"

I needed to get photos of the 264 defendants. They would be at the consulate. As soon as I met Branch Manager Han in Yongjeong, I asked him about it. Since I thought things would go wrong if this didn't work out, I insisted on going to the consulate anyway.

Knowing it would be somewhat difficult, and being aware of the importance of my mission, I had to be careful not to offend anyone. Fortunately, they agreed. I was overjoyed to learn that I could get photos of over 100 people. I thought, "I've come all this way to this foreign land for this case, so I'll gather as much material as I can."

I asked about the circumstances of the arrests, the methods used by the bandits, the contacts, and the course of escalation. Then, I memorized and wrote down as much as I could.

I borrowed the photo album. With the support of a photo studio, I entered the consulate's basement, which was being used as a darkroom. Once the door was locked, there would be no other way out. The thick iron bars and the heavy silence in the dark light were like a scene from a cave novel.

I heard that there were about 1,200 people at the time of the arrests, so they had to be transported in trucks. I thought that many people must have stayed in this room. I felt the atmosphere of Gando even here. As I developed the photos one by one, the night was restless but also filled with curiosity. My mind was constantly churning. I wondered if I would be trapped here again after safely crossing the border.

On this day, they brought in two or three rough-looking people. I don't know what they were doing or why they were called in, but it was clear that they had very gruff personalities.

I thought about the time when they burned and destroyed the Yongjeong, Gukjageori, and Nodogou electric companies, iron bridges, schools, and civic associations. Then, the Chinese soldiers with swords attached to the ends of their guns stared intently at the passersby, as if they were superiors, which made me feel uneasy. Moreover, walking the streets at night evoked the feeling of a war zone. "That house over there was attacked. That window is where the bomb hit. That is the Hailan River Iron Bridge (海蘭江鐵橋)." <15>

"They gathered here and planned the attack on Yongjeong and plotted the arson," I heard Mr. Han say, listening to the information coming into the consulate. Whenever I entered the cave-like basement to see how the photos were coming along, my hair would stand on end.

"Nepaegou (來皮溝) Apmaeul"

I rented a car and set off with the photography team. The millet and sorghum were announcing a bountiful harvest along with the yellowed rice ears, but the faces of the Huiren (好人) people being transported by the Gando specialty wagons did not seem friendly at all. I thought, "Those people must be bullying our compatriots by exploiting them." I also had the unfounded fear that they might attack our group if they saw us. I went to Biaam Village (琵岩村), where the most people had been arrested, and asked about the situation. Their so-called underground movement, which was in fact a clandestine movement, sounded very strange to me.

"That is where the 10-odd members of the police patrol (領警) kept watch all night."

"Right there, on the hill in front of that village, is where they dug an underground tunnel and hid, only to be discovered by the morning cooking smoke and arrested."

Hearing these words, it seemed as if the past of the seemingly peaceful autumn countryside was appearing as a grim ghost. As I reminisced about the times of chasing and being chased, hiding and being hidden, people who had sent their children to faraway lands or were thinking of their husbands in prison gathered around, hoping to hear news from Seoul.

The car rattled along the mountainside road. Pointing to the mud walls that seemed to enclose the road, it was said that the houses of the local tyrants (土豪) had been burned down. The foreign crowd driving pigs past the Guksadang (國師堂) seemed to be telling the story of that time.

A sign and a barbed wire fence stood by the roadside. It was said to be a place to commemorate the spirits of soldiers who were massacred in the war, the "Three Heroes." Recalling the time when the surrounding area was a sea of fire and the sounds of shelling and gunfire were rampant, I wondered again if such a disaster would ever visit this land again.

Two military and police cars carrying soldiers sped north along our road towards Yeonkil. I heard that a five-man armed bandit group had threatened people with guns and robbed them of their belongings, and they were being dispatched to the scene, which was about 20 li away. Hearing this, I felt dizzy, but as a journalist, I also thought about chasing after them. However, since my original mission was different, I continued on my way.

Not long ago, the driver had been driving customers in this very car when, about 10 li from Nodogou, he saw three carts full of flour being held by one person while 5 or 6 others were carrying the flour into the mountains. He felt his hands go weak and his mind go blank. However, seeing the car approaching, he realized that the military and police had heard the news and were coming with weapons, so he ran into the mountains, saving the lives of the three people and the carts. He said that we would soon see the place. It seemed that we were entering an increasingly dangerous area.

Trees had been cut down in the mountains and sorghum could not be planted in the fields, so there were not many secluded places. However, near the shrine, there were 7 or 8 groups of 잡나무 trees standing and swaying in the wind, which made me feel uneasy even though I was already nervous.

After passing 2 Dogou and 3 Dogou, I saw Nepaegou in the distance. It was said to be the location of the general headquarters that had directed the large and small-scale riots in the Donghae region until the very end. They had dug tunnels underground, printed leaflets using mimeograph (膽寫版), received information from various places, made contact, and carried out various secret plots. I was in a hurry to go there, and the faces of my companions turned pale.

I went to see the closest place, the so-called first clandestine movement site. The tunnel, which opened to the north and faced east, was spacious enough to accommodate 7 or 8 people. With just a door, it could be cleverly hidden from external traffic. It still gave the feeling that someone might jump out at any moment. The gathered residents each told their stories of near-death experiences. I didn't want to stay any longer.

More than half of Apmaeul was burned down, and many people died. Even though this was not the center of the disaster, it was said to be quite significant. It was said that it was common for passersby to be kidnapped these days, and I was eager to retreat rather than go any further. That is the Nepaegou mountain valley. It was said that when the trained bandits attacked with clubs (棍椊), kerosene, pistols, axes, and spears, the self-defense forces and policemen fought back, turning the area into a battlefield. The men and women who had fled at that time barely escaped with their lives, and even now, they have come back to temporarily settle down and preserve their lives.

There were countless people who lost their sons and whose fathers burned to death. Even these days, they prepare to flee at night, lock their doors, and curl up like shrimp. <16> The courage of these people who were pioneering a lifeline in this foreign land was admirable.

"Duman River Ferry"

I heard information coming into the consulate that new movements were taking place to cause disturbances in commemoration of the 2nd anniversary of the Manchurian Incident. It was reported that two armed communist bandits (共비) threatened passengers at the Duman River ferry and shot and killed a policeman before disappearing into the mountains. This was the news on the way back. The incidents happening in front, behind, left, and right were not reassuring. I had collected materials from various places and had to inform the readers of what I had seen and heard. Every day felt like three autumns, and the question was whether I would be able to overcome these difficulties.

I didn't want to be escorted by protective soldiers. I thought that even if something unfortunate happened, I could gather more important materials if I survived, so I suppressed my fear and decided to move forward. I visited Gukjageori and politely declined the recommendation to see Huimaktong (灰幕洞), the new international city, and left Yongjeong by car.

My worry was whether the materials I had collected would be confiscated during the customs inspection. I had photos and negatives. I also had diagrams and handwriting samples. If I lost these, it would be as good as losing more than half of my purpose, even if I survived. I had ten packs of cigarettes confiscated, but that wasn't a problem. The customs inspection was indeed strict.

However, from here, the extraordinary vigilance of the Korean police began. After the armed group had passed, they arbitrarily searched the bodies of the passersby one by one. I vaguely explained that I had come from Gyeongseong and that I was investigating the incident, referring to the story of the court, and barely managed to get through.

As I boarded the eastbound train at Sangsambong at 5 PM, it all felt like a bad dream. I seemed to see the clear blue cliffs of Sambang, and I got off at Cheongnyangri. It was noon on the 20th. <17>

**Named Entities**

間島	Gando
昭和	Shōwa
秋收暴動	Ch'usu Podong
廣東	Kwangtung
京城地方法院	Kyŏngsŏng Chibang Pŏbwŏn
魚君	Ŏ-kun
中央	Chungang
咸興法院	Hamhŭng Pŏbwŏn
永興農民組合事件公判記事	Yŏnghŭng Nongmin Chohap Sagŏn Kongp'an Kisa
朱乙溫泉	Chuŭl Onch'ŏn
京元線	Kyŏngwŏn Sŏn
漣川	Yŏnch'ŏn
大光里	Taegwangni
鐵原	Ch'ŏrwŏn
關北	Kwanbuk
上三峰	Sangsambong
會寧	Hoeryŏng
泰嶺	T'aeryŏng
豆滿江	Tuman-gang
龍井	Yongjŏng
韓君	Han-kun
琵岩村	Piam-ch'on
天涯一方	Ch'ŏn'ya Ilbang
國師堂	Kuksadang
三勇士	Sam Yongsa
老道溝	Nodogou
內皮溝	Naep'igou
東亞日報	Tong-A Ilbo
局子街	Kukchagŏri
海蘭江鐵橋	Haeran-gang Ch'ŏlgyo
延吉	Yŏnkil
新與國際都市 灰幕洞	Sin'yŏ Kukche Tosi Hwimak-tong
鴨綠江	Amnok-kang
淸凉里	Ch'ŏngnyangni



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤제73호
발행일	1934년 06월 01일
기사제목	間島共産黨事件活動裏面記
필자	東亞日報 金正實
기사형태	회고·수기

間島共産黨事件活動裏面記
						東亞日報 金正實
『發端』
간도(間島) 갓다 오라는 명령을 밧은 날이 9월 14일이다.
「昭和 5년 5월 31일을 긔하야 간도일대를 중심으로 발발된 대폭동의 뒤를 이어 일어난 秋收暴動, OO기념폭동 廣東OO記念暴動 등 대소 100회의 소위 간도 공산당 사건으로 피검되여 경성지방법원 신축 대법정에서 264명의 피고가 공판을 밧게 된 것은 량과 질로 보아 일본은 물론 세게 공판사상에도 그 류례를 구하기 어려울 만치 대사건이다.
1. 폭동의 원인, 2. 피검상황, 3. 피검자의 가족상황, 4. 免訴者의 그후 상황, 5. 관계인물 및 건물장소사진수집, 6. 그후 간도사상계의 一瞥
등의 조사를 목적하고」
라는 목적아래 5일 이라는 려정을 가지고 오후 5시 25분 경성발 상삼봉행 급행열차를 청량리역에서 탓을 때에는 해가 서산을 넘으려는 때이엇다.
가방을 들고 2등차실로 들어서자 텅비인 좌석에서 뜻박게 동업 「中央」의 魚君을 맛낫다. 쉬쉬하고 출장은 가면서도 비밀을 지키어야 하는 新間道에 잇서서 나는 직각적으로 「올치! 魚君도 역시 간도행이로구나.」 하엿다. 魚君 역시 나를 맛난 것이 의외엿던지 반갑게 맛어 한 자리에서 소정의 목적지를 서로 교환하엿다.
魚君의 행정이 咸興法院에서 열리는 永興農民組合事件公判記事를 쓸 책임을 지고 함흥까지인 것을 알때에 나는 친한 魚君에게까지 나의 간도행을 숨길 필요를 늣겻섯다.
공판을 압두고 社에서 朱乙溫泉에 5, 6일 정량하고 오라는 팔자 조흔 려행이라는 어물럭한 것으로 당장을 흐리고는 자리에 안즈나 원래 먼 곳에 가는 맘 갈아 안지 못하는 사람이고 보매 좌불안석격으로 가슴은 잠잠할 수 업섯다.
이 걸음이 어떳케 되나. 가는 길에나 답사하는 동안에도 몸을 특별히 조심하라는 재삼 당부를 들엇지마는 호긔심과 욕심이 가득찬 성미라 그래도 넓은 세게에 가서 무시무시한 불콩알떼를 실지로 당하지는 못할지언정 실감에 가까운 것은 좀 상미해 보앗스면 하는 충동이 가슴에서 치밀어 오르기는 하지마는 염려되는 것은 기실 한둘 이 아니엇다.
지내 놋코 보매 그 까짓것 하는 소리를 공중에다 방송을 하지마는 당한 그때는 까마득한 것이 첫재 몸이 완전해 가지고 돌아올지가 문제고, 둘재로는 신문으로서 부끄럽지 안코 보람이 잇슴즉한 재료를 구해올지가 의문이다.
일은 고약하게 되는 모양이다. 마침 京元線에 기차 탈선으로 시간은 예정이 전부 꺼꾸로 되고 말지경이다. 漣川서 한 두시간 지체하고는 大光里에 다여서는 압헤 탈선 현장이 잇다 한다.
터벅터벅 걸어가면서 두덜거리는 사람은 버단 우리뿐 안이라. 간도는 갈망정 이것도 그대로 놋칠 것은 업다하고 조사해 가지고서 전보지에다 썻섯다. 그러나 기차 련락은 그리 쉽게 되지 안엇다. 안타가운 가슴으로 鐵原에 다이매 발서 11시 반이다. 전보 취급시간이 느젓고 부근에 우편소문을 부서저라 하고 두들겨도 종무소식이라. 끙끙 알으면서 北行車에 몸을 실엇다.
새벽인지 아츰인지 자다가 일어나매 魚君이 나리는 함흥역을 지난다. 아침해가 드문드문 선 白沙에 松林 사이로 동해에 붉게 물들이고 돗아 오르는 것을 보는 느낌은 만일에 내가 좀더 자유스러웟더라면 시를 생각하고 휘파람＜14＞ 노래를 부르면서 關北의 정취를 느꼇슬 것이나 유감이다. 솟뚜껑가티 나려 누르는 짐이 맘을 끄을고 멀리 曠野 만주벌로 옴기게 한다.

『上三峰의 밤』
會寧서 자고 아침 첫차 車를 타는 것이 낫다는 차장의 말을 듯고 십지 안엇다. 기차가 연착되고 보매 아침 시간과 점심시간을 마추지 못하고 또 직행이 아니라서 식당차가 련락되지 안코 보매 그리 손님만치 안턴 驛벤도 파리들의 두서너 그릇 밧게 안되는 것으로는 도저히 세음을 잡을 수업서 주문해 주마고 두 번 세 번 명언하던 車掌의 말을 밀다가 오후 5시 지나서 겨우 아침인지 점심인지 모르는 벤도 한그릇을 차지 하엿으니 일이 안되는 판이로구나 하는 생각까지 해 보앗섯다.
會寧을 지나서는 어둠이 산과 골작을 덥는데 泰嶺을 허덕이면서 숨차하는 기차에 저기에서 바로 몃 십 명의 馬賊團이 뛰어나와 달여오지나 안을가 해서 소름이 쪽 끼친다. 사실 산간에 조그만한 역들이 첫 가을 찬바람에 올올 떨고 잇는 것을 볼적이나 무시무시한 경관의 6穴砲 겨누고선 서슬에 더한층 선듯해 진다. 車掌이 바뀌이더니 자긔 깐은 2등차실에 하나 뿐인 손나를 위로하여 주노라는 것인지 작년 재작년 통계까지 주어대가면서 마적단이니 OO단이니 하는 무장단들이 바로 지내온 역에 나타낫다 거니 압프로 오는 고개에서 차를 습격햇다거니 하는 바람에 눈치챌 줄 모르는 이 사람의 얼굴을 나는 참아 바라볼 수도 업섯다. 어둠은 점점 더해가고 새대와 갈입흘 뒤흔드는 바람이 캄캄한 산간을 지내가는 길손에게는 결코 조흔 소리가 되지 못햇다.
조곰 지나서는 고개를 넘는지 번적하며 힌빗치 자리를 편듯이 겻흐로 달겨 든다. 머리가 쭈빗해지면서 알어보니 豆滿江의 上流라 한다. 새삼스럽게 국경에 이르럿는가. 교과서에서 보던 두만강이란 이것인가 하는 사랑스런 생각이 떠오름을 느끼엇다.
어데가 어데인지 분간조차 할수 업는데 上三奉이라니 나렷다. 국경의 거리를 거니는 맘과 국경의 밤을 느끼는 꿈은 나만이 보앗다. 기차에 시달려서 피곤도 하련마는 잠이 잘 오지 안엇다. 鴨綠江을 끼고서 밀수입출이 가난한 사람들의 생명을 연장시킨다더니 여기도 다름이 업다는 소리다. 이 三峰旅館 주인도 이 골의 명물로서 일즉부터 전해 오는 습격당한 이야기를 들려주엇다. 그러고는 혼자 덧문을 잠그고서 몸을 새우 등갓치 꼬부리고서 잠들기를 바랏다. 그러나 잠은 힘쓰는데 반비레격으로 더 멀어저 갓다.
무슨 사변을 일으키려는 압잡이로 오는 무거운 침묵 갓치 아무런 소리도 들리지 안헛다. 바람소리만이 창문을 두들기고 진간다. 좀더 부드럽게 국경을 넘을려는 사람을 접해 주련만은 북만벌의 거친 냄새는 이 으릉거리는 바람에서도 넉넉이 짐작할 수가 잇섯다.

『領事館의 地下室』
264명의 피고의 사진을 구해야 한다. 영사관에는 잇을 것이다. 龍井 나려서는 지국장 韓군을 맛나던 길로 곳 물엇‹¤. 이게 만일에 뜻대로 되지 못한다면 일이 글럿다는 생각을 하엿슴으로 좌우간 영사관에 차저가 보라고 주장을 세웟다.
좀 까다로운 것으로 알엇기에 나역시 중임을 지고간 만큼 호의에 거실닐까하고 조심하는 수밧게 업섯다. 마참 승락은 낫다. 100여 명의 사진을 구할 수 잇다는 것을 알 적에 적지 안은 기쁨이 낫다. 천리 이역에 이 사건을 위해서 일부러 왓스니 재료를 모을 수 잇는데 까지 모아보자 하얏다.
피검 당시의 상황은 물론 공비들이 활동하던 방법, 련락, 격화해진 경로 등을 물엇섯다. 그러고는 머리에 색이고 긔억할 수 잇는 데까지 긔사(記寫)햇섯다.
寫眞臺帳을 빌렷다. 사진관의 후원을 어더 암실로 쓸 수 잇게 까지된 영사관 지하실에로 들어갓다. 콱하고 잠그는 날이면 고흔이 되엿지 별도리가 업슬 것은 더 말할 것이 업다. 굵은 쇠창살이 덜컥하고 다치는 문과 컴컴한 빗에 무거운 침묵 마치 암굴고에 나오는 장면 갓햇다.
당시 검거할 때에는 1,200여 명이엇섯다니 트랙으로 실어 다 나르는 판에 이 방에서도 여러 사람이 지냇슬 것으로 생각이 낫다. 여기서도 間島긔분이 난다. 한 장 두 장 박는 동안에 밤은 초조하면서도 호긔심에 움즈겻다. 맘은 쉴새업시 물결치고 잇섯다. 국경은 무사히 넘엇으나 여기서 다시 한번 채워지면 그만인가 하는 생각도 낫섯다.
이 날도 험상 굿은 사람을 두서넛 다려 왓다. 그들이 무엇을 하다가 불려 왓는지는 모르지마는 매우 껄껄하고 거치른 성격을 가질 것만은 더 말할 것 업다.
龍井, 局子街, 老道溝 - 電燈公司, 鐵橋, 학교, 民會를 불질르고 파괴하던 당시를 생각하여 보앗다. 그러고는 총 끗에 칼을 꼬츤 중국병장이 지나가는 사람을 상관 갓치 보아서 그런지 뚤어지게 보는 것이 어쩐지 조치 못하였다. 더욱이 밤거리를 거닐면서 마다치면 전선에서 보는 처참한 늣김을 일으킨다. 습격당하던 집이 바로 저 집입니다. 저기 들창이 그 폭탄 맛은 자리입니다. 海蘭江鐵橋라는 것은 저것입니다.＜15＞
여긔서 모여서 龍井습격을 계획하엿고 불지를 꾀를 내엿더라오」 하는 韓군의 말을 듯고 영사관으로 들어오는 정보를 들으며서 사진이 어찌되엇나 하고 굴안갓튼 지하실에로 들어가면 머리 끗이 하늘을 가르치곤 햇섯다.

『來皮溝 압마을』
자동차 한대를 세내가지고 사진반과 한가지로 출발하엿다. 서속과 기장들이 누러케 된 벼이삭과 함께 풍년임을 고하고 잇는데 간도명물로 보이는 마차에 실려 가고 오는 호인들의 얼굴에는 하나도 정든 맛이 떠오르지 안엇다. 저 무리들이 터세를 하고서 우리네 동포를 못살게 굴엇거니 하는 생각도 떠오르나 저들이 만일에 우리 일행을 보고서 덤벼들면 어쩌나 하는 어림 업는 생각도 해 보앗다. 琵岩村에서 제일 만히 부뜰려 갓다기로 차저 단이면서 정황을 물엇다. 그들의 잠행운동을 하던 이른바 사실상의 지하운동은 나에게 이양(異樣)의 소리가 되엇슴은 물론이다.
「저기가 領警 단원 10여 명이 밤을 새이면서 파수 보던 곳이오.」
「바로 저마을 압 언덕진데가 지하굴을 파고 잠복햇다가 아침 김연기로 발각되여 체포되던 지점입니다.」
하는 소리를 듯고보매 평화한 듯한 가을별에 혀선 농촌의 과거가 험상 굿은 얼골로 환영을 보이는 것 갓다. 쫏고 쫏기고 숨고 숨기고 하던 당시를 회상하면서 天涯一方에 자제를 보내고 또는 남편을 옥중에 생각는 사람들이 행여나 서울소식을 듯고 십퍼해서 내달어 모여 들엇다.
자동차는 덜덜거리면서 산비탈길로 달렷다. 길가에 흙벽만이 놉게 담친 듯이 들려잇는 것을 지적하면서 (2字 略-원문) 土豪들이 (9字 略-원문) 불에 태워지고만 집터라고 한다. 도야지를 몰고서 國師堂 뒤으로 지나가는 異國무리들이 그 당시를 말하는 것 갓다.
길가에 비가서고 철책이 들렷다. 三勇士가 잇다더니 전란에 학살당한 병사의령을 긔렴한다는 곳이다. 부근일대가 불바다로 화하고 砲擊, 彈擊이 소란을 곡하던 당시를 회상해 보고 또다시 아니 언제 그런 격난이 이 땅을 방문하지 안흘지 의문이다.
우리 길보다 연길로 긴 군경을 실은 자동차 두 대가 전 속력을 노아서 북으로 달린다. 들으매 무장공비 5인 一團이 권총으로 위협하고 행인의 소지품을 배앗어갓다는 급보를 접하고 출동하는 모양인데 그 지점이 20리 남짓하다고 한다. 듯고 보매 정신이 앗득해지나 긔자의 호긔심으로 뒤를 추격해 볼 생각도 낫으나 원래 使命(?)이 다르고 보매 내길로 발을 몰렷다.
얼마전에 운전수가 바로 이 자동차에 손님을 태우고 가다가 老道溝에서 한 10리 되는데 강을 조구만한 다리로 건너랴는데 압헤 보매 밀가루를 가득히 실은 구루마 세챼를 붓잡고 하나는 직히고 5, 6명은 실어다가 산중으로 옴기는 광경을 보고 손에 맥이 업서지고 정신이 아득햇으나 오는 자동차를 보고 군경이 이 소식을 듯고 무장해 가지고 달려오는 것으로 알아채고 산중으로 달려가서 세사람과 말이 생명을 보전해 갓다는데 얼마 아니면 그곳이 보일 것이라고 한다. 어떠게 되는 모양인지 점점 위험지대를 들어가는 것도 갓햇다.
산에는 나무를 베히고 들에는 수수대를 심으지 못하게 해서 그다지 으슥한 곳은 업스나 神堂 부근에는 잡나무 7, 8그룹이 서서 바람에 위슬렁하니 그러치 안어도 놀낸가슴이라 선듯해 진다.
2道溝, 3道溝를 지나서 內皮溝를 저기에 바라 보앗다. 최후까지 동해지방의 대소동을 지휘하던 총 본부가 잇던 곳이라 한다. 지하에 굴을 파고 膽寫版으로 비라를 박히고 중요분자들이 각지의 정보를 밧고 련락을 취하면서 여러 가지 비밀획책을 햇다는 것이다. 기어히 가보리라고 서두는 통에 갓치 동반하는 이는 얼골을 일엇다.
제일 갓가운 곳 말하자면 첫 잠행운동지라는 곳을 차저 보앗다. 나무 사이에 북으로 뚤어지고 동으로 면한 굴이 7, 8명은 넉넉이 수용하고도 남앗다. 외부와의 교통을 끈키에는 문작 하나이면 묘하게 보인다. 지금이라도 어데서 뛰어나오는 것 갓흔 늣김을 주는데 몰려 온 주민들이 구사일생을 한 회고긔담을 제각금 이야기해 준다. 더 잇고 십지 안엇다.
압 마을에는 반 넘어 불타고 죽은 사람도 적지 안타. 참변은 여기가 중심지는 아니라 하더래도 상당한 모양이다. 요사이로 지내가는 행인들을 납치해 가는 일이 례사라고 하며 더 갈용긔보담도 뒤로 물러갈 생각이 간절햇다. 저기가 內皮溝 산골이다. 말을 달린 즉 훈련한 공비들이 棍椊, 석유, 권총, 도끼, 대창 등으로 습격해 들어오자 이여 응전하는 자위단원, 순경 등으로 전쟝화 해진 당시에 도망질 치던 사내들과 부녀자들이 겨우 모진 목숨을 건저서 그래도 쫏겨 갓다가 지금 다시 와서 임시로 의거하고 목숨을 보전해 가는 중이라 한다.
아들 일은 사람 애비 타 죽은 사람 等 數가 업다. 요사이도 밤으로 도망갈 준비를 해가지고서 문을 잠그고 허리를 새우등 갓치 오그린다고 한다.＜16＞ 만리 이역에서 생명선을 개척해 가는 무리들의 용긔도 가상스러웟든 것이다.

『豆滿江渡船場』
領事館에서 각처에 들어온 정보를 들으매 만주사변 2주년 기념으로 소동을 이르키려는 테로운동이 적지 안케 일어나고 잇는 모양이다. 豆滿江渡船場에는 兩名의 권총 共비가 渡船客을 위협하고 또 순사 한 명을 총살하고는 산중으로 잠적햇다는 소식이다. 돌아갈 길에서 난 사실이다. 압흐로 뒤로 좌우에 일어나는 사건이 그리 심상치 안타. 여러 곳에서 재료는 수집햇고 보고 드를 것은 독자에게 알으켜야 되겟다고 하로가 삼추도 갓트나 과연 이 난관을 돌파할 수가 잇슬 것인가가 문제이다.
保護兵을 부치고는 십지안코 불행이 당하고서 다시살면 중요재료도 나오겟고해서 욱이고서 전진하는 수밧게 업다. 局子街에 갓다가 新與國際都市 灰幕洞을 보고 가자는 권고를 곱게 사절하고서 자동차로 龍井을 하직하엿다.
걱정은 세관의 검사에서 수집한 재료가 압수는 당하지 안을가 하는 것이다. 사진도 잇도 원판도 잇다. 계통도는 물론 筆蹟 等 地點略圖도 들엇다. 이것을 빼앗기는 날에는 못숨만 살아가서는 본의의 반 넘어를 일은 것이다. 담배 열갑을 압수당햇기로 그야 문제될 것이 아니엇다. 세관은 과연 엄중하엿다.
그러나 여기서는 조선경찰의 비상한 경게가 시작된다. 전긔 武裝團이 지나가고 난 후 임으로 행인의 신체를 일일히 수색하려고 든다. 경성서 갓다는 것과 사건의 탐방을 간 동긔 등을 이번에는 재판소 이야기로 어물어 대고서 겨우 면햇다.
午後 5時에 上三峰의 東行車에 몸을 실리매 모도가 한바탕 악몽같햇다. 三防의 淸流壁도 보는 듯 마는 듯하고 淸凉里에 나렷다. 二十일 正午엿다.＜17＞
＜14-17＞