잡지명	別乾坤第73號
발행일	1934년 06월 01일
기사제목	人肉속의 夜光珠, 探偵小說
필자	崔流帆
기사형태	소설

Magazine Title: 別乾坤第73號
Publication Date: June 01, 1934
Article Title: 人肉속의 夜光珠, 探偵小說 (Night-Shining Pearl in Human Flesh, Detective Novel)
Author: Choe Ryufan
Article Type: 소설 (Novel)

Before getting to the main story, I will briefly talk about my background. I was originally a jewel thief. However, after being caught by the police in a certain incident, I reformed and became a loyal subordinate of the "Jaggu-Man" detective. Since I was originally a jewel thief, I have a lot of knowledge and experience about jewels, and I have used it to arrest many jewel thieves. This story is one of them.

Seeing the business card "Matt Cadman" brought in by the servant, I immediately thought, "Huh, he must have come because of the Minus affair." But I didn't want to meet Cadman. To be honest, I didn't want to meet him. It was an unpleasant memory from three years ago... a group of four professional jewel thieves. A guy named "Matt Cadman" was one of them, and "Acton Do-es" was me.

Before I was caught by the police, reformed, and became a subordinate of the "Jaggu-Man" detective, I was the most depraved person among the four. And, a little embarrassingly, I had quite a bit of affection for Cadman's beautiful face.

During the three years that passed, I had forgotten they existed. But suddenly receiving his visit felt like reopening old wounds, so I didn't want to meet him.

However, on the other hand, thinking that he must have come because of the Minus night-shining pearl incident, I wanted to meet him a little.

It was only a few weeks ago that the famous Colonel Minus's treasured night-shining pearl was stolen by someone. As the night-shining pearl was famous and had a lot of surveillance, the police and the "Jaggu-Man" detective were searching day and night, and they also asked me for help. But for some reason, the forgotten night-shining pearl disappeared like it was sunk to the bottom of an endless sea. So, I was very anxious, and although it was unpleasant, I decided to meet Cadman. When he came into the room, an erotic fragrance stung my nose, and his face, wrapped in a thin veil hanging from the brim of his hat, was as attractive and seductive as before.

"What special matter brings you here?" I asked very politely and kindly. He looked back at the door and said,

"I came to see you about the Minus night-shining pearl incident. You are trying to find that night-shining pearl now, aren't you? But stop that futile effort. No matter how hard you try, it will never come back into your hands." His voice, filled with animosity and resistance, gradually grew louder. I deliberately tried to remain calm, lighting a cigar that hadn't even gone out, and asked,

"Perhaps that's true. But it's very surprising to hear such things from you. Why bother to bring such old matters and come to an old comrade to tell such a story?"

"I came to advise you not to make vain efforts," he said with a sulky attitude, looking straight at me.

"What is the reason..." I asked again.

"Yes, I'll tell you... Do you know who stole that night-shining pearl? We stole it. I can't tell you the details, but it's true that I have it in my possession. It's definitely not a lie. It took a lot of effort and I went through many difficult things to steal it."

"We? So you mean you didn't steal it alone, but you had a comrade? An old comrade..."

"I've already cut ties with old comrades. This time, I only did it with one new comrade. You may know this new comrade, Leon Sack."

Hearing this, I unconsciously frowned. Seeing that, he smiled as if he had won and spoke again.

"Of course, you know Leon Sack, don't you?"

"What? I've only heard the name. If I were the old Acton E-dos before I reformed, I would have taken off my hat and paid my respects even at the mention of his name. Anyway, you've found a good comrade. He's so skillful and daring that he's like a king of crime. But watch now. It won't be long before that big fish gets caught in the police net."

At this, he laughed loudly. His laughter contained a mockery that pricked my nerves. I retorted, not wanting to be defeated.

"So, because a great enemy named Leon Sack has joined this case, you mean that you can't find the Minus night-shining pearl no matter what? You came all the way here just to tell me that? How kind of you?"

"No. That's not it. You shouldn't give up, and you don't need to. Originally, I was the one who came up with the idea to steal that night-shining pearl... By the way, you are going to marry Colonel Minus's daughter, aren't you?"

I was startled. Where on earth did this woman hear that news? I looked at his face. Strangely, a youthful blush rose on his face.

"Tell me more. I don't understand what you mean."

"Then I'll tell you. We stole the night-shining pearl and were very relieved. But when we heard that you were trying to find the night-shining pearl, we couldn't just sit still. Because someone like you would definitely find it. But then, you would have to die. That's what's painful to me. So, I'm asking you to give up the search. Or rather, turn it over to the police. If you don't grant that request, I'll tell your fiancée, Colonel Minus's daughter, that you are a former criminal."

After saying this, he avoided my gaze and lowered his head. Then, he raised his head again and suddenly said in a defiant voice,

"It doesn't matter to you even if I do that, does it?" I made a firm decision.

"Yes. It doesn't matter. Once I've made up my mind, I don't care about any danger."

"So, you don't believe what I said?"

"That's right. Such words don't reach my ears."

"Okay. You won't listen even if I say this much, will you? But don't regret it later," he said and tried to go out the door. I quickly called him back and said,

"Wait a moment. I'll tell you that you're already caught in our hands. You confessed in front of me that you stole the Minus night-shining pearl, especially in front of a detective's subordinate... What if I call the 'Jaggu-Man' detective right now and have you arrested?" I pressed.

"Yes. Do as you please. But then, you will be in despair along with me."

"Thank you. But I am currently not ashamed of anything. If you're going to send a letter to Colonel Minus's house, wait until tomorrow morning and call first. Well... I'll call Miss Millicent now."

I called the Colonel's house and called my fiancée, Miss Millicent. During this time, only about 30 seconds passed, but although he looked calm, his face was pale with no color. In the meantime, Miss Millicent came to the phone.

"Hello. Is that Miss Millicent? Yes, there's a lady here who wants to say something to you, so please wait a moment." I looked back at him and said, <61>

"Miss Millicent is here. Speak to her." and handed him the receiver.

He took the receiver. His hand trembled strangely. Then, he put the receiver to his small ear. I quietly smoked a cigar, suppressing my pounding heart. At that moment, suddenly a rustling sound was heard and

"Ah! You are... You are a coward." His voice crying out was heard. He twisted his body, and it seemed as if he was about to collapse from agony. I grabbed his wrist as I approached to support him. He opened his marble-like pale lips and muttered to himself, "I... I," as if choking.

In this moment of astonishment - the moment when his agony and my agony reached their peak - I wondered if he was staging a play to interfere with the engagement that had been established between me and Miss Millicent. Feeling intense confusion, I said coldly to him as he lifted his body from my arm,

"Well done. But I'm not someone who will be swayed by such a play." Then, he said with tearful eyes, pleadingly,

"Please, save me. Please save me and lead me to the right path like you. There's no one else I can rely on." He pressed his neck with a gloved hand and sobbed. I couldn't say anything.

I fully understood what his words meant. Thinking about it made me shudder. But he continued to sob and speak.

"You have come out of the pit of sin. You have left me alone in that pit of sin. Please save me too. No matter how much I struggle, I can't do it with my own strength. Because the forces around me are too strong. Do you know how much I'm suffering? A past embroidered with sin, a present filled with falsehood, a future without light - ah, what should I do? I am now surrounded by endless fear, and at night I have terrible dreams and hear the sound of the prison door creaking open and the footsteps of the guard."

He covered his face with both hands as if trying not to see the terrible visions. Emotions that had been forgotten for a long time strangely began to stir again in my heart.

"Then why don't you just leave that place?"

I asked. Of course, I knew it was a commonplace remark.

"Is that... is that what you're saying to me? I'm drowning right now. You have to lend me a hand."

"But I can't do anything."

He looked at me with mournful eyes, then staggered and

"I'm going," he said and walked out. His voice echoed in my ears coldly and sadly.

"Goodbye. We were born under bad luck."

He shed another stream of tears on both cheeks. My heart was boundlessly sad.

"But you won't be able to find the Minus night-shining pearl no matter how hard you try," he said to me as I went to the door. "Something very strange has happened to that jewel. Leon Sack is ostensibly running a photo studio. Because he is very skilled in photography. I can't tell you where it is, but it's about a mile from here. One day when the owner of the house called workers to fix the roof because the glass roof of Leon Sack's photo studio was leaking, a guest came to see Leon Sack. At that time, he was carrying the night-shining pearl with him. But no matter how he looked at the guest, he seemed like a detective, so he didn't know where to hide it. But suddenly, an unexpected incident happened. One of the workers who was talking on the glass roof slipped and fell into the studio, causing a large wound under the foreigner's armpit with a piece of glass. You may not know this, but Leon Sack is good at surgery. So he rushed over and sewed up the wound, and because he thought the guest in the reception room was a detective, he thought of hiding the night-shining pearl and wrapped it in gauze and put it in the person's wound and sewed it up.

Of course, that person was unconscious at the time."

As I listened to this story, I looked at his face with surprised and doubtful eyes.

"That's a very strange story."

"Well, I'm not saying you have to believe this. I'll leave the decision of whether to believe it to you..." he said, as if a little dissatisfied that I was half-believing him.

"Anyway, what happened next?"

"Before long, the worker regained consciousness and was very surprised to hear that he had been injured by the glass. But at that time, he had already had surgery, so he wasn't too sore, and he decided to come back the next day for more medicine. Leon Sack was finally relieved and came to the guest waiting in the reception room, but in reality, the guest wasn't a detective at all."

"And... the worker...?"

"The worker disappeared and can't be seen anywhere."

"Huh?! What happened?!"

"Either he discovered that the night-shining pearl was inside his wound... or..."

"But is it possible for a person to disappear on their own?" I shouted unconsciously at the unbelievable story.

"But it's true that he disappeared. No matter how hard Leon Sack searched, he couldn't find him. But I think that person found the night-shining pearl, but Leon Sack confidently says that's not possible. According to him, the surgery to hide the night-shining pearl was so skillful that no one would know about it... But the problem will only be solved if that person is found. If you can, try to find that person before Leon Sack does."

"That's a very interesting case." I felt genuinely interested. "Of course, it's not a lie, is it?"

"Of course! But Leon Sack is a dangerous person, so avoid getting too close to him, and stop things like reporting him to the police as I mentioned earlier."

"I swear here that I will never do anything to trouble you."

At this, he quietly looked at my face, then left without saying anything.

Since then, I have not met him again. His beautiful face still lingers in my eyes, but I think he has given up on the shadow of vain happiness.

The "Jaggu-Man" detective clenched his fist and shouted.

"Leon Sack is the king of crime. There's no one in the current police force who can cleverly catch that electric eel-like fellow."

"He's the kind of person who gets away cleverly, just as you said, sir." I said with a smile. "Then what are you going to do, sir?"

I told the detective everything about meeting Ma-teul, but I couldn't bring myself to tell him his name. The detective thought for a while and said,

"It's not an easy task. It's not an easy task for Leon Sack either... If he were an ordinary thief, he would have been caught a long time ago, but his actions match his words. But how could such a meticulous and skillful man miss that worker?!"

"He must have missed him because it was a dangerous situation."

"That worker must have discovered that he had a night-shining pearl like that inside his flesh..." So <63> without saying anything, he secretly ran away, thinking it was fortunate..."

"That's probably right."

"But Leon Sack won't give up... He'll dig up the ground and find him... He'll probably use newspaper advertisements."

"No, Leon Sack wouldn't be that reckless, would he?" I 반박했다.

"But isn't there any other way? I'm going to have to investigate the newspaper advertisements from now on... Because the fish called Leon Sack is bigger than the Minus night-shining pearl..."

"Do as you please, but it'll be a waste of effort."

In fact, "Jaggu-Man" detective failed. A week later, when I went to see him, he was just grumbling that he had failed. I told him my plan.

"Listen to my plan. Leon Sack is not someone who will fall for an easy bait. So, instead of waiting for his advertisement, it's better for us to put out an advertisement."

"Put out an advertisement?"

"It's nothing special. Just put out a short advertisement looking for the worker who fixed the roof... The address and name are not clear, but he has been missing since a certain month, a certain day - that is, the day the jewel was lost... And that worker fell from the roof of a certain photo studio and suffered a major injury, and has been missing ever since, so if anyone knows him and finds him, they will be rewarded... If we put out an advertisement like this, won't Leon Sack see it? Won't he see it and think, 'The person who put out this advertisement is related to the Minus night-shining pearl' and come looking out of curiosity?"

"That's right, that's right... You're right... Then who is the advertiser?"

"Let's use my name."

"Okay, okay... If he sees the advertisement, he'll come looking out of curiosity. Well, let's put out the advertisement from this evening's evening edition."

"Yes... He might send a subordinate instead of coming himself, but anyway, I'll make sure to call you before meeting him. If we're lucky, we might be able to arrest him on the spot."

"That's very clever. That's what will happen..." The detective was so happy that he was jumping around.

"You have to come as soon as I call. It's a big adventure."

We sat down together and worked hard to write the advertisement, and we put it out in the evening edition that day.

Several days passed, but there was no news. We still continued to put out the advertisement.

Sure enough, about a week later, the person in question, Leon Sack, came to see me. Fortunately, I was at home, so I suppressed my racing heart and called the "Jaggu-Man" detective at the police station. But unfortunately, the detective was not at home and would not be back for another forty minutes.

I had no choice but to leave a message asking him to come as soon as he returned and hung up the phone. I tried to prolong the meeting time with him as much as possible.

A little later, I heard the sound of his footsteps, and as soon as his figure appeared before me, the blood in my veins was racing as if it would burst.

He was a small gentleman with a neat beard and clear eyes like the clear sky. No matter how I looked at him, there was nothing particularly different from an ordinary person.

"You've been waiting too long." I greeted him as politely as possible and offered him a chair.

"Yes, that's fine." He replied politely, but did not offer a greeting. He just stared at my face as if something was strange. He must have been monitoring my actions since the first day the advertisement was published.

"I saw the advertisement you put out..." He touched his beard and quickly cut off what he was about to say.

"Yes. Did you come after seeing the advertisement?" As I was answering, the phone rang. Was it the "Jaggu-Man" detective? If it was him, he wouldn't hesitate to call or linger.

In that situation, I couldn't turn my back to Leon Sack, so I didn't answer the phone. Noticing that, he smiled slyly and

"The phone is ringing." and called my attention.

"It doesn't matter. Leave it alone."

He smiled again.

"Is that so..." He put his hands in his coat pocket and talked as if nothing was wrong. "I think I've seen you somewhere before?"

"That's for sure." I replied.

"I think I saw you at my photo studio."

"Of course, that's probably right."

"By any chance, did you fall from our roof?"

"Yes... I had a really hard time then."

"That's right, that's right! I knew it. You came to my house disguised as a worker..."

"That's right. The worker at that time was me."

He gasped and said, "Uh..." The intense telephone bell sound had already stopped at that time.

"So, how is the injury from that time?"

"Thanks to your concern, it's all healed."

"That's good. I was very worried and was looking for you. At that time, you had a beard, didn't you? You look 10 years younger now... By the way... Is that injury still bothering you? Is your skin stiff?"

"It's a little like that, but after having a simple surgery again, it's fine."

"Huh?! It's fine?!"

"Here! Look." I took out a piece of paper from my pocket and gave it to him.

As he lowered his gaze onto the piece of paper, the door handle moved slightly. The detective must have arrived... I felt relieved inside.

Leon Sack suddenly raised his voice and started reading.

"I, Doctor John Getting, at the request of Mr. Acton Do-es, operated on a small wound following Mr. Do-es's instructions, and extracted a night-shining pearl from it..."

He dropped the piece of paper from his hand. His eyes were blazing with anger.

"At the request of Mr. Do-es... So you knew that there was a night-shining pearl inside?

"Yes... on one opportunity..."

"Uh... that woman told you! It was that woman, wasn't it?"

"I absolutely cannot say who it was."

"Then I will take your life."

At that time, I saw a pistol flashing in his hand that he had put in his pocket.

"Don't do that, calm down... Our teacher, the 'Jaggu-Man' detective's subordinate, is waiting behind you right now."

At this, he growled and rushed at me. At the same time, eight strong arms grabbed his arms and put handcuffs on him.

An hour later, I handed the yellow Minus night-shining pearl to the detective. Without Doctor Getting's certificate and the scar on the armpit, no one would believe my story.

In fact, I had been suspecting Leon Sack even before Ma-teul came to tell me. Therefore, when I saw Ma-teul, who was working with him, visit, I guessed that he had come about the Minus night-shining pearl incident.

I had been trying to search Leon Sack's house somehow, and fortunately, I heard that the glass roof was being fixed, so I disguised myself as a worker and jumped in. Then, my foot slipped and I almost died, and fortunately, the night-shining pearl came out of my flesh. I had never even dreamed of it until Ma-teul came and told me. <65>

**Named Entities**

崔流帆	Choe Ryufan
마이나스大佐	Mainasu Taesa
자거-맨	Chŏgŏ-maen
레온·삭크	Leon Sack
미리센트양	Mirisŭntŭ yang
악톤·도-에스	Akton To-esu
마-틀·캐드맨	Ma-t'ŭl K'aedŭmaen
존·게-틤	Jon Ke-t'wim



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤제73호
발행일	1934년 06월 01일
기사제목	人肉속의 夜光珠, 探偵小說
필자	崔流帆
기사형태	소설

人肉속의 夜光珠, 探偵小說
						崔流帆
원줄기로 들어가기 전에 나의 내력을 잠간 이야기하려 한다. 나는 원래 보석 도적이엇섯다. 그런데 어느 사건으로 경찰의 손으로 잡혓다가 개심을 한 뒤로부터는 도리어 「자거-맨」 탐정의 부하가 되어 츙실하게 일을 보아오는 중이다. 내가 본시 보석 도적이엇든 만큼 보석에 대하야 지식과 경험이 만흠으로 그것을 이용하야 만흔 보석도적을 체포한 일이 잇다. 이야기도 그 중의 하나이다.
하인이 가지고 들어온 「마-틀·캐드맨」이라는 명함을 보고 나는 「흥 마이나스 까닭으로 왓고나」하고 즉각 하엿다. 그러나 나는 「캐드맨」을 맛나지 안으려고 하엿다. 사실 말하면 맛나 보고십지 아니하엿다. 그것은 불쾌한 3년전의 기억… 4인조 일단의 보석전문의 도적이엇섯다. 「마-틀·캐드맨」이라는 자가 그 중의 하나이엇섯고 「악튼·도-에스」라는게 나엿섯다.
경찰의 손에 잽히어 개심을 하여가지고 「자거-맨」 탐정의 부하가 되기전의 나는 그 4人組의 타락한 중에도 제일 타락된 사람이엇섯다. 그리고 좀 붓그러운 말이나 나는 「캐드맨」의 아름다운 얼골에 적지 아니한 정을 붓치고 잇섯다.
3년이 지나는 동안에 나는 그들이 잇는 줄 몰으게 이저바렷다. 그런데 갑작이 그의 방문을 밧고 나니 묵은 상처를 닷치는 것가터서 나는 그를 맛나지 아니하려고 한 것이다.
그러나 한편 생각하면 그는 분명히 마이나스 야광주사건으로 왓느니라고 생각하니 좀 맛나보고도 십헛다.
그때에 한참 유명하든 마이나스大佐가 비장하여 둔 야광주를 누구인지 훔처 가버린 것이 바로 몃 주일전 일이엇섯다. 그 야광주가 유명하고 감시 만흔 만큼 경찰과 「자거-맨」 탐정은 밤낫업시 수색을 하면서 나에게도 그 조력을 식히엇다. 그러나 웬일인지 이저바린 야광주는 끗치업는 바다 미테 가러안진 것처럼 종적이 묘연하엿다. 그래서 나도 마음이 매우 초조하든 판이라 불쾌는 하지만 「캐드맨」을 맛나보기로 하엿다. 그가 방으로 들어올 때에 에로틕한 향내가 나의 코를 쏘며 모자 압가리로부터 느러트린 엷은 베일에 싸인 그의 얼골은 옛과 달음업시 매력과 요염한 자태가 그대로 갓추어 잇섯다.
「무슨 특별한 일이 게심니까?」하고 나는 아주 은근하고도 상냥하게 물엇다. 그는 문을 자조 도라보며
「저-마이나스 야광주사건으로 좀 뵈우러 왓습니다. 당신은 지금 그 야광주를 차즈려고 하시지요? 그러치만 그 헛수구는 그만두세요. 아무리 애를 쓰서도 당신의 손으로 돌아오지는 못할테니까요.」 하는 그의 말소리는 적의와 반항을 먹음고 점점 놉하젓다. 나는 일부러 침착한체 하느라고 꺼지지도 아니한 여송연에 불을 붓치면서 물엇다.
「혹 그럴지도 모르지요. 그러나 당신에게서 그러한 중고를 뭇는다는 것은 매우 의외인데요? 하필 그만끔 헌것을 가지고 옛 동간을 차저 와서 그런 이야기를 할 필요는 업지 안해요?」
「나는 당신이 공연한 헛수고를 하시지 말나고 충고를 하러 온 것이야요.」 하고 그는 새치-ㅁ한 태도로 말을 하면서 똑바로 나를 건너다 보왓다.
「그 리유가 어데 잇느냐…는 말슴이야요.」 하고 나는 다시 물엇다.
「네. 말슴하지요… 그 야광주를 누가 흠처 갓는지 아시겟슴니까? 우리가 훔첫서요. 그것은 넘우 자세히 이 약이 해 드릴 수는 업습니다만은 하여간 내가 수중에 너은 것만은 사실이야요. 결코 거짓말이 아닙니다. 훔치는데는 애는 뭇척 쓰고 어려운 일도＜60＞ 여러 번 격것서요.」
「우리라니요? 그러면 당신이 혼자서 훔친 것이 아니라 동간이 잇섯다는 말슴이지요? 옛날의 동간…」
「옛날 동간하고도 발서 손을 끈헛슴니다. 이번 일은 다만 한사람의 새동간하고 한것이야요. 그 새동간이라는 이는 당신도 아시겟지만 레온·삭크입니다.」
이 말을 듯고 나는 무심코 이마ㅅ살을 짜푸리엇다. 그것을 보고 그는 승리나 한듯이 입모숨에 미소를 띄우고 다시 말을 하엿다.
「물론 당신도 레온·삭크를 아시지요?」
「뭣. 나는 일흠만 갈엇슬 뿐입니다. 내가 만일 전날의- 개심하기 전의 악톤·에-도스일 것 가트면 혹 그의 일흠을 듯고 만이라도 모자를 벗고 경의를 표햇겟지요. 좌우간 당신은 조흔 동간을 어드섯습니다. 그 사람은 범죄大王이라고 할만큼 교묘하고 대담하니까요. 그러나 인제 보십시요. 오래지 안해서 그 큰고기가 경찰의 그물에 걸닐테니까.」
이 말에 그는 깔깔- 우섯다. 그 우슴에는 나에 신경을 꼬집는 조소가 품기어 잇섯다. 나는 지지 아니하고 비꼬아서 말을 하엿다.
「그러면 당신은 이 사건에 레온·삭크라는 대적이 참례를 햇스니까 마이나스 야광주를 도저히 찻지 못한다는 말슴이지요? 그런 말을 해주려고 일부러 차저 오시다니 매우 친절하심니다 그려?」
「아니요. 그러치 안습니다. 그것을 단념하실 당신도 안이요. 또 그럴 필요도 업습니다. 원래 그 야광주를 훔치려든 것은 내가 생각해 낸 것이니까요…… 그런데 당신은 마이나스대좌의 따님과 결혼을 하시게 되엿지요?」
나는 깜짝 놀낫다. 대관절 이 녀자가 어데서 그 소식을 들엇슬가? 나는 그의 얼골을 바라보앗다. 그의 얼골에는 이상하게도 젊은 핏기운이 피어 올낫다.
「더 자세히 말슴해 보십시요. 나는 무슨 뜻인지 알 수가 업습니다.」
「그러면 이야기 하지요. 우리는 그 야광주를 훔처 가지고 아주 안심을 햇슴니다. 그런데 당신이 그 야광주를 차즈려 든다는 말을 듯고는 그대로 잇슴니다. 당신가트면 기어코 차저 내일 것이니까요. 그러나 그때에는 당신은 죽지 아니하면 안됨니다. 그것이 나에게는 마음이 괴로워요. 그래서 당신더러 그 수색을 단념해 주시라는 것이야요. 아-니 그것 보담도 경찰방면으로 돌려노아 달나는 것임니다. 그 청을 아니 들어주시면 나는 당신이 전과자라는 것을 당신의 약혼자인 마이나스대좌의 따님에게 말을 할테야요.」
이러케 말햇스나 그는 나의 시선을 피하여 고개를 숙이엇다. 그리다가 다시 고개를 들고 갑작이 반항하는 소리로
「당신에게는 그러케 해도 관게치 안켓지요.」 하엿다. 나는 단연코 결심을 하엿다.
「네. 관게업슴니다. 한번 결심한 것은 엇더한 위험이 잇더래도 나는 아모럿치도 아니하게 생각합니다.」
「그러면 내가 한말을 당신은 신용치 아니하심니까?」
「그럿습니다. 그런 말은 나의 귀에 들어오지 아니합니다.」
「네. 이만치 말슴을 해도 듯지 아니하섯지요? 그러나 나종에 후회하지 마십시요.」하고 그는 문밧그로 나아가려고 하엿다. 나는 급히 그를 불너드려 가지고
「잠간 기다리십시요. 당신네는 이미 우리 수중에 엉켜들엇다는 것을 말해 둠니다. 당신은 내 압헤서 당신네가 마이나스 야광주를 훔첫다는 것을 자백햇지요? 하물며 탐정의 부하 압헤서… 만일 내가 지금 「자거-맨」 탐정에게 전화를 걸어서 당신을 체포하면 엇절텝니까?」 하고 다지엇다.
「네. 그것은 자량대로 하십시요. 그러나 그때에는 당신도 나와 한가지로 절망임니다.」
「고맙습니다. 그러나 나는 현재에 잇서서 조곰도 붓그럽지 아니한 몸입니다. 편지를 마이나스대좌의 댁에 하랴거든 그것은 내일 아츰가지 기다리고 위선 전화로 하십시요. 그려… 자- 내가 미리센트양을 불너드리지요.」
나는 대좌의 집에 전화를 걸고 나의 약혼자인 미리센트양을 불넛다. 그동안 이 약 30초 밧게는 아니되는데 그는 평온한체하고 잇기는 하나 얼골에는 핏긔가 업시 창백하엿다. 그새에 미리센트양이 전화 압흐로 나왓다.
「여보세요. 미리센트양 입니까? 네 지금 나한테 어느 부인이 왓는데 당신한테 무슨 말을 한다니까 잠ㅅ간만 기다려 주십시요.」 하고 나는 그를 돌아보며＜61＞
「미리센트양이 나왓슴니다. 이약이 하십시요.」 하고 수화귀를 내어주엇다.
그는 수화긔를 바더 들엇다. 그의 손은 이상하게 떨렷다. 그러면서 그는 수화기를 그의 조고만한 귀에 대엿다. 나는 무섭게 두근거리는 가삼을 누르면서 고요히 여송연을 피엇다. 그때에 갑작이 싸그락소리가 들니며
「아! 당신은... 당신은 비겁합니다.」 하고 울며 부르짓는 그의 소리가 들녓다. 그는 몸을 뒤틀면서 고민하는 것이 방금 쓸어질 것 가탯다. 이것을 붓들어 주려고 각가히 가는 나의 손목을 꼭트려 쥐엿다. 그는 대리석가티 햇쓱하야진 입술을 열어 「나는…나는」하며 혼자말가티 목을 늑기엇다.
이 경이의 순간- 그의 고민과 나의 고민은 절정에 이르른 순간-에 나는 그가 나와 미리센트양 사이에 성립된 약혼을 방해하려는 연극이나 아닌가 하고 생각하엿다. 나는 격렬한 혼란을 늑기면서 나의 팔에서 몸을 이르키는 그에게
「잘되엿습니다. 그러나 그만쯤한 연극으로 마음을 번드칠 내가 아닙니다.」 하고 냉냉하게 말을 하엿다. 그런즉 그는 애원하듯 눈물을 흘니며
「여보세요. 나를 제발 구해주세요. 제발 나를 당신과 가튼 바른 길로 구해내 주세요. 당신밧게는 힘을 입을 곳이 업습니다.」 그는 장갑을 끼인 손으로 자긔의 목을 눌느며 늣기어 울엇다. 나는 아모말도 하지 못하엿다.
그의 말이 무엇을 의미하는지 나는 넉넉히 알 수가 잇섯다. 그것을 생각하매 나는 몸서리가 치엇다. 그러나 그는 여전히 늑기며 말을 하엿다.
「당신은 죄의 구렁에서 헤여 나왓습니다. 당신은 그 죄의 구렁에 나 혼자만 남기어 두엇습니다. 나도 구해내 주세요. 나는 아모리 몸부림을 하여도 내 힘으로는 엇지할 수가 업습니다. 주위의 힘이 넘우 큰 까닭이야요. 얼마나 내가 괴로워하는지 당신은 아심니까? 죄로 수를 노흔 과거 허위에 찬 현재 광명이 업는 미래 아- 나는 엇지하면 조아요. 나는 지금 끈임업는 공포에 싸혀 밤이면 꿈도 어지가니 꾸면서 감옥문이 덜크럭 열니는 소리와 간수의 발소리를 들읍니다.」
그는 무서운 환영을 보지 아니하려는 듯이 두 손으로 얼골을 가리엇다. 오랫ㅅ동안 이젓든 감정이 이상하게도 또다시 나의 마음속에서 움즉이기 시작하엿다.
「그러면 당신은 그 속에서 떠나버리면 그만이 아닙니까?」
하고 물엇다. 물론 평범한 말인 줄은 나도 알엇다.
「그것이 그것이 당신에 말입니까? 나는 지금 물속에 빠저 잇습니다. 당신이 손을 빌려주어야만 합니다.」
「그러나 나는 엇지할 수가 업서요.」
그는 구슬푼 눈동자로 나를 바라보다가 비틀비틀하면서
「나는 가겟습니다.」 하고 걸어나갓다. 그 말소리는 싸늘하고도 구슯흐게 나의 귀에 울니엇다.
「안녕히 가십시요. 우리들은 악운을 타고 낫습니다.」
그는 다시 한줄기 눈물을 두 볼에 흘니엇다. 나의 마음은 한량업시 슯헛다.
「그러나 마이나스 야광주는 아모리 활동을 하서도 당신이 차저내이지 못합니다.」 하고 문압까지 나아간 나에게 그는 말을 하엿다. 「그 보석에 대해서 아주 이상한 일이 일어낫서요. 레온·삭크는 표면상 사진관을 경영하고 잇섯서요. 그 사람은 사진긔술이 아주 놀나우니까요. 어데라고 말해드릴 수는 업고 하여간 이 근처에서 1마일 가량 되는 곳에 잇습니다. 그런데 레온·삭크의 사진관 유리집웅이 새게되엿서요. 그래서 그 집의 주인이 일ㅅ군을 불러다가 집웅을 곳치든 날 웬 손님이 레온·삭클 차저왓습니다. 그때에 그 야광주를 그는 몸에다 지니고 잇섯서요. 그런데 손님이 아모리 보아도 탐정가태서 어데다 숨기어야 조흘지 모르고 잇섯습니다. 그런데 맛침 의외 사건 하나가 생기어 낫습니다. 그것은 유리집옹우에서 말을＜62＞ 하고 잇든 인부가 엇지하다가 발이 밋그러저서 촬영장으로 떨어저 가지고는 외인편 겨드랑이 밋테 유리조작으로 큰 상처를 내엇습니다. 아실지 모르겟지만 레온·삭크는 외과수술을 잘하는 사람이야요. 그래서 그는 얼핏 달녀들어 상처를 꾸매여 주면서 그는 응접실에 잇는 손님을 곡 탐정으로만 알고 야광주를 감추려 든 판인데 문득 생각하고 그 야광주를 까-제에 싸서 그 사람의 상처 속에다 집어 너코는 꿔매여 두엇습니다.
그 사람은 물론 그때에 긔절이 되엿땟스니까.」
나는 이 이약이을 들으면서 놀납고도 의혹에 찬 눈으로 그의 얼골을 바라보앗다.
「그것참 이상한 이약이로군요.」
「뭣 이 말을 꼭 미드시라는 것은 아닙니다. 신용여부는 당신의 판단에 맛기겟고…」 하며 그는 개가 반신반의하는 것을 좀 불만히 녁이는 듯하엿다.
「좌우간 그 다음은 엇지 되엿나요?」
「오래지 아니하여 그 인부는 정신을 차려가지고 자긔 유리에 닷첫다는 이약이를 듯고 퍽 놀내엇슴니다. 그러나 그때는 수술을 밧고 난뒤라 과히 압흐지도 안코해서 다음날 다시와서 약을 바르기로 하고 도라갓슴니다. 레온·삭크는 겨우 안심을 하고나서 응접실에서 기다리든 손님한테로 왓는데 실상 알고보면 그 손님이 탐정도 아니엿슴니다.」
「그러고… 그 인부는…?」
「그 인부가 어데론지 가바리고 보이지를 아니해요.」
「응?! 웬일일가요?!」
「자긔의 상처 속에- 야광주가 들어잇는 것을 발견햇든지… 그러찬허면…」
「그러나 사람이 제절로 업서저 바리는 법이야 잇나요?」 하고 나는 넘우나 이상한 이약이에 무심코 소리를 질넛다.
「그런데 사실로 업서젓단 말슴이야요. 레온·삭크가 아모리 눈을 뒤집어쓰고 차저다녀야 차저낼 수가 업섯서요. 그러나 내 생각에는 그 사람이 야광주를 발견한 것 갓흔데 레온·삭크는 그럴리가 업다고 자신이 잇게 말을 해요. 그의 말을 들으면 야광주를 숨겨둔 상처의 수술은 아조 교묘해서 아모라도 그것을 알지는 못할 것이라고… 그러나 그 사람을 차저내어야만 문제가 해결이 될텐데 당신이 될 수 잇스면 그 사람을 레온·삭크보다 먼첨 차저보시지요.」
「아주 자미잇는 사건인걸요.」 하고 나는 진정으로 흥미를 늑기엇다. 「물론 거짓말은 아니겟지요?」
「그러면요! 그러나 레온·삭크는 위험한 사람이니까 될 수 잇스면 그 주위에 각가히 마시고 뚝 악가 말슴한 경찰에 고발하신다는 그런 것은 그만두십시요.」
「나는 당신을 괴롭게 할 것은 결코 아니하겟다고 여긔서 맹세하겟슴니다.」
이 말에 그는 나에 얼골을 고요히 바라보다가 아모 말이 업시 그대로 나아가 버렷다.
그 뒤에 이내껏 나는 그를 맛나보지 못하엿다. 나의 눈에는 지금도 그의 아름다운 얼골이 어른거리기는 하지만. 생각건대 그는 헛된 행복의 그림자를 단렴한 듯하다.

「자거-맨」 탐정은 주먹을 부르쥐이면서 소리를 질넛다.
「레온·삭크라면 범죄의 제왕이다. 그 전긔 뱀장어가튼 녀석을 묘하게 잡어 노을 사람은 지금의 경찰게는 업슬것이다.」
「맛침 선생의 말과 가티 묘하게 빠저 나가는 사람입니다.」 하고 우수면서 나는 말을 하엿다. 「그러면 선생님은 어터게 하시렵니까?」
나는 탐정에게 마-틀을 맛나든 이약이를 전부 말햇스나 참아 그 성명까지는 일너주지 못하엿다. 탐정은 곰곰 생각하면서
「용이치 안은 일이다. 레온·삭크에게도 역시 용이치 안은 일이겟지… 그가 보통 도적이면 발서 옛날에 붓잽혓겟지만 그의 행동은 그의 말과 한가지 되여 마즈니까. 그러나 그러케 면밀하고 교묘한 사내가 엇지 그 인부를 놋첫슬가?!」
「위험경우기 때문에 놋친게지요.」
「그 인부가 틀님업시 자긔의 살속에 그와 가튼 야광주가 들어 잇다는 것을 발견한게야…」 그래서＜63＞ 아무말도 아니하고 그러한 것을 다행으로 슬그머-니 달어나 바린게지…」
「대개 그럿켓지요.」
「그러나 레온·삭크는 단렴을 아니할 걸… 땅을 파헤치고라도 차저 내일테야… 아마 신문광고를 리용하겟지.」
「아니 레온·삭크는 그러켄 섯불니는 아니할 걸요?」 하고 나는 반Œ€를 하엿다.
「그러나 그 밧게는 더 방법이 업지 안나? 나는 지금부터 신문광고를 좀 조사해 봐야겟군… 마이나스 야광주라는 것보담도 레온.삭크라는 고기가 크니까…」
「자랑대로 해보십시요만은 헛수구일 것 갓습니다.」
사실 「자-거맨」 탐정은 실패를 하엿다. 일주일이 지나 그를 차저가니까 실패를 햇다고 투덜거리기만 하엿다. 나는 그에게 나의 게책을 이약이 하엿다.
「내 게책을 들어보십시요. 레온·삭크는 먹기가 업시는 낙거지지 아니함니다. 그러니까 저편의 광고를 기다리는 것보담도 우리가 광고를 내이는게 좃습니다.」
「광고를 내이다니?」
「별것이 업서요. 집옹 곳치든 인부를 찻는 짧분 광고만 내이면 그만입니다… 주소 성명이 분명치 못하나 어느 달, 어느 날- 즉 보석을 이저바리든 날부터 행방불명이 된 것으로 하고… 그러고 그 인부는 어느 사진관의 집옹을 곳치다가 밋그러저서 큰 부상을 당햇는데 그뒤로 간 곳이 업스니 아는 사람이 그를 차저주면 사레를 하겟다고… 이러케 광고를 내여노면 레온·삭크가 볼 것이 아뉀˜니까? 보고는 하하 이 광고를 내인 사람은 마이나스 야광주에 관해서 인연이 잇는 사람이로구나 생각하고 호기심으로 차저 올 것이 아님니까?」
「올타올타… 자네 말이 그럴듯 허이… 그러면 그 광고주는?」
「내일흠으로 해두지요.」
「됫서됫서… 광고를 보면 궁금해서라도 차저 올테란 말이야. 자 그러면 오늘 저녁 석간부터라도 광고를 내이지.」
「네… 그래서 그 차저온다드지 부하를 보낼지도 모르나 하여간 면회를 하기전에 선생님한테는 전화를 걸어 놋키로 하지요. 잘하면 그 당장에서 체포할 수도 잇슬테니까요.」
「그것 참 썩 묘-하다. 그럴거야…」 하고 탐정은 조아서 날뛰엿다.
「내가 전화를 걸면 곳 오서야 합니다. 큰 모험이니까요.」
우리는 마조안저 애를 써가며 광고문을 작성하여 가지고 그날 석간에 광고를 내엿다.
몃칠이 지나갓스나 아모런 소식도 업섯다. 우리는 그래도 게속해서 광고를 내엿다.
과연 일주일쯤해서 돌연 문제의 인물인 레온·삭크가 나를 차저왓다. 다행히 나는 집에 잇섯슴으로 뛰는 피를 억제하면서 경찰서의 「자-거맨」 탐정에게로 전화를 걸엇다. 그런데 맛참 탐정이 집에 업고 사오십분 지나 아니하면 돌아오지 아니한다는 대답이 왓다.
나는 할 수 업시 돌아오는대로 곳 와달나는 부탁을 하여 노코 전화를 끈엇다. 나는 될 수 잇는 대로 그와 면회시간을 길게 끌려고 하엿다.
조곰 잇다가 그의 발자국소리가 들니고 바로 이어 그의 정체가 내압헤 나타날 때에는 나의 혈관에는 터질 뜻이 피가 뛰놀앗다.
그는 조고만한 신사로 수염이 곱고 눈은 맑은 하눌과 갓치 영롱하엿다. 아모리 보아도 보통사람보담 특별히 달은 점이라고는 업섯다.
「넘우 오래 기다리섯습니다.」 하고 나는 될 수 잇는대로 은근히 인사를 하고나서 의자를 권하엿다.
「네 좃습니다.」 하고 그도 은근히 대답은 하나 인사라고는 아니하엿다. 다만 그리고 무엇인지 이상스러운 듯이 나의 얼골을 끄윽 바라보앗다. 그는 분명 광고가 처음 나는 날부터 나에 행동을 감시하고 잇섯든 게다.
「그 광고 내신 것을 보앗는데…」 하고 수염을 만지면서 하려든 말을 급히 끈엇다.
「네. 그 광고를 보고 오섯습니까?」 이러케 대답하는 판에 전화가 울엇다. 「자-거맨」 탐정이나 아닌가? 그일것 가트면 전화를 건다든가 꾸물거릴리가 업섯다.
그 경우에 나는 레온·삭크에게 등을 향할 수가 업섯슴으로 전화를 밧지 안엇다. 그것을 눈치채엿지 그는 숭글스럽게 우스면서
「전화가 왓슴니다.」 하고 주의를 식혀주엇다.
「관게치 안습니다. 두어두십시요.」
그는 또 싱끗 우섯다.
「그럿습니까…」 하고 그는 외투 속에 두 손을 집어너코 아모러치도 아니한 듯이 이약이를 하엿다. 「나는 어데선지 당신을 한번 본듯 한데요?」
「확실히 그럿습니다.」 하고 나는 대답하엿다.
「나에 사진관에서 본듯 한데요.」
「물론 그럴 것입니다.」
「그런데 당신이 밋그러저서 우리 집옹에서 떨어지지 안햇습니까?」
「네… 그때야말로 경을 톡톡히 첫습니다.」
「그래그래! 알엇다. 인부로 가장하고 나의 집에 들어온…」
「틀님업습니다. 그때의 인부가 즉 나입니다.」
그는 숨이 맥히는 듯이 「응…」 하엿다. 격렬한 전화밸소리는 그때에 임이 근첫섯다.
「그래 그때의 상처는 엇지 되엿습니까?」
「렴려하신 덕으로 다 나엇습니다.」
「그건 잘 되엿군요. 나는 퍽 걱정을 하면서 당신을 차저단녓지요?＜64＞ 그때에 당신은 수염을 기르섯지요? 지금보니까 10년은 젊어 보입니다… 그런데 … 그 성처는 지금은 아모러치도 안이합니까? 살이 뻣뻣하지 아니해요?」
「약간 그러치 아니한 것도 아닌데 다시 간단한 수술을 밧고 나서는 아모러치도 안습니다.」
「응?! 아모러치도 안타?!」
「자! 보십시요」 하고 나는 포켓 속에서 한장의 종이쪽을 끄내어 그에게 주엇다.
그가 종이쪽 우에 시선을 내려트릴때에 또어의 핸들이 가볍게 움직이엇다. 탐정이 왓게지… 하고 나는 속으로 안심하엿다.
레온·삭크는 갑작이 소리를 놉혀 읽기 시작하엿다.
「나는 악톤·도-스씨의 청으로 씨의 지시를 딸어 조고만한 상처를 수술하엿고 그 속에서는 한개의 야광주를 끄내엇다… 의사 존·게-틤」
그는 종이쪽을 손에서 떠러트렷다. 그의 눈은 분노의 불길이 타올낫다.
「도에스씨의 청으로…랫스니 그러면 당신은 그 속에 야광주가 들은 줄을 알엇습니다 그려?」
「네… 어느 긔회에…」
「응… 그년이 이약이를 햇구나! 그년이지요?」
「절대로 누구라는 것은 말슴할 수 업습니다.」
「그러면 당신의 생명은 내가 어더가겟습니다」
그때에 나는 포켓속에 집어 너흔 그에 손에서 피스톨이 번적이는 것을 보앗다.
「그러지말고 마음을 진정하구려… 우리 선생님 「자거-맨」 탐정의 부하가 지금 당신의 뒤에서 대령하고 잇스니까요.」
이 말에 그는 으르렁거리며 드리 덤볏다. 동시에 네 사람의 굿세인 여달깨의 팔이 그의 팔을 움켜쥐이고 수갑을 채엿다.

한시간 뒤에 나는 탐정에게 노-란 마이나스 야광주를 내어 주엇다. 게틩의사의 증명서와 겨도랑의 상처가 업스면 아모도 나의 이약이를 정말이라고 밋지는 아니할 것이다.
사실 나는 마-틀이 와서 이약이를 하기전부터 레온·삭크를 의심하여 왓다. 그럼으로 그와 공부하고 잇는 마-틀이 방문 온 것을 보고 그가 마이나스 야광주 사건으로 온 것이라고 짐작한 것이다.
전부터 나는 어터케 해서라도 레온·삭크의 집안을 뒤저보려고 하든 차에 다행히 유리 집옹을 곳친다는 말을 듯고 인부로 가장하고 뛰여 들어간 것이엇섯다. 그러다가 발이 밋그러저서 하마트면 죽을번 하엿고 그것이 또 다행으로 내 살속에 야광주가 나오게 된 것이엇섯다. 그것도 마틀이 와서 이약이 해 주기 전에는 꿈에도 생각지 못하엿든 것이다.＜65＞
＜60-65＞