잡지명	별건곤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	羅末怪傑 泰封王 弓裔 秘史 (The Secret History of Gungye, the King of Taebong, a Remarkable Figure from the End of the Silla Period)
필자	車相瓚
기사형태	소식 (News)

The Secret History of Gungye, the King of Taebong, a Remarkable Figure from the End of the Silla Period
						Cha Sang-chan

Born on May 5th

The brilliant golden age of Silla had passed, and the desolate autumn wind began to blow through the yellow leaves of Gyerim (鷄林). By the time of Queen Jinseong (眞聖女皇), the 51st ruler, her favorites were stealing power, and the nation's discipline was becoming increasingly disordered. A great famine struck year after year, causing the people to scatter and bands of thieves to spring up everywhere like swarms of bees. Taking advantage of this time, two remarkable figures arose in Silla and divided the world into north and south, vying with each other. One was Gyeon Hwon (甄萱), the king of Later Baekje, and the other was Kim Gungye (金弓裔), the king of Taebong, whom I want to discuss here. Gungye (or Gongcha (躬叉)) was a son of King Heonan (憲安王), the 47th ruler of Silla (or some say a son of King Gyeongmun (景文王) Eungnyeom (膺廉)), born to his maternal family on May 5th. At his birth, a white ray of light like a rainbow (虹) surrounded the roof, and in addition to an unusual glow on his head, he had teeth (齒) from birth. The whole family considered this strange and asked a diviner (占者), who said that a child born on the fifth day of the fifth month was originally ominous. Furthermore, this child had teeth from birth and an unusual glow, so he would undoubtedly be detrimental to the nation in the future and should not be raised. King Heonan believed the words and sent a messenger to kill him. The messenger took him out of his swaddling clothes (襁褓) and threw him under the loft. A wet nurse (乳婢), feeling sorry for him, secretly caught him but accidentally pierced one of his eyes with her hand, blinding it. She then ran away and raised him secretly for more than ten years.

He is no dragon in a pond.

As he grew up, he was very fond of mischief. The wet nurse warned him, saying, "When you were first born, the country abandoned you, but I couldn't bear to see it and secretly raised you until today. If you are careless like this and play recklessly, and if it is discovered, both you and I will suffer harm. What should we do?" Gungye cried and said, "If that is the case, I will hide and go far away to relieve my wet nurse's worries." That day, he went to a temple called Sedalsa Temple (世達寺) (also known as Heunggyosa Temple (興敎寺)), shaved his head, and became a monk (僧), calling himself Seonjong (善宗). However, originally being an extraordinary person, he was not bound by trivial monastic precepts (僧戒) and always took free actions. One day, while going to perform a Jae (齋), a crow (烏) flew from the sky with a toothpick (牙籤) in its beak and dropped it into the alms bowl (鉢) he was carrying. He found this strange and looked closely, and saw the character for "King" (王字) clearly written on the toothpick. He rejoiced inwardly but did not tell anyone, always taking pride in it. From then on, he had even greater ambitions and waited for a good opportunity to be active.
<98>

At that time, Silla was in a state of political turmoil, and thieves arose everywhere, occupying each ju (州) and gun (郡). Gungye thought to himself that it was not the work of a great man to fail to achieve any merit and grow old in the mountains during such chaotic times. He burned his monastic robe and wooden bell and immediately descended the mountain to find Gi Hwon (箕萱), a thief in Jukju (竹州). (5th year of Queen Jinseong, 2nd year of Daeshun (大順) of Emperor Zhaozong (昭宗) of Tang, Sinhae (辛亥) year). However, Hwon was originally an arrogant and self-important person, so he treated Gungye with arrogance and disrespect. Gungye felt depressed and uneasy, only befriending Hwon's subordinates, Wonhoe (元會) and Shin Hwon (申煊), to discuss their inner thoughts. The following year, in the year of Imja (壬子), he went to Yang Gil (梁吉), a thief in Bukwon (北原) (present-day Wonju (原州)). Gil treated him with special kindness, entrusting him with important matters and eventually discussing military affairs, allowing him to attack various places in the east. Gungye was greatly pleased and stayed at Seoknamsa Temple (石南寺) on Chiaksan Mountain (雉岳山), attacking various hyeon (縣) such as Jucheon (酒泉), Naseong (柰城), Ullo (鬱烏), and Eojin (御珍). All the hyeon surrendered at the mere sight of him. The following year, in the 8th year of Queen Jinseong, the year of Gapin (甲寅), he also occupied Myeongju (溟州) (Gangneung (江陵)), and his troops reached over 2,500 people. Gungye divided the entire army into 14 units (隊), appointing Kim Dae (金大), Geommo (黔毛), Sinjang (盺長), Gwi Pyeong (貴平), and Jang Il (張一) as Sajeong (舍上) (i.e., unit leaders). He shared both joys and hardships with the soldiers and distributed even the smallest items with extreme fairness, so the public all feared and loved him, and they elected him as their general. Gungye then attacked and took Jojuk (猪足) (present-day Inje (麟蹄)), Saengcheon (牲川) (present-day Hwacheon (華川)), Suryeok (水若) (Chuncheon (春川)), Geumseong, and Cheorwon (鐵圓) (Cheorwon (鐵原)). Thieves from all directions surrendered to him. Gungye thought to himself that with that much power, he was capable enough to establish a nation and become a king. He established internal and external government positions and appointed Wang Geon (王建) (i.e., Taejo (太祖) of Goryeo (高麗)), a native of Songak-gun (松嶽郡), as the taesu (太守) of Cheorwon (鐵原). He appointed Hong Sul (洪述) (Hong Yu (洪儒)), Baek Ok-sam (白玉三) (Bae Hyeon-gyeong (裵玄慶)), Neung San (能山) (Shin Sung-gyeom (申崇謙)), and Bok Sa-gwi (卜沙貴) (Bok Ji-gyeom (卜知謙)) as generals. In the 10th year of Queen Jinseong, Byeongjin (丙辰), he took Seungnyeong (僧嶺) and Imgang (臨江) counties, and the following year, Dingsa (丁巳), he took Inmul County. Gungye also said that Songak-gun (松嶽郡) was a famous county in Hanbuk (漢北) with beautiful mountains and rivers, so it was suitable to be the capital. He attacked and occupied Kongam (孔巖) (Yangcheon (陽川)), Geompo (黔浦) (Gimpo (金浦)), and Hyeolgu (穴口) (Ganghwa (江華)). At that time, Yang Gil was still in Bukwon (北原), occupying over 30 cities, including Gugwon (國原). Seeing that Gungye's territory was vast and his people were numerous, he became jealous and angry, and he intended to attack Gungye with the skilled soldiers of his 30-odd cities. However, he was attacked first by Gungye and was greatly defeated. Gungye then seized those 30-odd cities and, riding on that momentum, in the 2nd year of King Hyogong (孝恭王), Muo (戊午), he
<99> attacked and captured Songak-gun (松岳郡), built a castle, and appointed Wang Geon as *Gidae-gam (騎大監), defeating Yangju (楊州) and Gyeonju (見州). In the 4th year, Gyeongsin (庚申), he also conquered Gwangju (廣州), Chungju (忠州), Dangseong (唐城), Cheongju (靑州) (or Cheongcheon (靑川)), and Gwaeyang (塊壤), and for that merit, he gave Wang Geon the position of Achan (阿飡).

The Founding of the Taebong Kingdom

As Gungye's power grew day by day in this way, his ambition to rule the world became even more intense. In the 5th year of King Hyogong, Sinyu (辛酉), he finally publicly declared himself king and proclaimed throughout the country, "In the past, Silla requested troops from Tang and forcibly destroyed Goguryeo (高句麗), so its old capital, Pyongyang (平壤), has become a desolate ruin. I will surely avenge Goguryeo." The people of Goguryeo all sighed and responded in unison. (This declaration was, of course, intended to rally the hearts of the Goguryeo remnants, that is, the people of northern Joseon (朝鮮), and on the one hand, to express resentment against the Silla dynasty for mistreating them. It can be inferred from the fact that he went to Buseoksa Temple (浮石寺) in Heungju (順興) and drew his sword to strike a mural of the Silla king that his usual resentment was great.) In the 8th year of King Hyogong, Gapja (甲子) (904 AD), he established a kingdom, calling it Majin (摩震), and named the era Mutae (武泰). He established a system of government, first establishing the Gwangpyeongseong (廣評省) and appointing officials such as Gwangchi Nae (匡治柰) (i.e., Yeocho (麗朝) Sijung (侍中)), Seosa (侍郞), and Oeiwon (外員) (Weiwonoe-rang (員外郞)). He also established the Byeongbu (兵部) (Ministry of War), Daeryongbu (大龍部) (Sikbu (食部)), Suchunbu (壽春部) (Yebu (禮部)), Bongbinbu (奉賓部) (Yebin Province (禮賓省)), Uihyeongdae (義刑臺) (Ministry of Justice), Nakhwasa (納貨寺) (Daebusa (大府寺)), Jowi-bu (調位部) (Samsa (三司)), Naebongseong (內奉省) (Doseong (都省)), Geumseoseong (禁書省) (Biseo Province (秘書省)), Namsang*(*Jakgam (*作監)), Sudan (水壇) (Subu (水部)), Wonbongseong (元鳳省) (Hallimwon (翰林院)), Biryongseong (飛龍省) (Taebuksa (太僕寺)), Muljangseong (物藏省) (Sobugam (小府監)), Chisa-dae (置史臺) (in charge of learning various translations), Sikhwabu (植貨府) (in charge of planting fruit trees), Jangseonbu (障繕府) (in charge of repairing fortresses), and Jutao Province (珠淘省) (in charge of creating utensils). He also established ranks such as Jeonggwang (正匡), Wonbo (元輔), Daesang (大相), Wonyun (元尹), Jwayun (佐尹), Jeongjo (正朝), Boyun (甫尹), Gunyun (軍尹), and Jungyun (中尹). In the autumn of the 7th month, he moved 1,000 households from Cheongju (靑州) to Cheorwonseong (鐵圓城) and made that city the capital (王京). He also attacked and seized over 30 ju (州) and hyeon (縣), including Sangju (尙州). General Hong Gi (弘奇) of Gongju (公州) also surrendered. The following year, Eulchuk (乙丑), he entered the new capital and greatly constructed palaces and pavilions, surpassing the splendor and magnificence of the Silla capital. He changed the era name from Mutae (武泰) to the first year of Seongchaek (聖冊) and established the 13 towns (鎭) of Paeseo (浿西). General Geom Yong (黔用), the commander of Pyongyang (平壤), surrendered, and Jeungseong Jeokgeom (甑城赤芡) and Hwangui Jeok (黃衣賊) Myeong Gwi (明貴), and others also submitted. Gungye then intended to annex Silla and ordered the people of the country to call Silla Myeoldo (滅都). He killed anyone who came from Silla, and with Wang Geon leading the troops, he attacked and captured Geumseong in the south, renaming it Naju (羅州). (Wang Geon Taejo (太祖) became Daeahchan (大阿飡) general for that merit.) In the 7th year (Seongchaek (聖冊)), Sinmi (辛未), he changed the era name again to Sudeok Manse (水德萬歲) and renamed the country Taebong (泰封).

<100>

Claiming to be Maitreya Buddha

Gungye established the nation and became king through military prowess, but originally being a devout Buddhist, he always diligently believed in and studied Buddhism. He called himself Maitreya Buddha (彌勒佛), wore a gold cap (金幘) on his head, and wore a square robe (方袍). He called his eldest son Cheonggwang Bosal (靑光菩薩) and his youngest son Singwang Bosal (神光菩薩). When he went out, he rode a white horse decorated with colored silk, with young boys and girls carrying parasols and incense flowers and leading the way, followed by 200 monks and nuns chanting Buddhist scriptures. He also wrote over 20 volumes of Buddhist scriptures himself, and his words were all mysterious and strange, with many things that were not originally in the scriptures. At times, he would sit upright and give lectures, and the monk Seokchong (釋聰) commented that the scriptures and lectures were all heretical and strange, so Gungye was furious and killed him with an iron pestle (鐵椎). In the 3rd year, Gyeyu (癸酉), he appointed Wang Geon as Pajinsan Sijung (波珍飡侍中), and in the 4th year, Gapsul (甲戌), he changed the era name of Sudeok Manse (水德萬歲) to the first year of Jeonggae (政開), and appointed Wang Geon as Baekseon Janggun (百船將軍), annihilating the Later Baekje fleet on the sea off Naju (羅州). The nation's prestige shook the world for a time. However, as a result of arrogance and self-importance, his misdeeds and transgressions became extremely numerous. His wife, Lady Kang (康氏), offered direct advice, but Gungye became greatly angry and accused his wife of adultery, killing her by piercing her private parts with a red-hot iron pestle. He also killed his two sons. From then on, he became even more mentally disturbed, became suspicious of everyone, and easily became enraged, so many officials and ordinary people were unjustly killed, and the people of Bukwae (斧壞) (Pyeonggang (平康)) and Cheorwon (鐵圓) were all terrified and unable to settle down.

A Strange Mirror Prophecy

It was the 5th year of Jeonggae (政開), Muin (戊寅). Wang Changjin (王昌瑾), a merchant from Tang, resided in Cheorwon (鐵圓) and engaged in trade. One day, he saw an old white-haired man with a majestic appearance and strange attire, holding a porcelain bowl in his left hand and an old mirror (鏡) in his right hand, selling the mirror. Changjin gave him rice and exchanged it. The old man gave the rice to the beggar children (乞兒) in the street and disappeared without a trace. Changjin hung the mirror on the wall, and when sunlight shone on the mirror surface, fine letters like the following clearly appeared, which looked like ancient poems. The outline was as follows:
『上帝降子於辰馬, 先採鷄後摶鴨,
巳年中二龍見一則藏身靑木中,
一則顯形黑金東』
Changjin did not know that there were letters at first, but eventually discovered them and found it strange. He reported it to King Gungye, and the king ordered the authorities (有司) to seek the owner of the mirror with Changjin, but they eventually failed to find him. However, there was a statue of the planet Saturn (鎭星) in the Buddhist temple of Bolsalsa (勃颯寺), and its appearance was identical to that person. The king found this strange and sighed for a long time, ordering the scholars Song Ham-hong (宋含弘), Baek Tak (白卓), and Heo Won (許原) to interpret the meaning. Ham-hong and the others discussed and said, "上帝降子於辰馬 refers to Jinhan (辰韓) and Mahan (馬韓), and 二龍見에 一則藏身靑木하고 一則現形黑金云云者 refers to the one who is hiding in the green tree because green is Song (松), it refers to Songak-gun (松嶽郡) and the descendant of the dragon of that name, who is now Pajinsan Sijung (波珍飡侍中) (i.e., Wang Geon), and Black Gold (黑金) is iron (鐵), which is the current capital Cheorwon (鐵圓), which means that the current king first prospered here, but will eventually perish here. 先操鷄後摶鴨 means that Wang Geon will first obtain Gyerim (鷄林) and then obtain the Amnok River (鴨綠)." However, because the current ruler is so tyrannical, if we tell the truth, not only will we suffer harm, but Wang Sijung will also be harmed. So they fabricated words and answered, and the king
<101> believed it without any sign of alarm, fear, or repentance, and his cruelty became even more severe, and the general officials were greatly terrified and did not know what to do.

Gungye's End

It was June of that year. Generals Hong Yu (洪儒), Bae Hyeon-gyeong (裵玄慶), Shin Sung-gyeom (申崇謙), and Bok Ji-gyeom (卜知謙) conspired to revolt and went to Wang Geon's private residence in the middle of the night, saying, "The current ruler is tyrannical and cruel, slaughtering his wives and children and indiscriminately executing his officials, causing the people to suffer. Since ancient times, overthrowing a foolish ruler and establishing a wise ruler has been the great righteousness of the world. You should follow the ancient examples of Tang and Wu (湯武)!" Geon initially declined, but at the earnest persuasion of his wife, Lady Ryu (柳氏), and the generals, he finally raised the banner of revolution and, leading the generals, rushed to the front of the palace gate with drums and shouts. The general public also responded, shouting cheers and acclaiming. The king was in the palace and suddenly faced with this change, not knowing what to do, flustered and forgetting what to do. He fled in disguise and hid in the mountains. Suffering from severe hunger and thirst, he was picking barley ears in the barley fields of the people when he was harmed by the people of Bukwae (斧壞) (Pyeonggang (平康)). Thus, the Taebong Kingdom perished after 18 years. (Because the people of Pyeonggang (平康) killed their king, Gungye, Pyeonggang was suspended from civil service examinations from the beginning of the Goryeo Dynasty until it was finally lifted during the reign of King Yeongjo (英祖) of the Joseon Dynasty.)

Appendix: Gungye's Remains

Today, at Sambangsan Mountain (三防山) on the Gyeongwon Line (京元線), there is Gungye's tomb and shrine, and at Woljeong-ri (月井里), 3 li (里) north of Cheorwon-eup (鐵原邑) (on the northern end of the Gyeongwon Line (京元線)), there are the remains of Gungye's ancient capital. At that time, the circumference of the outer castle was 14,421 cheok (尺), and the circumference of the inner castle was 1,905 cheok. Also, Gwol-ri (古闕里), the ancient site of his palace, is located about 1 li north of the fortress, and a stone lantern said to be from that time still remains (12 cheok high, 8-sided, 5-story spherical). There are also many of his remains in Pyeonggang (平康). It is said that "Wan'ilteong (莞爾亭)" (located at the foot of Hwahyeonsan Mountain (花峴山麓) in Pyeonggang-myeon (平康面)) is named so because Gungye smiled (莞爾而笑) when he was enjoying a banquet with courtesans. "Gyeohyeon (憩峴)" is said to be where Gungye rested while hunting (located 3 li west of the county). "Gapgicheon (甲棄川)" (located 1 li west of the county) is where Gungye was defeated and abandoned his armor while fleeing from the Goryeo Taejo (麗 太祖). Ongju-po (翁主浦) is the place where Gungye's princess committed suicide. Sacheongsan Mountain (射廳山) (north of Ongju-po (翁主浦)) is Gungye's training ground, Jeonjungpyeong (典仲坪) (in Hyeonnae-myeon (縣內面), also known as Jeonjung or Jeonjung) was a jeokjeon (籍田) during the Taebong period, and Munkwajang (文科場) (commonly known as Munkwa-dudok (文科두둑), located in Eupdongbyeon-ri (邑東邊里)) was a gwageo (科場) site during the Taebong period. It is said that Geombeolnang (劒拂浪) was named so because Goryeo Taejo (麗 太祖) wiped his sword (劒을 拂) and fought fiercely. The Sinseong Sansong (新城山城) (circumference 2,510 cheok, located in Hyeonnae-myeon (縣內面)) is also said to have been built by Gungye. Also, in Pyeonggang (平康) and Cheorwon (鐵原), the rocks are insect-eaten (火成岩), and when his ministers advised him because Gungye was always tyrannical, Gungye said, "When a black-headed white horse grows horns and insects are born in stones, I will perish." So Goryeo Taejo (麗 太祖) pointed to this igneous rock and called it "stone-born insects" in order to win over the people, and the people all believed and listened. (Refer to the Cheorwon (鐵原) and Pyeonggang (平康) County Records.) Finally, I will copy and post one of my old drafts, a 5-syllable quatrain reminiscing about the ancient capital of Taebong, and put down my pen.
철주추일모, 원객동신수.
고국산하재, 황성초수유.
수지가무지, 편작토호구.
왕적무인문, 운공수자류.
<102>
On an autumn evening in Cheolju, a distant traveler stirs new sorrow.
The ancient nation's mountains and rivers remain, the deserted city's grass and trees are secluded.
Who knows the place of songs and dances, has become a rabbit and fox hill.
No one asks about the past traces, the clouds and sky and water flow on their own.

**Named Entities**

新羅	Silla
甄萱	Gyeon Hwon
泰封王 金弓裔	Gungye, the King of Taebong
躬叉	Gongcha
憲安王	Heonan Wang
景文王 膺廉	Gyeongmun Wang Eungnyeom
鷄林	Gyerim
眞聖女皇	Queen Jinseong
竹州	Jukju
箕萱	Gi Hwon
唐 昭宗	Emperor Zhaozong of Tang
大順	Daeshun
元會	Wonhoe
申煊	Shin Hwon
北原	Bukwon
原州	Wonju
梁吉	Yang Gil
雉岳山 石南寺	Chiaksan Mountain Seoknamsa Temple
酒泉	Jucheon
柰城	Naseong
鬱烏	Ullo
御珍	Eojin
溟州	Myeongju
江陵	Gangneung
金大	Kim Dae
黔毛	Geommo
盺長	Sinjang
貴平	Gwi Pyeong
張一	Jang Il
猪足	Jojuk
麟蹄	Inje
牲川	Saengcheon
華川	Hwacheon
水若	Suryeok
春川	Chuncheon
金城	Geumseong
鐵圓	Cheorwon
鐵原	Cheorwon
松嶽郡	Songak-gun
王建	Wang Geon
高麗 太祖	Taejo of Goryeo
弘述	Hong Sul
洪儒	Hong Yu
白玉三	Baek Ok-sam
裵玄慶	Bae Hyeon-gyeong
能山	Neung San
申崇謙	Shin Sung-gyeom
卜沙貴	Bok Sa-gwi
卜知謙	Bok Ji-gyeom
僧嶺	Seungnyeong
臨江	Imgang
仁物縣	Inmul County
漢北	Hanbuk
孔巖	Kongam
陽川	Yangcheon
黔浦	Geompo
金浦	Gimpo
穴口	Hyeolgu
江華	Ganghwa
孝恭王	King Hyogong
楊州	Yangju
見州	Gyeonju
廣州	Gwangju
忠州	Chungju
唐城	Dangseong
靑州	Cheongju
靑川	Cheongcheon
塊壤	Gwaeyang
弘奇	Hong Gi
公州	Gongju
摩震	Majin
武泰	Mutae
廣評省	Gwangpyeongseong
匡治柰	Gwangchi Nae
麗朝	Yeocho
侍中	Sijung
徐事	Seosa
外員	Oeiwon
員外郞	Weiwonoe-rang
兵部	Byeongbu
大龍部	Daeryongbu
食部	Sikbu
壽春部	Suchunbu
禮部	Yebu
奉賓部	Bongbinbu
禮賓省	Yebin Province
義刑臺	Uihyeongdae
納貨寺	Nakhwasa
大府寺	Daebusa
調位部	Jowi-bu
三司	Samsa
內奉省	Naebongseong
都省	Doseong
禁書省	Geumseoseong
秘書省	Biseo Province
南廂	Namsang
Jakgam	Jakgam
水壇	Sudan
水部	Subu
元鳳省	Wonbongseong
翰林院	Hallimwon
飛龍省	Biryongseong
太僕寺	Taebuksa
物藏省	Muljangseong
小府監	Sobugam
置史臺	Chisa-dae
植貨府	Sikhwabu
障繕府	Jangseonbu
珠淘省	Jutao Province
正匡	Jeonggwang
元輔	Wonbo
大相	Daesang
元尹	Wonyun
佐尹	Jwayun
正朝	Jeongjo
甫尹	Boyun
軍尹	Gunyun
中尹	Jungyun
靑州	Cheongju
鐵圓城	Cheorwonseong
王京	Wanggyeong
尙州	Sangju
新京	Sin Gyeong
黔用	Geom Yong
浿西	Paeseo
平壤	Pyongyang
甑城赤芡	Jeungseong Jeokgeom
黃衣賊 明貴	Hwangui Jeok Myeong Gwi
滅都	Myeoldo
錦城	Geumseong
羅州	Naju
大阿飡	Daeahchan
水德萬歲	Sudeok Manse
泰封	Taebong
彌勒佛	Mireuk Bul
金幘	Geum Cheok
方袍	Bangpo
靑光菩薩	Cheonggwang Bosal
神光菩薩	Singwang Bosal
釋聰	Seokchong
波珍飡侍中	Pajinsan Sijung
政開	Jeonggae
百船將軍	Baekseon Janggun
康氏	Lady Kang
洪儒	Hong Yu
裵玄慶	Bae Hyeon-gyeong
申崇謙	Shin Sung-gyeom
卜知謙	Bok Ji-gyeom
柳氏	Lady Ryu
斧壞	Bukwae
平康	Pyeonggang
唐	Tang
王昌瑾	Wang Changjin
勃颯寺	Bolsalsa
宋含弘	Song Ham-hong
白卓	Baek Tak
許原	Heo Won
辰韓	Jinhan
馬韓	Mahan
安綠江	Amnok River
京元線 三防山	Gyeongwon Line Sambangsan
鐵原邑 北三里 月井里	Cheorwon-eup Buksam-ri Woljeong-ri
古闕里	Gwol-ri
莞爾亭	Wan'ilteong
平康面 花峴山麓	Pyeonggang-myeon Hwahyeonsan-rok
憩峴	Gyeohyeon
甲棄川	Gapgicheon
翁主浦	Ongju-po
射廳山	Sacheongsan
典仲坪	Jeonjungpyeong
縣內面	Hyeonnae-myeon
箭中又殿中	Jeonjung or Jeonjung
籍田	Jeokjeon
文科場	Munkwajang
邑東邊里	Eupdongbyeon-ri
麗 太祖	Taejo of Goryeo
劒拂浪	Geombeolnang
新城山城	Sinseong Sansong
鉄州	Cheolju



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	羅末怪傑 泰封王 弓裔 秘史
필자	車相瓚
기사형태	소식

羅末怪傑 泰封王 弓裔 秘史
						車相瓚
誕生은 5月 5日
新羅의 찬란한 황금시대도 어느덧 다 지나가고 蕭蕭한 가을 바람이 鷄林 黃葉에 불어들기 시작하야 제 51대의 왕 眞聖女皇 시대에 이르러서부터는 嬖臣이 정권을 竊弄하야 나라의 기강이 날로 문란하게 되고 兼하야 큰 흉년이 연겁허 드니 백성이 모도 流離分散하고 사방에 도적의 무리가 벌떼 가티 이러낫섯다. 이러한 때를 타서 新羅에는 양대 怪傑이 이러나 천하를 남북으로 분할하야 가지고 서로 각축하얏스니 한 사람은 後百濟王 甄萱이오 또 한 사람은 여긔에 말코자 하는 泰封王 金弓裔다. 弓裔(或稱躬叉)는 新羅 제 47대왕 憲安王의 庶子니(或云 48대 왕 景文王 膺廉의 子) 5월 5일에 그의 외가에서 탄생하엿는대 날 때에 무지개(虹)가튼 흰 광선이 집웅 우를 돌나싸고 머리에는 이상한 광채가 잇는 외에 날 때부터 이(齒)가 잇스니 왼 집안이 모도 기괴하게 녁여 占者에게 물은 즉 占者가 말하기를 5월 단오에 나흔 아희는 원래 불길할 뿐 안이라 이 아희는 나면서부터 이가 잇고 또한 이상한 광채가 잇서서 장래에 반듯이 국가에 不利할터인 즉 양육을 하지 말나 하니 憲安王은 그 말을 밋고 사신을 보내어 죽이라 하엿더니 사신이 그를 포댁이(襁褓) 속에서 끄러내여 다락 밋헤다 더지니 乳婢가 불상이 녁여 비밀이 밧다가 잘못하야 손으로 그의 한 편 눈을 찔너 멧트려 가지고 그냥 도망하야 10여년 동안을 비밀한 속에서 양육하얏다.

龍非池中物
그는 점점 자라매 작란을 몹시 조와하니 그 乳婢가 경계하야 曰 당신이 츰 나을 때에 나라에 버림을 바드매 내가 참아 볼 수가 업서서 비밀히 양육하야 오늘날까지 이르럿는데 당신이 이와가티 부주의를 하고 함부로 놀다가 만일에 발각이 된다면 당신과 내가 다가티 화를 당할 킀°이니 엇지 하겟느냐 하니 弓裔가 울며 말하야 曰 만일 그러하다면 나는 종적을 감추고 멀니 가서 乳母님의 걱정을 더러드리겟다 하고 그날로＜98＞ 世達寺(일명 興敎寺)라는 절을 차저 가서 머리를 깍고 중(僧)이 되야 自號를 善宗이라 하엿섯다. 그러나 원래에 인물이 비범한 그는 구구한 僧戒의 구속을 밧지 안코 항상 자유의 행동을 取하엿섯다. 하루는 齋를 올니러 가는데 가마귀(烏) 한 마리가 책대(牙籤)를 물고 공중으로 날어가다가 그가 가지고 가는 바리(鉢) 속에다 떠러트림으로 괴이하게 녁여 자서히 본 즉 그 책대 우에 王字가 두렷이 씨워 잇슴으로 그는 속으로 혼자 깃버하며 다른 사람에게는 말도 하지 안코 항상 自負하야 그 뒤부터는 더욱 큰 뜻을 두고 활약할 조흔 기회가 도라오기만 기달엿다.
그때에 마츰 新羅는 국정이 문란하야 사방에 도적이 이러나서 각 州郡을 점거하니 弓裔는 스사로 생각하되 이러한 亂時를 타서 아모 功도 이르지 못하고 산중에서 헛되이 늙은 것은 대장부의 할 일이 안이라 하고 장삼과 목탁 등을 모도 불지르고 즉시 하산하야 竹州 賊 箕萱을 차저 갓섯다. (眞聖王 5년 唐 昭宗 大順 2년 辛亥) 그러나 萱은 위인이 본래 傲慢自大하는 자인 故로 弓裔를 대하는데도 또한 傲慢無禮하니 弓裔가 鬱悒不平하야 마음을 안정치 못하고 다만 萱의 부하 元會, 申煊 등과 벗을 삼어 心事를 서로 의론할 뿐이러니 그 翌年 壬子에 다시 北原(今原州) 賊 梁吉에게 더저 가니 吉이 특히 후대하야 대사를 위임하고 遂히 군사를 논하주어 東으로 각지를 공략케 함으로 弓裔는 크게 깃버하야 雉岳山 石南寺에 유숙하며 酒泉, 柰城, 鬱烏, 御珍 등 諸縣을 습격하니 諸縣이 모도 望風歸降하얏다. 그 翌年 즉 眞聖王 8년 甲寅에는 또 溟州(江陵)을 점령하니 부하 兵이 2,500여인에 달하는지라 弓裔는 全軍을 14隊에 分하야 金大, 黔毛, 盺長, 貴平, 張一 등으로 舍上(즉 部長)을 삼고 사졸로 더부러 甘苦과 勞逸을 가티 하며 지극 사소한 물품의 분배까지도 극히 공평무사하게 하니 衆心이 모다 畏愛하야 그를 장군으로 추대하얏섯다. 弓裔는 다시 猪足(今 麟蹄), 牲川(今 華川), 水若(春川), 金城, 鐵圓(鐵原) 등을 처서 取하니 사방의 賊徒가 모도 귀화하는지라 弓裔는 스사로 생각하되 세력이 그만한 이상에는 족히 국가를 건설하고 군왕이 될 만하다 하고 내외의 관직을 設하고 松嶽郡人 王建(즉 高麗 太祖)을 擧하야 鐵圓 태수를 삼고 弘述(洪儒), 白玉三(裵玄慶 ), 能山(申崇謙), 卜沙貴(卜知謙) 등 諸人物로 장군을 삼엇섯다. 그리고 眞聖王 10년 丙辰에는 僧嶺, 臨江 兩縣을 取하고 그 翌年 丁巳에는 仁物縣을 取하얏는데 弓裔는 또 말하되 松嶽郡은 漢北의 名郡으로 산수가 奇麗한 즉 國都가 될 만하다 하고 孔巖(陽川), 黔浦(金浦), 穴口(江華) 등 城을 처서 점령하니 때에 梁吉은 아즉까지 北原에 잇서서 國原 등 30여 城을 차지하고 잇스나 弓裔의 地廣民衆한 것을 보고 忌惡憤怒하야 자기 30여 城의 날낸 軍兵으로 裔를 습격하랴다가 弓裔에게 먼저 공격을 당하야 크게 패하니 弓裔가 遂히 그 30여 城을 占奪하고 그 승세를 타서 孝恭王 2년 戊午에는 ＜99＞松岳郡을 攻取하야 성을 쌋코 王建으로 *騎大監을 삼어 楊州, 見州를 격파하고 4년 庚申에는 또 廣州, 忠州, 唐城, 靑州(或云 靑川), 塊壤 등을 討平하고 그 공으로 王建에게 阿飡의 職을 주엇섯다.

泰封國을 創建
弓裔의 세력이 날로 이와가티 커지니 王天下할 覇心이 더욱 勃勃하게 되야 孝恭王 5년 辛酉에는 遂히 公然하게 왕이라 칭하고 국내에 聲言하야 曰 往者에 新羅가 唐의 원병을 청하야 무리하게 高句麗를 파멸한 까닭에 그 故都 平壤이 遂히 荒茂의 丘墟가 되엿슨 즉 내가 반듯이 高句麗를 위하야 그 원수를 갑겟다 하니 高句麗의 유민이 모도 歎呼響應하얏다. (이 聲言은 물론 高句麗 遺土 즉 北部 朝鮮의 인심을 收拾하고 一方으로 新羅 王朝가 자기 학대한 것을 怨하는데서 나온 것이다. 그가 興州(順興) 浮石寺에 갓다가 新羅王 像의 벽화를 보고 칼을 빼여 친 것을 보와도 그의 평소 원한이 엇더한 것을 可知하겟다) 이에 孝恭王 8년 甲子(西紀 904)에 國을 建하야 號를 摩震이라 하고 연호를 武泰라 하며 관제를 設하되 먼저 廣評省을 두어 匡治柰(즉 麗朝侍中), 徐事(侍郞), 外員(員外郞) 등 官員을 비치하고 또 兵部, 大龍部(食部), 壽春部(禮部), 奉賓部(禮賓省), 義刑臺(刑部), 納貨寺(大府寺), 調位部(三司), 內奉省(都省), 禁書省(秘書省), 南廂*(*作監), 水壇(水部), 元鳳省(翰林院), 飛龍省(太僕寺), 物藏省(小府監), 置史臺(掌習諸譯語), 植貨府(掌栽植菓樹), 障繕府(掌修理城隍), 珠淘省(掌造成器物) 등을 置한 외에 正匡, 元輔, 大相, 元尹, 佐尹, 正朝, 甫尹, 軍尹, 中尹 등 品職을 設하며 秋 7월에는 靑州人戶 1천을 鐵圓城에 移하고 其城으로 王京을 삼으며 또 尙州 등 30여 州縣을 처서 빼스니 公州 장군 弘奇가 또한 來降하얏다. 그 翌年 乙丑에는 新京에 드러가서 궁전과 樓觀을 크게 건축하니 그 華奢壯麗함이 新羅의 王京을 능가하고 武泰의 연호를 곳처 聖冊 원년이라 칭하고 浿西 13鎭을 定하니 平壤 主將軍 黔用이 來降하고 甑城赤芡�黃衣賊明貴 등이 또한 歸服하얏다. 弓裔는 이에 다시 新羅를 倂呑코자 하야 國人으로 하야금 新羅를 呼하되 滅都라 하고 또 新羅에서 來하는 사람이면 모주리 다 죽이며 王建으로 兵을 率하고 남으로 錦城을 攻取하야 羅州라 개칭하고(王建 太祖가 그 공으로 大阿飡 장군이 되엿다) 7년(聖冊) 辛未에는 다시 연호를 곳치여 水德萬歲라 하고 國號는 泰封이라 개칭하얏다.

自稱彌勒佛
弓裔는 이와 가티 武功으로 국가를 건설하고 왕이 되엿스나 원래에 불교의 신도인 故로 불교에 대한 신앙과 연구는 항상 不怠하야 自號를 彌勒佛이라 하고 머리에는 金幘을 쓰고 몸에는 方袍을 입으며 長子를 靑光菩薩, 季子를 神光菩薩이라 하고 나아갈 때에는 綵色으로 장식한 백마를 타되 童男童女로＜100＞ 하야금 일산과 香花를 밧들고 압흘 인도하며 僧尼 200여 人으로 염불을 하고 뒤로 따르게 하얏다. 그리고 그는 또 불경 20여 권을 自述하니 그 말이 모도 神奇怪異하야 원래 경전에 업던 것이 만코 또 엇던 때에는 正坐하야 講說을 하니 僧 釋聰이 평하야 曰 경전과 講說이 모도 邪說怪談이라 하니 弓裔가 대노하야 鐵椎로 打殺하얏다. 3년 癸酉에는 王建으로 波珍飡侍中을 삼고 4년 甲戌에는 水德萬歲의 연호를 곳치여 政開 원년이라 하고 王建으로 百船將軍을 삼어 羅州 해상에서 後百濟의 함대를 격멸하니 國威가 일시 천하를 震慴하얏다. 그러나 驕奢自慢의 결과로 失德과 非行이 甚히 만어서 부인 康氏가 直諫하엿더니 裔는 크게 노하야 그 부인을 간음죄로 몰아 火熱한 鐵杵로 그 陰部를 따려 죽이고 또 그 두 아들까지 죽엿섯다. 그 後부터는 정신이 더욱 흥분이 되야 아모에게나 의심을 만히 내고 또 動輒激怒하야 부하 관료와 일반 평민까지 모다 無辜하게 살해를 당하는 사람이 만흐니 斧壞(平康) 鐵圓의 人民들이 모도 恐怖하야 안정을 못하얏다.

可怪한 鏡讖文
政開 5년 戊寅이다. 唐의 상인 王昌瑾이 鐵圓에 寓居하야 장사들 하더니 하루는 본 즉 狀貌가 魁偉하고 衣冠이 古怪한 엇던 백발노인이 왼편 손에는 사긔 사발을 가지고 오른편 손에는 녯날 거울(鏡)을 가지고 와서 거울을 사라고 함으로 昌瑾은 쌀을 주고 박구웟더니 그 노인은 그 쌀을 갓다가 거리에 잇는 거지아희(乞兒)들을 논하 주고는 어드로 갓는지 종적을 감추고 말엇섯다. 昌瑾은 그 거울을 壁上에 걸어 두엇더니 日光이 鏡面에 빗치며 左記와 가튼 가는 글자가 완연히 낫타나는데 엇지 보면 古詩와도 갓텃다. 其 略曰
『上帝降子於辰馬, 先採鷄後摶鴨,
巳年中二龍見一則藏身靑木中,
一則顯形黑金東』
昌瑾은 첨에 그 글자 잇는 것을 알지 못하얏다가 급기야 발견하고는 이상히 녁여 弓裔王에게 고하엿드니 왕은 有司를 命하야 昌瑾과 가티 그 鏡主를 求하얏스나 마츰내 찻지 못하고 다만 勃颯寺 불당에 鎭星의 塑像이 잇는데 그 사람과 모양이 가틀 뿐임으로 왕은 괴이히 녁여 한참 慨歎하다가 文人 宋含弘, 白卓, 許原 등을 命하야 그 뜻을 해석하라 하니 含弘 등이 서로 논의하야 曰 上帝降子於辰馬는 辰韓과 馬韓을 이름이요 二龍見에 一은 藏身靑木하고 一은 現形黑金 云云者는 靑木은 松이니 松嶽郡人의 龍으로써 이름을 지은 사람의 孫인 지금 波珍飡侍中(즉 王建)을 가르침이요 黑金은 鐵이니 今의 國都 鐵圓을 이름인데 지금 국왕이 처음에 이곳에서 흥하얏다가 也終에는 이곳에서 멸망할 것을 의미함이요, 先操鷄後摶鴨은 王建이 먼저 鷄林을 어든 다음에 鴨綠을 엇는다는 뜻이다. 그러나 지금에 主上이 이와가티 虐亂하니 우리들이 만일에 實狀대로 말한다면 다만 우리만 화를 당할 뿐 안이라 王 侍中까지도 해를 입을 것이라 하고 이에 말을 꾸며서 대답하니 왕은＜101＞ 그양 밋고 조곰도 警懼悔悟하는 기색이 업시 凶暴가 더욱 심하게 되야 일반 신료가 크게 震懼하며 엇지할 줄을 몰낫다.

弓裔의 末路
그 해 6월이엿다. 장군 洪儒, 裵玄慶, 申崇謙, 卜知謙 등 4인은 혁명의 음모를 하고 밤중에 王建의 私第에 가서 말하야 曰 지금 主上이 無道亂酷하야 처자를 학살하고 신료를 함부로 誅戮하야 生民이 塗炭中에 드른지라 自古로 昏君을 廢하고 明君을 立하는 것은 천하의 大義니 公은 湯武의 古事를 行하라 하니 建은 처음에 사양하다가 그의 부인 柳氏와 諸將의 懇勸으로 遂히 혁명의 긧발을 들고 여러 장군을 선두로 하야 鼓喊을 치며 宮城 문 압흐로 돌진하니 일반 人民이 또한 響應하야 만세를 불으며 환호하는지라 왕은 궁중에 잇다가 졸지에 이 변을 당하매 엇지할 줄을 모르고 蒼皇忘措하다가 微服으로 도망하야 산중에 隱避하더니 饑渴이 심하야 人民의 보리밧에서 보리 이삭을 따먹다가 斧壞(平康) 人民에게 被害하니 이에 泰封國도 18년을 一期로 하고 遂히 멸망하얏다. (平康人民이 자기의 국왕인 弓裔를 살해한 까닭으로 麗初부터 停擧가 되엿다가 李朝 英祖時에 비로소 해제되야 과거를 보게 되엿다.)

附 弓裔의 遺蹟
지금 京元線 三防山에는 弓裔陵과 廟閣이 잇고 또 鐵原邑 北三里 月井里 北端(京元線邊)에는 弓裔 古都의 遺址가 잇스니 당시 外城의 주위는 1만 4,421척이오 內城의 주위는 1,905척이요 또 그 궁전의 古址인 古闕里는 城北 1里許에 잇스니 당시 유물이라 칭하는 석등이 尙存하고(高 12척 8角, 球形 5층) 平康에도 또 그의 유적이 甚多하니 『莞爾亭』(在 平康面 花峴山麓)은 弓裔가 妓樂으로 遊宴할 때에 莞爾而笑한 故로 此名이 有하다 전하고 『憩峴』은 弓裔가 遊獵하다가 休憩하던 곳이라 하고(在 郡西3리) 『甲棄川』(在 郡西 1리)은 弓裔가 麗 太祖와 戰하다가 敗하야 棄甲逃走한 곳이오 翁主浦는 弓裔 翁主의 자살한 處요, 射廳山(在 翁主浦北)은 弓裔의 講武地, 典仲坪(在 縣內面 일명 箭中又殿中)은 泰封時 籍田이요 文科場(속칭 文科두둑이니 在 邑東邊里)은 泰封時 科場이오 劒拂浪(검불랑)은 麗 太祖가 劒을 拂하야 격전한 故로 仍名하얏다 하고 新城山城(周圍 2,510척 在 縣內面)은 또한 弓裔所築이라 한다. 그리고 또 平康 鐵原에는 암석이 虫食함과 如한데(火成岩) 弓裔가 常히 暴虐함으로 臣이 諫한 즉 裔가 自言하되 烏頭白馬生角, 虫生石이라야 망한다 한 故로 麗 太祖가 인심을 수습하기 위하야 此 火成岩을 指하야 石生虫이라 하니 인민이 다 信聽하얏다 한다.(鐵原及平康郡誌 참조) 최후에 나는 나의 舊稿 중에 잇는 泰封古都懷古 5絶 1首를 抄揭하고 擱筆한다.
鐵州秋日暮, 遠客動新愁.
古國山河在, 荒城草樹幽.
誰知歌舞地, 便作兎狐邱.
往跡無人問, 雲空水自流.＜102＞
＜98-102＞