Magazine Title: 別건곤
Publication Date: 1930년 06월 01일
Article Title: 高級映畵 되는 秘訣十則 (Ten Secrets to Becoming a High-Class Movie Buff)
Author: 講師 스크린·－쥐 (Lecturer Screen-Jwi)
Article Type: 잡저 (Miscellany)

The modern youth must be high-class in their language, in their behavior, even in the way they move a finger—high-class! What an appetizing word! Like the ‘pro’ of high and noble [unclear romanized English phrase], like the skyscraper (摩天樓) house of noble America. One must be free and without stubbornness, light and soft yet without frivolousness, to possess the glory of being so-called high-class. However, the philosophical interpretation of high-class will be deferred to the next lecture, and today, I will first have the honor of explaining the secrets to becoming a high-class movie buff to you all.

1
Generally, on Wednesdays or in Wednesday evening newspapers, movie theater advertisement sections alternate with photographs. If you want to become a high-class movie buff, first choose a movie from those advertisements that seems worth watching, memorize the names of the director and leading actors, and try to find out something about the content of the movie beforehand as much as possible.

And for a decent movie, a simple critique will be published in newspapers or magazines under the title "From the Screening Room" before its release. You should read that article thoroughly before anything else (even before the front-page article).

That preliminary knowledge will be effective when you are strolling with your lover and they ask, "Shall we have a cup of tea or go to the theater?" Moreover, women have a nasty habit of getting upset and blaming you as if you made the bad movie yourself if the movie poster isn't good. For example, they might say, "You call this a movie? You asked me to come see this! You're so clueless!" or "I'll never go to the theater with you again! Did I come all the way here just to see this kind of movie...?" These are scary declarations! Even if you disregard the benefits of such romantic or courtship relationships, you can answer people's questions on the street about what movies are currently showing at which theaters and what the movies are about. Being able to answer questions directly like this earns you praise from others in any situation. Also, if you have some insight into the flow of plays or movies, adding slight embellishments when answering will be even more effective.

2
Now, let's say you've taken a seat in a movie theater thanks to an advertisement (or at the request of a lover or friend, it doesn't matter!). What's the first thing you should do then? What should you do first? Don't overthink it; just go to the restroom (便所). It may sound funny, but going to the restroom helps calm your mind and is necessary for planning your next move. If you enter the movie theater and have time before the show starts, it's interesting to go to the restroom and then stroll leisurely and dignifiedly through the lobby or aisles. At this time, your attitude should be very calm and weighty so that people will look at you and think, "That guy must be a celebrity in the movie industry," and be filled with caution and admiration. Yawning with a bored expression will also attract attention, but this method can easily have the opposite effect, so be careful when choosing this method.

And if you run to the movie theater and the movie has already started, ignore the movie and take your seat, put down your hat or coat, and go to the restroom first. If the movie has already started, seeing it for two or three minutes more or less makes no difference. Going to the restroom is more important. I see many people rushing to the restroom during the short intermission between movies, but that is a very clumsy action and is not commendable, at least from the perspective of a high-class person or even from the standpoint of social etiquette.

3
Also, some people get anxious and read the program or the plot written in the "weeklies" before the movie starts, but that's not a good thing either. If you can't understand the story or connection of a movie without reading that kind of explanation before watching it, then you have a significant problem as a movie buff. You should be prepared to completely lose your qualification as a movie buff with just this. This is something to pay great attention to. You can just glance at the program when you get home.

What's even more absurd is seeing friends struggling to read the program by stealing the dim light even after the movie has started and the lights have been dimmed. This is truly tragic and beyond words.

The first scene and the subtitles that appear at the beginning are originally the most important parts of a movie. Unless you oversee the production credits and stroke your chin with a smile, you are still far from becoming a high-class person. And some ignorant friends think it's all over as soon as the hero and heroine hug each other, and they get up and rush to the exit as if they're in a hurry. But this is also a significant mistake. Events can still occur after that, and getting up without seeing the last scene is unforgivable as a movie buff. Everything has a beginning and an end. You should know that the first scene and the last scene are invariably mentioned by movie buffs when discussing movies.

4
Next, if there is music during the intermission, you can listen to it or not, it doesn't matter. The point is not to pay too much attention to the music. Moreover, if you are so moved that you clap after it ends, you run the risk of being ridiculed by others, so be careful. In any case, a high-class movie buff cannot cope with such easy emotions. You should always keep in mind that you need to have a nonchalant attitude, saying things like, "It's so funny I can't watch," "I can't stand listening to this," or "This is terrible."

5
Then, gentlemen, what attitude should you take when the film suddenly breaks during the movie? At that time, you should sit quietly with a Christ-like expression. It is extremely vulgar to shout, "The movie's ruined!" or "Turn on the lights!" or to peek into the projection room. Also, when there is a power outage, it is better to sit quietly and pretend to be thinking about something. However, don't close your eyes and fall asleep while pretending to think.

6
Next, what attitude should you take when the narrator drones on with unnecessary things or mistranslates the subtitles? At that time, you should glare at the side where the narrator is standing with a very scary face. This may not have any objective effect, but from a subjective point of view, it gives you the exhilarating feeling of a patriot whose blood is boiling with justice, and your heart feels refreshed.

7
Now! You have seen the movie. Then the remaining question will be how to critique it. The story? The scenario? The director? The actors? If you make a cookie-cutter critique like this, then you cannot be a high-class movie buff. You can laugh at those who spout such things, calling them "people who give many orders with little food." Instead, you should utter aphorisms. You should dismiss the movie with one hand. It is not the concern of modern high-class people to use long speeches to expose the emptiness of the content or to show their own shortcomings to others. After all, it is a world of make-believe.

8
In this day and age, those who want to be high-class movie buffs don't necessarily have to see all the famous movies. You can pass as a high-class person even if you haven't seen them. Instead, you should carefully read the movie reviews in newspapers and magazines, and when others ask why you haven't seen a movie, memorize only the critical parts of the review and say, "In the end, it was just a movie that was swayed by a flimsy story! Who would go see something like that?" and dismiss it with one word. Then, after glancing through foreign movie magazines, say, "However, I have high expectations for the movie '△△' that the American ○○ Company is currently producing! If only that would come over here, I would put everything else aside and go see it..." and subtly show that you are knowledgeable about movies, thus manipulating your interlocutor's liver. Isn't that refreshing?

9
Your clothing shouldn't be too chaotic. If it's too flashy or the design is too unusual, you can easily be mistaken for a vagrant or a "modu," which would ruin your reputation in vain. It's better to be the head of a chicken than the tail of an ox. It's better to be seen as Marks or Robespierre than to be mistaken for a "mo-dan."

Also, you shouldn't be mistaken for a cinematographer or cameraman. A high-class movie buff must avoid being confused with people from the film studio with meticulous care. You shouldn't be confused with critics either. At the very least, you should despise the people at the film studio as clever dogs of capitalists and treat critics as parasites or paid hack writers. Also, you should never carry around movie magazines, unless they are foreign. In short, a high-class movie buff should have the pride of a cineaste, be snobbish and melancholy, know how to despise, be superficially knowledgeable, and also be a skillful sophist, and many other things.

10
Finally, one thing to mention in passing is about the current popular movies, talkies. Our high-class movie buffs should be cautious if they are sound pictures, but unfortunately, if they are talking pictures. Why? Unless you are an outstanding linguist or a brilliant improvisational poet, you may not be able to respond to your companion's (e.g., your lover's) questions, and you may have eternal regrets. Therefore, I say again, a high-class movie buff should broadly and deeply cover up the fact that they do not require knowledge and culture, and instead, they should firmly grasp despising as their sole motto, philosophy, and tactic, and know that they should keep their distance respectfully.

Named Entities

李 －인	Li Pa'in
모	mo-dan
맑스	Markx
로보힐	Robespierre



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	高級映畵 되는 秘訣十則
필자	講師　스크린·－쥐
기사형태	잡저

高級映畵 되는 秘訣十則
						講師　스크린·－쥐
現代靑年이란 그 言語에 잇서 處身에 잇서 아니 손가락 한개를 놀니는데 잇어서도 모름직이 高級이여야 한다高級! 얼마나 입맛이 당기는 말이냐!
hign and noble 리모어-의 푸로과 가튼 noble 美國이면 摩天樓 댁이와가튼 hign　그러한 것을　집어삼킨듯한　自면서도　頑迷한구석이 업고　輕快軟美하면서도　浮輕한맛이 업서야만　所謂高級에 屬하는 榮光을 가질 것이다.　그러나　高級의 時代哲學的解釋은　다음 講義에미루고　오늘은　諸君들압헤서　映畵의高級되는 秘訣을　解說하는　榮光을　내가 먼저　가지기로한다。

1
大槪　水曜日이나　水曜日夕刊新聞에는各映畵館의　寫眞交替廣告가　다토아난다諸君이　高級映畵　이되려면　먼저　그러한廣告가운데서　한번　鑑賞할價値가잇슴즉한映畵를　選擇한다음에　그映畵의監督이며　主演俳優등의일흠을　외워두고　寫眞內容에들어가서도　될수잇는대로　多少間미리　알어둘必要가잇다。
그리고　위연만한映畵이면　對切하기전에　新聞이나　雜誌에서　「試寫室에서」란題로　簡單한　批評비슷한 것이　실니는 法이다。 諸君은 무엇보담도 먼저(一面記事보담도) 그記事를 通讀해두어야한다。
그러고보면 諸君이 諸君의戀人과더부러散步를나왓다가「茶나한잔 마시려오 劇場엘가시료?」 할도 그러한 豫備識見이如干有效한게 아니다 더구나 女子들이란寫眞이조치못하면 그寫眞을 가치간사나희가 만들기나한것처름 증을내고 책망을하는 고약한버릇이잇다 가령이를테면「이진걸다 사진이라고 구경오렛서요! 당신두참도하시우!」 혹은「인젠 두 번두 당신하고가치 극장에오진아을테야요 내가그래 겨우이우사진을 보러 왓단말이요……?」 이런 매서운宣告等이다 무섭지아느냐!? 설사 이러한 戀愛, 求愛關係等의 利得을 度外視하고도路上에서 偶然히 사람을맛낮슬 그사람의質問에應하야 시방아무映畵館에서는무슨映畵를 上映中인데 그映畵는云云, 이럿케直席에서 對答할수잇는 利益이르는닭이다。 이와가치 直席에서 남의質問에 應答할수잇다는 것은 무슨일이고間에 남의讚嘆을 밧는法이다。그러고 萬若 諸君이 劇이나映畵의 氣脈에多少間通하는바가잇다면 그答을할 살작살작添附揷入作用을 하고보면 效驗이더욱날것이 틀님엄다。

2
자 그러면 諸君이 廣告의 案內로(혹은戀人이나 친구들의 要請에應해서든지상관이엄지만)이제 映畵館의 한座席을차지햇다고하자! 그러면 그 諸君이가장먼저 取할方法이 무엇일가? 諸君은 무엇을먼저하여야 할것인가! 그러나 너무어렵게 생각할것은업다 그저便所에가라는게다。 우수운말가트나 便所에가라는 것은 마음을가라안치는데 적지안흔도움이 될아니라 다음方策을 세우는데도 必要한 것이다。 寫眞館에 들어가보아서 始作하기지에 時間의 餘裕가잇슬는 便所에 갓다나와서 悠悠凜凜한 態度로 당하나 通路가튼데를 건닐는것도興이잇다。 이態度는 아주 沈着하고도 무게잇게보여야 하나니 하여간 一見之下에 남들이 짐즛 아마놈이 映畵界名士인가보다 하고 남에게 警戒와讚美의 嘆辭가흘으게 態度를가저야한다 지루해못견듸여하는 얼골로 하품을하는것도남의注意를 을기는하나 이方法은 도로히 反對의效果를 가저오기가 쉬우니 이方法을 擇할는 機微를잘보아서 하지아느면 失敗다。
그리고 만약諸君이 寫眞館으로달녀갓슬 임이映畵가 始作되엿슬는 寫眞상관할것업시 자리를잡아 帽子나外套를 노와두고는 便所부터 먼저가야할것이다。 임이始作된寫眞일것가트면 二三分동안더보나 덜보나맛찬가지다。 그것보다는便所에단여오는게 더必要하다。 한寫眞이나고 다시다른寫眞이 始作되는 은休息時間에 불이낮케 便所에갓다가 慌急히자리에 돌아오는사람을만히보는데 그것은 극히拙劣한行動이요 적어도 高級에잇서서는 勿論 社會道德의觀念에서말하드래도 그리稱讚할바行動이못된다。

3
그리고 寫眞이 始作되기전에 急해저서 푸로그람이나 위-크리에쓰인 푸롯트를 닑는사람이잇는데 그것도 아름답지못한일이라 대관절 映畵를보기전에그런類의 解說을 닑지안고는 映畵의 스토리나 聯絡을 모른대서야 映畵으로써 적지안흔問題라할수잇다 이것만으로도 映畵의資格은 完全히喪失된다고 覺悟하고잇서도좃타。 크게注意할일이다。 푸로그람가튼 것은 집에돌아가서 눈을한번 거치면 그만이다。
더구나 긔막히는 것은 寫眞이始作되여電燈이커진뒤에도 그캄캄한불빗을 훔쳐서 푸로그람을 닑을여애쓰고잇는 친구들이다。 이럿케되면 悲慘又慘憺 實로言語道斷이다。
映畵란원래 그 first scene과 아울너最初에나오는 字幕이 가장必要한 것이다 이製作役割을 一督하고는 微笑를 우여서 아래턱을 스담게되지안코는 아즉도 高級되기는멀엇다。 그리고 몰으는 친구들은 hero와 heroine이 서로안기만하면 발서다된줄알고 일어나서 무엇이그리急한지 出口로 우루루몰여나가는 고약한버릇이잇다 그러나이것도 적지안흔 失策인 것이 映畵란 그뒤에도 事件이 始作되는수가잇스며 첫제 last scene을보지안코 일어선다는 것은 映畵으로 容恕치못할일이다。 엇더한일이고 첨이잇고 이업는法은업다。 first scene과 last scene은 映畵를 論함에잇서서 반다시 들의입에 올으는것임을 알어두어야한다。

4
그다음休憩時間에 奏樂이잇슬는 그것을들어도좃코 듯지안어도 상관이업다。 단지 要點은 奏樂에너무 귀를기우려서는 안된다는말이다。 더구나난뒤에 感激해서 손벽을친든지 하고보면 남의嘲笑를 바들憂慮가 만흔것이니 注意할일이다。 하여튼 高級映畵이란 그리헐하게感激해서는 견대나갈수업는 處世術?이다。 무엇이고『정말 우수워못보겟네』라든지『나온 긔가막혀 이걸엇듯케 듯고잇서』라든가『이건 지독헌데』等等의 능청스런 態度를 가저야한다는 것을 늘 머리속에 銘念해두어야한다。

5
그러면諸君! 映畵中에 突然히 음(film)이 허질는 엇더한態度를 取할것인가 그는 크리스트와가튼 얼골을하고 黙黙히안저잇서야하다。『사진망햇다』『불켜라』하고 怒號한다든가 映寫室을 힐힐 들여다보는 것은 賤薄하기짝이업는짓이다。停電이되엿슬에도 자지에 가만히안저서 무엇을생각하고잇는것처름 보히는게좃타 그럿타고 너무생각하는척하노라고 눈을감고 그대로 잠이들어바리면 야단이다。

6
다음 解說者가 쓸데업는것을 느려놋는다든지 字幕가튼것을 誤譯햇슬는엇더한態度를 取할것인가하면 그는 아주 무서울얼골로 解說者가서잇는편을노려보는것이다。 이것은 客觀的으로 아무른效果도업다고 생각할넌지모르나 主觀的見地에서 본다면 正義의 熱血이 러오르는 志士와가튼 興奮을 늣기게되여 다시업시 마음이 快한 것이다。

7
자! 諸君은 인제映畵를보앗다 그리면 엇더케그것을 批評할가가 나머지問題일것이라。 스토리는? 시나리오는? 監督은? 俳優는? 이럿케 版에 박은듯한批評을한다면 발서諸君은 高級映畵이못된다。 그런 것을 짓거리는 徒輩를가르처諸君은 食少事煩의 注文도리라고 鼻笑하고잇서도 좃타。 그보다는 警句를 吐해야한다。 한팔로 그映畵를 차던저야한다 기다란辯舌을 弄하야 內容의 空虛를 暴露식힌다든지 自己의 不足處를 남에게보히든지 하는 것은 모-던高級들의 關與할바못된다 무엇이고 Make believe의 世上이니말이다。

8
그리고보면 今世의高級映畵된자 반다시 일홈잇는映畵를 全部다보고 단이지안어도된다。 안이 보지안트래도 高級으로 通할수잇다 그대신 新聞雜誌에실니는映畵批評을 精讀해두엇다가 다른사람들이 웨안보느냐고 물을는 그批評의 攻擊部分만을 외워두어서『結局허잘것업는 스토리에左右된 映畵엿섯지뭐야! 흥그진걸 누가보러간단말이야』 하고 한마듸로 擊退해바리면고만이다。 그러고는 外國映畵雜誌等을 一督해두엇다가『그러나 이번米國○○會社에서 製作하고잇는 △△란 映畵만은 나로서적지안흔 企待를 가지고잇는걸! 그것이 건너오기만하고보면 億萬事를제처놋코도 보러가겠네만은……』하고는 슬적 映畵通인點을보혀서 相對者의 肝을주무러놋는것도 속시원한노릇아니냐

9
服色은 너무혼란해서는 못쓴다 너무 지나치게 華麗하다든지 製法이別나고보면浮浪者나 모로 잘못보히기가쉬워서 헛되이 名聲을러트리게된다。 寧爲鷄口언정 不爲牛後로 맑스·이 로보힐지언정 모·로 잘못보혀서 쓸가부냐다。
그러고 撮影監督이나 캐메러맨으로보혀서도 안된다。高級映畵은 撮影所人種들과 混同되는 것을 細心한注意를가지고 避해야한다批評家부류의 人種하고도 混同이되지말어야한다。 적어도 撮影所人種들을 資本家의 怜悧한走狗로보아 輕蔑하고 批評家를 寄生蟲이나 御用賣文業者로 取扱하는 것이다。 그러고 映畵雜誌가튼 것은 外國것이면몰나도 絶對로 가지고단여서는 안된다。 要컨대 高級映畵은 시네어스트의 衿恃를가지고 스넙하면서 憂鬱하여야하고 輕蔑할줄을알고 淺學博識이여야하며한巧妙한詭辯家여야하며 其他여러가지여야한다。

10
흐로한가지 浮言해둘 것은 요사이流行映畵인 토-키에대한것인데 우리高級映畵들은 그것이 사운드·픽춰-이면상관이업지만 不幸히도 토-킹·픽춰-일는 勤愼을해야한다 何故오하면 諸君이 여난語學者이거나 긔막흰卽興詩人이아닌以上 同伴者(例컨대 君들의 戀人)의質問에 應하지못하야 千秋에悔恨을 남길念慮가 업지안흐니말이다。 그럼으로 다시말하노니 高級映畵은 廣汎深遠한 智識과 敎養을 要하는 것은 이것저것 할것업시 덥허놋코 敬而遠之하고그대신 罵蔑하는 것을 唯一한 Motto요哲學이요 戰術로알고 굿게 把握하고잇서야한다。