별건곤 제29호
1930년 06월 01일
행길에서 失戀復讐 (Revenge for a Broken Heart on the Street) (Literary Criticism)

In the heart of a woman scorned, a flame of wrath blazed without discrimination. Her blood felt like pillars of fire coursing through her, and unable to bear it, she ran madly into the street. Her eyes, filled with nothing but the cruelty of revenge, searched in front of the ○hwa Girls' School (○花學校) for the figure of her lover, walking joyfully to school with her friends, the morning sun reflecting off her neatly combed hair. It was her detestable lover, who had betrayed her and run into the arms of another man. Like an enraged wolf, she pounced with fire in her eyes, grabbing her by the hair, striking and kicking her indiscriminately, spitting on her face... she did all she could with her hands and feet. The weak and pitiful woman, caught in the sudden attack, had no way to resist. Her swollen cheeks, lightly covered with Japanese beauty powder (日本美顏料), immediately developed bumps. Her skirt was torn, and her hair was disheveled... However, upon hearing this urgent news, Principal Kim (金○○氏), who rushed over breathless, fainted, and no one said a word or even tried to stop her. From behind the crowd, countless faces seemed more concerned about missing the interesting spectacle and feared it would end too quickly, revealing nothing but that expression. Regardless of the reason, how could people's nerves be so numbed that they didn't even raise an eyebrow at a woman being beaten so severely? Was it weariness from the hardships of life? In any case, that man's method of revenge was barbaric and clumsy, and not befitting of a man. What can turn a woman's heart once it has turned? Will crying or hitting her do the trick? Adopt a new and liberated view of life and love! He should cure that insanity...

Golden Fingertip Guards

Recently, Parisian women have become obsessed with dyeing their nails... If one were to say that, even the women of the countryside would scoff, saying, "What's so great about that? We've been dyeing our nails with balsam flowers (봉선화) for ages..." However, since it's Paris, and the Parisian beauties who boast tiny waists with corsets, even when they dye their nails, they use various colors like blue, yellow, red, green, and gold, and they match the color of the fingertip guards (掌甲) they wear to harmonize with the color of their nails. So, recently, a certain Countess appeared wearing golden fingertip guards with golden nails. It was such a novel sight that it was initially thought to be fake gold, but it was later revealed to be woven with fine gold threads. Since then, orders for fingertip guards woven with gold, silver, and platinum have been flooding in so much that the fingertip guard merchants are going crazy. Our modern girls (모들), suffering from a gold shortage! Don't you want to try one? However, since it costs over 500 won, will there be any modern girl with the courage to buy it? It's a rather useless worry... Modern, trendy, cutting-edge, nails - terms that go well together.

Street School Girl

A certain painter was on his way to France and stopped at the Ch'ŏngjin Inn (淸○旅館) in a corner of Ch'ŏngjin-dong (淸進洞), Seoul. Although he checked in because of a friend's recommendation, the appearance of the place was as frightening and sinister as the courtyard of a demon's lair, yet it possessed some kind of charm that made him unable to turn back. So, he settled in a room guided by the owner and unpacked his luggage. By some coincidence, the room next door was occupied by a female student. The mere sight of two pairs of pointed women's shoes neatly placed in front of the door next to his room, separated only by a wall, was an unexpected comfort. He had a vague expectation and a slight anxiety that something would happen if he stayed there for a few days, but how could he have imagined that things would begin that very night? That night, a yellowish voice saying, "Excuse me," cautiously opened the painter's door.
△ "Who is it?"
○ "Um, could you lend me a newspaper?"
△ "I don't have a newspaper."
○ "Then, could you lend me some kind of novel?"
△ "I don't have any novels at all."
○ "Don't you have any magazines or anything?"
△ "I don't have any magazines or anything!"
The painter turned around and looked at the wall. The female student, having failed in her first attempt, did not forget to apologize and closed the door. Every night, until they fell asleep, the high-speed, fervent discussions that made their lips ache were actually about the rights and wrongs of the fate of the heroines in newspapers and novels. And occasionally, the sound of a man's laughter could be heard from that room. He also realized that school was in their never-ending blankets. This is what they call a "street school girl" (STREET SCHOOL GIRL) cultivated in this kind of inn. "Street" (스트리트) is similar in sound and meaning to "ga" (假 - fake) so watch out in Seoul if you mess up - you might end up being a teacher in a blanket school (이불학교). If you are unemployed and have ideas then maybe, but those that don't should be careful!

**Named Entities**

金○○氏	Kim
○hwa Girls' School	○花學校
Ch'ŏngjin-dong	淸進洞
Ch'ŏngjin Inn	淸○旅館



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	행길에서 失戀復讐
기사형태	문예평론

행길에서 失戀復讐
失戀한사나희의 가상에는 아모分別도업는 분노의불길이 타올넛다 全身에흐르는피가 모다샛발간 불기동이 된듯참지못해 그는밋친듯이 거리로여나갓다復讐의殘忍性밧게 더남지안은 그의눈은○花學校校門압헤서 동무들과 쌍쌍이봄날의아침빗을 고히빗긴머리우에 反射하면서 즐거운 걸음거리로 登校하는戀人의뒷모양을 차저내엿다 자긔를背叛하고다른 사나희의 품으로다라난可憎한 愛人이엿다 그는진노한 승냥이가티 두눈에불을켜고 와락 달겨들엇다 머리채를휘휘감어쥐고 닥치는대로 리고 차고얼골에 가래침을뱃고…두손과두발로할대로는다하얏다 불의에 습격을당한약하고 가련한女子는 대항할길이업섯다 일본美顔料를 살작먹음은 볼통한 두ᆯ에는 대번에혹이느러젓다 치마는 저지고 머리는흣트러지고…그러나 이 급보를듯고 숨이턱에다어 달려온 校長金○○氏가 긔절하야 혼도한것밧게는누구하나말니는사람도 말한마듸 걸어보는사람도업섯다한다 억개넘어로 겹겹이내면 수업는얼골들에는자미잇는 구경리를 놋칠가봐 속히 치날가봐넘려하는듯한 표정밧게는더움즉이지안엇다 理由야 如何間에 女子가그럿케도 몹시어더맛는걸보고도 눈섭하나 작안하리만치 사람들의神經이 마비되엿든가 生에시달닌倦怠이엿나! 그건하여간 그사나희의復讎手段이야말로 蠻的이요拙劣하다 사나희답지도못하다 한번돌아진 女子의마음을뭘로돌니랴 울어서되며린다고되랴! 좀더 새롭고解脫된 人生觀과 戀愛觀을가저보아라! 그런痴狂症을 잘곳처주느니……

黃金掌甲
最近巴里모들은 손톱에 물들이기에熱이낫단다‧‧‧‧하면「그진게뭐그리장하오 우리는언제부터 손톱에봉선화물을드려왓는데‧‧‧‧」하고 우리싀골색시지 빈정거릴게다 그러나 곳이 巴里요콜셋트를고 細腰를자랑하든 巴里美人들이니만치 물을드려도 靑‧黃‧赤‧綠‧黃‧金色等가진 色彩로 물을드리며 손에는掌甲빗도 손톱色彩에 調和를마처가튼빗갈로한단다 그리햐야 얼마前에는某伯爵夫人이 金色손톱에 金色이燦然한掌甲을고나섯다 처음보는일이라 필시假ㅅ字金이려니햇드니 나종알고보니 그게 가는黃金絲로것이드라나 그리고부터는 金銀라나等으로 掌甲注文이엇지나 들이밀니는지 인제는掌甲商이바람이나고 경풍을할지경이란다 黃金不足症에걸닌우리모들아! 하나보구십흐냐 그러나갑시五百圓이넘는다니 사줄勇氣를가진 모가 과연잇슬가‧‧‧‧좀실업슨걱정이다만‧‧‧‧모-던‧流行‧尖端‧손톱‧괜찬이어울니는 術語들이다。

STREET SCHOOL GIRL
엇던畵家하나가 佛蘭西가는길에 서울淸進洞한구석에잇는淸○旅館에들엇섯다。
친구의紹介로 들기는하엿스나 집생긴품이발서 伏魔殿의압가티 무시무시하고 응큼하면서도 그저돌아설수는업는무슨魅力을가젓드라나 그래主人의인도로房하나를定하고 旅裝을풀게되엿는데무슨인연이엿든지 바로女學生잇는 엽헤房이엿드라고 壁하나를隔한 엽房문압헤족한女子의구두가 두켜레 나란히 노엿다는것만도 望外의慰安이 아닐수업섯다엇전지 몃칠만묵고잇스면 무슨일이 생기고야말듯한 어렴풋한긔대와 가벼운不安지돌긴하엿스나 일이 그날밤으로始作될줄이야 엇지하엿스랴 그날밤「용서하세요」하는 노르스름한 목소래가바시시 화가의방문을열엇다。
△누구요?
○저어 신문점빌려주세요
△신문업서요
○그럼 저어 무슨 소설책이라도빌려주섯스면……
△소설책 도모지업쇠다
○잡지가튼것도업스세요?
△잡지가튼것도업소!
화가는 돌아안자벽을처다보앗다 첫교섭에 실패한女學生은 그래도미안하다는인사를닛지안코 문을다첫다 밤마다잠들기前지 입리가압푸도록 재잘대는高速度的熱熱한談論은알고보니 新聞小說女主人公의運命에對한 是是非非드란다
그리고 간간이는 그방에서 남자의우슴소래도석기여나오드라고-학교는 그들의 개킬줄모르는이불속에잇다는것도알엇다。 이것이 이런類의旅館에서養成해가는STREET SCHOOL GIRL라는게다「스트리트」는「街」로「假」와는音相似意相通이라니말이다 서울와서ᆺ댁잘못하면 이불학교敎師로就任을하게된다 失業者로생각이잇스면 모르지만 그러치못한사람은注意할일!