잡지명	別乾坤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	新綠과 나 (The New Green and I)
필자	崔曙海
기사형태	문예기타 (Literature, Other)

The New Green and I
						Ch’oe Sŏhae

My house is across the street from the Sŏnŭigung grounds (宣義宮압). When you leave the gate, there is a cabbage patch the size of a cat's forehead. If you go past that patch to the left for two or three houses, there is a small stream. That is right next to the Sŏnŭigung main road (宣義宮압 큰길), and the water flowing from Inwang Mountain (인왕산) and the well water that people in our neighborhood drink mix together and flow gurgling. Along the stream, there are old willow trees standing with sparsely drooping branches. I have only now seen those branches, dyed in a light green color, swaying in the spring breeze. This morning, I went out to the main road with my child in my arms because she kept dozing off while her mother was cooking rice, and I saw it. This is a true story that seems like a lie. I have lived in this neighborhood for more than a day or two, and it hasn't been just a day or two since the willow branches turned green, but I only noticed it this morning. Is it because my mind is burdened with trivial matters? Or is it because I am too indifferent? I don't know, but when I saw the willow leaves, growing thickly right in front of my house, for the first time yesterday, I couldn't help but feel absurdly sad that I, as a being, was aging. Standing in the hazy morning mist, bathed in the gentle and tender morning sunlight, my heart trembled with an inexplicable feeling of affection as I looked at those branches, faintly green with sprouts as soft as a child's hair. The blue light of Pugak Mountain (북악) and the haze at the top of Inwang Mountain (인왕산) also seemed like things I was seeing for the first time. The world is so green. Even old trees have sprouted leaves. Yet I didn't know. I don't even have a patch of field, so what would I know about the seasons, but when I think about it, there is probably no being more insignificant than a human who doesn't know the seasons. What was blocking my ears, and what was covering my eyes? I stroked the hair of the child in my arms, who was smiling innocently, and looked again at the new green world where the warm sunlight was flowing. Although those colors will surely fade with the seasons, what will become of these things in the future?

**Named Entities**

宣義宮압	Sŏnŭigung ap
인왕산	Inwangsan
북악	Pugak
崔曙海	Ch’oe Sŏhae



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	新綠과 나
필자	崔曙海
기사형태	문예기타

新綠과 나
						崔曙海
우리집은 선의궁압 큰길건너편이외다 대문을나서면고양이 니마만한 배추밧치잇슴니다 그밧흘왼편으로 고이삼간나오면 실개천이잇슴니다 그것은바로 선의궁압 큰길인데 인왕산에서 흐르는물과우리동리에서먹는 우물물이 서로 어울려서 졸졸졸흘으로잇슴니다 그개천에는 늙은버드나무가 듬은듬은실가티늘어진가지를 니고서잇슴니다 실가티늘어진 그가지가연두빗츠로 물들여 봄람에 하늘거리는것을 이제야 비소보앗슴니다 아참에 어린애가 밥짓는 안해를 하도졸으기에안고큰길로나갓다가 보앗슴니다 이것은거짓말가튼참말임니다 내가이동리로이사한지가하로이틀이안이요 그버드나무가지가 풀은것이한하로잇흘이안이엇슬터인데 내눈에인것은어제아츰이엇슴니다 마음이 허울의 수고를바드니그런지? 는내가넘어도무심하여서그런지는몰으나하여튼 바로집아페욱어저가는 버들닙흘어제비로소볼 나는어지나라는존재를넘어도 어이업시늑기지안을수업섯슴니다 아른한아침연긧속을 고요히그리고도정답게 흘너내리는 아침볏을밧고서서 어린애가티부드러운싹에 실실이풀은 그가지를보는내가슴은 닭몰을 애틋한늑김에흔들리엿슴니다 북악의푸른빗과 인왕산머리의 아지랑이도 모다 처음보는것가티엿슴니다 천지는이러케풀으럿슴니다 늙은 나무에지 잎이텃슴니다 그래도나는몰낫슴니다 한사래의밧도업는 내가 철은아러무엇하리이만은 생각하면 철을몰으는 인간가티 미미한존재는 세상에서업슬것임니다 무엇이나의귀를막고 무엇이나의눈을가리엇든고? 나는가슴에안겨서 철업시 방긋거리는 어린것의을문질으며 수한 볏발이흘으는 신록의천지를다시보앗슴니다 저빗치야철을일흐리이만은 이것들 장래는엇지될딘지?