잡지명	別乾坤 第29號
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	뷔인주머니 (Empty Pouch)
필자	金昭姐
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Is it the tears of parting that begrudge spring? The rain falls steadily all day long. It falls like the monsoon rain, without rest.

Even without that, in this world full of sorrow and bitterness, how much more do these rains of the old spring days, falling with mournful sounds, scatter the hearts of so many young people!

Even if the day were clear, there wouldn't be many places to go, but my heart feels heavier as if I can't go because of the rain. I have no choice but to deceive my heart by thinking that way. It is cruel.

A boarding house on a rainy day is particularly bleak and lonely. I don't have much attachment to my hometown, but on rainy days, I am always tormented by homesickness. I closed all the books and went out to the porch, opening the door. The eaves and the fence meet, and the roof of the house across the street meets in front of the fence. Unfortunately, from this cramped house, I can't even see the cloudy sky.

Looking out through that narrow gap, I can see the green trees in the neighbor's yard. Among them, there is a tall zelkova tree (?) that I thought was dead because it didn't turn green even in spring, but lately, though late in recognizing spring, it has grown leaves as big as anyone else's, and the sap has risen. New green! New green adorning the old spring!

If flowers flirt and reach out their tiny hands to distract my heart, the new green has a light yet subtle great charm that intoxicates people.

Having prepared rain gear, I went up to Ch'uiun Pavilion (翠雲亭) to find the new green.

All that is heard is the sound of rain, and all that is seen is the blue color. I stood there blankly, as if drunk. I don't know where all the jumbled thoughts have run off to; only my heart is empty. Only a large rubber pouch remains that can hold endlessly.

When I came back to my senses, there was still only the sound of rain and the blue color. No matter how much I look at it, it is the never-tiring new green. It is the new green that came to me in the rain but has no words.

It is the new green that seduces my restless heart.

The rain-soaked new green is dark in color, and the leaves are so abundant that the green shade will be lush in the near future.

But is this year's spring rain not falling on the wronged people and the frustrated masses?

○ Again, my heart is empty, and only a large rubber pouch remains that can hold endlessly.

**Named Entities**

金昭姐	Kim So-je
翠雲亭	Ch'uiun-jŏng



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	뷔인주머니
필자	金昭姐
기사형태	문예기타

뷔인주머니
						金昭姐
봄을앗기는이별의눈물인지-비는왼종일한결가티나리고잇다。 장마비와도가티 쉬일새업시나리고잇다。
그럿치안어도 괴롬만코 설홈만흔 이에 애련한소리를내이며 나리는 늙은봄날의이비는 얼마나만흔젊은이의마음을散亂케하는지!
날이맑엇단들 갈곳이야 별로잇섯스랴만은 비문에못가는것처럼 마음한편이가비얍지가못하다。 그럿케라도생각하야 내마음을속일수밧게업스니말이다 야속한일이다。
비오는날 下宿집이란 별하게도 음산하고쓸쓸하다 내별로 고향에애착이업건만은 비오는날만은 늘-鄕愁에마음을조리고잇는것이다。 보든책을덥허놋코 문을열고 대청에나섯다 첨하와 담장이맛붓고 건넛집집웅이담장압헤맛다은 안탑갑게도붓흔 이집은 亦是 구름백힌 하눌이나마도 볼수엄다。
그좁은틈으로 부비여 내다보면 엽집에잇는 푸른나무가보인다。 그중에도귀달한느틔(?)나무하나는봄이되여도 푸르지를안키에 죽은줄로만알엇드니 요사이에는 늣게 봄을알엇슬망정 남못지안케닙히크고 물이올낫다。 新綠! 늙은봄을 치장하는新綠이!
이 아양부리며 조고마한 손을 내밀어 내마음을잇다하면 新綠은 輕快하면서도 은근한 큰 魅力을가지고 사람을醉하게한다。
雨備를 갓초고 新綠을차저翠雲亭으로올나갓다。
들니는것은비소래요 뵈이는것은푸른빗이다。 술취한것처럼 멍-하니서잇섯다。 뒤숭숭하든생각이 다어데로달아낫는지 오직마음이텡뷔여잇슬이다。 수업시담을수잇는 큰고무주머니가남어잇슬이다。
正體로돌아왓슬도 역시 비소리와푸른빗이잇슬이다。 암만보아도계염증안나는 新綠이다。 비마즈며 차저왓스되 아모 말이업는新綠이다。
갈내만흔마음을 誘惑식히는 新綠이다。
비마즌 新綠은 색이진하고 닙이 만허저서 멀지안은 압날에 綠陰이 욱어질것이다。
그러나 억울한이 鬱憤한이백성들에게는금년도 봄비가안이나리나。

○ 다시마음은 텡뷔이고, 수업시담을수잇는 큰고무주머니가 남어잇슬이다。