잡지명	별건곤  
발행일	1927년 12월 20일  
기사제목	新年劈頭의 大偉觀 (The Grand Viewpoint at the Start of the New Year)  
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Editorial)  

The New Year brings a magnificent edition of our magazine!! 

In addition to the grand special feature, there are also supplementary items presented. 

The best New Year reading material in the world! Spend your year with laughter through a single issue! 

Tales of Odd People and Strange Behaviors from East and West 

In a world that is caught up with small wealth and honor, even the illustrious Ten Thousand Chariots Emperor and Millionaire Tycoons abandon them to meander freely and leisurely like ancient odd individuals from both East and West! This is history within history, and the strange among the strange!! 

Chronicles of Famous People’s Events 

Before an audience of over a thousand, famous personalities shout on stage! Fear not! They have faced such failures that have stirred up such controversies. Many readers from Gyeong and Yang will likely witness this!

Secret Stories of Life: Four Great Strange Tales 

Facts we do not know from fleeting accounts! The authors are skillful journalists from various newspapers and magazines! How deeply will the life stories shared by the living resonate with our hearts? These are precious insights that must be explored.

Hosting the  

Modern Exhibition of Peculiar Trends and Customs 

Unmatched delight! Outrageously sharp satire!!!

World Exhibition of Wondrous Marriage Customs 

Strange and very strange!! Look at these curious customs that defy explanation! 

Special Reading Material: ○○○○ 

This is a special publication that our magazine has been planning for over half a year! The content will remain strictly confidential until the publication date of the New Year issue, but I can confidently say it will become a new source of pride for our magazine for readers! 

Await the New Year issue!! 

New Year Predictions for New Trends 

What will become the new trends in the coming year… Truly fascinating predictive articles. Only satirical and suggestive, but they are rare stories! 

Main Article Aggregation: ○○ Grand Investigation 

Unique to our magazine!! A dynamic aggregation of main articles! What is ○○? It will be captured in one sweep! Look forward to strange discoveries by our readers. 

Special New Year Supplement Presented Free 

Though it may not be extravagant, this is a "gift" from our magazine to readers for the first time. Beautiful and substantial! Given generously to those who purchase the New Year issue. 

Additionally, over seventy new intriguing articles are packed!! 

The price is only fifty-two coins, so order quickly!!  

Summary  

This editorial highlights the forthcoming New Year issue of the magazine "별건곤," emphasizing its grand content, intriguing features on peculiar people and customs, and exclusive stories that promise to captivate readers. It employs a tone of excitement and anticipation, positioning itself as essential seasonal reading. The article reflects a cultural fascination with eccentricities during the colonial period, where interests often circled around depicting the unusual as entertainment, hinting at the contemporary societal dynamics in colonial Korea. Scholars might find the blending of satire and curiosity in this periodical indicative of the social undercurrents of the time in Korea.

Named Entities  

별건곤	별건곤	The magazine title  
京鄕	고향	Gyeong (Kyong)  

Glossary  

新年	신년	New Year  
崇大	숭대	Magnificent, Grand  
風波	풍파	Controversy, Turmoil  
怪習	괴습	Strange customs  
特別	특별	Special  
讀物	독물	Reading material  
秘話	비화	Secret stories  


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제10호
발행일	1927년 12월 20일
기사제목	新年劈頭의 大偉觀
기사형태	사고·편집후기

新年劈頭의 大偉觀
더욱 宏壯할 本誌新年號!!
內容大特輯外에 附錄品進呈
新年讀物로 天下第一! 別乾坤一冊으로 우스면서 過歲
東西奇人奇行錄
조그만 富貴와 榮譽에 汲汲해하는 이 世上에 훌노 萬乘天子도 百萬巨富도 헌신가티집어내버리고 世外에 逍遙, 悠悠히 放浪한 東西古今의 奇人들! 史外의 史요, 奇中의 奇奇!!
名流名士『壇上風波錄』
千餘의 聽衆을 압헤두고 壇上에 叫呼하는 名流名士! 놀라지말라! 그들에게 이런 失敗로 이런 風波가잇섯다. 京鄕讀者의 目睹한것도 만히잇슬것!
人生秘話『四大事實奇談』
우리가모르는 엽헷집의 事實! 筆者들은 各新聞雜誌의 手腕記者! 살아잇는 人生이지여낸 피무든이약이는 얼마나 우리의 가슴을 를것이냐 다가티 닑어야할 貴重한이약이이다.
誌上開催
現代奇風怪俗博覽會
痛快無比! 奇拔한 諷刺는 를른다＜64＞
世界結婚怪習博覽會
怪常怪常!! 奇怪莫測의 이 怪習을보라
特別讀物『○○○○』…………
本誌가 半箇年이나 두고 計劃해오던 特別中의 特別大讀物!
內容은 新年號發行日지 絶對秘密, 本誌의 새로운 자랑거리일것만미리 말해둔다 讀者여!
新年號를가다리라!!
新年『新流行豫想記』
새로오는 一年에는 무엇이새로流行하겟는가……實로 興味津津한 豫想記事이다. 諷刺만코 暗示만흔 珍珍記事!
記事總出『○○大探査記』
本誌獨特!! 記事總出의 非常活動!! ○○은 무엇? 一網打盡하여다! 讀者의 압헤밧칠 奇怪한 收獲을보라.
特別新年附錄 無料進呈
大端한 것은 못되나 別乾坤이 讀者에 처음드리는 『선물』이다 美麗하고도 重實로운것! 新年號사는이에게 一一히 無料進呈
以外 新珍記事 七十餘種滿載!!
定價亦五十二錢 注文을 速히!!＜65＞
＜64-65＞