別건곤 第11號
1928년 02월 01일
朝鮮初有의 創作大衆讀物 名士連作大講談 (Korea's First Serialized Popular Reading Material: A Series of Lectures by Famous Figures)
소식 (News)

Korea's First Serialized Popular Reading Material: A Series of Lectures by Famous Figures
A Great Treatise Beyond Essays, A Great Novel Beyond Novels
Famous Writers in Serial (in Korean Alphabetical Order)
Kim Ki-tŏn
Yi Sang-hyŏp
Yi Ton-hwa
Pak Hŭi-do
Sŏnu Chŏn
Song Chin-u
An Chae-hong
Chŏng Tae-hyŏn
Ch'oe Nam-sŏn
Hong Myŏng-hŭi

This special serial reading material, an unprecedented new plan that could not be conceived of outside of "Pyŏl Kŏn'gon (別乾坤)", is a series of interesting lectures more interesting than novels, created by famous figures from various fields, each person connecting to the next in turn. How will the subsequent writers handle and develop the content and events created by others without prior consultation...? It is a reading material unrivaled in interest, and moreover, since the writers are not novelists, the fact that it is a creation by non-creators adds another layer of interest to this serial.

Moreover, the writers are either the chiefs of popular opinion organizations, or executives of large popular groups, or giants of the educational world. What kind of events will they handle and present to the readers...? What kind of characters will they create and how will they make them act...? They, who have devoted their lives to thinking about Korea and "Korean Life," will pour all their thoughts into this work and present it to the Korean masses. This work is truly a great novel beyond novels and at the same time a great treatise beyond essays. From this point of view, this work is something that all the millions of masses should pay attention to and read.
The title and serial order will be announced in the next issue. <79>
<79>

**Named Entities**

金起田	Kim Ki-tŏn
李相協	Yi Sang-hyŏp
李敦化	Yi Ton-hwa
朴熙道	Pak Hŭi-do
鮮于全	Sŏnu Chŏn
宋鎭禹	Song Chin-u
安在鴻	An Chae-hong
鄭大鉉	Chŏng Tae-hyŏn
崔南善	Ch'oe Nam-sŏn
洪命憙	Hong Myŏng-hŭi



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제11호
발행일	1928년 02월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮初有의 創作大衆讀物 名士連作大講談
기사형태	소식

朝鮮初有의 創作大衆讀物 名士連作大講談
論文以上의 大論文ㆍ小說以上의 大小說
連作執筆名士(가나다順)
金起田氏
李相協氏
李敦化氏
朴熙道氏
鮮于全氏
宋鎭禹氏
安在鴻氏
鄭大鉉氏
崔南善氏
洪命憙氏

『別乾坤』안이면 計劃하지못할 空前의 新計劃인 이 特別大連作讀物은 小說보다 興味잇는 講談을 各方面의 名士諸氏가 一人一回式에 을 連달어 創作해가는것이니 남의 創作한 內容事件을 彼此相議엄는 다음 執筆者들이 엇더케 取扱하야 엇더케 展開식여나갈넌지……興味잇기로 天下에 比類가업는 讀物인데 더욱 執筆者諸氏가 小說創作家가안인만큼 非創作家의 創作인 點에 이 連作이 한層의 興味를 더하는 것이외다.
그러고 執筆者諸氏가 或은 民衆言論機關의 主幹이요 或은 民衆大團體의 幹部요  或은 敎育界의 巨人들이니 그들이 將次 엇더한 事件을 取扱하야 讀者의압헤 公開할넌지………엇더한 人物을 지여서 엇더케 活動을 식일넌지………平生을다밧처 朝鮮을 생각하고 「朝鮮의 生活」을 생각하는그들이 이 作品에 그생각해온바를 다쏫아서 朝鮮의 大衆에게 提示하려는것이슬것이라 이 作品은 實로 小說以上의 大小說인 同時에 한 論文以上의 大論文이외다. 이 點에서 이 作品은 千萬大衆이 다갓치 注意하야닑어야할것이외다.
題名及連作順序는 來號에 發表＜79＞
＜79＞