잡지명	별건곤 제11호
발행일	1928년 02월 01일
기사제목	諷剌諧謔, 新流行豫想記 (Satire and Humor: Predictions for New Trends)
기사형태	설문 (Essay)

Satire and Humor: Predictions for New Trends
One of the New Trends Coming This Year
Kwon Gu-hyeon

“What will be the trend coming this new year?” This is the editor's request. It's an awkward request. In a world where things change in the morning and evening, it's difficult to separate the years and say what will be popular this year and what will be popular next year, distinguishing them annually. Moreover, it's really difficult to predict in advance. It would be fortunate if I guessed correctly like a fortune teller, but if I don't, I'll be humiliated.

Anyway, predicting future trends in advance is more like being a fortune teller than calling it a "prediction," taking it too seriously.

Trends, like their name, are a type of epidemic. Once a germ appears, it spreads rapidly with unstoppable force. Therefore, it is both comical and has tremendous power. As someone said, "The spread of all culture is due to the grace of trends," and our daily lives cannot experience special excitement without them. However, what's even more interesting is that despite this tremendous power, trends don't last long. They sweep through the world like a flood and then disappear, only for another trend to take its place.

To give a few obvious examples, the song "Katyusha, My Love" faded away, and then songs like "Strolling along the Daedong River (大同江) beside Pubyŏng Pavilion (浮碧樓)..." followed. <94> After that, it changed to "Otewa Kawarano Karesusugi..." and some "Oryokko Bushi Kagono Tori Sasurai no Uta." In terms of clothing, when Western trousers came to Korea, for a while, people acted like they couldn't be stylish without wearing wide-legged trousers and a wide-sleeved jacket. But now, the sleeves of overcoats are so wide that even a roll of cotton cloth would be too narrow, like a "pocket," and the trousers are so baggy that you could fit two new brides inside. This is a new trend. As for growing hair, it started when a French painter couldn't afford a haircut and let his hair grow. This became a trend, and it was assumed that anyone who held a brush would grow their hair. Now, it seems that anyone who has a new inclination, whether they are poets, novelists, musicians, or ideologists, knows they should grow their hair, and they think they should grow it to have that inclination. Conversely, women thought they had to cut their hair to become New Women, recklessly chopping off their long hair. But recently, as the number of long-haired men has decreased, the number of bobbed-hair women is also decreasing. However, while men can avoid being called "long-haired ghosts" with just 30 jeon, it will be quite difficult for women to grow back their hair and avoid being called "bobbed-hair beauties." Besides this, what's even more interesting is that when male students' Western jackets became tight above the ribs, female students' jackets covered their wide hips. And when male students' trousers covered their shoes, female students' skirts became short above the knees. However, this was criticized and attacked from all sides for being related to public morals, and as a result, the length of jackets has shortened, and the length of skirts has recently become longer. So, should male students' Western jackets and trousers also become longer above and shorter below? It's all a trend, so there will be more changes in the future, right?

Anyway, the monster of trends, like an epidemic, will never be eradicated as time flows. Therefore, it is quite interesting to look back on past trends and imagine the new trends that will inevitably come.

So, what kind of trends will come this new year? Of course, people's philosophies of life are not fixed and simple but multifaceted with various changing facts. Therefore, the types of trends are countless. So, I will only mention one of the most powerful and widespread trends that will come this new year.
(The following 20 lines are deleted from the original text.) <95>

Joint Dining for Newlyweds
Double S-Saeng

What is the most difficult thing for a woman who graduates from girls' school? Having a baby. But even more difficult is bending over, lighting the stove, and cooking every morning and evening. So, their number one condition for marriage is "being able to live without getting their hands wet."

However, unfortunately, young men these days rudely ignore such women and look for "women who can cook and clean themselves." So, while trying to find a place where they don't get their hands wet, they unknowingly end up living as bachelors, which is somewhat pleasing to think about.

But in reality, once they start their new life, even city dwellers realize that the task is meaningless effort and wasted time. No matter how much they are in love, they can't cook in a room where they have to bend over to clean. And no matter how sweet their home is, they can't cook without touching fire on a hot summer day. It's unbearable to watch a lovely queen wrestle with firewood. Can't they live without doing that? Can't they use that effort and time more effectively? Simple living, simple living. Once the kitchen is gone, the crock platform will disappear, and kimchi and salted seafood won't be a problem. Simple living in this house, simple living in that house, and simple living in the house across the street! Now is the time! Taking advantage of this opportunity, K, a young writer with a keen sense of such news, took 700 won and opened a new restaurant in his house, calling it "New Friend House" (新友軒) in Anguk-dong (安國洞). Because of the times, it is as prosperous as a factory workers' pub. However, no matter how prosperous it is, the customers are only select, so it is neither chaotic nor noisy, which is a welcome feature for both the business owner and the customers.

Around eight o'clock in the morning, young couples gather in groups. <96>
"We're first today."
"What is it this morning? Fried cod?"
The woman comes in asking about the side dishes first.

The owner and the customers are old friends, so it's not like coming to a strange house to eat but like people living in the same dormitory gathering in the dining hall, with an unusually friendly atmosphere.
"Oh, why is Gye-dong (桂洞) S so late today?"
"I don't know, the person who always comes first..."
"I heard he had indigestion after eating dinner last night, so maybe he got sick overnight?"
"Oh, what if he really got sick?"

While exchanging these stories, most of the regulars gather. Among them, there are not only couples but also a few single young people.
The owner's wife and daughter bring the morning meal, which is simple and regular. Soup, pickled vegetables, kimchi, diced radish...

They sit around and eat, engaging in random conversations, freely discussing worldly affairs.
Newspaper articles are usually the topic, discussing what's right and wrong, what lectures are being held tonight, who the speaker is, what the topic is... There's no issue that doesn't come up, from labor strikes somewhere to whether the company or the workers are right. In the midst of this, opinions are exchanged diligently and smoothly.

After breakfast, they scatter to their respective offices, and at dinner time (six o'clock), they all gather again, eating fish fries and stews that the owner's family is proud of, <97> freely discussing what happened during the day, arguing about what is right and wrong.

Of course, this is not an introduction to something that exists right now. It's something that seems likely to happen, and I wrote about what it would be like if it did. As the number of newlywed couples without in-laws increases, and as the number of working wives increases every day, I believe that if something like this were to happen, it would thrive enough to sustain itself, and I expect that someone with a keen sense will start this sometime this year.

It would be even better if they could deliver lunch to the offices during the day. And it would be even better if they could provide a newspaper and magazine reading room.

A New Protective Device for Helpless Female Students
Dori

Given the same price, people prefer to go to a street full of flowers than a street full of beggars. Given the same price, people prefer to see a beautiful woman rather than an ugly object. Isn't that right? If there is a pervert who claims otherwise, they deserve to be crucified.

It's not a big deal to scold acne-faced male students or vagrant youths with flat caps who loiter around and wait for the streetcar, choosing to ride the streetcar with female students.

But the most outrageous thing is that these hoodlums stand firmly in front of the female students' seats and rub their knees against them when the streetcar is crowded. These types of people have no shame, and they consider it fortunate that the female students don't shout loudly, rubbing against them once more before getting off the car. This alone is definitely a bad thing. <98>

A clever female student who commutes by streetcar, having suffered so much from these hoodlums, came up with an idea. She placed a special order at a metal shop to make a small iron plate covered with many needles, like the back of a hedgehog. She attached a string to it and wore it on both knees (under her skirt) when she rode the streetcar.

Unaware of this, a romance-obsessed delinquent, whose luck was bad, got on the streetcar that this female student was on. There was even a seat available, but he had a firm plan and stood in front of this female student's knees.

The female student also noticed and thought, "I'll test my hard-earned invention on this guy." She sat down, bracing herself. As the streetcar started abruptly after stopping, shaking everyone, the man, taking it as a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, thrust his left knee so hard that it would crush the female student's knee. The female student also didn't avoid it, giving strength to her knee and pushing it out. What would have been the state of the man, injured by the subtle activity of the weapon? "Ouch!!" He managed to suppress the sound that came up to his throat with a desperate effort, and his knee bounced back as if he had been electrocuted. But the pain, like being sawed with a saw, was unbearable and couldn't be hidden.

Lifting his wounded leg and twisting his body, his face more pitiful than someone who had chewed on a rotten bug, he barely waited for the next stop and limped away.

This report of a triumphant victory spread among the female students, but unfortunately, the loser never spoke about it to his so-called comrades, so only he stopped the habit. Therefore, the "knee needle judgment" became a trend among the female students! Or it seems likely to become a trend, a simple prediction. Hopefully, this satire, which is not like satire, will sting the hearts of school officials or delinquent students even a little bit... <99>

Ice Water Shop of the Women's Youth Association
Samsanin

What seems likely to be a new trend this year? Asking someone as dull as me about such things is a mistake. But the mistake is theirs, not mine, so I'll try to be helpful and say something different, even if it's just nonsense. I apologize to the readers. In April, night markets open, and people who want to buy things and people who don't come out in droves. People who go to the night market don't necessarily go there just to buy things, so those who want to sell things better at the night market should create something unique that doesn't exist elsewhere.

So far, the only famous things at the night market are "cheap" goods and flower sellers without flowerpots. If there's anything else, maybe watermelon sellers and singing book sellers who play the kkangkkaengi (깡깡이 - a percussion instrument).... But this summer, I predict that one more famous thing will appear: the "Ice Water Shop of the Women's Youth Association (女子靑年會氷水店)." They will set up tents in various places in the night market, and pretty female members of the association with good reputations will wear adorable aprons, swaying their hips back and forth, attracting passersby with bright smiles, and the sign will say <100> "OO Women's Youth Association Restaurant (OO女子靑年會食堂)." This grand idea came from the fact that last winter, a women's organization, OO Association (OO會), opened a restaurant at a bazaar, with all the executives participating and newspaper articles covering it extensively, earning a net profit of 160 won.

If the income is used for the maintenance of the association, there will be no difference in purpose. And the customers coming to the bazaar and the people walking around in the night market will be no different. Newspapers will also take pictures of all of this and write extensively about it. This will promote the association throughout Korea, give the members commercial knowledge, provide social training, and give unmarried women a chance to get some fresh air...

It's a beneficial thing in many ways, and since even large organizations that set an example in everything have done it, it's definitely not a matter of losing face. So, when one Women's Youth Association goes to the night market and the income results are better than expected, and the members enjoy it very much, the news of success spreads. Other Women's Youth Associations hold emergency meetings and unanimously decide to open ice water shops at the night market. Love affairs increase in the night market, which is full of pranksters. Hahaha, what a harmonious world...

Gamju and Makgeolli
Seongseoin

It's been a long time since the "Japanese noodles (왜국수)" sellers who pull carts appeared, and it's already common to see yakshik sellers shouting like tofu sellers. But this year-end, gamju (甘酒 - sweet rice drink) sellers shouting "It's sweet and hot!" "Taste it and buy it!" and making noise in the deep alleys at night have also appeared.

Especially in the student boarding areas in the northern villages (Won-dong (苑洞), Gye-dong (桂洞), Jae-dong (齋洞), Hwa-dong (花洞), Gan-dong (諫洞), Sogyeok-dong (昭格洞), Samcheong-dong (三淸洞), Hyoja-dong (孝子洞), etc.), around ten or eleven o'clock, selling the sweet-named Gamju to students who don't know the taste of alcohol or to young lovers blushing with love will be more appreciated than "Calpis" (カルピス). <101> Holding hands with a man or woman on a snowy winter night and "buying Gamju" will definitely be one of the new trends of the year Muchin (戊辰 - 1928).

But I expect this trend to give rise to another trend: makgeolli (막걸리 - Korean rice wine) peddling. To put it simply, it means selling warm makgeolli on cold nights, just like selling ice cream on summer nights will become popular. How it would be a business with more customers than yakshik sellers or roasted sweet potato sellers. Putting a brazier on a small handcart, carrying a couple of side dishes, and slowly going around the northern villages (北村) around ten or eleven o'clock. It's easy to guess that the opinionated debaters who are tired of silly stories in the Sarangbang (사랑방 - guest room) in this alley and that alley will take out their wallets.

Whether eating at a restaurant or drinking at a pub... there is nothing as lonely as parting after enjoying a few drinks. Stumbling along the snowy alley with a slightly flushed face, meeting a liquor cart with a dim light and warm steam rising like smoke in a narrow alley corner, and shaking off the snow on your hat and taking a drink. Clearly, this will become a big trend if it starts. <102>

They Can't Get Married Because They Go to Girls' School
Samsanin

"It's difficult to find trustworthy young female students, so it's difficult to get married easily now," complain many young people unexpectedly. If old people say that, it's because they misunderstand the lives of young people. But if young people say that, it's because they have followed and associated with female students, knowing their hidden behaviors well, so there's no way to reassure them.

Until two or three years ago, fathers-in-law from the countryside or school teachers would say, "It's difficult to trust female students who went to high school, so I'll choose a bride who graduated from elementary school and stayed at home." But now, most of the young modern boys say, "Huh, are there any good female students with big heads? Instead of those rude, bad-mannered fakes, it's best to marry a woman who graduated from elementary school, knows how to read newspapers and letters, and is good at housework." "That's right! What's the difference between a woman who graduated from elementary school and a woman who finished high school for four more years? The difference is not that great..." <103>
"That's right! Even if they go for four more years, they only learn how to knit socks and write love letters. There's no improvement in their performance in four years. The level is not that different, and elementary school graduates are several times better because they don't have horns on their butts..." It might be an unwelcome thing to say, but if things continue like this, it will clearly be an era of difficulty (horror?) in marriage for female students. So, every female student's mother tells the matchmaker, "Hey, don't even mention that she went to high school. Just say she graduated from elementary school and stayed at home." This is all they say, and even at home, they scold the servants or children, "Hey, even when you guys go out to play, don't even say that your sister goes to high school. It'll be a big problem if such rumors spread."

And occasionally, if someone comes looking for a female high school student in this house and asks, "Excuse me, is there a female high school student in this house?" they jump as if the public hospital came to catch them during an epidemic, saying, "Oh my gosh, absolutely not. You're saying terrible things. Are you trying to kill my family? How do you see my daughter going to high school?"

This strange trend is actually starting to show signs from one side, so everyone involved in the girls' school, whose net is starting to break, what will happen if things stay the way they are now? Can't the minds of the female school teachers be renewed? Quickly, quickly.

A Group of Strange androgynous Men and Women
Samgakjeongin

Let's cover everything and just become like men. That's the modern thing to do for new women! Men cut their hair, so women should cut their hair too! Men go ice skating, so women should break the ice too. That's what happened until last year, and it will progress further this year. Men smoke cigarettes, so women should smoke cigarettes too. Men carry short canes, so women should carry short canes too. That's how a world of gender equality will come. Let's quickly become like men. Let's give lectures and distribute flyers, making all women do the same. Quickly, quickly, men wear glasses, so we should wear glasses too. Men urinate standing up, so women should urinate standing up too! Men grow beards, <104> so women should grow beards too!

On the men's side, there is a new faction that does not give in, starting an equally progressive movement.

Let's cover everything and just become like women. That's how to be a new young man. That's how to become a modern boy! Women do their hair, so men should grow their hair too! Women put on powder, so men should put on powder too. Women wear colored belts, so men should wear colored belts too!

This is what they have been doing until last year, and it will develop even further this year. Women speak in thin voices, so we should speak in thin voices too. Women wear high-heeled shoes, so we should make our heels as tall as the Songguk mushrooms (송굿 - type of mushroom). Women become concubines, so we should open that path as a new profession too. Women give birth to children, so men should decide to get pregnant too!

What will be the result of this? Men with beards knitting socks and sitting down, and aspiring young men unable to leave the stove and cutting board, and women earning side dishes at a pub and bringing them to their pregnant husbands... I don't know if it will go that far... I can't predict that yet, but the strange trend of women forming groups and following men wearing powder and men with long hair putting on powder and waiting for love letters to arrive will happen this year. I can easily guess that much. I don't know if they will change direction and turn back before lightning strikes... -The End- <105>

**Named Entities**

權九玄	Kwon Gu-hyeon
大同江	Taedong-gang
浮碧樓	Pubyŏng-nu
安國洞	An-guk-tong
桂洞	Kye-dong
三山人	Samsanin
苑洞	Won-dong
齋洞	Chae-dong
花洞	Hwa-dong
諫洞	Kan-dong
昭格洞	Sogyŏk-tong
三淸洞	Samch’ŏng-dong
孝子洞	Hyoja-dong
城西人	Sŏngsŏin
三角町人	Samgakch’ŏngin



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제11호
발행일	1928년 02월 01일
기사제목	諷剌諧謔, 新流行豫想記
기사형태	설문

諷剌諧謔, 新流行豫想記
새해에 올 流行中의 한 가지
權九玄

새해에 닥처 올 유행은 무엇이냐」 이것을 말해 달나는 것이 편집자의 주문이다. 거북살스런 주문이다. 朝變夕改하는 세태에서 따로 해(年)를 난우어 가지고 금년에는 무엇이 유행한다. 또 명년에는 무엇이 유행하리라. 이럿케 歲別的으로 구별을 지여서 말하기도 어렵거니와 더욱이 압일이니만치 미리 안저서 推斷하기도 정말 어려운 노릇이다. 問卜쟁이처럼 잘들어 맛치면 萬幸이려니와 못들어맛치는 날이면 키가 납작해지는 판이니까.
엇잿던 압흐로 올 유행을 미리 안자서 말한다는 것은 그것을 大事視하여써 무슨 「豫言」이라 하는 이보다도 차라리 問卜쟁이 노릇이라 안이 할 수 업는 것이다.
대체 유행이라는 것은 그 일홈과 맛찬가지로 일종의 전염병 가튼 것이니 한번 微菌이 발생만 하면 엇더한 힘으로도 막을 내야 막을 수 업시 一瀉千里의 勢로 쭉-퍼지고야 마는 것이다. 그럼으로 그것이 우습광스러우면서도 엄청난 세력을 갓게 되는 것이니 「모든 문화의 보급이라는 것은 곳 유행의 恩澤이라」고 누구도 말하엿거니와 우리의 일상생활도 유행을 떠나서는 특별한 흥미를 맛 볼 수 업슬 것이다. 그러나 더 한가지 滋味스러운 것은 이러한 엄청난 힘을 가진 것이면서도 그것이 流行이니만치 오랜 생명을 갓지 못하는 것이니 즉 一瀉千里의 勢로 세상을 한번 徘徊하고는 이내 쑥 드러가곤 또다른 유행이 유행을 하는 것이다.
이에서 가장 들어난 몃가지 例를 들어 보면 「갓추샤 내사랑아」하든 노래가 들어가자 「大同江邊 浮碧樓下 散步하는...」＜94＞ 이러한 노래가 곳 뒤를 이여서 유행하엿고 그 다음에는 「오테와 가와라노 가레스스기...」 또 무슨 「오료꼬부시 가고노도리 사스라이노 우다」 등으로 변하여 왓다. 의복으로 말한대도 양복바지가 조선에 건너오자 이번을 떠서 한동안은 홀태 바지에 홀태조고리가 안이면 행세를 못 할 것처럼들 알더니 또 이즈막에 와서는 두루막이 소매는 玉洋木 한통광을 맛접어도 좁다 하리만치 「콩택이」처럼 넓지 하니하고 바지에는 새악씨를 둘식은 집어 느리만치 풍성풍성하게 하여 입는 것이 새로운 한 유행이 되여 잇고 머리를 길으는 것만 하여도 당초에는 佛蘭西 어느 화가가 머리 하나 깍글 처지가 되지 못하여서 그대로 길너 둔 것이 일종의 유행이 되어서 畵筆만 들게 되면 의례히 머리를 길늘 줄 아는 것이 화가들 간에 약속이나 한 것처럼 전염이 되여 잇더니 이즈막에 와서는 시인, 소설가, 음악가. 主義者 할 것 업시 새로운 경향만 갓게 되는 사람이면 의례히 머리를 길늘 줄 알고 또 길너야만 그러한 경향을 갓게 되는 줄노들 알다십히 하엿고 이와 정반대로 여자들은 머리를 잘너야만 新女性이 되는 줄 알고 삼단가튼 머리를 함부로 댕강댕강 짜르더니 웬 세음인지 최근에 와서는 남자들 사이에는 長髮친구가 하낫식 둘식 줄어 들어감을 따라 여자측에서도 斷髮孃의 수효가 점점 줄어가는 모양이다. 그러나 남자들이야 30전만 가지면 당장에 長髮鬼를 면할 수 잇지만은 여자들에게 잇서서는 앗김업시 잘낫든 머리를 길너가지고 단발미인 소리를 면하게 되기까지는 꽤 힘이 들 것이다. 이 밧게도 더 滋味스러욊� 것은 남학생의 양복 조고리가 갈비ㅅ대 위에가 들어 붓게 되자 여학생의 웃조고리는 펑퍼짐한 응뎅이를 덥게 되엿고 남학생의 아랫바지가 구쓰굽을 나려 덥게 되자 여학생의 초마자락은 무릅에서 담방담방하게 된 것이다. 그러나 이에 대하여서는 風紀上 關係라고 그리하엿던지 엇잿던 각 방면에서 비난과 공격이 심하엿던 결과 웃조고리 기리가 짧아즘에 상반하여 초마 기리도 최근에 와서는 좀 길어지게 되엿다. 그러면 이에 따라서 남학생들의 양복바지 조고리도 좀 위는 길어지고 아래는 짦아저야 할 것이 안인가? 그것도 유행 이것도 유행이니까 압흐로 엇더한 변동이 잇서도 또 잇겟지-
엇잿던 유행이라는 전염병 가튼 괴물은 시간의 流轉을 따라서 영원히 근절되지 안을 것이다. 그럼으로 지난날의 모든 유행을 回顧하며 압흐로 의례ㅅ건으로 닥처 올 새 유행을 상상하여 보는 것도 자못 흥미잇는 일이라 할 것이다.
그러면 새해에 닥처올 유행은 엇더한 것일가? 물론 사람의 생활철학이라는 것이 고정된 단순한 일면만이 잇는 것이 안이라 유동하는 諸事實이 千態萬像의 格으로 다방면이니만치 유행의 종류란 그 數부터 헤아릴 수 업슬 것이다. 그럼으로 나는 새해에 닥처 올 유행 중에서도 가장 유력하게 보편화할 유행의 한 가지만을 말하여 두기로 한다.
(以下20행 삭제-원문) ＜95＞

新婚살림들의 公同食堂
雙S生

여학교를 졸업한 여자에게 제일 고생스러운 일이 무어냐? 아기낫는 일, 그 보다도 더 苦로운 일이 허리꼽으리고 火爐 불피우고 朝夕지여 먹는 일이다. 그래서 그들의 결혼 第一조건이 「손끗에 물 안 뭇치고 살 수 잇는 것」이게 된 것이다.
그러나 千萬未安한 일로 요새의 청년들은 그런 여자에게 念慮업시 失禮를 엿주어 두고 「自己손으로 밥이라도 짓고 소제라도 하려면 할 여자」를 찻게 되어서 그럿케 손 끗에 물 안 뭇친 곳을 차즈려다가는 저도 모르는 중에 독신주의자 행세를 하게 되엿스니 생각하면 조곰쯤은 快한 일이다.
그러나 실제로 신접살림을 시작해 놋코 보면 시톄사람쯤은 그 일이 엇더케 무의미한 노력이요 공연한 시간인 것을 깨닷게 된다. 방에서도 허리가 꼽으라지게 치운 날 아모리 연애생활이라도 방속에서 밥을 지여 먹을 수 업는 일이요 가만히 안저서도 땀이 흐르는 여름날 아모리 스위트 홈-이라도 불(火)을 만지지 안코는 밥을 지을 수 업는 것이라 어엽분 여왕님이 장작과 씨름을 하는 꼴을 보고 잇슬 수도 업거니와 大體 그럿케 아니하고는 절대로 살아가지 못할 것일가. 그만한 노력과 시간을 달리 더 유효하게 이용하지를 못할가? 간편생활 간편생활 브억찬간만 업서지면 장독대도 업서질 것이요 김장도 젓갈도 문뎨가 안 될 것이다. 이 집에서도 간편생활 저 집에서도 간편생활 건너집에서도 또 간편생활 이때다! 이때를 타서 이러한 소식에 눈치빠른 靑年文士 K氏가 一金 七百圓也를 가지고 자기 居宅을 그대로 새로운 식당간판을 붓치고 영업을 시작한 것이 安國洞의 「新友軒」이다. 때가 때인지라 공장엽희 선술집처럼 繁昌 또 繁昌 그러나 아모리 번창하여도 손님이 조촐한 손님뿐이라 난잡하거나 싯그럽지 안케 번창하는 것이 영업자에게나 손님에게나 고마운 특색이다.

아츰 여덜시만 갓가워 오면 한패씩 두패씩 젊은 부부가＜96＞ 모여든다.
「오늘은 우리가 일등이로군.」
「오늘아츰은 무어요. 대구(大口魚)지짐이 하엿소?」
우선 여자는 반찬 먼저 무르면서 드러온다.
주인이나 손님이나 전부터 친한 동무인 새이라 모르는 집에 밥 사먹으러 오는 것이 안이고 한 기숙사 안에 동거하는 사람끼리 각방에서 식당으로 모여드는 폭이나 답지안케 친근한 맛이 잇다.
「아이그 오늘은 桂洞S가 왜 이럿케 느즐가.」
「글세 날마다 第一 먼저 오는 사람이... ...」
「어적게 저녁 먹고 간 것이 거북하다더니 밤새에 병이 나 나지안흔 모양일가?」 「아이고 정말 병이 나던지 했스면 엇저나.」
이런 이약이를 주고 밧고 하는 동안에 매일 오는 사람이 대강은 모다 모힌다. 그 중에는 부부동반 뿐이 아니라 독신청년도 두어 사람 석긴다.
주인부인과 소녀가 아츰 상을 날러 오는데 아츰이라 정해 놋코 간단하다. 국, 장앗지, 김치, 깍둑이... .... .
쭉 둘너안저서 식사를 하면서의 系統업는 담화, 저절로 세상일이 자유롭게 토의된다.
신문기사가 대개는 화제에 올라서 올커니 그르거니 오늘 저녁에 어데서 무슨 강연이 잇는데 연사가 누구이니 演題가 무어거니... ...어느 곳에 同盟罷業이 생겻는데 회사측이 낫브거니 직공측이 올커니 끗에 끗을 니여 안이 나오는 문제가 업고 그러하는 중간에서 의견교환이 퍽 부즈런히 퍽 원만하게 되어간다.
아츰을 먹고는 각각 헤여저서 자기의 사무소로 흐터저 가고 저녁밥 시간(여섯시)이 되면 모조리 또 모혀들어서 생선 지짐이 찌개 주인댁 솜씨＜97＞자랑 될만한 요리를 먹으면서 오늘 하로 지내는 중에서 생긴 일을 또 올커니 그르거니 자유토의를 한다.

물론 이러한 것이 방금 어느 곳에 잇다! 고 紹介하는 것이 안이다. 이런 것이 생길 듯도 한 일이고 생기면 이러하리라고 예상해서 써 본 것이다. 신혼부부의 싀부모 업는 가정이 차차로 느러가는 때 더욱 직업부인이 날마다 느러가는 때라 이런 것이 생기기만 하면 그것하나쯤 유지해 갈 만큼은 번창할 것을 밋을 수 잇고 금년쯤 누구던지 눈치 빠른이로 이것을 시작하는 사람이 잇슬 것을 예상할 수도 잇는 일이다.
만일 시작하는 이가 낮에는 점심밥을 사무소에까지 배달해 줄 수 잇스면 더욱 조흘 것이요. 신문, 잡지 縱覽室까지 준비할 수 잇스면 더욱 더 조흔 일이겟다.

어업븐 女學生의 新案護身具
돌이

갓흔 갑이면 북덕이 만흔 골목보다 꼿나무 만흔 골목으로 가려는 것이 인정이다. 갓흔 갑이면 눈에 뜨이는 것이 醜物보다는 미인이기를 조와하는 것이 인정이다. 그럿치 안타! 고 주장할 變態漢이 잇스면 십자가에 목을 매일 자격자이다.
밧븐 일업시 노다거리면서 집에 도라가는 여드름 남학생이나 납작벙거지 뺏죽하게 쓴 浮浪청년의 떼가 압헤가는 電車 내여 놋코 기다려 가면서 여학생 탄 천차를 골나 탄다고 그다지 큰일 난 것처럼 꾸지즐 것은 업는 일이다.
그러나 여긔에 제일 怪惡한 일은 그따위 불량캡장이들이 여학생의 압자리에 요지부동으로 섯다가 차내가 복잡한 틈을 타서 무릅을 부비대는 것이다. 이따위 인물에게 廉恥가 잇슬리 업는 것이요 그리한다고 여학생이 크게 소리치치 안이하는 것만 다행으로 녁이고 車를 나리게 되기 전에 한번이라도 더 부비적댄다. 이것뿐만은 천하에 뭇지 안어도 분명히 낫븐 일이다.＜98＞

電車通學하는 꾀만흔 여학생 한 분이 이 不良輩에게 얼마나 苦로움을 밧엇던지 한 꾀를 내여 가지고 鐵物廛에 특별주문을 하야 「고슴도치」의 등덜미 가티 바눌이 수업시 만히 솟은 조고만 철판을 맨들고 거긔다 끈을 달어서 兩무릅에다가 (치마 속에) 감추어 매고 전차를 탓겟다.
그런 줄은 모릅시고 불량연애지상주의자께서 運數가 不吉하야 골르고 골른다는 꼴이 이 여학생이 탄 차에 올나 타서는 자리도 한자리쯤은 남어 잇건만 계획을 단단히 차리고 이 여학생의 무릅압헤 (立) 섯느니란 말이다.
여학생도 알아 채이고 「힘드린 新發明品을 이 놈에게 시험해 보리라.」하고 잔뜩 벼르고 안젓는대 전차가 정차햇다가 갑작이 떠나느라고 흔들니는 판에 千載의 一時랍시고 놈이 왼편무릅을 여학생 무릅이 으스러지게 벗석 내밀자 여학생도 피하지 안코 무릅에 힘을 잔득 주어 내벗틔여 노앗스니 고때의  微妙한 武器의 활동에 놈의 부상하게까지 慘憺한 꼴이 엇더하엿슬 것이냐. 아얏!! 소리가 목구녁에까지 나온 것을 그야말로 필사의 노력으로 꽉 담으러 참고 전기에 찔닌 사람처럼 자기도 모르게 무릅이 도로 튀여 나왓스나 그러나 톱으로 써는 것처럼 쓰라리고 압흔 것은 참을 수도 숨길 수도 업섯다.
戰傷한 다리를 들고 몸을 비틀면서 얼골은 썩은 버러지를 께문 사람보다도 더 불상하게 되어 가지고 간신히 다음 정류장에 닷기를 기다려서 긔여  ‚˜려 가 버렷다.
이 통쾌한 戰捷의 보고가 여학생계에 적지 안이 퍼젓섯스나 딱한 일은 패전자가 절대로 그들 소위 동지간에서도 開口를 안이한 고로 그 한사람 밧게는 그 버릇이 업서지지 안엇다. 그래서 여학생편에서는 나도 나도 하고 무릅針判이 유행! 대유행하게 되엿다. 아니 유행될 늣도 십다는 심심한 예상이다. 다행히 이 諷刺갓지 안이한 諷刺가 學父兄들이나 또는 불량학생들의 가슴에 조곰이라도 찔니는 맛이 잇슬넌지...＜99＞

女子靑年會 氷水店
三山人

금년에 무엇이 새로 유행할 듯 십으냐? 나 가튼 둔한 인물에게 그런 것을 뭇는 것은 아모리 해도 실책이다. 그러나 실책은 그의 실책이지 내 잘못이 안이니 인심 좃케 生色이나 내고 딴청이라도 하나 해 본다. 讀者께는 미안하지만. 4월이 되면 夜市場이 버러지고 물건 살 사람, 안 살 사람이 쏘다저 나온다. 그런대 夜市에 나오는 사람이 반듯이 물건 살 필요로만 나오는 것이 안이니 夜市에서 물건을 좀더 잘 팔 욕심이 잇는 사람은 무얼로던지 다른데에 업는 夜市의 名物을 지어야 할 것이다.
이때까지로 보아서 夜市의 名物은 「싸구료」소리와 뿌럭지 업는 花草장사 뿐이라 할 것이다. 만일 더 잇다면 수박장사와 깡깡이 켜는 唱歌冊장사나 혜일가.... 그런데 금년 녀름에는 名物 한 가지가 더 생길 것을 예상할 수가 잇다. 무언고 하니 「女子靑年會氷水店」일 것이다. 夜市 군데군데에 布幕을 치고 일홈 조흔 트레머리 여자회원들이 앙징스러운 압치마를 닙고 들낙날낙 허리를 흔들면서 지나가는 행객을 방긋방긋 우슴으로 끄러드리면서 간판에＜100＞ 하얏스되 「OO女子靑年會食堂」이라고. 이 宏壯스러운 꾀는 어데서 출발한 것인고 하니 지난 겨을에 여성단체OO會가 어느 빠사會에 식당을 열고 幹部總出, 新聞記事 고대로 대활동을 하야 순이익 160원也를 어덧다 하는데서 모범(?)을 하여온 것이다.
수입을 會의 유지비에 쓴다하면 그 목적에 잇서 다를 것이 업는 것이요 손님이야 빠사會에 오는 손이나 夜市에 나 다니는 사람이나 다를 것이 업스니 신문사에서도 이것들을 모조리 寫眞을 백여다가 大書 또 特書해 줄 것이다. 그리되면 會의 선전이 全鮮的으로 될 것이요 회원들에게 상업지식(?)을 주는데 兼하야 사회적 대훈련(?)이 되고 아즉 미혼여자들로서 바람쏘일 기회도 되고 ... ...
가지가지로 有益만한 일인데 더욱 매사에 모범을 보히는 큰 단체에서도 한 일이니 결코 결코 결코 체면상할 일이 안이고 그래서 한 곳의 女子靑年會에서 夜市에 출장을 하여 본 일이 예상 이상으로 수입성적이 좃코 從業회원들의 滋味도 만허서 성공, 대성공이란 소문이 퍼지자 다른 女子靑年會에서도 緊急會議를 열고 夜市에서 氷水店開業할 件을 滿場一致로 결의하야 작란꾼만 만흔 夜市바닥에 戀愛都家가 늘고 또 는다. 하하하하 조화지는 세상이지... ... .

감주와 막걸리
城西人

구루마에 끌고 단이는 「왜국수」장사가 생긘 것은 오래 된 옛니약이요 약식장사가 두부장사처럼 외치고 단이는 것도 발서 현 이약이가 되엿지만 이번 세밋(歲末)에는 「뜩근딱근 하구료」 「맛보고 사 잡수시요」하고 밤 깁흔 골목을 요란히 외치고 단이는 감주(甘酒)장사도 생겻다.
딴은 북촌일대의 좁은 골목거리(苑洞 桂洞 齋洞 花洞 諫洞 昭格洞 三淸洞 孝子洞 等)의 학생하숙촌으로 열시 열한시쯤하야 일홈도 달큰한 甘酒를 팔러 단이면 술맛 모르는 학생들에게나 사랑에 낫 붉히고 안젓는 나어린 애인(愛人)들에게는 「칼피스」이상의 고마운 맛이 잇슬 것이니＜101＞ 눈나리는 겨울밤 남녀 손목 잡고 「감주사먹기」란 분명히 무진년두(戊辰年頭)의 새류행의 하나일 것이다.
그러나 이 류행이 나는 또 한 가지 류행을 나어 놀 것을 예상한다. 그것은 막갈리 행상(行商)이다. 손쉽게 말하면 녀름날 밤에 아이스크림 팔러 다니듯 치운 밤에 더운 막걸리를 팔러 다니는 것이 류행하리라는 말이다. 약식장사보다도 야끼이모장사보다도 엇더케 만흔 손님을 가즌 장사일 것이냐 말이다. 조고만 짐구루마에 화덕을 놋코 두어가지의 안주를 싯고 열시 열한시의 북촌(北村)일대를 천천히 돌아가면 이 골목 저 골목 사랑방에서 허튼 이약이에 긔운지친 유지론객(有志論客)들이 저마다 주머니를 터러들고 나올 것은 의론해 보지 안코도 짐작할 수 잇는 일이다.
료리집에서 먹던지 선술집에서 먹던지... 긔분좃케 몃잔씩 기우리고는 헤여질 때처럼 쓸쓸한 것이 업다. 상당히 얼근 한 거름으로 눈나리는 골목을 터벅터벅 거러가다가 좁다란 골목 모퉁이에 밝지도 안흔 등불에 더운 김을 연긔가티 올리고 잇는 술구루마를 맛나서 모자우에 눈을 툭툭털면서 한잔 기우리는 멋과 맛. 분명히 이것은 시작만하면 크게 류행이 될 것이다.＜102＞

女學校다니곤 結婚을 못하게 되어서
三山人

「밋을 수 잇는 처녀여학생을 구하기가 어려워서 지금은 장가도 容易히 들기 어렵다.」고 괴탄을 하는 젊은이가 한편에는 意外에 만히잇다. 老人이 그러한다면 그것은 젊은 사람들의 생활을 오해하고 하는 말이라 하지만은 젊은 사람의 하는 말이라 자기도 여학생 뒤를 따러도 보고 사괴여도 보아서 그들의 숨은 품행을 잘 알고 잇는 까닭으로 생기는 괴탄이라 무어라고 안심을 식힐 도리도 업는 것이다.
2,3년 전까지는 村에서 올너온 싀아버지나 보통학교의 샌님선생 가튼 이가 「고등학교 다닌다고 쏘대든 여학생은 밋기가 어려우닛가 보통학교나 졸업하고 집에 드러안즌 신부를 골르겟소」하더니 지금쯤은 새파란 모던 뽀-이(?)들이 대개는 「흥 머리큰 여학생에야 한나나 고흔 것이 잇나. 품행 낫브면서 입버릇만 건방진 얼치기보다는 그저 보통학교나 졸업해서 신문편지나 볼만큼 되고 살림공부 잘 배훈 여자안테 장가드는 것이 第一이니...」 「그럿코말고 숫처녀업는 것은 그만두고라도 첫재 보통학교만 졸업한 여자나 고등학교까지 더 맛친 여자나＜103＞ 차이나는 것이 잇서야지 정도가 별로 달른 것이 업는 걸... ...」
「올치오라! 4년 더 단긴대야 족기 짯는 것이나 배흐고 연애편지나 더 배호는 것 뿐이지 무어 4년성적이 튀어 나는게 잇는가 말이야. 정도는 별차업고 엉덩이에 뿔이 안난만큼 보통학교 졸업생이 몃 10層낫지...」 하게 되어서 미움밧을 말갓지만 이대로 나가면 분명히 여학생의 결혼난(恐怖?)시대일 것이다. 그래서 여학생의 어머니마다 중매인 보고서 「여보 아예 고등학교 단겻단 말은 하지 마시우. 그저 보통학교만 졸업하고 드러안젓다구 그래요.」 신신히 부탁하는 말이 이 말뿐이요 집에서도 하인이나 어린애 보고도 「이 애야. 너의들 밧게 나가서 놀때라도 아예 누님은 고등보통학교에 다닌다는 말하지 말아라. 그런 소문나면 큰일난다.」하고 을러대이게 된다.
그러고 간혹가다가 누가 차저와서 혹시 이 宅에 녀자고등학교에 다니는 학생이 잇슴닛가.하고 무르면 「아이그 천만에요. 큰일날 말슴을 다 하심니다. 남의 집 식구를 그냥 죽이는 게 올치 그게 무슨 말슴임닛가. 어듸로 보아서 우리집 딸을 고등학교에 보낼 것 갓슴닛가?」 하고 바로 전염병 류행 때 순화병원에서 잡으러 온 것처럼 날뛰이게 된다.
이 괴상한 유행이 사실로 한편부터 고개를 들 념녀가 보이니 거믜줄치게 될 여학교 당국자 여러분! 어느 때까지 지금대로만 잇스면 큰일이 아니겟슴닛가? 女學校 敎員 諸氏의 머리가 좀더 새로워 질 수가 업겟슴닛가? 急히 急히요.

奇怪千萬·中性男女의 떼
三角町人

다 덥허 치우고 그저 남성 가티 되어라. 그래야 신여성이 다 모던 껄이다! 남자가 머리를 깍그니 여자도 머리를 깍자! 남자가 스켓을 타니 여자도 어름을 짓치자. 여긔까지가 작년까지의 일이요 금년에는 더 진전된다. 남자가 卷煙을 피우니 여자도 卷煙을 피우자. 남자가 短杖을 집흐니 여자도 短杖을 집자. 그래야 남녀동등의 세상이 온단다. 어서 밧비 남자처럼 되자. 선전강연을 하고 선전지를 백여 돌려가며 모든 여자가 다 가티 그럿케 되게 하자. 어서어서 남자가 안경을 쓰니 우리도 안경을 쓰자. 남자가 니러슨 채 小便을 보니 여자도 니러슨 채로 小便을 보기로 하자! 남자가 수염을 길으니＜104＞ 여자도 수염을 길으자!
남자편에도 이보다 지지안는 신진패가 잇서서 지지안는 진화운동을 니르키고 잇다.
다 덥허치우고 그저 여성가튼 인물이 되어라. 그래야 신진청년이다. 모던뽀-이가 된다! 여자가 머리치장을 하니 남자도 머리를 기르자! 여자가 粉을 바르니 남자도 粉을 바르자. 여자가 色허리띄를 띄니 남자도 色허리띄를 띄기로 하자!
여긔까지는 작년까지 하여온 사업이요 금년에는 더욱 발전을 할 터이니 금년에는 또 여자가 목소리를 가늘게 내니 우리도 가늘게 내자. 여자가 굽놉흔 구두를 신으니 우리도 굽을 송굿가티 하자. 여자가 남의 妾으로 드러가니 우리도 그리로 新職業의 길을 열자. 여자가 아해를 나으니 남자도 아해를 배이기로 결의하자!
이럿케 나아가는 결과가 엇더케 될가. 수염난 남자가 버선짝을 깃고 안젓고 有志(?)청년일스록 아궁이와 도마 엽을 떠나지 못하고 여자가 선술집 안주를 엇어다가 아해 배고 누은 남편에게 가저다 주고... 설마 그럿케까지 될넌지 안될넌지... 그것은 내년 일이겟스닛가 아즉은 예상 못하겟스나 그러나 여자들이 떼를 지여 粉바른 남자의 뒤를 따라 다니면서 作亂하고 머리 기른 남자가 粉을 바르고 다니면서 연애편지 드러오기만 기다리고 잇는 怪流行까지는 금년내 일이닛가 넉넉히 짐작할 수 잇다. 다행히 벼락이 내리기 전에 그들이 방향전환을 하고 도라슬넌지 그것까지는 몰나라도... -(끗)-＜105＞
＜94-105＞