Magazine Title: 삼천리 제6권 제11호
Publication Date: 1934년 11월 01일
Article Title: 接吻硏究 (Kiss Research)
Author: 朴晶月 (Pak Chŏngwŏl)
Article Type: 잡저 (Miscellaneous Writing/Essay)

接吻硏究
						朴晶月
One who does not drink alcohol and does not kiss is close to a dead person. (Goethe)

Korea and Kissing
It is a peculiar global phenomenon, perhaps unique to Korea (朝鮮), that people occasionally get drunk, fall asleep using the railroad tracks (汽車軌道) as a pillow, and get run over and die. Similarly, it was a commonplace fact in Korea that people lived from birth <109> until death without ever experiencing a passionate kiss, that is, mouth-to-mouth kissing. Moreover, it was strictly prohibited even in motion pictures. However, it now seems that the word "kiss" has become so commonplace that it hardly catches the ear anymore.

Tokyo Kiss
There was nothing that people in Tokyo (東京) disliked more than the words "kiss" and "socialism." But then socialism became communism, and the word "kiss" became the fashionable term among the young men and women of Tokyo and Osaka (大阪).
So, does this mean there were no kisses in Tokyo or Osaka before? No, there are many examples of Tokyo people kissing in the old days. To this day, it is said that the races in the world who do not know how to kiss are the Tahitian (따이디도) men and women depicted in Gauguin's (고-간) "Noa Noa," the Māori of New Zealand (新西蘭士), the Papuans (빠부아) of Australia (濠洲), nomads, Eskimos (에스키스), and other such barbaric and unenlightened peoples.
Many scholars interpret kissing not as something stemming from human instinct, but rather as a product of the culture of love (戀愛文化). As evidence, not a few argue that kissing is absent among barbarians. Even looking at Toyotomi Hideyoshi (豊太閤), who is highly touted in the hero-worship theory today, in a letter to Yodo-gimi (淀君), there is a passionate promise of a kiss "[...]" upon his return from war. Also, looking at Ukiyo-e prints, which are artistic works worthy of boasting about abroad today, many depict "[...]" kissing, and these are included as color illustrations in Western histories of customs. Things like Shunsui's "Harutsuge-dori" (春告烏) and "Aite Warm語" (相對暖語) describe kissing no less than Western novels do.
Years ago in Tokyo, when the works of the French sculptor Rodin (로단) were exhibited, officials from the Ministry of Home Affairs prohibited the display of Rodin's masterpiece "The Kiss." When the French Embassy protested, the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department replied, "Kissing is a very bad custom." But how is it now? Isn't kissing流行 so prevalent among the young men and women of Tokyo and Osaka that it's almost overused?

China's Kiss
So, do the Chinese not kiss? According to tradition, it is said that kissing did not exist in China (中國) previously.
However, in the book "Europe and China" (歐羅巴及中國) by a Frenchman, published in 1897, it says that instead of kissing, Chinese people sniff each other. First, they place their nose on <110> the other person's cheek and take a long, quiet breath. Simultaneously, their eyes naturally close. Then, they remove their mouth and slap the cheek soundly.
Today, American movies seem to be widely promoted in China, and among some young men and women, kissing is reportedly also流行 to the point of being called overuse.

The Kiss of the East
The lands appearing in the Old Testament are generally close to the East (東洋). Thus, the kisses of Turkey (土耳其), Arabia (亞羅比亞), and Persia (波斯), which stand in contrast to the West, are seen in the "Arabian Nights" and the kisses of Turkish women. From the perspective of lewdness and carnal desire (淫逸肉慾的), the consensus is that they certainly surpass those of the West. It is said to have flourished most in ancient Egypt (埃國), and kissing was a most important part of life for ancient Egyptians. There's even an anecdote about a woman who received the king's favor through her skillful kissing. While in the West, kissing is considered a skill of men, in the East, it is conversely a secret art (秘技) of women.
Turkish women are also said to possess world-class skills in kissing. Moving towards the Far East from the rest of the Orient, there are various accounts. For instance, it is said that women of Java (쨔봐) live by dancing and die by kissing. Javanese women kiss after dancing and dance after kissing. When dancing, they become women; when kissing, they are like goddesses. A Westerner commented, "He who has been entangled in the kiss of a Western woman, let him try loving a Javanese woman again; anyone will surely be intoxicated."
The kiss of the Indian woman is described as wholehearted (專心). As everyone knows, the "Kama Sutra" (감스트라) is the treasure trove of Indian sexuality, unparalleled even by Western texts. The kisses described in its seventh chapter, the "Auparishtaka" (愛撫) section, are depicted with extreme detail. Anyone reading this can truly understand the captivating mood of Indian women.
Siamese (샴우) women are said to kiss as if dreaming. The spirit of love in Indian women is truly multifaceted. However, Siamese women are criticized for lacking a tender flavor, overflowing vitality, and having little longing for death.

The Kiss of the West
So, how do Western women compare to Javanese and Indian women? This is also very complex and difficult to summarize in one word.
For example, Russians (露西亞) kiss intensely. It can signify farewell or express respect. However, kisses arising from romantic love between men and women are said to be extremely secretive and gentle. Moving from Russia to Poland (波蘭), the Polish kiss is merely an imitation of the Parisian (巴里) kiss, lacking the pleasant pain of the lips during the act. There is criticism that they overuse kissing here and there without reason.
Even within the West, Hungary (匈加利) is like the East; there is passionate love, but not passionate kissing. Hungarians are said to kiss not only the lips but also the forehead, arms, hands, chest, and waist. Kissing is the breath of an intoxicated soul, definitely not a physical movement. Hungarians might fail in terms of kiss philosophy.
Slavonian (슬나보니아) women are considered inferior in Europe, but their sensuality <111> is like that of Northern European/American women, their speech is gentle like Southern Europeans, and their willingness to throw body and soul into love is Western. Only their kissing is said to be Eastern. That is, they momentarily smile, lower their heads, gently open their eyes like dreamers, and melt into the embrace of their beloved man.
The kiss of the Greek (希臘) woman is by no means insignificant in the world history of kissing.
Kissing was prevalent in ancient Greece. It was from Greece that it first spread to Rome. Books tell us that Penelope (뻬넬오베) received guests with kisses, Ulysses (울세스) kissed the earth upon landing on the island of Italy (伊太利), and Agamemnon (앙메뭉) kissed his beloved homeland upon returning. Priam (뿌리암스) kissed Achilles' (아기레스) hand and swore to return the body of his son Hector (헥구돌). Hector, bidding farewell, smiled and kissed his beloved son.
The ancient Greek kiss involved grasping the partner's ears and holding their head as if gripping the mouth of a bottle (甁). Since the era of Abraham (아부라함), Isaac (이삭), and Jacob (야곱) mentioned in the Bible is around 2000 BC, the history of kissing in the world can indeed be said to date back to 2000 BC.
Kissing was not just a human act. Greek mythology tells us that Juno (유노) reconciled the jealousy of the great god Jupiter (쮸비다) with a kiss, and the adulterous Venus (베누스), hiding from human eyes, kissed Mars (마루스), causing Vulcan (쓰루간) to become enraged and cast a net over them. The Olympian (오림비아) gods, too, certainly did not dislike the human act of kissing.
Finnish (芬蘭) women are said to be bold in loving men but unskilled in kissing. They are said to be the only women in the world who do not place their hearts on their lips. Copenhagen (펜하우겐) women are described as international, while Oslo (오스로) women kiss stiffly and briefly. Swedish (瑞典) women, having the smallest mouths in the world, are said to kiss very elegantly.
The kiss of Dutch (和蘭) women is said to be very bland and dry. The kiss of English (英國) women is like the so-called refined housewife style; even while kissing, they think about the money spent today and the guests to invite tomorrow.
Few praise the kiss of Belgian (白耳義) women, but Belgian women are said to smile at a man for a long time, then stare intently before kissing. Among Italian (伊太利) women's kisses, those from Milan (밀난) and Rome (羅馬女쭈) <112> are very selective, while Neapolitan (비폴) women kiss anyone anywhere without much selection. A certain poet, unable to bear the longing for his lover, sent a messenger saying:
"Kiss my lady's white and beautiful hand and convey this to her.
Instead of words to my lady,
I send a kiss."
This well expresses the Italian sentiment towards kissing.
Even within Southern Europe, Southern Spanish (西班牙) women employ various techniques before kissing, silently trying to figure out for a while how much the man desired the kiss and how many kisses he has received. Isn't it surprising? They are said to compare their own value to others based on the number of kisses.
Estremaduran (에스데루마즈라) women are said to kiss like doves. Like the wool produced in that region, it is soft, light as fleece, yet pierces the heart like the claws of a wild beast.
The kiss of the Andalusian (안달샤) woman already has a worldwide reputation. Like a pomegranate, it is red, neither hard nor soft, just like a perfectly ripe pear. The kiss equates to the meaning of love. Also, when kissing, the woman sighs deeply. That sigh is said to be like the woman's soul taking flight. The man who receives that sighing kiss, when he gathers his senses again, finds the chilly morning wind already shaking the flowers, and the moonlight quietly passing over the Spanish pines.
Portugal (뽈도갈) is the country in Europe known for canned sardines (鰯魚). It is said that the kisses of women here generally smell of sardines.
Moving from Southern Europe to the Swiss (瑞西) region, women become very cool and reserved. The kiss of a Genevan (쩨네바) woman is said to lack the refined quality of a Parisian department store (떼파드맨드스토아) saleswoman, maintaining a model-like attitude like a mannequin (마네킨).
The daughter of a fisherman in Normandy (노루만데이) does not put on airs like Asura. She is extremely innocent and expresses poetic sentiment. Her lips have strength, and they are thin. Cheek to cheek, like a cormorant flying over the sea, quickly... she rushes forward strongly like a dolphin (海豚). One who has tasted these lips feels as if Carnival (謝肉祭) and Ascension Day (昇天祭) have arrived on the same day.
Compared to such kisses, the kiss of a Romanian (루마니아) woman is bleak, and a Bulgarian (뿔가리아) woman is said to bite.
The women of the Cévennes (세반) region in France (佛蘭西) are the orthodox school of kissing. Women from this land first tilt their heads forward, suppressing intensity and passion in their kiss, performing it extremely solemnly and subtly. Savoyard (사보야) women do strange things. First, they purse their lips like a rabbit and blow air into the nostrils.
Gypsy (집시이) women, like Mongols (蒙古好), do not know how to kiss.
Samoan (사모아) women learned to kiss from Europeans. Their kiss is extremely soft, completely selfless, and lacks the elegant attitude of always picking flowers. Isn't that beautiful! <113>
The kiss of the Mexican (멕시코) woman, who has Spanish and Black ancestry and where 샤보덴 flowers bloom, resembles that of Andalusia; her spirit is like fire, bordering on madness.

Urban Women
Are the kisses of urban women superior to those of rural women? One cannot assert that definitively. It varies from person to person. Parisian (巴里) women smile when they kiss. Berlin (伯林) women are characterized by squinting their eyes. This also depends on the partner. Parisian women might be called skillful and cunning, but one cannot say all are like that. The kiss of Berlin women is considered flexible (柔靭性) but somewhat inferiorly carnal (肉慾的). It lacks fragrance and charm. The kiss of New York (紐育) women also appears polite on the surface, but it hints at an extraordinary fondness for kissing.
However, the consensus is that among urban women's kisses, none surpasses the Viennese (維也納) woman. The lips of a Viennese woman are said to be like the sound of a harp played by the wind. The Viennese woman laughs, cries, lies, requests, permits, gives, swears, sows seeds, and when there are no words, she kisses. The Viennese woman knows the tactic of kissing another man while remaining faithful (貞操) to her husband.

Closing One's Eyes
Closing one's eyes when kissing is definitely not limited to the Chinese mentioned above; this is a difficult-to-understand major issue that has been greatly debated since ancient times.
When kissing, one closes their eyes. This is an inexplicable fact. The person who raised this issue was indeed the poet Heine (하이네). A line from Heine's poem goes:

From midnight until dawn breaks
Endlessly searching for that lover
Kissing my lover's lips
Why do I close my eyes?
For what reason, I myself do not know
What answer can I give?
Only closing my eyes, turning towards my lover
Only kissing my lover's lips.

Heine also said, "Why, I don't know either," in his "Lorelei" (로레라이) poem. This very line from the poem was the initial conundrum that troubled the minds of many love scholars.
Years ago, when I was in Berlin, a weekly magazine posed this question to its readers and solicited answers. Some of them were:
1. Even a child can answer that. Haven't people always said love is blind? <114>
2. It's because one wishes the surroundings to become night.
3. Love is made of three things: two eyes and one mouth. But to make it stronger, two of them must be closed.
4. It's because youth cannot bear to see foolish things.
5. Kissing is falling into the pleasure of love.
6. Kissing is the Seventh Heaven. Looking down makes one dizzy.
7. Kissing is like alcohol. To appreciate the taste of alcohol well, one drinks with closed eyes.
8. Because one does not inject the fiery eyes of love.
9. Because one intends to realize its pleasure.
Etc., etc., etc.
The first prize winner here was:
10. The Bible says, "Love your neighbor and close your eyes even to their weaknesses." When kissing, there are truly two people.
A feeling of weakness arises. Therefore, one is yours, one is mine. And so, both eyes close.
Quoting the words of Christ (基督), indeed, kissing belongs to the Seventh Heaven. In any case, the proposition of why one closes their eyes when kissing still awaits resolution.

Eve and the Bee
The answer that kissing is like the Seventh Heaven raises the question of whether kissing existed in Heaven. For example, the question arises whether Adam (아담) kissed Eve (해와) when receiving the apple. According to the Old Testament, Jehovah (여호와) formed man from dust and breathed life into him. Some say that if this breath hadn't been into the nose, it might have been the world's first kiss of creation. Perhaps so.
Those who claim Adam and Eve kissed tell this story: When Eve was lying naked in the Garden of Eden (에덴동산), a honeybee flew by, saw Eve's red lips, and thinking there must be sweet honey, tried to land on them. Adam, watching nearby, driven by curiosity and jealousy, chased the bee away and placed his mouth on Eve's lips, kissing her. Eve woke up and was delighted by Adam's kiss.
The kiss between Adam and Eve is somewhat strange. However, since Adam died at the age of 930, kissing might not have been so unusual afterward. Looking at Genesis (創世記), Isaac (이삭) called his son Jacob (야곱) and said, "Come near and kiss me." When Jacob arrived in Mesopotamia (메소보다미아) at the well of Harran (하란새음가), he kissed Rachel (하헬). Laban (라반) said to Jacob, "Could you let me kiss my granddaughter?" Besides these, Esau (에소) and Jacob kissed, and Joseph (세제후 - likely a typo/misidentification for Joseph) kissed his dead father's face. Seeing this, kissing was not unusual for the people and lands of the Genesis era. That is, Isaac and Jacob cannot be called the discoverers* of the kiss.

Caucasus Flower
Again, rivaling the Viennese kiss is the kiss of the Caucasus (고가색). Little Russia's (小露西亞) Caucasus is famous for its <115> high terrain and abundance of splendid places.
Women there are tall, often have golden hair, their eyes shine, and their white necks are said to be like the first snow piled on the Caucasus mountains. As it has long been a land rich in flowers, women tuck flowers into their belts, barely cover their chests with clothes ending in lilies (百合), hold crimson carnations (石竹) or gentians (龍膽꼿) between their beautiful, round lips, and adorn their hair with apricot blossoms (살구꼿), cherry blossoms (앵도꼿), or orchids (蘭꼿). Even when bathing secretly in a valley, the scent of flowers emanates from their mouths.
Let's assume such a woman's lover is one of the valiant knights. The woman will stand before this man without any hesitation, staring into his eyes with half-questions and half-answers. Then, she will remove the gentian flower held between her snow-white teeth, momentarily stare fixedly at a pasture on one side, then turn her eyes meaninglessly towards a forest on the other, and unconsciously gaze down at the ground. The flower-loving Caucasus woman is said to possess lips like fire.

The Age of Kissing
Thus, depending on the country and the woman, when does kissing flourish? This is a very novelistic question and simultaneously a difficult one to solve. For example, a virgin's kiss is more one of anticipation and longing (憧憬) than passion (熱情). There is also a taste of faint anxiety. Such kisses do not belong among beautiful kisses. Therefore, in Europe (歐羅巴), it is said that for Northern European women, the age for the most beautiful kiss is between 30 and 40, and for Southern European women, it is between 20 and 30. Kisses truly welling up from the heart naturally belong to the latter category.

Kissing as a Legal Issue
The age for kissing is a novelistic issue as well as a legal one. Many tragedies in life arise from kisses. Furthermore, the 30s and 40s for Northern European women can be called the most dangerous age. Many tragedies of European women indeed occur during this time of beautiful kissing. Thus, kissing often becomes a legal matter. Questions regarding problematic kisses often include the following points:
1. When a virgin or an engaged woman is forcibly kissed by a man, or if she allows a kiss of her own free will, can she still be called a virgin?
2. When a man asks a woman, "If you have the heart to take me as your husband, please kiss me," and the woman kisses him without saying a word, can this be considered a firm <116> promise of marriage?
3. If another man's wife does not refuse and kisses a third-party man, should this immediately be suspected as adultery (姦通)?
These issues were studied by kiss scholars around the 17th century. Today they seem like very amusing questions, yet no one can render a clear judgment. The subtleties of such kisses are depicted extensively in films, and they are the source of all comedies and tragedies today.
Kissing began to be actively studied legally during the Baroque (바록구) era. According to German Roman Law (獨逸露馬法):
The central points of discussion were whether it was acceptable for a woman to kiss someone else, or whom she should kiss. Until 1740, a law called the "Kiss Law" (키스法) existed in Paderborn (빠죤 - likely Paderborn). According to this law, if there was proof that a young woman kissed an unmarried man, she could inherit his entire estate even after his death. It didn't matter whether the woman was engaged to the deceased man or not. However, in the opposite case, could the man inherit the deceased woman's estate? No, he could not.
This spirit originated from ancient Roman Law (露馬法). In Roman Law, Emperor Constantine the Great (콘스탄진大帝) was a great defender of women's kisses. According to Constantine the Great's interpretation, if an engaged couple broke off their engagement, the woman only needed to return half of the items she received from the man. The remaining half was considered her receipt for the kisses she received. Roman Law only recognized kisses between engaged persons. In such cases, if the woman had never kissed the man, she would have had to return all the received items. In Roman Law, a kiss became legally recognized as consent to marriage. However, while this was advantageous for the woman, there were penalties for the man, showing that the spirit of Roman Law was always protective of women. Constantine the Great's popularity among women was also due to such reasons. The fact that legal issues surrounding kissing generally resulted unfavorably for men was not unique to the Roman Law era; because men often initiated kisses aggressively, men usually lost kiss-related lawsuits. In 1926, there was a lawsuit in Vienna where a man was bitten by a woman and required 14 months of treatment. Upon investigation, the man had boasted, "I can kiss any woman," dragged the woman into a room, and forcibly tried to kiss her. The woman, using all her strength, bit the man's tongue and pushed his arms away. The man sued her for assault (傷害罪). The judge ruled, "A kiss is evidence of affection, and its moral basis lies solely in the free will of both parties." The woman was, of course, acquitted (無罪放免).
If this is the case, how the law resolves kissing becomes a fundamental issue. The definition of a kiss announced by the German Supreme Court (獨逸大審院) in 1940 (this date seems incorrect, likely a typo, perhaps meaning 1840 or similar era, or refers to a specific case/ruling year) is as follows:
"A kiss is an act applied to the body of another person and always requires the consent of the person being kissed. Kissing is only permissible without explicit consent in clear cases where the other party <117> implicitly consents, such as between relatives, parents, siblings, and lovers. If the other party resists, it is recognized as an illegal act infringing on personal rights and defamation (名譽毁損). If, in this state, one forces a kiss upon the resisting party, they cannot escape the charge of insult (侮辱罪)."
Therefore, the Viennese woman biting the man's tongue was excellent self-defense (正當防衛).

Kiss of the Hand
There is one type of male kiss. This is limited to men kissing a woman's hand. This kiss signifies not only affection (戀切) but also respect (尊敬) for the woman. When a man respectfully bows his head and touches his lips to the back of a woman's hand, the woman typically lifts her small nose slightly and puffs out her chest. This kiss is rare among Americans (米國) but common among French (佛蘭西人), Russians (露西亞人), and Germans/Austrians (獨墺人).
However, one must not forget that the hand kiss developed from the old custom of kissing the hem of a skirt and always signifies respect for the lady. It is not meant erotically (好色的). If it were the palm instead of the back of the hand, the meaning of respect and etiquette disappears.

Kiss of the Tongue
Besides lips and hands, kisses are also done with the tongue. This is difficult to speak about, so I will stop here.

From a German Poet's Poem
A kiss on the hand means respect (尊意)
On the forehead, friendship (友情)
On the cheek, joy (喜悅)
With the mouth, indeed, delightful love (戀愛)
On closed eyes, longing (憧憬)
On the palm, desire (熱望)
On the arm and neck, passion (情慾)
Anything else is madness (狂氣).

Kiss of the Nose
Besides these, there is the nose kiss. The nose has a deep connection with the sexual organs (性慾機管), and just as there is the expression "nose greeting" (코인사), the nose kiss is quite important. This is different from the Chinese scent-sniffing kiss.

Other Kisses
Furthermore, if a husband receives flowers from his beloved wife for some reason, it is customary for him to kiss his wife's forehead as a sign of courtesy (禮). When giving a kiss on the forehead, if the woman receives it respectfully and elegantly like a lady, it can be called the most graceful kiss. The morning kiss must be given from the husband's heart. When the husband unexpectedly buys something the wife enjoys, or when the husband's <118> carelessness, unapproved by the wife, needs correction, a kiss welling up from the heart must be given. After a couple's quarrel, upon reconciliation, the husband should gently kiss his wife's cheek. When welcoming a husband returning from a long trip, if overcome with joy and unable to speak, one should kiss silently. Or, unable to contain the joy, one might forget the kiss and simply cling to the husband's chest.

Beard Kiss
The beard kiss can be well understood by carefully watching the movies of the kissing master Adolf Menjou (아돌후만쥬). The beard is a type of anesthetic (痲痺劑).

Old Kisses
Research into the origin of the kiss suggests physiological causes stemming from the sucking motion of an infant nursing at its mother's breast. It's also said that in Roman times, it was a method for husbands to check if their wives had secretly drunk wine (葡萄酒). It's a very difficult issue. Besides love, there are various ritual and customary kisses like the "contract kiss" (契約키스), "Ascension Day kiss" (昇天祭키스), and Christmas kiss. A famous story involves the English custom where, on Christmas evening, under a mistletoe branch hanging from the ceiling, one could freely kiss another man's wife or a virgin. In the Middle Ages, kissing as a courtesy (禮) towards guests was extremely important. Even in the "Nibelungenlied" (니이벨루겐歌), women give welcoming kisses to all the guests. In places like France, during the age of chivalry, there was a custom where noblewomen exchanged kisses with their pages (小姓) as part of the master-servant relationship. In the 16th century in England, after finishing a dance, a woman would kiss the man she danced with as a substitute for courtesy. Not only that, but there was also a custom in churches where the priest (牧師) would first kiss the bride (新婦) during the wedding ceremony.

Kissing Games
The effect of kissing is not limited to rituals and love. It also features in games (遊戱). Kissing games are largely gone today, but they were popular until 40 or 50 years ago. The reason such games are not popular today is that the times are too dangerous, and also because there is no need for young men and women to kiss even during games.
The names are as follows:
1. Kissing Bet (키스의 賭賻)
2. Abduction of the Sabine Women (자비이네女子의 掠奪)
3. Kiss Through the Gate (門隔한 키스)
4. Aristotle's Horse (아리스도데레스의 馬)
5. Knight with a Sad Demeanor (슯흔 態度의 騎士)
6. Cupid's Bridge (규빗도의 橋)
7. Bound Forest God (묵겨진 森林의 神)
8. Sorrowful Man (悲哀스러운 男子)
9. Wrong Kiss (틀닌키스)
10. Cutting Off (베곤비난것 (切))
11. Kissing One's Own Shadow (自己그림자키스)
12. Kissing an Unknown Partner (相對者를 아지 못하난 키스)
Etc., etc., etc.

Anti-Kiss Arguments
However, it is necessary to remember that quite a few people oppose such beautiful and precious kisses.
The opposition to kissing in Europe, claiming it is unhygienic (非衛生的), was first advocated in Russia. In 1924, the Soviet (쏘비에트) People's Commissariat of Health <119> issued a nationwide order prohibiting kissing among the general public. This wasn't just aimed at banning kisses between lovers; it prohibited the long-standing Russian custom of peasants kissing each other as a welcoming gesture whenever they met, instead of just greeting. Then, in the same year, newspapers reported the establishment of a league in Madrid (마드리드), Spain, opposing the unhealthy "Pain of Kissing." A new law was enacted imposing fines even for casting flirtatious glances (秋波). In 1926, the "Women's Anti-Kissing League" was formed in London (倫敦). This, too, was not about opposing kisses between men and women, but an alliance to stop the custom of close female friends kissing each other upon meeting. A similar association was formed in Paris (巴里). In the United States (米國), the New Jersey (뉴짜스) State Department of Health issued instructions restricting kissing in 1926, strictly warning against it as a medium for transmitting infectious diseases (傅染病).
Opposition to mouth or hand kissing is certainly not a new issue today. In 1900 (likely 1890 or 1900 based on context and number 1990), a German physician gave an anti-kissing speech titled "On the Abuse of Friendship Kisses and Embraces." The anti-kissing theory mainly advocated today concerns the transmission of *poison/disease (毒). However, since this often applies to men and women who didn't know each other before, or strangers, it can be seen as irrelevant to kisses between people who love each other.

What is a Kiss?
Thus, the final question is: what is a kiss? There has been much discussion about this since ancient times. Today, however, a kiss cannot be considered complete unless the three elements of touch (觸覺), smell (嗅覺), and taste (味覺) are combined. Furthermore, people nowadays are all aware of the moral significance (道德的 意義) of kissing. However, whether kissing violates chastity (貞童) is difficult to resolve. Only in Italy, there is a saying, "A woman who has received a kiss is a married woman." There is also another saying, "A woman who has received a kiss has half consented her body."
Zola (조라), upon receiving congratulations for his 50th birthday, stated in an interview published in a Paris newspaper, "All talents, all honors are in my past and also in my future. But before the fresh kiss given by the lips of a 16-year-old girl, I would abandon everything and not look back." Is the kiss of a young woman that beautiful and precious?
"On a girl's lips, the kisses of her father and mother quietly remain. That kiss is indeed given to my daughter like a flower, as a precious seal (封印). Young people, do not break that seal needlessly."
This is like the warm spring affection (溫情春) of Frederick Hebbel (후리도릭크 헷베루). Many scholars view kissing as a prelude to sexual intercourse (性交). How should the philosophy of kissing discussed thus far be resolved? Young men and women must develop their own philosophy of kissing. <120>
<109-120>

**Summary**

This 1934 article by Pak Chŏngwŏl explores the multifaceted nature of the kiss ("接吻硏究" - Kiss Research). It begins by noting the historical absence and recent emergence of kissing in Korea, contrasting it with its complex history and varied practices in Japan, China, the wider East (Egypt, Turkey, Java, India, Siam), and extensively across Europe (Russia, Poland, Hungary, Greece, Italy, Spain, France, Germany, UK, etc.) and the Americas. The author discusses cultural interpretations, techniques, the "ideal age" for kissing, its depiction in art and literature, psychological aspects like closing one's eyes (citing Heine), and historical anecdotes involving figures like Adam and Eve or Greek gods. The piece delves into the legal implications of kissing, citing historical Roman and German laws, and touches upon anti-kissing movements based on hygiene concerns. It concludes by pondering the fundamental definition and moral weight of a kiss, emphasizing its perceived preciousness, particularly a young woman's first kiss.

From a historical perspective, the article is fascinating as it reflects the rapid social changes and influx of Western cultural concepts (like romantic kissing) into Korea during the Japanese colonial period. The initial observation about Koreans traditionally not kissing and its recent popularization highlights this cultural shift. The extensive comparison with global practices, particularly the detailed, sometimes stereotypical, descriptions of European national kissing styles, reveals a Korean intellectual engaging with and interpreting global culture, likely influenced by Japanese and Western sources available at the time. The discussion of legal cases and anti-kissing movements (especially the Soviet decree) mirrors contemporary global discourses, positioning the Korean discussion within a broader international context of modernity, hygiene, and evolving social norms regarding intimacy. Historians might find the specific cultural comparisons, the author's tone (observational yet sometimes judgmental), and the underlying theme of Korea "catching up" or navigating new social practices particularly revealing about colonial-era intellectual life and cultural transformation.

**Named Entities**

괴테	괴테	Goethe
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
汽車軌道	기차궤도	Railroad tracks (Literal: Steam Car Rail Track)
東京	도쿄	Tōkyō
大阪	오사카	Ōsaka
고-간	고갱	Gauguin
따이디도	타히티	Tahiti
新西蘭士	신서란사	New Zealand
빠부아	파푸아	Papua
濠洲	호주	Australia
에스키스	에스키모	Eskimo
豊太閤	풍태합	Toyotomi Hideyoshi
淀君	전군	Yodo-gimi
로단	로댕	Rodin
佛蘭西	불란서	France
警視廳	경시청	Metropolitan Police Department (Tokyo)
中國	중국	China
歐羅巴	구라파	Europe
土耳其	토이기	Turkey
亞羅比亞	아라비아	Arabia
波斯	파사	Persia
亞羅比亞夜話	아라비아 야화	Arabian Nights
埃國	애국	Egypt
가이로	카이로	Cairo
쨔봐	자와	Java
印度	인도	India
감스트라	카마수트라	Kama Sutra
샴우	샴	Siam
露西亞	노서아	Russia
波蘭	파란	Poland
巴里	파리	Paris
匈加利	흉가리	Hungary
슬나보니아	슬라보니아	Slavonia
北歐米	북구미	Northern Europe/America
南歐	남구	Southern Europe
希臘	희랍	Greece
뻬넬오베	페넬로페	Penelope
울세스	율리시스	Ulysses
伊太利	이태리	Italy
앙메뭉	아가멤논	Agamemnon
뿌리암스	프리아모스	Priam
아기레스	아킬레스	Achilles
헥구돌	헥토르	Hector
아부라함	아브라함	Abraham
이삭	이삭	Isaac
야곱	야곱	Jacob
유노	유노	Juno
쮸비다	쥬피터	Jupiter
베누스	베누스	Venus
마루스	마르스	Mars
쓰루간	불카누스	Vulcan
오림비아	올림피아	Olympia
芬蘭	핀란드	Finland
펜하우겐	코펜하겐	Copenhagen
오스로	오슬로	Oslo
瑞典	서전	Sweden
和蘭	화란	Netherlands
英國	영국	England
白耳義	백이의	Belgium
밀난	밀라노	Milan
羅馬	로마	Rome
비폴	나폴리	Naples
西班牙	서반아	Spain
에스데루마즈라	에스트레마두라	Estremadura
안달샤	안달루시아	Andalusia
뽈도갈	포르투갈	Portugal
鰯魚	정어리	Sardine
瑞西	서서	Switzerland
쩨네바	제네바	Geneva
떼파드맨드스토아	데파트망 스토어	Department Store
마네킨	마네킹	Mannequin
노루만데이	노르망디	Normandy
海豚	해돈	Dolphin
謝肉祭	사육제	Carnival
昇天祭	승천제	Ascension Day
루마니아	루마니아	Romania
뿔가리아	불가리아	Bulgaria
세반	세반	Cévennes
사보야	사보이	Savoy
집시이	집시	Gypsy
蒙古	몽고	Mongolia
사모아	사모아	Samoa
멕시코	멕시코	Mexico
伯林	백림	Berlin
維也納	유야납	Vienna
紐育	뉴욕	New York
하이네	하이네	Heine
로레라이	로렐라이	Lorelei
基督	기독	Christ
이브	이브	Eve
아담	아담	Adam
에덴	에덴	Eden
여호와	여호와	Jehovah
創世記	창세기	Genesis
메소보다미아	메소포타미아	Mesopotamia
하란	하란	Harran
하헬	라헬	Rachel
라반	라반	Laban
에소	에서	Esau
고가색	코카서스	Caucasus
小露西亞	소노서아	Little Russia (Ukraine/Southern Russia)
百合	백합	Lily
石竹	석죽	Carnation/Pink (Dianthus)
龍膽꼿	용담꽃	Gentian flower
아돌후만쥬	아돌프 만주	Adolf Menjou
獨逸露馬法	독일로마법	German Roman Law
빠죤	파더보른	Paderborn (likely)
콘스탄진大帝	콘스탄티누스 대제	Constantine the Great
獨逸大審院	독일대심원	German Supreme Court (Reichsgericht)
米國	미국	United States
露西亞人	노서아인	Russian people
獨墺人	독오인	German/Austrian people
코인사	코인사	Nose greeting
니이벨루겐	니벨룽겐	Nibelungenlied
아리스도데레스	아리스토텔레스	Aristotle
규빗도	큐피드	Cupid
쏘비에트	소비에트	Soviet
마드리드	마드리드	Madrid
倫敦	런던	London
뉴짜스	뉴저지	New Jersey
조라	졸라	Zola
후리도릭크 헷베루	프리드리히 헤벨	Frederick Hebbel

**Glossary**

갓갑다	가깝다	To be close, near (older spelling)
朝鮮	조선	Korea (Joseon dynasty context, here used for Korea generally)
汽車軌道	기차궤도	Railroad track
異彩	이채	Peculiarity, unique color
만치	만큼	As much as, to the extent that (older form)
例事	예사	Commonplace, usual thing
貌樣갓다	모양같다	Seems like, looks like (older spelling/form)
실혀하난	싫어하는	Disliking, hating (older spelling/form)
업섯다	없었다	Did not exist, was not present (older spelling)
거시	것이	Thing (subject marker attached, older spelling)
만타	많다	To be many, much (older spelling)
고-간	고갱	Gauguin (phonetic transcription)
따이디도	타히티	Tahiti (phonetic transcription)
新西蘭士	신서란사	New Zealand (Hanja representation)
빠부아	파푸아	Papua (phonetic transcription)
濠洲	호주	Australia (Hanja representation)
에스키스	에스키모	Eskimo (phonetic transcription)
本能	본능	Instinct
戀愛文化	연애문화	Culture of love/romance
産物	산물	Product, outcome
解釋	해석	Interpretation
野蠻人	야만인	Barbarian
英雄待望論	영웅대망론	Theory of awaiting a hero
高唱	고창	Advocating loudly, chanting
豊太閤	풍태합	Toyotomi Hideyoshi (title)
淀君	전군	Yodo-gimi (consort of Hideyoshi)
片紙	편지	Letter (older term, less common now)
浮世畵	부세화	Ukiyo-e (Japanese woodblock prints)
揷畵	삽화	Illustration
春告烏	춘고조	Harutsuge-dori (Japanese literary work title)
相對暖語	상대난어	Aite Warm語 (Japanese literary work title, precise reading uncertain)
彫刻家	조각가	Sculptor
로단	로댕	Rodin (phonetic transcription)
陳列	진열	Exhibition, display
內務省	내무성	Ministry of Home Affairs
官憲	관헌	Government official, authorities
警視廳	경시청	Metropolitan Police Department
風習	풍습	Custom, practice
濫用	남용	Overuse, abuse
流行	유행	Fashion, trend, prevalence
中國	중국	China
冊	책	Book
뺨	뺨	Cheek
코	코	Nose
숨	숨	Breath
찰삭찰삭	찰싹찰싹	Sound of light slapping or splashing
宣傳	선전	Propaganda, promotion, advertisement
模樣갓흐며	모양같으며	Seems like, looks like (older spelling/form conjunction)
舊約聖書	구약성서	Old Testament
土地	토지	Land, territory
大槪	대개	Generally, mostly
對立	대립	Opposition, confrontation
土耳其	토이기	Turkey (Hanja representation)
亞羅比亞	아라비아	Arabia (Hanja representation)
波斯	파사	Persia (Hanja representation)
亞羅比亞夜話	아라비아 야화	Arabian Nights
淫逸肉慾的	음일육욕적	Lewd and carnal
確實히	확실히	Certainly, surely
正評	정평	Established opinion, consensus
古代	고대	Ancient times
埃國	애국	Egypt (Hanja representation)
盛行	성행	Flourishing, being popular
重要	중요	Important
巧妙	교묘	Skillful, clever
逸話	일화	Anecdote
技能	기능	Skill, technique
秘技	비기	Secret art/technique
有數	유수	Prominent, leading, one of the best
極東	극동	Far East
쨔봐	자와	Java (phonetic transcription)
춤	춤	Dance
女神	여신	Goddess
西歐	서구	Western Europe
앵킨者	얽힌 자	One who is entangled/involved
醉하리라	취하리라	Will surely be intoxicated (older future tense form)
印度	인도	India (Hanja representation)
專心	전심	Wholeheartedness, concentration
性慾	성욕	Sexual desire
寶典	보전	Treasury, authoritative book
匹敵	필적	To be equal, rival
愛撫	애무	Caress, fondling (here likely referring to a specific chapter/topic)
精細	정세	Detailed, fine
描破	묘파	Depiction, description
厭倒的	염도적	Captivating, enchanting (uncommon term, likely 壓倒的 - overwhelming)
氣分	기분	Mood, feeling, atmosphere
샴우	샴	Siam (phonetic transcription)
到底히	도저히	(Cannot) possibly, by any means
欠缺	흠결	Lack, deficiency
非難	비난	Criticism, blame
西洋	서양	The West, Occident
複雜	복잡	Complex, complicated
一言	일언	One word
甚하게	심하게	Intensely, severely
作別	작별	Farewell
表	표	Sign, indication, expression
敬意	경의	Respect, reverence
戀情	연정	Romantic feeling, affection
秘密	비밀	Secret
溫柔	온유	Gentle, tender
波蘭	파란	Poland (Hanja representation)
巴里	파리	Paris (Hanja representation)
흉내	흉내	Imitation
지나지 아니하야	지나지 아니하여	Being nothing more than, merely
快味	쾌미	Pleasant taste, pleasure (less common term)
空然히	공연히	Uselessly, needlessly, without reason
評	평	Comment, criticism, review
匈加利	흉가리	Hungary (Hanja representation)
갓하야	같아서	Being like, similar to (older form)
熱烈	열렬	Passionate, ardent
魂	혼	Soul, spirit
呼吸	호흡	Breath, respiration
肉體	육체	Physical body
運動	운동	Movement, exercise
哲學	철학	Philosophy
落第	낙제	Failure (in an exam or standard)
슬나보니아	슬라보니아	Slavonia (phonetic transcription)
劣等	열등	Inferior
맥기러온	매끄러운	Smooth, sleek (perhaps 'sensual', older spelling/usage)
말씨	말씨	Way of speaking, accent
얌전한	얌전한	Gentle, modest, well-behaved
意志	의지	Will, intention
卽	즉	Namely, that is
微笑	미소	Smile
고개	고개	Head (specifically back of head/neck area, implies bowing head)
숙여	숙여	Lowering, bowing
꿈꾸는 者	꿈꾸는 자	Dreamer
살그머니	살그머니	Gently, stealthily
녹이난 듯	녹이는 듯	As if melting
앵켜진다	안겨진다	To be embraced, held (older spelling)
希臘	희랍	Greece (Hanja representation)
史上	사상	In history
輕視	경시	Disregard, looking down upon
盛行하여 잇섯다	성행하여 있었다	Was prevalent, flourished (older past progressive)
비로소	비로소	For the first time, only then
傳해왓다	전해왔다	Has been transmitted/passed down
뻬넬오베	페넬로페	Penelope (phonetic transcription)
接客	접객	Receiving guests
울세스	율리시스	Ulysses (phonetic transcription)
伊太利	이태리	Italy (Hanja representation)
上陸	상륙	Landing (on shore)
大地	대지	Earth, ground
앙메뭉	아가멤논	Agamemnon (phonetic transcription)
祖國	조국	Homeland, fatherland
故鄕	고향	Hometown
뿌리암스	프리아모스	Priam (phonetic transcription)
아기레스	아킬레스	Achilles (phonetic transcription)
헥구돌	헥토르	Hector (phonetic transcription)
死體	사체	Dead body, corpse
誓約	서약	Oath, vow
甁	병	Bottle, jar
주둥이	주둥이	Mouth (of a bottle), snout, muzzle
귀	귀	Ear
쥐고	쥐고	Grasping, holding
끼어 안는다	끼어 안는다	To hold tightly, embrace closely
聖書	성서	Bible
아부라함	아브라함	Abraham (phonetic transcription)
이삭	이삭	Isaac (phonetic transcription)
야곱	야곱	Jacob (phonetic transcription)
紀元前	기원전	B.C. (Before Christ)
實로	실로	Indeed, truly
神話	신화	Mythology
유노	유노	Juno (phonetic transcription)
大神	대신	Great god
쮸비다	쥬피터	Jupiter (phonetic transcription)
嫉妬	질투	Jealousy
和解	화해	Reconciliation
不義者	불의자	Adulterer, unjust person (here likely referring to Venus)
베누스	베누스	Venus (phonetic transcription)
마루스	마르스	Mars (phonetic transcription)
까닭	까닭	Reason, cause
쓰루간	불카누스	Vulcan (phonetic transcription)
發怒	발노	Getting angry
網	망	Net
씨웟다고	씌웠다고	Said to have covered/put on (older spelling)
오림비아神	올림피아 신	Olympian god
行事	행사	Act, deed, event
실치 아니하엿든	싫지 아니하였던	Did not dislike (older form)
芬蘭	핀란드	Finland (Hanja representation)
大担	대담	Bold, daring
익숙치 못하다	익숙지 못하다	Not skilled, unfamiliar
心臟	심장	Heart
唯一	유일	Only, sole
펜하우겐	코펜하겐	Copenhagen (phonetic transcription)
國際的	국제적	International
오스로	오슬로	Oslo (phonetic transcription)
딱딱하게	딱딱하게	Stiffly, rigidly
짤게	짧게	Briefly, shortly
瑞典	서전	Sweden (Hanja representation)
高尙	고상	Elegant, refined, noble
和蘭	화란	Netherlands (Hanja representation)
無味乾燥	무미건조	Bland and dry, uninteresting
英國	영국	England (Hanja representation)
主婦風	주부풍	Housewife-style
동안	동안	During, while
招待	초대	Invitation
白耳義	백이의	Belgium (Hanja representation)
嘆賞	탄상	Admiration, praise
向하야	향하여	Towards
노려보다가	노려보다가	After staring intently
伊太利	이태리	Italy (Hanja representation)
밀난	밀라노	Milan (phonetic transcription)
羅馬	로마	Rome (Hanja representation)
女쭈	여쭈	Woman (meaning unclear, possibly typo or obscure term)
選擇	선택	Choice, selection
까다라우며	까다로우며	Being picky, particular (older spelling)
비폴	나폴리	Naples (phonetic transcription)
別노	별로	Particularly, especially (older spelling)
아모대나	아무데나	Anywhere
詩人	시인	Poet
戀人	연인	Lover
思慕	사모	Longing, yearning
못견대서	못 견뎌서	Unable to bear/endure
傳해주소	전해주소	Please convey/tell (older polite imperative)
代身	대신	Instead of, in place of
心情	심정	Feeling, sentiment
南歐	남구	Southern Europe
西班牙	서반아	Spain (Hanja representation)
技巧	기교	Technique, skill
弄絡	농락	Playing with, manipulating
要求	요구	Demand, request
몃 번	몇 번	How many times (older spelling)
밧앗나	받았나	Received? (older spelling)
알어내다	알아내다	To find out, discover (older spelling)
놀납지 아니한가	놀랍지 아니한가	Isn't it surprising? (older spelling)
度數	도수	Degree, frequency, number of times
따러	따라	According to, following (older spelling)
自己	자기	Oneself
價値	가치	Value, worth
比較	비교	Comparison
에스데루마즈라	에스트레마두라	Estremadura (phonetic transcription)
비둘기	비둘기	Dove, pigeon
地方	지방	Region, area
羊毛	양모	Wool
軟軟하게	연연하게	Softly (Hanja suggests 'tenderly', but context points to softness)
털	털	Fur, fleece, hair
개볍게	가볍게	Lightly (older spelling)
猛獸	맹수	Wild beast
발툽갓치	발톱같이	Like claws (older spelling)
백혀진다	박혀진다	To be embedded, stuck into (older spelling)
안달샤	안달루시아	Andalusia (phonetic transcription)
世上	세상	World
임의	이미	Already
正評	정평	Established reputation
무녹은	무르익은	Ripe (older spelling/form, context suggests ripe)
石榴	석류	Pomegranate
단단치도 안코	단단치도 않고	Neither hard/firm
軟하지도 안케	연하지도 않게	Nor soft (Hanja 軟 suggests soft/tender)
알마치	알맞게	Properly, fittingly (older form)
익은	익은	Ripe
배	배	Pear
歎息	탄식	Sigh
魂	혼	Soul
飛出	비출	Flying out
再次	재차	Again, second time
거둡잡을	거두잡을	To gather (oneself), compose (older spelling/form)
발서	벌써	Already (older spelling)
찬아침바람	찬 아침바람	Cold morning wind
꼿	꽃	Flower (older spelling)
흔들고	흔들고	Shaking
소나무우에	소나무 위에	Above the pine tree (older spelling)
달빗치	달빛이	Moonlight (subject marker attached, older spelling)
넘어가는	넘어가는	Passing over, setting
뽈도갈	포르투갈	Portugal (phonetic transcription)
鰯魚	정어리	Sardine (Japanese Kanji reading Iwashi)
간쓰메	간즈메	Canned goods (from Japanese 缶詰 kanzume)
내암새	냄새	Smell, odor (older spelling)
붓허	부터	From (older spelling)
瑞西	서서	Switzerland (Hanja representation)
이르면	이르면	Upon reaching/arriving
冷靜	냉정	Coolness, calmness, composure
점잔을 뺀다	점잔을 뺀다	To put on airs, act reservedly
쩨네바	제네바	Geneva (phonetic transcription)
떼파드맨드스토아	데파트망 스토어	Department Store (phonetic transcription of French 'departement store')
看守女子	간수여자	Female guard/watchman (context suggests saleswoman/shop assistant)
品	품	Quality, dignity, grace
失하고	실하고	Losing
마네킨	마네킹	Mannequin (phonetic transcription)
模範的	모범적	Exemplary, model-like
態度	태도	Attitude
注意	주의	Attention, care
잇섯다고	있었다고	Said to have been (older spelling)
노루만데이	노르망디	Normandy (phonetic transcription)
漁夫	어부	Fisherman
女娘	여낭	Daughter (older/literary term)
아스라	아수라	Asura (Buddhist demigod, context suggests putting on airs/being haughty)
극히	극히	Extremely
無邪氣	무사기	Innocence
詩的	시적	Poetic
感情	감정	Feeling, emotion
流露	유로	Disclosure, revealing
힘	힘	Strength, power
게다가	게다가	Moreover, besides
얇다	얇다	To be thin
찰삭대고	찰싹대고	Making slapping sounds
물가마귀	물까마귀	Cormorant
模樣	모양	Shape, appearance, manner
빨느게	빠르게	Quickly (older spelling)
海豚	해돈	Dolphin (Hanja representation, common term 돌고래)
强하게	강하게	Strongly
突進	돌진	Rush, charge
입술맛	입술맛	Taste of the lips
謝肉祭	사육제	Carnival (Hanja representation)
昇天祭	승천제	Ascension Day (Hanja representation)
한날	한날	Same day
열닌	열린	Opened, held (older spelling)
感	감	Feeling, sense
이러한	이러한	Such, like this
比하면	비하면	Compared to
루마니아	루마니아	Romania (phonetic transcription)
殺風景	살풍경	Bleak, dreary, desolate
뿔가리아	불가리아	Bulgaria (phonetic transcription)
무러뗀다고	물어뜯는다고	Said to bite (older spelling)
佛蘭西	불란서	France (Hanja representation)
세반	세반	Cévennes (phonetic transcription)
正統派	정통파	Orthodox school
압호로	앞으로	Forward (older spelling)
强烈	강렬	Intensity, strength
情熱	정열	Passion
눌너	눌러	Pressing down, suppressing (older spelling)
참으며	참으며	Enduring, suppressing
靜肅	정숙	Solemn, quiet, demure
隱隱하게	은은하게	Subtly, gently, faintly
사보야	사보이	Savoy (phonetic transcription)
이상한	이상한	Strange, unusual
짓	짓	Act, behavior
토기	토끼	Rabbit
뽀족하게	뾰족하게	Pointedly
코구녕	콧구멍	Nostril (older spelling)
뿜어는다고	뿜는다고	Said to blow out (older spelling/form)
집시이	집시	Gypsy (phonetic transcription)
蒙古	몽고	Mongolia (Hanja representation)
모른다	모른다	Does not know
사모아	사모아	Samoa (phonetic transcription)
배온	배운	Learned (older spelling)
軟하고	연하고	Being soft/tender
全혀	전혀	Completely, entirely (older spelling)
나를 잇고	나를 잊고	Forgetting oneself (older spelling '잇다' for '잊다')
늘	늘	Always
꺽난	꺾는	Breaking, picking (flowers) (older spelling)
優美	우미	Graceful, elegant
아람다온	아름다운	Beautiful (older spelling)
黑人	흑인	Black person
血統	혈통	Bloodline, lineage
샤보덴	사보텐	Cactus (from Japanese サボテン saboten)
멕시코	멕시코	Mexico (phonetic transcription)
髣髴	방불	Resembling, similar to
意氣	의기	Spirit, mettle
불과 갓고	불과 같고	Like fire
狂氣	광기	Madness, insanity
갓갑다고	가깝다고	Said to be close/near (older spelling)
都會	도회	City, urban area
地方	지방	Rural area, countryside
優勝	우승	Superiority, victory
그럿타고	그렇다고	Saying it is so (older spelling)
斷言	단언	Assertion, declaration
업는	없는	Not existing, without (older spelling)
달는	다른	Different (older spelling)
手練 手管	수련 수관	Skill and cunning, tricks of the trade
當하다	당하다	To be equivalent to, correspond to
柔靭性	유인성	Flexibility, suppleness
劣等	열등	Inferior
肉慾的	육욕적	Carnal, lustful
香氣	향기	Fragrance, scent
風韻	풍운	Charm, elegance, grace
缺하다	결하다	To lack
紐育	뉴욕	New York (Hanja representation)
表面	표면	Surface, appearance
禮意	예의	Politeness, courtesy
갓가오나	가까우나	Although close/similar (older spelling)
非凡	비범	Extraordinary, uncommon
愛好力	애호력	Fondness, liking (power/force of liking)
暗示	암시	Hint, suggestion
維也納	유야납	Vienna (Hanja representation)
竪琴	수금	Harp
소래	소리	Sound (older spelling)
거짓말	거짓말	Lie
求한다	구한다	Requests, seeks
許한다	허한다	Permits, allows
준다	준다	Gives
盟誓	맹세	Oath, vow
씨 부린다	씨 뿌린다	Sows seeds
貞操	정조	Chastity, fidelity
直히면서	지키면서	While keeping/guarding (older spelling)
術策	술책	Tactic, stratagem
웨	왜	Why (older spelling)
以上	이상	Above mentioned, more than
難解	난해	Difficult to understand
大問題	대문제	Major problem, big issue
녯붓터	옛부터	Since old times (older spelling)
言論	언론	Discussion, debate, discourse
說明	설명	Explanation
提出	제출	Submission, presentation
詩人	시인	Poet
하이네	하이네	Heine (phonetic transcription)
一句	일구	One phrase, one line (of poetry)
深夜	심야	Late night, midnight
날샐 때까지	날 샐 때까지	Until dawn breaks
끈임업시	끊임없이	Endlessly, ceaselessly (older spelling)
찻난다	찾는다	Searches for, seeks (older spelling)
엇지하야	어찌하여	Why, for what reason (older form)
綠故	연고	Reason, cause (less common Hanja usage)
對答	대답	Answer, reply
오직	오직	Only, merely
向할뿐	향할 뿐	Only turning towards
로레라이	로렐라이	Lorelei (phonetic transcription)
만흔	많은	Many, much (older spelling)
戀愛學者	연애학자	Love scholar, scholar of romance
괴롭게	괴롭게	Painfully, troublesomely
最初	최초	First, initial
問題거리	문제거리	Source of a problem, issue
週刊雜誌	주간잡지	Weekly magazine
讀者	독자	Reader
募集	모집	Recruitment, collection (of answers)
一部	일부	Part, portion
어린이	어린이	Child
녯부터	옛부터	Since old times (older spelling)
盲目的	맹목적	Blind (as in 'love is blind')
周圍	주위	Surroundings
밤	밤	Night
願	원	Wish, desire
세가지	세 가지	Three things
두	두	Two
눈	눈	Eye
한	한	One
입	입	Mouth
强하게	강하게	Strongly
하랴면	하려면	If one intends to do/make
감어야	감아야	Must close
靑春	청춘	Youth
莫迦	모가	Foolish, stupid (less common term, possibly 바보)
까닭	까닭	Reason
快樂	쾌락	Pleasure, enjoyment
빠지는	빠지는	Falling into
第7天國	제7천국	Seventh Heaven
아래	아래	Below, down
어리지러운	어지러운	Dizzy, giddy (older spelling)
故로	고로	Therefore, consequently
술	술	Alcohol
마신다	마신다	Drinks
戀愛焰眼	연애염안	Fiery eyes of love (invented term?)
注射	주사	Injection
깨다르랴는	깨달으려는	Intending to realize/understand (older form)
一等賞	일등상	First prize
밧은	받은	Received (older spelling)
聖書	성서	Bible
말하기를	말하기를	Saying that...
이웃사람	이웃 사람	Neighbor
無力	무력	Weakness, powerlessness
何如튼	하여튼	Anyway, in any case
命題	명제	Proposition, thesis
依然히	의연히	Still, as ever
解決	해결	Solution, resolution
免할 수 업다	면할 수 없다	Cannot escape/avoid (older spelling)
疑問	의문	Doubt, question
例하면	예하면	For example
해와	하와	Eve (older phonetic transcription)
능금	능금	Apple (specifically Malus asiatica, native Korean apple)
밧을	받을	Receive (future/potential, older spelling)
밧지나 아니하엿나	받지나 아니하였나	Didn't (she) receive? (older interrogative past)
舊約聖書	구약성서	Old Testament
傳하는 바에 依하면	전하는 바에 의하면	According to tradition
여호와	여호와	Jehovah (phonetic transcription)
흙	흙	Soil, earth, dust
맨들고	만들고	Making, creating (older spelling)
입김	입김	Breath (blown out)
부러느어	불어넣어	Blowing into (older spelling)
쉬게	쉬게	To breathe (make breathe)
萬一	만일	If, in case
엇든들	었던들	If it had been (older conditional past)
世界創造	세계창조	World creation
엿는지	였는지	Whether it was (older form)
알수 업다	알 수 없다	Cannot know (older spelling)
에덴동산	에덴동산	Garden of Eden
裸體	나체	Naked body, nudity
두러누어	드러누워	Lying down (older spelling)
엇슬 때	있을 때	When (she) was (older spelling/form)
蜜蜂	밀봉	Honeybee
날아와서	날아와서	Flying over
붉은	붉은	Red
確實히	확실히	Surely, certainly
단꿀	단 꿀	Sweet honey
잇스리라	있으리라	Will be (older future tense form)
날나들냐고	날아들려고	Trying to fly in/land on (older spelling/form)
엽헤	옆에	Beside, next to (older spelling)
보든	보던	Who was watching (older form)
好奇心	호기심	Curiosity
嫉妬心	질투심	Jealousy
벌	벌	Bee
쫏고	쫓고	Chasing away (older spelling)
대여	대어	Touching, placing on (older spelling)
깃버햇다고	기뻐했다고	Said to have been pleased/delighted (older spelling)
怪異	괴이	Strange, weird
歲	세	Years old (age counter)
後	후	After, later
그리	그리	So, that much
異常	이상	Unusual, abnormal
創世記	창세기	Genesis
불너	불러	Calling (older spelling)
갓가이	가까이	Near, close (older spelling)
내게	내게	To me
메소보다미아	메소포타미아	Mesopotamia (phonetic transcription)
倒着	도착	Arrival
하란새음가	하란 샘가	Near the well of Harran (새음 = 샘 wellspring, older form)
하헬	라헬	Rachel (phonetic transcription)
라반	라반	Laban (phonetic transcription)
孫女	손녀	Granddaughter
잇더냐	있더냐	Was there? Could you? (older interrogative)
外	외	Other than, besides
에소	에서	Esau (phonetic transcription)
세제후	요셉	Joseph (likely mistranscription for 요셉 Yosep)
얼굴	얼굴	Face
發見者	발견자	Discoverer
지지 아니할	지지 아니할	Not inferior to, not losing to
고가색	코카서스	Caucasus (phonetic transcription)
小露西亞	소노서아	Little Russia (Ukraine/Southern Russia)
高峻	고준	High and steep
華麗	화려	Splendid, gorgeous
만키로	많기로	Being known for being many/much (older form)
金色	금색	Golden color
光彩	광채	Brilliance, radiance
목	목	Neck
흰 것	흰 것	Whiteness
싸힌	쌓인	Piled up (older spelling)
初雪	초설	First snow
갓다고	같다고	Said to be like (older spelling)
由來	유래	Origin, history; since long ago
꼿	꽃	Flower (older spelling)
革帶	혁대	Leather belt
겨오	겨우	Barely, scarcely (older spelling)
가심	가슴	Chest, breast (older spelling)
가린	가린	Covered
衣	의	Clothes, garment
끗	끝	End, tip (older spelling)
百合	백합	Lily
곱고	곱고	Being beautiful/fine
둥근	둥근	Round
眞紅色	진홍색	Crimson color
石竹	석죽	Carnation, pink (Dianthus)
龍膽꼿	용담꽃	Gentian flower
물고	물고	Holding in the mouth
살구꼿	살구꽃	Apricot blossom (older spelling)
앵도꼿	앵두꽃	Cherry blossom (older spelling)
蘭꼿	난꽃	Orchid flower (older spelling)
땅골작이	땅 골짜기	Valley floor, ravine (older form)
은근이	은근히	Secretly, quietly
沐浴	목욕	Bathing
새	새	While, time (archaic particle)
냄새	냄새	Smell, scent
勇壯	용장	Valiant, brave
騎士	기사	Knight
一人	일인	One person
합시다	합시다	Let's assume, let's say
아모	아무	Any (older spelling)
주저함	주저함	Hesitation
업시	없이	Without (older spelling)
압헤	앞에	In front of (older spelling)
서서	서서	Standing
半問半答	반문반답	Half question, half answer
노려 볼 것이라	노려 볼 것이라	Will likely stare (older future form)
갓치	같이	Like (older spelling)
무럿든	물었던	Was holding in the mouth (older spelling)
빼서	빼서	Taking out
잠시동안	잠시 동안	For a short while
한편	한편	One side
牧場	목장	Pasture, ranch
꼿꼿이	꼿꼿이	Stiffly, uprightly
森林	삼림	Forest
아모뜻엽시	아무 뜻 없이	Meaninglessly, without any intention (older spelling)
不知不覺中	부지불각중	Unconsciously, unknowingly
年(나이)	년(나이)	Age (year)
나라	나라	Country
小說的	소설적	Novelistic, fictional
同時	동시	Simultaneously
難解	난해	Difficult to understand
處女	처녀	Virgin
熱情	열정	Passion
오히려	오히려	Rather, preferably
期待	기대	Expectation, anticipation
憧憬	동경	Longing, yearning
淡薄	담박	Faint, pale, light
不安	불안	Anxiety, uneasiness
맛	맛	Taste, flavor
아름다온	아름다운	Beautiful (older spelling)
北歐	북구	Northern Europe
間	간	Between
제일	제일	Most, best, number one
마암	마음	Heart, mind (older spelling)
소사나는	솟아나는	Welling up, springing forth (older spelling)
勿論	물론	Of course, naturally
後者	후자	The latter
屬한다	속한다	Belongs to
法律問題	법률문제	Legal issue
人生	인생	Human life
悲劇	비극	Tragedy
發生	발생	Occurrence, happening
危險	위험	Danger
할할 수 잇다	말할 수 있다	Can say (possible typo '할할' for '말할')
機微	기미	Subtlety, nuance
映畵	영화	Movie, film
從橫	종횡	Lengthwise and crosswise; freely, extensively
喜悲劇	희비극	Tragicomedy
原因	원인	Cause, reason
盛히	성히	Actively, vigorously
硏究	연구	Research, study
바록구 時代	바로크 시대	Baroque era
獨逸露馬法	독일로마법	German Roman Law (likely referring to Reception of Roman Law in Germany)
他人	타인	Another person, stranger
조흔가	좋은가	Is it good/acceptable? (older spelling)
議論	의론	Discussion, argument (older spelling '의론' for '의논')
中心	중심	Center, focus
빠죤	파더보른	Paderborn (German city, phonetic transcription)
키스法	키스법	Kiss Law
存在	존재	Existence
依하면	의하면	According to
젊은	젊은	Young
未婚男子	미혼남자	Unmarried man
證明	증명	Proof, evidence
잇스면	있으면	If there is (older spelling)
遺産	유산	Inheritance, estate
全部	전부	All, entire amount
갓게 되엿다	갖게 되었다	Came to possess/have (older spelling)
與否	여부	Whether or not
뭇지 안는다고	묻지 않는다고	Said not to ask (older spelling)
反對	반대	Opposite
境遇	경우	Case, circumstance
情神	정신	Spirit, mind, mentality (older spelling '정신')
古代	고대	Ancient times
擁護	옹호	Protection, defense
콘스탄진大帝	콘스탄티누스 대제	Constantine the Great (phonetic transcription)
解釋	해석	Interpretation
破婚	파혼	Breaking off an engagement
밧앗든	받았던	Had received (older spelling)
物件	물건	Item, object
반쯤	반쯤	About half
돌녀 보내면	돌려 보내면	If (she) sends back (older spelling)
남은	남은	Remaining
領收證	영수증	Receipt
認定	인정	Recognition, acknowledgment
有利	유리	Advantageous
罰則	벌칙	Penal regulations, penalty clause
어대까지든지	어디까지든지	To whatever extent, thoroughly (older spelling)
婦人	부인	Woman, lady, wife
好評	호평	Favorable reception, good reputation
듯든	듣던	Heard, was known for (older spelling)
結果	결과	Result, consequence
訴訟	소송	Lawsuit
攻擊的	공격적	Aggressive, offensive
機會	기회	Opportunity, chance
지게 된다	지게 된다	Ends up losing
治療	치료	Treatment, cure
要하난	요하는	Requiring (older spelling)
잇섯다	있었다	There was (older spelling)
調査	조사	Investigation
끌고 드러가서	끌고 들어가서	Dragging into (older spelling)
無理	무리	Unreasonableness, force
强要	강요	Coercion, forcing
故로	고로	Therefore
혀	혀	Tongue
무러뜻고	물어뜯고	Biting (older spelling)
뿌리첫다	뿌리쳤다	Shook off, rejected forcefully (older spelling)
傷害罪	상해죄	Crime of inflicting bodily injury, assault
告訴	고소	Accusation, lawsuit filing
裁判長	재판장	Presiding judge
愛着	애착	Attachment, affection
證券	증권	Certificate, evidence (here metaphorical)
兩者	양자	Both parties
自由意思	자유의사	Free will
道理的	도리적	Moral
根據	근거	Basis, grounds
判決	판결	Judgment, ruling
勿論	물론	Of course
無罪放免	무죄방면	Acquittal and release
根本問題	근본문제	Fundamental problem/issue
獨逸大審院	독일대심원	German Supreme Court (Reichsgericht)
發表	발표	Announcement, publication
定義	정의	Definition
身體	신체	Body
作用	작용	Action, effect
恒常	항상	Always
被키스者	피키스자	Person being kissed
承諾	승낙	Consent, approval
要한다	요한다	Requires
업슬	없을	Without, non-existent (future/potential, older spelling)
暗黙	암묵	Tacit, implicit
確實	확실	Certainty
親戚	친척	Relative
父母	부모	Parents
兄弟	형제	Siblings (brothers)
戀人	연인	Lover
抵抗	저항	Resistance
不法行爲	불법행위	Illegal act, tort
人格權侵害	인격권침해	Infringement of personal rights
及	급	And
名譽毁損	명예훼손	Defamation, slander/libel
狀態	상태	State, condition
强行	강행	Forcing, pushing through
侮辱罪	모욕죄	Crime of insult
急할 수 업다	피할 수 없다	Cannot avoid (likely typo 급 for 피)
훌늉한	훌륭한	Excellent, admirable (older spelling)
正當防衛	정당방위	Legitimate self-defense
손	손	Hand
限하야	한하여	Limited to
손등	손등	Back of the hand
恭遜히	공손히	Respectfully, politely
조고만	조그만	Small, little (older spelling)
조곰	조금	A little, slightly (older spelling)
위로	위로	Upwards
내미난	내미는	Sticking out, protruding (older spelling)
常例	상례	Customary practice, norm
米國	미국	United States (Hanja representation)
佛蘭西人	불란서인	French person
露西亞人	노서아인	Russian person
獨墺人	독오인	German/Austrian person
이저서	잊어서	Forgetting (older spelling '이저서' for '잊어서')
옛날	옛날	Old days, ancient times
치마자락	치맛자락	Hem of a skirt
慣習	관습	Custom, practice
붓터	부터	From (older spelling)
發達	발달	Development, progress
意味	의미	Meaning
好色的	호색적	Erotic, lewd
손바닥	손바닥	Palm of the hand
禮儀	예의	Etiquette, manners
以外	이외	Other than, besides
獨逸	독일	Germany
友情	우정	Friendship
喜悅	희열	Joy, delight
즐거운	즐거운	Pleasant, joyful
憧憬	동경	Longing
熱望	열망	Ardent desire, aspiration
情慾	정욕	Passion, lust
其外	기외	Other than that, besides that
狂氣	광기	Madness
性慾機管	성욕기관	Sexual organ (older term/spelling)
깁흔	깊은	Deep (older spelling)
關係	관계	Relationship, connection
코인사	코인사	Nose greeting (rubbing noses)
相當히	상당히	Considerably, quite
냄새맛는	냄새 맡는	Smelling, sniffing (older spelling)
다르다	다르다	To be different
남편	남편	Husband
안해	아내	Wife (older term)
動機	동기	Motive, reason
禮	례	Courtesy, etiquette
이마	이마	Forehead
밧는 者	받는 자	One who receives
最高雅	최고아	Most elegant/graceful
아침	아침	Morning
許諾	허락	Permission, approval
不注意	부주의	Carelessness, negligence
侮改할 때	뉘우칠 때	When repenting (侮 likely typo for 悔 - hwe/hoe, older form 뉘우칠)
솟아나는	솟아나는	Welling up
부부싸홈	부부싸움	Couple's quarrel (older spelling)
和解	화해	Reconciliation
부드럽게	부드럽게	Gently, softly
旅行	여행	Travel, trip
迎接	영접	Welcoming, reception
넘어	너무	Too much, excessively (older spelling)
반가워서	반가워서	Being glad/happy to see
黙黙히	묵묵히	Silently
깃븜	기쁨	Joy, gladness (older spelling)
익여	이겨	Overcoming, unable to contain (older spelling '익여' for '이겨')
잇고	잊고	Forgetting (older spelling '잇고' for '잊고')
앵겨질	안겨질	Will be embraced (older spelling)
수염	수염	Beard, mustache
名人	명인	Master, expert
아돌후만쥬	아돌프 만주	Adolf Menjou (phonetic transcription)
注意	주의	Attention
痲痺劑	마비제	Anesthetic, paralyzing agent
녯(昔)	옛	Old, ancient (older spelling with clarification)
起源	기원	Origin
萬物	만물	All things (context suggests 'various sources' or 'general research')
生理的	생리적	Physiological
原因	원인	Cause
어머니	어머니	Mother
젓	젖	Breast milk, breast
빠는	빠는	Sucking
嬰兒	영아	Infant
動作	동작	Movement, action
露馬時代	로마시대	Roman era
葡萄酒	포도주	Wine (grape alcohol)
숨어서	숨어서	Secretly, hiding
마섯는지	마셨는지	Whether (she) drank (older spelling)
試驗	시험	Test, examination
手段	수단	Method, means
種種	종종	Various kinds
儀式	의식	Ritual, ceremony
契約	계약	Contract
昇天祭	승천제	Ascension Day
習慣	습관	Habit, custom
하날	하늘	Sky, heaven (older spelling)
弔하난	드리운	Hanging down (弔 likely typo for 垂 - su, older form 드리운)
寄生木	기생목	Mistletoe (parasitic plant)
마음대로	마음대로	As one pleases, freely
法	법	Law, custom
이약이	이야기	Story, talk (older spelling)
中世紀	중세기	Middle Ages
賓客	빈객	Guest
對한	대한	Towards, regarding
重大	중대	Serious, important
니이벨루겐歌	니벨룽겐 가	Nibelungenlied (Song of the Nibelungs)
一同	일동	All members present
歡迎	환영	Welcome
貴婦人	귀부인	Noblewoman
부리는	부리는	Who employs/manages
小姓	소성	Page (attendant boy)
主從間	주종간	Between master and servant
交換	교환	Exchange
騎士時代	기사시대	Age of Chivalry
世紀	세기	Century
춤추든	춤추던	Who danced (older form)
맛치면	마치면	When finished (older spelling)
禮代身	예 대신	Instead of courtesy/bowing
牧師	목사	Pastor, minister
新婦	신부	Bride
風俗	풍속	Custom, manners
遊戱	유희	Game, play
効力	효력	Effectiveness, efficacy
업서젓스나	없어졌으나	Although it has disappeared (older spelling)
只今	지금	Now
盛行	성행	Prevalence, popularity
넘오	너무	Too (older spelling)
時代	시대	Era, times
必要	필요	Necessity
名目	명목	Name, title
如下	여하	As follows
賭賻	도부	Bet, wager (賻 usually means condolence gift, context suggests gambling/bet)
자비이네女子	사비니 여자	Sabine Women
掠奪	약탈	Plunder, abduction
門隔	문격	Through the gate/door (隔 means separated by)
아리스도데레스	아리스토텔레스	Aristotle
슯흔	슬픈	Sad (older spelling)
態度	태도	Attitude, demeanor
규빗도	큐피드	Cupid
橋	교	Bridge
묵겨진	묶여진	Bound, tied up (older spelling)
森林	삼림	Forest
神	신	God, deity
悲哀	비애	Sorrow, grief
틀닌	틀린	Wrong, incorrect (older spelling)
베곤비난것 (切)	베어 비는 것	Cutting and praying/begging (meaning obscure, 切 might indicate 'cut')
그림자	그림자	Shadow
相對者	상대자	Partner, counterpart
아지 못하난	알지 못하는	Not knowing (older spelling)
反對論	반대론	Argument against, opposition theory
不少	불소	Not few, considerable number
記憶	기억	Memory, remembrance
非衛生的	비위생적	Unhygienic, unsanitary
主張	주장	Assertion, claim
쏘비에트	소비에트	Soviet (phonetic transcription)
國民衛生委員會	국민위생위원회	People's Commissariat of Health (literal: National Hygiene Committee)
全國	전국	Nationwide
命令	명령	Order, command
禁止	금지	Prohibition, ban
發表	발표	Announcement
百姓	백성	Common people, peasants
인사	인사	Greeting
맛나기만 하면	만나기만 하면	Whenever they meet
同年	동년	Same year
마드리드	마드리드	Madrid (phonetic transcription)
不健全	불건전	Unsound, unhealthy
苦痛	고통	Pain, suffering
同盟	동맹	Alliance, league
設立	설립	Establishment, foundation
報告	보고	Report
秋波	추파	Flirtatious glance, amorous look
罰金	벌금	Fine, penalty
法律	법률	Law
倫敦	런던	London (Hanja representation)
婦人키스 反對同盟	부인키스 반대동맹	Women's Anti-Kissing League
亦是	역시	Also, likewise
同性	동성	Same sex
聯盟	연맹	League, federation
米國	미국	United States
뉴짜스	뉴저지	New Jersey (phonetic transcription)
衛生局	위생국	Bureau of Health/Hygiene
制限	제한	Restriction, limitation
訓示	훈시	Instruction, directive
傅染病	전염병	Infectious disease (older Hanja '傅' for '傳')
媒介	매개	Medium, intermediary
嚴誡	엄계	Strict warning, admonition
友愛	우애	Fraternal love, friendship
並	병	And, as well as
拘擁濫用	구용남용	Abuse of embracing (拘擁 likely means embrace/hug)
演說	연설	Speech, address
理論	이론	Theory
*毒	독	Poison, toxin (asterisk likely denotes a note or emphasis in original)
傅染	전염	Transmission (of disease) (older Hanja '傅' for '傳')
他人同志間	타인 동지간	Between strangers (同志 usually means comrade, here likely 'fellow people/strangers')
關係업다	관계없다	To be unrelated, irrelevant (older spelling)
最後	최후	Final, last
觸覺	촉각	Sense of touch
嗅覺	후각	Sense of smell
味覺	미각	Sense of taste
섹기지	섞이지	Mixed, blended (older spelling)
完全	완전	Complete, perfect
道德的	도덕적	Moral
意義	의의	Significance, meaning
就하여서도	취하여서도	Regarding, concerning (older form)
貞童	정동	Chastity (possibly typo for 貞操 - jeongjo)
破한 것	파한 것	Thing that breaks/violates
祝賀	축하	Congratulation
밧을 때	받을 때	When receiving (older spelling)
發表	발표	Publication, announcement
感想談	감상담	Account of one's impressions/thoughts
才能	재능	Talent
榮譽	영예	Honor, glory
過去	과거	Past
未來	미래	Future
少女	소녀	Girl
新鮮	신선	Fresh
버리고	버리고	Abandoning, throwing away
돌아보지 아닐 것시다	돌아보지 않을 것이다	Will not look back (older future assertive ending)
貴한	귀한	Precious, valuable
아버지	아버지	Father
어머니	어머니	Mother
조용히	조용히	Quietly
남아잇다	남아있다	Remains (older spelling)
꼿과 갓치	꽃과 같이	Like a flower (older spelling)
貴重	귀중	Precious, valuable
封印	봉인	Seal
쓸대업시	쓸데없이	Needlessly, uselessly (older spelling)
破裂	파렬	Breaking, rupture
후리도릭크 헷베루	프리드리히 헤벨	Frederick Hebbel (phonetic transcription)
溫情	온정	Warm affection, kindness
春	춘	Spring
性交	성교	Sexual intercourse
前提	전제	Premise, prerequisite
哲理	철리	Philosophy, philosophical principle
엇덧케	어떻게	How (older spelling)
스스로	스스로	Oneself
生기지	생기지	Does not arise/form (older spelling)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제6권 제11호
발행일	1934년 11월 01일
기사제목	接吻硏究
필자	朴晶月
기사형태	잡저

接吻硏究
						朴晶月
술 안먹고 키스 아니하는 者는 죽은 사람에 갓갑다.(괴테)

朝鮮과 키쓰
술 먹고 汽車軌道를 베고 잠드럿다가 갈녀 죽난 일이 종종 잇난 것은 朝鮮에만 잇는 世界的으로 異彩려니와 나서부터＜109＞ 죽을때까지 한번도 뜨거운 키스 즉 입맛초지 못하엿든 것도 朝鮮서는 예사알앗든 事實이다. 더구나 活動寫眞上에도 嚴禁하엿든 것이다. 그리하얏든 것이 지금은 키스란 말이 귀에 걸니지 안을만치 例事가 되다 십히 하난 貌樣갓다.

東京키스
키스와 社會主義라는 말처럼 東京사람이 실혀하난 것은 업섯다. 그리하든 거시 社會主義가 共産主義가 되고 키스란 말은 東京 大阪靑春男女의 流行語가 되고 말엇다.
그러면 東京, 大阪에난 키스가 업섯너냐하면 옛날에도 東京사람은 키스를 한 例가 만타. 今日까지 키스를 할 줄 모른난 人種은 世界中에 고-간이 그린 「노아노아」에 나타난 따이디도男女 新西蘭士 빠부아 濠洲土人 노말, 에스키스等 野蠻蒙味한 人種이라고 한다.
키스란 것은 사람의 本能으로 나온난 것이 아니오. 오히려 戀愛文化의 産物이라고 解釋하난 學者가 만타. 그 實例로난 키스는 野蠻人에게 업다고 말한난 者가 적지 아니하다. 今日 英雄待望論을 高唱하난 豊太閤으로 보더라도 淀君에게 주는 片紙中에 戰爭에서 도라가면 반드시「...」戀戀한 키쓰의 約束이 잇다. 또 今日 外國에 자랑할 만한 藝術品中 浮世畵를 보더라도「...」말하난 그림이 만하 西洋에서도 風俗史中에 彩色으로 揷畵해 잇다. 春水의 「春告烏」 「相對暖語」等은 西洋小說의 지지안케 키스하난 것이 써잇다.
年前에 東京서난 佛蘭西彫刻家 로단의 作品을 陳列햇슬 때 內務省官憲은 로단의 名作 「키스」의 陳列을 禁止하엿다. 그리하야 佛蘭西大使館이 抗議를 申出하엿슬 때 東京警視廳에서는 「키스는 매오 아니 된 風習」이라고 答하엿다. 그러나 지금은 엇더한가. 東京 大阪靑年男女間에 濫用할 만치 키스가 流行하지 아니하는가.

中國의 키스
그러면 中國사람은 키스를 아니 하난가. 傳하난 바에 依하면 中國에도 前에난 키스가 업섯다고 한다.
그러나 1897年에 公開한 佛蘭西人의 作 「歐羅巴及中國」의 키스라난 冊에서 보면 中國人은 키스하는 代身에 서로 X다고 한다. 처음 相對者의 뺨에＜110＞ 코를 대고 가만히 길게 숨을 쉰다. 이와 同時에 눈은 자연이 감겨지고 그리고서는 입을 떼고 뺨을 찰삭찰삭 따린다 한다.
今日 中國에난 米國映畵 만히 宣傳하난 模樣갓흐며 一部 靑年男女間에난 亦是 濫用이랄 만치 流行한다고 한다.

東洋의 키스
舊約聖書에 나타나는 土地는 大槪 東洋에 갓갑다. 그리하야 西洋에 對立할 土耳其, 亞羅比亞, 波斯의 키스는 「亞羅比亞夜話」에 쓴 키스 土耳其여자의 키스로 보면 淫逸肉慾的 点으로보아 確實히 西洋의 以上이라고 하난 것이 正評이오 古代埃國에서 第一 盛行하엿다 하며 古代가이로 사람의 生活은 키스가 가장 重要한 것이 엇든 것이다. 엇던 女子는 키스를 巧妙하게 해서 王의게 불님을 밧다다난 逸話도 남아 잇다. 西洋에서난 키스는 男子의 技能이 反對로 東洋서는 女子의 秘技다.
土耳其의 女子도 키스한데는 世界的으로 有數한 技能을 가지고 잇다고 한다. 東洋에서 極東으로 오면 여러 가지 말이 잇다. 즉 쨔봐의 女子는 춤으로 살고 키스로 죽는다고 한다. 짜봐 女子는 춤추고난 키스하고 키스하고는 춤춘다고 한다. 춤출 때는 女子가 되고 키스할 때는 女神과 갓다. 「西歐女子 키스에 앵킨者는 다시 짜봐女子를 사랑해보라 누구든지 반드시 醉하리라」고 西洋人이 評하엿다.
印度女子의 키스는 專心이라고 稱한다. 누구나 다 아는 바 「감스트라」는 印度性慾의 寶典이오 西洋文書로도 이에 匹敵할 바가 업스며 그 七章「愛撫」編에 나타나는 키스는 精細를 極度로 描破하엿다. 이것을 읽는 者는 참으로 印度女子의 厭倒的 氣分을 알 수 잇다.
샴우女子는 꿈을 꾸는 것가치 키스를 하고 잇다고 한다. 到底히 印度女子의 愛情의 情神은 가지가지 아니하엿다. 즉 샴우女子의게는 軟軟한단 맛을 欠缺하여잇다. 넘치난 生活力과 死에 對한 熱望이 적다고 非難한다.

西洋의 키스
그러면 쨔봐 印度女子에 比하야 西洋女子는 엇더한가하면 이것도 매오 複雜하야 一言으로 말하기 어렵다.
例하면 露西亞사람은 甚하게 키스를 한다. 作別하난 表도 되고 敬意를 表하난 것도 된다. 그러나 男女戀情에서 生기는 키스난 極히 秘密스럽고 溫柔하다 한다. 露西亞에서 波蘭으로 건너가면 波蘭사람의 키스난 巴里사람의 키스를 흉내내는대 지나지 아니하야 키스할 때 입술의 압흔 快味를 맛보지 못한다. 空然히 여긔저긔 키스를 濫用하난 일이 만타고 評이 잇다.
갓흔 西洋中에도 匈加利는 東洋에 갓하야 熱烈한 사랑은 잇스나 熱烈한 키스는 업다고 한다. 匈加利사람은 입뿐이 아니라 이마, 팔, 손, 가심, 허리갓흔데도 키스를 한다고 한다. 키스는 醉한 魂의 呼吸이오 決코 肉體의 運動이 아니라 匈加利사람도 키스哲學上으로 보면 落第일난지 모른다.
슬나보니아女子는 歐洲에서도 劣等한 사람으로 치지마는 그 살性 맥기러온 거슨＜111＞ 北歐米女子와 갓고 그 말씨 얌전한 거슨 南歐와 갓하야 몸과 마음을 던지는 意志는 西洋的이다. 다만 키스뿐은 東洋的 이라한다. 卽 잠간 微笑를 띄고 고개를 숙여 꿈꾸는 者와 갓치 눈을 살그머니 뜨고 사랑하난 男子의 품에 녹이난 듯 앵켜진다고 한다.
希臘女子의 키스는 世界키스史上으로 보면 決코 輕視할 것이 아니다.
古代 希臘에는 키스가 盛行하여 잇섯다. 希臘에서 비로소 로마로 傳해왓다. 冊을 보면 뻬넬오베가 키스로써 接客하엿고 울세스가 伊太利島에 上陸할 때에 그 大地에 키스하엿고 앙메뭉이 祖國에 도라왓슬 때도 사랑하난 故鄕에 키스하엿다. 뿌리암스가 아기레스의 손에 키스를 하고 그의 아들 헥구돌 死體를 내주기로 誓約하얏다. 헥구돌이 作別할 때 微笑를 띄고 사랑하난 아들에게 키스하엿다고 한다.
古代 希臘사람의 키스는 마치 甁주둥이를 잡난 것가치 相對者의 귀를 쥐고 머리를 끼어 안는다. 聖書에 나타난 아부라함과 이삭과 야곱의 時代로 말하면 紀元前 2천년이라하니 世界의 키스史는 實로 紀元前 2천년이라고 말할 수 잇게 된다.
키스난 다만 사람들의 行事뿐이 아니엇다. 希臘의 神話를 보면 유노가 大神 쮸비다의 嫉妬를 키스로 和解하고 不義者 베누스가 사람눈을 숨어 마루스와 키스한 까닭으로 쓰루간의 發怒하야 網을 씨웟다고 한다. 오림비아神 等도 決코 사람들의 行事인 키스를 실치 아니하엿든 것이다.
芬蘭의 女子는 男子를 사랑하난 点이 大担하나 키스하난 것은 익숙치 못하다 한다. 입술에 心臟을 두지 안는다는 世界唯一의 女子다코. 펜하우겐女子는 國際的이라 하며 오스로女子는 딱딱하게 짤게 키스한다 하며 瑞典女子는 世界의 第一 적은 입을 가지고 잇서 매오 高尙하게 키스를 한다고 한다.
和蘭女子의 키스는 매오 無味乾燥하다 하며 英國女子의 키스는 所謂 高尙한 主婦風과 갓하야 키스한동안에도 오날 쓴 돈 생각을 하고 明日 招待할 손님 생각을 하고 잇다.
白耳義女子의 키스는 嘆賞하난 者가 적으나 白耳義女子는 男子의게 向하야 오래 微笑를 띄인 후 노려보다가 키스를 한다고 한다. 伊太利女子의 키스중 밀난과 羅馬女쭈는＜112＞ 매오 選擇이 까다라우며 비폴女子는 別노 選擇업시 아모대나 한다하며 某詩人은 그 戀人을 思慕하난 대 못견대서 사람을 보내어
님의 희고 아람다운 손에 키스하고 님의게 傳해주소.
님의게 말하난 代身에
키스를 보내노라
라고 한 것은 伊太利의 키스 心情을 잘 表現한 것이다.
갓흔 南歐中에도 南西班牙女子는 키스하기전에 여러 가지 技巧를 弄絡하며 相對者의 男子가 얼마나 키스를 要求하엿섯나 몃 번이나 키스를 밧앗나 말업시 한참 동안 알어내다 하니 놀납지 아니한가. 그 키스의 度數에 따러 自己의 價値를 他와 比較한다고 한다.
에스데루마즈라女子는 비둘기와 갓치 키스를 한다고 말한다. 그 地方에서 나는 羊毛와 갓치 軟軟하게 털과 갓치 개볍게 그러나 猛獸의 발툽갓치 心臟에 백혀진다고 한다.
안달샤女子의 키스는 世上에 임의 正評이 잇다. 무녹은 石榴와 갓치 붉고 단단치도 안코 軟하지도 안케 꼭 알마치 익은 배와 갓다고 한다. 키스는 즉 사랑하난 뜻과 갓다. 또 키스할 때 女子는 크게 歎息을 한단다. 그 歎息은 마치 여자의 魂이 飛出하난 것 갓다고 한다. 그 歎息하는 키스를 밧는 男子는 再次 마음을 거둡잡을 때는 발서 찬아침바람이 꼿을 흔들고 西班牙 소나무우에 조용히 달빗치 넘어가는 때라 합니다.
뽈도갈은 歐羅巴中 鰯魚 간쓰메에 나는 나라다 여긔여자는 개개 키스에서 鰯魚 내암새가 난다고 한다.
이 南歐로붓허 瑞西地方에 이르면 女子는 매오 冷靜해지고 점잔을 뺀다. 쩨네바女子의 키스는 巴里 떼파드맨드스토아(雜貨商)看守女子의 高尙한 品을 失하고 마네킨과 갓흔 模範的 態度로써 注意하고 잇섯다고 한다.
노루만데이의 漁夫의 女娘에게난 아스라 가치 점잔을 빼지 아니한다. 극히 無邪氣하고 詩的 感情을 流露한다고 한다. 그 입술에는 힘이 잇고 게다가 입술이 얇다. 뺨과 뺨을 찰삭대고 바다우에 나는 물가마귀 模樣으로 빨느게... 하면서 海豚과 갓치 强하게 突進한다. 이 입술맛을 본 者는 謝肉祭와 昇天祭가 한날에 열닌 것갓흔 感이 잇다고 한다.
이러한 키스에 比하면 루마니아女子의 키스는 殺風景하며 뿔가리아女子는 무러뗀다고 한다.
佛蘭西 세반地方女子는 키스의 正統派다. 이 土地女子는 먼저 머리를 압호로 하며 그 키스는 强烈과 情熱을 눌너 참으며 極히 靜肅하고 隱隱하게 한다. 사보야女子는 이상한 짓을 한다. 먼저 입술을 토기와 갓치 뽀족하게 하고 코구녕에다가 숨을 뿜어는다고 한다.
집시이 여자는 蒙古好와 갓치 키스를 할 줄 모른다.
사모아女子가 키스하는 것은 歐羅巴人에게 배온 것이다. 그 키스는 極히 軟하고 全혀 나를 잇고 늘 꼿을 꺽난 優美한 態度가 잇지 아니한다니 아람다온 것이 아니냐!＜113＞
西班牙와 黑人의 血統을 가진 샤보덴 꼿피는 멕시코女子의 키스는 안달샤와 髣髴하야 그 意氣는 불과 갓고 狂氣에 갓갑다고 한다.

都會女子
都會女子의 키스는 地方女子의 키스보다 優勝하냐하면 그럿타고 斷言할 수 업는 것이다. 다 사람에 따라서 다른 것이다. 巴里女子는 키스할 때 微笑를 띤다. 伯林女子는 실눈을 한다는 特徵이 잇다고 한다. 이것도 相對者에 따라 달는 것이다. 巴里女子는 手練 手管하다고 할난지 모르나 다 그러타고 할 수 업고 伯林女子의 키스는 柔靭性에 當하다고 하나 좀 劣等한 肉慾的이 잇다. 香氣와 風韻에 缺하다. 紐育女子의 키스도 表面에는 禮意에 갓가오나 그러나 키스에 對한 非凡한 愛好力을 暗示한다고 한다.
그러나 都會女子의 키스로는 維也納女子보다 優勝할 者가 업다난 것이 正評이다. 維也納女子의 입술은 바람에 불녀들니난 竪琴소래와 갓다고 한다. 維也納女子는 웃는다 운다 거짓말한다 求한다 許한다 준다 盟誓한다 씨 부린다 그리하고 말 업슬 때는 키스한다. 維也納女子는 男便에게 貞操를 直히면서 다른 男子에게 키스하는 術策을 안다.

웨눈을 감다
키스할 때 눈을 감는다는 것은 決코 以上에 擧한 中國人뿐 아니라 이것은 輕視할 수 업는 難解의 大問題로 녯붓터 크게 言論이 잇는 바다.
키스할 때에는 눈을 감는다. 이것은 說明할 수 업는 事實이다. 이 問題를 提出한 者는 實로 詩人 하이네다. 하이네 詩中 一句는

深夜붓터 날샐 때까지
끈임업시 그 님을 찻난다
내 님의 입술에 키스하니
엇지하야 눈을 감는가
무슨 綠故인지 내 스스로 몰나
무엇이라고 내 對答할 수 업다
오직 내 눈을 감아 님을 向할뿐
님의 입술에 키스할뿐.

하이네는 「로레라이」詩中에도 「왜인지 나도 몰라」하고 말하엿다. 이 詩中 一句야말노 만흔 戀愛學者의 머리를 괴롭게 하는 最初의 問題거리이엇다.
年前에 내가 伯林에 잇슬 때 週刊雜誌에 이 問題를 讀者의게 提出하야 그 解答을 募集한 일이 잇다. 그 一部를 말하면
1. 그런 對答은 어린이라도 할 수잇는 녯부터 戀愛는 盲目的이라고 하지 안는가.＜114＞
2. 周圍가 밤이 되여지기를 願하는 까닭이오.
3. 戀愛는 세가지로 되여잇소. 두 눈과 한입으로 되여잇소. 그러나 더 强하게 하랴면 그 중에 두 가지를 감어야 하겟소.
4. 靑春으로서 莫迦한 것을 보지 못한 까닭이오.
5. 키스는 戀愛快樂에 빠지는 것이다.
6. 키스는 第7天國이다. 아래를 보면 눈이 어리지러운 故로.
7. 키스는 술과 갓다. 술맛을 잘 알냐면 눈을 감고 마신다.
8. 戀愛焰眼을 注射하지 아는 故로.
9. 그 快味를 깨다르랴는 까닭에.
等, 等, 等,
여긔서 一等賞을 밧은 것은
10. 聖書에 말하기를 「너희는 이웃사람을 사랑하야 그 無力한 대에도 눈을 감으라. 키스를 할 때는 實노 두 사람이다.
힘이 업서지는 感이 생긴다. 그런 故로 하나는 당신의 것 하나는 내것. 그리하야 두 눈이 감겨진다.
基督의 말삼을 引用하면 果然 키스는 第7天國의 것이다. 何如튼 왜 키스할 때는 눈을 감나하는 命題는 依然히 解決를 免할 수 업다.

이브와 蜂
키스는 第7天國과 갓다는 解答을 보면 天國에도 키스라는 것이 잇섯나 하는 疑問이 생긴다. 例하면 아담이 해와에게 능금을 밧을 때 키스를 하고 밧지나 아니하엿나는 疑問이 생긴다. 舊約聖書에 傳하는 바에 依하면 여호와는 흙으로서 사람을 맨들고 입김을 부러느어 숨을 쉬게 하엿다고 한다. 萬一 이것이 코가 아니엇든들 世界創造의 最初의 키스이엿는지 알수 업다하고 말하는 者가 잇다. 그럴런지도 모른다.
아담과 이와가 키스를 햇다고 하는 者들은 이런 말을 한다. 해와가 에덴동산에 裸體로 두러누어 엇슬 때 한 蜜蜂이 나라와서 해와의 붉은 입술을 보고 確實히 단꿀이 잇스리라하고 해와의 입술에 날나들냐고 할 때에 엽헤 보든 아담이 好奇心과 嫉妬心으로 그 벌을 쫏고 헤와의 입술에 입을 대여 키스하엿다는 이야기가 잇다. 해와는 잠이 깨여 아담의 키스에 깃버햇다고한다.
아담과 해와 사이에 키스는 좀 怪異하다. 그러나 아담이 930歲에 죽엇다하니 그 後는 키스가 그리 異常스럽지 아니하엿을 것이다. 創世記를 보면 이삭이 그 아들 야곱을 불너 갓가이 와서 내게 키스하라 하엿고 야곱이 메소보다이에 倒着하야 하란새음가에서 하헬에게 키스하고 라반은 야곱에게 向하야 날노 하여곰 내 孫女와 키스할 수 잇더냐고 말하엿다. 그 外에도 에소과 야곱이 키스하고 세제후가 죽은 아버지얼굴에 키스한 것을 보면 키스는 創世記時代 土地와 사람에게는 異常스러운 것이 아니엿다. 卽 이삭과 야곱이 키스* 發見者라고 할 수 업다.

고가색 花
다시 維也納의 키스에 지지 아니할 만한 것이 고가색의 키스다. 小露西亞 고가색은 土地高峻하고 華麗한 곳 만키로＜115＞ 有名한 곳이다.
女子는 키가 크고 머리가 金色이 만코 눈이 光彩나고 그 목이 흰 것은 고가색 山에 싸힌 初雪과 갓다고 한다. 由來꼿 만흔 곳인 故로 女子는 革帶에 꼿을 끼고 겨오 가심을 가린  衣 의 끗에는 百合을 꼿고 곱고 둥근 입술에는 眞紅色의 石竹이든지 龍膽꼿을 물고 머리에는 살구꼿 앵도꼿 또난 蘭꼿을 꼿는다. 땅골작이에서 은근이 沐浴할 새라도 그 입에서는 꼿냄새가 난다.
이러한 女子의 戀人이 勇壯한 騎士中 一人이라고 합시다. 女子는 아모 주저함 업시 이 男압헤 서서 半問半答으로 男子의 눈을 노려 볼 것이라. 그러다가 눈과 갓치 흰 이에 무럿든 龍膽꼿을 빼서 잠시동안은 한편 牧場을 꼿꼿이 서서 노려보다가 다시 한편 森林에 아모뜻엽시 눈을 두고 不知不覺中에 땅을 노려본다. 꼿을 사랑하는 고색女子는 불과 갓흔 입술을 가지고 잇다는 것이다.

키스의 年(나이)
이와 갓치 나라와 女子에 따라서 키스를 어느 때 盛行하나냐고 하면 매오 小說的 問題인 同時에 難解할만한 문제다. 例하면 處女의 키스는 熱情이란것보다 오히려 期待와 憧憬의 키스다. 淡薄한 不安의 맛도 잇다. 이런 것은 아름다온 키스에 들지 안는다. 그리하야 歐羅巴에서는 北歐의 女子는 30과 40間이오. 南歐女는 20과 30間이 제일 아름다온 키스를 할 나이라고 한다. 참으로 마암에서 소사나는 키스는 勿論 後者 屬한다.

法律問題로서의 키스
키스 할 나이라고 하는 것은 小說的 問題인 同時에 法律的 問題이다. 인생의 만흔 悲劇은 키스로 發生하는 수가 만타. 하물며 北歐女子의 30,40때는 제일 危險한 나이라고 할할 수 잇다. 만흔 歐羅巴女子의 悲劇은 實노 이 아람다온 키스를 할 때에 만타. 그리하야 키스로는 法律問題를 삼난 때가 만히잇다. 往往 問題를 삼은 키스에 關한 疑問에 다음과 갓흔 여러점이 잇다.
1. 處女 或은 約婚한 女子가 어느 男子의게 無理하게 키스를 밧을 때 또는 自由意思로 키스히게되면 그 여자를 處女라고 할 수 잇슬가.
2. 어느 男子가 女子에게 對하야 나를 남편을 삼아 줄 마암이 잇거든 키스해 달나고 할 때 女子는 한말도 아니하고 키스하엿다하면 이것을 굳은＜116＞ 結婚의 約束이라고 할가.
3. 남의 안해로서 拒絶하지 아니하고 第三者인 男子와 키스하엿다하면 이것을 곳 姦通의 嫌疑를 할 것인가.
이러한 問題는 17世紀頃 키스學者의 硏究한 바다. 今日보면 매오 우수운 問題갓흐나 또한 누구나 明快한 裁斷을 내리지 못한다. 이러한 키스의 機微은 映畵로도 從橫으로 描破하여 잇스나 今日의 모든 喜悲劇의 原因이 이에서 생긴다.
키스가 法律상 盛히 硏究하게 된 것은 바록구 時代이여서 獨逸露馬法에 依하면
女子가 他人에게 키스해도 조흔가. 或은 누구에게 키스를 해야 조흔가. 하난 問題가 議論의 中心이 되여잇다. 1740年까지는 빠죤에는 「키스法」이라난 法律이 存在해 잇다. 이 法律에 依하면 젊은 女子가 未婚男子와 키스하엿다는 證明만 잇스면 그 男子가 죽은 後라도 遺産全部를 갓게 되엿다. 그 女子가 죽은 男子와 約婚與否는 뭇지 안는다고 한다. 다만 이것이 反對인 境遇에는 男子가 죽은 女子의 遺産을 갓게 되너냐하면 그것은 갓게되지 안니 한다.
이 情神은 古代露馬法에서 생긴 것으로 露馬法中에 女子의 키스를 크게 擁護한 것은 콘스탄진大帝이엿다. 콘스탄진大帝 解釋에 依하면 約婚하엿든 男女가 破婚할 境遇에는 女子가 男子에게 밧앗든 物件을 반쯤 다시 보내면 된다. 남은 半은 女子의게서 밧은 키스의 領收證이라고 한다. 露馬法에난 約婚者間에만 키스를 認定하엿든 것이다. 이러한 境遇에는 萬一 女子가 한번도 男子와 키스한 일이 업다하면 밧은 物件을 全部 돌녀 보내야 할 것이다. 露馬法에는 키스는 結婚承諾으로 法律上 認定하게 된 것이다. 그러나 이것은 女子便으로난 有利하게 되여 잇스나 男子便으로난 罰則이 잇서서 露馬法情神은 어대까지든지 婦人擁護이다. 콘스탄진大帝가 女子間에 好評을 듯든 것도 이런 까닭이엇다. 法律問題上 키스가 大槪 男子에게 不利한 結果를 준 것은 오직 露馬法時代뿐 아니라 만흔 境遇에 男子로붓허 攻擊的으로 對하난 機會가 만흔 綠故인지 키스訴訟에난 대개 男子가 지게 된다. 1926年에 維也納男子가 女子의게 물녀서 治療로 14月間을 要하난 訴訟이 잇섯다 한다. 調査해 본 즉 男子가 나는 엇던 女子하고라도 키스해 보인다하고 女子를 房으로 끌고 드러가서 無理로 키스를 强要하엿난 故로 女子는 힘을 다하야 男子의 혀를 무러뜻고 男子의 팔을 뿌리첫다. 男子는 그것을 傷害罪라고 하야 告訴한 것이다. 裁判長은 키스난 愛着의 證券이여서 兩者의 自由意思上으로만 그 道理的 根據를 두게 된다라고 判決하엿다. 여자는 勿論 無罪放免이 되엿다.
이와 갓치되면 法律은 키스를 엇더케 解決하나 根本問題가 된다. 1940年 獨逸大審院에서 發表한 키스의 定義는 이와 갓다.
「키스는 相對者의 身體에 加한난 한 作用으로 恒常 被키스者의 承諾을 要한다. 萬一 그 承諾업슬 때는 相對者가＜117＞ 暗黙으로 承諾한다는 確實한 境遇뿐 키스할 수 잇다. 例하면 親戚, 父母, 兄弟, 戀人間 사이와 갓다. 萬一 相對者가 抵抗할 때는 不法行爲의 人格權侵害 及 名譽毁損으로 認定한다. 만일 상대자가 저항할 때는 불법행위의 인격권 침해 及 명예훼손으로 인정한다. 萬一 이 狀態에 잇서서 相對者에게 키스를 强行한 者는 侮辱罪를 急할 수 업다.
그런 故로 그 維也納女子가 男子의 혀를 무러뜬 것은 훌늉한 正當防衛다.

手(손)의 키스
男子키스中 한 가지가 잇다. 이거슨 男子에게만 限하야 女子의 손에 키스하난 거시다. 이 키스는 戀切한 意味도 되려니와 女子의게 對한 尊敬의 表示도 된다. 男子가 恭遜히 머리를 숙여서 그 입술을 女子손등에 댈 때 女子는 조고만 코를 조곰 위로 들고 가삼을 내미난 것이 常例이다. 이 키스난 米國사람에게난 적고 佛蘭西人 露西亞人 獨墺人에게 만타.
그러나 이저서는 아니될 것은 손키스난 옛날 치마자락에 키스하든 慣習으로 붓터 發達한 바 이여서 어대까지 婦人에게 대한 尊敬을 意味한 것은다. 好色的 意味는 아니다. 或은 손등이 아니라 손바닥이라하면 尊敬 禮儀의 意味는 업서진다.

혀의 키스
키스는 입술 以外에 손에 하고 손 以外에 혀로 한다. 이것은 말하기 어렵기에 고만두노라.

獨逸詩人의 詩中
손에 키스하난 것은 尊意
이마에는 友情
뺨에는 喜悅
입으로야말로 즐거운 戀愛다
감은 눈에 憧憬
손바닥에 熱望
팔과 목에 情慾
其外의 것은 狂氣다.

鼻의 키스
以外에 코의 키스가 잇다. 코는 性慾機管과 깁흔 關係가 잇서서 「코인사」라난 말이 잇난 것과 갓치 코의 키스는 相當히 重要한 것이다. 이것은 中國의 냄새맛는 키스와는 다르다.
그 外
그 外 키스는 萬一 남편이 사랑하난 안해에게서 엇던 動機로 꼿을 밧게되면 禮로서 안해의 이마에 키스하게 된다. 이마에 키스를 줄 때 恭遜하게 밧는 者가 女子답게 高尙하게 하고 잇스면 最高雅한 키스하고 할 수 잇다. 아침키스는 남편된 者 마음으로 붓터 주지 안으면 아니된다. 妻가 즐겨하난 것을 意外에 남편이 사다가 줄 때 안해가 許諾지 안은 男便의＜118＞ 不注意가 侮改할 때 이러한 때는 마음에서 솟아나는 키스를 하지 안으면 아니된다. 부부싸홈 뒤 和解될 때 남편은 안해뺨에 부드럽게 키스를 해주기 바란다. 긴 旅行으로 도라오난 남편을 迎接할 때 넘어 반가워서 말이 아니 나거든 黙黙히 키스할 것이라. 或은 깃븜에 못 익여 키스를 잇고 남편의 가삼에 앵켜질 것이다.

수염키스
수염키스는 키스名人 아돌후만쥬의 映畵를 잘 注意하야 보면 잘 알 수가 잇다. 수염은 一種의 痲痺劑이다.

녯(昔)키스
키스의 起源을 硏究한 萬物을 보면 生理的 原因으로는 어머니젓을 빠는 嬰兒의 動作으로 붓터 露馬時代 안해가 葡萄酒를 숨어서 마섯는지 아니 마섯난지를 試驗해보난 手段이엿다고도 말할 수 잇다. 매오 어려운 問題이여서 戀愛以外에도 「契約키스」 「昇天祭키스」 크리스마스키스等 種種 儀式과 風習의 키스가 잇다. 英國習慣으로는 크리스마스저녁 하날에 弔하난 寄生木나무가지 아래에 남의 안해든지 處女든지 마음대로 키스하난 法이 잇섯다난 것은 有名한 이약이다. 中世紀에는 賓客의 對한 禮로서 키스는 極히 重大한 일이엿섯다. 「니이벨루겐」歌中에도 女子가 客一同에게 歡迎의 키스를 하난 것이 잇다. 佛蘭西等地에도 貴婦人이 부리는 小姓은 主從間에 키스로서 貴婦人과 交換하든 風習이 騎士時代에 잇섯다. 16世紀에는 英國서 女子가 自己와 갓치 춤추든 남자에게 춤이 맛치면 禮代身으로 男子의게 키스를 하엿다. 그 뿐 아니라 敎會에서 結婚할 때 牧師가 먼저 新婦의게 키스하여 주든 風俗도 잇섯다.

키스의 遊戱
키스의 効力은 오직 儀式과 戀愛뿐만이 아니다. 遊戱로도 되여잇다. 키스의 遊戱는 今日은 만히 업서젓스나 只今으로 붓터 4,50年前까지는 盛行하엿섯다. 今日 이와갓흔 遊戱가 流行하긴 넘오 時代가 危險하고 또한 靑春男女間 遊戱까지 키스할 必要가 업는 까닭이다.
그 名目은 如下하다.
1. 키스의 賭賻
2. 자비이네女子의 掠奪
3. 門隔한 키스
4. 아리스도데레스의 馬
5. 슯흔 態度의 騎士
6. 규빗도의 橋
7. 묵겨진 森林의 神
8. 悲哀스러운 男子
9. 틀닌키스
10. 베곤비난것 (切)
11. 自己그림자키스
12. 相對者를 아지 못하난 키스
等, 等, 等.

키스 反對論
그런대 이와 갓치 아람답고 貴한 키스를 反對하난 사람이 不少한 것은 記憶할 必要가 잇다.
歐羅巴에서 키스를 反對하난 것은 키스는 非衛生的 이라하야 이것을 처음으로 主張한 것을 露西亞이다. 1924年에 쏘비에트 國民衛生委員會에서는＜119＞ 全國에 命하야 一般에게 키스禁止命令을 發表하엿다. 그것은 決코 男女相愛의 키스를 禁止할 뿐 아니라 露西亞百姓이 인사하난 代身에 맛나기만 하면 歡迎하난 意味로 키스를 한 옛붓터의 習慣을 禁止하엿다. 그런대 同年에 西班牙 마드리드에도 不健全한 「키스의 苦痛」에 反對하난 同盟이 設立된 거을 新聞은 報告하엿다. 秋波를 던지난대까지 罰金이 잇다난 새 法律이 생겻다. 1926年에는 倫敦에 「婦人키스 反對同盟」이라난 것이 生겻다. 이 亦是 男女間 키스에 反對하난 것이 아니라 사이 조흔 同性끼리 맛날 때 반드시 키스하난 風習을 말자고 하난 聯盟이다. 이와 갓흔 會가 巴里에도 生겻다. 米國에서는 1926年에 뉴짜스州 衛生局에서 키스制限訓示를 提出하엿스나 이것은 傅染病媒介를 嚴誡한 것이다.
입의 키스 또난 손의 키스를 反對하난 것은 決코 今日의 새로윤 問題가 아니다. 1990年에 獨逸醫師가 「友愛키스 並拘擁濫用에 對하야」라는 키스反對演說을 하엿다. 今日 主唱하난 키스反對理論은 *毒이 傅染된다난 말이다. 그러나 이것이 只今까지 서로 알지 못하든 男女 又는 他人同志間인 境遇가 만흔 故로 서로 사랑하난 사람의 키스는 關係업다고 볼 수가 잇다.

키스라는거슨
그리하야 最後問題는 키스라는 것은 무엇인가. 이것은 옛부터 言論이만타. 다만 今日 키스의 三要素로 觸覺, 嗅覺, 味覺, 이 섹기지 아니하면 完全한 키스라고 할 수 업다. 그러고 키스의 道德的 意義에 就하여서도 지금 사람들은 다 아는 바다. 그러나 키스는 貞童을 破한 것인지 이는 解決하기 어려운 것이다. 다만 伊太利에서는 「키스 밧은 여자는 結婚한 女子」라는 것이 잇다. 다시 「키스밧은 여자는 半은 몸을 許한 거시라」라고 한 것이 잇다.
조라는 50年誕生 祝賀를 밧을 때 巴里新聞에 發表한 感想談中 모든 才能 모든 榮譽는 다 내 過去에 잇고 또 未來에 잇다. 모든 것도 16歲 少女의 입으로 주는 新鮮한 키스압헤는 나는 모든 것을 버리고 도라보지 아닐 것시다라고 하엿다. 젊은 女子의 키스난 그만치 아람답고 貴한 것인지?
「少女의 입술에는 아버지 어머니의 키스가 조용히 남아잇다. 그 키스야말노 꼿과 갓치 내 딸에게 貴重한 封印으로서 준 것이다. 젊은 者들이여 그 封을 쓸대업시 破裂하지 말나.」
이것은 후리도릭크 헷베루의 溫情春와 갓흔 것이다. 키스를 性交의 前提로 본 學者가 만타. 이와 갓치 지금까지의 키스哲理를 엇덧케 解決하나 젊은 男女에게는 自己 스스로의 키스哲學이 生기지 아니면 아니 된다.＜120＞
＜109-120＞