Magazine Title: 삼천리 제6권 제11호
Publication Date: 1934년 11월 01일
Article Title: 國民文學의 建設者 (Builders of National Literature)
Author: 徐恒錫 (Sŏ Hang-sŏk)
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/Essay)

國民文學의 建設者
獨逸國民文學樹立의 殊勳者 레씽의 經歷과 業績
徐恒錫

一. 序言
The presence of Goethe and Schiller in German literature is historical and world-renowned. It is the achievement of these two great poets that Germany, once a backward country in Europe, became an important participant in world literature. However, even if Goethe and Schiller were geniuses unparalleled in history, had the foundation for them to fully display their innate talents not been prepared, they might have merely ended their lives in vain like prized horses in a humble stable. It is true for any country that the golden age of its literature does not come overnight, and in Germany too, there were much wandering and searching before the era of Goethe and Schiller emerged. Amidst the influx of various influences from advanced nations like a flood, they wandered, unsure whether to go east or west, searching day and night to grasp the core of what was truly German.<217> In this dawn period, the one who established a firm standard for selecting and rejecting foreign culture with a clear mind and broad perspective, furthermore defining the outline of Germanness and indicating the direction for German literature, while simultaneously testing it himself and showing achievements to a certain extent, was Gotthold Ephraim Lessing.
In 17th-18th century Germany, on one hand, there was the "scholar literature" (學者文學) of the Latin literary tradition, the literature of the intellectual class, transmitted and produced in scholars' studies unrelated to the lives of the common people, much like Chinese literature (漢文學) in Chosŏn. On the other hand, there was the simple "folk literature" (民衆文學) that arose naturally from the lives and emotions of the populace, existing scattered in a very rudimentary form, awaiting collection by discerning eyes. Although the two were bound to be unified and blended sooner or later, for a time they had almost no connection. The gardener of distinguished merit who grafted these two types of flowering trees onto German soil, enabling the two great flowers, Goethe and Schiller, to bloom later and be sent to the world's garden of arts, was indeed Lessing himself.
However, one pioneer was not sufficient to bring about the golden age of German literature. Among Lessing's contemporaries before Goethe and Schiller appeared were Klopstock and Wieland, and after Lessing came figures like Herder and Hamann, all beings who emitted comet-like brilliance in the dawn sky. Since Lessing's influence can be discovered in Herder and Hamann, we will omit them here, but comparing and contrasting the three stars—Klopstock, Wieland, and Lessing—who appeared simultaneously, each with distinct characteristics, is not only interesting but also indispensable in discussing the establishment of German national literature. At the time when the light of these three stars was most brilliant, people temporarily rejoiced and yearned for them as the true sun they had long awaited. The three seem to represent different aspects of the German national character. First, regarding their birthplaces, Klopstock represents Northern Germany, Lessing Central Germany, and Wieland Southern Germany, each richly displaying the unique local color in their innate temperament. Looking at their fields of work, the former is a subjective, passionate lyric poet; Lessing is an objective, rational dramatic poet; and the latter is the founder of the modern German novel, a narrator, an epic poet. Furthermore, in terms of thought, the former was a fervent patriot close to Pietism (敬虔主義); Lessing was purely an apostle of the Enlightenment, a humanitarian philanthropist, a cosmopolitan; and the latter was a skeptic. Each of these three contributed significantly to German literature in the dawn period according to their respective strengths.
However, as will be detailed later, Lessing left the most enduring <218> legacy among them. Moreover, considering the position of dramatic literature in German literature, it is easily understandable why Lessing, the representative of dramatic literature among the three, is acclaimed as the person of distinguished merit in establishing German national literature. It is often said from a comparative literature standpoint when examining the literatures of various European countries that the characteristic of German literature was dramatic literature. Most of Germany's literary masterpieces 자랑할 만한 (to be proud of) for the world are plays. This is because the literary form most suited to the German characteristics—such as martial spirit (尙武), internal strife (內訌), thoroughness (徹底), revenge (復讎), perseverance (堅忍), diligence (勤勉), as well as introverted contemplative tendencies, a strong sense of loyalty and duty (義務), a puritanical sense of shame (廉恥心) and desire for honor (名譽慾), stubborn pride (自負) and dignity (矜持), an organizational inclination respecting order, and self-insistence not easily yielding to others... in short, the German propensity for "thoroughness" (徹底)—is drama, more so than poetry or novels. Being a nation with such characteristics, the naturally gifted playwright Lessing was the most suitable person to be its literary leader. Next, I will briefly describe his career and then move my pen to his achievements.

二. Lessing's Brief Biography
Lessing was born on January 22, 1729, in Kamenz, Saxony, 20 years before Goethe and 30 years before Schiller. His father was a poor pastor. Among 12 siblings, 10 were boys, and he was the eldest son. From June 1741 to June 1746, he studied at the middle school in Meissen. Not only was he a brilliant prodigy, but he also possessed the diligence to study tirelessly, receiving high praise from the principal. During this period, he conceived the idea for his first work, "The Young Scholar" (젊은學者).
In August 1748, he entered the University of Leipzig as a theology student. While studying not only theology but also literature, philology, and even medicine, he took a particular interest in drama, associating with contemporary figures like Mylius (뭘리우스) and Weiße (봐이쎄), and also became acquainted with the famous actress Frau Neuber (노이버). His father, the pastor, worried that his approach to the theatrical world was degenerate behavior and summoned him back to his hometown under the pretext of his mother's illness. During his time in Leipzig, the aforementioned "The Young Scholar" was performed by Frau Neuber and received considerable praise.
After leaving Leipzig, he went to Wittenberg to study medicine, but finding little satisfaction, he eventually moved to Berlin, staying there until 1751. During this period, he took up writing for a living. He did translations and worked as a magazine reporter. He wrote several plays and also lyric poems.
At the end of 1751, he returned to Wittenberg, and at the end of the following year, he went back to Berlin. While associating with Mendelssohn (멘델스존), Nicolai (니콜라이), and others, he engaged in playwriting. During this time, he pointed out mistranslations in Lange's (랑게) translation of Horace's (호라츠) poems, instantly gaining recognition as a critic. <219>
Later, in Potsdam, he wrote Germany's first bourgeois tragedy, "Miss Sara Sampson" (사라삼프손孃). In 1755, passing through Berlin, he went to Leipzig, and the following year, supported by the scion of a wealthy family, he traveled around Europe. When he went to Amsterdam, the Seven Years' War was raging.
Between September 1756 and September 1758, he associated with the poet Kleist (클라이스트) and wrote "Faust" (파우스트). It is said that Lessing's "Faust" provided much suggestion for Goethe's later "Faust."
From October 1758 to 1760, he was in Berlin for the third time, dedicating himself to the study and praise of ancient literature and the examination of fable literature. The patriotic play "Philotas" (필로타스) was also written during this time. He also launched a periodical called "Letters Concerning the Most Recent Literature" (最近文學書簡) with Nicolai and Mendelssohn.
From November 1760 to April 1765, he stayed in Breslau as secretary to General Tauentzien (타우엔치엔), having frequent contact with officers and also experiencing a dissipated life. However, he wrote most of the comedy of character "Minna von Barnhelm" (민나, 픈, 바른헬름) here and also prepared to write the famous "Laocoön" (라오코온) during this period.
In 1765, he returned to Berlin for the fourth time. By this time, his reputation as a scholar was considerably known. A "National Theatre" (國民劇場) (not a building name, but an intangible troupe) was newly established in Hamburg, and Lessing accepted its invitation and went to Hamburg. While with this troupe, he produced the famous "Hamburg Dramaturgy" (함부르히劇論). It was an effort to establish German national drama by resisting the influence of French classical drama. However, the troupe disbanded the following year due to financial difficulties, and Lessing was once again caught in financial hardship.
In April 1770, upon the recommendation of Karl Ferdinand (카-ㄹ, 페르디난드), he took charge of the management of the public library in Wolfenbüttel (볼펜퓌텔). At that time, his father passed away, leaving behind huge debts. Burdened even by these inherited debts, he felt the difficulty of living even more acutely.
Lessing was a very reserved person regarding relationships with women. He spent half his life unmarried without creating any frivolous romantic scandals. His association with Frau Neuber was merely that of acquaintances. Then, in 1770, he finally got engaged to a woman named Eva (에봐), the widow of a merchant named König (괴-니히), whom he had met during his time in Hamburg.
In 1772, he wrote the tragedy "Emilia Galotti" (에밀리아, 갈로티), and only when he returned to Wittenberg in February 1776 did he finally have enough financial stability to marry Eva, six years after their engagement. At that time, Eva was 40 years old. However, in 1778, Eva's postpartum recovery was poor, and both mother and child died. Thus, Lessing once again became a person living in solitude. The play "Nathan the Wise" (賢者나탄) was newly written as a result of his dispute with Goeze (고에체) in Hamburg at this time.
He ended his 52-year life with a stroke on February 5, 1781. <220>

三. Lessing's Achievements
Lessing was born, lived, and died in the revolutionary era between the collapse of medieval culture in the broad sense and the rise of critical modern culture—that is, the peak era of 18th-century Enlightenment thought. The 18th century was the youth of all Europe, a time filled with healthy thought and vibrant spirit throughout the world. Looking just at Germany, after Frederick the Great ascended the throne in 1740, a new epoch was marked in the life and culture of the German people. The wounds of the Thirty Years' War were finally healed, and a strong momentum for renewal (更生) permeated all layers of society, as the German nation, once politically fragmented, leaped forward to unify into a nation and people with global influence. Consequently, this gave a huge impulse (衝動) to the realm of spiritual life as well.
It was natural that Lessing, born in such an era, harbored great ambition for playwriting. That is, as a dynamic person born in a dynamic era, he adopted a dynamic form of expression. Thus, Lessing's main field was playwriting. At the same time, he showed versatile activity as a critic, thinker, preacher, and scholar, suitable for any role. Now, in examining his various activities, we should divide them into three aspects:
(1) Lessing as a playwright and drama theorist
(2) Lessing as an aesthetician, primarily a literary critic
(3) Lessing as a critic of theology and an Enlightenment thinker
However, here we will only discuss (1) and (2).

1. Lessing as Playwright and Drama Theorist
To understand Lessing's activities in this field, it is necessary first to glance at the general situation of the German stage at that time. The major metropolis of the German nation at the time was Vienna, where there was a permanent theater, but its performances were merely the improvisational skills of actors, and even those mostly imitated Italian and French styles. Berlin was much the same; in the court theater, French actors performed works by French playwrights every Wednesday, and the influence of France and Italy was generally strong. This was partly due to the fact that foreign literature already held a dominant position in Germany as a backward country, and earlier, around 1740, Gottsched (꼬트쉐드), a pedantic scholar and professor at Leipzig University with stubborn prejudices, had emphatically argued that Germany should model itself after French playwrights, consciously promoting French imitation. While foreign plays held sway like this, the populace could not understand them, and the desolation (蕭條) of the stage was enough to worry intellectuals. Seeing this phenomenon, Lessing lamented, "We have not a single theater, actor, or audience." In any era and any country, the development of <221> theater requires the harmony of the three elements: theater, actor, and audience; what harmonizes them is outstanding drama. Only plays that are truly artistic while simultaneously rooted in the lives of the people, inspiring and invigorating them, can fully harmonize those three elements. And outstanding plays can only be obtained by waiting for great writers. Lessing continuously carried out sharp criticism and fierce polemics (論戰) to guide German dramatic culture onto the right path, while on the other hand, what he tested in his playwriting was the creation of such plays, and he succeeded to some extent.
Lessing, together with his close friends Nicolai and Mendelssohn, published the "Letters Concerning the Most Recent Literature" (最近文學書簡), attacking the attitude of Gottsched's faction, which, as a result of misinterpreting (曲解) the true spirit of Aristotle (아리스토텔레스), strongly recommended even the flaws and errors of French classical drama to their own country's stage as if they were golden rules (金科玉條). He argued that it would be better to imitate England, which belonged to the same racial lineage, and recommended Shakespeare (沙翁) as the true model (師表) for German drama. This greatly helped German dramatic literature grow in a German way.
Later, the "Hamburg Dramaturgy" (함부르히 戱曲論), written while at the Hamburg National Theatre, is a treasure that left an immortal achievement on the German stage. It was a serial publication issued 2-3 times a week. Initially focused on critiquing the stage performances of the National Theatre actors, it shifted its focus mainly to analytical criticism of play scripts and a thorough investigation into the essence of drama in general, especially tragedy, after complaints arose from those being criticized. Among these, the famous "Pity and Fear" (同情과 危懼) essay, which pointed out Gottsched's error, is renowned. This refers to Aristotle's definition of tragedy: "Tragedy, then, is an imitation of an action that is serious, complete, and of a certain magnitude... through pity and fear effecting the proper purgation (淨化作用) of these emotions." Gottsched misinterpreted "pity and fear" as "pity and terror" (同情과 恐怖), but Lessing, with clear logic, elucidated that it was not "terror" but "fear" (危懼). Besides this, this Dramaturgy contains many noteworthy views, such as the theory regarding the three unities.
Next, let's look at Lessing as a playwright. It is impossible to discuss all his numerous works one by one; here, I will limit myself to introducing the important ones among them: "Miss Sara Sampson" (사라 삼프손孃), "Philotas" (필로타스), "Minna von Barnhelm" (민나, 폰, 바른헬름), "Emilia Galotti" (에밀리아, 갈로티), and "Nathan the Wise" (賢者나탄).
The bourgeois tragedy (平民悲劇) "Miss Sara Sampson" is a five-act play written when he was 26, past his apprenticeship period, in which the influence of England can be clearly observed. Both the setting and characters are taken from England. It deals with the triangular relationship between a dissolute rich man, a nobleman's daughter seduced by him, and a wicked widow who loves this rich man. <222> Traditionally, the protagonists of tragedy were always emperors or heroes, but this play was the first bourgeois tragedy featuring common people (市井之人) as protagonists. Also, using prose for the dialogue and proceeding as naturally as possible was a new experiment.
The patriotic play "Philotas" is a one-act tragedy. Philotas, a Macedonian prince, is captured by the enemy. His father, the king, wins the battle and also captures the enemy prince. When the king intends to sue for peace to exchange his son, Philotas hears this news and worries that his country's victory might not be complete because of him alone, finally taking his own life. This work heightens the patriotic spirit, influenced by the strong war atmosphere of the time.
The comedy of character (性格喜劇) "Minna von Barnhelm" showed tremendous effect on stage, clearly proving that its author was not merely a theorist but possessed outstanding skill as a writer. It was written at the age of 35, during his mature period. This comedy deals with the conflict (葛藤) arising from a fallen and unfortunate German soldier who, despite facing any hardship, does not lose the German sense of honor, justice, and self-respect, and is reluctant to accept even the sincere help of his former lover. While previous low-brow comedies merely made the audience laugh temporarily through mistakes, coincidences, and tricks, this comedy develops conflict originating from human character. It is the first work of legitimate comedy (正喜劇) in Germany, and literary historians say it is also the last such work to date in Germany, where comedies are few.
The tragedy "Emilia Galotti" is a five-act bourgeois play. While "Miss Sara Sampson" is memorable as the first experiment in bourgeois tragedy, in terms of success as a work, "Emilia" should be mentioned. If "Minna" holds the position of progenitor in the history of German comedy, the work that occupies the same position in the history of German bourgeois tragedy is indeed "Emilia." Based on an episode from Roman history, it depicts a tragedy (慘事) of common life where a father kills his daughter to preserve her honor and purity when she is about to be violated, crushed by the power of a prince. Such themes were subsequently treated numerous times, forming a lineage leading up to Hebbel's "Maria Magdalena" (아리아, 막달레나) and Sudermann's "Honor" (名譽).
The problem play (問題劇) "Nathan the Wise" pioneered a new field as a problem play by providing a resolution, within the limits possible in art, to the central questions concerning Lessing's views on religion, ethics, and philosophy of life. Setting the time to the Crusades era and the place to the holy land Jerusalem where three religions coexisted, it features main characters like Sultan Saladin (살탄, 사라딘) (representative of Islam), the wealthy and wise Jew Nathan (나탄) (Judaism), his adopted daughter Recha (레하), and a Crusader Knight (騎士) (Christianity). It skillfully creates conflict among them and brings about a peaceful and satisfactory <223> resolution in the end. That is, Recha and the Knight are revealed to be actually siblings and also Saladin's niece and nephew, showing that the representatives of the three religions were one family. It blesses the victory of the "Religion of Humanity" based on the harmony of various religions and praises the spirit of "tolerance" (寬容) transcending race, religion, and nation. Here, one can also see Lessing's aspect as a cosmopolitan (世界市民).

2. Lessing as Aesthetician, Primarily Literary Critic
Lessing also left many brilliant insights and great achievements in the field of literary criticism. Among them, the achievement of liberating literature from the plastic arts (造形美術) through the famous "Laocoön" is significant. Today, clear boundaries (限界) are defined between poetry and painting, but at that time, their essence and characteristics were not sufficiently investigated. Lessing undertook a profound examination of the prevailing principle, generally accepted at the time, that "Painting is mute poetry, poetry is speaking painting." He renewed contemporary notions about poetry and painting, while simultaneously correcting the flaw of poetry merely drifting into description and remedying (濟度) the tendency of painting to fall into clumsy allegory (寓意), thus pioneering paths for these two arts to develop and grow in their respective original domains. The title "Laocoön" was chosen, as Lessing stated in his introduction, because he started from Laocoön, frequently returned to Laocoön, and discussed it again. Laocoön is the name of a sculpture depicting the Trojan priest and his two sons entangled by large snakes due to divine punishment, succumbing to the agony of their death throes.
I would like to introduce Lessing as a literary critic in more detail, but his achievements as a drama critic have already been mentioned. A detailed explanation of the vast content of Laocoön cannot find its proper place here, and other numerous activities and achievements must also be omitted due to space constraints. =(End)=<224>

愛蘭民族文學建設者-윌렴· 버틀러· 예이츠- (Builder of Irish National Literature - William Butler Yeats)
金珖燮 (Kim Kwang-sŏp)

From a national perspective, the Celts (켈트族), due to their formidable offensive power, were once a threat to Europe (歐州). Nevertheless, they lacked the persistence and self-defense capabilities to build settled nations.
Their historical path, apart from a period of prosperity, was a succession of plunder and the rise of external enemies.
When they rose from the Danube River basin in Southern Europe, dispersed, and migrated to the small island of Ireland (愛蘭士), they soon found themselves overshadowed by the great ambition of the British Empire (大英帝國).
This national fate was compounded by an extremely unfortunate geographical environment. Far from our imagination of seeing clear skies year-round, in autumn and winter, the short days are shrouded in mist and clouds due to fog (雲霧). Within this, this passionate and sentimental nation never had a moment to forget the long lament derived from the tyranny of reality and its own weaknesses.
Thus, their beautiful nomadic and sentimental nature became linked to a social basis of escaping an unfavorable reality. Consequently, they reflected subjective, impressionistic, emotional, and intuitive elements in their literature to the extent that it could be called a national characteristic. There seems to be almost no room for the world of reason.
The one who embodied all these characteristic elements—who represented the sentimental content of Ireland up to the standard of world literature—is none other than William Butler Yeats (윌렴. 버틀러. 예이츠).
The starting point of the modern Irish literary movement lies in Parnell's (파-넬) political downfall in 1881. As the nation's intellectual capacity retreated from political concentration, the youthful passion seeking to express the true spirit (本念) of Ireland through literary expression led to the founding of the Irish National Literary Society (愛蘭國民文學協會) in the capital, Dublin (더부린), in 1892. Thus, they sought to revive Ireland by giving voice (소리) and rhythm (리즘) to the pure traditions, ideals, and old tales buried in Ireland. Yeats, Hyde (하이드), Lady Gregory (그레고리夫人), Moore (무어), etc., were the core representatives. <225>
The greatest harvest of this national literary movement was the drama and theater movement.
Culturally, Ireland had contact with the advanced cultural nations of Southern Europe earlier than England. Although Ireland had a literary renaissance movement even before Italy (伊太利), there had never been a dramatic cultural movement. However, the dramatic talent of the Irish people was remarkable, enough to be said to have rescued the English stage from every crisis after Shakespeare (沙翁). Goldsmith (골드스미드) and Sheridan (쉐리단) in the mid-18th century, Oscar Wilde (오스카·와일드) at the end of the 19th century, Shaw (쇼-翁) who introduced Ibsen's (입센) modern drama to England, and others like Irving (어-빈) and O'Casey (오케-시)—listing these gives the impression that Shakespeare's sun was succeeded by Irish playwrights. Thus, the British Empire, which sought to extinguish the Irish language, received excessive compensation, ultimately enriching the content of its literature.
Ireland, possessing first-rate dramatic talent but unable to cultivate a dramatic culture in its own country, was stimulated by the Little Theatre Movement in England. Yeats, Martyn (마-틴), Moore, Lady Gregory, etc., became central figures, leading to the establishment of the Irish Literary Theatre (愛蘭文藝座). Its first performance took place in May 1899, marking the beginning of the birth of Irish national drama. One of the plays performed was Yeats's "The Countess Cathleen" (伯爵夫人 카드린).
It is a beautiful poetic drama based on an Irish legend. Triggered by the Irish famine, devilish merchants carry bread and give it to those who sell their souls. Countess Cathleen tries to save the starving people by selling her pure soul to them, but divine mercy prevents it.
Famine, bread, and soul—. If these three are juxtaposed, the popular will leans towards bread. Yeats tried to guide Ireland towards the soul. This was the initial birth of Irish national drama.
Thus, until the Abbey Theatre (아베-座-), a small theatre with nearly 30 years of worldwide fame, was established in central Dublin in 1904, Yeats was the pivotal figure in composing the repertoire and in administrative practicalities. However, Yeats's strengths and weaknesses both lay in the national and ethnic aspects. The conflict between Moore, who early on adopted a global perspective, and Yeats, who stood on a national footing, ended unfavorably for the former. Yet, today, the Abbey Theatre stands more than half aligned with Moore's side.
This does not diminish Yeats's evaluation as a builder of the Irish literary movement. We frankly agree with the conclusion that all movements in Ireland originated with Yeats; the only remaining question is whether they will also return to Yeats.
Yeats's father was a painter. Yeats, his eldest son, was born on June 13, 1865, in Dublin, the capital of Ireland. As a child, he sometimes stayed with his grandfather in the Irish village of Sligo (스라이고), mentioned in the poem "The Meditation of the Old Fisherman." While listening to Irish legends and myths, he received a deep impression of the simple rural landscape of Sligo. <226> Thus, the seed of connection with literature was sown in his heart, which had intended to become a painter. He studied in London (倫敦) at the age of ten, returned to Dublin five years later, and attended art school, again intending to become a painter, but eventually became interested in Irish national literature and thereafter devoted himself to literature.
Although he produced juvenilia from the age of 13, he showed the peak of mystical symbolism (象徵主義) with "The Wind Among the Reeds" (갈닙에 부는 바람) in 1899. Since then, he established himself in the world poetry scene with the praise of being a "rare genius poet" of modern times. However, as the mainstream of the Irish literary movement was drama, he could not distance himself from drama and began to put his pen to it.
Thus, his contributions across the board—poetry collections, play collections, prose collections, etc.—finally led to his being awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature (노벨 文學賞) in 1923. Currently, he is active in the political sphere as a member of the Senate of the Irish Free State (愛蘭自由國).
Yeats is, first and foremost, a lyric poet. Critics say that even A.E.'s most refined and beautiful mystical lyric poetry cannot compare to Yeats's poetry. Before being second to Dr. Douglas Hyde (다그라스·하이드博士) in knowledge of Irish legends and language, he is a poet, and even though he wrote plays, he was still a poet.
Reading his poems, one finds the lament of sorrowful passion, reminiscence of the past, graves in foreign lands, elegies of love, and meditation—. It seems all these Eastern, nihilistic (虛無的) colors became his poetry. Entering the world of his poetry, we forget strength, struggle, science, and reason, sinking into calm lament and meditation, dissolving into an emotion of selflessness (沒我). Sad things, nostalgic things—. These are the continuous elegies in Yeats's poetry. Thus, we imperceptibly become attuned and immersed in Yeats's poetry, just as the Celtic spirit harmonizes with and merges into nature.

Dream of Death (Summary)

I dreamt I saw one die in a strange place
Far from her kindly hands;
The village farmers
Nailed the coffin lid over her face,
And with strange thoughts by that lonely grave
Planted cypress (糸杉) and yew (水松).
Saying, what can man do?
I went and wrote upon a wooden cross:
This woman sleeping by the tree
Was more beautiful than my first love;
Gazing up at the sorrowful stars of heaven,
Also listening to the sorrowful sound of the wind. <227>

Note - "Cypress" (糸杉) is a symbol (表象) of mourning (哀悼) for the deceased. "Yew" (水松) is an evergreen tree often planted in cemeteries in England.
In the first two lines and the last two lines, one cannot help but feel the poignant Celtic sensibility of Ireland. For Yeats, all phenomena in this world flow from emptiness to emptiness, and only the world of "emotion" (情緖) that collides with that emptiness is the world of eternal reality.

Yeats's evaluation as a playwright is settled. He locates the essence of drama in passion and language. In contrast to world drama theory, which places the essence in action, Yeats created his plays based on a different theory. Therefore, his plays possess only stillness. Yeats is indeed a playwright who could not leave the domain of the poet. Consequently, he might be a Senator.
Recently, he has been studying Japanese Noh (能樂) drama and infusing its static expressive beauty into his plays. Ultimately, his plays failed to succeed as drama because he was a poet, and they failed because of the "Celtic Twilight"—as Yeats himself called it.
To express this Celtic Twilight, Yeats employed the technique of emotional symbolism (象徵主義). Whether in poetry or drama, he does not appeal to human intellect but stimulates emotions through the senses, thereby attempting to suggest a non-sensory world. Therefore, he holds a unique position not only in the history of the Symbolist movement in poetry but also in drama.
Among his several plays, the most successful as drama and the most dynamic is the 1902 work "Cathleen ni Houlihan" (카드린·니·후-리한) (one-act play). Cathleen ni Houlihan is a symbol of Ireland in national distress. When French troops landed in 1798, this old woman appears at the house of the young man Michael, who is about to get married, suggests the spirit of Ireland, and says, "Your names will never leave the ears of our people." As she exits, Michael follows the old woman.
Old Woman: It is not easy to help me. Red faces will turn pale, and people who roamed freely over hills, bogs, and fields will be driven to distant lands to walk stony fields. Good plans will all be broken, and even if they gather money, they will not live in this world long enough to spend it all. No matter how many children they bear, the father will not be at the naming ceremony. Red faces will turn pale for my sake. Yet those people will be satisfied enough."
In the lineage of Yeats's plays, this is the most dramatic, the simplest, and also the one that expresses the national spirit most directly.
However, as drama, it still falls short compared to Synge (싱그) and Lady Gregory (그레고리夫人), especially Synge. But we cannot forget that it was also Yeats who discovered Synge, immersed in the fin-de-siècle mood under the roofs of Paris (巴里), <228> and sent him to the Aran Islands (아란 島) of Ireland.
Finally, there is one important issue regarding the literature and drama of Yeats, Synge, etc.
That is the criticism from general Irish people that Yeats, Synge, etc., do not know the Irish language and therefore cannot truly understand Ireland. This is the common criticism.
Just as the Celts and Anglo-Saxons are different, so are their languages. A nation's inherent language belongs to the last property that nation loses. England tried to extinguish it first.
Under the tyranny of Russia, Polish mothers, fearing the police, placed slates under their sewing machines on their laps and taught their children their mother tongue.
Yeats's literature is written in English. Therefore, great English critics say Yeats is a great English poet. Indeed, without knowing the language, it is difficult to know the truth of that nation. Although he was undoubtedly born, heard, and saw things in Ireland, it is questionable whether that is necessarily the pure voice and expression of Ireland. Therefore, criticism from Irish nationalists or revolutionaries is not unreasonable. However, apart from Irish literature written in English, it cannot be denied that the constructive role in Irish literature written in Irish also started with Yeats. (End)
September 19, 1934 Night
Postscript - Due to constraints of time and health, I regret ending this without further investigating the Irish literary movement and Yeats, and the relationship between Yeats's life, thought, and art, acknowledging that considerable supplementation is needed. <229>

古典主義의 先驅 라불레 (Rabelais, Pioneer of Classicism)
李軒求 (Yi Hŏn-gu)

The sole characteristic of the Renaissance (文藝復興), beginning in Italy (伊太利), lies in the development of individualism. That is, they sought, above all, to be "Selves," staking their lives on it. This can be fully seen in a sentence from a letter sent by Petrarch (페트라르카), the pioneer of the Italian Renaissance, to Boccaccio (보카치오): "Each person possesses something unique in their appearance, actions, voice, and language. Rather than changing this, it is not only easier but also more useful and splendid to think of cultivating (陶冶) and improving (改良) it."
Such a new spiritual transformation began to occur on the literary soil of France (佛蘭西), which had not discovered new horizons (頃域) from the imitation of Latin literature (拉典文學). That is, literature and art emerged from the shadow (陰影) of certain systems and religions, and simultaneously with the revival of new Greek literature and art, discovered the profound impression of great "Beauty" and, along with it, a distinct human way of life. This richness and uniqueness of the new spirit truly produced (輩出) many spirits of human or literary martyrs (殉死者). In France, which until the 16th century was extremely poor in works and even poorer in thought, the influx of this individualistic thought and literature came to produce a fundamental French, yet most human, way of thinking. Here, I intend to briefly introduce François Rabelais (프랑소와 라블레), a true builder and pioneer of French literature. His literary thought is the most representative discovery among them.
His Life - Rabelais was born in 1494 in Touraine (투-레느), famous for its fine wine. His date of birth remains unknown. He was by nature a heavy drinker, who throughout his life adhered to (遵奉) the "Sanctity of Nature" and the "Goodness of Nature," a satirical great writer (大文豪). Thus, his life is full of many famous legends and anecdotes. I will narrate one or two of them to illustrate his character.
When he accompanied Cardinal Du Bellay (듀,벨레) to have an audience with the Pope in Rome (羅馬), while everyone else kissed the Pope's foot, he refused such a kiss, saying:
"I cannot imitate my master (the Cardinal). The master is a Marquis; I am a mere monk. I am waiting for someone to take off the Pope's underwear, wash it, and ask me to kiss that." <230>
Thus, before the Pope, the god on earth, he boldly performed sharp (辛踈) satire and uttered bold words (豪言). He had already broken free from religious blind faith (盲信) and such ignorance (無智), discovering the goodness of nature from a human self.
However, on the other hand, Rabelais's learning was truly astonishing. He learned Latin and Greek, and studied astronomy, mathematics, and law. Not only that, he immersed himself in natural history research, was particularly proficient in botany, and his knowledge as a physician, both theoretical and clinical, was also remarkable. Thus, while serving as the physician to the household of Cardinal Du Bellay (듀벨레-), he traveled to Rome three times.
However, due to his character, Rabelais experienced much hardship and misery in his life. Although he received some benefit (惠澤) from Francis I (프랑소와一世), the emperor known for his patronage of literature at the time, he still could not secure a stable and comfortable life and wandered (放浪) near Lyon (리용). Nevertheless, the material and spiritual support from Cardinal Du Bellay was significant, allowing him finally, in 1550, to be appointed pastor (牧師) of the Church of Saint-Martin (생 미르탕敎會) in Meudon (무우동). He spent two years there, but that too was not Rabelais's true calling, so he abandoned the position in 1552 and passed away in poverty around 1553.
His Two Major Representative Works - Rabelais's two major representative works are Gargantua (가르강튜아) and Pantagruel (팡타그류엘). These are not separate, independent works but a two-part work telling the story of a father and son. The former was created around 1532. The first volume of the latter was published around 1535. The former consists of one book, while the latter consists of four books, the final volume being published after Rabelais's death. Both works were published in Lyon.
First, let's write a brief outline (梗槪) of "Gargantua." The protagonist is truly the most delightful giant in this world. From birth, his first cry (呱呱聲) was a call of "I want to drink, I want to drink!" But don't be surprised. This Gargantua needed the milk of 17,913 cows to be nursed, and making his clothes—vest, underwear, jacket, trousers altogether—required an astonishing 319,017,600 shaku (尺) of silk fabric (綢緞). However, this baby also slept, ate, and drank just like other infants. He set out on the path of learning, visiting all the scholars of the country. He rode a horse as large as six elephants combined and set off for Paris. When the horse swished its tail once, all the trees fell, creating a wide plain. In Paris, he took the great bell from the famous Notre-Dame Cathedral (노트르담寺院) and hung it on his horse's neck, causing the scholars of Paris great astonishment as they chased after him to find (차즈러) the bell.
After conquering the neighboring country of Picrochole (피크로코을), he established a great monastery to commemorate the victory. However, unlike other monasteries, this Abbey of Thélème (텔렘僧院) had only one creed: "Do what you will!" (하고싶은 일을 하라!). This is the entire lifeblood of this work. That is, it aims to liberate (解放) humanity into a new moral world where spirit and flesh are united (靈肉一致), leaving everything to nature. Indeed, this work was the sharpest satire (諷刺), lesson, opposition, and negation against the conventions (因習) of over a thousand years and all the institutions of schools or churches. Within this, the fundamental spirit of French literature was truly established, embodying the rich expression and free application of the new spirit of the Renaissance.
Next, let's briefly note the literary life of "Pantagruel." This protagonist is the son born between the protagonist of the previous work, Gargantua, and Badebec. His mother passed away forever from the childbirth (産耨) that brought this great protagonist into the world. Gargantua, faced with these two facts of joy and sorrow, did not know whether to weep or laugh. This Pantagruel is also an astonishing giant. While traveling through all the universities of the country to study, in Orléans (오를래안), he encountered a giant bell buried for 240 years, which no one could dig out. He easily pulled it out with his little finger, placed it on his palm, struck it, and wandered through the city streets.
Gargantua sent a letter to his son in Paris with earnest lessons about the vanity (虛無) of life and about teachers and friends. Here, a new protagonist, Panurge (파뉴르쥬), appears.
Panurge is also a hero of great merit who conquered the enemy country of Pantagruel's mother (she is a queen). However, he agonizes over the truly important life question of whether he should marry or not. To resolve this question, he consults Pantagruel, as well as sibyls, sages, monks, poets, physicians, philosophers, and theologians, but fails to get any answer. Finally, he sets off to seek the ultimate oracle from the Oracle of the Divine Bottle (酒甁神) said to be in the north of India (印度). Pantagruel leads this group. They pass beautiful islands with lighthouses and marble high towers, an island inhabited only by old men, islands where people live only on wind, and finally seek the island nation of arts (End of Books 3 & 4).
Next, the final Book 5 (published posthumously) continues the voyage. Passing the Island of Sonnante (소낭트島?) where birds of five colors fly together, and deserted islands with strange trees from which all daily necessities grow, they are finally guided to the land of the Oracle of the Divine Bottle. In this land, there is a huge vineyard that ripens perpetually. Passing through this place and the place where goddesses, half-human, half-goat, dance wildly, they enter underground. Descending marble stairs, the emerald gate is firmly closed within a diamond wall, secured by two deep red silk cords in a silver box. Pulling these cords attached to golden hooks opens the blue bronze gate, leading into the temple of the Oracle of the Divine Bottle.
Panurge, guided by the priestess Bacbuc (바크뷰크), listens to the oracle. He undergoes various procedures sequentially. He kisses the fountain rock, dances, and sings. Then, the moment the priestess throws something into the fountain, a terrifying sound like a summer downpour erupts from the sacred bottle, shouting "Trink!" According to the priestess's interpretation, this means "Drink!" (마셔라!). Overjoyed, Panurge shouts "Bravo!", drinks the great water of life from nature there, and returns singing a song of victory. <232>
This work is truly the most concrete expression of the "Divinity of Nature" and the "Goodness of Nature." Here, like Homer's (호메-르) "Iliad" or "Odyssey," Dante's (단톄) "Divine Comedy," Cervantes's (세르반테스) "Don Quixote," or Goethe's (괴-테) "Faust," the solemn world of human life, a new essence of great literary origin, is revealed.
The author Rabelais says this in Book 4: "Physis (피지스), that is, Nature, first begets Beauty and Harmony... Antiphysis (앙티피지스) is always the enemy of Nature, envying this most admirable and noble birth of Nature, and conversely begets Boundlessness and Ignorance.... Thus, thereafter were born madmen, begging monks, hypocrites... and other deformed monsters contrary to Nature." Within these words lies a truly exhilarating attack on the remaining waste (廢物) of all medieval institutions. He demanded, in the name of Nature, the reform or abolition of everything that hinders (阻害) all human freedom.
Within the humor (諧謔) and satire (諷刺) hidden and overflowing in this work, the unrestrained (奔放) spirit (羈氣) and temperament flowing in the bloodline (血脉) of the Gaulish people who constituted the French nation are also fully contained. This kind of exhilarating optimism (樂天性) finally led to the belief that "Nature is good," and against the defiled, tyrannical, artificial sins called by the names of Habit, Rule, Authority, Bondage—"humanity's greatest enemies"—he finally insisted emphatically that "even if confronting them with all methods—ridicule, extremism, abuse (罵詈)—this sole enemy must be attacked and destroyed."
For him, the existence of his own life and art was to be found within the most concrete expression of the strongest desire for life. Thus, he advocated Pantagruelism, urging people to "live always peacefully in joy and health while practicing great feasting!" and threw the creed that "the greatest task of education is the liberation of instinct" like a beacon into the diseased hearts of all humankind.
Among the great writers who established true national literature in France—literature possessing the greatest, best, and unique expression of a nation as a nation—Rabelais of the 16th century is particularly highlighted for various reasons beyond those briefly described above. However, lacking sufficient intent and opportunity to elaborate on this vast topic here, I only reveal its tail end. Besides Rabelais, the pioneers of classical literature—the Renaissance—in 16th-century French literature, one must mention Calvin (칼뱅), who brought about a revival of the religious spirit, and Montaigne (몬테-뉴), who discovered the intelligence (聰慧)—the meditative (瞑想的) contemplation—of literature. However, due to my own circumstances, I must postpone discussing all these to another occasion.
Finally, it should be noted that Rabelais's humorous realism, satirical nature, and worldliness created a significant background for Molière's (몰리에-르) comedies in the 17th century and the Enlightenment critique of civilization by Voltaire (볼테-오) and Rousseau (루소오) in the 18th century, serving as the source of realism, truthfulness, and morality—the unique lifeblood of French literature. <233>

**Summary**

This document contains three essays from the November 1934 issue of the magazine *Samch'ŏlli* (삼천리), each profiling a "Builder of National Literature": Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (Germany), William Butler Yeats (Ireland), and François Rabelais (France). The first essay, by Sŏ Hang-sŏk, details Lessing's life and his pivotal role in establishing German national literature, particularly drama, by advocating for German distinctiveness against French classical influence and championing figures like Shakespeare, thus paving the way for Goethe and Schiller. The second, by Kim Kwang-sŏp, focuses on Yeats as the central figure in the Irish literary revival, highlighting his poetic genius, his contributions to the Abbey Theatre, and the inherent tension between his use of English and the goals of Irish nationalism. The third, by Yi Hŏn-gu, introduces Rabelais as a pioneer of French Renaissance literature, emphasizing his satirical works *Gargantua* and *Pantagruel*, his advocacy for natural human instincts against medieval constraints, and his foundational influence on later French writers.

From the perspective of Korean colonial history, these essays are fascinating. Published in 1934, they reflect a strong interest among Korean intellectuals in how other nations, particularly those perceived as having overcome cultural backwardness or foreign dominance (like Germany and Ireland), constructed their own "national literature." The emphasis on figures like Lessing resisting foreign (French) influence or Yeats fostering a distinctly Irish spirit likely resonated with Koreans seeking cultural self-assertion under Japanese rule. The discussion of choosing national models (like Lessing preferring Shakespeare over French models for Germany) and the debate around language (Yeats writing in English vs. Irish) mirrors contemporary Korean concerns about cultural identity, foreign influence (especially Japanese), and the role of the Korean language in literature.

**Named Entities**

*Lessing Article*
괴-테	괴테	Goethe
쉴러	쉴러	Schiller
獨逸	독일	Germany
歐洲	유럽	Europe
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
레씽	레싱	Lessing
클롭슈톡	클롭슈톡	Klopstock
뷔-란드	빌란트	Wieland
헵더	헤르더	Herder
하-만	하만	Hamann
羅典	라틴	Latin
北方獨逸	북방독일	North Germany
中部獨逸	중부독일	Central Germany
南方獨逸	남방독일	South Germany
작센	작센	Saxony
카-멘츠	카멘츠	Kamenz
마이센	마이센	Meissen
라이프치히	라이프치히	Leipzig
뭘리우스	뮐리우스	Mylius
봐이쎄	바이세	Weiße
노이버	노이버	Neuber
뷔텐베르히	비텐베르크	Wittenberg
伯林	베를린	Berlin
멘델스존	멘델스존	Mendelssohn
니콜라이	니콜라이	Nicolai
랑게	랑게	Lange
호라츠	호라티우스	Horace
포츠담	포츠담	Potsdam
암스텔담	암스테르담	Amsterdam
클라이스트	클라이스트	Kleist
파우스트	파우스트	Faust
뿌레슬라우	브레슬라우	Breslau
타우엔치엔	타우엔치엔	Tauentzien
함부르히	함부르크	Hamburg
佛蘭西	프랑스	France
카-ㄹ, 페르디난드	카를 페르디난트	Karl Ferdinand
볼펜퓌텔	볼펜뷔텔	Wolfenbüttel
괴-니히	쾨니히	König
에봐	에바	Eva
고에체	괴체	Goeze
아리스토텔레스	아리스토텔레스	Aristotle
英國	영국	England
沙翁	사옹	Shakespeare

*Yeats Article*
愛蘭	아일랜드	Ireland
윌렴· 버틀러· 예이츠	윌리엄 버틀러 예이츠	William Butler Yeats
金珖燮	김광섭	Kim Kwang-sŏp
켈트族	켈트족	Celts
歐州	유럽	Europe
大英帝國	대영제국	British Empire
파-넬	파넬	Parnell
더부린	더블린	Dublin
愛蘭國民文學協會	아일랜드 국민문학협회	Irish National Literary Society
하이드	하이드	Hyde
그레고리夫人	그레고리 부인	Lady Gregory
무어	무어	Moore
伊太利	이탈리아	Italy
골드스미드	골드스미스	Goldsmith
쉐리단	셰리든	Sheridan
오스카·와일드	오스카 와일드	Oscar Wilde
입센	입센	Ibsen
쇼-翁	쇼옹	Shaw
어-빈	어빙	Irving
오케-시	오케이시	O'Casey
마-틴	마틴	Martyn
愛蘭文藝座	아일랜드 문예좌	Irish Literary Theatre
아베-座	애비 극장	Abbey Theatre
倫敦	런던	London
스라이고	슬라이고	Sligo
노벨 文學賞	노벨 문학상	Nobel Prize in Literature
愛蘭自由國	아일랜드 자유국	Irish Free State
A.E.	A.E.	A.E.
다그라스·하이드博士	더글러스 하이드 박사	Dr. Douglas Hyde
日本	일본	Japan
能樂	노가쿠	Noh
싱그	싱	Synge
아란 島	아란 섬	Aran Islands
巴里	파리	Paris

*Rabelais Article*
라불레	라블레	Rabelais
李軒求	이헌구	Yi Hŏn-gu
伊太利	이탈리아	Italy
르네상스	르네상스	Renaissance
페트라르카	페트라르카	Petrarch
보카치오	보카치오	Boccaccio
佛蘭西	프랑스	France
希臘	그리스	Greece
프랑소와 라블레	프랑수아 라블레	François Rabelais
투-레느	투렌	Touraine
듀,벨레	뒤 벨레	Du Bellay
羅馬	로마	Rome
프랑소와一世	프랑수아 1세	Francis I
리용	리옹	Lyon
무우동	뫼동	Meudon
생 미르탕敎會	생 마르탱 교회	Church of Saint-Martin
노트르담寺院	노트르담 사원	Notre-Dame Cathedral
텔렘僧院	텔렘 수도원	Abbey of Thélème
피크로코을	피크로콜	Picrochole
오를래안	오를레앙	Orléans
印度	인도	India
소낭트島	소낭트 섬	Island of Sonnante (?)
피지스	피시스	Physis
앙티피지스	앙티피시스	Antiphysis
호메-르	호메로스	Homer
단톄	단테	Dante
세르반테스	세르반테스	Cervantes
괴-테	괴테	Goethe
칼뱅	칼뱅	Calvin
몬테-뉴	몽테뉴	Montaigne
몰리에-르	몰리에르	Molière
볼테-오	볼테르	Voltaire
루소오	루소	Rousseau

**Glossary**

*Lessing Article*
國民文學	국민문학	National Literature
殊勳者	수훈자	Person of distinguished merit
彷徨	방황	Wandering, roaming
模索	모색	Groping, searching
黎明期	여명기	Dawn period, early stage
外來文化	외래문화	Foreign culture
取捨	취사	Selection and rejection
輪廓	윤곽	Outline, contour
學者文學	학자문학	Scholar literature (academic literature)
民衆文學	민중문학	Folk literature, people's literature
具眼者	구안자	Person with a discerning eye
接木	접목	Grafting (horticulture); metaphorically, blending
殊勳	수훈	Distinguished merit/service
推擧	추거	Recommendation, proposing someone
敬虔主義	경건주의	Pietism
啓蒙主義	계몽주의	Enlightenment
博愛	박애	Philanthropy, universal love
世界市民	세계시민	Cosmopolitan, world citizen
懷疑家	회의가	Skeptic
貢獻	공헌	Contribution
劇文學	극문학	Dramatic literature
尙武	상무	Martial spirit
內訌	내홍	Internal strife/discord
徹底	철저	Thoroughness, completeness
義務	의무	Duty, obligation
廉恥心	염치심	Sense of shame/honor
自負	자부	Pride, self-esteem
矜持	긍지	Dignity, self-respect
性癖	성벽	Disposition, temperament, propensity
經歷	경력	Career, experience
墮落的	타락적	Degenerate, corrupt
批評家	비평가	Critic
平民悲劇	평민비극	Bourgeois tragedy, commoner's tragedy
論戰	논전	Polemic, debate, dispute
師表	사표	Model, exemplar
推獎	추장	Recommendation, praise
曲解	곡해	Misinterpretation, distortion
金科玉條	금과옥조	Golden rule, inviolable principle
同情	동정	Sympathy, pity
危懼	위구	Fear, apprehension, anxiety (distinct from 공포 'terror')
淨化作用	정화작용	Purification effect; Catharsis (in tragedy)
性格喜劇	성격희극	Comedy of character
葛藤	갈등	Conflict, strife
慘事	참사	Tragedy, disaster
問題劇	문제극	Problem play
寬容	관용	Tolerance, magnanimity
造形美術	조형미술	Plastic arts (sculpture, painting)
限界	한계	Limit, boundary
寓意	우의	Allegory, hidden meaning
濟度	제도	Salvation, relief, remedy (often in a Buddhist context, used metaphorically here)
잇어서의	있어서의	(Older spelling) Pertaining to, regarding (modern: 있어서의)
엿다	였다	(Older spelling) Was (past tense copula; modern: 였다)
잇지 않앗든 들	있지 않았던들	(Older spelling) If it had not been (modern: 있지 않았더라면)
하야	하여	(Older spelling) Doing, causing (modern: 하여)
붓잡고저	붙잡고자	(Older spelling) Trying to grasp (modern: 붙잡고자)
맨들지	만들지	(Older spelling) Make, create (modern: 만들지)
들레인	들린	(Older spelling) Heard, known (modern: 들린)
붓잡히엇다	붙잡혔다	(Older spelling) Was caught, was seized (modern: 붙잡혔다)
齋來함에	초래함에	Bringing about, causing (齋來 is unusual; likely intended 招來, 'invite/bring about')

*Yeats Article*
民族的	민족적	National, ethnic
攻勢力	공세력	Offensive power
安住	안주	Settling down, living peacefully
執着性	집착성	Persistence, attachment
掠奪	약탈	Plunder, pillage
勃興	발흥	Sudden rise, emergence
雲霧	운무	Clouds and fog
專制	전제	Tyranny, despotism
悲歎	비탄	Lamentation, grief
放浪性	방랑성	Nomadic nature, propensity to wander
感傷性	감상성	Sentimentality
逃避	도피	Escape, evasion
結聯되여젓다	결련되어졌다	(Older spelling) Became connected/linked (modern: 결부되었다, 연결되었다)
主觀的	주관적	Subjective
印象的	인상적	Impressionistic
情緖的	정서적	Emotional
直觀的	직관적	Intuitive
反映식혓다	반영시켰다	(Older spelling) Reflected (causative; modern: 반영시켰다)
本念	본념	True spirit, original thought/idea
파뭇긴	파묻힌	(Older spelling) Buried (modern: 파묻힌)
古譚	고담	Old tales, legends
異彩	이채	Brilliance, uniqueness
繼承	계승	Succession, inheritance
剌戟	자극	(Older spelling?) Stimulus, stimulation (modern: 자극, 刺戟)
脚本	각본	Script, scenario
詩劇	시극	Poetic drama
靈魂	영혼	Soul, spirit
聯立	연립	Juxtaposition, standing together
中樞的	중추적	Pivotal, central
役割者	역할자	Person playing a role, actor (in a situation)
評價	평가	Evaluation, assessment
自初	자초	Beginning, origin (archaic)
習作品	습작품	Juvenilia, practice work
神秘的	신비적	Mystical
象徵主義	상징주의	Symbolism
哀殘	애잔	Sorrowful, pathetic, plaintive
追想	추상	Reminiscence, recollection
悲歌	비가	Elegy, lament
瞑想	명상	Meditation, contemplation
虛無的	허무적	Nihilistic
潛기게	잠기게	(Older spelling) Become immersed/absorbed (modern: 잠기게)
沒我	몰아	Selflessness, loss of self
表象	표상	Symbol, representation
哀悼	애도	Mourning, condolence
吹入	취입	Infusion, blowing in (metaphor)
暗示	암시	Hint, suggestion, implication
非難	비난	Criticism, blame
建設者	건설자	Builder, founder
이슬 때	있을 때	(Older spelling) When there was/is (modern: 있을 때)
업섯다	없었다	(Older spelling) Did not exist, was not (modern: 없었다)
하리만큼	하리만큼	To the extent that one would say (modern: 하리만큼)
식히혀든	시키려던	(Older spelling) That tried to make/cause (modern: 시키려던)
바듬으로	받음으로	(Older spelling) By receiving (modern: 받음으로써)
피우지 못한	피우지 못한	Unable to make bloom/flourish
보게되엿고	보게 되었고	(Older spelling) Came to see/establish (modern: 보게 되었고)
하여스니	하였으니	(Older spelling) Because it did (modern: 하였으니)
이서서	있어서	(Older spelling) Regarding, in (modern: 있어서)
끈첫다	끝났다	(Older spelling) Ended (modern: 끝났다)
남어지	나머지	(Older spelling) Remainder, rest (modern: 나머지)
이즐 수 업다	잊을 수 없다	(Older spelling) Cannot forget (modern: 잊을 수 없다)
듯는	듣는	(Older spelling) Listening (modern: 듣는)
어덧다	얻었다	(Older spelling) Gained, obtained (modern: 얻었다)
매저젓다	맺어졌다	(Older spelling) Was formed, was tied (modern: 맺어졌다)
단여스나	다녔으나	(Older spelling) Attended, but (modern: 다녔으나)
내여스나	내었으나	(Older spelling) Produced/published, but (modern: 내었으나)
업섯든지	없었든지	(Older spelling) Whether there was or not (modern: 없었든지)
다이기	대기	(Older spelling) To touch, apply (pen to paper) (modern: 대기)
듯고	듣고	(Older spelling) Hearing, listening (modern: 듣고)
씨여	쓰여	(Older spelling) Written (passive; modern: 쓰여)

*Rabelais Article*
古典主義	고전주의	Classicism
先驅	선구	Pioneer, forerunner
文藝復興	문예부흥	Renaissance (lit. Arts Revival)
個人主義	개인주의	Individualism
賭하야	도하여	(Older spelling?) Staking, risking (modern: 걸고)
探究햇든	탐구했던	(Older spelling) That explored/investigated (modern: 탐구했던)
陶冶	도야	Cultivation, refinement (of character)
改良	개량	Improvement, betterment
拉典文學	라틴문학	Latin literature
頃域	경역	Realm, domain, sphere (archaic)
陰影	음영	Shadow, shade
復活	부활	Revival, resurrection
殉死者	순사자	Martyr (lit. one who follows in death)
輩出	배출	Producing (many talented people), emergence
貧困	빈곤	Poverty, scarcity
流入	유입	Influx, inflow
産出	산출	Production, yielding
遵奉	준봉	Adherence to, observance of
諷剌的	풍자적	Satirical
文豪	문호	Great writer, literary master
傳說	전설	Legend
逸話	일화	Anecdote
拜謁	배알	Audience (with a ruler/pope)
拒絶	거절	Refusal, rejection
盲信	맹신	Blind faith
無智	무지	Ignorance
辛踈	신랄	(Uncommon Hanja for 踈; likely intended 辣) Sharp, biting, acrimonious (modern: 신랄하다)
豪言	호언	Bold words, bragging
敢行	감행	Daring to do, carrying out boldly
敎養	교양	Culture, education, refinement
精通	정통	Proficiency, expertise
惠澤	혜택	Benefit, favor, grace
放浪	방랑	Wandering, vagrancy
援助	원조	Aid, assistance, support
牧師	목사	Pastor, minister
就任	취임	Inauguration, taking office
天職	천직	Vocation, calling (lit. heaven-appointed duty)
放棄	포기	Abandonment, giving up
貧窮	빈궁	Poverty, destitution
梗槪	경개	Outline, summary
痛快	통쾌	Delightful, gratifying, exhilarating
巨大漢	거대한	Giant, huge fellow
呱呱聲	고고성	Cry of a newborn baby
哺乳	포유	Nursing, breastfeeding
綢緞	주단	Silk fabric, satin
歷訪	역방	Visiting various places/people
征服	정복	Conquest, subjugation
刱設	창설	(Older form of 創) Establishment, founding
僧院	승원	Monastery, abbey
信條	신조	Creed, belief, principle
靈肉一致	영육일치	Unity of spirit and flesh
因習	인습	Convention, custom, tradition (often negative)
諷刺	풍자	Satire, irony
否定	부정	Negation, denial
具現	구현	Embodiment, realization
抄記	초기	Brief note, summary record
産耨	산고	(耨 is unusual here; likely intended 褥 'mat' or 苦 'pain') Pains of childbirth (modern: 산고 産苦)
巫女	무녀	Sorceress, shamaness, sibyl
賢人	현인	Sage, wise person
法師	법사	Buddhist master; sorcerer
神託	신탁	Oracle, divine message
侍女	시녀	Maidservant, lady-in-waiting
歡悅	환열	Joy, delight, ecstasy
凱歌	개가	Triumphant song, paean
啓示	계시	Revelation, disclosure
諧謔	해학	Humor, wit
奔放	분방	Uninhibited, free-spirited
羈氣	기개	(羈 'bridle' + 氣 'spirit'; implies unrestrained spirit) Spirit, mettle, vigor (modern: 기개 氣槪)
血脉	혈맥	Bloodline, lineage
樂天性	낙천성	Optimism
提唱	제창	Advocacy, proposing
阻害	저해	Hindrance, obstruction
罵詈	매리	Abuse, revilement, cursing
瞑想的	명상적	Meditative, contemplative
聰慧	총혜	Intelligence, wisdom
낫다	낳았다	(Older spelling) Gave birth to (modern: 낳았다)
남어	남아	(Older spelling) Remaining (modern: 남아)
잇어야	있어야	(Older spelling) Must be (modern: 있어야)
맹그는데	만드는데	(Older spelling) In making (modern: 만드는데)
너머저서	넘어져서	(Older spelling) Falling down (modern: 넘어져서)
쪼처 단겻다	쫓아다녔다	(Older spelling) Chased after (modern: 쫓아다녔다)
차즈러	찾으러	(Older spelling) To look for, to find (modern: 찾으러)
너머지든	나머지든	(Older spelling) Whatever remained (modern: 나머지든)
마럿다	말았다	(Older spelling) Ended up (doing); finished (modern: 말았다)
몰낫다	몰랐다	(Older spelling) Did not know (modern: 몰랐다)
끄어내	끌어내	(Older spelling) Pulling out (modern: 끌어내)
올려노코	올려놓고	(Older spelling) Placing upon (modern: 올려놓고)
도라단엿다	돌아다녔다	(Older spelling) Wandered around (modern: 돌아다녔다)
물엇스나	물었으나	(Older spelling) Asked, but (modern: 물었으나)
무르러	물으러	(Older spelling) To ask (purpose; modern: 물으러)
불넛다	불렀다	(Older spelling) Sang; called (modern: 불렀다)
나면서	나면서	(Older spelling) While occurring/sounding (modern: 나면서)
부르짓는	부르짖는	(Older spelling) Shouting, crying out (modern: 부르짖는)
도라온다	돌아온다	(Older spelling) Returns (modern: 돌아온다)
낫는다	낳는다	(Older spelling) Gives birth to, begets (modern: 낳는다)
나헛다	낳았다	(Older spelling) Gave birth to (modern: 낳았다)
불너지는	불러지는	(Older spelling) That is called (modern: 불리는, 불려지는)
식히지	시키지	(Older spelling) Cause, make (modern: 시키지)
안으면 안된다	않으면 안된다	Must do (lit. if not do, it won't do) (modern: 않하면 안된다 / -해야 한다)
노앗스며	놓았으며	(Older spelling) Placed, established; and (modern: 놓았으며)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제6권 제11호
발행일	1934년 11월 01일
기사제목	國民文學의 建設者
기사형태	논설

國民文學의 建設者
獨逸國民文學樹立의 殊勳者 레씽의 經歷과 業績
徐恒錫

一. 序言
獨逸文學에 잇어서의 괴-테와 쉴러의 存在는 歷史的이오 世界的이다. 歐洲의 後進國이든 獨逸로 하여금 世界文學의 重要한 參與者가 되게 한 것은 이 兩大詩人의 功績이다. 그러나 괴-테와 쉴려가 비록 不世出의 天才兒엿다 할지라도 그 天賦의 才能을 充分히 發揮할 만한 土臺가 準備되어 잇지 않앗든 들 그들도 槽櫪의 間에 헛되히 生을 마치는 아까운 驥足들임에 지나지 않앗을는지 모르는 일이다. 어느 나라를 물론하고 그 文學의 黃金時代가 결코 一朝一夕에 오는 것이 아니어니와 獨逸에 잇어서도 괴-테, 쉴러의 時代가 出現되기까지에는 幾多의 彷徨과 模索이 잇엇든 것이다. 先進諸國의 여러 가지 影響이 湖水와 같이 밀려드는 속에서 東으로 갈지 西으로 갈지를 몰라 이리저리 彷徨하면서 참으로 獨逸的인＜217＞ 것의 核心을 붓잡고저 日夜로 摸索하고 잇엇든 것이다. 이 黎明期에 잇어 明晳한 頭腦와 該博한 眼識으로써 外來文化의 取捨에 確乎한 基準을 세우고, 나아가서는 獨逸的인 것의 輪廓을 規定하야 獨逸文學의 나아갈 바 方向을 指示하는 同時에 손소 이를 試驗하야 어느 정도까지의 實績을 보여준 이는 「꼬트홀드, 에푸라임 레씽」이다.
17,8世紀의 獨逸에는 한편에는 知識階級의 文學인 羅典文學系統의 「學者文學」이 이서 마치 朝鮮의 漢文學과 같이 民衆의 生活과는 無關係하게 學者의 書齋에서 傳援 生産되어 갓고 또 한편에는 民衆의 生活과 感情에서 自然 生長的으로 發生한 素朴한 「民衆文學」이 잇어 극히 幼稚한 形態를 가지고 具眼者의 收拾을 기다리는 채로 散漫히 存在하여 왓다. 兩者는 早晩間 統一되고 交合되어야 할 것이면서 한동안은 거이 風馬牛의 關係에 잇엇엇다. 이 二樣의 꽃나무를 獨逸의 土壤우에서 接木하야 後日 괴-테, 쉴러의 兩大花를 피워 世界의 藝苑에 보낸 殊勳의 園丁은 實로 레씽 그 사람이엇다.
그러나 獨逸文學의 黃金時代를 現出함에는 단 한사람의 先驅者로서 充分한 것은 아니엇다. 괴-테, 쉴러가 나오기까지에 레씽과 同時代의 人으로는 「클롭슈톡」 「뷔-란드」같은 이가 잇엇고 레씽以後의 人으로는 「헵더」,「하-만」같은 이가 잇어 다 黎明의 하눌에 彗星과 같은 光芒을 發하는 存在들이엇다. 「헬더」와 「하-만」에서는 레씽의 影響을 發見한 수 잇는 것이매 이는 割愛하거니와 저 各各 特色을 가진 同時出現의 三明星 클롭슈톡 뷔-란드, 레씽을 여기서 比較對照함은 興味잇는 일일뿐 만 아니라 獨逸의 國民文學樹立의 論함에 잇어서는 必要 불가결의 일이기도 하다. 이 세개의 明星은 그 빛이 가장 燦然하든 때에 잇어서는 世人은 一時 그들이야말로 오래 待望中에 잇든 眞箇의 太陽이라고 歡喜하고 渴仰하엿든 것이다. 3者는 各各 獨逸國民性의 한 方面을 代表하는 觀이 잇다. 于先 그 出生地로부터 말하면 클롭슈톡은 北方獨逸을 레씽은 中部獨逸을 뷔-란드는 南方獨逸을 대표하야 그 夫稟氣質에 잇서서도 각각 地方獨特의 色彩를 濃厚하게 나타내고 잇다. 이를 作品의 分野에서 본다면 前者는 主觀的 情熱의 抒情詩人이오 레씽은 客觀的 理性的의 劇詩人이오 後者는 近代獨逸小說의 開祖로 物語의 作者인 叙事詩人이다. 다시 思想方面으로 보면 前者는 敬處主義에 接近한 熱烈한 愛國主義者로 레씽은 純然한 啓蒙主義의 使徒로 人道主義的 博愛의 世界市民이오 後者는 一個의 懷疑家엿다. 이 세 사람은 각각 特長대로 黎明期의 獨逸文學에 적지 않은 貢獻을 하엿다.
그러나 뒤에 詳述하려니와 그 중에서도 레씽은 가장 不朽의＜218＞ 業績을 남긴 者이다. 더구나 獨逸文學에 잇어서의 劇文學의 位置에 想到하면 저 3人中에서 劇文學의 代表者인 레씽이 獨逸國民文學 樹立의 殊勳者도 推擧되는 所以가 容易히 首肯되리라고 생각한다. 歐洲各國의 文學을 比較硏究的 立場에서 考察할 때에 흔히 하는 말이거니와 獨逸文學의 特色은 劇文學이엇다. 獨逸이 世界에 자랑할 만한 文學上 傑作은 大部分이 戱曲이다. 이것은 獨逸人의 特性인 尙武, 內訌, 徹底, 復讎, 堅忍, 勤勉, 그리고 內面的 思索的 傾向, 堅固한 忠誠과 義務의 觀念, 潔癖스러운 廉恥心과 名譽慾, 頑冥不遜의 自負와 矜持, 秩序를 尊重하는 組織的 性癖, 容易히 他에 讓步치 않는 自己固執... 等等 卽 一言으로써 蔽하면 獨逸人의 「徹底」를 좋아하는 性癖이 가장 適應한 文學形式은 詩보다도 小說보다도 戱曲이기 때문이다. 저러한 特性을 가진 國民인지라 天生의 劇作家인 레씽이 그 文學의 指導者로서 가장 適役이엇든 것이다. 다음에 그의 經歷을 간단히 敍述하고 및 나는 그의 業績에 붓을 옴기기로 하자.

二. 레씽의  略歷
레씽은 괴-테에 앞서기 20年 쉴러에 앞서기 30年인 1729年의 1月 22日 「작센」의 「카-멘츠」에서 낫다. 그의 父親은 貧寒한 牧師엿다. 12人兄弟中 男子가 10人이오 그가 長男이엇다. 1741年 6月부터 1746年 6月까지 「마이센」의 中學校에서 배웟다. 頭腦 明敏한 秀才일 뿐 아니라 學而不倦하는 誠勤까지 잇어 校長의 極讚을 받앗다. 이 時期에 벌서 그중 最初의 作인 「젊은學者」의 想을 얻엇다.
1748年 8月에는 神學生으로 「라이프치히」大學에 入學하야 神學은 勿論이오 文學, 語學, 醫學의 硏究까지 하면서 特히 劇에 興味을 가지어 當時의 人士 「뭘리우스」 「봐이쎄」等과 交遊하엿고 名女優 「노이버」主人과도 相從이 잇게 되엇다. 牧師님인 그의 父親은 그의 劇界 接近을 墮落的 行動이라고 걱정하야 母病에 稱托하야 그를 故鄕으로 召還하엿다. 그가 라이프치히에 잇든 동안에 전기 「젊은學者」가 노이버夫人에 依하야 上演되어 상당한 賞讚을 받앗다.
라이프치히를 떠난 그는 「뷔텐베르히」에 가서 醫學硏究를 해 보앗으나 別로 신통한 자미를 보지 못하고 드디어 伯林으로 가서 1751年까지 거기 잇엇다. 그는 이 時期에 生活을 爲하야 文筆을 잡앗다. 或은 翻譯도 하고 或은 雜誌記者도 되엇다. 여러 篇의 戱曲과 또 抒情詩의 作이 잇다.
1751年末에는 뷔텐베르히로 다시 갓고 그 翌年末에 伯林으로 도루 돌아왓다. 「멘델스존」, 「니콜라이」等과 交際하는 한편으로 劇作에 從事하엿고 이 時期에 「랑게」의 翻譯한 「호라츠」詩集의 誤譯을 指摘하야 一躍 批評家로서의 認定을 받앗다.＜219＞
그後 「포츠담」에서 獨逸의 最初의 平民悲劇인 「사라삼프손孃」을 썻고 55年에는 伯林을 거처 라이프치히에 갓다가 翌年에는 某富豪子弟의 援助로 歐洲漫遊를 하엿다. 「암스텔담」에 간 때에는 7年戰爭이 한창이엇다.
56年 9月부터 58年 9月까지의 間에 詩人 「클라이스트」와 交遊하엿고 「파우스트」를 썻다. 이 레씽의 「파우스트」는 後日 괴-테나 「파우스트」에 많은 示唆을 주엇다 한다.
58年 10月부터 60年까지 세번째 伯林에 잇어 古代文學의 硏讚과 㝢活文學의 考究에 힘썻다. 愛國劇 「필로타스」도 이때에 쓴 것이다. 그러고 니콜라이, 멘델스존과 함께 「最近文學書簡」이라는 定期刊行物을 내엇다.
60年 11月부터 65年 4月까지 「타우엔치엔」將軍의 秘書官으로 「뿌레슬라우」에 滯在하야 士官들과의 接觸이 많앗고 遊蕩한 生活도 하여 보앗다. 그러나 性格喜劇 「민나, 픈, 바른헬름」의 大部分을 여기서 썻고 有名한 『라오코온』을 쓸 準備도 이 時期에 되엿다.
65年에는 네번째 伯林에 돌아왓다. 이때는 벌서 學者로서의 그의 名聲은 相當히 들레인 때이다. 「함부르히」에 새로 「國民劇場」(建物名이 아니오 無形의 團體)이 創立되고 레씽은 그 招聘에 應하야 함부르히로 갓다. 이 劇團에 잇는 동안 그는 有名한 「함부르히劇論」을 내엿다. 佛蘭西의 古典劇의 影響에 反抗하야 獨逸國民劇의 創設에 努力한 것이다. 그러나 이 劇團은 그 翌年에 經營難으로 解體되고 레씽은 또다시 生活難에 붓잡히엇다.
1770年 4月 「카-ㄹ, 페르디난드」의 勸에 依하야 「볼펜퓌텔」公立圖書館의 管理를 맡게 되엇다. 그때에 그의 父親은 巨大한 負債를 남기고 逝去하엿다. 그는 이 물려받은 負債에까지 눌리어 生活의 困難을 더욱 느끼엇다.
레씽은 婦人과의 關係에 잇어 매우 淡泊한 사람이엇다. 半生을 獨身으로 지내면서 허튼 艶聞하나도 맨들지 않앗다. 「노이버」夫人과의 相從도 知已로서의 交遊이엇을 뿐이다. 그러다가 1770年에 와서 비로소 일즉이 함부르히時代에 知面한 일이 잇는 「괴-니히」하는 商人의 未亡人 「에봐」라는 女子와 約婚하엿다.
72年에는 悲劇 「에밀리아, 갈로티」를 썻고 776年 2月에 뷔텐베르히로 다시 돌아간 때에야 겨우 生活의 餘裕가 생겻으므로 約婚한 지 6年만에 에봐와 비로소 結婚하엿다. 그때에 에봐는 40歲엿다. 그러나 1778年 에봐는 産後의 經過가 좋지 못하야 母子가 다 死亡하고 말앗다. 이리하야 레씽은 또다시 孤寂의 속에 사는 사람이 되엇다. 이때에 함부르히의 「고에체」와 論爭하든 結果로 새로 쓴 것이 戱曲 「賢者나탄」이다.
그는 1781年 2月 5日 52歲의 一生을 卒倒로＜220＞ 마치엇다.

三. 레씽의 業績
넓은 意味에 잇어서의 中世紀의 文化가 崩壞되고 批判的인 近世文化가 생겨나는 그 中間의 革命時代 卽 18世紀의 啓蒙思想 全盛時代에 레씽은 나고 자라고 죽엇다. 18世紀란 時代는 全歐洲의 靑年時代로서 健全한 思想과 潑剌한 氣風이 一世에 彌滿하든 때이다. 獨逸만 보더라도 1740年에 「프리드리히」大王이 登極한 以後로 獨逸國民의 生活과 文化에 一新紀元을 劃하야 저 30年戰爭의 創痍도 이제는 겨우 醫治되엇고 社會의 各層에 更生의 機運이 濃厚하야 일즉이 政治的으로 四分五裂되엇는 獨逸民族이 一躍 世界的 勢力을 가진 國家와 國民으로 統一되어가든 時期이다. 따라서 이것이 精神生活 方面에도 커다란 衝動을 주엇섯다.
이러한 時代에 태여난 레씽이 劇作에 一代의 野心을 가진 것은 當然한  인이다. 卽 動的인 時代에 태어난 動的인 人間으로서 動的인 表現形式을 取한 것이다. 이와 같이 레씽의 本領은 劇作에 잇엇다. 그러고 그는 同時에 批評家, 思想家, 說敎者, 學者로서도 無往不適한 多方面의 活動을 보엿다. 이제 그의 諸活動을 살피는데 잇어서는
(1) 劇作家, 戱曲論家로서의 레씽
(2) 美學者, 主로 文藝批評家로서의 레씽
(3) 神學의 批評家, 啓蒙思想家로서의 레씽
의 3方面에 나누어 보아야 할 것이로되 여기에서는 (1)과 (2)만에 對하야 言及하기로 한다.

1 劇作家, 戱曲論家로서의 레씽
레씽의 이 方面에 잇어서의 活動을 알기 爲하여서는 우선 大體로 當時의 獨逸劇壇의 形勢를 一瞥할 必要가 잇겟다. 當時의 獨逸民族의 大都會는 維也納에 잇는데 이곳에는 常設劇場은 잇으나 그 上演物은 俳優의 卽興的 技藝에 不過한 것이오 그것조차 대개는 伊太利, 佛蘭西의 風을 模倣한 것이엇다. 伯林도 또한 이와 매한가지로 宮廷內의 劇場에 每週水曜마다 佛國의 俳優가 佛國作家의 作品을 上演하야 一般으로 佛伊의 影響이 濃厚하엿다. 이것은 그러치 않아도 後進國으로서의 獨逸에는 外國文學이 支配的 地位에 잇엇는데 先是하야 1740年頃에 라이프치히大學敎授로 固陋한 偏見을 가진 腐儒的 學者 「꼬트쉐드」가 獨逸이 師表로 할것은 佛國의 劇詩人들이라고 力說하야 意識的으로 佛國模倣을 高調한데 綠由함도 잇는 것이다. 이와같이 外來의 劇이 우위를 占하고 잇으되 民衆들은 이를 理解하지 못하야 劇壇의   蕭條가 識者의 걱정을 살만하엿다. 이러한 現像을 보고 레씽은 歎하되 「우리들에게는 한 개의 劇場도 俳優도 觀衆도 없다」하엿다. 어느 時代 어느 나라를 勿論하고 演劇의＜221＞ 發達에는 劇場, 俳優, 觀衆의 3要素가 調和되어야 하는 것이어니와 이들을 調和시키는 것은 優秀한 戱曲이다. 참으로 藝術的인 同時에 그 基底를 民衆의 生活에 두어 民衆으로 하여금  이로 말미암아 鼓舞되고 振作되게 하는 배 잇는 戱曲이라야 저 3要素를 充分히 調和시킬 수 잇는 것이다. 그러고 優秀한 戱曲은 偉大한 作家를 기다려서야 얻을 수 잇는 것이다. 레씽은 獨逸의 劇文化를 正道로 인도하기 위하야 辛辣한 批判과 猛烈한 論戰을 不斷히 敢行하엿거니와 한편으로 그가 劇作에 잇어 試驗한 것은 저러한 戱曲의 創作이엇고 또 이능� 어느 程度까지 成功하엿다.
레씽은 親友 리콜라이와 멘델스존과 함께 「最近文學書簡」을 刊行하야 꼬트쉐드一派가 「아리스토텔레스」의 眞精神을 曲解한 結果로 佛蘭西古典劇의 缺陷과 誤謬까지도 金科玉條와 같이 여러 自國의 劇壇에 力勸하고 잇는 態度를 痛擊하고 차라리 種族的으로 同一系統에 屬하는 英國을 模倣함이 가까우리라 하야 沙翁을 獨逸劇의 眞正한 師表로 推獎하엿다. 이는 獨逸의 劇文學을 獨逸的으로 成長시키는데 크게 도음이 된 일이다.
그 뒤에 함부르히의 國民劇場에 가서 執筆한 「함부르히 戱曲論」은 獨逸劇壇에 不朽의 成績을 남긴 至寶이다. 이것은 每週 23號씩 내는 繼續刊行物로서 처음에는 國民劇場俳優들의 舞臺上의 연기를 評함을 主眼으로 하든 것이 被批評者들의 不平이 잇기 시작하여서부터는 主로 劇本의 解剖批評과 一般戱曲 特히 悲劇의 本質에 대한 徹底한 考究로 筆鋒을 돌린 것이다. 그 중에서도 꼬트쉐드의 誤謬를 指摘한 「同情과 危懼」論은 有名한 것이다. 이것은 아리스토텔레스의 悲劇의 定議 「悲劇은 一種의 組成과 偉大性을 가진 動作의 模倣으로서... 그 效果는 同情과 危懼의 念을 惹起함에 依하야 此種 及 他種의 情熱로서의 淨化作用을 齋來함에 잇다」하는 것의 「同情과 危懼」를 꼬트쉐드는 誤解하야 「同情과 恐怖」로 解釋하엿든 것을 레씽은 明快한 理論으로써 이것이 「恐怖」가 아니오 「危懼」임을 闡明한 것이다. 이밖에도 이 戱曲論에서는 31致의 法則에 對한 理論等 傾聽할만한 見解가 많이 잇다.
다음으로 劇作家로서의 레씽을 보려하거니와 그의 數多한 作品을 一一히 擧論할 수는 없는 것이오 이에는 다만 그 中에서 重要한 것인 「사라 삼프손孃」, 「필로타스」 「민나, 폰, 바른헬름」, 「에밀리아, 갈로티」 「賢者나탄」 等의 諸作을 紹介함에 그치려 한다.
平民悲劇 「사라, 삼프손孃」은 그가 習作時代를 지난 26歲의 作으로서 多分히 英國의 影響을 觀取할 수 잇는 五幕劇이다. 舞臺도 人物도 英國에서 取하엿다. 放蕩한 富者와 그에게 誘惑받은 貴族의 딸과 또 이 富者를 戀慕하는 邪惡한 寡婦와의 三角關係를 取扱한 것이다.＜222＞ 從來로 悲劇의 主人公은 의례히 帝王이나 英雄이엇섯지마는 이 劇은 市井의 人을 主人公으로 한 最初의 平民悲劇이다. 그러고 그 對話에 잇어서도 散文을 가지고 되도록 自然스럽게 進行시킨 것은 새로운 試驗이다.
愛國劇 「필로타스」는 一幕悲劇이다. 마케도니아의 王子 필로타스가 敵軍에게 捕虜되엇는데 父王은 싸움에 이겨 敵國의 王子를 역시 捕虜하여 가지고 자기의 아들과 交換하기 爲하야 和를 請하려할 때 이 消息을 들은 필로타스는 자기의 한 몸때문에 祖國의 勝利가 完全한 것이 되지 못할까 念慮하야 드디어 自刃하고 만다는 것이다. 이것은 당시의 濃厚한 戰爭氣分의 影響을 받아 愛國的 精神을 高調한 作品이다.
性格喜劇 「민나, 폰, 바른헬름」은 舞臺上에서 굉장한 效果를 보여 이 劇의 作者가 單統히 理論家임에 그치지 아니하고 作家로서의 卓越한 手腕을 가지고 잇음을 明確히 證明한 것으로서 그의 圓熟期인 35歲時의 作이다. 이것은 零落반 不遇의 獨逸軍人이 어떠한 困窮을 當할지라도 獨逸人의 名譽, 正義, 自尊의 觀念을 잃지 아니하야 옛 戀人의 眞情으로의 도음도 받기를 즐겨하지 아니함으로부터 생기는 葛藤을 取扱한 喜曲이다. 從來의 低級한 喜曲은 錯誤와 偶然과 奸計로써 一時 觀衆을 웃김에 지나지 못하는 것이엇지마는 이 喜曲은 人間의 性格으로부터 由來한 葛藤을 發展시킨 것으로서 正喜劇으로는 獨逸에 잇어서는 이것이 最初의 作品이오 또 喜曲이 적은 獨逸에 잇어서는 지금까지에 이것이 最後의 作品이라고 文學史家는 말한다.
悲劇 「에밀리아, 갈로티」는 五幕의 平民劇이다. 平民悲劇으로서의 「사라, 삼프손孃」은 最初의 試驗으로하여서는 記憶할 만한 것이지마는 作品으로서 成功한 点에서는 이 「에밀리아」를 들어야 하겟다. 「민나」가 獨逸喜曲史上에 元祖로서의 位置를 차지한다면 그와 같은 位置를 獨逸 平民悲劇史上에 차지할 것은 實로 이 「에밀리아」다. 이것은 羅馬史의 一揷話에서 取材한 것으로서 王公의 勢威에 눌려 장차 그 蹂躪을 받지 않을 수 없이 된 딸의 名譽와 純潔을 保全하기 爲하야 아버지로써 딸을 죽이는 市井의 慘事를 그린 것이다. 이러한 題材는 그 후 「헵벨」의 「아리아, 막달레나」와 「주더만」의 「名譽」에 이르기까지 여러 번 取扱되어  한 系統을 이루엇다.
問題劇 「賢者나탄」은 레씽의 宗敎觀, 倫理觀, 人生哲學에 관한 中心問題에 藝術에 잇어서의 可能한 限度의 手法으로써 解決을 지워 問題劇으로써 新分野를 開拓한 것이다. 時代를 十字軍時代로 하고 場所들 三敎並立의 聖地 예루살렘으로하야 主要人物 「살탄, 사라딘」(마호메트교의 代表) 富有하고 賢明한 猶太人 「나탄」(猶太敎) 그의 養女 「레하」, 十字軍의 騎士 (基督敎) 等으로써 그사이에 巧妙히 葛藤을 맨들어 가지고 最後에 無事圓滿한＜223＞ 解決을 짓는다. 卽 「레하」와 騎士는 실상은 兄妹間이오 또 「살탄」의 조카들임을 서로 알게하야 三宗敎를 代表하는 여러 사람이 한 家族이엇다는 것을 보이기 各宗敎의 融和의 우에 「人類의 宗敎」의 勝利를 祝福하야 人種과 宗敎와 國家를 超越한 「寬容」의 精神을 讚美한다. 여기서 레씽의 世界市民으로서의 一面을 또한  볼 수 잇다.

2 美學者, 主로 文藝枇評家로서의 레씽
레씽은 文藝批評方面에 잇어서도 많은 卓見과 偉績을 남기엇다. 그 中에서도 有名한 「라오코온」으로써 文學을 造形美衝에서 解放한 功績은 크다 하겟다. 오늘날 와서는 詩歌와 繪畵의 사이에는 明確한 限界는 規定되어 잇지마는 當時에 잇어서는 그 本質과 特性의 究明이 充分히 되어 잇지를 아니하엿든 것이다. 當時에 一般이 公認되어 잇든 바 「繪畵는 舞聲의 詩歌, 詩歌는 有聲의 繪畵」라는 根本原則에 對하야 레씽은 深刻한 吟味를 시작하야 詩歌와 繪畵에 對한 時人의 槪念을 一新시키는 同時에 詩歌가 單純히 敍述에만 흐르는 弊를 匡正하고 繪畵가 拙劣한 寓意에 墮하는 傾向을 濟度하야 이 두 가지 藝術이 각각 本來의 天地에서 發達 成長할 길을 開拓한 것이다. 表題를 「라오코온」이라 한 것은 레씽이 그 序論에서 말한 바와 같이 라이코온에서 出發하야 때때로 라오코온에 돌아가 다시 論한 까닭이오 라오코온이란것은 「트로이」의 司祭가 神罰때문에 父子 3人이 大蛇에게 몸을 얽혀 斷末魔의 苦惱에 못이기는 것을 사겨낸 彫刻像의 이름이다.
文藝批評家로서의 레씽을 좀더 仔細히 紹介하고 싶지마는 劇評家로서의 業績은 이미 前述한 바이오 浩澣한 라오코온의 內容을 詳說함도 여기에서는 適處를 얻엇다 할 수 없고 그 밖에 다소 無數의 活動과 功績도 다 紙面關係로 割愛하기로 한다. =(끝)=＜224＞

愛蘭民族文學建設者-윌렴· 버틀러· 예이츠-
金珖燮

民族的으로 보아 켈트族은 그 强大한 攻勢力으로 말미아마 한때 歐州의 威가 된 때가 이섯다. 그럼에도 그들은 安住의 國家를 建設하리 만큼한 執着性과 自己防禦性을 가지지 못하엿다.
그들의 歷史的 經路는 한때의 隆盛의 時代를 除하면 掠奪과 外敵의 勃興- 그 連續이엇다.
南歐 다늅-江沿岸서 일어나서 分散되야 一小島 愛蘭士에 移住되여슬 때에는 그들은 어느듯 大英帝國의 커다란 抱負아래에만 지우게 되엿다.
이 民族的 運命에 地理的 環境은 地極히 不幸하여 四時로 맑은 하늘을 보는 우리의 想像과는 멀리 秋冬이면 雲霧로 말미아마 짧은 해가 憂鬱에 가리워 잇다. 그 속에서 이 多情多感한 民族은 現實의 專制에 自體의 弱點을 通한 긴-悲歎을 이저버릴 사이가 업섯다.
그리하야 그 아름 운 放浪性, 感傷性은 順調롭지 못한 現實逃避의 社會的 根據에 結聯되여젓다. 따라서 그들은 民族的 特質이라할 程度까지 主觀的 印象的 情緖的 直觀的 要素를 文學에 反映식혓다. 거기에는 理性의 世界의 餘地가 거진 업서 보인다.
이 모든 特質이라 할만한 要素를 타고난 것이-愛蘭의 感性的 內容을 世界의 文學水準에까지 表象한 것이 곳 윌렴. 버틀러. 예이츠이다.
近代愛蘭文藝運動에 이서서 그 出發點은 1881年 파-넬의 政治的 失脚에 잇다. 民族의 智的 能力이 政治的 集中에서 退却되야 愛蘭의 本念을 文藝的 表現에 求하랴는 젊은 情熱은 1892年 首都 더부린에 愛蘭國民文學協會를 創設케 하엿다. 그리하야 愛蘭士에 파뭇긴 純粹한 傳統 理想 古譚- 그것에 소리(聲)를 주고 리즘을 주어서 愛蘭을 살리려 하엿다. 예이츠, 하이드 ·그레고리夫人, 무어等은 그 中堅 되는 代表들이엇다.＜225＞
이 민족적 문예운동에 이서서의 최대의 收獲은 劇 及 극장운동이엇다.
文化史的으로 愛蘭은 英國보다 일즉 南歐의 先進文化國과의 交涉을 가젓다. 愛蘭은 伊太利 以前에 임이 文藝復興運動이 이섯스나 劇文化運動이 이슬 때는 업섯다. 그러나 愛蘭人의 劇의 才質은 沙翁以後 美國劇壇의 모든 危期를 求하여 내엇다 하리만큼 異彩엇다. 18世紀 中葉의 골드스미드, 쉐리단 19世紀末의 오스카·와일드 입센의 近代劇을 英國에 發表식힌 쇼-翁 그외 어-빈 오케-시등-이러케 들고보면 沙翁의 太陽은 愛蘭人 劇作家로 繼承된 感이 난다. 그리하야 愛蘭의 國語를 消滅식히혀든 英帝國은 過分의 報酬를 바듬으로 말미아마 드디어 그 文學의 內容을 豊富케 하엿다.
一流의 劇才를 가지고 自國에서 劇의 文化를 피우지 못한 愛蘭은 英國의 小劇場運動에 剌戟되야 예이츠·마-틴, 무어, 그레고리夫人 等이 中心되야 愛蘭文藝座의 創設을 보게되엿고 1899年 5月 初演을 하여스니 그것이 愛蘭 國民劇 誕生의 發端이며 그 上演 脚本의 하나가 예이츠作 「伯爵夫人 카드린」이엇다.
한 개의 아름다운 詩劇으로 愛蘭을 內容으로 한 傳說을 劇化한 것이다. 愛蘭의 饑饉을 契機로 惡魔의 奸商이 빵을 질머지고 「靈魂」을 파는 者에게 빵을 준다. 伯爵夫人 카드린이 自己의 純潔한 靈魂을 그에게 팔어서 주린 百姓을 求하려 하나 神의 慈悲로 防止된다.
饑饉과 빵과 靈魂-. 이 세가지를 聯立해 노으면 그 取하는 바 大衆的 意思는 빵에 기우러진다. 예이츠는 愛蘭을 靈魂에로 引導하려 하엿다. 이것이 愛蘭國民劇의 最初의 誕生이다.
그리하야 이제 30年에 가까운 世界的 名聲을 가진 小劇場 「아베-座-가 1904年에 더부린 中央에 서기까지 예이츠는 레퍼토리의 構成에 이서서 또는 事務的 實際에 이서서 中樞的 役割者이엇다. 그러나 예이츠의 强點과 弱點은 共히 國民的 民族的에 이섯다. 일즉 世界的 立場에 선 무어와 民族的 立場에 선 예이츠와의 對立은 前者가 不利하게 됨에 끈첫다. 그러나 오늘에 이서서 아베이座는 무어의 便에 半身以上을 걸처놋코 잇다.
그러타해서 愛蘭文藝運動의 建設者로써의 예이츠의 評價가 低下됨은 안이다. 우리는 率直히愛蘭의 모든 運動은 예이츠에게서 일어낫다는 決論에 同意하며 오직 남어지疑問은 그것이 또한 예이츠로 도라갈 것인가함에 이슬 뿐이다.
예이츠의 아버지는 畵家엿다. 예이츠는 그의 長男으로 1865年 6月 13日 愛蘭首府 더부린에서 낫다. 어려슬 때는 詩「老漁夫의 瞑想」에 나오는 愛蘭의 村 「스라이고」에서 할아버지와 함께 지내기도 햇다. 愛蘭의 傳說 神話를 듯는 사이에 「스라이고」의 素朴한 農村 그 風景에 깁흔 印象을＜226＞ 어덧다. 그리하야 畵家가 되려든 그의 마음에는 文學과의 因緣의 自初가 매저젓다. 열살 때 倫敦에서 工夫햇고 5年 後 더부린에 도라와서 亦是 畵家될려고 美術學校에 단여스나 結局 愛蘭國民文學에 留意하야 爾後文學에 專念하엿다.
일즉 13才때부터 習作品을 내여스나 1899年 「갈닙에 부는 바람」으로 神秘的 象徵主義의 絶頂을 보엿고 그後 現代 「稀類의 天才詩人」의 稱頌으로 世界詩壇에서 一家를 確立하게 되엿다. 그러나 그는 愛蘭文藝運動의 主流가 劇인 것만큼 劇과의 距離를 멀니할 수 업섯든지 劇에 붓을 다이기 始作하엿다.
그리하야 詩集, 戱曲集, 散文集等 文學의 全面에의 貢獻은 드디어 1923年 노벨 文學賞을 援與케 되엿다. 현재 그는 愛蘭自由國의 元老院의 一員으로써 政治的 方面에 活動하고 잇다.
예이츠는 무엇보다도 먼저 抒情詩人이다. A.E.의 가장 洗諫되고 아름다운 神秘的 抒情詩도 예이츠의 詩에는 對가 되지 못한다고 批評家는 말한다. 愛蘭士의 傳說과 言語의 智識에 이서서 또한 다그라스·하이드博士에 뒤지기 前에 그는 詩人이며 비록 劇을 썻다고 할지라도 亦是 그는 詩人이엇다.
그의 詩를 읽으면 哀殘하는 情熱의 悲歎 過去의 追想 異鄕의 무덤 사랑의 悲歌와 瞑想-. 이 모든 東洋的 虛無的 色彩가 그의 詩가 된 것 갓다. 그의 詩의 世界에 드러가면 우리는 힘도 싸홈도 또는 科學도 理性도 모도다 이저 버리고 平靜한 悲歎과 瞑想죽에 潛기게 되야 沒我의 情緖에 融解된다. 슬픈 것 그리운 것-. 그것은 예이츠의 詩에 連續되는 悲歌이다. 그리하야 어느 듯 우리는 켈트的 精神이 自然에 合致되고 沒入되드시 예이츠의 詩에 合致되고 沒入되어진다.

죽엄에 꿈 大意

情다운 손(手)을 멀니하고
낫선 곳에서 죽는 사람을 나는 꿈에 보앗나니.
마을 農夫들
그 얼골 棺널판우에 못을 치고
奇異한 마음으로 외로운 그 무덤까에
糸杉과 水松을 심으더이다.
사람이 할바 무어 이스랴하야
나는 가서 나무의 十字架에 글을 썻나니
나무엽헤 잠든 이 女人
그는 나의 첫 愛人보다 더 아름답나니
하늘에 구슬픈 별들을 처다보며
또한 구슬픈 바람소리 듯고 잇나니.＜227＞

註-「糸杉」은 死者에 대한 哀悼의 表象. 「水松」은
英國에서는 墓地에 만히 심는 綠樹.
이 첫 두 句와 마지막 두 句 가운데는 切切한 愛蘭의 켈트的 性情이 느껴짐을 禁할 수 업다. 예이츠에게는 이 世上의 모든 現像이 空虛에서 空虛로 흘러가며 오직 그 空虛에 부다치는 「情緖」의 世界만이 永遠한 實在의 世界인 것이다.

劇作家로서의 예이츠는 이 그 評價가 決定되여잇다.는 演劇의 本質을 情熱과 言語에 두고 잇다. 世界의 演劇論은 그 本質을 動作에 두고 이슴에 對하야 예이츠는 하나의 異論우에서 그 劇을 制作하엿다. 그럼으로 그의 劇에는 靜이 이슬 뿐이다. 亦是 예이츠는 詩人의 籍을 떠나지 못한 劇作家이다. 따라서 元老院議員일 것이다.
最近 그는 日本의 能樂을 硏究하야 그 靜的 表現美를 劇에 吹入하고 잇다. 結局 그의 劇은 詩人인데서 劇으로 成巧치 못햇고 켈트的 黃昏-예이츠自身이 말한-인데서 失敗를 求하엿다.
이 켈트的 黃昏을 나타내기 爲하야 예이츠는 情緖的 象徵主義의 手法을 取햇다. 詩에서든지 劇에서던지 마찬가지로 그는 人間의 知性에 訴함이 안이고 感覺을 通하야 情緖를 剌戟하며 그리하야 非感覺的 世界를 暗示하려 한다. 따라서 그는 詩에
이서서의 象徵主義 運動史에도 獨特한 地位를 가지거니와 演劇에 이서서도 또한 그러하다.
그의 幾個의 劇가운데서 劇으로서의 가장 成功된 그리고 가장 動的인 것은 1902年作 「카드린·니·후-리한」(一幕物)이다. 카드린·니·후-리한이란 國難愛蘭의 象徵으로서 1798年 佛軍이 上陸하여슬 때 이 老婆가 結婚式을 하로 압둔 靑年 마이켈의 집에 나타나서 愛蘭의 精神을 暗示하며 「永遠히 그대들의 일홈은 우리國民의 귀를 떠나지 안으리라」하며 이 退場할 때 마이켈은 老婆의 뒤를 따러간다.
老婆-. 나를 도아주는 것은 쉬운 일이 안이니라. 붉은 얼골도 蒼白해지고 언덕이며 못(澤)가며 들을 자유롭게 도라단이던 사람도 먼-나라로 쫓겨가서 돌밧흘 것게 되리라. 조흔 計劃도 다 깨드러지고 돈을 모아도 그것을 다 쓸 때까지 이 세상에 살지 못하리라. 아무리 아이들을 나어도 일홈을 지어주는 式典에는 아버지가 업스리라. 붉은 얼골도 나를 爲하여서는 창백하게 되리라. 그래도 그 사람들은 充分히 滿足하리라.」
이것은 예이츠의 劇의 系列에서 보면 가장 劇的이고 가장 平易하고 또한 가장 端的으로 民族心을 表現한 劇이다.
그러나 亦是 劇으로서는 「싱그」와 「그레고리夫人」에 步를 讓할 점이 적지 안타. 더군다나 「싱그」에게 이서서는 그러하다. 그러나 巴里의 집웅밋헤서 世紀末的 氣分에 潛겨＜228＞ 잇는 싱그를 發見하야 愛蘭의 아란 島로 보낸 것이 亦是 예이츠임을 우리는 이즐 수 업다.
마지막으로 예이츠, 싱그等의 文學 及 劇에 對한 한 개의 重大한 問題가 잇다.
그것은 예이츠, 싱그等-그들은 愛蘭語를 알지 못하며 따라서 眞正한 愛蘭을 正解할 수는 업다는 것이다. 이것이 一般 愛蘭人의 非難이다.
켈트族과 앵그로·색슨族이 서로 다른 것만큼 그 言語도 서로 다르다. 한民族의 固有한 言語란 그 民族이 일어버릴 最後의 財産에 屬한다. 英國은 그것을 最先으로 消滅식히려 하엿다.
일즉 露西亞의 暴政밋헤 이슨 파란의 어머니들은 警官을 두러워하면서 裁縫틀아래 石板을 무릅아레에 두고 그 子女에게 자기母國語를 가르처 주엇다.
예이츠의 文學은 英語로 씨여 잇다. 그럼으로 偉大한 英國의 批評家는 예이츠는 偉大한 英詩人이라 한다. 實로 言語를 알지 못하고 그 民族의 眞을 알기는 어려운 일이다. 愛蘭士에서 나서 듯고 본 것에 틀임업스나 그러타고 그것이 반드시 純眞한 愛蘭의 소리요 그 表現인지는 疑問도 될 수 잇다. 그럼으로 愛蘭民族主義者, 或은 革命黨員에게 非難됨도 無理는 안이다. 그러나 英語로 쓴 愛蘭文學以外에 愛蘭語로 쓴 愛蘭文學에 이서서도 그 建設的 役割은 亦是 예이츠에서 出發하엿다고 안이 할 수 업다. (끗)
1934. 9. 19日夜
附記- 時間上, 健康上, 적지안은 不平으로 蘭愛文藝運動과 예이츠, 及 예이츠의 生活과 思想과 藝術과의 交涉을 좀더 究明하지 못한 채 적지안흔 補充을 必要로 하면서 끗맛침을 謝하야 마지 안는다.＜229＞

古典主義의 先驅 라불레
李軒求

伊太利를 爲始한 르네상스(文藝復興)의 唯一의 特徵은 個人主義의 發展에 잇다. 卽 그들은 무엇보다도 「自我」이기를 生命을 賭하야 探究햇든 것이다. 伊太利의 文藝復興의 先驅者 「페트라르카」가 보카치오에게 보낸 書簡에 쓰인 바 「사람은 各自가 그 容貌에 그 行動에 그 音聲에 그 言語에 그 어떤 獨特한 것을 가지고 잇다. 이것을 變更하기 보담은 차라리 이것을 陶冶하고 改良하랴는 것이 더 容易할 뿐 아니라 더 有用하고 더 훌늉한 생각이라고 할 것이다」하는 一句中에서 充分히 發見할 것이다.
拉典文學의 模倣에서 새로운 頃域을 發見하지 못햇든 佛蘭西의 文學的 國土우에 이러한 새로운 精神的 變革이 이러나게 되엿다. 卽 文學 乃至 藝術이 어떤 制度와 宗敎의 陰影속에서 새로운 希臘文藝의 復活과 同時에 偉大한 「美」의 感銘과 거기 따르는 人間的 別個의 生活을 차저낸 것이다. 이러한 새로운 精神의 豊富와 獨自性에서 實로 人間的 又는 文學的 殉死者의 만흔 精靈을 輩出케 된 것이다. 이때까지도 作品으로 極히 貧困하엿스며 思想으로는 더욱 貧困한 當時 16世紀까지의 佛蘭西에 잇어서 이 個人主義的 思想과 文藝의 流入은 佛蘭西的 그러면서 가장 人間的인 根本思想을 産出하게 되엿다. 여기서 簡單히 紹介하랴는 佛蘭西 文藝의 참다운 建設者은 先驅者인 프랑소와 라블레(Francois Rablais)이다. 文藝思想은 그 中의 가장 代表的 發見이다.
그의 生涯-. 라블레는 1494年 美酒産地로 有名한 「투-레느」에서 낫다. 그의 生月日은 아직도 未知의 事實로 남어 잇다. 그는 天性으로 好飮痛飮으로 「自然의 神聖」 「自然의 善性」을 一生을 通하야 遵奉한 諷剌的 大文豪다. 그래서 그의 一生에는 여러 가지 有名한 傳說과 逸話가 만타. 그 中 1,2를 列擧함으로써 그의 性格을 말하랴 한다.
그가 大僧正 「듀,벨레」를 따라 羅馬法王에 拜謁하러 갓을 때 모도가 法王의 발에 갓다 키쓰할 때 그는 이러한 接吻을 拒絶하고
「나는 主人(大僧正)과 가튼 흉내는 낼 수 업소이다. 主人은 大侯요 나는 一個 僧侶다. 나는 누구나 저 法王의 속옷을 벽겨 빨아가지고 내게 키쓰하라기를 기달리고 잇소이다.」＜230＞
이러케 그는 地上의 神인 法王압헤서 辛踈한 諷剌와 豪言을 憺大히 敢行하엿든 것이다. 그는 임이 宗敎的 盲信과 그러한 無智에서 뛰여나와 그는 一의 人間的 自我에서 自然의 善性을 發見하엿든 것이다.
그러나 이 反面에 라블레의 敎養은 實로 놀낼만하다. 그는 拉典語를 배왓고 希臘語를 배왓스며 天文學 數學, 法律을 배왓다. 그뿐이랴 博物學硏究에 沒頭하엿고 特히 植物學에 精通하엿으며 또 醫師로서의 學理上 又는 臨床上智識은 또한 놀낼만 하엿다. 그래서 그는 大僧正「듀벨레-」家의 醫師로 잇으면서 羅馬에는 3次나 來往한 일이 잇엇다.
그러나 라블레에게는 그의 性格上 生活에는 가진 幸酸과 悲慘을 맛보앗다. 그래서 當時 文學愛護의 帝王인 프랑소와一世의 惠澤이 없음도 아니엿스나 亦是 一定한 生活의 安逸을 얻지 못하고 리용近地로 放浪하엿다. 그러면서도 「듀벨데」僧正의 物質上 精神上 援助는 적지 아니하야 드듸여 그는 1550年 「무우동」의 생 미르탕敎會의 牧師로 就任하야 2年間 지냇스나 그 역 「라블레」의 天職은 아니여서 1552年 이 職을 放棄하고 1553年頃에 貧窮속에서 이 世上을 떠나고 마럿다.
그의 2大代表作-. 「라블레」의 2大代表作品은 가르강튜아(GARGANTUA)와 팡타그류엘(PAN AGR EL)이다. 이 作品은 別個의 獨立된 作品이 아니라 父子物語로 된 2部作이다. 前者는 1532年頃에 創作되엿다. 後者는 1535年頃 初券이 出版되엿다. 前者는 一冊으로 되엿스나 後者는 四冊으로 되여 最終券은 라블레의 死后 出版되엿다. 그리고 이 作品은 모도 다 「리용」에서 發刊되엿다.
몬저 「가르강튜아」의 簡單한 梗槪를 쓰기로 하자. 이 主人公은 實로 이 世上에 가장 痛快한 巨大漢이다. 그는 날 때부터 「마시고 십다, 마시고 십다!」하는 부름지즘이 그 呱呱聲이엿다. 그러나 놀나지 마라. 이 「가르강튜아」는 1萬7千9百13頭의 암소젓이 잇어야 哺乳할 수 잇고 그의 옷을 맹그는데는 죡기, 속옷 저고리 바지 모다 合해서 3億1千9百1萬76尺이라는 實로 놀랠만한 綢緞을 必要로 하는 것이다. 그러나 이 아기는 亦是 다른 幼兒와 가티 자고 먹고 마시고 하기를 마찬가지로 하엿다. 그는 나라의 모든 學者를 歷訪하야 修學의 길을 떠낫다. 그는 여섯區의 코기리를 한대 合친 것만큼이나 큰말을 타고 巴里로 떠낫다. 그 말이 꼬리를 한번 치면 모든 나무는 다 너머저서 넓은 平野가 생기고 巴里에 가서는 有名한 노트르담寺院의 巨鍾을 띄여 말목에 달고 다니매 巴里의 學者는 크게 놀래어 鍾을 차즈러 쪼처 단겻다.
그는 「피크로코을」이라는 隣國을 征服하고는 그 戰勝의 紀念으로 大僧院을 刱設하엿다. 그러나 이 僧院은 다른 僧院과는 달리 이 「텔렘」僧院에는 오직 한 개의 信條가 잇으니 「하고싶은 일을 하라!」는 것이다. 이것이 이 作品의 全的 生命이다. 卽 모든 것을 自然그대로 靈肉一致된 새로운 道德世界에＜231＞ 人間을 解放하자는 것이다. 實로 이 作品은 千餘年의 因習과 學校 또는 敎會의 모든 制度에 對한 가장 辛諫한 諷制요 敎訓이요 反對요 否定이엿다. 이 속에 實로 佛蘭西의 文藝의 根本的 精神을 樹立하는 바 文藝復興의 새로운 精神의 豊富한 發露와  自由로운 運用의 思想이 具現되엿든 것이다.
그 다음 「팡타그류엘」의 文學的 生命을 抄記하자. 이 主人公은 前作의 主人公 「가르강튜아」와 「바두베크」사이에 태여 난 아들이다. 어머니는 이 偉大한 主人公을 낳은 産耨에서 永遠히 이 世上을 떠나고 마럿다. 「가르강튜아」는 이 두 가지 喜悲의 事實 앞에 울어야 할지 웃어야 할지 몰낫다. 이 『팡타그류엘』 亦是 놀낼만 한 巨人이다. 그가 修學하려고 全國의 各 大學을 巡歷하는 途中 「오를래안」에서 240年간 埋沒되엿든 巨鍾, 아무도 파낼 수 없는 이 巨鍾을 그는 손쉽게 색기손가락으로 끄어내 가지고는 손바닥에 올려노코 두드리며 市街를 도라단엿다.
「가르강튜아」는 巴里의 아들에게 人生의 虛無에 對하야 또는 師友에 對한 切實한 敎訓의 편지를 보내엿다. 여기에 또 새로운 主人公 「파뉴르쥬」가 登場한다.
「파뉴르쥬」는 亦是 「팡타그류엘」의 어머니(그는 女王이다)의 敵國을 征服한 偉勳의 英雄이다. 그러나 그는 自己가 結婚해야 하느냐? 또는 結婚하지 말어야 할까하는 實로 人生의 重大한 問題를 爲하야 煩悶한다. 그래서 그는 이 問題의 解決을 爲하야 「팡타그류엘」을 爲始하야  巫女, 賢人, 法師, 詩人, 醫師, 哲學者, 神學者에게 물엇스나 그러나 아모런 解答도 얻지 못한 그는 드디여 印度北方에 잇다는 酒甁神에게 最後의 神託을 무르러 떠난다. 이 一行에는 「팡타그류엘」이 引率者가 되여 그들은 燈臺와 大理石의 高塔의 아름다운 섬과 老人만 사는 섬 바람만 먹고 사는 섬들을 지나 藝術의 섬나라를 차저간다 (以上3,4卷)
다음으로 最后의 第5卷(이는 死后에 出版)은 亦是 航海의 繼續으로 五色鳥가 交飛하는 「소낭트島, 모든 日用道具가 出生하는 怪樹의 無人島들을 지나 드디여 酒甁神의 나라로 案內되여간다. 이 나라에는 無時로 成熟하는 巨大한 葡萄園이 잇다. 이곳을 지나 半人半羊의 女神의 亂舞하는 데를 지나 地下로 드러간다. 門은 大理石階를 나려가면 翠玉門은 金剛石담은 銀箱속에 두갈내의 深紅色 비단줄을 느리고 굳게 다처 잇다. 이 줄을 金고리에 매여 단기면 靑洞門이 열니며 酒甁神의 殿堂으로 드러간다.
「파뉴르쥬」는 侍女, 바크뷰크」에 案內되여 神話을 듯는다. 그는 여러 가지 일을 次例로 當한다. 泉石에 接吻도 하고 춤도 추고 노래도 불넛다. 그리자 侍女가 泉水에 던지는 그 瞬間 聖스러운 酒甁에서는 여름 소낙비와 가티 무서운 소리가 나면서 「트링크!」라고 부르짓는 소리가 난다. 이 말은 侍女의 通譯에 依하면 「마셔라!」하는 말이다. 極度로 歡悅을 느낀 「파뉴르쥬」는 「브라보!」를 외치며 거기서 새로운 自然의 偉大한 生命水를 마시고 勝利의 凱歌를 부르면서 도라온다.＜232＞
이 作品은 實로 「自然의 神性」 「自然의 善性」의 가장 具體的 表現이다. 여기에는 「호메-르」의 「일리앗드」나 「오뎃시」또는 「단톄」의 神曲, 세르반테스의 「동키호테」와 함께 또는 괴-테의 「파우스트」와 가티 偉大한 文學發祥의 새로운 精華의 莊嚴한 人生世界를 啓示한 것이다.
作者 「라블레」는 第4卷에서 이러케 말한다-. 「피지스(Physis) 卽 自然은 몬저 美와 調和를 낫는다. ...앙티피지스(Antiphysis)는 恒常 自然의 敵이 되여 自然의 이러한 가장 嘉尙하고 尊貴한 出産을 怨망하야 反對로 無際限과 不知를 낫는다... . 그리하야 爾來 狂爺 乞僧 僞善家...기타 自然에 違反되는 異形의 怪物을 나헛다.」 이 말 가운대는 實로 中世的 모든 制度의 殘存한 廢物에 대한 痛快한 攻擊이다. 그는 모든 人間의 自由를 阻害하는 一切에 對하야 自然의 일홈으로써 이 모도을 改革 又는 廢止하기를 要求한 것이다.
이 作品에 숨고 넘치는 바 諧謔과 諷制속에는 또한 숨길수 없는 佛蘭西民族을 構成한 바 고올族의 奔放하는 羈氣에 넘치는 血脉과 氣質이 充分히 涵蓄되여 잇다. 이러한 일의 痛快的 樂天性이 드디여 「自然은 善이다」라는 信念으로써 「人間 最大의 敵은 習慣 規則, 權威 束縛이라는 일홈으로 불너지는 것이다」 라는 이 汚辱된 橫暴한 人爲的 罪果에 對하야 그는 드듸여 「모든 方法, 嘲笑, 過激 罵詈으로 對抗하더래도 이 唯一의 敵은 攻擊하야 破毁식히지 안으면 안된다」라고 力說하엿다.
그에게 잇어서는 가장 强烈한 生의 慾求의 가장 具體的 表現가운대 自身의 生命과 藝術의 모든 存在를 發見하려 하엿든 것이다. 그래서 恒常 偉大한 美食을 行하면서 平和스럽게 歡喜와 健康속에서 살라!」라는 팡타그류엘니슴을 提唱하엿스며 「敎育의 最大事는 本能의 解放이다」라는 信條를 모든 人類의 病廢된 心胸 에 한 個의 烽火와 가티 던저 주엇든 것이다.
佛蘭西에 眞正한 國民文學- 한 國民으로서 그 國民의 最大요 最善이요 唯一의 表現을 가진 文學-을 刱設한 文豪가운대 特히 16世紀의 「라블레」을 드는데는 以上에 簡述한 以外의 여러 가지 理由가 잇다. 그러나 여기 이 巨大한 論題를 仔詳히 云爲할 充實한 意圖와 機會의 準備가 未洽하야써 여기 그 末尾의 露出을 보게 되엿거니와 이 16世紀 佛文學의 古典文藝- 文藝復興의 先驅者로는 「라블레」以外에 宗敎的 精神의 復活을 持來한 「칼뱅」과 文藝의 瞑想的 思索의 知性-聰慧를 發見한 「몬테-뉴」에 言及하지 안으면 안되겟스나 이 모든 것은 다른 機會로 미루지 안을 수 없는 자신의 事情을 가지고 잇다.
끄트로 이 「라블레」의 諧謔的 眞實性, 諷剌性, 現實性은 드디여 17世紀의 「몰리에-르」의 喜曲과 18世紀의 「볼테-오」 「루소오」의 啓蒙的 文明批評의 커다란 백,그라운드를 맹그러 노앗스며 佛蘭西文藝의 唯一의 生命인 現實性 眞實性, 道德性의 源泉이엿다는 것을 附記한다.＜233＞
＜217-233＞