Magazine Title	삼천리 제6권 제11호
Publication Date	1934년 11월 01일
Article Title	春園文壇生活 20年을 機會로 한 『文壇回顧』 座談會 (A "Literary Retrospective" Roundtable Commemorating 20 Years of Ch'unwŏn's Literary Life)
Article Type	대담·좌담 (Interview/Roundtable Discussion)

**A "Literary Retrospective" Roundtable Commemorating 20 Years of Ch'unwŏn's Literary Life**
Time: October 2nd, 5 PM to 10 PM
Place: At Wash Sword Pavilion (洗劒亭), outside the city
Attendees: Yi Kwangsu
Yang Paekhwa
Pak Wŏlt'an
Kim Tongin
Kim Ansŏ
Kim Tonghwan <234>

Foreword: It has been about 20 years since our senior, Mr. Yi Kwangsu, published "Heartless" (無情). "Heartless" was not only Ch'unwŏn's debut work but truly the first foundation stone for the construction of modern Korean literature. Following "Heartless," Ch'unwŏn subsequently produced "The Pioneer" (開拓者), and also wrote numerous long novels such as "Prince in Hemp Clothes" (麻衣太子), "The Sad History of King Tanjong" (端宗哀史), "The Tale of Hŏ Saeng" (許生傳), "The Leader" (先導者), "Yi Sunsin" (李舜臣), "The Tale of Ch'unhyang" (春香傳), "Rebirth" (再生), and "Earth" (흙), as well as over 10 short stories including "Kasil" (嘉實), "Blood Letter" (血書), and "A Certain Morning" (엇던아츰). He also pioneered much ground in pure literature, including Sijo and new-style poetry. Thus, compared to any other writer in the current literary scene, the scope of his pioneering work is vast, and in terms of quantity, he is decidedly prolific. The achievements he has contributed during this time can only be looked up to. Had he not captured the beauty of the Korean language and the true reproduction of Korean sentiment, would such balance have been achieved? Our hearts, as his juniors, are filled solely with gratitude. Of course, we also know that the transgressions he committed on the other side cannot be forgotten.
In any case, while his literary position will surely be clarified by the hands of future literary critics, we first decided to hold a one-day gathering of various writers from the literary world, centered around Ch'unwŏn, to take the opportunity for reminiscence over the past 20 years. We hope this becomes an occasion for a grand 20th-anniversary celebration for our senior Ch'unwŏn, involving the entire literary world and society.

Kim Tonghwan: Tonight, we came primarily to hear the words of Ch'unwŏn. Ansŏ has only been active in the poetry scene for 15 years, Yang Paekhwa and Kim Tongin are also just over 10 years, and moreover, figures like Wŏlt'an belong to a much younger generation. In a literary scene as young as Korea's, steadfastly pursuing the path of pure literature for 20 years is truly astonishing. Please tell us about the very beginning, when you first started appearing in the literary world, perhaps what could be called the writer's preparatory period. Please tell us about those distant, bygone days of over 20 years ago.

Yi Kwangsu: Thank you. I am grateful that several respected colleagues haveわざわざ (wazawaza -わざわざ; Japanese for 'gone out of their way') come all this way to this remote place for someone as insignificant as myself. Actually, I too was quite surprised recently to realize that it has already been 20 years since I wrote "Heartless." The flow of time is truly swift.
I will say a few things as you ask. When I was fifteen, I was in Tokyo then. In a boarding house called Okchinkwan (玉眞館) in Honkyō-ku Won-ch'on (本鄕區元町). <235> One day, I went to a nearby public bath, and a young man with a faint white mark on his forehead from a headband (망건자국) was washing himself next to me. No matter how I looked, he seemed Korean, so I asked his name.
"I am Hong Myŏnghŭi."
He replied. This was the first occasion I met Pyŏkch'o Hong Myŏnghŭi. Pyŏkch'o was nineteen then, four years older than me. He had been studying in Hanyang, but finding it unsatisfactory, he shaved his head and dashed off to Tokyo.

Yang Paekhwa: Was Pyŏkch'o also from the same era? These are quite old stories.

Yi Kwangsu: Yes, they are. They seem like very old stories. Anyway, through my connection with Pyŏkch'o, I first learned about Byron. I read poetry collections like "Cain" (카인), "Mazeppa" (마젯빠), "The Corsair" (海賊), and "Parisina" (빠리시나), translated by Kimura Kōtarō (木村興太郞), either given to me by Pyŏkch'o or bought from bookstores following his directions, reading them avidly. Being 15 or 16, with youthful passion, and furthermore engrossed in the fiery and heroic poems of Byron, my heart truly boiled over at that time. While doing this for a while, my personality began to change. Perhaps it could be described as becoming "wayward" (放奔) and "rough" (粗暴). From then on, I started drinking alcohol and smoking tobacco, abandoned my disciplined morning and evening studies, and thinking, "So this is how the world is," I took, to put it negatively, the first step into "degeneration" (墮落). This was all Byron's influence. Since it was during my youth when I hadn't yet established principles in mind or conduct, if I had run wild idolizing Byron, <236> what else could I do but go mad? Drinking, smoking, crying, wailing—studies became secondary, so while my grades were good in the 1st and 2nd years, I graduated ninth from Meiji Gakuin (明治學院).

Kim Tongin: We thought Tolstoy's influence was significant, but hearing it was Byron is unexpected.

Yi Kwangsu: Tolstoy came after that. Just as I was immersed in Byron day and night, walking down the street thinking of Byron, lying down thinking of Byron, memorizing verses from his poems, and running wild for a while, one day, a classmate named Yamasaki Toshio (山崎トシオ) brought me a piece titled "My Religion" (我ガ宗敎) by Tolstoy, translated by Katō Naoshi (加藤直士), telling me it was very much worth reading and urging me to read it. Yamasaki Toshio later pursued pure literature, publishing many poems and novels in Teikoku Bungaku (帝國文學), published by Tokyo Imperial University (東京帝國大學), and also in Mita Bungaku (三田文學), gaining considerable literary fame. So, I first got a taste of Tolstoy. Reading Tolstoy, I saw in him a depth and a humanistic, grand light that could not be found in Byron at all. Even in the smallest essays or short fables, his spirit as a seeker of truth flowed, captivating my mind indescribably.
Well, from then on, I told Byron to go his own way and read only Tolstoy day and night. I read all his essays like "My Confession" (我ガ懺悔), "My Religion" (我ガ宗敎), "My Art" (我ガ藝術), as well as works like "Resurrection" (復活), "War and Peace" (戰爭과 平和), "Anna Karenina" (안나카레니아), "The Power of Darkness" (어둠의 힘), and his fables, letters, and diaries. And so, I became completely immersed in Tolstoyism. <237>

Pak Wŏlt'an: Your devotion to Tolstoy probably continued steadily after that?

Yi Kwangsu: There was another stage. What was it? One summer day, I went for a walk to the night stalls (夜店 - yomise) in Kanda (神田), and in front of a bookstore, there was a novel with "Pillar of Fire" (火の柱 - Hi no Hashira) written largely in red letters. I bought it and read it, and it was so filled with active, critical, civilization-critiquing thoughts about the social system. Looking at the author, it said Kinoshita Naoe (木下尙江).
My passion for this author ignited again with "Pillar of Fire," and I immediately started seeking out and reading every book written by Kinoshita Naoe, such as "My Husband's Confession" (良人の自白 - Ryōjin no Jihaku). It seems that the social-reformist opinions in these works, which I hadn't seen in Tolstoy or Byron, captured my heart. They were truly wonderful.

Yang Paekhwa: Kinoshita Naoe (木下尙江)! Right, this person also considerably stirred the blood of Tokyo youth for a while. As a close friend of Sakai Toshihiko (堺利彦) and an early socialist, there were indeed many people influenced by him. Now I see, Ch'unwŏn was also influenced by Kinoshita Naoe. I too was deeply captivated by his works for some time. <238>

**The Preparatory Period Before "Heartless" (無情)**

Kim Tonghwan: From the words above, we generally understand the history of your writer's preparatory period. Now, please tell us about the time right before writing "Heartless," when you were publishing your writings to the world. How did your connections <238> with "Youth" (靑春), "Children's View?" (아이들보이), and "Boy" (少年) come about?

Yi Kwangsu: Speaking of "Youth" brings Yuktang (六堂 - Ch'oe Namsŏn) to mind. I first met Yuktang back then at the dormitory for the supervisor of Korean students abroad, next to the Korean legation in Kōjimachi-ku (麴町區), Tokyo. Since we shared a love for literature, we resonated, and later, when he launched magazines like "Youth" or "Boy," I naturally contributed manuscripts. Even before "Youth" or "Boy," the first time I tried writing was when the students at Meiji Gakuin gathered and started a circulating magazine where we wrote and hand-copied manuscripts to share. I wrote a short story titled "Young Sacrifice" (어린 犧牲) for it. That magazine later expanded its scale and was even mimeographed. I was in charge of editing at that time.
The first time my work was actually printed was later, in a monthly report called the "Journal of the Society for the Promotion of Korean Learning" (大韓興學報), published by Tokyo students. Mr. Chang Ŭngjin, who was attending Tokyo Higher Normal School at the time, was in charge of editing it. So, wanting to publish in the "Journal of the Society for the Promotion of Korean Learning," I wrote a short story titled "Gone..." (가버번-).
Yang Paekhwa: Yes, I think I remember seeing it once. It was a story titled something like "Gone..." about seeing someone off – something about the scenery of Pakch'ŏn Songnim Pine Forest (博川松林)?

Yi Kwangsu: You remember it well. Yes. The content was like that. It's been so long, I've even forgotten the title now. I wrote that story and visited Mr. Chang Ŭngjin's house several times, but I couldn't muster the courage to say, "Here's a story I wrote," and just brought it back <239> home, then went back again. After doing this several times, I finally went to his house as if just visiting, pretended to forget it, and stealthily left the manuscript on his desk. Later, I saw it printed in the magazine. I was extremely pleased.

Kim Ansŏ: That was the era of Yi Pogyeong (李寶鏡), wasn't it.

Yi Kwangsu: Right, I was called Pogyeong.

Kim Tongin: Pogyeong?

Yi Kwangsu: My childhood name is Pogyeong. When my parents had me, they dreamt they received a mirror (鏡). So they gave me the name Pogyeong (寶鏡 - Precious Mirror).
Not long after the "Journal of the Society for the Promotion of Korean Learning," this time, with the intention of reforming the family system, I submitted an article titled "Theory of Emotional Education" (情育論) to the Hwangsong Sinmun (皇城新聞). A few days later, it appeared right in the editorial column! At that time, people like Mr. Chang Chiyŏn were writing the editorials for the Hwangsong Sinmun.
However, just publishing these two pieces couldn't satisfy my desire for expression. As I mentioned briefly earlier, literary youths attending Aoyama Gakuin (靑山學院) – people like Kim Ch'anyŏng (金讚泳), Ok Chonggyŏng (玉宗鏡) (he went to America), Pyŏn Ponghŏn (卞鳳憲), Kim Il (金一), and several others – formed a mimeographed circulating magazine. About 20 members gathered once a week to discuss novels and poetry. Furthermore, to get others interested in literature, at this weekly meeting, I even performed plays by myself and told stories as interestingly as possible.
Besides literature, this youth association also encouraged sports, and I even tried pitching and catching in baseball.

**Motivation and Process of Writing "Heartless" (無情)**

Kim Tonghwan: What motivated you to write "Heartless"?

Yi Kwangsu: As you know, I grew up without receiving familial love from close relatives. I lost both my father and mother suddenly when I was young. I always thought I wanted to write about the sad circumstances of my deceased parents. So, I occasionally wrote fragments in the form of poems and short stories. Around that time, <240> while at Waseda University (早稻田大學) in Tokyo, the 20 yen monthly stipend sent from my middle school wasn't enough; after paying for food and buying books, there was absolutely no surplus, so I could never afford even one set of clothes. At that time, Mr. Sim Ch'ŏnp'ung (沈天風) said he would introduce me to Mr. Abe Mitsuie (阿部充家), the president of the Maeil Sinbo (每日申報), and suggested I write for the Maeil Sinbo, which would generate some money, even if small, to supplement my school expenses. So, being in dire straits and thinking about the money, I agreed. At first, under the title "Tokyo Miscellany" (東京 雜信), I wrote stories about the Sumida River (隅田川) and about visiting Fukuzawa Yukichi's (福澤諭吉) grave, sending the manuscripts. They sent me 5 yen each month. I was very grateful for this money at the time. Then, a letter came asking me to write a "novel." They said they planned to publish it starting from the New Year issue and requested that I notify them of just the title immediately, even sending a telegram. Moved that they were urging me, an insignificant writer, even by telegram, I chose the title "Heartless" (無情), an expression of the cold sentiment always flowing at the bottom of my heart, finally decided to write the novel, telegraphed back that the title would be "Heartless," and then, in the excitement, immediately took up my brush and wrote 72 manuscript pages in one sitting. The joy at that time was incomparable.
While writing "Heartless," the newspaper company consistently sent me 10 yen.

Yang Paekhwa: Was the "Record of Traversing Five Provinces" (五道踏破記) also around that time?

Yi Kwangsu: It was right after that. Also struggling with tuition, Sim Ch'ŏnp'ung suggested to Nakamura Gontarō (中村權太郞), a consultant for the Maeil Sinbo, "'There's a young man named Yi Kwangsu with writing talent, so let's have him write something. And when having him write, if we make him actually go sightseeing <241> here and there and then write, it will greatly capture the readers' interest.'" It was quickly decided to have me travel locally and publish travelogues, and a letter conveying this intention came to me. It was just during school vacation, my friends had all gone to their hometowns, and I was staying in Ugome-ku (牛込區), eating meals prepared by Mr. Im Kyu's (林圭) wife. Thinking it was a good idea, I immediately jumped at the opportunity, and it was decided that I would travel through the five provinces of "Ch'ungch'ŏng North and South (忠淸南北), Chŏlla North and South (全羅南北), and Kyŏngsang South (慶尙南道)." I was extremely happy then too.

Yang Paekhwa: When did you write "Paris" (파리)?

Yi Kwangsu: A little after that.

Pak Wŏlt'an: "Paris"?

Yang Paekhwa: Ch'unwŏn wrote about 200 pages at once, intending to publish it as a standalone book (書卸し - kaki-oroshi; Japanese for 'written specially for book publication'), and gave it to Sŏnwŏnkwan (新文館), run by Yuktang. But it went into censorship, and the Police Affairs Headquarters (警務總監部) ended up censoring every single page (XX). However, it was apparently a great piece of writing. Rumor has it that even while censoring it (XX), the Police Affairs Headquarters praised it as truly well-written.

Yi Kwangsu: Yuktang still often urges me to write something like "Paris" again.

Kim Tonghwan: You are active in various fields like poetry, novels, plays, and literary criticism. Which among these do you consider your main field?

Yi Kwangsu: It's still novels. Although I strongly dislike the term "novelist" (小說家), I am ultimately a novelist. Just the other day, after not holding a brush for several months, I picked it up after a long time, and sure enough, a novel came out. So I thought, "I guess I really am a novelist," and gave a wry smile to myself.

Kim Tongin: Among your various novels, which is your most satisfying work?

Yi Kwangsu: Since "Heartless" was the first one I wrote, whether good or bad, I always feel attached to it. And then there's "The Sad History of King Tanjong" (端宗哀史). For short stories, it's "Kasil" (嘉實).

Kim Tongin: If I were writing it, I wouldn't portray King Tanjong like that. I would bring the Six Martyred Ministers (死六臣) to life more.

Pak Wŏlt'an: That's a difference in perspective. Whether to write history faithfully as it was, or to entrust it to the artist's imagination and freely create the characters and events.

Kim Ansŏ: What path do you intend to take in the future? <242>

Yi Kwangsu: I intend to try putting effort into playwriting (劇作). I feel that drama (戱曲), more than novels or poetry, is a more advanced art form. So, recently I've been reading almost everything from ancient Homer onwards, up to Shakespeare. I believe the day will come when a play movement and enthusiasm for playwriting will flourish in the Korean literary world. Although my strength is meager, I want to try contributing my efforts in that direction.

Kim Tonghwan: There are many other things I'd like to ask, but the story of the Korean literary world after that would likely become common knowledge, easily guessed by anyone, and the history of the literary scene after "Heartless" is knowledge that is widely known, so we won't make it a topic here anymore.
Also, since the main purpose of tonight's gathering was to enjoy an evening of pleasant conversation with our senior, Ch'unwŏn, let's conclude the talk here. Now that many poets have gathered, let's share cups of wine and recite poetry. (Continued with banquet and poetry session) <243>

**At the Wash Sword Pavilion Poetry Seat**

Yi Kwangsu
煩惱無盡誓願斷 (Pŏnnoe mujin sŏwŏn tan - Though afflictions are endless, I vow to sever them)
衆生無邊誓願度 (Chungsaeng mubyŏn sŏwŏn to - Though sentient beings are limitless, I vow to save them)

Yang Paekhwa
廬山烟雨浙江潮 (Nosan yŏnu Chŏlgang cho - Mount Lu's misty rain, the Zhejiang tide)
未到千般恨未消 (Mido ch'ŏnban han miso - Before arriving, a thousand regrets remain unresolved)
到得還來無別事 (Todŭk hwan nae mu pyŏlsa - Having arrived and returned, there's nothing special)
廬山烟雨浙江潮 (Nosan yŏnu Chŏlgang cho - Mount Lu's misty rain, the Zhejiang tide) (蘇軾 - Su Shi poem)

Kim Ansŏ
잔노코 하는말이 (Channok'o hanŭnmari)
모다 녯날情 (Moda yennal chŏng)

라듸오 자즌가락 (Radio chajŭn'garak)
더욱 조와라 (Tŏuk chowara)
(The words spoken holding a cup / Are all old affections // The radio's frequent tunes / Are even better)

Kim Tongin
小說을 쓰기에는 조히가 적고 (Sosŏrŭl ssŭgienŭn chohiga chŏkko)
小說 以外에는 딴 재조업노라 (Sosŏl ioee nŭn ttan chaejo ŏmnora)
(For writing novels, paper is scarce / Besides novels, I have no other talent)

Pak Wŏlt'an
酒國依然 (Chuguk ŭiyŏn - The land of drink remains the same)
論己酣 (Non ki ham - The discussion has become lively)
明日有意抱琴來 (Myŏngil yuŭi p'ogŭm nae - Tomorrow, if inclined, I will come embracing the zither)

Kim Tonghwan
洗劒亭上磨一劒 (Segeomjeong sang ma il kŏm - Upon Wash Sword Pavilion, I sharpen a sword)
此劒何時光茫發 (Ch'a kŏm hasi kwangmang pal - When will this sword's brilliance shine?) <243>

**Summary**

This 1934 roundtable discussion commemorates the 20th anniversary of Yi Kwangsu's (pen name Ch'unwŏn) literary debut with his novel "Heartless." Yi recounts his early literary influences, beginning with Byron during his teenage years in Tokyo, which led to a rebellious phase, followed by a deep immersion in Tolstoy's humanism and moral philosophy. He later discovered the socialist writer Kinoshita Naoe, whose critiques of social systems resonated with him. Yi details his first publications in student magazines and the "Journal of the Society for the Promotion of Korean Learning," his contributions to Ch'oe Namsŏn's (Yuktang) magazines, and the circumstances leading to the serialization of "Heartless" in the Maeil Sinbo newspaper, motivated partly by financial need. He reflects on his prolific output, considers "Heartless" and "The Sad History of King Tanjong" his most significant novels, and expresses his future intention to focus on playwriting. The discussion concludes with impromptu poetry recitations by the attendees. From a historical perspective, the article offers valuable insight into the formative influences on a pivotal figure in modern Korean literature, highlighting the complex interplay of Western (Byron, Tolstoy) and Japanese (Kinoshita Naoe, literary milieu) influences alongside burgeoning Korean nationalism during the colonial period. Yi's candid recollection of financial struggles and reliance on Japanese-run publications like the Maeil Sinbo, alongside mentions of censorship (the fate of "Paris"), provides a nuanced glimpse into the realities faced by Korean intellectuals and writers under Japanese rule.

**Named Entities**

李光洙	이광수	Yi Kwangsu
梁白華	양백화	Yang Paekhwa
朴月灘	박월탄	Pak Wŏlt'an
金東仁	김동인	Kim Tongin
金岸曙	김안서	Kim Ansŏ
金東煥	김동환	Kim Tonghwan
洗劒亭	세검정	Segeomjeong (Wash Sword Pavilion)
無情	무정	Mujŏng (Heartless)
開拓者	개척자	Kaech'ŏkcha (The Pioneer)
麻衣太子	마의태자	Mauitaeja (Prince in Hemp Clothes)
端宗哀史	단종애사	Tanjong Aesa (The Sad History of King Tanjong)
許生傳	허생전	Hŏsaengjŏn (The Tale of Hŏ Saeng)
先導者	선도자	Sŏndoja (The Leader)
李舜臣	이순신	Yi Sunsin
春香傳	춘향전	Ch'unhyangjŏn (The Tale of Ch'unhyang)
再生	재생	Chaesaeng (Rebirth)
흙	흙	Hŭk (Earth)
嘉實	가실	Kasil
血書	혈서	Hyŏlsŏ (Blood Letter)
엇던아츰	어떤 아침	Ŏttŏn Ach'im (A Certain Morning)
東京	도쿄	Tokyo
本鄕區元町	혼고쿠 모토마치	Honkyō-ku Won-ch'on (Hongo-ku Motomachi)
玉眞館	옥진관	Okchinkwan
洪命憙	홍명희	Hong Myŏnghŭi
碧初	벽초	Pyŏkch'o (Hong Myŏnghŭi's pen name)
漢陽	한양	Hanyang
빠이론	바이런	Byron
木村興太郞	기무라 고타로	Kimura Kōtarō
카인	카인	Cain
마젯빠	마제파	Mazeppa
海賊	해적	The Corsair (Kaizoku)
빠리시나	파리시나	Parisina
明治學院	메이지가쿠인	Meiji Gakuin
톨스토이	톨스토이	Tolstoy
山崎トシオ	야마사키 도시오	Yamasaki Toshio
加藤直士	가토 나오시	Katō Naoshi
我ガ宗敎	아가종교	Waga Shūkyō (My Religion)
東京帝國大學	도쿄제국대학	Tokyo Imperial University (Tokyo Teikoku Daigaku)
帝國文學	제국문학	Teikoku Bungaku (Imperial Literature)
三田文學	미타문학	Mita Bungaku
我ガ懺悔	아가참회	Waga Zange (My Confession)
我ガ藝術	아가예술	Waga Geijutsu (My Art)
復活	부활	Puhwal (Resurrection)
戰爭과 平和	전쟁과 평화	Chŏnjaenggwa P'yŏnghwa (War and Peace)
안나카레니아	안나 카레니나	Anna Karenina
어둠의 힘	어둠의 힘	Ŏdumŭi Him (The Power of Darkness)
神田	간다	Kanda
火の柱	히노하시라	Hi no Hashira (Pillar of Fire)
木下尙江	기노시타 나오에	Kinoshita Naoe
良人의 自白	양인의 자백	Ryōjin no Jihaku (My Husband's Confession)
堺利彦	사카이 도시히코	Sakai Toshihiko
靑春	청춘	Ch'ŏngch'un (Youth magazine)
아이들보이	아이들 보이	Aidŭlboi (Children's View? magazine)
少年	소년	Sonyŏn (Boy magazine)
六堂	육당	Yuktang (Ch'oe Namsŏn's pen name)
麴町區	고지마치쿠	Kōjimachi-ku
韓國公使館	한국공사관	Han'guk Kongsagwan (Korean Legation)
어린 犧牲	어린 희생	Ŏrin Hŭisaeng (Young Sacrifice)
大韓興學報	대한흥학보	Taehan Hŭnghakpo (Journal of the Society for the Promotion of Korean Learning)
張膺震	장응진	Chang Ŭngjin
東京高等師範	도쿄고등사범	Tokyo Higher Normal School (Tokyo Kōtō Shihan)
가버번-	가버린	Kabŏbŏn- (Gone...)
博川松林	박천송림	Pakch'ŏn Songnim
李寶鏡	이보경	Yi Pogyeong (Yi Kwangsu's childhood name)
情育論	정육론	Chŏngyungnon (Theory of Emotional Education)
皇城新聞	황성신문	Hwangsong Sinmun
張志淵	장지연	Chang Chiyŏn
靑山學院	아오야마가쿠인	Aoyama Gakuin
金讚泳	김찬영	Kim Ch'anyŏng
玉宗鏡	옥종경	Ok Chonggyŏng
米國	미국	Miguk (USA)
卞鳳憲	변봉헌	Pyŏn Ponghŏn
金一	김일	Kim Il
早稻田大學	와세다대학	Waseda University
沈天風	심천풍	Sim Ch'ŏnp'ung
每日申報	매일신보	Maeil Sinbo
阿部充家	아베 미쓰이에	Abe Mitsuie
隅田川	스미다강	Sumida River (Sumidagawa)
福澤諭吉	후쿠자와 유키치	Fukuzawa Yukichi
五道踏破記	오도답파기	Odo T'ap'agi (Record of Traversing Five Provinces)
中村權太郞	나카무라 곤타로	Nakamura Gontarō
忠淸南北	충청남북도	Ch'ungch'ŏng North and South Provinces
全羅南北	전라남북도	Chŏlla North and South Provinces
慶尙南道	경상남도	Kyŏngsang South Province
牛込區	우시고메쿠	Ugome-ku (Ushigome-ku)
林圭	임규	Im Kyu
파리	파리	P'ari (Paris)
新文館	신문관	Sŏnwŏnkwan (Shinbunkan, publishing house)
警務總監部	경무총감부	Kyŏngmu Ch'onggambu (Police Affairs Headquarters)
死六臣	사육신	Sayuksin (Six Martyred Ministers)
廬山	노산	Nosan (Mount Lu)
浙江	절강	Chŏlgang (Zhejiang)

**Glossary**

文壇	문단	Literary world, literary scene
座談會	좌담회	Roundtable discussion
先輩	선배	Senior (in school, work, etc.)
發表	발표	Publication, announcement
出世作	출세작	Debut work, work that brought fame
實로	실로	Truly, indeed (older form of 실로)
建設	건설	Construction, establishment
주춧돌	주춧돌	Foundation stone, cornerstone
契機	계기	Opportunity, occasion, turning point
썻스며	썼으며	Wrote and... (older spelling of 썼으며)
境地	경지	Boundary, realm, state
開拓	개척	Pioneering, cultivating
範圍	범위	Scope, range
斷然	단연	Decidedly, definitely
功績	공적	Achievement, contribution
우러러봄	우러러봄	Looking up to, reverence
情緖	정서	Sentiment, emotion
均齊	균제	Balance, symmetry
後輩	후배	Junior (in school, work, etc.)
感謝	감사	Gratitude, thanks
一念	일념	Single-minded devotion, sole thought
罪過	죄과	Transgression, sin, fault
半面	반면	Other side, flip side
업슴도	없음도	Absence also (older spelling of 없음도)
批評家	비평가	Critic
地位	지위	Position, status
分明	분명	Clearly, distinctly
會合	회합	Meeting, gathering
回想	회상	Reminiscence, recollection
機緣	기연	Opportunity, chance connection
爲하야	위하여	For the sake of (older spelling/form of 위하여)
盛大	성대	Grand, magnificent
全文壇的	전문단적	Entire literary world
全社會的	전사회적	Entire society
잇서지기를	있어지기를	To come into being, to be held (older spelling of 있어지기를)
바라는 바이다	바라는 바이다	It is hoped that...
주장	주장	Main point, protagonist, assertion (here likely refers to the main speaker, Yi Kwangsu)
말슴	말씀	Words, speech (honorific, older spelling of 말씀)
드르려	들으려	To listen to, intend to listen (older spelling of 들으려)
터임니다	터입니다	It is the occasion/reason (older form of 터입니다)
밧게	밖에	Only, outside of (older spelling of 밖에)
아니되엿고	아니되었고	Has not become, is not yet (older spelling of 아니되었고)
남짓	남짓	A little over, slightly more than
더구나	더구나	Moreover, furthermore
屬함니다	속합니다	Belongs to (older form of 속합니다)
精進	정진	Devotion, diligence, perseverance
하섯다는	하셨다는	That (you) did (honorific, older spelling of 하셨다는)
驚異	경이	Astonishment, wonder
이외다	외다	Is/am (deferential ending, archaic)
녯날	옛날	Old days, bygone days (older spelling of 옛날)
들여주서요	들려주세요	Please tell (older spelling/form of 들려주세요)
變變치 못한	변변치 못한	Insignificant, humble
爲하여	위하여	For the sake of
尊敬	존경	Respect
하든	하던	Used to do, who did (older spelling of 하던)
동무	동무	Comrade, friend (used more broadly then than its N. Korean connotation now)
일부러	일부러	Intentionally, on purpose
차저	찾아	Finding, visiting (older spelling of 찾아)
나오서	나오셔서	Coming out (honorific, older spelling of 나오셔서)
주시니	주시니	Because (you) give/do (honorific)
日前	일전	The other day, recently
안엇슴니다	않았습니다	Did not (older spelling/form of 않았습니다)
歲月	세월	Time, years
무르시는 대로	물으시는 대로	As you ask
몃가지	몇 가지	A few things (older spelling of 몇 가지)
열다섯살	열다섯 살	Fifteen years old
나든 해	나던 해	The year when (I) turned (age)
잇섯지요	있었지요	Was there (older spelling of 있었지요)
沐浴場	목욕장	Public bathhouse
갓는데	갔는데	Went, but/and
이마	이마	Forehead
망건자국	망건 자국	Mark left by a traditional Korean headband (Manggeon)
허-여케	허옇게	Whitish (older spelling of 허옇게)
난	난	Appeared, which has
靑年	청년	Youth, young man
내겻헤서	내 곁에서	Beside me (older spelling of 내 곁에서)
잇겟지요	있겠지요	Was there, probably was there (older spelling of 있겠지요)
보여도	보아도	Even looking at (older spelling of 보아도)
갓기에	같기에	Because (he) seemed like (older spelling of 같기에)
姓名三字	성명 삼자	Full name (literally, three characters of the name)
무럿더니	물었더니	When I asked (older spelling of 물었더니)
하겟지요	하겠지요	Said, probably said (older spelling of 하겠지요)
動機	동기	Motive, occasion
외다	외다	Is/am (deferential ending, archaic)
年長	연장	Older (in age)
이든데	이던데	Was (retrospective)
工夫	공부	Study
시언치 안키에	시원치 않기에	Because it wasn't satisfactory (older form of 시원찮기에)
削髮	삭발	Shaving one's head (often implying becoming a monk or making a drastic change)
뛰어 온 터입데다	뛰어온 터입니다	Had dashed off / run away (older form of 뛰어온 터입니다)
그려	그려	Indeed, so (conversational ending)
올래요	옳아요	That's right (older spelling/pronunciation of 옳아요)
퍽	퍽	Very, quite
녯날가튼	옛날 같은	Like old times (older spelling of 옛날 같은)
이약이들이지요	이야기들이지요	They are stories (older spelling of 이야기들이지요)
반연으로	반연으로	Through connection with, due to
알엇지요	알았지요	Knew, learned (older spelling of 알았지요)
飜譯	번역	Translation
等	등	Etc., and so on
或은	혹은	Or, either
冊店	책점	Bookstore (older term, now 서점)
熱中	열중	Enthusiasm, absorption
읽엇지요	읽었지요	Read (older spelling of 읽었지요)
少年情熱	소년 정열	Youthful passion
불과갓치	불과 같이	Like fire (older spelling of 불과 같이)
뜨겁고	뜨겁고	Hot
壯烈	장렬	Heroic, valiant
耽讀	탐독	Reading avidly, engrossment
되엿스니	되었으니	Became, so (older spelling of 되었으니)
당시	당시	At that time
웬통	온통	Entirely, wholly
끌어 올낫지요	끓어올랐지요	Boiled up (older spelling of 끓어올랐지요)
性情	성정	Nature, disposition, temperament
變하여	변하여	Changing
집데다	집데다	Became (colloquial, dialectal/older form suffix)
放奔	방분	Waywardness, running wild (less common term)
粗暴	조폭	Rough, violent
젓다고나	졌다고나	Became (colloquial, older form suffix)
形容	형용	Describe, express
그제부터는	그제부터는	From then on
마시고	마시고	Drink
담배도 먹으며	담배도 먹으며	Smoke tobacco (lit. eat tobacco, older expression)
規律	규율	Discipline, regulation
지어	지어	Making, establishing (here: following)
하든 것도	하던 것도	Things one used to do (older spelling of 하던 것도)
다-뿌리치고	다 뿌리치고	Shaking off everything, casting aside
낫뿌게	나쁘게	Badly, negatively (older spelling of 나쁘게)
墮落	타락	Degeneration, corruption
거름	걸음	Step
내리 드듼	내디딘	Took (a step) (older spelling of 내디딘)
섬이엇지요	셈이었지요	It was the case that (older spelling of 셈이었지요)
影響	영향	Influence
主ㅅ대	줏대	Principles, backbone (older spelling of 줏대)
서지 못 하엿든	서지 못하였던	Had not been established (older spelling of 서지 못하였던)
어럿을	어렸을	When young (older spelling of 어렸을)
崇拜	숭배	Worship, adoration
날뛰엿다면	날뛰었다면	If (I) had run wild (older spelling of 날뛰었다면)
밋치기	미치기	Going mad (older spelling of 미치기)
밧게	밖에	Other than, except for (older spelling of 밖에)
하겟서요	하겠어요	Would one do? (older spelling of 하겠어요)
實想	실상	In reality, actually (here context suggests 'really/truly' like 정말)
울고불고	울고불고	Crying and wailing
이러느라고	이러느라고	Because of doing this
學課	학과	School subjects, studies
뒷전	뒷전	Background, secondary priority
되여서	되어서	Becaming (older spelling of 되어서)
成績	성적	Grades, results
조와섯지만은	좋았지만은	Was good, but (older spelling of 좋았지만은)
아홉제	아홉째	Ninth
나왓서요	나왔어요	Came out, graduated (older spelling of 나왔어요)
意外	의외	Unexpected
그 다음이지요	그다음이지요	It's after that
이럿케	이렇게	Like this (older spelling of 이렇게)
밤낫	밤낮	Day and night (older spelling of 밤낮)
눕엇다가도	누웠다가도	Even when lying down (older spelling of 누웠다가도)
詩篇	시편	Poem, verse
외이고	외우고	Memorizing (older spelling of 외우고)
날 뛸때에	날뛸 때에	When running wild (older spelling of 날뛸 때에)
하로는	하루는	One day (older spelling of 하루는)
同窓	동창	Alumnus, classmate
갓다주면서	갖다 주면서	While bringing (older spelling of 갖다주면서)
甚히	심히	Very, greatly
期於히	기어이	By all means, surely
그래서	그래서	So, therefore
맛을 드렷지요	맛을 들였지요	Got a taste for (older spelling of 들였지요)
본 즉	본즉	Upon seeing/reading
도모지	도무지	At all, utterly (older spelling of 도무지)
깁히	깊이	Depth (older spelling of 깊이)
큼직한	큼직한	Grand, large
빗치	빛이	Light (older spelling of 빛이)
보이겟지요	보이겠지요	Was visible, seemed (older spelling of 보이겠지요)
아모리	아무리	No matter how (older spelling of 아무리)
小論文	소논문	Short essay, treatise
短篇寓話	단편 우화	Short fable
갓튼	같은	Like (older spelling of 같은)
求道者的	구도자적	Like a seeker of truth
精神	정신	Spirit, mind
흘르는	흐르는	Flowing (older spelling of 흐르는)
끄으렷서요	끌렸어요	Was drawn, was attracted (older spelling of 끌렸어요)
네 갈데로 가라고	네 갈 데로 가라고	Telling (it) to go where it wants
폭	폭	Completely, deeply
저저버렷지요	젖어버렸지요	Became completely soaked/immersed (older spelling of 젖어버렸지요)
心醉	심취	Deep admiration, captivation, fascination
繼續	계속	Continuation
하섯슬 걸요	하셨을걸요	Probably did (honorific, older spelling of 하셨을걸요)
階段	계단	Stage, step, phase
무엔고 하니	무엔고 하니	What it was, is that... (older form of 무엇인고 하니)
散步	산보	Walk, stroll
나갓는대	나갔는데	Went out, and/but (older spelling of 나갔는데)
冊店앞에	책점 앞에	In front of the bookstore (older spelling of 책점)
글자	글자	Letter, character
잇겟지요	있겠지요	Was there, probably was there (older spelling of 있겠지요)
엇덧케	어떻게	How (older spelling of 어떻게)
社會制度	사회제도	Social system
積極的	적극적	Active, positive
批判的	비판적	Critical
文明批評的	문명 비평적	Civilization-critiquing
思想	사상	Thought, idea
담어 잇든지요	담겨 있든지요	Was contained (older spelling/form of 담겨 있더군요)
著者	저자	Author
써습데다	써 있었습니다	Was written (older spelling/form of 써 있습디다/써 있었습니다)
對한	대한	Regarding, about
情熱	정열	Passion
끌키	끓기	Boiling, igniting (older spelling of 끓기)
그 길노	그 길로	By that path, immediately (older spelling of 그 길로)
始作	시작	Start, beginning
하엿음니다	하였습니다	Did (formal, older spelling of 하였습니다)
作品	작품	Work (of art, literature)
社會改造的	사회 개조적	Social-reformist
意見	의견	Opinion, view
붓잡은	붙잡은	Captured, seized (older spelling of 붙잡은)
모양이지요	모양이지요	It seems, it appears
조와요	좋아요	Is good (older spelling of 좋아요)
그러치	그렇지	That's right (colloquial, older spelling of 그렇지)
왼간히	웬간히	Considerably, fairly (older spelling of 엔간히/웬만히)
끌케한	끓게 한	Made boil, stirred up (older spelling of 끓게 한)
갓가운	가까운	Close (older spelling of 가까운)
벗	벗	Friend
初期	초기	Early period
社會主義者	사회주의자	Socialist
이니 만치	이니 만치	Being so, to the extent that (older form)
밧는	받는	Receiving (older spelling of 받는)
만엇지요	많았지요	Were many (older spelling of 많았지요)
인제 아니	이제 아니	Now, isn't it (older pronunciation/form)
바드섯군	받으셨군	You received (honorific, older spelling of 받으셨군)
퍽으나	퍽이나	Very much indeed (older spelling of 퍽이나)
心醉하엿섯지요	심취하였었지요	Had been deeply captivated (older spelling of 심취했었지요)
以上	이상	Above, aforementioned
來歷	내력	History, background
大槪	대개	Generally, mostly
알겟음니다	알겠습니다	I understand (older spelling of 알겠습니다)
文章	문장	Writing, composition, sentence
因綠	인연	Connection, tie, fate (older form of 인연)
매저 젓든가요	맺어졌던가요	Was formed? (older spelling of 맺어졌던가요)
이야기나니	이야기 나니	Speaking of which (older spelling of 이야기하니)
엽댕이	옆댕이	Side, vicinity (dialectal/older term for 옆)
奇宿舍	기숙사	Dormitory
맛낫지요	만났지요	Met (older spelling of 만났지요)
가치	같이	Together (older spelling of 같이)
즐기는대서	즐기는 데서	In enjoying
共鳴	공명	Resonance, sympathy
後日	후일	Later days, future
냄에 이르러	냄에 이르러	When it came to publishing
自然히	자연히	Naturally
寄稿	기고	Contributing a manuscript
몬저	먼저	First, before (older spelling of 먼저)
써 본 일	써 본 일	Experience of having written
모여	모여	Gathering
規模	규모	Scale, size
크게하여	크게 하여	Making larger
謄寫版	등사판	Mimeograph
謄寫	등사	Mimeographing
하기까지	하기까지	Even doing
하엿지요	하였지요	Did (older spelling of 하였지요)
編輯	편집	Editing
마터	맡아	Taking charge of (older spelling of 맡아)
하엿서요	하였어요	Did (older spelling of 하였어요)
活字化	활자화	Being put into print
月報	월보	Monthly report/journal
發生	발생	Occurrence, publication (here: launch)
하든	하던	Which was (older spelling of 하던)
잇섯는대	있었는데	There was, but/and (older spelling of 있었는데)
다니든	다니던	Who attended (older spelling of 다니던)
하고 잇섯서요	하고 있었어요	Was doing (older spelling of 하고 있었어요)
십허서	싶어서	Wanting to (older spelling of 싶어서)
한筀‡을	한편을	One piece/story (筀‡ likely error for 篇)
썻지요	썼지요	Wrote (older spelling of 썼지요)
記憶	기억	Memory
나요	나요	Comes (to mind)
시앗보고	시아버지	Father-in-law (Context suggests error; likely means 'seeing someone off' or similar, unrelated to father-in-law)
엇저고 엇저고	어쩌고 어쩌고	Something something, et cetera
內容	내용	Content
그러햇지요	그러했지요	It was like that (older spelling of 그러했지요)
넘우	너무	Too, very (older spelling of 너무)
오래여서	오래여서	Being long ago
인제는	이제는	Now
題目	제목	Title
조차	조차	Even
이젓군요	잊었군요	Have forgotten (older spelling of 잊었군요)
수차	수차	Several times
차저 갓다가	찾아갔다가	Visited and then... (older spelling of 찾아갔다가)
참아	차마	(Not) bring oneself to
내어놀	내어놓을	To take out, present (older spelling of 내어놓을)
勇氣	용기	Courage
업서	없어	Not having (older spelling of 없어)
그양	그냥	Just, as it is (older spelling of 그냥)
도로 가저 오고	도로 가져오고	Bringing back again (older spelling of 가져오고)
마즈막엔	마지막엔	Finally, in the end (older spelling of 마지막엔)
놀너간	놀러 간	Went to visit/play (older spelling of 놀러 간)
이저버린	잊어버린	Forgotten (older spelling of 잊어버린)
체하고	체하고	Pretending
슬며시	슬며시	Stealthily, secretly
原稿	원고	Manuscript
책상우에	책상 위에	On the desk (older spelling of 책상 위에)
놋코	놓고	Placing, leaving (older spelling of 놓고)
왓지요	왔지요	Came (older spelling of 왔지요)
그랫더니	그랬더니	After doing so
실렷겟지요	실렸겠지요	Was published, probably was published (older spelling of 실렸겠지요)
愉快	유쾌	Pleasant, delightful
하엿서요	하였어요	Was (older spelling of 하였어요)
그려	그려	Indeed (conversational ending)
그러치	그렇지	That's right (colloquial, older spelling)
햇지요	했지요	Did (older spelling of 했지요)
兒名	아명	Childhood name
어르신네가	어르신네가	Parents, elders (older term)
나을 때에	낳을 때에	When giving birth
꿈에	꿈에	In a dream
거울	거울	Mirror
어더 보섯대요	얻어 보셨대요	Received and saw (honorific, reported speech, older spelling)
지어 주섯담니다	지어 주셨답니다	Named (honorific, reported speech, older spelling)
얼마 잇지안어	얼마 있지 않아	Not long after (older spelling of 얼마 있지 않아)
改革	개혁	Reform
멧칠	며칠	A few days (older spelling of 며칠)
낫겟지요	났겠지요	Appeared, probably appeared (older spelling of 났겠지요)
社說欄	사설란	Editorial column
아모래도	아무래도	In any case, after all (older spelling of 아무래도)
表現慾	표현욕	Desire for expression
滿足	만족	Satisfaction
식킬	시킬	To make, cause (older spelling of 시킬)
악가	아까	A short while ago (older spelling of 아까)
잠간	잠깐	Briefly, for a moment (older spelling of 잠깐)
더부러	더불어	Together with (older spelling of 더불어)
會員	회원	Member
一週日	일주일	One week
한번식	한 번씩	Once each (older spelling of 한 번씩)
시이약이를	시 이야기를	Poetry talk, talk about poetry (older spelling)
趣味	취미	Hobby, interest
붓처주기	붙여주기	To attach, instill (interest) (older spelling of 붙여주기)
演劇	연극	Play, drama
하여가며	하여가며	While doing
자미잇게	재미있게	Interestingly (older spelling of 재미있게)
들니엿지요	들려주었지요	Told, let hear (older spelling of 들려주었지요)
以外	이외	Besides, other than
運動	운동	Sports, exercise
獎勵	장려	Encouragement, promotion
뻬쓰뽈	베이스볼	Baseball (older phonetic rendering)
피취	피처	Pitcher (older phonetic rendering)
캣취	캐처	Catcher (older phonetic rendering)
보앗대요	보았대요	Tried (reported speech, older spelling)
動機	동기	Motive, reason
쓰섯서요	쓰셨어요	Wrote (honorific, older spelling)
아시다십히	아시다시피	As you know (older spelling)
家庭的	가정적	Related to family
肉親	육친	Blood relative, close family
사랑	사랑	Love
못밧고	못 받고	Without receiving (older spelling)
자라난	자라난	Grew up
어릴 때에	어릴 때에	When young
갑작이	갑자기	Suddenly (older spelling)
여이엇스니까요	여의었으니까요	Because I lost (parents) (older spelling)
불상하게	불쌍하게	Pitiably, sadly (older spelling)
도라가신	돌아가신	Deceased (honorific, older spelling)
늘	늘	Always
글노	글로	With writing, as writing (older spelling)
십다고	싶다고	Wanting to
생각하엿지요	생각하였지요	Thought (older spelling)
각금	가끔	Sometimes (older spelling)
端片	단편	Fragment, piece
形式	형식	Form, format
써봣지요	써 봤지요	Tried writing (older spelling)
그러든지음	그러던 즈음	Around that time (older spelling)
學費	학비	School expenses, tuition
가지고는	가지고는	With
밥갑	밥값	Cost of meals (older spelling)
물고	물고	Paying (older term/usage for paying)
餘裕	여유	Surplus, leeway, composure
업서서	없어서	Because there isn't (older spelling)
못하여	못하여	Unable to do
입엇지요	입었지요	Wore (older spelling)
紹介	소개	Introduction
하여 줄 터이니	하여 줄 터이니	Will introduce, so... (older form)
學費補助	학비 보조	Tuition assistance/supplement
생기리라고	생기리라고	That it would arise/be generated
말합데다	말합디다	Said (reported speech, older form)
窮한 판에	궁한 판에	In a desperate situation
돈준다는	돈 준다는	Saying they'll give money
雜信	잡신	Miscellaneous correspondence/news
題下	제하	Under the title
엇덧타는	어떻다는	Being how (older spelling)
이약이	이야기	Story (older spelling)
무덤	무덤	Grave, tomb
보냇더니	보냈더니	When I sent (older spelling)
보내줍데다	보내줍디다	Sent (regularly) (reported speech, older form)
밧어썻지요	받아썼지요	Received and used (older spelling)
勸하는	권하는	Recommending, urging
片紙	편지	Letter
왓습데다	왔습디다	Came (reported speech, older form)
新年號	신년호	New Year issue
낼 作定이니	낼 작정이니	Planning to publish, so
조흐니	좋으니	Is good, so (older spelling)
곳	곧	Immediately (older spelling)
通知	통지	Notice, notification
달나고	달라고	Asking for
電報	전보	Telegram
왓습데다	왔습디다	Came (reported speech, older form)
보잘 것 업는	보잘것없는	Insignificant, trivial (older spelling)
督促	독촉	Urging, pressing
感激	감격	Being deeply moved
밋바닥에	밑바닥에	At the very bottom (older spelling)
흐르는	흐르는	Flowing
차듸찬	차디찬	Very cold (older spelling)
情緖	정서	Sentiment, emotion
表現	표현	Expression
擇하여	택하여	Choosing
마츰내	마침내	Finally, eventually (older spelling)
決心	결심	Decision, determination
하겟노라	하겠노라	Will do (declarative, older form)
答電	답전	Reply telegram
興奮	흥분	Excitement
드러	들어	Lifting, taking up (a brush)
안즌자리에서	앉은자리에서	In one sitting (older spelling)
原稿紙	원고지	Manuscript paper
써 노앗슴니다	써 놓았습니다	Wrote down (older spelling)
比할 데가 업섯슴니다	비할 데가 없었습니다	Was incomparable (older spelling)
붓저줍데다	부쳐줍디다	Sent (money) (reported speech, older form)
그때든 가요	그때던가요	Was it that time? (older form)
엇지요	었지요	Was (older spelling contraction)
囑託	촉탁	Entrusted position, non-regular staff, consultant
글재주	글재주	Writing talent
잇스니	있으니	Has, so (older spelling)
쓰이게	쓰이게	To make write, have write (causative)
實際	실제	Actual, real
이곳저곳	이곳저곳	Here and there
求景하게	구경하게	To make sightsee
씨우게 하면	쓰이게 하면	If you have (him) write (older causative form)
讀者	독자	Reader
興味	흥미	Interest
끄을 것이라고	끌 것이라고	That it will attract
決定	결정	Decision
뜻으로	뜻으로	With the intention of
마츰	마침	Just then,正好 (older spelling)
放學	방학	School vacation
故鄕	고향	Hometown
마누라	마누라	Wife (now often considered informal or slightly derogatory)
밥지어 주는 것	밥 지어 주는 것	Thing of cooking meals
먹고 잇슬 때	먹고 있을 때	When eating (older spelling)
조켓다고	좋겠다고	Saying it would be good (older spelling)
뛰어나와서	뛰어나와서	Ran out
旅行	여행	Travel, trip
된 것이지요	된 것이지요	It was decided
하엿담니다	하였답니다	Did (reported speech, older spelling)
낼 作定으로	낼 작정으로	With the plan to publish
단꺼번에	단번에	At once, in one go (older spelling)
檢閱	검열	Censorship
드러가서	들어가서	Entered, went into (older spelling)
그만	그만	Just, unfortunately
謦務總監部	경무총감부	Police Affairs Headquarters (Typo 謦 for 警)
한 장도	한 장도	Not even one page
남기고	남기고	Leaving behind
되여 버렷는데	되어 버렸는데	Ended up becoming (censored) (older spelling)
名文	명문	Excellent writing, fine piece
엇더래요	엤더래요	Was (reported speech, hearsay, older form)
들니는 말에	들리는 말에	According to rumor (older spelling)
하면서도	하면서도	Even while doing
稱讚	칭찬	Praise
하드래요	하더래요	Did (reported speech, hearsay, older form)
졸느지요	조르지요	Urges, nags (older spelling)
小說	소설	Novel
戱曲	희곡	Play, drama
文藝評論	문예 비평	Literary criticism
各方面	각 방면	Various fields
活躍	활약	Activity, being active
本領	본령	Main field, specialty
삼슴니까	삼습니까	Consider as (older formal question ending)
亦是	역시	As expected, likewise, still
몹시	몹시	Very, extremely
듯기 실흐면서도	듣기 싫으면서도	Even while disliking hearing it (older spelling)
結局	결국	Eventually, in the end
小說쟁이	소설쟁이	Novelist (slightly dismissive suffix -쟁이)
오래간만	오래간만	After a long time
붓	붓	Brush
잡아보지 안타가	잡아보지 않다가	After not holding (older spelling)
역시	역시	As expected, sure enough
써집데다그려	써집디다 그려	It came out as writing (novel) (older form + conversational ending)
이구나	이구나	Am indeed, is indeed (realization)
혼자	혼자	Alone, by oneself
苦笑	고소	Wry smile, bitter smile
第一會心의 作	제일 회심의 작	Most satisfying work, masterpiece
구즈나	궂으나	Whether bad (older spelling)
愛着	애착	Attachment, affection
史實	사실	Historical fact
藝術家	예술가	Artist
想像力	상상력	Imagination
맷기어	맡기어	Entrusting (older spelling)
性格	성격	Character, personality
事件	사건	Event, incident
自由	자유	Freely
制作	제작	Creation, production
함이	함이	Doing (nominalizer)
今後	금후	Hereafter, from now on
나가시려 하서요	나가시려 하세요	Do you intend to go/proceed? (honorific, older form)
劇作	극작	Playwriting
努力	노력	Effort
한層	한층	More, further
進步	진보	Progress, advancement
늣겨저요	느껴져요	Is felt (older spelling)
그 동안	그 동안	Meanwhile, during that time
최근	최근	Recent
거진	거의	Almost (older spelling)
멋슴니다	믿습니다	Believe (older spelling)
微力	미력	Meager strength, humble ability
方面	방면	Field, direction
힘써 보고저 함니다	힘써 보고자 합니다	Intend to try putting effort (older form)
이밧게도	이 밖에도	Besides this (older spelling)
뭇고 십흔	묻고 싶은	Wanting to ask (older spelling)
만흐나	많으나	Are many, but (older spelling)
以后	이후	After this
누구나	누구나	Anyone
짐작	짐작	Guess, conjecture
常識	상식	Common sense, common knowledge
普遍化	보편화	Becoming universal/common
智識	지식	Knowledge (older Hanja form)
話題	화제	Topic of conversation
논으려함에	나누려 함에	In intending to share (older spelling)
잇섯슴으로	있었음으로	Because there was (older spelling)
끗치고	끝내고	Ending (older spelling of 끝내고/끝이고)
이제는	이제는	Now
詩壇多士	시단 다사	Many scholars/talents of the poetry world
모엿스니	모였으니	Have gathered, so (older spelling)
酒杯	주배	Wine cup
논우면서	나누면서	While sharing (older spelling)
詩吟	시음	Reciting poetry
하기로 합시다	하기로 합시다	Let's decide to do
繼續	계속	Continuation
酒宴	주연	Banquet, feast
詩會	시회	Poetry gathering
잔노코	잔 놓고	Putting down the cup (older spelling)
하는말이	하는 말이	Words spoken
모다	모두	All (older spelling)
녯날情	옛날 정	Old affection/sentiment (older spelling)
라듸오	라디오	Radio (older phonetic rendering)
자즌가락	잦은 가락	Frequent tune/melody (older spelling)
더욱	더욱	More, even more
조와라	좋아라	Is good (exclamatory, older spelling)
조히	종이	Paper (older spelling)
적고	적고	Is scarce, is few
以外	이외	Besides, except for
재조	재주	Talent, skill (older spelling)
업노라	없노라	Have not (declarative, older form)
明日	명일	Tomorrow
有意	유의	Having intention, if inclined
抱琴來	포금래	Come embracing the zither (Classical Chinese phrase)
磨一劒	마일검	Sharpen one sword (Classical Chinese phrase)
此劒何時光茫發	차검하시광망발	When will this sword's brilliance shine? (Classical Chinese phrase)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제6권 제11호
발행일	1934년 11월 01일
기사제목	春園文壇生活 20年을 機會로 한 『文壇回顧』 座談會
기사형태	대담·좌담

春園文壇生活 20年을 機會로 한 『文壇回顧』 座談會
時日 10月2日 午後 5時로부터 10時까지
場所 市外 洗劒亭에서
出席者 李光洙
梁白華
朴月灘
金東仁
金岸曙
金東煥＜234＞

前言 先輩 李光洙氏가 「無情」을 發表한 지 約20年이 된다. 「無情」은 春園의 出世作일 뿐더러 實로 朝鮮 新文學建設의 그 첫 주춧돌이엿다. 春園은 이 「無情」을 契機로 뒤를 이어 「開拓者」를 내엿고 또 「麻衣太子」 「端宗哀史」 「許生傳」 「先導者」 「李舜臣」 「春香傳」 「再生」 「흙」等의 諸長篇을 썻스며 短篇으로도 「嘉實」 「血書」 「엇던아츰」等 10餘 篇을 내엿스며 時調, 新體詩等 純文學의 境地를 開拓함이 만헛다. 그래서 現文壇의 어느 作家보다도 그 開拓한 範圍가 넓고 量에 이르러도 斷然 만햇다. 그 동안 그가 끼처논 功績은 오직 우러러봄이 잇슬 뿐이다. 조선말의 美와 조선情緖의 眞實한 再現이 그를 엇지 못하엿든들 이러틋 均齊를 어덧슬가함애 우리들 後輩의 가슴은 오직 感謝의 一念에 차질 뿐이다. 물론 그가 저즐너 논 罪過도 그 半面에 이즐수 업슴도 안다.
엇잿든 後日 文藝批評家의 손으로 그의 文學上 地位도 分明하여 지려니와 爲先 우리는 春園을 中心으로 文壇諸作家의 一日의 會合을 지어 過去 20年間의 回想을 機會를 가지기로 하엿다. 이것이 機緣이 되야 先輩 春園을 爲하야 盛大한 20年祭가 全文壇的으로, 全社會的으로 잇서지기를 바라는 바이다.
金東煥-. 오늘저녁은 주장 春園의 말슴을 드르려 온 터임니다. 岸曙도 詩壇生活 15年밧게 아니 되엿고 梁白華, 金東仁도 아직 10數年 남짓밧게 아니되엿고 더구나 月灘等에 이르러는 먼 後輩에 屬함니다. 朝鮮文壇가치 나이 어린 文壇에서 20年이나 꾸준히 純文藝의 길로 精進하섯다는 것은 驚異할 일이외다. 이제 맨 처음 文壇에 나오기 시작하든, 말하자면 作家準備時代라고 할는지요. 그 20餘年前 먼-아득한 녯날의 말슴을 좀 들여주서요.
李光洙-. 感謝함니다. 이 변변치 못한 사람을 爲하여 늘 尊敬하든 여러 동무께서 일부러 먼 곳까지 차저 나오서 주시니- 나도 實은 日前에 어느새 「無情」을 쓴 지 벌서 20年이 되든가 하고 저윽히 놀나기를 마지 안엇슴니다. 歲月의 흐름이란 참으로 빠름니다.
무르시는 대로 몃가지 말슴하지요. 내가 열다섯살 나든 해 그때 東京에 잇섯지요. 本鄕區元町 玉眞館이라는 下宿에-.＜235＞그런데 하로는 그 近處 沐浴場에 갓는데 이마에 망건자국이 허-여케 난 靑年 한 분이 내겻헤서 몸을 씻고 잇겟지요. 암만 보여도 朝鮮사람 갓기에 姓名三字 무럿더니
「나는 洪命憙요.」
하겟지요. 이것이 碧初 洪命憙君을 처음 안 動機외다. 碧初가 그때 나보다 4年長인 열아홉살이든데 漢陽서 工夫하다가 시언치 안키에 削髮하고 東京에 뛰어 온 터입데다 그려-.
梁白華-碧初도 同時代든가요. 한참 먼-이야기들이로군.
李光洙-. 올래요. 퍽 녯날가튼 이약이들이지요. 그런데 나는 碧初의 반연으로 처음 「빠이론」을 알엇지요. 木村興太郞이 飜譯한 「카인」이라든가 「마젯빠」라든가 「海賊」이라든가 「빠리시나」等 詩集을 或은 碧初가 주는 것을 或은 그 사람의 指示밧고 冊店가서 사다가 熱中하면서 읽엇지요. 15,6 나는 少年情熱에 더구나 불과갓치 뜨겁고 壯烈한 빠이론 詩篇을 耽讀하게 되엿스니 참으로 그 당시는 가슴이 웬통 끌어 올낫지요. 이러기를 한참하는 동안에 내 性格이 變하여 집데다. 「放奔」 「粗暴」하여 젓다고나 形容할는지요. 그제부터는 나는 술도 마시고 담배도 먹으며 아츰저녁 規律지어 工夫하든 것도 다-뿌리치고 世上이란 이러쿠나하는 생각에 낫뿌게 말하자면 「墮落」의 첫 거름을 내리 드듼 섬이엇지요. 이것이 모다 「빠이론」의 影響이지요. 아직 마음이나 行實에 主ㅅ대가 서지 못 하엿든 어럿을 때 일이엿스니 「빠이론」을 崇拜키로 되어 날뛰엿다면＜236＞ 밋치기 밧게 더 하겟서요. 술담배 實想 울고불고 이러느라고 學課는 뒷전이 되여서 1,2學年까지는 成績이 조와섯지만은 明治學院 卒業할 때는 아홉제로 나왓서요.
金東仁-. 우리는 「톨스토이」 影響이 크엇든 줄 알엇는대 「빠이론」이라니 意外인걸요.
李光洙-. 톨스토이는 그 다음이지요. 이럿케 밤낫 빠이론, 길 가다가도 빠이론, 눕엇다가도 빠이론 그의 詩篇속 詩歌를 외이고 한참 날 뛸때에 하로는 나와 同窓인 「山崎トシオ」라는 靑年이 加藤直士가 飜譯한 톨스토이의 「我ガ宗敎」라는 一篇을 갓다주면서 이 冊은 甚히 볼 만헤서 期於히 보라고 합데다. 山崎トシオ라는 사람은 그 뒤로도 純文學의 길노 나가서 한동안 東京帝國大學에서 내든 帝國文學과 또 三田文學誌上에서 詩와 小說을 만이 發表하여 文名이 嘖嘖하든 분임니다. 그래서 처음 톨스토이의 맛을 드렷지요. 톨스토이를 본 즉 이 사람에게는 빠이론에게서는 도모지 맛볼 수 업는 깁히와 휴-마니스릭한 큼직한 빗치 보이겟지요. 아모리 적은 小論文이나 短篇寓話갓튼 데 까지 그 求道者的 精神이 흘르는 것이 말할 수 업시 내 정신을 끄으렷서요.
자-그제부터는 빠이론은 네 갈데로 가라고 밤낫 톨스토이만 읽엇지요. 그의 「我ガ懺悔」 「我ガ宗敎」 「我ガ藝術」等 論文은 勿論 「復活」 「戰爭과 平和」 「안나카레니아」 「어둠의 힘」의 作品과 그의 寓話 書翰集 日記等을 모조리 읽엇지요. 그러고는 아조 톨스토이이즘에 폭 저저＜237＞버렷지요.
朴月灘-. 톨스토이 心醉가 아마 그 뒤로는 늘 繼續하섯슬 걸요.
李光洙-. 또한 階段이 잇섯서요. 그것은 무엔고 하니 하로는 여름인데 神田(간다) 夜店(요미세)로 散步나갓는대 冊店앞에 빨간 글자로 크게 「火の柱」라고 쓴 小說冊이 잇겟지요. 그 놈을 사다가 읽으니 엇덧케 社會制度에 대한 積極的 批判的 文明批評的 思想이 담어 잇든지요. 著者를 보니 木下尙江이라고 써습데다.
「火の柱」에서 이 作家에 對한 情熱이 다시 끌키 시작한 나는 그 길노 「良人의 自白」等 木下尙江이 쓴 冊이란 冊은 모조리 차저 읽기 始作하엿음니다. 이 作品속에서는 톨스토이나 빠이론에서 보지 못하든 社會改造的 意見이 내 마음을 붓잡은 것인 모양이지요. 참으로 조와요.
梁白華-. 「木下尙江」! 그러치 이 사람도 한동안 東京 靑年의 피를 왼간히 끌케한 사람이지요. 堺利彦과 매우 갓가운 벗으로 初期의 社會主義者이니 만치 그 사람의 影響밧는 사람이 참으로 만엇지요. 인제 아니 春園도 木下尙江에서 影響바드섯군. 나도 한동안 그 사람 作에 퍽으나 心醉하엿섯지요.＜238＞

「無情」前의 準備時代
金東煥 - 以上의 말슴으로 作家準備時代의 來歷은 大槪 알겟음니다. 그러면 이번에는 「無情」 쓰기 바로 前, 文章을 世上에 發表하든 때 말슴을 하여주서요. 「靑春」 「아이들보이」 「少年」들과는＜238＞ 엇덧케 되어 因綠이 매저 젓든가요?
李光洙 - 靑春 이야기나니 六堂 일이 생각남니다. 六堂은 그때 東京 麴町區에 잇는 韓國公使館엽댕이의 朝鮮留學生 監督部 奇宿舍에서 처음 맛낫지요. 가치 文學을 즐기는대서 共鳴되여 後日 그 사람이 「靑春」이나 「少年」等 雜誌를 냄에 이르러 自然히 寄稿하게 되엇지요. 「靑春」이나 「少年」보다도 몬저 내가 글을 써 본 일은 그때 明治學院學生들이 모여 처음 原稿를 서로 써서 그것을 筆記하여 돌여보는 週覽雜誌를 始作하엿는대 거긔에다가 「어린 犧牲」이라는 한 篇의 小說을 써섯지요. 그 雜誌는 그 뒤에 좀더 規模를 크게하여 謄寫版으로 謄寫하기까지 하엿지요. 그때 編輯을 내가 마터 하엿서요.
정말 活字化하여 보기는 그 뒤 「大韓興學報」라 하여 東京留學生들 손으로 發生하든 月報    가 잇섯는대 그것을 마터 編輯하기는 그때 東京高等師範을 다니든 張膺震氏가 하고 잇섯    서요. 그래서 「大韓興學報」에 글을 내고 십허서 「가버번-」 무에라고한 小說 한筀‡을 썻지    요.
梁白華 - 네 나도 한번 본 듯한 記憶이 나요. 가버린 무에라고 하여 시앗보고- 博川松林 한가가 엇저고 엇저고 한 內容의 小說이엇지요.
李光洙 - 용케 기억해 주심니다. 올해요. 內容이 그러햇지요. 넘우 오래여서 인제는 題目조차 다 이젓군요. 그 小說을 한篇 써서 張膺震氏 집으로 수차 차저 갓다가 참아 「이게 내 쓴 小說이요」하고 내어놀 勇氣가 업서 그양 도로＜239＞ 가저 오고 또 도로 가저오군 하엿지요. 여러번 이러다가 마즈막엔 놀너간 모양으로 그 집으로 차저갓다가 이저버린 체하고 슬며시 原稿를 책상우에 놋코 왓지요. 그랫더니 그 뒤에 보니 活字가 되어 雜誌에 실렷겟지요. 대단히 愉快하엿서요.
金岸曙- 그때가 李寶鏡時代이엿슴니다 그려.
李光洙 - 그러치 寶鏡이라 햇지요.
金東仁 - 寶鏡이라니?
李光洙 - 내 兒名이 寶鏡이라 함니다. 우리 어르신네가 나를 나을 때에 꿈에 거울을 어더 보섯대요. 그래서 寶鏡이라고 이름을 지어 주섯담니다.
「大韓興學報」 뒤에 얼마 잇지안어 이번에는 家族制度를 改革하자는 그런 뜻으로 「情育論」    이란 한篇의 글을 皇城新聞에 投稿하엿더니 멧칠 뒤에 그것이 글세 바로 社說欄에 낫겟지    요. 皇城新聞이라 하면 그때 張志淵氏等이 社說을 쓰고 잇섯지요.
그러치만 두篇을 이러케 내는 것만으로는 아모래도 表現慾을 滿足식킬 수 업서 악가도 잠    간 말슴하엿슴니다만은 靑山學院다니든 文學靑年들끼리 말하자면 金讚泳
玉宗鏡(이분은 米國 가 잇다), 卞鳳憲, 金一 等 여러 사람들과 더부러 謄寫版回覽雜誌를 만들고 約20名 會員이 一週日에 한번식 모여 小說과 시이약이를 하엿지요. 더구나 남들이 文藝에 趣味붓처주기 위하여 나는 一週日에 한번식 모이는 이 會合에서 혼자 演劇도 하여가며 小說이야 기를 아모조록 자미잇게 하여 들니엿지요.
이 少年會에서는 文藝以外에도 運動을 獎勵하여 나도 뻬쓰뽈의 피취 캣취를 다 하여 보앗    대요.

無情 쓴 動機와 經過
金東煥 - 無情은 엇던 動機로 쓰섯서요.
李光洙 - 나는 아시다십히 家庭的으로 肉親의 사랑을 못밧고 자라난 사람이외다. 어릴 때에 아버지, 어머니를 갑작이 다 여이엇스니까요. 그때 불상하게 도라가신 아버지, 어머니의 일을 늘 글노 써보고 십다고 생각하엿지요. 그래서 각금 端片 端片으로 詩의 形式으로도 쓰고 小說의 形式으로도 써봣지요. 그러든지음 東京＜240＞ 早稻田大學에 잇슬 때 中學校에서 보내주든 20圓式의 學費를 가지고는 밥갑 물고 冊 사고하면 조곰도 餘裕가 업서서 늘 옷 한벌 못하여 입엇지요. 그럴 때에 沈天風君이 每日申報社長 阿部充家氏에게 紹介하여 줄 터이니 每日申報에 글 쓰라 그러면 한 달에 다만 얼마라도 學費補助가 될 돈이 생기리라고 말합데다 그려. 그래서 窮한 판에 돈준다는 생각에 그러라하고 처음에는 「東京 雜信」이라 한 題下에 隅田川 강물이 엇덧타는 이약이도 쓰고 福澤諭吉의 무덤을 가 본 이약이도 써서 原稿를 보냇더니 5圓式 每月 보내줍데다. 그때 이 돈을 퍽으나 고맙게 밧어썻지요. 그러든지음 이번에는 「小說」를 쓰라고 勸하는 片紙가 왓습데다. 그러고는 新年號부터 낼 作定이니 題目만이라도 조흐니 곳 通知하여 달나고 電報가 왓습데다. 보잘 것 업는 내 글을 電報로까지 督促하여 주는 일에 感激하여 늘 내 가슴밋바닥에 흐르는 차듸찬 情緖의 表現인 「無情」이란 表題를 擇하여 가지고 마츰내 小說을 쓸 決心을 하고 表題를 「無情」이라 하겟노라 하고 答電하고 나서 興奮하엿든 김에 곳 붓을 드러 안즌자리에서 原稿紙 72枚를 써 노앗슴니다. 그때의 愉快함이란 比할 데가 업섯슴니다.
「無情」쓰는 동안 新聞社에서 꼭꼭 10圓式 돈을 붓저줍데다.
梁白華 - 「五道踏破記도」 그때든 가요.
李光洙 - 바로 그 뒤엇지요. 역시 學費에 窮하여 잇슬 때에 沈天風이 每日申報 囑託으로 잇는 中村權太郞이라는 이에게 『李光洙란 靑年이 글재주가 잇스니 글을 좀 쓰이게 하고 그리고 글을 쓰이되 實際로 이곳저곳 가＜241＞ 求景하게 한뒤 씨우게 하면 매우 讀者의 興味를 끄을 것이라고」 勸하여서 그대로 地方旅行을 식키고 紀行文을 싯게하겟다고 곳 決定이 되여 나한테 그 뜻으로 便紙가 왓습데다. 그때는 마츰 放學이 되어 친구들은 모다 故鄕으로 나가고 나만 牛込區에서 林圭氏 마누라가 밥지어 주는 것을 먹고 잇슬 때 그도 조켓다고 곳 뛰어나와서 「忠淸南北, 全羅南北, 慶尙南道」의 五道를 旅行키로 된 것이지요. 그때도 퍽으나 愉快하엿담니다.
梁白華 - 「파리」를 쓴 것은?
李光洙 - 그보다 조곰 뒤엇지요.
朴月灘 - 「파리」라니?
梁白華 - 春園이 單行本을 낼 作定으로 約200枚나 단꺼번에 「書卸し」하여 六堂이 하는 「新文館」에 주엇는데 그것이 檢閱에 드러가서 그만 謦務總監部에서 한 장도 안 남기고 XX되여 버렷는데 그것이 크게 名文이엇더래요. 들니는 말에 警務總監部에서도 XX는 하면서도 참 잘 쓴 글이라고 稱讚하드래요.
李光洙 - 六堂은 그 뒤에도 늘 「파리」가튼 글을 다시 쓰라고 작고 졸느지요.
金東煥 - 詩, 小說, 戱曲, 文藝評論等 各方面으로 活躍하시는데 그 중에 어느 것을 本領으로 삼슴니까.
李光洙 - 亦是 小說입데다. 나는 小說家라는 名詞가 몹시 듯기 실흐면서도 結局 小說쟁입데다. 前日도 여러 달 동안 붓이라고 잡아보지 안타가 오래간만에 붓을 드럿더니 亦是 小說이 써집데다그려. 그래서 나는 亦是 小說家구나 하고 혼자 苦笑하엿담니다.
金東仁 - 여러小說 中 第一會心의 作은?
李光洙 - 「無情」은 처음 쓴 것임으로 조흐나 구즈나 늘 愛着이 가며 그러고는 「端宗哀史」외다. 短篇으로는 「嘉實」이고.
金東仁 - 내가 쓰면 端宗을 그러케 아니 꾸미겟서요. 좀더 死六臣을 살녀노치요.
朴月灘 - 그것은 見解의 相違지요. 史實을 史實대로 쓰느냐 또는 藝術家의 想像力에 맷기어 그 性格과 그 事件을 自由롭게 制作하겟느냐 함이.
金岸曙 - 今後로는 엇든 길로 나가시려 하서요.＜242＞
李光洙 - 劇作에 努力해 보려고도 함니다. 小說보다도 詩歌보다도 戱曲이 藝術形式으로서는 더 한層 進步한 것으로 늣겨저요. 그래서 나는 그 동안 녯날 후-머이러앗트로부터 최근은 썩스피어 것을 거진 다 보고 잇슴니다. 今后 朝鮮文壇에 劇運動과 劇作熱이 全盛할 날이 올줄 멋슴니다. 나는 微力하나마 그 方面에 힘써 보고저 함니다.
金東煥 - 이밧게도 뭇고 십흔 말슴이 만흐나 그 以后의 朝鮮文壇 이약기는 大槪 누구나 짐작하는 常識이 되기 쉽겟고 「無情」 以后의 文壇史는 누구나 普遍化하여 잇는 智識이기에 여기서는 더 話題를 삼지 안켓슴니다.
또 오늘 저녁 會合의 主要目的이 先輩 春園으로 더부러 愉快하게 一夕의 談話를 논으려함에 잇섯슴으로 말슴은 以上으로 끗치고 이제는 詩壇多士 모엿스니 酒杯나 논우면서 詩吟이나 하기로 합시다. (繼續하야 酒宴 及 詩會)＜243＞

洗劍亭詩席에서
李光洙
煩惱無盡誓願斷
衆生無邊誓願度

梁白華
廬山烟雨浙江潮
未到千般恨未消
到得還來無別事
廬山烟雨浙江潮

金岸曙
잔노코 하는말이
모다 녯날情

라듸오 자즌가락
더욱 조와라

金東仁
小說을 쓰기에는 조히가 적고
小說 以外에는 딴 재조업노라

朴月灘
酒國然
論己酣
明日有意抱琴來

金東煥
洗劒亭上磨一劒
此劒何時光茫發＜243＞
＜234-243＞