偉人·難關·努力, 勇斷一實의 孫義菴
(Great Man, Difficulties, Efforts, Sun Ui-am's Courage and Decisiveness)
朴達成
(Pak Tal-seong)
논설 (Essay)

The Mueo and Gihae Years of Added Misfortune

Five years after the Gabo Eastern Learning Rebellion (甲年東亂), 33 years ago from now (Gwangmu 2, 1898), June 2nd of the Mueo year was the day the second leader of the Donghak Party (東學黨), Choe Hae-wol (崔海月) was executed by hanging in Gyeongseong Prison (京城監獄) under the charge of "Leftist Deviant Rebellion (左道亂正)."

Trouble broke out, and a great misfortune fell upon the Donghak Party. All of Joseon was in an uproar, focusing on arresting the Donghak army. Arrest warrants were posted in every street and alley, and under the guns of soldiers and police, all visitors were seized and interrogated under the name of Donghak. It was a tiresome, dreary scene.

At this time, Son Ui-am (孫義菴) shed tears of grief as he turned away from seeing his teacher executed! How must he have felt? Behind him were soldiers, and in front of him were police; he had nowhere to go and nowhere to weep. In a situation of being stuck between a rock and a hard place, he could only look up to the vast sky and let out a long sigh. At the end of his long sigh, he habitually pondered, "What plan will bring about national preservation and peace for the people (保國安民이 計將安出고)?" He longed for Su-un (水雲) Teacher's heart at the time, and he silently hardened his resolve, wondering, "When will I clear the teacher's unjust death (先生至冤을 何時雪고)?" The thought of "Should I die following the teacher? Or should I flee far away and see the end of the affair?" also crossed his mind. "Should I enter Geumgang Mountain (金剛山) and become a monk? Or should I gather comrades and await an opportunity?" Such thoughts also ran through his mind. It must have truly been so.

Master Son (先生) finally, at the Ridge of Mangur-ri, Yangju (楊州忘憂里嶺上), resolved his life's ambition with the following two poems. We can understand the great man's spirit from them.

"Seated, I view the landscape, as if spitting into the universe,
In the midst of abundant fullness, the world shares in the fullness."

How grand was this ambition? "Sitting and looking at the landscape painting, I feel full in the midst of abundance. If I were to spit it out into the universe, the world would share in the fullness!" Such a grand vision could only have been conceived by Son Ui-am (孫義菴).

Having made such a grand resolution, he fled far to Wonju (原州), and at Deokso, Yangpyeong (楊平 德沼), he persuaded and disbanded 40 soldiers (the anecdote at this time is worth recording, but is omitted as it was written in last year's issue of this magazine), and entered Songdong, Wonju (原州 松洞), his destination.

How could he feel at ease and stay long in Songdong (松洞)? He was in a truly dangerous situation, unable to hide himself from the arrest warrant. He had no choice but to travel at night through the swords and waters of Geomsan (釰山刀水), fleeing to Mao-ri, Tangjin (唐津茅里). But since this was also Joseon territory, how could he be allowed to stay long? Again, he had no choice but to flee to Maji, Jeongsan (定山 馬峙), but unable to stay there either, he fled to Hwiseong-ri, Punggi (豐基 惠息里), but still to no avail, he fled up to Eumjuk, Gyeonggi (京畿 陰竹), and the hardship and trials he endured cannot be fully expressed! Finally, to add insult to injury, his comrade and uncle, Son Cheon-min (孫天民) of Songam (松菴), was also hanged in Gyeongseong Prison (京城監獄) in August of the Gyeongja year. How must Son Ui-am (孫義菴) have felt at this time! It was truly a difficult situation.

Overcoming All Difficulties and Deciding to Travel Abroad

As the saying goes, heroes are known in times of difficulty, and truly, without such difficulties, Son (孫) would not have been known. He fled and was chased amidst guns, spears, and swords, losing comrades and his teacher, yet he did not yield in the slightest and struggled to the end for the Great Way.

In the early part of March of the Sinchuk year (辛丑年), Joseon, advocating for rejecting foreigners and Japanese and embracing isolationism as the ultimate solution, was focused on exterminating the Donghak Party (東學黨). Meanwhile, among the comrades within the party, there were arguments for entering the mountains and living in seclusion, arguments for following the teacher and sacrificing oneself, and arguments for each returning home to protect their wives and children and secure their family's livelihood. Opinions were divided. Among them, there was a stalemate of conflicting arguments from the Three Ams (3菴鼎立). One day, Son Ui-am (孫義菴) made a firm decision and declared to his comrades:

"Gentlemen, from now on, I will overcome all difficulties and resolutely travel abroad (外遊를 決行)! How can we proclaim that we will spread virtue throughout the world, broadly relieve the suffering of the masses, and preserve the nation and bring peace to the people (布德天下廣濟蒼生保國安民) while being chased around in other people's homes or between rocks in the mountains? To pass on the late teacher's legacy to future generations and to spread the great virtue of the Great Way to all nations of the world, it cannot be done by merely living in seclusion like this, nor can it be done only within Joseon. We must travel widely throughout the world, absorbing the world's customs and modern civilization, in order to promote our cause. What are your opinions, gentlemen (諸君의 意思若何오)?"

At this time, only a few people agreed with Master Son's (先生의) plan to travel abroad. Almost everyone argued against it. The entire nation was rejecting foreigners and Japanese and embracing isolationism as the ultimate solution, so how could even a part of the people, even if they were members of the Donghak Army (東學軍), greatly support traveling abroad?

However, Master Son (孫先生), undeterred by the opposition of all, resolutely embarked on the journey abroad, crossing from Incheon (仁川) to Shanghai (上海) in the early part of March of the Sinchuk year (辛丑3월). The only follower at that time was Kim Dae-yu (金大有).

For almost half a year, from March to June, he stayed in Shanghai (上海), roughly assessed the overall situation of the world, and sent letters of encouragement to his disciples in the home country. One passage reads:

"When I observe the great trends of the world (吾觀天下之大勢), I can know where our path will lead (可知吾道之將就)." This letter from Master Son (先生) from Shanghai (上海) was truly a stimulant and restorative tonic for the general party members. The party members in various regions, through secret communication (傳傳相聞(사발通文)), strengthened their solidarity twice as much as before and vigorously supported Master Son's (先生) trip abroad.

After staying in Shanghai (上海) for half a year, Master Son (孫先生) roughly observed the customs of Qing China (淸國) and the state of Western affairs, and then changed his mind, deciding to go to Japan. He briefly returned to his home country and then crossed over to Osaka, Japan (日本大阪) in January of the Im-in year (壬寅年). This could be called the second trip abroad.

Seizing the Russo-Japanese War Opportunity for a Grand Reform Movement

What did he do in Japan? Initially, he changed his name to Yi Sang-heon (李祥憲) and widely associated with Joseon's exiled patriots. Eventually, he revealed his identity as the leader of the Donghak Party (東學黨), and while associating with Japanese politicians, he selected 63 students from his home country and focused on modern education, while observing the trends of East Asia.

In the 8th year of Gwangmu! (Meiji 37th year) In the Gapjin year (甲辰), the Russo-Japanese War (日露) finally broke out. The opportunity had come. He would not miss this opportunity! Master Son (先生) ordered his disciples in the home country to launch a major reform movement under the name of the Progressive Society (進步會), and at the same time declared the public and social advancement of the Donghak Party (東學黨). This was the Donghak Army's (東學軍) Gapjin Movement. (Omitted below)

Named Entities

崔海月	 Choe Hae-wol
京城監獄	Kyŏngsŏng Kamok
孫義菴	Son Ŭi-am
水雲	Su-un
金剛山	Kŭmgangsan
楊州忘憂里嶺上	Yangju Mangur-ri Ryŏngsang
原州	Wŏnju
楊平德沼	Yangp'yŏng Tŏkso
松洞	Songdong
釰山刀水	Kŏmsan Tosu
唐津茅里	Tangjin Mao-ri
定山馬峙	Chŏngsan Maji
豐基惠息里	P'unggi Hwiseong-ri
京畿陰竹	Kyŏnggi Ŭmjuk
松菴孫天民	Songam Son Ch'ŏn-min
金大有	Kim Tae-yu
仁川	Inch'ŏn
上海	Shanghai
李祥憲	I Sang-hŏn
大阪	Ōsaka
進步會	Chinbohoe



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제27호
발행일	1930년 03월 01일
기사제목	偉人·難關·努力, 勇斷一實의 孫義菴
필자	朴達成
기사형태	논설

偉人·難關·努力, 勇斷一實의 孫義菴
						朴達成
雪上加霜의 戊戌已亥
甲年東亂이 지난지 5년 지금으로부터 33년전(光武2年 西紀1898年) 戊戌 6월2일은 東學黨 제2세 首領 崔海月先生이 左道亂正이란 죄명으로 京城監獄에서 絞刑을 바든날이다.
일은 나섯다 東學黨에게는 一大悲運이 도라왓다. 朝鮮의 上下는 떠드러 東學軍逮捕에 몰두하게 되얏다. 街里街里 坊坊谷谷에 逮捕令을 봇치고 兵丁巡檢槍銃의 하에 來人去客을 모조리 잡아서 東學의 명으로써 問討하든 판이엿다. 지긋지긋한 殺風景이엿다.
이때 선생을 극형에 밧치고 熱淚를 뿌리고 도라선 孫義菴先生!!. 그 심사 엇더하얏스랴? 뒤에는 병정 앞헤는 巡檢 갈내야 갈곳이 업고 울내야 울곳이 없섯다. 進退維谷에 오직 蒼大을 우르러 長太息만 할뿐이엿다. 長太息 끗테는 依例로 「保國安民이 計將安出고하고 水雲先生의 當年心懷를 그리여보고 「先生至冤을 何時雪고」하야 구든 힘을 혼자 쓰고말군 하얏다. 「선생을 따라죽느냐? 멀니 도망을 갓다가 대사의 끗를 보느냐?」 이러한 심사도 업지안엇다. 「金剛山에 드러가 僧이 되느냐? 동지를 수습하면서 기회를 기다리느냐?」＜2＞ 이러한 *跙도 업지안엇다. 실로 그래섯슬 것이다.
선생은 맛츰내 楊州忘憂里嶺上에서 아레와 갓튼 詩2首로써 평생의 志를 결하얏스니 偉人의 氣宇가 그엇던 것을 可知하겟다.
「坐見江山圖 若吐宇宙間
茂然飽腹中 天下共飽腹」
이 얼마나 큰 抱負이엿느냐. 「안저서 강산 그림을 보니 茂然히 배부른 가운데로구나. 만약 우주의 간에 뱃터 노으면 천하가 갓치 배부르겟도다!」 이런 雄圖는 실로 孫義菴이 안이면 불능하얏슬 것이다.
이와갓치 대지를 다시 決斷하고 멀니 原州로 피하다가 楊平 德沼에서 兵丁 40名을 反히 說諭解散식키고 (이때의 逸話가 可記할만하나 本誌昨年分中에 기재되얏기 略함) 목적지 原州 松洞으로 드러가섯다.
松洞엔들 엇지 安心長留를 할 수 잇스랴. 獨處逮捕令에 실로 一身難藏의 危境이엿다. 할 수 없시 釰山刀水의 중에 夜行潛行을 하야 唐津茅里로 避하얏다. 여기도 朝鮮의 땅이라 엇지 長留를 許하게 되랴. 또 할 수 업시 定山 馬峙로 避하얏다가 여기서 또 잇슬 수 없서서 豐基 惠息里로 피하얏스나 역시 별수가 업서서 京畿 陰竹으로 올녀 피하고 나니 그 辛酸한 風雨를 다 말 할 수야 잇스랴!. 맛츰내 雪上加霜으로 同志요 叔父이든 松菴孫天民先生이 庚子8月에 또 京城監獄에서 絞刑을 밧게 되얏섯다. 이때의 孫義菴先生의 그 심사 엇더하엿스랴! 實로 難局의 難局이엿다.

萬難을 排除하고 外遊斷行
난국에서야 영웅을 안다는 격으로 실로 이러한 난국이 안이엿드면 孫先生을 알 수 업섯슬 것이다. 銃槍釰戟의 중에 피해 단니고 쫏겨 단니며 동지를 일코 선생을 여이고서도 조곱도 굴치 안코 끗끗내 大道를 위하야 분투하얏섯다.
때는 辛丑年 3월 초순 朝鮮의 상하는 斥洋斥倭를 내걸고 鎖國萬能을 시사하면서 東學黨盡滅에 몰두하는 一方 黨內 同志間에는 入山隱居論이 잇고 從師殉道論이 잇고 各歸其家하야 保妻子安家道論도 잇고 하야 의논이 不一하얏다. 중에도 3菴鼎立의 세로 曰可曰否主張이 업든판인데 一日은 孫義菴先生 대지를 결하야써 동지간에 선언하되
「諸君. 나는 이로부터 萬難을 排除하고라도 外遊를 決行＜3＞하겟노라. 우리가 布德天下廣濟蒼生保國安民을 하겟다하면서 남의 집안 방이나 山間 바위틈으로 쫏겨단이며 할 수 잇느냐. 先師의 遺志를 後代萬年에 傳하고 大道의 大德을 世界萬邦에 布하자면 이와갓치 隱避生活뿐으로도 안이되고 朝鮮內地만으로도 안이되나니 널니 世界에 노라 世界風物 또는 近代의 文明을 흡수하야써 우리의 일을 촉진하리라. 諸君의 意思若何오?」
하얏섯다. 이때 先生의 外遊를 贊成한 사람은 멧 사람이 못되얏다. 擧皆가 불가를 主論하얏다. 국가전체가 斥洋斥倭에 鎖國萬能인 바에 況百姓의 일부엿스랴. 비록 東學軍이라 하나 外遊에는 大不贊成이엿섯다.
그러나 孫先生은 萬人皆制止도 불포하고 決然히 外遊의 途에 就하니 즉 辛丑3월 상순에 仁川에서 上海로 건너뛴 그것이다. 그때의 從者란 金大有 1人뿐.
3,4,5,6월 上海에 잇슨지 거의 반년에 천하의 대세를 거이 짐작하고 本國徒弟에게 督勵의 書를 치하얏스니 그 1절에 曰
「吾觀天下之大勢하니 可知吾道之將就」云云 上海로부터 드러온 先生의 이 一張敬通은 實로 一般黨員의 興奮劑이며 補元湯이엿다. 각지 黨員은 傳傳相聞(사발通文)에 결속이 倍前하야 先生 外遊를 極力援助케 되얏섯다.
先生은 上海에 잇슨지 半年에 淸國의 風物及 서양의 물정을 대강 관찰하고 나서 다시 뜻을 옴기여 日本行을 결하고 나서 잠간 還國하얏다가 壬寅年 1月에 日本大阪으로 건너갓섯다. 이것이 제2차 外遊라 할넌지.

乘日露風雲 大擧革新運動
日本에 가서는 무엇을 하얏는가? 初에는 李祥憲이라 變姓名을 하고서 널니 朝鮮의 亡名志士와 交遊를 하얏다. 맛츰내 東學黨首領의 정체를 내놋코 日本의 政客과 交遊하는 一方 本國으로부터 書生63人을 선발하야 現代敎育에 주력을 하면서 장차 동양의 풍운을 규시하고 잇섯다.
光武8년!(明治37년) 甲辰에 맛츰내 日露의 風雲은 니러나고야 마럿다. 기회는 왓다. 이때를 놋치지 못하리라! 하야 先生은 本國의 徒弟에게 令하야 進步會의 명으로써 크게 革新運動을 起하는 동시에 東學黨의 공공연 사회적 진출을 선언하얏섯다. 이것이 東學軍 甲辰運動이엿다.(以下略)＜4＞
＜2-4＞