잡지명	別건곤 제27호
발행일	1930년 03월 01일
기사제목	投稿大歡迎 (Submissions Welcome)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Notice/Editor's Note)

Submissions Welcome

◇ Truly Existing Stories… Facts More Bizarre Than Novels – Truly existing stories that have arisen in modern times (Refer to "Facts or Records of Human Life" in this issue).

◇ Hidden Good Deeds… The current work and brief history of people who devote themselves to projects for the sake of society without selling their fame or merits.

◇ Reader's Column… Novels, Plays, Travelogues, Essays, Poems, Sijo, Folk Songs, Research Papers, etc.

Submission Regulations

一, The decision to accept or reject manuscripts rests entirely with the company.
一, Manuscripts will not be returned under any circumstances.
一, The type of submission should be written in red ink on the envelope.
一, For manuscripts of "Truly Existing Stories" and "Hidden Good Deeds," please clearly state the submitter's address and name, and affix a personal seal. It would be even more appreciated if you could also provide a photograph.

◇ Consultation Corner… Consultation on simple matters that are difficult to think about alone in daily life (However, legal disputes should be avoided, and the paper should be limited to ordinary postcards).

◇ Postcard Communication… Refer to the existing regulations and the articles in the postcard communication column of this magazine.

◇ Local Color… Unique circumstances of each locality such as scenery, customs, annual events, legends, etc. <37>

**Named Entities**

대한민국	Republic of Korea



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제27호
발행일	1930년 03월 01일
기사제목	投稿大歡迎
기사형태	사고·편집후기

投稿大歡迎
◇정말로 잇든이약이………小說보담도 珍奇한 事實---現代에 생겨난 정말로 잇든이약이(本號『事實이나어논 人生의 記錄』參照)
◇숨은일………名譽니 功德을 팔지안코 진社會를 爲하야 事業에 盡力하는사람의 現在事業과 略曆.
◇讀者欄………小說 戱曲 紀行女 隨筆 詩 時調 民謠 硏究編文等

投稿規定
一, 原稿의 取捨는 本社에 一任함
一, 原稿는 一切返還치아니함
一, 皮封에는 各其投稿의 種類를 朱書할것
一, 『정말로잇든이약이』『숨운잇ㅅ군』의 原稿에 限하야 投稿者의 住所姓名을 明記하고 實印을 을 것, 寫眞지주시면 더욱 感謝하겟슴니다

◇誌上相談所………日常生活에잇서서 혼자 생각키어려운 簡單한 事件의 相議(但法律上爭訟가튼 것은 避하며 用紙는 普通葉書에 限함)
◇葉書通信………在來 規定과 本誌葉書通信欄記事參照
◇地方色………風景, 風俗, 年中行事, 傳說等各其地方의 特殊한 事情＜37＞
＜37＞