잡지명	별건곤 제46호
발행일	1931년 12월 01일
기사제목	滿洲事變에 活躍하는 人物 (Personalities Active in the Manchurian Incident, News)
기사형태	소식

Personalities Active in the Manchurian Incident

(1) Briand

He is the chairman of the League of Nations to discuss the Manchurian Incident. He is 69 years old this year. As a veteran French politician, he started his political life as a member of parliament in 1902. Since organizing his first cabinet in 1909, he has done so ten times and has also served as foreign minister several times. The party relations in France are different from other countries and are ever-changing. This shows how diverse his political life has been and how great his power is. <25>

(2) Simon

He is the person who represented England. He is 57 years old this year and is a diplomat from the legal profession. After serving as the Deputy Attorney General, including the Royal Legal Officer, he was the Minister of Home Affairs in the Allied Cabinet during World War I. After quitting this, he became a lawyer again, and when World War I became fierce, he even went to war as a company commander. Then he entered politics again and became the floor leader of the Liberal Party, and in the organization of the MacDonald National Unity Cabinet this time, he holds the important position of Foreign Minister. <27>

(3) Cecil

He is a British aristocrat diplomat who is currently a Count, and is 66 years old this year. He was the Undersecretary of State for Foreign Affairs in the Allied Cabinet during World War I and even became a Privy Councilor. It is said that he demonstrated his power in the policy of blockading Germany during the Great War, and later served as the honorary president of the University of Birmingham and was famous as a supporter when the League of Nations was first established, even receiving the Wilson Peace Prize of 10,000 won. He joined the Baldwin Cabinet in 1923 and then resigned due to the issue of arms reduction. In the world, people say that Cecil is a favorable understander of the League of Nations. <29>

(4)

He is the first Secretary-General of the League of Nations. He is a 54-year-old politician from an aristocratic background who served in the Foreign Ministry for many years as the Prime Minister's secretary. He organized all the affairs related to the Manchurian Incident this time. <30>

(5) Dawes

He is a diplomat from a military background, 64 years old this year. During World War I, he led the American army and was stationed in France and received the Croix de Guerre, and received the Nobel Prize in 1925. After that, he served as Vice President under President Coolidge and proposed the famous Dawes Plan and was the chairman of the Dawes Reparations Committee. He is currently the U.S. Ambassador to the U.K., and because the current situation between Japan and China is unusual, he attended the League of Nations Council to protect the political and treaty rights and interests of the United States. <31>

(6) Shí Zhào Jī (施肇基)

He is one of China's genius diplomats, 53 years old this year, and is the Chinese representative to the League of Nations this time. He graduated from St. John's University in Shanghai and went to the United States as an interpreter at the Chinese Embassy, ​​and then graduated from Cornell University and returned. After returning to his country, he was active in politics, and during the Tang Shaoyi (唐紹儀) cabinet, he served as the Director of the Transportation Bureau and the Minister of Finance. After the end of World War I, he attended the Peace Conference as a Chinese representative, and the following year he was appointed as the Minister to the United States, and even attended the Washington Conference as a Chinese plenipotentiary representative. <32>

(7) Kijūrō Shidehara (芳澤謙吉)

He is 58 years old this year, born in Niisaka Village, and graduated from the English Department of Tokyo Imperial University. After graduating, he passed the diplomatic and consular examination and worked in Chosŏn as a diplomatic intern. He successively served as a consular intern in various countries, and later was promoted to foreign ministry councilor, secretary, etc., and was stationed in various countries as minister and ambassador. He is currently the ambassador to France in Paris, and this time he will attend the League of Nations Council representing Japan. <33>

**Named Entities**

부리앙	Briand
싸이몬	Simon
세실	Cecil
또스	Dawes
施肇基	Shí Zhào Jī
芳澤謙吉	Kijūrō Shidehara
滿洲事變	Manchurian Incident
鮮	Chosŏn
東東京大	Tōkyō Teidai
윌손	Wilson
맥드날드	MacDonald
伯爵	Count
唐紹儀	Tang Shaoyi
聖約翰	Seiyo Han
新釋峴	Niisaka



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제46호
발행일	1931년 12월 01일
기사제목	滿洲事變에 活躍하는 人物
기사형태	소식

滿洲事變에 活躍하는 人物
(1) 부리앙
만주사변문제를 토의할 국제련맹의 리사장이다. 씨는 금년 69세. 불란서의 로청치가로 1902년 국회의원이 되면서부터 정치가 생활을 시작하야 1909년 제일차로 내각을 조직한이래 지금까지 열 번이나 하엿스며 외상으로 각원의 자리에 잇기도 여러번이다. 불란서의 정당관게는 다른 나라와 달라 변화무쌍하다. 이것으로 보면 씨의 정치가적 생활이 얼마나 다단하엿스며 그력량이 얼마나 큰 것을 알 수 잇다.＜25＞

(2) 싸이몬
영국을 대표하야 출마한 사람. 씨는 금년 57세로 법조계출신의 외교가이다. 왕실법무관인 차석검사를 비롯하야 검사총장을 역임한후 세게대전 중 련립내각때에는 내무대신이엇다. 그후 이것을 고만두고 다시 변호사 되엿다가 세게대전이 맹렬하게 되자 중대장으로 전쟁에까지 나갓다. 그리다가 다시 정게에 나서서 자유당의 원내총무가 되엿고 금번 맥드날드 거국일치 내각의 조직에는 외무대신의 중직에 잇게 되엿다.＜27＞

(3) 세실
현재에 백작(伯爵)인 영국귀족 출신의 외교가로 금년 66세이다. 세게대전때 련립내각에 외무정무차관이엿섯고 추밀원의원까지 되엿섯다. 대전 당시에 독일 봉쇠정책에 력책에 력량을 발휘하엿다하며 그후 「버밍헴」대학의 명예총장이엿스며 국제련맹이 처음 생길 때 옹호자로 유명하야 1만원의 윌손평화상까지 바덧다. 1923년에 뽈드윈 내각에 입각하얏다가 그후 군비축소문제로 사임하얏다. 씨을 세게에서는 국제련맹에 대한 유리한 리해자라는 말을 한다.＜29＞

(4)
씨는 제 일대 국제련맹총장이다. 금년 54세의 귀족출신의 정치가로 총리대신의 비서로 다년외무성에 재건하엿다. 이번 만주사변에 대한 사무는 전부 씨가 정리하엿다.＜30＞

(5) 또스
씨는 군인 출신으로 금년 64세의 미국외교가이다. 세게대전때에 미국군을 잇글고 불란서에 주둔하야 싸비훈장을 탓섯고 1925년에 노벨상을 바덧다. 그후 쿨리지대통령때 부대통령으로 잇섯스며 유명한 또-스만을 제창하야 또스배상위원회장이엇섯다. 지금은 주영미대사(駐英米大使)로 잇스며 금번 일중사태가 심상치 안음으로 미국의 정치급조약상권익을 옹호하기 위하야 련맹리사회에 출석한 것이다.＜31＞

(6) 施肇基
금년 53세의 중국의 천재적 외교가의 한 사람으로 금번 국제련맹 중국대표이다. 상해 「성요한」대학을 졸업하엿고 일즉이 중국공사관 통역생으로 미국에 가 잇다가 그곳 「코넬」 대학을 마치고 도라왓다. 귀국하야 정계에 활동하다가 당소의 내각때는 교통국장겸 재정총장으로 잇섯다. 세게전쟁이 끗나고 강화회의때는 중국대표로 출석하엿고 그 이듬해에는 미국공사로 전림하야 워싱톤회의 때에는 중국전권대표로 출석한 일까지 잇다.＜32＞

(7) 芳澤謙吉
씨는 금년 58세 신석현출생으로 동경제대 영문과 출신이다. 졸업후 외교관 령사관시험에 합격하야 외교관보로 조선에 주대한 일도 잇다. 일즉이 령사관보로 각국으로 점임하다가 그후에 승진하야 외무성참사관 서기관등으로부터 전권공사대사로 각국에 주재하엿스며 현재는 주불대사로 파리에 잇서서 금번 련맹리사회에는 일본을 대표하야 출석하게 되엿다.＜33＞