잡지명	별건곤 第53號
발행일	1932년 07월 01일
기사제목	連作滑稽小說, 시골아저씨의 서울구경 (Serial Comedic Novel, An Uncle from the Countryside's Sightseeing in Seoul)
기사형태	소설 (Novel)

A Suspicious Telegram

Ungcho

"Arrive at Han River on the 28th"
Hyeong-sik, a fashionable modern boy in Seoul, received this telegram from his uncle in the countryside ten days ago.
Why would he send a telegram ten days in advance when he could have sent it on the day of departure at the station? However, the clever Hyeong-sik already realized.
"Since this gentleman is going to see Seoul for the first time in his life, he is rushing from the start. It's clear that this comes from my uncle's motto of 'Better safe than sorry,' wanting to do things in advance rather than being flustered when faced with them."
However, one thing suspicious in the telegram was "arrive at Han River." Why Han River instead of Gyeongseong Station? Was this country bumpkin trying to save 5 or 10 jeon by getting off at Yongsan Station or Noryangjin Station? If so, he would have said Yongsan Station or Noryangjin Station! No, that can't be it. An uncle who is more familiar with the word "Seoul" than "Gyeongseong" would have no way of knowing Yongsan or Noryangjin.
On the morning of the 28th, Hyeong-sik woke up an hour earlier than usual, at nine o'clock, changed into a neat summer suit, and drove in a taxi towards the Han River.
"Waking up early has led to this situation! What should I do? I'm worried the poor uncle might be wandering on the road."
He felt terribly sorry.
The Gyeongbu Line train arrives at Gyeongseong Station at 8:50. Even if his uncle got off at Yongsan, it would be difficult to meet him. He passed through the front of Yongsan Station, but the uncle was nowhere to be seen.
As he was about to pass the Han River Grand Iron Bridge, Hyeong-sik exclaimed with a delighted shout, "Ah-?" There was his uncle, holding the donkey's reins, leaning against the bridge railing and waiting for him.
As soon as Hyeong-sik got out of the car, he rushed over and said,
"Uncle! What time did you arrive? Which station did you get off at?"
"Ah, Hyeong-sik, I've been waiting for you here for a while. You received the telegram I sent ten days before leaving, right? The road to Seoul takes exactly ten days."
"So you came riding a donkey. Hahaha... My Uncle, like Don Quixote! Let's go inside. Let's take that car."
"Why take a car? Let's go by donkey. You're a fancy gentleman in a suit, so ride. I'll lead the way."
"Oh, the donkey is a problem. Uh—wait a minute, I've got it. Let's attach it to the back of the car."
After a long time, the uncle and nephew, with delighted faces, got into the car. The short-legged donkey, tied to the back of the car, trotted along, its breath coming in gasps.

The Rapidly Turning Great Gyeongseong

Bakjin

His uncle had probably only ridden a cart (荷車) in the countryside, and other than that, the only 'cha' (차) he had experienced was the 'cha' (차, tea) that went down his throat, making him a complete bumpkin. After being jostled on a donkey's back for ten days, sitting in a car felt so plush that he seemed to sink up to his neck. The car's interior was so cozy that it felt like riding in a sedan chair (사인교), and he was very pleased. However, the poor donkey, after carrying his uncle on its back and trotting all the way to Seoul for ten days, had no thought for others' hunger or sore legs. Tying its reins to the back of the car and making it follow was a big problem. However, his uncle, being a man of kindness, had the car drive slowly, seeing how hard it was for the donkey to follow, which was very appreciated. But now, more difficult than hunger and sore legs, was the car's fart smell. This fart didn't stink or smell good, but made his head ache and caused nausea, threatening to bring up the bean porridge he had eaten in Gwacheon. <34>
"Hey, where is this?"
"This is Gyeongseong Station. If you had come by train, you would have gotten off at this station. Why did you ride a donkey? It made you suffer more, and you arrived late." While asking and answering these questions, the uncle felt queasy and his head was spinning, making him feel like the two cups of raw rice wine (makgeolli) he had drunk in Siheung were about to come up.
"Hey, I'm going to walk."
"Why are you doing this?"
"Maybe it's because I'm riding this sedan chair (사인교) for the first time, but I think I have motion sickness. My stomach is churning and I'm dizzy. It was comfortable at first, but I can't ride anymore."
Before he could even enter Namdaemun, the uncle got out of the car.
"How can you get motion sickness from such a car? I'm very sorry for you. Why did you come to Seoul to see the sights if you can't even ride in a car like this?"
"You ask why I came to Seoul if I can't ride in a car? Is sightseeing in Seoul so dizzying? This is a big problem. How can I do such dizzying and nauseating sightseeing? Then I'll go back."
"That's not it. Why would you be dizzy if you walk? You're dizzy because you have motion sickness. No one in Seoul rides a donkey like that. Everyone rides in cars like this. Come on, let's ride the donkey." Thus, after entering Namdaemun, they headed towards Hyeong-sik's lodging, while the uncle, riding on the donkey's back, puffed on his long pipe and enjoyed the sights of the passing streetcars, cars, tall buildings, and well-dressed people, just looking at others and letting others look at him. First, they untied the donkey's saddle at Hyeong-sik's house.

The Donkey Sees Seoul Too!

Bangchon

First, the two had finished breakfast. Hyeong-sik, who usually couldn't wake up until eleven o'clock, woke up a bit earlier this morning to meet his uncle, so his head was dizzy and breakfast didn't sit well with him. He wanted to lie back down and take another nap.
"You must be very tired from traveling for so many days. Why don't you rest at my house today and start sightseeing in Seoul tomorrow!"
Hyeong-sik tried suggesting this to his uncle.
"Hey... don't talk nonsense! What time is it now! The countryside is so busy with farming right now! I need to finish sightseeing in Seoul as quickly as possible and go back down tomorrow. When would I have time to rest at home! We need to start sightseeing right away!"
"But you must be tired..."
"Hey, don't worry about me..."
And so, inevitably, Hyeong-sik ended up taking his uncle from the countryside to see the sights. Even when leaving for sightseeing, there was an argument between the two about whether to ride or not.
"Uncle! Let's go sightseeing by car!" Hyeong-sik suggested, but his uncle insisted, "No, I'm going to ride the donkey!" It was quite difficult for Hyeong-sik to make this stubborn uncle understand how inconvenient it would be to ride a donkey in the busy streets of Seoul.
Eventually, the stubborn uncle agreed to ride the car, but he said, "Still, I can't leave the donkey alone at home. I brought him with me, so I have to let him see Seoul too." The uncle treated the donkey as if it were his close friend.
Hyeong-sik was speechless, but he said, "Okay, let's do that!" since it was his uncle's wish, and they decided to take the donkey along. Of course, there was no way they could put the donkey inside the car with the people <35>, so they tied it securely to the back of the car as before.
The first sightseeing destination was the famous department stores—Jeongjaok and Samwoltong. The best route from Hyeong-sik's lodging was to catch a car in front of Pagoda Park, go around Jongno Intersection, and then turn towards Hwanggeumjeong. With the itinerary decided, the two prepared to depart.

The First Day's Turmoil

Lihyo

The two men were half-sunken in the plush car sofa. Hyeong-sik was puffing on a cigarette, thinking that driving wasn't a bad feeling (気持ち, kimochi), no matter what! The uncle from the countryside was also in a good mood this time, without any car sickness. Of course, at this time, the donkey, trying to keep up with the super-speeding car, was trotting with its tiny hooves, but the donkey's existence had already faded from the minds of the two men absorbed in the car's sofa.
At this time, the car carrying the two men was approaching Jongno Intersection. From here, the car was supposed to cross the intersection and turn towards Hwanggeumjeong. At this moment, the traffic signal was clearly showing "Go!" However, the traffic policeman's arm was about to come down, signaling "Stop!" The driver knew this well from his long experience. The driver swiftly stepped on the brakes to cross the intersection before the stop signal came on. And he quickly turned the steering wheel. Indeed, the car entered the intersection. However, due to this rapid turn, the donkey that was tied to the back rolled over. Naturally, the car was stuck in the middle of the intersection. At this time, the traffic policeman, of course, had no idea that there was a donkey tied to the back of the car and signaled "Stop." Now it was the turn of the cars from the opposite side to come out. The first car that came out into the middle of the intersection exclaimed "Oh dear!" and tried to adjust the brakes, but it was too late. The car and the donkey collided! The car in Seoul ended up running over and killing the country donkey.
It was a collision! Seoul people love to gather anyway! Instantly, people gathered like clouds. Of course, the first to jump out of the car was the uncle from the countryside. The uncle grabbed the car, yelling that it had killed his donkey. And he grabbed the traffic policeman, pleading for him to bring back his donkey. The gathering people laughed and gossiped, saying it was a good sight. The traffic in Jongno was completely blocked due to the people and carts—the traffic policeman was busy dispersing the onlookers and organizing the traffic.
Our modern boy Hyeong-sik was watching this complex scene from beginning to end. "What should I do about this?" The modern boy Hyeong-sik frowned and was racking his brains to solve the problem. <36>

Young Love

Gyeonghwa

Just then, a friend of the uncle, who had also come up to Seoul for sightseeing, got out of the collided car with a pretty woman.
"Hey, what's going on?"
"Haha, I also came to see Seoul."
"I thought I was coming secretly, but you ended up following me."
"Let's have a cigarette and talk slowly. Hey, this is a cigarette, it's very refreshing."
"But who is this woman?"
"Oh, this girl? Why don't you know yet? She's my niece that I've always talked about, her name is Suk-ja, they say."
"Oh really, this is Hyeong-sik, also my nephew."
Hyeong-sik forgets everything else and just stares at the woman's face. The woman also glances at Hyeong-sik and smiles subtly. Hyeong-sik suddenly remembers that she works at the cosmetics department of Jeongjaok.
The two uncles seem to be having a long conversation while sitting in the car. The policeman shouts angrily, and the crowd, impressed by the leisurely attitude of the two country guests, gathers more and more. With all the policeman's efforts, the donkey was taken care of and the crowd was dispersed. They decided never to rely on cars again and started on foot. They circled Jeongjaok and Samwol, went up Namsan to Jingogae, and then went down to Jangchungdan. The sun was already setting, and a cool evening breeze was blowing.
"Come on, try it once. Isn't it written here as one, two, three, four, five, six? You roll these dice. If one comes up, the person who bet on one wins, and if two comes up, the person who bet on two wins. Anyone can try it."
The two uncles looked at it, unable to resist their gambling instincts, and started placing bets. The young people exchanged greetings and, forgetting about the uncles, strolled into the mountains, chatting intimately. As it got dark, the two uncles lost their money and sighed in frustration.
"Aigoo, I lost money and I'm angry, let's have a drink."
The two uncles went into a tavern and drank ten or so bowls of makgeolli. And then, feeling tipsy, the world became enjoyable. The two gentlemen, wearing their hats askew, opening their coat strings, and carrying large scrotum-like pouches on their belts, staggered along Shinmachi (新町). On either side, women with painted faces stood, flirting and enticing them.
"What kind of place is this? Shall we go in and take a look?"

The young people were whispering sweet nothings and forgot about the uncles, searching around for them, but they were nowhere to be seen.
Ah, where did our uncles go!

An Unexpected Great Incident

Songjak

Suk-ja "Where would those country bumpkin uncles go? They're probably just in this Jingogae."
Hyeong-sik "Then why don't we go to Jingogae together for a walk and look for the uncles?"
The two young men and women held hands and searched all over Jingogae. They rushed after anyone wearing a hat, thinking they might be the uncles, and they suspected any Japanese nanny caring for a child in an alley might be one of them. But the uncles were nowhere to be seen. Eventually, they ended up in Shinmachi (新町).
As they approached the Shinmachi police box (新町派出所), they saw a crowd gathered, and inside the police box, some country people were being held. The two young men and women curiously squeezed their way in and were shocked to see that it was the country uncles they had been looking for all this time. The situation was so embarrassing that they couldn't directly ask the police what happened, so they asked the bystanders, and the story was simple.
The uncles, under the influence of the cloudy rice wine (takbae) they had drunk earlier, had gone to Shinmachi for sightseeing when suddenly, they needed to urinate. So, they went to a secluded place where the women wouldn't see them and started urinating, but coincidentally, they urinated behind the police box, and the stream of urine splashed into the police box. Normally, even urinating on the street would be severely punished in Seoul, but they had urinated in front of the police box, which deserved even harsher punishment.
If they were friends accustomed to Seoul life, they would have bowed their heads and apologized for what had happened, even if they were drunk. But these two country uncles, for some reason, got angry and said,
"Hey, how can we live in this world like this? In the countryside, we can urinate freely on the rice paddies, field edges, and roadsides as long as there are no women around. So what's wrong with us finding a place where there were no women and urinating?"
They showed no signs of backing down. And they stroked their yellow beards. <37>
The crowd that had gathered burst into laughter. The police officer at the police box was so dumbfounded that he almost burst out laughing, but he tried to maintain his dignity as a police officer and said sternly,
"Even if that's the case in the countryside, you can't do that in Seoul."
"Hey, are you saying we should pee in our pants?"
Another uncle retorted.
The chief officer, who was standing nearby, said annoyedly,
"If you have nothing to do, get out of here."
And he pushed them out, treating them like drunks.
"Of course, what's the big deal about peeing on the street?"
One uncle muttered as he came out, and Hyeong-sik's uncle added,
"Today is all ruined. The donkey died, and we got caught by the police... But where did those kids go? We need to know the way to go."

An Amazing Tavern

Hyosan

While Hyeong-sik and Suk-ja were searching for the two uncles, they saw what was happening inside the police box and felt awkward just watching, but they couldn't just run in and say, "These two are our uncles," and drag them out, considering their own reputations. However, they were relieved and impressed when the two uncles managed to hold their ground and come out safely.
As the two uncles came out of the police box, they straightened their hats and staggered aimlessly towards the main street. The two young people followed them slowly, and when they were far enough away from the crowd, they pretended to meet them by chance and told them how they had been searching for them.
The two uncles, not seeming to be upset, and seemingly fond of the two young people, said,
"Haha, you guys must have had a hard time. We were also looking for you and even had an unpleasant experience. I guess the Seoul police are quite strict."
And then, they took turns telling the story of what happened at the police box.
Hyeong-sik and Suk-ja took the two uncles to the Daegwanwon Chinese restaurant (大觀園 청요리ㅅ집) on the second floor, turning from Hwanggeumjeong Sajungmok to Yeongnakjeong and entering Supyodari Alley to have dinner.
The two uncles took off their straw shoes (jipsin) from the bottom floor and were about to go up, but the bellboy told them to go up with them on, so they carefully put their straw shoes back on and went up, looking around the room.
"This is quite a big tavern," they said to each other, very impressed.
While ordering sweet and sour pork, japchae, dumplings, and a keun (斤) of baegal (白葛), Hyeong-sik and Suk-ja were happier that they had unexpectedly met and were whispering sweet nothings than they were happy to be treating their uncles who had come from the countryside to dinner. So they left the alcohol entirely to the two uncles and only put chopsticks on other dishes. The uncles, enjoying the rare food and saying that the taste of the alcohol was more pungent and tickled their noses than the country soju, smacked their lips with great pleasure.
Hyeong-sik and Suk-ja were tired and wanted to go straight home and sleep, but the two uncles, being in Seoul, insisted on seeing the nightlife of Seoul, not knowing they were tired, and more so because they were drunk on baegal. Suk-ja insisted that they had to see a theater. Hyeong-sik also didn't want to oppose it.
Around seven-thirty, the two uncles and two young people left the Daegwanwon and headed towards the Joseon Theater.

Disappearance at the Theater

Cheonoe

The outdoor lights were brighter than day, and students, gentlemen, workers, gisaengs, modern boys, and modern girls of the city were flooding into the theater like a flood to enjoy a night of pleasure.
Squeezing into the crowd, Hyeong-sik and Suk-ja bought four tickets and went up to the second floor of the theater with the two uncles.
In reality, Hyeong-sik and Suk-ja were ashamed of having their uncles from the countryside wearing hats among so many people, so they avoided sitting together as much as possible, and they thought that sitting together alone would make others envious. So they gave the two uncles seats on one side and sat together in the family seats.
Suddenly, the lights went out. The two uncles' eyes widened and they didn't know what to do, but then some ghostly person appeared on the other side and did all sorts of things, so the two uncles, having seen a touring hygiene lantern slide show (순회위생환등대회) at their local elementary school once, felt relieved. After the film ended, a gisaeng dance revue opened.
Suk-ja's uncle, unable to bear to watch, poked the side of Hyeong-sik's uncle, who was sitting next to him, and said,
"What kind of cursed girls are those? Aren't they naked? Aigoo, the world is ending. How can we send our children to Seoul to study with peace of mind when they go around seeing such things day and night and have no time for anything else?"
Hyeong-sik's uncle, still drawn by some curiosity, said,
"Hey, it's okay, we wouldn't see this if we didn't come to Seoul."
He seemed quite absorbed in watching the revue.
Strangely, the gazes of two women dressed naturally like neighborhood wives next to the two uncles were sending unusual signals of seduction to the two uncles.
The two uncles, who had come to Seoul for sightseeing, became quite interested in it, and now the seduction of the two women was drawing the two uncles' attention more than the revue.
They completely forgot about how the theater show was going, where Hyeong-sik and Suk-ja had gone. The two country gentlemen followed the winks of the two women. Hyeong-sik and Suk-ja were completely unaware.
It was almost eleven o'clock, and the theater was over, and the audience that had filled the upper and lower floors flowed out into the outside like a flood again. Only then did Hyeong-sik and Suk-ja think of the two uncles and quickly came out to the front door to examine the scattering crowd one by one. But the two uncles were already nowhere to be seen.

Seoul is a Scary Place

Bukheung

The night passed without knowing the whereabouts of the two uncles, and the next morning at dawn.
Hyeong-sik vaguely woke up to the sound of people chattering outside.
"Aigoo, what a world to skin a mountain man alive!"
"Oh my, what should we do?"
It was the angry voice of Hyeong-sik's uncle and the comforting voice of the landlady.
Hyeong-sik jumped up and opened the door.
There were the two uncles, sitting side by side on the porch with extremely angry faces and equally disappointed expressions, smoking cigarettes as if they had made a promise.
"What's wrong?"
"What's wrong? Don't even talk about it, we're going down now."
"Going down?"
"I heard Seoul is scary, but I didn't know it would be this scary." This was Suk-ja's uncle's response.
"Don't even talk about it! It's all because of you." Hyeong-sik's uncle scolded Suk-ja's uncle.
"What?! Didn't you say you wanted to follow those girls? Did I say it first?"
"I did follow them, but I said I was coming back, why did you stick to them?"
"Why did you give them all the money you had?"
"Did I give it to them? They stole it while I was sleeping."
"Don't even talk about it, I lost all my money because of you, not even a penny left."
"Why couldn't you say a word to the police when you're so smart!"
"You were just trembling."
From this fight, Hyeong-sik guessed that the two uncles had been dragged to some libertine or prostitute, had all their money stolen, had even gone to the police station, and had been ripped off again on their way back.
"This damn Seoul sightseeing, I hate it, I'm going down now."
Hyeong-sik's uncle stood up abruptly. The other uncle also stood up.
"What's wrong? You should see more sights before you go."
"I don't want to, I don't know."
It seemed useless to try to stop them.
"Then wait a while and take the train."
"Do we have money to take the train?! Let's walk."
"I'll give it to you."
"Leave it alone."
Even while saying this, he didn't seem to have the courage to walk, so he quietly sat back down.
After breakfast, Suk-ja and Hyeong-sik put the two uncles on the train at Gyeongseong Station and headed towards Pe-ppi Kolpujang. - (End) - <39>

**Named Entities**

熊超	Ungcho
경성	Gyeongseong
룡산	Yongsan
로량진	Noryangjin
돈키호테	Don Quixote
과천	Gwacheon
시흥	Siheung
정자옥	Jeongjaok
삼월동	Samwoltong
파고다공원	Pagoda Park
종로	Jongno
황금정	Hwanggeumjeong
黎曉	Lihyo
鏡花	Gyeonghwa
숙자	Suk-ja
신맛지	Shinmachi
新町派出所	Shinmachi Police Box
松雀	Songjak
曉山	Hyosan
대관원	Daegwanwon
영락정	Yeongnakjeong
수표다리골목	Supyodari Alley
조선극장	Joseon Theater
天外	Cheonoe
北熊	Bukheung



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제53호
발행일	1932년 07월 01일
기사제목	連作滑稽小說, 시골아저씨의 서울구경
기사형태	소설

連作滑稽小說, 시골아저씨의 서울구경
미심한 電報

熊超

「28일조한강착」
서울서 일류가는 모뽀 형식은 싀골아저씨로부터 벌서 열흘전에 이가튼 전보를 바덧다.
길떠나는 날 당일 정거장에서 쳐도 될 전보를 여를 압서서 칠 필요가 어데 잇슬까 그러나 영민한 형식군은 벌서 아러채렷다.
『이 냥반이 생전 처음으로 서울구경을 하게 되니까 미리부터 서두르시는구나 매사는 불여튼튼 일에 맛닥드려가지고 헝겁지겁을 할게 아니라 미리부터 해두자하는 아저씨의 모토에서 나온 것이 분명하다』
그러나 전보문에 한가지 미심한 것은 「한강착」이다. 경성역이면 경성역이지 한강에 도착한다하엿스니 무슨 말인가 촌양반이라 5전 혹은 10전을 앳겨서 룡산역이나 로량진역에서 내릴 모양인가? 그러타면 룡산역이면 룡산, 로량진역이면 로량진이라고 햇슬터인데! 아니다 모두 안될 말이다. 경성이란 말보다 서울이란 말이 귀에 익은 아저씨가 룡산이며 로량진을 알리 만무하다.
28일 아츰 전보다도 한시간 이르게 아홉시에 이러난 형식은 말숙한 여름양복을 가라입고 택시를 모라 한강으로 달렷다.
「일즉 이러난다는 꼴이 이 지경이 됏스니 엇저면 조흔가! 가엽슨 아저씨가 로두에서 방황하지나 안을까」
미안한 생각이란 이루 말할수 업다.
경부선차의 경성역착이 8시 50분 아저씨가 룡산서 내렷슬지라도 맛나기는 어렵게 생겻다. 허허실실 룡산역압흘 지내보앗스나 아저씨는 보이지 안엇다.
한강대철교를 막 지나칠 때 형식은 무심결에 반가운 소리를 「아-?」하고 질럿다. 그것은 아저씨가 당나귀곱비를 잡은채 철교 난간에 기대서서 자기를 기다리고 잇는 것이엇다.
형식은 차에서 내리자마자 달려들면서
『아젓씨-! 몃시에 나리섯서요 어느 정거장에서 나리섯서요』
『아 형식이냐 너를 여기서 한참 기다려섯섯다-내가 여를전 떠날 때 부친 전보는 바다 봣겟지 서울길이 꼭 열흘 걸리는구나』
『그래 당나귀를 타구 오섯군요. 하하하하...돈키호테가튼 마이 엉클!(우리 아저씨) 어서 문안으로 드러갑시다. 저 자동차타구』
『자동차 탈것 무엇잇니 당나귀타고 가지 너는 양복입은 나-리니까 타라 내가 끌고가마』
『아참 당나귀가 문제군요 어-가만잇자 됏습니다. 자동차꽁문이에 달고 갑시다』
오래간만에 맛난 숙질 두분은 반가운 얼골로 자동차에 몸을 실엇다. 다리 짧은 당나귀가 자동차에 매달려 숨 갑부게 동동거름을 친다.

팽팽도는 大京城

迫眞

아저씨가 차라고는 싀골서 짐차(荷車)나 타 보앗슬가 그 외에 차라고는 목구멍으로 넘어가는 차도 못 먹어본 아조 고라리이시엿다. 나귀 등에서 열흘동안이나 출넝거리다가 자동차에 올나 안저보니 자리가 엇지 푹신한지 모가지까지 빠지는 것갓고 차안이 안윽한 것이 마치 사인교나 탄것가태서 매우 편하기도 하려니와 처음 타보는 자동차 서울구경첫거름부터 마음이 매우 흡족하얏다. 그러나 가엽슨 당나귀는 열흘동안이나 아저씨를 등에 올녀노코 동동거름을 처가며 서울에 갓다노아주니까 남의 시장한 사정 다리 압흔 사정은 조곰도 생각지 안코 자동차 꽁문이에 곱비를 매여놋코 달니니 등이 겁분하야 몸이 것든하기는 하나 짤븐다리를 종종거리며 따러가기가 큰일이엿다. 그러나 인정푼어치나 쓰는 아저씨라 당나귀따러 오기힘들가보아 자동차를 천천히 가게 해준 것은 대단 고마웟다. 그러나 인제는 시장하고 다리압흔 것보다 더 곤란한 것은 자동차란 놈의 방귀냄새엿다. 이놈의 방귀는 구리지도 안코 고리지도 안코 사뭇 골치가 압흐고 구역이 나서 과천서 어더먹은 콩죽이 도로 올나와 죽을 지경이엿다.<34>
「얘 이게 어듸냐」
「여기가 경성정거장입니다. 긔차를 타고 오섯스면 이 정거장에서 나리실걸 당나귀는 왜 타고 오섯서요 고생도 더하시고 날도 늣지 안습니가」이러저러한 이야기를 무르며 대답하며 오면서도 아저씨는 엇재 앗가부터 속에 메식메식하고 머리가 훵훵 내둘니며 당장에 시흥서 두잔 자신 막걸니가 꼴닥꼴닥넘어올것가탯다.
「얘야 나는 거러가겟다」
「왜 그러십니가」
「아마 내가 이런 사인교는 처음 타는데 이게 멀민가보다. 엇재 속이 울넝거리고 어지러워죽겟다. 처음에는 편하드니 더는 못타고 가겟다」
남대문을 채 드러스지도 못해서 아저씨는 자동차에서 나리시고 마럿다.
「차멀미를 아모리하시기로 이까짓 자동차야 머시 어지럽습니까 참 딱하십니다. 이런 자동차도 못 타시면서 서울구경은 멋하러 오섯서요」
「자동차도 못타면서 서울 구경은 멋하러 왓느냐고? 서울구경은 그럼 그러케 어지러운 것이냐 큰일낫구나 그러케 어지럽고 메시꺼운 구경을 어떠케하늬 그럼 도로 나려가겟다」
「그런게 아닙니다. 거러안단이면 어지럽긴 왜 어지러워요 차멀미를 하시니가 어지러우시지요. 서울서도 그런 당나귀를 타고 단이는 사람은 업서요 다 이런 자동차를 타고 단이지요 그럼 어서 당나귀가 타고 가십시다」 이리하야 남대문안을 드러서서 형식이의 묵고 잇는 하숙을 향하야가면서 우선 오고가는 전차 자동차 웃뜩한 집 말쑥한 사람들 이것저것 눈이 휘궁구래지는 구경을 해가며 나귀등에 올나안저 장죽에 연긔를 퍽퍽 피우며 그저 내구경 남도 식히고 남의 구경 나도 하며 우선 형식이의 집에서 나귀 안장을 풀너노앗다.

당나귀도 서울구경!

芳村

위선 두사람은 조반을 맛치럿다. 보통 열한시가 되지 아니하면 이러나지 못하든 형식군이 오늘 아츰은 아저씨 마중 때문에 좀 일즉이 이러나서 그런지 머리가 부영부영하고 조반까지도 잘 비위에 달이지 아넛다-그대로 다시 자리에 누어서 한잠 더 내자고 십헛다.
『여러날 객지에 고생하서서 퍽으나 고단하실 터인데 오늘은 저의 집에 좀 쉬시고 내일부터 서울거리구경을 하시지요!』
형식군은 아저씨에게 이러케 말을 걸어보앗다.
『이애야...한가롭은 소리마라! 지금이 어느 때라고! 지금 시골은 경작긔로 불이나게 밧분토막이다! 서울구경을 하로밧비 맛추고 내일이라도 속히 내려가보야할 형편이다. 언제 한가로히 집에서 쉬고 잇겟늬! 이제부터 곳 구경을 떠나야하겟다!』
「그레도 피곤하실텐데...」
「이애 내걱정은 마라...」
그리하야 하는수 업시 형식군은 시골아저씨를 다리고 거리구경을 떠나게 된 것이다. 구경을 떠나는데도 두사람사이에는 무엇을 타고 단니면서 거리를 볼가?의 문제로 한참동안 말성이 생겻다.
「아저씨! 구경은 자동차로 하시지요!」하는 형식군의 의견에 대하야 「아니다 나는 당나긔를 타고 구경을 할테다!」라고 아저씨는 내욱엿다. 그리고 형식군이 이 완고한 아저씨에게 당나귀를 타고 다니는 것이 이 복잡한 서울장안에서는 얼마나 불편한 일이라는 것을 해득식히는 것은 여간한 곤난이 아니엿다.
결국 완고한 아저씨가 자동차를 타기로 승낙은 하엿스나 「그레도 당나귀를 집에다 혼자 내버려둘수는 업다. 내가 가티 다리고 온놈이니 서울구경도 그놈과 가티해야하겟다」아저씨는 당나귀를 맛치 자신의 친한 동무와 가티 취급하는 것이엇다.
형식군에겐 하도 어이가 업섯스나 아저씨의 소원이라 「그러면 그러케하지요!」하고 당나귀도 함께 다리고 나가기로 하엿다. 그러타고 하여서 물논 당나귀를 자동차안에<35> 사람과 함께 태이는 수가 업고 역시 전과 가티 자동차 뒷꽁문이에다 단단히 붓잡어 매기로 하엿다.
구경의 목표는 첫재 유명한 백화점-정자옥과 삼월동이엇다. 형식군의 하숙에서 가랴면 파고다공원압헤서 자동차를 잡어타고 종로네거리를 돌아 황금정으로 돌아지는 것이 제일순서올흔 경로이엇다. 경로의 프로그람이 이와 가티 되자 두사람은 출발하기로 하엿다.

첫날의 風波

黎曉

두사람의 몸은 푹은푹은한 자동차 소파- 우에 반신이나 잠겨 잇섯다. 형식군은 하마끼 한 대를 내피이면서 드라브는 언제하든지 「기모찌」납분 것은 아니다!라고 생각하고 잇섯다. 시골아저씨도 이번은 차멀미도 아니나고 아조 긔분이 조왓다. 물론 이때에 자동차뒷꽁문이에는 초스피드의 자동차와 경주를 하노라고 당나귀란 놈은 조고마한 발굽으로 동동거름을 치고 잇섯것만 자동차의 소파-맛에 취한 두사람의 머리에는 어느듯 당나귀생각은 멀리 살어지고 말엇다.
이때 두사람을 태인 자동차는 막 종로네거리에까지 닥어왓섯다. 여긔서 자동차는 그대로 十字路의 외인편차도(車道)를 넘어 다시 외인편으로 황금정에 꼽으러질 순서이엇다. 이때에 교통신호는 확실히 「고우」(나가라!)를 가르치고 잇섯다. 그러나 교통순사의 외인편 팔은 방금 내려지며 「스톱」(머즈라!)이 걸어질려는 순간이엇다. 그것을 자동차운전수는 오래동안의ㅡ 경험으로 잘 알고 잇섯다. 운전수는 스톱이 걸니기전에 크로스(十字路)를 지내가려고 민활하게 부레-키를 잡엇다. 그리고 급속도로 핸들을 외인편으로 돌리엇다. 과연 자동차는 그대로 크로스에 들어갓다. 그러나 이러케 급속도로 회전을 하는 바람에 뒤에 매달렷든 당나귀는 한바탕 궁굴러 뛰엿다. 그 바람에 자연히 자동차도 크로스 한폭판에서 그대로 머뭇거리고 잇는 중이엇다. 이때에 교통순사는 물론 자동차뒤에 당나귀를 달고 단니는 것까지는 짐작지 못하고 그대로 스톱을 거럿다. 이번은 반대편쪽의 자동차들이 밀리어나오는 차레엿다. 제일 먼저 자동차가 마음노코 한복판에 나왓슬땅에 「앗풀사!」급히 부레이키를 조절하려고 하엿스나 때는 느젓섯다. 자동차와 당나귀의 충돌! 서울의 자동차는 그여코 시골당나귀를 깔어죽이고 말엇다.
충돌이다! 그러지 아너도 모이기를 조와하는 서울사람들이라! 순식간에 사람들은 구름가티 모여드럿다. 그중에도 제일먼저 자동차를 뛰여나린 것은 시골아저씨인 것은 물론이다. 아저씨는 닷자곳자로 그 자동차를 붓잡고 이놈 우리당나긔 죽엿다고  야단법석을 하엿다. 그리고 교통순사를 붓잡고 당나귀를 불러달라고 호소를 하는 것이엇다. 모여드는 사람들은 조흔 구경낫다고 웃고 떠들엇다. 사람과 구루마 때문에 종로의 교통은 꽉 맥히고 말엇다-교통순사는 구경꾼의 해산과 교통의 정리에 몸이 다럿다.
이러한 복잡한 광경을 처음부터 나종까지 보고섯는 것이 우리 모던뽀이 형식군이엇다.「이일을 엇지하면 조흘까」모던뽀이 형식군이 눈섭을 집흐리고 문제해결에 고심을 하고 잇섯다.<36>

젊은이의 사랑

鏡花

마츰 충돌된 자동차 안에서는 역시 서울 구경차로 올나온 아저씨의 친구가 어엽분 색씨 하나를 다리고 내려슨다.
「이사람 자네 이게 웬일인가」
「허허 이사람 나도 서울구경왓네」
「나혼자 몰래 오는 줄 알엇드니 종내 뒤를 따라왓네그려」
「자 우리 담배나 한 대씩 풰가면서 천천이 이야기하세 엣네 이게 권연이라든가 아조 승거」
「그런데 이색씨는 누군가」
「오 얘말인가 왜 아직 모르나 얘가 바로 늘 말하든 내 족하딸일세 시체 이름으로 숙자라고 한다나」
「오 그래 얘는 형식이라고 역시 내족할세」
형식이는 이것저것 모도다 니저버리고 색씨 얼굴만 처다본다. 색씨도 형식이를 힐끔힐끔 처다보면서 상긋상긋웃는다. 형식이는 올치 정자옥 화장품부에서 일보는 녀자로구나하고 생각이 낫다.
아저씨 두분은 자동차에 올라타는데 걸처 안자서 뭐라고 긴 이야기를 할 모양이다. 순사는 악이 올라 외치고 군중은 그 시골 손님 두분의 유한한 태도에 감심하야 점점 더 모여든다. 순사의 온갓 노력으로 당나귀처치도 하고 군중도 헤치엿다. 그들은 다시는 자동차신세는 지지안키로 결심한후 도보로 출발하얏다. 정자옥과 삼월 한바퀴 도라서 진고개로 남산에 올낫다가 장충단으로 내려섯다. 해는 이믜 서산에 걸리고 저녁 바람이 슬슬 분다.
「자 자 한번씩 해보십시요. 여기 일이삼사오륙이라고 씨여잇지 안습닛가 이 주사위를 굴립니다 일이 나오면 일짜에다 돈을 논 사람이 먹고 이가 나오면 이짜에다 논 사람이 모다 먹습니다. 자 누구시든지 한번씩 해볼만합니다」
아저씨 두분은 무엔가하고 드려다보다가 그만 도박본능을 못 익이여서 턱 안자서 돈을 대이기를 시작하얏다. 젊은이들은 어느새 인사를 하고 정답게 아저씨고 뭐고 다 니저버리고 정신업시 거닐며 산속으로 드러갓다. 어둑어둑해올 즈음에 아저씨 두분은 돈원이나 톡톡이 일고 분하지만 하는 수 업시 한숨짓고 이러섯다.
「에익 돈도 일코 화도 나니 술이나 한잔 먹세」
두 아저씨는 선술집에 드러가서 막걸리를 여나무 사발씩 드리켯다. 그리고나니 얼근한게 세상이 즐거웟다. 두양반이 갓을 빗켜쓰고 옷고름을 헤치고 커단 소 불알가튼 쌈지를 허리띄에 매달고 비틀비틀 신맛지(新町)를 거러간다. 좌우에는 분칠한 색씨들이 서서 아양을 떨며 살살 꾀인다.
「이것이 무슨 집이야 드러가 구경 좀 할까」

젊은이들은 사랑을 속삭이다가 정신을 차려 아저씨들을 아모리 차저 도라다녓스나 보이지 안엇다.
아아 우리 아저씨는 어디를 갓나!

意外의 大逢變

松雀

숙자 「시골뜩이 아저씨가 가면 어듸를 갓겟서요 고작해야 이진고개이겟지」
형식 「그러면 우리 두리 동반을 해가지고 산뽀 겸 아저씨 찻기 겸하야 진고개나 가볼까?」
두 젊은 남녀는 이러케 손에 손을 잡고 진고개 일판을 다 뒤젓다. 길에서 갓쓴 사람만 얼른하면 아저씨인가하고 밧비 쪼차가보기도 하고 골목안에서 희끔한 옷을 입은 일본집 아희 보와주는 어멈만 보와도 아저씨인가 의심하얏다. 그러나 아저씨는 암만해도 뵈이지 안엇다. 그럭저럭 간 것이 역시 신맛지(新町)엿다.
큰길로 나서서 조곰 가느라닛가 신정 파출소(新町派出所) 압헤 사람이 백접치듯 모혓는데 파출소 안에는 어떤 시골사람들이 잡혀 안치웟다. 두 남녀는 호긔시으로 밧삭 드러가서 보니 앗불사 자긔들이 이때까지 차저다니던 시골 아저씨들이엿다. 모양이 창피하야 순사에게 즉접 뭇지는 못하고 겻헤서 구경하는 사람들에게 물으니 사실인즉 이럿케 단순하엿다.
그 아저씨란 양반들이 악가 먹은 탁백이 바람에 우연이 신맛지 구경을 갓다가 별안간 오줌이 마려우닛가 일껀 녀자들이 보지안는 으슥한 곳에 가서 오줌을 눈다는 것이 공교스럽게도 파출소 뒤에다 대고 누어서 오줌줄기가 파출소 안에까지 튀여드러갓섯다. 보통으로 길에서 오줌을 누어도 경을 톡톡이 치는 서울인데 항차 파출소 압헤서 오줌누어 노핫스니 경을 팟다발가티 칠 지경이엇다.
서울 살림에 단련한 친구가트면 아모리 술낌이라도 일이 이러케 된바에 머리를 굽실거릴판이지만 이 시골 두 아저씨들은 웬심인지 가장긔가 나서
「여보 이래서야 어대 세상에 살수 잇겟소 시골서야 논뚝이고 밧가상 자리고 길까이고 간에 녀자들 보이지 안는 곳이면 똥오줌쯤이야 마음대로 누지 안소 그래 해도 저물고 녀자들 안뵈는 곳을 차젓 오줌 눈 것이 무엇 잘못이란 말이요」
하고 조금도 굴하는 빗치 업섯다. 그리고는 노랑수염을 쓱쓱 쓰다듬엇다.<37>
모혀섯든 군중들은 껄걸 우섯다. 파출소순사도 하도 어이가 업스니까 속으로는 우슴이 터질지경이엇스나 그대로 순사의 위엄을 일치 안흐랴고 가장 정색을 하며
「시골은 암만 그래도 서울 와서는 그래서 안돼」
하고 소리를 꽥 질럿다.
「허 이냥반 그럼 오줌을 바지에다 싸란 말이요」
하고 다른 아저씨 한 분이 또 말댓귀를 하엿다.
엽헤서 보고 섯든 주임순사가 귀찬타는드시
「일이 업서 얼른가」
하고 술주정꾼이취급으로 등을 내여미럿다.
「하면그러치 길까에서 오줌은 좀 누엇기로 어떳탄 말이야」
한 아저씨가 중얼중얼하며 나오니까 형식이아저씨는 거기에 잇대여서 또 중얼거렷다.
「오늘 재수는 다 글럿네 당나귀 죽이고 순금한테 취체당하고...그런데 얘들이 대체 어대를 갓서? 이것 길을 알어야 어대로 가지」

굉장한 술집

曉山

형식군과 숙자는 두 아저씨들을 차즈랴고 헤매든 판에 파출소 안에서 당하는 꼴을 보고는 그대로 보고만 잇기도 난처한 일이요 그러타고 해서 얼른 튀여드러가서 「이 두분은 우리아저씨요」하고 끌고 나올 용긔도 자긔들 체면을 생각해서 도저이 나지 안헛다. 그러나 두 아저씨가 다 상당이 버티다가 무사이 나오는 꼴을 보고는 한편으로 안심도 하고 한편으로는 감심도 하엿다.
두 아저씨들은 파출소를 나오자 여전이 삣닥-하게 갓을 재켜쓰고는 비틀거름을 치며 큰길로 향하야 무정방하고 거럿다. 두 젊은이는 슬슬 뒤를 따라가다가 모혓든 군중이 보이지 안흘만큼 되여서야 의외에 거긔서 맛나는 것처럼 아저씨들을 붓들고 지금껏 차저다닌 이야기를 하엿다.
두 아저씨들은 불쾌한 생각도 업다는드시 그리고 두 젋은이가 귀엽다는드시
「허허 이 사람들아 원 좀 욕보앗겟나 우리 역시 너의들을 차저다니다가 공연한 봉변까지 하고 원 남이 창피해서 서울순사란 꽤 딱따하게 굴든구나」
하고는 번가라가며 파출소에서 지난 이야기를 늘어노앗다.
형식군과 숙자는 두 아저씨를 다리고 황금정 사정목에서 꺽기어 영락정으로 해서 수표다리골목으로 드러서서 저녁요긔 하랴고 대관원 청요리ㅅ집 이층으로 인도하엿다.
두 아저씨들은 아래층에서부터 신엇든 집신을 버서들고는 올라가랴고 하다가 뽀이가 그대로 신고 올라가라는 바람에 다시 버서들엇든 집신을 신고 조심조심이 올라가서 방안을 휘휘 들러보며
「주막치고는 쾌 큰 주막일세」하고 서로 도라다보며 매우 경탄하엿다.
탕수육, 잡채, 만두 그리고 배갈 한근을 청하야 노코 먹는데 형식이와 숙자는 모처럼 시골서 오신 두 아저씨를 모시고 저녁 대접을 하는 것이 깃브다는 것보다도 자긔들 두 젊은이가 의외에 만나서 사랑을 속삭이게 되고 더구나 지금은 한자리에서 음식까지 가티 먹게 된 것이 훨신 마음에 자질자질하게 깃벗섯다. 그리하야 술은 왼통 두 아저씨에게 맛겨노코 다른 것에만 젓가락을 대엿다. 아저씨는 모처럼 먹는 진긔한 음식에다가 더욱 술맛이 시골소주보다는 더 지독하게 코를 찌른다고하야가며 매우 유쾌한드시 입맛을 다시엇다.
형식군과 숙자의 피곤한 분수로 해서는 여긔서 바로 허터저 집으로 도라가 자는 것이 퍽 편햇겟지만 두 아저씨가 이왕 서울을 온김이니 서울의 밤구경을 해야만 되겟다는 것이 피곤한 줄도 모르고 더구나 배갈긔운에 흥이 도든 그들의 주장이엇다. 숙자는 무엇보다도 극장을 보아야 한다고 주장하엿다. 거기에는 형식이도 반대하고 십지 안헛다.
일곱시 반쯤 되어서 두 아저씨와 두 젊은이는 대관원을 나서서 조선극장으로 향하엿다.

劇場의 失踪

天外

옥외의 조명등은 낫보다고 더 밝은데 학생, 신사, 노동자, 기생, 모던뽀이, 모던껄이라는 장안의 모뽀, 모껄은 하로ㅅ밤의 형락을 누리어보랴고 홍수처럼 극장 압흐로 쏘다저 밀리엇다.
그틈에 끼워서 형식군과 숙자는 두 아저씨를 모시고 입장권 넉장을 사들고는 극장 이층으로 올나갓다.
형식군과 숙자는 실상 자긔아저씨들이엇만 여러사람들속에서 갓쓴 시골떽이라는 것이 자긔들 체면에 무슨 수치나 되는 것가터서 될 수 잇는대로 가튼 자리에 안기를 피하고 더구나 자기들끼리만 둘이서 한자리에 안는 것이 남보기에 부러워 할 것만 가티 생각이 드럿다. 그래서 두 아저씨들은 한편에다 자리를 잡어주고 자기들끼리는 둘이서 가족석에 가 나란이 안젓다.
별안간 불이 탁 꺼젓다. 두 아저씨들은 네눈이 휘둥그래저서 어쩔줄을 모르다가 또다시 건너편에 무슨 귀신가튼 사람이 나타나서 왼갓짓을 다하자 두 아저씨들은 자기 지방 보통학교에서 순회위생환등대회를<38> 한번 본 겸 경험이 잇기 때문에 착히 안심하엿다. 그 활동사진이 끗나고 둘째번에 기생의 땐쓰레뷰가 열리엇다.
숙자의 아저씨는 참아 못 보겟다는드시 엽헤 안저잇는 형식이 아저씨의 엽구리를 쿡 찌르며
「조런 망할년들이 잇나 조것 빨가벗지안햇나. 에이 세상은 말세일세 조러니 어대 시골서 마음노코 자식들을 무어 서울로 공부시킨다고 보낼수 잇겟나 밤낫 조런 구경이나 다니면 볼일은 다 보지」
형식이 아저씨는 그래도 무슨 호긔심에 끌리어
「얘 그래도 괜찬헤 서울이나 왓스니까 이런 구경도 하지안나」
하고 레뷰구경에 꽤 정신이 팔린 모양이엇다.
이상하게도 두 아저씨 엽헤 염집 부인처럼 천연스럽게 차린 두 부인의 시선은 두 아저씨에게로 보내는 추파가 심상치 안햇다.
모처럼 서울구경오신 두 아저씨들은 꽤 거기에 흥미를 늣기게 되야 이제는 레뷰보다도 두 녀자의 추파가 더 두 아저씨의 마음을 끄럿다.
극장구경이 어떠케 되는지 형식이와 숙자가 어데가 하고 잇는지 그런 것은 전연이 다 이저버리고 두 녀자의 흘리는 눈짓에 시골 두 양반은 뒤를 따라나섯다. 그는 형식이와 숙자도 전연 모르고 안젓섯다.
열한시가 거의 되어 극장은 파하고 아래 웃층에 갓득 찻든 관중은 다시 쏘다저 박그로 흘러나왓다. 그제야 형식이와 숙자는 두 아저씨들을 새삼스러이 생각하고 빨리 문압헤 나와서 허터지는 군중을 일일이 검사해보앗다. 그러나 두 아저씨는 벌서 그림자도 볼수가 업섯다.

서울은 무서운 곳

北熊

두 아저씨의 종적을 알지 못한 채 그날밤이 지나고 이튼날 새벽.
밧게서 웅성거리는 소리에 형식은 잠이 아렴풋이 깨엇다.
「원 원 산사람의 껍질을 볏겨먹을 세상이지 원!」
「아이그 어쩌엇면」
형식의 아저씨의 분개하는 소리와 하숙집 로파의 위로하는 소리다.
형식은 뛰여 일어나 문을 열엇다.
거긔에는 두 아저씨가 극도로 분개한 얼골에 역시 극도로 락망한 표정을 하고 나란히 마루에 걸어 안저 약속이나 한것처럼 담배를 피우고 잇다.
「웬일이세요?」
「웬일이라니 말도 말어나 우리는 지금 내려갈난다」
「내려가시다니요?」
「참 서울이 무섭다더니 이러케 무서울 줄은 몰낫네」이것은 숙자 아저씨의 장단이다.
「말도 말게 이사람! 왼통 자네 때문에 그러케 되엿네」하고 형식이 아저씨가 숙자아저씨를 핀잔을 준다.
「뭐?! 아-니 자네가 그년들을 따러가자고 햇지 내가 먼점 그랫나?」
「가기는 갓지만 내가 도루 오랴고 하는데 무얼 빌어먹으러 붓터안젓서?」
「자네는 왜 잇는 돈을 다 털어주엇나?」
「내가 털어주엇나? 그년들이 나 자는틈에 훔처갓지」
「말도 말게 나도 자네 때문에 동전한푼 업시 다 털엇네」
「저러케 똑똑하면서 왜 순사한테 가서는 한말도 못하고 그래!」
「자네도 벌벌 떨기만 하데」
이 싸홈으로 형식은 두 아저씨가 어느 은군자나 밀매음에게 끌녀가서 돈을 다 빼ㅅ기고 파출소에까지 갓다가 역시 뒤통수를 치고 돌아온 것을 짐작하엿다.
「이놈의 서울구경 이가 갈닌다 지금 내려갈난다」
하고 형식이 아저씨는 벌떡 일어선다. 또 한분 아저씨도 딸어 일어선다.
「뭘 그러세요? 더 구경을 하시고 가서야지요」
「실타 모른다」
아무리 말녀도 아니들을 눈치다.
「그러면 시간이나 기달녀서 차를 타고 가서야지요」
「차 탈내야 돈 잇지?! 걸어가지」
「제가 드리지요」
「그만 두어라」
이러게 말하면서도 그래도 걸어갈 용긔는 나지 아니하는지 슬그머니 주저안는다.
조반후에 숙자와 형식은 두 아저씨를 경성역에서 차에 실어보내고 뻬-삐 꼴푸장으로 향하여갓다.-(끗)-<39>
<34-39>