**Header Section**
Magazine Title: 三千里 제12권 제8호
Publication Date: 1940년 09월 01일
Article Title: 關北, 滿洲 出身 作家의 『鄕土文化』를 말하는 座談會(第四回) (A Round-Table Discussion on the "Local Culture" by Writers from Kwanbuk and Manchuria (Part 4))
Article Type: 대담·좌담 (Interview/Round-table Discussion)

**Body Text Translation**

A Round-Table Discussion on the "Local Culture" by Writers from Kwanbuk and Manchuria (Part 4)

Our company has divided all of Chosŏn into five regions: Kwansŏ, Kiho, Yŏngnam, Kwandong, and Kwanbuk. We have been holding monthly discussions in our pages, gathering valuable insights on local culture from literary figures hailing from these regions. As the fourth installment, we now present the Kwanbuk and Manchuria section in this month's issue.

**Participants (Present)**

Kim Kirim (Kyŏngsŏng)
Kim Kwangsŏp (Kyŏngsŏng)
Pak Kyeju (Kyŏngsŏng)
Yi Pungmyŏng (Hamhŭng)
Yi Yongak (Kyŏngsŏng) <96>
Yi Ch'an (Samsu)
Yi Hŏn'gu (Kyŏngsŏng)
Ch'oe Chŏnghŭi (Kyŏngsŏng)
Han Sŏrya (Hamhŭng)
Hyŏn Kyŏngjun (Tomun)
(In alphabetical order)

**Characteristics of "Kwanbuk, East Manchu" Works**

I. What efforts have you usually made to incorporate the beautiful mountains and rivers and the unique local "linguistic beauty" of your hometown, Kwanbuk and Northeast Manchuria, into your works? Also, among the achievements of the Chosŏn literary world so far, what value and characteristics do the works contributed by writers from Kwanbuk and Manchuria possess?

**Han Sŏrya** - I think the feminine word "beautiful" (秀麗) is probably not appropriate for the mountains and rivers of Kwanbuk. I once described the mountains and fields of Kwanbuk as prosaic, and I believe it can be seen that way. It could also be called masculine. Indeed, there is a taste of majestic strength.
Similarly, the Kwanbuk dialect cannot be called beautiful or lovely; it is blunt, eccentric, and rough.
I have tried using this regional language directly in my works, but because it is difficult for the general public to understand, it presents various difficulties in literature. Therefore, I do not attempt to transplant the Kwanbuk language directly into literature. Instead, I try to capture the unique local flavor, purity, resilience, and passion inherent in the Kwanbuk language and infuse them into my literature. If my intention has manifested to any extent, the Central Language (中央語) I use should contain something different, something heretical (異端的) and northern (北方的), distinct from the sentiment of pure Central region people. Whether this is truly the case, I cannot say. But it is true that I strive for it.
Whether in speech or writing, I never try to adopt the beautiful, feminine, Seoul-like sentimentality in the spirit of the words and text. To the very end, I want to cultivate the aspect of being an earthy Northern human, a writer from the North.
The characteristic <97> contribution of Kwanbuk writers to Chosŏn literature might be called the "power of will" (意志의 힘). A writer like Ch'oe Sŏhae is the best example. Not only did he technically elevate Chosŏn literature, but more importantly, the passion – rather, the fervent blood – he threw into Chosŏn literature is something that thousands of mediocre writers like us cannot match, and I have yet to find anyone comparable among other writers. There are many promising writers for the future, but I cannot acknowledge anything original or unique, nor hold great expectations, for some Kwanbuk writers who abandon the Kwanbuk-style fortitude and will, striving instead to learn beautiful and maidenly things.

**Kim Kirim** - The mountains and streams of Kwanbuk might be beautiful, but my hometown is not. The modest small fields and the Mach'ŏnnyŏng (摩天嶺) range blocking the view always seemed desolate and frustrating. Our local dialect is also not particularly beautiful. In my forgotten minor works like "A Certain Life" (어떤人生), "Prosperity Chronicle" (繁榮記), and "Along the Railway Line" (鐵道沿線), I tried to preserve the local dialect in the dialogue, but I probably ended up killing it.
The characteristic of works by writers and poets from this northern region, though not necessarily common to everyone, is generally perceived – I've heard this in many places – as having a somewhat coarse texture (부틈부치) and a rough brushstroke. However, individually, poems like Mr. Kim Kwangsŏp's are delicate and refined (精麗), unlike what one might expect from a northern native, so it cannot be said uniformly. Sŏhae, Sŏrya, P'ain... generally seem to possess the Northernness (北方性) mentioned earlier.

**Yi Hŏn'gu** - I have never made a special effort to incorporate the Kwanbuk dialect into my writing. However, in the works of Ch'oe Sŏhae, P'ain's "Night on the Border" (國境의 밤), or the works of Yi Sŏnhŭi and Ch'oe Chŏnghŭi, I feel a persistent flow of something like a dull gleam (鈍光?) shining faintly amidst the tough, desolate, and gloomy atmosphere of Kwanbuk. This sensation contains a powerfully oppressive and wild Northern difficulty (難澁) that is hard for ordinary constitutions to bear. This strong expression of life, this temperament that knows no retreat, refuses to yield to others, and is almost ignorantly firm, I believe will become a shield for the new future of Chosŏn literature.

**Kim Kwangsŏp** - Somewhere along the line, the place where I was born – my region – seems to have vanished from my spirit. I already want to demand something beyond these thoughts that are hard to discard. Yet, sometimes, like a blue serpent slithering over the wall in my mother's <98> conception dream (태몽), I find myself visiting my hometown house. This is my small instinct regarding my hometown, "Kwanbuk."
The mountains and fields have rugged skeletons, hefty frames (體大), and strong currents, and the East Coast is like a blue flow. There are times when drowning there wouldn't feel like a waste of life.
There are skies, winds, and clouds fitting these mountains, waters, and seas, which constitute the nature of Kwanbuk. But unlike people from other provinces, I have never boasted about it, nor have I ever wanted to. To put it plainly, Kwanbuk seems to be the emerging America (新興 亞米利加) within Chosŏn, no matter what criticisms others may level.
Perhaps because the climate is cold and nothing is gentle, people are reluctant to open their mouths, or perhaps their lips are thick and tongues heavy, their pronunciation (音) is unclear. They say "pabu" (바부) for "papŭl" (밥을 - rice), "muru" (무루) for "murŭl" (물을 - water), "ttŏgŭ" (떠그) for "ttŏgŭl" (떡을 - rice cake), and there are enough other words mocked by Seoul and Southern Chosŏn dialects to fill a dictionary (字典). Thus, it seems disadvantageous not just for literature but also for socializing or romance. In truth, when Hamgyŏng people come to Seoul, they have more words to discard than to use. Literature requires dressing up like the daughter of language, but the Hamgyŏng dialect is a fighting language – even buying and selling sounds like arguing, and when truly fighting, the words are like clubs. Weak people might even die from being hit by the words upon hearing "North Chosŏn." Therefore, this language has the characteristic of not easily lending itself to pleading or explaining situations.
Although it is truly awkward and grating to write with, a remarkable number of male and female writers emerge from here. However, they inevitably end up expressing themselves in the Seoul dialect. Perhaps this is because although nature resides in the region, language gathers in the center, and literature grows there too. But when they go towards Paektu Mountain (白頭山) and the Tuman River (豆滿江), they seem to abandon all Seoul and Southern Chosŏn dialects.
And since my poetry doesn't particularly require the local beauty of language, I have no specific intention of using it. Among novelists, I recall Yi Sŏnhŭi writing a novel set in a Hamgyŏng coastal village, using the Hamgyŏng dialect in an interesting and folksy way. If there is literary value and uniqueness, it lies in the fact that novels *can* be written with it, and perhaps another unique aspect is that writers from Kwanbuk haven't been able to write many novels using it yet.

**Yi Ch'an** - My hometown is Pukch'ŏng (北靑), but <99> for the past 4-5 years, due to my profession, I have mostly lived in the so-called Samsugapsan (三水甲山) area, along the Yalu River (鴨綠江), and in the North Manchuria (北滿) region. Now, I even consider myself a resident engaged in business here. For years, my heart has constantly yearned for this rich (豊*) artistic virgin territory (처녀지). I aspire to create a magnificent and poignant (豪壯凄絶) epic poem, a life's work, or a major piece (力作) on a grand scale like Sholokhov's "Quiet Flows the Don" (쇼-롭의 『고요한 동』), reading into this great nature, unique language and customs, the sorrowful local human history, and the bleak aspects of life. However, I haven't made any effort worth revealing here yet. If I must say something, it's that I try to achieve physical closeness, especially with the destitute mountain people, learning about their history and daily lives whenever possible. A dynamic touch, somber coloring, hidden intense passion and overflowing romance, or perhaps a bold spirit, an indomitable will – it's regrettable that none of us have yet reached this threshold.
(*Original text has a non-standard character豊*)

**Yi Pungmyŏng** - The question of how to digest local language literarily is a homework assignment that has been discussed for some time. Especially in the Kwanbuk region, where historically several local languages are mixed, using local language to enhance the content of a work is difficult. And regionally, I think there are still many places where strong, wild accents are used crudely. However, if analyzed and studied, very flavorful (滋味있다), folksy (구수하다), effective, and subtle language can be discovered. I particularly adopt this method when I feel the need to use local language. If I decide to write a piece based on region A, after roughly completing the conceptualization, I travel to region A. Staying there for about a week, I observe and listen to the local terminology, customs, habits, lifestyle, etc., and take notes. I always write my works using this method.
The wild character of some parts of Kwanbuk is naturally reflected in the works of writers from that region. It's a style shaped not with a plane, but as if carved with an axe. Works with bold lines and content – isn't this the tendency of works by Kwanbuk writers? However, this is not to say it applies universally.

**Hyŏn Kyŏngjun** - My hometown is Hwadae (花臺), Myŏngch'ŏn (明川), North Hamgyŏng Province (咸北), but having wandered away from home since the age of 9, sometimes my memories of home become faint.
But home is still home. <100> Home is an unspeakably dear and cherished place.
Moreover, my hometown is a place of beautiful mountains and rivers.
Ch'ilbosan (七寶山), known as the Kŭmgang of Kwanbuk, is a scenic spot of absolute beauty that wouldn't be inferior anywhere. How could this be just my own self-praise?
Just as Kŭmgangsan (金剛山) is divided into Inner, Outer, and Sea sections, Ch'ilbosan can also be divided into Inner Ch'ilbo (內七寶), Outer Ch'ilbo (外七寶), and Sea Ch'ilbo (海七寶), and it is indeed structured that way.
Among them, Sea Ch'ilbo starts from the coastline of my hometown Hwadae region, passes Musudan (舞水端), skirts the Sanggŏi (上古而) coast, and stretches north. I love this Sea Ch'ilbo the most. The East Sea (東海), like 풀어 풀어 물드린 듯한 (as if dyed with loosened indigo)!
I can never forget it, even in my dreams. I always want to sing of those blue waves. Because of this, I think about half of my works depict that sea.
The sea and the boatmen (사공)! On land, they seek alcohol and women, but once out at sea, they courageously battle fearsome storms and rough waves!
Those boatmen who, when drinking, toss aside cups and small bowls, and gulp down 35-proof soju from large bowls or gourds!
Those boatmen who, if they disagree even slightly, mercilessly beat up even brothers or fathers and sons, but once their anger subsides, embrace each other right there, rolling around and drinking heavily (鯨飮) again!
I really like those boatmen. I tried to portray such boatmen by writing "Rough Waves" (激浪) and "Omari" (오마리), but ultimately failed due to my lack of talent. However, I am determined to someday splendidly depict that sea, those boatmen, and the countless schools of fish (魚群) that migrate with the seasons.
Next, regarding the local language, as you all know, our regional dialect (方言) has a strong accent and unclear intonation (語調), making it very difficult (困難) to incorporate into works.
When inserting this strongly accented and unclear speech into scenes where dialect is necessary, I always feel the inadequacy (不足性) of Han'gŭl. While my own study of Han'gŭl is insufficient, the Kwanbuk dialect has many speech sounds (語音) that cannot be expressed with Han'gŭl.
To overcome these issues and achieve complete expression, those of us engaged in writing must deeply study regional dialects and Han'gŭl. <101>
Next, discussing works contributed to the literary world by Kwanbuk writers, everyone mentions the late Ch'oe Sŏhae's "Crimson Flame" (紅焰). Currently, Han Sŏrya's various works, especially "Twilight" (黃昏), are works I am extremely proud of. In poetry, it's Kim Tonghwan's "Night on the Border" (國境의 밤). I read "Night on the Border" hundreds of times during my wandering life in Siberia (西伯利亞), eventually memorizing it.
However, the reason I want to rate the works of Mr. Ch'oe, Mr. Han, and Mr. Kim higher than those of writers from other regions is that, although their works – that is, the works of Kwanbuk writers – might be technically immature, their attitude towards their work is utterly sincere (眞摯), and the scale (스케-ㄹ) is large. I find works that are neatly polished without sharp edges interesting, but I don't consider them good.
When I encounter works that lack substance but have polished technique, I somehow get the feeling of looking at a gold-plated (鍍金) utensil. I know this is likely an outrageous statement (暴言), but as someone who prefers Balzac to Maupassant, I can't help it. Technique should absolutely be learned. Without it, a completed work cannot ultimately be made, so one must learn diligently.
But I think it's unnecessary without substance.

**Yi Yongak** - Depending on the context, words used in the countryside can be much more flavorful, but doesn't the effectiveness of that perceived beauty often limit itself to those steeped in that language? Therefore, I want to avoid dialect in my works as much as possible. Finding the beauty of Hamgyŏng dialect or P'yŏngan dialect is good, but I believe we must first find and protect the beauty of the Korean language itself.
Also, people say the characteristic of Kwanbuk writers' works is that they are not neat or delicate. If so, perhaps being blunt or having thick lines is the characteristic, but this could easily become the weakness of Kwanbuk writers as well.
However, works like Kim Tonghwan's "Night on the Border" (國境의 밤), Ch'oe Chŏnghŭi's "Earth Veins" (地脈), or Hyŏn Kyŏngjun's recently published "Wanderers" (流氓) are truly excellent, aren't they?

**Ch'oe Chŏnghŭi** - I have never done that.
From Yi Sŏnhŭi's "Woman's Command" (女人命令), I felt that the Hamgyŏng dialect could indeed be used in works. Sometime ago, in Kim Kirim's novel "Along the Railway Line" (鐵道沿線), there was the dialogue "제미는 어디르 감매" <102> (Mother, where are you going?). This line is just one phrase thrown by the son at his mother in the ink-like darkness as the mother, becoming promiscuous, walks the night path to find the man's place. I think the Hamgyŏng dialect was extremely appropriate here, more than any other regional dialect.

**Pak Kyeju** - My parents' hometown is Hamhŭng (咸興), but I was born in Yongjŏng (龍井), North Kando (北間道), and grew up drinking Manchurian water for the long period of 20 years. In Manchuria, the mountains and rivers around Yongjŏng or Kukchagae (局子街) (Yŏngil/延吉) are unspeakably desolate, bare mountains without a single tree, so "beauty" (秀麗) cannot be found anywhere in the Kando (間島) land. Nevertheless, the poets and writers of Kando sing songs like "Twilight on the Haeranggang" (海蘭江의 黃昏), "Ilsongjŏng Pavilion under the Moon" (月下의 一松亭), "Spring on Piamsan Mountain" (飛岩山의 봄), or "Autumn Night on Yesusan Mountain" (秋夜의 耶蘇山), as if they possessed beautiful mountains and rivers – perhaps it's just putting a good face on things.
As for language, Kando is like a United States where people from all 13 provinces of Chosŏn gathered, so one can hear various dialects. Still, there is a unique Kando language, different from Kwanbuk. Calling "mother" (어머니) "jemae" (제에마), answering "yes" (네) with "yaang" (야앙), calling "grandmother" (할머니) "amae" (아매), or "grandfather" (할아버지) "abangi" (아방이) are generally common dialects in Kwanbuk, but the dialects vary from place to place within Kwanbuk. For example, "grandmother" is "amangi" (아망이) in Hamhŭng, "amae" (아매) in Tanch'ŏn (端川), "umae" (우매) in Sŏngjin (城津), and "k'ŭramae" (크라매) in the Kando region. Recording all the dialectal variations here would amount to a voluminous dictionary, so I'll avoid it beforehand. Regarding sentence endings, women saying "Father, please have your meal" (아버지, 진지 어서 잡수세요) becomes "Abunnim sigŏngnallae tŭŭpchi" (아분님 시걱날래 드읍지) in the Puryŏng (富寧) region. In the Hoeryŏng (會寧) region, the word "good" (좋와요) is "chosŭkkomа" (좋스꼬마), and in the Kyŏngwŏn (慶源) region, it's "chosŭkkwŏni" (좋스꿔니). And in Kando, "Master, are you in?" (主人, 계십니까) is asked as "Chwinjang, kyesimdung?" (쥔장, 계심둥?). Looking at it this way, there's no linguistic beauty at all; compared to the Seoul dialect, it's all bizarre.
Among works incorporating Kwanbuk dialect, I enjoyed reading Yi T'aejun's "Descendant of Adam" (아담의 後裔), "The Sea" (바다), and "O Mongnyŏ" (五夢女). After that, I haven't seen much else. Last autumn, I heard Ch'ae Mansik say, "It's unpleasant that Han Sŏrya never incorporates his own Hamhŭng dialect into his works." Indeed, looking at Han Sŏrya's "Mire" (泥濘) or "Vaccination" (種痘) (the success of the work is not for me to judge), the setting is clearly Hamhŭng, but <103> the appearance of Seoul dialect feels unavoidably awkward. Of course, writing in Kwanbuk or Kando dialect would require footnotes for everything, which is also pitiable.
In my unfinished work "Dregs" (滓渣), which I started writing and then abandoned, I included Kando dialect. But having left Kando over 8 years ago and now being accustomed to Seoul dialect, there are many things I can't recall, so I often face difficulties (困難).
There don't seem to be many writers originally from Manchuria. Among works set in Manchuria, I was deeply impressed by the late Ch'oe Sŏhae's "Crimson Flame" (紅焰) in my youth. Recently, I read Yi T'aejun's "Peasant Soldiers" (農軍), and I haven't yet read Yi Kiyŏng's "Sons of the Earth" (大地의 아들). The full-length novel "Kando Bloodline" (間島血脈), a middle-ground work between pure and popular literature that I intend to write, covers the 50-year history of Kando up to the year Manchukuo was founded. It will depict various things I directly saw, heard, and experienced over 20 years: the history of Chosŏn peasant pioneers, the tyranny (虐政) of Chinese police since the Chang Tso-lin (張作霖) regime, the violence (暴行) of the Chinese army, the rampancy (跋扈) of mounted bandits (馬賊), the relationship between Chinese landlords and Chosŏn tenant farmers, smuggling (密輸業) across the border, opium (阿片) dens, addicts of "yanghui" (양휘 - gambling), Chinese prostitution dens, and the student atmosphere of old Chosŏn students acting like ideologues (主義者然), strutting about (꺼떡대던); the ideological transition over 50 years from nationalism to socialism, and then from socialism to communism, showcasing all sorts of ugly behavior under the name of "ideologue," etc.

**Romance of Youth**

II. You must have various sweet recollections (回想) from your boyhood/girlhood days in your hometown (especially regarding the opposite sex). Please recount them emotionally.

**Kim Kirim** - I was sad when my mother passed away, and sad when my sister died – but those are common stories everyone has, so I'll skip them. Who doesn't have one or two little "romances" from childhood? But since everyone else has those too, talking about them would be dull.

**Yi Pungmyŏng** - For me, the Hŭngnam era was the most cherished time. It was during this period <104> that I began to understand life, started literature, and experienced a great love. Exactly 10 years ago from now.

**Yi Yongak** - When I was little, I remember being carried on my mother's back to places like Vladivostok or Khabarovsk. After my younger sibling was born, I lost my mother to my sibling, and I recall anticipating the day my mother would return from Russia (아라사).
On the days she returned, my older sister and I would ride a handcart from early morning to Ch'ŏngjin, where the ship docked.
I also fondly remember sharing the khlebal (흘레발 - Russian bread) she always brought back with Sin Tongch'ŏl (the poet), who lived next door at the time, and running around happily.
I do have memories concerning women, but since I'm still a bachelor, it's best to refrain from complicated stories.

**Kim Kwangsŏp** - My family was from Hamgyŏng Province, but we didn't live in aristocratic wealth. I didn't grow up wearing fine colorful jackets and traditional shoes. I just went to the mountains, looked for bird nests, collected shells on the sandy shore (모랬가), sometimes went hungry, got beaten... the thought that I grew up well without any particular method – perhaps this qualifies as sentiment. Since you mentioned boyhood, there wouldn't be the same sentiment towards women as now, but among the young women carrying platters on their heads on holidays (名日날), there seem to have been pretty ones.

**Yi Hŏn'gu** - I must have been extremely shy since I was young. I occasionally heard later stories about how, when my cousin carried me (at age three) on her back to gatherings of only young ladies during winter holidays, I wouldn't pee at all because I was shy of the ladies, even if I needed to. I received affection, rather than having what I would call sweet recollections (甘美로운 回憶). I think it was when I was about 7 or 8 years old. It was early spring, and many young ladies and I went to watch a shamanistic ritual (굿) being performed in front of the stone wall behind the hill. As the sun set, it got so cold that everyone huddled under blankets. I was the only boy sitting in the middle. Later, I met one of those young ladies in a dream. It was probably due to excessive innocence rather than precociousness. I was truly an only son with no older or younger sisters. I think this might have been the biggest reason I occasionally dreamed of girls during my boyhood.

**Hyŏn Kyŏngjun** - I don't have many <105> sweet recollections from my boyhood days in my hometown. Especially concerning women, there are none.

**Yi Ch'an** - "Grinding, grinding, applying rouge..." The grinding song was joyful, and in autumn when the gourd flowers bloomed fully, the moon was bright too.
In the deep moonlight and faint scent of gourd flowers, Suni and I held hands tightly, melting away. Ah, nobody saw us.

**Han Sŏrya** - I don't have any sweet recollections of my hometown, but I can never forget that endlessly vast plain. The character "野" (field/plain) in my name is because of that. When I was young (어릴 쩍에), I don't know how many times I resolved to at least place a small hill on that wide, boundless great plain.
And as I grew up, I intended to write works with this plain as the subject, but I still haven't produced anything significant. So, in a manner of speaking, I only carry debt regarding my hometown landscape and village, having repaid nothing.
However, in the long novel "The Pagoda" (塔), which is finally being published in print, this plain and this hometown village will appear occasionally.
I have never cherished any woman from my hometown, past or present, but I always cherish this plain. I earnestly hope to be as vast, fertile, generous, and compassionate as that land.
Essentially, during our boyhood, due to the customs of our native land, free mingling or romance between boys and girls was impossible. Furthermore, our village was a clan settlement (同姓部落) of about 200 households, making such things even more impossible. But I have never thought this was bad, and I still feel the same way now.

**Ch'oe Chŏnghŭi** - It seems there were some. But talking about everything would be tedious for both sides. One thing I still find strange happened when I was definitely eight years old, I estimate. There was a boy named Samt'aek in the neighborhood. He seemed three or four years older than me. He was always sick. So his face was pale. All the kids in our neighborhood herded cows, cut fodder, and weeded fields, so their faces were all dark, but only Samt'aek was white. I always wanted to go to his house. But somehow I was too shy to go. In autumn, when many gourd flowers bloomed, I would go outside his house fence, smell the medicine he was taking (he even drank boiled earthworms then) for a long while, and wish I could rummage through <106> the bright red silk pouch he wore, which contained a paper charm said to ward off ghosts.

**Pak Kyeju** - I lived in Yongjŏng until I was six, and until thirteen, I lived in Idogu (二道溝), about 70 *ri* from Yongjŏng towards Paektu Mountain. Then I came back to live in Yongjŏng, so most of my boyhood was spent in Idogu. Looking ahead at the majestic Changbaek Mountain range veiled in purple haze, the boys and girls I held hands with, going to the back hill where azaleas and magnolias bloomed in spring, or to the willow banks dense along the Haeranggang River (海蘭江畔) in summer to pick flowers, catch fish, or have picnics – they still occasionally bring back old memories.

**Old Age and Hometown Landscape**

III. Decades later, in your later years with white hair flowing (白鬚), would you choose your hometown as the place for your final moments (臨終)? Also, discuss the nostalgia (鄕愁) you occasionally feel even now.

**Yi Hŏn'gu** - I have never once thought about burying my white bones (白骨) in my hometown when I get old, nor do I seem to have the kind of attachment that would make me want to be buried there. As for nostalgia, one needs to live farther away. Otherwise – even though separated by 1,500 *ri* – I don't have any special interest yet. I'll have to see when I get older.

**Yi Ch'an** - I don't want to go. To my hometown.
If I could choose freely, I would establish my final resting place on some lofty rock summit in a deep mountain or secluded valley where no one comes or goes.
What poignant nostalgia (鄕愁) could there be for a hometown where I have no parents, siblings, relatives, or close friends?
Only, on a spring morning brilliant with flowers and butterflies, or an autumn dusk when leaves turn color, I sometimes find myself unexpectedly yearning for the familiar mountains and rivers.

**Hyŏn Kyŏngjun** - Asking if I would choose my hometown as the place for my final moments in old age is a question quite contrary to my thoughts. An old saying goes, "Green mountains for burial exist everywhere under heaven" (人間到處有靑山). Why would a man confine his final resting place (臨終地) only to his hometown? I plan to just wander as life takes me and make my grave wherever I die. However, the feeling of nostalgia, yearning like for a mother's breast in childhood, is impossible to suppress.
Memories of carrying the Thousand Character Classic (千字文) to the village school (書堂), <107> playing house (소꼽작난), the family of Suni who lived next door and moved to Kando (間島) – all are cherished memories. Now, under the green pines by the sea in my hometown, the rugosa roses (海棠花) must be blooming bright red, and the sight of young ladies digging for *bangp'ung* roots (防風뿌리) would also evoke much sentiment.

**Yi Pungmyŏng** - No matter what, the good and cherished place is home. Perhaps not during youth, but upon entering old age (老境), I think the final resting place will indeed be home.

**Yi Yongak** - It's uncertain. If you could guarantee that I will definitely live until my hair and beard turn white, I would answer. But somehow, I feel like I will die before even reaching 30. Also, when I was in Tokyo, P'ain (巴村) said that fellow Yongak would just keep wandering everywhere and eventually stick his head into a ditch with rotting water flowing and die. How wonderful it would be to close my eyes in my Kyŏngsŏng, where the water tastes exceptionally good. But according to P'ain's words, it seems unlikely I'll die in my hometown.

**Kim Kwangsŏp** - Who would seek their hometown in old age with white hair (白髮) flowing? Just because I was born in my hometown, I don't want to make it my final resting place (臨終地). My final resting place is wherever I am at the time of death. Nostalgia (향수) is merely a single unripe apple, stolen and eaten, then taken away.

**Han Sŏrya** - Wanting to bury one's white bones (백골) in the cherished homeland seems to be a common human sentiment (通情), but I haven't thought that far yet. Perhaps it's because I'm still young.
Often, seeing elderly people, it seems their sole wish (唯一한 希願) is to be buried in the ancestral graveyard (先瑩). Maybe when I get old, I too will choose my hometown as my burial place (墳墓의 地). Some time ago, I visited the southern-born old painter Su Hsüan (蘇懸) in Peking (北京). He gave me the following poem:
塊壘塡胸總未消 (Kuàilěi tián xiōng zǒng wèi xiāo / Lumps fill my chest, never dissolving)
何年歸去故山樵 (Hé nián guī qù gù shān qiáo / What year shall I return to my old mountains to gather wood?)
丹靑也許金錢易 (Dānqīng yěxǔ jīnqián yì / Painting may perhaps be exchanged for money)
差勝權門事折腰 (Chā shèng quán mén shì zhéyāo / Better far than bowing low serving powerful gates.)
Then I met the old painter Ch'i Pai-shih (齊白石). He gave me the following text and also painted his famous "Crabs and Shrimps" scroll for me:
鄕思九千里, 春秋八十餘, 與君同是思鄕人也 (Xiāng sī jiǔ qiānlǐ, chūnqiū bāshí yú, yǔ jūn tóng shì sī xiāng rén yě / Homesickness stretches nine thousand *li*, eighty-some springs and autumns have passed, I am, like you, a person who misses home.)
Looking at this, one can see they both yearn for their hometowns like writing. They are top artists of their time, originally from the South (南方), who achieved success and fame in the North (北方). They are famous figures with fortunes worth millions (屢巨萬), with over a thousand people bowing at their gates daily, yet they long for their humble hometowns like children missing their mothers. <108>
However, perhaps because my wandering spirit hasn't faded yet, I am still more drawn to the saying, "Green mountains for burial exist everywhere under heaven" (人間到處有靑山).
Though I am an insignificant being, my desire to live longer seems earnest. Therefore, I wish wise magazines wouldn't ask about the disposal of my white bones decades hence, but magazines have a habit of hitting sore spots, so it can't be helped...

**Kim Kirim** - I have no such thoughts. I'd rather live somewhere better. A place where I can see the blue sea, there are fields, I can swim, take walks, eat fresh fish year-round, and if possible, near scenic hot springs. I'd like to live there. I don't particularly feel nostalgia (향수). Only, when my father was alive, I missed him, and now, the grave site covered in weeds is the strongest force pulling my heart towards my hometown.

**Ch'oe Chŏnghŭi** - Why think now about when white hair (白鬚) is flowing? I don't even feel like I'll live to be old and die. I think I might die under some unknown sky on some unknown day. Wherever I die under whatever sky, on a night when the moonlight is intensely blue, I want my soul to be as blue, lovely, and beautiful as that moonlight, and then I want to die.

**Pak Kyeju** - My father's grave is still in Kando (間島), but I have no desire to spend my old age (老後) in Kando, nor do I wish to have my white bones buried there. Of course, the whole world is my home and my land, so where I'm buried is not worth worrying about...

**Friendship Records with Kwansŏ and East Manchu Writers**

IV. Sir/Madam, please share your records of friendships (交友記) with various writers and poets from Kwanbuk and Northeast Manchuria.

**Kim Kwangsŏp** - There isn't much to say about friendships with Kwanbuk writers, but I am close with Mr. Yi Hŏn'gu and Mr. Sŏ Hangsŏk. I occasionally meet the poets Kim Tonghwan, Kim Kirim, and Yi Yongak, and occasionally meet the novelists Yi Sŏnhŭi and Ch'oe Chŏnghŭi. That seems to be the extent of my acquaintance record. I don't know many literary friends (文友).

**Yi Pungmyŏng** - The person with whom I can speak most openly (心胸) and whom I respect literarily is Mr. Han Sŏrya. Mr. Kim Tongmyŏng lives in Sŏhojin (西湖津), 30 *ri* outside Hamhŭng, but I haven't met him at all in recent years, nor have we exchanged letters (書信). Mr. Yi Ch'an is also a dear literary friend, but we haven't exchanged letters <109> much either.

**Yi Ch'an** - Among close friends, there was the late Kye Wŏl (桂月). Back then, we were both very romantic (낭만하다) and sentimental (쎈치하다). One summer in my hometown Pukch'ŏng, we spent time together nearby, sometimes walking shoulder-to-shoulder aimlessly on rainy nights, or sometimes looking at each other shedding tears for no reason after suddenly saying "Hey!" and sharing faint, bitter smiles (微苦笑).
That winter, that night, I returned late to his boarding house in P'alp'anchŏng (八判町), then went straight to another world (別有天地). The following year, on the Tano festival in May, when the sun shone on the high prison bars, I received unexpected news of his death. It's a deeply emotional past. The poet Chŏng Ku (貞求), now in Osaka (大阪), is also an unforgettable old friend (親友) who visited my humble home (鄙居) in my hometown many times. Whenever we met, it was customary to start with melancholic complaints rather than happy handshakes. With Brother Ma Ya (馬野), during our fleetingly splendid days, he was involved with "New Stage" (新階段) and I with "Literary Construction" (文學建設), and we frequently crossed paths at the An'gukchŏng (安國町) intersection for a while. With Pungmyŏng and Han Hyo (韓曉), we merely had brief encounters (邂逅禽別) as described, in strange settings. Beyond that, my record of Kwanbuk friendships is extremely meager, as I mostly have correspondence-based acquaintances (書面相交) with many other senior and peer colleagues but lack even a single face-to-face meeting (一面識).

**Yi Yongak** - I know many well-known figures, but they are all considerably senior in age and achievement, so there are few I would dare mention here as friends (교우).
Among friends who occasionally publish works but are not widely known, just like myself who is nameless (無名), yet are poised to make a name for themselves: in our Kyŏngsŏng alone, there are Kim Chinse (金軫世), Sin Tongch'ŏl (申東哲), Hŏ Ribok (許利福), O Hwaryong (吳化龍), Ham Hyŏngsu (咸亨洙), Ham Yunsu (咸允洙), Yi Suhyŏng (李琇馨) – so many, all poets. Also, there's Kim Tonggyu (金東圭), who is always immersed in classical Chinese poetry (漢詩). I like him very much, so whenever I head north, I always stop by a place called Komusan (古茂山) to spend a night chatting with him.

**Hyŏn Kyŏngjun** - Due to my inherently unsociable (非사교적) nature, I haven't socialized much with fellow writers. The writers I know and exchange letters (書信出來) with are: Mr. Han Sŏrya and Mr. Han Hyo in Hamhŭng; Kim Ujong (金宇鍾) in Sŏngjin; Chang Chŏngnam (張正南) and Kim Kwangsŏp (金光爕) in Ch'ŏngjin; in Manchuria, Kim Kwi (金貴), Ham Hyŏngsu (咸亨洙), Yi Chuyong (李周用), Kim Chogyu (金朝奎), Kang Kyŏngae (姜敬愛), Ch'ŏn Ch'ŏngsong (千靑松), An Sugil (安壽吉); and among those currently in Seoul, Mr. Yi Yongak. No matter how I count on my fingers, I cannot list more Kwanbuk or East Manchu writers than these.

**Han Sŏrya** - Among writers from Kwanbuk, I haven't had the chance to meet Mr. Yi Sŏnhŭi or Mr. Yi Yongak. I have met most of the others at least once (面顔), but being poor at socializing (社交) <110>, I don't have anyone I am particularly close with.
Perhaps because I am inherently blunt (무틀하다) and lack charm (자밋性), I don't make friends easily. From my side, I feel quite friendly, but it seems the other party doesn't feel much need to associate. If I were an editor at some major magazine or newspaper, perhaps some Kwanbuk writers might feel the need to associate even with someone like me...
Perhaps because of this, I actually have more close friends (知友) outside the literary circle. I inherently dislike so-called literary types, people with eccentric personalities. Therefore, in friendships, I completely disregard literary consciousness and choose to associate broadly with people who have admirable human qualities. That's why among my friends, some don't even know I write, and those who have heard I write but know what kind of writing I do, how, and where, are extremely rare.

**Kim Kirim** - Since I am inherently very poor at socializing, I don't have many friends. Also, I have almost no friends from childhood.
All are people I became close with after starting to wear a necktie. During middle school, I once traveled on the same boat from Wŏnsan to Sŏngjin with Ms. Ch'oe Chŏnghŭi during vacation, but back then, I was even more shy, so naturally, we didn't greet each other. The only thing I remember is that Ms. Ch'oe Chŏnghŭi wasn't very tall even then. Someone I haven't met often but who left a deep impression is Mr. Kim Tongmyŏng. When passing through Sŏho (西湖), I always want to stop by. He probably lives there, feeling quite distrustful and contemptuous of city dwellers.

**Yi Hŏn'gu** - During my middle school days, all my hometown friends were aspiring writers. Among them was Kim Yŏnghun (金永勛), who wrote "Wandering Boy" (漂浪少年) in *Kaebyŏk* (開闢). There were also Kim Pyŏngmin (金秉敏) and Kim Ch'angjin (Kim 滄振), who read extensively and wrote poetry from middle school and later went to Tokyo to study literature, but they all gave up literature midway. Besides them, there were quite a few aspiring writers. I was actually influenced directly and indirectly by such friends. Among them, I cannot forget another middle school friend named Ham Ŏnju (咸彦柱).
However, among all these, the person I have associated with the longest is brother Kim Kwangsŏp (金珖爕). We have built our friendship (交誼) for 15 years without a single day's change. The first time I met P'ain (巴人) was the year the Great Kanto Earthquake occurred in Tokyo. The first time we talked together at the same table was, I recall, at a *Samch'ŏlli* round-table discussion. With Mr. Kim Kirim, it started from the *Chosŏn Ilbo* days in Yŏn'gŏnchŏng (蓮建町), but we truly (continued on page 231) <111> became close when we started working together in the *Chosŏn Ilbo* arts and culture department. It was also at this department desk that I became quite close with Mr. Yi Sŏnhŭi. With Mr. Sŏ Hangsŏk, it's been a 10-year friendship through the Theater Arts Research Society (劇藝術硏究會).

**Ch'oe Chŏnghŭi** - Among Kwanbuk writers, I know most of them, and there are some I am close with. However, I have not yet met Mr. Yi Ch'an and Mr. Hyŏn Kyŏngjun.

**Pak Kyeju** - I have more acquaintances among writers from Kwansŏ and Kiho than from Kwanbuk. Among Kwanbuk writers, perhaps because we work at the same company (社), I am closest and most informal with Ms. Ch'oe Chŏnghŭi. I also know Messrs. Han Sŏrya, Kim Tonghwan, Yi Sŏnhŭi, Kim Kwangsŏp, and Yi Yongak. -End- <231>
<96-111, 231>

**Summary**

This 1940 round-table discussion features writers from Korea's northern Kwanbuk region (Hamgyŏng provinces) and Manchuria, reflecting on their regional identity's influence on their literature. They discuss the rugged Kwanbuk landscape and dialect, contrasting its perceived "masculine," "strong," and "rough" nature with the "feminine" refinement associated with Seoul. There's debate about incorporating regional dialects versus using standardized Central Korean, acknowledging the difficulty dialects pose for wider readership but also their unique expressive power. Several writers emphasize a "Northern spirit" characterized by strong will and sincerity, sometimes viewing technical polish without substance negatively. Experiences in Manchuria, particularly the harsh frontier life and encounters with diverse peoples and political turmoil in Kando (Jiandao), are highlighted as significant sources of inspiration and subject matter.

From a colonial history perspective, the article is revealing about the complex interplay of regionalism and emerging national identity under Japanese rule. The writers' conscious reflection on their "Northernness," the linguistic tension between dialect and standard language (influenced by Seoul as the colonial center), and the profound impact of the Manchurian experience (a space of migration, hardship, and ideological ferment for many Koreans) offer valuable insights into the cultural and social dynamics of the period. Historians might find the self-perception of these Northern/Manchurian writers, their literary aspirations tied to regional characteristics, and their candid discussion of Manchuria's conditions particularly interesting.

**Named Entities**

關北	관북	Kwanbuk
滿洲	만주	Manchu/Manchuria
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng
金起林	김기림	Kim Kirim
金珖燮	김광섭	Kim Kwangsŏp
朴啓周	박계주	Pak Kyeju
咸興	함흥	Hamhŭng
李北鳴	이북명	Yi Pungmyŏng
李庸岳	이용악	Yi Yongak
三水	삼수	Samsu
李燦	이찬	Yi Ch'an
李軒求	이헌구	Yi Hŏn'gu
崔貞熙	최정희	Ch'oe Chŏnghŭi
韓雪野	한설야	Han Sŏrya
圖們	도문	Tomun
玄卿駿	현경준	Hyŏn Kyŏngjun
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
關西	관서	Kwansŏ
畿湖	기호	Kiho
嶺南	영남	Yŏngnam
關東	관동	Kwandong
東北滿洲	동북만주	Tongbuk Manchu (Northeast Manchuria)
摩天嶺	마천령	Mach'ŏnnyŏng
崔曙海	최서해	Ch'oe Sŏhae
巴人	파인	P'ain (Kim Tonghwan's pen name)
李善熙	이선희	Yi Sŏnhŭi
北靑	북청	Pukch'ŏng
三水甲山	삼수갑산	Samsugapsan
鴨綠江	압록강	Amrokkang (Yalu River)
北滿	북만	Pukman (North Manchuria)
쇼-롭	쇼로프	Sholokhov (Mikhail)
咸北	함북	Hambuk (North Hamgyŏng Province)
明川	명천	Myŏngch'ŏn
花臺	화대	Hwadae
七寶山	칠보산	Ch'ilbosan
金剛山	금강산	Kŭmgangsan
內七寶	내칠보	Nae Ch'ilbo
外七寶	외칠보	Oe Ch'ilbo
海七寶	해칠보	Hae Ch'ilbo
舞水端	무수단	Musudan
上古而	상거이	Sanggŏi
東海	동해	Tonghae (East Sea)
西伯利亞	서백리아	Siberia
金東煥	김동환	Kim Tonghwan
平安道	평안도	P'yŏngan-do
北間道	북간도	Puk Kando (North Jiandao)
龍井	용정	Yongjŏng
局子街	국자가	Kukchagae (Juzijie)
延吉	연길	Yŏngil (Yanji)
間島	간도	Kando (Jiandao)
海蘭江	해란강	Haeranggang (Hailan River)
一松亭	일송정	Ilsongjŏng
飛岩山	비암산	Piamsan
耶蘇山	야소산	Yesusan
端川	단천	Tanch'ŏn
城津	성진	Sŏngjin
富寧	부령	Puryŏng
會寧	회령	Hoeryŏng
慶源	경원	Kyŏngwŏn
李泰俊	이태준	Yi T'aejun
蔡萬植	채만식	Ch'ae Mansik
李箕永	이기영	Yi Kiyŏng
張作霖	장작림	Chang Tso-lin
東京	동경	Tokyo
興南	흥남	Hŭngnam
아라사	아라사	Arasa (Russia)
申東哲	신동철	Sin Tongch'ŏl
西湖津	서호진	Sŏhojin
金東明	김동명	Kim Tongmyŏng
大阪	오사카	Osaka
桂月	계월	Kye Wŏl (Pen name?)
八判町	팔판정	P'alp'anchŏng (?)
貞求	정구	Chŏng Ku
馬野	마야	Ma Ya (Han Sŏrya's pen name?)
文學建設	문학건설	Munhak Kŏnsŏl (Literary Construction - group/publication?)
新階段	신계단	Sin Kyedan (New Stage - group/publication?)
安國町	안국정	An'gukchŏng
韓曉	한효	Han Hyo (Pen name?)
金軫世	김진세	Kim Chinse
許利福	허리복	Hŏ Ribok
吳化龍	오화룡	O Hwaryong
咸亨洙	함형수	Ham Hyŏngsu
咸允洙	함윤수	Ham Yunsu
李琇馨	이수형	Yi Suhyŏng
金東圭	김동규	Kim Tonggyu
古茂山	고무산	Komusan
金宇鍾	김우종	Kim Ujong
張正南	장정남	Chang Chŏngnam
金光爕	김광섭	Kim Kwangsŏp (appears again, likely typo for another Kim)
金貴	김귀	Kim Kwi
李周用	이주용	Yi Chuyong
金朝奎	김조규	Kim Chogyu
姜敬愛	강경애	Kang Kyŏngae
千靑松	천청송	Ch'ŏn Ch'ŏngsong
安壽吉	안수길	An Sugil
西湖	서호	Sŏho
開闢	개벽	Kaebyŏk (Magazine name)
金永勛	김영훈	Kim Yŏnghun
金秉敏	김병민	Kim Pyŏngmin
金滄振	김창진	Kim Ch'angjin
咸彦柱	함언주	Ham Ŏnju
蘇懸	소현	Su Hsüan (?)
北京	북경	Peking (Beijing)
南方	남방	Namfang (Southern China)
齊白石	제백석	Ch'i Pai-shih
北方	북방	Pukpang (Northern China)
蓮建町	연건정	Yŏn'gŏnchŏng (?)
朝鮮日報	조선일보	Chosŏn Ilbo (Newspaper)
徐恒錫	서항석	Sŏ Hangsŏk
劇藝術硏究會	극예술연구회	Kŭgyesul Yŏn'guhoe (Theater Arts Research Society)

**Glossary**

關北	관북	Kwanbuk region (Hamgyŏng Provinces in northern Korea)
滿洲	만주	Manchuria
鄕土文化	향토문화	Local culture, regional culture
座談會	좌담회	Round-table discussion, symposium
用力	용력	Effort, exertion
秀麗하다	수려하다	Beautiful, graceful (often used for landscapes)
괴벽스럽다	괴벽스럽다	Eccentric, peculiar, odd
移植	이식	Transplanting (here, transplanting language into literature)
純實性	순실성	Purity and faithfulness, genuineness
强靭力	강인력	Tenacity, fortitude, resilience
異端的	이단적	Heretical, unconventional
北方的	북방적	Northern (style, character)
意志	의지	Will, volition
凡庸하다	범용하다	Mediocre, commonplace
유닉크하다	유니크하다	Unique (loanword transcription)
부틈부치	부틈부치	Texture, grain (possibly dialectal or specific usage)
거츨다	거칠다	Rough, coarse (older spelling of 거칠다)
精麗하다	정려하다	Exquisite and beautiful, refined
鈍光	둔광	Dull gleam, faint light
難澁	난삽	Difficult and obscure, complex and hard to understand
體大	체대	Physical build, frame
듬석하다	듬석하다	Bulky, hefty, large (possibly dialectal)
新興 亞米利加	신흥 아메리카	Emerging America
字典	자전	Dictionary (character dictionary)
사투리	사투리	Dialect
尨大하다	방대하다	Vast, immense, enormous
처녀지	처녀지	Virgin territory
豪壯凄絶	호장처절	Magnificent and poignant, grand and tragic
滋味있다	자미있다	Flavorful, tasty, interesting (older form of 재미있다 can mean interesting/fun)
구수하다	구수하다	Savory, hearty, folksy, charmingly rustic
遜色	손색	Inferiority, disadvantage (usually in ～이 없다, not inferior)
鯨飮	경음	Drinking heavily (like a whale drinks water)
사공	사공	Boatman
不足性	부족성	Inadequacy, insufficiency
째운	째운	Neat, polished (likely dialectal or older form, possibly related to 재다 - measure precisely?)
鍍金	도금	Gilding, gold-plating
暴言	폭언	Violent language, outrageous statement
主義者然	주의자연	Acting like an ideologue/activist
꺼떡대던	꺼떡대던	Strutting about, acting presumptuously (older spelling/form)
回想	회상	Recollection, reminiscence
同姓部落	동성부락	Clan village, settlement of people with the same surname
소꼽작난	소꿉장난	Playing house (older spelling of 소꿉장난)
白鬚	백수	White beard (referring to old age)
臨終	임종	Deathbed, final moments
鄕愁	향수	Nostalgia, homesickness
白骨	백골	White bones, skeleton (metaphor for remains after death)
先瑩	선영	Ancestral graveyard
塊壘塡胸總未消	괴뢰전흉총미소	(Chinese poem line) Lumps fill my chest, never dissolving
鄕思九千里	향사구천리	(Chinese text) Homesickness stretches nine thousand *li*
交友記	교우기	Record of friendships
心胸	심흉	Mind, heart, feelings (을 헤치다 - open one's heart)
쎈치하다	센치하다	Sentimental (loanword transcription, from 'senti')
낭만하다	낭만하다	To be romantic
微苦笑	미고소	Faint, bitter smile
鄙居	비거	My humble abode (humble term for one's own house)
邂逅禽別	해후금별	Meeting and parting soon after (lit. encounter and bird-like parting)
書面相交	서면상교	Acquaintance through correspondence
一面識	일면식	Knowing someone by sight, having met once
面顔	면안	Face, countenance (만나다 - meet face-to-face)
交誼	교의	Friendship, friendly relations


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제12권 제8호
발행일	1940년 09월 01일
기사제목	關北, 滿洲 出身 作家의 『鄕土文化』를 말하는 座談會(第四回)
기사형태	대담·좌담

關北, 滿洲 出身 作家의 『鄕土文化』를 말하는 座談會
이번 本社에서 全朝鮮을 關西, 畿湖, 嶺南, 關東, 關北의 5地區로 分하여 그 지방 출신의 文士 諸氏로부터 鄕土文化에 대한 高見을 들어서 매월 계속하여 紙上에 좌담회를 개최하는바 그 제4차로 이제 關北及滿洲篇을 今月號 誌上에 실리기로 하다.

誌上出席者
현재

金起林     (京城)

金珖燮     (京城)

朴啓周     (京城)

李北鳴     (咸興)

李庸岳     (京城) (96)

李燦       (三水)

李軒求     (京城)

崔貞熙     (京城)

韓雪野     (咸興)

玄卿駿     (圖們)

(가나다順)

「關北, 東滿」作品의 特懲
一. 선생의 고향이신 關北 及 東北滿洲의 그 秀麗한 山河와 독특한 지방적『言語美』를 작품  속에 집어넣으려고 平日 어떠한 用力을 하여 오셨습니까. 또 지금까지 가진 朝鮮문단의     收獲 중 關北 及 滿洲작가가 끼친 그 작품의 특징은 어떤 점에 가치와 특색이 있습니까.

韓雪野 - 關北의 山河에는 아마 수려하다는 여성적인 말은 적당치 않으리라고 생각합니다.  언젠가 저는 關北의 山野를 散文的이라고 한일이 있습니다만, 그렇게도 볼 수 있을 줄 압   니다. 또 男性的이라고도 할 수 있겠지요. 실상 雄健한 맛은 있습니다.
그와 마찬가지로 關北의 말씨도 아름답다거나 곱다고는 할 수 없고 무뚝뚝하고 괴벽스럽    고 거칠지요.
저는 이 地方語를 작품에 그대로 사용해 본  적도 있습니다만, 일반이 알기 어렵기 때문   에 문학에 있어서는 여러가지 난색이 있슴니다. 그러기 때문에 저는 關北語를 그대로 문    학에 移植하려고는 하지 않습니다. 그럼 그 대신 關北語가 가지고 있는 그 독특한 鄕土味   와 純實性과 强靭力과 정열을 취해서 문학에 집어넣랴고 합니다. 만일 저의 이 用意가 어   느 정도까지라도 나타나 있다고 하면 제가 쓴 中央語에는 순수한 中央人의 그 情調와는     다른 어떤 異端的, 北方的인 것이 섞여 있어야 할 것입니다만, 과연 그런지 어쩐지는 저로   서는 알 수 없습니다. 그러나 그렇게 되려고 애쓰는 것은 사실입니다.
저는 결코 말이나 글이나를 勿論하고 그 말과 글의 정신이 수려하고 아름답고 여성적인     서울的 情調를 가지려고 하지 않습니다. 어디까지든 저는 흙내 나는 北方의 인간이오 北    方출신의 작가인 그 점을 키여 가고 싶습니다.
朝鮮문학에 關北 작가가 끼처준(97) 特點은 『意志의 힘』이라고 할까요. 崔曙海같은 작가는 그 가장 좋은 표본입니다. 그는 기술적으로 朝鮮문학을 향상시켰을     뿐 아니라 그보다 그가 朝鮮문학에 던저준 熱意 - 차라리 熱血은 우리같은 凡庸한 작가    의 千百이 미칠 배 아니고 또 여러 작가 중에서도 나는 아직 그만한 사람을 발견하지 못    합니다. 앞으로도 기대되는 작가가 적지 않습니다만, 다만 關北의 작가로서 關北的인 굳셈   을 버리고 의지를 버리고 아름답고 處女的인 것을 배우려고 애쓰는 일부의 작가들에게는    하등 독창적이고 유닉크한 것을 인정하지 못하니만치 큰 기대도 가지지 못합니다.
金起林 -  關北 산천은 혹은 수려할지 몰라도 저의 故鄕은 그렇지 못합니다. 초라한 적은   벌판과 앞을 가리는 摩天嶺 連山이 늘 막막하고 안타까워 보였습니다. 우리지방 말은 역    시 그리 아름답지 못합니다. 아무도 기억할 이 없는 졸작 『어떤人生』 『繁榮記』 『鐵道沿     線』 속의 대화에는 지방말을 그대로 살려보려고 했습니다만은 아마도 죽여버렸을 걸요.
이 북쪽에서는 작가나 시인의 작품의 특질은 반드시 누구에게나 공통되지는 않어도 대체    로는 좀 부틈부치가 텁텁하고 붓이 거츨지나 않을까 - 그런 말을 여러 곳에서 들었습니    다. 그러나 개인으로는 金珖燮氏의 詩같은 것은 북쪽출신 같지않게 섬세하고 精麗하니까    一律로는 그렇다고 할 수 없겠지요. 曙海, 雪野, 巴人... 대체로는 모두 앞    에서 말한 의미의 北方性이 있는 것 같습니다.
李軒求 -  특별히 關北말을 내가 쓰는 문장 속에 살리랴고 노력한 일은 없습니다. 그러나   崔曙海의 작품이나 巴人의 『國境의 밤』 또는 李善熙, 崔貞熙氏등 작품 중    에서 맛보는 關北의 억세고도 황량하고 암담한 중에도 무듸게 비치는 鈍光(?)이랄까 이런   것이 끈氣있게 그 속에 흘러있음을 느낍니다. 이 感觸은 오히려 보통사람의 체질로는 감    당하기 어려울 만큼 위압적이요 야생적인 北國的 難澁이 숨어 있습니다. 강한 生의 표현,    뒤로 물러설 줄 모르고 남에게 지지아니하는 거의 무지할 만큼 굳센 이 기질은 朝鮮문학    에의 새로운 앞날의 문학의 방패가 되리라고 믿습니다.
金珖燮 -  어느 사이에 나의 정신에는 내가 난 곳 - 나의 지방이라는 것이 빠저버린 것 같  습니다. 나는 이 버리기 어려운 생각들보다 벌서 그 이상의 것을 요구하고 싶습니다. 그리   면서도 어떤 때에는 어머니의(98) 태몽같이 담장을 넘어 들어가는 파란 구렁이 같이 고    향의 집에 찾어가는 때가 있습니다. 이것이 고향 『關北』에 대한 나의 조그마한 본능입니    다.
산과 들은 골격이 모질고 體大가 듬석하고 물결도 세고 또 東海岸은 푸른 流動같습니다.    빠저 죽어도 목숨이 아깝지 않은 때가 있습니다.
이 산 이 물 이 바다에 알맞는 하늘과 바람과 구름이 있으니 그것이 關北의 자연을 맨드    는 것이겠지만 나는 다른 道의 사람들처럼 한번도 그것을 자랑해 본 일도 없고 자랑해보    고 싶지도 않었습니다. 그냥 말하자면 關北은 누가 무슨 흉을 보더라도 朝鮮에 있어서의    新興 亞米利加일 것 같습니다.
기후가 차고 모든 것이 부드럽지 못한 탓인지 그래서 입을 벌이기 싫고 그렇지 않으면 입   술이 탁하고 혀바닥이 두터워 그런지 音이 不明치 못하여 「밥을」 「바부」하고 「물을」 「무루」하고 「떡을」 「떠그」하며 그 외에도 서울말과 南鮮말들이 흉보는 말들이 字典하나 꾸밀만큼 많습니다. 그래서 문학은 커녕 社交나 戀愛에도 不利할 것 같습니다. 實相 함경도 사람은 서울오면 쓸 말보다 버리고야 견딜 말이 더 많습니다. 문학이란 언어의 따님같은 차림을 차려야하는 것인 데 함경도 말은 투쟁하는 말 - 사고 팔고 하는 데도 싸움하는 것  같고 또 정말 싸움할 때면 말이 방맹이같애서 약하디 약한 사람은 北鮮하면 말에 맞어 죽   을런지도 모릅니다. 그래서 이말을 가지고는 請을 하거나 사정하거나 하는 버릇이 붙지     못하는 특성이 있습니다.
참으로 글로 쓰기 거북하고 거슬리는 데가 많은 데도 남녀 문인들은 주목하리만큼 많이     납니다. 그러나 말은 서울말로 표현할 수 밖게 없이 되었습니다. 자연은 지방에 있어도 언   어는 중앙에 모이고 문학도 거기서 자라는 때문인가 봅니다. 하나 白頭山과 豆滿江으로     갈 때에는 그들은 서울말 南鮮말을 다 버리고 가는 것 같습니다.
그리고 나의 詩에는 별로히 언어의 地方美가 필요없어서 쓸랴는 별 용의가 없습니다. 소    설가로서는 李善熙氏가 함경도 어느 해안촌을 주제로 하여 소설을 썼는데 함경도 사투리    를 재미있고 구수하게 썼든 것같이 기억됩니다. 문학상 가치와 특색이 있다면 그것으로     소설을 쓸 수 있다는 것이 가치요 아직까지 그것으로 關北출신 작가가 소설을 많이 쓸 수   없었다는 것이 또 특색일 것 같습니다.
李燦 - 제 고향은 北靑입니다만(99) 近 4,5년 간은 직업관계로 소위 三水甲山일대와 鴨綠   江연안 北滿방면에 거진 살어오다싶이 하고 그예 지금은 이 지역 한 주민의 榮業까지 제    것으로 하고 있는데 年來 마음은 항상 이 豊*한 예술적 처녀지에 戀戀하여 내 일생일대    의 豪壯凄絶한 한편의 장편 서사시라든가 이 위대한 대자연과 독특한 언어풍습에 多恨한    이 곳 인문역사와 悲凉한 생활諸相을 읽어 쇼-롭의 『고요한 동』같은 尨大한 스케일의 한   개 力作을 가져보려 하는 것인데 여기 드러 공개할만한 노력이란 아직 별로 해오는 바 없   고 구태여 말하자면 期會있는 대로 그들 산간 窮民들의 내력과 일상에 특히 육체적 접근    을 꾀하고 있다는 것 뿐이올시다. 다이나믹한 텃취와 沈痛한 채색 그 뒤에 숨은 격렬한     정열과 란만한 낭만 또는 豪放한 기개랄까 불굴의 의지라고나 해야할 겐데 아직 너나없이   이 문턱에도 이르지 못했음은 遺憾이올시다.
李北鳴 - 지방어를 문학적으로 어떻게 소화해야겠느냐는 문제는 벌서 전부터 논의되어오는,  한 개의 숙제라고 생각합니다. 특히 역사적으로 보아 數種의 지방어가 혼용되고 있는 關    北지방에서는 지방어를 사용하여 작품내용을 빛낸다는 것은 곤란한 일입니다. 그러고 지    방적으로 보아 아직 야성적인 강한 악센트를 조잡하게 사용하고 있는 데가 많다고 생각합   니다. 그러나 이것을 分析하여 연구해 본다면, 아주 滋味있고, 구수하고 효과적인 美妙한    언어가 발견됩니다. 나는 특히 지방어를 사용할 필요를 느낄 때는 이런 방법를 취하고 있   습니다. 내가 만약 A란 지방을 취재하여 작품을 쓰겠으면, 구상을 대충 완료시켜 가지고    는, A지방으로 떠나갑니다. 한 일주일 그 지방에 머므르면서, 그 지방의 用語, 風俗, 習慣,   生活樣姿 등등을 보고 들은 대로, 노-트합니다. 나는 이 방법으로 늘상 작품을 써옵니다.
야성적인 일부 關北의 성격은, 자연 그 지방 작가의 작품에도 반영됩니다. 대패로서가 아    니라, 도끼로 깎은 듯한 형식이다. 툭한 線을 싼 내용의 작품, 이것이 關北지방 작가의 작   품경향이 아닌가 생각합니다. 그러나 이것은 전체적으로 보아 그렇다는 것은 아닙니다.
玄卿駿 - 고향은 咸北 明川 花臺지만 9세 때부터 타향을 떠다닌 관계로 때로는 고향의 기  억조차 희미해지는 때가 있습니다.
그러나 역시 고향은 고향입니다.(100) 말할 수 없이 그립고 정다운 곳은 고향입니다.
더구나 내 고향은 산수가 수려한 곳입니다.
關北의 金剛이라고 하는 七寶山은 어떠한 데다가 내놓아도 遜色이 없을 絶勝地라는 것은    어찌 내 혼자의 自畵自讚이라고 하겠습니까?
金剛山이 內外海의 3부로 나누어놓듯 七寶山도 內七寶, 外七寶, 海七寶의 3부로 나눌 수가   있고, 또 되기를 그렇게 되었습니다.
그중 海七寶는 내 고향 花臺地方 해안선으로부터 시작되여 舞水端을 지나 上古而해안 일    대를 끼고 北으로 뻗혀들어갑니다. 나는 이 海七寶를 그 중 사랑합니다. 쪽을 풀어 물드린   듯한 東海!
나는 꿈에도 그것을 잊을 수가 없습니다. 언제던지 그 푸른 물결을 노래하고 싶습니다. 이   러한 관계로 나의 작품 중에는 그 바다를 그린 것이 절반은 된다고 생각합니다.
바다와 사공! 육지에서는 술과 계집을 찾다가도 일차 바다에만 나가면 그 무서운 폭풍과    격랑과 용감하게 싸우는 사공!
술을 마시게 되면 잔이나 곱부는 죄다 집어치우고 35도의 소주를 사발이나 박아지로 퍼먹   는 그 사공!
서로 수만 틀리면 형제간이나 부자간이라도 용서없이 때려부시다가도 분만 풀리면 그 자    리에 서로 안고 딩굴며 또 鯨飮하는 그 사공!
나는 그 사공을 무척 좋와합니다. 그런 사공을 그려보느라고 『激浪』도 써보고 『오마리』도   썼지만 결국은 내 才分의 부족으로 실패를 하고 말었습니다. 만은 나는 언제던지 그 바다   와 사공과 그리고 철을 따라 수없이 浮遊하는 魚群들을 훌륭히 그려볼 결심입니다.
다음 지방의 언어에 대하여 한말슴 드린다면 우리지방 方言은 여러분도 다 아다싶이 액센   트가 강하고 語調가 明瞭지 못해 작품에 넣기가 매우 困難합니다.
사투리를 꼭 써야 할 장면에 이 액센트가 강하고 不明瞭한 말을 집어넣을 때 항상 느끼는   것은 한글의 不足性입니다. 내 자신 아직 한글에 대하여 연구가 불충분한 탓도 있겠지만,    關北사투리는 한글로서 표현못할 語音이 많습니다.
이런 것들을 정복하여 버리고 완전한 표현을 하랴면 반드시 우리 文筆에 종사하는 자들이   지방사투리와 한글에 대한 연구를 깊이 해야할 줄 압니다.(101)
다음 關北작가로서 문단에 내놓은 작품을 논한다면 누구니 누구니해도 故崔曙海氏의 『紅    焰』같은 것이고 현재로는 韓雪野氏의 諸作, 특히 『黃昏』은 내가 못내 자랑하고 싶은 作입   니다. 詩로서는 金東煥氏의 『國境의 밤』입니다. 더구나 『國境의 밤』은 내가 西伯利亞에서    방랑생활을 할 때 수백번도 더 읽어서 乃終에는 冊없이도 읽게 되었던 것입니다.
그런데 나는 崔氏나 韓氏나, 金氏의 諸作들을 他지방 작가들의 작품들보다도 더 높이 평    가하고 싶어하는 것은 氏들의 작품, 다시 말하면 關北작가들의 작품들은 기술적으로 본다   면 어리다지만 그 작품을 대하는 태도는 어디까지던지 眞摯하고, 그리고 「스케-ㄹ」이 큰  때문입니다. 나는 조그맣게 모난 데가 없이 반드시 째운 작품은 재미있게는 보아도 좋게   는 안봅니다.
내용이 없이 수법만 바로 된 작품들을 대할 때면 어쩐지 鍍金칠한 器具를 보는 듯한 느낌   이 납니다. 이것은 물론 나의 暴言인 줄 알지만, 그러나 「모-팟쌍」보다 「발작크」를 좋와하는 나로서는 할 수 없는 일이라고 생각합니다. 기술은 어디까지던지 배우겠습니다. 그것  이 없이는 결국 완성된 작품은 못 맨드니까 정성껏 배워야지요.
그러나 내용이 없이는 필요가 없다고 생각합니다.
李庸岳 - 말에 따라선 시골서 씨여지는 말이 훨신 맛나는 것이 있겠지만 그 아름답다고 생  각하는 말의 효능이 그 말에 저즌 사람들에게만 限하는 수가 많지 않습니까. 그러므로 작   품에선 되도록 방언을 피하고 싶습니다. 咸鏡道말의 아름다움이나 平安道말의 아름다움을   찾는 것두 좋겠지만 그보다도 조선말의 아름다움을 먼저 찾어야겠고 또 그것을 지켜야한    다고 저는 생각합니다.
그리고 關北작가들의 작품의 특징을 사람들이, 말하기를 찹찹하지 못하다던지 섬세하지     못하다던지 하는 걸 보면 아마 무뚝뚝하거나 線이 굵직한 것이 특징인가 본 데 이러한 것   이 그대로 關北작가들의 약점이 되기도 쉬울 것입니다.
그러나 金東煥氏의 「國境의 밤」이나 崔貞熙氏의 「地脈」이나 요즘 발표된 玄卿駿氏의 「流氓」같은 작품들은 아주 훌륭하지 않습니까.
崔貞熙 -  해본 일이 없읍니다.
李善熙氏의 「女人命令」에서 咸鏡道 사투리도 작품 속에 썸즉하다는 것을 느꼈고, 언젠가  金起林氏 소설 「鐵道沿線」속에 「제미는 어디르 감매」(102)하는 대화가 있는데, 이 대화는, 방탕해지는 어머니가 밤길을 걸어 사나이 있는 곳을 찾어가는 때, 그 아들이 어머니한태  먹칠갓은 어둠 속에서 집어던진 꼭 한마디의 말입니다. 어느 고장 말보다도, 여기엔 感鏡    道 사두리가 매우 적절했다고 생각합니다.
朴啓周 -  내 부모의 고향은 咸興이지만 나는 北間道 龍井에서 출생해서 20년동안이라는   긴 세월을 滿洲물을 먹으면서 자랐습니다. 滿洲에서도 龍井이나 局子街(延吉)지방의 山河    란 말할 수 없이 황량하고, 나무 하나 없는 禿山이여서 「秀麗」라는 것을 間島天地에서는  찾아 볼 수가 없습니다. 그래도 間島의 詩人墨容들은 「海蘭江의 黃昏」이니, 「月下의 一松  亭」이니, 「飛岩山의 봄」이니, 「秋夜의 耶蘇山」이니, 하고 제법 수려한 山河를 가진 듯이 노래를 읊는 것은 빛좋은 개살구의 打令이라 할까요.
언어 역시, 間島라는 곳은 朝鮮 13道 백성이 모여든 合衆國 格이여서 여러가지 말을 다     들을 수 있으나 그래도 關北과도 또 다른, 間島의 독특한 언어가 있습니다, 「어머니」를 「  제에마」라고 부른다든가, 「네」라는 대답을 「야앙」라고 한다든가, 「할머니」를 「아매」라든가, 「할아버지」를 「아방이」이라고 부르는 것은 關北의 대체로 공통된 사투리겠지만, 그래도 關北의 지방지방의 사투리가 다 다른 것입니다. 예컨대 「할머니」를 咸興에서는 「아망이」이요, 端川서는 「아매」요, 城津서는 「우매」요, 間島지방에서는 「크라매」라 합니다. 여기에 그 방언별을 기록하자면 방대한 辭典을 이를 정도니 미리 피하는 바이어니와 語尾에 있어서도 여인들이 「아버지, 진지 어서 잡수세요」하는 것을 富寧지방에서는 「아분님 시걱날래 드읍지」하고, 會寧지방에서는 「좋와요」라는 말을 「좋스꼬마」, 慶源지방에서는 「좋스꿔니」합니다. 그리고 間島에서 「主人, 계십니까」를 「쥔장, 계심둥?」하고 부르는 데, 이러구보니 言語美랄 것은 하나도 없고 모두 서울말에 비하면 해괴망칙할 뿐입니다.
關北 사투리를 집어넣은 작품으로는 李泰俊氏의 「아담의 後裔」와 「바다」와「五夢女」를 재미있게 읽었고, 그 다음에는 별로 구경 못했습니다. 작년 가을에 蔡萬植氏가 「韓雪野氏는 한번도 작품속에 自己지방인 咸興말을 집어 넣어서 쓰지않는 것이 불쾌하다」고 하는 말을 들었는데 사실 韓雪野氏의 「泥濘」이라든가 「種痘」를 보면(작품 성공 여부는 내 논할 바가 아니고) 배경이 咸興인 것이 歷然한데 咸興 말을 피하고(103) 서울말이 나오는 데는 좀 어색하지않다 않을 수 없었습니다. 하긴 關北 사투리나 間島 사투리로 쓰면 일일히 註를 달아야겠으니 그도 딱하긴 하지요.
내가 쓰다가 내버려 둔 미완성 작품인 「滓渣」에 間島 사투리를 넣었는데, 間島를 떠난 지  가 8년이 넘어서, 서울말에 젖은 지금의 나로서는 생각나지 않는 것이 많으므로 困難을     받는 때가 많습니다.
滿洲출신의 작가라고는 있는 상 싶지 않고 滿洲를 무대로 한 작품으로는 故崔曙海氏의 「   紅焰」을 소년시절에 감명깊게 읽었으며, 近者에 와서는 李泰俊氏의 「農軍」을 읽었고,     李箕永氏의 「大地의 아들」을 아직 읽지 못했습니다. 내가 장차 집필하려는  순수와 대중의 중간물인 장편 「間島血脈」은 滿洲國이 건립되든 해까지의 間島50年史인데,  거기에는 朝鮮농민의 개척사, 張作霖 治政시대로부터의 支那경찰의 虐政, 支那육군의 폭     행, 馬賊의 跋扈, 支那人지주와 朝鮮人소작인의 관계, 國境의 密輸業, 阿片굴, 「양휘」(도박)  의 중독자, 支那人 賣淫굴, 그리고 옛날의 朝鮮人학생들의 그 主義者然하고 우쭐거리며 꺼   떡대던 學生風紀와 東興, 大成의 校風, 민족주의로부터 사회주의로 전향하고, 다시 사회주   의로부터 공산당으로 전향해서 主義者라는 이름 밑에서 온갖 추태를 出演하던 50년간의     사상변천의 과정 등, 내가 20년간 직접 보고 듣고 체험한 가지가지를 그려볼까 합니다.

少年時節의 로맨스
二. 소년소녀시절 고향에 게실 때에 가지신 여러가지 甘美한 回想이 있을 줄 암니다.(더구나  異性에 대하여) 그를 情緖的으로 回憶 記送하여 주십시오.

金起林 - 어머니가 세상 떠나슬 때도 슲었고, 누이가 죽었을 때도 슲었고 - 그렇지만 그런  얘기는 누구나 다 갖인 평범한 얘기니까 그만둠니다. 어린시절의 자그만식한 『로맨쓰』야    누가 한두가지 없겠습니까만은 그런 것도 남들이 다 있는 있이니까 얘기했자 싱거울 것임   니다.
李北鳴 - 역시 내게 있어서는, 興南시대가 제일 그리운 시절이였습니다. 인생을 알기 시작  한 것도(104) 이 시대고, 문학을 시작한 것도 이 시대 위대한 연애를 해본 것도, 이 興南    시대였습니다. 바로 지금으로부터 10년 전.
李庸岳 - 저는 어릴 때 어머니에게 업혀서 우라지오나 허바리깨 같은 델 단닌 일이 있는   데 밑엣 동생이 생긴 뒤로는 어머니를 동생에게 빼았기고 어머니가 아라사에서 돌아오시    는 날을 기대리는 일이라던지.
어머니가 돌아오시는 날엔 새벽부터 누나랑 소술기를 타고 배닫는 淸津으로 가던 일이라    던지.
오실 때마다 으례히 갖다주시던 흘레발(로시아빵)을 그 때 아래웃집에 살든 申東哲(詩쓰는)군과 나눠 먹으면서 좋다고 뛰어 단이던 일이라던지 모두 그리웁습니다.
여인에 대하여서도 없지는 않습니다만 제가 아직 총각인즉 잡잡한 이야긴 그만두는게 좋    겠이다.
金珖燮 - 가정이 咸鏡道요 귀족적 살림 속에서 산 것도 안이요 고흔 색동저고리에 갓신을  신고 자란 것도 아니요 그냥 산에 가서 새둥이도 들추고 모랬가에서 조개줍기도 하고 배    도 곺은 때가 이섰고 어더맛기도 했고... 방법없이 잘 자랏다는 생각 - 이런 것이나 정서    가 될런지 모르겠습니다. 소년시절이라 했으니 지금처럼 여인에게 대한 정서야 있겠습니    까만 名日날 떠함박을 머리에 이고 단이는 색시들 중에는 입분 색시들도 있엇든 것 갔습    니다.
李軒求 - 나는 어려서부터 몹시 부끄럼을 탓든가 바요. 그래서 내 사촌누님이 세 살된 나를  업고 겨을 명절같은 때 아가씨들만 모힌 데로 가서 놀다가 오줌이 마려워도 색시가 부끄    러워 당초에 오줌을 누지 않더라는 얘기를 그 후에 가끔 듣든 기억이 있습니다. 오히려     귀여움을 받었지 내가 甘美로운 回憶이라고까지는 가져보지를 못했습니다. 한번은 내가     7,8세 되든 때 일인가 바요. 일은 봄인가 되는 데 뒷산 돌각담 앞에서 굿을 한다고 해서     많은 아가씨들과 나도 구경을 갔는데 해가 지나니까 어떻게 추웠든지 모두들 담요를 뒤집   어 쓴 그 속에 사내라고는 나 혼자 한가운데 앉어 있었습니다. 그후 꿈 속에 그 중의 한    아가씨를 마난 일이 있었습니다. 早熟한 까닭이라기 보다도 너무 천진스러운 탓이었겠지    요. 나는 정말 손우로나 손아래로 누이나 누나가 없는 외아들이었으니까. 이것이 가끔 소    년시절에 소녀를 꿈꾸게 한 가장 큰 이유가 되었든가 생각돼요.
玄卿駿 - 소년시절 고향있을 때에 가진 (105)甘美한 회상은 별로 없습니다. 더구나 여인에  게 대한 것은 없습니다.
李燦 - 「박고 박고 옌지 박고...」 박고노래에 흥겨워 박꽃이 활작 픤 가을엔 달도 밝고.
밝은 달빛 그윽한 박꽃행긔ᄉ 속에 順이와 나와 아스러지게 잡든 손길은 아아무애도 보질   못했드람니다.
韓雪野 - 고향에 대한 甘美한 회상이라고는 없습니다만, 그 가없이 넓은 벌판만은 언제든지  잊지 못합니다. 내 이름에 『野』字가 들어간 것도 그 때문입니다. 저는 어릴 쩍에 너르고     넓은 一望無附한 大평야에 하다 못해 조그만 언덕 하나라도 저다가 앉혀놓리라고 몇번이    나 다짐했는지 모릅니다.
그리고 자라나서는 이 평야를 題材로 작품을 쓰려고 했습니다만 아직도 이렇다할 작품을    맨들지 못했습니다. 그러니 말하자면 저는 고향산촌에 대해서 부채만 걸머지고 있을 뿐이   오 하나도 갚아주지 못한 채로 있는 셈입니다.
그러나 이제 겨우 紙上에 발표하게된 『塔』이라는 장편 중에는 가끔 이 평야와 이 鄕村이    나올 것입니다.
나는 고향에 그리는 여성이라고는 예나 이제나 한사람도 없습니다만, 이 평야만은 언제든   지 그리고 있습니다. 그 땅과 같이 너르고 살지고 너그럽고 慈悲하기를 나는 절실히 바라   고 있습니다.
本是 우리가 지나온 소년시절은 순전히 古土인 향토풍속 상 남녀가 자유로 만난다든가 연   애한다든가 하는 일은 있을 수 없었을 뿐 아니라 우리말은 한 2백戶되는 同姓部落이여서    더욱 그런 일은 있을 수 없었습니다만 그렇다고 이 말을 나쁘다고 생각해 본 일은 없고     지금도 역시 그렇습니다.
崔貞熙 - 있은 듯 합니다. 만다 이야기하긴 彼此에 支離한 일. 꼭 한가지 아직껏 신기하게
생각되는 건 제가 분명히 여덟살 때였다고 짐작함니다. 동네에 三澤이란 소년이 있었습니   다. 저보다, 서너살 더 먹었든 것 같습니다. 그는 늘 앓었습니다. 그래서 얼굴이 창백했습    니다. 우리동네 아이들이 소먹이고 꼴을 비고 김을 매고 해서 죄다 얼굴이 새깜한데 三澤   이만은 하이야했습니다. 저는 늘 그애 집에 가고 싶었습니다. 마는 어쩐지 부끄러워서 못    가고, 가을이면 박꽃이 많이 픠는, 그애 집 울타리밖에 가서, 그애가 먹을 약-(그애는 그    때 지렁이도 다려 먹었습니다)냄새를 한참씩 맡으며, 그애가(106)차고 다니는 귀신을 쫓아   낸다는 종이쪽이 들어 있는 새빩간 모번단주머니래도 한번 뒤저보았으면 하는 생각을       했습니다.
朴啓周 -  龍井에서 여섯살 때까지는 지냈고, 열세살 때까지는 龍井에서 白頭山편으로 70里  許에 있는 二道溝에서 지났습니다. 그리고 다시 龍井에 와서 살었으니 내 소년시절의 대    부분은 二道溝에서 보낸 셈이외다. 紫霞에 잠긴 崢嶸한 長白山 連脈을 앞으로 바라보면서,   봄이면 개나리꽃과 함박꽃이 피는 뒷산으로, 여름이면 海蘭江畔에 우거진 버들방천으로,     꽃 따러도 다녔고 고기잡으러, 혹은 천렵하러 손잡고 다니던 소년소녀들은 지금도 때때로   옛 기억을 들춰주군 합니다.

老後와 故鄕山川
三. 이 뒤 몇십년 지나 白鬚가 휘날리는 晩年에 臨終의 地를 고향에 擇하겠습니까. 또 지금  도 가끔 느끼시는 鄕愁 등등.

李軒求 - 늙어서 白骨을 고향에 묻겠다는 그런 생각은 아직 한번도 해 본 일이 없고 또 내  가 고향에 묻힐 만한 그런 애착도 없는 것 같습니다. 향수라는 것도 좀더 멀리 떠러저 살   어야지 그렇지 않고 - 비록 1천5백里를 隔한다 하더래도 - 특별한 관심이 아직은 없습니   다. 좀더 늙어봐야 알 일이지요.
李燦 - 안 가렴니다. 고향엔.
만일 맘대로 된다면 오다가다 오는 이 가는 이 없는 深山도 幽谷 그 어느 孤高한 바윗등    에나 저의 望後의 대를 갖겠습니다.
父母兄弟 親戚知己 하나 없는 고향에 그 무슨 애절한 鄕愁ᄂ들 있겠습니까.
다믓 꽃나비 화려한 봄 아침이나 나무닢 물드려지는 가을 황혼 불연듯 情든른 山川이 그    리워지는 때가 있군 합니다.
玄卿駿 - 晩年에 임종할 곳을 고향에 택하겠냐는 것은 너무도 내 뜻에 맞지 않는 질문입니  다. 옛 글에도 人間到處有靑山이라 했거든 어찌 사내자식이 臨終地를 고향에만 국한시키    겠습니까? 그저 닥치는 대로 떠돌다가 죽는 곳을 분묘지로 삼을 판이지요. 그러나 가끔     아린시절의 어머니의 젔가슴처럼 그리워지는 향수의 심정은 막을래야 막을 수가 없습니     다.
千字文을 안고 서당 다니드 일,(107) 소꼽작난 하던 일, 이웃에 살다가 間島로 이사간 順    伊네 일, 모도 다 그리운 것입니다. 지금 고향의 바다ᄉ까 靑松밑에는 海棠花가 빩앟게 피   었을 것이고 防風뿌리 캐러 다니는 아가씨들의 그 모양도 한껏 정취를 자아내어 주겠지     요.
李北鳴 - 무어니 무어니해도 좋고, 그리운 곳은 고향입니다. 청춘시대는 몰라도 老境에 들  어가면, 역시 최후의 안식처는 고향일까 생각합니다.
李庸岳 - 아득합니다. 머리가 히도록 수염이 히도록 제가 꼭 산다는 것을 책임지신다면 대  답하겠읍니다만, 어쩐지 저는, 30두 못돼서 죽을 것만 같습니다. 그리고 東京있을 때        巴村이 말하기를 庸岳이란 녀석은 어디고 자꾸만, 돌아다니다가 나종엔 썩   은 물이 흐르는 개울창에 대가리를 틀어박고 죽을게라고 했읍니다. 물맛이 유달리 좋은     우리 鏡城서 눈을 감게 된다면 얼마나 좋겠읍니까만 巴村의 말같애선 고향서 죽기는 틀렸   나 봅니다.
金珖燮 - 白髮이 휘날리는 만년에 고향을 찾을 인사야 어디 있겠읍니까. 고향에서 났기 때  문에 고향을 臨終의 地로 하고 싶지는 안읍니다. 나의 臨終地는 죽는 시간에 내가 있는     곳입니다. 오직 향수는 훔처서 먹다가 빼아낀 한 개의 떨븐 사과올시다.
韓雪野 - 그리는 향토에 백골을 묻고 싶은 것은 아마 인간의 通情인 듯하나 나는 아직 그  런 생각까지는 해 본 일이 없읍니다. 아직은 나이가 많지 않어서 그런지도 모르지오.
흖이 늙은이들을 보면 先瑩에 묻히는 일이 唯一한 希願인 듯 하니 저도 늙으면 고향을 墳   墓의 地로 擇할는 지 모르지오. 얼마전 北京에서 南方출신의 老畵家 蘇懸    氏를 방문하였드니 그는 저에게 다음과 않은 一詩를 주었습니다.
塊壘塡胸總未消
何年歸去故山樵
丹靑也許金錢易
差勝權門事折腰
그 다음 老畵家 齊白石氏를 만났드니 그는 다음과 같은 一文을 주고 또     저 유명한 蟹蝦一幅을 그려 주었습니다.
鄕思9千里, 春秋8十餘, 與君同是思鄕人也
이것을 보면 그들은 한 글같이 고향을 그리고 있는 것을 알 수 있습니다. 그들은 南方출    신으로 北方에 와서 功成名遂한 당대 일류의 예술가들입니다. 屢巨萬의 재산을 가지고 문   앞에 절하는 사람이 매일 천명도 넘는 著名의 人이나 窮谷의 향토를 마치 어린아이가 어    머니 그리듯 합니다.(108)
그러나 나는 아직까지 방랑성이 가시지 않어서 그런지 역시 『人間到處有靑山』이라는 말에   더 맘이 붓들려 있습니다.
허잘 것 없는 존재지만 아직은 더 살고 싶은 생각이 간절한 모양입니다. 그러니까 몇 십    년 후의 白骨 처치같은 것은 현명한 잡지사에서 물어주시지 않었스면 싶으되 잡지사란 워   낙 남의 아픈 곳에 일침을 주는 버릇이 있으니까 하는 수 없습니다만...
金起林 - 그런 생각은 없읍니다. 좀더 좋은 곳에 가 살지요. 푸른 바다도 보이고 들이 있고  수영도 할 수 있고 산보도 할 수 있고 사철 생선도 먹을 수 있고 될 수만 있으면 風光 좋   은 온천도 가까웁고 한 데 그런데 가 사렀으면 합니다. 향수라는 것은 별로 느끼지 않습    니다. 다만 아버지가 게실 적에는 아버지가 그리웠고 지금은 잡초에 덮여있을 墓所가 저    의 마음을 고향으로 껄어붙이는 가장 큰 힘입니다.
崔貞熙 - 白鬚가 휘날리는 때의 일을 지금부터 생각할 게 뭐얘요. 늙어서 죽을 것 같은 생  각도 없읍니다. 어느 날 어느 하늘 밑에서 죽을지 모르겠다고 생각됩니다. 아모 하늘 아래   서 죽든 지, 달빛이 몹시 푸른 밤, 제 영혼이 그 달빛처럼 푸르고 곱고 아름다웁고, 그리    고 죽고 싶습니다.
朴啓周 - 아버지의 무덤이 아직까지도 間島에 있으나 나는 老後를 間島에서 보내고 싶은   생각도 없고, 내 백골을 그곳에 묻히고도 싶지 않습니다. 하기야, 천하가 내 집이오 내 땅   이니 아무 데 묻힌들 掛念할 배가 아니지만...

關西, 東滿 文人과의 交友記
四. 先生께서 關北 及 東北滿洲출신의 諸文人 詩客과의 交友記.

金珖燮 - 關北文人 交友記랄 것은 별로 없으나 李軒求氏, 徐恒錫氏와 親하고  詩人 金東煥氏, 金起林氏, 李庸岳氏를 或時 만나고 소설가로 李善熙氏, 崔貞熙氏를 或時     만나는 것이 交友錄일 것 갓습니다. 그자지 아는 文友는 없습니다.
李北鳴 - 제일 心胸을 헤처놓고 이야기하고, 문학적으로 존경하는 이는 韓雪野氏입니다.    金東明氏는 咸興에서 30里밖 西湖津에 게시나, 근년에는 통 만나지 못하     고, 書信왕래도 없읍니다. 李燦氏도 그리운 文友나, 書信왕래도(109) 그다지 없읍니다.
李燦 - 親한 이를 들자면 이미 작고한 桂月 - 그 시절 둘다 하도 낭만하    고 쎈치하야 그 어느 한여름 제 고향 北靑서 인접해 지내며 어께를 나란히 비오는 밤길을   하염없이 거닐기도 하고 금시 얘이하다 말고 영문없이 눈물짓는 서로를 처다보며 微苦笑    난혼 때도 있었드람니다.
그 해 그 겨을 그 밤 八判町 그의 하숙서 밤늦게야 도러와 그 길로 저는 別有天地로 가고   이듬해 드높은 철창에 5월 端陽이 어리든 날 뜻찮은 그의 恢報를 접했었습니다. 감개 깊    은 과거올시다. 지끔 大阪 가 있는 시인 貞求도 여러번 제 鄕里 鄙居까지    찾어준 잊을 수 없는 옛 친우의 한사람이올시다. 맛나면 반가운 악수보다도 피차 우울한    넉두리 앞세움을 상식으로 했드랍니다. 馬野兄과는 갚프 화   려하든 시절 그는 「新階段」 저는 「文學建設」하느라 한동안 安國町 네거리를 서로 繁多히 왕래한 적 있고 北鳴·韓曉와는 기이한 자리에서 말대로의 邂逅禽別에 끝었을 뿐 그외 여러 선배 同好諸氏들과 대개 書面相交는 있으면서도 아즉 一面識의 기록도  갖지못한 저의 關北交友錄은 심히 빈약합니다.
李庸岳 - 알려진 분으로 알고 지내는 이들도 많습니다만 연령으로나 업적으로나 모두 훨신  선배들 뿐이기 때문에 감히 교우라는 말로서 여기 모실만한 이는 별로 있지 않습니다.
가끔 작품을 발표는 하나 제가 無名하듯이 그다지 알려지지 못한, 이제 큰소리를 치고 나   설 동무로선 우리 鏡城만 해두 金軫世, 申東哲, 許利福, 吳化龍, 咸亨洙, 咸允洙,        李琇馨 이렇게 많은데 모두 시인입니다. 그리고 늘 漢詩만 주물르고 있는    金東圭란 이가 무척 좋와서 北쪽으로 길 때엔 으레히 古茂山이란 곳에 들   려서 하롯밤씩 이야길 나누고 오군합니다.
玄卿駿 - 원래가 非사교적으로 되여먹은 탓으로 나는 문인끼리 그다지 交際를 못해봣습니  다. 내가 알고 서로 書信出來도 이서오는 문인은 咸興에 韓雪野氏, 韓曉氏, 城津에          金宇鍾, 淸津에 張正南氏, 金光爕氏, 滿洲에 와서는 金貴氏, 咸亨洙氏, 李周用氏, 金朝奎氏, 姜敬   愛氏, 千靑松氏, 安壽吉氏 그리고 지금 서울게신     분으로서는 李庸岳氏 - 아무리 손까락을 꼽아가며 세여 봐야 關北, 東滿의 문인으로서는    이 이상 더 꼽을 수가 없습니다.
韓雪野 - 關北출신의 문인중, 李善熙氏, 李庸岳氏는 대면할 기회가 없었고 그밖의 여러분은  대개 面顔이나 있으나 워낙 사교에(110) 能치 못해서 그다지 썩 친하게 사괴는 사람은 없   습니다.
본시 사람이 무틀하고 자밋性이 없어서 그런지 친구가 잘 생기지 않는군요. 제 편에서는    퍽 정답게 생각하지만 저편이 그다지 사괼 필요를 느끼지 않는 모양인 것 같습니다. 나도   어느 大잡지나 신문의 편집인쯤 되었다면 關北문인들이 더러는 나같은 사람과도 상종할     필요를 느끼겠지만...
그래서 그런지 저는 차라리 문인이외의 知友ꮀ€ 많습니다. 나는 본시 이른바 문인다운 문    인, 괴팍스러운 성격의 인간을 싫어하는 까닭에 交友에 있어서는 전연 文人意識을 떠나서   널리 인간적으로 취할 점이 있는 사람을 택해서 사굄니다. 그러기 때문에 내 친구 가운데   는 내가 글쓰는 것을 알지 못하는 사람도 더러 있고, 또 글쓴다는 말은 들었으나 무슨 글   을 어떻게 어디다가 쓰는지 아는 사람은 극히 드믐니다.
金起林 - 본래 교제가 몹시 무딘 때문에 많은 사람은 없습니다. 또 어려서부터 사괸 분은   거진 없습니다.
모다 『넥타이』를 매게 된 다음에 친한 분들입니다. 중학생 때에 방학같은 때 崔貞熙씨랑    함께 元山서 한배를 타고 城津까지 간 일은 있지만 그때는 더군다나 수집은 때라 인사는    물론 없었습니다. 다만 기억나는 것은 崔貞熙씨는 그때에도 그리 크지는 않었습니다. 자조   뵌 적은 없이 印象에 깊은 분은 金東鳴씨입니다. 西湖를 지날 적에는 늘     들리고 싶읍니다. 그런데서는 아마 도회에 사는 사람을 퍽 無信하고 輕蔑하시면서 사실     것입니다.
李軒求 - 나의 중학시절에 내 고향 교우는 모두가 문학청년이었습니다. 그 중에는 開闢에   『漂浪少年』을 쓴 金永勛氏도 있고 중학시대부터 詩作 讀書를 많이 했고     그후도 東京에까지 가서 문학공부를 한 金秉敏, 金滄振, 이   런 분들도 있었는 데 모두들 중도에서 문학에서 손을 끊고 말었습니다. 이 외에도 적지     아니하게 문학청년이 있었습니다. 오히려 나는 이런 교우의 직접간접의 영향을 받었습니    다. 이런 중에 또 한분 咸彦柱라는 중학시대의 교우를 잊을 수 없습니다.    그러나 이런 중에서 제일 오래두고 사괴여온 분으로는 金珖爕 兄입니다. 15년간 하로의     변함없이 오늘까지 交誼를 쌓어 왔습니다. 巴人을 처음 만난 것을 東京大震災가 나든 해    요. 그후 서로 한자리에서 얘기하게 되기는 三千里 좌담회 석상인가 기억됩니다. 金起林氏   와는 蓮建町 朝鮮日報시대부터지만 정말 (231面에 계속)(111) 친해지기는 朝鮮日報 학예    부에서 함께 일하게 되면서부터이고 李善熙氏와도 이 학예부 책상에서 어지간히 가까워젔   습니다. 徐恒錫氏는 劇藝術硏究會를 통하여 10년 交友입니다.
崔貞熙 - 關北문인중, 대개 다 인사가 있고, 친밀히 지내는 분도 있습니다. 마는 李燦氏, 玄  卿駿氏 두분은 아직 뵈온 일이 없습니다.
朴啓周 - 關北출신 문인보다도 關西와 畿湖출신 문인 중에 知人이 많으며, 關北문인으로는  같은 社에서 일보는 관계인지 崔貞熙氏와 제일 친하게 허물없이 지납니다. 그리고, 韓雪     野, 金東煥, 李善熙, 金珖爕, 李庸岳, 諸氏와 알고 지납니다.  -끝- ＜231＞
＜96-111, 231＞