Magazine Title: 개벽 신간 제3호
Publication Date: 1935년 01월 01일
Article Title: 朝鮮蓄妾史 (History of Concubinage in Korea)
Author: 靑吾 (Ch'ŏng'o)
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/Article)

A History of Concubinage in Korea
						Ch'ŏng'o

1. Meaning and Other Names for Concubine (妾)

What is a concubine (妾)? Is it a side dish container (쟁첩) for a meal setting (飯床器) or a thread spool case (실첩) in a sewing kit? Such talk is idle chatter used in the alleys. However, if we consult the classics for a more meaningful understanding, the *Shuowen Jiezi* (說文) states, "The word *ch'ŏp* (妾) means *chŏp* (接, to connect/meet). Upon hearing that he [the master] observes propriety, she runs forth to meet him, thereby gaining an audience with the gentleman." The *Zuo Zhuan* (左傳) says, "A woman becomes a person's *ch'ŏp*; a *ch'ŏp* is not betrothed." The *Huiyuan* (彙苑) states, "*Ch'ŏp* means *chŏp*; she gets to meet the gentleman but cannot be his equal partner (伉儷)." In a common Korean riddle, it goes: "If it's red, it's a jujube (大棗); if it's a jujube, it's sweet; if it's sweet, it's taffy (飴); if it's taffy, it sticks (接, *chŏp*); if it sticks, it's a concubine (妾, *ch'ŏp*)." Synthesizing these various sayings, *ch'ŏp* means *chŏp* (接), signifying a woman living in close proximity to a man without being his formally married wife. There are two types of concubines: *yangch'ŏp* (良妾) and *ch'ŏnch'ŏp* (賤妾). *Yangch'ŏp*, as the characters suggest, is a woman from a good family (良家) who becomes someone's concubine (in this case, the wedding ceremony is no different from that for a formal wife, except the groom performs the rites wearing a *samo* (紗帽, official's hat) with its two 'horns' removed). *Ch'ŏnch'ŏp* is a woman originally of low status who becomes someone's concubine, examples being private slaves (私婢), government slaves (官婢), state slaves (國婢 - *kwanbi* and *kukpi* are essentially *kisaeng* (妓生)), that is, concubines from the classes of public and private slaves and prostitutes (娼妓類). However, there are also various other names for a concubine, namely *pusil* (副室, secondary room), *sosil* (少室, lesser room), *pyŏlsil* (別室, separate room), *ch'ŭksil* (側室, side room), and *soga* (小家, small house). *Soga* has the same meaning as *sosil*; because the principal wife is, in principle, in the main house (*taega*, 大家), this term is used in contrast. Also, *ch'ŭksil*, *pyŏlsil*, and *pusil* are terms that arose in contrast to calling the principal wife *chŏngsil* (正室, main room). However, in the Kinki region (近畿地方, area around Seoul), *pyŏlsil* generally refers to an old man's concubine, and in the Kaesŏng region (開城地方), a *yangch'ŏp* is called *saenghusil* (生後室, living later room). Recently, too, there are cases where the term *ch'ŏp* is disliked and avoided, sometimes being referred to as the 'second wife' (第2夫人) or 'left wife' (左夫人). And while the principal wife is referred to with the character *t'aek* (宅, house/residence), such as Yangju-t'aek, Ch'unch'ŏn-t'aek, Okdong-t'aek, Kahoe-dong-t'aek, a concubine is specifically referred to with the character *chip* (집, house), like P'yŏngyang-chip, Chŏnju-chip, Taegu-chip, Ch'ŏngjin-chip, Sa-dong-chip. Even when addressed honorifically, she is simply called *mama* (媽媽), and the terms *manim* or *assi* <20> are not used.

2. Origin of Concubines

The system of keeping concubines (畜妾制度) among East Asians originally derived from the polygyny (多妻主義) of the Chinese. According to Chŏng Hyŏn's (鄭玄) commentary in the "T'an Kung" (檀弓篇) section of the *Book of Rites* (禮記), polygyny was prevalent in China from the era of the so-called Two Sovereigns and Three Kings (2帝3王). Emperor Ku (帝嚳) established four consorts (四妃), making one the primary consort (正妃) and the next three secondary consorts (次妃). Emperor Yao (帝堯) also followed this example. Emperor Shun (帝舜), because he married without informing his parents (不告而娶), had no primary consort but had three wives (the eldest consort Ŏhwang (娥皇), the second consort Yŏyŏng (女英), and the next consort Kyebi (癸比)). Emperor Yü of the Hsia dynasty (夏禹氏) added three times Shun's three consorts, i.e., nine, to his own three wives, making a total of 12. The Yin (殷) people added three times the nine of the Hsia, i.e., 27, to their 12, totaling 39. The Chou (周) dynasty, modeling after Emperor Ku from the preceding era, established a primary consort. Below her, they added three times the 27 consorts of the Yin, i.e., 81, plus the 39, totaling 121. Their ranks were: one Empress (后), three Consorts (夫人), nine Concubines (嬪), 27 Hereditary Consorts (世婦), and 81 Assistant Gentlewomen (女御). *Yü* (御) means 'to advance' (進) or 'to attend' (侍), thus signifying attendant women (侍女). Also, the commentary in the "Nei Tsê" (內則篇) states: The Son of Heaven's 81 *yüch'ŏ* (御妻, attendant wives) attend for nine nights; the 27 *sebu* (世婦) attend for three nights; the nine *pin* (嬪) attend for one night; the three *puin* (夫人) attend for one night; and the one Empress (后) attends exclusively for one night. Thus, in a cycle of 15 days, they complete their turns, attending for five days overall. A feudal lord (諸侯) marries nine women in total. Two *puin* each have nieces and sisters accompanying them, so those six attend for one night. The next two accompanying women (*yŏng*, 媵) attend for one night, and next, the *puin* attends exclusively for one night, completing one round every five days. The *Pai Hu T'ung* (白虎通) states: High officials (卿大夫) have one wife and two concubines; lower officials (士) have one wife and one concubine.
Thus, because China, from the ancient emperors down to the nobles, high officials, and lower officials, publicly recognized polygyny, i.e., the system of keeping concubines, even the so-called Great Sage, Confucius (孔子), had a concubine (The *K'ung Ts'ung Tzu* (孔叢子) says Tsai Yü, upon seeing King Chao of Ch'u, remarked, 'The Master's [Confucius's] wife does not wear colored silk, and his concubine does not wear plain silk,' confirming that Confucius indeed had a concubine). Confucius's son Po-yü (伯魚) likely also had a concubine (There is a theory that Tzu-ssŭ was Confucius's illegitimate grandson (庶孫), suggesting Po-yü also had a concubine). Besides them, renowned figures such as Han T'ui-chih (韓退之), Pai Lo-t'ien (白樂天), and Tu Mu-chih (杜牧之) of the T'ang dynasty, and Su Tung-p'o (蘇東坡) of the Sung dynasty, generally had concubines. The saying that Emperor Ming of T'ang (唐明皇) had 3,000 beauties in his rear palace might be an exaggeration typical of the Chinese, like the 'three thousand *chang* of white hair' (白髮三千丈), and thus not entirely credible. However, it is a very well-known fact that a modern warlord like Chang Tsung-ch'ang (張宗昌), quite the ladies' man, had no fewer than 26 beloved concubines. Therefore, it would not be an overstatement to say that one could gauge a Chinese man's character and influence by the number of concubines he possessed.

3. Concubinage in the Three Kingdoms and Koryŏ Periods

Korea (朝鮮), sharing a border with China (支那), has historically received much influence in various aspects, including politics and culture. Among these, the harmful custom of concubinage was also influenced, and the system existed from the early Three Kingdoms period. According to the *Wei Chih* (魏志), Okchŏ (沃沮) was a small country, subordinate to Koguryŏ (高句麗), and sent beautiful women to serve as maids and concubines (婢妾). The *T'ang Shu* (唐書) states: The Silla (新羅) royal clan is called *chin'gol* (眞骨, true bone) or *cheilgol* (第1骨, first bone), and the aristocracy is called *cheigol* (第2骨, second bone). They marry <21> paternal aunts, female cousins, and sisters as wives, so the wife's clan is mostly *cheilgol*, and they do not marry women of the *cheigol*. If they do marry such women, they are always made concubines (*ch'ŏp'yŏng*, 妾媵). In the royal family as well, similar to the Chinese custom, there were numerous secondary consorts (*hŭibi*, 姬妃) besides the primary queen (正妃). To cite prominent examples: Koguryŏ's second king, Yuri Myŏngwang (琉璃明王), besides Queen Song (松氏王妃), had Hwahui (禾姬), a woman from Kyŏnch'ŏn (鵑川), and Ch'ihŭi (雉姬), a Han Chinese woman. After Queen Song died, the two women competed for the king's favor. Ch'ihŭi was insulted by Hwahui and fled back to Han territory. The king, lamenting this, composed the famous "Song of the Oriole" (*Hwangjoga*, 黃鳥歌). Later, King Sansang (山上王), besides making his elder brother's wife, Queen U (于后), his queen, also took a beautiful woman from Chut'ong Village (酒桶村) as a secondary queen (*sohu*, 小后). King Chungch'ŏn (中川王), despite having Queen Yŏn (椽氏王后), favored the beautiful Kwanna (貫那) and wished to make her a secondary queen. Besides these, it is certain from various records that Silla, Paekche (百濟), and Later Paekche (後百濟) all had numerous women in the rear palace, and that high officials and scholar-officials (公卿士大夫家) also had concubines.
Koryŏ (高麗), similar to the system of the Three Kingdoms, also had several queens and consorts in the royal family besides the primary queen. First, King T'aejo of Koryŏ (麗太祖), besides Queen Sinhye of the Yu clan (神惠王后 柳氏), had Queen Changhwa of the O clan (莊和王后 吳氏, mother of Hyejong (惠宗)). Subsequent kings also naturally had numerous palace women. Officials of the sixth rank and above were also permitted to have concubines. Even Buddhist monks kept concubines. Consider Sŏ Kŭng's (徐兢) *Koryŏ Togyŏng* (高麗圖經): "In Koryŏ government offices, there are attendant women (*yŏng*, 媵); state officials have concubines... Wealthy commoners take up to three or four wives; if they do not get along well, they readily separate; children born live in separate rooms." Also consider Sŏng Hyŏn's (成俔) *Yongje Ch'onghwa* (慵齋叢話): "In the Koryŏ period, head monks of temples (住持僧) were wealthier than high ministers (公卿), even possessing female slaves and concubines (婢妾)." These passages are sufficient to infer the system and atmosphere of the time. However, it was not so severe in the early Koryŏ period, but by the middle period, customs deteriorated greatly. There were even instances among scholar-officials of fighting over wives and concubines. During the reign of Myŏngjong (明宗), Ch'oe Ch'unghŏn (崔忠獻) killed General Son Hongyun (孫洪胤) and seized his wife, making her his concubine. Kim Namjun (金南俊) secretly had an affair with the wife of Magistrate Yi Chip (李緝) and had her kill her husband (*Koryŏ Pon'gi* (高麗本史) reference). In the second year of Kojong (高宗), Chŏng Nang (鄭稂) competed over wives and concubines and was demoted to Vice Minister (部 尙書) (*Tongguk T'onggam* (東國通鑑) reference). In the third year of the same king, Yi Ŭibang's (李義曩) son Chi-yŏng (至榮), serving as a general in Sakchu division (朔州分道), took all the Yangsuch'ŏk (楊水尺) people who had naturalized and were scattered in the Hŭnghwa and Unjung districts (興化雲中道), assigned them to his beloved concubine Chaundsŏn (紫雲仙), registered their names, and arbitrarily imposed forced tribute. (Korea's *paekchŏng* (白丁) and *kisaeng* originated from the Yangsuch'ŏk at that time.) After Chi-yŏng died, Ch'oe Ch'unghŏn took Chaundsŏn as his concubine, counted the registered population, and also levied tribute (Ibid.). State Councilor Kim Wŏnmyŏng (金元命) seated his wife and concubine together while entertaining his friend, Vice Councilor Yi Kusu (李龜壽), and was reprimanded by Kusu. Yun Kwan (尹瓘) also had a beloved Jurchen concubine named Ung (熊). Among them, the greatest keeper of concubines was Chi Yun (池奫) during the reign of King U (禑王). Yun, originally from the ranks, rose to the position of State Councilor (宰輔) through military merit. However, he was lecherous and avaricious, possessing over 30 concubines and female entertainers (姬妾). It is said he mostly acquired them through wealth, not necessarily for their beauty. And among Koryŏ kings, those with many favored palace women and beloved concubines were King Ch'ungsuk (忠肅王) and King U (王禑). U was a dissipated and lewd monarch similar to Yŏnsan-gun (燕山君) of the Yi Dynasty. Not only was his rear palace filled with beauties, but he also doted on numerous *kisaeng*. Among them, the *kisaeng*-concubines he particularly favored were Ch'iljŏmsŏn (七點仙), Nanssangbi (鸞雙飛), and Somaehyang (小梅香). (These *kisaeng* <22> were all enfeoffed as princesses (翁主).)

4. Concubinage in the Yi Dynasty Era

In the Yi Dynasty (李朝時代), the system of concubinage was explicitly codified into law. According to the *Veritable Records of the Yi Dynasty* (李朝實錄), in the first month of spring in the second year of T'aejong's (太宗) reign, the king ordered the Ministry of Rites (禮曹) and Ha Ryun (河崙), head of the Office for Annals Compilation (領春秋舘事), and Kwŏn Kŭn (權近), director of the same office (知春秋舘事), to investigate and report on the number of consorts, concubines, and attendant women of kings from the Three Dynasties (三代) down to successive dynasties. The Ministry of Rites submitted a memorial stating: "We, your subjects, have carefully examined the records. The *Book of Rites* states that a feudal lord marries nine women; if taken from one state, two states gain advantage, with nieces and sisters all accompanying them. High officials have one wife and two concubines; lower officials have one wife and one concubine. This was originally intended to broaden the line of succession and prevent licentiousness (淫佚). However, in the system of the previous dynasty [Koryŏ], marriage rites were unclear, and the distinction between legitimate and illegitimate offspring (嫡庶) was undefined. If numerous, they sometimes exceeded the proper number, leading to usurpation and disorder (僣亂); if few, they sometimes fell short, even leading to the extinction of the lineage (絶嗣). They did not follow the laws of the former kings and disrupted the great relationships (大倫). This is for no other reason than that while the state has established precedents (成憲) for various institutions, marriage rites alone still follow the old abuses. Your Majesty should, according to the system of the former kings, establish the rites for the inner palace (宮壺) and ensure that high officials and scholar-officials also follow the fixed regulations, neither cutting off lineages nor exceeding limits, thereby settling the foundation of human relations. If any violate this, they should be dealt with by law." The King approved. Also, the *Chŏllyŏ T'onggo Hon'ga* section (典餘通考婚嫁條, Compendium of Statutes, Marriage Section) states: "Commoners aged forty or older without a son are permitted to take a concubine for the first time; violators receive 40 strokes of the lash (笞40)." It also states: "Treating a wife as a concubine incurs the heavy bamboo (杖); taking a concubine as a wife while the wife is living incurs 90 strokes of the heavy bamboo (杖九)."
Because the Yi Dynasty thus legally recognized concubines, not only high officials and great nobles but even scholars living in seclusion (山林學者) openly kept concubines. Starting with Chu Sebung (周世鵬), the founder of Korea's *sŏwŏn* (書院, private academies) (Chu Sinjae's (周新齋) *Mureung Chapko* (武陵雜稿) contains a poem "Sending Off an Old Concubine from Yangju" (送襄州老妾詩): "Soul vanishes, heart breaks, tears intertwine / How could I have known at first sight this parting? / Caring for illness four years, long attending with medicine / Enduring severe cold three years, never prying into secrets / My lingering stay caused your youthful resentment / Old and ugly, I am ashamed of my white hair / Go well, return to care for your parent in your beautiful land / If our bond is not severed, perhaps in the next life we'll meet"), great Confucian scholars like Sŏ Hwadam Kyŏngdŏk (徐花潭敬德) (Sŏng Ugye's (成牛溪) collection states Hwadam had two sons by a concubine), Cho Nammyŏng Shik (曺南冥植) (See Yi I's (李珥) *Sŏktam Ilgi* (石潭日記)), Yi Hoejae Ŏnjŏk (李晦齋 彦迪), Ko Chebong Kyŏngmyŏng (高霽峰 敬命), and Yi Yulgok I (李栗谷 珥) all had concubines. Among meritorious subjects (勳臣), Ha Ryun (河崙) in the early dynasty, Kim Chong-sŏ (金宗瑞) during Tanjong's (端宗) reign, Pong Sŏkchu (奉石柱) during Sejo's (世祖) time, and Pak Wŏnjong (朴元宗) and Song Il (宋軼) during Chungjong's (中宗) reign were all major keepers of concubines. Ha Ryun's numerous *kisaeng*-concubines were widely discussed even at the time. Kim Chong-sŏ, on the very day he fell victim to Sejo's coup, had three concubines (one of whom was Jurchen) in the inner chambers who served drinks to Hong Yunsŏng (洪允成) when he came to spy. Pong Sŏkchu was a figure similar to Koryŏ's Chi Yun; brave, skilled in archery and polo, he participated in Sejo's coup (靖亂之功) and was enfeoffed as a lord, reaching the senior second rank. However, he was greedy and cruel. When the court distributed the wives and concubines of purged officials to meritorious subjects as slaves (奴婢), he sought out those with attractive features to make them concubines, indulging day and night. Pak Wŏnjong, as Chief State Councilor (首相) also concurrently held military command. His residence, pavilions, and ponds were extremely vast and luxurious, and his attendant concubines numbered several dozen, all renowned dancers and musicians, beauties of the era. Song Il, in his humble days, lacked clothing, so brothers shared clothes when going out. After becoming a meritorious subject, he lived an extremely extravagant life, keeping official *kisaeng* (官妓) as concubines. The concubine's house was incomparably large and splendid for the time, and the concubines reportedly refused to wear anything but silk brocade (綾緞). <23> Military officials generally had more concubines than civil officials. The fact that even figures like Admiral Yi Sunsin (李忠武公) and Generals Hwang Chin (黃進) and Im Kyŏngŏp (林慶業) (whose concubine's name was Maehwan (梅環)) had concubines allows us to infer the situation for others. Royal princes and noble youths (王族貴公子流) traditionally had many concubines and female entertainers, but among successive princes, the one who lived the most extravagant life and had the most concubines was Prince Anp'yŏng (安平大君), Yi Yong (李瑢). Besides several beloved concubines, he had ten particularly famous beautiful entertainers (美姬): So'ok (小玉), Puyong (芙蓉), Pich'wi (翡翠), Ongnyŏ (玉女), Kŭmnyŏn (金蓮), Ŭnsŏm (銀贍), P'igyŏng (飛瓊), Cha*** (紫* - name unclear/censored?), Unyŏngbo (雲英寶), etc. These ten women were not only beautiful but also exceptionally skilled in singing, dancing, calligraphy, and painting, and also proficient in poetry. The "Poems on Mist" (烟詩), each composed by one of the ten entertainers, are widely acclaimed. In modern times, the Taewŏn'gun (大院君) was also a great keeper of *kisaeng*-concubines, comparable to Prince Anp'yŏng. And among successive kings, Sŏngjong (成宗) and Yŏnsan-gun (燕山君), father and son, were exceptionally fond of numerous concubines and *kisaeng*, a fact well-known to everyone without needing further mention here.

5. Legal Status of Concubines and Their Descendants

As mentioned above, although the Yi Dynasty legally recognized concubines, their treatment was extremely demeaning. While a wife received ranks corresponding to her husband's official position, such as Chŏnggyŏng Puin (貞敬夫人, wife of senior/junior 1st rank), Chŏng Puin (貞夫人, senior/junior 2nd rank), Suk Puin (淑夫人, senior 3rd rank, high official), Yŏngin (令人, senior/junior 4th rank), Kongin (恭人, senior/junior 5th rank), Ŭiin (宜人, senior/junior 6th rank), Anin (安人, senior/junior 7th rank), Tanin (端人, senior/junior 8th rank), Yuin (孺人, senior/junior 9th rank), a concubine, no matter how high-ranking her partner, was never granted such honorary titles. In the household register (戶籍), she was merely recorded as *solch'ŏp* (率妾, accompanying concubine) followed by her name, or *Mŏ Sosi* (某召史, Mistress So-and-so), unlike the wife who was recorded as *Mŏ-pong Mŏ-ssi* (某封某氏, [Title] Lady So-and-so). The same applied to inscriptions on funeral banners (銘旌) and coffins after death, and the mourning rites (服制) also involved considerable discrimination.
Regarding the descendants of concubines (*ch'ŏpchasun*, 妾子孫), from the beginning of the dynasty, a strict distinction was made between them and legitimate descendants (*chŏkchasun*, 嫡子孫). In the 13th year of T'aejong (癸巳), a royal decree established the law that illegitimate descendants (*sŏŏlchasun*, 庶孽子孫) should not be appointed to prominent official positions (勿叙顯職). This must be considered the greatest evil law (最大惡典) of the Yi Dynasty. The motive for enacting this law originated when the powerful minister Chŏng Tojŏn (鄭道傳), himself an illegitimate son of low birth (庶孼賤子), assisted Yi T'aejo (李太祖) in founding the dynasty. Later, driven by jealousy and personal grudges, he falsely accused and killed innocent, virtuous men. Finally, he conspired with Nam Ŭn (南誾), Yi Chik (李稷), and others to enthrone Pangsŏk (芳碩) and harm T'aejong and the other princes. When the plot was discovered beforehand, he was executed. Sŏ Sŏn (徐選), an official Censor (言官) at the time who held a grudge against Tojŏn and viewed him with animosity, seized this opportunity. With the intention of permanently expelling Chŏng's descendants and other illegitimate offspring from politics, he submitted a memorial proposing this infamous, or rather, evil bill (惡法案). It is said that Sŏ's wife, upon hearing her husband had made such a proposal, lamented that he would have no future posterity, and indeed, Sŏ reportedly had no descendants. Whether the underlying facts are truly as stated is unknown, but as an evil bill, it was an infamous evil bill rarely seen in ancient or modern times. However, that law did not go so far as to completely bar illegitimate descendants from office (*kŭmgo*, 禁錮). It was during the reign of Sŏngjong (成宗), when the *Kyŏngguk Taejŏn* (大典, Grand Code) was promulgated, that it became even stricter, creating a law prohibiting illegitimate descendants from taking the civil or military preliminary examinations (*munmu saengjin*, 文武生進) (great-grandsons and below were, of course, unaffected). Later, when commentaries on the *Taejōn* (大典註解) were made, it became yet more severe with the addition of the phrase "sons and grandsons in perpetuity" (子子孫孫), <24> resulting in their permanent exclusion from office. This corresponds to what Sŏngho Yi Ik (星湖 李瀷) stated: the law restricting illegitimate offspring began with Sŏ Sŏn and became severe when Kang Hŭimaeng (姜希孟), An Wi (安瑋), and others compiled the *Taejōn*.
Regarding inheritance of headship by concubine's sons (*ch'ŏpcha kadok sangsok*, 妾子家督相續), according to the *Veritable Records of the Yi Dynasty*, T'aejo, 6th year, 8th month, *sinmyo* day, based on a report from the Office for Slave Investigation (奴隷辨定都監), if the legitimate wife's line (嫡室) had no heir, a concubine's son (*ch'ŏpcha*, 妾子) could succeed the lineage (*kyesa*, 繼嗣). Priority was given to the descendants of a *yangch'ŏp* in order, who received all the slaves (奴婢). If the *yangch'ŏp* had no son, but a son existed by one's own female slave concubine (*chagi pich'ŏp*, 自己婢妾), even without explicit text allowing succession, half the property was given, and half reverted to the state (屬公). Even if one took another person's female slave as a concubine (*chakch'ŏp*, 作妾) and had a son, one-seventh was given, and the remainder reverted to the state. Also, regarding property inheritance, land granted to meritorious subjects (功臣田) was passed down to descendants. If the legitimate line had no descendants, it passed to the descendants of a *yangch'ŏp*. If the *yangch'ŏp* line had no descendants, it passed to the descendants of a *ch'ŏnch'ŏp* (*Kyŏngguk Taejŏn*, Hojŏn, Chŏnt'aek section (經國大典戶典田宅條)).
Regarding ancestral rites (*pongsa*, 奉祀), civil and military officials of the 6th rank and above performed rites for three generations; 7th rank and below, for two generations; commoners (庶人) only for their parents (*kobi*, 考妣). If the eldest legitimate son (*chŏkchangja*, 嫡長子) had no heir, the other legitimate sons (*chungja*, 衆子) performed the rites. If the other legitimate sons had no heir, a concubine's son performed the rites. If the eldest legitimate son had only a concubine's son, and wished for his younger brother's son to perform the rites, or wished for the concubine's son to establish a separate branch (*ilchi pyŏlwi*, 一支別爲), this was also permitted (聽從). If a *yangch'ŏp*'s son had no heir, a *ch'ŏnch'ŏp*'s son assumed the main ritual duties (*sŭngjung*, 承重) (*Yejŏn*, Pongsa section (禮典奉祀條)).
Regarding appointment to office (*kwalli sŏyong*, 官吏叙用), descendants of a *yangch'ŏp* of civil/military officials of the 2nd rank or higher were limited to the senior 3rd rank; descendants of a *ch'ŏnch'ŏp* were limited to the senior 5th rank. For officials of the 6th rank or higher, descendants of a *yangch'ŏp* were limited to the senior 4th rank; descendants of a *ch'ŏnch'ŏp* to the senior 6th rank. For officials of the 7th rank or lower and those without office (*mujikin*, 無職人), descendants of a *yangch'ŏp* were limited to the senior 5th rank; descendants of a *ch'ŏnch'ŏp* and commoners who became *yangin* (賤人爲良者) were limited to the senior 7th rank. Descendants of a *ch'ŏnch'ŏp* by a *yangch'ŏp*'s son (so-called *kaettong sŏŏl*, 개똥庶孽 - base illegitimate offspring) were limited to the senior 8th rank. The Ministry of War (兵曹) followed the same rules. Descendants of concubines of officials of the 2nd rank or higher could also be employed according to their talents in the Bureau of Interpreters (司譯院), Bureau of Astronomy (觀象監), Royal Household Supply Office (內需司), Office for Assistance to the People (惠民署), Bureau of Painting (圖畵署), mathematics (算學), and law (律學). (*Ijŏn*, Hanp'um Sŏyong section (吏典限品叙用條)).
- The following sections from the *Taejŏn T'ongp'yŏn* (大典通編, Comprehensive Grand Code), Hanp'um Sŏyong section, and Hyŏngjŏn Chorye (刑典條例, Penal Code Regulations) are omitted due to their complexity.
However, now that general laws and customs have been broken and changed, and concubines are fundamentally unrecognized by law, the complex and manifold issue of legitimate versus illegitimate lines (嫡庶), which persisted for hundreds of years through laws and customs, has also naturally disappeared.

6. Brief Biographies of Famous Concubines Through History

As the custom of keeping concubines flourished throughout Korean history, there were also many famous concubines. Here are introductions to some representative figures:
Yi Okpong (李玉峯), Concubine of Un'gang Cho Wŏn (雲江 趙瑗) = Cho Wŏn's courtesy name (字) was Paegok (白玉), and he was from Imch'ŏn (林川). During the reign of King Sŏnjo (宣祖朝), he reached the rank of Royal Secretary (承旨) and died during the national crisis [Japanese invasions]. He once took the illegitimate daughter (*sŏnyŏ*, 庶女) of Yi Pong (李逢), a member of the royal family, as his concubine. This Lady Yi's style name (*ho*, 號) was Okpong (玉峯) or Ogin (玉人). She was beautiful and skilled in poetry, prose, and song, such that the great literary figures of the time all conceded her superiority. Unfortunately, she died young without children, leaving only a few poems to posterity. Her poem composed en route to Yŏngwŏl (寧越途中詩) contains the lines: "A thousand-*li* long journey, crossing in three days / Songs of sorrow cut off the clouds of Nolŭng (魯陵) / I too am a king's granddaughter / Here, the cuckoo's cry is unbearable to hear." The poem is extremely poignant and sorrowful, enough to make the reader shed tears thrice upon one reading. Her poem sent to her husband Un'gang after their affection cooled and she was dismissed, "How have you been lately? / When the moon reaches the silk window, my sorrow multiplies / If my dreaming soul could leave tracks / The stone path before your gate would already be sand," <25> vividly portrays lingering affection and sorrow. This poem of sentiment (*chŏnghan si*, 情恨詩) is widely acclaimed and recited in popular songs even today. Additionally, her five-quatrain poem "Parting Sorrow" (別恨五絶) includes: "Though tomorrow night is short, I wish tonight were long / Hearing the rooster crow near dawn, tears stream down both cheeks." Her five-quatrain poem "Sorrow of Separation" (離怨五絶) includes: "Deep feelings are easily sent, but wanting to speak, I hold back shyly / If you ask for news from the fragrant boudoir, alone I lean by the window with makeup faded." Her poem "Autumn Sorrow" (秋恨詩) includes: "The lamp glows red at night, far beyond the hemp-stalk screen / Waking from a dream, the silk quilt is half empty / Frost chills the jade cage, the parrot speaks / Paulownia leaves fill the steps, falling in the west wind." All are considerable masterpieces.
Kim Ch'ŏm (金蟾), Concubine of Song Ch'ŏn'gok Sanghyŏn (宋泉谷 象鉉) = Kim Ch'ŏm, concubine of Ch'ŏn'gok Song Sanghyŏn, who died for his principles as Magistrate of Tongnae (東萊府使) during the Imjin War (壬辰), was originally a *kisaeng* from Hamhŭng (咸興). Though of lowly *kisaeng* status, she was skilled in poetry and prose and possessed integrity. She followed the magistrate to Tongnae, disliked a luxurious life, resided in a thatched cottage of a few rooms, and normally did not set foot in the public hall. During the Imjin War, when Master Song died for his principles, she reportedly followed him in death out of loyalty (this is the general record of the time). However, according to the diary of Kang Hang (姜沆), styled Suŭn (睡隱), who was captured as a prisoner of war and later returned, Kim Ch'ŏm did not know of Ch'ŏn'gok's loyal death and was taken captive to the enemy country. Toyotomi Hideyoshi (豊臣秀吉), hearing that Magistrate Song's concubine was beautiful, summoned her. However, possessing innate quiet virtue and dignified bearing, besides being proficient in writing, Hideyoshi dared not violate her and treated her well, appointing her as a tutor for women. At that time, women of the Shogunate (幕府) officials all came to study under her, transforming the previously ignorant and decadent customs of the women's quarters. While being repatriated, she heard on the ship that Ch'ŏn'gok had died for his principles and attempted suicide by drowning. Several people restrained her, and Kang Suŭn, who was on the same ship, also persuaded her with righteous reasoning. She then composed a poem demonstrating her chastity. Upon arriving at the Song family home, she reportedly never spoke of her own chastity.
Her poem reads:
On the day the great tree was blown down, / The lingering flower endured the fierce wind. / The fierce wind naturally subsided, / The flower fell and was buried in the mud. / Who knows the flower in the mud / Was not trifled with by butterflies? / Even if it returns to its roots, / It is merely laughed at by the other fragrances.
Concubine of Yang Sa-gi (楊士奇) = It is regrettable that her name is lost, but she was renowned for her poetry. When her husband was in Anak (安岳), she sent him a poem: "Gazing toward the long road, I don't close the door / Late at night, wind and dew dampen my hemp clothes / In the Yangsan Inn (楊山舘), a thousand flowering trees / Daily watch the flowers, awaiting your return." And her "Autumn Boudoir Lament" (秋閨怨): "The autumn wind rustles, moving the paulownia branches / The blue void is vast, wild geese depart slowly / Leaning obliquely by the jade window, unseen / A crescent moon eyebrow descends below the western pond." The phrasing and meaning are extremely fresh and fine works. Besides these, Chŏng Sunhŭi (丁舜憘), concubine of Kim Sŏngdal (金盛達) of Kosŏng (高城), and the concubine of Kim Nong'ŏm (金農嚴) were both celebrated for their literary talent and brilliance that dominated the age. In modern times, Pak Chukso (朴竹西), concubine of Sŏ Kibong (徐箕輔), Kŭmwŏn (錦園), concubine of Vice Minister Kim Tŏkhŭi (金侍郞 德熙), Nagap (羅閤), concubine of Kim Chwa-gŭn (金佐根), and the concubine of Yi Yuin (李裕寅) were also famous for their poetic talent and wit. (I intend to write more detail about these famous concubines in a future opportunity and will abbreviate for now.)

6. Concluding Remarks

Having written this history of concubinage, albeit brief and flawed, perhaps some people might misunderstand. Just as some think that because heroes are said to enjoy wine and women (好酒色), merely liking wine and women makes one a hero, and thus indulge in them first, they might think that since concubinage has a considerable history, and since successive emperors, monarchs, the so-called Great Sage Confucius and his son, and great Confucian scholars like Hwadam, Yulgok, and Nammyŏng all had concubines, it is natural for ordinary people like us to keep concubines as well, thereby having the negative effect of encouraging concubinage.
However, writing a biography of Robber Chih (盜跖傳) does not mean everyone will become Robber Chih, and writing biographies of famous *kisaeng* <26> does not mean chaste ladies and virtuous women will all fall into the demimonde (花柳巷). If the public reads this and is alerted, how can it be said to be without benefit? In any case, concubinage is an evil custom of the East, or rather, the greatest evil custom of Korea. Individual families have been ruined by it, and society and the state have declined because of it. The Koryŏ kings Ch'ungnyŏl (忠烈), King Min (巷愍王 - likely a typo for Kongmin?), and King U (禑王) had many failings, but a large part stemmed from women and concubines, leading to disasters like assassination, loss of the throne, and destruction of the kingdom. In the Yi Dynasty too, after the concubine system was officially recognized, the customs of rulers and subjects alike deteriorated. Even during the prosperous reign of Sejong (世宗), princes, royal relatives, and court officials openly fought over *kisaeng*-concubines (Minister of Rites Kim Ha (金何) and a royal relative minister fought over the *kisaeng*-concubine Nongmyŏng (鹿鳴), until a royal command allowed Kim to take her). During Sŏngjong's (成宗) time, as a result of Sŏngjong's fondness for *kisaeng*-concubines, not only did competition among court officials for *kisaeng*-concubines flourish, but Sŏngjong himself, seeing the handsome royal relative Yi Sŏn-ch'ŏn Mŏ (李宣傳某 - name incomplete) beloved by many *kisaeng*, became jealous and blocked him from advancing in officialdom for life, thereby paving the way for the debauchery of the later Yŏnsan-gun (燕山君). When Yŏnsan was at the height of his debauchery, he seized the concubine of the scholar Hwang Yunhŏn (黃允獻), who was exceptionally skilled at the *kayagŭm* (伽倻琴) and beautiful. Because she did not smile or laugh readily, he claimed she longed for her former husband and killed Yunhŏn. A *kisaeng* from Sŏngju (星州), upon seeing a pig's head used for sacrificial rites (祭肉), thought it resembled Chang Sunson's (張順孫) skull and laughed, nearly causing Chang Sunson to be killed as well. He also seized the Sŏngsan *kisaeng* (商山妓) belonging to Sŏng Sejŏng (成世貞, uncle of Ch'ŏngsong (聽松)) and, jealous of Sŏng, sent him into exile. These acts were direct copies of Sŏngjong's suppression of Yi Sŏn-ch'ŏn. The blame is actually greater for Sŏngjong, who taught him, than for Yŏnsan. Regarding factional strife (黨禍), too, during the mourning period for King Sŏngjong, Chŏlla Governor (全羅監司) Yi Kŭk-ki (李克均 - likely error for Yi Kŭk-ton 李克墩) traveling with *kisaeng*-concubines was recorded directly in the historical draft (*sach'o*, 史草) by Kim Ilson (金馹孫). This became the starting point for the Muo Sahwa (戊午士禍), the first literati purge in Korea. Furthermore, how much great harm did the issue of legitimate versus illegitimate offspring (*chŏksŏ*, 嫡庶), arising from concubinage, inflict upon society and the state? Especially in modern times, as state law has loosened and public morals have greatly deteriorated, those appointed as local officials seem to go not to govern the people but to seek concubines. Those who have served as local officials in regions known for beautiful women, like P'yŏngan Province (平安道) or Kyŏngsang Province (慶尙道), almost all acquire *kisaeng* concubines from P'yŏngyang (平壤妓), Nyŏngbyŏn (寧邊妓), Taegu (大邱妓), or Chinju (晋州妓) – sometimes two or three, in severe cases, the "Eight Fairies" (八仙女), and even more severely, establishing what amounts to private brothels (私設遊廓), leading lives with many concubines. Where on earth did that money come from? Other than extracting the lifeblood (膏血) of innocent people or stealing state finances (國財), there could be no other way. Considering this, how could the country prosper, and how could the people live secure lives? People from the Western Provinces (西道, P'yŏngan Province) often say that the Seoul *yangban* (兩班) stole all the wealth of the Western Province people. However, the wealth of these so-called *yangban* was mostly spent on *kisaeng* concubines from the Western Provinces. Ultimately, the wealth of the Western Provinces was regained by the Western Province *kisaeng*, and the *yangban* merely engaged in a kind of regurgitation (反芻作用), like calves. Look, even now, among the so-called aristocratic and wealthy families like the Min (閔家), Yi (李家), or Kim (金家), where is there a household whose threshold has not been crossed by the footprints of P'yŏngyang *kisaeng*? To stop this, I believe it is necessary, more than anything, to implement a high concubinage tax (畜妾稅) on those who already have concubines, and at the same time, apply some legal sanction, like the punishment for bigamy (重婚), to those who take concubines in the future. <27>

**Summary**

This 1935 article by "Ch'ŏng'o" traces the history of concubinage (畜妾, *ch'ukch'ŏp*) in Korea, arguing it originated from Chinese polygyny and became deeply embedded in Korean society from the Three Kingdoms period through Koryŏ and the Yi Dynasty. The author details the types of concubines (*yangch'ŏp*, *ch'ŏnch'ŏp*), their legal status (inferior to wives, lacking titles), the severe legal discrimination against illegitimate offspring (*sŏŏl*, 庶孽), particularly the Yi Dynasty laws barring them from high office, and provides examples of kings, officials, scholars (including Confucius, Yi I, Yi Sunsin), and commoners who kept concubines. The article concludes by condemning concubinage as Korea's "greatest evil custom," blaming it for personal ruin, social decay, political corruption (especially officials acquiring concubines through exploiting the populace), and historical disasters like factional strife and royal misrule, advocating for taxation and legal penalties against the practice. From a colonial history perspective, the article is interesting for its explicit condemnation of a traditional practice as an "evil custom" hindering national progress, reflecting reformist sentiments common during the period. The author's lament about contemporary officials (implicitly Korean officials under the Japanese system or traditional elites) continuing the practice, funded by exploiting the populace, and the specific mention of regional *kisaeng* (P'yŏngyang, Taegu etc.) associated with powerful families, offers a glimpse into social critiques and perceived corruption persisting under colonial rule. Historians might find the direct link made between historical concubinage, its legal framework (especially the *sŏŏl* discrimination), and contemporary social problems particularly noteworthy.

**Named Entities**

支那	지나	China
帝嚳	제곡	Emperor Ku
帝堯	제요	Emperor Yao
帝舜	제순	Emperor Shun
夏禹氏	하우씨	Emperor Yü of Hsia
殷人	은인	Yin people
周	주	Chou dynasty
孔子	공자	Confucius
孔叢子	공총자	K'ung Ts'ung Tzu (Text)
楚昭王	초소왕	King Chao of Ch'u
伯魚	백어	Po-yü
子思	자사	Tzu-ssŭ
韓退之	한퇴지	Han T'ui-chih
白樂天	백낙천	Pai Lo-t'ien
杜牧之	두목지	Tu Mu-chih
宋	송	Sung dynasty
蘇東坡	소동파	Su Tung-p'o
唐明皇	당명황	Emperor Ming of T'ang
張宗昌	장종창	Chang Tsung-ch'ang
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
魏志	위지	Wei Chih (Records of Wei)
沃沮	옥저	Okchŏ
高句麗	고구려	Koguryŏ
唐書	당서	T'ang Shu (Book of Tang)
新羅	신라	Silla
琉璃明王	유리명왕	King Yuri Myŏngwang
松氏	송씨	Song clan
禾姬	화희	Hwahui
漢女	한녀	Han Chinese woman
雉姬	치희	Ch'ihŭi
山上王	산상왕	King Sansang
于后	우후	Queen U
酒桶村	주통촌	Chut'ong Village
中川王	중천왕	King Chungch'ŏn
椽氏	연씨	Yŏn clan
貫那	관나	Kwanna
百濟	백제	Paekche
後百濟	후백제	Later Paekche
高麗	고려	Koryŏ
麗太祖	여태조	King T'aejo of Koryŏ
神惠王后 柳氏	신혜왕후 유씨	Queen Sinhye of the Yu clan
莊和王后 吳氏	장화왕후 오씨	Queen Changhwa of the O clan
惠宗	혜종	Hyejong
徐兢	서긍	Sŏ Kŭng
高麗圖經	고려도경	Koryŏ Togyŏng (Illustrated Account of Koryŏ)
成俔	성현	Sŏng Hyŏn
慵齋叢話	용재총화	Yongje Ch'onghwa (Assorted Writings of Yongje)
明宗	명종	Myŏngjong
崔忠獻	최충헌	Ch'oe Ch'unghŏn
孫洪胤	손홍윤	Son Hongyun
金南俊	김남준	Kim Namjun
李緝	이집	Yi Chip
高麗本史	고려본사	Koryŏ Pon'gi (Basic Annals of Koryŏ)
高宗	고종	Kojong
鄭稂	정랑	Chŏng Nang
東國通鑑	동국통감	Tongguk T'onggam (Comprehensive Mirror of the Eastern Kingdom)
李義曩	이의방	Yi Ŭibang (appears to be a typo in the original, likely 李義旼 Yi Ŭimin)
至榮	지영	Chi-yŏng
朔州	삭주	Sakchu
興化	흥화	Hŭnghwa
雲中道	운중도	Unjung District
楊水尺	양수척	Yangsuch'ŏk
紫雲仙	자운선	Chaundsŏn
金元命	김원명	Kim Wŏnmyŏng
李龜壽	이구수	Yi Kusu
尹瓘	윤관	Yun Kwan
熊	웅	Ung (Jurchen concubine's name)
禑王	우왕	King U
池奫	지윤	Chi Yun
忠肅王	충숙왕	King Ch'ungsuk
燕山君	연산군	Yŏnsan-gun
七點仙	칠점선	Ch'iljŏmsŏn
鸞雙飛	난쌍비	Nanssangbi
小梅香	소매향	Somaehyang
李朝	이조	Yi Dynasty
李朝實錄	이조실록	Veritable Records of the Yi Dynasty
太宗	태종	T'aejong
禮曹	예조	Ministry of Rites
春秋舘	춘추관	Office for Annals Compilation
河崙	하륜	Ha Ryun
權近	권근	Kwŏn Kŭn
典餘通考	전여통고	Chŏllyŏ T'onggo (Compendium of Statutes)
周世鵬	주세붕	Chu Sebung
周新齋	주신재	Chu Sinjae (Style name of Chu Sebung)
武陵雜稿	무릉잡고	Mureung Chapko (Miscellaneous Writings from Mureung)
襄州	양주	Yangju
徐敬德	서경덕	Sŏ Kyŏngdŏk
花潭	화담	Hwadam (Style name of Sŏ Kyŏngdŏk)
成牛溪	성우계	Sŏng Ugye (Style name of Sŏng Hon)
曺植	조식	Cho Shik
南冥	남명	Nammyŏng (Style name of Cho Shik)
李珥	이이	Yi I
石潭日記	석담일기	Sŏktam Ilgi (Sŏktam's Diary)
李彦迪	이언적	Yi Ŏnjŏk
晦齋	회재	Hoejae (Style name of Yi Ŏnjŏk)
高敬命	고경명	Ko Kyŏngmyŏng
霽峰	제봉	Chebong (Style name of Ko Kyŏngmyŏng)
李栗谷	이율곡	Yi Yulgok (Style name of Yi I)
端宗	단종	Tanjong
金宗瑞	김종서	Kim Chong-sŏ
世祖	세조	Sejo
洪允成	홍윤성	Hong Yunsŏng
奉石柱	봉석주	Pong Sŏkchu
中宗	중종	Chungjong
朴元宗	박원종	Pak Wŏnjong
宋軼	송일	Song Il
李忠武公	이충무공	Yi Ch'ungmugong (Admiral Yi Sunsin)
黃進	황진	Hwang Chin
林慶業	임경업	Im Kyŏngŏp
梅環	매환	Maehwan
安平大君	안평대군	Prince Anp'yŏng
李瑢	이용	Yi Yong (Prince Anp'yŏng's given name)
小玉	소옥	So'ok
芙蓉	부용	Puyong
翡翠	비취	Pich'wi
玉女	옥녀	Ongnyŏ
金蓮	금련	Kŭmnyŏn
銀贍	은섬	Ŭnsŏm
飛瓊	비경	P'igyŏng
紫*	자*	Cha* (Name unclear/censored)
雲英寶	운영보	Unyŏngbo
大院君	대원군	Taewŏn'gun
成宗	성종	Sŏngjong
鄭道傳	정도전	Chŏng Tojŏn
李太祖	이태조	Yi T'aejo (Founder of Yi Dynasty)
南誾	남은	Nam Ŭn
李稷	이직	Yi Chik
芳碩	방석	Pangsŏk (Yi Pangsŏk)
徐選	서선	Sŏ Sŏn
大典	대전	Taejŏn (Kyŏngguk Taejŏn, Grand Code)
星湖 李瀷	성호 이익	Sŏngho Yi Ik
姜希孟	강희맹	Kang Hŭimaeng
安瑋	안위	An Wi
奴隷辨定都監	노예변정도감	Office for Slave Investigation
經國大典	경국대전	Kyŏngguk Taejŏn (Grand Code)
司譯院	사역원	Bureau of Interpreters
觀象監	관상감	Bureau of Astronomy
內需司	내수사	Royal Household Supply Office
惠民署	혜민서	Office for Assistance to the People
圖畵署	도화서	Bureau of Painting
大典通編	대전통편	Taejŏn T'ongp'yŏn (Comprehensive Grand Code)
趙瑗	조원	Cho Wŏn
雲江	운강	Un'gang (Style name of Cho Wŏn)
白玉	백옥	Paegok (Courtesy name of Cho Wŏn)
林川	임천	Imch'ŏn
宣祖	선조	King Sŏnjo
李逢	이봉	Yi Pong
李玉峯	이옥봉	Yi Okpong
玉峯	옥봉	Okpong (Style name)
玉人	옥인	Ogin (Style name)
寧越	영월	Yŏngwŏl
魯陵	노릉	Nolŭng (Tomb of King Tanjong)
宋象鉉	송상현	Song Sanghyŏn
泉谷	천곡	Ch'ŏn'gok (Style name of Song Sanghyŏn)
金蟾	김섬	Kim Ch'ŏm
咸興	함흥	Hamhŭng
東萊府使	동래부사	Magistrate of Tongnae
姜沆	강항	Kang Hang
睡隱	수은	Suŭn (Style name of Kang Hang)
豊臣秀吉	풍신수길	Toyotomi Hideyoshi
楊士奇	양사기	Yang Sa-gi
安岳	안악	Anak
楊山舘	양산관	Yangsan Inn
金盛達	김성달	Kim Sŏngdal
高城	고성	Kosŏng
丁舜憘	정순희	Chŏng Sunhŭi
金農嚴	김농엄	Kim Nong'ŏm
徐箕輔	서기보	Sŏ Kibong
朴竹西	박죽서	Pak Chukso
金德熙	김덕희	Kim Tŏkhŭi
錦園	금원	Kŭmwŏn
金佐根	김좌근	Kim Chwa-gŭn
羅閤	나합	Nagap
李裕寅	이유인	Yi Yuin
忠烈	충렬	King Ch'ungnyŏl
巷愍王	항민왕	King Hangmin (Likely typo for Kongmin (恭愍王))
世宗	세종	King Sejong
金何	김하	Kim Ha
鹿鳴	녹명	Nongmyŏng (Kisaeng's name)
李宣傳	이선전	Yi Sŏn-ch'ŏn
黃允獻	황윤헌	Hwang Yunhŏn
星州	성주	Sŏngju
張順孫	장순손	Chang Sunson
成世貞	성세정	Sŏng Sejŏng
聽松	청송	Ch'ŏngsong
商山妓	상산기	Sŏngsan Kisaeng
李克均	이극균	Yi Kŭk-kyun (likely typo for 李克墩 Yi Kŭk-ton)
金馹孫	김일손	Kim Ilson
戊午士禍	무오사화	Muo Sahwa (First Literati Purge of 1498)
平安道	평안도	P'yŏngan Province
慶尙道	경상도	Kyŏngsang Province
平壤妓	평양기	P'yŏngyang Kisaeng
寧邊妓	영변기	Nyŏngbyŏn Kisaeng
大邱妓	대구기	Taegu Kisaeng
晋州妓	진주기	Chinju Kisaeng
西道	서도	Western Provinces (P'yŏngan Province)
閔家	민가	Min family
李家	이가	Yi family
金家	김가	Kim family

**Glossary**

妾	첩	Concubine
意義	의의	Meaning; significance
古典	고전	Classic texts; classics
巷間	항간	Alleys; among the common people
良妾	양첩	Concubine from a respectable family (*yangin* class)
賤妾	천첩	Concubine from a low-born background (slave, *kisaeng*, etc.)
婚儀	혼의	Wedding ceremony; marriage rites
紗帽	사모	Official's winged cap worn during the Chosŏn Dynasty
私婢	사비	Privately owned female slave
官婢	관비	Government-owned female slave
國婢	국비	State-owned female slave (often referring to *kisaeng*)
妓生	기생	Female entertainer, similar to courtesan, often of low status
副室	부실	Secondary room/wife; concubine
少室	소실	Lesser room/wife; concubine
別室	별실	Separate room/house (often for a concubine)
側室	측실	Side room/wife; concubine
小家	소가	Small house; lesser wife/concubine
大家	대가	Main house; principal wife
正室	정실	Main room/wife; principal wife
忌嫌	기혐	To dislike and avoid; taboo
夫人	부인	Lady; wife (often used for wives of high officials or nobles)
宅	택	House; residence (suffix used for principal wives, indicating their origin or residence)
집	집	House (suffix used for concubines, often indicating their origin)
媽媽	마마	Honorific term, used here for concubines, less formal than *manim*
마님	마님	Madam; mistress (higher honorific for the principal wife)
아씨	아씨	Young mistress; miss (often used for unmarried daughters or young wives)
畜妾	축첩	The practice of keeping concubines
多妻主義	다처주의	Polygyny
妃	비	Royal consort; concubine of an emperor or king
嬪	빈	Imperial concubine (rank below *fei*)
世婦	세부	Hereditary consort (rank in Zhou court)
女御	여어	Assistant gentlewoman (lowest rank of consort in Zhou court)
媵	영	Accompanying woman given in marriage; secondary wife/concubine
卿大夫	경대부	High officials (in Zhou/ancient China)
士	사	Lower officials; scholar-officials
婢妾	비첩	Female slaves and concubines
眞骨	진골	True Bone (highest rank in Silla bone-rank system)
姬妃	희비	Palace women; secondary consorts and concubines
公卿士大夫	공경사대부	High ministers and scholar-officials
僧侶	승려	Buddhist monk
住持僧	주지승	Head monk of a temple
嫡庶	적서	Distinction between legitimate (by the primary wife) and illegitimate (by concubines) lines/offspring
庶孽	서얼	Illegitimate offspring (children of concubines)
庶孫	서손	Illegitimate grandson
顯職	현직	Prominent official position
禁錮	금고	Prohibition from holding government office
庶孼賤子	서얼천자	Illegitimate son of low birth
言官	언관	Censorate official; official responsible for remonstrance
惡法案	악법안	Evil bill; harmful proposed law
大典	대전	Grand Code (*Kyŏngguk Taejŏn*)
文武生進	문무생진	Civil and Military preliminary licentiate examinations (*saengwon* and *chinsa*)
妾子	첩자	Son of a concubine
繼嗣	계사	To succeed the lineage; inherit the headship
屬公	속공	To revert to the state/government
功臣田	공신전	Land granted to meritorious subjects
奉祀	봉사	Performance of ancestral rites
嫡長子	적장자	Eldest son by the primary wife
衆子	중자	Other sons by the primary wife
承重	승중	To assume the primary responsibility for ancestral rites
庶女	서녀	Illegitimate daughter
號	호	Style name; pen name
kayagŭm	가야금	Traditional Korean zither-like string instrument
史草	사초	Historical draft; annals draft
士禍	사화	Literati purge
兩班	양반	The traditional ruling class or nobles of dynastic Korea
膏血	고혈	Lifeblood (lit. fat and blood); referring to wealth extracted from the people
反芻作用	반추작용	Rumination; regurgitation (used metaphorically)
畜妾稅	축첩세	Concubinage tax
重婚	중혼	Bigamy


---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 신간 제3호
발행일	1935년 01월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮蓄妾史
필자	靑吾
기사형태	논설

朝鮮蓄妾史
						靑吾
1.妾의 意義及別稱

妾이란 무었이냐. 반상긔(飯床器) 쟁첩이냐 바누질 그릇의 실첩이냐 하는 말은 巷間에서 쓰는 허튼 수작이어니와 그것을 좀더 意義잇게 古典에 參考하야 본다면 說文에는 曰하되 妾之言은 接也-니 聞彼有禮하고 走而往焉하야 以得接見君子也-라하고 左傳에는 云하되 女爲人妾하니 妾은 不聘也-라하고 彙苑에는 妾은 接也-니 得接見君子而不得伉儷也-라 云하얐으며 朝鮮俗行謎語에는 「붉으면 대초(大棗)요. 대초면 달고 달면 엿(飴)이요. 엿이면 붙(接)고 붙으면 妾이다」란 말이 잇다. 이 여러 가지의 말을 綜合하아보면 妾은 接이란 뜻이니 卽 女子가 男子와 正式의 夫婦가 되지 않고 그냥 接近하야 산다는 뜻이엿다. 妾에는 良妾과 賤妾의 2종 구별이 있으니 良妾은 글자 그대로 良家의 여자로 남의 妾이 된 것이요 (이 경우에 婚儀는 정식의 妻와 無異하나 다만 新郞이 所著紗帽의 兩角을 除하고 禮를 행한다.) 賤妾은 元來身分이 천한 여자로 남의 妾이 된 것이니 例하면 私婢, 官婢, 國婢(官婢, 國婢는 卽 妓生의 類다.) 卽 公私賤婢及娼妓類의 妾이 그것이다. 然而妾에는 또 여러가지의 別稱이 있으니 卽 副室, 少室, 別室, 側室, 小家 等이 是다. 小家는 少室과 가튼 말이니 本妻가 原則上 大家에 있는 까닭에 거긔에 對하야 하는 말이요. 또 側室, 別室, 副室은 本妻를 正室이라 하는데 對하야 생긴 말이다. 그런데 近畿地方에서는 別室이라면 대개는 老人妾을 가르처 말하고 開城地方에서는 良妾을 가르처 산後室(生後室)이라 하며 또 近來에는 妾이란 名稱을 忌嫌하야 或稱 第2夫人 또는 左夫人이라고도 하는 일이 잇다. 그리고 本妻는 宅字를 노와서 혹은 楊州宅 春川宅, 玉洞宅, 嘉會洞宅 하지만은 妾은 특히 집字를 부처서 平壤집, 全州집 大邱집, 淸進집, 寺洞집이라 하며 尊稱하야도 그저 마마(媽媽)라 하고 마님 아씨의＜20＞ 말은 쓰지 안는다.

2. 妾의 起源

東洋人의 畜妾制度는 원래 支那人의 多妻主義에서 기원되였으니 禮記檀弓篇鄭註에 의하면 支那는 소위 2帝3王시대부터 일즉이 多妻主義가 유행되야 帝嚳(곡)은 四妃를 立하되 1은 正妃를 삼고 其次三은 次妃를 삼었으며 帝堯도 또한 그 例를 쓰고 帝舜은 不告而娶한 까닭에 正妃는 없으나 이 三夫人있었고(長妃娥皇, 次妃女英, 又次妃癸比) 夏禹氏는 3부인外 舜의 3배 卽 9인으로 增하야 合 12인을 두고 殷人은 12인 외 3의 9배 卽 27인을 더하야 合 39인을 두고 周는 上代로 帝嚳을 본받어 正妃를 立하고 下로 殷人의 27인의 3배 卽 81인을 加한 外에 39인을 더하야 合 121인을 두었으니 그 位는 后 1인과 夫人 3인과 9嬪과 27世婦와 81女御엿다-御는 進也며 侍也-니 卽 侍女의 意다. 또 內則篇註에 云하되 天子는 御妻81인이 9夕을 當하고 世婦27인이 3夕을 當하고 嬪9인이 1夕을 當하고 夫人3인이 1夕을 當하고 后1인이 1夕을 專當하야 凡 15日만에 두루 5일의 御를 하고 諸侯는 1인이 9女를 娶하되 夫人 2인이 各히 姪姊가 있어서 그 6인이 1夕을 當하며 次의 2媵이 1夕을 當하고 次에 夫人이 1夕을 專當하야 凡5日에 1回를 맛추게 된다 하얐으며 白虎迪에는 云하되 卿大夫는 1妻2妾이요 士는 1妻 1妾이라 하얐다.
이와같이 支那는 古代 帝王으로부터 王公卿士에 이르기까지 多妻 卽 畜妾制度를 公認한 까닭에 소위 大聖人이라고 稱하는 孔子까지도 妾이 있었고 (孔叢子에 曰 宰予가 楚昭王을 보고 말하되 夫子는 妻不服綵하며 妾不衣帛이라 하얐은즉 孔子도 妾이 있었던 것이 사실이다.) 孔子의 子伯魚도 妾이 있었으리 (子思는 孔子의 庶孫이란 說이 있은즉 伯魚도 有妾한 것을 알 수 있다) 그 외 唐代의 韓退之, 白樂天, 杜牧之, 宋의 蘇東坡 等 소위 著名의 인물치고는 별로 妾없는 사람이 없었다. 唐明皇當時에 後宮佳麗 3천인이 있었단 말은 虛風 잘 뜨는 中國사람의 소위 白髮三千丈式으로 그리 신용할 수 없다 할지라도 近代軍閥의 張宗昌가튼 色男이 자그만치 26인의 愛妾을 두엇다는 것은 누구나 너무 잘 아는 사실이다. 그럼으로 中國人의 人物 如何와 세력 여하는 그 妾數의 多寡를 가지고 評할 수 있다 하야도 過言이 안일 것이다.

3. 三國及高麗時代의 畜妾

朝鮮은 支那와 國土가 相接하야 自來 政治上, 文化上 各方面으로 그 影響을 많이 바든 中 畜妾의 弊風도 또한 그 影響를 바더서 往昔 三國初期부터 벌서 畜妾의 制가 있었으니 魏志에 의하면 沃沮는 나라가 小하야 高句麗에 臣屬되고 美女를 보내서 婢妾을 삼었다 하고 唐書에는 云하되 新羅王族은 眞骨 또는 第1骨이라하고 貴族은 第2骨이라하야 兄弟女姑姊姊妹를＜21＞ 모도 聘하야 妻를 삼음으로 妻族은 대개가 第1骨로서 第2骨의 女를 娶하지 않고 만일 娶하다면 항상 妾媵을 삼었다 하얐으며 王室에 있어서도 대개가 支那의 風과 가티 正妃以外에 다수의 姬妃를 두었으니 그 중 顯著한 예를 말한다면 高句麗 第2世王 琉璃明王이 松氏王妃가 잇는 외에 鵑川女禾姬와 漢女雉姬를 두어 松妃가 薨한 후 2기가 서로 寵을 다투다가 雉姬가 禾姬에게 辱을 보고 漢土로 逃歸하매 王이 안탑갑다녁여 저-유명한 黃鳥歌를 지은 사실과 그 뒤 山上王이 兄妃于后로 后를 삼은 外에 酒桶村 美人으로 小后를 삼은 것과 中川王이 椽氏 王后가 잇고도 또 美女貫那를 寵愛하야 小后를 삼고자한 것가튼 것이다. 그 외 新羅, 百濟, 後百濟 等國도 모도 다수의 後宮이 있었던 것은 물론이고 公卿士大夫家까지 역시 妾이 있엇던 것은 여러 가지 記錄에 의하야 또한 알 수 있다.
高麗는 역시 三國의 制와 맛찬가지로 王室에도 正妃 以外 여러 后妃가 있었으니 爲先 麗太祖는 神惠王后 柳氏외에 莊和王后 吳氏(惠宗母)가 있었고 其外 역대 제왕도 모도 다수의 후궁을 두었던 것은 물론이요 官吏도 6품관 이상은 또한 妾을 두게 되엿고 乃至 僧侶까지도 妾을 두었으니 徐兢의 高麗圖經에 「高麗官府는 有媵하고 國官은 有妾하고(中略-원문) 富豪는 娶妻至34人하야 少不相合하면 輒離去하고 産子居別室이라」한 것과 成俔의 慵齋叢話에 『高麗時以爲住持僧者-豪富勝於公卿하야 至擁婢妾이라』한 것을 보와도 當時制度와 風氣를 족히 推知할 것이다. 그러나 高麗初 等에는 그러케 심하지 안엇다가 中葉에 이르러서 風俗이 크게 毁敗하야 士大夫間에 妻妾을 서로 爭奪하는 일까지 있어서 明宗때 崔忠獻은 大將軍 孫洪胤을 죽이고 그 妻를 빼아서서 妾을 삼고 金南俊은 牧使 李緝의 妻를 潛通하야 其妻로 하야금 其夫를 殺케 하고 (高麗本史叅照) 高宗 2년에 鄭稂은 妻妾으로 競爭을 하다가 그 部 尙書로 降職까지 되고 (東國通鑑叅照) 同王3년에 李義曩의 子至榮은 朔州分道 將軍이 되야 興化雲中道에 歸化散居하는 楊水尺을 모조리 자기의 愛妾 紫雲仙에게 屬하고 其名을 籍하야 强制의 徵貢을 함부로 하다가 (朝鮮의 白丁及妓生이 그때 楊水尺에서 기원되였다) 至榮이 죽은 뒤에 崔忠獻이 다시 紫雲仙을 取하야 妾을 삼고 籍口를 計하야 또한 徵貢하였으며 (仝上)相國 金元命은 妻妾을 한자리에 안치고 그 友人 贊成 李龜壽를 接待하다가 龜壽에게 叱責을 당한 일이 있었고 尹瓘은 또 女眞人의 熊이란 愛妾이 있었다. 그 중에 畜妾大家는 禑王때 池奫이니 奫은 본래 行伍의 出身으로 軍功을 세워 位가 宰輔에까지 이르럿으나 爲人이 好色貧財하야 姬妾이 30여인에 달하얏는데 대개는 재물을 취하야 얻고 色은 취치 안엇다고 한다. 그리고 高麗의 君王으로서 寵姬愛妾이 많은 분은 忠肅王과 王禑니 禑는 李朝 燕山君과 비슷한 風流淫君으로 후궁에 佳麗가 충만한 것은 물론이고 羣妓를 총애하였으니 그중 特愛한 妓妾은 七點仙鸞雙飛 小梅香 等이였다. (此等妓는＜22＞ 모다 翁主로 封하얏다)

4. 李朝時代의 畜妾

李朝時代에는 畜妾의 制度가 아주 法令으로 具體化하얐으니 卽 李朝實錄에 의하면 太宗 2년春 正月에 王은 禮曹及領春秋舘事 河崙과 知春秋舘事 權近을 명하야 三代以下歷代君王의 妃嬪侍女의 수를 考査以聞하라 하니 禮曹는 上疏하야 曰 臣等이 謹案하온 즉 昏儀에 云하되 諸侯는 9女를 취하되 一國에 취하면 兩國이 勝하야 姪姊로써 모도 從케하고 卿大夫는 1妻2妾이요 士는 1妻1妾인바 그것은 원래 繼嗣를 넓이하고 淫佚을 防코자 함이어늘 前朝의 制에 婚禮가 밝지 못하고 嫡庶가 제한이 없어서 많으면 혹은 수에 넘처 너머 僣亂한데 이르고 적으면 또는 수를 闕하야 絶嗣까지 하고 先王의 법을 좃지않으며 大倫을 紊亂케 하니 그는 다른 까닭이 안이라 國家가 여러가지 施爲를 擧皆成憲하얐스되 유독 혼례는 舊弊를 아즉까지 쫏는 까닭인즉 殿下는 先王의 制에 의하야 宮壺의 儀를 가추게 하고 卿士大夫까지도 또한 定制에 의하야 絶嗣치 않음과 또는 踰越치 않게 하야써 人倫의 本을 定하되 만일 違越하는 者면 법으로 처리하여 진다. 하니 上이 允許하얏다하고 또 典餘通考婚嫁條에는 民年四十 이상 無子者는 비로소 娶妾을 許하되 違令하는 者는 笞40이라하고 以妻爲妾은 杖하고 妻在한데 妾으로 妻를 삼는 者 杖九라 하얏다.
李朝에는 妾을 이러케 법령으로 公認한 까닭에 高官大爵의 人은 물론이고 至於山林學者까지도 공연하게 畜妾을 하얐으니 朝鮮書院의 創設者 周新齋 世鵬을 위시하야 (周新齋 武陵雜稿에 有送襄州老妾詩하니 曰魂消心折淚交㶊 始見寧知此別離 慈病四年長侍藥 嚴寒三歲不窺私 覊留致汝靑春怨 老醜慙吾白髮垂 好去寧親歸美土 緣如未晝後生期) 徐花潭敬德 (成牛溪集에 云花潭이 有妾子2人) 曺南冥植(見李珥石潭日記) 李晦齋 彦迪 高霽峰 敬命 李栗谷 珥 等 大儒學者가 모도 妾이 있었고 勳臣으로는 國初 河崙 端宗朝 金宗瑞 世祖時 奉石柱, 中宗朝 朴元宗, 宋軼 等이 擧皆畜妾大家니 河崙의 妓妾 많은 것은 당시에도 世評이 藉藉하였고 金宗瑞는 世祖에게 被禍하던 當日에도 3妾(其中 一妾은 女眞人)이 內房에 있어서 內探하러 온 洪允成에게 술을 부어준 일이 있었으며 奉石柱는 麗朝 池奫과 비슷한 인물로 驍勇醉하고 善射擊毬하야 世祖 靖亂의 功에 叅한 까닭으로 君을 封하고 官이 정2품까지 되였으나 爲人이 貪婪酷暴하야 朝廷이 亂臣의 妻妾을 功臣에게 下給하야 奴婢를 삼게 할 때이면 그 중 姿色잇는 자를 구하야 妾을 삼고 日夜로 縱謠하고 朴元宗은 首相으로 兵制까지 겸하얏는데 屋宇樓池가 극히 廣大奢麗하고 侍妾이 수십여인에 달하는데 擧皆名舞善彈의 當代麗人이엿고 宋軼은 微賤時에 衣服이 없어서 형제가 옷을 易服하며 出入하다가 功臣이 된 후에는 극히 豪奢의 생활을 하야 官妓의 妾을 置하되 妾家의 廣大華麗하기가 當時無比하고 綾緞이＜23＞ 안이면 妾들이 입지를 안엇다한다. 武將은 文官보다도 원래 妾을 畜하는 風이 만엇스니 李忠武公과 黃進 林慶業 將軍(妾名梅環)가튼 분까지도 妾이 잇는 것을 보면 다른 사람들도 족히 推知하겟고 王族貴公子流는 自來 姬妾이 많었으나 역대왕자 중 第1豪華의 생활을 하고 姬妾이 만엇던 이는 安平大君 李*이니 그는 여러 愛妾이 있는 중에 특히 저명한 美姬 10인이 있었으니 曰 小玉, 芙蓉, 翡翠, 玉女, 金蓮, 銀贍, 飛瓊, 紫*, 雲英寶 等等이다. 그들 10姬는 모도 容姿가 美麗할 뿐 안이라 歌舞書畵가 絶特한 외에 詩가 또한 능하였으니 소위 10姬의 各賦한 烟詩는 세상에서 膾煮하는 바이오. 근대 大院君도 安平에 못지 안은 妓妾大家엿다. 그리고 역대 군왕 중에는 成宗과 燕山君 두父子가 稀有의 多妾愛妓家이니 그것은 여긔에 구태여 말치 않어도 이미 누구나 잘안는 바이다.

5. 妾及妾子孫의 法典上地位

上述함과 가티 李朝에서는 法典上으로 妾을 公認하얐으나 그 待遇에 있어서는 극히 賤待하얐으니 卽 妻는 夫의 官職을 따러서 貞敬夫人(正, 從1品의 妻) 貞夫人(正, 從2品) 淑夫人(正, 3品, 堂上官) 令人(正, 從, 4品) 恭人(正, 從5品) 宜人(正, 從6品) 安人(正, 從7品) 端人(正, 從8品), 孺人(正, 從9品) 等의 職號를 與하나 妾은 비록 如何한 高官의 妾이라도 그러한 榮職을 與하는 事가 없고 戶籍에도 단지 率妾某 혹은 某召史라 하고 妻와 가티 某封某氏라 하지 못하여 死後銘旌及棺上에 쓰는 것도 또한 그러하고 服制에 있어서도 여간한 賤待를 한 것이 안이엿다.
그리고 妾子孫에 있어서는 國初로부터 嫡子孫과 差別을 甚嚴하게 하야 太宗 13년 癸巳에 왕명으로 庶孽子孫은 勿叙顯職이란 법전을 정하얐으니 이것은 李朝의 最大惡典이라 안이할 수 없다. 이 법전을 제정한 동기는 원래 당시 權奸 鄭道傳이 庶孼賤子로 李太祖를 佐하야 開國의 功을 이른 후 嫉妬私怨으로 無罪한 賢良을 構誣殺害하고 최후에는 南誾, 李稷 等과 陰謀하야 芳碩을 擁立하고 太宗 等 諸王子를 해하랴다가 일이 먼저 發覺되야 伏誅하니 當時代 言官으로 잇던 徐選은 평소에 道傳과 틈이 있어서 互相疾視하다가 이 기회를 타서 鄭의 子孫, 其他 庶孼 等을 모도 政界에서 永久驅逐할 심산으로 上䟽하야 이 名案 안이 惡法案을 提議한 것이라 한다. 그때 徐의 夫人은 其夫의 그러한 提案을 하얐다는 말을 듯고 그 후가 없으리라 歎하더니 徐氏는 과연 자손이 없었다고 한다. 그 裏面의 사실의 裏面이 과연 그러한지 그것은 알 수 없으나 惡法案인즉 古今稀有의 名惡法案이엿다. 그러나 그 法典은 庶孼子孫을 全然禁錮하는 데까지는 이르지 안엇다가 成宗朝에 이르러 大典을 頒降할 때에 또 1층 심하게 되야 庶孼子孫은 文武生進을 不許하는 法이 생기고 (曾孫以下는 물론 無關) 그 후 大典註解를 할 때에는 加일층심하게 되야 子子孫孫이란 句語를 添付하야＜24＞ 아주 永世禁錮가 되였으니 星湖 李瀷先生의 云한바 庶孼防限의 法은 徐選으로 始하야 姜希孟安瑋 等이 大典을 纂할 때에 심하게 되였다는 말이 곳 이것이다.
其外 妾子家督相續에 있어서는 李朝實錄 太祖 6년 8월 辛卯에 奴隷辨定都監上言에 의하야 嫡室無後者는 妾子가 繼嗣하되 먼저 良妾子孫을 順으로 하야 奴婢를 專給하고 良妾이 無子하고 自己婢妾의 子가 有한 時는 傳繼의 明文이 없더라도 半分은 給하고 半分은 屬公하며 타인의 婢를 作妾하야 有子한 경우라도 또한 7分之1을 주고 여분은 屬公케 하얐으며 또 재산상속에 있어서 功臣田은 자손에 전하되 嫡室이 자손이 없으면 良妾子孫에게 전하고 良妾子孫이 없으면 賤妾子孫에게 전한다 規定하고 (經國大典戶典田宅條)
奉祀에 있어서는 文武官 6품 이상은 3대를 祭하고 7품 이하는 2대를 祭하고 庶人은 考妣만 祭하되 嫡長子가 無后면 衆子 衆子無后면 妾子가 奉祀하되 嫡長子가 妾子만 잇는 때에 弟의 子로 奉祀을 원하거나 妾子로 一支를 別爲한다 하야도 또한 聽從하고 良妾子가 無后면 賤妾子가 承重한다 云하고 (禮典奉祀條)
官吏叙用에 있어서는 文武官2품 이상의 良妾子孫은 정3품에 限하고 賤妾子孫은 정5품 6품 이상은 良妾子孫은 정4품, 賤妾子孫은, 정6품, 7품 이하 無職人의 良妾子孫은 정5품 賤妾子孫及賤人爲良者는 정7품, 良妾子之賤妾子孫(소위 개똥庶孽)은 정8품에 한하고 兵曹도 同하며, 2품 이상 妾子孫은 또한 司譯院, 觀象監, 內需司, 惠民署, 圖畵署, 算學, 律學에 才를 따러 採用하게 되엿다. (吏典限品叙用條)
-이하 大典通編限品叙用條 及 刑典條例는 繁多함으로 略한다.
그러나 지금에 와서는 일반의 法規及慣習이 打破變更되는 同時 妾을 根本的 法令上으로 認치 안케 되였은즉 累百年間 法令 또는 慣習으로 複雜多端하던 嫡庶의 문제도 또한 자연 消滅하게 되였다.

6. 歷代名妾畧傳

朝鮮은 역대로 畜妾의 風이 盛行하니만치 名妾이 또한 많었으니 이제 그 代表될만한 인물을 소개한다면
雲江 趙瑗의 妾 李玉峯=趙瑗의 字는 白玉이요. 林川人이니 宣朝朝에 官至承旨하고 國難에 死하였다. 일즉이 宗室 李逢의 庶女를 卜하야 妾을 삼었으니 李氏는 號를 玉峯 또는 玉人이라 하얏는데 姿色이 美麗하고 詩文歌謠에 능하야 당시 文章巨公이 모도 一頭를 讓하얐다. 그러나 불행히 無子早死하고 詩 몃篇만 世에 傳하얐으니 그의 寧越途中詩「千里長程三日越 哀歌唱斷魯陵雲 妾身亦是王孫女 此地鵑聲不忍聞의 句는 詩가 극히 凄悽絶悲哀하야 讀者로하야금 1唱3淚를 할만하고 그의 남편 雲江과 情疏見黜한 후 지여보낸 근래 安否問 如何 月到紗窓妾恨多 若便夢魂行有跡 門前石路己成沙＜25＞ 云云의 詩는 綿綿한 情恨을 曲畵抽寫한 情恨詩로 世人이 膾煮하야 지금까지 巷間俗謠에 오르나린다. 其外 別恨五絶에 明宵雖短短 今夜願長長 鷄聲聽欲曉雙臉淚千行과 離怨五絶에 深情容易寄 欲說更含羞 若問香閨信 殘粧獨倚樓秋恨詩에 蓬紗遙隔夜燈紅 夢覺羅衾一半空 霜冷玉籠鸚鵡語滿階梧葉落西風 等은 擧皆 相當한 名作이다.
宋泉谷 象鉉의 妾 金蟾=壬辰 常時 東萊府使로 節死한 泉谷 宋象鉉의 妾 金蟾은 元咸興妓엿다. 몸이 비록 賤妓나 詩文에 능하고 節操가 있어서 府使를 따러 東萊에 있었는데 화려한 생활을 실여하고 數間의 茅屋에 居處하며 평소에 足跡을 公堂에 入지 안타가 壬亂時 宋公이 節死하매 그 亦隨死殉節하얏다 한다. (이것은 당시 일반 기록이다) 그러나 당시 俘虜로 잡혀갓다. 歸國한 姜睡隱澶의 日記에 의하면 金蟾은 泉谷의 節死한 것을 알지 못하고 敵國에까지 잡혀갓섰는데 豊臣秀吉이 宋府使의 妾이 美人이란 말을 듯고 招見하얐으나 원래 幽靜한 德과 澶澶한 威儀가 잇는 외에 文翰이 또한 능달하니 秀吉이 敢犯치 못하고 優待하야 女敎員으로 삼으니 당시 幕府官閥의 여자들이 모도 就學하야 그때까지 蒙眛靡하던 閨風이 일변하고 解俘歸國하다가 船中에서 泉谷의 節死함은 聞하고 投水自殺하랴다가 여러사람이 制止하고 同船한 姜睡隱이 또한 擧義勸止하니 그는 詩一篇을 지여 자기몸의 介潔한 것을 뵈히고 宋氏家에 와서는 자기의 身上 介潔한 것은 말도 하지 안엇다 한다.
그 詩에 曰
大樹飄零日, 殘花受狂風, 狂風結自息, 花落埋泥中, 誰識泥中花, 不爲蝴蝶嬲(音丘)縱然歸根蔕, 徒爲衆香笑.
楊士奇 妾 그는 失名한 것이 遺憾이나 詩로 著名하얐으니 그 夫君이 安岳에 있을 때에 寄送한 『悵望長途不掩扉 夜深風露濕蘿衣 楊山舘裏花千樹 日日看花歸來歸』와 秋閨怨에 秋風槭槭動梧枝 碧落冥冥鴈去遲 斜依玉窓人不見 一眉新月下西池는 辭意가 극히 淸新한 佳作이다. 此外에 金高城盛達의 妾 丁舜憘 金農嚴의 妾은 모도 詩文才華가 一世를 擅하엿고 근대에 있어서는 徐箕輔의 妾 朴竹西 金侍郞 德熙의 妾 錦園과 金佐根의 妾 羅閤, 李裕寅의 妾 等은 詩才機智가 또한 유명하엿다.(이 名妾列傳은 後機會에 祥記할 심치고 이만 略한다)

6. 尾言

踈漏하나마 이러케 畜妾史를 쓰고보니 혹은 세상사람들이 잘못 오해하고 맛치 영웅이 好酒色을 한다닛가 酒色만 조와하면 영웅이 되는 줄로 알고 먼저 酒色부터 貪하는 것과 맛찬가지로 畜妾도 상당한 역사가 잇고 歷代帝王君主와 소위 大聖人의 孔子 父子와 大儒學者 花潭 栗谷 南冥 等이 모도 妾이 있으니 보통의 우리들도 당연이 妾을 둘 것이라하야 畜妾獎勵하는 惡影響을 줄는지도 알 수 없다.
그러나 盜跖傳을 짓는다고 世人이 모도 盜跖이 되고 名妓列傳을＜26＞ 썻다고 貞女淑姬가 모도 花柳巷으로 墮落할 것은 안이다. 이것을 읽고 일반이 警醒한다면 그엇지 무익하다 하랴 었지하엿던 畜妾은 東洋의 惡風 또는 朝鮮의 最大惡風이다. 개인의 가정도 그로하야 破滅하고 사회국가도 그로하야 衰亡하얏다. 麗朝의 忠烈 巷愍王 禑, 諸王도 여러가지의 失德이 만치만은 大部分은 女妾으로 失德하야 被殺失君亡國의 諸禍를 입고 李朝에도 妾制를 公認한 후 君臣上下의 風氣가 毁敗하야 비록 世宗의 盛代에도 王子王族과 朝官이 공연하게 妓妾을 爭奪하고 (禮判金何와 宗室宰相의 妓妾鹿鳴을 相爭하다가 御命으로 金이 妾을 차지케 하엿다) 成宗時에는 成宗이 妓妾을 愛好한 結果 朝臣의 妓妾爭奪戰이 盛行할 뿐 안이라. 成宗자신도 美貌한 宗室 李宣傳某가 羣妓에게 사랑밧는 것을 보고 妬嫉하야 終身토록 官路에 進치 못하게 하고 後日 燕山君의 荒淫의 道를 啓하얐으니 燕山이 한참 荒淫할 때에 伽倻琴과 姿色이 雙絶한 生員 黃允獻의 妾을 奪하고도 言笑를 不喜하는 탓으로 舊夫를 戀한다하야 允獻을 죽인 것과 星州妓가 祭肉의 猪頭를 보고 張順孫의 頭骨과 가튼 것을 생각하야 웃다가 張順孫까지 죽일 번하게 된 것과 成世貞(聽松의 叔父)의 商山妓를 뺏고도 成氏를 妬忌하야 流謫식힌 것가튼 것은 成宗의 李宣傳을 坎墩식히던 것을 그대로 배운 것으로 그 죄가 燕山보다도 實은 그것을 가르친 成宗의 責이 더 큰 것이다. 그리고 黨禍에 있어서도 成廟喪時에 全羅監司 李克妓이 妓妾載行한 것을 金馹孫이 史草에 直書한 그것이 端緖가 되야 朝鮮 最初의 士禍인 戊午士禍를 이르킨 것이다. 그리고 妾으로 因하야 발생한 嫡庶의 문제가 그 얼마나 사회국가에 多大한 害毒을 끼첫느냐 특히 근대에 있어서는 국법이 解弛하고 風氣가 大毁하야 소위 지방관리로 가는 자는 治民을 하려 가는 것이 안이라 求妾을 하려가는 感이 있어서 名色平安道, 慶尙道, 가튼 色鄕의 地方官을 지낸 자이면 擧皆平壤妓, 寧邊妓, 大邱妓, 晋州妓의 妾을 두되 혹은 2,3인, 심하면 8仙女, 더 심하면 私設遊廓을 두다 십히하야 多妾생활을 하게 되였으니 그 돈이 대체 어듸서 낫섯스랴. 無辜한 백성의 膏血을 뽑지 안으면 國財를 盜賊질하는 것외예는 他道가 없을 것이다. 그리고보니 국가가 엇지 잘 되며 백성이 엇지 安全한 생활을 할 수 있으랴. 西道사람들은 흔이 말하기를 서울兩班놈이 西道사람의 재물을 다 빼섯다고 하지만은 그 소위 兩班놈들의 재산은 모도가 西道妓生妾에게 消費하게 되여 결국 西道재산은 西道妓生이 도로 차지하고 兩班은 송아지모양으로 일종의 反芻作用을 한데 不過한 것이다. 보라 지금까지도 소위 貴族富豪閔家나 李家 金家 들 가정에 平壤妓生의 足跡이 드러가 백히지 안는 집이 어듸잇는가를 그것을 制止하랴면 나는 무엇보다도 이미 畜妾한 자는 高率의 畜妾稅를 實施하는 동시 未來畜妾을 하는 자는 重婚의 處罰과 가튼 무슨 법적 制裁가 잇는 것이 필요할 줄로 안다. ＜27＞
＜20-27＞