Magazine Title: 삼천리 제12권 제10호
Publication Date: 1940년 12월 01일
Article Title: 伯林, 巴里, 白耳義의 戰火 속에서 최근 귀국한 兩氏의 報告記 (Report from Two Gentlemen Recently Returned from the Flames of War in Berlin, Paris, and Belgium)
Author: 裵雲成 金載元 鄭寅燮 金東煥, 崔貞熙, 朴啓周 (Pae Un-sŏng, Kim Chae-wŏn, Chŏng In-sŏp, Kim Tong-hwan, Ch'oe Chŏng-hŭi, Pak Kye-chu)
Article Type: 대담·좌담 (Interview/Roundtable Discussion)

Report from Two Gentlemen Recently Returned from the Flames of War in Berlin, Paris, and Belgium
						Pae Un-sŏng, Kim Chae-wŏn, Chŏng In-sŏp, Kim Tong-hwan, Ch'oe Chŏng-hŭi, Pak Kye-chu

We welcomed two rare guests who recently arrived in Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul). One is Mr. Pae Un-sŏng, a luminary in the European art world, who resided in Berlin and Paris for 19 years and escaped Paris the night before its fall, narrowly surviving. The other is Mr. Kim Chae-wŏn, an authority in archaeology from the research office of Ghent University in Belgium, who also resided in Belgium and Berlin for nine years and hastily returned to avoid the dangers as the flames of war spread near him. Along with Professor Chŏng In-sŏp of Yŏnhŭi College, who toured various Western countries four or five years ago, we sat together for a roundtable discussion to hear the most vivid news from war-torn Europe. We are confident this will be the most candid, bold, and fresh record. <102>

Graduate of Berlin Art School
Member of Paris Salon and
German Culture Institute          Pae Un-sŏng

Graduate of Munich University, Germany
Member of the Oriental Studies Research Office,
Ghent University, Belgium          Kim Chae-wŏn

Professor, Yŏnhŭi College       Chŏng In-sŏp

Samch'ŏlli Magazine Side    Kim Tong-hwan, Ch'oe Chŏng-hŭi,
Pak Kye-chu
October 20th at Kyŏngsŏng Kŭmch'ŏndae Hall (京城金千代會館)

Paris Escape and the Maginot Line
Kim Tong-hwan - Please tell us first about the scene when the German army bombed Paris and about your escape from war-torn Paris.

Pae Un-sŏng - The German army captured Paris on June 13th, and I escaped Paris on June 11th, just one day before the fall. Until then, I was at 38 Rue Singer, Paris. Around June 5th or 6th, I was having lunch at home when suddenly the sirens went off. I looked outside, but couldn't see anything. Then I heard the roar of airplanes and the sound of anti-aircraft guns firing. A few hours later, I heard that the Renault automobile factory in the suburbs of Paris had been bombed, but the evening extra edition announced that work would continue the next day, so it seemed the damage wasn't severe. Also, when German planes attacked border areas <103> or other regions, the sirens in Paris did not sound. After sounding the siren just once initially, they realized how much fear it caused the public and consequently how much loss it inflicted on business. The citizens of Paris also remained calm and composed. However, once news spread that Belgium and the Netherlands had succumbed to the German advance, and that German mechanized units had advanced to a point 60 kilometers from the outskirts of Paris, the city descended into great chaos. The train stations overflowed with refugees like a flood, truly becoming a scene of carnage (修羅場化). Buses and taxis carrying refugees flooded the streets, and the subway was used as an air-raid shelter. However, because the French government declared it would "fight to the end," and because they believed in America's entry into the war and Britain's active support, they didn't feel overly anxious. But eventually, Italy entered the war, and America's stance became ambiguous, causing fear in Paris to reach its peak. So, on the advice of the Japanese embassy, on June 11th, carrying only a few changes of clothes and a portrait of my mother I painted over 10 years ago when I was in Germany, I fled Paris in a great hurry towards Tours. I encountered air raids twice, once near the famous Chartres Cathedral on the way to Tours, and again on the way from Tours to Bordeaux, but fortunately, I was unharmed. I couldn't get a ship in Bordeaux and ended up boarding the "Haruna Maru" in La Rochelle. My companions were Katsuru Hamanaka, famous for etching (테크랑), writer Kiyoshi Komatsu, the singer couple Makishi, Mr. Inamura, and others. It's regrettable that I left 170 watercolors and oil paintings behind in Paris.

Chŏng In-sŏp - Do you have any intention of going back?

Pae Un-sŏng - Why, yes. Once the war between Germany and Britain ends and Paris becomes completely peaceful, my home is in Paris, and I left all my other furniture, belongings, and paintings as they were, so I intend to go back.

Kim Tong-hwan - Mr. Kim, on what day did you escape Belgium?

Kim Chae-wŏn - It was May 4th. I also escaped Antwerp following the advice of the Japanese embassy. After escaping Belgium, I went to Germany and left Germany on May 14th.

Kim Tong-hwan - In the recent German-French war, was the Maginot Line's equipment insufficient, allowing it to be breached so easily?
Pae Un-sŏng - Why, that couldn't be the case. The German army did not capture the main Maginot Line this time; they destroyed a part of the connecting line on the Dutch side. A major question is why the retreating French forces didn't destroy the bridges there before withdrawing. <104> According to some accounts, there were rumors that some of the retreating French troops had been bribed by the Germans, but that's a military secret, so I wouldn't know. In any case, not destroying the bridges was a fatal blow to the French side and a great miracle for the German side. If those bridges had been destroyed, it would have been very difficult for the German army to advance into France. For the German army to break through the main Maginot Line, they would have had to sacrifice at least one million soldiers; it would have been extremely difficult otherwise. Therefore, one question is whether the German army could have defeated Britain and France after losing such a huge number, one million men. In this respect, the French army also would have had to lose one million lives to break through Germany's Siegfried Line (지크리프트線). Could this nation, which lost so many lives in World War I that women outnumbered men, sacrifice another million to break the Siegfried Line? It couldn't. That's why the French army gave up on breaking the Siegfried Line. Also, France, believing that the German army wouldn't try to break the Maginot Line at the cost of a million lives, colluded with Britain and attempted to strangle Germany economically through a naval blockade.

Current Status of Koreans in Europe
Kim Tong-hwan - How many Korean students are currently studying in Europe, or how many Koreans are active in other social fields?
Pae Un-sŏng - There were about ten Koreans in Paris, but only three or four had families. Mr. Chang Kil-lyong graduated from the University of Paris and immediately got a job at the Manchurian Railway office in Paris. Besides him, there were Messrs. Yun Ŭl-su, Kim Pong-su, Kim Chun-yŏp, Yu Chae-sŏng, and Yi Yong-jae. Mr. Kim Pong-su had specialized in radio technology at university in Germany and came to Paris to continue his research at the university. When the German-French war broke out this time, he was suspected by the French military because he had personally installed a radio antenna at his house. Coupled with the fact that he came from Germany and other circumstances, he was arrested by the French military as a German spy and reportedly suffered greatly.
Kim Chae-wŏn - I heard news recently through someone from the Government-General's Foreign Affairs Division that Mr. Kim Pong-su was released safely. They said he was interrogated for about two months.
Pae Un-sŏng - And there's Mr. Yun Ŭl-su, who also graduated from the University of Paris, obtained a doctorate in philosophy, won a translation award from the Paris academic society, and even received an award from the Japan-France Association in Paris. He became famous enough that renowned publishing houses would publish any of his works, and his books seem to sell well. When I was escaping Paris, Mr. Yun happened to be temporarily in Italy conducting research at the Vatican Palace. When the Italian government declared war on France, he couldn't return to France. Perhaps now that the armistice treaty between the two countries has been established, he might have returned to Paris.
Kim Chae-wŏn - In Belgium where I was, there wasn't a single Korean compatriot, nor were there any in the Netherlands. So I thought I was the only one. However, when the German army began its advance into Belgium this time and started capturing territories one by one, I unexpectedly learned, while preparing to evacuate on the advice of the Japanese Embassy, that there was another Korean in Belgium besides myself. I didn't meet him directly, but it seems he was either a Catholic priest or someone there for research related to Catholicism.
Chŏng In-sŏp - When I went to Paris, I heard about someone who made a good amount of money selling tofu (豆腐). What was his name?
Pae Un-sŏng - That would be Mr. An Pong-un; he succeeded in the tofu business. Also, I heard two Korean women came to Switzerland (쇗타레?), but I didn't meet them. It seems they are studying at a Catholic convent school.
Chŏng In-sŏp - I also heard there's a Korean woman in Italy at a convent in the Vatican Palace. Did you meet her, Mr. Pae?
Pae Un-sŏng - No, I haven't met her yet. They say there are three Koreans in Italy. By the way, Professor Chŏng, when you went to Britain, how many Koreans were there?
Chŏng In-sŏp - In Britain, besides Mr. Kap (甲), who gained fame as a ship captain, there were several students, and then mainly laborers, quite a few of them.
Kim Tong-hwan - How many Koreans are in Berlin? <106>
Kim Chae-wŏn - About six or seven. Most are students.

European Personalities and Strengths
Kim Tong-hwan - What aspects should Koreans learn from Europeans? Specifically, what traits should be learned from the German character, and what points are worth taking from the French?
Pae Un-sŏng - Since I also spent a considerable time in Germany, I interacted with many Germans. Above all, I saw it as a truly beautiful trait that Germans, even if they disagree with the rulers or authorities and harbor dissatisfaction, faithfully fulfill their duties. If it were us Koreans, if our opinions conflicted with the rulers or authorities, if we couldn't get our intentions across at all, and thus found it difficult to realize our ideals, we might adopt an attitude of disregard for the world (壓世的), or else retaliate by not performing our duties properly, or in severe cases, adopt a self-destructive attitude. I think this might be a flaw in our Korean character, but Germans are absolutely not like that. Even if they are dissatisfied with the attitude of their superiors, they are truly loyal to their duties towards those superiors. In other words, they are people who live to work. To rephrase, one could say they are good followers of the state. <107>
Kim Chae-wŏn - As Mr. Pae just mentioned, it's true that the German people live to work. They are governed by the spirit of Goethe; they are good companions marching in step with the spirit and character of "Faust," so to speak. Continuous thought, continuous action, continuous strength – thus, like Faust, they never cease thinking and seek truth, never cease acting and do their work. Seeing this, some third parties might criticize them as a nation without criticism or as unconditional followers of the state, but that is absolutely not the case. The proof lies in the fact that even before the Nazi regime came to power, Germany had 32 political parties. Their capacity for criticism is also several times greater than that of other peoples. There's a proverbial saying that if ten Germans gather, twelve opinions emerge, and it's actually true. However, thanks to a good ruler like Hitler, this nation, which used to have many conflicting opinions, now possesses national unity and serves as good workers under state totalitarianism.
Kim Tong-hwan - Compared to this German nation, what about the French nation?
Pae Un-sŏng - The French nation also loves pleasure and enjoys beauty, but the general assessment of them – namely, that they enjoy splendor, lack interest in home life, are frivolous, and live for luxury and vanity – seems to stem from a lack of understanding. They place great emphasis on the expression, appreciation, and harmony of beauty from an artistic standpoint. By fully expressing the harmony of beauty, they please others and themselves. Regarding makeup, there's makeup done out of vanity, and makeup done for the harmony, expression, and appreciation of beauty. French makeup generally belongs to the latter category, I believe. Therefore, even with modest clothing, they pay considerable attention to color and line. That this doesn't stem from vanity or luxury is evidenced by the fact that among Europeans, few nations are as economical in household management as the French; they are known for being thrifty and, consequently, even considered stingy. Not only that, but French women, once married, tend to stay firmly within the home, rarely appearing in social circles. In this respect, it wouldn't be an exaggeration to say they are like Korean housewives. Also, although people think the French highly exalt women, women still do not have suffrage. <108> (*Note: page number seems incorrect, should be <108>*)
Kim Chae-wŏn - To me, it doesn't seem like that at all. The French people seem to be a nation that enjoys splendor and luxury. If you go to certain neighborhoods in Paris, the uncleanliness, the peeling walls, the disorderliness – you can't see them as people who solely enjoy expressing and appreciating beauty to adorn themselves with splendor. If it were for the sake of expressing beauty, why would they only know how to adorn their own bodies, yet leave their homes or personal spaces in such a state?
Chŏng In-sŏp - I don't think that's the case. Artists who enjoy beauty and see it correctly generally take care of their bodies haphazardly, and if you peek into their studios, the untidiness is often beyond description. Isn't it similar to that? Also, my thought is this: in France, while there are extremely extravagant people, there are also extremely frugal people. Just as Catholicism is widespread in France, leading many to pursue moral cultivation, there are also conservative people. In short, I think it might be a place where people of two extremes live.

Activities of Korean Artists
Kim Tong-hwan - Among Korean artists, who gained fame in Europe? And how popular was Ms. Ch'oe Sŭng-hŭi?
Pae Un-sŏng - Ms. Ch'oe Sŭng-hŭi can be considered successful in Europe this time. Her husband, Mr. An Mak, being a good manager, skilled in socializing, and bold, certainly helped a lot. But Ms. Ch'oe herself, with her rich physique and graceful lines, performed exotic and classical dances, earning considerable acclaim even in Paris. She performed in top-tier theaters, and critics praised her significantly in print.
Kim Chae-wŏn - She was very well-received in Belgium too. However, I suspect Ms. Ch'oe didn't achieve enough financial success to bring money back home. That's because, to gain popularity and fame, one must stay in first-class hotels, and all expenses for socializing and other things must be high-class so as not to be looked down upon. A lot of money must have been consumed in that way. So, while she surely earned a lot, I doubt her success extended to bringing money back. In any case, she succeeded in terms of dance, popularity, and earnings.
Pae Un-sŏng - She signed contracts with owners of first-class opera houses, so you can imagine her popularity. <109> It's very regrettable that the season was bad; she had contracts lined up for the fall, but the war broke out in the fall, forcing everything to stop. Also, Mr. Cho T'aek-wŏn came to Paris and received favorable reviews. He performed once for critics only, once through the good offices of the Japanese Embassy in Paris, arranged by the embassy, and then held public performances, all of which were well-reviewed. Then there's Mr. An Ik-t'ae, who is now in Hungary; years ago, he conducted an orchestra in Germany, and he was truly excellent. Having arrived in Korea only a few days ago, and thus not having seen Korean conductors, I can't definitively say Mr. An is the best, but from what I've seen so far, I haven't encountered such a splendid conductor. In any case, having reached the point of conducting a major orchestra in a large country like Germany, you can guess his skill is considerable. ****** There's also a dancer named Pak Yŏng-in, who graduated from Tokyo Imperial University and the Berlin State Dance Academy, performed 24 times in Europe to great acclaim, and is gaining considerable fame. She is currently registered with the Hungarian Royal Dance Company.
Kim Tong-hwan - It might be impolite to ask, but Mr. Pae, you are renowned as a first-rate painter in Europe. What is the European assessment of your paintings, or what position do you currently hold?
Pae Un-sŏng - When I was in Germany, I was a member of the Culture Institute (獨逸文化院), and in Paris, I was a member of the Paris Salon. As for my paintings, the head of what might be translated as the Ministry of Fine Arts (美術省) or Bureau of Fine Arts (美術局) – anyway, such a bureau exists in the French government – praised my work, saying it "skillfully harmonizes East and West." Saying this feels a bit like praising my own painting (自畵自讚), but I also received favorable reviews from art critics when I was in Germany.
Kim Tong-hwan - Excuse me, but which school did you graduate from?
Pae Un-sŏng - The Berlin Art School (獨逸伯林美術學校) in Germany.
Kim Tong-hwan - How many solo exhibitions did you hold while in Paris? And how many paintings did you exhibit?
Pae Un-sŏng - I held one solo exhibition. At that time, there were about 60 oil paintings and over 100 watercolors. Also, there is a major art exhibition held in Paris every spring and autumn, featuring renowned artists, and I exhibit my paintings there every spring and autumn as well. My paintings primarily draw subjects from the East, while the style and color are Western.
Kim Tong-hwan - How was Painter Fujita's popularity in Paris? <110>
Pae Un-sŏng - It was quite high. His paintings would invariably sell at high prices, and art dealers would confidently purchase any number of his works. Of course, behind such high popularity, there might have been corrupt practices like bribing critics or dealers promoting works for their own profit. In any case, Mr. Fujita's art eventually reached a dead end, became commercialized, and he ended up quietly fleeing Paris. I learned after his escape that the reason was heavy debt and his inability to pay half a million (francs?) in taxes. Now, his popularity has completely plummeted, and the dealers who had bought many of his paintings are said to have suffered considerable losses.
Chŏng In-sŏp - What about Picasso's paintings? To us, they sometimes look like a kind of abnormality (變態的), but somehow the paintings seem splendid.
Pae Un-sŏng - Picasso is a world-renowned painter, correspondingly splendid and popular. Of course, although he belongs to the traditional school (正統派), his paintings sometimes show abnormal, that is, Surrealist (슈르레아리즘) tendencies. This happens when an artist reaches a state of selflessness (無我の境地), meaning, while engrossed in painting, they enter a subconscious state, become almost intoxicated by the atmosphere and their own emotions, and the brush flows freely. This is what the public seems to call abnormal or Surrealism. We sympathize with that.
Kim Tong-hwan - Mr. Kim, you mainly studied archaeology, correct?
Kim Chae-wŏn - Yes, I pursued studies that were quite removed from art.
Kim Tong-hwan - Excuse me, but which school did you graduate from?
Kim Chae-wŏn - I finished Munich University (뮨헨大學) in Germany, and until this spring, I was researching at the Oriental Studies Research Office (東洋學硏究室) of Ghent University (겐츠大學) in Antwerp (안토와푸), Belgium, but ended up leaving due to the war.
Kim Tong-hwan - Did you publish many writings related to Korea while you were there?
Kim Chae-wŏn - When I was in Berlin, I often published in the Berlin Museum Magazine (伯林博物館雜誌).

"Paris Festival" and Encounters with Famous Koreans
Kim Tong-hwan - Please tell us about the famous Paris Festival (巴里祭) in France, and about meeting various famous Koreans in Europe.
Pae Un-sŏng - The Paris Festival is a holiday commemorating the French Revolution Day. <111> On this day, the entire nation celebrates very lavishly.
Chŏng In-sŏp - Indeed, when I went to Weimar, Germany, the entire citizenry celebrated the city's anniversary quite luxuriously. The scene at night, with people dancing and drinking under dazzling multicolored electric lights, causing a great commotion, was truly indescribable. Is the Paris Festival similar?
Pae Un-sŏng - Yes, they dance and have a really enjoyable time.
Kim Tong-hwan - Whom among famous Koreans did you meet in Europe?
Pae Un-sŏng - I met Mr. Ch'oe Rin in Paris, and I also met Ms. Na Hye-sŏk in Paris. And I met Mr. Hŏ Hŏn and Mr. Kim Sŏng-su in Berlin. I also met Mr. Pak Sŏk-yun, also in Paris, which was after Poland had been defeated by the German army.
Kim Chae-wŏn - I met Mr. Pak Sŏk-yun in Antwerp, Belgium, and I met Mr. Kim Sŏng-su in Munich.

Europe Before and After the War
Kim Tong-hwan - Before the outbreak of the great European war this time, did the various European countries anticipate the war's coming, or when did preparations for it begin?
Pae Un-sŏng - As laymen in politics, we wouldn't know the details about such matters, but France is fundamentally a country that dislikes war. Because of that, until the Four Powers Conference (四頭會議) the year before last, it wouldn't be an exaggeration to say they were in a state where war preparations were non-existent. Then, when Germany laid hands on Czechoslovakia, France finally opened its eyes wide and convened the so-called Four Powers Conference. Based on the outcome of this conference, the French military side announced that war between Germany and France would likely break out, so during the conference proceedings, even the citizens of Paris began to evacuate. I too packed all my belongings then and even bought a ticket to evacuate, but things turned out peacefully, so I stayed put in Paris. From that time, the French government predicted that war with Germany was an unavoidable fact that would come soon, and began war preparations. Until then, France had no air-raid shelters (防空壕), and only 650,000 gas masks – truly pathetic.
Kim Tong-hwan - Please tell us about Belgium.
Kim Chae-wŏn - Belgium is a country that gained independence in 1830, having a short history of only 100 years now. This country has no national language; <112> German is used in the north, and French in the south. Even the king, during parliamentary sessions or other speeches, first speaks in German, then translates the same speech into French, delivering the same content twice. Also, until before World War I, French influence dominated this country. The people are also of mixed ethnicity, with the Flemish (후란만) comprising 60% and the French-descended Walloons (바론) 40%. And Catholicism (舊敎) holds significant influence. Belgium was first bombed on May 5th earlier this year. Immediately after the German army captured Belgium in this war, you couldn't see a single German soldier inside Belgium; German soldiers did not walk the streets. This was probably a German political strategy (政略) to avoid giving Belgians a bad impression. Only the post office and railways were managed by the German army; all other matters were entrusted to Belgians, imposing no restraints whatsoever. They even prohibited German soldiers from taking Belgian goods back to Germany. However, in contrast, German oppression against Poland was reportedly very severe.
Pae Un-sŏng - Similarly, when the German army advanced into France, they behaved very gentlemanly. Even when the mechanized units entered Paris, they did so solemnly. French onlookers lined both sides of the street, and among them, French soldiers still in uniform were sporadically standing and watching, which was a peculiar sight (異彩) if you call it peculiar, or an eyesore (꼴불견) if you call it an eyesore. (All laugh)
Kim Tong-hwan - What was Germany like?
Kim Chae-wŏn - Germany must have been preparing for war beforehand out of a desire to recover lost territories and seek revenge for World War I. Even now, there are always blackout restrictions (燈火管制) in the streets of Berlin at night, making the streets completely dark (캉캄해요). Nevertheless, numerous men and women wander the streets, each chatting away. To avoid bumping into each other in the dark, women wear phosphorescent stone pins, like buttons, on their chests, which glimmer, preventing collisions between men and women. However, once, a thief snatched a woman's handbag at night and ran off. He was investigated and arrested shortly after, and sentenced to death. It was truly strict (嚴하드군요). Since they execute even a petty handbag thief among robbers, it seems inevitable that all controls would function well under these strict regulations.
And, on the other hand, entertainment like movies is completely liberalized (解放主義). This is probably because they realized it was a mistake during World War I to impose excessive control on the people, restricting even emotional expression among the domestic population while soldiers died at the front. This time, they adopted a liberal approach to such things. <113> Operas and theaters are always packed to capacity. Even in Düsseldorf (와룻셀도루푸?), a border city just 30 minutes by car or 5 minutes by plane from the border, the opera house and theaters are always thriving, filled to capacity.
Kim Tong-hwan - What about prices?
Pae Un-sŏng - Meat is rationed at 500 grams per person per week, butter at 150 grams. Besides that, flour, bread, etc., are all distributed using a coupon system (切符制). These are the actual coupons. (Mr. Pae and Mr. Kim each show coupons they brought back from Europe.)
Kim Tong-hwan - During the Paris air raids, did they bomb indiscriminately, without regard for cultural facilities?
Pae Un-sŏng - No, they didn't. There are over 30 museums just within Paris city limits, and all were unharmed.
Kim Chae-wŏn - When I went to Paris last year before the war started, I went to the Oriental artifacts display room at the museum for research related to archaeology, but there was nothing there. When I asked to see them, they brought them out from crates (궷속). As Mr. Pae mentioned earlier, during the Four Powers Conference the year before last, fearing war might break out, they had packed everything into crates to transport somewhere. Since war didn't break out then, they left them as they were, but they still haven't put them back on display even today, they said.
Kim Tong-hwan - Thank you for sharing such vivid material with us for such a long time. (End) <114>

**Summary**

This 1940 roundtable discussion features Pae Un-sŏng, a painter recently returned from Paris, and Kim Chae-wŏn, an archaeologist returned from Belgium and Germany, interviewed by magazine staff and Professor Chŏng In-sŏp. They share firsthand accounts of escaping Europe just before or as war escalated, describing the atmosphere in Paris during bombings, the fall of Belgium, the perceived strengths and weaknesses of the French and German national characters, rationing, blackouts in Berlin, and the state of cultural institutions. They also discuss the activities and reputations of Korean artists like Ch'oe Sŭng-hŭi, Cho T'aek-wŏn, An Ik-t'ae, Pak Yŏng-in, and Pae Un-sŏng himself, as well as Japanese artist Fujita, and mention brief encounters with prominent Koreans like Ch'oe Rin, Na Hye-sŏk, Hŏ Hŏn, Kim Sŏng-su, and Pak Sŏk-yun in Europe.

For colonial history, the article offers a rare glimpse into the lives and perspectives of elite Koreans navigating wartime Europe, their connections via the Japanese empire (embassy advice, travel on Japanese ships), and their observations on European powers, potentially reflecting colonial anxieties or comparisons. The discussion on national character (German discipline vs. French perceived frivolity/frugality) and the mention of Koreans finding work or achieving recognition abroad provide insights into Korean identity and aspirations during this period.

**Named Entities**

伯林	베를린	Berlin
巴里	파리	Paris
白耳義	벨기에	Belgium
裵雲成	배운성	Pae Un-sŏng
金載元	김재원	Kim Chae-wŏn
鄭寅燮	정인섭	Chŏng In-sŏp
金東煥	김동환	Kim Tong-hwan
崔貞熙	최정희	Ch'oe Chŏng-hŭi
朴啓周	박계주	Pak Kye-chu
歐羅巴	유럽	Europe (Europa)
겐츠대학	겐츠대학	Ghent University
延專 (延禧專門學校)	연희전문학교	Yŏnhŭi College
京城金千代會館	경성금천대회관	Kyŏngsŏng Kŭmch'ŏndae Hall
獨軍	독일군	German Army
레-노	르노	Renault
和蘭	네덜란드	Netherlands (Holland)
米國	미국	United States (America)
英國	영국	United Kingdom (Britain)
伊太利	이탈리아	Italy
日本	일본	Japan
두루	투르	Tours
샤를레교회당	샤르트르 대성당	Chartres Cathedral (likely)
보르도	보르도	Bordeaux
라스랠	라로셸	La Rochelle
하루나마루	하루나마루	Haruna Maru (Ship name)
濱中勝	하마나카 카츠루	Hamanaka Katsuru
小松淸	코마츠 키요시	Komatsu Kiyoshi
牧嗣	마키시	Makishi
伊奈村	이나무라	Inamura
안또와푸	안트베르펜	Antwerp
獨逸	독일	Germany
佛國 (佛蘭西)	프랑스	France
마지노線	마지노선	Maginot Line
지크리프트線	지크프리트선	Siegfried Line
朝鮮	조선	Korea (Chosŏn)
張吉龍	장길룡	Chang Kil-lyong
滿鐵	만철	Manchurian Railway (Mantetsu)
尹乙洙	윤을수	Yun Ŭl-su
金鳳洙	김봉수	Kim Pong-su
金俊燁	김준엽	Kim Chun-yŏp
劉在成	유재성	Yu Chae-sŏng
李用宰	이용재	Yi Yong-jae
總督府 外事課	총독부 외사과	Government-General Foreign Affairs Division
발티칸宮	바티칸궁	Vatican Palace
安鳳雲	안봉운	An Pong-un
쇗타레	스위스	Switzerland (likely Sŭwiseu/Swiss, transcription unclear)
甲	갑	Kap (placeholder name/initial)
꾀-테	괴테	Goethe
파우스트	파우스트	Faust
나치스	나치스	Nazis
히틀러	히틀러	Hitler
崔承喜	최승희	Ch'oe Sŭng-hŭi
安漠	안막	An Mak
趙澤元	조택원	Cho T'aek-wŏn
安益泰	안익태	An Ik-t'ae
洪牙利	헝가리	Hungary
東京帝大	도쿄제국대학	Tokyo Imperial University
伯林國立舞踊大學	베를린국립무용대학	Berlin State Dance Academy
朴永仁	박영인	Pak Yŏng-in
洪牙利王室舞踊會	헝가리왕실무용회	Hungarian Royal Dance Company (likely)
獨逸文化院	독일문화원	German Culture Institute
巴里살롱	파리 살롱	Paris Salon
美術省/美術局	미술성/미술국	Ministry/Bureau of Fine Arts
獨逸伯林美術學校	독일 베를린 미술학교	German Berlin Art School
藤田	후지타	Fujita
피카소	피카소	Picasso
뮨헨大學	뮌헨대학	Munich University
東洋學硏究室	동양학연구실	Oriental Studies Research Office
伯林博物館雜誌	베를린박물관잡지	Berlin Museum Magazine
巴里祭	파리제	Paris Festival (Bastille Day Celebration)
와이말	바이마르	Weimar
崔麟	최린	Ch'oe Rin
羅惠錫	나혜석	Na Hye-sŏk
許憲	허헌	Hŏ Hŏn
金性洙	김성수	Kim Sŏng-su
朴錫胤	박석윤	Pak Sŏk-yun
波蘭	폴란드	Poland
첵코	체코	Czechoslovakia (Czech)
四頭會議	사두회의	Four Powers Conference (Munich Conference)
와룻셀도루푸	뒤셀도르프	Düsseldorf (likely)

**Glossary**

좌담	좌담	Roundtable discussion
귀국(歸國)	귀국	Returning to one's country
양씨(兩氏)	양씨	Both gentlemen/persons
화백(畵伯)	화백	Master painter (honorific)
체재(滯在)하다가	체재하다가	While residing/staying
함락(陷落)	함락	Fall, capture (of a city)
권위(權威)	권위	Authority (expert)
위난(危難)	위난	Danger, peril
급거(急遽)	급거	Hastily, urgently
시찰(視察)하고	시찰하고	Having inspected/observed
생생(生生)한	생생한	Vivid, fresh, live
자신(自信)합니다	자신합니다	Am confident
사론(沙龍)	살롱	Salon
회원(會員)	회원	Member
동양학(東洋學)	동양학	Oriental Studies
연희전문학교(延禧專門學校)	연희전문학교	Yŏnhŭi College (historical name)
본사측(本社側)	본사측	Our company's side (the magazine's)
공습(空襲)	공습	Air raid
당시(當時)	당시	At that time
전화(戰禍)	전화	Ravages of war, calamities of war
탈출(脫出)하시던	탈출하시던	Regarding your escape
싸이렌	사이렌	Siren (older transcription)
폭음(爆音)	폭음	Sound of explosions/bombs/engines
고사포(高射砲)	고사포	Anti-aircraft gun
교외(郊外)	교외	Suburbs
폭격(爆擊)	폭격	Bombing
호외(號外)	호외	Newspaper extra
손해(損害)	손해	Damage, loss
내습(來襲)할 때	내습할 때	When attacking/raiding
울리지 않어요	울리지 않아요	Does not sound (older negative ending)
공포(恐怖)	공포	Fear, terror
업무(業務)	업무	Business, work
끼치게 된다는	끼치게 된다는	That it causes/inflicts
덤벼지 않고	덤비지 않고	Without panicking/rushing (older form of 덤비다)
침착(沈着)하더니	침착하더니	Remained calm, but then...
굴(屈)하고	굴하고	Yielding, surrendering
기계화부대(機械化部隊)	기계화부대	Mechanized unit
진격(進擊)하여	진격하여	Advancing, attacking
대혼잡(大混雜)	대혼잡	Great chaos/congestion
정차장(停車場)	정거장	Station (older term for train/bus station)
피난민(避難民)	피난민	Refugees
수라장화(修羅場化)	수라장화	Becoming a scene of carnage/hell
범람(氾濫)하였고	범람하였고	Overflowed, flooded
방공호(防空壕)	방공호	Air-raid shelter
선언(宣言)하기	선언하기	Declaring
참전(參戰)하고	참전하고	Entering the war
후원(後援)	후원	Support, backing
불안(不安)	불안	Anxiety, unease
결국(結局)	결국	Eventually, in the end
태도(態度)	태도	Attitude, stance
애매(曖昧)하기	애매하기	Being ambiguous
절정(絕頂)	절정	Peak, climax
권고(勸告)	권고	Advice, recommendation
초상화(肖像畫)	초상화	Portrait
걸머지고	짊어지고	Carrying on the back/shoulder (dialectal/older form)
이르렀을 때	이르렀을 때	When (we) arrived at/reached
무사(無事)했었습니다	무사했었습니다	Was unharmed/safe (older past polite ending)
동행자(同行者)	동행자	Companion(s)
문예가(文藝家)	문예가	Literary person, writer
성악가(聲樂家)	성악가	Vocalist, singer
수채화(水彩畫)	수채화	Watercolor painting
유화(油畫)	유화	Oil painting
유감(遺憾)입니다	유감입니다	It is regrettable
웨요	왜요	Why? (older spelling)
평온(平穩)해지면	평온해지면	When it becomes peaceful
기구(器具)	기구	Utensils, furniture, belongings
함락(陷落)되도록	함락되도록	So that it could be captured/fall
설비(設備)	설비	Equipment, facilities
불충분(不充分)했던가요	불충분했던가요	Was it insufficient? (older interrogative)
본선(本線)	본선	Main line
연선(連線)	연선	Connecting line
파괴(破壞)했는데	파괴했는데	Destroyed, but
퇴각(退却)하면서	퇴각하면서	While retreating
의문(疑問)	의문	Question, doubt
매수(買收)되었다는	매수되었다는	That (they) were bribed
군사비밀(軍事秘密)	군사비밀	Military secret
치명상(致命傷)	치명상	Fatal blow/wound
기적(奇蹟)	기적	Miracle
돌파(突破)하자면	돌파하려면	If one intends to break through
희생(犧牲)하지	희생하지	Without sacrificing
지극(至極)히	지극히	Extremely, exceedingly
이겨낼 수 있을까	이겨낼 수 있을까	Whether (they) could win
단념(斷念)했고	단념했고	Gave up, abandoned the idea
결탁(結託)하고	결탁하고	Colluding with
해상봉쇄(海上封鎖)	해상봉쇄	Naval blockade
말려 죽이려던	말려 죽이려던	Tried to dry up and kill (i.e., strangle economically)
동포(同胞)	동포	Compatriots
졸업(卒業)하자	졸업하자	As soon as (he) graduated
취직(就職)하여	취직하여	Getting a job and
전공(專攻)하고	전공하고	Majoring in
발발(勃發)되자	발발되자	As soon as (it) broke out
가설(架設)했던	가설했던	Had installed/set up
혐의(嫌疑)	혐의	Suspicion
조건(條件)	조건	Conditions, circumstances
체포(逮捕) 되여서	체포되어서	Being arrested (older spelling)
뭇척	무척	Very much, greatly (older spelling)
석방(釋放)되었다는	석방되었다는	That (he) was released
취조(取調)를	취조를	Interrogation
학위(學位)	학위	Academic degree
획득(獲得)했고	획득했고	Acquired, won
저서(著書)	저서	Written work, book
저명(著名)한	저명한	Famous, renowned
출판사(出版社)	출판사	Publishing house
유명(有名)해젔으며	유명해졌으며	Became famous and (older spelling)
착실(着實)히	착실히	Steadily, faithfully
성공(成功)했지요	성공했지요	Succeeded, right?
수녀학교(修女學校)	수녀학교	Convent school
유학(留學)하는	유학하는	Studying abroad
이름을 떨치던	이름을 떨치던	Who were famous/renowned
부군(夫君)되는	부군되는	Her husband (formal)
마네쟈	매니저	Manager (loan word)
능난(能爛)하고	능란하고	Skillful, adept (likely typo for 능란)
뱃심	배짱	Guts, nerve (colloquial)
풍부(豐富)하고	풍부하고	Rich, abundant
육체(肉體)	육체	Body, physique
이국적(異國的)이요	이국적이고	Exotic and
고전적(古典的)인	고전적인	Classical
무용(舞踊)	무용	Dance
호평(好評)을 박(博)했었습니다	호평을 받았습니다	Received favorable reviews/acclaim (博하다 is archaic)
일류(一流)	일류	First-class, top-tier
비평가(批評家)	비평가	Critic
지상(紙上)	지상	In print (on paper)
짐작(斟酌)합니다	짐작합니다	Guess, suppose, estimate
유숙(留宿)해야	유숙해야	Must lodge/stay
교제(交際)	교제	Socializing, association
비용(費用)	비용	Expenses, cost
고급(高級)으로	고급으로	As high-class
소모(消耗)되었을	소모되었을	Would have been consumed/spent
물론(無論)	물론	Of course
계약(契約)하고	계약하고	Making a contract
씨즌	시즌	Season (loan word)
나뻣기	나빴기	Because it was bad (older spelling)
중지(中止)된	중지된	Was stopped/halted
유감(遺憾)돼요	유감돼요	It's regrettable (slightly older form)
호의(好意)	호의	Goodwill, favor
주선(周旋)으로	주선으로	Through the arrangement/mediation of
공연(公演)	공연	Public performance
항가리國	헝가리국	Hungary
관현악단(管絃樂團)	관현악단	Orchestra
컨덕터	지휘자	Conductor (loan word)
지휘(指揮)했는데	지휘했는데	Conducted, and
솜씨	솜씨	Skill, dexterity
출신교(出身校)	출신교	Alma mater, school graduated from
전람회(展覽會)	전람회	Exhibition
망라(網羅)하여	망라하여	Gathering, encompassing
개최(開催)되는	개최되는	Is held/opened
출품(出品)합니다	출품합니다	Exhibit (items)
취재(取材)를	취재를	Subject matter, material gathering
방식(方式)	방식	Method, style
화백(畫伯)	화백	Master painter
으레이	으레	Usually, customarily (older spelling)
고가(高價)로	고가로	At a high price
화상(畫商)들도	화상들도	Art dealers also
안심(安心)하고	안심하고	Without worry, feeling secure
구입(購入)했지요	구입했지요	Purchased, right?
평론가(評論家)	평론가	Critic
회물(賄物)을 먹이고	뇌물을 먹이고	Bribing (older term/spelling for 뇌물)
이윤(利潤)	이윤	Profit
선전(宣傳)하는	선전하는	Promoting, advertising
악폐(惡弊)	악폐	Corrupt practice, vice
막다른 골목	막다른 골목	Dead end
상품화(商品化)되어서	상품화되어서	Becoming commercialized
탈출(脫出)해 도망(逃亡)하고	탈출해 도망하고	Escaping and fleeing
원인(原因)	원인	Cause, reason
세금(稅金)	세금	Tax
지불(支拂)하지	지불하지	Paying (older form)
푹 떨어젔고	푹 떨어졌고	Dropped sharply and (older spelling)
변태적(變態的)인	변태적인	Abnormal, perverted (here likely meaning unconventional)
정통파(正統派)	정통파	Orthodox school, mainstream
경향(傾向)	경향	Tendency, inclination
무아(無我)의 경지(境地)	무아의 경지	State of selflessness/absorption
무의식상태(無意識狀態)	무의식상태	Subconscious state
도취(陶醉)되다싶이 되어	도취되다시피 되어	Becoming almost intoxicated/absorbed
동정(同情)합니다	동정합니다	Sympathize
고고학(考古學)	고고학	Archaeology
등지다싶이 된	등지다시피 된	Almost turned one's back on (distanced from)
문헌(文獻)	문헌	Literature, documents
발표(發表)했습니까	발표했습니까	Did you publish/present?
혁명일(革命日)	혁명일	Revolution Day
기념(紀念)하는	기념하는	Commemorating
축제일(祝祭日)	축제일	Festival day, holiday
호화(豪華)롭게	호화롭게	Lavishly, splendidly
눌드군요	놀더군요	Were playing/celebrating (older spelling/dialect)
오색(五色)이 찬란(燦爛)한	오색이 찬란한	Brilliantly five-colored
전광(電光)	전광	Electric light
야단법석(惹端法席)하는	야단법석하는	Making a great fuss/commotion
형용(形容)할 수 없을	형용할 수 없을	Indescribable
지경(地境)입니다	지경입니다	Is the state/point
상면(相面)하셨나요	상면하셨나요	Did you meet? (formal/older)
패망(敗亡)한 뒤었습니다	패망한 뒤였습니다	It was after the defeat/fall (older ending)
발발(勃發)되기 전에	발발되기 전에	Before it broke out
장차(將次)	장차	In the future
예상(豫想)했는지	예상했는지	Whether (they) predicted/expected
준비(準備)	준비	Preparation
시작(始作)되었습니까	시작되었습니까	Did it begin?
문외한(門外漢)인	문외한인	Being a layman/outsider
자세(仔細)히	자세히	In detail
원래(元來)	원래	Originally, fundamentally
싫여하는	싫어하는	Disliking (older spelling)
재작년(再昨年)	재작년	The year before last
과언(過言)이 아닐만한	과언이 아닐만한	Not much of an exaggeration
현상(現象)	현상	Phenomenon, state
결과(結果)	결과	Result, outcome
여하(如何)에 의해서	여하에 의해서	Depending on how it turns out
눌러있었는데	눌러앉아 있었는데	Stayed put, settled down but...
불가피(不可避)의	불가피의	Unavoidable
불원(不遠)에	불원에	Soon, in the near future (not far off)
예측(豫測)하고	예측하고	Predicting, forecasting
착수(着手)했지요	착수했지요	Began, embarked on, right?
한심(寒心)했지요	한심했지요	Was pathetic, deplorable, right?
독립(獨立)한	독립한	Became independent
국어(國語)	국어	National language
의회(議會)때나	의회때나	During parliamentary sessions or...
연설(演說)할 때	연설할 때	When giving a speech
번역(飜譯)해서	번역해서	Translating (older Hanja 飜)
풍미(風靡)했었습니다	풍미했었습니다	Swept through, dominated (older ending)
민족(民族)	민족	People, ethnic group
혼혈종(混血種)	혼혈종	Mixed race/blood
후란만	플란데런	Flemish (transcription)
바론	왈롱	Walloon (transcription)
구교(舊敎)	구교	Old Teaching (Catholicism)
세력(勢力)	세력	Influence, power
직후(直後)	직후	Immediately after
볼래야 볼 수 없도록	보려고 해야 볼 수 없도록	So that one couldn't see even if one tried
악감(惡感)	악감	Bad feeling, animosity
정략(政略)	정략	Political strategy/maneuvering
우편(郵便)	우편	Postal service
관리(管理)할 뿐으로	관리할 뿐으로	Only managing
제반사(諸般事)를	제반사를	All various matters
맡겨서	맡겨서	Entrusting
구속(拘束)을	구속을	Restraint, restriction
심지어(甚至於)	심지어	Even, what is worse
병정(兵丁)일지라도	병정일지라도	Even if a soldier
압박(壓迫)	압박	Oppression, pressure
심합디다	심합니다	Is severe (older polite ending -ㅂ디다)
진격(進擊)해서도	진격해서도	Even when advancing/attacking
점잖게	점잖게	Politely, gentlemanly
엄숙(嚴肅)하게	엄숙하게	Solemnly
좌우(左右)에는	좌우에는	On the left and right (both sides)
구경꾼	구경꾼	Onlooker, spectator
느러서고	늘어서고	Lining up and (older spelling)
드문드문	드문드문	Sporadically, sparsely
끼여서서	끼어서서	Standing mixed in among (older spelling)
이채(異彩)	이채	Peculiar sight, highlight
꼴불견	꼴불견	Unsightliness, eyesore
실지회복(失地恢復)	실지회복	Recovery of lost territory
보복(報復)으로	보복으로	As revenge/retaliation
등화관제(燈火管制)	등화관제	Blackout restrictions
캉캄해요	깜깜해요	Is pitch black (colloquial/older form)
짖거리고	지껄이고	Chattering, babbling
부디치지 않도록	부딪히지 않도록	So as not to bump into (older spelling)
야광석(夜光石)	야광석	Phosphorescent stone/material
반작이기	반짝이기	Because it glimmers/sparkles (older spelling)
핸드빽	핸드백	Handbag (loan word)
빼앗아	빼앗아	Snatching, stealing
조사(調査)해서	조사해서	Investigating
사형(死刑)에 처(處)해버렸습니다	사형에 처해버렸습니다	Was sentenced to death
엄(嚴)하드군요	엄하더군요	It was strict (older ending)
시시한	시시한	Petty, trivial
절취범(竊取犯)	절취범	Thief, burglar
규율(規律)	규율	Discipline, regulations
통제(統制)	통제	Control
될 리(理)가 없을	될 리가 없을	There is no reason it wouldn't be done
반면(反面)에	반면에	On the other hand
오락(娛樂)	오락	Entertainment
해방주의(解放主義)	해방주의	Liberalism, policy of liberalization
제한(制限)한 것을	제한한 것을	Having restricted
잘못으로	잘못으로	As a mistake
초만원(超滿員)	초만원	Overcrowded, packed beyond capacity
성황(盛況)입니다	성황입니다	It is thriving/prosperous
물가(物價)	물가	Prices (of goods)
배급(配給)하고	배급하고	Rationing, distributing
밀가루	밀가루	Flour
절부제(切符制)	절부제	Coupon/ticket system
전표(傳票)	전표	Voucher, coupon, slip
내어보인다	내어보인다	Takes out and shows
문화시설(文化施設)	문화시설	Cultural facilities
개전 전(開戰 前)	개전 전	Before the war started
진열실(陳列室)	진열실	Exhibition room
궷속	궤짝 속	Inside a chest/crate (older form/dialect?)
운반(運搬)하려던	운반하려던	Intended to transport
진열(陳列)은	진열은	Display, exhibition


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제12권 제10호
발행일	1940년 12월 01일
기사제목	伯林, 巴里, 白耳義의 戰火 속에서 최근 귀국한 兩氏의 報告記
필자	裵雲成 金載元 鄭寅燮 金東煥, 崔貞熙, 朴啓周
기사형태	대담·좌담

伯林, 巴里, 白耳義의 戰火 속에서 최근 귀국한 兩氏의 報告記
						裵雲成 金載元 鄭寅燮 金東煥, 崔貞熙, 朴啓周
근일 入京한 희귀한 두 손님, 한 분은 伯林파 巴里에 19년을 체재하다가 巴里함락의 바로 전날밤 九死一生으로 탈출한 歐羅巴 畵壇의 明星인 裵雲成화백, 또 한 분은 역시 白耳義와 伯林등지에 9개년을 체재하다가 戰火가 신변에 파급하자 危難을 피하여 급거 귀국한 白耳義 겐츠대학연구실의 고고학계 權威 金載元씨를 迎하여, 4,5년전 구미 각국을 시찰하고 돌아온 延專 교수 鄭寅燮씨까지 함께 鼎座하여, 가장 생생한 전쟁 중의 구라파 소식을 듣기로 하였습니다. 이것이 가장 숨김없고, 대담하고 生新한 기록이 될 것임을 자신합니다.＜102＞

伯林美術學校 卒業
巴里사론會員及
獨逸文化院會員          裵雲成

獨逸뮨헨大學卒業
白耳義겐츠大學
東洋學硏究室員          金載元

延禧專門學校 敎授       鄭寅燮

本社側    金東煥, 崔貞熙,
朴啓周
10월 20일 於京城金千代會館

巴里탈출과 마지노線
金東煥 - 獨軍이 巴里를 공습하던 당시의 광경과, 戰禍의 巴里에서 탈출하시던 일을 우선 들려주십시오.

裵雲成 - 獨軍이 巴里를 함락하기를 지난 6월 13일이었는데, 제가 巴里를 탈출하기는 6월 11일이었으니 함락되기 하루 전입니다. 그때까지 저는 巴里리·살게街 38번지에 있었으며, 6월 5,6일경 저는 집에서 점심을 먹고 있는데 갑자기 싸이렌이 울리기에 밖을 내어다 보았으나 아무 것도 보이지 않아요.
그리자 비행기의 폭음이 들리고 高射砲를 터지는 소리가 들려요. 몇 시간 뒤에 알고 보니 巴里 교외에 있는 「레-노」자동차공장을 폭격했다고 전하나 그날 저녁 號外에 明日부터 일을 계속한다고 했으므로 그리 손해를 당한 것 같지는 않어요. 그리고 獨機가 국경지방이나＜103＞ 기타 다른 지방에 내습할 때는 巴里에서는 싸이렌을 울리지 않어요. 맨 처음 한번만 싸이렌을 울리고는, 그것이 얼마나 국민에게 공포를 주며, 따라서 업무에 얼마나 손해를 많이 끼치게 된다는 것을 알기 때문이었습니다. 巴里市民 역시 덤벼지 않고 침착하더니 白耳義와 和蘭이 獨軍의 진격 앞에 굴하고, 獨軍의 기계화부대가 巴里 교외에 60킬로 지점에 까지 진격하여 왔다는 報가 한번 傳하자, 시내는 대혼잡을 이루고 停車場은 피난민이 홍수같이 밀려서 그야말로 修羅場化 되었지요. 피난민을 태운 뻐스와 택시는 길 우에 범람하였고, 지하철도는 防空壕로 사용되었었습니다. 그러나 불란서 정부는 「最後까지 싸운다」고 宣言하기 때문에, 그리고, 米國이 參戰하고 英國의 적극적 후원을 믿고 있었기 때문에 그다지 불안을 느끼지 않었으나, 결국 伊太利가 參戰하고 米國의 태도가 애매하기 때문에 파리의 공포는 절정에 이르다싶이 되었어요. 그래서 저도 일본대사관의 勸告에 의해 6월11일, 의복 몇 벌과 10여년 전에 獨逸에 있을 때 그린 어머니의 초상화 한 점만을 걸머지고 불이야 불이야 巴里를 탈출하여 두루로 향했습니다. 두루로 가는 路傍에 있는 유명한 샤를레교회당 부근에 이르렀을 때와, 두루에서 보루도로 가는 도중, 두 차레나 공습을 받었으나 天幸히 무사했었습니다. 그래서 보르도에서 배를 타지 못하고 라스랠에서 「하루나마루」를 타게 됐 는데 동행자는 테크랑으로 유명한 濱中勝, 문예가 小松淸, 성악가 牧嗣夫婦, 伊奈村 等 諸씨였고, 저는 巴里에다가 수채화와 油畵 1백7십점을 두고 온 것이 유감입니다.

鄭寅燮 - 다시 들어가실 생각은 없으십니까.

裵雲成 - 웨요. 獨英間의 전쟁도 끝나서 巴里가 아주 평온해지면, 제 집도 巴里에 있고, 그 他 기구 물건, 그림 등을 전부 그대로 두고 왔으니까 가려고 합니다.

金東煥 - 김선생은 白耳義를 어느날 탈출하셨던가요?

金載元 - 지난 5월 4일이었습니다. 저 역시 일본대사관의 권고로 안또와푸를 탈출하게 되었으며, 白耳義를 탈출하여 독일로 갔다가 독일에서 떠나기는 5월 14일이었습니다.

金東煥 - 今次 獨佛戰에 마지노線이 그렇게 쉽게 함락되도록 설비가 불충분했던가요?
裵雲成 - 웨, 그럴 리가 있나요. 금번 獨軍이 마지노本線은 함락시키지 못했고, 저, 和蘭편에 있는 連線의 일부를 파괴했는데, 佛軍이 퇴각하면서 거기에 있는 교량을 웨 파괴하고 퇴거하지 않었을까가 큰 의문 중의＜104＞ 하나입니다. 일부의 말을 들어서는, 그때 퇴각 중의 佛軍의 일부가 獨軍에게 매수되었다는 설도 있었으나 그것은 군사비밀이니 알 바 없고, 어쨋던 교량을 파괴하지 않었다는 것은 佛軍側에 있어서는 크나큰 致命傷의 하나요, 獨軍側에 있어서는 크나큰 기적이었습니다. 하여간 그 교Ÿ‰을 파괴했으면 獨軍이 佛國 內로 진격하기가 매우 곤란했을 것이며, 마지노本線을 獨軍이 돌파하자면 적어도 백만 명이라는 군병을 희생하지 않고는 지극히 돌파할 수 없었을 것입니다. 그러므로 獨軍이 백만 명이라는 거대한 수효를 잃고 능히 英佛을 이겨낼 수 있을까가 한 의문이며, 이 점에 있어서는 佛軍 역시 獨逸의 지크리프트線을 돌파하자면 백만 명이라는 생명을 없애야 하는데, 제1차 대전에서 그렇게 많은 생명을 잃어서 남자보다 여자가 더 많은 이 나라가 백만 명을 죽이고도 지크리프트선을 돌파하겠느냐하면 그렇지를 못 할 것입니다. 그랬기 때문에 佛軍은 지크리프트선을 돌파하기를 단념했고, 또 獨軍이 백만명을 죽이면서까지 마지노선을 돌파하려고 하지 않으리라는 점에서 佛國은 英國과 결탁하고 海上封鎖를 하여서 獨逸을 경제적으로 말려 죽이려던 것이었습니다.

在歐朝鮮人近况
金東煥-現在 歐羅巴에서 留學하고 있는 朝鮮人學生이나, 또는 其他 社會的으로 活動하고 있는 朝鮮人이 얼마나 됩니까.
裵雲成-巴里에는 朝鮮同胞가 10여명 있었으나, 家庭을 이루고 있는 이는 不過 3, 4명밖에 안됩니다. 張吉龍씨는 巴里大學을 卒業하자 곧 巴里에 있는 滿鐵事務所에 就職하여 일을 보며, 其外 尹乙洙, 金鳳洙, 金俊燁, 劉在成, 李用宰 諸氏가 있었습‹ˆ다. 金鳳洙씨는 獨逸에 있을 때 대학에서 라디오에 관한 것을 專攻하고 巴里로 와서 역시 대학에서 硏究하던 분인데, 今番 獨佛戰爭이 勃發되자 자기 집에 라디오 안떼나 등을 自手로 架設했던 것이 佛軍의 嫌疑를 받게 되어, 더욱이 獨逸서 왔다는 것 등 諸條件으로 그만 獨逸스파이로 佛軍에게 체포 되여서 뭇척 고생을 받는다고 하드군요.
金載元-얼마 전에 總督府 外事課 사람을 통해서 金鳳洙씨가 無事히 釋放되었다는 消息을 들었습니다. 한 2개월간이나 取調를 받었다구 하드군요.
裵雲成-그리고 尹乙洙씨라는 분도 역시 巴里大學을 나와 哲學博士의 學位를 얻은 분으로 巴里學會에서 譯文賞을 획득했고, 巴里에 있는 日佛協會에서까지 賞을 탄 분입니다. 그리고 그의 저서면 무엇이든지 著名한 出版社에서 出版해 주게끔 유명해젔으며, 著書 역시 잘 팔리는 모양이며, 내가 巴里를 脫出할 때 尹氏는 마침 伊太利에 잠시 가서 발티칸宮에서 硏究하던 중인데, 伊太利政府가 佛蘭西에 대하여 宣戰市告를 하게 되자 그만 佛國으로 오지 못하게 되었지요. 아마 지금은 兩國間 休戰條約이 성립됐으니까 다시 巴里로 왔을 것입니다.
金載元-제가 있던 白耳義에는 朝鮮同胞가 한 명도 없었고 和蘭나라에도 역시 한 명도 없었습니다. 그래서 나만 혼자 있거니 하고 생각했더니 今次 獨逸軍이 白耳義 內로 진격을 開始하여 着着 함락하게 되자 日本大使錧의 勸告로 나도 피난하게 될 때 白耳義國에 나 외에도 朝鮮人이 한 명 있는 것을 의외에 알었습니다. 직접 만나보지는 못했으나 가톨릭系의 신부나, 혹은 그 계통의 연구차로 와 있는 분인가 봐요.
鄭寅燮-제가 巴里에 갔을 때, 그 왜 豆腐장사를 해서 着實히 돈을 모은 이가 있다고 하둔데 그분의 이름이 무엡니까.
裵雲成-安鳳雲이라는 분인데 豆腐장사로 成功했지요. 그리고 쇗타레에 朝鮮女子 두 명이 와서 있다는데 만나보지 못했어요. 그 역시 가톨릭 修女學校에서 留學하는 모양이드군요.
鄭寅燮-伊太利에도 朝鮮女子 한 명이 발티칸宮 修女院에 있다는 말을 들었는데, 裵선생은 만나뵙지 못했나요?
裵雲成-네, 아직 못 뵈었어요. 伊太利에는 朝鮮人이 세 명이 있다고 합디다. 그런데 鄭선생이 英國에 갔을 때는 英國에 朝鮮人이 얼마나 있습디까.
鄭寅燮-英國에는 艦長으로 盛名을 날리고 있는 甲씨를 비롯하여 몇 명의 留學生과, 그 다음은 主로 勞働者가 많은 편이드군요.
金東煥-伯林에는 朝鮮人이 얼마나＜106＞ 있나요?
金載元-6, 7명 됩니다. 大槪가 留學生들이지요.

歐州人의 性格과 長點
金東煥-朝鮮人으로 歐羅巴人에게서 배울 點이란 어떠한 것일까요? 具體的인 말씀을 한다면, 獨逸人의 性格 중에서는 어떠한 점을 배워야 하며, 佛蘭西人에게서는 取할 점이 어떠한 것인지요?
裵雲成-저는 獨逸에서도 相當히 있었기 때문에 독일인을 많이 대했었는데, 무엇보다도 獨逸人은 爲政者나 혹은 主權者와 서로 意見이 對立되어서 설혹 불만이 있다손 치더라도 自己의 직무에 忠誠을 다하는 점은 實로 아름다운 성품이라고 보았어요. 우리 朝鮮人같애서는 萬一 主權者나 혹은 爲政者와 意見이 相違되고, 自己의 意思를 조금도 通할 수 없고, 따라서 自己의 理想대로 무엇을 실현시키기가 어렵다고 하면, 壓世的인 態度를 취하거나, 그렇지않으면 報復으로 일을 잘 보아주지 않거나, 甚한 경우에는 자포자기적인 態度를 취하리라는 것이 우리 朝鮮人된 性格의 한 缺陷이 아닐까 생각하는데, 獨逸人은 絶對로 그렇질 않어요. 상부인의 취하는 태도에 불만을 가졌을지라도 上部人에게 대한 自己의 직무에만은 實로 忠誠스러워요. 이를테면 그들은 일하기 위해서 사는 사람들이예요. 還言하면 國家에 대한 좋은 服從者라고도 하겠지요.＜107＞
金載元-지금 말씀한 裵선생의 말씀과 같이 獨逸國民은 일하기 위해서 사는 사람이라는 것은 事實입니다. 그들은 꾀-테의 정신에 支配받는, 말하자면 「파우스트」의 정신과 性格에 발마춰 나아가는 좋은 伴侶들이지요. 繼續하는 思索, 繼續하는 행동, 繼續하는 힘, 이리하여 그들은 파우스트와 같이 생각을 그치지 않고 진리를 探求하며, 행동을 그치지 않고 일을 하는 사람들입니다. 이러한 점을 보아서 제3者는, 그들을 가르쳐 批判이 없는 민족이라거니, 혹은 國家에 대한 무조건의 服從者라고 評하는 사람이 있나봅디다마는, 그것은 絶對로 그렇지를 않습니다. 웨 그런고 하니 나치스 政權이 성립되기 前까지도 獨逸에 政黨이 32개나 있었다는 것이 이를 증명하며, 그들의 비판력도 다른 민족에 比해서 數倍나 많습니다. 獨逸人이 열사람만 보이면 열두 가지의 意見이 나타난다는 격언같은 말이 있으며, 事實 또한 그래요. 그러던 것이 히틀러라는 좋은 統治者로 因하여 意見對立이 많던 이 민족도 擧國一致의 團結力을 가지고 國家全體主義에서 좋은 일꾼이 되어 있지요.
金東煥-이 獨逸民族에 比해서 佛蘭西민족은 어떻습니까.
裵雲成-佛蘭西民族은 역시 樂을 좋아하고 美를 즐기는 민족이지만, 一般이 그들을 가르쳐 논평하는 바, 卽 華麗한 것을 즐기고, 家庭에 趣味가 없으며, 경박하고, 사치와 허영에 사는 민족이라고 斷案을 내리는 것은 좀 인식 부족이 아닐까 생각합니다. 그들은 예술적인 입장에서 보는 美의 表現, 美의 鑑賞, 美의 調和에 大端히 착안하기 때문에 美의 調和를 完全히 표현하므로써 남을 즐겁게 하고 自己 역시 즐거워 합니다. 같은 화장에 있어서도 허영심에서 하는 化粧이 있고, 美의 調和와 표현과 鑑賞을 위해서 하는 화장이었으니, 불란서인의 化粧은 普遍的으로 後者에 屬하는 것이라고 생각합니다. 그러므로 그들은 비록 검소한 衣服일지라도 色과 線에 如間 着念하지 않으며, 그것이 허영심이나 사치심에서 發해진 것이 아니라는 것은, 歐羅巴人 中에서 佛蘭西人처럼 家庭살림에 經濟하는 민족도 적을 것이며, 규모가 있고, 따라서 인색하다는 소리까지 듣습니다. 그뿐만 아니라 佛蘭西女人은 한번 결혼하게 되면 家庭에 아주 들어백히리만치 社交界에 잘 나타나지 않는 민족입니다. 이 점에 있어서는 마치 朝鮮人 主婦와 같다고 해도 過言이 아닐 것입니다. 그리고 佛蘭西人은 大端히 女子를 떠바뜨는 줄로만 생각하지만 아직까지도 女子에게 參政權이 없습니다.＜103＞
金載元-제 생각엔 전혀 그런 것 같지도 않어 보여요. 역시 佛蘭西人은 華麗와 사치를 즐기는 민족같애요. 그것은 巴里의 어떤 洞里에 가보면 그 不潔한 것이라든지, 壁이 떨어지고, 그 不秩序한 것을 보면 美의 표현과 鑑만을 즐겨서 華麗를 꾸미는 사람들이라고는 볼 수 없어요. 萬一 美의 표현을 위한다면 웨 自己 몸만 꾸밀 줄 알고, 自己 집이나 自己 處所를 그렇게 내여버려 둘까요?
鄭寅燮-그것은 그렇지 않다고 생각합니다. 美를 즐기고 美를 바로 본다는 예술가들이 大體로 그 몸을 되는 대로 건사하고, 또는 그들의 실내를 엿보면 그 整頓되지 못한 風景이란 이로 말할 수 없는 形便이지요. 그와 마찬가지가 아닐까요. 그리고 제 생각엔 이래요. 佛蘭西에는 極端의 사치자가 있는 反面 極端의 검소자가 있는 줄로 봅니다. 佛蘭西에 가톨릭敎가 많이 普及돼 있어서 도덕적인 修養을 하고 있는 사람이 있는 同時에 보수적인 인민이 또한 있어서 요컨대 再極端의 人이 사는 곳이 아닐까 생각합니다.

朝鮮人 術術家의 活動
金東煥-조선인 예술가로서 歐羅巴에서 이름을 떨치던 분으로 누구누굽니까. 그리고 崔承喜씨의 인기는 어떠했습니까.
裵雲成- 崔承喜씨는 금번 歐羅巴에서 성공했다고 볼 것입니다. 夫君되는 安漠씨가 좋은 마네쟈로 社交도 능난하고 뱃심도 좋아서, 많은 도음이 된 것도 있으려니와 崔여사 역시 풍부하고 線이 좋은 육체로 이국적이요 고전적인 舞踊까지 해서 巴里에서도 상당한 호평을 博했었습니다. 극장도 일류 극장에서 했고, 비평가들도 紙上에 상당히 호평했드군요.
金載元-白耳義에서도 매우 호평이였었요. 그러나 崔여사가 돈을 벌어 가지고 나오도록까지 金錢의 성공은 없으리라고 짐작합니다. 그것은, 인기를 끌고 盛名하려면 호텔도 일류호텔에 留宿해야 하고, 交際, 기타 費用을 전부 고급으로 해야, 내려다 보지 않을테니까 그러한데 돈이 많이 消毫되었을 것입니다. 그러니 돈을 벌기야 물론 많이 벌었을테지만 가지고 돌아오도록까지의 성공은 없으리라는 것입니다. 하여간 舞踊으로나 인기로나 돈으로나 모두 성공은 했지요.
裵雲成-일류 오페라 劇場主와 계약하고 했으니 그의 인기를 可히 짐작하실＜109＞ 것이며, 씨즌이 나뻣기 때문에, 卽 가을로 모두 계약했었는데 가을에 전쟁이 勃發되어 그만 중지된 것이 매우 遺憾돼요. 그리고 趙澤元씨도 巴里에 와서 호평을 받었습니다. 한번은 批評家들만 모인데서 했고, 한번은 巴里日本大使館의 好意로 大使館의 周旋으로 했고, 그 다음 일반 公演을 했는데 評이 좋았어요. 그 다음, 지금 항가리國에 가있는 安益泰씨가 年前에 獨逸에서 管絃樂團의 컨덕터-로 지휘했는데, 참 잘 하드군요. 제가 朝鮮에 온지가 며칠 안되고, 따라서 朝鮮人의 音樂指揮者를 보지 못했으니 斷然 安씨가 제일이라는 말을 할 수가 없으나, 제가 이때까지 본 것으로는 그만한 훌륭한 指揮者가 없었습니다. 어쨋든, 獨逸과 같은 큰 나라의 大管絃樂團을 指揮하게까지 되었으니 그의 솜씨가 如間 아니라는 것을 짐작하실 것이 ****** 東京帝大를 졸업하고 伯林國立舞踊大學을 졸업한 후 歐羅巴에서 24회의 공연을 하여 호평을 博한 朴永仁씨라는 舞踊家가 있어서 상당히 盛名을 날리고 있지요. 그는 현재 洪牙利王室舞踊會에도 入籍해 있습니다.
金東煥-이렇게 물으면 失禮일지 모르나 裵선생께서는 歐羅巴에서 일류화가로 著名하시다는데, 선생의 그림에 對한 歐洲人의 評이나, 또는 현재 어떠한 지위에 계신지요?
裵雲成-獨逸에 있을 때는 文化院의 회원으로 있었고, 巴里에서는 巴里살롱의 회원으로 있었습니다. 그리고 제 그림에 對해서는, 美術省이라고 번역해야 좋을지, 美術局이라고 번역해야 좋을지, 어쨋든 그러한 美術局이 佛蘭西정부에 있는데, 그곳의 長官이 제 그림을 「東西洋의 調和를 잘 시킨 그림이라」고 격찬해 주었습니다. 이렇게 말하고 보니 自畵自讚하는 感이 없지 않습니다마는, 獨逸에 있을 때에도 美術批評家들의 호평을 받었었습니다.
金東煥-실례입니다마는 出身校는 어느 학교 입니까.
裵雲成-獨逸伯林美術學校입니다.
金東煥-巴里에 계실 때 개인展覽會는 몇 번이나 하셨나요? 그리고 출품한 그림이 몇 點이었습니가?
裵雲成-個人展은 한번 했는데, 그때 油畵가 60여점, 水彩畵가 100여점이었습니다. 그리고 매년 春秋로 著名한 美術家를 網羅하여 巴里에서 개최되는 큰 美術展覽會가 있는데 그 展覽會에 저도 매년 春秋로 제 그림을 출품합니다. 제 그림은 主로 取材를 東洋的인 것에서 하고, 방식과 色은 西洋的인 것으로 해왔습니다.
金東煥-巴里에서 藤田畵伯의 인기는 어떠했습니까.＜110＞
裵雲成-상당히 높았지요. 그의 그림이라면 으레이 高價로 팔렸고, 畵商들도 그의 그림은 안심하고 얼마든지 購入했지요. 無論, 이렇게 인기가 높은 뒤에는 評論家들에게 賄物을 먹이고, 또는 畵商들은 자기들의 이윤을 爲해서 宣傳하는 惡弊가 或 있을 수도 있는 일이나 어쨋던 藤田씨의 그림은 마지막에 막다른 골목에 이르렀고, 상품화되어서 그만 巴里를 가만히 탈출해 逃亡하고 말었습니다. 逃亡한 뒤에 안 일이지만, 도망한 원인은 빗을 많이 지고, 半밀리온이라는 세금을 지불하지 못했기 때문에 그랬다고 하며, 지금은 全혀 인기가 푹 떨어젔고, 그의 그림을 많이 사두었던 畵商들은 모두 상당한 손해를 보았다해요.
鄭寅燮-피카소의 그림은 어때요? 우리 보기엔 一種 變態的인 그 무엇도 보입데다마는, 如何間 그림이 훌륭해 보여요.
裵雲成-피카소는 세계가 認定하는 화가요, 따라서 그만침 훌륭하고 인기가 높습니다. 毋論, 그는 正統派에 屬하는 사람이지만 때때로 그의 그림에는 變態的인, 즉 슈르레아리즘인 경향이 있지요. 그것은 예술가로서 無我의 境地에 이르렀을 때, 즉 그림을 한창 그리다가 무의식상태에 이르러 그만 그때의 분위기와 自己感情에 陶醉되다싶이 되어 붓대가 되는대로 흘러가는데, 이를 가르쳐 변태적이요, 或은 슈르레아리즘이라 一般이 부르는 모양이지요. 우리는 그것을 同情합니다.
金東煥-金선생은 主로 考古學을 硏究하셨다지요?
金載元-네, 저는 예술과는 등지다싶이 된 工夫를 했습니다.
金東煥-失禮지만 출신교는 어는 學校인가요?
金載元-獨逸에서 뮨헨대학을 마치고, 白耳義 안토와푸의 겐츠大學 東洋學硏究室에서 今春까지 硏究하다가 그만 戰火로 나오고 말었지요.
金東煥-그곳 계실 때 朝鮮에 關한 문헌을 많이 발표했습니까.
金載元-伯林에 있을 때 伯林博物館雜誌에 종종 발표했습니다.

「巴里祭」와 朝鮮名士와의 對面記
金東煥-佛蘭西의 有名한 巴里祭이야기와, 歐洲에서 朝鮮人 名士 諸씨를 만나셨던 이야기를 들려주십시오.
裵雲成-巴里祭라고 하는 것은 佛蘭西革命日을 記念하는 祝祭日로,＜111＞ 이 날은 全國民이 매우 豪華롭게 놉니다.
鄭寅燮-하긴, 제가 독일 와이말에 갔었을 때로 市記念이라고 전시민이 참 호화롭게 눌드군요. 밤에 五色이 찬란한 電光 밑에서 춤추고 술 마시고, 야단법석하는 그 광경은 實로 형용할 수 없을 地境입니다. 巴里祭때도 그와 마찬가지겠지요?
裵雲成-네, 춤추고 참 즐겁게 놀아요.
金東煥-歐羅巴에서 朝鮮名士로는 누구누구를 相面하셨나요?
裵雲成-崔麟씨를 巴里에서 만나 뵈었고, 羅惠錫씨 역시 巴里에서 만나뵈었습니다. 그리고 許憲씨와 金性洙씨는 伯林에서 만났었습니다. 그 다음 朴錫胤씨를 만나기도 역시 巴里에서 였는데, 그때가 波蘭이 獨軍에서 敗亡한 뒤었습니다.
金載元-전, 朴錫胤씨를 白耳義의 안또아푸에서 만나뵈였고, 金性洙씨는 뮨헨에서 相面했었습니다.

戰爭前後의 歐羅巴
金東煥-今次 歐洲大戰이 勃發되기 전에 歐洲의 各國은 將次 戰爭이 일 것을 豫想했는지, 또는 그에 대한 준비가 언제부터 始作되었습니까.
裵雲成-政治의 문외한인 우리로서 그러한데 關해서 仔細히 알배는 없지만, 佛蘭西라는 나라는 元來 戰爭을 싫여하는 나랍니다. 그랬기 때문에 再昨年 四頭會議가 있기 전까지는 전쟁준비가 없었다고 해도 過言이 아닐만한 現像에 있었을 것입니다. 그리자 獨逸이 첵코에 손을 대자, 佛蘭西는 그제야 눈을 번쩍 뜨고, 所謂 四頭會議을 열었는데 이 會議의 結果 如何에 의해서 獨佛間에 戰爭이 勃發되리라고 佛軍側에서도 발표했기 떄문에 會議進行 中에 모두 巴里시민까지 피난하기 始作했습니다. 나도 그때 짐을 다 꾸려놓고 피난하기 위해 차표까지 다 삿다가 無事하게 되어 그대로 巴里에 눌러있었는데, 그때부터 佛國政府는 獨逸과의 전쟁은 불가피의 事實로 不遠에 오리라는 것을 예측하고 전쟁준비에 着手했지요. 그때까지도 佛國에는 防空壕라는 것이 없었고, 가스 마스크가 겨우 65만개였으니 實로 한심했지요.
金東煥-白耳義에 關해서 말씀해 주십시오.
金載元-白耳義는 1830년에 독립한 國家로 지금으로부터 100년이라는 짧은 歷史를 가지고 있습니다. 이 나라에는 국어도 없으며＜112＞ 북부에서는 獨逸말, 남부에서는 佛蘭西말을 使用하는데, 국왕도 議會때나 기타 演說할 때 처음엔 獨逸말을 하고, 다음은 그 말을 다시 佛蘭西말로 번역해서 한가지 말을 두 번씩 演說하지요. 그리고 第1次 歐洲大戰 前까지는 佛勢力이 이 나라를 風靡했었습니다. 민족도 역시 混血種으로 후란만系統이 6割, 佛系의 바론이 4割입니다. 그리고 舊敎(가토릭敎)가 많은 勢力을 잡고 있지요. 白耳義가 最初 폭격을 當하기는 지난 5월 초 5일이었는데, 今次 戰爭에 獨軍이 白耳義를 함락한 직후 白耳義國內에서는 獨軍을 볼래야 한 명도 볼 수 없도록 거리에 獨軍이 나다니지 않어요. 이것은 아마 白耳義국민에게 惡感을 주지 않으려는 獨側의 政略인가봐요. 郵便과 汽車만 獨軍이 管理할 뿐으로, 其外의 諸般事를 모두 白耳義人에게 맡겨서 조금도 구속을 주지 않습데다. 그리고 심지어 白耳義國內의 물건은 獨逸兵丁일지라는 獨逸나라로 못 가져가게 해요. 그러나 그 반대로 波蘭에 對해서는 獨逸의 압박이 매우 심합디다.
裵雲成-역시 獨軍이 佛蘭西에 進擊해서도 아주 행동을 점잖게 取하며, 機械化部隊가 巴里에 入城할 때도 엄숙하게 했는데, 길 좌우에는 佛蘭西人 求景꾼이 쭈욱 느러서고, 그 中에는 軍服을 그대로 입은 佛軍이 드문드문 끼여서서 求景하는 것도 異彩라면 異彩요 꼴불견이라면 꼴불견이였지요. (一同笑)
金東煥-獨逸은 어떠했습니까.
金載元-獨逸은 失地恢復과 第1次 大戰의 報復으로 미리부터 전쟁준비가 있었을 것이고, 지금고 늘 밤이면 伯林市街에도 燈火管制를 하여서 거리가 아주 캉캄해요. 그래도 거리거리에는 수많은 남녀가 제각금 짖거리고 다니며, 캉캄한 속에서도 서로 부디치지 않도록 여자들은 가슴에 단추같이 생긴 야광석을 달고 단여서 그것이 반작이기 때문에 남녀가 부디치는 일은 없어요. 그런데 한번은 어떤 도적이 밤에 어떤 여자의 핸드빽을 빼아서 가지고 달아난 것을 그 뒤 곧 調査해서 체포했는데 死刑에 處해버렸습니다. 참 嚴하드군요. 도적놈 中에서도 시시한 핸드빽 절취범을 死刑에 處하니, 이 嚴한 규율 밑에서 모든 통제가 잘 되지 않을 理가 없을 것이외다.
그리고, 그 反面에 映畵나 其他 娛樂은 아주 解放主義입니다. 이것은 아마 第1次大戰 時에 너무 국민에게 통제를 심하게 해서 戰線에서 兵士가 죽는 일편, 국내 국민에게까지 감정적인 것을 制限한 것을 잘못으로 생각하고, 금번은 그런 것에는 解放主義를 써서＜113＞ 오페라나 극장이나 늘 초만원이며, 심지어 국경선에서 자동차로는 30분 걸리고 비행기로는 5분밖에 안 걸리는 國境地帶 와룻셀도루푸에서도 오페라座나 극장이 늘 滿員이 되도록 盛況입니다.
金東煥-물가는 어떠합니까.
裵雲成-고기는 한사람에게 일주일에 500그람을 배급하고, 빠다는 150그람, 그 외에 밀가루나 빵 등을 모두 切符制로 배급하지요. 이것이 바로 그 傳票외다.(裵씨와 金씨 두분이 各各 歐洲에서 가지고 돌아온 傳票를 내어보인다.)
金東煥-巴里공습때 文化施設같은 것을 가리지 않고 막 공습하든가요?
裵雲成-그렇질 않아요. 巴里시내에만 박물관이 30여개소가 되는데 다 無事했습니다.
金載元-제가 開戰 前인 작년에 巴里에 갔을 때는 古考學에 관한 硏究로 博物館 東洋品陳列室에 들어갔더니 하나두 없어요. 그래서 보기를 청했더니 궷속에서 내여보이는데 아까 裵선생이 말씀하신 재작년 四頭會義 때 전쟁이 일까바 모두 궷속에 넣어서 어데로 運搬하려던 것을 그때 일지 않어서 그대도 두었으나 오늘까지도 역시 陳列은 하지 않었다고 합디다.
金東煥-오랫동안 이렇게 生生한 材料를 가지신 말씀을 하여주셔서 感謝합니다. (끝)＜114＞
＜102-105＞