Magazine Title: 삼천리 제6권 제8호
Publication Date: 1934-08-01
Article Title: 世界一流 政治家·思想家 論評會 (Roundtable Discussion Reviewing World-Class Politicians and Thinkers)
Article Type: 대담·좌담 (Interview/Roundtable Discussion)

**世界一流 政治家·思想家 論評會 (Roundtable Discussion Reviewing World-Class Politicians and Thinkers)**

Attendees (By Age)

Hŏ Hŏn (許憲氏): Graduate of Meiji University Law School, former President of the Chosŏn Bar Association, Principal of Posŏng College, Acting President of the Dong-A Ilbo, President of the Sin'ganhoe. Recently returned from a world tour. Age 50.
Yŏ Unhyŏng (呂運亨氏): Graduate of Nanjing Jinling University, active overseas for many years, returned to Korea and currently President of the Chosŏn Chungang Ilbo. Age 49.
Kim Pyŏngno (金炳魯氏): Graduate of Meiji University Law School, former Professor at the Government Law College, President of the Chosŏn Bar Association, former Chairman of the Sin'ganhoe Central Executive Committee. Currently a lawyer. Age 48.
Kim Yaksu (金洛水氏): Studied at Nihon University, former executive of the Chŏnbuk P'unghoe, head of Taejungsa. Currently a writer. Age 43.
Kim Kyŏngjae (金璟載氏): Graduate of Suwŏn Higher School of Agriculture and Forestry, studied agriculture at Tokyo Imperial University, former executive of the Hwayohoe. Currently a writer. Age 35.
Kim Tonghwan (本社金東煥) of this company.
Publisher (本社): Then, let us begin the meeting now. Among you, there are those who have traveled various countries around the world and met many famous politicians and thinkers, and I believe there are also those who have studied these figures extensively through their writings. Please share unique perspectives that are not commonly found scattered in newspapers and magazines. First, our attention inevitably turns to the contemporary politicians and thinkers of China. Therefore, firstly, please speak about the figure of Chiang Kai-shek (蔣介石), the commander who currently holds both political power and military authority in one hand. <18>

Hŏ Hŏn: Perhaps Mr. Yŏ Unhyŏng knows Chinese figures well, not just Chiang Kai-shek, but also diplomats or financiers. Years ago, when the International Bar Association Conference was held in Beijing (北京), I met Dr. Yan Huiqing (顔蕙慶 博士), who attended as the Foreign Minister at that time, but otherwise, I only know about them through newspapers and magazines. Generally speaking, if we are looking for a politician who can be entrusted with the fate of China now, it would still likely be Chiang Kai-shek. When Sun Yat-sen (孫文) went to Moscow (모스꾸바) as a representative in 1912, Chiang also meticulously studied the organization of the Red Army (亦衛軍組織) and upon returning, immediately established the Whampoa Military Academy (黃浦軍官學校). He seems like a politician who always thinks about the future and looks ahead. Also, after the success of the Northern Expedition, he eliminated various warlords and, even if only formally, unified political power in the hands of the Nationalist Government (國民政府) for a time; his merits are many. If it weren't for Chiang, perhaps warlords like Wu Peifu (吳佩孚), Yan Xishan (閻錫山), Cao Kun (曺곤), Feng Yuxiang (馮玉祥) would still be carving up the North and South, and it might have become prey for division by the powers. And now, if not for Chiang Kai-shek, Mao Zedong's (毛澤東) Red Army (紅軍) would occupy the Yangtze River (長江) basin. If that happens, the allied forces of the powers would capture Nanjing (南京), and the old great nation would fall into the hands of joint international administration. In any case, Chiang Kai-shek's fate probably depends on whether he can successfully fend off this huge Red Army and resolve the Manchurian problem (滿洲問題) well.

Yŏ Unhyŏng: Regarding Chiang Kai-shek, I have relatively extensive experience and knowledge of his character and have had many dealings with him while in China, but due to deeply considered reasons, I will maintain absolute silence about Chiang Kai-shek for now. A politician more noteworthy than Chiang is Wang Ching-wei (汪兆銘). Not only does he control domestic administration, but he is also in charge of foreign affairs, so it's no exaggeration to say that political power is effectively in his hands. However, in my view, his character is not that of a great figure who will lead China tomorrow. Firstly, he has a habit of not sharing life and death with his comrades. <19>
Since 1926, whenever his plans failed, he abandoned his comrades and subordinates who had nowhere to turn and nonchalantly fled overseas. Because of this, Sun Fo's (孫科) efforts significantly increased. Activists who trusted Wang but were abandoned by him eventually ended up in Sun Fo's embrace. Therefore, it could be said that Sun Fo currently holds more real power than Wang Ching-wei (王精衛). Anyway, the most crucial condition in a revolutionary movement is to share life and death with comrades, but Wang abandons comrades too easily. Therefore, he is currently in a state of isolation. The influence of the former Reorganization Clique (改粗派) has also lost its form now.

Kim Kyŏngjae: However, generally speaking, it seems that in the current situation, political power in any country tends to be grasped by the middle faction. Isn't Chiang Kai-shek precisely the middle faction? The characteristic of the middle faction is that they never clearly state their principles and policies, and whenever it suits them, they collaborate with the right wing to expel the left wing, or ally with the left wing to drive out the right wing. Thus, they always maintain political power within a gray zone. For example, didn't the centrist Chiang shake hands with the rightist Hu Hanmin (胡漢民) to first drive out Wang Ching-wei, and then ally with the leftist Wang to drive out Hu Hanmin? In Russia (露西亞), didn't the centrist Stalin ally with the rightist Bukharin to drive out Trotsky, and then later drive out Bukharin as well, now claiming to represent the interests of the Russian people? No matter how clever the masses may seem, they cannot quickly judge whether to support or reject complex national political and economic policies individually. Therefore, up to a certain point, that is, in the historical process, those with strong conspiratorial tendencies and superior organizational skills acquire political power, and ultimately, once acquired, they claim to have received the support of the masses in the end, making it easy for the middle faction to operate. Since Chiang Kai-shek holds military power, he succeeded in numerous coups d'état and won all domestic wars against warlords, so he is a triumphant man. However, what will he do about the power of the Red Army? One cannot help but say that Chiang's tomorrow is an unknown quantity. <20>
But setting aside my personal feelings, if the goal is to save China from its crisis, it seems better for Chiang Kai-shek to keep holding on like this.

Kim Yaksu: No, that's not right. Chiang Kai-shek's era is gradually receding. The time when a single individual becomes a hero to lead and command the masses has already passed. When were the masses ever behind Chiang Kai-shek? If there were, it was the Zhejiang (浙江) financial clique, his bourgeois supply base, and the comprador class (買辨階級) that doubly exploits China. I haven't heard that he ever represented the interests of workers, peasants, or students. There were numerous coups d'état and domestic wars, but besides maintaining and strengthening his own political power, did he succeed in abolishing even one unequal treaty for the people? On the contrary, didn't we witness the April 12th Incident (四,一二事件)? As the activity of the working masses centered in Shanghai (上海) increased, General Chiang, the representative of the commercial and industrial bourgeoisie, upon occupying Shanghai, immediately severed ties with the workers and destroyed their organizations. He is now exerting all his efforts to destroy class forces, but the awakened masses of China—especially the workers and student strata—abandoned Chiang long ago. Future leaders will only emerge from this rising stratum. Isn't this a time when compromising, centrist forces are declining worldwide? Isn't the talk of Fascism (팟쇼), Fascism evidence of this? Whether it's the Nazis or Mussolini, isn't it true that power either goes to the extreme right or into the hands of the emerging class—there are only these two paths? The problem no longer lies in the individual superiority or inferiority of Chiang Kai-shek's skill, talent, or wisdom.

Kim Pyŏngno: However, Chiang Kai-shek seems like someone who will live longer yet. Of course, the reach of the Kuomintang's (國民黨) government decrees only extends to a few provinces like Zhejiang and Jiangsu (江蘇). Manchuria (滿洲) has broken away, and Mongolia (蒙古), Xizang (西藏, Tibet), and Qinghai (靑海) are all in a process of disintegration. At such a time, if Chiang's powerful influence were to collapse, at best, the old warlords would re-emerge, leading to domestic war, and at worst, the Red Army would ride the momentum, sweep through China under its rule, and consequently, hand over the opportunity to the foreign powers even sooner. Chiang Kai-shek serves as China's breakwater. I hear <21> he is a strategist (兵略家). If he finds someone skilled in politics and they work together hand-in-hand, I believe he is capable of maintaining the status quo in China.

Publisher: We have generally understood about Chiang Kai-shek. Now, please tell us about other figures besides Chiang, such as Hu Hanmin, Wang Ching-wei, Huang Fu (黃孚), He Yingqin (何應欽), Song Ziwen (宋子文), Sun Fo, and other pro-Japanese, pro-American, pro-British figures.

Yŏ Unhyŏng: Song Ziwen is outstanding. He is bold, embraces comrades well, understands world politics, and although he resigned after being called the perennial finance minister, it seems that even Song, reputed as a brilliant financier at the time, couldn't manage China's finances. Firstly, with the establishment of the Beiping Political Affairs Committee, the Nanjing government had to take over the Northern miscellaneous armies, requiring a monthly expenditure of 3 million yuan. Additionally, 90 percent of the national revenue had to be allocated to repay domestic debts amounting to 1 billion yuan. Furthermore, the most important source of revenue (52 percent of total revenue), customs duties, drastically decreased due to famine, floods, and the separation of Mongolia and Xizang, leading to the bankruptcy of state finances. Although he was overthrown by the schemes of opponents, Song is the linchpin of the Zhejiang financial clique, his brother-in-law Kong Xiangxi (孔祥熙) is the president of the Central Bank, he is related to Chiang through marriage (男妹間), and he has the support of Britain and America, so there will surely be a day for his comeback. Sun Fo is the son of Sun Yat-sen (孫逸仙), shining due to his father's legacy. I don't know Huang Fu or He Yingqin well. Hu Hanmin, however, is one of the Kuomintang's foremost theorists, possessing integrity and incorruptibility, and striving to realize the Principle of People's Livelihood (民生主義), so someday he will surely stand at the forefront of the masses once again.

Kim Kyŏngjae: I generally think so too. Song Ziwen has good sisters. His brothers-in-law (妹父) include Sun Yat-sen, Chiang Kai-shek, and Kong Xiangxi – all advantageous. He could gain much just from his sisters' connections (누이德). Besides these, I believe there are other figures worth noting. These are Chen Lifu (陳立夫) and Chen Guofu (陳果夫), the actual leaders of the Blue Shirts Society (藍衣社). They are graduates of Moscow's Communist University of the Toilers of the East (모스꼬바 共大) and readily adopt the excellent strategies of the Communist Party, also borrowing many of its policies. The leadership of the Blue Shirts Society, being intelligent and skillful, seems likely to produce China's future successors. In reality, Fascism (팟쇼-) has a nature similar to the two sides of a coin with the Communist Party. If it flips this way, it's Fascism; if it flips that way, it becomes Soviet (쏘비엣-).

Kim Pyŏngno: In any case, it seems that today's significant figures in China are gathered around the Zhejiang financial clique. The day the Zhejiang financial clique falls, all the politicians currently claiming prominence will likely tumble. And Wang Ching-wei is a theoretical politician; <22> he gives the impression of still conducting politics from his desk. Huang Fu appears to be a man with bureaucratic skills for handling difficult national situations. He Yingqin seems like a rather simple military man, apparently not involved in practical politics and focusing entirely on military affairs. Overall, it seems that the pro-American faction has more substantial figures with means and skills compared to the pro-British or pro-Russian factions.

**Outlook on Figures in the Diplomatic World (外交界人物展望)**

Publisher: Please tell us about Wang Zhengting (王正廷), Gu Weijun (顧維均, Wellington Koo), Yan Huiqing (顏惠慶), Hu Weide (胡維德), Jiang Zuobin (蔣作賓), Chen Youren (陳友仁) in the diplomatic circle.

Yŏ Unhyŏng: Wang Chonghui (王寵惠) is a diplomat and scholar who observes East Asian issues well and is knowledgeable about Korean affairs. He served as President of the Legislative Yuan and is a renowned scholar well-versed in international law. And Wang Zhengting, a graduate of Columbia University in the United States, served as Vice Speaker of the Senate and made a name for himself as a diplomat at the Paris Peace Conference. He is extremely cool-headed and a man of reason who firmly asserts his arguments. I hear he has visited Korea as well. Both Wang Zhengting and Gu Weijun are talented in languages and quick-witted, always showing dynamic activity on the international stage as sharp, emerging figures.

Kim Kyŏngjae: Among the diplomats, Chen Youren (陳友仁), the former Deputy Foreign Minister of the Guangdong Government (廣東政府), attracts attention more than anyone. Coming from the left-wing camp, he attempted to forcibly recover the British concession in Hankou (漢國 租界) and was a bold diplomat who didn't take the privileges of the powers lightly. During the revolutionary diplomacy era of the Guangdong Government, if only he had strong national support and military preparation behind him, he was a man who could have decisively opened up a new phase. I read this in some magazine, but after organizing the Guangdong Government, Chen Youren immediately went to Japan. It's said that when he came to Japan, he secretly revealed the details of a secret pact that the Chiang Kai-shek government was trying to conclude with Britain, France, and America. Initially, it seems he said all this to campaign for support for the independence of the Guangdong Government. At that time, Chen Youren's secret information seems to have caused significant waves in the Far East political situation in various ways.

Hŏ Hŏn: As I mentioned earlier, the only Chinese diplomat I have met is Dr. Yan Huiqing. He has an imposing presence and speaks English well. People like Wang Zhengting and Gu Weijun are undoubtedly distinguished, but considering his experience and time on the international diplomatic stage, Dr. Yan is probably considered the foremost figure in China now. Also, when I went to Paris, I could have met Wang Zhengting shortly, but I missed the meeting by about five minutes. Generally, China has many brilliant diplomats, <23> but there are many instances where they are labeled as pro-Japanese, pro-American, or pro-Russian. However, because they are trying to save a nation currently in chaos like a tangled mess, they inevitably need weapon supplies and loans, so they might pretend to lean towards America or Britain. But in my view, they all seem to be diplomats with patriotic fervor. In fact, China is now in a situation where it cannot simply maintain friendly relations with only one country because the common interests of the powers are intricately intertwined.

Kim Pyŏngno: That may be so. There are unlikely to be any traitorous diplomats. And recently, the activities of Huang Fu, the diplomat dealing with Japan who holds sway over the North China political situation, have been significant. The recent resolution of the through-traffic issue and the North China ceasefire agreement were all achieved by his hands. I heard Huang Fu was active during the student movement in Beiping and also served as a minister in some cabinet! However, he gives the impression of being a talented man and a bureaucrat. In any case, the popular diplomats now, after Wang Zhengting, Chen Youren, and others have fallen from grace, are likely Yan Huiqing, Gu Weijun, and Guo Taiqi (郭泰琪).

Yŏ Unhyŏng: Yes, among them, I have met Guo Taiqi several times. In terms of language skills, he is several times better than Wang Zhengting or Gu Weijun. He is not a master at presenting diplomatic policy and engaging in combative debate before a large audience, but in gathering 5 or 6 people for impromptu Q&A sessions to resolve diplomatic issues, he has unparalleled talent. He is quick-witted and skilled in repartee (應口輒對的 口辨). He was quite active as a representative of the defeated side during the Shanghai Ceasefire Agreement. And Chen Youren is also a valuable figure. As an uncompromisingly upright diplomat who knew no compromise, if not for the treacherous and utterly reactionary coup d'état by Chiang Kai-shek at that time, China could have abolished many humiliating treaties and recovered many foreign concessions through Chen Youren's hands. It's unclear whether he has gone into exile in France or perhaps to Russia, but he is a talent worth bringing back someday. I was also personally close to Chen Youren.

**Figures of Soviet China (쏘비엣中國의人物들)**

Publisher: We have generally concluded the discussion on figures related to the Nationalist Government and the Kuomintang system. Now, please tell us about the Chairman and other key figures of Soviet China, which the whole world is watching, as well as important military strategists of the Red Army.

Yŏ Unhyŏng: I know Mao Zedong (毛澤東) well. He is currently in the capital Ruijin (首都端金), working intensely on political tasks as Chairman of the Central Government alongside Vice Chairman Zhang Guotao (張國濤). Externally, however, he appears thin, weak, and somewhat shabby, lacking an impressive presence. So, anyone unfamiliar with him is surprised to learn he is the Chairman. Also, unlike Hitler or Mussolini, he is not an orator who commands storms; <24> when he speaks, he does so quietly. He is like a village scholar (村夫子式). Yet, there is no one with a stronger will than this man. As the world knows, the Shanghai General Strike occurred in May 1925. Before this, the ruling Kuomintang was merely a coalition of the national bourgeoisie, but with the entry of the Communist Party, peasants and workers joined the Kuomintang ranks. As a result, the boycott movement was led with full national effort, and the anti-imperialist movement along the Yangtze River reached its peak. At this time, the bourgeoisie held the Western Hills Conference (西山會議), resolved to oppose class struggle and expel communists from the Kuomintang, leading to Chiang's infamous coup d'état. Consequently, Communist Party members were severely persecuted, and the communist movement suffered a blow. Looking at the situation then, the Western Hills faction including Zhang Ji (張繼), the Guangxi clique (廣西派) including Li Zongren (李宗仁) and Bai Chongxi (白崇禧), warlords like Yan Xishan (閻錫山) and Feng Yuxiang (馮玉祥), along with Chiang Kai-shek, Hu Hanmin, and the Reorganization Clique's Wang Ching-wei, all united under the Kuomintang banner. At that time, when the Communist Party's power was decimated, many defected, changed allegiance, or fled, it was Mao Zedong who gathered the ousted comrades and persistently advocated for the reconstruction of Soviet China. If not for him, the construction of the Soviet Republic would indeed be questionable. So now, among the eighteen provinces of the country, they govern over 10 provinces including Jiangxi (江西), Fujian (福建), Hubei (湖北), Shanxi (山西), ruling over 60 million people.

Kim Yaksu: That's right. Mao Zedong should be considered first. His contributions were immense. In any case, within the Soviet areas, there are abundant resources like coal in Jiangxi province, iron in Hubei province, as well as rice, cotton, and ramie (枯麻). Although new roads haven't been built everywhere, there are many rivers serving as transportation routes via waterways. With the organization of peasant armies and the growing strength of the Red Army, if only there were no military aid from the powers behind Chiang Kai-shek, the Red Army's capture of Nanjing would be no problem. The fact that over 600 representatives from various provinces gathered at the 1931 Congress gives an idea of their strength.

Kim Pyŏngno: The Red Army seems to have considerable weaponry too. I read in some book that they have 200,000 rifles (xx - likely rifles). They also reportedly have a fair number of airplanes and machine guns. Most of these were gifts brought by Central Army troops surrendering after fighting Chiang Kai-shek's forces, some are captured items, and some are supplied by xxx (likely 'Soviets' or 'Comintern'). The Red Army is said to be weak in flatland warfare but very strong in mountain warfare. Perhaps unknown to us, there seem to be many skilled military strategists. However, do the Red Army soldiers in the Soviet areas—mostly peasant soldiers—truly revere socialism? It seems more likely that they joined partly out of self-interest, as land becomes available automatically and agricultural products become their own upon entering the Soviet zone. The former warlords or provincial governors were, in fact, local tyrants (土豪). They were the largest landlords in their provinces. And the majority of the provincial population were tenant farmers (小作人) cultivating the governor's land. Perhaps everyone welcomes the Red Army, chanting "Red Army, Red Army," <25> because the warlords who inflicted suffering for years are gone. Therefore, there are still many doubts about how many trained soldiers there are and how many Soviet citizens would die for socialism.

**Thinkers like Hu Shih, Liang Qichao (胡適,梁 超啓 等思想家)**

Publisher: Now, please tell us about the leading thinkers guiding modern China.

Kim Kyŏngjae: In the past, politicians and thinkers were separate, but now, actual politicians also serve as thinkers. That is, they are only satisfied when they apply their ideas directly to politics, and the public also loses interest in isolated thought unaccompanied by practice. Therefore, when we speak of modern Chinese thinkers, it immediately implies actual politicians like Wang Ching-wei and Hu Hanmin.

Kim Yaksu: That's true. Nowadays, intellectual levels are mostly similar, making it difficult for anyone to possess an exceptionally outstanding mind. Even if there were lofty ideas generated by such a mind, if they are detached from practical life, they cannot be highly valued. Thus, thinker equals practical activist—it has become like this.

Hŏ Hŏn: I agree on that point too. In the past, figures like Cai Yuanpei (蔡元培), Hu Shih (胡適), Li Dazhao (李大釗) guided young China, but now I haven't heard of any group of young, emerging professors within Peking University, nor have I heard of thinkers forming groups and taking positions in any corner.

Yŏ Unhyŏng: That's right. Those individuals are all figures of the past. Especially someone like Cai Yuanpei, originally a Catholic (天主敎信者), has now completely left the intellectual world and is said to be living a secluded life with his Western wife in a temple in some mountain valley in Belgium (白耳義) or Switzerland (瑞西).

Kim Kyŏngjae: Liang Qichao (梁啓超) also caused a stir for a while, but from what I've heard, while Liang Qichao was talked about in Korea, he wasn't considered that significant in China.

Publisher: The discussion on China has become too lengthy. We will conclude the topic of China here.

**India, Philippines, Others (印度, 比島其他)**

Publisher: This time, let's turn our eyes to the newly emerging Philippines (比律賓), India (印度), and further afield to the political and intellectual circles of America (亞米利加). Will Gandhi have another chance to rise up leading the Indian masses?

Yŏ Unhyŏng: Unlikely. Gandhi is now a man of yesterday; he is already a dead man. He played the role of pouring cold water on the movements of Indians rising up everywhere. Since we know the history before and after the Great War well, I won't elaborate further, but Gandhi's policies messed things up. And what's strange is calling Gandhi a "Sacred Hero" (聖雄). The terms "Saint" (聖人) and "Hero" (英雄) are fundamentally incompatible names. A saint is benevolent, while a hero follows the way of the hegemon (覇道); the term "Sacred Hero," seeming to mix a good person and a bad person, is bizarre from the start. Anyway, he was promoted to Europeans and Americans beyond his actual influence. <26>
That was because, immediately after the Great War, when humanitarianism surged worldwide amidst curses against the calamities of war, he arose advocating non-resistance humanitarianism. This, combined with gratitude for the Indian expeditionary forces during the war, deeply moved Westerners. Thus, even the Central Church in New York after the Great War clamored, "Oh, Jesus has returned. If you want to see the Jesus of the 20th century, go to India." It's laughable. In any case, the Indian masses will likely not be moved by Gandhi's words anymore. Instead, it is necessary to pay more attention to younger leaders like Nehru (넬 - likely Jawaharlal Nehru).

Kim Kyŏngjae: Well, maybe so. But Gandhi seems like someone who tried very hard. And recently, he seems to show a tendency to avoid prison frequently. This is probably because, having been imprisoned several times, his contact with the outside world is completely cut off, preventing him from seeing or hearing about external events, thus unable to guide the movement outside. Generally, figures in India seem to be within the religious sphere, so it's hard to know well.

Hŏ Hŏn: Philippine (比島) Senate President Quezon (켜즌) also seems to be a considerable figure. Since Aguinaldo (아기날드), he seems to be the first to receive the support of the Filipino people. He appears skilled in diplomacy as well, always handling negotiations with the US. The Philippines will probably be managed under his hand for the time being.

Kim Kyŏngjae: Generally, it seems figures emerge during periods of destruction and construction. During those turbulent times or transitional periods (xx過中), geniuses suddenly appear with extraordinary ideas. Therefore, in places like America, where everything is already set, one only sees figures who bureaucratically manage the existing system, and there seem to be no one who could be called a hero. Even a figure like US President Roosevelt seems merely to be upholding American tradition.

Kim Pyŏngno: That's true. In a system where one passes the Higher Civil Service Examination, becomes a bureaucrat, then some bureau chief, and then some minister, great figures cannot emerge.

Hŏ Hŏn: Furthermore, in America, one can hardly find thinkers. If any exist, they are pragmatist philosophers like James. It might be wrong from the start to look for thinkers in a country like America, where practical economics is almighty.

**Figures in Various Parts of Europe and America (歐米各地의人物)**

Publisher: Now let's move to Europe (歐羅巴). Please speak about Mussolini, Hitler, de Valera (떼발레라), MacDonald (맥드날드), Masaryk (마사릭), Dollfuss (돌푸), Lassalle (랏살), etc. As time is running late, please keep it brief.

Hŏ Hŏn: I believe Mussolini's life will continue at least as long as he lives, but Hitler seems like he could be overthrown anytime. Mussolini is the man who rebuilt Italy (伊太利). He even reformed the Italian national character, known as the dirtiest and laziest <27> in the world, and solidified the Fascist party's political power so it won't be shaken again. The second and third Mussolinis, steadily nurtured since the party's founding, have now become the bearers of Italy's political organization, so rebels against Mussolini will hardly arise. Conversely, Hitler temporarily rose by advocating the abrogation of the Versailles Treaty and non-payment of reparations, gaining the support of the German people and seizing Nazi power. However, no matter how many purges like the recent one he carries out, his policies have been so wicked that he won't last many days.

Yŏ Unhyŏng: That's right. Hitler is a figure whose immediate future cannot be predicted. Looking at his actions like the expulsion of Jews or the suppression of intellectuals (坑西炊儒 - likely a typo or misinterpretation, perhaps referring to burning books and burying scholars, 焚書坑儒), he is a barbarian, what else? Moreover, the Nazi party originally contained various elements—nationalists, communists, monarchists restorationists—all mixed together. When will it ever be fundamentally purged? However, the achievement that Germany's revival was hastened by Hitler's appearance cannot be forgotten. What's interesting is the attitude of Mussolini, Hitler, and France surrounding Austria (墺太利). Metaphorically speaking, Hitler tries to violently rape the maiden Austria, Mussolini tries to coax her, and France tries to use Austria to incite a fight between Mussolini and Hitler.

Kim Kyŏngjae: MacDonald seems to have no more room to develop as a leader of a left-wing political party. Originally, British workers are mostly coal miners. In reality, the position of workers in Britain is analogous to the tenant farmer class in Korea. British coal miners are stuck at the bottom of the British industrial structure like a dead end, so it doesn't seem likely that a large-scale proletarian movement will ever achieve victory in Britain.

Yŏ Unhyŏng: The futures of Dollfuss (돌프스) in Austria and de Valera (떼발레라) in Ireland (愛蘭) are noteworthy. Dollfuss, a short man barely 5 feet tall, bears the crisis of Austria and bustles about quite effectively. De Valera is a steadfast man who adheres firmly to his principles. He adopted a policy of active engagement on the international stage to strengthen Ireland. Thus, he was quite active as chairman of various committees in the League of Nations, striving to showcase Ireland's strength to the world. However, as the League of Nations, which was a good stage for small nations, has recently become quite powerless, he has lost his advantageous platform. Nevertheless, with religious backing and the support of the entire population, his future, along with Ireland's, seems destined for further growth.

Publisher: Thank you for speaking for such a long time. It would be good if the discussion could extend to various countries and peoples like Russia, Turkey (土耳其), Jews (猶太), Egypt (埃及), etc., but it has become too lengthy, so we will conclude here. - (1934. 7) <28>

**Summary**

This 1934 roundtable discussion features prominent Korean intellectuals (Hŏ Hŏn, Yŏ Unhyŏng, Kim Pyŏngno, Kim Yaksu, Kim Kyŏngjae) analyzing contemporary world leaders and thinkers, with a primary focus on China. They discuss Chiang Kai-shek's precarious position, the potential of Wang Ching-wei and Song Ziwen, the rise of Mao Zedong and the Chinese Soviet Republic, and the fading influence of older thinkers. The conversation then briefly touches upon figures like Gandhi (seen negatively), Quezon, Roosevelt, Mussolini, Hitler, MacDonald, Dollfuss, and de Valera, offering perspectives on their political standings and prospects.

From a Korean colonial history perspective, the article is revealing for several reasons. Firstly, it showcases the deep engagement of leading Korean nationalist figures with international politics, particularly Chinese affairs, reflecting Korea's geopolitical situation and hopes for liberation potentially linked to changes in China. Secondly, the participants' diverse backgrounds (lawyers, journalists, activists with ties to nationalist and socialist groups like Sin'ganhoe and Hwayohoe) and varied opinions (e.g., differing views on Chiang Kai-shek's role) highlight the intellectual ferment and ideological spectrum within the Korean elite under Japanese rule. Historians might find Yŏ Unhyŏng's insider knowledge of Chinese politics, the critical assessment of Gandhi, and the analysis of rising fascism particularly interesting, reflecting contemporary global concerns viewed through a colonial lens.

**Named Entities**

許憲	허헌	Hŏ Hŏn
明治大學	명치대학	Meiji University
朝鮮辯護士協會	조선변호사협회	Chosŏn Bar Association
普成專門學校	보성전문학교	Posŏng College
東亞日報	동아일보	Dong-A Ilbo
新幹會	신간회	Sin'ganhoe
世界	세계	World
呂運亨	여운형	Yŏ Unhyŏng
南京金陵大學	남경금릉대학	Nanjing Jinling University
朝鮮中央日報	조선중앙일보	Chosŏn Chungang Ilbo
金炳魯	김병로	Kim Pyŏngno
官立法學專門學校	관립법학전문학교	Government Law College
金洛水	김약수	Kim Yaksu
日本大學	일본대학	Nihon University
全北風會	전북풍회	Chŏnbuk P'unghoe
大衆社	대중사	Taejungsa
金璟載	김경재	Kim Kyŏngjae
水原高等農林	수원고등농림	Suwŏn Higher School of Agriculture and Forestry
東京帝大	동경제대	Tokyo Imperial University
火曜會	화요회	Hwayohoe
本社金東煥	본사김동환	Kim Tonghwan (of this company)
中國	중국	China
蔣介石	장개석	Chiang Kai-shek
北京	북경	Beijing
國際 辯護士 大會	국제 변호사 대회	International Bar Association Conference
外交 總長	외교 총장	Foreign Minister
顔蕙慶 博士	안혜경 박사	Dr. Yan Huiqing
孫文	손문	Sun Yat-sen
모스꾸바	모스크바	Moscow
黃浦軍官學校	황포군관학교	Whampoa Military Academy
北伐	북벌	Northern Expedition
國民政府	국민정부	Nationalist Government
吳佩孚	오패부	Wu Peifu
閻錫山	염석산	Yan Xishan
曺곤	조곤	Cao Kun
馮玉祥	풍옥상	Feng Yuxiang
列國	열국	The Powers (Various nations)
毛澤東	모택동	Mao Zedong
紅軍	홍군	Red Army
長江	장강	Yangtze River
南京	남경	Nanjing
滿洲	만주	Manchuria
汪兆銘	왕조명	Wang Ching-wei
孫科	손과	Sun Fo
王精衛	왕정위	Wang Ching-wei (alternative writing)
改粗派	개조파	Reorganization Clique
胡漢民	호한민	Hu Hanmin
露西亞	노서아	Russia
스타-린	스탈린	Stalin
부하린	부하린	Bukharin
트로츠키	트로츠키	Trotsky
浙江	절강	Zhejiang
買辨階級	매판계급	Comprador class
四,一二事件	사일이사건	April 12th Incident (Shanghai Massacre)
上海	상해	Shanghai
팟쇼	파쇼	Fascism/Fascist
나치스	나치스	Nazis
뭇소리니	무솔리니	Mussolini
江蘇	강소	Jiangsu
蒙古	몽고	Mongolia
西藏	서장	Xizang (Tibet)
靑海	청해	Qinghai
宋子文	송자문	Song Ziwen
北平政務委員會	북평정무위원회	Beiping Political Affairs Committee
孔祥熙	공상희	Kong Xiangxi
中央銀行	중앙은행	Central Bank
英美	영미	Britain and America
孫逸仙	손일선	Sun Yat-sen
黃孚	황부	Huang Fu
何應欽	하응흠	He Yingqin
民生主義	민생주의	Principle of People's Livelihood
藍衣社	남의사	Blue Shirts Society
陳立夫	진립부	Chen Lifu
陳利夫	진과부	Chen Guofu (Likely typo for 陳果夫)
모스꼬바 共大	모스크바 공대	Moscow Communist University (Communist University of the Toilers of the East)
쏘비엣-	소비에트	Soviet
王正廷	왕정정	Wang Zhengting
顧維均	고유균	Gu Weijun (Wellington Koo)
顔惠慶	안혜경	Yan Huiqing
胡維德	호유덕	Hu Weide
蔣作賓	장작빈	Jiang Zuobin
陳友仁	진우인	Chen Youren
王寵惠	왕총혜	Wang Chonghui
立法院長	입법원장	President of the Legislative Yuan
米國	미국	United States (America)
콜럼비아	컬럼비아	Columbia University
參議院副議長	참의원부의장	Vice Speaker of the Senate
巴里講和會義	파리강화회의	Paris Peace Conference
廣東政府	광동정부	Guangdong Government
漢國 租界	한구 조계	Hankou Concession
日本	일본	Japan
英佛 美	영불미	Britain, France, America
郭泰琪	곽태기	Guo Taiqi
쏘비엣中國	소비에트중국	Soviet China
首都端金	수도서금	Ruijin (Capital, written 端金 likely for 瑞金)
張國濤	장국도	Zhang Guotao
힛틀러	히틀러	Hitler
上海總罷業	상해총파업	Shanghai General Strike
西山會議	서산회의	Western Hills Conference
張繼	장계	Zhang Ji
廣西派	광서파	Guangxi clique
李宗仁	이종인	Li Zongren
白崇禧	백숭희	Bai Chongxi
江西	강서	Jiangxi
福建	복건	Fujian
湖北	호북	Hubei
山西	산서	Shanxi
蔡元培	채원배	Cai Yuanpei
胡適	호적	Hu Shih
李大쇄	이대조	Li Dazhao (쇄 likely for 釗)
北京大學	북경대학	Peking University
天主敎	천주교	Catholicism
白耳義	벨기에	Belgium
瑞西	서서	Switzerland
梁啓超	양계초	Liang Qichao
印度	인도	India
比律賓	필리핀	Philippines
亞米利加	아메리카	America
깐디	간디	Gandhi
聖雄	성웅	Sacred Hero
紐育中央敎會	뉴욕중앙교회	New York Central Church (likely Riverside Church or similar prominent church)
넬	네루	Nehru (Jawaharlal)
比島	비도	Philippines (abbrev.)
켜즌	케손	Quezon (Manuel L.)
아기날드	아기날도	Aguinaldo (Emilio)
루-즈벨트	루스벨트	Roosevelt (Franklin D.)
제임쓰	제임스	James (William)
歐羅巴	유럽	Europe
떼발레라	데 발레라	De Valera (Éamon)
맥드날드	맥도널드	MacDonald (Ramsay)
마사릭	마사리크	Masaryk (Tomáš)
돌푸	돌푸스	Dollfuss (Engelbert)
랏살	라살	Lassalle (Ferdinand)
伊太利	이태리	Italy
獨逸	독일	Germany
墺太利	오스트리아	Austria
佛蘭西	프랑스	France
愛蘭	애란	Ireland
國際聯盟	국제연맹	League of Nations
土耳其	터키	Turkey
猶太	유태	Jews/Jewish
埃及	애급	Egypt

**Glossary**

좌담	좌담	Roundtable discussion
역임 (歷任)	역임	To have held positions successively
만유 (漫遊)	만유	Tour, extensive travel
재임 (在任)	재임	Currently in office
주간 (主幹)	주간	Chief editor, manager
저술 (著述)	저술	Writing, literary work
개회 (開會)	개회	Opening of a meeting
각국 (各國)	각국	Various countries
회견 (會見)	회견	To meet, interview
연구 (硏究)	연구	Research, study
산견 (散見)	산견	To be seen here and there, scattered
경지 (境地)	경지	State, standpoint, perspective
주목 (注目)	주목	Attention, focus
당대 (當代)	당대	Contemporary, the present age
급 (及)	급	And (formal conjunction, often linking nouns)
정권 (政權)	정권	Political power, regime
병마 (兵馬)	병마	Military forces
통솔자 (統帥者)	통솔자	Commander, leader
인물 (人物)	인물	Figure, personage, character
박게	밖에	Only, nothing but (older spelling of 밖에)
외교관 (外交官)	외교관	Diplomat
재정가 (財政家)	재정가	Financier
대체로 (大體로)	대체로	Generally, on the whole
운명 (運命)	운명	Fate, destiny
그래도	그래도	Still, nevertheless, even so
역시 (亦是)	역시	As expected, likewise, still
치밀히 (緻密히)	치밀히	Meticulously, closely
세운 것	세운 것	The act of establishing (older grammatical form)
항상 (恒常)	항상	Always
장래 (將來)	장래	Future
성공 (成功)	성공	Success
군벌 (軍閥)	군벌	Warlord
업새 버리다	없애 버리다	To eliminate, get rid of (older spelling of 없애)
형식 (形式)	형식	Formality, form
통일식혀노흔 (統一식혀놓은)	통일시켜놓은	Having unified (older causative/passive form and spelling)
점 (點)	점	Point, aspect
공 (功)	공	Merit, achievement
만일 (萬一)	만일	If by any chance
할거 (割據)	할거	To occupy territory and act independently
이식 (餌食)	이식	Bait, prey
점령 (占領)	점령	Occupation (military)
연합군 (聯合軍)	연합군	Allied forces
함락 (陷落)	함락	Fall, capture (of a city)
노대국 (老大國)	노대국	Old great nation
공동 관리 (共同 管理)	공동 관리	Joint administration
달엿슬걸요	달렸을걸요	It probably depends on (older spelling/form)
비교적 (比較的)	비교적	Relatively
접촉 (接觸)	접촉	Contact, interaction
사건 (事件)	사건	Incident, event
경험 (經驗)	경험	Experience
깁히	깊이	Deeply (older spelling)
절대함구 (絕對緘口)	절대함구	Absolute silence
주목하다 (注目하다)	주목하다	To pay attention to, note
행정 (行政)	행정	Administration
통할 (統轄)	통할	To control, supervise
외교 (外交)	외교	Diplomacy
임 (任)	임	Duty, responsibility
실제상 (實際上)	실제상	In reality, practically
좌우되다 (左右되다)	좌우되다	To be controlled, influenced
과언 (過言)	과언	Exaggeration
동지 (同志)	동지	Comrade
사생 (死生)	사생	Life and death
버릇	버릇	Habit, tendency
이래 (以來)	이래	Since
계획 (計劃)	계획	Plan
실패 (失敗)	실패	Failure
무소귀 (無所歸)	무소귀	Having nowhere to return to
부하 (部下)	부하	Subordinate
버리다	버리다	To abandon, discard
초연히 (超然히)	초연히	Aloofly, transcendently
도망 (逃亡)	도망	Escape, flight
붓적	부쩍	Significantly, markedly (older spelling)
세력 (勢力)	세력	Influence, power
승하다 (勝하다)	승하다	To surpass, be superior
아모튼	아무튼	Anyway, in any case (older spelling)
혁명 운동 (革命 運動)	혁명 운동	Revolutionary movement
중대하다 (重大하다)	중대하다	To be important, crucial
조건 (條件)	조건	Condition
생사 (生死)	생사	Life and death
고립 상태 (孤立 狀態)	고립 상태	State of isolation
형편 (形便)	형편	Situation, circumstances
장악하다 (掌握하다)	장악하다	To grasp, seize, control
중간파 (中間派)	중간파	Middle faction, centrists
특징 (特徵)	특징	Characteristic, feature
언제든지	언제든지	Always, whenever
주의정책 (主義政策)	주의정책	Principles and policies
분명히 (分明히)	분명히	Clearly
내세우다	내세우다	To put forward, advocate
우파 (右派)	우파	Right wing
합작 (合作)	합작	Collaboration, joint work
좌파 (左派)	좌파	Left wing
구축 (驅逐)	구축	Expulsion, driving out
제휴 (提携)	제휴	Alliance, cooperation
내몰다	내몰다	To drive out, expel
회색 (灰色)	회색	Gray color (metaphor for ambiguity)
유지하다 (維持하다)	유지하다	To maintain
실례 (實例)	실례	Actual example
악수 (握手)	악수	Handshake
내어 쫓다	내쫓다	To drive out, expel (older form)
민중 (民衆)	민중	The masses, people
총명하다 (聰明하다)	총명하다	To be clever, intelligent
복잡하다 (複雜하다)	복잡하다	To be complex, complicated
경제적 (經濟的)	경제적	Economic
얼는	얼른	Quickly, promptly (older spelling)
일일히 (一一히)	일일히	One by one, individually
지지 (支持)	지지	Support
배척 (排斥)	배척	Exclusion, boycott, rejection
판단하다 (判斷하다)	판단하다	To judge, decide
시기 (時期)	시기	Time, period, opportunity
역사적 과정 (歷史的 過程)	역사적 과정	Historical process
음모성 (陰謀性)	음모성	Conspiratorial nature
조직 (組織)	조직	Organization
기술 (技術)	기술	Skill, technique
뛰어나다	뛰어나다	To be outstanding, excellent
획득하다 (獲得하다)	획득하다	To acquire, obtain
결국 (結局)	결국	Eventually, in the end
결과 (結果)	결과	Result, outcome
밧덧노라	받았노라	(Claim to) have received (older, emphatic form)
병력 (兵力)	병력	Military strength
가젓스니까	가졌으니까	Because (he) possessed (older spelling)
수차 (數次)	수차	Several times
쿠-테타-	쿠데타	Coup d'état
성공하다 (成功하다)	성공하다	To succeed
국내 전쟁 (國內 戰爭)	국내 전쟁	Domestic war, civil war
승리하다 (勝利하다)	승리하다	To win, be victorious
득의 (得意)	득의	Triumph, pride
미지수 (未知數)	미지수	Unknown quantity, x-factor
개인 (個人)	개인	Individual
감정 (感情)	감정	Feeling, emotion
별 문제 (別 問題)	별 문제	Separate issue
위난 (危難)	위난	Crisis, danger
구제하다 (救濟하다)	구제하다	To save, relieve
버티다	버티다	To endure, hold out
조흘 즐	좋을 줄	That it would be good (older spelling/form)
천하 (天下)	천하	The world, rule, reign
물너가다	물러가다	To recede, step back (older spelling)
영웅 (英雄)	영웅	Hero
지도하다 (指導하다)	지도하다	To lead, guide
명령하다 (命令하다)	명령하다	To command, order
배후 (背後)	배후	Behind, background
뿔조아지-	부르주아지	Bourgeoisie (phonetic transcription)
병참부 (兵站部)	병참부	Supply department, logistics base
재벌 (財閥)	재벌	Financial clique, chaebol
이중xx하다 (二重xx하다)	이중 착취하다	To exploit doubly (xx likely 착취 - exploitation)
매판계급 (買辨階級)	매판계급	Comprador class
노동자 (勞働者)	노동자	Worker, laborer
농민 (農民)	농민	Peasant, farmer
학생 (學生)	학생	Student
이해 (利害)	이해	Interests
대표하다 (代表하다)	대표하다	To represent
위하다 (爲하다)	위하다	To do for the sake of
불평등 조약 (不平等 條約)	불평등 조약	Unequal treaty
폐기 (廢棄)	폐기	Abrogation, abolition
도로혀	도리어	Rather, instead (older spelling)
중심 (中心)	중심	Center
활동성 (活動性)	활동성	Activity, dynamism
증대하다 (增大하다)	증대하다	To increase
상공 (商工)	상공	Commerce and industry
절연하다 (絶緣하다)	절연하다	To sever ties
파괴하다 (破壞하다)	파괴하다	To destroy
계급적 세력 (階級的 勢力)	계급적 세력	Class forces
전력 (全力)	전력	All one's strength
각성하다 (覺醒하다)	각성하다	To awaken (politically, socially)
학생층 (學生層)	학생층	Student stratum/group
금후 (今後)	금후	From now on, future
신흥층 (新興層)	신흥층	Rising stratum/group
오직	오직	Only, solely
타협적 (妥協的)	타협적	Compromising
중간적 (中間的)	중간적	Centrist, intermediate
세계적 (世界的)	세계적	Worldwide, global
몰락하다 (沒落하다)	몰락하다	To fall, collapse, decline
증거하다 (證據하다)	증거하다	To prove, provide evidence
극우 (極右)	극우	Extreme right
수중 (手中)	수중	In the hands of
수완 (手腕)	수완	Skill, ability, finesse
재조 (才操)	재조	Talent, skill
지혜 (智慧)	지혜	Wisdom
우열 (優劣)	우열	Superiority or inferiority
정령 (政令)	정령	Government decree
밋치다	미치다	To reach, extend to (older spelling)
떠러저 나가다	떨어져 나가다	To break away, secede (older spelling)
분해과정 (分解過程)	분해과정	Process of disintegration
실추되다 (失墜되다)	실추되다	To fall, lose (of prestige, power)
납부게	나쁘게	Badly, unfortunately (older spelling?)
승승장구하다 (乘勝長驅하다)	승승장구하다	To follow up a victory with a pursuit
석권하다 (席捲하다)	석권하다	To sweep over, conquer
치하 (治下)	치하	Under the rule of
기회 (機會)	기회	Opportunity
방파제 (防波堤)	방파제	Breakwater, seawall (metaphorical)
듯건대	듣건대	As I hear it (older form)
병략가 (兵略家)	병략가	Military strategist
방면 (方面)	방면	Field, area, aspect
위인 (爲人)	위인	Person (of a certain capability)
대개 (大槪)	대개	Generally, mostly
가령 (假令)	가령	For example, supposing
제인물 (諸人物)	제인물	Various figures
친일 (親日)	친일	Pro-Japanese
친미 (親米)	친미	Pro-American
친영 (親英)	친영	Pro-British
대담하다 (大膽하다)	대담하다	To be bold, daring
포용하다 (包容하다)	포용하다	To embrace, tolerate
정국 (政局)	정국	Political situation
만년 (萬年)	만년	Perennial, long-standing
재정부장 (財政部長)	재정부장	Finance Minister
사직하다 (辭職하다)	사직하다	To resign
실로 (實로)	실로	Indeed, truly
당시 (當時)	당시	At that time
명 (名)	명	Famous, renowned
엇절 도리 업섯든	어쩔 도리 없었던	There was nothing that could be done (older spelling/form)
첫재	첫째	Firstly (older spelling)
인수함애 (引受함애)	인수함에	Upon taking over (older grammatical ending)
매월 (每月)	매월	Monthly
지출하다 (支出하다)	지출하다	To expend, spend
게다가	게다가	Moreover, in addition
내국채 (內國債)	내국채	Domestic bonds/debt
상환하다 (償換하다)	상환하다	To repay, redeem
국고수입 (國庫收入)	국고수입	National treasury revenue
지급하다 (支給하다)	지급하다	To pay, supply
더구나	더구나	Furthermore, moreover
중요하다 (重要하다)	중요하다	To be important
재원 (財源)	재원	Source of revenue
전세입 (全歲入)	전세입	Total annual revenue
관세 (關稅)	관세	Customs duty, tariff
기근 (飢饉)	기근	Famine
홍수 (洪水)	홍수	Flood
분리 (分離)	분리	Separation
격감하다 (激減하다)	격감하다	To decrease sharply
파탄하다 (破綻하다)	파탄하다	To fail, collapse, go bankrupt
반대파 (反對派)	반대파	Opposition faction
음모 (陰謀)	음모	Scheme, conspiracy
꺽구러지다	꺾어지다	To be broken, overthrown (older spelling)
중추 (中樞)	중추	Pivot, center, nucleus
총재 (總裁)	총재	President, governor (of a bank)
의형 (義兄)	의형	Sworn brother; here: brother-in-law
남매간 (男妹間)	남매간	Relationship between brother and sister/brother-in-law and sister-in-law
지원 (支援)	지원	Support, backing
반드시	반드시	Surely, certainly
재기하다 (再起하다)	재기하다	To make a comeback
아들	아들	Son
아버지 덕	아버지 덕	Thanks to (one's) father
빗나는	빛나는	Shining, brilliant (older spelling)
이론가 (理論家)	이론가	Theorist
강직청렴 (剛直淸廉)	강직청렴	Uprightness and integrity
살니려하는니만치	살리려 하는 이니만치	As he is one who tries to revive/realize (older spelling/form)
어느날이든	어느 날이든	Someday
진두 (陳頭)	진두	Forefront, vanguard
나서고야 말걸요	나서고야 말걸요	Will surely end up standing (at the forefront) (older form)
제누이를 잘두엇지요	제 누이를 잘 두었지요	He was fortunate in his sisters (idiomatic)
매부 (妹夫)	매부	Younger sister's husband, brother-in-law
실제적 (實際的)	실제적	Actual, practical
지도자 (指導者)	지도자	Leader
출신 (出身)	출신	Origin, graduate of
공산당 (共産黨)	공산당	Communist Party
우수하다 (優秀하다)	우수하다	To be excellent, superior
전략 (戰畧)	전략	Strategy
그냥	그냥	Just, as it is
갓다가 쓰다	가져다가 쓰다	To bring and use, adopt (older spelling)
정책 (政策)	정책	Policy
인용하다 (引用하다)	인용하다	To quote, cite, adopt
두뇌 (頭腦)	두뇌	Brain, intellect
간부층 (幹部層)	간부층	Leadership stratum, executives
후계자 (後繼者)	후계자	Successor
실상 (實相)	실상	In reality, actually
손바닥	손바닥	Palm of the hand
양면 (兩面)	양면	Both sides
성질 (性質)	성질	Nature, characteristic
번지다	번지다	To spread, flip over
주위 (周圍)	주위	Surroundings, vicinity
모아잇는 듯해요	모여 있는 듯해요	Seems to be gathered (older spelling/form)
망하다 (亡하다)	망하다	To fall, perish, be ruined
내로라 하든	내로라 하던	Those who claimed to be the best (idiomatic, older form)
이론정치가 (理論政治家)	이론정치가	Theoretical politician
책상우에서 (冊床우에서)	책상 위에서	On the desk (older spelling)
늣김	느낌	Feeling, impression (older spelling)
난국수습 (難國收拾)	난국수습	Resolving a national crisis
사무가적 (事務家的)	사무가적	Bureaucratic
단순하다 (單純하다)	단순하다	To be simple
무인 (武人)	무인	Military man
우여하다 (于與하다)	관여하다	To be involved in (likely 관여하다)
군사 (軍事)	군사	Military affairs
전체로 (全體로)	전체로	Overall, as a whole
친영 (親英)	친영	Pro-British
친로파 (親露派)	친로파	Pro-Russian faction
주ㅅ대	줏대	Backbone, principle (older spelling)
실하다 (實하다)	실하다	To be substantial, solid
수단 (手段)	수단	Means, measure, skill
외교계 (外交界)	외교계	Diplomatic circles
전망 (展望)	전망	Outlook, prospect
관찰하다 (觀察하다)	관찰하다	To observe
조선 사정 (朝鮮 事情)	조선 사정	Korean affairs
밝다	밝다	To be knowledgeable, bright
학자 (學者)	학자	Scholar
입법원장 (立法院長)	입법원장	President of the Legislative Yuan
국제법 (國際法)	국제법	International law
통효하다 (通曉하다)	통효하다	To be well-versed in
쟁쟁하다 (錚錚하다)	쟁쟁하다	To be prominent, distinguished
참의원부의장 (參議院副議長)	참의원부의장	Vice Speaker of the Senate
일흠날린	이름 날린	Who made a name for oneself (older spelling)
몹시	몹시	Very, extremely
냉철하다 (冷徹하다)	냉철하다	To be cool-headed, rational
주장 (主張)	주장	Assertion, argument
굿굿이	꿋꿋이	Firmly, steadfastly (older spelling)
세워나가다	세워나가다	To establish, assert progressively
이지 (理知)	이지	Reason, intellect
왓다갓다고 합데다	왔다 갔다고 합니다	It is said that he visited (older form)
어학 (語學)	어학	Language study, linguistics
재능 (才能)	재능	Talent
기민하다 (機敏하다)	기민하다	To be agile, quick-witted
국제무대 (國際舞臺)	국제무대	International stage
신진기예 (新進氣銳)	신진기예	Sharp and emerging, up-and-coming
활동 (活動)	활동	Activity
이전 (以前)	이전	Before, formerly
외교 부장 (外交 部長)	외교 부장	Foreign Minister (or Deputy Minister)
끌다	끌다	To draw, attract
좌익 진영 (左翼 陣營)	좌익 진영	Left-wing camp
영국 (英國)	영국	United Kingdom
조계 (租界)	조계	Concession (territory)
강제 회수 (强制 回收)	강제 회수	Forcible recovery/retraction
열강 (列强)	열강	The Great Powers
이권 (利權)	이권	Rights and interests, concessions
대수롭게 보다	대수롭게 보다	To consider important, make a big deal of
혁명 외교 (革命 外交)	혁명 외교	Revolutionary diplomacy
강력하다 (强力하다)	강력하다	To be strong, powerful
국민적 성원 (國民的 聲援)	국민적 성원	National support/cheering
무력 (武力)	무력	Military power
준비 (準備)	준비	Preparation
국면 (局面)	국면	Phase, situation
타개하다 (打開하다)	타개하다	To break through, overcome
노앗슬	놓았을	Would have placed/achieved (older spelling)
잡지 (雜誌)	잡지	Magazine
건너가다	건너가다	To cross over, go over
밀약 (密約)	밀약	Secret pact/treaty
체결하다 (締結하다)	체결하다	To conclude (a treaty)
내막 (內幕)	내막	Inside story, hidden details
밀고하다 (密告하다)	밀고하다	To inform secretly, denounce
독립 (獨立)	독립	Independence
원조하다 (援助하다)	원조하다	To aid, support
운동 (運動)	운동	Movement, campaign
극동 정국 (極東 政局)	극동 정국	Far East political situation
파동 (波動)	파동	Wave, fluctuation, disturbance
이르키다	일으키다	To cause, raise (older spelling)
앗가	아까	A short while ago (older spelling)
풍채 (風采)	풍채	Appearance, presence
당당하다 (堂堂하다)	당당하다	To be imposing, dignified
유수하다 (有數하다)	유수하다	To be prominent, leading
열력 (閱歷)	열력	Experience, career
제일인자 (第一人者)	제일인자	The foremost person, number one expert
조곰	조금	A little, shortly (older spelling)
차위 (差違)	차위	Difference, discrepancy (here: time difference)
만흐나	많으나	Although there are many (older spelling)
지명하다 (指名하다)	지명하다	To designate, name
난마 (亂麻)	난마	Tangled hemp (metaphor for chaos)
무기 (武器)	무기	Weapon
공급 (供給)	공급	Supply
차관 (借款)	차관	Loan (foreign)
어더야 할 터이니까	얻어야 할 터이니까	Because (they) will have to obtain (older form)
부득이 (不得已)	부득이	Unavoidably, inevitably
혹은 (或은)	혹은	Or, perhaps
붓는 체하기라도	붙는 체하기라도	Even pretending to side with (older spelling)
애국적 정열 (愛國的 情熱)	애국적 정열	Patriotic passion
교착되다 (交錯되다)	교착되다	To be intertwined, intersected
매국적 (賣國的)	매국적	Traitorous
잇슬리 업겟지요	있을 리 없겠지요	There's likely no... (older spelling/form)
최근 (最近)	최근	Recently
대일 외교가 (對日 外交家)	대일 외교가	Diplomat specializing in relations with Japan
흔들다	흔들다	To shake, wield influence
활약 (活躍)	활약	Activity,活躍
통차문제 (通車問題)	통차문제	Through-traffic issue
정전협정 (停戰協定)	정전협정	Ceasefire agreement
드른즉	들은즉	According to what I heard (older form)
내각 (內閣)	내각	Cabinet
총장 (總長)	총장	Minister, chief
재인 (才人)	재인	Talented person
사무가 (事務家)	사무가	Bureaucrat, administrator
인상되다 (印象되다)	인상되다	To give the impression
인기 (人氣)	인기	Popularity
실각하다 (失脚하다)	실각하다	To lose one's position, fall from grace
몃 갑절	몇 갑절	Several times over (older spelling)
만인 좌중 (萬人 座中)	만인 좌중	In front of a large audience
전투적 (戰鬪的)	전투적	Combative
논전 (論戰)	논전	Debate, polemic
펴다	펴다	To unfold, spread out
즉석 (卽席)	즉석	Impromptu, on the spot
수문수답 (酬問酬答)	수문수답	Exchange of questions and answers, dialogue
해결짓다 (解決짓다)	해결짓다	To resolve, settle
명철하다 (明哲하다)	명철하다	To be clear-headed, discerning
응구첩대적 구변 (應口輒對的 口辨)	응구첩대적 구변	Skill in immediate repartee/rebuttal
능하다 (能하다)	능하다	To be skilled at
패군 (敗軍)	패군	Defeated army
위원 (委員)	위원	Committee member, representative
상당히 (相當히)	상당히	Considerably, quite
앗가운	아까운	Regrettable, valuable (older spelling)
타협 (妥協)	타협	Compromise
강직하다 (剛直하다)	강직하다	To be upright, uncompromising
신의업고 (信義업고)	신의 없고	Faithless, treacherous (older spelling)
반동무쌍 (反動無雙)	반동무쌍	Unparalleled reactionary
국치조약 (國恥條約)	국치조약	Humiliating treaty
폐지식힐 (廢止식힐)	폐지시킬	To abolish (older causative form)
회수하다 (回收하다)	회수하다	To recover, retrieve
요지간은 (要只間은)	요즈음은	Nowadays, recently (archaic form)
어듸	어디	Where (older spelling)
불란서 (佛蘭西)	프랑스	France
망명하다 (亡命하다)	망명하다	To seek exile
인간적 (人間的)	인간적	Personal, human
각가웟슴니다	가까웠습니다	Was close (older spelling)
계통 (系統)	계통	System, lineage
이상 (以上)	이상	Above, aforementioned
끗치고	끝내고	Ending, concluding (older spelling)
이하 (以下)	이하	Below, following
제요인 (諸要人)	제요인	Various key figures
중요군략가 (重要軍畧家)	중요군략가	Important military strategist
수도 (首都)	수도	Capital city
주석 (主席)	주석	Chairman
부주석 (副主席)	부주석	Vice Chairman
함께	함께	Together
정치공작 (政治工作)	정치공작	Political maneuvering/work
열중하다 (熱中하다)	열중하다	To be absorbed in, engrossed in
외형 (外形)	외형	External appearance
약하다 (弱하다)	약하다	To be weak
허줄구레하게	허술하게	Shabbily, poorly (older form)
생기어서	생겨서	Appearing, looking like (older form)
풍우 (風雨)	풍우	Wind and rain (metaphor for turmoil)
웅변가 (雄辯家)	웅변가	Orator
조용조용하게	조용조용하게	Quietly, calmly
촌부자식 (村夫子式)	촌부자식	Like a village scholar, rustic scholar style
뜻	뜻	Will, intention
굿은	굳은	Firm, resolute (older spelling)
세상 (世上)	세상	World
총파업 (總罷業)	총파업	General strike
결합체 (結合體)	결합체	Combined body, coalition
불과하다 (不過하다)	불과하다	To be merely, only
진형 (陣形)	진형	Camp, ranks
배화운동 (排貨運動)	배화운동	Boycott movement (against foreign goods)
전국력 (全國力)	전국력	Full national strength
반제운동 (反帝運動)	반제운동	Anti-imperialist movement
극도 (極度)	극도	Extreme degree
달하다 (達하다)	달하다	To reach
불조아-지	부르주아지	Bourgeoisie (phonetic transcription)
결의하다 (決議하다)	결의하다	To resolve, decide
유명하다 (有名하다)	유명하다	To be famous
박해 (迫害)	박해	Persecution
타격 (打擊)	타격	Blow, hit, impact
형세 (形勢)	형세	Situation, state of affairs
등 (等)	등	Etc., and others
기치하 (旗下)	기치하	Under the banner of
뭉치다	뭉치다	To unite, band together
측 (側)	측	Side, faction
괴멸 (潰滅)	괴멸	Annihilation, destruction
다수 (多數)	다수	Majority, many
변절하다 (變節하다)	변절하다	To betray, change allegiance
전향하다 (轉向하다)	전향하다	To change direction/ideology
도주하다 (逃走하다)	도주하다	To flee, run away
쪽겨나온	쫓겨나온	Ousted, driven out (older spelling)
끄을고	이끌고	Leading (older spelling)
재건하다 (再建하다)	재건하다	To rebuild, reconstruct
끗까지	끝까지	Until the end (older spelling)
주장하다 (主張하다)	주장하다	To assert, advocate
엇지 되엇슬는지	어찌 되었을는지	How it might have turned out (older spelling/form)
실로 (實로)	실로	Indeed, truly
의문 (疑問)	의문	Doubt, question
전국 (全國)	전국	Entire country
십팔성 (十八省)	십팔성	Eighteen provinces
통치하다 (統治하다)	통치하다	To rule, govern
그러치요	그렇지요	That's right (older spelling)
처야하겟지요	쳐야 하겠지요	Should consider/rank (older spelling)
공로 (功勞)	공로	Merit, contribution
구역 (區域)	구역	Area, zone
석탄 (石炭)	석탄	Coal
철 (鐵)	철	Iron
쌀	쌀	Rice
면화 (綿花)	면화	Cotton
고마 (枯麻)	황마/아마	Jute/Flax (likely 黃麻 or 亞麻, not 枯麻)
산물 (産物)	산물	Produce, product
풍부하다 (豐富하다)	풍부하다	To be abundant, rich
각지 (各地)	각지	Various places
신작로 (新作路)	신작로	Newly built road
하천 (河川)	하천	River
수운 (水運)	수운	Water transport
교통로 (交通路)	교통로	Transportation route
편제 (編制)	편제	Organization (of troops)
점점 (漸漸)	점점	Gradually
증대하다 (增大하다)	증대하다	To increase
대회 (大會)	대회	Congress, large meeting
모앗드란	모였더란	(That) had gathered (older spelling/form)
점 (點)	점	Point, fact
가히 (可히)	가히	Indeed, quite
무기 (武器)	무기	Weaponry
상당하다 (相當하다)	상당하다	To be considerable, suitable
책 (冊)	책	Book
xx	개	Units/items (likely 개 '個' for rifles)
비행기 (飛行機)	비행기	Airplane
기관총 (機關銃)	기관총	Machine gun
투항하다 (投降하다)	투항하다	To surrender
중앙군 (中央軍)	중앙군	Central Army (Nationalist)
선물 (膳物)	선물	Gift
대부분 (大部分)	대부분	Most, majority
더러는	더러는	Some of them
포획품 (捕獲品)	포획품	Captured goods, spoils
xxx	소련/코민테른	Soviets/Comintern (unclear abbreviation)
평지전 (平地戰)	평지전	Flatland warfare
산악전 (山岳戰)	산악전	Mountain warfare
아조	아주	Very, extremely (older spelling)
찬앙하다 (讚仰하다)	찬양하다	To praise, admire (likely 찬양하다)
그럴가요	그럴까요	Is that likely? (older spelling)
땅	땅	Land
저절로	저절로	By itself, automatically
생기다	생기다	To arise, come into being
농산물 (農産物)	농산물	Agricultural products
제것	제 것	One's own thing/possession (older spelling)
이해타산상 (利害打算上)	이해타산상	From the viewpoint of calculating profit and loss
점 (點)	점	Aspect, point
녯날	옛날	Old days, formerly (older spelling)
성장 (省長)	성장	Provincial governor
사실 (事實)	사실	Fact, reality
토호 (土豪)	토호	Local tyrant, powerful local family
대지주 (大地主)	대지주	Large landowner
성민 (省民)	성민	Provincial residents
가라먹는	갈아먹는	Cultivating (land) for subsistence (older spelling)
소작인 (小作人)	소작인	Tenant farmer
적년 (積年)	적년	For many years
고통 (苦痛)	고통	Suffering, pain
바람에	바람에	Because of, due to
환영하다 (歡迎하다)	환영하다	To welcome
정련 병대 (精練 兵隊)	정련 병대	Elite/trained troops
사회주의 (社會主義)	사회주의	Socialism
사상가 (思想家)	사상가	Thinker
녜전에는	예전에는	In the past (older spelling)
따로	따로	Separately
실지 (實地)	실지	Practice, reality (older spelling of 실제)
운용하다 (運用하다)	운용하다	To operate, apply, utilize
만족하다 (滿足하다)	만족하다	To be satisfied
고립하다 (孤立하다)	고립하다	To be isolated
흥미 (興味)	흥미	Interest
아니늣기니까	아니 느끼니까	Because (one) does not feel (older spelling)
의미하다 (意味하다)	의미하다	To mean, signify
지식수준 (智識水準)	지식수준	Level of knowledge/intellect
거지반	거의 반	Almost half, mostly (older spelling/form?)
동일하다 (同一하다)	동일하다	To be identical, same
특별히 (特別히)	특별히	Specially
뛰여난	뛰어난	Outstanding, excellent (older spelling)
머리	머리	Head, mind
짜 내인	짜낸	Squeezed out, devised (older form)
놉흔	높은	High, lofty (older spelling)
유리되다 (流離되다)	유리되다	To be detached, separated from
평가하다 (評價하다)	평가하다	To evaluate, assess
운동가 (運動家)	운동가	Activist
이러케	이렇게	Like this (older spelling)
동감 (同感)	동감	Same feeling, agreement
청년중국 (靑年中國)	청년중국	Young China
지도하다 (指導하다)	지도하다	To guide, lead
신진 (新進)	신진	Emerging, new
소장교원단 (小壯敎援團)	소장 교원단	Group of young/middle-aged professors (援 likely 授)
모퉁이	모퉁이	Corner
그룹	그룹	Group
진치다 (陣치다)	진치다	To set up camp, take a position
원래 (元來)	원래	Originally
신자 (信者)	신자	Believer
사상계 (思想界)	사상계	Intellectual world
떠나다	떠나다	To leave
서양여자 (西洋女子)	서양여자	Western woman
안해	아내	Wife (older term)
다리다	데리다	To take along, accompany (older spelling)
은거생활 (隱居生活)	은거생활	Secluded life, life of a hermit
한동안	한동안	For a while
울니엇지만	울렸지만	Although (he) made a noise/stir (older spelling)
의하면 (依하면)	의하면	According to
대단하게	대단하게	Greatly, significantly
치지안엇대요	치지 않았대요	They say (he) wasn't regarded as (older spelling)
끈치겟슴니다	끝내겠습니다	Will conclude/end (older spelling)
신흥하다 (新興하다)	신흥하다	To rise newly, emerge
정계 (政界)	정계	Political world
사상계 (思想界)	사상계	Intellectual world
끄을고	이끌고	Leading (older spelling)
이러날	일어날	To rise up (older spelling)
기회 (機會)	기회	Chance, opportunity
업겟지요	없겠지요	There probably isn't (older spelling)
어저께	어제	Yesterday (colloquial)
죽은 사람	죽은 사람	Dead person
각처 (各處)	각처	Various places
끼어언진	끼얹은	Poured, splashed (older spelling)
역할 (役割)	역할	Role
대전 (大戰)	대전	Great War (WWI)
그르치다	그르치다	To spoil, mess up
괴이하다 (怪異하다)	괴이하다	To be strange, bizarre
성인 (聖人)	성인	Saint, sage
영웅 (英雄)	영웅	Hero
도모지	도무지	Utterly, at all (older spelling)
조화되다 (調和되다)	조화되다	To harmonize, be compatible
인하다 (仁하다)	인하다	To be benevolent
패도 (覇道)	패도	Way of the hegemon, rule by force
선인 (善人)	선인	Good person
악인 (惡人)	악인	Bad person
혼합하다 (混合하다)	혼합하다	To mix, blend
기괴하다 (奇怪하다)	기괴하다	To be strange, grotesque
엇잿든	어쨌든	Anyway, in any case (older spelling)
실력 (實力)	실력	Real ability, actual power
구미인 (歐美人)	구미인	Europeans and Americans
선전되다 (宣傳되다)	선전되다	To be publicized, propagandized
즉후 (卽後)	즉후	Immediately after
전화 (戰禍)	전화	Calamities of war
저주하다 (詛呪하다)	저주하다	To curse
나마지	나머지	As a result of, remainder (here: in the wake of)
인도주의 (人道主義)	인도주의	Humanitarianism
팽배하다 (膨湃하다)	팽배하다	To surge, swell
무저항 (無抵抗)	무저항	Non-resistance
원정군 (遠征軍)	원정군	Expeditionary force
감사 (感謝)	감사	Gratitude
아울너	아울러	Together with, along with (older spelling)
감격케 하다 (感激케 하다)	감격케 하다	To move deeply, impress
심지어 (甚至於)	심지어	Even, going so far as to
재림하다 (再臨하다)	재림하다	To return, second coming (of Christ)
떠들어 대다	떠들어 대다	To make a fuss, clamor
우수운	우스운	Laughable, ridiculous (older spelling)
움지겨지지 안켓지요	움직여지지 않겠지요	Will likely not be moved (older spelling/form)
젊은	젊은	Young
와이얄	?	Wayal? (Unclear name)
글세	글쎄	Well, let me see
애는 쓰다	애는 쓰다	To make an effort, try hard
최근 (最近)	최근	Recently
감옥 (監獄)	감옥	Prison
작고	자꾸	Repeatedly, frequently (older spelling)
피하다 (避하다)	피하다	To avoid
경향 (傾向)	경향	Tendency
보이다	보이다	To be seen, appear
외계 (外界)	외계	Outside world
딱	딱	Completely, suddenly
끈어저서	끊어져서	Being cut off (older spelling)
밧갓	바깥	Outside (older spelling)
듯지도 못하게 되니	듣지도 못하게 되니	Becoming unable even to hear (older form)
대체로 (大體로)	대체로	Generally
종교계 (宗敎界)	종교계	Religious world/circles
상원의장 (上院議長)	상원의장	Senate President
큼직한	큼직한	Rather large, considerable
이잘	이래	Since (perhaps '이래' meant?)
대미교섭 (對米交涉)	대미교섭	Negotiations with the US
마터하더구만	맡아 하더구만	I observed that (he) took charge of (older form)
당분간 (當分間)	당분간	For the time being
수습되다 (收拾되다)	수습되다	To be brought under control, managed
파괴 (破壞)	파괴	Destruction
건설기 (建設期)	건설기	Construction period
격동기 (激動期)	격동기	Turbulent period
xx과중 (xx過中)	과도기 중	During a transition period (過渡期 中 likely)
천재 (天才)	천재	Genius
불숙불숙	불쑥불쑥	Suddenly, unexpectedly (appearing)
기상천외 (奇想天外)	기상천외	Fantastic, extraordinary, bizarre
내다라와요	나타나요	Appears (older dialectal form?)
탁짜어진	딱 짜여진	Tightly organized, set up (older spelling)
기성제도 (旣成制度)	기성제도	Established system
사무가적 (事務家的)	사무가적	Bureaucratic
운용하다 (運用하다)	운용하다	To manage, operate
보일 뿐이고	보일 뿐이고	Only appears
부를 자	부를 자	One who can be called
전통 (傳統)	전통	Tradition
수직하다 (守直하다)	수호하다	To protect, uphold (likely 수호하다)
고등 문관 시험 (高等 文官 試驗)	고등 문관 시험	Higher Civil Service Examination
파스하여	패스하여	Passing (loanword 'pass')
사무관 (事務官)	사무관	Administrative official, bureaucrat
국장 (局長)	국장	Bureau director
대신 (大臣)	대신	Minister
위대하다 (偉大하다)	위대하다	To be great, grand
나오지 못하라고 말지요	나오지 못하고 말지요	Ends up being unable to emerge (older form)
실용주의 (實用主義)	실용주의	Pragmatism
철학자 (哲學者)	철학자	Philosopher
만능 (萬能)	만능	Almighty, omnipotent
옮겨가다	옮겨가다	To move to
생존 (生存)	생존	Survival, existence
계속되다 (繼續되다)	계속되다	To continue
들니워날지	?	(Unclear word, possibly related to being overthrown)
건국 (建國)	건국	Founding of a nation
불결하다 (不潔하다)	불결하다	To be unclean, dirty
나태하다 (懶怠하다)	나태하다	To be lazy, indolent
국민성 (國民性)	국민성	National character
일신 식혀노앗고 (一新 식혀놓았고)	일신시켜 놓았고	Having renewed/reformed (older spelling/form)
파시스당 (파시스트黨)	파시스트당	Fascist Party
흔들다	흔들다	To shake
다저 노앗지요	다져 놓았지요	Has solidified/hardened (older spelling/form)
입당 (立黨)	입당	Founding of a party
꾸준히	꾸준히	Steadily, persistently
양성하다 (養成하다)	양성하다	To nurture, train
부담자 (負擔者)	부담자	Bearer (of responsibility)
반역자 (叛逆者)	반역자	Rebel, traitor
좀처럼	좀처럼	Rarely, hardly
이러서지 못 할 것입니다	일어서지 못할 것입니다	Will likely not be able to rise up (older spelling)
반대 (反對)	반대	Opposite, contrary
일시 (一時)	일시	Temporarily, for a time
벨사이유조약 (베르사유條約)	베르사유 조약	Treaty of Versailles
파기 (破棄)	파기	Abrogation, annulment
불배상주의 (不賠償主義)	불배상주의	Principle of non-payment of reparations
청당운동 (淸黨運動)	청당운동	Party purification movement
거듭하다	거듭하다	To repeat
고약스럽다	고약스럽다	To be wicked, nasty
몃날	몇 날	A few days (older spelling)
예측하다 (豫測하다)	예측하다	To predict
유태인 (猶太人)	유태인	Jew, Jewish person
추방하다 (追放하다)	추방하다	To expel, banish
갱서취유 (坑西炊儒)	분서갱유	Burning books and burying scholars (likely typo/misinterpretation of 焚書坑儒)
행동 (行動)	행동	Action, behavior
야만인 (野蠻人)	야만인	Barbarian
무에요	뭐예요	What is it? (older spelling)
국수주의자 (國粹主義者)	국수주의자	Nationalist, chauvinist
공산주의자 (共産主義者)	공산주의자	Communist
제제복벽파 (帝制復辟派)	제제복벽파	Imperial restoration faction
별 분자	별 분자	Various elements/types
잡탕 (雜湯)	잡탕	Hodgepodge, miscellaneous mixture
본질적 (本質的)	본질적	Fundamental, essential
출현 (出現)	출현	Appearance, emergence
복흥 (復興)	부흥	Revival, restoration (likely 부흥)
속하여진 (速하여진)	속하여진	Hastened, quickened
공적 (功績)	공적	Achievement, merit
니치지	잊히지	Be forgotten (older spelling)
자미잇는	재미있는	Interesting (older spelling)
싸고돌다	싸고돌다	To hover around, protectively circle
처녀 (處女)	처녀	Maiden, virgin
강간하다 (强姦하다)	강간하다	To rape
달래다	달래다	To soothe, coax
이용하다 (利用하다)	이용하다	To use, utilize
싸홈	싸움	Fight, conflict (older spelling)
부치려 들다	부치려 들다	To try to instigate/attach
좌익정당 (左翼政黨)	좌익정당	Left-wing political party
수령 (首領)	수령	Leader
발전하다 (發展하다)	발전하다	To develop
여지 (餘地)	여지	Room, scope
탄광부 (炭坑夫)	탄광부	Coal miner
대부분 (大部分)	대부분	Majority
지위 (地位)	지위	Status, position
유사하다 (類似하다)	유사하다	To be similar
산업 조직 (産業 組織)	산업 조직	Industrial structure
근저 (根底)	근저	Foundation, basis
막다른 골목	막다른 골목	Dead end alley
탁 맥혀잇지안키에	딱 막혀있지 않기에	Because it is not completely blocked (older spelling/form)
대규모 (大規模)	대규모	Large-scale
푸로레타리아	프롤레타리아	Proletariat
오척단구 (五尺短軀)	오척단구	Short stature (lit. 5-foot short body)
조고만	조그만	Small, little (older spelling)
양반 (兩班)	양반	Gentleman (here, just 'man')
위기 (危機)	위기	Crisis
질머지다	짊어지다	To shoulder, bear (older spelling)
동분서주하다 (東奔西走하다)	동분서주하다	To bustle about, be busy running around
고수하다 (固守하다)	고수하다	To adhere firmly to, stick to
강화 (强化)	강화	Strengthening
방침 (方針)	방침	Policy, course of action
취하다 (取하다)	취하다	To take, adopt
의장 (議長)	의장	Chairman, speaker
자랑하다	자랑하다	To boast, show off
약소국 (弱小國)	약소국	Small/weak nation
무력하다 (無力하다)	무력하다	To be powerless
득의 (得意)	득의	One's specialty, forte; pride
이른 것	잃은 것	Thing lost (older spelling)
종교 (宗敎)	종교	Religion
배경 (背景)	배경	Background
전 인민 (全 人民)	전 인민	Entire population/people
성장하다 (成長하다)	성장하다	To grow
장시간 (長時間)	장시간	Long time
감사하다 (感謝하다)	감사하다	To thank
밋첫스면	미쳤으면	If (it) had reached (older spelling)
조켓스나	좋겠으나	Although it would be good (older spelling)
지리하여 (支離하여)	지리하여	Being rambling, disjointed
이만	이만	This much, here
끈침니다	끝냅니다	Will end/conclude (older spelling)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제6권 제8호
발행일	1934년 08월 01일
기사제목	世界一流 政治家·思想家 論評會
기사형태	대담·좌담

世界一流 政治家·思想家 論評會

出席者(年齡順)

許憲氏 明治大學法科出身, 朝鮮辯護士協會會長, 普成專門學校校長, 東亞日報社長代理新幹會會長을 歷任近年世界漫遊而歸國 年五十
呂運亨氏 南京金陵大學出身, 海外多年奔走, 歸國하야 現在朝鮮中央日報社長으로 在任 年四十九
金炳魯氏 明治大學法科出身, 官立法學專門學校敎授, 朝鮮辯護士協會會長, 新幹會中央執行委員長歷任, 現在辯護士 年四十八
金洛水氏 日本大學修學, 全北風會幹部, 大衆社主幹, 現在著述 年四十三
金璟載氏 水原高等農林出身, 東京帝大農科修學, 前火曜會幹部現在著述 年三十五
本社金東煥
本社-그러면 지금부터 開會 하겟슴니다. 여러분 중에는 世界 各國에 도라 다니며 有名하다는 政治家와 思想家을 만히 會見하고 오신 이도 잇고 또는 著書을 통하야 그人物을 만히 硏究하고 게신이도 잇을줄 암니다.
아모조록 從來 新聞雜誌에서 散見하지 안튼 特異한 境地을 말슴 하여주시기를 바람니다. 爲先 우리의 注目은 當代의 中國 政治家 及 思想家에 올마가지 안을 수 업슴니다. 그러기에 첫재로 今日 政權과 兵馬의 權을 아울너 한손에 쥐고잇는 統帥者 蔣介石의 人物에 대하여 말슴하여 주십시요.<18>

許憲-아마 中國 人物은 蔣介石 뿐 아니라 外交官 이라든지 財政家 라든지 呂雲亨氏가 잘아 걸요. 나는 年前 北京서 國際 辯護士 大會가 열니엇슬 때에 그때 外交 總長으로서 참석하엿든 顔蕙慶 博士만은 맛나 보앗지만 그박게 이들은 新聞雜誌을 통하야 겨우 아는 것 박게 업서요. 大體로 말하자면 現在 中國의 運命을 맛길만한 政治家을 찻자면 그래도 亦是 蔣介石 일걸요. 蔣은 一九一二年 孫文이 代表로 모스꾸바 갓슬 때에 亦衛軍組織을 緻密히 硏究햇고 도라와선 곳 黃浦軍官學校를 세운 것이 恒常 將來를 生覺하는 앞 길 보는 政治家라할 수 잇을 것 갓해요. 또 北伐成功 後 여러 軍閥을 업새 버리고 形式만으로도 한 때는 國民政府손에 政權을 統一식혀노흔 點이라든지 그 功이 만치요. 萬一 蔣이 아니엇더면 아직도 南北에 吳佩孚閻錫山  曺곤 馮玉祥 等 軍閥이 割據하여 列國分割의 餌食이 되엿슬는지 모르지요. 그러고 只今은 蔣介石이 아니면 毛澤東 等의 紅軍이 長江沿岸을 占領 할 것이요. 그리되면 列國 聯合軍이 南京을 陷落하고 老大國은 列國 共同 管理의 손에 떠러질걸요. 엇잿든 蔣介石의 運命은 이巨大한紅軍을 잘 막어내느냐와 滿洲問題를 잘 解決짓느냐 하는데 달엿슬걸요.
呂雲亨-蔣介石에 대하여는 내가 比較的 그 사람된 품과 또 中國잇을 때 만히 接觸 하여본 여러가지 事件과 經驗이 잇기는 하지만은 나는 깁히 生覺하는 바 잇서 아직까지는 蔣介石만에 대하여는 絶對緘口하겟서요 蔣보다 더 注目할 政治家로 汪兆銘이 잇지요. 國內 行政을 그사람의 손으로 統轄하고 잇을 뿐더러 外交의 任까지 맛고 잇스니까  實際上 政權이 그 사람손에 左右된다 해도 過言이 아니지요 그러나 사람된 품이 나 보기에는 明日이 中國을 잇글어갈 大 人物로는 보지 안어요. 첫재 그는 同志와 死生을 함게 하지안는 버릇이 잇서요.<19>
1926年 以來 여러번 自己의 計劃이 失敗될 때마다 無所歸의 同志와 部下를 바리고 超然히 海外로 逃亡을 하엿지오. 이 바람에 孫科勞力이 붓적 느럿지요. 王을 밋다가 王에게 버림바든 運動者들은 이럭저럭 孫科의 품안에 안켯지요. 그러기에 現在 王精衛보다 實勢力이 孫科가 勝하다 할걸요. 아모튼 革命 運動에 잇서 第一重大한 條件이 同志끼리 生死을 같이하여야 하는것이로되 王은 너무 잘 同志을 버러요. 그러지에 只今 그는 孤立 狀態에 잇지요. 녯날이 改粗派의 勢力도 只今은 形體가 업서젓고요.
金璟載-그런데 大體로 보아서 지금같은 形便에서는 어느 나라 政權이나 늘 中間派가 掌握하게되는 모양이드군요. 蔣介石이 바로 中間派가 아녀요? 中間派의 特徵은 언제든지 제主義政策을 分明히 내세우지 안코 제 便이 조흔 때마다 右派와 合作하여 左派를  驅逐하기도하고 左派와 提携하여 右派를 내 몰기도 하지요. 그래서 언제든지 灰色 벨 속에서 政權만을 維持하지요. 實例로 中間派인 蔣이 右派인 胡漢民과 握手하여 처음엔 王兆銘을 내어  쫏첫다가 다시 左派인 汪과 提携하여 胡漢民을 내어 쫏지 안엇서요. 露西亞도 中間派인 스타-린이 右派인 부하린과 提携하여 트로츠키를 내어 쪼코 그제는 또 부하린까지 내어 쪼코 이제는 노서아民衆의利害를 제가 代表하엿노라 하지 안어요. 民衆이란 아모리 總名하다 섬치드래도 一國의複雜 한 政治經濟的 政策에 대하여 얼는 일일히 支持라거나 排斥이라거나를 判斷하지못해요 그러니까 어느 時機까지 卽 歷史的 過程에 잇서선 陰謀性이 만코 組織에 대한 技術이 뛰어난者가 政權을  獲得하고 마는데 結局 획득만 하여노흐면 結果에잇서 大衆의 支持을 밧덧노라 말하게 되니까 언제든지 中間派가 일하기 쉽지요. 蔣介石은 제가 兵力을가젓스니까 數次의 쿠-테타-에 다 成功하엿고 軍閥과 하든 國內 戰爭에도다 勝利하엿스니 그는 得意한男兒이지요. 그러나 紅軍 勢力을 엇지할가요 蔣이 明日은 未知數라고<20> 아니할 수 업서요. 그러치만 나個人의感情은 別 問題로하고 中國의 危難을 救濟하자면 蔣介石의 저러케 그냥 버티고 잇는 것이 조흘 즐 알어요.
金若水-아니지요. 蔣介石의 天下는 漸漸 물너가고 잇지요. 이제는 어느 一個人이 英雄이 되어 大衆을 指導하고 命令할 때는 이미 지낫지요. 蔣介石의 背後에 언제 大衆이 잇섯든가요. 잇섯다면 뿔조아지의 兵站部인 浙江 財閥이 잇섯고 中國을 二重xx하는 買辨階級이 잇섯지요 그가 勞働者, 農民, 學生의 利害를 代表한 적이 잇다는 말을 못드럿서요. 數次의 쿠테타- 數次의 國內戰爭이 잇섯스나 그는 제 政權의 維持 强化 以外에 人民을 爲하야 不平等 條約하나 廢棄에 成功하엿든가요. 도로혀 四,一二事件을 못 보앗는가요. 上海中心으로 勞働者大衆의 活動性이 增大하여가자  商工뿔조아지-의 代表者인 蔣將軍은 上海를 上領하자 곳 勞働者와 絶緣하고 그組織을 破壞하여 버리엇지요. 그는 지금 階級的 勢力을 破壞하기에 全力을 다하고 잇지만은 그러나 覺醒한 中國의大衆은-더구나 勞働者, 學生層은 蔣을 버린지 오래지요. 금후의 指導者는 이 新興層에서 오직 나올 것임니다. 妥協的, 中間的 勢力이 只今世界的으로 沒落하는 때가 아님니까. 팟쇼 ,팟쇼라 함이 그를 證據하고 잇지안는가요. 나치스나 뭇소리니나 다 極右에 政權이 가든지 新興階級 手中에 政權이 가든지 두 길박에 업지안어요? 이제는 蔣介石의 手腕이라든지 才操라든지 智慧라든지 하는 個人的 優劣에 그問題가 잇지안어요
金炳魯-그러나 蔣介石은 아직 더 길게 살 사람으로 보여요. 그야 國民黨政令이 미치는 곳이라면 浙江,江蘇 등 몃 省밧게 아니되지요. 滿洲도 떠러저 나가고 蒙古, 西藏, 靑海가 다 分解過程에 잇고 이러한 때에 그나마 强力한 蔣의 勢力이 失墜된다면 조케되어 녯軍閥이 다시 割據하야 國內戰이 이러나겟고 납부게 되어 紅軍이 乘勝長驅하야 中國을 그 治下에 席捲할 터이니 그리되면 列國에 하로라도 일즉이 그機會를 주고마는 結果가 될 것이니 蔣介石은 中國의 防波堤格이지요 내가 듯건대<21> 그는 兵略家라합데다. 政治 方面에 手腕잇는 人物을 어더 둘이 손이 맛게 일 해간다면 中國의 現狀維持는 식혀나갈 爲人으로 알어요.
本社-蔣介石에 대하여는 大槪 알엇슴니다. 이제는 蔣 以外에 假令 胡漢民, 王兆銘, 黃孚, 何應欽, 宋子文, 孫科 等 親日, 親米, 親英派 諸人物을 말슴하여 주서요
呂運亨-人物은 宋子文이 나서요. 大膽하고 同志를 잘 包容하고 世界政局을 잘 볼 줄 알고 그가 萬年財政部長이란 말을 듯다가 辭職하엿지만 實로 中國의 財政은 그 當時 名 財政家라든 宋으로도 엇절 道理업섯든 모양이드군요. 첫재 北平政務委員會가 생기어 北中雜軍을 南京政府가 引受함애 거기에는每月 300萬圓을 支出하여야하고 게다가 10億圓이나되는 內國債을 償換하기에 國庫收入의 90파-센트를 支給하여야하며 더구나 第一 重要한 財源인(全歲入의 52파-센트)關稅가 飢饉과 洪水와 蒙古 西藏의 分離等으로 激減하여 國家財政이 破綻하게됨애 反對派의 陰謀로 꺽구러지기는 하엿지만 그러나 宋은 浙江財閥의 中樞요 中央銀行의 總裁인 孔祥熙가 그 義兄이오 蔣과는 男妹間이요 英美의 支援이 잇스니 반드시 再起할 날 잇슬걸요. 孫科는 孫逸仙의아들로 아버지 덕에 빗나는이고 黃孚나 何應針은나는 잘 모르겟서요 胡漢民만은 國民黨有數의 理論家로써 剛直淸廉을 가젓고 民生主義를 살니려하는니만치 어느날이든 民衆의 陳頭에 다시한번 나서고야 말걸요.
金璟載-大體는 나도 그러케 생각하여요. 宋子文은 제누이를 잘두엇지요. 妹父에 孫文, 蔣介石, 孔祥熙 다조치요 누이德에만도 한 목 볼걸요.
이박게 나는 注目할 人物이 잇는줄 아러요 그것은 藍衣社의 實際的指導者인 陳立夫와 陳利夫이여요. 그네는 모스꼬바 共大 出身으로 共産黨의 그優秀한 戰畧을 그냥 갓다가 쓰고 그政策도 만히 引用하고 잇지요. 頭腦도 잇고 手腕도 잇는 藍衣社幹部層에 將來中國의 後繼者가 잇슬 듯 해요. 실상 팟쇼-란 共産黨과는 손바닥의 兩面과 가튼 性質을 가지고 잇지요 이리 번지면 팟쇼-요 저리 번지면 쏘비엣-이되니까요,
金炳魯-엇잿뜬 浙江財閥周圍에 오늘 中國의人物은 모아잇는 듯해요. 浙江財閥이 亡하는 날 現在내로라 하든 모든 政治家가 꺽구러질걸요. 그리고 汪兆銘은 理論政治家지요<22> 아직冊床우에서 政治하는 듯한 늣김을 주어요.
黃孚는 難國收拾에 事務家的 手腕가진 사람으로 보여요. 何應欽은 퍽 單純한 武人인 듯 實際政治에는 于與하지 안코 軍事에만 全力하는 듯해요. 全體로 보아서 親英 親露派보다 親米派에 主ㅅ대가 實하고 手段잇는 政治家가 잇는 듯해요.

外交界人物展望

本 社-外交界의 王正廷, 顧維均, 顔惠慶, 胡維德, 蔣作賓, 陳友仁 등을 말슴하여 주서요.
呂運亨-東洋問題를 잘 觀察하고 또 朝鮮 事情에 밝은 外交家요 學者로서 王寵惠가 잇지요. 그 사람은 立法院長으로도 잇섯고 國際法에도 通曉한 錚錚한 學者지요. 그러고 王正廷 그는 米國 콜럼비아 出身으로 參議院副議長으로 잇다가 巴里講和會義에 가서 일흠날린 外交官이지요. 몹시 冷徹하고 主張을 굿굿이 세워나가는 理智의 사람이지요. 朝鮮에도 왓다갓다고 합데다 王正廷이나 顧維均이나 모다 語學에 才能잇고 機敏하여 항상 國際舞臺에서 新進氣銳한 活動을 보인 분들이지요.
金璟載-外交家중에는 누구 누구하여도 以前 廣東政府에 外交 副長이든 陳友仁이 注目을  끄려요. 그는 左翼 陳營에서 나온 사람으로 英國의 漢國 租界를 强制 回收하려 햇고 그박게 列强의 利權을 대수롭게 보지 안튼 大膽한 外交家엇지요. 廣東政府의 그 革命 外交時代에 만일 그 사람 背後에 强力한 國民的 聲援과 武力의 準備만 잇섯더라면 한 局面은 단단히 打開하여 노앗슬 사람인걸요.
이것은 어느 雜誌에서 본 말이지만 廣東政府를 組織하고서 陳友仁은 곳 日本에 건너갓는데 그가 日本와서 蔣介石 政府가 英佛 美와 엇든 密約을 締結하려 하는 그 內幕을 密告하엿다 하드구만. 처음에는 아마 廣東 政府의 獨立 支持을 援助하여 달나는 運動을 하기 위하야 이런말을 다한듯 하드군요 그때 陳友仁의 密告란 것이 여러 가지 點으로 極東 政局에 큰 波動을 이르킨 듯 합데다.
許  憲-나는 中國 外交官으로 맛나본 사람은 앗가도 말한 바와 갓치 顔惠慶博士인데 그 사람은 風釆가 當當하고 英語 잘 합데다. 王正廷, 顧維均 가튼 사람도 다 有數하겟지만 閱歷으로나 國際 外交舞臺의 經驗으로 보거나 지금 中國서는 顔博士를 第一人者로 칠걸요. 그러고 巴里갓슬 때 王正廷을 조곰 하더면 맛나볼 수 잇섯든 것을 約五分間의 差違로 會見을 못하고 말엇슴니다.
大體로 中國에는 錚錚한 외교가가 만흐나 그사람들을<23> 모다 親日派이니 親米派이니 親露派이니 하고 指名하는 例가 만흐나 그것은 現在 亂麻와 가튼 國家를 救濟하려니까 武器의 供給도 밧어야 하고 借款도 어더야 할 터이니까 不得已 或은 米國에 或은 英國에 붓는 체하기라도 하겟지만 그 보다도 나보기에는 모다 愛國的 情熱잇는 外交家로 보입데다. 事實 中國은 只今 어느 한나라와만 親善 關係를 맷고만 지날 수 업게 列國의 共同 利害가 錯雜하게 交錯되어잇스니까.
金炳魯-그야 그러겟지요. 賣國的 外交家야 잇슬리 업겟지요. 그러고 最近 北中 政權을 쥐고 흔드는 對日 外交家 黃孚의 活躍이 만흔데 이번의 通車問題의 解決과 北中停戰協定等 다 이 사람의 손으로 된 것이지요. 드른즉 黃孚는 北平서 學生運動때 活躍한 적도 잇고 어느內閣때든가 總長도 지난 일이 잇섯지요! 그러나 이 분은 才人이요 事務家인드시 印象되드군요.
엇잿든 只今 人氣 外交家로는 王正廷, 陳友仁 등이 모다 失脚한뒤는 顔惠慶, 顧維均, 郭泰琪일걸요.
呂運亨-그래요 그 중에 郭泰琪는 몃번 맛나 본 일도 잇지만 語學에 드러선 王正廷, 顧維均보다도 몃갑절 나어요. 그 사람은 萬人 座中에서 當當히 外交政策을 들고 戰鬪的 論戰을 펴는데에 將인 것이 아니라 5,6人쯤 모아서 서로 卽席에서 酬問酬答하면서 外交問題를 解決짓는데에 그 以上가는 才操가 업지요 頭腦明浙하고 應口輒對的 口辨에 能하지요. 上海 停戰協定 때에 敗軍의 委員으로서 相當히 活躍하엿지요.
그러고 陳友仁도 앗가운 人物이지요. 打協을 모르는 剛直한 外交家로써 그때 信義업고 反動無雙한 蔣介石의 쿠-테타만 업섯더면 陳友仁의 손을 通하야 中國은 國恥條約을 만히 廢止식힐 수 잇섯고 外國租界地도 만히 回收할 수 잇섯슬 것임니다.
요지간은 어듸 佛蘭西로 亡命하엿다든지 露西亞로 갓다든지 잘 모르겟스나 한번 再起식힐만한 人材지요.
나는 陳友人과는 人間的으로도 각가웟슴니다.

쏘비엣中國의人物들

本  社-國民政府及 國民黨係統의 人物들은 大體 以上에서 끗치고 이제는 世界가 모다 注目하고 잇는 쏘비엣中國의 政府主席 以下 諸要人과 紅軍의 重要軍畧家들을 말슴하여 주서요.
呂運亨-나는 毛澤東은 잘 압니다. 그 사람은 지금 首都端金에 잇스면서 中央政府의 主席으로 副主席 張國濤와함께 政治工作에 熱中하고잇지요. 그런데 外形으로 보기에는 몸이 가늘고 弱하고 허줄구레하게 생기어서 風釆가 보잘 것 업지요. 그래서 누구나 그가 主席일가하고 모르는 사람은 다 놀남니다. 또 힛틀러나 뭇소리니 모양으로 風雨을 부르는 雄辯家도 아니고 말할 때 보아도<24> 조용조용하게 말하지요. 村夫子式이지요. 그런데 이사람가치 뜻이 굿은 사람이 업서요. 世上이 다아는 바와가처 1925年 5月에 上海總罷業이 잇지 안엇서요. 이것은 그前까지는 政府黨인 國民黨은 오직 國民 뿔조아지-의 結合體에 不過하든것이 共産黨이 드러가면서 國民黨 陣形안애 農民,勞働者가 드러갓지요. 그 結果排貨運動을 全國力으로 指導하엇고 揚子江一帶의 反帝運動이 極度에 達하엇지요. 이 때에 불조아-지는 西山會議를여러 階級투쟁 反對,共産黨主義者를 國民黨에서 驅逐할 것을 決議하고 有名한 蔣의쿠-테타가 잇지 안엇서요. 그래서 共産黨員은 크게 迫害를 밧고 共産運動은 打擊을 입엇지요. 이 때의 形勢를 보면 張繼等西山會義派, 李宗仁, 白崇禧 等의 廣西派, 閰錫山, 馮玉祥 등 軍閥과 거기에 蔣介石, 胡漢民과 改組派의 王兆銘등이 모다 一致하여 國民黨旗下에 뭉첫지요. 그때 共産黨側에선 勢力이 괴멸을 當하야 多數는 變節하고 轉向하고 逃走할 때 쪽겨나온 同志를 끄을고 쏘비엣中國을 再建하여야 한다는 것을 끗까지 主張한 사람이 이때 毛澤東이엇지요. 이 사람이 아니엇더면 쏘비엣共和國 建設은 엇지 되엇슬는지 實로 疑問이지요. 그래서 只今은 全國十八省中 江西, 福建, 湖北. 山西等 10餘省 6,000餘萬名을 統治하고 잇지요.
金若水-그러치요. 毛澤東을 第一 처야하겟지요. 그사람 功勞가 컷지요. 엇잿든 쏘비엣區域안에는 江西省의 石炭, 湖北省의 鐵 또, 쌀, 綿花, 枯麻 等 産物이 豊富하며 各地에 新作路 까지는 못노여도 河川이 만허서 水運으로 交通路를 삼고 農民軍의 編制等 紅軍의勢力이 漸漸增大하여 가고 잇스니 萬一 蔣介石 背後에 列强의 武力援助만 업다면 紅軍이 乘勝長驅 南京 陷落하기는 問題 아닐걸요. 1931年 大會때에는 600餘 名의 各 省 代表가 모앗드란 点으로 보아 가히 그 勢力을 알겟서요.
金炳魯-紅軍은 武器도 相當한 듯 합데다. 어느 冊에서 보앗는데 二十萬個의 xx가 잇다구요.  또 飛行機도 機關銃도 相當하다드군요. 그것이 모다 蔣介石軍과 싸우다가 投降하여오는 中央軍이 가지고 온 선물이 大部分이고 더러는 捕獲品이고 더러는 xxx의 供給이라드군요. 紅軍은 平地戰에선 弱하나 山岳戰에서 아조 强하다 해요 아마 우리들은 모르지만 有數한 軍略畧家가 만흔듯하여요. 그러나 쏘비엣 區域안의 紅軍-大部分인 農民軍은 確實히 社會主義를 讚仰하여 그럴가요? 그 보다도 쏘비엣 구역 안에 들면 땅이 저절로 생기고 農産物이 제것이 되니 利害打算上 그러케한 点도 잇슬것 갓해요. 녯날 軍閥이란 또는 省長이란 事實 말하자면 土豪지요. 그 省內에 가장 큰 大 地主지요. 그러고 省民 大部分은 모다 省長집 밧을 가라먹는 小作人들 이엇지요. 이 積年 苦痛을 주든 軍閥이 업서지는 바람에 아마 누구나 紅軍紅軍하고<25> 그를 歡迎하는 듯 하여요. 그러니까 精練 兵隊가 얼마나 잇고 社會主義를 爲하야 죽겟다는 쏘비엣 人民이 얼마나 될는지는 아직 여러가지 疑問이 잇는 듯 함니다.

胡適,梁 超啓 等思想家

本  社-이제는 現代 中國을 指導하는 有數한 思想家를 말슴하여 주서요.
金璟載-녜전에는 政治家 따로 思想家 따로 잇섯스나 이제는 實際 政治家가 思想家를 兼하여잇지요. 卽 그思想을 實地로 政治上에 運用하고야 滿足 하니까 또 民衆도 實際를 伴치안은 孤立한 思想이란 것에 興味를 아니늣기니까 그러니까 現代中國의 思想家라하면 卽그것이 곳王兆銘, 胡漢民 등 實際政治家를 意味하겟지요.
金若水-그야그러치요. 이제는 智識水準이 거지반 同一하여서 누구라고 特別히 뛰여난 머리를 갓기가 어려웁고 또 뛰어난 머리로 짜 내인 놉흔 思想이 잇다하여도 實地生活과 流離된 것이면 그를 놉히 評價할 수가 업스니까 思想家 卽 實際運動家-이러케 되지요.
許  憲-나도 그点에는 同感 임니다. 녜전에는 蔡元培 胡湖適, 李大쇄等이 잇서 靑年中國을 指道하엇지만 지금은 北京大學 속에 新進의 小壯敎援團이 잇다는말도 못드럿고 어느모퉁이에 思想家만 그룹을 지어 陣치고 잇단 말을 못 드럿서요.
呂運亨-그러치요. 그 여러 사람은 다 過去의 人物이엇지요. 더구나 蔡元培 가튼 사람은 元來 天主敎信者인데 지금은 아조 思想界를 떠나서 西洋女子인 제 안해를 다리고 白耳義라든가 瑞西 어느 山谷의 寺院속에 隱居生活을 한대요.
金璟載-梁啓超도 한동안 울니엇지만 내가 드른바에 依 하면 梁啓超는 朝鮮에서 梁啓超, 梁啓超하고 떠들엇지 中國서는 그러케 大端하게 치지안엇대요.
本 社-中國에 對한 것이 너무 길어 젓슴니다. 中國은 이에 끈치겟슴니다.

印度, 比島其他

本  社-이번에는 新興하는 比律賓과 印度와 또 멀니 亞米利加의 政界 及 思想界에 눈을 돌려주서요. 깐디는 다시 印度 民衆을 끄을고 이러날 機會잇을 사람일까요.
呂運亨-업겟지요. 깐디는 이제는 昨日의 사람이요. 이미 죽은사람이지요. 各處에서 이러나든  印度人의 運動에 x에 물을 끼어언진 役割을 한 사람이지요. 우리들은 大戰 前 後의歷史를 잘아니까  더길게 말슴치 안켓슴니다 만은 깐디政策은 일을 그르처 버렷지요.
그리고 怪異한 것은 깐디를「聖雄」이라하여요. 聖人과 英雄이란 도모지 調和되지안는 일흠이지요. 聖人이란 仁한 자고 英雄이란 覇道의 자인데 善人과 惡人을 混合한 듯한「聖雄」이란 말부터가 奇怪하지요. 엇잿든 實力 以上으로<26> 歐美人에 宣傳되엇지요. 그것이 大戰 卽後 世界에 戰禍를 詛呪하는 나마지 人道主義가 膨湃할 때에 無 抵抗 人道主義를 들고 이러낫스니 大戰時 印度 遠征軍에 對한 感謝와 아울너 西洋人을 感激케 하엇지요. 그래서 심지어 大戰 後 紐育中央敎會에서는「오-耶蘇가 再臨하엇다. 二十世紀의 예수를 보려면 印度에 가거라」고까지 떠들어 대엇지요. 우수운 일지요. 엇재뜬 깐디 말에 印度大衆이 이제는 움지겨지지 안켓지요. 그보다도 젊은 指導者인 와이얄, 넬을 더 注目할 필요가 잇슬걸요.
金璟載-글세 그럴까요. 그러나 깐디도 애는 무척 쓴사람 갓해요. 그리고 最近에는 監獄을 작고 避하려고 하는 傾向이 보이는데 그것은 아마 數次 監獄에 드러가 잇스니까  外界와 接觸이 딱 끈어저서 밧갓 일은 보지도 듯지도 못하게 되니 外界의 運動을 指導할 수 업서 그런듯해요. 大體로 印度의 人物은 宗敎界 속에 잇는 모양이기 잘 모르겟서요.
許  憲-比島上院議長 켜즌도 큼직한 人物인가 보더구만. 이잘 아기날드 以後 처음으로 比島人의 支持를 밧는 모양인데 氏는 外交에도 能한 모양으로 對米交涉을 늘 마터하더구만. 比島도 아마 當分間은 이 사람 손에 收拾되어갈걸요.
金璟載-大體로 人物이란 破壞와 建設期에 나는 듯 해요. 그激動期에  또는 xx過中에서 天才가진이가 불숙불숙 奇想天外로 내다라와요. 그래서 마치 米國과 가치 모든 것이 탁짜어진 곳에서는 그저 그 旣成制度를 事務家的으로 運用하는 人物이 보일 뿐이고 英雄이라부를 者는 업는듯해요. 米國大統領 루-즈벨트가튼 人物도 米國의 傳統을 守直하고 잇슬 뿐이지요.
金炳魯-그는그러치요. 高等 文官試驗에 파스하여 事務官이 되고 무슨局長이 되고 무슨大臣이 되는 것 가튼 組織속에선 偉大한 人物이 나오지 못하라고 말지요.
許  憲-더구나 米國에는 思想家라고 볼수 업지요. 잇다하여도 제임쓰 가튼 實用主義哲學者나 잇슬 뿐이지요. 米國가 튼實用經濟萬能 나라에 思想家를 찻는 것 부터 잘못이겟지만은.

歐米各地의人物

本  社-이제는 歐羅巴로 옮겨가겟슴니다. 못소리니, 힛틀러,  떼발레라, 맥드날드, 마사릭, 돌푸, 랏살 等을 말슴하여주서요 時間이 너무 느젓기에 簡單簡單히 願함니다.
許  憲-나는 뭇소리니 生命은 적어도 그가 生存 할때까지 繼續되리라고 봄니다만은 힛틀러는 언제 들니워날지 모르게 보아요. 뭇소리니는 伊太利의 建國을 다시 한번 한사람이지요. 그 는 世界에서 第一不潔하고 懶怠하다는<27> 伊太利 國民性까지 一新 식혀노앗고 파시스당의 政權을 다시 더 흔들지 안케 다저 노앗지요 立黨以後 꾸준히 養成하여 노은 第二 뭇소리니 第三 뭇소리니들이 이제는 尹太利 政治組織의 負擔者가 되엇스니까 뭇소리니에 叛逆者가 좀처럼 이러서지 못 할 것입니다. 그反對로 히틀러는 一時 벨사이유條約 破棄 不賠償主義-를 들고 이러나서 獨逸國民의 支持를 바더 나치스 政權을 어더 쥐엇스나 아모리 이번가튼 淸黨運動을 거듭한다하여도 그가 하여온 政策이 고약스러워서 몃날 못 갈걸요.
呂運亨-올해요. 힛틀러는 당장 明日을 豫測하지 못할 人物임니다. 그가 猶太人 追放한것이라든지 坑西炊儒한 그 行動을 보면 野蠻人이지 무에요. 그러고 나치스란 元來 그속에는 國粹主義者도 共産主義者도 帝制復辟派도 별分子가 다 드러가 雜湯으로되엇지요. 그것이 언제 本質的으로 淸黨되겟서요. 다만 힛틀러의 出現으로 獨逸의 復興이 速하여진 功績만은 니치지 못 할것임니다. 仔味잇는 것은  墺太利를 싸고도는 뭇소리니, 히틀러, 佛蘭西의 태도지요 말하자면 墺太利란 處女를 히틀러는 마구 강간 하려고들고 뭇소리니는 달래려고들고 불란서는 墺太利를 이용하여 뭇소리니와 히틀러를 싸홈 부치려 들지요.
金璟載-맥드날드는 더 그以上 左翼政黨的 首領으로 發展할 餘地가 업는 듯해요. 元來 英國勞働者라면  炭坑夫가 大部分으로 實로 英國에 對한 勞働者의 地位란 朝鮮에 잇서서의 小作農民층과 類似한데 英國 炭坑夫는 英國産業 組織의 根底에잇서 막다른골목 모양으로 탁 맥혀잇지안키에 英國에선 大規模의 푸로레타리아 運動이 勝利할 날이 올 것 갓지 안어요.
呂運亨-墺太利의 돌프스와 愛蘭의 떼발레라의 將來가 注目되지오. 돌프스는 5尺短軀의 조고만 양반이 墺太利의 危機를 질머지고 잘도 東奔西走하지요. 떼발레라는 主義를 固守하는 剛直한男兒지요. 그는 愛蘭의 强化를 爲하야 國際舞臺에 만히 活躍하는 方針을 取 햇지요. 그래서 國際聯盟의 무슨 議長 무슨 議長으로 꽤만히 活動하면서 愛蘭의힘을 世界에 자랑하느라 하엿지요. 그러나 弱小國의 조흔 舞臺이든 國際聯盟이 最近와서는 퍽이나 無力하게 되엇기에 그는그만 得意의 무대를 이른 것이 되지요. 그러치만 종교의 背景과 全 人民의 지지가 잇스니그의 將來는 愛蘭과 함께 더더成長 할바 인줄 아옵니다.
本  社-너무 長時間 말슴하여주셔서 感謝하엿슴니다.
이박게 露西亞나 土耳其, 猶太, 埃及等 各國家 民族에말슴이 밋첫스면 조켓스나 너무 支離하여 이만 끈침니다.-(1934. 7)<28>
<18-28>