**Header Section:**
Magazine Title: 三千里 제6권 제8호
Publication Date: 1934년 08월 01일
Article Title: 危難中國을 어느 政治家에 맛길가? (To Which Politician Should Perilous China Be Entrusted?)
Author: 安在鴻 咸尙勳 金璟載 元世勳 (An Chaehong, Ham Sanghun, Kim Kyŏngjae, Wŏn Sehun)
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/Opinion Piece)

**Body Text Translation:**

To Which Politician Should Perilous China Be Entrusted?
						An Chaehong, Ham Sanghun, Kim Kyŏngjae, Wŏn Sehun
One Aspect of the Chinese Situation Reflected Through a Critical Eye, Centered on Chiang Kai-shek

An Chaehong

Brother P'a-in (巴人兄),
You often make requests, but I feel apologetic for not being able to fulfill any of them. You ask which politician's emergence is awaited to rescue China from its current crisis? This too seems like a rather P'a-in-style, ingenious question. For someone not in China, but in Chosŏn across the Eastern Sea, confined indoors (杜門屛居) and unable even to handle tomorrow's affairs, to discuss whether to support the Chiang Kai-shek regime or perhaps some politician from the Communist faction... seems inappropriate. Lately, I've developed a taste for unearthing and reviewing old books, so I don't devour newspapers and magazines as before, merely skimming the main articles. Therefore, rambling on about your question is unfitting. However, considering China's current national situation and the international political landscape surrounding it, it seems most appropriate to see things proceeding centered around the Chiang Kai-shek regime for some time. Unless some bizarre misfortune occurs, like Mr. Chiang's personal demise, I have viewed it for years as bound to happen this way. Why is that? There's no need to lengthily state the obvious, common-sense arguments, but firstly, there is still no figure who commands an organized political structure capable of replacing * *. Looking briefly at China's current path, one might say there are two diverging points: one, given the extraordinary international situation, is whether to adopt strong national measures, even risking war (抗x開戰)? The other is whether to adopt gradual measures accompanied by concrete policies (regardless of their feasibility), like the attitude held by the Chiang Kai-shek regime? That is one divergence. Another divergence is whether the Communist Red regime of Chu Te (朱德), Mao Tse-tung (毛澤東), etc., who established a Soviet government in Ruijin County (瑞金縣), Jiangxi Province (江西省), will dominate the situation? Or, at the current juncture where national animosity is boiling over, will the aforementioned Chiang Kai-shek's "bourgeois" (「부르」的) nationalist dictatorial regime—controlling the most elite directly affiliated troops in the country, shouldering Sun Yat-sen's<52> last testament, under the guiding spirit of the Kuomintang's Three Principles of the People (though there seems to be a plan to revise this somewhat recently), furthermore embracing the support of the dictatorial Blue Shirts Society (藍衣社), backed by the largest national financial cliques centered around the Jiang[su] (江) and Zhe[jiang] (浙) plutocrats, hoisting the moral slogan of peaceful unification internally, and pursuing policies of utilizing relations with the United States or other powerful nations externally—manage the immediate course? For the sake of explanation, it would be best to first discuss China's current international position, touch upon Chiang's attitude, glance at the personalities and power relations of the leaders of various factions, and then address the Communist-military-* problem, which holds the greatest relevance to the success or failure of China and Chiang.

Though exceedingly common sense, the first thing to break down is that Chiang and his China, amidst the extraordinary international circumstances of recent years, cannot consciously sacrifice the entire nation and its people on the tip of a spear in a desperate ploy (苦肉計) for a grand unfolding of international warfare. While the tenacious street fighting within specific areas like the Shanghai Incident was one thing, the decisive battle last May in the small area north of Hebei Province (河北省), south of the Great Wall (長成), clearly demonstrated the current offensive and defensive capabilities of the Chinese and Japanese armies. Lacking not only the prospect of victory but even confidence in their defensive power for the time being, a head-on military clash would be national recklessness. To leap beyond this national recklessness and offer the nation itself as a sacrifice to the international political situation is currently unthinkable. Thus, Chiang's policy of neglecting Manchuria to build up strength, the so-called "Cut off the arm to save the nation, pacify the interior to expel the foreigner" (割臂救國案內攘外), is perhaps an inevitable course. This goes back to the Nanjing Incident (南京事件) of March 25, 1927, where their international predicament should be examined. That is, at the time of the Nanjing Incident, Chiang and the China under his leadership stood at a crossroads: should they, in such an extraordinary period, adopt a nationalist reckless charge-ism (猪突主義), confront the imperialist powers head-on, and march into the wilderness of self-destruction? Or should they, inevitably requiring compromise with the powers at this juncture, adopt a gradualist policy of the national bourgeoisie (民族부르的)? They unhesitatingly chose the latter and have come this far. Their situation back then, which left them no choice but the latter, has once again confronted the extraordinary international situation of the past few years. Since the historical path since the Nanjing Incident inevitably extends to the current situation, Chiang Kai-shek's appearance remains a necessity now as well. Could Hu Hanmin (胡漢民), currently lying low (雌伏中), emerge to replace Chiang Kai-shek? Perhaps in a temporary transitional form, but it is unlikely. Firstly, although Hu Hanmin is a top disciple of Sun Yat-sen (孫中山) and an elder statesman of the Kuomintang, he is a purist of "bourgeois democracy" (「부르·떼모크라씨」). Even in the advanced societies of the international powers today, the purist faction of "bourgeois democracy" is least popular. Moreover, for an idealistic, literary figure (翩翩文人的) like Mr. Hu, especially in a chaotic period like China's, advocating the pure theory of capitalist democracy which requires the support of the intelligentsia (「인테리」層), he is destined socially to be overshadowed by the Communist faction of Chu, Mao, etc., on the left, pushed aside by the military dictatorial forces associated with Chiang Kai-shek on the right,<53> and even liable to be outmaneuvered by the reformist faction (改造派) like Wang Jingwei (汪兆銘) in the middle. This situation was vividly demonstrated during the Fujian (福建) independence disturbance that erupted last winter. Though it's old news now, when the Fujian Incident occurred, the Chosŏn press tended to overestimate it considerably. Some perhaps thought it sufficient merely to express praise for the name "Revolutionary Government," and seeing it overthrown in just 40 or 50 days, there were instances of feigned weeping, mimicking Emperor Yang of Sui crying over his palace concubines. However, the Fujian government faction was essentially a motley crew (烏合之衆), an ill-formed entity that hadn't fully hidden its head or tail (藏頭慝尾). Ultimately, they bore the crime of causing internal strife and harming the nation (內爭禍國) in a time of national difficulty. Their radical socialist coloration, such as confiscating private property, firstly provoked fearful hatred among the realistically powerful strata within Fujian province itself, hastened the mobilization of joint vigilance among capital strata nationwide, and elicited aversion from the related foreign powers. Their political disadvantage was thus immense. Geographically, they lacked the convenience of avoiding the dust of the Central Plains (中原風塵) from a remote corner like the southwestern provinces of Liangguang (兩廣), Yunnan (雲南), Guizhou (貴州), nor did they possess the advantage of utilizing the treacherous mountain terrain of Jiangxi (江西) for skillful interior line operations (內線作戰). Situated in an isolated, surrounded corner of the southeast, they awaited defeat. This was self-evident from the beginning. Hu Hanmin, sitting in Hong Kong (香港), merely broadcast arguments criticizing both Nanjing and Fujian, unable to take any active stance. This suggests Hu Hanmin's overall fate; it indicates he cannot easily undertake active endeavors in the future either. He is not someone with the strength to replace Chiang Kai-shek and take control of the nation in the current chaotic China. Although On Puch'ŏn Chang Kye (溫溥泉張繼) are elder statesmen of the party-state, they certainly lack that power and are currently acting in concert with Mr. Chiang. In short, what the Fujian Incident revealed was that among figures on the same level, there is still no one with the power to replace Chiang and grasp control of the nation. It also highlighted that the Communist faction, which, as is typical in such turbulent times, has increased its power, is a major presence for Chiang and for China. It is clear that the future of Chiang and China rests on the success or failure of the so-called "bandit suppression campaign" (剿匪工作).

What is interesting when evaluating China's current situation are its historical parallels. Many scenes similar to the present can be found in Chinese history. For decades since the Wuchang Revolution (武漢革命), while facing unprecedentedly powerful external enemies glaring contemptuously (脾睨), they have merely immersed themselves in internal strife, sliding step by step towards collapse. This resembles the repeated factional struggles between Lü Yijian (呂夷簡) and Ouyang Xiu (歐陽修), Sima Guang (司馬光) and Wang Anshi (王安石), known as the Qingli (慶曆) and Yuanyou (元祐) party conflicts, even while being continuously pressured by the northern powers of Liao and Jin. The various factions command armies reportedly numbering in the hundreds of thousands, the highest number in the world, yet at the Great Wall (長城) and Shanghai (上海), despite momentary clamor (喧騷), they fail to display the actual strength to confront their opponents.<54> This resembles the Disaster of Jingkang (靖康之禍), where, with the entire nation's forces of 60,000-70,000 surrounding the capital, and despite having 200,000 loyalist troops under Zhong Shidao (种師道) and Li Gang (李綱) present beneath strong walls and fortifications, they were unable to fight a decisive battle. Emperors Huizong (徽宗) and Qinzong (欽宗), leading the emperors, empresses, consorts, concubines, crown princes, and royal grandsons, were captured with tied hands and dragged off to Northern Manchuria. While the external threat is thus, the frequent breakdown of unity among their leadership resembles the rivalry (角立) between Niu Sengru (牛僧孺) and Li Deyu (李德裕) during the Tang dynasty under Li Shi (李世 - *likely referring to the era or context*), where, even as the Tubo (吐藩) were about to trample the imperial capital, they obstructed Li Deyu's western strategy (西邊經畧) and returned surrendered generals to the enemy state (Tubo), trading the nation's fate for factional strife. The existence of factions fighting bloody battles on one side while others implicitly raise banners of revolt resembles the late Ming period. The iron cavalry of the Qing Taizong had already captured Yanjing (燕京), and Emperor Yizong (毅宗 - Chongzhen) had committed suicide, yet under the bitter loyalty of Shi Kefa (史可法), who supported the Prince of Fu in Nanjing (南京) for defensive warfare, bandits swarmed Shanxi and western regions, while Zuo Liangyu (左良玉), Xu Dingguo (許定國), etc., raised banners of revolt in places like Wuchang and Weizhou. Even observing from a scholar's (讀書子的) perspective, the current situation in China evokes a flood of impressions (感想泉湧). While they are absorbed in internal strife, it is presumptuous for idle observers overseas to comment this way or that. In short, the Chiang Kai-shek regime is comparatively the better choice among the current contenders in China, and it seems unlikely that any other force will rise to prominence. Even Bai Chongxi (白崇禧) in Guangxi (廣西), reputedly the foremost strategist in China today, should be careful not to end up playing the role of Zuo Liangyu, merely aiding the ambitions of a Qing Taizong.

Finally, let me conclude by saying a word about the Communist army in Jiangxi (江西) to address your question. In ancient times, China conceived of itself as "All Under Heaven" (一天下) and did not recognize itself as a state (國家). In modern times, it has failed to successfully forge itself into a capitalist nation-state. It is currently repeating the historical missteps of the Tang, Song, and Ming dynasties in their contests with peoples beyond the frontier (塞外諸民族). The menacing presence that has sprung forth, exploiting the cracks in this fragmented social foundation and loosened political structure, is its Communist regime. The emergence of the Communist regime in China, seizing the opportunity of such chaotic times and unstable life, has its historical inevitability. But can it truly grasp complete control of the nation overnight? As mentioned above, the Chinese national character tends towards diffusion and centrifugal forces, making it not an easy task to suddenly overturn the situation through party actions organized from the bottom up—this needs no repetition. The key question is whether the historical juncture where the national entity called China completely collapses is rapidly approaching, bringing about a great leap, or not. Although China as a country is vast, it is vastly different from the geographical advantage of Russia, which borders the boundless icy oceans of the great desert (大漠之冰洋), preventing enemy cavalry from easily invading in long charges (長駈侵入). It is also dissimilar to the situation in Tsarist Russia, which was filled with the unified and aggressive spirit (統一的 밋 突進的 氣魄) of the resilient and fierce Great Slavs (大슬라부人), striving under the leadership of the Tsar and his aristocratic military clique to conquer the world. Furthermore, compared to the situation where concentrated and organized soldiers and factory workers, numbering several million each with overwhelming force, overthrew the Kerensky regime in one fell swoop while the European powers<55> were exhausted by the Great War and the masses harbored resentment against the gasping ruling powers, China cannot easily hope for such an opportune moment. Therefore, the fact that the current Communist regime in China, despite having allegedly Communized Outer Mongolia (外蒙) to the north and Xinjiang (新彊) to the west where alarms of Communization grow louder daily, cannot easily dominate the national situation, has its reasons. The only thing advantageous to them is that the Chinese people, prone to following the crowd (雷同性), are situated in unstable times. Currently, Chiang has set up his headquarters (行營) in Nanchang (南昌) and is planning a four-sided encirclement strategy with his trusted main force of 800,000 troops. In the highlands, watchtowers (望樓), forts (堡疊), and troops maintain defenses, while from the four sides, so-called "bandit suppression roads" (剿共導路) are being constructed, preparing for a step-by-step, forceful encirclement battle. Looking back at the failure of the previous four bandit suppression campaigns, many predict that the fifth campaign will also fail. However, this is still difficult to predict, and one must observe the actual developments on both sides. Since "pacifying the interior to expel the foreigner" (安內攘外) is Chiang's greatest current concern, its success or failure is the most crucial watershed for judging the historical course of China, not to mention Chiang's position. Given this current situation based on China under Chiang and his associated rulers, Wang Jingwei's diplomatic course, regardless of its merits, is simply inevitable. If "cutting off the arm to save the nation" (割臂救國) is an unavoidable course (1코-쓰), then one cannot attack Wang's course and expect some fantastical, unrestrainedly exhilarating (天馬行空的) outcome beyond it. This has become too lengthy, so I shall put down my pen (擱筆). (July 21st)

Diagnosing Suffering China

1. Will China be partitioned by the imperialist powers, jointly managed, or achieve self-determination and independence?
2. For China to achieve complete unification, self-determination, and independence, which force must seize political power? Chiang Kai-shek? Or Hu Hanmin? Or the Communist Party?

Ham Sanghun

1. China is precisely in the process of being partitioned by the powers. Manchuria (滿洲) and Jehol (熱河) are independent as Manchukuo, beyond China's sovereignty.<56> Outer Mongolia (外蒙古) has long been under the manipulation of Soviet Russia (쏘베트露西亞), becoming the Outer Mongolian Soviet Autonomous Republic and joining the Soviet Union (蘇聯邦). In Xinjiang (新彊), the Soviet Union and Britain repeatedly contend for influence around the Muslim population. In Sichuan (四川), amid the fighting between the two Lius (兩劉), the Soviet Union and Britain are establishing influence. Tibet (西藏) is under the influence of the British-manipulated Tibetan Independence Army (with the Dalai Lama (韃*喇嘛) as religious and national king), and most of Qinghai (靑海) is also in the hands of the Tibetan Independence Army. Yunnan (雲南), due to its geographical proximity bordering French Indochina (佛領印度支那), is within the French sphere of influence—a well-known fact. Is it only the border regions? Most of Jiangxi Province (江西省) is the territory of the Chinese Soviet Republic headquartered in Ruijin (瑞金). The Yangtze River (楊子江) area is a British non-alienation zone, Fujian (福建) is a Japanese non-alienation zone. Macau (碼澳), Xiamen (厦門), Hong Kong (香港), etc., are territories of various powers. Foreign concessions in places like Shanghai (上海) and Tianjin (天津) are not recent developments either, as everyone knows. And due to unequal treaties and political loans with various countries, the current Nanjing government exists, in effect, under the manipulation and support of the imperialist powers—this cannot be doubted.
Then where is China headed? Will it indeed be partitioned by the powers, or will it fall under joint management? The term joint management is used when powers manage cooperatively. The predatory powers (虎視耽耽) cannot manage through coordination. Therefore, joint management is impossible. Partition might occur, but joint management cannot. However, partition too may not proceed as easily as anticipated. Why? Not because China itself has the strength to prevent partition by the powers, but because the rapacious ambitions of the powers inevitably provoke mutual conflict, providing opportunities for the Chinese government to employ the diplomatic strategy of "using barbarians to control barbarians" (以夷制夷).

2. Then, by utilizing the conflict between which powers, and under which force, will China become a completely sovereign and unified nation? The authority of the Chiang Kai-shek government currently extends only to 4 or 5 provinces like Zhejiang (浙江) and Jiangsu (江蘇). It is doubtful that Chiang Kai-shek can completely unify China for the time being. If Hu Hanmin, who could be called the embodiment of civilian rule and democracy (文治主義, 民主主義), were to take power, would unification be achieved? That too faces difficulties. Why? Suppose Hu Hanmin, based on his ideal Three Principles and Five-Power Constitution (三民五權主義), passes through the tutelage period (訓政期) and reaches the constitutional period (憲政期), implementing universal suffrage. Then, just like other advanced capitalist countries, politics in China would clearly be manipulated by financial capitalists (金融資本家). Consequently, a government of financial capitalists cannot be strong externally and will end up compromising with and submitting to foreign imperialist forces.<57>
In that case, if the Communist Party emerges, will it completely unify China? According to Communist theory, a China under Communist rule could achieve complete unification. Since autonomy for each nationality would be granted and federation with neighboring regions would occur, one cannot definitively say what constitutes Chinese territory. Accordingly, existing as one part of a world federation, a Chinese Communist state would rule a unified China. However, that is after realization, and the possibility of realization is low. Why? Suppose the Communist army now overthrows the Nanjing government and holds power even for just one day. Then, on that very day, the warships of the imperialist powers would bombard the Wusong Battery (吳淞砲臺) and sail up the Yangtze River (長江) to capture Jinling Castle (金陵城 - Nanjing).
Therefore, currently, no force, whichever emerges, can achieve the complete unification of China. Only the Chiang Kai-shek government, sustained by its position between the various imperialist forces, having its legs cut off and arms severed, holding onto just the torso, might wait for a time when the powers clash and fall together. Then perhaps some force, say, the Communist force, could fight and overthrow the Nanjing regime and rise to unify. But under the current strength of imperialism, China's unification is a distant prospect (杳然하다).

The Problem of Financial and Military Strength

Kim Kyŏngjae

Although there is some degree of dissatisfaction, and now even a sense of weariness, I still want to place my hopes in Chiang Kai-shek.
The reasons are as follows. He is the leader of the Kuomintang, the Kuomintang advocates the Three Principles of the People (三民主義), which are already deeply imprinted in the minds of the Chinese people, and thus today, anyone speaking of reform in China must inevitably uphold the Three Principles of the People—the situation has reached such a point. Now in China, one cannot speak of Chinese politics excluding the Kuomintang, nor can one establish a revolutionary theory for China by rejecting the Three Principles of the People<58>; it has become extremely difficult. As non-Chinese observers looking at the Kuomintang and the Three Principles of the People, we can find flaws and criticize them as being regressive, but the fact that the vast majority of the current Chinese populace supports and believes in them is an undeniable reality. And Chiang Kai-shek has the support of the majority within this Kuomintang, thus being the head of the Nationalist Government and the leader of the Kuomintang.
Next is the point that he has a financial background and military strength. Besides his sibling relationship with Song Ziwen (宋子文 - T.V. Soong), the popular figure in China's financial world, he has significant support from the Zhejiang (浙江) financial clique, and having been the commandant of the Huangpu Military Academy (黃浦軍官學校) for many years, he is the real power holder in military affairs. Outsiders can certainly debate the rights and wrongs of this, but that is the criticism of third parties who haven't actually held responsibility. In present-day China, anyone capable of grasping central political power must possess military strength, even if labeled a warlord, to handle the role, and those without financial backing have always failed. The numerous precedents since China's modernization prove this.
Many criticize Chiang Kai-shek's current attitude, but in today's China, no matter how great a personality or strategist emerges, it would be futile. How can China escape its current state of being a semi-colony of the capitalist powers without the political awakening of the Chinese masses? One might retort to Chiang Kai-shek, "Why can't you become a communist?" but that is a separate issue.
Therefore, I believe that China's central political power should still be entrusted to Chiang Kai-shek, allowing him to succeed in internal unification through political maneuvering, urging the awakening of the masses, and focusing step by step on expelling foreign influence through gradual progress.<59>

Continuation with the Kuomintang is Possible

Wŏn Sehun

One, let us first consider China's international position before entrusting it.
The question "To whom should China be entrusted?" is almost the same as "Who can save China?" The only difference is that "entrusting" carries the meaning of handing over for governance, while "saving" implies rescue from a perilous situation. Entrusting the United States to Roosevelt or Britain to MacDonald means asking them to strive for the national welfare and people's livelihood while maintaining the existing international status of the US or Britain. However, entrusting post-World War I Turkey to Kemal Pasha or entrusting China 10 years ago to Sun Yat-sen's Kuomintang is vastly different from the US or British cases. Because Turkey and China were nations in peril, the immediate issue was the importance of saving the nation and people from that peril.
What defines China as a nation in peril? More than the ceaseless occurrence of internal worries and external threats, it points to China's semi-colonial international status, placing it in a critical situation where it cannot conduct an independent national life. Because China is a semi-colonial nation, even Sun Yat-sen, considered the father of the Republic of China (中華民國), did not use slogans like "Promote national prestige" or "Preserve national power," but rather used the slogan "Save the Nation" (救國)—in other words, let's save the country.
The immediate problem of "Saving the Nation" was not something only Sun Yat-sen dedicated his life to solving; his entire party treats this issue as the nation's immediate problem. Not just Kuomintang members, but various other parties, factions, and the entire populace regard "Saving the Nation" as the urgent task at hand. This is the immediate problem inevitably and unavoidably adopted due to the nation's semi-colonial status. Even if you brought any great world statesman—forget Mussolini (무솟린) or Hitler (히틀러)—to China and asked what China's immediate problem should be, they too would inevitably make "Saving the Nation" the immediate issue.<60>
However, what we must deeply consider here is that entrusting a fully independent and powerful nation like Britain, America, or France to someone is not particularly difficult, but entrusting a semi-colonial nation like China is most difficult. In the former case, it suffices to take charge and protect it, but in the latter case, one must take charge and save it. Protecting might be considered difficult, but compared to saving, it is an easier task.
Therefore, when we ask, "To whom shall we entrust China to save it?", we must select the suitable person after considering China's semi-colonial international status. This is precisely why we premise that China's international status is semi-colonial and in peril, in order to choose the right person to entrust China to.
Two, let us consider the international situation and China's current state before entrusting it.
That the current international situation is more critical than the situation just before the Great European War is affirmed by everyone. Rumors abound daily: "A military secret pact between Britain and France is being renewed," "An alliance between Germany, Italy, Austria, and Hungary has been concluded," "An alliance between Russia and France has been concluded," "There is a tacit understanding between Britain and America," "There is a military agreement between America and Russia," and so on. The arms race among nations has become openly intense, and various military preparations and demonstrations are flourishing without restraint. The international situation is such that a major world war seems unavoidable, merely a matter of time. "Wind fills the tower before the mountain rain comes" (山雨欲來風滿樓) is perhaps too vague; the current international situation has reached a point where it cannot end without triggering a world war. It is even asserted that the time is imminent.
What is the current state of China, facing such an international situation? The Manchurian Incident approaches its third anniversary, postal and rail traffic issues are being resolved based on the truce agreement between Japan and China, only the technical assistance committee of the effectively defunct League of Nations (國際聯盟) comes and goes, and T.V. Soong's (宋子文) delegation busily explores northwestern economic development—appearing peaceful and uneventful. If anything seems busy, it's the internal military actions like suppressing the Fujian independence government or the Communist army. Meanwhile, the national livelihood struggles daily in hardship, and national finances seem to have no recourse but to consider foreign loans as the sole source. This is the current state of China. However, this state did not just arise in recent years; its origins go back over half a century. In a word, the semi-colonial situation has somewhat worsened in tandem with the international situation.<61>
In this situation and condition, whoever takes charge of China must determine the path forward. A firm policy, whether external or internal, must be established. If one fails to adapt externally to the international situation and internally disregards the current state, it will not be saving China from peril but leading it straight to the realm of death. Therefore, the conditions for selecting the suitable person to take charge and save China now should include: externally, possessing the preparation of strength to adapt to the international situation, namely military power; and internally, possessing the magnanimity and ability to maintain the national livelihood, control various parties and factions, and achieve nationwide unity.
Three, let us entrust China to Sun Yat-sen, conditionally.
Sun Yat-sen is dead. How ludicrous is the statement to entrust present-day China to a dead man? However, perhaps more laughable than my statement is the talk of dissecting some living individual from various angles, discussing them this way and that, and concluding that without that person, no one else has the qualification and ability to manage China. When comparing individuals as natural persons, each has strengths and weaknesses, merits and demerits, making it extremely difficult to find someone equipped with all capabilities. For example, Chiang Kai-shek might not match Wang Jingwei (汪兆銘) in political theory; Wang Jingwei cannot match Cai Tingkai's (蔡廷楷) military tactics; Cai Tingkai cannot match the diplomatic skills of V.K. Wellington Koo (顧維均) or C.T. Wang (王正廷); Wang and Koo cannot match the Kuomintang standing or qualifications of Hu Hanmin or Sun Fo (孫科); Hu and Sun cannot match the military bases of Zhang Xueliang (張學良) or Yan Xishan (閻錫山). To put it extremely, in certain aspects, individuals like Hu Hanmin or Chiang Kai-shek might even compare unfavorably to some village head (區長) in rural Chosŏn. Viewed this way, entrusting China based on the standard of natural individuals seems a very foolish argument.
If I ask, "Since the founding of the Republic of China, how many people have taken charge of China?", I would like to name two: first, Yuan Shikai (袁世凱) took charge of China, and second, Sun Yat-sen took charge. The Yuan Shikai and Sun Yat-sen I refer to here are, of course, not Yuan Shikai or Sun Yat-sen as natural persons, but Yuan Shikai representing the feudal warlords, and Sun Yat-sen representing the members of the national revolution party.
Yuan Shikai the natural person died, but countless Yuan Shikais of the feudal warlords succeeded him, taking charge of China: Li Yuanhong (黎元洪),<62> Feng Guozhang (憑國璋 - *likely 馮國璋*), Xu Shichang (徐世昌), Duan Qirui (段祺瑞), Cao Kun (曹鯤), Zhang Xun (張勳), Zhang Zuolin (張作霖), etc., were all Yuan Shikais as feudal warlords. To say Lenin (레닌) died and Stalin (쓰달닌) took charge of the Soviet Union is too much of a natural person standard; Stalin took over Lenin's work as an extension of him. To say Sun Yat-sen died and one among Chiang Kai-shek, Wang Jingwei, or Hu Hanmin took charge of China is also a statement based solely on the natural person standard. Regardless of whether it is Chiang, Wang, or Hu, they are extensions of Sun Yat-sen. In short, the Republic of China was in the hands of feudal warlords for a long time since its founding, and then passed into the hands of the Kuomintang, which uses "Save the Nation" as its slogan. Altogether, it has been entrusted to these two types of hands.
If the current Kuomintang were to hand over political power back to a feudal warlord like Duan Qirui, or to someone from the Communist army, then it could not be said that it was entrusted to Sun Yat-sen. But if some member within the Kuomintang takes charge, then China remains entrusted to Sun Yat-sen. Since the establishment of the Nationalist Government, Chiang Kai-shek has stepped down twice, and Wang Jingwei, Hu Hanmin, etc., have also stepped down once or twice. These were not such major issues, merely advances and retreats occurring based on the internal circumstances of the party.
Now, the biggest question is whether to keep China entrusted to the Kuomintang as it is, or to entrust it to a second or third party outside the Kuomintang. However, judging by all current circumstances, this issue cannot be realized suddenly. Even if it were realized, it would not be fortunate for China. It would be a better policy for now to leave China entrusted to the Kuomintang. However, for the Kuomintang to continue leading China, conditions must be attached: internally, achieving nationwide unity; externally, abandoning the old tactic of "using barbarians to control barbarians" (以夷制夷) and finding allies willing to share fate (興亡); and firmly establishing control within the party, sweeping away the harmful practice of countless factions within the party (黨中之黨) viewing each other with hostility. This constitutes the general condition for conditionally entrusting [China] to Sun Yat-sen. If Chiang Kai-shek tries to replace the Kuomintang with the Blue Shirts Society (藍衣社), a party within the party; if Wang Jingwei tries to guarantee only his own position with the Reformist faction (改組派), another party within the party; or if Hu Hanmin, Sun Fo, etc., based on the regional factions of Guangdong (廣東) and Guangxi (廣西), try to act arbitrarily within the Kuomintang, mutually refusing to yield, it will not only bring misfortune to China but also invite self-destruction. If control within one's own party is chaotic, the work of achieving nationwide unity cannot proceed. For a weak entity lacking even nationwide unity, ruin is hard to avoid due to accompanying internal and external troubles. This is the point of concern for the Chinese populace who have entrusted China to the Kuomintang, and the point where Chiang Kai-shek (military), Wang Jingwei (politics), Hu Hanmin, Sun Fo, etc. (party discipline) must reflect, be diligent (勤愼), and strive not to disgrace Sun Yat-sen's party.<63>

**Summary**

The article presents four Korean intellectuals' views in 1934 on who should lead China through its multifaceted crisis. An Chaehong argues Chiang Kai-shek, despite flaws, is the most pragmatic choice for stability, given the lack of viable alternatives and the immediate dangers of radicalism or external conflict. Ham Sanghun offers a pessimistic view, seeing China already undergoing partition by imperial powers and doubting any current leader (Chiang, Hu Hanmin, Communists) can achieve genuine unification against internal divisions and external pressures. Kim Kyŏngjae supports Chiang based on his Kuomintang leadership, financial/military backing, advocating gradual progress. Wŏn Sehun reframes the question away from individuals towards the legacy of Sun Yat-sen and the Kuomintang, arguing it should continue leading but must achieve internal unity and adopt realistic policies to "save the nation." For colonial Korean history, the article reveals the intense interest Korean intellectuals took in China's struggles, viewing them through the lens of imperialism and national survival, likely drawing parallels to Korea's own situation under Japanese rule. Historians might find the diverse assessments of Chinese political factions, the use of historical analogies, and the underlying concern with national sovereignty and modernization strategies particularly insightful regarding Korean perspectives during this period.

**Named Entities**

安在鴻	안재홍	An Chaehong
咸尙勳	함상훈	Ham Sanghun
金璟載	김경재	Kim Kyŏngjae
元世勳	원세훈	Wŏn Sehun
蔣介石	장개석	Chiang Kai-shek
中國	중국	China
巴人兄	파인형	P'ain hyŏng
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
朱德	주덕	Chu Te
毛澤東	모택동	Mao Tse-tung
江西省	강서성	Jiangxi Province
瑞金縣	서금현	Ruijin County
孫文	손문	Sun Yat-sen
藍衣社	남의사	Blue Shirts Society
江	강	Jiang (Jiangsu)
浙	절	Zhe (Zhejiang)
上海	상해	Shanghai
長成	장성	Great Wall
河北省	하북성	Hebei Province
南京	남경	Nanjing
胡漢民	호한민	Hu Hanmin
汪兆銘	왕조명	Wang Jingwei
福建	복건	Fujian
香港	향항	Hong Kong
溫溥泉張繼	온부천장계	On Puch'ŏn Chang Kye
白崇禧	백숭희	Bai Chongxi
武漢	무한	Wuhan
遼	요	Liao
金	금	Jin
呂夷簡	여이간	Lü Yijian
歐陽修	구양수	Ouyang Xiu
司馬光	사마광	Sima Guang
王安石	왕안석	Wang Anshi
徽宗	휘종	Emperor Huizong
欽宗	흠종	Emperor Qinzong
种師道	종사도	Zhong Shidao
李綱	이강	Li Gang
靖康	정강	Jingkang
吐藩	토번	Tubo (Tibetan Empire)
李德裕	이덕유	Li Deyu
唐	당	Tang
李世	이세	Li Shi
牛僧孺	우승유	Niu Sengru
淸太宗	청태종	Qing Taizong
燕京	연경	Yanjing
毅宗	의종	Emperor Yizong (Chongzhen Emperor)
福王	복왕	Prince of Fu
史可法	사가법	Shi Kefa
山西	산서	Shanxi
左良玉	좌양옥	Zuo Liangyu
許定國	허정국	Xu Dingguo
武昌	무창	Wuchang
唯州	유주	Weizhou (*likely a typo or obscure place name*)
南昌	남창	Nanchang
外蒙	외몽	Outer Mongolia
新彊	신강	Xinjiang
露國	노국	Russia
滿洲	만주	Manchuria
熱河	열하	Jehol
쏘베트露西亞	소베트 러시아	Soviet Russia
蘇聯邦	소련방	Soviet Union
英國	영국	Britain
四川	사천	Sichuan
西藏	서장	Tibet
韃*喇嘛	달라이 라마	Dalai Lama (*Hanja seems corrupted, context indicates Dalai Lama*)
靑海	청해	Qinghai
雲南	운남	Yunnan
佛領印度支那	불령 인도지나	French Indochina
楊子江	양자강	Yangtze River
日本	일본	Japan
碼澳	마오	Macau
厦門	하문	Xiamen
天津	천진	Tianjin
宋子文	송자문	T. V. Soong (Song Ziwen)
黃浦軍官學校	황포군관학교	Huangpu Military Academy
國民黨	국민당	Kuomintang (Nationalist Party)
國民政府	국민정부	Nationalist Government
米國	미국	United States
英國	영국	Britain
土耳其	토이기	Turkey
게말파사	게말파샤	Kemal Pasha
中華民國	중화민국	Republic of China
무솟린	무솔리니	Mussolini
히틀러	히틀러	Hitler
歐洲	구주	Europe
英	영	Britain
佛	불	France
獨	독	Germany
伊	이	Italy
奧	오	Austria
洪	홍	Hungary
露	노	Russia
國際聯盟	국제연맹	League of Nations
吳淞砲臺	오송포대	Wusong Battery
金陵城	금릉성	Jinling Castle (Nanjing)
蔡廷楷	채정해	Cai Tingkai
顧維均	고유균	V.K. Wellington Koo (Gu Weijun)
王正廷	왕정정	C.T. Wang (Wang Zhengting)
孫科	손과	Sun Fo (Sun Ke)
張學良	장학량	Zhang Xueliang
閻錫山	염석산	Yan Xishan
袁世凱	원세개	Yuan Shikai
黎元洪	여원홍	Li Yuanhong
憑國璋	빙국장	Feng Guozhang (*Hanja 憑 likely typo for 馮*)
徐世昌	서세창	Xu Shichang
段祺瑞	단기서	Duan Qirui
曹鯤	조곤	Cao Kun
張勳	장훈	Zhang Xun
張作霖	장작림	Zhang Zuolin
레닌	레닌	Lenin
쓰달닌	스탈린	Stalin
루스벨트	루스벨트	Roosevelt
맥도날드	맥도날드	MacDonald
廣東	광동	Guangdong
廣西	광서	Guangxi
改組派	개조파	Reformist faction (Gaizupai)

**Glossary**

危難	위난	Peril, crisis
政治家	정치가	Politician, statesman
맛길가	맡길까	(Question ending) Entrust to? (Older spelling/form of 맡길까)
批判眼	비판안	Critical eye
暎하는	영하는	Reflecting
一面相	일면상	One aspect, one side
酬應치	수응치	Not respond/reply to (Older form)
未安합니다	미안합니다	I am sorry, apologetic (Humble, older form)
現下	현하	Currently, presently (Sino-Korean term)
杜門屛居	두문병거	Staying secluded indoors, shutting oneself off
당치가 안흔	당치가 않은	Inappropriate, unfitting (Older spelling)
이약이	이야기	Story, talk (Older spelling)
가틈니다	같습니다	Is like, seems (Older spelling)
着味한	착미한	Developed a taste for
涉獵하는	섭렵하는	Skimming, browsing (reading widely but not deeply)
橫竪說去	횡수설거	Speaking incoherently, rambling
걸맛지 안는	걸맞지 않는	Unfitting, unsuitable (Older spelling)
行進될	행진될	Will proceed, will march forward
업슴니다	없습니다	There is not, do not have (Older spelling)
언뜻	언뜻	Briefly, at a glance
보하	보아	Seeing, looking at (Older form)
開戰	개전	Start of war
가지는	가지는	Having, possessing
어쪄되든	어찌 되든	Regardless of how it turns out (Older spelling)
동무한	동반한	Accompanied by (Older meaning, now 'friend')
쏘베트	소비에트	Soviet
미테	밑에	Under, below (Older spelling)
더구나	더구나	Moreover, furthermore
끼고	끼고	Embracing, holding (also 'wearing')
업는	없는	Without, lacking (Older spelling)
마주 바더	마주 받아	Confronting, facing directly (Older spelling)
다닥드린	닥뜨린	Encountered, faced (Older form of 닥뜨린/닥친)
밧게	밖에	Only, nothing but (Older spelling)
雌伏中	자복중	Lying low, biding one's time
翩翩文人	편편문인	Elegant literary figure
인테리	인텔리	Intelligentsia (Loanword)
뒤채고	뒤채고	Being overshadowed, lagging behind
비켜 주어야	비켜 주어야	Must yield, give way
녁엿든지	여겼든지	Whether one regarded (Older spelling)
뽄으로	본으로	As a model, example (dialectal/older form of 본)
닐으키며	일으키며	Causing, provoking (Older spelling)
안저서	앉아서	Sitting (Older spelling)
이엇거니와	이었거니와	Although it was (Connective ending, older form)
안저	앉아	Sitting (Older spelling)
밋	및	And (Older spelling)
剿匪工作	초비공작	Bandit suppression campaign/operation
脾睨	비예	To glare contemptuously
만히	많이	Many, much (Older spelling)
하되	하되	Although, but (Connective ending)
업시	없이	Without (Older spelling)
끄을려 가든	끌려 가든	Was dragged away (Older spelling)
如斯한데	여사한데	Being like this, in such a situation
깨여짐은	깨어짐은	The breaking of (Older spelling)
밧고든	바꾸던	Used to trade, exchanged (Older spelling)
잇거늘	있거늘	While there is/are (Connective ending)
들끌코	들끓고	Swarming, teeming (Older spelling)
만흔	많은	Many, numerous (Older spelling)
빌으집고	비집고	Squeezing through, exploiting (Older spelling)
퉁겨저나온	튕겨져 나온	Sprung out, emerged suddenly (Older spelling)
올러가는	올라가는	Going up, ascending (Older spelling)
아니오	아니요	No, it is not (Polite negative)
갓갑게	가깝게	Near, close (Older spelling)
닥어오느냐	다가오느냐	Is approaching? (Older spelling)
안느냐	않느냐	Is it not? (Question form)
나라됨이	나라됨이	The state/condition of being a nation
벅차든	벅차던	Was overwhelming, demanding (Older spelling)
놉허지는	높아지는	Becoming higher (Older spelling)
놋코서도	놓고서도	Even with, despite having (Older spelling)
돌어보아	돌아보아	Looking back at (Older spelling)
만 흔터이나	많거니와	Although there are many (Older spelling)
업슴니다	없습니다	There is not (Older spelling)
말할것	말할 것	Needless to say (particle omission common in older texts)
코-쓰	코스	Course (Loanword)
심슴니다	싶습니다	Want to (Older spelling)
맛기여	맡기어	Entrusting (Older spelling/form)
막기자	맡기자	Let's entrust (Older spelling)
거진	거의	Almost, nearly (Older form/spelling)
달으다면	다르다면	If it is different (Older spelling)
맛터서	맡아서	Taking charge of, undertaking (Older spelling)
가르처서	가리켜서	Pointing to, indicating (Older spelling)
것만치	것만큼	As much as, seeing that (Older spelling)
가저다 놓고	가져다 놓고	Bringing and placing
맛게ㅅ서	맡겠어	Will entrust (Contraction, older form)
함게	함께	Together (Older spelling)
맛터다고	맡았다고	Said that (someone) took charge (Older spelling)
맛테따	맡았다	Took charge (Older spelling)
맛터나니	맡아나니	Takes charge and appears (Older spelling)
맛터다면	맡았다면	If (someone) took charge (Older spelling)
맛튼	맡은	Who took charge, 맡은 바 (duty) (Older spelling)
맛게두는	맡겨두는	Leaving entrusted (Older spelling)
맛터	맡아	Taking charge (Older spelling)
맛기겟느냐	맡기겠느냐	Will you entrust? (Older spelling)
막긴	맡긴	Entrusted (Older spelling)
말로톡	말로써	With words (Older spelling/form)
勤愼하고	근신하고	Being diligent and prudent


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제6권 제8호
발행일	1934년 08월 01일
기사제목	危難中國을 어느 政治家에 맛길가?
필자	安在鴻 咸尙勳 金璟載 元世勳
기사형태	논설

危難中國을 어느 政治家에 맛길가?
						安在鴻 咸尙勳 金璟載 元世勳
蔣介石中心으로 批判眼에 暎하는 中國情勢 一面相

安在鴻

巴人兄
往往注文을 하시되 하나도 酬應치 못하야 未安합니다. 現下 危難의 中國을 救出키 爲하야  어느 政治家의 出現을 待望하느냐고요? 이것도 巴人式의 좀 奇拔하신 設問이겟지요. 中國도  아닌 海東은 朝鮮에서 내일도 못하야 杜門屛居하는 사람으로 蔣介石政權을 支持하느냐? 또는 共産系의 어느 政治家냐...하는 것은 당치가 안흔 이약이 가틈니다. 近日은 흔히 古書를 들추어 評讀하기에 着味한 까닭으로 新聞雜誌를 前처럼 耽讀치 안코 主要한 記事만 골러 涉獵하는 터이니까 貴問에 대하야 橫竪說去하는 것이 걸맛지 안는 일입니다. 그러나 現下 中國의 國情과 그의 外廓에 둘러잇는 國際政局은 한동안 蔣介石政權을 中心으로 어느 時期까지 行進될 것이라고 보는 것이 가장 妥當하겟지오. 무슨 奇禍가 잇서 蔣氏 個人이 絶命이라도 하는 일이 업는 限에 반듯이 그리될 것이라고 年來로 보고 잇든 바입니다. 웨 그럴가? 新奇치도 안흔 常識談을 길게 말할 나위 업지마는 첫재 * *을 대신할 組織的 政治的 機搆를 掌握할 人物이 아즉 업슴니다. 現下 中國의 갈곳을 언뜻 보아 두가지 分岐點이 잇다고 하겟스니 하나는 非常한 國際時局으로 보하 抗x開戰까지도 할 수 잇는 國民的 强硬手段을 취하느냐? 蔣介石政權이 가지는 態度와 가티 具體的 政策(그 實現 可能與否는 어쪄되든)을 동무한 漸進手段을 取하느냐가? 한 分岐點이고 江西省 瑞金縣에 쏘베트政府를 建設한 朱德 毛澤東等의 共産主義 赤色政權이 大勢를 支配하는가? 國民的 敵愾心이 鬱勃하게 된 現下 途程에서 自國에서 가장 精銳한 直屬軍隊을 多數 掌握하고 孫文의<52> 遺囑을 떠메는 國民黨의 三民主義(近者 이 點에 多少 修正을 計劃하는 모양이나)의 指導精神미테 더구나 獨裁支持勢力인 藍衣社의 一隊까지 끼고 잇서 江, 浙財閥을 中心으로 한 거의 全國的인 最大한 民族的 財閥을 그 背後의 支持勢力으로 하야 內로 和平統一의 道德的 口號를 걸고 外로는 親米 或은 其他 列强勢力과의 利用을 그 政策으로 하는 上述 蔣介石의 「부르」的 國粹的의 獨裁政權이 우선 當面의 途程을 수습하는가? 가 또 하나의 分岐點입니다. 그런데 說明의 便宜상 中國 現下의 國際的 地位를 말하야 蔣의 態度에 미츠고 各 派 首領의 人物, 勢力關係를 一瞥하면서 中國과 밋 蔣의 成敗의 最大關係를 가진 共産軍*伐問題에 미츠는 것이 조켓지오.
너무 常識的이지만 먼저 깨트릴 것은 蔣氏와 밋 그의 中國이 昨今 數年 非常한 國際際會에서 全國家國民을 祭物로 槍끗에 꾀어 國際戰局 大展開의 意識的 苦肉計에 내바릴 수는 업는 일입니다. 上海事變과 가티 特殊한 區域內에서의 악착스러운 市街戰은 어찌하엿든 昨年 5月 長成以南 河北省 北部 小地帶의 決戰에서 中日 兩軍의 現下의 戰守力은 아주잘 表明된 바어니와 勝算은 커냥 防備力조차 우선 到底 自信이 업는 그들에게 武力的 正面衝突은 國家的 無謀이오 이 國家的 無謀를 뛰어넘어 그 國家 自身을 國際政局의 犧牲으로 내놋는다는 것은 아즉은 예상할 수도 업는 바이니 蔣의 滿洲방치 實力養成 卽 所謂「割臂救國案內攘外」의 政策은 차라리 必然의 코-쓰이겟지오. 일은 1927年 3月 25日 南京事件에 되돌어가   그들의 國際的 處地를 검색할 것입니다. 卽 南京事件 當時 蔣과 그의 一聯의 指導下에 잇는  中國은 그러한 非常時期에서 國民的 猪突主義로 帝國主義列國과 마주 바더 그 自己破壞의  荒野로 邁進할가? 그러치 안흐면 此際에 必然으로 列國과의 妥協을 要하는 民族부르的 漸進政策을 取하여야 할가?의 첫 岐路에 섯든 것인데 그들은 두말 업시 後者를 골러 今日까지 온 것이오. 그 當時 後者를 골를 밧게 업든 그들의 處地는 또 다시 昨今 數年來의 國際非常時局에 다닥드린 것입니다. 南京事件以來의 歷史的 途程은 必然 現下 時局에까지 延長되는 것인지라 現下에도 依然히 蔣介石의 登場을 要하는 것이 또 必然한 일이지오. 雌伏中의 胡漢民이 蔣介石 대신으로 出現할가? 一時 過渡形態라면 몰라도 안될 일입니다. 첫재 胡漢民은 孫中山의 高足으로 國民黨의 元老라고 하드라도 彼는「부르·떼모크라씨」의 純理波입니다. 現下 國際列國의 先進社會에서도 가장「시수」가 안나가는 것이「부르·떼모크라씨」의 純理派인데다 胡氏와 가티 翩翩文人的인 理想家바탈로써 더구나 中國 가튼 混亂時期에서 「인테리」層의 支持를 要하는 資本的 民主主義의 純理論을 主張하니 그가 左하야는 朱, 毛等 共産派에 뒤채고 右하야는 蔣介石 一聯의 武力獨裁勢力에 밀리며<53> 中間에서는 汪兆銘等改造派에게도 건듯하면 一籌를 비켜 주어야 할 社會的 宿命을 차지하게 되는 것이외다. 그 經緯는 客冬에 퉁겨젓듯 福建獨立騷動에서 歷歷히 나타낫든 것입니다. 이미 묵은 일이지만 當時福建事件이 터졋슬 때 朝鮮의 言論界는 어지간찬케 이를 過大評價한 편도 잇섯고 그 革命政府라는 名稱에 그저 讚意만 表하면 조혼 줄로 녁엿든지 不過 4, 5旬에 이것이 打倒된 것을 볼 때 隋煬帝가 宮妾을 울든 뽄으로 질질 우는 시늉을 내인 곧도 업잔어 잇섯으나 福建政府 一派의 사람들이 要컨대 烏合의 衆이엇슬 분더러 藏頭慝尾를 채 다 못한 얼치기的 存在로서 結局 國家多難한 際會에 內爭禍國의 罪名을 天下에 무릅씨게 되엇섯고 私有財産沒收 하 等의 急進社會主義的 色彩는 첫재 福建省 內에서도 現實有力層의 恐怖的 憎惡를 닐으키며 外他 全國資本層의 方面에게도 共同警戒의 發奮力을 재촉하엿으며 關係列國으로도 嫌惡의 情을 내이게 되엇스니 그들의 政治的 不利가 가장 컷섯고 그 地理上으로는 兩廣雲貴 西南諸省처럼  天涯一角에서 中原風塵을 멀리 避하는 便도 업고 江西山地險阻를 阨하야 內線作戰의 巧를 發揮하는 利도 가지지 못하엿스며 東南一角 孤立包圍된 땅에서 안저서 敗亡을 보게 된 것이라. 이것은 最初부터 自明한 理이엇거니와 胡漢民은 香港에 안저 南京福建 兩非의 論만 放送하고 아무 積極態度를 取치 못하엿습니다. 이것은 곧 胡漢民의 全的 運命을 示唆하는 바 今後에도 容易히 能動的 活動을 할 수 업는 것을 말함이라. 彼는 現下 混亂한 中國에서 蔣介石을 대신하야 天下를 取할 力量을 가진 者 아닐 것입니다. 온 溥泉張繼 비록 黨國의 元老이나 勿論 그 力量이 업는 者이오 現在에는 蔣氏와 한가지로 行動하고 잇는 中입니다. 要컨대 福建事件을 通하야 나타난 것은 同一한 水平線上에선 各派의 人物들로서는 아즉 蔣을 대신하야 天下를 掌握할 力量을 가진 者 업는 것을 證함이엇고 이 風雲際會에서 例에 빠짐업시 勢力을 增長하엿다는 共産派만이 蔣과 믿 中國에게 一大의 存在인 것을 表明하는 것입니다. 蔣과 믿 中國의 今後가 所謂剿匪工作」의 成敗如何에 잇다는 것은 明白한 일이지오.
中國 現下時局을 評하는데 興味잇는 것은 그들의 歷史的 對照입니다. 中國史上 現在와 가튼 場面은 만히 차저낼 수 잇슴니다. 武漢革命 以來 벌서 數10年에 外部에 未曾有한 强敵의  脾睨를 노하두고 그저 다만 內爭에만 沒頭하야 한거름식 傾敗에 쏠리든 것은 遼와 金의 北方의 强에게 連하야 威壓되면서도 慶曆, 元祐의 黨議라고 呂夷簡과 歐陽修 司馬光과 王安石 等의 黨爭만 反覆하든 그것과 같고 백수십만이라는 각파 군대가 세계 최고의 수량을 보이면서 長城, 上海 각지에서 一時의 喧騷는 겨우게(極)하되 元來 그 對立의 實力을 表하지 못하는 것은<54> 6,7萬의 全國 兵馬가 汁京을 包圍하엿는데 种師道 李綱等의 20萬의 勤王兵이 手下에 現存하면서 堅城强壁의 미테 一大決戰을 할 수도 업시 徽宗欽宗 兩大皇帝를 筆頭로 帝, 后, 妃, 嬪, 太子, 王孫이 束手就縛하야 北滿으로 끄을려 가든 靖康의 禍란 者와 가트고 外患 이 如斯한데 그들 首腦部사이에 往往結束이 깨여짐은 吐藩 의충이 帝京을 躁躙하려는 판에 李德裕의 西邊經畧을 沮害하고 降將을 敵國(吐藩)에 돌려주어 國家의 成敗를 黨爭으로 밧고든 唐의 李世의 牛僧孺, 李德裕의 角立과 彷佛하고 한 편에서 血戰하는 派잇거늘 한 편에서는  隱然 反旗를 날리는 者잇는 것은 淸太宗의 鐵騎가 이미 燕京을 빼앗고 毅宗 皇帝는 自殺까지 하엿는데 福王을 南京에 推戴하야 防戰에 血心하는 史可法의 苦忠미테 流賊은 山西陟 西에 들끌코 左良玉 許定國等은 武昌唯州 等地에서 反旗를 들든 明말의 그것과 彷佛합니다. 讀書子的 眼孔으로 보고만 잇드라도 感想泉湧하는 것은 現下 中國의 時局이라. 自己들은 內爭에 沒頭하는데 海外의 閑人들의 이러니 저러니가 깜냥에 업는 일입니다. 要컨대 蔣介石政權이 차라리 現下 中國 諸人者의 속에는 差勝한 편이요 그 外에 別勢力이 擡頭할 것 가트지 안합니다. 廣西에 雌伏할 現下 中國 最一의 智이라는 白崇禧일지라도 자칫하면 左良玉 구실을 하고 淸太宗의 雄圖만 도아주는 結果나 안짓는 것이 조흘 것입니다.
最終으로 江西의 共産軍에 關하야 一言하야 貴問에 마감키로 합시다. 中國은 上代에 잇서  自己를 一天下로 觀念하야 國家로 認識치 안하엿섯고 現代에 와서는 資本主義 民族國家로 鍜鍊 結成되기에 成功하지 못하엿으매 唐宋明의 歷史塞外諸民族과의 角逐에 失策하든 覆轍 을 方今도 그대로 밟고 잇는데 그 龜裂된 社會的 地盤과 이완된 政治的 機搆의 틈을 빌으집고 퉁겨저나온 恐嚇的 存在가 그의 共産政權입니다. 中國의 共産政權은 이와 가티 混亂한 時局 不安定한 生活의 際會를 타서 나온 것이 그 歷史的 必然性인데 그것이 果然突嗟에 天下를 完全히 握掌하드록 될 수 잇슬가? 中國의 國民性이 上述과 가티 散漫한 遠心的 傾向으로 되어 미창으로부터 組織하여 올러가는 黨的 行動으로 猝然大勢를 翻覆하기는 容易한 일 안일 것은 再言할 바 아니오. 要는 中國이라는 國家的 存在가 全然 崩毁되는 歷史的 際會에 닥드리어 一大飛躍을 가저올 時機가 갓갑게 닥어오느냐 안느냐?의 問題입니다. 中國의 나라됨이 비록 廣大하나 茫茫한 大漠의 氷洋에 連接하야 敵國의 鐵騎가 長駈侵入함을 許치 안는 露國의 地의 利와는 逈殊하고 大슬라부人의 强韌猛悍한 風이 싸르」와 밋 그 貴族軍閥의 指導下에 世界라도 征服하려고 滔滔驀進하든 帝政當時의 露國 그대로의 統一的 밋 突進的 氣 魄에 벅차든 그것과 同一치 못하며 列國은<55> 大戰役에 疫弊하고 大衆은 헐덕이는 支配勢力에 反心을 품는데 集中 밋 結成된 兵隊와 工場 勞動者가 各各 數百萬의 壓倒的 勢力으로  一擧에「케렌스키」政權을 取하든데 비하야 容易히 그 時機를 僥倖할 수 업는 것이니 現下 中國의 共産政權이 北에는 赤化하엿다는 外蒙을 두고 西에는 역시 赤化警報가 날로 놉허지는 新彊을 놋코서도 容易히 天下의 大勢를 支配할 수 업는 것은 理由가 잇는 일이외다. 오즉 그들에게 有利한 것은 雷同性이 만흔 中國人을 不安定한 時局에 處한 것이외다. 目下 蔣은 南昌에 行營을 두고 自己의 心腹部下 80萬의 大兵으로써 四面包圍의 作戰을 計劃하야 高地帶에는 望樓와 堡疊와 軍隊로써 守備하고 4面으로부터는 所謂 剿共導路란 者를 建築하야 한 거름식 强力인 包圍戰을 準備하는 터이매 前後 4回의 剿共工作이 失敗에 돌아갓슴에 돌어보아 第5回 剿共工作도 벌서 失敗에 돌어갈 것을 預斷하는 者만 흔터이나 그러나 이것은 아즉  預斷하기 어려운 者로 左右를 實際에 徵할 밧게 업슴니다.「安內攘外」가 蔣의 目下 最大關心處이니 만큼 그 成敗는 中國의 그것 歷史的 去就를 判斷할 最大關嶺이오 蔣의 地位는 더 말할것 업습니다. 蔣과 밋 그 一聯의 支配者들의 中國을 土臺로 한 現下의 情勢가 이러한 以上 汪兆銘의 外交 코-쓰는 是非를 떠나서 다만 必然의 일이오「割臂救國」이 奈何할 수 업는 1코-쓰라고 하면 汪의 코-쓰를 掛擊하고 그 以上의 天馬行空的인 痛快事를 期할 수 업슬 것입니다. 너무 冗長하여 젓스니 擱筆하지오.(7月21日)

受難中國의 打診

1. 中國은 帝國主義列國에 分割될가 共同管理될가 또는 自主獨立될가
2. 中國에 完全이 統一, 自主, 獨立되려면 어떤 勢力이 政權을 잡아야할가 蔣介石? 혹은 胡漢民? 或은 共産黨?

咸尙勳

1. 中國은 正히 列國의 分割途程에 잇다. 滿洲及熱河는 滿洲國의 獨立으로서 中國의 主權이 미치지<56> 못하고 外蒙古는 벌서부터 쏘베트露西亞의 操縱 밑에 外蒙古 쏘베트 自治共和國으로서 蘇聯邦에 加入되엇고 新彊은 回敎徒를 둘러싸고 蘇聯勢力과 英國이 爭奪戰을 거듭하고, 四川에는 兩劉가 싸우는 틈에 蘇聯과 英國이 勢力을 扶植하고 잇다. 西藏이 英國의 操縱하는 西藏獨立軍 (韃*喇嘛를 敎王 及 國王으로 한)의 勢力下에 잇고, 靑海의 大部分이 또한 西藏獨立軍의 手中에 잇스며 雲南이 佛領印度支那와 接境한 地理的 關係로 佛國勢力圈下에 잇는 것도 周知의 事實이다. 오즉 邊境뿐이랴. 江西省 大部分이 瑞金을 首都로 하는 中華 쏘베트共和國區로 되어 잇고, 楊子江 一帶가 英國의 不割讓地, 福建이 日本의 不割讓地, 碼澳, 厦門, 香港 等이 各其 列國의 領地로 되엇스며, 上海, 天津 等地에 外國人租借地가 近日에 새로 생긴 일이 아닌것도 다 아는 일이다. 그리고 各國과의 不平等條約과 政治借款때문에 現南京政府는 事實上 帝國主義列强의 操縱, 支持밑에 存立한 것만은 疑心하지 못할 일이다.
그러면 대처 中國은 어데로 갈 것인가. 그야말로 列强에게 分割이 되고 말가, 或은 共同管理하에 잇게 될가. 共同管理란 말은 列國이 和協的으로 管理할 境遇에 쓰는 말이다. 虎視耽耽하는 列强이 協調하야 管理할 수는 업다. 그러므로 共同管理는 不可能한 일이다. 分割은 잇을지언정 共同管理는 잇을 수 업다. 그러나 分割도 그리 豫想과 같이 될 수가 업다. 왜그러느냐하면 中國 自體의 實力이 잇어 列强이 分割하지 못한다는 것이 아니라, 列强의 虎虎耽耽하는 野心은 畢竟 互相間 衝突을 招來하야 中國政府의 以夷制夷의 外交策을 쓰기에 便할 機會를 주는 때문이다.

2. 그러면 언저, 어느 나라의 衝突을 利用하야 어느 勢力이 中國의 完全한 主權國이되고, 統一國家가 될가. 蔣介石政府의 威令이 미치는 곳은 現在 浙江, 江蘇 等 4, 5個省에 不過한다.  蔣介石이 中國을 完全統一하리라고는 當分間에 잇어서 疑問이다. 그러타고 文治主義, 民主主義의 化身이라고도 할만한 胡漢民이가 政權을 잡으면 統一될가하면 그도 또한 難色이 잇다.  왜 그러느냐하면 設使 胡漢民이가 그 理想하는 三民五權主義에 依하야 訓政期를 지나 憲政期를 마자 人民皆投票의 實을 擧한다 하자. 그러타고 하면 中國도 다른 先進資本國과 마찬가지로 金融資本家들의 弄絡에 政治가 左右 것은 明若觀火한 일니다. 따라 金融資本家의 政府는 對外强이 될 수 업고 外國帝國主義勢力과 妥協屈從되고 말 것이다.<57>
그러타면 共産黨이 出現하면 完全히 中國을 統一할가. 共産主義의 理論으로보면 共産治下의 中國이면 完全히 中國을 統一할 수 잇게 한다. 各 民族의 自治가 許與되고 隣邦과의 聯邦하게 될 것이니까 반듯이 어떤 것이 中國領土라고 할 수 업다. 따라 世界聯邦의 하나로 存在하야 中國共産主義國家가 統一中國을 支配하게 될 것이다. 그러나 그것은 實現後의 말이오 實現될 可能性이 적다. 왜 그러느냐하면 萬一 共産軍이 이제 南京政府를 打倒하고 1日만이라도 政權을 掌握한다고 假定하자. 그러면 그 當日로 帝國主義列國의 軍艦은 吳淞砲臺를 砲擊하고 長江을 溯及하야 金陵城을 陷落시킬 것이다.
그러므로 現在로는 어떤 勢力이 나서거나 中國의 完全한 統一을 期할 수는 업다. 諸帝國主義勢力間에 介在하야 支持된 蔣介石政府만이 다리를 베주고 팔을 잘나주고 胴體만 가지고 잇다가 列强의 衝突이나 잇어 共倒되는 때나 오면 어떤 勢力 假令 共産勢力같은 것이 南京政權과 싸와 打倒하고 드러서 統一할지 帝國主義가 强盛하야 잇는 現下 權勢로는 中國의 統一은 杳然하다.

財政과 軍事上 實力 問題

金璟載

어느 程度의 不滿이 잇고 그리고 지금에 와서는 倦怠도 업지 안으나 그래도 蔣介石에게 期待를 갓고 십슴니다.
그 理由는 이러함니다. 그가 國民黨의 統首이요 國民黨은 三民主義를 標傍하야 그가 임이 中國人의 머리에 깁히 印象되여잇고 그리하야 오날에 와서는 中國의 改革을 말하는 者는 누구나 반듯이 三民主義를 머리에 띠밧들지 안코는 안니되리 만큼 情勢가 되여잇다는 것이외다. 이제 中國에 잇서 國民黨을 除外하고 中國의 政治을 말하지 못할 것이요 또 三民主義를  排擊하고는 中國의 革命理論을 樹立키가<58> 至極히 困難하리 만큼 되어 잇음니다. 非中國人인 우리들로서 國民黨을 보고 三民主義를 보면 거긔에는 缺陷도 잇고 時代 逆行이라하야 非難할 바도 업지 안으나 現在의 中國民衆의 多大數가 그를 支持하고 信奉하고 잇는 것만은  否認 못할 事實의 하나일 것이외다. 그런대 蔣介石은 이러한 國民黨에서 多數의 支持者를 갓고 잇으며  그리하야 그가 國民政府의 首班인 同時에 國民黨의 統首이라는 것임니다.
다음에는 財政的 背景이 잇고 軍事上의 實力이 잇다는 點임니다. 中國의 財界의 人氣男 宋子文과의 男妹關係도 잇거니와 엇지 햇든 浙江財閥의 支持가 크고 그가 黃浦軍官學校의 校長으로 多年잇서 軍事方面의 實權者이라는 것이외다. 거긔에 是非야 얼마든지 局外者로서 할 수 잇을 것이나 그는 實地로 任에 서지 못한 第3者의 批評이요. 現在의 中國에 잇서 中央政權을 掌握할 수 잇는 者는 비록 軍閥이라는 루名을 쓰드래도 軍事上의 實力을 갓고 잇는 者이라야 그를 堪當할 수 잇고 그리고 財政的 背景이 업는 자는 언제나 失敗햇음니다. 그는 中國의 維新以來로 幾多의 前철이 그를 證明하고잇음니다.
蔣介石의 現在의 態度에 對하야 非難하는 者가 만으나 그는 오늘의 中國에 잇서서는 아모러한 偉大한 人格者가 나오고 政畧家가 나오드래도 道理가 업는 일이니 資本主義列强의 準殖民地가 되여 잇는 現像에 中國의 民衆은 政治的으로 覺悟가 업시는 엇더케 그를 免할 수 잇을것 임니까. 蔣介石보고 그러면 네가 왜 컴무니스트가 못되느냐고 反問할 수도 잇을지나 그는 別問題이외다.
그럼으로 中國의 中央政權은 아즉 蔣介石에게 맛기여 政治工作에 依하야 內國統一에 成功케하고 民衆의 覺醒을 促하야 一步一步 漸進的으로 外勢驅逐에 注力토록 할 것이라고 보고 심슴니다.<59>

國民黨에 繼續可

元世勳

一, 먼저 中國의 國際的 地位를 생각하고 막기자.
「中國을 누구에게 막길가?」하는 말은「누가 能히 中國을 救할가?」하는 말과 거진 한가지 말이다. 다만 달으다면 「막긴다는 말에는 그대로 마터서 다스려 달나는 意味가 잇고 「구한다」는 말에는 危境에서 救하여 내라는 意味가 잇는 것이다. 루스벨트에게 米國을 막긴다든지? 맥도날드에게 英國을 막긴다면 其 意味가 現存한 米國이나 英國의 國際的 地位를 維持하는 限에서 國計民生을 爲하야 努力하여 달나는 말이지만 大戰直後의 土耳其를 게말파사에게 막긴다든지 10年前의 中國을 孫文의 國民黨에게 막겻다면 이는 米國이나 英國의 그것과 크게 달은 것이다. 土耳其나 中國은 危亡에 빠진 나라인 것만치 그 當面의 問題가 그國家와 民族을 그 危亡에서 救하는 것이 重要하기 된 까닭이다.
무엇을 가르처서 中國을 危亡에 빠진 나라라고 하는가?하면 그 內憂와 外患이 不絶하게  發生한다는 것보다 中國의 半殖民地的 國際地位가 中國으로 하여곰 獨立한 國家生活을 營爲할 수 업는 危境에 在한 것을 가르칩이다. 中國이 半殖民地的 國家인 까닭에서 中華民國의  國父格이든 孫文도 國威를 振興하자든지 國勢를 保守하자든지의 標語를 標語로 하지 아니하고「救國」다시 말하면 나라를 救하자-하는 말을 標語로 하엿다.
救國이라는 當面問題는 孫文만이 그 解決을 爲하야 畢生의 努力을 한 것도 아니오 그 黨員全體가 이 問題를 그 國家의 當面問題로 取扱하고 잇는 것이며 國民黨員이 아니라 그 밖의 各黨 各派와 全國民衆이 總히 「救國」으로써 當面의 急務라고 하는 것이라. 이것은 곳 그 國家의 地位가 半殖地的인데서 必然 且 不可避的으로 取하게 된 當面의 問題이다. 무솟린과 히틀러는 그만두고 그 如何한 世界的 大政治家를 中國에 가저다 놓고 中國의 當面問題를 무엇으로 할가 하더라도 亦是 救國으로써 當面의 問題를 삼게 될 것이다.<60>
그런데 우리가 여기에서 깊이 생각하여야 할 바는 英米佛等과 如히 完全獨立이오. 또는 强覇의 國家는 그 누구에게 막기든지 그다지 困難할 것이 업지만 中國과 如한 半殖民의 國家는 막기가 가장 困難하다는 바이다. 前者에 在하여는 맛터서 직혀나 주면 그만이지만 後者에 在하여는 맛터서 救하여 달나는 까닭이다. 직히는 것도 어럽다고 하겟지만 救하는 것에 比하면 容易한 業이다.
그럼으로 우리가 中國을 누구에게 막게ㅅ서 救할가?할 때에 中國의 半殖民地的인 그 國際地位를 생각한 뒤에 그 適任者를 擇하여야 할 것이다. 이것이 곳 中國을 맛를 適任者를 擇하기 爲하여서 中國의 國際的 地位가 半殖民地로서 危境에 在하다는 것을 前提로하는 所以이다.
二, 國際情勢와 中國의 現狀을 考慮하고 막기자.
現下의 國際情勢가 歐洲大戰의 直前에 잇든 情勢보다 더 急迫하다는 것은 누구나 肯定하는 바이다. 傳하는 바에 依하면 「英佛間에 軍事密約이 更新된다」「獨伊奧洪의 同盟이 締結되엿다」「露佛의 同盟이 締結되얏다」「英米間의 黙契가 잇다」「米露間의 軍事的 協定이 有하다」하는 等等의 說이 날마다 喧傳되는 이때이다. 各國의 軍備競爭은 露骨的으로 激烈하게 되고 各種의 軍事的 施設과 示威運動은  忌憚없시 盛行되야 世界的 大戰爭은 자못 時間上의 問題뿐인 國際的 情勢이다. 山雨가 欲來에 風滿樓는 오히려 不分明한 말이고 現下의 國際情勢는 戰爭을 世界的으로 惹起하지 아니하고는 말지 못하게 되엿다. 그 時間도 急迫하엿다고까지 斷言하게 되엿다.
이러한 國際情勢를 벗하고잇는 中國의 現狀은 如何한가 하면 滿洲事變이 3週年을 마지하게되 日中間의 停戰協定에 依하야 通郵通車問題를 解決하며 形體도 남지 못한 國際聯盟의 技術援助委員만 오락가락하며 宋子文 一行의 西北經濟發展의 探査隊이나 奔走하야 太平無事한 듯하라. 오즉 多忙하다면 福建의 獨立政府를 討伐하느니 共産軍을 討伐하느니하는 等으로 內爭的 軍事行動이 奔忙한 듯하다. 그리고 國民生計는 날마다 困境에서 헤매는데 지나지 못하고 國家財政은 外國이 借款을 唯一한 原泉으로 생각하는 外에 道理가 다시 없게 되여진 것이 中國의 現狀이다. 그러나 이러한 中國의 現狀이 近年에 비로소 생긴 것이 아니오 由來가 半百年이 넘는다. 一言으로 況하자면 半殖地의 現狀이 國際的 情勢에 伴하야 좀더 甚하여진것 이라할 것이다.<61>
이 情勢와 이 現狀에서 中國을 맛터가지고 나아갈 자는 그 進路를 確定하여야 할 것이다. 對外나 對內를 莫論하고 確乎한 對策을 樹立하지 아니치 못하게 되여진 情勢와 現狀이다. 萬一 對外的으로 國際情勢에 順應하지 못하고 對內的으로 現狀을 等閑視한다면 그것은 中國을 危境에서 救하는 것이 아니라 中國을 아조 死亡의 域까지 引導하는 工作에 불과할 것이다. 그런즉 現下에서 中國을 맛터 救할 適任者를 擇하는 條件으로 우리는 對外하야 國際情勢에 順應할만한 力의 準備 곳 軍事上의 實力을 가질 것과 對內하야 民族生計를 維持하며 各黨各派를 統制하야 擧國一致의 團結을 得할만한 雅量과 能力을 條件으로하야 擇할 것이다.
三. 條件附로 中國은 孫文에게 막기자.
孫文은 죽은 사람이다. 죽은 사람에게 現中國을 막기자 하는 말이 얼마나 抱腹絶倒할 말인가? 그러나 나의 이 말보다는 살어 잇는 엇든 一個人을 이모 저모로 뜨더보고 이리 저리 論評하여서 그 사람이 아니면 中國을 맛틀만한 資格과 能力이 없다는 말이 도리어 可笑한 듯하다. 自然人으로서의 各個人을 互相 對照하며 比較하여 볼때에는 그 長短과 優劣이 各有하야 萬能이 具備한 사람을 求하기 極難할 것이다. 例컨대 蔣介石은 政治理論에서 汪兆銘을 따라갈 수 없을 것이며 汪兆銘은 蔡廷楷의 戰術을 따르지 못할 것이며 蔡廷楷는 顧維均이나 王正廷의 外交手腕을 따르지 못할 것이며 王과 顧는 胡漢民이나 孫科의 國民黨員的 地位나 資格을 따르지 못할 것이며 胡와 孫은 張學良이나 閻錫山의 軍畧의 地盤을 따르지 못할 것이다. 甚하게 말하면 胡漢民이나 蔣介石이 個人으로는 어떤 點에서 朝鮮農村의 區長의 어떤 個人에게 比較하야 못할 點도 잇을 것이다. 이러케 본다면 自然人的 個人을 標準하고 中國을 막긴다는 말이 甚히 어리석은 論이라고 할 터이다.
나는 中華民國이 成立된 以來로 그 멫 사람이나 中國을 맛터 가지고 왓든가?하고 묻는다면 첫사람으로 袁世凱가 中國을 맛터 가젓고 물재사람으로 孫文이 맛테따 하야 두사람을 들고 싶다. 내가 여기에서 말하는 袁世凱나 孫文은 勿論 自然人으로서의 袁世凱나 孫文이 아니라 封建的 軍閥의 代表로 袁世凱를 가르침이오 國民革命的黨員의 代表로 孫文을 말한 것이다.
自然人의 袁世凱는 죽엇지만 封建的 軍閥의 無數한 袁世凱가 相續하야 중국을 맛터나니 黎元洪<62> 憑國璋, 徐世昌, 段祺瑞. 曹鯤, 張勳, 張作霖 等等이 封建的 軍閥로는 總히 袁世凱이엇다. 레닌은 죽고 쓰달닌이 소벳聯邦을 맛터다고 하여서는 너무나 自然人의 標準이다 쓰달닌은 레닌의 延長으로 그 업을 맛튼 것이다. 孫文은 죽고 蔣介石, 汪兆銘, 胡漢民 中의 어느 한사람이 中國을 맛터다면 亦是 自然人만을 標準하는 말이다. 蔣, 汪, 胡의 어떤 사람을 莫論하고 孫文의 延長이다. 要컨대 中華民國은 建國以來로 오랫 동안 封建軍閥의 손에 잇다가 救國을 標語로하는 國民黨의 손에 넘어간 것까지 合하야서 두사의 손에 막긴 것이라는  말이다.
만일 現在의 國民黨이 그 政權을 封建軍閥의 段祺瑞에게 다시 넘군다든지? 共産軍의 某氏에게 넘군다면 그 날은 孫文에게 막긴 것이라고 할 수가 없갓니와 國民黨員中의 某氏가 맛터다고 한다면 依然하게 中國은 孫文이 맛튼 것이다. 國民政府가 成立한 以來로 蔣介石이 2次나 下野하얏고 汪兆銘 胡漢民 等도 亦是 1, 2次式은 下野한 일이 잇섯다. 그것은 그다지 重大한 問題가 아니엇고 다만 그 黨內의 情勢에 依하야 生하엿든 進退이엇다.
이제 가장 큰 問題가 된자면 中國을 國民黨에게 그대로 막기느냐? 國民黨 以外의 第2 或은 第3黨에게 막기겟느냐 하는 問題이다. 그러나 이 問題는 現下의 모든 情勢로 보아서 갑작히  實現될 수가 업고 設或 實現된다 하더라도 中國의 幸이 되지 못할 것이오 中國은 아즉 그대로 國民黨에게 막게두는 것이 그런대로 得策이라 할 것이다. 다만 國民黨이 中國을 依然하게 맛터 가지고 나아가는데는 內으로는 擧國一致의 團結과 外로는 以夷制夷의 舊套를 버리고 興亡을 함게 할 만한 同盟을 얻을 것과 그 黨內의 統制를 단단히 하야 黨中의 黨이 無數하야 互相 敵視敵對하는 弊害를 一掃하는 것으써 條件을 附하여야 할 것이다. 이것이 곳 孫文에게 條件附로 막기자는 大體의 條件이다. 만일 蔣로介石이 藍衣社라는 黨中黨을 가지고 國民黨을 代替하자든지 汪兆銘이 改組派라는 黨中黨을 가지고 自家의 地位만 保障하자든지? 胡漢民, 孫科 等이 廣東, 廣西의 地方派를 根據로 하야 國民黨內에서 專橫하자든지? 하야  互相不下한다면 中國에 不幸을 끼칠뿐만 아니라 자멸을 自招할 것이다. 自黨內의 統制가 紊亂하고는 擧國一致의 工作을 進行할 수가 없을 것이오 弱子로서 擧國一致의 團結까지 없다면 對內對外을 不問하고 憂患의 相隨로 破滅을 難免할 것이다. 이 點이 國民黨에게 中國을 막긴 中國民衆의 憂慮하는 點이며 軍事의 蔣介石, 政治의 汪兆銘, 黨紀의 胡漢民 孫科等이 反省하고 孫文의 黨에 누를 끼치지 말로톡 勤愼하고 努力할 點인가 한다.<63>
<52-63>