Magazine Title: 삼천리 (Samch'ŏlli) 제17호
Publication Date: 1931년 07월 01일 (July 1, 1931)
Article Title: 現代女流思想家들(3), 붉은 戀愛의 主人公들 (Contemporary Women Thinkers (3), Protagonists of Red Love)
Author: 草士 (Ch'o Sa)
Article Type: 소식 (News/Report)

Contemporary Women Thinkers (3), Protagonists of Red Love
						Ch'o Sa
Hŏ Chŏng-suk, Hwang Sin-dŏk, Chu Se-juk, Nam Sura, Hyŏn Kye-ok, Chŏng Hak-su, Ko Myŏng-ja, Chŏng Ch'il-sŏng, Sim Ŭn-suk, Cho Wŏn-suk, Chŏng Chong-myŏng, U Pong-un, etc. – Socialist women of much affection and many sorrows.

In the early summer of Taishō 14 (1924), as the lonely shadow of an exile drifted uncertainly along the waves to the mournful tune of the "Volga Boatmen's Song" upon the vast blue waters of the border river Amnokkang (Yalu River), the massive underground organization called the "Chosŏn Kongsandang" (朝鮮共産黨 - Korean Communist Party) was suddenly exposed by the Sinŭiju Police Station. Following the capture of key figures like Kim Yak-su, Yu Chin-hŭi, Kwŏn O-sŏl, Hong Tŏk-yu, Kim Chae-bong, Pak Hŏn-yŏng, Im Wŏn-gŭn, and Kim Kyŏng-jae, and then after the June 10th Manse Incident during Emperor Sunjong's state funeral (因山), Kang Tal-yŏng and subsequently, in the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th association incidents, numerous renowned giants of this land's ideological movement such as Kim Chun-yŏn, Yi Yŏng, Pak Hyŏng-byŏng, Hong Yang-myŏng, Yi Pyŏng-ŭi, and Cha Chae-jŏng were bound in iron cages. This fact is known to all young Koreans. However, around these numerous fighters—who, while divided into factions like the Ilwŏlhoe (一月會), Hwayohoe (火曜會), Sŏul-kye (서울系), Pukp'ung-kye (北風系), etc., all burned intensely day and night, moving underground as if spewing fire from their chests for the same direction—there followed flower-like, beautiful young Marx-girls and Engels-ladies, like shadows, adding a spray of flowers to the bleak landscape of this ideological movement front.

As lives that could be arrested at any moment, during their brief, lightning-like encounters, a strong temple of steel-like love was built between them. Possessing new views on love and society, they danced upon and trampled the world's traditional concepts of marriage and remained composed. If we understand them, should we not rather say they were honorable?

Here are 10 ladies who directly or indirectly danced upon the flames of love and desire with these leaders. Let us unravel the threads of "that Red Love." However, readers, please forgive this unfree brush tip (不自由한 붓끗) which, unable to properly introduce these various women thinkers—who bravely rowed upon the sea of modern thought—from the front, detailing their thoughts and integrity, must resort to describing them through profiles of love and desire by going around the back alleys. At the same time, I feel apologetic for putting these ladies into such writing.

Lady Hŏ Chŏng-suk (許貞淑), of Many Sorrows, Wandering to America

One remembers a young woman who existed in a corner of the Chosŏn press world around 1923, serving as the first female reporter for the Tong-a Ilbo (東亞日報), translating poems by Sarojini Naidu—the famous poetess and then President of the Indian National Congress—extensively from English with a fluent writing style. That was Lady Hŏ Chŏng-suk.
She finished Kobe Theological Seminary, studied in Shanghai for several years, returned to Korea, and joined the Tong-a Ilbo with her husband. Her husband at that time was Mr. Im Wŏn-gŭn (林元根).<13>
However, five months after joining the company, when Pak Hŏn-yŏng, Im Wŏn-gŭn, Cho Tŏk-jin, and 14 or 15 other employees resigned en masse in a strike (盟罷退社), she too threw down her resignation letter. In front of all the employees gathered, she even gave a fierce speech denouncing the management before storming out.
After that, whenever any declaration or platform came out from the Yŏsŏng Tonguhoe (女性同友會) or the Kŭn'uhoe (槿友會), it was invariably co-authored by the masterful calligrapher Hwang Sin-dŏk and Ms. Hŏ. Then, holding positions as a cadre in the Ch'ŏngch'ong (靑總 - Youth General Federation) and also in the Kŭn'uhoe, she showed surprisingly persistent practical activism, traveling tirelessly from Hamgyŏng North Province and Kando (間島) in the north to Chŏlla and Kyŏngsang provinces in the south, without time to sit comfortably.
During that time, her beloved husband, Mr. Im Wŏn-gŭn, was imprisoned in connection with the First Party incident. She wept. When her three-year-old beloved son P'yo (豹), who had been selected first place in the T'aehwa Yŏjagwan's (泰和女子舘) outstanding child selection contest and even received a bathtub made of reeds as a prize, called out "Appa, appa" (Daddy, daddy), how many times did the young woman in the boudoir, Lady Hŏ, collapse weeping on the floor with the heart-wrenching tears of maternal love?
However, Lady Hŏ was too passionate and too resiliently endowed a beauty. After sending Im to prison, not long after, she became a woman with an ice-cold side, writing a divorce notification and visiting her husband's prison cell.
After that, she bore a second child whose father had a different surname. An unavoidably cold and delicate atmosphere lingered in her home, starting with her gentle father, Hŏ Hŏn (許憲). Later, Lady Hŏ followed Hŏ Hŏn to America. During her stay there for over a year, she reportedly settled all her mental entanglements and returned as a new person. While in the US, she met a certain female leader of America in some international organization and studied the history of the American social movement extensively.
Before the age of 30, she had three lovers, and with each, she bore a precious son (玉童子). But whether this will be the seed of tears or the seed of laughter, no one knows. The three siblings who share the same mother but lost their fathers are now being raised by their grandmother. Hŏ Chŏng-suk received a one-year prison sentence for the Kwangju Student Incident, was temporarily released due to childbirth (解産), and then was imprisoned again about a month ago, so she is absent.
Recently, to draft her American travelogue, she had been borrowing sections of the Europe-America travelogue her father Hŏ Hŏn had written for "Samch'ŏlli" (三千里) at the time and was studying them diligently, but the police seem to<em> have</em> taken her away without even allowing her the leisure for this writing.
"Love is a private matter!" Under this proposition,<14> there is no basis to attack the Lady. Had her husband not been separated from her from the beginning, would such complicated factors of tragedy have become entangled in her life? Also, was what she sought the touch of sex like 'Olga' (올-가 - likely referring to a character or concept symbolizing purely physical desire), or was it love? If the former, understanding human instinct, it might rather be a matter for sympathy. In any case, the passionate, sincere, beautiful Lady Hŏ Chŏng-suk, a person of clear mind who can eloquently record systematic thought, a person of the pen, a person of the tongue, is a woman with a brilliant future, counted on the fingers of the Chosŏn female intelligentsia. Born in Myŏngch'ŏn, Hamgyŏng North Province, she is 29 this year.

Shining Beauties Overseas: Three March Stars

Overseas, there are even more individuals leaping onto the ideological movement front. Among them, we shall select three of the most renowned. Anyone discussing the overseas movement likely knows of "Nam Man-ch'un" (남만춘) of Russia; his very own sister is "Nam Sura" (南수라), an "old youth." Some years ago, she came to Chosŏn and unfortunately died as a visitor at Severance Hospital (세부란쓰病院 - Severance Hospital). She was once the lover of Professor Ch'ae Kŭregori (蔡그리고리敎授). The two were often seen arm-in-arm, affectionately strolling, presenting a beautiful scene 자랑함이 한두번이 아니엇다 (boasted not just once or twice) to international figures, whether on a small boat on the Hŭngnyonggang (黑龍江 - Heilongjiang River) or in Red Square behind the Kremlin Palace in Moscow. Having lost her beloved Ch'ae, Lady Nam Sura is now said to be observing solitary fidelity (孤節) and working actively, forgetting food and sleep, as one of the top leaders in the Yŏnhaeju (沿海州 - Maritime Province). Her wide, round face is said to always be full of spirit whenever seen. Is she forty-two this year?
The love story woven between them, like blue and red threads (靑실紅실), unfolded against the backdrop of the Russian capital, which extols and praises proletarian love to its peak, making it very profound and dramatic. However, wouldn't digging up the romance of Lady Nam, now like a lone wild goose in the autumn sky after losing her partner, merely add to her sorrow? She is a full party member (正黨員).
Secondly, there is Ms. Hyŏn Kye-ok (玄桂玉). Those with good memory will recall a person named Hyŏn Chŏng-gŏn (玄鼎健). He was the elder brother of the Tong-a Ilbo reporter and novelist Pinghŏ Hyŏn Chin-gŏn (憑虛 玄鎭健氏), who was active in Shanghai early on. Mr. Hyŏn's lover was named Kye-ok. Around the March 1st Movement (3.1當時), she, along with Lady Chŏng Ch'il-sŏng (丁七星女史), was a famous kisaeng (妓生) of the capital (長安), renowned for her beauty, voice, and skill in ink painting (묵화), captivating the city (傾城名妓). Influenced by her lover Hyŏn Chŏng-gŏn, during the KimI year (己未 - 1919), she coaxed a young master from the noble M family (M이란 名門의 도련님) into giving her 4,000 won. Using that money for travel expenses, she held hands with her lover Hyŏn Chŏng-gŏn, made a 100% speedy ideological leap, and soon reached Shanghai, where both threw themselves into the movement front.
In Shanghai, Lady Hyŏn Kye-ok attended an English school. Her later fluent English, combined with her beauty like an Eastern lily (東洋的 百合꼿), made her famous among activists both at home and abroad.
Later, Hyŏn Chŏng-gŏn was arrested in Shanghai, returned to Chosŏn, received a 4-year sentence at the P'yŏngyang Court, and is now serving his term. As things turned out this way, Lady Hyŏn Kye-ok reportedly went to Moscow and is doing important work. She too is a full party member.
Lastly, let us mention Lady Chŏng Hak-su (鄭學秀女史). Lady Chŏng Hak-su was a delegate representing women at the XX Conference held in Shanghai some years ago.<15> Her lover is a Mr. Yi (李某氏), an important cadre in some department of the Kye-boe-u (께뵈,우 - likely Khabarovsk) in Vladivostok (海參威). As a politician, the Lady is already famous and does not await the introduction of our pen. She is also a full party member.
Besides these, there are many other beauties riding the winds of change, displaying their elegant figures (楚楚한 어엽분 姿態). But we shall stop here for now.

Hwang Sin-dŏk (黃信德) of Many Vicissitudes

In the years 1923-24, when the social movement was burgeoning, three young ladies returned splendidly to this land from Tokyo after finishing women's university, spreading their silver wings evenly. They were Ms. Yu Yŏng-jun (劉英俊氏), who had made a name for herself as the president of the Tonggyŏng Hak'hŭnghoe (東京學興會) and as a female politician in the capitals of the three Eastern nations (東洋三國); Ms. Ch'oe Ŭn-hŭi (崔恩喜氏), later a Chosŏn Ilbo female reporter whose literary and romantic fame spread even to the corners of Southern Chosŏn; and this Ms. Hwang Sin-dŏk.
No sooner had Ms. Hwang returned home (歸國하기 밧부게) than she joined the Kŭn'uhoe, resolved to awaken the women of the deep inner chambers steeped in a 500-year slumber. Whenever she had time, she took up the teacher's pointer at night schools, spewed red flames from lecture platforms, and diligently played the role of a "V Narod" (부-나로드 - populist campaigner) visiting farming villages. Later, she moved between roles as a female reporter for the Sidae Ilbo (時代日報) and the Chungoe Ilbo (中外日報). During this time, the women's critiques she wrote under the pen name "Wŏram Tongin" (月岩洞人) were the first sharp pen strokes from a proletarian standpoint in the Chosŏn female discourse.
Lady Hwang had a lover. It was none other than Mr. Yu Chin-hŭi (兪鎭熙氏), a giant of the intellectual world who played a huge role in the First Party incident and received a sentence of 5 years and 3 months. The love between the two, which began to ignite in Tokyo, only intensified with each passing day, consuming everything and leaving nothing behind. At such a time, Mr. Yu became a body shackled by ice-cold handcuffs (手錠). Hwang, a woman of strong will, clenched her teeth and stared blankly at the retreating figure of her lover, dragged away, uncertain when they would meet again. Not long after that, how many times did she personally carry jackets and undergarments, knitted with devotion and soaked in tears, to Sŏdaemun Prison, seeking to deliver them from Hwang's hands to Yu? Drops of the maiden's tears of love and desire dripped onto the railing of the meeting room.
Then, a storm arose in the maiden's life. Everything—yes, it could truly be called everything—a great transformation struck all that she possessed: her thoughts, passions, and body.
Receiving Lady Hwang's letters after the transformation from behind cold iron bars, Mr. Yu doubted, thinking, "Surely not." He then wrote back, "Please don't say such things, even as a joke." However, "stark reality" trampled upon the dreams, sentiments, and pleas of the imprisoned man, marching forward relentlessly.
Lady Hwang later welcomed Mr. Im Pong-sun (任鳳淳氏), a Tong-a Ilbo reporter and fighter of the Sŏul-kye faction, as her most beloved partner, and is now setting up a sweet home (쓰윗트,홈) in Sinjŏn-ri (新設里) outside the city. It is said she has had a son.
She is currently teaching at Myŏngsŏng Yŏja Hagwŏn (明星女子學院), the successor to the city's Silch'ŏn Yŏhakkyo (實踐女學校), and occasionally broadcasts home lectures on J, O, T, K (JODK - Kyŏngsŏng Broadcasting Station).
Her hometown is P'yŏngyang; she is said to be twenty-eight this year. A particularly noteworthy fact is that Ms. Hwang has a historically brilliant older sister. That is Ms. Hwang Aesidŏk (黃愛施德氏), who holds an MA degree from an American university. Lady Aesidŏk (Esther Hwang) was a person whose whole being became an incarnation of fervor during the KimI year (己未 - 1919), working alongside Kim Maria (김마리아) and others, accomplishing many things. As our pen will touch upon her again when recording matters related to the XX Women's Association, we will end here for now. Looking from this perspective, the two sisters are a pair of remarkable individuals from any angle.

Chŏng Chong-myŏng (鄭鍾鳴), Sharing Life and Death with Sin Ch'ŏl (辛徹)

After weeping for several years in her marital home's chamber as an "unfortunate bride," then spending several more years as a "demure young widow," Lady Chŏng Chong-myŏng met Mr. Sin Ch'ŏl, a comrade reliable in thought, some years ago. Just as the light of spring seemed about to melt into her youth again, she was caught in a sudden roundup and is now under preliminary examination (豫審中). The case relates to the recently frequently reported formation of the Working Committee of the Reconstruction Party (再建黨의 工作委員會結社關係).
Lady Chŏng worked as a nurse at Severance Hospital (세부란쓴病院), founded the Association for Mutual Aid of Female Students Struggling Financially (女子苦學生相助會), and in the 10 years of social activism since founding the Kŭn'uhoe, she often entered police station detention cells (警察署留置場), but this is her first time going to prison. Having placed her beloved son Pak Hong-jae (朴弘濟) there, she herself has now followed him in.
Lady Chŏng was the nanny (保姆) of all social activists. If anyone fell ill at the Association Hall (會舘), she would use the 1 or 2 won earned from midwifery to buy medicine, brew it, make rice gruel (미음), and if someone was arrested, she would hurry her steps to the place of detention,<16> busily arranging for toiletries, clothing, and food deliveries (差入). Professor Ch'ae Kŭregori of the Far Eastern University in Russia, who died at Severance Hospital, was one of those moved to tears by Lady Chŏng's kindness, visiting him attentively despite having no prior acquaintance.
Professor Ch'ae called for Ms. Chŏng Chong-myŏng even on his deathbed (臨終의 席上).
She is not a person of the pen. But she was a person of the tongue. Especially when criticizing someone, she attacks like lightning, giving the opponent no opening. Her force (勢) is so fierce that most men back down.
She is a person of passion rather than a person of will. Though she appears quite cold, she was, like the late Pak Wŏn-hŭi (朴元熙女史), on the side of much affection and many sorrows (多情多恨).
Some years ago, when her lover Mr. Sin Ch'ŏl was released on bail and lay ill in bed, her devoted nursing was truly a record of tears. It can be said that Mr. Sin Ch'ŏl's recovery (回春) from serious illness was largely due to the Lady's efforts. She had one or two sexual partners (性的 同伴者). But no one blames her for it. Her circumstances evoke that much sympathy. Born in Kyŏnggi Province, is she forty-one this year?

Ko Myŏng-ja (高明子), the Sole First Female X Member, a Single Red Dot

Two years ago, in the autumn of Shōwa 4 (1929), during the Chosŏn Exposition (朝鮮博覽會), the Kyŏnggi Provincial Police Department suddenly mobilized several automobiles to the vicinity of Tohwa-dong (桃花洞) in Yongsan (龍山) and arrested dozens of Communist Party members. Among them was Ko Myŏng-ja, a woman of flower-like beauty. Ko Myŏng-ja had entered from Moscow with her lover Kim Tan-ya (金丹冶), the organizer of the 1st and 2nd association incidents. They had set up a small household, shunning the world in a secluded house outside the city where people rarely visited, while she took charge of organizing the women's section for the Party's reconstruction movement and was active.
Ko Myŏng-ja is a graduate of Seoul's Ihwa Haktang (梨花學堂 - Ewha School). Afterwards, she joined the Tonguhoe (同友會) and worked there before going to Moscow, where she entered the Communist University (共産大學) and stayed for 4 years. After the Chosŏn Communist Party was completely crushed by numerous arrests, she received a secret order from the International Party (國際黨 - Comintern?) for the Party's reconstruction and returned.
She is a talented woman (才媛), always receiving praise as a top student (秀才) even in school. She is a woman of crescent-moon beauty (半月形의 美貌), and around her always gathered many hot-blooded youths discussing Marx and Engels. Among them was the outstanding 'comrade' (올쿠 - likely "올곧다" [olgutta - upright] or a term for comrade) Kim Tan-ya. The two first resonated in thought, then in personality, and then in "everything"—yes, not partially, but completely resonated in everything.
After becoming passionately devoted comrades who promised to share life and death, they held hands and rushed about at home and abroad. Incidentally, when Ko Myŏng-ja was arrested, Kim Tan-ya remained hidden in Seoul for two months before escaping abroad again. Among the many women thinkers of Chosŏn, isn't Ko Myŏng-ja the only one who became a direct party member (直接黨員) and was active? She received a 3-year sentence, so the day of her release is still far off. She must be twenty-five or six years old.

Lady Chu Se-juk (朱世竹氏), a Beauty of Eastern Classical Grace, and Others

In the winter of 1922, when the name "Party" (黨) was not yet even heard in Chosŏn, a group of three sturdy youths entered Seoul via Beijing and Shanghai after leaving Moscow. They were arrested in Sinŭiju<17> and all served 1 year and 6 months. These were the three men—Pak Hŏn-yŏng (朴憲永), Kim Tan-ya (金丹冶), and Pak Wŏn-gŭn (朴元根)—who would later startle everyone as organizers of the first, the initial First Party incident.
At that time, Pak [Hŏn-yŏng] had Hŏ Chŏng-suk, Kim [Tan-ya] had Ko Myŏng-ja, and Pak [Wŏn-gŭn?] had Chu Se-juk, a lady of elegant and refined beauty, as if quietly stepped out of an Eastern classical painting (東洋古典畵).
Chu met Pak [Hŏn-yŏng?] in Shanghai. Lady Chu, who, with the body of a delicate woman (纖弱한 女性), had early crossed the border and dragged her tormented and troubled mind and body far into the rough plains of Russia, reached Shanghai and met Pak, her comrade and lover. She borrowed from and praised the eternal flow of the Huangpu River's (黃浦灘) waves. At that time, when her husband Pak Hŏn-yŏng, released from P'yŏngyang Prison, was working as a political reporter for the Tong-a Ilbo, sitting side-by-side with Im Wŏn-gŭn (Kim Tan-ya was a Chosŏn Ilbo reporter), Cho Tong-u (趙東祐), and Hŏ Chŏng-suk, Lady Chu came to Chosŏn. While active as the organizational director of the Tonguhoe (同友會), she earned a living by typing English at a Western trading company somewhere in Sŏdaemun, Seoul.
Later, when her husband was arrested again in Sinŭiju as the top leader of the CY (Communist Youth?), the Lady also received the same binding rope (捕繩), and her jade-like skin and rosy face (玉膚紅顔) were subjected to the border's snowy winds under the moon for more than a day or two.
After that, Pak was released on bail. Lady Chu Se-juk took her sickly husband to her hometown, Hamhŭng (咸興) in Hamgyŏng Province (咸鏡道), for treatment, and then all trace of them was lost (종적을 차즐길 업시 되엇다). Perhaps now, somewhere under a far, far sky, the two are sitting shoulder to shoulder, counting the stars in their homeland's sky, one by one.
At that time in Seoul, there were four women called the Four Beauties (四美人). They were Chu Se-juk, Hŏ Chŏng-suk, Sim Ŭn-suk (沈恩淑), and Cho Wŏn-suk (趙元淑). Among them, Chu was considered the finest (白眉) for her elegant, graceful, and ethereal charm (楚楚漂漂神韻). One of those Four Beauties, Ms. Cho Wŏn-suk, hails from Uljin (蔚珍) in Kangwŏn Province (江原道). As a daughter of a noble family (名門), hidden deep in the women's quarters during her maiden days, her father and brothers arranged a marriage for her. On the very night before the wedding ceremony (花燭典禮), saying she didn't want to get married, she secretly took a palanquin and fled to Seoul—a thrilling woman. She attended Sukmyŏng Yŏhakkyo (淑明女學校 - Sookmyung Girls' School) up to the 2nd grade, during which time she became close to Kim Tong-myŏng (金東鳴), a young fighter of the then Sinhŭng Ch'ŏngnyŏn Tongmaeng (新興靑年同盟 - New Rising Youth Alliance). Later, when Kim fled to Shanghai for some reason to evade the police, she then became involved with Yang Myŏng (梁明). When Yang Myŏng also fled to Shanghai due to the ML Party Incident (ML黨事件), Lady Cho followed him there some years ago. Having given birth to a precious son (玉童子), she returned to Korea a month ago. She is now said to be holding her beloved child and living under the deep affection of her kind parents-in-law in Yang's hometown, a fishing village on Cheju Island (濟州島).
The white gulls of the ever-spring South Sea leap freely over the blue waves. May there be a day when the Lady's heartstrings, weary from weathering storms at home and abroad, are washed clean again in these waves.

Chŏng Ch'il-sŏng (丁七星), Sim Ŭn-suk (沈恩淑), Yi Hyŏn-gyŏng (李賢卿), and Others

Ms. Sim Ŭn-suk's hometown is Yangyang (襄陽) in Kangwŏn Province, where mountains and waters are all beautiful. A long-time fighter who stood at the forefront of the Kŭn'uhoe, she was once in love with and loved by the social critic Mr. Kim Kyŏng-jae (金璟載氏). After Kim was imprisoned for the first time, she formed a sweet home (쓰윗,홈) with Mr. Hong Ki-mun (洪起文氏), a young fighter of the Sin'ganhoe (新幹會). She gave birth to a precious son last winter. Ms. Yi Hyŏn-gyŏng was born in Suwŏn (水原), worked as a primary school teacher (普校敎師) and a Tong-a Ilbo female reporter, then followed An Kwang-ch'ŏn (安光泉) to Shanghai. Recently, she is said to have returned to her hometown. Along with Sin Kyŏng-ae (申敬愛女史) of Kwangju and Ms. Chŏng Chong-myŏng, she went through the Yongsan Police Station for involvement in the Working Committee (工作委任會) affair and is currently imprisoned.
As we conclude this writing, we shall complete the colors on this canvas of "Red Love Stories" (赤戀史) by briefly recounting the brilliant first half of the life of Lady Chŏng Ch'il-sŏng, who served as the Central Committee Chairwoman of the Kŭn'uhoe.
Lady Chŏng Ch'il-sŏng was a famous kisaeng who captivated the capital (長安). The Taegu Kamyŏng (大邱監營 - Taegu Governor's Compound), like the P'yŏngyang Kamyŏng (平壤監營), spread out like hourglass drums (장구모양) in the south and north of the peninsula. Famous for its beautiful people, this scenic spot of Yŏngnam (嶺南) was the Lady's birthplace, Taegu. Later, when she came up to Seoul (올나오매), her beautiful face, skilled in song and dance (歌舞), and slender like a willow leaf (버들입), earned her the reputation of a beauty capable of overthrowing kingdoms (傾國) until the time of the March 1st Movement. At that time, Lady Chŏng had a close kisaeng friend. She was Ms. Hyŏn Kye-ok, the lover of Hyŏn Chŏng-gŏn mentioned earlier.
iDuring the March 1st Movement! Everyone was a political actor then. Old people, young children, everyone spoke of the state and the nation, and also got excited and fired up. Riding a white horse, flamboyantly flicking a silver whip against its flank, roaming as if the main streets of the capital were too narrow, the fire of "politics" began to ignite in Lady Chŏng's heart too. Casting aside that luxurious life in a single morning like a worn-out shoe, she dashed off to Tokyo, completed studies at an arts school (技藝學校), and Lady Chŏng Ch'il-sŏng's leap was indeed an existence sufficient to startle the world.
There, she threw herself into the social movement. Since then, needing no introduction from the pen, she has maintained solitary fidelity (孤節) for 10 years, shouldering the Kŭn'uhoe on both shoulders until now, spewing forth immense spirit (萬丈의 氣焰) for the women of the peninsula. There was talk for a time that she was in a relationship of mutual love with Mr. C (C氏와) (continued on page 51)<18> and so on, but I do not know for sure.

We still have many female fighters to list: U Pong-un (禹鳳雲), Kang Agŭnia (姜아근니아), Pak Wŏn-hŭi (朴元熙), Pak Sun-ch'ŏn (朴順天), Kang Sŏk-cha (姜石子), etc. However, due to space limitations, we will end here for now and await a day to continue in the future.<51>

**Summary**

This 1931 article by "Ch'o Sa" profiles several prominent Korean socialist women active in the 1920s and early 1930s, including Hŏ Chŏng-suk, Hwang Sin-dŏk, Chu Se-juk, Nam Sura, Hyŏn Kye-ok, Chŏng Chong-myŏng, Ko Myŏng-ja, and Chŏng Ch'il-sŏng. While acknowledging their status as "contemporary women thinkers," the author explicitly focuses on their "Red Love"—their romantic relationships, marriages, divorces, and children—often linking their personal lives to their political activities and the arrests and imprisonments of their male comrades in various Communist Party incidents. The author expresses slight unease about this focus but frames it as necessary due to censorship ("unfree brush tip"), while also suggesting their unconventional relationships stemmed from new social views and difficult circumstances.

From a historical perspective, the article is fascinating for its candid (though potentially biased or speculative) discussion of the personal lives of female political figures during a period of intense colonial suppression. It reveals the intertwined nature of political struggle, personal relationships, exile, imprisonment, and evolving gender roles for activist women in colonial Korea. The mention of specific incidents (KCP arrests, Kwangju Student Movement), locations (Shanghai, Moscow, Sinŭiju), and organizations (Kŭn'uhoe, Tong-a Ilbo, various communist factions) provides valuable context. Historians might find the contemporary perspective on these women's perceived romantic choices, the explicit labeling of their relationships as "Red Love," and the author's ambivalent tone particularly noteworthy for understanding social mores and the challenges faced by female intellectuals and activists under Japanese rule.

**Named Entities**

許貞琡	허정숙	Hŏ Chŏng-suk
黃信德	황신덕	Hwang Sin-dŏk
朱世竹	주세죽	Chu Se-juk
南수라	남수라	Nam Sura
玄桂玉	현계옥	Hyŏn Kye-ok
鄭學秀	정학수	Chŏng Hak-su
高明子	고명자	Ko Myŏng-ja
丁七星	정칠성	Chŏng Ch'il-sŏng
沈恩淑	심은숙	Sim Ŭn-suk
趙元淑	조원숙	Cho Wŏn-suk
鄭鍾鳴	정종명	Chŏng Chong-myŏng
禹鳳雲	우봉운	U Pong-un
압녹강	압록강	Amnokkang (Yalu River)
新義州 警察署	신의주 경찰서	Sinŭiju Police Station
朝鮮共産黨	조선공산당	Chosŏn Kongsandang (Korean Communist Party)
金若水	김약수	Kim Yak-su
兪鎭熙	유진희	Yu Chin-hŭi
權五卨	권오설	Kwŏn O-sŏl
洪悳裕	홍덕유	Hong Tŏk-yu
金在鳳	김재봉	Kim Chae-bong
朴憲永	박헌영	Pak Hŏn-yŏng
林元根	임원근	Im Wŏn-gŭn
金璟載	김경재	Kim Kyŏng-jae
純宗帝	순종제	Emperor Sunjong
姜達永	강달영	Kang Tal-yŏng
金俊淵	김준연	Kim Chun-yŏn
李英	이영	Yi Yŏng
朴衡秉	박형병	Pak Hyŏng-byŏng
洪陽明	홍양명	Hong Yang-myŏng
李炳儀	이병의	Yi Pyŏng-ŭi
車載貞	차재정	Cha Chae-jŏng
一月會	일월회	Ilwŏlhoe (Monday Society)
火曜會	화요회	Hwayohoe (Tuesday Society)
서울系	서울계	Sŏul-kye (Seoul Faction)
北風系	북풍계	Pukp'ung-kye (North Wind Faction)
맑스	마르크스	Marx
엥겔스	엥겔스	Engels
亞米利加	아메리카	America (USA)
東亞日報	동아일보	Tong-a Ilbo
印度 國民會議	인도 국민회의	Indian National Congress
사로지니,나이두	사로지니 나이두	Sarojini Naidu
神戶神學校	고베신학교	Kobe Theological Seminary
上海	상하이	Shanghai
趙德津	조덕진	Cho Tŏk-jin
女性同友會	여성동우회	Yŏsŏng Tonguhoe (Women's Comrade Society)
槿友會	근우회	Kŭn'uhoe (Rose of Sharon Society)
靑總	청총	Ch'ŏngch'ong (Youth General Federation)
咸北	함북	Hamgyŏng North Province (Hamhŭng)
間島	간도	Kando (Jiandao)
全羅	전라	Cholla Province
慶尙	경상	Kyŏngsang Province
泰和女子舘	태화여자관	T'aehwa Yŏjagwan (Taiwha Woman's Hall)
豹	표	P'yo (name)
許憲	허헌	Hŏ Hŏn
光州學生事件	광주학생사건	Kwangju Student Incident
三千里	삼천리	Samch'ŏlli (magazine name - excluded as per instructions, but listed here for completeness in thought process)
露西亞	러시아	Russia
남만춘	남만춘	Nam Man-ch'un
세부란쓰病院	세브란스병원	Severance Hospital
蔡그리고리敎授	채그리고리 교수	Professor Ch'ae Kŭregori (Gregory)
黑龍江	흑룡강	Hŭngnyonggang (Heilongjiang River)
모스꾸바	모스크바	Moscow
구레무린 宮殿	크렘린 궁전	Kremlin Palace
赤廣場	붉은 광장	Red Square
沿海州	연해주	Yŏnhaeju (Maritime Province)
玄鼎健	현정건	Hyŏn Chŏng-gŏn
憑虛 玄鎭健	빙허 현진건	Pinghŏ Hyŏn Chin-gŏn
長安	장안	Chang'an (metaphor for the capital, Seoul)
平壤法院	평양법원	P'yŏngyang Court
李某氏	이모씨	Mr. Yi
海參威	해삼위	Haesamwi (Vladivostok)
께뵈,우	하바롭스크	Khabarovsk (transliteration unsure, interpreted as Khabarovsk)
東京	도쿄	Tokyo
女子大學	여자대학	Women's University
劉英俊	유영준	Yu Yŏng-jun
東京學興會	도쿄학흥회	Tonggyŏng Hak'hŭnghoe (Tokyo Student Association)
東洋三國	동양삼국	Three Eastern Nations (Korea, China, Japan)
崔恩喜	최은희	Ch'oe Ŭn-hŭi
朝鮮日報	조선일보	Chosŏn Ilbo
時代日報	시대일보	Sidae Ilbo
中外日報	중외일보	Chungoe Ilbo
月岩洞人	월암동인	Wŏram Tongin (pen name)
西大門監獄	서대문감옥	Sŏdaemun Prison
任鳳淳	임봉순	Im Pong-sun
新設里	신설리	Sinjŏn-ri (Sinsŏl-li)
實踐女學校	실천여학교	Silch'ŏn Yŏhakkyo (Practical Girls' School)
明星女子學院	명성여자학원	Myŏngsŏng Yŏja Hagwŏn (Myungsung Women's Academy)
J, O, T, K	JODK	JODK (Kyŏngsŏng Broadcasting Station call sign)
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
黃愛施德	황애시덕	Hwang Aesidŏk (Esther Hwang)
김마리아	김마리아	Kim Maria
辛徹	신철	Sin Ch'ŏl
再建黨	재건당	Reconstruction Party (Chae Kŏn Tang)
工作委員會	공작위원회	Working Committee (Kongjak Wiwŏnhoe)
女子苦學生相助會	여자고학생상조회	Association for Mutual Aid of Female Students Studying Abroad
朴弘濟	박홍제	Pak Hong-jae
會舘	회관	Association Hall
朴元熙	박원희	Pak Wŏn-hŭi
京畿道	경기도	Kyŏnggi Province
朝鮮博覽會	조선박람회	Chosŏn Exposition (Korea Exposition)
京畿道警察部	경기도경찰부	Kyŏnggi Provincial Police Department
龍山	용산	Yongsan
桃花洞	도화동	Tohwa-dong
金丹冶	김단야	Kim Tan-ya
梨花學堂	이화학당	Ihwa Haktang (Ewha School)
同友會	동우회	Tonguhoe (Comrade Society)
共産大學	공산대학	Communist University
國際黨	국제당	International Party (Comintern?)
北京	베이징	Beijing (Peking)
朴元根	박원근	Pak Wŏn-gŭn
趙東祐	조동우	Cho Tong-u
咸鏡道	함경도	Hamgyŏng Province
咸興	함흥	Hamhŭng
四美人	사미인	Four Beauties
江原道	강원도	Kangwŏn Province
蔚珍	울진	Uljin
淑明女學校	숙명여학교	Sukmyŏng Yŏhakkyo (Sookmyung Girls' School)
新興靑年同盟	신흥청년동맹	Sinhŭng Ch'ŏngnyŏn Tongmaeng (New Rising Youth Alliance)
金東鳴	김동명	Kim Tong-myŏng
梁明	양명	Yang Myŏng
ML黨	ML당	ML Party (Marxist-Leninist Party?)
濟州島	제주도	Cheju Island
襄陽	양양	Yangyang
金璟載氏	김경재씨	Mr. Kim Kyŏng-jae
新幹會	신간회	Sin'ganhoe (New Stem Society)
洪起文	홍기문	Hong Ki-mun
李賢卿	이현경	Yi Hyŏn-gyŏng
水原	수원	Suwŏn
普校敎師	보교교사	Primary School Teacher
安光泉	안광천	An Kwang-ch'ŏn
申敬愛	신경애	Sin Kyŏng-ae
龍山警察署	용산경찰서	Yongsan Police Station
大邱監營	대구감영	Taegu Kamyŏng (Taegu Governor's Compound)
平壤監營	평양감영	P'yŏngyang Kamyŏng (P'yŏngyang Governor's Compound)
嶺南	영남	Yŏngnam (region)
大邱	대구	Taegu
技藝學校	기예학교	Arts School
姜아근니아	강아근니아	Kang Agŭnia
朴順天	박순천	Pak Sun-ch'ŏn
姜石子	강석자	Kang Sŏk-cha

**Glossary**

女流思想家	여류사상가	Female thinker
붉은 戀愛	붉은 연애	Red Love (referring to socialist/communist relationships)
多情多恨	다정다한	Full of affection and sorrow
地下層的	지하층적	Underground (adjective)
발각되면서	발각되면서	While being discovered/exposed
因山	인산	State funeral for royalty (specifically Emperor Sunjong here)
思想運動	사상운동	Ideological movement
知名	지명	Well-known, renowned
철창	철창	Iron bars (of a prison)
억메이게 된	얽매이게 된	Became bound/tied up (older spelling/form of 얽매이다)
云云하면서도	운운하면서도	While saying such and such, etc.
불고치	불꽃이	Flame/spark (older spelling of 불꽃)
뿜는드시	뿜는듯이	As if spewing/gushing
灼熱하여	작열하여	Burning intensely
땅밋흐로	땅 밑으로	Under the ground (older spelling)
도라다니든	돌아다니던	Who used to roam around (older spelling)
身邊	신변	One's surroundings, personal affairs
妙齡	묘령	Young age (esp. for women)
꼿과 가튼	꽃과 같은	Like a flower (older spelling of 꽃)
맑스껄	마르크스 걸	Marx girl
엥겔스레듸	엥겔스 레이디	Engels lady
殺風景한	살풍경한	Bleak, desolate, dreary
꼿수	꽃수	Spray of flowers, floral embroidery (older spelling of 꽃)
노아주엇다	놓아주었다	Placed, put down (older spelling)
잡힐는지	잡힐는지	Whether (one) will be caught
한낫	한낱	Mere, humble / One day (depending on context; here likely 'mere' or 'one')
번개가ти	번개같이	Like lightning
맛나는	만나는	Meeting (older spelling)
殿堂	전당	Palace, hall, temple
싸여지는	쌓여지는	Being built up (older spelling/form of 쌓이다)
새	새	New
傳統的	전통적	Traditional
배앗고	빼앗고	Snatching away (older spelling)
줏 밟고도	짓밟고도	Even after trampling upon (older spelling/form of 짓밟다)
理解할진대	이해할진대	If (we) understand...
떳떳하다	떳떳하다	To be honorable, upright, confident
愛慾	애욕	Love and desire, passion
실마리	실마리	Thread end, clue, beginning
勇敢하게도	용감하게도	Bravely
놀대질하고 잇든	놋대질하고 있던	Who were rowing (likely figurative, navigating) (older spelling/form '놋대질')
正面으로	정면으로	From the front, directly
志操	지조	Integrity, fidelity, principles
紹介하지	소개하지	Introducing
행낭 뒷골	행랑 뒤곬	Back alley behind the servants' quarters
描寫하려하는	묘사하려하는	Trying to depict/describe
不自由한	부자유한	Unfree, restricted
붓끗	붓끝	Tip of the brush
豫期하면서도	예기하면서도	While expecting/anticipating
未安스럽게	미안스럽게	Apologetically, feeling sorry
아노라	아노라	Archaic verb ending expressing speaker's realization/statement
放浪	방랑	Wandering, vagabondage
女記者	여기자	Female reporter
流麗한	유려한	Fluent, elegant (writing style)
筆致	필치	Writing style, stroke
盛히	성히	Actively, vigorously, prosperously
飜譯하여내든	번역하여내던	Who used to translate (older spelling/form)
存在하엿든	존재하였던	Which existed (older spelling)
기억하리라	기억하리라	Will remember (predictive/expectant)
夫君	부군	Husband (honorific)
入社하엿든	입사하였던	Who had joined the company (older spelling)
盟罷退社	맹파퇴사	Strike and mass resignation
辭表	사표	Resignation letter
집어 뿌리고	집어 뿌리고	Throwing down
幹部彈刻演說	간부탄핵연설	Speech denouncing the management/cadres
뛰어나와 버렷다	뛰어나와 버렸다	Ran out (emphatic) (older spelling)
宣言	선언	Declaration
綱領	강령	Platform, guiding principles
반드시	반드시	Invariably, certainly
達筆	달필	Masterful calligraphy, fluent writing
合作	합작	Collaboration, joint work
職任	직임	Position, duty
맛고서	맡고서	Taking charge of (older spelling of 맡다)
안즐 자리	앉을 자리	Place to sit (older spelling of 앉다)
땃듯할	따뜻할	Warm (older spelling)
사이업시	사이없이	Without pause, incessantly (older spelling of 없이)
놀납게도	놀랍게도	Surprisingly (older spelling of 놀랍다)
根氣잇는	근기있는	Persistent, tenacious
活躍	활약	Activity,活躍
보엿섯다	보였었다	Had shown (older spelling)
最愛의	최애의	Most beloved
入獄하게 되엇다	입옥하게 되었다	Came to be imprisoned (older spelling)
울엇다	울었다	Wept (older spelling)
優良兒	우량아	Outstanding child
選拔되어	선발되어	Being selected
뿌리끼	버들고리	Willow basketwork (phonetic rendering, likely 버들고리)
沐浴桶	목욕통	Bathtub
賞品	상품	Prize
세 살먹은	세 살 먹은	Three-year-old
愛兒	애아	Beloved child
압바압바	아빠 아빠	Daddy, daddy (child's pronunciation)
閨帳	규장	Boudoir, women's quarters
젊은 女人	젊은 여인	Young woman
斷腸	단장	Heartbreak, grief (lit. intestines cut)
母性愛	모성애	Maternal love
몃번	몇 번	How many times (older spelling)
방바닥에	방바닥에	On the room floor
업딜어 울엇든가	엎드려 울었던가	Did (she) collapse weeping? (older spelling of 엎드리다, 울었다)
情熱的	정열적	Passionate
豊饗한	풍향한	Richly endowed, voluptuous (likely intended 풍만한?)
彈力	탄력	Resilience, elasticity
麗人	여인	Beautiful woman
얼마 잇지 안어서	얼마 있지 않아서	Not long after
離婚屆	이혼계	Divorce notification/report
써가지고	써가지고	Having written
獄舍	옥사	Prison cell
차저가는	찾아가는	Visiting (older spelling of 찾다)
어름가튼	얼음같은	Like ice (older spelling)
一面	일면	One side, aspect
녀성	여성	Woman (older spelling)
아버지의 성이 다른	아버지의 성이 다른	Having a different father's surname
둘재아해	둘째 아해	Second child (older spelling of 아이)
나엇다	낳았다	Gave birth (older spelling)
溫厚하든	온후하던	Who was gentle and warm (older spelling)
싸늘하고	싸늘하고	Cold, chilly
떼리케잇트한	델리케이트한	Delicate (loanword)
空氣	공기	Atmosphere
떠도는	떠도는	Floating, lingering
엇절길이 업섯다	어쩔 길이 없었다	There was no way to help it (older spelling)
실겅키	실몽당이	Tangled thread, mess (dialectal/older term?)
淸算하고	청산하고	Settling, liquidating (accounts, past issues)
歸國하엿다	귀국하였다	Returned to the country (older spelling)
國際的	국제적	International
團體	단체	Organization, group
某氏	모씨	A certain person, Ms. So-and-so
硏究하엿섯다고 한다	연구하였었다고 한다	It is said that (she) had studied (older spelling)
愛人	애인	Lover
가젓고	가졌고	Had, possessed (older spelling)
가겻슬적마다	가졌을 적마다	Each time (she) had (a lover) (older spelling)
玉童子	옥동자	Precious son (lit. jade boy)
어덧다	얻었다	Obtained, got (older spelling)
눈물의 씨	눈물의 씨	Seed of tears
우슴의 씨	웃음의 씨	Seed of laughter (older spelling of 웃음)
아모도	아무도	Nobody, anyone (older spelling)
아는 이가 업다	아는 이가 없다	There is no one who knows (older spelling)
이른	잃은	Lost (father)
同腹兒	동복아	Siblings (sharing the same mother)
只今	지금	Now (older Hanja usage)
祖母	조모	Grandmother
길기워잇다	길리어 있다	Are being raised (older spelling/form of 길리다)
最近에	최근에	Recently
旅行記	여행기	Travelogue
草하기	초하기	To draft
執筆하엿든	집필하였던	Who had written (older spelling)
部分	부분	Part, section
빌어다가	빌려다가	Having borrowed
熱心히	열심히	Diligently, enthusiastically
보고 잇더니	보고 있더니	Was looking at/reading, when...
捕吏	포리	Police officer (archaic term)
餘裕	여유	Leisure, allowance
다러간 듯하다	데려간 듯하다	Seems to have taken (her) away (older spelling/form of 데리다)
私事	사사	Private matter
隔離식히지	격리시키지	Separating, isolating
안엇든들	않았던들	If (he) had not been... (older spelling)
錯雜한	착잡한	Complicated, mixed, confusing
悲劇	비극	Tragedy
因子	인자	Factor, element
얼키어 젓슬가	얽히어 졌을까	Would have become entangled? (older spelling/form)
求한 것이	구한 것이	What (she) sought
觸手	촉수	Tentacle, touch
前者라면	전자라면	If the former...
人間本能	인간본능	Human instinct
理解하는 限에서	이해하는 한에서	As far as one understands
오히려	오히려	Rather, preferably
同情할 일이리라	동정할 일이리라	Would be a matter for sympathy
아무튼	아무튼	Anyway, in any case
誠實하고	성실하고	Sincere, faithful
美貌이고	미모이고	Being beautiful
體系잇는	체계있는	Systematic
暢達하게	창달하게	Eloquently, fluently
記錄할 수 잇는	기록할 수 있는	Able to record
明哳한	명철한	Clear-headed, sagacious (likely 明哲)
頭腦	두뇌	Brain, mind
첫손꼬락에 곱힐	첫손가락에 꼽힐	Counted on the first finger (i.e., among the very best) (older spelling)
빗나는	빛나는	Shining, brilliant (older spelling)
未來	미래	Future
出生	출생	Birthplace
今年	금년	This year
海外	해외	Overseas
跳躍하는	도약하는	Leaping, jumping
著名한	저명한	Famous, renowned
摘出하리라	적출하리라	Will extract, select
云云하는	운운하는	Who speaks of, mentions
듯	듯	As if, likely
親누이동생	친누이동생	Younger sister
늙은 靑春	늙은 청춘	Old youth (oxymoron)
年前에	연전에	Some years ago
客死하고만	객사하고만	Died while away from home
한때	한때	Once, for a time
쪽배우에서나	쪽배 위에서나	Whether on a small boat
팔목끼고	팔목 끼고	Arm-in-arm
다정하게	다정하게	Affectionately
도라 다니는	돌아다니는	Strolling around (older spelling)
一幅	일폭	One scroll (painting), a scene
風景	풍경	Scenery, scene
國際人	국제인	International person/figure
자랑함이	자랑함이	Boasting
한두번이 아니엇다	한두번이 아니었다	Was not just once or twice
孤節	고절	Solitary fidelity (esp. of a widow)
직히면서	지키면서	While observing/keeping (older spelling)
最高責任者	최고책임자	Person in highest authority
寢食	침식	Sleep and food
닛고	잊고	Forgetting (older spelling)
넓고 둥그런	넓고 둥그런	Wide and round
얼골우에는	얼굴 위에는	On the face (older spelling)
覇氣	패기	Spirit, ambition, drive
가득 갑엇다 한다	가득 차 보였다 한다	Is said to have looked full of (older spelling/form)
마흔둘인가	마흔둘인가	Is she forty-two?
靑실紅실	청실홍실	Blue thread and red thread (symbolic of marriage/love)
느리든	느리던	Which were weaving/hanging down (older spelling)
展開하든	전개하던	Which unfolded (older spelling)
場所	장소	Place, location
푸로레타리아	프롤레타리아	Proletariat (loanword)
高潮讚美하는	고조찬미하는	Which extols/praises the high tide of
背景	배경	Background
역기어 진 것만치	엮이어 진 것만치	As much as it was woven together (older spelling)
深刻하고	심각하고	Profound, serious
劇烈한	극렬한	Dramatic, intense, fierce
配人	배인	Spouse, partner (archaic/literary)
이른	잃은	Lost
가을하늘	가을 하늘	Autumn sky
외기럭이가튼	외기러기같은	Like a lone wild goose (older spelling)
로-만스	로맨스	Romance (loanword)
둘춤이	들춤이	Digging up, exposing (older spelling/form of 들추다)
괴롬을	괴로움을	Sorrow, pain (older spelling)
더할뿐이 아닐가	더할 뿐이 아닐까	Wouldn't it just add...?
正黨員	정당원	Full party member
記憶	기억	Memory
조흔 이는	좋은 이는	Those who are good (at remembering) (older spelling)
小說家	소설가	Novelist
伯氏	백씨	Elder brother (honorific)
일즉	일찍	Early on (older spelling)
묵화	묵화	Ink painting
잘치든	잘 치던	Who painted well (older spelling)
傾城名妓	경성명기	City-toppling famous kisaeng (beauty who could overthrow a city/kingdom)
情人	정인	Lover
感化	감화	Influence, inspiration
밧고	받고	Receiving (older spelling)
己未때에	기미년에	In the KimI year (1919)
꼬여내어서	꼬여내어서	Coaxing, luring
어더쥔 뒤에	얻어쥔 뒤에	After getting hold of (money) (older spelling/form)
旅費	여비	Travel expenses
삼고서	삼고서	Making it into..., considering it as...
맛잡고	맞잡고	Holding (hands) together (older spelling)
스피드的	스피드적	Speedy (loanword + suffix)
飛躍	비약	Leap, jump
곳	곧	Soon, right away (older spelling)
내어던젓다	내어던졌다	Threw (themselves) out (older spelling)
英語學校	영어학교	English school
後日	후일	Later days, in the future
流暢한	유창한	Fluent
東洋的	동양적	Eastern, Oriental
百合꼿가튼	백합꽃같은	Like a lily flower (older spelling)
아울너	아울러	Together with, along with
內外	내외	Inside and outside, domestic and foreign
運動者	운동자	Activist, campaigner
일홈이 놉헛다	이름이 높았다	Name was high (i.e., was famous) (older spelling)
도라나와	돌아나와	Returning (older spelling)
判決	판결	Verdict, sentence
밧고	받고	Receiving (older spelling)
服役하고 잇는데	복역하고 있는데	Is serving a sentence
마즈막으로	마지막으로	Lastly (older spelling)
들어보겟다	들어보겠다	Will mention, will bring up
열닌	열린	Held, opened (conference) (older spelling)
參席한	참석한	Attended
代議員	대의원	Delegate, representative
놉허	높아	Being high (famous) (older spelling)
紹介의 붓	소개의 붓	Pen of introduction
기다리지 안는다	기다리지 않는다	Does not wait for
亦	역	Also (Hanja)
風雲	풍운	Winds and clouds (metaphor for turbulent times, change)
楚楚한	초초한	Neat, trim, elegant / Pitiful (depending on context, here likely elegant)
어엽분	어여쁜	Pretty, lovely (older spelling)
姿態	자태	Figure, appearance
날니는	날리는	Flying, scattering (older spelling)
佳人	가인	Beautiful person (woman)
만타	많다	Many (older spelling)
爲先	우선	For now, first of all
끈친다	끊친다	Stop, cease (older spelling)
幾多波瀾	기다파란	Numerous waves/vicissitudes
勃興하든	발흥하던	Which were rising, burgeoning (older spelling)
年代	연대	Era, period, decade
마치고	마치고	Finishing
銀翼	은익	Silver wings
가지런히	가지런히	Neatly, evenly
날니면서	날리면서	Flying, flapping (wings) (older spelling)
華麗하게	화려하게	Splendidly, magnificently
이땅에	이 땅에	To this land
도라온	돌아온	Who returned (older spelling)
아가씨	아가씨	Young lady, miss
잇섯스니	있었으니	As there were... (older spelling)
卽	즉	Namely, that is
女流政客	여류정객	Female politician
일홈을	이름을	Name (older spelling)
南朝鮮	남조선	Southern Chosŏn (Korea)
一角	일각	One corner
뻐치든	뻗치던	Which stretched out, extended (older spelling)
밧부게	바쁘게	Busily, no sooner than (older spelling)
드러가서	들어가서	Entering (older spelling)
迷夢	미몽	Illusion, delusion, slumber
저즌	젖은	Soaked in, steeped in (older spelling)
深閨	심규	Deep inner quarters (women's)
婦女	부녀	Womenfolk
깨우치기로	깨우치기로	Decided to awaken
決心하고	결심하고	Having resolved
틈잇는대로	틈있는 대로	Whenever there was time (older spelling)
夜學	야학	Night school
敎鞭	교편	Teacher's pointer/cane (metaphor for teaching)
잡고	잡고	Holding
演壇	연단	Lecture platform
紅焰	홍염	Red flame (metaphor for passionate speech)
吐하며	토하며	Spewing, uttering
農村	농촌	Farming village
차저	찾아	Seeking out, visiting (older spelling)
꾸준히	꾸준히	Steadily, persistently
하엿다	하였다	Did (older spelling)
轉轉하엿는데	전전하였는데	Moved from place to place (older spelling)
이사이에	이 사이에	During this time
婦人評論	부인평론	Women's critique/commentary
無産階級的	무산계급적	Proletarian (adjective)
立場	입장	Standpoint, position
銳利한	예리한	Sharp, keen
붓날이엇다	붓날이었다	Was the blade of the pen (older spelling)
役割	역할	Role
實刑	실형	Prison sentence (as opposed to suspended)
밧은	받은	Received (older spelling)
巨人	거인	Giant
불붓기	불붙기	Catching fire, igniting (older spelling)
시작한	시작한	Began
갈사록	갈수록	As time goes by, increasingly
오직	오직	Only, solely
태워버리고도	태워버리고도	Even after burning up completely
남김이 업섯다	남김이 없었다	There was nothing left (older spelling)
手錠	수정	Handcuffs
차는 몸	차는 몸	Body wearing (handcuffs)
意志	의지	Will, volition
악물고	악물고	Clenching one's teeth
끄을니어 가는	끌리어 가는	Being dragged away (older spelling/form)
뒷 態度	뒷 태도	Retreating figure/posture (뒷모습)
물그럼히	멀거니	Blankly, vacantly (likely 멀거니)
치어다 보앗다	쳐다 보았다	Looked up at (older spelling)
정성으로	정성으로	With devotion, sincerity
뜬	뜬	Knitted
짜겟트며	재킷이며	Jackets and... (loanword, older spelling)
內服	내복	Underwear
傳하려고	전하려고	Trying to convey/deliver
親히	친히	Personally
들고	들고	Carrying
차즘이	찾음이	Visiting (noun) (older spelling)
엇지	어찌	How, why (interrogative)
面會室	면회실	Meeting room (in prison)
란간에는	난간에는	On the railing
娘	낭	Maiden, young lady (archaic/literary)
點點히	점점히	In drops, dottedly
흘넛섯다	흘렀었다	Had flowed/dripped (older spelling)
暴風	폭풍	Storm, tempest
이럿다	일었다	Arose (older spelling)
모든-	모든	All, everything
실로	실로	Indeed, truly
하리만치	하리만치	To the extent that one might say...
가젓든	가졌던	Which (she) had possessed (older spelling)
肉體	육체	Body, flesh
크다란	커다란	Great, large (older spelling)
轉變	전변	Transformation, change
다닥처왓다	닥쳐왔다	Approached suddenly, befell (older spelling/form)
書翰	서한	Letter (formal)
차듸찬	차디찬	Ice-cold (older spelling)
鐵窓	철창	Iron bars (window)
밧어 읽든	받아 읽던	Who used to receive and read (older spelling)
설마	설마	Surely not, impossible
의심하엿다	의심하였다	Doubted (older spelling)
弄談	농담	Joke
말어달나	말아달라	Please don't say (older spelling/form)
回答	회답	Reply, answer
썻다	썼다	Wrote (older spelling)
번듯한 現實	번듯한 현실	Stark/clear reality
가친 사람	갇힌 사람	Imprisoned person
꿈과 感傷	꿈과 감상	Dreams and sentimentality
呼訴	호소	Appeal, plea
즛밟고	짓밟고	Trampling upon (older spelling)
끗간데를 모르게	끝간 데를 모르게	Without knowing where it ends, relentlessly
邁進활 뿐이엇다	매진할 뿐이었다	Only marched forward vigorously (older spelling)
쓰윗트,홈	스위트 홈	Sweet home (loanword)
꾸미고 잇다	꾸미고 있다	Is setting up/decorating
一男	일남	One son
어드섯다든가	얻으셨다든가	Is said to have obtained/had (a son) (honorific, older form)
敎鞭을 잡고잇는 중인데	교편을 잡고있는 중인데	Is currently teaching
각금	가끔	Sometimes, occasionally (older spelling)
家庭講座	가정강좌	Home lecture series
放送한다	방송한다	Broadcasts
故鄕	고향	Hometown
스물여덜	스물여덟	Twenty-eight (older spelling)
이시라든가	이시라든가	Is said to be (honorific, older form)
特記할	특기할	Specially note
빗나는	빛나는	Shining, brilliant (older spelling)
언니	언니	Older sister (for females)
가젓다	가졌다	Has, possesses (older spelling)
學位	학위	Academic degree
全身	전신	Whole body
熱의 化身	열의 화신	Incarnation of fervor/passion
만흔 일을 한분	많은 일을 한 분	One who did many things (older spelling)
미칠것임으로	미칠 것임으로	As it will reach/touch upon...
여기에는	여기에는	Here
끗치거니와	끝이거니와	Will end here, but... (older spelling)
點	점	Point, aspect
바라보면	바라보면	If one looks from...
姊妹	자매	Sisters
한쌍의	한 쌍의	A pair of
傑物	걸물	Remarkable person, outstanding figure
死生	사생	Life and death
가치하는	같이하는	Doing together, sharing (older spelling)
不幸한	불행한	Unfortunate
新婦	신부	Bride
侍家閨房	시가규방	Inner room of the husband's family home
數年	수년	Several years
얌전한	얌전한	Demure, gentle, well-behaved
靑상과婦	청상과부	Young widow
지내다가	지내다가	While spending time, living
思想上의	사상상의	Ideological
信賴할	신뢰할	Trustworthy, reliable
同志	동지	Comrade
맛나	만나	Meeting (older spelling)
봄비치	봄빛이	Spring light/color (older spelling)
물으녹으려	무르녹으려	About to ripen/mellow (figurative, spring arriving)
하든중	하던 중	While doing so, in the midst of...
突然한	돌연한	Sudden
檢擧	검거	Arrest, roundup
豫審中	예심중	Under preliminary examination
新聞	신문	Newspaper
報導되는	보도되는	Being reported
看護婦	간호부	Nurse
만들엇고	만들었고	Made (older spelling)
創立한	창립한	Founded
以後	이후	Since then, after
警察署留置場	경찰서 유치장	Police station detention cell
각금	가끔	Sometimes (older spelling)
드러갓스나	들어갔으나	Entered, but... (older spelling)
감옥	감옥	Prison
이번이 처음이다	이번이 처음이다	This is the first time
너코 잇든	넣고 있던	Who had put in (older spelling)
自身	자신	Oneself
마저	마저	Even, also, following
드러간	들어간	Entered (older spelling)
保姆	보모	Nanny, governess
알는다 하면	앓는다 하면	If (someone) is said to be ill
産婆	산파	Midwife
收入된	수입된	Earned (income)
圓	원	Won (currency unit)
쥐고가서	쥐고 가서	Holding and going
藥	약	Medicine
사다 다리어주고	사다 달여주고	Buying and brewing (medicine)
미음도 써주고	미음도 쑤어주고	Making rice gruel too
총총한 거름	총총한 걸음	Hurried steps
옴기어	옮기어	Moving (older spelling)
수지	수지	Toiletries (likely 수세 - 洗漱)
의복이고	의복이고	Clothing and...
음식이고	음식이고	Food and...
差入하여주기에	차입하여주기에	In delivering goods (to prisoners)
奔走한다	분주한다	Is busy, bustles about
極東大學	극동대학	Far Eastern University
一面의 識	일면의 식	Acquaintance of even one meeting
업건만	없건만	Even though there isn't (older spelling)
親切히	친절히	Kindly
차저와 주는	찾아와 주는	Visiting (and helping) (older spelling)
厚意	후의	Kindness, goodwill
感激하야	감격하여	Being moved/touched (older spelling)
운 사람중의 하나다	운 사람 중의 하나다	Is one of the people who wept
죽을 때	죽을 때	At the time of death
臨終의 席上	임종의 석상	Deathbed
불넛다	불렀다	Called (older spelling)
붓의 사람	붓의 사람	Person of the pen (writer)
舌의 人	설의 인	Person of the tongue (speaker)
論擊할때는	논격할 때는	When attacking in argument
敵	적	Enemy, opponent
間隙	간극	Gap, opening, chance
집어세운다	집어세운다	Attacks sharply, points out forcefully
勢	세	Force, momentum, power
猛烈하야	맹렬하여	Being fierce, intense (older spelling)
어지간한	어지간한	Ordinary, average
男性	남성	Male
물너선다	물러선다	Retreats, backs down (older spelling)
情熱	정열	Passion
보기에는	보기에는	In appearance
퍽으나	퍽이나	Very, quite (older spelling)
싸늘하건만은	싸늘하건만은	Although cold (older spelling)
多情多恨	다정다한	Full of affection and sorrow
病床	병상	Sickbed
눕엇슬 때	누웠을 때	When (he) was lying down (ill) (older spelling)
진실한	진실한	Sincere, true
看護	간호	Nursing
實로	실로	Truly, indeed
記錄	기록	Record
重病알튼	중병 앓던	Who suffered from a serious illness (older spelling)
回春	회춘	Recovery of health (lit. return of spring)
功	공	Merit, contribution
의함이 만타고 할 것이다	의함이 많다고 할 것이다	It can be said it is largely due to... (older spelling)
性的 同伴者	성적 동반자	Sexual partner
한둘 잇섯다	한둘 있었다	There were one or two (older spelling)
나무래는 이는 업다	나무라는 이는 없다	There is no one who blames (her) (older spelling)
그만치	그만치	That much, to that extent
境遇	경우	Circumstances, situation
同情	동정	Sympathy
끄으니까	끄니까	Because it draws/evokes (older spelling)
마흔하나인가	마흔하나인가	Is she forty-one?
唯一最初	유일최초	The sole first
女X員	여X원	Female X member (likely 女黨員 - female party member)
紅一點	홍일점	Single red dot (in a field of green; sole woman among men)
재작년	재작년	The year before last
卽	즉	Namely
秋	추	Autumn
當時	당시	At that time
附近	부근	Vicinity, neighborhood
數臺	수대	Several vehicles/machines
自動車	자동차	Automobile
모라	몰아	Driving, herding (older spelling)
數十名	수십명	Dozens of people
共産黨員	공산당원	Communist Party member
逮捕하엿다	체포하였다	Arrested (older spelling)
가운데	가운데	Among
꼿과 가튼	꽃과 같은	Like a flower (older spelling)
美貌	미모	Beautiful face/appearance
끼엇다	끼었다	Was included, was among them (older spelling)
올가나이자-	올가나이저	Organizer (loanword)
드러와서	들어와서	Having entered (older spelling)
市外	시외	Outside the city
人跡	인적	Human traces, signs of people
드문	드문	Rare, infrequent
외따로운	외따로운	Secluded, isolated
세상을 꺼리는	세상을 꺼리는	Shunning the world
조고마한	조그마한	Small, tiny (older spelling)
살림사리	살림살리	Household affairs, living
차리고 잇스면서	차리고 있으면서	While setting up (older spelling)
黨	당	Party (political)
再建運動	재건운동	Reconstruction movement
女性部組織	여성부조직	Women's section organization
任	임	Duty, responsibility
맛고	맡고	Taking charge of (older spelling)
出身	출신	Origin, graduate of
入會하여	입회하여	Joining an association
秀才	수재	Brilliant person, top student
稱	칭	Title, praise
밧엇고	받았고	Received (older spelling)
半月形	반월형	Crescent moon shape
周圍	주위	Surroundings
多血質	다혈질	Hot-blooded temperament
靑年	청년	Youth, young man
모엿섯다	모였었다	Had gathered (older spelling)
뛰어난	뛰어난	Outstanding, excellent
올쿠	올쿠	Comrade (likely dialectal/specific term, or misspelling of 올곧다?)
처음에	처음에	At first
思想	사상	Thought, ideology
共鳴하고	공명하고	Resonating with
性格	성격	Personality, character
全部	전부	Everything, all
部分	부분	Part
아조	아주	Completely, entirely (older spelling)
約束한	약속한	Promised
熱愛	열애	Passionate love
同志	동지	Comrade
손에 손에 맛잡고	손에 손을 맞잡고	Holding hands tightly together (older spelling)
海內海外	해내해외	At home and abroad
奔走히	분주히	Busily, hurriedly
도라다녓든	돌아다녔던	Who roamed around (older spelling)
딴말이나	딴말이나	Incidentally, by the way
잡힐 때	잡힐 때	When (she) was caught
동안이나	동안이나	For as long as (two months)
잠복하여 잇다가	잠복하여 있다가	While remaining hidden (older spelling)
몸을 海外에 避하엿다	몸을 해외에 피하였다	Escaped abroad (older spelling)
만흔	많은	Many (older spelling)
直接黨員	직접당원	Direct party member
아직	아직	Still, yet
한사람뿐이 아닐가	한 사람뿐이 아닐까	Isn't (she) the only one?
出獄할 날	출옥할 날	Day of release from prison
멀다	멀다	Is far
나은	나이는	Age (older spelling/form)
이십오륙	이십오륙	Twenty-five or six
되엇슬가	되었을까	Might be? (older spelling)
古典美	고전미	Classical beauty
其他	기타	Others, etc.
일홈조차	이름조차	Even the name (older spelling)
못듯든	못 듣던	Had not heard (older spelling)
겨을	겨울	Winter (older spelling)
떠나	떠나	Leaving
거처서	거쳐서	Passing through (older spelling)
드러오든	들어오던	Who entered (older spelling)
一行	일행	Party, group
세사람	세 사람	Three people
標悍한	표한한	Fierce, valiant, sturdy
낫다	났다	Finished, came out (prison) (older spelling)
뒷날	뒷날	Later days
놀래이든	놀래이던	Who startled/surprised (older spelling)
고요히	고요히	Quietly, calmly
빠저 나온듯한	빠져 나온 듯한	As if having slipped out (older spelling)
高雅秀麗한	고아수려한	Elegant and beautiful
纖弱한	섬약한	Delicate, frail
國境	국경	Border
너머서	넘어서	Crossing over (older spelling)
멀리	멀리	Far away
거친 벌판	거친 벌판	Rough plain/field
煩悶	번민	Anguish, torment
苦惱	고뇌	Agony, distress
心身	심신	Mind and body
니끄든	이끌던	Who led/dragged (older spelling)
이르러	이르러	Reaching, arriving at
黃浦灘	황포탄	Huangpu River bank/Bund (Shanghai)
萬年悠久함	만년유구함	Eternal permanence
빌고	빌고	Borrowing / Praying for (here likely borrowing/invoking)
讚美하엿다	찬미하였다	Praised (older spelling)
出獄하고 나온	출옥하고 나온	Having been released from prison
政治部記者	정치부기자	Political reporter
책상을 나란이 하고	책상을 나란히 하고	Sitting side-by-side at desks
일보고 잇슬때에	일보고 있을 때에	While working (older spelling)
組織部長	조직부장	Organizational Director
한편	한편	On the other hand
西洋人商會	서양인상회	Western trading company
이르러	이르러	Going to
英文타이부라이타-	영문타이프라이터	English typewriter (loanword)
찍어주고	찍어주고	Typing
生活의 資	생활의 자	Means of living, livelihood
어덧다	얻었다	Obtained (older spelling)
잡히게 되자	잡히게 되자	As (he) got caught
亦是	역시	Also, as expected
捕繩	포승	Binding rope (for prisoners)
밧아	받아	Receiving (older spelling)
雪月	설월	Snow and moon
어리운	어리운	Reflected, suffused (older poetic/archaic form)
國境朔風	국경삭풍	Border's north wind
玉膚紅顔	옥부홍안	Jade-like skin and rosy face (beautiful complexion)
깍금이	깎임이	Being worn down/subjected to (older spelling/form)
한두날만이 아니엇다	한두 날만이 아니었다	Was not just for one or two days
保釋	보석	Bail
病弱	병약	Sickly, frail
안어서	안아서	Holding, embracing (older spelling)
治療하고 잇다드니	치료하고 있다더니	Was said to be treating (illness) (older spelling)
이내	이내	Soon after, right away
종적을 차즐길 업시 되엇다	종적을 찾을 길 없이 되었다	Trace became impossible to find (older spelling)
지금쯤은	지금쯤은	Around now
먼-먼 하늘아래에서	먼먼 하늘 아래에서	Under a far, far sky
故國	고국	Homeland
별들을	별들을	Stars
두분이	두 분이	The two people (honorific)
억개를 나란히 하고	어깨를 나란히 하고	Shoulder to shoulder (older spelling)
한낫둘	하나 둘	One, two (counting)
헤고 잇지 안을가	헤고 있지 않을까	Might be counting? (older spelling)
白眉	백미	White eyebrow (metaphor for the best among peers)
첫다고 한다	쳤다고 한다	Is said to have considered/ranked (as first)
楚楚漂漂神韻	초초표표신운	Elegant, graceful, and ethereal charm/aura
깁히	깊이	Deeply (older spelling)
무처잇든	묻혀있던	Who was buried/hidden (older spelling)
處女時代	처녀시대	Maiden days, virgin period
父兄	부형	Father and elder brothers
强制로	강제로	Forcibly
結婚	결혼	Marriage
定하여 노은 곳	정하여 놓은 곳	Place (family) decided upon
花燭典禮	화촉전례	Wedding ceremony (lit. flower candle ceremony)
前날 夜半	전날 야반	Midnight of the previous day
실타고	싫다고	Saying (she) dislikes/doesn't want (older spelling)
아모도 몰내	아무도 몰래	Secretly from anyone (older spelling)
가마타고	가마 타고	Riding a palanquin
逃走하여 온	도주하여 온	Who fled and came
痛快한	통쾌한	Exhilarating, satisfying, thrilling
級	급	Grade (in school)
다니다가	다니다가	While attending
갓가운 사이	가까운 사이	Close relationship (older spelling)
되엇다	되었다	Became (older spelling)
事情	사정	Circumstance, reason
손을 避하여	손을 피하여	Evading the hand (of the police)
내닷자	내닫자	As (he) fled/dashed off (older spelling)
사랑하는 사이	사랑하는 사이	Loving relationship
마저	마저	Also, even (Yang Myong)
亡命하자	망명하자	As (he) defected/fled into exile
갓드니	갔더니	Went, and then... (older spelling)
나어가지고	낳아가지고	Having given birth (older spelling)
月前에	월전에	A month ago
歸國하엿다	귀국하였다	Returned to the country (older spelling)
안고	안고	Holding (a child)
漁村	어촌	Fishing village
이르러	이르러	Going to
慈愛깁흔	자애깊은	Deeply affectionate/loving (older spelling)
侍父母	시부모	Parents-in-law
사랑속에서	사랑 속에서	Within the love of...
지낸다든가	지낸다든가	Is said to be spending time/living
常春	상춘	Everlasting spring
南海	남해	South Sea
白鷗	백구	White gull
훨이, 훨이	훨훨	Flappingly, freely (sound of flying)
겅충 띄는	겅충 뛰는	Leaping, bounding
푸른 물결	푸른 물결	Blue waves
風霜격기에	풍상 겪기에	In experiencing hardships (wind and frost)
지치운	지치운	Weary, exhausted (older spelling/form)
心琴	심금	Heartstrings (lit. heart zither)
씻치울 날 잇스리라	씻기울 날 있으리라	There will be a day it is washed clean (older spelling/form)
山村水廓	산촌수곽	Mountain village and watery surroundings (scenic place)
秀麗한	수려한	Beautiful, scenic
第一線	제일선	Front line
나섯든	나섰던	Who stepped forward (older spelling)
多年	다년	Many years
社會評論家	사회평론가	Social critic
한때를	한때를	For a time
사랑밧는	사랑받는	Receiving love (older spelling)
少壯鬪士	소장투사	Young vigorous fighter
이루고 잇다	이루고 있다	Is forming/making
작년 겨을	작년 겨울	Last winter (older spelling)
나엇스며	낳았으며	Gave birth, and... (older spelling)
지낸 뒤	지낸 뒤	After spending time as...
이르럿다가	이르렀다가	Reached, and then... (older spelling)
요지음은	요즈음은	Nowadays (older spelling)
도라와 잇다든가	돌아와 있다든가	Is said to have returned (older spelling)
거처	거쳐	Going through (police station)
方今	방금	Just now, currently (formal/archaic)
入獄中	입옥중	Currently imprisoned
막음에 이르러	막음에 이르러	Reaching the end (of writing)
棹尾로	도미로	Finally, at the very end (lit. oar tail)
中央委員長	중앙위원장	Central Committee Chairperson
지내든	지내던	Who served as (older spelling)
光輝잇든	광휘있던	Which was brilliant (older spelling)
前半生	전반생	First half of life
占綴함으로써	점철함으로써	By interspersing/dotting with
칸파스우의	캔버스 위의	On the canvas (loanword, older spelling)
色彩	색채	Color, hue
完成하랴한다	완성하려한다	Intend to complete
울니든	울리던	Which made cry / Resounded through (older spelling)
半島	반도	Peninsula
장구모양으로	장구 모양으로	In the shape of an hourglass drum (janggu)
벌너저 잇서	벌어져 있어	Spread out (older spelling)
人物	인물	Person, figure, looks
生地	생지	Birthplace
올나오매	올라오매	Upon coming up (to Seoul) (older spelling)
버들입가치	버들잎같이	Like a willow leaf (older spelling)
기름한	기름한	Slender, sleek (archaic/dialectal?)
아릅다운	아름다운	Beautiful (older spelling)
얼골은	얼굴은	Face (older spelling)
傾國	경국	Toppling a kingdom (referring to exceptional beauty)
소리를 들엇다	소리를 들었다	Heard the sound/reputation (older spelling)
切親한	절친한	Very close (friend)
앗가 말한	아까 말한	Mentioned earlier (older spelling)
政治客	정치객	Political actor/figure
老人	노인	Old person
어린 아해들도	어린 아해들도	Even young children (older spelling of 아이)
國家	국가	State, nation
民族	민족	Nation, people, ethnicity
興奮하여서	흥분하여서	Being excited (older spelling)
熱이 올낫섯다	열이 올랐었다	Fever rose, got fired up (older spelling)
白馬	백마	White horse
銀鞭	은편	Silver whip
馬腹	마복	Horse's belly/flank
豪華롭게	호화롭게	Luxuriously, flamboyantly
던지며	던지며	Throwing, flicking
네거리	네거리	Intersection, crossroads
좁다하고	좁다하고	Saying it's narrow
도라다니든	돌아다니던	Who roamed around (older spelling)
가슴속에도	가슴 속에도	Even in the heart/chest
붓기 시작하엿다	붙기 시작하였다	Began to ignite (older spelling)
一朝에	일조에	In a single morning, suddenly
헌신작가치	헌신짝같이	Like a worn-out shoe (older spelling)
차버리고	차버리고	Kicking away
내다라	내달아	Dashing off (older spelling)
充分한	충분한	Sufficient
存在	존재	Existence, presence
投身하엿다	투신하였다	Threw oneself into (older spelling)
紹介의 붓	소개의 붓	Pen of introduction
기다릴 것 업시	기다릴 것 없이	Without needing to wait (older spelling)
두억개에	두 어깨에	On both shoulders (older spelling)
질머지고	짊어지고	Shouldering, bearing (older spelling)
萬丈의 氣焰	만장의 기염	Immense spirit/vigor
吐하고 잇다	토하고 있다	Is spewing forth
相愛	상애	Mutual love
엇저고 하는 말이 잇섯스나	어쩌고 하는 말이 있었으나	There was talk saying such and such, but... (older spelling)
잘 모르겟다	잘 모르겠다	I don't know well
列擧할	열거할	To list, enumerate
女流鬪士	여류투사	Female fighter/warrior
가젓다	가졌다	Have (older spelling)
紙數	지수	Number of pages, space
制限	제한	Limitation, restriction
繼續할 날	계속할 날	Day to continue
기다린다	기다린다	Wait for


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제17호
발행일	1931년 07월 01일
기사제목	現代女流思想家들(3), 붉은 戀愛의 主人公들
필자	草士
기사형태	소식

現代女流思想家들(3), 붉은 戀愛의 主人公들
						草士
許貞琡, 黃信德, 朱世竹, 南수라, 玄桂玉, 鄭學秀, 高明子, 丁七星, 沈恩淑, 趙元淑, 鄭鍾鳴, 禹鳳雲等 多情多恨의 社會主義的 諸女性

大正14년(1924년) 첫여름 국경 압녹강의 양양한 푸른 물결우에 한가락의 구슬푼 「볼가」의 뱃노래와 함께 망명객의 외로운 그림자가 水波를 따러 뜰낙말낙할때에 突然히 新義州 警察署의 손에 「朝鮮共産黨」이란 地下層的 방대한 조직이 발각되면서 金若水, 兪鎭熙, 權五卨, 洪悳裕, 金在鳳, 朴憲永, 林元根, 金璟載等 巨頭들이 잡힌 뒤를 이어서 또 純宗帝의 因山때 6.10만세로 姜達永 게속하여 第2, 第3, 第4次 結社로 金俊淵, 李英, 朴衡秉, 洪陽明, 李炳儀, 車載貞等 이땅 思想運動의 知名의 巨人들이 다수히 철창에 억메이게 된 그 사실은 젊은 조선사람이면 다아는 일이라 다만 이러케 一月會요 火曜會요 서울系요 北風系云云하면서도 다가튼 方向을 위하여 불고치를 가슴에서 뿜는드시 늘 灼熱하여 밤낫 땅밋흐로 도라다니든 이 多數한 鬪士의 身邊에는 妙齡- 꼿과 가튼 아름다운 맑스껄, 엥겔스레듸들이 마치 구름자 모양으로 그뒤를 따르면서 殺風景한 이 思想運動線上에 한떨기의 꼿수를 노아주엇다.
언제 잡힐는지 모르는 한낫 생명들이매 번개가티 잠간잠간 맛나는 그동안에 강철가튼 굿은 사랑의 殿堂이 둘의 사이에 싸여지는 것이요 새 연애관 새 사회관을 가진 몸들이매 세상의 전통적 결혼관념을 춤 배앗고 줏 밟고도 태연하여한다. 그를 理解할진대 우리들은 오히려 그를 떳떳하다 하여야 올흘것이 아닐가.
여기 이 巨頭들과 直接間接 愛慾의 불길우에 뛰노든 10娘子가 잇스니 우리는 「그 붉은 戀愛」의 실마리를 풀어 보기로 하자. 다만 近代의 思想界에 勇敢하게도 놀대질하고 잇든 이 여러 女流思想家를 正面으로 堂堂히 그 思想 그 志操를 紹介하지 못하고 겨우 행낭 뒷골로 도라가서 愛慾의 푸로필을 通하여 描寫하려하는 이 不自由한 붓끗을 讀者諸氏는 용서하여 주실 것을 豫期하면서도 이러한 筆觸에 諸娘子를 올님을 未安스럽게 아노라.

亞米利加로 放浪의 多恨의 許貞淑女史

最初의 東亞日報 女記者로 잇스면서 流麗한 筆致로 그 當時 印度 國民會議議長이자 有名한 女詩人이든 사로지니,나이두의 詩歌를 盛히 英文에서 飜譯하여내든 妙齡女性이 1923年代의 朝鮮言論界의 一角에 存在하엿든 것을 記憶하리라. 그가 許貞琡女史엇다.
그는 神戶神學校를 마치고 上海에 이르러 數年間 留學하다가 歸國하여 夫君과 함께 東亞日報에 入社하엿든 것이다. 그때 夫君이란 林元根氏엇다.<13>
그러다가 許女史는 入社 5個月만에 朴憲永, 林元根, 趙德津等 社員 14,5名이 一齊히 盟罷退社할때에 저도 함께 辭表를 집어 뿌리고 全社員이 모힌 자리에서 猛烈한 幹部彈刻演說까지 한 뒤 뛰어나와 버렷다.
그 뒤 女性同友會와 槿友會에서 무슨 宣言이나 綱領이 나오면 반드시 達筆의 人 黃信德氏와 許氏의 손으로 合作이 되어나왓섯다. 그러고는 靑總幹部요 또 槿友會의 職任을 맛고서 北은 咸北, 間島, 南은 全羅 慶尙에 이르기까지 안즐 자리 땃듯할 사이업시 놀납게도 根氣잇는 實際運動의 活躍을 보엿섯다.
그럴때에 最愛의 夫君 林元根氏가 第一次黨關係로 入獄하게 되엇다. 그는 울엇다. 泰和女子舘의 優良兒選出大會때에 一等에 選拔되어 뿌리끼로 만든 沐浴桶까지 賞品으로 탄 세 살먹은 그의 愛兒 豹가 압바압바를 부를때에 閨帳의 젊은 女人 許女史는 斷腸의 母性愛의 눈물에 몃번 방바닥에 업딜어 울엇든가.
그러나 許女史는 너무나 情熱的이고 너무나 豊饗한 彈力을 가진 麗人이엇다. 獄에 林을 보내고 그러고 얼마 잇지 안어서 離婚屆를 써가지고 夫君의 獄舍를 차저가는 어름가튼 찬 一面을 가진 녀성이 되엇다.
그 뒤 그는 아버지의 성이 다른 둘재아해를 나엇다. 그의 집에는 溫厚하든 아버지 許憲을 비롯하여 싸늘하고 떼리케잇트한 空氣가 떠도는 것을 엇절길이 업섯다. 그러다가 許憲을 따라 許女史는 아메리까로 건너 갓다. 거기서 1년 남어지 잇는 동안에 그는 精神上의 모든 실겅키를 淸算하고 새사람이 되어 歸國하엿다. 米國잇슬때는 國際的 무슨 團體에 米國의 女流指導者 某氏를 맛나 米國社會運動史를 만히 硏究하엿섯다고 한다.
아직 나이 30以前에 愛人을 세 번 가젓고 가겻슬적마다 玉童子를 어덧다. 그러나 이것이 눈물의 씨가 될는지 우슴의 씨가 될는지 아모도 아는 이가 업다. 아버지를 이른 同腹兒 3兄弟는 只今 그 祖母의 손에 길기워잇다. 許貞琡은 光州學生事件으로 1년 懲役을 밧고 解産 때문에 一時保釋되엇다가 또다시 약한달전에 入獄하고 업스니까.
그는 最近에 美國旅行記를 草하기 위하여 아버지 許憲이 그 當時 「三千里」에 執筆하엿든 歐米旅行記의 部分部分을 빌어다가 熱心히 보고 잇더니 捕吏는 아마 이 執筆의 餘裕도 주지안코 다러간 듯하다.
「戀愛는 私事다!」 이 命題아래에선 女史를<14> 攻擊할 아모 根據가 업다. 그에게서 처음부터 夫君을 隔離식히지 안엇든들 그의 身邊에 이러틋 錯雜한 悲劇의 因子가 얼키어 젓슬가. 또 그가 求한 것이 「올-가」가치 性의 觸手엇는지 戀愛엇는지 萬一 前者라면 人間本能을 理解하는 限에서 오히려 同情할 일이리라. 아무튼 熱잇고 誠實하고 美貌이고 그러고 體系잇는 思想을 暢達하게 記錄할 수 잇는 明哳한 頭腦의 人, 筆의 人, 舌의 人 許貞琡女史는 朝鮮女流思想界의 첫손꼬락에 곱힐 빗나는 未來를 가진 女性이다. 咸北明川出生, 今年이 29.

海外에 빗나는 麗人 三月星

海外에는 思想運動線上에서 跳躍하는 이가 더욱 만타. 우리는 그중에서 가장 著名한 이로 세분을 摘出하리라. 海外運動을 云云하는 분으로 아마 露西亞의 「남만춘」을 모르는 이가 업슬 듯 그 남만춘의 바로 親누이동생에 「南수라」라는 「늙은 靑春」이 잇다. 年前에 朝鮮에 나왓다가 세부란쓰病院에서 그만 客死하고만 蔡그리고리敎授의 한때 愛人으로 두분은 黑龍江 쪽배우에서나 모스꾸바의 구레무린 宮殿 뒤 赤廣場에서 팔목끼고 다정하게 도라 다니는 一幅의 아름다운 風景을 國際人들에게 자랑함이 한두번이 아니엇다. 그러다가 最愛의 愛人 蔡를 이른 南수라女史는 지금 孤節을 직히면서 沿海州의 最高責任者의 한사람으로 寢食을 닛고 活躍한다는데 넓고 둥그런 얼골우에는 언제 보아도 覇氣가 가득 갑엇다 한다. 今年이 마흔둘인가.
그분들의 靑실紅실 느리든 戀愛史는 展開하든 場所가 바로 푸로레타리아戀愛를 高潮讚美하는 露西亞서울을 背景삼고 역기어 진 것만치 매우 深刻하고 劇烈한 바 잇스나 이미 配人을 이른 가을하늘 외기럭이가튼 南女史의 로-만스를 둘춤이 한갓 괴롬을 더할뿐이 아닐가. 그는 正黨員이다.
둘재로는 玄桂玉氏다. 記憶이 조흔 이는 玄鼎健이란 이를 記憶하리라. 東亞日報의 記者요 또 小說家인 憑虛 玄鎭健氏의 바로 伯氏로 일즉 上海에서 活躍하고 잇든 분 玄氏의 愛人에 桂玉이란 이가 잇다. 3.1當時에는 丁七星女史와 가티 長安에서 울니든 인물 잘나고 소리 잘하고 묵화 잘치든 傾城名妓엇다. 그가 情人 玄鼎健의 感化를 밧고 己未때에 M이란 名門의 도련님을 꼬여내어서 돈 4千圓을 어더쥔 뒤에 그돈으로 旅費를 삼고서 愛人  玄鼎健과 가티 손에 손을 맛잡고 百파센트의 스피드的 思想上 飛躍을 하여 곳 上海에 이르러 둘이다 運動線上에 몸을 내어던젓다.
上海에선 玄桂玉女史는 英語學校를 다니엇다. 後日 流暢한 그 英語는 東洋的 百合꼿가튼 美貌와 아울너 內外運動者間에 일홈이 놉헛다.
그 뒤 玄鼎健이 上海에서 잡혀서 朝鮮에 도라나와 平壤法院에서 4년의 判決을 밧고 지금 服役하고 잇는데 일이 이러케 되자 玄桂玉女史는 모스꾸바로 가서 큰일을 하고 잇다든가. 그도 正黨員이다.
마즈막으로 우리는 鄭學秀女史를 들어보겟다. 鄭學秀女史는 上海에서 年前에 열닌<15> XX會議때 女性을 代表하여 參席한 代議員이엇다. 그의 愛人은 海參威 께뵈,우의 어느 部門의 重要幹部인 李某氏인데 女史는 政治家로서 이미 일홈의 놉허 우리의 紹介의 붓을 기다리지 안는다. 그 亦 正黨員이다.
그박게도 風雲을 타고 楚楚한 어엽분 姿態를 날니는 佳人이 만타. 그러나 爲先 여기에 끈친다.

幾多波瀾의 黃信德

社會運動이 한참 勃興하든 1923,4年代에 東京서 女子大學을 마치고 銀翼을 가지런히 날니면서 華麗하게 이땅에 도라온 아가씨 세분이 잇섯스니 그가 卽 東京學興會長으로 女流政客으로 일홈을 東洋三國의 首都에 날니든 劉英俊氏와 뒤날 朝鮮日報女記者로 文名艶名을 南朝鮮一角에까지 뻐치든 崔恩喜氏와 그리고 이 黃信德氏엇다.
黃氏는 歸國하기 밧부게 槿友會에 드러가서 500年迷夢에 저즌 深閨의 婦女를 깨우치기로 決心하고 틈잇는대로 夜學에 敎鞭을 잡고 演壇에서 紅焰을 吐하며 農村을 차저 「부-나로드」의 役을 꾸준히 하엿다. 그러다가 時代日報女記者로 中外日報女記者로 轉轉하엿는데 이사이에 「月岩洞人」의 號로 쓴 婦人評論은 無産階級的 立場에서 쓴 朝鮮女流論壇最初의 銳利한 붓날이엇다.
黃女史에게는 愛人이 잇섯다. 第一次黨때에 巨大한 役割을 하여 實刑 5년3개월을 밧은 思想界의 巨人 兪鎭熙氏가 바로 그이엇다. 東京에서부터 불붓기 시작한 두분의 사랑은 날이 갈사록 오직 모든 것을 태워버리고도 남김이 업섯다. 이럴때에 兪氏는 어름가튼 찬 手錠을 차는 몸이 되엇다. 意志의 人 黃女史는 이를 악물고 끄을니어 가는 언제 다시 맛날는지 모르는 그 愛人의 뒷 態度를 물그럼히 치어다 보앗다. 그런 뒤 얼마잇지 안어 정성으로 뜬 눈물에 무든 짜겟트며 內服이 黃의 손으로 兪에게 傳하려고 親히 들고 西大門監獄을 차즘이 엇지 한두번이엇스랴. 面會室란간에는 娘의 愛慾의 눈물이 點點히 흘넛섯다.
그러다가 娘의 身邊에는 暴風이 이럿다. 모든- 그러치 그것은 실로 모- 든 것이라 하리만치 그가 가젓든 思想, 情熱, 肉體의 모든 것에 크다란 轉變이 다닥처왓다.
轉變後 黃女史의 書翰을 차듸찬 鐵窓에서 밧어 읽든 兪氏는 「설마」하고 의심하엿다. 그러고는
「弄談으로라도 그런말을 말어달나」
고 回答을 썻다. 그러나 「번듯한 現實」은 가친 사람의 꿈과 感傷과 呼訴를 즛밟고 끗간데를 모르게 邁進활 뿐이엇다.
黃女史는 그 뒤 東亞日報記者며 서울系 鬪士이든 任鳳淳氏를 最愛의 配人으로 마지하고서 지금은 市外新設里에 쓰윗트,홈까지 꾸미고 잇다. 一男를 어드섯다든가.
그리고 市內實賤女學校의 後身明星女子學院에 敎鞭을 잡고잇는 중인데 각금 J, O, T, K에 이르러 家庭講座를 放送한다.
故鄕은 平壤 올에 스물여덜이시라든가. 그런데 特記할 일은 氏는 歷史的으로 빗나는 언니를 가젓다. 米國某大學MA의 學位를 가진 黃愛施德氏가 그이다. 愛施德女史는 己未當時 김마리아등과 가티 全身이 熱의 化身이 되어 만흔 일을 한분으로 우리는 다시 XX婦人會關係를 記錄할때에 붓이 이분에 미칠것임으로 여기에는 그만 끗치거니와 이 點에서 바라보면 姊妹두분은 어느 點으로 보든지 한쌍의 傑物이라 할 것이다.

辛徹氏와 死生을 가치하는 鄭鍾鳴

「不幸한 新婦」로 侍家閨房에서 數年을 울다가 「얌전한 靑상과婦」로 또 몃해를 지내다가 그러다가 年前에 思想上의 信賴할 同志 辛徹氏를 맛나 鄭鍾鳴女史의 靑春엔 다시 봄비치 물으녹으려 하든중 突然한 檢擧로 지금 豫審中에 잇게 되엇다. 事件은 近來에 작고 新聞에 報導되는 저 再建黨의 工作委員會結社關係이다.
鄭女史는 세부란쓴病院 看護婦로 잇다가 女子苦學生相助會를 만들엇고 槿友會를 創立한 以後 10년의 社會運動中에 警察署留置場엔 각금 드러갓스나 감옥으로 가기는 이번이 처음이다. 最愛의 아들 朴弘濟를 그곳에 너코 잇든 그가 自身이 이제 마저 드러간 것이다.
鄭女史는 모-든 社會運動者의 保姆엇다. 누구나 會舘에서 알는다 하면 産婆를 하여서 겨우 收入된 1,2圓돈을 쥐고가서 藥도 사다 다리어주고 미음도 써주고 누가 檢擧되엇다면 총총한 거름을 구류된 곳에 옴기어<16> 수지고 의복이고 음식이고 差入하여주기에 奔走한다. 세부란스病院에서 죽은 노서아 極東大學敎授 蔡그리고리氏도 一面의 識조차 업건만 親切히 차저와 주는 鄭女史의 厚意에 感激하야 운 사람중의 하나다.
蔡敎授는 죽을 때 臨終의 席上에서까지 鄭鍾鳴氏를 불넛다.
그는 붓의 사람은 아니다. 그러나 舌의 人이엇다. 더구나 누구를 論擊할때는 敵에 間隙을 주지안코 번개가치 집어세운다. 그 勢- 猛烈하야 어지간한 男性들은 물너선다.
그는 意志의 人이라기보다 情熱의 人이다. 보기에는 퍽으나 싸늘하건만은 죽은 朴元熙女史와 가치 多情多恨한 편이엇다.
年前에 愛人 辛徹氏가 保釋이 되어 病床에 눕엇슬 때 그의 진실한 看護는 實로 눈물의 記錄이엇다. 重病알튼 辛徹氏의 回春이 女史의 功에 의함이 만타고 할 것이다. 그에게는 性的 同伴者가 한둘 잇섯다. 그러나 그를 나무래는 이는 업다. 그만치 그의 境遇는 同情을 끄으니까. 京畿道出生 올에 마흔하나인가.

唯一最初의 女X員인 紅一點의 高明子

재작년 卽 昭和4년 秋 朝鮮博覽會當時에 京畿道警察部는 突然히 龍山桃花洞附近에 數臺의 自動車를 모라 數十名의 共産黨員들을 逮捕하엿다. 그가운데 꼿과 가튼 美貌의 女性 高明子도 끼엇다. 高明子는 愛人이 第1次及第2次結社의 올가나이자-인 金丹冶와 함께 모스꾸바로부터 드러와서 市外人跡이 드문 외따로운 집에 세상을 꺼리는 조고마한 살림사리를 차리고 잇스면서 黨의 再建運動에 女性部組織의 任을 맛고 活躍하엿든 것이다.
高明子는 서울 梨花學堂出身이다. 그 뒤 同友會에 入會하여 일하다가 모스꾸바로 가서 그곳 共産大學에 入學하여 4년이나 잇다가 여러번의 檢擧에 朝鮮共産黨이 아조 潰滅되자 黨의 再建密命을 國際黨에서 밧고 드러왓든 것이다.
그는 才媛이라 學校에서도 항상 秀才의 稱을 밧엇고 그는 半月形의 美貌의 女性이라 그의 周圍에는 항상 맑스, 엥껄스를 말하는 多血質의 靑年들이 만히 모엿섯다. 그가운데 뛰어난 「올쿠」 金丹冶가 잇섯다. 둘은 처음에 思想에 共鳴하고 그다음에 性格에 共鳴하고 그다음에 「全部」그러치 部分이 아니라 아조 全部에 共鳴하엿다.
生死를 가치하기로 約束한 熱愛의 同志가 된 뒤 손에 손에 맛잡고 海內海外로 奔走히 도라다녓든 것이다. 딴말이나 高明子가 잡힐 때 金丹冶는 두달동안이나 서울에 잠복하여 잇다가 다시 몸을 海外에 避하엿다. 朝鮮의 만흔 思想女性中 直接黨員이 되어 活躍한 이는 아직 이 高明子 한사람뿐이 아닐가. 3년을 밧엇스니 아직 出獄할 날은 멀다. 나은 이십오륙이나 되엇슬가.

東洋的 古典美의 麗人 朱世竹氏 其他

조선에 아직 黨이라고 일홈조차 못듯든 1922년 겨을 莫斯科를 떠나 北京, 上海를 거처서 서울로 드러오든 一行 세사람의 標悍한 靑春이 잇섯스니 그네는 新義州에서<17> 잡히어 모다 1년반의 服役을 하고 낫다. 이것이 뒷날 最初이든 第1次黨의 「올가나이자」로 萬目을 놀래이든 朴憲永, 金丹冶, 朴元根 3人이엇다.
그때 朴에게는 許貞琡이 金에게는 高明子가 그러고 朴에게는 朱世竹이란 東洋古典畵속에서 고요히 빠저 나온듯한 高雅秀麗한 麗人이 잇섯다.
朱는 上海에서 朴을 맛낫다. 纖弱한 女性의 몸으로 일즉 國境을 너머서 멀리 露西亞의 거친 벌판으로 煩悶과 苦惱의 心身을 니끄든 朱女史는 上海에 이르러 同志이자 愛人인 朴을 맛나 黃浦灘 물결의 萬年悠久함을 빌고 또한 讚美하엿다. 그때 平壤監獄에서 出獄하고 나온 夫君 朴憲永이 東亞日報政治部記者로 林元根(金丹冶는 朝鮮日報記者) 趙東祐, 許貞琡等과 책상을 나란이 하고 일보고 잇슬때에 朱女史는 조선에 나와 同友會의 組織部長으로 活躍하는 한편 서울西大門 어느 西洋人商會에 이르러 英文타이부라이타-를 찍어주고 生活의 資를 어덧다.
그러다가 夫君이 新義州에 CY의 最高責任者로써 또 잡히게 되자 女史도 亦是 가튼 捕繩을 밧아 雪月이 어리운 國境朔風에 玉膚紅顔을 깍금이 또한 한두날만이 아니엇다.
그 뒤 朴은 保釋이 되엇다. 病弱의 夫君을 안어서 朱世竹女史는 女史의 故鄕인 咸鏡道 咸興에 이르러서 治療하고 잇다드니 이내 종적을 차즐길 업시 되엇다. 아마 지금쯤은 먼-먼 하늘아래에서 故國의 하늘에 뜬 별들을 두분이 억개를 나란히 하고 한낫둘, 한낫둘 헤고 잇지 안을가.
그때 서울에는 四美人이라고 부르는 이가 잇섯다. 朱世竹, 許貞琡, 沈恩淑, 趙元淑의 네분이다. 그가운데도 楚楚漂漂神韻이 돌기로는 朱女史를 白眉로 첫다고 한다. 그 四佳人中의 한사람이든 趙元淑氏는 故鄕이 江原道 蔚珍이다. 名門의 따님으로 閨房깁히 무처잇든 處女時代에 父兄들이 强制로 結婚을 定하여 노은 곳을 花燭典禮의 바로 前날 夜半에 시집가기 실타고 아모도 몰내 가마타고 서울로 逃走하여 온 痛快한 女性이다. 淑明女學校를 2年級까지 다니다가 그때 新興靑年同盟의 젊은 鬪士 金東鳴과 갓가운 사이가 되엇다. 그 뒤 金이 무슨 事情으로 捕吏의 손을 避하여 上海로 내닷자 그뒤는 梁明과 사랑하는 사이가 되엇섯다. 梁明마저 ML黨事件으로 上海로 亡命하자 趙女史 또한 年前에 그를 따라 上海에까지 갓드니 玉童子를 나어가지고 月前에 歸國하엿다. 지금은 愛兒를 안고 梁의 故鄕인 濟州島 漁村에 이르러 慈愛깁흔 侍父母의 사랑속에서 지낸다든가.
常春의 南海의 白鷗 훨이, 훨이 겅충 띄는 푸른 물결, 이 물결속애 海內海外로 風霜격기에 지치운 女史의 心琴이 다시 씻치울 날 잇스리라.

丁七星, 沈恩淑, 李賢卿등 諸氏

沈恩淑氏는 山村水廓이 모다 秀麗한 江原道 襄陽이 그 故鄕이다. 槿友會의 第一線에 나섯든 多年의 鬪士로 社會評論家 金璟載氏와 한때를 사랑하고 사랑밧는 몸이 되엇다가 金이 第一次로 入獄한뒤에 다시 新幹會의 少壯鬪士 洪起文氏와 쓰윗,홈을 이루고 잇다. 작년 겨을에 玉童子를 나엇스며 李賢卿氏는 水原出生으로 普校敎師, 東亞日報女記者를 지낸 뒤 安光泉을 따라 上海에까지 이르럿다가 요지음은 다시 故鄕에 도라와 잇다든가. 光州의 申敬愛女史, 鄭鍾鳴氏와 함께 工作委任會일로 龍山警察署를 거처 方今 入獄中에 잇다.
우리는 이 붓을 막음에 이르러 棹尾로 槿友會中央委員長을 지내든 丁七星女史의 光輝잇든 前半生을 占綴함으로써 이 「赤戀史」 칸파스우의 色彩를 完成하랴한다.
丁七星女史는 長安을 울니든 名妓엇다. 大邱監營이라면 平壤監營과 가치 半島의 南北에 장구모양으로 벌너저 잇서 모다 人物이 秀麗하기로 有名한 嶺南의 勝地라 女史의 生地가 大邱이엇다. 뒷날 서울에 올나오매 歌舞잘하고 버들입가치 기름한 아릅다운 그 얼골은 3.1當時까지 傾國의 소리를 들엇다. 그때 丁女史와 切親한 名妓한분이 잇섯다. 그는 앗가 말한 玄鼎健의 愛人 玄桂玉氏이엇다.
i3.1當時! 그때는 누구나 政治客이엇다. 老人들도 어린 아해들도 누구든지 國家와 民族을 말하고 또한 興奮하여서 熱이 올낫섯다. 白馬를 타고 銀鞭을 馬腹에 豪華롭게 던지며 長安네거리 좁다하고 도라다니든 丁女史의 가슴속에도 「政治」의 불이 붓기 시작하엿다. 그 豪華롭든 生活을 一朝에 헌신작가치 차버리고 東京에 내다라 技藝學校를 마치고난 丁七星女史의 飛躍은 實로 一世를 놀내기에 充分한 存在엇다.
그는 거기서 社會運動에 投身하엿다. 그 뒤 紹介의 붓을 기다릴 것 업시 10년 孤節을 직히며 지금까지 槿友會를 두억개에 질머지고 半島女性을 위하야 萬丈의 氣焰을 吐하고 잇다. 한때 C氏와(이하 제51頁에)<18> 相愛의 사이가 되엇고 엇저고 하는 말이 잇섯스나 잘 모르겟다.

우리는 아직도 列擧할 女流鬪士를 만히 가젓다. 禹鳳雲, 姜아근니아, 朴元熙, 朴順天, 姜石子等 諸氏를 그러나 紙數의 制限이 잇기에 爲先 이것으로 끗치고 뒷날 繼續할 날이 잇기를 기다린다.<51>
<13-18, 51>