잡지명	동광 제9호
발행일	1927년 01월 01일
기사제목	岩石崇拜로서 巨石文化에까지 (From Rock Worship to Megalithic Culture)
필자	崔南善
기사형태	논설 (Editorial/Essay)

岩石崇拜로서 巨石文化에까지
						崔南善

朝鮮의 「윌트솨야」
From late October to early November last year, I spent about three weeks exploring the historical sites around Kuwŏl Mountain (九月山). As various busy tasks piled up, I initially set out thinking I would just spend about a week doing a cursory look (走馬看山), but once I got there and saw things, I naturally ended up visiting here and there, taking three times longer than planned. This was particularly because my interest was unexpectedly sparked by the relationship between Kuwŏl Mountain and Megalithic Culture. Kuwŏl Mountain, along with East Kŭmgang (東金剛), South Chiri (南智異), and North Myohyang (北妙香), is one of the so-called four great mountains, representing the West. Historically, it was the second capital of the national founder Tangun (檀君) and also known as his place of divine transformation (神化地), long serving as a central sacred site (靈場) for the national religion. However, in terms of scenery alone, it pales considerably compared to the other three mountains, and regarding historical remains (故蹟), there wasn't much of outstanding note to see. But, what truly caught my eye was the fact that a major phenomenon, hitherto unnoticed by the world yet holding significant academic importance and value, was distributed centering on Kuwŏl Mountain. What is it? It is the numerous remains of Megalithic Culture. It is indeed the fact that a truly surprising quantity of these precious remains is densely clustered around Kuwŏl Mountain, almost too miraculously to be called coincidence. I realized that the Ŭllyul (殷栗) and Anak (安岳) area is the "Wiltshire" (윌트솨쓀¼) of Chosŏn (朝鮮). What I intend to speak about now will primarily focus on the megalithic remains around Kuwŏl Mountain that I briefly investigated on this trip, extending to my years of fieldwork covering all such remains in Chosŏn. First, for the general reader, I believe it necessary to introduce the concept of Megalithic Culture.

巨石文化란 무엇인가
Megalithic Culture is a term in ethnology (土俗學), referring to the cultural observation of various remains made of large stones by people of a certain ancient period. Among these are objects of faith, burial sites (故蹟), and various others whose purpose is still unknown. In any case, the cultural life content of that era, centered around structures made of massive stone blocks (石塊), is what is called Megalithic Culture in ethnology. One might think that the cultural materials of that era could have included wood or bone and horn, <6> but other easily perishable materials have long since disappeared, leaving only the durable stone structures (石造物). Thus, while Megalithic Culture might not necessarily be solely a stone culture, it remains that humans of a certain era eagerly utilized large stones to physically express their various concepts, leaving numerous remains down to the present day. This likely stems not only from choosing stone for its inherent hardness (堅硬) but also from recognizing a kind of divine power (神威) in the stone (large rocks, 巨巖) itself. Based on our many years of fieldwork (踏驗), the ancient sacred sites (靈場) of Chosŏn are mostly high mountains, their main peaks, their towering (嵂兀) sheer summits (絶顚) of piled rocks (礧磈). This itself is good evidence for examining the relationship between rocks and mystical feeling. Looking more concretely, the Tangun-related remains like Tangun Cave (檀君窟) in Myohyang Mountain (妙香山), Tangun Terrace (檀君臺), the Arrow-Testing Rock (試射石), and Sacred Trace Rock (聖跡石) in Kuwŏl Mountain all seem related to rocks. Even man-made structures like Samnang Castle (三郞城) and Ch'amsŏng Altar (塹城壇) in Kanghwa (江華) are only associated with stone materials. Also, although we cannot say for sure what the "Sindan" (神壇, divine altar) mentioned in the myth of Hwanung's (桓雄) descent from heaven was like, whether natural or artificial, it was likely some kind of stone object. This can be inferred from the fact that stages for legends involving human-heaven interaction (人天䊺涉), such as Koguryŏ's Ch'och'ŏn Stone (朝天石) and Silla's P'yŏam (瓢岩), which are thought to have inherited that tradition, are often rocks.
Najŏng (羅井) in Yangsan (楊山), said to be the place where Silla's founder descended from heaven, is actually a flat rock (一平岩) if you visit. Current explanations say stones were later placed over it to protect the sacred trace (聖跡), but we believe the stone itself was the sacred place (聖地) from the beginning. Mirŭk Mountain (將軍岩, General Rock) in Iksan (益山), "Wirye Castle" (慰禮城) in Chiksan (稷山), Ch'ŏnjŏng Terrace (天政臺) in Puyŏ (扶餘), Sŏhyŏng Mountain (西兄山) in Kyŏngju (慶州), Songak Mountain (松岳山) in Songdo (松都) are all legendary places related to Heaven (天), and they are all stone platforms (石臺) similar to Tangun Terrace. Furthermore, considering the white, pointed, solitary rocky mountain forms (岩石的 山容) of mountains within castles bearing the name "Palk'ŭn" (), meaning Heaven or God, such as Paegun Terrace (白雲臺) on Samgak Mountain (三角山), Piro Peak (毘盧峯) or Paegun Terrace on Kŭmgang Mountain (金剛山), and Piro Peak on Myohyang Mountain, one can guess how significantly rocks were involved in our ancestors' spiritual thought (神靈思想). In ancient Silla legends, there is a story of a couple named Yŏnjo and Sejo who rode a rock (一岩) from the East Sea coast to Japan and became its rulers, claiming it was Heaven's command and thus offering sacrifices to Heaven. The "rock" (岩 = pawee) mentioned here might have appeared in the story through linguistic corruption (言語疾病的) due to its phonetic similarity to "boat" (船 = pae), but it can undoubtedly be seen as an expression of the idea of rock's spiritual power (岩石靈力思想). Also, looking at ancient Korean phonetic examples, the initial sound "ㄷ" (t/d) was often used to mean high or large, and the initial sound "ㅂ" (p/b) was often used to mean sacred or divine. Thus, calling stone "tolk" (돍) and rock "pawee" (바위) might already be unusual. This spiritual foundation, the belief that rocks possess a great and sacred spiritual power (靈威), is truly the progenitor of Megalithic Culture. In the Korean case, remains constructed by freely manipulating large rocks, such as auspicious stones (瑞石), broad stones (廣石), standing stones (立石), and propped stones (撑石), are called Megalithic Monuments (巨石紀念物, Megalithic Movement).

岩石은 偉大의 表象
Looking broadly at folklore past and present, revering rocks as symbols of greatness, power, and sanctity is almost a universal phenomenon worldwide. First, looking nearby in Japan, the name "Ama-no-Iwato" (天岩戶, Heavenly Rock Cave) exists in the original residence of the national ancestors, the place where gods reside is called "Ama-no-Iwakura" (天磐座, Heavenly Rock Seat), and linguistically, things that are solid (片物), firm (堅固), and strong (雄强) are often compared to "rock" (岩), as seen in words like "tokiwa" (常磐, evergreen/eternal) and "akiwa" (堅磐, firm rock). Factually as well, ancient sacred precincts (神域) and domains (靈疇) <7> were generally enclosed by large stones – like the "kōgoishi" (神籠石, divine enclosure stones); the tombs (墳墓) of nobles in ancient times were mostly chambers made of huge stones; ancient legends viewing rocks as gods (岩石神視) are not few in the *Kojiki* and *Nihon Shoki*; and examples where rocks are worshipped as profound objects of folk belief even today are too numerous to list, such as the "Gosōntai-iwa" (御尊體岩, August Body Rock) on Mt. Fuji's summit, the "Tenchūseki" (天柱石, Heaven Pillar Stone) in Abō, Yakushima Island, Ōsumi Province, the "Ishigami" (石神, Stone God) in Mikasa Village, Chikushi District, Chikuzen Province, the "Sekison Daigongen" (石尊大權現) on Mt. Ōyama in Sagami Province, and the numerous stone gods (石神) enshrined as divine bodies (神體) in various shrines throughout the country. (For details, refer to Katō Genchi's (加藤玄智) article "Rock Worship" (岩石崇拜) in the *Dictionary of Philosophy* (哲學大辭書), the same author's book *New Religious Studies Research on Shinto* (神道の宗敎學的 新硏究), p. 161, Katō Taichirō's (加藤態一郞) *History of Japanese Customs* (日本風俗志), Vol. 1, p. 283, and the same Katō's *History of Folk Beliefs* (民間信仰史), p. 163 (regarding the legend of Ame-no-Hiboko's Izushi sword)).
Turning to China (支那), on Mt. Tai (泰山), the supreme object of ancient faith, there are numerous standing stones (立石), sometimes called uninscribed steles (沒字碑); ancient emperors erected stones (立石) on famous mountains as part of the ritual of sacrificing to Heaven (祭天) (cf. *Records of the Grand Historian* (史記), Annals of the First Emperor of Qin); there are legends from ancient times that tallies (符籙) from Heaven often appeared inscribed in cinnabar on white stones (白石) (cf. *Book of Han* (漢書), Biography of Wang Mang); and numerous other rock legends such as "auspicious stones" (瑞石) (cf. *New Book of Tang* (唐書), Annals of Empress Wu Zetian) and "sacred stones" (聖石) (cf. *Comprehensive Gazetteer of the Realm* (一統志), Zunzhou Prefecture) all seem to arise from the concept of viewing rocks as divine (岩石神視). The tale of Nüwa (女媧氏) smelting stones to mend the heavens (鍊石補天) in ancient mythology and the numerous "Waiting for Husband Rocks" (望夫石) legends in folk tales are mostly things that can be seen as having arisen against the background of rock worship. (For convenience, refer to Ma Su's (馬氏) *Yi Shi* (繹史) and Luo Mi's (羅氏) *Lu Shi* (路史) for Nüwa; refer to ancient novels like *Shenyi Jing* (神異經), *Youming Lu* (幽明錄), *Soushen Houji* (搜神後記), *Shu Wang Shiji* (蜀王世紀) for Wang Fu Shi).
Furthermore, in the Achaean region of Greece (希臘), there are over 30 natural stones worshipped as gods, each with a divine name; Tegea and Epbesos also have sacred stones, as does the church of Diana; the Argives (알꼬쓰인) call a large stone Zeus Cappatas; the oldest idol of the Thespians (데쓰피하) was a natural stone; the origin of the famous god Hermes (Hermes神), when traced back, turns out to be nothing more than an upright standing stone (一直立石); moreover, the Canaanites' (Kanaan人) "high place" (崇邱, Massabah), frequently mentioned in the Old Testament, was also an upright stone (第一圖 叅照); the Israelites' (以色列人) so-called holy temple "Bethel" (뻬델); the Kaaba black stone (Kaaba黑石) in Mecca (亞拉比亞 Mekka府), venerated by Muslims (回回敎徒); and the stone tablets placed within Jehovah's (여호아) Ark of the Covenant (約匱) – all these are readily seen to derive from rock worship. Also, a current folk custom in Sweden (瑞典) involves "mountain spirit stone mortars" (Elfvokviirnar) used when offering sacrifices to mountain spirits; this, like the "Jade Maiden Hair-Washing Basins" (玉女洗頭盆) found at Kŭmgang Mountain's Sinsŏn Terrace and elsewhere, must also be something arising from viewing rocks as spirits (岩石靈視). (Regarding the Canaanite high places, refer to Numbers 22:41, 1 Kings 10:107 [likely error, maybe 1 Kings 3:2-4 or similar context], 14:23 etc. in the Old Testament, and Karl H.C.Narti [likely Karl Budde or similar scholar] PhD's *The Religion of the Old Testament among the Religions of the Near East*, Chapter 3; a Japanese translation exists).
[Image Caption: 계셀의 숭구에 있는 마셰바 (Massabah at the High Place of Gezer)]
Such rock worship (Stone-worship, litholatry) generally originates from the mysteriousness of their shape, hardness (强固), luster (光輝), durability (堅牢), etc. Ancient primitive peoples, likely considering these as ultimate things, explained them by saying they were handed down from ancestors or gods, or sometimes thought of them as dwelling places for the souls of these beings. <8> Furthermore, the universal legends found across time and space about people or gods being born from rocks, people transforming into rocks, and rocks performing actions, all arise from the thought that rocks possess life and consciousness, similar to humans. Rocks – especially strangely magnificent ones – thus gradually became sacred objects, then altars, and further evolved into representations of gods, sacred items enjoying the sacrificial blood and flesh which are the food of gods. Progressively changing, they took on various symbolic uses as markers of gods and sacred domains. Consequently, like other natural objects – indeed, more than other natural objects – they became the starting point for myths and legends, and objects of faith and reverence. All these circumstances provided significant driving forces for the emergence of Megalithic Culture. (For numerous examples and theories regarding this, refer to the Japanese translation of C. H. Toy's *Introduction to the History of Religion*, pp. 176ff).

巨石紀念物의 種類
The commonly mentioned remains of Megalithic Culture today are firstly, "sŏndol" (선돌, standing stone, 立石, Menhir); next, "koindol" (고인돌, propped stone, 支石, 撑石, Dolmen); also, "toluri" (돌울이, stone circle, 環狀石籬, Stone circle); and "sŏkchang" (石葬, stone burial, Tumulus) – these four types collectively are called "Megalithic Monuments" (巨石記念物, Megalithic monument). The term Megalith, commonly used in archaeology and anthropology recently, combines Mega = Megas meaning Great, and Lith = lithos meaning A stone, thus signifying Huge stone (巨大한 岩 又 石). The remains of Megalithic Culture seem generally distributed across various parts of the world, but those in Europe are the best studied and already well-established among scholars. The current consensus among scholars is that they were mostly related to faith or tombs. They are seen as tombs of prominent figures or monuments associated with them.
It is difficult to determine precisely when and how human burial customs (葬俗) began, but based on remains, it seems tombs were already being made and bodies interred (감장) during the Paleolithic Age (舊石器時代). Inside a tomb discovered at La Chapelle (라 솨벨), bones lay supine with the head to the west, surrounded by flint (燧石), ochre (赭土), and broken bone fragments. At the head, a large bone lay neatly horizontally, one piece still connected to the foot and toe bones, indicating it was originally buried with flesh attached. This is clearly ceremonial interment (儀式的 埋葬), suggesting food and tools were included for the deceased to use in the spirit world. Dr. Klaatsch (클랏취 博士), studying a Paleolithic burial in the Le Moustier (뢰 무스티어) rock shelter, concluded it was a ritual burial. The practice of such ceremonial burials demonstrates that rituals for the dead had already emerged by that time. Furthermore, the discovery of weapons, tableware, etc., within tombs suggests these were prepared for the deceased soul's use in the spirit world.
Skeletons found in the Aurignac (오리낙) cave were accompanied by tools and ochre, while the Cro-Magnon (크로마년) remains included necklaces and pendants, suggesting such ornaments were part of the burial rites. In the Ofnet (오프네) cave burials, 27 skulls lay facing the setting sun, oriented eastward. <9> To understand the meaning of these Paleolithic burials, comparing them to the burial practices of contemporary primitive peoples like the Bushmen (뿌쉬멘) is a shortcut. In Bushmen territory, the deceased's body is smeared with ochre and fat, buried facing east, with a bow and arrow placed beside it. By analogy, it is beyond doubt that Paleolithic humans believed in life after death. (This passage is conveniently summarized based on Nishimura's [西村] *Cultural Anthropology* [文化人類學]; for detailed examples concerning the relationship between belief and burial, refer to the famous British ethnologist E.B. Tylor's [타일러] masterpiece *Primitive Culture*, Vol. 1).

信仰과 葬式과의 關係
The belief that after death, humans go to another world (他界) and extend this life (此生) is generally prevalent among primitive peoples throughout history. This gave rise to various rituals surrounding corpse burial and led to diverse methods such as inhumation (土葬), cremation (火葬), aerial burial (空中葬), tree burial (樹間葬), platform burial or scaffolding burial (架上葬), house interment (屋中安置), air burial (風葬), and water burial (水葬), as well as various tomb forms like earth mounds (土塚, Mound or Barrow) and stone mounds (石塚, Cairn).
Generally, the custom of burying the dead began in the Paleolithic Age, during the Pleistocene epoch (洪積期) in geology. Humans of the Pleistocene, living in natural limestone caves from the middle to late period of this era, buried their dead directly within these caves. As the Paleolithic passed and the Neolithic Age (新石器時) began, burial rituals and tomb forms developed significantly. A simple burial method emerged, involving digging a pit (壙穴) in the ground and placing the body inside. Megalithic Culture truly emerged from this starting point. In this primitive burial method, the place where the body was interred was marked with an earth mound or stone structure; the former is the earth mound (土塚), the latter the stone mound (石塚). Among stone mounds, those constructed specifically with small stones are called cairns (積石塚, Cairu [sic, Cairn]). Small cairns are sometimes found within earth mounds. Later, the practice of partitioning the tomb with stone slabs (石板) arose, and to protect this, a large capstone (天盖石) was placed on top. This led to the creation of the cist (石槨), a typical ancient tomb form widely practiced in antiquity. Not long after, this form grew larger, giving rise to the "megalithic tomb" (巨石塚) featuring a "chamber" (玄室) as the deceased's dwelling and an "entrance passage" (羡道) as its entryway. It was a natural progression for these to become increasingly elaborate and grand. Such magnificent tombs were constructed not merely out of respect for the dead; according to the general consensus among archaeologists, it was believed that the tomb served as a temporary abode (假寓) for the soul until the body completely decomposed and became an intermediate entity (中陰物) between the human and spirit worlds. From very ancient times, fire was believed to possess a kind of purifying power (淨化力, Purification). There was also the belief that only when the human body, even the bones, completely disappeared could the soul finally be freed from the fetters of the flesh (肉身의 繫縛) and enter the future world. Thus, cremation also emerged quite early. As cremation spread, in regions where it became common, only the remaining bones needed to be collected, resulting in smaller tomb forms, and in many places, megalithic tombs transformed into small stone coffins (小石棺). Since the current purpose is only to discuss Megalithic Culture, there is no need to detail the evolution of tombs. However, Megalithic Culture, having begun thus, started to flourish among the people from the mid-Neolithic period, <10> and its legacy persisted even into the subsequent Bronze Age (靑銅器時代). Now, I will outline the types of remains of Megalithic Culture.

「멘힐」(立石, 선돌)
Among megalithic monuments, the simplest is the "Menhir" (멘힐), generally consisting of a single upright stone pillar (Monolith). Men is Breton for Stone, Hir means Long or High – meaning a tall standing stone. In English, it's Standing stone, which corresponds exactly in name and reality to the Korean term "sŏndol" (선돌, 立石). Its shape resembles an Egyptian obelisk (方尖碑), hence it's also called a Crudeobelisk. Menhirs were originally naturally pointed stones shaped by weathering or other causes, erected as religious markers. They were used as grave markers (墓標) or as religious symbols (信仰上의 「심볼」). <11> Recently, some Western scholars argue that menhirs have a close connection to sun worship, but they have yet to provide definitive evidence, remaining merely a hypothesis. The true motive behind erecting menhirs is still largely unknown, beyond the vague notion that it was religious.
Menhirs exist throughout Europe, being most numerous in France, especially Brittany (쁘리타니). According to de Mortillet's (되모르티어) calculations, including stone circles and alignments, they reach 1,192 in number. In the Morbihan (모비안) region of Brittany, there is a menhir reaching 20 meters in height, called Fairy Stone or Giant Stone by locals. Smaller ones, 7 to 11 meters high, are scattered across various locations. (See Figures 2, 3, 4).

[Image Caption: 여러 형태의 선돌(第二圖) (Various forms of Menhirs (Figure 2))]

[Image Caption: 第三圖, 第四圖 (Figure 3, Figure 4)]

「크로믈렉」과 環狀石籬
When two menhirs stand parallel with a horizontal stone (橫石) placed on top, it is called a "Trilithon" (트라일리톤), which is extremely rare. More common is the "Alignment" (알라인멘트), where menhirs stand parallel in several long straight lines with roughly equal spacing. <12> In other words, while a single stone pillar is a menhir, menhirs arranged in rows are called alignments. (The French term Alignement is also commonly used). Alignments come in various forms: single rows, double rows, oval arrangements, and arrangements with a large central pillar surrounded by smaller ones. Each of these has names like Oval Stone or Cromlech, i.e., Stone Circle. Cromlech is a Celtic word: Kroumm means curved, Lech means stone, translated as "Ring-shaped Stone Fence" (環狀石籬). They are most abundant in the Carnac (카르낙) region of France and are also found scattered across the Pacific Islands (太平洋群島). (See Figures 5, 6).
[Image Caption: 第五圖, 第六圖 (Figure 5, Figure 6)]

A large stone circle in England is called Stonehenge, generally considered a combination of menhirs and trilithons. Two concentric circular arrangements (環狀圓周) made of standing stones are nested, with an oval stone setting inside. The outer circle's diameter can exceed 50 meters. The most famous stone circle is in Avebury (에베부리), England, consisting of over 100 standing stone circles (立石環羣), with tombs inside. The purpose of stone circles, besides being burial sites for the dead, is thought to have been a type of altar (祭壇). (See Figures 7, 8).
[Image Caption: 영국의 環狀石籬(第七圖) (Stone Circle in England (Figure 7))]

[Image Caption: 영국 에베브리에 있는 環狀石籬(第八圖) (Stone Circle in Avebury, England (Figure 8))]
Alignments and cromlechs involve connecting two standing stones with a horizontal stone. When many cromlechs are connected, they form a stone circle. These are simple structures formed by combining individual menhirs as units. However, there is a more complex grouping of multiple menhirs called a "Dolmen" (똘멘).

「똘멘」(支石, 撑石)
The "Dolmen" (똘멘) is what is termed a Compound Megalithic Formation in archaeology. <13> It appears in various forms, but the commonest and simplest consists of a single capstone (盖石) resting on several supporting pillars (支柱). Some have slanted support stones, forming a truncated pyramid shape. Among dolmens found in France and Ireland (愛蘭), some occasionally use collections of small stone fragments for the ceiling instead of a single capstone. Some capstones weigh over 60 tons, raising questions about how they were moved into position. Based on ancient Egyptian paintings and other evidence, it is speculated they might have been transported using rollers (轉子) or levers (槓桿). Commonly, dolmens were covered with earth and sand to form a burial mound (封墳形). Some scholars believe that dolmens were originally meant to be mound-shaped, and those exposed today are the result of earth and sand eroding due to cultivation or landslides (沙汰), but this is not definitively established. Also, among mound-shaped <14> dolmens, some have a circle of standing stones around them, with the central dolmen now missing. These are sometimes confused with stone circles, but the two should be clearly distinguished. (See Figures 9, 10, 11, 12, 13).
[Image Caption: 여러형태의 똘맨(第九圖) (Various forms of Dolmens (Figure 9))]

[Image Caption: 프랑스 모르비안에 있는 똘멘(第十圖) (Dolmen in Morbihan, France (Figure 10))]

[Image Caption: 프랑스 카르낙에 있는 똘멘(第十一圖) (Dolmen in Carnac, France (Figure 11))]

[Image Caption: 뽀르타뉴에 있는 똘멘(第十二圖) (Dolmen in Brittany (Figure 12))]

[Image Caption: 영국 아일레쓰포드에 있는 똘멘(第十三圖) (Dolmen in Aylesford, England (Figure 13))]
The distribution of dolmens is extremely wide, covering, within currently known limits, the southern half of the Scandinavian (스칸디나비아) peninsula, across Western Europe, Algeria (알제리아), the Mediterranean coast (地中海岸) to India (印度). In the East, they have been discovered in Chosŏn (朝鮮) and Japan (日本). Additionally, they are scattered in Madagascar (마다가스칼) and the islands of Oceania (大洋洲). If the megalithic cultures of Peru (베루) and Mexico (멕시코) are also considered part of the same lineage as dolmens, then the distribution of dolmens can truly be called worldwide.
Seeing the widespread distribution of Dolmen Culture, some scholars have proposed that in ancient times, a type of migrating people (移動人種) carried it southwards from Scandinavia to Africa, naming them the "People of the Dolmens." Of course, it is also possible to imagine them moving northwards from Africa to Scandinavia. However, according to research by Lesds [likely Leeds] (리이쓰), the homeland of the dolmen is France. Over 4,000 dolmens have been discovered in France, 618 of which are in Brittany (쁘리티니).
Dolmens are found built on plains or small hills; these were tombs where people were buried at the time. Therefore, various artifacts (器物) and sometimes human bones are found inside them.
In the word "dolmen," "dol" is Gaulish (꼬울語) for table, and "men" is stone, combining <15> to mean Stone table (石冊床). The name obviously derives from its shape. Dolmens, with their sturdy design and solid construction, represent a considerable advancement compared to menhirs or cromlechs and are a major representative of Megalithic Culture.
The earliest forms of dolmens everywhere utilized natural stones as they were. However, after some time, the large stones of the outer walls were replaced by stacked smaller stones. Further evolving, the dolmen structure itself gradually shrank, eventually becoming stone cists (石棺). However, this doesn't mean that cists are always an evolution of dolmens; the origin of the cist itself existed early on, and there are many examples where they coexisted with dolmens. It is faintly imaginable that the concept of the dolmen later became a factor in inducing the development of pyramids (피라미드).

「투물루쓰」(石葬)
[Image Caption: 투물루쓰의 형태(第十四圖) (Form of a Tumulus (Figure 14))]

Besides these, there is another type called "Tumulus" (투물루쓰), which can be seen as a dolmen with a complex structure. In archaeology, the French term Allee couverte [Allée couverte] is used, meaning A mound of earth over a grave. It refers to A barrow, a high, large tomb covered with earth. These are the ancient tombs called "Koryŏch'ong" (고려총, Koryŏ tomb), "sŏkchang" (석장, stone burial), "Han'imudŏm" (한이무덤, Han tomb?) in Chosŏn, and "kōzuka" (高塚, high mound) in Japan. Anthropologically speaking, the ancient tombs of Chosŏn and Japan are precisely this type, Tumulus. (In English, these are often called Sepulchral mounds). These tumuli have an attached passage (通路) of varying width and height, leading into one or several separate compartments. This passage is called the entrance passage (羡道, Corridor), and the compartments inside are called chambers (玄室, Chambers); the chamber is where the corpse was placed. <16>
The periphery of these ancient tombs was sometimes enclosed by a single stone wall (石壁) or by stacking boulders (뭉우리) to build a stone wall (石墻). Between the entrance passage and the chamber, there was a stone door (石門) to separate the spaces, and another stone door at the entrance sealed the front tightly. The ceiling was formed by placing several flat stones (平石) as a roof, resulting in a quite complex structure. Earth was piled over this stone structure to build a tomb, which came in various types of structure and external appearance.

巨石墳墓와 信仰關係
[Image Caption: 巨石墳墓의 평면도 및 측면도(第十五圖) (Plan and Side View of a Megalithic Tomb (Figure 15))]

The aforementioned Menhir (立石), Cromlech (石門) [Error: should be 環狀石籬, stone circle; 石門 means stone gate], Dolmen (撑石), and Tumulus (石葬) are collectively called "Megalithic Monuments" (巨石紀念物) (or Stone Structures, 石建造物), and the period when such things were frequently constructed is called the "Megalithic Culture Age" (巨石文化時代). The reason the people of that time expended great effort to handle such large stones was mainly for religious purposes and for use as tombs. With the emergence of concepts of the soul (靈魂) and the afterlife (他界), tombs, as the dwelling place (寓所) and passage (通路) for the soul, were elaborately decorated to allow the soul to rest peacefully and transition smoothly to the other world (彼界). To ensure no lack (窮乏) even after death, items cherished during life, and sometimes even wives, concubines, and slaves, along with various necessities of life, were placed inside.
Constructing tombs firmly also had the intention of sealing the deceased's spirit (魂靈) inside, preventing it from coming out again. <17> While cremation was not practiced in Eastern countries before the introduction of Buddhism, in Europe, cremation was often performed spontaneously from the Neolithic Age onwards. The reasons are as mentioned above, and cremated remains are occasionally found in ancient European tombs.
One point to note here is that megalithic tombs were originally built by placing the stone structure on the ground surface and covering it with earth, not by digging into the ground. This was because digging pits was impossible for the people of the Stone Age. Since they didn't dig pits but placed stones on the ground to create space and put the deceased inside, it could also be considered a form of aerial burial (空葬).

建造의 年代와 目的
The construction period of megalithic structures is generally thought to span from the Neolithic Age to the early Copper (銅器) and Bronze Age (靑銅器時代), but the precise dating, along with their purpose, remained unclear for a long time. Only recently has the idea emerged that they were tombs of powerful chieftains of the time or perhaps shrines (廟所) for worship in Druidism (뜨루이드敎, Druidism). (Druidism was a kind of religious group (宗敎的 團體) that arose among the ancient inhabitants of Gaul (깔리아, Gallia) and Britain (英吉利). It comprised relatively upper-class individuals like scholars, priests, judges, poets, and prophets. Its doctrines taught that the world was created by the god of death and would eventually be destroyed by water and fire, yet they believed in the immortality of the soul (靈魂不滅) and reincarnation (輸迴轉生). They also devoted efforts to the study of astrology (占星術), geography (地理學), physics (物理學), and medicine (醫學). Britain (쁘리텐) was the location of its headquarters, but an annual general assembly was held at Carnutes (카누티) in Gaul). (See Figure 16).
[Image Caption: 영국 스노트웨이에 있는 뜨루이드敎의 거석유물(第十六圖) (Druidic Megalithic Remains in Snowdonia [? unlikely, maybe another site], UK (Figure 16))]
When the nature of megalithic structures was unknown, various folk tales circulated around them. The stone circle at Penrith (펜리쓰?) was called King Arthur's (아더王) Round Table, the table stone (冊床石) at Berkshire (빠크솨야?) was called Wayland Smith's (웰랜드 스미드) Stone Gate [likely Smithy], and the standing stone at Orkney (오크니) acquired the name Odin Stone (오듼石).
As a result of research on the Arbor Low (아버 로우) stone circle, its construction period was determined to be the Neolithic Age. Through the investigation of Dr. Gowland <18> (꼬울랜드 博士), the purpose of constructing stone circles was revealed to be sun worship. Furthermore, Sir Norman Lockyer (써 노맨 로키여) studied the menhir called the Friar's Heel (프라이여의 발굼치) and established evidence that the sun would have risen over its summit on the summer solstice around 1680 BC [original text error likely meant 1680 BC not 168 AD]. Lockyer's research attempted to simultaneously prove the date and purpose of megalithic structures. Although there are counterarguments, the frequent northeast orientation (向) of menhirs hints that they were for observing solar phenomena.

太陽巨石 複合文化說
The theory attributing the worldwide distribution of dolmens and other megalithic remains to a single origin, spreading gradually from a central region, has often been proposed by scholars. Its most recent proponent is Professor G. Elliot Smith (스미드 敎授). Since around 1912, the professor has advocated the Egyptian origin theory (埃及淵源說) of dolmens. He argues that the "Heliolithic culture-complex" (太陽巨石複合文化) – a complex culture centered on sun worship and the construction of megalithic monuments – which gradually developed in Egypt between 4000 BC and 900 BC, was spread by Phoenicians (풰니키아人) seeking profit. Starting shortly before 800 BC, these Phoenicians, voyaging (漂洎) through the Mediterranean Sea, Red Sea (紅海), Persian Gulf (波斯灣), Indian Ocean (印度海), etc., adopted the megalithic lever lifting technique (巨石의 槓桿擧 上術, Lever) invented in Egypt at that time, along with numerous associated cultural elements. They carried this culture, on one hand, into East and West Africa (東西亞弗利加), and on the other, along the Asian coast (亞細亞의 海岸), through India (印度) to China (支那), Chosŏn (朝鮮), Japan (日本), into the Pacific Islands (太平洋諸島), and further into the Americas (亞米利加). Furthermore, he attributes the distribution of Totemism (도데미슴), Couvade (産室男忌), mummification (「멈미」製作), the Swastika motif (卍字文), Serpent worship (蛇體崇拜), tattooing (文身), Great Flood legends (大洪水傳說), etc., all to this Egyptian monocentric theory called Heliolithic Culture, claiming they spread from Egypt along with dolmens. While Professor Smith's theory has parts worth considering, it also raises significant questions and remains just one hypothesis. Most scholars still tend to believe that dolmens had multiple minor centers in different regions, from which the culture spread to neighboring peoples.
(From now on, I will discuss the remains of Megalithic Culture in Chosŏn. For more detailed information on what has been discussed so far, you can conveniently refer to the articles on Stone monuments and Stonehenge in the Encyclopædia Britannica, 11th edition, Volume 26. It also provides references to important books, offering ways to delve deeper. Although there are no specialized books, translated or original, on this topic in Japanese, useful materials can be found in Dr. Torii's [島居] *Our Ancient Culture from an Anthropological Perspective* [人類學より見たる我が古代の文化], and his articles in journals like *Jinruigaku Zasshi* [人類學雜誌], *Minzoku* [民族], *Shizen Kagaku* [自然科學], *Tōyō Bunko Ōbun Ronsō* [東洋文庫歐文論叢], etc. There are also some descriptions in Yagi's [八木] *Anthropology* [人類學], Nishida's [西田] *Outline of Anthropology* [人類學槪論], Nishimura's [西村] *Cultural Anthropology* [文化人類學] and *National History of Japan: Yamato Period* [國民の日本史大和時代]. Chapter 8 of Satō Denken's [佐藤傳繭] translation of Danvers' [딴버스] original work, *Tales of Archaeological Primitive Man Research* [考古原人究話], contains descriptions of Wiltshire's [윌트口야] Avebury stone circle and others, which may be consulted). <19>

**Summary**

Ch'oe Namsŏn describes his recent archaeological fieldwork around Kuwŏl Mountain, discovering a dense concentration of megalithic remains (dolmens, standing stones), which he calls the "Wiltshire of Chosŏn." He introduces the concept of Megalithic Culture, linking it globally to ancient rock worship stemming from beliefs in the spiritual power of large stones, citing examples from Korea (Tangun legends, sacred mountains), Japan, China, Greece, and the Near East. He details types of megalithic monuments (menhirs, alignments, cromlechs/stone circles like Stonehenge, dolmens, tumuli), discussing their presumed functions as tombs or religious sites, construction methods, and dating (Neolithic to early Bronze Age). He touches upon theories of origin, including G. Elliot Smith's controversial "Heliolithic" diffusionist theory tracing megaliths and associated cultural traits back to Egypt, while acknowledging most scholars favor multiple centers of origin. The article serves as an introduction before delving into Korean examples.

From a historical perspective, the article is significant as an early Korean attempt by a prominent intellectual, Ch'oe Namsŏn, to systematically study and contextualize Korean megalithic monuments within global archaeology and anthropology during the Japanese colonial period. His effort to connect these remains to foundational myths (Tangun) and assert a deep indigenous history reflects nationalist sentiments and the search for cultural roots. His engagement with contemporary Western archaeological theories (Megalithic Culture, Druidism, Heliolithic theory) demonstrates the influx of modern academic disciplines into Korea, albeit framed within his particular historical narrative.

**Named Entities**

崔南善	최남선	Ch'oe Namsŏn
九月山	구월산	Kuwŏl Mountain
東金剛	동금강	East Kŭmgang
南智異	남지리	South Chiri
北妙香	북묘향	North Myohyang
檀君	단군	Tangun
殷栗	은율	Ŭllyul
安岳	안악	Anak
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
윌트솨쓀¼	윌트셔	Wiltshire
江華	강화	Kanghwa
妙香山	묘향산	Myohyang Mountain
桓雄	환웅	Hwanung
高句麗	고구려	Koguryŏ
新羅	신라	Silla
楊山	양산	Yangsan
羅井	나정	Najŏng
益山	익산	Iksan
彌勒山	미륵산	Mirŭk Mountain
稷山	직산	Chiksan
慰禮城	위례성	Wirye Castle
扶餘	부여	Puyŏ
天政臺	천정대	Ch'ŏnjŏng Terrace
慶州	경주	Kyŏngju
西兄山	서형산	Sŏhyŏng Mountain
松都	송도	Songdo
松岳山	송악산	Songak Mountain
三角山	삼각산	Samgak Mountain
白雲臺	백운대	Paegun Terrace
金剛山	금강산	Kŭmgang Mountain
毘盧峯	비로봉	Piro Peak
日本	일본	Japan / Nihon
天岩戶	아마노이와토	Ama-no-Iwato
天磐座	아마노이와쿠라	Ama-no-Iwakura
富士山	후지산	Mt. Fuji
大隅國	오스미노쿠니	Ōsumi Province
屋久島	야쿠시마	Yakushima Island
筑前國	치쿠젠노쿠니	Chikuzen Province
筑紫郡	치쿠시군	Chikushi District
御笠村	미카사무라	Mikasa Village
相模郡	사가미군	Sagami District
大山	오오야마	Mt. Ōyama
加藤玄智	카토 겐치	Katō Genchi
加藤態一郞	카토 타이치로	Katō Taichirō
天日槍	아메노히보코	Ame-no-Hiboko
支那	지나	China
泰山	태산	Mt. Tai
秦始皇	진시황	First Emperor of Qin
王莽	왕망	Wang Mang
則天皇后	측천황후	Empress Wu Zetian
瓚州府	찬주부	Zunzhou Prefecture
女媧氏	여와씨	Nüwa
馬氏	마씨	Ma Su
羅氏	나씨	Luo Mi
希臘	희랍	Greece
Achain	아카이아	Achaea
Tegea	테게아	Tegea
Epbesos	에베소	Ephesus
Diana	다이아나	Diana
알꼬쓰인	아르고스인	Argives
Zeus Cappatas	제우스 카파타스	Zeus Cappatas
데쓰피하	테스피아이인	Thespians
Hermes	헤르메스	Hermes
Kanaan人	가나안인	Canaanites
이스라엘人	이스라엘인	Israelites
뻬델	베델	Bethel
回回敎徒	회회교도	Muslims
亞拉比亞	아라비아	Arabia
Mekka府	메카부	Mecca
Kaaba	카바	Kaaba
여호아	여호와	Jehovah
瑞典	서전	Sweden
Karl H.C.Narti	칼 부데?	Karl Budde? (likely identification)
계셀	게셀	Gezer
C. H. Toy	크로포드 H. 토이	Crawford H. Toy
歐羅巴	구라파	Europe
라 솨벨	라 샤펠	La Chapelle
클랏취	클라취	Klaatsch
뢰 무스티어	르 무스티에	Le Moustier
오리낙	오리냐크	Aurignac
크로마년	크로마뇽	Cro-Magnon
오프네	오프네트	Ofnet
뿌쉬멘	부시멘	Bushmen
타일러	타일러	Tylor
佛蘭西	불란서	France
쁘리타니	브르타뉴	Brittany
되모르티어	모르티예	Mortillet (Gabriel de Mortillet?)
모비안	모르비앙	Morbihan
카르낙	카르나크	Carnac
太平洋群島	태평양군도	Pacific Islands
英國	영국	England / UK
Stonehenge	스톤헨지	Stonehenge
에베부리	에이브버리	Avebury
愛蘭	애란	Ireland
스칸디나비아	스칸디나비아	Scandinavia
알제리아	알제리아	Algeria
地中海	지중해	Mediterranean Sea
印度	인도	India
마다가스칼	마다가스카르	Madagascar
大洋洲	대양주	Oceania
베루	페루	Peru
멕시코	멕시코	Mexico
리이쓰	리즈	Leeds (E. Thurlow Leeds?)
아프리카	아프리카	Africa
아시아	아시아	Asia
亞米利加	아미리가	Americas
埃及	애급	Egypt
G. Elliot Smith	G. 엘리엇 스미스	G. Elliot Smith
풰니키아人	페니키아인	Phoenicians
紅海	홍해	Red Sea
波斯灣	파사만	Persian Gulf
印度海	인도해	Indian Ocean
東西亞弗利加	동서아프리카	East and West Africa
펜리쓰	펜리스	Penrith?
아더王	아서왕	King Arthur
빠크솨야	버크셔	Berkshire?
웰랜드 스미드	웨일랜드 스미스	Wayland Smith
오크니	오크니	Orkney
오듼	오딘	Odin
아버 로우	아버 로	Arbor Low
꼬울랜드	가울랜드	Gowland (William Gowland)
써 노맨 로키여	노먼 로키어 경	Sir Norman Lockyer
프라이여	프라이어	Friar('s Heel)
깔리아	갈리아	Gaul
英吉利	영길리	England / Britain
쁘리텐	브리튼	Britain
카누티	카르누테스	Carnutes
스노트웨이	스노도니아?	Snowdonia? (location uncertain)
島居	토리이	Torii Ryūzō
八木	야기	Yagi Shōzaburō?
西田	니시다	Nishida Naojirō?
西村	니시무라	Nishimura Shinji
딴버스	댄버스	Danvers? (Author name unclear)
佐藤傳繭	사토 덴켄	Satō Denken

**Glossary**

巡探	순탐	To explore, investigate (historical sites)
叢集	총집	To gather, cluster together
走馬看山	주마간산	Cursory look, superficial observation (lit. 'seeing mountains from a running horse')
故蹟	고적	Historical remains, ancient sites
土俗學	토속학	Ethnology, folklore studies (older term)
靈場	영장	Sacred site, spiritually significant place
嵂兀	율올	Towering, steep (describing mountains/rocks)
絶顚	절전	Summit, peak (esp. sheer)
礧磈	뇌뢰	Piled rocks, boulders
神壇	신단	Divine altar
朝天石	조천석	'Heaven-facing stone' (Koguryŏ artifact name)
瓢岩	표암	'Gourd Rock' (Silla artifact/place name)
人天䊺涉	인천교섭	Interaction or connection between humans and heaven/divinity
	밝은	Bright, clear; often implies 'divine' or 'heavenly' (older spelling for 밝은)
靈威	영위	Spiritual power, divine authority or aura
言語疾病的	언어질병적	Linguistic corruption, phonetic change/error (unusual term)
國祖	국조	National founder (referring to Tangun)
神籠石	신롱석	Kōgoishi (type of ancient Japanese stone structure)
墳墓	분묘	Tomb, grave
沒字碑	몰자비	Uninscribed stele/monument
符籙	부록	Tally, amulet, charm (often associated with Daoism)
鍊石補天	연석보천	Smelting stones to mend the heavens (Nüwa myth)
望夫石	망부석	'Waiting-for-husband rock' (folklore motif)
崇邱	숭구	High place (Biblical term for Canaanite worship site)
Massabah	마세바	Massebah (Hebrew: standing stone, pillar)
뻬델	베델	Bethel (Hebrew: House of God)
約匱	약궤	Ark of the Covenant
堅牢	견뢰	Strong, durable, solid
立石	입석	Standing stone, menhir (also 선돌)
支石	지석	Supporting stone (part of a dolmen); often used for dolmen itself (also 고인돌)
撑石	탱석	Propped stone (synonym for 支石/dolmen)
環狀石籬	환상석리	Stone circle, cromlech (lit. 'ring-shaped stone fence')
石葬	석장	Stone burial; tumulus with stone chamber
巨石記念物	거석기념물	Megalithic monument
燧石	수석	Flint
赭土	자토	Ochre
埋葬	매장	Burial, interment
儀式的 埋葬	의식적 매장	Ceremonial interment/burial
土葬	토장	Inhumation, earth burial
火葬	화장	Cremation
空中葬	공중장	Aerial burial
樹間葬	수간장	Tree burial
架上葬	가상장	Platform burial, scaffolding burial
屋中安置	옥중안치	House interment (placing body within a dwelling)
風葬	풍장	Air burial (exposure to elements)
水葬	수장	Water burial
土塚	토총	Earth mound, barrow
石塚	석총	Stone mound, cairn
積石塚	적석총	Cairn (mound of smaller stones)
石槨	석곽	Stone cist, stone-lined grave chamber
玄室	현실	Burial chamber (within a tomb)
羡道	연도	Entrance passage (to a tomb chamber)
淨化力	정화력	Purifying power
方尖碑	방첨비	Obelisk
Crudeobelisk	크루드오벨리스크	Crude obelisk (referring to menhir shape)
橫石	횡석	Horizontal stone, lintel stone (in trilithons, dolmens)
作列	작렬	To form a line, arrange in rows
彎曲	만곡	Curved, bent
天盖石	천개석	Capstone (of a dolmen or cist)
封墳	봉분	Mounded tomb, burial mound covering a structure
沙汰	사태	Landslide, erosion (causing earth removal)
移動人種	이동인종	Migrating people/race
冊床	책상	Table (used in the etymology of 'dolmen')
石棺	석관	Stone coffin, sarcophagus; sometimes Cist
고려총	고려총	Koryŏ tomb (folk name for certain ancient tombs)
석장	석장	Stone burial (another term for tumulus-like tombs)
한이무덤	한이무덤	Han tomb? (folk name, meaning uncertain, poss. 'big tomb')
高塚	고총	High mound (Japanese kōzuka; term for tumulus)
뭉우리	뭉우리	Boulder, large rounded stone (used for construction)
뜨루이드敎	드루이드교	Druidism
輸迴轉生	윤회전생	Reincarnation, transmigration of souls
禮拜	예배	Worship
廟所	묘소	Shrine, temple; sometimes tomb
太陽巨石複合文化	태양거석복합문화	Heliolithic culture-complex (Elliot Smith's theory)
漂洎	표박	To drift, voyage by sea
槓桿擧 上術	강관거상술	Lever lifting technique (for megaliths)
産室男忌	산실남기	Couvade (custom where father mimics childbirth)
卍字文	만자문	Swastika motif
蛇體崇拜	사체숭배	Serpent worship
文身	문신	Tattooing
大洪水傳說	대홍수전설	Great Flood legend/myth


---------------------------


잡지명	동광 제9호
발행일	1927년 01월 01일
기사제목	岩石崇拜로서 巨石文化에까지
필자	崔南善
기사형태	논설

岩石崇拜로서 巨石文化에까지
						崔南善
朝鮮의 「윌트솨야」
나는 지난 10월 하순으로부터 11월 상순까지 약 3주간을 들여 九月山방면의 사적을 巡探하엿슴니다. 여러 가지 바쁜 일이 叢集하여 잇슴으로 처음에는 1주간쯤 그야말로 走馬看山이나 하고 오리라 하고 나섯더니 급기 가서 본즉 자연 여긔도 저긔도 하게되어 예정의 3배나 되엇는데 그것은 특히 九月山과 巨石文化와의 관계에 의외의 흥미를 誘發하게 된 까닭이엇슴니다. 九月山은 東金剛, 南智異, 北妙香과 한가지 西方을 대표하는 자로 일은바 4山의 1이 되는 명산이며 역사상으로 말하여도 國祖 壇君의 제 2도읍이요 兼하여 그 神化地라 하여 길이 국교의 중심적 靈場을 지은 곳이지오마는 다만 風景만으로는 다른 3山에 비하여 만흔 遜色을 가젓고 故蹟이라 하여도 두드러진 무엇의 볼만한 가ƒ이 잇지는 아니하엿슴니다. 그러나 시방까지 그리 世人의 注意에 오르지 아니하고도 실상은 학술상 큰 관계와 딸아서 큰 가치를 가지는 일대 사실이 九月山을 중심으로 하여 일대 분포를 보이엇슴에는 과연 눈이 번쩍 띄움이 잇섯슴니다. 그것이 무엇인고 하니 곳 巨石文化의 허다한 遺蹟임니다. 실로 놀랄만콤 만흔 분량의 이 귀중한 遺蹟이 우연이라고 하기에는 넘우 신기하다 할만치 九月山의 주의에 밀집하여 잇는 사실임니다. 殷栗, 安岳一帶가 朝鮮의 「윌트솨쓀¼」임을 안 것임니다. 이제부터 말슴하려하는 것은 이번 길에 略査한 바 九月山 부근의 巨石的 遺蹟을 爲主하여 朝鮮에 잇는 그 全遺蹟에 대한 年來의 踏驗에까지 밋칠 터인데 위선 一般의 讀者를 위하여 巨石文化란 것의 개념을 소개함이 필요할까 함니다.

巨石文化란 무엇인가
거석문화(Megalithic Culture)란 것은 土俗學上의 용어인데 오랜 옛날 어느 時期의 사람들이 커단 돌로 만들어 노흔 여러가지 유적을 문화적으로 관찰하여 부르는 이름임니다. 그 중에는 신앙의 대상이던 것도 잇고 매장의 故蹟이던 것도 잇고 또 아직 그 소용을 아지 못하는 이것저것이 잇지오마는 여하간 커단 石塊를 재료로 하는 建造物을 중심으로 하여 그 시대의 생활내용을 지은 무엇을 土俗學上에서 巨石文化라고 부르는 것임니다. 어찌 생각하면 그 시대의 문화적 재료에 나무나 骨角 가튼 것도 잇섯슬지나＜6＞ 腐化하기 쉬운 다른 것은 다 이미 업서지고 단단한 石造物만이 떠러잇슨 관계도 잇슬 터인즉 巨石文化가 반듯이 唯 石文化는 아닐 이유도 잇지오마는 여하간 어느 시대의 人類가 질겨서 거석을 運用하여 그네의 여러가지 관념을 事物的으로 表白한 것이 허다한 遺蹟으로 시방까지 전래하니 이는 대개 돌이 질적으로 堅硬함을 취하는 밧게 돌(巨巖) 그것에 일종의 神威를 認한 관계도 잇는 것임니다. 우리가 多年 踏驗한 바에 據하건대 朝鮮 고대의 靈場은 대개 고산이요 그 主峰이요 그 嵂兀한 絶顚의 礧磈한 石頭이니 이것이 이미 岩石과 神秘感과의 관계를 살필 好材料임니다마는 더 구체적 방면으로 볼 것 가트면 妙香山의 檀君窟, 九月山의 檀君臺, 試射石, 聖跡石 등 檀君관계의 遺蹟이 총히 岩石에 한하는 감이 잇고 江華의 三郞城이니 塹城壇이니 하는 것처럼 그 人造物인 것도 石材 관계의 물건뿐이요 또 桓雄天降說話 중에 나오는 「神壇」이란 것이 어떠한 것인지 質言할거리는 업스되 天然이엇고 人工이엇고 필시는 일종의 石物이엇슬 것은 대개 그 전통을 바닷스리라고 생각되는 高句麗의 朝天石, 新羅의 瓢岩 등 人天䊺�涉的 傳說舞臺가 흔히 岩石임으로써 짐작됨니다.
新羅 始祖의 天降地라 하는 楊山의 羅井도 가서 보면 실상 一平岩이니 시방 이르는 말에는 聖跡을 掩護하기 위하여 나종에 돌을 덥헛다하나 우리는 본디부터 돌 그것이 聖地이엇스리라고 생각함니다. 益山의 彌勒山(將軍岩), 稷山의 「慰禮城」, 扶餘의 天政臺, 慶州의 西兄山, 松都의 松岳山 등은 다 天과 관계잇는 傳說地인데 그것이 다 檀君臺와 가튼 石臺돌이요 또 天인 神을 의미하는 「」의 名號를 대한 城中의 山岳 - 이를테면 三角山의 白雲臺, 金剛山의 毘盧峯 내지 白雲臺, 妙香山의 毘盧峯 등의 히고 뾰족하고 떨기진 岩石的 山容을 볼찌라도 岩石이 어떠케 우리 祖先의 神靈思想에 중대한 교섭을 가젓섯슴을 짐작할 것임니다. 新羅의 古傳說에 東海濱에 延鳥細鳥라는 婦夫가 一岩을 타고 日本으로 가서 그 王이 되엇는데 이것이 天의 시킴이라 하여 天을 祭하엿다는 것이 잇스니 여긔 이른바 「岩」=바위가 혹 船=「배」와 音相似함에서 「言語疾病的으로 설화중에 나타난 것인지도 알 수 업스되 이것을 또한 岩石靈力思想의 一表現으로 볼 수 잇슴이 母論임니다. 또 朝鮮 古語의 音例를 보건대 무릇 高大를 意味함에 민하 「ㄷ」頭音을 쓰고 神聖을 의미함에 만히 「ㅂ」頭音을 쓰니 石을 「돍」이라 하고 岩을 「바위」라 함이 이미 尋常함 아닐 것 갓슴니다. 이러케 岩石에 대하여 위대하고 神聖한 일종의 靈威를 가젓다 하는 정신적 근거가 실로 巨石文化의 産母인 것이니 朝鮮의 예로 말하면 瑞石, 廣石, 立石, 撑石 등처럼 큰 岩石을 자유로 운용하여 建造한 遺跡을 巨石紀念物(Megalithic Movement)이라고 일컷슴니다.

岩石은 偉大의 表象
널리 古今의 민속을 살필찌라도 岩石을 위대와 威力과 神聖 등의 意味로 尊信함은 거의 세계의 通例라고 하겟슴니다. 먼저 가까운 日本에 가서 보건대 國祖의 本居에 「天岩戶」(アマノイハト)의 이름이 잇고 神의 依止處를 「天磐座」(アノイハクう)라고 일컷고 「常磐」(トキハ), 「堅磐」(アキハ) 등처럼 片物의 견고하고 雄强한 것을 만히 「岩」으로써 견줌과 가티 言語上에도 徵驗되거니와 사실의 上에 잇서서도 古代의 神域 靈疇는＜7＞ 대개 巨石으로 을을 할 것 - 「神籠石」(クウゴイシ)가튼 것이요 그 옛날 존귀한 사람의 墳墓는 대개 巨石으로 방을 만든 것이요 古事紀, 日本書紀 등에 岩石神視의 古傳도 작지 아니하고 또 富士山頂의 「御尊體岩」, 大隅國 屋久島 阿房의 「天柱石」, 筑前國 筑紫郡 御笠村의 「石神」, 相模郡 大山의 「石尊大權現」, 기타 國中 諸社에 神體로 奉安한 허다한 石神 등처럼 시방까지 民間信仰의 거록한 대상으로 岩石이 崇拜되는 예를 이로 들출 수 업슴니다. (자세한 것은 哲學大辭書의 加藤玄智氏 「岩石崇拜」, 가튼 加藤氏의 著書인 「神道의 宗敎學的 新硏究」 161面, 加藤態一郞氏 著 「日本風俗志」上卷 283面 또 이 加藤氏의 「民間信仰史」 163面(天日槍의 出石刀干傳說) 등에 參照하시오)
支那로 말하면 그 古信仰의 최고 對象인 泰山의 上에 허다한 立石이 잇서 혹 沒字碑라고도 일컬음과 古代의 帝王이 祭天의 일의식으로 名山에 올나가서 立石함과 (史記의 秦始皇本紀  參照) 옛날부터 上天에 符籙이 만히 白石에 丹書되어 출현한다는 傳說이 잇슴과(漢書의 王莽傳 叅照) 기타 「瑞石」(叅唐書의 則天皇后紀 叅照), 「聖石」(一統志의 瓚州府 叅照) 등 허다한 岩石傳說은 다 岩石神視의 관념으로서 생겨난 말일찌며 古神話중의 女媧氏 鍊石補天談과 民間說話中의 허다한 「望夫石」傳說도 대개는 岩石崇拜를 배경으로 하여 생기어난 것으로 보아서 可한 것들임니다. (便宣上 女媧氏의 일은 馬氏 「繹史」 羅氏「路史」에 望夫石은 「神異經」, 「幽明錄」, 「搜神後記」, 「蜀王世紀」등 古小說에 叅照)
또 希臘의 Achain地方에는 神으로 崇拜하는 30餘箇의 天然石이 잇서 각각 神名이 잇고 Tegea에도 Epbesos에도, Diana의 敎會에도 다 聖石이 잇고 「알꼬쓰」인(Argiues)은 大石을 Zeus Cappatas라고 부르고 데쓰피하 Thespiaus人의 最古偶像은 天然石이엇고 유명한 Hermes神의 起源도 溯突해보면 一直立石에 不外한 것이며 기타 奮約書중에 만히 나오는 Kanaan人의 「崇邱」 Massabah도 또한 直立石인 것이며(第一圖 叅照) 以色列人의 이른바 聖殿인 「뻬델」(Bethel)이며 回回敎徒의 神聖視하는 亞拉比亞Mekka府의 Kaaba黑石이며 「여호아」 神의 「約匱」(Ark)중에 너허둔 石板이 대개 다 岩石崇拜에서 유래한 것임은 얼른 살피어지는 일임니다. 또 시방 瑞典地方의 土俗에 山靈에게 제물을 바치는 때 쓰는 「山靈의 石臼」(Elfvokviirnar)란 것이 잇는데 이것도 우리 金剛山 神仙臺 기타에 잇는 「玉女洗頭盆」이란 것과 한가지로 또한 岩石靈視로서 생긴 일일 것임니다. (가나안人의 崇邱에 관하여는 舊約聖書의 民數紀略 22의 41, 列王紀畧上 10의 107, 同 14의 23등과 밋 Karl H.C.Narti博士의 「近東諸地의 宗敎間에 잇는 舊約聖書의 宗敎」第 3章 叅照, 日譯本 잇슴)
계셀의 숭구에 있는 마셰바
이러한 岩石崇拜(Stone-whoship, lithoratry)는 대개 그 형상과 强固, 光輝, 堅牢등 성질의 신비스러움에 基因함이니 옛날의 原始人들은 이것을 究極的의 일로 생각할 양하여 그를 설명할 양으로 그것이 祖先 혹 神으로부터 전래한 것처럼 니야기하고 또 혹 이런 이들의 靈魂의 住所로 생각하기도＜8＞ 하엿슴니다. 또 古今 各地의 보편한 바 岩石에서 사람이나 神이 生出하엿다는 傳說이며 사람이 化하여 岩石이 된다는 전설이며 岩石이 動作을 한다는 傳說 등은 다 岩石에 생명이 잇고 意識이 잇서서 인류와 비스름하다고 생각함에서 나온 일임니다. 암석 - 특히 奇偉한 그것은 이러케 차차 신성한 물건이 되고 또 祭壇이 되고 更進하여는 神을 대표하는 것으로 神의 食物인 犧牲의 血肉을 享受하는 聖物이 되고 점점 轉變하여서는 神 及 神域의 標幟로 여러가지 相用을 가지게 되엇슴니다. 그리하여 다른 自然物과 가티 - 아니 다른 自然物보담 더 만히 神話와 傳說의 출발점이 되고 신앙과 존경의 對象物이 되니 이러한 事情은 總히 巨石文化를 産出하는 우에 큰 動力을 지은 것들임니다.(여긔 관한 허다한 실례와 그 이론은 시 메취 토이氏 「宗敎史槪論」의 日譯本으로 176面 이하를 叅照하시오)

巨石紀念物의 種類
巨石文化의 遺跡으로 시방 흔히 일컨하는 것은 첫째 「선돌」(立石, Menhir), 다음 「고인돌」(支石, 撑石, Dolmen), 또 「돌울이」(環狀石籬, Stone circle), 「石葬」(Tumulus) 4種이니 이것을 合하여 부르는 이름이 「巨石記念物」(Megalithic monumenn)이란 것임니다. Megalith란 말은 考古學上과 人類學上에 요새 와서 흔히 씨우는 것이니 Mega = Megas는 Great을 의미하고 Lith = lithos는 A stone의 義로 合하면 巨大한 岩 又 石(Huge stone)을 의미하는 것임니다. 巨石文化의 遺跡은 대개 세계 각지에 골고로 분포된 모양임니다마는 이미 學者의 藥籠中物이 되어서 가장 잘 硏究되기는 歐羅巴에 잇는 그것이니 시방까지 學者間의 通說로 말하면 대개 信仰關係, 墳墓關係의 것이리라 함임니다. 이것을 尊貴者의 墓所나, 혹 거긔 附隨해 잇던 紀念物이라고 봄임니다.
人類의 葬俗은 언제쯤 어떠케 비롯하엿는지 쉽살히 判斷하기 어려운 일이지마는 遺跡으로써 짐작되는 바에는 舊石器時代(paleolithic age)에는 이미 墳墓를 맨들어 屍體를 감장하엿스며 「라 솨벨」(La Chapelle)에서 발견한 墳墓의 속에는 骨이 머리를 西에 두고 仰臥하여 잇고 그 주위에는 燧石이며 赭土며 破碎된 骨片 등이 잇고 머리마테는 기단뻑다귀가 반듯하게 가로 노히엇는데 그 骨의 一片은 여전히 足骨과 趾骨과 連繫하여 잇서서 그것이 본디 肉이 부튼채 그 위치에 잇던 것임을 알리어주니 이것은 분명히 儀式的 埋葬(Ceremonial Iaterment)으로 死者가 精靈의 세계에서 受用하게 하기 위하여 食物과 器具를 너히 줌이리라 함니다. 「클랏취」博士(Dr, Klaatsch)는 「뢰 무스티어」(Le Mustier) 岩穴의 舊石器時의  埋葬을 연구하여 그것이 儀式가추어 埋葬한 것임을 斷定하니 이러한 儀式的 埋葬이 行하엿슴은 死者에 대한 儀式이 그때에 벌서 생겨잇섯슴을 證示하는 것이며 또 墳墓의 중에서 武器, 食器 등이 나오는 것으로 보면 死者의 靈魂이 精靈의 세계에서 사용하도록 그것을 준비하엿던 것이 짐작됨니다.
「오리낙」 洞窟發見의 骨骼에는 器具와 赭土가 附隨되어 잇고 「크로마년」의 遺骨에는 頸飾과 垂飾이 들어잇슴으로써 그러한 裝飾品이 葬式의 일부분인 것을 짐작케 하며 「오프네」(Ofne)의 墳墓에서는 27개의 頭骨이 동일한 方向으로 落日을 바라보도록 머리를 東으로 두어서 누여잇섯슴니다.＜9＞ 이따위 舊石器時代의 매장의 의미를 짐작함에는 현대의 原始民衆인 「뿌쉬멘」(Bushmen)의 葬式에 비교해 보는 것이 捷徑인데 「뿌쉬멘」의 고장에서는 死者의 몸에 赭土와 脂肪을 발나서 東向으로 埋葬하고 그 겨테 弓失를 놋는 법임니다. 이것으로써 類推하건대 舊石器時代의 人類가 死後의 생활을 미덧슴이 조곰도 의심업는 일임니다. (이 一節은 便宣上, 西村氏「文化人類學」에 據하여 적엇거니와 信仰과 埋葬의 관계에 관하여 詳細한 실례를 알려하면 英國 著名의 土俗學者 「타일러」氏의 名著「原始文化」 第1卷(E.B.Tylor, Primitive Culture)을 참고하시오)

信仰과 葬式과의 關係
사람이 死後에는 他界로 가서 此生을 延長한다는 信仰은 古今을 통하여 모든 原始民의 사이에 대개 行하는 바니 이것이 屍體埋葬의 우에 種種의 儀式을 지어내고 또 土葬(Inhumation), 火葬(Cremation), 空中葬, 樹間葬(Tree Bnrial), 架上葬(Platform Burial or Scaffolding Buriai), 屋中安置, 風葬(AiraloB.), 水葬(Aqnatio B) 등 種種의 方法을 맨들어내고 또 墳墓에도 土塚(Mouud or Barrow), 石塚(Cairn)등 種種의 형식을 난화내게 되엇슴니다.
대개 사람이 죽으면 埋葬하는 風은 舊石器時代, 地質學上의 洪積期로부터 비롯하엿지마는 洪積期의 人類는 이 時期의 中葉으로부터 末期에 걸처서 天作한 石灰岩동굴에 살다가 사람이 죽으면 屍體를 그대로 이 동굴의 안에 감장하던 것인데 舊石器時代가 지내고 新石器時로 들어오면서부터 埋葬의 儀式과 墳墓의 形式이 크게 발달하여 地中에 壙穴을 파고 屍體를 넛는 簡單한 葬法이 생기니 巨石文化는 실로 이것을 端緖로하여 출현한 것임니다. 이 原始的 埋葬法에서는 屍體 감장한 곳을 土塚 혹 石物로 표시하니 前者가 土塚, 後者가 石塚이란 것이오, 石塚의 중에 특히 小石으로 축조된 것을 積石塚(Cairu)이라 하며 조고만 積石塚이 土塚의 중에서 발견되는 일도 각금 잇슴니다. 다시 그 뒤에 墳墓를 石板으로 區劃하는 일이 생기고 이를 보호하기 위하여 그 石上에 1個의 큰 天盖石을 언는 법이 나니 이래서 古代에 널리 行하던 石槨(Cist)이란 典型的 古墳이 맨들어젓는데 이 形式이 더 커저서 「玄室」(Chambers)이라는 死者의 居室과 「羡道」(Entrance Passage)라는 그 入口를 가진 「巨石塚」이 생기기는 그 뒤 얼마 아니 되어서의 일이요, 이것이 점점 精巧와 雄大를 더하여 감도 자연한 勢이엇슴니다. 이러케 훌륭한 墳墓를 築造하게 되기는 다만 死者에 대해서의 존경으로만이 아니라 考古學者의 일반으로 考察하는 바를 據하건대 屍體가 아주 分解하여 人界와 靈界間의 中陰物이 되기까지 墳墓가 한참동안 靈魂의 假寓가 되는 줄로 신념하엿섯기 때문이라 함니다. 썩 오랜 옛적부터 火에는 一種의 淨化力(Purification)이 잇슴을 밋기도 하고 또 人體는 뼈까지라도 말큼 업서저야 靈魂이 비롯오 肉身의 繫縛을 벗고 미래의 세계로 가세 된다는 信念도 잇서서 火葬하는 법도 퍽 일쯕 생기엇는데 이것이 보급함을 딸아서 또 보급된 地方에서는 타고 남은 뼈만을 거두어 두면 그만이게 된 결과로 墳形이 작아저서 巨石墳이 小石棺으로 변한 곳도 만핫슴니다. 시방은 巨石文化만을 이야기함이 目的이니까 墳墓의 變遷을 서술할 까닭이 업거니와 이러케 시작된 巨石文化는 新石器時代의 中頃으로부터 當時民衆의＜10＞ 사이에 유행하기 비롯하여 그다음 靑銅器時代에까지도 이 遺風이 업서지지 아니하엿슴니다. 시방부터 巨石文化의 遺跡의 종류를 난우어 槪說해 보겟슴니다.

「멘힐」(立石, 선돌)
巨石紀念物의 중에 가장 간단한 것은 「멘힐」Menhir이란 것이니 대개 직립한 一石柱(Monolith)로 성립된 것임니다. Men은 Breton語로 Stone, Hir은 Long 혹 High의 意-니 우뚝 섯는 돌이란 의미며 英語로 말하자면 Standing stone 國語에 「선돌」(立石)이라고 부름과 名實이 正히 相符하는 것이며 그 모양이 埃及의 方尖碑와 비스름함으로 Crudeobelisk라고도 부름니다. 「멘힐」은 본디 風化作用이나 其他의 원인으로 저절로 尖直하여진 돌을 가저다가 宗敎上의 標幟로 세운 것이니 墓標로 쓰기도 하고 또 信仰上의 「심볼」을＜11＞ 삼기도 하엿슴니다. 최근에 와서 西洋에도 「멘힐」이 太陽崇拜하고 密接한 관계가 잇슴을 論說하는 學者가 잇스나 아직 的確한 근거를 제출하지 못하여 一假說임에 그치며 「멘힐」 建立의 眞的한 動機에 관하여는 아직 홋츠로 信仰的이니라 하는 밧게 아주 未詳하다 하는 바임니다.
「멘힐」은 歐羅巴의 各地에 잇는데 佛蘭西, 특히 「쁘리타니」(Brittany)에 가장 만하서 「되모르티어」氏의 계산을 좃건대 環狀石籬, 「알라인맨트」까지를 합하여 1,192개에 達한다 함니다. 「쁘리타니」의 「모비안」(Morbihon)地方에는 高 20米突에 達하는 「멘힐」이 잇서서 근처의 人民들이 仙人石 혹 怪人石이라고 부른다 하며 작은 것은 7 내지 11米突의 것으로 각지에 散在하엿다 함니다.(第 2, 3, 4圖 叅照)

여러 형태의 선돌(第二圖)

第三圖, 第四圖

「크로믈렉」과 環狀石籬
「멘힐」이 雙으로 並立하고 그우에 橫石을 언즌 것을 「트라일리톤」(Trilithon)이라 하는데 이것은 極히 稀穻하며 이보담 만히 잇는 것은 「알라인멘트」(Alignment)라 하여 「멘힐」이 거의 동일한 間隔으로써＜12＞ 기단 直線의 약간 平列을 지어서 並立한 그것임니다. 말하고 보면 單一한 石柱를 「멘힐」이라 함에 대하여 作列한 「멘힐」을 「알라인멘트」라고 한다 할 것임니다. (佛語로는 Olignement라고 하는데 이것으로 通用하기도 함니다). 「알라인멘트」에는 一列로 생긴 것, 2列로 늘어선 것, 卵形으로 둘러선 것 또 중앙에 大柱에 세우고 이것을 삥 둘러서 小柱들이 늘어선 것 등 種種이 잇스니 이 各個에 Oval Stone이니 또 Cromlech 즉 Stone Circle이니 하는 名稱이 잇슴니다. Croml-ech는 「켈트」語-니 Kroumm는 彎曲하엿다 함이요. Lech는 石이란 의미인데 飜譯하여 「環狀石籬」라 함니다. 佛國의 「카르낙」(Carnac) 地方에 가장 만코 太平洋群島의 處處에도 잇슴니다. (第 5, 6圖 參照)
第五圖, 第六圖

環狀石籬의 큰 것을 英國에서 Stonehenge라 하니 대개 「멘힐」과 「트라일리톤」 둘이 합하여 된 것이라 할 것인데 立石으로 일운 兩個의 環狀圓周가 겹으로 노히고 그 속에 卵形의 石列이 들어 잇스며 外側의 圓周는 直徑 50米突 以上에 미치는 것도 잇슴니다. 環狀石籬의 가장 유명한 것은 英國 「에베부리」지방에 잇는 것이니 100유여개의 立石環羣으로 成하고 그 가운대 墳墓가 들어 잇슴니다. 環狀石籬의 動機는 死人의 埋葬地인 이외에 일종의 祭壇이엇던가보다 함니다. (第 7, 8圖 參照)
영국의 環狀石籬(第七圖)

영국 에베브리에 있는 環狀石籬(第八圖)
兩個의 立石에 橫石을 언저서 연결한 것이 「알라인멘트」 내지 「크로믈렉」이요 「크로믈렉」이 다수로 연결한 것이 環狀石籬인데 이것들은 一個의 「멘힐」이 단위가 되어서 결합된 간단한 것이지마는 여러 「멘힐」이 복잡하게 一羣을 지은 것에 「똘멘」(Dolmen)이란 것이 잇슴니다.

「똘멘」(支石, 撑石)
「똘멘」(Dolmen)은 考古學上에 Compuond Megalithic Formation이라＜13＞ 하는 것이니 種種의 形相으로 생기엿스나 보통이요 또 가장 간단한 者는 數個 支柱의 우에 一張 盖石을 언즌 것임니다. 어떤 것은 바침돌이 비스듬하여 角錐를 절단한 모양으로 생긴 것도 잇스며 佛國과 愛蘭 등에서 발견하는 「똘멘」의 중에는 盖石을 一張으로 쓰지 아니하고 小石片을 모아서 天井을 만든 것도 간혹 잇슴니다. 盖石의 큰 것에는 60噸 이상의 重量을 가진 것이 잇서서 어떠케 그 位置로 가저갓는지가 의문인데 埃及의 古畵와 기타의 증거로써 轉子 혹은 槓桿을 가지고 운반하엿스리라는 상상은 듬니다. 보통으로 「똘멘」은 그우에 土沙를 더퍼서 封墳形으로 맨든 것이 만흐니 본디 「똘멘」은 封墳形으로 생긴 것이 正式이요 地上에 露出하여 잇는 것은 土沙가 耕作이나 沙汰를 인하여 流失된 것이라고 보는 학자도 잇스되 확정된 말은 아님니다. 또 封墳形＜14＞ 「똘멘」의 중에는 一列의 立石이 둥그러케 그 주위에 들러 잇고 中央部에는 시방 「똘멘」이 업서진 것이 잇는데 간혹 이것을 環狀石籬하고 혼동하기 쉬웁되 이 兩者는 명백히 구별해야 할 것임니다. (第 9, 10, 11, 12, 13圖 參照)
여러형태의 똘맨(第九圖)

프랑스 모르비안에 있는 똘멘(第十圖)

프랑스 카르낙에 있는 똘멘(第十一圖)

뽀르타뉴에 있는 똘멘(第十二圖)

영국 아일레쓰포드에 있는 똘멘(第十三圖)
「똘멘」의 분포는 극히 넓어서 시방 아는 범위만 하여도 「스칸디나비아」반도의 半部로부터 西歐一帶와 「알제리아」, 地中海岸으로 印度에까지 미치고 東洋에서는 朝鮮, 日本에서 다 發見이 되엇고 이밧게 「마다가스칼」, 大洋洲 諸島에도 散在하여 잇스며 만약 「베루」와 「멕시코」의 巨石文化까지를 「똘멘」과 동일한 系統에 예속시킬 것가트면 실로 「똘멘」의 분포는 世界大라고 할 수 잇슴니다.
「똘멘」文化의 이러틋 분포된 것을 보고 어떠한 學者는 遠古에 일종의 移動人種이 잇서 이것을 가지고 「스칸디나비아」로부터 「아프리카」까지 南下하엿다 하고 이것을 「똘멘」民衆(“The people of the dolmens")이라고 이름지엇는데 그 反對로 「아프리카」로부터 北上하여 「스칸디나비아」까지 갓다고 생각할 수 잇슴도 毋論임니다. 그러나 「리이쓰」(Lesds)씨의 연구를 據하건대 「똘멘」의 故鄕은 佛國이라고 함니다. 佛國에서 발견된 「똘멘」은 4,000개가 넘는데 그 중 618개가 「쁘리티니」에 잇슴니다.
「똘멘」에는 平地 혹은 작은 丘陵의 우에 맨들어 논 것이 잇스니 이것은 당시에 사람을 무덧던 墳墓임니다. 그럼으로 이 속에서 여러 가지 器物이며 간혹 人骨이 나오는 일도 잇슴니다.
「똘멘」의 「똘」은 「꼬울」語로 冊床이며 「멘」은 石이니 합하여＜15＞ 石冊床(Stone table)을 의미하는 것이요 무론 그 形相으로서 어든 이름임니다. 「똘멘」은 意匠이 견실하고 제작이 安固하여 「멘힐」이나 「크로믈렉」에 비하면 퍽 進步한 형식이며 巨石文化의 一大 代表物인 것임니다.
「똘멘」의 최초형식은 어느 지방에서던지 自然石을 그대로 이용하엿섯지마는 한참 지난 뒤에는 外壁의 巨石이 작은 돌을 싸하 올리는 것으로 바뀌고 그것이 更進하여서는 「똘멘」 그것의 形體가 첨차로 작아저서 마침내 石棺(Cist)이 되어 갓슴니다. 그러나 이러케 말한다고 어떠한 경우에던지 石棺이 「똘멘」의 진화한 것이라고 함은 아니니 石棺 그것의 기원이 진작부터 잇섯고 「똘멘」과 병행하여 존재한 예도 작지 아니함니다. 이 「똘멘」의 개념이 뒤에 가서 「피라미드」를 誘發한 원인이 된 것도 얼풋이 상상되는 일임니다.

「투물루쓰」(石葬)
투물루쓰의 형태(第十四圖)

이 밧게 또 「투물루쓰」(Tumulus)라고 하는 일종이 잇스니 구조를 복잡하게 한 「똘멘」으로 볼 것임니다. 考古學上에는 佛語를 써서 Alee couverte라고 이르니 A monnd of earb over a grave의 意로 A barrow 곳 흙으로 더픈 노픈 큰 무덤이요 朝鮮에서 「고려총」, 「석장」, 「한이무덤」 등으로 부르고 日本서 「高塚」라고 일컷는 古墳들임니다. 朝鮮과 日本의 古墳을 人類學上으로 말하면 端的히 이 Tumulus란 것임니다. (이것을 英語로는 흔히 Sepulchral mound라고 이름니다.) 이 「투물루쓰」에는 漸異한 幅과 高를 가진 通路가 딸려잇서 그리로 딸아 들어가면 一 혹 數三의 別 區劃을 만든 것이 잇는데 이 通路를 羡道Corridor라 하고 그 속의 區劃을 玄室Chambers이라고 하니 玄室은 곳 屍體를 두는 곳임니다.＜16＞
이 古墳의 주위는 一張 石壁식으로 둘러막기도 하고 뭉우리들을 싸하올리어 石墻을 싸키도 하엿스며 羡道와 玄室의 사이에는 石門이 잇서 사이를 막고 입구에도 따로 石門이 잇서 아플 꽉 막앗스며 天井에는 數張의 平石을 언저서 집웅을 삼는 것으로 그 구조가 꽤 복잡하게 생기엇슴니다. 이러한 石造物을 우로서 흙을 더 퍼서 한 墳墓를 짓는데 그 構造와 외형에 여러가지 종류가 잇슴니다.

巨石墳墓와 信仰關係
巨石墳墓의 평면도 및 측면도(第十五圖)

이 우에 말슴한 「멘힐」(立石), 「크로믈렉」(石門), 「똘멘」(撑石), 「투물루쓰」(石葬)등을 總稱하여 「巨石紀念物」(혹 石建造物)이라 이르고 이따위를 만히 造作하던 時節을 「巨石文化時代」라고 일켓슴니다. 당시의 民衆이 큰 힘을 드리어서 이러케 큰 돌을 달운 것이 무슨 까닭이냐 하면 대개 宗敎上의 소용과 墳墓로의 소용이었슴니다. 靈魂과 他界의 觀念에 생기어서 靈魂을 편히 쉬게 하고 또 영원히 彼界로 安穩히 가도록 하자하매 그 寓所와 通路인 墳墓를 잘 치장하게 된 것이며 死後에도 아모쪼록 窮乏이 업게 하기 위하여는 生前에 愛用하던 물건과 심하면 妻妾, 奴隷까지와 또 인생에 必需되는 여러 物品을 그 속에 너허 두엇슴니다.
또 墳墓를 堅固하게 築造함에는 死者의 魂靈을 그 속에 密閉하여 다시 外間으로 나오지 못하게 하자는 뜻도 잇슴니다.＜17＞ 東方의 여러나라에는 佛敎 流入되기 전까지 火葬하는 풍습이 업섯지마는 歐羅巴에서는 新石器時代로부터 自發的으로 왕왕 火葬을 행하니 그 이유는 上文에 말한 것과 가트며 歐羅巴의 古墳 중에서 火葬으로 무든 것이 각금 나옵니다.
여긔 한가지 주의시키어 둘 것은 巨石의 墳墓는 본디 그 石造物을 地上에 노코 그 우로서 흙을 더퍼씌운 것이지 결코 땅을 파는 것 아님임니다. 이것은 그때 石器時代의 民衆이 구덩이를 파기가 不可能함에 말미암음이니 굿을 파지 안코 地上에 돌을 노코 空間을 만들고 그 속에 死者를 두는 것이매 一種의 空葬이라고 할 수도 잇슴니다.

建造의 年代와 目的
巨石建造物의 제작된 연대는 대개 신석기시대로부터 銅器 及 靑銅器時代의 초기에 걸치리라고 생각하지마는 精確한 연대는 그 목적과 한가지 오랜동안 명백해지지 아니하던 것임니다. 최근에 와서야 그것이 당시 유력한 君長의 墓所나 혹 「뜨루이드」敎(Drnidism)의 禮拜보던 廟所리라는 생각을 하게 되엇슴니다. (「뜨루이드」란 것은 「깔리아 (Gallia = Gaul) 及 英吉利 古代 住民의 사이에서 생긴 一種의 宗敎的 團體-니 학자, 僧侶, 法官, 詩人, 預言者 등 비교적 上流人士만으로 集合되엇고 그 敎義에 세계는 死의 神의 지은 바로 마침내는 水火에 壤滅될 것을 말하고 그러면서도 靈魂不滅과 輸迴轉生을 밋고 또 占星術, 地理學, 物理學, 醫學의 硏究에도 致力을 하던 것임니다. 「쁘리텐」Britain이 그 敎本部의 所在地이지마는 每年 一次의 總會는 「깔리아」의 「카누티」 Carnuti에서 設行하엿슴니다). (第16圖 叅照)
영국 스노트웨이에 있는 뜨루이드敎의 거석유물(第十六圖)
巨石建造物의 性質이 未詳할 적에는 여러 가지 民間說話가 이 주위에 다니엇스니 「펜리쓰」의 環狀石籬는 「아더」王의 圓卓이라고 일컷고 「빠크솨야」의 冊床石은 「웰랜드 스미드」의 石門이라고 일컨되고 「오크니」(Oakney)의 立石은 「오듼」石이란 이름을 어덧슴니다.
「아버 로우」(Arbor Low)의 環狀石籬가 硏究된 결과로 그 建造된 時代가 新石器時代인 줄을 알게 되고 「꼬울랜드」＜18＞博士(D. Gowland)의 審究를 인하여 環狀石籬 建造의 목적이 太陽을 예배하기 위함인 줄이 밝히어젓스며 다시 「써 노맨 로키여」는 「프라이여」의 발굼치라고 부르는 「멘힐」을 硏究하여 기원전 168년의 夏至節에 그 「멘힐」의 頂上에 太陽이 떳섯스리라는 증거를 세우니 「로키여」의 연구는 巨石 建造物의 年代와 목적을 한꺼번에 증명하려한 것이엇슴니다. 여긔 대하며 反對說도 잇지오마는 「멘힐」의 向이 흔히 北東임은 太陽의 현상을 관찰한 것이엇슴을 暗示함니다.

太陽巨石 複合文化說
「똘멘」 其他 巨石遺物의 世界大的 분포를 단일한 기원으로 돌리어 보내서 어느 중심적 지역으로부터 점차 각지로 傳播한 것이라 하는 學說은 학자들이 왕왕이 提唱하는 바인데 최근의 그 代表者되는 이는 「스미드」敎授(Prof G. Elliot Smith)임니다. 교수는 1912년頃으로부터 「똘멘」의 埃及淵源說을 唱道하되 기원전 4000년 至 기원전 900년의 동안에 埃及에서 점차로 발달한 「太陽巨石複合文化」(Heliolithic culture-cmplex = 太陽崇拜와 巨石紀念物建造를 중심으로 하는 복잡한 文化)가 기원전 800년의 조곰 압서서부터 財利를 구하여 埃及으로부터 東方으로 출발한 「풰니키아」人이 地中海, 紅海, 波斯灣, 印度海 等地로 漂洎하는 동안에 그때 埃及에서 발명작용하던 巨石의 槓桿擧 上術(Lever)과 여긔 附隨한 허다한 문화를 受入하여서 一方으로 東西亞弗利加로 들어가고 一邊을 亞細亞의 海岸으로 沿하여 印度로서 支那, 朝鮮, 日本을 太平洋諸島로 들어가고 다시 나아가서 亞米利加로 들어가게 된 것이라 하며 此外에 「도데미슴」(Totemism), 産室男忌(Coward), 「멈미」製作, 卍字文(Swastika), 蛇體崇拜(Serpentworship), 文身, 大洪水傳說 등의 분포까지도 太陽巨石文化라 하는 埃及 一元說으로 돌리어 보내서 「똘멘」과 한가지로 埃及으로부터 各處에 傳播되엇다 함임니다. 스미드 敎授의 所說에는 傾聽할 부분도 잇지마는 의문도 작지 아니하여 아직 一說로 잇슬 따름이며 일반의 학자들은 아직까지 「똘멘」에 대하여 지방마다 小中心地가 잇서 그것이 隣族에게 傳及한 것으로 認하는 편이 만슴니다.
(인저부터 朝鮮에 잇는 巨石文化의 遺蹟을 말슴하겟는데 시방까지 이야기한 것을 좀더 자세서 알려하시면 便宣上 Encyclopeadia Britanica 11枚 第26冊의 Stone monument, Stonehenge 兩條를 參照할 것이며 거긔는 중요한 參考書의 指示도 잇스메 더 기피 알아볼 방법도 알 것임니다. 日本文에는 여긔 관한 專書가 著譯間에 업슴니다마는 島居氏의 「인류학よリ見たる我ガよ代の文化」중에와 「人類學雜誌」, 「民族」, 「自然科學」, 「東洋文庫歐文論叢」 등의 同씨 論文 중에 유익한 자료가 잇스며 八木氏의 「人類學」, 西田氏의 「人類學槪論」, 西村氏의 「文化人類學」 及 「國民の日本史大和時代」 등에 각각 若干의 서술이 잇스며 「딴버스」氏의 原著를 譯한 佐藤傳繭氏의 「考古原人究話」 제 8장에 「윌트口야」의 「아베브리」의 石籬와 기타에 관한 서술이 잇스니 참조하시오). ＜19＞
＜6-19＞