Magazine Title	동광 제9호
Publication Date	1927년 01월 01일
Article Title	南忠緖(上篇) (Nam Ch'ung-sŏ - Part 1)
Author	염상섭 (Yŏm Sang-sŏp)
Article Type	소설 (Novel)

南忠緖 (Nam Ch'ung-sŏ)
						염상섭 (Yŏm Sang-sŏp)

Across the brazier, Mijasŏ (美佐緖), seated opposite, paid no mind to her son's earnest words, merely puffing relentlessly on her cigarette.

"...Anyway, given the circumstances, please come back home today. Please, do that."

Ch'ung-sŏ finished speaking and looked up at his mother's face, but Mijasŏ remained silent as ever. (Their conversation, of course, was in Japanese.) Ch'ung-sŏ had no choice but to light a cigarette himself and sit with his mouth shut for a moment.

"In other words, you're asking me to move in to please my daughter-in-law, seeing how she's behaving."

Finally opening her mouth, Mijasŏ tossed her cigarette pipe onto the tatami mat with a thud, glaring at her son with narrowed eyes.

"Mother, isn't that going too far? Setting aside my wife's efforts, her family (妻家) is incredibly worried. They send people almost daily just to gauge the situation, which is quite unpleasant. Since the daughter-in-law moved in, rumors are flying that she kicked out her mother-in-law, or that the mother-in-law was chased out. Firstly, doesn't that look bad for our family's reputation? Of course, one could say it doesn't matter what others say as long as we live our own lives securely, but it makes the household look wretched, and Father seems increasingly unable to settle his mind either..."

Ch'ung-sŏ spoke calmly, trying as much as possible not to provoke his mother's temper. However, Mijasŏ once again shut her mouth, poured fresh tea into her own cup, and sipped it alone.

"So, what are you planning to do? Are you really going to leave for America?" she asked sharply.

"Well – I haven't decided for sure yet, but I came rushing here today intending to discuss it with you and decide..."

"With me? What is there to discuss with me all of a sudden? Hmph!"

Mijasŏ cut off her son's words as if startled by something, scoffed, and then continued,

"...I'm not in a position worthy enough to interfere in your father's or your affairs, but anyway, going somewhere for a honeymoon trip wouldn't hurt, I suppose!"

As Mijasŏ spoke, two blue veins popped out on her lightly powdered, small forehead, and she scoffed again. Ch'ung-sŏ frowned, feeling a surge of displeasure, but kept quiet.

Even when she was at home, it wasn't a recent habit for her to fret alone <63> from morning till night for no reason, tormenting everyone. Although it was his own mother, when Ch'ung-sŏ's temper flared, he would sometimes say harsh things to her face, like, "That's one of the final amusements of the declining 'bourgeoisie' (뿔조아-지)." Since they started living separately due to the marriage issue, Mijasŏ's habit had worsened considerably, and whenever she saw Ch'ung-sŏ, she would spew biting, unpleasant words.

"Please stop making such sarcastic remarks without knowing how I feel... So, what do you think would be best, Mother? I can't stay cooped up at home, but if you tell me not to leave either – what on earth do you want me to do?"

Ch'ung-sŏ, seemingly lost in thought for a moment, burst out as if his pent-up anger had finally erupted.

"Who pushed you out, telling you to leave the house? I don't know about your father, but..."

Mijasŏ's lips trembled as she glared fiercely back at her son.

"But if I stay, the house will never be peaceful, day or night, and things will remain like this."

"So you're saying because of me, you two will leave, and in return, I should move back into the house?"

Mijasŏ raised her voice as if wanting to fight, leaning closer.

"Mother, you're reading too much into it."

"Who's reading too much into it! You might think I'm lingering here like this, waiting to move back in after driving you out, but the one who sees you as a thorn in the side isn't me, it's your father. You always side with your father, getting angry on his behalf, but your father... you... It's truly absurd!"

Mijasŏ sighed, cutting off her words as she was about to start criticizing her husband.

"Father's side or Mother's side, I've never even dreamt of such things, so it doesn't matter to me. But even if I were to leave, it's definitely not because I'm afraid of someone or feel like a thorn in someone's side and am being chased out... Anyway, if I just slip away by myself, I don't care what happens afterward, but still – I don't know if it's an unnecessary worry, but Mother's situation weighs on my mind... That's why I'm doing this."

"Who brought up this sudden talk of Tokyo or America in the first place?" Mijasŏ asked after a moment's thought, then continued.

"...Surely Father didn't suggest it first? After going to the trouble of calling a student home, saying he needed help with family affairs, even getting him married, and now that his temper has cooled, he wouldn't have the face to ask you to leave, even in front of his own child, right?... So, it must have been the orders of that young lady, or madam, named Chŏng (貞)-something?" <64>

Chŏng-something, of course, referred to Ch'ung-sŏ's wife, Chŏng-hŭi (貞姬). To Mijasŏ, she was, after all, the precious daughter-in-law of her one and only son, whom she had borne herself, a newlywed not even two months into her marriage. Yet, the only time they had met was on the wedding day when she received a single bow, without the customary p'yebaek ceremony. Afterward, when the so-called mother-in-law visits were supposed to happen, Mijasŏ had vehemently refused, preventing her from coming. Whether she couldn't remember the daughter-in-law's name or did it intentionally, she never called her Chŏng-hŭi properly, habitually referring to her mockingly as "that young lady named Chŏng-something." Even though one was a woman she disliked and the other was the mother who gave birth to him, Ch'ung-sŏ found it unpleasant. However, according to Mijasŏ, the name Chŏng-hŭi was quite difficult and awkward to pronounce in Japanese, and she couldn't get used to it.

"The talk about America was my idea. Actually, Father first brought up the idea of taking Chŏng-hŭi to Tokyo for sightseeing, but I suggested that while we're at it, we could go to America for two or three years. He said that sounded good too but suggested we think about it more, so I've been planning and preparing on my own, it seems..."

"See! What did I tell you?!..."

Mijasŏ's eyes widened, a cold smile playing on her lips as if her suspicions were confirmed, yet she couldn't hide the fury welling up inside her.

"Wasn't I right?! To marry that wench, he must have felt ashamed and embarrassed even in that state, so he had no choice but to drive you out, coaxing you to go to Tokyo, didn't he? To hold some sort of ceremony secretly in the meantime... And you, oblivious, suggested going all the way to America? That must have been exactly what he wished for, though he couldn't ask directly! He must be thrilled! What kind of man is your father to spend hundreds of won a month sending you and your wife to America? You clueless child! You're not a toddler anymore, try thinking things through! He'll hastily give you some travel money to chase you out, and once he's infatuated and shacked up with that wench, do you think he'll diligently send your tuition? If you want to starve to death, go wherever you please, America or anywhere else!..."

"Please stop that useless talk. Whether I starve to death or not, I have my own thoughts!"

Ch'ung-sŏ frowned, trying to cut off Mijasŏ's words, but Mijasŏ turned even paler and continued sharply.

"...Useless talk? I'll bet my hand on it! I've danced to your father's tune until now, but if you leave now, do you think you'll ever set foot in the Nam (南哥) house again! Do you think you'll ever touch a single penny! From the moment he insisted on breaking off the engagement with P'alchungja (八重子) and rushed into this marriage, I saw right through your father's intentions as if looking through glass."

"What's the point of bringing that up again? I don't want money, I don't want anything... When did I ever linger, hoping for the inheritance?..."

Ch'ung-sŏ uttered this single phrase placidly, trying to prevent his mother from bringing up the inheritance issue again, a topic he had heard until his ears hurt. Mijasŏ was speechless, struck dumb. <65>

She couldn't stand her son's attitude. Whether thinking of Ch'ung-sŏ himself or reflecting on her own precarious situation, adrift like something floating in the air, she wished Ch'ung-sŏ would pull himself together and tackle everything head-on, but he seemed to have no such thoughts, wandering around talking about going to America or giving up the inheritance rights. His mentality was utterly incomprehensible. To Mijasŏ, her son seemed like a kind of mentally disturbed person, even if not actually feeble-minded, or perhaps he was caught in his father's manipulations, unknowingly rejecting her.

However, Ch'ung-sŏ, for his part, was not unaware of his mother's difficult situation or her state of mind, stemming from her lack of direction. He understood well that it wasn't simply the lonely psychology of someone entering old age (老境) or the kind of "hysteria" commonly seen in such women. Considering his own upbringing, caught in a strange crevice, neither Korean nor Japanese, and his current peculiar circumstances, both domestically and socially, even now as an adult; considering his current psychological state, where the older he got and having married, the more he became a complete individual, yet somehow felt increasingly anxious and restless, unable to firmly plant his life's roots and face life with a composed attitude—he could readily transpose this onto his mother's situation and couldn't help but view her with sympathy. However, when he heard her endlessly harboring resentment about his marriage, persistently disapproving of him and his wife, uttering words that grated on one's nerves at every turn, and even pouring out complaints and dissatisfaction about his father in front of him, his pity vanished, leaving only a throbbing headache.

"Never mind not inheriting, who even asked you to! You caused all this trouble yourself, and now that you can't even stay in the house, you very gallantly talk about not inheriting or going to America. But who knows what will happen to you or me, what tomorrow will bring?... You too will regret not listening to my words one day."

"What difference does it make if I regret it or not? Are you telling me to annul a marriage that's already done? It's not like I did it because I wanted to, nor am I so crazy about a woman that I don't give a damn what happens to my mother, so please, just stop. Since I'll be fine just slipping away by myself, what else can I say but do as you please with what comes after?"

Ch'ung-sŏ was getting increasingly agitated.

"What do you mean, do as I please? Now you can't even handle your own wife, and you intend to burden someone else? Why did you bring her here in the first place then..."

Mijasŏ lowered her voice again and began the same old lament he heard day in and day out.

"Others – never mind others, even you might think I'm trying to pick on my daughter-in-law, but what's a daughter-in-law anyway? Whether it's Chŏng-hŭi or P'alchungja, as long as she pleases you, that's all that matters. If she doesn't suit your taste, are you worried there aren't plenty of other women to be your daughter-in-law? But hasn't the family situation completely changed since that girl arrived? Who knows what schemes she's plotting with him? Setting that aside, if only we had brought P'alchungja, you weren't entirely unfamiliar <66> with her, wouldn't that have been better? If only she had come, why would the family register (民籍) issue have arisen, and why would the inheritance issue be popping up anew now?!!! When I think about that, I feel resentful even in my sleep!"

"Stop it. That's enough, I understand. P'alchungja is P'alchungja, and the family register issue is the family register issue. It's not as if these problems suddenly arose just because Chŏng-hŭi came instead of P'alchungja. And this talk of family registers and inheritance is just Mother needlessly worrying. Has anyone ever mentioned the family register or inheritance until now?"

"So you're saying I'm stirring up trouble out of nowhere?"

"No, that's not it, but anyway, in place of P'alchungja not marrying you, I will ensure that you, Mother, alone have everything arranged to your satisfaction." Ch'ung-sŏ seemed to smile coldly.

"I don't want to hear it. You're always sitting there glibly spouting such thoughtless words."

Mijasŏ became even more enraged at her son's seeming smile.

The girl named P'alchungja, whose loss Mijasŏ lamented so bitterly, was a girl from Tokyo related to Mijasŏ's original family. As Mijasŏ originally had no close family ties, P'alchungja was perhaps a distant relative, like a cousin eight times removed. But just as Mijasŏ, despite her past as a kisaeng, did not come from lowly common stock, P'alchungja too seemed to have received a decent education. However, Mijasŏ had various plans in mind when she went through the trouble of connecting the lines to bring her over. After taking someone else's child and making him her own, it might be human nature to want to bring in someone from the same nation, with whom she could discuss even simple things like clothes or stew, rather than a Korean woman. But Mijasŏ's ambition wasn't merely focused on the simple harmony of the household. When, after the first wife died and the funeral ended, she fought tooth and nail with her husband to take over the main house, it wasn't just out of rivalry with other Korean mistresses but also from a desire to secure her and her children's position and future more firmly. Considering she had borne him two grown children and had spent some twenty years in the Nam family household, she should have had free rein. Although she wasn't registered on the family register (民籍) under her own name, since Ch'ung-sŏ, born from her own womb, was clearly the eldest son of the Nam family, there was no reason for her request to be denied solely because she was a former kisaeng and Japanese. However, Ch'ung-sŏ had already guessed that it would be impossible for someone who had prettily adorned herself in "marumage" and "haori" (上衣) and indulged in hot spring (溫泉) treatments between Japan and Korea to suddenly enter and manage the vast household affairs of a purely Korean style – moreover, one belonging to perhaps the third wealthiest family in Seoul – no matter how immersed she had been in Korean customs for twenty years. But since his father seemed resigned due to propriety, Ch'ung-sŏ couldn't say anything from the side. Ch'ung-sŏ, having grown up Korean-style under his late stepmother (the first wife), thought his mother's desire wasn't unreasonable but worried about various things. Anyway, having thus taken possession of the main house's inner room (anpang), Mijasŏ first <67> broached the daughter-in-law issue seriously. Nam Sang-ch'ŏl (南相哲), for his part, had intended to find a Korean daughter-in-law if his first wife had lived. Even without that, feeling pity for Ch'ung-sŏ being considered an illegitimate son (庶子) by others, he had almost arranged a marriage over ten years ago with Chŏng-hŭi, the daughter of Yi P'ansŏ, a recognizable name among the Old Doctrine (老論) faction. However, the engagement fell through vaguely due to someone spreading rumors of adultery, with the remark, "even if he is legally registered as such..." Because of this situation, Sang-ch'ŏl still wished to choose a daughter-in-law from a respectable Korean family after taking a formal second wife. But having reluctantly installed Mijasŏ, he came to think it might be better to simply let Mijasŏ have her way, bring in the Japanese girl, entrust things to her, and set up his own separate establishment to look after Ch'ung-hŭi and his sibling. For Sang-ch'ŏl, maintaining both Korean and Japanese style households was practically unavoidable due to circumstances, and also necessary for his tastes and social interactions. However, the thought that the eldest grandson of the Nam family was born of a Japanese woman and would also marry a Japanese woman, thus permanently diluting the Nam family bloodline, not just in terms of ancestral rites, made even Sang-ch'ŏl, a staunch pro-Japanese figure, feel uneasy. Therefore, Sang-ch'ŏl eventually decided that, depending on future circumstances, while nominally and outwardly designating Ch'ung-sŏ and his mother as the main household, he would ultimately pass the lineage to Ch'ung-hŭi, centering things around Ch'ung-hŭi and his sibling. With this resolve, he had consented to Mijasŏ's request to bring P'alchungja. Thus, Mijasŏ had gone to Tokyo the previous early spring. When Mijasŏ secured this promise from her husband, she felt as if a heavy burden she had carried on her shoulders for over ten years had instantly been lifted, and she danced for joy alone. However, upon returning after securing consent from the other party in Tokyo and even arranging for her son, then taking his graduation exams, to meet P'alchungja, she found the situation unexpectedly transformed. She had previously considered the children left by the first wife, Ch'ung-hŭi and his sibling, as her most formidable rivals. But barely a month later, she found a young, modern woman shadowing them like a ghost. This was Ch'ung-hŭi's maternal aunt, who had stayed at the house for a full year during the mother's illness, serving as a tutor for the young daughter and caregiver for the sick woman. Mijasŏ knew her well; she was someone who had stopped coming completely after Mijasŏ took over the inner room following Ch'ung-hŭi's mother's death, but she seemed to have started visiting again during Mijasŏ's absence. She occupied the room across the courtyard with Ch'ung-hŭi's younger sister, having chased Mijasŏ's own daughter, Hyoja, into the inner room. According to her husband, she had been called back because there was no one to look after the children while Mijasŏ was away. However, her daughter seemed very unhappy, though she didn't say anything specific, and her husband's attitude and tone towards the woman were overly familiar, making things look suspicious. A few days later, the woman in question vanished again like a shadow. Then, her husband began persuading Mijasŏ to break off the engagement with P'alchungja and explained the circumstances that led to bringing in Chŏng-hŭi, arguing it was better for Ch'ung-sŏ's future. In essence, his reasoning was that for Ch'ung-sŏ to act as the Nam family's eldest grandson, he needed a Korean daughter-in-law; only then could the inheritance be fully passed on; and unless he married into a prestigious family like Chŏng-hŭi's <68>, others wouldn't recognize him as the legitimate heir, which would be greatly advantageous for his social standing. While Mijasŏ thought the reasoning sounded plausible, she suspected that Ch'ung-hŭi's aunt had been involved in some conspiracy during that time and that her husband's sudden change of heart was also due to that woman. So, while outwardly protesting, she subtly tried to bargain, demanding to be registered as the legal wife on the family register (民籍) as a condition. However, he evaded the issue, showing no sign of granting her request.

"After nearly thirty years together, how can you distrust me so much! We can sort things out gradually later, but besides, your moving in here has already caused much discontent. If the family register issue comes up again, they'll start demanding the house be enlarged or the property divided. Let's settle this marriage issue first, keeping that other matter separate."

This was the husband's primary excuse. "They'll start demanding" referred to the old mistress and the young kisaeng mistress and student mistress he kept in separate establishments. Mijasŏ thought it sounded plausible, but thinking of Ch'ung-hŭi's aunt and the Ch'ung-hŭi siblings, she couldn't feel at ease. Ever since moving into this house, she felt like she had suddenly jumped into a Korean neighborhood only to become a laughingstock, her nerves fraying daily. Though she could speak Korean well enough not to embarrass herself, the three members of the inner room household – herself, her daughter, and one personal maid – became targets. Whenever the kitchen staff or others gathered in room corners, they would whisper and giggle:

"That Waemama (倭媽媽, Japanese madam) or Hongyŏk (紅疫, measles - derogatory term for Japanese?) did something earlier... and that girl is just like a kitten, always watching cautiously..."

Hearing this whispering and giggling made her shrink. Anything the Waemama or the Waemama's daughter did, no matter how irrelevant, became fodder for ridicule among the servants, met with giggles and laughter. The more they laughed, the angrier the madam and her daughter became, nagging the household staff incessantly. The more they nagged, the more the backbiting increased daily. Mijasŏ's personal maid, moreover, spoke haltingly, becoming a prime target for teasing, either sitting huddled in a corner or trying to spy on household affairs to show loyalty to her mistress. But though not deaf, her inability to understand made her useless. Her husband chided her, asking how she could distrust him after nearly thirty years together, but even his actions seemed to side with "those people." Since he had three mistresses' houses, even when living at the Namsan-jŏng house, he only came to sleep once or twice a month. But after moving into this main house, it became a habit for him to leave immediately after dinner, saying he was busy. She wished she could fire all the servants, seamstresses, and everyone else and replace them, which would be refreshing and allow her to command freely, but fearing that the "new madam's" tyranny would further provoke popular resentment (民怨), she could only simmer inwardly. Her only outlet was venting her frustration in letters, nearly a foot long each, sent almost daily to her son, who was engrossed in his graduation exams in Tokyo. A letter Ch'ung-sŏ once received from Mijasŏ contained these words:

"As you know, the reason I confidently moved into this house, knowing full well my inability to manage a Korean-style household and its incompatibility with hygiene and my tastes, was solely <69> for the sake of you siblings, whom I cherish more than my own life, and the desire to enjoy the happiness of a harmonious family in my old age—this needs no repetition. That is why we initially agreed to bring P'alchungja. Yet, Father suddenly opposes it, and this household, from Ch'ung-sŏ's aunt down to the lowest servants, treats us two like enemies, mocking and ridiculing us. Who could have known that my final chapter, after thirty years of hardship in a foreign land, would turn out like this?... If you hear that my daughter and I are nowadays so fearful and suspicious at every meal that we cannot eat with peace of mind, resorting to secretly going up to Chin'gogae to buy food, you will grasp the current state of this household and understand how pitifully wretched our situation is, caught in the middle. If, amidst this, you reject P'alchungja and bring in the daughter of the Yi family, who are part of the group trying to eliminate us now, then I shall consider my life's purpose fulfilled and resign myself beforehand..."

Receiving such letters, although he suspected it was due to his mother's hypersensitivity, Ch'ung-sŏ couldn't help but shed tears thinking about the plight of his mother, sister, and himself. Amidst the bustle of exams, he pondered deeply for several days and finally sent a firm letter to his father: First, he opposed the marriage plans entirely, agreeing with neither side. Second, he declared his resolve to renounce his inheritance rights and become free; if he didn't embark on a wandering life after graduation, he would continue his studies. Third, although his mother and sister Hyoja held prejudiced views, he asked his father to take responsible care of them so they could live comfortably for the rest of their lives. Making such requests between father and son was unusual, but Ch'ung-sŏ vehemently criticized his father's attitude, eventually even cutting out and enclosing the passage from Mijasŏ's letter about not being able to eat peacefully.

Upon receiving this letter, Nam Sang-ch'ŏl threw a fit, jumping up and down. He alternately scolded and comforted Mijasŏ, berated and appeased the household staff, turning the house upside down. Although his true intentions were unclear, Mijasŏ realized she had misspoken, at least to her son. However, the rift between husband and wife widened further, leaving Mijasŏ's position precarious. Yet, she was not the kind of woman to give up the inner room and leave voluntarily over such a matter. On the contrary, after the turmoil, she ate her meals with peace of mind and asserted her authority as the mistress even more forcefully, striving to dominate everyone.

Meanwhile, Ch'ung-sŏ finished his graduation exams but stubbornly refused to return home. However, his father issued a strict order to return, saying he needed to hand over the household management to settle matters, and Mijasŏ, for her part, created a scene, claiming she would die if he didn't come back. So, he returned, only to find the household in chaos. He knew he definitely couldn't take over the household management, but realized that to regain people's trust and maintain appearances with relatives and the household, the only immediate solution was to have his mother temporarily move back out to the Namsan-jŏng house. A verbal agreement was made between the father, son, and Mijasŏ: in the future, if Ch'ung-sŏ married, whether it be a Japanese girl other than P'alchungja or a Korean woman Mijasŏ deemed suitable <70>, Mijasŏ would then be registered on the family register, giving her the legal status as the mother of Ch'ung-sŏ and his sister. Thus, Mijasŏ, though embarrassed, had temporarily moved out, "driven away" to this Namsan-jŏng house.

However, this provisional arrangement, arising by chance, was actually fortunate for Sang-ch'ŏl. Sang-ch'ŏl's plan was nothing more than to bring in Ch'ung-hŭi's aunt, whom he had vaguely considered after his wife's death, have her look after the Ch'ung-hŭi siblings, and relieve himself of worry. Now, after this development, his intention was to marry Ch'ung-sŏ off first and then proceed slowly with his original plan. On the other hand, Ch'ung-sŏ thought that not only was his father insisting, but if he didn't get married, his father, under the pretext of settling household affairs, would likely marry Ch'ung-hŭi's aunt. If that happened, his own mother would surely not remain quiet, and the barely subsided turmoil would erupt again. Therefore, he reasoned that if he got married, the household would be stabilized for the time being. Without informing Mijasŏ, he agreed to his father's proposal to marry Chŏng-hŭi. Of course, at this time, Ch'ung-sŏ paid no attention to his father's talk about needing to perform ancestral rites to inherit, or marrying a daughter from a prestigious family to overcome the social stigma of being an illegitimate son by leveraging his wife's family background. Only one thing quickly swayed Ch'ung-sŏ's decision: Chŏng-hŭi's appearance. He had seen her photograph, attended her school's alumni event (謝恩會) with his younger half-sister (Ch'ung-hŭi's sister), who was a junior at the same school, and her picture being prominently featured in the newspaper's introduction of spring graduates was also a contributing factor.

However, when Mijasŏ later learned that things had been decided this way, she felt as if the sky had fallen and the earth had caved in. She started fussing, convinced that the plan was now to isolate her and her daughter as if in prison (監獄?) and starve them to death. More than anyone, she cursed Ch'ung-sŏ for betraying his promise and his own mother, calling him horrid names. Yet, she also tried hard to change Ch'ung-sŏ's mind. She even spread rumors that he had already had relations with P'alchungja while in Tokyo and that P'alchungja was pregnant. But his father merely scoffed. This only widened the gap between husband and wife, and mother and son. Consequently, his father's attitude towards Ch'ung-sŏ, whom he had trusted so much, seemed to grow increasingly cold. This might have been because Ch'ung-hŭi's aunt was behind his father, influencing him, and the growing Ch'ung-hŭi siblings were in front, but Ch'ung-sŏ felt his barely settled position becoming unstable again. However, he was not unaware that he shouldn't neglect the protection of his mother and sister. It was just that, having an artistic temperament, while studying economics following his father's wish for him to advance in the business world (實業界), he had become particularly interested in social issues. Consequently, he was currently agonizing through an ideological turning point (轉向期), and because he viewed his own strange fate and his position as a child of the "bourgeoisie" with extremely sharp criticism, his father was incomprehensible and irrelevant from the start. As for Mijasŏ, her insistence that it was fine even if her son didn't inherit, that he should just ensure the family lived peacefully, and her constant siding with his father were incomprehensible and hateful to him. Yet, amidst this, Ch'ung-sŏ resolutely married Chŏng-hŭi. Ch'ung-sŏ himself, though he had his biological parents (親父母) above and four siblings (同긔), albeit half-siblings, below, <71> felt he had no one to offer a warm word. Having struggled through four or five years of living away from home, he longed for a partner of the opposite sex to soothe his roughened heart. The wedding ceremony (結婚式) was held quite grandly at Chŏng-hŭi's graduating school, as Ch'ung-sŏ rejected Christianity, but Mijasŏ and Hyoja never showed up, not even their shadows. Hyoja, with her childish heart, had wanted to come just to watch, but Mijasŏ reportedly locked the wardrobe and wouldn't let her out.

Mother and son sat listlessly for a while, each lost in their own thoughts.

'...Of course, it's not a fundamental solution. But then again, is there really a fundamental solution? However, if my marriage ultimately ended up being just something Father used (利用)... No, whether it was used or not, having Mother move back in as soon as possible is the safest option. Of course, it might not be a fundamental solution, but still, if he insists on getting married, I should at least make him divide the property and leave!... What next? - How would I know?... Perhaps it would have been better not to marry in the first place and just start a wandering life... Making things complicated for no reason...'

Ch'ung-sŏ sat thinking these thoughts to himself. His opposition to the marriage with Ch'ung-hŭi's aunt was for his mother's sake. He thought it was a way to console her for the unpleasantness caused by his own marriage.

"No matter what, if even you run away, what will happen to me and my daughter!"

Mijasŏ, whatever she had been thinking, suddenly spoke listlessly, in a completely different tone than before. It sounded pitiful even to Ch'ung-sŏ's ears.

"But even if I stay here, in my current position, there's nothing I can do, is there? Please try to consider my situation too."

Ch'ung-sŏ added a word, his voice sounding almost pleading.

"If only you would consider my situation, wouldn't I be able to pull myself together and find some way forward! If only you would stand firm and take charge of the household, what worries would there be?... But ah – now I've given up on everything. I never dreamt of relying on you anyway..."

Mijasŏ sighed and lowered her head.

"So, please just consider me gone from the start and carry on. But whatever the case, please go back soon and take charge again, Mother. Then everything will be fine, won't it? Staying out here like this just makes everything tangled, doesn't it?"

"Why should I go back if even you won't be there? If I go back now, won't it be the same situation as before? Going back or not isn't the issue. Look at how they won't even put me on the family register first! Whether I stay in this house or go stay in that house, is the house the problem? There are plenty of houses. If I chase them to that house, won't he just set up another house with that wench and live lavishly?"

Ch'ung-sŏ thought Mijasŏ's words made sense, but he also knew that the real reason Mijasŏ wasn't returning to the main house was that, things having come to this pass, this house in Namsan-jŏng (南山町) was more comfortable <72> than the inconvenient and unfamiliar Korean-style household. She preferred sitting and lying on tatami, even if it was colder than an ondol floor.

"Still, please go back and settle in. Only then will Father settle down too, and the family register issue can be resolved... I need to see things settled like that before I can leave with peace of mind..."

Ch'ung-sŏ urged her once more. Mijasŏ sat silently for a moment, then asked,

"...Is that wench still coming every day?"

She brought up Ch'ung-hŭi's aunt again. Sensing she seemed willing to return depending on the situation, Ch'ung-sŏ thought he mustn't miss this chance.

"She doesn't seem to come much these days. But from what I see, there's nothing suspicious at all. Even if she does come, what does it matter? It's just needless suspicion... The more suspicious you feel, isn't it better to go back and see for yourself?"

He watched his mother's expression.

"What did you say? Do you think I don't know everything? They're stuck together day in and day out, what are you talking about! Are you trying to deceive me too?!"

Mijasŏ's voice turned harsh again.

Ch'ung-sŏ averted his gaze from Mijasŏ's embarrassing glare.

"That can't be true. Why would I hide such a trivial thing from you, Mother? As I always say, she comes occasionally because her mother sends her since there's no one to look after the children. If you keep making an issue out of such things with baseless suspicions, aren't you actually making it happen... There's no way Father would get married now, at this point."

He tried to calm his mother's rising emotions.

"You really do talk such thoughtless nonsense. Ch'ŏn Sŏbang (千書房) came the other day and told me that when Ch'ung-hŭi's mother was dying, the four of them gathered – she, her own mother, and your father – and she made him promise to live with her younger sister after she died. According to Ch'ŏn Sŏbang, the truth is he was already involved with that wench, but Ch'ung-hŭi's mother, knowing her illness was fatal, was actually secretly pleased about his involvement with her sister! Others secure things even after death, but am I supposed to just stand by while my own daughter, who is alive and well, is sent off to marriage practically naked?!"

She trembled as if unable to contain her fury.

"Ah – are you worried Hyoja won't get married? Did Father say he doesn't consider Hyoja his child? It's all sickness, Mother! Sickness!"

Ch'ung-sŏ turned away, looking displeased.

"Even if he helps, how poorly will he do it!"

"Is that really such a big worry right now? With what you already have, Mother, you could comfortably marry off two Hyoja-like daughters. Once she has a husband, won't she manage to live well on her own? Anyway, why do you let that fellow Ch'ŏn hang around here? How dare such an impudent fellow gossip about another family's affairs? That rascal is one thing, but Mother, falling for his smooth talk is also pitiful!" <73>

This Ch'ŏn Sŏbang was a young man who had risen from being an errand boy at Nam Sang-ch'ŏl's company to become a clerk there. Due to this connection, he had frequented the Nam household, both large and small matters, since he was young. Although his quick-witted and slick personality made him popular with the women, Ch'ung-sŏ, for some reason, considered him the lowest sort of creature and avoided even greeting him.

"It's my fault for being naive, why blame Ch'ŏn Sŏbang? Anyway, I heard they're holding the wedding ceremony this winter! They twisted the marriage plans as a means to drive me out first, and now that they've set you up with this sham marriage as a shield, they plan to send you into exile in America or Tokyo and then hold their grand ceremony, or whatever ruckus it is, at the public hall! That blockhead, isn't he ashamed of his age (年齡)?! But let's see how well they live! Do they really think those damn scoundrels will escape my grasp so easily?!"

Mijasŏ was livid, her face pale with venom, tears welling up in her eyes.

"Mother, that absolutely cannot be true. Your nerves are shot, and you're tormenting yourself by inventing baseless fantasies!"

"I don't want to hear it! Who asked to hear your opinion! Can't you even see your own mother! Is it enough for you to just side with your father's womanizing, whether your mother starves to death or is thrown out onto the street? What are you doing here now, all of a sudden? Are all Korean bastards like this?!..."

Mijasŏ, seeming unable to sit still, jumped up agitatedly, flung open the sliding door leading to the inner courtyard, stepped out onto the veranda, and leaned against a pillar.

(Lower Part in Next Issue) <74>

**Summary**

This excerpt from Yŏm Sang-sŏp's novel "Nam Ch'ung-sŏ" depicts a tense confrontation between the protagonist, Ch'ung-sŏ, and his Japanese mother, Mijasŏ. Ch'ung-sŏ urges his estranged mother to return to the main family home for the sake of household stability, especially following his recent, contentious marriage to a Korean woman, Chŏng-hŭi. Mijasŏ refuses, consumed by resentment towards her husband (Nam Sang-ch'ŏl), her daughter-in-law, and her perceived marginalization within the Korean household due to her Japanese identity and past as a kisaeng. The conversation reveals deep-seated family conflicts involving inheritance, the father's multiple relationships, cultural clashes, and Mijasŏ's fears about her future and her daughter Hyoja's prospects, particularly suspecting her husband plans to marry Ch'ung-hŭi's maternal aunt.

From a colonial history perspective, the story offers valuable insights into the complexities of Korean-Japanese relations at a personal level during the colonial period. It highlights the precarious social position of Japanese individuals within Korean families, the tensions arising from intermarriage, the significance of the family register (minjŏk) in establishing legitimacy and inheritance rights, and the protagonist's identity crisis as someone caught between Korean and Japanese worlds. The mother's anxieties and the family's internal power struggles reflect the broader societal dynamics and prejudices of the era, making it interesting for historians studying social and cultural life under Japanese rule.

**Named Entities**

南忠緖	남충서	Nam Ch'ung-sŏ
美佐緖	미좌서	Mijasŏ
염상섭	염상섭	Yŏm Sang-sŏp
미국	미국	Miguk
동경	동경	Tōkyō
貞姬	정희	Chŏng-hŭi
八重子	팔중자	P'alchungja (Yaeko)
南哥	남가	Namga (Nam Family)
南相哲	남상철	Nam Sang-ch'ŏl
老論	노론	Noron
이 판서	이 판서	Yi P'ansŏ
충희	충희	Ch'ung-hŭi
효자	효자	Hyoja
남산정	남산정	Namsan-jŏng
진고개	진고개	Chin'gogae
千書房	천서방	Ch'ŏn Sŏbang
공회당	공회당	Konghoedang

**Glossary**

화로	화로	Brazier
안젓는	앉아 있는	Sitting (older form of 앉아 있는)
노상	노상	Always, constantly
빡빡	뻑뻑	Puffing heavily (onomatopoeia); older variant of 뻑뻑
맷고	맺고	Concluding, finishing (older form of 맺고)
잠잣고	잠자코	Silently (older form of 잠자코)
업시	없이	Without (older spelling of 없이)
며누리	며느리	Daughter-in-law (older spelling)
사패	사패	Behavior, conduct (possibly archaic/dialectal term for 행실 or 태도)
다다미	다다미	Tatami mat (Japanese loanword)
샐룩한	샐쭉한	Pouting, narrowed (eyes)
처가(妻家)	처가	Wife's family home
꼴악신이요	꼴이 말이 아니요	The state/appearance is terrible (idiomatic phrase, older form)
안허요	않아요	Isn't it; don't you (older spelling/dialectal form of 않아요)
신긔	심기	Mood, temper (older form of 심기)
안흐려고	않으려고	Trying not to (older spelling of 않으려고)
뭇는다	묻는다	Asks (older spelling of 묻는다)
의론	의논	Discussion, consultation (older spelling/form of 의논)
너이들	너희들	You (plural) (older form of 너희들)
어대던지	어디든지	Wherever, anywhere (older form of 어디든지)
안켓지	않겠지	Wouldn't it be (older form of 않겠지)
조고만	조그만	Small, little (older spelling of 조그만)
바그르를 끄리며	바글바글 끓이며	Simmering/Boiling with anger (onomatopoeic expression, older form)
들복는	들볶는	Tormenting, nagging (older form of 들볶는)
뿔조아-지	부르주아지	Bourgeoisie (loanword, phonetic spelling)
맛대해	맞대어	Face to face (older form of 맞대어)
듯기 실흔	듣기 싫은	Unpleasant to hear (older spelling of 듣기 싫은)
헤여저	헤어져	Separated (older spelling of 헤어져)
한칭	한층	Even more, further (older spelling of 한층)
빙정대는	빈정대는	Sarcastic, mocking (older form of 빈정대는)
햇스면	했으면	If one did (older spelling of 했으면)
조켓단	좋겠단	Would be good (older spelling/contraction of 좋겠다는)
잇슬	있을	To be, to stay (older spelling of 있을)
그러타고	그렇다고	Even so, saying that (older form of 그렇다고)
엇덕하란	어떡하란	What to do (older form of 어떡하라는)
분긔	분기	Anger, indignation
등ㅅ줄기	등줄기	Spine, back (older spelling)
미러내든	밀어내던	Was pushing out (older form of 밀어내던)
구순히	구순히	Peacefully, without trouble
넘거 집는	넘겨짚는	Making assumptions, guessing wrongly (older form of 넘겨짚는)
눈의ㅅ 가시	눈엣가시	Thorn in one's side (idiom, older spelling)
아피라도	앞이라도	Even in front of (older form of 앞이라도)
마님의	마님의	Madam's, lady's
안해	아내	Wife
페백	폐백	Traditional Korean wedding ceremony gifts/bows
긔억하지를	기억하지를	To remember (older spelling of 기억하지를)
슨거워서	어색해서/거북해서	Awkward, uncomfortable (to pronounce) (older form/dialect?)
헌	한	Did, made (older past tense marker, form of 한)
끄내시긴	꺼내시긴	Brought up, initiated (talk) (older spelling of 꺼내시긴)
엿주엇더니	여쭈었더니	When I asked respectfully (older form of 여쭈었더니)
마젓다는	맞았다는	Was correct (older form of 맞았다는)
띄이면서도	띠면서도	While showing/having (a smile) (older spelling of 띠면서도)
밧작	바짝	Intensely, closely
그년	그년	That wench (derogatory term for a woman)
얼음 얼음	어름어름	Vaguely, stealthily, secretively
잭히나	재키나/얼씨구나	Exclamation of delight/satisfaction (archaic/dialectal?)
몃	몇	How many, several (older spelling of 몇)
어부바	어부바	Piggyback ride (baby talk); implies childishness
압 뒤ㅅ요량	앞뒤 요량	Considering the pros and cons, thinking ahead (older spelling)
얼렁얼렁해서	얼렁얼렁해서	Hastily, carelessly
노자ㅅ냥	노잣냥	Travel money (older form, 냥 is an old currency unit)
내쪼차	내쫓아	Chase out, drive away (older form of 내쫓아)
업대	업데/업혀	Carried on the back; implies being supported/infatuated
잘두	잘도	Well, diligently (older emphatic form of 잘도)
죽으려거던	죽으려거든	If you intend to die (older form of 죽으려거든)
맘대루	맘대로	As one pleases (older form of 마음대로)
쓸대 업는	쓸데없는	Useless, pointless (older spelling of 쓸데없는)
눈쌀	눈살	Frown (older spelling of 눈살)
퐁퐁대인다	쏘아붙인다/퉁명스럽게 말한다	Speaks sharply, snaps (onomatopoeic/descriptive, older usage)
손에 장을 지저라	손에 장을 지져라	"Sear my hand" (idiom expressing certainty: I'll bet my hand)
민적(民籍)	민적	Family register (historical term)
게집	계집	Woman, girl (can be derogatory, older term)
마저오고	맞아오고	To welcome, receive (as family/wife) (older form of 맞아오고)
안핫섯다	않았다	Did not (older past negative form)
나하	낳아	Gave birth to (older form of 낳아)
썩엇다는	썩었다는	Spent time, lingered, "rotted away" (figurative)
저저낫다기로서니	젖어났다기로서니	Even though one was immersed in (older form)
하오리(上衣)	하오리	Haori (Japanese jacket)
별안어	별안간에	Suddenly (older form of 별안간에)
업슬	없을	Will not be, without (older spelling of 없을)
벌서	벌써	Already (older spelling of 벌써)
슈 업서	수 없어	Cannot, no way to (older spelling/form of 수 없어)
여페서	옆에서	Beside, next to (older spelling of 옆에서)
무에라고	뭐라고	What (older form of 뭐라고)
엇던지	얻든지	Obtain, get (older form of 얻든지)
어엿히	어엿이	Respectably, properly (older spelling)
상속	상속	Inheritance
서자(庶子)	서자	Son of a concubine, illegitimate son
노론(老論)	노론	Noron (Old Doctrine political faction in Joseon)
흐지부지하고	흐지부지하고	Vaguely, indecisively, fizzled out
어든	얻은	Gained, obtained (older form of 얻은)
안치고	앉히고	Seat, install (older form of 앉히고)
배포하는	배포하는	Arrange, set up (household)
물리겟다고까지	물리겠다고까지	Even saying one would pass down/transfer (inheritance)
다려올	데려올	To bring (a person) (older form of 데려올)
마틀	맡을/받을	To receive, accept (older form, here: consent)
묵어운	무거운	Heavy (older spelling of 무거운)
노흔	놓은	Put down, released (older spelling of 놓은)
딸아다니는	따라다니는	Following around (older spelling)
누엇슬	누웠을	Was lying down (ill) (older spelling)
안ㅅ방	안방	Inner room (main room used by the mistress of the house)
끈헛던	끊었던	Had cut off (ties/visits) (older form of 끊었던)
뒤치닥거리	뒤치닥거리	Looking after, taking care of (chores, children)
안허서	않아서	Because not (older form of 않아서)
거죽으로는	겉으로는	Outwardly, on the surface (older spelling)
아니 보이엇다	아니 보였다	Did not show (older form)
들어 주려는	들어주려는	Intending to grant/listen to (older form)
그리지 안허두	그렇지 않아도	Even without that, anyway (older form)
만흔데	많은데	Are many, but (older spelling of 많은데)
난우어	나누어	Divide (older spelling of 나누어)
버릇을 게니	버릴 게니 (?)	Will likely throw away/start habit (?) (meaning slightly unclear, likely 버릴 것이니)
가라치는	가리키는	Pointing to, referring to (older spelling/form)
옮겨 안진	옮겨앉은	Moved and settled in (older form of 옮겨앉은)
놀림감이	놀림감이	Object of ridicule
뛰어든	뛰어든	Jumped into
가타서	같아서	Being like, seeming like (older spelling of 같아서)
죄 질으게	낯 뜨겁게/창피하게	Embarrassingly, shamefully (idiomatic, older form?)
부억이고	부엌이고	Kitchen (older spelling of 부엌이고)
왜마마(倭媽媽)	왜마마	Japanese madam (derogatory term using 倭 'Wa')
홍역(紅疫)	홍역	Measles (used derogatorily for Japanese?)
뒤ㅅ공논	뒷공론	Backbiting, gossip (older spelling)
됨시러운	됨됨스러운	Seemingly well-behaved, acting prim (possibly archaic/dialectal)
염탐하여	염탐하여	To spy on
상전 마마님께	상전 마마님께	To the master/mistress
듯지	듣지	Hear (older spelling of 듣지)
아니언만	아니언만/아니지만	Although not (older form)
목도	몫도	Share, part (older spelling)
밋느냐고	믿느냐고	Asking if one believes (older form of 믿느냐고)
거동까지도	거동까지도	Even behavior/actions (older spelling)
뺑손이를 쳐버리고	뺑소니를 쳐버리고	Run away, disappear quickly
침모고	침모고	Seamstress (older spelling/term)
모조리	모조리	All, entirely
내쫏고	내쫓고	Drive out, fire (older spelling of 내쫓고)
들이엇스면	들였으면	If one had brought in/hired (older form)
휘둘을	휘두를	To wield, command freely (older spelling)
잇겟지마는	있겠지만은	Although there might be (older form)
민원(民怨)	민원	Public resentment, popular grievance
바르를 끄리며	바르르 끓이며	Simmering with anger (onomatopoeia, older form)
화ㅅ푸리	화풀이	Venting anger (older spelling)
하로가 머다고	하루가 멀다고	Almost every day (idiom: lit. 'before a day is distant')
댓발만큼식	댓발만큼씩	About a foot long each (older spelling of 씩)
씨어 잇섯다	쓰여 있었다	Was written (older spelling)
아다시피	알다시피	As you know
안홈은	않음은	The fact of not being (older spelling)
업새	없애	Eliminate, get rid of (older form of 없애)
바들	받을	Receive (older spelling of 받을)
삼모자	세 모자	Three people: mother and children
곰곰	곰곰	Deeply, carefully (in thought)
안는다는	않는다는	Saying one does not (older form)
잇스나	있으나	Although there is (older spelling)
웃으운	우스운	Funny, ridiculous (older spelling)
나종에는	나중에는	Later, in the end (older spelling)
꾸지젓다가	꾸짖었다가	Scolded and then... (older form)
호령햇다가	호령했다가	Commanded/shouted and then... (older form)
어떠턴	어떻든	Anyway, regardless (older form)
노핫다	놓았다	Put, placed; caused (a situation) (older spelling)
에겔망정	에게일망정	Even if only to (someone) (older form)
깨달앗다	깨달았다	Realized (older spelling)
벌어저	벌어져	Widened, grew apart (older spelling)
행틔	행태	Behavior, conduct (often negative nuance)
마치엇스나	마쳤으나	Finished, but (older form)
아니 돌아오겟다고	아니 돌아오겠다고	Saying one would not return (older form)
세엇다	세웠다	Stood firm, insisted (older form)
맛길	맡길	To entrust (older spelling of 맡길)
돌아와 보앗다	돌아와 보았다	Returned and saw (older form)
간과하엿다	간파하였다	Saw through, perceived (more likely meaning than 'overlooked' here)
엇되	얻되	Obtain, but (older connective form)
올리어서	올리어서/올려서	Registering, putting up (older form)
엇게	얻게	To get, obtain (older spelling)
하마는	하마는/하겠다는	Saying one will do (older form)
조껴	쫓겨	Being chased out (older spelling)
나왓던	나왔던	Came out (older form)
조처가	조처가	Measure, arrangement
더붓적	더부룩/갑자기 (?)	Suddenly, unexpectedly (meaning unclear, possibly 더부룩하게 or 갑자기)
안처서	앉혀서	Seating, installing (older form of 앉혀서)
쓰려 맛기고	돌보아 맡기고	Entrusting the care of
잇자는	있자는	Let's be, intending to be (older form)
하랴는	하려는	Intending to do (older form)
안코	않고	Not doing, without doing (older form of 않고)
움즉이게	움직이게	To move (transitive/causative) (older spelling)
망내누의	막냇누이	Youngest sister (older spelling)
딸아가	따라가	Following (older spelling)
뽑히어서	뽑히어서/뽑혀서	Being chosen/selected (older form)
커다케	커다랗게	Largely, prominently (older spelling)
동긔(同긔)	동기	Motivation, cause; sibling (here: motivation)
한울	하늘	Sky (older spelling/dialectal)
문허지고	무너지고	Collapsing (older spelling)
감ª½ 가티	감옥같이	Like a prison (ª½ likely 獄)
서둘으기	서두르기	Hurrying, fussing
묵어워 젓다는	무거워졌다는	Became heavy (idiom for pregnancy) (older form)
내어	내어	Putting out, spreading (rumors)
버스러저만	부스러져만	Only crumbling, deteriorating
꼬득이고	꼬드기고	Inciting, instigating (older spelling)
들먹들먹하는	들먹들먹하는	Unstable, shaky
실업게에	실업계에	Business world (older spelling)
발쩐하라는	발전하라는	To develop, advance (older spelling)
전향긔(轉向期)	전향기	Turning point, period of ideological change
헐개빠진	헐개 빠진/얼빠진	Thoughtless, senseless, foolish
리용ㅅ거리만	이용 거리만	Only material for exploitation/use (older spelling)
하로바삐	하루바삐	As quickly as possible (older form)
긔어코	기어코	By all means, definitely (older spelling)
난호	나눠	Divide (older spelling)
너마자	너마저	Even you (older form of 너마저)
주ㅅ대를	줏대를	Backbone, principles (older spelling)
붓들어	붙들어	Hold onto, support (older spelling)
어떠턴지깐에	어떻든지 간에	Whatever the case may be (older form)
안지시면	앉으시면	If you sit/settle down (older form)
행결	한결	Much more, decidedly
채이고	채이고/눈치채고	Noticing, sensing
노처서는	놓쳐서는	Missing (an opportunity) (older spelling)
오나 보드군요	오나 보더군요	Seems to come (older form of 보더군요)
오기루서니	오기로서니/온다 한들	Even if one comes (older form)
의심쩍을 쓰룩에	의심쩍을수록에	The more suspicious one feels (older form of 수록)
조치	좋지	Good, isn't it good (older form of 좋지)
맛부터	맞붙어	Stuck together, close together (older spelling)
속이랸	속이련/속이려느냐	Are you trying to deceive? (older form)
거치러젓다	거칠어졌다	Became rough/harsh (older form)
뒤 거둘	뒤 거둘	Look after, take care of the affairs of
세음이	셈이	It amounts to, it's like (older spelling of 셈이)
조하햇단다	좋아했단다	Liked it, they say (older form)
시퍼러케	시퍼렇게	Vividly (alive), bright blue/green (here: vividly alive)
에미가	어미가	Mother (familiar/slightly derogatory)
거나마	거나마/것이나마	Even that thing/person
못견딀	못 견딜	Unbearable (older spelling)
지질히	지질히/변변치 않게	Poorly, shabbily
서방마저	서방마저	Even the husband
어련히	어련히	Surely, naturally, without difficulty
천가란	천가란/천 서방이란	That fellow Ch'ŏn
발직한	발칙한	Impudent, insolent
쏘삭어리고	소삭거리고/쑥덕거리고 (?)	Whispering, gossiping (onomatopoeic/descriptive, older usage)
알랑알랑	알랑알랑	Fawningly, trying to curry favor
딱하슈	딱하슈/딱하오	Pitiful (older polite ending)
니ㅅ삿도	인사도	Greeting (older spelling)
어울으지를	어울리지를	To associate with, get along with (older form)
방패맥이로	방패막이로	As a shield, scapegoat (older spelling)
묵사발이 된 놈	묵사발이 된 놈	"Guy whose head is mush" (insult, blockhead)
년놈들이	년놈들이	Those wenches and scoundrels (derogatory plural)
밋두	밑도	Bottom, beginning (older spelling of 밑도)
끗두	끝도	End (older spelling of 끝도)
썩이시는구려	썩이시는구려	You are worrying/tormenting yourself (older ending 구려)
듯자니	듣자니	Hearing that; why listen to (older form)
굴머 죽던지	굶어 죽던지	Whether one starves to death (older spelling)
길거ㅅ리에	길거리에	On the street (older spelling)
쫏겨나던지	쫓겨나던지	Whether one is chased out (older form)
애비의	애비의	Father's (familiar/derogatory)
역성을	역성을	Taking someone's side
씨알머리는	씨알머리는	Seed, lineage (derogatory term for person/people)
발닥	발딱	Suddenly (standing up) (older spelling)
미다지를	미닫이를	Sliding door (older spelling)
열어 젓드려	열어젖혀	Fling open (older form)
퇴ㅅ마루로	툇마루로	Onto the narrow wooden porch/veranda (older spelling)


---------------------------


잡지명	동광 제9호
발행일	1927년 01월 01일
기사제목	南忠緖(上篇)
필자	염상섭
기사형태	소설

南忠緖
						염상섭
화로를 하나 격하여 저편에 안젓는 미좌서(美佐緖)는 아들이 정성것 하는 맘을 귀담아 들으려고도 아니하고 노상 담배만 빡빡 빨고 잇다.
『...어쨋던 그런 형편이니까 오늘이라도 집으로 들어와 주세요. 제발 그러케 해 주세요.』
충서는 이러케 말을 맷고 어머니의 얼굴을 치어다 보앗스나 미좌서는 역시 잠잣고만 잇다.(두 사람의 대화는 물론 일본 말로 한다) 충서도 허는 수 업시 권연에 불을 부치며 잠깐 동안 입을 답치고 안젓슬 수 밧게 업섯다.
『말하지면 며누리의 사패 봐서 며누리 비위 마치려 들어가 달란 수작이로구나.』
겨우 입을 버린 미좌서는 담배ㅅ대를 「다다미」 우에 대구르를 던지면서 샐룩한 눈으로 아들을 치어다 보앗다.
『그건 어머니 넘우 심한 말씀이 아니얘요. 제 처가 애를 쓰는 것은 고사하고 처가(妻家)에서 여간들 걱정을 아니하고 요새도 사림을 날마다 보내다 시피하여 눈치만 스르를 보고 가는 꼴악신이요 며누리가 들어오더니 시어머니를 내쪼찻느니 어머니가 쫏겨 나가셧느니 하고들 법석이고 보니 첫재 의문이 사납지 안허요. 그야 남들은 무에라구 하던지 제 각기 제 생활만 튼튼히 해나가면 고만이라 하겟지만 그러고 보면 집안 꼴만 사나워지고 아버지께서도 점점 더 맘이 붓지를 못하시는 모양이니까 말얘요...』
충서는 될 수 잇는 대로 모친의 신긔를 거슬리지 안흐려고 환순히 이야기를 하엿다. 그러나 미좌서는 또 다시 입을 답치고 안저서 자긔 차ㅅ종에만 차를 새로 따러서 혼자 홀짝홀짝 마시고 잇다가
『그래 너는 어떠케 하겟단 말이냐? 정말 미국에를 떠날테란 말이야?』
하며 톡 쏘듯이 뭇는다.
『글세 - 아직 확실히 결정한 것은 아니지만 그것도 어머니께 의론해서 결정할까 하고 오늘 부리나케 온 터인데요...』
『내게? 새삼스럽게 내게 의론은 무슨 의론을 한단 말이냐? 흥!』
미좌서는 무엇에 놀란 것처럼 이러케 아들의 말을 막고 코웃음을 치다가
『...내야 너 아버지나 너이들 일에 입을 버릴만한 그런 고마운 신세도 못 된다마는 어잿던지 신혼여행 삼아 어대던지 가보는 것도 해롭지는 안켓지!』
하며 미좌서는 살짝 분 때를 밀은 조고만 이마에 파란 힘줄을 두 줄기나 보이면서 또 코웃음을 친다.
충서는 심사가 불끈 나서 눈쌀을 찌프려 보엿스나 잠잣고 말앗다.
집에 잇서서도 자고 새기가 무섭게 공연히 혼자 속을 바그르를＜63＞ 끄리며 뭇 사람을 못살게 들복는 것은 어제 오늘 시작한 예증도 아니요 충서는 자긔 어머니의 일이언만 심사가 틀린 때는
『그게 「뿔조아-지」 중에도 유민계급의 마즈막 오락(娛樂)의 한아란 것이지요.』 하며, 맛대해  노코 듯기 실흔 소리를 하는 일도 잇거니와 충서도 혼인사단으로 하여 이러케 따로 헤여저 살게 된 뒤로부터는 미좌서의 그 버릇이 한칭 더 심하여저서 충서만 보면 비위 거슬릴 소리를 뼈지게 퐁퐁하게 되엇다.
『남의 속도 모르고 그런 빙정대는 말씀 좀 고만 두세요...그럼 어머님 생각에는 어떠케 햇스면 조켓단 말씀얘요? 집 구석에부터 잇슬 수도 업고 그러타고 나가지도 말라고 하면 - 대관절 날다러 엇덕하란 말얘요?』
충서는 한참 무슨 생각을 하는 눈치더니 참앗던 분긔가 불끈하는 듯이 대들엇다.
『누가 널더러 집을 나가라구 등ㅅ줄기를 미러내든? 너 아버지는 어쩌는지 모르지만...』
미좌서는 입술을 바르를 떨며 매서운 눈으로 아들을 마주 건너다 본다.
『하지만 내가 잇스면 집안이 밤낫 구순히 지내지 못하고 이 모양대로 잇슬께니까 말얘요.』
『그러니까 나 때문에 너이들이 나가버릴테니 그 대신에 나더러 집으로 들어가란 말이지?』
하며 미좌서는 싸우려는 사람처럼 소리를 빽빽 지르며 닥아 안는다.
『그건 어머니께서 넘거 집는 말씀얘요.』
『누가 넘거 집고 하는 수작이게 말이야! 너이들 생각에는 내가 이러케 하고 잇는 것이 너이들을 내쫏고 나서 들어가려고 멈웃거리고 잇는 줄 알찌 모르지만 너이들을 눈의ㅅ 가시로 아는 것은 내가 아니라 너 아버지야요. 아버지 말이라면 상성이 나서 싸고 돌고 편을 들지만 너 아버지는 너를... 참 어이가 업서서!』
미좌서는 신야넉시야 하며 남편의 흉아적을 끄러내려다가 한숨을 짓고 말을 끈는다.
『아버지 편이구 어머니 편이구 나는 꿈에도 그런 생각은 하여 본 일도 업스니까 아무래도 게관이 업슴니다마는 내가 나간다손 치더라도 누가 무섭고 누가 눈의ㅅ 가시라고 생각하기 때문에 쫏겨 나가는 것은 결단코 아니니까요...하여간 제 몸 하나만 훌적 빠저 나가면 뒤ㅅ일이야 어떠케 되거나 난 모름니다마는 그래도 - 어머니ㅅ 일이 식이지 안는 걱정인지는 몰라도 - 마음에 꺼리키어서...그러는 거야요?』
『대관절 별안간 동경이니 미국이니 하는 것은 누가 먼저 발론을 한 것이란 말이냐?』
하며 미좌서는 잠깐 무슨 생각을 하다가 이러케 뭇고 다시 잇는다.
『...설마 아버지가 먼저 그런 소리를 내이지는 안엇겟지? 공부하는 사람을 집안 일 보인다고 애를 써서 불러다가 장가까지 들여노코 언저는 성이 가시니 나가달라고는 아무리 자식 아피라도 체면이 부끄러워서 너 아버지 입으로는 못 하엿겟지?...허구 보면 역시 정(貞) 무엇이라던가 하는 아가씨ㄴ지 실내 마님의 분부란 말이냐?』＜64＞
정 무엇이라는 것은 물론 충서의 안해 정희(貞姬)말이다. 미좌서로 보면 어째떤 자긔 배로 나흔 둘도 없는 외아들의 긔여운 며누리요 혼인한지 두 달도 못되는 새아씨언마는 지금까지 대면을 한 것도 혼인 날 페백 여부 업시 절 한번 바든 것 뿐이요. 그 후에는 소위 시어머니 문안이라고 온다는 것도 도리질 도리질을 하여 못 차저 오게 한 것이엇다. 며누리의 이름조차 긔억하지를 못하는지 늘 정희라고 똑바로 부르는 것이 아니요. 정 - 무엇이라던지 하는 아가씨라고 비웃어 부르는 버릇이다. 아무리 한편은 맘에 싸지 안흔 게집이요 한편은 자긔를 나하준 어머니언마는 충서에게는 불쾌하엿다. 그러나 미좌서의 말을 들으면 정희라는 이름을 일본말로 부르기에는 꽤 까다롭고 슨거워서 입에 익숙하여지지를 안는다 한다.
『미국 일절 이야기는 내가 헌 이야기얘요. 사실 처음에 정희를 데리고 가서 동경 구경이나 시키고 오지 인흐려느냐?고 아버지께서 먼저 말을 끄내시긴 햇지만 이왕이면 미국 가서 이삼년 잇다가 오겟다고 엿주엇더니 그것도 조켓지만 좀 더 생각해 보자고 하시기에 나 혼자 계획을 세워서 준비하는 모양이지만...』
『그거봐라! 뭐러구 하든?!...』
미좌서는 눈이 화동그래지며 자긔의 짐작이 들어 마젓다는 듯이 쌀쌀한 웃음을 띄이면서도 발악이 밧작 치밀어 오르는 양을 감추지는 못하엿다.
『내 말이 어떠냐?! 그년하고 혼인을 하려면 그 꼴에도 창피하고 겸연쩍은 생각은 잇서서 너이들을 내쫏는 수 밧게 업스니까 동경을 갓다 오라고 꼬인 게 아니냐 그 동안에 얼음 얼음 예식을 하려고. ...그런 걸 멋두 모르구 미국까지 가겟다니까 그야말로 불감청이나 고소원이지 잭히나 조켓니! 너 아버지란 이가 어떤 솜씨길래 너이 내외를 한달에 몃 백원씩 들여서 미국에를 보내더란 말이냐? 이 어림업는 아이야! 너두 한 두살 먹은 「어부바」가 아닌 다음에야 좀 압 뒤ㅅ요량을 해 보렴으나! 얼렁얼렁해서 노자ㅅ냥이나 주어 내쪼차 버리고 그년한테 얼이 빠저서 들어 업대 잇게 되면 학비를 잘두 보내 주리라. 굶어 죽으려거던 미국이구 어대구 네 맘대루 가렴으나!...』
『그런 쓸대 업는 소리 좀 고만 두세요. 굶어 죽던 말던 나도 내 생각이 잇겟지요!』
충서는 눈쌀을 찌프리며 미좌서의 말을 막으려 하엿스나 미좌서는 한칭 더 파래지며 퐁퐁대인다.
『...쓸대 업는 소리? 내 손에 장을 지저라! 나두 이때까지 너 아버지 춤에 노랏다마는 네가 지금 떠나면은 남가(南哥)의 집에 다시 발을 들여노케 될 줄 아니! 동전 한푼이나 손에 만저 볼 줄 아니! 팔중자(八重子)편을 긔어코 파혼하고 불야불야 혼인을 할 때부터 너 아버지 배ㅅ속은 유리를 부쳐노코 들여다 보듯이 나는 다 - 알고 안젓던 것이다.』
『또 그런 이야기를 끄내면 무얼해요. 돈도 실코 아무 것 다 - 실혀요. 언제는 내가 상속하려고 머읏거리고 잇섯던가요...』
충서는 자긔 어머니에게 귀에 못이 박이도록 듯던 상속문제를 또 다시 끌어내지 안케 하려고 예긔 지름으로 이러케 순타히 한마듸 하엿다. 미좌서는 긔가 막혀 말이 아니 나왓다. ＜65＞
아들이 미워서 못 견듸엇다. 충서 자신을 생각하던지 자긔의 공중에 뜬 것 가튼 지금의 처지를 돌보아 죽던지 하여간 모던 일에 충서가 정신을 밧작 차리고 덤벼 들엇스면 조흐련마는 그런 생각은 꿈에도 업시 미국을 가느니 상속권을 내어 놋느니 하며 돌아 다니는 심리를 도모지 알 수가 업섯다. 미좌서로 보면 아들이 반편이 아니면서도 일종의 정신이상이 잇는 사람 갓기도 하고 부친의 농락에 빠저서 멋 모르고 자긔를 배척하는 것 갓기도 하다.
그러나 일편 충서로 보면 자긔 모친의 곤난한 처지라던지 지향을 못해서 하는 심중을 모르는 것도 아니엇다. 그것은 단순히 노경(老境)에 들어가는 사람의 고적한 심리라던지 이러한 여자에게서 보통 볼 수 잇는 「히스테리 - 」 때문 뿐만이 아닌 것도 충서는 잘 짐작하는 일이엇다. 충서 자신이 조선사람도 아니요 일본사람도 아닌 이상한 틈박우니에서 부댁기며 자라낫고 성인한 오늘날에도 역시 가정적으로나 사회적으로나 긔이한 처지에 노혀 잇는 것이라던지 나이 먹어가고 장가를 가고 하여 완전한 한사람 목시 되어갈쓰록 어쩐지 공연히 맘이 불안초조하여 저만 가서 생활의 뿌리를 튼튼히 막고 침착한 태도로 인생을 바라 보며 걸어나갈 것 갓지가 안흔 지금의 심리상태를 생각하면 그것을 곳 옴겨다가 자긔 어머니ㅅ 경우에 비최어 볼 수가 잇는 것을 그는 동정을 가지고 바라보지 안흘 수 업섯다. 그러나 자긔의 결혼에 대한 불평을 언제까지던지 속에 품고 자긔 내외를 끗끗내 못 맛당해 하거나 말끗마다 사람의 비위를 거슬리는 소리를 하며 심지어 부친에게 대한 불평 불만까지를 충서의 아페서 뇟가리는 것을 들을 때는 가엽슨 생각도 슬어지고 머리ㅅ 골만 직근직근 하엿다.
『상속을 아니하긴 고사하고 누가 시킨다길래 말이야! 모두 제가 일을 저즐러 노코 인저는 집안에 부터 잇게도 못되니까 아-주 호긔스럽게 상속을 안하느니 미국으로 가느니 하지만 너나 내나 잇다가 어떠케 될찌 내일 어떠케 될찌 누가 알 일이냐?...너두 내 말 안 들엇던 것을 후회할 날이 잇스리라.」
『후회를 하면 어떠케 하구 안허면 어떠케 된다는 말이야요? 이왕 헌 혼인을 무르란 말이얘요? 누가 허구시퍼서 헌 노릇도 아니요 게집에 미처서 어머니는 어떠케 되던지 거듧 떠보지도 안는다는 것도 아니니 조토록 하세요. 나는 내 몸 하나만 훌적 빠저 나가면 고만이니까 뒤ㅅ일은 맘대로 하시란 밧게 어떠케 하란 말씀이얘요.』
하며 충서는 점점 흥분이 되어 갓다.
『날더러 무얼 맘대로 하라는 말이냐? 인저는 제 게집 하나도 주체를 못하고 뉘게 복장을 안길 작정이냐? 그럴 걸 웨 어더 왓더란 말이냐...』
하며 미좌서는 다시 목소리를 나치어서 또 밤낫 듯는 푸념을 시작한다.
『남들은 - 남은 고사하고 너부터라도 날더러 며누리를 들복그려고 그러는 줄 알겟지만 항상 며누리가 무어냐? 정희고 팔중자고 네 맘에만 들면 고만이요 네 맘에 맛지 안흐면 허구 만흔 게집에 며누리 업슬까 봐 걱정이냐. 허지만 그 애가 들어온 뒤에 집안 형편이 일변하지 안핫니? 그년하고 부동이 되어서 무슨 짓을 하는지 누가 아니? 그는 고사하고 팔중자만 데려 왓드면 너도 당자를 아주 모르는 ＜66＞ 것도 아니고 하니 좀 조앗겟니! 그애만 왓스면야 민적문제는 웨 일어나고 상속문제가 지금 새삼스럽게 튀어나올 리가 잇겟니!!! 그걸 생각하면 자다가 생각해도 분하지 안흐냐!』
『고만 두세요. 그만 하면 다 - 알앗스니요. 팔중자는 팔중자요 민적문제는 민적문제지 팔중자가 아니 오고 정희가 왓다고 별안간 그런 문제가 생긴 것도 아니요 민적이니 상속이니 하는 것도 어머님이 공연히 사서 하는 걱정이지 이때껏 민적이고 상속이고 입 밧게 내인 사람도 업지 안슴니까?』
『그래 내가 공연히 평지풍파를 일으켯다는 말이지?』
『아니 그런 것은 아니지요만 하여간 팔중자가 결혼을 아니 한 대신에 어머니 한분만은 모든 것이 여의하게 해 노흘테야요.』
하며 충서는 냉연히 웃는 듯 하엿다.
『듯기 실타. 너는 밤낫 헐개빠진 소리만 이죽이죽 잘도 하고 안젓다.』
하며 미좌서는 아들이 웃음을 띄이는 듯 하는 대에 한칭 더 노발대발 하엿다.

미좌서가 이러케도 노친 것을 분해하는 팔중자라는 게집 아이는 미좌서의 본가 부치가 되는 동경 게집 아이다. 원래 본가 부치가 업는 미좌서에게는 팔중자도 사돈의 팔촌격이나 되겟지만 미좌서의 전신이 기생일망정 가문이 그리 막우된 상사람의 씨가 아니니 만큼 팔중자도 상당한 교육은 바든 모양이엇다. 그러나 특별히 미좌서가 연줄연줄 대어서 끌어대인 대는 여러 가지 게획이 잇던 것이엇다. 남의 자식 데려다가 내 자식 만든 다음에야 가튼 갑시면 조선 여자보다 옷 한가지 찌개 한 그릇이라도 서로 의론하여 만들만한 한 나라 백성에서 마저오고 시픈 것은 사람의 상정이겟지만 미좌서의 배포는 다만 구구한 가정의 단란이란 것만을 생각하지는 안핫섯다. 본실이 죽은 뒤 장사가 끗나자 남편과 싸움 싸움하여 큰 집 차지를 할제는 다른 조선첩들과의 경쟁심으로만 그러한 것이 아니라 자긔와 자식들의 지위와 장내를 좀 더 튼튼히 하려는 생각으로 이엇다. 장성한 자식을 둘식이나 나하 주엇고 이십여년이라는 세윌을 남가의 집에서 썩엇다는 것만 생각하여도 네 활개를 칠 일인데 민적에는 자긔 아프로 아니 되엇슬망정 자긔 속으로 나온 충서가 어엿히 남씨의 집 장남인 다음에야 기생 퇴물이요 일본사람이라는 이유로만 미좌서의 요구를 거절당할 까닭은 업던 것이다. 그러나 순 조선식 살림 - 더구나 서울서 셋째 손가락 차례는 되는 부자집의 거창한 살림을 아무리 이십여년이나 조선 풍속에 저저낫다기로서니 「마루마게」 「하오리」(上衣)로 곱게 꾸미고 일본으로 조선으로 온천(溫泉) 신세나 지고 다니던 사람이 별안어 들어와서 감당을 해낼 장비가 업슬 것은 충서도 벌서 짐작하엿던 것이다. 그러나 의리상 부친도 어쩔 슈� 업서 하는 것을 충서가 여페서 무에라고 할 것은 못 되엇다. 어려서부터 큰 어머니 (先室) 아페서 조선식으로 자라난 충서는 자긔 어머니의 소원이 무리치 안타고는 생각하면서도 여러 가지로 염녀를 하던 것이다. 하여간 그리하여 큰 집 안ㅅ방 차지를 하고 안자 미좌서는 첫째 ＜67＞ 정색으로 며누리 문제를 끄냇다. 남상철(南相哲)이 생각으로 하면 전실 마누라가 살아 잇섯드면야 며누리는 물론 조선사람으로 구하려 하엿섯고 그러지 안해도 충서가 서자(庶子)라고 하여 남이 어찌나 생각하면 당자가 가엽다는 생각도 업지 안해서 십여년 전에 노론(老論)패에서는 그래도 누구라면 알만한 이 판서의 딸 정희와 약혼까지 될 번한 것을 누가 간통질을 하고 다니엇던지 아무리 민적상으로는 그러타 하더라도...하는 한마듸로 그 혼담은 흐지부지하고 오늘날까지 지내온 것이엇다. 이와 가튼 형편인 고로 상철이는 지금도 정실 후취를 어든 뒤에 며누리도 조선의 상당한 문벌가에서 택하고는 시픈 것이다. 그러나 하는 수업시 미좌서를 들여 안치고 보니 차라리 미좌서의 말대로 일본 게집아이를 어더 맛겨 버리고 자긔는 따로 배포를 차려 가지고 충희 남매의 뒤를 보아 주게 하는 것이 돌이어 낫겟다고 생각하게 되엇다. 상철이로 말하면 어차피에 조선식 일본식의 두 살림을 배포하는 것이 형편으로도 부득이 한 일이요 취미나 교제상으로도 그리 할 수 밧게 업기 때문이엇다. 그러나 남가의 집 장손이 일본 게집의 출생이요 또 역시 일본 게집하고 짝을 짓는다는 것은 봉제사의 범절로만 아니라 영원히 남가의 집 피를 흐려 놋는 것이라는 생각이 잇서서 아무리 참 친일파인 상철이로도 맘에 께름하지 안흘 수 업섯다. 그래서 상철이는 나종에 형편 딸아서는 명의와 표면으로는 충서의 모자를 큰 집이라 하고 충희 남매를 중심으로 한 것을 작은 집이라 하더라도 결국 충희에게 뒤를 물리겟다고까지 결심하고 미좌서의 소청대로 팔중자를 다려올 것을 승낙하엿섯다. 그리하여 미좌서는 지난 초봄에 동경에까지 건너갓던 것이다. 미좌서는 남편에게 이 승낙을 마틀 때 십여년 동안 어깨에 매달리엇던 묵어운 짐을 금시로 내려 노흔 듯이 혼자 용춤을 추엇섯다. 그러나 동경에 가서 저편 승낙도 마트는 일편에 그때 졸업시험을 보는 아들을 달래서 서로 선까지 보게 하여 노코 돌아와 보니 형세는 천만 뜻밧게 변하엿다. 이때까지 제일 무서운 적수는 본실댁이 남겨 노코 간 충희 남매라고 생각하엿던 것이 불과 한달 남짓 후에 와서 보니 충희 남매의 뒤에는 그림자와 가티 딸아다니는 젊은 신녀성이 하나 잇다. 그러케 미인이랄 것은 업스나 충희 어머니가 일년 동안이나 알아 누엇슬 적에 이 집에 아주 와서 어린 딸의 가정교사 겸 형의 병구원 겸하여 잇던 충희의 이모이다. 이 여자는 미좌서도 잘 알지마는 충희 어머니가 죽은 뒤에 미좌서가 안ㅅ방 차지를 하자 발을 똑 끈헛던 사람이 업는 동안에 다시 드나들게 된 모양이다. 미좌서의 친딸인 효자는 안ㅅ방으로 쫏고 건넌방에서 충희의 누이동생을 더리고 지낸다. 남편의 말을 들으면 자긔가 업는 동안에 아이들 뒤치닥거리 할 사람이 업서서 불러 왓다 한다. 그러나 딸의 말을 들으면 무에라고 분명히는 말을 아니 하나 하여턴 불평이 만흔 모양이요 또 남편의 그 여자에게 대한 태도와 말씨가 매우 친숙한 것을 보면 좀 이상한 눈치엇다. 그 후 며칠 잇다가 그 의문의 여자는 또 다시 그림자 가티 스러저 버리엇다. 그러자 남편은 팔스�자편을 파약할 것과 정희를 다려오게만 된 사정과 그 편이 충서의 장내를 위하여 조타는 것으로 미좌서를 달래게 되엇다. 요컨대 충서가 남가의 집 장손 노릇을 하려면 조선 여자로 며누리를 다려와야 할 것 그래야 완전히 상속을 시킬 것 또 정희와 ＜68＞ 가튼 문벌가로 장가를 들지 안흐면 다른 사람이 적자로 인정해 주지 안흘 것이니 당자가 사회에 나서는 대에도 크게 유리하다는 등 이유로이엇다. 미좌서는 말인즉슨 그럴 듯 하다고 생각하면서도 그지간에 충희의 이모가 끼어서 무슨 음모를 하고 또 남편의 맘이 금시로 변한 것도 그 게집 탓이 아닌가 하는 의심이 업지 안허서 거죽으로는 반대를 하여 가며 은근히 그 교환조건으로 자긔를 민적에 정실로 올려 달라고 졸라 보앗다. 그러나 그것은 차탈피탈하고 들어 주려는 긔색도 아니 보이엇다.
『삼십년 가까이 지내면서 사람을 그러케도 못 미들 수야 잇나! 차차 어떠케 해두 조치마는 그러구 보면 그리지 안허두 자네가 이리 들어오게 되어서 불평들이 만흔데. 또 민적 노래가 나면 그 대신 집을 늘리라는 둥 재산을 난우어 달라는 둥 하고들 지랄을 버릇을 게니 그 문제는 그 문제로 두고 이 혼인문제부터 결정을 합시다.』
이것이 남편의 핑게하는 첫 이유엿다. 지랄을 버린다는 것은 따로 배포하여 둔 늙은 첩과 젊은 기생첩. 학생첩들을 가라치는 것이다. 미좌서로 생각하면 그럴 듯도 하지마는 충희의 이모라던지 충희 남매를 생각하면 도저히 안심할 수는 업섯다. 도대체 이 집으로 옴겨 안진 뒤로부터는 별안간 조선사람 촌에 놀림감이 되랴 뛰어든 것 가타서 날마다 신경이 부풀어 오를 뿐이다. 조선말도 조선사람 볼 죄 질으게 하지마는 안ㅅ방 식구인 자긔 모녀와 몸 하인 하나를 합한 세 식구는 돌림 쟁이가 되어서 부억이고 방ㅅ구석이고 모여 안기들만 하면,
『왜마마(倭媽媽)인지 홍역(紅疫)인지가 아까 어떠케 하구...고 계집애는 똑 고양이새끼 모양으로 눈치만 남아서 어쩌구 어쩌구...』
하며 수군수군 낄낄 대이는 때에는 사람이 졸이들 지경이다. 왜마마나 왜마마의 따님이 하는 일은 불관한 것이라도 면구스럽게 하속배에까지 낄낄낄 히히히...웃음ㅅ거리가 된다. 웃으면 웃을쓰록 마마와 따님은 역정을 내고 집안 사람을 달달 복는다. 복기는 대로 뒤ㅅ공논은 나날이 늘어간다. 미좌서의 몸하인은 게다가 말이 서툴으니까 놀림ㅅ감이 되어 한구석에 쭉지고 안젓거나 집안의 물론을 염탐하여 상전 마마님께 충성을 다하려도 귀먹쟁이는 아니언만 듯지 못하는 귀를 가지고는 한 사람 목도 아니 된다. 남편은 근 삼십년을 살고도 사람을 그러케 못 밋느냐고 핀잔을 주지만 남편의 거동까지도 그 년놈들의 한편 가티 보이엇다. 첩의 집이 세군대나 되니까 남산 정집에 살 때도 와서 자는 것은 한달에 한 두번 밧게는 아니 되엇지만 이 집으로 들어온 뒤에는 저녁 한끼니만 먹으면 입버릇이 되다시피 바뻐바뻐 하고 뺑손이를 쳐버리고 만다. 하인이고 침모고 무엇이고 할 것 업시 모조리 내쫏고 갈아 들이엇스면 시원도 하고 맘대로 휘둘을 수도 잇겟지마는 신 등내의 폭정(暴政)이 민원(民怨)을 더 살까 보아 속만 바르를 끄리며 화ㅅ푸리는 동경에서 졸업시험에 골몰하는 아들에게 하로가 머다고 댓발만큼식 한 편지로 겨우 뽑아 내고 안젓슬 뿐이다. 언젠가 충서가 바든 미좌서의 편지에는 이러한 말이 씨어 잇섯다. -
『내가 조선식 살림을 할 줄 모를 뿐 아니라 위생에나 취미에도 도저히 맛지를 안는 것을 알면서도 자신하여 이 집에 들어온 것이 그편도 아다시피 내 목숨보다도 첫째로 ＜69＞ 생각하는 너이 남매의 신상을 생각하고 늙은 뒤에 단란한 가정의 행복을 누리자는 것에 지나지 안홈은 누누이 말할 것도 업는 일이로다. 그럼으로 애초에 팔중자를 데려 오기로 한 것이엇거늘 부친은 별안간 반대를 하시고 충서의 이모를 비롯하여 이 집이 안팟 상하가 우리 두 식구를 원수 가티 알고 놀리고 비웃으니 만리 타향에 나와 삼십년 고생한 마즈막 판이 이럴 줄이야 뉘 알앗스리요.... 우리 모녀는 요사이 밥상을 대할 때마다 이상하고 무서운 생각에 떨면서 음식도 맘을 노코 못 먹고 우리 둘이 틈틈이 진고개에 올러 가서 음식을 사 먹고 지낸다는 말을 들으면 지금 이 집 형편이 어떠케 된지를 대강은 짐작할 것이요 또한 그 가운대서 가련히 쩔쩔 매이는 우리 모녀의 신세가 얼마나 비참한 가를 알까 하노라. 만일 이러한 가운대에 그 편이 팔중자를 물리치고 지금 우리를 업새 버리려고까지 하는 사람들의 한편이 되는 이씨집 딸을 데려온다 하면 나는 이 세상에서 볼 것을 다- 보앗다고 밀이 결심하노라...』
이와 가튼 편지를 바들 때 그것이 자긔 어머니의 신경과민한 탓으로 그러한 줄은 짐작하면서도 자긔 삼모자의 신세를 생각하고는 눈물을 뿌리지 안흘 수 업섯다. 그는 시험으로 하여 머리ㅅ속이 분주한 가운대도 며칠을 두고 곰곰 생각한 결과 단연히 부친에게 편지를 하엿다. - 첫째 결혼문제를 중지하고 아무대도 찬성치 안는다는 것과, 둘째 상속권을 버리고 자유로운 몸이 되려는 결심이거니와 만일 졸업한 후에 유랑의 길을 떠나지 아니하면 연구를 더 계속할 것과, 셋째 모친과 누이 효자는 암만해도 편벽된 생각을 가지고 잇스나 일생을 안락하게 지내도록 책임잇는 보호를 해달라는 것을 말하엿다. 부자 간에 이러한 부탁을 새삼스럽게 하는 것은 웃으운 일이나 충서는 격렬하게 부친의 태도를 비난하고 나종에는 식사도 맘노코 못한다는 미좌서의 편지의 일절까지를 오리어서 보냇다.
이 편지를 바든 남상철이는 천길 만길 뛰며 야단을 첫다 미좌서를 꾸지젓다가 위로하엿다가 하기도 하고 집안 사람을 호령햇다가 달래기도 하고 하면서 어떠턴 집안을 발깍 뒤집어 노핫다. 남편의 진의는 알 수 업스나 미좌서가 아들에겔망정  말을 실수한 것은 자긔도 깨달앗다. 그러나 부부 간은 점점 더 벌어저 가고 미좌서의 처지는 공중에 뜨게 되엇다. 그러나 그만 일에 안ㅅ방을 내 노코 제 풀에 나갈 그런 어림업는 미좌서는 아니엇다. 돌이어 그런 풍파가 잇슨 뒤에는 맘노코 음식도 먹고 한칭 더 상전 마마님의 행틔를 하여 모든 사람을 억누르기에 힘을 썻다.
그 동안에 충서는 졸업시험을 마치엇스나 한사코 아니 돌아오겟다고 고집을 세엇다. 그러나 부친은 집안 수습을 하기 위하여 살림을 내어 맛길 터이니 돌아오라고 엄명을 하고 미좌서는 미좌서대로 네가 아니 돌아오면 나는 죽는 사람이라고 야단을 하는 바람에 돌아오기는 돌아와 보앗다. 그러나 돌아와 보니 집안은 난장판이다. 자긔는 결단코 세간살이를 마틀 수 업는 줄을 알지만 하여간 인심 수습을 하여 집안이나 일가에 대한 체면을 유지하려면 모친을 다시 남산정 집으로 잠깐 나가게 하는 수 밧게 업슬 형편을 간과하엿다. 장내에 혼인을 하면 팔중자가 아니라도 일본 게집을 엇던지 그러치 안흐면 미좌서가 적당하다고 인정하는 조선여자를 ＜70＞ 엇되 그 때에는 미좌서를 민적에 올리어서 떳떳이 충서 남매의 모친이란 법률상 표적을 엇게 하마는 계약을 부자와 미좌서 사이에 구두(口頭)로 하엿다. 그리하여 미좌서는 이 남산정 집으로 창피하나마 일시 조껴 나왓던 것이다.
그러나 우연한 일로 이러케 위선 조처가 된 것은 상철이로 보아서는 돌이어 다행한 일이엇다. 상철이의 계획이라야 별다른 게 아니라 마누라가 죽은 뒤에 더붓적 생각하게 된 충희 이모를 들여 안처서 충희 남매를 쓰려 맛기고 한시름 잇자는 것이지마는 이러케 된 뒤에 충서나 장가를 보내 노코 서서히 예정대로 하랴는 것이다. 그런데 일편 충서로 생각하면 아버지가 강권할 뿐 아니라 자긔가 장가를 아니 가면 부친이 집안 수습을 한다는 핑게로 충희 이모와 결혼을 하고 말 것이니 그러고 보면 자긔 친모는 도저히 가만 잇슬 리가 업고 이래저래 겨우 자진 풍파가 또 다시 일어날 거니까 자긔가 결혼을 하여 버리면 집안은 위선 안정되리라는 생각으로 미좌서에게는 알리지도 안코 부친에게 정희와 결혼하기를 승락하엿다. 물론 이때의 충서로는 자긔 부친이 하는 말과 가티 봉제사를 하게 되어야 상속을 시키느니 문벌가의 딸을 데려다가 게집의 문벌을 팔아서 서자라는 사회의 푸대접을 면하느니 하는 문제에는 귀도 기울이지 안헛스나 다만 한가지 충서의 맘을 그러케 속히 움즉이게 한 것은 정희의 자태이엇다. 사진으로 보고 정희가 졸업한 학교의 사은회(謝恩會) 때에 가튼 학교에 하급생인 『망내누의(충희의 친누의)를 딸아가 보앗고 또 신춘 졸업생 소개에 정희가 뽑히어서 커다케 신문지상에 게재된 것도 그 동긔의 하나이엇다.
그러나 일이 이러케 결정된 것을 나종에 알게 된 미좌서는 한울이 문허지고 땅이 꺼지는 줄 알앗다. 인저는 모녀만 감ª½ 가티 돌려 노코 굶겨 죽일 작정이라고 서둘으기 시작하엿다. 누구보다도 신용을 지키지 안코 친모를 배반한 충서를 죽일 놈 살릴 놈 하고 야단을 첫다. 그러면서도 충서의 맘을 돌이키게 하느라고 애도 만히 썻다. 동경 잇슬 때에 벌서 팔중자와 관계를 하여 팔중자가 몸이 묵어워 젓다는 소문까지를 내어 보앗다. 그러나 부친은 코웃음을 치고 말앗다. 그럴 쓰록에 부부의 사이 모자의 틈이 점점 더 버스러저만 가고 그로 인하여 그러케 신용하던 부친의 충서에게 대한 태도가 차차 냉냉하여 가는 것 가탓다. 그것은 부친의 뒤에는 충희의 이모가 잇서서 꼬득이고 아페는 장성하야 가는 충희 남매가 잇서서 그러키도 하겟지만 충서는 겨우 맘을 부치려다가 또 엉덩이가 들먹들먹하는 것을 깨달앗다. 그러나 모친과 누이의 보호를 게을리하여서는 아니 될 줄을 모르는 것은 아니엇다. 다만 예술가적 천품이 잇는 그가 실업게에 발쩐하라는 부친의 말을 딸아 경제학을 공부하는 동안에 사회문제에 더욱이 힘을 쓰기 때문에 그는 지금 사상적 전향긔(轉向期)에서 번민을 하고 또 그만치 자긔의 긔이한 운명과 『뿌르조아-지』의 자제인 자긔 처지를 몹시 예민한 비판으로 돌려다 보고 잇기 때문에 부친은 처음부터 이해도 업고 문제도 업거니와 미좌서는 아들이 상속을 안해도 조타 집안만 말 업시 지내도록 하라 하며 아버지편만 드는 것이 알 수 업는 일이요 미운 일이다. 그러나 이러한 가운대서 충서는 단연코 정희와 결혼을 하엿다. 충서 자신도 우으로 친부모를 모시고 아레로 이복일망정 사남매의 동긔를 거나리고 ＜71＞ 잇 지마는 따뜻한 말 한마듸 걸어주는 사람조차 업는 처지라 사오년 객고에 부댁긴 거친 맘을 쓰다듬어 줄 이성을 그리워 하던 것이엇다. 결혼쉀은 충서가 야소교를 배척하기 때문에 정희의 졸업한 학교에서 꽤 성대히 거행하엿스나 미좌서와 효자는 끗끗내 그림자도 보이지 안해엿다. 효자는 그래도 어린 맘에 구경 삼아 오려고 한 것을 미좌서가 옷장에 쇠를 채우고 내노치를 안하엿다 한다.

모자는 한참동안 제 각긔 제 생각에 팔리어서 풀 업시 안젓섯다.
『...물론 근본책은 아니다. 그러케 말하면 대관절 근본책이 잇는가? 그러나 내 결혼이 결국은 아버지의 리용ㅅ거리만 되고 말앗다면... 아니 리용ㅅ거리가 되고 아니 되고 간에 하로바삐 어머니가 들어가시게 하는 것이 제일 안전하다. 물론 근본책은 아니 되겟지마는 그래도 긔어코 결혼을 하신다면 재산이나 난호 가지고 나오게 하지!... 그 다음 일? - 그야 내가 아나?...역시 처음부터 결혼도 말고 유랑생활로 들어 갓던 편이 낫슬 것을 공연히...』
충서는 혼자 속으로 이런 생각을 하고 안젓섯다. 충희 이모와 결혼하는 것을 반대를 하는 것은 어머니 때문이다. 결혼 일절로 미안하게 된 것을 그것으로나 위로하자는 것이다 - 고 충서는 생각하엿다.
『무어니 무어니 하여도 너마자 달아나 버리면 우리 모녀는 어떠케 되니!』
미좌서는 무슨 생각을 하고 잇섯던지 이때까지와는 딴판으로 풀 업시 이런 소리를 한다. 충서의 귀에도 애처럽게 들리엇다.
『하지만 여긔 잇슨 댓자 지금 내 처지론 어떠케 하는 수 업지 안허요. 내 사정도 좀 생각을 하여 주서야지요』.
충서도 애원하는 듯한 목소리로 한마듸 하엿다.
『너야말로 내 사정을 좀 생각하여 주면야 좀 정신도 차리고 어떠케 할 도리도 잇지 안켓니! 너 하나만 좀 주ㅅ대를 딱 세우고 집안의 채를 붓들어 나가려는 생각을 먹으면야 무슨 걱정이 잇겟니마는... 그러나 아- 인전 이것두 저것두 다- 단념하엿다. 어차피에 너를 밋고 살려는 생각은 꿈에도 업스니까...』
하며 미좌서는 한숨을 짓고 고개를 떨어트린다.
『글세 그러니까 원래 나는 업는 셈 치시고 지내셔요. 하지만 어떠턴지깐에 곳 들어가서서 어머니나 다시 채를 잡고 안지시면 모든 게 고만 아니야요 공연히 이러케 나와 계시니까 모든 일이 뒤틀려 가기만 하지 안허요?』
『글세 너마자 업는데 무얼하려 들어가란 말이냐. 지금 들어가면 또 그때 그 꼴이 아니냐? 들어가고 안 들어가고가 문제가 아니라 위선 나를 민적에도 아니 올려주는 것을 보렴으나! 이 집에 잇스나 그 집에 가서 잇스나 집이 문제냐. 집은 암만이라도 잇스니까 그 집으로 쪼차가면 그 년을 데리고 다른 집을 배포하고 떵떵거리고 살 게 아니냐.』
미좌서의 말도 그럴 듯하다고 충서는 생각하엿스나 실상 미좌서가 본집으로 아니 들어가는 것은 이왕 그러케 된 바에야 불편하고 서투른 조선식 살림보다는 남산정(南山町)의 ＜72＞ 이 집이 편하여 그리하는 것인 줄은 충서도 모르는 것이 아니엇다. 온돌방보다는 치워도 「다다미」 우에 안꼬 눕는 것이 맘에 행결 나서 그러는 것이엇다.
『그래도 하여간 들어가서 자리를 잡고 안지세요. 그래야 아버니께서도 맘을 잡고 민적 문제도 해결될 게니요...어떠케 그러케 되는 것을 보고야 나도 맘을 노코 떠날 것이니까요...』
충서는 다시 한번 권하여 보앗다. 미좌서는 잠잣고 안졋다가
『...요새도 여전히 그 년 날마다 온다지?』
하며 또 충희 이모의 말을 뭇는다. 형편 보아서는 들어가겟다는 눈치인 것을 채이고 충서는 이 긔회를 노처서는 아니 되겟다 하면서
『요새는 별로 아니 오나 보드군요. 마는 나 보기에는 조금 수상할 것 업습데다. 오기루서니 무슨 상관잇나요. 공연한 의심이세요...의심쩍을 쓰룩에 어서 들어가 보시는게 조치 안허요.』
하며 자긔 모친의 눈치를 보앗다.
『무어 어째? 나는 다- 모르는 줄 아니? 허구한 날 둘이 맛부터 잇다는데 무슨 소리야! 너까지 나를 속이랸!』
미좌서의 말 소리는 또 다시 거치러젓다.
충서는 면구스럽게 흘겨보는 미좌서의 시선을 피하면서
『그럴 리가 잇나요. 그까짓 일을 무엇하자구 어머니께 숨긴단 말씀얘요. 늘 하는 말이지만 아이들을 뒤 거둘 사람이 업서서 외할머니가 틈틈히 보내니까 오는 것이지요. 그런 것을 공연히 의심을 하고 문제ㅅ거리를 삼으니까 돌이어 그러케 만들게 하는 세음이 아니야요...지금 새삼스럽게 아버지가 결혼을 하실 리가 잇나요.』
하며 부풀어 오르는 어머니의 감정을 가라 안치려 하엿다.
『참 너야 말루 헐개 빠진 어림 업는 소리도 한다. 충희 어머니가 죽을 적에 저의 친정 어머니하고 네 사람이 모여서 나 죽은 뒤에는 우리 동생하고 살아달라고 유언을 하엿다는 말을 천서방(千書房)이 일전에 와서 이야기하더라. 천서방 말을 들으면 실상은 그년하고 벌서부터 상관이 잇섯는 것을 충희 어머니는 자긔 병이 다시는 일어나지 못할 줄을 알고 동생과 상관이 잇는 것을 속으론 돌이어 조하햇단다! 남은 죽은 뒤의 일까지 그러케 튼튼히 해 노코 가는데 시퍼러케 살아 잇는 에미가 딸 하나 잇는 거나마 벌거 벗겨 싀집을 보내게 가만 내버려두란 말이냐!』
하며 분해 못견딀 듯이 치를 떤다.
『아- 효자 시집 못 보낼까보아 걱정이세요? 아버지께서 효자만은 자식으로 안 아신다고 하십데까? 모두가 병이세요. 병!』
하며 충서는 못맛당한 듯이 외면을 한다.
『해주면 얼마나 지질히 해줄라구!』
『글세 그게 지금부터 그러케 큰 걱정이얘요? 어머니가 지금까지 가지고 게신 것만으로도 효자가튼 것 둘은 실컨 보내시리다. 서방마저 가면 제 어련히 잘 살라구! 그는 하여간에 천가란 놈이 웨 여긔를 드나들게 하세요. 고런 발직한 놈이고 놈이 남의 집 일을 무얼 알길레 쏘삭어리고 다닌단 말씀얘요. 고놈도 고놈이러니와 고놈의 알랑알랑 하는 말에 속아 넘어가는 어머니도 딱하슈!』 ＜73＞
천서방이라는 것은 남상철이 회사의 상노 아이로 출세하여 그 회사 사무원까지 된 청년이다. 그런 관게로 남씨 집에는 대소가를 물론하고 어리어서부터 드나들뿐 아니라 위인이 잽싸고 얍브장스러워서 안악네들의 귀염은 바드나 충서는 웬일인지 천하의 간물이라고 니ㅅ삿도 어울으지를 안흐려 하엿다.
『모르는 내가 어수룩하지 천서방이 웨 잘못이냐. 어떠튼지 간에 이 겨울 안으로 결혼식을 한다더라! 나부터 내쫏는 수단으로 혼인을 뒤틀어 노코 인저는 너를 말 방패맥이로 장가랍시고 들여 노핫스니까 미국이구 동경이구 귀양사리를 보낸 뒤에 떵떵거리고 공회당에서 예식인지 난장인지 한다더라! 대가리는 묵사발이 된 놈이 나이(年齡)가 부끄럽지! 허지만 얼마나 잘들 사나 해 보랸다! 그까진 년놈들이 아무려면 내 손에 곱게 박일줄 아니!』
하며 미좌서는 독이 파라케 질리어 눈에는 눈물까지 핑 고이엇다.
『글세 그럴 리가 절대로 업세요. 신경과민이 돼서서 밋두 끗두 업는 것을 공연히 공상으로 지어 가지고 속을 썩이시는구려!』
『듯기 실타! 누가 네 이야기 듯자니! 네 눈에는 에미는 보이지도 안니! 에미는 굴머 죽던지 길거ㅅ리에 쫏겨나던지 애비의 게집질하는 것이나 역성을 들고 다니면 고만이냐? 지금 새삼스럽게 와서 무슨 소리냐! 조선놈의 씨알머리는 모두 그 모양이냐!...』
미좌서는 안절부절을 못하는 듯이 팔팔 뛰다가 발닥 일어나더니 안뜰로 난 미다지를 열어 젓드려 노코 퇴ㅅ마루로 나가서 기둥에 기대어 안는다.(下篇은 次號에) ＜74＞
＜63-74＞