별건곤 제30호
1930년 07월 01일
『開闢』時代를 追憶하며, 當時에 執筆하든 諸氏의 紀念執筆 (Recalling the "Gaebyeok" Era, Commemorative Writings by Contributors at the Time) (회고·수기 Reminiscence and Memoir)

『開闢』을 생각하고
魯啞子

When I think of Gaebyeok, I think of Mr. Kim Kitaek. He often came to visit me when I was living in seclusion in Tangju-dong, and he brought me money for manuscripts (原稿料) in cigarette boxes for the manuscripts I wrote. In times of poverty (though it is the same now), I don't know how grateful I was.

There was an upheaval (逢變) at the Gaebyeoksa (開闢社) when my "Theory of National Reconstruction" (民族改造論) was published. Chairs were broken, and it is said that even Goyu-seonsaeng (古友先生) suffered.

Among the things I wrote that were published in Gaebyeok, the most important were the aforementioned "Theory of National Reconstruction," "Korea's Past, Present, and Future" (朝鮮의 過去와 現在와 將來) (which was confiscated), "To the Youth" (少年에게), "Art and Life" (藝術과 人生), etc.

Gaebyeoksa has the feel of a large family (一大家族). I don't know what kind of oath (結義) the several colleagues (同人) made, but it is truly a unique sight (一異彩) that they stick together without wavering or scattering, even while barely making a living on their meager salaries (薄俸).

As I celebrate the 10th anniversary of Gaebyeoksa, I hope that Gaebyeok magazine will be published again and that the company's fortunes will prosper even more. <10>

아아 房門을 열니 업느냐
月灘

Isn't there anyone to open the door?
Woltan

My heart is aching
The smell of many people, the smell of people
Ah, I feel like I'm going crazy
Let the sky break or the earth split open
This suffocating heart
I feel like I'm choking to death
Under the gloomy sky
A city of oppressive melancholy
More gloomy than death
In a tightly closed bar
Like rotten fish
Lying crisscrossed
The nasty smell of those petty thugs (오살이 잡놈)
Ah, I feel like I'm going crazy, open the door
Isn't there anyone to open this door (房門)?

Faces with greasy skin flowing
The dull, distorted faces of many men
Snoring and mumbling
The stuffy smell of sweat
The smell of rotten toes
The air in this bar is filled with these smells
Ah, I feel like I'm going to suffocate
My lungs are exhausted and fading

Look at that virgin (處女)
A future mother, a shy young woman
Isn't she collapsing now, suffocating?
Her clear and blue eyes, like the sea
Are being overturned by the rotten breath of many men
Aren't they becoming a wasteland?
Open the door, open the door
Let new light come in
Ah, isn't there anyone to open the door (房門)!

Isn't there anyone, isn't there anyone?
Kick the wall
Beyond a layer of stone
Isn't there refreshing air
That can save this pure shy woman? <11>
Truly, isn't there anyone, isn't there anyone?
Tear down the fortress with your fists
Even a ray of light
Can save this sacred future mother
Ah, I feel like I'm going crazy
Isn't there anyone to open this door (房門).
"To the Young People of this Country" (이 나라 젊은이들게) 1930.5

세 가지 印象回顧
金璟載

Three Recollections of Impressions
Kim Gyeongjae

The other day, I went late to a private school (私館) and found a business card (名啣) of Mr. Chae Mansik of Gaebyeoksa, and on the back it was written: "I came to see you, but I just left since you weren't there. Please call the company, either Mr. Bang (方) or Mr. Cha (車), or me if you have time."
Wondering what it was about, I called as requested the next day, and there were two requests. One was that since it had been 10 years since Gaebyeoksa came into the world, they were publishing a 10th-anniversary issue (10週年 紀念號), and they wanted me to write a simple impression (感想) or feeling (印象) about it. The other was to write a paper (論文) on the current state of the world economy (世界 經濟界의 現狀) and its future prospects (將來의 展望). It was difficult to refuse both, so I said that I could write something like an impression or feeling about the 10th anniversary, but I couldn't possibly take responsibility for the second request because I didn't have the time and needed to consult various sources.

I was imprisoned in Seodaemun Prison (西大門刑務所) for the First Communist Party Incident (第一次 共産黨 事件) about two months before Gaebyeok was banned from publication (發行禁止). Being isolated from the world, I didn't know that Gaebyeok had received the severe punishment of being banned. I thought that Gaebyeok, which was either likely to receive a sales ban (發賣禁止의 處分) or was the most left-leaning (左翼的) in the Joseon (朝鮮) media at the time, would not be easily banned from publication because it had the backing of the large Cheondogyo (天道敎) organization. It had already been over a year since Gaebyeok had disappeared, but I still didn't know. One day, when a friend (親舊) came to visit, he was holding Joseon Ji Gwang (朝鮮之光). Not knowing that Joseon Ji Gwang, which had been a weekly, had been changed to a monthly, I asked him if Joseon Ji Gwang had become a monthly and if it wouldn't compete with Gaebyeok. He stared at me for a while and then said, "It's been a long time since Gaebyeok disappeared. It's been over a year since Gaebyeok stopped publishing." I wondered if Gaebyeok stopped publishing because it didn't have money, but that didn't seem likely... "No, the authorities (當局) banned it from publication." At that time, the chief warden (看守部長) who was present shook his head from side to side and said, "Ikan, sonna koto iu mon ja nai (イカン 其ンナ事云ワモンチヤナイ)" [Japanese for "No, you shouldn't say such things"]. <12> Later, in the courtroom (公判廷), I met other comrades (同志) and, as if I alone knew the secret news, I told them that Gaebyeok had been banned from publication. Then, Bae Seong-ryong (裵成龍), who had been arrested about 40 days after me, looked at me and said that he had heard about it in the police detention center (警察部 留置場). It was funny that I was the only one who didn't know something that everyone else already knew, and then I tried to spread it to everyone as if it were new and amazing news, just 10 days before the trial (公判) was held.

Next, I remember writing for Gaebyeok and getting beaten up. It was several years ago. Gaebyeok was introducing important social organizations (社會團體) in Joseon, especially in Gyeongseong (京城). I was then affiliated with the Hwayohoe (火曜會) group, and Hwayohoe was one of the Four Organizations Joint Council (四團體合同會). However, it was only a formality that it was the Four Organizations Joint Council, and in reality, they inevitably faced friction (軋轢). The Proletarian League (無産者同盟) was another name for Hwayohoe, and the Bukpunghoe (北風會) was allied with the Joseon Labor Party (朝鮮勞動黨), and it was the observation of the world that their opposing forces would soon break down. The Seoul Youth Association (서울靑年會) and us were incompatible (氷炭不相容), and while there was some approach to the Bukpunghoe amidst mutual intolerance, the conflict (葛藤) with Hwayohoe remained severe. At that time, I was asked to introduce social organizations. Factional strife (派爭) is scary. I believed in my heart that it would never be smooth without controversy, and if I rejected the request, it would go to someone else, and I thought that it would be greatly disadvantageous to our Hwayohoe, so I agreed to the request, giving myself room to think about it. When I returned to the organization, they said that I should definitely write the article, but since the Bukpung group was still under the umbrella of the Four Organizations, I would sincerely introduce and promote them, but on this day when we were openly hostile to the Seoul group, we could not possibly treat them equally. It was distressing for us who lived in organizations. Personally, I hoped for an equal introduction and promotion for every organization, but since the organization's opinion was that it should not be done that way, I couldn't insist on my personal opinion and just did it very insincerely, only going through the motions (形式) as requested by Gaebyeoksa. Of course, it was even more insincere to the Seoul Youth Association. When the Four Organizations Joint Council was formed, there was a faction that opposed it and split off from the Joseon Labor Party. Therefore, since there were two signs of the Joseon Labor Party, we could not possibly introduce or acknowledge the existence of the Labor Party that had split off from our standpoint. So, it was naturally excluded from the introduction. Then, the Seoul Youth Association and the Joseon Labor Party in front of Donhwamun (敦化門) were dissatisfied and tried to make an issue by making excuses (口實), but they were also unsuccessful, so they sent members of the Red Terror Corps (赤雹團) to beat me up. As I turned around behind the post office (遞信局) and headed to my lodgings in Doyeom-dong (都染洞) as the sun was setting, three or four young men with sakura clubs (사구라 몽둥이) followed me. Knowing that they were from the Red Terror Corps, I just kept walking. When I arrived at the private school (私館), <13> they followed me without a word. I, who was not so easily intimidated in such a situation, just laughed without saying anything. It was even more funny to see them reciting the reason for following me in a monotonous way, like reading a declaration (宣言書).

Third, I regret that it was a chaotic (亂文) mess. My personality is such that I can't bring myself to reject a request from someone, especially a friend, even if I know it will be somewhat difficult for me. Gaebyeoksa was always asking me to write, and my situation was so busy that I couldn't open my eyes and nose (眼鼻莫開). I had to write three editorials (社說) a week for the Era Ilbo (時代日報), and Joseon Ji Gwang was published every Saturday, so a weekly was busier than a daily. For a daily, each person has a assigned part to do and that is all they have to do, but a weekly has no such division, so it is busier than a daily, and on top of that, I was also involved in practical movements, so I would leave the private school (私館) in the morning and not return home until sunset, and friends would come to visit late into the night. I would lie down on the bedding and just write with a pencil as ideas came to me. That is my recollection (追憶) and reminiscence (回顧) of writing manuscripts (原稿) for Gaebyeok. So, there was no way that meaningful articles (內容) could come out, and all of them were a chaotic (亂–‡) mess.

오, 가는 歲月은 10年도 꿈이라
金岸曙

Oh, ten years of passing time are like a dream
Kim Anseo

The world (世相) is changing every day. Ten years ago is as faint as a dream, and the fragrance may or may not remain, like a withered flower (꼿송이). If the endlessly flowing water is like the human heart, then the clouds wandering aimlessly in the wide sky are like the years (歲月). The traces of clouds gathering on the clear flowing water will surely remain. But when the wind blows and the rain falls, where in the ripples of the water can we find the traces of the clouds that lingered? Everything is merely an unbearable memory.
Even the bright star (明星) that floats faintly in the dawn sky disappears as the day breaks. Should we give up on it because it will fade away?

Like water, everything flows away
What do I see again in this memory?
Like flowers, everything is soaked in the wind
Again, I declare my fruit

Happy days have disappeared without a trace
Sad days also flow by as they are <14>
What shall I seek again now?
Only ripples in the sea, only memories in the heart

On this day of the 10th anniversary, when all the burdensome memories have entered into a deep and profound oblivion, shall I sing this kind of song of a poet and be done with it?

The first 10 years of enlightenment (文明開化) must have been when bugles were blown and Western drums were beaten, and the sound of "Eotteul" (엇뚤) like "gymnastics is omnipotent" was heard everywhere along with the ridiculous song (唱歌) of "Students, students, our young students" (學徒야 學徒야 우리 靑年學徒들아), smashing all the rural study rooms (싀골 書齋) and making schools. It was also at that time that great movements (大運動) everywhere knocked off the topknots (상투) of stubborn spectators in a day. The burning eloquence of conscientious gentlemen (有志紳士) made the tears of many good men and women hot, and "Elementary School" (初等小學) and "Essential Readings for Children" (幼年必讀) showed them a new world, and their desire for knowledge opened their eyes for the first time.
However, as frost falls on newly blooming flower buds, the first 10 years of enlightenment (文明開化) were soon silenced by a solemn silence that made everything mute. But the same years brought the same spring to the flower garden every year.
The first 10 years soon became the second 10 years, and everything was full of vitality and courage to move forward. It was also at that time that new news at the end of the newspaper deliveryman's bell (新聞配達夫의 방울) rang in the hearts of young people. It was also at that time that magazines and magazines were published one after another. It was also at that time that things like poems, novels, and papers came into being.
Indeed, there were many hopes to bless the future, and inspiring bourgeois sentiments were heard everywhere. The magazine Gaebyeok was one of them.

The years have passed, and it has become the third 10 years. What do we learn in this third 10 years? In the midst of ideological chaos (思想的 混沌), we see gold (黃金), love (戀愛), and ruin (沒落) everywhere. However, it is an unforgettable fact that there are always people on the streets wearing Western clothes (洋服), hats, and rubber shoes (고무신) and swinging short canes (短杖) on their bodies. I don't know what "modernism" (모던니즘) is, but among the three 10-year periods before and after, we only have the three things of the West (西洋), Japan (日本), and Joseon (朝鮮) residing in our hearts. And we still haven't clearly distinguished ourselves.
However, what has changed has clearly changed. It has changed internally and externally, but which one is our own image is like a clever cat mistaking its own tail for someone else's. -1930.5.25- <15>

「開闢」으로에
廉想涉

Back to "Gaebyeok"
Yeom Sangseop

Gaebyeoksa has a 10-year history. However, "Byeolgeongon" (別乾坤), which is one of Gaebyeoksa's projects (事業), does not have a 10-year history. Therefore, everyone is celebrating and reminiscing about the 10th anniversary of Gaebyeoksa's founding through "Byeolgeongon," and not celebrating "Byeolgeongon."
I respectfully congratulate Gaebyeoksa on its 10th anniversary. Moreover, in a media organization (言論機關) in Joseon (朝鮮) that has the so-called three major difficulties (三大難關) (management difficulties (經營難), censorship difficulties (檢閱難), editing difficulties (編輯難)), it is only possible to establish today's foundation after 10 years of growth with the sincerity (誠意), skills (手腕), and efforts (努力) of the relevant executives (幹部 諸氏), which everyone will consider, so I respectfully congratulate those executives (幹部 諸氏) without any flattery and also believe that they cannot help but be grateful for their cultural contributions (文化的 貢獻) and achievements (業績).

However, if I speak frankly without pretense (體面), the era when Gaebyeoksa published the magazine "Gaebyeok" will receive the respect (敬意), gratitude (感謝), and praise (讚辭) of the public (民衆). After "Byeolgeongon" (別乾坤), I am afraid that the public will hesitate somewhat to give heartfelt respect, gratitude, and praise to Gaebyeoksa.
If this is the case, what is the cause? First, "Gaebyeok" had a "purpose" (뜻), but it is not clear in "Byeolgeongon." Second, there used to be "struggle" (싸홈), but it is not visible later. Third, there used to be spirit (氣魄), pride (矜持), and a sacrificial spirit (犧牲的 精神), but is it not because of several reasons that it has become insufficient later?

However, when considering another layer of reasons why Gaebyeoksa's business (事業) could not have been otherwise (if this is the case), we cannot help but feel even more sympathy (同情) before hating and blaming Gaebyeoksa. Why? Because it is chafing in adversity (不遇) that it cannot freely express its aspirations (暢敍 所志), and it is not because it has lost its original "purpose" (뜻), "struggle" (싸홈), spirit (氣魄), pride (矜持), and sacrificial spirit (犧牲的 精神). In other words, it is not because it satisfies with commercialized (商品化) popular publications (通俗的 刊行物) because it has lost these virtues, but rather because it is in a situation where it has no choice but to endure and be self-restrained at this level, so we cannot help but regret its plight.

Therefore, on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of Gaebyeoksa, the only wish we can offer in a single word is to return to "Gaebyeok" as soon as possible (* *시사함니다). <16> In that way, on the day when its virtues, which cannot be hidden, shine again before us without rusting, we will once again shout "Long live Gaebyeoksa!"

However, it does not mean that we doubt the achievements of the current "Byeolgeongon" (別乾坤) at all. The effectiveness (功効) and contribution (貢獻) to the enlightenment (啓發) of the popular readership (通俗的 讀書層) cannot be said to be small at all. Also, these kinds of publications (刊行物) have the most necessary partial mission (部分的 使命) in Joseon (朝鮮) today, and in fact, some people (一部 民衆) demand it. Nevertheless, the reason why I made the above remarks is that, from Gaebyeoksa's own subjective point of view (自體의 主觀), it is more unsatisfactory (不滿足) than "Gaebyeok," and it means that the livelihood has decreased rather than increased. In fact, the material aspects (物質的 方面) of business (經營) may have become more abundant than in the "Gaebyeok" era, but is it not in a state of hibernation (冬眠狀態) spiritually (精神的)? It is uneasy (未安) to go to someone else's party and only point out the flaws in the food, but depending on how you look at it, there may be no greater blessing than this. (June 3rd, Morning)

10年의 感! 10年!
李一

10 Years of Feelings! 10 Years!
Yi Il

10 Years of Feelings! 10 Years! 10 years can truly be said to be a long time. Without borrowing the saying that "rivers and mountains change in 10 years" (10年이면 江山이 變한다), the fact that your company has remained healthy and strong (健在) through the ups and downs (七顚八倒) of progress (前進) and unwavering perseverance (百折不屈) during these 10 years, and especially during the eventful and difficult 10 years, is worthy of full celebration, considering the ebb and flow (消長) of events is like a revolving lantern (走馬燈), and looking at even small media organizations (言論機關) or magazines (雜誌), the appearance and disappearance (明滅) is unrestricted under the oppression (抑壓) of the third force (第三 情勢), even though there have been some setbacks (頓折). It is also a strange fate (奇緣) that I, the writer, am writing a congratulatory message (祝賀辭) 10 years later today, and while your company will achieve geometric progress (幾何學的 進展) and move forward majestically (武步 堂堂) even 10 or 100 times more than these 10 years from today, will I have the opportunity to write another congratulatory message (祝筆) in the next 10 years? Having lived more than half of my life, I sometimes think about the other side (彼岸) of life, so these words sometimes come out.
10 years is a truly great fact, a period of time that has come to the stage of human drama (人間劇 舞臺). In Joseon (朝鮮) as well, while some ideologies (主義) have latent potential (潛在性), some thoughts (思想) were rampant (橫行), Sun Yat-sen (孫文) and Yi Rin (禮麟) entered the spirit world (鬼籍), and Mussolini (舞率利尼) handled the Italian political situation (伊國 政局) with quick strokes, and some disarmament conferences (軍縮小 會議) were held twice in both hemispheres (兩半球) before stopping in the usual stillbirth (流産) movement, and looking only at the press in Joseon (朝鮮), 10 years ago there was "Seogwang" (曙光), which could be called semi-literary and semi-press (半文藝 半言論), and "Changjo" (創造), which was pure literature (純文藝), but during those 10 years, how many magazines (雜誌) of various colors (各色) appeared and disappeared (明滅), and in the current happy situation (깁뿐 現狀) where the quality (質) and quantity (量) in both aspects are somewhat different from the past (今昔의 感), it will be one of them. <17>
Finally, I pray that the future of your company will be a healthy development (健全한 發展) in terms of quantity (量) and quality (質) as if now is the starting point, and I will end here. End.

開闢社의 첫 印象
金振九

First Impression of Gaebyeoksa
Kim Jingu

I was a devoted reader (愛讀者) of Gaebyeok from the first issue of Gaebyeok. I learned about the thoughts (思想) of the Gaebyeok staff (社員) through the pages of the magazine (誌面), and I even tried to imagine their personalities (性格) and even their physiques (體格), sometimes right and sometimes wrong. Therefore, I thought of them as ten-year friends (十年知己之友), and I was deeply attached to them, as if they were childhood friends (竹馬故友), even though I had never met them in person (一面識). It wasn't just me; there were probably a lot of people like me in Joseon (朝鮮) society at that time.
It was five years ago that I first set foot in Gaebyeoksa. It was the year Gaebyeok died after being hit by three arrows. I was traveling around Japan (日本 全國) to publish the Complete Works of the Three Heroes of the Late Korean Empire (韓末三傑全集) (Kim Ok-gyun (金玉均), Kim Bong-jun (金琫準), Son Byeong-hui (孫秉熙)), and after roughly collecting materials on Kim Ok-gyun first, I was returning home with my comrade Kim Cheol-ho (金喆鎬) to visit the related figures (關係 人物) at the time, research reference books (參考書籍), and start publishing (尙今 未完).
While working in various fields, I visited Gaebyeoksa, which I had known as a ten-year friend (10年 故友), as mentioned above, and also to borrow "Great Men of Joseon (朝鮮之偉人)," written by Kim Kitaek (金起田) (then editor-in-chief (主幹)). I met Kim Kitaek, whom I wanted to meet, and finished my business, but I couldn't meet any other staff members (他社員) because they were mobilized to the printing house (印刷所), so I just returned. Mr. Kim was a simple and uninteresting person then and now. After that, there was a national funeral (國喪), and because Emperor Sunjong (純宗) was near the burial ground (因山), rumors (流言蜚語) were circulating everywhere, and people's hearts were turbulent (洶洶), like something was about to explode somewhere, just like 10 years ago. At that time, I was going around to various newspaper companies (新聞社) and organizations (團體), hoping to hear some good news or push my foot in somewhere, but it seemed like there were no real plans, and moreover, I was visiting every day with some expectation and enthusiasm, wondering if something would explode from the large and scary mass called Cheondogyo (天道敎) behind the newspaper companies, but I felt infinitely disappointed that nothing happened in the end. But this was not a complaint (不平) against the newspaper companies.
Then, by chance, I had a travelogue (紀行文) that I had sent to Kim Mook (金墨) in Tokyo (東京) (affiliated with the anarchist group (아나系) = later Kim Jeong-geun (金正根) who died in prison in Daegu (大邱)), and I contributed this to Gaebyeok, which was in the month (August issue (8月號)) that it was 폐간 [closed down]. This became the eulogy (吊狀) to Gaebyeok in the end. One day, I visited the company and the affectionate Cha Sang-chan (車相瓚) said to me very kindly,
"The Governor-General (總督府) told us to stop working because we have been too tired (疲困) lately." <18>
I intuitively associated it with suspension (停刊) and said,
"Why? Have you been suspended (停刊)?"
"No. They told us to stop completely."
As soon as the words were spoken, a look of deep sorrow (沈痛) appeared on his face. Looking around, not only Mr. Cha but also the quiet and taciturn Kim Kitaek, the broad and boastful Park Dal-seong (朴達成), the round and obese Bang Jeong-hwan (方定煥), and the neat and talented Park Yeong-hui (朴英熙) all had the same look on their faces. Some even had tears welling up in their eyes. In that instant, my heart felt like it was bursting and my guts were aching, no different from them.
I sat there heavily for two or three hours, but the atmosphere (空氣) in the company was very bleak (凄凉) and desolate (寂寞), with newspaper reporters (新聞記者) coming and going and high-ranking detectives (高等刑事) peeking in. If it were us, we would have already scraped together the remaining money (殘金) in the safe (金庫) and the comrades (同志) would have gathered together and had a makgeolli (막걸리) party to relieve our anger for a while, but they were tightening their belts and maintaining a calm and composed attitude (泰然自若한 態度), saying,
"The magazine is dead, but Gaebyeoksa is not dead, so we will continue with a new plan (新計劃)."
Everyone couldn't help but admire (敬服) them for demonstrating the gentleman's spirit (君子風) of "not compromising in the face of difficulty (臨難不苟)" and the martyr's path (烈士道) of "unyielding spirit (百折不屈)." So, I only wanted to give them comfort (慰安) in any way I could, but I couldn't think of a way to discuss it because I was completely broke then and now, so I decided to find a capitalist (資本主) and persuaded my close friend Ha (河) to come, but he also wasn't well-off enough, so I tried to comfort them with a few bowls of seolleongtang (설넝탕), but I sometimes laugh to myself when I think about how the comfort ended up making them more uneasy.
Anyway, I think it is still regrettable that Joseon's (朝鮮) only representative (代表的) ideological magazine (思想 雜誌) was hit by arrows and died, and that the righteous fists (義拳) of "youth guidance (靑年指導), government impeachment (當局彈劾), and current affairs criticism (時事批評)," which some of Joseon's leading (有數의) model youths (模範 靑年) had thrown to some extent, were broken.
My first impression of Gaebyeoksa was not of someone blowing a trumpet (喇叭) and commanding (號令) an army (一軍). My first impression of Gaebyeoksa was of someone winding up the flagpole (旗ㅅ대) and clutching their head, bleeding (鮮血) from the bullet holes (彈丸 구멍), and falling down, twitching.

10年을 이럿게
李浩

These 10 Years
Yi Ho

The movement that started like a raging fire has both inevitable causes due to the nature of the movement and artificial causes within the limits permitted by the environment. As a result, it inevitably shows a somewhat subdued (沈勢) tendency in the eyes of others, with rational frost and cold passion. <19>
If the connection of understanding between what is seen and the person concerned only discovers approximate values, there can be no more disappointing words than this.
There are many things that are brewed in the hotbed of depression (沈勢의 溫床), intertwined unnoticed, and strive for organizational diffusion (組織的 擴散) from dispersion (分散) to organization (組織). As for the phenomenon seen as a photograph (寫眞), subdued (沈勢) may be the appropriate word, but we will examine the three-dimensional beauty of the photograph.
Taking advantage of the gaps where water seeps in, the best efforts were made, and even in the slightest remaining space, we stubbornly started to penetrate and reaped the final or possible results.
The movement for life (生活을 爲하여의 運動) sacrificed life (生活을 犧牲하엿고). The intertwined times (時代), systems (制度), appearances (體面), and circumstances (事情) led to tragic sacrifices (悲慘한 犧牲) in difficult situations! In the suffocating atmosphere of each passing moment, where bone-chilling silence continued, there were cries that could not be suppressed even by the courage of a commoner (匹夫의 勇). It was frustrating, sad, and resentful. How many times have we faced such dramatic scenes, which are difficult to describe without tears, from facing life directly to engaging in the life movement? However, in the meantime, there has been a sweet training, weight, and three-dimensional deep growth. The result of enduring hardship for ten years as if it were one day (十年一日가치 臥薪嘗膽), the remaining hardship is also hardship, but it seems that we have become enlightened to reality. It seems that the current reality as a historical outcome (歷史的 成果로서의 지금의 이 現實) has been captured to some extent. It can be said that the social reality (社會的 情實) derived from this has a great direct and indirect impact. It has become the 10th anniversary (10週年 紀念) at this time when we are not lazy to allocate this social reality (社會的 情量).
Comrades who shared rice from a bowl! Comrades who were tied together with a single hemp rope! It's a time to wonder where they've gone. What are they doing, and what are they going through!
We are constantly seeking ourselves and finding our fellow sufferers (同苦의 同志).
1030. June 15th

첫 寄稿의 回顧
憑虛

Reminiscences of My First Contribution
Bingheo

It is said that it has already been 10 years since "Gaebyeok" was first published. I cannot help but be surprised by the speed of time. The first impression that appeared before us with great spirit (偉大한 氣魄) and refreshing attitude (淸新한 姿態) seems like yesterday, but has more than 3650 days passed in the meantime? Furthermore, what is deeply moving is that the magazine (同志) has disappeared in its physical form (形體). However, I believe that only its spirit (精神) and vigor (氣魄), which lived a short but thick life and chose to be shattered like jade (玉碎) rather than preserved like tile (瓦全), will forever illuminate our path like a lighthouse.
The first time I contributed to the magazine (同志) was with a short story (短篇) called "Sacrifice Flower" (犧牲花). This was the first time I had ever seen my writing in print (活字) under the name of creation (創作). <20> With burning enthusiasm (意氣) and trembling fear (恐懼心), I couldn't sleep at night and waited for the results of its publication. When I saw the letters I had written appearing proudly and clearly in the magazine (同志), I even shed tears for no reason.
After that, most of my important creations (重要한 創作) were introduced to the world (세상에 얼골을 내어노케 되엿다) through the magazine (同志).
If I have gained even a small amount of literary fame (文名) today, it is entirely due to the magazine (同志) as a base (母盤).
"Sacrifice Flower" (犧牲花) seems to have been published in the year of the magazine's (同志) founding, so it seems that it has already been 10 years since I took my first step (第一步) into the literary world (文壇). What have I done in these 10 years?
如何一少年 怱怱已三十 [How a young man became thirty in a hurry], I suddenly remember this poem I read in Chabisil's collection (次氷室文集) when I was young, and I cannot help but reflect (反省) and feel deeply moved (感慨).

10週年을 마즈며 - 『開闢』과 아울너 생각나는 閔, 李 兩兄
朴達成

Celebrating the 10th Anniversary - Thinking of Min and Yi, My Two Brothers, Along with "Gaebyeok"
Park Dal-seong

The 10th anniversary of the founding of Gaebyeoksa! Reaching this point, it feels like a solitary brave general (彈騎勇將) on a long and arduous journey (路遠任重) has overcome numerous fierce battles (惡戰苦鬪) amidst wind and rain, and finally - having overcome all difficulties (萬難을 制勝) - climbed to the top of the first great mountain (第一太嶺). At the same time as


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제30호
발행일	1930년 07월 01일
기사제목	『開闢』時代를 追憶하며, 當時에 執筆하든 諸氏의 紀念執筆
기사형태	회고·수기

『開闢』時代를 追憶하며, 當時에 執筆하든 諸氏의 紀念執筆
『開闢』을 생각하고
魯啞子

開闢을 생각하면 나는 金起田君을 생각한다. 君은 내가 唐珠洞에 蟄居할 때에 가끔 나를 차자왓고 내가 쓴 原稿를 爲하야서는 담뱃갑스로 原稿料를 갓다가 주시엿다. 窮한 때(只今도 마찬가지지만은) 그것은 엇더케나 고마왓던지 모른다.

내 「民族改造論」을 싯고 開闢社에서는 逢變한 일이 잇다. 倚子가 다 부서지고 古友先生까지에도 累가 밋첫다고 한다.

내 글로 開闢에 실렷던 것 中에 重要한 것은 우헤 말한 「民族改造論」, 「朝鮮의 過去와 現在와 將來」(이것은 押收를 當하엿다), 「少年에게」, 「藝術과 人生」 等이엿다.

開闢社는 一大家族인 觀이 잇다. 멧분 同人들이 무슨 結義를 햇는지 모르지만은 그 薄俸을 가지고 겨우 運命을 해 가면서도 흔들리지 안이하고 흐터지지 안이하고 한데 뭉치어 게신 것이 一異彩라고 안이할 수 업다.

開闢社 10週年을 祝함에 當하야 나는 開闢雜誌가 다시 나오고 社運이 더욱 隆昌하기를 바란다.＜10＞

아아 房門을 열니 업느냐
月灘

가슴 괴로웁구나
뭇사람의 냄새 사람들의 냄새
아아 미칠 것 갓다
한울이 깨여지거나 땅이 갈너지든지 해라
답답한 이 가슴
숨이 꼭 맥혀 죽을 것 갓다
찌푸려진 한울 밋
찌는 듯한 憂鬱의 都市
죽음보다도 더 음울한
꼭 다쳐진 목로ㅅ방에
썩은 생선뭇가티
세로가로 잡바진
오살이 잡놈의 오살이 잡내
아아 미칠 것 갓다 문을 열어라
이 房門 방문을 열니 업느냐

개기름 흐르는 얼골 얼골
뭇사나히의 失眞한 鈍濁한 얼골
코소리 잠고대
휘적지근한 땀냄새
썩은 발구락냄새
목로ㅅ방 이 안에 가득찬 냄새
아아 숨이 맥힐 것 갓다
허패가 질려 褪色이 된다

보아라 處女 한아
압날의 어머니 숫색시 한아
지금 걱구러저 窒息되지 안엇나
바다물가티 맑고 푸른 어엽분 눈이
뭇사나히의 썩은 숨ㅅ결에
뒤집혀 만경되지 안엇나
문을 열어라 문을 열어라
새로운 광명이 드러오게
아아 房門을 열니 업느냐!

업는가 업는가
발로 벽이라도 차거라
돌 한 겹박게는
이 깨끗한 숫색시를 살릴 수 잇는＜11＞
산듯하고 맑은
시원한 공귀가 잇지 안느냐
참으로 업는가 업는가
주먹으로 고래라도 바서라
한줄기 光明이나마
이 거륵한 압날의 어머니를 살닐 수 잇지 안으냐
아아 미칠 것 갓다
이 房門을 열니는 업느냐.
「이 나라 젊은이들게」 1930.5

세 가지 印象回顧
金璟載

지난 여느날 나는 눗게 私館에 드러가니 開闢社의 蔡萬植氏의 名啣이 잇고 그 後面에는 뵈오려 왓다가 안게서 그냥 감니다. 어려우신대로 社로 『方』이 나 『車』에게나 또는 저에게 電話 거러 주시요하고 씨여잇다.
무슨 일일가 翌日에 나는 要求대로 電話를 거럿더니 두 가지의 要求가 잇다. 하나는 開闢社가 世上에 나온 後 10週年이나 되엿슴으로 10週年 紀念號를 내이니 그에 對하야 感想이나 或은 印象을 간단히 써 달나는 것이요. 다른 하나는 世界 經濟界의 現狀은 如何하며 그 將來의 展望은 如何한가 그런 內容을 가진 論文을 쓰라는 것이엿다. 두 가지를 다-拒絶하기 어려워 十週年 紀念에 對한 感想 印象가튼 것은 쓸 수 잇겟스나 둘재 問題의 要求는 지금 나에게는 그런 時間의 餘裕가 업고 또한 여러 方面의 參考가 必要할 것임으로 閑暇하지 못한 나는 到底히 責任질 수 업다는 것을 말햇다.

나는 開闢이 바루 發行禁止를 當하기 두 달 前에 第一次 共産黨 事件으로 西大門刑務所에서 갓치게 되엿다. 世上과 隔離되여 잇는 나는 開闢이 發行禁止란 慘刑을 밧은 것도 모루고 잇다. 發賣禁止의 處分 잘 밧기로 또는 그때에 잇서 朝鮮 言論界에 가장 左翼的이엿든 開闢은 그래도 天道敎란 큰 團體의 背景이 잇스니 그럿케 쉬웁게 發行禁止處分이 나리리라고는 생각지 안엇다. 開闢이 업서즌 지 벌서 1年이 넘엇건만 나는 그냥 모루고 잇다. 언제인가 엇던 親舊가 面會 올 때에 그의 손에는 朝鮮之光이 쥐여잇다. 週報로 나든 朝鮮之光이 月刊으로 變改된 것을 모루고 있는 나는 그에게 朝鮮之光이 月刊으로 되엿는가 뭇고 그리면 開闢하고 競爭되지 안느냐고 무럿다. 그는 나를 한참이나 치여다보고 잇더니 開闢 업서즌 지가 언제라구요, 開闢 못하는 지가 벌서 1年이 넘엇서요 한다. 開闢이 못한다니 돈 업서 못하는 셈인가 그럿치도 안을텐데... ... 안이요 當局으로 發行禁止處分해서요. 그때에 立會하는 看守部長은 고개를 左右로 흔들며 イカン 其ンナ事云ワモンチヤナイ한다. ＜12＞ 그 後 公判廷에서 다른 同志들과 對하게 되어서 남 모루는 消息을 나 혼자 아럿다는 듯이 開闢이 發行禁止되엿다는 것을 말햇다. 그랫더니 裵成龍君이 나를 도리다보면서-그는  나보다 40餘日 後에 잡혓다-自己는 警察部 留置場에서 드럿다고 한다. 다른 사람은 벌서 알고 잇는 것을 나만 모루고 잇다가 겨우 公判이 열니기 10餘日 前에 드러 아럿고 그리고는 나만 아는 新奇한 消息가티 생각하여서 여러 사람에게 廣布하려든 것이 우서웟다.

다음에는 開闢에 글 쓰고 매 맛든 것이 생각난다. 벌서 여러 해 前이다. 開闢에서 朝鮮에 있는 特히 京城을 中心으로 하고 重要한 社會團體를 紹介하게 되엿다. 나는 그때에 火曜會系의 사람이고 火曜會는 四團體合同會의 한 團體이엿다. 그러나 形式만이 四團體合同會일뿐이지 實地에 잇서서는 依然한 軋轢을 免치 못햇다. 無産者同盟은 火曜會의 異名同體이엿고 北風會는 朝鮮勞動黨과 提携하야 그 對立된 氣勢가 不遠에 破綻할 것이라고 世人의 觀測하는 바이엿다. 서울靑年會와는 氷炭不相容의 格이엿든지 서로의 容納이 업는 中에 北風會와는 多少 接近되는 氣味가 잇섯스나 火曜會하고는 그대로 葛藤이 甚할 뿐이엿다. 그때에 나다려 社會團體의 紹介를 依托한다. 派爭이란 무섭다. 나는 마음으로는 그것이 決코 波紋업시 順坦히 되지 안을 것을 밋으면서 만일 내가 그를 拒絶하면 그 依托이 다른 사람에게 갈 것이고 그리된다면 우리 火曜會를 爲하야 크게 不利하지나 안을가 하야 그 依托에 생각해보겟다는 餘裕를 두고 應諾햇섯다. 團體에 도라와 議論하니 반듯이 그 글을 내가 쓰되 北風系까지는 形式이나마 四合이란 그늘 아레 잇스니 誠意로 紹介 宣傳해주려니와 서울系의 團體와는 方今 敵對視하고 잇는 오날에 到底히 平等한 대우를 할 수 업다는 것이다. 團體生活을 하는 우리에게는 그가 괴롬이엿다. 나 個人으로는 어느 團體이나마 平等한 紹介 宣傳이 希望이엿스나 團體에서 그리해서는 안 된다는 것이 全部의 意思이니 나 個人의 意思를 固執할 수 업서 開闢社에서 依托하는대로 그냥 어는 團體이나마 아주 無誠意하게 ꊰ�단히 形式만을 치루엇다. 勿論 서울靑年會側에게는 한층 더 無誠意하게 되엿다. 朝鮮勞動黨은 四合이 이루워질 때에 그에 反對하고 分裂해 나간 一部가 잇섯다. 그럼으로 朝鮮勞動黨이란 看板이 두 개이엿는대 分裂하야 나간 勞動黨은 우리의 立場으로서는 到底히 紹介하거나 그 存在를 是認할 수 업섯다. 그래서 自然히 紹介에서 빠젓다. 그랫더니 서울靑年會와 敦化門 압헤 잇는 朝鮮勞動黨 쪽에서는 그가 恰足치 안어 이러니 저러니 하는 口實을 맨들고 問題 삼으려 햇스나 또한 如意하게 되지 안으니 그때에는 赤雹團의 사람을 식히여 나를 때리려 보낸 것이다. 해가 점으러 遞信局 뒤에로 도라서 都染洞 나의 宿所를 차저갈 때에 엇던 사구라 몽둥이 든 靑年 3, 4人이 나의 뒤를 따른다. 그것이 赤雹團의 그들인지 알면서 나는 그냥 거러간다. 그리하여 私館에 이르니＜13＞ 그들은 無一言하고 따린다. 그런데에는 그럿케 고개가 숙으러즈지 안는 나는 아모 말업시 웃고 마젓다. 그들은 마즈막에 나를 따린 理由를 무슨 宣言書나 朗讀하듯이 千篇一律的으로 쭉 나려 외이는 것이 더욱 우서워 뵈일 뿐이엿다.

셋재로는 亂文이엿든 것이 後悔난다. 나의 性格은 남이 더욱이 親舊의 付托이면 自己에게는 多少 괴로운 것을 번연히 알면서도 딱- 拒絶 못한다. 開闢社에서는 언제나 글 써 달나는 要求이고 나의 處地는 眼鼻莫開로 밧벗다. 時代日報에도 한 週間에 3回의 社說은 써야 하고 朝鮮之光은 每週 土曜發行이엿스니 週刊이란 밧부기가 日刊보다 더 밧부다. 日刊은 各其 擔任한 部分이 잇서 그것만 치르면 그만이지만은 週刊은 그럿케 分擔이 업스니 밧부기가 日刊의 類가 안이며 그 우에 實地 運動까지 하는 까닭에 아참에 私館에서 나오면 해가 점으러야 집에 드러가고 밤이 깁드록 親舊가 차저온다. 이불 패고 자리에 누어서 생각나는 대로 그저 鉛筆로 적는다. 그것이 내가 開闢에 原稿 쓰는 過去의 追憶이요 回顧이다. 그러니 內容잇는 글이 나올 理 萬無하며 그 全部가 亂–‡이엿다.

오, 가는 歲月은 10年도 꿈이라
金岸曙

날마다 變해가는 世相이외다. 十年의 옛일은 꿈속 가티 아득하고 말나버린 꼿송이 가티 잇슬가 말가 한 香내일 것이외다. 끗업시 흘러가는 물을 사람의 맘이라 하면 넓은 한울을 支向 업시 헤매는 구름은 歲月이외다. 흘러가는 맑은 물 우에 모여드는 구름의 자최가 업시는 안이할 것이외다. 그러나 바람 불고 비 내리니 물살 짓는 물결의 어느 곳에서 어리웟든 구름의 흔적을 차즐 것임닛가. 모든 것은 한갓 슬어지지 안이 할 수 업는 記憶에 지내지 안이함니다.
새벽 한늘에 햇슥하야 떠도는 明星도 날 밝으니 가업다. 슬어질 그것이라고 斷念을 하오릿가.

물가티 모든 것은 흘러간 이때
무어라 다시뵈노 이 記憶이어
꼿과 함끠 바람에 모다 젓길래
다시금 지노란다 나의 이 열매.

깃븐 날은 슬어저 간데가 업고
설은 날도 그대로 흘러를 가건＜14＞
이제 다시 무엇을 차즐 것인고
바다에는 잔물살 맘엔 記憶뿐

까닭스럽고 무거운 記憶의 모든 負擔이 다가티 깁고 그윽한 忘却 속으로 들어간 10年의 이 날에 詩人의 이러한 노래나 한번 불으고 말리잇가.

나발 불고 洋鼓 치며 싀골 書齋를 모조리 부쉬여 學校를 만들어 놋코는 體操萬能이란 듯이 「엇뚤」소리가 「學徒야 學徒야 우리 靑年學徒들아」의 우습광스런 唱歌와 함끠 곳곳마다 들리든 때는 文明開化의 첫 10年이 잇슬 것이외다. 到處에 大運動 이 하로가티 頑固한 구경꾼의 상투를 날녀버리든 때도 그때엿슴니다. 有志紳士의 뜨겁은 辯舌에 여러 善男信女의 눈물도 뜨겁어 「初等小學」과 「幼年必讀」이 그들에게 새롭은 世界를 보여주어 그들의 知識慾은 첫눈을 뜨는 때엿슴니다.
그러나 갓 피랴는 꼿봉오리에 때안인 서리가 내리는 양으로 文明開化의 첫 10年에는 얼마 안이하야 엄숙한 沈黙이 모든 것을 벙어리 만들고 말앗슴니다. 그러나 가튼 歲月은 해마다 가튼 봄을 꼿동산에 던지고 가든 것이엿슴니다.
첫 10年은 어느덧 둘재 10年이 되야 모든 것에는 活氣가 잇섯고 前進할 만한 勇氣도 잇섯든 것이외다. 新聞配達夫의 방울 끗에 새롭은 消息이 젊은 사람의 가슴을 울니든 때도 그때엿슴니다. 雜誌와 雜誌가 꼬리를 맛물고 刊行되든 때도 그때엿슴니다. 詩니 小說이니 論文이니 하든 것이 생긴 때도 그때엿슴니다.
果然 前途에는 祝福할 만한 만흔 希望과 우령찬 부르지즘이 곳곳마다 들니엇슴뉀ˆ다. 雜誌 開闢도 그 中의 하나이엇슴니다.

가고 오는 歲月은 어느덧 셋재 10年이 되엿슴니다. 이 셋재 10年에서 우리는 무엇을 배홉닛가. 思想的 混沌 속에서 곳곳마다 黃金, 戀愛, 沒落 이 세 가지를 봄니다. 그러나 거리에는 언제든지 한 몸에다가 洋服입고 갓 쓰고 고무신 신고 短杖 휘둘으는 사람이 잇는 것을 니즐 수 업는 일이외다. 「모던니즘」이란 엇더한 것인지 몰으거니와 前後 세 가지 10년 중 우리의 잇는 것은 西洋, 日本, 朝鮮 세 가지가 心中에 雜居할 뿐이외다. 그러고 아직까지는 自己와 相을 分明히 가지지 못하엿슴니다.
그러나 變한 것은 分明히 變하엿슴니다. 內外로 變하엿슴니다 만은 어느 것이 自己의 相인지는 약빠른 고양이 제 꼬리를 남의 꼬리로 아는 양과 다름이 업슴니다. -1930.5.25- ＜15＞

「開闢」으로에
廉想涉

開闢社는 10年의 歷史를 가젓다. 그러나 開闢社의 事業의 한아인 「別乾坤」은 10年의 歷史를 가진 것이 안이다. 그럼으로 누구나 「別乾坤」을 通하야 開闢社 創立 10週年을 祝賀, 또 回顧하는 것이요 「別乾坤」을 祝賀하는 것은 안일 것이다.
나는 開闢社에 對하야 敬意로써 그 十週年을 祝賀한다. 더욱히 朝鮮과 가티 所謂 三大難關(經營難, 檢閱難, 編輯難)을 가진 言論機關에 잇서서 10年의 成長을 온전히 하야 오늘날의 基礎를 確立하얏다는 것은 그 關係 幹部 諸氏의 如干한 誠意와 手腕과 努力 업시는 到底히 바랄 수 업슴임을 누구나 斟酌할 것이니만치 조금도 외누리 업시 그 여러 幹部 諸氏에게도 敬意를 가지고 慶賀하며 또한 아울러서 그 文化的 貢獻과 業績에 對하야 感謝하지 안이치 못하리라 밋는다.

그러나 體面 업시 입바른 말을 한다면 開闢社에서 雜誌 「開闢」을 發刊할 時代가 民衆의 敬意와 感謝와 讚辭를 바들 것이요. 「別乾坤」 以後의 開闢社에 對하야는 民衆이 衷心에서 나오는 敬意와 感謝와 讚辭를 밧들기에 多少 躊躇치나 안이할까 두려워하는 바이다.
事實 그러하다 하면 이것은 어대에 原因하얏는가? 첫재는 「開闢」에 「뜻」이 잇섯스나 「別乾坤」에는 그것이 分明치 안코 둘재에는 前에는 「싸홈」이 잇섯스나 後에는 그것이 보이지 안코 셋재에는 前에는 氣魄과 矜持와 犧牲的 精神이 잇섯스나 後에는 그것이 不足하야진 몃 가지 理由에 잇지나 안흘까?

그러나 開闢社의 事業이(이러케 된 것이 事實이라면) 이러케 되지 안흘 수 업게 된 또 한 겹의 原因을 생각할 제 우리는 開闢社를 미워하고 나무래기 前에 한층 더한 同情을 늣기지 안흘 수 업다. 웨 그러냐 하면 그는 跼蹐하야 所志를 暢敍치 못할 不遇에 노혀 잇기 때문이요. 決코 그 本來의 「뜻」과 「싸홈」과 氣魄과 矜持와 犧牲的 精神을 일허버린 것이 안이기 때문이다. 다시 말하면 이러한 美德을 일키 때문에 商品化한 通俗的 刊行物에 滿足하는 것이 안이라 이 程度에서 隱忍自重하는 수밧게 업는 情勢에 노혀 잇스니 차라리 우리는 그 苦衷을 痛惜히 생각 안 할 수 업다는 말이다.

그럼으로 우리는 開闢社 10週年 紀念에 際하야 오즉 한마대로 드리울 祝願은 하로밥비 「開闢」에 도라가* *시사함니다.＜16＞ 그리하야 그 감추어 두지 안흘 수 업는 美德이 녹스지 안흔 채로 우리 압헤 다시 빗나게 되는 날 우리는 다시 한번 開闢社 萬歲를 부르게 될 것이다.

그러나 그러타고 現在의 「別乾坤」의 業績을 決코 疑心하는 것은 안이다. 通俗的 讀書層의 啓發을 爲한 功効와 貢獻은 決코 적다고 못할 것이요. 또 이러한 刊行物은 現下 朝鮮에 잇서서 가장 必要한 部分的 使命을 가젓스며 實際에 一部 民衆은 그것을 要求하기 때문이다. 그러면서도 내가 如上의 言論을 한 것은 다만 開闢社 自體의 主觀으로 보면 「開闢」보다 不滿足일 것이요 살림이 늘엇다느니보다 줄엇다는 말이다. 實際의 經營上 物質的 方面은 「開闢」 時代보다 豐饒하게 되엿슬지 몰으나 精神的으로는 冬眠狀態가 안인가? 하는 말이다. 남의 잔채에 가서 그 음식의 흉하적만하고 오는 것 가타야 未安하나 보는데 따라서는 이에 더한 祝福도 업슬까 한다.(6월3일 朝)

10年의 感! 10年!
李一

10年의 感! 10年! 10年은 참말 긴 歲月이라 할 수 밧게 업소이다. 10年이면 江山이 變한다는 俗談를 빌지 안이 하야도 貴社가 10年이란 長歲月 그 中에도 多事多難한 10年을 七顚八倒의 前進으로 百折不屈히 健在한 것은 事態의 消長이 走馬燈과 갓고 一小局面의 言論機關이나 雜誌를 보더라도 明滅이 限定 업는 第三 情勢의 抑壓 하에서 多少한 頓折은 이섯스나 滿 10年이 되는 今日까지 健在한 것만 하야도 滿幅의 祝賀에 價値가 잇스며 또는 筆者인 내가 10年 後 今日에 祝賀辭를 書하게 되는 것이 貴社와 奇緣갓기도 하고 貴社가 今日로도 10年의 10倍나 百倍라도 더욱 武步 堂堂하게 幾何學的 進展을 遂成하겟지만 내가 今後의 10年에 다시 祝筆를 報할 期會를 再得할까요. 나도 人生의 半이나 휠신 넘어 살고 보니 生命의 彼岸을 생각킴이 間或 잇슴으로 이런 말이 잇따금 나아옴니다.
10年 참 偉大한 事實이 人間劇 舞臺에 올으난 期間이외다. 朝鮮에서도 무슨 主義가 潛在性을 가지게 되는 同時에 무슨 思想이 한참 橫行하얏고 孫文과 禮麟이 鬼籍에 入하고 舞率利尼가 伊國 政局을 快刀亂麻的으로 料理하야 가며 무슨 軍縮小 會議가 兩半球에 두 번이나 열니엿다가는 依例히 流産의 運動에 停止하고 우리 朝鮮의 言論界로만 보더라도 10年 前 當時에는 半文藝 半言論이라고 할 「曙光」과 純文藝로 「創造」가 잇섯더니 그 10年 동안에 各色 雜誌의 明滅이 얼마나 만앗스며 現在에는 質로나 量으로 두 方面이 今昔의 感이 不無하다는 깁뿐 現狀 가운대 하나일 것임니다.＜17＞
最後로 貴社의 今後가 只今이 出發點이 되리만치 量과 質로 健全한 發展이 되기를 비 오며 끗치나이다. 끗.

開闢社의 첫 印象
金振九

나는 開闢 創刊號로부터 開闢의 愛讀者이엿다. 誌面을 通하야 開闢 社員들의 思想을 알게 되며 또 그네들의 性格을 想像도 해보고 심지어 그네들의 體格까지도 틀리고 맛고 間에 擬寫해본 적이 잇다. 딸아서 나는 그네들을 十年知己之友로 생각하엿스며 멀리 一面識도 업스면서 竹馬故友나 달음업시 情이 푹 들어왓다. 나뿐 안이라 아마 그때는 나와 가튼 사람이 朝鮮 社會에 퍽 만헛슬 것이다.
내가 開闢社에 첫 발작을 드려 노흔 것은 지금으로 5年 前이엿다. 바로 開闢이 세화살에 마저 죽든 그 해이다. 나는 韓末三傑全集(金玉均, 金琫準, 孫秉熙)을 出版할 目的으로 日本 全國을 行脚하면서 우선 金玉均에 對한 材料 蒐集을 대강 맛춘 후에 當時의 關係 人物을 訪問하고 또 參考書籍을 探求하야 刊行(尙今 未完)에 着手하려고 同志 金喆鎬君과 故國에 도라온 길이다.
各方面으로 活動하는 동안에 우에도 말한 바와 가티 10年 故友로 알든 開闢社이며 또 金起田氏(當時 主幹)의 著인 「朝鮮之偉人」을 빌어 보려고 開闢社를 차젓든 것이다. 만나려든 金起田氏는 맛침 맛나서 用務를 맛첫스나 印刷所로 動員을 햇든지 他社員은 한 사람도 맛나 보지 못하고 그냥 도라왓다. 金氏는 그때나 지금이나 淡泊無味한 분이라 아주 잔재미는 족금도 업섯다. 그린 후에 國喪이 나시고 純宗 因山이 갓가워서 四方으로 流言蜚語가 돌고 人心이 洶洶하야 10年 前 그때처름 금방 어대서 무엇이 툭 터질 듯 터질 듯 하든 그때이다. 나는 그때 各 新聞社로 各 團體로 불판이 나게 도라단이면서 무슨 조흔 소식이나 들어볼가 어대든지 한 다리 드러 밀어 볼가 해서 열고가 낫지만은 별로 이러타는 計劃도 업는 모양 더구나 新聞社의 背後에 잇는 天道敎라는 크고 무서운 덩어리에서 무슨 XX이 터지지나 안는가 해서 엇더한 期待와 熱誠을 가지고 每日 訪問하엿스나 종시 아무 부시댁이도 업시 지난 것을 나는 그때 무한 섭섭히 녁인 것이다. 그러나 이것은 新聞社에 對한 不平은 안이엿다.
그리다가 내게 偶然히 東京 金墨君(아나系=後에 大邱에서 獄死한 金正根君)에게 보내는 紀行文이 된 것이 잇서서 이것을 開闢에 寄稿햇더니 바로 廢刊하든 그 달(8月號)이다. 이것으로써 開闢 最後에의 吊狀이 되고 말엇다. 하로는 同社를 訪問햇더니 多情스런 車相瓚氏는 가장 慇懃히 나더러 하는 말이
『우리는 그동안 넘우 疲困햇다고 總督府에서 그만 일을＜18＞ 쉬이라고 한담니다.』
나는 直覺的으로 停刊을 聯想하면서
『웨요? 停刊을 當하섯슴닛가』
『안이요. 아주 그만 두란답니다.』
한마듸 말이 떨어지면서 그의 얼굴에는 沈痛한 빗이 떠올랏다. 휘도라 살피니 車氏뿐 안이라 沈靜寡黙의 金起田氏나 廣面豪談의 朴達成氏나 圓滿肥大의 方定煥氏나 介潔多才의 朴英熙氏 나의 얼굴에는 죄다 한가지 빗이 떠올은다. 눈에는 눈물이 그렁그렁한 이도 잇섯다. 나는 그 刹那에 그네나 달음업시 가슴이 뻑애지고 肝腸이 쓰라렷섯다.
2. 3時間을 거긔서 궁둥이 무겁게 안젓스나 新聞記者가 드나들고 高等刑事가 삣꿈 삣꿈할 뿐으로 社內의 空氣는 자못 凄凉하고 寂寞한 殺風景이엿다. 우리 가텃스면 일이 벌서 글읏된 김에 金庫에 잇는 殘金이나 톡톡 털어 가지고 同志들이 『와!』 뭉처가서 『막걸리』 타령이나 해서 一時 火푸리나 하겟는데 그네는 이럴수록 허리끈을 졸나매고 泰然自若한 態度로
『雜誌는 죽엇지만 開闢社는 죽지 안엇스니 新計劃으로 繼續 進行하겟다.』
는 것을 작구 내세워서 『臨難不苟』의 君子風과 百折不屈의 烈士道를 發揮하고 잇는데는 누구나 敬服 안이 할 수 업섯다. 그래서 나는 그네들을 어떠케든지 慰安을 주겟다는 마음만 조왓지만 그때나 시방이나 懷中하고 相議하는 때는 아주 쫄딱이라 생각다 못해서 資本主를 하나 求하기로 決心하고 親知 河某를 誘致하야 온 것이 그도 역시 넉넉지 못해서 담뿍 『설넝탕』 몃 그릇으로 위로를 해보려니까 慰安이 도로 그네로 하여금 不安을 주고 말든 일을 지금도 생각하면 噴飯一笑을 할 때가 잇다.
엇잿든지 朝鮮 唯一의 代表的 思想 雜誌가 활마저 죽어 가고 朝鮮 有數의 模範 靑年들이 어느 程度까지의 巨彈을 投하든 「靑年指導, 當局彈劾, 時事批評」의 義拳을 꺽기고 난 것만은 시방 새삼스럽게 痛惜할 일이라고 생각한다.
나의 開闢社의 첫 印象은 喇叭불고 號令하야 一軍을 揮動하든 그것이 안이고 나의 開闢社의 첫 印象은 旗ㅅ대를 휘말어 들고 머리를 움켜쥐고 彈丸 구멍으로서 鮮血이 淋漓한 채로 곡구러저 버리적거리는 그것이엿다.

10年을 이럿게
李浩

불이 번적 나두록 이러난 運動이 그 運動의 性質上 必然한 탓도 잇고 環境에서 허하는 한의 人爲의 탓이 잇서 理智的인 서리를 쓰고 차듸찬 情熱로서 남이 보기에는 多少의 沈勢의 傾向이 업지 못하다.＜19＞
보는 바하고 當事者하고의 關係에 잇서 理解의 連結이 近似値만을 發見할 뿐이라면은 이보다 더 섭섭한 말이 또 업슬 것이다.
沈勢의 溫床에서 饂釀되고 모르는 새이에 얼거가고 分散에서 組織으로 組織的 擴散을 策하야 남어지 잇는 일이 만흔 것이 잇다. 寫眞으로서 본 現像만으로는 沈勢란 該當한 말일는지 모르겟스나 그 寫眞의 立體美를 檢味하여 볼 것이다.
물 쐬여 가는 틈을 타서는 最善의 努力이 잇섯고 一髮의 餘地에 오히려 발을 드밀어 눗키 始作하여서는 有終의 또는 될 수 잇는 結果를 收恰하엿다.
生活을 爲하여의 運動에 生活을 犧牲하엿고 時代, 制度, 體面事情이 얼키여서 難境에서의 悲慘한 犧牲!을 覺悟할 때에 뼈가 아리는 沈黙이 이어가는 刻一刻의 沈鬱한 空氣 속에서는 匹夫의 勇으로서도 抑制치 못한 울음이 잇섯다. 분하고 설-고 원통하여서다. 直面한 生活에서 그 生活運動에 이르기까지 이 가튼 피눈물이 안이고는 말하기 어려운 劇的 씬을 當하기를 얼마나 하엿스랴만은 그러는 동안에 달코 訓練되고 重量이 잇고 立體的 深刻味가 잇는 生長이 잇서왓다. 十年一日가치 臥薪嘗膽한 남어지의 結果 남어지 고생도 고생이거니와 現實에 눈이 밝아진 것이겟다. 歷史的 成果로서의 지금의 이 現實을 다소간이나마 捕捉하여진 것이 잇겟다. 이에서 따저 나가는 社會的 情實이 直接 間接으로 밋치는 影響이 컷다고 하겟다. 이 社會的 情量을 按配하기에 게으르지 안이할 이때가 10週年 紀念이 되고 마랏다.
그릇의 밥을 노나 먹든 同志! 한 줄의 참 바줄에 묵겨 단이든 同志! 의 간 데를 몰라 궁금할 때다. 무엇을 하고 잇스며 무슨 일을 당하고 잇는지!
自己를 찾고 同苦의 同志를 차저서 끗치지 안는다.
1030. 6月15日

첫 寄稿의 回顧
憑虛

「開闢」이 創刊된 지 어느듯 10週年이 되엇다 한다. 새삼스럽게 歲月의 빠름에 안이 놀낼 수 업다. 偉大한 氣魄과 淸新한 姿態로 우리 압헤 나타난 첫 印象이 어제 갓거든 그 사이에 벌서 3650餘 日이 지냇단 말인가. 더구나 感慨無量한 것은 同誌가 오늘날 그 形體가 살아진 것이다. 그러나 짧으나마 굵게 살고 玉碎할지언정 瓦全치 안흔 그 精神과 氣魄만은 해발과 가티 기리 기리 우리의 압길을 비칠 줄 밋는다.
내가 처음에 同誌에 寄稿하기는 「犧牲花」란 短篇이엿다. 명색 創作으로 活字가 되어 보기는 이것이 처음이다.＜20＞ 타는 듯한 意氣와 조비비는 듯한 恐懼心으로 나는 밤잠도 못 자고 그 發表 結果를 기다렷든 것이다. 내가 쓴 글자가 의엿하게 뚜렷하게 同誌 上에 나타난 것을 볼 때에 나는 까닭 모를 눈물까지 흘렷든 것이다.
그 후 나의 重要한 創作은 대게 同誌를 通하야 세상에 얼골을 내어노케 되엿다.
오늘날 족으만한 文名이라도 어든 것이 잇다면 그것은 온전히 同誌를 母盤으로 생겨난 것이다.
「犧牲花」가 發表되기는 同誌의 創刊 當年인 듯 하니 그러면 내가 文壇에 第一步를 들어민지도 어느듯 10年이 지낸 모양이다. 이 10年 동안에 나는 무엇을 하얏는가.
如何一少年 怱怱已三十, 어릴 때 次氷室文集에서 읽은 이런 詩가 문득 생각나며 反省과 感慨를 禁할 수 업다.

10週年을 마즈며 - 『開闢』과 아울너 생각나는 閔, 李 兩兄
朴達成

開闢社 創立 10週年! 여기까지 오고 보니 實로 路遠任重의 彈騎勇將이 風風雨雨中에 惡戰苦鬪를 거듭하다가 結局 - 萬難을 制勝하고 나서 第一太嶺에나 올나선 感이 업지 못하다. 막혓든 한숨이 탁 터저 나오는 同時에 깃븐 일도 만커니와 슯흔 일도 업지 못하다.
庚甲으로 庚午! 這間 10週年의 行程을 생각하니 實로 입에서 신물이 난다. 안이 도리여 快하다. 우리는 우리들의 忍耐力, 自制力, 奮鬪力, 勇進力에 自讚을 안이할 수 업스며 거긔에 따라 싸아노은 모든 事蹟을 또한 自祝하기에 躕詛치 못하겟다. 우리는 實로 戰勝者이다. 這間 風雨不測의 險惡한 路程에서 「開闢」을 업고 「新女性」을 안고 「어린이」를 잇글고-또다시 「別乾坤」을 들너 업고 「學生」을 집어 안고서 이와 가티 묵어운 짐을 지고 호랑이와 싸우면서 九尾狐를 달내면서 毒蛇를 짓밟으며 魍魎을 뒤업흐면서 그래도 조곰도 不撓不屈하고서 勇往邁進을 할 뿐이엿다. 그러나 亦是 運이엿든지 不測의 惡風暴雨는 맛츰내 우리들로 하여금 「開闢」을 일어버리게 하고야 마럿다.
10週年의 今日에 생각나는 것이 무엇이냐? 오직 開闢이다. 後悔나는 것이 무엇이냐? 亦是 開闢이다. 寃痛한 것이 무엇이냐? 또 다시 開闢밧게 업다. 그러나 往事라 莫論이지 悔恨한들 밋츨 바 잇스랴.
여기까지 생각하니 開闢과 아울너 생각나는 두 분 친구가 잇다. 한 분은 昨年 3月 11日에 우리와 永遠히 길을 달니한 前 우리社 營業局長 石溪 閔泳純兄이고＜21＞ 한 분은 今年 5月 8日에 우리와 永遠한 作別을 告하고 멀니 彼界로 向한 前 우리 開闢社 發行人 一熊 李斗星兄이다.
開闢도 몹시 생각나거니와 閔 李 兩兄 亦是 悟寢間 닛지를 못하겟다. 두 분은 우리와 가티 社를 創立하얏고 開闢과 苦樂을 가티 하얏다. 閔은 營業局長 兼 印刷人으로 李는 發行人으로 「開闢」이 잇든 날까지 그 休戚을 가티 하든 우리社의 가장 功勞者이엿섯다. 그야말로 開闢誌가 그들의 손에서 殉하얏고 그들이 亦 開闢誌 殉하고 乃己한 셈이엿다.
閔은 徹頭徹尾 誠勤이엿고 李는 白頭至足히 活手腕이엿다. 閔의 그 責任感과 重厚性은 우리 社會에서 보기듬은 活模範이엿고 李의 그 敏活한 手腕과 참새 굴네 씨우는 外交는 언제든지 우리가 말하야 마지못하든 터이다. 생각이 여기까지 밋츠매 멀니 舊 龍山 一隅에서 朝飯도 闕하고서 신 둘네 매고 社를 向하야 怱怱히 거름을 옴기는 閔兄의 그 老衰한 擧動이 눈압헤 그대로 낫타난다. 발서 社에 와 안저서 우리를 보고 왜 그럿케 눗게 오느냐고 책망 비슷히 그러나 은근하게 간단한 한마듸 말을 던지는 光景도 주린 배를 웅켜쥐고 盡日 職務에 充實하다가 午後 5, 6時쯤 되야 맨 那終에 또 龍山 길로 허덕어리고 잇는 擧動도 보인다. 생각사록 그가 남긴 印象은 多感多傷이다. 이와가튼 犧牲的 人物을 다시 어데서 求해 보가나!? 天意가 無情하고녀!
李로 말해도 亦是 그럿타. 虎랑이와 만나면 虎랑이와 수작하고 톡기를 만나면 톡기와 작란하고 곰과 동무를 하고 여호와 握手를 하는 等 多角的 外交手段! 그 한번 웃고 한번 뻣대는 光景이 눈압헤 낫낫치 뵈여진다. 「押收요」 「停止요」할 때 그는 주먹을 븨틀며 니러서군 햇다. 「通過요」 「解除요」할 때 그는 살작 우스며 안군햇다. 그는 實로 多角的 外交家이엿다. 이와 카티 閔은 안에서 李는 밧게서 閔은 實勤에서 李는 交際에서 하로와 가티 社를 最善의 方으로 運轉하야왓섯다. 實로 우리社의 雙璧이엿다.
이것이 이제는 모다 옛말이 되고 마럿다. 開闢도 가고 閔도 가고 李도 가고 마럿다. 俗所謂 一場春夢格이다. 차저볼 곳이 바이 업다. 그러나 그럿치도 안타. 開闢은 가고 閔 李는 갓스나 社勢는 그대로 뻣쳐서 이제 10週年 紀念을 하게 되고 동무는 갈사록 느러서 이제 前日의 數倍에 達하니 恨보다 깃븜이 倍나 더하다. 우리는 오직 우리의 信條인 奮鬪와 努力 自制와 忍耐 그것을 武器로 하야써 압흐로 압흐로 - 勇進할 뿐이다. 閔의 그 犧牲心과 責任感을 우리는 다시금 생각한다. 李의 그 活手腕과 名交際도 닛지 안키로 한다. 그리하야써 오는 10週年에는 現在의 10倍 事業으로써 두분 兄의 靈前에 告하려 한다. 이것이 10週年 今日에 가지는 우리 社員들의 盟誓이다.
(以上原稿倒着順) ＜22＞
＜10-22＞