잡지명 別乾坤 第30號
발행일 1930년 07월 01일
기사제목 朝鮮新聞雜誌 沿革及發行史 (History of Korean Newspapers and Magazines)
필자 壽春學人
기사형태 논설 (Essay)

朝鮮新聞雜誌 沿革及發行史
壽春學人

I. Newspapers

A. Origin of World Newspapers

When discussing the origin of Korean newspapers, it seems convenient to first briefly discuss the origin of world newspapers. In the West, the first newspaper was "Acta Senatus" and "Acta Diurna Populi Romani" (around 60 BC) created by the famous Roman hero, Caesar. Both were official gazettes reporting simple records of Senate meetings and their decisions, as well as articles from the National Assembly and other important public matters. The contents of this official gazette were written on plaster-coated boards and publicly displayed to the general public, similar to today's bulletin boards. For local residents, numerous scribes were employed to transcribe and send copies to those who requested them.

Western newspaper historians consider this Roman official gazette to be the origin of world newspapers. However, among Eastern countries, especially in China, the "Spring and Autumn Annals" (春秋), a primitive official gazette, was issued about 500 to 600 years earlier than the two Roman official gazettes mentioned above. Therefore, as an official gazette, it could be considered the world's first. Later, during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty (about 600 years after the Roman official gazette era), there was also a notable Dibao (邸報). This Dibao was issued from the private residences of the 16 military commissioners (節度使) in Chang'an (長安), the capital of the Tang Dynasty at the time, and reported to their respective jurisdictions. Its contents included the Emperor's movements, imperial edicts (詔勅), memorials to the throne (章奏), appointments and dismissals of officials (官吏의 敍任, 辭令), audiences (朝謁), rewards and condolences (賞恤), meetings of the central government (廟堂會議), and other private communications. It was of the same nature but with a different name as the "Gongmen Chao" (宮門抄) of the Ming Dynasty and the "Jingbao" (京報) of the Qing Dynasty. However, the newspaper in the form of a so-called modern newspaper was the Baihua Aiguobao (白話愛國報), published immediately after the Boxer Rebellion in 1900. This is the origin of Chinese newspapers. Next was the Jinghua Ribao (京話日報), founded in 1904, and then the Beijing Ribao (北京日報), founded in 1909. Among them, the Beijing Ribao had the most newspaper-like format and content. <23>

After the fall of Rome, famous in European history, and the domination of all of Europe by the Germanic barbarians, the old Roman culture was destroyed without a trace. The construction of a new culture by the barbarians was still a long way off, and in the so-called Dark Ages, the level of civilization and the state of social organization were such that even dreaming of issuing a newspaper was impossible. Around the 12th to 13th centuries, traces of reports and letters being sent only between messengers of temples, universities, and other high-ranking monks began to appear. In the 14th and 15th centuries, postal and similar urban communication agencies were established for the communication of letters related to commerce and urban official duties. The term "newspaper" also originated at this time. That is, in major commercial cities and transportation hubs, reports converging from various places were collected and compiled, and sent to various directions as letters or appendices. This was the so-called "Zeitung" or "Neue Zeitung." The content of these letter newspapers mainly consisted of political reports, and the news material was collected from oral reports or letters from acquaintances, traveling merchants, soldiers on expeditions, wandering foreigners, students abroad, messengers dispatched from other official courts, and secretaries of nobles.

However, the first newspaper to be operated commercially in a modern style was the "Notizie Scritte" founded in Venice, Italy, in 1566. The so-called "Gazette," a name commonly used for newspapers, originated from the small coin "Gazeta" used as the price for a copy of that newspaper. At that time, Venice was a mediator of transportation between the East and West, and the location of governments that organized modern diplomatic and political communication affairs. It was also a gathering place for important news from various countries around the world, so the occurrence of this commercial newspaper was inevitable and natural.

There are various theories about when daily newspapers began, but what is generally accepted now is that Germany is considered the place of origin. The "Leipziger Zeitung," founded in 1660, is considered the first. Next is the "Daily Courant," founded in England in 1702, and the "Journal de Paris," published in France in 1777. In the United States, the "Pennsylvania Packet and Daily Advertiser" was published in 1784, and in Japan, the Yokohama Mainichi Shimbun was first published as a daily newspaper in December of Meiji 3 (Cheoljong 7, Gyeong-o) [1870].

B. Origin of Korean Newspapers

As mentioned above, if official gazettes are considered the origin of newspapers, then the so-called "Gbyeolji" (기별지), a type of official gazette in Korea, can be considered the origin of newspapers. In the private sector, Yadam (野談) and Yasa (野史) can also be seen as a type of newspaper. However, the exact year of their origin is not known, but according to the History of Silla (新羅史), Seol Chong (薛聰) created Idu (吏讀) characters in the 12th year of King Sinmun (神文王), Imjin (壬辰) (682 AD - 1248 years ago), for use in government documents. From this, it can be inferred that the Gbyeolji began to circulate from that time. However, the so-called modern newspaper was <24> the Hanseong Sunbo (漢城旬報), founded in the 20th year of King Gojong (李太皇), Gyemi (癸未) (47 years ago), under the leadership of Japanese Inoue Kakugoro (井上角五郞). At that time, the Korean government established the Tongni Gyoseop Tongsang Amun (統理交涉 通商衙門) immediately after the Imo Incident (壬午軍亂), and hired Inoue as a consultant on the recommendation of Min Yeong-ik (閔泳翊). In Gyemi year, the Giboguk (機器局), Jeonhwanguk (典圜局), and Bagmunguk (博文局) were established, and this Sunbo was launched as a project of the Bagmunguk. (The Bagmunguk was located at the site of the current dormitory of the attached teachers' college of Gyeongun Girls' High School [慶雲洞 女高附屬師範學校 寄宿舍址]). The style was purely Korean paper with old-style type, giving it a similar feel to an ancient collection of writings. The content of the articles was limited to records of the court, changes of internal and external officials, and diplomatic treaties. The readership was also limited to government officials, so the newspaper was essentially a type of official gazette, as the organizer was a government figure.

C. American-Affiliated Newspaper = The Independent

The following year, in October of Gapsin (甲申), the reform movement of Kim Ok-gyun's (金玉均) faction failed, and Japanese influence decreased while Qing (淸) influence rose again. The new facilities of the so-called civilization organization were completely swept away, and by Muo year (the 25th year of King Gojong), even the Bagmunguk was abolished. From then until the Sino-Japanese War (甲午 日淸戰爭) era, no trace of newspapers could be seen in Korea. Then, in Eulmi year, the Treaty of Shimonoseki (日淸馬關條約) was concluded, and Korea's independence was proclaimed to the world. In the following year, Dingu (丁酉), the first year of Gwangmu (光武), Seo Jae-pil (徐載弼), who had fled to the United States during the Gapsin Coup, returned to Korea. At that time, King Gojong relied on Russian power, but as Russia's ambitions were exposed, he sought to approach the United States, which was advertised as a world power, as a strategy of using barbarians to control barbarians (以夷制夷). He pardoned Seo, who had become a US citizen, of the crime of being a "traitor" from the Gapsin year, and hired him as a new government advisor. He became a central figure among the new progressives, enjoying great trust from King Gojong. At a time when the general system of Korea was being reformed, he advocated the independence and egalitarianism he had learned in the United States for many years. He transformed Great Joseon (大朝鮮) into Great Han (大韓), Great Monarch (大君主) into Great Emperor (大皇帝), the reign name of Geonyang (建陽) into Gwangmu (光武), Mohwagwan (慕華館) into Independence Hall (獨立館), Yeongeunmun (迎恩門) into Independence Gate (獨立門), and Nambyeolgung (南別宮) into Hwangu-dan (圜丘壇). He expanded the knowledge exchange center for government officials and established the Independence Association (獨立協會), and at the same time, published its own journal. This was the famous Independent Newspaper (獨立新聞). The content and format of this newspaper were completely different from the former Hanseong Sunbo, and it became a political textbook by promoting the ideas of independence and freedom for the people.

At the same time as this newspaper, the Gyeongseong Sinmun (京城新聞) and the Maeil Sinmun (每日新聞) (not the current Maeil Sinbo) were founded. The former was run by Yoon Chi-ho's (尹致昊) younger cousins, Yoon Chi-so (尹致昭) and his brother, with a small scale of less than 100 won, and the size of the paper was only about the size of a palm. The Maeil Sinmun was run by Yang Hong-muk (梁弘黙) of the Baejae Hakdang (培材學堂), an American-run school, and someone else. The characteristics of these few newspapers at that time were that they were all in pure Korean, affiliated with the American system, had a strong Christian flavor in addition to politics, and advocated for breaking down class distinctions, liberating slaves, and promoting freedom and equality.

Later, in the early summer of Musul year (戊戌年), the Independence Association was defeated due to the reaction of the so-called Hwanguk Association (皇國協會), <25> and Seo Jae-pil fled to the United States again. The members of the Independence Association were rounded up and expelled, and the Independent Newspaper suffered the unfortunate fate of being discontinued. However, Namgung Eok (南宮億), Na Su-yeon (羅壽淵), and others among the members thought that newspapers were most necessary for guiding the people and raising public opinion. Namgung and Na acquired the Gyeongseong Sinmun run by Yoon and changed its name to Hwangseong Sinmun (皇城新聞), placing it in Jwasunyeong (左巡營) (the site of the current Hwangtohyeon Memorial Pavilion [黃土峴 紀念碑閣]), operating it on a shareholding system. Lee Jong-il (李鍾一) took over Yang's Maeil Sinmun, renamed it Jeguk Sinmun (帝國新聞), and placed it in Hanyang-dong (漢陽洞) (now Donui-dong [敦義洞]) (the first pure Hangeul newspaper in Korea). With his extraordinary writing skills, he expressed strong and scathing criticism, denouncing and condemning the government at the time. At the same time, he confronted Kikuchi Kenjo's (菊池謙讓) Hanseong Sinbo (漢城新報), Hagiya Shuufu's (萩谷籌夫) Daehan Ilbo (大韓日報), and Arise Juro's (蟻生十郞) Daedong Sinbo (大東新報), which were run by Japanese, and enlivened the Gyeongseong forum. Jang Ji-yeon (張志淵) and Ryu Geun (柳瑾) of the Hwangseong and Jeong Un-bok (鄭雲復) of the Jeguk were all veterans of this field, and their reputations were well-known. At the time of the Eulsa Treaty (乙巳新條約), the two articles "This Day, Let Us Cry Aloud" (是日也放聲大哭) and "Throwing Down the Pen and Shouting" (擲筆大呼) in the Hwangseong stirred the passions of the general public and were widely quoted. The authors were even imprisoned for their writing. Also, at that time, when writing an article about the Emperor's Birthday (萬壽聖節) in the Jeguk Sinmun, the word "mansae" (萬歲) was mistakenly written as "mangse" (망세) by the proofreader, and President Lee Jong-il was temporarily detained for disrespect, which is still a story told in the field today.

D. The Golden Age and Dark Age of Korean Newspapers

After the Eulsa Protection Treaty (乙未保護條約), Korean politics, of course, suffered various unspeakable restrictions. However, the old and cunning Resident-General Itō Hirobumi (伊藤博文) used his usual political tactics to ease the hearts of people inside and outside the country. He also allowed some degree of freedom of speech in order to refer to public opinion. The approximately six years from Eulsa year to the Gyeongseul Annexation era were the first golden age for newspapers in Korea since their inception. The Resident-General's official newspapers, the Gyeongseong Ilbo (京城日報) and the Seoul Press (서울푸렛스가), were created, and the Daehan Maeil Sinbo (大韓每日申報), run by Englishman Ernest Bethell (裴說), who advocated extreme anti-Japanese sentiment under the grace of extraterritoriality, and won the great favor of the general Korean population, was also created at this time.

Also noteworthy at this time is the Mansae Bo (萬歲報), run by the Cheondogyo (天道敎). It was founded in June of Gwangmu 9 (乙未) [1905]. The location was Hoedong (會洞) (now Asahi-cho 1-chome [旭町 1丁目]), the president was Oh Se-chang (吳世昌), and the chief editor was Lee In-jik (李人稙). They were all new figures at the time, and Lee in particular had a lot of knowledge about newspapers from his many years of stay in Japan. The newspaper was completely revamped from the traditional Korean-style newspaper, changing the number of columns from the traditional 8 to 10, and using the first ruby-style type in Korea. The so-called New Novel "The Voice of the Devil" (鬼의 聲) was also first published in this newspaper. (Written by Kikucho Lee In-jik). However, due to management difficulties, it was unfortunately sold to the Lee Wan-yong (李完用) Cabinet as its official newspaper in the autumn of Dingu year and renamed Daehan Sinmun (大韓新聞). It was discontinued at the time of the Gyeongseul Annexation. At the same time, the so-called Kukmin Sinbo (國民新報), the official newspaper of the Iljinhoe (一進會), was published in Midong (美洞) (now Hwanggeum-cho [黃金町]). The chief editor was Maeha Choi Young-nyeon (梅下 崔永年), and the public posting of the petition for annexation (合邦建白書) is still unforgettable in our memories. This newspaper was also the first to solicit votes from readers on paper. Later, around the 2nd year of Yunghee (隆熙) [1908], the Daehan Association (大韓協會), which was formed by the Cheondogyo in opposition to the Iljinhoe and the Gukseoyuseoldan (國是遊說團), ran another newspaper. That was the Daehan Minbo (大韓民報). The Daehan Minbo was a sister paper to the Hwangseong and Jeguk, and as the official newspaper of a political party, it contained many dignified criticisms and denunciations of the government in each issue. It was also notable for publishing the first satirical cartoons in Korea. The location was Susong-dong (壽松洞) (now Jongno Elementary School site [鐘路小學校址]), and the president was Oh Se-chang, who also served as the president of the Daehan Association.

In addition, Japanese-run newspapers included the Chosen Shinbun (朝鮮新聞) in Incheon, as well as the Hanseong Sinbo, Daehan Ilbo, Daedong Sinbo, and others mentioned above. Branches of Hochi, Jiji, Kokumin, Mancho, Osaka Asahi, and Osaka Mainichi were also established. At one time, there were so many newspaper signs in Gyeongseong that they could compete with the signs of private schools.

Then, on August 29 of Gyeongseul (庚戌) [1910], the so-called Japan-Korea Annexation (日韓合倂) took place, and Terauchi Masatake (寺內 總督), a representative figure of military rule, governed Korea. The Korean press was completely wiped out under his sword, and no newspaper other than the so-called Goyongji Maeil Shinbo (御用紙 每申) (at that time, all other newspapers were discontinued, and the Daehan Maeil was bought from Ernest Bethell and used as a government mouthpiece, while also being renamed Maeil Shinbo) survived. The approximately ten years from Gyeongseul year to Saimi year can be called the dark age of the Korean press.

Then, in March of Gimi year (己未年) [1919], the sound of "Mansae" (萬歲) rang out, and Hasegawa Yoshimichi (長谷川 總督) retired and Saitō Makoto (齋藤 總督) succeeded him. In proclaiming the so-called Cultural Rule (文化政治), some freedom of speech was relaxed, and several newspapers (magazines will be discussed separately below) were permitted. In April of Gyeongsin year (庚申年) (Taisho 9 [大正 9年] [1920]), the Dong-A Ilbo (東亞日報), initiated by Lee Sang-hyeop (李相協) and others, was founded. In March of the same year, the Chosun Ilbo (朝鮮日報), run by the Taisho Chinmokhoe (大正親睦會), was founded (this Chosun Ilbo is, of course, the predecessor of the current Chosun Ilbo, but as a result of several changes in management, it is now completely unrelated to the Taisho Chinmokhoe). At the same time, the Sisa Sinmun (時事新聞), the official newspaper of the Kukmin Association (國民協會), was published (discontinued about two years later). Later, on March 30 of Taisho 12 (大正 12年) [1923], the Sidae Ilbo (時代日報), edited by Yukdang Choi Nam-seon (六堂 崔南善), was published, but was discontinued in the autumn of Taisho 15. Furthermore, on November 15 of Taisho 15 [1926], the Jungoe Ilbo (中外日報), edited by Lee Sang-hyeop, was published and has continued to this day. However, as the public is already well aware of these recently created newspapers, I will not discuss them in detail here, but will provide a detailed review on another occasion. Regardless of the nature of their rhetoric or ideological color, these newspapers have made considerable progress in terms of form and format compared to the past, and these newspapers were also the first to use rotary presses for printing.

(The discussion of magazines will continue next time.) <27>

**Named Entities**

Ssi-sa	Caesar
A-gu-da, Se-na-da-seu	Acta Senatus
A-gu-da, Te-yul-na, Po-pu-ri, Ro-ma-ni	Acta Diurna Populi Romani
Tang Hyeonjong	唐 玄宗
Jang-an	長安
Gongmun Cho	宮門抄
Gyeongbo	京報
Bae-khwa Ae-guk-bo	白話愛國報
Gyeong-hwa Ilbo	京話日報
Pae-kyeong Ilbo	北京日報
No-de-it-bi-e, Seu-ku-reot-te	Notizie Scritte
Ra-i-peu-chi-ga, Sseu-a-i-sseun-gu	Leipziger Zeitung
Te-i-ri-geu-ran-deu	Daily Courant
Jo-na-ru, to, Pa-ri	Journal de Paris
Pen-sil-be-i-ni-a, Ppa-get-deu, Aen-deu, Te-ri, A-do-bi-a-ta-i-ssaa	Pennsylvania Packet and Daily Advertiser
Yo-ko-ha-ma Mae-il-chi Sinmun	橫濱每日新聞
Cheoljong	哲宗
Gyeong-o	庚午
Gbyeolji	기별지
Yadam	野談
Yasa	野史
Sinmun-wang	神文王
Seol Chong	薛聰
Idu	吏讀
I-no-u-e Kakugoro	井上角五郞
Gojong	李太皇
Tongni Gyoseop Tongsang Amun	統理交涉 通商衙門
Min Yeong-ik	閔泳翊
Giboguk	機器局
Jeonhwanguk	典圜局
Bagmunguk	博文局
Gyeong-un-dong	慶雲洞
Gim Ok-gyun	金玉均
Muo	戊午
Il-cheong Jeonjaeng	日淸戰爭
Eulmi	乙未
Seo Jae-pil	徐載弼
Gwangmu	光武
Geonyang	建陽
Mohwagwan	慕華館
Yeongeunmun	迎恩門
Nambyeolgung	南別宮
Hwangu-dan	圜丘壇
Kyungsung Shinmun	京城新聞
Yun Chi-ho	尹致昊
Yun Chi-so	尹致昭
Baejae Hakdang	培材學堂
Yang Hong-muk	梁弘黙
Musul	戊戌
Hwanguk Hwe	皇國協會
Namgung Eok	南宮億
Na Su-yeon	羅壽淵
Hwangseong Sinmun	皇城新聞
Jwasunyeong	左巡營
Hwangtohyeon Ginyeombigak	黃土峴 紀念碑閣
Lee Jong-il	李鍾一
Jeguk Sinmun	帝國新聞
Hanyang-dong	漢陽洞
Kikuchi Kenjo	菊池謙讓
Hanseong Sinbo	漢城新報
Hagiya Shuufu	萩谷籌夫
Daehan Ilbo	大韓日報
Arise Juro	蟻生十郞
Daedong Sinbo	大東新報
Jang Ji-yeon	張志淵
Ryu Geun	柳瑾
Jeong Un-bok	鄭雲復
Eulsa Sinjoyak	乙巳新條約
Ito Hirobumi	伊藤博文
Gyeongseong Ilbo	京城日報
Seoul Peulessesu	서울푸렛스가
Ernest Bethell	裴說
Daehan Maeil Sinbo	大韓每日申報
Cheondogyo	天道敎
Mansae Bo	萬歲報
Oh Se-chang	吳世昌
Lee In-jik	李人稙
Kikucho	菊初
Lee Wan-yong	李完用
Daehan Sinmun	大韓新聞
Iljinhoe	一進會
Kukmin Sinbo	國民新報
Maeha Choi Young-nyeon	梅下 崔永年
Gukseoyuseoldan	國是遊說團
Daehan Hyeophoe	大韓協會
Daehan Minbo	大韓民報
Terauchi Masatake	寺內總督
Goyongji Maeil Sinbo	御用紙 每申
Hasegawa Yoshimichi	長谷川總督
Saitō Makoto	齋藤總督
Dong-A Ilbo	東亞日報
Lee Sang-hyeop	李相協
Taisho Chinmokhoe	大正親睦會
Chosun Ilbo	朝鮮日報
Sisa Sinmun	時事新聞
Yukdang Choi Nam-seon	六堂 崔南善
Sidae Ilbo	時代日報
Jungoe Ilbo	中外日報



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제30호
발행일	1930년 07월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮新聞雜誌 沿革及發行史
필자	壽春學人
기사형태	논설

朝鮮新聞雜誌 沿革及發行史
						壽春學人
一. 新聞
甲. 世界新聞의 由來
朝鮮 新聞의 由來를 말하자면 먼저 世界 新聞의 由來를 잠간 말하는 것이 便利할 것 갓다. 西洋에 잇서서 最初의 新聞紙는 彼 羅馬의 有名한 英傑 『씨사』의 創設한 『아구다, 세나다스』 『아구다, 데율나, 포푸리, 로마니』니-(西記前 60年頃)-兩者는 共히 官報로서 元老院의 會議 及 其決定에 關한 簡單한 記錄과 國民議會의 記事 及 其他 重要한 公共的 記事를 報道하는 것이엿다. 然而 此 官報의 內容 發表는 石膏를 塗한 板上에 文字를 써서 一般市民에게 公示하얏스니 卽 今日의 揭示板과 비슷하얏고 且 地方住民을 爲하야는 多數의 書記로 此를 筆寫케 하야 要求者에게 發送하얏다.
西洋의 新聞史家들은 이 羅馬의 官報로써 世界 新聞의 元祖라 稱하나 東洋 諸國中 特히 中國에서는 『春秋』라 稱하는 原始的 官報가 上記한 羅馬의 二種 官報보다 約 5, 6百年을 압서서 發行되엿슨 즉 官報로는 이것이 世界 最初의 것이라 하겟다. 그 뒤 唐 玄宗 때에(羅馬 官報 時代보다 約 6百年 後) 이르러서 또 著名한 邸報가 잇섯스니 이 邸報는 當時 唐의 國都 長安에 잇는 16節度使의 私邸에서 發行하야 各其 所管地方에 通報하는 것으로서 그 內容은 皇室의 動靜, 詔勅, 章奏, 官吏의 敍任, 辭令, 朝謁, 賞恤, 廟堂會議 及 其他 私事通信 等이엿섯는데 明代의 『宮門抄』 淸代의 京報와 同質異名의 것이다. 그러나 所謂 近代의 新聞紙의 形式을 具한 新聞은 光緖 26年(西紀1900年)에 이러난 所謂 義和團事件 直後에 發行한 白話愛國報니 此는 中國 新聞의 元祖요. 其次는 光緖 30年(書記1904)에 創刊된 京話日報, 又 其次는 同35年(西紀1909)에 創刊된 北京日報니＜23＞ 그 中 北京日報는 軆裁와 內容이 그 中 新聞다웟섯다.
歐羅巴는 彼 歷史上 有名한 羅馬가 滅亡하고 게루만의 蠻族이 全歐洲를 支配하게 된 뒤로 羅馬의 녯 文化가 餘地업시 破壞되고 蠻族의 新文化 建設은 아즉것 前途가 遙遠하야 所謂 暗黑時代에 잇섯슨즉 그때 文明의 程度라던지 社會의 組織狀態는 到底히 新聞의 發行과 가튼 것은 꿈도 뀌지 못할 경우엇섯다. 그리하야 第12世紀 乃至 13世紀 頃에 이르려 겨우 寺院 大學 其他 高僧의 使者間에 限하야 報告 及 信書 送達이 開始된 痕跡이 잇섯고 第14世紀-第15世紀에 이르러서는 商業 及 都市官職에 關한 信書 交通을 爲하야 郵便과 類似한 都市通信機關이 생기엿다. 新聞紙라는 말이 생기기도 이때엿다. 卽 大商業都市 及 交通中心點이 되는 地方에서는 各地로서 輻輳하는 報告를 蒐集 編成하야 書信 또는 그 附錄으로 此를 各方面에 送達하얏스니 此가 卽 所謂 『쓰아이쓰구』 또는 『노이여쓰아이쓰구』라 하는 것이엿다. 此 書信新聞紙의 內容은 政治邊報道를 主로 하고 記事材料는 親知人의 口頭 또는 편지의 報道外에 行商人, 出征軍人, 漫遊外國人, 留學生, 其他 官廷에서 派遣한 使者, 貴族의 書記官 等에서 採取하엿다.
然而 新聞紙가 近代式과 가티 營利的으로 經營하게 되기는 西紀 1566年에 伊太利의 『베니스』에서 創刊된 『노데잇비에, 스쿠럿테』가 嚆矢이니 新聞紙 名稱의 한아로 一般이 使用하는 所謂 『까제트』라 하는 것은 當時 右 新聞 一部의 代價로 使用하던 小貨幣 『까제트』에서 생긴 말이다. 當時 『베니스』는 東西 兩洋 交通의 媒介者로 또는 近來 外交術 及 政治的 通報 事務를 組織한 政府의 所在地로 尙又 世界 各國에서 來하는 重要 新聞의 集積地인즉 이 營利的 新聞 發生은 必然 또 當然의 일일 것이다.
그리고 日刊新聞이 언제부터 始作되엿느냐 하는데 關하야는 諸說이 區區하나 只今에 一般이 認定하는 것은 獨逸이 其 發祥地라 稱하나니 卽 1660年에 創刊한 『라이푸치가, 쓰아이슨구』가 그것이오. 其次는 1702年에 英國에서 創刊된 『데-리그란드』 1777年에 佛國에서 發行한 『죠-나-루, 도, 파리』오. 其外 米國은 1784년에 『펜실바니아, 빠겟드, 앤드, 데리, 아도비아-다이싸』를 發行하고 日本은 明治 3年 12月(哲宗 7年 庚午)에 橫濱每日新聞이 最初 日刊新聞으로 發行되엿다.

乙. 朝鮮新聞의 由來
上述함과 가티 官報를 新聞의 元祖라 하면 우리 朝鮮에 잇서서는 官報의 一種인 所謂 『기별지』가 新聞의 元祖라 하겟고 또 民間에 잇서서는 野談, 野史 가튼 것이 또한 新聞의 一種으로 볼 수 잇다. 然而 그 始初된 年代에 이르러서는 아측 詳細한 記錄이 업스나 新羅史에 依하면 神文王 12年 壬辰(西紀682-距今 1248年前)에 薛聰이 吏讀(두)文을 지다 官府文札에 用하얏다 하얏슨즉 그때부터 긔별紙가 始行된 것을 足히 짐작하겟다. 그러나 所謂 近代式의 新聞은＜24＞ 李太皇 20年 癸未(距今 47年前)에 日本人 井上角五郞의 主幹 下에 創刊된 漢城旬報니 그때 朝鮮政府에서는 壬午軍亂 卽後에 統理交涉 通商衙門을 新設하고 閔泳翊의 推薦으로 井上氏를 囑託으로 雇聘하얏섯는데 癸未年에 機器局, 典圜局, 博文局을 設置하는 同時에 博文局 事業으로 이 旬報를 啓行하게 된 것이엿다.(博文局은 只今 慶雲洞 女高附屬師範學校 寄宿舍址) 그 樣式은 純朝鮮紙에 舊式 鑄字를 그대로 써서 一見하면 古代 文集과 비슷한 感이 잇고 記事의 內容은 宮廷錄事, 內外官吏의 異動, 外交條約等에 不過하고 讀者도 또한 官公吏에 限하얏스니 그 主宰者가 官邊人物이니만치 그 新聞이란 것도 一種 官報의 形式에 지나지 못한 것은 勿論이엿다.

丙. 米國系 新聞=獨立新聞
그 翊年 甲申 10月에 金玉均 一派의 革新運動이 失敗되며 日本의 勢力이 減少하고 淸國의 勢力이 다시 擡頭하니 所謂 文明機關의 新施設은 一掃無餘하게 되야 戊午年(李太玉 25年)에 이르러서는 博文局까지 革罷하게 되니 그때로부터 甲午 日淸戰爭 時代에 이르기까지는 朝鮮에는 新聞의 影字좃차 볼 수 업게 되엿다. 그러다가 乙未年에 日淸馬關條約이 成立되며 朝鮮의 獨立을 世界에 公布하게 되고 그 翌翌年 丁酉 卽 光武 元年에 往者 甲申政變 때 米國으로 亡命하엿던 徐載弼이 歸國하니 當時 李太王은 露國의 勢力을 恃賴하얏스나 露國의 野心이 暴露됨을 따러 다시 以夷制夷의 策으로 當時 世界 富强國이라 宣傳되는 米國과 다시 接近코자 하야 米國에 入籍한 徐氏의 所謂 甲申年 逆賊의 罪名을 蕩斥하고 새로 政府의 顧問으로 聘用하니 그는 李太王의 信任이 多大한 中 一般 新進派의 中樞 人物이 되엿섯다. 때마침 朝鮮의 一般制度를 革新하는 즘이라 그는 多年間 米國에서 訓習한 獨立主義, 平民主義를 高唱하야 大朝鮮은 大韓, 大君主는 大皇帝, 建陽의 年號를 光武로 慕華館은 獨立館, 迎恩門은 獨立門, 南別宮은 圜丘壇으로 變稱하고 官吏의 智識交換所를 擴張하야 獨立協會를 創設하는 同時에 또 機關紙를 發行하얏스니, 此가 卽 有名한 獨立新聞이다. 이 新聞의 內容과 體裁는 勿論 前日 漢城旬報와는 아주 天壤의 差가 잇슬뿐더러 人民의 獨立, 自由의 思想을 鼓吹하야 一個 政治的 敎科書가 되엿다.
이 新聞과 同時에 京城新聞과 每日新聞(只今 每日申報는 勿論 안이다)이 創刊되엿스니 前者는 米國通인 尹致昊氏의 從弟 尹致昭 兄弟의 經營으로 百圓未滿의 小規模로 하엿섯는데 紙面의 大가 손바닥만밧게 안하엿고 每日新聞은 米國人 經營의 學校인 培材學堂의 梁弘黙氏  外 某氏의 經營한 것이엿다. 그때 이 몃 各 新聞의 特色은 全部가 純朝鮮文인 것과 系統이 米國 系統인 것과 政治 以外에 基督敎의 냄새가 만흔 것과 階級打破, 奴隷解放, 自由 平等을 主唱한 것이엿다.
그 뒤에 戊戌年 初夏에 獨立協會가 所謂 皇國協會의 反動으로 因하야 敗北되고＜25＞ 徐載弼이 다시 米國으로 亡命하며 獨立協會의 會員이 一網打盡으로 驅逐을 當하니 獨立新聞도 따러서 廢刊의 悲運을 當하게 되엿다. 그러나 當時 會員 中 南宮億, 羅壽淵 外 某某氏는 人民을 指導하고 與論을 이르키는데는 무엇보다 新聞이 가장 必要하다 생각하고 南宮, 羅 兩氏는 尹氏의 經營하던 京城新聞을 讓受하야 名稱을 皇城新聞으로 變更하고 位置를 左巡營(現 黃土峴 紀念碑閣 자리)에 置하되 股金制로 經營하고 李鍾一氏는 梁氏의 每日新聞을 引受하야 帝國新聞이라 改稱하며 位置를 漢陽洞(今 敦義洞)에 置하고(朝鮮 最初의 純諺文 新聞) 例의 雄文巨筆로 慷慨, 辛辣한 言論을 하야 當時 政府를 鞭韃罵倒하는 同時에 日本人의 經營하는 菊池謙讓의 漢城新報, 萩谷籌夫의 大韓日報, 蟻生十郞의 大東新報와 對峙하야 京城 論壇을 繁盛케 하얏스니 當時 皇城의 張志淵, 柳瑾과 帝國의 鄭雲復 諸氏는 다 斯界의 百戰老將으로 名聲이 錚錚한 中 乙巳新條約 當時에 皇城의 『是日也放聲大哭』과 擲筆大呼의 兩論文은 當時 一般民衆의 熱血을 躍動케 하는 同時 누구나 膾煮하얏고 또 筆禍로 因하야 그 筆者가 또한 縲絏의 辱까지 當하얏섯다. 그리고 그때 帝國新聞에서 萬壽聖節 記事를 쓰는데 『만세』란 말을 校正이 잘못되야 『망세』라고 하엿다가 社長 李鍾一氏가 不敬罪로 一時 拘禁되엿던 일은 只今까지 斯界에 한 이약이 거리가 되여잇다.

丁. 朝鮮新聞의 全盛時代와 暗黑時代
乙未保護條約 以後로 朝鮮의 政治는 勿論 여러 가지의 말할 수 업는 制限을 바덧지만은 彼老獪無雙한 新統監 伊藤博文은 例의 政治手段을 써서 內外의 人心을 緩和식히고 또한 自己도 一般 與論을 參考하기 爲하야 어느 程度까지 言論의 自由를 容認하얏스니 乙巳年으로부터 庚戌合邦時代까지 約 6年間은 朝鮮에 新聞이 생긴 後 第一 全盛하던 時代라 하겟다. 卽 統監府 機關紙로는 京城日報, 서울푸렛스가 생기고 治外法權의 恩德으로 極端의 排日論을 主唱하야 一般 朝鮮 사람의 大歡心을 사던 英人 裵說氏의 經營인 大韓每日申報도 이때에 생기엿다.
그리고 이때에 特記할 것은 天道敎에서 經營한 萬歲報니 이것은 光武 9年 乙未 6月에 創刊된 바 位置는 會洞(今 旭町 1丁目) 社長은 吳世昌, 主筆은 李人稙이엿섯는데 그들은 다 當時 新進人物로 特히 李氏는 多年間 日本에 滯留하는 中 新聞에 關한 智識을 만히 가진 關係로 그 新聞도 在來 朝鮮式의 新聞보다는 아주 面目을 一新케 하야 段數도 在來 8段이던 것을 10段으로하고 活字도 朝鮮 初有의 루비式 活字를 쓰고 『鬼의 聲』이란 所謂 新小說도 이 新聞에서 嚆矢로 揭載하얏다.(菊初 李人稙作) 그러나 經營의 困難으로 丁未年 秋期에 不幸히 李完用 內閣의 機關紙로 賣渡되야 大韓新聞으로 改號하얏다가 庚戌合邦時에 廢刊되고 또 그와 同時에 一進會의 機關紙인 所謂 國民新報란 것이 美洞(今 黃金町)에서 發行되엿스니 그 主筆은 梅下 崔永年으로＜26＞ 合邦建白書까지 公共하게 揭載한 것은 아즉것 吾人의 記憶에 살아질 수 업고 讀者에게 紙上 投票募集을 하기도 此報가 嚆矢엿다. 그 뒤 隆熙 2年頃에 一進會와 國是遊說團을 對抗하야 天道敎의 策動으로 이러난 大韓協會에서 經營한 新聞이 또 잇섯스니 그것은 卽 大韓民報다. 이 大韓民報는 皇城, 帝國 等과 姉妹가 되는 同時에 政黨의 機關紙이니만침 每號마다 政府를 攻擊非難하는 堂堂한 言論이 만엇섯고 朝鮮 最初의 諷刺漫畵를 揭載함이 큰 特色이엿다. 位置는 (壽松洞 今 鐘路小學校址요. 社長은 大韓協會長 吳世昌 兼任)
此外에 日本人 經營 新聞으로는 仁川의 朝鮮 新聞을 爲始하야 上記한 漢城新報, 大韓日報, 大東新報 等等 外에 報知, 時事, 國民, 萬朝, 大阪朝日, 同每日 等 여러 支局이 設置되야 一時 京城에는 新聞 看板이 私立學校 看板과 伯仲을 닷툴만치 만케 되엿섯다.
그러다가 庚戌 8月 29日 所謂 日韓合倂이 되고 武斷政治의 代表人物인 寺內 總督이 朝鮮을 統治하게 되니 朝鮮의 言論界는 그의 一刀之下에 餘地업시 抹殺되야 所謂 御用紙 每申(그때 다른 新聞은 다 廢刊식히고 大韓每日은 裵說에게 買收하야 御用紙를 삼는 同時 每日申報라 改稱함) 以外 다른 新聞은 殘命좃차 保存을 못하얏스니 庚戌年으로부터 巳未年까지 約 10年間은 朝鮮 新聞界의 暗黑時代라 可謂하겟다.
그러자 己未年 3月에 萬歲의 소리가 터지며 長谷川 總督이 退歸하고 齋藤 總督이 繼任함에 臨하야 所謂 文化政治를 布告하고 言論의 自由도 多少 緩和되야 몃 個의 新聞(雜誌는 下段에 別論)을 許하게 되엿스니 卽 庚申年(大正 9年) 4月에는 李相協氏 外 某某氏의 發起한 東亞日報가 創刊되고 同年 3月에는 大正親睦會의 經營인 朝鮮日報가 創刊되고(이 朝鮮日報는 勿論 現 朝鮮日報의 前身이나 中間 經營者가 여러 번 變更된 結果 只今에는 大正親睦會와 全然 關係가 업게 되엿다) 그와 同時에 國民協會 機關紙 時事新聞이 發刊되고(約 2個年後 廢刊) 其後 大正 12年 3月 30日에 六堂 崔南善氏의 主幹인 時代日報가 發刊되엿다가 大正 15年 秋期에 廢刊되고 尙又 大正 15年 11月 15日에는 李相協氏의 主幹한 中外日報가 發行되야 只今까지 나려왓섯다. 然而 이 近來에 생겨난 新聞에 關하야는 一般이 이미 잘 아는 바임으로 여긔에 자서이 말치 안코 後日 다른 機會에 자서한 論評을 하겟거니와 此等 新聞은 其 言論의 如何라던지 主義 色彩의 如何는 別問題로 하고 形式과 體裁는 前에 比하야 相當히 進步되엿고 또 輪轉機로 印刷를 하게 된 것도 此等 新聞이 츰이엿다.
-(雜誌에 關하야는 次回에 繼續)- ＜27＞
＜22-27＞