잡지명	別乾坤 第30號
발행일	1930년 07월 01일
기사제목	印度運動의 史的 考察 (Historical Examination of the Indian Movement)
필자	金起田
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

A Historical Examination of the Indian Movement
						Kim Ki-t'aek

It was in 1858 (73 years ago) that the British government abolished the rule delegated to the East India Company and directly administered the government. Prior to this, in 1857, there was what was called the (Great Indian Rebellion), the causes of which were:

I. Opposition to British policies and European-style education
II. Destabilizing the position of Indian royalty
III. Loss of religious privileges for Indian and Muslim groups

Due to this great rebellion, the then British government (Queen Victoria) issued a declaration promising to guarantee the interests of the Indian people:

I. Royal territories would not be annexed by reason of misgovernment or lack of succession.
II. Landowners' rights would be recognized, and taxes would not be arbitrarily collected.
III. There would be no interference with the religion of the Indian people.
IV. Indian participation in legislation would be permitted.

"In their prosperity lies our strength, in their satisfaction lies our security, and in their gratitude lies our great reward" was a famous rhetoric of the declaration.

It is a fact that British influence in India became much more prosperous after the Great Rebellion due to British capital, commerce, and education. However, new ideas arose among the middle class, especially those engaged in liberal professions, in major ports such as Calcutta and Bombay, and those who studied in Britain came into contact with Western European, no, British democracy, and came to believe that "social and political detachment is a disgrace to the Indian people," and the political movement of the Indian people became truly generalized and modernized. Thus, in March 1885, the Indian National Congress movement began.

1885 (43 years ago) was the year when the Indian National Movement officially began. That is, in March of this year, new thinkers dissatisfied with the government gathered representatives from various parts of India to establish the Indian National Congress for the first time with the aim of reforming the status quo. <32> Its purpose was

I. To allow people active for national progress to make personal contact, and
II. To discuss and decide on political movements.

The first meeting was held in Mumbai, with 172 participants, mainly lawyers, journalists, and teachers, with only two Muslims. The resolutions were (1) expanding the legislative councils in the central and local governments, and (2) holding civil service exams simultaneously in India and Britain. The second meeting was held in Calcutta the following year, with 440 participants (representatives of the nobility, merchants, and farmers were very few), and the resolutions were similar to the previous ones. And this meeting only dealt with political issues and did not touch on social reform at all, in order to promote the fusion and unification of various races, classes, and sects.

The Indian government's attitude towards the National Congress was to regard it as representing the Liberal Party and to clearly state (1890) that it would take a neutral and impartial attitude as long as the movement was constitutional.

The National Congress has held meetings every year since the first one, but its activities have extended beyond India, establishing a National Congress Committee in London and working with British radicals as its members to cooperate with the main conference in India to achieve its goals.

The National Congress did not discriminate against sects or classes in its purpose, but Muslims tended not to participate well from the beginning.

Many Muslims favored being under British rule and warned against its followers participating in the National Congress, and in 1893, there was even anti-British, anti-Muslim agitation. In other words, the National Congress was mainly manipulated by Hindus.

The movement of the National Congress gradually progressed towards anti-British steps. Around 1880, starting with several graduates of Bombay University, including "Raknallikna," fierce anti-British rhetoric and actions (two British officials were killed) began to appear, and British capital and commerce brought prosperity to the port society, but prices also rose, and the educated class who received new education had no way to find employment. Political gatherings increasingly attracted people's interest, and famine and disease exacerbated this trend. In addition, reducing the import tax on British cotton products from 5 to 3.5 percent and imposing a consumption tax of 3.5 percent on domestic products in 1894 proved the British government's harsh policies, and in this situation, Governor-General Curzon's malpractices in the education system and the division of Bengal (with a population of 78 million) made him the target of Indian hatred. Therefore, the National Congress of 1905 decided to (1) form a boycott of British goods, (2) occupy half of the elected members in the legislative and administrative councils, regardless of central or local, and expand their authority, and (3) appoint three Indians to the Indian Council, an advisory body to the Indian legislature, and further accelerate the opposition to the division of Bengal.

As the movement of the National Congress gradually materialized, moderate and radical factions arose within it, mutually neutralizing each other's strength, and at the 1906 <33> meeting, a resolution was passed stating that "the political organization of self-governing colonies should also be applied to India," preventing its division.

On the other hand, a radical movement aiming at direct action was lurking, and in 1907, two British women were bombed to death by Bengal youths, and "Orak," who declared this to be the result of British autocratic politics, received six years of imprisonment.

In order to counter the Indian National Congress, Muslims have organized the All-India Muslim League since 1906, and its purpose is to criticize the National Congress's false and impractical aspects, and although it is a moderate faction, it is a fact that it has begun to enter the vortex of political movement.

On the occasion of the 50th anniversary of Queen Victoria's Declaration (good governance) in November 1908, the Indian Reform Plan was announced (Governor-General Minto). The legislative councils were expanded throughout the central and local governments, and non-official members occupied a majority in the local legislative councils. Members of the legislative councils were given the power to propose motions on financial matters and to resolve issues related to public interest. Indians could also become members of the administrative councils of the central and local governments, and one Hindu and one Muslim each were appointed to the Indian Council, an advisory body to the Indian Minister. However, the British did not intend to grant autonomy to India until now. Morley, the then Indian Minister, said in Parliament that even if his existence were extended 20 times as an official or individual, giving parliamentary politics to India was not his purpose to advocate.

In March 1913, the Muslim League added a new color to its purpose, stating that it would achieve a self-governing organization suitable for India, reversing its previous attitude. The Indian National Congress welcomed this and sent ardent sympathy.

Around the time of World War I, the revolutionary movement in India swept across all of India. Actions such as throwing documents and bombs also occurred from time to time.

In 1916, the Indian Home Rule League was organized, centered around Irish woman Mesant. This was because British rule, not autonomy under British rule, was harming India's freedom.

In November 1917, representatives of the National Congress and the Muslim League met in Calcutta to determine the program for the self-government movement. The following December 12 was a day to be greatly remembered in Indian political history, as the moderate and radical factions of the National Congress, or the previous antagonistic attitude between Muslims, abandoned their mutual opposition and declared their unity for the self-government movement, and decided on future movement plans. India's political movement became the ideal of the Indian people. The main points of their argument were

I. India should become an autonomous nation as an independent unit constituting the British Empire.
II. India should receive fair representation in the British joint conference after the war, just like other autonomous territories.
III. India should not be ruled by the London government office, but should be ruled from "Delhi," so that it can obtain sufficient autonomy in legislative, administrative, and financial matters. <34>
IV. The bureaucrats of the Governor-General's Office should not be the administrative heads of the Governor-General's Office.
V. Indian administrative officials should belong to the Governor-General and the Participating Council, but half of the councilors should be elected from among the members of the Governor-General's Legislative Council.
VI. All budgets except for military budgets should be resolved by the Legislative Council.
VII. Local governments should be autonomous, and the Governor-General's Office should only provide assistance.
VIII. The administrative power of the local governments should belong to the Governor and the Administrative Council, and half of the members should be elected from among the Indian members of the Local Legislative Council who were elected as non-officials.
IX. India should have a national army, and Indians should become its officers.
X. Local organizations should have the authority to elect their chairmen.

The British government first allowed Indian representatives to participate in the Imperial Conference in 1916, and on August 20, 1917, Indian Minister Montagu delivered a famous declaration of Indian autonomy in Parliament.

On July 8, 1918, the concrete plan for Indian reform was announced, but the radical faction and British residents opposed it for conflicting reasons, and at the special meeting of the National Congress and the Muslim League in the same August, a resolution was passed to oppose the reform plan, and the political movement was vigorously launched. The National Congress resolved to apply the principle of national self-determination, abolish the Newspaper Law and the Revolutionary Suppression Law, grant financial freedom and immediate local autonomy, prevent British independent electoral districts, and that the highest authority in Indian domestic affairs would be the Supreme Legislative Council representing the will of the Indian people. It also nominated Jirak, Kanji, and Imamu as Indian representatives to the Peace Conference.

When the Great War began, the government enacted the Indian Defense Law, which was abolished six months after the end of the war. The government established a Rebellion Investigation Committee to come up with a prevention bill for this, and in January 1919, it promulgated the so-called Rowlatt Act, and despite the opposition of all of India, the government limited the enforcement period of this bill to three years and stated that its application would be limited solely to revolutionary and anarchic actions, and passed it. Also, the contents of the bill are (1) to try treason without a jury and with three judges, (2) to give local governments the right to detain people in necessary cases, and (3) the governor-general will determine the area of enforcement of the law and announce it in advance.

On March 10 of the same year that this bill was passed, India's non-cooperation movement greatly arose, and leader Gandhi was imprisoned.

The method of non-cooperation is to reject cooperation with Britain in all aspects of politics, economy, and society, not participate in British administration regardless of legislation and administration, call Indian judges from British courts, resist British goods, refuse Indian children to attend British schools, and withdraw Indian deposits from British banks, etc.

The contents of the Indian Government Act established at the end of December 1919 are

I. To establish a Central Administrative Council and a Legislative Assembly in the center, <35> to have the Administrative Council oversee 11 provinces and increase the number of Indians there.
II. The Legislative Assembly should be a bicameral system, with 27 officials and 33 elected members out of 60 members in the Upper House, and 5/7 of 145 members in the Lower House should be elected members.
III. There are also a council and a legislative assembly in the local government, and there are reserved and delegated matters in the legislative assembly, and the local governor is not responsible for the resolution of reserved matters.

Despite the promulgation of this New Government Act, the non-cooperation movement centered on Gandhi arose, attacking the passage of the Rowlatt Act, General Dyer's massacre, and the incompleteness of the Government Act, and it continued to become violent. Gandhi was imprisoned for six years in 1922, and the non-cooperation movement was temporarily stalled. Accordingly, the "Tass" faction won in the Indian National Congress, and the Swaraj Party was organized in the same year. In the general election according to the New Law the following year, it achieved a great victory, gaining 15 members and 38 quasi-members out of 145 central members.

In 1924, Gandhi was released from prison and confronted each other over the non-cooperation issue, but in April of the same year, a joint agreement was reached between the two, and the Autonomous Party was at its peak. Later, the Indian National Congress and others insisted on abolishing the Government Act before 1929 and building India's political power within the law until that time, but due to Tass's death in June 1925 and the re-division of Indian and Muslim groups from around 1924, its power was not so great.

In November 1927, Britain created a committee to investigate the issue of autonomy, with two members from the Conservative and Labor parties each and Simon as the chairman, and conducted a practical investigation in India in 1928, receiving great opposition from the Indian public. As a result, the Indian autonomy movement after 1928 regained its vitality, and the so-called Nehru Report, a draft on the future autonomous constitution of India, was approved at the Joint Association of Political Parties in December 1928.

I. Grant the status of autonomous territory to British India, immediately abolish the Indian Affairs Department, and transfer political power from the hands of the British to Indian voters.
II. Establish the Indian National Defense Committee for the purpose of controlling military affairs.
III. Establish the Legislative Department as a bicameral system and grant the highest authority.
IV. Grant the same qualifications and new authority to the Governor-General of India and the governors of each state as other autonomous territories.

The All-India National Congress was divided by the adoption of this report, divided into the most left-wing Young Indian faction, the pure autonomy faction, and the intermediate faction such as Nehru, but in the end, under the spirit of Gandhi's autonomy movement, which ultimately aims at independence, if the autonomous territory status is rejected, the report was approved on the condition that the non-cooperation movement of 1924 would be revived.

As the 10-year trial period was approaching, on October 31 last year, Indian Governor-General <36> Irwin declared that he would hold an All-India conference on the Indian constitutional reform. Dissatisfied with this, about 3,000 leaders of the National Congress issued the following statement on November 2 last year.

Hoping to be able to cooperate with Britain in creating the Indian Autonomous Territory Constitution, on the condition of
I. Adoption of a general reconciliation policy
II. Amnesty and release of political prisoners
III. Establishment of representation of progressive political groups
IV. The Indian National Congress will enjoy superior representation as the largest conference in India, and the London All-India Conference will be held soon.

However, the Indian Minister's reply in the House of Commons on November 1 denied almost the previous Governor-General's statement. As a result, on the 16th of the same month, the National Congress rejected the above-mentioned cooperation statement and declared that it would not participate in the London Indian Conference.

On December 22, the meeting between the Indian Governor-General and the leaders was broken, and at the main meeting of the Indian National Congress on the 31st, Gandhi's resolution was passed by a majority of 942 to 792 votes.

I. Regretting the bombing incident of the Governor-General on the 23rd of last month
II. The Nehru Report adopted at the All-India Conference last year is a draft of the Indian Constitution drafted on the basis of the autonomous territory status. Also, in light of the result of allowing hostility between Indian Muslims, the National Assembly withdraws its responsibility for this report.
III. Defining the meaning of Swaraj that we desire as complete Indian independence.
IV. Requiring the members of the All-India Council of Members to resign from their positions as Central and Legislative Assembly members to show boycott.
V. Granting the National Assembly Executive Committee the authority to start tax refusal and military conflict, regardless of time and place, whenever it deems necessary.

＜Major Years of India＞
1600  Establishment of the British East India Company
1744  Clive comes to India
1774  Hesding becomes the first Governor-General of India
1856 (73 years ago)  Queen's Declaration the following year after the Great Indian Rebellion
1885 (46 years ago)  Establishment of the Indian National Congress
1906  Organization of the Muslim League
1908  Announcement of the British Indian Reform Plan
1916  Organization of the Autonomous League
1917  Achievement of the Self-Government Movement Establishment of a Joint Association of Various Factions
(November to December August of the same year British Declaration of Autonomy)
(April of the same year The Dyer Incident of 500 people)
End of 1919  Promulgation of the Indian Government Act
(Promulgation of the Rowlatt Act in January of the same year)
1922  Establishment of the Swaraj Party <37>

**Named Entities**

東印度會社	Tongindohwehoe
印度	India
빅토리아女皇	Pikt'oria Yŏhwang
칼캇타	K'alk'ŭt'ta
쁨페이	Ppŭmp'ei
印度國民會議	Indo Kungminhoeŭi
孟買	Maengmae
락날릭나	Rangnalligna
카존	K'ajon
벤갈	Pegal
모-래-	Mo-rae-
민-트 總督	Min-t'ŭ Ch'ongdok
愛蘭	Aeran
메산트 夫人	Mesant'u Buin
지라크	Chirak'ŭ
깐지	Kkanji
이마무	Imamu
몬큐	Monk'yu
따이어 將軍	Ttaiyŏ Changgun
로랏트法案	Rorat'ŭ Pŏban
스와라쟈黨	Sŭwarajya Tang
따스	Tt'asŭ
네루報告書	Nerŭ Pogosŏ
어원卿	Ŏwŏn Kyŏng



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제30호
발행일	1930년 07월 01일
기사제목	印度運動의 史的 考察
필자	金起田
기사형태	논설

印度運動의 史的 考察
						金起田
英政府가 東印度會社에 委任하엿든 統治를 廢하고 스사로 政權을 總理하기는 1858年(73年재이다) 이에 先하야 1857年에 (印度의 大叛亂)이란 것이 니러낫스니 其 原因은,
一. 英國의 政策 及 歐洲式의 敎育을 反對할 것
二. 印度王族의 地位를 不安케 한 것
三. 印度 及 回敎族이 宗敎上 特權을 喪失케 한 것
이 大叛에 因하야 當時의 英政府(빅토리아女皇)는 宣言을 發하야 印度 國民의 利益을 保障할 것을 約하되
一. 失政 又는 無繼을 籍하야 王族의 領土를 倂合치 못할 것
二. 地主의 權利를 承認하야 妄히 官收치 못할 것
三. 印度人의 宗敎에 干涉치 못할 것
四. 印度人의 立法에 參與함을 許할 것
으로 하얏다. 「그들의 富榮 속에야말로 우리의 힘이 잇고 그들의 滿足 속에야말로 우리의 安全이 잇고 그들의 感謝의 속에야말로 우리의 큰 報償이 잇슬지여다」한 것은 그 宣言의 有名한 修辭이엿다.
大叛亂 後 英國의 資本과 商業과 敎育에 依하야 印度에 잇는 英國의 勢力이 훨신 隆盛하게 된 것은 事實이다. 然而 칼캇타, 쁨페이 等의 大海港에서 中産階級 特히 自由職業에 從事하는 동모에 新思想이 닐고 또 英國에 遊學하는 사람은 西歐, 안이 英國의 民主主義에 接觸하야 「社會上, 政治上 超然한 態度를 갓는 것은 印度人의 恥辱이라」하는 생각을 갓게 되어 印度人의 政治運動은 그야말로 一般化 近代化하게 되엿다. 그리하야 1885年 3月의 印度國民會議 運動의 創始를 보게 되엿다.
1885年(43年째)는 印度國民運動의 公然 開始된 年이다. 卽 이 해 3月에 政府에 不平을 품은 新思想家는 現狀 改革의 目的으로써 印度 各地의 代表者를 모아써 처음으로 印度國民會議라는 것을 創設하얏다.＜32＞ 其 目的은
一. 國民的 進步를 爲하야 活動하는 사람 사람으로 하야금 個人的으로 接觸케 하고
二. 政治的 運動을 協議 決定케 하는 것이다
이것의 第一 會議는 孟買에서 열엇는데 參會者 172人 法律家 新聞記者 敎員 等이 其 主로 回敎徒는 2人에 不過하엿다. 其 決議事項은 (一)中央 各地方의 立法會議의 擴張 (二)普通任用官吏의 試驗을 印度 及 英國에서 同時에 施行하자는 것이엇다. 第二回 會議는 翌年 갈맛타에서 열엇는데 參會者 440人이고(貴族, 商民, 農民 이 級의 代表는 極少) 決議는 大累와 가튼 것이엿다. 그리고 이 會議는 오직 政治問題에 끗치고 社會改革의 論議에는 조곰도 손을 대이지 못하얏스니 各 種族, 各 階級, 各 宗派로 모힌 融合 統一을 期키 爲함이다.
印度政府의 全國民會議에 對한 態度는 그로써 自由黨會의 代表를 한 것으로 보고 그 運動이 立憲的인 限에는 中立 不偏의 態度를 取한다는 것을 明言(1890年)하엿다.
國民會議는 第一回 以來로 每年 開會를 行하되 其 活動은 印度 域內를 버서나서 멀니 倫敦에 國民會議 委員會를 두고 英國의 急進派를 其 委員으로 하야 印度의 本會議와 策應해서 目的의 貫徹에 努力하엿다.
國民會議는 其 趣旨에 잇서 宗派의 階級을 둔 것은 안니나 回敎徒를 當初부터 잘 干與하지 안는 傾向이엿다.
回敎徒의 多部는 英國 治下에 잇는 것을 도로혀 可하다 하고 其 徒의 國民會議에 參加하는 것을 警戒하야 1893年에는 反英, 反回의 搔動을 보기까지 하엿다. 말하면 國民會議는 주로 印度敎徒에 의하야 操縱되엿다.
國民會議의 運動은 漸次 反英의 步를 進하얏다. 1880年頃에는 孟買大學 卒業生인 「락날릭나」 數員을 爲始하야 猛然한 挑英的 言論 及 行動(二人의 英官吏가 被殺되엿다)이 나기 始作하는 중 英國의 資本 及 商業은 海港 社會의 繁榮을 가저옴과 가티 物價도 騰貴하고 新敎育을 바든 知識階級은 就職의 길이 업고 政治的 集會는 나날이 人民의 興味를 잇글고 飢饉과 疾病은 이러한 趨勢를 助長하며 加之而 1894年 英國棉製品에 對한 輸入稅를 5分으로부터 3分半에 減하고 內地製品에 3分半의 消費稅를 課한 것은 英國의 苛政을 證明하엿스며 이러한 때에 잇서 또 카존 總督은 敎育制度의 惡政과 멘칼州의 分割(3洲로)(7千8百萬의 人口를 가젓다)을 하야 印度人 憎惡의 的이 되엿다. 그래서 1905年의 國民會議는 (一)英貨의 不買同盟, (二)中央 地方을 不問하고 立法 及 行政의 會議에서 選擧에 依한 議員의 半數를 占하고 且 權限을 擴張할 것, (三)印度 六法의 諮問機關인 印度會議에 3名의 印度人을 任命할 것 等을 決하며 벤갈 分割 反對의 氣勢를 一層 속히 하엿다.
國民會議의 運動이 漸次 具體化함에 따라서 스사로 溫和 過激 兩派가 생기여 서로 그 힘을 相殺하다가 1906年의＜33＞ 會議에는 「自治植民地의 政治 組織을 印度에도 適用할 것이라」는 決議를 行하야 그 分裂을 沮止하얏다.
이러한 一面에는 直接行動을 目標로 하는 過激運動이 潛行하야 1907年에는 2人의 英國 婦人이 벤갈 靑年의게 爆死되고 이를 가르켜 英國 專制政治의 結果임을 揚言한 「오라크」는 6年의 禁錮를 바닷다.
回敎徒는 印度國民會議에 對抗키 爲하야 1906年 以來 全印度回敎同盟을 組織하야 其 趣旨는 國民會의 虛僞 非實際인 것을 攻評하는 溫和 一方임에 不拘하고 이로써 政治運動의 渦中에 들기 始作한 것만은 事實이다.
1908年 11月 빅토리아 女皇宣言(善政主義) 50年 紀念을 機로 하야 印度改革案이 發布되엿다.(민-트 總督) 立法會議는 中央, 地方을 通하야 擴張되고 地方立法會議에는 非官吏 議員이 多數를 占하게 되고 立法會議議員은 財政問題에 對하야 動議를 提出할 수 잇게 되고 公益에 關한 問題에 對하야 議決하는 權能을 주게 되엿고 中央 及 地方의 行政會議에 印度人도 議員이 될 수 잇게 되고 印度 大臣의 諮問機關인 印度會議에는 印度敎徒 及 回敎徒의 各 一名式을 任命하게 되엿다. 그러나 英國의 心事는 이적까지 印度에 自治를 許與할 心事는 안이엿다. 當時의 印度 大臣인 모-래-는 議會에서 假令官吏 又는 個人으로서 予의 存在가 20倍 延長이 된다 할지라도 印度에 議會政治를 주고 € 함은 決코 予의 鼓吹코저하는 目的이 안이라 하얏다.
1913年 3月 回敎同盟은 其 目的에 新色彩를 加하야 印度에 適應한 自治組織을 達成할 것이라 하야 在來의 態度를 一變하얏다. 이에서 印度國民會議는 이를 歡呼하여 熱烈한 同情을 보내엿다.
世界大戰 前後로 印度의 革命運動은 全印度를 風靡하엿다. 文書投彈의 行動도 각금 이러낫다.
1916年에는 愛蘭人 메산트 夫人을 中心으로 한 印度自治同盟이 組織되엿다. 이것은 英國 治下의 自治가 안이라 英國의 統治로써 印度의 自由를 害한다는 것이엿다.
1917年 11月 國民會議 及 回敎同盟의 代表者는 칼캇타에 會合하야 自治運動의 푸로그람을 定하얏다. 翌 12月에는 印度 政治史上 크게 記憶할 날이니 國民會議의 溫和派와 過激派 또는 回敎徒와의 間에 在來의 反目 態度를 버리고 互相 提携하야 自治運動을 爲하야 團結하는 것을 宣言하고 將來의 運動 計劃을 決定하얏다. 印度의 政治的 運動은 印度 人民의 理想이 되엿다. 그 主張의 要點은
一. 印度는 英帝國을 構成하는 獨立의 單位로서 自治國家가 될 것
二. 印度는 戰後에 英國의 聯合會議에서 他自治領과 가티 公平한 代表를 어들 것
三. 印度는 倫敦政廳에게 統治될 것이 안이라 「떼리」로부터 統治되게 할 것. 그래서 立法上 行政上 財政上의＜34＞ 充分한 自治를 어들 것
四. 總督府의 官僚는 總督府의 行政長官됨을 不得할 것
五. 印度의 行政官은 總督 及 參與會에 屬하되 參議員 半數는 總督府 立法會議에서 其 議員 中으로부터 選出할 것
六. 軍事豫算을 除한 外에 全豫算은 立法會議의 議決을 經할 것
七. 地方政府는 自治로 하고 總督府는 單히 輔助를 與•  것
八. 地方政府의 行政權은 知事 及 行政會議에 屬하고 그 議員의 半數는 地方立法會議에서 非官吏로 民選한 印度人 議員 中으로 選出할 것
九. 印度는 國民軍을 갓고 印度人은 그 士官이 될 것
十. 地方團體는 其 議長을 選擧하는 權能을 가질 것

英政府는 1916年에 첨으로 帝國會議에서 印度人 代表者를 參與케 하고 1917年 8月 20日 印度 大臣 몬큐는 議會에서 有名한 印度自治의 宣言을 發表키에 이르럿다.
1918年 7月 8日로 印度 改革의 具體案은 發表되엿스나 過激派 及 在留 英人은 相反의 理由로 이를 反對하야 同 8月 國民會議 及 回敎同盟의 特別會議는 改革案 反對를 決議하고 盛히 政治運動을 니르켜 國民會議는 民族自決原理의 適用, 新聞紙法 及 革命鎭壓法의 廢止, 財政上의 自由, 地方自治의 卽時 付與, 英人 獨立選摀§區의 防止, 印度 內政의 最高權威는 印度人의 意思를 代表하는 最高立法會議가 될거란 等을 決議하고 지라크, 깐지, 이마무 3人을 講和會議의 印度 代表로 指名하엿다.
大戰이 開始되자 政府는 印度防衛法을 制定하엿는대 그것은 戰爭 終了 後 6個月로 廢止된 것이엿다. 政府는 이에 叛逆調査委員會를 設하고 이에 對한 防止法案을 考出케 하야 1919年 1月에 所謂 로랏트法案을 發布하야 全印度의 反對가 有함에 不拘하고 政府는 이 法案의 施行期間을 3年間에 限하고 且 其 適用은 專혀 革命的 無政府的 行動에 限할 것을 聲明하야 이를 通過케 하얏다. 又 法案의 內容은 (一)陪審을 不用하고 3人의 判官으로 反逆罪를 審理할 것 (二)必要한 境遇는 人民으로 抑留하는 權利를 地方政府에 줄 것 (三)該法의 施行區域은 總督이 定하야 豫히 告示할 것 等이다.
이 法案이 通過되는 同年 3月 10日 印度의 非協同運動은 크게 닐며 首領 깐듸는 投獄되엿다.
非協同의 方法은 政治上, 經濟上, 社會上 各 方面에서 英國과의 協力을 排하고 立法 行政을 不問하고 英國의 施政에 不參하며 英國의 法廷에 印度人 法官을 불너 내이고 英貨를 抵制하고 印童의 英學校 就學을 拒하고 英銀에서의 印度人 預金을 引出하는 等이다.
1919年 12月末로 成立된 印度統治法의 內容은
一. 中央에는 中央行政參事會와 立法議會를 두되＜35＞ 行政參事會는 11省을 統括하게 하고 여긔에 印度人을 增加케 하엿스며
二. 立法會議는 上下院制로 하야 上院에는 總 議員 60名 중 官選議員 27名 民選議員 33名이요 下院은 145名 중 民選議員은 7分之5됨을 要하게 하얏다
三. 地方에도 參事會와 立法會議가 잇는대 立法會議에는 保留事項과 委讓事項이 잇서 保留事項에는 地方長官이 그 決議의 責을 不負한다.
이 新統治法이 發布가 有함에 不拘하고 로랏트法案의 通過, 따이어 將軍의 虐殺 統治法案의 不徹底를 攻擊하야 깐듸를 中心한 非協同運動이 닐고 그것이 니어 暴力化하며 깐듸는 禁錮 6個年으로 1922年에 入獄하며 非協同運動은 一時 打頓되며 따라서 印度國民會議에서는 「따스」派가 勝利하야 同年에 스와라쟈黨이 組織되엿다. 翌年 新法에 依한 總選擧에서 中央議員 145名 同黨員 15名, 準黨員 38名을 엇는 大勝利를 어덧다.
1924年 깐듸가 出獄하여 非協同 問題로 相對하엿스나 同年 4月 兩氏 合同協約이 成하야 自治黨는 其勢 最盛하엿다. 그 後 印度國民會議 其他에서는 1929年 前으로 統治法을 廢止할 것과 그 時期까지는 그 法 안에서 印度 政治的 勢力을 지을 것을 主張하얏스나 1925年 6月 따스氏의 病沒 同 24年 頃부터의 回印兩敎徒의 再分裂로 其勢는 그러케 떨치지 못하얏다.
1927年 11月 英國은 保守勞動黨의 議員 各 2名과 사이몬氏을 委員長으로 하는 自治問題 調査委員會를 맨드러 同 28年 印度를 實踐 調査하며 印度 大衆의 大反對를 바덧다. 이로써 28年 以後의 印度 自治運動은 다시 活氣를 어더 印度 將來의 自治 憲法에 關한 草案으로 所謂 네루報告書를 同 28年 12月의 各 政派聯合會에서 承認하게 되엿다.
一. 英領 印度에 自治領 地位를 許하야 卽時 印度事務省을 廢止하고 政權을 英人의 手로부터 印度人 選擧 有權者에게 移讓할 것.
二. 軍務統制를 掌握할 目的으로 印度國防委員會를 設置할 것.
三. 立法部를 二院制로 하야 最高의 權限을 賦與할 것.
四. 印度總督 及 各州知事에게 他 自治領과 同一한 資格 及 新權을 줄 것.
全印度國은 會議에서 이 報告의 採擇으로 紛紛하야 最左翼의 靑年印度派, 純自治派, 네루 等의 中間派로 난호게 뒤엿스나 結局 깐듸氏의 自治運動의 究極의 目的은 獨立에 잇다는 年來의 精神 下에서 萬一 自治領 地位를 拒否하면 1924年의 非協同運動을 再起할 것을 條件으로 右 報告를 可決하엿다.
10年의 試期가 갓가워오며 昨年 10月 31日 印度 總督＜36＞ 어원卿은 印度 憲法 改革에 關한 全 印度會議를 열을 것을 聲明하얏다. 이에 滿足한 國民會議의 首領 約 3千名은 昨年 11月 2日에 左의 聲明書를 發布하얏다.
印度自治領憲法 作成에 對하야 英國과 協力할 수 잇슬 것을 希望하되 그 條件으로
一. 全般的 和解政策의 採用
二. 政治犯人의 大赦 及 釋放
三. 進步的 政治團體의 代表權 確立
四. 印度國民會議는 印度 最大의 會議로서 優越한 代表權을 亨受할 것, 倫敦全印度會議를 速開할 일.
然而 11月 1日 下院에서의 印度 大臣 答辯은 거히 前 總督의 聲明을 否認하엿다. 이에서 同月 16日 國民會議는 前記의 協力 聲明을 不定하고 倫敦印度會議에 不參할 것을 聲明하얏다.
12月 22日 印度 總督과 同首領과 會見이 決裂되고 31日의 印度國民會議 本會議에서는 942對 792票의 多數로 깐듸氏의 決議案이 會議를 通過하엿다.
一. 去 23日 總督의 爆彈事件을 遺憾으로 思함
二. 昨年 全印度會議에서 採擇한 레루報告書는 自治領 地位를 基로서 起草된 印度憲法草案이오. 且 印回敎徒의 間에 敵意를 讓한 結果에 鑑하야 國民會는 이 報告書에 對한 責任을 撤回함.
三. 吾等의 要望하는 스와라지의 意味를 完全한 印度의 獨立으로 定함.
四. 全印度會 議員會議에 對하야 中央並立法議會 議員의 職을 辭하야 보이고트할 것을 要求함.
五. 國民會議 執行委員會에 對하야 必要로 思惟하는 時에는 時와 所를 不問하고 納稅拒否 及 軍事的의 抗爭을 始할 權限을 賦與함.

＜印度의 主要年代＞
1600年  英 東印度會社 設立
1744年  클나이보 來印度
1774年  헤스징 爲 弟一代 印度總督
1856年(73年째)  印度 大叛亂 後 翌年 女皇宣言
1885年(46年째)  印度國民會議 成立
1906年  回敎同盟 組織
1908年  英 印度改革案 發布
1916年  自治同盟 組織
1917年  自治運動 達成 各派合同 成立
(11月至12月 同8月 英自治宣言)
(同年 4月 따이어 將連 5百名 事起)
1919年末  印度統治法 發布
(同年 1月로 로랏트法案 發布)
1922年  스와라쟈黨 成立 ＜37＞
＜32-37＞