잡지명	별건곤 제30호
발행일	1930년 07월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮사람과 녀름 (Koreans and Summer)
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

Koreans and Summer
Food of Koreans and Summer
Song Geum-seon

Summer! Our people's food! What comes to my mind is, I'm worried that you'll all be concerned, but the various foods visible in restaurants with blue curtains or glass windows! Pork, beef, fried oily fish, various colorful toppings, etc. Food piled high on trays, looking delicious, with black flies, silver flies, and gold flies swarming around. Whether it's a coincidence or irony, or maybe it's because I'm looking with a nervous eye, but when I eat three bowls of cold noodles, there's always a fly in one of them. Also, I went to a wedding reception at a large restaurant and saw about 20 flies covering a zucchini pancake. Eating such food always gives me a stomach ache and I suffer for days.

Is it just my nervousness that makes me associate flies with summer food? Do you all eat without any hesitation?

There must be several reasons for this. It wouldn't be an exaggeration to say that in Korean households, a woman's job is simply to eat and dress. Of course, there are families that aren't like this, but in most traditional old families, that's the case. <100>

Making and cleaning up breakfast is one task, then laundry, ironing, sewing, lunch, dinner. A woman is tied to this all day and has no time to play. Unlike foreign women, going to cultivate themselves, attending lectures, or even just reading the newspaper or picking up a magazine every month, I doubt that half of our women do that. Korean households are truly full of work.

In Korean households where women dedicate themselves to clothing and food all day long, the efficiency of how well they eat and dress compared to foreigners is very low. Many homes spend the summer making kimchi every day. If this could be simplified, the effort put into summer food would be greatly reduced. It seems that kimchi is only eaten by Koreans and Japanese people. Chinese people are so hygienic that they don't eat anything, even water, without boiling it, and even the most civilized Westerners don't eat anything like kimchi. Japanese kimchi isn't as complicated as Korean kimchi. Cabbage, cucumbers, radishes, or eggplants are pickled and eaten after washing, or pressed into soybean paste, which is so simple. Pickled radish or narazuke for the winter are also much simpler than Korean kimchi. Even spinach is boiled and eaten with ajinomoto or katsuobushi sprinkled on top with soy sauce, but when we season one vegetable, we have to chop and wash green onions and garlic, add sesame salt, sesame oil, chili powder, vinegar, etc. I don't know how many times we have to touch it.

Korean food usually has seasoning in everything. And the seasoning isn't just one or two things. If you make a slightly higher-class dish, the effort put into making the seasoning is even greater. Of course, without seasoning, Korean food wouldn't taste the same, but it's more complicated because it takes more effort to season than foreign dishes.

Can't we simplify food a little? This is of course a big problem. It's not about abandoning 4,000 years of tradition in one morning, but I wish we could improve it scientifically. <101>

And I wish Korean housewives could have some free time to devote themselves to their self-cultivation and improvement.

The improvement of ordinary women is the improvement of the entire family.

They shouldn't just follow traditional habits without knowing the nutritional value of food. Wouldn't it be better to know the nutritional value and digestibility of fresh produce, vegetables, seaweed, grains, and fruits that are in season each season and eat them appropriately?

And it's unreasonable in many ways to leave the purchase of daily necessities to men or servants. It's only right that the woman who's going to cook should buy the things she needs and not buy unnecessary things, which would be more economical. It's more beneficial for the family for the woman herself to buy things, and it's also a good way to broaden her knowledge. The era when women "can't go out to buy things because it's not proper" according to traditional Korean customs is over.

The era of riding in palanquins and wearing headscarves is over. In an era where female aviators are flying in the sky, it's truly regrettable and pathetic that progress within our homes hasn't been as great due to a lack of self-awareness among women.

Instead of just eating whatever we can for three meals a day, it would be convenient to create a menu in our homes.

A menu is a selection of the quality of food that will be placed on the table, and a plan for the combination of nutrients and cooking methods. Furthermore, in the summer, unlike the winter, food must be changed every day and cannot be eaten after being left out, so if you eat the same food three times a day, you will get tired of it and it won't be good for your health. So, you should write down what you're going to eat every day for a week in advance.

When creating a menu, first, you should use health food (保健食料) (there is a set amount of calories that a person needs per day, in other words, a certain amount that you must eat to avoid harming yourself) as a standard, and then adjust it appropriately to your occupation, age, level of labor, and economic situation. <102>

First, you need to know the nutritional value. Just because something is delicious doesn't necessarily mean it has nutritional value.

Second, the quality of digestion. The food you eat is useless if it isn't digested and absorbed in our body. No matter how nutritious the food is, if it's difficult to digest, it's of little value and harmful to the stomach if you eat it often. It doesn't matter for healthy people.

Third, the combination of foods. It's difficult to get all the nutrients a person needs by eating only one thing. Therefore, you need to mix several things, but you should think about combining rich meats with bland vegetables, and think about it according to nutritional value.

Fourth, change the diet according to the season. In winter, it's cold, so you need rich foods to warm your body, and you naturally crave them. In the summer, you don't need that, so cool, light foods are good and taste good. Also, seafood and vegetables have their own seasons, so there are times when they are plentiful and cheap. If you take advantage of these times, it will be economical, taste good, and seasonal ingredients are fresh, which is good for hygiene.

Fifth, consider the appropriateness of taste. Food preferences vary depending on age, constitution, and habits. If you eat the food you like, it will taste good and digest well. Also, you can avoid getting tired of the same ingredients by using different cooking methods.

Sixth, pay attention to the economy. Food costs are a major part of a household's livelihood, so you should avoid simple food for hygiene reasons and be wary of extravagance for economic reasons. Furthermore, once you get into the habit of eating well, it's difficult to be frugal. You should eat moderately for your body normally.

Creating a menu may seem very difficult, but it's not. Once you get used to it, you'll feel lost if you don't have a menu, and it's easy to stay within your budget if you write down what you're going to eat for a week. On special days like birthdays or holidays, it's good to make better food than usual on the menu. <103>

The title is Summer and Food, but it seems like I've digressed a lot, so I'll end by writing a little about how to store food that spoils easily and about refreshing drinks.

Food spoils over time. The reason is the action of bacteria in the air. Bacteria multiply when there is adequate nutrition, temperature, and moisture, so to preserve food and prevent it from spoiling, it is necessary to prevent bacteria from entering and eliminate the temperature and moisture necessary for their survival and reproduction.

The first storage method currently used is as follows. There are types such as heating, drying, refrigeration, sealing, and chemical preservation.

1. Heating method
This is a method of killing bacteria by boiling or grilling food to prevent spoilage.
Vinegar can be preserved for a long time once boiled, and leftover side dishes are easily spoiled if left as is, so boiling or grilling them again can preserve them until the next day.

2. Drying method
This is a method of drying food in the sunlight, in the shade, or by roasting it over a fire to remove moisture.
Tea, dried fish, dried radish, mushrooms, shiitake mushrooms, etc. are made using this method.

3. Refrigeration method
This is a method of preventing spoilage by putting food in an icebox, a cool cellar, or in ice.
It's also good to soak it in a well or stream, but you have to cook it right away after taking it out, as it spoils easily.

4. Sealing method
This is a method of putting food in a tin can, glass bottle, box, etc. and sealing it tightly to prevent bacteria from entering.
Ramune and beer cans are applications of this method, and canned meats and fruits are a combination of the heating method. <104>

5. Chemical preservation method
This is a method of preventing spoilage using salt, sugar, mustard, alcohol, vinegar, etc. Salted fish, salted meat, pickled vegetables, food placed in soybean paste, fruits soaked in sugar, and pickled garlic are examples.

Second. Examples of storage methods
1. Rice is easily spoiled by steam and moisture, so put it in a dry bowl, but prevent steam from forming on the lid. It's good to put it in a bamboo basket and cover it with a sieve, and rice is less likely to spoil if you wash the rice the night before and pour water over it, then cook it the next morning.
2. Dried fish or salted dried croaker should be kept in a well-ventilated place and aired out from time to time.
3. Laver, shiitake mushrooms, mushrooms, and dried radish should be stored using the sealing method.
4. Eggs can be placed in buckwheat husks or bran, or you can dissolve slaked lime in 20 times the amount of water, soak them in it, and then take them out.
5. Potatoes, taro, ginger, sweet potatoes, and onions should be stored without washing the soil, and raw chestnuts should be buried in the ground, but not in wet soil.
6. Choose fruits without blemishes, place them in sawdust or buckwheat husks, or wrap them individually in paper to prevent them from touching each other, and put them in a box.
7. Beer and wine should be stored with the bottles lying down in a windy place away from the sun.
8. Milk must be in a clean bottle. Seal boiled milk tightly and keep it in cold water or ice.
9. Fish should be salted, grilled, or soaked in vinegar.

Refreshing drinks
These are the most palatable and refreshing drinks in the summer, so they are used a lot.
Cider, Citron, Hirano water, Ramune, etc. Hirano water is natural carbonated spring water bottled, and all are made by dissolving sugar, fruit juice, and flavoring in water and dissolving carbon dioxide. These have no nutritional value, but are the best for quenching thirst <106> and refreshing the mind. However, eating too much will harm the stomach. Also, never eat anything that is suspected of being spoiled, that is not clear, or that has sediment at the bottom, and be sure to eat ice water appropriately, as eating too much can be harmful.
Other barley tea, brown rice tea, soybean tea, and iced tea are good to use chilled or warm after roasting and boiling each ingredient.

Summer and Women's Clothing
Heo Yeong-suk

The purpose of clothing is by no means simple. (1) Etiquette (2) Hygiene (3) Aesthetics (4) Economics, etc. So when talking about women's summer clothing, it is necessary to keep these four things in mind.

First, summer clothes should adequately cover the parts of the body that need to be covered, which meets the condition of etiquette. Even underwear is made of ramie cloth or other thin material, so when a person wearing such clothes walks down the road with the setting sun behind them, their whole body is clearly visible when you sit on the street and look at them. So, no matter how hot it is, you need to choose a fabric that doesn't show through, at least for your underwear.

Second, from a hygienic point of view, I don't think there are many flaws in summer. It's cool, light, and refreshing.

Third, from an aesthetic point of view, there are many flaws in women's summer clothes. First of all, I think it would be good to try to show some individuality. Korean clothes can barely distinguish between men and women, young and old, rich and poor, and everyone wears the same style. There is no difference in color or style. <106> Western and Japanese clothes come in a wide variety of colors and styles, so you can choose a style that suits your age, height, face, complexion, figure, taste, occupation, and season. Korean clothes have only a few pure colors such as white, black, and jade green, and there is no difference in style, so Westerners might suspect that young women are wearing uniforms in accordance with school orders. If clothing has moral and physiological meanings as well as aesthetic meanings, then I think the direction in which Korean clothing should move forward is the complexity of color and style.

What urgently needs to be improved in Korean women's summer clothes is that they should not be starched too much. Wouldn't it be beautiful if the clothes clung to the body and rippled as the body moved? It's ugly to have the four corners sticking up because the starch is so strong, and the body moves inside like peeling firewood.

Finally, since our Korea is an extremely poor country, Korean housewives, who are the heads of Korean households, should make clothes from materials that cost less money and can be made by Korean people. Luxury that doesn't consider income - this is not beauty, but rather ugliness.

Koreans and Summer Seen Through Housing
Kim Jong-ryang

1.
Because housing has the same mission as clothing, each country and each society make it a social problem, and they research and build it to adapt to real life as a national or group project. But what about our people's clothing, food, and housing? When we think of our people, we think of white clothes, rice, and warm rooms. White clothes are artistic and hygienic. However, in this age of survival, it is uneconomical and needs to be improved. It is true that food is the most necessary item in life. We need to abolish multi-eating habits (多食主義) and adopt nutritional principles (榮養主義). Improving clothing and food must start with improving housing. So what is housing? The full mission of housing is not only to protect against wind, rain, and enemies, but also to actively control sunlight and ventilation to make daily life in the room pleasant under health conditions. Looking at the houses of modern Koreans, most of them have many points that are inconsistent with the original purpose of housing. The greatest paradise for mankind is the house that surrounds the family. In modern Korean society surrounded by mental anguish and physical pain due to the neglect of housing, where can we seek even temporary enjoyment? Originally, due to the aftereffects of the feudal era, I cannot but sympathize with the Korean women who are unwilling to go out (不肯) and spend most of their lives in unreasonable houses. Looking at modern Korean housing from a historical perspective, the structure of the houses has been greatly influenced by the cold regions due to geographical reasons, and the winter equipment is relatively complete, although incomplete, compared to the summer equipment. Summer is the most important season for health care out of the four seasons. As Koreans, we cannot but study how Korean houses affect summer health. The occurrence of mortality rate, morbidity rate, crime rate, etc. of Koreans is largely caused by living in incomplete houses. The mortality rate in cities is twice that of rural areas, and most of them live in unsanitary houses. Therefore, we cannot but say that the true value of urban planning also lies in improving housing. From the perspective of public health in the summer, it is necessary to consider the unhealthy problems of uncleanliness, bad habits, gloom, and displeasure caused by living in poor housing. Observing Korean houses as a summer hygiene problem, I think most of them are poor houses. <109> It has been developed to some extent for cold protection, but ignoring the sunlight and refreshing air that unconditionally gives to our mankind is to ignore the natural value, that is, the beauty of nature. The mind that seeks natural beauty loves delicious food, beautiful clothes, and beautiful homes. When these gather in rural areas, it becomes rural beauty, and when these concentrate in cities, it becomes urban beauty. Where these concentrate, human kindness, social beauty, and healthy beauty occur. Urban beauty is owned by the residents of the city, so urban beauty must be popular beauty. But what about Korean urban beauty? It has only become the beauty of the ruler of the city. In winter, the miserable lives of those who die from freezing and starvation due to insufficient housing, and in summer, unhealthy problems due to the intoxication of evil epidemics, dense housing, foul odors, and noise - is this the essence of modern Korean culture? Koreans live in these unhealthy areas and incomplete houses, but I think that not recognizing that they are unhealthy and incomplete gives a great shadow to the future health problems of Koreans.

2. Poor housing in summer and public health issues
The relationship between the house (住家) that we cannot live without in our daily lives and public health has a greater relationship than people generally think. It is not only in the structure of the house but also in the surrounding environment of the house. A well-built house in a city is less healthy than a small house in the countryside with clear air. Whenever you are looking for a house to live in, you must pay attention to the surrounding environment of the house. For example, even if you have a good house in Chayawon-cho (茶屋町) or Cheongjin-dong (淸進洞) in Gyeongseong (京城) City, it is difficult to get enough sunlight and ventilation in the summer, and it is easy for sewage and other pollutants to rot in streams and sewers, spreading the germs of infectious diseases. Everyone knows that the mortality rate and morbidity rate in the old residential areas of large cities are high. The reason why the former mortality rate and morbidity rate show a high rate is mostly due to the relationship between poor housing and dense housing. Refer to the comparison of mortality rates in dense housing as follows. <109>

Number of family members/Number of rooms/Mortality rate
4 people / 1 room / 25.9 people per 1,000 houses
4 people / 2 rooms / 16.5 people per 1,000 houses
4 people / 3 rooms / 11.5 people per 1,000 houses
4 people / 4 rooms / 10.8 people per 1,000 houses

Comparing 1-room houses and 4-room houses, the mortality rate of the former is more than twice that of the latter.

3. Items necessary for housing from a summer hygiene perspective
(1) Structural items that are indispensable as a healthy house necessary to maintain health.
1. The house should not be directly affected by the weather such as rain, dew, wind, and dust.
2. Control extreme temperature differences to prevent the sweltering heat in summer.
3. Since the structure and materials of the warm room are soil and stone, moisture penetrates into the ground by capillary action in the summer, so take special moisture-proof measures.
4. Always pay attention to drying the walls, roofs, and floors to prevent moisture.
5. Make the internal structural materials easy to clean.
6. The number of rooms should be in excess of the number of residents.
7. Ensure sufficient lighting and ventilation.
8. The room layout should be such that it does not take time for housework.
9. Sufficient supply of drinking water and water supply facilities to easily wash away pollution, etc.
10. Need for installation of a bathroom.

(2) Items necessary for the surrounding environment of the house.
1. Make the house and garden independent, but abandon the ornamental purpose of the garden and make it practical and hygienic.
2. The area of the house leveling should be enough to ensure sufficient air circulation and sunlight entry.
3. Place the toilet in a convenient location for nighttime traffic and prevent odors from entering the room.
4. The need for laundry drying equipment and storage place. <110>
5. Do not allow places to abandon sewage, etc. on the land around the house.

(3) General facilities of the house.
1. Always keep the surroundings of the house cool.
2. Locate the house away from chemical factories, airborne smoke, and dust.
3. Select a location for the house that is directly adjacent to transportation facilities.
4. Cultivate plants, etc., both inside and outside the house leveling, to add natural beauty.

4. The future house of Koreans. We should study both building a new house and remodeling an existing house under the minimum conditions to adapt to our lives. In order to fundamentally improve our future houses, we must start with the idea that we need a house that is a little better than our current house.
Whether it is a Korean-style house, a Japanese-style house, or a Western-style house, regardless of the class of rich or poor, it should be a house that is appropriate for their living standards.
Even if the structure and style of Korean houses are the same, the room layout must be absolutely improved to ensure sufficient lighting and ventilation so that there will be no regrets in the future.

Koreans and Summer Seen by a Writer (?)
Horyeondangin

Let's examine the title first.
The word writer (文藝家) is more than I deserve. <111>
It is true that I wrote a few novels like candy when I was young and then hibernated for a while, and then wrote and published a few short stories from the fall of last year based on a new ideology (it is questionable to what extent I accurately and thoroughly grasped it). Considering that I have the honor of being included in the category of writers with just this, it is a good time and Korea is a good place. Are there any foreigners who are not sad that they were not born in Korea at this time?
But I am ashamed.
The lack of quantity is not a big problem, but in terms of quality, when I look at my work and the objective situation in Korea, there is nothing to compare to the shame and frustration.
Proletarian novels are for proletarians to read. If proletarians cannot read proletarian novels, it is the suicide of proletarian novels. But how many proletarians in Korea read proletarian novels?
Despite being in this state, how much social labor is consumed to print out my poor novel!
The pitiful sorrow of the pale intelligentsia (蒼白한 인텔라겐챠!), who cannot abandon this suicidal (『自殺』적) novel business even though they try to abandon it!
But there is one thing I believe in. Whether I continue to be a writer or not will depend on the circumstances, and I have a firm determination to jump into the direct XX of XX in the near future.
This is by no means an escape from the current reality or temporary self-deception. The reason why I cannot jump in right now is because I am not confident in the theory I have grasped. A hasty midwife is likely to kill or cripple the baby by helping with childbirth.
Of course, we need a fighting literature (鬪爭的 文藝). <112> Literature also plays a significant role. But literature cannot do everything. A certain comrade in Japan said, "The value of ideology and professionalism contained in literature is only 30%. If the value of ideology and professionalism is 30%, the actual effect will be only 10%."
Next, as for Koreans and summer, I don't know anything about Koreans with a lot of money.
If they have money, they will go to villas, build ice pillars, and go on vacation.
What I am talking about is poor Koreans. Poor Koreans... ...Is there anything special about them?
There will probably be nothing special. Is it just that poor people in Korea mostly eat millet or barley rice instead of black bread all year round, like poor people in the West?
There is nothing different from anyone else in feeding parasites with blood and sweat.
Of course, Korea's nature is very different from that of foreign countries. But even if nature is different, life will not be that different from that of foreigners.
Then this title will end up being something that I cannot write. The editor may be disappointed, but I will try to avoid responsibility with the following verses. - Even if it's a chicken instead of a pheasant, please use it as a substitute.

The scorching sun that seems to melt even iron is shining down. In the rice paddies where fertilizer and soil have fermented, a foul smell rises up every time the hoe touches the ground.
The hemp shirt and pants that cover only the back and crotch become one with the body, soaked in sweat. Sweat drips mercilessly into my eyes.
Only the sound of the mud clinging to the hands, feet, and hoe is disgusting.
My back hurts and the horseflies are clinging to my stomach. It's almost time for the morning snack, what's going on!
The mistress is carrying a basket with the morning snack on her head and coming along the rice paddies. She puts it down on the rice paddies and calls out.
It's rice cake wine (malgeolli) and chili paste with garlic.
The thick rice cake wine filled to the brim in the bowl passes from hand to hand and then gulps down the throat. Each drop becomes blood and flesh.
The sour barley chili paste and the pungent garlic taste like honey.
One bowl is passed around, then half a bowl each. It would be nice to have a couple more bowls, but there are none left.
After struggling for a while, clouds like lead begin to cover the sky, and it becomes stuffy, making it hard to breathe.
After holding back for a long time, raindrops come rushing from the mountain corner over there.
A refreshing breeze that seems to add several pounds of flesh blows past, and raindrops fall drop by drop. Little by little it pours down.
It pours down coolly and really coolly. It stops for a moment and then pours down again, stops again and then pours down again, and then stops completely.
The clouds scatter like defeated soldiers, and a clear ray of sunlight peeps out between the clouds. A beautiful double rainbow stands to the east.
A calf that has lost its mind in the downpour shouts out from the rice paddies.
From the belly that has driven away the heat, the sound of love songs (sangsa) comes out by itself: "Eo-yeo-eo, eo-yeo-yeoru sang-sang-dwi-yeo-."

The dark barley rice that the wife made while fighting with the young child was pushed into the throat and swallowed.
A mosquito fire is lit in the yard, and as soon as he lies down on the straw mat, swatting mosquitoes with the insufficient fan, his nose starts to snore.
Thus, the robot's day is over.
Only the wife is still standing by the mortar, pounding the barley rice to tear it up to make morning rice. <114>
There are poets who praise this life as idyllic, leisurely, and beautiful.
But for this life to become beautiful, more history is needed. - Until the robot develops emotions, and that becomes power, and it exercises that power, and then... -.

Korean Summer from a Health Perspective
Jeong Gi-seop

The purpose of hygiene is to maintain and promote the health of our lives and to live a healthier and happier life than the current situation. Everything we wear, eat, and sleep is related to hygiene. However, there are significant differences depending on the climate, region, and lifestyle. There are not a few devils that will harm our health in the summer, and there are not one or two things that we Koreans should pay attention to during this season.
Among infectious diseases, there are those that enter through the respiratory system, such as tuberculosis, diphtheria, pneumonia, smallpox, measles, and influenza, and those that enter through the digestive system, such as cholera, typhoid fever, dysentery, and parasites. Generally speaking, diseases that enter through the digestive system are more prevalent in the summer. Among them, dysentery and typhoid fever are the most prevalent and dangerous diseases in Korea in the summer. According to statistics, these two diseases begin to flourish from June and July, are most severe in August and September, and then decline again in October and November. The pathogens of infectious diseases all parasitize the flora and fauna, but the human body that is their host becomes weak <115> and they take the opportunity to develop. The former is called the carrier and the latter is called the patient.
Summer is the season when our digestive system is most likely to weaken and when problems are most likely to occur. Therefore, there are many media. Therefore, we must pay special attention to food, clothing, and housing in the summer. However, looking at the current living conditions of Koreans, there is nothing that can be said to be an appropriate hygiene measure to promote our health. Of course, I also think that there are not a few cases where people know but cannot fix it because the situation does not allow it. However, leaving this aside, if there is anything that we can fix and do in our position, we must fix it and do it.
The first thing to do in Korea in terms of hygiene is for each person and each family to fix what they know and do what they know. In other words, individual hygiene is the first step in public hygiene, so I would like to give a few examples of what each individual and each family in Korea can do today.
1. Room - Looking at Korean homes in the summer, there are almost no places that do not have micro-organisms such as flies, bedbugs, and fleas that were not seen in the winter. However, if it is severe, it is not considered a sleep disturbance, but not many people consider it a danger.
Some people even say, "I don't get bitten, so I don't care about bedbugs or fleas." This is a big misunderstanding. You must know that one micro-organism such as a fly, bedbug, or flea is a medium that takes away the life of our lives. You should not save a little money on micro-organism defense, even if it means drinking a glass of alcohol or smoking a cigarette less. Flies are a major reason why dangerous infectious diseases such as cholera, typhoid fever, and dysentery flourish in the summer. Flies sit on feces containing pathogens and carry the bacteria on their wings or legs to food. However, no one will eat them if they see the germs, but because they are invisible, the germs unknowingly enter the digestive system along with the food, and infectious diseases such as malaria (瘧疾) enter the bloodstream through mosquitoes (蚊) and develop after a certain incubation period. Even if it heals, it must cross the death line of great pain for dozens of days, and if not, the number of people who lose their lives because of this is countless every year. Therefore, in the summer, there is an outbreak of infectious diseases in places with large populations such as cities.

2. Drinking water - In the summer, the climate is very hot, so sweat secretion is severe and a large amount of drinking water is required as a substitute. Therefore, shaved ice, ordinary cold water (running water, well water, tap water), and carbonated water are commonly used as drinking water. It is very dangerous to use running water as drinking water as it is. The bacteria-containing water that flows from washing the feces or clothing of summer infectious disease patients mentioned above will unfortunately be infected if consumed as drinking water. In addition, well water is better than running water, but the groundwater that is its source can also become bacteria-containing water when germs hide underground with rainwater. Artificial ice can be said to be safe, but it is difficult to trust what is sold on the market absolutely. Among them, carbonated water is sterile and reliable, but drinking a large amount of it can irritate the digestive system. Therefore, even if you need cold water, you can use tap water as it is in urban areas, but the safest thing to do is to boil it once and then cool it down before using it.

3. Vegetables - You must be careful about the fact that food quickly changes flavor due to the climate. In particular, Koreans eat a lot of raw vegetables in the summer. Even from the perspective of the so-called "vitamin" theory, this is the most reasonable, but when using raw lettuce, crown daisy, cucumber, and cabbage as food, the biggest problem is the method of washing them. Looking at Korean raw vegetables, there are mostly parasite eggs such as duodenal worms and roundworms, and there are more germs of infectious diseases depending on the time and region, so when washing, pay attention to the invisible worm eggs or germs rather than the visible soil or dust. Choose clean water as much as possible and wash repeatedly until you are sure that you have cleaned them before using them as food.

4. Fruits - There are the most fruits in the summer of the four seasons, so many people commonly eat melons, watermelons, pears, and apples. Therefore, general digestive disorders with unknown causes, especially ordinary diarrhea in children, are mostly caused by fruits. Melons and watermelons are delicacies, and eating only these for a while to the exclusion of all other food, or eating unripe ones, irritates the digestive system and is harmful. It is beneficial to eat them as a side dish after each meal, after discarding the seeds and insides of fully ripe ones.

5. Composition of food and drink - Even if the food is free from any suspicion of infectiousness, its composition and amount are greatly related in the summer. Eat less indigestible foods such as fatty meats and use moderate amounts of vegetables with high water-soluble carbohydrates as food to prevent digestive problems.

6. Clothing - Korean clothing is mostly white in color, so its heat absorption is low, making it naturally suitable for summer hygiene. Also, in terms of materials, ramie cloth is rough and the weave is suitable for air circulation, so this alone is something to be proud of. However, in the summer, sweat secretion is high, so clothing is easily dirtied by combining with dust in the air, which is harmful to hygiene and easily unsightly to others. Therefore, the effort of washing must be several times greater than in the winter. Furthermore, you should pay even more attention to bedding and other items that are sometimes shared with others.
In addition to this, there is nothing in food, clothing, and housing that should not be paid attention to in terms of hygiene, but I believe that the above-mentioned notes are the first step and the top priority of hygienic life, and therefore, I hope that we will fulfill our duty to practice them. (End) <117>

**Named Entities**

宋今璇	Song Geum-seon
支那	China
日本	Japan
나라즈게	narazuke
아지노모도	ajinomoto
가쓰오부시	katsuobushi
平野水	Hirano water
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
茶屋町	Chayawon-cho
淸進洞	Ch’ŏngjin-dong
芥子	Gaeja
許英肅	Hŏ Yŏng-suk
金宗亮	Kim Chong-nyang
浩然堂人	Horyeondangin
鄭基燮	Chŏng Ki-sŏp



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제30호
발행일	1930년 07월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮사람과 녀름
기사형태	논설

朝鮮사람과 녀름
녀름과 朝鮮人의 食物
宋今璇

여름! 우리나라 사람의 飮食物! 나의 머리에 곳 연상되는 것은 여러분께 걱정드를지 모르겟스나 거리에 음식점에 파란장이나 유리창으로 보이는 여러 가지 음식! 豚肉, 牛肉, 煎油魚 여러 가지 색 고명 등등 머금직스럽게 채반에 고여 노은 음식, 거기에 왕왕하고 모여드는 흑파리 은파리 금파리 우연인지 皮肉인지 내가 신경질 눈으로 차저 그런지 냉면 세 그릇 먹는 중 한 그릇쯤은 꼭 파리가 석겻다. 또 어는 大料理店에 某 결혼식 피로연에 가서 음식 먹는대 호박전 우에 쉬를 한 20마리 몽처 깔긴 것을 보앗다. 그런 음식을 먹으면 꼭꼭 복통이 나서 수일 고생을 한다.
여름 음식 하면 파리가 연상되는 것은 나의 신경질뿐 일가. 여러분께서는 아모 꺼림업시 잡수시나!
여기는 여러 가지 원이 잇슬 것이다. 우리나라 사람 가정에는 부인의 일은 단순이 먹고 입는 것에 잇다 하야도 과언이 아닐 줄 안다. 물론 그러치 안은 가정도＜100＞ 잇지만 재래 舊家庭에서는 대부분이 그럿타.
朝飯해먹고 치우는 것이 한 일 빨내, 다뒤미, 바누질, 점심, 夕飯 부인은 여기 하로 종일 매여달녀도 놀 새도 업다. 외국 부인들과 갓치 수양, 강좌을 들으러 간다던지 강연, 강습 등은 고사하고 매일, 신문이나 똑똑히 드려다보는 부인, 매월 잡지나 손에 드는 부인이 반수나 될가. 우리나라 가정은 참으로 일이 만타.
부인이 종일토록 가정에 매달려 衣食을 傳心하는 우리나라 가정에서는 외국인보다 얼마나 잘먹고 잘입나 그 能率이 아조 적다. 夏節에는 매일 김치 당그다 해를 보내는 집이 만타. 이것을 좀 간단히 할 수 잇스면 녀름 음식에 드는 품이 행결 적을 것이다. 김치라는 것은 朝鮮人과 日本人밧게는 업는 듯하다. 支那 사람은 生食이라고는 물도 끄리지 아느면 안 먹는 衛生家니까 말할 것도 업거니와 가장 文明하다는 서양인도 김치 먹듯 먹는 음식이 업다. 일본 김치는 조선 김치가티 그러케 복잡하지 안타. 배추나 오이나 무나 가지나 夏節은 저려서 씨서 먹거나 등게 속에 꾹꾹 녓다가 먹으니 그 얼마나 간단함니가. 겨을 김치 다구앙이나 또는 나라즈게 가튼 것도 우리나라 김장보다는 퍽 간단함니다. 또 「시금치」 갓흔 것도 삶머서 아지노모도나 혹은 가쓰오부시 가튼 것이나 우에 언저 장이나 처먹는대 우리는 파와 마늘을 다듬어 씨서 써려 깨소곰치고 기름치고 고초가루 초 등등 나물 한가지 뭇치는대도 몃 번이나 손이 가야하는지 모르겟다.
우리나라 음식에는 무엇에던지 대게 양렴 안드러 가는 곳이 업다. 그 양렴이 한가지 두 가지가 아니요. 좀 상등 요리를 만들면 양렴 만드는 공이 더 만타. 물론 양렴 안 들고야 조선 요리 맛이 나지 안치만 타국 요리보다 유난이 양렴에 손이 만이 가니 이것 또한 복잡하기 짝이 업다.
좀 음식을 간단히 할 수 업슬가. 이 문제는 물론 큰 문제다. 4천년 이래에 傳風을＜101＞ 一朝에 버리라는 것이 안이라 좀 과학적으로 개량을 하엿스면 조켓다.
그러고 우리나라 가정 부인도 좀 시간의 여유를 어더 자기의 수양과 향상에 뜻할 여유를 두엇스면 조켓다.
일반 부인의 향상은 즉 가정 전체의 향상이다.
음식 가튼 것도 그 영양의 가치도 모르고 재래의 습성대로만 할 것이 안이다. 각 철철이 나는 生鮮, 野菜, 海芋, 穀類, 果實 등이 영양가와 그 소화율 가튼 것을 알아서 적당히 먹게 하면 더 일층 조치 안을가.
그러고 매일 소비되는 식료품 갓흔 것도 남자들이나 또는 하인에게 매입을 맛기는 것은 엇던 점으로 보아서 불합리한 일이다. 요리할 부인이 소용되는 물건을 보고 사야 不用한 것을 안 사고 경제적일 것은 정한 리치가 안인가. 못조록 부인 자신이 물건을 매입하는 것이 가정에 이익이요. 또한 부인 자신의 聞見을 넓히는 조흔 방법이다. 재래 조선 풍속대로 부인이 「어대를 사러 나가 점잔치 못하게」하는 시대는 다 지냇다.
교군 타고 장옷 쓰고 단이는 시대는 옛날이요. 여류 비행사가 하눌을 나라다니고 잇는 시대에 우리 가정 內만은 놀나울 만큼 진보가 못되고 잇는 것은 참으로 부인의 자각이 적은 탓이요 한심한 일이다.
매일 하로 삼시 먹는 음식을 되는 대로 먹을 것이 안이라 우리 가정에서도 獻立하는 것을 만드는 것이 편리하다.
獻立이라는 것은 식탁 上에 올을 음식의 품질을 선정하며 영양분의 배합과 조리법 등을 예정하는 것이다. 더구나 하절에는 동절과 달나 음식을 매일 갈아야지 두엇다 먹지를 못하니 매일 三時 먹는 음식을 가튼 것만 먹으면 제일 물리고 또 생리상에도 조치 안타. 그러니 매일 먹을 것을 一週間分을 미리 적어놋는 것이다.
獻立을 만들 적에는 우선 保健食料(사람이 하로에 필요한 가로리 다시 말하면 이만큼은 꼭 먹어야 사람에게 해롭지 안타 하는 定量이 잇다)를 표준삼아 직업, 연령, 노동의 정도에 딸아 그 지반＜102＞ 경제 방면도 생각하야 실지에 적당하게 할 것이다.
第一은 영양의 가치를 알아할 것. 아모리 맛 잇는 진미라고 반다시 영양의 가치 잇는 것이 안이다.
第二는 소화의 良否다. 먹은 음식이 우리 체내에서 소화 흡수만 하면 아모 효력도 업는 것이다. 아모리 영양이 만은 음식이라도 소화되기 어려운 것이면 그 가치가 적을뿐더러 여러 번 먹으면 위장에 해롭다. 健康者는 無妨이다.
第三은 음식의 배합이다. 한가지만 먹어 가지고 사람에게 필요한 영양을 다 엇기는 어렵다. 고로 여러 가지를 석거 먹을 필요가 잇스되 거기 생각할 것은 닉닉한 고기 등에는 淡泊한 야채를 배합할지며 영양 가치를 딸아 생각할 것이다.
第四는 계절에 딸아 변화식일 것이다. 겨울에는 치운 고로 체온을 더웁게 하기 위하야 濃厚한 食物이 필요하며 또 자연적으로 요구한다. 夏節에는 그 필요가 업기 때문에 淸凉 淡泊한 음식이 조코 또 비위에도 맛는다. 또 생선이나 채소 갓흔 것은 그 종류에 딸아 제철이 잇서 물품이 흔하고 쌀 때가 잇다. 이런 때를 이용하면 경제도 되고 맛도 조코 제철 물건은 신선하야 위생에도 좃타.
第五는 기호의 適否를 생각할 것이다. 연령, 체질, 습관 등에 딸아 음식의 기호도 달으다. 자기 조와하는 음식을 먹으면 맛이 잇슬 뿐더러 소화도 잘된다. 또 가튼 재료라도 요리법을 달으게 하면 덜 물닌다.
第六은 경제에 주의할 것이다. 음식에 대한 비용은 가정의 생계 중에 주요 부분인 고로 위생상 粗食을 삼가는 동시에 경제상 사치를 경게할지어다. 더구나 음식은 한번 잘 먹는 버릇이 생기면 質素하게 하기는 어렵다. 平常 몸에 적당히 먹을 것이다.
獻立 만드는 것은 대단이 괴로울 것 갓해도 그러치 안타. 습관만 되면 獻立이 업스면 무엇을 할넌지 망연할 때가 만으며 一週日分을 일일이 적어노으면 그 비용과 예산 내에서 하기가 쉽다. 獻立에 생일이라던지 명절 가튼 祝日에는 평상보담＜103＞ 음식을 잘하는 것이 조타.
녀름과 음식이 제목인데 그와는 아주 탈선이 만이 된 듯하니 끗트로 상하기 쉬운 食物의 저장법과 淸凉飮料에 대하야 좀 쓰고 끗츨 막을가 한다.
食物은 시간을 경과하면 부패한다. 그 원인은 공기 중에 잇는 세균의 작용 때문이다. 세균은 적당한 영양분, 온도, 수분이 잇스면 번식하는 고로 食物을 보존하야 그 부패를 막는대는 세균의 침입을 막으면서 그 생존 번식에 필요한 온도와 수분을 업시하는 것이 필요하다.
第一 저장법 현재 사용되는 것은 아래와 갓다. 加熟法, 乾燥法, 冷藏法, 密閉法, 藥劑防腐法 등의 종류가 잇다.

1. 加熱法
음식물을 끌이든지 혹은 구어서 세균을 죽여 부패를 막는 방법이다.
酢는 한번 끌여 두면 오래동안 보존할 수가 잇고 또 반찬 남은 것을 그냥 두면 상하기 쉬우니 다시 끌이던지 구어 두면 그 잇튼날까지는 보존할 수가 잇다.

2. 乾燥法
식품을 일광에 널든지 혹은 응달에 널든지 혹은 불노 복가 건조식혀 수분을 업새는 방법이다.
茶, 乾魚, 무말냉이, 버섯, 표고 등은 이 방법으로 한 것이다.

3. 冷藏法
冷藏器라는 어름 궤짝이나 온도가 얏흔 땅광이나 또는 어름 속에 食物을 너두어 부패를 막는 방법이다.
또 우물 속에나 시내물 속에 당거두는 것도 조으되 꺼내서는 곳 요리해야지 상하기 쉽다.

4. 密閉法
食物을 생철통이나 유리병, 상자 등속에 너서 꼭 막어 세균이 드러오지를 못하게 하는 것이다.
랴무네, 삐-루 罐詰가튼 것은 이 방법을 응용한 것이며 육류, 과실 등의 罐詰은 가열법을 병용한 것이다.＜104＞

5. 藥劑防腐法
食鹽, 砂糖, 芥子, 알코-올, 酢 등을 가지고 부패를 막은 것인대 鹽魚, 鹽肉, 짠지, 된장에 넌 食物, 果實 등에 砂糖에 담은 것 마눌장앗지 등이다.

第二. 貯藏法의 實例
1. 飯 밥은 蒸氣와 물기로 인하야 쉬기가 쉬우니 마른 그릇에 담되 뚝겅에 증기가 괴이지 못하게 하라. 속쿠리에 담어 체가튼 것을 덥허두는 것이 조으며 밥질 적에 쌀을 전날 저녁에 씨서 물 부어 두엇다가 그 잇튼날 아츰에 짓는 것이 덜 쉬는 것이다.
2. 자반이나 굴비 가튼 것도 바람 잘 통하는 곳에 두고 각금 거풍을 식혀 둡니다.
3. 김, 표고, 버섯, 무말냉이 등은 密法으로 저장하는 것이다.
4. 계란은 메대껍질, 겨 속에 너두며 또는 消石灰에 20배의 물을 부어 풀어 그 속에 당것다가 끄내두는 것도 좃타.
5. 감자, 토란, 생강, 고구마, 다마네기 등은 흑 잇는 채 씻지 말고 두며 또 生栗은 땅속에 파뭇어 두는 것이 조으되 물기 만흔 땅속은 좃치 안타.
6. 과실은 상처 업는 것으로 골나 톱밥이나 게, 메대껍질 속에 넛커나 혹은 한 개식 종이에 싸서 서로 닷치 안케 궤짝 속에 너두는 것이 조타.
7. 맥주 포도주 등은 병을 뉘어 두어 해 안드는 바람잇는 대 두나니라.
8. 우유는 정한 병이야 된다. 끌인 것을 막에를 꼭 하야 냉수나 어름 속에 두라.
9. 생선은 소금으로 간을 하거나 좀 구어 두거나 초에 당거두라.

淸凉飮料
녀름에는 제일 비위에 마즈며 시원하야 만이 쓰게 되는 것이다.
사이다, 시토론, 平野水, 라무네 등. 平野水는 天然炭酸泉을 병에다 넌 것이며 모다 물에다 砂糖, 果汁, 香料 등을 너서 炭酸瓦斯를 溶入한 것이다. 이것은 영양분은 업스나 목마른대 제일이며＜106＞ 정신을 爽快하게 한다. 그러나 너머 만이 먹으면 위를 害한다. 또 부패에 의심 잇는 것, 물이 맑지 못한 것, 밋헤 가라안즌 것이 잇는 것 등은 결코 먹지 말지며 또 氷水가튼 것도 적당이 먹어야지 너머 먹으면 해롭다.
기타 麥湯, 玄米湯, 豆茶, 冷茶은 其 각각 재료을 복가서 끌인 것을 차게 한 것이나 혹은 더운 채로 쓰는 것이 조타.

녀름과 女子의 衣服
許英肅

의복의 목뎍은 결코 단순한 것이 안임니다. (1)례의 (2)위생 (3)미관 (4)경제 등 여러 가지 목뎍이 잇슴니다. 그러니까 여자의 녀름 의복을 말하는 데도 이 네 가지를 염두에 둘 필요가 잇슴니다.
첫재 녀름옷은 가리워야 할 몸의 어떤 부분을 넉넉히 가리우는 것이 례의라는 조건에 합합니다. 속옷까지도 모시와 가튼 열분 감으로 만들어서 그런 옷을 닙은 사람이 석양의 광선을 등진 때에 길로 걸어가는 것을 길ㅅ가에 안저서 보면 전신이 환하게 비최어 보임니다. 그러니까 녀름옷은 아모리 덥드래도 속옷 한가지만은 비최지 안는 감을 택할 필요가 잇슴니다.
둘재 위생뎍 의미로 보아서는 녀름이 과히 결뎜이 업다고 생각함니다. 서늘하고 가뷔엽고 상그럽슴니다.
셋재 미관으로 보아서 여자의 녀름옷은 결졈이 만슴니다. 먼저 개성을 좀 보이도록 힘쓰는 것이 조흐리라고 생각함니다. 조선옷은 겨우 남녀로소 빈부귀천을 구별할 수 잇는 것 밧게는 만인이 다 한 모양임니다. 빗갈이나 모양이나 도모지 차별이 업슴니다.＜106＞ 서양 옷이나 일본 옷에는 빗갈 모양이 천태 만상이여서 입은 사람의 년령, 키, 얼골, 살빗, 몸맵시, 취미, 직업, 철을 따라서 거긔 만는 제도를 올를 수가 잇슴니다. 조선옷은 빗이라고 흰 것, 검정, 옥색 등 멧 가지 순색박게 업고 모양에 이르러서는 그만한 차별조차 업서 서양 사람이 보면 학교 학생이 학교의 명령에 따라 일제히 교복을 닙고 나서지 안이햇나 의심하리만치 절문 부인네의 옷 모양이 똑갓슴니다. 옷이 도덕뎍 의미와 생리뎍 의미를 가진 것과 가티 심미뎍 의미도 잇다고 하면 조선옷이 압흐로 나아갈 방향은 빗갈과 모양의 복잡화라고 생각함니다.
조선 녀자들의 녀름 옷에 시급히 개량해야 할 것은 풀을 너무 세게 입지 아니할 것임니다. 옷이 몸에 착 붓허서 몸이 움직이는 대로 옷이 물결을 처야 아름답지 안켓슴닛가. 풀이 세서 네 귀가 번쩍 들녀서 그 속에서 몸이 움직이거나 말거나 장작깨비 벗히듯 하고 잇는 것이야말로 보기 흉함니다.
최후로 우리 조선은 지극히 가난한 나라이니까 조선ㅅ 가정의 주인 되는 조선 부인들은 아모조록 돈 적게 들고 조선 사람의 손으로 만들 수 잇는 감으로 옷을 지어 입는 것이 맛당할가 함니다. 수입을 고려하지 안이하는 사치 - 이것은 미가 안이라 도로혀 추인가 함니다.

住宅으로 본 朝鮮사람과 녀름
金宗亮

1.
주택도 의복과 동일한 사명을 가진 관계상 각 국 각 사회를 물론하고 사회 문제화하야 혹은 국가적 사업 혹은＜107＞ 단체적 사업으로 실제 생활에 적응하도록 연구도 하고 건설도 한다. 그러나 우리 사람의 의식주는 과연 如何한가. 우리 사람이라면 白衣 米食 溫房이 연상된다. 백의는 예술적이고 위생적이다. 그러나 생존 경쟁 此時에 不經濟임으로 개선할 필요가 잇다. 食은 생활상 제일 필요품인 것은 사실이다. 우리는 多食主義를 廢하고 榮養主義를 취할 필요가 잇다. 이상 衣食改善도 주택 개선으로부터 출발하야 할 것이다. 그러면 주택은 무엇인가. 주택의 全使命은 결코 防風 防雨 防敵의 의미에만 잇지 안이하고 일광 통풍 등을 상당히 조절하야 보건의 조건 하에서 실내의 일상생활을 유쾌하게 하는 적극적 사명도 잇다. 현대 조선 사람의 주택을 보면 대부분은 주택의 本意에 불합리한 점이 허다하다. 인류의 최고 낙원이란 가정을 包圍하여 주는 주택을 등외시하는 조선 사람 처지로 정신상 번민 육체상 고통으로 包圍된 현대 조선 사회에서 어데 가서 일시적 亨樂이라도 구할가. 본래 봉건시대의 餘風으로 외출을 不肯하는 조선 부인의 全生活의 대부분을 불합리한 주택 속에서 일평생을 지내는 그분들에게 동정 안이 할 수가 업다. 현대 조선 주택을 沿革上으로 보면 주택 구조 凡百이 지리상 관계로 한대지방의 영향을 만히 바더서 불완전하나마 夏節設備보담 冬節設備가 비교적 완전하다. 夏節이 사계 중 건강상 주의가 제일 필요하다. 조선 주택이 하계 보건상 如何한 영향을 주는가를 조선 사람으로 연구 안이 할 수가 업다. 조선 사람의 사망률 罹病率 범죄율 등의 발생이 불완전한 주택에 주거함으로 원인 되는 것이 허다하다 . 도시의 사망률이 농촌의 二倍 되는 것도 不衛生的인 주택에 거주하는 것이 대부분이다. 그럼으로 도시 계획의 眞價値도 주택 개선에 잇다고 안이할 수가 업다. 夏節에 민중 건강상 견지로 볼 때에 불량 주택에 거주함으로 不潔 惡習 陰鬱 不愉 등의 밧는 不健康 문제를 생각할 필요가 잇다. 夏節 위생 문제로 조선 주택을 관찰하면 대부분이 불량 주택이라고 생각한다.＜109＞ 防寒에는 어느 정도까지 발달되엇스나 無量히 우리 인류에게 무조건하고 주는 태양 광선 청쾌한 공기를 무시하게 된 것은 천부적인 자연의 가치, 즉 자연미를 무시한 것이다. 자연미를 구하는 마음은 美食, 美衣, 美家를 애호한다. 이것이 농촌에 집합하면 農村美가 되고 이것이 도시에 집중하면 都市美가 된다. 이것이 집중하는 곳에는 인정미 社會美 건강미가 발생한다. 都市美는 그 도시 거주자의 소유임으로 都市美는 대중적 美가 되야 할 것이다. 그러나 조선 都市美는 과연 如何한가. 그 도시의 지배자의 美가 되고만 것이다. 冬節에는 주택 부족한 관계상 凍餓로 生하는 비참, 하계에는 惡疫 密住 臭氣 喧轟 등의 중독으로 不健康 문제 이것이 현대 조선 도시 문화의 精華일가. 조선 사람이 이런 不健康地帶 불완전한 주택에 거주하면서도 그것이 不健康 불완전한 것을 인식치 못하는 것만큼 장래 조선 사람 건강 문제에 큰 暗影을 주는 것이라고 생각한다.

2. 하절의 불량 주택과 민중의 건강 문제
吾人 일상생활에 업지 못할 住家와 민중의 건강 문제 관계는 일반이 생각하는 以上 大關係가 잇다. 그것은 주택 구조에만 잇지 안이하고 주택 주위환경에도 잇다. 도시 중에 건축된 양호한 주택이 공기 쾌청한 야외 小住宅보담 보건상으로는 못한 것이다. 언제든지 거주할 주택을 구할 시에는 밧듯이 주택의 주위환경을 주시할 필요가 잇다. 실례로 보면 京城 都市中 茶屋町 淸進洞 등지에 양호한 주택을 가젓다고 하드라도 하절에는 채광 통풍을 충분히 하기도 難할 뿐만 안이라 개천 하수도 등에 오물 등이 부패하야 전염병의 세균을 전파되기가 용이하다. 대도시의 古來 住家部分의 사망률 罹病率을 占한 것은 誰某이든지 잘 아는 것이다. 前者의 사망률 罹病率이 高率을 示한 것은 대부분은 불량 주택에 密住의 관계이다. 密住 관계의 사망률을 비교한 것을 참고하면 如左하다.＜109＞

가족수/방수/사망율
4인 / 1실 / 주택 1千인에 대하야 25,9인
4인 / 2실 / 주택 1千인에 대하야 16,5인
4인 / 3실 / 주택 1千인에 대하야 11,5인
4인 / 4실 / 주택 1千인에 대하야 10,8인

1실 주택과 4실 주택을 비교하면 前者 사망률이 後者의 2배 이상이나 된다.

3. 夏節 위생상으로 본 주택에 필요한 諸項
(1) 건강을 保持함에 필요한 건전 주택으로써 업지 못할 만한 구조상 조항.
1. 주택은 雨露風塵의 天候의 영향을 직접 밧지 안이하도록 할 일.
2. 온도의 극단의 차를 조절하야 하절의 혹서를 방비하도록 할 것.
3. 온방의 구조 재료가 土, 石임으로 하절에는 습기가 지상으로 모세관 현상에 의하야 침입함으로 특별 防濕方針을 취할 것.
4. 壁, 屋根, 마루 등을 항상 건조을 주의하야 방습하도록 할 것.
5. 내부 구조 재료를 청결하기에 용이하도록 할 것.
6. 房數는 거주 인원수에 비하야 여유 잇도록 할 것.
7. 채광 환기를 충분히 하도록 할 것.
8. 방배치는 가사에 시간이 걸이지 안이하도록 할 것.
9. 飮水 用水의 공급 설비를 충분히 하야 오염 등을 洗棄함에 容易히 할 것.
10. 욕실의 설치의 필요.

(2)주택의 주위환경에 필요한 조항.
1. 주택과 정원을 독립적으로 하되 정원은 觀賞的 本義를 廢하고 실용적 위생적 本位로 할 것.
2. 주택의 整地 면적은 공기 유통, 태양 광선의 入射를 충분히 할 만한 것.
3. 변소의 위치를 야간 통행에 편리한 장소에 배치하고 臭氣 등이 실내에 침입하지 안이하도록 할 것.
4. 세탁물 의복의 건조할 설비 物置所의 필요.＜110＞
5. 주택의 주위 토지에 汚垢物 등의 棄置所을 업도록 할 것.

(3)주택 일반의 설비.
1. 주택의 주위를 항상 청량하도록 할 것.
2. 주택 위치를 화학 공장, 空中煤煙, 塵埃 등으로부터 遠避할 것.
3. 주택의 위치를 교통기관에 직접 근접한 장소를 선정할 것.
4. 가옥 整地 내외를 물론하고 植木 등을 재배하야 자연미를 가미하도록 할 것.

4. 조선 사람의 장래 주택. 주택을 신축하는 것과 재래 가옥을 우리 생활에 적응하도록 최소 조건 하에서 개축하는 것. 두 가지를 연구하야 할 것이다. 吾人의 장래 주택을 근본적으로 개선하자면 지금부터 일반 우리가 현재 우리 주택보담 좀더 양호한 주택이 필요하다는 관념부터 시작되야 할 것이다.
조선식 주택 일본식 주택 구미식 주택 등을 물론하고 빈부 귀천의 각 계급을 물론하고 자기 생활 정도에 적당한 주택이라 할 것이다.
조선 가옥도 구조 양식 등은 그樣 두드라도 방배치는 절대로 개선하야 채광 환기를 충분히 하야 日後에 遺憾이 업도록 하여야 할 것이다.

文藝家(?)가 본 朝鮮 사람과 녀름
浩然堂人

제목부터 진찰하여 보자.
文藝家라는 말이 무엇보담도 나에게는＜111＞ 과분한 稱啣이다.
철을 몰으든 시절에 봉어사탕 가튼 소설 멧 편을 써 본 일이 잇고 한동안 冬眠을 하다가 작년 가을부터 다시 새로운 이데올로기에 의하야(그것도 어는 정도까지 정확 그러고 철저하게 把持하엿는지가 의문) 멧 개의 단편을 써서 발표할 것은 사실이다. 이만ㅅ것을 가지고 문예가의 축에 끼일 영광을 가진다는 것을 생각하면 시절은 조흔 시절이요, 조선은 조흔 곳이다. 타국 사람이 이때의 조선에 태어나지 못한 것을 발 구루며 안탁가워하지 안이하는가?
그러나 나는 붓그럽다.
量이 부족한 것은 그다지 문제가 되지 안이하지만 質에 잇서서 내가 나의 작품과 조선의 객관적 정세를 볼 때에 붓그러움과 한심함이 비길 데가 업다.
푸로레타리아 소설은 푸로레타리아를 읽히기 위한 것이다. 푸로레타리아 소설을 푸로레타리아가 읽지 못한다 하면 그것은 푸로레타리아 소설의 자살이다. 그런데 조선의 푸로레타리아로써 푸로레타리아 소설을 읽는 사람이 멧이나 되는가?
이러한 상태에 잇슴에도 불구하고 빈약한 나의 소설 한 편을 인쇄해 내이기 위하야 사회적으로 소비되는 노동은 얼마나 큰가!.
이 『自殺』적 소설업을 버리려 버리려 하면서도 그래도 바리지 못하는 『蒼白한 인텔라겐챠!』의 얄미운 비애여!.
그러나 한가지 미둠ㅅ성은 잇다. 압흐로 文人業을 계속하건 안이하건 그것은 나중 형편에 딸어 할 것이고 압흐로 머지 안이하여 卽接 XX의 XX에 뛰여 나서겟다는 구든 결심이 잇는 것이다.
이것은 결코 목전의 현실도피나 일시적 자아 기만이 안이다. 지금 당장에 뛰여나서지 못하는 것은 나의 把握한 바 이론에 대하야 구든 자신이 업기 때문이다. 섯부른 산파가 助産을 하다가는 도리여 아희를 죽이거나 병신을 만들기 쉬운 것이다.
물론 우리에게는 鬪爭的 文藝가＜112＞ 필요치 안이한 것은 안이다. 문예도 상당한 一役을 하지 안이하는 것은 안이다. 그러나 문예로써 전체는 하지 못한다. 일본의 어느 同志는 『문예에 품기어 잇는 애지,푸로의 가치는 30%밧게는 안이 된다고 하엿다. 애지,푸로의 가치가 30%이니 실제의 효과는 10%밧게 안이 될 것이다.
다음에 조선 사람과 녀름이라고 하엿지만 돈 만흔 조선 사람은 나에게 알 바이 업다.
돈이 잇스면 별장에도 가고 어름 기둥도 세우고 피서도 가고 하겟지.
내가 말하게 되는 것은 가난한 조선 사람이다. 가난한 조선 사람... ... 은 그러면 무슨 특별한 것이 잇슬가?
역시 별달은 것이 업슬 것이다. 서양의 가난한 사람이 사철 검은 빵을 먹는 대신 조선의 가난한 사람이 대부분 조팝이나 보리밥을 먹는 것이나 달으다고 할가?
피와 땀으로 기생충을 먹여 살니기는 누구하고도 달을 것이 업다.
물론 조선의 자연만은 외국의 그것과 만히 달으다. 그러나 자연이 달으다고 생활이 그닥지 크게 외국 사람의 그것에 비하여서 달너질 것은 업다.
그러면 이 제목은 결국 나로써는 쓰지 못할 것이 되어바리고 만다. 편집자가 실망할지 모르나 하는 수 업시 다음의 멧마듸로 책임을 면하려 한다. -꿩 대신 닭이라도 아쉰대로 쓰시오.

쇠ㅅ뎅이라도 녹여 내일 뜻한 불볏이 내려 쬐인다. 거름과 흙이 발효된 논바닥에서는 고약한 냄새가 호미 끄틀 두르는 대로 물큰물큰 소사올은다.
등과 사타구니만 가린 삼베 등거리와 잠뱅이는 땀에 저저 몸과 한살이 된다. 땀방울은 사정업시 눈으로 고여 든다.
두 손과 두발과 호미에서 진흙의 벌크덕거리는 소리만 진그럽게 들닌다.
허리가 압흐로 배ㅅ주락은 등애가 착 들어붓텃다. 하마 새ㅅ참이 나올 때가 되엿는데 웬 일일가!.
주인 마누라가 광주리에 새ㅅ참을＜113＞ 담어 이고 아장아장 논 두덕으로 해서온다. 논 두덕에 내려노코 불은다.
말걸니와 고초장에 마눌이다.
주발에 넘실넘실 부은 틉틉한 막걸니가 손에서 손으로 넘어 다시 목구멍으로 벌컥벌컥 넘어간다. 그 한 방울 한 방울이 피가 되고 살이 된다.
시쿠룸한 보리 고초장과 노자근한 만눌이 달기가 꿀 한가지다.
한 사발씩 돌아오고 다음에 반 사발씩이다. 두어 사발 더먹엇스면 꼭 조켓스나 더는 업다.
다시 한참 허부덕거리는 때에 납뎅이 가튼 구름이 덥히기 시작하며 숨이 턱턱 맥히게 무더웁다.
한참ㅅ동안 두고 살무며 벼루다가 저-편 산모퉁이로부터 빗발이 몰녀온다.
한거번에 살이 맷斤은 올으는 듯한 산뜻한 바람이 훠 지나가며 빗낫치 뚝뚝 듯는다. 조곰 조곰하다가 와시르르 쏘다진다.
시원스럽고 정말 시원하게 쏘다진다. 잠ㅅ간 머졋다가 또 한번 쏘다지고 다시 머졋다가 또 쏘다지고는 아주 머저바린다.
구름이 이리저리 敗陣將卒가티 허터지며 구름ㅅ장 사이로 맑은 해ㅅ발이 족흠 버더나온다. 동쪽으로 무지개가 곱게 쌍으로 선다.
내ㅅ두덕에서 소낙비에 정신이 나간 송아지가 매-ㅇ하고 소리를 질은다.
더위를 물니친 배ㅅ속에서는 『어-여-어, 어-여-여루 상-상-뒤-여-』 한마듸 상사ㅅ소리가 제절로 울어나온다.

마누라가 어린놈과 싸워가면서 지어노흔 싯검한 곱살미보리밥이 꾸역꾸역 목구멍으로 해서 다 넘어갓다.
마당에 모깃불을 질으고 거적자리에 누어 모자라진 붓채로 모기를 날니며 눕자마자 코가 들으렁거린다.
이리하야 로포트의 하로 일은 맛치어젓다.
다만 마누라만이 아침 보리ㅅ쌀을 찟느라고 절구통에 부터 서서 꽁꽁 방아를 찟는다.＜114＞
이러한 생활을 牧歌的이라고 長閒하다고 아름답다고 찬미하는 시인도 잇다.
그러나 이 생활이 알음다워지자면 좀더 역사가 필요하다. - 로포트에 감정이 생겨나고 그것이 힘이 되어 그 힘을 행사하고 그러고 난 다음에... ...까지의 -.

健康上으로 본 朝鮮 녀름
鄭基燮

우리 인생의 건강을 保持하고 증진하야 現象보다 더 건강의 생활, 행복의 생활을 하랴는 것이 모다 위생의 本意이니 입는 것 먹고 자는 것 것 등이 모다 위생에 관계되지 안는 것이 업슴니다. 그러나 기후, 지방, 생활 방침을 따라서 至大한 차이가 有하니 하절에 잇서서 吾人의 건강을 害할여는 病魔도 적지 안이하며 특히 우리 조선 사람으로서의 이 시절을 주의하여야 할 것도 하나둘이 안임니다.
전염병 중에는 結核띕데리아, 肺炎, 天然痘, 麻疹, 流行性 感冒 등 가티 호흡기로 침입하는 것도 잇고 虎列刺, 腸窒扶斯, 赤痢, 寄生蟲 등이 소화기로 침입하는 것도 잇스니 대체로 말하면 하절에는 소화기로 침입하는 질병이 만히 유행되는 시기임니다. 그 중에도 우리나라에 잇서서는 하절이면 赤痢와 腸窒扶斯가 제일 만히 유행하는 위험한 병임니다. 통계상으로 보면 이 두 가지 병들은 6,7월부터 繁猖되기 시작하야 8,9월에 제일 심하고, 10,11월에 至하면 다시 감퇴하여지는 병임니다. 전염병들의 병원균이 모다 동식물계에 기생하는 것이나 그 宿住되는 인체가 약할＜115＞ 시기를 기회로 발병을 함으로 其前을 보균자로 하고 其後를 병자라 부름니다.
하절은 吾人의 소화기가 가장 약하여지기 쉬웁고 가장 장해가 이러나기 쉬운 시기임니다. 따라서 매개물도 만슴니다. 고로 하절에는 의식주에 특별한 주의를 가지고 지내야 됨니다. 그러나 現下 우리 조선인의 생활 상태를 살혀보면 무엇 무엇이 우리의 건강을 증진하기에 적당한 위생 방책이라고 세일 것이 업슴니다. 물론 몰나서 못하는 것보다 알면서도 형편이 不許하여서 곳치지 못하는 것도 不無하다는 것은 필자도 생각하는 바임니다. 그러나 此는 예외로 두고 우리의 처지로서 고칠 수 잇고 행할 수 잇는 것이라면 고처야 하겟고 행하여야 할 것임니다.
우리나라에 잇서서 위생상의 先着處는 몬저 각자 각 가정부터 아는 대로 고치고 아는 대로 행하여야 할 것임니다. 즉 각자 위생은 공중 위생의 제일보임으로 금일에 우리나라에 잇서서 각개인 각 가정에서 능히 행할 수 잇는 멧 가지 실례를 들어 볼여 합니다.
1. 居室-녀름에 우리나라 가정을 살펴보면 겨울에 보지 못하던 즉 파리, 빈대, 베룩 등 微物들은 대개 업는 곳이 별로히 업슴니다. 그러나 그것이 심하면 安眠에 장해물로 看做하는 外에 별 위험성을 念慮하는 이가 만치 못함니다.
혹자는 말하기를 「나는 물 것을 안이타니까 빈대, 베룩 가튼 것은 모다 관계가 업다」고 까지 함니다. 이는 실로 큰 오해임니다. 파리, 빈대, 베룩 가튼 微物의 한머리가 우리 인생의 생명을 빼앗는 매개자인 것을 알어야 함니다. 한잔 술, 한 개 흡연을 들할지언정 微蟲防禦에는 약간의 비용을 앗기지 말어야 할 것임니다. 호열자, 장질부사, 赤痢 등 위험한 전염병이 하절에 번창하는 큰 이유는 파리임니다. 파리는 병원균을 함유한 糞便 우에 안젓다가 날개나 다리에 菌體를 무처가지고 음식물로 운반하여 옴니다. 그러나 그 병균을 보고는 먹을 자가 업겟지만은 보이지 안는 고로 먹을 자가 업겟지만은 보이지 안는 고로 무의식중에 그 병원균은 食物을 따러 소화기에 침입하고 말라리아(瘧疾) 가튼 전염병은 모기(蚊)로 인하야 血行系에 침입하야 일정한 잠복기를 경과한 후에는 발병하야, 낫는다 하여도 수십일 간 큰 고통의 死線을 넘어야 하고 不然이면 이로 인하야 생명을 빼앗기는＜116＞ 人數가 매년 허다함니다. 그럼으로 하절에는 도시와 가튼 인구가 만흔 곳에는 전염병 만연의 소동이 나게 됨니다.

2. 飮料水- 하절에는 기후가 제일 고열임으로 汗分泌가 심하야 其 대용으로 음료수를 다량으로 요함니다. 고로 흔이는 빙수, 보통 냉수(長流水, 井水, 水道), 탄산수 등을 음료수로 쓰게 됨니다. 長流水를 그대로 음료수로 쓰는 것은 크게 위험한 일임니다. 上述한 하계 전염병 환자의 糞便, 혹은 의복류를 세탁한 含菌水가 흐르는 물을 불행이 그대로 음용할 때는 역시 전염을 밧게 됨니다. 그 외에 井水는 長流水보다는 나흐나 그 水源되는 地底水에도 병균은 雨水와 함끠 지하로 숨어서 含菌水가 될 수 잇는 것이요. 氷은 人造氷이면 안전타 할 수 잇스나 市上에 行賣하는 것은 절대의 신용은 하기 어려운 것이오. 그 중 탄산수가 무균하고 신용할 만하나 다량을 음용하면 소화기를 자극할 염려가 만슴니다. 然則 아모리 냉수를 요할지라도 음료수로는 도회지에는 혹 水道水를 그대로 사용할 수 잇스나 제일 안전하기는 일차 열탕을 만들엇다가 다시 식히여서 쓸 것임니다.

3. 菜蔬- 기후에 의하야 食物이 속히 變味가 됨으로 此에 주의는 물론이오. 특히 우리나라에서는 녀름에 生菜를 만히 먹게 됨니다. 이것은 근대 소위 『븨-타민』說로 보더래도 가장 합리한 것이나 생치, 쑥갓, 외, 배차 가튼 것을 食物로 쓸 때에 몬저 그 씻는 법이 큰 문제임니다. 우리나라 생채로 보면 대개 십이지장충, 회충 등 寄生蟲卵이 제일 만코 시기와 지방을 따러서 전염병의 병균이 더 잇는 것임으로 씨슬 때 눈에 보이는 흙이나 틔보다도 보이지 안는 蟲卵이나 병균을 주의하야 가급적 淸水를 택하야 의심이 업기까지 씻기를 누차 거듭한 것을 食物로 쓸 것임니다.

4. 果物- 果物은 사계 중에 녀름이 제일 만흠으로 참외, 수박, 배, 사과 가튼 것은 공통으로 만히 먹게 됨니다. 고로 원인 未詳한 일반 소화장애 특히 소아의 보통 下痢가튼 것은 果物의 원인이 가장 만슴니다. 참외나 수박이 기호품이 되고 一時 全食量을 이것만으로 포식하거나 더구나 未熟한 것을 먹을 때에는 소화기를 자극하야 해가 됨니다. 완전히 성숙한 것으로 씨나 속을 다 바리고 매 식후의 副食物로 먹는 것은 利가 됨니다.

5. 飮食物의 成分- 전염성의 하등 의심이 업는 음식물이라도 하절에는 그 성분과 분량에 큰 관계가 됨니다. 지방질이 만흔 육류와 가튼 不消化物을 들 먹고 含水炭素가 만흔 채소 가튼 것을 적당하게 식료로 써서 소화기에 장애가 업도록 도모할 것임니다.

6. 衣類- 우리나라 의복은 그 색이 대개 백색임으로 열의 흡수력이 적어서 자연적으로 하절 위생에 적당함니다. 또한 재료로 보드래도 苧布가튼 것은 성질이 깔깔하고 직조가 공기 유통하기에 적당함으로 이것만은 우리의 자랑거리가 될 만함니다. 그러나 하절에는 汗分泌가 만흠으로 공기 중에 塵埃와 합하야 의복이 더럽기 쉬움으로 이는 위생에 해롭고 남 보기에 不美하기 쉬웁니다. 고로 세탁의 수고가 동절보다 幾倍나 더하지 안으면 안됨니다. 더구나 침구가티 혹 타인과 공용하는 것은 일층 주의를 요함니다.
이외에도 의식주에 하나도 위생상 주의치 안을 것이 업스나 필자는 이상의 멧 가지 記抄한 것을 위생 생활의 제일보요 급선무라고 보는 바이며 따라서 피차에 실행하는 의리가 되기를 기대하야 마지안슴니다.(完) ＜117＞
＜100-117＞