별건곤 제30호
1930년 07월 01일
女人, 追憶의 더듬길 (Women, A Fumbling Path of Recollection)
金東仁
소설 (Novel)

Women, A Fumbling Path of Recollection
Kim Tong-in

4. M
I cannot help but throw away the brush with which I was going to write about M. Our association with him, like a childhood dream, should be secretly cherished forever in both of our hearts, so I have decided to put down the brush again for his sake.

I still see him on the street from time to time. However, he, a distinguished man as a good wife in a harmonious family, pretended not to know me even when he met me. I also pretended not to know him.

Once, I ran into * in a narrow alley where there were no people. At that time, his face changed, and he bowed his head and quickly passed by. I also quickened my pace and passed by.

Due to this, I cannot help but hesitate to publish his story to the world. The short and beautiful dream of our childhood, which only he and I know, must be hidden deep in our hearts forever, and we can only sometimes recall it and immerse our minds in his beautiful dream.

5. Kim Ok-yeop
In the spring of 1921, I, being twenty-two years old, went to Seoul (上京) to attend a promoters' meeting of a certain society. And there, I saw a *kisaeng* (妓生) for the first time and tasted the pleasures of *kisaeng*.

To be honest, it wasn't that I had never seen them before. Having grown up under Christian education and Confucian moral teachings, I considered the life of a *kisaeng* dirty and despised young men who played with *kisaeng* as a result of the education I had received. However, the magnanimous nature inherited from my father and the flamboyant personality I had consciously created were more than enough to suppress that second nature. So, I had secretly seen *kisaeng*, a type of person, at restaurants a few times the previous winter. However, those few secret encounters only served to arouse my curiosity about that field. And while despising the young men who played with *kisaeng* as failures, I was anticipating myself frequenting restaurants without hiding my face in the near future.

However, there was no opportunity to play freely in small P'yŏngyang, where news spread from one end of the South to the other in less than two hours, even if a trivial matter occurred at the southernmost end. Although I had lost my Christian faith, as a slick young man—a cultured gentleman—a clean youth, I could not openly satisfy my extraordinary curiosity about the pleasure quarters, even though I had it in my heart. At that time, my personality still retained many innocent aspects that feared what others would say.

After the promoters' meeting was over, I could not calm my mind from wanting to go to Seoul again, so I returned to P'yŏngyang the next day. After spending a few days like this, I made an excuse and went up to Seoul again. The excuse was to discuss future plans for "Ch’angjo" (創造), which had been in a state of suspension after publishing its ninth issue at that time.

On the night I went up, a riotous party was held at Myŏngwŏn Hall (明月館). And at that time, I met Kim Ok-yeop (金玉葉) for the first time. I remember that Kim Ŏk (金億), Kim Hwan (金煥), Kim Ch’an-yŏng (金瓚永), Ko Kyŏng-sang (高敬相) and others were there as men, and Kang Myŏng-hwa (康明花), An Kŭm-hyang (安錦香), and Kim Ok-yeop (金玉葉) were there as *kisaeng*.

Having a strange belief that a man should know how to drink alcohol, I, who did not know how to drink, got drunk after a few drinks and stepped away from the table. At that time, one of the *kisaeng* sitting across from me came over and kindly took care of me. That was Ok-yeop.

That night, I stayed at Ok-yeop's house through Kim Hwan's introduction. That night, spent whispering until dawn without getting a wink of sleep, was one of the unforgettable evenings of my life.

A person I didn't even know until yesterday noon, a woman I met for the first time last night, had captured this young man's entire heart. It was a strange, if it could be called strange, and bizarre, if it could be called bizarre, human heart.

This young man, whose passion never knew where to end once it started burning, went out to Ch'ŏngsong Hall (靑松舘) with a few friends the next evening, cherishing a burning passion in his heart.

"I'm here, I'm here.
I'm here in this distant land.
Did I come carried by the wind?
Did I come carried by the clouds?
Perhaps the reason I came here is
to see my sugar daddy."

My face changed at the sound of this song coming from the upper floor. At that time, I couldn't tell that it was Ok-yeop's voice just by the voice alone. But in this wide world, Ok-yeop (玉葉) would be the only one who could sing "to see my sugar daddy." When I asked the boy to find out if Ok-yeop was there and bring me some *kaep’yŏng* (개평), my heart felt as heavy as if it were crushed under a rock.

Thus, the flames of my love for him grew even more fiercely.

Four days later, I returned to P'yŏngyang.

Suppressed passion, unbearable tension, unexpressable love—because of these sweet and painful emotions, I spent a lonely day and greeted a new lonely day with a heart as tragic as a martyr's. A few lines of the song he whispered into my ear remained in my ear and constantly echoed. The scent of camellia oil, which I smelled for the first time in my life, strangely remained in my nose and became a material for thinking of him.

A few days after returning to P'yŏngyang, I bought an alexandrite ring for him and sent it. At first, I went to a certain precious metal store to buy a diamond ring, but I happened to discover a rare, genuine alexandrite that was not easily found in Korea and decided to buy and send it. It was not the kind of stone that is commonly displayed in jewelry stores—the kind whose brilliance in firelight and sunlight is not very different—but a hard-to-find, high-quality stone that shines a deep green in sunlight as if it were a lie and shines bright red like a ruby in firelight.

I send you this stone, which changes color from time to time but whose essence as a jewel remains unchanged, hoping that even if the color changes, your heart will remain unchanged like this stone.

This letter went to him along with the ring.

Letters and letters – three-cent stamps disappeared every day. Letters also came from him every day. After a month of exchanging only a few letters of things we wanted to say to each other, he suddenly came down to P'yŏngyang. His main home was in Chinnamp'o (鎭南浦).

The effort I spent secretly going to his hiding place in narrow and small P'yŏngyang was considerable. Moreover, the hardship that this decent young man, who had never gone out at night except for special occasions, endured to make excuses to his wife for going out was rather amusing when I think about it now.

After a few days like this, I finally sent him to his home in Chinnamp'o. And twice a week, I went to Chinnamp'o to meet him. We always went to quiet places, claiming 玉泉臺 and 寶林寺, which were also close to the outside of Chinnamp'o.

However, it was impossible for this to go unnoticed. Moreover, it was impossible for my behavior, which was heated with passion, not to be noticed by my wife, who was very sensitive in that regard. It was one summer day about a month after I had taken him to Chinnamp'o. We had stayed at 寶林寺 the day before, and after returning to Chinnamp'o by car after dark, we were sitting face to face playing cards, waiting for the last train to P'yŏngyang. At that time, a woman entered his house and came in, saying, "Can you exchange some money?"

I recognized the woman and my face changed. My liver was shrinking, and after signaling to Ok-yeop with my eyes, I hurriedly got up, took my wife, left the house, and took her to a certain inn.

That night, I apologized, saying all sorts of things. I, who was not very eloquent to begin with, apologized while sweating profusely. And as a result of that effort, the following compromise was reached between him and me: the man will sever his relationship with Ok-yeop from now on; instead, he will be free to travel for a month or two to soothe his wounded heart; the woman will never bring up this unpleasant incident again to avoid future conflicts, etc.

Love was truly a monster. "Love," which made this innocent and honest young man, who had always avoided making oaths in anything that would restrict his heart or body, make such an impossible oath so naturally, was truly a monster. I already knew that I would not be able to break up with Ok-yeop so suddenly. But I had made the above oath to my wife. And when I returned to P'yŏngyang with my wife the next day, I had already informed Ok-yeop of the conditions that had been established between my wife and me, and even made a promise to meet on the Busan (釜山) train at twelve o'clock three days later.

Three days later, I met Ok-yeop on the train and went straight to Seoul. And I hid in a secluded house in Ch’ŏngjin-dong (淸進洞), going out during the day to meet friends and disappearing into that house at night.

Among my friends at that time, it was a matter of concern. Some friends asked where I disappeared to at night when we met during the day, and some even followed me. Even these trivial matters were very pleasant and mysterious at the time. I treated them with a strange and proud heart, as if I were hiding an unknown treasure and secretly taking it out from time to time.

After a few days like this, we suddenly disappeared from Seoul as well. And the day after disappearing from Seoul, we appeared at a certain inn in Kyŏngju (慶州), the ancient capital of Silla (新羅).

The life of traveling around Kyŏngju, from Pulguk Temple (佛國寺) to Sŏkkuram (石窟庵) and Naengch'ŏn (冷泉), was the most poetic scene in my life. That month of sitting face to face with him by the stream doing laundry, or going to a village beyond the hill to buy chickens to eat, holding his hand freely and wandering around happily.

The fields of Kyŏngju were like a painting. It was an ordinary field with nothing special, but somehow it still possessed the appearance and achievements of the ancient capital of 2* years ago. I would sometimes look at those beautiful fields and think of the majesty of our ancestors in the past, forgetting even the existence of Ok-yeop next to me.

Moreover, there was something that made my heart flutter even now when I thought about the time I stayed at Pulguk Temple. The old monk's chanting in the main hall before it was even light, the moss-covered Jade Pagoda (玉塔), the tilting stairs—and the young monk who sometimes peeped at our lives with extraordinary curiosity added to the atmosphere. Moreover, one of the young monks who was working at Pulguk Temple followed Ok-yeop with a blatant disregard, and when we left Pulguk Temple, he followed us from a distance and only returned when we took the train the next day.

We took a picture in Kyŏngju. Ok-yeop was very reluctant to do so at that time.

"They say that if you take a picture, the relationship will fall apart."

He said things like this.

In fact, at that time, he tried everything he could to avoid breaking up with me. Having already passed the age of twenty and being old enough to sometimes look to her future, she was determined not to lose this innocent young man whom she had barely caught. She sometimes boasted about her knowledge of household affairs. She implied that she was good at sewing. She also boasted that she knew how to cook. And during that trip, she tried to hide her origin as a *kisaeng* as much as possible from others. I could no longer hear the song that she used to whisper into my ear. She didn't wear makeup on her face either. She tried to imitate the style of a female student as much as possible in her appearance.

Whenever I saw and thought about these things, my affection for him grew even more, and the accompanying anguish also grew. We could not break up at all, but the circumstances of the family and the son-in-law's situation did not allow us to live together forever. Approaching a *kisaeng* was something that had to be kept absolutely secret not only from my family but from all of P'yŏngyang, as our family was well-established in the church. While lying on the lawn and watching him sew next to me, I would secretly sigh, thinking about the fact that I would be separated from him in the near future.

A month later, we returned to Seoul. Because we had run out of the money we had taken with us.

At that time, there was a letter from my wife among the letters that had come to me at Kwangik Publishing House (廣益書舘). I was surprised at first when I saw the letter, and then I became angry. The letter said that rumors had spread throughout P'yŏngyang that I had gone on a trip with a *kisaeng*, and that my mother and brother disliked my attitude very much because of it. And there were unpleasant words that were inappropriate for a woman to say written in it.

Excessive jealousy had made her forget her dignity and behavior as a woman.

I was about to go down to P'yŏngyang without considering the circumstances. But in an instant, regaining my composure, I realized that I could no longer walk the streets of P'yŏngyang with my face held high.

"What will be, will be."

So, I decided to stay in Kyŏngsŏng (京城).

Ok-yeop re-registered at the Hansŏng kwŏnban (漢城券番). And while staying at a friend's *kisaeng* house, she started her business.

This summer, the most serious life in my life began.

The money was all gone. Now, there was no way to ask for money from home. With no place to sleep and no place to eat, I could only wander the streets, clutching my empty stomach.

For the first few days, I stayed at Yi Il's (李一) house. At that time, Yi Il had gone to Kŭmgangsan (金剛山) for his honeymoon, and Kim Hwan was taking care of his empty house. However, his time of entering at night and coming out in the morning was irregular, and the house, where he would lock the door and sleep after getting drunk and lock the door from the outside after coming out in the morning, was a house where I could not enter and sleep unless I met Kim Hwan at the gate at the right time. This young man still had too much pride to wait for him at the gate for thousands of years, as he came home drunk at night and was irregular in his return.

I was annoyed by the few days of unpleasant "waiting," and from then on, I decided to make An Sŏ's (岸曙) boarding house my lodging. An Sŏ was also a drunkard, and his comings and goings were irregular, but since his house was a boarding house, I could go in and sleep whenever I wanted. During the day, I would wander the streets or go to Ok-yeop's house where she was staying, and at night, I would stagger to An Sŏ's lodging.

I didn't like my friends. After the money in my pocket ran out, I didn't like meeting them. I felt like they looked down on me, so I avoided and avoided them.

It seemed that Ok-yeop's business was not doing well at that time either. After putting on makeup, she often waited for customers to come in *kuruma* (구루마) until late at night with her eyes wide open. And with the money she earned from that poorly performing business, she paid for both her and my expenses.

One day during the day, I was wandering aimlessly through the streets with a friend named L. The streets of Chongno (鍾路) were lying quietly as if exhausted by the intensely pouring sunshine.

"I'm quite hungry."

L said this. It wasn't that I wasn't hungry either. But what could I do with only 20 chŏn (전) in my pocket?

"Is there anything we can eat together with 20 chŏn?"

"Well, *hottŏk* (호떡) or something."

My friend laughed weakly. I laughed too.

We arrived at Chongno intersection. At that time, I discovered something shining at my feet. The moment I bent over and straightened up, I picked up a 20-chŏn silver coin in my hand.

"Let's go!"

"Where to?"

"To eat lunch."

"*Hottŏk*."

My friend asked back listlessly like this.

"No! Let's eat *pibimbap* (비빔밥). Look at this."

I proudly raised the 20-chŏn I had just obtained in front of me. Thus, we ate our lunch deliciously that day.

Even now, whenever I pass by Chongno, I unintentionally see that spot from that day. Although the sidewalk has been paved and asphalt has been laid on the road, so the shape of the past is gone, the fact that that 20 chŏn was so precious on that day still makes me unintentionally look at that place. (This section is incomplete)

**Named Entities**

金東仁	Kim Tong-in
金玉葉	Kim Ok-yeop
上京	Sanggyŏng
妓生	kisaeng
平壤	P'yŏngyang
創造	Ch’angjo
金億	Kim Ŏk
金煥	Kim Hwan
金瓚永	Kim Ch’an-yŏng
高敬相	Ko Kyŏng-sang
康明花	Kang Myŏng-hwa
安錦香	An Kŭm-hyang
明月館	Myŏngwŏn Hall
靑松舘	Ch'ŏngsonggwan
개평	kaep’yŏng
鎭南浦	Chinnamp'o
玉泉臺	Oksŏn-dae
寶林寺	Porimsa
釜山	Pusan
淸進洞	Ch’ŏngjin-dong
新羅	Silla
慶州	Kyŏngju
佛國寺	Pulguksa
石窟庵	Sŏkkuram
冷泉	Naengch'ŏn
玉塔	Oktap
廣益書舘	Kwangik Sŏgwan
李一	Yi Il
金剛山	Kŭmgangsan
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
漢城券番	Hansŏng kwŏnban
岸曙	An Sŏ
鍾路	Chongno
호떡	hottŏk
비빔밥	pibimbap



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제30호
발행일	1930년 07월 01일
기사제목	女人, 追憶의 더듬길
필자	金東仁
기사형태	소설

女人, 追憶의 더듬길
						金東仁
4. M
나는 M의 일을 쓰랴는 붓을 던저 버리지 안을 수가 업다. 어린 시절의 꿈과 가튼 그가 나와의 교제는 영구히 우리 두 사람의 마음 속에 비밀로 상사하여 버리고 마는 것이 그를 위하여 온당한 일이라 생각됨으로 잡앗든 붓을 다시 노키로 작정한 것이다.
지금도 때때로 그를 거리에서 본다. 그러나 단란한 가정의 어진 지어미로서 이름 놉흔 그는 나를 만날지라도 모른 체하엿다. 나도 또한 아는 체하지 안엇다.
언젠가 한번 사람 업는 좁은 골에서 *와 마조친 일이 잇섯다. 그때에 그는 얼골빗이 변하며 머리를 숙으리고 빨니 지나가 버렷다. 나도 거름을 빨니하여 지나갓다.
이런 일로 미루어서 그의 일을 세상에 발표하는 것을 나는 꺼리지 안을 수가 업다. 그와 나의 두 사람밧게는 아모도 모르는 어린 시절의 쨟고도 아름다운 꿈은 영구히 우리 두 사람의 마음 기픈 데 감초아 두고 우리뿐이 때때로 회상하여 보고는 아름다운 그의 꿈에 마음을 잠글 수 밧게는 도리가 업다.

5. 金玉葉
1921년 봄 - 그때에 스물 두 살 난 나는 엇던 회의 발긔인 회에 참석키 위하여 上京하엿다. 그러고 거기서 처음으로 기생을 보앗스며 기생의 취미를 맛보앗다.
정직하게 말하자면 그전에도 못 본 바는 안이엇섯다.＜167＞ 예수교식의 교육과 도학적 교훈 아레서 기러난 나는 아직것 바든 교양의 결과로서 기생이라 하는 인생을 더럽게 녁이고 기생과 노는 젊은이를 경멸하는 뎨2쳔성은 가졋슬 망정 아버지에게서 물려바든 호탕한 텬성과 내가 스스로 의식적으로 지은 방분스런 성격과는 그 뎨2텬성을 누르기에 넉넉하엿다. 그리하여 그 전해 겨울에도 몰내 서너 번 요리ㅅ집에 기생이라는 인생을 보기는 보앗다. 그러나 그 몰내 몃 번 본 것은 나로 하여금 그 방면에 대하여 더욱 호긔심을 니르키게 한데 지나지 못하엿다. 그러고 기생을 데리고 노는 젊은이들을 패자라 경멸하면서도 갓가운 장래에 얼골을 감초지 안코 요릿집에 드나들을 나를 예상하고 잇섯다.
그러나 극히 사소한 일이 南쪽 끗헤서 생길지라도 두 시간 이내에 그 소문이 北쪽 끗까지 퍼지는이만치 작은 평양서는 한번 마음노코 놀 긔회가 업섯다. 예수교의 신앙은 일헛슬 망정 얍전한 젊은이 - 교양잇는 신사 - 깨끗한 청년 이러한 명색을 밧고 잇는 나로서는 마음속에 화류게에 대한 비상한 호긔심을 가지고도 내노코 그 호긔심을 만족시킬 수가 업섯든 것이엇섯다. 그때의 나의 성격에는 아직 남의 말성을 꺼리는 순ㅅ된 점이 만히 남어 잇섯다.
발긔인회의 일이 끗나고 그 이튼 날로 평양으로 나려온 나는 다시 서울을 가고 십흔 생각에 마음을 진정할 수가 업섯다. 이리하여 소소한 몃칠을 지낸 뒤에 나는 핑게를 하나 만들어 가지고 또 서울로 올나갓다. 핑게로는 그때 9호를 내이고 停刊 상태에 잇든 「創造」의 장래방책강구-엇섯다.
내가 올나간 날 밤으로 질탕한 노리는 명월관에 열엿다. 그러고 그때에 첫 번 金玉葉을 만낫다. 그때에 사내로서는 金億, 金煥, 金瓚永, 高敬相君 等이 잇섯고 기생으로는 죽은 康明花와 安錦香과 金玉葉이 잇섯다고 긔억한다.
사내로 생겨서는 술을 먹을 줄 알어얀다는 이상야릇한 주의를 가지고 잇는데 반하여 술을 먹을 줄을 모르는 나는 몃잔 못한 술에 취하여 상에서 좀 물너나고 말엇다. 그때에 마즌 편에 아젓든 기생 하나이 이편으로 도라와서 친절히 간호하여 주엇다. 그것이 玉葉이엇섯다.
그날 밤 金煥의 소개로서 나는 玉葉의 집에서 묵엇다. 한잠을 못 이루고 날이 밝기까지 속살거림으로서 보낸 그 밤 - 그 밤은 나의 생애를 통하여 잇지 못할 저녁의 하나이엇섯다.
어제 낫까지는 서로 알지도 못하든 사람 어젯 저녁에 처음으로 알은 女人 그는 별서 이 젊은이의 왼 마음을 글어 쥐엇다. 이상하다면 이상하달 수도 잇고＜168＞ 긔괴하다면 긔괴하달 수도 잇는 사람의 마음이엇섯다.
쏠니기 시작하면 그 끄칠 바를 모르고 쏠니고야 마는 이 熱情의 젊은이는 이튼 날 저녁도 불붓는 정열을 가슴에 간직하고 몃 사람의 벗과 작반하여 靑松舘으로 놀녀 갓다.
왓소 나 여기 왓소.
천리타향 나 여기 왓소.
바람낄에 쌔여를 왓나.
구름낄에 쌔여를 왓나.
아마도 나 여기 온 것은.
시어딤 보려.
웃층에서 들니는 이 노래까락의 소리에 나의 얼골 빗은 변하여 젓다. 그때는 무론 목소리 뿐으로는 그것이 玉葉의 소리라 함을 분간 못할 때엇섯다. 그러나 이 너른 세상에 「시어딤보려」하고 노래를 부를 사람은 玉葉 한 사람밧게는 업슬 것이엇섯다. 뽀이를 불러서 玉葉의 온 것을 알아보고 개평 떼여오기를 부탁할 때는 나의 마음은 묵어운 바위 아레 깔니운 듯이 괴로웟다.
이리하여 그에게 대한 나의 사랑의 불길은 더욱 맹렬히 니러섯다.
나흘이 지난 뒤에 나는 平壤으로 도라왓다.
압착된 정열 펴지 못하는 긴장 발표할 수 업는 사랑 - 이러한 달고도 괴로운 감정 때문에 그것은 마치 순교자와 가튼 비창한 마음으로서 나는 쓸쓸한 하로를 보내고 다시 쓸쓸한 새날을 마젓다. 그가 나의 귀에 입을 대이고 작은 소리로 부르든 노래까락의 몃 구절은 내 귀에 그냥 남어서 늘 쟁쟁이 울니엇다. 나의 생애에 처음 마타 본 동백기름의 내음새는 이상히도 그냥 코에 남아서 그를 생각하는 재료가 되게 하엿다.
平壤으로 나려온 지 몃츨 뒤에 나는 그에게 알렉산델을 박은 반지를 하나 사서 보냇다. 처음에는 金剛石 반지라도 하나 사서 보내려고 엇던 貴金屬店이를 갓다가 우연히 조선서는 구하기 쉽지 안은 희대의 眞品 알렉산델을 발견하고 그것을 사서 보내기로 한 것이엇섯다. 寶石商의 店頭에 흔히 장식되여 잇는 - 火光에서와 日光에서의 광채가 그리 다르지 안은 그런 것이 안이고 日光에서는 거짓말과 가티 濃綠色으로 빗나며 火光에서는 루비와 가티 샛밝아게 빗나는 구하기 힘든 品質 조흔 돌이엇섯다.
때를 따라서 빗은 변하나 寶石인 그 本質에는 변함이 업는 이 돌로서 너에게 부치노니 빗에는 변함이 잇슬지라도 마음 하나는 이 돌과 가티 변함업기를 바란다.＜169＞
이러한 글이 그 반지와 함께 그에게 갓다.
편지와 편지 - 3전 짜리 우표 한 장식이 매일 업서젓다. 그에게서도 매일 편지가 왓다. 이러케 서로 하고 십흔 말을 겨우 몃 글자의 편지로서 주고 밧든 한 달이 지난 뒤에 그가 후덕덕 平壤으로 뛰처 나려왓다. 그의 본 집은 鎭南浦엇섯다.
좁고 작은 平壤에서 그가 숨어 잇는 집을 남모르게 다니노라고 쓴 그 애는 여간이 안이엇섯다. 더구나 밤에 외출이라고는 특별한 경우밧게는 하여보지 못한 이 참한 젊은이가 외출할 핑게를 제 안해에게 대이노라고 苦心하든 그 苦心은 지금 생각하면 오히려 우수운 일이엇섯다.
이러한 몃츨이 지난 뒤에 나는 마츰내 그를 진남포 제 집으로 보냇다. 그러고 한 주일에 두 번식 진남포로 그를 만나려 갓다 玉泉臺로 寶林寺로 진남포 외 시가도 끄리어서 우리 둘은 늘 조용한 곳으로 자처 단엿다.
그러나 이러한 일이 발각 안될 리가 업섯다. 더구나 정열로써 들뜬 나의 태도는 그런 방면에 몹시 신경이 예민한 안해에게 발각 안될 리가 업섯다. 그를 진남포에 데려다 둔 지 한 달쯤 된 엇던 녀름날이엇섯다. 그 전날을 寶林寺에서 묵고 날이 어두운 뒤에 자동차로 진남포에 도라온 우리는 平壤行 막차의 시간을 기다리면서 마조안저 화투를 하고 잇섯다. 그때에 웬 女人이 쑥 그의 집 대문 안에 드러서면서 돈 좀 밧과주 하면서 왓다.
나는 그 女人의 정체를 알아보고 얼골 빗이 변하엿다. 간이 조막막 하여진 나는 창황히 니러서서 옥엽에게 눈찟을 한 뒤에 안해를 모시고 그 집을 나와서 엇던 녀관으로 데리고 갓다.
그날 밤 나는 별 말을 다하며 사죄를 하엿다. 본시 그다지 能辯이 되지 못하는 나는 땀을 벌벌 흘니면서 사죄를 하엿다. 그러고 그 노력의 결과로서 그와 나와의 새에는 아례와 가튼 타협이 성립되엿다. - 사내 된 자 이제부터 옥엽과의 관게를 끈을 것. 그 대신에 마음의 상처를 위로키 위하여 한두 달 동안 려행을 하는 것은 그의 자유에 맛길 것. 女人된 자는 장래 영구히 이번의 이 불유쾌한 사건을 입밧게 내이지 안어서 장래의 공연한 충돌을 피할 것 등등.
사랑이라 하는 것은 과연 괴물이엇섯다. 본시 자긔의 마음이나 몸을 구속하는 일이 잇슬 것에는 엇던 일에던 맹서라는 것을 피해 오던 이 순진하고 정직한 젊은이로 하여금 이럿틋 실행할 수 업는 맹서를 천연히 하게 하는 「사랑」이라 하는 것은 과연 괴물이엇섯다. 나는 옥엽이와 갑작이 떠러지지는 못할 줄을 번이 알엇다. 그러나 우에와 가튼 맹서를 안해에게 한 것이엇섯다.＜170＞ 그러고 이튼 날 안해와 함께 平壤으로 도라올 때는 벌서 우리 부처 새에 성립된 조건을 옥엽에게 알니우고 사흘 뒤 밤 열두 시 釜山行 列車에서 만나자는 약속까지 되여잇섯다.
사흘 뒤에 나는 긔차 안에서 옥엽을 만나가지고 그 길로 上京하엿다. 그러고 淸進洞 엇더한 으슥한 집에 숨어서 나제는 나와서 친구들과 만나고 밤에는 그 집으로 종적을 감추고 하엿다.
그때의 친구들 새에는 그것이 한 문제ㅅ거리엇섯다. 밤에는 어듸로 업서지느냐 나제 맛나서 뭇는 친구 혹은 뒤를 밟는 친구까지 잇섯다. 이러한 변변치 안은 일도 그 당시에는 몹시도 유쾌하고 신비스러웟다. 갑 모를 보배를 감초아 두고 남 몰내 간간 꺼내여 보는 것과 가튼 괴상스럽고도 자랑스러운 마음으로 나는 그들을 대하엿다.
이러케 몃츨이 지난 뒤에 우리는 서울서도 문득 자최를 감초앗다. 그러고 서울서 사라진 이튼 날 우리는 新羅 古都 慶州의 엇던 旅舍에 몸을 나타내엿다.
慶州에서 佛國寺로 또는 石窟庵, 冷泉들로 도라 다니며 놀든 生活은 나의 一生을 통하여 가장 詩的인 한막이엇섯다. 실개천에서 그와 마조 안저 빨내를 하며 혹은 재 넘엣 마을에 가서 닭을 사다가 잡아먹으며 아모 구애업시 그의 손을 잡고 희희히 도라 다니든 그 한달.
경주의 벌판은 그림이엇섯다. 아모 진긔가 업는 평범한 벌판이엇섯지만 어듼지 모르게 거기는 2*년 전 古都의 풍모와 위업을 가지고 잇섯다. 나는 때때로 그 아름다운 벌판을 바라보며 마음으로 녯날의 우리의 조상의 위엄을 생각하면서 겻헤 잇는 玉葉의 존재까지 니젓다.
더구나 佛國寺에 묵어잇든 얼맛동안은 지금 생각하여도 나의 마음을 뛰놀게 하는 것이 잇섯다. 밝기도 젼에 本堂에서 외우는 老僧의 경ㅅ소리 이끼로 덥핀 玉塔, 기우러저 가는 층게, 이러한 가운데서 우리의 생활을 비상한 호긔심으로 때때로 엿보는 젊은 중은 더욱 정취를 돗구는 것이엇섯다. 더구나 佛國寺에 손으로 와 잇던 엇던 젊은 중 하나는 露骨이상의 로골로서 옥엽의 뒤를 밟으며 우리가 佛國寺를 떠날 때는 멀니 떠러저서 뒤를 밟아서 우리가 이튼 날 긔차를 탈 때에야 겨우 도라갓다.
경주서 우리는 사진을 직혓다. 옥엽은 그때에 그것을 몹시 꺼리엿다.
「사진을 직히면 새가 떠러진대요.」
이런 말을 하엿다.
사실 그때에 그는 별별 수단을 다 써서 나와 떠러지지 안으려 하엿다. 나히 벌서 스물을 지나서,＜171＞ 자긔의 장래라 하는 것을 때때로 바라볼 만한 철이 들은 그는 겨우 붓드른 이 순진한 젊은이를 결코 일치 안으려 하엿다. 그는 때대로 가정에 대한 제 지식을 자랑하엿다. 바느질의 곱게 함을 암시하엿다. 음식 만들 줄 아는 것도 자랑하엿다. 그러고 그 려행을 다니는 동안 그는 남에게 할 수 잇는 대로 기생인 제 본적을 감초려 하엿다. 이전에 흔히 내 귀에 대이고 부르든 노래까락도 다시 드를 수 업섯다. 얼골에 화장도 안하엿다. 몸맵시도 할 수 잇는 대로 녀학생의 투를 숭내내엿다.
이런 일을 보며 생각할 때마다 나의 그에게 대한 애착이 더욱 커지는 동시에 거기 따르는 번민도 컷섯다. 도저히 떠러지지 못할 그러면서도 집안의 사정과 사위의 정태는 또한 영구히 함께 지냄을 허락지를 안엇다. 기생과 접근한다 하는 것은 나의 집안뿐 안이라 왼 평양에 절대로 비밀히 하지 안으면 안될 만치 우리 집안은 敎會에 자리잡은 집안이엇섯다. 잔디밧헤 누어서 겻헤서 바느질을 하는 그의 속을 번-히 바라보면서 갓가운 장래에 그와 헤어질 일을 생각하고는 몰내 한숨을 쉬이고 하엿다.
한달 뒤에 우리는 서울로 도라왓다. 가지고 떠낫든 돈이 다 업서젓슴으로엇섯다.
그때에 廣益書舘에 내게 와엇는 편지 가운데 안해에게서 온 것이 잇섯다. 나는 그 편지를 보고 처음에는 놀라고 그 뒤에 성을 내엿다. 그 편지에는 내가 기생과 가티 길을 떠낫다는 것은 왼 평양에 소문낫스며 그 때문에 어머니와 형이 몹시 나의 태도를 밉게 녁인다는 말이 잇섯다. 그러고 녀자로서 맛당치 안은 불유쾌한 言句가 씨어 잇섯다.
과도한 질투는 그로 하여금 녀자로서의 단아함과 행실을 닛게 한 것이엇섯다.
나는 전후를 불고하고 평양으로 나려가려 하엿다. 그러나 순간에 랭정함을 회복한 나는 이제 얼골을 들고 차마 평양의 거리를 다니지 못하겟슴을 깨다럿다.
「되는 대로 되엿다」
그리하야 나는 경성에 그냥 묵어 잇기로 하엿다.
玉葉은 다시 漢城券番에 籍을 두엇다. 그러고 엇던 친구 기생의 집에 寄留하면서 영업을 시작하엿다.
이 한녀름 나의 생애ㅅ 가운데 가장 심각한 생활이 시작되엿다.
돈은 다 떠러젓다. 이제 집에 청구할 면목도 업섯다. 잘 곳도 업고 먹을 곳도 업는 나는 주린 배를 웅켜쥐고 거리거리를 헤매일 뿐 이엇섯다.
처음 몃츨은 李一의 집에서 묵엇다. 그때 李一은 新婚旅行으로 금강산으로 가고 그 뷔인 집을 金煥이 마터 잇섯다.＜172＞ 그러나 밤에 드러가고 아츰에 나오는 시간이 일정치 안은 그-엇스며 술에 취하여 드러가서는 쇠를 잠그고 자버리며 아츰 나와서는 밧그로 쇠를 잠가버리는 그 집은 대문깐에서 시간 맞추어 金煥을 만나지 못하면 도저히 드러가 잘 수 업는 집이엿섯다. 밤나즈로 술에 취하여 집에 도라오는 시간이 일정치 못한 그를 千年歲月하고 대문깐에서 기다리고 잇기에는 이 젊은이는 아직 넘우 自尊心이 만엇다.
몃츨 동안의 불유쾌한 「苦待」에 역정이 난 나는 그 다음부터는 岸曙의 下宿집을 宿所로 정하엿다. 岸曙는 역시 술꾼으로서 그의 출입은 일정치 못하엿지만 집이 下宿집인지라 언제던 드러가서 잘 수가 잇섯다. 나제는 거리거리 헤매이며 혹은 옥엽의 긔류하고 잇는 집에도 가 놀고 하다가 밤이 되면 비슬비슬 岸曙의 下宿으로 차저가고 하엿다.
벗들은 실헛다. 나의 주머니에 돈이 떠러진 뒤부터는 그들을 만나기가 실혓다. 그들이 나를 업수히 녁이는 것 가태서 나는 그들을 꺼리고 피하엿다.
옥엽도 그때는 영업이 잘 안 되는 모양이엇섯다. 화장을 한 뒤에는 눈이 멀진멀진 밤이 깁도록 구루마의 오는 것을 기다리고 잇는 때가 흔히 잇섯다. 그러고 그 잘 되지 안는 영업으로서 번 돈으로 그와 나 두 사람의 용처를 쓰든 것이엇섯다.
엇던 날 낫 나는 L이라는 벗과 함께 거리에서 거리고 일업시 도라다니고 잇섯다. 몹시 나려쪼이는 벼체 종로의 거리는 긔운 빠진 듯이 고요히 누어 잇섯다.
「배가 꽤 고픈데」
L이 이러케 말하엿다. 나도 배가 안 곱흔 바는 안이엇섯다. 그러나 주머니에 20전밧게는 업는 것을 엇지하랴.
「20전으로 둘이서 먹을 게 뭘 업슬가」
「글세 호떡이나」
벗은 적적히 우섯다. 나도 우섯다.
종로 네거리에 일으럿다. 그때 나는 발알에 무엇이 번쩍하는 것을 발견하엿다. 내가 허리를 굽혓다가 펴는 순간 나의 손에는 20전 짜리 은전 한닙이 집히웟다.
「가세!」
「어듸를?」
「점심 먹으로」
「호떡」
벗은 풀업시 이러케 반문하엿다.
「웨! 부빔밥 먹지. 이것 보게.」
나는 장한 듯이 인재 어든 그 20전을 압흐로 놉히 처들엇다. 이리하여 우리는 그 날의 점심을 맛잇게 먹은 것이엇섯다.
지금도 종로를 지날 때마다 뜻하지 안코 그 날의 그 자리를 본다. 보도 장치가 되고 길에는 애스팔트를 펴서 녯날의 그 형태는 업서젓지만 그 날의 그 20전의 그다지도 고마웟슴은 지금도 나로 하여금 뜻하지 안코 그곳을 바라보게 하는 것이엇섯다. (此項未完) ＜173＞ ＜167-173＞