잡지명	별건곤 제33호
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	露西亞는 어데로 가나?, 五箇年計劃의 業績과 그 將來計劃
필자	一記者
기사형태	논설

Magazine Title: 別乾坤 第33號
Publication Date: October 01, 1930
Article Title: Where is Russia Going?, The Achievements and Future Plans of the Five-Year Plan (露西亞는 어데로 가나?, 五箇年計劃의 業績과 그 將來計劃)
Author: A Reporter (一記者)
Article Type: Editorial (논설)

Where is Russia Going?, The Achievements and Future Plans of the Five-Year Plan
						A Reporter
This article is a translation of Mr. Ōtake Hakuyoshi's article "How many years will it take for Russia to realize a communist society?" published in the Japanese magazine "Kaizō" September issue, to provide news to the readers. - Reporter

"When and how will the Communist Party of Soviet Russia, which retreated with the New Economic Policy, build a communist society?" is a very interesting topic.

Russia is currently in the second year of its Five-Year Plan. Regarding this Five-Year Plan, Stalin, at the 12th Communist Party Congress in July of this year, like a victorious general commanding a pursuit battle,
"Speed up the progress of the Five-Year Plan! Intensify the offensive against capitalist elements on all fronts!" he ordered. What is this "Five-Year Plan"?
It can be said to be an important tactic for transitioning from the era of retreat with War Communism to the New Economic Policy, back to an era of socialist offensive.

The first Five-Year Plan, including 1928, 1929 and 193, aims to rapidly develop the national economy of Soviet Russia with an extremely tense wartime atmosphere, with the following fundamental policies:
1. To industrialize Soviet Russia, which has been an agricultural country until now.
2. To reorganize the Soviet countryside, which is dominated by individualistic small-scale farming, into large-scale agricultural management and to socialize it again.
3. To overcome the capitalist elements remaining in the economic organization of the state and strengthen socialist elements. <16>

As this process progresses, if the second and third "Five-Year Plans" are continuously implemented, there will inevitably be:
(1) A society where industry is highly developed, (2) an agricultural organization socialized in a large-scale manner, and (3) capitalist elements do not exist - a new society will emerge. That is, the communist society that the Communist Party is ultimately aiming for will be realized.
"The Five-Year Plan is a Bolshevik fantasy." When the plan was announced, many people mocked it. Not only that, but Bukharin, a representative theorist within the Communist Party, said from the right wing, "It is too early to take an offensive." Trotsky sneered, "The Five-Year Plan is Stalin's toy." But how did Stalin use that toy?!

First of all, he made Trotsky and Bukharin victims of the toy by exiling them in the form of expulsion. Then what happened?
It is gradually becoming clear that the "Five-Year Plan" has progressed beyond the initial program in various aspects. Capitalist countries around the world, which had only been sneering until now, suddenly felt uneasy and began to pay attention to "the Bolshevik fantasy - Stalin's toy." The United States began to say, "Materials that the Bolsheviks forcibly and plundered from the people should not be imported into the free homeland of the United States of America." The recent detention of Russian merchant ships and the import ban on Russian goods in the United States are concrete manifestations of this.

In Japan, first of all, a group of Russian fishing operators banded together, saying, "In order to counter the advance of the Soviet fishing industry's Five-Year Plan, we must unite and defend the fishing rights in the Far East Russian territory, which were acquired with the blood and sweat of the Japanese people." The fact that the Russian fishing operators, who have always been self-serving, recently formed a business partnership under the name of defending the rights acquired with the blood and sweat of the Japanese people as a countermeasure to the Five-Year Plan is also a concrete manifestation of this.
Foreigners who have concession enterprises in Soviet Russia are feeling uneasy, saying, "The Soviet government is showing a significant tendency to oppress foreign concession enterprises and force them to abandon them, following the development of the Five-Year Plan." A specific example is that "the lack of skilled workers has rapidly arisen due to the development of the Soviet national economy, which has led to restrictions on the supply of workers to foreign concession enterprises and demands for wage increases..." <17>

In this way, it can be factually seen that the "Five-Year Plan" in all aspects is not a futile joke. However, when and in what way will a communist society be built in Soviet Russia, which is surrounded by capitalist countries?

Lenin said, "Retreating with the New Economic Policy is to prepare to move towards the construction of socialism - or the realization of a more complete form, a communist society - as we gain new strength." However, he did not predict how many years later and to what extent a communist society would be realized.
After that, Stalin advocated the "Theory of Building Socialism in One Country." The world's capitalist powers, which currently surround Soviet Russia, certainly do not like the existence of a socialist country anywhere on this planet, but due to the conflicting interests that characterize capitalist powers as imperialistic policies, and the support of the working class within capitalist countries, Soviet Russia can maintain its existence even if it is just one country. In other words, even if a world revolution does not occur, Soviet Russia can build a socialist society independently - in one country.

According to Stalin's theory, the realization of a socialist society in Soviet Russia seems much closer. This is because it does not make "world revolution" an inseparable condition for "socialist construction."
The "Five-Year Plan" starts from Stalin's "Theory of the Possibility of Building a Socialist Society in One Country."
However, Stalin also did not predict how many years later the construction of a socialist society in Soviet Russia would be completed and a communist society would be realized there. He only said at the 16th Communist Party Congress that "it is rapidly progressing towards socialization," but he did not predict "in how many years" in the future.
However, as the plan is progressing without fail, it is not impossible to raise the question of how and by when socialism will be completed and a communist society or a communist state will be built. <18>
In this sense, the "State Planning Committee" of Soviet Russia is starting to create an interesting plan called "Genplan (Grand Plan)."

This "Grand Plan" is a detailed plan of "how far will Soviet Russia progress" in the next 15 years, including the current ongoing achievements of the first Five-Year Plan's last two years, the next second Five-Year Plan, and the third Five-Year Plan. That is, it will expand Lenin's Great Electrification Plan to all sectors of the national economy.
This "Grand Plan" is not yet complete. Currently, scholars and experts within the State Planning Committee are actively discussing various issues of the "Grand Plan Proposal," and it is expected to be completed by next spring.
By the way, what is currently the center of discussion and what is attracting the most interest is Kowalewski's proposal that "a communist society can be built in Soviet Russia in 10-15 years and can reach the ideal of the United States in terms of technology and production."

Kowalewski concluded in the Grand Plan proposal as follows:
1. It can advance beyond the most advanced country among the world's capitalist countries in terms of production and technology.
2. By the time the first Five-Year Plan (1928-29 to 1932-33) ends, that is, in the 15 years since the October Revolution, the cooperative plan established by Lenin will be implemented and the New Economic Policy will be completed.
3. Advance to a new economic form and gradually transition to a more complete communist form.
4. As a result of the reorganization of 10-15 years, a completed form of communist society will be built to the extent permitted under the condition that capitalist and communist forces coexist in the world.

This conclusion is based on the two years of experience of the current first Five-Year Plan, the natural resources, technological progress, and labor force of Soviet Russia, and considers the possibilities of the future development process, <19> and extracts it by comparing it with the economic development of the United States.
Kowalewski pointed out that Soviet Russia can achieve the increase in production of about 25 times that the United States achieved in 75 years from 1850 to 1925 in the 25 years since the October Revolution.
Also, in 1937 and 1938, the final year of the second Five-Year Plan, the production of each sector of Soviet coal, oil, iron, machinery industry, electrical industry, and other various industries will surpass the current (1929) production of the United States, and by the final year of the third Five-Year Plan, the production increase rate of Soviet Russia can be advanced to a much higher level compared to the production increase rate of the United States thereafter.
Here, it was emphasized that the production of the United States is completed with the latest technology and various old technologies are used together, while in Soviet Russia, almost everything is newly installed with the latest technology, and the labor productivity is high.
Finally, Kowalewski's proposal states that Soviet Russia will build a proletarian communist society during this Grand Plan period, but the entire world will still have the old capitalist society and the communist society coexisting. Therefore, this communist society will not be developed into its final form of XXXXX, but will preserve the national organization necessary to resist the constant oppression of foreign countries. This is completely consistent with Stalin's "Theory of the Possibility of Building Socialism in One Country."
All of these Grand Plans will be based on the achievements of the first Five-Year Plan. Then, what are the achievements of the first Five-Year Plan?

At the 16th Communist Party Congress, Stalin compared the recent three-year production status of Soviet Russia and important capitalist countries and explained as follows:
"According to the industrial production statistics that the German Institute for Economic Research recently developed, which include mining and large-scale industry, if the production level in 1928 is 100, the US production level in the first quarter of 1930 is 95.55, Germany is 93.4, and the UK is 104?, <20> but Soviet Russia shows a number of 155.5. This shows that the industrial production of Soviet Russia is developing at a very high speed."
In addition, according to the survey by the State Planning Committee, the total national income of Soviet Russia in 1926 and 1927 was 23.1 billion rubles, but in 1929 and 1930, it reached more than 34 billion rubles. There is no example of a country showing an average annual national income increase rate of 15% like this in any advanced capitalist country today.

What are the achievements of the Five-Year Plan, which has been transformed from an agricultural country to an industrial country?
In this year, the second year of the Five-Year Plan, the industrial production value in Soviet Russia will exceed the agricultural production value. This is a landmark event in the history of this country.
Before the war, the industrial production value accounted for 42.1% of the income of the Russian people. After that, in 1928 and 1929, the first year of the Five-Year Plan, the industrial production value barely increased to only 48.7%, but in 1929 and 1930, the second year, the industrial production value suddenly showed a ratio of slightly over 53%, and the agricultural production value showed a ratio of slightly under 47%.
Now, Soviet Russia cannot be called an agricultural country. It has taken the first step in the "transformation into an industrial country."

In what state is the socialist process of production, which is an important issue of the Five-Year Plan, progressing?
First of all, if we observe from the industrial aspect, the Five-Year Plan, which focuses on the industrialization of the state, is putting all its efforts into the production of means of production (heavy industry).
In 1927 and 1928, the production of heavy industry accounted for only 27.2% of the industrial production of Soviet Russia, and the rest was all consumer goods. That has increased to 32.7% this year.
The total capital invested in socialist industry in 1926 and 1927 was 1.27 billion rubles, but this year it has increased to about 3 times, 4.2 billion rubles, and instead, the total capital invested in private industry has decreased from 63 million rubles to 51 million rubles during this period. This shows that socialist industry is booming in leaps and bounds, while private industry is declining.
This can be sufficiently understood not only by investment, but also by the fact that the production value of socialist industry increased from 1.2 million rubles to 2.4 million rubles during this period, while the production of private industry decreased from 4.4 billion rubles to 3.3 billion rubles.

Next, how is the process of agricultural socialization progressing? The issue of agricultural socialization in Soviet Russia is closely related to the organization of "state-run agriculture" and "collective farms," which are currently the subject of various discussions. (Collective agriculture is a unique form of agricultural association of poor and middle peasants in Soviet Russia.)
Until today, agriculture in Soviet Russia has been maintaining a particularly decentralized, individualistic economic state, especially after the New Economic Policy. It is a fact that this agricultural state is a major obstacle in the course of national economic socialization.
However, it is a big problem that most of the industrial sector is gradually being socialized, while most of the agricultural sector remains under individual management.

In 1928, there was a severe famine. This was partly due to crop failures in some grain-producing areas, but the bigger reason was that the kulaks, the wealthy class among private farmers, boycotted the official prices of the Soviet grain purchasing agencies.
Therefore, it was concluded that expanding state-run agriculture, reorganizing the scattered private small-scale agriculture of middle and poor peasants into large-scale collective agriculture, promoting the socialization of agriculture, and controlling it by state agencies were the only means to solve the grain problem.
Therefore, the Five-Year Plan is putting all its efforts into expanding state-run agriculture and encouraging the organization of collective agriculture. State-run agriculture is a large-scale agricultural organization managed in the form of a trust, and collective agriculture is a type of stock organization in which middle and poor peasants share means of production such as agricultural tools and machinery, and distribute the profits generated according to the labor unit and ownership added to it. <22>

Currently, countries around the world are experiencing a sharp increase in unemployment along with industrial stagnation and decline due to the economic crisis. However, the opposite phenomenon is occurring in Soviet Russia.
That is, the sharp increase in production is mainly due to the improvement of production technology, but despite this, the number of workers is further increasing and the number of unemployed is decreasing. In particular, there is a feeling that there is a shortage of skilled workers. Recently, the number of people engaged in production (combining wage workers and intellectual workers) has increased from 10.99 million to 13.12 million in 30 years. Also, the number of workers (excluding office workers) engaged in large-scale industry alone has increased from 2.44 million to 3.03 million.
There are very few unemployed people if they can engage in production. According to a survey by the Central Employment Agency, even if 80% of the job applications for skilled workers coming from various companies cannot be met, it is sufficient to know the lack of skilled workers.

How much the increase in real wages of workers has been implemented is the most important issue in the process of socialization. The worker's social insurance borne by the entrepreneur, the state's expenditure on improving the lives of workers, the increase in the budget for businesses for maternity and infant protection, cultural education facilities, etc., and the reduction of working hours all mean an increase in the real wages of workers. If we calculate this as a whole, the real wages of workers in Soviet Russia have now increased to 167% compared to before the war. The 7-hour workday and the 5-day week are gradually being expanded to a wide range of industrial workers, and by May 1930, the number of industrial workers working under the 7-hour system was about 800,000, and the number of workers working under the 5-day week was reached 1.5 million.

The achievements made in the second year of the Five-Year Plan have been largely stated above, but it cannot be said that in this process of development, we will not face various obstacles and shortcomings that necessarily arise in the process of changing from the old to the new.
Even so, when we link the powerful progress of the Five-Year Plan with Kowalewski's Grand Plan, we sometimes feel as if something unknown is approaching before our eyes. <23>

**Named Entities**

Ōtake Hakuyoshi	Ōtake Hakuyoshi
改造	Kaizō
스타-린	Sŭt’allin
부하린	Puharin
트로츠키-	T’ŭroch’ŭk’i
露領漁業家	Roryŏng Ŏŏpka
레-닌	Re-nin
國家計劃委員會	Kukka Kyehoek Wiwŏnhoe
겐, 푸랜	Ken, P’uryaen
코와레푸스키-	K’owarep’ŭsŭk’i
獨逸	Togil
中央職業紹介所	Chungang Chiŏp Sogaeso



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제33호
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	露西亞는 어데로 가나?, 五箇年計劃의 業績과 그 將來計劃
필자	一記者
기사형태	논설

露西亞는 어데로 가나?, 五箇年計劃의 業績과 그 將來計劃
						一記者
이 一文은 日文雜誌 『改造』9월호에 게재된 大竹博吉씨의 『露西亞는 멧 년 후에 共産制 社會를 실현하겟느냐?』라는 記事인바 독자에게 뉴-스를 전하는 의미로 여긔에 秒譯하는 바이다.- 記者

『新經濟政策으로 退却한 소베트 露西亞의 共産黨은 어느 때에 어터케 해서 共産制 社會를 건설할 터인가?』하는 것은 매우 흥미잇는 이약이 거리다.
露西亞는 지금 5箇年計劃의 第2년을 經過하고 잇는 중이다. 이 5箇年計劃에 대하야 스타-린은 금년 7월에 열닌 第12회 共産黨大會席上에서 追擊戰을 지휘하는 常勝將軍과 가티
『5箇年計劃의 진행속도를 더욱 급히 하여라! 資本主義分子에 대한 攻勢를 全戰線에 잇서서 더욱 강열히 하여라.』 고 號令을 하엿다. 그러면 이 『5箇年計劃이란 무엇인가?
그것은 戰時 共産主義에서 新經濟政策으로 退却한 시대로부터 다시 社會主義的 攻勢時代로 전환되는 중요한 전술이라고 할 수가 잇는 것이다.
1928, 9년도-192·3년도를 포함한 第1次의 5箇年計劃은 극도로 긴장된 戰時氣分으로써 다음과 가튼 根本方針의 遂行을 목적으로 소베트 露西亞의 國民經濟를 급속히 발전식히고 잇다.
1, 至今까지 농업국이든 소베트 露西亞를 공업화할 것.
2, 個人主義的 小農經營이 주체가 되여 잇는 소베트 농촌을 大農經濟經營으로 再織하야 그것을 다시 社會主義化할 것.
2, 國家의 經濟組織 가운데 殘在하여 잇는 資本主義的 分子를<16> 克服하야 社會主義的 分子로 강화할 것.
이러틋한 과정이 진행함을 따라 第2次 第3次의 『5箇年計劃』을 계속적으로 실행하느라면 그곳에 반듯이
(1) 工業이 非常히 발달된 (2) 大農式으로 社會主義化한 農業組織을 가진 (3) 資本主義的 分子가 존재치 아니한- 새로운 사회가 생기어 나게 될 것이다. 卽 共産黨이 終局의 목적으로 바라보고 잇는 共産制社會가 실현이 되게 되는 것이다.
『5箇年計劃은 볼세비키-의 空想이다.』고 그 案이 발표되엿슬 때에 嘲笑하는 사람이 만히 잇섯다. 그것이 남뿐이 아니라 共産黨안에 잇서 대표적 이론가인 부하린은 右翼으로부터 『攻勢를 取하는 것은 時機尙早다.』고 말을 하엿다. 트로츠키-는 『5箇年計劃은 스타-린의 작난감이다.』고 냉소하엿다. 그러나 스타-린은 그 작난감을 어떠케 사용하엿는가?!
爲先 트로츠키-와 부하린을 破門의 형식으로 좌우로 메여 내러람 그 작난감의 犧牲者를 만들엇다. 그러고 나서는 엇지 되엿는가?
『5箇年計劃』은 여러가지 방면에 잇서서 최초의 푸로그람 이상으로 진전이 되엿다는 것이 요지음와서 차차 알어보기 쉽도록 표면에 나타난다. 至今까지 冷笑만 하고 잇든 세계각국의 資本主義國家에서는 갑작히 불안을 늣기고 『볼세비키-의 空想-스타린의 작난감』을 주의하야 보게 되엿다. 미국은『볼세비키-가 强制와 掠奪로써 인민에게서 거더드린 물자를 자유의 조국인 아메리카 合衆國에 수입식혀서는 아니된다.』는 말을 하게 되엿다. 최근 米國에서 일어난 露西亞商船의 억류사건이나 露西亞商品의 수입금지사건가튼 것이 그 구체적 現顯이다.
日本에서는 爲先 露領漁業家의 一團이 『소베트 어업 5箇年計劃의 진출에 대항하기 위하야 힘을 합하야 日本人의 피와 땀으로 獲得한 極東露領의 漁業利權을 擁護하지 아니하면 아니된다.』고 들메고 나섯다. 원래가 利已一貫인 露領漁業家가 5箇年計劃 對抗策으로 日本人의 피와 땀으로 어든 利權의 名目下에 최근 企業合同을 하게 된 것은 역시 그 구체적 現顯이다.
소베트 露西亞안에 利權企業을 가지고 잇는 세계각국의 利權家들은 『소베트 정부는 5箇年計劃의 발전를 따러 외국인의 利權企業을 壓迫하야 그것을 放棄하도록 하려는 증조가 顯著하여 젓다.』고 불안을 늣기게 되엿다. 그 구체적 實例로는 소베트 國民經濟의 발전을 『딸어 熟鍊勞働者의 缺乏이 급속히 일어낫는데 그것 때문에 외국인 利權企業에 대한 勞働者供給을 제한하고 賃금의 인상을 요구하기 시작한 것...등이다.』<17>
이리하야 모든 방면의 『5箇年計劃』이 헛작난이 아닌 것은 사실상으로 알 수가 잇게 되엿다. 그러나 주위에 資本主義國家로 돌녀싸인 소베트 露西亞에서는 어느 때에 엇더한 방식으로 共産制 社會를 건설할 것인가

레-닌은 『新經濟政策으로 退却하는 것은 새로운 힘을 어듬을 따러 社會主義의 건설로 -또는 社會主義보담도 보다 더 완성된 형태인 共産制 社會의 실현으로 향하야 나아가는 준비을 하기 위한 것』이라고 말을 하엿다. 그러나 대체 멧 해 후에 엇더한 범위의 共産制 社會가 실현되리라...는 것은 豫言하지 아니 하엿다.
그뒤에 스타-린은 『一國內 社會主義建設 可能論』을 주창하엿다. 현재 소베트 露西亞를 둘너싸고 잇는 세계 資本主義 列强은 이 지구상 어데서든지 社會主義國家가 존재하여 잇는 것을 즐겨하지 아니하는 것은 물론이나 資本主義 列國이 그 특징으로 가지고 잇는 帝國主義定策이라하는 서로 모순되는 利害關係와 資本主義國內의 勞働階級의 지지하는 힘으로 다만 한나라 일망정 소베트 露西亞는 자기의 존재를 支繼할 수가 잇다는 것이다. 다시 말하면 世界革命이 일어나지 아니한다 하더래도 소베트 露西亞는 단독으로 -一國內에서 社會主義社會를 건설할 수가 잇다...는 것이다.
이 스타-린의 이론에 의하면 소베트 露西亞의 社會主義社會의 실현이 전망이 훨신 각가히 보이게 된다. 그것은 『世界革命』을 『社會主義建設』의 不可分條件으로 하지 아니하기 때문이다.
『5箇年計劃』은 스타-린의 이『一國內 社會主義社會建設 可能論』에서 출발한게 된다.
그러나 스타-린도 멧 해 후에 소베트 露西亞국내의 社會主義 社會 건설이 완성되야 그곳에 共産制社會가 실현될 수 잇다는 豫言은 하지 아니 하엿다. 그는 다만 第16회 共産黨大會에서 『社會主義化로 향하야 급속히 진전되고 잇다.』고만 하엿슬뿐이지 압흐로 『멧 해만』에 라는 豫言은 하지 아니 하엿다.
그러나 그 계획이 실수업시 진행이 되여가고 잇는 이상 거긔에는 어터케해서 언제까지에 社會主義化를 완성하고 共産制 社會 혹은 共産制國家가 건설될 것인가?...하는 問題를 내세우지 못할 것도 아니다.<18>
이 의미에 잇서서 소베트 露西亞의 『國家計劃委員會』에서는『겐, 푸랜(大計劃)』이라는 흥미잇는 계획의 제작에 着手하고 잇다.
이 『大計劃』은 현재의 진행중인 第1次 5箇年計劃의 最期 2箇年의 實蹟에 立脚하야 다음의 第2次 그 다음의 第3次의 5箇年計劃까지를 포함한 前後 15箇年에 소베트 露西亞를 『어데까지나 進展식히겟느냐?』하는 상세한 계획안이다. 卽 레-닌의 大電化計劃을 國民經濟의 全段에 擴大식히게 되는 것이다.
이 『大計劃』은 아직 완성이 되여 잇지 아니하다. 현재 國家計劃委員會의 내부에서 학자와밋 전문가들이 『大計劃案』의 여러가지 문제에 대하야 활발한 토의를 하고 잇는 중이요 豫定은 明春까지에 완성되리라고 한다.
그런데 至今 論議의 중심이 되여 잇고 또 가장 흥미를 끄으는 것은 『10년-15년 사이에 소베트 露西亞에 共産制社會를 건설하고 또한 기술과 생산방면에 잇서서 米國의 이상에 도달할 수가 잇다.』는 코와레푸스키-의 案이다.

코와레푸스키-는 大計劃案의 결론에서 다음과 가티 말하엿다.
1, 생산과 기술에 잇서서 世界資本主義國家중 最先進國 이상으로 나아갈 수가 잇다.
2, 第1次 5箇年計劃(1928·9년도-1932·3년도)이 끗나기까지 卽 10月革命으로부터 15개년간에 레-닌이 세운 協同組合計劃을 수행하야 新經濟政策을 완료한다.
新經濟形態에 進展하야 점차 보다 더 완성된 共産主義 형태로 전환한다.
4, 10년-15년간의 再組織의 결과로 資本主義와 共産主義 兩勢力이 세계에 공존하여 잇다는 조건하에서 許하여지는 범위의 共産制社會의 완성된 형태를 건설한다.
이 결론은 현재의 第1次 5箇年計劃의 2년간의 경험과 소베트 露西亞가 가진 天然의 富源과 技術的의 진보와 勞働力등을 기초로 하야 압흐로 發展過程의 가능을 考한<19> 것이며 그것을 다시 米國의 經濟發展과 대비한데서 抽出한 것이다.
코와레푸스키-는 그것을 米國이 1850년으로부터 1925년까지 75년간에 達成한 약 25배라는生産額의 증가를 소베트 露西亞는 10月革命으로부터 25년간에 達成할 수가 잇는 것을 지적하엿다.
또 第2次 5箇年計劃의 最終年인 1937, 8년도에도 소베트의 石炭 石油 鐵 機械工業 電氣工業 기타 各種 工業 각 부문의 生産額은 현재(1929년도)의 米國生産額을 凌駕할 것이요 第3次 5箇年計劃의 最終年까지에는 소베트 露西亞의 生産增加率은 爾後의 米國의 生産增加率에 비하야 훨신 놉흔 정도로 前進될 수가 잇다는 것을 指摘하엿다.
여긔에는 米國의 生産이 最新式 技術로 완성된 것과 여러가지 舊式 技術을 倂用하는데 反하야 소베트 露西亞에서는 거의 全部가 最新式의 것으로 新規裝置를 하게 되는 것 勞働生産力이 큰 것 등을 强調하엿다.
最後에 코와레푸스키-案은 소베트 露西亞는 이 大計劃期에 잇서서 無産階級의 共産制 社會를 建設하나 世界全體는 아직 묵은 資本制 社會와 共産制 社會가 倂存하여 잇게된다. 그럼으로 이 共産制 社會는 그 最終形態인 XXXXX로 展開되는 것이 아니라 외국의 끈임업는 壓迫에 抗爭하기 위하야 必要한 國家機構를 保存할 것이라고 말하엿다. 이것은 스타-린의 『一國內 社會主義 建設 可能論』과 全然 一致하는 것이다.
이러한 大計劃은 全部 第1次 5箇年計劃의 實蹟을 基礎로 하게 되는 것이다. 그러면 第1次 5箇年計劃의 實績은 엇더한가?

스타-린은 第16回 共産黨大會에서 소베트 露西亞와 重要한 資本主義國과의 最近 3箇年間의 生産狀態를 對照하야 다음과 가티 설명을 하엿다.
『最近 獨逸의 景氣硏究所에서 發展한 鑛業 及 大工業을 一括한 工業生産統計에 依하건데 1928년의 生産水準을 100으로 하면 1930년 第1期의 米國生産水準은 95,55 獨逸이 93,4요 英國이 104?인데<20> 소베트 露西亞는 155,5라는 數字를 보이고 잇다. 이것으로써 소베트 露西亞의 工業生産이 非常한 速度로 發展되여 잇다는 것을 알 수가 잇다.』
이밧게 國家計劃委員會의 調査에 의하면 1926·7년도의 소베트 露西亞의 國民總收入은 231億留이든 것이 1929·30년에는 340億留 以上에 達하여잇다. 이와가티 每年 平均 15%의 國民收入 增加率을 보이는 나라는 現在 아모리 進步된 資本主義國에도 그 例를 볼 수가 업는 것이다.

農業國으로부터 工業國에 轉化된 5箇年計劃의 實績은 엇더한가?
5箇年計劃의 第2年인 今年度에 소베트 露西亞에서는 工業生産額이 農業生産額 以上에 올나간다. 이것은 이 나라의 歷史에 大書特筆할 만하 일이다.
戰前의 露西亞國民의 收入中 工産額은 42.1%이엇섯다. 그 後 5箇年計劃의 第1年인 1928·9年에도 工産額은 겨우 48.7%밧게는 더 나아가지 못하엿는데 第2年인 1929·30年度에는 一躍 工産額이 53%强이요 農産額이 47%弱의 比率을 보이게 되엿다.
인제는 소베트 露西亞를 農業國이라고 할 수는 업다. 『工業國으로의 轉化』의 第1步를 내어드듼 것이다.

5箇年計劃의 重要問題인 生産의 社會主義 過程은 엇더한 狀態로 進展되여 잇는가?
爲先 工業方面으로부터 觀察하면 國家의 工業化에 重心을 두고 잇는 5箇年計劃에서는 生産手段의 生産(重工業)에 全力을 다하고 잇다.
192·78年度에는 소베트 露西亞의 工業生産中 重工業의 生産이 겨우 27.2%에 不過하엿고 남어지의 全部는 全部 消費品이엇섯다. 그리하든 것이 今年度에 일으러서는 32.7%로 올나간다.
1926·7年度에 社會主義化工業에 投下된 總資本은 12億7千萬留이엇섯는데 今年度에는 約3培인 42億留로 增加되고 그 代身 私工業에 投下된 總資本은  이 期間에 6千3百萬留로부터 5千百萬留로 減下되엿다. 이것은 社會主義化工業이<21> 躍進的으로 勃興하는 反面에 私營工業이 凋落되여간다는 것을 보이는 것이다.
이것은 投資뿐이 아니라 이 期間에 社會主義化工業生産額이 120萬留로부터 240萬留로 增加된데 反하야 私營工業의 生産이 40億4千萬留로부터 33億留로 減下된 것으로 보아도 넉넉히 알 수가 잇는 것이다.

다음에 農業社會主義化의 過程은 엇더케 進展되여 잇는가? 소베트 露西亞의 農業社會主義化라 하는 問題는 現在 여러가지로 이약이 거리가 되는 『官公營農業』과 『集團農』의 組織과 密接한 關聯을 가지고 잇다. (集團農業은 소베트 露西亞의 特在한 貧·中農의 組合農業이다.)
소베트 露西亞의 農業은 오늘날까지 특히 新經濟政策 以後 더욱더욱 分散的 個人主義 經濟狀態를 持續하고 잇다. 이러한 農業狀態는 國民經濟 社會主義化의 途程에 가로 노힌 크나큰 障碍인 것이 事實이다.
그런데 工業方面에 잇서서는 大部分이 漸次 社會主義化가 되여가는데 農業方面에 잇서서는 壓制的 大部分이 個人經營인 채로 되여잇는 것은 큰일거리라 아니할 수 업다.
1928年에는 非常한 팡의 缺乏이 일어낫다. 그것은 穀物地方의 一部에 凶作이 잇섯든 까닭도 잇스나 달은 큰 原因은 私營農業中 富裕層인 搾取農民階級이 소베트 穀物買付機關의 公定價格上에 보이코트를 한 點에 잇다.
그리하야 官公營農業을 擴張하고 中貧農의 分散的 私營小農業을 大規模의 集團農業으로 再組織을 하야 農業의 社會主義化를 促進하며 그것을 國家機關에서 統制하는 것이 穀物問題解決의 唯一한 手段이라는 結論에 이르럿다.
그럼으로 5箇年計劃에 잇서서는 官公營農業의 擴張과 集團農業組織의 獎勵에 全力을 드리고 잇다. 官公營農業은 트러스트가튼 形式으로 經營하는 큰 規模의 農業組織이요 集團農業은 中貧農이 農具나 機械가튼 生産手段을 共有로한 一種의 株式組織으로 그에 加한 勞働單位와 所有權에 딸어 收穫에 생기는 바을 分配하게 되는 것이다.<22>

現在 世界各國은 經濟恐慌으로 因하야 産業의 停頓 及 衰退와 한 가지로 失業者의 激增을 보고 잇다. 그러나 소베트 露西亞에서는 이와 正反對의 現象이 일어나고 잇다.
卽 生産의 激增은 大體로 生産技術의 改良으로 因한 것인데 그러함에도 不拘하고 勞働者의 數는 더욱 增加되고 失業者의 數는 減少되여가는 現象이다. 特히 熟練勞働者는 도리어 不足을 늑기게 되여잇다. 最近 生産에 從事하는 (賃金勞働者 智能勞働者를 合하야 30年間에 1099萬人으로부터 1312萬人으로 增加되엿다. 또 大工業에 從事하는 勞働者(事務員을 除함)만도 그 數가 244萬人으로부터 303萬으로 增加되엿다.
生産에 從事할 수 잇는 사람이면 失業者는 極히 적다. 中央職業紹介所의 調査에 依하면 各種 企業에서 오는 熟練勞働者에게 對한 求人申込中 8割까지는 應할 수가 업다고 한 것을 보더래도 熟練勞働者의 缺乏을 넉넉히 알 수가 잇는 것이다.

勞働者의 實賃金增加가 어느 程度까지 實行되여 잇는가 하는 것은 社會主義化의 過程中 가장 重要한 問題다. 企業家側의 負擔에 依한 勞働者社會保險 勞働者의 生活改善에 對한 國家의 支出 母性 及 嬰兒保護에 對한 事業文化敎育施設 等의 豫算增加와 勞働時間의 短縮은 勞働者實賃銀의 增加를 意味하는 것이다. 이것을 全體的으로 計算하면 現在 소베트 露西亞의 勞働者의 實賃金은 戰前에 比하야 167%로 增加되엿다. 7時間 勞働과 5日 1週制는 漸次 工業勞働者의 넓운 層으로 擴大되여 가는 中이니 1930年 5月까지에 7時間制에 依한 工業勞働者의 數가 約 80萬이요 5日 1週制로 勞働하는 勞働者의 數가 150萬에 達하여 잇다.

5箇年計劃의 第2年에 잇서 達成한 業績은 우에서 大體로 말한 바이어니와 이러한 發展過程에 잇서서는 묵은 것으로부터 새로운 것으로 밧귀여 나아가는 途中에 必要的으로 일어나는 여러가지 障碍와 缺陷에 닥드리지 아니한다고는 할 수가 업는 것이다.
그러타하더래도 5箇年計劃의 힘세인 進行과 코와레푸스키-의 大計劃과를 連結하야 볼 때에는 우리의 眼前에 무엇인지 모를 것이 닥처오는 듯한 氣分이 일어나기도 한다.<23>
<16-23>