Magazine Title: 別건곤 第33號
Publication Date: 1930년 10월 01일
Article Title: 吸煙室 (Smoking Room)
Author: N/A
Article Type: 잡저 (Miscellany)

Smoking Room

After dinner, I light a cigarette, and as I smoke, conversation arises. A pleasant, yet unremarkable chat! Those who don't like it might want to try a puff.

Chosŏn has a bountiful harvest, and Japan too has a great harvest!! The officials greatly rejoice at this announcement. I wish they would explain to the farmers, who can't even repay their debts due to the plummeting rice prices, what exactly is so joyful about it.

Autumn has arrived, and the homeless have disappeared, so officials with swords rejoice, but we have yet to hear the concerns of officials who worry about the number of frozen corpses on the streets without shelter. Didn't many people lose their homes due to floods this year?

The Government-General's travel expense reduction for officials took effect on September 1st. Those who can't travel often might be disappointed, but the local government officials' entertainment expenses will also be reduced, so could this be killing two birds with one stone?

It seems easy to cut back on, but it's not: tobacco. In September alone, the Monopoly Bureau produced 332,810,000 cigarettes. 332,890 kwan of raw tobacco!! We are eating smoke instead of rice, so we must have become gods.

They say they will monopolize liquor in the future, so will salted shrimp and salt also have Monopoly Bureau stamps attached? The makgeolli we drink in anger will be consumed dutifully to subsidize the military coffers!

A certain girls' school in Kyŏngsŏng, where the principal was sent to the police station (送局), is said to be closing. Even if the school closes, will they let go of the principal? Even if the students are scattered and the school is gone, they can still be a principal within the XX Bureau.

They expel 30 or 40 young students at once who are clinging on saying they want to learn more and do better, but then tell reporters that everything has been resolved without incident. If the principal had resigned and become a police chief at a police box (駐在所), they would have written a great report.

They say works by civilian writers will be included in the newly compiled textbooks. Even if their awakening is late, it's still commendable, but they should correct the habit of including works without the author's permission in advance to avoid future problems.

Since the topic of textbook compilation has come up, they say that the clause about Empress Jingū's (神功皇后) conquest of the Three Han (三韓征伐) will be removed from the Korean history being compiled this time, because there is no such fact in existing Korean history. It seems that the conscience of scholars is finally awakening.

These days, readers who don't understand Japanese cannot read the political and art columns of a certain newspaper, so if you are going to translate so poorly, how about just publishing the telegrams or Japanese magazines as they are in photographic form?

Lawyer Kim U-yŏng has opened a joint office with Maruyama Keijirō in Meiji-cho. This is practically a small merger of Korea and Japan.

Wŏnsan Higher Girls' School has decided to remove Nakatani's travelogue "Sagano" (嵯峨野) from the fourth-grade reader. That school deserves first prize for suppressing dangerous ideas about allowing wives to live comfortably.

The Honmachi Police Station conducted health checkups on September 1st and 2nd for female employees of restaurants, other female servers (女給), and matchmaking women (仲介女) within its jurisdiction, and it is said that 32 out of 586 examinees had venereal disease. The nose of the friend enforcing public morals must be swollen more than a stage 3 syphilis patient.

A certain British university professor announced that the second world war would break out within the next few years, and quick-witted merchants are dreaming of making money... Is there nothing for Koreans to dream of?

<43>

Named Entities

金雨英	Kim U-yŏng
丸山敬次郞	Maruyama Keijirō
明治町	Meiji-chō
元山	Wŏnsan
中谷崎	Nakatani
嵯峨野	Sagano
本町署	Honmachi-sho
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
朝鮮	Chosŏn
日本	Japan



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제33호
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	吸煙室
기사형태	잡저

吸煙室
저녁밥 먹고는 담배를 피여 물고 담배를 피여들면 한담이 나온다. 심심하면서도 별다른 맛잇는 한담! 실치 안흔 사람은 한대 픠여들고 옴이 可흠.

朝鮮도 豐年 日本도 大豐!! 大端히 깃부다는 發表를 벼슬하는 兩班들이 하신다. 무엇이 엇더케 깃븐지 米價暴落으로 빗도 다 못갑흘 農民들에게도 說明을 좀 해주섯스면 感謝하겟구먼.

가을이 되여서 露宿群이 업서젓스니 조흔 일이라고 깃버하는 칼찬 兩班은 잇서도 住所업는 路上凍屍가 뒤니어 생길 것을 걱정하는 官吏의 말슴은 아즉 發表를 못보앗다. 금년에는 水害에 집 일흔 사람이 만엇다지요?

총독부 관리의 旅費 긴축이 9월 1일부터 실시되엿다. 자조 못갈 사람은 섭섭할넌지 모르나 지방관공리의 交際費도 긴축되겟스니 이거야말로 一擧에 兩得이랄 것일가.

긴축되기 쉬울 듯하면서 못되는 것은 담배다. 9月 한달 동안에만 專賣局에서 나온 卷煙이 3億3281萬箇하고도 또 잇소이다. 살 담배 33萬2890貫!! 밥 안먹고 煙氣만 먹으니 神仙이 되엿지.

압흐로는 酒類도 專賣를 하리라니 새우젓 소곰에 專賣局딱지가 부터지지 아느려는가 홧김에 마시는 막걸니도 軍庫補助로 忠誠스럽게 먹을 판!

校長閣下가 送局된 京城某女學校가 廢校되리란다. 廢校는 될 망정 校長이야 내여놋켓소? 學生이 헤여지고 學校가 업서지고 XX局안에서도 校長노릇만 하면 되지.

배호겟다고 더 잘 배호겟다고 매여달니는 어린 학생들을 단번에 30명씩 40명씩 퇴학시이면서도 신문 기자보고는 無事解決되엿슴니다고. 校長내놋코 駐在所 벼슬을 하엿드면 報告書는 잘 쓸것.

새로 編纂되는 敎科書에 民間作家의 作品이 실닌다고. 늣게 깨인 머리일망정 무던은 하지만 作家의 承諾업시 실는 버릇은 미리 고처야 後患을 免할 것.

敎科書 編纂 말이 낫스닛가 말이지 이번에 編纂하는 朝鮮歷史에는 神功皇后 三韓征伐하얏다는 句節을 削除하기로 하얏다는데 그 理由는 在來 朝鮮歷史에는 그런 事實이 全혀 업는 까닭이라고. 學者의 良心이 이제야 發生하는 모양.

요새 某新聞의 政治蘭 學藝欄은 日本말 모르는 讀者는 닑을 재조 업스니 그러케 토만 飜譯하려거던 電報通信이나 日文雜誌를 고대로 寫眞版으로 揭載하는 것이 엇덧소.

辯護士 金雨英君은 丸山敬次郞君과 明治町에 公同事務所를 내엿다. 이를 터이면 日韓小合倂이지.

元山高等女學校에서는 4學年 讀本 中谷崎君의 『嵯峨野』란 紀行文을 除去하기로 決議하얏다. 讓妻不穩思想取締에 一等賞金은 그 學校에서 구어 노흔 당상.

本町署에서는 9月1,2兩日間 그 管內飮食店雇女, 其外 女給, 仲介女등 健康診斷을 하얏는데 受診者 586名중 花柳病者 32名이나 된단다. 風紀取締하는 친구의 코는 第3期 梅毒患者 以上으로 불거젓슬 듯.

第2의 世界大戰亂이 이 數年안으로 니러난다고 英國의 某大學敎授가 發表하여 눈치빠른 장사치들이 돈벌이할 꿈을 꾼다고... 朝鮮 사람 꿈꿀 일이 업겟는가.
<43>