별건곤 제33호
1930년 10월 01일
十日天下 北方政府, 不遇政客의 大同團結?, 中國時事二題 (The Ten-Day Reign of the Northern Government, A Grand Union of Unfortunate Politicians?, Two Topics on Current Chinese Affairs)
朱耀翰
논설 (Commentary)

The Chinese situation in September opened with the formal establishment of the Northern Government.

The anti-Chiang (蔣介石) movement, led by Mr. Yŏm Sŏk-san (閻錫山), gained great momentum with the northward movement of Mr. Wang Chao-ming (汪兆銘) and the fall of Che-nam (濟南), finally leading Wang to travel with Messrs. Chu Ru (鄒魯), Chin Kong-bak (陳公博), and Ku Maeng-yŏ (顧孟餘) on August 3rd to meet Yŏm Sŏk-san in Sŏk-kajang (石家莊) and P’ung Ok-sang (馮玉祥) in Changdŏk (彰德). On the 5th, the three leaders, Yŏm, P’ung, and Wang, held a conference in the same place to agree on principles regarding government establishment and diplomatic policy. Wang then returned to Pukp’yŏng (北平) <44> and formally convened the Kuomintang Enlarged Conference (Northern faction) at Hwairintang (懷仁堂) on August 7th. The Kuomintang Central Party Headquarters, which had been unified in 1928, was thus completely divided into two.

The Enlarged Conference immediately established the Central Political Conference Rules and completed the organization of the Central Party Headquarters Standing Committee and various departments, but did not reach discussions on the government issue. This was because Yŏm Sŏk-san first insisted on gradually establishing the government while watching the negotiations with the Feng faction (奉派) and the progress of the war situation, and also because Wang and Chin originally had more interest in completing the party as party members.

The Enlarged Conference on August 11th denied the Kuomintang 3rd National Congress held in Nanking (南京) and resolved to formally hold the 3rd Congress and enact and implement a provisional constitution for the people.

The members of the established Central Party Headquarters are as follows:

Standing Committee: Wang Chao-ming (改, Reform Faction), Cho Dae-mun (趙戴文, Yŏm), Hŏ Ch’ung-ji (許崇智, Elder), Wang Pŏp-gŭn (王法勤, 改), Sae Ji (謝持, Western Hills Faction), Paek Mun-wi (栢文蔚, P’ung)
Organization Department: Wang Chao-ming (Director), Chu Ru (西), Chin Kong-bak (改), Cho P’i-ryŏm (趙丕廉, 閻), Chu Che-maek (朱霽麥, 改?) <45>
Propaganda Department: Ku Maeng-yŏ (Director, 改), Chang Chi-bon (張知本), Sŏl Tok-p’il (薛篤弼, 馮), P’an Un-ch’o (潘雲超, 改), Chŏn Yo-rim (傳如霖)
People's Training Committee: T’am Jin (覃振, 西, Director), Paek Un-t’ye (白雲梯, 改, Mongolian), Chin Ka-u (陳嘉佑, 廣), Chin Su-in (陳樹人, 改), Sang Jin (商震, 閻)
Domestic Ethnic Affairs Department: Director Paek Un-t’ye (改)
Overseas Department: Director Chin Su-in (改)
Secretary General: Ho Yak-u (胡若愚, Northeast faction)
Note: 改= Reform faction, 西= Western Hills faction, 閻= Yŏm faction, 馮= Northwest faction, 廣= Kwangtung (Guangdong) faction

The activities of the Northern faction, which had gained momentum, suffered a major blow when Che-nam Castle (濟南城) was recaptured from Chiang Kai-shek's direct lineage forces on August 15th. Furthermore, the loss of more than half of the military power as a result of the lack of agile action in the retreating army was almost a fatal blow. As a result, the Northern faction, which had delayed the establishment of the government, quickly proceeded with the work in order to boost the falling morale, and announced the seven government members at the Enlarged Conference on September 1st as follows:

Yŏm Sŏk-san (Chairman), Wang Chao-ming (Acting Chairman), P’ung Ok-sang, Chang Hak-ryang (張學良), Ri Jong-in (李宗仁), Sae Ji, Tang So-ui (唐紹儀)

Prior to this, the selection of government ministers, which was said to have been decided at the T’aewŏn (太原) Conference on the 31st, was as follows:

Foreign Affairs: Ku Wi-gyun (顧維鈞), Navy: Sim Hong-ryŏl (沈鴻烈), Education: T’ang Ĭr-hwa (湯爾和) (Above, Northeast lineage), Finance: Ryang Ru-ju (梁如舟), Transportation: Mae Kyŏng-dŏk (買景德) (Above, Yŏm faction), Army: Nok Jong-nin (鹿鍾麟), Internal Affairs: Sŏl Tok-p’il (Above, Northwest faction), Commerce and Industry: Ho Jong-dok <46> (Kwangsi faction)

Or it is said that Ro Mun-gan (羅文幹) (Northeast lineage) is the Minister of Finance, or that Ro Mun-gan is the Minister of Justice, T’ang Ĭr-hwa is the Minister of Agriculture and Mining, Cho P’i-ryŏm is the Minister of Commerce and Industry, Chu Ru is the Minister of Education, Ho Jong-dok is the Minister of State-Run Enterprises, Ki Kong-ch’ŏn (冀貢泉) is the Chief Justice of the High Court, Chin Su-in is the Chairman of the Education Committee, Paek Un-t’ye is the Chairman of the Mongolian-Tibetan Committee, and others are the same as before.

On the 1st, Yŏm Sŏk-san issued a telegram assuming the chairmanship and immediately headed north, and on September 9th, the auspicious day of 9:00 AM in the 19th year of the Republic of Korea, a swearing-in ceremony for government members was held, and the Northern Government was formally established. Pukp’yŏng was renamed Beijing (北京), and China, which had been under a unified government for a full two years, was again divided in name and reality.

However, the establishment of the Northern Government seemed to be unable to hide its somewhat shabby appearance even to the eyes of the observers. First, it was established at a time when it was in a militarily unfavorable situation. Second, the composition of its organizational members was too mixed, making one suspect a long-term cooperation. Also, it seemed that the names were borrowed by force without asking for the individuals' intentions. Furthermore, it seemed that the financial basis was not very deep. <47>

It was too lonely that only three of the seven government members, Wang, Yŏm, and Sae, participated in the swearing-in ceremony. It is said that P’ung Ok-sang did not participate because he was at the front line encouraging military affairs and held an inauguration ceremony in Chŏngju (鄭州), but the whereabouts of Ri Jong-in are currently unknown, and Tang So-ui, an old man, has already sent a reply of acceptance, but not announcing it for the time being seems like child's play and there is nothing to answer.

Among them, the telegram from Chang Hak-ryang of the Northeast rejecting the appointment of a committee member seemed to make the establishment ceremony of the Northern Government the most bleak. The embarrassed Northern faction immediately offered half of the government ministers' positions to the Northeast and at the same time began a fierce behind-the-scenes movement. It seems that it is not an empty rumor compared to the selection of personnel that was internally decided at the T’aewŏn Conference.

While Chang Hak-ryang was using roundabout words, saying that the personal participation of ministers was not impossible in appearance, he called all the retainers gathered in Pukp’yŏng, drunk on the dream of becoming ministers, back to Pongch’ŏn (奉天) in order to avoid misunderstandings, so the curtain of the appointment of ministers of the Northern Government has not yet shown any possibility of opening.

The fact that the Northern Government is currently a total collection of unfortunate politicians in China can be guessed simply by looking at the selection of the seven government members.

As unfortunate figures from influential factions:
Yŏm Sŏk-san, the general of the Shansi faction (山西派)
P’ung Ok-sang <48>, the leader of the Northwest faction
Ri Jong-in, the defeated general of the Kwangsi faction
And Chang Hak-ryang of the Northeast was included, but whether he is an unfortunate military man or a successful politician will depend on who is looking. After the establishment of the Northern Government, Wu P’ei-fu (吳佩孚) was taken in in the remote areas of Sichuan (四川), and the remnants of old soldiers declared anti-Chiang, so they are also kites hoping for the rotten meat of Beijing.

Next, as unfortunate people on the literary side:
Wang Chao-ming, who represented the usual reform faction, and Sae Ji, who represented the Western Hills Conference faction, and as an expression of welcoming all unhappy party members, Tang So-ui, an elder of the Kuomintang, was invited as a government member, and Hŏ Ch’ung-ji and Paek Mun-wi were invited as members of the Tang Department.

If you look at the fact that the seven members represent seven factions, you can see the traces of not a few efforts, but since some of them are mixed up in a jumble, it is a question among questions whether the detail will maintain its shape until which day.

First, the Western Hills Conference faction represented by Mr. Sae Ji greatly shunned Sun Wen (孫文) cooperating with the Communist Party during his lifetime and opposed it from beginning to end. After Sun Wen died in Beijing, they held a Central Plenary Session in the Western Hills in the west of Beijing and resolved to abandon the alliance with Russia and tolerance of communism policy. At that time, Wang Chao-ming, Ryo Chung-gae (廖仲愷), Ho Han-min (胡漢民), Sun K’o (孫科), who were the left-wing of the Kuomintang, went down to Kwangtung and held the 2nd Central Plenary Session, denied the Western Hills Conference, and expelled or disciplined Sae Ji, Chu Ru, etc. As a result, the Kuomintang Central Party Headquarters was established in both Shanghai (上海) and Kwangtung, and fierce friction continued between the two.

After the northward expeditionary army advanced into the Yangtze River (長江), Chiang Kai-shek, Ho Han-min, etc. broke off relations with the Communist Party first, and even after the Wang Chao-ming faction declared anti-communism, the friction between the Western Hills faction and the Kwangtung faction was incessant. Even when the so-called Special Committee was produced in Nanking in the autumn of 1927, the Wang Chao-ming faction (the so-called left-wing or Kwangtung faction at the time) absolutely opposed the participation of Western Hills Conference members and finally killed the Special Committee early.

Now, it is not only evokes a sense of wonder that the two factions, which have been so mutually exclusive, have shaken hands amicably at the so-called Pukp’yŏng Enlarged Conference, but also makes one question their sincerity and sustainability. Furthermore, the difference between the ideologies of the two factions, which are still clearly nationalistic right-leaning and socialist left-leaning, can be seen from the policy of Wang Chao-ming's announcement of guaranteeing the lives of small farmers and workers, and it can be predicted that the conflict between these two elements will surface sooner or later.

The Kwangsi faction, including Ri Jong-in, has not yet shown any signs of substantial participation <50>, but since Wang Chao-ming secretly planned with Chang Pal-gwi (張發奎) to deceive Ri Je-sim (李濟琛) in the famous Kwangtung Incident in 1928, the secret struggle between the Kwangtung faction and the Kwangsi faction has been fierce. Therefore, the cases such as the non-interference of soldiers in politics and the abolition of political divisions raised by the Kwangtung faction at the 2nd Central Committee 5th Plenary Session were actually guns pointed at the Kwangsi faction. However, despite the support of Chiang Kai-shek, the Kwangtung faction was completely defeated at that time. Although both factions are currently in a position of misfortune and sympathize with each other, can this old grudge be forgotten?

The Northeast lineage is refusing to join, so it may not be a problem, but originally, Wang Chao-ming and others have not had good relations since the time of his father Chang Tso-lin (張作霖), and furthermore, they are sworn enemies with the Northwest Army of P’ung Ok-sang since the Kwak Song-ryŏng (郭松齡) Incident.

The two Yŏm and P’ung lineages, which are the actual basis of the Northern Government, have not been on good terms from the beginning. It is said that two heroes cannot stand side by side, and the fact that the roots of the local government are two major forces with equal strength at any time includes the crisis of rupture. The fact that the giants of the warlords are cooperating through mutual concessions has already proven failure in repeated experiments through the Pukhwan (北漢) era and the Nanking era <51>. Just as the Nanking Government finally ended up with only the Chiang direct lineage remaining, if the Northern Government is to be stable, either Yŏm or P’ung must fall.

As mentioned above, the Northern Government has been severely lacking in momentum since its establishment, and the crises it faces in the future are too diverse.

Whether Yŏm or P’ung are capable of controlling and managing such a situation is not an easy question to answer.

The Northeast Supreme Council, on which the Northern Government had placed many hopes, was held in mid-September, but as everyone had expected, it seems to have decided to maintain a clever attitude of supporting the central government in name and observing the situation in reality. The Northern faction's desired participation from the Northern faction is out of the question, and armed mediation is also difficult to hope for.

Therefore, the situation in late September concentrates the world on the great decisive battle between P’ung and Chiang on the P’yŏnghwan (平漢) Line. If the Nanking army wins decisively, the dream of the Northern Government will be in vain. If a decisive victory or defeat does not occur, the situation will become even more chaotic.

It is said that the Northern army has already begun to retreat, so the winning momentum seems to be with the Southern army. However, it is always important to remember that the course of China is determined by the flow of the lives of the people inside, rather than the rise and fall of politicians and soldiers on the surface. (End)

<44-52>

**Named Entities**

閻錫山	Yŏm Sŏk-san
汪兆銘	Wang Chao-ming
鄒魯	Chu Ru
陳公博	Chin Kong-bak
顧孟餘	Ku Maeng-yŏ
石家莊	Sŏk-kajang
馮玉祥	P’ung Ok-sang
彰德	Changdŏk
北平	Pukp’yŏng
懷仁堂	Hwairintang
南京	Nanking
趙戴文	Cho Dae-mun
許崇智	Hŏ Ch’ung-ji
王法勤	Wang Pŏp-gŭn
謝持	Sae Ji
栢文蔚	Paek Mun-wi
趙丕廉	Cho P’i-ryŏm
朱霽麥	Chu Che-maek
張知本	Chang Chi-bon
薛篤弼	Sŏl Tok-p’il
潘雲超	P’an Un-ch’o
傳如霖	Chŏn Yo-rim
覃振	T’am Jin
白雲梯	Paek Un-t’ye
陳嘉佑	Chin Ka-u
陳樹人	Chin Su-in
商震	Sang Jin
胡若愚	Ho Yak-u
濟南城	Che-nam Castle
蔣介石	Chiang Kai-shek
張學良	Chang Hak-ryang
李宗仁	Ri Jong-in
唐紹儀	Tang So-ui
太原	T’aewŏn
顧維鈞	Ku Wi-gyun
沈鴻烈	Sim Hong-ryŏl
湯爾和	T’ang Ĭr-hwa
梁如舟	Ryang Ru-ju
買景德	Mae Kyŏng-dŏk
鹿鍾麟	Nok Jong-nin
胡宗鐸	Ho Jong-dok
羅文幹	Ro Mun-gan
冀貢泉	Ki Kong-ch’ŏn
奉天	Pongch’ŏn
四川	Sichuan
吳佩孚	Wu P’ei-fu
孫文	Sun Wen
廖仲愷	Ryo Chung-gae
胡漢民	Ho Han-min
孫科	Sun K’o
上海	Shanghai
張發奎	Chang Pal-gwi
李濟琛	Ri Je-sim
張作霖	Chang Tso-lin
郭松齡	Kwak Song-ryŏng
平漢線	P’yŏnghwan Line



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제33호
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	十日天下 北方政府, 不遇政客의 大同團結?, 中國時事二題
필자	朱耀翰
기사형태	논설

十日天下 北方政府, 不遇政客의 大同團結?, 中國時事二題
						朱耀翰
9月달의 中國時局은 北方政府 正式成立의 場으로 開幕되얏다.
閻錫山氏를 盟主로 한 反蔣運動은 汪兆銘君의 北上과 濟南의 陷落으로 一大躍進의 形勢를 이루어 드듸어 汪氏는 8月3日 鄒魯 陳公博 顧孟餘의 3氏와 同行하야 石家莊에서 閻錫山을 彰德에서 馮玉祥을 會見하고 同 5日 同所에서 閻 馮 汪 3巨頭會議를 開하야 政府樹立 及 外交方針 등에 대한 原則을 協定하고 汪氏는 다시 北平으로<44> 歸하야 8月 7日 國民黨 擴大會議(北方)派를 懷仁堂에서 正式으로 開會하니 1928年에 하나이 되엿든 國民黨 中央黨部는 이에 完全히 兩分되다.
擴大會議는 즉시 中央政治會議規則을 制定하고 또 中央黨部 常務委員 及 各部署의 組織을 完成햇스나 政府問題에 대해서는 討論에 밋지 안앗스니 그 까닭은 첫재 閻錫山이 奉派와의 交涉 及 戰況의 進展을 보아 徐徐히 政府를 成立시키자고 主張한 것과 또는 汪 陳등이 본래 黨人으로 黨部完成에 더 만흔 興味를 갓고 잇는 까닭일 것이다.
8月11日의 擴大會議는 南京에서 열녓든 國民黨 第3次 全國代表大會를 否認하고 正式으로 第3次 大會를 開催할 것과 民衆의게 約法을 制定實施할 것을 議決햇다.
成立된 中央黨部의 委員은 如左하다.
常務委員會    汪兆銘(改) 趙戴文(閻) 許崇智(元老) 王法勤(改) 謝持(西) 栢文蔚(馮)
組  織  部    汪兆銘(主任) 鄒魯(西) 陳公博(改) 趙丕廉(閻) 朱霽麥(改?)<45>
宣  傳  部    顧孟餘(主任)(改) 張知本  薛篤弼(馮) 潘雲超(改) 傳如霖
民衆訓練委員會  覃振(主任)(西) 白雲梯(改)(蒙古人) 陳嘉佑(廣) 陳樹人(改) 商震(閻)
國內民族部    主任  白雲梯(改)
海  外  部    主任  陳樹人(改)
書  記  長          胡若愚(東北派)
註   改= 改造派   西= 西山派   閻= 山西派  馮= 西北派  廣= 廣西派
勢를 어더 進行되는 北方派의 活動은 8月 15日 濟南城이 蔣介石의 直系軍에서 奪回됨으로써 一大打擊을 밧게 되얏다. 더구나 退却軍에서 敏捷한 행동을 缺如한 結果로 半數以上의 軍力을 喪失한 것은 거이 致命傷이 되엿다. 이로 인하야 政府成立을 遷延하든 北方派는 떨어진 士氣를 振作하는 意味로 急遽히 일을 進行하게 되어 9月1일 擴大會議에서 政府委員 7名을 如下히 發表햇다.
閻錫山(主席) 汪兆銘(主席代理) 馮玉祥 張學良 李宗仁 謝持 唐紹儀
이에 先하야 31日 太原會議에서 決定되엿다고 전하는 政府 各部長의 人選은 다음과 갓다.
外交 顧維鈞 海軍 沈鴻烈 敎育 湯爾和(以上 東北系) 財政 梁如舟 交通 買景德(以上 山西派) 陸軍 鹿鍾麟 內政 薛篤弼(以上 西北派) 工商 胡宗鐸<46>(廣西派)
或 財政部長에 羅文幹(東北系)이라고도 하며 또는 司法 羅文幹, 農鑛 湯爾和, 工商 趙丕廉, 敎育 鄒魯, 國營事業部長 胡宗鐸, 高等法院長 冀貢泉, 敎育委員長 陳樹人, 蒙藏委員長 白雲梯, 기타 同前의 說도 잇다.
1日에 閻錫山은 主席就任通電을 發하고 즉시 北上하야 民國 19年 9月9日 午前9時라는 49의 吉日을 擇해서 政府委員의 宣誓式을 擧行하야 北方政府는 正式成立되고 北平은 다시 北京ㅇ로 改稱하야 滿 2箇年 統一政府下에 잇든 中國은 다시 名實共히 兩分되얏다.
그러나 北方政府의 成立은 觀光者이 우리 눈에도 좀 초라한 것을 가리우지 못한 것 갓다. 그 成立의 時機가 目下軍事上으로 不利한 形勢에 處한 때임이 첫재는 그 組織分子의 色別이 넘우나 雜然하야 長久한 合作을 疑心케 하는 바 잇스며 또는 本人의 意思도 뭇지 안코 억지로 일홈만 빌은 感이 잇스며 더구나 財政에 관한 根據가 그리 깁지 못한 듯한 까닭이다.<47>
宣誓式에 參加한 政府委員은 7名 中 僅히 汪, 閻, 謝의 3人에 不過한 것은 넘우도 寂寞한 일이엇다. 馮玉祥은 前線에 잇서서 軍事를 督勵함으로 參加치 못하고 鄭州에서 就任式을 擧行햇다 하드라도 李宗仁은 目下 그 所在까지도 不明하고 唐紹儀 老人은 이미 承諾의 回電은 잇스나 當分 發表는 아니한다하는 것은 兒戱와 가티 보인다 해도 對答할 말이 업슬 것이다.
그 중에도 가장 北方政府成立式을 蕭條케 한 感이 잇는 것은 東北의 張學良君이 委員就任拒絶의 通電이엇다. 狼狽한 北方派는 즉시 東北에 대하야 政府部長의 地位의 半分을 提供할 提議를 하는 동시에 裡面運動을 猛烈히 開始햇다. 그것은 太原會議에서 內定햇다는 人選과 對比하야 虛傳이 아닐뜻 십다.
張學良은 表面으로 部長들의 個人的 參加는 非不可라고 圓曲한 言辭를 弄하면서도 誤解를 피하기 위함이라 하야 北平 聚集하야 部長夢에 醉한 門客들을 다 奉天으로 불너들이 엇슴으로 北方政府部長任命의 幕은 아직까지도 열릴 可望이 보이지 안케 되엿다.
北方政府가 現下中國의 不遇政客의 總集合인 것은 政府委員 7名의 人選만 보아도 짐작할 수가 잇다.
實力派의 不遇客으로는
山西派의 大將  閻錫山
西北派의 首魁  馮玉祥<48>
廣西波의 敗將  李宗仁
그리고 東北의 張學良을 집어 너헛스나 그가 不遇의 武人인가 得意의 政客인가는 보는 사람을 딸아 다를 것이다. 北方政府成立 後 四川奧地에서는 吳佩孚를 축겨들고 舊軍人末流들이 反蔣을 宣言햇스니 그들도 北京의 腐肉을 바라는 소리개들이다.
다음 文人側의 不遇의 人들로는
例의 改造派를 代表한 汪兆銘  西山會議派를 代表한 謝持 가잇고 기타 모든 不平黨員을 歡迎하는 表示로 國民黨元老  唐紹儀를 政府委員으로 또 許崇智 栢文蔚등을 唐部委員으로 모셔왓다.
7名의 委員이 7個의 派閥을 代表한 것을 보면 如干치 안은 苦心의 形跡일 보인다만은 그 중에는 뒤범벅으로 석기엇스니 果然 어느 날까지나 그 細工이 形體를 維持할는지가 疑問중 疑問이다.
첫재로 謝持氏가 代表하는 西山會議派라는 것은 孫文이<49> 生前에 共産黨과 合作하는 것을 大忌하야 自初至終으로 이를 反對하다가 孫文이 北京서 客死한 뒤에 北京의 西에 잇는 西山에서 中央全體會議를 열고 聯俄容共政策의 抛棄를 決議한 것이엇다. 當時의 國民黨 左派이든 汪兆銘, 廖仲愷, 胡漢民, 孫科등은 廣東으로 나려가 第2次 中央全體會議를 開催하야 西山會議를 否認하고 謝持, 鄒魯, 등을 除名 혹은 懲戒處分한 것이엿다. 그리하야 國民黨 中央黨部는 上海와 廣東에 兩立하게되고 兩者間에는 猛烈한 軋轢이 繼續되엇섯다.
其後 北伐軍의 長江進出以後 蔣介石, 胡漢民등이 먼저 共産黨과 끈허지고 뒤에 汪兆銘 一派도 反共을 宣明한 후까지라도 西山派 對 廣東派의 軋轢은 不絶하야 1927년 秋南京에서 所謂 特別委員會라는 것이 産出될 때에도 汪兆銘 一派(當時 所謂 左派 又는 廣東派)는 西山會議分子의 加入을 絶對反對하야 마츰내 特別委員會를 早死케 하엿섯다.
現今에 와서 所謂 北平擴大會議의 자리에서 그러케 水火相克하는 兩派가 義조케 손을 잡앗다는 것은 奇異의 感을 이를킬 뿐 아니라 그 眞摯性과 持續性을 뭇게하는 것이다. 더구나 兩派의 思想이 아직도 國家主義的 右傾과 社會主義的 左傾과의 差異가 顯明한 것은 汪兆銘의 發表한 小農 工人의 生活保障이란 政策을 보아도 可知할 것이며 이 兩分子의 對立은 早晩間表面化할 것을 豫測할 수가 잇다.
李宗仁등의 廣西派는 아직 實質로 加入한 形跡이 보이지<50> 아니하나 汪兆銘이 저 유명한 民國 17年 廣東事變에 잇서서 張發奎와 密計하야 李濟琛을 속여 넘긴 以來로 廣東派 對 廣西派의 暗鬪는 激烈한배 잇섯다. 그리함으로 第2屬 中委五中全會時에 廣東派가 提起한 軍人의 政治不干涉 政治分會廢止등의 案件은 其實 廣西派에게 향한 槍鋒이엇다. 그러나 蔣介石의 支持가 잇섯슴에도 不拘하고 廣東派는 그때에 아조 敗北햇다. 비록 兩派가 다 現在는 不遇의 地位에 잇서 同病相憐한다하지만은 이 宿怨을 가히 이저버릴 수잇슬가.
東北系는 加入을 拒絶하고 잇스닛가 問題도 아니되겟지 만은 元來 汪兆銘 등과는 乃 父 張作霖時代부터 誼가 조치 못햇고 더구나 馮玉祥의 西北軍과는 郭松齡事變 以來로 世讐다.
北方政府의 實力的 根據가 된 閻馮兩系도 본래부터 誼조흔 사이가 아니다. 兩雄 이 竝立치 못한다 하는 말이 이거니와 地方 政府의 뿌리가 形勢 互角인 兩大勢力이라고 하는 것은 언제든지 決裂의 危機를 包含하고 잇는 것이다. 軍閥의 巨頭들이 互讓合作한다는 것은 北漢時代로 南京時代를 通하야<51> 이미 屢次 試驗에 失敗를 證한 것이다. 南京政府가 마츰내 蔣直系 홀로 남게 된 것 가티 北方政府도 安定이 되랴면 閻이나 馮이나 둘중 하나는 꺼꾸러저야 할 것이다.
以上과 가티 北方政府는 그 成立當初부터 氣勢가 오르지 못함이 甚하거니와 아프로 그 直面한 危機는 넘우도 多端하다고 보겟다.
閻이나 馮인 능히 이런 局面을 統轄收給할 수 잇는 人物이냐 하면 쉽게 對答이 아니 나올 것이다.
北方政府가 만흔 希望을 부치든 東北最高會議는 9月中旬에 열니엿스나 누구가 豫想햇든 바와 가티 名分上으로 中央支持 實際上으로 形勢觀望이라는 怜悧한 態度를 持續하기로 決定되는 듯하다. 北方이 바라는 北方加擔은 어림도 업고 武力調停도 所望하기 어럽다.
그럼으로 9月下旬의 時局은 전혀 平漢線上의 馮蔣大決戰으로 萬國을 集中한다. 南京軍이 決定的으로 勝利하면 北方政府의 꿈은 수포로 돌아갈 것이다. 決定的 勝負가 나지 못한다면 時局은 더욱 混沌해질 것이다.
北軍은 이미 後退를 始作햇다고 하니 勝勢는 南軍에게 만흔 듯. 다못 中國의 行程은 表面에 나타나는 政客軍人의 集散盛衰보다도 裡面에 잇는 民衆의 生活의 흐름이 決定한다는 것을 항상 記憶함이 緊要한 일이다.(끗)
<44-52>