잡지명	別乾坤 第33號
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	第一步가 글럿다, 新家庭 生活 破綻記, 新女性들 그는 왜 시집살이를 못하나. (The First Step Failed, A Record of a New Family Life Rupture, Why Can't New Women Endure Married Life?)
필자	金O淑
기사형태	문예기타 (Miscellaneous Literature)

The First Step Failed, A Record of a New Family Life Rupture, Why Can't New Women Endure Married Life?
						Kim O-suk

To have me say this is like stabbing at a healing wound, making me feel the newness of the pain again, or what else could it be? Why couldn't I endure married life - how can I speak of what I cannot write as a test answer in this place<136>? And these inauspicious words... ...
Why couldn't I endure married life? The marriage, which I thought was satisfactory enough at the time, ended in rupture after 3 years, which is a very unfortunate fact.
In the autumn of the year I turned twenty, my family said that there was a suitable marriage prospect somewhere, and they wanted me to meet him.
One day, my mother said she was going to XX Store (XX商會) to buy something. And she interfered in everything, from what I wore to how I combed my hair, even my makeup, which was unprecedented. How could I not have guessed, if I wasn't an idiot? That's how I first saw him (the man who was my husband) at that store. After that, the household was busier than ever with preparations. They provided clothes and household goods that I couldn't have worn in my whole life, making sure I wouldn't be envious of anyone else. Following the old-fashioned ways that were agreed upon by my husband's family and my own, I put on rouge, powdered my face, and got married.
Three days passed!
From that day on, my suffering began.
From morning dawn until I went to bed at night, everything was a formality. Morning greetings, evening greetings, etiquette at meals, and in the remaining time, I had to manage the servants skillfully and push them relentlessly all day long without a break. If there was even the slightest violation of these formalities, my mother-in-law would scold me without forgiveness, and that evening, the family would gather and it would definitely become a topic of conversation.
For two years after graduating from school, I learned various etiquette and manners as well as anyone else, and even though my family home was full of empty formalities, we still followed them to a considerable extent.
However, the customs of Hamgyŏng Province (咸鏡道) and Chŏlla Province (全羅道) - these different provinces - did not match at all. Everything was clumsy and awkward, and I didn't know where to put my hands. My mother-in-law, who didn't understand this, always frowned, displeased with everything, and complained every time she spoke, saying, "I don't like my student daughter-in-law." With such behavior, there was no room for me to establish my own opinions, and where could I realize my plans and hopes from my unmarried days?
To add insult to injury, my widowed sister-in-law, who was twenty-five years old, came with her own money and took her place in the warm part of the room, and her pickiness was another story that's hard to put into words. She made it her daily routine to find fault with even the smallest things and run to her mother and brother to tell on me.
However, for me, if there was one ray of hope in all that suffering, it was my husband's love and his success.
Even if I was mistreated, if I could only trust him, or if he got a job separately after graduating from school (he was studying at a certain university in Japan at the time) then I could escape this trap - that's what I thought. But no. My husband after graduating from school - in a situation where even the top students were struggling to find jobs, it was impossible for him, who had no special talent, to get a job, and if he could barely make a living, his notoriously lazy nature led him to come home with his diploma. And he spends his days chatting with his mother, who has a lot of complaints, and joking with his widowed sister.
Seeing this, it seemed like all my hopes had crumbled. And my heart, which wasn't originally joined by great love, gradually lost affection for him, and conflicts with my husband's family and disagreements with my in-laws became more frequent. The husband, who was not strong-willed, only trusted his mother and sister and became increasingly estranged from me, and his narrow-mindedness, which I hadn't noticed much before, became more and more apparent, finding fault with everything like a hated stepchild. The details are vague, but I eventually went through this process and ended up getting divorced. Of course, the above are distant causes, but they are also important reasons.
So, to summarize:
1, Not knowing each other well due to lack of interaction during the engagement period or before the engagement, and not marrying for love.
2, Different customs and habits due to different provinces.
3, The shortcomings of the extended family system.
I wonder if these are distant causes.<137>

**Named Entities**

咸鏡道	Hamgyŏngdo
全羅道	Chŏllado



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제33호
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	第一步가 글럿다, 新家庭 生活 破綻記, 新女性들 그는 왜 시집살이를 못하나.
필자	金O淑
기사형태	문예기타

第一步가 글럿다, 新家庭 生活 破綻記, 新女性들 그는 왜 시집살이를 못하나.
						金O淑
나에게 이 말을 하라함은 마치 나어가는 傷處를 찔너 다시 압흠의 새로움을 늣기게 함이 안이면 무엇이겟습니까. 웨 싀집을 못살엇나 - 試驗 答案쓰듯 할 수 업는 것을 엇지 이 자리에서<136> 말하라 하십니까. 또 상서롭지 못한 이 말을... ...
나는 웨 싀집을 못 살엇슬가요. 當時에는 10分의 滿足으로 매젓든 結婚이 3年을 1期로 破綻이 생겻다는 것은 너무도 악착한 事實입니다.
나희 수무살 되든 해 가을 집에서는 엇던 곳에 適合한 婚處가 잇스니 맛나보게 한다고 하엿습니다.
엇던 날 어머님은 XX商會에 物件을 사려가자고 하섯습니다. 그리고는 옷 입는 것 머리빗는 것 심지어 얼골단장까지를 前例업시 일일히 간섭하십니다. 천치안이고야 엇지 짐작이 업섯겟습니까. 그러케 하야 나는 처음으로 그를 (男便이엿든 사람) 그 商店에서 보앗든 것입니다. 그후로는 눈코 뜰 새 업시 집안에서는 準備에 밧벗습니다. 平生입어도 못다 입을 衣服과 家裝具物로서도 남부럽지 안케 해가지고 싀家와 本家의 상의한 缺課 舊式으로 연지 찌고 눈부치고 시집을 갓섯슴다.
사흘이 지난날!
그 날부터 나의 受難은 始作되엿슴니다.
아침 새벽부터 밤자리에 눕기까지 모든 것은 形式的엿습니다. 起寢問安 就寢問安 食事때 禮式 그 남어지 時間엔 下人들을 法方잇게 부리며 왼종일 뷘틈업시 모라가야 합니다. 그 形式에 秋毫라도 違反이 잇스면 싀어머님은 容赦업시 책망이요 그날 저녁에는 家族이 모여 안저 반드시 話題가 됩니다.
學校를 卒業하고 2年동안을 가지가지로 남못지 안케 禮儀法式을 배호고 우리집안도 아모리 虛禮일망정 상당히 法式은 차리는 집이엿슴니다.
그러나 咸鏡道와 全羅道- 이 판다른 道의 法式은 도모지 相合하지 못하엿슴니다. 모도가 서투른 것뿐이고 어색하여 손노을 곳을 몰낫슴니다. 이것을 理解못하는 싀어머님은 모든 것이 싀언치 안어 밤낫 얼골을 찌푸리고 『학생 며누리 싀원치 안타.』고 말매듸마다 不平임니다. 이러케 행세가 되고 보니 내의 主見을 세울 여지가 어대잇스며 未婚 時代의 計劃과 希望을 어대서 實現할 수가 잇겟슴닛가.
雪上에 加霜으로 수물 다섯 살 먹은 寡婦된 싀누이는 自己의 돈냥잇는 것을 가지고 와서 아랫목을 차지하고 그 까다라움이 또 一口難說이지요 조고만 것이라도 해치고 꼬집어서 자긔어머니께 옵바께 告하기로 日課를 삼슴니다.
그러나 나여게 잇서서 그 모든 괴롬속에서라도 한 줄기 希望이엿다면 男便의 사랑과 그의 成功과 엿슴니다.
아모리 구박을 밧드래도 그 사람하나만 미들 만하면 또는 그가 學校(當時 日本 某大學에 在學中이엿슴.)를 卒業한 後에 따로히 就職을 하면 이 함정을 버서나려니 - 하엿든 것이엿슴니다. 그러나 웬걸요. 學校를 卒業하고 난 男便 - 首席들도 就職할 곳이 업서 머리를 싸고도는 판에 별다른 재조업는 그가 就職되기는 어림도 업는 일이고 또 당장 糊口나 할 수 잇스면 게으르기 有名한 그 性質은 그만 卒業狀을 안고 집으로 도라왓슴니다. 그리고는 매일 잔말만흔 어머니의 말친구요 과부 싀누이와 롱담으로 세월을 보냄니다.
이것을 보는 나에게는 모든 希望이 다 쓸어진 듯 하엿슴니다. 그리고 本來 큰 사랑으로 매즌 혼인도 안이엿든 내 마음은 차차 그에게 愛着이 엷어지고 싀집 종사리와 간혹 싀가족들과 意見 충돌까지 자조 생기게 되엿슴니다. 꿋꿋지 못한 男便은 어머니와 누이의 말만 밋고 나에게서 점점 버성기여지고 前에는 別로 몰낫든 그의 偏狹性은 나날이 무르녹아 마치 미워하는 이붓자식처럼 件件事事에 말성임니다. 말은 퍽 漠然하나 대체 이만한 經路를 밟어와서 나종에는 리혼까지 하게 되엿슴니다. 勿論 以上은 遠因이나 또한 重要한 原因도 되겟지요.
그러니까 주려 말슴드리면
1, 約婚 時代 或은 約婚 前에 서로 交際가 업서서 對象을 充分히 알지 못한 것과 또 사랑으로 매즌 結婚이 안인 것.
2, 道가 달너서 風俗 習慣이 다른 것.
3, 大家族 制度의 缺陷.
이러한 것들이 遠因이나 안일가 합니다.<137>
<136-137>