별건곤 제33호
October 01, 1930
骨相學上으로 본 朝鮮役軍의 얼골(第二回) (Faces of Korean Soldiers According to Phrenology, Part 2)
裴相哲
잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

Faces of Korean Soldiers According to Phrenology (Part 2)
Bae Sang-cheol

Wealth in a Lifetime: Shin Seok-u

Shin Seok-u, President of the Chosŏn Ilbo - he couldn't get a single line of writing into the world, and he was a nobleman who lived in ease, more so than a rustic scholar with a doctorate, just called 'President.'
I wondered how someone like that, in the position of president of such a large newspaper, couldn't have his name known more widely than a doctor. The professor examined his face closely, wondering if he was just getting by thanks to someone with a hat (冠쓴 놈), just warming a seat. After a closer look, I discovered that he was not someone who could be easily dismissed.

Carp Among Fish

Our U-chang, Mr. Shin Seok-u, is truly like a carp, to use an analogy rather than physiognomy. If the weather is good and a drought continues, the carp is in terrible condition. Unlike other things on land that dislike continuous rain, the carp thrives when the monsoon season continues. Likewise, Mr. U-chang's time is during chaotic times rather than times of peace. How much can a carp in a small pond play? But if there's a flood, it can splash its tail and go to the sea, and it can get horns of creation (造化) again on its ten thousand silver scales and gain the transformation of heaven (得天의 變改), so how can it be compared to those mudfish (澤出) fellows?<138> But right now, there's a drought.

Much to Gain, Much to Doubt, Much to Measure

Mr. U-chang wants to do this and that, become prime minister and a famous general, and a meritorious subject, and take a hat-wearing friend (冠쓴 도모닷지) out of prison in a golden cabinet and build a five-story Western-style house, and cultivate even the wide fields of Siberia and the wasteland of the Three Eastern Provinces to create a large village and be a special village head. The reason is that he has monkey eyes (猴眼) and an earth-based fire body (土局火體). When trusting someone, he trusts unconditionally and would give his liver (is the liver still in his belly?), but he also has a disease of doubting many things where there is no need to doubt. That is also due to his monkey eyes. His heart is so impatient that he wants to do everything today that should be done tomorrow. He doesn't like talking to people who are slow and meticulous; he just wants to do things quickly and clearly, which is because his pointed frontier (邊城) has achieved a fire body. But his heart is big, quite different from those mudfish who only make trouble with stale writing. Therefore, he seems like he would drink a lot of makgeolli with a professor like me, but if that happens, he'll call me over and say, "I urge you to drink one more cup of wine and dispel ten thousand years of sorrow with me." That's really worrying, anywhere.

A Past Full of Twists and Turns

Mr. U-chang's parents have quite a lot of wealth. Looking at his moist and wide forehead, round cheeks, and sun and moon corners (日月角), he undoubtedly heard the words "young master of a wealthy family" in his twenties. But even in good fortune, there is misfortune. From the ages of 16 to 29, he would have been tormented by the suffering of crossing water and mountains, illness, and disaster, and would have heard unpleasant words. It seems he almost ruined his fields (田地) once or twice. He was truly both good and a complete pain in the ass during the Spring and Autumn period. Laughing.

Wealth in a Lifetime, Nobility in a Moment

His six mansions (六府) and five peaks (五岳) are very abundant and in good order, and he also has a field-shaped face (田字面), so he will live with very abundant wealth throughout his life. At the very least, he will easily harvest 1,000 bags of rice per autumn without using a large measuring stick but using a heaping one. That's really good. Moreover, his chin is thick and his servant palace (奴僕宮) is abundant, so after his sixtieth birthday, he will easily become a rich man who burdens me, and I don't know if a pro-student (副奴書生) like the professor will be able to borrow some rice. Haha.
However, his nobility is unsuitable even for a moment. His configuration (格) is a great noble configuration, so if it were the old days, he would have held the position of Chief State Councilor (領相) for about 3 years and written his name in the Yellow Pavilion Records (黃閣錄) - but now, he can only become Chief State Councilor and Prime Minister while closing his eyes on his pillow, and as soon as he opens his eyes, it's over, so isn't that short-lived nobility? Damn it!<139>

Big Face, Small Nose: A Lifetime of Labor

No matter what, he will have a lot of suffering in his life. Even if he holds office, he will always be busy, and even if he plays the role of president like now, others may think he is comfortable, but he also has a lot of suffering, and even if he returns to farming, he will have a life of hard labor, because his face is big and his nose is a bit small.

Good Luck and Bad Luck All in One Handful

Since he is 37 years old this year, it is the luck of the central sun (中陽) (in the middle of the left eye), so for the 4 years from 36, 7, 8, and 9, it is a configuration of outer wealth and inner poverty, and a number of busy with nothing to do and empty fame without substance. Within these 4 years, his reputation will not be harmed, but money will be fleeing, and he will have a lot of worries because of his subordinates, and it is a time when good fortune and sorrow are mixed in the family, so I humbly hope that you will not disregard the words of Professor Bae. Haha.
His bluish lips seem to be capable of quite a lot (do not be angry), so do not approach the character for comfort (安) with the head removed, or the character for good (好) with the son (子) removed. It is easy to see failures because of that - for 3 years at 48 (nose tip luck), 49, and 50 (Byeongnanje TIngwi luck), there will be very bad luck, and everything will not succeed, so to put it plainly, it is a very tough time.
The lucks at 55 and 60 are positions of extreme minister (位極人臣) and ordering yin and yang to follow the seasons (理陰陽順四時), so will the sun shine warmly on the peninsula?
A black mole below the left eyebrow symbolizes good luck, but a black spot (黑子) (black mole) above the left eyebrow foretells death away from home, so it would be harmless to have it removed. His lifespan is a little less than 70, and three branches of the treasure tree in front of the yard will bear fruit.
-A crucian carp only gets the moonlight of the four rivers, with a thunderous sound it reaches the ninth heaven-

San-ho and Hae-ryong: An Jae-hong

Minse (號) An Chae-hong, he was a talented man. His high forehead (天庭) expressed the meaning of high heaven (天高), and his slightly abundant chin (地閣) well expressed the thickness of the earth (地厚), but only making the sky excessively high and only showing nobility, the foundation to receive it (chin) is a little thin, not matching the intention of heaven, so that is why heaven 미리 (in advance) made Mr. Minse, who is 40 years old, unable to be complacent about this. But Lao Tzu's words that great talents mature late are very comforting and pleasing to the stomach in our situation, so Mr. Chae-hong, who has the ambition of a swan, is there anything more to say?
Mr. Minse, who seems to confine the world in his brain and pour the four seas into his chest, has a look in his eyebrows that shows he considers the world depressing rather than having the capacity to eat an ox, so perhaps the name Minse is a misspelling or phonetic variation of Munse (悶世)? But whatever the case, it's up to him, but what's regrettable is that his mountain root (山根) (between the eyebrows and above the nose) is deeply sunken, so he will dispose of all his ancestral property with his own hands,<140> there will be zero harmony between brothers and help from relatives, and if he has a son early, he may see tragedy, his wife's virtue will be little, and there will be some illness.
The professor's nose is ruddy like a crayfish, excuse my bluntness. He says that it's because of something he ate when he was young, but in physiognomy, the nose is the earth star (土星), and if there is fire (redness) on the earth, it is said that all things do not grow, so whether it is man-made or natural, the number is still the number, so at the age of 48, he will break off relations with a friend wearing a hat (冠쓴 親舊) and have quite a futile time.
With wood-based water courtesy (木局水禮) and wide nostrils, he is a magnanimous man with a lot of inner thoughts, and his ear gate (耳門) is wide, so his wisdom and talent will be considerable, and if he had been born in the old days, he would have been a prime minister for 10 years and have both literary and military skills, but even now he will definitely not be troubled. His great luck will come in the future, and if he gets through the tough times of 47, 8, and 9, he will be in a position that everyone will look up to, and he will always be in a position to use others rather than be subordinate, which is the pattern of being a tiger in the mountains and a dragon in the sea (在山爲虎요 在海爲龍格). Then the professor wants to apply to him to change his name. Instead of Chae-hong, he should be called Chae-ho or Chae-ryong.
Judging from the fact that his philtrum (印堂) and middle court (中庭) are slightly sunken and he has eight-character wrinkles (八字紋), I can guess that he had hardships around 25 and 28, but (if it's not right, it's a sideswipe) I can also see that he has become a generous man because of that, and I can also guess that good luck will come in his later years, and the red and white face is in harmony with his constitution, so at 57 and 8, it's the number of the dragon forming golden horns, and that will be the year of great success. (Good!)
He will have good fortune with his children, 3 brothers (there are probably some outside), but he will spend his ancestral property with his own hands and only be able to get about 100 bags of rice with his own efforts, and he will live at least 70 years. According to his legal orders (法令), he will live to be over 80, but his ears are slightly slanted downwards, so it will be reduced somewhat.

Drunk and unable to live in this world.
Breaking the golden jar, the earth star (nose) turns red!

Once the earth star turns red, it doesn't know how to pale even after a long time.
Are there so many golden jars in this country?

Even the Yellow River turns pale to see the earth star so red!
The tower built with effort doesn't collapse... ... .
(The professor humbly prays...)

Shin Heung-u, the Beardless Public Official

Mr. Shin Heung-u, who doesn't have a single beard and looks like a young man under 20 at first glance, seems to have heard the praise "young and handsome son-in-law" from his mother-in-law many times in his youth,<141> but now that wrinkles have formed, it must be an old dream. If Mr. Shin is 48 years old now, the fact that he looks so wrinkled is probably because he has no beard, perhaps.
Anyway, let's put that aside and evaluate his facial features.
His rugged face reminds me of the ominous aura in Song Jin-u's face, which is probably the murderous aura of going to the fields (田中)!
With a water-based body and earth-based voice and a long face (I'm not talking about the head of the district), and also dark and round, even if he went to the railway industry, he would be at least a foreman, but since a beard is the representative of yang energy in face reading books, since he has no beard and therefore no yang energy, if he had been born in the old days when the lunar calendar was used, he would not have been able to participate in even a chambong, so it would have been a truly tragic face. (Because yin seeks yang)
He will be very discreet when it comes to women. (Maybe the opposite...) Why is that? Because he doesn't have that beard I mentioned earlier, but if the professor's words are wrong, he will think to himself, "Hmph, that guy doesn't even know what a dog rice cake (犬ノ餠) is, how can he just look at faces and do something..." and smile to himself.
His face is one that will definitely gather wealth, and he will probably harvest 578 bags of rice. His nose tip is round and abundant, and his five peaks (五岳) and six mansions (六府) are without flaws, so he has wealth and fortune and will see a lot of virtue from others. Also, his heart is kind and his mouth is not obstructed by a beard, so it is not difficult to speak and he even has good eloquence. (So, he became an orator.) However, he must have had some bad luck 2 or 3 times within the last 10 years, because he is beardless and has well-like wrinkles (井紋) (under the eyes).
His face makes it difficult to get an official position, but his reputation will be good throughout his life, and his lifespan will be at least 70 years, so I can't help but say that it is a good face. He will have several daughters and may even have a son. That's all.
(I can't write more because there are two Shin's in this month's issue, so "Shin Shiwake ga nai" (no dividing the Shin's)).

God! Your sons "Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you." I still recite your gospel now.

Please grant the requests of these sons! O Father, Son, and Holy Spirit! Amen.

Ms. Kim Mi-ri, Rice Rice Thousands

The professor perspiring

The reader will be confused by the meaning of "Rice Rice Thousands" and will look around. Therefore, I will give a simple explanation, and the readers will laugh so hard at the phrase of Kim Baek-gok's feet walking four inches (金栢谷脚下肉走四寸格) that their navels will be in danger.
If you say "funenga gome gome itai (舟ガ米米痛イ)," you will get sick of saying "My stomach is rice rice painful," like a professor. Then there is no need to explain further, but she was truly a Miss Kim Mi-ri of Rice Rice of the autumn wind. Now let's hear about her face reading, no, her visit!
The professor was going to visit a woman for the first time in a long time, so before he reached her door, he secretly took out a mirror from his pocket 3 or 4 times to see if there was dirt on the professor's face or if there was sleep in his eyes, trying to look good, and at the same time, he had the greedy thought of "Well, since she's a woman, she might not give me makgeolli, but maybe I'll get a cup of tea," drinking kimchi soup first, and with the most dignity and caution, he went to Keunhwa Girls' School to find Ms. Kim Mi-ri, wouldn't you know?
As luck would have it, she had gone to take a bath, so I couldn't just come out, so I sat and waited in a corner of the office. With an unknown guest-.
From the classroom across the hall, the sound of piano playing burst out. The "melody" coming from the hands of a virgin who looked about 18 or 9 years old did not give the professor, who was sitting bored, much comfort. Moreover, it was okay to listen, so after the professor's snake-like wish, "Ah-ga, please play for a long time," the Ah-ga sang and sang together. It wasn't shameless, and the professor closed his eyes for a moment when he heard a rattling sound of a window opening. It was Ms. Mi-ri.
The professor gave her his name card. From then on, according to my friend from Yeongnam, the "ibagu" (story) began.
Kim: "Why did you come?" (Looks at the name card.)
Park: "I came to see you because you are so enthusiastic about education, and I wanted to express my gratitude."
Kim: "Come here." (Puts a small chair in front of her chair and tells him to come closer.)
Park: "Yes, it's okay."
Kim: "I'm deaf, so I need you to speak loudly for me to understand."
"Oh, mimi o tabeta ka (オー耳ヲ食ベタカ?)" The professor thought to himself like this and, with the utmost obedience to orders like a woman going to a temple, sat right in front of her and explained his purpose. So, she picked up the name card and looked at it closely. She put it on the table and picked it up again and looked at it more closely before putting it on the table, adding up to seven and a half times.
Kim: "Speak, then."
"Oh, for God's sake, does she have to do so much nitpicking even to someone who is just talking?" The professor was sweating. So agitated, the professor said, "Oh, scary, let's pack our bags," and was about to turn around when he examined her face again and it was like this.
With deep eyes and a speckled face, it is certain that she will be cold, but I can undoubtedly know that she is a strong woman with a firm will.<143>
Her face didn't look that old, but no matter how I looked at her, she looked 52 or 3, and she was small and her back was straight, so it could be seen as a heavenly matter that a woman's achievement would be the best in the world.
Her hair is curly and her voice is like iron, and no matter how I look at her, she seems cold-hearted. (These are just guesses, so please don't get angry again.) Also, her firm teeth are dense and her philtrum is deep and long, so she will be successful in business and she will live to be 78 or 9 even if she doesn't want to. Just that much. (The photo is of Ms. Kim in her younger days.)

Ms. Shin Albert, Full of Generosity

The professor went to Yanghyeon Girls' School to find Ms. Shin Albert, no, Ms.
"Is Ms. Shin here?"
"Welcome."
"I've come from Jeokseon-dong. I have something to see Ms. Shin about, so I'm sorry, but please let me meet her for a moment." The professor, who had no eloquence, said bluntly like this, and the old woman led him to the waiting room and listened to his intention. As the professor was telling her his intention, he thought to himself, "Rude old woman, I don't know if her daughter is Ms. Shin, but it would be better if she just conveyed the message without saying so many unnecessary things." So, he asked again,
"Isn't Principal Shin here?"
"I am Shin Albert." What is this? The one who opens the door is the one who closes it, and I never dreamed that the mumbling old woman would be Ms. Shin. She was 35 or 6 years old, her rouge was still red, and her voice was calm and soft, but she seemed like an adult whose temper could flare up. Thinking about it, the professor's expectations were completely different - she was Shin, and the professor apologized again, and the two laughed loudly for a while!
Ms. Shin Albert, after looking at her more closely, was truly the owner of a magnificent face.
Her forehead is pointed, so if there is no separation from her husband (男便宮) in life, there will be separation in death, but her pupils shining like stars clearly show that she is a wise and intelligent woman, and her marrow-like teeth are inwardly round and long legal orders (法令), and her small mouth on her large face seems to have a lot of affection, resentment, and generosity, and she is a noble woman with little worldly desire in her clear face.
Even though she is in her middle age of 52 years old, if she has all kinds of beauty even in her still firm skin, it can be seen that in her 20s and 30s, she was a woman with a truly beautiful appearance and intelligence, so her past must have been like adding flowers to brocade (錦上添花). Looking at her three divisions (3停),<144> not only her past but also in her future luck at 60, she will definitely hear the name of a rich woman, and at 65, she will be revered by the public, so perhaps a good wind will blow for women and there will come a time when she will serve as a member of the National Assembly!
Ms. Shin's face is of a water-based metal constitution, so it is easy to earn money, but it is even easier to spend it, like water flowing, and she will do a lot of good deeds for others, but the merit will be small, and there will be little joy in her family life. She has a fate to not have her own children and to have many other people's children, so is it her fate to become a monk, or is it because she is a teacher now that she has many disciples? Curious, the professor feigned ignorance and asked her if she had children now, and she said, "No. My family story was once published in detail in the newspaper." Since even a professor with good memory cannot remember newspapers he has not seen, haha.
Her lifespan will be a long life of 83 years, so there are still many days left for her to be active!

Be the scattered monsoon rain.
Dissolving a single hibiscus flower blooming in front of the yard.

Be it a dark hole or a fine hole
Does the flower bud not know the flow of blood?

Even if it melts and melts, the roots cannot melt
Know that the old roots will sprout again next year.<145>

**Named Entities**

朝鮮日報	Chosŏn Ilbo
申錫雨	Shin Sŏk-u
于蒼	U-chang
宋鎭雨	Song Chin-u
金栢谷	Kim Paek-gok
申興雨	Shin Hŭng-u
金美理士	Kim Mi-ri-sa
養賢女校	Yanghyŏn Yŏgyo
申알뱃트	Shin Al-baet'ŭ
積善洞	Chŏksŏn-dong



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제33호
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	骨相學上으로 본 朝鮮役軍의 얼골(第二回)
필자	裴相哲
기사형태	잡저

骨相學上으로 본 朝鮮役軍의 얼골(第二回)
						裴相哲
富在一生 申錫雨

朝鮮日報 社長 申錫雨氏- 그는 글 한 줄 世上에서 어더 볼 수 업고 社長어른이라며 博士의 山ㅅ골 사둔 보담도 일홈엄는 從容스럽ㅅ게 處世하는 兩班이엇다.
원 엇더케 생긴 이가 以若 大 新聞의 社長의 地位로서 그러케 일홈이 博士 以上으로 世上에 傳聞되지 못햇는가. 퍽  궁거워 博士는 그가 或是 冠쓴 놈 德分에 尸位素餐으로 나잇게된 것이 안인가하고 그의 骨相을 똑바로 삷혀 보앗다. 缺課로, 그러코 그럿다곤 못할 人物임을 發見햇다.

魚中之鯉魚

우리 이 于蒼 申錫雨先生은 정말 物形論이 안이라 譬喩하자면 鯉魚 한가지다. 날이 조와 너무 감음이 繼續되면 鯉魚는 아조 젬병이다. 다른 陸上의 物은 支離한 霖雨를 시려함에 反하야 鯉魚는 장마비가 繼續되여야 洋洋히 得意하는 것이다. 와, 가티 于蒼氏는 治世보담 亂世가 適其時라. 조고만 못에 생긴 鯉魚가 뛰놀면 얼마나 뛰놀랴마는, 허나 大水만 지면 풀풀 꼬리를 치며 바다로도 갈 수 잇고 萬點의 銀鱗에 다시 造化의 ‘뿔을 어더 得天의 變改를 qhf수도 잇는 것이니, 저 澤出(못난, 못생긴)의<138> 송사리輩와 엇지 趣를 가티 할 바이랴? 허나, 只今 가믐이라놔서.-

多盧多疑又多量

于蒼氏는 요것도 하고 십고 저것도 하고 십고, 首相도 되여 보고 십고 名將도 되여 보고 십고, 功臣도 되여 보고 십고, 冠쓴 도모닷지(친구)를 金櫃속에서 假出獄을 식혀다가 5層洋屋도 지여보고 십고, 西伯利亞 너른 벌판과 東三省의 陳地까지라도 모조리 開墾을 식혀 큼직한 大村落을 만드러 노코, 別스러운 村長노릇도 해보고 십고 할 것이라. 왜 그러냐하면 그가 猴眼에 土局火體가 된 까닭이다. 남을 밋는 때에 無條件하고 미더 肝이라도 빼줄것이나(只今肝在腹中乎?) 空然이 疑心안할 곳에 만흔 疑心을 가질 것이 또한 病이니 그亦 猴眼의 所致이며 마음은 如干 急하잔어 來日할 것도 오늘 죄다 하고십고, 또박또박 따지며 느리게 구는 이하고는 말도 하기 실코, 거저, 얼는얼는, 시원시럽게하고 십흐니 그것은 뾰족한 邊城이 火體를 이뤗기 때문이다. 그러나 통은 크다, 고리 삭지근한 글作亂만하는 그런 澤出이들과는 大딴판이다. 따라서 博士와 가티 목걸니(막걸니)도 꽤 자실듯 십건만 이래면 또 博士 불너다노코 「勸君更進一盃酒하야 與爾同消萬古愁하리.」하며 한잔하자 하느니, 그러면 참말 걱정인걸, 아무따나-.

曲折과 波瀾만흔 過去

于蒼氏는 父母의 財産이 꽤 만타, 潤澤하고도 넓은 天庭이면 불눅한 兩輔角과 日月角을 보아 疑心업시 20時節에는 富者ㅅ집 도련님이란 말을 드럿슬 것이다. 허나 吉中에도 凶이 잇서서 16歲에서부터 29歲까지는 渡水越山하는 苦楚와 病厄, 災厄, 이 種種 그를 시달녀 주엇슬 것이며 수월찬은 口舌도 들엇슬 것이오. 밧가운대(田中이) 갈 번한 數가 1,2次나 되여 보인다. 참말 春秋時代에 조흐면서도 아조 신단지 한가지엿다. 大笑-.

富在一生貴霎時

氏의 六府와 五岳 매우 豐厚하야 得格되엿스며 兼하야 田字面이 되엿슨 즉 一生에 財物은 매우 豐足히 가지고 지낼 것이다. 적어도 大斗로 방망이질 안코 야마모리(高峰)로 쌀 1,000말式의 秋收는 無難할 것이니 썩 괜찬다. 더구나 地閣이 두툼하고 奴僕宮이 豐厚하니 還甲지내서는 수윌찬은 富累釣我地가 될 것이니 博士가튼 副奴(푸로) 書生도 쌀되나 좀 꾸어다 먹을는지 알 수가 업슬 것이다. 呵呵-.
그러나  氏는 貴가 片時에 不適하다. 格은 大貴格으로 되엿슨즉 녯날갓햇스면 領相의 자리를 3年間쯤 안께되여 일홈을 黃閣錄에 쓸것인데- 只今은 枕上에 눈을 감어야 領相이고 首相이고 되여 보다가 눈만 번ㅅ듯 뜨면 고만이니 그 안이 짧은 貴인가? 제-기 참!<139>

面大鼻小一生勞

무엇 무엇하야도 씨는 平生에 受苦가 꽤 만을 것이다. 벼슬해도 늘 몸이 밧부고 只今처럼 社長 어른노릇을 해도 남은 便한 줄 알지만 亦是 受苦가 만코 歸農을 해도 술명이 苦勞가 잇슬 것이니 그것은 얼골은 크고, 코는 좀 젹게 된 까닭이다.

達運窮運總一掬

氏는 今年 37歲이닛가 中陽(左目中)의 運이니 36,7,8,9까지 4年間 外富內貧의 格이며 無事多忙과 虛名無實의 數이다. 이 4年內에는 名譽는 害롭지 안으나 돈이 뒷꽁문이를 잘 치고 手下사람때문에 걱정이 만이 되는 數이며 家庭에 慶運과 悲事가 交雜한 運이니 부대 裵博士의 말을 虛廳치 勿하심을 伏望候也. 呵呵.
푸루족족한 입술이 꽤 무엇함즉 하시니(勿怒) 편안 安字에 간머리 뗀글자나 조을 好ㅅ字에 아들字 빼인 畫은 애여 갓가히 마시구려. 그로써 수월치안은 失敗를 보기 쉬우니- 48(準頭運), 49, 50. (竝蘭坮廷尉運)의 3年間은 아조 敗運이 잇서 每事不成이니 특이 말로 하자면 단단이 지바리 運이다.
55와 60運은 位極人臣이오 理陰陽順四時의 格이니 半島에 해가 따근따근 비최련가?
左上眉下에 거먹사마귀는 吉運을 像徵함이나 左上眉上에 黑子(거먹사마귀)는 客死를 豫示함이니, 빼내바리는 것이 無妨할 것이다. 壽는 70에 1이 不及이고 庭前, 寶樹는 3枝가 結實할 것이다.
-鮒魚只得四江月, 霹靈一聲到九天-

山虎海龍 安在鴻

民世(號) 安在鴻 그는 俊傑의 士엿다, 놉ㅅ다란 天庭은 天高의 意를 表햇고 조금 豐厚한 地閣는 地厚를 잘 말햇스나 하늘만 벗젹 놉허 그의 뜻만 크게 해 노코 貴만 보여주엇스나 그것을 밧을 따(地閣)이 조금 얇어 天意와 相符치 못하니 그것이 써 民世氏로 하여금 40男兒가 尙此得意치 못함을 미리 하느님이 만드러 주신 것이다. 하나 大器는 晩成이란 老子의 말도 이때 우리 處地로는 썩 慰安劑로 脾胃에 맛는 것이니 鴻鵠의 뜻이 在한 在鴻 氏야 더 말할ㅅ게 잇슬나구.
腦에 天下를 拘留식히고 胸에 四海를 注入할ㅅ듯한 民世氏는 駸駸有食牛之量이람 보담 世上을 悶惘이 녁이는 氣分이 眉間에 떠보이니 아마 民世란 號는 悶世의 誤稱이 안이면 그의 變音인지? 허건 말건 그야 任其自裁려니와 可惜한 것은 山根이 (眉下鼻上) 深陷되여 노와서 祖業을 自己손으로 깡그리 處分할 것이고<140> 兄弟間의 綠과 親戚의 도음이 아조 제로이고, 또 아들도 일즉 두면 慘慽을 볼 수가 잇스며 妻德도 젹ㅅ고 疾厄도 더러 잇슬 것이다.
先生의 코는 失禮지만 가재군 것 以上으로 붉다. 氏의 말에 어러서 그럿타고는 하더라만은 相法에 코는 土星인 바. 흙우에 불이(紅色) 잇스면 萬物이 不生이라고 하지안엇나 하닛간 人爲거나 天作이거나 數는 數대로 때우는 것이니 48歲 運에 冠쓴 親舊와 絶交地境이 되여 꽤 헛심켈 것이다.
木局水禮에 鼻孔이 廣大하니 大度量이 잇는 丈夫로서 속에 궁그릴 性이 만으며 다시 耳門이 廣濶하니 智慧와 才操도 무던할 것이며 녯젹에 타고 낫스면 10年 獨相에 兼하야 文武兼全할 것인데, 그러나 지금이라고 그가 決코 困할 것은 안이다. 氏는 將來 大運이 올것이니 그가 47,8,9의 3年間 단단이 지바리 運이 지내면 衆人이 仰視할 地位에 잇슬것이다, 그리고 그는 늘 남의 手上노릇을 할지언정 部下는 안될 相이니 이것이 곳 在山爲虎요 在海爲龍格이다, 그러면 博士가 그의게 改名을 하시라고 申請해 보고 십다. 在鴻이라 하지 말고 在虎나 在龍이라고 하라고-.
氏의 印堂과 中庭이 小陷하고 八字紋이 잇슴을 보아 그가 25와 28頃에 困厄이 잇섯슴을 짐작하겟스나 (여, 안마지면 랑팬걸) 그것으로 慷慨의 士가 됨도 알겟고 또 末運에 達運이 當來할 것도 짐작하겟스며 紅白한 面이 그 局體에 相生이 되니 57,8에 龍이 金角을 이룬 數이니 大成功의 해가 그때 일 것이다. (조와라!)
子宮은 잘하야 3兄弟(外房에도 잇슴즉 하지만) 富로는 祖業은 自手로 消費하고 다시 自手로 百石쯤 밧게 못할 것이며 壽는 젹어도 70歲는 살 것이다. 法令으로 보면 80上壽이나 귀가 아래가 조금 빠러서 多少減少될 것이기 때문에-.

醉찬코 못살 世上이니.
金罍를 잔질하야 土星(코)을 붉혓노라!

土星 한번 붉은 제 오래엿만 휠 줄을 모르오니.
이 나라 이 따에 이다지도 金罍가 만턴가.

黃河도 희려든 土星이라 붉기만 하랴!
싸코싼는 功든 塔 문어지지 안느니... ... .
(博士는 삼가 비노니...)

無髥公의 申興雨

수염이란 도모지 한 개가 업서 언듯보면 20以內의 靑年갓해 보이는 申興雨氏는 젊어서 엽분 사외 어덧다는 稱讚을<141> 그의 丈母夫人ㅅ게 여러 번 들녀 주웟슬 듯해 보인다 만은 只今은 오그락 쪼그락 주름살이 잡히고 보니 그亦 녯꿈이엿스리라. 氏의 나이 只今 48歲라면 그대지 주름 잡혀 보임은 암만 보아도 鬚髥업는 탓이지, 아마-.
아무따나 그는 그럿타 해두고 骨相이나 評해보자.
우숙부숙한 얼골은 宋鎭雨氏의 얼골빗에 잇는 劫氣를 聯想케하니 아마도 그것이 밧가온데(田中) 다니는 殺氣지!
水體土聲에 面長(區長의 長官은 안이오)이 되고도 동고스름하니 鐵道판에를 設或 간다하더라도 什長하나는 할 것이지만 수염이란 相書에 陽氣의 代表이니만치, 수염이 업서 陽氣가 업슨즉 陰曆을 쓰는 녯날에 낫스면 參奉하나 參與못할 相이니 참말 참혹할ㅅ번한 相이다. (陰은 陽을 求하기 때문에)
氏는 아조 色에는 점잔할 것이다.(反對나 안될지 모르지만...) 웨 그런고 하니 그, 앗가 말한 수염 고것이 업기 때문에, 하나 萬若 博士말이 안마즈면 氏는 속으로 「흥, 이누못지(犬ノ餠)=개떡」도 모르는 녀석이 空然이 觀相본다고 무얼 엇지구, 엇재...」하며 빙그레- 혼자 우서 보렷다.
氏의 얼골은 財物은 단단히 모흘 相이여, 아마 벼 578石은 秋收해 볼걸 準頭가 豐圓하고 五岳과 六府가 缺함이 업스니 財福이 잇스며 他人의 德도 만히 볼 것이오. 또 心相도 착하고 입이 수염의 가로것칠 게 업스니 말하기도 성가시지 안어 口辯조차 조흘 것이다.(그래 雄辯家가 되엿남.) 하지만 10以內에 2,3次 厄運이 如干되지 안엇슬 것이니 그는 無髥에 다가 淚堂의 井紋(눈아래)때문이다.
氏의 얼골은 벼슬은 어려우나 名譽는 平生에 조흘 것이며 壽도 70歲는 無難할 것이니, 그만하면 上相이라고 하지 안을 수 업다. 따님도 몃 분 두실 것이고 잘하면 아들도 두실 듯하지만.- 고만.
(더 쓸내야 今月號에 申氏가 두 分이여서「申シワケガナイ」여서)

하느님이여! 당신의 아들은 「求하라. 곳 바들 것이오. 두다리라. 곳 열니리라.」 너의 福音을 只今도 읇흐나니.

이 아들들의 求함을 許諾하소서! 오 父와 子와 聖神이여! 아-멘-.

米米千萬의 金美理士 女士

博士가 汗出沾背

米米千萬이라면 讀者는 語義를 몰너 눈을 두리번거릴 것이다. 때문에 簡單한 解釋을 붓치는 것이니 金栢谷脚下肉走四寸格의<142> 文字에 讀者는 우슴치다 배ㅅ곱이 危險하리라.?
『후넹아 고메고메이다이(舟ガ米米痛イ)』하면 博士마냥 「배가 쌀쌀 압흐다.」는 말로 病드러(아러) 먹을 것이다. 그러면 더 解釋할 必要가 업지만 참말 米米한 秋風이 도는 美理士 女史엿다, 어듸 좀 그의 骨相, 안이 訪問記를 드러보자!
博士는 못처럼 婦人을 尋訪하려 가는 길인지라 그의 門ㅅ間을 채 못미처서붓험 나는 面鏡을 懷中에서 3,4次나 남모르게 꺼내여 或是 博士의 얼골에 때나 안 끼엿나, 눈꼽이나 잇지 안은가?하여 冶容을 해가며, 一邊 마음으로는 「흥 婦人이닛가 막걸니는 안 주어도 엇저면 차(茶)盃이나 어더 먹으렷다.」하는 김치국부터 마시는 格의 慾心을 먹음ㅅ고 가장 점잔과 操心을 다 해가며 槿花 女學校에로 金美理士氏를 차저 가지 안엇겟나,
가든 날이 장날이라고 막 그는 沐浴을 가셋다고 하겟지, 도로 나오기도 무엇하고 해서 事務室 한 구석에서 안저 기다리게 되엿겟다. 엇던 낫모르는 來客 하나하고-.
건너便 校室에서는 「피아노」타는 소리가 터저 나온다. 18,9歲쯤되여 보이는 處女의 손을 것처 떨여나오는 「멜로듸」는 無聊히 안즌 박사에게 如干 慰安을 주지 안엇다. 더구나 廳之無禁이니「娥歌氏여! 바라건대 기-리 타주소서.」구렁이가튼 博士의 心祝이 끗나자 娥歌氏는 唱歌와 兼唱을 햇다. 야시럽시 害롭지 안타하고 博士는 눈을 스르르 감는 瞬間에 『드르륵-』영窓열니는 소리가 난다. 美理士氏다.
博士는 名啣을 갓다밧첫겟다. 일로부터 領南親舊 말마따나 「이바구」(이약이)가 開始.
金 「웨 왓쏘.」(名啣을 들고본다.)
博 「先生ㅅ게서 敎育에 하도 熱心하세서 고맙다는 뜻으로 뵙고 가려고 일부러 왓슴니다.」
金  「이리로 오시오.」(自己椅子 압헤 조고만 椅子를 노코 밧ㅅ작 오라고 한다.)
博  「녜, 괜찬슴니다.」
金  「난 귀먹어서 크게 하야 아러드러요.」
『오- 미미오다베다까(オー耳ヲ食ベタカ?)』博士는 혼자 이가티 生覺하고 절에 간 색시뻔나게 命令服從 至上主義로 엄연이 그 압헤 밧작 닥어안자 來意를 말햇다. 한즉, 그는 名啣을 반짝 드러보앗다. 테불우에 노코 또다시 반짝 들어 삷혀보다 테불에 노코하기를 에누리 붓처 일곱 번 半-.
金 「그래 말슴하시오.」
『나원 이런 제-기 거저 말하는 사람보고도 이러케 是非를 請하는 것 뻔나게 하실 게 잇나. 』博士令監은 그만 등에서 땀이 날 지경이엿다. 하도 魂이 나서 博士는 「에그 무서 짐싸자.」하고 발ㅅ길을 도리키려고 하며 다시 그 骨相을 한번 삶혀본 바 이러햇다.
深目(웅어눈이) 斑面이 되엿스니 米米(쌀쌀)할 것은 定理이나 意志가 굿은 女丈夫일것도 疑心업시 알겟다.<143>
얼골은 그리 늙어 보이든 안하나 아모리 보아도 52,3은 되여 보엿스며 키는 조고만하고 허리는 花花(꼿꼿하여)하여 女子의 功名이 一世에 冠할 것도 天定의 事로 볼 수 잇섯다.
머리는 곱수머리 소리는 鐵聲, 아이고 아모리 보아도 冷情하실 듯 하외다 그려. (그저그럿타고 推測하는 말이니 空然이 또 怒여는 마세요.) 兼하야 오곳한 齒牙가 堅密하고 人中이 深長하니 事業成功도 잘하시련니와 壽도 못 사러야 78,9는 사실 것이다, 요만치만-. (寫眞은 金氏 少時적 것)

慷慨滿面의 申알뱃트 女士

博士가 養賢女校로 申알뱃트 女史 안이 女士를 차저갓겟다.
「申先生님 게심닛가?」
「어서 오셋슴닛가?」
「전 積善洞서 왓슴니다. 申先生님 좀 暫間 뵈일 일이 잇서 왓스니 未安하지만 좀 面會 좀 식혀 주십세요.」口辯엄는 博士는 이러케 뭇뜩 잘너 말을 한즉 그 老婆는 待合室로 引導를 하고 來意를 듯는다. 나는 앗참 博士는 來意를 말하면서도 속으로 「건방진 老婆, 自己따님이 申先生인지는 모르지만 여러 잔말말고 말이나 傳해주면 조치만 웨 곰파뭇긴 무러.」이러케 生覺하고 다시
「申校長先生님 안 게심닛가.」하고 무럿다.
「제가 申알벳트올시다.」 야 이게 무슨 말이냐. 開門人是閉門人이라더니 곰파뭇는 老婆가 申女士일줄이야. 博士 엇지 꿈에나 뜻햇스랴? 나이는 35,6歲, 연지볼이 아직 붉으래하고 말소리는 알곰삼삼하면서도 참불 나러가는 소리갓해 보이는 어른이렷다.」生覺하고 잇든 博士 豫想과는 아조 距離가 千里萬里- 그가 申先生이라 말에 博士는 다시 謝過를 드리고 두리는 一時大笑!
申알벳트씨, 그이는 다시 떠더보니 정말 훌륭한 骨相의 所有者엿다.
이마는 뾰족하야 男便宮에 生離別이 업스면 死離別이라도 잇서 보이지만 새별가티 빗나는 瞳子는 足히 智慧 聰明한 女士임을 잘 말하며 박속가튼 이(齒)와 안으로 오곳하고도 기다란 法令이며 오모다대한 얼골에 조고만 입은 多情, 多恨과 慷慨의 懷가 잇서 보이며, 더욱 맑은 얼골속에는 世上物慾이 적어 보이는 女中君子엿섯다.
그가 只今 52歲라는 中老의 年에 드럿서도, 아직 팽팽한 皮臂에 저가티 온갓 美를 兼햇거든 萬若 그의 2,30時代에는 可謂 아름다운 容貌에 聰慧를 兼한 婦人이엇슴으로 알 수 잇스니 그의 過去에는 참말 錦上添花엿슬 것이다. 그의 3停을 보면<144> 過去뿐안이라 未來 60運에 가서는 巨富의 名을 當然이 드를 數가 잇스며 65에는 衆人의 推仰을 밧을 數가 잇스니 或是 女子도 조흔 바람이 부러 代議士노릇을 하게 되는 때가 올는지!
女史의 얼골은 水局金體여 돈은 벌기도 쉽지만 쓰기가 더 쉬워서 물흐르듯 절절 흐르는 셈이고 남에게 積善도 만이 할 것이나 功이 젹은 數이며 家庭的으로는 樂이 多少 적을 것이다. 내의 親아들이 업고 남의 아들이 만을 八字니 중되라는 八字인가, 只今 先生이시니 弟子가 만탄 말인가. 궁거워서 博士는 그의게 只今 子弟와 게심닛가하고 시침을 떼고 무른즉 「안이오. 나의 家庭이야기는 新聞에 한번 仔細이 낫슴넨다.」말슴만 하시니 아모리 記憶力이 조흔 博士기로 못본 新聞까지야 記憶할 수 잇서야지, 呵呵.
壽는 83歲의 長壽니 아직 活動하실 날이 만소구려!

비 支離한 장마비.
뜰압헤 핀 한 가지의 무궁화꼿을 녹여내나니.

검이어 이 홀목이 가는 홀목이
꼿붓돗기에 피흐름을 모르나닛가.

녹이고 녹여도 뿌리는 못녹이나니
묵은 뿌리 明年에 또다시 싹틀 줄 압소서.<145>
<138-145>