**Header Section:**
Magazine Title	三千理 第八巻 第八號
Publication Date	1936년 08월 01일
Article Title	「安昌浩論」의 再批判, 中央日報에 난 印貞植 對 朱耀翰 論爭을 보고 (A Re-critique of the "An Ch'angho Discourse," Observing the In Chŏngsik vs. Chu Yohan Debate in the Chungang Ilbo)
Author	元世勳
Article Type	論說 (Editorial/Critique)

**Body Text Translation:**

A Re-critique of the "An Ch'angho Discourse," Observing the In Chŏngsik vs. Chu Yohan Debate in the Chungang Ilbo
						By Wŏn Sehun

In the academic section of the Chungang Ilbo, under the title "An Ch'angho Discourse" (安昌浩論), Mr. In Chŏngsik's (印貞植) thesis was serialized for ten days, and Mr. Chu Yohan's (朱耀翰) article refuting Mr. In's argument was also serialized for three days, drawing some attention from those who have had even a brief acquaintance with Mr. An (An Ch'angho). (Photo shows Mr. Chu Yohan on the right, Mr. In Chŏngsik on the left)

As someone who could be said to have had connections with Mr. An, and indeed, one of those who could be called close to him, I read it relatively more carefully than I would character studies of other people.

However, Mr. In's discourse on Mr. An generally gives the impression of being excessively lengthy while containing little substance in its actual content.

Furthermore, Mr. In's view of Mr. An, treating him as an extremely extraordinary figure from beginning to end, makes it difficult for the reader to agree with Mr. In's satirical and derisive methods. On the other hand, it evokes a sense of disappointment, as if Mr. In had high expectations for Mr. An, which Mr. An failed to meet.

Moreover, Mr. In discussed Mr. An by comparing his achievements and role to those of Fukuzawa Yukichi (福澤諭吉) in mainland Japan and Wang Jingwei (汪兆銘) in China, but this seems to be an argument stemming from a lack of detailed knowledge of Mr. An's cultivation and courage.<50> Both Mr. Fukuzawa and Mr. Wang originally possessed deep scholarly cultivation, and Mr. Wang, furthermore, was even an assassin at one time. However, Mr. An lacked somewhat in these aspects due to his era and environment. Also, the place, time, and audience that Mr. Fukuzawa and Mr. Wang addressed were almost entirely opposite to those of Mr. An, so how could their achievements and roles possibly be the same!

Regardless, the several years around the time of the Russo-Japanese War (日露戰爭), until he composed "I Am Leaving" (나는간다) and departed Chosŏn (Korea), likely constituted the golden, peak era of Mr. An's life. It is this Mr. An, introduced to the populace during this period, about whom Mr. In wrote his character study and Mr. Chu offered his rebuttal.

Mr. In, discussing Mr. An's time abroad, stated, "While lighting the beacon of education when Chosŏn was asleep was certainly a progressive endeavor, the fact that he continued to repeat the empty cultural rhetoric of education-omnipotence, even going to China, despite the populace having already awakened and grown enough to demand something else, was certainly nothing more than a kind of Buddhist chant (염불)."

Regarding this statement, setting aside the rightness or wrongness of the theory, I must point out a discrepancy in fact. Namely, Mr. An left Chosŏn, temporarily resided in China and the Russian Maritime Province (露領沿海州), then crossed over to America (美國), spending a long period there until before the March First Movement (己未). Therefore, the claim that he repeated education-omnipotence or cultural movements in China contradicts the facts. Even considering his time in Shanghai (上海) after the March First Movement, there was no scope or stage to repeat education-omnipotence; at most, there might have been times he spoke of cultural movements in private conversations. (Photo shows Mr. An Ch'angho)

If that is the case, even if Mr. In's argument was taken up for the sake of that 'something' demanded by the times and the populace, it can be said that he failed to establish a correct factual basis for his argument.

Then, Mr. In, developing his discourse on Mr. An further, discussed based on the premise of a rumor (風聞) that he (Mr. An) often whispered into the ears of youths speaking the Northwestern (西北) dialect, "The greatest enemy of the Northwestern people are the people of South Chosŏn (南朝鮮人)," concluding, <51> "Then he (Mr. An) must have committed a grave error, enough that he cannot escape the public ridicule of being a despicable instigator of regional fervor (地方熱) and a cursed reactionary symbol." Thus, he asserted that Mr. An bore the fault of allowing such rumors to be heard.

Again, Mr. In, in the 8th installment of his thesis, stated, "On one hand, the so-called Kwansŏ faction (關西派) of the Tosan (島山 - An Ch'angho's pen name) clique lacked the magnanimity and reason to fully develop the natural class hatred and deep-seated animosity of the Kwansŏ populace towards the yangban (兩班) gentry of South Chosŏn along the democratic line of eradicating the yangban gentry. Instead, they were preoccupied solely with transforming this into a regional feud between South Chosŏn and Kwansŏ, exploiting the ignorant regional fervor of the foolish to establish their own political base. On the other hand, the so-called Kihŏ faction (畿湖派) of the Yi Sŭngman (李承晩) clique, even more despicably, exploited the foolish arrogance and narrow-minded pride of the South Chosŏn yangban gentry towards the Kwansŏ people, similarly preoccupied with forming a political base centered on the Kihŏ region. Was this not the case?"

In response to this attack by Mr. In on Mr. An, Mr. Chu rebutted, stating, "Mr. In most carelessly uses the term 'regional fervor' (地方熱), which is Mr. In's greatest error in perception and the sole point upon which I condemn his thesis." He then prefaced, "I say this term 'regional fervor' is both an unidentified monster of Chosŏn society for the past 40 years and a goblin (독갑이) that tormented Tosan throughout his life," and vehemently argued that Mr. An was not an instigator of regional fervor. On the contrary, he definitively asserted that Mr. An was "the opposite of a promoter of regional fervor." He claimed that if anyone were to call Mr. An someone with regional fervor, it would be malicious propaganda (惡宣傳) and slander (中傷), attributing the fact that Mr. An heard such things to false rumors stemming from the slanderous machinations of opposing factions. He insisted that regional fervor itself is fundamentally like a goblin—mere empty rumor (虛傳) and not reality (實在).

Furthermore, Mr. Chu criticized Mr. In for using rumors (風聞) as material for his argument. Not only that, Mr. Chu argued that anything currently referred to by others as regional fervor is, in reality, not regional fervor but merely a kind of malicious document (怪文書) or rumor (謠言). He stated, "It is necessary to pay some attention to stop the rampant spread of these malicious documents and rumors."

"First, be wary of those who point fingers at others, calling them promoters of regional fervor; such people invariably harbor some ulterior motive.
Second, strive to understand the character, habits, and temperament of people from other provinces.<52>
Third, contrary to the second point, in any enterprise or institution, it is natural for people from the same hometown to trust each other (recognize this as due to shared sentiment and knowing each other's roots well) and refrain from criticizing it.
Fourth, in business institutions like schools, newspaper companies, corporations, etc., the principle is for those who trust each other most to work together. Idealistic pan-provincialism covering all 13 provinces (13道 網羅主義) is impossible unless it's an assembly, and even if possible, acknowledge that it is inefficient." He called attention to these points, totaling six items.

Regarding the arguments presented above by Messrs. In and Chu—whether Mr. An was a promoter of regional fervor or not—the general readership likely has its own considerable views, but I find points in both arguments difficult to accept. The alleged words of Mr. An quoted by Mr. In, "The Kihŏ people (畿湖人) are the enemies of the Northwestern people (西北人)," are likely complete rumor and fabrication (僞造). If one bases an argument primarily on such rumors and fabrications, it is difficult for anyone to accept that argument. Why do I call this statement rumor and fabrication? Having spent several decades abroad where regional factional strife (地方熱的 派爭) was said to be severe, I have some understanding of the reality of regional factionalism. No matter how pathologically affected someone might be by regional fervor, for the sake of their own reputation and strategy, they would not have been able to say to the youth of their region or anyone else, "People from X province are the enemies of our province's people." However, it might be considered factual that some people did say things like, "We are unable to unite regionally, but people from X province have formed a regional clique (地方黨) and oppose us, which is truly worrying," thereby implicitly inciting their own people to form a regional faction by mentioning the regional cliques of others. But the assertion that Mr. An directly instigated regional fervor by saying with his own mouth, "The Kihŏ people are the enemies of the Northwestern people," is likely rumor and fabrication.

Next, Mr. Chu's theory that regional fervor is an empty rumor like a goblin and lacks reality is also difficult to accept. If the majority of people from the Western provinces (西道 - likely P'yŏngan) followed An Ch'angho as their leader and adhered to his views, the majority of people from the Kihŏ region followed Yi Sŭngman as their leader and adhered to his views, and the majority of people from the Northern provinces (北道 - likely Hamgyŏng) followed Yi Tonghwi (李東輝) as their leader and adhered to his views, then besides naming this phenomenon 'regional cliques' (地方黨), there would be no other appropriate term.

Therefore, I would rather say that people from Kwansŏ, Kwanbuk (關北 - Hamgyŏng), and Kihŏ all formed regional cliques in the past, and urge that from today onwards, they should unite solely based on their respective principles and ideologies, and cease forming regional alliances (野合).<53>

Based on what I have seen and heard, although Mr. An spoke out and cried out against regional cliques anytime and anywhere, he received just as much criticism as others for being a promoter of regional fervor. Although Mr. An claimed he did not engage in factional strife and was busy mediating others' fights, he himself became involved to some extent in various disputes, making his excuses seem rather pitiable and futile. Things that exist only in words do not disappear just by saying they don't exist, nor do things that don't exist come into being just by claiming they do; only the reality manifests itself as it is. Rather than digging through old book pages, let's open new ones. There is no need to vehemently deny what existed in the past, but more importantly, correcting past mistakes as they are discovered seems the wisest path forward.

Furthermore, there are points in the arguments of both Mr. In and Mr. Chu that raise further doubts. Mr. In argued regarding the so-called Sŏdo faction (西道派) of the Tosan clique, lamenting that they failed to develop the natural class hatred and animosity of the Kwansŏ populace towards the South Chosŏn yangban gentry along the democratic line of eradicating the yangban gentry, instead transforming it into a regional feud. At first glance, this seems plausible, but there's a point where it falters. What is it? South Chosŏn (南鮮地方) was not entirely inhabited by yangban; in every nook and cranny, at various times, the number of commoners (常民) groaning directly under the oppression of the yangban was no less than the number of people oppressed by governors (守令) and magistrates (方伯) in the Western region (西鮮地方). And even in the Western region, while perhaps not yangban, local gentry (土班) existed everywhere. If so, one should rather criticize the failure to strive for a class-based division between yangban and commoners throughout all of Chosŏn (全鮮), rather than criticizing the failure to form a battlefront by categorizing South Chosŏn entirely as yangban and West Chosŏn entirely as commoners. This gives the appearance that Mr. In himself, while attacking regional fervor, became regionalistic. Not only that, Mr. In continued his argument below, saying, "The so-called Kihŏ faction (畿湖派) of the Yi Sŭngman clique was even more despicable than this," thereby distinguishing between similar regional factions by labeling Yi Sŭngman's Kihŏ faction as "more despicable" than An Ch'angho's Sŏdo faction. This distinction is easily susceptible to misunderstanding, even by those not wearing colored glasses. Taking it a step further, what is the reason for using Mr. An's pen name, Tosan clique (島山一派), while not using Mr. Yi's pen name for his clique? This might be Mr. In's oversight rather than an intentional distinction.

Next, regarding Mr. Chu's argument, I wish to address one point. He stated, "In any enterprise or institution, recognize it as natural for people from the same hometown to trust each other and refrain from criticizing it." And again,<54> "In business institutions like schools, newspaper companies, corporations, etc., the principle is for those who trust each other most to gather and work together. Idealistic pan-provincialism covering all 13 provinces is impossible unless it's an assembly, and even if possible, acknowledge that it is inefficient." He presented this as a necessary point of attention to counter the spread of malicious documents called "empty-rumor regional fervor." This is difficult to accept. Why? In any enterprise or institution, the standard for mutual trust should solely be whether it benefits or aids the enterprise or institution itself, even if customs and tastes do not align. It is not necessarily true that people from the same hometown trust each other, nor that people from other hometowns are untrustworthy. Particularly in sectors like education (schools), media (newspaper companies), and business (companies), Mr. Chu's assertion that it is the principle for the most trusted hometown people to gather and work together, and that involving people from all provinces is impossible, or inefficient even if possible, cannot go unchallenged.

Regarding this, without needing lengthy explanation, in the Wha Sin Department Store (和信百貨店), the business institution where Mr. Chu himself currently serves, it is likely that not only people from P'yŏngan Province (平安道) work together, but also people from Tokyo (東京) and Osaka (大阪) are employed for efficiency, and there are likely Seoul (서울) maidens and youths from other regions as well. If even a profit-seeking department store operates this way, it is difficult to find grounds for the argument that in fields like education or media, work must be done exclusively by people from the same hometown to be efficient, and mixing with people from other provinces leads to inefficiency. According to Mr. Chu's logic, various schools and prominent newspaper companies currently in Seoul would have to consist solely of people from one specific province to become more efficient than they are now.

In my opinion, unless it is my personal household affair, for undertakings in education, media, or business, it is most efficient to select personnel based on suitability for the task, transcending regional ties (鄕黨). Furthermore, if things proceed according to Mr. Chu's words, every enterprise and institution would gather only people from one region, and the result, no matter how much Mr. Chu denies it being regional factionalism, would surely risk the formation of distinct regional factions (地方的 派黨).

Now, returning to Mr. In's "An Ch'angho Discourse," he expressed considerable disappointment not so much with the past Mr. An but with the present Mr. An. Discussing and dissecting Mr. An's speech delivered to the employees at the Wha Sin Department Store, he remarked, "Even if his (Mr. An's) salvationist assertion is that all working <55> masses must willingly sacrifice body and mind to build Korean commerce and industry, our wise An Tosan surely could not have been unaware that the appropriate venue for such words is in private conversations with millionaire shop owners or at their gatherings. In front of these employees, who sell their youthful labor because they lack even a single penny, for An Tosan, of all people, to go around praising commerce and industry and lauding the virtues of the shop owner—surely Tosan must also know that such people are common in the world."

He lamented, "Why then did Tosan, who surely had much to say, choose to speak only the most unseemly words out of all the things he could have said?" He also mentioned hearing the employees who heard his speech angrily骂 (怒罵 - Chinese: nùmà, meaning curse angrily) Tosan as a "frivolous fellow" and consequently burst into laughter (哄笑). Thus, this aspect of Mr. An's Wha Sin Department Store speech, discussed in Mr. In's critique of An, is news newly conveyed to us, and the lamentation and laughter cannot be deemed unreasonable. Mr. Chu, being one of the executives (幹部) of that company and likely knowing the inside reasons for having Mr. An give that speech, had the need and even the duty to clearly explain this point if he wished to defend Mr. An. Yet, Mr. Chu offered not a single word about it, instead engaging in irrelevant responses (問東答西格 - lit. asking east, answering west). Mr. Chu was preoccupied only with defending Mr. An by claiming that past labels like "manipulator" (手腕家), "schemer" (陰謀家), and "ambitious man" (野心家) misunderstood and slandered Mr. An, arguing that scheming and maneuvering were distant from Mr. An's character, and that he advocated and practiced faithfulness (信義) and straightforwardness (率直).

To prove the correctness of his own assertions, Mr. Chu cited an example: "It is a famous story that when he (Mr. An) was in OO, Han Someone (韓某) brought OO million won from OOO, intending to entrust it to him, but he refused, saying, 'That money came from the OO government, so I cannot accept it.' Consequently, Mr. Wŏn OO (元OO), who had urged him to use the money, exclaimed, 'What madman called Tosan ambitious?' and distanced himself from Tosan—this is also true. And later, that faction, having no choice, had Mr. Na OO (羅OO) lie that different money had arrived from Kyŏngsŏng (京城 - Seoul) and gave a portion of that money to Tosan to use—this is also true." Thus, he emphasized Mr. An's lack of ambition and his straightforwardness.

Based on these old book pages Mr. Chu refers to, can Mr. An truly be considered a man of Daoist virtue (道學者)? Were the old book pages Mr. Chu mentioned indeed factual? No. They are old book pages far removed from the facts. The claim that Mr. An refused to accept the money Han Someone brought, saying, "It came from the OO government, so I (Mr. An) cannot accept it," is a complete misunderstanding.<56> At that time, Han Someone had no intention of entrusting that money to anyone. There was no prior intimacy, trust (信交), or anything else between them that would have led Han Someone to entrust the money to Mr. An. Even assuming, hypothetically, the non-fact as fact, if Han Someone had entrusted the money to Mr. An, how could the supposedly loyal Mr. An not have accepted the money and returned it to the OO government? Was this also because Mr. An's Daoist-like straightforward conscience and faithfulness did not permit it?

And Mr. Chu stated it as fact that Mr. Wŏn OO, who had urged Mr. An to use the money Han Someone offered, upon seeing Mr. An refuse the money, exclaimed, "What madman called Tosan ambitious?" and distanced himself from Tosan. However, as long as the Mr. Wŏn who said those words at the time, Mr. An who heard them, and several other people are still alive, Mr. Chu cannot arbitrarily misrepresent the situation to portray Mr. An as a man of virtue while making others appear ambitious. There were roughly four factions seeking to have Han Someone give them the money to use.

First, the OOOO government side; second, the OO Party side; third, the OO Group side; and fourth, the OO Representative Meeting Preparatory Committee side. At that time, Han Someone was adamant that he could not give the money to any single faction and would offer it to the OO Representative Meeting once a unified body was established. Mr. Chu sweepingly claims Mr. Wŏn urged Mr. An to use the money. However, when Mr. Wŏn urged Mr. An regarding the money, it was not to suggest that Mr. Wŏn or Mr. An use it privately. Rather, at a time when Mr. An, Mr. Wŏn, and various other factions had long agreed to convene the OO Representative Meeting but lacked the funds, the proposal from many was to use some of that money to convene the meeting first. It is true that Mr. An alone insisted that not a single penny from that money could be used. Now, to state nicely the underlying reason why Mr. An insisted the money could not be used for convening the meeting, it could be called Mr. An's loyalty (忠義) to the OOO government. To state it according to Mr. Wŏn's perspective, Mr. An's refusal stemmed not so much from loyalty but from a lack of courage to bear the criticism of convening the meeting with that money, and from a difference in interpretation. Based on this, Wŏn did say, "Who called Tosan a builder of regional cliques? He's not even capable of building a regional clique. Go back to the mainland (內地 - Korea) and be a school principal!"

Using those words spoken by Mr. Wŏn, substituting "ambitious man" (野心家) for the phrase "builder of regional cliques" (地方黨을 짓는다), Mr. Chu made it sound like Mr. An was not ambitious, while Mr. Wŏn and others were, causing misunderstanding depending on the listener.<57> Since the topic came up, let me quote a few more lines from the old book pages (묵은 冊¼µ)! Although I feel somewhat apologetic towards Tosan due to our friendship (親誼), since Mr. Chu brought it up first, I am compelled to speak. Last summer, sometime, Tosan and I had a long talk at a certain restaurant. Tosan asked three things of me: "Don't drink alcohol, get a regular job, don't fight." I also expressed several hopes to Tosan, among which was the phrase, "Don't build regional cliques." Tosan replied, "Ch'ungok (春谷 - Wŏn Sehun's pen name), don't you know well that I am incapable of building regional cliques? You told me to go back to the mainland and be a primary school principal; now I've come to the mainland, but it seems I don't even qualify for that!" he said, laughing jokingly.

Now, Mr. An himself tries to use the few passing words I spoke in Shanghai about Tosan lacking courage (憺力) as evidence that he doesn't build regional cliques, and Mr. Chu tries to use them as evidence that Mr. An is not ambitious. I cannot help but be amazed that my few words have such great effect (功効). If, by quoting my words, they serve as evidence that Mr. An doesn't build regional cliques and isn't ambitious, thereby erasing the labels "regional clique builder" and "ambitious man" attached to Mr. An, how wonderful that would be! Even if the original intention of my words is buried, would it be such a great loss to me? But what effect will those words actually have?

Furthermore, another point to mention regarding Mr. Chu's evidence: "The faction that distanced themselves from Tosan had Mr. Na lie that different money had arrived from Kyŏngsŏng and gave a portion of that money to Mr. An to use, which is also true." This statement by Mr. Chu, intended to defend Mr. An, ends up portraying Mr. An merely as someone who refused to use money intended for open and honest use but accepted money acquired through lies. Mr. Chu! Understand clearly! It wasn't that Mr. Wŏn distanced himself from Mr. An; rather, because their intentions did not align, they parted ways, and Mr. Wŏn, together with the entire OO Meeting Preparatory Committee (OO會議籌備會委員), decisively proceeded to convene the meeting using some of that money. Eventually, Mr. An, knowing the details, ended up working together with them—that is the fact. And the claim that "it is also true that a portion of the money was given to Mr. An to use" is factually incorrect. Even if some expenses for convening the meeting passed through Mr. An's hands, those were expenditures of the Preparatory Committee side, not Mr. An's usage—that is the fact. Evidence contrary to fact fails to produce the expected effect and instead causes harm. If the attempt to defend Tosan only causes him unintentional, factually incorrect misunderstandings,<58> should this not be handled with great care?

Both Mr. In and Mr. Chu incorporated the Hŭngsadan (興士團) and Tonguhoe (友會) into their discussions of Mr. An. I don't feel the need to speak at length about this, but suffice it to say that Mr. In, prefacing that he was examining "Tosan-ism" (島山이슴), introduced its principles and then offered little critique, instead discussing the past actions of the organizations' influential members: Mr. Lee So-and-so couldn't forget his wife's backside (궁둥이), betrayed his comrades (同志), and secretly returned to Chosŏn from Shanghai; someone else preaches the gospel in church; another earns a large salary developing the commerce and industry advocated by Tosan in a large store; another writes sentimental novels (軟泒小說) to relieve the boredom of leisured madams (有閑매담); another became a doctor and does something or other; another runs a rubber factory and faced a strike (스트락이) for refusing workers' wage increases (賃金引上), etc. He discussed these things as if "Tosan-ism" itself was the source that produced such individuals. Mr. Chu, in response, merely offered excuses that the Hŭngsadan and Tonguhoe were not regional cliques and not political organizations, but solely self-cultivation groups (修養團體), again engaging in irrelevant responses.

In any case, the actions of the main members of these groups are their individual actions, and blaming Mr. An severely for them seems excessive. The excuse that Hŭngsadan is not a regional clique is one made not only by Mr. Chu today but also by Mr. An frequently, everywhere. However, the public has come to recognize Hŭngsadan merely as the organization of Mr. An's Western region clique, rendering the excuses futile, which must be frustrating for them.

If that is the case, why do they desperately try to continue these groups, which have long been branded as regional cliques, instead of completely disbanding them? Does this not intensify public criticism? Within my knowledge, similar groups receiving such criticism existed in various regions but have all disappeared, leaving only the Hŭngsadan, led by Mr. An, remaining. Therefore, on this occasion, I want to advise Mr. An, "Better to disband that organization!" However, I worry that these words of mine are likely useless.

Finally, I wish to mention an example of Mr. In placing inappropriate expectations (不相適한 期待) and making unreasonable demands (無理한 注文) on Mr. An. Mr. In stated that Mr. An claimed not to be a Christian believer,<59> but not many days later, he saw Mr. An accompanying someone to church (예배당) to listen to a sermon. Disappointed that Mr. An, whom he thought incapable of lying, had lied, he endeavored to explore the necessity of Mr. An's lie by citing the falsehoods of Kaiser Wilhelm, Chiang Kai-shek (蔣介石), and Feng Yuxiang (馮玉祥). Seeing this, I felt frustrated by the inappropriate expectations Mr. In had placed on Mr. An. It's not just Mr. An; lies emerging from mouths that vowed not to lie are plentiful in this world. Going to church does not necessarily make one a Christian believer, just as going to a Confucian shrine (孔子廟) does not necessarily make one a Confucian scholar (儒生). Even if Mr. An's statement was a lie, there seems little reason to make a big fuss (大驚小怪) about it. Such a small lie likely causes no great harm (弊害) to Mr. In or society. Even if he had told bigger lies, in cases where forgiveness and understanding are possible, it is better to overlook them and instead strive together for the light—this seems the loyal sentiment and attitude.

What do I mean by Mr. In making unreasonable demands on Mr. An? Expecting and demanding that a 60-year-old man (60 老翁), holding onto an ideology (이데올오기) from 30 years ago, act like a youth with a 1940s ideology is a completely unreasonable demand. Didn't Mr. In himself say that when spring passes, the azaleas also wither? What was new yesterday becomes old today, and what was new the day before yesterday becomes old today; today's new thing will again become old tomorrow—this is the formula of nature (天演). Everyone fulfills their role for their time and then retreats. Criticizing Mr. An, who was invited by Messrs. Pak Hŭngsik (朴興植) and Chu Yohan to speak at the Wha Sin store, for not siding with the employees is also a matter of interpretation (解釋) and seems an unreasonable demand.

As for Mr. Chu, if he intends to defend Mr. An, rather than trying to correct misunderstandings within Mr. In's thesis or those held by the public through refuting articles, the superior strategy (上策) would be fundamental cleansing (根本的 淸潔) that allows all misunderstandings to collapse on their own without attack (不攻自破).

Above, I have roughly stated my impressions regarding the arguments of Messrs. In and Chu on the subject of Mr. An. On this occasion, I wish to introduce Mr. An's current situation (現狀).

Whatever the youth of the era may define Mr. An as, the Mr. An I see currently evokes sympathy in more than one or two aspects. No matter how extraordinary a person may be, they are still human. One cannot expect or demand more than human capabilities from a human being. An old man of nearly 60 years<60> has returned to the homeland (故土) he left decades ago, only to suffer daily from an intractable stomach illness (胃病) contracted in Taejŏn (大田). Having lost all his own teeth and needing to chew food with dentures (人造齒牙), his resentment is understandable. His beloved wife and children are far away across the Pacific in America; how intense must be his longing to see them in his old age? Suffering from a chronic cough he has long had, he reluctantly cultivates a hobby in gardening (園藝) at a house built on the site of a mountain temple outside P'yŏngyang Castle (平壤城外 某山寺). How severe must his psychological distress (心理苦痛) be? Despite all this, perhaps watching the world go by and spending his remaining life (餘生) is the one hope for him, living as a scholar recluse (處士的). Poje (普齋), Sŏngjae (誠齋), Ch'ujŏng (秋汀) have all passed away from this world... (The End) <61>

**Summary**

This article by Wŏn Sehun critiques a recent debate between In Chŏngsik and Chu Yohan concerning the legacy and character of the Korean nationalist leader An Ch'angho (Tosan). Wŏn finds In's critique overly long, factually flawed (especially regarding An's activities abroad and alleged promotion of regionalism), and holding An to unreasonable, anachronistic standards. He finds Chu's defense of An equally problematic, particularly Chu's denial of the existence of regional cliques (which Wŏn argues clearly existed around figures like An, Yi Sŭngman, and Yi Tonghwi) and Chu's justification for hiring based on hometown ties, which Wŏn sees as promoting inefficiency and factionalism. Wŏn shares anecdotes aiming to correct factual errors in Chu's defense concerning financial dealings and factional disputes in Shanghai, suggesting An was neither the simple saint Chu portrays nor the malicious figure In implies, but a complex individual with limitations. He concludes by expressing sympathy for An's difficult circumstances in his later years and implicitly suggests moving beyond past factional debates. From a historical perspective, the article is highly valuable for its detailed insider's view of the intense factionalism (particularly regionalism between Kwansŏ, Kihŏ, and Kwanbuk groups) and ideological debates within the Korean nationalist movement during the colonial period. It reveals the personal rivalries, differing strategies (education vs. politics, unity efforts), the sensitive issue of funding, and the difficulties leaders like An Ch'angho faced in maintaining unity and navigating criticism, offering historians concrete examples and perspectives on these internal conflicts.

**Named Entities**

安昌浩	안창호	An Ch'angho
中央日報	중앙일보	Chungang Ilbo (Central Daily News)
印貞植	인정식	In Chŏngsik
朱耀翰	주요한	Chu Yohan
元世勳	원세훈	Wŏn Sehun (Author)
日本內地	일본내지	Mainland Japan
中國	중국	China
福澤諭吉	후쿠자와 유키치	Fukuzawa Yukichi
汪兆銘	왕조명	Wang Jingwei
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
露領沿海州	노령연해주	Russian Maritime Province
美國	미국	America (USA)
上海	상해	Shanghai
西北	서북	Northwest (region of Korea, likely P'yŏngan)
南朝鮮	남조선	South Chosŏn (Southern Korea)
關西	관서	Kwansŏ (Western region, P'yŏngan)
兩班	양반	Yangban (gentry class)
島山	도산	Tosan (An Ch'angho's pen name)
李承晩	이승만	Yi Sŭngman
畿湖	기호	Kihŏ (region including Kyŏnggi and Ch'ungch'ŏng)
北道	북도	North Province (likely Hamgyŏng)
李東輝	이동휘	Yi Tonghwi
西道	서도	Sŏdo (Western provinces, P'yŏngan)
關北	관북	Kwanbuk (Northern region, Hamgyŏng)
全鮮	전선	All of Chosŏn (Entire Korea)
和信百貨店	화신백화점	Wha Sin Department Store
東京	동경	Tokyo
大阪	오사카	Osaka
서울	서울	Seoul
平安道	평안도	P'yŏngan Province
韓某	한모	Han Someone (Mr./Ms. Han)
OO政府	OO정부	OO Government (Censored, likely Korean Provisional Government)
元OO	원OO	Wŏn OO (Censored surname, likely Wŏn Sehun himself or related)
羅OO	나OO	Na OO (Censored surname)
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Colonial name for Seoul)
OOOO府	OOOO부	OOOO Government (Censored, likely KPG variant)
OO黨	OO당	OO Party (Censored political party)
OO團	OO단	OO Group (Censored organization)
OO代表會議籌備會	OO대표회의주비회	OO Representative Meeting Preparatory Committee (Censored)
春谷	춘곡	Ch'ungok (Wŏn Sehun's pen name)
興士團	흥사단	Hŭngsadan
同友會	동우회	Tonguhoe
李某	이모	Lee Someone (Mr./Ms. Lee)
基督	기독	Christ (Christianity)
蔣介石	장개석	Chiang Kai-shek
馮玉祥	풍옥상	Feng Yuxiang
孔子廟	공자묘	Confucian Shrine
朴興植	박흥식	Pak Hŭngsik
大田	대전	Taejŏn
平壤城外 某山寺	평양성외 모산사	A certain mountain temple outside P'yŏngyang Castle

**Glossary**

安昌浩論	안창호론	Discourse on An Ch'angho
再批判	재비판	Re-critique
論爭	논쟁	Debate, dispute
交	교	Acquaintance, relations
有하다	유하다	To have, possess (Older form of 있다, sometimes used for emphasis on existence/possession)
자서히	자세히	In detail, carefully (Older spelling/pronunciation variant)
지나치게	지나치게	Excessively, too much
골자	골자	Gist, main point, substance
적엇다	적었다	Was small, few (Older spelling of 적었다)
늒임	느낌	Feeling, impression (Older spelling)
相符되다	상부되다	To correspond to, match
落望	낙망	Disappointment
소양	소양	Cultivation, knowledge, accomplishment
膽力	담력	Courage, nerve
멧 해	몇 해	Several years (Older spelling)
去國行	거국행	Act of leaving one's country
外地	외지	Foreign land, place outside one's home area
봉화	봉화	Beacon fire
깨여	깨어	Awakening, waking up (Older spelling)
依然히	의연히	Still, as before
文化타령	문화타령	(Often derogatory) Harping on culture, empty talk about culture
反覆하다	반복하다	To repeat
相左되다	상좌되다	To contradict, be contrary to
暫時暫時	잠시잠시	Temporarily, for short periods
己未	기미	Kimi year (1919, referring to the March First Movement)
거론하다	거론하다	To mention, bring up, discuss
風聞	풍문	Rumor, hearsay
사투리	사투리	Dialect
귀ㅅ가	귓가	Near the ear (Older possessive marker 'ㅅ')
唾棄하다	타기하다	To spit on and reject, despise
地方熱	지방열	Regional fervor, excessive regional loyalty/partisanship (often negative)
선동가	선동가	Instigator, agitator
轉化식켜	전화시켜	Transforming into (Older form of 시키다)
급급하다	급급하다	To be preoccupied with, busy with
인식착오	인식착오	Error in perception/understanding
定罪하다	정죄하다	To condemn, convict
독갑이	도깨비	Goblin, bogeyman (Dialectal/older form)
극구	극구	Vehemently, strongly
確斷하다	확단하다	To assert definitively
惡宣傳	악선전	Malicious propaganda
中傷	중상	Slander, defamation
誣陷	무함	False accusation, frame-up
謠言	요언	Groundless rumor, false report
橫行	횡행	Rampancy, prevalence (usually of something bad)
怪文書	괴문서	Suspicious/malicious document
제지하다	제지하다	To stop, restrain, prohibit
음모	음모	Conspiracy, plot
기질	기질	Temperament, disposition
신임하다	신임하다	To trust
시비하다	시비하다	To argue right and wrong, criticize
망라주의	망라주의	Principle of encompassing all, comprehensive inclusion
비능률적	비능률적	Inefficient
수긍하다	수긍하다	To accept, agree with
위조	위조	Forgery, fabrication
派爭	파쟁	Factional strife, dispute
어느 때 어느 곳에서든지	어느 때 어느 곳에서든지	Anytime, anywhere
불으지섯지만	부르짖었지만	Although cried out, shouted (Older spelling/form)
안탑가운	안타까운	Pitiable, regrettable, frustrating (Older form)
强辯하다	강변하다	To argue forcefully, insist unreasonably
匡正하다	광정하다	To correct, rectify
疑訝되다	의아되다	To be doubtful, suspicious
소위	소위	So-called
掃蕩	소탕	Sweeping away, eradication
路線	노선	Line, course (political)
외관	외관	Outward appearance
呈하다	정하다	To present, show, display
아호	아호	Pen name, courtesy name
부주의	부주의	Carelessness, oversight
고의적	고의적	Intentional, deliberate
互相	호상	Mutually, each other
設或	설혹	Even if, supposing that (Literary/older form)
유익하다	유익하다	To be beneficial, useful
유조하다	유조하다	To be helpful, assisting
향당	향당	Hometown region, local clique (can be negative)
초월하다	초월하다	To transcend
우려	우려	Concern, worry
확유하다	확유하다	To possess certainly, surely have
不少한	불소한	Considerable, not a few
해부하다	해부하다	To dissect, analyze
근로하다	근로하다	To labor, work diligently
자진희생	자진희생	Voluntary sacrifice
구세적	구세적	Salvationist, pertaining to saving the world
백만장자	백만장자	Millionaire
개인적 담화	개인적 담화	Private conversation
현명하다	현명하다	Wise, sagacious
점원	점원	Shop employee, clerk
장려	장려	Encouragement, promotion
공덕찬송	공덕찬송	Praising virtues and merits
실없는	실없는	Frivolous, insincere, nonsensical
노매	노매	Angry curse/scolding (怒罵 - nùmà)
개탄하다	개탄하다	To lament, deplore
홍소	홍소	Roaring laughter, ridicule (哄笑)
간부	간부	Executive, leading member
이면	이면	Behind the scenes, inner workings
변명하다	변명하다	To make excuses, defend oneself
일언반사	일언반사	A single word or half a phrase, slightest remark
문동답서격	문동답서격	Responding irrelevantly (lit. asking east, answering west)
수완가	수완가	Man of ability, manipulator
음모가	음모가	Schemer, conspirator
야심가	야심가	Ambitious person
오해하다	오해하다	To misunderstand
모함하다	모함하다	To slander, falsely accuse
술책	술책	Trick, stratagem, maneuver
신의	신의	Faithfulness, trust
솔직	솔직	Straightforwardness, frankness
역설하다	역설하다	To emphasize, stress, argue forcefully
묵은 책장	묵은 책장	Old book pages (metaphor for past records/history)
도학자	도학자	Scholar of Daoism, virtuous scholar
친분	친분	Intimacy, friendship
신교	신교	Trust and association
충성스럽다	충성스럽다	Loyal, faithful
견해	견해	Viewpoint, opinion
뻣틔다	뻗티다	To stand firm, resist stubbornly (Older form/spelling)
사용하다	사용하다	To use privately
회의소집	회의소집	Convening a meeting
충의	충의	Loyalty and righteousness
비난	비난	Criticism, blame
감당하다	감당하다	To bear, endure, cope with
해석	해석	Interpretation
친의	친의	Friendship, amity (Similar to 親誼)
부탁하다	부탁하다	To request, ask a favor
자격	자격	Qualification
공효	공효	Effectiveness, efficacy (功効)
매몰되다	매몰되다	To be buried, submerged
단행하다	단행하다	To carry out decisively
내종	내종	In the end, eventually
오류	오류	Error, mistake
예기	예기	Expectation, anticipation
비본의	비본의	Unintentional
비사실적	비사실적	Untrue to fact, non-factual
음미하다	음미하다	To savor, appreciate, ponder
동지	동지	Comrade
배반하다	배반하다	To betray
복음	복음	Gospel
전파하다	전파하다	To propagate, spread
월급	월급	Monthly salary
연파소설	연파소설	Sentimental/weak/soft school novel (軟派小說)
유한마담	유한마담	Leisured madam/woman (有閑madam)
심심풀이	심심풀이	Killing time, pastime
임금인상	임금인상	Wage increase
불허하다	불허하다	To not permit, disallow
스트락이	스트라이키	Strike (Loanword, older transliteration of 'strike')
배출하다	배출하다	To produce, turn out (people)
본원	본원	Origin, source
수양단체	수양단체	Self-cultivation group
세인	세인	The public, people in general
낙인	낙인	Brand, stigma
마즌	맞은	Struck, branded (Older spelling of 맞은)
사력	사력	Utmost strength, desperate effort
권고하다	권고하다	To advise, recommend
불상적한	불상적한	Inappropriate, unsuitable (不相適)
무리한 주문	무리한 주문	Unreasonable demand/order
작반하다	작반하다	To accompany, keep company with
예배당	예배당	Church, chapel
대경소괴	대경소괴	Making a fuss over something trivial (大驚小怪)
맹세하다	맹세하다	To vow, pledge
폐해	폐해	Harm, evil effect, abuse
용서하다	용서하다	To forgive
양해하다	양해하다	To understand, excuse
덮어두다	덮어두다	To cover up, leave untouched, overlook
이데올오기	이데올로기	Ideology (Older transliteration)
노옹	노옹	Old man (老翁)
천연	천연	Nature, natural
현상	현상	Current situation, status quo
고토	고토	Homeland, native soil
난치	난치	Difficult to cure
위병	위병	Stomach illness
인조치아	인조치아	Artificial teeth, dentures
가히	가히	Understandably, possibly (可知)
기침병	기침병	Chronic cough illness
원예	원예	Gardening, horticulture
심리고통	심리고통	Psychological distress/pain
여생	여생	Remaining life
처사	처사	Scholar recluse, gentleman living in retirement
상책	상책	Best plan, superior strategy
근본적	근본적	Fundamental
청결	청결	Cleanliness, purity
불공자파	불공자파	To collapse on its own without being attacked (不攻自破)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제8권 제8호
발행일	1936년 08월 01일
기사제목	「安昌浩論」의 再批判, 中央日報에 난 印貞植 對 朱耀翰 論爭을 보고
필자	元世勳
기사형태	논설

「安昌浩論」의 再批判, 中央日報에 난 印貞植 對 朱耀翰 論爭을 보고
						元世勳
中央日報 학술란에 『安昌浩論』이라는 題下에서 印貞植씨의 논문이 10일이나 연재되고 印씨의 論을 반박하는 朱耀翰씨의 논문도 3일이나 연재되야 安씨와 一面의 交라도 有한 인사들의 약간의 주의를 끄을게 되엿다. (사진은 右가 朱耀翰씨 左가 印貞植씨)
나도 安씨와 교분이 有하다면 有하고 친한 사람이라면 친한 사람 가운데의 한사람인 것만치  달은 사람에게 대한 인물론보다는 비교적 자서히 읽어 보앗다.
그런데 印氏의 安氏論은 대체에서 너무 지나치게 장편인 동시에 실제 그 내용에 포함된 골자가 적엇다는 감이 有하며
그 다음 印씨의 安氏觀은 출발점으로부터 종말까지 몹시 비범한 인물로 취급한 데서 읽는 사람으로 하여곰 氏의 풍자·조소법에 동의하기 難한 반면으로는 安씨에 대한 印씨의 기대가 컷다가 安씨가 그 기대에 相符되지 못하는 데서 落望한 듯한 늒임을 주게 하엿다.
그리고 印씨는 安씨를 日本內地의 福澤諭吉, 중국의 汪兆銘 등의 업적과 역할에다가 대조하면서 논하엿지만 이것은 安씨의 소양과 膽力을 자서히 알지 못한 데서 나온＜50＞ 論인가 한다. 福澤씨와 汪씨는 본래 깁흔 학문의 소양이 有하며 더욱히 汪씨는 한때에 刺客까지 되엿든 사람이지만 安씨에게는 시대와 환경으로 그것이 좀 부족하엿고 또 福澤씨나 汪씨가 무대로한 장소와 시간과 대상이 安씨와는 거진 전적으로 상반되엿으니 그 업적과 역할인들 엇지 동일할 수 잇으랴!
그러나 저러나 日露戰爭을 전후하야 氏가 『나는간다』의 去國行을 짓고서 조선을 떠날 때까지의 멧 해 동안이 安씨 일생에서 금자탑적 전성시대일 것이다. 이 시대에서 민중에게 소개된 安씨를 가지고서 印씨가 인물론도 쓰고 朱씨가 반박도 하게 된 것이다.
印씨는 外地시대의 安씨를 論하되 『조선이 잠자고 있을 時에 있어서 교육의 봉화를 든 것은 확실히 진보적 사업이엇다 하더라도 민중이 이미 눈을 깨여 달은 무엇을 요구할 만큼 성장되엿슴에 불구하고 依然히 더욱히 중국까지 가서 교육만능주의 공허한 문화타령을 反覆한다는 것은 확실히 일종의 염불에 불과한 것이엇다.』
云云한 데 대하여 그 이론의 是非는 말할 것이 없고 사실이 相左되는 점을 말치 안흘 수 없으니 곳 安씨는 조선을 더나서 중국과 露領沿海州를 暫時暫時 거처서 美國에 건너가서 己未 이전까지의 장구한 세월을 보냇으니 중국에서 교육만능주의나 또는 文化運動을 反覆하엿다는 것은 사실과 상반되는 것이며 己未 이후에 上海에서 지낸 바를 거론하더라도 교육만능주의를 反覆할 여지와 무대가 無하얏스며 다만 개인간 좌담에서 文化運動을 말한 때가 有하엿슬 것뿐일 것이다. (사진은 安昌浩씨)
그럿타면 印씨의 論이 시대와 민중이 요구하는 그 무엇을 위하야서 붓잡은 것이라 할지라도 사실의 논거를 바루 잡ㅅ지 못하엿다고 할 수 잇는 것이다.
그런데 印씨는 다시 安氏論을 전개식히다가 論하되 風聞에 의하면 그(安씨)는 흔히 西北 사투리를 말하는 청년들의 귀ㅅ가에 입을 대이고 『西北人의 최대의 적은 남조선 사람들이다』운운의  風說을 전제로 하여 논하다가 『그러면＜51＞ 그(安씨)는 한개의 唾棄할 地方熱의 선동가이며 저주될 반동적 표본이라는 世人의 조롱을 면할 수 없을 만큼 중대한 과실을 저즐은 것이 아니면 안 되라.』고 하야 그러한 風聞을 들을만한 과실이 安씨에게 잇다는 것을 말하엿으며
다시 印씨는 자기의 논문 제8회에서 말하되 『一方으로 島山一派의 所謂 關西派는 남조선의 兩班輩에 대한 關西 민중의 당연한 계급적 증오와 역사깊은 반감을 끝까지 兩班 輩掃蕩의 민주주의적 노선에로 발전식키려는 도량과 이성을 가지지 못하고 도리어 이것을 남조선 對 關西의 지방 쌈으로 轉化식켜 우매한 자들의 우매한 地方熱을 이용하야 자기의 정치적 지반을 수립하기에만 급급하엿으며 地方으로 李承晩 일파의 所謂幾湖派는 이보담도 더 더럽게 남조선兩班輩의 關西人에 대한 어리석은 교만과 편협한 자존심을 이용하야 이것 역시 畿湖一帶를 기초로한 정치적 지반을 형성하기에 급급하여온 것이 아는엿든가고』云云 하엿다.
이러한 印씨의 安씨 공격에 대하야 朱씨는 반박하되 『印씨는 가장 경솔하게 地方熱이라는 문자를 사용하고 잇는 바 이것이 印씨의 가장 큰 인식착오인 동시에 내가 그 논문을 定罪하는 유일의 점이라』고 전제한 뒤에 『이 地方熱이라는 문자는 40年來의 조선사회의 정체 모를 괴물인 동시에 島山의 일생을 괴롭게하는 독갑이라고 나는 말한다』고 하여 노코 安씨가 地方熱의 선동자가 아닌 것을 극구 변명하는 동시에 安씨는 차라리 『地方熱 고취자와는 정반대의 인물이라』고 確斷하며 安씨를 만일 地方熱 가진 사람이라고 말하는 사람이 잇다면 그것은 惡宣傳이며 中傷이라고 하야 安씨가 그러한 말을 듯게 된 것은 반대파의 誣陷中傷에서 나온 謠言이라고 하며 地方熱이라는 것이 근본적으로 독갑이와 갓치 虛傳 뿐이오 실재가 아니라는 것을 주장하엿다.
그리고 朱씨는 印씨가 風聞을 가지고서 論材삼은 잘못을 책하엿다. 뿐만 아니다. 朱씨는 현재에서 남이 地方熱이라고 지칭할만한 모든 것이 실제에서 地方熱 아니라 일종의 怪文書나  謠言에 불과하다고 논하고 『이 怪文書와 謠言의 橫行을 제지하기 위하야 약간의 관심을 가질 필요가 잇다.』
『첫재, 타인을 가르켜 地方熱者라 선전하는 그 자를 경계할 것이니 그런 자가 內心으로 엇더한 음모를 가지고 잇는 법이다.
둘재, 他道人이 성격, 습성, 기질 등을 이해하도록 노력할 것이다.＜52＞
셋재, 둘재와 반대 엇더한 사업이나 기관에서 같은 고향사람끼리 서로 신임하는 것은 당연한 일로(즉 기분이 맛고 근본을 잘 알고 잇는 까닭으로 인정하야 시비하지 말 것이다.
넷재, 사업기관인 학교, 신문사, 회사 등에 잇서서는 가장 신임하는 사람끼리 일하는 것이 원칙이오 이상적인 13道 網羅主義는 議會가 아닌 이상 불가능한 것이오 또 가능하다 하드라도 비능율적인 것을 시인할 것.』등등의 6개조의 주의를 환기하엿다.

이상에서 인용한 印朱兩氏가 安씨는 地方熱者이다! 아니다! 한 兩氏의 所論에 대하야 일반독자도 저마다 상당한 견해가 있으려니와 나는 兩氏의 所論에 대하야 수긍하기 難한 점이 有하다. 印씨가 인용한 畿湖人은 西北人의 적이다라』는 安씨의 말이라는 것은 완전한 風說이며 위조일 것이다. 그러한 風說과 위조를 가지고 立論의 主材를 삼는다면 그 論을 누구나 수긍키 難한 것이다. 무엇을 가릇처서 그 말이 風說이며 위조라고 하는가 하면 나도 地方熱的  派爭이 심하엿다는 外地에서 수십년의 세월을 보낸 것만치 地方派爭의 진상을 짐작하는바 如何히 地方熱的 病的心理作用을 가진 자라도 자기의 체면과 정책상에서 某道人은 我道人의 적이다 하고 자기 지방의 청년이나 기타 누구에게 말하지 못하엿을 것이다. 다만 『우리들은 지방적으로 단결되지 못하는데 某道 사람들은 地方黨을 지어가지고 우리를 반대하니 참으로 걱정이라.』는 말을 하야 他道人의 地方黨을 말하야 은근히 자기들도 지방적으로 당파를 형성하자고 고취하든 것은 사실이라고 할 수도 잇는 것이어니와 安씨가 직접으로 『畿湖人은 西北人의 적이라』는 말을 자기 입으로 하야 地方熱을 선동하엿다는 것은 風說이며 위조일 것이다.
그 다음에 朱씨의 地方熱이란 독갑이같은 虛傳이오 實在가 아니라는 설도 수긍키 難하다 西道사람의 대다수는 安昌浩씨를 首領으로 하며 그 주장을 따라가고 畿湖사람의 大多數는 李承晩씨를 首領으로 하고 그 주장을 따라가며 北道사람의 대다수는 李東輝씨를 首領으로 하고 그 주장을 따라갓다면 그것을 가릇처서 地方黨이라고 命名하는 외에 달은 제2의 명사가 업을 것이다.
그럼으로 나는 차라리 關西사람이나 關北사람이나 畿湖사람이 過去에서  總히 地方黨을 지엇든 사람들이라고 말하고 今日 이후에는 오즉 저마다 자기의 주의주장을 따라서 결합하고 지방적으로는 野合하지 말나고 말하고＜53＞ 싶다.
내가 보고들은 바에 의하야도 安씨는 地方黨을 타파한다고 어느 때 어느 곳에서든지 말하고 불으지섯지만 地方熱 鼓吹者라는 평은 安씨 또한 남만치 들엇으며 자기는 派爭하지 안코 남의 싸홈 말니기에 분주한다고 安씨가 말하지만 모든 싸홈에 安씨 자신이 叅加되여진 데가 다소 잇게 되엿으니 그 변명은 도리어 안탑가운 無用의 변명에 지나지 못하엿다. 말로만 잇는 것을 없다고 하여서 없서지는 것이 아니며 남에게 없는 것을 잇다고 하여서 잇서지는 것이 아니고 오즉 실상 그대로 나타나는 것뿐인가 한다. 묵은 책장을 뒤적거리지 말고 새 책장을 펴자는 말인데 과거에서 잇섯든 것을 없섯다고 强辯할 필요도 없거니와 그보다도 과거의 착오를 발견하는대로 匡正하는 것이 가장 현명한 前途인가 한다.
그리고 印朱兩氏의 所論에서 다시 疑訝되는 점을 지적할 바가 有하니 무엇인가 하면  印씨는 論하되 島山一派의 소위 西道波는 云云하고 그것이 차라리 남조선의 兩班輩들에 대한 關西民衆의 당연한 계급적 증오와 반감을 끝까지 兩班輩 掃蕩의 民主主義的 路線에로 발전식히지 못하고 지방싸홈에 轉化식힌 것이 잘못이라고 한탄하엿는데 이것을 얼는 보면 그럴 듯하나 그럿치 아니한 점이 잇다. 무엇인가 하면 南鮮地方이라고 전체가 양반만 사는 것이 아니오 방방곡곡과 時時種種에서 직접으로 兩班의 壓迫下에서 呻吟하든 常民의 수가 西鮮地方에서 守令方伯에게 壓制밧든 민중의 수만 못지 아니하엿으며 西鮮地方에도 양반은 아니지만 土班쯤은 到處에 잇은 것이다. 그럿타면 차라리 全鮮을 통하야 班常의 계급적 兩黨分立을 謀하지아니하엿다고 責할지언정 지역으로 南鮮은 總히 양반, 西鮮은 總히 常民으로 하야 戰線을 형성하지 못하엿다고 責한 것은 地方熱을 공격하든 印씨 자신이 地方熱化한 外觀을 呈하게 되엿다. 뿐만 아니라 印씨는 그 아래에서 續論하되 『李承晩一派의 所謂 畿湖波는 이보담도 더더럽게』 云云 하야 동일한 地方派에 대하야 李承晩의 畿湖派는 安昌浩의 西道派보담도 더 더럽게라고 구별한 것은 색안경을 안 쓴 사람에게도 오해밧기가 쉽게 되엿다. 한거름 더 나아가서 말한다면 安씨에게는 島山一派라 하야 그의 雅號를 쓰고 李씨에게는 그의 雅號를 쓰지 아니한 구별은 어데 잇는가? 이것은 印씨의 부주의일지언정 고의적 구별은 아닐 것이다.
그 다음으로 朱씨의 論에서 한 가지 말하고저 하는 바는 엇더한 사업이나 기관에서 같은 고향사람끼리 신임하는 것을 당연한 일로 인정하고 是非하지 말나.』하고 다시＜54＞ 말하되 『사업기관인 학교, 신문사, 회사 등에서 가장 신임하는 사람끼리 모혀서 일하는 것이 원칙이오 이상적인 13道 網羅主義는 議會가 아닌 이상 불가능한 것이오 또 가능하다 하더라도 비능율적인 것을 是認할 것.』이라고 云云 하야 이것으로써 虛傳的인 地方熱이라는 怪文書의 橫行을 抵禦하기 위하야 관심을 가질 필요가 잇다고 한 것에 대하야 수긍하기 難한 점이 잇다. 무엇인가 하면 무슨 사업이나 기관에서 互相 신임할 수 잇다는 표준은 設或 習俗과 취미가 맛지 안터라도 오즉 그 사업이나 기관의 自體를 有益하고 有助하면 그만이오 같은 고향사람이라고 반듯이 서로 신임되며 타향사람이라고 불신임될 것은 아닐 것이다. 더욱히 교육계(학교), 언론계(신문사), 실업계(회사) 등 사업기관에서는 가장 신임하는 고향사람끼리 모여서 일하는 것이 원칙이오 各道 사람이 모여서 일하기는 불가능하다. 설혹 가능하다 하더라도 비능률적인 것을 是認하라는 朱씨의 주장에는 異議하지 아니할 수가 없다.
여긔에 대하야는 길게 말할 것이 없이 朱씨가 현재 봉사하고 잇는 和信百貨店이라는 실업기관에는 반듯이 平安道사람끼리만 모여서 일하는 것이 아니라 능률을 내기 위하야 東京과 大阪사람도 잇을 것이며 서울 처녀도 잇을 것이며 달은 시골 청년도 없지 아니할 듯하다. 謀利하는 백화점도 그러하거든 교육계나 언론계 등 사업에서 반듯이 同鄕사람끼리 일을 하여야 능률적이오 他道 사람과 석기면 비능률적이라는 論據를 찻기가 곤란하다. 朱씨의 말대로 한다면 현재 서울에 잇는 각 학교나 명 신문사에는 반듯이 그 어느 一道의 同鄕사람끼리만 모혀서 일을 하여야 현재보다 능률적이 될 것이다.
나는 생각컨대 一個人인 나의 집안살님사리가 아니오 적어도 교육계나 언론계나 실업계의 사업인 이상에는 그 사업에 적당한 인재를 표준하고 鄕黨을 초월하야 선임하는 것이 가장 능률적일가 한다. 뿐만 아니라 朱씨의 말대로 한다면 모든 사업과 기관에는 一地方사람끼리만 모히게 되고 그 결과는 朱씨가 아무리 地方派는 아니라고 변명하더라도 각각 지방적 파黨만을 형성하고 말게될 우려까지 確有하다고 할 터이다.
이제 다시 도리켜 印씨의 『安昌浩論』을 읽어본다면 그는 과거의 安씨보다 현재의 安씨에 대하야 不少한 落望을 가젓다. 和信百貨店에서 그 점원에게 행한 安씨의 연설을 가지고 이리저리 論難하며 解剖하다가 말하되 『조선인의 상공업을 건설하기 위하야 모든 勤勞하는＜55＞ 무리들은 몸과 마음을 自進犧牲하여야 한다는 것이 비록 자기(安씨)의 救世的 主張이라 하더라도 그러한 주장은 백만장자인 商店主와의 個人的 談話나 혹은 그들의 會合에서나 하는것이 그 말의 적당한 장소라는 것은 결코 현명한 우리 安島山이 모를 리가 만무할 것이다. 돈 한 푼 없서서 청춘의 노동을 팔고 잇는 이 점원들 앞에서 상공업 獎勵와 店主의 功德讚頌하고 돌아다니기에야 安島山이 아니라 하더라도 세상에 사람이 흔한 것쯤은 또한 島山이 모를 리가 없을 것이다.』
『그러면 웨 島山은 할 말도 많을 것인데 하필 그 많은 말 가운데서 가장 아름답지 못한 말만 추리어 내어가지고 말슴하시었을가? 하는 慨嘆도 하고 『그의 연설을 들은 점원들이 島山을 『실없는 친구라고 怒罵라는 것을 들은 까닭에 哄笑도 한다고 하엿다. 이리하야 印씨의 安氏論中에서 論難한 安씨의 和信百貨店 연설의 一端은 우리에게 새로 전하여준 뉴쓰이며 그 嘆惜과 哄笑를 무리라고 할 수가 없는 것이다 朱씨는 자신이 該商會의 幹部中一人이며 安씨로 하여곰 그 연설을 하도록 한 裏面의 이유도 자서히 알 것이며 安씨를 辯護하자면 이점을 명백히 변명할 필요와 의무까지 잇을 것인데 朱씨는 이 점에 대하야 一言半辭도 하지안코 問東答西格으로 朱씨는 과거에서 安씨가 『手腕家』 『陰謀家』 『野心家』라는 말들이 安씨를 오해케 하며 謀陷한 것이라고 하며 安씨의 성격상에서 음모와 術策과는 距離가 멀고 信義와 率直을 主唱하고 실행하엿다고 변호하기에만 汲汲하엿다.
朱씨는 自說의 올흔 것을 증명하기 위하야 일례를 擧하되 『그(安씨)가 OO에 있을 때에 OOO에서 韓某가 가지고 나온 돈 OO만원을 갖다가 맡기는데도 불구하고 그것은 OO정부에서 나온 돈이니 나는 맡을 수 없다 하야 아니받은 것은 유명한 이야기다. 그래서 그돈을 쓰자고 권하든 元OO씨가 『어느 미친 놈이 島山을 野心家라 하였더냐.』 부르짖고 島山에게서 물러선 것도 사실이요 그 다음에 그 一派가 할수없이 羅OO씨를 시켜서 京城에서 딴 돈이 왓다고 거짓말을 하여 가지고 그 돈의 일부를 島山에게 주어서 사용케 된 것도 사실이다.』 云云 하야 安씨의 야심없고 솔직한 것을 역설하엿다
이와 갓치 朱씨가 말하여 노흔 묵은 冊張에 의지하야 安씨는 참으로 道學者와 같은 분이 될  수 있을가? 朱씨의 말하여 노흔 묵은 책장이 과연 사실이엇든가? 아니다. 사실과는 너무 먼  묵은 책장이다. 韓某가 가지고 온 돈을 安씨에게 맡기는 것을 OO정부에 나온 돈이니 나(安씨)는 맡을 수 없다 하야 받지 아니 하엿다는 것은 완전한 誤認이다.＜56＞ 그때의 韓某가 그 돈을 누구에게나 맡기자고 한 일이 없섯다. 韓某가 그돈을 安씨에게 맡기자고 할만한 친분이나 信交나 그박게 아무것도 그들의 사이에 아직 없든 시간이다. 설혹 사실이 아닌 사실을 사실이라고 가정하고 韓某가 安씨에게 그돈을 맡겻다면 OOO府에 그러게 충성스러운 安씨가 그돈을 엇지하야 맡어서 OO정부에 돌이지 못하엿다고 할 것인가? 이것도 安씨의 道學者的 솔직이 양심과 信義에 不許하엿든 까닭이다 할 것인가?
그리고 安씨가 韓某의 맡기는 돈을 쓰자고 권하든 元OO씨가 安씨의 돈 맡지 아니하는 것을 보고서 『어느 미친 놈이 島山을 野心家라 하엿더냐?』 하고 島山에게서 물너선 것도 사실이라고 朱씨는 말하엿는데 이것도 그 당시에 그말한 元某와 그말들은 安씨와 그박게 몃사람이 아즉도 살어잇는 이상에는 朱씨가 임의로 誤認하야 安씨는 道學者로 만들고 달은 사람은 野心家만 되게 할 수가 없는 것이다. 韓某가 가지고온 그돈을 자기들에게 주어서 쓰게 하라는 側이 大略  네 가지 방면이엇다.
첫재, OOOO府側과 둘재, OO黨側과 셋재, OO團側과 넷재, OO代表會議籌備會側이다 당시의 韓某는 그 돈을 어느 一派에게 줄 수가 없고 OO代表會議로 통일기관이 성립되면 그곳에 받치겟다고 뻣틔고 잇든 시간이다. 朱씨는 덮어노코 元某가 安씨에게  그돈을 쓰자고 권하엿다 하지만 元某가 安씨와 그돈을 쓰자고 권한 것은 그돈을 가지고 元某나 安씨가 私用하자고 권한 것이 아니고 OO代表會議를 소집하자고 安씨와 元某와 그박게 여러 방면의 意思가 合致된 지 오라고도 會議召集費用이 없서서 못불으든 시간에서 그돈 가운데로 얼마를 가지고 회의부터 소집하자는 여러 사람의 意見에 安씨만은 그돈 가운데서는 한 푼도 쓸 수가 없다는 한 것만은 사실인데 엇지하야 安씨가 그돈을 가지고 회의소집비로 못 쓰겟다고 주장한 裏面을 이제 듯기조케 말하자면 OOO府에 대한 安씨의 忠義라 할 것이오 元某의 所見대로 말하자면  安씨가 그돈을 쓰고는 함깨 일할 수 없다는 것이 그 忠義보다도 그돈을 가지고 회의를 소집한다는 非難을 堪當할만한 용기와 또 解釋의 相異에서 왓다고 본 데서 『누가 島山을 가릇처 地方黨을 짓는다고 하엿는가? 地方黨도 못 지을 분이다. 內地에 가서 學敎敎長이나 하시오!』 한 말은 잇섯다
그러케 말한 元某의 말을 가지고 安씨가 『地方黨을 짓는다.』는 구절의 代에다 『野心家라 하엿다.』는 구절을 써 서넛코 安씨는 野心家가 아니오 元某等이 野心家라고＜57＞ 듯는 사람에 따라 誤解하게 햇다. 말이 난 김에 나도 묵은 冊¼µ의 멧 줄만 더 인용하자! 다만 島山과의 親誼上에서 미안한 마음은 不無하지만 朱씨가 먼저 끄집어낸 이상에는 不得已 말하게 되는것이다. 지난해 여름 어느 때에 나는 島山과 某음식점에 장시간을 이야기하게 되엿는데 島山은 내게 『술 마시지 말 일, 일정한 직업을 가질 일, 싸우지 말 일』등의 세 가지를 부탁하고 나도 島山에게 멧 가지를 희망하엿는데 그 가운데는 『地方黨을 짓지 말 일』이라는 말이 잇섯는데 島山은 대답하되 『春谷은 내가 地方黨을 짓지 못하는 것을 잘 알지 아니하우? 內地에 가서 小學校校長이나 하라고 하더니 이제 內地에는 왓지만 小學校校長의 자격도 없소구려!』하면서 농담격으로 우스며 말한 일도 잇다.
이제 내가 上海에서 島山에게  憺力이 부족하다고 지나가는 말노 한 말 멧 마듸를 가지고서 安씨 자신은 地方黨 짓지 아니하는 證據로 인용할여 하고 朱씨는 安씨의 野心家가 아닌데 인용할여고 하니 나의 멧 마듸 말이 이와 갓치 功効가 큰 데서 놀나지 아니 할 수 없는 것이다. 나의 그말은 인용하여 가지고 安씨가 地方黨 안 짓는데 證據도 되며 야심 없다는 證據도 되야서 安씨에게 부터다니는 『地方黨』 『野心家』라는 別稱이 없서진다면 얼마나 훌융할 것이며 비록 나의 말한 본의가 埋沒된다고 하더라도 나에게 그다지 큰 손실이 될 것이야 잇으랴!만은 그 말의 功効가 엇더할넌지요.
그리고 朱씨의 引證에서 또 한 가지 말할 바는 島山에게서 『물너선 一派가 羅某를 식혀서 京城에서 딴돈이 왓다고 거즛말하여 가지고 그돈의 일부를 安씨에게 주어서 사용한 것도 사실이다.』 云云한 것은 朱씨가 安씨를 辯護한다는 것이 도리어 安씨를 공개적으로 솔직하게 쓰자는 돈은 쓰지 안코 거즛말하는 돈을 쓴 사람으로만 만들고 말엇다. 朱씨여! 분명히 이해하라! 元某가 安씨에게서 물너선 것이 아니라 安씨와 의사가 合致되지 아니함으로 安씨와는 갈나저 OO會議籌備會委員一同과 함깨 그돈 가운데서 얼마를 가지고 會議의 소집을 斷行케 하엿으며 乃終에는 安씨가 그 내용을 알고서도 함게 일하게 된 것이 사실이다. 그리고 安씨에게 그돈의 일부를 주어서 사용케 한 것도 사실이라는 사실은 사실이 錯誤다. 會議召集의 費用上에서 安씨의 손을 거처서 지출한 것이 잇다 하더라도 그것은 籌備會側의 지출이오 安씨의 사용이 아닌 것이 사실이다. 引證이 사실과 상반되는 引證은  預期의 효과를 내지 못하고 도리어 손실이 되는 것이다. 島山을 辯護하자든 것이 도리어 그에게＜58＞ 非本意, 非事實的 誤解만 사게 한다면 이 엇지 신중히 할 바 아니랴.
그리고 印朱兩氏는 『興士團』 『同友會』를 가지고 그것을 安氏論에다 編入하면서 論하엿다. 여긔에 대하야 길게 말할 필요를 늑기지 못하는 동시에 다만 印씨는 『島山이슴』을 吟味한다고 전제하고 그의 이론이라고 소개한 뒤에 거긔에 대한 비판은 별로 나리지 아니하고 그 단체의 유력한 分子들의 과거 행위를 거론하되 李某는 마누라의 궁둥이를 못 이저서 同志를 背叛하고 上海에서 살작 조선으로 왓느니 누구는 교회에서 복음을 傳播하느니, 누구는 大商店에서 島山의 주장하는 상공업의 발전을 식히여 많은 月給을 타먹느니, 누구는 軟泒小說로 有閑매담의 심심푸리를 식히느니, 누구는 醫師가 되어서 엇지느지 누구는 고무공업을 하면서 勞働者의 賃金引上을 不許하다가 스트락이』를 맛나느니 등등을 말하야 맛치 『島山이슴』이 그러한 인물들을 輩出케한 本源처럼 論한 데 불과하고 朱씨는 여긔에 대하야 변명하되 『興士團』이나 『同友會』는 地方黨이 아니라는 변명과 정치단체가 아니오 오즉 修養團體뿐이노라는 변명으로서 역시 問東答西格에 지나지 못하엿다.
於左於右에 그 단체의 主要分子들의 행위는 그들 각개인의 행위이고 그것을 가지고 安씨에게 深責하는 것은 너무나 지나치는 감이 有하고 興士團은 地方黨이 아니라는 변명은 오늘의 朱씨만이 아니고 安씨도 時時處處에서 하는 변명이지만 世人은 興士團이라면 安씨의 西道地方黨의 단체로만 인정하게 되고 변명이 無用하게 되여젓은즉 氏들로 하여곰 안탑가운 노릇이다.
그럿타면 발서 오란 세월에서 地方黨이라는 烙印을 마즌 該團體를 氏들은 엇지하야 완전히 해산하지 아니하고 死力을 다하야 繼續할여고만 하는가? 그럴수록 世人의 비판은 심하여가는 것이 아닌가? 나의 아는 범위에서는 그러한 비난을 받던 단체가 각지방마다 잇다가 모다 없서지고 오족 安씨를 首領으로 하는 興士團만이 남어잇는 듯한즉 나는 이 機會에서 安씨에게 『차라리 그 단체를 해산식히고 말나!』고 勸告하고 싶다. 그러나 나의 이 말은 아마도 無用일 듯하야 걱정이다.

최후로 말하고저 하는 바는 印씨가 安씨에게 대하야 不相適한 期待와 無理한 注文을 하엿다는 一例을 말하게 되는데 印씨는 安씨가 基督信者가 아니노라 말하더니＜59＞그 뒤에 멧 날이 못 되여서 安씨는 누구와 作伴하야 예배당에 가서 설교를 듯고 도라오는 것을 보앗노라. 安씨는 거즛말하지 아니할 사람으로 알엇더니 거즛말을 하더라고 落望하고서 카이젤, 蔣介石, 馮玉祥 等의 허위를 引證하면서 安씨의 거즛말한 필요를 探索하기에 노력한 것을 볼 때에 나는 印씨의 不相適한 기대를 安씨에게 가젓든 것을 답답하게 생각되엿다. 거즛말하지 안는다고 盟誓하든 입에서 거즛말이 나오게되는 것은 安씨뿐만 아니라 이 세상에 얼마든지 잇는 것이며 예배당에 간다고 반듯이 基督信者가 되는 것도 아니며 孔子廟에 간다고 반듯이 儒生이 되는 것도 아니다. 설혹 安씨의 그것이 거즛말이라 하더라도 거긔에서 大驚小怪할 가ƒ은 업는 듯하다. 그만한 거즛말쯤에서는 印씨에게나 사회에 그다지 큰 弊害가 되지 아니할 것이다. 그보담 더큰 거즛말을 하엿을지라도 容恕하고 諒解할 경우에는 덮어두고 오즉  빛일만 위하야 노력을 함깨하자는 것이 충성스러운 심경과 태도인가 한다.
무엇을 가르처서 印씨가 安씨에게 無理한 注文을 하엿다고 하는가 하면 30년 전부터의 『이데올오기』를 가진 60 老翁에게 1940년대의 『이데올오기』를 가진 청년처럼 활동해 달나고 기대하고 注文한다면 그 注文은 완전히 無理한 注文이다. 봄이 가면 진달내꼿도 진다는 말은印씨 스사로 한 말이 아닌가? 그적게 새것이 어제와서 묵은 것이 되고 어적게 새것이 오늘에 묵은 것으로 되며 오늘의 새것은 또다시 내일에 묵은 것이 되는 것은 天演의 公式이다. 저마다 저 한때의 역할을 다하고 물너가는 것이다. 朴興植 朱耀翰씨등의 招請으로 和信商店에서 연설하게되 는 安씨를 그 점원들의 편이 되지 아니한다고 말하는 것도 解釋에 달닌 것이라 無理한 注文인가 한다.
朱씨로 論하여도 安씨를 위하야 변호할진대 單純히 印氏論文中에 잇는 오해라든지 世人이 가지고 잇는 오해를 풀야면 논문의 反駁으로써 匡正할려 하지 말고 모든 오해가 不攻自破할만한 根本的 淸潔을 하는 것이 上策인가 한다.
이상으로써 安씨를 論題로 한 印朱兩殀의 所論에 대한 나의 소감은 대강 말하엿거니와 이 機會에서 나는 安씨의 現狀을 紹介코저 한다.
時代靑年이 무엇이라고 安씨를 규정하든지 내가 본 安씨의 現狀에는 同情에 넘치는 점이 한 두 가지가 아니다. 아무리 남다른 인물이라도 동일한 인간이다. 인간에다가 인간 이상의 것을 기대하며 注文하지 못할 것이다. 60세나 되는 ＜60＞ 늙은 몸이 멧 10년 떠낫든 故土에 도라와 섯는데 大田에서 어든 難治의 胃病으로 一日도 고통받지 아니하는 날이 없게 되엿으며 자신의 치아는 모다 일허버리고 인조치아로써 음식을 씹자니 그의 恨되는 점도 可知이며 일홈은 故土이지만 사랑하는 처자는 멀이 태평양 건너 米國땅에 잇으니 늙으막에 보고싶은 생각인들 오즉할가? 본래부터 가지고 잇든 기침병으로 괴롭어 하는 그 몸을 平壤城外 某山寺터에다 지은 집에서 마지못하야 園藝에 취미를 가지고 잇게 되엿으니 그의 心理苦痛인즉 얼마나 심할까? 아무리 그럿터라도 世相되여가는 것이나 구경하며 餘生 보내 가는 것이 處士的 氏에게 그중 한 가지의 희망이라고 할까. 普齋, 誠齋, 秋汀이 모다간 世相인저...(끗)＜61＞
＜50-61.