잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	國都以前의 京城, 上下 1300년간의 略史 (A Brief History of Kyŏngsŏng Before It Was the Capital, Approximately 1300 Years)
필자	翠雲生
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

Kyŏngsŏng Before It Was the Capital, A Brief History of Approximately 1300 Years
						翠雲生

The Initial Reclamation of Kyŏngsŏng

Today, Seoul, with its 70,000 households and a population of over 300,000 bustling day and night, trains, trams, cars, and carriages ceaselessly running through its streets, and various other amenities, feigns to be a metropolitan city. People in Seoul look down on the countryside, calling it "mountain valleys" or "remote areas," and even scorn people as "country bumpkins." However, about 2,000 years ago, or even just 500 years ago at the beginning of the dynasty (國初), Seoul was a large village or a very remote mountain area. Not only were the mountains treacherous, but fierce beasts roamed even more freely than bedbugs (蝎蟲) do now. It is said that tigers roamed openly in broad daylight in places like Chongno (鍾路) intersection or Paeu-gae (배우개) market. Even now, in common parlance, people often talk about "Inwangsan (仁旺山) tiger" or say that Paeu-gae's original name was Paek-kogae (百峴), because tigers were so abundant that people couldn't travel alone but had to gather in groups of hundreds. Or they tell legends about Kang Kam-ch'an (姜邯贊) writing charms to chase away tigers when he was the magistrate of Namgyŏng (南京, present-day Seoul). Hearing these stories, one can well imagine what the old days were like. It was Paekche’s (百濟) King Kae-ru (盖婁王) who first reclaimed this harsh land and built the North Hansan Fortress (北漢山城). This was 1,798 years ago—the fifth year of his reign, Imsin (壬申) in the second month (132 AD). The site of the fortress is in present-day Hanyang-gol (漢陽골). (This North Hansan Fortress is not the one on Samgaksan (三角山); the Samgaksan Fortress was started in the 37th year of King Sukchong (肅宗) of the Yi dynasty. Hanyang-gol was divided into two districts, located in the eastern area near the entrance of present-day Nagwŏn-dong (樂園洞).) At that time, the king, of course, developed Seoul for his own national defense, to protect against the powerful northern kingdom of Koguryŏ (高句麗), not for the happiness of the people of today, but<2> his merit is more admirable than that of Yu the Great (夏禹) who developed the nine provinces of China, and no one should forget it. If a statue or a monument is erected even for building a bridge or establishing a school, it is truly regrettable that there isn't even a monument at the site commemorating the person who pioneered the capital of Chosŏn.

One Hundred and Five Years as the Capital of Paekche

Enough of digressions—239 years later, in the 26th year of King Kŭn Ch'ogo (近肖王) of Paekche (371 AD), the king moved the capital from Hannam (漢南, South of the Han River) to Hansan (漢山, i.e., Hanyang-dong), which marks the beginning of Seoul as a national capital. (At that time, the king, leading 30,000 troops with the crown prince, attacked the P'yŏngyang Fortress (平壤城) of Koguryŏ, killed King Kogugwŏn (故國原王), and moved the capital here to dominate the north with his remaining power.) In the second year of King Ch'imnyu (枕流王), in the third month of spring, a Buddhist temple was founded in Hansan, which was the first temple in Seoul. However, in the 21st year of King Kae-ro of Paekche, in the ninth month of autumn (475 AD), a great military upheaval occurred. This was the revenge war of King Changsu (長壽王) of Koguryŏ. Koguryŏ always regarded the harm done to King Kogugwŏn by the Paekche army as a national shame and relentlessly attacked Paekche. In this year, the Koguryŏ king, leading 30,000 elite troops with four fierce generals—Taero (對盧), Cheja (齊子), Chaechŭnggyŏllu (再曾桀婁), and Kŏirmannyŏn (古爾萬年) (Chaechŭng and Kŏir were originally Paekche people who became guides)—laid siege to the capital for seven days. He divided the troops into four routes, attacking from all sides, and used fire to break down the city gates. The king fled with only a few dozen riders but was killed by Kyŏllu (桀婁) and others below the Acha Fortress (阿且城, located on present-day Achasan Mountain). (Kyŏllu bound the king, spat on his face three times, and then killed him.) Over 8,000 men and women were taken as prisoners by the Koguryŏ army. This was the first time Seoul had fallen to enemy forces after becoming a capital. Although it is difficult to know the details of that time now, the tragic scene of the defeat—the collapse of the capital and the death of the king—how could it be expressed? As a result of this defeat, Prince Munju (文周) fled south and established a new capital in Ungjin (熊津, present-day Kongju), and the Hanyang capital became Koguryŏ territory under the name Namp'yŏngyangsŏng (南平壤城, i.e., Namgyŏng) for 77 years. In the 29th year of King Sŏng (聖王) of Paekche, the king attacked Koguryŏ again and recovered the old territory. However, in the 31st year, King Chinhŭng (眞興王) of Silla (14th year of his reign) attacked and established Sinju (新州), appointing Ach'ang (阿滄) Kim Mu-ryŏk (金武力) as the military commander. From this time, the Hanyang capital became Silla territory, and in the 16th year of King Chinhŭng, in the 10th month of winter, the king inspected North Hansan (Samgaksan), determined the boundaries, and arrived in Hanyang in the 11th month. The Stele of King Chinhŭng's Inspection Tour (巡狩碑) on the north peak (Bipong, 碑峯) of Sŭngga Temple (僧伽寺) on Samgaksan was erected at that time. (The inscription consists of 12 lines, but the letters are difficult to decipher due to wind and rain erosion. The first line reads "The Record of King Chinhŭng and His Ministers' Inspection Tour" (『曰眞興王及衆臣等巡狩時記』), and the eighth line contains "Military Commander of Namch'ŏn" (『南川軍主』). It is said to have been erected in the 29th year of his reign.) In the 18th year, Sinju was abolished and North Hansanju (北漢山州) was established, but in the 29th year, it was changed to Namch'ŏnju (南川州). After 26 years, it was renamed North Hansanju again. Later, in the 5th month of summer in the 8th year of King T'aejong (太宗王) of Silla, another large country was encountered, namely, Koguryŏ General No Ŭm-sin (惱音信) allied with Malgal General Saeng Gye (生偕) to attack. At that time, the Koguryŏ general fiercely attacked the city with cannons and flying stones, destroying all the houses in the city and creating an immediate crisis. However, the city lord, Taesa (官名) T'ach'ŏn (陀川), was originally a brave and wise general. He threw iron caltrops (鐵蒺藜) to prevent the enemy's men and horses from passing<3> and defended well by firing cannons and crossbows. With only 2,800 people (men and women), he defended to the death for 20 days, so no matter how strong the enemy was, they could not overcome it and retreated. (At that time, a star fell in the enemy camp, and there was a disaster of thunder and rain.) Seeing this and then seeing how, during the Imjin (壬辰) or Pyŏngja (丙子) invasions, so many people fled in terror without even trying to fight once, how can one compare these people, even though they are both from Seoul?
Later, in the 10th year of King Munmu (文武王) of Silla, the Koguryŏ refugees killed the Tang officials and welcomed An Sŭng (安勝) (grandson of King Bojang (寶藏王) and son of Yŏn Chŏng-t'o (淵凈土)) from Saya Island (史冶島, present-day Saya Island (士也島) in Inch'ŏn) to Hansŏng (漢城), making him king and temporarily becoming a vassal king of Silla. Afterward, in the 16th year of King Kyŏngdŏk (景德王) when reforming the military system, North Hansanju was renamed Hanyang-gun (漢陽郡), and Hwanghwae (荒壞, or P'unghwae 豐壞) and Kaebaik (皆伯, or Haengju 幸州) two counties were placed under this county. It was from this time that Seoul was called Hanyang.

Promoted to Namgyŏng during the Koryŏ Dynasty

After about 160 years of the passage of time, in the early Koryŏ period, it was called Yangju (楊州). In the second year of King Munjong (文宗), it was elevated to Namgyŏng (南京) and a new palace was built. In the seventh month of autumn in the first year of King Sukchong (肅宗) (1096 AD), there was even a debate about moving the capital entirely, because Kim Wi-je (金謂磾), a courtier in the Royal Guard, submitted a memorial to King Sukchong based on the geomancy theories of Tosŏn (道詵). His memorial stated, in brief:
"Tosŏn's records say that there are three capitals in Koryŏ: Song'ak (松岳) is the central capital, Mongmyŏk-t'o (木覓壤, Hanyang) is the southern capital, and P'yŏngyang (平壤) is the western capital. If you live in the central capital in the 11th and 12th months and the 1st and 2nd months, in the southern capital in the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th months, and in the western capital in the 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th months, 36 countries will pay tribute. It also says that 160 years after the founding of the nation, the capital will be in Mongmyŏk-t'o. I believe that now is the time to live in the new capital. Currently, the country has the central and western capitals, but lacks the southern capital. I humbly request that you build a capital south of Samgaksan and north of Mongmyŏk Hill and make a tour of them according to the seasons."
Then and now, people who are deluded by geomancy theories and the secret records of Tosŏn, as well as prophecies like the Chŏnggamnok (鄭堪錄), as soon as the memorial fell into the palace, everyone echoed Kim's words as if it were the word of God, so Sukchong also seemed to listen. In the ninth month of autumn in the fourth year, he first ordered the chief ministers and astrologers (天文官) to discuss matters regarding the construction of Namgyŏng, and the king, princes, and queen traveled to Samgaksan and personally inspected the land for establishing the capital in Yangju (i.e., Kyŏngsŏng). In the sixth year, in the ninth month of autumn, he established the Namgyŏng Construction Office (南京開創都監) and appointed Ch'oe Sa-swi (崔思諏), vice-minister of the Ministry of Culture; Im Ŭi (任懿), censor-in-chief; and Yun Kwan (尹瓘), administrator of Ch'inju, to survey the land. In the tenth month of that year, Ch'oe and others returned and reported, "We have inspected the mountains and rivers in Nowŏn (盧原, present-day Wangsimni 往十里), Haech'on (海村), Yongsan (龍山), and other places, but they are not suitable for building a capital. Only the south of Samgaksan Myŏn-ak (面岳, Myŏnbuksan 負岳山) has a mountain shape and topography that matches the ancient texts (古文, secret records). We request that you build the capital following the central main vein with Im sitting and Pyŏng facing (壬坐丙向, present Kyŏngbok Palace sitting and facing)." The king followed this advice. (At that time, Namgyŏng was established and plum trees 李樹 were planted, and because they propagated greatly, they were immediately cut down and the Li surname 李性 was chosen to be the Han Yoon 漢尹 and the king buried dragon and phoenix tents 龍鳳帳 to suppress the qi 每歲巡幸시에 龍鳳帳을 埋하야 壓氣하얏스니. This was because the secret records said that the Li clan would become kings.) And in the seventh year, following the recommendation of the Ministry of Culture and the Ministry of Appointments, Namgyŏng was newly built, and the boundaries were set according to the mountain shapes and water currents, from Taebong (大峯)<4> in the east, Kibong (岐峯) in the west, Sari (沙里) in the south, and Myŏn-ak in the north.
From the time of Sukchong onwards, the successive kings of Koryŏ regarded Namgyŏng, or Seoul, as a place of longing or mystery and visited it as an annual event. King Yejong (睿宗) visited four times (once accompanying the queen mother and visiting Changŭi Temple (藏義寺) and Sŭngga Cave (僧伽窟) on Samgaksan), King Injong (仁宗) visited once, King Ŭijong (毅宗) visited twice, and King Kojong (高宗), based on the prophecy of a certain monk, had Eunuch Yi Paek-chŏn (李百全) enshrine the royal robes in a temporary palace in Namgyŏng (21st year). In the 22nd year, he moved the portrait of King T'aejo (太祖神御) to the temporary palace (according to the theory of the three capitals, the royal robes were enshrined in the palace from the 3rd to the 5th month, moved to the Kang'an Hall (康安殿) in the Four Capitals from the 7th to the 11th month, and moved to Namgyŏng from the 12th month to the 11th month of the following year). In the 11th year of King Ch'ungyŏl (忠烈王), the king and the princess visited Namgyŏng together and inspected the Munsukgul (文殊窟) on Samgaksan, and in the 27th year, they hunted. King Ch'ungsuk (忠肅王) also followed this practice of visiting, but in the 6th year of King Kongmin (恭愍王), believing in the prophecy of monk Pou (普愚), he sought to move the capital, and Yi Che-hyŏn (李齊賢) surveyed the land and built a palace, but then stopped based on the words of a diviner. In the 8th year of King U (禑王), in the 8th month, the capital was temporarily moved, but returned to the old capital in the spring of the following year. King Kongyang (恭讓王) also moved the capital in the 9th month of autumn in his second year, but returned to Songgyŏng (松京) in his third year, and after the fall of the country, Hanyang became the royal capital of the Yi clan. In short, before it was the national capital, for about 1,260 years after recorded history (mainly history related to Kyŏngsŏng) (from the 5th year of King Kae-ru of Paekche to the end of Koryŏ), Kyŏngsŏng changed hands four times among Paekche, Koguryŏ, Silla, and Koryŏ. It was the royal capital continuously for 105 years under 9 generations of kings during the Paekche period (from the 26th year of King Kŭn Ch'ogo to the 21st year of King Kae-ro) and about 10 months under Koryŏ. In terms of warfare, because it was the border region between Koryŏ and Che during the Paekche period, there were few peaceful days, but the great disturbance during the last years of King Kae-ro of Paekche was the first great disaster after the expansion of territory. After that, the invasion of Koguryŏ during the time of King T'aejong of Silla was also a significant disturbance, and later, during the Koryŏ period, apart from the temporary stationing of Mongol troops in the 7th month of autumn in the 23rd year of King Kojong and the 6th month of the 44th year, it was generally peaceful. In any case, because Kyŏngsŏng was a key strategic point in central Chosŏn, its history was complex, and it was a place that greatly troubled the Wang clan of Koryŏ with talk of becoming the national capital.<5>

**Named Entities**

盖婁王	Kae-ru Wang
百濟	Paekche
漢陽골	Hanyang-gol
李朝	Yi dynasty
肅宗	Sukchong
樂園洞	Nagwŏn-dong
近肖王	Kŭn Ch'ogo Wang
漢南	Hannam
漢山	Hansan
高句麗	Koguryŏ
平壤城	P'yŏngyangsŏng
故國原王	Kogugwŏn Wang
枕流王	Ch'imnyu Wang
長壽王	Changsu Wang
對盧	Taero
齊子	Cheja
再曾桀婁	Chaechŭnggyŏllu
古爾萬年	Kŏirmannyŏn
阿且城	Acha-sŏng
文周	Munju
熊津	Ungjin
公州	Kongju
聖王	Sŏng Wang
新羅	Silla
眞興王	Chinhŭng Wang
新州	Sinju
阿滄	Ach'ang
金武力	Kim Mu-ryŏk
北漢山州	Pukhansanju
南川州	Namch'ŏnju
太宗王	T'aejong Wang
惱音信	No Ŭm-sin
靺鞨	Malgal
生偕	Saeng Gye
大舍	Taesa
陀川	T'ach'ŏn
文武王	Munmu Wang
寶藏王	Pojang Wang
淵凈土	Yŏn Chŏng-t'o
史冶島	Saya-do
安勝	An Sŭng
漢城	Hansŏng
景德王	Kyŏngdŏk Wang
楊州	Yangju
文宗	Munjong
南京	Namgyŏng
肅宗	Sukchong
衛尉承同正	Wiwisŭngtongjŏng
金謂磾	Kim Wi-je
道詵	Tosŏn
松岳	Song'ak
木覓壤	Mongmyŏk-t'o
平壤	P'yŏngyang
鄭堪錄	Chŏnggamnok
崔思諏	Ch'oe Sa-swi
任懿	Im Ŭi
尹瓘	Yun Kwan
盧原	Nowŏn
往十里	Wangsimni
海村	Haech'on
龍山	Yongsan
李樹	Yi-su
李性	Yi-sŏng
大峯	Tae-bong
岐峯	Ki-bong
沙里	Sa-ri
負岳山	Pu-ak-san
睿宗	Yejong
藏義寺	Changŭi-sa
僧伽窟	Sŭngga-gul
仁宗	Injong
毅宗	Ŭijong
高宗	Kojong
李百全	Yi Paek-chŏn
太祖神御	T'aejosinŏ
康安殿	Kang'an-jŏn
忠烈王	Ch'ungyŏl Wang
文殊窟	Munsu-gul
忠肅王	Ch'ungsuk Wang
恭愍王	Kongmin Wang
普愚	Pou
李齊賢	Yi Che-hyŏn
禑王	U Wang
恭讓王	Kongyang Wang
松京	Songgyŏng
李氏	Yi-ssi
壬辰	Imjin
丙子	Pyŏngja
朝鲜	Chosŏn
景福宮	Kyŏngbok Kung



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	國都以前의 京城, 上下 1300년간의 略史
필자	翠雲生
기사형태	논설

國都以前의 京城, 上下 1300년간의 略史
						翠雲生
京城의 첫 開闢

지금의 서울에는 7만여 호에 30여만 인구가 밤낫으로 들석들석하고 기차 전차 자동차 마차가 쉴새업시 시가로들 달이며 기타 여러가지의 시설이 具備하닛가 제법 도회적인 척하고 서울에 잇는 사람들은 시골을 업수이 녁여서 曰 山골이니 두메니 하고 심지어 사람까지도 시골뜩이 두메놈하며 뱃대불은 짓을 하지만은 지금으로 약 2,000여년 전 안이 500여년 전 國初 때만 하야도 서울은 시골이라면 큰 시골이오 두메라면 아주 山두메엿다. 山岳의 험한 것도 험한 것이어니와 맹수가 지금의 빈대(蝎蟲)보다도 더 들석들석하야 鍾路 네거리나 배우개 시장 가튼데도 호랑이가 白晝에 橫行하얏다 한다. 지금에도 俗間에서 言必稱 仁旺山호랑이가 엇더하니 또는 배우개는 本名 백고개(百峴)인데 녯날에 호랑이가 엇지 만엇던지 혼자는 단이지를 못하고 백여명식 모혀 다녓기 때문에 그럿케 이름을 지엿너니 또는 姜邯贊이가 南京判官으로 잇슬 때에(南京은 지금 서울) 부적을 써서 호랑이를 쫏찻너니 하는 전설이 만이 잇는 것을 드러도 녯날일을 足히 짐작하겟다. 이럿케 험악한 지대를 츰으로 개척하고 北漢山城을 싸흐이는 百濟 盖婁王이엿스니 때는 지금으로부터 1,798년 전-同王5년 壬申2월(서기 132년)이오 그 성의 故址는 지금의 漢陽골이다. (이 北漢山城은 三角山의 北漢山城은 안이니 三角山城은 李朝 肅宗37년에 始築한 것이오 그리고 漢陽골은 상하 二洞이엇스니 지금 樂園洞 입구 東便地帶다) 그때에 그 왕은 물론 북방의 강국인 高句麗를 防備하기 위하야 자기의 국방상 필요로 이 서울을 개척한 것이오 지금 사람의 행복을 위한 것은 안이지만은<2> 그의 공덕은 支那의 九州를 개척하던 夏禹 이상으로 갸륵하야 누구나 잇지 못할 것이다. 한 개의 다리를 架設하거나 한 개의 학교를 設하야도 동상이나 기념비를 해 세우거던 적어도 朝鮮의 수도를 개척한 이에 대하야 이때것 그 故址에 기념비 한아도 업는 것은 너무나 섭섭한 일이다.

百五年間 百濟의 國都로

閒話休題--그후 239년을 經하야 百濟 近肖王26년(서기371)에 왕은 漢南(南漢)으로부터 漢山(즉 漢陽洞)엥 移都하얏스니 이것은 서울이 國都된 시초이오(그때에 왕이 태자와 가티 3만 대병을 率하고 高句麗 平壤城을 攻하야 故國原王을 射殺하고 그 餘威로 북방을 經略코자 하야 此에 移都함) 枕流王2년 春三月에는 漢山에 佛寺를 창건하얏스니 서울에 사찰이 생기기는 이것이 嚆矢엿다. 그러나 百濟 盖鹵王21년 秋9월(서기 475년)에 이르러 일대 兵亂이 이러나섯스니 그것은 곳 고구려 長壽王의 復讎戰爭이엿다. 高句麗는 往時 故國原王이 濟兵에게 被害한 것을 항상 國恥로 생각하고 百濟의 攻伐을 不休하다가 이 해 이르러서 對盧, 齊子, 再曾桀婁, 古爾萬年(再曾 及 古爾는 원래 濟人으로 嚮導가 됨)等 4猛將으로 3만의 精兵을 率하고 麗王이 自將하야 國都를 포위공격한지 凡7일에 兵을 四道로 分하야 夾攻하고 또 風을 縱하야 성문을 燒破하니 왕은 수십騎로 도주하다가 阿且城(在今峨嵯山上)下에서 桀婁 등에게 피해(桀婁가 왕을 縛하야 其面에 三唾後弑함)하고 남녀 8천여인이 麗軍에게 被虜되니 이것은 서울이 都城된 후 츰으로 적병에게 함락됨이다. 지금에 잇서서 그 때의 일을 잘 알기 어렵지만은 都破君亡--그 참패의 비통한 광경이야 엇지 형언할 수 잇섯스랴. 이 戰敗의 결과로 왕자 文周가 南奔하야 熊津(今 公州)에 新都를 세우고 漢都는 遂히 高句麗의 영지가 되야 南平壤城(즉 南京)이란 名義로 凡 77년간을 잇다가 百濟 聖王29년에 왕이 다시 高句麗를 伐하야 故地를 復하엿더니 同31년에 新羅 眞興王(14년)이 攻略하야 新州를 置하고 阿滄金武力으로 軍主를 삼으니 이로부터 漢都는 遂히 新羅의 영지가 되고 眞興王16년 冬10월에는 왕이 北漢山(三角山)에 巡幸하야 封疆을 정하고 동11월에는 漢都에까지 至하얏스니 지금 三角山 僧伽寺 北峯(碑峯)上에 잇는 眞興王의 巡狩碑는 당시에 立한 것이엿다.(비문은 凡12行으로 風磨雨洗하야 字劃을 辨키 難하되 제1행에 『曰眞興王及衆臣等巡狩時記』라 하고 제8행은 『南川軍主』라 記한 것이 僅히 見하는데 同王29년에 建한 것이라 한다) 同王18년에는 新州를 廢하고 北漢山州를 置하얏다가 同29년에는 南川州로 變하엿더니 其後26년에는 다시 北漢山州로 復號하얏다. 그 뒤 新羅 太宗王8년 夏5월에 이르러 또 한 큰 나라를 만낫스니 그것은 高句麗將 惱音信이 靺鞨將 生偕로 더부러 合攻함이엿다. 때에 麗將은 砲車와 飛石으로 城中을 猛擊하니 城中 家屋이 모다 破壞하야 一時危急에 빠젓섯다. 그러나 城主 大舍(官名) 陀川은 원래의 智勇의 將으로 鐵蒺藜를 擲하야 적의 人馬가 通行치 못하게<3> 하고 砲弩를 발사하야 적을 善히 防守하얏다. 그리하야 僅히 2,800인(남녀並)으로 凡20일간을 抵死防禦하니 아모리 강대한 적도 엇지하지 못하고 退去하얏다.(其時 敵營에 星이 落하고 雷雨의 災가 有함) 이것을 보고 과거 壬辰이나 丙子亂 때에 그 허다한 인민이 감히 한번 싸워 보지도 못하고 抱頭鼠竄한 것을 보면 가튼 서울 사람이라도 其比가 엇지 霄壤의 判일 뿐이랴.
그 뒤 新羅 文武王 10년에는 高句麗 유민이 唐의 官人을 殺하고 寶藏王의 外孫 安勝(淵凈土子)을 史冶島(今 仁川 士也島)로서 漢城에 迎立하야 왕을 삼고 일시 新羅의 藩王이 되엿다가 其後 景德王16년 군제개혁할 때에 北漢山州를 改하야 漢陽郡이라 하고 荒壞(豐壞) 皆伯(幸州) 2縣을 此郡에 속하얏스니 서울을 漢陽이라 稱하기는 이 때부터엿다.

高麗때에는 南京으로 陞次

그후 春風秋雨 160여년을 지내 高麗 초에는 楊州라 칭하다가 文宗2년에는 南京으로 陛하고 新宮을 築하엿더니 肅宗 원년 秋7월(서기1096년)에는 아주 遷都論까지 이러낫스니 이는 衛尉承同正 金謂磾가 道詵의 風水說로 肅宗에게 上䟽한 까닭이엿다. 其書에 略曰
『道詵記에 云하되 高麗之地에 三京이 有하니 松岳이 爲中京이오 木覓壤(漢陽)이 爲南京이오 平壤이 爲西京이라. 11, 12, 2월에 中京에 住하고 3, 4, 5, 6월에 南京에 住하고 7, 8, 9, 10월에 西京에 住하면 36국이 朝한다 하얏고 又云하되 開國 후 160여년에 木覓壤에 都한다 하얏스니 臣은 謂하되 今時가 正희 新京에 住할 시기라. 今에 國家가 中京과 西京은 有하되 南京이 闕焉하니 伏望컨대 三角山 南과 木覓 北坪에 都城을 건립하야 時로써 巡驆하소서』云云.
그 때나 이 때나 風水說 안인 道詵의 秘記와 鄭堪錄가튼 것을 迷惑하는 사람들은 그 上書가 한번 궁중에 떠러지매 무슨 上帝의 降話나 나린 듯이 如出一口로 모도 金의 말을 雷和하야 肅宗에게 말하니 肅宗도 또한 그럴듯이 듯고 同4년 秋9월에는 먼저 宰臣과 日官(天文官)에 명하야 南京 건설에 관한 事를 論케 하고 왕 及 왕자, 왕후는 三角山까지 幸行하고 친히 楊州(즉 京城)에 至하야 宅都할 地를 鑑相하고 同6년에는 秋9월에 또 南京開創都監을 두고 門下侍郞平章事 崔思諏와 御史大夫 任懿와 知秦事 尹瓘 등으로 地를 相케 하니 그해 10월에 崔등이 還奏하되 『臣 등이 盧原(今 往十里) 海村 龍山 등지에 就하야 산수를 審視하니 建都에 不合하되 오즉 三角山 面岳(面岳은 負岳山) 南이 山形과 산세가 古文(古文은 秘記)에 부합하니 청컨대 主幹中心大脉壬坐丙向(지금 景福宮 坐向)에 隨形建都하소서 하니 왕이 從하얏다.(其時 南京을 設하고 李樹를 種하니 매우 繁殖됨으로 卽輒斫去하고 李性을 택하야 漢尹을 삼고 왕이 每歲巡幸시에 龍鳳帳을 埋하야 壓氣하얏스니. 이것은 그 秘記에 李씨가 왕이 된다는 말이 잇슴으로 그리함니다.) 그리고 同7년에는 中書門下의 奏言에 從하야 南京을 新作하되 山形水勢를 從하야 東으로는 大峯<4> 西으로 岐峯 南에 沙里 北에 面岳까지 界를 정하얏다.
肅宗 이후부터 高麗의 역대 군왕은 南京 즉 서울을 한 懷疑의 鄕 또는 神秘의 地로 생각하고 연중 행사로 幸行하야 睿宗은 凡4차를 내왕하고(1차는 태후까지 奉하고 三角山의 藏義寺, 僧伽窟까지 幸行함) 仁宗은 1차, 毅宗은 2차 幸行하고 高宗은 엇던 僧의 讖說에 의하야 內侍 李百全으로 御衣를 南京 假闕에 奉安하고(21년) 또 22년에는 太祖神御를 假闕에 移安하고(三京說에 의하야 3월로 5월까지 御衣를 궁전에 安하고 7월로 至11월은 四京 康安殿, 12월로 翌年11월가지는 南京에 移安) 그리고 忠烈王11년에는 왕이 공주와 가티 南京에 幸하야 三角山 文殊窟까지 臨御하고 同27년에는 畋獵을 하며 其後 忠肅王도 其例로 幸行을 하다가 恭愍王6년에는 僧 普愚의 讖說을 信하고 遷都코자 하야 李齊賢으로 地를 相하고 궁궐을 築하다가 다시 卜者의 言에 의하야 중지하얏고 禑王8년 8월에는 일시 천도하얏다가 그 翌年 春에 환도하엿더니 恭讓王이 그 2년 秋9월에 또 천도하엿다가 同3년에 다시 松京에 還하고 國亡 후 漢陽은 遂히 李씨의 王都가 되엿다. 요컨더 國都 이전에 잇어서서는 有史 후(주로 京城에 관한 史) 凡1,260여년간(自 百濟 蓋婁王5년으로 至 麗末)에 京城은 百濟, 高句麗, 新羅, 高麗 등 주인을 범 4차 교체하는 중 계속하야 王都가 되기는 百濟時 9代왕, 105년간이오(自近肖古王26년 至盖鹵王21년) 高麗에 약 10개월이며 병란으로는 百濟시대에 麗濟의 국경지대가 되니만치 寧日이 別無하얏스나 百濟 盖鹵王 말년의 高句麗의 병란이 拓地 후 츰 되는 대란이엿스며 其後 新羅 太宗王 때 高句麗의 침입도 적지 안은 병란이엿고 降하야 高麗시대에는 高宗23년 秋7월과 同44년 6월에 蒙古의 兵이 일시 주둔하엿던 외에는 대걔 安靜하게 지냇섯다. 엇지하엿던 京城은 朝鮮의 중부 요충지이니만치 역사가 多端하엿고 國都의 說로 高麗의 王씨를 퍽 괴롭게 한 곳이엿다.<5>
<2-5>