별건곤 제23호
1929년 09월 27일
京城의 五百年史 (Five Hundred Year History of Kyŏngsŏng)
車相瓚
논설 (Essay)

The Five Hundred Year History of Kyŏngsŏng
Cha Sang-ch'an

The Capital Was First Established in the Second Year of Yi T'aejo

It was July 16th of the year Imshin in the autumn, 538 years ago from now (1392 AD). Yi T'aejo conspired with Pae Kŭng-nyŏm, Cho Chun, Chŏng To-jŏn, and others to usurp the throne of Koryŏ, and he ascended the throne at Souch'anggung in Songgyŏng, changing the country's name to Chosŏn (initially it was Hwaryŏng, but it was immediately changed). However, since he originally had no distinguished lineage or generations of merit, and he was merely a self-made military man from beyond the borders who obtained the throne solely through the power of his three-foot sword, not only did he not yet have the support of the general public, but also the various royals of Koryŏ and the hereditary officials all harbored discontent and showed signs of resistance. T'aejo, always burdened with anxiety, planned to leave Songgyŏng, the ancestral base of the Wang clan, and move the capital to another place to establish a new base for the Yi clan. In doing so, he thought it would be much better to move further away than Kyŏngsŏng, which was close to Songgyŏng, to the area south of Ch'aryŏng (在公州, in Kongju), which had been treated poorly by the Koryŏ dynasty (because Later Paekche was fickle and unreliable, T'aejo of Koryŏ instructed his descendants in his will not to favor people from south of Ch'aryŏng, and consequently they stopped employing them generation after generation). In the spring of the following year, Kyeyu, he personally traveled to Kongju, selected a site at the foot of Mt. Kyeryong (now the so-called New Capital), and began the construction of the capital. However, because the land was originally narrow in terrain, the soil was poor, transportation was inconvenient, and the waterway was distant, making it impossible to become a national capital, he was greatly worried. Then, because there was an opposition memorial from Ha Ryun, the Kyŏnggi observer, he entrusted it to a divine dream (T'aejo dreamed that a divine person came and said that this land was the capital site of the Chŏng clan, and Hanyang was the capital site of the Yi clan, etc. This was of course a story made up by T'aejo to rally people and maintain his authority). He stopped the construction and ordered Chŏng To-jŏn, Nam Ŭn, Yi Chik, and others to inspect Hanyang again, after which he finalized it as the national capital (T'aejo year 2). He changed Hanyang Prefecture to Hansŏng Prefecture, and divided the prefecture into 5 parts and 49 wards (the names of the parts and wards are detailed elsewhere). Calling Seoul Hansŏng Prefecture began at this time, and moving the capital to Hansŏng in the 3rd year, Kapsul, was entirely in accordance with the following argument for fixing the capital by Yu Kwan.

『In short, the capitals of ancient and modern times have not gone beyond Kwanchung (關中) and Loyang (洛陽). Moreover, within our country's four borders, it is only ten thousand ri (里), how could there be many places to make a capital? Only Songdo (松都) and Hanyang are the best of the best. Last year, when we fixed the capital at Kyeryong, the people were all worried <6> because its terrain was narrow and the land was poor, the roads were uneven and the waterways were circuitous. Now, the people are all happy about the move to Hanyang, and its terrain, land, and waterways are similar to Songdo. Looking at the popular sentiment, Hanyang is truly the place where Your Majesty's heavenly mandate lies.』

Muhak Taesa and Kyŏngsŏng

Muhak Taesa (無學大師) cannot be forgotten in the matter of designating Hansŏng as the national capital. When T'aejo was still of humble origin, Muhak Taesa, along with his teacher Naong Taesa (懶翁大師), happened to pass by Hamhŭng and met T'aejo. At his request, he chose the burial site for Hwanjo (桓祖) (Hwanjo was T'aejo's father; his tomb, Chŏngnŭng (定陵), is located on land that Muhak had chosen, commonly known as the land of kings and nobles). Later, at Mt. Sŏlp'ong in Anbyŏn, he also interpreted T'aejo's dream, which is why T'aejo always trusted Muhak (When T'aejo was in Anbyŏn, he dreamed that 10,000 chickens crowed at once, and he heard the sound of pounding a millstone, and flowers fell and a mirror broke, and he entered a dilapidated house and carried out three rafters (椽). He told the old woman who owned the house about his dream, and the old woman said that it was an auspicious dream and told him not to speak of it carelessly, but to ask the strange monk on Mt. Sŏlp'ong (Sŏgwangsan (釋王山)). T'aejo went and asked the monk, and the monk replied that the crowing of 10,000 chickens meant a high and noble position (because the sound of chicken (鷄音) is the same as high and noble position (高貴位)), the sound of the millstone meant virtue added to the east, flowers fell and formed fruit, and a broken mirror made a sound, and carrying three rafters meant king (王字), etc. The strange monk was none other than Muhak, and from then on T'aejo was pleased and confident and trusted Muhak as his divine teacher. After T'aejo ascended the throne, he searched in all directions to determine the national capital, and discovered Muhak living in seclusion on Mt. Kodal in Koksan County, Hwanghae Province (at that time, the governors of the three provinces of Kyŏnggi, Hwanghae, and P'yŏngan proceeded together to find Muhak, and upon hearing that a monk was living in seclusion on Mt. Kodal in Koksan, the three governors entered the mountain, but the road was rough, so they each hung their seals on pine branches and proceeded in straw shoes. They saw the monk and asked him why he was living alone, and the monk pointed and said that if they built a house at Samp'ong Peak (三印峯) beyond that pass, the three provincial governors would come to visit at once. The governors knew that the man was Muhak and invited him to come with them), he was greatly pleased and immediately summoned him and asked him about the site for the capital. Muhak followed the mountain range from Paegundae (白雲臺) on Mt. Samgak to Pip'ong (碑峯), southwest of Man'gyŏngdae (萬景臺) (i.e., Kukmangbong (國望峯)), where there was a stone monument inscribed with the six characters 『Muhak has mistakenly come here (無學이 誤尋到此)』. This was a monument erected by Tosŏn (道詵). Muhak then changed his route and followed the due south ridge of Man'gyŏngdae, arriving directly below Mt. Paegak and choosing the site for the palace, which was the place where Yi trees had been planted during the Koryŏ dynasty. Initially, Muhak wanted to make Mt. Inwang (仁旺山) the guardian mountain (鎮山), and Mt. Namsan (南山) and Mt. Paegak (白岳) the left and right dragons and tigers, but Chŏng To-jŏn<pers> questioned him, saying that emperors have always ruled facing south, and he had never heard of facing east, and he insisted. Muhak<pers> sighed and said that if they did not listen to him, they would think of his words 200 years later. (The Sinsu Biki (山水秘記) of the Great Master Ŭisang of Silla says that if those who choose a capital listen to the words of a monk, the nation's fortune may be extended, but if a person with the surname Chŏng (鄭姓人) appears and argues, a disaster of usurpation will occur within five generations, and a great upheaval will occur within 200 years. Because the palace was built facing south (壬坐丙向) according to Chŏng's words, there was the change of brothers and flesh and blood of T'aejong, the change of Sejo's reinstatement, and the Imjin War, so there is a popular tradition that Ŭisang was able to foresee events 800 years later, and Muhak also knew it.) According to another account, when Muhak first decided on the national capital, he first tried to fix it in Wangsimni, but a divine person appeared and said to go 10 more ri and find it at the foot of Mt. Paegak. <7> Because of this, the place name Wangsimni (往十里) outside the East Gate was created, and when the palace was being built, the pillars were small and fell over, and Muhak did not know the reason, so he was in trouble for a while. Then an old farmer appeared, plowing a field with a black ox, and the words he used to scold the ox were as foolish as Muhak. Muhak was surprised and asked the farmer the reason, and the farmer replied that Hanyang was the shape of a crane (鶴의 形). If you want to build a house on the back of a crane, you have to press down on the wings (羽), but if you leave the wings alone and build the house on the back first, how can it not fall over? Muhak realized and then built the palace walls first, and built the palace later, and there was no problem. Whether this is true or not is another matter, but it is true that Muhak chose the site of Hanyang, and it is also true that he argued with Chŏng To-jŏn. (The above facts are all in Osan Sŏllim (五山說林), Sun'osaji (旬五誌) and other old records, but it seems to have come from the worship of geomancy (風水) at the time.)

The Construction of the Three Palaces and the Allocation of the Six Ministries

The story of fixing the capital has become too long. So, T'aejo first moved the capital to Hanyang, but because there was no palace, he temporarily resided in Suganggung (壽康宮) (now the old site of Ch'anggyŏngwŏn (昌慶苑)), which was a detached palace during the Koryŏ period, and appointed Ch'ŏngsŏngbaek (靑城伯) Shim Tŏk-pu as the superintendent of the palace construction project. In September of the fourth year, Ŭlhae, the various palaces and the T'aemyo (太廟) were completed, and he immediately moved to the new palace, and after holding a banquet for the officials and the completion, he ordered Chŏng To-jŏn to name the various palaces and allocate each government office outside the Six Ministries (吏戶禮兵刑工), and in the summer of that year, he built a bell tower (鐘閣) on Unch'ŏnggae (雲從街) (now Chongno 1-ga (鍾路1丁目)) and struck the bell every morning and evening. At 1 kyŏng 3 chŏm (1更3點), he struck it 28 times to correspond to the 28 constellations (28宿), which was called injŏng (人定) (the word injŏng (人定) for bell is a corruption of this word), and at 5 kyŏng 3 chŏm (5更3點), he struck it 33 times to correspond to the 33 heavens (33天), which was called p'aru (罷漏). In the same year, Pyŏngja (5th year), he conscripted about 200,000 commoners from each province to build the city walls under the direction of P'yŏngyangbaek (平壤伯) Cho Chun (details about this are in the article on the city walls), and renewed other general facilities. Hansŏng, which had long been a virgin land, underwent a complete transformation and became a grand metropolis. However, because many things were still in their infancy and the subjects mostly thought of the old capital, and T'aejo also could not sever his old ties, he moved the capital back to Kaesŏng in March of the first year of Chŏngjong, and the palaces of Kyŏngsŏng became temporarily empty.

The Golden Age of Kyŏngsŏng and the Dark Age of Kyŏngsŏng

Not long after, T'aejong ascended the throne and re-established the capital in Hanyang (T'aejong year 5), and from then on, Hanyang became the permanent capital of the Yi clan. In the 8th year of the same king, a large pond was dug south of Muhwagwan (慕華館), which is the current Yŏn'gyŏngdang Pond (天然亭池). In the 9th year, a memorial stele was erected at the Munmyo (文廟) (see the article on famous historic sites of Kyŏngsŏng), and in the 11th year, four schools (中,東,西,南) were established, which was the beginning of schools in Seoul. In the 12th year, a large bell was cast and hung at Kwanghwamun (光化門) (this bell, with an inscription by Pyŏn Kyeryang (卞季良), was a bell to praise the merits of T'aejong, and was melted in the Imjin War), and in the following year, Kongp'an (工判) Pak Cha-ch'ŏng was ordered to build Kyŏnghoeru (慶會樓), and Ha Ryun was commissioned to write the inscription and named it Kyŏnghoeru, and the name Kyŏnghoeru became known to the world from this time. (The pavilion was originally built by T'aejo, but it had deteriorated so it was rebuilt.) <8> Later, in the 3rd year of Sejong (1421 AD), from January 15th to February 23rd, for 38 days, 322,000 commoners from each province were conscripted to rebuild the capital city of Kyŏngsŏng with stone, and the eight gates were newly built. Kyŏngsŏng at that time must have been very bustling, but the appearance of the so-called national capital was completed for the first time at this time (details about the construction of the city and the erection of the gates are in other articles on the city walls and the eight great gates). In the 20th year of the same king (1438 AD), Chŏng In-ji (鄭麟址), Chŏng Cho (鄭招), Yi Chang (李藏), and Chang Yŏng-sil (蔣永實) (Yi and Chang supervised the project, and the two Chŏngs oversaw the classics) were ordered to make two angbu ilgu (仰釜日晷) (commonly known as sun dial), one was placed by the Hyejŏnggyo bridge (惠政橋) (near the current Kwanghwamun post office), and one was placed on Chongno 4-ga (鍾路4丁目) north side of Chongmyo South Street (宗廟南街) so that the general public could look down and know the time, which is a noteworthy event in the history of Kyŏngsŏng. In the 9th year of Sejo, Taewŏn'gaksa (大圓覺寺) was founded on the old site of Hŭngboksa (興福寺) (now Tapkol Park (塔洞公園)), and in April of the 12th year, the 13-story pagoda (Tapkol Park) which is known today in Kyŏngsŏng as a great treasure and a great historic site was completed and a lantern festival was held. Tens of thousands of monks and other men and women participated, creating an unprecedented grand scene. In short, the Sejong era to the Sejo era was the golden age in the history of the Yi dynasty, and it can be said to be the golden age in the history of Kyŏngsŏng as well (the pagoda and Wŏn'gaksa are also mentioned in the article on famous historic sites). From the time of Yejong to the time of Sŏngjong, there were changes in the palace system, with the Hansŏngbu P'anbusa (漢城府 判府事) becoming P'anyun (判尹), Yun (尹) becoming Chwayun (左右尹), and Soyun (少尹) becoming Sŏyun (庶尹) in April of the first year of Yejong, and the construction of Chongyŏnggak (尊經閣) in Sŏnggyunkwan (成均館) in January of the 6th year of Sŏngjong, the construction of Ch'anggyŏnggung (昌慶宮) in the 15th year (see the article on famous historic sites elsewhere), and the expulsion of monks and shamans from the city in the 2nd year of the same king, but there was nothing else of note. However, in the Yŏnsan era, Kyŏngsŏng underwent a major change and reached a temporary dark age. In the spring of the 10th year of Yŏnsan, Sŏnggyunkwan (成均館) was made a place for banquets, and the spirit tablets of Confucius and other sages were exiled to Kosan'am (高山庵), and shamans were gathered in Taehakkwan (大學館) to "make a lot of noise all day long with popular songs and entertainers (倡夫), performing licentious rituals (淫祀)." Within the city, gisaeng houses such as Yŏn'bangwŏn (聯芳院) (now Tapkol Park), Hamp'angwŏn (含芳院), Nuryangwŏn (蕾陽院), Ch'wihyangwŏn (趨香院), and Chwihyangwŏn (聚香院) were established, and ch'aech'ŏngsa (採靑使) and ch'aehongsa (採紅使) were appointed to conscript beautiful women and fine horses from each province. Three hundred musicians and famous gisaeng from various provinces were selected, the musicians were called Kwanghŭi (廣熙), and the prostitutes were called Unp'yŏng (運平), Hŭngch'ŏng (興淸), and Sokhong (續紅). The world of Kyŏngsŏng became a land of song and dance day and night, a land of licentiousness. Also, all the houses outside the city walls were demolished, and the inner city walls were built, and the towns of Yangju, P'aju, and Koyang outside the city were abolished and their land was left empty to create places for excursions. The scholar purges (士禍) also occurred, and Kyŏngsŏng's nose was filled with the stench of scholars' blood. At that time, Kyŏngsŏng suffered no small amount of disturbances if it was called a riot after the allocation of the national capital, and it was a big mistake if it was called a mistake. However, on the night of September 1st of the same king's 2nd year, Pak Wŏn-jong (朴元宗) and Sŏng Hŭi-an's (成希顔) coup to enthrone Chungjong broke out at the training center, and Yŏnsan abdicated, and Kyŏngsŏng became temporarily quiet again, like a house that had been set on fire and then put out.

The Imjin War and Kyŏngsŏng

In the summer of the 5th year of Chungjong, middle school students with anti-Buddhist ideas set fire to Chŏngnŭngsa (貞陵寺) (i.e., Hŭngt'ŏnsa (興天寺), located in Chŏngdong), causing a temporary disturbance, and in the 7th year, by royal order, Wŏn'gaksa (圓覺寺) was demolished, and in September of the 8th year of Myŏngjong <9>, a fire broke out in the Great Palace of Kyŏngbokkung (景福宮 大內), extending to the Ŭnjŏngjŏn Nammun (恩政殿 南廡), which was an unprecedented major fire. The king reduced meals and suspended the market for three days, and Kyŏngsŏng was noisy again for about a year until October of the following year, when it was rebuilt. However, such fires were rather minor and not worth discussing much, but in the Byŏngja War of the Imjin year of Sŏnjo's 25th year, all of Chosŏn, and especially Kyŏngsŏng, suffered a great tragedy that could never be forgotten in history. Not only were many lives taken, but also the various palaces and other facilities were all burned down. Only the sites of Kyŏngbokkung and Chongmyo remained roughly, and only Namdaemun (南大門) barely preserved its shape among the eight great gates. Ch'angdŏkkung (昌德宮) was completely reduced to ashes except for Tonŭimun (敦義門), and Ch'anggyŏnggung (昌慶宮) only maintained the remains of Honghwamun (弘化門), Myŏngjŏngmun (明政門), and Myŏngjŏngjŏn (明政殿). The Ingyŏngjŏn (仁慶殿) bell tower in Chongno even melted down, so what more can be said about other government office buildings and houses? On the empty palace grounds, flocks of magpies and foxes cried wildly in broad daylight, and packs of hungry dogs and cats roamed the streets more fiercely than wild beasts, tearing apart and devouring human corpses. Not a single Chosŏn person could be seen in the ten-ri royal city, only the enemy's swords and flags could be seen, and only the enemy's mournful bugle sounds and fierce horse hoof sounds could be heard. How could the tragic situation of Kyŏngsŏng at that time be bearably described? Compared to this, the rebellion of King Changsu of Koguryŏ in the era of the Paekche capital was merely a children's play. However, whether it was heavenly grace or divine help, the turtle ships of Admiral Yi Sun-sin crushed the enemy in the southern sea as if in a land without people, and the sound of the Ming dynasty's relief troops echoed through the mountains and rivers of the peninsula, and the righteous armies of the eight provinces also rose like swarms of bees. The enemy, who were advancing with irresistible force, were so frightened that they fled far away, and the three capitals were recovered. Yi Yu-song (李如松) stayed in Kyŏngsŏng (the old site of the Chosŏn Hotel, the small princess's house), and on October 4th of the 26th year, the royal carriage returned to the capital and proclaimed throughout the country. He resided in the residence of Wŏlsan Taegun (月山大君) in Chŏngdong (now Tŏksugung (德壽宮)), and the house of Sim Ŭi-gyŏm (沈義謙) was made the East Palace (東宮), and the house of Sim Yŏn-wŏn (沈連源) was made the Middle Palace (中宮) (because the palaces were burned down). However, as the saying goes, when a tiger leaves through the front gate, a lion enters through the back gate. Although the Japanese soldiers had retreated from Kyŏngsŏng, the tyranny of the Ming soldiers was truly unparalleled, wantonly raping women and plundering the people's wealth, and the citizens of Kyŏngsŏng were also in a state of fear. The tragedy of a weak nation is felt even more greatly here. At this time, another de facto iconic object was created in Kyŏngsŏng, which was the Kwan U Temple (關羽廟) in addition to Sungnyemun (崇禮門) and Hŭnginmun (興仁門), and the Sŏnmu Shrine (宣武祠) (commonly known as the Saengsadang (生祠堂)) of Ming generals Hyŏng Kae (邢玠) and Yang Ho (楊鎬) in T'aep'yŏnggwan West (太平館西) (the residence of the Governor-General in Sŏsomunjŏng (西小門町)). Of course, it was more about trying to win the favor of the Ming people than about thinking of the grace of the Ming generals. However, because of that, several new buildings were built in Kyŏngsŏng, so it can be said that the household goods have increased a little.

The Kwanghae Era is the King of Kyŏngsŏng's Reconstruction

Kyŏngsŏng, which had suffered such devastation, was rebuilt during the reign of Kwanghae. In the first year, Chongmyo and Ch'angdŏkkung were rebuilt, and the Sŏnhyech'ŏng (宣惠廳) was established (the reconstruction of Chongmyo and the implementation of Sŏnhyech'ŏng were events in the final years of Sŏnjo, but were actually Kwanghae's projects). In the second year, Pongjajŏn (奉慈殿) (Kwanghae's mother, Kongbin's shrine) was built, the four schools were rebuilt, the Ch'ŭmgyŏnggak (欽敬閣) was rebuilt in Ch'angdŏkkung, and Porugak (報漏閣) was built. In the 7th year, Ŭlmyo, Ch'anggyŏnggung was renovated, and in the 8th year, Pyŏngjin, three new palaces, Ingyŏng, Chasu, and Kyŏngdŏk <10> (now Honghwamun Palace), were created again. In the 11th year, Kimi, the Manninkwa (萬人科) was established in Kyŏngsŏng, and 10,000 warriors were tested and selected. Because he was so eager to rebuild the capital, the finances were naturally poor in the aftermath of the war, so he implemented the Sale of Offices Act (賣官法) and the Payment for Exemption from Punishment Act (納金贖刑法), which gradually disrupted the national discipline and created growing popular resentment. In addition, the factional strife of the court officials, which had temporarily ceased during the war, began to raise its head again. The Sŏin faction Yi Kwi (李貴), Kim Ryu (金瑬), Ch'oe Myŏng-gil (崔鳴吉), Chang Yu (張維), and Kim Cha-jŏm (金自點), as well as military officials Yi Sŏ (李曙), Sin Kyŏng-jin (申景禛), and Wŏn Tu-p'yo (元斗杓), who had long been dissatisfied and hated the Taebuk (大北) faction of Yi I-ch'ŏm (李爾瞻) and Chŏng In-hong (鄭仁弘), who were in power at the time, conspired to destroy the Taebuk and even remove Kwanghae from power. They secretly conspired with Prince Nŭngyang (綾陽君) (Injio) and on the night of March 12th of Kwanghae's 15th year, Kyehae, Prince Nŭngyang and others gathered near Sejaengjŏng (洗劍亭), raised a banner of revolt, broke through Ch'angŭimun (彰義文), and stormed into Ch'angdŏkkung, overthrowing Kwanghae and slaughtering or exiling hundreds of people from the Taebuk faction, including Yi I-ch'ŏm. On the orders of Queen Kim (Injio's queen), Injio ascended the throne, and Kwanghae's ambitious plans for reconstruction were thwarted midway. Until this time, the people of the world knew Kwanghae only as a foolish and violent ruler because of the malicious propaganda of the anti-government (the Injio government) and the biased writing of later historians, but in reality he was the opposite, the leader of projects, and unfortunately he became a pitiful victim caught in the midst of factional strife. Of course, he made some mistakes at that time, but for the merit of rebuilding the capital, he cannot be called a benevolent king. If a rebellion had not occurred at that time and there had been a capable person to correct Kwanghae's mistakes and devote himself to state affairs, Kwanghae would have been enough to become a wise ruler of the restoration, and there would have been no reason for Yi Kwal's rebellion to occur, and the two Horan (胡亂) of Tingmyo and Pyongja would have been avoided thanks to the defense measures of P'yŏngan Kamsa (平安監司) Pak Yŏ<11>. However, what can be done when the time is unfavorable and fortune is unequal? (There were many invasions by the Hu during Kwanghae's reign, but because Pak Yŏ defended well as P'yŏngan Kamsa, there was no problem. When Pak was executed after the anti-government, he said that he did not regret his life, but he feared that there would be a Hu disturbance in the country within 10 years after his death.)

Yi Kwal's Rebellion and the Two Horan of Tingmyo and Pyongja

One year after Injio's coup, there was another major disturbance in Kyŏngsŏng, which was the famous Kapcha Yi Kwal's Rebellion. Injio fled to Kongju, and many people in the city also fled to avoid the chaos, but because the people of Kyŏngsŏng did not resist Yi Kwal in any way, Yi Kwal also occupied Kyŏngsŏng safely. Even when fighting the government forces at the end, the battlefield was fortunately in Anhwŏn (鞍峴) (Kilmajae), a mountainous area outside the West Gate, so the people inside the gate not only did not feel any fear, but also gathered on the castle walls to watch the battle as onlookers. This can be sufficiently known from the fact that the Annals of the time said, "The spectators on the castle walls were like a flock of herons." During the Tingmyo Horan (丁卯胡亂) in the 5th year of Injio, when the enemy reached P'yŏngsan, the king had already fled to Kanghwa, so the enemy did not invade Kyŏngsŏng and went straight to Kangdo. The talks broke down in just two months. Kyŏngsŏng at that time, of course, was agitated like the previous Yi Kwal Rebellion, but it did not receive direct military attacks either. However, during the Pyongja Horan (丙子胡亂) in the 10th year of Injio, although the enemy briefly passed through Kyŏngsŏng and went to Namhan, the number of fierce and unparalleled enemies reached 130,000, and it was winter, so many people died of freezing on the way to fleeing, and were plundered, raped, and killed by the rebel army. Even more people died of freezing while fleeing to the mountains during the so-called snowstorm (雪亂) (there was heavy snow and extreme cold at that time). Besides that, there were many people who lost their fathers, sons, brothers, wives, and children and were wailing on the roads. The tragic scene was no less than the Imjin War. The only fortunate thing was that there was no major fire in the capital like in the Imjin War, and they did not kill people at will. After all, the enemy's purpose was not to directly plunder Chosŏn, but only to have Chosŏn sever its relationship with Ming and conclude a treaty of amity with its own country. However, the king's oath of allegiance at the foot of the castle on January 30th of the year of Tingch'uk! The capture of two princes and grand lords and important ministers! How shameful is the hostage taking! The long flowing water of the rapidly flowing Han River cannot wash away the fearful pages of history.

Kyŏngsŏng in the Sukchong and Yŏngjo Eras

After that, during the reign of Hyojong, the Pyŏlgunchikt'chŏng (別軍職廳) and Nŭngmaŏryŏng (能麽兒廳) (military officials' test training ground) were newly established in Kyŏngsŏng because of the advocacy of the Northern Expedition (北伐). Except that the Kkoch'angpaji (꼬창바지) of the Kŭmwisa (禁衛士) fluttered in the streets (Hyojong ordered the guards to wear narrow-sleeved short clothes) and the sound of the hooves of the faltaech'ong (伐大驄) were more frequent than before, there was no particular difference. During the reign of Hyŏnjong, there was nothing else except for the establishment of Pukhak (北學) in the 2nd year of the same king and the establishment of the Kyŏngsŏng Post Office (驛馬遞送處) in the 5th year. During the reign of Sukchong, however, there were the most events since Kwanghaegun. In October of the first year, the household registers of Kyŏngjung and each province were investigated. At that time, the number of households nationwide was 1,234,512, and the population was 4,703,550. For two years, from the 21st to the 22nd year, there was a great famine, and many people starved to death<12>, so two soup kitchens were set up in Kyŏngsŏng to feed the starving people. The famine that year was called the Byŏngja year famine, and there has never been such a thing in all ages. It was also the first time since the Imjin War that famine was prevented with porridge. At that time, the so-called position of Sŏlchuk Kamgwan (設粥監官) was a story to be heard now. In the years 24 and 25, an epidemic (癘疫) raged, and floods occurred for three consecutive years (三歲를 連亘), causing damage to both people and livestock not only in the countryside but also in Kyŏngjung. From the 30th year, the military men of the Five Military Commands (五營門) were released and spent 7 years of their spare time repairing the capital city of Kyŏngsŏng. The neat stones and magnificent gates of Seoul's city walls today were all repaired at that time. In the 37th year, Bukhan Sansŏng (北漢山城) was built, and in the 39th year, Hanbukmun (漢北門) outside Ch'angŭimun (彰義門) was built. (Details about the construction of the city are in the City Walls article.) Sukchong killed many people during his reign due to the Deposed Queen incident and other factional struggles, making the so-called scholars in Kyŏngsŏng unable to feel at ease, and making the citizens see the horrifying scenes of executions every day. He made many mistakes, but for the construction of this Kyŏngsŏng metropolis, he was the greatest contributor since Sejong, the first in a long time since Kwanghae. After that, in the 8th year of Yŏngjo, a famine broke out, and the citizens were given relief, and an epidemic spread, causing great agitation among the people. In the 20th year, ch'oru (譙樓) were first established at the East and West small gates, and in the 32nd year, those who were stranded in Kyŏngsŏng were given porridge by the Sŏnhyech'ŏng (宣惠廳). In February of the 36th year, Chunch'ŏnsa (濬川司) was first established and Kaech'ŏn (開川) was dredged. In 57 days of construction, 150,000 people and 50,000 hired workers were used, spending more than 35,000 nyang (緡) in cash and more than 2,300 bags of rice. A water gauge stone (水標石) 10 cheok high was erected in Supyogyo


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	京城의 五百年史
필자	車相瓚
기사형태	논설

京城의 五百年史
						車相瓚
國都는 李太祖二年에 始定

때는 지금으로부터 538년전(서기1392년) 壬申 秋 7월16일이다. 李太祖는 裵克廉, 趙浚, 鄭道傳 외 某某人과 陰謀하야 高麗의 왕위를 纂奪하고 松京의 壽昌宮에서 왕위에 卽하고 국호를 朝鮮이라 改하얏다.(초에 和寧이라 하얏다가 卽改함) 그러나 원래에 무슨 門閥이나 屢世의 공덕이 업고 一時平地突出의 塞外武夫로 단지 3척 長劍의 힘을 빌어서 왕위를 엇게 된 그에게는 아즉 일반의 인심이 歸從치 안을 뿐 안이라 高麗의 여러 왕족과 世祿의 諸臣이 모도 불평을 품고 반항의 태도를 뵈히니 항상 불안 중에 싸힌 太祖는 근본으로 王씨의 屢世 근거지인 松京을 떠나서 다른 곳으로 천도하야 李씨의 새 근거지를 삼으랴고 꾀하엿다. 그리 하는데는 松京에서 갓차운 京城보다도 더 헐신 나아가서 高麗왕조에 천대를 밧던 車嶺(在公州) 이남지방으로 옴기는 것이 좃켓다 생각하고(先時에 後百濟가 反復無常함으로 麗太祖가 遺命으로 車嶺 이남인을 중용치 말나고 자손에게 훈하야 遂히 世世停擧함) 그 翌年 癸酉 春에 친히 公州에 幸行하야 鷄龍山下에 地를 택하고(지금 소위 新都) 建都의 役을 始하얏다. 그러나 그 땅은 원래 지형이 狹隘한 외에 토지가 汚下하고 교통이 불편하며 水路가 遙遠하야 도저히 國都될 가능성이 업슴으로 크게 걱정하던 중 마츰 京畿觀察 河崙의 반대疏가 잇슴으로 이에 神夢을 托하야(太祖가 夢에 神人이 來言하되 此地는 鄭씨의 都邑之地요 李씨의 都邑之地는 漢陽이라 云云하얏다. 이것은 물론 太祖가 常時人心의 수습 또는 위신 관계상 做出한 說이다) 공사를 중지하고 다시 鄭道傳, 南誾, 李稷 등을 命하야 漢陽을 시찰한 후 國都로 확정하고(太祖2년) 漢陽府를 漢城府로 곳치며 府를 또 5部49坊(部 及 坊名은 他項에 詳載)에 分하얏스니 서울을 漢城府라 칭함은 이 때부터 비롯하고 國都를 漢城에 移하기는 3년 甲戌로서 全허 下記한 柳觀의 定都論을 從함이엿다.
『其略曰 古今所都가 不越乎關中洛陽이라 況我國四境之內는 不過 萬里어널 可都之地가 豈能多有리요 惟松都與漢陽이 善之善也니이다. 去年 春에 定都于鷄龍할새 民咸憂之는<6> 以其形勢狹隘而土地汚下하며 道路不均而水路迂遠也려니 今之遷漢陽也에 民咸喜之하니 形勢와 토지, 水路가 與松都로 相似라 民心觀之則漢陽은 誠陛下天命之所都也 云云』

無學大師와 京城

이 漢城을 國都로 정한 일에 대하야는 無學大師를 또한 이즐 수 업스니 無學大師는 원래 太祖가 미천할 때에 其師 懶翁大師와 가티 우연히 咸興을 지내다가 太祖를 만나 그이 간청으로 桓祖의 묘지를 卜하야주고(桓祖는 太祖의 父니 其묘 定陵은 無學의 所占之地로 속칭 王侯之地) 그 뒤 安邊 雪峯山에서는 또 太祖의 해몽을 하야준 까닭으로 無學을 항상 信仰하더니 (太祖가 安邊에 잇슬 때에 꿈에 萬家의 닭이 일시에 울고 또 방아 찟는 소리가 나며 꼿이 떠러지고 거울이 깨지는 것을 보며 破屋에 드러가 석가래(椽) 3개를 지고 나온 일이 잇슴으로 그 꿈 이약이를 주인 노파에게 하얏더니 노파는 말하되 이것은 貴夢이니 함부로 말하지 말고 雪峯山(釋王山)에 잇는 異僧에게 물으라 함으로 太祖가 가서 물은즉 僧이 대답하되 萬家鷄一鳴은 高貴位오(鷄音이 高貴位와 同故로 云) 杵聲은 德加東이오, 花落成實에 鏡破有聲하고 負三椽은 王字라 云云하니 그 異僧은 즉 無學이오 太祖는 이로부터 心獨喜自負하고 無學을 神師로 信仰하얏다. 太祖가 등극한 뒤에 國都를 정코자하야 사방으로 물색하다가 黃海道 谷山郡 高達山에 은거한 것을 발견하고(그 때에 京畿, 黃海, 平安 3道 方伯이 一路竝進하야 無學을 찻다가 谷山 高達山에 一僧이 은거한다는 말을 듯고 3方伯이 其산에 入할새 路가 험함으로 각기 印章을 松枝에 掛하고 芒鞋로 진행하야 僧을 보고 그 獨居하는 이유를 물은즉 僧이 指하야 曰 저 越便에 三印峯이 잇는데 이 곳에 집을 짓고 살면 三道方伯이 일시에 차자온다 云하니 方伯은 그 사람이 곳 無學인 것을 알고 가티 와다한다) 크게 깃버하야 즉시 召見하고 定都의 地를 問하니 無學이 三角山의 白雲臺로부터 산맥을 차저서 萬景臺(즉 國望峯)의 서남방인 碑峯에 이른즉 일개 石碑가 잇는데 『無學이 誤尋到此』 6자가 刻하얏스니 此는 즉 道詵의 立한 배라 無學이 遂히 路를 改하야 萬景臺의 正南脉을 從하야 白岳山下에 直到하야 궁궐의 터를 잡으니 이것은 곳 高麗 때에 李樹를 심엇던 곳이엿다. 그런데 無學은 常初에 仁旺山으로 鎭山을 삼고 南山과 白岳으로 左右龍虎를 삼으랴고 하엿더니 鄭道傳<pers>이 詰難하야 曰 자고로 제왕이 다 南面而治하얏고 東向을 하얏다는 말은 듯지 못하얏다하고 고집하니 <pers>無學이 歎하야 曰 내의 말을 듯지 안으면 200년 후에 맛당히 내의 말을 생각하리라 하얏다. (新羅義相大師山水秘記에 云하되 都를 택하는 자가 僧言을 信聽하면 국운의 연장할 가망이 잇스나 만일에 鄭姓人이 나와서 시비를 한다면 五世가 못 되야 纂奪의 禍가 生하고 200년 내외에 板蕩이 된다 云하얏는데 鄭言에 의하야 南向(壬坐丙向)으로 建宮한 후로 太宗의 兄弟骨肉之變과 世祖反正의 變이 잇고 또 壬亂이 잇섯슴으로 義相은 800년 後事를 능히 預知하고 無學이 역시 그것을 알엇다는 俗傳이 잇다.) 또 일설에 의하면 無學이 츰에 國都를 정할 때에 먼저 往十里에다 정하랴 하엿더니 엇던 神人이 출현하야 曰 10리를 더 가서 白岳山 밋헤 차즈라한 일이<7> 잇섯기 때문에 東大門外 往十里란 지명이 생기고 또 궁궐을 지을 때에 지둥을 세운즉 작고 넘어짐으로 無學은 그 이유를 알지 못하야 한참 곤란 중에 잇섯더니 엇던 늙은 농부가 黑牛를 물며 밧을 갈다가 소를 꾸진는 말이 그 놈의 소가 미련하기가 無學이 갓다하니 無學이 놀나서 농부에게 그 이유를 물은즉 농부가 대답하되 漢陽은 鶴의 形이라 鶴의 등에 집을 짓자면 저 나래(羽)를 눌느고 지어야 할터인데 나래는 그대로 두고 등에다 집만 먼저 지니 엇지 넘어지지 안켓느냐 하니 無學이 께다고 그제야 먼저 宮城을 쌋고 宮闕을 추후에 진즉 아모 일도 업섯다 한다. 이것이 사실인지 안인지 그것은 별문제어니와 하여간 이 漢陽의 터를 無學이 정한 것만은 사실이오 또 鄭道傳과 서로 詰難한 것도 사실이다. (이상 사실은 五山說林, 旬五誌 기타 고기록에 다 잇는데 필경 당시 風水의 說을 숭상하는데서 나온 말인듯 하다.)

三宮建築과 六曺배판

定都의 이약이가 너무 길엇다. 且說 太祖는 츰에 漢陽에 移都하얏스나 궁궐이 업슴으로 高麗시대  離宮이던 壽康宮(今 昌慶苑 舊址)에 임시 臨御하고  靑城伯 沈德符로 建宮의 役을 總監케 하야 4년 乙亥 秋9월에 諸宮殿과 太廟를 落成하고 즉시 新宮에 移御하야 諸官과 落成의 宴을 開한 후 鄭道傳을 명하야 諸궁전의 이름을 짓고 六曺(吏戶禮兵刑工)이외 각 관서를 배판하고 그 해 녀름에는 雲從街(今 鍾路1丁目)에 鐘閣을 建하고 매일 晨昏에 鐘을 치되 1更3點에는 28宿을 應하야 28번을 치니 謂之人定이오(鐘을 인경이라함이 차의 訛音) 5更3點에는 33天을 應하야 33번을 치니 謂之罷漏엿다. 그리고 同5년 丙子에는 各 道 民丁 약20만을 徵하야 平壤伯 趙浚으로 성벽을 축조하고(此에 관한 것은 성벽 기사에 詳載) 기타 일반의 시설을 일신케하니 오래동안 처녀의 地로 잇던 漢城은 遂히 면목이 一變하야 당당한 大都會가 되엿다. 그러나 여러가지가 아즉 草創이오 臣民이 대개 舊都를 생각하고 太祖도 또한 舊緣을 끈치 못함으로 定宗원년 3월에 다시 開城으로 천도하니 京城의 궁전은 일시 空闕이 되엿섯다.

黃金時代의 京城과 暗黑時代의 京城

그런지 얼마 안이하야 太宗이 즉위하며 다시 漢陽에 復都하니(太宗5년) 이로부터 漢陽은 영구히 李씨의 王都가 되엿다. 同王8년에는 慕華館 南에 大池를 팟스니 지금 天然亭池가 그것이오 同9년에는 文廟의 廟庭碑를 세우고(京城의 名勝古跡記事 참조) 동11년에는 四學(中,東,西,南)을 세웟스니 이는 서울에 학교가 생긴 효시엿다. 同12년에는 大鐘을 鑄하야 光化門에 懸하고(此鐘은 卞季良의 銘한 바로 太宗의 頌功德鐘이니 壬亂兵火에 消融됨) 그 翌年에는 工判 朴子靑을 명하야 慶會樓를 건축하고 河崙으로 記를 짓게 하고 慶會樓라 명명하니 慶會樓란 이름이 이때부터 世에 顯하얏다. (樓는 원래 太祖가 창건하얏스나 至是壞頹<8>함으로 개축함.) 그후 世宗3년(서기1421)에는 1월15일로부터 2월23일까지 38일간에 各道 民丁 32만2천여명을 賦役하야 京城의 都城을 石築으로 改修하고 八門을 새로 세웟스니 당시의 京城은 매우 벅적거리기도 하엿스려니와 소위 國都라는 면목도 이 때에 비로소 완성되엿고(築城 及 立門에 관한 것은 他項 성벽과 八大門 기사에 詳載함) 同王20년(서기1438)에는 鄭麟址, 鄭招, 李藏, 蔣永實(李와 蔣은 그 役을 掌督하고 양鄭은 古典을 掌稽함) 등을 명하야 仰釜日晷(속칭 日影臺) 2개를 製하야 1은 惠政橋畔(今 光化門우편국 부근) 1은 宗廟南街(鍾路4丁目 북측)에 置하야 일반인민으로 俯視하고 시간을 知케 되얏스니 이는 京城사상에 특기할 바이다. 그리고 世祖9년에는 興福寺 古址(今 塔洞公園)에 大圓覺寺를 창건하고 同12년 4월에는 今日 京城에서 일대 보물이오 일대 古蹟으로 知하는 13층탑(塔洞公園)이 落成되야 연등회를 設하얏는데 승려와 기타 남녀의 參會者 수만에 달하야 공전의 대성황을 이르럿다. 요컨대 世宗시대로부터 世祖시대는 李朝史上에 황금시대인 동시에 이 京城史上에 잇서서도 또한 황금시대라 可謂하겟다.(塔 及 圓覺寺도 名勝古蹟記事 참조) 其後 睿宗시대로부터 成宗시대까지는 睿宗원년 4월에 漢城府 判府事를 判尹으로 尹은 左右尹으로, 少尹을 庶尹으로 한 宮制의 변경과 成宗6년 정월에 成均館 내에 尊經閣 건축, 15년에 昌慶宮 건축(他項 名勝古跡記事 참조)한 것과 同王2년에 승려 巫覡을 성외에 축출한 사실 이외에 별로 이럿타 할 것이 업스나 燕山朝에 이르러서는 京城은 일대 변동이 이러나서 일시 암흑시대를 이르럿다. 즉 燕山10년 봄에는 成均館을 宴樂處로 삼고 孔子 이하 諸賢의 位版는 高山庵에 귀양을 보내며 大學館에는 巫覡을 모혀드러 『요새에는 흔히 流行하는 노래까락 倡夫타량 가튼 것으로 종일 요란하게 떠들며 淫祀를 행하고 성내에는 聯芳院(今 塔洞公園), 含芳院, 蕾陽院, 趨香院, 聚香院 등의 妓樂院을 設하고 採靑使, 採紅使를 設하야 各道의 미녀 良馬를 採徵하고 諸道의 樂工과 名妓300을 選하야 악공은 稱曰 廣熙라 하고 娼妓는 稱曰 運平, 興淸, 續紅이라 하야 京城의 천지는 晝夜 歌舞의 鄕, 淫蕩의 鄕으로 化하고 또 城基 외 인가를 전부 撤毁하고 內都城을 築하며 城外 楊州, 坡州, 高陽 등 읍을 혁파하고 其地를 空하야 遊幸所를 맨들고 또 士禍를 이르키여 京城은 선비의 비린내에 코가 실만하얏다. 그 때야말로 京城은 國都배판 이후에 난리라면 적지 안은 란리를 당하엿고 오입이라면 큰 오입을 한 셈이다. 그러나 同王2년 秋9월1일 밤 三更에 中宗을 推戴한 朴元宗
成希顔의 反正의 긧발이 訓練院에서 한번 날이자 燕山은 其位를 退하고 京城은 다시 굿하다 난 집모양으로 일시 조용하게 되엿다.

壬辰亂과 京城

그 뒤 中宗5년 夏4월에는 中學儒生들이 斥佛의 생각을 가지고 貞陵寺(즉 興天寺니 在貞洞)를 불질너서 일시 소란을 이르키고 同7년에는 왕명으로 圓覺寺를 毁撤하고 明宗8년<9>9월에는 또 景福宮 大內에 화재가 나서 恩政殿 南廡가지 延及하니 이는 空前의 큰 화재이라 上은 減饌을 하며 朝市를 3일간 정지하고 그것을 복구 건축하너라고 그 翌年10월까지 달구질 소리에 京城은 다시 약1개년간 떠들석하얏섯다. 그러나 이런 화재는 도로혀 적은 일인즉 별로 논할 바가 못되지만은 其後 宣祖25년 壬辰의 병란에는 全朝鮮 그 중에도 京城은 더욱이 역사상 이지랴야 이질 수 업는 큰 慘禍를 입엇섯다. 人命의 살해도 만핫거니와 여러 궁전 기타 시설이 모도 燒盡되엿다. 景福宮과 宗廟는 터만 성그럿케 남고 八大門은 南大門만 겨우 形容을 보존하얏스며 昌德宮은 敦義門 한아 외에 전부 잿덤이가 되고 昌慶宮은 다만 弘化門, 明政門, 明政殿이 잔명을 유지하고 鍾路 인경殿은 인경까지 록아 업서젓스니 기타 관공서 건물이며 人家야 다시 말이나 할 수 잇스랴. 궁전의 빈터에는 烏鵲의 무리와 狐狸가 백주에 亂鳴하고 시가지에는 주린 개와 고양이 떼가 맹수보다도 더 무섭게 도라다니며 사람의 시체를 뜨더믹엇다. 10리 王城에 朝鮮 사람은 影字좃차 볼 수 업고 다만 뵈히는 것은 적군의 칼빗과 기빨뿐이요 들이는 것은 적군의 처량한 라팔 소리와 사나운 말발굽 소리엿다. 그 때에 경성의 비참한 정경이야 엇지 참아 형언할 수 잇스랴. 녯날 百濟 도읍시대에 高句麗 長壽王의 난은 여긔에 비하면 일개 小兒戱에 불과하얏다. 그러나 天佑라 할지 神助라 할지 忠武公의 거북배가 남해에서 無人之境과 가티 적군을 破碎하고 明나라의 구원병 북소리가 반도의 산하를 울이는 바람에 팔도의 義軍이 또한 벌떼가티 이러나니 그 封豕長蛇의 勢로 所向無前하는 적군도 그만 魂膽이 俱傷하야 望風遠走하고 三京이 회복되여 李如松이 京城에 留屯하고(今 朝鮮호털故址小公主宅) 26년 冬10월4일에는 大駕가 다시 還都하야 中外에 頒敎하며 貞洞 月山大君邸(今 德壽宮)로 臨御하고 沈義謙家는 東宮, 沈連源家는 中宮으로 삼엇다.(궁궐이 燒盡하얏슴으로) 그러나 眞소위 前門에 虎가 나아가면 後門에 사자가 드러온다고 日兵이 비록 京城을 退去하얏스나 明兵의 횡포란 실로 무쌍하야 부인의 凌辱 民財의 약탈을 함부로 하니 京城의 시민은 또한 공포의 중에 잇섯다. 弱國의 비애는 여긔서 더욱 크게 늣기는 것이다. 이 때에 京城에는 또 한가지 생긴 事大的 偶像物이 잇섯스니 그것은 崇禮門과 興仁門 외에 關羽廟와 太平館西(西小門町 總督府 官舍地)에 明將 邢玠와 楊鎬의 宣武祠(속칭 生祠堂)다. 그것은 물론 明將의 은덕을 思하는 것보다도 明人의 환심을 사고자 함이엿다. 그러나 그로 인하얏 京城에는 몃개의 신건물이 생겻스니  세간사리는 한아 늘엇다 할가.

光海朝는 京城再造의 恩王

이와 가티 板蕩을 당한 京城은 光海朝 때에 다시 再造하얏스니 즉 元年에는 宗廟와 昌德宮을 중건하고 宣惠廳을 置하며 (宗廟 重建과 宣惠廳 實施는 宣祖 말년의 일이나 실은 光海의 사업이다) 2년에는 奉慈殿(光海母 恭嬪廟)을 建하고 四學을 중건하며 昌德宮 내에 欽敬閣을 改建하고 또 報漏閣을 建하며 7년 乙卯에는 昌慶宮을 重修하고 8년 丙辰에는 다시 仁慶, 慈壽, 慶德,<10>(今 興化門 대궐) 三新宮을 창건하며 11년 己未에는 萬人科를 京城에 設하야 武士萬人을 試取하얏다. 如斯히 國都再造에 급급한 그는 병란의 餘에 자연 재정이 困乏하야 賣官法과 納金贖刑法을 실시하게 되니 國紀가 점차 문란하고 民怨이 層出하며 加之兵亂中에 일시 휴식하얏던 朝臣의 당쟁은 다시 머리를 들기 시작하야 당시 조정에 세력을 잡고 잇는 李爾瞻, 鄭仁弘 등 大北一派를 질시하고 오래 동안 불평이 滿滿하던 西人派 李貴, 金瑬, 崔鳴吉, 張維, 金自點 외 武臣 李曙, 申景禛, 元斗杓 등은 大北의 撲滅를 陰謀할새 근본적으로 光海朝까지 退逐코자 하야 綾陽君(仁祖)을 暗中結託하고 光海15년 癸亥 3월12일 밤에 綾陽君 이하 諸人이 洗劍亭 부근에 집합하야 반기를 들고 彰義文을 斫破한 후 昌德宮에 突入하야 光海君을 폐하고 李爾瞻 이하 大北一派 수백인을 살육 또는 竄逐하고 金大妃(仁祖왕비)의 명으로 仁祖가 位에 卽하니 光海君의 再造雄圖도 그만 중도에 좌절되고 말엇다. 세상 사람들은 이 때까지 당시 반정 정부(仁祖정부)의 惡선전과 其後 史家의 曲筆에 의하야 光海를 일개 昏暴의 主로만 알지만은 실은 그와 반대인 사업의 主로 불행이 黨派爭의 와중에 드러, 가엽슨 희생이 된것이다. 물론 그도 그 때에 다소 失政은 하얏지만은 이 京都再造의 공덕에 대하야는 한 恩王이라 안이할 수 업다. 그 때에 만일 반정의 난이 이러나지 안코 상당한 인물이 잇서서 光海의 잘못되는 일을 교정하고 國事에 盡瘁하얏스면 光海는 족히 중흥의 英主가 되고 따러서 李适의 내란도 이러날 이유도 업고 平壤監司 朴曄의 防禦策에 의하야<11> 丁卯, 丙子의 兩 胡亂도 면하얏슬 것이다. 그러나 時가 불리하고 운이 不齊한데야 奈何하리오. (光海主 때에도 胡의 침입이 만엇스나 朴曄이 平壤監司로 잘 備禦한 까닭에 무사하얏는데 反正 후 朴이 被誅할 때에 曰하되 자기의 생명은 악가울 것이 업스나 자기의 사후 불과 10년 내외에 국가에 胡患이 잇슬 것이 可畏라 云하얏다.)

李适亂과 丁丙兩胡亂

仁祖의 反正亂이 잇슨 후 1년만에 京城에는 또 큰 소란이 잇섯스니 그것은 유명한 甲子 李适亂이다. 仁祖가 公州로 播遷을 하고 성중의 人도 다소 避亂을 가너라고 한참 요란하얏스나 京城의 人民은 李适에게 하등 반항이 업섯기 때문에 李适도 무사이 京城을 점거하얏고 최후 관군과 싸울 때에도 戰地가 다행이 西門 박 산지인 鞍峴(길마재)이기 때문에 門안의 사람들은 하등 공포를 늣기지 안을 뿐 안이라 壁上觀楚戰格으로 城上에 모혀서 관전을 하얏다. 그것은 당시 실록에 『城壁上에 관전자가 백로의 群과 如하다』. 云한 것을 보와 족히 知하겟다. 그리고 仁祖5년 丁卯胡亂 때에도 적이 平山에 至할 때에 大駕가 벌서 江華로 播遷하얏기 때문에도 적은 京城을 범치 안코 江都로 直向하야 불과 2개월에 講和가 되니 당시 京城은 前日 李适亂 때와 가티 물론 요동은 하얏스나 또한 직접의 兵刃은 밧지 안엇다. 그러나 其後 仁祖10년 丙子胡亂에는 비록 적군이 잠시 京城을 경유하야 南漢으로 갓스나 원래 慓悍無雙한 적군의 수가 13만에 달하고 때가 마츰 嚴冬이라 피란을 가다가 중도에서 凍死-亂軍에게 약탈 浚辱 殺戮을 당한 사람도 만엇고 그보다도 소위 雪亂으로(그 때 大雪이 오고 酷寒하얏다) 산중에 피란 갓다가 동사한 사람도 퍽 만헛스며 其外 부자 형제 처자를 서로 일코 號哭하는 자가 도로에 충만하얏다. 그 비참한 광경은 壬辰亂에 지지 안엇다. 다만 幸事는 壬亂과 가티 都城에 큰 兵火가 잇섯다던지 함부로 사람을 죽이지 안은 그것이다. 그것은 결국 적군의 목적이 직접 朝鮮을 강탈하는데 잇지 안코 다만 朝鮮으로 하야금 明과의 관계를 끈코 自國과 和好條約을 맷고자 함에 잇는 까닭이다. 그러나 丁丑 정월30일의 國王城下盟! 두 王子大君 중요 宰臣의 被虜! 人質 그 얼마나 羞恥되는 일이냐. 滾滾이 흐르는 漢江의 長流水로도 그 두려운 역사의 편지는 능히 씻지 못할 것이다.

肅英兩宗시대의 京城

그 뒤 孝宗 때에는 北伐을 主唱하는 바람에 京城에는 別軍職廳, 能麽兒廳(武臣試陣所)이 신설되고 禁衛士의 꼬창바지가 시가에 번득거리며 (孝宗命衛士服狹袖短衣) 伐大驄의 말굽소리가 전보다 빈번한 외에는 별로 異色이 업섯고 顯宗 때에도 同王2년에 北學을 設한 곳과 同5년에 京城郵官(驛馬遞送處)을 置한 외에는 다른 일이 업섯스나 肅宗 때에는 光海君 이후 제일 多事하얏다. 즉 원년10월에는 京中 及 각도 戶口를 조사 하엿스니 그 때 전국 호수는 123만4,512, 인구는 470만3,550人이엿고 21년부터 22년까지 양년은 큰 흉년이 드러 인민의 餓死者가 만흠으로<12> 京城에 2개 施粥所를 두고 飢民을 먹엿스니 그해 흉년은 소위 병자년 흉년으로 萬古에 其此가 업섯고 죽으로 飢民을 막인 것도 壬亂 후 初有의 일이다. 그때 소위 設粥監官이란 벼슬은 지금 드르면 한 이약이 거리엿다. 그리고 24년, 25년 양년에는 癘疫이 大熾한 중 홍수가 三歲를 連亘하야 시골은 물론이고 京中에 人畜의 상해가 만엇스며 同30년부터는 五營門의 軍丁을 풀어 軍務餘暇에 凡7년의 시일을 費하야 京城의 都城을 修築하얏스니 금일 서울 성벽의 번듯번듯한 돌이라던지 壯麗한 여러 성문은 다 그 때에 修築한 것이다. 그리고 또 37년에 北漢山城을 築하고 同39년에는 彰義門 외 漢北門을 建하얏다. (城築에 관한 것은 城壁記事에 詳載함) 肅宗은 재위 중에 廢妃사건 기타 당쟁의 관계로 다수한 사람을 만히 죽여 京城에 잇는 소위 士類로는 안심을 못하게 하고 시민으로 하야곰 날마나 行戮處斬의 참혹한 구경을 하다십히 하게 失政이 만엇스나 이 京城都會建設에 대하야는 光海 이후 안이 世宗이후 초유의 偉功者엿다. 그 후 英祖 때에는 8년에 흉년이 드러서 시민에게 賑恤하고 癘疫이 유행하야 인심이 크게 요동하얏스며 同20년에는 東西兩小門에 譙樓를 始設하고 同32년에는 팔도 飢饉民의 京城에 流離하는 자를 宣惠廳에 명하야 施粥하고 同36년2월에는 濬川司를 始置하고 開川을 濬하얏스니 공사 57일간에 役夫防民 15만, 雇丁 5만, 費錢이 3만5천餘 緡,米가 2,300여包오 또 高가 10척되는 水標石을 水標橋 西川에 立하고 庚辰地平이라 刻하얏스니 지금 水標橋川 中에 잇는 標石이 그것이다. 그리고 同44년 春에는 漢城府에서 戊子試年 戶口를 조사하엿스니 京中 及 各道 戶數가 167만9,865, 인구 700만6,248이라 此를 孝宗8년 丁酉에 比하면 戶는 102만, 인구는 480만이 증가된 셈이엿다. 그 뒤 49년에는 또 開川을 石築하얏스니 京城의 開川을 石築함은 이것이 시초엿다. 요컨대 肅宗 英宗은 京城의 修築工事에 만흔 노력을 한 이엿다.

大院君과 京城

그 뒤 正宗15년에는 壯勇營을 京城에 신설하고 純祖3년 12월에는 仁政殿이 불에 터서 그 翌年 12월에 중건 落成을 하고 同21년 6월에는 홍수가 나서 가옥이 다수 파괴하고 8월에는 關西로부터 虎列刺가 침입하야 불과 旬餘에 만여명이 死하고 同33년 5월에는 輪疾이 유행하고 翌年 壬辰6월에는 흉년으로 米價가 騰貴하야 米商이 米廛을 開치 안음으로 飢民이 亂을 作하야 米廛을 毁破하고 大臣을 侵辱하니 정부에서 亂魁7인을 捕斬하얏다. 순서는 박귀엿스나 12년 壬申에는 洪景來의 亂이 關西에 起하야 유언비어로 京中이 大騷하얏다. 이 純祖 一代에는 일반 정치도 衰敗한 동시에 京城도 대불운을 당하얏다. 그리고 憲宗5년에 특기할 것은 9월21일에 京城에서 佛國人天主敎僧侶모빤, 사스탄, 암뻬르 등을 斬殺한 것이고 其外 哲宗시대에는 仁政殿을 重修한 외에 別로 京城에 관한 사건이 업섯다. 그러나 최근 開國473년 甲子년에 李太王이<13> 등극하며 大院君이 攝政된 후에는 積年間 萎靡不振하던 王政을 一新 개혁하는 동시에 京城都市行政의 쇄신 기타 건설에 주력하얏스니 第一은 李太王 원년에 京城5部의 府勢 조사를 하야 戶數 4만6,565戶, 인구 男 10만137, 女 10만2,502口 共 20만2,639人인 것을 명백히 알게 되고 또 팔도의 戶數 155만7,883戶, 인구 男 335만2,528 女 330만3,355口 共 665만5,883인 것도 알게 되엿스며(인구의 은닉 기타 누락 관계로 그것이 꼭 정확치 못한 것은 물론이다)

同2년 乙丑에는 景福宮에의 중건을 계획하야 훈련대장 李景夏로 營造都監官을 삼고 3월15일에 기공하야 同4년 丁卯 11월에 준공하고 왕이 移御하얏다. 공사비는 약740여만 兩이요 인부는 약200만명이며 財源은 국고금 외에 부족액은 소위 願納錢 結髮錢 人頭稅 외에 當百錢을 鑄用하얏다. 이 공사 당시에야말로 서울은 全盛의 시대인 것 가텃고 또 사실로 말하야도 李太祖 건국 공사 후 초유의 대공사로 李朝 말엽상 도는 京城史上에 大書特書할 것이다. 그리고 同3년 丙寅 3월8일에는 左捕盜大將 李景夏를 명하야 佛國宣敎師 張敬一(뻬르뉴) 등 9인 외 南鍾三, 李身逵 가족 수30명과 기타 교도 약2만여인을 대학살하고 또 繼하야 지방에서 捕來하는 교도를 날마다 무려 수만식 학살하니 東大門과 水口門外에 퇴적한 시체가 큰 丘山을 이르고 전 京城은 腥風血海로 化하야 萬鼻가 皆酸하얏다. 이것은 京城 設都 후 최초의 참사일 뿐 안이라 巴里의 聖빠톨노뮤학살(서기1572) 이후 세계 초유의 事이다. 이것도 大院君시대 京城史上에 特記할 바이어니와 그해 9월에<14> 江華島上에서 法艦을 격파하고 또 8년 辛未 7월에 소위 辛未洋擾(美艦來寇사건)가 잇슨 후 鍾路街頭에 『洋夷侵伐非戰則和主和賣國』 12자를 刻한 斥和碑를 立한 것은 또한 누구나 기억에 남어 잇는 일이다.(비는 화강석으로서 長 4척8촌, 폭 1척5촌, 厚 1척인데 표면에 前記 12자를 先書하고 其側에는 細字로 『戒我萬年子孫丙寅作辛未立』이라 한바 當時 鍾路에 立하얏더니 壬午軍變 후 지하에 매몰되엿다가 大正4년 南大門 도로 改修시 掘得하야 總督府에서 보관함) 그 사실의 是非는 별문제어니와 그때야말로 京城 시민의 제일 활기가 잇던 때요 排外사상도 가장 橫溢하엿던 때이며 洋鬼來! 洋鬼來!하고 또한 한편으로 공포도 만히 가젓섯다.

그러나 大院君이 失勢하고 閔妃가 정권을 잡게 되자 12년9월에 江華島에서 발생한 소위 雲揚艦 포격문제를 導火로 하야 13년 丙子 2월2일에 日朝 양국간에 江華條約(朝日修好條約)이 체결되며 同14년 9월21일에 花房義質이 日本代理公使로 天然亭(淸水館)에 와서 留하게 되니 此는 京城에 최초로 생긴 유일한 외국 공관이오 그 해에 또 統理機務衙門(其下에 同文, 軍務, 通商, 利用, 典遷, 律例, 監工 7司가 有함)이 設始되며 개화파 인물을 임용하고 武衛壯禦 兩營이 設始되고 別技軍이 생기면서(신식군인) 日本육군중위 堀本禮造를 초빙하야 下都監(훈련원)에 사관학생을 敎授케 하니 日本人으로 朝鮮人의 교관된 효시다. 이로부터 漢城의 정계에는 日本의 세력이 자못 농후하게 되엿다.

壬午軍亂 以後의 京城

그리하다가 同19년 壬午 6월초9일(陽7월23일)에<15> 訓練都監의 해산된  舊兵이 급료 不給 문제로 軍擾를 이르키여 武庫를 突破하고 무기를 各持한 후 rnjf내에 直犯하야 宣惠廳 都提調 閔謙鎬 前畿伯 金輔鉉을 학살하고 일방으로 閔昌植 외 閔族일파 某某大官와 下都監에 잇는 日本人 교관 堀本禮造를 살해하고 또 亂民과 호응하야 日本공사관을 습격하니 공사관원은 仁川으로 피란을 하고 閔妃는 亂軍 중에서 九死一生으로 忠州로 도피하니 그 때 京城의 천지는 실로 살기충만하야 일대 수라장이 되엿다. 그러나 大院君이 입궐하며 此를 진정하고 閔族一派의 그릇된 政務를 일시 쇄신하더니 의외에 閔足一派의 책동으로 淸將 吳長慶 외 馬建忠 袁世凱 등이 수륙의 대군을 率하고 朝鮮의 內亂을 鎭撫한다 稱托하며 京城에 殺到하야 朝鮮의 軍兵을 亂殺하고 大院君을 誘拿하야 天津에 호송하니 閔妃가 다시 환궁하는 동시에 閔派의 守舊黨이 또 국정을 잡게 되고 일방 淸의 간섭이 날로 甚함을 따러서 此를 반대하는 開化黨(친일파)이 또한 暗中활약을 하니 이로부터 京城은 점점 多事紛擾하게 되엿다. 그리하야 21년 甲申 10월에는 金玉均의 혁명운동이 이러나서 京城은 일시 또 殺伐의 鄕이 되고 그 뒤 甲午에는 東學亂의 발단으로 日淸戰爭이 되며 그 결과로 馬關條約에 의하야 朝鮮의 독립이 되엿스나 일은 의연히 亂麻와 가터서 그 翌年 乙未8월에는 閔妃 被害의 대사건이 생기고 建陽원년 丙申2월에는 俄館播遷의 사변이 잇섯스며 同2년에는 獨立協會와 보부상이 貞洞 仁化門前 또는 阿峴 부근에서 大格鬪를 하야 人命의 傷害가 또한 만엇고 그 뒤 光武8년 甲辰에는 日露戰爭으로 京城이 크게 불안하엿던 것은 물론이오 日本이 戰勝 결과 朝鮮에 대한 세력을 독점하게 되매 稍蠶食之로 同9년 乙巳 11월17일에는 소위 신조약 즉 保護條約이 성립되며 그 翌年에는 統監府가 京城에 신설되고 同11년 7월20일에는 海牙事件의 발단으로 太皇帝가 禪位하며 同8월1일에 군대를 해산하게 되니 西小門 내의 侍衛隊兵이 분개하야 日兵과 일시 충돌하니 그 부근 일대가 또한 크게 소요하고 그 뒤 降熙4년 8월29일에는(明治13년) 합병조약이 되며 朝鮮總督府가 京城에 신설되고 同10월에 漢城은 京城府로 개칭하고 大正3년에는 京城府가 市街地로 지정되며 전일의 5部49坊은 변하야 85洞 101町으로 변하얏스며 其後 己未 3월1일에는 만세사건으로 京城에 일대 소란이 이러낫섯다. 이 외에는 더 말하고 싶지 안타.

外國公領館 設置와 其他 文化施設

최후에 순서를 박구워 잠간 소개코자 하는 것은 京城에 설치된 외국 公領館과 기타의 중요안 합병 이전의 시설이니 즉 李太王20년 癸未 11월에는 博文局을 設하고 日本人 井上角五郞을 초빙하야 한자로 漢城旬報를 발행하얏스니 此는 朝鮮新聞의 원조요(其後 戊子에 廢局) 21년 甲申 정월에는 인경을 폐하고 昌德宮내 錦川橋에서 放砲케 하니 午砲의 시초요 22년 乙酉 9월27일에는 京仁간 電信이 相聯하고 同25년 戊子7월9일에는 京釜간 電信이 통하고 同32년 정월에는 漢城新報가<16> 발간되고(日本人 安達謙藏과 佐佐木正之 主刊) 建陽원년 丙申 4월7일에는 獨立新聞이 발간되고(徐載弼 主幹) 光武3년 己亥 5월20일에는 전차가 개통되고(米國人 骨佛安의 경영 韓美電氣會社의 부설로 淸凉里와 京城간 先通) 同4년 庚子 8월8일에는 京仁鐵道가 개통되고 5년 辛丑 3월20일에는 泥峴 日人거류지에 京城郵便局이 설립되고 8년 甲辰11월에는 京釜鐵道가 개통되고 同9년 乙巳 11월1일에는 京義線이 개통되고 隆熙2년 8월에는 水道가 신설되며 同3년 10월29일에는 韓國銀行(今 朝鮮銀行)이 설립되엿스며(合倂 이후 事는 略)  次에 외국 公領事館은 上述함과 가티 李太王1년 丁丑에 日本공관이 최초 설치된 후 同20년 癸未 5월20일에 米國공관이 제2차로 설치되고(全權公使 푸트將軍) 同年9월에는 淸國 총영사관이 개시되며(영사 陳樹棠) 21년 甲申 4월28일에는 英國 총영사관(영사 아스톤) 同10월8일에는 獨逸영사관이 駱洞에 설치되고(其後 磚洞-貞洞-尙洞-西大門外로 轉居한 바 최초 영사는 쳄쉬 부영사는 뻐들너) 22년 乙酉 10월에는 露공관(공사 巴禹露厚) 25년 6월6일에는 佛공관(공사 佛郞是) 光武5년 辛丑10월에는 白耳義總領館(方葛) 同12월16일에는 伊太利공관(프랑세셋띄, 되, 말나伯爵 총영사 兼任)이 설치되엿다. 然而 이상 諸國 공관은 乙巳保護條約 이후 撤歸하고 지금은 영사관만 잔존하얏다.<17>
<6-17>