잡지명: 別乾坤 第23號
발행일: 1929년 09월 27일
기사제목: 京城洞町名의 由來 及 今昔의 比較, 서울의 洞里 일흠푸리- 洞名 하나에도 史的 由來가 잇다 (The Origin of Kyŏngsŏng’s Tong and Chō Names and a Comparison of the Past and Present: An Explanation of Seoul’s Tong Names – Even a Tong Name Has a Historical Origin)
기사형태: 논설 (Essay)

One, Administrative Districts of the Past and Present

The current administrative districts of Kyŏngsŏng are divided into 85 tong and 101 chō, and there are so many strange names such as so-called such-and-such chō and such-and-such t’ong that I have never seen before. However, before the implementation of the City Zone Revision Ordinance, that is, before April of Kapin year (The District Revision Ordinance was promulgated and implemented by Kyŏnggi Province Announcement No. 7 on April 11, Taishō 3), the entire Kyŏngsŏng was divided into 5 pu and 49 bang as shown below. (This division was made in November of Kapsul year, the 3rd year of Yi T’aejo, and the bang names were selected by Chŏng To-jŏn, who was in charge of the entire construction of the new capital at the time.)
Central = 8 bang - Changt’ong, Kwanin, Chŏngsŏn, Kyŏnp’yŏng, Sŏrin, Sujin, Kyŏnghaeng, Ch’ŏngch’ŏng
Eastern = 12 bang - Sungsŏn, Yŏnhwa, Sŏun, Tŏksŏng, Sunggyo, Yŏnhŭi, Kwandŏk, Ch’ŏntal, Hŭngsŏng, Ch’angson, Taltŏk, Inch’ang
Western = 8 bang - Indal, Chŏksŏn, Yŏgyŏng, Hwanghwa, Yangsaeng, Sinhwa, Pansong, Pansŏk
Southern = 11 bang - Kwangt’ong, Hohyŏn, Myŏngnye, T’aep’yŏng, Hŭnt’o, Sŏngp’yŏng, Naksŏn, Chŏngsim, Myŏngch’ŏl, Sŏngsin, Yeseong
Northern = 10 bang - Kwanghwa, Yangdŏk, Kahoe, An’guk, Kwangwang, Chinchang, Myŏngt’ong, Chunsŭ, Sunhwa, Ŭit’ong
Comparing the old administrative districts with the current administrative districts, it seems that in the old days, districts were divided based solely on area, but now they are divided based on people rather than area. That is, the area north of Kwanggyoch’ŏn (廣橋川), which is the center of Koreans, is called tong (洞), and the area south of Kwanggyoch’ŏn (廣橋川), which is the center of Japanese, is called chō (町), and the main roads are mostly called t’ong (通), such as Kwanghwamunt’ong (光化門通), Chongnot’ong (鍾路通), and T’aep’yŏngt’ong (太平通).

Two, The Origin of Kyŏngsŏng's Tong and Chō Names

Kyŏngsŏng is divided into 85 tong and 101 chō as mentioned above, so it seems somewhat more complicated than in the past. The origin of the names has undergone many changes, so it is difficult to know in detail. However, I will briefly introduce what I know.

The Origin of Tong Names

Samch’ŏngdong (三淸洞) and Sogyŏkdong (昭格洞) are adjacent to each other, but the origin of their names is also related. In Sogyŏkdong (昭格洞), there used to be the Sogyŏksŏ (昭格署) (near the current Kyujanggak), which was a vestige of Chinese Taoism where the state held ceremonies for the stars. In the T’aеil Hall (太一殿) in that office, the Chilssŏng (七星) and various stars were worshiped; their images were all women with disheveled hair. In the Samch’ŏng Hall (三淸殿) (Samch’ŏng (三淸) is T’aech’ŏng (太淸), Sangch’ŏng (上淸), and Okch’ŏng (玉淸)), more than 10 deities were worshiped, including the Jade Emperor (玉皇上帝), T’aesang No-gun (太上老君), Pohwa Ch’ŏnjun (普化天尊), and Chajŏng Chegun (梓潼帝君); all were images of men. In the other inner and outer altars, hundreds of plaques with the titles of the Four Seas Dragon Kings, Divine Generals, the Ten Kings of the Underworld, and the various gods of the Water Palace were prepared. When there was a celebration of a birth in the palace, a high official with many children and much fortune would fast for three days and perform a ceremony there. Thus, the place was called Sogyŏkdong (昭格洞), and the area north of it was called Samch’ŏngdong (三淸洞) (because of the presence of Samch’ŏng Hall). The spring water in the current Samch’ŏngdong (三淸洞), commonly known as the Brothers' Well, is actually called Sŏngjejong (星祭井), but it is mistakenly believed to be the Brothers' Well by the public. In Samch’ŏngdong (三淸洞), Songgang (松江) and Nam Gŏn (南袞) used to live; the so-called Taeŭn’am (大隱岩) and Mallise (萬里瀨) belonged to the descendants of Nam Gŏn’s family and were named by Pak Ǒm (朴闇). (See Yŏllam = it seems to be the current K’ŭngol in Samch’ŏngdong (三淸洞).) Hwadong (花洞) is an abbreviation of the former Hwa’gaedong (花開洞); there is a stone pillar of a pine tree planted by Sŏng Sammun (成三問) in front of the Memorial Stele Pavilion site. K কানndong (諫洞) is named because the former Saganwŏn (司諫院) was located there. An’gukdong (安國洞) is named after the old bang name An’guk (安國) from the beginning of the dynasty. Songhyŏndong (松峴洞) is named after the old Songhyŏndong (松峴洞) place name (originally Songhyŏn (松峴) was the middle ground from Andong Plaza to the Cross Bridge). Kahoe (嘉會洞) adopted the old bang name as is. In the old small place name, Maeng-hyŏn (孟峴) is called Maeng-hyŏn (孟峴) because Maeng Sa-sŏng (孟思誠) lived there, and the small place name where you go from Kahoe-dong to Kye-dong is Hong Sul-hae-gol (洪述海골) because Hong Sul-hae (洪述海), who briefly influenced the world during the reign of King Chŏngjo (正廟), lived there. Kye-dong (桂洞) is named after the old Kye-sandong (桂山洞) because there is Kye-san (桂山). Wŏn-dong (苑洞) is named because of the presence of the Ch’angdŏk Palace (昌德宮) Forbidden Garden (禁苑). Suŭndong (授恩洞) is named because the Ŭnsasusan-chang (恩賜授産場) is located in the vicinity; this can be said to be a creation. Waryongdong (臥龍洞) means that it is located near Ch’angdŏk Palace (昌德宮), so I will omit a little explanation because it is uncomfortable. P’irundong (弼雲洞) is the birthplace of the former Ǒsŏngbuwŏn-gun (鰲城府院君), and it is named after Ǒsŏng’s (鰲城) nickname, P’irun (弼雲). Such’angdong (需昌洞) takes the Su (需) character from the old name Naesusa (內需司) and the Ch’ang (昌) character from Taeso-ch’angdong (大小昌洞). Tangjudong (唐珠洞) comes from the old tong names Tangp’idong (唐皮洞) and Yajuhyŏn (夜珠峴), and Mik’ŏndong (渼芹洞) is a combination of Midong (湄洞) and K’ŏndong (芹洞). Chungnimdong (中林洞) takes the Rim (林) character from Hallimdong (翰林洞) and the Chung (中) character from Yakchungdong (藥中洞). Songwŏldong (松月洞) is a combination of Songjŏngdong (松亭洞) and Wŏramdong (月巖洞). Haengch’ondong (杏村洞) takes the Ch’on (村) character from Sinch’on (新村) and the Haeng (杏) character from Ŭnhaengdong (銀杏洞). Hongp’adong (紅把洞) is a combination of Hongmundong (紅門洞) and P’ap’aldong (把撥洞). Chŏksŏndong (積善洞) uses the old bang name as is. Tunŭidong (敦義洞) is a collaboration between the old Tunnyŏngdong (敦寧洞) and Ŏŭidong (於義洞). Iksŏndong (益善洞) adds the Sŏn (善) character of Chŏngsŏnbang (貞善坊) to Iktong (益洞). Susongdong (壽松洞) is a combination of Sujindong (壽進洞) and Songhyŏn (松峴). Kyŏng’undong (慶雲洞) adds the Un (雲) character of Unhyŏn (雲峴) to the Kyŏng (慶) character of the old Kyŏnghaengbang (慶幸坊). Insadong (仁寺洞) takes the In (仁) character of Kwaninbang (寬仁坊) and the Sa (寺) character of Taesadong (大寺洞). Nagwŏndong (樂園洞) adds the Nak (樂) character to the old Wŏndong (園洞). Other tongs are not much different, so I will omit them here. (The origin of the old small tong names has some historical interest, but it is too complicated, so I will investigate and announce them in detail at a later opportunity.)

Two, The Origin of Chō Names

T’aep’yŏngt’ong (太平通) is simply the old T’aep’yŏngdong (太平洞) with the chō (町) character attached. T’aep’yŏngdong (太平洞) originally had the T’aep’yŏnggwan (太平舘). Chugyochō (舟橋町) also uses the former name Chugyodong (舟橋洞) as is. Meijichō (明治町) is the old Myŏngdong (明洞), and Sumachō (壽町) takes only the Su (壽) character from the Chu (鑄) character of the old Chujadong (鑄字洞) (Chuja-gol) to match the Japanese place name. The reason why Chujadong (鑄字洞) was created in the past was because the Chujasŏ (鑄字署) was located in the vicinity. However, it is meaningless to take only the Su (壽) character and name the chō. Komekurachō (米倉町) is named because there used to be a warehouse, that is, the Sŏnhyech’ŏng (宣惠廳) affiliated rice warehouse (米倉). Kōganechō (黃金町) is a change of the copper (銅) of the former Tong-hyŏn (銅峴) (Kurigae) to gold (黃金), which seems to elevate its status. Chayachō (茶屋町) is Chabanggdong (茶房洞), and Hayashichō (林町) is Sanrimdong (山林洞), which are also somewhat changed from the old names. Eirakuchō (永樂町) takes the Ei (永) character because the Yeonghŭidŏn (永禧殿) (Sŏnwŏndŏn) was located near the Honmachikeisatsusho (本町警察署) in the former Chukdong (竹洞). Other Seodaemoon (西大門), Kwanghwamun (光化門), Kwangheemun (光熙門) chō, etc., have no special meaning and are named after the gates. Hasegawachō (長谷川町) is named after Hasegawa Yoshimichi (長谷川好道), the military commander at the time of the Russo-Japanese War, who resided in Daikantei (大觀亭) (now the site of Mitsui Bussan Kaisha). Okazakichō (岡崎町) is where the 20th Regiment Commander Okazaki Chūshō (岡崎中將) resided, and Furuichichō (古市町) is where the President of the Keijo Railway Company, Furuichi Kōi (古市公威), resided. Takezoechō (竹添町) is because Takezoe Shin'ichirō (竹添進一郞) was a minister at Ch’ŏnyŏnt’ing (天然亭). Ōshimachō (大島町) is the base of the Ōshima Mixed Brigade Commander, and Tōzai Shikenchō (東西四軒町) is because there were four houses each in the east and west separated by a stream, which were the army officers' quarters at the time of the Russo-Japanese War. Other Sūdōchō (水道町), Kankōdōri (漢江通), Misakadōri (三坂通), Sankakuchō (三角町), Suhyōchō (水標町), Nanzan (南山), and Honmachichō (本町) are named geographically or historically. Also, Yanagichō (柳町), Yoshino (吉野), Yamatochō (大和町), Hinode (日出), and Asahichō (旭町) are simply taken from Japanese place names and have no meaning.

Three, The Origin of Bridge, Well, and Other Place Names

The bridge from Sogyŏkdong (昭格洞) to P’alp’andong (八判洞) is called Changwŏnsŏ (掌苑署) Bridge because the Changwŏnsŏ (掌苑署) used to be located on the east side on the way to Bokju Well in Hwadong (花洞). Changwŏn (掌苑) is the government office in charge of guarding and planting the Forbidden Garden (禁苑). The West Cross Bridge and the East Cross Bridge are named as such because they are located at the east-west crossroads, so no further explanation is needed. I will omit the explanation about Jasugung (慈壽宮) Bridge as it has been explained several times in other sections. The stone bridge at the entrance of Kyŏngbok Palace (景福宮) Sŏch’ebu-dong is the so-called Kŭmgyo (禁橋), which was built during the reign of King Sukjong (肅宗) of Goryeo and has three arched waterways like glasses. It has the oldest history and the most ingenious construction in Kyŏngsŏng. It is called Kŭmgyo (禁橋) because the Kŭmwiyŏng (禁衛營) (different from the Ŭnsasusan-chang site Kŭmwiyŏng) used to be located in the vicinity. The Chonggyo (宗橋) at the entrance of Sajikdong (社稷洞), now Naejadong (內資洞), was originally called Chongch’im Bridge (琮沉橋 or 琮琛橋). In the past, during the reign of King Sŏngjong (成宗), the famous prime ministers Hŏ Chong (許琮) and Hŏ Ch’im (許琛) brothers lived in Sajikdong (社稷洞), and their sister was also a wise woman. Whenever the Hŏ (許) brothers had important state affairs, they would consult with their sister before entering the palace. At that time, King Sŏngjong (成宗) intended to depose and then order the death of Yun Ssi (尹氏), the mother of Yŏnsan-gun (燕山君), and was consulting with various ministers. Hŏ Chong (許琮), as the Right Prime Minister (右相), also attended the meeting. Hŏ (許) consulted with his sister first, and she slowly replied that even though the heavenly authority was overwhelming and the subject could not dare to directly criticize the king, it would be like a private servant killing his master's mother because he could not disobey the master's orders. Not only was it impossible in terms of righteousness, but also when the son of the master's mother succeeded to the throne in the future, how could those who participated in the matter escape disaster? If he wanted to avoid the disaster of his family, he should act wisely. Hŏ (許) was greatly awakened and deliberately fell under this bridge on the way from his house to the palace, and was injured and did not attend the meeting, thus not participating in the Yun Ssi's death sentence meeting. Later, when Yŏnsan-gun (燕山君) ascended the throne, the general ministers related to the deposed queen incident were all caught in a sweep and suffered great disaster, but only the Hŏ (許) family escaped the disaster, so later generations named it Chongch’imgyo (琮沈橋). As for the stories of P’och’ŏng Bridge (Hyejŏnggyo), Kwanggyo, Sup’yogyo, and Han River Bridge, they have been discussed in other sections, so I will omit them here. On the east side of the current Kyŏngsŏng Ilbosa (京城日報社), there used to be the Kunggisa (軍器司), where military equipment was stored, and the bridge near it was called Kunggisagyo (軍器司橋). In the past, those who were to be executed quickly among the criminals sentenced to death were killed here before going outside the city. This is the so-called Kunggisa-ch’am (軍器司斬). At the entrance to Yŏngdosa (永渡寺), there is Yŏngdogyo (永渡橋), and on the middle road from Wangsimni (往十里) to Ttukdo (纛島), there is Chŏnch’wangyo (箭串橋), also known as Chep’an Bridge. Both bridges were named by King Sŏngjong’s own handwriting. Other Hagyyo and Kwansugyo have no special history, so I will omit them here.
Next, as for the wells, there is Hŏ Kyŏn Well in Sajikdong (社稷洞) (now Naejadong (內資洞)), which was the site where Hŏ Kyŏn (許堅), the illegitimate son of Prime Minister Hŏ Chŏk (許積) during the reign of King Sukjong (肅宗), lived. Because he suffered a great disaster in the so-called Kyŏngsin Great Treason, his house was also confiscated. Near the church in Seodaemun-cho, there is a place called Yŏmjŏngdong (廉井洞), which is because a man named Yŏm Chŏng-su (廉정수), who lived in the market of Nammun during the reign of King Ch’ŏljong (哲宗), falsely claimed to be King Ch’ŏljong’s cousin and enjoyed heavenly wealth by deceiving the king. In reality, his cousin Yŏm Pok-gil (廉福吉) was the magistrate of Kanghwa. When Yŏm Pok-gil (廉福吉) came to Seoul, Yŏm Chŏng-su (廉정수) tried to kill him and illegally imprisoned him. At night, Yŏm (廉) escaped by making a hole in the chimney and reported it. Yŏm Chŏng-su (廉정수) was executed and his family was also confiscated. Even now, the neighborhood is called Yŏmjŏngdong (廉井洞), and Yŏmjŏng still exists. Although Bokju Well (복주우물) in Hwa’gaedong (花開洞) is forcibly attached with Chinese characters such as Bokji (福地) or Bokchi (伏雉), in reality, the hole from which water comes out seems to resemble a Bokju (飯盖) (rice bowl lid). You can infer this from the fact that the well above it is said to be like a Yangp’un (brass bowl), hence Yangp’un Well, and the one on the east side of Unryongjŏng (雲龍亭) in Samch’ŏngdong (三淸洞) is said to be like a horse's vulva, hence Horse Well. The pass from Samsŏnp’yŏng (三仙坪) to Ui-dong (牛耳洞) is called Tunam-hyŏn (敦岩峴), but originally it was Tik-yu-hyŏn (狄踰峴), which is said to be named because the Hu people (胡人) passed through that road on their way back during the Pyŏngja Horan (丙子亂). The Tosŏdang (讀書堂) Pass on the Tumop’o (豆毛浦) Road is named because the Tosŏdang (讀書堂) (Hotang) in Yongsan (龍山) was moved to the shore of Tumop’o (豆毛浦) in the 10th year of King Chungjong (中宗).

Four, Distribution Status of People of Various Classes in Old Kyŏngsŏng

The foot of Puksan (北山) was called Pukch’on (北村), the foot of Namsan (南山) was called Namch’on (南村), the vicinity of Naksan (駱山) was called Tongch’on (東村), the inside and outside of Sŏsomun (西小門) was called Sŏch’on (西村), the area around Changgyo and Sup’yogyo was called Chungch’on, Kwangt’onggyo (廣通橋) and above were called Udai, and Hyogyodong (孝橋洞) and below were called Araedae. The riverside was called Ogang, and the area within four sides and ten li outside the fortress was called Chanae (Chanae (字內) means that the area between a certain point and another point in the order of Chŏnja-hyŏnhwang (天地玄黃) on the Seoul fortress wall was called Chŏnja (天字) area or Chija (地字) area, and each military camp was responsible for defending the area between the letters). The four ch'on (commonly called four mountains) of the east, west, south, and north were inhabited by yangban, with munban (文班) living in Pukch'on (北村) and muban (武班) living in Namch'on (南村). ********** was inhabited by "Sŏin" (西人) in Sŏch'on (西村) (the reason why the titles of Sŏin (西人) and Tongin (東人), which are the origin of the so-called four-color division that ruined the entire Joseon, arose was because Sim Ŭi-gyŏm (沈議謙), the main person of Sŏin (西人), lived in Chŏngdong (貞洞), Sŏch'on (西村), and Kim Hyo-wŏn (金孝元), the main person of Tongin (東人), lived in Yŏndong (蓮洞), Tongch'on (東村), so it was called karon Tongin (가론東人) and karon Sŏin (가론西人)). Later, Sŏin (西人) was divided into Noron (老論) and Soron (少論), and Tongin (東人) was divided into Namin (南人), Pugin (北人), Taebuk (大北), and Sobuk (小北). Sŏch'on (西村) was inhabited by Soron (少論), Pukch'on (北村) by Noron (老論), and Nam (南) by Namin (南人). In fact, even Soron (少論) lived mixed in, but mainly muban (武班) lived there. Tongch'on (東村) was inhabited by Sobuk (小北), Chungch'on by chungin (中人), Udai by officers and servants belonging to each division under the Six Ministries, especially merchants (commonly called market people) in Tadong (茶洞) and Sangsadong (相思洞), and Araedae by various military personnel (generals, officials, etc.), especially the so-called Daejŏnbyŏl (大殿別) (belonging to the palace) living near Nuhwadong (樓下洞) on the west side of Kyŏngbok Palace (景福宮). Wŏnnamdong (苑南洞) and Yŏnjidong (蓮池洞) near Ch’angdŏk Palace (昌德宮) were inhabited by Mugam (武監) families. The vicinity of Sŏnggyungwan (成均舘) inside Tongsŏmun (東小門) was inhabited by Kwanin (館人) (commonly called Kwan people), Wangsimni (往十里) was inhabited by Gunt’ong (軍統) (military villages), and Ogangbyŏn (五江邊) was inhabited by many sailors and merchants. The so-called Kangdae people (강대사람) referred to people living on the riverside.
At that time, foreigners or people from other provinces could not easily enter Kyŏngsŏng. Only poor people from the vicinity of Kyŏnggi Province lived as servants in the corridors, or village women from Hwanghae Province came to Seoul to sell straw baskets. Apart from those who entered Seoul to visit powerful families, other people from other provinces could not live in Seoul.

Five, A Comparison of Old and New Tong and Chō in Kyŏngsŏng

(Yeji-dong) Chungbu-dong Hyo-gyo Ilbu Tŏn’gan-dong Hapia-madong Ilbu Sangch’ŏnbyŏn-dong Ihyŏn Ilbu Okpang-dong Ch’ilpang-dong Sŏksu-bangdong
(Chongno 4-chome) Hapia-madong Ilbu Myo-dong Hu-jŏngdong Ilbu Ihyŏn Ilbu Hyo-gyo Ilbu Igyo-dong Ilbu
(Chongno 5-chome) Igyo-dong Ilbu Yŏnji-dong Ilbu Ŏŭi-dong Hadae-jŏngdong Hach’ŏnbyŏn-dong Sangdae-jŏngdong
(Chongno 6-chome) Ch’ŏgyo-dong Ilbu Yangsa-dong Tonghak-dong Tosŏn
(Wŏnnam-dong) Hams’un-dong Ilbu Ho-dong Yŏnch’on-dong Ilbu S’unra-dong Ilbu Sangsa-dong Kamjŏng-dong Sŭngmun-dong Sinmin-dong Majŏng-dong
(Inŭi-dong) Hu-jŏngdong Ilbu Yŏnji-dong Ilbu Tŭngja-dong Sin’gi-dong Piseok-tong Kajŏng-dong
(Sungil-dong) Song-dong Ilbu Hŭngdŏk-tong Ilbu Pima-dong Ilbu<89> Sikdang-dong Suji-dong Tŏdok-tong P’o-dong Sangjŏng-dong
(Sungi-dong) Song-dong Ilbu Sangt’ogyo Ilbu Kwangrye-gyodong Ilbu Kungnae-jŏngdong Sahyŏn-dong Pima-dong Ilbu Chŏngmun-dong Sanch’ŏn-dong Hŭngdŏk-tong Ilbu Kungnae-dong Pakjŏng-dong Kwanggi-gyodong
(Sungi-dong) Yanghyŏn-dong Sŏp’an-dong Cheok-dong Hongmun-dong Yŏng-dong I-mun-dong
(Sungsa-dong) Han-jŏngdong Kwangrye-gyodong Ilbu Sallak-kyo Chŏnsŏk-hyŏn
(Ch’ungsin-dong) Kyŏnggi-dong Changwŏn-dong Ch’ŏgyo-dong Ilbu Sin’gyo-dong Ilbu
(Yŏn-gŏn-dong) Kwa-dong Hams’un-dong Ilbu Chyang-dong Nammita-ptong Sin’gyo-dong Ilbu Tokkap-hyŏn P’ansong-jŏngdong
(Yŏnji-dong) Naengjŏng-dong Yŏnji-dong Ilbu
(Hyote-dong) Sin’gyo-dong Ilbu Naegyo-dong Yŏnji-dong Ilbu Hwaech’ŏn-dong Sangbuk-tong
(Hyehwa-dong) Mi-dong Sangt’ogyo Hat’ogyo Sangbaek-tong Ilbu
(Tongsung-dong) Sangbaek-tong Ilbu Sin’dae-dong Habaek-tong Ssanggye-dong Ilbu
(Ihwa-dong) Ssanggye-dong Ilbu Ihwa-dong
(Sungin-dong) Yŏngmi-dong Mijeon-dong Namgyo Ilbu Sinsŏlgye Changgŏ-ri Namgyo Tongmyo-dong
(Ch’angsin-dong) Chaji-dong Chŏngja-dong Sŏngch’ŏ-dong Sinch’on Namgyo Ilbu Tang-hyŏn-dong Pokch’a-gyo Hongsu-dong Taejŏng-dong Puŏjŏng-dong Pokch’a-gyo (Waryong-dong) Naitong Ilbu Nu-dong Ilbu S’umun-dong Ilbu Sŭngmun-dong Ilbu Madong Ilbu
(Suŭn-dong) Ma-dong Ilbu Myo-dong Ilbu
(Kwŏnnon-dong) S’umun-dong Ilbu Nonp’o-dong Sŭngmun-dong Ilbu Ma-dong Ilbu
(Pongik-dong) Ma-dong Ilbu T’aejŏng-dong Ilbu Myo-dong Ilbu
(Hŭn-jŏng-dong) T’aejŏng-dong Ilbu S’unsyŏm-dong Ilbu Hu-jŏngdong Ilbu Myo-jŏn-dong Myo-dong Ilbu
(P’ilun-dong) P’ilun-dae Kwi-dong Ch’ŏnjŏng-dong Tae-gu-do-ga-dong To-ga-dong Songmok-tong Namjŏng-dong Ilbu Sajik-tong Ilbu
(Sajik-tong) Ch’angp’yŏng-dong Ilbu Sajik-tong Ilbu Mudŏngmun Pakjŏng-dong Ilbu
(Naeja-dong) Namjŏng-dong Ilbu Sajik-tong Ilbu Chŏnlip-tong Ko-gandong Changhŭng-gudong Ilbu Ch’angnyŏm-dong Ilbu Chonggyo Ilbu Ŭnhaengdong
(Such’ang-dong) Sajik-tong Ilbu Pakjŏng-dong Ilbu Yŏngbin-dong Nu-jŏngdong Sŭngjŏng-gyo Naesusa-jŏn-dong Naesusa Chonggyo Ilbu Tae-ch’angdong Ilbu (Tangju-dong) Pukmun-dong Ilbu Pongsangsa-jŏn Tae-ch’angdong Ilbu Naechŏm-dong Nammun-dong Ch’angnye-dong Hyunjodong Ilbu Yaju-hyŏn Ilbu Tangp’idong Ilbu
(Seodaemun-chome Il-chome) Songgyo Ilbu Hapia-banggyo Ilbu Sangbanggyo Chungbanggyo Sŏn-gong-dong Wŏndong Yaju-hyŏn Ilbu Yŏmjŏng-dong Pibyeonsa Chŏngja-dong Tangp’idong Ilbu Hyunjodong Ilbu O-gungdong Ilbu
(Seodaemun-chome I-chome) Chamun-dong Sinmun-dong Hams’un-dong Pangch’u-dong Changsaeng-dong Nonp’o-dong O-gungdong Ilbu
(Mu-gyochome) Mo-gyodong Ilbu Mu-gyodong Ilbu Sangch’adong Ilbu Toja-dong Mo-gyo Tuju-dong Mugyo Taejŏngdong Ilbu S’aedong Ilbu Kyuk-tong
(T’aep’yŏng-tong Il-chome) Ku Sŏbudong Ilbu Sŏhak-hyŏn Ilbu Sŏhak-tong Kungi-sa S’aedong Ilbu Taejŏngdong Ilbu
(Sŏsomun-chome) Sojŏngdong Ilbu Naech’ŏn-dong Waesong-dong Hak-gyo-dong Sŏsomun Nae-dong S’a-ch’angdong Kwanjŏng Ilbu T’aep’yŏngdong Ilbu Saengsa-dong Ilbu
(T’aep’yŏng-tong I-chome) Sŏk-chŏngdong Ilbu Pokch’a-gyodong Chŏn-gyo Pokch’a-gyo Yang-dong Ilbu Taejŏngdong Ilbu Kwanjŏng Ilbu Saengsa-dong Ilbu Sangdong Ilbu Ch’ilkan-dong
(Chŏngdong) Taejŏngdong Ilbu Sojŏngdong Ilbu
(Namdaemun-tong O-chome) Yŏnji-dong Ilbu Yang-dong Ilbu Taeri-mundong Ilbu Sori-mundong Ilbu Pun-dong Ilbu Nanjŏng Ilbu
(Ŏsŏng-chome) Yang-dong Ilbu Sori-mundong Ilbu Chiha-do-jŏ-dong<90>
(Yoshino-chome Il-chome) To-dong Ilbu
(Yoshino-chome I-chome) U-su-hyŏn To-dong Ilbu Taeri-dong Ilbu
(Furuichi-chome) To-dong Ilbu Tongja-dong Sinch’on-dong Ilbu Chugyo Ilbu Karmwŏl-ri Ilbu Sŏkkyo-dong Ilbu
(Sŏgye-dong) Chugyo Ilbu Sinch’on-dong Ilbu Ch’ŏngp’a Ilgye Ilbu Sŏkkyo-dong Ilbu
(Hōraichō Ni-chome) Yaktaejung-dong Ilbu
(Hōraichō Ichi-chome) K’urjŏng-dong Ŭnhaengdong S’un-dong Ilbu Chaam-dong Ilbu Mae-dong Pun-dong Ilbu Yŏnji-dong Ilbu Nanjŏng
(Hōraichō San-chome) Yaktaejung-dong Ilbu Tongsan-dong Ilbu
(Hōraichō Yon-chome) Tongsan-dong Ilbu
(Chungnim-dong) Yaktaejung-dong Ilbu Hyŏngje-dong Ilbu Hallim-dong Ilbu
(Mi-gŏn-dong) Gŏn-dong Ilbu Mi-dong Ilbu
(Ŭiju-tong I-chome) Chŏngja-dong Chaam-dong Ilbu Naeng-dong Ilbu Pan-ch’ŏn-dong Ilbu Gaejŏng Pu-dong Tae-dong Sa-gŏri Ilbu Han-dong


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	京城洞町名의 由來 及 今昔의 比較, 서울의 洞里 일흠푸리- 洞名 하나에도 史的 由來가 잇다
기사형태	논설

京城洞町名의 由來 及 今昔의 比較, 서울의 洞里 일흠푸리- 洞名 하나에도 史的 由來가 잇다
一, 今昔의 行政區域

지금 京城의 행정구역은 85洞 101町에 分하야 잇고 전날에 드러 보지도 못하던 소위 무슨 町 무슨 通하는 이상야릇한 이름이 만치만은 市區改正令이 실시되기 전 즉 甲寅年 4월 이전까지에는 (大正3년 4월11일 京畿道告示 第七號로 區改正令 發布施行) 全京城은 下記와 如히 5部49坊으로 分하야 잇섯다.(此區劃은 李太祖3년 甲戌 11월에 하고 坊名은 당시 新都건설에 全책임을 담당한 鄭道傳이 選定함)
中部 = 8坊 - 長通·寬仁·貞善·堅平·瑞麟·壽進·慶幸·澄淸
東部 = 12坊 - 崇信·蓮花·瑞雲·德成·崇敎·燕喜·觀德·泉達·興盛·彰善·達德·仁昌
西部 = 8坊 - 仁達·積善·餘慶·皇華·養生·神化·盤松·盤石
南部 = 11坊 - 廣通·好賢·明禮·太平·薰陶·誠平·樂善·貞心·明哲·誠身·禮成
北部 = 10坊 - 廣化·陽德·嘉會·安國·觀光·鎭長·明通·俊秀·順化·義通
이제 녯날의 행정구역과 지금의 행정구역을 비교하야 보면 녯날에는 全然히 지역만 標準하야 區分하얏스나 지금은 지역보다도 사람을 標準하야 區分한 것 갓다. 즉 朝鮮人의 중심이 되는 地方 廣橋川 以北은 洞으로 하고 日本人의 중심이 되는 廣橋川 以南 지방은 町으로 하며 또 大路側은 대개가 通이라하야 曰 光化門通·鍾路通·太平通이라 하엿다.

二, 京城 洞町名의 由來

京城은 上記함과 가티 85洞 101町에 分하얏슴으로 전날에 비하면 다소 複雜을 免한 것 가트다. 그 名稱의 유래는 變遷이 甚多하야 또한 詳知키 어렵다. 그러나 아는대로 잠간 소개하자면

洞名 由來

三淸洞과 昭格洞은 땅도 隣接地이지만은 名稱 유래도 동일한 관계를 가젓다. 昭格洞에는 前日에 昭格署가 잇섯는데(在今 奎章閣 부근) 그것은 支那道敎의 한 遺風으로 국가에서 星宿을 祭하는 곳이다. 그 署에 잇는<86> 太一殿에서는 七星諸宿(별)를 祀하얏스니 其像은 다 被髮한 여자요 三淸殿(三淸은 太淸·上淸·玉淸)은 玉皇上帝 太上老君 普化天尊 梓潼帝君 등 10여位를 祀하얏스니 다 남자의 像이오 其餘 內外祭壇에는 四海龍王神將 冥府十王 水府諸神의 題名한 位牌 수백개를 爲하고 宮中에 誕兒하는 慶事가 잇스면 大官 중 多子多福한 사람으로 3일간 齋戒하고 祭하던 곳이다. 그리하야 그 곳을 昭格洞이라 하고 其北을 三淸洞이라 하얏다.(三淸殿이 잇는 까닭) 지금 三淸洞의 藥水 속칭 兄弟우물은 實名은 星祭井인데 俗에서 兄弟井으로 오인하는 것이다. 三淸洞에는 전날에 松江과 南袞의 살던 洞里니 소위 大隱岩 萬里瀨는 南袞家後의 것으로 朴闇이 命名한 것이다.(輿覽참조=그 곳은 지금 三淸洞 큰골인 것갓다.) 花洞은 전일 花開洞의 畧이니 紀念碑閣址 前에 成三問의 手植松 石柱가 잇다. 諫洞은 前日 司諫院이 잇섯던 까닭이오 安國洞은 元 國初부터 坊名이 安國인 故로 仍名함이오 松峴洞은 舊松峴洞 地名을 取한 것이오(元 松峴은 安洞廣場에서 十字橋로 가는 中間地) 嘉會洞은 舊 坊名을 그대로 採用한 것이다. 舊小地名에 孟峴은 孟思誠이 살엇기 때문에 孟峴이라 하고 嘉會洞에서 桂洞으로 넘어가는 곳의 小地名은 洪述海골이니 正廟朝에 일시 世道를 하다가 물인 洪述海가 살던 곳이다. 桂洞은 元 桂山洞으로 桂山이 잇서 取名함이오 苑洞은 昌德宮 禁苑이 잇는 까닭이다. 授恩洞은 恩賜授産場이 그 부근에 잇는 까닭이니 이것은 可謂 創作이다. 臥龍洞은 昌德宮 근처에 잇는 것을 의미함이니 조곰 설명하기 거북하야 畧한다. 弼雲洞은 녯날 鰲城府院君의 출생지인데 鰲城의 少號가 弼雲인 고로 仍名하고 需昌洞은 舊名의 內需司의 需字와 大小昌洞의 昌字를 띄여 온 것이오 唐珠洞은 舊洞名의 唐皮洞·夜珠峴에서 取來하고 渼芹洞은 湄洞·芹洞의 合名이오 中林洞은 翰林洞의 林字와 藥中洞의 中字를 取하고 松月洞은 松亭洞·月巖洞의 合名, 杏村洞은 新村의 村과 銀杏洞의 杏字를 取하고 紅把洞은 紅門洞과 把撥洞의 合名, 積善洞은 舊坊名을 仍用한 것이오 敦義洞은 舊 敦寧洞 於義洞의 合作, 益善洞은 益洞에 貞善坊의 善字를 附하고 壽松洞은 壽進洞·松峴의 合稱, 慶雲洞은 舊 慶幸坊의 警字에 雲峴이란 雲자를 附한 것이오 仁寺洞은 寬仁坊의 仁字에 大寺洞 寺字를 취하고 樂園洞은 舊 園洞上에 樂字를 附한 것이오 其外 다른 동은 별로 다를 것이 업기 玆에 畧한다.(舊 小洞名의 由來는 다소 歷史的 자미 잇는 일이 잇스나 너무 복잡하기로 後기회에 다시 상세히 조사 발표하랴 한다.)

二, 町名의 由來

太平通은 舊 太平洞에다 町字만 부친 것이니 太平洞은 원래에 太平舘이 잇섯던 까닭이오 舟橋町도 역시 前名 舟橋洞을 仍用한 것이고 明治町은 舊 明洞 壽町은 舊 鑄洞(鑄字골)의 鑄字에서 壽字만 띄여 일본 지명과 符合케 한 것이다. 元 鑄字洞이 생기기는 前日에 그 부근에 鑄字署가 잇섯던 까닭인데 지금 壽字만 띄여 町名을 지은 것은 아모 의미업는 짓이다. 米倉町은 前日 倉洞 즉 宣惠廳 附屬 米倉이 잇섯던 까닭이오 黃金町은 전일 銅峴(구리개)의 銅을 黃金으로 變한 것이니 이를 터이면 지위가 놉하진 새음이다. 茶屋町은 茶房洞, 林町은 山林洞 其亦 녯이름을 다소 變한 것이오 永樂町은 前日 竹洞으로 本町警察署 附近地에 永禧殿(璿源殿)이 잇섯기 때문에 永字를 띄여 온 것이고 其外 西大門·光化門·光熙門町 등은 별의미가 업고 門을 取하야 名함이오 長谷川町은 日露戰爭 당시에 軍司令官 長谷川好道가 大觀亭(今 三井物産會社宅地)에 住居하엿기 때문에 仍名하얏고 岡崎町은 第20團長 岡崎中將이 住居하고 古市町은 京釜鐵道會社의 總裁 古市公威가 住居하고 竹添町은 竹添進一郞이<87> 天然亭에 公使로 잇섯기 때문이오 大島町은 大島混成旅團長의 陣地, 東西四軒町은 日露戰爭 당시에 陸軍 官舍가 小川을 隔하야 東西에 四軒식이 잇섯기 때문이다. 其外 水道町·漢江通·三坂通·三角町·水標町·南山·本町 등은 地理 또는 역사적으로 命名한 것이오 또 柳町·吉野·大和町·日出·旭町 등은 日本의 地名을 그대로 取한 것이고 何等 意味가 업는 것이다.

三, 橋梁, 井戶 其他 地名 由來

昭格洞에서 八判洞 가는 다리를 掌苑署다리라 하니 그는 前日에 花洞 복주우물 가는 도중 東便에 掌苑署가 잇섯던 까닭이니 掌苑은 즉 禁苑의 守護 封植을 마튼 官署이다. 西十字橋와 東十字橋는 字義와 가티 東西十字街頭에 잇는 까닭에 그리 이름이 된 것이니 별로 설명을 요할 것 업다. 淸風溪로 올나가서 慈壽宮다리는 他項에 屢次 설명하얏슴으로 畧하거니와 景福宮 西體府洞 입구에 잇는 石橋는 소위 禁橋이니 此는 考慮 肅宗時代에 架設한 것으로 水口가 3개의 眼鏡形과 가티 되엿스니 此는 京城에서 最古의 역사를 가진 동시에 最巧妙하게 架設한 것이다. 禁橋라 함은 前日 禁衛營(恩賜授産場址 禁衛營과는 別것)이 그 부근에 잇섯기 때문이다. 그리고 社稷洞 입구에 지금 宗橋는 元名 종침다리니(琮沉橋 혹은 琮琛橋) 前날 成宗 때에 유명한 宰相 許琮 許琛 형제가 社稷洞에 살엇섯는데 그의 姊氏는 역시 知鑑이 장한 夫人인 故로 許相형제가 무슨 중대한 國事가 잇스면 入闕하기 전에 먼저 남매가 상의하던바 그때 成宗이 燕山의 母妃 尹氏를 廢한 후 賜死코자 하야 여러 大臣과 상의하는데  許琮이 역시 右相으로 入侍하게 된지라 許相은 먼저 그 姊氏를 보고 意思를 물엇더니 姊氏는 徐徐이 對하되 비록 天威가 大震하야 신하로써 犯顔直諫은 못할지라도 譬컨대 私家의 老僕이 家主의 命을 違치 못하야 主母를 共殺함과 가트니 義分上 不敢할 뿐 안이라 他日에 主母의 아들이 繼位하는 때이면 其事에 叅한 사람이 엇지 禍를 면하리오. 그대가 一門의 禍를 免하랴거던 맛당이 善處하라 하니 琮이 크게 깨닷고 自宅에서 闕內로 가는 길에 짐짓 此橋下에 떠러저 負傷하고 入朝치 안음으로 尹氏 賜死會議에 不叅하게 되엿는데 그후 燕山 卽位 당시에 廢妃 사건에 관련한 일반 宰臣은 모도 一網打盡에 大禍를 被하얏스되 惟獨 許相家는 禍를 免하얏슴으로 後人이 名하야 曰 琮沈橋라 하얏다. 其外 捕廳다리(惠政橋)·廣橋·水標橋·漢江橋 이약이는 他項에 論하얏기로 玆에 畧하거니와 지금 京城日報社 東側에는 前日 軍器司가 잇서 軍器를 보관하얏고 其 附近橋를 軍器司橋라 하얏는데 前日 斬刑罪人 중에 急速히 죽일 사람은 市外로 가기 전에 여긔서 죽엿스니 소위 軍器司斬이 이것이다. 永渡寺에 드러가는 입구에 永渡橋가 잇고 往十里에서 纛島가는 中路에 箭串橋는 일명 濟磐橋인데 兩橋는 다 成宗 御筆로 題名 한 것이다. 기타 河橋·觀水橋 등은 별로 역사가 업기 玆에 畧한다.
次에 井戶는 社稷洞(今 內資洞)에 許堅우물이 잇스니 그것은 肅宗 때 政丞 許積의 庶子 許堅이 살던 터로 소위 庚申大獄에 大禍를 被한 故로 그 집도 籍沒되엿다. 그리고 西大門町 禮拜堂 부근에는 廉井洞이란 데가 잇섯스니 그것은 哲宗 때 南門박 市井에 잇는 廉정수란 者가 自稱 哲宗의 외사촌이라 하고 欺上하야 薰天富貴를 하엿더니 實 외사촌 廉福吉이 江華使令으로 잇다가 上京하매 廉정수가 福吉을 죽이랴고 私禁하엿더니 夜間에 廉이 烟突을 뚜르고 逃出하야 告發함으로 廉정수는 被誅하고 其家가 역시 籍沒되엿는데 지금에도 그 洞里를 廉井洞이라 하고 廉井이 아즉 잇다. 花開洞<88> 복주우물을 福地니 伏雉니 하고 억지로 漢字를 붓치지만은 실상은 물 나오는 구멍이 복주(飯盖)와 가터서 그런 것갓다. 그 우에 잇는 우물은 양푼갓다고 하야 양푼우물, 三淸洞 雲龍亭 東편에 잇는 것은 馬의 陰戶와 갓다고 하야 말우물이라 한 것을 보면 미루워 알 수 잇다. 三仙坪에서 牛耳洞으로 가는 고개를 敦岩峴이라 하나 원래는 狄踰峴이니 丙子亂 때에 胡人이 歸路에 그 길로 간 까닭에 이름하얏다 傳하고 豆毛浦 通路에 讀書堂고개가 잇스니 이는 中宗10년에 龍山에 잇는 讀書堂(湖堂)을 豆毛浦岸에 移轉함으로 이름함이다.

四, 녯날 京城 各級人의 分布狀況

北山 밋흘 北村, 南村 밋흘 南村, 駱山 근처를 東村, 西小門 內外를 西村, 長橋·水標橋 어름을 中村, 廣通橋 以上을 우대, 孝橋洞 以下를 아래대, 江邊을 五江, 城 밧 四面十里 以下를 字內(字內라 함은 서울 성벽에 天地玄黃의 順으로 어느 點으로부터 어느 點까지의 間은 天字區域 혹은 地字區域이라 하야 그 文字와 文字의 間을 各軍營에서 分擔 守備한 故이다)라 하야 東·西·南·北의 네村(通稱曰 四山밋)에는 양반이 살되 북촌에는 文班, 南村에는 武班이 살엇스며 ********이로되 西村에는 「西人」(朝鮮의 全體를 亡해 버린 소위 四色別의 元始인 西人 東人의 稱號가 생긴 원인은 西人의 張本人 沈議謙은 西村 貞洞에 살고 東人의 張本人인 金孝元은 東村 蓮洞에 살은 故로 가론東人 가론西人이라 한 것이다.)이 살엇스며 그 후 西人이 다시 老論 少論으로 난위고 東人이 다시 南人 北人 또 大北 小北으로 난위메 밋처는 西村은 少論, 北村은 老論, 南은 南人이 살엇다고 할 수 잇스나 사실은 少論까지 雜居하되 주로 武班이 살엇스며 그리고 東村에는 小北, 中村은 中人, 우대는 六曹以下의 各司에 소속한 吏輩庫直 族屬이 살되 특히 茶洞·相思洞 등지에 商賈(通稱 市井輩)가 살엇고 아래대는 각종의 軍屬(將校 執事 等類)이 살엇스며 특히 宮家를 중심으로 하야 景福宮 西便 樓下洞 근처는 소위 大殿別(宮家의 隷屬)派들이 살고 昌德宮 동편의 苑南洞·蓮池洞 근처는 武監 族屬이 살엇스며 東小門안 成均舘 근처는 舘人(속칭 舘사람)이 살고 往十里에는 軍統(兵村)들이 살고 五江邊에는 船人商買들이 만히 살엇는대 속칭 강대사람이라 함은 江邊에 사는 사람을 지칭함이엿다.
이와가티 살뎐 당시의 京城 안에는 外國人 *勿?**地方사람 한 名일지라도 함부로 侵入할 길이 업섯스며 다못 近畿의 지방의 細民이 혹 行廊살이로 또는 黃海지방의 村婦가 광우리 장사로 서울을 드러왓슬 뿐이오 그밧게 지방 사람은 權門 출입을 위하야 入京하는 以外에 달리 서울 살님을 할 수가 업섯다.

五, 京城 洞町의 古今 比較一覽

(禮智洞) 中部洞 孝橋一部 田間洞 下避馬洞一部 上川邊洞 梨峴一部 玉房洞 漆房洞 石手房洞
(鍾路四丁目) 下避馬洞一部 廟洞 後井洞一部 梨峴一部 孝橋一部 二橋洞一部
(鍾路五丁目) 二橋洞一部 蓮池洞一部 於義洞 下大井洞 下川邊洞 上大井洞
(鐘路六丁目) 杵橋洞一部 養士洞 東學洞 島村
(苑南洞) 含春洞一部 壺洞 蓮村洞一部 巡邏洞一部 相思洞 甘井洞 承文洞 新民洞 麻井洞
(仁義洞) 後井洞一部 蓮池洞一部 登子洞 新基洞 碑石洞 嘉井洞
(崇一洞) 宋洞一部 興德洞一部 避馬洞一部<89> 食堂洞 水之洞 道德洞 浦洞 上井洞
(崇二洞) 宋洞一部 上土橋一部 廣禮橋洞一部 宮內井洞 四賢洞 避馬洞一部 旌門洞 山泉洞 興德洞一部 宮內洞 朴井洞 觀旂橋洞
(崇三洞) 養賢洞 西泮洞 濟玉洞 紅門洞 營洞 里門洞
(崇四洞) 寒井洞 廣禮橋洞一部 思樂橋 磚石峴
(忠信洞) 經基洞 長垣洞 杵橋洞一部 新橋洞一部
(蓮建洞) 果洞 含春洞一部 墻洞 南彌塔洞 新橋洞一部 獨甲峴 盤松井洞
(蓮池洞) 冷井洞 蓮池洞一部
(孝悌洞) 新橋洞一部 內橋洞 蓮池洞一部 槐泉洞 尙北洞
(惠化洞) 米洞 上土橋 下土橋 上栢洞一部
(東崇洞) 上栢洞一部 新垈洞 下栢洞 雙溪洞一部
(梨花洞) 雙溪洞一部 梨花洞
(崇仁洞) 穎眉洞 米廛洞 藍橋一部 新設契 場巨里 藍橋 東廟洞
(昌信洞) 紫芝洞 亭子洞 城底洞 新村 藍橋一部 堂峴洞 伏車橋 紅樹洞 大井洞 鮒魚井洞 伏車橋(臥龍洞) 泥洞一部 樓洞一部 水門洞一部 承文洞一部 麻洞一部
(授恩洞) 麻洞一部 廟洞一部
(勸農洞) 水門洞一部 農圃洞 承文洞一部 麻洞一夫
(鳳翼洞) 麻洞一部 太井洞一部 廟洞一部
(薰井洞) 太井洞一部 巡暹洞一部 後井洞一部 廟前洞 廟洞一部
(弼雲洞) 弼雲臺 龜洞 塡井洞 大口都家洞 都家洞 松木洞 南征洞一部 社稷洞一部
(社稷洞) 昌平洞一部 社稷洞一部 武德門 朴井洞一部
(內資洞) 南征洞一部 社稷洞一部 戰笠洞 古澗洞 長興庫洞一部 昌染洞一部 宗橋一部 銀杏洞
(需昌洞) 社稷洞一部 朴井洞一部 英嬪洞 樓井洞 承井橋 內需司前洞 內需司 宗橋一部 大昌洞一部(唐珠洞) 北門洞一部 奉常司前 大昌洞一部 內瞻洞 南門洞 昌禮洞 燻造洞一部 夜珠峴一部 唐皮洞一部
(西大門町一丁目) 松橋一部 下芳橋一部 上芳橋 中芳橋 繕工洞 園洞 夜珠峴一部 廉井洞 備邊司 亭子洞 唐皮洞一部 燻造洞一部 五宮洞一部
(西大門町二丁目) 紫門洞 新門洞 含春洞 芳楸洞 長生洞 農圃洞 五宮洞一部
(武橋町) 毛橋洞一部 武橋洞一部 上茶洞一部 刀子洞 毛橋 豆粥洞 武橋 大貞洞一部 篩洞一部 麯洞
(太平通一丁目) 舊西部洞一部 西學峴一部 西學洞 軍器寺  篩洞一部 大貞洞一部
(西小門町) 小貞洞一部 內泉洞 倭松洞 鶴橋洞 西小門內洞 司倉洞 舘井洞一部 太平洞一部 生祠洞一部
(太平通二丁目) 石井洞一部 卜車橋洞 錢橋 卜車橋 陽洞一部 大貞洞一部 舘井洞一部 生祠洞一部 尙洞一部 太平洞一部 七間洞
(貞洞) 大貞洞一部 小貞洞一部
(南大門通五丁目) 蓮池洞一部 陽洞一部 大里門洞一部 小里門洞一部 盆洞一部 藍井洞一部
(御成町) 陽洞一部 小里門洞一部 地下桃楮洞<90>
(吉野町一丁目) 桃洞一部
(吉野町二丁目) 牛首峴 桃洞一部 大里洞一部
(古市町) 桃洞一部 東子洞 新村洞一部 舟橋一部 葛月里一部 石橋洞一部
(西界洞) 舟橋一部 新村洞一部 靑坡一契一部 石橋洞一部
(蓬萊町二丁目) 藥田中洞一部
(蓬萊町一丁目) 窟井洞 銀杏洞 巡洞一部 紫岩洞一部 梅洞 盆洞一部 蓮池洞一部 藍井洞
(蓬萊町三丁目) 藥田中洞一部 東山洞一部
(蓬萊町四丁目) 東山洞一部
(中林洞) 藥田中洞一部 兄弟洞一部 翰林洞一部
(渼芹洞) 芹洞一部 尾洞一部
(義州通二丁目) 亭子洞 紫岩洞一部 冷洞一部 半泉洞一部 蓋井洞 布洞 帶洞 四巨里一部 汗洞 蛤洞一部
(和泉町) 米廛下車洞一部 冶洞一部 舊巡廳 巡洞一部 簡洞 紫巖洞一部
(義州通一丁目) 米廛車洞一部 西醬洞 凉臺洞 雇馬洞一部 尾洞一部 芹洞一部 四巨里一部 新橋 米廛上新洞 京橋一部
(竹添町一丁目) 平洞一部 京口 雇馬洞一部 新門外 京橋一部
(竹添町二丁目) 尾洞一部 鍮洞 八角洞 權政丞契 芹洞一部 冷洞一部
(竹添町三丁目) 兄弟井洞一部 阿峴 芹洞一部
(平洞) 平洞一部
(橋南洞) 平洞一部 冷洞一部 石橋一部 川邊洞一部
(冷洞) 冷洞一部 李判洞一部
(天然洞) 李判洞一部 石橋一部
(玉川洞) 李判洞一部 玉瀑洞一部
(舘洞) 玉瀑洞一部 舘後洞 舘前洞一部 壯元亭洞一部
(橋北洞) 壯元亭洞一部 舘前洞一部 新村洞一部 紅花洞 把撥洞一部 石橋一部
(松月洞) 松亭洞 川邊洞一部 月巖洞一部
(杏村洞) 新村洞一部 谷井洞 御水井洞一部 銀杏洞
(紅把洞) 新村洞一部 御水井洞一部 紅門洞 月巖洞一部 把撥洞一部  川邊洞一部
(峴底洞) 慕華峴
(體府洞) 九曲洞 禮府洞 樓閣洞一部
(樓下洞) 五巨里 南隻洞 松木洞 長城洞 柳木洞 福井洞 樓閣洞一部
(樓上洞) 樓閣洞一部
(茶屋町) 毛橋一部 上茶洞一部 中茶洞一部 下茶洞一部
(黃金町一丁目) 由洞 南川邊洞 武橋洞一部 堅井洞 石井洞一部 美洞一部 熟手房洞 休紙洞 香木洞 宮內井洞 小公洞一部
(長谷川町) 小公洞一部 儲慶宮宮洞 松峴洞一部 石井洞一部
(北米倉町) 司畜洞 松峴洞一部 太平洞一部 宮垈洞
(南大門通四丁目) 水橋洞一部 蓮池洞一部 太平洞一部 生祠洞一部 倉洞一部
(南大門通三丁目) 尙洞一部 水橋洞一部 長洞一部 松峴洞一部 倉洞一部
(南大門通二丁目) 小龍洞一部 大龍洞一部 長洞一部  松峴洞一部 小公洞一部 銅峴洞一部
(三角町) 大廣橋洞一部 寫字廳洞一部 弘門洞 曲橋洞 小廣橋洞一部<91>
(南大門通一丁目) 美洞一部 下茶洞一部 大廣橋洞一部 寫字廳洞一部 小廣橋洞一部 席洞一部 銅峴洞一部 廣橋洞 富井部一部 白木廛洞一部 靑布廛后洞一部
(水下町) 席洞一部 水下洞 上犁洞一部 下犁洞一部
(長橋町) 下犁洞一部 棗洞一部 苧洞一部 惠民洞一部 墨井洞一部 長橋洞
(水標町) 惠民洞一部 墨井洞一部 水標橋洞 竹洞一部 甲洞一部
(*町) 山林洞一部 二台洞 石中洞 鍊井洞 后洞一部
(笠井町) 詩洞一部 河橋洞 甲洞一部 笠井洞一洞 馬契洞 草洞一部 舊造山洞一部 篩洞一部 山林洞一部
(舟橋町) 后洞一洞 坪井 孝洞 昌廛洞
(芳山町) 午橋洞一部 蓮坊洞一部
(黃金町七丁目) 下都監洞 東山里洞一部 裵洞一部 新堂里
(黃金町六丁目) 訓練院 南小洞一部 藍井洞一部 蓮坊洞一部
(黃金町五丁目)  蓮坊洞一部 午橋洞一部 漁橋洞一部 帶洞一部 芹洞 靑橋洞 五壯洞一部
(黃金町四丁目) 靑寧橋洞 甕井洞一部 園井洞 銀洞 坂井洞一部 直井洞 大仁峴洞一部 山林洞一部
(黃金町三丁目) 山林洞一部 草洞一部 篩洞一部 椒洞一部 笠洞一部 詩洞一部 履洞一部 竹洞一部
(黃金町二丁目) 竹洞一部 苧洞一部 棗洞一部 上犁洞一部 下犁洞一部 水下洞一部 銅峴一部 掌樂院洞一部 墨井洞一部 冷井洞一部 明洞一部 小龍洞一部 惠民洞一部
(明治町一丁目) 掌樂院洞一部 舊南洞一部 小龍洞一部 大龍洞一部 鐘峴洞一部 苧洞一部
(明治町二丁目) 駱洞一部 大龍洞一部 明洞一部 鐘峴洞一部  苧洞一部
(永樂町一丁目) 苧洞一部
(永樂町二丁目) 冷井洞一部 竹洞一部 履洞一部 宮基洞一部
(若草町) 宮基洞一部 椒洞一部 草洞一部 履洞一部
(櫻井町一丁目) 筆洞一部 桑洞 山林洞一部 大仁峴洞一部 晦洞一部
(櫻井町二丁目) 晦洞一部 小仁峴洞 大仁峴洞一部 板井洞一部 仁峴洞一部 藝洞一部 甕井洞一部
(花園町) 藝洞一部 仁峴洞一部 甕井洞一部 舟橋洞一部 沈橋洞一部 五宮洞一部
(初音町)  舟橋洞一部 沈橋洞一部 五壯洞一部 雙林洞一部 帶洞一部
(光熙町一丁目) 漁橋洞一部 雙林洞一部 藍井洞一部 南小洞一部 石橋一部
(光熙町二丁目) 石橋洞一部 裴洞一部 東山里洞一部 南城底洞 兄弟洞 谷洞 知禮洞一部
(並木町) 南小洞一部 雙林洞一部
(本町五丁目) 雙林洞一部 沈橋洞 冶峴洞一部 墨井洞一部
(本町四丁目) 五壯洞一部 藝洞一部 筆洞一部 晦洞一部 生民洞 墨洞
(本町三丁目) 草洞一部 椒洞一部 宮基洞一部 筆洞一部 鑄洞一部
(本町二丁目) 苧洞一部 鐘峴洞一部 鑄洞一部
(本町一丁目) 明洞一部 大龍洞一部 駱洞一部 長洞一部 會洞一部
(南米倉町) 倉洞一部 尙洞一部
(旭町一丁目) 倉洞一部 會洞一部 琥珀洞<92>
(旭町二丁目) 南山洞一部 會洞一部 長洞一部
(旭町三丁目) 駱洞一部 南山洞一部
(南山町一丁目) 南山洞一部
(南山町二丁目) 南山洞一部
(南山町三丁目) 南山洞一部
(倭城臺町) 鑄洞一部 南學洞一部
(壽町) 鑄洞一部
(日之出町) 鑄洞一部 南學洞一部
(大和町一丁目) 鑄洞一部 筆洞一部 南學洞一部
(大和町二丁目) 筆洞一部 墨洞一部
(大和町三丁目) 墨洞一部
(新町) 雙林洞一部 冶峴洞一部 墨洞一部
(西四軒町) 冶峴一部 南小洞一部
(東四軒町) 南小洞一部 知禮洞一部 藪坪里
(苑洞) 苑洞觀峴 桂洞一部
(桂洞) 桂洞一部
(嘉曾洞) 齋洞一部 孟峴 東谷一部
(齋洞) 齋洞一部 東谷一部 紅峴一部
(三淸洞) 三淸洞, 判洞一部
(八判洞) 八判洞一部
(花洞) 花開島一部 東谷一部 紅峴一部 小安洞一部
(安國洞) 小安洞一部 紅峴一部 安峴 齋洞一部
(昭格洞) 昭格洞 花開洞一部 大安洞一部
(松峴洞) 大安洞一部 碧洞一部 松峴一部 古里井洞
(諫洞) 諫洞 碧洞一部
(中學洞) 松峴一部 中學橋洞 碧洞一部 水門洞一部 東谷
(光化門通) 水門洞一部 禮賓洞 豆錫洞一部 黃土峴一部 司醞洞一部 都染洞一部 工後洞一部 保民洞 三澗洞 松橋一部 舊西部洞一部 西學峴一部 廣濟橋 東嶺洞 黃土峴 下芳橋一部 唐皮洞一部
(通義洞) 梅洞 西門洞 帶洞一部 壯洞一部
(通洞) 通谷 司圃洞 玉洞一部
(玉仁洞) 玉洞一部 仁旺洞
(昌成洞) 玉井洞 帶洞一部 間谷 昌成洞 壯洞一部 白狗洞一部
(孝子洞) 白狗洞一部 東谷一部 毓祥宮洞一部 孝谷 溫井洞一部 新橋一部
(新橋洞) 新橋一部
(宮井洞) 毓祥宮洞一部 東谷一部 溫井洞一部 新橋一部 朴井洞一部
(淸雲洞) 白雲洞 淸風洞 朴井洞一部 新橋一部
(瑞麟洞) 砂器廛洞一部 避馬洞一部 惠泉一部 毛橋 蛤洞一部 白木廛一部 富井洞一部 典獄洞 松橋一部 許屛一部 椎洞
(貫鐵洞) 靑布廛後洞一部 鞋廛後洞一部 鹽洞一部 東谷一部 長橋洞一部 貫子洞 笠洞一部 丁字洞
(觀水洞) 笠洞一部 琵琶洞一部 帽谷洞一部 上板橋一部
(長沙洞) 下板橋一部 上板橋一部 帽谷洞一部 河橋 板井洞 中部洞一部
(鍾路一丁目) 豆錫洞一部 避馬洞一部 惠泉一部 相思洞一部 外相思洞一部 黃土峴一部 許屛一部 蛤洞一部 紬廛洞
(鍾路二丁目) 靑布廛后洞一部 鞋廛後洞一部 鹽洞一部 東谷一部 鐵物橋 笠洞一部 布屛洞一部 典洞一部 里門一部<93> 香井洞一部 水典洞一部 承洞一部 塔洞一部 校洞一部 鉢里洞一部
(鍾路三丁目) 布屛洞一部 琵琶洞一部 帽谷洞一部 上板橋一部 中部洞一部 校洞一部 紬洞一部 廟洞一部 下板橋一部 避馬洞一部 笠洞一部
(壽松洞) 壽進洞一部 松峴 磚洞 中學橋 司僕洞 槐井洞
(淸進洞) 壽進洞一部 外相思洞一部 米廛洞 禁府後洞一部 相洞 相思洞一部
(堅志洞) 典洞一部 靑石洞一部 大寺洞一部 禁府後洞一部 氷庫洞 圖畵洞 銅井洞
(公平洞) 典洞一部 禁府後洞一部 槐洞 鉢里洞一部 里門洞一部
(寬勳洞) 大寺洞一部 靑石洞一部 勳洞
(仁寺洞) 大寺洞一部 里門洞一部 香井洞一部 水典洞一部 承洞一部 園洞一部
(慶雲洞) 校洞一部 石井洞
(樂園洞) 校洞一部 園洞一部 塔洞一部 漢洞一部 於義洞一部 紬洞一部
(雲泥洞) 泥洞一部
(益善洞) 宮洞 益洞 敦寧洞 泥洞一部 漢洞一部
(敦義洞) 漢洞一部 於義洞一部 張大將洞 樓洞一部 紬洞一部
(積善洞) 司醞洞一部 魚橋 月宮洞 十字橋 長興庫洞一部 宗橋一部
(都染洞) 義盈庫洞一部 都染洞一部 司醞洞一部 工後洞一部
(靑葉町一丁目) 靑坡 二契
(靑葉町二丁目) 靑坡三契一部 靑坡四契一部
(靑葉町三丁目) 靑坡三契一部 靑坡四契一部
(元町一丁目) 靑坡四契一部 下馬碑契一部
(元町二丁目) 東門外一部
(元町三丁目) 東門外一部
(元町四丁目) 兄弟井一部 灘項一部
(錦町) 下馬碑契一部 萬里倉一部
(彌生町) 萬里倉一部
(大島町) 下馬碑契一部 東門外一部
(榮町) 東門外一部
(淸水町) 新舊倉內一部 東門外一部 賑恤倉 兄弟井一部
(山手町) 灘項一部 兄弟井一部 桃花外洞一部
(巖根町) 桃花外洞一部 桃花內洞一部
(京町) 靑坡四契一部
(桃花洞) 桃花內洞一部 麻浦一部
(麻浦洞) 麻浦一部
(三坂通) 葛月里一部 典牲洞
(岡崎町) 葛月里一部
(漢江通) 元興洞 梨泰院洞
(二村洞) 新草里 沙村里 新村里<94>
<86-94>