잡지명	別건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	京城名物集 (Collection of Famous Things in Kyŏngsŏng)
기사형태	소식 (News)

Collection of Famous Things in Kyŏngsŏng
Famous Food

Sŏllŏngt'ang: When a country person first comes to Seoul and passes by a sŏllŏngt'ang restaurant, they see boiled cow heads with the fur still on, displayed on a tray as if advertising the sŏllŏngt'ang. They also see ŏji earthenware bowls (오지뚝백이) of sŏllŏngt'ang, which even the poorest people in the countryside wouldn't eat. Smelling the strong, gamey odor, they wrinkle their noses, thinking that even the so-called capital of the country has such dirty food and wondering who could eat it. However, if they try it once or twice, they will soon become addicted and spend all their money, even money meant for their wives' clothing, to keep eating it. It's not just the cheap price (usually 15 chŏn per bowl, with extra meat costing extra); it's the taste and nutrition that make it so valuable. In the past, people with tuberculosis and those recovering from serious illnesses in Seoul ate it to recuperate. Recently, even so-called modern (haikara) young men who have had new-style marriages cannot live without sŏllŏngt'ang for breakfast and dinner. - Nowadays, many so-called modern women don't know how to cook rice well, and they are often out in the morning and late in the evening, so husbands who have to go to work on time often rely on sŏllŏngt'ang. - In the past, the sŏllŏngt'ang at Pak Chambae (紫巖) in South Gate was considered the best. Even on cold winter nights, people would travel over ten li to eat it, like people going to Chŏngnŭng to drink water or to Akpawi-gol to drink medicinal water in the summer. However, now that sŏllŏngt'ang restaurants have sprung up all over the city, that trend has passed. There are quite a few sŏllŏngt'ang restaurants in the city, and among them, the sŏllŏngt'ang in Chongno I-mun-an (鍾路里門안), Changgyo (長橋) sŏllŏngt'ang, and Saenjŏn Ilsamok (샌전 一三屋) sŏllŏngt'ang seem to have inherited the fame of Pak Chambae sŏllŏngt'ang. However, people from the countryside should not become too fond of sŏllŏngt'ang. Like the young man from Sŏsan, Ch'ungch'ŏng Province, who sold all his rice paddies yielding 400 sŏk of grain and then regretted that sŏllŏngt'ang was not a nourishing soup but a ruinous soup, it's easy to regret.

Sŏnsuljip (Standing Bars): In the past, sŏnsuljip were mostly frequented by lower-class workers, and so-called high-status people didn't go there much. But now, whether it's due to economic hardship or the breakdown of class consciousness, workers aside, even well-dressed "modern" (shin-sa moppo) types go there as commonly as they used to go to yori-jip (料裡집) (Japanese-style restaurants) or anju-suljip (안진술집) (taverns with food). As a result, the names of sŏnsuljip are becoming more elevated, with modern-sounding nicknames like "Dutch Hotel" or "Minjung Hotel" (民眾호텔) in a Western-Japanese hybrid style. Whatever the name, the best thing about sŏnsuljip is that they are economical in terms of time. Second, anyone can enter with just 5 chŏn. Third, there are no classes, and everyone eats standing in the same place. Fourth, you can eat whatever anju <100> (side dishes) you want, grilling or cooking it on the spot, so you can be sure it's fresh, and you can even take the leftovers with you. In every way, it is democratic and ideal, especially suited to the lives of us Koreans today. Among the many sŏnsuljip, the Hwangottang (黃鰌湯) restaurant at the end of Hwadong is popular because of the taste of the wine and because, except during the summer off-season, it always has loach soup (ch'uot'ang), which is more delicious than anywhere else. The first sŏnsuljip inside Imun-an (里門안) has better anju than wine, and the way the woman pouring the wine taps out the rhythm on the wine glass each time she pours is charming. The sŏnsuljip in the alley below has both good anju and good wine, and because there are two women and the alley is secluded, it's the perfect place for secret drinkers. Oops, I'm about to start advertising sŏnsuljip. I won't name any specific places; it's enough to introduce sŏnsuljip as a famous thing in Seoul. Recently, a few sŏnsuljip have opened in Kaesŏng, Suwŏn, Inch'ŏn, and Ch'unch'ŏn, but they don't have the variety of sŏnsuljip in Seoul.

Yakshik (藥食) and Yakgwa (藥菓): The original place of origin of yakshik is Kyŏngju (during the Silla Dynasty), but now it has actually become a famous food in Seoul. It's not that there's no yakshik in the countryside, but except for Kaesŏng and Chŏnju, even if they use the same ingredients, the taste and color are not as good as Seoul's yakshik, and they are mostly like glutinous millet rice mixed with sugar. As the saying goes, "Just because it's Kangnŭng, doesn't mean everyone is a scholar," even Seoul yakshik these days, whether it's the "yakshik bento" sold by poor students or the yakshik made in restaurants that's been passed around from table to table for months like children's play stones, smelling of mold inside, I won't even mention it. But in reality, the yakshik made in respectable homes is truly good. And you can't eat yakgwa as tender or tasty as this in the provinces.

Namju Pukpyŏng (南酒北餠): The saying "Southern wine, northern rice cake" has become outdated with the changing times. Now, Namch'on (南村) has almost become a village of people who eat jeongsŏng (正宗; orthodox, genuine) food, and wine has become a company monopoly, so there's no room to discuss which wine is better. In order, Yunniga-ju (Yun Family Wine) (安國洞) and Riga-ju (Ri Family Wine) (中學洞), as well as Chungang-ju (中央酒), are relatively good in the city for soju (燒酒) and medicinal wine. And since the emergence of hottŏk (호떡) <101> (Chinese pancake), Japanese rice cakes (waettŏk; 왜떡), Russian bread (rosoa-ppang; 로서아빵), and other confectioneries, the number of rice cake shops has decreased and the types of rice cakes have decreased because there are fewer consumers than before. However, Kyŏngsŏng's seasonal foods, which are unique, are still preserved. In the spring, there are ssuk songpyŏn (쑥송편) (mugwort rice cakes), kapi ttok (가피떡), songi ttok (송긔떡), and pindaettŏk (빈대떡) (mung bean pancakes). On April 8th, there is nŭt'ŭ ttok (느트떡). On the 5th day of the 5th month (Tano), there is ch'wi ttok (취떡). In June and July, there are chŏngpyŏn (蒸편) and kkae injŏlmi (깨인절미). In August (Ch'usŏk), there is songpyŏn (송편). In the winter, there are siruttŏk (시루떡) (steamed rice cake) (of which there are many kinds) and tut'uttŏk (두투떡), which are famous. Of all the Seoul rice cakes, saekchŏlp'yŏn (색절편) (multicolored rice cakes) are brilliant rice cakes that cannot be seen in the countryside. It is also a famous product.

Yŏn'gyet'ang (軟鷄湯) (Young Chicken Soup) and Kalbi (갈비) (Ribs): It has been a long time since there were yŏn'gye restaurants in Wŏnsan, and I hear that kalbi restaurants have recently opened in P'yŏngyang. Until three years ago, there were no restaurants in Seoul that sold yŏn'gyet'ang or grilled kalbi, but after Chŏndong Taegut'ang (典洞 大口湯) restaurant started selling baeksuk yŏn'gye (백숙연계) (boiled young chicken) and grilling kalbi, several restaurants sprang up, and every restaurant started selling Taegut'ang, baeksuk yŏn'gye, and grilled kalbi as if they were copied from a photograph. Now, only a few restaurants besides Taegut'ang remain, but in any case, yŏn'gyet'ang and grilled kalbi have become a famous food in Seoul. The taste is nothing special, but everyone welcomes it because it is easy to eat. Also, you can't eat doenjang jjigae (된장찌개) (soybean paste stew), kkakdugi (깍둑이) (diced radish kimchi), and jang kimchi (장김치) like they do in Seoul when you go to the countryside. It is not unreasonable for someone who goes abroad to think more about Seoul kimchi and kkakdugi than about his own family.

Flowers and Birds

Baeksong (白松) (White Pine): This is not only a famous product of Kyŏngsŏng but also a precious tree that could become a world-famous product for all of Korea. Its scientific name is "Pinus Bungeana," and it is commonly called Tangsong (唐松), Paekkol-song (白骨松), or Paegyŏp-song (白葉松) in Korea and China. The trunk is white, and the leaves are needle-shaped and trifoliate, with a grayish-white tinge. Its native place is Mongolia, and the places where it is currently located in Kyŏngsŏng are as follows:
1. Inside the Buddhist Educational Center (佛教敎務院) in Susong-dong (壽松洞) (formerly the site of Posŏng High School); tree age unknown.
2. Inside the residence of Tongt'ak (東拓) in T'ongŭi-dong (通義洞) (formerly the site of Chang'ŭigong Palace); about 600 years old.
3. Ri Chaek-ka's (李載克家) house at 66 Wŏnnam-dong (苑南洞); about 300 years old.
4. Inside Ŏŭigong Palace (於義宮) in Naeja-dong (內資洞) (currently a branch office of the Police Department); 400 years old.
5. Inside the dormitory of Chae-dong Women's High School (齋洞女高普); 600 years old.
6. Inside the villa of Inoue Gibun (井上宜文), a Japanese person, at 87 Yongsan Wŏnjŏng 4-chome; 600 years old.
While we are talking about paeksong, let me also mention for reference that only three trees have been found in the provinces: (1) Kim Ki-wŏn's (金沂元家) house in Yonggung-ri (龍宮里), Yesan-myŏn (禮山面), Yesan-gun (禮山郡), Ch'ungnam Province (tree age 200 years); (2) Kim Sang-ch'ŏl's (金商徹家) house in Ŏam-t'aktok-ri (漁岩濯谷里), Boeun-ŭp (報恩邑), Boeun-gun (報恩郡), Ch'ungbuk Province (200 years); (3) Ch'oe Sang-gyu's (崔相奎家) house in Tŏk-i-ri (德耳里), Songp'o-myŏn (松浦面), Koyang-gun (高陽郡) (it is also said that there are some in Miryang and Kyŏngsŏng).

Taegam-song (大監松) and Nangnang-jangsong (落落長松): In Pagyul Temple (柏栗寺) in Kyŏngju, there are sunsong (筍松) (bamboo shoot pines), and in Namhansansŏng (南漢山城) in Kwangju, there are tangsang-song (堂上松) (senior official pines) with jade headgear attached (when King Injo moved to this area, he loved the pine trees so much that he gave them jade headgear). But in Seoul, there are as many as two so-called Taegam-song with gold headgear attached inside T'aehwagung (太和宮) (now Min Kyu-shik's house) at the end of Samch'ŏng-dong. It is said that when Queen Min (閔妃) used to move around during the year of her death, she took shelter under those pine trees from the rain, so they were given the title of taegam (大監) (high-ranking official) for their service <102>. One of the two Taegam trees burned down and died a few years ago (but has not yet been cut down), and only one Taegam tree remains, guarding the backyard of Min Taegam's descendants. The tree itself is an ordinary old pine, but it is a famous product because it has gold headgear attached. And on Sŭnggang T'ongro (乘江通路) - Ch'anggŏn-ri (倉川里), Yŏnhŭi-myŏn (延禧面), Koyang-gun (市外 高陽郡 延禧面), outside the city, there is a nangnang-jangsong, which has branches that droop down more than a weeping willow, which is a rare tree that cannot be seen elsewhere.

Mugunghwa (無窮花) (Rose of Sharon) and Chipbidalg'i (鵓鴿) (Domestic Pigeon): Korea has been called Kŭnyŏk (槿域) (Land of the Rose of Sharon) because there have been many mugunghwa since ancient times, but in reality, there are not that many. Except for Hŏngsŏng-ŭp (洪城邑), Ch'ungnam Province, even if there are some, there are only one or two trees in one area, and even more so, there are many places in North Korea where they don't even know the name. However, there are relatively many in Kyŏngsŏng. There are 3 or 4 trees in the compound of the Ch'ŏndogyo Church (天道敎堂), and they can also be seen frequently in private gardens, and there are many trees in T'ap-dong Park (塔洞公園), among which the white ones are also rare. The most numerous is Sorim Temple (小林寺) outside Ch'ang'ŭimun (彰義門). And although there are some places in the provinces that raise chipbidalg'i these days, there are not as many places that raise them as in Seoul. This seems to have a long history. According to Ryu Hwe-p'ung's (柳惠風) Kyŏngdo Chapki (京都雜記), there are eight types of domestic pigeons. A pigeon that is entirely white is called Chŏnbaek (全白), one that is white with a yellow tail and a black dot on its head is called Chŏm-o (點烏), one that is white in body and tail is called Chadan (紫丹), one that is white in body and has a black head and neck is called Hŏkhŏ-du (黑虛頭), one that is white in body and has a purple head and neck is called Chahŏ-du (紫虛頭), one that is white in body and has a red neck with two layers of red dots at the tip of the feathers is called Ch'ŏn'yangbaek (天仰白), one that is black in body and has a white tail is called Hŭkch'ŭng (黑層), and one that is brown with two layers of gold dots at the tip of the feathers is called Sŭng (僧). These days, there isn't much distinction between them, but it's true that many people raise them.

Tanjong's (端宗) Ginkgo Tree and Sŏng Sammun's (成三問) Hand-Planted Pine Tree: Behind Hyangch'on-dong (杏村洞) outside Sŏdaemun (西大門), there is a large ginkgo tree (Gongson-su (公孫樹), also called Apkyŏk-su (鴨脚樹)), and the branches of that tree all bend eastward. According to legend, this was planted by King Tanjong, and after Tanjong died unjustly in Nyŏngwŏl (寧越), Kangwŏn Province, the branches of the tree all turned east (that is, in the direction of Nyŏngwŏl, where Tanjong's tomb is located). On the road to Hwadong Pokju Well (花洞 복주우물) (behind the so-called Memorial Hall), there is a stone pillar inscribed with "Sŏng Sŏnsaeng Hand-Planted Pine Tree," because there used to be a pine tree that Sŏng Sammun himself planted when he lived there. The pine tree died decades ago, and the stone pillar is now lying overturned in an empty space.

In addition, the forsythia (shinti-hwa (莘荑花), also called kaenari (개나리) or yŏngch'unlyu (迎春柳), lyŏn'gyo (連翹)) in Changch'ungdan (獎忠壇), Yangsadong (養士洞), Samch'ŏngdong, and Sajikdong (社稷洞); the peach blossoms in Ch'ang'ŭimun pak (彰義門박) and Chaha-dong (紫霞洞), Nammun oe T'ohwa-dong (南門外 桃花洞); the lotus blossoms in Nammun oe Yŏnhwa-bong (南門外 蓮花峯); the apricot blossoms in Tongsomun pak Samsŏnp'yŏng (東小門밧 三仙坪); and recently, the cherry blossoms (벚꼿) in Changch'ungdan, Waesŏngdae (倭城臺), and Uidong (牛耳洞), and the willow trees in Ch'ŏngnyangni (淸凉里) have also become famous products.

Famous Vegetables

Minari (미나리) (Water Parsley) of Wangsimni (往十里): The minari of Anju is as famous in P'yŏngnam as Paeksangnu (百祥樓), and the minari of Namwŏn is as famous in Chŏlla Province as Ch'unhyang (春香), but it will not become as famous as the minari of Wangsimni in Seoul. The minari of other places is only available in the spring, but the minari of Seoul is available all year round, as the popular children's song says, "Minari is available all year round." It is long and tender, and the fragrance is also <103> good. In particular, the fresh sprouts of minari that sprout green even in the frozen rice paddies of winter cannot be seen anywhere but in Seoul.

Paekch'ae (白寀) (Chinese Cabbage) of Yŏndong (蓮洞) and Hullyŏnwŏn (訓練院): The Chinese cabbage of Kaesŏng is famous even in Seoul. Kaesŏng cabbage is large and tender, but the taste is not as good as that of Seoul. Among Seoul cabbages, Yŏndong and Hullyŏnwŏn cabbage have been famous since ancient times. They grow a lot of cabbage, and the taste is better than elsewhere. In particular, when you see the green-hearted cabbage that has been grown in a hothouse in the winter and put on the market in early spring, even before the fields are plowed in the countryside, everyone will feel the fresh taste by themselves. Recently, the cabbage of Ch'angsin-dong (昌信洞) outside Tongdaemun (東大門) is also gradually gaining fame.

Famous Fruits and Mushrooms -Songi (松茸) (Matsutake Mushrooms) and Apples, Monk Peaches, Cherries, Roasted Chestnuts-

If you tell people from the countryside that songi grow in Seoul, they won't believe it. However, the songi that grow on Pugak Mountain (北岳山) have been famous as "North Songi, North Songi!" since ancient times, and they have been presented to the royal court in the past, and of course, the general public all enjoy them raw and cooked. Because Pugak is originally a clean mountain and the soil is good, the songi are not only clean and large, but the fragrance is also good, so they are a delicacy that cannot be compared to the songi from so-called famous songi producing areas such as Yangdŏk (陽德), P'yŏngnam Province, Sŏkwang Temple (釋王寺), Iwŏn (利原), Sinhŭng (新興), Kŭmgang Mountain (金剛山), and Yŏngdŏk (盈德), Kyŏngbuk Province. Even in terms of songi fields, there are not many places where they don't grow because they are not well protected, and the quantity is also large. Not only Pugak, but also Namsan (南山) and Ch'angdŏkgung Biwŏn Songlim (昌德宮 秘苑 松林) also grow them. It hasn't been widely publicized yet, but it is a truly famous product. And apples and monk peaches (t'ŏlŏmnŭn poksa (털업는 복사) - hairless peaches) outside Ch'ang'ŭimun are special products of Kyŏngsŏng that are not common in other regions. Song-dong (宋洞) cherries inside Tongsomun (東小門) are also a famous product that cannot be left out. It's not that there are no cherries in the countryside, but there may be no other place like Song-dong where there are thousands of cherry trees in one place and a large quantity is produced. Even though there may be roasted chestnuts in other regions these days, Seoul's roasted chestnuts are still a famous product among fruits. The taste is good, and the roasted chestnut vendor's song is also worth listening to.

Famous Industrial Products

Because Seoul is not yet an industrial city, there are not many industrial products to speak of, but if I were to mention a few special products, wooden chests and wardrobes (ŭgŏri (으거리), banda-ji (반다지), sams'ŭngjang (三層欌), etc.) from Mugyo (武橋) and Insadong (仁寺洞) are famous products of Kyŏngsŏng and are considered valuable household items. Even in wealthy households in the countryside, they are usually kept, and recently, foreigners have also been using them, and the amount of exports abroad is increasing every year. Since the number of users of leaf tobacco and cut tobacco has decreased and hats and Western umbrellas have become popular, the demand for ssamji (쌈지) (tobacco pouches) and kanmo (간모) (simple hats) has decreased, but in the past, ssamji and kanmo from Nugak-dong (樓閣洞) (now Nusang-dong (樓上洞) and Nuhwa-dong (樓下洞)) were also a big famous product. Even now, there are still many users in the provinces, so they are not produced in as large quantities as in the past, but they still maintain their reputation. In addition, oil paper (changp'an-ji (장판지)), paper envelopes (chiji-tchyon (紙鬪箋)), and oil-paper raincoats (yusam (油衫)) are also famous products of Nusang-dong. Also, the colored boxes (saek sangja (色箱子)) of P'irun-dong (弼雲洞) are a special product of Seoul, and recently, gold and silver products manufactured in factories such as the Ri Wangjik Art Factory (李王職美術工場) <104>, Sinhang Commercial Company (信行商會), and Hwashin Commercial Company (和信商會) have also become a famous product and are exported to both domestic and foreign countries, and cotton goods, comforters, and bang-sŏk (方席) (square mats) from P'yŏngdong (舊 典洞) and recently, mosquito nets are also famous throughout the country. Paper goods outside Ch'ang'ŭimun (彰義門) and the decorative cords from Pyŏngmok-chŏng (並木町) are also well-known.

Miscellaneous and Different Famous Products

In the past, the chang'ot (장옷) (long coat) that Seoul women wore could not be seen in the countryside, but these days, the jobaegi (조백이) (hooded veil) that women wear is also a famous product, if you call it famous. People in Seoul are so used to seeing it that they don't know it well, but to those who see it for the first time, it looks like a bird with its tail feathers pulled out or like wearing a bowl upside down. It looks more strange than the colorfully striped jackets (saek-tong chŏgori (色童저고리)) worn by children in Hamhŭng, the sakkat (삭갓) (bamboo hats) worn by women in Taegu (大邱) or Haeju (海州), the hand towels (sugŏn (手巾)) worn by women in Hwangp'yŏng (黃平) and Yangsŏ (兩西), or the skirts worn by women in Kaesŏng (開城). Whether it's good or bad is a separate issue, but it's definitely a famous product of Kyŏngsŏng. Stone battles (sŏkjŏn (石戰)), t'aekhyŏn (擇奇緣) (fortune-telling game), and sandainori (山臺노리) (mask dance drama) were famous in Seoul in the past, but flying kites is still a famous product of Seoul today. Also, it is a famous product to pay a fee of 3 chŏn at the Kyŏngsŏng Station Special Toilet. The mumbling sound of Seoul merchants saying, "Buy mudeurang! Buy cabbage!" is something that people from the countryside who have just arrived cannot understand, but the sound of the hairy old man scythe seller shouting "Buy knives!" as he goes around Pukch'on (北村), and the sound of the hunchbacked old man soban (小盤) (small table) seller shouting "Buy soban!" from Tongdaemun an (東大門안) are the three famous sounds among Kyŏngsŏng's traveling merchants. And calling a house broker (chipchurum (家儈)) a bokdŏk-bang (福德房) (real estate agency) is also a word that cannot be seen in the countryside.
Oops, I almost forgot. The medicinal water of Akpawi-gol (악바위골) and the cold springs of Chŏngnŭng (貞陵) and Hongnŭng (洪陵) are also famous products of Seoul, and the kkakjŏngi (깍정이) (scavengers) who eat snakes are also famous products of Seoul, and the matchmakers (t'tuaeng-i; 뚜쟁이), ŭngunjachaek-juga (은군자 色酒家) (secretive wine house), and the ŭngŏ (葦魚) (Manchurian trout) in the spring and the paegŏ (白魚) (icefish) in the winter are also famous products that cannot be left out. And the blind people going around the streets advertising "Munsoye-" (문소예 -) (fortune-telling) is also something that cannot be seen in the provinces, and the temple food of Ch'ŏngnyang Temple (淸凉寺), Yŏngdo Temple (永導寺), and T'ap-dong Sŭngbang (塔洞 僧房) is also a plausible famous product.<105>

Named Entities

京城	Kyŏngsŏng
 Pak Chambae	박잠배
Chŏngnŭng	貞陵
Akpawi-gol	악바위골
Chongno I-mun-an	鍾路里門안
Changgyo	長橋
Saenjŏn Ilsamok	샌전 一三屋
Sŏsan	瑞山
Ch'ungch'ŏng	忠淸
Kaesŏng	開城
Suwŏn	水原
Inch'ŏn	仁川
Ch'unch'ŏn	春川
Hwadong	花洞
Kyŏngju	慶州
Silla	新羅
Chŏnju	全州
Kangnŭng	江陵
Namch'on	南村
安國洞	安國洞
中學洞	中學洞
Chungang-ju	中央酒
Wŏnsan	元山
P'yŏngyang	平壤
Chŏndong Taegut'ang	典洞 大口湯
Pugak	北岳
Mongolia	蒙古
Susong-dong	壽松洞
Posŏng High School	普成高等學校
T'ongŭi-dong	通義洞
Chang'ŭigong	彰義宮
Ri Chaek	李載克
Wŏnnam-dong	苑南洞
Naeja-dong	內資洞
Ŏŭigong	於義宮
Chae-dong Women's High School	齋洞女高普
Inoue Gibun	井上宜文
Yongsan Wŏnjŏng	龍山元町
Kim Ki-wŏn	金沂元
Yonggung-ri	龍宮里
Yesan-myŏn	禮山面
Yesan-gun	禮山郡
Ch'ungnam	忠南
Kim Sang-ch'ŏl	金商徹
Ŏam-t'aktok-ri	漁岩濯谷里
Boeun-ŭp	報恩邑
Boeun-gun	報恩郡
Ch'ungbuk	忠北
Ch'oe Sang-gyu	崔相奎
Tŏk-i-ri	德耳里
Songp'o-myŏn	松浦面
Koyang-gun	高陽郡
Miryang	密陽
Kyŏngsŏng	鏡城
Pagyul Temple	柏栗寺
Kwangju	廣州
Namhansansŏng	南漢山城
Injo	仁祖
T'aehwagung	太和宮
Min Kyu-shik	閔奎植
Sŭnggang T'ongro	乘江通路
Ch'anggŏn-ri	倉川里
Yŏnhŭi-myŏn	延禧面
Koyang-gun	高陽郡
Kŭnyŏk	槿域
Hŏngsŏng-ŭp	洪城邑
Ch'ŏndogyo Church	天道敎堂
T'ap-dong Park	塔洞公園
Sorim Temple	小林寺
Ch'ang'ŭimun	彰義門
Ryu Hwe-p'ung	柳惠風
Kyŏngdo Chapki	京都雜記
Tanjong	端宗
Hyangch'on-dong	杏村洞
Sŏdaemun	西大門
Nyŏngwŏl	寧越
Pokju Well	복주우물
Sŏng Sammun	成三問
Samch'ŏngdong	三淸洞
Sajikdong	社稷洞
Changch'ungdan	獎忠壇
Yangsadong	養士洞
Chaha-dong	紫霞洞
Nammun	南門
T'ohwa-dong	桃花洞
Yŏnhwa-bong	蓮花峯
Tongsomun	東小門
Samsŏnp'yŏng	三仙坪
Waesŏngdae	倭城臺
Uidong	牛耳洞
Ch'ŏngnyangni	淸凉里
Wangsimni	往十里
Anju	安州
Paeksangnu	百祥樓
P'yŏngnam	平南
Namwŏn	南原
Ch'unhyang	春香
Chŏlla	全羅
Yŏndong	蓮洞
Hullyŏnwŏn	訓練院
Ch'angsin-dong	昌信洞
Tongdaemun	東大門
North Songi	北松茸
Yangdŏk	陽德
Sŏkwang Temple	釋王寺
Iwŏn	利原
Sinhŭng	新興
Kŭmgang Mountain	金剛山
Yŏngdŏk	盈德
Kyŏngbuk	慶北
Namsan	南山
Ch'angdŏkgung Biwŏn	昌德宮 秘苑
Mugyo	武橋
Insadong	仁寺洞
Nugak-dong	樓閣洞
Nusang-dong	樓上洞
Nuhwa-dong	樓下洞
P'irun-dong	弼雲洞
Ri Wangjik Art Factory	李王職美術工場
Sinhang Commercial Company	信行商會
Hwashin Commercial Company	和信商會
P'yŏngdong	舊 典洞
Pyŏngmok-chŏng	並木町
Hamhŭng	咸興
Taegu	大邱
Haeju	海州
Hwangp'yŏng	黃平
Yangsŏ	兩西
Kaesŏng	開城
Akpawi-gol	악바위골
Chŏngnŭng	貞陵
Hongnŭng	洪陵
Ch'ŏngnyang Temple	淸凉寺
Yŏngdo Temple	永導寺
T'ap-dong Sŭngbang	塔洞 僧房



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	京城名物集
기사형태	소식

京城名物集
飮食의 名物

설넝湯 시골 사람이 츰으로 서울에 와서 설넝탕집을 지내가다가 털이 그대로 잇는 살믄 쇠머리가 설넝탕의 광고를 하는 듯이 채반 우에 뇌혀 잇고 시골에서는 아모리 가난뱅이의 집에서라도 잘 바더 먹지도 안는 오지뚝백이의 설넝탕 그릇이 뇌혀 잇는 것을 보며 확 끼치는 누린내를 맛트면 소위 일국의 首都라는 서울에도 저런 드러운 음식이 잇스며 저것을 그래도 누가 먹나 하고 코를 외로즈을 것이다. 그러나 시험으로 먹어 본다는 것이 한그릇 두그릇 먹기 시작을 하면 누구나 자미를 드려서 집에 갈 로자 돈이나 자긔 마누라의 치마감 사줄 돈이라도 안이 사먹고는 견듸지 못할 것이다. 갑이 눅은 것도 눅은 것이어니와 (보통 한 그릇에 15錢, 고기는 청구하는 돈대로 더 준다.) 맛으로던지 영양으로던지 상당한 가치가 잇는 것이다. 自來로 서울의 肺病쟁이와 重病 알코 난 사람들이 이것을 먹고 蘇復하는 것은 물론이고 近來에 소위 新式婚姻을 하얏다는 하이카라 청년들도 이 설넝탕이 안이면 朝夕을 굴물 지경이다. - 근래의 소위 新式女子들은 대개가 밥을 잘 질 줄 모르고 또 아츰이면 늣잠 저녁 때면 出入이 만키 때문에 時間出勤하는 남편이 설넝탕으로 신세를 지는 일이 간혹 잇다. - 전일에는 南門 박잠배(紫巖) 설넝탕을 제일로 처서 동지 섯달 치운 밤에도 10여 리 박게 잇는 사람들이 맛치 녀름날에 貞陵 물마지나 악바위골 藥水 먹으러 가덧이 爭頭를 하고 갓섯지만은 지금은 시내 각처에 설넝탕 집이 생긴 까닭에 그것도 時勢를 일엇다. 시내 설넝탕집도 數로 치면 꽤 만치만은 其中에는 鍾路里門안 설넝탕이라던지 長橋설넝탕, 샌전 一三屋설넝탕이 전날 잠배설넝탕의 勢道를 繼承한 듯하다. 그럿타고 시골에서 오신 이들이 설넝탕에 함부로 반하지는 마시요. 忠淸道 瑞山의 某청년처럼 400石 秋收하는 田畓을 다 팔어 먹고는 설넝탕이 안이라 날탕 敗家탕이라고 후회하기가 쉬울 터이다.

선술집 전날에는 선술집은 대개 下級 노동자들만 먹는 곳이요 소위 行勢 낫이나 하는 사람들은 별로 가지를 안엇지만은 지금은 경제의 困難한 까닭이라 할지 계급사상의 打破라 할지 노동자는 姑舍하고 말숙말숙한 소위 신사 모뽀축들이 전날 요리집이나 안진술집 다니덧이 보통으로 다닌다. 그리하야 선술집의 이름도 점점 승차하야 和洋折衷式의 「닷지호텔」이니 또는 「民衆호텔」이니 하는 하이카라 別號를 가지게 되엿다. 이름이야 엇지 되엿던지 선술집은 제일은 시간이 經濟되고 第二는 단돈 5錢만 가저도 누구나 들어갈수 잇고 第三은 계급이 업시 누구나 똑가튼 處所에서 서서 먹게 되고 第四는 안주는<100> 자기의 마음대로 먹는 중에도 당장에 굽던지 익혀 먹으니 안심이 되고 또 남은 것은 가지고 갈 수도 잇다. 어느 점으로 보던지 平民的이오 理想的으로서 特히 現下 우리 朝鮮 사람 생활에 適宜하게 되엿다. 선술집이 만은 중에도 花洞 막바지 黃鰌湯 집은 술맛도 술맛이여니와 여름 休業 시기를 除한 外에는 항상 鰌湯이 잇고 그 추탕은 다른 곳 것보다 별미가 잇기 때문에 누구나 한번 가랴고 한다. 里門 안으로 드러서 제일의 술집은 술보다 안주가 비교뎍 낫고 술 붓는 아씨가 술 불 적마다 술잔으로 장단을 맛치는 것도 멋이 잇다. 그  아래 골목 안 술집은 안주와 술맛이 다 좃코 게다가 아씨가 둘식 잇는 중 골목이 안윽한 까닭에 密賣飮者로는 가장 適宜한 곳이다. 압다 이러다가는 선술집 광고만 하야 주기 쉽겟다. 집이야 누집누집할 것 업시 이만 이약이하고 선술집이 서울 名物인 것만 소개하면 족할 것이다. 근래에는 開城이나 水原, 仁川, 春川 등지에도 선술집이 몃이 생겻스나 그래도 서울의 선술집처럼 여러가지가 얼니지는 안는다.

藥食과 藥菓 약식의 처음 發生地는 慶州(新羅時代)이지만 지금은 실상 서울의 名食品이 되엿다. 시골에도 약식이 업는 바는 안이지만은 開城, 全州를 除한 外에는 다 가튼 원료로 하야도 서울의 藥食처럼 맛과 빗갈이 좃치 못하고 대개가 수수밥에 사탕 버무리한 것 갓다. 眞所謂 江陵이면 다 士大夫냐고 서울 藥食이라도 요새 이 苦學生들이 「藥食벤도」하고 팔너 다니는 것이라던지 요리집에서 한번 맨긴 藥食을 아희들의 팽구 돌어덧이 몃달을 두고 이 상으로 돌니고 저 상으로 돌니여서 속에서 곰팡 냄새나는 것 가튼 것이야 말할 것 업지만은 실상 相當한 가정에서 맨긴 것은 참으로 좃타. 그리고 藥菓는 연한 것으로나 맛으로나 地方에서는 그런 것을 먹어 볼 수 업슬 것이다.

南酒北餠 南村의 술이요 北村의 떡이란 말도 시대 변천을 따러서 어느덧 넷말이 되엿다. 지금에 와서 南村은 거의 正宗 먹는 色다른 사람의 村이 되엿고 술도 會社의 獨占物이 되엿스니 무슨 술이 엇더하다고 論評할 여지가 업다. 아순대로 말하자면 孔德里 燒酒와 藥酒로는 시내에 尹家酒(安國洞) 李家酒(中學洞) 其外 中央酒가 비교적 조코 떡도 근래에 호떡,<101> 왜떡, 로서아빵 그 他 菓子 等屬이 생긴 뒤로 前日보다 需用者가 적어진 까닭에 떡집이 적어지고 떡의 종류도 줄어 간다. 그러나 京城의 時食인 特色은 그대로 보존하야 봄에는 쑥송편 가피떡 송긔떡 빈대떡이요 4월8일에는 느트떡 5월 端午에는 취떡 6,7월에는 蒸편 깨인절미 8월 秋夕에는 송편 겨울에는 시루떡(그 중에는 종류가 數多하다) 두투떡 등이 유명하다. 올치 서울의 떡 중에 色切편은 시골에서 볼 수 업는 찬란한 떡이다. 그것도 한 名物이다.

軟鷄湯과 갈비 元山에 軟鷄집이 잇는지는 벌서 오랫고 平壤에도 근래에 갈비집이 생겻다 한다. 서울에는 3년 전까지도 軟鷄湯이나 갈비 구어 파는 집이 업섯더니 典洞 大口湯집에서 白熟軟鷄와 갈비를 구어 팔기 시작한 뒤로 여러 식당이 생긔여 집집마다 사진판에 박은 것처럼 依例이 大邱湯, 白熟軟鷄, 군갈비를 팔게 되엿다. 지금은 大邱湯집 外 몃집에 불과하지만은 하여간 軟鷄湯과 군갈비는 서울의 음식에 한 명물이 되얏다. 맛이야 무슨 특별한 것이 업지만은 먹기에 편리한 까닭에 누구나 환영한다. 올치 된장찌개, 깍둑이, 장김치 가튼 것도 시골 가서는 서울것 가튼 것을 먹을 수 업다. 외국에 간 사람이 자기의 가족보다 서울의 김치 깍둑이 생각이 더 간절하다는 것도 無理가 안이다.

花卉·鳥類

白松 이것은 京城의 명물일 뿐 안이라 全朝鮮 안이 세계적 명물이 될만한 珍木이다. 學名으로 『피뉴스 쁀게아나』(Pinus Bungeana)이오 朝鮮과 支那에서는 通稱 唐松, 白骨松 또는 白葉松이라 하는 것이니 幹은 白하고 葉은 針狀三葉으로 灰白色을 帶하얏스니 原産地는 蒙古요 현재 京城에 잇는 곳은 如下하다.
一, 壽松洞 佛敎敎務院 內(元 普成高普址) 樹齡未詳
二, 通義洞 東拓 舍宅內(元 彰義宮址) 약600년
三, 苑南洞66 李載克家 약300년
四, 內資洞 於義宮內(現 警務課 分室) 400년
五, 齋洞女高普 寄宿舍構內 600년
六, 龍山元町4丁目87, 日人 井上宜文의 別莊內 600년
白松 이약이를 하는 김에 參考로 또 말하자면 지방에는 아즉 발견된 者가 僅히 3株뿐이니 (一)은 忠南禮山郡禮山面龍宮里 金沂元家(樹齡200년), (二)는 忠北報恩邑漁岩濯谷里 金商徹家(200년), (三)은 高陽郡松浦面德耳里 崔相奎家(200년)(密陽 鏡城에 亦有之云)

大監松과 落落長松 慶州 柏栗寺에는 筍松(움이 나는 소나무)이 잇고 廣州 南漢山城에는 玉貫子를 붓친 堂上松(仁祖大王이 播遷하얏슬 때에 그 솔나무를 사랑하야 玉貫子를 封하얏다.)이 잇지만은 서울에는 三淸洞 막바지 太和宮內(지금 閔奎植家)에 金貫子를 붓친 소위 大監松이 자그만치 두 株식 잇다. 그것은 전날 閔妃 當年字內 거동을 할 때에 그 솔나무 밋헤서 避雨를 한 까닭에 그 功으로 大監을 封한<102> 것이라 한다. 두 株중 一株大監은 年前에 불에 타서 말너 죽고(아즉 斫伐은 안이 하얏다) 一株大監만 남어서 閔大監 子弟의 後園을 직히고 잇다. 나무야 보통의 老松이지만은 金貫子를 부친 것으로 보와 한 名物이다. 그리고 乘江通路 - 市外 高陽郡 延禧面 倉川里에는 落落長松이 잇스니 그것은 垂楊버들 이상으로 가지가 모도 늘어젓는데 보통 다른 것에서는 볼수 업는 珍木이다.

無窮花와 집비닭이(鵓鴿) 朝鮮에는 自來 무궁화가 만흔 까닭에 槿域이라고 하얏지만 실제에는 그렇케 만치 못하다. 지방으로 忠南 洪城邑을 除한 外에는 간혹 잇다 하야도 한 지방에 1,2株에 불과하고 더구나 北鮮 지방에서는 이름좃차 모르는 곳이 만타. 그러나 京城은 비교적 만타. 天道敎堂 構內에도 3,4株가 잇고 其外 개인 정원에도 흔이 볼 수 잇스며 塔洞公園에도 여러 株가 잇는데 其中 白色이 잇는 것은 또한 珍奇하고 數가 만키로는 彰義門밧 小林寺다. 그리고 집비닭이도 근래에는 지방에서도 或 養하는 것이 잇지만은 서울처럼 만히 養하는 곳이 업다. 이것은 벌서 역사가 오란 것 갓다. 柳惠風 京都雜記에 의하면 家養鵓鴿은 八目의 稱이 잇는데 全身이 白한 者를 全白, 身이 白하고 尾가 黃하고도 頭에 黑點을 有한 者를 點烏, 身亦尾白한 것을 紫丹, 身이 白하고 頭頸이 黑한 것을 黑虛頭, 身이 白하고 頭頸이 紫한 것을 紫虛頭, 身이 白하고 頸이 赤하되 翎端에 二層赤點이 잇는 것을 天仰白, 身이 黑하고 尾가 白한 것을 黑層, 褐色으로 翎端에 二層金色點이 잇는 것을 僧이라 한다 하얏다. 지금은 그럿케 구별하는 일은 별로 업지만은 만히 養하는 것은 사실이다.

端宗의 銀杏木과 成三問의 手植松 西大門밧 杏村洞 뒤에 큰 銀杏나무(公孫樹 又云 鴨脚樹)가 잇스니 그 나무는 가지가 모도 東向으로 굽엇다. 俗傳에 이것은 端宗大王의 手植한 것으로 端宗이 江原道 寧越에서 寃死한 후로부터 그 나무가지가 모도 東으로 (즉 端宗陵 所在地 寧越 방향으로) 향하얏다 하고 花洞 복주우물로 가는 路邊(속칭 紀念碑閣 뒤)에는 成先生 手植松이라 삭인 石柱가 잇스니 그것은 前日 成三問이 그 곳에 살 때에 친히 심은 소나무가 잇섯던 까닭이다. 그 소나무는 수십년 전까지도 잇다가 枯死하고 石柱도 지금은 空墟에 걱구러저 서 잇다.

그 외에도 獎忠壇, 養士洞, 三淸洞, 社稷洞의 莘荑花(속칭 개나리 一名 迎春柳, 連翹) 彰義門박과 紫霞洞, 南門外 桃花洞의 桃花, 南門外 蓮花峯, 東小門밧 三仙坪의 杏花, 근래에는 獎忠壇, 倭城臺, 牛耳洞의 櫻花(벗꼿) 淸凉里의 버들도 한 名物이 되엿다.

菜蔬의 名物

往十里의 미나리(水芹) 安州의 미나리가 百祥樓와 가티 平南에서 이름이 놉고 南原의 미나리가 春香이에 지지 안케 全羅道에 소문이 놉지만은 서울 往十里의 미나리처럼 명물은 되지 못할 것이다. 다른 곳의 미나리는 봄철에만 잇지만은 서울의 미나리는 流行童謠에 미나리는 사철이란 말과 가티 四時에 업는 때가 업다. 길고 軟하기도 하려니와 香취가 또한<103> 좃타. 특히 冬至 섯달 어름이 꽝꽝 어른 논속에서도 새파랗케 새싹이 난 미나리를 캐내는 것은 서울이 안이고는 그 生新한 맛을 보지 못할 것이다.

蓮洞과 訓練院의 白寀 開城의 배추가 서울에서도 이름이 놉다. 開城 배추는 크고 軟하지만은 맛이 서울 것갓지 못하다. 서울 중에도 蓮洞파 訓練院 배추는 自來로 有名한 것이다. 배추 농사도 만히 하거니와 맛이 다른 곳 것보다 좃타. 그중에도 겨울에 움속에 길넛다가 이른 봄 시골에서 아즉 밧도 갈기 전에 샛파란 속금배추를 시장에 출품한 것을 보면 누구나 生新한 맛을 절로 늣기게 된다. 근래에는 東大門박 昌信洞의 배추도 점차 名價가 놉다.

果物과 茸類의 名物 -松茸와 林檎·僧桃·櫻桃·燒栗-

서울에도 松茸가 난다고 하면 시골 사람들은 잘 고지듯지 안을 것이다. 그러나 北岳山에서 나는 松茸는 自來로 北松茸 北松茸! 하고 이름이 놉하서 前日에 闕內의 進上品이 된 것은 물론이고 일반이 모도 膾煮하는 것이다. 北岳은 원래 산이 깨끗하고 地質이 조흔 까닭에 松茸가 깨끗하고도 클 뿐 안이라 香臭가 또한 조와서 平南 陽德이나 釋王寺, 利原, 新興, 金剛山, 慶北 盈德 等地 소위 松茸의 名産地라는 곳의 松茸로는 도저히 비하야 말할 수 업는 珍品이다. 松茸의 밧으로 말하더라도 잘 保護를 하지 안어 그럿치 별로 안이 나는 곳이 업고 수량도 또한 만타. 北岳 뿐 안이라 南山에서도 나고 昌德宮 秘苑 松林에서도 난다. 이것이 아즉까지 널리 선전이 못되야 그럿치 名物인즉 珍名物이다. 그리고 彰義門 밧 능금(林檎)과 僧桃(털업는 복사)는 다른 지방에 흔치 못한 京城의 特産品이다. 東小門內 宋洞 櫻桃도 빼지 못할 명물이다. 시골에도 앵도가 업는 바는 안이지만은 이 宋洞과 가치 한 곳에 앵도나무가 數千株식 잇서서 多量으로 産出되는 곳은 업슬 것이다. 지금은 다른 지방에도 혹 군밤(燒栗)이 잇지만은 서울의 군밤은 역시 果實 중 명물이다. 맛도 맛이어니와  군밤장사의 군밤타령이 또 드를 만하다.

工産品의 名物

서울은 아즉까지 工業都會가 되지 못한 까닭에 工産品의 이럿타할 것이 만치 못하지만은 特産名物로 몃가지 말하자면 武橋와 仁寺洞의 木製籠欌(으거리, 반다지 三層欌 等屬)은 京城의 名産品으로 가정에서 귀중히 녁이는 세간이다. 시골에도 돈푼이나 잇는 집 가정에서는 依例히 그것을 備置하거니와 근래에는 외국 사람도 愛用하야 해마다 國外輸出이 늘어간다. 근래 葉草, 切草의 吸用者가 縮少하고 帽子 洋傘이 유행한 후로 쌈지와 간모의 需用이 적어 젓스나 前날에는 樓閣洞(今 樓上洞, 樓下洞)의 쌈지, (烟草入)간모도 큰 명물이엿다. 안이 지금에도 지방에는 아즉도 使用者가 만흔 까닭에 전일과 가티 多數하게 제조치는 안으나 依然이 名聲은 보존하고 잇다. 其外 油紙(장판지) 紙鬪箋, 油衫 등도 역시 樓上洞 명물이다. 또 弼雲洞의 色箱子도 서울의 특산품이오 근래에는 李王職美術工場,<104> 信行商會, 和信商會 등 공장에서 제조하는 金銀屬製品도 한 명물로 內外國에 수출이 되며 公平洞(舊 典洞)의 毛物, 補褥, 方席 等屬과 근래의 蚊帳도 전국에 이름이 놉다. 彰義門 박 紙物, 並木町 끈목도 著名하다.

雜同散異 名物

前날에 서울 여자들이 입던 장옷도 시골에서는 볼 수 업던 것이지만은 근래에 여자들이 쓰고 다니는 조백이도 名物이라면 한 명물이다. 서울에 잇는 사람은 항상 눈에 익은 까닭에 잘 알지 못하지만은 츰 보는 사람에는 맛치 꽁지 빠진 새갓치 뵈이기도 하고 되빡 뒤집어쓴 것도 가터서 咸興 여자의 아희의 色童저고리 쓴것이라던지 大邱나 海州 여자의 삭갓 쓴 것이나 黃平 兩西 여자의 手巾이나 開城 여자의 치마 쓴것보다 더 괴이하게 뵐 것이다. 그것이 좃코 안된 것은 別問題어니와 京城의 명물인 것은 틀임업다. 石戰, 택현(擇奇緣) 山臺노리도 전날 서울에 이름난 것이지만은 紙鳶 날리는 것은 지금도 서울의 명물이다. 올치 京城驛 特別便所에서 3錢 요금을 밧는 것도 명물이다. 서울의 장사치가 반벙어리 소리로 『무드랑 사려오 배추드랑 사려오 - 』하는 것도 初行의 시골 사람은 드를 수 업지만은 北村으로 도라다니는 털보령감 시칼장사의 칼 사라는 소리와 절눙뱅이 소반장사의 소반 사라는 소리, 東大門 안  곱추령감 솜장사의 외치는 소리는 京城의 行商 중 三名物이다. 그리고 집주름(家儈) 집을 福德房이라 하는 것도 시골서는 볼 수 업는 文字이다.
앗차 또 이젓구나. 악바위골 藥水와 貞陵 洪陵의 冷泉도 서울의 명물이오 뱀잡아 먹고 사는 깍정이도 서울의 명물이오 뚜쟁이 은군자 色酒家도 서울의 명물이오 봄철의 웅어(葦魚) 겨울의 白魚도 뺄 수 업는 명물이다. 그리고 장님이 거리로 도라다니며 『문소예 - 』하고 問卜의 광고를 하는 것도 지방에서는 볼 수 업는 것이오 淸凉寺 永導寺 塔洞 僧房의 절밥도 그럴듯한 명물이다.<105>
<100-105>