잡지명	別乾坤 第23號
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	假刑事에게 二百圓을 빼앗겨, 서울은 낭이다! 京城와서 속아 본 이약이 (各地各人의 實地經驗談) (Robbed of 200 Yen by a Fake Detective, Seoul is a Den of Thieves! Stories of Being Deceived After Coming to Gyeongseong (Real Experiences from Various People in Various Places))
필자	鐵山 崔希洙
기사형태	회고·수기 (Reminiscence/Memoir)

Robbed of 200 Yen by a Fake Detective, Seoul is a Den of Thieves! Stories of Being Deceived After Coming to Gyeongseong (Real Experiences from Various People in Various Places)
						Ch'oe Hŭi-su, Ch'ŏlsan

It was during summer vacation two years ago. I was leaving Seoul on a night train to go to my hometown. In the train car, there was a middle-aged gentleman who looked about 37 or 38 years old. He was full of worry for some reason, and kept sighing. I didn't know what was going on with him, but I felt sorry for him, so I started talking to him and asked him the reason for his worries. He said in a weak voice:

"My hometown is Kwaksan, and I heard that land prices are cheap in Kangwŏn Province, so I gathered 200 yen in cash to go and see the market conditions. I had only heard that Seoul was good, but I had never seen it, so I deliberately stopped by this time. I asked for directions as I went, and looked around Chongno and Chinkogae, which I had only heard about. As I was heading towards Tongdaemun, I saw a sign for a restaurant in a small alley, so I went in to get some lunch. A young man came up to me as if he was glad to see me<125>, and said he felt like he'd seen me somewhere before, and that his hometown was also Kwaksan, and his name was Kim. Just as he was welcoming me, someone walked by and dropped a 10-yen bill. The young man quickly picked it up and gave it to the person. The person thanked him repeatedly and gave him 1 yen as a token of appreciation and left. I was thinking that people in Seoul were honest and had good manners. Then, out of nowhere, someone came in and said, 'Who are you people gathering around whispering? These days are full of suspicious people.' Using the method and language of a police officer making an arrest, he searched both of our pockets without asking any questions. He took out the 200 yen in cash that was in my pocket and yelled at me, asking what kind of person carries around 200 yen so carelessly, and that it must be stolen money. He took out an envelope from his pocket and put it in my pocket. I explained in detail about my story of coming to Seoul and where I was going to spend the money, but the man kept saying that I was suspicious and that we should go to the police station. He dragged me outside and into a narrow alley, and then said, 'Looking at you, you seem like an honest person, so there's no need to go to the police station. Take your money back.' He took out the envelope and gave it back to me, and then he and the young man who had been so kind disappeared somewhere. I was so relieved, and I took the envelope, thinking that the money was inside. But when I opened it, it was full of cut-up newspaper. I was shocked and tried to follow them, but I couldn't find them, and I was completely deceived." As he told this story, he sighed again. So he couldn't even go to his destination of Kangwŏn Province and was going back home. How scary Seoul is."<126>

Named Entities

郭山	Kwaksan
江原道	Kangwŏn-do
鐘路	Chongno
진고개	Chinkogae
東大門	Tongdaemun
金	Kim



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	假刑事에게 二百圓을 빼앗겨, 서울은 낭이다! 京城와서 속아 본 이약이 (各地各人의 實地經驗談)
필자	鐵山 崔希洙
기사형태	회고·수기

假刑事에게 二百圓을 빼앗겨, 서울은 낭이다! 京城와서 속아 본 이약이 (各地各人의 實地經驗談)
						鐵山 崔希洙
재작년 夏季放學 때임니다. 밤車로 서울을 떠나서 고향으로 가는 길 차 안에서 年녕이 37,8쯤 되여 보히는 중년손 한분이 무슨 일인지 愁色이 滿面하야 한숨만 지우고 잇섯슴니다. 나는 그의 내막은 모르나 보기에 딱하여서 그에게 이말 저말 부치다가 근심스러워하는 이유를 무르니 그는 힘업는 소리로 이가티 이약이를 하엿슴니다.
『나의 고향은 郭山인데 江原道는 땅갑이 헐하다기로 현금 200圓을 꾸려 가지고 時勢를 보러 가든 중 서울이 조타는 말만 듯고 구경은 못하엿다가 이 기회에 들너가려고 일부러 나러서 아지 못하는 길을 무러가며 말노만 드럿든 鐘路니 진고개니 구경을 단이다가 東大門으로 간다는 길을 향하야 가다가 조고만 한 골목에 음식점이란 간판이 부텃기로 점심 요기나 하려고 드러가니 엇던 청년 하나히 반가운 듯이<125> 오드니 언제 어듸서 보힌 것도 갓다고 하며 자기 고향도 郭山인데 金某라 하며 반겨하는 즈음에 엇더한 者가 하나 지나가면서 10圓 紙貨 한장을 떠러트리고 가는 것을 보고 그 청년이 얼는 집어서 그 者에게 주니 그 者는 재삼 고맙다고 하며 謝禮金이라고 1圓을 주고 가버리기에 서울 잇는 사람들은 정직도 하려니와 인사도 밝다고 생각을 하고 잇스랴닛가 어데서인지 난데업는 者 하나가 드러오드니 『웬 사람인데 모혀서 수근거리여, 요새 수상한 者들이 만흔 때야』하며 警官이 취체하는 방법과 言法으로 不問曲直하고 두 사람의 주머니를 뒤지드니 내 주머니에 잇든 현금 200圓을 꺼내들고 무엇하는 사람인데 200圓식을 허술히 넛코 다니느냐고 어데서 도적질한 돈이 분명하다고 으르딱딱거리이며 자긔 주머니에서 봉투 한장을 꺼내여 제 주머니에 넛키에 나는 내가 서울에 들는 이약이와 돈을 쓸 곳을 세세히 말을 하얏스나 그 者는 암만해도 수상하니 경찰서까지 가자고 끄을고 밧갓트로 나아와서 어느 좁은 골목으로 가드니 하는 말이 보아하니 순직한 사람이니 경찰서까지 갈것 업고 돈을 도로 가지고 가라고 도로 봉토를 꺼내 주고서는 어듸로인지 그 친절히 굴든 젊은 자와 가버렷슴니다. 나는 엇지 다행한지 그 봉투를 바더서 돈이 잇스려니 하고 꺼내여 보니 신문지 오린 것만이 작득 드러 잇슴니다. 깜짝 놀내여 뒤를 따러갓스나 종적을 알수 업서 그만 기가 막히게 속고 마럿슴니다.』 이러케 이약이를 하면서 다시 한숨을 쉬고 잇섯슴니다. 그래서 그는 목적지인 江原道도 가보지 못하고 그대로 나려가는 길이엿슴니다. 얼마나 서울은 무서운 곳임닛가.<126>
<125-126>