별건곤 제23호
1929년 09월 27일
人力車삭 쉰냥 횡재한 萬年筆, 서울은 낭이다! 京城와서 속아 본 이약이 (各地各人의 實地經驗談) (A Lucky Fountain Pen Bought for 50 Nyang in a Rickshaw: Seoul is a Den of Swindlers! Stories of Being Deceived in Seoul (Real Experiences from Various Places and People))
鐵山 崔希洙
회고·수기 (Reminiscence/Personal Essay)

A Lucky Fountain Pen Bought for 50 Nyang in a Rickshaw: Seoul is a Den of Swindlers! Stories of Being Deceived in Seoul (Real Experiences from Various Places and People)
Cheolsan Choe Huisu

It was the first spring of Gyohae (癸亥), seven years ago from now. K and I, who graduated elementary school together, came to Gyeongseong (京城, Seoul) against our parents' wishes to pursue our studies. When we got out at the train station, everything looked strange, like something out of a dream, and it was truly a Byeolgeon-gon (別乾坤, a different world).

K took a rickshaw to a lodging, and I took one to a relative's house. The following story is about K being swindled.

The next morning, I looked for K to accompany him to submit our application forms to the school and to see the city.

K's first words were, "I was swindled by the rickshaw man last night. He asked for 50 nyang (냥) for the rickshaw fare, and after haggling, I paid him 40 nyang (냥), only to realize I had been cheated," and he was quite upset. This was because his sense of money was different. In Pyeongan-do (平安道), one won (圓) is called ten nyang (냥), and 10 jeon (錢) is one nyang (냥), so he thought only of his hometown, and when he heard 50 nyang (냥), he thought it was 5 won (圓). It turned out that 80 jeon (錢) would have been enough, but since Seoul was said to have high prices, he thought the rickshaw fare was also that expensive. <126> However, this was not K's fault, but the fault of the lack of unified monetary terms in Joseon (朝鮮). Anyway, even if K was foolish, the guy who took 4 won (圓) without saying a word when only 1 won (圓) was offered is also a Seoulite.

We went sightseeing here and there that day and then parted ways. The day after, I met K again. Unexpectedly, there was a look of joy on his face. K's first words were, "Yesterday, I bought a fountain pen for 50 nyang (냥)!" and he proudly showed me a fountain pen. When I received it, it was not even worth 50 jeon (錢), let alone 5 won (圓). K told the story of how he bought it as follows.

"Yesterday, I was sightseeing in Honmachi (本町) with the lodging porter, and on the way back, a young man came up to me and asked me to buy a fountain pen. He said he bought it for 12 won (圓) about ten days ago, but he came to Seoul from Jeongeup (井邑) to find his younger sibling but could not find them. He ran out of travel expenses and has been starving for several meals, so he has no choice but to sell it. He pleaded with me to buy it to help him out. I only had 5 won (圓), so I said I couldn't buy it, but he said he would sell it for 5 won (圓), so I quickly bought it..." K looked foolish, but honest country people who come to Seoul without knowing how it is are always getting cheated, so I would like to give a strong warning to those who are going to Seoul for the first time. <127>

**Named Entities**

癸亥	Kyohae
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
平安道	P'yŏngan-do
朝鮮	Chosŏn
本町	Honmachi
井邑	Chŏngŭp
鐵山 崔希洙	Ch'ŏlsan Ch'oe Hŭisoo



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	人力車삭 쉰냥 횡재한 萬年筆, 서울은 낭이다! 京城와서 속아 본 이약이 (各地各人의 實地經驗談)
필자	鐵山 崔希洙
기사형태	회고·수기

人力車삭 쉰냥 횡재한 萬年筆, 서울은 낭이다! 京城와서 속아 본 이약이 (各地各人의 實地經驗談)
						鐵山 崔希洙
지금으로부터 7년 전 癸亥 첫봄이엿다. 小學校를 가치 졸업한 K군과 함끠 부모가 허락지 안는 學業의 길을 거러 京城에 다러왓다. 驛前에 나서 보니 온갓 것이 꿈나라에서 보는 것가티 이상스럽고 그야말노 別乾坤이엿다.
K군은 여관으로 나는 친척의 집으로 각각 인력거를 타고 갓다. 이 다음 이약이가 K군이 속앗다는 이약이다.
그 이튼날 아츰 학교에 입학원서도 드릴 겸 市街를 구경할 겸 K군과 同伴을 하기 위하야 K군을 차젓다.
K군은 맛나는 첫인사가 나는 어제밤에 인력거꾼에게 속아서 인력거삭을 쉰냥 달나는 것을 에누리하야 마흔냥을 주고 보니 속앗서 하고 자못 분해하엿다. 이는 用錢語法이 틀니는 까닭이다. 平安道에서는 一圓을 열냥이라고 10錢을 한냥이라는 고로 싀골로만 녁이고 쉰냥이라니까 5圓인줄 아럿든 것이다. 알고 보니 80錢쯤 주면 넉넉한 것이엿것만은 서울은 물가가 빗싸다니까 인력거삭도 그리 빗싼줄만 아럿드란다.<126> 그러나 이것은 K군의 잘못이 안이오 朝鮮의 語法이 통일되지 못한 허물이다. 하여간 K군은 어리석어서 그랫다드라도 1圓 달나든 것을 4圓식 준다고 아모 말업시 바더가는 놈도 또한 서울놈인 까닭이다.
그날은 여기저기 구경을 하고 헤여지고 그 이튼날 K군을 다시 맛낫다. 그날은 뜻밧게 君의 얼골에는 喜色이 보혓다. K군은 역시 첫인사가 『어제 내 쉰냥 주고 萬年筆 하나 사써』하며 자랑스럽게 만년필 한 자루를 꺼내 보인다. 바더서 보니 5圓은 커녕 50錢짜리도 못 되엿다. K군은 그것을 사기까지의 이약이를 이러케 하엿다.
『어제 여관뽀이와 함께 本町 구경을 하고 도라오는 길인데 엇던 젊은 사람이 녑흐로 오드니 만년필을 한 자루를 사십시요. 이것은 10여일 전에 12圓을 주고 산 것인데 故鄕인 井邑에서 동생을 차저왓다가 맛나지도 못하고 路費는 떠러저서 나려갈 수도 업고 밥도 몃끼나 굴머서 엇절 수 업시 팔냐고 하니 사정을 보아서라도 사 주십시요. 하며 애원을 하기에 5圓 밧게 업서서 살 수가 업다고 하닛가 그 자는 5圓에라도 팔 터이니 사달나고 하기에 얼는 사서....』하는 K군이 어리석어도 보혓스나 順直한 地方人이 서울이 이런 줄 모르고 왓다가는 늘 속아만 지내는 것이니 처음으로 서울 가시는 분에게 십분 주의를 드림니다.<127>
<126-127>