잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	세상에 나온 잘못된 記錄들, 京城에 關한 諸記錄의 錯誤, 讀書人은 注意하라. (Incorrect Records in the World, Errors in Various Records about Kyŏngsŏng, Readers Beware.)
기사형태	논설 (Article)

Incorrect Records in the World, Errors in Various Records about Kyŏngsŏng, Readers Beware.
Recently, among Korean histories or Kyŏngsŏng guidebooks published by both domestic and foreign authors, there are many instances of incorrect dates or historical facts. This is a significant error, even if seemingly minor. Even a brief glance at a few books at hand reveals numerous misrecords.

I. Errors Regarding the Pagoda Park Stone Pagoda

It is clearly stated in the Annals of King Sejo (世祖實錄) and the Inscription of the Great Wŏngaksa Temple (大圓覺寺碑文) that the Stone Pagoda in Pagoda Park was built in the 12th year of King Sejo. (See articles on famous historical sites.) Nevertheless, in Nam Kong-ch’ŏl’s (南公轍) *Kŭmnŭng chip Koryŏ pulsa ki* (金陵集高麗佛事記), it is written that Emperor Shundi of Yuan (元順帝) had Prime Minister T’oqtogha (脫脫不花) build the pagoda for Princess Kŭmtong (金童公立), the daughter of King Ch’ungsuk of Koryŏ (高麗 忠肅王女金童公立) and empress of Yuan Shundi. In *Kyŏngsŏng Pangnirok* (京城坊里錄) (author unknown), it is written that when the daughter of Emperor Shizu of Yuan (元世祖), Princess Cheguk Taechang (齊國大長公主), married King Ch’ungsuk of Koryŏ, she brought two Mongolian pagodas, placing one in Liaodong (遼東) and the other in Wŏngaksa Temple (圓覺寺) in Hanyang (漢陽). Because of these errors, many recent Korean records, as well as those by foreigners, often contain misrecords. (I will not specify them here.) For example, in the "Chosun Monthly Report" (朝鮮月報) published by the Japanese, Kanazawa Shōzaburō (金澤庄三郞), it is written that "this stone pagoda was donated by the Yuan Dynasty during the time of King Ch’ungsuk of Koryŏ," and in the "Korean Peninsula" (韓半島) published by Nobu Junpei (信夫淳平), there is an absurd article stating that King Wonjong of Koryŏ (高麗元宗) received it as a gift from the Ming emperor when he welcomed his queen from the Ming court. Furthermore, in "The Country's Master" (國士) published by Yagi Shōzaburō (八木獎三郞), it is written that it was moved from Songdo (松都) in the early Yi dynasty. In addition, similar erroneous records can be found in "Korean Repository" published by a Westerner, Allen (安連), and "Korea Review" published by Hulbert (訖法). This is ultimately because they did not refer to actual historical evidence and instead recorded unreliable rumors from the neighborhood (閭巷俚說).

II. Errors Regarding the P'oshingak Bell

This has been detailed in this magazine's "Verification Record of the Five Great Bells of Kyŏngsŏng" (京城五大鍾辨正錄) and in the article "The Story of the Bronze Bell of Injŏng," but this bell clearly states in its inscription that it was cast in February of the 4th year of Sŏnghwa (成化) (the 13th year of King Sejo, 戊午). However, the *Augmented and Revised Remarks on the Encyclopedia of Korea* (增補文獻備考輿地考) and the *Yŏllyŏshil kisul pyŏljip* (燃藜室記述別集) confuse it with the Chŏngnŭngsa Temple Bell (貞陵寺鍾) or the Wŏngaksa Temple Bell (圓覺寺鍾), leading to errors in recent records by both domestic and foreign authors. Some refer to it as the Chŏngnŭngsa Temple Bell, while others call it the Wŏngaksa Temple Bell. There are too many such records to list individually, but the *Kyŏngsŏng Guidebook* (京城便覽) recently published by Hongmunsa (弘文社) vaguely states that it was cast after the Imjin War (壬亂).

III. Errors Regarding the Gate Signboards of Namdaemun and Kwanghwamun

It is generally recorded that the signboard of Namdaemun (南大門), bearing the characters for "Sungnyemun" (崇禮門), was written by Anp'yŏng Taegun (安平大君) or Hyoryŏng Taegun (孝寧大君). (For example, in "Kyŏngsŏng Five Hundred Years" (五百年京城) published by the Teachers Association and "Kyŏngsŏng Guidebook" published by Hongmunsa.) However, the truth is that it was written by Chuktang Yu Chin-dong (竹堂柳辰同) (see article on the Eight Great Gates). As for the Kwanghwa Gate (興化門) signboard, it is said that the character "hwa" (化) in "Kwanghwa" (興化) was such a masterpiece by Anp'yŏng Taegun that its radiance shined as far as Yaju Pass (夜珠峴), giving rise to the name Yaju Pass, but after a bullet pierced the "hwa" character during the Imjin War, the radiance disappeared. However, the Kwanghwa Gate Palace (興化門大闕), namely Kyŏnghŭigung Palace (慶熙宮), was actually built in the 8th year of Kwanghae (光海) after the Imjin War, and the writer of the signboard was Yi Shin (李伸). (See articles on the Eight Great Gates and the Five Palace Gates.) <169>

IV. Yukgung and the Brothers’ Well

Because the pronunciation of Yukhyang Palace (毓祥宮) is similar to Yuksanggung (六尙宮), it is mistakenly transmitted among the common people as Yuksanggung, and the Japanese, further misunderstanding it, quite absurdly call it Yukgung (六宮), using that name in maps or articles. Of course, Yukhyang Palace is also one of the Yuksanggung, but to call that palace Yukgung is wrong. The Brothers' Well (兄弟井) in Samch’ŏng-dong (三淸洞) originally got its name because Samch’ŏng-dong had the Taoist hall, Samch’ŏngjŏn (三淸殿). The Brothers’ Well is actually Sŏngje Well (星祭井), meaning the well where stars are worshiped. Because commoners call it Sŏngje Well, writers, trying to appear knowledgeable, write it as Brothers' Well, thus revealing their ignorance (無識). (For example, in "Kyŏngsŏng Five Hundred Years").

V. The Forsythia in Changch’ungdan

The "Kyŏngsŏng Five Hundred Years" article on Changch’ungdan (獎忠壇) mentions forsythia (莘荑花), and there's another ridiculous claim to address. It says that forsythia is called "gaenari" (개나리) because its color is the same as a yellow bird, "canary," and that English had been imported into Joseon hundreds of years ago, hence the name. But what can be said when "gaenari" is originally a Korean word? There’s no room for further unnecessary explanation.

VI. Errors Regarding Namsan

Furthermore, in two or three records written by Japanese authors, the west side of Namsan (南山) is called Mokmoksan (木覓山), and the east side is called Chongnamsan (終南山). It is unknown what this is based on. One can only laugh it off. (For details, see Famous Historical Sites.)

VII. Changi Gate, Kwanghŭi Gate, and Sukchŏng Gate

I have seen a record stating that Changi Gate (彰義門) was named Changi after Injo (仁祖) staged the coup. However, Changi Gate was called Changi from the early days of the nation, long before the time of Injo. And Kwanghŭi Gate (光熙門) is known to everyone today as Sugumun (水口門). However, according to *Chipong yusŏl* (芝峯類說), Sugumun existed separately from the Eight Great Gates. Originally, Kwanghŭi Gate was the Small South Gate (南小門), and Sugumun existed separately, but according to geomancy (風水說), the modern Small South Gate was abolished, and the Kwanghŭi Gate signboard was moved to Sugumun, thus making Sugumun Kwanghŭi Gate. And the North Gate, namely Sukchŏng Gate (肅靖門), is referred to as Sukch’ŏng Gate (肅淸門) in *Yŏjisŭngnam* (輿地勝覽) and other records. However, the actual signboard clearly reads Sukchŏng Gate, and *Chipong yusŏl* also records it as Sukchŏng. (See article on the Eight Great Gates.)

VIII. Hŭngdŏk's Flowers and P'irundae's Turtle

Among the Ten Odes of the Capital (漢都十詠), there is Hŭngdŏk sanghwa (興德賞花), and recent records generally point to Songdong Cherry Blossoms (宋洞櫻花). However, Hŭngdŏk (興德) was originally the name of a temple located inside the East Small Gate (東小門 內), and at that time, lotus flowers bloomed profusely in the pond around the temple, which is why Hŭngdŏk's flowers were included in the Ten Odes. This can be easily inferred from the poem by Sŏ Kŏ-jŏng (徐居正) at that time. The turtle of P'irundong (弼雲洞) is of unknown era, but according to the village legend, it seems to be a relic of an ancient temple. However, the 00 Guidebook states that it was moved from the pond of Kyŏngbok Palace (景福宮) during the Imjin War. On what basis is this claim made? <170>

IX. Miscellaneous Errors

I will not specifically name the magazine, but in the September issue of a certain magazine, photos of Kyŏngsŏng's historic sites and attractions are published, and the explanation states that the Thirteen-Story Pagoda was completed on April 8th of the 20th year of Yi T'aejo (李太祖) (略) and that its side is 14 ch'ŏk 4 ch'on, estimated to be 40 ch'ŏk, etc. Furthermore, it says that Kyŏnghoeru Pavilion (慶會樓) was completed in the 4th year of Yi T'aejo, Kwanghwamun (光化門) also in the 4th year of Yi T'aejo, and Kŭnjŏngjŏn Hall (勤政殿) also in the 4th year of T'aejo. Furthermore, Independence Gate (獨立門) is located in Muhak Pass (舞鶴峴). It is unknown whether it was a mistake in proofreading, but with a little more attention, such errors could have been avoided. As we all know, Kyŏnghoeru, Kŭnjŏngjŏn, and Kwanghwamun were reconstructed by the Great Regent (大院君) in modern times, and the Pagoda Park Pagoda was completed in the 12th year of Sejo. (See this magazine's Famous Historical Sites.) I hope readers will not misread. <171>

**Named Entities**

世祖實錄	Sejo Shillok
大圓覺寺碑文	Tae Wŏngaksa Pimon
南公轍	Nam Kong-ch’ŏl
金陵集高麗佛事記	Kŭmnŭng chip Koryŏ pulsa ki
元順帝	Wŏn Sundi
忠肅王	Ch’ungsuk Wang
脫脫不花	T’oqtogha
金童公立	Kŭmtong Kongnip
京城坊里錄	Kyŏngsŏng Pangnirok
元世祖	Wŏn Sejo
齊國大長公主	Cheguk Taechang Kongju
遼東	Liaodong
漢陽	Hanyang
金澤庄三郞	Kanazawa Shōzaburō
朝鮮月報	Chosun Wŏlbo
信夫淳平	Nobu Junpei
韓半島	Hanbando
高麗元宗	Koryŏ Wŏnjong
八木獎三郞	Yagi Shōzaburō
國士	Kokushi
松都	Songdo
安連	Allen
코리안·례포스토리	*K’orian ryep’osŭt’ori*
訖法	Hulbert
코리아·으리뷰	*K’oria ŭribyu*
京城五大鍾辨正錄	Kyŏngsŏng Odaejong Pyŏnjŏngnok
增補文獻備考輿地考	Chŭngbo Munhŏn Pigo Yŏjigo
燃藜室記述別集	Yŏllyŏshil Kisul Pyŏljip
貞陵寺鍾	Chŏngnŭngsa Jong
圓覺寺鍾	Wŏngaksa Jong
弘文社	Hongmunsa
京城便覽	Kyŏngsŏng P'yŏnnam
壬亂	Imnan
南大門	Namdaemun
崇禮門	Sungnyemun
安平大君	Anp'yŏng Taegun
孝寧大君	Hyoryŏng Taegun
柳辰同	Yu Chin-dong
竹堂	Chuktang
五百年京城	Obaeknyŏn Kyŏngsŏng
興化門	Hŭnghwamun
安平大君	Anp'yŏng Taegun
慶熙宮	Kyŏnghŭigung
光海	Kwanghae
李伸	Yi Shin
毓祥宮	Yukhyang Gung
六尙宮	Yuksanggung
三淸洞	Samch’ŏng-dong
三淸殿	Samch’ŏngjŏn
兄弟井	Hyŏngdjeong
星祭井	Sŏngjejong
獎忠壇	Changch’ungdan
芝峯類說	Chipong Yusŏl
肅靖門	Sukchŏngmun
肅淸門	Sukch’ŏngmun
興德賞花	Hŭngdŏk Sanghwa
宋洞櫻花	Songdong Ŏnghwa
東小門	Tongsomun
徐居正	Sŏ Kŏ-jŏng
弼雲臺	P’irundae
太祖	T'aejo
孝寧大君	Hyoryŏng Taegun
太宗	T'aejong
世祖	Sejo
宣祖	Sŏnjo
顯宗	Hyŏnjong
仁祖	Injo
景福宮	Kyŏngbok Kung
西小門	Sŏsŏmun
水口門	Sugumun
大院君	Taewŏngun
舞鶴峴	Muhakhŏn
李太祖	Yi T'aejo
慶會樓	Kyŏnghoeru
勤政殿	Kŭnjŏngjŏn
光化門	Kwanghwamun
安平大君	Anp'yŏng Taegun
夜珠峴	Yaju Hyŏn
木覓山	Mokmoksan
終南山	Chongnamsan



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	세상에 나온 잘못된 記錄들, 京城에 關한 諸記錄의 錯誤, 讀書人은 注意하라.
기사형태	논설

세상에 나온 잘못된 記錄들, 京城에 關한 諸記錄의 錯誤, 讀書人은 注意하라.
근래 內外人의 著作 刊行하는 朝鮮史 혹은 京城紹介書 중에는 연대 혹은 史實을 잘못 기록한 것이 만흔 바 이는 적으면서도 적지 안흔 잘못이라. 우선 案頭에 잇는 몃 권만 잠시 훌처 보아도 이러케 誤記된 것이 만타.

一. 塔洞石塔에 關한 錯誤

塔洞公園의 石塔이 世祖12년에 건립된 것은 世祖實錄과 大圓覺寺碑文에 明記되엿다.(名勝古跡記事참조) 그럼에 불구하고 南公轍所著 金陵集高麗佛事記에는 元順帝가 고려 忠肅王女金童公立(元順帝妃)를 위하야 承相 脫脫不花로 하야금 其塔을 築한 것이라 하고 京城坊里錄(作者未詳)에는 元世祖의 女齊國大長公主가 高麗忠肅王에게 下嫁할 때에 蒙古塔 二座를 가지고 와서 一座는 遼東에 置하고 一座는 漢陽圓覺寺에 置하얏다 하얏다. 이런 錯誤로 인하야 외국인은 물론이고 근래 朝鮮人記錄에도 종종 誤記한 것이 만타.(이것은 구태여 指名치 안는다.) 즉 日本人 金澤庄三郞의 發行인 「朝鮮月報」에는 「이 石塔은 高麗 忠肅王時 元朝에서 기증한 것이라 하고 信夫淳平의 發行한 「韓半島」에는 高麗元宗이 其妃를 明室에서 迎娶할 때에 明帝가 기증하얏다는 語不成說의 記事가 잇고 八木獎三郞이 發行한 「國士」에는 舊時 松都에 잇던 것을 李朝 初에 移來하얏다 하고 此外 서양인 安連의 刊行한 「코리안·례포스토리」 訖法의 發行한 「코리아·으리뷰」에도 대개는 이와 비슷한 착오의 기록이 잇다. 이것은 결국 實跡을 참고치 안코 可信할 수 업는 閭巷俚說」만 듯고 그대로 기록한 까닭이다.

二, 普信閣鍾에 關한 錯誤

이것도 本誌 京城五大鍾辨正錄 及 인경의 신세타령 기사에 詳載하얏거니와 이 鍾은 그 鍾銘에 成化4년 2월(世祖13년 戊午)에 鑄하얏다고 명백히 記하얏는대 增補文獻 備考輿地考라던지 燃藜室記述別集에는 연대가 아주 相違되는 貞陵寺鍾 또는 圓覺寺鍾과 혼동하야 기록하얏기 때문에 근래 內外國人의 기록에도 모도 착오가 생겨서 혹은 貞陵寺의 鍾이라고도 하고 혹은 圓覺寺鍾이라고도 한다. 그런 기록이 하도 만흐닛가 玆에 一一 列記치 안커니와 요새이 弘文社에서 發行한 京城便覽에는 그저 모호하게 壬亂 후 鑄造한 것이라고 하얏다.

三, 南大門과 光化門의 門額書에 關한 錯誤

南大門에 崇禮門이란 門額字는 일반 기록에 安平大君 또는 孝寧大君의 글시라<169> 하얏다.(列如敎員會發行인 五百年京城 及 弘文社發行 京城便覽) 그러나 사실은 竹堂柳辰同의 글시요(八大門 기사 참조) 興化門 글시는 安平大君 글시로 興化란 化字가 아주 천하의 명필이기 때문에 그 光彩가 野珠峴까지 빗치여서 夜珠峴이란 洞名까지 생겻다가 壬辰亂 때에 총알이 化字를 따러서 구멍이 뚜러진 뒤로 그 光彩가 업서젓다 한다. 그러나 실제 興化門大闕 즉 慶熙宮은 壬亂 후 光海8년에 건축한 것이오 門額筆者는 李伸이다. (八大門과 五宮門 기사참조)

四, 六宮과 兄弟井

毓祥宮의 字音이 六尙宮과 비슷한 까닭에 俗間에서 六尙宮으로 誤傳하고 日本人들은 그것을 또 誤信하야 아주 엄창나게 六宮이라고 이름을 부처서 地圖로 또는 記事로 썻다. 물론 毓祥宮도 六尙宮 중에 한 尙宮이지만은 그 宮을 곳 六宮이라 함은 잘목리오 三淸洞의 兄弟井은 원래 三淸洞이 道敎의 殿堂인 三淸殿이 잇기 때문에 洞名이 생기고 兄弟井은 星祭井 즉 별을 祭하는 井이란 말인대 俗間에서 성제우물이라 하닛가 기사쓰는 사람들이 有識한 척하고 兄弟井이라 써서 도로혀 無識을 탈로하얏다.(例如五百年京城)

獎忠壇의 개나리

五百年京城에 獎忠壇記事에는 개나리(莘荑花) 이약이를 썻는데 또 腰折할 말이 잇다. 즉 개나리는 黃鳥 「가나리아」와 빗갈이 갓기 때문에 개나리라 하고 조선은 數百年 前부터 英語가 수입되야 그리 되얏다 云하얏다. 그러나 개나리는 元 朝鮮語인대야 엇지 하랴. 苟苟한 설명까지도 붓칠 餘地가 업다.

六, 南山에 관한 錯誤

그리고 日本人이 著한 2,3 기록에는 南山의 西를 木覓山, 東을 終南山이라 云하얏다. 이것은 무엇을 근거하야 한 말인지 알 수 업다. 그저 付之一笑할 수박게 업다. (詳細한 것은 名勝古跡 참조)

彰義門과 光熙門 及 肅靖門

彰義門은 仁祖가 反正한 뒤로 彰義라 命名하얏다는 엇던 기록을 보왓다. 그러나 彰義門은 仁祖時보다 헐신 以前 - 國初부터 彰義라 하얏고 光熙門을 곳 水口門으로 지금의 일반 사람들은 다 안다. 그러나 芝峯類說에 의하면 八大門 외에 水口門이 따로 잇다고 하얏다. 즉 元光熙門은 南小門이오 水口門은 따로 잇섯는데 風水說에 의하야 근대의 南小門을 廢하고 光熙門 看板을 水口門에 移懸함으로 水口門이 光熙門이 된 것이다. 그리고 北門 즉 肅靖門을 輿地勝覽 其他某某記錄에 肅淸門이라 하얏다. 그러나 실제 그 門額을 보면 肅靖門이라 明記하고 芝峯類說에도 肅靖이라 記하얏다.(八大門 기사 참조)

興德의 花와 弼雲臺의 거북

漢都十詠 중에 興德賞花가 잇는대 요새의<170> 기록에는 대개 宋洞櫻花라 指摘하얏다. 그러나 興德은 원래 東小門 內에 잇던 寺名으로 당시 其寺 주위 연못에 蓮花가 盛開하엿기 때문에 興德의 花가 十泳 중에 든 것이다. 그것은 그 때 徐居正의 시를 봐와도 족히 짐작할 것이다. 弼雲洞의 거북은 시대는 알 수 업스나 그 洞里 전설에 의하면 고대 사찰의 유물인 것이 사실인 듯한데 00便覽에는 또 景福宮 연못에 잇던 것을 壬辰亂 때에 이전한 것이라 云하니 未知何據?

九, 雜同散異錯誤

잡지의 이름은 구태여 지적지 안는다 만은 某誌 9월호에 京城의 고적과 명소의 사진을 게재하고 그 설명에 曰하되 十三層塔은 李太祖20년 4월8일에 준공되고(中畧) 그 方이 14척4촌 目測으로 40尺이라고 운운하고 又 慶會樓는 李太祖4년 光化門도 李太祖4년 勤政殿도 太祖4년에 준공이라 하고 尙又 獨立門은 舞鶴峴에 잇다 하얏다. 그것이 혹 교정을 잘못하얏는지 자서이 알 수는 업스나 다소 주의하얏스면 그런 착오는 업슬 것이다. 알고 보면 慶會樓·勤政殿·光化門은 근대 大院君이 重建한 것이오 塔洞塔은 世祖12년에 준공된 것이다.(本誌 名勝古蹟 참조) 독자는 또한 誤讀치 안키를 바란다.<171>
<169-171>