別건곤 제23호
1929년 09월 27일
編輯室 (Editorial Room)
사고·편집후기 (Notice·Post-editing Review)

The interest and benefit of reading magazines that come out monthly are great if you read them continuously. Those who have seen this issue should be sure to get the next issue. The next issue is the 3rd anniversary commemorative issue of this magazine and will be edited even more grandly than its splendid content, with a cover that is brilliantly adorned and an appendix so generous that all readers will be surprised and amazed at its grandness.

How to Order

◇ For any magazine, you should order it in advance with payment so that you can see it sooner than others and avoid the disappointing experience of hearing "It's sold out."

◇ When ordering this magazine, be sure to write the magazine name and which month's issue or what special issue it is, or the name of the issue you saw in the advertisement. When ordering the next issue of this magazine, write "Pyŏlgŏn'gon 3rd Anniversary Issue."

◇ Write the magazine order form clearly without scribbling. Because the company handles over a thousand orders every day to publish three major magazines, orders that are not written clearly are likely to be sent to the wrong place or be delayed.

◇ Orders must be prepaid; cash on delivery is absolutely not accepted.

◇ For remittances, it is best to send them to the transfer account rather than using a postal money order, as the fee is lower and there is no concern about loss during transit. If you go to the nearest post office and say, "I want to send money to Kaeppyŏksa Transfer Account Kyŏngsŏng 8106," the post office will give you the form and teach you how to fill it out.

◇ If the post office is too far and it is difficult to get there, you can send postage stamps worth one chŏn (錢) up to the amount due, but you must send an additional 10% of the price. If it is 10 chŏn, send eleven 1-chŏn stamps; if it is 50 chŏn, send fifty-five stamps.

◇ We absolutely do not accept revenue stamps (印紙).

別乾坤第貳拾參號

Shōwa 4 (1929) September 25 Printed
Shōwa 4 (1929) September 27 Published
88, Kyŏngundong, Kyŏngsŏng-pu
Editor and Publisher: Ch'a Sang-ch'an
8, Ch'ŏngsu-chŏng, Kyŏngsŏng-pu
Printer: Min Yŏng-sun
62, 3-chome, Pongnae-chŏng, Kyŏngsŏng-pu
Publisher: Kaeppyŏksa
Phone: Kwanghwamun 42
Transfer: Kyŏngsŏng 8106
Reprinting Prohibited <174>

**Named Entities**

車相瓉	Ch'a Sang-ch'an
閔泳純	Min Yŏng-sun
京城府	Kyŏngsŏng-pu
慶雲洞	Kyŏngundong
淸水町	Ch'ŏngsu-chŏng
蓬萊町	Pongnae-chŏng
開闢社	Kaeppyŏksa
光化門	Kwanghwamun
郵便局	Uchinkyoku (Post Office)



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	編輯室
기사형태	사고·편집후기

編輯室
◇雜誌는 每月나는 것을 斷續해닑어야 興味도 有益도만흔것임니다. 이번 冊을 보신이는 반듯이 요다음 號를 求해보십시오 요다음 冊은 本誌의 創刊三周年紀念號로 핑장한 中에도 더욱 굉장히 編輯되야 表紙아지찬란하고 附錄아지너어서 諸者여러분이놀나시게 굉장하게 發行됨니다.

注文方法

◇雜誌는 어느 雜誌던저 미리 先金으로 注文해두서야 남보다일즉보시고『다팔리고엄슴니다』하는 섭섭한 을 안보시게됨니다.
◇本誌를 注文하시는 반듯이 雜誌일흠을 쓰고 어느달 號라던지 무슨 特別號라던지 廣告에서보신 그 號일홈을 쓰서야 함니다. 本誌다음 號를 注文하실는 『別乾坤三週紀念號』라고쓰십시오.
◇雜誌注文書는 아로리밧바도 흘너쓰지말고 히쓰십시오 本社에서는 三大雜誌를 發行하느라고 每日千餘장의 注文書를 取扱하는지라 히안쓰신 注文冊은 잘못가기쉽고 늣게가기쉽슴니다.
◇注文은 반듯이 先金이라야지 代金引換은 絶代謝絶함니다.
◇注文하시는 送金은 所爲替보다도 振替口座로보내시는 것이 第一料金이 고 中間流失의 不安이엄슴니다 갓가운 郵便局에가서서 『開闢社振替京■八一○六番으로돈을보내겟다』하시면 局에서 用紙도드리고 쓰는법도아르켜드림니다.
◇郵便局이 正히머러서 困難하신데서는 一錢리 郵票를 代金額만큼보내시되 定價의 一割를 더보내서야함니다 十錢이면 一錢郵票十一枚 五十錢이면 五十五枚.
◇印紙는 絶對로 밧지안슴니다.

別乾坤第貳拾參號


昭和四年九月二十五日印刷
昭和四年九月二十七日發行
京城府慶雲洞八十八番地
編輯兼發行人 車相瓉
京城府淸水町八番地
印刷人閔泳純
京城府蓬萊町三丁目六二
印刷所慶雲洞八十八番地
發行所 開闢社
電話光化門四二番
振替京城八一○六
不許轉載＜174＞
＜174＞