別건곤 제59호
1932년 12월 30일
癸酉史話 自稱大金皇帝 李澄玉反亂記 ―端宗元年癸酉― (Gyesa History: The Rebellion of Yi Cheung-ok, Who Called Himself Emperor of the Great Jin - First Year of King Danjong, Gyesa Year)
車相瓉
문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Gyesa History: The Rebellion of Yi Cheung-ok, Who Called Himself Emperor of the Great Jin - First Year of King Danjong, Gyesa Year
Cha Sang-chan

What Kind of Person Was Yi Cheung-ok?
People think it quite exhilarating that Xiang Yu of China, a young man of twenty-four, gathered eight thousand disciples from Gangdong and bravely crossed the Yangtze River to the west to smash the then-mighty Qin dynasty.

However, in our Joseon, there was an even more enormous and absurd great hero who made his name known throughout the world in Xiang Yu's age and dreamed of becoming the Emperor of the Great Jin (大金皇帝). He was Yi Cheung-ok (李澄玉) of Yangsan, Gyeongsang Province, during the reign of King Sejong of Joseon (李朝世宗大王). He was the great-grandson of Minister Yi Man-yeong (判書李萬英). From a young age, he possessed the strength of a heavenly general, and his archery was that of a master who could pierce a hundred targets (百步穿揚). Once he held a bow and shouted, even fierce tigers and giant bears could not dare to approach him and would close their eyes and fall to the ground, killed by a single arrow.

It was when he was fourteen years old. His older brother, Yi Cheung-seok (李澄石), was also a strongman, four years older than Cheung-ok. One day, their mother wanted to test their archery skills and ordered them, "My sons, I have never seen a wild boar (山猪) before. Go together and catch one." His brothers listened to their mother's order and immediately went hunting in a certain large mountain. Cheung-seok came back that day with a large boar, but Cheung-ok returned empty-handed after two days. His mother found it strange and said, "Everyone says Cheung-ok is better than Cheung-seok in strength and archery, but today it seems quite different from what I heard. What is the reason?" Only then did Cheung-ok kneel and say to his mother, "I have driven a wild boar in front of the gate, so please go out and see it." His mother thought it strange but went out and saw a boar as big as a mountain, with no arrow marks, staring blankly with large eyes like Buksa and panting heavily. Originally, Cheung-ok wanted to show his mother the wild boar as it was, so he didn't shoot it with an arrow or hit it with his fist, but just drove it through the mountains and fields until the boar was exhausted, and then brought it. His mother was greatly surprised by this and loved Cheung-ok even more, always warning him to be careful.

He once went to Gimhae (金海) and asked for an audience with the magistrate (府使), but the magistrate, thinking of him as a humble scholar, sternly refused the meeting. Helpless, he returned. On his way, he arrived at a place where bamboo groves were thick, and there were two or three houses. A young woman was wailing loudly, so Cheung-ok, finding it strange, asked her what was wrong. She said that her husband had just been taken by a tiger, and that the tiger was in the bamboo grove next to her house, eating her husband. An ordinary person would have trembled in fear at those words and been unable to walk, but he, who originally found catching tigers easier than cats catching mice and was full of chivalry, became enraged upon hearing those words. He flexed his arms, jumped into the bamboo grove, grabbed the tiger's neck with one hand, and drew his sword with the other, cutting open the tiger's stomach. The human flesh had not yet been digested. Cheung-ok took out all the human flesh from the tiger's intestines and had the woman collect it. He also skinned the tiger and gave the skin to the woman, telling her to report it to the government office. The woman thanked him profusely, and the magistrate was also greatly surprised and sent a person to apologize for refusing the meeting and asked to meet him again.

However, Cheung-ok did not listen and returned home.

The Heartless and Proud Wife's Secret Night Flight
No matter how great a hero is, if he doesn't meet the right time and is poor, even his beloved wife will despise him and have ill intentions. This is a common occurrence in our harsh human society. In the past, when Su Qin (蘇秦) of China became destitute in Luoyang (洛陽) and returned home, his wife did not even get off the loom. Zhu Maichen's (朱買臣) wife betrayed him and married someone else. After Maichen became noble, she swept the road as he passed by and died of shame by hanging herself. Such things didn't only happen in China. Even a hero like Yi Cheung-ok had such secret sorrow. His wife was originally of a proud nature and always despised Cheung-ok's poverty. Eventually, she betrayed him and eloped in the middle of the night to live with another man. Another person would have considered it a great shame, but he was originally a cheerful man, so he didn't make a big deal out of it.

However, he always remembered it in his heart. Later, when he became the military commissioner of Yeongnam (嶺南節度使), he gathered all the local magistrates and officers in front of the house of his ex-wife's new husband to show off his authority and dignity. He held a large joint hunt (聯合大獵) and gave hundreds of deer and wild boars to his ex-wife's husband. At first, the man was greatly terrified, but then he was moved, and people admired his generosity.

Eighteen Years Old, Magistrate of Ganggye
He passed the military examination as a fifteen-year-old boy, and at eighteen, he was specially appointed as the magistrate of Ganggye (江界府使). After Kim Jong-seo (金宗瑞) resigned as the military commissioner of the northern provinces and returned, he recommended him to King Sejong (世宗大王) as his successor. Eventually, he became the military commissioner of the northern provinces. Sejong loved and trusted him greatly. When he left, Sejong held his hand and said, "I will not call you unless there is a great event in the country. Until then, rest assured and defend the border well." After Cheung-ok went to his post, he selected strong men from among the northerners (胡人) in the Six Garrisons (六鎭) who were good at riding and archery, assigned them to his command, and organized them into units. The northerners of Hoenyeong (會寧胡) were dressed in white on white horses, the northerners of Jongseong (鍾城胡) were dressed in blue on blue horses (靑駞馬), and other places were divided and dressed differently. He trained them diligently every day, and within a few years, he had over three thousand elite soldiers unmatched in the world. Whenever Cheung-ok inspected the various counties, they came out to greet him, their dignity so imposing that it was as if he had become a local king in the northern provinces. Cheung-ok occasionally crossed the Tuman River (頭滿江) to inspect various places, pacifying and appeasing the native northerners. Those who submitted were allowed to live by the river, and those who did not submit were expelled far away. He also made a promise, saying, "Those who violate my orders will be killed." If even a small number disobeyed his orders, he would immediately execute them without mercy. After patrolling the river for ten days, not a single northerner could be seen. However, some government officials at the time, full of suspicion and jealousy, argued that if northerners were drafted into the military register (軍籍) and made into soldiers, Yi Cheung-ok could command and order them well for a time, but others would find it difficult to do the same, so it was uncertain whether it would be a future problem. They ordered the abolition of the system. Cheung-ok had no choice but to follow. He only comforted them with good words, saying, "Since you have turned to righteousness and submitted, you are all our people. You only need to focus on farming, and there will be no tax or labor obligations. If you are bound by laws and forced into military service, it would be too harsh." The northerners were all pleased and dispersed, but they still respected and feared him, and continued to obey him.

Raising the Banner of Rebellion and the Plan to Build the Great Jin State
Four hundred and eighty years ago—in the Gyesa year, the first year of King Danjong (端宗元年癸酉)—Sejo (世祖) plotted to usurp the throne from Danjong. His accomplices, Han Myeong-hoe (韓明澮), Kwon Ram (權擥), and Hong Yun-seong (洪允成), first killed Kim Jong-seo (金宗瑞), Hwangbo In (皇甫仁), and other loyal ministers (顧命重臣) of Danjong. However, there was another dangerous figure, Yi Cheung-ok (李澄玉), the military commissioner of Hamgil Province (咸吉道都節度使), who had been dedicated to the country since the time of King Sejong, had a close relationship with Kim Jong-seo, and held great military power with a reputation both internally and externally. If he were left alone, no matter how much Sejo had accomplished in his coup, hearing the news of the murder of a loyal minister like Kim Jong-seo and raising the banner of rebellion, it was uncertain what would happen to Sejo's faction. Therefore, all the figures besides Sejo plotted to kill Yi Cheung-ok. They replaced Cheung-ok with Park Ho-mun (朴好問) and summoned Yi Cheung-ok to Seoul quickly. At first, Cheung-ok suspected something was amiss, so he handed over the seal of office (印綬) and general documents to Ho-mun and set off for Seoul. After traveling for a day and arriving in Gilju (吉州), he thought that the military commissioner was an important position in the country, but Ho-mun had suddenly replaced him without any news. Moreover, there was an internal order from the court that he would not be called unless there was a great event in the country, so he suspected that there must be a reason for this. He turned his horse back and ran to Gyeongseong (鏡城), asking Park Ho-mun for the reason. Park stammered and could not answer well, so Cheung-ok became even more suspicious and greatly enraged. He arrested Ho-mun, imprisoned him, and sat on the top and scolded him, saying, "If you don't tell me the truth, I will cut off your head right now!" Ho-mun dared not hide anything and confessed everything. Cheung-ok was furious and killed Ho-mun with a single strike. He commanded his soldiers to raise the banner of rebellion that day and head to Seoul to punish the traitors in the government, but then he changed his mind and said, "How can a great man go to the narrow Seoul and argue black and white with petty men? My prestige has spread throughout the mountains (山■), so now I should cross the river, occupy Ogukseong (五國城), the old capital of the Jin kingdom (金國), command the north, and become the Emperor of the Great Jin (大金皇帝) myself!" The next day, he promised to cross the river. How exhilarating and grand his ambition was!

Alas, the Emperor's Dream Was Just a Fleeting Dream
However, if the time is not favorable and luck is not on your side, even a great roc (大鵬) will be humiliated by a flock of sparrows, and even a fierce lion (猛獅) will be caught by a small mouse. At that time, the magistrates (六塵判官) of the Six Garrisons were all under Cheung-ok's command, but Jeong Jong (鄭鍾), the magistrate of Jongseong (鍾城府使), had harbored different intentions towards Cheung-ok from the beginning. Now, with his petty vision, he planned to harm Cheung-ok in order to establish his own merit and curry favor with the government. Cheung-ok's stay for a day without crossing the river was also a result of Jeong Jong's scheme. That night, Jeong Jong had two strongmen (力士) hide inside Cheung-ok's lodgings with long swords (長劍), planning to harm Cheung-ok while he was sleeping. At that time, Cheung-ok was dozing off, leaning on a chair, and his son was sleeping under the chair. Suddenly, he woke up and told Cheung-ok, "I dreamed that blood was flowing from my father's head and running down to my legs." Cheung-ok replied indifferently that it was a good dream. Before he could finish speaking, Jeong Jong entered and shouted the battle cry. The two strongmen jumped down from the ceiling, wielding their long swords, and struck the unsuspecting Cheung-ok, cutting off his right arm. Cheung-ok was startled and jumped up, drawing his sword and holding it in his left hand. He killed the two strongmen on the spot. Barefoot, he ran out and killed hundreds of Jeong Jong's men. He died in the chaos of the rebels, and his sons, Ja-won (滋源), Yun-won (潤源), and Cheol-dong (鐵同), were also brutally killed. Alas, the grand plan of the Emperor of the Great Jin vanished like a fleeting dream. Cheung-ok was only twenty-four years old at the time.
If we think about Yi Cheung-ok's failure for a moment, we might say it was just the failure of Yi Cheung-ok alone, but if we look at the entire Joseon nation and trace the history of Joseon after that, Cheung-ok's failure was a great loss to the entire Joseon. Why? If he had not been killed by petty men like Jeong Jong at that time and had successfully crossed the Tuman River with his grand ambition and built the Great Jin State, he could have built a great power like Goguryeo (高句麗) and Balhae (渤海) of the old days. And if he had connected it with the Joseon mainland, the Qing dynasty would not have dared to rise anew, and Joseon might have avoided disasters like the Japanese and Manchu invasions. But what can we do about fate? Now, as we face the Gyesa year (癸酉) of his death again, I cannot help but shed tears of indignation and sympathy.

Named Entities

李澄玉	Yi Cheung-ok
項羽	Xiang Yu
秦國	Qin dynasty
李朝世宗大王	King Sejong
判書李萬英	Yi Man-yeong
李澄石	Yi Cheung-seok
金海	Kimhae
府使	Magistrate
蘇秦	So Qin
洛陽	Nangyang
朱買臣	Chu Maichen
嶺南節度使	Yeongnam military commissioner
江界府使	Ganggye Magistrate
金宗瑞	Kim Jong-seo
咸吉道都節度使	Hamgil-do military commissioner
韓明澮	Han Myeong-hwoe
權擥	Kwon Ram
洪允成	Hong Yun-seong
皇甫仁	Hwangbo In
朴好問	Park Ho-mun
吉州	Kilchu
鏡城	Kyŏngsŏng
五國城	Ogukseong
鄭鍾	Chŏng Chong
鍾城府使	Chongsong magistrate
高句麗	Koguryŏ
渤海	Palhae
頭滿江	Tuman River
六鎭	Yukchin
會寧胡	Hoenyong ho
鍾城胡	Chongsong ho
世祖	Sejo
端宗	Tanjong
癸酉	Kyesa



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제59호
발행일	1932년 12월 30일
기사제목	癸酉史話 自稱大金皇帝 李澄玉反亂記 ―端宗元年癸酉―
필자	車相瓉
기사형태	문예기타

癸酉史話 自稱大金皇帝 李澄玉反亂記 ―端宗元年癸酉―
						車相瓉

李澄玉은 어사람인가
세상사람들은 지나(支那)의 항우(項羽)가 스물네살의 청년으로 강동자제팔천인을거나리고 당시천하막강의 진나라(秦國)를 려바시랴고 용감하게 장강을건너섯족으로 처서드러간 것을 퍽이나 장쾌하게 녁인다.
그러나 우리조선에는 그보다도 더 엄청나고 엉스럽게 항우의 년갑시절에벌서 이름을 천하에 치고 대금황제(大金皇帝)를 인대영웅 호걸아가 잇섯스니 그는 이조세종대왕(李朝世宗大王)의 경상도양산사람 이증옥(慶尙道梁山人李澄玉)이다. 그는 판서이만영(判書李萬英)의 증손이니 어려서부터 힘이 천하장사이고 활이 백보천양(百步穿揚)의 명궁이엿다. 활을들고한번고함을치며 제아모리 맹호거웅(猛虎巨熊)이라도 감히 적을하지못하고 두눈을저절로감고 에 엄듸여서 한활살에죽엇섯다.
그가 열네살엿다. 그의형 리증석(李澄石)은 역시장사로 증옥보다 네 살이우이엿섯는데 하루는 그의어머니가 그들형제의 활쏘는재조를 한번시험하야 보랴고 그들형제를 불너서 명령하되 이애-내가이지 산도야지(山猪)구경을못하얏스니 너히둘은 가티가서 도야지한마리를 삽아오라고 하엿섯다. 그의 형제는 어머니의 명령을 듯고 즉시에 어큰산으로 산양을 하러갓섯다. 중슥은 당일에 큰도야지 한 마리를 잡아가지고왓스나 증옥은 이틀만에 도라오는데 아모것도가진것이엄시 공수로도라왓더니 그의 어머니가 이상이녁이고 말슴하되 세상사람들이모도말하기를 증옥은 힘과활재조가 증석보다낫다고하더니 오늘에보니듯던바와는 아주판이니 그것이 무슨닭이냐고하니 증옥이 그제야 어안저서 그어머니 여자오되 문압헤산도야지를 그대로 모라다노왓싸오니 나가서 구경을 하시라고하엿다 그의 어머니는 긔연미연하게 생각하고 나가보니 과연 산덤이가티 큰도야지가 활한대도마진곳이엄시 북사씨가튼 큰눈을 멀거니고 헐덕거리며 누어잇섯다. 그것은 원래 증옥이가 그어머니 산도야지구경을 그대로식혀드리랴고 활로쏘거나 주먹으로 리지도안코 그냥 모라가지고 산과들로차다니다가 도야지가 긔진맥진한다음에 그대로 잡아가지고 온것이엿다. 그의어머니는 그것을 보고 크게 놀내며 한긔특히녁여 증옥을 더욱사랑하고 항상자중하기를 경계하엿섯다.
그는 일즉 김해(金海)에 놀너갓다가 부사(府使)에게 면회를 정하엿더니 부사는 그를 일개한미한서생으로알고 엄수이녁여 면회를 사절하엿섯다. 그는 할수엄시 그대로도라오다가 한곳을 다다르니 죽림이욱어지고 이삼의인가가잇는대 어젊은녀자가 방성대곡을함으로 증옥은 괴이히녁여 물어본즉 자긔의 남편이 방금에 호랑이에게 물녀갓는대 그호랑이가바로 그집월편의 죽림속에서 잇서서 자긔의 남편을 잡아먹고잇다고한다. 범상한 사람가트면 그말만드러도무서워서 벌벌고 길도못가겟지만 원래에 호랑이잡기를 고양이의 쥐잡는것보다 더쉽게 잡고 의협심이 풍부한그는 그말을 한번드르매 노긔가충천하야 팔을 내고 죽림속으로 여드러 한손으로 호랑＜20＞이의멱두지를 잡아어내고 한손으로 칼을서 호랑이의 배를 갈으니 사람의고긔가아즉지 삭지도 안엇섯다. 증옥은 호랑이 창자속에잇는 사람의 고긔를모도 내여 그녀자로하야금수습케하고 호랑이의 가죽을 벽겨서 그녀자를주며 관가에 보고케하니 그녀자가백배사례하고 부사한 크게 놀나 사람을 보내서 전날에 면회사절한 것을 사과하고 다시만나보기를 청하얏다.
그러나 증옥은 듯지아코 그길로 집에 도라왓섯다.

無情한 驕妻의 暗夜逃走
아모리영웅호걸이라도 를만나지 못하고 빈천한에는 다른사람은 그만두고 자긔의 사랑하는 처첨이라도 엄수이 녁이고 마음을 먹는것이야 박한 우리인간사회ㅔ 흔이잇는통례이다 옛날에 지나의 소신(蘇秦) 이가 낙양(洛陽)에서 곤궁하게되야 집으로 도라오매 그처가 벼틀에서 나리지도 안이하고 주매신(朱買臣)의처는 매신을 배반하고 다른곳으로 시집을 갓다가 매신이 귀하게 된뒤에 그의 지나가는 행차길을 쓸다가 붓그러워서 목을 매여죽은일이잇섯다. 그러한 일이엇지 지나에만 잇섯스랴 이리증옥가튼 호걸에게도 일즉이 남모르는 그러한 비애가 잇섯다. 그의 처는 원래 성질이 교오하야 항상증옥의 빈천한 것을 엄수이녁이더니 결국 그를 배반하고 밤중에도 망을하야 다른남자와 가티 살게되엿다. 다른사람가트면 그것을 큰수치로 녁엿겟지만은 그는 원래 쾌활한남자이기문에 귻을 그다지문제도 삼지안엇섯다.
그러나 중심에는 항상잇처지지안어서 그뒤그가령남절도사(嶺南節度使)가 되엇슬에 자긔의 위염과 긔히된 것을 그처되엿던 여자에게 뵈키기위하야 일부러그처의후부의 집압헤다. 각군수령장관을 모와노코 연합대산양(聯合大獵)을하고 그처의후부를 불너이며 노루ㆍ산도야지등속의 수백마리를주니 그사람이처음에는크게 공황하다가 다시 감복하고 세상사람들도 그의아량을 감탄하얏섯다.

十八歲에 江界府使
그는 十五세의 소년으로 일즉이무과에 급제하고 十八세에는 초천하야강계부사(江界府使)가되엿더니 김종서(金宗瑞)가 북도절도사를 사즉하고 도라온뒤에 세종대왕 그후임자로 추천하야 드듸여 북도절도사가되니 세종이크게 사랑하고 신임하야날에는 친이 손을잡고말슴하되 국가에큰일이잇기전에는 경을불으지안을것이니인제지던지 안심하고 국경을 잘방어하라고하시엇다. 증옥은 그임소에간뒤로 륙진(六鎭)에잇는 호인(胡人)중에 말잘타고 활잘쏘는장정을 아서 자긔부하에다 예속식하고 대오를 편성하되 회녕호인(會寧胡)은백마에힌옷을 입히고 종성호인(鍾城胡)은 청타말(靑駞馬)에청의를 입히고 다른곳도 그와가티 구역을 논아복색을 달니하고 날마다 렬심으로 교련을 하니 불과수년지내에 천하막능당할정병삼천여명을 가지게 되엿섯다. 그드른 증옥이 각군을 순시할마다 군경에 나와영접을하니 그위의 가실로 당당하야엄연이 북도이 한와자라가위하게 되엿섯다. 증옥은 로 두만강(頭滿江)을 건너서 각지를 순력하며 토착의 호인을 은위로아울너 다시려서 귀화하는자는 강가에 살게하고 귀순치안는자는 멀니축출을하며 언약하야 갈오되 내의령을범하는자는 죽인다하고 소호라도위령을하는자면 아모용서가 엄시 즉시 참령을하니 강을 지내다닌지 십여일에 호인은그림자도 볼수가엄게되엿섯다. 그러나 의심이만코 시긔가만흔당시일부의 정부사람들은 론의를 하되호인을아다가 군적(軍籍)에놋코 군병을 삼으면 이증옥은 일시에 능히 잘지휘하고 명령할수잇스나 다른사람은 그와가티하기어려울터인즉 도로혀후환이될는지알수엄다하고 그제도의혁파를 명령하니 정옥도 한할수엄시그것을타라고 다만 조흔인사로 위유하야 말하되너히들이이미의(義)에향하야 귀화하얏슨즉 다우리의 백성이라 다만농사에 안엄할이요 세와 힘의복역은엄서도 조흘지니 만일에 법령에 구속되야 군적에지 복역케한다면 너무나 과한구속인즉 이후부터는 병역은 특히 면제한다하니 호인이모다깃버하고 그저해산할이엿스나 그를 항상 경모하고 무서워하야 여전이복종할이엿다.

反旗를 들고 大金國建設計劃
지금으로부터 四百八十년전―단종원년계유엿다―(端宗元年癸酉) 세조(世祖)는단종의 왕위찬탈을음모하니 그음모를 찬동하는 한명회(韓明澮)ㆍ권람(權擥)ㆍ홍윤성(洪允成)의 무리들은 제일의착수로먼저 단종의 고명중신(顧命重臣)인 김종서(金宗瑞)ㆍ황보인(皇甫仁)등을 죽이게되엿다. 그러나 그박게일대위험한 인물이잇섯스니 그는 물론세종대왕이래 력대의헌신으로 김종서와 막약의의가잇고 오래동안 변경에 잇서서 막대한 병권을 가지고 위명이내외에 혁혁한 함길도도절도사이증옥(咸吉道都節度使李澄玉)이엿다. 그를그대로둔다면 세조가 아모리반정의 공을 일럿슬지라도 김종서가튼중신을 살해하엿다는 소식을 듯고 문죄인반란을 이르킨다면 세조일파의 운명이엇지될지알수엄슬 것이다. 그리하야 세조이외모모인물들은 다시 리증옥을 죽이기로 음모하고 이에 박호문(朴好問)으로 증욱의 벼슬을 대신식히고 리증옥을 속히 서울로 오라고 불넛섯다. 처음에 중옥은 심상이 녁이고 인수(印綬)와 일반 문부를 모도 호문에게 인도하고 서울을 향하야 길을 낫섯다. 하루길을 지나길주(吉州)에지와서 생각한즉절도사는 국가의 중즉인데 호문이 아모소식도＜21＞ 엄시졸지에 외서즉의 대신하고 당초에 조정에서 ■■■■■■■에 국가에 큰일이엄스면 불으지안켓다는 내명이 잇섯슴에 불구하고 이와가티하는 것은 필경 무슨 닭이잇는 것이라하고 다시 말머리를 돌녀 경성(鏡城)으로 달녀가서 박호문을 보고 그사유를 물은즉박은우물주물하고 대담을잘하지안는지라 증옥은 더욱의 심하고 크게노하야 호문을 잡아내서 녀안치고 상에올나안저 크게 지저갈오되 네가자서한 말을하지안으면 당장에 목을 베하리라 하니 호문이 감히 숨기지못하고 일일이자백하니 증옥이분노하야 한칼로 흐둔을 처죽이고 군사를 호령하야 당일에 반귀를 들고 서울로 향하야 정부에 잇는간세배를 소청하랴고하다가 다시 말하야갈오되 대장부가엇지 구구하게 좁다란서울에가서 소아배들과 가티 흑백을 가리리요 내가본래에 위신이산윤(山■)에 치엿스니 이제 맛당이 강을건너서 김국(金國)이옛도성인 오국성(五國城)을차지하고 북방에 호령하야 스사로대김황제(大金皇帝)가되겟다하고 그이튼날에 강을 건너가기로 약속하니 그의 포부가 얼마나 장쾌하고 웅대하냐.

嗚呼 皇帝의 도 一場春夢
그러나 가이롭지못하고 운이좃치못하면 대붕(大鵬)이라도 뱁새무리에게 욕을보고 맹사(猛獅)라도적은 쥐에게 잡히는 법이라. 그륙진의 판관(六塵判官)들이 모도증옥의 부하에 잇섯는데 그중 종성무부사정종(鍾城府使鄭鍾)은 본래부터증옥에게 다른 을 품고 잇다가 이에 이르러좀다란 소견으로 자긔의 공을 세우고 당시 정부에 아부코자하야 증옥을 해치랴고 계획하얏스니 그날에 증옥이강을건너지안코 하루동안을 체류한것도 한 이정종의 술책에 진것이엿다. 그날밤에 정종은 미리증옥의류숙하는집청정속에다 력사두사람으로 장검(長劍)을 가지고 매복케하엿다가 증옥의 잠자는 틈을타서 해하기로계획하엿섯다. 그에 증옥은 의자에의지하야 졸고잇섯고 그아들은 의자밋헤서자고잇더니 홀연이이러나 증옥에게 고하되 을 즉부친의 머리에서 피가흘너서 다리에지나러왓다고하니 증옥은 무심이 대답하기를 그것은 길몽이라하더니 말이맛치지안어정종이 드러오며 군호를 하니두력사가천정으로부터 장검을 휘두르고 여나려와서 무심중에잇는증옥을 처서 우편팔을 어트리엿다 ㄱ은 놀나이러나 그칼을아서서왼순에들고 그 자리에서두력사를 처서죽이고 적신으로 여나가 정종의 무리수 십백인을죽인후 자긔는란군증에서죽고그의아들자원(滋源)ㆍ윤원(潤源)ㆍ철동(鐵同)등도무참하게 다마저죽으니 가엽다 대김황제의 큰계획도 그만일장의춘몽가티 살어저버리엿스며 증욱의 그나히는 겨우 스물네살이엿다.
이리증옥의실패는 잠간생각하면증옥일개인의 실패라하겟지만은 조선민족전체로보고 그뒤조선의 력사를 저본다면 증옥의 실패는 전조선에 대하야 큰손실이라하겟다. 웨-그러냐하면그에만일 그가 정종이가튼 소아배에게죽지안코 그의 웅대한 포부와 가티두만강을 무사이건너가서 과연 대김국을 건설하얏다면 옛날의 고구려(高句麗)와 발해(渤海)가튼 대강국도건설할수잇슬것이요 그리고 일반으로 조선본토와 련결을한다면 뒷날에 청국이 감히새로이러나자못하고 러서 조선도 임진병자란과가튼××을면하얏슬지모를 것이다. 그러나 그역운명인대야 엇지하랴. 이제다시그의 죽던계유(癸酉)년을당하매 비분강개한동정의 눈물을 금치못하겟다.＜22＞
＜20-22＞