Magazine Title	동광 제22호
Publication Date	1931년 06월 01일
Article Title	半島 樂壇人 漫評 (A Ramble Review of Musicians on the Peninsula)
Author	洪鍾仁
Article Type	문예평론 (Literary/Art Criticism)

半島 樂壇人 漫評
						洪鍾仁
(A Ramble Review of Musicians on the Peninsula)
						Hong Chong-in

Preface

My initial intention in taking up this pen was to gather the flowers of the music world blooming anew in the Peninsula's spring, but since I've started, why limit it to just this spring's music scene? If the Peninsula's music scene is barely lifting its head from the hard, frost-covered ground in what is still early spring, rather than meticulously picking out flowers, buds, or fruits, it seems worthwhile to discuss all at once the old and new figures ascending and descending the "stage."

Therefore, I should clarify the scope of the "music scene" (樂壇) and "musicians" (樂人) I intend to portray. Simply put, shall we define the music scene conceptually as the social and collective existence of musicians? Though the terminology might be inadequate, it seems plausible to state it this way. Then, what is the scope of "musicians"? Strictly speaking, even Yi Tong-baek or Yi Hwa-jung-sŏn, no matter how commercially they act in the market, are undoubtedly musicians. However, the musicians I wish to discuss here are those who constitute the music scene—to set a more concrete condition, referring to musicians within the category of Western music seems the proper way not to misuse the name "music scene." (Lest there be any misunderstanding, I should mention that I am one who recognizes and cherishes the artistic value of Korea's folk songs, traditional music, dance, etc.)

Furthermore, I'd like to briefly outline the general form of the Peninsula's music scene. The origin of the music scene—the influx of Western music—can be seen as starting far back with the introduction of Christianity (耶穌敎). However, looking at its development process and current state, while it cannot be said to lag significantly behind painting or literature within the same artistic domain, it is a fact that it has certainly not maintained a vigorous pace of development. The music scene, in terms of its interaction with general social life and its cultural evaluation, might be called a hothouse flower... To add one more word, our music scene will not see healthier development as long as music does not break free from being an object of cheap amusement or pleasure, and as long as musicians do not escape the realm of self-intoxication. Thus I declare.

This talk seems to have become a bit thorny. But before getting into the topic, let me state this: whether this writing will turn out to be criticism, an impressionistic sketch, or idle chatter, even I, writing up to this point, cannot guarantee. Also, I might occasionally put someone on a pedestal (lit. "give them an airplane ride") or drop them into a bottomless pit. In any case, I intend to stride briskly through, saying a word or two about those people I've heard and seen and who remain in my memory.

Now then, which path shall we take? It seems good to cross the Chŏng-dong hill first, but since there is an order to paths, starting from inside Namdaemun <36> and sweeping down T'aep'yŏng-t'ong seems the polite way.

Kim In-sik (金仁湜氏)  With a somewhat bulging forehead and large, dark eyes rolling, he quietly stands in the very back row of the Chŏng-dong Praise Team (貞洞讚揚隊). When the Ewha Professional School (梨花專門) girls, aged 17 or 18 like granddaughters, stand in front drawing out voices like silken mosquito hums, he alone (though there are two or three others in his part) belts out a thick voice like a ship's hawser. Then, if somehow a note goes wrong (during a certain practice), the innocent girls turn around. The teacher, without batting an eye, corrects it again. This person is truly like an apostle in our music world. 15 or 16 years ago, he was the indispensable "licorice root" (감초) famous singer at any concert.

Kim Hyŏng-jun (金亨俊氏)  Also a person of T'aep'yŏng-t'ong, another "licorice root" type. Was it the year before last? At the Youth Association, his tenor voice in the quartet was completely hoarse and dry. Age is age, after all. And years ago at the Public Hall (公會堂), I saw him conduct the Chongshin (貞信) chorus singing "O Sole Mio" ("오! 伊太利 내 사랑" - Oh! Italy, my love). Weren't his gestures actually more lively than the singing? Now, he is decidedly more famous as the father of pianist Kim Wŏn-bok (金元福 女史) than as tenor Kim Hyŏng-jun sŏnsaengnim.

Yi Sang-jun (李尙俊氏)  Go to a bookstore, and there are many volumes: titled such-and-such Song Collection (唱歌集), titled such-and-such Collection, titled, titled. Perhaps among Korean music publications, this gentleman's works constitute the majority (among the few that exist). Among them, the collections of Korean folk songs (朝鮮俗謠集) transcribed into musical notation, though imperfect, should certainly be counted as one of his achievements. It goes without saying that they served as references for younger generations, and his effort cannot be deemed small. However, it was surely mischievous mischief, unbecoming of the skill of someone who created the "Middle School Song Collection" (中等某學校 唱歌集), for this gentleman—out of what senility, I wonder—to gather dirty, noisy songs and even publish them. Nevertheless, he will remain as a presence from the past.

Since we are passing through T'aep'yŏng-t'ong, though he is not someone to discuss in the music scene now, I also remember the stylish teacher Ch'oe Tong-jun (崔東俊氏) from the old days at Paejae Haktang (培材學堂) across from Ewha Haktang (梨花學堂), who taught singing while whistling to a mandolin and playing the flute.

(Though it seems like a digression mid-writing, it might be better to trace the development process of the music scene and find musicians step-by-step, but that would make the task enormous, so I will write down names as they come to mind, without order.)

Yun Kŭk-yŏng (尹克榮氏)  It seems about 3 or 4 years since he left Korea. I don't know, but I suspect many people who know the children's song "Half Moon" ("반달") with the lyrics "푸른 하늘 은하수" (Blue sky, Milky Way) might not remember the name Yun Kŭk-yŏng (尹克樂 - note: uses 樂 instead of 榮 here, likely a typo in the original or referring to him by a pen name). Already 6 or 7 years ago, when direct translations of Japanese children's songs were very popular and children's magazines often featured their melodies, this song became hugely popular upon its release. It certainly marked an era of the "Blue Sky." This song, carrying a strong sense of sorrow (애상적), is not entirely free from Japanese sentiment, but as an original composition, it is a charming song that established a cornerstone in children's song composition. Mr. Yun is currently at a certain school in Longjing Village (龍井村), Jiandao (間島).

An Ki-yŏng (安基永氏)  His appearance as a male vocalist in our desolate music scene was certainly a marvel. Some find fault with his somewhat small physique, nervous appearance, and the slight accent (액썬트) in his strong high notes. However, with his firmly established vocal placement, wide vocal range (音域), and excellent technique (테크닉), there is likely no one yet who surpasses him. The "legato pianissimo" (레가-토 피아니씨모) singing style is said to be his particular forte. And he is passionate. <37> Not only as a singer, but recently also as a composer, great expectations are placed on him. His first collection of compositions (already published, 旣刊) and second collection (in preparation for publication, 發刊準備), along with the Collection of Korean Folk Songs (朝鮮民謠集, to be published soon, 近刊), are songs of ours that can be presented to the music scenes of advanced countries without any shame. They fully capture our budding emotions. Since returning from the United States (米國), he has been a professor in the Music Department at Ewha Professional School (梨花專門).

Hyŏn Che-myŏng (玄濟明氏)  Alongside Mr. An Ki-yŏng, he forms the twin pillars of our music scene as a tenor singer. His relatively rich and soft volume (聲量) is a particular strength, but it's regrettable that his vocal range (音域) is somewhat narrow for a tenor. Since I haven't heard him recently, I cannot say much, but at the Yonhui College (延專) concert and on several other occasions I heard him, his song selection was consistently not very good, making it impossible to gauge his skill. However, at the music festival hosted by foreigners at Morris Hall (모리쓰 홀) in May of last year, I was finally able to fully appreciate his innate talent. His solemn voice was masculine, like his physique. It may sound presumptuous, but isn't his timbre (음색) closer to a baritone than a tenor? As the conductor of the Yonhui College Orchestra (延專樂隊) and Yonhui College Choir (延專合唱隊), his activities are indeed extensive. Also returned from the United States (米國).

Yi In-sŏn (李寅善氏)  A talented tenor singer said to have learned much from phonograph records while studying medicine at Severance (세부란쓰). (Though he also received guidance from Mrs. Boots [부츠 부인] and studied under Mr. An Ki-yŏng for a time.) His tone is quite beautiful. Was it one autumn? The memory of hearing Handel's "Largo" and also "Rigoletto" at the professional school music competition at the Public Hall (公會堂) is deep. Though an amateur, he is a singer with popularity exceeding his actual skill, and much can be expected from his future. But to what extent will he pursue music professionally, now that he is a doctor at Severance Hospital?

Kwŏn T'ae-ho (權泰浩氏)  A tenor who graduated from a music school in Japan. I heard him sing Grieg's "Solveig's Song" ("쏠베지」노래") in P'yŏngyang (平壤). (This song is thought to be for a soprano.) The accompaniment was by the reputable Professor Marsbury (말쓰버리) of Soongsil College (崇專), but even the tempo was off. Also, his tone color seemed artificial, departing from natural human vocalization. It appears he sings all high notes in pianissimo (피아니씨모), but it sounded rather close to falsetto (가성). I heard he is going back to Japan to study; I hope he has a future.

Ch'a Chae-il (車載鎰氏)  Highly renowned in P'yŏngyang. For someone who has sung that much, it is shameful, especially when trying to express local color with the "Moranbong Song" ("모란봉 歌" - P'yŏngyang's famous peak), to borrow the melody of a foreign military song (外國軍歌 曲調). Listening to his song on a record recently, his voice sounded constricted, like a goat's bleating. Naturally, there would be no variation in tone.

Chŏng Sun-ch'ŏl (鄭淳哲氏)  Sometime ago, at the Cheondogyo Memorial Hall (天道敎紀念館), I heard him sing children's songs without accompaniment. However, one cannot call him a vocalist based on that. I don't know yet if he is a musician, composer, or vocalist, but I remember him as a gentle teacher at Tongdŏk Girls' High School (同德女高普) who knows music and teaches music.

Sometime ago, in the Maeil Sinbo (每日申報), I saw the name Ch'ae Kyu-yŏp (蔡奎燁) written large under the title "Solo Singing Method" ("독창법"). Years ago, hearing he was holding a solo recital at the Youth Hall (靑年會舘), I went, only to find he couldn't even hold the pitch correctly for songs like elementary school anthems. When the accompanist (Tokko Sŏn氏 [獨孤璇氏]) eventually disappeared, he said, "Whether one can sing without accompaniment has become a question among musicians. Well then, I shall try." I saw that. It is also a fact that this same person has recently advanced greatly onto the streets as a singer of the nation-ruining tune "Arirang" ("아리랑") on gramophones.

That's enough for male singers; let's turn to female singers. Female singers! The late Yun Sim-dŏk (故 尹心德孃) comes to mind. She certainly possessed wonderful natural talent (天稟). However, her final "Hymn of Death" ("死의 讚美"), whether it was a planned recording or not, was neither the song selection nor the work of a musician. It is regrettable <38> that she left behind something unpraiseworthy.

Madam Pak Kyŏng-hŭi (朴慶姬 女史)  Among the female singers currently in Korea who are worth mentioning, it is quite regrettable that Madam Pak, being a homemaker, does not appear on stage. As an alto, her rich volume and "bel canto" (벨, 칸토) singing style were distinctive. The solo recital she gave once upon returning from Shanghai (上海) is thought to have given a great impulse to the music scene. Both her potential talent and her studies are sadly wasted.

Miss Yun Sŏng-dŏk (尹聖德孃)  After finishing Ewha, she went to the United States and returned to become a professor in the music department of her alma mater. Her major is voice. It seems it's already been 3 years since her return. However, though we keep waiting expectantly, she still hasn't let us hear her beautiful voice. (Since her older sister was Sim-dŏk [心德氏], she must naturally have inherited a good voice.) She is getting married in June, so maybe she will hold a commemorative solo recital then?

Madam Ch'oe Myŏng-sun (崔命順 女史)  A soprano singer possessing considerable skill. If such people cannot appear frequently because the music scene is not prosperous, their natural talent will inevitably be wasted. Though she may not be entirely free from unrefined points, she sings confidently with a passionate, good voice. (Some say she strains.) Her vocal production is also good. I heard she graduated from Kansai Music Academy (關西音樂學院) or somewhere similar in Kobe (神戶).

Miss Kim Hyŏn-sun (金顯順孃)  While receiving private lessons from Mr. An Ki-yŏng, she decided to specialize in music again, finished the liberal arts course at Ewha (梨花 文科) this year, and is now attending the music department. It seems she is endowed with that much natural talent and she herself has confidence. Indeed, her voice is quite beautiful. It's a "sweet" (스위-트) voice, like children singing playfully. Although still a student, her beautiful tone (美音) already has a reputation. I believe she will widely make her name as a coloratura soprano (콜로라투라 소푸라노) singer in the future.

Madam Ch'oe Myŏng-suk (崔命淑 女史)  A soprano with a charming voice who graduated from Chungang Childcare School (中央保育) last year. Although not yet trained, her impression was deep when I heard her a couple of times at school concerts and elsewhere. However, I wonder what has become of her since then.

Miss Kim Pan-sŏk (金磐石孃)  A person shining like a star within the Namsan Hill Praise Team (南山峴讚揚隊) in P'yŏngyang. With adequate volume and a smooth voice like silver thread, she possesses natural talent, lacking only the refinement of a singer. If she were to strive a bit more, there would certainly be great expectations for her.

Madam Chŏng Hun-mo (鄭薰模 女史)  A renowned singer who has not yet appeared in public venues in Korea (outside P'yŏngyang). I heard her several times before she went to Japan after finishing P'yŏngyang Girls' High School (平壤 女高普). She possessed a powerful, clear voice. It became even more lustrous after entering high school. Expected to be a "great singer" (명가수), she went to Japan, enrolled at the National Higher Music Academy (國立高等音樂學院), then transferred to the Imperial Music Academy (帝國音樂學院), graduated this spring, and was immediately selected to teach at her alma mater. She plans to undertake a performance tour this autumn, truly a comet newly appearing in our music scene.

Among female singers, the memories of Madam Han Ki-ju (韓琦柱 女史) and Miss Kim Yŏng-suk (金永淑孃), whom I heard 6 or 7 years ago, also faintly resurface.

Having laid out the singers, let's move on to instrumental music, starting with the piano. Even with reed organs, quite a few might emerge, but considering a piano worth using costs over 1,000 won, how sorrowful must it be for poor geniuses who, even if praised for their talent at school, cannot own a piano or even have the opportunity to get close to one? Moreover, when it becomes an object of vanity for so-called young ladies (令孃), a kind of certificate ("Tetel" - 텟테르) for marriage... perhaps the scarcity of pianists is also related to this situation. <39>

Kim Yŏng-hwan (金永煥氏)  As a pianist, he is the one who paved the way for our music scene. I recall he is the only Korean to have graduated from the main course of the Tokyo Music School (東京音樂學校 本科). It is said that when he graduated, whether to formally give him a diploma or not became an issue. And eventually, while giving him the certificate, they strongly urged him to stay at the Government-General's Bureau of Academic Affairs (總督府 學務局), but he consistently refused. The reason, he says, was "We musicians—artists—are not people who should wear swords" (at that time, it was the era of Hasegawa's [長谷川] military rule when even civil officials wore swords [佩劒]). And another reminiscence of his—the year he graduated, at Emperor Kojong's (高宗帝) birthday banquet held at Sŏkcho-jŏn (石造殿), he performed before the Emperor (御前 演奏). Wasn't this perhaps the first piano performance before the emperor? And the monetary gift (金一封) bestowed was 3,000 won. He says he had the honor of receiving the highest amount he ever earned from a performance, the first and the last time. Since then, he has received much respect from various quarters as a pianist. Moreover, he had more access to the Japanese side, so to speak, to the houses of high officials. Now, it might be better to call him a musical socialite. There's talk that he's quite effective even when asked for help with job placements or school admissions. Once dragged around like cattle to concerts eastward, he now only teaches at Sookmyung (淑明). A benefactor-like contributor to the music world.

Madam Chŏng Ae-sik (鄭愛息 女史)  A professor at Ewha Professional School's Music Department, she only appears occasionally at school concerts. Perhaps due to being busy with household chores, she is rarely seen on stage. (If she continues like that, who can guarantee that the skills she has already polished will not decline? Not just her.) Was it the autumn before last? At a small gathering held in the Ewha auditorium, I quietly listened to her play an Irish folk song (愛蘭民謠曲). Her lightly audible sound was quite mature (爛熟). Isn't she already 36 or 7 years old?

Tokko Sŏn (獨孤璇氏)  Nowadays, she probably won't appear on stage much either. Because the people (of that level) who learned from her before have already progressed beyond that. She has many years of experience as a girls' school teacher. I hear she is now the academic supervisor (學監) at Chungang Childcare School (中央保育).

Miss Kim Yŏng-ŭi (金永義孃)  Graduated from Ewha Professional Music Department 3 years ago? Said to be very skilled. I've seen her accompanying more than playing solo. I believe she is quite proficient, but she seems to lack a certain composed beauty on stage, appearing a bit too excited. Is it due to her great skill?

Miss Ko Pong-gyŏng (高鳳京孃)  Also an accompanist, long familiar to the public centered around the Central Music Friends Association (中央樂友會). An Ewha graduate. She is going to the United States this time, so I trust she will learn much more and return.

Yi Kwang-jun (李光俊氏)  In terms of skill, I believe he is quite considerable. Even performing backstage at the theater (Ch'oe Sŭng-hŭi's [崔承喜] dance, Hungarian Rhapsody), one could glimpse the considerable passion hidden in his playing style (奏法). However, nobody looks after him. Perhaps stemming from a genius's eccentricity (怪僻), his life is "gypsy"-like (집씨적). All he knows is the piano and perhaps alcohol? Starting from Kwangsŏng High School (光成高普) era in P'yŏngyang, he received guidance from Kim Yŏng-hwan at Yonhui College (延專) and seems to have gone to Japan as well. If only he had created more opportunities for himself.

Miss Paek Ok-ch'an (白玉贊孃)  From this year's Ewha Music Department graduating class. The "Moonlight Sonata" she performed at the graduation concert was said to be the best among those heard annually. (According to my close friend Ch'oe Ho-yŏng氏 [崔虎永氏].) Though I couldn't hear it then, seeing her accompany usually, she absorbs the entire atmosphere of the piece and handles it smoothly; one cannot help but be amazed at her talent.

Being at the level of Ewha Women's Professional Music School (梨花音樂專門學), it sends out several young musicians (music teachers?) every year. <40> But where do all those graduates go each year? Of course, Korea is still too lacking to welcome them warmly, but isn't the trace they leave behind musically too faint? It must be a matter of their own effort. Among last year's graduates, Cho Ŭn-gyŏng (曺恩卿) and Im Sŏng-ŭi (林性義孃) are said to be pursuing research as assistants at their alma mater. And among this year's graduates, Ch'ae Sŏn-yŏp (蔡善葉) and Yi Sun-yŏng (李順永) are also said to possess quite skillful abilities. Also, Pak Sun-dŏk's (朴順德孃) graduation composition, the song "Sach'okto" ("사촉도"), was a sorrowful descriptive piece that concisely captured the main points. Furthermore, the skills of Pak Hyŏn-suk (朴賢淑) and Kim Sin-bok (金信福孃), graduating next year, are also astonishing.

Pak Kyŏng-ho (朴慶浩氏)  As a pianist, one cannot forget this person. His technique is extraordinary. He handles any piece easily at first sight without difficulty. His comprehension is rich. Besides that, his musical talents are diverse; there's almost nothing he doesn't do—he also paints, engages in literature, did sports; there's hardly anything he can't do among the things he has tried. After finishing Soongsil College (崇專), he went to Nanjing Jinling University (南京金陵大學)—then Kyŏngsŏng (京城)—(The orchestra of the Central Music Friends Association [中央樂友會의 管絃樂隊] was entirely due to his efforts). Currently studying abroad in the United States, he is expected to graduate this year and come to Ewha next year. Having surely honed his skills during this time, his return will be a new light for Ewha and a pillar of our music scene.

Madam Kim Wŏn-bok (金元福 女史)  We must not forget this person who graduated with excellent results from the National Higher Music Academy (國立高等音樂學院) in Tokyo last year. At the new musicians' introductory concert hosted by the Yomiuri Shimbun (讀賣新聞社) during last year's graduation season (6 from the Higher Music Academy, 6 from Ueno [上野]), she was chosen as the representative piano virtuoso from her alma mater. Her skill is that outstanding. Generally, the life of a musician is natural talent and technique. Therefore, apart from voice, in instrumental music, especially piano or violin, one must start from childhood at home. However, among Koreans who face difficulties in having such an environment in many ways, it was great fortune for Madam Kim to have a musician father (Kim Hyŏng-jun氏). As she had innate talent and accompanied her father since she was a girl with braided hair (編髮少女), and then followed the steps receiving guidance from good teachers, it is natural that her technique is masterful. She is in a position to be the pride of our music scene. That she is still young and also has a fellow musician (violinist Hong Sŏng-yu氏 [洪性裕氏]) as her husband will further widen her path of activity as a pianist; her future is truly blessed. Currently employed at Chongshin Girls' School (貞信女學校).

—Let's move on to the violin. Around 1920, pieces like the so-called "Warship March" ("軍艦 마-취") were performed quite naturally at concerts. And before the Manse movement (萬歲前), the violin itself was a rare sight, but it became very popular afterwards, and now there are even middle school students who play quite well. Reasons for its wide dissemination might include the instrument's portability and the fact that one can acquire it relatively cheaply, but as it is a foundational instrument like the piano, its spread is perhaps natural.

Ch'ae Tong-sŏn (蔡東鮮氏)  Among the violinists currently in Korea, he is the one who should be counted first as a technician and artist. About 9 years ago, at a concert sponsored by the Waseda University (?) alumni association's tennis club held at Meiji Hall (明治會舘) in Tokyo (during his Waseda [早大] days), the impression of him standing perfectly still like a statue, eyes closed, playing a solo, remains deeply etched. His technique, further matured after studying in Germany (獨逸), has become more accomplished. His balanced tone color (均齊된 음색), producing each note clearly and beautifully, possesses a tender charm. Furthermore, the respect due to him as an artist comes from his performances always showing beautiful musical sentiment. It is said he also gives private lessons upon request to talented individuals.

Hong Nan-p'a (洪蘭坡氏)  A person known more widely by his pen name Nanp'a (蘭破) than Yong-hu (永厚), long established in the music scene. Reading his writing some time ago, <41> he claimed if he had finished medicine, he would have become a Doctor of Medicine... and he would have become a newspaper editorial bureau chief... etc., etc. He is a person with much confidence in various fields, just as there were many things he "would have become." He is also quite prolific in composition and engages in theory as well. However, with simplistic theories below common sense (regarding "Music and Class Consciousness?" [음악과 계급의식] in the Dong-a Ilbo [東亞報], someone has already slightly refuted its puerility, so I won't say more), there's even a risk his reputation might decline. He is skilled only in violin technique; sometimes his performance seems to toss off pieces as if saying, "A piece like this is nothing." As a private teacher, he has many students, and even now, he continuously exerts much effort in nurturing younger talents, gaining influence in the music scene, making him a heavyweight (重鎭) in our music world.

Ch'oe Ho-yŏng (崔虎永氏)  A person who carried a racquet (라켈) and a violin case (筩), studied medicine, then finished Toyo Music School (東洋音樂) in Tokyo. People say he fails in stage performances due to excitement (엑싸이트) every time, but he has a reputation for teaching well as a private instructor. His technique is said to be considerable, but lacking the passion to strive as a musician is his major flaw.

An Pyŏng-so (安炳玿氏)  Widely known as the "lame" (절름발이) boy genius violinist (提琴家). He held a solo recital covering major works when he was already just 15 years old (?). People in the field comment that there are some habits in his playing style (奏法) that need correction, but his near-perfect mastery (手練) is astonishing. Technically, he has entered a respectable domain. His performances are passionate to the end. However, his misfortune of being unable to continue his studies as he wished due to poverty (家貧), thus failing to fully display his talent, cannot but be considered a loss for the music scene.

Chŏng Chŏng-sun (鄭正淳氏)  A young musician who, like Mr. An, possesses considerable skill. This spring, I heard his first solo recital at Morris Hall (모리쓰, 홀). Having started in elementary school and currently receiving guidance from Mrs. P'u-ssŭ (뿌-쓰 부인 - Mrs. Boots?), his polished technique showed much virtuosic effect. Lively pieces seem to be more his forte. One thing he should be careful about: maintain a more sincere attitude on stage and not let his eyes wander to the audience.

Hong Sŏng-yu (洪性裕氏)  Graduated from Tokyo Higher Music Academy last year, he was a representative virtuoso within the school, possessing considerably skilled technique. Having started under his uncle, Hong Nan-p'a (洪蘭坡氏), from childhood and subsequently followed the steps through music school, he is someone who had all the opportunities. Furthermore, as he is said to be continuing his studies in Tokyo, I believe his talent will be fully displayed in the future.

An Sŏng-gyo (安聖敎氏)  A talented student who graduated from Japan Music School (日本音樂學校) in Tokyo last year. His teacher (a Japanese person) lent him the violin he cherished, showing how much his skill and character were trusted, when he planned to return to Korea last summer to hold a solo recital. However, regrettably, he couldn't find the opportunity to hold the recital and went back to Tokyo. He performed once as a supporting musician for someone at Naech'ŏng-gak (來靑閣?), showcasing a solid playing style.

Kim Chae-hun (金在勳氏)  A person from Hamhŭng (咸興) who married a foreigner in Germany and returned once years ago. At his solo recital, he played Mendelssohn's Concerto, about 40 minutes long, and his own compositions. From this, I think his skill must have reached a considerable level. Of course, one shouldn't unconditionally pay respects just because he performed major, difficult works, but the traces of his effort certainly deserve full appreciation (放意).

Kye Chŏng-sik (桂貞植氏)  Having finished Toyo Music School (東洋音樂) in Tokyo, he went to Germany 8 years ago already. He is said to be the first East Asian to have properly graduated from a music school there. <42> He finished Würzburg Music School (우르즈부르그 음악학교), held a solo recital in the German music scene already 3 years ago, and also performed a solo accompanied by a 50-60 member orchestra in Rome (羅馬), Italy (伊太利). It would not be an exaggeration to say he is already a presence in the European music scene. Looking at German newspaper reviews from years ago, they asserted he "stands at the pinnacle of art," indicating he stands in the realm of a master (大家) both as a technician and an artist. Currently, he is a lecturer at the same school, conducting the school orchestra, representing Koreans under the name "Tarŭbwich'wi, K'e" (다르비취, 케 - perhaps Drebitsch, K?), displaying immense spirit (萬丈의 氣焰). The fact that he holds such a position in Germany, the musical nation that judges the world's musicians, deserves 120% praise for the blood-and-tear efforts he has accumulated until today, and at the same time, he should be respected as someone deepening Korea's global presence. As a gentle young man of only 28, I believe he will soon stand in the ranks of world-class musicians and hold sway over the East. It is rumored he might briefly visit Korea this autumn, but it's hard to guarantee.

Madam Chŏng So-gun (鄭昭君 女史)  The only female violinist (女流提琴家) from Korea who studied early on, travelling to Shanghai (上海) and Manila (마니라). Her whereabouts are now unknown in the music scene. I remember her light and nimble playing style (輕妙한 그의 奏法) was quite beautiful.

There are many violin players, but let's stop here and finally introduce the sole cellist, Mr. An Ik-t'ae (安益泰氏).

An Ik-t'ae (安益泰氏)  Last year's graduation from the Tokyo Music Academy (東京音樂學院) was almost represented by Koreans, filled with our outstanding young musicians like Kim Wŏn-bok, Hong Sŏng-yu, and Mr. An. This young man's performance is full of passion and emotion. He could be called the person who first introduced the value of the cello as an instrument to Korea, as his skill has reached a mature level (원숙한 境), fully demonstrating the capabilities of the cello. Currently studying abroad in the United States, as someone who works diligently with such passion, his future path cannot but be paved. A trustworthy person.

It seems the page limit does not allow more. Not mentioning the national structure (國體 - This seems misplaced, perhaps meant ensembles?) feels like burying about half the music scene, but unavoidably, let me conclude with a few words. For orchestras, the Central Music Friends Association (中央樂友會) would represent Korea. Next are Yonhui Professional School (延禧專門) and Soongsil Professional School (崇實專門), but while improvement seems possible, they still fall short of expectations. It seems plausible for string quartets (퀄텟) or similar groups to exist, but the fact that there are none yet gives a strange feeling. The gathering in P'yŏngyang with violin (Chŏng U-hyŏn [鄭友鉉]), viola (Ham Hŭi-il [咸希一]), cello (Kim Tŭk-yŏng [金得泳]), and piano (Miss Song Kyŏng-sin [宋敬信孃]) showing considerable performance is a unique highlight.

In vocal music, for choirs, Ewha's Glee Club (글리크럽) should be mentioned first, but with only women, it feels like mist in a drought—frustrating and unsatisfying. The Chungang Childcare Choir (中央保育合唱), conducted by Hong Nan-p'a, also had many points worth seeing. For male choruses (메일 코러쓰), Yonhui and Soongsil, being schools, are steady. For mixed choruses, there is the Central Music Friends Association Choir conducted by Hyŏn Che-myŏng and the Sŏnguhoe (聲友會) conducted by An Ki-yŏng, but neither can be called robust due to personnel issues. It seems plausible that at least one more substantial chorus should exist.

And the Musicians' Association (音樂家協會), supposedly encompassing the authority of the music scene, had aspects casting doubt on its development from its very inception. The concert planned for this spring, as promised, is said to be held at the end of this month. I hope for more sincere activity.

Finally, with my clumsy musical knowledge, this critique likely falls short of being proper criticism, and the impressions may not resemble true impressions. I ask for forgiveness for my rash words (妄言) as I lay down my pen (擱筆).
(Recorded May 10, 1931) <43>

**Summary**

This 1931 article by Hong Chong-in provides a critical overview of the Western classical music scene in colonial Korea. Hong evaluates prominent singers (tenors, sopranos, altos), pianists, violinists, and one cellist, assessing their technical skills, artistic merits, training (often in Japan, the US, or Germany), and current activities. He laments the overall underdeveloped state of the music scene compared to literature or art, attributing it partly to music being treated as mere entertainment and musicians' self-absorption. He also touches upon ensembles like choirs and orchestras, noting their limitations, and expresses hope for future development, particularly through musicians studying abroad.

From a historical perspective, the article is revealing about the early formation of a Western classical music culture in Korea under Japanese rule. It highlights the importance of missionary schools (Ewha, Yonhui, Soongsil) and study abroad (Japan, US, Germany) in training musicians. The mention of Japanese institutions, figures like Kim Yŏng-hwan navigating interactions with the Government-General, and anxieties about preserving Korean identity (e.g., criticizing foreign melodies for Korean themes) offer insights into the complex cultural dynamics of the colonial period. The sheer number of individuals discussed indicates a burgeoning, if fragile, musical community striving for recognition and artistic growth.

**Named Entities**

半島	반도	Pando (Korean Peninsula)
洪鍾仁	홍종인	Hong Chong-in
李東伯	이동백	Yi Tong-baek
李花中仙	이화중선	Yi Hwa-jung-sŏn
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
耶穌敎	예수교	Yesugyo (Christianity)
貞洞	정동	Chŏng-dong
南大門	남대문	Namdaemun
太平通	태평통	T'aep'yŏng-t'ong
金仁湜	김인식	Kim In-sik
貞洞讚揚隊	정동찬양대	Chŏng-dong Ch'anyang-dae (Chŏng-dong Praise Team)
梨花專門	이화전문	Ihwa Chŏnmun (Ewha Professional School)
金亨俊	김형준	Kim Hyŏng-jun
青年會	청년회	Ch'ŏngnyŏn-hoe (Youth Association)
公會堂	공회당	Konghoe-dang (Public Hall)
貞信	정신	Chŏngsin (Chongshin Girls' School)
伊太利	이태리	It'aeri (Italy)
金元福	김원복	Kim Wŏn-bok
李尙俊	이상준	Yi Sang-jun
梨花學堂	이화학당	Ihwa Haktang (Ewha Hakdang)
培材學堂	배재학당	Paejae Haktang (Paichai Hakdang)
崔東俊	최동준	Ch'oe Tong-jun
尹克榮	윤극영	Yun Kŭk-yŏng
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
間島	간도	Kando (Jiandao)
龍井村	용정촌	Yongjŏng-ch'on (Longjing Village)
安基永	안기영	An Ki-yŏng
米國	미국	Miguk (USA)
玄濟明	현제명	Hyŏn Che-myŏng
延專	연전	Yŏnjŏn (Yonhui College)
모리쓰 홀	모리스 홀	Morissŭ Hol (Morris Hall)
延專樂隊	연전악대	Yŏnjŏn Aktae (Yonhui College Orchestra)
延專合唱隊	연전합창대	Yŏnjŏn Hapch'angdae (Yonhui College Choir)
李寅善	이인선	Yi In-sŏn
세부란쓰	세브란스	Sebŭranssŭ (Severance)
부츠 부인	부츠 부인	Puch'ŭ Puin (Mrs. Boots)
헨델	헨델	Hendel (Handel)
리고렛	리고렛	Rigoret (Rigoletto)
權泰浩	권태호	Kwŏn T'ae-ho
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
그리익	그리그	Kŭriik (Grieg)
崇專	숭전	Sungjŏn (Soongsil College)
말쓰버리	말스버리	Malssŭbŏri (Marsbury?)
車載鎰	차재일	Ch'a Chae-il
모란봉	모란봉	Moranbong
鄭淳哲	정순철	Chŏng Sun-ch'ŏl
天道敎紀念館	천도교기념관	Ch'ŏndogyo Kinyŏm-gwan (Cheondogyo Memorial Hall)
同德女高普	동덕여고보	Tongdŏk Yŏgobo (Tongdŏk Girls' High School)
每日申報	매일신보	Maeil Sinbo
蔡奎燁	채규엽	Ch'ae Kyu-yŏp
靑年會舘	청년회관	Ch'ŏngnyŏn Hoegwan (Youth Hall)
獨孤璇	독고선	Tokko Sŏn
尹心德	윤심덕	Yun Sim-dŏk
朴慶姬	박경희	Pak Kyŏng-hŭi
上海	상해	Sanghae (Shanghai)
尹聖德	윤성덕	Yun Sŏng-dŏk
崔命順	최명순	Ch'oe Myŏng-sun
神戶	신호	Sinho (Kobe)
關西音樂學院	관서음악학원	Kwansŏ Ŭmak Hagwŏn (Kansai Music Academy)
金顯順	김현순	Kim Hyŏn-sun
崔命淑	최명숙	Ch'oe Myŏng-suk
中央保育	중앙보육	Chungang Po'yuk (Chungang Childcare School)
金磐石	김반석	Kim Pan-sŏk
南山峴讚揚隊	남산현찬양대	Namsan-hyŏn Ch'anyang-dae (Namsan Hill Praise Team)
鄭薰模	정훈모	Chŏng Hun-mo
平壤 女高普	평양 여고보	P'yŏngyang Yŏgobo (Pyongyang Girls' High School)
國立高等音樂學院	국립고등음악학원	Kungnip Kodŭng Ŭmak Hagwŏn (National Higher Music Academy, Tokyo)
帝國音樂學院	제국음악학원	Cheguk Ŭmak Hagwŏn (Imperial Music Academy, Tokyo)
韓琦柱	한기주	Han Ki-ju
金永淑	김영숙	Kim Yŏng-suk
金永煥	김영환	Kim Yŏng-hwan
東京音樂學校	동경음악학교	Tonggyŏng Ŭmak Hakkyo (Tokyo Music School)
總督府 學務局	총독부 학무국	Ch'ongdokpu Hakmu-guk (Government-General Bureau of Academic Affairs)
長谷川	장곡천	Changgokch'ŏn (Hasegawa)
高宗帝	고종제	Kojong-je (Emperor Gojong)
石造殿	석조전	Sŏkcho-jŏn (Stone Palace Hall)
淑明	숙명	Sukmyŏng (Sookmyung)
鄭愛息	정애식	Chŏng Ae-sik
金永義	김영의	Kim Yŏng-ŭi
高鳳京	고봉경	Ko Pong-gyŏng
中央樂友會	중앙악우회	Chungang Agu-hoe (Central Music Friends Association)
李光俊	이광준	Yi Kwang-jun
崔承喜	최승희	Ch'oe Sŭng-hŭi
光成高普	광성고보	Kwangsŏng Kobo (Kwangsŏng High School)
白玉贊	백옥찬	Paek Ok-ch'an
崔虎永	최호영	Ch'oe Ho-yŏng
曺恩卿	조은경	Cho Ŭn-gyŏng
林性義	임성의	Im Sŏng-ŭi
蔡善葉	채선엽	Ch'ae Sŏn-yŏp
李順永	이순영	Yi Sun-yŏng
朴順德	박순덕	Pak Sun-dŏk
朴賢淑	박현숙	Pak Hyŏn-suk
金信福	김신복	Kim Sin-bok
朴慶浩	박경호	Pak Kyŏng-ho
南京金陵大學	남경금릉대학	Namgyŏng Kŭmnŭng Taehak (Nanjing Jinling University)
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul)
讀賣新聞社	독매신문사	Tokmae Sinmunsa (Yomiuri Shimbun)
上野	상야	Sang'ya (Ueno)
洪性裕	홍성유	Hong Sŏng-yu
貞信女學校	정신여학교	Chŏngsin Yŏhakkyo (Chongshin Girls' School)
蔡東鮮	채동선	Ch'ae Tong-sŏn
明治會舘	명치회관	Myŏngch'i Hoegwan (Meiji Hall)
早大	조대	Chodae (Waseda University)
獨逸	독일	Togil (Germany)
洪蘭坡	홍난파	Hong Nan-p'a
永厚	영후	Yong-hu (Hong Nan-p'a's given name)
東亞報	동아일보	Tong-a Ilbo
東洋音樂	동양음악	Tong'yang Ŭmak (Toyo Music School)
安炳玿	안병소	An Pyŏng-so
鄭正淳	정정순	Chŏng Chŏng-sun
뿌-쓰 부인	뿌스 부인	Ppu-ssŭ Puin (Mrs. Boots?)
安聖敎	안성교	An Sŏng-gyo
日本音樂學校	일본음악학교	Ilbon Ŭmak Hakkyo (Japan Music School)
來靑閣	내청각	Naech'ŏng-gak
金在勳	김재훈	Kim Chae-hun
咸興	함흥	Hamhŭng
멘델쓴	멘델스존	Mendelssŭn (Mendelssohn)
桂貞植	계정식	Kye Chŏng-sik
우르즈부르그 음악학교	우르즈부르그 음악학교	Urŭjŭburŭgŭ Ŭmak Hakkyo (Würzburg Music School)
羅馬	나마	Roma (Rome)
다르비취, 케	다르비취, 케	Tarŭbwich'wi, K'e (Drebitsch, K?)
鄭昭君	정소군	Chŏng So-gun
마니라	마닐라	Manira (Manila)
安益泰	안익태	An Ik-t'ae
東京音樂學院	동경음악학원	Tonggyŏng Ŭmak Hagwŏn (Tokyo Music Academy)
延禧專門	연희전문	Yŏnhŭi Chŏnmun (Yonhui Professional School)
崇實專門	숭실전문	Sungsil Chŏnmun (Soongsil Professional School)
鄭友鉉	정우현	Chŏng U-hyŏn
咸希一	함희일	Ham Hŭi-il
金得泳	김득영	Kim Tŭk-yŏng
宋敬信	송경신	Song Kyŏng-sin
글리크럽	글리클럽	Kŭllik'ŭrŏp (Glee Club)
메일 코러쓰	메일 코러스	Meil K'orŏssŭ (Male Chorus)
聲友會	성우회	Sŏnguhoe
音樂家協會	음악가협회	Ŭmakka Hyŏphoe (Musicians' Association)

**Glossary**

樂壇人	악단인	People of the music world; musicians
漫評	만평	Rambling critique; critical essay with personal impressions
初意	초의	Initial intention
이왕이면	이왕이면	Since it's already started; while one is at it
악단	악단	Music scene; musical world
봉오리	봉오리	Bud (flower)
스테이지	스테이지	Stage (loanword)
오르고 내리는	오르고 내리는	Ascending and descending; appearing and disappearing (from the stage)
묵은 사람	묵은 사람	Old person; veteran
개념적	개념적	Conceptual
사회적	사회적	Social
집단적	집단적	Collective
未及	미급	Inadequate; lacking
오해	오해	Misunderstanding
念慮하여	염려하여	Being concerned about; fearing (older form)
민요	민요	Folk song
古樂	고악	Traditional music (lit. old music)
애상하는	애상하는	Cherishing; loving
개괄적으로	개괄적으로	Generally; broadly; outlining
기원	기원	Origin
유입	유입	Influx; introduction
멀리	멀리	Far back; distantly
하얏다고	하였다고	(He/She/They) did (older spelling/form of 하였다고)
現勢	현세	Current situation; present state
부	부	Department; section
회화	회화	Painting
문예	문예	Literature and arts
뒤떠러젓다고	뒤떨어졌다고	Lagged behind (older spelling/form of 뒤떨어졌다고)
활발한	활발한	Active; vigorous
보조	보조	Pace; step
교섭	교섭	Interaction; relations; negotiation
문화적	문화적	Cultural
평가	평가	Evaluation; assessment
온실	온실	Greenhouse; hothouse
화초	화초	Flowering plant
염가	염가	Low price; cheap
도락	도락	Amusement; pastime; pleasure
환락	환락	Merrymaking; pleasure
자기도취	자기도취	Self-intoxication; narcissism
境	경	State; realm; boundary
건전한	건전한	Healthy; sound
단언한다	단언한다	Declare; assert
까다라와진	까다로워진	Became complicated/thorny (older spelling)
화제	화제	Topic; subject of conversation
평	평	Critique; review; criticism
印象記	인상기	Impressionistic sketch/account
잡담	잡담	Idle chatter; gossip
보증치	보증치	Guarantee (older form, contraction of 보증하지)
비행기(를) 태우다	비행기를 태우다	To flatter excessively; put on a pedestal (idiom, lit. 'make someone ride an airplane')
굴엉	구렁	Pit; abyss (older spelling)
떠러치는	떨어뜨리는	Dropping; causing to fall (older spelling)
성큼 성큼	성큼 성큼	With long strides; briskly
넘어서는	넘어서는	Crossing over
훑어가는	훑어가는	Sweeping down; skimming through
인사	인사	Polite way; proper courtesy; greeting
불그러진	불거진	Bulging; protruding (older spelling)
이마	이마	Forehead
눈알	눈알	Eyeball
둥실거리며	둥실거리며	Rolling (eyes); floating lightly
처녀	처녀	Young woman; maiden; virgin
모기 소리	모기 소리	Mosquito(-like) sound; faint hum
뽑는다	뽑는다	Draws out; produces (a sound)
뱃달줄	뱃달줄	Ship's hawser; thick rope (likely 밧줄)
굵다란	굵다란	Thick; stout
음	음	Note; pitch
틀리는	틀리는	Being wrong; making a mistake
곁눈	곁눈	Sidelong glance
고처 한다	고쳐 한다	Corrects and does again (older spelling)
이이야말로	이이야말로	This very thing/person indeed (emphatic form)
사도	사도	Apostle
탕약	탕약	Herbal decoction
감초	감초	Licorice root (often used metaphorically for someone indispensable or appearing everywhere)
명가수	명가수	Famous singer
재작년	재작년	The year before last
퀄텟	퀄텟	Quartet (loanword)
테너-	테너	Tenor (loanword)
목소리가 쉬다	목소리가 쉬다	Voice becomes hoarse
말럿섯다	말랐었다	Had dried up (older spelling/form of 말랐었다)
제스추어	제스처	Gesture (loanword)
오이려	오히려	Rather; actually (older spelling)
단연	단연	Decidedly; definitely
양반	양반	Gentleman; person (colloquial, sometimes slightly archaic or teasing)
대다수	대다수	Vast majority
본시	본시	Originally; fundamentally
음보화	음보화	Transcription into musical notation
속요	속요	Folk song; popular song
공적	공적	Achievement; contribution
헤일 바다	헤아릴 바이다	Should be counted as (older form/spelling)
후배	후배	Junior; younger generation
참고	참고	Reference
씨웟을	쓰였을	Would have been used (older spelling/form of 쓰였을)
망녕	망령	Senility; delusion
잡소리	잡소리	Noise; useless talk; miscellaneous sounds
솜씨	솜씨	Skill; dexterity
동일	동일	Same
악희	악희	Mischief; prank
존재	존재	Existence; presence
맨도린	만돌린	Mandolin (loanword)
쉬파람	휘파람	Whistle (older spelling)
풀륫	플루트	Flute (loanword)
가르키든	가르치던	Who used to teach (older spelling)
하이카라	하이칼라	High collar; stylish; Westernized (loanword from Japanese ハイカラ)
잇섯든	있었던	Who existed; who was there (older spelling)
군소리	군소리	Unnecessary remark; digression
발전	발전	Development
과정	과정	Process
밟아가면서	밟아가면서	Following step-by-step; tracing (older form)
단계	단계	Step; stage; phase
잇게	있게	Having; possessing (older spelling)
동요	동요	Children's song
직역	직역	Direct translation
유행하며	유행하며	Being popular; prevailing
실리울 때	실릴 때	When it was published/featured (older passive form)
발표되자	발표되자	Upon being released/announced
기축	기축	Axis; cornerstone
귀어운	귀여운	Cute; charming (older spelling)
애상적	애상적	Sorrowful; melancholic; plaintive
기분	기분	Feeling; mood
정조	정조	Sentiment; mood; atmosphere
창작곡	창작곡	Original composition
방금	방금	Currently; right now
적막하든	적막하던	Which was desolate/lonely (older spelling)
성악가	성악가	Vocalist; singer
출현	출현	Appearance; emergence
경이	경이	Wonder; marvel
체격	체격	Physique; build
신경질적	신경질적	Nervous; neurotic
고음	고음	High note; high pitch
액썬트	액센트	Accent (loanword)
불만	불만	Dissatisfaction; complaint
오먕	모양	Appearance; seeming (older spelling/form)
발성	발성	Vocal production; vocalization
정확히	정확히	Accurately; precisely
음역	음역	Vocal range
테크닉	테크닉	Technique (loanword)
탁월한	탁월한	Excellent; outstanding
레가-토	레가토	Legato (loanword)
피아니씨모	피아니시모	Pianissimo (loanword)
창법	창법	Singing method/style
장기	장기	Specialty; forte
정열적	정열적	Passionate
작곡가	작곡가	Composer
촉망되다	촉망되다	To be promising; have high expectations placed upon one
작곡집	작곡집	Collection of compositions
기판	기판	Already published (旣刊)
발간준비	발간준비	In preparation for publication (發刊準備)
근간	근간	To be published soon (近刊)
내오놓아도	내어놓아도	Even if presented/put forward (older spelling)
부끄럽지	부끄럽지	Not shameful/embarrassing
싹아적가는	싹아져 가는	Budding; sprouting and growing (older spelling/form)
정서	정서	Emotion; sentiment; feeling
쌍벽	쌍벽	Twin pillars; pair of rivals/equals
성량	성량	Volume (of voice)
유하다	유하다	Soft; gentle (柔)
특장	특장	Special strength; forte
유감	유감	Regret; pity
최근	최근	Recently
선곡	선곡	Song selection
기량	기량	Skill; ability
천분	천분	Natural talent; gift (天分)
장중한	장중한	Solemn; dignified; weighty
체격	체격	Physique
남성적	남성적	Masculine
주제넘은	주제넘은	Presumptuous; impertinent
음색	음색	Timbre; tone color
바리톤	바리톤	Baritone (loanword)
악대	악대	Band; orchestra (樂隊)
합창대	합창대	Choir (合唱隊)
지휘자	지휘자	Conductor
활동	활동	Activity
출신	출신	Origin; background (often implies place of graduation/study)
재간	재간	Talent; skill
축음기	축음기	Phonograph; gramophone
배웟다지만	배웠다지만	Although (he) learned (older spelling)
지도	지도	Guidance; instruction
비전문가	비전문가	Non-professional; amateur
실력	실력	Actual skill; real ability
인기	인기	Popularity
장래	장래	Future
기대할 바	기대할 바	What is to be expected
반주	반주	Accompaniment
정평	정평	Established reputation
박자	박자	Tempo; meter; beat
우선	우선	First of all; primarily
자연 발성	자연 발성	Natural vocalization
지어내는 듯	지어내는 듯	Seeming artificial/fabricated
가성	가성	Falsetto
전도	전도	Future; prospects
지방색	지방색	Local color
명승	명승	Famous scenic spot
외국군가	외국군가	Foreign military song
곡조	곡조	Melody; tune
빌러서	빌려서	Borrowing (older spelling)
수치	수치	Shame; disgrace
레코-드	레코드	Record (phonograph) (loanword)
염소 소리	염소 소리	Goat's sound; bleating
움쳐들어간	움츠러든	Constricted; shrunken (older spelling)
변화	변화	Change; variation
무반주	무반주	Without accompaniment; a cappella
기념관	기념관	Memorial hall
독창법	독창법	Solo singing method
크다케	크다랗게	Largely; greatly (older spelling)
독창회	독창회	Solo recital
창가곡	창가곡	School song; anthem
음정	음정	Pitch; intonation
반주자	반주자	Accompanist
내종에는	나중에는	Eventually; in the end (older form)
자취를 감추다	자취를 감추다	To disappear without a trace
시험하다	시험하다	To test; try
이즈음	이즈음	Around this time; nowadays
유성기	유성기	Gramophone; phonograph
망국조	망국조	Tune of a ruined nation; decadent tune
가두	가두	Street (街頭)
몹시	몹시	Extremely; severely
진출한	진출한	Advanced; made inroads
여류가수	여류가수	Female singer
훌륭한	훌륭한	Excellent; splendid
천품	천품	Natural gifts; innate talent (天稟)
종말	종말	End; conclusion
사(死)의 찬미(讚美)	사의 찬미	Hymn of Death
취입	취입	Recording (audio)
작가	작가	Composer; writer (here likely composer)
유감	유감	Regret
현재	현재	Currently; present
이러타 할 만한	이렇다 할 만한	Worth mentioning; notable
세이기	세기가	Counting (older spelling)
가정인	가정인	Homemaker; family person
가석한	가석한	Regrettable; pitiful (可惜)
알토	알토	Alto (loanword)
풍부한	풍부한	Rich; abundant
벨, 칸토	벨칸토	Bel canto (loanword)
독특한	독특한	Distinctive; unique
충동	충동	Impulse; impact
발휘될	발휘될	To be displayed/demonstrated
천재	천재	Genius
공부	공부	Study; practice
아깝다	아깝다	Regrettable; pitifully wasted
마치고	마치고	Finishing; completing
모교	모교	Alma mater
귀국한지	귀국한지	Since returning to the country
고대하고	고대하고	Eagerly awaiting; anticipating
잇서도	있어도	Even though there is (older spelling)
형님	형님	Older brother/sister (here, older sister)
혈통적으로	혈통적으로	By bloodline; genetically
기념	기념	Commemoration
소푸라노	소프라노	Soprano (loanword)
상당한	상당한	Considerable; substantial
흥성치	흥성치	Not prosperous (contraction of 흥성하지)
자연	자연	Naturally; inevitably
세련되지 못한	세련되지 못한	Unrefined; unpolished
열	열	Passion; enthusiasm; heat
신뢰	신뢰	Trust; confidence
개인 교수	개인 교수	Private lessons
문과	문과	Liberal arts course
단닌다	다닌다	Attends (older spelling)
재낭스서	재롱스러이	Playfully; charmingly (likely related to 재롱)
스위-트	스위트	Sweet (loanword)
미음	미음	Beautiful voice (美音)
평	평	Reputation; review
콜로라투라 소푸라노	콜로라투라 소프라노	Coloratura soprano (loanword)
널리	널리	Widely
아직	아직	Still; yet
단련되지	단련되지	Not trained/disciplined
기타	기타	Etc.; and others
궁금하다	궁금하다	Curious; wondering
명성	명성	Star; celebrity (明星)
매끄러운	매끄러운	Smooth
가추가지엇으나	갖추었으나	Although endowed with (older spelling)
정진하엿으면	정진하였으면	If (she) had striven harder (older spelling)
공개된	공개된	Public; open
자리	자리	Place; venue
운택	윤택	Luster; gloss; polish
발탁되어	발탁되어	Being selected; chosen
교편을 잡다	교편을 잡다	To teach (lit. hold the teacher's pointer)
금추	금추	This autumn (今秋)
연주여행	연주여행	Performance tour
혜성	혜성	Comet
희미한	희미한	Faint; dim
떠오른다	떠오른다	Comes to mind; surfaces
기악	기악	Instrumental music
피아노	피아노	Piano (loanword)
풍금	풍금	Reed organ
이상	이상	More than; over
재주	재주	Talent; skill
칭찬	칭찬	Praise
덤으로	덤으로	As a bonus; in addition
빈한한	빈한한	Poor; destitute
설읍지	서럽지	Not sorrowful (older spelling)
소위	소위	So-called
영양	영양	Young lady (of high status) (令孃)
허영	허영	Vanity
텟테르	테텔	Label; certificate (perhaps German 'Zettel'?)
이르리서야	이르러서야	Reaching the point where (emphatic)
관계	관계	Relation; connection
피아니스트	피아니스트	Pianist (loanword)
本科	본과	Main course (of study)
졸업장	졸업장	Diploma
문제	문제	Issue; question; problem
내종에	나중에	Eventually; finally (older form)
증서	증서	Certificate
학무국	학무국	Bureau of Academic Affairs
종시	종시	Consistently; from beginning to end
거절하다	거절하다	To refuse
이유	이유	Reason
문관	문관	Civil official
패검	패검	Wearing a sword (佩劒)
무단정치	무단정치	Military rule
술회담	술회담	Reminiscence; recollection
생신	생신	Birthday (honorific)
어연	어연	Imperial banquet (御宴)
어전 연주	어전 연주	Performance before the Emperor (御前 演奏)
하사된	하사된	Bestowed (by a superior, esp. royalty)
금일봉	금일봉	Monetary gift (in an envelope) (金一封)
출연하야	출연하여	Appearing; performing (older spelling)
생긴	생긴	Earned; obtained
최고액	최고액	Highest amount
영광	영광	Honor
이래	이래	Since then
각방면	각방면	Various fields/quarters
존대	존대	Respect
대관	대관	High official
출입	출입	Visiting; frequenting
사교가	사교가	Socialite
취직자리	취직자리	Job position
입학	입학	School admission
청	청	Request; plea
끌려단니더니	끌려다니더니	Used to be dragged around (older spelling)
은인	은인	Benefactor
공로자	공로자	Person of meritorious service; contributor
간혹	간혹	Occasionally; sometimes
교내음악회	교내음악회	School concert
가정살림	가정살림	Household affairs; housekeeping
분주한	분주한	Busy
탓인지	탓인지	Whether it's due to; perhaps because of
스테-지	스테이지	Stage (loanword)
닥거 둔	닦아 둔	Polished; honed (older spelling)
퇴보	퇴보	Decline; regression
회합	회합	Meeting; gathering
애란민요곡	아일랜드 민요곡	Irish folk song (愛蘭民謠曲)
조용히	조용히	Quietly
가볍게	가볍게	Lightly
난숙하엿다	난숙하였다	Was mature/ripe (older spelling)
연령	연령	Age
다년	다년	Many years
경력자	경력자	Experienced person
학감	학감	Academic supervisor; dean (學監)
독주	독주	Solo performance
능숙한	능숙한	Proficient; skillful
감격하여	감격하여	Being deeply moved/excited
침착미	침착미	Composed beauty; calmness
낯닉은	낯익은	Familiar (face) (older spelling)
막 뒤	막 뒤	Backstage
무용	무용	Dance
광상곡	광상곡	Rhapsody
주법	주법	Playing style/technique (奏法)
숨어 잇음을	숨어 있음을	That is hidden (older spelling)
엳볼 수	엿볼 수	Can glimpse (older spelling)
돌보지	돌보지	Does not look after/care for
괴벽	괴벽	Eccentricity (怪僻)
집씨적	집시적	Gypsy-like
술	술	Alcohol
지도	지도	Guidance
기회	기회	Opportunity
졸업음악회	졸업음악회	Graduation concert
친우	친우	Close friend (親友)
평소	평소	Usually; ordinarily
곡	곡	Piece (of music)
공기	공기	Atmosphere
흡수하여	흡수하여	Absorbing
무난히	무난히	Smoothly; without difficulty
재능	재능	Talent
놀라지 않을 수 없다	놀라지 않을 수 없다	Cannot help but be surprised/amazed
지위	지위	Position; status
군소	군소	Numerous; many (群少 - likely means 群小, small group or many small...)
음악교원	음악교원	Music teacher
내 보낸다	내 보낸다	Sends out
환대하기에	환대하기에	To welcome warmly
미약하지	미약하지	Not faint/weak
자신	자신	Oneself; self
노력	노력	Effort
문제겟지	문제겠지	It must be a matter of (older spelling)
조수	조수	Assistant
연구 중	연구 중	In the midst of research/study
솜씨	솜씨	Skill; dexterity
작품	작품	Work; composition
요령	요령	Gist; main point
설어운	서러운	Sorrowful (older spelling)
묘사곡	묘사곡	Descriptive piece; program music
명년	명년	Next year (明年)
기술	기술	Technique; skill
비범하다	비범하다	Extraordinary; uncommon
첟 솜씨로	첫 솜씨로	With first attempt/skill (older spelling)
이해력	이해력	Comprehension ability
여가	여가	Spare time; leisure
여가	여기	Here? (餘技 seems intended: side skill, avocation)
대강한	대강한	Roughly done; attempted generally
관현악대	관현악대	Orchestra (管絃樂隊)
전혀	전혀	Entirely; completely
수련되엇을	수련되었을	Would have been trained/honed (older spelling)
터이니	터이니	Since it is expected that
귀국	귀국	Return to one's country
기둥	기둥	Pillar
우수한	우수한	Excellent
성적	성적	Results; grades
신진음악가	신진음악가	New/rising musician
소개	소개	Introduction
명수	명수	Virtuoso; master (名手)
대표되엇섯다	대표되었었다	Had been represented (older spelling)
뚜렷하다	뚜렷하다	Clear; distinct; outstanding
생명	생명	Life (force)
별문제	별문제	Separate issue
어렷을 때	어렸을 때	When young; in childhood (older spelling)
환경	환경	Environment
처지	처지	Circumstance; situation
가젓섯다는	가졌었다는	That (she) had (older spelling)
원래	원래	Originally; inherently
편발소녀	편발소녀	Girl with braided hair (編髮少女)
계단	계단	Steps; stages
능난할	능란할	Masterful; skillful (older spelling)
자랑	자랑	Pride; boast
남편	남편	Husband
더욱이	더욱이	Furthermore; moreover
활약	활약	Activity;活躍
전도	전도	Future prospects
축복되엿다	축복되었다	Was blessed (older spelling)
재직중	재직중	Currently employed
바이올린	바이올린	Violin (loanword)
군함 마-취	군함 마치	Warship March (loanword)
천연스러이	천연스레	Naturally; unaffectedly (older spelling)
만세전	만세전	Before the Manse Movement (1919)
대유행하야	대유행하여	Becoming hugely popular (older spelling)
중학생	중학생	Middle school student
보급된	보급된	Disseminated; spread
악기	악기	Musical instrument
경편하고	경편하고	Portable; convenient (輕便)
비교적	비교적	Relatively
값	값	Price; cost
손에 넣다	손에 넣다	To obtain; get one's hands on
기초	기초	Foundation; basis
당연한	당연한	Natural; expected
바이올리니스트	바이올리니스트	Violinist (loanword)
첟손	첫손	First hand; top place (older spelling)
꼽아야 할	꼽아야 할	Should count/choose
학우회	학우회	Alumni association; student association (學友會)
정구부	정구부	Tennis club (庭球部)
주최	주최	Sponsorship; hosting
동상	동상	Bronze statue
그린 듯이	그린 듯이	As if drawn/painted
독주하는	독주하는	Playing solo
수업하여	수업하여	Having studied
원숙하여	원숙하여	Becoming mature/accomplished
낭랑히	낭랑히	Clearly; resonantly
곱게	곱게	Beautifully; finely
균제된	균제된	Balanced; well-proportioned (均齊)
다정한	다정한	Affectionate; tender
매력	매력	Charm; attraction
경의	경의	Respect; reverence
표할	표할	To express
뵈어 줌이다	보여 줌이다	Is showing (older form)
청	청	Request
호	호	Pen name; alias (號)
알리워 진	알려진	Known (older passive form)
이론	이론	Theory
상식	상식	Common sense
이하	이하	Below; less than
유치한	유치한	Childish; puerile
계급의식	계급의식	Class consciousness
반박한	반박한	Refuted; argued against
염려	염려	Concern; worry
능한	능한	Skilled; proficient
쉽사리	쉽사리	Easily
해치운다	해치운다	Tosses off; handles easily
부단히	부단히	Constantly; unceasingly
양성	양성	Nurturing; training
세력	세력	Influence; power
중진	중진	Heavyweight; important figure (重鎭)
라켈	라켓	Racquet (loanword)
통	통	Case; container (筩)
엑싸이트	익사이트	Excitement; getting excited (loanword)
실패하다	실패하다	To fail
정진할	정진할	To strive; devote oneself
결점	결점	Flaw; shortcoming
절름발이	절름발이	Lame person (offensive term)
제금가	제금가	Violinist (提琴家 - lit. string instrument player)
널지	널리	Widely (older spelling)
알리워졋다	알려졌다	Became known (older spelling)
대곡	대곡	Major work; large piece (大曲)
망라하여	망라하여	Covering comprehensively
주법	주법	Playing style (奏法)
버릇	버릇	Habit
방면	방면	Field; area
완벽	완벽	Perfection
수련	수련	Training; practice; mastery (手練)
영역	영역	Domain; realm
가빈하여	가빈하여	Being poor (家貧)
뜻 같이	뜻같이	As desired
불우	불우	Misfortune; adversity
손실	손실	Loss
년소악인	연소악인	Young musician (年少樂人)
첟 독주회	첫 독주회	First solo recital (older spelling)
소학교	소학교	Elementary school
연마된	연마된	Polished; honed
기교적	기교적	Technical; virtuosic
효과	효과	Effect
쾌활한	쾌활한	Lively; cheerful
장기	장기	Forte; specialty
주의할	주의할	To pay attention to; be careful about
정성스러운	정성스러운	Sincere; earnest
태도	태도	Attitude
관중	관중	Audience
눈을 팔다	눈을 팔다	To let one's eyes wander; be distracted
숙련된	숙련된	Skilled; practiced
수완	수완	Skill; ability; finesse
교내	교내	Within the school
숙부	숙부	Uncle (paternal)
계제	계제	Steps; ladder; opportunity (階梯)
가추 가진	갖추 가진	Fully possessed (older spelling)
계속하여	계속하여	Continuously
수재	수재	Talented person; prodigy (秀才)
작하	작하	Last summer (昨夏)
들어온다고	들어온다고	Saying (he) was coming back (to Korea)
애용하든	애용하던	Cherished; frequently used (older spelling)
빌려까지	빌려까지	Even lending
인물	인물	Character; personality
아울러	아울러	Together with; as well
신임받앗다	신임받았다	Received trust/confidence (older spelling)
섭섭히	섭섭히	Regrettably; disappointingly
도동	도동	Crossing back to Tokyo (渡東)
조연	조연	Supporting performance/role
착실한	착실한	Solid; steady; diligent
외인	외인	Foreigner (外人)
결혼하여	결혼하여	Having married
년대	년대	Years ago; decade (年前)
약	약	Approximately
콘체르트	콘체르토	Concerto (loanword)
작곡	작곡	Composition
무조건하고	무조건하고	Unconditionally
방의	방의	Appreciation; respect (放意 - unusual term, context suggests positive meaning)
표해 좋을	표해도 좋을	Would be good to express
정당히	정당히	Properly; legitimately
동양인	동양인	East Asian
그곧	그곳	That place (older spelling)
이태리	이태리	Italy (伊太利)
관현악대	관현악대	Orchestra
반주	반주	Accompaniment
이미	이미	Already
구주	구주	Europe (歐洲)
과언	과언	Exaggeration
최고봉	최고봉	Highest peak; pinnacle
대가	대가	Master; great figure (大家)
강사	강사	Lecturer
지휘하고	지휘하고	Conducting
만장의 기염	만장의 기염	Immense spirit/vigor (萬丈의 氣焰)
뽑고 잇다	뽑고 있다	Is displaying/showing off (older spelling)
저울질하는	저울질하는	Weighing; judging
피눈물 나는	피눈물 나는	Blood-and-tear inducing; extremely arduous
찬사	찬사	Praise; compliment
동시에	동시에	At the same time
깊이 할	깊이 할	Will deepen
온후한	온후한	Gentle; good-natured
머지 않아	머지 않아	Soon; before long
열	열	Ranks; line (列)
군림할	군림할	Will reign over; dominate
밑는다	믿는다	Believe (older spelling)
잠간	잠깐	Briefly; for a moment (older spelling)
보증키는	보증하기는	Guaranteeing (older form)
일즉히	일찍이	Early on (older spelling)
여류제금가	여류제금가	Female violinist (女流提琴家)
소식	소식	News
묘연하다	묘연하다	Unknown; obscure
경묘한	경묘한	Light and nimble; skillful (輕妙)
첼리스트	첼리스트	Cellist (loanword)
단 한 사람	단 한 사람	Only one person
소개하련다	소개하련다	Intend to introduce (older form)
거이	거의	Almost (older spelling)
탁월한	탁월한	Outstanding; excellent
차 잇엇다	차 있었다	Was full of (older spelling)
이이	이이	This person (older form)
열	열	Passion; fervor
감격	감격	Deep emotion; being moved
첼로	첼로	Cello (loanword)
가치	가치	Value
기능	기능	Function; capability
원숙한	원숙한	Mature; accomplished
경	경	State; realm (境)
근공하는	근공하는	Working diligently (勤工)
개척되지	개척되지	Not be paved/pioneered
신뢰할	신뢰할	Trustworthy
지면	지면	Page space
허하지	허하지	Does not permit (contraction of 허락하지)
국체	국체	National structure/body (國體 - likely used incorrectly here, context suggests 'ensembles' or 'overall structure')
파묻어	파묻어	Burying
부득이	부득이	Unavoidably; inevitably
한 말로 하자면	한 마로 하자면	To put it briefly; in a word
진보됨	진보됨	Improvement; progress
잇음즉	있음직	Plausible; likely to exist (older spelling)
이상한	이상한	Strange; odd
비오라	비올라	Viola (loanword)
이기	이기	Performance skill; technique (演技?)
이채	이채	Unique feature; highlight (異彩)
우선	우선	First; primarily
칠 것	칠 것	Will count/mention
가물에 안개비	가물에 안개비	Misty rain during a drought (metaphor for something insufficient or unsatisfying)
안타깝고	안타깝고	Frustrating; regrettable
씨원치	시원치	Not satisfying/refreshing (older spelling)
볼 점	볼 점	Points worth seeing/noting
메일 코러쓰	메일 코러스	Male chorus (loanword)
꾸준하다	꾸준하다	Steady; consistent
혼성합창	혼성합창	Mixed chorus
양자	양자	Both parties/entities
인원문제	인원문제	Personnel issue; problem with numbers
건실타고는	건실하다고는	Cannot say it is robust/sound (older form)
충실한	충실한	Substantial; faithful; solid
코러쓰	코러스	Chorus (loanword)
권위	권위	Authority
망라되엇다는	망라되었다는	Said to encompass/include (older spelling)
조직	조직	Organization
당초	당초	Beginning; outset
의시되는	의심되는	Being doubted/questioned (older spelling?)
공약햇든	공약했던	Which was promised (older spelling)
금월 말	금월 말	End of this month
성실한	성실한	Sincere; faithful
바란다	바란다	Hope; wish
서툴은	서투른	Clumsy; unskilled (older spelling)
망언	망언	Rash words; thoughtless remarks (妄言)
용서키를	용서하기를	Asking forgiveness (older form)
각필한다	각필한다	Lay down the pen; conclude writing (擱筆)


---------------------------


잡지명	동광 제22호
발행일	1931년 06월 01일
기사제목	半島 樂壇人 漫評
필자	洪鍾仁
기사형태	문예평론

半島 樂壇人 漫評
						洪鍾仁
머리말
半島의 봄에 새로 피는 악단의 꽃을 거두어 보겟다는 것이 이 붓을 들려든 初意엿으나 이왕이면 하필 이 봄의 악단에 한하랴. 半島의 악단 그것이 아직 봄도 일은 봄에 서릿발 덮인 굳은 땅 속에서 간신히 머리를 들고 잇는 셈이라면 새삼스러이 꽃이니 봉오리니 열매니 골을 것 없이 「스테이지」에 오르고 내리는 묵은 사람 새 사람들을 한꺼번에 들어 논해 보는 것도 좋은 듯 하다.

그러면 내가 그려보려는 樂壇과 樂人의 범위는 어느 정도의 것이냐 하는 것을 말해 둘 필요가 잇을 것이다. 간단히 악단이란 개념적 해설을 붙인다면 음악인의 사회적 집단적 존재이라 할까. 용어에 未及한 점이 잇을는지 모르나 이만큼 말해 둘 수도 잇음즉 하다. 그러면 樂人이란 범위는? 말하자면 李東伯인들 李花中仙인들 아무리 시장의 상품적 행세를 한다고 해도 樂人임은 틀림 없을 것이다. 그러나 내가 여기에 말하고저 하는 樂人은 악단을 구성하는 樂人―좀 더 구체적 조건을 짓자면 서양음악 그 범주 內의 樂人을 말하는 것이 악단이란 이름을 그릇치지 않는 온당한 방편일까 한다. (만일의 오해를 念慮하여 나도 朝鮮의 민요, 古樂, 무용 등의 예술적 가치를 인정하고 애상하는 한 사람인 것을 말해 둔다)

그러고 半島 樂壇의 형태를 개괄적으로 간단히 한 마디 하고 싶다. 樂壇의 기원―서양음악의 유입을 멀리 耶穌敎의 수입에서 시작하얏다고 볼 것이다. 그런데 그 발전과정과 現勢로 보아 같은 예술부 내의 회화나 문예에 비하여 그리 뒤떠러 젓다고도 할 수 없으나 결고 활발한 발전적 보조를 못 가진 것만은 사실이다. 일반 사회생활과의 교섭과 문화적 평가로서의 악단은 아직 온실 내의 화초라고 말할까... 한 마디 더 붙여 말하자면 우리의 악단은 음악이 廉價의 道樂이나 歡樂의 대상에서 벗어나고 또 악인들이 자기도취의 境을 벗어나지 못하는 한에는 좀 더 건전한 발전을 못 볼 것이다. 이러케 나는 단언한다.
이아기가 좀 까다라와진 듯 하다. 그런데 화제에 들어가기 전에 말하여 둔다. 이 글이 평이 될는지, 印象記가 될는지, 잡담이 될는지, 여기까지 써 가는 나도 보증치 못하겟다는 것이다. 그러고 혹 가다가 비행기도 태우고 천길 만길 굴엉에도 떠러치는 일이 잇을는지 모른다. 어쨋든 듣고 본 사람으로 기억에 남은 사람들에 관해서 될 수 잇는대로 한 마디씩 성큼 성큼 뛰어가면서 해 보련다.

却說, 그러면 어느 길로부터 들어갈가. 貞洞 고개부터 넘어서는 것이 좋을 듯 하나 길에는 순서가 잇으니 南大門 안 ＜36＞ 太平通부터 내려 훑어가는 것이 인사일 듯 하다.

金仁湜氏  半번대 툭 불그러진 이마에 크다란 검은 눈알을 둥실거리며 은근히 貞洞讚揚隊 맨 뒷줄에 서 잇다. 손녀? 같은 17, 8세의 梨花專門 處女兒들이 앞에 서서 명주실 같은 모기 소리를 뽑고 잇을 때 혼자(두 세 명의 한 파-트는 잇으나) 뱃달줄 같은 굵다란 소리를 뽑는다. 그러다가 어떠케 음이 틀리는 일이 잇으면 (어느 연습 때의 일)새 없는 처녀들이 돌아본다. 선생님은 곁눈도 안 파고 다시 고처 한다. 이이야말로 우리 악단에는 使徒같은 樂人일 것이다. 15, 6년 전 음악회라면 湯藥의 감초같은 名歌手이엇다.

金亨俊氏  역시 太平通의 한 사람, 감초 같은 사람. 再昨年엔가 청년회서 「퀄텟」에 나온 「테너-」의 그는 완전히 목소리가 쉬이고 말럿섯다. 벌서 나이가 나이니까. 그리고 年前 公會堂에서 貞信코러쓰 「오! 伊太利 내 사랑」을 지휘하는 것을 보앗다. 노래보다는 그의 「제스추어」가 오이려 활기 잇지 안엇든가. 이제는 「테너-」金亨俊 선생보다 「피아니스트」金元福 女史의 아버지로서 단연 더 유명할 것이다.

李尙俊氏  서점에 가면 曰 무슨 唱歌集 曰 무슨 集, 曰, 曰이 많다. 아마 朝鮮의 음악출판물로서는 이 兩班의 것이 대다수일 것이다. (본시 적은 중에) 그 중에는 불완전하나마 音譜化된 朝鮮俗謠集 類는 확실히 그의 공적의 하나로 헤일 바다. 후배에게 참고로라도 씨웟을 것은 물론, 그의 노력을 적다 할 수 없다. 그러나 이 양반이 무슨 망녕에서 나온 것인지 더러운 잡소리를 모아 출판까지 한 것은 「中等某學校 唱歌集」을 만든 이의 솜씨라고는 동일에 論할 수 없는 惡戱일 것이다. 그러나 지난 날의 한 존재로는 남을 사람이다.

太平通 길을 거처 가든 길이니 지금은 악단에서 이아기할 사람은 아니나 옛날에 梨花學堂 건너 편 培材學堂에서 「맨도린」에 쉬파람 불며 또 「풀륫」불며 唱歌 가르키든 하이카라 선생님 崔東俊氏가 잇섯든 것도 기억에 남앗다.

(써 내려가든 중간에 군소리 같으나 악단의 발전 과정을 밟아가면서 樂人들도 階段잇게 찾아보는 것이 좋을 듯 싶지만 그리자면 일이 크게 되니 생각나는 대로 순서 없이 써내려 가련다)

尹克榮氏  벌서 朝鮮을 떠난 지 3, 4년 되는 듯 싶다. 모르거니와 「푸른 하늘 銀河水」라는 동요 「반달」은 잘 알면서도尹克樂이라는 이름을 기억치 못하는 사람이 많을 줄 안다. 벌서 6, 7년 전 日本 童謠의 直譯이 많이 유행하며 어린이들의 잡지에 동요곡이 많이 실리울 때 이 노래가 한번 발표되자 크게 유행하엿다. 확실히 어떤 때는 「푸른하늘」의 시대를 지엇섯든 것이다. 애상적 기분을 많이 가진 이 노래는 다소 일본식 정조가 없지는 않으나 창작곡으로 동요 작곡에 한 기축을 지은 귀어운 노래다. 氏는 방금 間島 龍井村 某 學校에 잇다.

安基永氏  적막하든 우리 악단에 남자 성악가로의 그의 출현은 확실히 악단의 경이이엇다. 체격이 좀 적고 생김이 신경질적인 점과 강한 고음에 「액썬트」가 좀 끼인 점으로 일부에서는 다소 불만을 가지는 이도 잇는 오먕이다. 그러나 발성에 정확히 자리를 잡앗고 音域이 넓고 「테크닉」이 탁월한 점 等으로 그를 따르는 이가 아직 없을 것이다. 「레가-토 피아니씨모」의 창법은 특히 그가 장기로 하는 것이겟다. 그러고 정열적이다. ＜37＞ 가수로서 뿐 아니라 근래 작곡가로서 촉망되는 바 또 크다. 그의 작곡집 1집(旣刊)과 2집(發刊準備) 朝鮮民謠集(近刊)等은 우리들의 노래로 선진국 악단에 내오놓아도 조금도 부끄럽지 않을 것이다. 싹아적가는 우리의 정서를 완전히 살리엇다. 米國서 돌아오면서 梨花專門 音樂科 교수로 잇다.

玄濟明氏  安基永氏와 같이 테너 가수로 우리 악단의 쌍벽이다. 聲量이 비교적 풍부하고 柔한 것이 特長이나 「테너」로서는 다소 音域이 좁은 것이 유감이다. 최근은 못 들엇으므로 여러 가지 말할 수는 없으나 延專音樂會 때와 其外 몇 번 들엇을 때 번번히 그의 선곡이 그리 좋은 것이 없어 그의 기량을 알 수 없엇다. 그런데 작년 5월 「모리쓰 홀」에서 外人側 주최로 열리엇든 음악제에 비로소 그의 가진 天分을 다 맛볼 수 잇엇다. 장중한 그의 소리는 그의 체격과 같이 남성적이엇다. 주제넘은 말 같지만 그의 음색은 「테너-」보다는 「바리톤」에 가깝지 않을까? 延專樂隊와 延專合唱隊의 지휘자로 그의 활동은 실로 크다. 역시 米國 出身.

李寅善氏  「세부란쓰」에서 의사 공부를 하면서 축음기로 많이 배웟다는 재간 많은 테너 가수다. (부츠 부인에게도 지도를 받고 한때는 安基永氏 한데도 배웟다지만) 음이 퍽 곱다. 어느 해 가을이엇든가 公會堂에서 전문학교 음악대회에 「헨델」의 「라르고」와 또 「리고렛」을 듣든 기억이 깊다. 비전문가이나 실력 이상의 인기를 가진 가수로 그의 장래는 기대할 바 많다. 그러나 지금 세부란쓰 병원 의사로 잇는 그가 어느 정도까지나 더 음악 전문을 할는지.

權泰浩氏  日本 어느 음악학교를 나온 테너. 平壤서 「그리익」의 「쏠베지」노래를 들엇다. (이 노래는 「쏘푸라노」가 할 노래로 생각된다) 반주는 정평 잇는 崇專 「말쓰버리」 교수이엇는데 박자조차 틀리엇섯다. 그리고 음색이 우선 사람의 자연 발성을 떠나서 지어내는 듯 하엿다. 고음은 모두 「피아니씨모」로 하는 모양이나 오이려 가성에 가까웟다. 다시 日本 유학 간다는 말을 들엇으나 前途가 잇기를 바란다.

車載鎰氏  平壤서 이름이 높다. 그만큼 노래를 해온 사람으로 더구나 지방색을 내이려는 「모란봉 歌」(平壤 名勝)에 外國軍歌 曲調를 빌러서 한다는 것은 수치라 하겟다. 최근에 그의 노래를 「레코-드」로 들으니 「염소」소리 같이 목이 움쳐들어간 소리로 들렷다. 그러므로 음의 변화가 없을 것은 물론.

鄭淳哲氏  언젠가 天道敎紀念館에서 무반주로 동요를 하는 것을 들엇다. 그러나 그것으로 이를 성악가라고 할 수 없다. 아직 음악가인지 작곡가인지 성악가인지 모르나 음악을 아는 사람, 음악을 가르키는 사람으로 얌전한 同德女高普 선생님인 줄 기억한다.

언젠가 每日申報에 「독창법」이라 하고 크다케 쓴 蔡奎燁이란 이름을 보앗다. 年前 靑年會舘에서 독창회를 한다기에 갓더니 소학교 창가곡 같은 곡에 음정을 바로 못 잡앗다. 반주자(獨孤璇氏)가 내종에는 자취를 감추니 「무반주로는 못 하느냐 하는 것이 음악가 간에 한 문제가 되엇소, 그러면 한번 시험하겟소.」하든 것을 보앗다. 그때 그 사람 이즈음 유성기에 亡國調 「아리랑」가수로 가두에 몹시 진출한 것도 한 사실.

남자 가수들은 이만하고 여류 가수를 들어보자. 여류가수! 故 尹心德孃이 생각난다. 확실히 그는 훌륭한 天稟을 가지엇섯다. 그러나 종말의 「死의 讚美」만은 계획적 「취입」이엇는지는 모르나 음악가로서의 선곡도 작가도 아니엇다. 讚美못할 것을 남기고 간 것이 ＜38＞ 유감이다.

朴慶姬 女史  현재 朝鮮 內에 잇는 여류가수라고 이러타 할 만한 사람을 세이기 어려운 중에서 女史가 家庭人으로 「스테-지」에 나타나지 않는다는 것은 퍽 可惜한 감을 준다. 「알토」로 그 풍부한 성량이며 「벨, 칸토」의 창법 등 독특한 것이엇다. 上海서 갖 돌아왓을 때 한번 들려준 독창회는 악단에 큰 충동을 주엇섯다고 생각한다. 발휘될 天才와 工夫가 다 아깝다.

尹聖德孃  梨花를 마치고 米國 갓다 와서 모교 음악과 교수로 잇다. 전공은 성악. 그런데 귀국한지 벌서 3년 되나 보다. 그러나 이때나 저때나 하고 고대하고 잇서도 아직 그의 아름다운 소리를 안 들려준다.(그의 형님이 心德氏 이엇으니 물론 혈통적으로 좋은 목소리를 가졋겟지) 6월에 결혼식을 한다니 아나 그때나 기념으로 독창회를 열라는지.

崔命順 女史  소푸라노 가수로 상당한 실력을 가진 분이다. 악단이 흥성치 못하여 이런 분들이 자주 나오지 못하게 되면 자연 天分을 버리게 될 것이다. 아직 세련되지 못한 점도 없지 아나 보이나 熱 잇는 좋은 목소리로 자신잇게 부른다. (악을 쓴다고 하는 사람도 잇으나)발성도 좋다. 神戶 關西音樂學院인가를 나왓다고 들엇다.

金顯順孃  安基永氏에게 개인 교수를 받는 중에 다시 음악을 전문할 생각을 가지고 금년 梨花 文科를 마치고 다시 음악과에 단닌다. 그만큼 天禀도 타고낫고 그도 자신을 가진 모양이다. 사실 그 소리는 퍽 곱다. 어린아이들이 재낭스서 부르는 듯한 「스위-트」한 목소리다. 아직 학생이나 그의 美音은 이미 評이 잇다. 앞으로 「콜로라투라 소푸라노」로 名歌手의 이름을 널리 할 것을 믿는다.

崔命淑 女史  작년 中央保育을 나온 귀어운 목소리를 가진 「소푸라노」다. 아직 단련되지 못하엿섯으나 교내 음악회 기타 두어 번 들엇을 때 인상이 깊다. 그러나 그동안 어떠케 되엇는지 궁금하다.

金磐石孃  平壤 南山峴讚揚隊 中의 明星같이 빛나는 한 사람이다. 알맞은 성량에 은실같이 매끄러운 음, 天分은 가추가지엇으나 아직 가수로서의 세련이 부족할 뿐, 좀 더 정진하엿으면 확실히 기대할 바 클 것이다.

鄭薰模 女史  아직 朝鮮에서 (平壤 以外)공개된 자리에 나타나지 않은 명가수다. 平壤 女高普를 마치고 日本 가기 전에 몇 번 들엇다. 기운찬 맑은 목소리를 가지엇섯다. 高普에 올라가서 더 潤澤하엿다. 「명가수」로 촉망되든 그가 日本 건너가서 國立高等音樂學院에 籍을 두엇다가 帝國音樂學院으로 옮아서 今春 졸업하자 곳 모교에 발탁되어 교편을 잡고 잇다. 今秋에는 演奏旅行을 할 터이라니 실로 우리 악단에 새로 나타나는 慧星일 것이다.

여류가수로 6, 7년 전에 듣든 韓琦柱 女史며 金永淑孃의 기억도 희미한 중에 떠오른다.

가수들은 그만큼 널어놓고 器樂으로 넘어가 우선 「피아노」로부터 찾아가기로 하자. 풍금만 해도 좀 나올 것이나 1,000원 이상은 주어야 쓸만 하다는 「피아노」이니 학교에서나 재주 잇다고 칭찬을 덤으로 받앗단들 「피아노」를 가질 수 없고 가까이 할 기회도 없는 貧寒한 천재들이야 설읍지 않으랴. 더구나 소위 令孃들의 허영의 대상. 결혼의 일종 「텟테르」가 되는 매 이르리서야 이런 관계로 「피아니스트」가 적은 듯도 하다. ＜39＞

金永煥氏  「피아니스트」로서는 우리 악단의 길을 열은 사람이다. 朝鮮人으로 東京音樂學校 本科를 나온 이가 이 사람 혼자 뿐인 줄 기억한다. 그가 학교를 졸업할 때 정식으로 졸업장을 주느냐 마느냐 하는 것이 문제가 되엇섯다 한다. 그러고 내종에 증서를 주면서 總督府 學務局에 잇으라고 굳게 권하엿으나 그는 終始 거절하엿다 한다. 이유가 「우리 음악가―예술가는 검을 찰 사람이 아니다」라는 것이엇다고 (당시는 文官도 佩劒하든 長谷川武斷政治時代)그는 말한다. 그러고 그의 述懷談 또 한 가지―학교를 나오든 그 해의 高宗帝生辰御宴이 石造殿에서 열리엇을 때 그가 御前 演奏를 하엿다. 이것이 피아노 御前 演奏가 처음이 아니엇을까 한다. 그러고 하사된 金一封이 일금 3,000圓也라. 그가 출연하야 돈 생긴 처음이요 마지막일 최고액일 영광을 가졋다고 한다. 그는 이래 「피아니스트」로 각방면의 많은 존대를 받아 왓다. 더구나 일본인측 말하자면 대관 집 출입이 더 많앗다. 이제는 오이려 음악 사교가라고 하는 편이 나을 것이다. 어느 편으로는 취직자리나 학교 입학의 請을 대도 꽤 잘 된다는 말이 잇다. 한 때는 소나 말 같이 음악회마다 東鄕으로 끌려단니더니 지금 淑明한 곧만 선생으로 잇다. 樂界의 은인같은 공로자.

鄭愛息 女史  梨花專門 音樂科 교수로 잇으면서 간혹 교내음악회에나 나올 뿐, 가정살림이 분주한 탓인지. 스테-지 우에서는 좀처럼 볼 수 없다. (그 모양으로 지난다면 이미 닥거 둔 기량도 퇴보 않으리라고 누가 보증할까. 이 분뿐 아니라) 재작년 가을엔가 梨花 강당에서 열리엇든 조그마한 會合에서 그의 愛蘭民謠曲을 조용히 들엇다. 가볍게 들리는 그의 음은 퍽 爛熟하엿다. 연령이 벌서 36, 7되지 않는지.

獨孤璇氏  오늘 와서는 그도 좀 해서 「스테이지」에 안 나설 것이다. 벌서 그 앞에 배운 사람들(그 級)이 그 이상 진보 하엿으니까. 여학교 선생으로 다년 경력자이다. 지금은 中央保育 學監이라고 들엇다.

金永義孃  梨專 音樂科를 나온지 3년? 퍽 실력 잇다고 한다. 독주보다는 반주하는 것을 많이 보앗다. 그만하면 퍽 능숙한 줄만은 믿으나 스테이지에서 좀 더 감격하여 보이는 듯한 침착미가 적어 보인다. 기량이 좋은 까닭인지.

高鳳京孃  역시 반주자로 中央樂友會를 중심으로 오래 전부터 일반에게 낯닉은 사람이다. 梨花 出身. 이번 米國 간다니 더 많이 배워 올 줄 믿는다.

李光俊氏  기량으로서 이만하면 상당할 줄 안다. 연극장 막 뒤에서 (崔承喜 舞踊 헝거리안의 狂想曲)하는 것에도 그의 奏法에는 퍽 정열이 숨어 잇음을 엳볼 수 잇엇다. 그러나 누가 그를 돌보지 안는다. 천재적 怪僻에서 나온 것인지 그의 새활은 「집씨」적이다. 다만 아는 것은 피아노와 술? 뿐. 平壤서 光成高普時代부터 시작하야 延專서 金永煥氏에게 지도를 받고 日本도 갓섯든 듯 하다. 그가 좀 더 기회를 만들엇으면.

白玉贊孃  금년 梨花 音樂科 출신 졸업음악회에서 그가 연주란 「문라이트 쏘나타」는 해마다 듣든 중 가장 좋앗다 한다. (親友 崔虎永氏 말) 그때 나는 못 들엇으나 평소 반주하는 것을 보아도 곳 곡의 전체의 공기를 흡수하여 가지고 무난히 하는데 그의 재능에 놀라지 않을 수 없다.

梨花音樂專門學이라는 지위에 잇는 만큼 群少音樂家(음악교원?)를 해마다 몇 명씩은 내 보낸다. ＜40＞ 그러나 해마다 나오는 그들이 다 어대로 가는지. 물론 朝鮮이 아직 그들을 환대하기에 너무 부족한 바도 잇겟지만 그들이 다녀가는 자취가 樂壇的으로 너무도 미약하지 않은가. 자신으로서의 노력 문제겟지. 작년 출신으로 모교 조수로 잇다는 이가曺恩卿, 林性義孃 等이 잇어 연구 중이라 한다. 그러고 금년 출신으로 蔡善葉, 李順永, 이런 이들도 퍽 재간 잇는 솜씨를 가졋다고 한다. 또 朴順德孃의 졸업작품 「사촉도」 노래는 간결하게 요령을 잡은 설어운 描寫曲이엇다. 그러고 明年 졸업 朴賢淑, 金信福孃, 이 두 사람의 실력이 또 놀랍다.

朴慶浩氏  「피아니스트」로 이이를 잊을 수 없다. 기술이 비범하다. 어떤 곡이든지 첟 솜씨로 어렵지 않게 쉬이 해치운다. 이해력이 풍부하다. 그 외에 餘技가 음악으로 이것저것 안하는 것이 없고 그림도 그리고 문학도하고 운동도 햇고 대강한 것으로 못하는 것이 없는 사람이다. 崇專을 마치고 南京金陵大學으로―京城으로―(中央樂友會의 管絃樂隊는 전혀 氏의 노력으로 된 것이다) 방금 米國留學 中 금년 졸업하고 明年 梨花로 나온다고 들엇다. 그 동안 퍽 수련되엇을 터이니 그의 귀국은 梨花의 새 빛이 되고 우리 악단의 한 기둥이 될 줄 안다.

金元福 女史  작년 東京 國立高等音樂學院에서 우수한 성적으로 나온 이 분을 잊어서는 안 된다. 작년 졸업기 讀賣新聞社 주최이든 신진음악가 소개 음악회(高等音樂學院에서 6명, 上野에서 6명)에 모교의 피아노 名手로 대표되엇섯다. 그만큼 그의 실력은 뚜렷하다. 대개 음악가의 생명은 天分 곳 기술문제다. 그러므로 성악은 별문제로 하고 器樂에 들어서 「피아노」나 「바요린」은 더구나 어렷을 때 가정에서부터 시작하여야 한다. 그러나 여러 가지로 이러한 환경을 가지기 어려운 처지에 잇는 朝鮮人 中에서 金女史가 음악가 아버지(金亨俊氏)를 가젓섯다는 것은 큰 행복이엇다. 원래 천재가 잇어 編髮少女 때부터 그 아버지의 반주를 하든 그가 階段을 밟아서 좋은 선생의 지도를 받앗으니 기술이 능난할 것은 물론이다. 그는 우리 악단의 자랑이 될 만한 지위에 잇다. 아직 그가 젊고 또 같은 음악가(바이올리니스트 洪性裕氏)를 남편으로 가졋다는 것이 더욱이 「피아니스트」로서의 그의 활약의 길을 넓히게 할 것이니 그의 前途는 실로 축복되엿다. 방금 貞信女學校에 在職中.

―「바이올린」으로 넘어 가 보자. 1920년경만 해도 음악회에서 소위 「軍艦 마-취」等을 천연스러이 하엿다. 그러고 萬歲前만 해도 「바이올린」이란 것이 보기 드물든 것이 그 후 대유행하야 이제는 중학생 중에서도 상당히 잘 하는 사람이 잇다. 널리 보급된 이유로는 악기가 輕便하고 비교적 적은 값으로도 손에 넣을 수 잇다는 편도 잇겟으나 원래 피아노와 같이 악기 중에 기초가 될 만한 것이라 당연한 보급일 것이다.

蔡東鮮氏  현재 朝鮮 안에 잇는 「바이올리니스트」로는 기술가로, 예술가로 첟손을 꼽아야 할 사람이겟다. 약 9년 전 東京 明治會舘에서 열렷든 學友會 庭球部 主催의 음악회에서 (早大時代) 눈을 감고 동상과 같이 그린 듯이 서서 독주하는 그의 인상이 아직 깊이 남아 잇다. 그 후 獨逸가서 수업하여 온 그의 기술은 더 원숙하여 왓다. 한 음 한 음이 모두 朗朗히 곱게 내는 그의 均齊된 음색은 다정한 매력을 가지엇다. 그러고 그를 예술가로 경의를 표할 것은 그의 연주가 모두 아름다운 음악적 정서를 뵈어 줌이다. 請에 의하여 天分 잇는 사람에게는 개인 교수도 한다고 한다.

洪蘭坡氏  永厚라기 보다 蘭破라는 號가 더 널리 알리워 진 사람, 악단에서 벌서 오랜 사람이다. 얼마 전 그의 글을 보니 ＜41＞  의학을 마저 햇드면 의학박사 하나는 되엇을 것이엇고... 신문 편집국 국장도 되엇을 것이고... 등등 무엇무엇 「되엇을 것」이 많앗든 만큼 다방면으로 자신을 많이 가진 사람이다. 작곡도 상당히 多作, 兼하여 이론도 한다. 그러나 상식 이하의 유치한 이론(東亞報上의 「음악과 계급의식」?에 대하여서는 그 유치의 一面을 약간 반박한 사람이 잇으므로 더 말 안는다)으로는 그의 평가가 떠러질 염려조차 없지 않다. 바이올린 기술만은 능한 사람, 어떤 때의 연주는 「이런 곡쯤이야」하는 듯이 쉽사리 해치운다. 개인교수로 많은 제자를 가졋고 지금도 부단히 후배양성에 많은 노력을 하여 악단 세력을 가지게 된 만큼 우리 악단에서는 重鎭이다.

崔虎永氏  「라켈」과 바이올린 筩을 들고 醫學을 다니다가 東京 東洋音樂을 마친 사람. 이이는 「스테이지」의 연주는 번번히 「엑싸이트」에서 실패한다고 하나 개인교수로 잘 가르킨다는 이름이 잇는 사람이다. 기술도 상당하다고 하나 음악가로서 精進할 熱이 없는 것이 큰 결점.

安炳玿氏  「절름발이」소년 천재 提琴家로 이름이 널지 알리워졋다. 大曲을 網羅하여 독주회를 열엇든 것이 벌서 15세 때(?)이엇다. 그의 奏法에는 다소 고쳐야 할 버릇이 잇다고 그 방면 사람들의 평이 잇으나 그의 완벽에 갓가운 手練은 놀랄 만하다. 기술로는 당당한 영역에 들어가 잇다. 연주는 끝까지 정열적이다. 그러나 家貧하여 뜻 같이 더 수업치 못하여 天才를 충분히 발휘치 못하는 그의 不遇는 악단 손실이라 않을 수 없다.

鄭正淳氏 年少樂人으로 安君과 같이 상당한 기량을 가졋다. 今春 첟 독주회를 「모리쓰, 홀」에서 들엇다. 소학교 시대부터 시작하여 현재도 「뿌-쓰」부인의 지도를 받고 잇는 만큼 연마된 솜씨는 기교적 효과를 많이 나타내엇다. 쾌활한 곡이 좀 더 長技인 모양. 그에게 한 가지 주의할 것은 「스테이지」우에서 좀 더 정성스러운 태도를 가지고 관중에게 눈을 팔지 말 것.

洪性裕氏  작년 東京 高等音樂學院을 나온 상당히 숙련된 수완을 가진 교내 대표적 名手엿다. 그의 숙부 되는 洪蘭坡氏 밑에서 어렷을 때부터 시작하엿고 이어서 階梯를 밟아서 음악학교를 다닌 기회를 가추 가진 사람이다. 그러고 계속하여 아직도 東京서 연구중이라니 앞으로 그의 天才는 마음껏 발휘될 줄 믿는다.

安聖敎氏  작년 東京 日本音樂學校를 나온 수재. 昨夏 독주회를 열려³  朝鮮 들어온다고 해서 그의 선생(日本人)이 그가 애용하든 提琴을 빌려까지 주엇든 만큼, 그의 기량과 인물이 아울러 신임받앗다. 그러나 섭섭히 독주회를 열을 기회를 못 가지고 다시 渡東하엿다. 來靑閣에서 어떤 이의 助演을 한번 하엿는데 착실한 奏法을 보여주엇다.

金在勳氏  獨逸서 外人과 결혼하여 가지고 年前에 한 번 들어 왓든 咸興人. 독주회에서 약 40분간의 「멘델쓴」의 「콘체르트」와 자기의 작곡 등을 들려 주엇는데 그만큼 그의 실력은 상당한 영역에 들어 갓을 것으로 생각한다. 물론 大曲 難曲만을 하엿다고 무조건하고 경의를 표할 것은 못 된다고 해도 그가 노력하어온 자취만은 충분히 放意를 표해 좋을 것이다.

桂貞植氏  東京 東洋音樂을 마치고 獨逸 건너간지 벌서 8년. 동양인으로 그곧 음악학교를 정당히 졸업한 첟 사람이라 한다. ＜42＞ 「우르즈부르그」음악학교를 마치고 獨逸樂壇에서 독주회를 한지도 벌서 3년 전이엇고 伊太利 羅馬에서 5, 60명의 관현악대 반주로 독주를 한 일도 잇어 이미 歐洲樂壇 한 존재라고 하여도 과언이 아닐 것이다. 年前 獨逸 신문의 評을 보아도 「예술의 최고봉에 섯다」고 단언하야 기술가로, 예술가로 大家의 영역에 서 잇음을 말하엿다. 현재는 同校의 강사로 잇으면서 同 學校 관현악을 지휘하고 잇어 「다르비취, 케」라는 이름으로 朝鮮人을 대표하야 萬丈의 氣焰을 뽑고 잇다. 세계의 樂人을 저울질하는 音樂國 獨逸에서 그가 그만한 지위에 서 잇다는 것이야말로 그가 오늘까지 피눈물 나는 노력을 쌓아 왓다는 점에 12分의 찬사를 보내는 동시에 朝鮮의 세계 존재를 깊이 할 한 사람으로 경의를 표하여 좋을 것이다. 아직 28세의 溫厚한 청년으로 머지 않아 세계적 樂人의 列에 서서 동양에 군림할 것을 밑는다. 어떠면 今秋에 잠간 朝鮮을 다녀간다고도 전하나 보증키는 어렵다.

鄭昭君 女史  일즉히 上海 「마니라」로 다니며 공부하여온 朝鮮의 단 한 사람이든 女流提琴家. 지금 어대 잇는지 악단에서는 소식이 묘연하다. 輕妙한 그의 奏法은 퍽 고왓섯다고 기억한다.

「바이올린」하는 사람은 퍽 많으나 이만하고 끝으로 「첼리스트」로 단 한 사람인 安益泰氏를 소개하련다.

安益泰氏  작년 東京音樂學院 졸업은 거이 조선사람으로 대표햇다고 할 만치 탁월한 우리 젊은 樂人으로 차 잇엇다. 곳 金元福, 洪性裕, 安氏 等, 이이의 연주는 열과 감격에 차 잇다. 「첼로」의 악기의 가치를 처음 조선에 소개한 사람이라고 할 만치 그의 기량을 「첼로」가 가진 기능을 충분히 보여줄 만큼 원숙한 境에 들어 갓다. 방금 米國 유학중인데 그만한 熱을 가지고 勤工하는 이로 前途가 개척되지 않을 수 없다. 신뢰할 만한 사람이다.

紙面이 더 許하지 않을 것 같다. 國體를 말하지 않고는 악단의 한 半 가량을 파묻어 두는 것 같으나 부득이 이만하되 한 말로 하자면 관현악대로는 中央樂友會가 朝鮮을 대표할 것이고 다음에 延禧專門과 崇實專門이 잇으나 좀 더 진보됨 즉 하면서도 아직 기대같지는 못하다. 현악도 「퀄텟」같은 모임이 잇음즉 하나 아직 없는 것은 이상한 감이 잇다. 평양에 바욜린(鄭友鉉) 「비오라」(咸希一로」 (金得泳) 피아노」(宋敬信孃)의 모임이 잇어 상당한 연기를 보여 주는 것은 한 異彩다.

성악으로는 합창대로 우선 梨花의 「글리크럽」을 먼저 칠 것이나 여자들만 가지고는 가물에 안개비 같아서 안타깝고 씨원치 못하다. 中央保育合唱도 洪蘭坡氏의 지휘인 만큼 볼 점이 많앗다. 「메일 코러쓰」로는 역시 延專, 崇專이 학교인 만치 꾸준하다. 혼성합창으로는 玄濟明氏 지휘의 中央樂友會 합창대, 安基永氏 지휘의 聲友會가 잇으나 兩者가 다 인원문제로 건실타고는 못하겟다. 좀 더 충실한 「코러쓰」하나 쯤은 잇음즉한 일이다.

그리고 악단의 權威로 網羅되엇다는 音樂家協會는 조직 당초부터 그 발전이 疑視되는 점이 많더니 공약햇든 今春의 음악회는 今月 末에 연다고. 좀 더 성실한 활동이 잇기를 바란다.

끝으로 서툴은 음악지식으로 評이 評같지 못한고 印象이 印象같지 못한 바가 많을 듯 싶으니 妄言을 容赦키를 바라며 擱筆한다.
(1931. 5. 10 記) ＜43＞
＜36-43＞