잡지명	개벽 제11호
발행일	1921년 05월 01일
기사제목	生活上으로 觀한 經濟觀念의 基礎 (The Basis of Economic Concepts Viewed from Life)
필자	李敦化
기사형태	논설 (Editorial/Essay)

生活上으로 觀한 經濟觀念의 基礎
						李敦化

一, 慾望의 向上과 慾望의 改造
(1. The Improvement of Desire and the Remodeling of Desire)

It would not be amiss to interpret the saying "Man does not live by bread alone" as explaining that man is indeed an animal of great desire (慾望). Because man has great desire, he is not satisfied merely with the matter of "food" (食) alone, but progresses to demand a religious and philosophical life, and literary and artistic tastes; the true value of man being human is truly revealed herein.

Man's nature (性), compared to other animals, could be described as that of an animal whose impulse of desire is enormous. He is an animal eagerly seeking the satisfaction of new desires, forgetting the satisfaction of past desires, and an animal diligently striving to pioneer the realm of future happiness once the quest for past happiness has been achieved. To speak of being content with one's lot (安分知足) is entirely contradictory to human instinct, and to speak of finding joy in few desires (小慾自樂) can be called an act that transgresses human nature (本性). Who among men would dislike the Crane of Yangzhou (楊洲鶴)? Man's greatness appears, and man's value is expressed, in knowing satisfaction and yet seeking new satisfaction, in knowing joy and yet demanding new joy. If man were content with just one satisfaction and one comfort, lacking the instinct to seek further satisfaction and comfort beyond that, how would he differ from birds and beasts, and how would he be distinct from wood and stone? When Laozi (老子) taught man to be without desire (欲) and Mencius (孟軻) taught man to curb human desire (人慾), were they not aiming to guide man's instinctual impulse toward a place of greater satisfaction and greater happiness, rather than driving man to completely annihilate the desire that is his instinct?

I once, at a certain train station when the scheduled train was delayed by 20 minutes, heard one passenger furiously declare, "How can we pursue a civilized life when the means of transportation (交通) are like this?" In response, another person <11> answered, "No. Compared to the situation in our Chosŏn (朝鮮) era when we walked hundreds or thousands of *ri* of distance, isn't the train convenient even if it arrives late by several hours or even several days?" I could not help but side with the former's words. Forgiveness (容恕), in any matter, is merely an exception. It is merely a method of consolation (慰安). One who reflects on the past and has no hope for the future is nothing but a demon of regression (退化). Of course, it is a fact that compared to the era of our past ancestors, even if our lives today regressed several hundred steps, various efficiencies would still likely remain abundant. However, if man adds forgiveness upon forgiveness and seeks consolation upon consolation, regressing to the idleness and inaction (安逸無爲) of the past, man would ultimately have no other path than to revert to the state of eating wood and nesting in caves (木食巢穴).

As I have often stated, I question whether a nation that boasts of its long ethnic history will indeed progress rapidly in the future. When a person's or a nation's history is long, they are inevitably bound by past customs (因襲)—this is an unavoidable phenomenon for both individuals and nations. In the case of individuals, is not the reason why the elderly are slower in their capacity for progress than the young evidence that the elderly person's own history, being longer than the youth's, has had their future-oriented new desires erased by what is called experience (經驗)? It is also true for nations; is not the reason why peoples such as present-day Egypt (埃及), China (中華), India (印度), or Turkey (土耳其) have come under the rule of newly advanced nations, despite their long past histories, nothing more than this principle? The reason why the people of the present-day United States (米國), a nation with the shortest history, can dominate world hegemony (覇權) can also be regarded as identical to the youth's power of desire increasing with the sharp spirit of new advancement.

In any case, man aims for improvement (向上), improvement requires abundant energy (精力), and energy depends on the vitality of desire (慾望). Man's future happiness, whether as an individual or a nation, is determined by the vitality of desire. Therefore, we must take care to remodel the value of desire and elevate the scope of desire.

Whenever we attempt to discuss the common shortcomings of our Chosŏn people (朝鮮民族), what we must first consider above all is that our desire is extremely narrow and small (狹小). It has been our greatest flaw that Koreans (朝鮮人) have traditionally regarded the life of a recluse in the mountains and forests (山林的 處士生活) as the noble principle of worldly conduct, or else it has been our ominous sign that letting things drift and misunderstanding the world (放任誤世) was considered a man's pleasure. Sobu (巢父) and Hŏyu (許由) were the ideal figures for Koreans; the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove (竹林七賢) were the revered heroes of Koreans. <12> Thus, Yan Hui (顔回), who said "joy is also found therein" amidst poverty in a humble lane (陋巷曲肱), was indeed the most revered figure for Koreans. If called a scholar (士), only after enduring poverty with simple food and drink (簞食瓢飮) as his pleasure was he deemed to have almost preserved the ultimate integrity (貞節) of a human being. In a word, finding peace in poverty and joy in the Way (安貧樂道) can be called the unique virtue (美德) of the Chosŏn scholar (士者), and at the same time, the universal malady (弊害) of the Korean people. Of course, it is the inherent duty (天職) of a scholar to cultivate his virtue (德行) and pursue his studies (硏究) while enduring any poverty and hardship (貧苦). However, how could the world's virtues reside solely in the scholar? If the scholar has the scholar's virtue, then the farmer (農者) must have the farmer's virtue, and the merchant (商者) and artisan (工者) must also have the merchant's and artisan's virtues. Thus, the so-called virtue will be expressed in a special manner for each specialty concerning that specialty. If we assume the scholar's virtue is *anp'in nakto* (安貧樂道), then the farmer's virtue should be the improvement of agriculture (農業), and the merchant's and artisan's virtues should be the improvement of commerce and industry (商工). Nevertheless, Koreans in the past regarded only the scholar's virtue of *anp'in nakto* as the virtue for all under heaven. Therefore, there were merchants, but no merchant's virtue; there were farmers and artisans, but no farmer's or artisan's virtue. From this point, the desire of all Koreans became constrained by the narrow desire called the scholar's *anp'in nakto*, leading to the present day. Therefore, the perception among Koreans when sending their children to school (學校) is predominantly a desire for the children to become scholars (官吏 - government officials), rather than a perception that the parents aim to broaden the children's knowledge (知識) and improve their character (人格). This is truly the reason why the desires of the majority of Koreans have been inverted (顚倒) and thus become narrow, petty, and constrained (狹隘齷齪). If we intend to improve the life of the Korean people now, we must necessarily remodel and elevate this erroneous desire. Then, in what direction should we, the Korean people, remodel and elevate our desires?

二, 生存과 生活의 *을 먼저 알라
(2. First Know the Distinction Between Survival and Life) [*Note: There seems to be a missing word/character between 生活의 and 을 in the original heading.]

As stated above, if we, the Korean people, first intend to remodel desire and improve desire, it is absolutely imperative that we first know the distinction between survival (生存) and life (生活). Those who do not know the distinction between survival and life are beasts (禽獸) and barbarians (野蠻). Survival merely means that an animal possessing life barely maintains that life. Life, however, does not stop at merely maintaining life but refers to the direction of increasing all the enjoyments (享樂) of life. That is, if a person lives only by "bread," this is merely the meaning of survival, but life <13> carries the meaning of enjoying desires higher than "bread." Although plants and beasts may be said to have the same heaven-endowed right to survival (生存權) in a sense, when it comes to the issue of life, there is an extremely distant difference between the two. Also, although other animals and humankind may have the same right to survival, when it comes to life, there is a vast difference, like that between sky and earth (霄壤之懸殊), between human life and animal life. Thus, even among humankind, although they may be the same in maintaining life, however they survive, a great difference arises between humans concerning the satisfaction of human desires—that is, the issue of life. The reason why the life of barbarians and the life of civilized people (文明人) differ fundamentally, why the life of people in rich countries (富國人) and poor countries (貧國人) differ in degree, and why even among people of the same rich or poor country, the lives of individuals differ, is because humans have a distinction between survival and life. If we compare the standard of living of present-day Americans (米國人) and Japanese (日本人), and then compare the life of Japanese people and Korean people, anyone can know that a difference of several tens of times arises in between. Americans, Japanese, and Koreans are the same in being human, and the same in maintaining their human life, that is, in surviving. However, when it comes to the standard of life, a gap like that between sky and earth truly arises. While they rise and rest in multi-storied Western houses reaching the clouds (凌雲冲霄之洋屋), we huddle inside dilapidated and crumbling houses (廢棟頹屋之裡). While they receive high enjoyment such as scholarship, literature, and art (學術文藝藝術 等 高等한 享樂), are we not in a situation where we receive physical consolation (肉體的 慰勞) mostly from a bowl of cloudy rice wine (一碗之濁醪)? Generally, human desire can be stretched limitlessly if stretched, and can also be shrunk limitlessly if shrunk. As desire becomes lofty and far-reaching (高遠), even the life of an airplane (飛行機) is not satisfactory, leading to seeking communication with the Martian world (火星界) and daring journeys to the lunar world (月世界). As desire shrinks (縮小), even life in a stone hut or grass shack (石磵草屋) becomes impossible, ultimately leading to seeking earthen caves (土窟) and building nests in trees (木巢). That is, just as desire knows no limit as it grows larger, it also has no limit as it shrinks smaller; thus, the amount of desire can be seen as the dividing point (分岐點) between evolution (進化) and regression (退化). We Chosŏn people, having been extremely weakened by letters (文弱) for several hundred years, have had our desires extremely shrunk, resulting in all forms of life gradually beginning to regress, finally forming today's state. Calling it contentment (知足) made people settle for regression; calling it acceptance of one's lot (安分) made the people indulge in lazy slumber (惰眠); claiming frugality (儉朴) led housing, clothing, and food to decline into crudeness (野卑); claiming simplicity (質素) made people's minds stop at dullness and sluggish movement (鈍朴蠢動). Thus, the state of life has shrunk as much as it could shrink. <14>

In any case, Koreans must expand their standard of living. The current standard of living must be increased tenfold or perhaps twentyfold. With the current standard of living of Koreans—this state of affairs—talk of cultural construction (文化建設) and civilizational improvement (文明向上) is all useless. When food is in this state, clothing is in this state, housing is in this state, and all aspects of life are in this state, how could there be leisure to build high cultural enterprises? When one is hungry, cold, and without shelter, how could thoughts of anything else possibly arise? The ancients said, "Know propriety (禮節) only after food and clothing are sufficient (衣食足)." How could the situation arise to explain all constructions to a people lacking sufficient food and clothing? Therefore, the most practical urgent task (實地的 急務) for Koreans today is, above all, to possess an economic consciousness (經濟的 觀念). And thus, they must strive for the improvement of life (生活의 向上). It can be sufficiently proven through statistical tables (統計表上) that the current average monthly living expense per person for Koreans does not exceed 5 Won (圓). With the material value of an average of 5 Won per person per month, how can there be leisure to speak of culture and plan for civilization? Only after that 5 Won reaches at least 6 or 7 times, or more than 10 times its value, can it be said that living blood (生血) circulates in the veins of the Korean people.

If we lack the distinction between survival and life, live as best we can when we cannot manage, live as we are when we have nothing, and then, when we truly cannot manage and truly have nothing, decide to join hands together and go drown ourselves in the sea, then there would be no worries and no problems would arise. However, if we are to at least open up something called light (光明) and prepare something called happiness (幸福) for the future of our people, we must awaken fiercely from now on, abandon the regressive principle (退屈主義) of Yan Yuan (顔淵) who found peace in poverty and joy in the Way, and learn the economic means (經濟手段) of Tao Zhugong (陶朱公) who turned everything he touched into gold (觸手成金). Present-day Chosŏn must not become the Chosŏn of Yan Yuan, but must become the Chosŏn of Tao Zhugong.

三, 經濟라는 것은 무엇인고
(3. What is Economy?)

What is economy (經濟)? It is nothing other than the means (手段) and direction (方針) for improving life. If we speak merely of survival, although economic means may not be required, when it comes to the issue of life, there is nothing, not a single movement or stillness (一動一靜), that does not contain economic meaning. Originally, economy likely has three standards (標準). One is when exports (輸出) exceed imports (輸入); then the economic situation (經濟狀況) will become abundant. One is when exports and imports are balanced (平均); this can be called achieving economic harmony (調和). One is when exports are less than imports; <15> such a nation will not escape daily economic difficulties (經濟의 困難).

Now, before we know through statistics whether exports and imports in our Chosŏn are indeed balanced or not, if we first look back at our own selves and the household life (家庭生活) of ourselves alone, we can first know the state of our economy. We wear Western socks ("洋襪") on our feet, gloves (掌匣) on our hands, wrap ourselves in foreign cotton cloth (玉洋木), and wear an overcoat (外套) outside. Western socks, gloves, foreign cotton cloth, overcoat, watch (時計), eyeglasses (眼鏡), Western-style cane (開化杖), scarf (목돌이), hat (帽子), belt (腰帶)—investigate just once whose hands produced all these things. As for our own goods (物件), there is nothing except the food buried in our stomachs (腸胃). Among the various items on our bodies, 8 or 9 out of 10 are all imported from outside. Then return home and look. Pots (가마), pans (남비), coal (石炭), bowls (사발), lamp oil (燈油), bedding (寢具), luggage (行李), desks (机子), chairs (交椅), mats (蓆子), etc., and even the plaster on the walls (壁의 塗褙)—is there even one item that is ours? And then buildings (建築物), machinery (機械), craftsmanship (工匠)—all these need no further mention. Even to stack one small brick (벽돌), without borrowing the hands of foreigners, there is absolutely no hope. Look at the construction or repair of various buildings such as churches (敎會堂), schools (學校), government offices (官衙), companies (會社), etc., in Kyŏngsŏng (京城) recently; not a single one is done without passing through the hands of Japanese (日本人) or Chinese (支那人). In such a situation, how can we have the courage to discuss the economic state? When I try to understand the economic situation of our Korean people's lives, I definitely do not have the courage to advocate using negative methods (消極的 方法). That is, I do not have the courage to say that, given our current phenomenon, we should eat less, wear less, spend less, and be even more frugal (儉朴) than this, employing negative economic means. No matter how poor the livelihood, one must eat that much, wear that much, and spend that much to make it resemble a life. Whether the economy works out or not, that minimum level of circumstances must be maintained. Therefore, what I call the Chosŏn economy must at least adopt positive methods (積極的 方法) and pursue the path of self-production and self-sufficiency (自作自給); and for that method of self-production and self-sufficiency, it is imperative first

to embark on the path of industrial development (産業開發). We must reclaim even one *p'yŏng* (坪) of land, plant even one tree (木), create even one handicraft item (手工), taking the path of producing ourselves and supplying ourselves.

Whether the method is good or bad, since Chosŏn is an agricultural nation (農業國), it is no exaggeration to say that the sole basic asset (基本財産) of Chosŏn, both now and in the future, is solely agriculture (農業). Therefore, we <16> must further improve the current state of agriculture to strive to obtain several times more profit (收益) than at present. I hear that in Chosŏn, among the current paddy fields (畓), those where irrigation improvement (灌漑改善) can be easily carried out amount to 400,000 *chōbu* (町步) [approx. 396,700 hectares]; those dry fields (田) whose land category can be changed to become paddy fields amount to 200,000 *chōbu*; and those areas suitable for reclaiming grasslands (草生地) and developing tidal flats (干潟地) amount to 200,000 *chōbu*. Furthermore, it is said that among the total area of forest land (山林地), approximately 15,880,000 *chōbu*, mature forests (成林地) constitute merely 30 percent (3割). Seen from this perspective, the future of Chosŏn's agriculture can be said to be very promising (前途洋洋). If those engaged in agriculture adopt policies for further improvement and advancement, they can enjoy abundance in plentiful years (豐歲) and avoid starvation in lean years (凶年). However, if the livelihood of even one nation relies entirely solely on the single matter of agriculture, a blessing of nature's grace (天惠), it will end up being a life of hemiplegia (半身不遂). Just as man needs bread, he must also have clothes, general furniture (家具), and consequently, all the export goods (輸出品) that enrich life. Thereupon, one first feels the necessity of industry (工業) and requires the development of commerce (商業). Seeing that the so-called civilized nations (文明國) that boast of themselves in the present world are all industrial and commercial nations, shouldn't we realize how central commerce and industry (工商) are to the economy? In short, the life-or-death issue (死活問題) for Chosŏn henceforth lies solely in the sufficiency or insufficiency of the economy, and thus, the sufficiency or insufficiency of the economy lies entirely in industrial development (産業啓發). In summary, economy was first a requirement of life. That is, it was an issue required by the stomach (胃) and bowels (腑). Although man cannot live by bread alone, one must first eat bread before seeking the way to renew anything. Thus, the source of bread lies solely in the state of production (生産), and the state of production necessitates that the entire nation engage in a properly

planned life (計劃잇는生活). Hitherto, our Chosŏn people can be called a people who did not possess sufficient demands regarding life. Consequently, they can be called a people without predetermined plans (豫定計劃) for life. They merely thought that human life ends if each day passes, and they did not possess planned preparations (計劃잇는 準備) under a predetermined plan that foresaw a superior life emerging 5 years, 10 years, or perhaps 20 years later than the present. Therefore, when we encountered situations where the price of rice (米價) soared or prices (物價) rose, making it difficult to sustain life, we were a people who adopted extremely negative methods, abandoning the cities (都會) to enter the countryside (地方), abandoning the fields (野) to enter the mountains (山), taking the extreme of negativity. This can be known by observing the gradual decrease in the number of Korean households (朝鮮人 戶數) in urban areas and the increase in the number of foreign <17> households (外人 戶數) over the several decades since the opening of Chosŏn (朝鮮開放). In contrast to the people of Europe and America (歐米) who possess the courage to plunge into and struggle within any vortex of life due to their flourishing desire for survival (生存의 欲求), our Chosŏn people are in a situation of wanting to detach themselves from modern life as much as possible and retreat instead toward a primitive state (原始狀態). This could be described as foreigners having an instinct for creating wealth (造富) while Koreans have an instinct for accepting poverty (甘貧). There is some subtle charm (妙味) in being detached (恬淡), having few desires (寡欲), and transcending the mundane (脫俗), but to resonate with the times (時勢) today, when the struggle for existence (生存競爭) is fierce, one must become a struggling people (奮鬪的 國民) with a solid will (鞏固한 意思). Furthermore, one must be thoughtful and meticulous (思慮周密), establishing a proper plan (正當한 計劃) envisioning what kind of success (成功) will be achieved several decades later, and become a people who steadily improve (着着 向上). Considering that the world economy (世界經濟) will become even more intense (激烈) in the coming times, we must necessarily conduct a planned economic life (計劃잇는 經濟的 生活). Originally, economic life does not merely mean passively eating frugally and dressing frugally; actively

increasing the efficiency of all labor (勞働의 能率을 增進) is the true economic life. Then, what does the increase in labor efficiency (精神的 及 肉體的 - mental and physical) mean? Regarding this, it goes without saying that first, one must make the body healthy (身體를 健康히). Where physical strength (體力) is weak, there is no need to inquire about the presence or absence of efficiency. Therefore, physical health is the primary basic condition for enhancing efficiency. Next, a person's entire body, limbs and trunk (四肢百體), must all be adaptable (適用的). The activity of fingers (指), ears (耳), eyes (目), hands and feet (手足) must be as adaptable as possible, and thus, one must become a living machine (活機械) that approaches tasks swiftly. Also, regarding the mental elements (精神的 要素), one must be sincere (誠實), enthusiastic (熱心), and diligent (勤勉). That is, physically, all parts of the body must develop to be utilized in useful work (有用한 事業), and mentally, the energy of perseverance and sincerity (堅忍誠實) must be abundant (充湓). Next, as a method for improving efficiency, meticulous preparation (用意周密) is required. For example, if one is a clerk (文書係), preparing things such that all arrangements are properly placed (適宜히 排置) for every move—where it is appropriate to place the glue (護模糊 - *possibly paste or glue*), where the scissors (鋏), where the postage stamps (郵便切手), where the postcards (葉書), where the telegraph forms (電報用紙), where the envelopes and letter paper (封套卷紙), where the ink (墨) and brush (筆)—arranging these preparations neatly for convenience and speed is desirable. Although these may seem like trivial matters (些少한 事), if one exercises such preparation in all affairs, efficiency will naturally improve therein. Next, tasks should be appropriately classified (分類), <18> and the burdens balanced (均衡). For instance, even with a hoe (鍬) used in the field (田), it is necessary to manufacture and use one that fits the hand, being neither too large nor too small. Comparing the work done over several days with an inconvenient tool (不便한 器具) versus the work done over several days with a convenient tool (便利な 器具) will reveal a marked difference (顯著한 能率의 高下) in efficiency between the two. In any case, what must necessarily accompany economic life is the improvement of efficiency. Trying to achieve economic improvement while disregarding the improvement of efficiency is no different from forcing travel without money (金錢). Finally, one matter inseparable from economic life is

feeling pleasure in one's work (業務에 對한 快樂). Only when each person can feel the pleasure of service (服務的 快樂) towards their own occupation (自己所業) can they be said to have truly grasped economic taste (眞經濟的 趣味).

Indeed, the two enemies of human happiness (人生幸福) are suffering (苦痛) and boredom (退屈). Thus, trying to escape suffering leads to boredom, and trying to avoid boredom leads to suffering. The majority of people generally swim between these two.

Generally, poverty (貧困) gives rise to suffering, and wealth (富裕) gives rise to boredom. To enable the poor to be free from suffering in their lives and the rich to be free from boredom, so that both can achieve appropriate activity (適當한 活動), there is nothing better than for each person to discover natural pleasure (天然의 快樂) within their own work, allowing their skills (技能) to harmonize (融和) and mature (淳化) along with their work. This can be called the mystical power (神秘의 力) indispensable to economic life.

Originally, whether discussing individuals or nations, if that individual or nation wishes to achieve great development (偉大한 發達) in the future, they cannot do so without relying on the source of the four great driving forces (4大 原動力). The four great driving forces are physical strength (體力), wealth (富力), intellectual power (智力), and moral power (德力). The world depends on the harmonious elements of these four great driving forces for individuals to become superior (優者) and nations to become great (偉大).

Quietly considering and comparing the disposition (素質) of us Chosŏn people to these four great driving forces, we Chosŏn people possess physical strength, intellectual power, and moral power that we would certainly not yield (讓頭) to other nations. It would not be an exaggeration to say that God (上帝) and spirits (鬼神) are offering protection in this regard. However, concerning economic life—that is, the cultivation of wealth (富力)—it would not be an exaggeration to say that the fundamental flaw (根本的 缺陷) of us Chosŏn people lies here. Koreans truly have many points of self-confidence and self-reliance (自信自賴) in moral and intellectual power since ancient times. But when it comes to wealth, there has been a custom (風化) and teaching (敎習) of looking down upon it (輕蔑視). This was truly a virtue (美德) of Koreans and, at the same time, a major flaw (一大缺點) of Koreans. Koreans were the exact opposite (正反對) of the Jewish people (猶太人) and the exact contradiction (正矛盾) of the Chinese people (中華人). The Chosŏn people have shown not the slightest disgraceful behavior (寸毫의 醜態) towards the impure thing called money (金錢); this is the pride (자랑거리) of Koreans and, at the same time, the reason why Koreans have been brought to the poverty of existence (生存의 貧弱) and the precariousness of their standing in life (生活의 立場을 危) today and hereafter—or even currently. We must pay special attention (注意) to this point and arouse our economic consciousness (經濟的 觀念). <19>

**Summary**

Yi Tonhwa argues that Koreans must fundamentally transform their mindset to achieve national progress and improve their lives under the challenging circumstances of the early 20th century. He criticizes the traditional Korean admiration for "anp'in nakto" (finding peace in poverty and joy in the Way), viewing it as a source of passivity and regression that has led to a dangerously low standard of living compared to nations like the US and Japan. Yi urges Koreans to cultivate greater desire (慾望), distinguishing between mere survival (生存) and a fulfilling life (生活), and calls for a dramatic increase in the standard of living. The key to this, he contends, lies in adopting a proactive economic consciousness, prioritizing industrial development (産業開發), self-sufficiency (自作自給), meticulous planning (計劃), increased labor efficiency (勞働能率), and finding pleasure in work, thereby cultivating national wealth (富力) alongside existing strengths in morality and intellect. This article is historically significant as it reflects the urgent discourse among Korean intellectuals during the colonial period regarding modernization, economic self-strengthening, and cultural critique as paths to national survival and advancement. Historians might find Yi's sharp critique of traditional values, his comparative analysis of nations, and his detailed prescriptions for economic and behavioral change particularly revealing of the anxieties and aspirations shaping Korean nationalism and developmental thought at the time.

**Named Entities**

李敦化	이돈화	Yi Tonhwa
楊洲鶴	양주학	Yangjuhak (Crane of Yangzhou)
老子	노자	Noja (Laozi)
孟軻	맹가	Maengga (Mencius)
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
埃及	애급	Aegŭp (Egypt)
中華	중화	Chunghwa (China)
印度	인도	Indo (India)
土耳其	토이기	T'ŏlgŭi (Turkey - Note: Original Hanja transcription differs from modern)
米國	미국	Miguk (United States)
米國人	미국인	Migugin (American people)
日本人	일본인	Ilbonin (Japanese people)
巢父	소부	Sobu
許由	허유	Hŏyu
竹林七賢	죽림칠현	Chungnim Ch'irhyŏn (Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove)
顔回	안회	Anhoe (Yan Hui)
陶朱公	도주공	Tojugong (Tao Zhugong / Fan Li)
朝鮮人	조선인	Chosŏnin (Korean people)
朝鮮民族	조선민족	Chosŏn minjok (Korean ethnicity/people)
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Old name for Seoul)
歐米	구미	Kumi (Europe and America)
猶太人	유태인	Yut'aein (Jewish people)
中華人	중화인	Chunghwain (Chinese people)

**Glossary**

生活	생활	Life; livelihood
經濟觀念	경제관념	Economic concept; economic consciousness
基礎	기초	Basis; foundation
慾望	욕망	Desire; craving (Older form of 욕망)
向上	향상	Improvement; advancement; progress
改造	개조	Remodeling; restructuring; reorganization
實로	실로	Truly; indeed (Older spelling of 실로)
가르처	가르쳐	Teaching; indicating (Older spelling/form of 가르쳐)
無妨	무방	No hindrance; permissible; alright
만족치	만족지	Not satisfied (Older grammatical form)
進하야는	진하여는	Progressing; advancing (Older spelling/form)
宗敎	종교	Religion
哲學	철학	Philosophy
文學	문학	Literature
藝術	예술	Art
趣味	취미	Taste; hobby; interest
眞價	진가	True value; real worth
本能	본능	Instinct
衝動	충동	Impulse
巨大	거대	Huge; enormous
滿足	만족	Satisfaction; contentment
求코저	구하고자	Seeking to obtain (Older spelling/form)
汲汲하다	급급하다	To be engrossed in; to be eager
過去	과거	Past
幸福	행복	Happiness
希求	희구	Earnest desire; request
達하다	달하다	To reach; achieve
未來	미래	Future
境涯	경애	Boundary; realm; situation
開拓코저	개척하고자	Seeking to pioneer/develop (Older spelling/form)
孜孜하다	자자하다	To be diligent; assiduous
安分知足	안분지족	Being content with one's lot
矛盾	모순	Contradiction
小慾自樂	소욕자락	Finding joy in few desires
潜越	잠월	Transgression; overstepping
楊洲鶴	양주학	Crane of Yangzhou (symbol of unattainable/boundless desires)
실타하리요	싫다 하리오	Who would dislike? (Archaic interrogative form)
足를	족을	Satisfaction (Accusative case marker attached to Hanja)
樂을	락을	Joy; pleasure (Accusative case marker attached to Hanja)
偉力	위력	Great power; might
價値	가치	Value; worth
表顯	표현	Expression; manifestation (Older form of 표현)
缺乏	결핍	Lack; deficiency; shortage
禽獸	금수	Birds and beasts; animals
木石	목석	Wood and stone; inanimate object
差支	차지	Difference; distinction; hindrance (Older usage)
遏하다	알하다	To stop; suppress; curb
驅하야	구하여	Driving; urging (Older spelling/form)
全滅	전멸	Annihilation; total destruction
引導코저	인도하고자	Seeking to guide (Older spelling/form)
汽車	기차	Train
定刻	정각	Scheduled time
違됨	어김	Being violated; being broken (Noun form from 어기다)
憤慨하다	분개하다	To be indignant; resentful
交通	교통	Transportation; traffic
如此하고야	이러하고야	Being like this (Emphatic/rhetorical form)
文明	문명	Civilization
圖得하다	도득하다	To plan and obtain; achieve
怒號하다	노호하다	To roar in anger; shout furiously
對하야	대하여	Regarding; towards (Older spelling)
幾百幾千	기백기천	Several hundred, several thousand
道程	도정	Distance; journey
徒步하다	도보하다	To walk; go on foot
形便	형편	Situation; circumstances (Older form of 형편)
便利치 아니한가	편리하지 아니한가	Isn't it convenient? (Older negative interrogative)
聞하고	문하고	Hearing (Older connective form)
前者	전자	The former
左袒하다	좌단하다	To side with; support
容恕	용서	Forgiveness; pardon
例外	예외	Exception
不過하다	불과하다	To be merely; nothing more than
慰安	위안	Consolation; comfort
回하고	회하고	Reflecting on; looking back (Older connective form)
望이 無한 者	망이 무한 자	One who has no hope
退化	퇴화	Regression; degeneration; devolution
惡魔	악마	Demon; devil
勿論	물론	Of course; needless to say
祖先	조선	Ancestor
時代	시대	Era; period
今日	금일	Today; present day
諸般	제반	Various; all sorts of
能率	능률	Efficiency
有餘하다	유여하다	To have more than enough; abundant
事實	사실	Fact; truth
安逸無爲	안일무위	Idleness and inaction
마츰내	마침내	Finally; eventually (Older spelling)
木食巢穴	목식소혈	Eating wood and nesting in caves (primitive life)
狀態	상태	State; condition
還元하다	환원하다	To revert; return to original state
屢屢恒言하다	누누항언하다	To state repeatedly and constantly
自己民族	자기민족	One's own nation/ethnic group
歷史	역사	History (Older form of 역사)
長久하다	장구하다	Long-lasting; enduring
誇하다	과하다	To boast; brag
果然	과연	Indeed; truly; as expected
速하다	속하다	To be fast; rapid
否하다	부하다	To deny; negate (Here used like 'or not')
疑問하다	의문하다	To question; doubt
因襲	인습	Convention; old customs; tradition
拘束되다	구속되다	To be bound; restricted
避치 못할	피하지 못할	Unavoidable (Older spelling/form)
個人	개인	Individual
民族	민족	Nation; people; ethnic group
現象	현상	Phenomenon
在하야	있어서	In the case of; regarding (Older spelling/form)
老年	노년	Old age; elderly
靑年	청년	Youth; young person
遲鈍하다	지둔하다	To be slow; dull; obtuse
所以	소이	Reason; cause
經驗	경험	Experience
抹殺되다	말살되다	To be erased; obliterated
證據	증거	Evidence; proof
亦然하다	역연하다	To be also thus; likewise
現在	현재	Present; current
支配	지배	Rule; domination; control
受케됨	받게 됨	Coming to receive/be subjected to
此理	차리	This principle/reason
覇權	패권	Hegemony; supremacy
銳氣	예기	Sharp spirit; enthusiasm
增大하다	증대하다	To increase; grow larger
看做하다	간주하다	To regard as; consider
活氣	활기	Vitality; energy; liveliness
依하야써	의하여서	By means of; depending on (Emphatic older form)
前途幸福	전도행복	Future happiness
占하다	점하다	To occupy; predict; divine
吾人	오인	We; us (Literary form)
삼가	삼가	Carefully; cautiously
範圍	범위	Scope; range
必要	필요	Necessity; need
普遍的	보편적	Universal; general
缺點	결점	Shortcoming; defect; flaw
論據코저	논거하고자	Seeking to argue/base discussion on (Older spelling/form)
際에	즈음에	At the time of; when (Older spelling/form)
何보다도	무엇보다도	More than anything (Older form)
一考치 아니치 못할바	일고하지 아니하지 못할 바	Something that must be considered
狹小하다	협소하다	Narrow; small; limited
自來로	자래로	Traditionally; since old times
山林的 處士生活	산림적 처사생활	Life of a hermit/recluse in mountains/forests
處世	처세	Conduct in the world; worldly wisdom
高尙主義	고상주의	Noble principle; high-minded principle
不然이면	불연이면	Otherwise; if not so
放任誤世	방임오세	Letting things drift and misunderstanding the world
男子	남자	Man; male
快事	쾌사	Pleasant affair; delightful matter
不祥之兆	불상지조	Ominous sign; inauspicious omen
理想的	이상적	Ideal
人物	인물	Figure; personage
崇拜的	숭배적	Adored; worshipped
好漢	호한	Hero; fine fellow
陋巷曲肱	누항곡굉	Humble lane and bent arm (living simply/poorly like Yan Hui)
樂亦在其中	낙역재기중	Joy is also found therein (Quote from Analects about Yan Hui)
信仰的	신앙적	Faith-like; revered; believed in
一指不動	일지부동	Not lifting a finger (being idle)
簞食瓢飮	단사표음	Simple meal (basket of rice, gourd of drink); poverty
然後에야	연후에야	Only after that
人間 最後의 貞節	인간 최후의 정절	Ultimate human integrity/fidelity
守하엿다	수하였다	Preserved; kept (Older spelling)
一言而蔽하면	일언이폐하면	To sum up in one word
安貧樂道	안빈낙도	Finding peace in poverty and joy in the Way
唯一	유일	Only; sole; unique
美德	미덕	Virtue
同時에	동시에	At the same time
弊害	폐해	Evil; harm; malady
如何한	여하한	Any kind of; whatever
貧苦	빈고	Poverty and hardship
忍耐하다	인내하다	To endure; persevere
德行	덕행	Virtuous conduct
修하다	수하다	To cultivate; practice; repair
硏究	연구	Research; study
本來	본래	Originally; essentially
天職	천직	Heaven-sent duty; vocation
然이나	그러나	However; but (Older form)
天下	천하	The world; all under heaven
홀로	홀로	Alone; solely
土者	사자	Scholar (Here used as 士者)
農者	농자	Farmer
商者	상자	Merchant
工者	공자	Artisan; craftsman
專門	전문	Specialty; field of expertise
各各	각각	Each; respectively
特殊하다	특수하다	Special; particular
方式	방식	Method; way; mode
表顯하다	표현하다	To express; manifest (Older form)
假定하다	가정하다	To assume; suppose
農業	농업	Agriculture
向上	향상	Improvement; advancement
商工	상공	Commerce and industry
不拘하고	불구하고	Despite; nevertheless
오즉	오직	Only; solely (Older spelling)
삼맛는지라	삼았는지라	Regarded as; considered as (Older spelling/form)
업스며	없으며	Not having; without (Older spelling)
업서왓다	없어왔다	Has not existed (Older spelling)
點에서	점에서	From the point of; in the aspect
一個	일개	One; single
被拘하다	피구하다	To be constrained; restricted
되여써	되어서	Becoming; resulting in (Older spelling)
今日에 至하엿다	금일에 지하였다	Has reached the present day (Older form)
子弟	자제	Children; sons and disciples
學校	학교	School
通學케	통학케	To make attend school
觀念	관념	Concept; notion; idea
父母	부모	Parents
知識	지식	Knowledge
人格	인격	Character; personality
圖케하리라	도모케 하리라	Intending to plan/strive for
官吏	관리	Government official
慾望하다	욕망하다	To desire
多하나니	많으니	Being many/much (Older form)
顚倒되다	전도되다	To be inverted; turned upside down
且	차	Moreover; and also
狹隘齷齪	협애악착	Narrow, petty, and constrained
所以	소이	Reason; cause
方在	방재	Just now; currently (Archaic)
誤謬	오류	Error; mistake
必要	필요	Need; necessity
如何한	여하한	What kind of; how
方面	방면	Direction; aspect
別	별	Distinction; difference
絶阧하다	절규하다	To cry out; scream (Possibly intended as 絶叫? Context suggests urgency/emphasis)
不知하는 者	부지하는 자	One who does not know
是-	시-	This is (Older demonstrative form)
野蠻	야만	Barbarian; savage
意味함	의미함	Meaning (Noun form)
止하다	지하다	To stop; cease
享樂	향락	Enjoyment; pleasure
增大케하는	증대케 하는	That which increases/enlarges
方針	방침	Policy; course; direction
即	즉	Namely; that is
享受하다	향수하다	To enjoy; receive benefits
植物	식물	Plant
天賦	천부	Heaven-endowed; innate
生存權	생존권	Right to survival
同一하다	동일하다	To be identical; the same
問題	문제	Problem; issue; question
至하야는	이르러서는	When it comes to (Older form)
兩者	양자	Both parties; the two
隔遠하다	격원하다	Distant; far apart
差別	차별	Difference; discrimination
人類	인류	Humankind; humanity
霄壤之懸殊	소양지현수	Vast difference (like sky and earth)
互相	호상	Mutually; each other
至大하다	지대하다	Extremely large; immense
生케되는	생기게 되는	Comes to arise/occur
根本	근본	Root; basis; foundation
相異하다	상이하다	To differ; be different
富國人	부국인	People of a rich country
貧國人	빈국인	People of a poor country
程度	정도	Degree; level; standard
幾十倍	기십배	Several tens of times
差違	차위	Difference; discrepancy
可知하다	가지하다	Can be known; knowable
本位	본위	Standard; basis
懸隔	현격	Wide gap; great disparity
生케되나니	생기게 되니	Comes to arise (Older form)
彼	피	That one; he; they (Distant pronoun)
凌雲冲霄	능운충소	Reaching the clouds (describing tall buildings)
洋屋	양옥	Western-style house
起臥하다	기와하다	To rise and lie down; live
此	차	This one; here (Proximal pronoun)
廢棟頹屋	폐동퇴옥	Dilapidated and crumbling house
裡에서	속에서	Inside (Older form of 속에서)
奄하다	엄하다	To cover; hide; huddle (?) (Context suggests living poorly/hidden)
學術	학술	Scholarship; learning
文藝	문예	Literature and arts
高等하다	고등하다	High-class; advanced
受하는 代에	수하는 대에	While receiving/enjoying
一碗	일완	One bowl
濁醪	탁료	Cloudy rice wine (makgeolli)
肉體的	육체적	Physical; bodily
慰勞	위로	Consolation; comfort
밧고잇는	받고 있는	Receiving (Older spelling)
形便	형편	Situation; circumstances (Older form of 형편)
大槪	대개	Generally; mostly
限定	한정	Limit; restriction
업시	없이	Without (Older spelling)
늘일수	늘일 수	Can stretch/increase
잇는	있는	Existing; having (Modern spelling)
줄이면	줄이면	If shrunk/reduced
縮小하다	축소하다	To shrink; reduce
조차는	조차서는	Following; according to (Older form)
飛行機	비행기	Airplane
滿足치 못하다	만족하지 못하다	To be unable to be satisfied
火星界	화성계	Martian world
交通	교통	Communication; traffic; intercourse
月世界	월세계	Lunar world
旅行	여행	Travel; journey
敢行하다	감행하다	To dare to do; venture
石磵草屋	석간초옥	Stone hut or grass shack
不能하다	불능하다	Unable; impossible
마츰내	마침내	Finally; eventually (Older spelling)
土窟	토굴	Earthen cave
木巢	목소	Nest in a tree
營케 되다	영케 되다	To come to build/manage
多少	다소	Amount; quantity; degree
進化	진화	Evolution; progress
分岐點	분기점	Dividing point; fork
以來	이래	Since; hereafter
極端	극단	Extreme
文弱	문약	Literary weakness; effeminacy
退屈되다	퇴굴되다	To become bored; regressed (?) (退屈 usually means boredom, but here context implies weakening/regression)
結果	결과	Result; consequence
方式	방식	Method; way; form
漸次	점차	Gradually; step by step
始作하다	시작하다	To begin; start
終에	종에	In the end; finally
形成하다	형성하다	To form; shape; mold
至하였다	지하였다	Reached; arrived at (Older spelling)
知足	지족	Contentment
處케 하엿고	처하게 하였고	Made to be situated in (Older spelling/form)
安分	안분	Acceptance of one's lot/station
民으로	민으로	The people (Objective case)
惰眠	타면	Lazy slumber
貪케하엿스며	탐하게 하였으며	Made to covet/indulge in (Older spelling)
儉朴하다	검박하다	Frugal; simple; plain
居住	거주	Residence; dwelling
衣食	의식	Clothing and food; livelihood
野卑	야비	Crude; vulgar; base
退落케 되엇스며	퇴락하게 되었으며	Came to decline/fall into (Older spelling)
質素하다	질소하다	Simple; plain; frugal
人心	인심	People's minds; public sentiment
鈍朴蠢動	둔박준동	Dullness, simplicity, and sluggish movement
止케 하엿다	지케 하였다	Made to stop at (Older form)
生活狀態	생활상태	State of life; living conditions
즈러들이만치	줄어들 이만치	Shrunk to this extent (Older spelling/form)
말엇다	말았다	Ended up; finished (Older spelling)
늘여야	늘려야	Must increase/expand
現在	현재	Current; present
모양대로	모양대로	As it is; in this state
가지고 잇서서는	가지고 있어서는	Possessing/having (Older spelling)
文化建設	문화건설	Cultural construction/building
文明向上	문명향상	Civilizational improvement/advancement
쓸대 업는	쓸데 없는	Useless; pointless (Older spelling)
겨를에	겨를에	Leisure; spare time
事業	사업	Enterprise; business; work
建設하다	건설하다	To construct; build
줄이고	주리고	Being hungry (Older spelling of 주리고)
잇슬데	있을 데	Place to be/stay (Older spelling)
景況	경황	Situation; circumstances; state of affairs (Older form of 경황)
다른 생각	다른 생각	Other thoughts
날 리가 잇슬가보냐	날 리가 있을까보냐	How could it possibly arise? (Rhetorical question, older form)
古人	고인	Ancient person; the ancients
일럿스되	일렀으되	Said; stated that (Older spelling/form)
衣食이 足한 後에 禮節을 知한다	의식이 족한 후에 예절을 지한다	Know propriety only after food and clothing are sufficient
不足하다	부족하다	Insufficient; lacking
人民	인민	The people
何暇에	하가에	What leisure?; How could there be time?
說明하다	설명하다	To explain
생기리요	생기리오	Will it arise? (Archaic interrogative)
實地的 急務	실지적 급무	Practical urgent task
觀念	관념	Concept; idea; notion
가저야 하겟다	가져야 하겠다	Must possess/have
平均生活費	평균생활비	Average living expenses
지내지 못하는 것은	지나지 못하는 것은	Does not exceed
統計表上	통계표상	On the statistical table
넉넉히	넉넉히	Sufficiently; amply
證明하다	증명하다	To prove; certify
物質的 價値	물질적 가치	Material value
文化	문화	Culture
圖할	도모할	To plan; scheme
여가	여가	Leisure; spare time
잇스랴	있으랴	Will there be? (Archaic interrogative)
少하야도	적어도	At least (Older form of 적어도)
倍	배	Times (multiplier)
以上	이상	More than; above
達한 뒤에야	달한 뒤에야	Only after reaching
血管	혈관	Blood vessel
生血	생혈	Living blood
循環되다	순환되다	To circulate
區別	구별	Distinction; differentiation
업시	없이	Without (Older spelling)
못되면 못되는 대로	못되면 못 되는 대로	If unable, then as unable
업스면 업는대로	없으면 없는 대로	If without, then as without
살다가	살다가	While living
정말	정말	Truly; really
못되고	못되고	Being unable; becoming poor
업게 되면	없게 되면	If one becomes without
한 가지로	한 가지로	Together; in the same way
손목을 맛잡고	손목을 맞잡고	Holding wrists; joining hands (Older spelling)
바다에 나아가	바다에 나아가	Going out to the sea
빠저 죽기로	빠져 죽기로	Deciding to drown oneself (Older spelling)
작정을 대면	작정을 하면	If one makes a decision
근심	근심	Worry; anxiety
問題	문제	Problem; issue
생기지 아니할 것이지마는	생기지 아니할 것이지만은	Will not arise, but...
將來	장래	Future
爲하야	위하여	For the sake of (Older spelling)
光明	광명	Light; brightness
열어주고	열어주고	Opening up and giving
準備하랴면	준비하려면	If one intends to prepare
只今으로부터	지금으로부터	From now on
猛然히	맹렬히	Fiercely; vigorously
覺醒하다	각성하다	To awaken; realize
顔淵	안연	Yan Yuan (Confucius' disciple known for enduring poverty)
退屈主義	퇴굴주의	Principle of regression/boredom (?) (See previous note on 退屈)
버리고	버리고	Abandoning; discarding
觸手成金	촉수성금	Turning everything touched into gold (Midas touch; associated with wealth)
陶朱公	도주공	Tao Zhugong (Fan Li, ancient Chinese figure known for business success)
經濟手段	경제수단	Economic means/methods
배워야 하겟다	배워야 하겠다	Must learn
經濟	경제	Economy; economics
何엇인고	무엇인고	What is it? (Archaic interrogative)
手段	수단	Means; measure; method
方針	방침	Policy; direction; course
不外하다	불외하다	To be nothing other than; not outside of
生存	생존	Survival; existence
비록	비록	Although; even if
要치 아니하다	요하지 아니하다	Not require; not need
一動一靜	일동일정	Every single move and stillness
包含치 아니한 者	포함하지 아니한 자	That which does not include/contain
업겟다	없겠다	Will not exist (Older spelling)
元來	원래	Originally; primarily
標準	표준	Standard; criterion
輸出	수출	Export
輸入	수입	Import
만흔것이니	많은 것이니	Being many/much (Older spelling/form)
經濟狀況	경제상황	Economic situation/condition
넉넉하다	넉넉하다	Sufficient; ample; abundant
平均하다	평균하다	To be average; balanced
調和	조화	Harmony; balance
엇엇다	얻었다	Obtained; achieved (Older spelling)
적어짐이니	적어짐이니	Becoming few/less (Older form)
如斯하다	여사하다	Like this; such
國民	국민	Nation; people
날로	날로	Day by day
困難	곤란	Difficulty; hardship
免치 못하다	면하지 못하다	Cannot avoid/escape
爲先	위선	First of all; primarily
一身	일신	One's own body; oneself
家庭生活	가정생활	Family life; household life
돌아보면	돌아보면	If one looks back
如何	여하	How; what state
알 수 잇슬 것이다	알 수 있을 것이다	Will be able to know (Older spelling)
洋襪	양말	Western socks (Older term for 양말)
신엇스며	신었으며	Wearing (on feet) (Older spelling)
掌匣	장갑	Gloves (Older term for 장갑)
끼엿스며	끼었으며	Wearing (on hands) (Older spelling)
玉洋木	옥양목	Foreign cotton cloth; shirting
둘럿스며	둘렀으며	Wrapping around (Older spelling)
外套	외투	Overcoat
입엇스니	입었으니	Wearing (clothes) (Older spelling)
時計	시계	Watch; clock
眼鏡	안경	Eyeglasses
開化杖	개화장	Western-style cane ("enlightenment cane")
목돌이	목도리	Scarf; muffler
帽子	모자	Hat; cap
腰帶	요대	Belt
物件	물건	Thing; object; goods
腸胃	장위	Intestines and stomach
파무텨 잇는	파묻혀 있는	Buried in (Older spelling/form)
食物以外	식물 이외	Other than food
아모 것도 업다	아무 것도 없다	There is nothing at all (Older spelling)
諸具中에	제구 중에	Among various tools/items
外로부터	외로부터	From outside; from abroad
가마	가마	Pot; cauldron
남비	냄비	Pan; pot (Older spelling)
石炭	석탄	Coal
사발	사발	Bowl
燈油	등유	Lamp oil; kerosene
寢具	침구	Bedding
行李	행리	Luggage; baggage
机子	궤자	Desk; table (Archaic)
交椅	교의	Folding chair; armchair (Archaic)
蓆子	석자	Mat (돗자리)
甚至於	심지어	Even; going so far as
壁의 塗褙	벽의 도배	Wall plastering/papering
하나이나 잇는가	하나이나 있는가	Is there even one? (Older spelling)
建築物	건축물	Building; structure
機械	기계	Machine; machinery
工匠	공장	Craftsman; artisan
다시 말할 것도 업다	다시 말할 것도 없다	Needs no further mention (Older spelling)
조고마한	조그마한	Small; tiny (Older spelling)
벽돌	벽돌	Brick
싸흘지라도	쌓을지라도	Even if stacking (Older spelling)
外國 사람	외국 사람	Foreigner
到底히	도저히	Absolutely; utterly (usually with negative)
餘望이 업시된다	여망이 없이 된다	Becomes hopeless (Older spelling/form)
伊來	이래	Recently; lately (Archaic)
敎會堂	교회당	Church building
官衙	관아	Government office (Traditional term)
會社	회사	Company; corporation
建物	건물	Building (Older form of 건물)
建築	건축	Construction; architecture
修繕하다	수선하다	To repair; mend
支那人	지나인	Chinese person (Older, potentially offensive term)
手를 經由치 아니하고	손을 경유하지 아니하고	Without passing through the hands of
하나도 되는 것이 업다	하나도 되는 것이 없다	Not even one is done (Older spelling)
勇氣	용기	Courage; bravery
잇스랴	있으랴	Will there be? (Archaic interrogative)
經濟狀況	경제상황	Economic situation
알고저 할 때에	알고자 할 때에	When trying to know (Older spelling/form)
決코	결코	Never; by no means (Older spelling)
消極的 方法	소극적 방법	Negative method; passive approach
쓰라 할	쓰라 할	To say to use (Imperative form in quote)
나지 아니한다	나지 아니한다	Does not arise
現象	현상	Phenomenon
더 먹지안코	더 먹지 않고	Not eating more
더 입지안코	더 입지 않고	Not wearing more
더 쓰지안코	더 쓰지 않고	Not spending more
儉朴하야	검박하여	Being frugal (Older spelling/form)
經濟 手段	경제 수단	Economic means
用하라	용하라	Use! (Imperative)
살림살이	살림살이	Livelihood; housekeeping
그만치는	그만치는	That much; to that extent
生活의 꼴	생활의 꼴	Shape/form of life (implies minimum standard)
最下度로	최하도로	At the minimum level
維持하여야	유지하여야	Must maintain
이른바 所謂	이른바 소위	So-called
積極의 方法	적극의 방법	Positive method; active approach
取하야	취하여	Taking; adopting (Older spelling)
自作自給	자작자급	Self-production and self-sufficiency
講究치 아니함이 不可타	강구하지 아니함이 불가타	It is imperative to devise/pursue
産業開發	산업개발	Industrial development
途에 就치 아니함이 不可타	도에 취하지 아니함이 불가타	It is imperative to embark on the path
坪	평	P'yŏng (unit of area, approx 3.3 sq m)
土地	토지	Land
開墾하다	개간하다	To reclaim land; cultivate
株	주	Counter for trees/plants
木	목	Tree; wood
植樹하다	식수하다	To plant trees
品	품	Item; article; grade
手工	수공	Handicraft
創造하다	창조하다	To create
스스로 作하고 스스로 給하는	스스로 작하고 스스로 급하는	Producing oneself and supplying oneself
道를 取하여야	도를 취하여야	Must take the path
善하던지 否하던지	선하든지 부하든지	Whether it is good or not
農業國	농업국	Agricultural nation
將來	장래	Future
就하야	관하여	Regarding; concerning (Older usage/spelling)
唯一	유일	Sole; only
基本財産	기본재산	Basic asset; fundamental property
過言	과언	Exaggeration
收益	수익	Profit; earnings
得케하도록	얻게 하도록	So as to obtain/get
힘써야하리라	힘써야 하리라	Must strive; must make effort
듯건대	듣건대	As I hear it; reportedly
畓	답	Paddy field; rice field
容易히	용이히	Easily
灌漑改善	관개개선	Irrigation improvement
行키 得할 者	행하기 얻을 자	That which can be performed/carried out
町步	정보	Chōbu (unit of area, approx 0.99 ha)
田	전	Dry field
地目	지목	Land category
變換하다	변환하다	To change; convert
草生地	초생지	Grassland; meadow
開墾	개간	Reclamation; cultivation
干潟地	간석지	Tidal flat; tideland
開拓	개척	Pioneering; development
施行하다	시행하다	To implement; carry out
山林地	산림지	Forest land
總面積	총면적	Total area
約	약	Approximately; about
成林地	성림지	Mature forest land
겨우	겨우	Barely; merely
割	할	Unit of ten percent (Japanese 'wari')
前途洋洋	전도양양	Bright future; promising prospects
農業家	농업가	Agriculturist; farmer
一層	일층	More; further;一層 改良 向上의 策	일층 개량 향상의 책	Policy for further improvement and advancement
執하면	집하면	If one holds/adopts
可히써	가히써	Can indeed; sufficiently able to
豐歲	풍세	Abundant year; bumper harvest year
足을 樂할것이오	족을 낙할 것이오	Will enjoy satisfaction (?) (Context suggests enjoying abundance)
凶年	흉년	Lean year; bad harvest year
飢를 免할 것이다	기를 면할 것이다	Will avoid starvation
살림살이	살림살이	Livelihood; living
天惠	천혜	Grace of heaven; natural blessing
恩澤	은택	Grace; benefit; blessing
全賴하다	전뢰하다	To rely entirely on
半身不遂	반신불수	Hemiplegia; paralysis of one side (metaphor for imbalance)
一般	일반	General; ordinary
家具	가구	Furniture
딸아서	따라서	Consequently; therefore (Older spelling)
豊富케하는	풍부케 하는	That which enriches
輸出品	수출품	Export goods
거긔서	거기서	Thereupon; from that (Older spelling)
처음으로	처음으로	For the first time
工業	공업	Industry (manufacturing)
必要	필요	Necessity
感케 되는	감하게 되는	Comes to feel
商業	상업	Commerce; trade
發達	발달	Development; progress
要케 되는	요하게 되는	Comes to require
現世	현세	Present world; this age
내로라고	내로라하고	Claiming to be the best; boasting
自誇하다	자과하다	To boast; be proud of
所謂	소위	So-called
文明國	문명국	Civilized nation
다가티	다같이	All together; alike (Older spelling)
工業國	공업국	Industrial nation
商業國	상업국	Commercial nation
얼마나	얼마나	How much; to what extent
中心	중심	Center; core; focus
되엇슴을	되었음을	Became (Older spelling/form)
알 것이 아닌가	알 것이 아닌가	Shouldn't one know?; Isn't it clear?
要컨대	요컨대	In short; to summarize
今後	금후	Henceforth; from now on
死活問題	사활문제	Life-or-death issue
足 不足	족 부족	Sufficiency or insufficiency
오로지	오로지	Solely; only; entirely
産業啓發	산업계발	Industrial development/enlightenment (啓發 usually enlightenment, but context is development)
잇다 하리라	있다 하리라	It can be said that it exists/lies in
約言하면	약언하면	To speak concisely; in brief
要求	요구	Requirement; demand
胃와 腑	위와 부	Stomach and bowels (metaphor for basic needs)
爲先	위선	First; before anything else
먹고 나서야	먹고 나서야	Only after eating
更新하다	갱신하다	To renew; update
道를 求할 수 잇스리라	도를 구할 수 있으리라	Will be able to seek the way (Older spelling)
出處	출처	Source; origin
生産	생산	Production
如何	여하	How things are; state; condition
國民全體	국민전체	The entire nation/people
相當하다	상당하다	Suitable; proper; considerable
計劃잇는生活	계획있는 생활	Planned life
爲치 아님이 不可하겟다	위하지 않음이 불가하겠다	It is imperative to do/engage in
從來	종래	Hitherto; conventionally
十分	십분	Sufficient; full; ample
豫定計劃	예정계획	Predetermined plan
업는	없는	Without; lacking (Older spelling)
그날 그날	그날 그날	Day by day
지나갓스면	지나갔으면	If it passed (Older spelling)
人生生活	인생생활	Human life
머츨뿐이라	머무를 뿐이라	Merely stops/stays (Older spelling)
優勝하다	우승하다	Superior; excellent (Not championship here)
出來하리라	출래하리라	Will emerge; will come out (Archaic)
準備	준비	Preparation
가지지 못하엿다	가지지 못하였다	Did not possess (Older spelling)
米價	미가	Price of rice
高騰하다	고등하다	To soar; rise sharply
物價	물가	Prices (of commodities)
昻上되어	앙상되어	Rising up; soaring (Older form of 앙등?)
支持키 難한	지지하기 난한	Difficult to support/sustain
境遇를 當하면	경우를 당하면	When encountering a situation
極히	극히	Extremely; exceedingly
都會	도회	City; urban area
地方	지방	Countryside; region
入하며	입하며	Entering
野를 버리고	야를 버리고	Abandoning the fields
山에 入하야	산에 입하여	Entering the mountains
極消極	극소극	Extreme negativity/passivity
朝鮮開放	조선개방	Opening of Chosŏn (to foreign powers)
幾十年間	기십년간	For several decades
戶數	호수	Number of households
減하야가고	감하여 가고	Decreasing (Older spelling/form)
外人	외인	Foreigner
增加함	증가함	Increasing (Noun form)
可히 알겟다	가히 알겠다	Can know well enough
彼歐米의 人	피 구미의 인	Those people of Europe and America
生存의 欲求	생존의 욕구	Desire for survival
熾盛하다	치성하다	Flourishing; intense; ardent
渦卷中	와권중	In the middle of a vortex/whirlpool
突入하다	돌입하다	To plunge into; rush into
奮鬪하다	분투하다	To struggle hard; strive
反對로	반대로	In contrast; conversely
될 수 잇는대로 까지는	될 수 있는 대로까지는	As much as possible
現代生活	현대생활	Modern life
脫離하다	탈리하다	To detach from; break away
돌이어	도리어	Instead; on the contrary (Older spelling)
原始狀態	원시상태	Primitive state
退却코저하는	퇴각하고자 하는	Seeking to retreat
造富	조부	Creating wealth
本能	본능	Instinct
甘貧	감빈	Accepting poverty willingly
恬淡	염담	Detached; tranquil; disinterested
寡欲	과욕	Having few desires
脫俗하다	탈속하다	To transcend the mundane; be unconventional
妙味	묘미	Subtle charm; exquisiteness
업슴은 아니나	없음은 아니나	It is not that there isn't (Older spelling)
生存競爭	생존경쟁	Struggle for existence
激烈하다	격렬하다	Fierce; intense; violent
今日에	금일에	Today; nowadays
時勢	시세	The times; current trends
共鳴하랴면	공명하려면	If one intends to resonate with
鞏固하다	공고하다	Solid; firm; strong
意思	의사	Intention; will
奮鬪的 國民	분투적 국민	Struggling people/nation
思慮周密하다	사려주밀하다	Thoughtful and meticulous; circumspect
如何한	여하한	What kind of
成功	성공	Success
正當하다	정당하다	Proper; rightful; legitimate
計劃	계획	Plan; project
立하야	입하여	Establishing; setting up (Older spelling)
着着 向上하다	착착 향상하다	To improve steadily; make steady progress
思컨대	사컨대	Considering; thinking (Older form of 생각건대)
此秋를 當하야	차추를 당하여	Facing this time/occasion (秋 often metaphor for time)
모름즉이	모름지기	Necessarily; by all means
營치 아니함이 不可하리라	영위하지 않음이 불가하리라	It will be imperative to conduct/manage
勞働	노동	Labor; work (Older form of 노동)
能率을 增進케 함	능률을 증진케 함	Increasing efficiency (Noun phrase)
精神的 及 肉體的	정신적 급 육체적	Mental and physical
意味함이랴	의미함이랴	What does it mean? (Archaic interrogative)
第1로	제1로	Firstly; as the first
身體를 健康히	신체를 건강히	Making the body healthy
體力	체력	Physical strength
弱한 處에는	약한 처에는	Where it is weak
有無	유무	Presence or absence; existence or non-existence
무를것이 업다	물을 것이 없다	There is no need to ask (Older spelling)
故로	고로	Therefore; hence
是-	시-	This is (Older demonstrative form)
高케하는	높게 하는	That which makes high; enhances
基礎條件	기초조건	Basic condition
次에도	차에도	Next; secondly
四肢百體	사지백체	Limbs and trunk; the whole body
總히	총히	All; entirely; wholly
適用的	적용적	Applicable; adaptable
指	지	Finger
耳	이	Ear
目	목	Eye
手足	수족	Hands and feet; limbs
活動	활동	Activity; movement
迅速히	신속히	Swiftly; promptly
事에 臨하는	사에 임하는	Facing matters/tasks
活機械	활기계	Living machine
精神的 要素	정신적 요소	Mental element/factor
誠實하다	성실하다	Sincere; faithful; earnest
熱心	열심	Enthusiasm; zeal
勤勉치 아니함이 不可하다	근면하지 아니함이 불가하다	It is imperative to be diligent
卽	즉	That is; namely
有用한 事業	유용한 사업	Useful work/enterprise
活用되도록	활용되도록	So as to be utilized
發達되다	발달되다	To be developed
堅忍誠實	견인성실	Perseverance and sincerity
精力	정력	Energy; vigor
充湓치 아니함이 不可하겟다	충만하지 않음이 불가하겠다	It is imperative to be full/abundant
用意周密	용의주밀	Meticulous preparation; carefulness
要케 되나니	요하게 되나니	Comes to be required (Older form)
例하면	예하면	For example
文書係	문서계	Clerk; person in charge of documents
諸般의 整頓	제반의 정돈	Arrangement of various things
一擧手一投足	일거수일투족	Every single move; every action
適宜히	적의히	Appropriately; suitably
排置되도록	배치되도록	So as to be arranged/placed
整列케하는	정렬케 하는	That which arranges neatly
護模糊	호모호	Glue; paste (?) (Uncommon term, context suggests adhesive)
鋏	협	Scissors (Archaic Hanja for 가위)
郵便切手	우편절수	Postage stamp (Japanese term 切手 kitte)
葉書	엽서	Postcard (Japanese term 葉書 hagaki)
電報用紙	전보용지	Telegraph form
封套卷紙	봉투권지	Envelopes and letter paper rolls (?)
墨	묵	Ink stick; black ink
筆	필	Brush (for writing)
置함	치함	Placing (Noun form)
適當하랴	적당하랴	Would it be appropriate? (Archaic interrogative)
等의	등의	Etc.; and the like
準備	준비	Preparation
整齊하다	정제하다	To arrange neatly; put in order
便利	편리	Convenience
可하겟다	가하겠다	Will be acceptable/good
些少한 事	사소한 사	Trivial matter
屬한듯하나	속한 듯하나	Although it seems to belong to
萬事萬爲	만사만위	All affairs and all actions
如한	여한	Such; like this
用意를 盡하면	용의를 진하면	If one exhausts preparation/care
這裏에	저리에	Herein; in this (Archaic literary form)
스스로	스스로	Naturally; by itself
向上	향상	Improvement
有케 되는	유하게 되는	Comes to exist/have
事務	사무	Task; business; office work
適當하다	적당하다	Appropriate; suitable
分類	분류	Classification; sorting
施하야	시하여	Implementing; carrying out (Older spelling)
마틈을	맡음을	Responsibility; charge (Noun form of 맡다)
均衡히 하다	균형히 하다	To balance
鍬	鍬	Hoe; spade (Archaic Hanja)
넘우 크지도 안케하며	너무 크지도 않게 하며	Making it not too large (Older spelling)
넘우 작지도 안케하야	너무 작지도 않게 하여	Making it not too small (Older spelling)
손맛게	손맞게	Fitting the hand
製造	제조	Manufacture; production
使用함	사용함	Using (Noun form)
不便하다	불편하다	Inconvenient
器具	기구	Tool; implement; utensil
數日	수일	Several days
働한	동한	Worked (Japanese verb 働く hataraku's stem + Korean particle)
業務	업무	Work; task; duty
比較	비교	Comparison
對照하면	대조하면	If contrasted
兩者의 間	양자의 간	Between the two
顯著하다	현저하다	Marked; conspicuous; distinct
高下	고하	High and low; difference in level/quality
發見하리라	발견하리라	Will discover
伴隨하다	반수하다	To accompany; follow
度外로 視하다	도외로 시하다	To disregard; view as unimportant
圖코저함	도모하고자 함	Trying to plan/achieve (Older spelling/form)
金錢	금전	Money; cash
旅行	여행	Travel; journey
强制하다	강제하다	To compel; force
다름이 업다	다름이 없다	Is no different from (Older spelling)
分離치 못할	분리하지 못할	Inseparable
業務	업무	Work; duty; business
快樂	쾌락	Pleasure; enjoyment
感케 함	감하게 함	Making feel (Noun phrase)
人人이	인인이	Each person; everyone
能히	능히	Capably; well; can
自己所業	자기소업	One's own work/occupation
服務的 快樂	복무적 쾌락	Pleasure of service
眞經濟的 趣味	진경제적 취미	True economic taste/interest
得하엿다 할 자이라	득하였다 할 자이라	Can be said to have obtained (Older form)
抑	억	Well; now; incidentally (Transitional word)
人生幸福	인생행복	Human happiness
兩敵	양적	Two enemies
苦痛	고통	Suffering; pain; agony
退屈	퇴굴	Boredom; ennui
脫코저하면	탈하고자 하면	If one seeks to escape (Older spelling/form)
生하고	생하고	Arises (Older connective form)
免코저 하면	면하고자 하면	If one seeks to avoid (Older spelling/form)
되나니	되나니	Becomes (Older connective form)
多數	다수	Majority; large number
大槪	대개	Generally; mostly
兩有의 間	양유의 간	Between these two existences (?) (Meaning unclear, likely "between these two")
遊泳하겟다	유영하겠다	Will swim; will navigate
貧困	빈곤	Poverty; destitution
富裕	부유	Wealth; affluence
貧者	빈자	The poor person
富者	부자	The rich person
適當하다	적당하다	Appropriate; suitable
活動	활동	Activity
各人 共히	각인 공히	Each person together
天然의 快樂	천연의 쾌락	Natural pleasure
發見하다	발견하다	To discover
技能	기능	Skill; technique
共히	공히	Together with; along with
融和하다	융화하다	To harmonize; blend
淳化케 함만 不하니	순화케 함만 못하니	There is nothing better than making pure/refined (?) (만 못하다 means 'not as good as', but context suggests 'nothing better than')
神秘	신비	Mystery; mystical
力	력	Power; force (Older form of 력/역)
勿論하다	물론하다	Needless to say; not to mention
將來	장래	Future
偉大하다	위대하다	Great; grand
發達	발달	Development; progress
遂코저 하면	수하고자 하면	If one seeks to achieve (Older spelling/form)
原動力	원동력	Driving force; motive power
本源	본원	Source; origin
待치 아니하면 不可하나니	대하지 아니하면 불가하니	It is imperative to await/rely on
體力	체력	Physical strength
富力	부력	Wealth; economic power
智力	지력	Intellectual power
德力	덕력	Moral power; power of virtue
者	자	Thing; element; person
世間	세간	The world; society
圓滿하다	원만하다	Harmonious; perfect; satisfactory
要素	요소	Element; factor
依하야	의하여	Depending on; according to (Older spelling)
優者	우자	Superior person
國家	국가	Nation; state
가만히	가만히	Quietly; carefully
素質	소질	Disposition; nature; aptitude
比較하다	비교하다	To compare
能히	능히	Capably; can
讓頭치 아니하리라	양두하지 아니하리라	Will not yield/concede
上帝	상제	God; Supreme Being
鬼神	귀신	Ghosts; spirits
保護	보호	Protection; care
加하다	가하다	To add; apply; inflict
過言	과언	Exaggeration
根本的 缺陷	근본적 결함	Fundamental flaw/defect
此에 잇다	차에 있다	Lies here; exists in this
自古로	자고로	Since ancient times
自信自賴	자신자뢰	Self-confidence and self-reliance
多하다	다하다	Many; much
輕蔑視하다	경멸시하다	To look down upon; despise
風化	풍화	Customs; public morals; weathering (Here meaning custom/trend)
敎習	교습	Teaching; instruction; training (Here meaning ingrained teaching/habit)
잇서왓나니	있어왔나니	Has existed (Older spelling/form)
缺點	결점	Flaw; shortcoming
猶太人	유태인	Jewish people
正反對	정반대	Exact opposite
正矛盾	정모순	Exact contradiction
金錢	금전	Money; cash
不潔	불결	Impure; unclean
寸毫의 醜態	촌호의 추태	Slightest bit of disgraceful behavior
업서왓나니	없어왔나니	Has not existed (Older spelling)
자랑거리	자랑거리	Source of pride; boast
今日 以後	금일 이후	From today onwards; hereafter
或은	혹은	Or; perhaps
現在에서	현재에서	In the present
生存의 貧弱	생존의 빈약	Poverty/weakness of existence
致케 하엿스며	치하게 하였으며	Caused to reach; brought about (Older spelling)
生活의 立場	생활의 입장	Standing/position in life
危케한	위태롭게 한	That which endangered
所以	소이	Reason; cause
特히	특히	Especially; particularly
此點에	차점에	To this point
注意를 拂하다	주의를 불하다	To pay attention (拂払う harau - Japanese influence?)
奮起케 할지어다	분기케 할지어다	Let us arouse! (Hortative ending)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제11호
발행일	1921년 05월 01일
기사제목	生活上으로 觀한 經濟觀念의 基礎
필자	李敦化
기사형태	논설

生活上으로 觀한 經濟觀念의 基礎
						李敦化
一, 慾望의 向上과 慾望의 改造
사람은 다못 「빵」뿐으로마는 살지 못한다함은 이 實로 사람을 가르처 慾望이 大한 動物이라 解釋하야도 또한 無妨하겟다. 사람은 慾望이 大한지라. 그럼으로 다못 「食」 一件事에 뿐 滿足치 아니하고 進하야는 宗敎 哲學的 生活, 文學 藝術的 趣味를 要求케 되나니 사람의 사람된 眞價는 實로 이에서 나타난다 하리라.
사람 性은 元來-他 動物에 比하야 慾望의 衝動이 巨大한 動物이라 하겟다. 지나간 慾望의 滿足을 잇고 새로운 慾望의 滿足을 求코저 汲汲하는 動物이며 過去 幸福의 希求를 達하고 나면 또 다시 未來 幸福의 境涯를 開拓코저 孜孜하는 動物이엇다. 安分知足이라 함은 사람의 本能과 全히 矛盾된 말이요. 小慾自樂이라 함은 사람의 本性을 潜越한 行爲라 할 수 잇다. 사람이 누-楊洲鶴을 실타하리요. 사람은 足함을 知하고 다시 新한 足를 求하며 樂을 知하고 다시 新한 樂을 要하는 곳에 사람의 偉力이 이에 나타나는 것이요. 사람의 價値가 이에 表顯되는 것이다. 사람이 다만 一知足과 一安樂에 自處하야 다시 그 以上에 知足과 安樂을 求하는 本能이 缺乏하엿다 하면 그야말로 禽獸와 무엇이 다를배 잇스며 木石과 무엇이 差支될 배잇스랴. 老子가 사람을 가르처 欲이 無하라 하며 孟軻가 사람을 가르처 人慾을 遏하라 함은 이 사람을 驅하야 사람의 本能되는 慾求를 全滅코저 함이 아니요 차라리 사람의 本能的 衝動을 보다 以上의 知足보다 以上의 幸福의 處에 引導코저 함이 아니겟느냐.
나는 일즉 어떤 停車場에서 定刻의 汽車가 20分間 晩着케 되엇슬 時에 乘客 中 一人이 汽車의 定刻 違됨을 憤慨하야 「交通의 機關이 如此하고야 어찌 文明의 生活을 圖得할 수 잇으랴」하고 怒號함에 對하야 他 一人이＜11＞ 「아니다. 우리 朝先時代에 幾百幾千 道程이라도 徒步하던 形便에 比하야 汽車가 아모리 機時間 或은 機日間 晩着한다 할지라도 또한 便利치 아니한가」하고 答함을 聞하고 나는 바로 前者의 言에 左袒함을 마지아니하엿다. 무슨일이던지 容恕라 하는 것은 한 例外에 不過한 것이다. 한 慰安方法에 不過한 것이다. 過去를 回하고 未來의 望이 無한 者는 退化의 惡魔에 不過한 것이다. 勿論 過去의 祖先時代에 比하야 今日 우리時代의 生活은 이보다 幾百步 退步한다 할지라도 오히려 諸般의 能率이 有餘할 것은 事實이다. 그러나 사람이 容恕에 容恕를 加하고 慰安에 慰安을 求한다 하야 過去의 安逸無爲로 退化한다하면 사람은 마츰내 木食巢穴의 狀態에 還元할 外에 他道가 업슬 것이엇다.
나는 屢屢恒言함과 가티 世界의 自己民族의 歷史가 가장 長久하다 자랑하는 國家가 果然 未來의 進步가 速할가 否할가 함을 疑問하는 바니 사람은 歷史가 長하면 長하니 마치 過去 因襲에 拘束됨은 是-避치 못할 事이라 이는 個人으로나 民族이 다가티 그러한 現象을 가지고 잇슴으로써라 個人에 在하야 老年이 靑年보다 進步의 力이 遲鈍한 所以는 老年 自己의 歷史가 靑年에 比하야 長久함으로 未來的 新慾望이 過去라 云하는 經驗에게 抹殺된 證據가 아니리요. 民族에 在하야도 亦然하나니 現在의 埃及 或은 中華 印度 土耳 其等 各 民族은 過去의 歷史가 長久하엿슴에 不過하고 돌이어 新進의 國家의 支配를 受케됨은 또한 此理에 不過한 것이라 할지라. 現在의 米國人이 가장 短한 歷史의 國家로 能히 世界의 覇權을 支配하는 所以는 이 靑年이 新進의 銳氣로써 慾望의 力이 增大함과 同一하다 看做하야도 또한 無妨하리라.
어찌햇던 사람은 向上으로 目的으로 삼는 것이며 向上은 精力의 盛旺을 要하는 것이며 精力은 慾望의 活氣를 기달이게 되는 것이엇다. 사람은 慾望의 活氣에 依하야써 그 個人이나 그 民族의 前途幸福을 占하나니 吾人은 삼가 慾望의 價値를 改造케하고 慾望의 範圍를 向上케 할 必要가 有하겟다.
吾人은 恒常-吾 朝鮮民族의 普遍的 缺點을 論據코저 할 際에 무엇보다도 먼저 一考치 아니치 못할바는 慾望이 極히 狹小함이니 朝鮮人은 自來로 山林的 處士生活로써 處世의 高尙主義라 하엿슴이 가장 우리의 缺點이며 不然이면 放任誤世로써 男子의 快事라 하엿슴이 우리의 不祥之兆이엇섯다. 巢父許由는 朝鮮人의 理想的 人物이며 竹林七賢은 朝鮮人의 崇拜的 好漢이엇다. ＜12＞ 그리하야 陋巷曲肱의 中에서 樂亦在其中이라한 顔回이야말로 朝鮮人의 가장 信仰的 人物이엇다. 士로 稱하면 一指不動하고 오즉 簞食瓢飮으로써 其樂을 삼은 然後에야 거의 人間 最後의 貞節을 守하엿다 함이다. 一言而蔽하면 安貧樂道는 朝鮮 士者의 唯一의 美德됨과 同時에 朝鮮人의 普遍的 弊害라 할 수 잇다. 勿論 士者된 者의 美德은 如何한 貧苦를 忍耐하야 가며서라도 自己의 德行을 修하며 自己의 硏究를 加할 것은 土者-本來의 天職이라 할지나 然이나 天下의 美德이 어찌 홀로 土者에 뿐 在하리요. 士者에는 士者의 美德이 잇다 할 것 가트면 農者에는 農者의 美德이 잇슬 것이요. 商者 工者에는 또한 商者 工者의 美德이 잇슬 것이다. 그러하야 그 所謂 美德은 그 各 專門에 對하야 各各의 美德이 特殊한 方式으로 表顯할 것이다. 만일 土者의 美德을 安貧樂道르 假定한다할 것 가트면 農者의 美德은 農業의 向上이 될 것이며 商者 工者의 美德은 商工의 向上이 되어야 하겟다 然함에 不拘하고 朝鮮人은 過去에서 오즉 士者의 安貧樂道의 美德뿐으로 天下의 美德을 삼맛는지라. 그럼으로 商者는 有하나 商의 美德이 업스며 農工이 有하나 農工의 美德은 업서왓다. 이 點에서 朝鮮人 全部 慾望은 一個 士者라 云하는 「安貧樂道」的 狹小한 慾望에 被拘한 배 되어써 今日에 至하엿다. 그럼으로 朝鮮人이 子弟를 學校에 通學케 하는 觀念은 그 父母된 者-子弟에게 知識을 열어 人格의 向上을 圖케하리라는 觀念보다 子弟로써 士者(官吏)가 되게하리라 慾望하는 觀念이 多하나니 이 實로 朝鮮人 多數의 慾望이 顚倒된 것이며 그리하야 且狹隘齷齪케된 所以라 할지라. 吾人이 方在 朝鮮人의 生活을 向上케 하고저 하면 반듯이 此 誤謬된 慾望을 改造케하며 向上케 할 必要가 有하나니 然하면 吾等朝鮮人의 慾望은 如何한 方面으로 改造하여 *向上케 하랴.

二, 生存과 生活의 *을 먼저 알라
以上에 術함과 가티 吾等 朝鮮人이 먼저 慾望의 改造와 慾望의 向上을 圖코저하면 吾人은 먼저 生存과 生活의 別을 알라 絶阧하나니 生存과 生活의 別을 不知하는 者는 是-禽獸이며 野蠻이니라. 生存이라 함은 다만 生命을 가진 動物이 겨우 生命을 維持함에 止하는 것을 意味함이요. 生活이라 함은 다만 生命을 維持함에 止치 아니하고 進하야는 모든 生活의 享樂을 增大케하는 方針을 이름이니 即 人이 다만 「빵」뿐으로만 生한다하면 이곳 生存의 意味에 不過한 것이로되 生活이라 함은 다시＜13＞ 「빵」以上의 高等의 慾望을 享受하는 意味이엇다. 植物과 禽獸는 어떤 意味에서 그 天賦의 生存權은 同一하다 할지라도 그 生活이라는 問題에 至하야는 兩者가 極히 隔遠한 差別이 잇스며 또 他 動物과 人類는 그 生存權은 同一타 할지라도 그 生活에 至하야는 人類의 生活과 禽獸의 生活이 霄壤의 懸殊가 有하겟다. 그리하야 人類와 人類間에 在하야도 如何히 生存하던지 그 生命을 維持하는 點에서 同一타 할지라도 人類의 慾望을 滿足케하는 點-即 生活의 問題에 至하야 人類 互相의 間에 至大한 差別이 生케되는 것이엇다. 野蠻人의 生活과 文明人의 生活이 그 根本에서 相異함이며 富國人의 生活과 貧國人의 生活이 그 程度에서 相異함이며 同一한 富國人, 同一한 貧國人일지라도 또 그 個人 個人의 生活이 相異케 됨은 人이 곳 生存과 生活의 區別이 有한 所以라 할지라. 吾人이 現在 米國人의 生活과 日本人의 生活 程度를 比較하야 보며 또 日本人의 生活과 朝鮮人의 生活은 比較하야 보면 何人이던지 這間에 幾十倍의 差違가 生함을 可知할 것이엇다. 米國人이나 日本人이나 朝鮮人이나 그 人된 點에서 同一하며 그 人된 生命을 維持하는 點 即 生存하는 點에서 同一하나 그러나 그 生活의 本位에 至하야는 實로 霄壤의 懸隔에 生케되나니 彼가 凌雲冲霄의 洋屋에서 起臥하는 代에 此는 廢棟頹屋의 裡에서 奄하며 彼가 學術文藝藝術 等 高等한 享樂을 受하는 代에 此는 一碗의 濁醪에 거의 그 肉體的 慰勞를 밧고잇는 形便이 아닌가. 大槪 사람의 慾望이라 하는 것은 늘이면 限定업시 늘일수 잇는 것이요. 줄이면 또한 限定업시 줄일 수 잇는 것이다 慾望이 高遠함에 조차는 飛行機의 生活도 오히러 滿足치 못하야 火星界의 交通을 求하며 月世界의 旅行도 敢行하게 되는 것이오. 慾望이 縮小함에 조차는 石磵草屋의 生活도 오히려 不能하야 마츰내 土窟을 求하며 木巢를 營케 되는 것이다. 即 慾望이 大하면 大할 수록 그 制限을 不知함과 가티 小하면 小함에 조차 또한 그 制限이 업게 되나니 이곳 慾望의 多少는 進化와 退化의 分岐點이라 볼 수 잇다. 吾 朝鮮人은 幾百年 以來-極端한 文弱에 退屈되어 慾望이 極히 縮小케 된 結果는 모든 生活의 方式이 漸次 退化를 始作하야 終에 今日의 狀態를 形成함에 至하였다. 知足이라하야 人으로 退屈에 處케 하엿고 安分이라 하야 民으로 惰眠을 貪케하엿스며 儉朴한다하야 居住衣食이 野卑에 退落케 되엇스며 質素한다하야 人心으로 鈍朴蠢動에 止케 하엿다. 그리하야 그 生活狀態가 즈러들이만치 즈러들고 말엇다.＜14＞
어찌햇던 朝鮮人은 그 生活程度를 늘여야 하겟다. 現在의 生活程度를 10倍나 或은 20倍를 늘여야하겟다. 現在 朝鮮人이 이 生活程度-이 모양대로 가지고 잇서서는 文化建設이고 文明向上이고 다 쓸대 업는 말이겟다. 밥이라는 것이 그 모양이고 옷이라는 것이 그 모양이고 居住라는 것이 그 모양이고 모든 生活이라는 것이 다 그 모양되고 나서야 어느 겨를에 高等한 文化的 事業을 建設할 수 잇스랴. 줄이고 차고 잇슬데 업고 나서야 무슨 景況에 다른 생각이 날 리가 잇슬가보냐. 古人이 일럿스되 衣食이 足한 後에 禮節을 知한다 하엿스니 衣食이 不足한 人民에게 何暇에 모든 建設을 說明할 景況이 생기리요. 그럼으로 現在의 朝鮮人으로써 가장 實地的 急務라 할 것은 무엇보다도 먼저 經濟的 觀念을 가저야 하겟다. 그리하야 生活의 向上을 圖하여야 하겟다. 現在 朝鮮人 1個人의 對한 1個月 平均生活費가 5圓에 지내지 못하는 것은 統計表上으로 넉넉히 證明할 수 잇다. 1個人이 1個月 平均 5圓의 物質的 價値를 가지고 어느 겨를에 文化를 말하고 文明을 圖할 여가가 잇스랴. 그 5圓이 少하야도 6, 7倍 10倍 以上에 達한 뒤에야 거의 써 朝鮮人의 血管에 生血이 循環된다 하리라.
우리가 만일 生存과 生活의 區別이 업시 못되면 못되는 대로 살고 업스면 업는대로 살다가 그리다가 정말 못되고 정말 업게 되면 한 가지로 손목을 맛잡고 바다에 나아가 빠저 죽기로 작정을 대면 아모 근심도 업고 아모 문제도 생기지 아니할 것이지마는 그러나 少하야도 우리 民族의 將來를 爲하야 光明이라는 것을 열어주고 幸福이라는 것은 準備하랴면 우리는 只今으로부터 猛然히 覺醒하야 安貧樂道하는 顔淵의 退屈主義를 버리고 觸手成金하는 陶朱公의 經濟手段을 배워야 하겟다. 現在의 朝鮮은 顔淵의 朝鮮이 되지말고 陶朱公의 朝鮮이 되여야 하겟다.

三, 經濟라는 것은 무엇인고
經濟라는 것은 무엇이뇨. 이곳 生活을 向上케 하는 手段과 方針에 不外한 것이다. 다만 生存이라하고 보면 비록 經濟의 手段을 要치 아니한다 할지라도 生活의 問題에 至하야는 一動一靜이 다가티 經濟的 意味를 包含치 아니한 者- 업겟다. 元來-經濟라는 것은 세가지 標準이 잇슬것이다. 한 가지는 輸出이 輸入보다 만흔것이니 그리고 보면 經濟狀況이 넉넉하야질 것이오. 한 가지는 輸出과 輸入이 平均한 것이니 이는 經濟上 調和를 어덧다 할 것이요. 한 가지는 輸出이 輸入보다 적어짐이니 ＜15＞ 如斯한 國民은 날로 經濟의 困難을 免치 못할 것이겟다.
그런데 우리는 吾 朝鮮에 在한 輸出과 輸入이 果然 平均을 엇게 될 것인가 否한가를 統計로써 알기 前에 우리는 먼저 自己의 一身과 自己 一人의 家庭生活을 돌아보면 爲先 우리의 經濟狀態 如何를 알 수 잇슬 것이다. 발에 「洋襪」을 신엇스며 손에 掌匣을 끼엿스며 몸에는 玉洋木을 둘럿스며 거테는 外套를 입엇스니 洋襪·掌匣·玉洋木·外套·時計·眼鏡·開化杖·목돌이·帽子·腰帶 그 모든 것이 다 누구의 손으로 나온 것인가 한 번 調査하야보라. 우리의 物件이라고는 다만 腸胃속에 파무텨 잇는 食物以外에는 아모 것도 업다. 우리의 몸에 잇는 諸具中에 1對 8, 9는 다- 外로부터 輸入한 것뿐이다. 그리고 家庭에 돌아와 보라 ·가마·남비·石炭·사발·燈油·寢具·行李·机子·交椅·蓆子 等이며 甚至於 壁의 塗褙까지도 우리의 物件이 하나이나 잇는가 그리고 建築物·機械·工匠 모든 것은 다시 말할 것도 업다. 우리는 조고마한 벽돌 하나를 싸흘지라도 外國 사람의 손을 빌지 안코는 到底히 餘望이 업시된다. 伊來 京城에서 敎會堂 或은 學校·官衙·會社 等-諸 建物을 建築 或은 修繕할 때에 日本人의 手이나 或은 支那人의 手를 經由치 아니하고는 하나도 되는 것이 업다. 이러한 形便에 다시 經濟狀態를 論할 勇氣가 잇스랴. 나는 우리 朝鮮人의 生活的 經濟狀況을 알고저 할 때에 決코 消極的 方法을 쓰라 할 勇氣가 나지 아니한다. 即 우리의 今日 現象이 이보다 더 먹지안코 더 입지안코 더 쓰지안코 이보다 더 儉朴하야 가지고 消極的 經濟 手段을 用하라 할 勇氣가 나지 아니한다. 아모리 못사는 살림살이라도 그만치는 먹고 그만치는 입고 그만치는 쓰고야 生活의 꼴이 될것이니까. 經濟야 되던지 안되던지 最下度로 그만한 形便은 維持하여야 하겟다. 그럼으로 나의 이른바 所謂 朝鮮 經濟라 할 것은 少하야도 積極의 方法을 取하야 自作自給의 道를 講究치 아니함이 不可타하며 그리하야 그 自作自給의 方法으로는 먼저

産業開發 의 途에 就치 아니함이 不可타한다. 1坪의 土地라도 開墾하고 1株의 木이라도 植樹하고 1品의 手工이라도 創造하야 스스로 作하고 스스로 給하는 道를 取하여야 하겟다.
方法이야 善하던지 否하던지 朝鮮은 農業國이니까 現在 及 將來에 就하야 朝鮮 唯一의 基本財産이 될 것은 오즉 農業이라 하야도 過言이 아니라 그럼으로 우리는＜16＞ 現在의 農業狀態를 더욱 向上케 하야 現在보다 幾部分의 收益을 得케하도록 힘써야하리라. 듯건대 朝鮮에는 現在의 畓 中-容易히 灌漑改善을 行키 得할 者- 40萬 町步이며 田의 地目을 變換하야 畓으로 할만한 者- 20萬 町步이며 草生地의 開墾 及 干潟地의 開拓을 施行할만한 者가 20萬 町步가 된다하며 그리하야 山林地의 總面積이 約 1千5百8十8萬 町步 中에 成林地가 겨우 3割이라 한다. 이로써 보면 朝鮮의 農業 前途는 可히 前途洋洋타 할지니 農業家 된 者- 一層 改良 向上의 策을 執하면 可히써 豐歲에 足을 樂할것이오. 凶年에 飢를 免할 것이다. 그러나 少하야도 1 民族의 살림살이가 다만 天惠의 恩澤인 農業 1件事에뿐 全賴한다하면 이는 半身不遂의 生活이 되고 말 것이다. 사람은 「밥」이 잇슴과 同時에 옷이 잇서야 하는 것이요 一般의 家具가 잇서야 하는 것이요 딸아서 生活을 豊富케하는 모든 輸出品이 잇서야 할 것이다. 거긔서 처음으로 工業의 必要를 感케 되는 것이요 商業의 發達을 要케 되는 것이엇다. 現世에서 내로라고 自誇하는 所謂 文明國이라는 것은 다가티 工業國과 商業國 됨을 보아도 工商에 얼마나 經濟上 中心이 되엇슴을 알 것이 아닌가. 要컨대 朝鮮 今後의 死活問題는 唯一의 經濟의 足 不足에 잇다할 것이며 그리하야 經濟의 足 不足은 오로지 産業啓發에 잇다 하리라. 約言하면 經濟라 함은 먼저 生活의 要求이엇다. 即 胃와 腑의 要求하는 問題이엇다. 사람은 비록 「빵」으로만 살지 못한다 할지라도 爲先 「빵」을 먹고 나서야 무엇을 更新하는 道를 求할 수 잇스리라. 그리하야 「빵」의 出處는 다만 生産의 如何에 잇는 것이며 生産의 如何는 國民全體의 相當한

計劃잇는生活 을 爲치 아님이 不可하겟다. 從來 吾 朝鮮民族은 生活에 對하야 十分의 要求를 가지지 못한 民族이라 하겟다. 從하야 生活에 對한 豫定計劃이 업는 民族이라 하겟다. 그날 그날 지나갓스면 人生生活이 이에 머츨뿐이라 생각할 뿐이요. 5年 10年 或은 20年 後에는 只今보다 優勝한 生活이 出來하리라 하는 豫定잇는 計劃 下에서 計劃잇는 準備를 가지지 못하엿다. 그럼으로 우리는 米價가 高騰하던지 物價가 昻上되어 生活을 支持키 難한 境遇를 當하면 極히 消極的 方法을 取하야 都會를 버리고 地方으로 入하며 野를 버리고 山에 入하야 消極에 極消極을 取하는 民族이엇다. 그는 朝鮮開放 以來로 幾十年間- 都會地에 漸次 朝鮮人 戶數가 減하야가고 外人의＜17＞ 戶數가 增加함을 보아도 可히 알겟다. 彼歐米의 人이 生存의 欲求가 熾盛하야 어떠한 生活의 渦卷中이라도 突入하야 奮鬪하는 勇氣를 가진 反對로 吾 朝鮮民族은 될 수 잇는대로 까지는 現代生活로 부터 脫離하야 돌이어 原始狀態로 退却코저하는 形便에 잇다. 이곳 外國人이 造富의 本能이 有한 代에 朝鮮人은 甘貧의 本能이 잇다 하리라 恬淡, 寡欲, 脫俗하는 處에 多少의 妙味가 업슴은 아니나 그러나 生存競爭이 激烈한 今日에 時勢와 共鳴하랴면 鞏固한 意思로써 奮鬪的 國民이 되지 아니함이 不可하며 더욱이 思慮周密하야 幾 十年 後에는 如何한 成功이 有하리라 하는 正當한 計劃을 立하야 着着 向上하는 民族이 되지 아니함이 不可하다. 思컨대 今後의 世界經濟는 더욱 激烈이 될 此秋를 當하야 吾人은 모름즉이 計劃잇는 經濟的 生活을 營치 아니함이 不可하리라. 元來 經濟的 生活이라함은 消極的으로 儉朴히 食하고 儉朴히 衣함을 意味할 뿐 아니요. 積極的으로 모든

勞働의 能率을 增進 케 함이 참된 經濟的 生活이라 할 지라. 然하면 勞働(精神的 及 肉體的)의 能率增進이라함은 무엇을 意味함이랴. 此에 對하야는 第1로 身體를 健康히 하지 아니함이 不可함은 다시 말할것도 업다. 體力이 弱한 處에는 다시 能率의 有無를 무를것이 업다. 故로 體力健康이 是- 能率을 高케하는 基礎條件의 1이며 次에도 사람은 四肢百體가 總히 適用的 되지 아님이 不可하다. 指·耳·目·手足의 活動이 될 수 잇는대로 適用的이 되며 그리하야 且 迅速히 事에 臨하는 活機械가 되지 아니함이 不可하며 또 그 精神的 要素로는 誠實하며 熱心이며 且 勤勉치 아니함이 不可하다. 卽 肉體的으로는 百體 百體가 도모지 有用한 事業에 活用되도록 發達되며 精神的으로는 堅忍誠實의 精力이 充湓치 아니함이 不可하겟다. 次에는 能率向上의 方法으로는 用意周密을 要케 되나니 例하면 文書係라하면 諸般의 整頓이 一擧手一投足에 適宜히 排置되도록 整列케하는 것이니 護模糊는 何處에 置함이 適宜하며 鋏은 何處, 郵便切手는 何處, 葉書는 何處, 電報用紙는 何處, 封套卷紙는 何處, 墨과 筆은 何處에 置함이 適當하랴하는 等의 準備를 整齊하야 便利 且 迅速하도록 用意함이 可하겟다. 此等은 비록 些少한 事에 屬한듯하나 그러나 萬事萬爲에 다가티 此와 如한 用意를 盡하면 這裏에 스스로 能率의 向上이 有케 되는 것이엇다. 次에는 또 事務로써 適當한 分類를 施하야 ＜18＞各各의 마틈을 均衡히 할 것이니 例하면 田에 用하는 鍬라 할지라도 넘우 크지도 안케하며 넘우 작지도 안케하야 손맛게 製造 使用함이 必要할 것은 勿論이엇다. 不便한 器具로써 數日을 働한 業務와 便利한 器具로써 數日을 働한 業務를 比較 對照하면 兩者의 間에는 顯著한 能率의 高下를 發見하리라. 어찌햇던 經濟生活과 共히 必要伴隨할 것은 能率의 向上이 되지 아니치 못할지니 能率의 向上을 度外로 視하고 經濟의 向上을 圖코저함은 是-金錢이 업시 旅行을 强制함과 다름이 업다하겟다. 終에 經濟生活과 分離치 못할 一事는

業務에 對한 快樂 을 感케 함이니 人人이 能히 自己所業에 對하야 服務적 快樂을 感함에서 처음으로 眞經濟的 趣味를 得하엿다 할 자이라.
抑 人生幸福의 兩敵은 苦痛과 退屈이엇다. 그리하야 苦痛을 脫코저하면 退屈이 生하고 退屈을 免코저 하면 苦痛이 되나니 人의 多數는 大槪 此 兩有의 間에 遊泳하겟다.
大槪 貧困은 苦痛을 生케하고 富裕는 退屈을 生케하나니 貧者-能히 그 生活에 苦痛이 업게되고 富者- 能히 退屈이 업게하야 兩者 共히 適當한 活動을 得케 하랴면 各人 共히 自己의 業務의 中에서 天然의 快樂을 發見하야 自己의 技能이 業務와 共히 融和하며 淳化케 함만 不하니 이곳 經濟生活에 업지 못할 神秘의 力이라 할지라.
元來-個人이나 民族을 勿論하고 그 個人이나 그 民族이 將來 偉大한 發達을 遂코저 하면 4大 原動力의 本源을 待치 아니하면 不可하나니 4大 原動力이라 함은 곳 體力, 富力, 智力, 德力의 4者일 것이다. 世間은 此 4大 原動力의 圓滿한 要素에 依하야 個人은 優者가 되며 國家는 偉大케 된다 하리라.
가만히 생각하면 吾 朝鮮人의 素質을 此 4大 原動力에 比較하고 보면 吾等 朝鮮人은 能히 體力이 有하며 能히 智力이 有하며 能히 德力이 有함은 他民族에 決코 讓頭치 아니하리라. 이 點은 上帝 鬼神이 保護를 加하고 잇다하야도 過言이 아니겟다. 그러나 經濟的 生活- 即 富力의 養成에 就하야 吾 朝鮮人은 根本的 缺陷이 此에 잇다하야도 過言이 아니리라. 朝鮮人은 實로 德力 智力에서 自古로 自信自賴할 點이 多하다. 富力에 至하야는 그를 輕蔑視하는 風化와 敎習이 잇서왓나니 이 實로 朝鮮人의 美德됨과 同時에 朝鮮人의 一大缺點이엇더니라. 朝鮮人은 猶太人과 正反對이며 中華人과 正矛盾이엇다. 朝鮮民族은 金錢이라하는 不潔의 物에 對하야 寸毫의 醜態가 업서왓나니 이것이 朝鮮人의 자랑거리며 同時에 朝鮮人으로 今日 以後- 或은 現在에서 生存의 貧弱을 致케 하엿스며 生活의 立場을 危케한 所以이엇나니 吾人은 特히 此點에 注意를 拂하야 經濟的 觀念을 奮起케 할지어다.＜19＞
＜11-19＞