잡지명	개벽 第11호
발행일	1921년 05월 01일
기사제목	藝術的 良心이 缺如한 우리 文壇 (Our Literary Circle Lacking Artistic Conscience)
필자	李益相
기사형태	논설 (Editorial/Argumentative Essay)

藝術的 良心이 缺如한 우리 文壇
						李益相
1
Having decided on this title and taken up my brush to begin writing, such a memory naturally comes to mind.
When I was in our country, my friend K had absolutely no freedom due to the strict interference and sanctions of his family. It would be more appropriate to call it stubbornness rather than strictness. Thus, K, while pitying his father's excessive stubbornness and narrow-mindedness, harbored great resentment towards the elders of our Chosŏn (朝鮮).
One day, when several friends gathered and, as our youth always do, were venting their boundless frustrations about all the dissatisfactions in our current society, K said,
"Regarding the stubborn actions of our elders, the so-called organs of public opinion seem too silent and indifferent. They act as if it's someone else's problem. I once wanted to borrow the pages of a newspaper or magazine to deliver a major blow to the stubborn actions of our elders, but recently, an editorial in a certain newspaper criticized them with a tone similar to what I intended to say. I felt truly gratified."
Whether K possessed the intellect to write down his feelings and publish them as proper discourse in a newspaper or magazine, or whether the elders would be impressed by that discourse and decide to mend their ways henceforth, is a separate issue. I merely responded to K's words with a sneer.
However, before that sneer faded from my face, I find myself taking up this brush, regardless of the sneers I might receive from others. Is this not related to some cause and effect? <100>
I have harbored considerable dissatisfaction towards the writers active in our literary circle (though there's hardly a literary circle to speak of, let's just call it that for lack of a better term) – the various writers advertised in magazines as star writers, first-rate thinkers, genius poets – for the sake of our people's future and the destination of art. More than dissatisfaction, perhaps pity and regret; in any case, it is a fact that I thought things could not continue as they were, that it could not be overlooked.
So, just as my friend K intended to borrow a corner of a newspaper or magazine to admonish our elders, I wanted to offer my opinion to you, writers, and inquire about their artistic conscience.
However, upon reading the essay "Chosŏn Writers and Self-Cultivation" (朝鮮文士와 修養), written by the pen of Ch'unwŏn (春園), who had long been silent in our literary circle, in the New Year issue of the literary magazine "Ch'angjo" (創造) this time, I, like K who felt gratified reading the editorial that excoriated our elders, also spontaneously exclaimed "Bravo!" (快哉). I felt a sense of relief similar to what one feels upon hearing that someone who habitually engaged in bad behavior without hesitation was slapped by another while attempting yet another bad deed.
I firmly believe that Ch'unwŏn's article, brimming with passion, will serve as a reference and a warning to the writers bustling about in our literary circle. Thus, if anyone were to ask me, "What dissatisfaction did you harbor towards our literary circle?" I would have no choice but to reply, "It is largely the same as what Ch'unwŏn published in the New Year issue of Ch'angjo. Even if you asked me to state it again now, it would still be the same." Reaching this point, I recall the words of my friend K mentioned earlier and my sneer, and thinking that a sneer similar to the one I gave might naturally arise from those of you reading this now, I considered stopping. However, because I consider it an even stranger phenomenon that such a roaring critique (子吼) and satirical writing came from the hand of Ch'unwŏn, a writer currently active in the Chosŏn literary circle, let the sneering be as you wish; this is the reason I have taken up my immature pen. This is what created this nursery rhyme.
It is a fact that literary fervor is about to surge in our country today. Whether it's more appropriate to call it literary or artistic fervor is unknown, but in any case, the word "literature" (文) seems to hold great interest and stimulation among young students. Then, this<101> artistic fervor reaching a high pitch is certainly not an unfavorable trend. Rather, it can be called a favorable trend worthy of great welcome and guidance. To our stubborn old folks who believed there was no literature other than classical Chinese, or to the pseudo-new intellectuals steeped in the so-called new trends and having received new education, yet harboring the anachronistic idea that divides literature into soft and hard schools, that art is mere entertainment, a way to kill time, something for idle loafers to indulge in, and thus despising it – perhaps this trend seems truly worrisome. However, anyone who understands art even a little and knows its relationship with life cannot help but suppress a knowing smile. Isn't Carpenter's saying, "Life itself is art," a perfect penetration (喝破) of this? If we are truly to awaken to humanity and live in true emotion, we must live in art. In this sense, the fact that the youth of our country are coming to love literature and art seems to be the first cry for living as human beings. This will not only become a great driving force for the development of our thought but ultimately must govern our entire lives for us to live truly.
Don't we witness how those Russian (러시아) youths who, as boys, cherished the works of Dostoevsky (또쓰떠예-쁘시키) like the Bible, have grown up today and strive for the irrational life of us humans, and how great their sacrifices are? However, observing the direction in which the artistic taste currently burgeoning among the youth of our country is leaning, or seems to be leaning, I wonder if there isn't a tendency to diverge (背馳) from what I have stated above.
Since I mentioned that my demands of the literary circle are largely the same as Ch'unwŏn's, there is no need to add superfluous remarks (蛇足). Furthermore, whether it is appropriate to take up theories of art or literature, aim (照準) them at the works of the writers in our current literary circle, and critique their value is also merely a question. Perhaps they lack (缺與) the qualification to receive such criticism. This is like being unable to use a scalpel (메-써-) used for dissecting cows or horses when dissecting a tiny animal like a flea (蚤).
Isn't art, in its primary sense, the outpouring (流露) of the true emotions of our real lives? Therefore, the expression of the true emotions of that era can be called the art of that era. However, I have yet to discover whether the emotions expressed in the works of our current writers have expressed such true suffering of the times or the anguish of life. I have never encountered a work vibrant (潑剌) with emotions that could be refined (醇化) in my heart. I cannot help but doubt<102> whether there is human suffering burning in the hearts of you writers, whether there are emotions worth appealing to humanity. There is no other way but to ask the artistic conscience of the writers themselves.

2
Ch'unwŏn, the author of the article "Chosŏn Writers and Self-Cultivation" in the New Year issue of Ch'angjo, is a member who helped build our literary circle, an indispensable contributor to our literary circle, and someone in whom we place great expectations. In this sense, I hope for a more earnest confession from him. He stated thus:
"For over 10 years, I have written either essays or novels, amounting to over 3,000 pages. Besides having contributed to popularizing the newspaper style in our country, did I provide any stimulus? Thinking about it now, I wish I hadn't written 70 or 80 percent of it. When I think that those ignorant and shallow writings must have inflicted harm (害毒) on our beloved young brothers and sisters, I feel so guilty and heartbroken that I want to cut off this hand that held the brush."
From this fiery, burning confession (告白) of fervent remorse (悔恨), anyone can see how passionate and absolute his love for our compatriots is. Indeed, it is so. Among our writers today, the tendency observed by Ch'unwŏn certainly exists, and it is also a fact that harm similar to that inflicted by him is being inflicted. Our people have suffered limitless oppression under the old ethics and morals for many centuries, and politically too, we have rarely seen a world of freedom. We have seldom lived as human beings. Then, our hearts should be filled with lumps of pent-up resentment (鬱奮) and anguished (苦惱) blood, and our limbs should be surging with tides of rebellious (反抗的) blood. This should exist traditionally. That this mood and sentiment should be stronger in us than in any other nation or people can be recognized by anyone with a thinking mind.
If literature and art are the expression of emotion and the symbol of anguish, then our literary circle should abound with works that cannot fail to inspire deep emotion in those whose blood boils, and art that pierces the flesh like a needle, appealing to humanity, should flourish (勃興). However, contrary to this, the tendency for a profligate mood to surge among writers is truly<103> a strange (怪常) phenomenon. Consequently, one cannot help but doubt whether we too possess true humanity. We need to take this phenomenon as material and investigate the causes that have made it so.
Let's talk about the level of the people's enlightenment (民度) and the state of affairs (時勢) in our country at the time when the newspaper style emerged, as mentioned by Ch'unwŏn. After the Kabo Reforms (甲午更張), the slogan "literary weakness" (文弱) summarized the past history of our people. On the one hand, the classical examination system (科文) was abolished (癈止) and talent was supposedly recruited, but on the other hand, even the illiterate (不識文盲), if lucky, could suddenly become high officials (高官大爵), using schemes and tricks (權謀術數) as the sole key to advancement. The court was full of treacherous officials engaging in the sale of offices (賣官賣職), and in the provinces, corrupt officials (貪官汚吏) continued to run rampant (跳梁). Ultimately, they couldn't rectify this with their own conscience and only stopped these acts under pressure from other peoples or foreign powers. Eventually, a resistance movement of the awakened populace arose. Organizations like the Chaganghoe (自强會), Kungmin Hyŏphoe (國民協會), Ilchinhoe (一進會), and Taehan Hyŏphoe (大韓協會) sprang up like bamboo shoots after rain (雨後竹筍). The remnants (退物) of high officials who sold offices and the dregs (末流輩) of corrupt officials, without any self-awareness (自覺) or profound knowledge, exploited the ignorance of the masses and the weaknesses of the times, making the pursuit of fame and reputation (沽名釣譽) their sole objective. Thus, famous-in-name patriots (虛名志士) and counterfeit patriots (僞造 愛國者) emerged in droves (though there were also some with true, fervent patriotism). They used shamelessness without thought as their weapon, pounding desks with voices full of righteous indignation, repeating the word "everyone" several times, and thus became known as patriots or famous figures. Their reputations became widely known in the alleys, and the foolish masses looked up to them, offering voices of praise burning with envy. They became puffed up with pride, boasting that their character was truly noble and their insight superior, firmly believing they possessed the qualifications to be worshipped by the masses. Whether this is the fault of the era or our own making is unknown, but no people have been as severe as ours. How this superficial (皮相的) desire for honor has harmed our people is proven by the reality of Chosŏn today. Perhaps the issue has strayed too far, but since I intend to discuss our current literary circle, I cannot help but mention these things naturally. This might be too extreme a statement and merely a superficial observation, but it is a fact that the so-called famous figures' yearning (憧憬) for honor was stronger than anything, including concern for our people's culture. Famous figures and leaders who feared the loss (墜失) of their own honor more than the nation or people falling into a bottomless abyss (奈落) <104> naturally ended up envying (嫉妬) and fighting (爭鬪) each other for their positions and honor. The hearts of the youths who self-studied rhetoric and followed (追從) these famous figures were also filled with the desire for their own honor. I wonder if the tendency I have tediously described above is not also present in our newly emerging literary circle today. While it's an undeniable fact that the desire for honor or fame can be one of the motivations for initiating or founding something, it cannot be seen as the entirety, and certainly cannot be considered the highest goal.
However, those who avidly read literature and art in our Chosŏn are not the elderly, nor the middle-aged, but male and female students of middle school level whose spirit (血氣) is yet unsettled, or youths wandering in adversity. The various writers who have recently hastily wielded their pens in newspapers and magazines, having received the baptism of new literature before others, are also youths. It seems an excessive desire for fame and honor traditionally overflows (漲溢) in our veins. Therefore, I wonder if the demand for that shallow and detestable honor or fame is not more earnest (懇切) than the impulse of one's own art seeking to emit the true and brilliant (焰*) radiance of the essence (本質) of art – creation, the advance of internal life force, self-expression. Let us examine our current situation for a moment. Art demanding life fervently, like the cry (呌呼) of one on the verge (瀕한) of death, should be created from our heads burning with anguish. It should also cast into the hearts of the appreciators (鑑賞者) the same kind of moving experience we felt. Readers, too, should demand such works. However, if, contrary to this, there are only works filled with the mood of pleasure or amusement, works that give us no deep impression whatsoever, merely catering (迎合) to the readers' neophilia or curiosity, abstract (抽象的) works lacking (乏한) artistic value, isn't this wandering at a distant (遼遠한) distance from the highest standard of art? Art that arises from the depths (奧底) of true (直正한) life makes both the creator and us readers who appreciate it forget (妄却) the small self (小我) demanding narrow and base fame and honor, and awakens us to the vast and lofty great self (大我). Then, you might retort, "Do you think of art as a means (手段) for the improvement of our society or morals?" You might also deem it a violent argument that ignores and misunderstands art, but I too believe that art has its own unique life as art, and I certainly do not think it is merely a means to assist our social life. However, no matter how lofty the art, it is doubtful whether it can emit its brilliance (光輝) apart from our lives and society. <105> It is not something demanded by the pebbles (砂礫) rolling by the roadside or the cattle (牛馬) panting while pulling carts. It will only have brilliance and fervent demand in our human society, which possesses special vitality and reason. Just as our lives would end in meaninglessness if separated from this society, and indeed could not exist, the value of art too will diminish if separated from our lives. It is undeniable that it becomes meaningful only when it aligns perfectly with our lives.
Judging by the trends in our literary circle today, one doubts whether the vitality striving for infinite progress is inherent (內在한) even in our veins. Anyone with discerning eyes (具眼者) can see what this indicates about the writers' social consciousness and their internal demands. Let's see. If those who act like writers and great artists lack the demand of inner life and merely follow others out of curiosity or momentary impulse, saying "others are doing it, so I will too," they will certainly never become the artists or writers we demand. In other words, before identifying oneself as an artist or writer, one needs to reflect on their own demand for art. One should explore the demand burning from the depths (奧底) of one's life and the anguish (懊惱) associated with it.

3
Now, Ch'unwŏn called our writers "Made in Japan" (日本製). This is indeed the reality today. Since we learned from Japan (日本) and obtained things from Japan, it seems an unavoidable fact that the direction of all systems and thoughts naturally tends towards imitating (模倣) what we have seen and heard there. Therefore, it is also natural that our writers, lacking a unique national literature, are influenced by the literary circles of other countries.
Moreover, since everything concerning our people is in a transitional period (過渡期) striving for improvement, various phenomena naturally drift towards imitation and following. This seems to be the principle of the flow (流動) of thought and culture, regardless of East or West, ancient or modern times.
Thus, Ch'unwŏn, out of love for our writers and concern for the nation, came to think, "I wish I hadn't written 70 or 80 percent," and expressed his genuine remorse, saying, "When I think of the harm inflicted, the thought of cutting off this hand that held the brush comes to mind." To reproach (責) Ch'unwŏn, who repents thus, saying, "You are the main culprit (張本人) who made our literary circle this way," <106> might seem too merciless (無慈悲), but because my expectations for Ch'unwŏn are high and my thoughts of him are fervent, I wish to add a few words.
I have been an avid reader of your works, second to none, and remain so today. When I passed the time in the countryside finding entertainment in newspapers or magazines, nothing pleased me more than Ch'unwŏn's works. Thinking back now, the newspapers and magazines of that time totaled only 3 or 4 types, and the poverty of their content matched their number. The number of people who held a pen and wrote back then was also extremely small. Most of them were old-fashioned figures, their content traditional, products of convention, stubborn and stale. Among them, the writings of Ch'unwŏn, vibrant with life, began to roar as a reaction to this.
He wrote "New Life Theory," stirring controversy among the stubborn; wrote novels like "The Pioneer" and "Yun Kwang-ho," earning the resentment of moralists and religious figures; and when writing "Heartless," he incurred the frowns (嚬蹙) of patriotic figures for mixing Korean and Japanese. However, his continued status as an object of admiration (欽慕) and respect among youth and students of both sexes was not accidental. I heard in the countryside back then that competition among students to cut out his travelogue "Record of Traversing the Five Provinces" (五道踏破記) from newspapers was common. From this alone, we can well understand the extent of the youth's yearning for new literature at that time and how immensely and deeply every word and phrase of the newly roaring Ch'unwŏn influenced those yearning for the new. However, thinking back now, it is also true that Ch'unwŏn had an influence on us back then that makes him regretful enough to consider cutting off the hand that held the brush.
I declare with certainty: If the writers active in our literary circle today are, as Ch'unwŏn observed, mere "seeds" of writers rolling around without any cultivation (素養) or development, then Ch'unwŏn himself bears an unavoidable responsibility. I will not pursue this responsibility in various ways, because he confessed to having harmed the youth he loves and warned his successors out of fear they might tread the same path he did.
In any case, it was Ch'unwŏn who stirred waves in the calm sea; and Ch'unwŏn is one of those who induced (誘起) today's decadent (頹廢的) tendencies.
Ch'unwŏn, loving our people and worrying about the future, <107> tried to correct this tendency by berating (罵倒) the writers with such abstract critiques. If he himself had no remorse whatsoever, this would be mere temporary cajolery, and its effect (效力) would be minimal (稀薄). But I believe the fervor of his repentance is sufficient to evoke emotion in people.

4
I would like to say a bit about the reasons why writers who are merely seeds of what writers should be, as you put it, end up active in the literary circle. While I certainly nod in agreement with your courage in always discussing the results and rushing towards ideals, it seems we inevitably (必然的) cannot avoid talking about so-called reality (現實).
Stimulated by the times, dozens of organs of public opinion and other academic or literary magazines are currently being published. However, according to their managers and editors, besides significant economic difficulties, what they feel is extremely difficult is the collection (蒐集) of manuscripts. That is, there are few people capable of taking up the pen for their pages. What is supposed to be published monthly ends up being published after several months or even half a year. Of course, this is not solely related to manuscripts, but they say that if they try to select magazine-worthy magazines and opinion-worthy opinions to ensure substantial content, the aforementioned difficulties arise. Thus, to fill (顚充) the determined number of pages, they consciously or unconsciously end up publishing crude and prolifically produced (粗製溢作) bad writing (惡文). Then, isn't this the reason why immature young writers – precisely the kind Ch'unwŏn warned about, writers who need to learn more aesthetics, rhetoric, logic, sociology, and other metaphysical or physical sciences and graduate from school – end up mass-producing (搾出) poor-quality writing? Isn't it that, without the leisure to consider or investigate the quality, their writing gets turned into print (活字) and appears before the world? Furthermore, doesn't the thought "If this is how it's written, I can write too" further incite the impulse for fame or honor in other short-sighted (短見) and shallow-thinking (淺慮) writer-seeds? This is said to be the reason for the proliferation (輩出) of third-rate writers. Although such phenomena naturally occur in all periods of cultural development, those who considered it an honor for their writing to be turned into print eventually end up acting like writers and artists, don't they? The result is extremely low-grade and lewd (淫蕩的) content catering to the weaknesses of young men and women.
Even when discussing ideological issues with a so-called critical attitude, because the writers themselves lack profound insight (見識) based on a unique principle (主義), <108> the arguments presented resemble a patchwork quilt (褓子) made by sewing together scraps of silk or cotton cloth, appearing poor in content and lacking formal unity. Consequently, they fail to evoke any moving feeling in the reader, instead creating a hazy feeling as if wandering in a thick fog (五里霧中). If such low-grade, illogical, and inconsistent writing were to evoke moving feelings in us, it would surely be false.
Let's look again at the harvest of our literary circle. It's all a kind of love story (情話). When choosing a theme to create a novel, it seems everyone, without exception, centers it on the issue of love. Even if we count the works of our current writers on our fingers, there isn't a single one whose content is not entirely the development of love. It seems to be nothing more than the cry of the jilted lover or the cheer of one victorious in love. When dealing with the issue of love in a novel, concretizing all the conflicts (葛藤), anguish (苦惱), sorrow (悲哀), contradictions (矛盾), jealousy, etc., that arise between the sexes, and when the view of life regarding these or the personalities expressed in the work resonate with all the consciousness latent (潛在) in the depths of our lives, and we gain moving feelings from this, there might be no better material. However, novels lacking this seem only to inflict harm on our young readers whose spirit is yet unsettled. If shallow sexual issues are chosen solely for the curiosity of low-grade readers, there is no greater desecration (汚辱) of art. It is truly regrettable (遺憾) that I have yet to read a love novel "made by the hands of our writers" that possesses artistic value. The more such works become popular, the stronger (濃厚) the tendency for both writers and appreciators to entertain themselves with literature in a profligate mood will become.
We must remember: there is no reason why we must take themes centered on love to create masterpieces (雄篇傑作) when creating literary works.
In discovering themes, we have subjects sufficient to write about for our entire lives. The entire course (路程) and environment (環境) of our lives, the phenomena (事像) that disillusion (幻滅) us daily – there is nothing that cannot become a theme. Where is the logic that only love issues can be creative themes?
I am truly worried. As repeatedly stated above, all the cries emerging from our people should be nothing less than the screams (悲鳴) and desperate cries (絶呌) of unbearable suffering under the immense pressure (强壓) of tens of thousands of pounds (重). Consequently, as literature and art are reflections of the trends of the times and symbols of the anguish (苦悶) of the advancing inner life force, <109> it is natural and true only if rebellious colors are unconsciously expressed. What was the trend of Russian literature before the revolution? It was no accident that the works of the Populists (民情派) and Gorky (꼬리키), who idealized Nietzsche's (니체) power (强力), added courageous strength to the surging, melancholic (鬱寂) blood tide (血潮) in the hearts of youths demanding life. Seeing and thinking about this, it is truly detestable and deplorable (寒心) that we, whose hands and feet are bound in our current situation, sing praises of love and seek intoxication (陶醉) in pleasure. Consequently, I doubt whether the trends of the modern era provide a reaction (反動) to our people, whether we suffer through writing, and whether we possess nerves capable of feeling the pain even if our own flesh were cut (버이고) and salt (소곰) rubbed in (너터라도).
Such words may be an excessive expectation for our literature, which is still budding (움나랴는), but on the other hand, precisely because it is an opportunity to bud and set off, I desire it all the more earnestly. The destination (到着점) will depend on the direction set now. We certainly have no need to blindly copy the Japanese literary circle swimming in the downstream currents (末流) of Western thought.
Then, some might say, "Art is definitely not obtained for others, but it is enough if one enjoys it oneself and rejoices in a state of selflessness (無我의 境) unimaginable by others." If there exists for us an art solely for the self, with no connection (交涉) whatsoever to society, could it truly be established today when social consciousness has developed? This would amount to nothing more than the delirious talk (囈語) of the decadent school (頹敗派) from centuries ago, lacking social consciousness. Just as we cannot obtain absolute freedom, it seems art, which takes our society as its background (背景) and our lives or other constantly disillusioning phenomena as its theme, cannot be established by disregarding (沒却) or having no connection with our society or lives. This would be even truer unless it is the creation of a society of gods or ghosts (幽靈), or beasts (禽獸), whose kind differs from human society. Therefore, while the relativity of art's existence as art itself can be permitted, if there is an absoluteness (絶對性) that exists even by disregarding our lives and society, I cannot affirm (肯定) it.

5
Recently, "isms" (主義) are often discussed. Even art-for-art's-sake-ism (藝術至上主義) seems unable to stand in an absolute sense. Furthermore, intellectual currents (思潮) are by no means static (靜的); they are dynamic (動的), constantly flowing and never resting. It requires no further words that literary trends, philosophical thoughts, <110> and other general intellectual currents change (變遷) according to society and the times. Therefore, we should certainly not become followers (趨從者) who blindly (盲目的) adhere (信奉) to any particular ism or current. We must display the unique brilliance inherent in our own lives. If we only try to follow the footsteps others have trodden, what unique value could that possibly have? Even without trying to follow, common anguish or the suffering of the times exists in human inner life, naturally forming or conforming to certain isms or currents. Nothing is more pathetic than striving to attach oneself (付隨) from the beginning. If a child watches a play and imitates (흉내내엇다) it, can that be called art, and can the child be called an artist? Just as the child imitating the play cannot be called an artist, if one makes it their business (是務) only to imitate other people or other isms, that cannot be called an artist or art either. Saying "others do it, so I will too" obviously stems from shallow thinking, and I think that first proclaiming (標榜) oneself as an aestheticist or an adherent of art-for-art's-sake is also due to a weak foundation (根柢가 薄弱함) in art. (Of course, there may be none among our writers, but...) Also, I recall reading a critic (批評家) who, when critiquing a certain work, commented that we must inevitably pass through Naturalism (自然主義) in literature. This explains historically the course that the development of literature or general intellectual currents has taken; it does not mean that the literature of any newly emerging country must follow this path (經路) hereafter. Seen this way, the critic's earlier statement seems too much of a fatalistic (宿命論的) consideration. The idea that any writer, when first creating, must necessarily pass through Classicism (古典主義) - Romanticism (로맨틔시즘) - Naturalism - Neo-Romanticism (新로맨틔시즘) is too ridiculous. Of course, there is a great need for us to study literary history, but the notion that our newly emerging literary circle must also experience it is, no matter how I think about it, full of points difficult to understand (難解). The issue has perhaps diverged too much into side branches (枝葉) and become rambling (支離하게), but this is one of the things I wanted to say recently about our literary circle.

6
Ch'unwŏn said, "In our literary circle, I have seen seeds of writers who seem likely to become writers if they study (工夫) enough now, but I have not seen fully grown (長星한) writers. And what saddens (슯허하는) me greatly is that these writer-seeds show no sign of competing for every moment (寸陰을 是競) and striving painstakingly (刻苦)."<111>
This might be your subjective observation, but let's assume there are such instant (速成한) writers besides these seeds. If there are established (旣成) writers who stand by idly (袖手傍觀) entrusting literature – the precursor and mother of our new culture – solely to these writer-seeds and hastily formed writers (急成文士) (the term is a bit funny, meaning writers who popped up somehow without cultivation or natural talent (天品)), allowing them to freely disseminate things like syphilis germs (梅毒菌) and tuberculosis germs (結核菌), then their state of mind (心事) is truly incomprehensible. This crime is thousands, even tens of thousands of times heavier than unconsciously inflicting harm due to ignorance, immature artistic impulse, or desire for fame. Why stand by idly? Why not strive to elevate our people's eye for literary appreciation? Why not sweep aside impure writers? Why relinquish the pages of published magazines to writer-seeds and hastily formed writers? In any case, the crime of the established writers who just sit and watch is greater. If they truly care for the people, they should first guide (引導) our literary circle according to their own strength, instead of dreaming of becoming Goethe (꿰테) or Shakespeare (쉑스피어). Isn't it the mission (使命) of the established writers to ensure that an antitoxin (抗毒素) develops in our constitution (體質), enough to prevent infection by viruses like syphilis or tuberculosis germs?
Just as firefly light (螢光) cannot be seen in broad daylight (白晝), just as the multitude of stars (羣星) lose their light before the sun (太陽), just as petty people (小人) cannot be tolerated (容納) before a great personality (偉大한 人格者), the works of writer-seeds or hastily created writers (急造文士) will not be tolerated (容忍) before the works of writers with real ability (實力) and abundant natural talent (天品). I fervently hope (熱望) for the special effort and rousing (奮起) of the senior writers (先進文士 諸彦), and at the same time, I hope that those possessing the potential to become writers will achieve full development (發育). Talented writers with rich cultivation must emerge soon in our literary circle.
In this sense, I hope that Ch'unwŏn, who offered fervent advice to our writers, will also provide (提供) a large quantity of high-quality works. I believe this will be far more effective (效果) in reforming (革新) the literary circle than berating a thousand bad writers. ...(End)
(March 3, 1921)<112>

**Summary**

This 1921 editorial by Yi Ik-sang laments the lack of "artistic conscience" in the contemporary Korean literary scene (文壇, mundan). He criticizes writers for superficiality, chasing fame rather than expressing the deep suffering and aspirations of the Korean people under oppression. Yi echoes critiques made by Ch'unwŏn (Yi Kwang-su), agreeing that much current writing is immature, imitative (particularly of Japanese trends), and potentially harmful, often focusing on shallow romance instead of profound human or societal struggles. He compares this trend to the past opportunism of self-proclaimed patriots after the Kabo Reforms. Yi calls for writers, especially established ones like Ch'unwŏn, to cultivate genuine artistry rooted in lived experience and social consciousness, urging them to produce meaningful work that can guide the nation's cultural development rather than merely mimicking foreign styles or pandering to base tastes. He argues that true art, while having its own life, cannot be divorced from human life and society.

For historians, this article offers a valuable glimpse into the internal debates and self-critique among Korean intellectuals during the early colonial period. It reveals anxieties about the direction of modern Korean literature, the perceived negative influence of Japanese cultural models, and the struggle to define an authentic national artistic voice amidst political constraints and rapid social change. The author's strong emphasis on linking art to national suffering and social reality reflects the broader concerns of the era regarding cultural identity and resistance. The explicit mention of writers lacking "artistic conscience" and the comparison to opportunistic political figures highlight the perceived moral responsibilities of intellectuals in shaping national consciousness.

**Named Entities**

李益相	이익상	Yi Ik-sang
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
創造	창조	Ch'angjo
春園	춘원	Ch'unwŏn
러시아	러시아	Russia
또쓰떠예-쁘시키	도스토옙스키	Dostoevsky
甲午更張	갑오경장	Kabo Kyŏngjang
自强會	자강회	Chaganghoe
國民協會	국민협회	Kungmin Hyŏphoe
一進會	일진회	Ilchinhoe
大韓協會	대한협회	Taehan Hyŏphoe
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
꿰테	괴테	Goethe
쉑스피어	셰익스피어	Shakespeare

**Glossary**

缺如	결여	Lack; deficiency
文壇	문단	Literary circle; literary world
頑固	완고	Stubbornness; obstinacy
反憾	반감	Resentment; antipathy
言論機關	언론기관	Organ of public opinion; media outlet
痛詈	통리	To bitterly denounce; excoriate
快哉	쾌재	Bravo!; Hurray! (Exclamation of delight)
修養	수양	Self-cultivation; moral training
文士	문사	Writer; literary man
歸趨	귀추	Destination; outcome; trend
默過	묵과	To overlook; condone; pass over in silence
澎湃	팽배	Surging; swelling; widespread
高調	고조	High pitch; climax
沐浴	목욕	To bathe; (here) to be steeped in/influenced by
蔑視	멸시	Contempt; scorn; disdain
時代錯誤	시대착오	Anachronism
喝破	갈파	To penetrate; clearly expose; articulate forcefully
勃起	발기	(Here) Burgeoning; rising suddenly
背馳	배치	To diverge; run counter to
蛇足	사족	Superfluous remark; redundancy (lit. snake legs)
照準	조준	To aim; target
解剖	해부	Dissection; autopsy; analysis
流露	유로	Outpouring; expression; revelation
醇化	순화	To refine; purify
潑剌	발랄	Lively; vivacious; vibrant
悔恨	회한	Remorse; repentance
告白	고백	Confession
害毒	해독	Harm; poison; bane
鬱奮	울분	Pent-up resentment; indignation
苦惱	고뇌	Anguish; agony; distress
反抗的	반항적	Rebellious; defiant
怪常	괴상	Strange; odd; bizarre
民度	민도	Level of the people's enlightenment/culture
時勢	시세	State of affairs; trend of the times
文弱	문약	Literary weakness; effete (often used critically of traditional scholars)
標語	표어	Slogan; motto
癈止	폐지	Abolition (older form of 폐지)
權謀術數	권모술수	Schemes and tricks; machinations
賣官賣職	매관매직	Sale of government offices
貪官汚吏	탐관오리	Corrupt officials
跳梁	도량	To run rampant; be rampant
自覺	자각	Self-awareness; consciousness
雨後竹筍	우후죽순	Like bamboo shoots after rain (idiom: springing up everywhere)
沽名釣譽	고명조예	To seek fame and reputation undeservedly
皮相的	피상적	Superficial
憧憬	동경	Yearning; longing; aspiration
奈落	나락	Abyss; hell; bottomless pit
嫉妬	질투	Jealousy; envy (older form of 질투)
追從	추종	Following; imitation; adherence
漲溢	창일	To overflow; surge
本質	본질	Essence; substance; nature
衝動	충동	Impulse; urge
懇切	간절	Earnestness; eagerness
鑑賞者	감상자	Appreciator; audience
迎合	영합	To cater to; curry favor with
抽象的	추상적	Abstract
遼遠한	요원한	Distant; remote
奧底	오저	Depths; bottom; innermost recesses
小我	소아	Small self; ego
妄却	망각	To forget; disregard (stronger than 잊다)
大我	대아	Great self; universal self
手段	수단	Means; measure; way
光輝	광휘	Brilliance; radiance; splendor
內在한	내재한	Inherent; immanent
具眼者	구안자	Person with discerning eyes
懊惱	오뇌	Anguish; vexation; agony
模倣	모방	Imitation; mimicry (older form of 모방)
過渡期	과도기	Transitional period
張本人	장본인	Main culprit; ringleader
無慈悲	무자비	Merciless; ruthless
欽慕	흠모	Admiration; adoration
嚬蹙	빈축	Frown; disapproval
素養	소양	Cultivation; knowledge; refinement
頹廢的	퇴폐적	Decadent
誘起	유기	To induce; cause; bring about
罵倒	매도	To berate; denounce fiercely
效力	효력	Effect; efficacy
稀薄	희박	Thin; sparse; minimal
必然的	필연적	Inevitable; necessary
現實	현실	Reality (older form of 현실)
蒐集	수집	Collection; gathering (older form of 수집)
顚充	전충	To fill up; make up a shortfall (older spelling of 전충?)
粗製溢作	조제일작	Crude and prolific production; churning out low-quality work
惡文	악문	Bad writing; poor composition
搾出	착출	To squeeze out; extract; (here) mass-produce
短見	단견	Short-sighted view
淺慮	천려	Shallow thought; imprudence
輩出	배출	To produce in large numbers; emerge in droves
活字	활자	Printing type; print
淫蕩的	음탕적	Lewd; lascivious; obscene
情話	정화	Love story; tale of affection
葛藤	갈등	Conflict; strife; complication
悲哀	비애	Sorrow; grief; sadness
矛盾	모순	Contradiction
潛在	잠재	Latency; potentiality; lying hidden
汚辱	오욕	Desecration; disgrace; humiliation
遺憾	유감	Regret; pity
濃厚	농후	Strong; thick; dense; rich
雄篇傑作	웅편걸작	Masterpiece; magnum opus
路程	노정	Course; journey; path
環境	환경	Environment; surroundings
幻滅	환멸	Disillusionment
事像	사상	Phenomenon; event; matter
强壓	강압	Strong pressure; coercion
悲鳴	비명	Scream; shriek
絶呌	절규	Desperate cry; scream
苦悶	고민	Anguish; worry; agony
色彩	색채	Color; coloring; hue; (here) tone/character
民情派	민정파	Populists (Narodniks in Russian context)
鬱寂	울적	Melancholy; gloomy; depressed
血潮	혈조	Blood tide; surge of blood/passion
陶醉	도취	Intoxication; ecstasy; being engrossed in
寒心	한심	Deplorable; pathetic; pitiful
反動	반동	Reaction; backlash
感覺	감각	Sensation; feeling; sense (older form of 감각)
움나랴는	움나려는	About to bud; budding (움나다 = to bud)
到着점	도착점	Destination; arrival point
末流	말류	Downstream current; later stage; degeneration
헤엄치는	헤엄치는	Swimming
無我의 境	무아의 경	State of selflessness; trance
交涉	교섭	Connection; negotiation; dealings
頹敗派	퇴폐파	Decadent school/group
囈語	예어	Delirious talk; sleep talking; nonsense
背景	배경	Background
沒却	몰각	To disregard; ignore; obliterate
幽靈	유령	Ghost; specter
禽獸	금수	Beasts; brutes
相對性	상대성	Relativity
絶對性	절대성	Absoluteness
肯定	긍정	Affirmation; confirmation
主義	주의	Ism; principle; doctrine
藝術至上主義	예술지상주의	Art-for-art's-sake-ism; Aestheticism
靜的	정적	Static
動的	동적	Dynamic
變遷	변천	Change; transition; vicissitudes
盲目的	맹목적	Blind; indiscriminate
信奉	신봉	Adherence; belief in; worship
趨從者	추종자	Follower; adherent
付隨	부수	To accompany; be incidental to; attach oneself to
是務	시무	To make something one's main business; be devoted to
標榜	표방	To advocate; proclaim; profess
根柢	근저	Foundation; basis; root
薄弱함	박약함	Weakness; feebleness
批評家	비평가	Critic
自然主義	자연주의	Naturalism
宿命論的	숙명론적	Fatalistic
古典主義	고전주의	Classicism
로맨틔시즘	로맨티시즘	Romanticism
經由	경유	Via; by way of; passing through
難解	난해	Difficult to understand; abstruse
枝葉	지엽	Branches and leaves; nonessentials; side issues
支離하게	지리하게	Ramblingly; incoherently
工夫	공부	Study; effort; work (used broadly)
天才	천재	Genius
長星한	장성한	Fully grown; mature (older form of 장성한)
슯허하는	슬퍼하는	Saddening; sorrowful (older spelling of 슬퍼하는)
寸陰	촌음	A moment; brief time (lit. inch of shadow)
是競	시경	To compete for; contend over
刻苦	각고	Painstaking effort; assiduous toil
速成한	속성한	Hastily formed; quickly made; instant
急成文士	급성문사	Hastily formed writer; instant writer
天品	천품	Natural talent; innate gift
梅毒菌	매독균	Syphilis germ/bacterium
結核菌	결핵균	Tuberculosis germ/bacterium
散布	산포	Dissemination; scattering; spreading
袖手傍觀	수수방관	To look on with folded arms; stand by idly
旣成文士	기성문사	Established writer
心事	심사	State of mind; thoughts and feelings
引導	인도	Guidance; leading
抗毒素	항독소	Antitoxin
體質	체질	Constitution (physical); disposition
發生	발생	Occurrence; generation; development
使命	사명	Mission; calling
白晝	백주	Broad daylight
螢光	형광	Firefly light; fluorescence
太陽	태양	Sun
羣星	군성	Multitude of stars; host of stars
偉大한 人格者	위대한 인격자	Great personality; person of noble character
小人	소인	Petty person; small-minded person
容納	용납	Toleration; acceptance; accommodation
實力	실력	Real ability; competence; capability
豊富한	풍부한	Abundant; rich; plentiful (older form of 풍부한)
急造文士	급조문사	Hastily created writer
容忍	용인	Toleration; forbearance; acceptance
先進文士	선진문사	Senior writer; advanced writer
諸彦	제현	Gentlemen; sirs (addressing a group of respected men)
奮起	분기	Rousing; rising up; bestirring oneself
熱望	열망	Fervent hope; earnest desire
發育	발육	Development; growth
提供	제공	Provision; offer; supply
革新	혁신	Reform; innovation
效果	효과	Effect; result (older form of 효과)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제11호
발행일	1921년 05월 01일
기사제목	藝術的 良心이 缺如한 우리 文壇
필자	李益相
기사형태	논설

藝術的 良心이 缺如한 우리 文壇
						李益相
1
願目을 이와 가티 定하고 稿를 起하랴고 붓을 들음에 當하여 이러한 記憶이 절로 나옵니다.
내가 우리나라에 잇슬때에 나의 벗 K는 自己의 嚴格한 家庭의 干涉과 制裁로 말미암아 自由로운 것이 하나도 업섯습니다. 嚴格하다는 것보다도 차라리 頑固라 하는 편이 더욱 適切한 말이라 하겟습니다. 그래서 K는 自己 父親의 넘우 頑瞑固陋한 것을 憫然히 여기는 同時에 우리 朝鮮 父老들에게 큰 反憾을 품고 잇섯습니다.
1日은 여러 親舊가 모여서 우리 靑年들이 어느 때에던지 말하는 바와 가티 現今 우리 社會의 모든 不平에 對하여 互相萬丈의 氣炎을 吐할때에 K는 말하기를
『우리 父老들의 頑固한 行動에 對하여는 所謂 言論機關이란 것들이 넘우 沈默을 지키고 無神經한 듯해요. 꼭 남의 일 보듯이 해요. 나는 한 번 新聞이나 雜誌의 紙面을 빌어서 우리 父老네의 頑瞑한 行動에 一大 痛棒을 주려 하엿더니 日前 某 新聞의 社說에 내가 말하랴는 바가튼 論調로 그것을 痛詈하엿습디다. 나는 참으로 痛快히 여겻습니다.」라 하엿습니다.
K가 自己의 느낀바를 能히 써서 新聞이나 雜誌에 言論다운 言論으로 發表할 만한 頭腦의 所有者인지 또는 父老들이 그 言論에 感銘되어 今後로는 行動을 고치어야 되겟다는 그 效果는 別問題로 하고 나는 K의 말에 한 鼻笑로 答을 代하엿슬 뿐이엇나이다.
그런데 그와 가튼 鼻笑가 나의 코에서 사라지기도 前에 나의 자신이 또 다른 사람에게 鼻笑바들것도 不顧하고 이 붓을 잡게 된 것은 무슨 因果에 關係가 업지나 아니한가 합니다.＜100＞
나는 우리 文壇(무슨 文壇이라고 크게 말할 것도 업지마는 무엇이라 이름할 수 업스니 그저 文壇이라 불러둡세다.)에서 活動하시는 文士들 雜誌 廣告에 花形文士니 一流 思想家니 天才詩人이니 하는 여러 文士들에게 우리 民族의 將來와 藝術의 歸趨를 爲하여 적지 안흔 不滿을 가젓섯습니다. 不滿하다는 것보다 憫然하고 可惜하다 할는지 어쩃던지 그대로 가서는 아니되겟다. 默過할 수 업다고 생각한 것은 事實입니다.
그래서 나의 벗 K가 新聞이나 雜誌의 一隅를 빌어가지고 우리 父老들에게 諫하랴던 것처럼 나는 文士 여러분께 意見을 들이고 그들의 藝術的 良心을 무러보랴고 하엿섯습니다.
그런데 今番 文藝雜誌 『創造』 新年號에서 우리 文壇에 오래동안 寂寂하던 春園군의 붓으로 쓴 바 『朝鮮文士와 修養」이란 論文을 읽고 K가 우리 父老들을 痛詈한 社說을 읽고 痛快히 생각한 것과 가티 나 亦是 『快哉』라는 부로지즘이 절로 나왓습니다. 平素에 不良한 行動을 忌憚업시 하던 사람이 또 不良한 行動을 맘대로 하랴다가 남에게 뺨을 어더마젓다는 것 가튼 말을 들을 때에 感動하던 바와 가튼 시원한 생각을 하게 되엇습니다.
春園君의 熱情이 뭉틴 그 글이 우리 文壇에 날뛰는 文士 여러분에게 參考가 되고 警醒이 됨에 足할 것은 내가 確實히 밋는 바외다. 그러면 누구시던지 나에게 『너는 우리 文壇에 對하여 어떠한 不滿을 품고 잇섯더냐』고 무르시면 나는 『春園君이 創造 新年號에 發表한 그것과 大同합니다. 나더러 至今 다시 말하라 하더래도 亦是 그러하겟습니다.』라고 對答할 수 밧게 업습니다. 나는 여긔에 이르러 먼저 말한 바 나의 벗 K가 하던 말과 내가 鼻笑하던 것을 생각하고 내가 하던 바 鼻笑와 가튼 鼻笑가 至今 이 글을 보시는 여러분에게서도 自然히 나오리라고 생각하매 그러면 구만둘가하는 생각도 업지 안치마는 朝鮮文壇에서 現今 活動하는 文士로 文士려니와 春園君의 손에서 그와 가튼 *子吼하고 諷刺하는 글이 써젓다함을 더욱 希怪한 現像이라 생각하는 故로 鼻笑는 鼻笑하는 여러분의 任意으로 하고 나의 未熟한 붓을 들게된 까닭이외다. 이것이 童謠를 맨들어 준 것이외다.
現今 우리나라에 文學熱이 澎湃하랴는 것은 事實이외다. 文學이라는 것보다도 文藝熱이라는 것이 더욱 適切할는지 알 수 업스나 何如턴지 『文』이란말이 靑年學生間에 큰 興味와 刺激을 주는 듯 하외다. 그러면 이와가튼＜101＞ 文藝의 熱이 高調에 達하랴는 것이 不好한 傾向은 勿論 아니외다. 차라리 크게 歡迎하고 指導할 만한 好傾向이라 할 수 잇습니다. 漢文以外에는 文이란 것이 다시 업는 줄로만 밋던 우리의 頑固한 老人네나 所謂 新風潮에 沐浴하고 新敎育을 바닷다며서도 軟文學派이니 硬文學派이니 文藝란 것은 一個 娛樂物이요. 消日거리라. 閑人無事者의 耽溺할 바라고 蔑視하는 時代錯誤의 思想을 가즌 似而非 新人들에게는 이것이 참으로 憂慮할 만한 傾向이라 할는지 알 수 업스나 족음이라도 藝術을 理解하고 그것이 人生과 어떠한 關係를 가즌 것을 아는 이는 돌이어 會心의 微笑를 禁치 못할 것이외다. 카펜타-의 『生活이 곳 藝術이라.』 말이 이것을 喝破함이 아닌가요. 우리가 참의로 人間性에 눈뜨고 眞의 感情에 살랴고 할 것 가트면 藝術에 살아야 합니다. 이러한 意味에서 우리나라 靑年들이 文藝를 愛好하게 된다함은 人間으로서 生活하자는 第 1聲인가 합니다. 이것은 우리 思想發達에 큰 原動力이 될 뿐아니라 結苟은 우리 全 生活을 支配하게 되어야 우리는 참生活을 할 것이외다.
彼 『러시아』의 少年으로 「또쓰떠예-쁘시키」의 作品을 聖書처럼 愛讀하던 靑年들이 長成한 今日에 그들이 우리 人類의 不合理한 生活을 爲하여 努力함이 어떠하며 犧牲을 바침이 어떠케 큰 것을 우리가 目睹하지 안습니까. 그러나 우리나라 靑年들의 今日에 勃起한 바 文藝의 趣味가 어떠한 方面으로 기울어질는지 기울어지며 잇는 것을 보건대 내가 以上에 말한 바와는 背馳하랴는 傾向이 업지 아니한가 합니다.
내가 文壇에 對한 要求가 春園군과 大東하다는 것을 提言하엿슴으로 다시 蛇足을 加할 必要도 업겟고 또한 藝術論이나 文學論을 들어서 우리 現今 文壇의 文士의 作品을 照準하고 그 價値를 批評할만한가 하는 것도 疑問에 지내지 못합니다. 이러한 批評을 바들만한 資格도 缺與한가 합니다. 이것은 마치 벼룩(蚤)가티 작은 動物을 解剖함에 소나 말의 解剖에 쓰는 『메-써-』를 使用할 수 업슴과 갓습니다.
藝術은 第 1義的으로 우리 眞人生의 참 感情의 流露가 아닌가요. 이럼으로 그 時代의 眞實한 感情의 表現이야말로 그 時代의 藝術이라 할 것이외다. 그런데 現今 우리 文士들의 作品에 表現된 바 感情이 그와 가튼 眞實한 時代苦나 人生의 煩惱를 表現하엿는지 나는 아즉 發見하지 못하엿습니다. 나의 가슴에 醇化될만한 感情이 潑剌한 作品에 接한 일이 업습니다. 나는 文士여러분의＜102＞ 가슴에 타오르는 人間苦가 잇는가 人間性에 하소연할 만한 感情의 有無를 疑心치 아니할 수 업습니다. 이것은 作家 여러분의 藝術的 良心에 무러보는 수 밧게 별수가 업습니다.

2
創造 新年號에 『朝鮮文士와 修養』이란 글의 筆者 春園君은 우리 文壇을 建設한 一員이요. 우리 文壇에서는 이즐 수 업는 有功한 이요. 또한 우리가 君에게 多大한 期待를 가즈고 잇습니다. 이러한 意味에서 나는 君에게서 더 切實한 告白이 나오기를 바랍니다. 君은 이와가티 말하엿다
『나는 10餘年 來로 或은 論文 或은 小說하고 分量으로는 3千餘 頁을 썻거니와 우리나라에 新聞體를 普及시키는데 一助가 된 外에 多少間 무슨 刺激이나 주엇슬가 只今 생각하면 10의 7, 8은 아니 썻더면 하는 것이요. 그 無知하고 淺薄한 文이 사랑하는 우리 靑年 兄弟姉妹에게 害毒을 끼첫스리라고 생각하면 이 붓대잡은 손을 끈허 바리고 십도록 罪悚하고 가슴이 쓰립니다.』
이 불꼿가티 타오르는 熱熱한 悔恨의 告白으로 보면 君의 우리 同胞를 사랑함이 어떠케 熱情的이요. 絶對的인 것을 누구나 알 수가 잇습니다. 果然 그러합니다. 今日 우리 文士들 中에는 春園군의 본 바와 가튼 傾向이 確實히 잇고 君이 끼친 바와 가튼 害毒을 끼치며 잇는 것도 事實이외다, 우리 民族은 여러 世紀 동안을 두고 舊倫理 舊道德 下에서 無限한 壓迫을 바닷고 또한 政治的으로도 自由로운 世界를 본 적이 少하엿습니다. 우리는 人間으로서의 生活을 해 본 일이 적엇습니다. 그러면 우리의 가슴에는 鬱奮한 것과 苦惱한 피의 덩어리가 뭉텨잇슬 것이요. 四肢에는 反抗的의 피潮水가 물결처야 할 것이외다. 이러한 것이 傳統的으로 잇서야 할 것이외다. 이러한 氣分과 情緖가 어느나라 國民보다도 民族보다도 强熱하게 잇슬 것은 누구나 思索的 頭腦의 所有者며는 認知할 수 잇슬 것이외다.
그러면 文藝는 感情의 表現이요. 苦憫의 象徵으로서 되엇다하면 우리 文壇에는 피가 끌는듯한 사람에게 感激한 氣分을 주지 안코는 말지 아니할 作品이 多産할 것이요. 바늘처럼 살을 찌를 듯한 人間性에 하소연하는 藝術이 勃興할 것이외다. 그런데 이와는 反對로 遊蕩的 氣分이 물결치는 傾向이 文士들에게 잇슴은 참으로＜103＞ 怪常한 現象이외다. 딸아서 우리네에게도 참으로 人間性이 잇는지 업는지 疑心 아니할 수 업습니다. 우리는 이러한 現像을 材料로 삼아 그러케 맨든 바와 되어온 마 原因을 探究할 必要가 잇습니다.
春園君의 말한 바와 가티 新聞體가 일어난 當時의 우리나라의 民度와 時勢를 말하여 봅시다. 甲午更張 이후에 文弱이란 標語가 우리 民族의 過去 歷史를 統括하여 말하엿습니다. 科文을 癈止하고 人才를 登用한다는 反面에는 不識文盲이라도 運數조흐면 一朝에 高官大爵이 되며 權謀術數로 出書하는 唯一의 鍵鑰을 삼으며 朝廷에는 賣官賣職하는 僞造忠臣이 만하엿고 地方에는 貪官汚吏가 依然히 跳梁하엿섯습니다. 그들은 結局은 自己들의 良心으로 이러한 것을 고치지 못하고 他民族이나 他國의 勢力에 눌려서 이러한 짓을 中止하고 말앗습니다. 그러한 結局에 自覺한 民衆의 反抗運動이 일어낫섯습니다. 自强會니 國民協會니 一進會니 大韓協會니 하는 團體들이 雨後竹筍처럼 일어낫습니다. 賣官賣職하던 大官의 退物과 貪官汚吏의 末流輩들이 何等의 自覺도 업고 深奧한 學識도 업시 羣衆의 暗昧한 것과 時代의 弱點을 利用하며 沽名釣譽하는 것으로 唯一한 目的을 삼앗섯습니다. 그래서 虛名志士와 僞造 愛國者가 輩出하엿섯습니다. (其中에는 眞情의 熱熱한 愛國者도 업지는 안흐나) 그들은 思慮업시 뻔뻔한 것으로 武器를 삼아 悲憤慷慨한 소리로 冊床을 두드리며 『여러분』 하는 말을 數次 繼續하면 그래도 志士나 名士가 되고 말앗나이다. 그들의 聲聞은 閭巷에 藉藉하게 되고 群愚는 울어보고 羡望에 타오르는 贊聲을 그들에게 들엿슴니다. 그들은 意氣가 揚揚하고 自己네의 人格이 참으로 高尙하고 識見이 越等하여 群衆에게 崇拜바들 資格이 確有한줄로 自慢하고 잇섯습니다. 이것이 時代의 罪인지 吾人이 自作함인지 알 수 업스나 우리 民族처럼 甚한 이는 업섯습니다. 그 皮相的의 名譽心이 우리 民族을 어떠케 害하엿는지 이것은 朝鮮의 現實이 證明하고 잇습니다. 問題가 넘우 脫線이나 하지 안햇는가 하지만 나는 現今 우리 文壇을 論하랴니까 이러한 것을 自然히 말지 아니할 수 업습니다. 이것이 넘우 過激한 말이요. 皮相의 觀察에 不過할는지 알수 업스나 所謂 名士들은 그 榮譽에 對한 憧憬이 우리 民族의 文化를 爲함보다 무엇보다도 强熱하엿던 것은 事實이외다. 國家나 民族이 無底의 奈落에 떨어지는 것보다도 自己의 名譽가 墜失할가 唯恐하던 名士나 有志들은 自己들의＜104＞ 地位와 名譽를 爲하여 互相 嫉妬하고 爭鬪하게 된 것도 勢의 自然이외다. 雄辯術을 獨習하고 名士를 追從하던 靑年들의 가슴에 充滿한 것도 自己의 榮譽心이엇습니다. 나는 以上에 呶呶히 말한 바와 가튼 傾向이 現今 우리 新興하랴는 文壇에도 不無한가 합니다. 榮譽心이라던지 功名心이라던지가 무슨 일을 勃興케 하고 創始하랴는 動機中에 하다가 되는 것은 否認할 수 업는 事實이나 그러나 이것을 그 全體로 볼 수도 업고 더욱이 最高한 目的으로는 생각도 할수 업습니다.
그런데 우리 朝鮮에 文藝를 愛讀하는 사람들은 老人도 아니요. 壯年도 아니요. 血氣가 未定한 中等程度 學校의 男女 學生이나 逆境에서 彷徨하는 靑年이외다. 新文學의 洗禮를 그들보다 먼저 受한 이들 近日 新聞이나 雜誌에 慌忙하게 붓을 휘두른 여러 文士들도 亦是 靑年들이외다. 우리들의 血管에는 過度한 功名과 榮譽欲이 傳統的으로 漲溢한 듯 하외다. 그래서 文藝의 本質인 創造 創作의 感情, 內部 生命力의 進展하랴는 自己의 表現이라던지의 眞實하고 焰*한 光輝를 發하랴는 自己의 藝術의 衝動보다도 그 淺薄하고 可憎한 榮譽나 功名을 要求함이 더욱 懇切치나 아니한가 합니다. 우리 現今의 處地를 한 번 삷혀 봅시다. 必死의 境에 瀕한 이의 呌呼와 가튼 熱熱히 生을 要求하는 文藝가 煩惱에 타오른 우리 머리에서 創造되어야 할 것이요. 鑑賞者에게도 우리가 느낀 바와 가튼 感激한 氣會를 그들의 가슴에 더저야 할 것이외다. 讀者도 그와 가튼 作品을 要求하여야 할것이외다. 그러나 이와는 反對로 享樂이나 遊戱의 氣分이 充溢한 作品, 吾人에게 下等의 感激을 주지 못하고 讀者의 好新信心이나 好奇心에 迎合하는 藝術的 價値가 乏한 抽象的 作品뿐이 잇다하면 이것은 藝術의 最高한 標準과는 遼遠한 距離에서 彷徨함이 아닌가 합니다. 直正한 生命의 奧底에서 울어나온 藝術이야말로 創作者나 또는 이것을 鑑賞하는 우리 讀者로 하여금 그 偏狹하고 低劣한 功名과 榮譽를 要望하는 小我를 妄却하고 廣大하고 高遠한 大我에 눈뜨는 것이외다. 그러면 너는 藝術을 『우리 社會의 改良에나 道德의 一個 手段으로 생각하느냐.』고 反問할 듯 하외다. 또한 藝術을 無視하고 理解치 못한 暴論으로만 認定할는지 알 수 업스나 나도 藝術은 藝術로의 獨特한 生命이 잇슬 것이요. 다만 우리 社會的 生活을 補助하는 一個 手段이라고는 決코 생각치 안습니다. 그러나 아모리 高尙한 藝術일지라도 우리 人生을 떠나고 社會를 떠나서는 그 光輝를 發한다는 것이 疑問이외다.＜105＞ 路傍에서 데글데글 굴으는 砂礫이나 車를 헐덕어리며 끌는 牛馬가 要求할 것이 아니요. 特殊한 生命力과 理性을 가즌 우리 人生社會에서만 光輝가 잇슬 것이요. 熱熱한 要求가 잇슬 것이외다. 우리 人生이 이 社會를 떠나서는 生存이란 것이 無意味한대서 마칠 것이요. 또한 엇지도 못할 것과 가티 藝術이란 것도 우리 人生과 떠나서는 그 價値가 열버질 것이요. 우리 人生과 빈틈업시 符合하는 대에서 비롯오 有意義한 것은 否認할 수 업습니다.
今日 우리 文壇의 傾向으로 보아서는 우리들의 血管에도 無限히 進展하랴는 生命力이 內在한가를 疑心하게 됩니다. 이것이 곳 文士들의 社會的 意識과 自己의 內部要求의 如何함을 具眼者이면 누구나 알 것이외다 봅시다. 文士然하고 大 藝術家然하는 그들이 內的 生命의 要求가 업시 好奇心이나 一時의 衝動으로 남도 하니 나도 하겟다는 것 가트면 決코 吾人의 要求하는 바의 藝術家나 文士가 되지 못할 것이외다. 換言하면 自己가 藝術家나 文士로 自認하는 것 보다도 먼저 自身이 藝術에 對한 要求가 如何한 것을 反省할 必要가 잇습니다. 自己의 生命의 奧底에서 타서 오랴는 要求와 그에 對한 懊惱가 어떠한 것을 한 번 探究하여볼 것이외다.

3
그런데 春園君은 우리 文士들을 日本製라고 말하엿다. 이것은 今日 實際가 그러합니다. 우리가 日本에서 배우고 일본에서 어든 것이 잇슨 以上에는 모든 制度와 思想의 歸趨가 自然히 우리의 보고 들은 바 그것을 模倣하게 되는 것은 어쪌수 업는 事實인 듯 하외다. 그럼으로 우리 文士들도 自國의 獨特한 文藝가 업는 以上에는 他國 文壇의 影響을 밧게 되는 것도 勢의 自然함이외다.
더구나 우리 民族에게 잇는 바 모든 것이 向上하랴는 過渡期임으로 諸 現像이 模倣과 追從에 自然히 흐르게 되는 것이외다. 이것이 東西나 古今을 不問하고 思想이나 文化의 流動하는 原則인가 합니다.
이와가티 春園君은 우리 文士를 사랑하고 民族을 걱정함으로 『10의 7, 8이나 아니썻더면』하는 생각을 하게 되엇고 『害毒끼친 것을 생각하면 붓대 잡엇던 이 손을 끈허 바일 생각이 나옵니다.』하고 그 虛僞업는 悔恨을 하게된 듯 함니다. 이와가티 懺悔하는 春園에게 『우리 文壇을 그러케 맨들어 노흔 張本人은 君이다.』하고＜106＞ 다시 責하랴는 것은 넘우나 無慈悲하지 안흔가 하나 나의 春園君에 對한 期待가 크고 또한 君을 생각함이 熱熱함으로 數言을 加코자 합니다.
나는 君의 作品을 다른사람에게 뒤지지 아니할 만큼 愛讀하여 왓섯고 至今도 愛讀하는 한 사람이외다. 나는 鄕村에서 新聞이나 雜誌로 娛樂을 삼아 時日을 보낼때에 春園君의 作品처럼 나를 깃브게 한 것은 업섯습니다. 至今 생각하여 보면 그때의 新聞이나 雜誌라 하면 總計 3, 4種에 不過하엿고 또한 그 內容의 貧弱함도 그 數爻에 가탓섯습니다. 그때 붓을 잡고 글을 쓴다는 이도 極히 小數이엇습니다. 그들은 大部分이 舊式人物로 그 內容이 傳統的이요  因襲의 典型을 거처나온 것으로 固陋하고 酸臭나는 것이만 하엿습니다. 其中에 이런한 反動으로 부르지즈기 始作한 것은 生氣가 潑剌한 春園君의 글월이라 합니다.
그는 新生活論을 써서 頑固間에 物議를 일으켯고 開拓者나 尹光浩와 가튼 小說을 써서 道德家와 宗敎家의 反憾을 삿섯고 無情을 쓸때에 朝鮮語와 日語의 半석기를 써서 愛國志士들에게 嚬蹙을 바닷섯습니다. 그러나 依然히 靑年과 男女 學生間에 欽慕하는 目標가 되고 尊敬을 밧게된 것은 偶然함이 아니라 합니다. 그때에 君의 『五道踏破記』란 記行文을 切拔하라고 學生間에 新聞爭奪이 流行한다는 것을 내가 鄕村에서 들엇습니다. 이러한 것으로만 보아도 當時 靑年들의 新文藝에 대한 憧憬이 如何한 것과 春園君의 새로 부르지즈는 一言 一句가 새것에 憧憬한 그들에게 影響을 줌이 어떠케 크고 깁흔 것을 우리가 能히 알 수 잇습니다. 그러나 至今 생각하여 보면 그때의 우리들에게 春園君이 붓대 잡어던 손을 끈흘 생각이 나도록 後悔할만한 影響을 준 것도 事實이외다.
나는 確實히 斷言합니다. 今日 우리 文壇에 活動하는 文士들이 春園君의 본 바와 가티 아모 素養도 업고 發達도 못된 一個 文士의 『씨』로 굴은다 하면 이것은 春園君에게도 辭避할 수 업는 責任의 問題가 잇슬 것이외다. 이 責任에 對하여는 여러 가지로 追窮코자 아니합니다. 그것은 君이 自己가 사랑하는 우리 靑年들에게 害毒을 주엇다 自白하엿고 自己가 밟은 바와 가튼 길을 밟을가 두려워서 後進을 警戒하엿슴으로
何如턴지 고요한 바다에 물결을 일으켯던 春園君이요. 今日 頹廢的 傾向을 誘起한 이도 그들 中에 一員인 春園이외다.
우리 民族을 사랑하고 將來를 念慮하는 春園君으로서＜107＞ 이러한 傾向을 고처 보랴고 그와가튼 抽象的 短評으로 文士들을 罵倒하다십히 하엿스나 萬一 自身에 何等의 悔恨이 업섯더면 이것은 一時의 구슬림에 不過하고 그 效力이 稀薄하겟지마는 그 後悔의 熱熱함이 人으로 하여금 感激을 일으킴에 足한줄로 나는 밋습니다.

4
나는 君의 文士의 써될 만한 文士들이 씨 그대로 文壇에 活動하게 되는 原因을 좀 말할가 합니다. 君의 恒常 그 結果를 論하여 理想에 突進하는 勇氣에는 勿論 首肯하나 우리는 必然的으로 이른바 現實도 말치 아니할수 업는가 하외다.
우리들은 時代의 刺激을 바다서 言論機關 其他 學術이나 文藝雜誌가 現今 發行하는 것이 幾 10種에 達하엿스나 그 經營자나 編輯者들의 말을 들으면 經濟上에도 勿論 困難이 多大하거니와 또한 極히 困難을 感하는 것은 原稿의 蒐集이라 합니다. 即 紙面에 붓을 잡을만한 사람이 적다함이외다. 月刊으로 發行한다는 것이 數個月 乃至 半年만에 發行하게 되는 것이요. 이것은 勿論 原稿뿐만의 關係는 아니지마는 雜誌다운 雜誌와 言論다운 言論을 選擇하여 內容의 充實을 圖하랴면 以上의 困難이 잇다 합니다. 그래서 定한 頁數를 顚充하랴고 粗製溢作한 惡文이라도 無意識이나 有意識으로 記載하게 된다 합니다. 그러면 철업는 少年文士들 即 春園君이 注意한 바와 가튼 美學이나 修辭學이나 論理學이나 社會學이나 其外 形而上이나 形而下의 科學을 좀 더 배우고 學校를 卒業하여야 할 文士들의 惡質의 文을 多量으로 搾出하게 되는 까닭이외 . 質의 良否를 顧慮하고 探究할 餘暇업시 活字로 變하여 世間에 나오게 되는 것이 아닌가 합니다. 또한 이러케 쓰랴면 나도 쓰겟다는 생각이 다른 短見이요. 淺慮인 文士씨들에게 功名이나 榮譽에 對한 衝動을 더욱 일으킴이 아닌가 합니다. 이것이 3文 文士들이 輩出하게된 까닭이라 합니다. 이러한 現象이 모든 文化發展期에 自然히 잇슬것이나 自己의 글이 活字로 變하여옴을 名譽로 알던 그들은 結局에 文士然하고 藝術家然하게 되는 것이 아닌가 합니다. 그 結果는 極히 低級이요. 淫蕩的인 것이 靑年男女의 弱點을 迎合하게 되는 것이외다.
所謂 批評的 態度를 가지고 思想問題들을 이악이한다 하여도 筆者自身에 獨特한 主義의 深奧한 見識이＜108＞ 적음으로 論議한 바 그것는 恰似히 緋緞쪽이나 布木쪽으로 어더맨들은 褓子와 가튼 보이고 그 內容이 貧弱하고 形式의 統一을 缺하게 되는 理由인 듯 하외다. 딸아서 讀者에게 何等의 感激한 氣分을 일으키지 못하고 五里霧中에서 彷徨하는 듯한 濛濃한 생각을 일으키게 하는 것이외다. 萬一 如斯한 低級하고 無條理하고 不徹底한 文이 우리들에게 感激한 氣分을 준다하면 이것은 반듯이 虛僞일 것이외다.
다시 우리 文壇의 收穫을 봅시다. 모다 어떠한 一種의 情話이외다. 小說을 創作하랴고 그 題材를 選擇할 때에 누구를 勿論하고 戀愛問題를 中心을 삼는 듯 하외다. 至今 우리 文士들의 作品을 손가락 꼽아 세더래도 內容이 擧皆 戀愛의 發展 아닌 것이 하나도 업습니다. 失戀者의 부르지즘이나 戀愛에 勝利한 이의 歡呼에 不外한 듯 하외다. 小說에 戀愛問題를 取扱하여 異性사이에 나오던 모든 葛藤과 苦惱와 悲哀와 矛盾과 嫉妬 等을 具象化하고 이에 對한 人生觀이라던지 作品에 表現된 個性들이 우리 人生의 奧底에 潛在한 모든 意識과 合하고 이것에 對하여 感激한 氣分을 어들때에는 이만한 것 가튼 材料가 업슬것이나 이러한 것을 缺如한 小說은 우리 血氣未定한 靑年讀者에게 주는 것이 害毒뿐인가 합니다. 淺薄한 性的 問題만을 低級한 讀者의 好奇心을 위하여서만 取擇한다하면 藝術을 汚辱함이 이에 더함이 업습니다. 나는 戀愛小說 中에서 『우리 文士의 손에서 된 것』 藝術的 價値가 잇는 것을 至今것 읽지 못한 것은 참으로 遺憾이외다. 이러한 作品이 流行할스록 作家나 鑑賞者를 勿論하고 遊蕩의 氣分으로 文藝를 娛樂하자는 傾向이 濃厚하여 갈 것이외다.
우리는 記憶하여야 할 것이요. 우리가 文藝品을 創作할 때에 반듯이 戀愛를 中心으로 한 題材를 取하여야만 雄篇傑作이 되는 理由가 업는 것을.
우리가 題材를 發見하기에 우리가 一生을 두고 쓰지 못할 만큼의 對像이 잇는 것이외다. 吾人 生活의 全 路程과 環境에 每日 幻滅하는 事像이 모다 題材되지 안흘것이 업습니다. 戀愛問題라야만 創作의 題材될 것이라는 理致가 어대 잇겟습니까.
나는 참으로 걱정합니다. 以上에 屢陳한 바와 가티 우리 民族의 부르지즈는 바 모든 소리는 數萬斤의 重으로 눌린 强壓하에서 苦痛을 이기지 못하는 悲鳴과 絶呌가 아니면 아니될 것이외다. 딸아서 時代思潮의 反影이오. 內部 生命力의 進展하랴는 苦悶의 象徵인 文藝에도＜109＞ 反抗的 色彩가 不知中에 表現되어 잇서야만 自然함이요. 眞이라 할 수 잇습니다. 革命前 『러시아』 文藝의 傾向이 어떠하엿습니까. 民情派와 『니체』의 强力을 理想化한 『꼬리키』의 作品이 生을 要求하는 靑年들의 가슴에서 물결치는 鬱寂한 血潮에 勇敢한 힘을 더진것도 偶然한 結果가 아닌가 합니다. 이러한 것을 보며 생각할 때에 손과 발을 매인 우리들이 今日 處地에서 戀愛를 謳歌하며 享樂에 陶醉하랴는 것을 참으로 可憎하고 寒心치 안타 할 수 업습니다. 딸아서 現代의 思潮가 우리 民族에게 反動을 주고 우리가 글로 苦惱한다는 것도 그만두고 自己의 살을 버이고 소곰을 너터라도 그 苦痛을 感覺할 만한 神經의 所有者인가를 나는 疑心합니다.
이와 가튼 말이 아즉 움나랴는 우리 文藝에 過重한 企待인지 알 수 업스나 또 한 편으로 보면 方今 움나랴고 하고 出發하랴는 機會임으로 더욱 懇切히 바라는 바이외다. 至今 方向을 定하기에 그 到着점이 딸아서 잇슬 것이외다. 우리는 決코 西洋思潮의 末流에서 헤엄치는 日本文壇을 그대로 본 뜰 것은 업습니다.
그러면 어떠한 이는 말하시겟지요. 『藝術은 決코 다른 사람을 爲하여서 엇는 것이 아니라 自己가 깃버하고 自身이 다른 사람이 想像치도 못할 無我의 境에서 깃버하면 그만이라고』 萬一 우리들에게 社會와는 아모 交涉도 업고 自身을 爲하야만의 藝術이 잇다하면 果然 그것이 社會意識이 發達한 今日에 成立될가요. 이것은 數世紀 前의 社會的 意識이 업는 頹敗派의 囈語에 不過하고 말것이외다. 우리들은 絶對의 自由를 어들 수 업는 것과 가티 우리 社會를 背景으로 삼고 우리 人生이나 其他 時時刻刻으로 幻滅하는 現像을 題材로 삼는 藝術도 우리 社會나 人生을 沒却하고 沒交涉하고는 成立치 못할 듯 합니다. 이것이 人間社會와 씨가 다른 神이나 幽靈의 社會, 禽獸의 社會의 創造가 아닌 以上에는 더욱 그러할 것이외다. 그럼으로 藝術은 藝術로의 獨特한 存在의 相對性은 容許할 수 잇스 우리 人生과 社會를 沒却하고 까지라도의 絶對性이 잇다하면 나는 그것을 肯定할 수 업습니다.

5
近日 흔히 主義를 말합니다. 藝術至上主義란 것도 絶對的의 意味로는 成立할 수 업는가 합니다. 또한 思潮라는 것은 決코 靜的이 아니요. 日常 流動하여 쉬지안는 動的이외다. 文學思潮 라던지 哲學思想이라던지＜110＞ 其他 一般 思潮가 社會와 時代를 딸아 變遷하는 것은 多言을 不待할 것이외다. 그럼으로 우리가 반듯이 어느 主義나 思潮를 盲目的으로 信奉하는 趨從者가 되어서는 아니될 것이외다. 우리는 우리의 生命에 內在한 獨特한 光輝를 發揮하여야 할 것이오. 남의 밟은 바 그 발자취만 딸아가랴고 하면 그것이 무슨 獨特한 가치가 잇다 하겟습니까. 追從하지 안흐랴도 인간의 內部生命에는 共通의 苦悶이라던지 時代苦가 잇서서 自然히 어떠한 主義나 流를 이루고 또는 符合하게 되는 것이외다. 처음부터 付隨하랴고 애쓰는 것처럼 애처로운 일은 다시 업겟습니다. 어린아이가 演劇을 求景하고 그것을 흉내내엇다 하면 그것도 藝術이라 하며 그 아이를 藝術家라 할 수 잇슬가요. 演劇을 흉내내인 그 아이를 藝術家라 이를 수 업는것 가티 다른 사람이나 다른 主義를 模倣만을 是務한다하면 그것도 藝術家나 藝術이라고 이를 수 업습니다. 남도 하니 나도 하겟다는 것은 淺薄한 思慮에서 나온 것은 勿論이어니와 나는 唯美主義이니 藝術至上主義이니 標榜을 먼저 하는 것도 藝術에 對한 根柢가 薄弱함인가 합니다. (우리 文士들 中에는 勿論 업겟지마는) 또한 批評家로 어떠한 作品을 批評할 때에 우리는 自然主義의 文學을 반듯이 거치어 간다는 뜻으로 評論한 것을 읽은 記憶이 잇습니다. 이것은 文藝나 一般 思潮의 進展하는 趣向에 그러케 되어온 바 來歷을 史的으로 說明함이요. 今後라도 新興하는 어느나라의 文學이라도 이러한 經路를 밟아야만 된다는 것은 아니외다. 前者 批評의 말이 이로보면 넘우 宿命論的 考察이 아닌가 합니다. 어떠한 文士가 처음에 創作할 때에는 반듯이 古典主義로부터 『로맨틔시즘』-自然主義- 新『로맨틔시즘』을 經由한다는 것은 넘우 웃으운 일이외다. 勿論 우리는 文學史로서의 硏究할 必要는 크게 잇게지오마는 우리 新興하랴는 文壇에도 그것을 반듯이 격거야 한다는 것은 아모리 생각하여도 難解의 點이 多하외다. 問題가 넘우 枝葉으로 나아가서 支離하게 되엇지마는 이것이 近日의 나의 우리 文壇에 對한 말하고저 하던 바의 하나이외다.

6
春園君은 말하기를 『나는 우리 文壇에 只今 文士가 되도록 工夫하면 될 듯한 天才가즌 文士의 씨를 보앗지마는 이미 長星한 文士를 보지 못합니다. 그러고 甚히 슯허하는 것은 이 文士의 씨되는 이들이 寸陰을＜111＞ 是競하여 刻苦하는 빗이 아니 보임이외다.』하엿다.
이것은 君의 主觀的 觀察일른지도 알 수 업스나 이밧게 速成한 文士가 잇다합시다. 이러한 文士의 씨와 急成文士(말이 좀 웃으우나 素養과 天品이 업시 어찌 어찌 하다가 뛰어 나온 文士)들에게만 우리의 新文化의 先驅요. 母되는 文藝를 맛기고 梅毒菌과 結核菌가튼 것을 無難히 散布함을 袖手傍觀하는 旣成文士가 잇다하면 그의 心事야말로 解釋할 수 업습니다. 이것은 철모르고 自己의 未熟한 藝術의 衝動이나 功名心에 빠져서 아모 意識업시 害毒을 주는 것보다도 그 罪惡이 千倍나 萬倍나 重하다 하겟습니다. 웨? 袖手傍觀하는가. 웨? 우리 民族의 文藝 鑑賞眼을 놉히도록 努力하지 안는가. 웨? 不純한 文士들을 한 편에서 치어버리지 안는가. 웨? 發行하는 雜誌의 紙面을 文士의 씨나 急成文士들에게 放任하는가. 어찌햇던지 보고만 안젓는 旣成文士네의 罪가 더 크다 할 수 잇습니다. 참으로 民族을 위한다하면 爲先 『꿰테』나 『쉑스피어』를 꿈꾸지 말고 自己의 힘자라는대로 우리 文壇을 引導하여야 할 것이외다. 梅毒菌이나 結核菌과 가튼 病毒에 感染되지 안흘만큼한 抗毒素가 우리의 體質에 發生하도록 하는 것이 旣成文士 諸氏의 使命이 아닌가 합니다.
白晝에는 螢光을 볼 수 업는 것과 가티 太陽의 압헤서는 羣星이 光을 일는것과 가티 偉大한 人格者의 압헤는 小人이 容納할 수 업는 것 가티 實力이 잇고 天品이 豊富한 文士의 作品압헤는 文士될 만한 씨나 急造文士들의 作品은 容忍을 바들 수 업슬 것이외다. 나는 先進文士 諸彦의 特히 努力奮起함을 熱望하는 同時에 文士될 만한 素質을 가즌 諸氏도 完全한 發育을 엇기를 바랍니다. 어서 우리 文壇에도 素養이 富豊한 天才의 文士가 輩出하여야 할 것이외다.
이러한 意味에서 우리 文士들께 熱熱한 忠告를 들인 春園君도 質이 良好한 作品을 多量으로 提供하기를 바랍니다. 이것이 千百番 不良한 文士를 罵倒하는 것보다 文壇을 革新함에는 그 效果가 偉大할 줄 밋습니다. ...(끗)
(1921年 3月 3日)＜112＞
＜100-112＞