별건곤 제52호
1932년 06월 01일
探偵小說, 戀愛와 復讎 (Detective Novel, Love and Revenge)
流邦 (Yu Bang)
소설 (Novel)

The snow was swirling and the wind was sharp. The scattering snowflakes stung the faces of people wandering the night streets, shooting into their mouths and eyes. Even young men and women who seemed brave huddled and scurried into streetcars and bars.

An Kwan-ho, a lawyer and doctor of law, was heading from Jongno intersection towards Seodaemun when he inadvertently turned his head. At that moment, he saw a young man and woman, covered in snow, arguing fiercely at the entrance of an alley heading towards Anguk-dong. After some arguing, the woman suddenly stopped talking, pushed the man away, and ran towards Kwan-ho, crying out as if to embrace him.

"Oh, please help me. That fellow is a troublemaker."

The woman pointed at the man with a trembling hand, looking very frightened. The young lawyer almost unconsciously grabbed his wallet and walked closer to the man. Before he could reach him, the man, for some reason, turned and disappeared into the darkness like a flash of lightning.

The two entered a tearoom. The warm radiation from the stove gently melted their frozen bodies and minds. A few glasses of fragrant cocktails seeped into their stomachs, and Kwan-ho's passion was considerably aroused.

"Excuse me, but how did you come to know such a man?"

"Well, that man is named Pak Ho-sang, and he used to be an employee at the company I worked for. I felt terribly sorry for him. Even after I quit the company, he kept visiting the aunt's house where I live, asking me to marry him. One time, my aunt firmly refused him, and you know what he did? He just hung his head for a while, then suddenly grabbed his head with both hands and slammed it right onto the floor. He fainted, and there was quite a commotion. Hohoho."

The woman looked out the snowy window and then continued her story.

"After that, his mood worsened. Then, unexpectedly, I ran into him there, and I was so surprised that my head spun, and I almost fainted. I didn't know what to do, but just then, I saw you passing by, sir, and I took the liberty of doing that. I'm so sorry."

Her eyes, shining like stars, expressed gratitude. Her composure restored, the woman—Myŏng-suk—who had become somewhat reserved, blushed and slightly closed her eyes as her gaze met Kwan-ho's. Kwan-ho stared at Myŏng-suk's attractively made-up face and, before he knew it, felt a strange impulse and quietly sighed.

The night in the street past midnight grew quietly deeper.

Their relationship, which began with an urban incident, progressed to the point where they rented a house in Sŏrin-dong about a week later and started a new life together. Myŏng-suk presented the following cohabitation conditions and received Kwan-ho's unconditional approval:

1. For the time being, do not announce our domestic life to the world, and do so only after a certain period has passed.
2. Kwan-ho must strictly adhere to his office commute times.

A few days later, Myŏng-suk mentioned that her younger sister would be coming to Seoul soon.

One day, Kwan-ho finished his work and was on his way home when he stopped by his sister's house in Kaedong and heard this from her:

"Oppa, earlier around 3 o'clock, you were going out to play with a friend, and Unni was riding the streetcar with some man. So I didn't say hello and just passed by."

"Where did they ride together? What did the man look like?" <49>

"Right in front of the station. The man was very tall and wearing a suit."

Kwan-ho pondered on the way back home. Who could that man be? However, when he asked his wife at home, she said she hadn't gone anywhere. As proof, she had been knitting something that she couldn't possibly have left undone if she had gone out. Moreover, Kwan-ho's friend, the novelist Han Chin-sik, who was staying next door, also confirmed this.

Thus, Kwan-ho dispelled his suspicion. He wanted to spend that night especially pleasantly. They drank until they were drunk and sang until their throats were hoarse. Eventually, it was time to sleep. Lying on the soft bedding was Myŏng-suk's voluptuous figure, a fresh body that only he could enjoy. Kwan-ho, as if a monomaniac discovering a prized masterpiece and wanting to devour it immediately, grabbed Myŏng-suk's arm and rubbed it against his cheek. At that moment, he noticed something cold: a wristwatch. Kwan-ho playfully twisted it this way and that, pretending to adjust the hands, but he didn't realize that the hands were ten minutes ahead. The time was 2:25.

The next day, feeling tired and reluctant to leave his wife, he headed to the office around 2 PM. Gazing out the bus window as it sped along the familiar route, Kwan-ho saw something he couldn't believe as they crossed the road from Hwanggeumjeong to Jinkogae. It was Myŏng-suk, dressed smartly, entering XX Department Store with a young man, looking very affectionate.

"Oh, it's dangerous!"

Ignoring the bus conductor's words, Kwan-ho jumped off the bus. His cheeks grew cold, and his limbs trembled. Thinking that Myŏng-suk was going out with that guy every day, he felt despair and resentment rising, and his eyes burned.

He returned home just five minutes before 4 o'clock. When he flung open the door, he couldn't help but stand there dumbfounded, as if he had risen from the ground.

What was this? In the room, there were two Myŏng-suks, identical from head to toe. Both Myŏng-suks seemed surprised, and then one of them (who seemed like Myŏng-suk) opened her mouth.

"Hohoho. You're home early today. But why do you have such a strange face? Oh, this is the younger sister I told you about. She suddenly came up from the countryside today, so I was quite surprised. She must have come all the way here without even sending a telegram."

"Hello. I'm Yŏng-suk. I've heard a lot about you from Unni."

"Yes, yes, I suppose so."

Kwan-ho answered vaguely. His head was confused, and his chest felt tight. He felt as if he had discovered some great secret, but he couldn't grasp any clues to the mystery and kept looking back and forth between the two Myŏng-suks. A little later, Yŏng-suk said she needed to unpack and would go to her aunt's house and left.

Kwan-ho lay down and stared blankly at the ceiling. "I should have just asked," <50> he thought. Even if Myŏng-suk had answered that it was her, it would have been better than harboring anxiety and doubt. He abruptly spoke up.

"Yŏbo, where did you go with someone today?"

"Huh? What are you talking about? I stayed home all day."

"I clearly saw you entering the department store in Hwanggeumjeong. A very modern girl."

Myŏng-suk just burst out laughing.

"Haha. You must have seen Yŏng-suk. Let me tell you a story. That troublemaker I met before, you know? Somehow, he found out where we live and came over two or three times, threatening to reveal our relationship unless I gave him 2,000 won. I told him I couldn't possibly do that, so he left with a very scary look on his face. Then, today, as Yŏng-suk was getting off at the station and heading to her aunt's house, she was passing in front of the department store when that guy mistook her for me, grabbed her arm, and dragged her inside, saying he had something to say. Yŏng-suk told him she didn't even know who he was and shook him off and ran away. We were just laughing about it. Ask Mr. Han. See if I was home or if I went out."

"Well, then I must be mistaken. I'm sorry for suspecting you even for a moment. I need to deal with that troublemaker somehow, even if it costs some money."

"We don't need to spend money, but that man is a very perverted person."

Myŏng-suk went on to tell the story of how the troublemaker Pak Ho-sang had been hanging around behind their house, engaging in a kind of love demonstration, and how, when she had gone to stay at her maternal relatives' house in the countryside to avoid Pak, he had followed her there and wandered around the house all night in the rain, so she couldn't sleep and had fled to another place early in the morning.

The next day, Kwan-ho handed Myŏng-suk fifty 10-won bills, telling her to get rid of Pak for good.

Three or four days passed. When Kwan-ho returned home, Myŏng-suk was gone. Had she gone to take a bath? But an hour, two hours passed, and she didn't return. He became anxious. He searched everywhere he could think of, but it was all in vain. Had she gone to her aunt's house? But he couldn't find any such house. Myŏng-suk didn't return all night.

"Was it all an act to get 500 won?"

He was furious and spent the next day drinking heavily. When he came home, there was a special delivery letter from Myŏng-suk.

"I am leaving, promising to explain everything in a suitable manner later. And the 500 won you gave me to give to that troublemaker Pak is kept in the desk drawer. Goodbye. Myŏng-suk."

He crumpled the letter and threw it away. He immediately opened the desk drawer, but there was nothing inside. He felt his chest sink and couldn't suppress the anger that welled up inside him. He grabbed his hair with both hands and staggered out.

A lonely life continued for about ten days. One day, as he boarded a streetcar bound for Dongdaemun, he noticed a middle-aged man with a dark complexion in a suit sitting directly across from him, staring at him intently. Kwan-ho took out the extra edition (hooe) he had picked up earlier and began to read it.

"Murder of Chŏn Yun-su, the richest man in P'yŏngbuk -
Location: Inch'ŏn - Perpetrator unknown -
Early this morning at 5 a.m., Chŏn Yun-su, the richest man in P'yŏngbuk, who had been living in seclusion in Inch'ŏn, was murdered with a dagger by an unknown person. The Inch'ŏn police are mobilized and inspecting the scene - Prosecutors dispatched - Currently under strict investigation, but no clues have been obtained so far -"

Reading this extra edition, Kwan-ho stopped his visit to his friend and quickly returned home. The suspicious man followed him. As soon as he entered the house, he hurriedly went to the safe and opened it with the combination. He was relieved to see that what he had feared was still there.

His father had become successful as Chŏn Yun-su's secretary, and Kwan-ho, as a lawyer, had been Chŏn's legal advisor for all the companies he managed. Two years ago, when Chŏn suddenly stopped his business and went into seclusion, he had asked Kwan-ho to keep all the secret documents and a rough map of the secret address, asking him never to reveal the address to anyone else. Seeing that everything was safely inside the safe, he was finally relieved when the strange man who had followed him from the streetcar opened the door and entered.

"Please forgive me, Mr. An."

"Who are you?"

The strange man's business card read, "Cho T'ae-gyu, Detective, Jongno Police Station."

"I would like to ask you some questions regarding the murder of Chŏn Yun-su, for whom you serve as legal advisor."

Kwan-ho immediately thought of Myŏng-suk. But he didn't want to bring up Myŏng-suk's story, so he held back.

"I have nothing to say."

That night, the extra edition reported another unexpected event. It stated that when Chŏn's body was found, the circumstances had initially appeared to be murder due to a series of coincidences, but a thorough examination by the doctor had revealed that it was suicide. <51>

About two weeks later, in the May issue of "Yŏsŏng Segye" (Women's World), the leading women's magazine, a bizarre article titled "The Truth of the Strange Death of Chŏn Yun-su, the Richest Man in P'yŏngbuk - Written by Revenge Child (復讎兒) Ri Myŏng-suk" was published, shocking the world. The outline of the story is as follows:

"Mr. An -
It is very painful to publish such a thing on paper, but I have no choice but to publish it due to unavoidable circumstances. I suppose you can generally guess about Chŏn's suicide. My father was a considerable businessman in the P'yŏngbuk region and was friends with Chŏn. However, being a businessman means that being in the same business makes you both friends and enemies. So Chŏn advised my father to invest in a business that was advantageous to Chŏn, and then, through despicable means, bankrupted my father and used him to gain his current wealth and status. My father eventually resented Chŏn and died a tragic death. My siblings (the person you called the troublemaker Pak is my younger brother) and I planned revenge and were watching Chŏn's movements when he seemed to notice and asked you to keep the secret documents and hid himself.

After living with you, I used the key you had entrusted to me and opened the safe while you were not in the room, easily finding out where Chŏn was hiding. At that time, I accidentally discovered many secret documents proving Chŏn's past crimes and changed part of my plan, taking them to a reporter every day and having them copied exactly. The time I went out was from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m. I was worried that you might come home early and find out that I had gone out, so I had Yŏng-suk come to the house from 2:10 p.m. to 3:50 p.m. to knit and listen to records. The 20-minute difference was created so that Yŏng-suk and I would not be in the house at the same time. But strangely enough, on the day you said you saw me entering the department store, I didn't know anything about it, and when I came home, Yŏng-suk, who should have left at 3:50 p.m., was still there. When I asked her why she hadn't left yet, she showed me her wristwatch, saying it was now 3:50 p.m. But my watch was set 10 minutes ahead, so it was exactly 4 p.m. I was wondering how the two watches, which had been set exactly the same, could be different when you came in. At that time, I was really surprised. But you were quite drunk and didn't think carefully, but why would Yŏng-suk, who had just come to Seoul, go to a department store with a strange man?

Anyway, the document copying was finished, so our three siblings secretly invaded Chŏn's hiding place and threw all the secret documents in front of Chŏn, declaring that we would take them to the prosecutor's office tomorrow and submit them with a complaint. Chŏn's surprised and flustered look at that time - if Father had seen that disgraceful sight, how happy he would have been. As we left the house, there was a gunshot! We, who saw Chŏn's suicide, immediately left for Shanghai. This letter is being written in a secluded house in the X Concession in Shanghai. Even if our actions are brought to trial, we will not be guilty. But we never want to return to Korea.

Mr. An
How much have you cursed me? I know you will resent me as a cold robot. But I will protest about that - it is a kind of prejudice that puts love above the pleasure of revenge. Please find my love in the fact that I did not simply steal the secret documents -"

Kwan-ho finished reading and slammed the magazine down.

"Ugh, you wicked woman. Swindler!"

However, if Kwan-ho had known the reason why Kim, who lived in his outhouse, had suddenly moved elsewhere, he would have had no need or right to curse Myŏng-suk. (End) (Illustration Kim Kyu-taek) <52>

**Named Entities**

安寬浩	An Kwan-ho
朴虎相	Pak Ho-sang
明淑	Myŏng-suk
개동	Kaedong
韓鎭植	Han Chin-sik
영숙	Yŏng-suk
황금정	Hwanggeumjeong
진고개	Chinkogae
평북	P'yŏngbuk
全潤洙	Chŏn Yun-su
인천	Inch'ŏn
趙泰奎	Cho T'ae-gyu
李明淑	Ri Myŏng-suk
上海	Shanghai
金奎澤	Kim Kyu-taek



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제52호
발행일	1932년 06월 01일
기사제목	探偵小說, 戀愛와 復讎
필자	流邦
기사형태	소설

探偵小說, 戀愛와 復讎
						流邦
눈보라는 휘날니고 바람은 맵다. 뿌리는 눈가루가 밤거리를 헤매이는 사람 사람의 입과 눈으로 쏘아든다. 아조 용감한 듯이 것든 젊은 남녀도 전차로 술집으로 목을 움추리고 기여드러가는 때엿다.
변호사요 법학사인 안관호는 종로 네거리에서 서대문쪽으로 향해 내려가다가 무심코 얼골을 돌이켯다. 그 때 안국동 방면으로 가는 바른편 골목 어구에서 눈을 흠신 뒤집어쓴 젊은 남녀가 무슨 일인지 서로 몹시 다투는 것이 보엿다. 얼마쯤 다토는 모양이드니 녀자가 문득 말을 끈코 남자를 홱 밀처버리고 관호한테로 달녀와서 덥석 안킬 듯이 부르짓는다.
「아 여보세요. 나를 좀 구해주세요. 저녀석은 불량자입니다」
녀자는 대단히 무서운 표정을 하며 떨니는 손으로 남자를 가리친다. 청년법률가는 거이 무의무식적으로 지갑을 손에 쥐자 그 남자의 압흐로 갓가히 거러간다. 채 마추서지 안어서 그 남자는 무슨 생각을 하엿슴인지 홱 도라서더니 번개ㅅ불가티 어둠 속으로 사라지고 마럿다.
두 사람은 어느 틔-우룸에 드러갓다. 훈훈한 란로의 방사열은 두 사람의 꽁꽁 얼은 몸과 마음을 느긋하게 녹여 주엇다. 방향놉흔 칵텔 몃 잔이 배속으로 숨여들어 관호의 정열은 상당히 흥분되엿다.
「실레올시다만은 엇더케 되여서 그런 사내를 알게 되엿습니까」
「네 그 사내는 박호상이라고 제가 전에 댕기든 회사의 사원인데 아조 측은하기가 짝이 업서요. 제가 회사를 그만두고 나온 뒤에도 작고 제가 잇는 아즈머님댁엘 차저와서는 결혼하자고 조른답니다. 어느때인가 아즈머님이 닥 잘나 거절을 하시면서 실타고 하니까 그 사람 참 별해요. 한참이나 고개를 숙이고 잇더니 별안간 머리를 두 손으로 웅켜잡고 방바닥에 그낭 콱 부딋겟지요. 그래 졸도를 하고 듸리 야단이 낫섯답니다. 호호호」
녀자는 눈나리는 창밧글 내다보고 나서 다시 이야기를 닛는다.
「그 뒤로부터는 더욱 기분이 조치 안앗섯는데 그만 앗가 거기서 뜻밧게 만나노아서 엇더케 놀낫는지 그만 머리가 팽팽 내둘니면서 잣바질번 햇답니다. 그래 저도 엇절줄을 몰라 하든차에 맛츰 선생님께서 지나가시는 걸 보고 그만 실례를 무릅쓰고 그 짓을 햇서요. 참 엇더케 미안한지 모르겟습니다」
샛별가티 빗나는 눈동자가 감사하다. 다시 평정한 기분이 회복되여 얼마쯤 준혹적으로까지 된 녀자-명숙은 관호의 시선과 충돌하자 볼이 발개지며 눈을 살짝 감는다. 관호는 보기조케 화장한 명숙의 얼골을 물끄럼히 드려다보며 아지 못하는 동안에 이상한 충동을 늣기며 가만히 한숨을 쉬엿다.
자정 넘은 거리의 밤은 고요히 짓허간다.

도회적 색채를 띄운 사건으로부터 출발한 그들의 교제가 일주간 쯤 지난 뒤에는 벌서 서린동 어느 세집 하나를 어더서 새살림을 시작하게 되엿다. 명숙은 다음과 가튼 동거조건을 드러 무조건적으로 관호의 승락을 바덧다.
1. 당분간 우리의 가정생활을 세상에 발표하지 말고 일정기간을 지나서 할 것
2. 관호는 사무소출근 퇴근시간을 정확히 직힐 것
몃칠 후에 명숙은 자긔 동생이 일간 상경한다는 말을 하얏다.
어느 날 관호는 사무를 필하고 집으로 도라오는 길에 개동 아버지댁에를 들렷다가 누이동생한테 이런 말을 들엇다.
「옵바 앗가 3시쯤 동무하구 어데 놀너가누라니까 언니가 웬 사내하고 가티 전차를 타겟지. 그래 나는 인사도 안하고 지냇다우」
「어듸서 가티 타든? 사내는 엇더케<49> 생겻든?」
「바루 정거장 압히애요. 사내는 키가 훨석 크고 양복을 입엇습듸다」
관호는 도라오는 길에 곰곰 생각해 보앗다. 대체 그 사내는 누굴까. 그러나 집에 와서 안해에게 무러본즉 아모데도 나간데가 업다고 한다. 그 증거로는 밧게 나갓섯다면 도저히 뜰 수 업슬 편물을 떠노은 것. 또 이웃집에 유하는 관호의 친구 소설가 한진식이도 증명해 주엇다.
이리하야 관호는 의심을 풀엇다. 그날 밤은 각별히 유쾌히 보내고 십헛다. 그들은 취하도록 마시고 목이 쉬도록 노래 불럿다. 이윽고 잠 잘 때가 되엿다. 푹신한 이불 우에 누은 명숙의 발달된 자태, 자긔 뿐만이 향락할 수 잇는 신선한 육체, 관호는 모노마니아가 비장의 진품을 발견하얏슬 때 이모저모로 뜨더보며 당장 집어삼키고 십흔 병적 충동을 밧는 모양으로 덤썩 명숙의 팔을 붓잡어 뺨에다 갓다 부볏다. 그 때 무에 선뜩함으로 본즉 팔뚝시게다. 관호는 공연히 이리틀고 저리틀며 작난을 하다가 다시 바늘을 제자리에 옴겨놋노라고 하얏스나 바늘은 10분을 압서가라치는 것을 몰낫다. 때는 2시 25분-

이튼날은 몸도 피곤하고 안해를 떠나기 실은 정에 끌려 오후 2시 쯤에야 사무소를 향하얏다. 닥근듯한 길로 줄기차게 다라나는 뻐스의 창밧글 내다보며 황금정에서 진고개로 갈너지는 길을 건느랴 할 때 관호는 불의에 못볼것을 보고 무척 놀낫섯다. 그것은 그럿케가지 알뜰히 외출을 부인하든 명숙이가 스마-트한 양복청년과 한가지로 아조 정답게 XX백화점으로 드러가는 것을 봄이엿다.
「앗 위태합니다」
녀차장의 말니는 것도 뿌리치고 관호는 그냥 닷자곳자로 훠뛰여나렷다. 뺨이 싸늘해지며 사지가 부르르 떨렷다. 명숙이는 날마다 저놈과 한가지로 외출을 하는구나 하고 생각하니 그는 절망과 울분이 치밀어 올라 눈이 뜨거워젓다.
그는 4시가 되려면 5분밧게 아니 남앗슬때 풀업시 집에 도라왓다. 홱하고 문을 열치자 그는 땅에서 도다난 사람가티 웃뚝서지 아늘 수 업섯다.
이것이 왼 일일까. 방안에는 머리끗헤서 발끗까지 신통히도 꼭 가튼 두 명숙이가 안저 잇지 안으냐. 두 명 명숙이도 동시에 놀나는 기색이 드니 이에 명숙이(인듯한)가 입을 열엇다.
「호호호. 오늘은 퍽 일즉 오섯네. 그런데 웨 그러케 이상한 얼골을 하세요. 오 얘가 언젠가 이야기한 동생이애요. 오늘 별안간 시골서 올라왓기에 퍽 놀나웟든 차랍니다. 전보도 놋치안코 혼자 올라왓겟지요」
「안령하섯세요. 제가 영숙임니다. 언니한테 말슴은 만히 드럿지요」
「네. 네. 그러시겟습니다」
관호는 어름어름 대답을 해 버렷다. 머리가 혼난하고 가슴이 뻐근하엿다. 자기는 무슨 큰 비밀이나 발견한 듯 햇섯는데 그럿타고 의문의 힌트를 잡어낼 수 업는 별한 감정에 얽혀 두 명숙이를 번가라 보고 보고 하엿다. 조곰 잇다가 영숙은 짐을 풀어야 겟다고 아즈머님댁으로 간다고 도라갓다.
관호는 자리에 누어 멍하니 천정을 바라 보앗다. 그러타 차라리 무러보지.<50> 앗가 그것이 자긔라고 명숙이가 대답한대도 불안과 의혹을 품고 번뇌하느니보다는 낫다고 생각한 그는 툭명스럽게 말을 끄냇다.
「여보. 당신 오늘 누구하고 어듸 갓섯소」
「네? 별말슴을 다하세요. 오늘은 꼭 집에 드러안젓섯습니다」
「나는 황금정서 백화점에 드러가는 걸 분명히 보앗는데. 아조 모던뽀이드군」
명숙은 그냥 냅다 웃는다.
「하하. 영숙이를 보신게로군. 내 이야기 하리다. 이전에 맛난든 그 불량자 말이애요. 그 녀석이 엇더케 알앗는지 우리 집을 알아가지군 두서너번이나 차저와서는 당신과 떠러지지 안켓스면 2천 원을 내노라고 위협을 해요. 그래 내가 도저히 말을 들을 수가 업다고 하니까 아조 무서운 상판을 하고 도라갓답니다. 그런데 앗가 말이얘요. 정거장에서 내려서 아즈머님댁을 차저가든 영숙이가 백화점 압흘 지나가랴니까 그 녀석이 나로 잘못알고 영숙이 팔을 꽉 붓잡더니 말할 것이 잇다고 끌고 드러가드래요. 그래 영숙이는 나는 당신이 누군지도 모른다고 홱 뿌리치고 다라나왓대요. 앗가도 그 이야기를 하면서 서로 우섯답니다. 한 선생한테도 무러보세요. 내가 집에 잇섯나 밧게 나간 일이 잇나-」
「글세 그럿타면 내가 잘못됏소. 잠시라도 당신을 의심해서 미안하오. 그 불량자인가 한 그 자식을 엇더케 처치를 해야 할텐데 돈을 좀 들이더래도」
「돈이야 쓸것 업겟지만 하여간 그 사람 아조 변태적 인물이애요」
명숙은 불량청년 박호상이가 자긔 집 담장 뒤를 왓다갓다 하면서 일종 연애데모를 행한 일이며, 박을 피해서 다른 시골 외가댁에 가 잇슬 때도 또 쫏차와서 비가오는 밤중에 철벅철벅 밤새도록 집박을 왓다갓다 함으로 무서워 한 잠도 못자고 새벽일즉이 또 도망해서 다른 데로 갓섯다는 이야기를 죽- 하얏다.
이튼날 관호는 10원짜리 50장을 명숙의 손에 쥐여주며 박을 조토록 처치하라고 일럿다.

삼사일 지나서다. 관호가 집에 도라와 본즉 명숙은 업섯다. 혹시 목욕을 갓나. 그러나 한 시간 두 시간이 지나도 도라오지 안는다. 그는 불안해젓다. 여기저기 감즉한 데를 차저 도라다녓스나 헛거름이엿다. 아즈머님댁에 갓나 하고 차저 보앗스나 그런 집은 도모지 업다고 한다. 명숙은 밤새도록 도라오지 안엇다.
「모든 것이 500원을 먹으려구한 연극이엿든가」
그는 화가 잔득나서 이튼날은 늣도록 술만 먹엇다. 집에 오니 명숙이가 보낸 속달우편이 와 잇섯다.
「후일 적당한 방법으로써 모든 사정을 말슴하기로 하고 저는 떠나갑니다. 그리고 요전번 불랑자 박에게 주라고 주신 돈 500원은 책상설합에 간직햇나이다. 안영히 게서요. 명숙」
그는 편지를 탁 부벼 팽게치고 곳 책상설합을 열어보앗스나 그 속에는 아모것도 업다. 그는 그만 가슴이 턱 내려안즈며 분한 생각이 잔뜩 뭉겨지는 것을 억제하기 어려워 두 손으로 머리칼을 웅켜잡고 벌떡 나가 잣바젓다.
쓸쓸한 생활이 한 열흘동안 게속되엿다. 어느날 그가 동대문행 전차를 올나탄즉 바로 마즌편 자리에 얼골이 검으스럼한 양복입은 장년 한 사람이 자긔를 유난스럽게 처다본다. 관호는 앗가 바더 너엇든 호외를 끄내여서 읽기를 시작햇다.
「평북 제일의 부호 전윤수씨의 살해사건-
장소는 인천-범인은 상금불명-
금일 새벽 5시경 인천서 은둔생활을 하든 평북 제일의 부호 전윤수씨가 엇던 자에게 단도로 살해되다. 소관 인천경찰에서는 총동원하야 현장을 검사하고- 검사출장-목하 엄중 탐사중이나 지금까지 아모런 단서를 엇지 못하엿다-」
관호는 이 호외를 읽자 차저가랴든 친구방문을 중지하고 중도에 내려 급히 집으로 도라왓다. 수상한 남자는 뒤를 따라온다. 집에 드러스자마자 그는 부리낫케 금고 압흐로 가서 암호를 맛초아 문을 열엇다. 그리고 그는 자긔가 염려하든 것이 그대로 잇슴을 보고 안심하얏다.
그는 자긔 아버지가 전윤수씨의 비서역으로 오늘의 성공을 하게된 관게로 변호사가 된 후로도 전씨의 경영하는 모든 회사의 고문변호사로 잇섯스며 2년 전에 전씨가 별안간 장사를 그만두고 은거를 하게되자 절대로 타인에게 주소를 알려주지 말 것을 부탁밧는 동시에 일체 비밀서류와 비밀주소의 략도를 보관해 달나는 의뢰를 밧앗섯든 터이다. 그 모든 것이 금고안에 안전히 드러 잇슴을 보고 겨우 안심을 하자 앗가 전차에서부터 따라온 이상한 남자가 문을 열고 드러온다.
「용서합시요. 안선생」
「당신은 누구십니까」
이상한 사람의 명함에는 「종로경찰서 형사 조태규」라고 씨여 잇섯다.
다만 선생께서 고문이 되여잇는 전윤수씨 살해사건에 대하야 참고될 말슴을 좀 들여주섯스면 합니다」
관호는 얼핏 명숙의 생각이 낫다. 그러나 명숙의 이야기는 끄집어 내고 십지 안음으로 꾹 참앗다.
「별로 드릴 말슴이 업습니다」

그날 밤중 호외는 다시 의외의 일을 보도하엿다. 그것은 전씨의 시체가 발견 되엿슬 때는 너무도 우연한 사정이 중첩되여 타살인 듯한 상태를 나타내엿스나 의사의 엄밀한 검시로 인하야 자살인 것이 판명되엿다는 것이다.<51>
그 후 2주간쯤 지나서 녀성잡지계의 첫재로 꼽히는 「녀성세게」 5월호에 「평북부호 전윤수씨 괴사사건의 진상 필자는 복수아(復讎兒) 리명숙」이라는 기괴한 기사가 발표되여 세상을 놀나게 하엿스니 인제 대강 그 줄거리를 기록하면 이러하다.
「안선생님-
이런 일을 지상에 발표하기는 여간 괴로웁지가 안사오나 엇절 수 업는 사정으로 발표 아니 할 수가 업나이다. 전의 자살사건에 대하야는 대체로 짐작이 게실 줄 압니다. 나의 부친은 평북지방에 상당한 사업가로 전과는 친구의 사이엿습니다. 그러나 사업가라고 하는 것은 동업자간이 되고보면 친구인 동시에 적이 됨니다. 그리하야 전은 부친에게 유리한 사업이 잇스니 출자를 하라고 권고해서 비렬한 수단으로 부친을 파산케 하고 부친을 리용하야 자긔는 금일의 재산과 지위를 어덧든 것입니다. 부친은 드듸여 전을 원망하며 아조 무참한 죽엄을 하시엿습니다. 나는 동생들(불량청년 박이라고 한 사람은 내 동생입니다)과 가티 복수할 게획을 세우고 전의 신변을 엿보든 중 그도 눈치를 채엿든지 비밀서류를 선생님께 보관해 달나고 의뢰를 한 후 자긔는 몸을 숨겻든 것입니다.
당신과 한가지로 동거하게 된 이후로 나는 당신이 맛기신 열쇠를 가지고 당신이 안게실 동안 금고를 열어보고 쉽사리 전의 은가를 알아내게 되엿스며 그때 우연히 전의 종래 죄악을 증명하는 만흔 비밀서류를 발견하자 게획의 일부를 변경하야 매일 속긔자 한테로 가지고 가서 고대로 복사를 하얏습니다. 나가는 시간은 오후 2시로 4시까지엿는데 혹시 당신이 일즉 도라와서 내가 외출한 것을 알게 될까하는 염려로 영숙으로 하여금 오후 2시 10분으로부터 3시 50분까지 집에 와서 편물도 하고 유성기도 듯게 하엿습니다. 20분이라는 시간은 영숙이와 내가동시에 집안에 잇지 아니하도록 하기 위하야 만든 것입니다. 그런데 이상하게도 당신이 내가 백화점에 드러가는 것을 보앗다고 하시든 날 나는 그런 일도 모르고 집에 도라온즉 10분 전에 도라갓서야 할 영숙이가 아직도 잇지 안켓습니까. 그래 여태 아니갓느냐고 하니깐 인제야 3시 50분이 되엿다고 하면서 팔뚝시게를 보이겟지요. 그런데 내 시게는 10분 압서 꼭 4시가 되여 잇섯습니다. 꼭 마처노앗든 두 시게가 엇지되여 틀렷나 하고 이상히 생각하는 차에 막 당신이 드러오섯습니다. 그 때 나는 참말 여간 놀나지 안엇습니다. 더구나 당신이 앗가 누구하고 어듸를 가섯지 하고 무르실 때는 그만 비밀행위가 드러난 줄 알고 어름어름 대답을 하면서도 식은땀이 다 흘으도록 혼이 낫섯습니다. 그 때에 당신도 꽤 취하시어 차근차근히 생각지를 못하신 탓이겟지만 처음 서울을 나온 영숙이가 왜 모르는 남자와 가티 백화점 가튼데를 드러갓슬리가 잇겟서요.
그러구러 문서복사도 끗이 낫슴으로 우리 3남매는 몰래 전의 은가에 침입하야 전의 압헤다 일절 비밀문서를 내던지면서 이것을 내일 검사국으로 가지고 가서 고소장과 가티 제출하겟다고 선고를 햇습니다. 그때의 전의 놀나고 창황해 하는 모양이란- 아버지께서 그 추태를 보앗드라면 얼마나 깃버하섯슬는지요. 우리가 그 집에서 나오자 탕! 하는 총소리가 낫습니다. 전의 자살을 본 우리는 즉시 상해로 떠낫습니다. 이 글을 쓰는 곳은 상해 X조게의 한 너즐한 집입니다. 우리들의 행동은 설사 재판에 붓친다 하드래도 아모 죄가 아니되겟지요. 그러나 우리는 다시는 조선으로 도라가고 십지는 안습니다.
안선생님
얼마나 나를 욕하섯습니까. 냉혹한 로봇트라고 원망하실 줄 압니다. 그러나 거기 대해서 나는 이러케 항의 하려합니다- 그것은 연애를 복수의 쾌감우에 둔 일종의 편견이다. 비밀문서를 그대로 훔처내지 안은 거기에서 내의 사랑을 차저주소서 라고-」
관호는 다 보고나서 잡지를 탁 내동댕이첫다.
「에익 고약한 년. 사기사」
그러나 만약 관호가 자긔집 행랑에 들엇든 김서방이 별안간 다른데로 이사해간 리유를 알엇다면 명숙을 욕할 아모런 필요도 권리도 업섯슬 것이다. (끗)(偛畵 金奎澤)<52>
<49-52>