잡지명	別건곤 제19호
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	戀愛의 道
필자	高永煥
기사형태	논설

Magazine Title: 別건곤 제19호
Publication Date: February 1, 1929
Article Title: 戀愛의 道 (The Way of Love)
Author: 高永煥 (Ko Yŏng-hwan)
Article Type: 논설 (Essay)

The Way of Love
						Ko Yŏng-hwan

- "Marige in haste and repent at leisure." (Marry in haste and repent at leisure) - Western Saying

In Oscar Wilde's novel "The Picture of Dorian Gray," there is a very interesting but somewhat strange statement. It says that anyone in love begins by deceiving themselves and ends by deceiving others. That is what the world calls "romance." Here is the author's words in the original text:
“When one is in love, one always bigins by deceiving one's self, and one always ends by deceiving others, That is what the world calls a romance."-
-Oscar Wilde : The Picture of Dorien Grey.-

Upon careful reading and contemplation of Oscar Wilde's words quoted above, it seems to be a fact often found in common love relationships. However, it doesn't seem to be a truth that necessarily applies to truly innocent love. In other words, love that is forcibly established by deceiving oneself and the other person, as Oscar Wilde says, cannot be guaranteed to continue peacefully until the end. Such a sexual union established by deceiving oneself and others is merely a temporary sexual indulgence, just as the "marriage of convenience (Mariage de Convenance)" of the past feudal era ultimately leads to unhappy results.

Recently, young men and women in Korea seem to be rushing into love too quickly. Instead of dating for a considerable period, getting to know each other's hearts and personalities sufficiently, they fall in love after meeting only two or three times by chance. They then get married in a hurry, as if being chased by someone, and even publicly reveal the fruits of their love, such as the so-called five-month or six-month-old babies (五朔童이니 六朔童이니), only to separate again shortly after. This may be because men and women in their springtime feel a longing for the opposite sex without knowing why, and when they happen to meet someone who is not too ugly and says something that appeals to them, their spirit is unknowingly intoxicated, and their ideals cannot rise above their emotions. However, upon further reflection, it is like a man and woman forced into marriage becoming parents before they have fully understood what love is, and as a result, both men and women end up with unhappy results.

So, what is love?
As human beings, we cannot transcend material life (i.e., economic life), but on the other hand, we also lead a kind of spiritual life. Therefore, depending on the circumstances, it can be more difficult to endure spiritual loneliness than physical pain, as everyone has experienced. Moreover, the more developed a person's individuality, the more deeply they realize this loneliness and solitude. When this spiritual loneliness and *sim-* (心) solitude (*寂*) cannot be comforted, the instinct to yearn for the opposite sex, namely "love," unknowingly arises. That is because they seek to fill the solitude through the spirit and flesh of the opposite sex. The ardent longing to be comforted by the opposite sex—that is love. In other words, as Ellen Key said, love has both the natural attraction for men and women to unite to continue their species and the desire of the acting human to seek relief from the difficulties of others and themselves through friendship. However, there is an even stronger longing that transcends these. It arises from the human sense of solitude of being "alone" in this world. The degree of this solitude is felt more acutely the greater the individual's spirit. It is merely a longing for another spirit that can save one's spirit from such suffering.

In fact, it seems that a person cannot lead a complete human life with only one of the two sexes, whether viewed in terms of their reproductive function—since they cannot perform parthenogenesis (單性생식) like lower animals such as amoebas—or in terms of the effects of their spiritual life. In other words, a man cannot lead a complete life with just a man, and a woman cannot lead a complete life alone. Only after a man and woman have a purified love (Purified love) and a sexual union (sexual Union) <30> can they lead a complete human life. There is a similar meaning in the mythical interpretation of the Greek philosopher Plato. That is, humans were originally one, but were later separated into two sexes, male and female. The men and women thus separated later realized their incompleteness and grieved over their separation, so they seek to reunite and become one in this earthly life. Therefore, until they meet the opposite sex destined by fate, men do not stop seeking women, and women do not stop seeking men. It is not because they want to unite for sexual satisfaction or reproduction, but because true human love has arisen instinctively, to an indescribable extent.

Then, this sexual union does not mean economic union, sexual union, or forced union, but means a love union based on the freedom and equality of two human beings. There is a poem with a similar meaning in Tennyson's poem:
“Either sex alone is half itself, and in true marriage lies nor equal, nor unequal; each fulfils defect in each"
(Summary) Either sex alone is only half itself. In true marriage, there is neither equality nor inequality, and the two sexes complement each other's shortcomings.

As the late Dr. Kushi (廚川) from Kyoto Imperial University said, love between the sexes is generally the most intense and greatest of the mysterious affinities (Affinity) between people. Also, because it is the only love that arises from both the spiritual and physical aspects, it is always holistic and fully personal. In other words, because men and women are incomplete alone, the sexes complement each other, renewing and perfecting themselves, and drawing each other in, each renewing, perfecting, and fulfilling themselves. This is love. In other words, love is merely the symphony (Symphony) of two individuals of different sexes fulfilling each other as "people" through mutual union and completing each other. In other words, discovering the other in oneself and accepting one's own individuality in the other's individuality is love, which is a personal union. To quote Ellen Key, who described this most appropriately,
“This is the highest form of love: that men and women who are at the same level morally and intellectually demand to be completed by loving each other.
In such supreme love, the two lovers feel completely united. This feeling frees and preserves personality, and also deepens it.” <31>

However, it is said that the conditions for finding a partner in so-called love (?) that is prevalent in our society these days are almost uniformly the same for men and men and women and women. That is, when a man seeks a woman, the most important thing is that the woman has a pretty face, and if she does, they unconditionally approve, and when a woman seeks a man, the first condition is that he is the son of a wealthy family and not the eldest son, the second is that he is handsome, and the third is that he is an educated and respected figure in society... etc. Of course, there are many other conditions that both men and women look at, but it is said that the common conditions are as mentioned above. Some sophistical men may defend men by saying that the conditions for men are simple, while the conditions for women are various and all vain, but if we think about it calmly and criticize its value from a sociological point of view, it seems that the conditions for men seeking women are more vain, while the conditions for women are more practical. However, if a woman only agrees to the first condition, wealth, then the other conditions are not mentioned, so in the end, the conditions for both men and women are both vain, and if we criticize it with a thorough view of love, we cannot help but say that both the former and the latter are "zero."

At least, men and women who will share joys and sorrows from the moment they form a marital relationship until the moment they fall asleep forever—men and women who are the union of different sexes and the source of all blessings, to quote the old-fashioned marriage vows—are merely setting the standard for sexual union based on the beauty of appearance and the presence or absence of wealth and dreaming of future happiness. Of course, everyone chooses beauty over ugliness, which is human nature, and takes what they have rather than what they do not, which is the instinct of living things. But when you think about it, a person's appearance fades away like pear blossoms in the spring breeze, and the money of the world flows like clouds in the sky. Then, how can it not be said that it is a fool's fantasy to expect a hundred years of happiness by coveting such easily changing temporary wealth or appearance? If you want to admire the ideal life (?) of so-called harmonious couples, first of all, there must be a resonance in each other's ideals, and there must be points of harmony in each other's personalities. If you carefully consider these absolute prerequisites for the sexual union of men and women, it will take a considerable amount of time to date, but if you meet only once or twice and your eyes are blinded by temporary vanity and you cannot collect your mind, how can a couple who has become a fast-tracked couple be sure to fulfill their firm promise of growing old together? (There may be a microscopic number of performers among them) In most cases, when the heat combined with dizziness from the temporary vanity cools down, emotions clash with even minor differences of opinion, and the woman often goes hungry, and the man knows the entertainment world as his love and goes in and out <32>, so-called couples increasingly turn against each other, harboring feelings like dogs and cats, and in fact, continuing a "Cat-and-dog's life" day by day, and eventually, they end up with contradictory sorrows and unexpected lamentations, and in more severe cases, they end up giving entertainment expenses to extravagant lawyers or providing article material to lazy three-sided reporters. This not only ends with the ugliness of the men and women involved, but also has a negative impact on society.

I think that men and women should take considerable steps to love each other and have a complete sexual union to reduce regrets. Of course, when men and women date someone they admire to some extent, they may feel restless and impatient, as the Western proverb says, "When love waits, minutes are hours." But at least, it is easy to regret later if you recklessly and hastily carry out human affairs that depend on the glory and joy of your life. Therefore, when men and women know the opposite sex that they are drawn to for some reason, they should be open and honest, date each other a lot for a long time, and carefully observe what that person's personality is like and what their strengths are. If you understand each other to some extent while dating each other often and discover some points of agreement in each other's ideals, you will unknowingly be drawn to each other. Then, you should change direction again and assume that that person is now your lover, and you should not try to hide your shortcomings as much as possible, and you should also carefully discover the shortcomings of the other person and consider how much you can harmonize their shortcomings with your tolerance. In other words, you must understand each other's strengths and weaknesses and think carefully to see if the strengths and weaknesses of their personalities are well harmonized so that complaints will not explode in the future.
There is a strange word in German, "Pobe ehe," and this "Pobe Ehe" means "trial marriage." This was originally a custom in the Danzig (딴치히) region (separated from Germany as a result of the 1919 Paris Peace Treaty and now a free city). Anyone who initially had an agreement between the men and women would not get married right away, but in the form of "Pobe Ehe," they would live in the same house for a year like a couple—but I will avoid guaranteeing that they did not have sexual intercourse. They would test each other's personalities and ideals, and if the two agreed, they would formally begin "married life" (Ehe-leben).
If men and women were ascetics like Śākyamuni, I would approve with both hands and immediately recruit propagandists to carry out a large-scale movement to implement this good custom.
But <33> it seems more difficult than that for men and women who are not sexually disabled to do so. Anyway, even if we cannot carry out such a "trial marriage," I think it is absolutely necessary to have a "personality test" before engagement.

Of course, if you have some knowledge of phrenology and can judge the presence or absence of signs of a wife's death or a husband's death by the degree to which the cheekbones protrude after looking at it once in detail, and infer the personality by looking at the eyes and chin, and be sure to avoid starvation by looking at the ears and hands, and indicate the size of the sense of shame by the width of the face, and then make a general review of life with the harmony of the entire face and make a firm judgment - if you have such confidence, how can you figure out that he is the right person to be your companion for a hundred years after seeing him only once or twice without any phrenological common sense? Shakespeare said, "Whoever lov'd not first sight?" but it cannot be asserted that the affection will continue permanently just because it is love at first sight.
Some debaters may say this: Since love is not everything in life, is it necessary to take such a trivial thing so seriously? He is certainly not like that. Ancient Confucian thought also took marital relations very seriously. For example, in the Doctrine of the Mean (中庸), there is the saying "The Way of the Gentleman begins with the relationship between husband and wife, and reaches its highest point; Heaven and Earth observe it (君子之道, 造端乎夫婦憂及其至也, 天地察焉)," and in the Book of Changes (周易), it says "The way of Heaven creates the male, the way of Earth creates the female, the way of Heaven knows the great beginning, the way of Earth creates things (乾道成男, 坤道成女, 乾知大始, 坤作成物)." Even if you devote yourself to temporary love, the law that you will not be able to do anything in your life has not yet been discovered. He will be voluntarily proven by hard scholars such as Yulgok (栗谷) teacher, the Eastern Confucius, Rousseau of France, and Einstein of modern times, and if you fail to meet a consenting person while choosing a partner in such a way, to the extreme, like Plato, imagine your lover in your head and think that all the conditions are ideal as my lover, and you will be able to console yourself enough by doing "Platonic love". However, generally speaking, this may be too extreme a statement.

The world says that marriage is the tomb (Tomb of love) of love, and love ends with a temporary delicacy before marriage, and once married, love disappears forever, but since love is a mysterious affinity between people, it is thought that the heat will definitely become stronger as the months and years go by after marriage <34>. Of course, there will be no temporary squabbles with a little emotion, but that is so-called love fighting, so it cannot be said that it is a sign that there is no love. If there is really no affection, how can you live together for even an hour? However, if you get married in a way that many people know, or if you go one step further and have children between you, and you spend the rest of your life in such a way even if you have no affection, that will be a man (or woman) who will not succeed in anything in his life. The so-called couples continue to live together without affection under the bondage of marriage while hating each other like dogs and cats is, from the man's point of view, the same as dressing a slave called "human manufacturer," and from the woman's point of view, it is thought that there is nothing different from retaining a guest to keep the house quiet and to have errands run in case of emergency. Or, if you think that the so-called duty of parents to children is that you cannot bear to part because you have children, I am sure that you have the responsibility to prove that the negative impact on the future of the children who grow up seeing the reality of the extremely discordant parents is better than growing up peacefully with one parent among the parents.
Even dogs and beasts cannot be kept in the house if you do not like them, and even if we are going to stay in a room for only 7 or 8 hours when we travel, we cannot sleep if the room is dirty or smells bad and we do not like it. How can we live together without affection between couples who will grow old together? Therefore, even Confucius, a saint with much tolerance, carried out chulcheo (黜妻), and Baekŏ (白魚), who tasted the grief of being without a mother, and Jasa (子思), who did not know the love of a grandmother and the love of a mother, did not divorce. So, what is the reason why the sages continued to chulcheo for three generations in Confucius's school? Uyu (迂儒) often explain that it is because there were seven evils (chilgŏjiak, 칠거지악). Even if there were seven evils, if there was even a little affection between the couple, Confucius's abundant tolerance would not have led to chulcheo.

In short, the disharmonious life between couples without affection not only increases the pain and agony of the parties involved, but also has a huge negative impact on the future of their children and the harm to society is by no means small.
To give a close example, if a judge comes to work after having a couple fight in the morning, the unfortunate defendant will suffer more, and if a school teacher attends school after having an unpleasant fight with his wife before eating, the innocent student will pay the penalty.
Thinking about such facts, it is natural that men and women without affection cannot continue their married life, and thinking about such misfortune again, we cannot help but feel that we have an absolute responsibility to pay full attention to everything and handle it carefully when we try to have a sexual union in the first place. <35>

**Named Entities**

奧斯카-와일드	Oscar Wilde
또리안.그레이	Dorian Gray
카이	Ellen Key
希臘	Hŭirap
풀나토-	P'ullato-
테니슨	T'enisŭn
京都帝大	Kyoto Teidae
廚川	Kushi
栗谷	Yulgok
佛蘭西	Pŏllanŭsi
루쏘	Russo
아인쉬타인	Ainsyŭt'ain
孔子	Kongja
子思	Chasa
白魚	Paegŏ
巴黎	Pari
釋迦牟尼	Sŏkka Muni



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제19호
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	戀愛의 道
필자	高永煥
기사형태	논설

戀愛의 道
						高永煥
- "Marige in haste and repent at leisure." (밧부게 結婚하고서 閑暇한 때에 後悔한다) - 西諺

『오스카-와일드』의 『또리안.그레이』라는 소설을 읽어 보면 대단히 흥미잇는 중 좀 이상스러운 말이 잇다. 즉 누구든지 연애할 때에는 자기를 속이는 것으로써 시작하야 남을 속이는 것으로써 끗마친다. 세상에서 『로맨쓰』라고 부르는 것이 즉 그것이라는 의미의 말이다. 只今 그 작자의 말을 원문 그대로 써보면 아래와 갓다.
“When one is in love, one always bigins by deceiving one's self, and one always ends by deceiving others, That is what the world calls a romance."-
-Oscar Wilde : The Picture of Dorien Grey.-
이상에 인용한 『오스카-와일드』의 말을 좀 熟讀玩味하여 보면 그것은 보통 연애관계에서 흔히 차저볼 수 잇는 사실인 것갓다. 그러나 그것은 참으로 순진한 연애에도 꼭 부합될 진리라고는 생각되지 안는다. 다시말하면 『오스카-와일드』의 말과 가티 자기와 밋 상대자인 이성을 속여서 억지로 성립 식히는 연애, 그것이 끗까지 平穩無事하게 계속될 연애라고는 도저히 保證할 수 업는 것 가치 생각되다. 그러케 自他를 속여가지고 성립식힌 性的 결합이야말로 과거 봉건시대의 『정략적 결혼』(Mariage de Convenance)이 마츰내 不美의 결과를 내는 것과 마찬가지로 快코 영구히 계속되지 못할 一時의 性的 放縱에 불과한 것이다. 却說

근래 우리 朝鮮의 청년 남녀들은 연애를 너무 밧부게 하는 것갓다. 즉 남녀가 상당한 기간에 만히 교제하야 상호의 心志와 성격을 충분히 이해한 후에 연애하는 것이 안이라. 엇더한 기회로든지 단두리 2,3차만 만나보게 되면 곳 그들 사이에 연애가 성립되야 누가 쪼차 오는 것처럼 -밧부게 어대로 도망갈 사람 가티 불이 나케 결혼하야 소위 五朔童이니 六朔童이니 하는 연애의 결실까지 세상에 공개하고서 또 얼마 되지 안해서 다시 갈나서게 되는 일이 만흔 것갓다. 이는 아마 春機發動機에 잇는 남녀가 까닭 모르고 이성을 그리워하다가 엇더케 이성을 만나게 되야 그 상대자의 얼골이 과히 醜하지 안흔 동시에 자기의 비위에 맛는 말이나 한마듸쯤 하게 되면 不知中 정신이 魔醉되야 理想이 감정의 압헤 머리를 들지 못하게 되는 인간의 본능이라고 할는지도 모르나 좀 더 냉정히 생각해 보면 그것은 마치 강제 결혼을 당한 남녀가 아즉 애기를 충분히 免하기도 전에 不知中 애기의 아버지와 어머니되는 것과 마찬가지로 아즉 연애가 엇더한 것임을 분명히 이해하기도 전에 급히 연애에 着手하기 때문에 결국 남녀 쌍방에게 불행한 결과를 내게 되는 것이다.

그러면 戀愛라는 것은 엇더한 것인가?
우리 인류가 생물인 이상 도저히 물질적 생활(즉 經濟生活)을 초월할 수 업는 것은 眼前의 사실이나 그의 반면으로는 또 일종의 정신적 생활을 하기 때문에 엇던 경우에 따러서는 육체적 고통보담도 정신적 고독을 堪耐하기가 더 어려운 때가 잇는 것임은 누구나 체험해 본 사실일 것이다. 더욱히 개성이 발달된 사람일사록 이 고독과 寂寞을 깨달는 정도가 일층 더 深切하다고 할 것이다. 그러면 이 정신상 고독과 心*의 寂*가 아모리해도 慰安을 엇지 못할 時에는 거긔에 비로소 까닭모르게 이성을 思慕하는 戀 卽 “love"라는 본능이 부지중 발동하게 된다. 즉 그것은 이성의 靈와 肉에 依하야 寂寞을 구하려고 하는 까닭이다. 이성에 의하야 위안을 어드려는 열렬한 동경 -그것이 즉 연애이다. 환언하면 『카이』(Ellen Key) 여사의 말과 가티 연애라는 것의 가온대에는 남녀가 자기의 종족을 계속식히기 위하야 서로 牽引合體하는 자연적 魅力도 잇는 동시에 그 주동적인 인간이 우정에 의하야 타인과 밋 자신의 곤란을 구하려는 욕망도 잇다. 그러나 斯等을 초월하야 일층 더 강한 憧憬이 잇다. 그것은 이 세상에 다만 『혼자』라는 인간적 적막감으로부터 발생한 것이다. 이 적막의 정도는 개인의 心靈이 위대하면 위대할사록 더 痛切하게 늣기는 것이다. 그것은 자기의 心靈을 如斯한 고통으로부터 구해주는 다른 一人의 心靈에 대한 憧憬에 불과한 것이다.

사실상 사람이라는 것은 생식작용상 그 기능으로 보든지 - 「아미바」와 가튼 하등동물처럼 『單性생식』(Parthenogencsis)을 못하는 이상 - 또는 정신생활상 그 효과로 보든지 남녀 중 한사람만으로는 도저히 완전한 인간생활을 할 수 업는 것가티 생각된다. 환언하면 남자는 남자 일인만으로 완전한 생활을 할 수 업는 동시에 여자도 여자 단독으로서는 도저히 환전한 생활을 할 수 업는 동시에 여자도 단독으로서는 도저히 완전한 생활을 할 수 업고 오즉 남녀 양성이 정화된 연애(Purified love)에 의하야 性的結合(sexual Union)을＜30＞ 한 이후에야 비로소 완전한 인간적 생활을 할 수 잇는 것갓다. 희랍철학자 『풀나토-』의 신화적 해석에도 如斯한 의미의 말이 잇다. 즉 인간은 원래 하나이엿든 것이 그 후에 남녀라는 2개의 성으로 분리되엿다. 如斯히 갈닌 남녀는 각각 불완전함을 그 후 깨닷게 된 고로 그 분열 때문으로 번민하야 다시 이 지상 생활에서 서로 합하야 동심일체가 되려고 한다. 그럼으로 운명적으로 작정된 엇던 一人의 이성과 相合하기까지는 남자는 그 여자를, 여자는 그 남자를 求하야 마지 안는다. 그는 성욕만족이나 생식 때문에 결합을 원하는 것이 안이라 그야말로 진실한 인간적 연애가 무어라고 형용할 수 업스리만큼 본능적으로 발생한 까닭이다.
그러면 이 성적 결합이라는 것은 결코 경제적 결합이나 성욕적 결합이나 혹은 강제적 결합을 의미한 것이 안이라 어듸까지든지 남녀 두 인격의 자유 평등을 根柢로한 연애 결합을 의미한 것이다. 『테니슨』의 시에도 如斯한 의미의 시가 잇다.
“Either sex alone is half itself, and in true marriage lies nor equal, nor unequal; each fulfils defect in each"
(大意)남녀 양성 중에 어느 것이든지 하나만은 半밧게 안이된다. 진실한 결혼에는 평등도 업스며 불평등도 없고 그 남녀양성은 각각 부족한 결점을 서로 보충한다.

京都帝大 敎授이든 故廚川 博士의 말과 가치 大抵 양성간의 愛라는 것은 사람과 사람 사이의 영묘한 친화력(Affinity) 가운대에 가장 강렬한 것이며 위대한 것이다. 또 그것이 靈과 肉의 양 방면에서 발동한 유일의 愛이기 때문에 항상 全我的이며 全人格的이다. 즉 남자나 여자가 단독으로서는 불완전한 까닭에 양성이 서로 보충적 작용을 하는 소이로 자기를 일신케 하며 완전케 하며 서로 끄는 힘에 의하야 서로 각각 자기를 一新케 하며 완전케 하며 충실케 하는 그것이 즉 연애인 까닭이다. 환언하면 연애라는 것은 성을 달니한 두 개인이 상호의 결합에 의하야 서로 『사람』으로서의 자기를 충실케 하며 또 완성한 양성의 교향악(Symphony)에 불과한 까닭이다. 다시 말하면 자아 중에서 타아를 발견하며 타아의 개성 가운대에 자아의 개성을 용납하는 것이 즉 인격적 결합인 연애이다. 지금 이에 관하야 가장 적절하게 묘사한 『카이』 여사의 말을 인용하면,
『도덕적, 知力的으로 동일한 정도에 잇는 남녀가 相愛함으로 인하야 서로 완성되기를 요구하는 이것이 즉 최고의 연애이다.
如斯한 최고의 연애에 잇서서는 양인의 연인이 전혀 일체가 되는 것을 감각한다. 이 감정이야말로 인격을 자유롭게 하며 보존하며 그러고 또 深切케한다.』＜31＞

그런대 근래 우리 사회에 유행하는 소위 연애(?)에는 상대자를 구하는 조건이 남자와 남자, 여자와 여자끼리는 殆히 획일적으로 갓다고 한다. 즉 남자가 여자를 구할 時에는 무엇보담도 여자의 얼골 하나만 잘생겻스면 더 두말할 것 업시 무조건 찬성이고, 여자가 남자를 구할 시에는 첫재 재산가의 아들로서 장자가 안일 것, 둘ㅅ재 미남자일 것, 셋재 학식잇고 사회에 명망 잇는 인격자일 것... 등이라고 한다. 물론 남녀 쌍방이 모다 이외에도 보는 조건이 허다하겟지마는 대개 공통되는 조건이 상기한 바와 갓다고 한다. 엇던 譫辯적 남자는 남자의 조건은 단순한대 여자의 그것은 여러가지일 뿐 아니라 모다 허영적이라고 하야 은연중에 남자를 변호할는지 모르나 우리가 좀 냉정히 생각해보고 사회학적으로 그 가치를 비판할 것 갓흐면 남자의 여자 구하는 조건이 더 혀영인 반면에 여자의 그것이 좀 더 실제적이라고 할 수 잇는 것 가티 생각된다. 그러나 여자도 첫재 조건인 재산만 합의하면 기타의 조건은 불문에 부친다고 한 즉 결국은 남녀 쌍방의 조건이 다 가티 허영적인 동시에 철저한 연애관으로 비판하면 전자나 후자나 모다 『零』이라고 안이할 수 업다.

적어도 부부관계를 맷는 그 순간부터 永眠하는 그 찰나까지 동고동락할 남녀가 -구식의 혼인법문을 그대로 인용하면  異性之合이요. 百福之源인 남녀가 - 다만 용모의 美醜와 재산의 유무로써 성적 결합의 표준울 정하고서 장래의 행복을 꿈꾼다는 것은 저능 남녀의 忘念이 안이면 狂想이다.
물론 누구나 醜보담은 美를 택하는 것은 인간의 常情이며 먹을 것이 엄는 것보담은 잇는 것을 취하는 것은 생물의 본능이라고 할 것이다. 그러나 생각해보면 사람의 용모라는 것은 춘풍의 이화와 가티 허망하게 老衰하는 것이며, 또 세상의 금전이라는 것은 창공의 浮雲과 가티 쉬지 안코 유동하는 것이다. 그러면 그와 가티 용이하게 변동하는 일시적 재산이나 용모만을 탐하야 백년의 복락을 正待하는 것은 엇지 無智者의 공상이라 안이 할 수 잇는가? 소위 和樂한 부부의 이상적 생활(?)을 동경할 것 갓흐면 무엇보담도 먼저 상호의 이상에 共鳴되는 곳이 잇서야 하며 쌍방의 성격에 조화되는 점이 잇서야 할 것이다. 이와 가튼 남녀의 성적 결합에 절대의 先要 조건을 신중히 고려하자면 교제하는 시일이 상당히 걸녀야 할 터인대 겨우 일이차 만나보고는 일시적 허영에 눈이 어두어서 정신을 채리지 못하고 최대급행으로 속성한 부부가 엇지 꼭 偕老百年의 구든 약속을 끗까지 잘 履行할 수 잇슬ㅅ가? (그 중에는 현미경적 극소수의 履行者도 잇슬는지 모르나) 대개는 그 일시적 허영에 眩氣症을 겸한 熱度가 식게 되면 사소한 의견의 충돌로도 감정이 千里之差로 상반되야 여자는 밥 굼기를 常事로 하며 남자는 화류계를 자기의 사랑으로 알고 출입하게＜32＞ 되야 소위 부부간에는 더욱 더욱 반목질시하며 犬猫간과 갓흔 감정을 서로 품고 사실로 “Cat-and-dog's life"를 그날 그날 계속하다가 결국에는 모순되는 叩盆之痛이나 의외의 破鏡之歎을 하게 되는 동시에 좀 더 심한 경우에는 방탕한 변호사의 유흥비나 기부해주며 게우른 3면 기자의 기사재료나 제공하게 된다. 이는 오즉 그남녀 당사자들의 추태에만 끗칠 뿐 아니라 사회에도 그만한 붊�행의 악영향이 미치는 것이다.

남녀가 서로 연애하야 완전한 성적결합을 하는데 에는 상당한 계단을 발버서 해야 비교적 後廬가 적을 줄로 생각한다. 물론 남녀를 불문하고 다소간 사모하게 되는 이성을 교제하게 되면 “When love waits, minutes are hours."(연인을 기다릴 때면 분이 시간과 갓다.)라는 西諺과 가티 공연히 일각이 여삼추하게 燥燥한 생각이 들는지 모르지마는 적어도 자기 일생의 榮枯苦樂이 달닌 인간대사를 경솔하게 급히 하다가는 후일에 噬臍之歎을 하기가 쉬운 일인즉 남녀를 물론하고 까닭모르게 마음이 끌니는 이성을 알게 되면 아모쪼록 허심탄회하야 오래ㅅ동안 두고두고 만히 교제를 하는 동시에 그 사람의 성격이 엇더하며 또 장점이 무엇인가를 주의해서 관찰하여야 할 것이다. 그러케 자조 교제하는 동안에 어느 정도까지 서로 이해하게 되는 동시에 상호의 이상에 다소의 일치점을 발견하게 되면 부지중 서로 끌니게 될 터인즉 그때에는 다시 방향을 전환하야 저 사람은 이제 나의 연인이라고 가상하에서 자기도 될 수 잇는대로 短處를 감추려고 하지 안는 동시에 저 便의 短處도 세밀히 발견하야 그의 단점을 자기의 포용력으로 어느 정도까지 조화식히겟는가 그런 점을 극히 세밀하고 신중하게 고려해봐야 할 것이다. 다시 말하면 피차의 장단점을 서로 이해하고, 또 그 성격의 장단점이 잘 조화되여서 장래에 불평이 폭발되지 안켓는가를 千思萬慮 해봐야 할 것이다.
독일어에 “Pobe ehe”라는 묘한 말이 잇는대 이 『푸로베.에-』라는 것은 『시험결혼』이라는 말이다. 이것은 원래 『딴치히』지방(1919년 巴里 講和條約의 결과로 독일에서 분리하야 지금은 自由市가 되얏다)에서 행하든 풍속인대 누구든지 처음에 남녀 쌍방의 의사가 웬만치 합치하게 되면 곳 결혼을 하지 안코 『푸로베.에-』의 형식으로 한 일년동안 한집에서 꼭 부부와 가티 생활하면서 - 단 성교는 하지 안햇다고 하나 내가 지금 그것까지는 보증하기를 避하겟다.- 서로 성격과 이상을 시험해보다가 쌍방의 의사가 합치되면 비로소 정식으로 『결혼생활』(Ehe-leben)을 하게 되엿다고 한다.
만일 남녀가 釋迦牟尼와 가튼 금욕주의자가 한 일년간씩만 된다면 쌍수로 찬성하고 곳 선전대를 모집해서 실행운동을 대대적으로 해볼만한 良俗이라고 할 것 갓다.
그러나＜33＞ 성적 불구자가 안인 남녀로서는 그러케 실행하기가 좀 어렵다는 것 보담도 도저히 불가능할 것갓다. 엇잿든지 우리는 그러케 『시험결혼』까지는 실행을 못하드라도 약혼전에 『성격시험』만은 충분히 하여 볼 필요가 절대적 잇는 줄로 생각한다.

물론 骨相學에 다소의 素養이 잇서서 한번 자세히 보고도 광대뻬의 나온 정도로 喪妻ㅅ 살이나 喪夫ㅅ 살의 유무를 판단하며 눈과 턱 생긴 것을 보아 성격의 여하를 추측하며 귀와 손을 보고서 餓死免할 것을 확신하며 얼골의 넓이로 廉恥心의 대소를 지시하며 그리고 얼골 전체의 조화되고 안된 것을 가지고 일생의 總評을 단연할만한 -그런 자신이나 잇다면 몰나도 하등의 관상적 상식도 업시 한두번 보고서 엇더케 그가 자기의 偕老百年友가 될 적임자임을 간파할 수 잇겟는가 『쉑스피어』는 『누구든지 연애한 사람치고야 첫눈에 연애하게 되지 안흔 者이 잇느냐?』 “Whoever lov'd not first sight?" 고 하엿지마는 첫눈에 든다고 반듯이  그 愛情이 영구적으로 계속하리라고는 단언할 수 엄는 것이다.
論者中에는 혹 이러케 말할 사람이 잇슬 것이다. 즉 연애가 인생의 전부가 안인 이상에 그 까지ㅅ 것을 그리 중대시할 필요가 잇느냐고. 그는 결코 그러치 안타. 고대의 유교사상에도 부부관계를 여간 중대시하지 안햇다. 例하면 中庸에 『君子之道, 造端乎夫婦憂及其至也, 天地察焉』이라는 말이든지 또 周易繫辭에 『乾道成男, 坤道成女, 乾知大始, 坤作成物』이라는 것을 보드라도 소위 성현의 부부관, 남녀관을 대강 窺知할 수 잇는 바이다.
혹은 또 연애를 그러케 굉장히 하려고 들면 평생에 다른 것은 한가지도 못하게 될 뿐만 안이라 첫재 연애 그것도 여의케 하지 못하고 말 것이라고 냉소할는지 모른다. 그러나 이것도 역시 不徹底한 杞憂에 지내지 못하는 酬酌이다. 일시적 연애에 열중하엿다고 반듯이 평생에 아무 것도 못하리라는 법칙은 아즉 발견되지 안햇다. 그는 동방 孔子인 栗谷 선생, 佛蘭西의 『루쏘』, 그리고 현대의 『아인쉬타인』 갓흔 硬學들이 자진해서 입증할 것이며 또 그러케 상대자를 골느다가 합의자를 만나지 못한다고 극단적으로 말하면 『풀나토-』처럼 자기의 애인을 자기의 머리 속에서 상상해 가지고 모든 조건이 이만하면 나의 애인으로서는 이상적이다. 하는 생각으로 “Platonic love"를 하드라도 自慰는 넉넉히 될 것이다. 그러나 일반적으로 말하면 이는 너무 극단적의 말이 될는지 모르겟다.

세상에서는 결혼은 연애의 墳墓(Tomb of love)라고 하야 연애는 결혼전의 일시적 별미에 끄치고 한번 결혼만 하게 되면 연애는 영구히 소멸되야 버리는 것가티 말하나 연애라는 것은 사람과 사람 사이의 영묘한 친화력인 이상 결혼하야＜34＞ 달이 가고 해가 지날스록 그 熱度가 반듯이 더 강해지리라고 생각된다. 물론 些少한 감정으로 일시적 말다툼하는 것쯤이야 전연 업슬 것이나 그런 것은 俗 소위 사랑 싸홈인 즉 결코 사랑이 업는 증거라고는 할 수 업는 것이다. 만일 진정으로 애정이 업서젓다면 한시간인들 엇더케 동거할 수 잇는 것인가? 다만 여러 사람이 알게 결혼을 햇다거나 혹은 한거름 더 나어가서 두 사이에 자녀를 나엇슨 즉 애정은 업서도 그애로 그렁저렁 여생을 보낸다는 것은 그야말로 평생에 아무 것도 성공 못할 남자(혹은 여자)일 것이다. 소위 부부가 犬猫間과 가티 仇*視하면서도 다만 결혼이라는 구속하에서 애정엄는 동거를 계속한다는 것은 남자편으로부터 보면 일종의 『인간제조기』라는 奴隷를 衣食식히는 것과 한가지며 여자편으로부터 보면 집안이 고적함으로 사랑도 직힐 겸 급한 때에 심부름도 식히기 위하야 과객을 挽留식히는 것과 다른 것이 엄다고 생각된다. 또는 불행히 자녀가 잇슴으로 참아갈니지 못하게 되는 것이 자녀에 대한 부모의 소위 의무라고 생각하는 자는 그 극도로 불화하게 지내는 부모 상호간의 현실을 다 보고 자라는 자녀의 밧는 악영향이 부모 중 엇던 片親에게서 평화스럽게 자라는 것이 그 지녀의 장래에 대하야 더 낫다는 것을 증명할 책임이 잇는 줄로 확신한다.
개나 짐승도 보기 실흐면 집안에 둘 수 업는 것이며 또 우리가 여행할 때에 불과 7,8時 留宿할 방이라도 그 방이 불결하거나 혹은 악취가 나든지 해서 비위에 맛지 안흐면 잠을 자지 못하는 것이어늘 하물며 偕老百年할 부부 사이에 애정 업시 엇더케 동거할 것인가? 그럼으로 孔子와 가티 포용성이 만흔 聖人도 黜妻를 단행하엿스며 어머니 업는 비애를 맛 본 白魚도 또 조모의 사랑과 어머니의 사랑을 도모지 알지 못한 子思까지도 역시 이혼하지 안햇는가? 그래서 성현의 孔門에서 삼대를 계속하야 黜妻한 것은 무슨 까닭인가. 迂儒들은 흔히 변명하기를 다 칠거지악이 잇섯기 때문이라고 한다. 여하이 칠거지악이 잇섯다 할지라도 만일 추호만치라도 부부간의 애정이 잇섯드면 孔子의 풍부한 포용성으로 黜妻까지는 결행치 안햇슬 것이다.

간단히 말하면 애정 업는 부부간의 불화 생활이 그 당사자들의 고통과 번민을 더하는 것은 물론이려니와 안으로는 자녀들의 장래에도 막대한 악영향을 줄 뿐만 아니라 박그로 사회에 끼치는 害毒도 결코 不少한 것이다.
갓가운 예를 하나 들면 재판관이 아츰에 불화한 부부 싸홈을 하고 출근하게 되면 그 죄는 불행한 피고가 더 당하게 되며 또 학교의 교사가 불쾌한 내외 싸홈을 食前에 하고 출석하게 되면 그 罰을 애매한 학생이 쓰게 되는 것은 너무나 卑近한 예가 안인가?
如斯한 사실을 생각해보면 애정 업는 남녀는 도저히 부부생활을 계속할 수 업는 것이 자연의 도리이며 다시 또 如斯한 불행을 推想해보면 애초 성적 결합을 하려고할 때에 凡百에 십분 주의하며 신중히 처리할 필요가 잇다는 것보담도 절대의 책임이 잇다고 현대의 우리는 늣기지 안흘 수 업게 된다.＜35＞
＜29-35＞