잡지명	별건곤 제19호
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	이 世上에 萬若 男子가 업다면 (What if there were no men in this world?)
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

If There Were No Men in This World
My Dream of a Manless Land
Yi Il

Judging by the title alone, it seems quite excellent. One might expect a philosophical discussion and be pleasantly surprised, but in reality, the content is nothing special, falling below the ordinary. I admit this frankly from the outset, as I do not intend to deceive or make a business out of pretense, which is to be expected of someone like me.

However, the rampant activity of goblins (魑魅魑魍) during the day is a newly coined phrase for the advertising age, prioritizing auditory pleasure.

That being said, I am not one of the followers of these goblins, engaging in deceptive practices under the guise of the advertising era (廣告一代) by selling dog meat under a sheep's head (奉羊頭賣狗肉的). Regardless of the content's lack of novelty, I hope readers will be intrigued by the title and take a look. I consider this a clever idea from my clumsy efforts, not an overestimation.

Furthermore, as someone who has suffered from derailment disease (脫線病) for a long time, I invariably go off track once I hold a pen. When I trace back to my origins, when I was born into this bright world, I went through the standard birth process, whether as a prince, a noble's child (貴族之子), a wealthy person's child (豐富之子), a yangban's child (兩班之子), a commoner's child (白丁之子), or a beggar's child (乞食之子), and went through the usual growth process. But due to some unfortunate curse, my gaze began to slant, my mind began to twist, and eventually, I contracted the incurable disease called derailment disease. <96>

Anyway, let's stop the diagnosis of this incurable disease and put aside the interpretation of the times. What is this strange title, "Manless Land Dream Record," and what kind of absurd argument am I about to make? If there are gentlemanly readers who want to plug their ears before even listening, I apologize. "Manless Land Dream Record" is about what it would be like if there were no men in this world.

When considering what would happen if there were no men, the biggest concern is how to reproduce. But with modern civilization rushing like an arrow into this "Hidden Kingdom" (隱逃王國) called Joseon, the old women (老孃) crying on the front lines of life as a byproduct will surely say, "Oh, how refreshing! If all those men disappeared and we were left to ourselves!"

Then, the women (老孃) will gather the essence of modern makeup techniques, apply it to their faces, and lament not being large enough to cover themselves entirely in what is called silk. The women of the courtesan class (賣笑婦階級), who cannot find leisure from manufacturing seductive glances (秋波) day and night, will cry out, "Oh no! Who will pay for our time?" There will certainly be beauties who burst into tears on the spot.

In any case, if a Manless Land were to appear immediately, it is not difficult to imagine such a tragicomedy unfolding at once.

However, the rebellious joy of the old women (老孃) and the wails of the courtesans on the brink of survival cannot sustain them for long. It is obvious that they will have to find some way to adapt out of necessity.

However, I do not think the social structure will fundamentally change. I imagine that the women of the Manless Land will live a new life under the existing organizational structure. Let's record the things that will disappear and the things that will be newly created under the existing structure (旣成體下).

The most important thing to disappear will be chastity. New women who talk about chastity (정조) , listen up! Chastity is actually a nonexistent, fabricated thing. A woman's chastity is like a woman's makeup. Why does a woman wear makeup? It is an expression of the animalistic instinct to attract men. Is it not the same starting point as the beauty of the female oriole's colors and the beauty of the female cicada's song? When you wash away the roots, it's only this much, but for a long time, many women have thought of it as something very precious, something very clean, even to the point of not exchanging it for their lives. For example, if there were many men who wanted to hold the hand of a woman who did not wear makeup, and men welcomed it, would there still be makeup loyalists who would consider makeup their nature and insist on wearing it? Likewise, if men were to develop some kind of mood disorder (氣分病) and a fashion for welcoming women without chastity were to arise, would there not be many women who would struggle to get rid of their chastity and beg to have it removed? And the first advocate of chastity was probably a man, and that was created by the possessiveness that manifests as a person's desire for ownership. Why is that? Because they feared that a woman they once owned would run away to another man, they restrained her with the intangible shackles of chastity, didn't they? However, women who advocate for gender equality in everything are about to say that it was not men who advocated for chastity, but women. If that were the case, consider that it would have been a type of makeup to flatter men. Furthermore, the discussion of chastity (정조 云謂) began in royal families with the most power and wealth, and even more fussy agitation can be seen, giving a clear glimpse of that past story.

The content is only this much, but it is quite complicated in mixed-gender countries. With the emergence of the Manless Land, it will disappear like spring snow.

As the giant monster of chastity disappears, things that share the same fate of extinction include the terrifying crime of rape, the sin of secret affairs with married women whispered in dark corners, lawsuits for compensation for the violation of chastity (貞操躪蹂慰藉料請求) with a feeling like thorns wrapped in soft cotton, lawsuits for recognition of illegitimate children (私生子認定訴訟事件) like crying on ruins, the crime of kidnapping women (婦女子誘拐罪), the crime of disturbing public morals (風俗壞難罪), and occasionally the shocking beauty murder case involving the poisoning of the husband (本夫毒殺美人事件) that stimulates our sixth sense…

Even just this much would greatly reduce human unhappiness. First, the legal codes of each country will be halved. The number of inmates will also be halved, so half of the prisons will be used as public toilets, and the police's arrest duties will be halved, so they can take naps or get drunk during the remaining time. The work of judges and prosecutors will also be halved, and then the work of lawyers as litigation representatives will also be halved. Halving is good, but the income is halved, so it's a headache—good or bad? All of the above will be done by women, so there's no need to worry.

Next, cosmetics will be completely wiped out. This may cause some resistance from women, so I need to offer some defense. Women might say this:

"We don't wear makeup for men; we do it because we like it." But evidence is better than argument, so don't you see this? A woman whose heart flutters when she sees a man in her youthful years spends one-third of her day <98> on makeup matters, but after getting married, she does a little bit as if she can't bear the forced habit.

由此觀之則 It is certain that women in the Manless Land will not wear makeup.

Therefore, undoubtedly, cosmetics factories, cosmetics raw materials, and cosmetics wholesalers and retailers will all be eradicated. In the meantime, I wonder if France will not reach the point of ruin.

Next, in the disease world, the most common sexually transmitted diseases, that is, diseases from prostitution, will be completely eradicated. This, too, will cause a major change in the new society, like the aforementioned chastity. A large part of the medical community will disappear, many doctors will be eliminated, and half of the surgical hospitals will disappear. Seeing this, the unhappiness of humans caused by disease will also be reduced by almost half. Hooray!

Now, romance is completely wiped out. I was happy when chastity, cosmetics, and sexually transmitted diseases disappeared, but now that romance is about to disappear, I am sad.

It's not that I want to be in love, but I am a person who has a sole license as a lover of literature, so if you remove the theme of romance from literature, painting, and music, what remains are really just science books and philosophy books that give you a headache. So, most of Shakespeare's masterpieces, including Hamlet, Dante's Divine Comedy, Goethe's Faust, and Manon Lescaut, La Dame aux Camélias, Thaïs, and other masterpieces, all have a touch of romance. If you take these all away, how desolate will the art world be? It will be like flat beer, and no one will feel like looking back. 論至於此則 In this regard, I cannot help but feel deep sympathy for the new women of the Manless Land, and this is truly a great shadow, a misfortune, a panic of the Manless Land. What disappears along with romance is the messenger of love from ancient times, the flirtatious glance (추파). Next, kisses that bring blood rushing to both breasts at once. To give a simple example, movies—this must become obsolete—taking kisses out of movies will greatly reduce the enjoyment of watching them. In that case, Rodin's masterpiece "The Kiss" should also be smashed with poison.

Finally, of course, many new things will be created in the Manless Land, but since I've already talked too long, I'll just mention one thing that I'm confident will happen. That is "life-size rubber dolls of men" (「男子的 等身大고무人形」).

I have no doubt that this product will become as inevitably popular as chastity, cosmetics, and sexually transmitted diseases are in today's mixed-gender era. Therefore, if a "Life-Size Rubber Doll of Men" manufacturing and sales corporation is established in the newly emerging Manless Land, I advise that the profit dividend per share will be 10 or 20 times higher than the dividend of the Kyŏngsŏng Electric Company (京城電氣株式會社). With half the unhappiness of life in the existing system reduced, I bless the Manless Land female empire that is now emerging, and one man embarks on a widow's journey. Namuamitabul. Amen. <99>

Human Society is a Scene of Carnage (修羅場)
Yu Yŏng-jun

Just as there is water when there is a mountain, and just as there is negative electricity when there is positive electricity, in our human society, or even among lower plants and animals, there is a man when there is a woman, complementing each other's strengths and weaknesses, sharing what they have and do not have, maintaining their own existence, and preserving their species, which is the ultimate goal of living things. However, if, hypothetically, there were only men or only women living in this world, it would be a truly miserable and desolate world. More than without women, if men were to live without men, that world would be a scene of carnage. I am a woman myself, but for some reason, I have a lot of prejudice, jealousy, and suspicion, and less of the magnanimity, philanthropy, and humility of men. Therefore, when women gather in one place, conflicts always arise, and there are many grudges and curses. However, because there are always men behind the scenes to harmonize things, things proceed relatively smoothly. But if there were no men and only women lived, they would be fighting day and night. They would fight over a single piece of clothing, fight over a single spoonful of rice, and even fight over being homosexual, causing earthquakes with sighs and great floods with blood and tears.

Even if vicious creatures like tigers or snakes attacked, they would not have the courage to repel them and would just faint and fall over, running away at the sight of a tokkaebi's shadow. Since there are no men, there is no need to look good, so their hair would be scattered like a horse's mane, and their faces would turn yellow, transforming the world into a country of entirely yellow people. In general, there would be no bars or brothels in the city (although women also drink), and it would be difficult to find signs for obstetricians or barbers (since there would be no short-haired beauties without men). Instead, shaman houses, female fortune-tellers, and shrines, Buddhist halls (城隍堂), which women are easily infatuated with, would spring up everywhere, and the sounds of rituals, chanting, and drumming would hurt the ears morning and evening. Law courts would be flooded with cases of revealing others' secrets, false accusations, and duels, making the work of female judges and female lawyers very busy. One convenient thing would be that there would be no pregnancies, so there would be no annoying bellies, and it would be nice not to have to do men's laundry and sewing, so it would be nice to take naps. However, if there is no one to chop firewood, fine hands will become like pothooks, and what to do when there are no successors in old age? <100> Men might be able to find a way to preserve the race by researching some method of artificially creating humans if there were no women, but women are relatively incapable of such grand ideas and profound research, so they would just live busily among themselves in the present moment, and once that time passes, they would just disappear. However, if only women lived, this world would be beautified for a while. Art schools would increase more than military schools, and since there would be no pleasure with the opposite sex, the music and dance that women like would develop instead, and music halls would spring up in every street and dance halls in every neighborhood, where thousands and hundreds of women would gather to relieve their sorrow and resentment with it when flowers bloom and the moon is bright. Clever women might use telescopes or the like to find out if there are men on Venus or Mars. In any case, a world without men would be very lonely, and the whole world would be like the room of a young widow or the room of a Buddhist nun.

No Worries About Food, Clothing, and Shelter (衣食住)
Hŏ Chŏng-suk

As the saying goes, a widower has three measures of lice, and a widow has three measures of jewels. Even if there were no men in this world and only women lived, there would be no problems in our lives. According to the current social system and economic organization, women cannot live without the rule and protection of men, but if all men disappear and only women live, all systems and organizations will naturally be based on women, so each person will have the ability to be independent and self-reliant, and there will be no difficulties in life. Accordingly, all the resistance movements that women around the world are shouting about today will disappear on their own. The positions of monarch, president, or chairman, the heads of countries, as well as constables and soldiers, and myeon officials, will all be occupied by brave women with rosy cheeks and green hair. The suffrage movement will disappear first. The laws will also be completely changed and standardized for women, so the so-called ability issues of wives, divorce, bigamy, adultery, violation of chastity, and lawsuits for alimony will disappear. Women will occupy all the boys' schools, and there will be no question of abolishing prostitution or public brothels. No one will bother to research contraception or conception methods. On the streets, fashionable female police officers will guide the way for women coming and going with their slender jade hands, and in the barracks, female soldiers with buttocks as thick as rice cake boards and chests as plump as bird nests will be swarming. Among them, female officers will wear fake eight-character mustaches to show their authority and gold-rimmed glasses will flash, and they will shout commands in voices like jade. Instead of bars, midwives' houses, and barbershops, there will be many beauty salons, flower shops, and music halls. Young vagrants who follow women and do all sorts of jokes and superstitious women who go around temples and Buddhist halls praying for a good son-in-law or a good husband will all disappear. However, this is only in external life; in actual internal life, many flaws and harms will arise, making it more miserable and lonely than the current society. No matter how splendidly the hundred flowers bloom, if there is no mediation of bees and butterflies, how can those flowers obtain the good fruit of fruition? No matter how lush the shade of ten thousand green willows is, if only one female oriole sings alone, how can it not be desolate and sorrowful? Of course, people must eat to live, but they cannot live without an emotional life beyond food. It is said that a widow has three measures of jewels, but how many measures of tears are soaked and entangled in those three measures of jewels? It seems very noble for a Buddhist nun to wear eight-panel robes in the pure realm of white clouds and green mountains, striking a wooden fish and chanting Namuamitabul, but who knows if she secretly grabs the ear of the Buddha and kisses it in the dark night? When the Creator created humans, He inevitably created men and women together, and even lower microorganisms like amoebas have female and male genders, harmonizing emotions and satisfying sexual desires to achieve the ultimate goal of species reproduction. Positive and negative electricity respond to each other, emitting brilliant light, and the sun and the moon shine on each other, reflecting bright moonlight on the ground. Because men and women are mixed together, our human emotions are well harmonized, we share what we have and do not have, and we complement each other's strengths and weaknesses, making the life of this society, the life of the family, and even the life of the nation harmonious and prosperous, and also preserving the species, preserving the eternal life of mankind. But if there were no men in this world and only women lived, as I said above, we might be able to do well in external life, such as food, clothing, and shelter, but we would not be able to do well in the internal life beyond that. This is not because women are weak, but because the principles of human life are such. <102>

**Named Entities**

李一	Yi Il
京城電氣株式會社	Kyŏngsŏng Electric Company
劉英俊	Yu Yŏng-jun
許貞琡	Hŏ Chŏng-suk



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제19호
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	이 世上에 萬若 男子가 업다면
기사형태	논설

이 世上에 萬若 男子가 업다면
나의 夢想하는 無男鄕
李一

제목만 보면 꽤 훌륭하다. 무슨 哲理나 논하지 안으려나 하고 괄목상대하기 쉬울지 모르거니와 其實 내용은 아모 것도 신통한 것 업는 平凡線 이하의 말에 지내지 못함을 집필벽두에 솔직하게 자백하야 쓰겟다는 것이 欺僞로 業을 의식하고 삼으려 안이하는 나치고는 당연하리라고 생각함니다.
그러나 백주에 魑魅魑魍이 종행무진으로 횡행하는 것을 廣告시대라고 耳觸의 쾌감을 본위로 新造한 어구다.
그럿타고 나도 魑魅의 一從者가 되야 가지고 廣告一代라는 미명하에서 奉羊頭賣狗肉的 惡商行使를 하자는 것도 그 亦 勿論 안이엿지만 여하간 내용이 신기치 못할 지언정 제목이나 조흔 것을 붓치여서 독자의 호기심을 유인하야 볼가하는 것이 섯부른 내 솜씨에서 나아온 무슨 대묘안이라고 생각함도 大過가 안이겟다.
또 한가지 脫線病에 신음하는지 장구한 세월인 나로서는 펜만 손에 잡으면 의례히 탈선이다. 나도 근본을 따저보면 이 광명한 세계에 생을 바더 가지고 나올 때에는 왕자와 갓티 貴族之子와 가티 豐富之子와 가티 兩班之子와 가티 白丁之子와 가티  乞食之子와 가티 일반 원칙대로 출생의 수속을 畢하고 또는 보통 생장의 과정을 지내왓것만은 무슨 불행의 신이 저주를 하엿던지 그만 시선이 빗뚜뚜루 가기를 시작하고 마음이 찌그러지기를 시작하더니 나종에는 脫線病이라고 하는 불치지병에 걸니여 들엇다.＜96＞
여하간 불치병 변증도 그만두고 시대해석론도 집어 치우고 대관절 無男鄕夢想錄이란 무슨 괴상한 제목이며 또는 무슨 괴상한 악설을 토하려느냐 하고 드러보기도 전에 塞耳外面하실 君子的 독자가 잇스면 매우 미안하다고 생각키이지만 이 세상에 남자가 업쓰면 하는 것이 無男鄕 몽상록이다.
남자가 업다하면 엇지 될고 하는 생각을 하야볼 때에 제일 큰 걱정되는 것은 생식은 엇지하나 하는 것이 근심 중에 왕이 되겟고, 그럿치만 현대 문명이 조선이라고 하는 『隱逃王國」에 쏜살가티 달녀 드러오는 바람에 그것의 부산물로 생활선 후에서 啼泣하는 老孃들은 반드시 「에그 시원해라. 그놈의 사내들 다 업서지고 우리끼리만 살앗스면」할 것이다.
그럼 그 老孃들의 전선에서 현대의 화장술의 精을 모아서 얼골에 바르고 비단이라고 일홈하는 것을 한몸에 다 감으리만치 몸집이 크지 못한 것을 원망하며 주야로 秋波제조에 여가를 못찻는 賣笑婦階級들은 「에크 큰일낫고나 우리의 時間代는 누가 주나」하고 그 자리에서 방성통곡할 미인이 업지도 안켓다.
좌우간 無男鄕이 당장에 출현된다 하면 이와 갓흔 희비극이 일시에 연출되리라고 상상하기 어렵지 안타.
그러나 老孃들의 반항적으로 화ㅅ김에 나오는 깃부다는 것이나 賣笑미인들의 死活線에 섯다는 통곡소리만 가지고는 1, 2일 3, 4일 장구한 세월을 살 수 업스닛가 기어히 필요에 순응할 무슨 방책이 나아올 것은 명약관화한 것이다.
그러치만 사회조직이 근본적으로 變改되리라고는 생각키지 안코 대체로는 기성 조직체하에서 無男鄕여성들이 신생활을 하여갈 것이라고 상상하고 십거니와 그러나 旣成體下에서 업서질 것 數種과 新生할 것과를 기록하야 보자.
업서질 것 중에 제일 왕위를 占할 것은 정조이나 정조를 云謂하는 신여성들 좀 들어보라. 정조라는 것은 실은 업는 虛作의 物인대 여자의 정조는 여자의 화장과 갓다. 여자가 화장은 왜 하는고＜97＞ 하니 남성을 유인하는 동물성 본능의 발로다. 雌鶯이 색이 美하고 雌蟬이 성이 美한 것과 동일한 출발점을 가진 것이 안인가. 근본을 洗濯하야 보면 이만 밧게 안이한 것을 고래로 만은 여성은 무슨 굉장히 귀한 ,것 무슨 굉장이 청결한 것으로 생각하야 가지고 생명을 주어도 안이 밧군다고까지 고귀하게 맨드럿다. 가령 화장하지 안은 여자가 잡힐 손이 만코 남자가 환영한다면 그래도 화장을 천성으로 삼고 부득부득 화장하는 화장 충신 여성이 어대 잇겟는가. 이와 갓치 남자에게 무슨 氣分病이 들녀서 정조업는 여자를 환영하는 풍이 생긴다 하면 그 정조을 업새지 못하야 애를 쓰고 그것을 업새여 달나고 애걸복걸할 여성이 만을 것이 안이냐. 그리고 정조 주장자의 최초의 제1인은 남자이엿슬 것인대 그것은 사람의 소유욕으로 발현되는 독점성이 그럿케 맨드럿다. 왜 그런고 하니 한번 자기가 소유한 여자가 다른 남자에게로 도망가기를 염려하야 정조라고 하는 무형한 수갑으로 구속한 것이 안이고 무엇이냐. 그럿치만 남녀평등을 무엇에 대던지 주장하는 여성은 말하려고 하기를 정조는 남녀가 唱道하는 것이 안이고 여자이엿스리라고 가령 그럿타고 하면 그것은 남자를 阿喩하는 화장의 일종과 갓해쓸 것을 생각하야 보라. 더구나 정조 云謂는 세력이 제일 만은 왕가에 부귀에서 시작이 되얏고 일층 더 까다롭게 騷動하는 것을 보아도 과거의 그 소식을 능히 엿볼 수가 역력히 잇다.
내용이 요만 밧게 안이한 것을 지금껏 남녀혼합국에서는 어지간이 까다롭다가 無男鄕 출현을 따라서 春雪갓치 스러진다.
정조라는 巨怪物이 업서짐을 따라서 그것과 갓치 소멸의 운명을 가진 것이 듯기에 무시무시 하던 강간죄 어두운 구석에서 말소리 나직이 속삭이든 유부녀 밀통죄 보드러온 솜에 싸노은 가시 갓흔 感이 잇는 貞操躪蹂慰藉料請求 소송사건 廢墟우에서 우는 것갓흔 私生子認定訴訟事件  婦女子誘拐罪 風俗壞難罪 등과 그리고 잇따금 우리의 第六感을 꽤 刺激식이는 本夫毒殺美人事件도...
이만만하야도 인간의 불행이 퍽 만히 주럿다. 위선 각국 법전이 半分에 감할 것이요. 在監人數가 역시 반감될 터이며 따라서 감옥의 반분은 공동변소로 사용할 것이고 경관의 捉人사무가 반감인즉 남은 시간에는 午睡나 취하고 재판장 검사의 취급 사무도 반감 다음에 변호사의 소송대리 사무도 반감인대 반감은 찬성이지만 수입이 반감이니 대두통 올타 잘못이다. 이상에 모든 것은 다 여성들이 할 터이니 아모 걱정 업다.
다음에 화장품 전멸인대, 이것은 다소간 여성들의 반항이 잇슬는지 몰나서 한마듸 辯證할 필요가 잇다. 여성들이 이럿케 말하야 보리라.
「화장은 남자 보라고 하나 우리가 조와서 하지」하고 그러나 論보다 증거라니 이것을 보지 안는가. 이팔 방년에 남자를 볼때에 가슴이 울넝거리는 여자가 1일의 3분지 1은＜98＞ 화장사무로 세월을 보내다가 출가한 다음에는 그 彈力으로 억지에 못익이는 것처럼 조곰식 하는 것을 -
由此觀之則 無男鄕 여자가 화장 안이할 것은 정해 노은 일이다.
그런즉 의심업시 화장품 제조공장, 화장품 원료, 화장품 대소판매상 모도가 다 박멸인대 그 틈에 佛蘭西는 破局地境에나 안이 일으면 다행일가 한다.
그 다음에 疾病國으로 가면 제일 흔한 성병 즉 화류병 전멸이다. 이것 역시 이상에 말하든 정조 모양으로 신사회에 큰 변동을 일으키는 것이다. 제일 의학계 一大部가 업서지니 의사가 만이 도태되고 외과병원이 반은 소멸될 터이며 그리고 보니 병으로 생기는 인간의 불행도 거진 반은 주럿다. 만세!
인졔는 연애전멸이다. 이상에 정조 화장품 성병이 업서질 때에는 나는 깁뿌더니 인졔 연애가 업서지게 되니 나는 슬푸다.
내가 연애를 하고 십다고 그러는 것이 안이라 나는 평소에 문학애호가의 일인으로 獨免許狀을 가진 사람이닛가 문학 繪畵 음악에서 연애라는 테마를 업새고 본즉, 남는 것은 참말 머리 골치 압흔 科學書類와 哲學書類 박게 무엇이 잇느냐. 그런즉 쉑스피어의 걸작 대부분 其中에 햄릿트 단테의 神曲 꿰테의 파우스트 연애의 성전이라 하는 마논레스코 椿姬 타이쓰 其外에 어느 걸작치고 연애 향취 업는 것이 업는대 이런 것을 다 빼여 노으면 예술계가 얼마나 적막할가. 김빠진 맥주 갓해서 아모도 도라다 볼 기분이 업쓰리라고 생각한다. 論至於此則 나는 無男鄕新興國民 여성에게 대하야 滿腔의 동정을 금치 안이치 못하는 것이 이 점에 잇고 이것은 참말로 無男鄕의 一大黑影이오. 불행이오. 恐慌이라고 하겟다. 연애와 따라 업서지는 것은 녯적부터 말 안이하는 연애의 使者이든 추파 그 다음에는 두 가슴에 피가 일시에 끌어 올나오는 킷쓰 卑近한 예를 드러 보더라도 활동사진 이것은 廢語가 되어야 하겟다- 영화극에서 킷쓰를 빼면 구경할 맛이 어지간이 업써지겟다. 그런즉 로단의 걸작「베졔」라는 조각도 독기로 때려 부수어야 되겟다.
최후로 無男鄕에서 새로 생기는 것도 물론 만켓는대 벌서 말이 길어젓스니 其中에 꼭 생기리라고 자신하는 것 한가지만 말할가 한다. 그것이 무엇인고 하니 「남자의 等身大고무人形」
이다. 이 상품이 금일의 남녀혼합시대의 정조니 화장품이니 성병이니 하는 것 이상 필연적으로 대유행할 것을 나는 의심치 못한다. 그럼으로 새로 출현하려는 無男鄕에서 「男子等身大고무人形」 제조판매주식회사를 조직하얏스면 每株에 대한 이익배당이 京城電氣株式會社의 배당보다도 10배 20배 되리라고 一言을 충고하고 旣成體의 인생의 불행을 半減하야 가지고 今에 출현하는 無男鄕女性帝國을 축복하며 지금까지의 남자의 1인은 이에 寡府旅行을 출발하노라. 나무아미타불. 我面.＜99＞

人間社會는 修羅場
劉英俊

산이 잇스면 물이 잇고 陽電이 잇스면 陰電이 잇는 것과 가티 우리 인간사회 아니 하류의 동식물까지라도 남성이 잇스면 반듯시 여성이 잇서 서로 장단을 相補하고 유무를 相通하야 자기의 생존을 잘 유지하야 가며 생물의 최대 목적인 종족도 보존하야 가는 것이다. 그런데 만약 가설이나마 이 세상에 여자가 업고 남자만 산다던지 여자만 살고 남자가 업다던지 하면 그 세상은 참으로 비참하고 적막한 세상이 될 것이다. 여성보다도 더구나 남성이 업시 산다면 그 세상은 아주 수라장이 될 것이다. 나도 여성이지만은은 웬까닭인지 偏心과 嫉妬 猜忌心이 만코, 남자처럼 포용 박애 겸양하는 마음이 적은 까닭에 한곳에 모히면 항상 충돌이 생기고 怨尤와 咀呪가 만타. 그러나 항상 배후에 남자가 잇서서 항상 조화를 식히는 까닭에 무슨 일이던지 비교적 順調로 나가는 것이다. 그런데 만일 남성이 업고 여성끼리만 산다면 밤낫으로 싸홈만 하고 말 것이다. 옷 한벌에도 싸홈을 하고 밥 한술에도 싸홈을 하고 심지어 동성애인 까닭에도 싸홈을 하야 한숨소리에 지진이 이러나고 피와 눈물로 대홍수가 날 것이다.
호랑이나 구렁이가튼 惡物이 덤비드래도 졔법 퇴치할 용기가 업서서 그저 驚風을 하고 넘어지고 독갑이의 그림자만 보와도 도망을 하고 다러날 것이다. 남자가 업스닛가 모양내일 필요좃차 업서서 머리털은 말갈긔 가티 흐터지고 얼골빗은 노랑꼿이 피여 세계가 모도 황색인종국으로 化할 것이다. 일반 사회상으로 보면 市街에 술집, 유곽 가튼 것은 물론 影子도 업슬 것이요(여자도 술을 먹지만은) 産婆業者, 理髮業者(남자가 업스면 단발미인도 되지 안을 터이닛가)등의 간판은 구경하기가 어려울 터이다. 그 대신으로 여자들이 잘 迷惑하는 무당집, 女子問卜家, 城隍堂 신당 불당 가튼 것이 간 곳마다 생겨서 아츰 저녁으로 굿하는 소리 경 읽는 소리, 장고 치는 소리에 귀가 압흐고 재판소에는 남의 비밀 폭로죄, 유언죄, 무고죄, 결투죄 등의 사건이 벗적 늘어서 여자 재판관과 여자 변호사의 사무가 매우 분망할 것이다. 한가지 편한 것은 아히를 잉태치 안을 것이니 배불은 귀찬흔 일이 업서 조홀 것이오 남자의 빨내와 바느질을 안이할 것이니 낫잠자기가 조홀 것이다. 그러나 장작 패주는 사람이 업스면 고흔 손이 북두갈구리가 되고, 老來에는 후계자가 업는데야 엇지하랴.＜100＞ 남자는 여자가 업다면 무슨 방법을 연구하던지 인공으로 제조인간이라도 맨드러 민족을 보존할 도리가 잇슬지 알 수 업스나 여자들은 비교뎍 그런 원대한 생각과 심원한 연구를 못하는 까닭에 그저 目前에서 잇는 사람끼리만 복작복작하게 살다가 그 시기만 지내면 그만 업서지고 말 것갓다. 그러나 여자만 산다면 이 세상이 한동안 미화는 될 것이다. 兵學校보다도 미술학교가 늘고 이성과의 향락하는 일이 업스닛가 그대신 여자의 조와하는 音樂舞蹈가 발달 되야 거리마다 음악당, 동내마다 무도장이 생겨서, 꼿 피고 달 밝은 밤이면 수천 수백의 여자들이 모혀서 그것으로 芳愁香怨을 풀 것이다. 怜悧한 여자들은 혹 망원경 가튼 것을 이용하야 금성이나 화성에 남자가 잇고 업는 것을 조사하느라고 애를 쓸 것이다. 하여간 남성이 업는 세상은 아주 쓸쓸하야 왼 세상이 지금의 靑春寡婦의 방이나 여승의 방과 가티 될 것이다.

衣食住만은 無걱정
許貞琡

속담에 홀아비는 이(蝨)가 서말이요. 과부는 구슬이 서말이라고 이 세상에 남자가 업고 여자만 산다 하야도 우리 생활상에는 하등 문제가 업슬 것이다. 현재 사회제도나 경제조직으로 보면 여성은 남성의 지배와 보호를 밧지 안으면 살지 못할 것 갓지만은 만일 남성이 모도 업서지고 여성만 사는 세상이 된다면 모든 제도와 조직이 자연 여성본위로만 될 터이닛가 각자가 모도 자립자활할 능력이 생겨서 생활상 아모 곤란이 업슬 것이오, 따러서 금일에 세계 여성들이 떠들고 불으짓는 모든 반항운동도 스사로 소멸될 것이다. 군주, 대통령, 혹은 위원장 가튼 일국의 원수의 자리는 물론이고 巡査와 병졸, 面吏員까지 모도 紅顔綠髮의 여장부들이 차지를 할 터이니 참정권 운동이 먼저 업서질 것이오, 법률도 전부 변경이 되야 모도 여성으로만 표준할 터이니 금일에 소위 人妻의 능력문제, 이혼, 중혼, 간통, 정조유린, 위자료청구소송 등의 번잡한 문제도 업서질 것이오, 학교도 남학교는 전부 여자가 점령하고 유곽폐지, 공창폐지는 문제도 업스려니와 避妊法, 受胎法 가튼 것도 누가 머리 압흐게 연구도 안이할 것이다. 거리에는 하이카라의 여순사가 纖纖玉手를 들고 오는 여자 가는 여자의＜101＞ 길을 지도하며 병영에는 엉덩이가 떡판만 하고 가슴이 새둥우리만치 퉁퉁한 여병사들이 워글버글 하는데 그 중에도 여자 사관도 자기의 위엄을 뵈이기 위하야 假者의 8자 髥을 딱 붓치고 금테 안경이 번쩍번쩍하며 옥 가튼 목소리로 호령을 할 것이다. 술집 산파집 이발소 가튼 것이 업서지는 대신으로 미용원, 화초집, 음악당 가튼 것이 만히 생기고 여자의 뒤를 따러다니며 가진 怍戱를 다하는 浮浪청년과 子福夫福을 비너라고 신사 불당으로 도늝� 다니며 불공 新禱를 하는 미신의 여자 무리도 다 업서질 것이다. 그러나 그가ƒ은 외적 생활에 뿐이지 실상 내적 생활에 잇서서는 허다한 결함과 폐해가 생겨서 현재 사회 이상으로 참담하고 쓸쓸할 것이다. 백화가 아모리 爛漫히 피더라도 蜂蝶의 媒가 업스면 그 꼿이 엇지 결실의 好果를 어들 수 잇스며 萬樹의 綠楊이 아모리 그늘이 繁茂하다 할지라도 一鳥의 雌鶯만 홀로 운다면 그 안이 고적하고 비애하랴. 사람은 물론 밥을 먹어야 사는 것이겟지만은 밥보다 以上의 감정생활을 하지 안으면 안될 것이다. 寡婦는 구슬이 서말이라 하지만은 그 서말의 구슬에는 몃섬의 눈물이 저저 엉키고 여승이 白雲靑山의 淨界에서 8布 장삼을 들쳐입고 목탁을 두다리며 나무아미타불을 부르는 것이 퍽이나 고결하야 뵈이지만은 남모르는 暗夜에 말 못하는 붓쳐님의 귀를 잡고 키쓰를 하는지 누가 알랴. 조물주는 인간을 내일 때에 반듯시 남성과 여성을 가티 내이고 심지어 下等微生 『아메바』까지도 雌性 雄性이 잇게 하야 서로 감정을 조화식히고 성의 욕구를 만족케 하야 종족번식의 최대 목적을 달케 한 것이다. 陽電과 陰電은 서로 감응이 되는 까닭에 찬란한 電光을 발하고 태양과 月球는 서로 마주 빗치는 까닭에 교교한 월광을 地面에 반사케 하는 것이다. 우리 인간도 남성과 여성이 서로 석겨 잇기 때문에 피차에 감정이 잘 조화되야 유무를 상통하고 장단을 상보하야 이 사회의 생활과 가정의 생활 내지 국가의 생활까지도 원만하고 윤택하게 되고 또 종족을 보존하야 인류의 영원한 생명을 보존하는 것이다. 그런데 만일 이세상에 남자가 업고 여자만 산다면 우에 말한 바와 가티 의식주 等 外的생활은 잘 할지 알 수 업스나 그 이상의 내적  생활은 잘 못할 것이다. 이것은 무슨 여자가 약자인 까닭에 그런 것이 아니라 인류생활의 원리 원칙이 그러한 까닭이다.＜102＞
＜96-102＞