잡지명	別건곤 제19호
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	本誌三萬部突破紀念五百圓大懸賞 (Grand Prize of 500 Yen to Commemorate Exceeding 30,000 Copies)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Notice/Post-editing)

Grand Prize of 500 Yen to Commemorate Exceeding 30,000 Copies

The world ■■■... It is the world's established opinion of this magazine, and in fact, this magazine, which is increasing its readership with surprising momentum, sold out 30,000 copies in the previous issue (New Year's issue). Exceeding 30,000 copies in Korea! As a self-celebration, we are offering a special grand prize of 500 yen as described below. Anyone who is a reader of this magazine can apply.

Recruiting New Ideas for Modern Wedding Ceremonies

As times change, the old-fashioned wedding ceremony with silk hats and official robes (사모관대) has completely disappeared, except in remote villages. However, a new ceremony that can be used by anyone has not yet emerged, so when a wedding is imminent, people go to a place that does not suit their taste and somehow get through it haphazardly, which is a problem that everyone regrets. Gae Byeok Sa (開闢社) intends to widely solicit new ideas for wedding ceremonies that can be used by anyone through the two magazines, "Byeol Geon Gon" (別乾坤) and "Hak Saeng" (學生), and provide them to the general public.

Requirements ◇ Only consider the unveiling and party at the wedding ceremony ◇ Consider about 100 guests ◇ Consider expenses from 100 won to 500 won ◇ Consider the bride and groom's attire

Regulations ○ About 30 sheets of the company's manuscript paper ○ Deadline: April 15 ○ Cut out and attach the reader's certificate at the end of this magazine's table of contents

Screening ○ The company's editorial department will take responsibility for the screening and will seek the cooperation of prominent figures in the education and media fields and other fields to ensure thoroughness.

Rewards First Prize: 1 person, 100 won Second Prize: 2 people, 50 won each Third Prize: 2 people, 30 won each

(The prize money will be sent within 7 days of the announcement of the winning proposal.)

Recruiting Stories of Beautiful Deeds and Novels by Young People <106>

We are recruiting factual stories of beautiful deeds or novels by young people that will be read by tens of thousands of boys and girls, the readers of the magazine "Children" (어린이) published by our company.

We eagerly look forward to the special writing of teachers from schools all over Korea, and we earnestly hope for contributions from youth organizations or branch offices of media organizations and applications from students. (However, please keep in mind that the writing must pass the review of the Police Bureau.)

Regulations ○ About 20 sheets of the company's manuscript paper ○ Pure Korean ○ If it is a true story, please attach a photograph ○ Deadline: April 15 ○ You must agree to the company's additions and corrections

Rewards Twelve winning entries will receive 10 won each, for a total of 120 won.

(The prize money will be presented within 7 days of the publication of the winning manuscript.)

Recruiting Cover Designs for "Student" (學生) Magazine

Our company's new magazine "Student" (學生) is a magazine for male and female students, so we want the cover to be a student's work as well. You are free to choose any month of the year, and you are free to draw a male student or a female student, but do not forget that it is a magazine for both male and female students as much as possible. It should be as fresh and lively as possible.

Regulations ○ The color is limited to three colors, whatever they may be (refer to the cover of the inaugural issue of "Student" (學生)). ○ Deadline: April 15 ○ Reader's certificate must be attached

Rewards Twelve winners, one for each month, will receive 10 won each, for a total of 120 won. <107>

**Named Entities**

開闢社	Gae Byeok Sa
別乾坤	Pyŏl Kŏn Kon
學生	Hak Saeng
어린이	Ŏrini



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제19호
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	本誌三萬部突破紀念五百圓大懸賞
기사형태	사고·편집후기

本誌三萬部突破紀念五百圓大懸賞
天下■■■………本誌에 對한 天下의 定評이거니와 事實노 놀나운 氣勢로 讀者가 增加해가는 本誌는 期於코 前號(新年號)에 三萬部를 賣盡하엿슴니다. 朝鮮서의 三萬部突破이! 自祝으로 左記와가티 賞金五百圓을 提供하는 特別大懸賞을 募集함니다 아모나 本誌讀者이면 應募할수잇슴니다.
新式結婚禮式新案募集
時代가 變하야 시골村구석을 除하고는 사모관대의 舊式婚禮式이 全혀엄서젓슴니다. 그러나 그에 대신할 아모나 通用할수잇는 새로운 儀式이 아즉 生겨나지안어서 婚禮를 닥드리면 에 안맞는 場所에가서 아모러케나 우물물지내게되는 것은 누구나 다가티 遺憾으로 녁이는 問題임니다. 開闢社는 이에『別乾坤』과『學生』兩誌를 通하야 아모나 通用할수잇는 婚禮式의 新案을 널리 公募하야 一般에 提供하려함니다.
要件◇婚禮式場에서 披露其會지만을 생각할것◇손님은 百名內外로생각할 것 ◇費用은 百圓으로부터 五百圓지로 생각할 것 ◇新郞 新婦의 服裝도생각할 것
規定○本社原稿用紙三十枚內外 ○期限四月十五日○本誌目次終에잇는 讀者證을 오려부처보낼 것
審査○本社編輯局이 審査의 責任을지고 敎育界 言論界 其他各方面名士諸氏의 協贊을 求하야 愼重을 期하기로함
謝禮 一等一人 壹百圓 二等二人 五十圓式 三等二人 參拾圓式
(賞金은 當選案 內容發表한지 七日以內送金)
少年美談及少年小說募集＜106＞
本社發行『어린이』誌의 讀者 十數萬의 少年少女에게 닑힐 感激性만흔 事實美談이나 或은 少年小說을 募集함니다.
全鮮各地學校敎員諸氏의 特別하신 執筆을 바라기마지안이하며 靑年團體 或 言論機關의 支分局에게시는이의 投稿와 學生諸氏의 應募를 懇切히바람니다.(다만 답답한 注文은 警務局檢閱에 通過해야할 것을 생각하고쓰기가바라는것임니다)
規定○本社原稿用紙 二十枚內外 ○純朝鮮文 ○事實談이면 그 寫眞지 添附 ○期限四月十五日지 ○本社의 添削修正을 承諾하실 것
謝禮 當選一篇 拾圓式 拾二篇 合臺百貳拾圓
(賞金은 當選原稿揭載發行後七日以內送呈)
『學生』雜誌表紙圖案募集
本社發行新雜誌『學生』은 男女學生의 雜誌인 故로 表紙도 學生作品으로써하고십슴니다. 一年十二個月어느달치던지조흐니 自由로 달數를 擇할것이요 男學生을그리던지 女學生을 그리던지 그것도 自由이나 되도록 男女學生을 다 相對하는 雜誌인 것을 닛지말 것 되도록산듯하고 씩씩해야할 것
規定○色은 무슨色이던지 三色에 限함(學生創刊號表紙를 參照하시요)○期限四月十五日 ○讀者證必貼付
謝禮 各月分一枚式 合十二枚 當選一枚 拾圓式 合臺百貳拾圓＜107＞
＜106-107＞