잡지명	別乾坤 第19號
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	五大都市 美人評判記 (A Critique of Beauties in Five Major Cities)
필자	風流郞
기사형태	문예기타 (Literature, etc.)

A Critique of Beauties in Five Major Cities
						P'ungnyurang

Beauties of Kyŏngsŏng

Just as people say that even if they like everything with foreign letters on it, they don't like foreign rice, I heard someone say to me that even though everything in Seoul is good, Seoul women don't have faces worth looking at. And indeed, that's true. Not many women in Seoul seem to have pretty faces. But a woman's beauty isn't just about her face. Of course, it's true that a face has to be pretty to be a beauty, but more than that, a beauty has to have beauty in her whole body – her flesh, her posture, her behavior, her speech, etc. (as formal beauty). Though women like Kwan-na, Hwang Chin-i, Yang Guifei, and Cleopatra are called beauties of the world, if you were to take their faces and put them on the body of a monster like Chugal-lyang's wife (黃髮부인) or Muyŏm, who would call them beauties? And though peonies and hibiscus are called the most beautiful of flowers (花中名花), if you were to pluck off their petals and stick them on a thorn bush, who would call them beautiful flowers? When you see a woman in Seoul for a moment, it seems like there aren't many women with pretty faces, but in reality, the beauty of their whole body – the beauty of their flesh, the style of their body, the way they walk, their cleverness, their bright intelligence, and their beautiful voices – can't be compared to women from anywhere else. Watching someone like Yang Kŭm-chae wearing stylish clothes on her slender body, wearing beaded shoes on feet like ivory, walking in that unique way (紫*) across the main beams of Taemyŏng Hall (大明殿), it's like a fairy come down from the Moon Palace or a dragon girl risen from the Water Palace, so even moral gentlemen like Sŏ Hwa-dam and Yi T'oe-gye wouldn't be able to resist taking a look. In particular, the way they turn their heads while walking and glance back is truly worthy of the saying, "One look could destroy a city, a second look could destroy a nation." Who can guarantee that the reason the old walls of Seoul have all crumbled and the palaces have fallen into decay isn't because of these bewitching beauties who could bring down a nation? People often say that Seoul women don't have pretty faces, only good style, so looking at them from the front is worth a penny, looking at them from the back is worth ten thousand nyang. But how could there not be women with pretty faces in Seoul? As Seoul is the capital of the country, there have always been many women with pretty faces, but because families are more strict about inside and outside than elsewhere, women from respectable families, i.e. beauties, don't go out, and women from lower-class families, i.e. families that haven't been beautified yet, and women who have come up from the countryside go out, having only learned how to look like Seoul beauties without having pretty faces, so that's what people see and say. It's just like a country person coming to Seoul and eating sangbap (床밥) or soellongtang (설넝탕) and then saying that the food in Seoul isn't good. How can that be called a fair assessment? Someone who doesn't know Seoul well won't know what Seoul beauties are like. In fact, someone who knows Seoul women well will definitely praise them. That's how it is even for people from P'yŏngan Province, which is known for its sexual pleasures (色鄕), and people from everywhere else are the same. If you want to get a stylish woman, get a woman from Seoul; if you want to get a woman with a beautiful voice, get a woman from Seoul; if you want to taste clothes that are well-sewn and delicious soybean stew and cubed radish kimchi, get a woman from Seoul; if you want to be well-treated by your husband, get a woman from Seoul, everyone praises Seoul women. As Seoul is Seoul, Seoul women have many good qualities, along with their cleverness.

<115>

Beauties of P'yŏngyang

P'yŏngan Province is Chosŏn's land of sexual pleasures (朝鮮의 色鄕). There are many beauties in Kanggye, many beauties in Sŏngch'ŏn, many beauties in Sŏnch'ŏn and Anju. Whether it's a woman picking bracken and ferns on the high peaks of Myohyang Mountain, a woman washing clothes on the banks of the Amnok River, a woman planting rice in the 12,300 fertile fields, a woman hoeing bean fields and potato fields in the deep valleys of Ch'ŏnma Mountain, or a woman feeding calves in Ch'osan and Piktong, they are all beauties. But if I only comment on the beauties of P'yŏngyang, I might get beaten with flower clubs by the beauties from other places. But now, beauties are also concentrating in cities. Like provincial governors, they are only heading to the provincial capital. The reason I'm talking about the beauties of P'yŏngyang here is that P'yŏngyang is the concentration point (集中之地) for beauties from the Sŏdo (西道) region, so I'm speaking representatively. P'yŏngyang truly has many beauties. In the old days, the famous courtesan Kye Wŏl-hyang, the famous singer Mae-hwa, Ch'unsŏl, the famous poet-courtesans Ondŏng, Chukhyang, Chukseo, and Kuksaek, who combined poetry, song, and beauty, and Rohwa were all beauties of P'yŏngyang, and most of the famous courtesans and wealthy men's concubines scattered throughout the various cities today are also beauties of P'yŏngyang. Most of the neat and pretty women in the various girls' schools are also born in P'yŏngyang. People from the Sŏdo region say that in the past, the yangban magistrates and inspectors from Seoul plundered the wealth of the Sŏdo people, but in reality, the Sŏdo women's army (娘子軍) conquered the wealthy yangban from Seoul. Try it. See if there's a wealthy family in Seoul that has any power that doesn't have a P'yŏngyang woman. Although their status is as concubines, they hold the reins of finance because they receive special favor. Hong Kyŏng-nae's proclamation that "in the ranks of the hussars (細柳營中), the slender eyebrows and plump cheeks (曲眉豐頰) are all products of the Kwansŏ region (關西之産)" refers to this. Now, they have already conquered the wealthy yangban and are also organizing a Southern Expeditionary Force (南伐軍) to conquer the wealthy men of Chŏlla and Kyŏngsang Provinces. The reason the beauties of P'yŏngyang have so much power is that they are naturally skilled in tactics and sociability, but also because their seductive figures and behavior can bewitch people. Looking at their faces, which are white and smooth like cabbage stalks washed in autumn water, neatly combing and twisting their hair like three tiers, stylishly wrapping a white silk scarf around their heads, and then walking around with their slender waists swaying like the weeping willows of Nŭngnado in plain clothes and light makeup, who wouldn't be tempted? The words of a certain playboy poet of the past who said that if he couldn't be the governor of P'yŏngyang while alive, he would become a ghost in Ch'amyŏndong (嬋姸洞) (where the kisaengs are in Pukmang Mountain), and the P'yŏngyang proverb that P'yŏngyang has no three-generation wealth are not without reason. Among them, speaking in the P'yŏngyang dialect with a sentimental and resentful air, saying, "Oh my, how long has it been? I thought I wouldn't see you again before the Taedong River ran dry... you've come again," and smiling with half-open lips like a peony blooming in the spring breeze will melt even a man with an iron heart like the spring ice of Paegŭn-t'an. Ah, beauty, beauty, you are a person of the West.

Beauties of Haeju

The smooth Kŭmgang River brought forth 탁문군 (卓文君) and Sŏl T'o (薛濤), and the beautiful mountain village of Kyŏngmun gave birth to 명비 (明妃). As the saying goes, "People of talent are born in places of spiritual energy (人傑은 地靈)," there have always been many beauties in places with beautiful mountains and waters. Haeju is a region of mountains and waters in western Chosŏn. Suyang Mountain (首陽山), like a hibiscus, rises beyond the clouds and is surrounded by nine jade-like valleys. How could there not be beauties in such a region of water? Haeju has always been considered a land of beauties. In the past, when the traitor Nam Hoe (南衰), as a provincial governor, couldn't sleep all night at Kŭmgyo Station (金郊驛), it was because he couldn't overcome his love for 伊 (Nam Hoe's beloved concubine), a beauty of Haeju. And in recent times, the reason why a certain wealthy man (朝鮮甲富) treated his adopted son O-sik (O植) badly and gave all property rights to his illegitimate son was also because of the love of a Haeju beauty. These two beauties are both from kisaeng backgrounds, but there are many famous beauties besides kisaengs. Leaving the past behind, even now there are many women in Kyŏngsŏng who are considered beauties as students, teachers, or housewives (their names will not be revealed). A characteristic of Haeju beauties is that they are relatively tall and have white, plump cheeks. If the beauties of P'yŏngyang are compared to half-open peonies, the beauties of Haeju are luscious and extravagant like fully opened hibiscus. If the beauties of Haeju were to stand side by side (作隊幷立) by the lotus pond (芙蓉堂) when the hibiscus are in full bloom, it would be hard to tell whether the beauties are hibiscus or the hibiscus are beauties. Leaving aside the kisaengs, even ordinary women from commoner families, in the summer, covering half of their white, plump faces with a towel on their lithe, tall bodies, washing clothes by the clear waters of Baegsŏkch'ŏnggye (白石淸溪), and walking back and forth to do ironing on the grass field, even the souls of Paek I and Suk Che, who are famous for their integrity, would not be able to rest assured within Ch'ŏngsŏng*(在海州). In short, the beauties of Haeju are more elegant and leisurely than seductive and beautiful.

<117>

Beauties of Taegu

When people hear the name Taegu (大邱), they usually think of lepers, the herbal medicine market (藥令), and the lack of water, and it's easy to think of it as a dry and boring desert city compared to Chinju (晋州), Ch'angwŏn (昌原), and Kyŏngju (慶州), which have always been considered lands of sexual pleasure (色鄕) among the Kyŏngsang provinces. However, the changes of the times have brought about a great upheaval in this beauty world as well. As the tobacco song (담바귀타령) became popular, the Kyŏngbu Railway (경부철도) ran north and south, and in recent years, as the provincial government of Chinju (晋州) was blown away by the Pusan (釜山) foreign wind, and the historical sites of Kyŏngju (慶州) absorbed sightseers, the women's army of the south (南國의 娘子軍) flocked to Taegu (대구), the major city of Yŏngnam (영남) and the hub of north-south transportation, every year. The fragrance of powder and rouge dazzles the eyes of young men and women on every street, and the sound of kayagŭm (가야금) never stops in every alley, making alien guests realize the coldness of the south. Moreover, seeing the new-style high-collar (하이카라) women touring places like the theater or Talsŏng Park (達城公園) in groups of three or five, one gets the feeling that the desert city has become a flower city. Since Taegu (大邱) and P'yŏngyang (平壤) have different geographical conditions, human nature, and customs, the characteristics of their beauties are also different. The beauties of P'yŏngyang (平壤) are more inclined to being frivolous and lighthearted (浮華輕快), while the beauties of Taegu (大邱) are simple and dignified (質素沉重). Outwardly, they may not seem as affectionate and kind as the beauties of P'yŏngyang (平壤) but inwardly, they are more subtle and endearing, which the beauties of P'yŏngyang (平壤) can never match. If the beauties of P'yŏngyang (平壤) are charming and graceful (多嬌多態), the beauties of Taegu (大邱) are passionate and resentful (多情多恨). This is a matter of personality, and they are also completely different in appearance (of course, for most standards). The faces of the beauties of P'yŏngyang (平壤) are white and long like a gourd, but the beauties of Taegu (大邱) have round faces like the moon in the clouds and also have a slightly dark hue. The beauties of P'yŏngyang (平壤) are tall and slender (후리후리), with waists as thin as willows (버들가티 날슨), but the beauties of Taegu (大邱) are short and stocky (앙바틈), with waists as short as hourglass drums (장구통 모양으로 짤막). For makeup, P'yŏngyang (平壤) likes light and soft (輕軟) makeup, but Taegu (大邱) seems to like thick and rich (濃厚) makeup, and for the color of clothes, P'yŏngyang (平壤) likes light and pale (淺淡) colors, but Taegu (大邱) seems to like deep and dark (深濃) colors. In any case, the beauties of Taegu (大邱) are representative beauties of the south. The distribution of power in Kyŏnghyang (京鄕) is also the same.

<118>

Beauties of Hamhŭng

There is a saying, "Southern men, Northern women (南男北女)," and the Hamgyŏng provinces originally had good products and many famous beauties. The woman Kim Chŏng-ae (金貞*) who the world was talking about as a beauty who poisoned her husband (本夫독살미인), has more curiosity in her beauty made by newspaper reporters' brushes than in the natural beauty made by the Creator, so it is still difficult to make a definite assessment. However, the fact is that she had the most fame recently. So Ch'un-p'ung (笑春風), a famous singer during the reign of Sŏngjong who received Sŏngjong's favor and even brought her songs to the Royal Court, and who is still talked about by general scholars, was a beauty of Yŏnghŭng (永興) in Hamgyŏng Province. Kim Sŏm (金蟾), the beloved concubine of Song Sang-hyŏn (宋象賢), the magistrate of Tongnae (東萊), who committed a passionate suicide (節死) during the Imjin War, attracting the attention of people inside and outside the country, also committed suicide (one saying is that she survived) following Song, was a beauty of Hamgyŏng Province (Hamhŭng). Man-hyang (晩香), the beloved concubine of Hwang Sŭngji Kyu-ha (黃承旨 奎河), who kept her virtue (節), was also a beauty of Hamgyŏng Province (Hamhŭng). Hong-nyang (洪娘 洪原妓), the concubine of Ch'oe Ko-chuk (崔孤竹) Kyŏngch'ang (慶昌), and Ch'wi-ryŏn (翠蓮), the concubine of Sŏ P'yŏngsa Myŏng-bin (徐評事命彬), were also beauties of their time, as well as female poets. The Great Jin Emperor Yi Ch'ŏng-ok (李澄玉) was also deceived by the beauties of this Hamgyŏng Province and hesitated to cross the river, failing in his great ambition to dream of becoming the emperor of the continent, and the revolutionary officer Yi Si-ae (李施愛), the magistrate of Hoeryŏng (會寧), also carried a beauty while fleeing, becoming the wronged ghost of a prisoner outside Guimungak (鬼門閣) (Kyŏngsŏng). Anyway, it is true that Hamgyŏng Province has many beauties. Rather than makeup, they have abundant natural beauty, and the beauty of their flesh, with their complexion like peach blossoms and their limbs, bones, and muscles developed evenly, cannot be compared to the beauties of other provinces. In particular, their sense of chastity is strong, so not only ordinary women but also women in the entertainment world do not act like women from other places. This can be sufficiently proven by the fact that it is difficult to see the shadow of Hamgyŏng Province women in the entertainment circles of Kyŏnghyang and other men's concubine houses. The sayings that beauties have short lives or that beauties have no fidelity cannot be said to be true for these Hamgyŏng Province women. The fact that their speech is taciturn and their sociability is low is a shortcoming in their qualifications as beauties, but that is what people from the south say, and in that region, it may rather be a characteristic of beauties. Wearing a pressed cotton towel (文萊機) on their tightly-tied hair, wearing silver rings like chimes on their colorful ribbons, and showing their huge bodies and feet, which are more developed than Japanese women, they sit and say, "Ah, welcome, this guest - why, what's wrong? Did you have a good time..." Even if they are beauties, people from the south would say that they lose their affection at first sight, but in reality, when you get close to them, those attitudes and words are rather natural and endearing, and you gradually want to become closer to them. Among the Hamgyŏng provinces, the further north you go than the south, the more beauties there are, and places like Musan (茂山) have a high reputation as the so-called Musan fairies, but still, as the city is a city, Hamhŭng's beauties will be the first to be mentioned in terms of the number of women and the beautification of the times.

<119>
<120>

**Named Entities**

Kwan-na	Kwan-na
黃眞	Hwang Chin-i
楊貴妃	Yang Guifei
諸葛亮	Chugal-lyang
黃髮부인	Hwangbal puin
無鹽	Muyŏm
徐花潭	Sŏ Hwa-dam
李退溪	Yi T'oe-gye
大明殿	Taemyŏngjŏn
楊金彩	Yang Kŭm-chae
平安道	P'yŏngan-do
江界	Kanggye
成川	Sŏngch'ŏn
宣川	Sŏnch'ŏn
安州	Anju
妙香山	Myohyangsan
鴨綠江	Amnokkang
天摩山	Ch'ŏnmasan
楚山	Ch'osan
碧潼	Piktong
西道	Sŏdo
桂月香	Kye Wŏl-hyang
梅花	Mae-hwa
春雪	Ch'unsŏl
溫亭	Ondŏng
竹香	Chukhyang
竹西	Chukseo
芦花	Rohwa
洪景來	Hong Kyŏng-nae
白銀灘	Paegŭn-t'an
海州	Haeju
錦江	Kŭmgang
卓文君	卓文君
薛濤	Sŏl T'o
荊門	Kyŏngmun
明妃	Myŏngbi
南衰	Nam Hoe
金郊驛	Kŭmgyo Yŏk
芙蓉堂	Puyongdang
白石淸溪	Paegsŏkch'ŏnggye
伯夷叔齊	Paek I Suk Che
大邱	Taegu
晋州	Chinju
昌原	Ch'angwŏn
慶州	Kyŏngju
釜山	Pusan
達城公園	Talsŏng Kongwŏn
京鄕	Kyŏnghyang
咸鏡道	Hamgyŏngdo
金貞*	Kim Chŏng-*
成宗	Sŏngjong
永興	Yŏnghŭng
宋象賢	Song Sang-hyŏn
東萊	Tongnae
金蟾	Kim Sŏm
黃奎河	Hwang Kyu-ha
晩香	Man-hyang
洪娘	Hong-nyang
崔孤竹	Ch'oe Ko-chuk
慶昌	Kyŏngch'ang
翠蓮	Ch'wi-ryŏn
徐命彬	Sŏ Myŏng-bin
李澄玉	Yi Ch'ŏng-ok
李施愛	Yi Si-ae
會寧	Hoeryŏng
鏡城	Kyŏngsŏng
茂山	Musan



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제19호
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	五大都市 美人評判記
필자	風流郞
기사형태	문예기타

五大都市 美人評判記
						風流郞
京城의 미인
洋字 든 것이 다 조와도 洋쌀밥은 좃치 못하다는 것과 가티 서울 것이 다 조와도 여자의 얼골만은 서울 여자의 얼골이 볼 것이 업다는 말을 나는 엇던 시골 사람에게 드럿다. 과연 그럿타. 서울의 여자는 얼골이 별로 고와 뵈는 사람이 업다. 그러나 여자의 美라 하는 것은 다만 얼골 한가지만 보는 것은 안이다. 얼골도 물론 고와야 미인이 될 것은 사실이지만은 그보다도 몸 전체의 미 즉 肉色 자세, 행동, 언어 등이 모다 미를 구비하여야만 미인이 될 것이다. (형식미로서) 貫那와 黃眞, 楊貴妃, 크리오파트라, 가튼 여자들은 천하의 미인이라 하지만은 그 여자의 얼골만 띄여다가 諸葛亮부인(黃髮부인)이나 無鹽 가튼 괴녀의 몸동이다 붓쳐 노흔다면 그것을 누가 미인이라 하며 牧丹과 芙蓉은 花中名花라 하지만은 花辮만 뜨더다가 가시덤불에다 붓쳐 노흐면 그것을 누가 고흔 꼿이라 하랴. 서울의 여자는 잠깐 보면 얼골이 그다지 고흔 인물이 별로 업는 것 갓지만은 실상 그 몸 전체의 미 즉 육색의 고흔 것이라던지, 몸의 맵시라던지, 거름것는 본새라던지,  영리하고 경위 밝고 목소리 고흔 말씨는 도저히 다른 곳 여자로는 가티 비하야 말할 수도 업슬 것이다. 그 양금채 가티 호리호리하게 가는 몸에다 맵시 잇게 지은 옷을 뜰처입고, 외씨 가튼 버선으로 비오리 가튼 고흔 신을 업허 신고 대명전(大明殿) 대들보 우에 명맥이(紫*) 거름가티 행똥행뜽 거러가는 것을 보면 그야말로 月宮에서 나려온 선녀도 갓고 水宮에서 솟사 온 용녀와도 가터서 제아모리 徐花潭, 李退溪 가튼 도덕군자라도 한번 치여다 보지 안코는 못견딜 것이다. 그 중에도 거름을 거러가다가 머리를 돌치여서 흘깃 한번 도라다 보는 태도는 가위 一顧에 傾人城이오, 再顧슗� 傾人國이라 하겟다. 지금 서울의 녯 도성이 모다 문허지고 궁전이 頹廢하게 된 것은 이러한 傾國傾城의 妖艶美人이＜115＞ 잇는 까닭이 안이라고 누가 장담할 수 잇스랴. 세상 사람들은 서울의 여자는 얼골이 곱지 못하고 맵시만 조와서 압흐로 보니 한푼자리요. 뒤로 보니 萬兩판이라는 말을 흔이 한다. 그러나 서울의 여인인들 엇지 얼골 고흔 여자가 업스랴. 서울이 一國의 수도이니만치 自來로 얼골이 고흔 여자가 만치만은 다른 곳보다 內外가 심한 까닭에 상당한 가정의 여자 즉 미인들은 외출을 안이하고 低級가정 즉 아즉 美化가 되지 못한 가정의 여자들과 향촌에서 올나 온 여자들이 얼골은 입부지 못하면서도 서울 미인의 모양 보는 것만 배워가지고 출입을 하닛가 그것만을 보고 그리하는 말이다. 마치 시골사람이 서울에 와서 床밥이나 설넝탕을 사먹고서는 서울의 음식이 좃치 못하다고 평하는 것과 맛찬가지다. 그것이 엇지 공평한 觀評이라 할 수 잇스랴. 서울을 잘 알지 못하는 사람은 서울미인의 엇더탄 것을 잘 알지 못할 것이다. 실제 서울의 여자를 잘 아는 사람은 반듯시 칭찬을 한다. 그것은 色鄕이라는 平安道사람도 그럿코 其外 어듸 사람도 다 그런다. 맵시 나는 여자를 엇고 십흐면 서울의 여자 말씨 고흔 여자를 어드랴거던 서울의 여자 바누질 잘한 옷과 맛잇는 된장찌개, 깍둑이를 맛보랴거던 서울의 여자 남편의 대접을 잘 바드랴 하야도 서울의 여자라고 하야 모도 서울의 여자를 찬미한다. 서울이 서울이니만치 서울의 여자는 그 머리의 조흔 것과 한가지로 長處가 또한 만타.

平壤의 미인
平安道는 朝鮮의 色鄕이다. 江界에도 미인이 만코 成川에도 미인이 만코 宣川 安州에도 미인이 만타. 妙香山 놉흔 峯에서 고비 고사리 캐는 여자던지 鴨綠江변에서 빨내하는 여자던지 12,3千沃野에서 모 심으는 여자나 天馬山심곡에서 강낭이밧, 감자밧 매는 여자나 楚山碧潼에서 송아지 먹이는 여자도 모도 미인이다. 그런데 유독 평양의 미인만을 논평한다면 나는 다른 곳 미인들에게 꼿방맹이로 매를 마질는지도 알 수 업다. 그러나 지금은 미인도 도회로 집중한다. 道知事대감 모양으로 도청소재지로만 향한다. 여긔에 평양의 미인을 말하는 것도 평양이 西道미인의 集中之地인 까닭에 대표적으로 말하는 것이다. 평양은 참으로 미인이 만타. 녯날의 貴妓桂月香, 名歌의 梅花, 春雪, 名詩妓의 溫亭, 竹香, 竹西, 詩歌姿色을 겸유한 國色, 芦花도 다 이 평양의 미인이어니와 지금의 각 도시에 산재한 名妓와 當豪의 첩들도 대부분은 평양의 미인이다. 각 여학교에 말숙말숙한 여자들도 대개가 평양 출생이다. 西道 사람들은 前日 서울 양반의 郡守 監司가 西道 사람의 재산을 橫奪하얏다고 하지만은 실상은 西道의 娘子軍들이 서울 양반부호를 정복하얏다. 試하야 보라. 서울에 소위 세력이 잇던 某某가정에 평양여자가 업는 집이 잇는가를. 신분은 비록 첩이나 특별한 총애를 밧는 까닭에 재정권은 다 그들이 차지하얏다. 洪景來의 격문에 『細柳營中에 曲眉豐頰이 無非關西之産이라.』 운운함도 이것을 이름이다. 지금은 양반부호를 이미 다 정복하고 또 南伐軍을 조직하야 全羅, 慶尙의 부호를 정복하는 중이다. 평양의 미인이 이와 가티 세력이 큰 것은 원래에 수단과 교제가 능한 것도 능한 것이어니와 요염한 자태와 행동이 능히 사람을 魔殺식히는 까닭이다. 가을물에 씨처낸 배추ㅅ대 모양으로 허여말숙한 그 얼골에다 삼딴가티 조흔 머리를 곱게 비서 틀어 언고 백색의 비단 수건을 멋잇게 둘너쓴 다음에 素服淡粧으로 綾羅島 수양버들처럼 날슨날슨한 허리를 흔들며 다니는 태도를 보면 그누가 유혹되지 안으랴. 녯날에 엇던 오입쟁이 시인의 살어서 평양감사를 못하거던 죽어서 嬋姸洞(妓生이 北邙山)의 귀신이 되라는 말과 평양 속담에 평양은 삼대유산이 업다는 말은 역시 무리의 말이 안이다. 其中에도 多情多恨한 태도로 평양 사투리를 써가며 『애개개-이 얼마만임닛가 大同江이 말으기 전에는 못볼 줄 알엇더니 또 오섯쉬다 그라...』하고 半開한 모란이 춘풍에 흔날이덧 벙긋벙긋 웃는 것은 제아모리 鐵石의 간장을 가진 남자라도 白銀灘의 봄 어름 살어지덧 녹고 말 것이다. 아- 美人兮美人이여. 西方之人兮로다.

海州의 미인
滑膩한 錦江은 卓文君과 薛濤를 鍾出하고 秀麗한 荊門의 산촌에는 明妃가＜117＞ 生長하얏다. 人傑은 地靈이라고 녯날부터 산수가 佳麗한 곳에는 반듯시 미인이 만타. 海州는 西部朝鮮의 山水鄕이다. 芙容가튼 首陽山은 구름 밧게 소사 잇고 백옥가튼 구곡으로 홀너 잇다. 이만한 水鄕에 미인인들 엇지 업스랴. 海州는 自來 미인향이라 치는 곳이다. 녯날에 천하 간신南衰이가 一道의 감사로서 金郊驛에서 終夜不寢한 것도 이 海州의 미인 *伊(南衰愛妾)의 애정을 익이지 못함이오. 근래에 朝鮮甲富대감이 養子O植을 박대하고 넉點백이 아들에게 전재산권을 맥기게 된 것도 이 海州미인의 사랑에서 나온 것이다. 이 두 미인은 다 기생의 출신이지만은 기생 이외에도 이름난 미인이 만타. 녯날은 그만해 두고 지금 京城에 잇서서도 혹은 학생으로 혹은 교원으로 혹은 가정부인으로 평판 잇는 미인이 만타.(성명은 구태여 노출치 안는다.) 海州미인은 체격이 비교뎍 크고 白哲豐頰한 것이 한 특징이다. 평양의 미인을 半開牧丹에 비할 것 가트면 海州의 미인은 滿開芙蓉과 가티 탐스럽고 흐드락스럽다. 만일 芙蓉堂 연못에 芙蓉이 만개하엿슬 때에 海州의 미인들이 그 못가에 作隊幷立한다면 미인이 芙蓉인지 芙蓉이 미인인지 잘 알 수 업슬 것이다. 기생은 그만두고 보통의 여염집 부인이라도 녀름철 가튼 때에 그 후리후리하고 큰 키에다 白哲豐頰한 얼골을 수건으로 반줌 가리우고 白石淸溪 맑은 물가에서 빨내를 하야 가지고 풀밧에다 마전질을 하너라고 왓다 갓다하는 것을 보면 아모리 고결하기로 유명한 伯夷叔齊의 혼이라도 淸聖*(在海州) 안에 안심하고 잇지 못할 것이다. 일언으로 말하면 海州의 미인은 妖艶妙麗하다는 것보다도 優雅淸閒하다.

大邱의 미인
大邱라 하면 세상사람들은 의례히 문둥이를 연상하고 藥令을 연상하고 물 업는 것을 연상하야 경상도 중에서 自來 色鄕으로 치는 晋州나 昌原 慶州보다는 아주 건조무미한 사막의 도시로 알기 쉬울 것이다. 그러나 시대의 변천은 이 미인계에도 대변동을 이르켯다. 담바귀타령이 유행되며 경부철도가 남북을 縱貫하고 또 근래에는 晋州의 도청이 釜山왜風에 날어가고 慶州의 고적이 탐방객을＜118＞ 흡수함을 따라서 남국의 娘子軍도 해마다 영남의 대도시오 남북교통의 요충인 대구로 모라든다. 거리거리에 香紛紅脂가 청춘남녀의 눈을 현란식히고 골목마다 가야금 장단소리가 끈치지 안어서 異城孤客으로 남국의 취위를 깨닷게 되엇다. 더구나 신식의 하이카라 여류미인들이 삼삼오오로 짝을 지여 극장이나 達城公園 가튼 곳으로 도라다니는 것을 보면 어느덧 사막의 도시는 花도시로 化한 감이 잇다. 大邱와 平壤은 지리 인정 풍속이 서로 다르니만큼 미인의 특징도 또한 다르다. 평양의 미인은 浮華輕快함에 반하야 大邱의 미인은 質素沉重하다. 것흐로는 平壤미인 모양으로 다정스럽고 친절치 못한 것 갓지만은 속으로 은근하고 귀염성 잇기는 도저히 平壤미인으로서는 따르지 못할 것이다. 平壤의 미인이 多嬌多態하다면 大邱의 미인은 多情多恨하다. 이것은 성격상에 관한 말이어니와 외형으로도 전연 다르다. (물론 대부분의 표준) 平壤미인의 얼골은 외씨(苽實)모양으로 히고도 길지만은 大邱의 미인은 雲中의 月과 가티 둥글고 또 약간의 검은 빗이 잇다. 平壤의 미인은 키가 후리후리하고 허리가 버들가티 날슨 하지만은 大邱의 미인은 키가 앙바틈하고 허리도 장구통 모양으로 짤막하다. 화장도 平壤은 輕軟한 것을 조와하나 大邱 는 濃厚한 것을 조와하며 의복의 색태도 平壤은 淺淡한 것은 조와하나 大邱는 深濃한 것을 조와하는 것갓다. 하여간 大邱의 미인은 남도의 대표적 미인이다. 京鄕에 세력분포도 또한 그럿다.

함흥의 미인
南男北女라고 咸鏡道에는 원래에 物色이 조코 이름난 미인이 만타. 근래에＜119＞ 本夫독살미인으로 세상이 떠드던 金貞* 가튼 여자는 造化翁이 맨긴 天然의 美人보다도 호기심만은 신문기자들의 붓끗으로 맨긴 미가 만흐닛가 아즉까지 확실한 정평을 나리기는 어렵다. 그러나 평판인즉 근래에 제일 만헛던 것은 사실이다. 成宗때에 名歌妓로 成宗의 총애를 밧고 노래를 樂府에까지 올이여 지금까지 일반 풍류객에게 회자을 밧는 笑春風도 咸鏡道 永興의 미인이오. 壬辰亂때에 열렬한 節死를 하야 내외인의 이목을 **한 東萊府使 宋象賢의 애첩으로 宋씨를 따러서 또한 節死(一說에 생존하얏다는 말도 잇다.)한 金蟾도 咸鏡道(咸興)의 미인이요. 근세에 黃承旨 奎河의 애첩으로 節을 守한 晩香도 咸鏡道(咸興)의 미인이오. 기타 문장 崔孤竹 慶昌의 애첩 洪娘 洪原妓) 徐評事命彬의 妾翠蓮도 여류시인인 동시에 당대미인이엿다. 大金皇帝 李澄玉도 이 咸鏡道의 미인에 팔니어서 越江을 주저하다가 대륙의 황제를 꿈꾸던 대업을 실패하고 혁명가 會寧부사 李施愛도 失散逃走하는 중에 또한 미인을 携帶하다가 鬼門閣(鏡城)외에서 포로의 冤魂이 되엿다. 하여간 咸鏡道는 미인 만흔 것이 사실이다. 화장보다도 천연의 미가 풍부하야 그 桃花色과 가튼 혈색과 사지의 골격과 근육이 고로히 발달된 육체의 미는 도저히 他道의 미인으로 감히 同日에 語치도 못할 것이다. 특히 정조의 관념이 강하야 일반의 여자는 물론이고 비록 화류계의 여자라도 다른 곳 여자 모양으로 작*絮飛花의 행동은 하지 안는다. 그것은 鏡鄕의 화류권이나 기타 남의 妾窟에서 咸鏡道여자의 影姿를 보기 어 려운 것을 보와도 족히 증명할 것이다. 自來로 미인이 多薄命이라던지 미인이 無貞操라 하는 말은 이 咸鏡道 여자에 대하야는 적평이라 할 수 업다. 語音이 묵묵하고 교제성이 적은 것이 미인자격에 한 欠點이라 하지만은 그것은 남도사람이 하는 말이지 그 지방에서는 그것이 도로혀 미인의 특색일는지도 알 수 업다. 물래틀(文萊機)가티 티른 머리에 함박수건을 눌너쓰고 울긋블긋한 옷고름에 말굴네 가튼 은가락지를 주렁주렁 차고, 거대한 체격에다 일본 여자보다도 더 발딸된 큰 발을 그대로 드러내고 안저서 『아- 여봄세 이 손님- 그- 엇지 그러오 한쟁긔들 생겻슴마...』 하고 떠드는 것을 보면 아모리 미인이라도 남방사람이 츠음보면 정이 떠러진다고 하겟지만은 실상 친하야 보면 그러한 태도와 말이 도로혀 천연스럽고 귀염성이 잇서서 점점 친하고 십흔 생각이 잇다. 咸鏡道 중에는 남부보다 북부로 드러갈사록 미인이 만허 茂山 가튼 데는 소위 茂山선녀라고 평판이 놉지만은 그래도 도시가 도시이니만치 수가 만흔 것으로나 시대적 미화가 된 것으로나 咸興의 미인으로 第一指를 屈할 것이다.＜120＞
＜115-120＞