잡지명	별건곤 제19호
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	連作講談, 아츰, 제4회 女眞國의 征明動員令 (Serial Story, Morning, Episode 4: The Mobilization Order for the Conquest of Ming by the Jurchen State)
필자	朴熙道
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

1st, 2nd, and 3rd Episodes in Brief

A young man named Kim Ka-ji was from Changsengpo, Ulsan County, Gyeongsang Province. He was naturally endowed with loyalty and courage, and had the ambition to become a great hero of the world. He mastered all martial arts and military tactics. At the age of 20, he left home and traveled around. He obtained the *Northwest Territory Map* (『西北對地圖』), a secret artifact of Admiral Yi Chungmu, from a descendant of Yi Chungmu. At that time, Prince Gwanghae's favorite subject and Joseon's only master of military strategy, Pyeongan Magistrate Park Ye, was also executed. Helpless, he returned home, disguised himself as a wandering monk, and roamed the remote mountains, looking for a good opportunity. He happened to meet General Aichin, the third son of the King of the Jurchen State. Originally, the Jurchens had the great ambition to conquer the Ming Dynasty and become the Emperor of Han territory, but they lacked a general with both wisdom and courage. Therefore, they dispatched General Aichin by royal order to find such a person in Joseon. After searching for seven years, he saw Kim Ka-ji and was greatly pleased, persuading him to come to Jurchen.

On the morning of the third day, the young man Kim Ka-ji, with some unknown plan and determination, abandoned his previous hesitation and accepted General Aichin's earnest request. He decided to throw himself into Jurchen to fulfill his long-cherished desire to conquer the Ming Dynasty's Central Plains. However, just after clearing the breakfast table, he looked at his own face again and faced General Aichin, who seemed to expect his affirmative reply.

"General! I have already decided to conquer the Central Plains of the Ming Dynasty, as you requested." Even until he said this one phrase, he weighed it this way and that, and his hesitation and indecision were truly unbearable. His life so far had been a sea of tears or a mountain of sighs, but he had not been broken. Instead, he was preparing for a final victory with one great death, so he would not hesitate or complain about the myriad difficulties that would come in the future. Was he doubting General Aichin? Or was he unable to guarantee success in the future and wandering at a crossroads? Neither was the case. His thoughts had already moved forward: "If I help the Jurchens conquer the Central Plains according to General Aichin's request, who will be the master of the Central Plains, and whose will be the success? Then what have I (referring to Kim Ka-ji himself) been fighting for? Would my body really be fighting for the Jurchens, as General Aichin says?" This had been the subject of his worries for several days. However, on the morning of this third day, when he declared that he had already decided to conquer the Central Plains, he said, "General! But where lies my purpose in conquering the Ming Dynasty with the Jurchens? Please do not ask me further." His inner intention was already deeply imbued with an unknown plan and his own inevitable grand strategy.

General Aichin, hearing Kim Ka-ji's prompt acceptance, was overjoyed as if he had gained the world.

"General (referring to Kim Ka-ji)! Please draw your sword and swear again that you will strike the Central Plains for the Jurchens!"

However, Kim Ka-ji was unwilling to draw his sword for the Jurchens. The young man Kim Ka-ji only smiled and grasped General Aichin's wrist, expressing his intention of alliance with a smile of friendship.

"I do not fathom it. What could be Ka-ji's grand strategy and plan?"

General Aichin was considerably puzzled by Kim Ka-ji's attitude. However, he realized that his intention to conquer the Ming Dynasty with the Jurchens was no different from his own. He was pleased that his seven years of accumulated effort had not been a futile dream. As soon as the acceptance fell from General Ka-ji's lips, he hurriedly packed his luggage, and the group of three (including General Aichin's wife) set out northward towards Jurchen, traveling day and night, and 40 days after leaving the valley of the Mungyeong Saejae mountain pass, they safely arrived in Jurchen. It was simply said that they had achieved their national wish.

The joy of the king, who had sent his beloved sons to foreign lands thousands of miles away, east, west, south, and north, to fulfill his wishes, and had missed them for so long, cannot be described. However, after General Kim Ka-ji came to the court with General Aichin from Joseon, the atmosphere in the palace was tense. Except for the laughter of the Queen Mother regarding her son, only the sound of military secrets being whispered was heard, making the tense atmosphere in the palace even darker. However, the fact that a famous general named Kim Ka-ji had come from Joseon was unknown to anyone except General Aichin and his father, the King. Moreover, who could have known about the terrible military plot to conquer the Ming Dynasty with him, except for rats and birds? It was only proclaimed throughout the court that the third prince, who had gone on an expedition to Eastern Joseon, had returned a few days ago, bringing with him a young traveling monk and a beautiful female monk, and that the first and second princes, who had gone to the north and south, would also be summoned. In fact, it was not because the third prince Aichin's party had returned home that the two princes, who had gone to the north and south seven years ago to find generals by order of the King, were unconditionally summoned. It was because the third son, who had gone to Eastern Joseon, had found a general in the guise of a traveling monk, so another advisor was not needed. More than that, the operational plan for the conquest, which had been secretly in progress, was already concretely completed, and the order to mobilize towards the nearby Ming Dynasty's Central Plains was imminent.

With the imminent war ahead, the organization of the military department internally underwent a major shift. It was only natural that the newly arrived Kim Ka-ji became an advisor in the vanguard, but what exactly was the operational plan that had been secretly in progress for so long?

First, dispatch spies of intelligence to the Ming Dynasty to examine the internal affairs of the Ming court. At the same time, exacerbate the discord between Nurchaci's son Hong Taiji and Dorgon, which already seemed to exist to some extent, so as to disrupt the axis of politics. On the one hand, send undercover units to the Central Plains to disturb the foolish public sentiment. At the same time, in coordination with the allied forces that would launch a sudden and rapid attack, topple Nurchaci's lair, then push forward victoriously, destroy Fushun, break through the Shanhai Pass, and enter Beijing in one fell swoop, aiming for a great victory.

Naturally, there were clashes of opinion in reaching such a meticulously planned operation. As a result, Kim Ka-ji even pounded the table and stood up in front of the King more than once. However, in the end, Kim Advisor's arguments, who had been treated with utmost courtesy from the beginning in the capacity of Chief of Staff, were always forceful, and most of the overall operational plan became centered on his unknown grand strategy and wisdom.

Here, the speaker asks that you not misunderstand Kim Advisor's grand strategy and plan. It was nothing other than what he had done years ago, on a deepening summer day! In the boat cabin near the Daedong Gate, without hesitation, he had met with Pyeongan Magistrate General Park Ye, who was then Prince Gwanghae's favorite subject and whose valor was renowned throughout the world. He had spread out the *Northwest Territory Map* (『西北對地圖』) of Admiral Yi Chungmu, which he had obtained as a treasure, and looked out for the deer of the Central Plains, losing track of the passing nights as he devised thousands and millions of strategies and plans.

How can the transience of human affairs be compared! Barely passing the age of 20, Ka-ji looked far beyond 30, and the initial plan he had painstakingly devised became a mere bubble due to the Injo Restoration. The failure of his early years! Even before the wounds had healed, he was repeating the plan again in Jurchen. What was his state of mind at this time?

Late autumn! Deep at night, whenever he secretly took out the *Northwest Territory Map* (『西北對地圖』) from his backpack and spread it out, the heroic figure of Yi Chungmu would appear before his eyes, followed by the brave figure of Park Ye, who had been brutally beheaded on the banks of the Daedong River. And when he pointed with his finger at the map, marking the Joseon Northwest border and clearly indicating the strategic importance of Manchuria and the surrounding areas of Northern China, especially the distribution of Jurchen villages and the detailed arrangement of their migration routes, even the heart of a brave man seemed to collapse and heavy blood surged within him. And again, one day, he had calmly said to General Park Ye in the inner quarters:

"The Jurchens, who were driven north from Hoeryeong to the valleys of the Tumen River, have recently grown and prospered. With their elite military force, they are watching for the demise of the Ming Dynasty, which is in a state of crisis due to the corruption and exhaustion of national power, the rise of officials and the uprising of wandering bandits. We should take the lead in conquering the Central Plains first, seek the development of Joseon into the continent, and establish a grand plan for the nation's hundred-year future. This is the unique grand strategy and plan that inherits the will of the late King Taejo and the late King Injo." When he recalled that memory of tearfully explaining this, he was at a loss because his face was burning. (Of course, it was not that he had sold himself for the success of the Jurchens.) So, he secretly took out the *Northwest Territory Map* (『西北對地圖』) and, while devising the new operational plan, he shuddered at the failure of his early years when he tried to secretly fly over to Tonggu after the Injo Restoration, and gazed at the vast fields of Liaodong, 700 li away, without even being able to spread his wings, clinging to the stele of King Yeongnak. He also blamed his changed circumstances. And as a result of the thorough discussions with the King and General Aichin, on the final day when he established the concrete operational plan according to his stubbornness, late at night he asked himself, "Will my current plan truly be the success of my initial grand strategy? Or will my precious body, which I have confidently and resolutely sworn to become a great hero unlike any other in history for the sake of Joseon, which has been my ancestral homeland since the beginning of time, be sacrificed on the battlefield for the Jurchens?"

He also lamented in this way. And because he could not foresee the unknown future, he could not help but feel impatient and pressured. But he thought:

"Oh, my fate, entrusted to the gods! The teachings of the sacred Buddha in Seokguram clearly tell me to advance north, north again. Joseon is my country, so my will shall not change. Dangun Wanggeom will not abandon me. Dongmyeong Wang gave me a map as a treasure of the earth, so he will not forget me. My will is the will of my ancestors, so my ancestors and heaven will also look after their beloved son."

He asked and answered himself in this way, believing and shouting, and gained new strength and courage. So he raised his head from his desk and opened his closed eyes.

It was at this moment. The door creaked open, and unexpectedly a beautiful girl appeared in the doorway.

With her head slightly bowed, she said, "It is already the third watch of the night, but why has the General not yet gone to bed? His Majesty the King said that he had an unusual dream tonight, and ordered me to report whether the General has gone to bed. I dare to come with hurried steps, but I have come to check on the General's condition. Please forgive me a thousand times. If you are feeling unwell, I will offer you medicine. Please give your orders."

She ended her words respectfully without slurring.

Her voice, like jade rolling on a tray, resonated deeply in the ears of Staff Officer Kim Ka-ji, who did not understand why. But everything seemed like a faint dream to the Staff Officer, who had just woken up from a deep meditation as if waking from a nap. So, although he understood the meaning of her words, he wanted to know who she was after all. And he wanted to hear about the so-called unusual dream of His Majesty the King.

"I am grateful for your kindness, but who are you that you come at such a late hour with the King's command? And what is the nature of His Majesty's unusual dream?"

He looked at her again and asked. Her bowed face was barely visible in the flickering candlelight, but she did not seem to be of lowly birth. No, her slender figure, neither tall nor short, around the age of 20, and her eyes sparkling like stars in her eyebrows! Nose! Mouth! None of them were carelessly placed, and the perfect arrangement could not be said to be anything other than the epitome of absolute beauty. The girl turned her face a little more towards the door and blushed, saying shyly,

"His Majesty the King is my father, and I am sorry, but I cannot know the dream that my father had." The Staff Officer could not help but be surprised at the words that His Majesty the King was her father. He had only thought of her as the King's errand girl or maid. He hastily adjusted his posture and knelt down. And he remembered what General Aichin had once said to him, "What I miss most is my only younger sister. When I came to Joseon seven years ago, my sister was only twelve years old. She must have grown a lot, and she must be very beautiful. Even when she was young, she was the most beautiful woman in Jurchen."

He had been reminiscing about and proudly praising his sister when he was half-drunk. But he had never dreamed that she would come to his bedroom in the middle of the night.

He sat blankly for a while, then suddenly felt sorry and said, "I am not particularly uncomfortable, but I have been sitting here because I have some complicated thoughts. Please tell His Majesty not to worry."

He managed to answer in a trembling voice and sent her away.

Even after sending the Princess away, he felt embarrassed and did not know what was going on. Perhaps, he thought, "Does Jurchen have such an awkward custom?" and smiled to himself. In any case, the air in the room, which had been left by the one and only beautiful princess in the country, suddenly seemed warmer. And the fragrance was so intense that he could not control the itching all over his body.

He had never encountered such a pure and beautiful woman. No, if there was one, it was only that night when he lost his way in the bleak valley of Mungyeong Saejae and entered General Aichin's house and encountered his beautiful wife. And it was not that he had not frequented bars and brothels with Pyeongan Magistrate Park Ye and dallied with countless powdered and oiled courtesans, but it was of course different from his encounter with that pure young girl tonight.

Even as he lay down, he thought, "...What could His Majesty's suspicious dream be? And why would he send his own daughter, his beautiful daughter, to my bedroom when there are so many servants and maids? If it is a political trick to capture the unwavering will of a great man, where else could there be such a thing?"

Thinking this to himself, he was outraged that the act was so audacious.

"But how could they possibly know my deep thoughts and use such a trick?! It must be just my imagination?! Maybe they are just treating me as a kind guest, or maybe they pity me and want to marry their daughter to me. If that is the case, how should I react?"

He dreamed of a sweet dream that had not yet come and comforted himself with a self-satisfying interpretation. But as the night deepened, his head became more complex and his thoughts became more intense. So he struggled to solve the riddle that he did not understand. But before dawn, he did not realize that General Aichin's father and son had noticed his inner thoughts and were trying to swallow his great self with a political marriage. Without realizing it, he fell into a late sleep.

It was the next morning. He woke up late and replayed the dreamlike events of the night before. But the unknown feeling of the night before had simply disappeared, and he realized that all those thoughts were the foolishness of a weak person with an unsteady heart. And he swore never to think such things again. He believed that the Jurchens were of the same origin as the Joseon people, the Great Buyeo and Goguryeo tribes, but Jurchen was Jurchen and Joseon was Joseon. From a nationalistic perspective, he would rather have ambitions for the daughter of Kim Gyori, who is a pure Joseon person and is currently the wife of General Aichin, than be interested in the Jurchen Princess. It was because he had been moved when he heard the plea of that woman (Kim Gyori's daughter), who had accompanied General Aichin and his wife on their way to Jurchen one night, as she held him tightly and begged him to avenge her father and take care of her remaining life, which had no meaning for General Aichin. However, he concluded that all of that would only hinder the achievement of his ambitions and grand strategy and would not bring any benefit, so there was no wavering of his heart. Moreover, in the face of his great plan to use the Jurchens to throw a big fish into his own pit in the chaotic world of others, nothing else came to mind.

Not a week after such a test of his heart, all the preparations for the mobilization of the Expeditionary Generals were completed at once, and finally, the mobilization order was issued throughout the country.

The fierce storm of war that stretched across the Central Plains covered Liaodong, 700 li away, and the kind care of the beautiful Princess was rather following Staff Officer Ka-ji, who stood at the head of the army. What will happen in the next episode?

＜162-167＞

**Named Entities**

金可之	Kim Ka-ji
慶南	Gyeongnam
蔚山郡	Ulsan-gun
長生浦	Changsengpo
李忠武公	Yi Ch’ungmu-gong
西北對地圖	Sŏbuk Taejido
光海主	Kwanghae-ju
平安	P’yŏngan
朴曄	Pak Yŏp
女眞國王	Yŏjin Gukwang
愛親將軍	Aech’in Changgun
明國	Myŏngguk
漢土	Hant’o
朝鮮	Chosŏn
中原	Chungwŏn
鳥嶺山	Choryŏngsan
愛親右德	Aech’in U-dŏk
大同門	Taedongmun
朴曄將軍	Pak Yŏp Changgun
遼東	Yodong
永樂好大王	Yŏngnak Hodae Wang
通溝	T’onggu
仁祖	Injo
高句麗	Koguryŏ
大扶餘族	Tae Puyo-jok
金校理	Kim Kyori
黨弊	Tang P’ye
撫順	Pusun
山海關	Sanhaegwan
北京	Peking
佟家江	Tonggajang
會寧	Hoeryŏng
壇君王儉	Tangun Wanggŏm
東明王	Tongmyŏng Wang
石窟庵	Sŏkkuram
今上陛下	Kŭmsang P’ihap’a
聖上陛下	Sŏngsang P’ihap’a
女眞	Yŏjin



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제19호
발행일	1929년 02월 01일
기사제목	連作講談, 아츰, 제4회 女眞國의 征明動員令
필자	朴熙道
기사형태	문예기타

連作講談, 아츰, 제4회 女眞國의 征明動員令
						朴熙道
1, 2, 3회의 梗槪
金可之라는 청년은 慶南 蔚山郡 長生浦 사람이엿다. 生來로부터 忠勇이 겸비하고 天下偉傑이 되겟다는 웅지가 잇서서 모든 무예와 兵略을 습득하고 20세 때에 집을 떠나 사방으로 周遊하다가 李忠武公 遺孫에게 忠武公의 秘獎한 『西北對地圖』를 어더 가지고 당시 光海主의 寵臣이오 조선 유일의 武略家인 平安 監司 朴曄이 또한 被誅하니 그는 할 수 업시 귀국하야 巡禮僧으로 변장하고 적막한 산중으로 도라다니며 조흔 기회를 엿보다가 우연이 女眞國王의 제3子인 愛親將軍을 만낫섯다. 원래 女眞은 明國을 정복하고 漢土의 天子가 되랴는 大雄圖를 가젓스나 다만 智勇이 兼全한 大將이 업는 까닭에 朝鮮에서 그러한 인물을 구하랴고 왕명으로 愛親將軍을 派遺하야 凡7년간을 물색하던 중에 金可之를 보고 크게 깃버하야 女眞으로 다리고 가랴고 勸誘하엿다.

사흘째 되는 날 아츰 金可之라는 청년은 무슨 남모를 계획과 결심을 하얏든지? 전날까지도망서리고 躊躇하든 愛親將軍의＜162＞ 간절한 所請 그대로 위선 女眞에 일신을 던저 積年의 숙원인 明나라 中原을 공략하기로 承諾하얏다. 그러나 막 조반상을 물니고 난 뒤에 다시금 자기의 얼골을 바라보며 전날의 확답을 긔대리는 듯한 愛親將軍의 얼골을 대하야
『將軍이여! 나는 전날 장군의 所請대로 明나라 中原을 공략하기로 임이 뜻을 결단하얏슴니다.』 이 말 한마듸를 할 때까지도 그는 이리로 재어보고 저리로 헤아리어 그 망설거리고 주저함이 참 그럴 수 업섯다. 그는 자기의 前半生의 밟어온 길이 눈물의 바다가 안이엿스면 한숨의 山이엇다 하겟건만, 그는 오히려 꺽기지 안코 큰 죽엄 한번으로써 최후의 승리를 결단코저 널니 기회를 짓든 터이라 장차 미래의 닥처올 萬難을 저페하야 주저하거나 앙탈함은 물론 안이엇섯다. 그럿타고 愛親將軍을 의심하얏느냐. 그럿치 안으면 미래의 성패를 期必할 수 업서서 기로에서 방황하얏느냐? 하면 그런 것도 결코 안이엇다. 임이 생각은 일보를 進하야 『愛親將軍의 요구대로 女眞을 도아 中原을 捲席한다면 중원의 임자는 누구며 그 성공은 뉘의 것이겟느냐? 그러면 나는 (金可之 자신을 가라침) 무엇을 위하야 싸왓든가? 그야말로 愛親將軍의 말대로 내몸이 女眞을 위하야 싸와주엇든가? 』함이 수일동안 고민의 적이 되엇든 것이다. 그러나 사흘재 되든 오늘날 아츰 자기의 뜻이 임이 중원을 공략키로 되엇다는 것을 선언할 때에는 『장군이여! 그러나 내가 女眞으로 더부러 明나라를 공략하는 목적이 어대 잇는? 구타여 내게 뭇지 마러 주시오.』 하는 그 內志에는 임이 남 모를 계획과 할 수 업는 그의 經綸이 깁히 구덧든 것이엇다.
金可之의 快한 承諾을 드른 愛親將軍은 천하를 어든 것보다도 못하지 안이한 깃븜으로
『장군(金可之를 가라침)이여! 장군은 女眞을 위하야 중원을 친다는 것을 칼을 빼어 다시금 맹서하소서』하얏다.
그러나 金可之는 女眞을 위하야 칼을 빼이는데는 不聽이엇다. 오즉 金可之란 청년은 빙그레 우스며 愛親將軍의 손목을 쥐이고 和親의 우슴으로 拱手同盟의 뜻을 표하얏슬 뿐이다.
『아지못게라. 可之의 경륜과 그 계획이 엇더할가!』
이럿케 愛親將軍도 알 수 업는 金可之의 태도에 적지 안이한 의아를 가지게 되엇다. 그러나 그가 女眞으로 더부러 明나라를 정벌코저 하는 그것만은 족금도 자기와 틀님이 업슴을 깨다랏다. 그리하야 그는 7년의 積功이 부질업는 꿈은 안이엇거니 하고 그대로 깃버하야 可之將軍의 입에서 그 가튼 承諾이 떨어지기가 무섭게 불이야 불이야 여장을 收拾하야 가지고, 3인(愛親將軍의 처까지)의 일행은 女眞을 향하야 북으로, 북으로 길을 떠낫다. 일행은 압서거니 뒤서거니 晝夜倍道하야 鳥嶺山 골작이를 떠난지 40일만에 무사히 女眞에 도착하얏다. 한낫
『國願을 일우워지다.』
하고 사랑하는 자식들을 동으로 남북으로 각각 천리타국에＜163＞ 원정을 식히고 日久月深에 그리워하든 父王의 일행을 대하는 그 깃븜이야 오작하야스랴만은 朝鮮서 金可之장군이 愛親將軍으로 더부러 來朝한 후로는 闕內의 공기는 공연 긴장하야 內衙國母의 자식을 대한 우슴소리를 除한 외에는 오즉 군사상에 鳩首密議로 수군거리는 소리가 궐내의 긴장한 공기를 더욱 어슴푸리게 하얏슬 뿐이다. 그러나 조선에서 金可之라는 명장이 왓다는 것은 일행 중 愛親右德과 父王을 제한 외에는 누구나 몰낫든 것이다. 더구나 그로 더부러 明나라를 공략한다는 무서운 군사상의 그 비밀한 음모야 쥐나 새나 엇지 아랏스랴! 오즉 東方朝鮮으로 원정하얏든 제3皇子가 수일전에 엇던 청년 旅僧과 미인 女僧을 다리고 귀국하얏는데, 남북방으로 갓든 제1, 제2 皇子도 장차 불너드린다는 말이 朝野에 宣籍하얏슬 뿐이엇다. 사실은 안인게 안이라 제3 皇子 愛親將軍의 일행이 歸朝한지 얼마되지 안이하야 7년전 그와 한가지로 父王의 명령을 쪼치어 남북방으로 각각 명장을 구하러 갓든 兩皇子는 무조건으로 불너온 것이다. 그는 임이 東方朝鮮으로 갓든 셋재 아들이 旅僧이란 명실상반한 명장을 구하야 왓기 때문에 또다른 叅謀가 그가티 필요치 안은 것도 이유 안임은 안이겟지만은 그보다도 비밀리에 진행되는 공략의 작전계획이 벌서 구체적으로 완성되어 가지고 近近 적지 明나라의 中原을 향하야 출동명령을 발할 때가 절박하얏든 까닭이다.
압흐로 얼마남지 안이한 征戰을 압두고 내용으로 군부의 조직도 대이동을 보게 되엇스나 새로 入朝한 金可之가 前陳에 叅謀가 된 것은 무를 것도 업는 것이지만 오랫동안 비밀리에 진행된 그 작전계획이란 과연 엇더한 것인가?
몬저 智謀의 密使를 明나라에 派遺하야 明朝의 내정을 살피는 동시에 그럿치 안이하야도 원래 다소의 軋轢이 잇서 보이는 『노랴치』의 아달 『홍타시』와 『달곤』의 두 사이의 갈등을 더욱 맹렬히 하야 정사의 主軸을 문란케 하는 동시에 한편으로 중원에 便衣隊를 派送하야 어리석은 세간의 민심을 擾亂케 하는 동시에 猛襲突進하는 아군과 서로 상응하야 노라치의 巢窟을 떠업흔 뒤에 승승장구로 一 撫順을 들부시고 山海關을 깨트린 후 바로 북경에 드러가서 일망타진으로 대승을 기하자는 것이엇다.
그가티 智謀를 極한 작전계획이 이에까지 밋침에는 물론 쌍방의 의사충돌이 업지도 안이하얏다. 그리하야 金可之는 唐突하게도 父王 압헤서 책상을 치고 이러선 적도 한두번이 안이엇다. 그러나 결국은 처음부터 叅謀總長의 格으로 극진한 대우를 바다온 金叅謨의 주장은 어대까지나 張硬하야 전반 작전계획의 대부분이 그의 남모를 경륜과 智謀가 주체가 되고 마른 것이엇다.
이에서 講者는 金叅謨의 경륜과 계획이란 그것을 오해치 마라. 그것은 다른 것이 안이라 수년전 짓허가는 녀름! 大同門압 船艙에서 무를 것도 업시 당시 光海主의 寵臣으로 英勇이 천하에 떨치든 平安監司 朴曄將軍을 차자 보고 그와 가티 일즉 寶物로 어든 李忠武公의 『西北對地圖』를 펼처 놋코 中原의 사슴을 엿보아 밤 가는 줄을 모르게 천가지 만가지의 경륜과 계획을 세우든 그것이엇다.
인간의 무상함이 비길데 잇스랴! 겨우 20세라는 고개를 넘어서서 可之는 멀니 30을 바라보며 못처럼 세웟든 처음의 그 계획이 仁祖의 反正으로 한낫 물거픔이 되고 마즌 初年의＜164＞ 실패! 그 瘡痍가 채 업서지기도 전에 다시 女眞에서 그 계획을 反覆하고 잇는 이 때 그의 심경이야말로 과연 엇더하얏스랴!?
느저가는 가을! 깁흔 밤에 남모르게 혼자서 背襄에서 가만히 끄집어내는 『西北對地圖』을 펴처노흘 때마다 그의 눈압헤는 몬저 李充武公의 英姿가 나타나고 그 다음에는 大洞江가에서 無慘이도 斬를 당한 朴曄의 勇姿가 또한 나타나군 하얏다. 그리고 지도의 朝鮮 西北界를 갈나노흔 것과 滿洲 一幅과 北至那 일대의 兵要得失을 明細히 표시하고 특히 女眞부락의 분포 정황 及 移動線의 주도한 布置의 선을 손가락으로 집허가며 가라치게 될 때에는 문득 丈夫의 가슴도 문허지는 듯하고 무거운 피가 끌어 오르군 하얏다. 그리고 또 어느날 朴曄將軍으로 더부러 內衙에서 자기는 從容히
『會寧으로부터 佟家江의 골자군이로 쪼기어 북으로 드러간 女眞이 최근에 와서는 生聚가 왓작 번성하야 精銳의 무력으로써 黨弊와 국력의 疲弊로 官倖과 流寇蜂起로 時在危急存亡之秋에 잇는 明國의 敗亡을 재촉하야 中原의 사슴을 엿보고 잇는 中이니 우리는 그에 솔선하야 몬저 중원을 정복하야 조선의 大陸發展을 꾀하는 동시에 국가 백년의 대계를 세워야 함니다. 이것이 先朝大旭과 先考人虎의 遺志를 계승한 독자의 경륜과 계획임니다.』 이럿케 눈물을 흘려가며 설파하든 그 기억이 새삼스럽게 다시금 머리에 떠오를 때에는 자기의 얼골이 학근함으로 스사로 엇지 할 수가 업섯다.(물론 女眞의 성공을 위하야 몸이 팔닌 것은 안이지만) 그리하야 그는 남모르게 『西北對地圖』를 내어놋코 今般의 새로운 작전계획을 세우는 동안에 혼자서 仁祖의 反正으로 通溝에 暗中飛躍을 試하랴든 채 날개도 버려보지도 못하고 머나 먼 遼東七百里의 넓은 뜰을 흘겨 보며 永樂好大王의 碑를 붓들고 울고 또 울든 초년의 실패에 몸서리도 처보고 금석의 경우가 달라진 자기의 처지를 신끠 원망도 하야 보앗다. 그리고 父王과 愛親將軍으로 더부러 熟議한 결과 마츰내 자기의 고집대로 구체적 작전계획을 세운 최종의 날 깁흔 밤 그는 『나의 이번 계획이 과연 나의 처음에 뜻하얏든 경륜 그대로의 성공이 될 것인가? 그러치 안이하면, 本來先祖의 血統을 바닷거니 生民이 以來의 조선을 위하야 曠古에 업는 偉傑이 되리라고 자신하고 자처하야 굿게 맹서한 나의 任重道遠한 귀한 몸이 한낫 女眞을 위하야 戰地의 희생하는 피와 고기가 되고 말 것인가?』
이럿케 한탄도 하얏다. 그리고 알 수 업는 장래의 운명을 점칠 수 업슴에는 내심의 초조와 逼迫도 업지 안이 하얏다. 그러나 그는
『오! 나의 운명을 마튼 신이여! 石窟庵의 영험한 부처님의 降話之敎는 分明히 나에게 北으로 北으로 다시 전진하라 하얏슴니다. 조선이 내 국토이어니 내 뜻은 변치 못할 것이요. 壇君王儉은 나를 버리지 안을 것임니다. 東明王이 내에게 地寶로 地圖를 주엇거니 나를 이저버리지는 안을 것이요. 내 뜻이 곳! 先祖의 뜻이어니 先祖와 한울은 愛子를 또한 굽어 삷히실 것임니다.』
이럿케 자문자답으로 빌고 또 밋고 부르지저 이에서 또한 새로운 힘과 용기를 어덧다. 그리하야 그는 책상머리에서 고개를 들고 감앗든 눈을 번적 떳다.
때는 이때엿다. 방문이 바시시 열니드니 난데업는 어엽븐 게집아희가 문엽헤 나타낫다.＜165＞
고개를 좀 숙인 채
『밤은 임이 3경이옵는데 장군은 아즉 자리에 나아가시지 안이 하섯슴은 엇지 하신 일이 심닛가? 聖上陛下끠옵서 方今 夜夢이 殊常하옵다 하옵시며 장군마마끠옵서 침상에 나아가신 여부를 아뢰라 하옵삽기로 감히 게집의 거름이 惶悚하오나 장군마마의 기색을 살피어 이에 밋첫싸오니 千萬容恕하시옵고 惶恐하오나 혹시 氣候의 불편하시옴이 잇사오면 藥石을 진상하겟사오니 굽어 분부를 나리시옵소서』
하고 공순히 말끗을 흐리지 안코 매자 버렷다.
채반에 玉을 굴니는 듯한 그의 말소리는 叅謨 金可之의 귀에 영문도 모르게 깁히 깁히 肺肝에 심여들고 마럿다. 그러나 선잠을 깬드시 깁흔 冥想에서 방금 눈을 비비고 니러난 叅謨에게는 모든 것이 熹微한 꿈과 갓하엿다. 그리하야 그 말에 뜻을 모르는 바는 안이로되 대관절 그가 누구인가를 알고 십헛다. 그리고 소위 聖上陛下의 殊常한 꿈이란 그것을 듯고 십헛다.
『듯고 나니 그 厚意는 고마우나 여인은 누구관대 聖上의 命을 밧짜와 이럿케 밤이 야심한 때에 오시엇는지? 그리고 陛下의 殊常한 꿈이란 엇더한 것일고?』
그를 다시금 보며 물엇다. 숙으린 얼골이 우줄우줄하는 燭불에 어렴푸시 분명치는 안으나 보아하니 얼골이 그리 賤骨은 안이엇다. 안이 20전후의 키가 크도 적도 안은 호리호리한 몸맵시하며 兩眉에 반작거리는 샙별가튼 눈! 코! 입! 어느 것 하나 허술치 안은 그 알마즌 부침부침이 절세의 미인의 전형이 안이랄 수 업섯다. 소녀는 얼골을 좀 더 문엽흐로 돌니고 낫빗을 붉히어 수집어 하는 태도로
『今上陛下끠옵서는 소녀의 父王이옵사옵고 父王끠옵서 어드신 그 꿈이란 황송하오나 소녀로서는 알 수 업사옵니다.』 한다. 叅謨는 陛下끠옵서 소녀의 부왕이라는 말에 놀내지 안을 수 업섯다. 그는 처음 그를 陛下의 심바름종이나 시녀로 밧게 알지 못하얏든 까닭이다. 그는 황급히 자리를 고치어 무릅을 꾸럿다. 그리고 일즉 愛親將軍에게서 어느날 『나의 제일 생각나는 것은 다른 무엇보다도 나의 둘도 업는 누이동생이 제일 보고 십소. 7년전 내가 조선에 올 때에 내 동생은 겨우 열두살이엇소. 그는 크기도 무던히 컷지만 인물도 참 어엽버젓슬 것이요. 어린 그 때도 女眞에는 다시 업는 미인격이엇섯스닛가요.』
하고 술이 半醉나 되어 자기 누이동생을 그리워하고 자랑삼아 창찬하든 것을 다시금 기억에서 차자내고 잇섯다. 그러나 안인 밤중에 그가 자기 寢房에까지 차저오리라고는 꿈에도 생각지 못하얏든 것이다.
그는 한참동안 멍하니 안젓다가 불연듯 죄송한 생각이 나서 『별로 불편한데는 업스나 무슨 생각이 좀 복잡하야 아즉것 안젓든 바이옵는데 폐하끠옵서는 下念치 맙시사고 전하야 줍소서.』
떨니는 말소래로 겨우 이럿케 대답을 하야 그를 보내엇다.
翁主를 보내고 나서도 그는 혼자 황송하야 하고 혼자서 엇지한 영문을 몰나 하얏다. 혹시
『女眞에는 그런 쑥스러운 습관도 잇는가』하고 혼자서 빙그레 우서도 보앗다. 엇잿든 일국에 둘도 업는 어엽븐 공주가 단이여 나간 방안의 공긔는 엇전지 갑자기 따스하야진 듯 하얏다. 그리고 향취가 진동하야 온몸의 근지러움을 스사로 엇지 할 수가 업섯다.＜166＞
그는 일즉 그가튼 순결하고 아름다운 미녀를 대하야 본 적이 업섯다. 안이 잇섯다고 하면 鳥嶺山 쇠삽한 골작이에서 길 일코 헤매이든 그날밤 愛親將軍의 집을 차자 드러가서 아름다운 그의 처를 대하야 본 그뿐일 것이다. 그리고 그가 平安監司 朴曄으로 더부러 한때 酒肆靑樓에 出沒하야 허다한 油頭粉面의 美妓들을 대하야 노른 일이 만치 안음도 안이엇건만 그가 오늘밤 그 순결한 美少女를 대하는 그것과는 물론 달낫든 것이다.
그는 자리에 누어서도 『...대체 폐하의 수상한 꿈이란 엇더한 것일가? 그리고 웨 하인 시녀들도 만흘터인데 구타여 자기의 딸을 그 어엽븐 딸을 내 침실에까지 보냄은 무슨 까닭일가? 안이 그것이 만일 대장부의 철석가튼 志槪를 휘여잡는 정책적 마술이라면 그런 분할 데가 또 어대 잇는가?』
이럿케 혼자 생각하고는 그 진의를 의아하든 끗헤 그 짓이 괫심하다고 한껏 분개하기도 하얏다.
『그러나 설마 나의 깁흔 속을 엇지 알고 그러한 술책을 쓸 리가 잇다구?! 내 생각 뿐이겟지?! 아마 나를 친절한 귀빈으로 律遇하야 그런게지, 안이 나를 어엽비 보아 자기의 딸을 나에게 許婚코저 하는 것이 안인가? 만일 그럿타면 나로서는 엇더한 태도를 취할 것인가?』
이럿케 그는 오지도 안은 미래의 단꿈을 꾸어도 보고 자아만족의 해석으로 스사로 위안을 밧기도 하얏다. 그러나 밤이 깁흐면 깁흘사록 머리는 더욱 복삽하야지고 생각은 더욱 집허젓다. 그리하야 영문모를 수수꺽기를 풀기에 애를 태우기를 마지 안이하얏다. 그러나 밤이 새이기 전에 그는 愛親將軍의 父子가 자기의 내심을 아라차리고 정책적 결혼으로써 자기라는 大我를 삼켜버리랴는 무서운 술책인 것을 깨닷지는 못하얏다. 깨치지 못한 채 새벽 늣잠이 드러버리고 말엇다.
잇흔날 아츰이엇다. 그는 늣게야 자리에서 눈을 뜨고 전날밤에 꿈결가튼 일을 되푸리 하얏다. 그러나 전날밤에 알 수 업는 기분은 다만 어대 가버리고 그 모든 생각은 心柱가 튼튼치 못한 약자의 어리석음이엇든 것을 피압흐게 깨다랏다. 그리고 다시는 그러한 생각도 하지 안키로 맹세하얏다. 그는 女眞이 본래 조선종족과 한가지로 大扶餘族이며 高句麗族이라는 것을 미드나 女眞은 女眞이요, 조선은 조선이라는 국가적 관념에서 차라리 女眞의 翁主에 마음 둘진대 純朝鮮族으로 현재 愛親將軍의 처가 되어 잇는 金校理의 딸에 야심을 가질 것이라 하얏다. 그는 자기가 愛親將軍의 夫妻와 동행하야 女眞을 향하는 도중에 어느날 밤에 從容히 자기를 붓들고 자긔 아부지의 원수를 갑하주는 동시에 愛親將軍에게 뜻이 업는 자기의 餘生을 돌보아 달나는 그(金校理의 딸)의 애원을 듯고 적이 동정을 가지엇섯기 때문이다. 그러나 그 모든 것이 자기의 포부와 경륜을 성취함에 방해는 될지언뎡 毫利가 업는 것이라고 단정하야 버리엇기 때문에 心柱의 흔들님은 족음도 업섯다. 더구나 女眞을 이용하야 어지러운 남의 세상에서 큰 고기를 자기 구덩이에 너흐랴는 그가튼 큰 계획 압헤서는 다른 무엇이 얼는그리지 안이하얏다.
그가튼 마음의 시험이 잇는 후 일주일이 못되어 征明將軍의 萬般出動準備는 일제히 整頓되어 드듸어 전국에 동원령은 나리고 마럿다.
中原에 뻣친 전란의 사나운 풍운이 遼東 700리에 덥히고 陳頭에 선 可之叅謨의 신변에는 어엽분 翁主의 친절한 看護가 오희려 따르고 잇섯스니 장차 그 下回가 엇지나 될는지?＜167＞
＜162-167＞