잡지명 별건곤 제9호
발행일 1927년 10월 01일
기사제목 三將軍伸冤錄, 南征北伐의 大經綸이 水泡化, 叛逆罪로 寃死한 崔瑩 將軍 (The冤死 of General Ch'oe Yŏng, Whose Grand Design for Southern and Northern Expeditions Vanished Like Bubbles Due to False Accusation of Treason)
필자 文一平 (Mun Il-p'yŏng)
기사형태 문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

The transformation of a good person into a bad one, or a loyal subject into a traitor, is a common occurrence in the dynastic changes (鼎革) where ethical standards are altered, but there has never been such confusion of good and evil, or such a reversal of loyalty and treachery, as at the end of the Koryŏ Dynasty.

Ch'oe Yŏng, with his unwavering uprightness and loyalty, was falsely accused of treason and became a tragic sacrifice in an instant. Ch'oe Yŏng must have died with his eyes open. The fact that the people of the capital closed their markets and even street children and women shed tears on the day of his execution shows that the entire nation bitterly resented his unjust death. Furthermore, even the opposing party that condemned him to death for treason praised his great achievements, calling them "meritorious deeds that cover the entire nation" (功蓋一國).

Then, why was the meritorious subject (元勳) whose deeds covered the entire nation condemned to death for treason? It is said that it was because he offended the Son of Heaven (天子) by attacking a large country as a small one. "Ch'oe Yŏng served our King Hyŏn (玄陵), stabilized the chaos and enthroned the King, drove out the monks to the northern border, arrested and delivered the abdicated King, repelled the Japanese pirates at Sŭngch'ŏn (昇天) to preserve the nation, and quelled the villains in the spring to save the people. He was truly a minister of the nation (社稷之臣). However, he was ignorant of the greater good, disregarded the opinions of the masses, and decided to attack Liao (遼), thus offending the Son of Heaven (天子) and nearly destroying the country, thereby forfeiting his previous merits. Considering Ch'oe Yŏng's achievements, it is unfortunate that he committed such a treasonous crime, which the entire nation cannot bear. However, according to the opinion of the world, he is someone who deserves to be punished." This is an outline of the memorial submitted by the opposing party that condemned Ch'oe Yŏng to death for treason <2>. This means that Yi T'aejo, who staged the Wihwa Island Retreat (威化回軍), seized Ch'oe Yŏng, who was in charge of the military far from the capital as the supreme commander of the expeditionary force to conquer Liao, in one battle, deposed King U (耦王), installed the young King Ch'ang (昌王), and when his power grew day by day, he arrested Ch'oe Yŏng from his place of exile and brought him to the Sun'gun Prison (巡軍獄). While interrogating him, he also submitted a memorial, fabricating an absurd and unfounded charge that was actually unknown even to the Ming Emperor (明天子), accusing him of treason against the Ming Dynasty (明國) with a strange and unprecedented accusation, forcibly attaching a reason and executing him, a minister of the nation (社稷之臣) whose deeds covered the entire nation. When he died, his demeanor was natural, showing the magnanimity of a great man who was unperturbed by life and death, but how resentful he must have been to think that his grand design to conquer Liao (征遼) would end in vain due to the ambition of a petty military man. At that time, Liao was a kind of open area where the dominion of the Yuan Dynasty (元國) had already disappeared and the dominion of the Ming Dynasty (明國) had not yet been established, so if they had launched an expedition, they could have occupied it permanently. Liao was originally the old territory of Koguryŏ (高句麗), and as it was the national policy of Koryŏ to recover it, they launched an expedition and occupied it whenever they had the opportunity. During the reign of King Kongmin (恭愍王), taking advantage of the disturbances on the continent, they recovered Kwanbuk (關北) and invaded Liao twice. The general of the second expedition was Yi T'aejo. The year after T'aejo's expedition, that is, in the 20th year of King Kongmin's reign, Liu Yi (劉益), the p'yŏngjang (平章) of Liaoyang (遼陽), entered the Koryŏ court and requested internal affiliation.

Now we recognize Manchuria as someone else's land, but at that time Manchuria, that is, Liao, was regarded as the old territory of the nation, so when Yi T'aejo occupied Liaoyang, he sent a message to the Northern Yuan (北元) saying that Liao and Shim (瀋) were the old boundaries of the nation and had nothing to do with the Mongols and Han people. He also proclaimed to the officials and people of Liaoyang that the area east of the Liao River was our territory and that you should quickly enter the court and share the titles and rewards. What could possibly make Ch'oe Yŏng's re-issuance of mobilization orders suddenly an act of treason, when Yi T'aejo himself declared Liao to be the old territory of the nation? Why should it not be treason when Yi T'aejo launches an expedition, but only treason when Ch'oe Yŏng launches an expedition? Of course, the times have changed somewhat due to the distance of more than ten years in time between the former and latter expeditions, but the recovery movement for the old territory of the nation could not be considered treason against the Ming Emperor (明國天子). To put it bluntly, it came from a plan to take advantage of the Ming Dynasty (明國), which was prospering by intimidating others, and to wipe out Ch'oe Yŏng and the expeditionary faction. Just as Mount T'aesan (泰山) can be toppled by a tiny ant, Ch'oe Yŏng's death, as a great leader of the nation who was not accepted by the vicious opposing party of the small court and died unjustly, is to mourn the demise of the Koryŏ Dynasty. "Ch'oe Yŏng died and Koryŏ had no one left" is an appropriate assessment. King U and King Ch'ang were both killed as members of the Shin clan (辛氏), and Chŏng Mongju (鄭夢周) was killed with a hammer under the charge of "plotting to harm the loyal and disrupt the nation" (謀害忠良, 擾亂國家) and his head was displayed. As a result, Koryŏ was overthrown. This was only five years after Ch'oe Yŏng's death.

It is said that a nation prospers or declines due to one person. Anyway, when the Yi Dynasty (이조) was founded after the fall of the Koryŏ Dynasty (麗朝), it was necessary to commend the loyal subjects of the former dynasty to encourage future generations as a matter of high policy <3>. There was an event of bestowing posthumous honors (㫌閭襃贈) on those who died for their loyalty, such as Chŏng Mongju (鄭夢周), but there was no mention of Ch'oe Yŏng (崔瑩), who died for the sake of nationalism, until the very end, perhaps because they could not encourage a figure who was fundamentally opposed to the literary policy (右文政策) and subservience to great powers (事大主義). It was certainly not because Ch'oe Yŏng's character, achievements, or loyalty were inferior to those of Chŏng Mongju. "Seeing gold as stones (見金如石)," "not engaging in industry (不事産業)," and "being calm and composed when facing the enemy in battle (臨陣對敵神氣安閒)" allow us to vaguely imagine his character, and "winning every battle he fought, large or small (大小百戰, 所向有功, 未嘗一敗, 國賴以安, 人受其賜)" allows us to glimpse his great achievements, and "always speaking frankly and directly in the assembly hall (每赴都堂, 正色直言, 不少隱)" and "pondering national affairs in the middle of the night and discussing them with colleagues the next morning (吾於國事, 中夜思之, 詰朝語同列)" show how exceptional his loyalty was.

Even though the dynasty may not have commended such a representative great man (偉傑) of the Koryŏ Dynasty (高麗一朝), how could the people of the nation bear to forget him? However, Ch'oe Yŏng's shrine is only supported by shamans, and Ch'oe Yŏng's former residence is overgrown with weeds and few people even know about it. Whenever someone visits the ancient capital of Koryŏ, they visit the historic sites of Chŏng Mongju but not the historic sites of Ch'oe Yŏng. I find it very regrettable that even students on field trips have such a tendency. Years ago, while passing by Ch'oe Yŏng's former residence, I recited a sentimental clumsy poem, "The strategy of conquering Liao as the supreme commander (都統征遼策), the dignified demeanor of a national scholar (堂堂國士風), no one knows the remains (遺墟人不識), the lonely red sunset (寂寞夕陽紅)," and I do not admire Ch'oe Yŏng because of nationalism. I admire his extraordinary character and unconventional actions. The Korean people's conquest of the continent ended with Ch'oe Yŏng (崔瑩), and whether this was an inevitable historical destiny or not, I do not know, but afterward, no matter how great the person was, they could not dare to harbor ambitions for the continent and could not deviate from the fixed orbit of subservience to great powers (事大主義). As a result, they willingly resigned themselves to being an island people in thought, but once they think of Ch'oe Yŏng, their eyebrows are raised and their spirits soar, and they realize that their minds become much broader.

The phrase "With a single whip, the fate of the world is not yet determined (一條鞭末定乾坤)" perfectly expresses Ch'oe Yŏng's spirit, and when compared to Yi T'aejo's phrase "With a three-foot sword, the nation is secured (三尺劍頭安社稷)," the magnitude of the two figures is clearly evident, as the former person's assessment goes, but the fact that one should not hastily judge figures based on success or failure is further proven by Ch'oe Yŏng and T'aejo. The more successful one becomes, the smaller one's character may become, and the more one fails, the larger one's character may become. Someone like Ch'oe Yŏng is a great personality who failed. Whether people know it or not, he is one of the most precious national treasures of the Korean people throughout Korean history. <4>

Named Entities

崔瑩	Ch'oe Yŏng
玄陵	Hyŏnŭng
昇天	Sŭngch'ŏn
李太祖	Yi T'aejo
威化回軍	Wihwa Hoegun
耦王	U-wang
昌王	Ch'ang-wang
巡軍獄	Sun'gun Og
明天子	Myŏng ch'ŏnja
明國	Minguk
高句麗	Koguryŏ
恭愍王	Kongmin-wang
關北	Kwanbuk
遼陽	Ryoyang
劉益	Yu Ik
遼瀋	Ryosim
北元	Pukwŏn
泰山	T'aesan
辛氏	Shin-ssi
鄭夢周	Chŏng Mongju
麗朝	Ryŏjo
李朝	Ijo



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제9호
발행일	1927년 10월 01일
기사제목	三將軍伸冤錄, 南征北伐의 大經綸이 水泡化, 叛逆罪로 寃死한 崔瑩 將軍
필자	文一平
기사형태	문예기타

三將軍伸冤錄, 南征北伐의 大經綸이 水泡化, 叛逆罪로 寃死한 崔瑩 將軍
						文一平
선인이 변하야 악인이 되고 충신이 변하야 역신이 됨은 윤리표준이 밧구게 되는 鼎革의 제에 흔이 잇는 사실이지만 麗末처럼 선악이 淆亂하고 忠逆이 전도한적은 업섯다.
최영가튼 剛直忠淸으로서 도리어 반역의 누명을 쓰어 一朝怨痛한 희생이 되고 말앗스니 최영이 죽어도 눈을 감지 못하얏스리라. 사형하는 날에 國人이 撤市하고 街童巷婦까지도 모다 流涕하게 됨은 擧國이 최영의 그 죄 아닌데 寃死함을 통분히 녁임이다. 뿐만 아니라 당시 그를 반역으로 몰아 죽이든 반대당까지도 그의 위대한 勳業을 찬미하야 功蓋一國이라고 칭하얏섯다.
그러면 功蓋一國한 元勳을 엇지하야 반역으로 몰아 죽엿느냐 하면 소국으로서 대국을 범하야 천자에게 得罪한때문이라한다. 「崔瑩事我玄陵, 定亂興王, 驅僧北鄙, 逮奉上王, 却倭寇於昇天, 以存社稷, 盪群凶於今春, 以濟生民, 誠社稷之臣也, 然闇於大體, 不顧群議, 決策攻遼, 獲罪天子, 幾至覆國, 前功盡棄, 以瑩之功, 不幸有此叛逆之罪, 誠一國所不忍, 然在天下之議所謂人得而誅之者也」라 함은 반대당이 최영을 반역죄로 몰아죽이든 상소의 개요이다＜2＞. 이것은 위화회군한 이태조가 一戰에 征遼軍에 총사령으로서 본국에서 멀리 節度를 주든 최영을 執流하며 耦王을 폐출하고 어린 昌王을 세워 위세가 날로 성할때에 최영을 配所에서 巡軍獄으로 拿致하야 일편으로 推鞠하며 또 일편으로 상소하야 얼토당토아니한 뚱딴지가튼 그 실은 明天子가 아지도 못하는 「獲罪天子」라는 법전에 업고 선례도 업는 이상야릇한 明國에 대한 반역죄로 얼거 억지로 이유를 붓쳐 功蓋一國한 社稷之臣인 그를 誅戮한 것이다. 죽을적에 辭色이 自若하야 俯仰不怍하는 대장부의 心胸이 생사를 통하여 坦然無碍함을 표시하얏지만 한번 征遼의 대경륜이 小武人의 야심으로 말미아마 수포에 終함을 생각하게 되면 그 얼마나 통분하얏스리오. 당시 요동으로 말하면 元國의 지배권이 이미 소멸되고 明國의 지배권이 아즉 확립치 못한 일종 空曠地域임으로 출병하면 영구이 점령할 수도 잇는 것이다. 요동은 본대 고구려의 舊疆으로서 이를 회복하려는 것이 고려의 국시이니만큼 기회만 잇스면 출병 점령하얏섯다. 恭愍王때에 대륙의 변란을 타서 關北을 회수하는 동시에 요동을 진공함이 전후 二次에 亘하얏섯는데 제二次의 出征 將은 李太祖이엇섯다. 太祖出征이 잇슨 翌年卽恭愍20년에 遼陽平章劉益等이 고려에 入朝하야 內屬함을 간청한 일까지 잇섯다.
지금은 만주를 남의 땅으로 인정하나 당시는 만주 즉 요동을 본국舊疆으로 간주하야 李太祖가 遼陽을 점령하얏슬적에도 北元에 咨文하되 遼瀋은 본국舊界이니 몽고와 한인은 관계가 업다하엿고 또 遼陽官民에게 曉諭하되 요하以東은 우리 彊域이니 爾等은 빨리 入朝하야 爵祿을 共享하자 하얏섯다. 李太祖 자기입으로 본국舊疆이라고 선포하든 요동에 대하야 崔瑩이 다시 동원령을 내리운다기로서 갑작스러이 반역죄 될 것이야 무엇잇스리오. 李太祖의 정벌할 때에는 반역죄가 되지 안코 崔瑩의 정벌할때에만 호올로 반역죄가 성립될 것인가. 물론 전자 출정과 후자 출정이 시간상으로 십 수년의 거리가 잇는 이만큼 時勢도 다소 변천하지 아닌 것이 아니로되 본국舊疆에 대한 회복운동이 明國天子에게 반역죄 될 것이 도모지 업는 것이다. 기탄업시 노골로 말하면 狐假虎威로 勃與하는 明國을 憑藉하야가지고 최영이하 征遼派를 일망타진하자는 계획에서 나온 것이다. 泰山이 微蟻에게 傾頹하는 일도 잇거니와 국가의 대 지도자로서 악착한 小朝廷의 반대당에게 용납되지 못하야 원약하게 죽엇스니 崔瑩의 死를 哭함은 곳 고려왕조의 亡을 哭함이다. 「崔瑩死而麗無人」은 적절한 評言이다. 耦昌 兩王을 辛氏라하야 한 칼로 부자를 죽이고 鄭夢周를 「謀害忠良, 擾亂國家」란 죄목아레 椎殺하야 그 머리를 효시까지 하얏섯다. 그리하야 고려가 전복되고 말앗다. 이는 崔瑩이 죽은지 겨우 5년간 일이다.
국가가 일인으로써 흥하고 일인으로써 망함이 이를 두고 닐음이다. 어쨌든 麗朝가 망하고 이조가 창립되자 고등 정책상＜3＞ 前朝 충신을 표창하야서 來世를 권장할 필요를 늦겨 鄭夢周가튼 순절한 이에게 대하야 㫌閭襃贈의 擧가 잇섯지만 崔瑩가티 국가주의에 순사한 이에게 대하야서는 최후까지 아무말이 업섯스니 그는 右文政策과 사대주의에 근본적으로 상반되는 인물을 장려할 수 업는 따문인가보다. 결코 최영의 인물이나 功業이나 충의이나 정몽주만 못하야서 그러함은 안이엿다. 「見金如石」「不事産業」「臨陣對敵神氣安閒」은 그의 풍격을 彷佛히 想見할 수 잇스며 「大小百戰, 所向有功, 未嘗一敗, 國賴以安, 人受其賜」는 그의 偉功을 것볼 수 잇스며 「每赴都堂, 正色直言, 不少隱」「吾於國事, 中夜思之, 詰朝語同列」은 그의 충의가 얼마나 絶倫한 것을 알 수 잇다.
이러한 고려一朝의 대표적 偉傑에게 대하야 國朝로서 비록 표창의 擧는 업슬지라도 國人들이야 엇지 참아 니저 버리랴. 그러나 최영의 사당이 겨우 무녀에게 의하야 지지할뿐이며 최영의 宅墟는 오즉 황초만 무성하야 아는 사람조차 업게쯤 되엇다. 누구든지 고려 고도를 방문할 때에 정몽주의 유적은 참배하되 최영의 유적은 참배하지 안이한다. 수학여행가는 학생들까지도 그러한 경향이 잇슴은 퍽 유감으로 생각한다. 수년 전  최영의 宅墟를 지내면서 都統征遼策, 堂堂國士風, 遺墟人不識, 寂寞夕陽紅, 이라는 감상적 拙句를 自吟한 일이 잇섯거니와 나는 국가주의라하야 崔瑩을 숭앙하는 것이 아니다. 絶大한 인물과 아울러 파격적 행동 그것을 장하다 한다. 조선인의 대륙에 대한 經略이 최영을 최후로 하고 말앗슴은 또한 엇지 할 수 업는 역사적 운명인지 그는 마치 모르되 厥後에 나는 인물이 아무리 偉傑일지라도 감이 대륙에 대하야 異志를 품지 못하게쯤 사대주의의 일정한 궤도를 버서나지 못하얏섯다. 그리하야 사상상으로 아주 반도민이 됨을 自甘하얏지만 한번 崔瑩을 想到하게 되면 저절로 眉揚神飛하야 襟度가 퍽 宏濶하야짐을 깨다를 것이다.
一條鞭末定乾坤의 一句는 최영의 기상을 그대로 표시한 것으로서 三尺劍頭安社稷이라는 曀Ž太祖의 一句에 비하야보면 두 인물의 대소가 일목요연하다 함은 前人의 評言이지마는 세상에 성패로써 가부여이 인물을 權衡하지 못할 것은 최영과 태조에 의하야 더욱 증명할 수 잇다. 성할수록 인격이 도리어 적어지기도 하고 패할수록 인격이 도리어 커지기도 한다. 최영가튼 이는 실패한 대인격자이다. 세상 사람은 아든 모르든 조선역사를 통하야 조선민족이 가진 가장 귀중한 국보의 하나이다.＜4＞
＜2-4＞