잡지명	별건곤 제9호
발행일	1927년 10월 01일
기사제목	三將軍伸冤錄, 시슨 칼을 써보지 못하고 獄中慘死한 金德齡 將軍, 金將軍을 代身하야 崔聃齡에게 주는 편지 (The Record of Vindication for Three Generals: General Kim Deok-ryeong, who died tragically in prison without ever using his sword, a letter from General Kim to Choe Dam-ryeong)
필자	申瑩澈
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Choe, my friend! It has been over three hundred years since we left this world, and it seems there have been many changes in the three thousand li of Korea (槿域三千里), but the autumn leaves in Seokdi Village (石底村), where I was born and raised, are starting to turn color just like before, and Mount Mudeung (無等山), where I used to test my sword, still has its towering peaks.

It may seem laughable to the world that I, a spirit in prison for over three hundred years, am sending you, a spirit in the underworld, a letter, but I know that you are the only one to whom I can turn to express my deeply buried grievances. As the old saying goes, “In the acquaintance of people, it is precious to know each other’s hearts.” (『人之相知는 貴相知心』) In recent days, some people have lamented my unjust imprisonment and sought to vindicate my name, but these are merely abstract discussions, and the only one who truly understands my heart is you, though you are not of this world. And no matter how much speculation and conjecture people make about my history, they cannot fully know my inner thoughts since they are not me. My tragic end can only be truly explained by my honest letter.

Choe, my friend! It seems that the world's science, institutions, ideas, and morals have made great strides since our death three hundred years ago. They say the law is fair and morality is rational, but still, it defends certain privileges and is subservient to certain classes, taking this as the principle of law and the basis of morality, using fine-sounding <9> pretexts to boldly commit all kinds of inhumane acts. How much more can be said of the days when law and morality were enforced in an entirely despotic manner? In those days, people flattered those with power and influence and were jealous of those with greater talent and achievements, so it was only natural that patriots and virtuous men were falsely accused and subjected to torture. I could not have hoped to be exempt, given the circumstances, and even if I could have been, I would not have wanted to live in such a disgraceful way. I was falsely accused of treason and subjected to unspeakable torture, but my firm resolve did not betray my heart. Although my bones were crushed and my body was covered in wounds, I refused to abandon my convictions, and in the end, I became a wronged spirit in prison. How mournfully did my wandering soul cry and how profusely did it weep in the occasional wind and rain and on lonely moonlit nights? Sometimes I clenched my fists and shouted, and sometimes I drew my sword and whistled, but in this world where the living and the dead are separated, there was no one to answer my calls and no one to comfort my tears. Even though I was a brave warrior and an iron-fisted man, did I not also have tender tears?

Choe, my friend! As you know, though my body was small, I had the divine courage to face ten thousand men, and though my wisdom was dull, I had the heart to discern justice. The world only recognized me as a simple strongman, but I had studied literature and was not ignorant of etiquette. The times were chaotic, but I pride myself on my loyalty to the nation, which was perhaps second to none. However, my shortcomings were, first, my humble family background, and second, the suspicious environment and unfavorable circumstances, which led to disaster before I could achieve success.

Choe, my friend! I had foreseen my situation, environment, and the times from the beginning, so I was not unprepared for my eventual failure. However, when I faced a time of national crisis and received the encouragement of my brave elder sister (姊兄) Kim Eung-hoe (金應會氏) to raise an army, as well as the recommendation of Magistrate (府使) Yi Gyeong-rin (李府使景麟氏) and Yi Yeon-pyeong (李延平貴氏), and even the crown prince came south and issued an edict, I hesitated at first, but finally decided to dedicate my meager strength to the nation. Wasn't it you and I who first sold our land to buy weapons and send out proclamations to recruit volunteer soldiers? At first, there were only a few dozen men, but eventually, we recruited over five thousand soldiers and warriors, whom I personally commanded and drilled, receiving the special title of Winged Tiger General (翼虎將軍). At that time, I was only a vigorous young man of 26 years old. I wore a hundred-pound iron club on my waist and prepared for battle by taming the wild horses of Jinju (晋州). You witnessed and knew my spirit at that time, and you wholeheartedly devoted yourself to my efforts. Choe, my friend! <10> When we raised an army with nothing but our bare hands, did we harbor any secret ambitions or seek personal gain? I believe you know the answer.

Subsequently, I received the title of Loyal Brave General (忠勇將軍) from the court and the title of Seokdi General (石底將軍) from the enemy soldiers, which further boosted my morale. I led my troops from Damyang (潭陽) and Sunchang (淳昌) to Dongnae (東萊) and Busan (釜山), planning to cross the East Sea to Tsushima Island (對馬島) and directly attack Osaka Castle (日本大阪城) in Japan. I sent proclamations to Yeongnam (嶺南), and on the one hand, I visited Commander-in-Chief (權元帥) Gwon Yul, and on the other hand, I wrote to General (郭將軍) Gwak Jae-u, promising to cooperate in defeating the enemy. The enemy soldiers were terrified at the news of me, and the enemy generals were alarmed by my portrait, so they withdrew their forces and strictly forbade looting, preventing the enemy from showing their ferocity. Soon after, the court abolished the supply of all volunteer soldiers, saying it was flawed, and transferred them to the Loyal Brave Army (忠勇軍), which greatly strengthened our forces. I led my troops forward and sent proclamations to Japan, which were answered from far and wide. The courage of my soldiers doubled, and they leaped and fought with bloody bravery and roaring iron fists, so the victory of the great battle was imminent, and the triumphal song was about to be heard. Deok-ryeong's success was about to be complete, but did Heaven not favor us? Did the Creator doubt us? Suddenly, a truce broke out, and I received a royal order to cease fighting. Deok-ryeong's disappointment and dejection were beyond words, and the outrage and anger of my officers and men were unbearable. Waiting for another opportunity, I reluctantly left a large army in Jinju (晋州) to prepare for war and cultivate the land extensively to prepare for any eventuality. However, not being able to fight with the vigor I had at that time was a lifelong regret for Deok-ryeong, and losing that opportunity was the first step towards failure. Furthermore, those who envied my fame and hated my success obstructed me in every way, so I knew in advance that not only would the great achievement I had hoped for be in vain, but also that unexpected disaster would befall me. No matter how much I endured, how could I not feel sorrow and indignation as a man with blood and breath? The world criticizes alcohol as a mad medicine and mocks drinkers as drunkards, but at times, nothing inspires chivalry and makes one forget worries like alcohol. Who would have thought at first that the Loyal Brave General (忠勇將軍) would become a drunkard overnight, or that a bloody young man would suddenly become a sickly invalid? But Deok-ryeong could not help but drink at that time, and he could not help but suffer from heartache. Choe, my friend! You know exactly how I felt at that time.

Choe, my friend! The opportunity for the world to capture and kill me was approaching moment by moment. The people who envied and hated me began to create one or two good excuses to push me into the abyss of death. Deok-ryeong, who until yesterday had been single-mindedly loyal, brave, righteous, and determined to do his best for the nation and its people, was soon to be falsely accused and tortured.

At that time, Yun Du-su (尹斗壽), who had always advocated for expelling the barbarians, became the Chief Commander (都體察使) and came down to Namwon (南原), giving thousands of troops under his command to Seon Geo-yi (宣居怡) to advance and garrison Goseong (固城). He ordered me, Gwon Yul, and Yi Sun-sin to cooperate and attack the brigands garrisoned in Geoje (巨濟). In fact, this was the first opportunity for me to test the sword I had been sharpening, and it was a stepping stone for everyone to test my courage and strategy. However, I knew in advance that the morale of my soldiers was already low, and that the enemy's strength, relying on the sea's defenses, could not be easily controlled, but it was difficult to disobey the royal command, so I had no choice but to go down to the sea and join forces with General (李舜臣公) Yi Sun-sin, who had several times more courage and strategy than me. The military power at that time was so great that even people today can imagine it, and it is undoubtedly true that we attacked the enemy with all our might. However, our all-out attack did not produce much results. Of course, it can be assumed that my reputation, which I had held until now, was damaged, but it was also from this time that those who sought to frame and harm me gained a better opportunity. Then, in September of that year, Yun Geun-su (尹根壽), Yun Du-su's younger brother, was dispatched to Honam (湖南) and heard rumors that I was cruelly executing people. He used this as an excuse to arrest me and imprison me in Jinju (晋州), reporting it to the court. I was subjected to interrogation, but somehow I was released. Later, when Yi Mong-hak (李夢鶴) of Hongsan (鴻山) raised a rebellion, Commander (權元帥) Gwon Yul and Inspector (朴監司) Park Hong-ro (朴弘老) came with me to suppress it. However, a rumor arose from somewhere that I was rebelling together with you and Hong Gi-nam (洪季男). Weren't we, Kim, Choe, and Hong, the three who failed in the Geoje battle? Creating all sorts of excuses was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, and among them, Yi Si-eon (李時言) and Kim Eung-seo (金應瑞), who had especially hated me from the beginning, took this opportunity to secretly report my rebellion in order to kill me, ultimately leading to my death by flogging.

Choe, my friend! Kim Deok-ryeong (金德齡), the Loyal Brave General (忠勇將軍), was shackled and subjected to cruel interrogation under the charges of "cruel executions" (刑殺濫酷) and "rebellion and wickedness" (叛逆無道). Choe, my friend! Was there any truth to those charges? You know better than anyone else. If I had killed so many people, how could the local officials who should have resented me have petitioned the court to pardon me? How could Right State Councilor (鄭右相) Jeong Tak (鄭琢) have strongly opposed the idea of sending me as an envoy to the enemy, saying it was impossible? Or, if I had actually committed treason, how could those who thoroughly held the idea and ethics that "everyone should punish rebels and traitors" (「亂臣賊子는 人人得而誅之」) have not been eager to kill me first? How could they have instead lamented me, defended me, and appealed to the government on my behalf? How could the forbidden guards have dared not to arrest me but instead bowed and obeyed? How could the generals have been unable to bear it and wept in full court? How could the prominent statesmen of the time have even defended me? Saying this only makes my heart ache.

Choe, my friend! Should I laugh or cry here? <12> Having missed an opportunity to achieve remarkable success, and living in sorrow and depression, I met Yun Geun-su's (尹根壽) inspection and received the secret reports of Yi Si-eon (李時言) and Kim Eung-seo (金應瑞), and with the suspicion of Ryu Seong-ryong (柳成龍), I was charged with rebellion and wickedness, bound, beaten, flogged, and whipped, eventually dying by flogging, achieving a tragic end. But the so-called courtiers who made jealousy and factionalism their business and were blinded by private power and selfish interests buried me forever under the name of a traitor.

Choe, my friend! I did not mind being rebuked, beaten, bound, or even subjected to extreme punishment. But the one thing I could not bear was the unjust accusation of treason against Deok-ryeong, who swore to the mountains and rivers and prayed to heaven and earth, knowing that his only desire was for the nation and its people, not caring about his own life or death, entrusting the success or failure to fate, and trying his best to use his strength. If I had dreamed of my own glory and sought my own selfish desires, plotting to usurp the throne, I would have been unforgivable under the laws and morality of that time. Treason and extreme punishment would have been acceptable, but if a person who swore to his own conscience and was dedicated to the nation and its people met an innocent end due to the slander and false accusations of treacherous villains, could I not have resentment towards this world? However, although the treacherous courtiers envied, slandered, and killed me, even after three hundred years since my death, the people of Yeongho (嶺湖), no, the people of all of Joseon (전조선), have a tendency to truly understand and truly imagine my heart. Considering that I will probably forever have sincere friends among the people of Joseon, I feel a hundred or a thousand times more joy and gratitude than if I had been vindicated or had my spirit appeased. My bones have no place to rest, but my soul wanders and smiles among the people of Joseon.

Choe, my friend! I still feel a pang in my heart when I think of how you almost suffered the same extreme punishment as me because of me. My friend! If you also recall that time, your emotions and sadness will also be immeasurable. Merely recalling past grievances is useless, so let us cooperate and strive as we did in life to secretly help and protect the happiness of the Joseon people, though our paths are different. The rustling autumn wind and the desolate scenery only add to the sad memories. I will end here, so please be at peace. <13>

**Named Entities**

金德齡	Kim Deok-ryeong
崔聃齡	Choe Dam-ryeong
石底村	Seokdi Village
無等山	Mount Mudeung
金應會氏	Kim Eung-hoe
李府使景麟氏	Yi Gyeong-rin
李延平貴氏	Yi Yeon-pyeong
翼虎將軍	Winged Tiger General
晉州	Jinju
忠勇將軍	Loyal Brave General
潭陽	Damyang
淳昌	Sunchang
東萊	Dongnae
釜山	Busan
對馬島	Tsushima Island
日本大阪城	Osaka Castle
嶺南	Yeongnam
權元帥	Commander-in-Chief Gwon Yul
郭將軍	General Gwak Jae-u
忠勇軍	Loyal Brave Army
尹斗壽	Yun Du-su
都體察使	Chief Commander
南原	Namwon
宣居怡	Seon Geo-yi
固城	Goseong
權慄	Gwon Yul
李舜臣	Yi Sun-sin
巨濟	Geoje
尹根壽	Yun Geun-su
湖南	Honam
李夢鶴	Yi Mong-hak
鴻山	Hongsan
朴監司弘老	Park Hong-ro
洪季男	Hong Gi-nam
李時言	Yi Si-eon
金應瑞	Kim Eung-seo
柳成龍	Ryu Seong-ryong
鄭右相琢	Jeong Tak
嶺湖	Yeongho



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제9호
발행일	1927년 10월 01일
기사제목	三將軍伸冤錄, 시슨 칼을 써보지 못하고 獄中慘死한 金德齡 將軍, 金將軍을 代身하야 崔聃齡에게 주는 편지
필자	申瑩澈
기사형태	문예기타

三將軍伸冤錄, 시슨 칼을 써보지 못하고 獄中慘死한 金德齡 將軍, 金將軍을 代身하야 崔聃齡에게 주는 편지
						申瑩澈
최군! 우리가 이 세상을 떠난지도 이미 삼백년이 넘어 槿域三千里에는 滄桑의 변천이 또한 만흔 모양이나 내가 생장하던 石底村에는 만추의 黃葉이 전과 가티 물들기 시작하고 내가 칼을 시험하던 無等山은 첩첩한 峰巒이 그대로 소사잇네.
삼백년이 넘은 오늘에 안저서 옥중의 혼신이 된 나로 지하의 혼이 된 군에게 一書를 보내는 것이 세인으로 하야금 본다면 附之一笑할넌지 모르지만 나의 흉중에 깁히 깁히 감초어잇는 至冤至痛한 하소연을 하랴면 평소에 유일의 친우이던 군에게 박게 향할 곳이 업슴을 나는 자세히 아는 까닭일세. 고어에도 『人之相知는 貴相知心』이라 하지 아니하얏는가. 근일에 와서 세인이 幾分間 나의 冤獄에 대하야 애석해 하는 이가 잇고 나의 신명에 대하야 伸雪하는 바가 잇스나 그는 추상적 논의에 지나지 못하는 것이요 나의 마음을 아는 이는 다가티 此世의 人은 아니지만 그래도 君이 아니고는 알어줄 이가 그 누구이겟는가. 그리고 아모리 나의 史跡에 대하야 만흔 추측과 臆說을 내리나 그 사람들이 이미 내가 아닌 이상 도저히 나의 腸裏를 여실히 認知치는 못할 것이니 나의 말로가 과연, 비참하엿다 하면 나의 所懷는 나의 속임업는 一書가 오직 잘 설명할 수가 잇슬뿐인가 하네.
최군! 우리가 죽은 후 삼백여년 오늘에는 세상의 과학제도, 사상, 도덕이 그 때보다는 아마도 장족의 진보를 한 모양일세. 법률은 공평하니 도덕은 합리이니 하지만 아직도 그것이 어느 특권을 옹호하고 어느 계급에게 복종만 하는 것으로 법률의 원칙과 도덕의 기조를 삼아 간판 조흔＜9＞ 가명을 쓰고 표리 양면으로 모든 非道殘行을 敢然하거던 더구나 법률과 도덕이 오로지 전제적으로 시행되던 전일에야 더 말할 것이 무엇인가. 권력과 세력이 잇는 곳에 阿謏乞憐하고 재능과 功烈이 자기보다 나으면 猜忌嫉視하기로 일을 삼던 그 날에 안저서 志士仁人이 무고히 죄명과 혹형을 입는 것이 말하자면 당연히 그러케 될 것이라. 내가  홀로 免하고저 한덜 그 때의 형편으로 보아서는 바랄 수도 업는 일이요 또는 免할 수가 잇다하더래도 나는 구차히 取하고 십지 아니 함의로 내가 역적이라는 누명을 쓰고 言語道斷의 嚴刑을 바덧지만 단단한 일념이 내의 마을을 속이고 십지 아니한지라 정가이뼈가 부스터지고 몸둥이에 성한 살이 업슬지경이로되 나는 오직 나의 소신을 굴치 아니하랴다가 畢竟은 옥중의 冤魂이 되고 마럿네. 소소한 風雨와 적막한 月夜에 갈 곳조차 업는 나의 혼백은 얼마나 瞅啾히 우럿스며 滂沱히 눈물을 흘녓슬가. 어느때에는 주먹을 쥐고 부르지저도 보앗스며 어느 때에는 칼을 집고 휘파람도 부러보앗지만 幽明이 懸隔한 此世에는 불너도 대답하는 이가 업고 울어도 위로하는 이가 업데. 내가 아모리 一個勇士요 一個鐵拳兒라한덜 보드라운 눈물초자 업겟는가?
최군! 君도 아는 바와 가티 나의 몸이 비록 短小하엿스나 가히 만인을 대적할 神勇이 잇섯고 나의 지혜가 아모리 魯鈍하얏스나 정의를 분별할 만한 심보가 잇섯던 것이요, 세상사람은 다만 우직한 力士로만 인정하지만 일직이 유업을 익히며 예의의 풍도도 疎眛치치는 아니하엿스며, 시세는 淆亂하엿지만 국가에 대한 忠憤은 아마도 남에게 지지 아니 하엿스리라고 自矜하네. 그러나 다만 나에게 부족한 것은 첫재 가문이 한미하다는 것이요, 둘재는 환경이 猜疑하고 시세가 불리하야 성공이 未半에 禍孼이 先至한 것일세.
최군! 내가 처음부터 나의 처지와 환경과 시세를 미리 침작한지라 말로의 실패도 예상치 아니 한 것은 아니지만 한번 龍蛇의 변을 당하야 慷慨有志한 내의 姊兄金應會氏의 起兵하라는 권고도 듯고 李府使景麟氏와 李延平貴氏의 交薦이 잇슬뿐아니라 그때 세자까지 남하하야 令旨로 논고한 바가 잇슴으로 처음에는 躕躊도 만히 하얏지만 맛참내 投身蹶起하야 미력이나마 국가에 밧치고저 할제 맨 처음에 田宅을 팔어 병기를 사고 격문을 전하야 의용군을 모집한 것이 君과 나의 일이 안이엇던가. 처음에는 겨우 수십인이던 것이 나종에는 모집한 정병과 장사가 五千餘人이라 내 손으로 지휘하야 行陣을 敎練하고 翼虎將軍의 特號를 바드니 그 때 내 나히 겨우 方壯한 26세의 청년이엇섯네. 허리에 백근의 철퇴를 차고 晋州의 惡馬를 鉗御하야 臨陣對敵의 준비를 정돈하니 그때의 의기가 과연 엇더하엿던지는 君도 또한 目擊熟視할 뿐 아니라 同心戮力하야 한결가티 參謀盡瘁한 바가 아닌가. 최군! 우리가＜10＞ 單身空拳으로 起兵하던 그때에 과연, 異志를 품고 사리를 탐하랴던 少毫의 야심이 잇섯던가 업섯던가 君은 아마 아는바가 잇스리라고 밋네.
그리하야 다음에 조정으로부터는 忠勇將軍의 號를 밧고 賊兵으로부터는 石底將軍의 稱을 어드니 나의 志氣가 一層舊發된지라 潭陽 淳昌으로부터 東萊 釜山에 돌진하야 동해를 건너 對馬島로해서 日本大阪城까지 直衝하랴고 영남에 移檄하며 한편으로는 權元帥를 往見하고 한편으로는 郭將軍에게 移書하야 協力討賊키를 약정하니 賊兵이 일홍을 듯고 恐懼하며 敵將이 畵像을 보고 驚服하야 병력을 收斂하고 侵掠을 엄금하야 凶鋒이 逞威치 못하엿네. 그리고 조금잇다 조정에서 모든 의병들의 供饋가 有弊하다하야 그를 革罷하고 忠勇軍에게 전속케 되니 우리의 군세가 大振하는지라. 군대를 잇글고 전진하야 日本에 傳檄하니 遠近이 響應하고 장졸의 용기가 백배하야 쫏처나오는 血勇과 울녀뽐내는 철권으로 뛰놀며 싸호댜하니 대첩의 승리가 목전에 나터나고 개선의 군가가 경각에 들닐 판이라 德齡의 성공이 또한 완전을 기약케 되얏더니 天意가 不恤이러란가 造物이 猜疑런가 맛침 和議가 돌발하야 交兵치말나는 朝命을 바듬에 德齡의 落魄喪氣는 말할 것도 업거니와 麾下將卒들의 爵憤激怒야 참아볼 수가 잇던가 기회의 再來를 기다리기로 하고 부득이 大兵을 晋州에 留屯하야 攻戰의 준비를 정돈하고 屯田을 廣置하야 戰守의 계책을 세워 만일을 경비하고 잇지 아니하엿는가. 그러나 그때 銳氣를 가지고 한번 싸워보지도 못한 것이 德齡으로는 천추의 恨事어니와 기회를 한번 일흔 德齡은 그것이 실패의 제 일보 이엇던 것일세. 게다가 나의 威名을 끄려하고 나의 성공을 미워하야 백방으로 저해하니 기약하던 大功이 수포에 도라갈 것은 물론, 不測의 화가 도리여 몸에 밋칠 것을 나는 미리 알앗섯네. 아모리 참고 견듼덜 피잇고 기잇는 사람의 일홈을 가지고야 엇지 憂憤慷慨치 안겟는가? 세인은 술을 狂藥이라 배척하고 음주가를 주정군이라고 조소하지만 어느 때에는 술처럼 의협을 자아내고 술처럼 근심을 망각케하는 것은 업는가하네. 처음에야 누가 忠勇將軍으로 一朝酒輩가 될 줄을 뜻하엿스며 血勇男兒로 怱焉心疾의 病軀가 될 줄을 꿈이나 꾸엇슬가. 그러나 德齡은 그때 술을 아니 먹을 수가 업섯고 화병을 아니어 들 수 가 업섯네. 최군! 그때 내의 심정이 과연 엇더햇슬지도 군은 역시 자새히 알줄아네.
최군! 세상이 나를 잡고 나를 죽일 기회는 짬 맛침 刻一刻으로 닥어왓섯네. 나를 끄려하고 나를 미워하던 무리들이 나를 죽음의 구렁에 모라 늣키에 조흔 구실이 한 두가지 생기기 시작하니 어제까지 忠勇義烈의 斷斷一念이 국가와 生靈을 위하야 力盡乃己하랴던 德齡이 누명을 쓰고 혹형을 바들날도 머지는 아니하게 되얏섯네.
그때 매양 척화를 주장하던 尹斗壽가 都體察使가 됨애＜11＞ 南原에 내려와서 麾下兵수천명으로 宣居怡에게 주어 固城에 進屯케하고 權慄, 李舜臣과 나까지 합하야 협력으로 巨濟의 屯賊을 치라하니 실은 내가 처음으로 지금까지 갈어온 칼을 시험해 볼 기회가 이른 것이요 모든 사람도 내의 勇略을 한번 시험해 보랴던 階梯이나 장졸의 기세는 이미 沮喪한 끗이요 海險을 밋고 고수하는 적세는 容易히 제어할 수가 업슴을 미리 알면서도 朝命을 어기기가 어려워서 부득이 바다로 내려가 나보다 지용이 몇배인 李舜臣公과 병력을 연합하니 그때의 軍威가 얼마나 성대하엿슬지는 지금 사람으로 상상한다 하야도 넉넉히 알 수가 잇슬 것이요 우리가 誠力을 다하야 적군을 攻迫하엿슬 것도 의심업는 사실일세. 그러나 사력을 다하야 진공한 것도 별로 효과를 보지 못하니 물론 지금까지 갓고 잇던 나의 威名이 손상되얏슬 것은 누구나 推想할 수 잇는 바이지만 나를 構誣謀害하랴는 이가 더욱 호기를 엇게 된 것도 역시 이때 부터이엇네. 그리자 그 해 9월에 尹斗壽의 아우 根壽가 호남을 採訪하엿다가 내가 刑殺濫酷하엿다는 것을 풍문으로 듯고 구실을 삼어 晋州옥중에 잡어가두고 조정에 奏聞하야 捉囚鞠問을 밧다가 엇지하야 原釋을 밧게되고 말기에 鴻山人李夢鶴이 반란을 이르킴애 權元帥慄과 朴監司弘老가 나를 더불고 來討하게 되얏는데 어느 곳으로부터 나온 말인지는 모르지만 내가 군과 洪季男二人으로 同叛한다는 유언비어가 생기니 巨濟戰에 성공치 못한 삼인이 즉 우리 金崔洪三人이 아니엇나. 모든 구실거리 만들기는 천재일우의 호기회요 그중에도 평일부터 낊�를 특별히 忌惡하던 李時言, 金應瑞가 이 기회를 타서 나를 죽이랴고 叛狀을 密啓하야 필경은 나의 최후를 杖下의 혼이 되게 하고 만 것일세.
최군! 忠勇將軍의 金德齡은 「刑殺濫酷」「叛逆無道」이라는 죄목으로 수족에 桎梏을 가하고 그야말로 濫酷한 囚鞠을 바덧네. 최군! 그러면 과연 나에게는 그만한 죄명을 부칠 사실이 잇섯던가 업섯던가도 군이 오직 잘 알 일이 아닌가. 만일 내가 그와 가티 인명을 刑殺하엿다하면 맛당히 나를 怨恨할 그 지방의 인사들이 엇지 도리여 나를 위하야 上䟽請宥하엿스며 鄭右相琢갓흔 이는 가히 적국에 使聞할 수 업는 일이라고 極諫까지 하엿던가. 또는 내가 사실로 叛狀을 가젓다하면 그때 당시에 사람마다 품고 잇는 「亂臣賊子는 人人得而誅之」라는 사상과 윤리를 철저히 갓고 잇던 그들로서 나를 먼저 斬戮하기에 여념이 업슬지어늘 그들은 엇지 도리여 나를 애석히 녁이고 나를 옹호하고 나를 위하야 體府에 읍소하엿스며 禁吏가 감히 捕縛치 아니하고 執手稱命하엿스며 諸將이 참아보지 못하야 滿座가 읍하하엿스며 당시의 名相들이 나를 위하야 辯誣까지 한이가 잇섯슬가. 말이 여긔에 이름애 오직 가슴이 막힐뿐일세.
최군! 나는 여긔서 우서야 올을가 울어야 올을가?＜12＞ 한번 기회를 일흠애 혁혁한 성공을 보지 못하고 憂憤沈鬱한 속에 잇다가 尹根壽의 採訪을 맛나고 李時言, 金應瑞의 密啓를 밧고 柳成龍의 疑念으로 하야 나는 叛逆無道의 죄명을 입고 縛之打之하며 笞之鞭之하야 맛침내 杖下의 혼이 되야 무참한 최후를 이루고 마럿스나 猜忌와 당쟁으로 일을 삼고 私權과 사리에 눈이 어둔 소위 朝臣들은 나를 영원히 逆名에 무더버리고 말엇섯네.
최군! 나에게는 譴責도 조왓고 打罵도 조왓고 束縛도 하잘 것 업섯고 극형도 사양치 아니하엿네. 그러나 다만 산하에 맹서하고 천지에 기원하며 一心所向이 오직 국가와 生靈이 잇슴을 알 뿐이요 신명의 생사를 도라보지 아니하며 성패의 決否를 운명에 붓치고 소유의 힘을 다하랴던 德齡에게 천부당만부당의 逆名은 무엇보다도 참을 수 업는 侮辱으로 생각하네. 내가 만일 내 자신의 영화를 꿈구고 내 자신의 사리사욕을 탐하야 왕위를 빼스랴는 야심이 잇섯다면 그때의 법률이나 도덕으로는 斷不容貸하엿슬지라. 逆名도 可요 극형도 可어니와 자기의 寸腸과 양심에 自誓하고 국가와 生靈을 위하야 헌신코저 하던 一人이 奸凶輩의 跋扈捏誣로 무고한 최후를 이루엇다하면 내가 또한 이 人世에 대하야 원한이 업지 못할 것이 아닌가. 그러나 奸凶輩의 朝臣은 나를 시기하고 나를 중상하고 나를 살해하엿지만 내가 죽은 후 삼백년이 넘은 오늘 까지 嶺湖人士, 아니 전조선 민중의 두뇌에는 내의 心臟을 참으로 이해하여 주고 참으로 推想하여 주는 경향이 遍滿하엿네. 아마도 나는 영원히 조선의 민중에게 知心의 동무가 끈임이 업슬 것을 생각하면 建議伸寃한 것보다도 立嗣妥靈한 것보다도 백배 천배의 깃붐과 감사가 넘칠 뿐일세. 나는 백골도 차질곳이 업지만 나의 혼은 조선민중의 새이에서 왕래하며 미소하고 잇네.
최군! 나로 인하야 군까지 그때 극형을 당할번하던 일이 지금도 생각하면 가슴이 앗질해지네. 君! 군도 응당 그 때 일을 추억한다면 感慨悲懷가 또한 무량할 줄 아네. 지나간 원한을 한갓 추억만 한다는 것도 말하면 쓸데업는 일이니 우리는 이 압흐로 조선민중의 행복을 위하야 유명은 殊道하지만 陰助冥佑하기에 역시 생전과 가티 협동노력 해보세. 추풍이 소슬하야 滿目慘憺한 것이 도시 추억의 悲懷만 더할 뿐일세. 이것으로 끗을 막으니 부대 평안하게.＜13＞
＜9-13＞