별건곤 제9호
1927년 10월 01일
全鮮女子庭球大會를 보고 (Report on the All Joseon Women's Tennis Tournament)
一記者 (A Reporter)
소식 (News)

Report on the All Joseon Women's Tennis Tournament
						A Reporter

The Fifth All Joseon Women's Tennis Tournament, hosted by the Dong-A Ilbo, which has become almost an annual event, was held at the Gyeongseong Sports Ground on October 1st this year.

Even though I have never held a racket or bat, I have always been the type to follow sporting events with great enthusiasm. How could I not go to the All Joseon Women's Tennis Tournament? With a雀躍之勢 (jakyakjise, leaping and jumping eagerness) as if some great number would fall, I rushed there early, along with Mr. Smile.

That day was October 1st, "Sports Day." Tens of thousands of students from public and private schools for both men and women in Gyeongseong gathered at the Gyeongseong Sports Ground for联合競技 (yeonhapgyeonggi, joint competitions) as well as gymnastics, dance, baseball, and tennis, creating a truly magnificent spectacle. Moreover, with the women's tennis tournament also taking place, how could the male and female spectators not be numerous!

"Hey, we're going to see a lot of people today. Plus, we'll get a good whiff of women's perfume. Come on, let's hurry. But why is the weather like this? Is even the sky shedding tears because it's a gathering of women? Anyway, as long as it doesn't rain, the weather will be good for both spectating and playing. There will be a flood of tears this year, too. Seriously, they cry so well. Well, men cry too when they lose a match."
While I was making such a fuss to myself, without anyone asking or answering, the streetcar had already arrived at the Training Center.

I stopped by the joint sports field of each school and watched the short-distance race for a moment, and then entered the tennis tournament venue. Perhaps it was still early, but the audience wasn't very large, like a poor family's feast. When I got a program, there were as many as twelve schools participating, including Ilsin Girls' High School (一新女高) from Jinju, Jeongui Girls' High School (正義女高) from Pyeongyang, Nusi Girls' High School (樓氏女高) from Wonsan, and Hosu-don Girls' High School (好壽敦女高) from Gaeseong in the provinces, and Ewha, Jinmyeong, Jeongsin, Yonggok, Girls' Commercial School, Public Girls' School, First Girls' High School, and Second Girls' High School from Gyeongseong. I don't know what the progress of the skills is, but the fact that there are more participating schools than in previous years proves the progress of women's tennis. I felt sad that the shadows of Sukmyeong, Baehwa, and Dongdeok, which had participated for years, were gone, and even more sad that I couldn't see the ramie skirt and jacket of Gongju Yeongmyeong. <78>

"Which school will win this year?" With this very curious thought, I began to observe the appearance and expressions of the players. They all looked like 배나무 목침 (baenamu mokchim, pear wood neck pillows), plump and sturdy, truly befitting athletes. The shoes, socks, and uniforms were dazzlingly white, and some players even wore face powder. Standing on the white lime lines and exchanging the white ball toward the white net with the white racket, how refreshing it was. Moreover, it was even nicer to see them showing off their red lips and white teeth, like several gourds, to the audience, whether they succeeded or failed.

The athletic uniforms were mostly different, with the 아랑지 (arangji) skirt of Jinju being distinctive, and the neckties were also different, with the red necktie of Pyeongyang catching my eye. Among them, one interesting thing was that the uniforms of the Ewha team captains were specially made. Just as the uniforms of junior and senior officers are different in the military, the uniforms of the team captains should naturally be different. It was a good idea.

At nine o'clock, the matches finally began. Jeongui and Jeongsin were paired, Ilsin and Second Girls' High School were paired, Ewha and First Girls' High School were paired, and Hosu-don and Girls' High School were paired. Nusi, Jinmyeong, Public Girls' Commercial School, and Yonggok Girls' High School had a bye in the first round. Should I watch the A court or the B court? I wish I had four eyes at times like this.
Since I originally lacked knowledge of tennis, I couldn't really know the level of skill, but in any case, Nusi, Jeongsin, and Ilsin seemed weak in skill, and Girls' Commercial School and Yonggok especially showed their inexperience as first-timers. It was beyond imagination that First Girls' High School (Japanese) and Public Girls' High School were defeated in the first round.

The Ewha team captains were good, but they relied on their skills and didn't focus, making many mistakes. Anyway, left-handed Yi Bo-bae (李寶貝孃) gave a great impression to the audience. Jinmyeong's first team truly deserved praise for their skill and performance, and Hosu-don's team captains also had considerable skill. In the end, Ewha and Ilsin gained victory after a bitter battle of 승일패감전수십회 (seungilpaegamjeonsusiphoe, dozens of games with one win and one loss), with the final ball, truly relieving the audience of ten years of worry.
(Twelve lines deleted here - original text)

However, one strange sight that day was that neither the players nor the cheerleaders cried even after suffering a defeat. It was true that last year, they would throw their rackets and wail loudly when they lost, but this year, they just turned around casually and nonchalantly, which was very questionable. Whether their emotions had dulled, or their hearts had been washed away and tempered by the ways of the world, it was beyond imagination.

The cheering was mostly organized and regimented, but occasionally there were childish "taunts" similar to pranks from middle school students, which were not boring, and the extreme coolness of the local cheering was very disappointing. How disappointed the local players must have been!

Anyway, this year's women's tennis tournament was a great success. Next year will be even more spectacular. In conclusion, I wish the 선수諸君 (seonsujeokun, respected players) continued effort and hard work, and I'll stop here. <79>

**Named Entities**

東亞日報社	Dong-A Ilbo
京城	Gyeongseong
晋州	Jinju
一新女高	Ilsin Girls' High School
平壤	Pyeongyang
正義女高	Jeongui Girls' High School
元山	Wonsan
樓氏女高	Nusi Girls' High School
開城	Gaeseong
好壽敦女高	Hosu-don Girls' High School
梨花	Ewha
進明	Jinmyeong
貞信	Jeongsin
龍谷	Yonggok
公立女學普	Public Girls' School
第一女高	First Girls' High School
第二女高	Second Girls' High School
淑明	Sukmyeong
培花	Baehwa
同德	Dongdeok
公州永明	Gongju Yeongmyeong
李寶貝孃	Yi Bo-bae



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제9호
발행일	1927년 10월 01일
기사제목	全鮮女子庭球大會를 보고
필자	一記者
기사형태	소식

全鮮女子庭球大會를 보고
						一記者
거의 年中行事化한 東亞日報社主催의 第五回全朝鮮女子庭球大會는 금년도 10월 1일로써 京城運動場에서 열니게 되얏다.

자신이 「나겟」하나 「뺏트」하나를 쥐여보지 못하면서도 엇쨋든 운동회라면 머리를 싸매고 따라단이는 성미엿다. 함울며 全朝鮮女子庭球大會라니 안이 갈 수 잇스랴? 무슨 굉장한 數나 떠러질 듯이 雀躍之勢로써 일즉부터 덤벼들엇다. 微笑君과 가티.

이날은 맛츰 10월 1일 「體育데-」엿다. 京城運動場에는 경성내 공사립 남녀학교 수만명 학생이 총출동하야 聯合競技외에 체조, 딴스, 야구, 정구가 잇서 실로 장관이상의 장관을 볼 수가 잇섯다. 게다가 여자 정구대회까지 겹해 열녓스니 남녀 관중이 여간 할 수 잇스랴!

『여보게 오늘은 사람개나 톡톡히 보게 되얏네. 더구나 여자의 향수냄새는 슬컷 맛틀 수 잇겟네. 자- 속히 가세. 그런데 일기는 왜 이 모양인가? 여자들 모임이닛가 한울도 눈물을 짜 내려는가. 엇쨋든 비만 안오면 구경도 좃코 경기에도 조흔 일기일세.금년도 눈물동의나 흘닐 터이지. 아이그 대톄 울기들도 잘도 하지 하기야 경기애 패하면 남자는 안우나.』
뭇지도 대답도 안하는 말을 혼자서 이럿케 수선을 떠는 새에 전차는 발서 훈련원에 다엇다.

각 학교 연합 경기장에 들러서 잠간 단거리 경주를 보고나서 정구대회장으로 드러가니 아직 일너 그런지 가난한 집 잔채가티 관중이 별로 만치 안타. 「프로글람」을 어더보니 작으만치 열두 학교나 되는데 지방으로는 晋州의 一新女高, 平壤의 正義女高, 元山의 樓氏女高, 開城의 好壽敦女高가 출진하얏고 京城으로는 梨花, 進明, 貞信, 龍谷, 女商, 公立女學普, 第一女高, 第二女高가 출진하얏다. 기술의 진보는 엇던지 아직 모르나 참가교가 예년보다 만흔 것은 여자 정구계의 진보를 증명하고 잇다. 年來로 출진하든 淑明, 培花, 同德의 그림자가 업는 것이 섭섭하얏고 그보다도＜78＞ 公州永明의 모시치마 적삼을 못 보게 된 것이 섭섭하얏다.
『금년은 엇던 학교가 우승을 할텐고?』하는 몹시 궁금한 생각을 가지고 선수들의 觀容察色부터 해보니 모다 배나무 목침가티 퉁퉁하고 튼튼히 된 법이 과연 운동가다워 뵈인다. 구쓰, 양말, 복장이 눈이 부시게 하-얀데다가 엇던 선수는 분까지 발느고 石灰白線을 타고 서서 백색나껫으로 백색 넷트를 향하야 백색 뽈을 주고 밧고 하는 것이 엇지도 淸快한지. 게다가 성공, 실패간에 紅脣을 여러 박씨 가튼 하-얀니빨을 관중의 압헤 자랑하는 것은 더욱 보기 조왓다.
운동복은 대개 상이한데 晋州의 아랑지 치마가 특색이엿고 넥타이도 상이한데 平壤의 빨간 넥타이가 눈에 띄웟다. 그 중에도 한가지 이약이거리는 梨花軍大將組服色이 특제품인 것이엿다. 군인에도 소장 대장의 복색이 판이한 것가티 大將組의 복색은 물론 달너야 될 것이다. 잘한 생각이엿다.

아홉시가 되자 정말 경기는 시작되얏다. 正義와 貞信이 걸니고 一新과 第二女高가 걸니고 梨花와 第一女高가걸니고 好壽敦과 女高가 걸니고 樓氏, 進明, 公立女商, 龍谷女校는 제일회는 부전승이엿다. A코-트를 볼가 B코-트를 볼가? 이런 때는 눈이 넷이 엿스면 조켓다.
정구에 대한 상식이 본래 缺如하닛가 기술 여하는 잘 알 수가 업스나 하여간 樓氏와 貞信과 一新은 기술이 약하얏고 女商과 龍谷은 더구나 初出의 態가 그대로 뵈엿고 第一女高(日)와 공립여고가 제일회에 패배을 당함은 상상밧기엿다.
梨花의 大將組는 하기는 잘하나 기술을 밋고 着心을 들하야 실수가 만엇다. 엇쨋든 왼손잡이 李寶貝孃은 관중에게 만흔 인상을 주엇다. 進明의 제일조는 기술로나 성적으로나 과연 찬사를 들일만하고 好壽敦의 大將組도 기술이 상당하얏다. 梨花와 一勝一敗甘戰數十回에 결국 최후일공으로 승리를 得하는데는 과연 관중으로 하여금 십년감수는 식키고 마럿다.
(此間十二行削除-원문)

그런데 이날의 한 奇觀은 선수나 응원단간에 패배을 당하고 나서도 우지 안는 것이 한 奇觀이엿다. 작년만해도 지고 나오면 나껫을 메다치며 모다 대성통곡을 하얏든 것이 사실이엿는데 今年은 그저 평범하게 태연하게 예사로 슬적 도라서는 것이 일대 의문이엿다. 감정이 鈍해젓는지 세태물정에 씻기고 달녀서 심정이 寒凉해 젓는지 엇쨋든 상상밧기엿다.
응원도 대개 단체적이요 규칙적이엿는데 간혹 중학생들의 작란 비슷한 「야지」가 잇서서 심심치 안엇고 지방응원을 넘우도 냉냉함은 매우 섭섭하얏다. 지방선수들이 얼마나 섭섭하얏스랴?

엇잿든 금년의 여자정구대회는 대성황이엿다. 명년은 이보다 더 장관이겟지. 끗흐로 선수諸君의 부단한 분투를 祝하고 고만둔다.＜79＞
＜78-79＞