別乾坤 第21號
1929년 06월 23일
初夏大清潔 (Early Summer Cleaning)
掃除夫 (Sweeper)
雜著 (Miscellany)

Early Summer Cleaning
Sweeper

◇ T'apkol Park

My name is Sweeper, and my job is to sweep up trash. Shall I start by picking up the scattered 휴지각 (hyujigak, scraps of paper)? What are the park employees doing to leave it so dirty? If being a park official means just eating and doing nothing, I'd spend a hundred won to get some exercise! Even though the restroom is for urinating and defecating, it's filthy beyond decency! I can't even bring myself to go in! No matter how urgent, my stool would shrink back in! Damn them.

The stinking ■ atop the pagoda is just right for a fool! Because the park isn't like a park, the people who gather are also…
A diarrhea-inducing ice cream vendor! Frustrated friends just waiting to be tricked, a useless friend reading fortunes! A lazy old man gathering under the tree, telling old stories! Young masters with full bellies gambling in the shade!
These are the masters of T'apkol Park (塔洞公園), in the center of Kyŏngsŏng! No, they are the guests! When foreign tourists come, they invariably visit this central park. Because the name is high…

You can learn about a country's lifestyle and character by visiting its parks.
I'm already ashamed to show them the land of Chosŏn, but showing them this park and presenting these flawed people as representatives of Chosŏn! It's an insult to the city, so let's sweep away these unsightly, bloated people! Is it a legitimate business to grab a half-crazed guy in broad daylight and read his fortune? Why can't they arrest and chase them all away?

Because only these kinds of people gather, no one thinks about making it more like a park to enjoy! If I can't even step out and they won't fix it, I wish they'd get rid of the park altogether and build houses on the empty lot! <150>

◇ A Half-Western Monster

Seoul has the most arrogant, incompetent, and unpleasant people. Among the unpleasant, the most disgusting and irritating are the ones who say, "I went to America!" "I went somewhere!" They spend good money to eat bread and then strut around, thinking they're above everyone else! Inside, they're nothing but 생원님네 (saengwŏnnimne, country bumpkins) full of shit! "I'm this scholar, I'm this emperor," I don't know if they're scholars or swindlers, but they come back from America and act like Americans, they come back from Russia and act like Russians, pretending to know things they don't and babbling in foreign languages! Why didn't they ask to be born as Westerners? These half-Western gentlemen would even smear themselves with Western excrement and parade around! They say Western food is good, so I scraped together money to try lunch at Paekhapwŏn (百合園), a half-Western restaurant, and all the half-Western scholars were there. There's a limit to acting like no one else exists! They want to eat Western food, but do they have to speak Western languages too? Well, they spent money learning it, so they have to use it! But are these gentlemen, who go abroad and stir things up, the kind of people our people need? Head of the sanitation department! What are you going to do? Sweep them away!

◇ An Arch or a Sneeze!

If it's a trend, they'll even stick it up their noses and parade around! These days, 속업는 기동門 (sogŏmnŭn kidongmun, soulless arches) are so common! What do you call these 고동門 (kodongmun, archways)? Right? Ah-chi! An arch has to be semicircular to be an arch! But the Chosŏn people like foreign trends but never do anything properly! They just call it whatever they want! If they just keep building 속업는 기동문 (sogŏmnŭn kidongmun, soulless arches), Seoul will soon lose all its essence and become like 강정 (gangjŏng, puffed rice)! Ugh! What a thing to say!

An arch at the eighth-day play! An arch at the athletic meet! An arch at the exhibition! These days, 아―치 (a-chi, arches) are so common! For a while, I hated the flag advertisements for books at the bookstores, but now the whole place is arches! As I passed Chongno 4-ga (鍾路四丁目), there was even an 아―치 (a-chi, arch) at the 설넝탕집 (sŏllŏngt'angjip, ox bone soup restaurant)! The funniest was next door, where the 代書所 (taesŏso, scrivener's office) must have paid a few pennies to borrow a corner, where they were huddled, looking like they were standing on their heads, like a dog's hole! If only the phrases they wrote were more clever... How unsightly! This can't be fixed with a broom (■), you have to break it with poison! <151>

◇ The Kisaeng's Foreign Dance

Because it's modern, the kisaeng girls are trying to be modern too! How absurd! A Chosŏn kisaeng should always be a Chosŏn kisaeng! It's good and proper for kisaengs to seek modernity, but when they only seek modernity and Western things... In foreign countries, actors are the leaders of new trends, but in Chosŏn, it can only be the kisaeng. But it's pitiful to see them wearing long skirts, singing 땅따당 (ttangttadang, Western songs), spreading their 속곳가랭이 (sokotkarang'i, underwear crotches) wide in what they think is a Western dance, and singing "Niche, coolie, Imarino, Okkyo!" without knowing what they're doing. It's like a 송편쪼각 (songp'yŏnjjogak, piece of rice cake) that you ate last year popping out again. The oipchang who ask them to dance and sing like that are oipchang indeed, but I wish the kisaeng girls would think differently. Why isn't Chosŏn dance and Chosŏn song good? I know they do it because the customers ask them to, but don't they have the thought and heart to persuade these uncultured oipchang? Let's preserve our wonderful songs and dances, even if it's just through the kisaeng girls! Do we have to get rid of everything Chosŏn to feel better? Why do they give business licenses to kisaeng who don't know Chosŏn songs and dances? Do Chosŏn people think they can just get away with anything? I'd throw all those kisaeng into the trash at once!

◇ Temple or Brothel?

"Because the world is going to ruin!" This is not just the lament of stubborn fathers and brothers! How much would Sakyamuni have sighed and grieved when looking down from the pure realm of the lower world upon the temples! These days, temples just sell rice bowls, profit from alcohol, rent out secluded rooms, and make money from room rentals. Drinking alcohol and eating meat is commonplace, and they use the money they should be spending on reading Buddhist scriptures to keep three or four wives! Where is there a more shocking place than this? Is this the will of Buddha? Especially the temples near Kyŏngsŏng (京城) are not temples, and I don't need to clean them anymore, but the nearby temples are where adulterous men and women meet. If there aren't enough rooms, they'll even rent out the space under the Buddha's cushion in the Dharma Hall if you pay them! What does Buddha think when they commit acts of breaking the precepts under the cushion where he sits! Avalokiteśvara! Please tell Sakyamuni! Even though I am a commoner, I will cleanse the 淫窟寺刹 (ŭmkulsach'al, lewd temples) near Seoul for the sake of those who want to live purely and for the daughters of other families who are seduced by adulterous men and women and ruin their lives! Please take note of this. Namu-ami-t'a-bul. <152>

**Named Entities**

塔洞公園	T'aptong Kongwŏn
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
百合園	Paekhapwŏn
鍾路四丁目	Chongno 4-ga



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	初夏大淸潔
필자	掃除夫
기사형태	잡저

初夏大淸潔
						掃除夫

◇塔洞公園

일홈이 掃除夫요 職責이씨레기쓰러가는 놈이니 우선 헛트러진 休紙각부터쓰러볼? 이놈의데 公園지이는 무얼하길네 이러케지저분해? 놀고먹는 公園直이면 돈百이나드려서 나도 運動이나해볼 아모리 똥오즘싸는 便所이기로 염치업시도더럽다 드러술수가업스니!아모리急하다가도 드러스면 똥끗이쑥드러가겟네!미러먹을놈에――
누린내나는■넘탑은 질뚝백이가 제格이지!公園이公園가트닛가 모히는사람들도……
설사나기알마즌 아이스크림장사! 답답한친구들만오라다놋고 四柱본다는실업슨친구! 나무미테서 三國志보는 困客! 게으름뱅이모아놋고 옛니약이하는녕감! 담미테서이잡고잇는 밥통찬도련님네!
이들이 京城의 中央에잇는 塔洞公園의 主人! 안이손님들이다! 外國사람 觀光團이오면 의려히이 中央公園에를구경온다 일흠은놉흐닛가――
그나라사람의 生活狀態와 氣質如何는 公園에가서잘알수가잇다
조선땅덩어리도 구경시키기가남붓그러운데 이公園을구경식여가지고 이모든 찌그럭이사람들을 조선사람의 代表로내세워! 都會의 侮辱이요보기실흔 북덱이사람들을씨러바리자! 白晝에 얼쎄진놈을붓잡고 四柱를보아준다는것이 正當한장사일가이모든것을좀 왜못잡아가고 내쫏지를 못하노.
이런사람들만모혀드닛가 좀더 公園답게따며놀냐는생각을안이하지! 내차도안나가고 그러타고곳처노치도안을테면 公園이고 空園이고 싹업새버리고모자라는집터나닥것스면조켓서!＜150＞

◇半洋製의 怪物

잘난놈만코 못난놈만코 꼴보기실흔놈만키로는그래도 서울밧게는업다 보기실흔中에도■逆나고안이꼬운것―「나는 米國을갓다왓슴네―」「나는어듸를갓다왓슴네―」貴한돈갓다가 麵麭쪽이나 사먹고와서 내가내로세 하고뱃대기내밀고단이며 眼下의 無人으로꺼덕어린는 者들! 뻣속에는 똥밧게는 별노업는생원님네! 나는무슨士, 나는무슨帝, 士인지 詐인지모르겟스나 米國을갓다오면 米國놈이되고 俄羅斯엘갓다오면 俄羅斯놈이되고말어가지고 되지안케안느척하고 남모를 外國말들만씨부렁거리고단이는꼴들이야! 왜 西洋놈에게태여내여달나고미리부탁을못햇든고? 西洋것이라면 똥칠도하고단일 半洋製냥반들! 洋食이 하조흔것이라기에 업는돈을꾸려가지고 점심이나먹어보려고 百合園이란 半西洋집을드러서보면 半洋製의모든士들은 다모혓다 傍若無人도분수가잇지! 洋食은먹으려니와 말지 洋말을할게야잇나? 그야돈드려빼혼것이닛가 써먹어야하겟지! 그러나우리 民衆이 要求하는 人物이 所謂洋行이나하고와서 휘젓고단이는 이냥반들일가? 衛生課長녕감! 엇더케 할아요?――쓰러버려라―.

◇아취인지재채기인지!

流行이라면 코도버릭들고단일걸! 요새는 원 속업는 기동門이그리흔한지! 안이야 이고동門을무어라고? 올치? 안이아―치! 아―치는 半圓形이되여야 아―치라든데! 압다조선서남의 流行은조와하지만제대로하는것하나잇나? 아모케나부르지! 속업는기동문만세우면 아마 서울이좀더잇스면 요나마겨오남은속도다! 빼앗기고강정가티될걸! 엑그놈 그런소릴――
八日놀이에도 아―치! 運動會하는데도아―치 展覽會도 아―치!요새원 아―치가그리흔한지! 한참은 冊肆에 원놈의 冊광고 旗발이보기실트니 인제는기동문천지가되엿서! 鍾路四丁目을지내랴닛가 설넝탕집 門깐에지 아―치데그려! 그中에도우수운것은 그녑헤 代書所에서는 둔푼이나 얼너냇는지 한끗구녕을비러서 그속에웅그리고안젓는데 뺀드러세운꼴이라니 독개구녕안갓덱! 그나마 文句들이나 그럴듯하게썻스면……어여보기실럭! 이건 비(■)로는안될터이고 독기로부서야지!＜151＞

◇妓生의 外國歌舞

現代的現代的하닛가 妓生아씨들도 現代的으로되려고한다 될번이나한소린가! 조선妓生은 언제든지 조선기생이라야지! 現代的이라니 조키는조코맛당히그래야겟지만 妓生들이 現代을 찻고 西洋것만을찻는데는 좀――外國에서는 업든것이새로 流行되는것은 俳優가 先導者이지만은 조선서는 妓生이될수밧게업다 그러나 교자심녑해서 긴치마입고 땅따당을부르며 적지안은 西洋춤이라고 속곳가랭이를벌죽이리고 니핵구리이마리노 오쿅고―만 멋도모르고 부르는것을보면 작년에먹엇든 송편쪼각이고만툭뛰여나온다 그런춤이나 추라고 그런소리나하라고請하는 오입장이도오입장이려니와 妓生아씨 스스로가좀달니생각을해보앗스면 왜 조선춤이좀조코 조선노래가좀조흔가 그야손님이하라닛가 그러는줄은알지만 그런지각업는 오입장이를 타이를만한 생각과맘이업슬가? 우리의훌륭한노래와춤을 아씨넥만이라도 잡어줘고잇서봅시다그려! 조선것이라고는 모조리업서저야시원하겟소?조선 歌舞를모르는 妓生들은 왜 營業狀을내주노 조선놈들은 그저그런데나싸지고말나는심사인가 그진 妓生들 한꺼번에모라다 쓰러기통에넛코말걸!

◇절이냐 淫窟이냐

「世相이망하려닛가」! 이것은 반듯이 頑固한 父兄의 嘆息이안이다 釋迦加來大尊께서는 下界의 淨界일 절을나려다보시고 얼마나 嘆息을하섯스며 얼마나 哀痛히녁이섯겟느냐 요새절이란 밥그릇이나 팔고 술에서돈을남기고 으슥한 房이나 빌너주어 房세나바더먹고사는곳이다 술꺽고고기먹기는 例事이어니와 佛經읽어버른돈으로 妻를셋식넷식! 이런 駭怪할데가어듸잇나 부처님의 遺調이그러할가 그中에도 京城近郊에잇는절은 절이안이라 이제 다시 掃除할 必要가업스나 淫南蕩女가눈마처가는곳은 갓가온절이다 房이모자라면 法堂안 부처님방석미리대도 돈만내면 빌녀주니 自己안즌방석미테서 破戒의 行動을할제 부처님생각엔엇덜는지! 관셤보살! 釋迦大尊에한말슴사뢰나이다! 小生이비록 俗漢이오나 좀淨하게살기위하야 淫南蕩女 안어 꾀임에빠저서 一生을그르치는남의집딸들을위해서 서울 近處의 淫窟寺刹를 掃除해버리겟사오니 그리통촉하소서 나무―아미―타―불.＜152＞
＜150-152＞