잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	常識講座 第六感은 어더한感覺? (Commonsense Lecture: What Kind of Sense is the Sixth Sense?)
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

Commonsense Lecture: What Kind of Sense is the Sixth Sense?

What kind of sense is the sixth sense (第六感)?

There doesn't seem to be a definite definition for this. I don't know in what order the first sense to the fifth sense are, but it is certain and common enough that the five senses of sight (視覺), hearing (聽覺), smell (臭覺), taste (味覺), and touch (觸覺) make all things in human life convenient, as it appears in elementary school textbooks. However, while the five senses exist, it is not written that the sixth sense exists, so it seems that various senses are claiming, "I am the sixth sense," causing great confusion.

What kind of sense is the sixth sense (第六感)?

How should I answer this question?

A says, "The sixth sense is a sense that transcends the five senses, combining inspiration (靈感), intuition (直感), clairvoyance (千里眼), and everything else, and then dividing it again by that number." B says, "The sixth sense is... well, I can't say it out loud... ahem... is it sensuality (性感)? Because scholars of the old days were all hypocrites (僞善者), if they combined sensuality and announced that the whole thing was the sixth sense, and the teacher was lecturing at a girls' school and someone asked, 'Teacher, what is the sixth sense?', it would be difficult to explain in a way that people could understand, so they pretended not to know the remaining sense and skipped it!" C says, "The sixth sense is like the cinema news in the Tokyo Asahi Shimbun." If we consider this an eight-subject exam and grade it, I don't know if it would be in the order of A, B, and C, but it is certain that there are many candidates for the sixth sense.

What is interesting to prove this again is that the Western sixth sense and the sixth sense we speak of are completely different. I hope you will read the following, even though the writing is poor.

The Western Sixth Sense

Dr. Fraser Harris's recent book, "The Sixth Sense," has been published in England.

According to this book, even in the West, the "sixth sense" (第六感) is very ambiguous, and there are many candidates. A says, "The sixth sense refers to the intuition that women have." B says, "No, that's not true. I originally dislike cats, even though they don't harm me, but I somehow hate them; that's the feeling." And C says, "There are people who have the ability to sense electricity or machinery; that is the sixth sense."

However, Dr. Harris denies all of A, B, and C and says that the true sixth sense is the "muscle sense (筋力感)" or "kinesthetic sense (筋感)" advocated by Charles Bell of Scotland about a hundred years ago.

The five senses act from the outside to the inside. We see a bright light; the bright light shines through the eye and onto the retina; from the retina, a nerve races to the brain (腦髓) and senses that it is bright.

Charles Bell's "muscle sense (筋力感)" or kinesthetic sense (筋感), which he spoke of a hundred years ago, is a kind of sensation, other than the five senses, that is known through the activity of muscles, and it is sensed according to the degree of tension, relaxation, and resistance received by muscles or muscle groups. Bell studied the relationship between muscles and nerves and discovered that there are two kinds of nerves. Most of the nerves go from the brain to the muscles, but conversely, he discovered that there are nerves that go from the muscles to the brain. The latter is what is called muscle perception, and there is no difference in sensation. This is what one feels when muscles contract, and that is why the names muscle sense (筋力感) and kinesthetic sense (筋感) came into being, and Dr. Harris came to call this the sixth sense.
<154>
To give a brief example, if you want to know the weight of something, in addition to weighing it on a scale, you can roughly guess how much it weighs by lifting it up and holding it in your hand. Some people may say that it is pressure, but pressure does not move the kinesthetic sense, and the force felt when placing an object in the hand is more accurate perception than the sixth sense or muscle sense.

If we were to lift a paving stone, we could know how much force to exert to lift the stone through the sixth sense. Therefore, before touching the paving stone with our hand, the muscles are already preparing to exert force. Therefore, if this paving stone is a fake stone used in a play, made of wood, painted and colored, and someone lifts it up quickly, thinking it is a real stone, they will suddenly have excess strength, the stone will fly into the air from their hand, and they will fall backward. This sixth sense plays a very important role in sports such as tennis, baseball, and football. When hitting a ball with a racket, the sixth sense perceived by the muscles tells you how fast, how much force, and in what direction to hit it. The same is true for other sports. In particular, billiards players must have a well-developed sixth sense.

Also, the fact that the chewing force is subtly adjusted according to the size and hardness of the food when you put food in your mouth is because you have this sixth sense.

Looking at this, we can see that what we say about the sixth sense (第六感) all the time is very different from what they say in the West. (End)
<155>

**Named Entities**

푸레―서―하리스 박사	P’ure-sŏ-harisŭ Paksa
촤―르스 베일	Ch’wa-rŭsŭ Beil
英國	Yŏngguk
東京朝日新聞	Tōkyō Asahi Shinbun
스곳트란드	Sŭgot’ŭrandŭ



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	常識講座 第六感은 어더한感覺?
기사형태	논설

常識講座 第六感은 어더한感覺?
第六感이라는것은 어더한感覺이냐?
이것에 對한확실한 定議는 업는것갓다 第一感으로부터 第五感지가 어더한 順序로로되여잇는지는모르나 視覺 聽覺 臭聽 味覺 觸覺 이라하야서 이五感이 人間生活의 萬事를 便利케해주는것은 小學校讀本에도 活字로나오는이만큼 確實하고 普通的이다. 그러나 五感은잇스나 六感이잇다고는 쓰여잇지안이하엿스니만치 여러 가지感覺이『내가그六感이로라』하고나서는것가태서 大端히 混亂하다.
第六感이라니 어더한感이냐?
리러한 質問에무엇이라고 對答을해?
甲曰『第六感이라는것은 五感을 超越한 感覺으로 靈感과 直感과 千里眼과 이모든것을合해가지고 다시 그數대로개인것인다 乙曰『第六感이라는것은 히히 크게는못하겟스나 히히 저 性感이라나! 녯날 學者들이란 모도 僞善者인닭에 性感을 合해서 全部가 六感이라고 公表를하면 女學校에서 講義를 하는中 先生님 六感이라는것은 무엇입닛가하면 알어듯도록 說明을하기가 어려우닛가 나머지 一感은 모른체하고 띄여먹은게지 무얼!』丙曰『第六感이라는것은 東京朝日新聞의키네마뉴―스와갓다』이것을 八學試驗이라고보고 採點을한다면 甲乙丙의 順序로될는지는모르나 如何間 第六感에 對한 候補者가 만흔것은 確實하다.
다시 이것을 證明하기에자미잇는것은 西洋의 六感과우리가말하는 六感과는 全然틀닌다는것이다 이양이거리나하나 늘니가하니다음것을닑어주기바란다
西洋의 第六感
푸레―서―하리스博士의 近著『第六感』(The Six Sense.) 이라는것이 英國에서 出版이되엿다.
이冊에 依해서보면 西洋에서도「第六感」이란  大端히 曖昧하여서 여러 가지가 候補者가잇다 A曰「第六感은 女性이가지고잇는 直覺을말함이다」B曰「안이다 그러치안타 나는 本來고양이를 실력한다내게 害를끼치지안컨만 엇전지실히하는 그 感覺이다」C曰「電氣나 礎器를 感할수잇는 能力을가진사람이잇다 그것이 第六感이다」
그러나 하리스博士는 이ABC어느것이고 否認하고 眞正의 第六感이라는것은 至今으로부터 約百年前에 스곳트란드의촤―르스 베일傾이 主唱한「筋力感」는「筋感」이라는 感覺이 그것이라고한다.
五感이라는것은 外界에서 內部로 作用한다 밝안불을본다 밝안불이 眼孔으로 綗膜에빗친다 綗膜에서 腦髓아지 神經이란놈이 빼더밋서서 밝앗타고 感한다.
여기에 촤―르스 베일傾이 百年前에「筋力感」는筋感이라고한것은 五感以外의것으로 筋力의 活動狀態에 依하야 知得하는＜154＞一種의 感覺이며 筋肉는 筋肉群에밧는 張力과 弛■과 抵抗의 程度에따라서 感知하는것이다 베일傾이 筋力과 神經과의 對하야 硏究한 것으로 二種의 神經이잇는것을알게되엿다 神經의 大部分은 腦髓에서 筋肉으로가는것이지만 이것과는 반대로 筋肉에서부터 腦髓로가는 神經이잇는것을 發見한것이다 이 後者가 즉筋肉의 知覺이라고하는것이며 感覺에틀님이업다 이것은 筋肉이 收縮할에 感하는것이며 그럼으로 筋力感이니 筋感이니하는 일흠이생기고 하리스博士가 이것을 第六感이라고부르게되엿다.
잠간 例을드러보면 무슨물건이고 그무게를알냐면 저울에다러서 무게를아는以外에 그물건을쓴우에울녀 놋코들어보면 대개얼마가령의무게가되는것을집작할수가잇다 或그것은 壓力이나니냐고말하는사람이잇슬는지모르나 壓力은 筋感을움지기지안코물건을손우에 올녀노앗슬의 感하는힘이고 이것은 第六感筋力感보다 正確한 知覺을할수업는것이다.
우리가 만약에방치를하나를들녀면 第六感에 依하야그돌을들기에는 얼마나한힘을내여야할것을알수가잇다 그럼으로방치돌에 손을대이기前에 벌서 筋力은힘을 準備를하잇다 그럼으로 이방치돌 演劇에서쓰는 擬石으로 나무에조회를바르고 彩色을칠한것이라고하면 그것을실제의돌인줄알고 번쩍드는사람은 별안간에 힘이남어서 돌은손에서 空中으로올나갈것이고 그사람은뒤로벌넝넘어질것이다 스포―쓰에는이 第六感이더듸든지 重大한 役割을가지고잇다 테니스배―스뽈 풋뽈 어느것이고그럿다 뽈을 라켓트로치는데서 筋肉에 感知된 第六感은얼마나한速力으로 얼마나한힘으로 어느 方向을 向하야따려야한다는것을아르켜준다 다른스포―쓰에도 그러하다 特히 撞球選手는더구나이第六感이 發達된사람이라야한다.
한 食物을입에물엇슬에 그 食物의 大小와 軟硬에따라서 咀嚼하는힘이 微妙하게 調節되는것도 이第六感이잇는닭이다.
이것을보면 우리가말끗마다 第六感第六感하고드는것과 西洋에서 말하는 그것과는 大端히달은것을알수가잇다. (終)＜155＞
＜154-155＞