잡지명	별건곤 제2호
발행일	1926년 12월 01일
기사제목	大科學小說, 八十萬年後의 社會(二) (Great Science Fiction, Society 800,000 Years Hence (2))
필자	웰스(원작), 影洲(번역)
기사형태	소설 (Fiction)

Great Science Fiction, Society 800,000 Years Hence
						Wells (Original), Yeongju (Translation)
Important Contents from the Previous Issue
1. Applying the Principle of Invisibility (藏身法의 理致를 應用)
2. The Chronograph for Airplanes (飛行機에 對한 航時機)
3. A Speed of 100,000 Years Per Hour (한 時間에 10萬年의 速力)

4. The Machine and the Professor Suddenly Disappeared (機械와 博士는 忽然이 업서젓다)
Whether we can fly to the world of the future or not, the prototype of the Chronograph has truly disappeared as if it were hidden. There is no mistake, as it was watched by twelve eyes.

Next, the professor led the group to his workshop. There was a real object several times larger than the prototype. The professor, with great vigor, said, "I made this Chronograph myself. I didn't hire anyone, fearing that the secret of the invention might be revealed to others..."

"No, sir. Such a secret cannot be stolen except by a genius like you," another person replied.

"In other words, since there is no genius in the world comparable to you, no one can steal it," yet another person said.

"Have you already tested this machine?" the first person asked. <128>

"Yes, to test the machine's durability and to practice riding it, I have been to the society of tens of thousands of years in the future two or three times. This time, I am departing solely for the purpose of observation, and I will report the details to you when I return. Human society, even tens of thousands of years in the future, is showing surprising conditions, so I can't help but wonder what it will be like in hundreds of thousands of years," the professor replied.

While talking, the professor got on the machine, sat on the saddle, and grabbed the handle, saying, "It's like riding this. It's the same as riding a bicycle."

"When are you planning to depart, Professor?" another person asked.

"If I feel good, I can depart even tomorrow. My attire and luggage are already prepared."

"That's truly enviable," another person said.

The professor, talking almost dreamily while looking at the faces of the group, was fiddling with the departure needle (出發針) with his hand.

"After today, if you call me and I'm not here, know that I have departed. I will tell my family that I have gone on a trip to the countryside. I will return in just three or four days," the professor said.

Another scholar, who had been silent until now, said,

"But Professor, please tell us what you saw when you rode it for practice, even just briefly."

"That's right. We want to know, even roughly, whether this civilization of humanity will make us happy or unhappy."

The professor, with great vigor, said,

"Then I will tell you what I saw briefly and what I found particularly strange. Truly, in the world of the future, there was something unexpected that cannot be compared to anything. On my second test journey—" Before he could even finish his sentence, the professor's finger, which had been fiddling with the departure needle, had unknowingly moved the needle to the departure point, and the machine, with the professor on board, made a 'clang' sound and suddenly disappeared along with the professor's figure. Alas! The professor, unprepared for departure, had mistakenly turned on the machine and departed while simply engrossed in conversation.

5. Breaking Through the Gray World (灰色의 天地를 突破하다)
The six people were equally surprised, unable to say a word, when the professor's figure suddenly disappeared along with the Chronograph. The professor had already flown to the world of the future.

However, it was an unprepared departure. Just while fiddling with the departure needle, he unknowingly moved it to the departure point, and the machine suddenly flew away. <129> The professor's surprise, who was riding it, must have been very great.

Thinking this way, worry also gripped the hearts of the six people. However, unable to do anything, they discussed it for about an hour, and as a result, the six people, filled with surprise, strangeness, and worry, scattered and went their separate ways.

The next day, each of these six people thought of what happened the previous evening almost like a dream, and after thinking about it in various ways, it was not a dream. The professor had definitely disappeared along with the strange machine called the Chronograph. But could it be that the professor had deceived us? Yes, he must have hidden his figure along with the machine suddenly using some kind of magic trick. Since we were a little drunk at the dinner that day, we might have believed even unbelievable explanations. Even if you study the principles of invisibility, it was impossible not to think that you could not travel back and forth in time to the past and future worlds.

After a few days, the six people all decided that they had been deceived by the professor's magic, but since the professor's figure never appeared, they were somewhat unable to bear it with dissatisfaction.

However, the professor's disappearance was certainly not magic. He was just riding the Chronograph and suddenly departed. The professor, fearing that he would fall, could only hold onto the machine tightly and couldn't think of anything else. As his mind slowly calmed down, even when he thought that he had unknowingly moved the departure needle to the departure point while fiddling with it, the machine was flying at a speed of 100,000 years per hour. Because day and night changed even faster than the blink of an eye, there was no time to distinguish the boundaries between light and darkness, so only gray was visible before his eyes. Nothing was visible to the eye. However, he could tell that his body was moving with great speed. However, he could see that the speedometer and chronometer installed on the machine were showing that the machine and his body were moving at the same speed. When the professor first thought, "How far have I come now?", the chronometer was already indicating over 100,000 years. Again, the professor looked at the speedometer and muttered in amazement, "Ah! This is what's happening."

6. He Finally Landed 800,000 Years Later (기어코 八十萬年後에 着陸하엿다)
What did the professor mutter in amazement about? It was nothing else. The machine, which was expected to travel at a speed of 100,000 years per hour, was now flying at a speed of 200,000 years, and it was gradually increasing its speed. The quick-witted professor soon realized. Just like an object falling from the sky, it was gradually <130> increasing its speed. Now it would gradually go faster from 250,000 years per hour to 300,000 years.

Even so, the professor did not have any travel preparations. Therefore, he packed a camera and other items into a small bag, but because he suddenly flew away from the dinner party, he couldn't take anything. He only had matches and cigarettes in his pocket. If he were to return to the old world of the 20th century from now, it wouldn't be impossible. This Chronograph has a kind of long handle attached to one end of the machine, and if you tilt that handle forward, you go to the world of the future, and if you tilt the handle backward, you fly to the world of the past. However, the professor had already passed 300,000 years at this time, so going back again was a disappointing thing. Moreover, because the world of the future is more civilized, there will be people of high standing, and all kinds of facilities will be well organized. He thought that it wouldn't be necessary to deliberately bring the disorganized things of the 20th century.

During this time, various imaginations came and went in the professor's mind. If a 20th-century human being showed his face in the society of hundreds of thousands of years in the future, it would probably be provided as research material for scholars. Or a grand welcoming party might be held, and he might have to lecture about the events of the 20th century. Even so, he didn't know if the language of the 20th century would be understood by the people of that world. Looking again, the machine's speed was over 300,000 years per hour. He thought that it would be no fun to go too far, but it would also be dangerous to stop suddenly, and it would not be good for the machine, so he gradually slowed down the speed and finally stopped the progress. At the same time as stopping, the gray world, which had been a mixture of day and night until now, became brighter. He didn't know how many hours had passed, but it was about two o'clock in the afternoon in this world.

However, not knowing how far he had come, he looked at the chronometer again, and it was truly surprising. It was indicating "802701". That is, he had traveled only 802,701 years. Ah! The future is the future! The world of 800,000 years in the future! He worried that humanity might have already become extinct and the world might have become a place for inferior animals (劣等動物) to live again. Perhaps he alone was seeing strange things that none of his 20th-century compatriots had ever seen, and the professor realized something like the calmness before a storm, and the surging waves in his chest subsided.

7. It Was an Adult, Not a Child (어린애가 안인 어른이엿다)
The professor was surprised even by himself. 800,000 years was a truly long and long time. The history of mankind that we know only goes back about 5,000 years, doesn't it? <131> But considering that society, language, customs, and of course, human intelligence and even physique have changed drastically during those 5,000 years, he wondered how much the long, long 800,000 years had changed humanity. Until now, he had only been thinking about the pleasure of seeing the world of the future and drawing only interesting imaginations, but he didn't know what kind of dangerous things were hidden in reality. He didn't even have a handgun (短銃) with him. He even thought about what to do if the people of this world were already so cruel that they couldn't be called human beings.

However, the professor got off the Chronograph. What kind of place is this anyway? Looking at the rudder (舵) of the Chronograph, it didn't move to the left or right at all, so there was no way he could have gone anywhere other than England. Surely this was the bank (河畔) of the Thames 800,000 years in the future. That is, it couldn't be other than the London where we live.

The professor looked around, but it was just a wide, wide yard. It seemed like it was about to rain, so there was dew on the grass leaves. The soil was also soft, and the footprints of his feet and the wheel tracks of the Chronograph were sunken deep enough. It was the beginning of summer, and the sunlight was shining strongly. Ah! The earth and the sun had not yet aged so much.

Before the professor's eyes, there was a large lion-woman mask (獅子女面) image (像) carved out of marble. It looked very old, as if it were like a sphinx in ancient Egypt, and it looked decayed, but below its chest, there was something like a wide bronze (銅製) door. Or it seemed like something was stored inside that door, but he couldn't tell.

Around this stone statue (石像), there were various kinds of grass and trees. The trees had seemingly delicious fruit, and the grass had beautiful flowers. He wondered if the people of this era had already eradicated useless and incompetent (無藝無能) plants that had no flowers or fruit.

Besides the trees, there was a vast stone house. There was nothing like that that could be seen in the 20th century. Ah! Fortunately, that place was not where wild beasts and poisonous snakes lived, but still the world of people. Before long, three or four small people stuck their heads out of the window of that house and looked up at the professor. Ah! When he thought they might be children, they came down to the yard and seemed to be coming towards him. The colors of the clothes that were glimpsed between the trees were also beautiful. But they only came as far as the front of the stone statue and stood about ten yards away, looking at the professor. The professor faced them with a smiling face.

Ah! They were not children, but adults. He didn't know why humanity had become so small in 800,000 years. Their height was barely four feet tall. Because they didn't come closer, the professor kindly spread out his hands and went forward himself. <132>

8. Where Are They Taking Me? (어느 곳으로 다리고 가는가?)
As the professor approached with his hands outstretched, they didn't seem to be afraid. After whispering something to each other for a moment, they all came closer and surrounded the professor. They picked at the professor's clothes and rubbed his hands. All their actions were like those of children.

While leaving them to do as they pleased, the professor looked at them closely. They don't wear hats. Their hair is down to their shoulders. Their shoes are made of metal. Truly, they were a beautiful and also delicate race. The color of their faces was also so transparent, as if they had never been exposed to the harsh wind, that they looked just like wax dolls. If the professor were to swing his fist, he thought it would be easy to hit ten or twenty people at once. This alone was a somewhat reassuring thing. The sound of their whispering to each other was like hearing the sound of a thin violin, and their hands that touched the professor were as soft as cotton.

"Ah! This place is truly a land of peace!" the professor said, as if guessing to himself.

How surprised would the professor be if this world, which seemed to be a land of peace, faced a great and difficult problem that he could not solve with his intelligence or strength on another day? However, the professor, thinking of informing them that he came from the society of 800,000 years ago, first turned towards the Chronograph, but already one of them was in front of the Chronograph, playing with it. The professor immediately went there and took the departure needle (出發針) out and put it in his pocket. Without this, they would not be able to go to the future world carelessly, and it would also be impossible for those childlike figures to move it with their strength, so he was relieved for the time being.

Again, the professor tried to convey his meaning with a little speech and mostly with gestures, but the words did not communicate at all. The gestures were incomplete. By this time, their number had already increased by more than 20 people. One of them, as if asking a question, faced the professor, pointed to the sky, and imitated the sound of thunder with a cute voice. Ah, he understood. It was the first thunder in this world today. The ground being wet must be the reason. So the meaning of the question was clearly understood.

"You came down from the sky when it thundered just now." That was the meaning.

The professor, knowing this meaning, was almost disappointed. He could only think of these races as being as intellectually immature as five- or six-year-old children. If that were the case, this world didn't seem to have many research materials. But the professor

"Yes, from the sky," nodded his head as if saying. They seemed impressed and offered the professor beautiful flowers. The professor received them in his hands <133>, pinned them on his collar, and put them in his pocket to express his gratitude. Then they pulled the professor's hand and seemed to be leading him somewhere.

9. How Strange, This World! (이상도 하구나, 이세계여!)
The professor, while being dragged along, decided in his mind to call this race the doll race (人形人種). They were truly luxurious and beautiful dolls. Before long, they arrived at the door of the stone house he had seen earlier. It was truly a magnificent building, and the technology was surprisingly advanced. However, it seemed that it had been neglected for many years, so the corners were considerably damaged, and the overall dilapidated appearance of the house was evident. The professor soon realized. Ah! This race is already the end of humanity (人類의 末路). This house and the like were built by civilized people tens of thousands of years ago, and their descendants, those races now, don't even have the power to repair (修繕) this house.

Thinking this way, he walked into the house, where there was a large and wide room. Rows of marble tables, about one foot high—also broken in places—were laid out, and about a hundred doll races were eating. The professor was also hungry, so he followed their gestures and sat in front of the dining table.

The professor craved meat, but there was only fruit to eat. Eating this had a unique taste, so it was very delicious. This was also the remainder of what ancient civilized people had improved by adding various artificial elements. Furthermore, these fruits had no skin or seeds, so they were all small enough to be eaten in one bite, no matter what size they were. The professor ate almost six or seven servings of theirs.

While eating, they took turns coming in front of the professor, but they seemed to be a very easily tired race, so they looked at the professor's appearance for a moment and then retreated. At the same time, the professor was in the future world, and even though he thought his Chronograph would greatly impress them, it was no fun at all with such childish opponents. He decided that it was not worth staying in this world for a long time and decided to leave soon.

By the time he finished eating, almost all of the people who had initially guided the professor had left, one or two at a time. The professor quietly came out of this place and walked around as he pleased, looking at the situation of this world, but from where to where it was all a park that combined gardens and orchards, and the doll races were happily playing here and there. They seemed to have nothing to do but play, so they were truly idle people. Sometimes five or ten people would come and go in front of the professor, but they would just look at the professor's appearance for a moment and then retreat. They had no deep curiosity and no malice (惡心).

The professor suddenly found something strange. That was <134> how they made such beautiful clothes and shoes. Therefore, the professor walked around again, looking here and there, but strangely, there was no place to make things in this world, and there was also no place to sell them. He didn't even think that there was some kind of hidden power that he couldn't see.

10. There Is Nothing, Nothing at All (업다, 업다, 아모것도 업다)
If the professor had truly felt like observing this world in detail, he would have discovered many strange things. For example, not only are there no manufacturers and no traders in this world, but there are no transportation and traffic facilities. Of course, there are no carriages or anything like that. There are houses, but no cooking utensils and no fire. There are no dogs or cats, no cows or horses. There are no birds flying in the sky. Because all animals are gone, the whole world is completely inhabited only by human beings. So those human beings have nothing to do but play. There is no suffering and no worry, so there is no intelligence (智力), no strength, and no urge to exert oneself. Or perhaps this is truly a golden world. Even so, there are children and adults in this race, but no old people. Or he might have come to a country of immortality (不老長生), and he doesn't know at all. Therefore, there is also no funeral (葬禮式) and no tomb in this world.

Is it not strange that such a world exists? Is it not worth studying? What kind of organization, what kind of secret does this great world of comfort have, and how is it made and boasted? Truly, is it not greatly worth studying?

However, the professor was dissatisfied with this world from the beginning. Even if the races that can't even appreciate his Chronograph are the counterparts, it's no fun. He wanted to leave this place quickly and go to a more thriving era of previous civilization.

The professor stopped walking and went back towards the house where he had eaten earlier. Behind that house was a high hill. Now that he had come, he thought he would climb up to the ridge, see all the topography, and bid farewell to this world, so he chose a good place to look out and sat on the grass. It was already sunset (落照) at this time. Before his eyes, the large lion-woman mask statue (獅子女面像) was visible. His Chronograph was also left there in front of the statue. It could be seen that the statue was facing west, and the entire front was submerged in the evening sunlight.

While smoking a cigarette with a refreshing heart and looking at the surroundings, this place was the basin of the old Thames River. The river's streams branched out in many directions, and there were places that looked like mountain streams, but the image of the river winding through the large park, where flower fields and orchards were connected, was truly a masterpiece. While the professor was absentmindedly looking at this, the sun had completely set, and it had become a pale blue moonlight world. The professor, after being absentminded for a long time, thought that there was no need to see any more, so he was just about to get up, and when he shifted his gaze to the vicinity of the lion-woman mask (獅身女面像), what was this? The Chronograph had disappeared. Furthermore, the front of the statue was not clearly visible because there was a moon shadow. The professor strained his eyes and looked, but the Chronograph was still gone.

11. The Loss of the Chronograph (航時機의 紛失)
There is no greater surprise than the professor's surprise at this time. Without the Chronograph, he couldn't do anything at all. He wanted to call it his next life, but it was more precious than life.

The professor himself didn't know how he flew down from this hill. He went down as if rolling down and went to the place where the lion-woman mask was. The face of the marble statue was very old and discolored. Here and there it had fallen off, and the decaying appearance was visible, but now it was receiving the moonlight on its face and looking at the professor as if mocking him.

If the Chronograph has truly disappeared, it is now. When the professor climbed the hill, it was definitely shining in the evening light in front of that statue. And when the sun had completely set, it seemed that not a single doll race was walking outside. They had all seemed to have gone inside the big house. Not only that, but there was no one in front of it. Truly, if he had lost it, he couldn't tell how he had lost it at all. It disappeared in a short time. No. There's no way it could have disappeared. Since the professor had taken away the important departure needle (出發針), it couldn't disappear no matter what happened. Indeed, if it had truly been lost, it had been lost in a very short time. After the sun had set and the moonlight had begun to shine, about an hour or so later, someone must have moved it. No. There's no way that could be. There's no one who could move it. Or perhaps he had truly lost it completely. That's right. It might just be that the place was obscured by the moon shadow, so the professor's eyes couldn't see it from the hill.

The professor looked around like a madman in the darkness in front of the lion-woman mask, but the Chronograph was not there.

Perhaps it was leaning against the shade of a tree and he hadn't seen it, so he searched the surrounding grass and trees here and there, but the Chronograph was completely gone. If the professor had calmed down a little now, he might have seen someone wandering around in the dark place obscured by the moonlight in front of that statue. But it was not a time to calm down. Still, the professor had not discovered anyone. There was something moving under the shade of the statue, and there was someone like a pale black shadow trying to avoid him— whether it was some kind of animal or the shadow of his own eyes, it created various 暗塊 in the darkness. The professor only gnashed his teeth in resentment. (Unfinished)

Increasingly wondrous discoveries, frightening scenes, and interesting stories will unfold in earnest from the next issue. The start of these fascinating events can be seen in the next issue. <136>

**Named Entities**

웰스	웰스	Wells
影洲	영주	Yeongju
템스	템스	Thames
런던	런던	London



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제2호
발행일	1926년 12월 01일
기사제목	大科學小說, 八十萬年後의 社會(二)
필자	웰스(원작), 影洲(번역)
기사형태	소설

大科學小說, 八十萬年後의 社會
						웰스(원작), 影洲(번역)
전호 중요목차
1. 藏身法의 理致를 應用
2. 飛行機에 對한 航時機
3. 한 時間에 10萬年의 速力

4. 機械와 博士는 忽然이 업서젓다
과연 미래의 세게를 날러갈 수 잇는지 업는지 알 수 업스나, 참으로 航時機의 견본은 藏身된 것과 가티 업서지고, 말엇다. 열두개의 눈으로서 직히고 잇섯든 것이니깐 틀림은 업슬 것이다.
박사는 다음으로 그 일동을 자긔의 細工室로 인도하엿다. 이곳에는 그 견본보다 몃배나 큰 실물이 잇섯다. 박사는 매우 긔세가 잇시 「이 항시기는 내가 혼자서 만들엇지요, 발명의 비밀을 남에게 알릴 염려가 잇서서 아모도 사람을 부리지 안코. ... ...」
「안이올시다. 이 가튼 비밀은 박사와 가튼 텬재가 안이면 도적 할 수 업슴니다」하고 다른 사람이 대답하엿다.
「즉 말하면 가틀만한 텬제가 세게에 업는 까닭에 아모도 도적할 수 업다는데로 도라가고 말것이지요.」하고 또 다른 사람이 말하엿다.
「이 긔계는 벌서 실험해 보앗슴니까?」하고 먼저 사람이 물엇다.＜128＞
「네, 기계의 견고한 것을 시험해 보기위해서, 그리고 타는 방법을 련습하기 위해서, 말하면 이삼회나, 수만년 후의 사회에를 갓다가 왓슴니다. 이번에는 아조 관찰만을 목뎍하고 출발하는 까닭에 단여오면 자세한 것을 여러 분에게 보고하겟슴니다. 매우 사람의 사회는 수만년 후일지라도 놀랄만한 상태를 보이고 잇는 고로, 만일 수만년 후는 엇더할 것인가하고 이상이 생각하게 됨니다.」하고 박사가 대답하엿다.
박사는 이야기를 하면서 기계를 타고, 안장에 안저서 핸들(握柄)을 잡고 「이와 가티 타는 것임니다. 자전거를 타는 것과 가진 갓슴니다」
「박사끠서는 언제쯤 출발하실 터임니까?」하고 다른 한 사람이 물엇다.
「마음만 유쾌하게 되면 래일 일지라도 출발하겟슴니다. 벌서 복장이나 짐은 다 준비되엿스니까-」
「그것은 참으로 부럽슴니다.」하고 다른 한사람이 말하엿다.
박사는 거진 꿈속과 가티 이야기하면서 일동의 얼굴을 보면서 한편 손으로 출발침(出發針)을 작란하고 잇섯다.
「오날 이후에, 나에게 뎐화를 걸어서 내가 업슬때에는 내가 출발한 줄노 알으십시요. 집안 사람에게는 그만 시골에 려행하러 간다고 하겟슴니다. 그저 사흘이나 나흘만에 도라올 것임니다」하고 박사가 말하엿다.
지금가지 아모말이 업는 다른 학사가 말하기를-
「그러치만 박사끠서 련습으로 타섯슬 때에 보고온 것만이라도 지금 이야기해서 들려주시지요. 아모리 잠간 본것일지라도-」
「그럿습니다. 우리는 인류의 이 문명이라는 것이 과연 우리를 행복스럽게 할 것인지 불행하게 할 것인지를 대강이라도 알고십슴니다.」
박사는 매우 기세를 어더서
「그러면 내가 잠간 보면서, 특별이 이상하게 생각한 것을 말슴하지요. 참으로 미래의 세계에는 무엇이라고 비유할 수 업는 의외엣것이 잇섯슴니다. 나의 둘잿번 시험 려행에-」하면서, 아즉도 말이 끗도 나지 안이하엿는데 출발침을 작란하든 박사의 손구락은, 부지중에 출발뎜까지 그 바눌을 갓다노앗섯는지, 기계는 박사를 탠채 『쨍』하고 소리를 내고서, 박사의 자태와 한가지로 홀연히 업서지고 말엇다. 아아! 박사는 출발할 준비도 업시 다만 이야기에 열즁하여서, 잘못기계를 틀어서 출발하고 만 것이다.

5. 灰色의 天地를 突破하다
별안간에 박사의 자태가 항시기와 한가지로 업서진데에는, 여섯사람이 한가지로 말한마듸 할 수 업시 놀랏다. 박사는 임이 미래의 세계로 날러간 것이엿다.
그러나 준비업는 출발이엿다. 다만 출발침을 작란하다가 부지즁에 출발뎜까지 갓다놈으로, 아조 별안간에＜129＞ 기계가 날러간 것이엿다. 타고 잇든 박사의 놀라움도 매우 컷슬 것이다.
이러케 생각을 하니 또한 걱졍이 여섯사람이 가슴을 음습하엿다. 그러나 엇더케 할 수가 업섯는 고로, 한시간쯤 엇더케 할 수 업시, 의론한 결과, 여섯사람은 놀라움과 괴이함과 걱정을 품은채로 그대로 각각 헛터저 가버리고 말엇다.
그 이튼날이 된즉 이 여섯사람은 누구든지 어젯저녁의 일이 거진 꿈처럼 생각되여서, 여러 가지로 생각하여 보앗스나 꿈은 안이엿다. 확실히 박사는 항시기라는, 이상한 기계와 한가지로 업서젓든 것이다. 그러나 그것은 박사가 우리를 속인 것이나 안일까? 그러타, 엇더한, 요술방법으로 별안간 기계와 한가지로 자태를 감춘 것일 것이다. 우리들도 그날 만찬할 때에 조금 술이 취하엿든 까닭에, 밋기 어려운 설명까지를 미더버리 엿는지도 모를 것이다. 아모리 장신의 리치를 연구하엿다기로, 시간을 전후로 려행해서 과거의 세계와 미래의 세계로 왕래가 될 리가 업다는 것을 안이 생각할 수 업섯다.
몃칠 후에는 그 여섯사람이 다 한가지로 아조 박사의 요술에 속은 것이라고 결정해 버렷스나, 그러나 박사의 자태는 언제까지든지 나타나지 안는 고로 얼마쯤은 불만으로써 견딀 수 업섯다.
그러나 박사가 업서진 것은 물론 요술은 안이엿다. 아조 항시기를 타고 잇다가 그냥 고만 출발이 되고 만 것이다. 박사는 자기 스스로가 떠러질 것 가태서 다만 기계를 단단이 붓잡고 잇는 외에는 아모 생각도 하지 못하엿다. 천천히 마음이 가라안는대로, 참으로 자기가 출발침을 작란하다가 부지즁에 출발뎜까지 가게 되엿다는 것을 생각할 때에도 기계는 한시간에 십만년의 속도로써 날으고 잇다, 낫과 밤이 눈을 깜작이는 것보다도 오히려 더 속히 변해가는 까닭에 밝은 것과 어둔 것이 그 경게를 분별 할 새가 업슴으로 눈앞헤는 다만 회색으로만 보일 뿐이엿다. 무슨 물건이고 눈에는 비치지 안는다. 그러나 자기의 몸이 큰 속력으로 옴기여 가지고 잇는 것은 알 수 잇섯다. 그러나 기계에 장치한 속력계와 년대계들은 기계와 자기의 몸이 가튼 속력으로 다러나고 잇는 것을 볼 수가 잇섯다. 박사는 처음으로 「인제는 얼마나 왓나」 할 때에는 벌서 년대계(年代計)는 10만여년을 가르치고 잇섯다. 다시 박사는 속력계를 보고서 「아아! 이것은 이러한 일이잇다.」라고 의아하게 중얼대엿다.

6. 기어코 八十萬年後에 着陸하엿다
박사는 무엇을 이상하다고 중얼거리엿슬까. 다른 것이 안이엿다. 이 기계는 한식간에 10만년의 속도로 예산하엿든 것이 지금이 20만년의 속력으로 날으며, 또한 점점 그 속도를 더하여서 갓다. 깨닷기 잘하는 박사는 곳 알엇다. 꼭 하날에서 떠러지는 물체와 가티 차차로＜130＞ 속도를 더하는 것이엿다. 지금에 한시간에 25만년으로부터 30만년으로 점점 더 빨리 갈 것이다.
그만 하드래도 박사는 무엇한아 려행의 준비를 가지지 안엇다. 따러서 사진기와 그 외에도 여러 가지의 물품을 적은 짐으로 싸서 노앗는데, 고만 만찬회에서, 별안간 날러간 까닭에, 아모것도 가지지 못하엿다. 다만 포켓트 속에 성양과 담배가 잇슬 뿐이엿다. 만일 지금으로부터 20세기의 녯날세계로 다시 놀라갈 것이면 또한 못갈것도 안이다. 이항시기는 기계한 끗헤 일종의 긴 자루가 끼여 잇서서 그 자루를 압흐로 기우리면 미래의 세계로 가고 그 자루를 뒤로 기우리면 과거의 세계로 날러가는 것이다. 그러나 박사는 이때에 임이 30만년이나 지내온 고로, 지금 또다시 뒤로 다시 가는 것은 섭섭한 일이다. 더군다나 미래의 세계는 문명이 진보된 까닭에, 사람도 신망이 잇슬터이며, 무슨 설비든지 잘 뎡돈되여 잇슬 것이다. 그런데 20세기의 헛트러진 물건을 일부러 가질너 가기까지는 미치지 안을 것이라고 생각하엿다.
이러할 동안에도 박사의 마음에는 여러 가지의 상상이 왕래하엿다. 몃십만년 후의 사회에 20세기라는 옛날인류가 얼굴을 내여 노흐면, 아마 학자의 연구재료에도 제공이 될 것일터이다. 혹은 성대한 환영회 가튼 것도 열리게 되어서, 이몸이 20세기의 일을 강연하지 안으면 안이 될는지도 모른다. 그러타구 하드래도 20세기의 말이 그 세게 사람들에게 통할는지도 모를 일이다. 다시 본 즉 기계의 속력은 한시간에 30만년 이상으로 되어잇다. 너무 지내처가도 자미가업고, 그러나 별안간에 뎡지하여서는 위험하기도 하며, 기계를 위해서도 좃치못함을 생각하고 조금식 속력을 늣치면서 가다가 그여히 진행을 뎡지하고 말엇다. 뎡지하면서 그 동시에 지금까지 낫과 밤의 혼돈하든 회색의 천지가 밝어젓다. 몃시간이 지냇는지는 모르겟스나 이세계에서는 낫 두시가량이나 되엿다.
그럿치만은 얼마큼이나 왓는지 몰라, 또다시 연대계를 본즉, 참으로 놀라울 일이다. 「802701」을 가르치고 잇다. 즉 80만 2천 7백 1년만을 려행한 것이다. 아! 미래도 미래! 80만년도 미래의 세계! 엇지하면 벌서 인류가 사멸하고 세계는 또다시 렬등동물(劣等動物)의 사는 곳으로 되지 안이하엿나 하고 걱정이 된다. 아마도 일노부터 우리 20세기의 동포가 누구 한사람보지 못한 기이한 것을 이몸 뿐만이 보는구나 하는 생각을 할 때, 박사는 일초의 무사와 가튼 것을 깨다럿고, 가슴의 요동하는 물결이 처지엿섯다.

7. 어린애가 안인 어른이엿다
박사는 아조 자기로서도 놀랏섯다. 80만년이라는 것은 참으로 길고 긴 시대이엿다. 우리들이 알고 잇는 인류의 력사는 겨우 오천 박게 더 올라가지 못하지 안은가?＜131＞ 그런데 그 5천년 동안은 사회도 변하엿고 언어 풍속도 변하엿스며, 인간의 지력은 물론, 체격까지도 몹시 변화한 일을 생각하면, 길고 길 80만년은 얼마나 인류를 변화식히엿는지 모를 것이다. 지금까지는 다 미래의 세계를 본다는 즐거움 뿐으로 해서, 자미잇는 상상뿐만을 그리고 잇섯스나 그 실은 엇더한 위험한 것이 감추어 잇는지 모를 것이다. 자기의 몸에는 단총(短銃) 한자루 갓지안이 하엿다. 만일 이 세계 사람들이 벌서 인류라고 할 수 업슬 만치 참혹한 자들이 엿스면 엇더케 할가 하는 것까지 생각하엿섯다.
그러나 박사는 항시기에서 나리엿다. 대체 이곳은 엇더한 곳이냐. 항시기의 키(舵)를 본즉 조금도 좌우로 움즉이지 안는 까닭에, 영국으로부터 다른데로 갈 리가 만무하엿다. 확실이 이곳은 80만년 후의 템스 하반(河畔)이엿다. 즉 우리들 살고 잇는 런돈이 안일수 업섯다.
박사는 사면을 돌러보앗스나, 넓고 넓은 뜰뿐이엿다. 방금 비가 올 것 가타서 풀입우에는 이슬이 매지여 잇섯다. 흙도 부드러히 나의 발자죽과 항시기의 박휘자죽이 움푹 드러갈 만큼 저저서 잇섯다. 때는 녀름의 처음인지 해빗치 강하게 빗치엿다. 아아! 지구나 해나 아즉것 그리 늙지는 아니하엿다.
박사의 눈압헤, 대리석으로 삭인 큰 사자녀면(獅子女面) 의상(像)이 잇섯다. 예날 애급가튼 곳에 잇든 스핑스와 갓다고 할 만치 매우 오래된 것 가티 보이며 쇠퇴하여 보이엿스나 그 가슴아래로, 널분 동제(銅製)의 문과 가튼 것이 잇다. 혹은 그 문속에 물건이나 느어잇는 것 가티 생각이 되기는 하나 잘 알 수 업섯다.
이 석상(石像) 주위에는 여러 가지의 풀과 나무가 잇섯다. 나무에는 맛잇서 보이는 듯한 果實, 풀에는 아름다운 곳이 잇다. 벌서 이 시대의 사람들은 꼿과 열매도 업는 무예무능(無藝無能)의 초목은 근절되여 버리지나 안이 하엿나 하고 생각하엿다.
나무 이외에 광대한 돌로 지은 집이 보이엿다. 그런 것은 20세기에서는 그러한 것을 볼 수도 업슬만치 되엿다. 아아! 다행이 그곳은 맹수독사가 사는데가 아니이라 역시 사람들의 세계이엿다. 얼마 아니되여서 그집의 창으로부터 서너사람이 적은 사람이 머리를 내밀고 박사를 치여다보앗다. 아아! 아해들이나 안인가 하고 생각할 때에 그들은 뜰로서 나려와서 이편을 향하고 오는 모양이다. 나무새이로 흘끗 흘끗보이는 의복의 빗도 아름다웟다. 그러나 그들은, 석상압까지만 오고, 열간쯤 떠러저서 박사를 바라다 보앗다. 박사는 웃는 얼굴로서 그들을 대하엿다.
아아! 그들은 어린애가 아니이고 아조 어른들이엿다. 대체 80만년동안에 인류가 이처럼 적어젓슬는지 모르겟다. 그들의 키는 넉자가 될락말락하엿다. 그들이 잘 오지 안는고로, 박사는 정다웁게 두손을 벌리고 자기가 스스로 나아갓다.＜132＞

8. 어느 곳으로 다리고 가는가?
두손을 벌리고 박사가 갓가히 가는데, 그들은 두려워 하는 모양도 보이지 안엇다. 잠간동안 서로 무엇이라구 속은 거리더니 곳 한가지로 갓가히 나와 박사를 에워쌋다. 박사의 옷을 집어 단여도 보고, 박사의 손을 문지르기도 한다. 그들의 하는 짓이 모도가 어린애들의 짓과 갓헷다.
그들이 하는데로 내여버려 두면서, 박사는 그들을 잘 보앗다. 그들은 모자를 쓰지안는다. 머리털은 억개까지 나려와서잇다. 구두는 금속으로 만들엇다. 참으로 그들은 아름답고 또한 연약한 인종이엿다. 얼굴 빗가튼 것도 거츠른 바람을 쏘여본 일이 업섯든 것처럼 투명(透明)해서 꼭 납(蠟)으로 만든 인형과 가티 보이엿다. 만일 박사가 주먹이나 휘들럿뜨라면, 한번에 열사람이나 스무사람은 때려버리기가 용이할 것 가티 생각되엿다. 이것 뿐만은 좀 안심되는 일이다. 그들이 서로 소근거리는 소리는 가는 빠이오린의 소리와 가티 들이고, 박사를 만저보는 그들의 손은 햇솜과 가티 보드러웠다.
「아! 이곳은 아조 평화의 천지로구나!」하고, 박사는 스스로 짐작한 듯이 말하엿다.
만일 이 평화의 천지라고 보이든 세계가 다른 날에 박사의 지력이나 완력으로써 풀수 업는 큰 어려운 문톄가 생긴다 하면 박사는 얼마나 놀날 것인가. 그러나 박사는 이것들에게, 자기가 80만년 전의 사회로부터 온 것을 알릴 령으로 생각하고, 먼저 항시기편을 돌녀다 본즉, 벌서, 그들중에 한사람이 항시궀° 압헤가서 작란을 하고 잇다. 곳 박사는 그곳으로 가서 그 출발침을 빼여서 자기 주머니에 느엇다. 이것만 업스면 함부로 미래세계를 가지 못할 것이며, 또한 어린애 가튼 그 인물들의 힘으로는 그것을 움즉이지도 못할 터이니 이만하면 위선 안심이엿다.
다시 박사는 조금쯤은 말로써, 만히는 손찟으로써 자기의 뜻을 전하려 하엿스나 말이 조금도 통하지 안엇다. 손찟은 불완전하엿다. 이러케 할지음에 그들의 수는 벌서 20인 이상이나 더 하여젓다. 그 중의 한 사람이 무슨 말을 뭇는 것과 가티 박사를 향하고, 한울을 가르치며 귀여운 소리로 천동하는 흉내를 내엿다. 아, 알엇다. 악가 이 세계에눀” 처음 천동을 한 것이엿다. 땅이 축축한 것도 그 까닭일 터이다. 그래서 그 뭇는 뜻도 분명이 알엇다.
「당신이 악가 텬동을 할 때에 하눌로부터 나려왓지요.」 하는 뜻이엿다.
박사는 이 뜻을 알고서는 거진 실망하엿다. 이 인종들은 지식까지가 오륙세의 어린아해로 박게는 더 생각할 수 업시 유치하엿다. 이럴 것 가트면 이 세계도 그리 만흔 연구의 재료는 업는 모양이다. 그러나 박사는
「그러타, 하눌로부터」라고 하는 듯이 머리를 끗떡이엿다. 그들은 감심이나 한 듯이 몃사람들은 아름다운 꼿을 꺽거다가 박사에게 밧치엿다. 박사는 손에도 바더들고＜133＞ 옷깃에도 꼿고, 주머니 속에도 느어서 그 감사한 뜻을 표하엿다. 그런즉 그들은 박사의 손을 끌면서 어듸인지 인도하는 모양갓햇다.

9. 이상도 하구나, 이세계여!
박사는 끌리여 가면서도 마음속으로는 이 인종을 인형인종(人形人種)이라고 부르리라고 결정하엿다. 참으로 사치스럽고 아름다운 인형이엿다. 얼마 안이지내서 악까보이든 돌로만든 집 문까지에 도착하엿다. 참으로 웅대한 건물이니, 기술도 놀날만치 진보한 형적이잇다. 그러나 매우 여러해를 지내서 그리 손을 대지도 안은 것 갓해서, 구석구석은 적지안케 파손되여서, 집 전체의 퇴락한 모양이 현저하다. 박사는 곳 깨다럿다. 아! 이 인종은 임이 인류의 말로(末路)인 것이다. 이 집 가튼 것도 몃만년 이전의 문명인이 세워논 것이니, 그 자손인 지금 저 인종은 이집을 수선(修繕)할 힘까지도 업다.
이러케 생각하면서 집안으로 거러드러가는데 이곳에 크고도 넓은 방이 잇다. 놉히가 한자 가령되는 대리석의 상이-이것도 군데군데 깨여지엿다-몃줄로 벌려잇고, 백명이나 되는 인형인종이 밥을 먹고서 잇다. 박사도 배가 곱흠으로 그들의 손찟하는 대로 쪼차서 식탁압헤 안젓다.
박사는 고기를 조화하엿스나 먹을 것은 다만 과실뿐이엿다. 이것을 먹는데 일일이 딴 맛이 잇슴으로 매우 맛이 잇섯다. 이것도 옛날의 문명인들이 여러 가지의 인공을 더하야 개량한 남어지의 것이다. 더욱이 이러한 것은 과실에 껍질도 업고, 씨도 업스니, 크기는 엇던 것이든지 한입에 먹을 만하엿다. 박사는 거진 그들의 6,7인분이나 먹엇다.
밥먹을 동안에 그들은 번갈어가면서 박사 압흐로 왓섯스나 매우 피곤하기 쉬운 인종갓해서 잠간 동안 박사의 모양을 보고는 곳 물러가 버렷다. 겸해서 박사는 미래세계에 잇서서, 크게 자기의 항시기가 그들을 경탄식히리라고 하든 것이, 이러케도 유치한 상대자로서는 조금도 자미가 업섯다. 그만 이 세계에는 오래동안 머무를 가치가 업는 고로 곳 떠나버리려고 작정하엿다.
식사가 다 맛칠때에는, 처음에 박사를 인도하든 사람들까지 한사람 두사람 거진 다 가버리고 말엇다. 박사는 고요히 이곳에서 나와, 발가는대로 산보를 하면서 이 세계의 형편을 살피엿스나 어듸로부터 어듸까지 모다 화원과 과실밧을 겸한 공원뿐이라고도 할만한 곳이니, 이곳저곳에서 인형인종이 즐거웁게 놀면서 잇다. 그들은 노는 이외에는 아모것도 할 일이 업는 것 가트니 참으로, 한가한 자들이엿다. 어느 때에는 다섯사람이나 열사람식 박사의 압흐로 오가는 하나 잠간만 박사의 모양을 보고는 곳 물러갓다. 깁흔 호기심도 업고 또한 악심(惡心)도 업다.
박사는 문득 괴이 이역이는 것이엇섯다. 그것은 그들은＜134＞ 그러케 아름다운 옷과 신을 엇더케 만들엇슬까 하는 것이엿다. 그럼으로 박사는 또다시 여기저기를 보며 거러단이는대, 이상하고나 이 세계에는 물건을 만드는 곳도 업고, 또한 파는 곳도 업섯다. 설마 박사의 눈에 띄우지 안은 일좀의 힘이 감추어 잇따고는 생각지 안이하엿다.

10. 업다, 업다, 아모것도 업다
만일 박사가 참으로 자세히 이 세계를 관찰할 마음이 일어낫스면 매우 여러 가지의 이상한 것을 발견하엿슬 것이다. 가려말하면 이 세계에는 제조자가 업고 장사하는 사람이업슬 뿐만 아니라 운반과 교통의 기관이 업다. 물론 쉬뢰가튼 것은 도모지 업다. 집은 잇스되 솟이 업고 불도 업다. 개나 고양이도 업고 소나 말도 업다. 공중으로 나는 새도 업다. 모든 동물이 다 업는 까닭에 전 세계는 완전히 인류뿐만이 살고 잇다. 그래서 그 인류는 노는 것 이외에는 아모것도 할 일이 업다. 괴로움과 걱정이 아조 업스니, 지력(智力)도 업고 완력도 업스며, 분발력도 업다. 혹은 이것이 참말로 황금세계라는 것인지도 모른다. 그런데도 또한 이 인류에게는 어린애도 잇고 어른도 잇스나 늙은이가 업섯다. 혹은 불로쟝생(不老長生)하는 나라에 왓는지 도모지 모른다. 따러서 이 세계에는 장례식(葬禮式)이라는 것도 업고 무덤도 업다.
이러한 세계가 이상하지 안타고 할가, 연구의 가치가 업다고 할까, 대개 엇더한 조직 엇더한 비밀을 가지고 이러한 큰 안락의 세계가 만들어 젓는지 또한 자랑해가는지, 참으로 크게 연구의 가치가 잇지 안이한가.
그러나 박사는 처음부터 이 세계에 대하야 불만이 잇섯다. 자기의 항시기까지도 감심할 줄모르는 인종은 상대자로 한다하드라도 자미가 업다. 얼른 이곳을 떠나 좀더 이전의 문명의 번성한 시대로 가보고 십헛다.
박사는 산보를 중지하고 악가 밥먹든 집 건방으로 다시 갓섯다. 그 집의 등뒤에는 놉히 언덕이 되어 잇다. 이와 왓스니 이우에나 올나가서 모든 지형을 보고서 이 세계와 고별을 하리라고 생각하고, 언덕우에 올나가서 바라다 보기 조흔 곳을 뎡하고 풀난우에 안젓다. 이 때는, 임이 락조(落照)이엿다. 눈 압헤는 그 큰 사자녀면상(獅子女面像)이 보인다. 그 상압헤는 자기의 항시기도 그대로 노혀잇섯다. 상은 서편으로 향하고 잇는 것이 보이고, 전면은 저녁해빗헤 잠겨잇섯다.
박사는 상쾌한 마음으로 담배를 피우면서 원근을 바라보니, 이곳은 옛날 템스강의 류역이엿다. 강의 줄기는 여러갈래로 나고, 가는 산골의 시내처럼 보이는 곳도 잇스나 꼿밧과 과실밧이 련졉한 큰 공원 가운대를 그 강물이 보일 듯 말 듯이 이리저리 꾸여뚤코 나가는 그 형상은 참으로 절경이엿다. 박사는 이것보기에 흘러서 잇슬 동안에, 해는 아조 저버리고 말어서, 열게푸른 달빗의 세계가 되어 바렷다. 박사는 오래동안 흘려잇다가 더 볼 필요가 업는 까닭에, 방금 일어나가려고 생각하고, 그 사신녀면상＜135＞(獅身女面像) 근방으로 시선을 옴기여 본즉, 이것은 웬일이냐, 항시기가 업서저 버렷다. 더욱이 상압헤는 달그림자가 잇서서 잘 보이지 안엇다. 박사는 눈이 나올 듯이 고개를 내밀고 바라보앗스나 역시 항시기는 업섯다.

11. 航時機의 紛失
대저 사람의 놀나는 것으로, 박사의 이때의 놀난 것처럼 심한 놀나움은 업섯다. 항시기가 업서서는 아조 엇더케 할 수가 업다. 생명다음의 물건이라고 하고 십흐나, 생명보다도 더 귀중한 물건이엿다.
박사는 엇더케 이 언덕에서 날러나려왓는지 자기도 몰낫다. 굴너간 것과 가티 나려가서 그 사신녀면상이 잇는 곳까지 갓섯다. 대리석으로 만든 상의얼굴은 매우 이전의 연대가 색이여저 잇든 것이다. 군데군데 떠러지고, 퇴락한 형상이 보이기는 하나, 지금은 달빗을 그반면에 밧고서 박사를 조소하는 듯이 보고 잇섯다.
만일 참으로 항시기가 업서진 것이면 그것은 지금의 일이다. 박사가 언덕에 올나갈 때에는 확실이 그 상압헤 저녁빗헤 빗추어 잇섯다. 그리고 해가 아조 저물엇슬 때에는 벌서 인형인종은 한사람도 박게서 거닐지 안이하엿다 모다 큰 집속으로 드러간 것처럼 생각되엿다. 그 뿐만 아니라 그 압헤는 아모도 업섯든 것이다. 참으로, 일허버리엿스면 엇지해서 일허버린 것을 조금도 알수가 업섯다. 잠간 동안에 업서저 버린 것을 조금도 알수가 업섯다. 잠간 동안에 업서저 버린 것이다. 안이다. 업서질 리가 업다. 즁요한 출발침을 박사가 빼어가진 고로 엇더한 일이 잇드라도 업서질리는 업다. 과연 참으로 일어 버리엿스면 아조 얼마되지 안는 새이에 일어버린 것이다. 해가 진 뒤로, 달빗이 빗치기 시작할 때 곳 한시간 동안이나 그 이후해서 누구인지 옴기여간 것이다. 안이다. 그럴 리가 업다. 아모도 옴기여 갈 사람이 업다. 혹은 아조 참으로 일허버린 것인지 모르겟다. 그러타. 그곳이 달그림자에 가리여서, 언덕우에서 보는 박사의 눈에 보이지 안엇슬 뿐인지도 몰은다.
박사는 아조 미친사람모양으로 사신녀면상 압에 어둠속으로 이리저리 도라 보앗스나 그러나 항시기는 업섯다.
혹은 나무 그늘속에나 기대여 놋치 안이하엿나 하고 사방의 풀숩과 나무잇는 곳을 이리저리로 차저 보앗스나 그러나 항시기는 아조 업섯다. 박사가 만일 지금 좀 마음을 가러안치엿드라면, 박사는 그 상압헤 달빗이 가리여 어둔곳에 누구인지 도라단이는 것을 보앗슬는지도 모른다. 그러나 마음을 가러안칠 경우가 안이엿다. 그래도 박사는 아모도 발견못한 것은 안이다. 무엇인지 상그늘 밋헤서 움즉이고 잇는 것이 잇서서, 자기를 피하려고 생각하는 열게검은 그림자와 가튼 자가- 무슨 일종의 동물과 가튼 것이나 혹은 자기 눈의 그림자이엿는지 그 어둠속에서 여러 가지의 暗塊를 생기게 하엿다. 박사는 다만 원통함에 이를 가럿다.(未完)

점점 신기한 발견과 무서운 광경과 자미잇는 이야기는 다음으로부터 진경으로 드러간다. 이러한 취미 만흔 사건의 발단은 다음호라야 볼 수 잇다.＜136＞
＜128-136＞