Magazine Title	동광 제35호
Publication Date	1932년 07월 03일
Article Title	寬大한 愛人 一幕 (A Magnanimous Lover: One Act)
Author	愛蘭 씬 젼 어―빈(作), 張起悌(譯) (Ireland's St. John Ervine (Writer), Chang Ki-t'ae (Translator))
Article Type	희곡·시나리오 (Play/Scenario)

A Magnanimous Lover: One Act
						By Ireland's St. John Ervine, Translated by Chang Ki-t'ae

Characters
William Cater: Bootmaker
Jane Cater: His Wife
Maggie Cater: His Daughter
Samuel Hind: Grocer
Henry Hind: His Son

Setting
The stage is the kitchen and living room of William Cater's small house in the village of Tonaro (Donaghadee), Northern Ireland. It is a spacious room, very bright with two windows, through which the Irish Sea can be seen. The windows are shut tight, likely never having been opened since they were made. However, the main door, which is split into upper and lower halves, can always be freely thrown wide open, or kept half-open as it is now, so there is no hindrance to ventilating the room. Facing this door, which leads directly to the street, there is a door on the opposite wall leading to the best bedroom of the house. At the end of the wall with the bedroom door, there is another door leading to the kitchen and the back garden. Between these two doors stands a large dresser (食器*), upon which various kinds of ceramics are placed. Near the street door, against the wall, a large round pot hangs over the fireplace. On the mantelpiece are some modest porcelain items, a clock, a tea caddy, and above them hangs a large lithograph print in the style of an oil painting: "King William III Crossing the Boyne River." On either side of this portrait, attached to rectangular black boards, are printed maxims in floral script, quoted from the Bible: "Thou God Seest Me" and "What is Home Without a Mother." Between the two windows is a large, unpainted pine table, above which hangs another oil-painting-like lithograph depicting "The Secret of England's Greatness," with the maxim "There is No Place Like Home" attached. Additionally, maxims are attached here and there on various walls, some shield-shaped, some rectangular, some circular, all smaller than the previously mentioned ones. All are quotes extracted from the Bible: "What Shall It Profit a Man If He Gain the Whole World, and Lose His Own Soul," <101> "Jesus Wept," "Blessed are the Humble and Meek," "God is Here," etc.
Time: Late summer afternoon.

(Samuel Hind pokes his head over the bolted lower half of the door. No one is in the kitchen.)

Samuel Hind: Mrs. Cater, are you there?

Mrs. Cater: (From the kitchen) Yes, I am indeed. (Comes into the kitchen/living room) Oh, it’s you, Sam. Please come in.

Samuel: (Unbolts the door and enters) Well, Mrs. Cater, I’ve come because I have something urgent to tell you. Truly urgent.

Mrs. Cater: Yes, go on.

Samuel: Right. Where is William?

Mrs. Cater: He’s out back right now. Shall I call him?

Samuel: Yes, if you would, please.

Mrs. Cater: (Calling from the kitchen door) Hey, William, come inside for a moment.

William Cater: (Answering from the garden) What is it now?

Mrs. Cater: Come inside quickly. There's something important.

William: Alright, I'm coming, I'm coming.

Samuel: Well, where did Maggie go today?

Mrs. Cater: Oh, she went to K'irisŭl (Kilkeel). But she should be back soon. Do you have some business with her?

Samuel: No, it doesn't have to be right now. Later is fine.

(William Cater enters. A thin, kind-looking man wearing a leather apron.)

William Cater: What's the matter? (Notices Samuel) How are you, Sam?

Samuel: Just fine. Well, I have something brief to say... it’s about Maggie.

Mrs. Cater: About Maggie?

Samuel: Henry has returned. He arrived on the two o'clock train.

Mrs. Cater: He's returned! (Voice strengthening) So, now that he's back, will he make it so our Maggie isn't pointed at by others?

Samuel: Yes, that’s right.

Mrs. Cater: Oh, thank God!

William: Sit down, eh, Sam.

Samuel: Aye, I'll sit in a moment. But first, I think it would be best to call Henry over. He's waiting just around the corner.

William: Sure, bring him in, then.

(Samuel Hind goes to the door and gestures for his son Henry to come. Henry enters.)

Samuel: Henry is here, Mrs. Cater.

Mrs. Cater: How are you, Henry?

Henry Hind: Very well, thank you. And how are you?

Mrs. Cater: I'm doing well too, thank you. Please sit down, eh.

William: It’s good to see you again, Henry.

Henry: Thank you, Mr. Cater.

William: Your father was just saying something about you and our Maggie, my boy...

Samuel: Yes, what I was saying! ...

William: No, perhaps it’s better if Henry himself says it, Sam.

Samuel: Ah, that works too.

Henry: Mr. Cater, ten years ago, I committed a great sin against you. <102>

William: A great sin indeed, yes...

Henry: And now I feel terribly sorry about it.

William: It would have been much better if you'd felt sorry sooner.

Henry Hind: I was stubborn as could be, wouldn't listen to anyone even if it killed me. I was firmly in the Devil's grasp. But now, a great change has come over me. My old life has vanished, washed clean by the precious blood of our Lord.

Mrs. Cater: Then you've been saved, Henry?

Henry: Yes, thank God. I have been saved, Mrs. Cater. When I was here, I was truly dissolute, a sinner deserving only of hell. Whatever I did, I just wanted to do as I pleased, didn't care what happened to others. The Devil had possessed me. Even after seeing the child born and going to Ribŏp'ul (Liverpool), I continued my dissolute life. But God was always watching over me, and in the end, He saved me. Not only that, but I received glory beyond my deserts. Almighty God bestowed great grace upon me. I have received countless blessings for which I must give thanks.

William: I'm very glad to hear you say that, Henry. Maggie...

Henry: I came back for Maggie. Yesterday morning, while pondering the love God has shown me, the thought arose: what must I do to express my gratitude for God's grace? I owe God a huge debt, so shouldn't I repay something in return? Just then, a voice spoke within me, saying, 'Hey, Henry Hind, didn't you ruin a woman once? Didn't you get her pregnant with an illegitimate child and just abandon her?'

Mrs. Cater: Please don't use that word, Henry.

Henry: But isn't it the truth, Ma'am? Didn't I run away, leaving Maggie and the child I fathered? I sinned and didn't even act like I had sinned, refusing to marry Maggie as I pleased. My sin was deep, Ma'am, completely unforgivable. But after hearing God's command to return to the woman whose life I ruined and quickly save her from the disgrace of being pointed at by others, I immediately boarded the next ship leaving Ribŏp'ul. I arrived in Pelp'asŭt'ŭ (Belfast) this morning and came straight here without telling anyone I was coming.

Samuel: Aye. When I saw him standing at the door, I was so startled, felt like the slightest nudge would send me tumbling down. Honestly, I thought he was a ghost.

Henry Hind: No matter how I thought about it, it seemed my duty to return quickly. But this is by no means because I couldn't find another woman there. Don't forget that. It's simply God's will. It's like saying, 'Oh Lord, let not my will, but Thine be done.' If it were just up to me, I could have married a minister's daughter.

Samuel: Aye, a minister's daughter, mind you. Understand? In Ribŏp'ul, an English woman, mind you.

Henry: But I cast aside all my desires and returned here solely to do God's will.

Mrs. Cater: (In a tearful voice) Today is truly a day to thank God. <103>

William: (Gloomily) We've been waiting ten years for those words of God you speak of. Ten years is a long, long time, man.

Henry: What are ten years compared to eternity?

Samuel: Aye, that's right. Absolutely. What are ten years?

Henry: If I hadn't returned here as God commanded, my soul would surely have fallen into eternal hell. I truly didn't know. I couldn't possibly have known that God was testing me as if by fire.

Samuel: Aye, righteous words. Righteous words. Good heavens, going to hell, that would be terrifying indeed.

Henry: Is the child growing well?

William: Yes. Probably running around the streets somewhere.

Samuel: I was thinking to myself the other day, that lad seems a bit too unruly. Anyway, he seems to roam the streets (行길) too much. It's not good for a young lad to be running around the streets too much.

Mrs. Cater: What are you saying, Sam Hind? When has he ever roamed the streets so wildly? Why, in all of Tonaro, there's no child better looked after—oh, for an illegitimate child (사생아), the child of an unmarried mother, that is.

Henry: Now, I know it is also my duty to raise that boy in the fear of God. Since he is a child born from the devil's hand, he must be offered up to God. Does Maggie go to church (예배당) every Sunday?

Mrs. Cater: She hasn't gone since that ordeal, Henry.

Henry: Then her soul (靈魂) must be saved. With God's help, I will surely save her. Oh, I cannot tell you how glad I am to have heard God's commanding voice. From now on, following God's teachings, I intend to become a vessel solely for doing good.

William: Does that mean... you intend to marry our Maggie?

Henry: Yes. Because it is God's will that I must do so.

Samuel: You heard him. If it were just up to him, he could marry a minister's daughter. In Ribŏp'ul, mind you. And don't forget this: English women are all strange and peculiar.

William: Hmm, what you say may have merit, Sam, but that's not the issue. The issue is what Maggie will say. You heard him. Henry only spoke of his duty to God; was there even a single word about his duty to Maggie? Furthermore, it was Maggie whose life was ruined, not God. My point is, I'm certainly not saying we should neglect our duty to God. If anything, no one knows that duty better than I do. But we are men, eh, Sam? You, Henry, and I are all men, eh? Maggie is a woman, isn't she? Women don't hold the duty to God as terribly important as we men do. And if they did regard it so terribly, it would seem quite ridiculous from a man's perspective. So, do you love Maggie, eh?

Samuel: Man, are you out of your mind? Didn't I just tell you about the minister's daughter in Ribŏp'ul? She's the woman he loves.

William: Henry, do you love Maggie?

Henry: I love her as a fallen sister.

William: Do you love Maggie <104> the way you'd love a woman you want to marry?

Henry: I intend to fulfill my duty through (비러) Maggie. This is the debt I owe to God. I will be a good husband to Maggie and try my best to guide her onto a peaceful path. Will Maggie be much longer?

Mrs. Cater: Well, she said she'd be back soon. She should probably be here any minute now.

William: But I don't know if she'll agree to what you say.

Henry: It's common for women to value love for a man more than love for God. But how could you know that? I wish she would hurry up and come.

Henry: Well, I hope it's not too late. I absolutely must get to Pelp'asŭt'ŭ tonight to catch the boat to Ribŏp'ul. I can't leave the shop for more than a day.

Samuel: Ah, he seems to be running that shop remarkably well. Isn't that right, Henry?

Henry: Yes, the Lord has blessed me. I currently have two assistants (助手) and one drayman (車夫). The minister thinks very highly of me. It seems I made a good impression on him the first time he saw me at the cathedral.

Mrs. Cater: Cathedral! Then have you become a Catholic, eh?

Henry: No, Mrs. Cater. I'm a Protestant (新敎徒). Thank God. In England, they call all places of worship cathedrals except for the Anglican Church (監督敎 예배당). The English call us Nonconformists (非國敎徒) or Dissenters (독립敎徒), and they esteem Catholicism more than our Protestantism (新敎).

Mrs. Cater: My, what a strange and ridiculous country that is.

Henry: But Catholics too must receive salvation of the soul, just like us Protestants. Even if they haven't received God's light as we have, we should never scorn them.

Mrs. Cater: Aye, absolutely. I always say that too. Truly, in any religion, it's always the case that there's good and bad.

Henry: Mrs. Cater, in the religion I believe in, there is nothing bad. Where God resides, how could there possibly be any corner for badness?

Mrs. Cater: Aye, that sounds reasonable too.

Henry: Absolutely reasonable.

Mrs. Cater: Even so, there's no need to argue like that. Maybe all our words are wrong somehow. Nobody can know for sure in the first place.

William: I wish Maggie would hurry up and hear this.

Mrs. Cater: I think Maggie will surely listen to you without worry, Henry.

Samuel: Listen to him? Of course, she will, is there any doubt? Unless she's a complete idiot (天痴). Isn't that right?

Henry: No, Maggie is not in a position to pick and choose now, Ma'am. A woman who has borne an illegitimate child (私生子)...

Mrs. Cater: No, Henry, please just don't say that word.

William: Even so, aren't you that child's father? If Maggie isn't in a position to pick and choose, isn't your position exactly the same?

Henry: Neither of us is in such a position. Because it is God's will.

Samuel: But Maggie benefits anyway. Look at him. Look at the way he's dressed. Just like a gentleman, isn't he! He's set up a shop, has two assistants <105> and a drayman. If he wanted, he could marry a minister's daughter. No matter how you think about it, there's absolutely no doubt who is receiving more of God's grace.

William: Well, hmm, Sam, well, yes.
(Goes to the door and looks out worriedly.)

Mrs. Cater: Will the wedding be held soon, Henry?

Henry: I will do it as quickly as possible. Before leaving tonight, I will visit Reverend Maek'millan (MacMillan) and tell him. Then I will return within a month to get married.

William: Here comes Maggie now.
Henry: Ah, that's wonderful.

(Maggie Cater enters, wearing a plaid shawl over her head. She enters briskly*, throws off the shawl. Thus, she doesn't see Henry Hind at first.)
(*The original uses 바삐, meaning 'busily' or 'hurriedly')

Maggie Cater: (To Samuel Hind) Oh, Mr. Hind, you've come.
(Sees Henry) Henry! (Falls into a moment of pained silence. Then, collecting herself) How have you been?

Henry: Fine, thank you. I've been well.

Mrs. Cater: Why are you late, Maggie? You were gone for strangely long, I was wondering what happened.

Maggie: It took a bit longer than I thought. I came as quickly as I could. (To Henry) You must be here on holiday.

William: Maggie, Henry here has come home.

Maggie: Yes, I already knew that, Father.

William: He came home intending to propose to you.

Maggie: To do what?

William: He wants to marry you.

(Maggie looks from one person to another, as if she can't quite comprehend what's being said to her. Then she smiles and turns away.)

Mrs. Cater: What on earth are you laughing about? Honestly, you don't even seem to realize Henry is speaking sincerely, doing it so openly (公然히).

Maggie: Henry, is it really true you came here to marry me?

Henry: Yes, it's true. Now listen. I'm going to see the minister right away to ask him to prepare for the ceremony. I have to catch the boat to Ribŏp'ul tonight, so time is pressing.

Maggie: Henry, it's been ten years since you left here, hasn't it?

Henry: That's right.

Maggie: And only now you've come asking to marry me?

Henry: Yes. I'll go and return within about a month to hold the ceremony.

Maggie: (Pointing to her mother with sudden anger) Henry Hind, do you see that old woman?

Henry: Yes, I see her.

Maggie: Do you have no thoughts about her? Don't you remember meeting Mother and me one evening on Kŭregafŭ Lane (그레가프 小路) before the baby was born?

Henry: Yes, I remember.

Maggie: You remember Mother begging and pleading with you to please marry me, don't you?

Henry: Yes.

Maggie: (Voice growing increasingly angry) You wouldn't forget her kneeling before you, begging and pleading for God's sake to marry me, would you? And you remember how I pleaded too, don't you?

Henry: Yes, I remember, but what about it?

Maggie: You wouldn't have forgotten what you said to us, Henry?

Henry: No, I don't think I remember. <106>

Maggie: You said, 'You're a bad girl. I won't marry a whore like you.'

Mrs. Cater: (In a tearful voice) Maggie, please, for God's sake, child, what's the point of repeating that?

Henry: Yes, I remember now.

Maggie: If I was that kind of girl then, I still am now. Look, I haven't changed a bit from the time you abandoned me and ran away.

Henry: Whatever you are now, this isn't the time to make an issue of it. I know well what kind of person you are, and I also know well what kind of person I myself am. We both know that standing before God, we are sinners deserving only of hell. I didn't return because you're supposedly not who you used to be, but simply because marrying you is God's will.

Maggie: Yes, well, my will is different.

Samuel: 'My will is different.' Look here. That's surely an attempt to defy God.

Maggie: No. I'm not trying to defy God. I'm defying Henry.

Mrs. Cater: Maggie, child, please hold your tongue. What kind of senseless talk is that? Truly, isn't doing this the best thing, above all else?

William: Ah, don't interfere, just leave her be.

Maggie: Look here, Henry, my mother and I did things to you that no woman in the world would likely ever do to a man. Do you understand? Even though we pleaded so desperately to escape this shame (치욕), you wouldn't listen. You ran away alone, leaving me behind to endure this situation. Enduring this situation is no easy task. When I think about it, oh God forbid! Can I go to Sunday school? Can I go to any meetings? Everyone knows that an unmarried girl got pregnant. I tried to pretend nothing was wrong... One day, the minister preached a terrifying sermon about a sinful woman. It felt like the eyes of everyone sitting there were fixed on me. No pity (연민), no mercy (慈悲).

Henry: Think of God's mercy (慈悲), Maggie.

Maggie: I couldn't see anything like that. All I could see was ugliness (추악) and shame (치욕).

Mrs. Cater: Child, Maggie, why think about such things? It's all in the past now, isn't it? Now Henry will marry you, and then everything will be fine for you, won't it?

Maggie: I don't want to. I really, really don't want to. Marry him? I don't want to.

Samuel: Maggie Cater, you must have lost your mind. Look here, he's become a shop owner with two assistants and a drayman.

Maggie: Even if he owned fifty shops and had 50,000 draymen, I don't care. I wouldn't marry him even if I died.

William: (Soothingly) Maggie!

Samuel: Good heavens, is that all? And if he wanted, he could marry a minister's daughter.

Henry: Enough of the useless talk, Father. Maggie, no one knows better than I do what I've done. It's only natural that you feel such anger and sorrow, but I haven't come to make excuses. I am a sinner, just like you. But I have been saved. Truly, thank God. I <107> have received God's call, and I must respond to that call, even if it means giving my life.

Maggie: So, you didn't come back because you love me?

Henry: Carnal desire (情慾)...

Maggie: Ugh, stop it, stop it. Look, I don't want to hear it. Your kind of piety (신앙심) is utterly tiresome (귀챦아요).

Mrs. Cater: Child, Maggie...

William: Just leave her be.

Samuel: No matter how I look at it, her behavior doesn't seem very virtuous, eh, Maggie Cater.

Maggie: Listen, Henry Hind. For all these long years, while you were away in Ribŏp'ul where nobody knew you, I've lived here where everyone knows me. Do you know what that means? Everyone stares right at me, turns up their noses, and scoffs. At first, there was only contempt (멸시). No one even called me by name, just 'that bad girl.' The louts wandering the streets treat me like dirt under their feet. They talk to me as if addressing some worthless bad girl. But you just stayed in Ribŏp'ul as if nothing had happened, thinking all sorts of other thoughts. Right, was that right? And it's not just me who suffers the disgrace. One day, passing through an alley, I saw several kids just tormenting our child. They made him stand in the middle, circled around him, and made him repeat their words. They'd say, 'What are you? Willie,' and then make him say, 'I'm a little bastard (私生子).' Ah, if you had been within reach of my hands then, I might have just grabbed you by the scruff of the neck and killed you.

Mrs. Cater: But isn't everything alright now, child?

Maggie: Aye, now nobody scorns me either. Because I just endured it silently, now everyone pities me. The other day, passing by a door, an old woman heard my footsteps and asked who it was. What everyone says then is always, 'Ah, it's that poor Maggie Cater.' I'd rather endure contempt than hear pity from them; that's actually easier to bear. But I didn't run away from all that. I endured it all steadfastly and raised my young child as well as anyone else. And now, after going through all the difficult, difficult times, you finally come back wanting to marry me? If we marry, you'll surely just order me around this way and that, and scold the child harshly. I'd have to listen to whatever you say, love you, respect you, and obey you? Look, Henry, why on earth should I have to do that? I want to know why.

Henry: I returned because it is God's command.

William: Maggie, perhaps you don't fully understand everything. Wouldn't it be better to think about it more deeply?

Maggie: I understand everything, Father.

William: Ah! But wait just a moment longer, Maggie. There's more to this than you think. As the child grows older, do you understand, there will come a time when you can't handle him on your own. You know that too, eh, Maggie? There comes a time for every woman when she loses grip on her husband or her child. And whether you can get them back or not depends on very trivial things. Doesn't that child <108> need a man to look after him?

Maggie: Isn't Father enough?

William: Aren't I too old? An old man is much worse at managing a young person than an old woman. People are always better off being supervised by someone closer to their own age. He'll graduate from school in a year or two. And then, neither you nor I have any logic (理) to become younger. Above all, a man's hand is needed to look after him.

Mrs. Cater: Aye, child, absolutely, what more needs to be said?

Maggie: I can look after my* own child well enough (넉넉히). (*Misprint, should likely be '내 아이도' - my child too)

William: No, you can't. You'll understand when you mature a bit. Maggie, look here, there's a time when a person is neither a child nor a fully grown (長成한) adult, that in-between age—that's the only time a man isn't clinging (매어 달려 붓지 안는) to a woman. It's precisely the time when it's easiest to fall into the devil's temptations.

Henry: My own thought is to take him to Ribŏp'ul and give him a proper education. It occurred to me on the ship coming over, if I could somehow arrange for him to study for the ministry, perhaps I could shed some portion of the debt I owe to God.

Mrs. Cater: See, Maggie? Henry says he'll have Willie study for the ministry. Truly, wouldn't that bring you honor in the future?

Maggie: No, he is an honor to me even now.

William: Aye, Maggie, absolutely.

Samuel: Honestly, the way Henry thinks of what he ought to do is truly admirable and quite plausible.

Maggie: If I marry you, will you treat him just like an ordinary child? Not like some kind of...

Henry: I will treat him as if he were not a child of sin, but a child of God.

Maggie: (Returning to a bitter tone) Was that sin his fault?

Henry: The sins of the fathers visit upon the children unto the third and fourth generations.

Maggie: Aye, so you'll supervise him sternly and excellently, won't you? A supervision he can never escape from. Hmm, even if you inflict wounds (傷處) on his body, you'll still say it's God's will!

Samuel: Maggie Cater. Your words are highly inappropriate.

Henry: The devil has possessed her, Father. Leave her to me. With God's help, I will save her soul.

Mrs. Cater: Maggie, child, hurry up and say you agree.

William: Isn't it better for the child's sake too?

Maggie: Then I'll think about it for a bit.

Henry: No, I need to know right now. Your answer is not to me, but to God Himself. Does it make sense to postpone an answer to God?

William: Well Henry, my boy, perhaps if Maggie talks this over with just you two alone, you might reach a decision more easily. Jane and I will take your father out right now and show him the leather hides drying in the yard. Come this way, Sam.

Samuel: (Cheerfully) Why, William, that's a truly excellent idea. I was just about to say the same thing myself. Good heavens, you know? When a man and woman meet, they really just want to be alone together. It's truly clever of you to think of that. That's how it really is. Ah, people are quite amusing creatures. <109>

William: Those are the ones right there. Alright then, let's go see that drying rack. (Samuel exits through the kitchen door)

Mrs. Cater: Maggie, please agree, eh? Don't be too haughty with Henry. Men detest haughtiness. Agree, Maggie, eh? Then Henry will absolve you of your fault, won't he?

William: Come along now, come on. It's alright, it's alright, Maggie.
(They exit together)

Henry: Maggie, I am very busy.

Maggie: Henry, you used to love me.

Henry: I liked you, Maggie.

Maggie: But you don't love me now, do you?

Henry: It's been ten years since I last saw you.

Maggie: Do you love that minister's daughter your father mentioned earlier?

Henry: That's neither here nor there. When God tells us to cast aside all desires, we simply bow our heads and say, 'Oh Lord, not my will, but Thine be done.'

Maggie: Is the minister's daughter a virtuous woman?

Henry: Aye. That's right.

Maggie: She's never had a baby, has she?

Henry: Of course not. Because she's a virtuous woman.

Maggie: Then she's perfectly suited for you, isn't she?

Henry: Aye, suited. A virtuous man would be suited for anyone.

Maggie: And I'm probably not suited for you, am I?

Henry: You are someone who has fallen into sin, having not received God's glory.

Maggie: But Henry, haven't we both fallen into sin just the same?

Henry: I have been saved, and you have not. I am in a place of glory, and you are in a place of sin.

Maggie: So I'm inferior to you?

Henry: Aye, that's right.

Maggie: But if I were saved too, would I become just as good a person as you?

Henry: That's for God to know, how could I know?

Maggie: No, I mean, in your opinion, could I become just as good a person as you? Let's leave God out of it for a moment. If I committed a sin, didn't you commit a sin too?

Henry: I don't deny that.

Maggie: Yes, but you think I'm a greater sinner than you, don't you? And even if I were saved, you'd still say I'm inferior to you. Yes, isn't that right?

Henry: That's probably true.

Maggie: Why is that?

Henry: Because you are a woman. It was through woman that the very first sin entered the world, causing men's souls to fall into hell. It is because of woman, wrapped in a body of shame and carnal desire (情慾), that sin never ceases in this world. To save all men from the sins they committed, God Himself came down from heaven, endured the pains of hell to save them, thereby washing away all the sins of the world. Yet men of the world seek the path to hell themselves, betraying the high God and going to lowly women. Therefore, God will weep eternally in heaven for the souls of men. Still, men <110> refuse even to open their eyes to such things. Ah, when I think of the sin and shame that woman has brought into this world! All the souls suffering in hell became so entirely because of women.

Maggie: Look here, Henry, and yet you still intend to marry me?

Henry: Because that is the debt I owe to God. If I can save your soul, it will count as repayment before God.

Maggie: What if I don't marry you?

Henry: Regardless, I will try my best. What more can be done beyond that?

Maggie: Henry, you are many times worse than I thought. You haven't the slightest thought for me, nor any thought for the sin you committed. All you think about is yourself. You're scared of God, so you're trying to buy God off by selling my body, aren't you? Go ahead and call yourself a God-fearing man as you please. So, I am nothing to you? Far from being completely saved, you seem terrified and unable to collect yourself, just worried you might end up in hell somehow. Marry you? Never. Even if I don't get saved, I am no worse than you. What if I'm better than you? Because I am not a person who fears God [in that way]. (Goes to the kitchen door) Everyone, come in, yes.

(Samuel, Jane, William enter in order)

Mrs. Cater: So, did you agree?

Maggie: No. Father, I have decided not to marry Henry.

William: Are you sure, Maggie?

Maggie: Yes, Father.

William: Perhaps your judgment is better. Alright then.

Mrs. Cater: William Cater, are you just going to stand there perfectly sound (멀쩡하게) and let your daughter carry on like this?

Samuel: Aye, I truly think that's right, Mrs. Cater.

William: Look here, Sam, I don't want to hear whatever you think. My dear Jane, don't say another word now.

Mrs. Cater: Why shouldn't I speak? Why should I stop speaking? For how many years have I lived, enduring silently without saying a word? But now I can't endure it anymore. So what kind of ruined state is this family in, eh? What kind of ruined state, I ask? To have an illegitimate child (私生子) in the family! Such disgrace never happened even once in my family home, nor in your house, William Cater, before Maggie existed, did it?

William: But what can be done?

Mrs. Cater: So, when the chance came for her to erase her own disgrace and become a respectable woman, does it make sense for her to just throw her body back, act all haughty, and refuse? And even you, standing right beside her, just letting her carry on like that, what kind of behavior is that?

Maggie: I am a woman deserving respect even now.

Mrs. Cater: What did you say? What nonsense is this, when you clearly know you aren't? You're a bad girl. You know that too. Just let this fact get out to others. Even these good people will suffer needless pain.

William: Shut your mouth! Damn woman (원 예펜네두). If you intend to talk like that, I'll just beat you down (제길헐 그런 소리를 할 작정이면 그냥 때려잡아트리고 말겟소).

Mrs. Cater: Even so, dear, I am your wife. A wife who has acted as a proper <111> wife should. Since we married, I have obeyed you in all things until now. Just because of Maggie, I've endured silently, pretending not to notice the way people lower than me subtly turn away. But all I hoped and prayed for before God was that someday Henry would return and deliver that girl from her disgrace. And when I heard Henry came with his father and said he would marry her, I can't tell you how happy my heart was—but now—no, no, dear William, tell her to marry him quickly. Henry, it's still alright now, isn't it, eh?

Henry: Aye. It's still alright now.

Samuel: Child, that's truly too magnanimous (寬大) of you, eh, Henry? After receiving such contemptible treatment, still, eh?

William: Whether she marries him or not depends on Maggie's words; it doesn't concern me.

Mrs. Cater: Henry, ask her just once more, eh?

Henry: Maggie Cater, now, before our Creator God, I solemnly ask you, will you marry me?

Maggie: No.

Henry: I will give you one more chance. Maggie, will you marry me?

Maggie: No.

Samuel: Hmm. Looks like there's nothing left but to go home. Henry, you just wasted precious money coming back for nothing.

Mrs. Cater: No, please stay just a little longer, Henry. Let Maggie think a bit more, please wait just a little longer, eh? Perhaps her mind will change if she sees the child before her eyes. I'll go call him.

William: Where are you going? Stay put.

Henry: Maggie, this is the final request. Will you marry me?

Maggie: Am I not just as virtuous as you?

Henry: Didn't I tell you about that earlier? Will you marry me?

Maggie: No, I don't want to, I don't want to.

Henry: Very well. Then Maggie, goodbye.

Samuel: This is the last chance, madam. There won't be another, I tell you. Hmph, the way you carry yourself with such pride is quite impressive. Just looking at the way you speak, anyone would mistake you for a well-mannered lady.

William: Look here, Samuel Hind. If you don't want to see the Yellow Springs (黃泉) before your time without cause, shut up and get out quickly.

Samuel: Aye, right. I quite liked your arrogance. This man here could buy and sell the likes of you and your daughter two or three times over, and still not bat an eye, I tell you. He's a gentleman (紳士), see, he could even marry a minister's daughter. Yet, because his heart is too good, he comes here now to propose marriage to the daughter of a mere bootmaker who dirtied her body. And for that, he received filthy contempt. Hmph, a shop owner who employs two assistants...

William: Ah, we've heard all that already. Now, don't delay any further, please leave quickly.

Samuel: Let's go, Henry. Truly, staying here makes you devalue yourself needlessly.

Henry: I came here to fulfill God's will. I tried everything I could. (Closes his eyes and prays.) 'Lord, please forgive the weakness of Your servant. Even if I could not move the heart of this sinful woman who seeks only lust in this lust, oh Lord, <112> forgive me in Your name. Amen.' Goodbye, William. If we cannot meet again on this side of the eternal kingdom, I ask you to consider this: 'What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?' Goodbye, everyone.

(Samuel and Henry exit together)

Maggie: Did I do wrong, Father?

William: Only God knows that, Maggie.

Mrs. Cater: This is a sin, a sin! To throw away the chance to escape her disgrace with her own hands, what is it if not a sin?

Maggie: But Mother, what's the difference between you and me? You bore a child, and I bore one too.

Mrs. Cater: I am a married woman.

Maggie: You merely went to a minister. I did not do that. That's the only difference between me and Mother. In some ways, I might even be a better woman than Mother. I bore a man-child, while Mother merely bore a girl.

Mrs. Cater: (Furious, as if about to strike her daughter) How dare you be so impudent, how dare you be so impudent, to direct such sarcasm (嘲弁) at me, eh?

William: Jane. Dear, compose yourself, what is an old woman doing? And Maggie, don't be so bitterly angry.

Mrs. Cater: Why didn't you marry him, eh? Was he not good enough?

Maggie: Far from not being good enough, I worry he's excessively good. If only Mother had heard what he said to me! That I'm a very sinful, lewd (淫蕩한) girl, and no matter what, I could never become as good a person as him. He doesn't think about my future in the slightest; he only thinks about himself. I don't need to get married. Even if I had to, I would do it to save my own soul, never just to save the soul of someone like Henry Hind.

William: Alright, child, alright. There's no need to fuss over the likes of Henry. Anyway, perhaps it was very much the right thing for you to refuse his marriage proposal. (Affectionately pats his daughter's shoulder.)

Maggie: Yes. I tried to do the right thing too, Father.

William: Aye, it must have been the right thing. Alright. It's utterly unknowable, things like this.
(Exits through the kitchen door into the garden. Maggie picks up her shawl and goes into the bedroom. Mrs. Cater remains alone, crying by the fireplace.)

—Curtain— <113>

**Summary**

This one-act play, a Korean translation of St. John Ervine's "Magnanimous Lover," depicts the return of Henry Hind to his Northern Irish village after ten years. He abandoned Maggie Cater after getting her pregnant. Now claiming religious salvation, Henry offers to marry Maggie, not out of love, but as a duty dictated by God to save her from social disgrace and redeem his own soul. Despite pressure from her parents and Henry's father, Samuel, Maggie rejects the proposal, angered by Henry's self-righteousness, lack of remorse for her suffering, and his view of her as inherently inferior and sinful even if 'saved'. She chooses her self-respect and independence over legitimation through a loveless, judgmental marriage.

From a Korean colonial history perspective, the publication of this translated Irish play is interesting. It shows the importation of Western cultural products and potentially reflects contemporary Korean societal concerns about social stigma, unwed motherhood, religious morality (likely influenced by Christian missions), and the clash between tradition/social pressure and individual conscience, particularly for women. The specific Protestant undertones of the original (River Boyne reference) are presented, possibly resonating with the growing Protestant community in Korea, while the themes of sin, redemption, and hypocrisy had broader relevance.

**Named Entities**

愛蘭	애란	Ireland
씬 젼 어―빈	신 존 어빈	St. John Ervine
張起悌	장기제	Chang Ki-t'ae
윌렴 케이터	윌렴 케이터	William Cater
제인 케이터	제인 케이터	Jane Cater
매기 케이터	매기 케이터	Maggie Cater
쌔뮤엘 하인드	새뮤얼 하인드	Samuel Hind
헨리 하인드	헨리 하인드	Henry Hind
北部愛蘭	북부 애란	Northern Ireland
도나로	도나로	Tonaro (Donaghadee)
愛蘭海	애란해	Irish Sea
보인 江	보인강	River Boyne
윌렴 第三世	윌렴 삼세	William III
英國	영국	England
킬리슬	킬리슬	K'irisŭl (Kilkeel)
리버푸―ㄹ	리버풀	Ribŏp'ul (Liverpool)
벨파스트	벨파스트	Pelp'asŭt'ŭ (Belfast)
매크밀란	매크밀란	Maek'millan (MacMillan)
그레가프 小路	그레가프 소로	Kŭregafŭ Soro (Graveyard Lane?)
新敎徒	신교도	Protestant
監督敎 예배당	감독교 예배당	Anglican Church (lit. Episcopal Church Chapel)
非國敎徒	비국교도	Nonconformist
독립敎徒	독립교도	Dissenter (Independent Church Member)

**Glossary**

마님	마님	Madam; respectful term for a married woman (older usage)
게시우	계세요	Are you there? (polite, slightly older form of 계시다)
말슴	말씀	Word, speech (older spelling/pronunciation of 말씀)
왓는대요	왔는데요	I came, but... (older spelling of 왔는데요)
해주섯으면	해주셨으면	If you would please do it (older spelling/form of 해 주셨으면)
헐말	할 말	Something to say (older form of 할 말)
허다	하다	To do (common older form)
붓잡히다	붙잡히다	To be caught, grasped (older spelling of 붙잡히다)
싳엇습니다	씻었습니다	Washed (older spelling of 씻었습니다)
밧엇답니다	받았답니다	Received (reportedly) (older spelling of 받았답니다)
망처주다	망쳐주다	To ruin (for someone); spoil (older spelling of 망쳐주다)
사생아	사생아	Illegitimate child
아바지	아버지	Father (dialectal/older form)
免하게	면하게	To make someone avoid/escape
동구라저	동그래져	Rolling over (older spelling/form of 동그래져)
부잡스럽다	부잡스럽다	Restless, fidgety, unruly (older term)
行길	행길	Street, road (older term, often seen as '큰 길' - main road)
쏘단니다	쏘다니다	To roam around, wander about (older form/spelling of 쏘다니다)
敬畏하다	경외하다	To fear and respect; revere
예배당	예배당	Chapel, church (often refers to Protestant church)
靈魂	영혼	Soul, spirit
비러	비롯하여/빌어	Through, by means of (likely older form related to 비롯하다 or 빌다 contexts)
속히	속히	Quickly, speedily
公然히	공연히	Openly, publicly; overtly
대관절	대관절	On earth, in the world (used for emphasis in questions, often expressing frustration)
빌고빌든	빌고 빌던	Begged and pleaded repeatedly (older conjugation/form)
口調	구조	Tone of voice
멸시	멸시	Contempt, scorn
연민	연민	Pity, compassion
慈悲	자비	Mercy, compassion (often in Buddhist or Christian context)
추악	추악	Ugliness, hideousness
치욕	치욕	Shame, disgrace, humiliation
념려없이	염려없이	Without worry (older spelling of 염려없이)
天痴	천치	Natural fool, idiot (dated term)
長成하다	장성하다	To grow up, mature
理	리	Reason, logic; principle (often appears in phrases like ~ㄹ 리가 없다 - 'there is no reason/possibility that...')
만무하지	만무하지	Impossible; out of the question
넉넉히	넉넉히	Enough, sufficiently, amply
매어 달려 붓지 안는	매어달려 붙지 않는	Does not cling to (older spelling/phrasing)
情慾	정욕	Carnal desire, lust
신앙심	신앙심	Faith, piety
귀챦어요	귀찮아요	It's bothersome/annoying (older spelling of 귀찮아요)
멀정하게	멀쩡하게	Intact, soundly, soberly (older spelling)
제길헐	제기랄	Damn it, confound it (older curse word, contraction of 제기랄)
예펜네	여편네	Woman, wife (often derogatory or colloquial term for 'woman', especially older woman)
嘲弁	조변	Sarcasm, mockery (possibly 조롱 or similar meaning, 弁 might be non-standard Hanja use here for 변)
淫蕩한	음탕한	Lewd, licentious, debauched
寬大하다	관대하다	Magnanimous, generous, lenient


---------------------------


잡지명	동광 제35호
발행일	1932년 07월 03일
기사제목	寬大한 愛人 一幕
필자	愛蘭 씬 젼 어―빈(作), 張起悌(譯)
기사형태	희곡·시나리오

寬大한 愛人 一幕
						愛蘭 씬 젼 어―빈(作), 張起悌(譯)
인물
윌렴 케이터 靴商人
제인 케이터 그의 妻
매기 케이터 그의 딸
쌔뮤엘 하인드 식료품상인
헨리 하인드 그의 아들

배경
무대는 北部愛蘭 도나로-村. 월렴·케이터가 사는 조고만 집의 주방겸 起居室로 되엇다. 광대한 房, 두 창문이 잇어 무척 밝은대, 그 창밖으로 愛蘭海가 보인다. 창문은 꼭 닫혓는대, 모름직이 창문이 생긴 후로 한번도 열어본 적이 없을 것 같다. 그러나 上下 두쪽으로 된 출입문이 언제나 맘대로 잔뜩 열어 저칠 수도 잇는 것이요, 혹은 지금과 같이 반만 여러놓을 수도 잇는 까닭에, 이 방 환기를 위해서는 조금도 장애가 되지안는다. 바로 이 街路로 통하는 문을 향하야 마즌편쪽 벽으로 이집 제일 좋은 寢室로 통하는 문이 잇다. 寢室門이 잇는 벽끝으로 부억과 후정으로 가는 문이 또 하나 잇다. 이 문과 문사이에 커다란 食器*이 놓여 잇는대, 그우에 各色 各樣의 도자기 등이 놓여잇다. 街路로 향하는 문 저쪽으로 벽가까히 잇는 난로불 우에 커다란 圓形 남비가 매달려 잇다. 爐段 우에는 쌈직한 磁器들, 시계, 茶箱 등이 놓어 잇고, 또 그 우에 『보인 江을 건너는 국왕 윌렴 第三世』의 油畵風石版畵의 커다란 肖像이 걸리어 잇다. 이 초상화 양쪽으로 長方形 검은판에 花形문자로 格言을 인쇄한 것이 하나씩 부치어 잇는대 聖經중에서 抄한 句로 『당신 하나님께서는 저를 보십니다.』 "Thou God Seest Me" 와 『어머니가 없이 무슨 家庭이랴』 “What is Home Without a Mother" 두 창문사이에 커다란 칠하지 않은 松材탁자 하나, 그 우에 『英國의 위력의 신비』를 표현하는 또 하나의 油繪樣 石版畵가 걸리어잇고 『家庭에 비할 곳은 없느니라』 ”There is No Place Like Home" 란 격언이 부치어 잇다. 其外에도 이벽 저벽 여기저기에 격언들이 부치어 잇는대, 혹은 楯形, 혹은 長方形, 혹은 원형 등으로 前述한 것 보다는 모두 소형이다. 전부가 聖經에서 摘出한 句로 “Shall It Profit a Man If He Gain the Whole World, and Lose His Own Soul" (사람이 만일 온 天下를 얻고도＜101＞ 영혼을 잃으면 무엇이 유익하리오) ”Jesus Wept" (主예수께서는 통곡하섯다.) “Blessed are the Humble and Meek" (겸손하고 온순한 者여 福이 잇을지이다.) ”God is Here" (하나님은 이곳에 게시니라) 등.
時 늦은 여름날 오후.
(쌔뮤엘·하인드가 빗장이 질려 잇는 下半部門우로 머리를 드려민다. 주방에는 아모도 없다.)
쌔뮤엘·하인드. 케이터 마님 게시우.
케이터夫人. (부억에서) 네 잇구 말구요. (주방으로 나오며) 아니 난 누구라꾸 쌈이로구려. 어서 들어오시우.
쌔뮤엘. (門빗장을 열고 들어오며) 저, 케이터마님, 저 마님께 긴급한 말슴이 잇어 왓는대요. 정말 긴급한 말이야요.
케이터夫人. 네-그러시우.
쌔뮤엘. 그래요. 저 윌렴은 어디 잇어요.
케이터夫人. 지금 뒤겻헤 잇답니다. 오라고 할가요.
쌔뮤엘. 네 좀 그러케 해주섯으면 좋겟는대.
케이터夫人. (부억문에서 불른다.) 여보 윌렴, 이리 얼핀 들어와요.
윌렴·케이터. (뜰에서 대답한다.) 또 무슨 일이 잇소.
케이터夫人. 얼핀 들어와요. 일이 잇으니.
윌렴. 앗다 들어가오, 들어가요.
쌔뮤엘. 저 매기는 오늘 어디 갓어요.
케이터夫人. 네 저 킬리슬에 갓는대요. 그러치만 인재 곳 돌아올겝니다. 걔한테 무슨 볼일이 게서요.
쌔뮤엘. 아니 인제 今時에 아니라도 좋습니다. 잇다가도 괜챦어요.
(윌렴·케이터 등장. 몸이 수척하고 친절해보이는 사람. 허리에 가죽앞치마를 둘럿다.)
윌렴·케이터. 무슨 일이 잇단 말이요.(쌔뮤엘을 발견하고) 어떠신가 쌈.
쌔뮤엘. 그저 무사하이, 저 잠간 헐말이 잇어서... 매기에 대한 것인데.
케이터夫人. 매기에 대한 것이요?
쌔뮤엘. 헨리가 돌아왓는대요. 이 두時車로 왓답니다.
케이터夫人. 돌아왓어요! (語調가 강해 지면서) 그래 돌아왓으면 우리 매기를 남에게 손까락질 받지않게 해줄테라나요?
쌔뮤엘. 네 그러탑니다.
케이터夫人. 아이구 하나님 덕분에!
윌렴. 안께, 응, 쌈.
쌔뮤엘. 응, 인제 곳 안껫네. 그러치만 우선 헨리를 불러오는 것이 좋을 것 같어이. 지금 저 모통이에서 기다리고 서 잇으니깐.
윌렴. 암 어서 대리고 오게 응.
(쌔뮤엘·하인드 문에 가서 자식 헨리를 손짓으로 부른다. 헨리 등장)
쌔뮤엘. 헨리가 왓습니다. 케이터 마님.
케이터夫人. 어떠신가, 헨리.
헨리·하인드. 네 씩씩하지요 감사합니다. 당신은 어떠십니까.
케이터夫人. 나도 씩씩하게 잘 잇지. 감사하이. 앉으시지, 응.
윌렴. 이러케 다시 맞나보니 반가워이, 헨리.
헨리. 고맙습니다, 케이터氏.
윌렴. 자네 아버지께서 지금 나네와 우리 매기에 대한 무슨 말을 하시든대, 여보게...
쌔뮤엘. 그래 내 말은! ...
윌렴. 저 그럴 것이 아니라. 헨리 自身이 그 말을 하는 것이 더 좋을상 싶어이, 쌈.
쌔뮤엘. 아 그러키두 허이.
헨리. 케이터氏 10년전에는 당신에게 대해서 제가 큰 죄를 지엇습니다.＜102＞
윌렴. 큰 罪고 말고 그래...
헨리. 그래 지금 그것에 대해서 퍽 미안하게 생각합니다.
윌렴. 좀더 일즉히 미안한 생각이 일어낫드라면 퍽 좋앗을걸세.
헨리·하인드. 고집세기 짝이 없고, 남의 말이라고는 죽여도 안들엇으니깐요. 魔鬼의 손에 꼭 붓잡혓섯습니다. 그러나 지금은 제게 큰 변화가 왓습니다. 저의 그전 생활은 사라저버리고, 우리 주님의 寶血로 깨끗이 싳엇습니다.
케이터夫人. 그럼 救援을 받엇나, 헨리.
헨리. 네 하느님이 고마우시지요. 救援을 받엇답니다, 케이터夫人. 내가 여기 잇을 때는 정말로 방탕하고, 지옥에나 가기 마땅한 죄인이엇습니다. 무엇을 하든지 그저 내맘대로만 하고싶고, 남이야 어떠케 되든 상관할 것이 없엇습니다. 魔鬼가 들엇섯어요. 그 아이가 난 것을 보고 「리버푸―ㄹ」로 가서도, 역시 방탕한 생활을 햇지요. 그러나 하나님께서는 저를 항상 내려다 보시며 나종에는 저를 救援해 주시고야 말으섯습니다. 그 뿐 아니라 나는 분에 넘치는 영광을 받엇답니다. 전능하신 하느님께서 제게 큰 은총을 내려 주섯어요. 감사를 올려야 할 無數한 은혜를 많이 받엇어요.
윌렴. 자네 말을 들으니 퍽 기뿌이, 헨리. 매기가...
헨리. 내가 돌아온 것은 매기를 위해섭니다. 어제 아침 하나님께서 나에게 주신 慈愛를 곰곰히 생각하고 잇노라니 하나님의 은혜에 감사한 뜻을 표할랴면 무엇을 해야하나 하는 마음이 생기두군요. 하나님에게 거대한 빗을 젓으니 그 代身에 무엇을 갚어드려야쟎겟습니까. 그때 마츰 내속에서 무슨 소리가 들리면서 얘, 헨리·하인드야 그 전에 네가 어떤 여자를 망처준 일이 잇지. 너는 그 여자를 私生子를 낳게 하고 그냥 차버려두고 오지 않엇느냐 하겟지요.
케이터夫人. 제발 그 말만은 써주지 말게, 헨리.
헨리. 아니 사실이 아닙니까, 마님. 그래 내가 매기허구 또 내가 그 아바지가 되는 자식을 그냥 내버려 두고 도망허지 않엇서요? 죄를 짓고도 죄를 진 척도 하쟎고 내 멋대루 매기와 결혼을 허쟎엇지요. 내 죄는 깊엇습니다. 마님 도모지 용서할 수 없는거얘요. 그러치만 하나님께서 네가 몸을 망처준 그 여자에게로 돌아가서 남한테 손가락질을 받은 꼴을 어서 免하게 해주라는 명령을 듣고 나서는 곳 「리버풀」을 떠나는 그 다음 배를 잡어탓습니다. 오늘 아침 벨파스트에 도착해 가지고 누구에게나 한마디 온다는 말도 없이 이곳으로 온 것입니다.
쌔뮤엘. 암. 쟤가 문깐에 섯는 것을 보고 나서 어찌 놀랫섯는지 앗다 새깃으로 건드리기만 해도 금방 동구라저 태질을 칠 것 같엇다우. 아닌게 아니라 꼭 귀신인줄만 알엇섯는걸.
헨리·하인드. 아무리, 생각해도 어서 돌아오는 것이 내 의무이겟습디다. 그러치만 이것은 결코 내가 거기서 다른 여자를 얻지 못해서 그런 것€ 아닙니다. 그걸 잊지 마서요. 그저 하나님의 뜻이니깐 그러는게지요. 『오 주여 제 뜻대로 하게 마시고, 오직 당신의 뜻대로만 이루어질지어다』하는 거얘요. 그저 내맘만 잇으면 목사의 딸과 결혼을 할 수도 잇엇어요.
쌔뮤엘. 암 목사의 딸과 말이지. 알아 듣겟나. 리버풀에서, 英國여자와 말이야.
헨리. 그러나 나는 내 욕망을 모두 내버리고, 하나님의 뜻대로만 헐려구 이리로 돌아온 것입니다.
케이터夫人. (우름섞인 목소리로) 오늘이야 말로 하나님께 감사를 드려야할 날입니다.＜103＞
윌렴. (憂鬱하게) 우리는 10년 동안이나 자네 말하는 그 하나님의 말슴이 게시기를 기다리고 잇엇네. 10년이란 길고긴 세월일세 이 사람.
헨리. 永遠에 비하면 10년이란 다 무엇입니까.
쌔뮤엘. 암 그러치. 그러쿠 말구. 10년이 다 무어란 말인가.
헨리. 만일 내가 하나님의 명령대로 여기로 돌아오지 않엇드라면 내 영혼은 영원히 지옥에 빠지고 말엇을 것입니다. 참 몰랏서요. 마치 불을 가지고 시험허듯이 하나님께서 나를 시험하신 것인 줄은 도모지 알 수가 없엇습니다.
쌔뮤엘. 암 옳은 말이다. 옳은 말이야, 아이구 맙시사 지옥엘 가다니 참 무서울 것이다.
헨리. 어린 것은 잘 큽니까.
윌렴. 그래. 아마 어디 길거리를 뛰여 다니고 잇을껄세.
쌔뮤엘. 요전에 나혼자 가만이 생각한 것이지만, 놈이 어쩨 좀 너무 부잡스러운 모양이든걸. 아모려나 行길거리를 너무 쏘단니는 셈이야. 어린 놈이 行길거리를 너무 뛰여 다니는 것은 좋지 못한거야.
케이터夫人. 어쩌면, 여보 쌈·하인드. 걔가 언제 그러케 부잡스럽게 行길거리를 쏘단니드란 말요. 원 「도나로」땅에서 걔만침 보호를 잘받는 애는 없을꺼요 오」사생아, 저 결혼 허쟎은 어머니의 자식치고 말이지요.
헨리. 인제 그 놈을 하나님을 敬畏허두록 키어 갈 것이 역시 내 의무로 압니다. 마귀손에서 태여난 자식이니 하나님께 바처드리지 않으면 안될 것이얘요. 매기는 주일마다 예배당엘 갑니까.
케이터夫人. 그 고난을 당한 後부터는 가쟎는다네, 헨리.
헨리. 그럼 그 靈魂을 救援해 주어야겟습니다. 하나님의 도음을 받어 내가 꼭 救援해 줄테야요. 아 하나님의 명령하시는 말슴을 들은 것이 어찌나 기쁜지 모르겟습니다. 나는 인제부터 하나님의 가르키심에 쫓아서, 善만을 行하는 한 그릇이 되렵니다.
윌렴. 그 말을, 우리 매기하고 결혼을 하겟다는 말인가.
헨리. 그러습니다. 그러케 해야만 될 것이 하나님의 뜻이니까요.
쌔뮤엘. 자네 들엇지. 쟤는 제맘만 잇으면 목사의 따님과 결혼할 수가 잇엇단 말이야. 리버풀에서 말이지. 또 이것만은 잊지말게. 英國여자들이란 모두 異狀야릇허구두 별낫단 말이야.
윌렴. 음, 자네 말도 그럴듯하이마는 여보게, 쌈, 문제는 그것이 아닐세. 매기가 어떠케 말할지, 그것이 문제란 말이야. 자네도 들엇지. 헨리는 하나님에게 대한 제 의무만을 말햇지, 어디 매기에게 대한 自己의무야 한마디나 잇엇나. 또 더 말할 것 없이, 몸을 망친 것은 매기지, 어디 하나님인가. 내 말은 무어, 결코 하나님에게 대한 우리 의무를 踈忽히 허라는 말은 아닐세. 큰 소리가 아니라 나처럼 그 의무를 잘 아는 사람도 없으니 말이지. 그러치만 우리는 사내들이란 말야 응, 쌈. 자네나 헨리나 나는 모두 사내야, 응. 매기는 여자가 아니가. 여자란 우리 사내들처럼 하나님에게 대한 의무를 그러케 끔찍히 여기지는 안는걸세. 또 만약에 끔찍히 녀긴대면 우리 사내들로 보면 적쟎이 우서울 것이야. 그래 자네가 매기를 사랑허나 응?
쌔뮤엘. 아니 이 사람 정신잇나. 아 내가 저 리버풀에 잇는 목사님의 따님 이야기를 하쟎든가. 쟤가 사랑하는 여자는 그이란 말야.
윌렴. 헨리 자네는 매기를 사랑하나.
헨리. 타락한 자매로 알고 사랑하지요.
윌렴. 제가 결혼하고 싶어하는 여자를 사랑하듯이 자네가 매기를＜104＞ 사랑하느냔 말이야.
헨리. 매기를 비러 내 의무를 다 헐렙니다. 이것이 내가 하나님한테 진 빗이니까요. 나는 매기에게 좋은 남편이 되어 아모조록 편안한 길로 매기를 引導해 볼테야요. 매기는 아직 퍽 잇어야 오겟습니까.
케이터夫人. 글세 원 제 말은 곳 온다구 그리든대. 아마 인제 곳 오겟지.
윌렴. 그런대 걔가 자네 말에 승낙을 헐른지 난 모르겟네,
헨리. 일상 여자란 하나님에게 드리는 사랑보다도, 남자에게 대한 사랑을 더 크게 여기는 것이니까 말이지. 그러나 자네야 그런 걸 알 수가 잇겟나. 걔가 어서 왓으면 좋겟는대.
헨리. 글세요. 너무 늦쟎어야 좋을텐대요. 나는 오늘 저녁 꼭 벨파스트에 가서 리버풀로 가는 배를 타야 되겟습니다. 상점을 하루以上 더 떠나잇을 수가 없어서 말입니다.
쌔뮤엘. 아 쟤가 상점을 이상야릇하게 용케 해나가는 모양이란 말이요. 그러치 얘 헨리야.
헨리. 네 주님께서 福을 내려 주섯습니다. 지금 助手가 둘이요, 車夫가 하나 잇구 그러탑니다. 목사님께서는 나를 끔찍히 알어 주시구요. 성당에서 나를 처음 보자마자 마음에 꼭 들엇든 모양이얘요.
케이터夫人. 성당! 그럼 자네 천주교를 믿게 되엇나 응?
헨리. 아니올시다, 케이터夫人. 新敎徒얘요. 하나님이 고마우시지 저 英國선 監督敎 예배당을 내놓고는 예배당을 모두 성당이란답니다. 英國사람들은 우리를 非國敎徒라든지, 독립敎徒라고 해가지고, 우리 新敎보다는 천주교를 더 崇尙하지요.
케이터夫人. 어쩌면 참 별 망칙하구 우서운 나라도 다 잇네.
헨리. 그러치만 천주교도들도 역시 우리 新敎徒들과 마챦가지 영혼의 救援을 받어야지요. 우리와 같이 하나님의 빛을 받고 난 사람이 아닐지라도 도저히 경멸해서는 안될 것입니다.
케이터夫人. 암 그러쿠말구. 나도 일상 그러케 말하네. 정말이지 어느 敎든지 매양 마찬가지루, 그저 좋은 것도 잇고 나쁜 것도 잇는 법이야.
헨리. 케이터夫人, 내가 믿는 敎에는 나쁜 거란 없습니다. 하나님이 계신 곳에 어느 구석에 나쁜 것이 잇을 수가 잇겟서요.
케이터夫人. 암 그 말도 당연한가보이.
헨리. 당연허구 말구요.
케이터夫人. 그건 그러타 해두 그러케 싸울 것은 못되는 거지. 어쩌다 우리말이 모두다 틀렷는지도 모르는거야. 당초에 아모도 알 수 없는 노릇이지.
윌렴. 어서 매기가 와서 이 말을 좀 들엇으면 좋겟는대.
케이터夫人. 내 생각같아서는 념려없이 매기도 자네 말을 들을걸세, 헨리.
쌔뮤엘. 말을 들어요? 듣구말구, 여부가 잇소. 天痴가 아닌 담에야. 그러치않소?
헨리. 아니 매기가 지금와서 좋다 싫다할 처지가 아닙니다, 마님. 私生子를 낳은 여자가...
케이터夫人. 아니, 헨리, 제발 그말만을 말어주게.
윌렴. 그건 그러타 해도 자네는 그 놈의 아버지가 아닌가. 매기가 좋다 낮브다 할 처지가 아니라면 자네 처지도 역시 마찮가지 아니냔 말이야.
헨리. 우리 두사람이 다 그럴 처지가 못되지요. 하나님의 뜻이니깐요.
쌔뮤엘. 그러치만 어차피 매기가 이익이지. 쟤를 보게. 저 옷닙은 모양을 보란말야. 꼭 신사같쟎어! 상점을 차려놓고 助手가＜105＞ 둘, 車夫가 하나 잇겟다. 제맘만 잇으면 목수의 따님허구 결혼할 수도 잇겟다. 아무리 생각해봐야 하나님의 은총을 누가 더 입는 것인지 조금도 의심이 없는 것일세.
윌렴. 딴은, 음, 쌈, 딴은, 그러이.
(문으로 가서 근심스러히 내다본다.)
케이터夫人. 결혼식은 곳 지낼텐가, 헨리.
헨리. 될 수 잇는데까지 속히 하겟습니다. 오늘밤 떠나기전에 매크밀란목사를 찾어가서 말슴드리겟습니다. 그리고 한달안으로 돌아와서 결혼을 하겟습니다.
헨렴. 인제 매기가 온다.
윌리. 아이 참 잘됏습니다.
(매기·케이터 등장. 縱橫으로 줄진 숄을 머리에 썻다. *바삐 들어오며, 숄을 집어 던진다. 그래 맨처음은 헨리·하이드를 보지 못한다.)
매기·케이터. (쌔뮤엘·하인드에게) 아이구 하인드氏, 오섯습니까.
(헨리를 본다) 헨리! (잠시 괴로운 침묵에 빠진다. 그러다 정신을 수습해 가지고) 안녕하섯지요.
헨리. 네 고맙습니다. 잘 잇엇어요.
케이터夫人. 왜 늦엇니, 매기야. 이상하게도 오래 안돌아오기에 어쩐일인가 햇엇다.
매기. 생각보담 좀 늦어젓어요. 할 수 잇는대까지 속히 오는게 이러탑니다. (헨리에게) 아마 休暇가 되어 오섯지요.
윌렴. 매기야 저 헨리는 집에 왓는대.
매기. 그래, 나두 벌서 알엇어요, 아버지.
윌렴. 집에 온 것은 너한테 청혼을 할랴는 것이야.
매기. 무얼해요?
윌렴. 너허구 결혼하고 싶단 말이야.
(매기는 마치 自己에게 하는 말을 확실이 이해치못한 사람이 하듯이, 이 사람 저 사람 번갈러 처다본다. 그리고는 웃으며 비껴서 간다.)
케이터夫人. 대관절 어쨋다구 무얼 웃는거냐. 정말이지 헨리는 진심으로 말허는건 줄도 모르고, 公然히.
매기. 헨리, 그래 당신이 나허구 결혼하랴 왓단 말이 정말이요.
헨리. 네 정말입니다. 자 내말 들어요. 나는 인제 곳 목사님한테 가서 式을 위해 준비해 달라고 부탁하겟습니다. 오늘 밤으로 리버풀에 가는 배를 타얄테니깐, 한時가 바쁨니다.
매기. 헨리, 당신이 여길 떠난 지 10년이나 되엇지요.
헨리. 그럿습니다.
매기. 그래 가지구 인제사 겨우 나허구 결혼하겟다구 왓어요.
헨리. 네. 갓다가 한 一朔안으로 돌아와서 式을 지내겟습니다.
매기. (급격한 분노를 가지고 어머니를 가르키며) 헨리·하인드, 저 늙은이를 보십니까.
헨리. 네 봅니다.
매기. 그래 저이에게 대해서 아무 생각도 없습니까. 저 애기가 나기전 어떤 저녁에 그레가프 小路에서 어머니허고 나허구 맞나본 것을 기억못하겟서요.
헨리. 네, 생각납니다.
매기. 당신보고 제발 나허구 결혼해달라고, 어머니가 빌고빌든 것을 기억하지요.
헨리. 네.
매기. (漸漸 더 분노한 口調로) 어머니가 당신앞에 무릎을 꿇고, 제발 하나님덕분에 나와 결혼해 달라고 빌고비든 것을 잊지 않겟지요. 또 내가 얼마나 애원하든 것도 기억하지요.
헨리. 네, 기억합니다마는 그래 그게 어떠타는 말이얘요.
매기. 당신이 우리보고 한 말을 잊지 않엇겟지요, 헨리.
헨리. 아니, 생각안나는걸요.＜106＞
메기. 『너는 나쁜게집이다. 너같은 매춘부같은 년하구는 결혼하쟎는다』구 햇지요.
케이터夫人. (우름섞인 목소리로) 매기야 제발 하나님덕분에, 얘야 그걸 또 되푸리할 것이 뭐냐.
헨리. 네, 생각납니다.
매기. 나는 그때 그런 계집이면 지금도 그럿소. 여보, 나는 당신이 나를 버리고 도망가든 때나 조금두 다름없어요.
헨리. 당신이 지금 무엇이든, 그걸 문제삼을 때가 아닙니다. 당신이 어떤 사람이란 것도 잘 알고, 또 내 自身이 어떤 사람이란 것도 亦 잘 압니다. 우리는 둘이 다 하나님앞에 서면 지옥에나 빠저 싼 죄인이란 것을 잘 알어요. 내가 돌아온 것은 무어, 당신이 그전 당신이 아니라구해서가 아니라 그저 당신과 결혼하는 것이 하나님의 뜻이니까 그런게지요.
매기. 네, 그러타면 내 뜻은 그러치 않어요.
쌔뮤엘. 내 뜻은 그러쟎다. 이거봐. 그건 하나님에게 반항할려고 함에 틀림이 없는 것이야.
매기. 아니요. 하나님에게 반항할려는 것이 아닙니다. 헨리에게 반항하는 것이지요.
케이터夫人. 매기, 얘야, 제발 입을 다므러라. 그게 무슨 정신없는 수작이냐. 정말이지, 무엇보다도 이러케하는 것이 제일이 아니고 무어냐.
윌렴. 아 참견말구, 그냥 두어요.
매기. 여보 헨리, 세상에 여자가 되어서 사내에게 해본 일도 없을 짓을 나하고 우리 어머니는 당신한테 다 한 것이야요. 알아들어요. 그처럼 이 치욕을 免하게 해달라고 애원하는 대도 당신은 들어 주쟎엇지요. 혼자서 도망을 해버리고, 나혼자 남어 잇어 이꼴을 겪고 잇으라니. 이 꼴을 겪고 잇나니 쉬운 노릇이 아닙니다. 그런 것을 생각해보면 아이구 하나님 맙시사! 安息日학교엘 갈 수가 잇어요, 무슨 會合엘 갈 수가 잇어요. 누구나 할 것없이 시집도 안간 게집년이 아이를 뱃다고 다 알지요. 내딴은 혼자서 아모련 일도 없은 척 해도 보앗어요...언젠가는 목사가 죄를 지은 여펜네에 대한 무서운 설교를 합디다. 그때 거기 앉엇는 사람들의 눈이 모두 다 내게로 모이는 것 같습디다. 연민도 없고 慈悲도 없어요.
헨리. 하나님의 慈悲를 생각하십시요, 매기.
매기. 내게는 그런 건 보이지도 않습디다. 그저 보이는거라고는 추악과 치욕밖에는 없엇어요.
케이터夫人. 얘, 매기야, 그런 걸 왜 생각허니. 인제 다 지나간 일이 아니야. 인제 헨리가 너허구 결혼을 해줄테고, 그러면 너도 아모 일없이 될 것이 아니겟니.
매기. 난 싫어요. 난, 정말, 싫어요. 저이와 결혼을 하다니, 난 싫어요.
쌔뮤엘. 매기·케이터, 아마 정신이 나간 모양이구면. 이거봐, 쟤는 상점주인이 되어서 助手가 둘이요, 車夫하나가 잇단 말이야.
매기. 상점을 쉬인 개를 가젓고, 車夫를 5萬名이나 가젓다해도 내가 알 것없어요. 죽어두 결혼하쟎겟어요.
윌렴. (진정시키며) 매기야!
쌔뮤엘. 앗다 그뿐인가. 또 제맘만 잇으면 목사의 따님과 결혼할 수도 잇는거란 말이야.
헨리. 앗다, 쓸데없는 말일랑은 마세요, 아버지. 매기, 내가 한 짓을 나에서 더 잘 아는 사람은 없을겝니다. 당신이 그러케 분노허구 애통해하는 것도 당연한 일이지오만, 그러나 나는 무슨 변명을 허라 온 것이 아닙니다. 나도 당신과 똑같은 죄많은 죄인입니다. 그러치만 나는 救援을 받엇서요. 참 하나님께서 고마우시지요. 나는 하나님의＜107＞ 부르심을 받엇으니, 생명을 내놓고도 그 부르심에 보답을 해야겟습니다.
매기. 그럼, 당신이 돌아온 것은 나를 사랑하기 때문이 아니지요.
헨리. 육체의 情慾이...
매기. 앗다 고만둬요, 고만둬, 여보 듣기싫어요. 당신의 신앙심같은 것 도모지 귀챦어요.
케이터夫人. 얘, 매기야...
윌렴. 그냥 두어요.
쌔뮤엘. 암만 보아야 그하는 행동이 매우 착한 것 같지는 않은걸, 응 매기·케이터.
매기. 말들어요, 헨리·하인드. 이 기나긴 세월을 당신은 아모도 아는 사람없는 「리버풀」에 가 잇는 동안 나는 나를 누구나 다 아는 여기서 살어왓어요. 그래 그 말이 무슨 말인지 알어요? 누구나 할것없이 나를 뚜러지게 처다보며, 코를 웃죽들고 비웃는단 말이요. 그저 처음에는 한갓 멸시밖에는 없엇어요. 나를 나쁜 게집이라고 한 사람도 불러주는 사람이 없지요. 길거리를 댕기는 놈들은 나를 마치 저의 신바닥의 몬지나같이 알지요. 그저 보잘것없는 나쁜 게집이나 대하는 듯이 내게다 말을 해요. 그러치만 당신은 사뭇 아뭇 일이나 없엇는 듯이 리버풀에 잇으면서 별별 딴생각만 하고 잇엇지요. 그래, 그래야 옳단 말이요? 그리구 욕을 보는 것이 나뿐만 아니얘요. 언젠가 어떤 골목을 지나가누라니깐 여러 애자식놈들이 우리 애기를 그냥 골려대고 잇지않겟어요. 걔를 가운대에 세워놓고 죽 둘러서서 저의들의 말을 따라 허라는대 이런 짓을 합디다. 『너는 무엇이냐? 윌리야』하드니 그담엔 걔더러 말하라는 것이 『나는 쪼꼬만 私生子다』라 하쟎겟서요. 아 그때 만일 당신이 내손 가까히 잇기만 햇드랴면 그냥 멱덜미를 웅켜잡고 죽여 버리기도 햇겟소.
케이터夫人. 그러치만 인제 다 무사하게 되지않엇니, 얘야.
매기. 암 인젠 아무두 나를 경멸도 하쟎지도. 그저 꾹 참고 살어오니깐, 인제 와서는 모두들 나를 불상하다고들 합니다. 언젠가는 문앞을 지나가누라니깐 어떤 늙은예편네가 내 발자최를 듣고 누구냐고 물어요. 그럴 때 모두들 하는 말은 『아 저 불상한 매기·케이터로군요』라구 언제나 그럽니다. 그것들한테 불상탄 말을 듣기보다는 차라리 멸시를 받는 편이 외레 더 참기가 낫겟서요. 그러타고 나는 그 모든 것을 피해 도망가지는 않엇어요. 그 모든 것을 억세게 견뎌가며, 어린 자식도 남 지지않게 키여 왓습니다. 그런대 지금 어렵고 어려운 일을 다 겪고 나니깐 인제사 겨우 나허구 결혼하려 돌아왓다구요. 결혼을 하면 긔필코 내게 이래라 저래라 부리기만 하고, 애기를 막 야단할테지요. 당신말이라면 무어나 들어야되고 당신을 사랑하고, 존경하고, 복종해야 된단 말이지요. 여보, 헨리, 그건 대체 왜 그래야 된단 말이요. 그것이 알고 싶습니다.
헨리. 내가 돌아온 것은 하나님의 명령 때문입니다.
윌렴. 매기야, 아마 너는 모든 것을 잘 이해하지 못하는 것 같다. 좀더 깊이 생각해보는 것이 낫지않겟니.
매기. 나는 죄다 이해합니다, 아버지.
윌렴. 아! 그러나 잠깐만 더 기다려 매기야. 이것은 네가 생각하는 以上의 무엇이 잇는 것이다. 어린 것이 漸漸 커가면 아라듯겟니, 네손으로는 도저히 그 애를 감당못할 때가 온다. 너도 알지, 응, 매기야. 세상 여자란 어느 때든 한번은 제 남편이나 또는 자식을 손에서 노치게 될 때가 오는 것이야. 그런대 그걸 다시 도로 찾어드리며 못찾어드리는 것은 아주 사소한 일에 달린거란 말이다. 그애는＜108＞ 그애를 돌아보아 줄 남자가 필요한 것이 아니냐.
매기. 아버지만 게시면 훌륭하쟎어요.
윌렴. 나야 너무 늙지 않엇니. 젊은이를 거느리기엔 늙은 사내가 외레 늙은 예펜네보다 훨신 못한 것이란다. 사람이란 일상 제 나이에 가까운 사람에게 감독을 받는데서 더 나을 것이 없는 것이야. 걔도 한 해나 두 해만 지나면 학교도 졸업할테고. 그러니, 그러면 너나, 내나 더 젊어질 理는 만무하지. 아모래도 걔를 보살펴 줄 사내손이 우선 필요하다.
케이터夫人. 암은, 얘야, 그러쿠 말구, 다시 말할것잇니.
매기. 내*도 넉넉히 돌보아 줄 수 잇습니다.
윌렴. 아니야, 못한다. 인제 좀 철이 들면 안된다. 매기야, 이것봐, 사람이란 어린애도 아니고, 長成한 사람도 아닌 때, 그때가 말하자면 중간치기 나이가 되어서―사내가 여자에게 매어 달려 붓지 안는 때가 그땔뿐이다. 그저 무엇보다도 손쉽게 악마의 꼬임에 들어가기 똑 알맞은 때란 말이야.
헨리. 나혼자 생각에는, 걔를 리버풀로 대리구 가서 적당한 교육을 시킬가 하는대요. 배를 타고 오면서 생각나게지만, 어떠케 걔를 목사공부를 시킬 수가 잇엇으면 내가 하나님한테 진 빗을 얼마간이라도 벗어버릴 수가 잇지않을가 싶두군요.
케이터夫人. 자 보아 매기야, 헨리가 윌리를 목사공부를 시킨다지 안니. 정말이지 그러면 외레 걔가 장래 네게 명예가 될 것이 아니냐.
매기. 아니 지금도 걔는 내게 명예입니다.
윌렴. 암 매기야 그러쿠 말구.
쌔뮤엘. 참말이지, 헨리가 제가 해야할 것을 생각해내는 대는 참 신통허구두 아주 그럴듯하단 말이야.
매기. 만일 내가 당신허구 결혼을 한다면 걔를 보통애나 마챤가지로 여기겟소? 저 무슨 私...
헨리. 걔가 죄악의 자식이 아니라 하나님이 자식이나 다름없다는 듯이 그러케 여기지요.
매기. (비통한 語調로 다시 되어) 그 죄가 걔가 지은 죄요?
헨리. 先祖의 죄가 3, 4代까지 그 자손에게 이르는 것입니다.
매기. 암 그래서 당신은 경츠게 훌륭하게 걔를 잘 감독할테지요. 걔가 영 벗어날 수도 없는 그런 감독을요. 응, 사뭇 걔몸에 傷處를 내놓고도 그것이 역시 하나님의 뜻이라고 하겟지요!
쌔뮤엘. 매기·캐이터. 말이 매우 적당치 못헌걸.
헨리. 마귀가 들어서 그럿습니다, 아버지. 내게 맽겨 두세요. 하나님의 도옴을 받어 그 영혼을 救援해 줄텝니다.
케이터夫人. 매기야 얘, 어서 승낙한다고 해라.
윌렴. 어린 것을 위해서도 그러커는 것이 좋지 않으냐.
매기. 그럼 좀 생각해 보겟습니다.
헨리. 아니 난 금방 알어야겟어요. 당신의 대답은 내게 하는 것이 아니라 하나님 自身에게 하는 것입니다. 하나님에게 대답을 延期하다니 말이 되우.
윌렴. 저 헨리, 여보게 아마 매기를 자네하고 단 두리서만 이얘기하게하면, 둘이서 쉽게 결정을 지을 것 같으이. 제인허구, 나는, 시방 곳 자네 아버지를 모시고 나가서 뜰에 세운 皮革들 광을 보여 들이겟네. 자, 이리오게, 쌈.
쌔뮤엘. (경쾌하게) 아니 참 윌렴, 건 참 신통허구도 좋은 의견일세. 나도 막 그 말을 할가하든 길일세. 앗다 알겟나. 남녀가 서로 맞나면 정말 단둘이만 잇을려고 하는 것일세. 자네가 아 그것을 생각한 것은 참말 신통한걸. 실상은 그런거야. 아이 참 사람이란 무척 우서운거지.＜109＞ 윌렴. 저것들이 바루 그걸세. 자 그럼 어서 가서 그 광을 좀 보세. (쌔뮤엘 부엌문으로 퇴장)
케이터夫人. 매기야 제발 승낙해라, 응. 헨리에게 너무 거만하게 구지말어. 사내란 거만이 질색이란다. 매기야 승낙을 해 응. 그러면 헨리가 네 허물을 免하게 해줄 것이 아니냐.
윌렴. 어서와요, 앗다, 어서와. 좋다 좋아 매기야.
(둘이 같이 퇴장)
헨리. 매기, 난 매우 바쁨니다.
매기. 헨리, 그 전엔 나를 사랑해 주엇어요.
헨리. 당신을 좋아햇지요, 매기.
매기. 그러치만 지금은 나를 사랑챦지요.
헨리. 내가 당신을 마즈막 본 것이 10년이나 되니깐요.
매기. 아까 당신 아버지가 말슴하든 저 목사의 딸인가는 사랑허십니까.
헨리. 그런건, 이러니 저러니 할 것이 아닙니다. 하나님께서 우리들에게 모든 욕망을 다 내버리라고 하시면 그저 우리는 머리를 숙으리고 『오 주여. 저의 뜻이 아니라 오직 당신의 뜻대로만 일우어지이다』할 뿐이지요.
매기. 목사의 딸이란 선량한 여자얘요?
헨리. 암. 그러치요.
매기. 한번도 애기를 낫챦엇지요.
헨리. 물론이지요. 선량한 여자니깐.
매기. 그럼 그 여자는 당신에게 꼭 적당하지요.
헨리. 암 적당하지요. 선량한 남자이면 아모에게도 적당할 것입니다.
매기. 그리구 아마 나는 당신에게 적당챦지요.
헨리. 당신은 하나님의 영광을 못받고 죄악에 빠진 사람입니다.
매기. 그러치만 헨리, 죄악에 빠지기는 우리들이 다 마찬가지가 아니요?
헨리. 나는 救援을 받엇고, 당신은 못받엇습니다. 나는 영광의 자리에 잇고, 당신은 죄악의 자리에 잇는 거지요.
매기. 그럼 나는 당신만 못하단 말이지요?
헨리. 암, 그러치요.
매기. 그러치만 나도 救援만 받으면 역시 당신과 똑같이 좋은 사람이 될가요?
헨리. 그건 하나님께서 아실 일이지 내가 알 수 잇어요.
매기. 아니 당신 생각엔 나도 역시 당신과 똑같이 좋은 사람이 될 수가 잇느냔 말입니다. 잠간동안만 하나님일랑은 빼놓아요. 내가 죄를 犯햇다면 당신 亦 죄를 犯하쟎엇어요.
헨리. 그것은 否定치 않습니다.
매기. 네 그러치만 당신은 내가 당신보다 더 큰 죄인이라고 생각하지요. 또 가령 내가 救援을 받는다해도 그래두 당신은 나를 당신만 못하다고 하겟지요. 네, 그러치요?
헨리. 그건 그럴걸요.
매기. 왜 그래요?
헨리. 당신은 여자니까요. 남자의 영혼을 지옥에 빠지게해서, 이 세상에 제일 첫 번 죄가 생기게 한 것은 여자로 말미암아 된 것이니까요. 치욕과 情慾에 싸인 육체를 가지고 이 세상에 죄를 끊이지않게 하는 것도 여자때문이니까요. 모든 남자들을 저이가 犯한 죄악에서 구하야 주실려구, 하나님께서 손수 천국에서 내려오셔서 그들을 救援함으로써 세상 온갓 죄악을 다씨서 버리실려구 지옥고통을 다 당하섯습니다. 그러나 세상 남자란 스스로 지옥길을 찾어 높으신 하나님을 背叛허고 賤한 여자에게로 가는 것입니다. 그러니 하나님께서는 천국에서 영원토록 남자의 령혼을 위해서 눈물 흘리실 것입니다. 그래도 남자란＜110＞ 그런 것에 눈을 뜰려고도 하쟎지요. 아 여자가 이 세상에 가저온 죄악과 치욕을 생각하면! 지옥에서 고통을 받는 모-든 령혼은 죄다 여자로 말미암아 그러케 된 것이얘요.
매기. 여보 헨리, 그런대도 당신은 나허구 결혼할랴는 겝니까.
헨리. 그것이 내가 하나님에게 진 빗이니깐요. 만일 내가 당신 영혼을 救援할 수 잇다면 하나님앞에 보답을 하는셈이 될겝니다.
매기. 만일 내가 당신허구 결혼을 안한다면은?
헨리. 상관할 것없이 나만은 노력해 보지요. 그 以上 더 허는 수가 잇겟서요.
매기. 헨리, 당신은 내가 생각하고 잇든 것보다 몇배 더 나뿝니다. 나를 위해주는 생각도, 제가 지은 죄에 대한 생각도, 털끝만치돀 없구려. 당신이 생각하는 것은 그저 당신몸 하나밖엔 없지요. 하나님이 무서우니깐 그래 내 몸을 팔어 하나님을 買收하랴는게지 뭐요. 당신 멋대로 自己를 하나님을 敬畏하는 사람이라고 하세요. 그래 나는 당신에게 아무것도 아니란 말이요. 완전히 救援을 받기는커녕, 어쩌다 지옥에나 가게되면 어쩌나, 그저 겁이 나서 정신을 못채리는 모양이지요. 당신허구 결혼이-다 뭐요. 죽어도 안합니다. 설사 救援을 못받는다해도 나는 당신만 못하지는 않습니다. 당신보다 더 나으면 엇대서요. 나는 하나님을 두려워하는 사람은 아니니까요. (부억으로 가는 문으로 가서) 모두들 들어오세요, 네.
(쌔뮤엘, 제인, 윌렴이 순서로 등장)
케이터夫인. 그래 승낙을 햇단 말이냐.
매기. 아니요. 아버지 나는 헨리와 결혼 안하기로 결심햇습니다.
윌렴. 분명하냐, 매기야
매기. 네 아버지.
윌렴. 아마 네 짐작이 나을게다 오냐.
케이터夫人. 윌렴·케이터, 아니 그래 당신은 멀정하게 거기서 잇으면서 제 딸이 지랄치는 것을 보고 그냥 둔단 말이요.
쌔뮤엘. 암, 참말 그 말이 옳다고 생각합니다, 케이터마님.
윌렴. 여보게 쌈, 자네 생각이 어쨋든 다 듣기싫으이. 여보 제인 인제 아모 말두 마우.
케이터夫人. 왜 말어요. 말기는 왜 만단 말이얘요. 멫해를 두구서 꾹참어가며 말한마디 안허구 살어왓서요. 그러치만 인제와서는 더 참을 수 없어요. 그래 집안이 무슨 망꼴이요 응. 무슨 망꼴이냔 말이얘요. 집안에 私生子가 잇다니! 우리 친정집에도 이런 망신이란 한번두 없엇구, 또 윌렴·케이터, 당신집에도 매기가 잇 기전에는 한번도 없엇지 않엇어요.
윌렴. 그러나 헐 수 잇소.
케이터夫人. 그래 제 망신을 없애고 남에게 대접받을 예펜네가 될 수 잇는 기회가 왓는대두 그래 몸을 잔득 뒤루 잡아저치구 거만만 피며 거절을 허구말다니 말이 되우. 또 당신만 해두 옆에 버쳐 서 잇으면서 그 지랄을 그냥 내버려 두다니 그게 무슨 수작이란 말요.
매기. 난 지금 이래두 남에게 대접을 받을 여자얘요.
케이터夫人. 무어 어째. 저두 그러치않은 것을 뻔이 알면서, 무슨 수작이냐. 넌 나쁜 게집년이야. 그건 너두 알께다. 아마두 이 사실이 남에게 알리기만 해봐라. 이 착한 사람까지두 空然한 고통을 받게 될것이야.
윌렴. 앗다, 입을 다물어요. 원 예펜네두. 제길헐 그런 소리를 할 작정이면 그냥 때려잡아트리고 말겟소.
케이터夫人. 이래두 여보, 난 당신의 안해요. 안해래두 안해다운＜111＞ 안해노릇을 해온 사람이얘요. 결혼한 후부터 입대까지 만사에 당신한테 순종해 왓어요. 그저 매기때 매루나보다 賤한 놈들이 슬적 돌려 놓는 꼴을 꾹 참구 모르는척 허구 살아왓단 말이얘요. 그러치만 한갓 하나님앞에 바라고 기도한 것은, 어느때 헨리가 다시 돌아와서 저년의 욕을 免하게 해주려니하는 것 뿐이엇지요. 그래 헨리가 아버지허구 같이 와서 쟤하고 결혼을 하겟다는 말을 듣구서는 어찌나 맘이 기뻣는지 몰라요―그런 것이 지금은―아니, 아니, 여보 윌렴 쟤더러 어서 결혼을 허라구 하세요. 헨리 지금 이래두 괜찮지 응.
헨리. 암은요. 지금이래두 괜찮습니다.
쌔뮤엘. 얘 그건참 네가 너무 寬大하구나, 윽 헨리야. 아니 이런 천대를 받구서두 그래두 응.
윌렴. 허구 않어는건 매기말에 달리인게지 나는 관게없는 것이요.
케이터夫人. 헨리, 쟤보고 한번만 더 請해보게, 응.
헨리. 매기·케이터, 지금 우리 조물주 하나님앞에서, 당신께 엄숙하게 請하는 것이니, 저와 결혼해 주실렵니까.
매기. 아니요.
헨리. 한번만 더 기회를 드리겟습니다. 매기, 저와 결혼을 해주시렵니까.
매기. 아니요.
쌔뮤엘. 흠. 인제 집으로 가는 수밖엔 별 수가 없나보다. 헨리야, 넌 空然히 돌아오느라구 아까운 돈만 없앳구나.
케이터夫人. 아니 잠간만 더 잇어주게 헨리. 매기가 좀더 생각을 해보게, 잠간만 더 기다려주게, 응. 아마 자식을 눈앞에 보면 마음이 달라질지도 알 수 없으니. 내 가서 불러오지.
윌렴. 가긴 어딜가요. 가만 서 잇어요.
헨리. 매기, 최후 請입니다. 저와 결혼하시렵니까.
매기. 나두 당신만치 선량하지요?
헨리. 그건 왜 아까 말슴드리지 않엇어요. 결혼해 주시렵니까.
매기. 아니요, 싫어요, 싫어.
헨리. 네 그러세요. 그럼 매기 안녕히 게십시요.
쌔뮤엘. 이것이 마즈막 기회요, 귀부인. 인제 다신 없을거란 말이요. 허참 그 잔득 뽑내시는 품이 매우 훌륭하우. 그 말하는 솜씨만 보면 누구나 다 역낙없이 당신을 예절다운 귀부인으로 알겟소.
윌렴. 이것봐 쌔뮤엘·하인드 空然히 죽을 때도 안돼서 黃泉구경을 하구 싶지않거든 잠잣구 어서 나가주게.
쌔뮤엘. 암 그러치. 난 자네 그 자만심이 참 맘에 들엇네. 이 사람은 적어두 자네나 자네 딸같은 것은 두세번 삿다 팔엇다 할 수두 잇는 것이구, 또 그리구두 눈하나 끔쩍안할 사람이라네. 얘는 紳士야 그래 목사의 따님과라도 결혼 할 수 잇는거야. 그런대두 마음이 너무 착하기 때문에 지금 여길와서 그까짓 몸을 더럽힌 신거리장사의 딸에게 결혼을 請하는 거 말이야. 그나마 더러운 천대를 받엇지요. 흠 상점주인으로 助手를 둘식이나 쓰는 사람이...
윌렴. 아 그말은 발서 다 들엇네. 자 인제 더 기대릴 것 없이 어서 가주게.
쌔뮤엘. 가자 헨리야. 정말이지 여기 잇으면 네가 네몸을 값없이 맨드는 것이다.
헨리. 나는 여기 하느님의 뜻을 이룰려고 왓엇습니다. 내 가진 얘는 다 써보앗어요. (눈을 감고 기도한다.) 『주여 당신의 종의 軟弱한 것을 諒祭하야 주시옵소서. 設或 제가 이 淫慾에서 淫慾만을 찾고 잇는 이 죄많은 여자의 마음을 감동시키지 못햇다 하드래도 오 주여 당신의＜112＞ 이름으로 저를 용서해 주옵소서. 아멘.』 안녕히 게십시요 윌렴. 만일에 우리가 永生의 나라 이쪽에서 다시 맞나 볼 수가 없더라두 나는 당신에게 생각해 보라고 부탁하는 것은 『사람이 만일 온 天下를 얻고도 제 령혼을 잃으면 무엇이 유익하리요』하는 겝니다. 그럼 모두들 안녕히 게십시요.
(쌔뮤엘과 헨리 같이 퇴장)
매기. 내가 잘못햇어요, 아버지?
윌렴. 그건 하나님이나 아실 일이다, 매기야.
케이터夫人. 이건 죄악이다 죄악이야. 그래 제 망신을 免할 기회를 제손으로 뿌리쳐 버리다니, 죄가 아니고 무엇이냐.
매기. 그러치만 어머니, 어머니허구 나허구 달은 것이 뭐얘요. 어머니도 아이를 나엇고. 나도 나엇어요.
케이터夫人. 난 결혼한 여자야.
매기. 어머니는 한갓 목사한테 가섯지요. 나는 그것을 안햇구요. 저와 어머니 사이에 다른 것이란 그것뿐입니다. 어떠케 생각하면 내가 어머니보다 더 나은 여자일지도 몰라요. 나는 사내를 나엇고 어머니는 고작 게집애를 나엇으니까요.
케이터夫人. (딸을 막 두드려 팰 듯이 무섭게 성이 나서) 어쩌면 그러케 뻔뻔스럽게, 어쩌면 그러케 뻔뻔스럽게 네가 내게다 그런 嘲弁을 한단 말이냐, 응.
윌렴. 제인. 여보 정신차리우 늙은이가 무슨 짓이요. 그리구 매기야 그러케 속아프게 노여워마러라.
케이터夫人. 어쨋다구 그이허구 결혼을 않어는거냐, 응. 그래 그가 부족하단 말이냐.
매기. 부족허긴커녕, 지나치게 좋아서 걱정이라우. 어머니도 그가 내게하는 말을 들으섯드면! 나는 아주 죄많은 淫蕩한 게집이 되어서 아모리해도 自己같이 좋은 사람이 될 수는 없대나요. 내일은 조곰만치두 생각해주쟎구, 그저 自己自身밖에는 생각지 안는단 말이얘요. 난 결혼할 필요가 없어요. 그래두 해야된다면 내 自身의 령혼이나 救援받을려고하지 그까짓 헨리·하인드의 령혼이나 救援해줄려구는 결쿠 허쟎겟어요.
윌렴. 얘 좋다 오냐. 헨리같은 것을 가지구 어찌구 할 필요가 없다. 아모려나 네가 그 자식에게 결혼을 거절한 것은 퍽 잘한 일인지도 모른다. (귀여운 듯이 딸의 억개를 뚜드려 준다.)
매기. 네. 저도 잘 할려고 한 일이얘요 아버지.
윌렴. 암 잘한 일이겟지. 오냐. 도모지 알 수 없는 일이다, 이런건.
(부억문으로 나가 뜰로 간다. 매기는 쇼-ㄹ을 집어가지고 침실로 간다. 케이터夫人만 혼자 남어 난로 옆에서 울고 잇다.)
―幕―＜113＞
＜101-113＞