잡지명	별건곤
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	賞金五百圓懸賞 (Prize of Five Hundred Yen Offered)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Notice/Editorial Commentary)

Prize of Five Hundred Yen Offered

With the changing times, the old-fashioned wedding ceremonies based on the traditional customs are no longer present except in the corners of the rural villages. However, there has not yet emerged a universally applicable new ceremony to replace them, and it is a common regret that when weddings are held, they are conducted in places that do not suit the occasion, leading to unfortunate circumstances. In light of this, Kaebiksa intends to widely solicit new proposals for wedding ceremonies that can be universally adopted by publishing them in both "Byeolgeon-gon" and "Student" magazines.

Requirements ◇ Consider only the unveiling of the ceremony at the wedding venue ◇ Guests to be around one hundred ◇ Costs to be considered between one hundred and five hundred yen ◇ Proposals for the clothing of the bride and groom 

Rules ◇ Manuscripts to be around thirty pages ◇ Deadline is April 30 ◇ Cut out the reader certificate found on the last page of this magazine and send it 

Evaluation ◇ The editorial department of this magazine will be responsible for evaluation, seeking the assistance of notable figures from the educational, media, and various other circles to ensure careful consideration 

Rewards One first prize of one hundred yen, two second prizes of fifty yen, and two third prizes of thirty yen 

(Prizes will be sent within seven days after the winning proposal is published)

Solicitation for Children's Literature

This magazine, which publishes the most popular magazine for children in Korea, "Eorini," seeks to gather inspirational and factual stories that will resonate with its audience of tens of thousands of young boys and girls, as well as juvenile novels. 

We earnestly request the special contributions of teachers from schools throughout the country and sincerely hope that youth organizations and media groups will contribute ideas and submissions from students. (However, we ask that any submitted order should pass the review of the police department before being written.)

Rules ▲ Manuscripts to be around twenty pages ▲ Pure Korean text ▲ If it is a factual story, include accompanying photographs ▲ Deadline is April 30 ▲ Agree to the magazine’s editing and corrections 

Rewards One selected piece will receive ten yen, and twelve pieces will aggregate to provide a total of one hundred and twenty yen 

(Prizes will be sent within seven days after publication of the winning manuscript)

Solicitation for Cover Designs for "Students" Magazine 

Since our newly launched magazine "Students" is for both male and female students, we desire the cover to be the product of students’ works as well. You may freely select any month of the twelve months, and whether you are illustrating a male or female student, it is up to you. However, it should be noted that the magazine addresses both genders, and designs should reflect vitality. 

Rules ▲ Colors of any kind are acceptable but limited to four colors (refer to the April issue cover of Students) ▲ Deadline is April 30 ▲ A reader certificate must be attached 

Rewards For each month’s issue, one piece will receive ten yen, totaling to one hundred and twenty yen

Summary

This article invites proposals for innovative wedding ceremonies, searches for children's stories, and solicits cover designs for a student magazine, reflecting a shift in societal norms and cultural practices during the colonial period in Korea. Particularly, it highlights the tension between traditional practices and modern influences in Korea as it navigated the changing societal landscape during the 1920s.

This approach to redefining traditional customs reveals the evolving identity of Korean society under colonial rule, which historians may find indicative of the broader struggle between maintaining cultural heritage and embracing modernization.

Named Entities

開闢社	Kaebiksa
別乾坤	Byeolgeon-gon
學生	Students
어린이	Eorini

Glossary

賞金	상금	Prize money offered for competitions or contests.

懸賞	현상	Prize offered for a contest or solicitation.

結婚	결혼	Wedding, marriage ceremony.

費用	비용	Costs or expenses associated with an event or activity.

服裝	복장	Clothing, attire suitable for a particular occasion.


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제20호
발행일	1929년 04월 01일
기사제목	賞金五百圓懸賞
기사형태	사고·편집후기

賞金五百圓懸賞
新式結婚禮式新案募集
時代가 變하야 시골村구석을 除하고는 사모관대의 舊式婚禮式이 全혀엄서젓슴니다. 그러나 그에 대신할 아모나 通用할수잇는 새로운 儀式이 아즉 生겨나지안어서 婚禮를 닥드리면 에 안맞는 場所에가서 아모러케나 우물물지내게되는 것은 누구나 다가티 遺憾으로 녁이는 問題임니다. 開闢社는 이에『別乾坤』과『學生』兩誌를 通하야 아모나 通用할수잇는 婚禮式의 新案을 널리 公募하야 一般에 提供하려함니다.
要件◇婚禮式場에서 披露其會지만을 생각할것◇손님은 百名內外로생각할 것 ◇費用은 百圓으로부터 五百圓지로 생각할 것 ◇新郞 新婦의 服裝도생각할 것
規定 ◇本社原稿用紙三十枚內外 ◇期限四月三十日 ◇本誌最終頁에잇는 讀者證을 오려부처보낼 것
審査 ◇本社編輯局이 審査의 責任을지고 敎育界 言論界 其他各方面名士諸氏의 協贊을 求하야 愼重을 期하기로함
謝禮 一等一人 壹百圓 三等二人 五十圓式 三等二人 參拾圓式
(賞金은 當選案 內容發表한지 七日以內送金)
少年讀物募集
本社發行朝鮮最高人氣『어린이』誌의 讀者 十數萬의 少年少女에게 닑힐 感激性만흔 事實美談이나 或은 少年小說을 募集함니다.
全鮮各地學校敎員諸氏의 特別하신 執筆을 바라기마지안이하며 靑年團體 或 言論機關의 支分局에게시는이의 投稿와 學生諸氏의 應募를 懇切히바람니다.(다만 답답한 注文은 警務局檢閱에 通過헤야할 것을 생각하고쓰시기바라는것임니다)
規定 ▲本社原稿用紙 二十枚內外 ▲純朝鮮文 ▲事實談이면 그 寫眞지 添附 ▲期限四月三十日지 ▲本社의 添削修正을 承諾하실 것
謝禮 當選一篇 拾圓式 拾二篇 合臺百貳拾圓
(賞金은 當選原稿揭載發行後七日以內送呈)
『學生』雜誌表紙圖案募集
本社發行新雜誌『學生』은 男女學生의 雜誌인 故로 表紙도 學生의 作品으로써하고십슴니다. 一年十二個月어느달치던지조흐니 自由로 달數를 擇할것이요 男學生을그리던지 女學生을 그리던지 그것도 自由이나 되도록 男女學生을 다 相對하는 雜誌인 것을 닛지말것 되도록산듯하고 씩씩해야할 것
規定 ▲色은 무슨色이던지 四色以內에 限함(學生四月號表紙를 參照하시오) ▲期限四月三十日 ▲讀者證必貼付
謝禮 各月分一枚式 合十二枚 當選一枚 拾圓式 合臺百貳拾圓＜37＞
＜37＞