잡지명	별건곤 제7호
발행일	1927년 07월 01일
기사제목	드면錄!! 그때에 이리햇드면 只今 朝鮮은 엇지 되엿슬가, 壬辰倭亂 當年에 萬若 栗谷이 생존하엿더면 (If Only!! How Would Korea Be Now If Things Had Been Done Differently Back Then? What If Yulgok Had Lived During the Imjin War?)
필자	洪承耈
기사형태	문예기타 (Literature, Other)

If Only!! How Would Korea Be Now If Things Had Been Done Differently Back Then? What If Yulgok Had Lived During the Imjin War?
						Hong Seung-gu

1. "In a corner of Yongwan, the heavens are difficult, the earth's axis has reached its limit, where shall I go? Looking at the long river, it also flows to the east, my longing to return is like the滔滔 water."

In April of the 25th year of King Seonjo (宣祖) and Queen So-gyeong (昭敬大王), Imjin year (336 years ago from now), Toyotomi Hideyoshi (豐臣秀吉) of Japan planned to invade the Great Ming (大明), but using the refusal of passage as an excuse (借道不許에 藉口하야), he finally invaded Joseon (朝鮮). Joseon, which had not known war (兵革) for over 200 years of peace (昇平), was only in a state of chaos and loss of spirit (蒼黃失魄) from top to bottom at the enemy's invasion (來侵). Major towns and cities, including the Busan (釜山) gate, were destroyed within a short time. After Yi Il's (李鎰) army was defeated first in Sangju (尙州) and Commander-in-Chief Shin Rip (申砬) was also defeated and perished at Tangeumdae (彈琴臺) in Chungju (忠州), there was no time to defend further, and the enemy directly struck the capital (京城). Seonjo (宣祖), accepting the suggestion of Chief State Councilor Yi San-hae (李山海), decided to move west (西遷), first reaching Songdo (松都), then Pyongyang (平壤). However, the 100,000 soldiers of the Gyeongsang (慶尙), Jeolla (全羅), and Chungcheong Provinces (三南監司) were routed (潰走) before even engaging in battle (交鋒), and the two princes (二王子) who had fled to the North Province (北道) were captured (被獲). Subsequently, after Imjin River (臨津) was lost (失守), the carriage carrying the king in exile (蒙塵한 乘輿) once again crossed over to Uiju (義州), and the eight provinces (八道) were left to be ravaged by the enemy (敵人). The royal ancestral shrines (宗社) were destroyed, and the people became meat for the slaughter (魚肉). The devastation of the war was the first of its kind in Joseon's history (朝鮮 有史後), as many historical facts (史實) <2> confirm this.

The first eight lines (首揭 8句 32字), filled with tears and unparalleled grief (一字一涕로 비통무쌍한), are a section (一節) from the royal decree (罪已綸音) issued by King Seonjo (宣祖) to the people (國內軍民) at the time. Who would not shed tears (泣下) reading this passage? Thereupon, loyal subjects and righteous men (충신의사) rose up from all directions (팔방에서 봉기하게 되여). Even Confucian scholars reading in seclusion (林下 독서의 유생) and monks chanting scriptures in caves (岩穴誦經하는 승려) took up swords and joined the army (杖劒徒戎) to demonstrate their great cause of hating the enemy (敵愾의 대의). Some were able to destroy (摧破) powerful enemies (勁敵) with only a small army (孤軍弱卒), recovering (收復) territory and achieving great military merit (軍功 赫赫한 이도 잇고). Others died bravely (視死如歸한 義烈凜凜한) after losing all their weapons (失盡刀折). Furthermore, there were those with delicate feminine qualities (紅粉弱質) who accomplished what men (有髮男子) could not. I cannot record them all (殫記치 못하겟스나), but to name a few prominent ones (表表한 이를 略擧하면): Go Gyeong-myeong (高敬命), Jo Heon (趙憲), Kim Cheon-il (金千鎰), Gwak Jae-u (郭再祐), Jeong Mun-bu (鄭文孚), Kim Deok-ryeong (金德齡), Kim Myeon (金沔), Hyujeong (休靜), Cheo-yeong (處英), Yeong-gyu (靈圭), and the like of Non-gae (論介) and Gye Wolhyang (桂月香). Before and after these people, Yi Sun-sin's (李舜臣) fleet (舟師) roamed the seas (해상에 龍驤) and seized control of the ocean (制洋權을 장중에 收). Gwon Yul's (權慄) army achieved a miraculous victory (奇捷을 秦하야) at Haengju (幸州), maintaining the overall situation (大局을 유지하야 왓섯다). However, the national strength was exhausted (탕잔되고) and military supplies were not sufficient (兵糧은 不繼하야). Only with the aid (來援) of the Ming (明) army was the war (戰塵) quelled (鎭定) after eight years. However, the retreat of the Japanese army was not due to defeat in battle (戰敗), but rather due to the death of the ringleader, Hideyoshi (秀吉), and the succession of the Tokugawa (德川) clan, which led to internal troubles (國內多事). In contrast, Joseon (朝鮮), after eight years of war (戰禍), had no strength to recover (재기할 여력이 업서지고). The glorious history (光輝잇든 역사는) of the past Three Han (三韓) and Silla-Goryeo (羅麗) that were able to be rich and strong (富强自守) and resist (拒抗) the invasions (침략) of any powerful enemy (勁敵) all disappeared (사러지고). It only remained in a nearly dead (氣息奄奄하야 빈사상태로) state for 300 years. When the great trend of the world (一次寰宇의 대세) changed and the power of the white race (白族의 위력) reached Asia, and Joseon awoke from its isolationist dream (쇄국타몽), it was already too late (時已晩矣) and the matter was over (事已去矣). Like an old house (老屋) where the pillars have crumbled (柱楹이 頹殘) in yesterday's wind and today's rain (昨日風 今日雨), it simply collapsed (傾覆되고 말엇다). Viewing it thus (如斯히 觀來할 때에), the Imjin War (壬辰亂) had a significant impact (중대한 영향을) on the fate of this nation (이 나라의 운명) and left a deep impression (심각한 인상) on the minds of its people (이 백성의 뇌리) is more than imaginable (想察하고도 有餘한 일이다).

2. Not only that, but due to this war (戰役), the Ming Dynasty (明朝), which had unified China (中國의 정권을 一統) for 280 years, lost its dynasty (사직이 업서젓고). The foundation (기초도 동요하야) of the Toyotomi (豐臣) clan, who had taken the world as a commoner (匹夫의 몸으로 천하를 취하야) and flaunted their power (豪强을 誇耀하든), also shook (동요하야). Japanese history (일본 역사) welcomed a new master (새 주인을 맛게 되엿다) called the Tokugawa Shogun (德川將軍). What kind of strange old woman (何物怪婆) gave birth to the monkey-faced man (猿面郞) with the dream omen of the red sun entering her bosom (紅日入懷의 夢兆) and created a cause (素因) for disturbing the lands of East Asia (동양천지) and turning the fate of the Three Kingdoms (三國의 운명을 翻弄하는)? The mischief (惡戱) of the Creator (造化翁) has reached its extreme (이에 니르더 심하다). Whatever the case, let's leave that aside for a moment (잠시 별문제로 하고). It is clear (명백한 사실이다) that the demise (망멸된 것) of the Ming Dynasty (明나라) was due to the support (東援) of Joseon. Even without that (그럿치 안어도), after 200 years since its founding (창업 200여년에), the national fortune was declining (國運이 向衰하야). The governance of Hongwu (洪武) and Yongle (永樂) was far gone (머러지고). Entering the eras of Jiajing (嘉靖) and Wanli (萬曆), there was a great dispute over rituals (禮論, 흥왕추존). Next, Taoists (도사) and sorcerers (술객) became rampant (발호하다가). Eventually (終也에), eunuchs (閹宦) monopolized power (專權하야), treacherous subjects (奸細) advanced, and loyal and upright officials (忠直) retreated. The court was in disarray (朝網은 문란하고) and the laws were confused (법령이 혼탁하야). On top of that (가는데다가), after eight years of war (動兵 8년에), the financial resources (재력) of the empire (천하) were exhausted (耗盡하게 되매), and harsh taxes (苛歛) and demands (誅求) followed (따러 니러나니). The people lost the joy of peace (민생은 안도의 낙을 일코) and developed thoughts of revolt and resentment (思亂怨國의 心이 생기게) <3>. Thereupon, the Manchus (建虜) rose in the north (북에서 崛起하고), and the rebels (流賊) leaped about in the Central Plains (中原에서 跳梁하야). The world became like tangled hemp (亂麻갓치 되엿스나), and there was no one to bring it under control (수습할 자가 업시 되엿다). After about 20 years of this (이런지 약 20년에), the enterprise (위업) of the Zhu clan (朱氏) fell to the ground (따에 떠러지고) with the tragedy of Mansusan (萬壽山悲劇), and the braided-haired Manchus (辮髮族) of the Eight Banners (八旗子弟) replaced them in governing the Han lands (漢土를 代治 하얏다). This battle between the Manchu and Han races (滿漢二族의 싸움) only came to an end with the Wuhan Revolution (武漢革命) in 1911 (辛亥年), and there was also the comedic epilogue of Zhang Xun's (張勳) three-day restoration (三日復辟) in 1917 (丁巳年). Whatever the case (엇지햇든지), the historical cause-and-effect relationship (역사적 인과관계) of China's turmoil (中國動亂) is only proven by the fact that its origin lies in the decline of the Ming Dynasty (明朝의 쇠망), exhausted (疲罷) by its support of Joseon (東援). Now (지금에 와서는), it is no different from calculating the age of a dead child (死兒의 연령을 계산하는 것과 無異 하거니와). Let's suppose (假使) that Hideyoshi (秀吉) had not been born in a poor village (寒村) in Nagoya (名古屋), Japan, at that time (그 때에 일본). Or let's suppose (假使) that even if there were 1,100 Hideyoshis (秀吉이가 1,100 명이 잇섯다 할지라도), the Joseon government (조선정부) had adopted (採하야) Yulgok Yi I's (栗谷李珥) recommendations (建白). If internal factionalism (당론) had disappeared (사러지고) and the borders (변방) had been fortified (충실하야), if the court (朝著) had been clear (청명하며) and the military provisions (兵食) had been sufficient (족하엿다고 보자). Today's history of East Asia (오늘 東洋史) would have undoubtedly (반드시) shown a different aspect (별다른 국면에) and a different color (별다른 색채를 보혓슬). This is not simply a madman's dream (痴人의 畵夢). From this meaning and perspective (이러한 의미와 견지에서), attempting a fictional tale (夢中譫語 비슷한 架空談) under the title "If Only (하얏더면)" is not simply limited (긋치지 안을 것이다) to borrowing someone else's wine cup (타인의 酒盃를 借하야) to wash one's own breast (자기의 흉중을 澆洗하는 類에만).

3. Enough of idle talk (閑話休題). Yulgok Yi I (栗谷선생 李珥), who was born (呱呱의 聲을 擧한) in Gangneung (岡陵) Ojukheon (烏竹軒), inheriting the beauty (秀氣) of Japan, and borrowing the womb of his wise mother, Sin Saimdang (師姙堂), was born with a rare innate talent (殆히 生知의 異質을 가지고). His learning (學) penetrated heaven and man (天人을 貫하며), and his talent (才) combined the abilities of a king's advisor (王佐를 겸하야). He was the first saint and philosopher (聖哲) that the Eastern country (東國) produced, along with Maewoldang Kim Si-seup (梅月堂 金時習). There is no need to explain this further (煩說할 것도 업시), as history proves it (史乘이 증명하며) and word of mouth (口碑) transmits it endlessly (무궁에 전하는바 어니와). Even though he had the knowledge (학식) and statecraft (經濟) that did not fall short of Mencius (孟子에 下치 안는), he was unfortunate in his time (遭時不幸하야). He could not even try to display one ten-thousandth (萬分一도 試展치 못하고) of his ambitions (포부를), and his life was short-lived (천수가 長치 못하야). He passed away at the young age of 49 (49세로 짜른 일생을 맛치게 되엿슴으로), and the fact that the people (국민) did not receive his blessings (그 복리를 蒙치 못한) is a matter of regret (恨事) for thousands of years (千秋). Throughout his life (그의 일생을 통하야), he was consistent in the two words of loyalty and love (忠愛). He worked hard (노력한 것) to achieve the virtue of the ruler (君德成就에서), he was straightforward (邁直한 것) in distinguishing the wise from the wicked (賢邪辨別에), he dedicated himself (헌신한 것) to reconciling factional disputes (黨論調劑에), he was enthusiastic (열심한 것) in reforming corrupt practices (弊政改革에), he paid attention (주의한 것) to defending against enemy forces (禦侮敵氣에), he agonized (고심한 것) over liberating the commoners (庶族解放에), and he diligently encouraged (勉孜한 것) his successors (後進誘導에). None of these were not born from his clear and broad insight (精明博大한 식견) and his heart of loyalty and love (救國安民의 忠愛心) for saving the country and comforting the people (배태되지 안은 것이 업다). He had already ascended to the throne (筵對에 登하야) and discussed the current problems (時弊를 통론한 것) more than once or twice (一再에 止치 안커니와). One day (一日은), he said to the King (上께 말하되), "There are barbarians (虜胡) in the northwest (국가의 서북) and Japanese (倭) in the southeast (동남에). If the defense (邊圍의 방어를) is not strengthened (莊嚴게 하지 안으면), there will be a collapse (土崩瓦解) in case of an emergency (一朝有事의 時). War (兵) is a bad thing (凶事). Of course, it should not be encouraged (장려하며 窮瀆할 것이 되지 못함은) but one should not invade others (자아로 브터 他를 침략할 것은 안이로되). But when one is invaded by others (人의 侵凌을 밧을 때에는), if there is no preparation (그의 예비가 업시는), the existence of the country (국가의 존립을 期치 못할지니) cannot be hoped for (도저히). I (臣), looking at the heavens (天時) above, considering the geography (지리를 삷히며) in the middle, and weighing the human affairs (人事를 헤아리건대) below, believe (듯하니) that there will be a Japanese threat (倭患) to the country within 10 years (今으로 10년을 出치 안이하야), followed by (잇고) a Northern barbarian (北虜) invasion (難이 잇슬듯하니). I request (청컨대) that 100,000 soldiers (10만 兵을) be pre-trained (豫養하야) to prepare for unforeseen events (不虞에 備 하사) <4>."

Also, he said (갈오되), "Preparing for military defense (兵備의 豫籌할 것은) should be like this (如斯하거니와). To increase the army (增兵을 하자면), provisions (糧餉) and equipment (器械) should be prepared together (함께 준비할 것이니). As the saying goes (소위), without food (無食), there is no army (無兵). As for the source of funding for raising soldiers (養兵의 재원으로는), the military-agricultural system (屯田制) should be implemented (施하야). In peacetime (평시에는), they should work hard in farming and sericulture (農桑에 힘쓰며) and engage in land reclamation (개간에 종사 하다가), and in times of emergency (有事의 時에) they should serve in the military (병무에 服하면). This would be killing two birds with one stone (一擧兩得이 될것이요). At the same time (동시에), fortify the fortresses (성지를 견고히 하고), strictly maintain the beacon fire signals (烽燧를 嚴速히 하며), be thorough with intelligence gathering (諜報를 세밀히 하고), and reorganize the machines (기계) and military horses (군마) and renovate the military administration (군정을 쇄신하는 것이). I deeply believe (深信 하나이다) that this is the urgent task (급무) of today (금일의). However (그러나), the prior issue (선결문제) before this is to solidify (공고케 하는 것이) the foundation of the country (邦本을), which is to reform (개혁하야) the corrupt practices (弊政을) and prioritize the policies to relieve the people (蘇民策을 선행 할지라). First (爲先), establish (설치하야) the Office of Economic Affairs (經濟司) and gather (集衆하야) talented individuals (才識잇는 인사를). Fundamentally reform (革政하고) the policies and systems (政令과 제도를), make the taxes (세무를) fair (공정하게 하며), make the laws (율법을) strict and clear (嚴明하게 하고), be cautious (신중히 하며) in selecting officials (銓選을), cultivate (양성하고) talent (인재를), and open the way (길을 열어) to freely express opinions (언어를 자유롭게 하는). Share the governance (갓치하고) of the world with the people of the world (천하 사람으로 더부러 천하의 치리를) and strive for the politics of a true king (王者의 政을 힘써야 할지니) based on the public laws (公法) and great principles (大道) of heaven and earth (천지의). The order (순서는) to do this is to first confirm the will of the King (上意를 확정하야) and eradicate (근절할 것이오) the evils (弊) of following old practices (因循姑息의). Next (다음에), break down the factionalism (당론을 타파하야) of the court (조정의) and abandon (버리고) the evil practice (악습) of partiality (편당의) when discussing national affairs (국사를 논하며) and executing state affairs (국정을 행하는 데는). Work together (협력하야) so that you can fulfill (盡케 하소서) the duty (節) of a king and his ministers (王臣의). Since the founding of the nation (國朝가 창업이래로), the benefits (혜택) of peace (치평의) have not reached (밋치지 못하고) the people (민중에), except (제한 외에는) for the time of Shao Kang (少康) in the era of King Sejong (世宗時代의). In the middle (중간에는), powerful traitors (權奸) controlled the country (當國하야), and even the good laws and customs (良法美規) of the former kings (先王의) were destroyed (탕잔한지라). If Your Majesty (殿下) does not rouse (분발하야) your great ambition (大志) and save (救치 안이하면) this, there will be no day (날이 업슬지니) to correct the national affairs (國事가 바로 잡히여) and restore (挽回할) the national power (國勢를). If Your Majesty (殿下) does not take on (이에 自任치 안이하면) the position (位) of both the ruler and the teacher (君師의) and take responsibility (후세 자손에), there will be endless worries (無窮之憂) for future generations (잇슬가 하나이다)."

Also, he said (갈오되), "Our country (我國) is a small and poor (편소하고) land (地壤). The blessings of heaven (天惠) are also not abundant (풍부치 못하야). Now (이제) if we are sandwiched (介在하야) between the north and south (남북에) and want to maintain (유지 하자면) the lifeline (國脉을), we must (소지할 것이요) value the hearts of the people (인심 이거늘). However, the personnel administration (銓曹의 用人) is restricted (拘碍하고) by family background (門地) and qualifications (자격에), and the way (길이 열리지 안이하며) to broadly select people (公道廣選의) is not open (안이하며). Rewards and punishments (상벌이 不公하야) are not fair (업고). There are no long-term appointments (酬勞久任) or special promotions (不次超遷) for virtuous people (현자에게), and there are no punishments (책벌이 업스니) for the unvirtuous (불초자에게). This is convenient (편하나) for the shameless people (無耻輩) who steal positions (竊位) and greed for wealth (貪祿하는), but the way of governance (治道) and the political system (政體) are confused (淆亂 하야지며) by this. How can talent (인재) be nurtured (作興) and how can the virtuous and talented (賢俊) be promoted (등용이 되리잇까). Furthermore (더욱), the imprisonment (錮하야) of criminals (죄인) and commoners (庶族) extending to their descendants (자손에 及하는 것은) damages (損抑하는 것이며) the harmony (和氣) of heaven and earth (천지의) and is an evil policy (惡政이라) that does not exist even in barbarian countries (야만의 나라에도 존재치 안는). The country is deliberately (일부러) inviting public resentment (民怨을 買招하니). How can we not lament (엇지 통탄할 일이 안이며). On top of that (그 우에), the excessive taxes (苛稅) and the plunder (侵暴) by greedy officials (貪吏의) are suffered (褊受하니) by the common people (細民이). How can we expect a country (국가가) that has lost the hearts of the people (민심을 일흔) to be safe (무사키 바라리오)."

As such (如斯히), his repeated (反復陳秦한) statements (것이) amounted to thousands (千萬言) upon thousands (屢屢) of words (에 及 하얏고). In addition (그 외에도), he advised (規諫한 것은) the ruler (君上) and his colleagues (僚友에게) through memorials (章䟽) and letters (書牘으로), which would truly fill countless carts (汗牛充棟을 경할 것이다). Even then (그리고도), the teacher (선생) was different (달나) from other loud and empty talkers (大言壯語者와) in that he was not only good at persuasion (說幣에만 長함이 안이라). His measures (策) to remedy the ills (救弊의) were resourceful (自在한 것이) and even more admirable (敬服할 것이다). Ah (아)!. Indeed (과연), the exclamation (탄성이) of "If Only (하얏더면)" arises on its own (스사로 생긴다). If his life (壽) had been longer (더하고) and his words (說) had been implemented (行하얏더면), facing the Imjin War (壬辰亂을 당하야) <5>, that kind of fish-meat tragedy (魚肉慘劇) that destroyed myself and ruined others (결단나고 他까지 망케하는) would not have happened (비극이 일지 안엇고). Today, we would have been able to live a somewhat human life (사람다운 생활을 하게 되엿슬 것을) .............

5. The reform plan (改革大計) to which he poured his heart and soul (심혈을 傾注하야) and which he cherished throughout his life (畢生에 眷眷하든) was not even considered (一顧치도 안엇스며), let alone adopted (채용은 고사하고), by those above and below at that time (그 때의 상하가). Some severely (심한 자는) criticized (가릇처) his factional reconciliation (당론조정을) as a foolish argument (愚論이라) that confused right and wrong (是非混濁의). Eventually (終也에는), he was rejected (배척을 밧고) as the leader (首魁라고) of the Shim faction (沈黨). His theory of reforming abuses (革弊) and raising soldiers (養兵論을) was ridiculed (嘲篤하다가) as a grand and boastful statement (喜事大言이라고). Next (다음에), he was impeached (탄핵을 가하야) as a petty man who ruined the country (誤國小人이라고) and could not find a place (容身치도 못하게 하얏다) in the court (朝廷에). Killing the prophet (예언자를 죽이고) and kneeling (跪拜하는 것은) before the tomb (碑前에) after the event (事驗後에야) is a common fault (通弊) of foolish people (愚人) throughout history (古今이라). It is not surprising (怪할것이 되지 못하지만은). Even though (당시에는) there was an enlightened ruler like Seonjo (宣祖 갓흐신 英君) and a wise prime minister like Ryu Seong-ryong (柳成龍 갓흔 賢相이 잇스면서도) at the time of Yulgok (율곡), they did not listen (傾耳치 안타가) to Yulgok's words because (하야) the political system (政法은) was a legacy (遺制이라) of the former kings (先王의) and could not be changed (變通할수 업다는 것과) and because raising soldiers (養兵은) in times of peace (無事) was the root (本이라) of disaster (滋患의). After experiencing the Imjin War (壬亂을 치르고야), they were busy (급급하야) repairing the stable (失牛繕廏에) after losing the cow (牛). They established the Training Agency (訓練都監을 설치 하느니), learned how to use muskets (조총을 학습 하느니), and created military farms (屯田을 만드너니). It is still a matter of endless regret (遺憾千萬의 일이 될뿐이다) that they exclaimed (浩嘆을 발한 것이), "Yi Mun-seong (李文成) is a saint (聖人 이라고)." Like this (이와 갓치), he did not get (得치 못하고) his wishes (뜻을) from those above and below (상하에). When he encountered (遭遇하야) Song Eung-gae's (宋應漑) false accusation (誣彈에) and retired to his hometown (掛冠退鄕할 때에), he expressed his feelings (述懷하되):

"Going and staying is up to fate, not up to man (行藏由命豈由人), My original intention was not to keep myself clean (素志曾非在潔身). I resigned from the holy lord with three chapters in the village (閭闔三章辭聖主), I carry the lonely minister on a single reed in the rivers and lakes (江湖一葦載孤臣). My meager talent only farms the southern fields now (踈才只今耕南畝), My pure dreams still circle the northern stars (淸夢依然繞北辰). The thatched house and stone field are still my old business (茅屋石田還舊業), I am not worried about poverty for the rest of my life (半生心事不憂貧)."

Without even a hint (一毫의 辭色이 엄시) of resentment or blame (怨天尤人하는), he entered (入하야) his old life (舊生涯에) as an old scholar (老書生의) from the honorable position (榮位로 브터) of Minister of War (兵曹判書의). He showed (示하더니) a noble heart (雅懷를) that knew his place and fate (安分知命의). Before long (未久에), he was recalled (召還하야) and given (授하얏스나) the important positions (요직을) of Right Associate Chancellor (右贊成) and Minister of Personnel (吏曹判書의). But he passed away (長逝 하얏다) before he could warm his seat (席이 暖치 못하야). However (그러나), although his words (所說은) were not implemented (行치 안엇스되), his surviving wife, Lady Noh (盧氏), protested (抗議篤賊하야) the dragon and snake change (龍蛇之變) that he had foreseen (예지한) and died a martyr (烈死 하얏고) next to her husband's grave (부군의 墓側에서). Among the students (문생 중에는) he had guided (指導하든) in his daily life (평일), Jo Jung-bong (趙重峰) had remarkable insight (卓識) and righteousness (義烈에는), Kim Sa-gye (金沙溪) had great virtue (厚德) and scholarship in rites (禮學에는), and Yi Yeon-pyeong (李延平) had talent (재간) and distinguished service (勳業에는). They did not tarnish (실추치 안엇고) their teacher's name (師名을). Among his friends (友人에) with whom he associated (交友하든), Ryu Seo-ae (柳西崖) and Yun O-eum (尹梧陰) were there. Yi Baek-sa (李白沙) and Yi Han-eum (李漢陰), whom he had encouraged (汲引하든), all became famous ministers of the restoration (中興名臣이 되고). Yi Chung-mu (李忠武), whom he had taken a look at (顧一見之하야) and had great expectations (기대가 깁든), became a protector (護國長城이 되어) of the country (국가에) in a hundred battles (海上百戰) at sea, making great contributions (大造를 끼처) to the country and spreading (전하얏다) his clear judgment (明鑑을) of people (지인의). The author's (필자의) ancestor (先祖) mourned (輓하되) Yulgok's death (死를) at the time (당시):

"The master of this culture, the tortoise esteemed by the nation (斯文宗匠國著龜), His fame in this generation was known even to the servants (一代聲名走卒知). Meeting again in Luoyang on Sima's day (洛下重逢司馬日), The new loss of the sleeping dragon in Shu (蜀中新喪臥龍時). The blue collars (靑衿) cannot bear the pain of the collapsing beams (不耐摧樑慟), The dark throne (丹扆) deeply misses the mirror (失鑑悲). Why was he born so outstanding (何意挺生何意奮), Who can I ask in the indifferent blue sky (蒼天漠漠問憑誰)."

From this (이로써), we can know (알수가 잇슬 것이다) the general outline of his life (生涯大略을 生平).

6. So far, I (필자는) have only described (서술하얏슬 뿐임므로) the general outline (개략을) of his notable (表著한) achievements (행적의) from the front (정면으로 브터), which is too similar (넘우나 갓거워) to a spirit tablet inscription (神道碑文에) and is not only dry and dull (건조무미할 뿐만 안이라). Moreover (뿐만 안이라), it is far (거리가 멀어진 것은) from the inner desire (내면적 요구) of "If Only (하얏더면)", which the editor (편집자의) of this journal (본지) had hoped for, namely (즉) a somewhat (다소) humorous (희곡적으로) and interesting (취미적으로의) explanation (설명) (요구와). This is a considerable (不尠한) regret (유감이다). However (그러나), to be honest (솔직하게 말하면), I (나로서는), with my shallow knowledge (識淺) and poor writing skills (筆拙한), believe (확신하는 때문이다) that it is more prudent (온건한줄노) to stick (긋치는 것이) to the extent of drawing a tiger (畵虎) within my capabilities (분수지내는) than to go to great lengths (각고의 정도에). However (그러나), in conclusion (최후에 임하야), I will try (보기로한다) to add a modernized (근대화한) and concrete (구체적) commentary (해설을) to some of the "If Only (하얏더면)" ramblings (譫語에). What (무엇이라고) Yulgok's (율곡의) statements (筵秦) at the time (당시) deeply moved (심히 감동케 하얏다) King Seonjo (宣祖를). King Seonjo (宣祖) originally (본래브터), who had much trust (倚信이 만흐시던) in his loyalty and love (충애에), treated (대하고) him (그를) even more favorably (眷遇하게 되어) from then


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제7호
발행일	1927년 07월 01일
기사제목	드면錄!! 그때에 이리햇드면 只今 朝鮮은 엇지 되엿슬가, 壬辰倭亂 當年에 萬若 栗谷이 생존하엿더면
필자	洪承耈
기사형태	문예기타

드면錄!! 그때에 이리햇드면 只今 朝鮮은 엇지 되엿슬가, 壬辰倭亂 當年에 萬若 栗谷이 생존하엿더면
						洪承耈
1. 「龍灣一隅, 天步艱難, 地維已極, 予將奚適, 瞻彼長江, 亦流于東, 思歸一念, 如水滔滔」
宣祖 昭敬大王 25년 壬辰 4월(距今336년전)에 일본 豐臣秀吉이 大明侵略을 계획하다가 借道不許에 藉口하야 드듸여 조선에 入寇하게 되니 昇平 200여년에 兵革을 모르든 조선은 대적의 來侵에 상하가 오즉 蒼黃失魄 할뿐이오 부산관문을 비릇하야 巨鎭大邑이 旬望間에 와해하엿다. 李鎰의 군이 尙州에서 先敗하고 總帥申砬이 또한 충주 彈琴臺에 패몰된 후로는 다시 방어할 여가가 업시 적군은 京城을 直擣하엿다. 宣祖는 首相 李山海의 議를 納하야 西遷하기로 결정하고 몬저 松都로 다음 平壤에 이르럿스나 三南監司의 10만이나 되는 勤王兵이 交鋒하기도 전에 潰走하고 北道로 피난갓든 二王子가 被獲되며 계속하야 臨津이 失守하게 되니 蒙塵한 乘輿는 다시 義州에 播越되고 八道山河는 敵人의 유린에 일임 하얏스니 宗社는 훼파되고 生靈은 魚肉이 되어 兵禍 참혹하기가 조선 有史後 처음이란 것은 幾多의 史實이＜2＞ 이것을 확증하는 것이다.
一字一涕로 비통무쌍한 首揭 8句 32字는 당시 宣祖께오서 국내군민에게 罪已綸音을 내릴 때에 그 교서중에 적힌 一節이다. 이 글을 읽는 자-뉘 안이 泣下하얏스랴 於是에 충신의사가 팔방에서 봉기하게 되여 林下 독서의 유생과 岩穴誦經하는 승려까지 杖劒徒戎하야 敵愾의 대의를 발휘하게 되니 혹은 孤軍弱卒로 능히 勁敵을 摧破하야 疆土를 收復 軍功 赫赫한 이도 잇고 혹은 失盡刀折하야 視死如歸한 義烈凜凜한 이도 잇섯다. 더욱이 紅粉弱質로 有髮男子의 능치 못하는 것을 성취한 이도 잇스니 그 수효는 殫記치 못하겟스나 表表한 이를 略擧하면 高敬命 趙憲 金千鎰 郭再祐 鄭文孚 金德齡 金沔이며 休靜 處英 靈圭며 論介 桂月香의 류이다. 이들이 전후하야 李舜臣의 舟師가 해상에 龍驤하야 制洋權을 장중에 收하고 權慄의 육군이 행주의 奇捷을 秦하야 大局을 유지하야 왓섯다. 그러나 국력이 탕잔되고 兵糧은 不繼하야 僅히 明兵의 來援으로 8년만에야 戰塵이 鎭定 되엿스나 원래 일본군의 철퇴가 戰敗로 奈何치 못한 것이 안이오 禍魁秀吉의 死去와 德川氏의 繼興으로 그 國內多事한 이유에 의한 것임에 반하야 조선은 首尾8년의 戰禍로 다시 재기할 여력이 업서지고 往日三韓羅麗가 능히 富强自守하야 如何한 勁敵의 침략에도 拒抗하야오든 光輝잇든 역사는 모다 사러지고 오즉 氣息奄奄하야 빈사상태로 300년을 지내왓다. 그리다가 一次寰宇의 대세가 변하고 白族의 위력이 아세아에 밋처 鏁國惰夢으로브터 깨일 때에는 時已晩矣오 事已去矣다. 昨日風 今日雨에 柱楹이 頹殘한 老屋은 그대로 傾覆되고 말엇다. 如斯히 觀來할 때에 壬辰亂이란 그 사실이 이 나라의 운명에 如何히 중대한 영향을 밋첫스며 이 백성의 뇌리에 얼마낊� 심각한 인상이 남어 잇슬 것은 想察하고도 有餘한 일이다.
2. 그뿐 안이라 이 戰役으로 말미암어 280년동안 중국의 정권을 一統하야 온 明朝의 사직이 업서젓고, 匹夫의 몸으로 천하를 취하야 豪强을 誇耀하든 豐臣氏의 기초도 동요하야 일본 역사는 德川將軍이란 새 주인을 맛게 되엿다.何物怪婆가 紅日入懷의 夢兆로 猿面郞을 나어 가지고 동양천지를 식그럽게 하며 三國의 운명을 翻弄하는 素因을 만들엇는지 造化翁의 惡戱도 이에 니르더 심하다 하겟다. 이것은 如何튼지 잠시 별문제로 하고 明나라가 東援이 원인되여 망멸된 것만은 명백한 사실이다. 그럿치 안어도 창업 200여년에 국운이 向衰하야 洪武와 永樂의 治化는 머러지고 嘉靖과 萬曆에 들어 가서는 禮論(興王追尊)으로 대분쟁이 생기고 다음에 도사와 술객이 발호하다가 終也에 閹宦이 專權하야 奸細는 나아가고 忠直이 물너지니 朝網은 문란하고 법령이 혼탁하야 가는데다가 動兵 8년에 천하의 재력이 耗盡하게 되매 苛歛誅求가 따러 니러나니 민생은 안도의 낙을 일코 思亂怨國의 心이 생기게＜3＞ 되엿다. 이에 建虜는 북에서 崛起하고 流賊은 中原에서 跳梁하야 세상이 亂麻갓치 되엿스나 수습할 자가 업시 되엿다. 이런지 약 20년에 萬壽山悲劇으로 朱氏의 위업이 따에 떠러지고 八旗子弟의 辮髮族이 漢土를 代治 하얏다.이 滿漢二族의 싸움은 辛亥年 武漢革命으로써 비로소 막을 내리고 다시 丁巳年에 張勳의 三日復辟이라는 희극적 餘興도 잇섯거니와 엇지햇든지 中國動亂의 역사적 인과관계는 그 원인이 東援에 疲罷한 明朝의 쇠망에 잇는 것만을 증명하면 그만이다. 지금에 와서는 死兒의 연령을 계산하는 것과 無異 하거니와 假使 그 때에 일본 名古屋 寒村에서 秀吉이란 사람이 생겨나지 안엇다하고 보자 또 假使秀吉이가 1,100 명이 잇섯다 할지라도 조선정부에서 栗谷李珥의 建白을 採하야 內으로 당론이 사러지고 外으로 변방이 충실하야 朝著가 청명하며 兵食이 족하엿다고 보자. 오늘 東洋史라는 것은 반드시 별다른 국면에 별다른 색채를 보혓슬 것은 단순한 痴人의 畵夢이 안이엿슬 것이다. 이러한 의미와 견지에서 「하얏더면」이라는 제목 아래에서 夢中譫語 비슷한 架空談을 試하는 것도 또 반드시 타인의 酒盃를 借하야 자기의 흉중을 澆洗하는 類에만 긋치지 안을 것이다.
3. 閑話休題 岡陵 烏竹軒에서 東瀛의 秀氣를 鍾하고 현모 師姙堂의 배를 비러 呱呱의 聲을 擧한 율곡선생 李珥가 殆히 生知의 異質을 가지고 學이 天人을 貫하며 才가 王佐를 겸하야 梅月堂 金時習과 함께 東國이 나은 초유의 聖哲이든것은 이에서 煩說할 것도 업시 史乘이 증명하며 口碑가 무궁에 전하는바 어니와 그가 孟子에 下치 안는 학식과 경제를 가지고도 遭時不幸하야 그의 포부를 萬分一도 試展치 못하고 더욱이 천수가 長치 못하야 49세로 짜른 일생을 맛치게 되엿슴으로 국민이 함께 그 복리를 蒙치 못한 것은 千秋의 恨事라고 하지 안을수가 업다. 그의 일생을 통하야 終始한 것은 오즉 忠愛의 두글자이다. 그의 君德成就에서 노력한 것이며 그의 賢邪辨別에 邁直한 것이며 그의 黨論調劑에 헌신한 것이며 그의 弊政改革에 열심한 것이며 그의 禦侮敵氣에 주의한 것이며 그의 庶族解放에 고심한 것이며 그의 後進誘導에 勉孜한 것이 하나도 그의 精明博大한 식견과 救國安民의 忠愛心에서 배태되지 안은 것이 업다. 그가 일즉이 筵對에 登하야 時弊를 통론한 것이 一再에 止치 안커니와 一日은 上께 말하되 국가의 서북에 虜胡가 잇고 동남에 倭가 잇스니 邊圍의 방어를 莊嚴게 하지 안으면 一朝有事의 時에 土崩瓦解를 면치 못할지라. 兵은 凶事라 이것을 장려하며 窮瀆할 것이 되지 못함은 물론이나 그러나 자아로 브터 他를 침략할 것은 안이로되 人의 侵凌을 밧을 때에는 그의 예비가 업시는 도저히 국가의 존립을 期치 못할지니 臣이 上으로 天時를 보고 中으로 지리를 삷히며 下으로 人事를 헤아리건대 今으로 10년을 出치 안이하야 국가에는 倭患이 잇고 繼하야 北虜의 難이 잇슬듯하니 청컨대 10만 兵을 豫養하야 不虞에 備 하사＜4＞ 이다.
또 갈오되 兵備의 豫籌할 것은 如斯하거니와 增兵을 하자면 糧餉과 器械를 함께 준비할 것이니 소위 無食이면 無兵이라. 養兵의 재원으로는 屯田制를 施하야 평시에는 農桑에 힘쓰며 개간에 종사 하다가 有事의 時에 병무에 服하면 一擧兩得이 될것이요 동시에 성지를 견고히 하고 烽燧를 嚴速히 하며 諜報를 세밀히 하고 기계와 군마를 정돈하야 군정을 쇄신하는 것이 금일의 급무인 것을 深信 하나이다. 그러나 이보다도 선결문제는 邦本을 공고케 하는 것이니 卽弊政을 개혁하야 蘇民策을 선행 할지라. 爲先 經濟司를 설치하야 才識잇는 인사를 集衆하야 政令과 제도를 근본으로 革政하고 세무를 공정하게 하며 율법을 嚴明하게 하고 銓選을 신중히 하며 인재를 양성하고 언어를 자유롭게 하는 길을 열어 천하 사람으로 더부러 천하의 치리를 갓치하고 천지의 公法과 大道에 의하야 王者의 政을 힘써야 할지니 이것을 하는 순서는 몬저 上意를 확정하야 因循姑息의 弊를 근절할 것이오 다음에 조정의 당론을 타파하야 국사를 논하며 국정을 행하는 데는 편당의 악습을 버리고 피차가 협력하야 王臣의 節을 盡케 하소서. 國朝가 창업이래로 世宗時代의 少康을 제한 외에는 치평의 혜택이 민중에 밋치지 못하고 중간에는 權奸이 當國하야 先王의 良法美規까지 탕잔한지라. 殿下가 大志를 분발하야 이것을 救치 안이하면 國事가 바로 잡히여 國勢를 挽回할 날이 업슬지니 殿下가 君師의 位에 처하야 이에 自任치 안이하면 후세 자손에 無窮之憂가 잇슬가 하나이다.
또 갈오되 我國은 地壤이 편소하고 天惠도 풍부치 못하야 一個의 빈약한 소국이라. 이제 남북에 介在하야 國脉을 유지 하자면 소지할 것이요 오즉 인심 이거늘 銓曹의 用人이 門地와 자격에 拘碍하고 公道廣選의 길이 열리지 안이하며 상벌이 不公하야 현자에게 酬勞久任과 不次超遷이 업고 불초자에게 책벌이 업스니 竊位貪祿하는 無耻輩에게는 편하나 治道와 政體는 이로브터 淆亂 하야지며 인재가 何由로 作興이 되고 賢俊이 何由로 등용이 되리잇까 더욱 죄인과 庶族을 錮하야 자손에 及하는 것은 천지의 和氣를 損抑하는 것이며 야만의 나라에도 존재치 안는 惡政이라. 국가가 일부러 民怨을 買招하니 엇지 통탄할 일이 안이며 그 우에 苛稅와 貪吏의 侵暴는 細民이 褊受하니 민심을 일흔 국가가 엇지 무사키 바라리오.
如斯히 反復陳秦한 것이 屢屢 千萬言에 及 하얏고 그 외에도 章䟽와 書牘으로 君上과 僚友에게 規諫한 것은 실로 汗牛充棟을 경할 것이다. 그리고도 선생은 다른 大言壯語者와 달나 說幣에만 長함이 안이라. 그 救弊의 策이 自在한 것이 더욱 敬服할 것이다. 아! 과연 「하얏더면」의 탄성이 스사로 생긴다. 만약 그의 壽가 더하고 그의 說이 行하얏더면 壬辰亂을 당하야＜5＞ 그 갓흔 魚肉慘劇이 생겨 내가 결단나고 他까지 망케하는 비극이 일지 안엇고 오늘 우리도 제법 사람다운 생활을 하게 되엿슬 것을………….
5. 그의 심혈을 傾注하야 畢生에 眷眷하든 改革大計는 그 때의 상하가 채용은 고사하고 一顧치도 안엇스며 심한 자는 그의 당론조정을 가릇처 是非混濁의 愚論이라 하다가 終也에는 沈黨의 首魁라고 배척을 밧고 그의 革弊養兵論을 가릇처 喜事大言이라고 嘲篤하다가 다음에는 誤國小人이라고 탄핵을 가하야 朝廷에 容身치도 못하게 하얏다. 예언자를 죽이고 事驗後에야 碑前에 跪拜하는 것은 古今愚人의 通弊이라 怪할것이 되지 못하지만은 율곡 당시에는 宣祖 갓흐신 英君도 잇섯고 柳成龍 갓흔 賢相이 잇스면서도 政法은 先王의 遺制이라 變通할수 업다는 것과 無事養兵은 滋患의 本이라 하야 율곡의 말에 傾耳치 안타가 壬亂을 치르고야 失牛繕廏에 급급하야 訓練都監을 설치 하느니 조총을 학습 하느니 屯田을 만드너니 하면서 「李文成은 聖人 이라고」 浩嘆을 발한 것이 지금에도 遺憾千萬의 일이 될뿐이다. 이와 갓치 그는 상하에 뜻을 得치 못하고 宋應漑의 誣彈에 遭遇하야 掛冠退鄕할 때에 述懷하되
行藏由命豈由人 素志曾非在潔身 閭闔三章辭聖主 江湖一葦載孤臣 踈才只今耕南畝 淸夢依然繞北辰 茅屋石田還舊業 半生心事不憂貧이라하야 一毫의 怨天尤人하는 辭色이 엄시 병조판서의 榮位로 브터 老書生의 舊生涯에 入하야 安分知命의 雅懷를 示하더니 未久에 召還하야 右贊成 吏曹判書의 요직을 授하얏스나 席이 暖치 못하야 長逝 하얏다. 그러나 그의 所說은 行치 안엇스되 그의 남기고 간 미망인 盧氏는 그가 예지한 龍蛇之變에 抗議篤賊하야 부군의 墓側에서 烈死 하얏고 그의 평일 指導하든 문생 중에는 卓識과 義烈에는 趙重峰이며 厚德과 禮學에는 金沙溪며 재간과 勳業에는 李延平 갓흔 이가 잇서 그 師名을 실추치 안엇고 그가 交友하든 友人에 柳西崖 尹梧陰이며 그의 汲引하든 後進 李白沙 李漢陰이 모다 中興名臣이 되고 그가 顧一見之하야 기대가 깁든 李忠武는 海上百戰에 護國長城이 되어 국가에 大造를 끼처 그의 지인의 明鑑을 전하얏다. 필자의 先祖가 당시 율곡의 死를 輓하되
斯文宗匠國著龜 一代聲名走卒知 洛下重逢司馬日 蜀中新喪臥龍時 靑衿不耐摧樑慟 丹扆偏深失鑑悲 何意挺生何意奮 蒼天漠漠問憑誰 이로써 그의 生平大略을 알수가 잇슬 것이다.
6. 필자는 지금까지 정면으로 브터 그의 表著한 행적의 개략을 서술하얏슬 뿐임므로 넘우나 神道碑文에 갓거워 건조무미할 뿐만 안이라 본지 편집자의 기대한바의 「하얏더면」의 내면적 요구 즉 다소 희곡적으로 취미적으로의 설명 업는 요구와＜6＞ 거리가 멀어진 것은 不尠한 유감이다. 그러나 솔직하게 말하면 識淺筆拙한 나로서는 분수지내는 畵虎보다도 각고의 정도에 긋치는 것이 온건한줄노 확신하는 때문이다. 그러나 최후에 임하야 若干「하얏더면」의 譫語에 근대화한 구체적 해설을 봇처 보기로한다. 무엇이라고 당시 율곡의 筵秦는 심히 宣祖를 감동케 하얏다. 본래브터 그의 충애에 倚信이 만흐시던 宣祖는 이로브터 더욱 그를 眷遇하게 되어 文王의 姜太公처럼 師佐의 예로 대하고 所秦를 일일이 嘉納하야 大臣에게 博詢하시고 채용하기로 결정하시니 於時에 經濟司가 몬저 설치되여 甲午年 更張에 軍國機務處格으로 萬般維新政治 수립의 策原地가 되여 가지고 율곡은 發論者로 立案者를 겸하야 그 조직적 두뇌로브터 아래와 갓흔 政法革新의 기초안이 考出되여 宣祖께 密秦하니 즉
(1) 君民共治의 大憲制定
(2) 四民平等主義의 실현
(3) 입법, 행정, 사법의 삼권분립
(4) 惡習陋慣의矯救
등이다. 宣祖는 그의 설명에 경청하고 다시 乙夜淸覽을 거듭하신 후 敎書를 발하야 維新改革의 主義方針을 포고하고 율곡으로 하야금 憲章의 조항을 起草케 하야 종사에 고하고 발표시행케 하얏다. 이에 따러 몬저 궁중과 府中의 구별이 확립되고 책임내각제도가 실시 하게 되니 亞洲에서 近代立憲君主政體를 채용하기는 조선이 효시가 되엿다.
이로브터 율곡은 국가의 元勳으로 관직 유무에 불구하고 獻替桂沃의 책임을 가지고 맛치 일본의 近日元老와 갓흔 지위에 잇게 되엿다. 그리하야 제일차 내각은 율곡자신이 此를 조직하도록 大命이 내렷스나 固辭不受하고 그의 親友로 당대 諸葛亮의 칭이 잇든 宋翼弼을 秦薦하얏다. 宋은 大命을 밧고 즉시 閣員을 詮衡하야 親任式을 치르고 시정의 衡에 當하니 그 때의 중대한 인물들은 如左케 배포되엿다.(관명은 편의상 從近)
총리대신 宋翼弼
서기장관 李恒福
외무대신 柳成龍
次官 李德馨
내무대신 李元翼
次官 黃琳
육군대신 申砬
次官 劉克良
해군대신 李舜臣
次官 鄭運
大藏大臣 尹鉉
次官 李貴
문부대신 金繼輝
次官 洪聖民
사법대신 李後白
次官 鄭琢
농상대신 尹斗壽
次官 沈喜壽
교통대신 李山海
次官 朴謹元
(이상 內閣員)
遣外使臣 李廷龜
警視總監 金誠一
遣外使臣 黃愼
法制長官 閔純
遣外使臣 鄭崑壽
大審院長
遣外使臣 洪純彦
檢事總長＜7＞
參謀總長 權慄
參謀次長 李鎰
敎育摠監 趙憲
軍司令官 郭再佑
大學總長 李滉 身故欠
師團長 金德齡
旅團長 金應瑞
要塞總督 金時敏
艦隊長官 李億祺
艦隊參謀 宣居怡
(以上 重要 文武官)
宮內大臣 朴淳
內大臣 盧守新
中宮大夫 朴應順
東宮大夫 柳自新
宮中顧問 尹根壽
樞密議長 成渾
顧問官 沈守慶
顧問官 崔滉
顧問官 金應南
上院議長 李瑤
議員 沈義謙
議員(右貴族) 具思孟
議員 趙穆
議員 鄭述
議員 鄭仁弘
議員 崔永慶
議員 金千鎰
艦隊參謀 韓修
艦隊參謀(右勅選) 南彦經
堂侍司長 柳根
侍醫頭 許浚
禮式長官 金長生
宗秩總裁 李陽元
副議長 金守顒
顧問官 李憲國
顧問官 兪泓
顧問官 金命元
下院議長 金孝元
議員 鄭澈
議員 辛應時
議員 具鳳齡
議員 許曄
議員 李潑
議員 禹性傳
議員 宋應漑
議員 鄭汝玄
議員 洪汝諄
(地方官 其他는 省略)
新內閣은 취임후에 곳 政網을 협정하고 의회에 대하야 미리 內秦하야 裁可를 밧은 施政方針을 발표 하얏다.
1. 헌법을 恪守하야 삼권분립을 엄명히 할 事
2. 외교는 평화주의에 의할 事
3. 군비를 충실하되 防禦本位로 할 事
4. 稅制를 정리하야 부담의 공평을 기할 事
5. 産業立國主義를 확립할 事
6. 民刑法典을 新히 제정할 事
7. 교육기관의 확장과 개선을 圖할 事
이 내각은 군주의 신임이 깁흘뿐 안이라 전국민의 환호중에 출생하고 각료는 東西二派의 거두를 망라 하얏슴으로 하원에서 절대다수의 지지를 밧고 겨우 鄭汝立一派의 반대가 잇섯스나 그 세력이 미약할뿐 안이라 未久에 汝立의 罪에 범하야 좌경론은 자멸되고 말엇다.
新內閣은 銳意로 政網을 實施하야 내치에 비상한 성적을 擧하는 동시에 외교에도 허다한 功業을 세웟다. 西으로 明國과 攻守同盟을 체결하고 東으로 일본과 수호조약을 정하야 四境 晏如한 가운데 문화가 날로 향상 되엿다. 그리고 율곡은 海州 石潭에 退臥하야 遐齡으로 令終하고 國葬의 예를 賜 하얏다. 아차 그럿케 하얏더면 그럴뻔 하얏다.(5월13일 雨窓에서 伴鶴弄梅室主人)＜8＞
＜2-8＞