잡지명	별건곤 제7호
발행일	1927년 07월 01일
기사제목	雜同散異 臨時大淸潔 (Miscellaneous Similarities and Differences: Temporary Great Cleaning)
기사형태	세태비평 (Critique of Social Trends)

Miscellaneous Similarities and Differences: Temporary Great Cleaning

Spring cleaning, summer cleaning, there is nothing as necessary and beneficial as cleaning, and there is no time as refreshing as after cleaning. That's why we wash our face every day, wash our feet, clean our ears, pick our noses, and scrub off dirt - that's body cleaning. Sweeping away three winters' worth of dust in the spring and cleaning out three summer's worth of grime in the autumn is home cleaning, and beating clothes in every valley is clothing cleaning. It can be seen that people ultimately come out to clean and die cleaning.

But I am one of those human beings, so I cannot neglect cleaning. I have no family, so that is not a problem, and I have no major illnesses yet, so I can leave my body to Wang Nuni's skillful hands and entrust it to soap. As a shared duty to society, I will try to do some social cleaning, though clumsily. In doing so, I might break the bottom off the supervisor's broom, and after doing it, some people might question me. But I cannot neglect it due to responsibility. With what shall I do it? With a rag? With a broom? With water? With medicine? I might not have them <48>, and even if I did, there would be lamentation of insufficiency to do every nook and cranny of every aspect of society, and there would be annoyance. I have no choice but to do it easily with a brush. I must not use a large, fluffy yellow brush or a soft, fluffy sheep's hair medium brush. I must use at least a stiff steel brush or fountain pen that will draw blood if you poke it. That's it - that's the best plan. But what if I poke them carelessly and they cry and wail and make a big accusation? But how can a cleaning army consider this and that? I will close my eyes tight and sweep away most of them.

What shall I do first? Shall I do the outside first, or the inside first? In order, it would be good to do the outside first. Where shall I start? Shall I go horizontally or vertically? It would also be good to start with the horizontal. Then let's go. Pour ink into the fountain pen as much as possible. Now - let's go.

Eek! I caught one. There are people who threw away rice, seaweed soup, and dried pollack heads on Samro Street (三路街上). It looks very unpleasant. This is clearly a superstitious act of foolish men and women (愚夫愚婦) who visit Sungshing窟 (崇神窟) and are deceived by shamans and possessed by spirits. Depending on the degree of the act, I might forgive them, but considering the face of society, I cannot forgive them. I will sweep them away and leave, so do not do such a thing again. If you do such an ugly thing again <49>, not only will you receive the harsh punishment of this cleaning army, but heaven will secretly punish you and your neck will fall off, just like the spirit you worship.
Indeed, each grain is hard-earned! One grain of sweat is ten thousand drops, and blood is a thousand drops. How can you throw away that treasure, the result of human blood and sweat, in the middle of Samro Street (三路街上), where everyone can see it, when it is even frightening to eat? Instead of giving it to that spirit, give it to a poor person or beggar, a fellow human being. Do not do such a thing again.
Eek! I caught another one. These people deserve to be struck by lightning. All night long (or even during the day), the couple (or even their children) sit on chamber pots and secretly urinate into them, then open the door and pour that urine down the street in front of everyone. Don't they have a toilet in their house, or at least a drain? How can they be so shameless? Those who commit this dirty and shameless act are mostly lower-class tenants, so I might forgive them, but for the sake of society's face and public sanitation, I cannot forgive them. I will sweep them away and leave, so do not do such a thing again.
Eek! What is this poop? What kind of parentless children did this? Considering the size of the poop, it is not the act of a child. It must be the act of a spiteful bachelor or a drunken man. It's dirty, so let's sweep it away and go. If I see anyone doing such a thing again, I will slap them so hard that their ears fall off, without even mentioning a fine of 50 jeon.
Starting the cleaning with poop and urine makes me feel a bit unlucky. Since the cleaning army has already set out on this path, let's take a quick look at the public toilets. The toilet at Che-dong (齊洞) intersection? Ugh, it's dirty! The habits of the people's butts are strange, but the sanitation slogans of the government are also lies. What about Insa-dong (인사동)? It's even dirtier because there is so much human traffic. You can't even tell the difference between the poop and urine stalls because they are so littered with indiscriminate waste. Then what about the toilet behind the monument in Jongno (종로), the heart of Great Gyeongseong? These dog-like... it's too dirty to describe (though shouldn't toilets be dirty), it's just an underground chamber for filth and decay. If the public toilets at Jongno (종로) intersection are like this, what more is there to say about other places? I will post a warning on the butts and urine holes of the people, and I will shoot an arrow at the so-called government authorities or sanitation officials. If this happens again, I will show no more mercy.
Ah - even in broad daylight, there are people sitting in front of their shops urinating into chamber pots or tin cans and pouring it out onto the street, endangering passersby. They are truly hopeless people.

Eek! What is this again? Venereal disease and syphilis specialists? And Rakgu Trading Company (락구상회)? Even if your advertising skills are lacking, how can you put this on a major street corner where women and children can see it? In their minds, they are showing this hideous and monstrous thing to give the public a warning in advance and encourage patients to quickly seek treatment, which is a good intention <51>, but in any case, it looks terrible and disgusting, making me want to throw up the rice I ate earlier. What should I do about this? I will sweep it away and leave, so do not put it out again. Some women who saw it couldn't eat for three days, and some old men averted their eyes but tripped over a passing cart. Is this advertising? I will say it again.
Eek! What is this again? Lots of colorful and grotesque decorations like spirit dolls. Ah, yes! Funeral directors! In reality, they are gambling with spirit dolls. It looks disgusting and unpleasant. Wouldn't it be better to keep them deep in the storehouse and take them out secretly? I will throw them into the cleaning bin.
Eek! What is this again? The appearance of weddings and funerals is like that. Not only do I dislike the palanquins, which look like spirit doll houses, whether they are for the bride or groom, but I also dislike the lanterns and umbrellas. Moreover, I dislike the appearance of the maids wearing green jeogori (저고리) and carrying something big on their heads. Oh well, I'm hungry, so should I buy some taffy? Ugh, it's dirty! It's been dragged around in this dust all day long. How can I eat it? It's not sweet, and I can't swallow it. Whether it's dust or soybean powder, whether it's been kneaded ten times or a hundred times, how can I bear to buy and eat it? Why don't you cover it with a glass case, or at least a gauze wrapping? I guess it doesn't matter if you steal coins covered in dust and rolled around in the trash <52> from ignorant children to buy their favorite treats, but you should take better care of children's favorite foods. I'm giving you a warning, so don't do that again and always cover it with something.
At the entrance of the Yumigwan (優美館), they are always selling Japanese noodles and Chinese noodles, so-called this and that, to the poor, laborers, children, and especially rural customers. From now on, ice cream will also come out. However, it seems convenient as a temporary snack for busy passersby. The sight of the seller standing there in the dust and selling it, and the sight of the customer standing there, glaring, and slurping it down is even more unpleasant. It's not just unclean, but you should also have some human decency. I know you're hungry and don't have much money, so you have no choice, but it looks very unpleasant. Roadside vendor, wouldn't it be better to put up a tent or a gauze curtain and sell it? I feel too bad to just sweep it away, so I'll just sprinkle some lime on it and leave.
The open-air food vendors outside Dongdaemun (동대문) – why did they have to choose the side of the public toilet? Do they think more customers will gather because they can smell the poop? I can't bear to see people squatting and sitting in that dust, flies, and poop smell, eating and chewing. Wouldn't it be better to move the location? I know that you are poor and have no choice, but think about public sanitation and human decency. There is a saying that you don't care about appearances when you are hungry and cold, but... And I have a word of caution for the old woman frying mung bean pancakes on the street: please cover the dish of mung bean pancakes with something. It's cooked food, so you eat it without washing it. You need to be careful. And to the managers of the taverns and the cooks of the seolleongtang (설넝탕) restaurants, please keep in mind not to make the chopsticks and spoons dirty in the crock pot. This is the first time, so I'm just asking you nicely. And all you neighborhood vendors - vegetable sellers, cabbage sellers, green onion sellers, and fresh lettuce sellers - please wash your vegetables at least once in clean water, even if you sell them a little more expensive. When I see you washing your radishes and cabbages, it makes my stomach churn (but I still have to buy them). I'm just asking you nicely for now.

I don't know if I'll end up making enemies by saying this in this Gyeongseong (경성) where there isn't even one public washing place, but anyway, I'm saying it because it looks so dirty. When I see the laundry being done in the streams of Jungak-dong (中学洞), Seorin-dong (서린동), and near the training center, I feel like I want to live naked without wearing a single piece of clothing for the rest of my life. How dirty it must be to do laundry in water that is mixed with the urine and feces of 300,000 people in 60,000 households, water that has rotted again and is like the thick, dirty water that lice eat (of course, re-washing will be done in clean water), so there are many women who struggle and fight for a spot, which shows how precious water is in Gyeongseong (경성). It's the government's responsibility, but if the government doesn't do it, why can't the private sector build <54> a laundry facility? From now on, even if I join the Nude Alliance, I will not wear clothes made from that dirty laundry. But since humans can't live without clothes, we have no choice but to build a new public laundry facility. I have already thrown the old laundry facilities into the cleaning bin, so keep that in mind.
Hwanggeumjeong (황금정) to the training center, Gwanghuimun (광희문), and Wangsimni (왕십리) are the dirtiest places in Seoul. I cannot neglect cleaning. The rag dealers (늑마 *) on both sides of Hwanggeumjeong (황금정) are indispensable to human society, but they don't look good, and the famous dust in the Joseon near the training center, and the smell of old tombs and rotting fertilizer outside Gwanghuimun (광희문) are unbearable no matter how much you cover your eyes and plug your nose, and from Gwanghuimun (광희문) to Wangsimni (왕십리) or the entrance of Anjeongsa (안정사), I can't open my eyes and nose at all because of the dust and flies. There are so many flies in the streetcar that if you go once, you'll come back with a fly island. What kind of nonsense is this? It's all lies, even if you talk about hygiene and fly eradication. Is it because it's outside the city? Anyway, I can't help but throw it into the cleaning bin.
The dust outside Dongdaemun (동대문) is also terrible, and the dust in Ahyeon-ri (아현리) is also considerable. The road to Bongnaejeong (봉래정) is also quite slippery, and the Hwadong (花洞) passage is also considerable. I can't help but throw them into the cleaning bin. Cheongnyangri (청량리) has good scenery, but all the restaurants are unclean, and the taste of alcohol is the worst. The Hangang (漢江), even though it has good scenery, the restaurants are unremarkable, and at a certain house outside Dongdaemun (동대문), the owner is unkind, and at the house in the back alley of the Hanil Bank, the servants seem to be drunk more often than not, and the houses where the girls wear powdered ash are mostly not good, and the errand boy's clothes at the Daegu Tang Rice Soup (大邱湯飯) house in the back alley of Jongno (종로) are so dirty that it makes me sick. I will also throw that into the cleaning bin.

The unkindness of the bank clerks to the customers is beyond words, and the unkindness of the so-called Korean clerks in the post office is truly unsightly. O-hun-dong (O勳洞) and O-pyeong-dong (O平洞) seem to be the worst. The unkindness of the shopkeepers is beyond words, but what about the unkindness of the rickshaw pullers? How unpleasant is it for the night watchmen to curse at the customers and for the auctioneers to make fun of the customers? The drunken behavior of the prostitutes and the cursing of the customers by the medicine sellers is also unforgivable.
The topknots like mallet mallets and the hair of the bachelors like pig tails must be completely cleaned throughout Joseon (全鮮), and the foolish men and women (愚夫愚婦) who waste time and money on superstitious worship must also be completely cleaned throughout Joseon (全鮮), and those who sacrifice their entire fortune for weddings, funerals, ancestral rites, and festivals must also be cleaned throughout Joseon (全鮮). I don't like seeing people wearing hats and shoes, and I don't like seeing topknots riding bicycles. I don't like seeing Western-style men going to hotteok (호떡) shops, and I hate seeing Korean clothes worn with geta (게다). I don't like seeing women with their hair parted and wearing shoes, and I also don't like seeing women with trendy hair and wearing Tang shoes. I don't like seeing short men wearing long overcoats, and I hate seeing Western-style men wearing rubber shoes. I don't like seeing bachelors with shiny black hair, but I don't like seeing country bumpkins wearing towels and smoking cigarettes either. It's funny to see people wearing mourning hats and riding horses, and it's even funnier to see friends riding rickshaws without wearing durumagi (두루막)... <56> It would be nice to have a contest for the ugliest sights. Let's throw them into the cleaning bin first.

The meddlers who only talk without doing anything should be thrown away, and those who shamelessly advertise themselves should also be thrown away, and those who advocate for the people and society and only fill their own bellies with money from the people should also be thrown away, and those who do evil alone but pretend to be good should also be thrown away, and those who do well at OO even though they know the facts that everyone knows should also be thrown away, and those who sell positions, seek fame, pretend to have power, and are arrogant should all be thrown away, and vagrants, gamblers, and human traffickers should also be thrown away. It would be nice to pick out certain people and issue a cleaning order, but I can't bear to do that. I will only clean this much of the surface for now.

(40 lines omitted)

Cleaning? You can't do it all at once. No matter how well you do it, you have to do it again later. If you throw this one away, that one comes out again, and if you throw that one away, this one rots again, so how can you do it all at once? I will stop here for now and do it again in the summer or autumn. I've worked hard, so should I have a bowl of makgeolli (막걸니)? <57>

**Named Entities**

三路街上	Samro Street
崇神窟	Sungshing窟
Wang Nuni	Wang Nuni
齊洞	Che-dong
인사동	Insa-dong
종로	Chongno
락구상회	Rakgu Sanghoe
優美館	Yumigwan
동대문	Tongdaemun
설넝탕	seolleongt'ang
O勳洞	O-hun-dong
O平洞	O-p'yŏng-dong
全鮮	Chŏnsŏn
두루막	turumak
황금정	Hwanggeumjeong
광희문	Kwanghuimun
왕십리	Wangsimni
안정사	Anjeongsa
아현리	Ahyŏn-ri
봉래정	Pongnaejeong
花洞	Hwadong
청량리	Ch'ŏngnyangni
漢江	Han-gang
大邱湯飯	Taegu T'angban
中學洞	Chungak-tong
서린동	Sŏrin-dong
경성	Kyŏngsŏng



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제7호
발행일	1927년 07월 01일
기사제목	雜同散異 臨時大淸潔
기사형태	세태비평

雜同散異 臨時大淸潔
봄은 봄 청결 녀름은 녀름 청결 청결처럼 필요하고 유익한 일은 업고 청결후 처럼 爽快한 때는 업다. 그래서 날마다 세수하고 발 씻고 귀 홉이고 코딱지 홉이고 몸 때 떨고 하는 것이 몸청결이요 봄에 三冬 먼지 떨고 가을에 三伏븍덕이 치우는 것이 居處淸潔이요 山谷마다 방망이질 하는 것이 의복청결이니 사람이란 것은 결국 청결하러 나서 청결하다 죽는 것이라고도 볼수 잇게 된다.

그런데 나도 인간 놈의 하나이니 청결을 안이할 수 업다. 가정은 업스니 그것은 문제가 안이오 몸은 아직 별 병은 업스니 그런대로 王눈이게 말손을 식키되소곰 왜 비누에 맛겨두고 사회에 대한 공동의무로 사회청결이나 서틀지만 좀 해보기로 한다. 하다가 잘못한다고 감독의 비ㅅ자루 끗테 꽁문이가 부러질 넌지도 모로겟고 한뒤에 잘못 햇다고 뭇는 놈의 입질 손길질이 잇슬넌지도 모르겟다. 그러나 책임상 안이 할 수는 업다. 무엇으로 할고? 걸네로 할가? 비ㅅ자루로 할가? 물로 할가? 약으로 할가? 그것이 업기도＜48＞ 하려니와 잇다 해도 사회 각방면 구석구석을 다 하기에는 不及의 嘆도 잇겟고 귀찬은 감도 잇다. 손쉽게 붓끗흐로 해볼밧게 업다. 붓끗으로 하되 늘큰늘큰한 黃毛大筆이나 보들보들한 羊毛中筆로 해서는 안되겟다. 적어도 꼭 찌르면 피가 쫄 나리 만치 꼿꼿한 鐵筆이나 만연필을 쓸밧게 업다. 그럿타-그것이 第一策이다. 그러나 함부로 꼭 찔너 놈들이 압흐다고 울며불며 告發大發을 하면 엇지할가 그러나 淸潔軍이 어대 이것 저것을 다-갈릴수야 잇스랴 눈 꽉 감고 웬만한 놈은 다 쓰러 버리기로 한다.

무엇부터 먼첨 할고? 外面을 먼첨 할가 內面을 먼첨 할가 順次上 외면을 먼처함이 조켓다. 어대로 먼첨 할고? 橫으로 갈가 縱으로 갈가. 亦 횡면부터 먼첨함이 조켓다. 그럼 떠나자. 만연필에 잉크는 잇는대로 쏘아 너어라. 자-떠난다.

익크! 하나 걸엿다. 三路街上에다가 쌀밥 메욱국 북어 대가리를 내버린 년놈이 잇다. 보기에 퍽도 불쾌하다. 이것은 분명히 崇神窟을 차저 단니며 무당 판수놈들의 꼬임에 빠저 귀신독갑이에게 홀닌 愚夫愚婦의 迷信行爲니 그놈의 정도를 보아 혹-용서도 할 수 잇지만 사회의 체면을 보아서 도저히 용서할 수가 업다. 쓰러 버리고 가노니 다시 그런 즛을 말렷다. 다시 그런 못생긴 즛을 하면＜49＞ 이 掃除軍의 혹독한 벌은 고사하고 한눌이 暗暗中에 벌을 내려 그야말로 너의 말과 가치 귀신을 내목이 떠러질 것이다.
글세 粒皆辛苦 ! 한알의 땀이 萬 방울이요 피가 천 방울이나 되는 그러한 人間血汗의 결정품인 그 至寶를 먹기도 오히려 두려운데 萬人所視의 三路街上에 내다 버리니 엇지 천벌이 업겟느냐 그 귀신독갑이를 주는 대신에 인간의 하나인 빈민이나 거지를 주렴으나 다시는 그런 즛 말렷다.
익크! 또 하나 걸엿다. 이런 오줌벼락을 마즐 년놈들 밤새도록 (혹은 白晝에도) 년놈이 (혹은 애색기까지)요강을 타고 안저 실실 내 갈닌 그 오줌을 萬人所視에 들총을 열고 행길을 향하야 쭈루루 내버리는구나 그 년놈의 집에는 변소도 업고 하다못해 水口門도 업단말이냐 엇지면 그러케 철면피들이냐 이 더럽고 몰체면한 즛을 감행하는 것은 대개 행랑사리하는 하급에 만흐닛가 혹-용서할 수도 잇지만 사회의 체면이나 공동위생을 위하야는 도저히 용서할 수가 업다. 쓰러버리고 가노니 다시는 그런 즛 말렷다.
익크! 이것은 또 웬 똥이냐 엇던 어미 아비 업는 자식들이 해 노은 즛이냐 똥뗑이가 큰 것을 보니 어린 놈의 즛은 안이다. 심술구진 층각 놈 안이면 술주정군의 즛이 분명하다. 더러우니 쓰러버리고 가자 다시 그런 즛을 하는 놈을 보면 벌금 50전은 말도 말고 당장에 귀가 달아나가게 따귀를 붓칠테다.
청결벽두에 똥 오줌을 먼춤하게 되니 신수 좀 궁하다. 청결군이 이것 저것을 가리랴 임이 그길로 나섯스니 공동변소 구경이나 잠간 하고 가자. 齊洞 네거리의 변소? 에구 더러워! 놈들의 밋구멍 버릇도 괴악하지만 府廳의 위생표방도 거즛말이다. 인사동은 엇던고? 인간의 왕래가 복잡하니만치 더 더럽다. 똥간이니 오줌간이니 분별할수 업스리만치 亂放을 해 노앗다. 그러면 대경성의 한복판 종로 비각 뒤의 변소는 어떠한가? 이런 개가튼 ‥‥ 더럽기는 둘재요 (변소가 더럽지 안으랴마은) 창피하야 말 못하겟다 이는 그저 분요부식의 陰窟밧게 안된다. 종로 네거리의 공동변소가 이러하니 다른데야 더 말할 것 무엇이랴 년놈들의 똥구멍 오줌구멍에 注意碑를 붓치거니와 소위 부청당국 또는 위생부제군에게 一矢를 放한다. 차후 다시 그러면 更不容特엿다.
아-이런 백주대낮에 店頭에 안저 장사하는 놈들도 요강 또는 양철통에 오줌을 싸서 店外 막 행인의 안전에서 쭈루루 쏘다 버리는 구나. 참 할 수 없는 위인들이다.

익크! 이건 또 뭐냐? 임질매독전문 또 락구상회? 야무리 광고술이 궁하기로 글세 婦女兒童萬人 所視 큰 길 네거리에 이게 무슨 즛이냐 자기네 딴은 이 흉측망측 괴악한 것을 내놋코 만인에게 공포를 주어 미연에 주의를 식키고 병자앤 속키 곳치게 하기 위하야 好意＜51＞이겐지만 여하간 보기에 금즉스럽고 더러워 어적에 먹은 밥이 빡구로 튀여 나오게 되니 이것은 또 엇지할터인가 쓰러버리고 가노니 다시는 내놋치말나 엇던 부인은 그것을 보고 와서 사흘을 밥을 못 먹엇다하며 엇던 노인은 그리가연은 반듯이 외면을 하다가 지나가는 구루마에 발을 닷첫다 한다. 이것도 광고이냐? 다시 말엿다.
익크! 이것은 또 뭐냐? 울긋붉긋 독갑이 작란감 가튼 것이 만히 도 널녀잇구나 올타! 장의사! 실상은 귀신독갑이 노름 놈이다. 보기에 꿈즉이 불쾌하다. 庫 간에 깁히 간직해 두엇다가 비밀히 내다 씀이 엇더할가? 청결통에 엿키로 한다.
익크! 이건 또 뭐냐? 시집가고 장가가는 꼬락산이가 그럿타 가마인지 신랑신부 拘留間인지 독갑이 집 가튼 교자도 보기실커니와 燈籠이나 우산이니 그것도 보기실타 더군다나 초록 지고리 입고 큰 머리인가 뭔가 이고가는 하녀들의 꼬락산이가 더 보기실타 에라 배가 곱흐니 엿이나 사 먹을가? 아구! 더러워 이 몬지 속에 저대로 盡日을 끌고 단니니 저것을 엇터케 먹노 달지 안어 목졋이 넘어간대로 참아 못 먹겟다. 몬지인지 콩가루인지 열번을 주물넛는지 백번을 주물넛는지 그것을 엇더케 참아 사 먹으랴 琉璃함이라도 하고 하다못해 洋紗 자박이라도 왜 덥허가지고 못단니느냐 하기는 철업은 어린 애들의 코 뭇은 銅錢分 빼앗기야 塵芥桶에＜52＞ 열번 굴녓다가도 안이 되랴만은 어린 애들 好嗜品은 더 간수를 잘해야 된다. 주의를 주노니 다시는 그러지 말고 반듯이 무엇으로 든지 덥허가기고 단녀라.
優美館 입구에는 언제보든지 왜국수 되국수에 소위 무엇이니 무엇 등을 버려놋코 무산자 노동자 아동배 특히 시골 손님에게 팔고잇다. 이제부터는 아이스크림이 또 나올 것이다. 그런데 이것이 급한 행인의 임시 요긔로는 오히려 편한 듯 하다. 그 몬지 속에 버틔고 서서 파는 놈도 놈이 려니와 벗틔고 서서 눈을 부릅뜨고  후루룩 후루룩 먹는 놈의 꼴이 더 보기가 실타. 불결도 불결이지만 인간의 체면도 잇서야 된다. 배가 곱흐고 돈이 적어서 할 수 업서 그 모양이겟지만 보기에 퍽 불쾌하얏다. 路傍店人아 가만이 천막이라도 치고 洋紗揮帳이라도 치고 파라먹음이 엇터할가 치워버리기 까지는 넘어미안하고 석회나 뿌려두고 간다.
동대문밧 노천 賣食者들은 장소를 가리면 엇대서 그럿케 공동변소 겻을 가리엿는지 그래 똥냄새를 맛고 손님들이 만히 모여드는 셈인가. 몬지와 파리와 똥냄새 그 속에서 쭈구리고 안저 먹고 씹고하는 꼴은 참아 볼 수가 업다. 장소를 옴기미 엇더할가 무산자로서 할 수 업서  그 모양인 것 까지도 안다만은 공동위생과 인간의 체면을 보잔 말이다. 飢寒에 不顧體面이란 말도 잇지만은…… 그리고 노방에 안저 빈대떡 붓치는 노파의게 한 마디＜53＞주의를 주노니 부대 빈대떡 담은 그릇을 무엇으로 든지 가리우라 그것은 닉은 음식이라 씻지도삼지도 안코먹는 것이니 주의해야 된다. 그리고 선술집의 안주감독이며 설넝탕집의 밥또는 제군은 부대명심하야 뚝백이 집서 젓가락 숙가락을 더럽게 하지마러라 이번은 처음이니 한 마듸로 부탁만 해둔다. 그리고 메나리장사 배추장사 파장사 생추쌈장사 모든 동네장사들아 좀-빗싸게 팔지라도 제발 깨긋한 물에 단 한번이라도 씻처 가지고 오라 제군의 그 무 배추 씻는 골을 보면 비위가 상하야 못견대겻더라(그래도 할 수 업서 사 먹지만) 이것도 아직 부탁뿐 해둔다.

공동세면장 하나이 업는 이놈의 경성에서 이런 말을 하면 도리여 끝낼 친구가 잇슬넌지 모르나 여하간 보기에 하두 더러워서 한 마듸한다. 中學洞 개천개나 서린동개천가나 훈련원근처 개천가에 가서 빨내하는 광경을 보면 평생에 옷 한가지 안 입고 나체로 살 생각이 난다. 그 6만호의 30만이 싸버린 오줌 똥이 숨인 물이 다시 썩고 푸러저 여두족 살믄 물 가튼 걸죽걸죽한 더러운 물에다 빨내를 하니 얼마나 더러우랴(再벌 세탁은 물론 맑은 물에 하겟지만) 그것도 자리를 못 잡아 싸워가며 해매는 여자가 만흐니 얼마나 물 귀한 경성인 것도 알겟다. 府에서 할 것은 母論이지만 府에서 안한다 하면 민간에서라도＜54＞세탁장 하나를 엇재 못하는가 말이다. 이제부터는 나체동맹을 할지라도 그 더러운 빨내로서 된 옷은 입지 안음이 엇덜가 그러나 옷을 안입고는 못 사는 인간이니 부득이 공동세탁장을 새로 시설할 밧게 업다. 과거 세탁장은 청결통에 드러 갓스니 그리 알아 두란 말이다.
황금정턀µ으로 훈련원 광희문으로 왕십리 까지는 서울하고도 가장 더러운 곳이다. 청결을 안이 할 수 업다. 황금정 좌우의 늑마 *들은 인간사회에 업지 못 할 물건이나 보기에 좃치는 안으며 훈련원근처의 몬지난 조선에 유명한 몬지며 광희문 밧 古塚과 비료 썩는 냄새는 아무리 눈을 가리우고 코를 막어도 구역이 나서 못 견대겟고 광희문으로 왕십리 또는 안정사 입구 까지는 그 놈의 몬지와 파리 땀으네 도무지 눈 코를 못뜰 지경이다. 전차 안에 파리난리가 나서 한번 갓다 오면 파리 섬이나 지고오게 되니 이런 변이 어대 잇스랴 위생이니 파리박멸이니 해도 멀정한 거즛말이다. 그 亦 시외라해서 그런지? 엇잿든 청결통에 안 너을수 업다.
동대문밧 몬지도 굉장하고 아현리 몬지도 어지간 하다. 봉래정 길도 꽤 슬거니와 花洞통로도 어지간하다. 청결동에 안 너을 수 업다. 청량리는 경치로는 조흐나 음식점은 모다 불결하며 그 중에도 술맛이란 최하등이요 漢江넌 너도 경치로는 그럴 듯하나 음식점은 보잘 것 업스며 동대문 밧 무슨 집은 주인이 불친절하고 한일은행 뒷 골목 집은 하인 놈들의 술 주정이＜55＞ 더 만흔 듯하며 분으로 灰박을 쓴 게집애 잇는 집은 대개가 맛이 좃치 못하며 종로 됫골목 大邱湯飯집은 심부럼군의 옷이 너무 더러서 구역이 난다 그것도 청결통에 넛키로 한다.

은행원들의 고객에 대한 불친절은 말도 말고 우편소의 소위 조선인 사무원들의 불친절은 참말 꼴불견이다. O勳洞O平洞이 그 중에도 더 한 듯 하다. 상점주들의 불친절은 말도 말고 인력군 구루마군들의 불친절은 엇더하냐 야시군들의 손님 욕하기와 경매쟁이들의 손님 놀녀 대는 것은 얼마나 안이 꺼운 즛이냐 갈보년들의 술잔엇누리와 매약자들의 손님 욕하는 것도 용서할 수 업는 일이다.
말 말뚝 가튼 상투쟁이와 도야지 꼬리 가튼 총각놈의 머리는 全鮮的으로 대청결을 하야 되겟스며 淫祀迷信으로 시간과 錢穀을 밧치는 愚夫愚婦도 전선적으로 대청결을 하야겟고 冠婚喪祭로 全家産을 희생하는 자들도 全鮮的 청결을 하야겟다. 갓쓰고 구두 신은 놈도 보기실켜니와 상투쟁이 自行車 탄 것도 보기실타 양복쟁이 호떡집 출입도 보기실커니와 조선 옷에 게다 신은 것은 더 보기실타 머리쪽지고 구두 신은 것도 보기실코 또 트레머리하고 唐靴 신은 것도 보기실타. 키 적은 놈 긴 外套도 보기실코 양복쟁이 고무신은 더 보기가 실타. 총각 놈의 깜정쪽기도 얼니지 안치만 수건 쓴 촌 새서방 卷煙 문 것도 얼니지 안는다. 喪笠쓰고 말 탄 것도 우습거니와 두루막 안입고 인력차 탄＜56＞ 친구가 더 우습다……. 이런 것들을 추려서 꼴불견자대회를 해스면 조켓다. 우선 청결통에 집어녓코 보자.

실지는 업시 꺼덕대는 好事者들도 집어 치워야겟고 몰염치하게 자가광고만 하는 자들도 집어치워야 겟고 민중이니 사회니 표방하고 민간의 돈픈을 글거 自己充腹만 하는 자들도 집어치워야겟고 악은 혼자 하면서 선한 체하는 놈도 집어치워야 하겟코 萬人所共知의 사실을 놋코도 OO잘 하는 놈도 집어치워야 하겟고 賣職者 釣名者 假勢者 倨慢者類 다 집어 집워야 되겟고 부랑자 도박자 인간장사파들도 집어치워야겟다. 엇던 놈 엇던 놈 꼭꼭 집어 놋코 청결령을 내레스면 조켓스나 이는 참아 못하겟다. 아직 이 만콤 것목만 치고 만다.

此間40行削

청결? 이것은 한꺼번에는 다 못하는 것이다. 아무리 잘햇다 해도 잇다가 또 해야 되는 것이다. 이 놈을 집어치우면 저 놈이 또 나오고 저 놈을 집어치우면 이 놈이 또 썩어버리니 그것을 엇더케 한꺼번에 다 하랴 이번은 이만 해두고 夏季나 秋季에도 하기로 한다. 수고햇스니 막걸니나 한 잔 할가.＜57＞
＜48-57＞