잡지명 別乾坤 제7호
발행일 1927년 07월 01일
기사제목 小說보다 기이한 事實 로-맨쓰 苦戀悲戀 『7년 片愛』奇錄 (A Strange Record of a Romance, Bitter Love, and Tragic Love, 'Seven Years of One-Sided Love' - Stranger Than a Novel)
필자 天外漢
기사형태 문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

A Strange Record of a Romance, Bitter Love, and Tragic Love, ‘Seven Years of One-Sided Love’
						Ch'oeoehan (天外漢)

It may not happen in foreign countries, but it's truly a rare occurrence in our Joseon. Any curious young man or woman would drool over this story. To put it simply, an ugly, pockmarked male student harbored a seven-year one-sided love for a beautiful female student like a hibiscus flower, and finally, as a beggar, he received her ultimate pity, and the two formed a beautiful relationship. They each obtained decent jobs, bought a house, saved money, had sons and daughters, and lived a blissful life. This is a truly novel-like, real story.

It was 15 years ago. Cho Sang-ho (趙相鎬) (a pseudonym), an 17-18 year old pockmarked student with a registered address in OO-gun, OO-myeon, OO-ri, was attending elementary school at O-dong, O-dong School in Kyŏngsŏng. His family was quite wealthy, and he was already married with a son. While always lamenting his own ugliness, he also criticized his wife's appearance, constantly dreaming of divorcing his current wife and finding a new, modern (high-collar) woman to live with. So, while studying in Seoul, day and night he busied himself trying to improve his ugly face. He got a haircut two or three times a month, shaved once or twice a day, applied face cream (美顏水), wore perfume, carried a pink handkerchief, wore high-heeled shoes, and did everything he could to improve his appearance. But what could he do about his inherently ugly face, like a strange rock (怪石), pockmarked and rough? He looked in the mirror and threw it down several times, looked at photos and tore them up several times, blamed his parents, cried, laughed, and made a fuss. Despite all this, he still planned to divorce his wife and dreamed of marrying a pretty, modern new woman.

Anyone would guess that there was an O-myŏng Girls' School beyond O-dong School. This pockmarked man always came into contact with the female students of this O-myŏng Girls' School when going to and from school in the morning and evening. Whenever he saw the female students, wearing white blouses and black skirts, carrying books wrapped in cloths, coming and going busily, he always thought like this: "Ah! How pretty! Ah! How lively! How can I marry a woman like that and live a sweet life? Even if it's just for one day, I wouldn't have any regrets even if I died..." He stood there blankly, sighing, squeezing his own face, lamenting that his parents had made him so ugly, and also seeing his wife's wide and pale face, never a day or time passed without him sighing.

Among the many female students passing in front of O-dong School, there was one particularly pretty and beautiful female student named Ri Kyŏng-suk (李慶淑) (a pseudonym), a flower-like maiden of 16 years old, the daughter of a certain pastor at O-dong, OO address.

The pockmarked man picked out this female student from among the many and began to set his eyes on her. Every time he went to school, he made sure to shave, apply face cream, spray perfume on his clothes, polish his shoes, and wrap his books heavily in a cloth. He went out into the alley and waited, and when the female student passed by, he subtly appeared, either behind or in front of her, or pretended to read a book in the street, or pretended to tie his shoelaces, acting as her follower in any way he could. When coming from school, he always stood by the playground or the fence of some house, waiting for the female student to come so they could go together.

Like this, he drooled alone, following her for a day, two days, a month, two months, even a semester. But the female student never even glanced at him, just indifferently, calmly, and coldly walked straight ahead. The pockmarked man was as angry as he could be and as upset as he could be. He squeezed his ugly, pockmarked face, suffering greatly. Even during summer vacation, he didn't go home, and even if his parents knew, he didn't care. He just thought of that female student day and night.

As summer passed, autumn passed, and a year passed. Every day, using the same methods, he followed the female student, but the woman never even glanced at him. She just coldly sneered in her heart, "Crazy fool! Ugly fool!" But after a year, how could she not recognize his face?

From now on, the pockmarked man thought, "Now that she recognizes my face and knows who I am, right?" and decided to start writing letters. He went to Chŭn Pass (즌 고개) to buy colored letter paper (花箋紙), pink envelopes, and even a bottle of perfume. He came back and started writing a letter. "Ah - My most beloved Kyŏng-suk, I don't know if you know me, but I am Cho Sang-ho (趙相鎬) of O-dong School, Higher Elementary School (although it was elementary school), O grade, who has been longing for you morning and evening for a year."

After writing this much, he wondered if the words were good or bad, if the writing was good or bad, and hesitated several times, then tore it up. He put his hand on his forehead, looked up at the sky, thought for a while, looked in the mirror at his own face, and as if finally discovering his grotesque appearance, he sighed and clicked his tongue. He threw the mirror down in despair and lay flat on the floor, pondering this way and that, thinking, "But what if there's a connection?" and got up again to start writing a letter.

"Ah - My most beloved..." He just wrote and tore, wrote and tore, wasting dozens of sheets of paper on one letter and sacrificing more than ten envelopes. Finally, he wrote "Ri Kyŏng-suk (李慶淑), O-dong, O address" on the envelope, firmly attached a 3-chŏn stamp, went to the post office, put it in the mailbox, and even checked again to make sure it wouldn't be missed before returning. But the next day, the letter came back as it was. The pockmarked man was deeply disappointed and lay down clutching his head. But he decided not to be discouraged by the first failure and wrote another letter.

Like this, he wrote letters ten times, a hundred times, every day. But the letters always came back, ten times, a hundred times. Even if they didn't come back, there was never any news of a reply. The pockmarked man was as angry as he could be and almost got sick. But he continued to write letters and continued to follow her every day. Three long years had already passed.

Then, the female student graduated from O-myŏng Girls' School and entered the normal school (teacher training) course at OO Women's School. During this time, the pockmarked man had become so degenerate due to his exclusive pursuit of this female student that he failed several times at O-dong School and eventually dropped out. Despite repeatedly failing and dropping out, he deceived his family with his excellent skills, taking the tuition and pretending to study well. And to make it appear to the woman that he had graduated from O-dong School and was attending some vocational school, he attached gold buttons to his Western-style suit, changed his round hat into a square hat, and moved his residence near the woman's house. He continued to improve his appearance as much as possible, follow her whenever he had the chance, and continue to write letters.

Even after doing this for another year, the woman didn't even glance at him. So, he found out that he had a wife and wondered if she was suspicious of that, so he even forged a family register and sent a copy, bought and sent gifts, and tried everything. But since there was still no sign of change, this time he bought a violin ("빠요링"). He practiced it day and night. After learning it reasonably well, he opened the window whenever the woman passed by and played it enthusiastically. He went outside the woman's window and played good tunes. He threw letters, threw handkerchiefs, threw <90> snacks, and tried everything. But the woman tightly closed the window and didn't even look out or cough once.

Almost six years had passed like this. The woman had already graduated from the normal school course and had gone to O-wŏn, to a certain common school, to become a teacher. The pockmarked man had become extremely degenerate and was almost like a crazy person. His family didn't send him tuition anymore, he lost all his friends, and the landlord kicked him out for not paying rent, so he became a beggar. Even with his extremely degenerate and homeless situation, his longing for the woman didn't change at all, but continued more fiercely. Somehow he found out that the woman had gone to O-wŏn as a teacher, and he continued to write letters there.

"Because of you, I am dying. Save me. Kill me." He sent these letters day after day. But until now, there was never a single reply, whether she liked it or not. If she were an average woman, she would have been moved by his persistent passion and perhaps felt some pity. If not, she would have cursed, "Damn you! Crazy fool!" But this woman was so ruthless and indifferent that even after seven years of being bothered like this every day, she didn't budge an inch. She was a truly cruel woman.

As the seventh year was coming to an end, it was twenty-odd days before "Christmas". The pockmarked man finally begged, "Save me," and "Even if we can't marry, please just show me your face once."

Reader, don't be surprised. From that ruthless woman who hadn't budged an inch even after seven years of sending her love so persistently, a reply came for the first and last time. The reply was simple but meaningful.

"After such a long time of seven years, your passion for sacrificing yourself for a single woman is either foolish as a man or admirable. There is nothing else to say, and since 'Christmas' is near, I would appreciate it if you could buy and send me a few 'Ehagaki' (繪葉書) (picture postcards) to give to my friends." The pockmarked man, who received this unexpected letter, was so happy that he lost his mind and jumped so hard that the floor of the room seemed to cave in. Then he looked at the letter again and again, touched it to his cheek, kissed it, and was very happy, as if everything was done. He carefully wrapped the letter, kept it deep in his heart, and immediately went out to find money everywhere. But there was no way to get even a single chŏn or pun (Korean currency). He went to a friend from his hometown and, after telling all sorts of stories a thousand times, managed to get 2 wŏn and 50 chŏn. He was overjoyed and immediately went to Chŭn Pass (즌고개) and bought 1 wŏn's worth of pretty and refreshing "Christmas" postcards. Without delay, he decided to go down to O-wŏn. But since he only had 1 wŏn left, what should he do? He had to buy clothes, buy shoes, get a haircut, take a bath, and buy some other gifts, but there was no way. He might even run out of travel expenses. So, unable to think of anything else, he thought, "Well, what does it matter if I look like this or that? I'll just go and see her face once and then die!" And with his disheveled hair, dirty clothes, and worn-out shoes, he left Namdaemun and boarded the train. Because he was so ashamed, he took the night train.

He got off at O-wŏn station in the middle of the night, with no money and nowhere to go. Ah, what should he do? He used a bench in the waiting room as a bed and slept there, even though he was chased away by the station staff several times. But since he had no other choice, he endured the abuse and beatings and spent the night in the waiting room. He waited for the dawn and went to the school where the woman was, staggering like a crazy person or a beggar begging for food.

It was at this time. This pockmarked man was on his way to find the woman. At this time, the woman was sleeping in the school's night duty room and was on her way to visit her patron (食主人) (a certain myŏn chief (面長)).

The fields and paddies were covered with white snow, like a white cloth covering everything, but the narrow path between them was covered with <91> ice, making it easy to slip. The morning sun was reddish, and the chilly wind was scattering silver dust. At this time, the woman, wearing a white blouse, gray suit skirt, and a red muffler fluttering in the wind, walking with tottering, quick steps in high-heeled shoes, was coming from that way, and the beggar, this pockmarked man, with his disheveled hair, dirty cap, torn clothes, and worn-out straw shoes, was going from this way. They looked at each other, doubting each other, and gradually came closer. When their eyes and faces were almost touching, the woman was surprised as if it was completely unexpected and stepped back slightly, and the pockmarked man was so overwhelmed that he couldn't bear it and knelt down, bursting into tears. He cried loudly, as if a long-lost son had met his long-missed mother. The woman, who was faced with this completely unexpected situation, was both ashamed and overwhelmed, and without regard for appearances, she immediately helped the pockmarked man up, saying, "What's going on... It's cold and there are many people passing by, so let's go to where I am instead of doing this in the street." She helped the pockmarked man up and went to her quarters.

Because it was the room where the female teacher lived, the room was very clean and simple. The woman brought the pockmarked man into her room and immediately brought a brazier to warm him up, and then prepared breakfast and served him a meal. After trembling all night in the cold station, unable to sleep or eat, now in the warm room, embracing the brazier, his frozen body melted, his whole body softened, and he slowly fell asleep. Forgetting his shame and joy, he collapsed next to the brazier. The woman gave him her pillow and covered him with her blanket, and then sat beside him, watching the pockmarked man's sleeping face intently, as if taking care of a patient. His pockmarked and ugly face, unfed and unkempt, like a beggar half-crazed, was truly pitiful to see. Her pity was unparalleled. A cloud began to form in the woman's clear and pure heart. That cloud turned into a stream of rain and began to pour from her eyes. Could this be called love of humanity (人類愛)? Could it be called tears of compassion (同情淚)?

"Ah, he became like that because of me... Ah, I am truly a sinner who has ruined a person. A life that can't live more than a hundred years, ah, you are a pitiful man. For seven long years, you have dedicated yourself and sacrificed to me. Ah, you are truly a pitiful person. You have become degenerate and a beggar because of me, and now your life is threatened!" As she thought this, tears flowed from her clear eyes like stars. At this time, strangely, the pockmarked man opened his eyes. When he opened his eyes and saw the woman, he unexpectedly saw her crying. "That's it! These are tears of sympathy for me. I can't miss this opportunity. Seven years of effort has finally succeeded!" He immediately got up, grabbed the woman's wrist, and earnestly pleaded, "Save me. My entire life now depends on you." Without saying a word, the woman immediately collapsed into the pockmarked man's arms. The matter ended there.

The woman immediately resigned from her position as a teacher at the school and came up to Seoul with the pockmarked man. But how could the woman's parents approve of this? Knowing they would be immediately kicked out, they couldn't go straight home, so they rented a room in a house in O-wŏl-dong, outside Sŏdaemun, and held a simple wedding ceremony (酌水成禮) with just the two of them. After the ceremony, the love affair had succeeded, but from now on, the problem was eating, wearing, and making a living. The two men and women swore to each other that they would have to live well without embarrassing anyone, and both men and women worked hard to find jobs.

It was at this time that the Kimisaeng Independence Movement occurred. The pockmarked man was finding a lover and trying to find a job, and then that great movement arose. Just in time, the reporters and workers of OO Daily went on strike or resigned, making it impossible to publish the newspaper. They were desperately looking for workers, offering high wages. The pockmarked man didn't care about national pride or anything else, and he went to work at the OO Daily to feed his lover. At that time, the starting salary was 15 wŏn. Because he was a new person who had come in while others were leaving, he was given special treatment. The pockmarked man worked hard without complaining about anything. <93> Before long, he was earning 20 wŏn, and before long, 30 wŏn. In less than a year, he was earning a salary of 40 wŏn. From then on, they lived like a family, and the man and woman lived a sweet life. But not content with this, the pockmarked man advised his wife to enter the midwifery course at OOO Medical Clinic. In about a year, the woman became a midwife. Now, both men and women were earning money. As a result, the woman's parents were also moved by their deep affection and good life, and they bought them a house and gave them some rice paddies. In this way, the two men and women are now living well with sons and daughters in a neat tiled house at OO address, Chŏng O-sŏngmok, Sŏdaemun. The man still works at OO Daily, and the woman is a famous midwife in Seoul, posting midwifery signs in various places and constantly receiving countless sprouts of Joseon. How amazing! Congratulations on the couple's good fortune. (End)     <94>

**Named Entities**

趙相鎬	Cho Sang-ho
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
李慶淑	Ri Kyŏng-suk
O-wŏn	O-wŏn
OO일보	OO Ilbo
OO 의원	OO Ŭiwŏn
西大門	Sŏdaemun
O-wŏl-dong	O-wŏl-dong
丁O成목	Chŏng O-sŏngmok



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제7호
발행일	1927년 07월 01일
기사제목	小說보다 기이한 事實 로-맨쓰 苦戀悲戀 『7년 片愛』奇錄
필자	天外漢
기사형태	문예기타

小說보다 기이한 事實 로-맨쓰 苦戀悲戀 『7년 片愛』奇錄
						天外漢
외국에서는 모르지만 우리 조선에서는 사실 듬은 진긔한 일이다. 호긔심 만흔 청춘남녀는 누구든지 이 사실만 보면 헛침을 한 번식 생킬 것이다. 즉 간단히 요령만 먼첨 말하자면 쫄박쫄박 얼근 못생긴 남학생이 부용꼿 가치 잘 생긴 녀학생에게 7년이나 두고 외짝 련애를 해오다가 맛츰내 거지가 다 된 몸으로 녀자의 최후 동정을 입어 아름다운 인연을 매저 남녀가 다 각각 상당한 직업 아래에서 집 사고 돈 모으고 아들 낫코 딸 낫코 깨가 쏘다지게 잘 지내는 정말 소설 가튼 사실 잇는 니약이가 이것이다.

15년 전이다 OO군 OO면 OO리에 본적을 두고 경성 O동 O동학교 초등과에 단니는 17-8세 된 아조 못 생긴 죠상호(趙相鎬)라는 (假名) 곰보 학생이 잇섯다. 그의 본 집은 상당한 재산도 잇고 일즉 장가를 드러 아들도 발서 잇섯섯다. 그는 항상 자긔의 못 생긴 것을 한탄 하면서도 자긔 안해의 못 생긴 것을 따라서 하탄 한면서 언제든지 본 녀편네를 리혼하고 새로 하이카라 녀자를 어더 살기를 혼자 꿈꾸고 잇서섯다. 그래서 서울 와서 공부는 하면서도 밤낫 하는 일이 그 못 생긴 얼골 이지만 거긔에 모양 내기만 일삼고 잇섯다. 한 달에 두 세번식 리발을 하고 하로에 한 두 번식 면도를 하고 미안수(美顔水)를 발느며 향수를 뿌리며 분홍 손수건을 가지며 깃도 구두를 신으며 모양이란 모양은 다 내여 보앗섯다. 그러나 원체 괴석(怪石)갓치 쫄박쫄박 얽근 못 생긴 얼골을 엇더케 하랴. 거울을 보다가 거울도 멧 번이나 둘너 멧처 보고 사진을 보다가 사진도 멧 번 쯔저 보고 부모도 원망해 보고 우러도 보고 우서도 보고 별 질알을 다 하고 잇섯다. 그리면서도 자긔 녀편네와 리혼할 생각은 그냥 가지고 잇섯고 입븐 하이카라 새 녀자와 다시 결혼할 것은 항상 꿈꾸고 잇서섯다.

O동 학교를 지내 나가면 O명 녀학교가 잇는 것은 누구나＜87＞ 짐작할 것이다. 이 곰보는 앗츰 저녁 학교에 가고 올 때 마다 이 O명 녀학교 녀학생들과 늘 접촉을 하게 되얏다. 그-흰저고리 껌정치마에 책보를 산듯이 싸들고 활발히 왓다갓다 하는 녀학생들을 볼 때 마다 항상 이런 생각을 하고 잇섯다. 「아! 입뿌기도 하구나 ! 아! 활발도 하구나 ! 엇더케 하면 저런 녀자와 결혼을 해가지고 달콤한 생활을 한번 해보노? 단 하로라도 그러케 해 보면 금시 죽어도 한이 업겟는데…….」하고 망연히 서서 한탄을 하다가 자긔의 얼골도 쥐여 뜻어보고 부모들이 잘못 맨들어준 것도 한탄 해보고 자긔 녀편네의 그 넙적하고 퍼르덩덩한 얼골도 보이고 하야 날마다 때마다 한숨 안집픈 적이 업섯다.
그런데 이 O동 O동학교 압흘 지내단이는 만흔 녀학생 즁에는 특별히 입뿌고 잘 생긴 녀학생이 하나 끼여 단니는데 그는 O동 OO번지의 엇던 목사의 딸 리경숙(李慶淑)(假名)이라는 방년 16세의 꼿 다운 처녀 이엿다.
곰보는 그 만흔 녀학생 중에서 이 녀학생을 골나서 눈을 걸기 시작 하얏다. 학교에 갈 때 마다 반듯이 면도를 하고 미안수를 발느고 의복에 향수를 뿌리고 구두를 닥고 모사 책보에 다가 책을 산 듯이 싸들고 골목에 나와 직키고 잇다가 그 녀학생이 지내 갈 때에 슬적 나와 업서거니 뒤서거니 혹은 길우에서 책도 보는 체 하며 혹은 구두 끈도 매는 체하며 여하간 그 녀학생의 시종군 비슷한 행동을 하면서 단니엿다. 학교에서 올 때에도 반듯이 운동장이나 엇던 집 담겻테 붓터 섯다가 그 녀학생이 오기를 기다려서 갓치 오군 하얏다.
이럿케 혼자서 헛침을 생키며 따라 단이기를 하로 잇틀 한달 두달 한 학긔가지 내엿다. 그러나 그 녀학생은 한번도 눈 거러 보지도 안코 그저 무심히 태연히 아조 랭정히 자긔 압만 보고 단니엿다. 곰보는 화가 날 대로 나고 속이 상할 대로 상해 섯다. 자긔의 못 생긴 곰보 얼골을 쥐여 뜻으며 몹시도 속을 태우며 지내엿다. 녀름 방학이 되야도 집에도 안가고 부모가 알는다 해도 걱정도 안하고 그저 자나 깨나 오직 한 생각이 그 녀학생 뿐이엿다.
그렁저렁 지내는 것이 녀름이 지내고 가을이 지내고 일년이 지내엿다. 날 마다 한결 갓튼 수단으로 그 녀학생을 따러 다니나 녀자는 단 한 번이라도 눈을 드러보지 안엇다. 그저 「밋친 자식! 못 생긴 자식!」하고 속으로 랭소만 할 뿐 이엿다. 그러나 일년이나 지냇스니 얼굴이야 닉지 안엇스랴.
곰보는 이제 부터는 「그만 하면 얼굴도 닉엇고 내가 누구인지도 알겟지?」하고 편지 질을 하기로 작정 하얏다. 즌 고개에 가서 욕색 화전지(花箋紙)를 사고 분홍 꼿 봉투를 사고 간 김에 향수 까지 한 병 사 가지고 와서 편지를 쓰기 시작 하얏다. 「아- 나의 가장 사모하는 경숙씨 당신은 나를 아실는지 모르나 나는 당신을 일년이나 두고 앗츰 저녁으로 사모하든 O동 학교 고등과(초등과이면서) O학년의 됴상호란 사람임니다. 」
이 만콤 쓰고는 말이 잘 되얏나 못 되얏나 글씨가 잘 되얏나 못 되얏나 한 번 내려 보고는 아무래도 안된 듯 하야 멧 번 망설 거리다가 ＜89＞ 쭉 쯔저 버리고 마럿다. 니마에 손을 언고 텬정을 처다보며 한참이나 생각하다가 거울을 드러 자긔 얼굴을 물끄럼이 드려다 보다가 그 괴상망측한 꼴을 이제 비로소 발견한 듯이 한숨과 함께 혀를 채며 거울을 멧다 치고 락심인 듯 방바닥에 펄적 잣바 누어 이리 궁리 저리 궁리하다가 「그래도 혹시 연분이 잇스면?……」하고 다시 니러나 편지를 쓰기 시작하얏다.
「아- 나의 가장 사모하는 ……」하고 그저 한 모양으로 내려 쓰다가는 쯔저 버리고 쯔저 버렷다가 다시 쓰고 하야 편지 한 장에 편지지를 수십 장이나 업시하고 봉투도 십여 장이나 희생을 하얏다. 그리하야 맛츰내 봉투에다가 「시내 O동 O번지 리경숙씨」라고 써가지고 3전 우표를 단단히 붓쳐 가지고 우톄통으로 가서 집어 넛코도 혹시 루락이나 안될가 하야 다시한번 검시를 하고 도라 왓섯다. 그러나 그 잇튼날 그 편지는 그대로 도라 왓다. 곰보는 락심 천만하야 머리를 싸매고 누엇섯다. 그러나 첫 번 실패에 락심할 것은 업다고 다시 결심하고 또 편지를 썻섯다.

이럿케 편지 하기를 열번 백번 날마다 날마다 작구 하얏다. 그러나 그 편지는 열번이고 백번이고 작고 도라 왓다. 혹시 도라 오지 안는다 해도 답장이나 밧엇다는 소식은 한 번도 업섯다. 곰보는 화가 날대로 나서 거의 병나다 십히 되얏다. 그러나 일변 편지질은 게속해 하며 날마다 따라 단니기를 게속해 하얏다. 그럿케 한지가 벌서 3년이라는 긴 세월을 지내엿다.
그리자 그 녀학생은 O명 녀학교를 졸업하고 니여 녀자OO학교 사범과에 드러 갓다. 이 곰보는 그 동안 이 녀학생과 외짝 련애 전문으로 해서 그만 타락이 되야 O동 학교에서는 멧 번 락제를 하다가 그만 퇴학하고 마럿섯다. 락제를 거듭하고 퇴학까지 하얏지만 일등 수단으로 가정을 속키여 학비는 그대로 가저다 쓰며 공부는 의연히 잘 하는 체 하얏섯다. 그리고 그 녀자에게 자긔가 O동 학교를 졸업하고 엇던 전문학교에 단니는 것처럼 보이게 하기 위하야 양복에다 금 단추를 해 달고 둥글 모자를 사각 모자로 맨드러 쓰고 그리고 자긔의 사관을 그 녀자의 집 근처로 옴겻섯다. 그리고 계속하야 모양을 낼 대로 내고 긔회 보아 따라 단닐대로 따라 단니며 편지질도 작구 게속해 하얏섯다.
이럿케 하기를 또 일년이나 해도 그 녀자는 조곰도 눈 떠보지 안엇다. 그래서 자긔가 본 녀편네가 잇는 것을 탐지해 알고 그것을 혐의하야 그런가 하고 곳 민적 위조를 하야 민적등본도 보내 보고 물품도 사 보내 보고 별 수단을 다 써 보앗다. 그래도 종시 조곰도 긔색이 업는지라 이 번에는 「빠요링」을 하나 삿다. 그것을 밤낫 전문으로 배웟다. 어지간히 배워가지고는 그 녀자가 지나갈 때마다 들창을 여러 놋코  신이나게 켜군 하얏다. 그 녀자의 들창 밧게 가서도 조흔 곡조를 골나서 작구 켜군 하얏다. 편지도 던지고 수건도 던지고 ＜90＞ 과자도 던지고 별 수단을 다 써 보앗다. 그래도 그 녀자는 들창을 꽉 닷고 내다 보지도 안코 기침 한번을 안이 하얏다.

이러게 하기를 거의 6년이 지냇섯다. 그 녀자는 발서 사범과를 졸업하고 O원 엇던 보통학교로 훈도가 되야 갓섯다. 이 곰보는 극단으로 타락이 되야 거의 밋친 사람 갓치 되고 마럿다. 집에서는 학비도 안이 보내고 친구도 다 이러버리고 집주인은 밥갑 안낸다고 쫏처내고 하야 그만 알거지가 되고 마럿다. 입든 옷이란 말금 드러 뎐당 삽히고 빠요링과 책장 갓튼 것도 말금 파러 먹고 마럿다. 이럿게 극단으로 타락이 되야 갈데 업는 알거지가 된 그 신세를 가지고도 그 녀자에 대한 그리운 생각은 조곰도 변하지 안코 더 맹렬히 게속 하얏다. 엇더케 엇더케 탐문을 하야 그 녀자가 O원 엇던학교 훈도로 간 것을 알고 또 그 곳으로 작구 편지질을 하얏섯다.
「당신 땀으네 나는 죽슴니다. 살녀 줍시요. 죽여 줍시요.」하고 날을 걸너 작구 하얏다. 그러나 이 때 까지 실타건 좃타건 종시 회답 한 장이 업섯다. 웬만한 녀자 갓트면 그만하면 그 꾸준한 열정에 감동되야 혹시 동정도 잇슬 듯한테 그럿치 안으면 「엑기 망할 자식! 밋친 자식!」하고 눈알이 쏘다지게 욕이라도 할 듯한데 이 녀자는 엇지도 심독한지 엇지도 범연한지 7년이나 두고 하로 갓치 이럿게 성화를 밧치는 데도 꼼작달삭 눈섭 한 대 움즉이지 안엇다. 참 지독한 녀자 이엿다.
그렁저렁 지내온 것이 7년도 다 가는 섯-달 수무 날깨 바로 「크리쓰마쓰」멧즐 전 이엿다. 곰보는 마즈막으로 「사람을 살리라」고 「결혼은 못한다 해도 얼굴이나 한번 뵈여 달나」고 애원복걸을 하얏다.
독자여 놀내지 마러라 7년이나 두고 그럿케 꾸준히 사랑을 보내도 눈섭 한 대도 움즉이지  안튼 그러한 지독한 녀자로 부터 처음겸 마즈막겸 회답 한 장이 왓다. 그 회답은 간단 하얏스나 의미는 깁헛섯다.
「7년이나 긴 세월을 두고 일개 녀자를 위하야 그럿케 왼 몸을 희생하다 십히 하는 당신의 그 열정은 남자로서 용렬 하다면 용렬도 하지만 긔장 하다면 긔장 하기도 합니다. 다른 말은 할 것 업고 맛츰 「크리쓰마쓰」가 각가웟스니 「크리쓰마쓰」날 동무에게 선사할 「エハガキ」(繪葉書)나 멧 장 사 보내 주시면 감사 하겟슴니다.」라고 하얏다. 천만 뜻 밧게 이 편지를 바다 본 곰보는 밋친 듯 어린 듯 하도 깁버서 정신을 일코 방 바닥이 꺼지게 뛰엿섯다. 그리고 나서 편지를 보고 다시 보고 빰에 대 보고 입도 맛춰 보고 정말 다 된 듯이 몹시도 깃버 하엿다. 그리고 그 편지를 잘 싸서 가슴 속에 깁히 간직 하고서 곳 나아가 사면팔방으로 돈을 구해 보앗다. 그러나 어대서 일전 반푼이나 구할 도리가 업섯다. 엇던 동향 치구에게 가서 천번 백번 별의별 사정을 다 해 가지고 게오 2원50전을 구하얏다. ＜91＞ 조와라고 이것을 가지고 곳 즌고개로 가서 「크리쓰마쓰」에 대한 입브고 산듯한 것만 골나서 1원 어치를 삿섯다. 그리고 한시를 지체치 안코 곳 O원으로 내려가기로 하얏다. 그러나 돈이 1원 밧게 안 남어스니 엇지하랴 옷도 해 입어야겟고 구두도 사야겟고 리발도 해야겟고 목욕도 해야겟고 다른 선물도 좀 사야 겟는데 도무지 도리가 업섯다. 깟닥 잘못하면 차비 까지 업서질 것이다. 그래서 생각다 못하야 「에라 이제 이 꼴에 이러면 어떳코 저러면 엇더랴 가서 얼골이나 한 번 처다 보고 죽어 버리자!」하고 그-덥수룩한 머리 그 때가 지덕지덕한 의복 그 다 떠러진 신발 그대로 남대문을 나서 긔차에 몸을 실엇섯다. 하도 창피 하닛가 밤차를 탓섯다.
밤 즁에 O원 역에 내리니 돈은 업고 갈 곳은 업고 아-엇지하랴 대합실 걸상을 침대로 하야 거긔서 자다가 역부에게 멧 번이나 쫏겨도 낫섯다. 그래도 할 수 업스닛가 욕을 먹어가며 매를 마저 가며 대합실에서 밤을 새엿다. 발기를 기대려 그 녀자가 잇는 학교 근처로 밋친 사람 갓치 안이 거지가 밥 동녕이나 가듯이 비츨비츨 차저 갓섯다.
이 때이엿다. 이 곰보가 녀자 잇는 곳을 차저 가는 중로 이엿다. 이 때 맛츰 그 녀자는 학교 숙직실에서 자고 자긔의 식주인(食主人)으로 (엇던 面長십)가든 중이엇다.
논과 밧테는 흰 눈이 덥혀 백포장(白布帳)을 깐 듯 한테 문득 사이*은길은 *어름이 덥혀 잣칫하면 밋그러질 듯이 되야 잇다. 앗츰 해가 붉으레티미는데 쌀쌀한 바람은 은 가루를 날니고 잇섯다. 이 때에 흰 저고리 회색 세투 치마에 빨간 목도리를 바람에 펄펄 날니며 굽 놉흔 구두로 거의 넘어질 듯이 애질애질 종종 거름을 치는 녀자는 저리로서 오고 덥슬 머리에 때뭇은 캡을 눌너 쓰고 다 떠러진 의복에 헌 집석이를 신은 알거지 이 곰보는 이 쪽에서 가것다. 서로 처다 보며 서로 의심 하면서 점점 각가히 왓것다. 눈과 눈 얼골과 얼굴이 거의 마조치게 되얏슬 때에 녀자는 천만 뜻밧긴 듯 놀내여 홈즛 물너 서고 곰보는 넘우도 억삭하야 톄면 불구하고 그만 업드려 일장 통곡을 하얏다. 맛치 오래 떠나 잇든 아들이 오래 그립든 어머니 압해나 닥친 것 처럼 소리처 왕왕 우럿섯다. 천만 뜻 밧게 이 꼴을 당한 그 녀자는 일변 창피도 하고 일변 가이업기도 하야 그도 또한 톄면 불구하고 곳 곰보를 뭇드러 니르기며 「이게 웬 일이 심닛가…… 날도 차고 행인도 만흐니 길에서 이러실 것 업시 저 잇는 곳으로 가십시다.」하고 곰보를 붓드러 이르켜 가지고 자긔 숙소로 갓섯다.
녀 선생이 거처하는 방이라 방 안은 몹시 깨긋하고 청초하얏다. 그 녀자는 이 곰보를 자긔 방에다 듸려 안치고 곳 화로 불을 가저다 불을 쪼이게 하며 일변 앗츰을 차려다가 밥을 대접 하얏다. 밤 새도록 추운 정거장에서 잠도 잘못 자고 밥도 못 먹고 부들부들 떨든 터에 이제 따듯한 방에서 화로불을＜92＞ 끼고 앗츰을 먹으니 얼엇든 몸이 녹는 바람에 왼 몸이 보들보들 해지며 조름이 스르르 오것다. 북끄러운 생각도 반가운 생각도 다 니저 버리고 그만 화로 겻테 쓰러지고 마럿다. 녀자는 곳 자긔의 벼개를 베여주고 자긔가 덥든 니불을 덥허 주고 그리고 병자 간호 하듯이 그 겻테 안저서 곰보의 자는 꼴을 유심히 보앗다. 쫄박쫄박 억은 얼골에 다가 못먹고 못입고 알거지 반 밋치광이가 다 된 꼴이 보기에 실로 딱하얏다. 측은 하기가 비길데 업섯다. 녀자의 그 맑고 깨끗한 가슴에서는 한 떨기 구름이 일기 시작하얏다. 그 구름은 화하야안 줄기 비가 되야 두 눈으로서 쏘다지기 시작하얏다. 이것이 인류애(人類愛)라 할가. 동정의 눈물(同情淚)이라 할 가.
「아-저 이가 저 꼴이 된 것은 나 땀으네…… 아- 내야 말로 사람을 삽은 죄인이로구나 불과 백년 못 사는 인생이 아- 너야 말로 불상한 산애다. 7년이나 긴 세월에 왼 몸을 드려 나에게 희생한 셈이로다. 아-과연 불상한 사람이다. 너는 나 땀으네 타락이 되고 거지가 되고 이제 생명 까지 위협하게 되얏구나!」하고 생각할 때에 그 샛별 갓흔 맑은 눈에서는 눈물이 좌르르 흘러섯다. 이 때에 곰보는 이상하게도 눈을 떳섯다. 눈을 떠 그 녀자를 보니 생각박게 녀자는 눈물을 흘니고 잇것다. 「올타! 나에게 동정하는 눈물이다. 때를 놋치지 못하겟다. 7년 적공이 이제야 비로소 성공!」하고 곳 이러나 녀자의 손목을 잡으며 「살녀 주십시오 나의 전 생명은 이제 당신께 달녓슴니다.」하고 진정으로 애원 하얏다. 녀자는 두말 업시 당장에 곰보의 가슴에 쓰러지고 마럿다. 일은 여긔서 끗티 낫다.
그 녀자는 곳 학교의 교원을 사직하고 곰보와 함께 서울로 올나왓다. 그러나 녀자의 부모가 엇지 이것을 승락하랴. 알면 당장에 쫏처낼 듯 하야 집으로 바로 가지 못하고 서대문 밧 O월동 엇던 집에 방 한간을 어더 가지고 단 두리 작수성레(酌水成禮)를 하얏다. 성레를 하고 나니 련애로는 성공이 되얏스나 이제 부터는 먹고 입고 살님 할 그것이 문뎨이엿다. 두 남녀는 이제 이럿케 된 바에는 남 부끄럽지 안케 잘 사러야 되겟다는 것을 피차에 맹세를 하고 남녀가 각각 직업 구하기에 뢰력을 하얏다.
이 때가 맛츰 긔미년 이엿다. 됴천에 큰 운동이 니러낫다. 이 곰보가 애인을 어더 놋코 직업을 구하는 판인데 그 큰 운동이 니러나섯다. 때 맛츰 OO일보의 긔자와 직공은 모다 파업 혹은 퇴직을 하는 바람에 신문을 못할 지경이라 사방으로 고급을 주어가며 직공을 구하얏다. 이 곰보는 민족의 톄면이고 무엇이고 애인을 먹여 살리기 위하야 곳 이 OO일보의 직공으로 드러갓섯다. 그 때 초급이 15원이엿다. 남은 다 나가는데 새로 드러온 사람이라 하야 특별히 대우 하얏다. 이 곰보는 이것저것 다 불게하고 열심으로 일을 하얏다. ＜93＞얼마 되지 안어서 20원 또 얼마 되지 안어서 30원 일년이 채 못되야 40원의 월급을 타게 되얏다. 이제부터는 제법 살님 답게 살님을 하며 남녀가 꿀 갓튼 생활을 하얏다. 그러나 이것으로 만족할 수 업다고 곰보는 자긔 녀편네에게 권고하야 OOO의원 산파과에 드러가게 하얏다. 한 일년 만에 그 녀자는 산파가 되얏다. 이제는 남녀가 다 각각 돈을 버더 드리게 되얏다. 이러케 되닛가 녀자의 부모도 그들의 두터운 정리와 잘 하는 살님에 감동이 되야 곳 집 한 채를 사주고 또한 논도 멧 마지기 떼여 주어섯다. 이리하야 두 남녀는 지금 서대문 정O성목 OO번지 말숙한 긔와 집에서 아들 낫코 딸 낫코 잘 살고 잇단다. 남자는 지금도 OO일보에 단니고 녀자는 서울에서도 유명한 산파로 여러 곳에 산파 문패를 붓치고 수 만흔 됴선의 새싹을 작구 밧드러 내고 잇다. 얼마나 신긔한 일이냐! 두 남녀의 만복을 축하한다. (끗)     ＜94＞
＜88-94＞