잡지명	별건곤 제15호
발행일	1928년 08월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮三大內亂記, 六月大變! 壬午軍亂의 回想記 (The Three Great Rebellions of Joseon, The Great June Disturbance! A Memoir of the Imo Military Rebellion)
필자	車相瓚
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

朝鮮三大內亂記, 六月大變! 壬午軍亂의 回想記
						車相瓚
The Reign of the Hen

It hadn't been long since the sound of cannons firing at foreign ships from Ganghwa Island had ceased, and Minbi, who dreamed of reclaiming royal power every night by the deep palace's jade candle, her allure had already spread to the Confucian scholars of the countryside. A memorial against the regency (反攝政䟽) by Choe Ik-hyeon fell at the palace gate. Daewongun, the rare hero who had held the peninsula's mountains and rivers in his hands for ten years, had no choice but to leave the political circles of Hanyang and leisurely lie in a corner of Yangju, befriending sleeping tigers in the white clouds and green mountains. (Daewongun retired and immediately went into seclusion in Jikdong, Yangju). Originally, where there are no dragons, seaweed wags its tail in the sea, and where there are no tigers, foxes act like teachers in the mountains. Once Daewongun left the regency, Minbi manipulated the political power (政權을 幻弄) at will, appointing her relatives, even the most ordinary people (凡才庸人), to high official positions, and even her distant relatives (사돈의 팔촌), if they were born male, would all hold at least one position as a local magistrate (地方郡守). At that time, the children's song, "Don't be a fourth cousin of the Yi clan, be an eighth cousin of the Min clan," well explains this. Most of them were either pests (害毒蟲) to the nation or bloodsuckers (吸血鬼) of the people. Relying only on their power, they committed all sorts of tyranny, cruelty, extravagance, plunder, and corruption. Furthermore, to pursue immediate pleasure and seek future blessings, Minbi gathered all the singers and dancers in the world and indulged in revelry day and night in the palace, inviting groups of shamans, diviners, and monks to perform prayers and Buddhist offerings at famous mountains, great rivers, and ancient temples. There was not a single peak among the twelve thousand peaks of Geumgangsan that was not visited by several bags of rice, several hundred nyang of money, and several rolls of cotton cloth. The 53 Buddhas of Yujeomsa Temple had radiant gold on their heads. Even strangely shaped stones were offered great sacrifices, and trees that had aged for only a few years were adorned with jade and gold ornaments. In this state, what would become of the politics, and what would become of the dignity of the royal family? All the systems established during the Daewongun era were destroyed and purged, and the palace discipline (宮紀) was completely disrupted. The strict Ninefold Palace (九重宮闕) <11> transformed into a demon's den (伏魔殿) where monsters appeared in droves, and the full national treasury was completely emptied. No matter how much the people were subjected to various demands, the officials' salaries could not be paid for five or six years, and even the soldiers' pay in each camp had not been paid for 13 months. In addition, Minbi, relying on the power of foreign countries, completely reversed Daewongun's isolationist policy and entered into so-called commercial treaties with foreign countries. First, she allied with Japan, and as soon as the envoy came to reside in Seoul, the government reformed the military system, dismissing about 1,000 soldiers from the existing Five Military Commands (5營門) without pay and organizing a new army called Byeolgigun (別技軍), establishing the two new camps of Jang-eo and Muwi, and hiring a Japanese lieutenant, Horimoto Reizo, as a drill instructor. The resentment of the general public soared to the heavens, lamenting, "When a hen crows, the family is ruined (牝鷄之鳴은 惟家之索)," and they could not help but think back to the Daewongun era. In the Imo year, the drought was particularly severe from the spring, and the price of grain soared, causing unrest in the hearts of the people in all eight provinces, and everyone thought of rebellion.

The Outbreak of the Military Disturbance

It was June 9th of the Imo year. The Ministry of Finance (戶曹) decided to give the soldiers about one month's worth of pay and began distributing rice from the Gwangheung Warehouse (廣興倉). The soldiers of each camp, who had not received their pay for 13 months, flocked to the Gwangheung Warehouse as if parched fish had found water. Finally, when they received their pay, the rice was almost completely rotten, and the warehouse clerk was also engaging in fraud, mixing half of the rice with sand and stone, and the measuring was less than 10 du (斗) when 12 du equaled 1 seok (石). With things like this, how could the soldiers, who were usually as gentle as lambs, not be angered by the government's negligent treatment and the warehouse clerk's deceitful actions? The soldiers, filled with anger, punched and kicked, scolding and insulting the government officials' unreasonable actions. At that time, the warehouse clerk happened to be a member of the family of Min Gyeom-ho, the Minister of Finance (戶曹判書), who was the leader of the Min clan government, holding the important position of Seonhye-dangsang (宣惠堂上), and engaged in all sorts of activities that harmed the public and benefited himself, becoming the focus of public resentment. It was also Min Gyeom-ho who had prevented the soldiers from receiving their pay. It is true that the soldiers would be even more angry that a member of such a person's family had even committed fraud with the soldiers' pay. The soldiers, indignant at this, burst into anger, shouting, "Look here, even if we have to go to Samsu and Gapsan in the future, we must first kill this bastard!" As they were causing a disturbance, dozens of soldiers from the Training Command (訓練都監), known as the best soldiers at the time, rushed in and beat the warehouse clerks to death. At first, they killed the warehouse clerks out of anger, but they knew that they might be killed for killing a member of a powerful family like Min Gyeom-ho, so the soldiers of each camp gathered in one place to discuss countermeasures. Everyone was filled with indignation, saying, "Instead of waiting to be killed by those bastards, it is better to start a rebellion first, kill the high-ranking officials besides Minbi who are ruining the country, and correct the government." They unanimously approved, and on one hand, they dispatched people to Unhyeongung (雲峴宮) to convey their intentions to Daewongun and secretly communicate with him. The atmosphere in Hanseong changed rapidly by the hour, and it was extremely dangerous as to whether a torrential rain or a strong wind would come. <12> However, how could the sparrows (鷰雀) sleeping soundly in the Dang-sang (堂上) know that a great fire would come, and how could the flock of young sheep idling in the pasture imagine the fierce lion watching? The high-ranking officials in the palace and government did not know anything and only sang of peace in the sound of wind instruments and celebrated the Queen's longevity.

Swift and Rapid Anti-Military Action

When the soldiers of each camp were united in this way, a warehouse clerk who had escaped reported the murder of his family member to Min Gyeom-ho, who was furious and decided to arrest several leaders of the soldiers and execute them the next day. Although Min did this relying on his power, it was a reckless act that further promoted the soldiers' rebellion and brought disaster upon himself. As soon as the rumor spread, the soldiers of each camp's anger exploded at once, and they decided to start a rebellion before the leaders were executed. The soldiers of the Training Command (訓練都監) led the way, and the soldiers of each unit gathered at Iraehyeon, and the officers, cavalry, etc. of the East Byeolyeong and the soldiers who had been dismissed the other day also gathered, and the situation grew greatly. With words of sorrow and indignation, they swore to overthrow the treacherous party and reform the government, and began their march. First, they broke into the armory (軍器庫) and seized all the weapons, and as they armed themselves all at once, the banners, spears, and swords made fun of the sunlight, and the sound of drums and shouts shook the heavens and the earth. They divided into two teams, one heading straight to the palace and the other heading to the Training Command (訓練下都監). The former intended to attack the palace and the government, and the latter intended to attack the Japanese and the Japanese legation of the New Training Unit (新營訓練隊). As the army heading to the palace arrived near the palace, the king and his subjects were all frightened and did not know what to do. By royal order, the attendants were sent to announce to the soldiers, "Why are you doing this? If you have any requests, we will grant them all, so quickly return and rest assured," but the soldiers did not listen, shouting loudly and angrily, listing the crimes of the Min clan's greedy and country-destroying acts, and demanded that Daewongun be quickly brought into the palace to completely reform the politics. They did not retreat, so the king could not do anything and urgently sent a messenger to Unhyeongung (雲峴宮), asking Daewongun to enter the palace and requesting that he calm the military disturbance. Daewongun immediately entered the palace and sent Yi Gyeong-ha, the former Training Commander (訓練大將) whom he had trusted all his life and who was usually loved by the general army, to persuade the soldiers in every way to quickly disband, but originally, the excited crowd could not be satisfied with mere persuasion. As a result, Daewongun's prestige and Yi Gyeong-ha's trust had no effect, and the troops remained stationed outside the palace gate, only shouting and scolding in anger. And the army that had gone to Hadogam <13> broke into the New Camp Gate on the way and rushed into the camp, killing the Japanese instructor Horimoto Reizo, and that night burned the Japanese Legation Cheongsugwan (清水館) located in Cheonyeonjeong (天然亭) outside Seodaemun. Then the rioters harmonized their voices and even indiscriminately killed the Japanese residents as they were. At that time, the Japanese Minister Hanafusa Yoshitada barely escaped to Incheon and boarded the British survey ship "Flying Fish" and went to Nagasaki.
And that night, a team of soldiers also broke into the Podo Office (捕盜廳) and the prison (典獄) and released all the prisoners, which was out of resentment for the fact that the greedy officials of the Min clan arbitrarily imprisoned innocent people at that time. It had been dry for several months, and when the prisoners were released, a heavy rain suddenly came, and the general public rejoiced and said that because the government had imprisoned innocent people and now released them, heaven was moved and even sent rain.

The Bloody Storm of June 10th

It is June 10th. The troops, roaring like wild beasts, rushed to Unhyeongung from dawn and appealed to Daewongun. Daewongun came out himself and told the troops the pros and cons, asking them to disband first and then discuss future measures, but they stubbornly refused to listen and, with the force of a raging wave, rushed back to the palace and arrested Min Gyeom-ho, who had entered the palace, and Kim Bo-hyeon, the former Gyeonggi Governor, and beat them to death with chaotic spears and knives, and rushed straight into the inner palace, searching to kill Minbi. As usual, the quick-witted Minbi disguised herself as a palace maid and, under the protection of the military officer Hong Jae-hui (renamed Gye-hun), slipped out of the palace quietly with the help of the guards Kim Seong-taek and Han Eok-gil, and temporarily took refuge in the house of Hong Sang-gung, Hong Gye-hun's sister, outside Danbongmun (it is said that Minbi was caught by the rebellious soldiers at that time and avoided disaster by pretending to be Hong Gung-in), and then went to Yoon Tae-jun's house, where she got a small palanquin and fled to Min Eung-sik's house in Hwadong, and then hid in Lee Gyu-ik's house outside Dongdaemun. Since it was also dangerous, she took refuge in Min Yeong-wi's house, Eung-sik's uncle, in Janghowon, Chungju, under the protection of Min Eung-sik, Min Yeong-gi, Shim Sang-hun, and others. How could the tragic appearance at that time be described? The glory and wealth of that year turned into a dream of the hibiscus flower, the sound of pine and bird replaced the three-stringed and six-stringed instruments, and the dragon sauce and phoenix soup turned into mountain greens and wild vegetables. Whatever happened in the world, she only thought it fortunate to have preserved her life and offered thanks to the Immeasurable Buddha.
An Idle Tale - At this time, the high and low officials and palace attendants in the palace all fled, and the palace became empty, so the rebel soldiers roamed around the various palaces like a land of no one, and the king, in an emergency royal order, asked Daewongun to enter the palace and begged him to calm the military disturbance, and always stayed close to Daewongun to avoid disaster. At the same time as this upheaval in the palace, a branch of the army outside the palace gate braved the rain and attacked the house of Chief State Councillor Lee Choe-eung. Choe-eung was Daewongun's brother, Heungin-gun, and despite the fact that Minbi was Daewongun's political enemy, he flattered Minbi and wielded power, so the army also intended to kill him. Choe-eung's son, Jae-gyeong, ran into the palace and begged Daewongun to save his father's life, and Daewongun asked the army not to invade Heungin-gun's house, but it was already too late. Heungin-gun hid behind a jar, but was beaten to death by the iron club <14> of the rebel soldiers, and the house was completely destroyed. At the same time, Min Chang-sik's house in Midong was destroyed, and Min Chang-sik was arrested and stabbed to death on Jongno Street, and the house of Podo Chief Han Gyu-jik was also attacked, but Han was fortunate enough to escape and was not killed. In addition, there were also countless people from the Min clan who were killed and houses destroyed. The scene that day was truly terrifying and tragic. The entire city of Hanseong was filled with the smell of blood and rain, and the smoke and flames made it impossible to open one's eyes. Men and women, old and young, were constantly fleeing inside and outside the city, and the sound of crying and lamentation reached the heavens. How could the Min clan, who had enjoyed all kinds of extravagance with the power of scorching the heavens until the other day, have suffered such a terrible disaster in one morning? Everyone regretted not being born into the Min family, but on that day, even the Mun family, whose name was similar, had to change their surname. And how could the soldiers and citizens, who had been so docile and weak until yesterday, enduring all kinds of abuse and contempt, become so brave and fierce? There was no monarch, no national law, and not even Daewongun in the place they were heading. They just shouted, "Kill the traitors, exterminate the Min clan!" with the momentum of fierce lions and angry tigers, "Cut off the heads of the adults, castrate the children, and grab the hair of the women and pull it out!" For a while, even when Daewongun became regent again and personally handled all matters and ordered the troops to disband, they did not listen at all and only declared that they would retreat only after killing Minbi. Daewongun could not help but issue an order saying that Minbi had already died in the rebel army, so the troops should know that and quickly withdraw. After announcing Minbi's death in the country and preparing for a fake funeral with Minbi's clothes, he began to organize the government, appointing Lee Jae-myeon (Daewongun's eldest son) as Training Commander (訓練大將) and Minister of Finance (戶曹判書) Seonhye-dangsang (宣惠堂上), ordering the troops to settle down, and declaring a renewal of state affairs. Only then did the troops say that they had achieved their goal, and they shouted "Long live Daewongun!" and returned to their main camp from the palace amidst cheers.

The Joseon Political Situation After the Military Disturbance

In general, this military disturbance was the first internal upheaval since the founding of the Yi Dynasty. In just two days, with swift and rapid action like a whirlwind and thunderbolt, it fundamentally swept away the stage of the Min clan government, which had been as solid as an iron fortress for 10 years, and made Daewongun the ruler again, which was a great success for them and something that no one <15> could help but admire. However, after a few days, a major crisis suddenly broke out, which was the intervention of the neighboring Qing Dynasty. Initially, Minbi, having narrowly escaped death in Chungju, sent the translator Byeon Won-gyu to Seoul to secretly inform the King of her survival, and entrusted her close relative Min Tae-ho to request the Qing Dynasty to quell the rebellion. The King, again colluding with the Min Party, urgently sent Eo Yun-jung to Beijing to report the details of the situation to the Qing government through Kim Yun-sik, the envoy to the selection of the crown prince, who was staying there at the time, and also requested troops. This was a great miscalculation among the miscalculations that would ruin the country and destroy the society. If one were to speak of the crimes of the Min clan, what greater crime could there be? At this time, the Qing Dynasty saw that Joseon's traffic with Japan and other countries had become increasingly frequent since the Byeongin Western Disturbance (丙寅洋擾) and that its own power over Joseon was decreasing day by day. They were always looking for an opportunity to expand their power again, so when Joseon requested troops, Li Hongzhang, whose ambitions were aroused, thought of it as a golden opportunity, like a hungry dog ​​smelling meat. He immediately ordered the Beiyang Fleet to load about 5,000 troops from the Five Battalions of the Army and, under the leadership of Wu Changqing, Yuan Shikai, and Huang Shilin, rushed to Joseon, arriving at Namyang Bay on July 14 (August 29, solar calendar). At that time, the rebellion in Joseon had already been quelled, and Daewongun was ruling again and settling all matters. If they had a conscience of international morality, they would have just returned, but since they originally had special ambitions, how could they just return without doing anything? Also, while Daewongun was in power and managing Joseon well, they thought it was to their disadvantage. In addition, there was Daewongun's political enemy, the Minbi faction, so they thought that using the so-called barbarian control (以夷制夷) tactic of the Chinese to capture the Min clan and suppress Daewongun was a great strategy. On July 16, the third day after the Qing troops entered the capital, they lured Daewongun into Huang Shilin's camp. They said that the Qing government wanted to meet him, and unexpectedly, the soldiers escorted Daewongun and headed straight to Namyang Bay, taking him to Tianjin on the warship Dingyuan, and then he became a prisoner in Baoding Prefecture. Alas, Daewongun's second regency was only a three-day reign, and the work of reform that had been fought with the blood and flesh of the troops and citizens was reduced to nothing in an instant, and the streets of Hanyang were trampled by the hooves of the Qing soldiers, and the government returned to the hands of the Min clan.
After forcibly taking Daewongun away in this way, the Qing troops committed all kinds of atrocities, surrounding Wangsimni, Itaewon, and other bases of the Joseon army, massacring a large number of soldiers, abolishing the Training Command (訓練都監), Geumwiyeong (禁衛營), Muwiyeong (武衛營) Oyeongcheong (御營廳), and Chongyungcheong (摠戎廳), and reorganizing them into four camps, left, right, front, and rear, as they pleased, to be trained and commanded by the Qing army. On the other hand, the Min clan faction requested Minbi's return to the palace, and after sending so-called Envoy Bongyeong Hong Sun-muk and Aide Lee Yong-ik to the mountains of Gukmang, they brought Minbi back. Then, they withdrew Minbi's death announcement that had been made the other day, and the Min clan faction reorganized the government. At the same time, they gave posthumous titles and ranks to Min Gyeom-ho, Min Chang-sik, Kim Bo-hyeon, and Lee Choe-eung, who died in the military disturbance, executed Lee Gyeong-ha, Jeong Hyeon-deok, and Heo Bin, who were Daewongun's allies, and expelled Kim Hong-jip and others, who had participated in state affairs as famous scholars at the time, and appointed Min Eung-sik, Min Hyeong-sik, and Min Tae-ho, giving them power. The political situation in Joseon returned to its original state before the military disturbance. However, the Qing's intervention was even more severe than before, and even though Minbi had regained power, everything was under the command of Wu Changqing and Yuan Shikai. In addition, Japan raised the issue of the attack on the legation and the murder of residents, and the so-called Treaty of Jemulpo was established in Incheon, paying 50,000 won in compensation and stationing more than 200 troops in Seoul under the pretext of protecting the legation. From then on, Joseon was clearly under the supervision of both countries, and the conflict between Japan and Qing occurred during the Gapshin Coup, leading to the Treaty of Tianjin and the Sino-Japanese War of 1894. <16>

**Named Entities**

강화도	 Kanghwado
閔妃	 Minbi
秋波	 ch'upa
崔益鉉	 Ch'oe Ik-hyŏn
反攝政䟽	 pansŏpsŏngso
大院君	 Taewŏn'gun
漢陽	 Hanyang
楊州	 Yangju
直洞	 Chikdong
李氏	 Yi ssi
閔哥	 Min ka
高官大爵	 kogwandaejak
凡才庸人	 pŏmjaeyongin
地方郡守	 chibangkunsu
金剛山	 Kŭmgangsan
萬二千峰	 Manich'ŏnbong
楡岾寺	 Yujŏmsa
53佛	 Osipsambul
九重宮闕	 Kuju'nggunggwŏl
別技軍	 Pyŏlgigun
壯禦	 Changŏ
武衛	 Muwi
堀本禮造	 Horimoto Reizo
牝鷄之鳴은 惟家之索	 p'in'gyeji myŏngŭn yugaji saek
壬午年	 Imonyŏn
戶曹	 Hojo
廣興倉	 Kwanghŭngch'ang
三水甲山	 Samsu Kapsan
雲峴宮	 Unhyŏn'gung
梨峴	 Iraehŏn
東別營	 Tongbyŏlyŏng
訓練都監	 Hullyŏn Togam
軍器庫	 Kun'gigo
李景夏	 Yi Kyŏng-ha
訓練大將	 Hullyŏn Taejang
下都監	 Hadogam
清水館	 Ch'ŏngsugwan
花房義質	 Hanafusa Yoshitada
捕盜廳	 Podo ch'ŏng
典獄	 Chŏn'ŏk
天然亭	 Ch'ŏnyŏnjŏng
尹泰駿	 Yun T'ae-chun
花洞	 Hwadong
閔應植	 Min Ŭng-sik
李圭翊	 Yi Kyu-ik
閔泳綺	 Min Yŏng-gi
沈相薰	 Sim Sang-hun
忠州	 Ch'ungju
長湖院	 Changhowŏn
閔泳緯	 Min Yŏng-wi
洪在羲	 Hong Jae-hŭi
金聖澤	 Kim Sŏng-t'aek
韓億吉	 Han Ŏk-kil
洪啓薰	 Hong Kye-hun
洪尙宮	 Hong Sang-gung
領議政	 Yŏngŭijŏng
李最應	 Yi Ch'oe-ŭng
興寅君	 Hŭngin'gun
閔妃喪	 Minbi sang
李載冕	 Yi Chae-myŏn
吳長慶	 Go Chōkeo
袁世凱	 En Seigai
黃士林	 Kō Shirin
李鴻章	 Ri Kōshō
李朝	 Yi-jo
金允植	 Kim Yun-sik
閔台鎬	 Min T'ae-ho
丙寅洋擾	 Pyŏngin yangnyo
金弘集	 Kim Hong-jip
閔烔植	 Min Hyŏng-sik
往十里	 Wangsimni
梨泰院	 Itaewŏn
禁衛營	 Kŭmwiyeong
武衛營	 Muwiyeong
御營廳	 Ŏyeongch'ŏng
摠戎廳	 Ch'ongyungch'ŏng
鄭顯德	 Chŏng Hyŏn-dŏk
許斌	 Hŏ Bin
濟物浦條約	 Chemulp'o Choyak
甲申政變	 Kapsin Chŏngbyŏn
天津條約	 Ch'ŏnjin Choyak
甲午	 Kapo
日淸戰爭	 Ilch'ŏng Chŏnjaeng
宣惠堂上	 Sŏnhyedangsang
美洞	 Midong
閔昌植	 Min Ch'ang-sik
韓圭稷	 Han Kyu-jik
鐘路	 Chongno


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제15호
발행일	1928년 08월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮三大內亂記, 六月大變! 壬午軍亂의 回想記
필자	車相瓚
기사형태	문예기타

朝鮮三大內亂記, 六月大變! 壬午軍亂의 回想記
						車相瓚
암닭의 天下

江華島上에서 洋艦을 처바시든 대포 소리가 끈어진지 오라지 안이하야 深宮玉燭에 밤마다 왕권 탈환을 꿈뀌든 閔妃의 秋波는 어느덧 향촌 유림으로 건너가서 崔益鉉의 反攝政䟽 한 장이 宮門에 떠러지게 되니 10년 간 半島의 강산을 마음대로 쥐엿다 폇다 하는 稀世의 英傑 大院君도 할 수 업시 漢陽의 정계를 하즉하고 楊州 한 모통이에 한가러이 누어서 白雲靑山에 잠자는 猛虎와 짝을 짓게 되엿다. (大院君이 退位 즉시에 楊州 直洞에 은거함) 원래 龍이 업는 바다에는 미역이가 꼬리를 치고 호랑이 업는 산골에는 여호가 先生질을 하는 법이라 大院君이 한번 攝政의 자리를 떠나매 閔妃는 마음대로 政權을 幻弄하야 자기의 친족이면 비록 凡才庸人이라도 모다 高官大爵을 식임은 물론이고 심지어 사돈의 팔촌까지라도 남자로만 태여난 놈이면 하다못하야 地方郡守라도 한자리는 다 차지하게 되엿다. 그때 童謠에 「李氏의 四寸이 되지 말고 閔哥의 八寸이 되라」는 말은 그것을 잘 설명한 것이다. 그네들은 대개가 국가의 害毒蟲이 안이면 인민의 吸血鬼이다. 자기의 세력만 밋고 모든 橫暴, 殘虐, 驕奢, 掠奪, 貪汚 등을 자행하얏다. 뿐만 아니라, 閔妃는 目前의 향락을 취하고 장래의 冥福을 구하기 위하야 천하의 歌妓舞童을 모다 뽑아다가 밤낫으로 궁중에서 질탕히 놀고 巫女, 卜者, 僧侶의 무리들을 불너 드려 名山大川과 古寺大刹에 祈禱佛供을 하얏다. 金剛山 萬二千峰에는 峰마다 쌀 몃 섬, 돈 몃 백량, 布木 몃 필식은 안 간 곳이 업고 楡岾寺의 53佛은 머리마다 金色이 찬란하엿다. 돌도 이상하게만 생기엿스면 큰 祭를 바덧고 나무도 몃 해만 묵은 나무면 玉貫子金貫子를 부치게 되엿다. 이러하너라니 정치의 꼴은 엇지 되며 王家의 위신은 또한 엇지 되엿스랴. 前日 大院君 시대에 모든 시설은 다 파괴되고 肅淸하엿든 宮紀는 여지업시 紊亂하야 甚嚴한 九重宮闕이<11> 妖怪百出의 伏魔殿으로 化하고 충만하든 國庫는 蕩盡無餘하야 아모리 인민에게 별별 誅求를 다하야도 百官의 俸給은 5, 6年 동안을 주어 보지 못하고 심지어 各 營門 軍兵의 급료까지도 13개월이나 주지를 못하엿다. 加之閔妃는 외국의 세력을 恃賴하기 위하야 大院君의 鎖國政策을 一變하야 외국과 소위 通商條約을 하면서 몬저 日本과 結好하야 公使가 서울에 來駐하는 동시에 정부에서는 軍制를 개혁한다 하고 在來 5營門의 軍兵 약 1천 명을 급료도 주지안코 罷免하고 소위 別技軍이라는 新兵을 조직하고 壯禦 武衛의 兩新營을 設하며 일본인 中尉 堀本禮造를 敎練官으로 雇用하니 일반의 원성은 자못 하눌에 사모처서 牝鷄之鳴은 惟家之索이란 탄식을 發하며 前日 大院君 시대를 다시 생각치 안이치 못하게 되엿다. 그런 중에 壬午年에 이르러서는 봄부터 旱魃이 特甚하고 穀價가 暴騰하니 八路의 인심은 모다 搔動되야 누구나 亂을 思하게 되엿다.

軍擾의 發端

壬午年 6월 초9일이다. 戶曹에서는 軍士에게 약 1개월의 급료를 주기로 하고 廣興倉의 米穀을 내여 군사에게 分給을 개시하니 13개월이나 급료를 밧지 못하든 각 營의 兵卒들은 맛치 涸魚가 물을 맛난 듯이 모도 몰여드러 廣興倉으로 갓섯다. 급기야 급료라고 밧고 보니 미곡이 거의 다 부패하얏고 그 중에 倉吏놈은 또 作奸질을 하야 米穀에다 砂石을 절반이나 석고 또 斗量도 12두 1석이 10두도 未滿하얏다. 일이 이와가티 되니 아모리 평소에 幼羊과 가티 순하든 兵卒이라도 정부의 怠慢한 處治와 倉吏의 간특한 挾雜에야 엇지 분개치 안이하리오. 兵卒들은 怒氣가 등등하야 주먹질을 하며 정부 당국자들의 非理行事을 垂罵辱叱하얏다. 그런데 그때의 倉吏는 마츰 戶曹判書 閔謙鎬의 家人이오. 閔謙鎬는 閔族政府의 首魁로 宣惠堂上의 요직에 잇서서 모든 害公營私의 짓을 다하야 民怨의 焦點이 되는 중에 군사의 급료를 안이 주게 한 것도 또한 閔謙鎬의 일이라. 그런 사람의 家人으로서 군사의 급료에까지 作奸을 하니 몃 배나 더 憤할 것은 사실이다. 그것을 憤히 녁이는 군인들은 일제히 怒發하야 아우성을 치며 이놈 보와라, 우리가 장래에는 三水甲山을 갈지라도 爲先 이놈부터 따러 죽여야 하겟다 하고 惹擾를 하는 중에 당시 第一勇兵으로 칭호를 듯는 訓練都監 군사 수십 명이 먼저 달녀 들어 倉吏들 잡아다가 란매로 처 죽엿다. 그런데 그들은 츠음에 憤한 마음에 倉吏를 그와가티 죽엿스나 閔謙鎬가튼 大勢力家의 家人을 죽엿슨즉 그 죄로 몃 사람이 또 죽을는지 알 수 업는 고로 각 營 군사가 한곳에 모혀 그 대책을 논의하든 중에 일반이 다 憤然하야 말하기를 우리가 가만이 잇다가 그 놈의 손에 죽는니는보다 먼저 亂을 이르켜서 나라를 亡케 하는 閔妃 이외의 要路大官놈들을 다 죽이고 國政을 바로잡는 것이 올타 하고 만장일치로 可決하고 一方으로 사람을 雲峴宮에 파송하야 大院君에게 그 뜻을 전달하고 暗暗이 氣脉을 上通하니 漢城의 공기는 時刻으로 급변하야 장차 폭우가 올지 狂風이 불지? 극히 危險慘憺한 상황에 이르럿다.<12> 그러나 堂上에 安眠하는 鷰雀이 엇지 大火의 襲來할 것을 알며 牧場에 閒遊하는 幼羊의 무리가 엇지 猛獅의 엿보는 것을 짐작할 수 잇스랴. 宮中府中의 要路大官들은 아모 것도 알지 못하고 다만 管絃의 풍류 소리에 태평을 노래하며 坤殿의 만세를 부를 뿐이엿다.

疾風迅雷와 가튼 反軍行動

각 營의 군사들이 이와가티 결속되야 일슬 때에 마츰 倉吏의 도망한 자가 閔謙鎬에게 그 家人의 피살한 事를 보고하니 閔이 크게 노하야 곳 그 군병의 首謨者 몃 사람을 잡아 그 翌日에 사형에 처하기로 하니 이것은 閔이 비록 세력을 밋고 한 일이나 한시간이라도 軍兵의 反亂을 더 촉진식히고 自禍를 自招하는 무모의 짓이엿다. 그 소문이 한번 들리자 각 營의 군사들은 憤氣가 일시에 폭발되여 首謨者를 처형하기 전에 반란을 먼저 이르키자 하고 訓練都監의 군대를 首頭로 하야 각 隊 군사가 일제히 梨峴으로 모혀드니 東別營의 將校, 騎兵 등과 前日에 파면된 군졸도 모도 뫼혀 형세가 크게 뜰치엿다. 그들은 悲憤慷慨의 言辭로 奸黨討伐과 政府改革을 선서하고 행진을 시작하야 먼저 軍器庫를 깨트리고 모든 軍器를 점령하야 일제히 무장을 하니 旗幟槍劒이 日光을 희롱하고 鼓喊 소리는 천지를 진동하얏다. 이에 二隊로 논아 一隊는 대궐로 直向하고 一隊는 訓練下都監으로 향하니 前者는 궁중과 정부를 습격코자 함이오 候者는 新營訓練隊의 일본인과 밋 일본 공사관을 습격코자 함이엿다. 궁궐로 향하는 군대가 대궐 근처로 直到하니 君臣上下가 모도 驚惶하야 엇지할 줄도 모르다가 御命으로 近侍를 보내서 여러 군사에 宣諭하되 『너희들이 엇지하야 이러한 행동을 하느냐. 所請이 잇스면 무엇이던지 다 드러줄 터이니 속히 退歸하야 안심하라』하얏스나 군사들은 듯지 안이하고 高聲怒號하며 閔族派의 貪虐病國한 罪惡을 들어 꾸짓고 또 大院君을 속히 입궐식혀 정치를 一新改革하여야 된다 하고 退軍치 안이하니 王上도 또한 엇지 할 수 업서 이에 급히 使者를 雲峴宮에 보내 大院君의 입궐을 청하고 軍亂의 진정을 囑願하니 大院君이 直時 입궐하야 자기의 평생 신임하고 일반 군대에서도 평소 愛戴하든 前  訓練大將 李景夏를 보내서 군사에게 萬般의 說諭를 하야 속히 해산하기를 청하얏스나 원래 흥분된 군중은 다만 說諭 뿐으로 만족을 엇지 못할 것이다. 그리하야 대원군의 威德과 李景夏의 신망도 아모 효과를 엇지 못하고 군대들은 依然이 宮門 밧게 結陣하고 怒號叱辱할 뿐이엿다. 그리고 下都監으로<13> 가든 군대는 가는 길로 新營門을 깨트리고 營中에 亂入하야 일본인 교관 堀本禮造를 죽이고 또 그날 밤에는 西大門 밧 天然亭에 잇는 일본 공사관 淸水館을 불질으니 이에 亂民은 서로 聲을 和하야 일본 거류민까지도 잇는대로 막 잡아죽이니 그때 日本 公使 花房義質은 겨우 仁川으로 도피하야 英國測 量船 『뿌라이잉핏숭』號를 타고 長崎로 갓섯다.
그리고 그날 밤에 一隊의 군병은 또 捕盜廳과 典獄을 깨트리고 모든 죄수을 해방하니 그것은 당시 閔族一派의 貪官輩가 無辜한 인민을 함부로 잡아 가둔 것을 분개함이엿다. 때마츰 여러 달을 감을다가 죄수들이 해방되자 불시에 큰 비가 오니 일반 인민들이 깃버하며 말하기를 정부에서 無辜한 인민을 가두엇다가 이제 출옥하게 됨으로 하눌이 感應하야 비까지 온다 하얏다.

腥風血雨의 六月十日

6월 10일이다. 猛獸와 가티 怒號하는 군대들은 새벽부터 雲峴宮으로 몰녀들어 大院君에게 호소하니 大院君이 친히 나와서 군대에게 利害를 말하고 먼저 해산부터 하고 다시 善後策을 논의하자 하나 그들은 완강하게 듯지안코 狂瀾怒濤의 勢로 다시 대궐로 몰녀드러 가서 입궐하엿든 閔謙鎬p와 前 京畿監司 金輔鉉을 잡아내여 亂鎗亂刀로 처죽이고 內殿으로 直犯하야 閔妃를 죽이랴고 搜索하니 例의 機敏한 閔妃는 宮女로 變服하고 武監 洪在羲(改名 啓薰)의 보호로 守衛兵 金聖澤
韓億吉에게 어피워서 宮門을 가만이 나와 丹鳳門 밧 洪啓薰의 누의 洪尙宮의 집에서 잠시 난을 피하다가 (그때에 閔妃가 亂兵에게 잡히엿다가 洪宮人이라 詐稱하야 免禍함) 다시 尹泰駿의 집에 가서 小轎를 어더 타고 花洞 閔應植의 집으로 피하얏다가 또 東大門 밧 李圭翊의 집에 숨엇더니 그 亦 危殆함으로 閔應植
閔泳綺
沈相薰 외 某某의 옹호로 忠州 長湖院에 잇는 應植의 叔父 閔泳緯의 家에 잠복하야 난을 피하니 그때의 처참한 행색이야 엇지 형언할 수 잇스랴. 當年의 榮華富貴는 槿花의 一夢으로 化하야 松*鳥聲은 三絃六角을 대신하고 龍醬鳳湯은 山菜野蔬로 변하얏다. 천하 萬事야 엇지되엿던 다만 殘命만 보전한 것을 다행이 생각하고 無量大佛에 感謝를 올리엿슬 뿐이다.
閒話休題-이때 대궐 안에는 大小官員과 宮人掖屬이 다 도망을 하고 궁전이 공허하게 되니 亂兵이 여러 궁전을 無人之境과 가티 橫行하고 王上은 긴급 御命으로 대원군의 입궐을 청하야 軍亂의 진정을 애걸하고 항상 大院君의 겻헤 잇서서 禍亂을 피하얏다. 闕內에서는 이와가튼 變亂이 잇는 동시에 闕門 밧게 잇는 一枝의 군대는 雨中을 무릅쓰고 領議政 李最應의 집을 습격하니 最應은 大院君의 仲兄 興寅君으로서 閔妃가 大院君의 政敵임에 불구하고 閔妃에 아부하야 세력을 부리던 터임으로 군대가 그를 또한 살해코자 함이엿다. 最應의 子 載兢이 궐내에 달녀와서 대원군에게 父命의 구제를 哀乞하야 대원군이 興寅君家에 침입치 안이할 事를 군대에게 청하얏스나 때는 벌서 느진지라 興寅君은 장독 뒤에 숨엇다가 亂兵의 鐵杖에<14> 마저 죽고 집은 산산히 破碎를 당하고 또 美洞에 잇는 閔昌植의 집을 파괴하는 동시에 閔昌植을 잡아내여 鐘路街上에서 亂刺打殺하고 捕盜大將 韓圭稷의 집도 습격을 당하얏스나 韓은 다행이 身을 피하얏슴으로 죽지는 안엇다. 其外도 閔族一派의 피살된 자와 家屋의 毁破된 자가 또한 數가 업섯다. 그 날의 광경이야말로 참으로 悚懼悲慘하얏다. 漢城의 全市街는 血雨腥風에 코가 실 만하고 砲煙火炎에 눈도 뜰 수가 업스며 城內 城外에는 避亂히는 男女老少가 낙역 不絶하야 京號悲鳴의 소리가 九天을 通하얏다. 前日까지 薰天의 勢熖으로 별반의 驕奢를 다 부리던 閔族一派가 一朝에 엇지 그러한 慘禍를 당할 줄 알엇스랴. 사람마다 閔家에 태여나지 못한 것을 한탄하든 것이 그 날에 와서는 閔가는커녕 音 相似한 文가까지도 變姓을 하게 되엿다. 또 昨日까지 그리 柔順하고 殘弱하야 모든 虐待와 천시를 바드면서도 참어오든 군대와 시민은 엇지 그리 용맹스럽고 慓悍하게 되엿는가. 그들의 향하는 곳에는 君主도 업고 國法도 업고 大院君까지도 업다. 그저 猛獅怒虎와 가튼 기세로 國賊을 죽여라 閔族을 撲滅하라 어른이여든 목을 잘으고 아희어던 불알이라도 까고 여자여던 머리채라도 잡아 뽀바라하고 高喊怒叱할 뿐이엿다. 그리하야 한참 동안에는 대원군이 다시 攝政이 되야 萬事를 親裁하고 군대를 宣諭하야 해산하라 하야도 도모지 듯지안코 그저 閔妃를 죽여야만 退去하겟다고 聲言하얏다. 大院君도 할 수 업서 令을 나리되 閔妃는 亂軍 중에서 이미 죽엇슨즉 그리 알고 군대는 속히 퇴거하라 하며 국내에 閔妃의 喪을 발표하고 閔妃의 衣冠으로 假葬을 하기로 준비한 후 정부 조직에 着手하야 李載冕(대원군 長子)으로 訓練大將 겸 戶曹判書宣惠堂上을 식히고 군대의 安頓을 명령하며 政務의 刷新을 선언하니 군대들이 그제야 그 목적을 達하엿다 하고 大院君 만세를 高唱하며 환호성 속에 宮中을 退하야 本營으로 도라갓다.

軍亂後의 朝鮮政局

大抵 이 軍亂은 李朝 건국 이래에 츠음되는 內變으로 불과 이틀 동안에 疾風迅雷와 가튼 敏速한 행동을 하야 10년이래 鐵甕城가티 견고하든 閔族政府의 舞臺를 근본적으로 掃蕩하고 大 院君을 다시 執政케 한 것은 그네들의 큰 성공이요 누구나<15> 驚歎치 안이치 못할 것이다. 그러나 몃칠을 過하야 一大難關의 일이 돌발하얏스니 그것은 곳 隣邦 淸國의 간섭이다. 당초에 閔妃는 九死一生으로 忠州에서 亂을 피하다가 譯官 卞元圭를 京城에 보내 자기의 생존한 것을 國王에게 밀고하고 자기의 近親 閔台鎬를 囑하야 국왕에게 淸國에 교섭하야 내란 평정을 요구한 바 국왕은 다시 閔黨과 結托하고 魚允中을 北京에 급송하야 그때 當地에 체류하는 領選使 金允植으로 사실의 顚末을 淸 정부에 보고하고 또한 兵을 청하니 此는 誤國亡社하는 妄計 중에 큰 妄計엿다. 閔族 일파의 죄악을 말한다면 그 보다 더 큰 죄악이 또 어듸잇스랴. 이때에 淸國은 朝鮮이 丙寅洋擾 이후로 日本 급 세계 각 국과 점점 교통이 빈번하고 조선에 대한 自國의 세력이 날로 減少함을 보매 언제이던지 기회만 잇스면 세력을 다시 확장하랴고 하던 터이라. 조선에서 한번 兵을 청함매 彼野心勃發한 李鴻章은 맛치 飢狗가 肉臭를 맛튼것 모양으로 千載好機로 생각하고 즉시 北洋艦隊를 命하야 五營의 陸軍 약 5천을 실고 吳長慶 袁世凱, 黃士林의 인솔 하에 급히 조선을 향하야 7월 14일(陽8월29일)에 南陽灣에 도착하니 때에 조선은 벌서 亂이 평정되고 大院君이 다시 執政하야 만사를 정돈하는 중이엿다. 彼等이 만일에 국제상 도덕의 양심이 잇다 하면 그 길로 그저 도라갈 것이나 彼等은 원래 특별한 야심이 잇슨즉 엇지 공연히 그대로 도라가고만 말이요. 또 大院君이 當路하야 조선을 잘 요리하는 것은 自國의 不利로 생각하는 중에 加之閔妃一派의 大院君 政敵이 잇슨즉 支那人의 소위 以夷制夷의 凶計를 써서 閔氏를 붓잡고 大院君을 制抑하는 것이 큰 上策으로 생각하고 淸兵이 入京하던 제 3일 바로 7월 16일에 대원군을 黃士林의 陣中으로 유인하야 彼等은 말하기를 淸國 정부에서 당신을 좀 會見하자 한다 하고 不意에 군사로 大院君을 擁護하고 南陽灣으로 直向하야 軍艦 定遠號로 天津까지 갓다가 다시 保定府에 被囚의 몸이 되니 嗚呼 大院君의 제2회 攝政도 3일 천하에 불과하고 여러 군대와 시민의 피와 고기로 싸워서 일은 개혁의 功業도 一朝水泡에 도라가고 말엇스며 漢陽의 市街는 淸兵의 말발굽에 蹂躪을 당하고 정부는 다시 閔族의 수중으로 도라가게 되엿다.
淸兵은 이와가티 大院君을 무리하게 잡아간 후 가진 횡포를 자행하야 朝鮮 軍兵의 근거지인 往十里, 梨泰院, 等地를 포위하야 多數한 군인을 虐殺하고 訓練都監, 禁衛營, 武衛營御營廳, 摠戎廳을 廢하고 자기의 마음대로 좌우 전후 四營으로 편제하고 淸國 군대의 敎鍊과 지휘를 밧게 하엿다. 그리고 一方으로 閔族의 일파는 閔妃의 還宮 청하야 소위 奉迎使 洪淳穆과 陪從 李容翊 등을 國望山中에 보내서 閔妃를 영입한 후 前日에 발표하얏던 閔妃喪을 철회하고 다시 閔族 일파는 정부를 조직하는 동시에 軍亂에 죽은 閔謙鎬, 閔昌植, 金輔鉉, 李最應 등에 謚追追爵을 주고 大院君의 與黨인 李景夏, 鄭顯德, 許斌 등을 사형에 처하고 당시 名士로 국정에 참여하엿던 金弘集 등을 축출하고 閔應植, 閔烔植, 閔台鎬를 중용하야 정권을 맥기니 조선의 정국은 다시 군란 이전의 原狀으로 회복하엿섯다. 그러나 淸國의 간섭은 前日보다 더욱 심하야 閔妃가 비록 다시 정권을 잡엇슬지라도 만사가 다 吳長慶 袁世凱의 지휘를 밧게 되고 加之日本은 공사관 습격과 거류민 살해 사건으로 문제를 이르키어 仁川에서 소위 濟物浦條約이 성립되야 五萬圓의 배상금을 지출하는 동시에 공사관 보호의 名義 하에 二百餘의 군대를 京城에 駐在케 하니 이로부터 조선은 儼然이 兩國 감시 하에 잇게 되고 後日 甲申政變時 日淸의 충돌이 생기게 되고 따라서 天津條約 또는 甲午 日淸戰爭을 이르켯다. <16>
<11-16>