별건곤 제15호
1928년 08월 01일
죽을 뻔하다가 살아난 니약이 ,馬賊窟大秘密實見記 (Niyak who almost died and lived, A True Account of the Great Secrets of a Bandit Den)
金基鍾 (Kim Ki-jong)
회고·수기 (Recollections/Memoir)

1. Their Perfect Enticement

The land of China, and Changbaek County!
In the deep forests of Mount Paektu, tigers roar, and along the Yalu River, bandits sharpen their swords. Every evening, the villagers gather and say, "In XX Dogou, bandits captured OO Landlord," and "Somewhere, there was a battle with government soldiers." "Rumor has it that there was a lot of gunfire today."
My village is a place where people constantly live in fear and hardship. When the moon is bright, we sit together, shedding tears as we think of our homeland, and sigh towards our fatherland, Paedal Village.
"I was captured last June. Time flies so fast. It's already been a year. Even now, talking about bandits makes my heart cold. Unfortunately, my house was in a mountain village, and we made a living by raising cattle, so at night, only the children and women guarded the house, and the men took refuge in other houses to sleep. Back then, there were rumors of bandits everywhere. After several months of that, one day, I was working in the field until dusk and came home to eat dinner when two government soldiers came in, carrying their rifles upside down. I recognized one of them, so I greeted him happily and even treated him to dinner. One of them said very casually, 'We're on a business trip from the county office, so let's go to the upper village together.' So, we followed them without suspicion. As we entered the path in the woods at the entrance of the village, more than ten bandits jumped out from here and there, aiming their guns and tightly binding the three of us (grandfather, father, and me). We were tied up in confusion, not knowing what was going on. We were like mice caught by a cat. When I realized it, the bandit who had come to lure us had been a government soldier but had deserted to the bandit gang a few days before. We were caught in the bandits' clutches by their perfect enticement. Chinese officials, who you couldn't tell whether they were government soldiers or bandits!" <27>

2. You Must Pay Four Thousand Won

Last year, I was only nineteen years old! Being dragged around with a young body was worse than death. My body, which used to run and play freely, was now tied up with both arms bound tightly, so how could I live? Every morning and evening, I survived by eating a bowl of congee (粥) with salt. When I thought, "I'm going to die now," and tears welled up, my grandfather would only say softly, "Don't cry. It's fate. If we're meant to live, we'll live." Like this, mixed among dozens of bandits, I followed them for three or four days through the forest, only looking at the sky, not knowing where we were going. Probably to the bandit den - I followed with tears. One day, we repaired an empty house, an inn in the woods, and stayed there for several days. Then, the bandit leader called us and said, "Pay 40,000 Small Ocean Dollars (equivalent to 2,000 won) within a month," and sent my father back home. If my father goes home, where will he find 40,000 won.... My grandfather and I could only groan in the bandit den. 40,000 won! What does that mean to farmers who scratch out a living by slash-and-burn farming in a corner of Seogando due to the hardships of life? Even the better-off ones only raise a few cows and don't worry about millet rice. If you're going to kill us, just kill us.

3. Groaning Life for Dozens of Days

Living a hellish life here for dozens of days, I'm on the verge of death. I'm so hungry, there's nothing I can do. I don't know how they can eat such hideous food so deliciously. There were bandits in the gang who carried provisions and scouted, reporting to the leader every day, "Government soldiers came to such and such a place today," or "Such and such a landlord is very rich..."
After a few days, the number of Chinese friends being captured like us increased. Every night, we were tied hand and foot together in the corner of the room, and we could only sigh, thinking, "Now we're dead..." Even though they were foreigners and we didn't know them personally, I couldn't help but feel sorry for them. The Chinese friends also looked at us and their eyes were full of tears. Would we distinguish between foreigners in life and death? "I am you, you are me," and when the night grew deep, secret escape meetings were held with the Chinese friends. "How do we cut this rope? If we get caught trying to escape, we'll only get a grain of bean to eat. Stop it, stop it, don't make things worse," my grandfather said, trying to calm us down. Occasionally, I would hear the groaning of the Chinese friends, the sighing of my grandfather! I couldn't bear to hear it. I couldn't sleep and only daydreamed, and even the short summer night would pass by before I knew it.

4. To the Deep Bandit Den

One morning, the sound of a trumpet was so loud that I peeked out and saw them presenting the heads of government soldiers to the leader. They were excited and making a fuss as if they had won a great victory. I wondered where they had fought, and if the government soldiers had come to this den and made a fuss, wouldn't that have been the end of it! That's all I could think. It was the next morning. They were slaughtering a pig and holding a ritual, or perhaps a memorial service. <28> Clearly, some bandits had died too. (Last year, many bandit heads were brought to the Changbaek County office.)
After the scouts reported something, several of them held meetings all day long, and then suddenly packed their bags and set off. To the original bandit den!
Because the situation was not favorable, they entrusted the place to a few men, and the leader was moving, so about 30 people set out. Carrying provisions and luggage on horses, what a great move! We had our arms tied, but our legs were free, and we headed north, north on the road to death. How would my young heart have felt at this time? I couldn't laugh, cry, or feel sad.
There were 4 of us Korean compatriots and 7 black friends, a total of 11 friends who were tied with ropes and going along. (Before leaving, dozens of people who brought money were released.)

5. Arriving at the Main Den After 12 Days

It was the evening of the second day after we left. Several men went into the woods and fired their guns a few times, and after a while, they brought back a large gourd full of opium (唐烟). It seemed they had gone to an opium field, killed the owner, and stolen it. (By Zhang Zuolin's special permission, a lot of opium was planted in the Changbaek area this year.) It's good to have bullets. Everything is free.......................
I couldn't tell whether we were going east or west. We walked through the pathless woods, and I was beaten a lot by the bandits. Whether I lived or died, I had to go on. It was when I was walking in front. A Korean marksman was coming from afar, and I thought, "I'm going to be captured again!" and my heart was burning. I quickly stroked my beardless lips several times, and the quick-witted men ran away into the woods, while the bandits shot at them. (In Chinese, bandits are called "huzi (胡敵)," and beards are also called "huzi." Touching a beard means bandit.) They were indeed lucky to survive. Who are those people? Probably the ones who hunt wild goats in Mount Paektu. They might be talking about our story somewhere now..........
After several days, they said this was Mount Paektu. It was June, but it was very cold. I saw the source of the Yalu River from here, and it was just a small stream. We climbed up the cliff of Mount Paektu and looked down at the three thousand li of rivers and mountains and prayed to Dangun, "Please save the lives of these Dangun people who are captured by bandits." It was a strange thing. Did Dangun have divine power? The clear day suddenly turned into a storm. Driven by the rain, we set up tents in the woods and spent the night, and not surprisingly, tigers roared in the scary valley, and we couldn't sleep because of the tigers' roars, and the bandits also spent the night holding their guns. The next day, we barely regained our senses and set off. The 30 or so bandits split into three teams and went somewhere. Probably heading towards North Gando. Who else will be captured this time!?
In the deep forests of Mount Paektu, only the sound of hunters' guns was heard occasionally, and only thick fog surrounded us. Sometimes we <29> tried to kill the bandits and escape by signaling each other, but all plans were unsuccessful, and after 10 or so days, we arrived at the bandit den. Now we were all dead. Even if we did escape, we would not be able to find a human village in the hundreds of li of forest. The bandits knew the direction of the deep forest paths like a plain and walked around. Everything was solid for the qualifications of the mountain king.

6. Strange Secrets of the Main Den

After passing through the dark forest, there was a small field. I don't know if this is Fengtian Province or Jilin Province. There were six or seven houses built with trees stacked on top of each other. About 10 people came out to greet us as we arrived. I was dragged into the biggest and most magnificent house, and in the front yard, flowers and grass were overgrown, and chickens and dogs had even come to this den. The real boss is here. He is a gentle old man who looks about 50 years old. He is a blessed leader, reclining comfortably in a clean room decorated as splendidly as a king's palace, puffing on opium. Next to him is a beautiful woman who looks about 30 years old. Where was she captured and forced to be the unwilling wife of the leader? She treats us with a tearful face. When our group greets him, he coughs loudly several times and writes down our addresses and names in a OO book. The room is filled with money chests or opium chests, and the warehouse is teeming with dozens of piles of flour, soybean cakes, cows, horses, and pigs. I don't know how many bandits there are even if I go to see them. It seems that in addition to this main den, there are various factions gathered in the vicinity. Will government soldiers come to this deep mountain? Will enemy soldiers come? It's just freedom. He is the king of the mountain. He brings back deer and elk with his gun, captures human beings, takes their money, and lies down in peace, so where else is there such a peaceful country?

7. Hellish Life for Ten Months

About five li from the main den, only four people are living a prison life in a thatched cottage. And there is a small Korean child. When I ask him where he came from, he says he was captured from O Dogou in North Gando. Those terrible men kidnapped a 15 or 16-year-old child, so they will probably make him work as their son forever.........
There are many opportunities to escape, but I can't even dream of it. If I don't have rice and all the necessary supplies, I will starve to death in the middle. They are relieved and untie us, so we are a little freer, but after chopping wood, carrying water, and cooking, and getting beaten with a stick three times a day, I lose my mind.
Among the bandits, there are good ones who are considerate, but these guys are the most violent. We only get beaten, but they even hang Chinese people by their ears. After a few days, many friends brought money and returned home, and my grandfather also returned home. My father somehow managed to make 1,000 won and send it, but the bandits cut it off in the middle, and only a few coins reached the main den. So I couldn't go, and my grandfather <30> went home. How much would I have cried? I spent the bright Chuseok evening in tears and the winter solstice day in tears.
After that, I received the leader's favor and became his adopted son, so I wasn't beaten and became comfortable. Unfortunately, the bandit who was guarding me colluded with the leader, so I suffered again.
Once, when we were building an eight-room house, there were about 30 conscripted laborers gathered from various prisons! They were all captured Korean and Chinese people. Their faces were all pale and full of suffering. Every night, they would spend the night in tears. Ah- How can I deal with this evil den?
The winter in the North Country is very cold. The white snow is several feet deep, and the snowstorm cuts through the skin. I endured all kinds of hardships, wearing a ragged coat and barefoot, but I still survived. This is the story of surviving from near death.
On the morning of the last day of the year, the leader gave a sharp command, "Since the money promised for this year has not yet arrived, you will be executed today." What can I do? There's nothing I can do but die - I was dragged into the deep forest behind the house. Several men came out to watch, and behind me, a man was loading a bullet and aiming his gun. I wept loudly and begged, but they didn't listen. "You're going to kill me and bury me in this snow!" I felt only sorrow. Just as he was aiming the gun to shoot me, the woman who had been shedding tears secretly, "the captured leader's wife," grabbed the barrel of the gun and said, "No, no, don't kill him. He also has parents. How can you not think of your own children? What good will it do to kill him........" The leader was moved by the woman's earnest words, and I was finally saved. That young woman is my savior. She is probably still shedding tears there..........
The new year has arrived. It's the new year right now. At home, they must be thinking of me and spending the day in tears. My friends must be playing happily, I could only think. I was even sadder when I thought, "What if I die like this forever?" The bandits slaughtered a pig, made rice cakes, drank alcohol, and held a memorial service, and for about 10 days, they were so busy gambling that they didn't have time to breathe.

8. Escape! Escape!

The bandit who was guarding me was shot in the hand during a battle and couldn't even steal anymore. He seemed to be out of favor with the leader because several bad things had been revealed about him. So, he boasted that he had done his job well and shot me to death, cut off my ear, and brought it to the leader, saying, "I shot and killed this guy while he was escaping," trying to gain the leader's sympathy. I knew this and told the errand boy the truth, and he told the leader. The leader was furious and ordered him to be executed. The bandit who was guarding me was in a hurry and said to me, "If we escape together and I take you to your house, will you give me 100 won?" "If you go to my house, I'm the eldest grandson. <31> I'll give you even 300 won. Let's go quickly?" I was overjoyed and made a secret promise. I will never forget that happy day for the rest of my life.
On the morning of March 9th, I left prison with the bandit who was guarding me, with 2 du (斗) of rice prepared. I felt relieved to leave the den where I had been groaning for 10 months, but I thought, "The leader's house is only five li from here! If we get caught, we'll die," and my heart was pounding. We walked through the dark forest, not knowing where we were going, with all our strength.
What's going on? How did we find our way back to that den again? I was devastated. It seems that he also doesn't know the way. We set off again. We crossed ridges and rivers to the south, south, and when it was young moon, we cleared the snow, lit a fire, and spent the night. I don't know how scary it was.
After seven days of walking with all our strength, I saw Mount Paektu standing tall in the distance. Ah- What a happy thing! Somehow, Mount Paektu looked to the west. After 7 days, we had no food left. The future is still far away, so what should we do? Now we have no choice but to starve to death. We went to an empty house where hunters slept, and we were hungry and the road ahead was far away, so we held each other and cried and couldn't go on, and we slept for two nights starving. Now I'm not even afraid of bandits, I'm just going to starve to death.
Did heaven decide who would live? It was at this time. I looked at the trees inside the empty house and saw a strange bag, and I was happy and jumped up and saw that it was indeed rice. It's oat rice (*maek 麥). Is it rice given by heaven or rice given by a ghost? We cooked rice and ate it and survived.
Maybe it was rice left by the hunters from Musan. After coming here for 5 days, when I saw a human village, it was like another world. I wore the bandit's old coat and torn pants, and my hair was a foot long and covered my face, and when I went into the house, my younger siblings were making a fuss saying, "Brother" is coming. I can't write all the facts, so I just wrote the main points. <32>

**Named Entities**

長白縣	Changbaek County
압록강	Amnok River
倍達村	Paedal Village
西間島	Sŏgando
張作霖	Chang Tso-lin
檀君	Tan'gun
茂山	Musan



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제15호
발행일	1928년 08월 01일
기사제목	죽을 뻔하다가 살아난 니약이 ,馬賊窟大秘密實見記
필자	金基鍾
기사형태	회고·수기

죽을 뻔하다가 살아난 니약이 ,馬賊窟大秘密實見記
						金基鍾
1. 감쪽가튼 그들의 유인

중국 땅하고도 長白縣!
백두산 깁흔 숩속에는 호랑이가 울고 압록강 물가엔 馬賊*가 칼을 감니다. 洞里 사람들이 저녁마다 모이면 『XX 道溝에서 馬賊이 OO地主를 잡어가고 어데서는 官兵과 接戰을 햇다데-』 『글세 오날 총소리가 야단이야-』
이럿케 늘 공포에 싸혀 눈물겨운 생활을 하고 잇는 마을이 내가 사는 洞里임니다. 달이 밝으면 모와 안저 고향 생각에 눈물을 흘니고 故國을 향하야 한숨쉬는 倍達村임니다.
『내가 붓들니든 때는 바로 昨年 6월임니다. 세월이 잠간이지요. 어느듯 때가 1년이 되엿슴니다. 馬賊 이야기를 하면 지금도 가슴이 서늘해짐니다. 불행히 나의 집은 山村에 잇섯고 소(牛)바리나 매고 살든 터이라 밤이면 아해들과 여자들만 집을 직히고 남자들은 다른 집으로 피해가서 잠니다. 그때도 馬賊이 왓다고 사방에서 야단들이엿슴니다. 그럿케 몃 달 지내다가 하로는 저물도록 밧헤서 일을 하고 도라와서 저녁밥을 먹노라니까 官兵 두 놈이 총을 꺽구로 메고 들어옴니다. 그놈은 전날에 面目도 좀 잇든 터이라 반가히 인사를 하고 저녁밥까지 잘 대접하엿슴니다. 한 놈이 아조 능청스럽게 『지금 縣廳에서 출장을 나왓는데 저 웃마을노 다 갓치 갑시다』하기에 우리는 의심업시 따라 갓슴니다. 洞口밧 숩속 길을 들어서자 여긔서 저긔서 뛰여나오는 10여명 馬賊이 총 견양을 하더니 우리 3인(할아버지 아버지 나)을 꼭꼭 結縛함니다. 우리는 영문도 몰으고 정신업시 묵기엿슴니다. 고양이 압헤 쥐 잡히듯 하얏슴니다. 가만히 알고 보니 우리를 유인하려 왓든 馬賊놈은 官兵을 단이다가 수일 전에 馬賊團으로 도주해 온 놈인 것이 분명함니다. 깜쪽가튼 그들의 유인 수단에 우리는 馬賊의 毒手에 걸렷슴니다. 官兵인지 馬賊인지 알 수도 업는 中國官憲! <27>

2. 四萬元을 밧처야

작년의 내 나희 경우 열 아홉 살! 어린 몸으로 끌니여다니기는 죽기보담 실헛슴니다. 마음대로 뛰놀든 몸이 두 팔을 잔득 묵기여 노앗스니 엇더케 살겟슴닛가. 아츰 저넉으로는 콩죽一椀에 소곰을 먹고 살어감니다. 『인제는 죽나보다』하고 눈물이 그렁 그렁할 때에 할아버지는 은근히 『우지마라. 天命이지 우리도 살 사람이면 살겟지』하실 뿐임니다. 이럿게 수십 명의 馬賊 속에 석겨 三四日을 삼림 속으로 한울만 처다보며 어대인지도 몰으고 딸아갓슴니다. 아마 馬賊元窟로 가는 것이겟지- 눈물로 딸어갓슴니다. 하로는 숩속의 旅館 빈집을 修繕하고 數日을 留하게 되엿슴니다. 그때 馬賊 두목으로부터 우리를 불러 놋코 『小洋 4萬元(金二千圓値)을 1箇月 안으로 밧처라』하면서 나의 아버지를 노아 보냄니다. 아버지가 집으로 가시면 4萬元 돈이 어대잇나....할아버지와 나는 馬賊窟에서 呻吟하고 잇슬 뿐임니다. 4萬元! 생활난에 西間島 한구석에서 火田을 쪼아먹는 농민에게 이게 무슨 말임니까. 그 중에 좀 낫대야 소(牛)마리나 매고 조밥(粟飯) 걱정 아니하고 사는 형편인데 차라리 죽일랴면 그저 죽이지.

3. 呻吟生活 數十日

수십 일을 여긔서 지옥 생활을 하노라니까 죽을 지경임니다. 배가 곱흐니 하는 수 업지요. 보기에도 흉한 음식을 엇더케 맛잇게 먹는지 모름니다. 馬賊團에도 양식 날으는 놈 探偵하는 놈이 잇서서 『오날 어대는 官兵이 왓다느니 어느 地主는 큰 부자라느니....』 날마다 두목에게 보고를 하는 모양임니다.
몃 날을 지내니까 우리처럼 붓들려 오는 中國親舊가 늘어감니다. 밤마다 긔棟에 手足을 가치 매여 『인제는 죽엇거니....』하고 한숨만 쉴 뿐임니다. 비록 외국인이고 親面은 업지만 별노히 동정하고 십헛슴니다. 중국 친구도 우리를 처다보고 눈물만 그렁그렁 하얏슴니다. 生死에 외국인을 차리겟슴니까. 『내가 네요 네가 내다』하고 밤이 깁흐면 중국 친구들과 귀를 서로 대고 도주 회의가 굉장히 開會함니다. 이 결박한 노끈은 엇더케 끗나? 도망하다가 잡히면 콩알 한 개식 먹는다. 그만두어라 그만두어 공연히 큰 일 날나고-』하시며 할아버지는 작고 말님니다. 잇다금 잇다금 들니는 중국 친구의 신음하는 소리 할아버지의 알음 소리! 참아 못듯겟다. 잠은 오지 안코 空想만 하다 보면 짤은 여름밤도 어느듯 새여 버림니다.

4. 골깁흔 馬賊窟로

어느 날 아츰 나팔 소리가 요란하기에 엿보니까 官兵의 머리를 잘너다가 두목의 압헤 밧친 것 임니다. 勝戰이나 한 것처럼 신이 나서 야단들임니다. 어대서 接戰을 햇는지 官兵들이 이놈의 窟을 와서 퉁탕 거렷스면 左右間 判決이 날텐데! 하고 생각뿐 이엿슴니다. 그 이튼날 아침이외다. 도야지를 잡어 노코 제사를 지내는 모양인지 追悼式을 하는 모양인지 야단이엿슴니다.<28> 분명히 馬賊도 몃 놈 죽은 게지요.(작년 중 馬賊의 머리가 長白縣廳으로 만히 잘너왓다고 함니다)
探偵軍이 무슨 소리를 전하엿는지 여러 놈들이 종일 회의를 하드니만 不意에 짐을 차리고 출발함니다. 元 마적굴노!
大勢가 利롭지 못하닛가 몃 놈에게 委任하고 두목님이 이사를 하시려 일행 30여 명이 출동함니다. 양식바리 짐바리 말을 탑시고 이런 大運家는 또 잇슴닛가. 우리는 팔만 먜고 다리는 자유를 어더 北으로 北으로 죽엄 길을 떠나감니다. 이때 어린 가삼이 엇더 하엿겟슴닛가. 우슴도 울음도 슯흠도 안 나오더이다.
우리 同胞가 4인 검은 친구가 7인 모다 11인은 팔에 노끈을 매고 가는 친구들임니다.(출발 전 돈 가저온 사람은 수십 인 노여 가고)

5. 12일만에 本窟에 到着

떠나든 잇튼 날 저녁 때임니다. 몃 놈이 숩속으로 드러가서 총소리 몃 방 나더니 한참 뒤에 唐烟(아편)을 큰 박아지만한 놈을 가저옴니다. 아마 아편밧헤 가서 주인을 죽이고 빼아서 가저오는 모양임니다. (張作霖의 特許로 長白 지대에 금년도 아편을 만히 심엇슴니다) 총알이 좃키는 좃슴니다. 모든 것이 자유이니.......................
東으로 가는지 西으로 가는지 도모지 알 수가 업슴니다. 길도 업는 숩속으로 숩속으로 마음 업는 길을 가노라니 놈들의 매도 만히 마젓슴니다. 죽어도 살아도 갈 판임니다. 내가 압헤서서 갈 그 때임니다. 조선 사람 砲手가 멀니서 오기에 『또 붓들니는구나!』하고 은근히 속이 달엇슴니다. 나는 얼는 수염도 업는 입술을 몃 번이나 쓰담으니까 눈치 빠른 그들은 숩속으로 도망을 하는데 馬賊들은 따라가며 총을 놋슴니다. (馬賊을 中語로 후즈(胡敵)라 하는데 수염도 亦 후즈라 함니다. 수염을 만지면 馬賊의 뜻) 그들이 과연 요행 살엇지요. 어대잇는 사람들일가. 아마 백두산 산양 단이는 이들이겟지요. 그들은 지금 어대서 우리의 이약이를 하기도 할 테이여니..........
몃츨을 가더니 여긔가 백두산이라고 함니다. 6월이것만 몹시 춥습니다. 우리는 압록강의 발원지도 여긔서 보니 조고마한 실개천임니다. 백두산 허리 절벽에 올나 三千里 강산을 내려다보고 檀君 할아버지께 『馬賊에게 붓들려 가는 이 檀族을 목슴이나 살려 주옵소서』하고 黙禱를 올렷슴니다. 이상한 일이지요. 檀君 한아버지도 靈感이 잇섯든가 그럿케 淸明하든 날이 不意에 폭풍우가 나러침니다. 비에 쫏겨 숩속에서 역시 천막을 치고 밤을 새우는데 무서운 골에 범 난다고 안인게 아니라 호랑이의 우름 소리에 잠을 못 자고 놈들도 총을 쥐고 밤을 새웟슴니다. 잇튼 날 겨우 정신을 차려 가지고 떠낫슴니다. 30여명 馬賊이 三隊로 논아 어대로 감니다. 아마 北間島 방면으로 가는 것이지요. 이번에는 또 누가 붓들녀 오려는가!?
백두산 깁흔 숩속엔 잇다금 잇다금 포수의 총소리만 처량히 들리고 자옥한 雲霧가 사방을 둘넛슬뿐임니다. 우리는 엇던<29> 때는 서로 눈짓 회의로 馬賊을 打殺하고 도망하자든 것도 百計가 不如意하고 10여 일을 馬賊元窟을 차저 들어왓슴니다. 인제는 다 죽은 게지요. 설사 도주는 한다 해도 數百 里 삼림 속으로 人間村을 찻지도 못할 것임니다. 놈들은 그 깁흔 숩속 길을 평지가티 방향을 잘 알고 단임니다. 모든 것이 山中王의 자격이 튼튼함니다.

6 奇怪한 本窟의 內幕

어득한 숩속을 지내고 조고만 들이 잇슴니다. 여긔가 奉天省인지 吉林省인지 모르지요. 나무를 척척 걸처지은 집이 六七戶나 늘여 잇슴니다. 우리가 온다고 마짐을 10여 명이 나왓슴니다. 제일 크고 훌륭한 집으로 끌려 드러가니까 압마당에는 花草가 욱어지고 닭, 개들이 이 窟에까지 왓슴니다. 정말 魁首는 여긔 잇슴니다. 한 50 되어 보이는 점잔은 늙은이임니다. 님금님의 궁궐갓치 찬란히 차린 깨긋한 방안에서 高枕安席하고 아편을 뻑뻑 빨고 잇는 有福한 괴수이심니다. 그 겻헤는 30쯤 되여 보이는 꼿다운 여자가 잇슴니다. 그 여자는 어대서 붓들려서 마옴업는 괴수의 안해노릇을 할가..........그 여자는 우리를 눈물겨운 얼골노 대합니다. 우리 일행은 놈에게 인사하닛가 큰 기츰을 몃 번하더니 住所氏名을 OO책에다 적어 놋슴니다. 방안에는 돈 궤인가 아편 궤인가 가득히 노혀 잇고 창고에는 밀가루 豆餠 牛馬 豚數十匹이 우글우글합니다. 馬賊 數는 얼마나 되는지 가 보아도 모름니다. 元窟이 이곳 이외에도 근방에는 이 派 저 派가 웅거하고 잇는 모양임니다. 이 깁흔 산중 官兵이 오겟슴닛가. 敵兵이 오겟슴닛가. 그저 자유임니다. 산중 王임니다. 총 가지고 노루 사슴을 잡아오고 인간 놈들 잡아다가 돈 빼앗고 평안히 누엇스니 이런 太平國은 다시 어대 잇겟슴닛가.

7. 地獄生活 十箇月間

本窟에서도 五里쯤 가서 오막사리 草家에 4인만 감옥 살님을 하고 잇슴니다. 그리고 조고만 조선 아해가 잇슴니다. 너는 어대서 왓느냐고 물으닛가 그 애는 北間島 O道溝에서 붓들려 왓다 합니다. 지독한 놈들아 15,6세의 아해를 붓들어 오다니 아마 영원히 놈들이 아들 노릇을 식히겟지요...........
도망할 긔회는 만어도 꿈도 못 꿈니다. 쌀과 모든 준비가 업스면 중도에서 餓死함니다. 그들은 안심하고 결박한 것을 풀어노아서 좀 자유롭슴니다만 나무 패라 물기러 오라 밥해라 하면서 一日三回式 방망이로 매를 맛고 나면 정신이 앗득해짐니다.
馬賊團하고도 조흔 놈들은 사정이나 보지만 요놈들은 제일 强暴한 놈들임니다. 우리는 맛기만 하지만 중국인은 귀까지 꾸여 달아맴니다. 몃날 후에 여러 동무들은 돈을 가저 와서 집으로 도라가고 할아버지도 집으로 도라가섯슴니다. 아버지가 엇더케 돈 千圓이나 만들어 보내엿는대 중간에 놈들이 잘너 먹고 本窟에는 몃 푼 오지 안엇슴니다. 그래서 나는 못 가고 할아버지는<30> 집으로 가심니다. 내가 얼마나 울엇겟슴닛가. 달 밝은 추석날 저녁도 눈물노 보내고 동지ㅅ날도 우름으로 보내엿슴니다.
그 후 나는 괴수에 愛護를 닙어 수영아들노 매도 안 맛고 편하게 되엿슴니다. 불행히 나를 직히든 馬賊놈이 괴수에게 꼬여 또 고생을 하게 되엿슴니다.
언제인가 우리 손으로 八間 집을 짓는데 各 감옥소에서 모여든 役軍이 30여명! 모다 붓들려 온 中鮮人임니다. 모다 창백한 얼골에 苦勞가 가득함니다. 밤이면 모다 눈물노 지내겻지요. 아-이 惡魔窟을 엇더케 하겟슴닛까.
北國의 겨울은 몹시도 춥슴니다. 白雪이 數尺 싸혀서 눈바람이 살을 어임니다. 현저고리를 덥허 쓰고 맨발로 가진 고초를 다 바드며 그래도 숨은 살엇슴니다. 죽다가 살아난 이약이임니다.
바로 섯달금음날 아츰 때 『금년 내로 기한 한 돈이 아직도 안 오니 너는 오날 사형이다』하는 괴수님의 날카로운 명령이엿슴니다. 엇지함니까. 죽는 수 밧게- 집 압 깁흔 숩속으로 끌려 갓슴니다. 여러 놈들이 나와 구경을 하고 내 뒤에는 한 놈이 탄환을 너어 총 견양을 하고 섯슴니다. 나는 대성통곡을 하면서 애걸도 하엿슴니다만은 듯지도 안슴니다. 『나를 죽여서 이 눈 속에 파뭇을 테지!』할 때엔 서름만 작고 낫슴니다. 바로 나를 쏘려고 총을 견운 그 때임니다. 은근히 눈물 흘니든 그 여자 『붓들려온 괴수의 안해』가 총대를 잡으며 『아니 아니 죽이지 말어요. 그 애도 부모가 잇슬텐데. 자식 생각을 안할 理야 잇슴닛가 죽이면 무엇합닛가........』하는 간곡한 여자의 말에 괴수님도 감동되엿던지 나는 기어코 살아낫슴니다. 그 젊은 여자가 나의게는 再生의 恩人임니다. 지금도 그곳에서 눈물 흘니며 게시겟지요..........
새해가 닥처 왓슴니다. 바로 금년 새해임니다. 집에서는 나를 생각하고 눈물노 지내겟지. 동무들은 즐겁게 뛰놀겟지 하고 생각만 떠올을 뿐이엿슴니다. 나는 나는 영영 이대로 죽어지면 엇저나 할 때에 더욱 슬펏슴니다. 놈들은 도야지 잡고 떡을 하고 술을 먹고 제사를 지내고 10여일 간은 賭博하느라고 눈코뜰새가 업슴니다.

8. 逃亡! 逃亡!

나를 직히는 馬賊은 接戰하다가 총에 마저 한 손이 떠러저 도적질도 못감니다. 그놈은 여러 가지 낫분 일이 발각되야 괴수가 낫비 보는 모양임니다. 그래서 제 직무를 잘 직혓다는 자랑으로 나를 쏘아 죽여서 귀를 버혀 괴수에게 갓다밧치고 『이놈이 도망하는 것을 제가 쏘아 죽엿슴니다』하며 괴수의 동정이나 좀 어들가 하는 수작임니다. 나는 요것을 알고 심부림군 아해에게 사실을 말햇더니 괴수에게 닐넛슴니다. 괴수는 大怒하야 사형에 처한다고 명령을 내렷슴니다. 나를 직히든 馬賊놈이 일이 급햇는지라 나를 보고 『우리 갓치 도망하자 너희 집에 다려다 주면 百圓을 주겟늬?』 『우리 집에 가면 내가 長孫이란다.<31> 三百圓이라도 줄게. 속히 가자?』나는 大喜하야 비밀 약속을 매젓슴니다. 그 날처럼 깁브던 일은 평생 닛치지 안켓슴니다.
바로 3월 9일 아츰 나를 직히든 馬賊과 가티 쌀 2斗를 준비해 가지고 出獄햇슴니다. 10개월이나 신음하든 窟을 떠나니 속시원함니다 만은 『여긔서 괴수의 집이 五里! 잡히면 죽는다』하고 생각하니 가슴이 울넝거림니다. 靑天白日에도 어둠 컴컴한 숩속으로 정처도 업시 죽을힘을 다하야 걸엇슴니다.
이것이 웬일임니까. 엇더케 해서 다시 그 窟로 차저 왓슴니다. 落心千萬임니다. 그 놈도 길을 모르는 모양임니다. 또 떠낫슴니다. 南으로 南으로 嶺을 넙고 물을 건너 날이 젊을면 눈을 헤치고 불을 놋코 밤을 새움니다. 엇더케 무서운지 모름니다.
7일을 죽을힘을 다하야오니까 멀니서 백두산이 웃득한 것이 보임니다. 아- 얼마나 반가운 일임니까. 엇더케 왓든지 백두산이 西쪽으로 보임니다. 7일간 2인의 양식이 한 알도 업시 되엿슴니다. 아직도 압날이 멀엇는데 이를 엇지 함닛가. 인제는 굴머죽는 수 밧게 업슴니다. 포수들이 자는 빈집으로 가서 배는 곱흐고 압길은 멀고 둘이 붓들고 울면서 길도 못가고 2일 밤을 굴머서 잣슴니다. 인제는 馬賊도 겁나지 안코 굴머서 죽는 판임니다.
살 사람은 하날이 정하얏다 할까요. 바로 이 때임니다. 그 빈집 안 나무를 처다보니 이상한 자루가 잇서서 깁버서 一躍으로 올나가 보니 과연 쌀임니다. 귀리쌀(*麥)임니다. 하날이 준 쌀인가 귀신이 준 쌀인가 우리는 밥을 지어먹고 살어 낫슴니다.
아마 茂山따 포수들이 두고 간 쌀이겟지요. 여긔서 5일을 와서 人間村을 보니 別世上 갓슴니다. 馬賊놈의 헌 저고리와 떠러진 바지를 닙고 머리칼은 한자나 길어서 텁숙이해가지고 집으로 쑥 드러가닛가 동생들은 『형님』온다고 야단들입듸다. 그 사실을 다 쓸 수 업고 대강 뻬만 골나 썻슴니다. <32>
<27-32>