잡지명	別乾坤 第15號
발행일	1928년 08월 01일
기사제목	二十世紀大伏魔殿, 男女迷信窟의 秘密公開, 惑世誣民의 大魔窟 (The 20th Century Great Demon Palace, Secret Disclosure of the Superstition Den of Men and Women, The Great Lair of Deluding the World and Misleading the People)
필자	私偵察
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

The 20th Century Great Demon Palace, Secret Disclosure of the Superstition Den of Men and Women, The Great Lair of Deluding the World and Misleading the People
						By Private Investigator

Superstition! Superstition! There is no superstition that deceives and misleads people as well as a shaman. Although the blind make light of the spirits that exist in order to get money, shamans create non-existent spirits in order to get money. There is an old saying that even a living husband turns into a ghost in the place where the shaman goes. Isn't the Chinese character for "to accuse falsely" (誣 - *mu*) a combination of "shaman" (巫 - *mu*) and "words" (言 - *eon*)? Now, let's reveal a few verses of the so-called *changbu taryeong* (娼夫打令 - song of the male prostitute) that are commonly popular these days.

Eolssiguna johulssigu (얼시구나 조흘시구)
Jihwajja johulssigo (지화자 조흘시고)
If you spend money well, you're a *hwallyang* (활량 - gallant)
If you can't spend money, you're a wandering beggar

When shall we use the fence?
We cannot but use it
Eolssiguna johulssigo <88>
Jihwajja johulssigo
The sound of money rings, but
Only bad debts are poured out

Not being able to use one's own things
Is Wang Janggun's disability

What kind of vulgar and base words are these? There are no words about wishing others good fortune or preventing others from suffering misfortune, but only words that entice and provoke others to spend money on themselves. Is there any need to talk about right and wrong about that? It is their main job (本職) to sell non-existent ghosts and make money. If they don't do that, it would be abnormal. Although the times are getting brighter and the level of people's knowledge is increasing, the den of superstition is becoming more prosperous in direct proportion to that. Among them, the number of shamans increasing every year and the sound of *deongdeokgung* (덩덕궁 - shamanic music) being heard everywhere, what does that symbolize? Don't be surprised. There are currently 514 shamans in Seoul alone. Among them, a whopping 250 are in Yongsan district. Judging from this, how many are there in Joseon nationwide, and how harmful are they? (11 lines deleted here - original text)
They do nothing every day except use so-called Holy Ruler, Jade Emperor (*Ok Hwang Sangje* - 玉皇上帝), *Taesang No Gun* (太上老君), Old Man Star (*Noinseong* - 老人星), *Gangnam Hogu Byeolseong* (江南護口別星 - Smallpox God), Choe Yeong Janggun (崔瑩將軍) as objects of worship, judge people's good and bad fortune with their mouths, and perform *gut* (굿 - shamanic ritual) or *pudakgeori* (푸닥거리 - exorcism) to pray or curse the spirits to cure people's diseases and drive away disasters. After a person dies, they perform *jari gut* (자리굿 - death anniversary ritual), *talsang gut* (탈상굿 - ritual after the end of the three-year mourning period) after the three-year mourning, *sansin gut* (산신굿 - mountain god ritual) in the mountains, *yongsin gut* (용신굿 - dragon god ritual) in the water, and all sorts of rituals to extort money from ignorant people. Among them, a funny thing is performing a ritual to get a person out of prison quickly.

In terms of money, they spend from thirty or forty won to several hundred won at a time, including food. The women of Seoul all seem to live to perform rituals. Among them, even concubines perform rituals if they have a headache or if they want to see their beloved husband. They think of rituals as entertainment and picnics. They scrape together the money that men earn by the sweat of their brow and offer it all to the shaman's pocket. That is truly funny and pathetic. Then, how did shamans come to be? Looking back at ancient history, in the so-called theocratic era (祭政時代), women were the chief priests, and that custom originated in North Asia and Persia. The primitive gods there especially liked dancing, so the woman in charge of the ritual had to dance and perform the ritual. That became the origin of the shaman, and that custom came to Joseon through North China. Even in Joseon, in ancient times, shamans were not so lowly, but rather, as the chief priest of the gods, they were greatly respected and loved by the general public. However, following the changes of the times, they gradually became corrupted and commercialized, and accordingly, in order to extort money from the people, they even deceived and misled people with superstition. <89>
The shaman flourished in Joseon during the Goryeo Dynasty (it seems that the reason why there are so many shamans in Gaeseong now is due to that influence). In the early Joseon Dynasty, Ryu Mansu (柳曼殊) and Ryu Seongseung greatly prohibited it and even killed them. That is why shamans say "Eolha-Mansu-" first when performing rituals, fearing them. After that, shamans were greatly prohibited throughout history, but during the reign of Cheoljong, the national law became lax, and shamanism became widespread. Even shamans frequently entered and exited the palace. Daewongun greatly hated this and, as soon as he came into power, strictly prohibited shamans and isolated those in the city to Nodeul (鷲梁津). That is why there are so many shamans near Yongsan, Mapo, and Nodeul now. However, when Daewongun lost power and Queen Min became influential, she became close to monks and shamans, and the number of shamans suddenly increased. Every neighborhood in the city and outside the city was filled with the sound of rituals every day. At that time, a sorceress like Jinnyeonggun of Hongcheon (晉靈君) had great power in the palace, and even the ministers followed her lead, and many local officials and palace officials came from her hands. Around the 8th year of Gwangmu, shamans were expelled again, but because Empress Eom liked shamans, they flourished again until the annexation. After the annexation, the authorities' crackdown was somewhat strict, so shamans could not openly perform rituals for a while, but after the year of *Gimi* (己未), like the change in the regulations for public cemeteries, shamans were also tacitly allowed, so they are now flourishing again.

Blind people's hall that deceives by closing its eyes

It is outrageous for a sighted person to deceive a blind person, but if a blind person deceives a sighted person like a counterfeiter, isn't that a funny thing? Leaving aside all of Joseon, just speaking of Gyeongseong, there are 312 people who make a superstitious living by closing their eyes and deceiving others, and if you include those who have not yet registered with the Blind People's Hall, there are about 400. Because they unfortunately do not have eyes like others, and because the social education system is still incomplete, they have not received proper vocational training in schools for the blind and deaf, so they have naturally come to have the job of superstition. They say people's good and bad fortune by telling fortunes even though they cannot see the knife in front of them well, and they say they drive away terrifying ghosts by reciting scriptures even though they cannot chase away a single rat in their house. They carry a cane and a fortune-telling stick as their only weapons and only source of food, and in this scorching heat, they cannot see well and walk the streets, enduring the ridicule of bad boys who say, "How many pieces is a blind man's testicle? If you curse, you're a dog," hoping that someone will ask for a fortune. Anyone cannot help but shed tears of sympathy when they hear them shout, "Ask... slowly...." However, behind that, there are many shocking, disgusting, and terrifying things that entice people with superstition. Even when they clearly have indigestion from eating food, they do not say to take medicine, but say that a ghost has caught them, so they must recite scriptures. For injuries, they invoke *maegwol gwi* (埋骨鬼 - ghosts of buried bones), <90> for stomachaches, they invoke *haesanneo gwi* (解産女鬼 - ghosts of women in labor), for burns, they invoke *hwasal yeongsan* (火殺靈山) or *dokgabi* (독갑이 - goblin), for drowning, they invoke *susal yeongsan* (水殺靈山), for tiger attacks, they invoke *horang yeongsan* (호랑영산), for house repairs, they invoke *dongtogwi* (動土鬼 - ghosts of moving earth)...... They say such nonsensical things, receive some money as fortune-telling fees, and recite scriptures, not for just a day or two, but for several weeks for houses that have money, in what is called *chaegyeong* (채경 - hiring blind people to recite scriptures). Among them, a funny thing is that in Seoul, where there are many concubines, they recite scriptures for the concubine so that the legal wife dies or has no good relationship, and they recite scriptures for the legal wife so that the concubine dies or goes away. (Of course, there are many such things in shamanic rituals and Buddhist offerings.) Currently, the way of reciting scriptures in Seoul is not only in the homes of the sick, as in the countryside, but also in the Blind People's Hall or in a *dangjip* (堂집 - shaman shrine), and not just one blind person, but usually in odd numbers of 3, 5, 7, 11, 21, or 33. The scripture fee also varies according to the number of people, that is, 15 won for 3 people, 25 won for 5 people, 40 won for 7 people, 70 won for 11 people, 100 won for 21 people, and 300 won for 33 people. By the way, if you look at the various *dangjip* in Gyeongseong, there is no day when the sound of drums ceases, so if you add all of this up, how much money is Gyeongseong alone spending on deceiving with open eyes in a year, and how many people are losing their precious lives by missing the opportunity to administer medicine while reading these scriptures? Then, whose fault is it? The blind are, of course, sinners. However, it is truly said that if you are hungry, you will even eat people, so since they have no other talent to learn and there is no way for society to provide relief, should they be blamed for doing whatever it takes to survive, no matter how sinful it may be? More than them, it is a great sin that ignorant people, without awareness, are deceived by blind people even with their eyes wide open.

*Jeonnae* house that doubles as a pimp

People in the countryside may not know what a *jeonnae jip* (奠乃집 - shrine house, fortune telling house) is. In Seoul, where there is the most superstition even among cities, there is a strange house called *jeonnae jip* that deceives many people and often acts as a pimp as a secret job, enticing women from good families.

This *jeonnae jip* supposedly worships *Gwanseong Jegun* (關聖帝君 - i.e., Guan Yu), and it originated after the Imjin War. Originally, Chinese people had a strong ideology of so-called hero worship (英雄崇拜), so they worshiped Guan Yunchang (關雲長) of the Three Kingdoms era in every house, just as Westerners worship Jesus. When the Ming army stayed in Joseon for many years during the Imjin War, they naturally built shrines to Guan Yu, whom they worshiped. At that time, the government also built so-called *gwanwangmyo* (關王廟 - Guan Yu shrines) in order to win their favor and promote Guan Yu's loyalist ideology to the people. As a result, five *gwanwangmyo* were built in Seoul, in the east, west, south, north, and Jongno (next to Jonggak), and they were also built in Namwon and Pyongyang, where Ming soldiers were stationed at the time. The government revered them, not like the academies of Confucian scholars, and even during the Gwangmu era, <91> Guan Yu was given the honorary title of *Gwandi* (關帝 - Emperor Guan), and even until the annexation, several thousand *nyang* of incense money was given from the national treasury. As the saying goes, when a golden brush appears, a stone brush plays on its own, so since the government worshiped Guan Yunchang in this way, even commoners did not dare to call Guan Yu by name and simply called him *Gwan Mou* (關某), and by taking advantage of this, gangs of swindlers worshiped Guan Yu's spirit tablet or portrait in their own homes and ate the money and food offered by ignorant people, and this is the so-called *jeonnae jip*. The name *jeonnae* (奠乃) originally used the two characters *jeon* (奠) and *nae* (乃) by disassembling the character *jeong* (鄭) of the so-called Jeong clan of Gyeryongsan (鷄龍山) mentioned in the *Jeonggamnok* (鄭鑑錄 - Prophecies of Jeonggam), but in reality, there is no connection between *Jeonggamnok* and Guan Yu, but gangs of swindlers used the commonly superstitious *Jeonggamnok* and attached such a name. By the way, most of those who engage in the superstitious business of this *jeonnae* now are women, and men are relatively few. They are mostly related to shamans, but they do not openly come out and act like shamans, but secretly worship Guan Yu's portrait in their own homes and entice ignorant women to pray for blessings and ward off evil. Setting up food offerings when offering devotions is no different from a shaman's ritual, but they do not make sounds or dance like shamans, but simply play the cymbals and offer prayers. However, many shamans also worship *jeonnae*, so shaman houses and *jeonnae jip* are actually like siblings and cousins. By the way, there is no superstition that is not harmful to society and the people, but nothing causes as much harm as this *jeonnae jip*. Shamans and blind people act openly, so the public can know their harm, but this *jeonnae jip* is mostly secret, and because it is so secret, women from other people's houses go there often, and taking advantage of that, rogue men collude with the *jeonnae jip* and seduce the women who go there, and through that connection, just as a mouse bites the tail of another mouse, even women from good families sometimes become depraved. In the past, concubines or mistreated wives were easily enticed to such places, but recently, even innocent female students seem to be caught in the demonic cave of that superstition, so isn't that a surprising thing? Even if there were only one or two such houses, the harm would not be small, but there are currently 324 such houses in Gyeongseong, according to the author's investigation. How many more houses are missing from this? Anyone would feel chills down their spine when they think about it.

Among the monsters, the greatest monster is the *taeju halmi*

The *taeju halmi* (胎主할미 - fetus master grandmother) is also a type of shaman. It is said that the *taeju* (胎主 - fetus master) ghost possesses them, and they wander around, making strange sounds from a part of their body or in the air, and using the words of that ghost to tell people's good and bad fortune and entice them.
It is not yet known why this happens, but according to folk tales, the *taeju* ghost is also called *sajisin* (死指神 - dead finger god), and it is said that the *taeju halmi* cuts and dries the ring finger of a child who died of smallpox <92> and wears it under her underwear. That is why there is a story that in a certain house, the *taeju halmi* came to sleep, and the homeowner took advantage of the *taeju*'s sleep to steal the *taeju*'s little finger, that is, the *sajisin*, and the *taeju* never knew anything again. However, that is not yet certain. It is not known exactly how they do it, but it is a fact that it is a type of superstition that entices women as superstition.
By the way, there are a few such houses in Gyeongseong, but the public does not know them well because they operate secretly, and it is said that there are the most such houses in Gaeseong in Joseon. This is an issue that everyone should study.

*Sangtujaengi* who entice passersby by looking at old books

Ladies and gentlemen! If I say *sangtujaengi* (상투쟁이 - topknot wearing men who tell fortunes) who deceive people by looking at old books, you may easily mistake them for scholars who teach *Tonggam* (通鑑 - Comprehensive Mirror for Aid in Government) or *Mujesi* (無題詩 - untitled poems) in village schools and receive *gaengmi don* (갱미 돈 - tuition money). However, even if the scholars are behind the times, how can they be called superstition? If you pass by Jongno intersection or Dongdaemun-tong, or Namdaemun-tong in Seoul, or the corner of each inn in Pyongyang, you will see *sangtujaengi* gathered in ones or twos, sitting there with tattered books like ghostly talismans, looking at people coming and going and saying, "I'll tell you your *saju* (四柱 - four pillars, a person's birth date and time) or physiognomy." They don't even know how to read, so how can they know what the *saju*'s year, month, day, and time of birth are or what the five elements (五行) are? Because they have nothing to eat, they go to some old bookstore and buy a book called *Tang saju chaek* (唐四柱冊) or *Saju boneun beop* (四柱보는 법 - How to Tell Saju) for thirty or forty *jeon*, look at the notes written in Korean, pretend to do it by force, and extort money from foolish people. It's only ten or twenty *jeon* at a time, but if you collect things from many people, it's not a small amount of money. Isn't it truly funny that people who do that because they have nothing to do, because their own *saju* or physiognomy was seen wrongly, are saying how other people's lives will be? Once, such a thing happened. As I was passing by a certain place, there was also a *dang saju* seller spreading out his book, so I thought I would test him once, and I told him my date of birth, and as I looked at what that guy was muttering and rummaging through the book, he suddenly opened a page, looked at it, and the first sentence was, "Four geese fly together in the autumn moon of Dongting Lake" (洞庭秋月에 四雁이 齊飛라). When I asked what that meant, that guy's answer was truly absurd. He said, "Even if winter is cold, it's the life of a swallow," and said it was very good. That's because he didn't know Chinese characters well and only looked at the Korean written next to it and knew that "Dongting Autumn Moon" (洞庭秋月) meant that winter was cold, and that "Four Geese are Swallows" (四雁이제비) meant that they were mountain swallows. Isn't that truly funny?

Ladies and gentlemen! Your own *palja* (八字 - destiny) and your own good and bad fortune are all born with you and depend on your work. What is the point of looking at that book? If there are people in Joseon today whose *saju* or physiognomy <93> says they will be Prime Minister or Minister, can they become that in the current situation? During the Great European War or the Great Kanto Earthquake, what *saju* or physiognomy did all those people who died have? You should think about it once more.

Medicinal spring with five *maji*

Medicine becomes medicine because of the ingredients it contains, so whether it is effective for the person who eats it or not, it seems that just eating it is enough, and there doesn't seem to be any superstition attached to it. However, ignorant women believe that medicine has some kind of ghost in it, so if they offer sincerity well, it will be effective, and if they do not offer sincerity well, it will not be effective. Therefore, when going to a spring, they say they cannot use it if they are not clean, so they take a bath and do not eat fish or meat, and when they go to the spring, they offer white rice, offer money, offer clothes, and bow hundreds or thousands of times until their backs break. That, of course, came from the superstition of offering sacrifices to the water god, the dragon king, and the sea in the past. By the way, if you have an illness and drink medicinal water and offer devotions, whether there is a ghost or not, if the water is good and you pray with sincerity and drink it, you may be able to cure the disease due to the effect of the medicinal water and the relationship of psychology, but it is especially funny to go to a medicinal spring and ask to have a son or to get married well, what else is that if not superstition? Once, I saw something funny. At the Seongje well in Samcheong-dong, some women were making rice and offering it, bowing and praying, saying, "Please-please make that year fall-please-please-please let the virtue fall," so I thought that those women had some disease and were eating medicinal water and praying for the disease to fall, but when I found out later, those women were a mother and daughter, and because the young woman's husband had a concubine, the mother and daughter were praying for that concubine to fall. This is a bizarre thing that can only be seen in Joseon today. By the way, you should know that a terrifying demon is lurking in this medicinal spring besides these superstitions.

In the summer, many ignorant women gather at the medicinal springs, so you should know that gangs of demons like pimps take advantage of this and are lurking near the medicinal spring, enticing the women who come. There is a saying that has been passed down from ancient times that women who go to medicinal springs do five *maji*: first, water *maji*, second, husband *maji*, third, rain *maji*, fourth, thief *maji* (because the house is empty), and fifth, wife beating from her husband.
Should this be known only as a funny prank? <94>

**Named Entities**

崔瑩將軍	Ch'oe Yŏng Janggun
玉皇上帝	Ok Hwang Sangje
太上老君	T’aesang Nogun
老人星	Noinsŏng
江南護口別星	Kangnam Hogu Pyŏlsŏng
龍山	Yongsan
柳曼殊	Ryu Mansu
柳成升	Ryu Sŏngsŭng
鷲梁津	Ch'wuryangjin
閔妃	Minbi
晉靈君	Chinnyŏnggun
光武	Kwangmu
嚴妃	Ŏmbi
己未	Kimi
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
盲廳	Maengch'ŏng
三國	Samguk
關雲長	Kwan Unjang
關王廟	Kwanwangmyo
鍾路	Chongno
南原	Namwŏn
平壤	P'yŏngyang
關帝	Kwandi
關某	Kwan Mou
奠乃	Chŏnnae
鄭鑑錄	Chŏnggamnok
鷄龍山	Kyeryongsan
鄭氏	Chŏngssi
通鑑	T'onggam
無題詩	Mujesi
唐四柱冊	Tang saju chaek
三淸洞	Samch'ŏngdong
星祭	Sŏngje
Seongje
東大門通	Tongdaemunt'ong
南大門通	Namdaemunt'ong


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제15호
발행일	1928년 08월 01일
기사제목	二十世紀大伏魔殿, 男女迷信窟의 秘密公開, 惑世誣民의 大魔窟(題目削除)
필자	私偵察
기사형태	잡저

二十世紀大伏魔殿, 男女迷信窟의 秘密公開, 惑世誣民의 大魔窟(題目削除)
						私偵察
미신! 미신! 하야도 무당처럼 혹세무민을 잘하는 미신은 업슬 것이다. 장님은 돈을 먹기 위하야 잇는 귀신을 업시 한다고 하지만은 무당은 돈을 먹기 위하야 업는 귀신을 맨기러 낸다. 녯말에도 무당이 가는 곳에는 생존한 가시아비도 귀신으로 노라난다는 말이 잇다. 漢字에도 속힐 誣 字는 巫言의 合作이 안이냐. 이제 俗間에 흔이 유행하는 소위 창부타령 몃 節을 드러 말하야 보자.
얼시구나 조흘시구
지화자 조흘시고
돈 잘쓰면 활량이요
돈 못쓰면 전망난이

언제쓰자는 한울타리
안이쓰지는 못하리라
얼시고나 조흘시고
지화자 조흘시고<88>
돈야소리는 난다만은
악알전만 쏘다진다

제것 두고 못쓰는 것
왕장군의 고자로다

이것이 다 무슨 야비하고 천박한 소리냐. 거짓말이나마 남의 복을 빈다던지 남의 액을 막아 준다는 것이 거긔에 관한 말은 업고 다만 자긔에게 돈만 쓰라고 남을 유혹식히고 도발식히는 것이 안이냐. 거긔에 대해서야 무엇의 잘잘못을 새삼스럽게 말할 필요나 잇스냐. 원래에 업는 귀신을 팔어 가지고 돈을 불어먹는 것이 本職이닛가. 그럿케 안이한다면 도로혀 변측일 것이다. 시대는 점점 밝어 가고 인민의 지식 뎡도도 느러간다고 하지만은 迷信의 소굴은 그와 正比例로 왕성하야 간다. 그 중에도 무당의 수효가 해마다 느러가고 덩덕궁 소리가 곳곳이 듯게 되는 것은 그 무엇을 상증함이냐. 놀나지 말어라. 서울에만도 무당의 현재 수가 514인이나 된다. 그 중에 龍山 관내에 자그만치 250인이나 된다. 이로 미루어보면 조선 전국에 그 무리가 과연 몃 명이며 그 害毒이 또한 엇더하랴. (此間 11행 삭제-원문)
그것들은 날마다 아모 것도 하는 것이 업시 소위 聖主, 玉皇上帝, 太上老君, 老人星, 江南護口別星(痘疫神), 崔瑩將軍 등을 對象의 神으로 하야 뭇구리로 사람의 吉凶禍福을 판단하고 굿이나 푸닥거리로 귀신에게 祝願, 呪祝을 하야 사람의 질병을 곳치고 재앙을 쫏는다고 한다. 사람이 죽은 뒤에는 자리굿, 三年喪이 난 다음에는 탈상굿, 산에 가서는 山神굿, 물에 가서는 龍神굿, 별의 별 굿을 다 하야 무식한 사람들의 돈을 빼서 먹는다. 그 중에도 우수운 일은 감옥에 드러간 사람을 속히 나오라고 굿을 하는 것이다.
돈으로 말하면 한번에 음식물까지 합하야 적으면 삼사십 원 만흐면 수백 원까지 소비한다. 서울의 녀자들은 모도 굿을 하기 위하야 사는 것 갓다. 그 중에도 남의 妾 가튼 것들은 머리만 압허도 굿이오 愛夫만 보고 십허도 굿이다. 굿을 한 오락과 소풍거리로 생각한다. 뼈가 빠지게 벌은 남자의 돈을 글거다가 무당의 주머니 속에 다 밧치고 만다. 그것은 참으로 우숩고 가여운 일이다. 그러면 대체 무당이라는 것은 엇지하야 생겨난 것인가. 往古의 력사를 상고하야 보건대 소위 제정시대(祭政時代)에 여자가 主祭者가 되엿섯는대 그 풍속은 처음에 北方 아세아(亞細亞)와 波斯 지방에서 시작이 된바 그곳에 잇는 原始의 神은 특히 춤을 조와하는 고로 그 祭를 맛튼 여자는 반드시 춤을 추고 祭를 지내게 되엿다. 그것이 인하야 무당의 起源이 되고 그 풍속이 北支那를 것처서 우리 조선에까지 오게 되엿다. 조선에서도 上古時代에는 무당이 그리 천하지 안을 뿐 안이라 신의 한 主祭者인 까닭에 一반 민중에게 크게 敬愛를 바덧섯다. 그러나 시대의 변천을 따러서 점점 속화하야 영업뎍이 되고 따라서 인민의 돈을 빼서먹기 위하야 미신으로 혹세무민까지 하게 된 것이다. <89>
조선에 무당이 전성하기는 고려시대엿는대 (지금에 開城에 무당이 만흔 것도 그 遺風인 듯하다) 李朝 初에 류만수(柳曼殊) 류성승이 그것을 크게 금하고 심지어 잡아죽이기까지 하기 때문에 지금에 무당들이 굿을 할 때이면 그것을 끄리여서 먼저 『얼하-만수-』 소리를 하는 것이다. 그 뒤에도 력대로 무당을 매우 금지하얏스나 哲宗 시대에 국법이 해이하야 巫風이 크게 성행하고 심지어 궐내까지도 무당이 무상 출입을 하게 되매 大院君이 그것을 크게 미워하야 執政이 되는 동시에 巫女를 엄금하야 城內에 잇는 것을 모도 모라다가 로들(鷲梁津)로 격이(隔離)식히엿드니 지금에 룡산, 마포, 로들 부근에 무당이 만흔 것도 그 까닭이다. 그러나 大院君이 失勢를 하고 閔妃가 세도를 하며 승려, 무녀의 무리를 친근하게 되니 巫女가 일시에 격증하야 城內城外 어늬 동내마다 날마다 굿하는 소리가 안 나는 곳이 업고 당시 巫女 중에 洪川의 晋靈君 가튼 妖女는 궁중에서 큰 세력을 가저서 비록 大臣이라도 다 그를 추세하게 되고 地方官吏 궁내의 관리가 其 여자의 손에서 나온 것이 만헛다. 그 뒤 光武 8년경에 다시 무당을 추방하얏스나 嚴妃가 또 무당을 조와한 까닭에 合邦 臨時까지 다시 성하얏섯고 合邦 후에는 당국의 취체가 다소 엄절함으로 일시에는 무당이 공연하게 굿을 못하얏스나 己未 후에는 共同墓地 규측이 변경된 것과 가티 무당도 역시 묵인하는 덕택을 입어 지금에는 다시 盛하야가는 것이다.

눈을 감고 속혀 먹는 盲人廳

눈뜬 사람이 눈감은 사람을 속혀 먹는 것은 용혹무괴한 일이지만은 그와 반대로 눈감은 사람이 눈뜬 사람을 감작가티 속혀 먹는다면 그 안이 우수운 일이냐. 全 조선은 그만두고 이 京城만 말하야도 눈감고 남을 속혀 먹는 미신업을 하는 사람이 312인이나 되는대 盲廳에 아즉 등록을 안이한 자까지 치면 약 4백여 명이라 한다. 그네들은 불행이 남과 가티 눈이 업고 또 아즉까지 사회의 교육제도가 불완전하야 맹아학교 가튼데서 정당한 직업뎍 교육을 밧지 못한 까닭에 선텬뎍으로 미신의 직업을 하게 되엿다. 자긔의 압헤 칼이 드러가도 잘 보지를 못하면서도 占을 처서 남의 길흉화복을 말하며 자긔 집에 잇는 새양쥐 한 마리를 잘 쫏지도 못하면서도 경을 읽거서 무서운 귀신을 쫏는다고 한다. 지팡막대 한아와 占통 한아를 유일한 武器와 유일한 밥통으로 삼고 이와가티 찌는 드시 더운 날에 압도 잘 보지 못하고 가로(街路)로 단니며 惡少年들에게 『장님 불알이 몃 쪽이요 욕하면 개작식이지』하는 조롱을 바다가면서 행여나 問卜할 사람이 잇슬가 하고 『문....서히....』 소리를 죽도록 지르는 것을 보면 누구나 동정의 눈물이 업슬 수 업다. 그러나 그리면에는 놀납고도 가증스럽고 무섭게도 사람을 미신으로 유혹식히는 일이 만타. 번연이 음식을 먹고 체한데도 약을 먹으라는 말은 업고 귀신이 붓잡혓스니 경을 읽어야 한다고 한다. 落傷한데는 埋骨鬼,<90> 腹痛에는 解産女鬼, 火傷에는 火殺영산이나 독갑이, 물에 바진 데는 水殺영산, 虎口에는 호랑영산, 집진 뒤에는 動土鬼......등 이러한 허무맹낭의 말을 하야 卜債로 얼마 밧고 또 경을 읽으되 하루나 이틀도 안이요 돈푼이나 잇는 집에는 소위 채경이라고 하야 몃주일식을 읽은다. 그 중에도 우수운 일은 서울과 가티 妾 살임을 만히 하는 곳에서는 妾을 위하야는 本妻가 죽던지 금실이 업스라고 경을 읽고 本妻를 위하야는 妾이 죽거나 떠러저가라고 경을 읽어 준다.(巫堂의 굿이나 부처의 불공에도 물론 이러한 사실이 만타) 현재 서울에서 경을 읽는 법은 시골과 가티 병자의 집에서만 꼭 읽는 것이 안이라 병자의 집 이외에 盲廳이나 또는 堂집에 가서 읽는대 장님도 한사람이 안이고 대개는 奇數로 3, 5, 7, 11, 21, 33식 모혀서 읽는다. 그 經債도 물론 人數를 따러서 다르니 즉 3인에는 15원, 5인에는 25원, 7인에는 40원, 11인에는 70원, 21인에는 백원, 33인에는 3백원이다. 그런데 경성 내의 여러 堂집을 보면 매일 북소리가 끗칠 날이 업스니 이것을 모다 총계한다면 경성만 하야도 일년에 눈뜨고 속혀 먹는 돈이 얼마나 巨額이며 돈은 고사하고 이 경을 읽너라고 施藥할 시기를 일어서 가련한 생명을 빼앗기는 사람이 그 얼마나 될 것이냐. 그런대 그것은 과연 누구의 罪惡이라고 할가. 盲人도 물론 죄인은 죄인이다. 그러나 眞所謂 배가 곱흐면 사람도 잡아먹는다고 달리 배운 재조가 업고 사회에서 구제의 길이 업스닛가 죄악이야 엇지 되던지 자긔의 生을 위하야 하는 데야 그네에게 족히 責할 여디나 잇스랴. 그네보다도 무지몽매한 민중이 자각이 업시 성한 눈을 뜨고도 눈감은 사람에게 속는 것이 큰 죄악이다.

뚜쟁이 兼業의 奠乃집

전내(奠乃는 或稱 殿內)집이라 하면 시골에 잇는 사람들은 잘 알지도 못할 것이다. 도회 중에도 제일 미신이 만흔 서울 안에는 소위 전내집이라 하는 괴상한 집이 잇서서 여려 사람을 속히여 먹고 또 비밀 직업으로 뛰쟁이 겸업을 하야 량가 녀자를 록락하는 일이 만타.
이 전내집이라 하는 것은 소위 관성제군(關聖帝君=즉 關羽)을 위한다는 것으로 임진왜란 이후에 생겨난 것이다. 원래에 중국 사람들은 소위 영웅숭배(英雄崇拜)의 사상이 만허서 三國시대의 關雲長을 서양 사람의 야소 위하듯이 집집마다 위하는 습관이 잇섯는데 임진란 때에 明나라 군사가 조선에 여러 해 동안을 체류하게 되매 자연이 자긔네의 숭배하는 關羽의 사당을 짓게 되고 당시 정부에서도 그네의 환심도 사고 또한 인민에게 關羽의 尊皇하던 사상을 쟝려하기 위하야 소위 關王*를 짓게 되엿다. 그리하야 서울에는 東, 西, 南, 北, 鍾路(종각 엽집)등 다섯 관왕묘가 생기고 시골에도 당시 明兵이 주둔하던 南原, 平壤 등지에 다 잇게 되엿스며 정부에서는 그것을 先賢의 書院이나 지지 안케 존숭을 하고 光武시대에도<91> 關羽에게 關帝의 尊號까지 나리고 합병 당시까지도 국고금으로 香火錢을 몃 千兩식 나렷섯다. 진소위 금붓채가 생기닛가 돌붓채가 저절로 놀아난다고 정부에서 이와가티 관운장을 위하닛가 민간에서도 덩다리 위하야 關羽의 이름까지도 부르지 못하고 그저 關某라 하얏스며 또 그것을 이용하야 협잡배의 무리들은 자긔 箇人의 집에다 관우의 위패나 화상을 위하야 놋코 무지몽매한 사람의 치성 드리는 돈과 음식을 어더 먹게 되엿스니 이것이 소위 奠乃집이다. 奠乃라는 명칭은 원래에 정감록(鄭鑑錄)에 말한 소위 鷄龍山 鄭氏라는 鄭字를 解字하야 奠乃 두 자로 리용한 것이니 실상은 정감록과 관운장과는 아무 관계도 업지만은 협잡의 무리들이 일반의 미신하는 정감록을 리용하야 또 그러한 이름을 붓친 것이다. 그런데 지금에 이 전내의 미신업을 하는 자는 남자가 비교뎍 적고 대부분이 녀자들이니 대개는 무당과 관연이 각가우나 무당처럼 公然하게 나와서 그 행세를 하지 안코 자긔 집에다 비밀하게 관우의 화상을 위하야 놋코 무지한 여러 녀자들을 꾀여서 복도 빌고 도액도 하야 준다. 치성 드릴 때에 음식을 차려 놋는 것은 무당의 굿하는 것과 다름이 업스나 다만 무당처럼 소리를 하거나 춤을 추지 안코 그저 제금만 치고 축원을 한다. 그러나 무당 중에는 또한 奠乃를 위하는 者가 대부분이니 무당 집과 전내집은 실상은 형제 사촌 격은 되는 세음이다. 그런대 미신치고 어늬 미신이나 사회 민중에 害毒이 되지 안는 것이 업지만은 이 전내집처럼 해독을 끼치는 것은 업다. 무당과 장님은 그래고 公然히 행세를 하는 까닭에 그 해독을 일반이 알 수나 잇지만은 이 전내집은 대개가 비밀이 하고 그와 가티 비밀한 까닭에 남의 집 부녀들이 잘 가며 또 그것을 리용하야 부랑 남자배가 전내집과 결탁하야 거긔에 다니는 녀자들을 유혹식히고 또 그로 연줄 연줄하야 쥐가 쥐의 꼬리를 물 듯이 량가의 부녀까지도 동틔를 내는 일이 종종 잇다. 이전에는 남의 집 첩이나 소박덕이들이 그런 곳에 유혹이 만헛스나 근래에는 순질한 녀학생까지도 그 미신의 악마굴에 걸이여 가는 경향이 잇는 모양이니 엇지 놀나운 일이 아니냐. 그러한 집이 한아 둘만이라도 해독이 적지 안을 터인데 현재 경성에는 필자의 조사한 것만으로도 324호나 된다. 여긔에도 빠진 것이 또 몃 집이나 잇는 줄 알 수 잇느냐. 생각하면 누구나 가슴이 송연한 것이다.

妖物 中에  大妖物인 胎主할미

胎主할미라는 것은 역시 무당의 일종으로서 胎主귀신이 집헷다하고 도라다니며 자긔 신체의 한 부분에서나 空中에서 이상한 소리를 나게 하고 그 귀신의 말을 비러서 남의 길흉화복을 말하야 사람을 유혹케 하는 것이다.
이것은 아즉까지 무슨 까닭으로 그럿케 되는 것인지 알 수 업스나 민간에서 전하는 말을 드르면 胎主귀신은 死指神이라고도 하는데 痘役에 죽은 어린 아희의 無名指를 잘너 말녀서<92> 胎主할미가 자기 속옷 밋헤다 차고 다닌다고 한다. 그리하야 엇던 집에서는 胎主할미가 와서 자는데 그 집주인이 胎主의 자는 틈을 타서 胎主의 가진 小兒指 즉 死指神을 흠첫더니 그 胎主가 다시는 아모 것도 모르더라는 이약이도 잇다. 그러나 그것도 아즉 확신할 수는 업는 말이다. 그것이 과연 무슨 방법으로 그리하는지는 알 수 업스나 일종의 미신인즉 미신으로서 부녀자를 유혹하는 것은 사실이다.
그런데 그런 것이 경성에도 몃 집이 잇스되 비빌이 다니기 때문에 일반이 잘 알지를 못하고 조선 중에는 개성에 그런 것이 제일 만타고 한다. 이것은 누구나 한번 연구하야 볼 문뎨이다.

헌 冊을 보며 行人을 誘惑식히는 상투쟁이

여러분! 묵은 책을 보며 사람을 속혀 먹는 상투장이라 하면 잘못하면 서당방에서 通鑑이나 無題詩를 가르처주며 갱미돈을 바더먹는 학구쟁이 선생임으로 알으시기 쉬울 것이올시다. 그러나 학구쟁이야 비록 시대에 떠러진 것이라 할지언정 엇지 미신이라고야 하겟습니가. 서울의 종로 네거리나 東大門通, 또는 南大門通을 보던지 평양의 각 여관 집 모통이를 지내느라면 상투쟁이들이 한아식 혹은 두흘식 모혀 안저서 귀신의 부적가티 울굿불굿한 흔 누덕이 책를 가지고 오는 사람 가는 사람을 보고 四柱나 관상을 보시요 함니다. 그네들은 글자도 알지 못하거던 소위 四柱의 생년월일이 엇더 한 것인지 五行이 무엇인지 잘 알기나 하겟슴닛가. 그저 먹을 것이 업스닛가 엇더한 흔 冊사에 가서 소위 唐四柱冊인가 四柱보는 법인가 하는 책을 삼사십전에 사 가지고 국문으로 주석하야 노흔 것을 보고 억지로 하는 체하며 어리석은 사람의 돈을 빼서 먹슴니다. 한번에 불과 시 십전이 안이면 이십전이지만은 그것도 여러 사람의 것을 모흐면 적지 안흔 돈이 안임닛가. 제 四柱나 제 觀相을 잘못보와서 아모 것도 해먹을 것이 업서 그 짓을 하는 사람들이 남의 평생이 엇더 엇더 하다고 말하는 것이 참으로 우섭지 안슴닛가. 한번은 이러한 일이 잇섯슴니다. 필자가 어느 곳을 지내느라닛가 그곳에도 역시 당四柱쟁이가 책을 펴놋코 잇기에 나는 한번 시험을 하야보랴고 생년월일을 가르처 주고 보닛가 그자가 무엇이라고 지끄리며 책을 뒤적뒤적하더니 한 張을 썩 펴서 놋코 보는데 첫 句에 洞庭秋月에 四雁이 齊飛라 하얏기로 그 뜻이 무엇이냐고 무르닛가 그 자의 대답이 참 요절을 하겟지요. 즉 『겨울이 추어도 산제비(鷰)의 목숨이라』고 하며 대단이 좃타고 합니다. 그것은 그자가 漢文字는 잘 알지를 못하고 겻헤 써서 노흔 조선문만 브고 『동정추월』은 동절이 춥다는 줄로 알며 『사안이제비』는 산제비로 알고 그리 한 말임니다. 참으로 우숩지 안슴닛가.
여러분! 자긔의 八字와 자긔의 길흉은 자긔가 먼저 다 타고나고 자긔가 일을 하게 달일 것인데. 그 책을 보와서 무엇 하겟슴닛가. 그래 오눌에 우리 조선 사람이 四柱나 관상에<93> 政丞, 判書를 할 運이 잇다면 지금 형편으로서 될 수가 잇슴닛가. 구주 大전쟁이나 일본 대지진 때에 그 허다하게 죽은 사람은 무슨 사주나 관상이 글너서 그러하겟슴닛가. 한번 더 생각하야 볼 것이올시다.

五마지하는 藥水터

藥물이야 그 속에 포함하야 잇는 성분으로서 藥이 되는 것이닛가 그것이 먹는 사람에게 효험이야 잇던지 업던지 그저 먹기만 하면 그만이지 무슨 미신이 부터 잇슬 것 갓지 안타, 그러나 무지한 부녀들은 藥물에도 무슨 귀신이 잇서서 정성을 잘 드리면 효흠이 잇고 정성을 잘못 드리면 효과가 업는 줄로 밋는다. 그리하야 물터에 갈 때에도 不精하면 못 쓴다고 목욕재게를 하고 생선이나 육류의 비린 것을 안이 먹으며 물터에 가서는 노구메(白飯) 정성을 들이며 돈도 노흐며 의복 가지도 놋코는 허리가 부러지라 하고 百拜天拜를 한다. 그것은 물론 과거 水神이니 龍王이니 하고 江海에 祭 지내던 미신에서 나온 것이다. 그런데 자긔의 병이 잇는데 藥水를 먹고 치성을 드린다면 귀신이야 잇던지 업던지 그 물이 좃코 정성것 잘 긔도를 하고 먹으면 藥水의 功效와 心理의 관게로 혹 병을 치료할 수는 잇지만은 특히 우수울 일은 약수에다 가서 아들을 낫게 하야 달난다던지 시집 장가를 잘 가게 하야 달나는 것은 참 미신이 안이고 무엇이냐. 한번은 우수운 일을 내가 보왓다. 三淸洞 星祭 우물에서 엇더한 여자들이 밥을 하야 놋코 작고 절을 하면서 祝願을 하는 말이 『그저-그년을 떠러지게 하야 주십시요-그저-그저-제발 덕분 떠러지게 하야 주십시요』하기로 나는 생각하기를 그 여자들이 무슨 병이 잇서서 약수를 먹고 병이 떠러지게 하야 달나고 축원을 하는 줄로만 알엇더니 다시 알고 보닛가 그 여자는 母女間인데 그 젊은 여자의 남편이 妾을 엇긔 때문에 그 妾이 떠러지라고 모녀가 축원을 하는 것이다. 이것은 오눌의 우리 조선이 안이고는 볼 수가 업는 긔괴한 일이다. 그런데 이 약수터에는 이러한 미신 이외에 무서운 惡魔가 伏在하야 잇는 것을 알여야 한다.
녀름의 약물터에는 이러한 무지한 여자들이 만히 모혀들긔 때문에 그것을 이용하야 뚜쟁이 가튼 악마의 무리들이 고 약수 근처에 손을 버리고 잇서서 오는 여자들을 꾀여내는 일이 잇는 것을 꼭 알녀야 한다. 녯날부터 전하는 말에 약물터에 가는 여자는 다섯마지를 하는데 첫재에 물마지, 둘재에 서방마지, 섯제에 소낙비마지, 네ㅅ재에 도적마지, (집이 비힌 까닭) 다섯재에 남편에게 매마지를 한다고 한다.
이것이 엇지 한 우수운 작란 거리의 말로만 알 것이냐. <94>
<88-94>