잡지명	別乾坤 第26號
발행일	1930년 02월 01일
기사제목	假想夫婦 誌上 大披露宴 (Imaginary Couple: A Grand Reception on the Magazine)
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

식사 (Opening Remarks)
주례 관상자 (Officiant: Physiognomist)

If you think that even an imaginary couple is a marriage between men and women in Jinjam, it is a big misunderstanding. The so-called couple here does not mean the so-called couple in today's male-female relationship, but rather men and women who have the same intentions and circumstances, and who can do anything well if they are combined like a couple. However, since the word "couple" is usually understood as a combination of men and women, we avoid it here and gather men with men and women with women. However, it should not be misunderstood as homosexuality. It is just that men are combined as comrades, and women are combined as comrades. At first glance, this may seem like a funny article, but if you think about it again, it has a very profound meaning. In our society, where there are few like-minded people and few workers who match our hands, and we are all calling for loneliness, if those people, like the imaginary couple announced on this magazine, actually unite like loving couples and do something, there is no reason why that work cannot succeed, and what greater happiness could there be than that? It is in this sense that I have opened the unveiling ceremony of the imaginary couple with this space. Readers, please understand, and all the imaginary couples in the magazine, please understand and forgive me.

남자부 (Men's Section)

Chunwon (春園) Yi Kwang-su and Chu Yohan are both from Kansai and members of the Heungsadan (興士團). One is a novelist and the other is a poet. If the two of them were to marry, it would be an ideal and artistic marriage. Chunwon is qualified to be a husband in terms of age, career, and personality, and Yohan is qualified to be his wife. If the two couples were to be active according to their ideals, the Korean literary world would shine even more. If I say this, Chunwon's wife, Heo Yeongsuk, may worry about giving her husband to Yohan, be jealous of Yohan, and scold this writer, who is a matchmaker on the magazine. But don't worry and enjoy the wedding noodles. This is not a real couple, but an imaginary couple.

Min Tae-won and Pak Chan-hui have many similarities in physique and personality, and one is the head of the Jungoe Editorial Bureau and the other is the local head of the Donga. They have the same position of "head" and their families are also considerable because they are from Chungcheong Province. In terms of past newspaper experience and work skills, Ubo is qualified to be a husband, but in terms of good looks and the ability to stand firm in any work, Geumgye is fully qualified to be a husband. If the two of them become a couple and discuss internal and external affairs with each other, they will never leak secrets because they are as silent as each other, and there will be few bad things because they are as thoughtful and deliberate.
However, since Ubo originally has a lot of romantic luck, Geumgye will always find it difficult to feel at ease, so she will throw away her current gold-rimmed glasses and use a telescope or microscope to monitor Ubo. And since both of them have a gloomy personality, Dongbuin's walks should always be in sunny places so that warm feelings will sprout.

Just as electricity has opposite polarities, people also have many conflicts when their personalities are similar. But this is not the case with Yi Sang-hyeop and Kim Hyeong-won of Jungoe. Their appearances are similar, their personalities are similar, and their meticulousness in work is similar. At first glance, it seems that they will not be compatible with each other, but in reality, they are very close like glutinous rice cakes, and they seem to be doing everything well through consultation. In this era when men and women advocate equal rights—no, even realize it—there is no need for others to discriminate between who is the husband and who is the wife. If the two of them decide to become a couple in harmony without being distant from each other, Yi Sang-hyeop will be the husband and Kim Hyeong-won will be the wife.

Han Gi-ok of the Chosun Ilbo is a handsome man, but if he were a woman, he would also be a famous beauty. His appearance is beautiful, and his gentle personality makes him a very wise wife. I don't know if their personalities will match, but if they marry Seol Ui-sik of the Donga and harmonize well, they will be able to do anything. If I say this, Han Gi-ok may complain, "If I were to become a woman and get married, why would I marry a friend from Dancheon with a lot of facial hair and a dark face?" and Seol may also sell his family's Nongu and soybean islands, which are famous products of Dancheon, to hold a grand second party after this unveiling ceremony because he married a beauty from a yangban family.

Yeom Sang-seop and Yi Ik-sang are both writers, both broad-minded, both drinkers, and their personalities are similarly pure and honest, and their ideologies are also not very different. If Sang-seop is the husband and Ik-sang is the wife, and they start a family, it will look like a happy family to others, and they will handle everything smoothly. Since Ik-sang's pen name is Seonghae and Sang-seop's pen name is Sangseop, if Seonghae asks Sangseop on their wedding night how to cross the complicated human sea of suffering, Sangseop will close his big eyes and blink, thinking—that is, thinking about how to cross it. And since both of them are big drinkers, they will definitely write "Liquor expenses OO won" as the first item in the family budget table.

There is a saying that a poor person can become rich if they cook soybean sprout soup well for three years. Yang Baek-hwa is not very well-off either, so if he wants a wife who cooks soybean sprout soup, he should probably marry the writer Bang In-geun, who used to sell soybean sprouts. The two of them are originally close, but their thoughts and personalities seem to be similar. The only problem is that Baek-hwa is too tall, so it will be difficult to kiss Fang. However, since Chunhae is originally full of emotions, he will try to approach Baek-hwa's lips even if he has to climb up to the advertising tower on the upper floor of Jongno Yuchang Commercial Company if he has the passion.

It is said that it is an ideal marriage if a man from the South and a woman from the North get married. Kim Dong-hwan, who was born in the North, is a man, but if he were a woman, he would have tormented many men in the South with his beauty. He and Yi Eun-sang always share the same spirit in poetry and folk songs, and they have many things in common, such as being sincere in everything. Yi Eun-sang has a big nose and a dark face, so he is masculine, and Kim Dong-hwan has a handsome face and is full of emotions, so he is very feminine. If the two of them were to become a couple, even in imagination, everyone would applaud and congratulate them, and if the two of them were to work together and make a magazine or something, the pages would be fresher and more developed than the current Sinsaeng or Samcheolli.

If Byeongheo (憑虛) Hyeon Jin-geon and Kim Ryeosu Park Pal-yang get married, they will also be a beautiful couple. If they gather in one newspaper company as a couple and take charge of the social or academic sections, the pages will be very lively, and they will also do other things very meticulously and nimbly. By the way, if Byeongheo is the husband and Ryeosu is the wife in that couple, there will probably be no complaints among the parties involved, but since Ryeosu is a bit weak, it is questionable whether she will be able to endure Byeongheo's drunken dramas that he sometimes puts on.

Even today, when Japanese influence is rampant, it is a bit uncomfortable to become a couple with the same surname, Choi. However, it is an imaginary couple, and I don't even know if their hometowns are different, so there is no need to refuse outright. Choi Hak-song and Choi Dok-gu cannot be said to have exactly the same personalities or ideologies, but considering their past friendship, the fact that they are both writers, and the fact that they are in the same newspaper company, it would not be a completely wrong marriage even if they got married. If Hak-song is the husband and actively works outside in a round manner, and Dok-gu is the wife and sensitively handles internal affairs, they will complement each other's strengths and weaknesses—they will harmonize with each other and do things in an interesting way.

Kim Eok and Kim Dong-in—it is also uncomfortable to bring up the issue of couples with the two of them, just like the two Chois mentioned above, because they have the same surname. However, they are both from the same province and writers, so even if I don't attach a detailed explanation, those who know them will discover that the two of them have many things in common. If the two of them become a couple and do a lot of activities, it will not be difficult to develop the desolate literary world of Kansai. By the way, judging by looks, personality, and age, I'm sorry, but Dong-in will have to play the role of the wife.

Yi Jong-rin and An Jae-hong—the two of them are usually very friendly, and they are not only diligent in arranging things, but they also have many similarities in various ways, so if they combine like a couple and Bongsan becomes the husband and Minse becomes the wife and manages various things well, the effect will be very great. By the way, since both of them attend many gatherings, it will be uncomfortable for the cook to eat cold rice.

Song Jin-u and Kim Seong-su were originally like siblings, doing all sorts of things through consultation, but if Song Jin-u had become Kim Seong-su's husband instead of Kim Seong-su's brother-in-law, they might have been able to do more than they are doing now. The world already knows about them, so I don't want to explain it.

In addition, it would be nice if Kim Gi-jeon and Jo Gi-geum, Yi Seong-hwan and Yu Gwang-ryeol, and Shin Heung-u and Hong Byeong-* were married as couples.

여자부 (Women's Section)
Let's stop the men's unveiling ceremony, which is too long, and move on to the women's unveiling ceremony. Kim Miri-sa and Shin Al-bet are similar in age, and not only have similar environments since they were young, but both of them have contributed a lot to the women's education world. If the two of them were to become a couple, with Kim becoming the husband and using her skillful social skills and passionate sincerity to arrange outside work, and Shin becoming the wife and doing things well with her meticulous and diligent heart, they would do well in any job, not just women's education. The only troublesome thing is that it is difficult to have quiet and pleasant conversations because Kim has a slight hearing impairment. However, instead, Kim is originally good at being witty, and Shin is also quick-witted, so she will know what to do as soon as Kim winks once, so they will get along well without any problems in the family.

Kim Hwal-ran and Yu Gwak-hyang were both Christians and engaged in the same education field. Kim Hwal-ran's cheerful and sociable personality is more like a man, and Yu Gwak-hyang's meticulous and calm personality is inevitably feminine. Although their ages are a bit different, if the two of them become a couple and Kim Hwal-ran is active outside and Yu Gwak-hyang is active inside, helping and supporting each other, they will have a great effect on church affairs and other matters. However, Yu Gwak-hyang does not seem to approve of women cutting their hair yet, but Kim Hwal-ran has already cut her hair, so I don't know if their opinions will differ, and if Kim Hwal-ran, who lives a single life, does not agree to marry, this unveiling ceremony will be somewhat colorless.

Heo Jeong-suk and Kim Jeong-ae—both of them are women from Gwanbuk, both feminists, and both members of the Geunwoohoe. They are similar in terms of their full appearance and strong physique, and what's more, they even have the same character, Jeong, in their names, so it is clear that there is a relationship on this magazine, although I don't know if there is a natural connection. If the two of them become a couple and Jeong-suk engages in masculine activities outside and Jeong-ae engages in feminine activities inside—feminine activities here do not refer to the current domestic activities of women—the women's movement in Korea will be greatly invigorated.

Jeong Chil-seong and Gang Jeong-im—Since Gang Jeong-im has a deep connection with Daegu, she understands Jeong Chil-seong, who was born in Daegu, well, and always praises Jeong's diligence and embroidery skills, and Jeong also praises Gang's ability to manage the household and sympathizes with her lonely living environment. If the two of them become a couple and live together, they will understand each other in the women's movement, so things will go smoothly, and Jeong will do embroidery and Gang will do needlework, so they will live an interesting life in a real family setting.

Kim Mal-bong and Yun Seong-sang—No matter how prim and proper Kim Mal-bong of the Jungoe Ilbo tries to be, she is like a man, and no matter how active Yun Seong-sang of the Chosun Ilbo tries to be, she is inevitably feminine. It is questionable whether Mal-bong, who is from Busan in the Antarctic, and Seong-sang, who is from Jeongpyeong in the Arctic, will harmonize with each other in terms of personality, but if they do harmonize and become a couple with Mal-bong as the husband and Seong-sang as the wife and get a job at the same newspaper company, they will definitely not let other newspapers take the lead in the academic or family sections.

Hwang Sin-deok and Choi Eui-sun—If I say this, I don't know if Jin Jang-seop and Im Bong-sun will file an objection at the wedding unveiling ceremony, but if Hwang Sin-deok and Choi Eui-sun become a couple, they will create a more interesting family than their current family lives. If Sin-deok becomes the Chief of Staff for all matters and Eui-sun becomes the Minister of Affairs and proceeds with things smoothly, things will go well without any major mistakes.

Pak Ho-jin and Sim Eun-suk—It is said that chubby people harmonize well with thin people, and tall people harmonize well with short people. If Pak Ho-jin and Sim Eun-suk become a couple, Ho-jin is tall, so she will harmonize with the short Sim Eun-suk in terms of physique with complementary strengths and weaknesses, and Ho-jin is active and Eun-suk is calm, so they will also harmonize in their work. Since both of them are women's activists, they will have considerable eloquence, so if they hold a couple's oratorical contest at some point, they will also receive considerable acclaim.

Jeong Jong-myeong and Yu Yeong-jun. Jeong Jong-myeong treats Yu Yeong-jun as his older brother, so it would be uncomfortable for them to become husband and wife. However, that is a separate issue, and if they get married for work, things will go well in everything. Jeong Jong-myeong runs around outside with fire in his feet and is active in everything, and Yu Yeong-jun sits at home like the eldest daughter-in-law of a rich family, managing the household and whipping Jong-myeong, so what difficulties could there be? When you see that, some people may say that Jeong-myeong's rough face is a flaw, but since Yeong-jun is originally a female doctor, she will probably be able to fix the pockmarks to make them look better with some procedure.

Son Jeong-gyu and Bang Sin-yeong. The two of them are both educators and similar in age, and Bang is good at cooking and Son is good at housework. If the two of them become a couple, I don't know about other things, but no one will be able to match them in terms of household management. In a situation where they are similar to each other, there may be complaints if I decide who is the husband and who is the wife, so it would be good if Son became the husband in the first half of the month and Bang became the husband in the second half of the month, so there would be no disagreements. If the two of them agree, it would be nice to serve a table of dishes prepared by the two of them as a self-congratulatory unveiling.

Gwon Ae-ra and Han Gi-ju—Gwon Ae-ra, who was once a female orator and known for singing Gaeseong Nanbong songs well, is masculine in terms of personality and constitution, and Han Gi-ju, a female vocalist, is feminine in every way. If the two of them become a couple and hold a couple's music concert with Gwon's Nanbong song and Han's piano ensemble, even the deaf will shake their shoulders to try to hear it once.

Heo Yeong-suk and Hyeon Song-ja—I don't know if Chunwon Yi Gwang-su's wife, Heo Yeong-suk, and Yun Chi-ho's wife, Hyeon Song-ja, have a close relationship with each other. However, from the perspective of a third party, the two of them seem to have similar appearances and similar emotional temperaments, if I may be rude. If the two of them become a couple, their home will be a very beautiful home. Of course, the husband will probably get a lot of votes for Heo Yeong-suk in terms of experience and age.

Named Entities

李光洙	Yi Kwang-su
朱요한	Chu Yohan
春園	Chunwon
興士團	Heungsadan
許英肅	Heo Yeongsuk
閔泰瑗	Min Tae-won
朴瓚熙	Pak Chan-hui
中外編輯局	Jungoe P'yŏnjipkuk
東亞	Tonga
忠淸道	Ch'ungch'ŏngdo
牛步	Ubo
錦溪	Kŭmgye
李相協	Yi Sang-hyŏp
金炯元	Kim Hyŏng-wŏn
朝鮮日報	Chosŏn Ilbo
韓基岳	Han Ki-ok
薛義植	Sŏl Ŭi-sik
廉尙燮	Yŏm Sang-sŏp
李益相	Yi Ik-sang
星海	Sŏnghae
梁白華	Yang Paek-hwa
方仁根	Pang In-gŭn
春海	Ch'unhae
鐘路 裕昌商會	Chongno Yuch'ang Sanghwi
金東煥	Kim Tong-hwan
李殷相	Yi Ŭn-sang
新生	Sinsaeng
三千里	Samch'ŏlli
玄鎭健	Hyŏn Chin-gŏn
金麗水	Kim Ryŏsu
朴八陽	Pak P'al-yang
崔鶴松	Ch'oe Hak-song
崔獨瞗	Ch'oe Tok-ku
金億	Kim Ŏk
金東仁	Kim Tong-in
李鐘麟	Yi Chong-nin
安在鴻	An Chae-hong
宋鎭禹	Song Chin-u
金性洙	Kim Sŏng-su
金起田	Kim Ki-jŏn
趙基琹	Cho Ki-gŭm
李晟煥	Yi Sŏng-hwan
柳光烈	Ryu Kwang-ryŏl
申興雨	Shin Hŭng-u
洪秉*	Hong Pyŏng-*
金美理士	Kim Miri-sa
申알뺏트	Shin Al-bett
兪珏鄕	Yu Kwak-hyang
許貞淑	Hŏ Chŏng-suk
金貞嬡	Kim Chŏng-ae
丁七星	Chŏng Ch'il-sŏng
姜貞任	Kang Chŏng-im
金末峯	Kim Mal-bong
尹聖相	Yun Sŏng-sang
黃信德	Hwang Sin-dŏk
崔義順	Ch'oe Ŭi-sun
秦長燮	Chin Chang-sŏp
任鳳淳	Im Pong-sun
朴昊辰	Pak Ho-jin
沈恩淑	Sim Ŭn-suk
鄭鍾鳴	Chŏng Chong-myŏng
劉英俊	Yu Yŏng-jun
孫貞奎	Son Chŏng-gyu
方信榮	Pang Sin-yŏng
權愛羅	Kwŏn Ae-ra
韓琦珠	Han Ki-ju
尹致旿	Yun Ch'i-o
玄松子	Hyŏn Song-ja



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제26호
발행일	1930년 02월 01일
기사제목	假想夫婦 誌上 大披露宴
기사형태	잡저

假想夫婦 誌上 大披露宴
一 式辭
主禮 觀相者

假想이나마 夫婦라 하얏다고 진잠 남녀의 결혼으로 안다면 큰 오해이다. 여긔에 소위 부부라 한 것은 현재에 소위 남녀결합의 그 부부를 의미한 것이 안이요 남자나 여자간에 뜻이 서로 맛고 경우가 갓튼 사람으로 부부와 갓치 결합하얏스면 무슨 일이던지 잘 하겟다는 의미로 말하는 것이다. 그러나 부부라면 習慣上 의레 남녀의 결합으로 알기쉬운 까닭에 여긔에도 그것을 忌避하야 남자는 남자끼리, 여자는 여자끼리 부부를 모은 것이다. 그러나 그것을 또 同性愛로 오해하야서는 안될 것이다. 그냥 남자는 남자간 동지, 여자는 여자간 동지끼리 서로 결합을 식힌 것에 불과한 것이다. 이것이 잠간 생각하면 한 우슴거리의 기사와 갓지만은 다시 생각하면 의미가 매우 深長한 것이다. 동모가 업고 손 맛는 일꾼이 업서서 서로 고독을 부르짓는 우리 사회에 잇서서 이 지상에 발표한 것과 갓치 그 분들이 실제에 사랑하는 부부와 갓치 결속하야 무슨 일을 한다면 그 일의 성공치 못할 것이 어듸 잇스며 그보다 큰 행복이 또 어듸 잇스랴. 나는 이 의미에서 이 지면을 비러 假想夫婦의 披露宴을 열게 된 것이다. 讀者諒焉, 滿誌上 假想夫婦 여러분! 또한 諒解厚恕焉.

二 男子部

春園 李光洙 氏와 朱요한 氏는 가튼 關西의 인물이요 가튼 興士團圓인 중 한 분은 소설가 또 한 분은 시인이다. 그 두 분이 만일 결혼을 한다면 그야말로 참 이상적 결혼이오 예술적 결혼일 것이다. 春園은 연령으로 보나 履歷으로 보나 또는 성격으로 보와 물론 夫君이 될 만하고 요한 氏는 그의 부인될 자격이 충분하다. 그 두 부부가 理想에 맛는 대로 활약을 할 것 가트면 조선의 文壇은 一層 광채가 날 것이다. 이럿케 말하면 春園 夫人 許英肅 氏는 자기 남편을 요한 氏에게 애뀌일까바 염려하시고 요한 氏를 嫉妬疑視하고 또 誌上 仲媒者인 이 필자를 怒責하실는 지도 알 수 업다. 그러나 안심하시고 피로연 국수나 잘 잡수십쇼. 이것은 진잠 부부가 안이라 假想夫婦입니다.

閔泰瑗 氏와 朴瓚熙 氏는 체격으로나 성격으로나 비슷한 점이 만코 또 한 분은 中外編輯局長 한 분은 東亞의 地方部長―長 字의 지위도 갓고 동시 忠淸道 인물로 家閥도 상당하다. 과거 신문의 경험으로던지 일의 熟練한 점으로는＜80＞ 牛步 氏가 부군이 될 만하나 신수의 조흔 것이던지 무슨 일에 딱 버틔는 힘이 강한 그 점으로 보와 錦溪 氏가 부군될 자격이 충분하다. 그 두 분이 만일 부부가 되야 內外事를 서로 의논한다면 피차에 침묵하니만치 결코 秘密 漏泄을 안움´할 것이오 深思熟廬하는 이 만치 良貝가 적을 것이다.
그러나 牛步 氏는 원래 艶福이 만흔 까닭에 錦溪 氏는 항상 안심하기가 어려워서 牛步를 감시하너라고 지금의 쓴 금은眼鏡을 버서 버리고 망원경이나 현미경을 쓰랴고 할 것이다. 그리고 두 분이다 음울음을 하는 성격이 잇스닛가 同夫人 산보는 항상 陽地 족으로 하여야 땃듯한 정이 붓틀 것이다.

電氣가 同性相反하는 것과 갓치 사람도 성격이 비슷하면 도로혀 반대되는 일이 만타. 그러나 中外 李相協 氏와 金炯元 氏와만은 그럿치 안타. 외모도 비슷하고 성격도 비슷하고 일의 緻密從容한 것도 비슷하다. 잠간 보면 서로 相容치 안을 것 가트나 실제로는 아주 찰떡 갓치 親密하야 무슨 일이나 의론성 잇게 잘 하야 가는 모양움´다. 男女同等權을 主唱―안이 實現까지 하는 이 시대에 구태여 누구를 남편 누구를 부인이라고 남이 차별 지여 말할 것은 업거니와 두 분이 서로 逈遠하게 굴 것 업시 相協하야 부부를 정한다면 李相協 氏는 남편 金炯元 氏는 부인일 것이다.

朝鮮日報 韓基岳 氏는 남자로도 美男子이지만은 여자로 되엿서도 또한 評判美人일 것이다. 외모가 미인인 것은 勿論이어니와 성질이 온화한 분이 아주 賢夫人이다. 다소 성질이 맛치 안을는지는 알 수 업스나 東亞 薛義植 氏와 결혼을 하야 잘 조화를 한다면 무슨 일이나 할 수 잇슬 것이다. 이럿케 말하면 韓基岳 氏는―이왕 여자 되여 시집을 간다면 하필 수염 만코 얼골 검은 端川 친구에게 시집을 가겟느냐고 다소 불평을 불으짓기도 쉽고 薛 氏는 또 미인이오 兩班 장가를 드럿다고 端川 名産인 자기 집 農牛와 콩 섬이라도 툭툭 팔어서 이 披露宴 뒤끗에 성대한 第二次會를 열 것이다.

廉尙燮 氏와 李益相 氏 두 분은 가튼 문인이오 가튼 廣面이오 가튼 酒客이오 성질이 淳厚하기로도 비슷하고 主義도 또한 不甚相遠인 것 갓다. 尙燮 氏를 남편 益相 氏를 부인으로 삼어 가정을 이른다면 남 보기에 爲先 福슨러운 가정 갓치 뵈일 것이오 무슨 일이던지 원만하게 처리하야 갈 것이다. 益相 氏의 號가 星海오 尙燮 氏의 號가 想涉이니 만치 星海가 복잡한 人間苦海를 엇지 건너가겟느냐고 想涉 氏에게 의론성 잇게 결혼 初夜에 뭇는다면 想涉 氏는 건너갈 길을 冥想―즉 想涉하너라고 큰 눈을 감고 껍벅껍벅할 것이다. 그리고 두 분이 다 酒大王이닛가 家庭生計豫算表 第一項에는 반듯이 酒代 OO圓也를 特記할 것이다.

貧寒한 사람이 콩나물죽 삼 년만 잘 쑤어 먹으면 부자가 된다는 말이 잇다. 梁白華 氏도 그리 넉넉지는 못한 살임이라 家貧思賢妻라고 콩나물죽 쑤는 부인을 어드랴면 아마 콩나물 장사하던 문인 方仁根 氏와 결혼하는 것이 제일 조흘 것이다. 두 분이 원래 친분도 自別하지만은 생각도 비슷하고 성격도 비슷한 것 갓다. 다만 문제는 白華가 키가 너무 큰 까닭에 方 氏와 키스하기가 곤란할 것 갓다. 그러나 春海 氏가 원래 多情多恨하닛가 情만 잇다면 鐘路 裕昌商會 웃層 廣告臺에 올나서서라도 白華 氏와 입을 접근하도록 노력할 것이다.

南男北女라고 南方 남자와 北方 여자가 결혼을 한다면 그것은 理想的 결혼일 것이다. 北國에서 태어난 金東煥 氏가 남자이긔에 그럿치 만일 여자이엿스면 역시 미인으로 南方 남자들의 만흔 애를 태웟슬 것이다. 그는 詩로 民謠로 항상 李殷相 氏와 志氣가 相合하고 무슨 일에던지 誠意가 잇는 것도 가튼 점이 만타. 李殷相 氏는 코가 크고 얼골이 검으니 만치 男性的이요 金東煥 氏는 얼골이 美男子이요 多情多恨하니 만치 女性的이 만타. 그 두 분이 假想이나마 만일 부부가 된다면 누구나 박수 致賀를 할 것이오 그 두 분이 또한 손이 마저서 雜誌 가튼 것이라도 한다면 현재 新生이나 三千里가보다 以上으로 紙面이 生新하고 발전될 것 갓다.

憑虛 玄鎭健 氏와 金麗水
朴八陽 氏가 결혼을 한다면 또한 아리따운 부부일 것이다. 그들이 夫婦 格으로 한 新聞社에 모혀 社會欄이나 學藝欄을＜81＞ 마터 한다면 紙面이 매우 활기가 잇슬 것이오 그 외 다른 일도 매우 주밀하고 민활하게 할 것이다. 그런데 그 부부에 憑虛를 남편으로 하고 麗水를 부인으로 삼는다면 當事者間에도 과히 불평은 업슬 것 가트나 麗水가 좀 體弱한 까닭에 憑虛의 각금 演出하는 醉後劇을 堪耐할지 그것이 의문이다.

아모리 倭風이 성행하는 오늘이라도 가튼 崔 氏로 부부가 되라기는 좀 거북하다. 그러나 假想夫婦요 貫鄕이 역시 다른지도 알 수 업스닛가 그냥 거절할 필요는 업다. 崔鶴松 氏와 崔獨瞗 氏는 물론 성격이던지 主義가 꼭 맛는다고는 할 수 업지만은 과거의 지난 友誼로던지 가튼 문인이오 가튼 신문사에 잇는 관계로 보아서 결혼을 한대도 과이 틀닌 결혼은 안일 것이다. 鶴松 氏는 부군으로 둥글둥글하게 박갓으로 활동하고 獨瞗은 부인으로 예민하게 안일을 처리하면 長短相補―서로 조화가 되야 자미잇게 일을 할 것이다.

金億 氏와 金東仁 氏―두 분도 역시 同姓인 가닭에 우에 말한 兩 崔 氏와 갓치 부부문제를 끄내기가 거북하다 그러나 그는 동시 同道人이오 동시 문인으로 자서한 설명은 안이 붓처도 아는 사람들은 두 분 새에 가튼 점이 만흔 것을 발견할 것이다. 두 분이 부부가 되여 만흔 활동을 한다면 荒廢한 關西文壇을 개척함에 그리 어렵지 안을 것이다. 그런데 美나 성격이나 연령으로 보와 미안하지만 동인이 부인 노릇을 하는 수박게 업슬 것 갓다.

李鐘麟 氏와 安在鴻 氏―두 분은 평소에 友誼도 自別하고 무슨 일을 주선하는데도 부지런할 뿐 안이라 여러 가지로 비슷한 점이 만흔 즉 아주 부부 格으로 결합하야 鳳山은 부군 民世는 妻君이 되야 여러 일을 잘 料理할 것 가트면 효과가 매우 클 것이다. 그런데 두 분이 다 만흔 집회에 참석을 잘 하시닛가 食母가 찬밥 먹기에 거북할 것이다.

宋鎭禹 氏와 金性洙 氏 두 분은 본래 男妹間으로 與他 自別하야 온갓 일을 儀論성 잇게 잘 하야 가지만은 宋鎭禹 氏가 金性洙 氏의 妹夫 되지 말고 아주 부군이 되엿스면 현재보다 더 以上의 사업을 할지 알 수 업는 것이다. 그들에 관한 일은 세상이 잇미 다 아는 바이니 구태여 설명코자 안이한다.

以外에 金起田 氏는 趙基琹
李晟煥 氏와 柳光烈
申興雨 氏는 洪秉* 氏와 부부를 매젓스면 또한 조흘 것 갓다.

三 女子部
남자의 피로연은 너무 지리하니 그만두고 여자의 피로연으로 드러가자. 金美理士 氏와 申알뺏트 氏는 연령이 비슷하고 젊은 시대부터 주위환경이 상사할 뿐 안이라 두 분이 다 우리 女子敎育界에 功獻이 만흐신 이다. 그 두 분이 만일 부부가 되되 金 先生은 남편이 되야 그 능난한 交際와 뜨거운 정성으로 박갓일을 주선하고 申 先生이 부인이 되야 그 주밀하고 부지런한 마음으로 일을 잘 한다면 女子敎育은 그만두고 아모 일이라도 잘 하야 갈 것이다. 다만 각갑한 일은 金 先生이 조금 耳聾症이 잇는 까닭에 조근조근한 자미스러운 이약이를 하기 어려운 그것이다. 그러나 그 대신으로 金 先生이 원래에 쾌사를 잘 부리시고 申 先生이 또한 눈치가 빠르서서 金 先生이 눈만 한 번 깜작하면 벌서 무슨 일인지 알어차리실 터이닛가 家庭上에 아모 지장이 업시 잘 지내실 터이다.

金活蘭 氏와 兪珏鄕 氏는 가튼 기독교 信者이오 가튼 교육계에 종사하는 이엿다. 金活蘭 氏는 쾌활하고 交際性 만은 것이 남성에 각갑고 兪珏鄕 氏는 주밀하고 침착한 것이 아모래도 여성에 버서나기 어렵다. 연령이 조금 틀여서 그럿치 두 분이 부부가 되여 金活蘭 氏는 박그로 활동을 하고 兪珏鄕 氏는 안으로 활동하야 相扶相助한다면 그 교회의 일로나 그 외 다른 일이라도 特大한 효과를 내일 것이다. 그러나 兪珏鄕 氏는 여자의 斷髮을 아즉 그럿케 찬성치 안는 모양인데 金活蘭 氏는 벌서 斷髮을 하얏슨 즉 다소 의견이 不合할는지 알 수 업고 독신 생활하는 金活蘭 氏로서 결혼 승낙을 안이한다면 이 피로연은 다소 無色한 편이 업지 안을 것이다.

許貞淑 氏와 金貞嬡 氏―두 분은 다 關北女性으로 가튼 女流主義者오 가튼 槿友會 委員인 중에 용모의 豊厚한 것과 체격의 튼튼한 것도 비슷하고 더구나 이름까지 가튼 貞 字를 가진 것을 보면 天生緣分은 몰느나 이 誌上緣分이＜82＞ 잇는 것은 분명하다. 그 두 분이 만일 부부가 되야 貞淑 氏는 박으로 남자다운 활동을 하고 貞嬡 氏는 안으로 여자다운 활동―여긔에 여자다운 활동은 무론 현재 여자들의 가정활동을 말하는 것은 안이다―을 한다면 우리 조선의 女性運動이 큰 활기를 띄울 것이다.

丁七星 氏와 姜貞任氏―姜貞任 氏는 그가 대구에 인연이 깁흐니 만치  대구의 출생인 丁七星 氏를 잘 이해하고 언제이나 丁 氏의 부지런한 것과 刺繡 잘 하는 것을 층찬하며 丁 氏도 또한 姜 氏의 살임 잘 하는 것을 층찬하고 생활환경의 孤寂한 것을 同情한다. 그 두 분이 부부가 되여 산다면 女性運動에 서로 이해가 잇서서 일도 원만이 잘 하려니와 丁 氏는 刺繡 姜 氏는 바누질 그야말로 實在 가정생활에 자미잇게 살임사리를 할 것이다.

金末峯 氏와 尹聖相 氏―中外日報 金末峯 氏는 아모리 얌전을 부려도 남성에 갑갓고 朝鮮日報 尹聖相 氏는 아모리 활발한 척 하야도 별수 업는 여성이다. 南極의 釜山 인물인 末峯 氏와 北極의 定平 인물인 聖相 氏가 性格上으로 서로 조화가 될지 의문이지만은 만일에 조화가 되야 末峯 氏가 남편 聖上 氏가 부인인 결혼이 되야 가튼 신문사에 취직을 한다면 위선 學藝欄이나 家庭欄 가튼 것이라도 결코 남의 신문에 一頭를 讓하지 안을 것이다.

黃信德 氏와 崔義順 氏―이럿케 말하면 秦長燮 氏와 任鳳淳 氏가 결혼 披露宴場에 異議를 申込하는지 알 수 업지만은 黃信德 氏와 崔義順 氏가 부부가 된다면 현재 그 두 분의 가정 생활보다 더 이상의 자미잇는 가정을 이룰 것이다. 信德 氏는 모든 일의 參謀總將이 되고 義順 氏는 事務大臣이 되야 일을 착착 진행하야 간다면 별로 틀이는 일이 업시 될 것이다.

朴昊辰 氏와 沈恩淑 氏―뚱뚱한 사람은 파리한 사람과 조화가 되고 키 큰 사람은 키 적은 사람과 조화가 잘 되는 법이다. 朴昊辰 氏와 沈恩淑 氏가 부부가 된다면 昊辰 氏는 키가 크니 만치 키 적은 沈恩淑 氏와 長短相補로 체격에 조화가 될 것이요 昊辰 氏는 활발하고 恩淑 氏는 침착한 즉 일에도 조화가 될 것이오 두 분이 가튼 女性運動者로 辯才가 피차 상당할 즉 엇던 기회에 夫婦雄辯大會를 열어도 또한 상당한 환영을 바들 것이다.

鄭鍾鳴 氏와 劉英俊 氏. 劉英俊 氏를 형님으로 대접하는 鄭鍾鳴 氏더러 劉英俊 氏의 남편이 되라면 피차 거북할 것이다. 그러나 그것은 별 문제로 하고 일로 보와 피차 결혼을 한다면 매사에 진행이 잘 될 것이다. 정종명 氏는 두 발바당에 불이 나도록 박그로 도라다니며 무슨 일에 활동을 하고 英俊 氏는 부잣집 맛며누리처럼 집에 꾹 더러 안저서 안살임을 하며 鍾鳴 氏를 鞭韃하면 그 무슨 어려운 일이 잇스랴. 그리고 보면 일부에서는 鍾鳴 氏의 얼골 얼근 것이 한 결점이라 할는 자 알 수 업스나 英俊 氏가 원래 女流醫師시닛가 무슨 施術을 하던지 그 까진 마마구멍쯤이야 보기 좃케 고칠 수 잇겟지.

孫貞奎 氏와 方信榮氏. 두 분은 가튼 교육자로 연령도 비슷할 뿐 안이라 方 氏는 요리에 능하고 孫 孃은 家事에 능한 이다. 그 두 분이 부부가 된다면 다른 일은 모르지만은 가정의 살님사리로는 누구나 匹敵할 리가 업슬 것이다. 이와 갓치 피차 비슷한 터에 누구를 남편 누구를 부인이라 확정하면 불평이 잇슬는 지도 알 수 업스니 선 보름에는 孫 孃이 남편이 되고 후 보름에는 方 女史가 남편이 되엿스면 서로 異議가 업슬 것 갓다. 두 분이 만일 合意하다면 自祝披露로 두 분의 一手 料理를 한 卓 내시는 것도 조흘 듯하다.

權愛羅 氏와 韓琦珠 氏― 一時 女流雄辯家요 開城 난봉歌 잘하기로 평판이 놉던 權愛羅 氏는 성격으로나 체질로나 男性的이오 女流聲樂家 韓琦珠 氏는 어느 점으로 보던지 여성이다. 그 두 분이 만일 부부가 되야 權 氏 난봉歌에 韓 氏 피아노 合奏로 夫婦音樂大會를 개최한 다면 귀먹쟁이까지도 한 번 드르려 하랴고 억개를 들석들석 할 터이다.

許英肅 氏와 玄松子 氏―春園
李光洙 氏 부인 許英肅 氏와 尹致旿 氏 부인 玄松子 氏는 두 분이 서로 面分이 기신지 안이 기신지도 알 수 업다. 그러나 第三者의 눈으로 보와 그 두 분은 실례의 말이지만은 姿色도 비슷하고 多情多恨한 품도 비슷할 것 갓다. 그 두 분이 만일 부부가 되면 그 가정은 아주 美化한 가정이 될 것이다. 남편은 물론 경험으로나 연령으로 따저도 許英肅 氏에게 투표를 만히 할 것 갓다.＜83＞
＜80-83＞