잡지명	별건곤 제26호
발행일	1930년 02월 01일
기사제목	엽서통신 (Postal Communication)
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellaneous Writings)

Postal Communication
Current Regulations for Postal Communication
1. Limited to postcards only.
2. No responses to inquiries.
3. Deadline is the 20th of each month.

To Mr. Yuktang!
Yuktang,
Has the great teacher Choe Nam-seon finally woken up from his dream of Jungchwiwon? Strange things are coming out so absurdly, and he is writing this and that in the newspaper...
Mr. Hangeopjil Mushroom, you must have grown quite a bit, haven't you?
Teacher, how is the taste of the native mulberry leaves different from the old mulberry leaves?
Teacher, are you still secretly dipping into the manuscript fees at Netmatidang?
Alas, "The Hu horse cries to the north wind, and the Yue bird becomes accustomed to the southern courtesan..."
What do you think, teacher?
(Pyeongyang KK Student)

A Proposal
This is a slightly old story, but among the stories I heard around the time of the exposition, there is one thing that hasn't been forgotten and is stuck in my head like a brand. If I had to call it a gain, it would be a considerable gain.
In order to see a large number of people at the exposition, the boarding house owners, who had kept students in their homes for two or three years without regret or shame, posted advertisements on the streets when the exposition ended, saying that they treated students like family. How much did the students, who were kicked out of their boarding houses and wandered the streets carrying their desks on their backs after returning from their vacations, suffer? Are these boarding business operators the kind of people who alternately strike and befriend their relatives multiple times? I propose that these kinds of people be definitively excluded from the 22 million population and condemned.
(Gyeongseong Gim Seok-san)

Hope for the Geunwoo Association
I am an uneducated woman from the countryside. I wanted to know more about the world, so when the Geunwoo Association was formed here, I joined. But among the things they say when they gather, there are so many words I don't understand, so naturally, I can't find it very interesting. I wish they would include ignorant people like us.
(Daegu, a woman)

Psychology of Japanese Advertisements
There are all sorts of strange people in the world. Even though it is obvious that the customers are Korean and that the business is not of a nature that will develop with Japanese people as customers, they still put out advertisements in Japanese in newspapers and magazines. For example, the bookstore I-O-dang (以O堂) does this, and the sporting goods store Sam-O-dang (三O堂) does this. If we were to analyze this with psychopathology, what would the answer be?
(Gyeongseong Jiemgu-saeng)

To the Principal of Middle School
Since the capital and countryside are so different, and since we are ignorant rustics who cannot recognize letters, how would we know anything? But your sense of responsibility is even worse than ours. Our child, whom we entrusted to you like sticky rice cakes, is trembling in the detention center. What is the meaning of this? As the saying goes, "Cutting one's feet with one's own axe" (信斧斫足), is this what it means? From now on, we won't bother with automobiles, and we'll just entrust them to the police station. Surely, a child who receives the blood of his parents won't freeze to death.
(Sangju, an old man) <89>

**Named Entities**

崔南善	Choe Nam-seon
六堂	Yuktang
平壤	Pyeongyang
金石山	Gim Seok-san
尙州	Sangju
京鄕	Gyeonghyang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제26호
발행일	1930년 02월 01일
기사제목	엽서통신
기사형태	잡저

엽서통신
엽서통신 現定
一. 엽서에 한함
一. 문의에는 응치 아니함
一. 기일은 매월 20일까지

六堂先生게!
육당
崔南善대대선생님에서는 아마 중취원 잠안이 깨신 모양이지? 怪奇가 망측하게 나오고 신문에 무엇을 쓰고 또 무엇을 쓰고.....
한겁질버섯스니 선생님 몸집도 꽤 자라섯겟지?
선생님 재래종의 桑葉味와 舊來의 桑葉味가 어터케 달읍더이까?
선생님 그래도 넷맛이당지서 슬거머니 원고료에 손을 대이심니까?
흥 胡馬는 북풍에 울고 越鳥는 南妓에 길든다더니....
선생님 생각이 엇더하오?
(平壤 KK생)

제의한가지
조곰 묵은 이야기외다만은 박람때 전후에 보고드른 이약이 중에 이때까지 이처지지안코 내머리속에 불로지저 부친것처럼 박혀 잇는 한가지 소득? 소득이라면 대단한 소득이잇슴니다.
박람회에 큰 수를 보려고 2년 3년 내집에 잇던 학생들을 앗김없시 붓그럼없시 내여 뜻츤 하숙주인들이 박람회 끗나는때 길거리에 써부친 광고에 하였스되 학생을 친가족가치 대우함니다고. 방학때 귀향햇다가 도라오는 길로 하숙에서 내여 쫏긴 학생들이 길거리로 책상을 짊어지고 방황하면서 얼마나 고생을 하엿는가 대체 하숙영업자들은 친족들을 몇 번씩이나 때엿다 부첫다 하는 인종들인가...이 따위 인종들을 단연히 2천 2백만 속에서 제외해 평겨칠 일을 제의한다.(경성 金石山)

槿友會에 대한 희망
나는 싀골 무식한 녀성임니다. 세상 일이 좀 알고 십허서 이곳에 근우회가 생겻기에 나도 입회를 하엿슴니다만은 그들이 모여서 하는 말 중에는 술어도 몰을 것이 만흐니 자연히 별자미를 못부치게됨니다. 엇더케 우리가치 무식한 사람도 축에 들도록하여 주엇스면 조켓습듸다.(大邱 一女性)

일문광고심리
세상에는 별의별 이상야릇한 친구가 만타. 번연히 고객이 조선사람인 것을 알며 또 일본사람 상대로 발전될 성질의 상업이 아닌 것을 자타가 다가티 알고 잇는데도 신문이나 잡지에는 일본말로 광고를 내인다. 曰 書籍商 以O堂이 그러코 運動具商 三O堂이 그러타. 이것을 정신병학으로 해부한다면 답은 어테케될고.(경성 尖口生)

중학교 교장 선생 각하
京鄕이 落落하고 또 우리는 목불식정의 우매한 촌부가 되고 보니 무엇을 알겟소만 귀하의 책임관렴이 우리만도 못하외다그려 당신에 찰떡가치맛긴 우리 자제가 유치장에서 떨고 잇다니 이게 웬말이요. 속담에 信斧斫足이라드니 이걸 두고 이른말인지 이다음부터는 자동차 신세를 질 것업시 아주 경찰서에 갓다 맛기겟고 제 아비 혈육을 밧고 난 놈이 설마 얼어 죽기야 하겟소.(尙州 一老夫)＜89＞
＜89＞