잡지명	別乾坤 第26號
발행일	1930년 02월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮最近史 十三講(一) (Lectures on the Recent History of Korea, Part 1)
필자	金起田
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

朝鮮最近史 十三講
Kim Kitaen

Lecture 1: An Overview of 500 Years of History

Generally, the "Recent History of Joseon" (朝鮮近世史) refers to the 500 years of the Yi Dynasty (李朝). If we further specify "Most Recent History of Joseon" (朝鮮最近史), where should we start? Many consider the 47 years from the ascension of King Gojong (高宗登極) in the year Gapja (甲子) to the annexation in the year Gyeongseul (庚戌合倂) as the Most Recent History. However, I would like to add the 63 years of the Sunjo (純祖), Heonjong (憲宗), and Cheoljong (哲宗) reigns, which are closely related to these 47 years, and consider the 110 years before and after, that is, the final period of Joseon, as the Most Recent History.

When dividing the 519-year period of the Yi Dynasty's 27 kings, the classifications vary, but in my opinion, the first period should be the 102 years of the 9 kings from Taejo (太祖大王) to Jeongjong (定宗), Taejong (太宗), Sejong (世宗), Munjong (文宗), Danjong (端宗), Sejo (世祖), Yejong (睿宗), and Seongjong (成宗); the second period should be the 307 years of the 13 kings from Yeonsangun (燕山君), Jungjong (中宗), Injong (仁宗), Myeongjong (明宗), Seonjo (宣祖), Gwanghaegun (光海君), Injo (仁祖), Hyojong (孝宗), Hyeonjong (顯宗), Sukjong (肅宗), Gyeongjong (景宗), Yeongjo (英祖), and Jeongjo (正祖); and the third period should be the 110 years of the 5 kings from Sunjo onward, including Heonjong, Cheoljong, Gojong, and Sunjong. This is the most appropriate way to view it. The first period was an era of founding and construction, replacing the chaotic tides of the late Goryeo period, reforming social systems related to land, military, education, and all other aspects, rejecting Buddhism, which had decayed into superstition and formality, establishing Confucianism, rich in the practical aspects of self-cultivation and governance, as the state religion, creating a flourishing literary culture, and encouraging industry, striving to promote national fortune with all their might. It was the most glorious era in the five-hundred-year history. In the second period, complacency had already taken hold, and the seeds of decline were generally being sown. Even in this period, during the first 160 years of the 8 kings from Yeonsangun onward, scholar purges (士禍) frequently occurred, powerful in-laws ran rampant, the problematic East-West factional strife (東西黨爭) began, and the national strength was greatly weakened by experiencing the Japanese invasions of Imjin (壬辰의 倭亂) and the Manchu invasions of Byeongja (丙子의 胡亂). However, it did not reach an irredeemable state. In the subsequent 141 years of the 5 kings, the factional strife reached its peak, and the national administration was helplessly obstructed. Although there were efforts at reform by enlightened rulers such as Yeongjo and Jeongjo at the end of this period, the overall trend could not be reversed, and it became the preparation for the distant causes of the decline of the third period. The third period was truly the final chapter of the five-hundred-year history. Sunjo, Heonjong, and Cheoljong all ascended the throne at a young age (Sunjo at 11, Heonjong at 8, Cheoljong at 19, and Gojong at 12), leading to the rampant power of in-laws (外戚의 跋扈), and the national policy and decrees lost their system, going back and forth between the private factions of this party and that party, eventually collapsing in the face of the rapidly advancing modern winds. It could be said that the old leaves fell in the wind and rain before the new leaves could even sprout. Now, I will briefly record the facts of this period in order, but before studying this, we must remember and consider the following:

One, although this era was the final stage of the five-hundred-year Joseon dynasty, a period of deliberate decline, when viewed from the perspective of the ebb and flow of the entire nation, it was a time of concluding an old era and preparing to meet a clear new era. Therefore, although it appears to be a chaotic mess at first glance, upon closer examination, there is meaning and system, and every difficulty and movement is not in vain. To put it more concretely:

A, It was the beginning of the transition from the so-called hermit nation (仙逸國民) to an "active nation" (活動國民) with a modern national consciousness.

B, Initially, as a reaction against the old Confucian ideas, foreign ideas such as Catholicism (天主敎) were translated, but before long, the Donghak thought (東學思想) emerged, advocating the opening of the later heaven (後天開闢), a fundamental trend of humanity at the end of the century, replacing the pre-existing ideas of the East and West.

C, At first, only simple resistance such as popular disturbances and border conflicts occurred, but gradually developed into modern political party movements in the court (朝) and modern popular movements in the countryside (野). (For example, the Hong Gyeong-nae Rebellion (洪景來亂) in the Sunjo reign, and later the Independence Association (獨立協會) and Iljinhoe (一進會).)

Two, therefore, when we study this Most Recent History, we should not see it merely as a past event, but rather recognize that it is related to our current lives, and approach it with a warm attitude, as if investigating our own present lives.

Lecture 2: Decline and the Creation of Donghak

The 70-odd years of reign by Yeongjo and Jeongjo strived to harmonize factional strife and promote literary arts, showing signs of revival, but the accumulated problems of past generations could not be solved by this. During the three reigns of Sunjo, Heonjong, and Cheoljong (63 years), who were young and incompetent, the five-hundred-year royal spirit declined beyond salvation. It could be said that the fate of old Joseon had already ended here.

Sunjo, as the son of Jeongjo, ascended the throne at the age of 11, allowing the Kim clan of Yeongjo to rule as regents, opening the way for powerful in-laws to run rampant. In December of his 11th year, the Hong Gyeong-nae Rebellion occurred in the Gwanseo region, and although it was eventually suppressed in Jeongju in April of the following year, the nation and the people were greatly exhausted. Thereafter, epidemics, floods, and famines continued, further agitating the public sentiment, but in the court, the ostracism of factions grew daily, and memorials of condemnation piled up like mountains. Heonjong succeeded Sunjo after his 34-year reign, but at the age of only 8, the Jo In-yeong faction, who was his mother, seized power, and nothing was accomplished during his 15-year reign. Cheoljong ascended the throne at the relatively mature age of 19, but as a country bumpkin who had been living in seclusion in Ganghwa, he knew nothing about politics. His 14-year reign only served to promote the power of the Kim Mun-geun and Kim Byeong-gi factions, who were related to his wife.

At this time, there was only the power of in-laws and factional strife in the court, and no politics. Among the common people, the tyranny of the yangban (兩班) and local magnates (土豪) and the cruelty of the local officials and clerks (吏胥輩), who were in direct contact with the people, were extremely harsh. The people of the eight provinces (八域蒼生) could not survive under the oppression and demands from all aspects of politics and society. Once an epidemic started and the year was bad, there were no measures to prevent or relieve these disasters, so the affliction spread throughout the nation. Therefore, the common people, seeking a way to survive, (1) launched riots directly resisting the ruling class of the time (such as the Hong Gyeong-nae Rebellion of the Sinmi year and the popular uprisings in various parts of Jeolla, Gyeongsang, and Hamgyeong at the end of Cheoljong's reign), (2) hoping to survive by believing in the one God (一神인 天主) and relying on the power behind it as a reaction against the formality and falsehood of Confucianism, welcomed Catholicism (西來의 天主敎), and (3) believing in unfounded prophecies and geomancy (山水說) such as the Jeonggamrok (鄭鑑錄) and Tojeong bigyeol (土亭秘訣), they created a pitiful scene, trying to find their final settlement in places like Gyeryongsan (鷄龍山), Eulchon (弓乙村), Yangbaek (兩白), Sampung (三豐), and other locations with favorable mountain configurations (긴 山발).

This mainly refers to the domestic situation, but looking at the foreign forces that directly and indirectly swept over Joseon at the time:

England had already started the Opium War with China, a major power in the East, in 1839 (Heonjong Year 5), and in 1842, they concluded the Treaty of Nanking (南京條約), taking Hong Kong from China and opening 5 ports. Later, in 1856 (Sunjo Year 7), England, due to the insult of its merchant ship "Arrow" incident, and France, due to the murder of its missionaries, invaded Beijing with a combined force. The Qing Emperor fled to Jehol, and through the mediation of Russia, the Treaty of Beijing (北京條約) was concluded, seizing favorable conditions. Russia, prior to this, had concluded the Treaty of Aigun (愛琿條約), seizing the land north of the Amur River (黑龍 以北의 地), and as a reward for mediating the Treaty of Beijing, it incorporated the Primorsky Krai (沿海州), which was a mixed residence area for Russians and Chinese, into its territory. At the same time, in the following year, it established Vladivostok (浦鹽斯德), the only outlet to the East, as a naval port and planned the Trans-Siberian Railway (西伯利亞 大鐵道), increasingly planning to advance into Manchuria and Joseon. In 1861 (Cheoljong Year 12), there was an incident where it temporarily occupied Tsushima Island (對馬島).

The power of these Western countries trampling over the entire territory of the great empire of the East, China (中原 全土), and slowly advancing westward and northward caused a strange commotion among the upper and lower classes of Joseon. Furthermore, the appearance of British ships (英船) near Hongju (洪洲) and Godaedo (古代島) in 1831 (Sunjo Year 31), a British ship cruising the southern coast in 1845 (Heonjong Year 11), and a French ship sending a letter from Oeyeondo (外烟島) near Hongju in 1846 (同 12년), stimulated the public sentiment as so-called "strange ships" (「異樣船」).

This was the direct route to feeling the power of the West. Furthermore, looking at Catholicism (天主敎), which indirectly transplanted Western-style new forces in terms of ideology and education, this religion had briefly seen the entry and propagation of Portuguese missionaries during the Imjin War (壬辰亂 時), but it was just a story. In reality, in 1631 (Injo Year 9), when the envoy Jeong Du-won (鄭斗源) returned from Beijing, he brought back the Old Testament, and during the reign of Jeongjo, Yi Deok-jo (李德祚), Gwon Cheol-sin (權哲身), and Jeong Yak-jong (鄭若鍾) secretly entered the mountains and studied it (1784). In 1784 (同 7년), Yi Seung-hun (李承薰) followed the winter solstice envoy (冬至使) to Beijing, sought out Western missionaries, received baptism, and brought back the Bible, starting the actual propagation. Although Jeongjo's prohibition was severe, in 1794 (同 18년), the Chinese missionary Zhou Wenmo (周文謨) was invited, and thousands of believers were gained in the Gyeonggi and Chungcheong provinces. In 1801 (純祖 元年), the believer Hwang Sa-yeong (黃嗣永) was arrested on suspicion of plotting to borrow Western power to block the Joseon prohibition (朝禁), and five or six people, including Zhou Wenmo, Yi Seung-hun, and Jeong Yak-jong (鄭若鏞's brother), were killed. Despite this, the news of the promising propagation in Joseon reached the Roman Pope, and in 1836 (Heonjong Year 2), three French missionaries, including Mauban (모-반), entered the capital and hid in the house of Jeong Ha-sang (丁夏祥) to propagate. In 1839 (同 5년), they were discovered, and three missionaries and major believers, including Jeong Ha-sang, were executed. The government issued a prohibition against heterodoxy (斥邪의 禁令) and enforced the Five-Household Unit System (五家作統의 規約) (established in 1801), which had a significant impact. After Cheoljong's ascension, the policy towards Western learning changed, and it was left unaddressed. A large number of French missionaries, such as Benoist and Maistre, entered the capital, and churches were established and preaching was carried out in almost all major areas of Joseon, causing a great shock to the Korean people, who were tired of Confucianism.

Japan had repeatedly requested diplomatic relations since the Imjin War (壬辰亂), but it was not reciprocated. After sending back 3,000 prisoners and two grave robbery criminals, and after the general Tokugawa Ieyasu (德川家康) annihilated the Toyotomi Hideyoshi clan (豐臣秀吉 家) in Osaka and replaced them, diplomatic relations began. In 1617 (光海 9년), envoys were sent for the first time, and thereafter, whenever the general changed, there were frequent visits. The number of people in the procession was at least 270-280, reaching up to 500. The Japanese shogunate (幕府) expended a great deal of wealth, labor, and time to welcome them. Joseon used this as an opportunity to relieve the depression it felt from the Ming Dynasty (明) and to show off and boast to Japan. This became a problem in Japan, and since 1811 (純祖 11년) it was decided to receive and send them back at Tsushima, and the communication between the two countries was suspended. Later, in 1853 (哲宗 4년), the Japanese shogunate had already established trade relations with various countries other than the United States, and in 1860 (哲宗 11년), it communicated its intentions to Joseon. Japan, which had an advantage of one day in forming a modern nation, along with the powers of various foreign countries, also startled the dreams of the Joseon people.

In this time of internal and external troubles, Donghak (東學) was advocated in one corner of Gyeongsang Province. As the only response (和劑) of the Joseon people to the situation at the time, that was Donghak. The truth is that people are heaven (人乃天), the goal is to protect the country and secure the people (保國, 安民), spread virtue throughout the world (布德天下), and widely relieve the suffering of the masses (廣濟蒼生), and the method is for each individual to cultivate their mind (各自 爲心) and create a great union of one body (同歸一體의 大團圓). This was advocated by its founder, Choe Je-u (崔水雲), on April 5, 1860 (哲宗 11년, 庚申 4월 5일), exactly in the year when the Anglo-French Allied Forces occupied Beijing and Japan was spreading the message of opening the country and advancing.

Choe Je-u was born in Gyeongju in 1824 (純祖 24년), lost his parents early, experienced the hardships of the world, traveled around various parts of Joseon from around 1843 (憲宗 3년경), observed the hearts of the people and customs, repeatedly engaged in self-cultivation from around 1858 (哲宗 9년경), advocated Donghak, and devoted himself to promoting its doctrine and uniting its followers. He was arrested at the end of Cheoljong's reign under the name of sedition and disturbing the government (左道亂政의 名), executed in 1864 (高宗 元年 甲子), and thereafter, Donghak was led by Master Choe Hae-weol (崔海月).

Lecture 3: Gojong's Accession and the Daewongun's Reforms

In the previous lecture, I mentioned that the 63 years of Sunjo, Heonjong, and Cheoljong were the time to prepare for the final decline. The 63 years from Gojong's ascension in the year Gapja to the end of Sunjong's reign can be said to be the period when the decline that had been prepared for during that time was concluded, in conjunction with the foreign forces that were rushing in like a raging wave. Just as a dying fire flickers one last time, the fact that Cheoljong passed away and Gojong came to the throne, and his father, the Daewongun (大院君), took power, attempting the final reforms in a short period of only ten years, is something that cannot be overlooked, regardless of the rightness or wrongness of his political views. Now, to briefly record the course of events: Cheoljong, who had a reputation for being fond of women and sickly, suddenly passed away after 14 years on the throne at the age of 33. By order of Queen Dowager Jo (趙氏), the wife of Crown Prince Hyomyeong (翼宗王妃), Yi Ha-eung's (李昰應) second son, Myeongbok-gun (命福君), who was the great-grandson of Yeongjo, was welcomed and made king. This was Gojong, who was only 12 years old at the time. Again, at the insistence of Queen Dowager Jo, his biological father was ennobled as Heungseon Daewongun (興宣大院君) and was allowed to assume political power. This is the Daewongun, famous as a modern, decisive politician.

The Daewongun, fearing the persecution of the royal family by the Kim clan (金氏) during Cheoljong's reign, roamed the streets, experiencing all kinds of hardships. Once he seized the political power of the entire country, he immediately rejected the Kim clan, who were the powerful figures before, and appointed his trusted people, reorganizing the ranks and demonstrating the mighty power of the Daewongun internally and externally. The reconstruction of Gyeongbokgung Palace (景福宮) and the abolition of academies (書院) internally, and the extreme measures of isolationism and resistance to foreign powers (鎖國攘夷) externally, are examples. To further divide these into internal and external matters:

One, Internally: (A) He advocated the principle of talent recruitment (人材 登庸主義) and declared equality among the four colors (四色 평등), warning against the bias towards certain officials and employing people from the Northwest (西北人) and Southerners (南人). (B) He collected a large sum of 7.4 million nyang (兩) to rebuild Gyeongbokgung Palace, which had been burned down during the Imjin War (completed from the year Eulchuk (乙丑) to the summer of the year Muin (戊辰 夏)). (C) He prohibited the wind of superstition and extravagance (迷信奢靡의 風) and abolished academies (書院). (These academies began when the magistrate of Pungi County (豐基 郡守), Ju Se-bung (周世鵬), built the Baegundong Academy (白雲洞書院) in 1541 (中宗 36년 申丑) at the old residence of the great Goryeo Confucian scholar An Yu (安裕), allowing students to reside there, taking it as a means to inspire morale. Thereafter, its influence grew greatly, and they were built in various locations, possessing much land and occupied by corrupt yangban and students, arbitrarily engaging in political criticism, factional strife, schemes, and abuse of good people. The Daewongun had been jealous of this since long ago (?). From 1865 (高宗 2년) to 1869 (8년), he abolished all academies nationwide, starting from the Hwayang Academy (華陽書院) and the Mandongmyo Shrine (萬東廟), leaving only 47 academies, such as the Soseu Academy (紹修) in Pungi and the Dosan Academy (陶山) in Yean. To further note, the Hwayang Academy was dedicated to Song Si-yeol (宋尤菴 時烈), the head of the Noron faction, and the Mandongmyo Shrine was within the academy, dedicated to the Ming emperors Shenzong (神宗) and Yizong (毅宗) based on the record of Gwon Sang-ha (權尙夏), a high disciple of Song.) (D) He attempted to enrich the finances and enforce the Household Tax Law (戶布法), prohibiting illegal concealment of land and tax evasion by the yangban.

Two, Externally: Examples of various isolationist and anti-foreign policies (鎖國 攘夷) include the Byeongin persecution of Catholics (丙寅의 排佛) and the Sinmi opposition to rice (辛未의 排米), as well as smaller incidents such as the Gapja and Eulchuk opposition to Russia (甲子, 乙丑 年間의 排露), the Muin opposition to Japan (戊辰의 排日), and the Gyeong-o opposition to Germany (庚午의 排獨).

A. The Byeongin Persecution of Catholics (丙寅佛亂). Catholicism, which had gained considerable freedom of propagation after Cheoljong, saw its power greatly increase at the beginning of Gojong's reign. The Daewongun, famous for his stubbornness, could not welcome this. Nam Jong-sam (南鍾三), Hong Bong-ju (洪鳳周), and other members of the same religion, taking advantage of the fact that the Russians had invaded the Hamgyeong province twice, suggested to the Daewongun that they should use the power of England and France to control Russia and that they should borrow the power of French missionaries in Joseon to do so. In other words, they wanted to gain the Daewongun's favor for propagation. The Daewongun seemed to listen attentively, but once the Russians retreated, he hated them even more due to the memorials from government officials rejecting the heresy (邪敎 排斥 上䟽), and in December 1866 (高宗 3년 12월(陰 正月)), he massacred 9 missionaries, including Palluel (펄누), and over 10,000 Catholics, including Nam Jong-sam. Only 3 foreigners escaped to China and reported this to the French admiral. In September of the same year, he led 3 warships to Yanghwajin (楊花津), but nothing happened and he returned. In October, he came again with 6 warships and occupied Ganghwa Island (江華) for about a month, invading various places along the Gyeonggang River (京江 沿岸). However, they were largely repelled by the strong soldiers composed of mountain artillerymen (山砲手), and because it was cold, they withdrew towards China. This is called the Byeongin Western Disturbance (丙寅洋亂).

B. The Sinmi Western Disturbance (辛未洋擾). In July 1866 (丙寅 7월), the American ship "General Sherman" (샤만 號) arrived at the Daedong River (大同江) in front of Pyongyang (평양), asking to open trade and supply food. The fact that the Middle Army Commander Yi Hyeon-ik (李玄益) was detained on the ship became a problem, and the "General Sherman" was eventually burned down and could not return. The United States sent people twice to investigate the whereabouts of the "General Sherman" but could not obtain any information. Later, in March 1871 (後 8년 3월), the American envoy to Qing (駐淸 米國公使), Low (로-), came with 5 warships and questioned the "General Sherman" incident and requested trade of Korean rice (鮮米). Because the Daewongun rejected this, a major conflict between the two countries occurred at Gwangseongjin (廣城鎭), a strategic point on the Ganghwa waterway. The Korean side suffered hundreds of casualties, including Middle Army Commander Eo Jae-yeon (魚在淵), and the American side suffered 3 deaths, including a lieutenant. After stationing troops for over forty days, the American soldiers withdrew. It was at this time that the Daewongun erected a monument on Jongno Street with the inscription "If the Western barbarians invade, not fighting is reconciliation, and advocating reconciliation is selling the country" (洋夷侵犯非戰則和, 主和賣國), leading to the extreme isolationist argument.

In short, the Daewongun had the energy of a politician who tried to do everything according to his will, but his political views were mostly narrow-minded and he did not understand the overall situation. He carried out extreme and reckless isolationist policies, hindering the path of Joseon's reform. The large-scale repair of Gyeongbokgung Palace burdened the people, and the rapid reforms of the internal administration aroused the opposition of the students, resulting in him losing his position after only ten years in power and inducing the exclusive power of Queen Min (閔妃) (Empress Myeongseong). (To be continued)

Named Entities

李朝	Yi Dynasty
甲子	Gapja
庚戌合倂	Gyeongseul hapbyeong
純祖	Sunjo
憲宗	Heonjong
哲宗	Cheoljong
太祖大王	Taejo Daewang
定宗	Jeongjong
太宗	Taejong
世宗	Sejong
文宗	Munjong
端宗	Danjong
世祖	Sejo
睿宗	Yejong
成宗	Seongjong
燕山君	Yeonsangun
中宗	Jungjong
仁宗	Injong
明宗	Myeongjong
宣祖	Seonjo
光海君	Gwanghaegun
仁祖	Injo
孝宗	Hyojong
顯宗	Hyeonjong
肅宗	Sukjong
景宗	Gyeongjong
英祖	Yeongjo
正祖	Jeongjo
純宗	Sunjong
高麗	Goryeo
東西黨爭	Dongseodangjaeng
壬辰의 倭亂	Imjin oe ran
丙子의 胡亂	Byeongja oe horan
洪景來亂	Hong Gyeongnae ran
獨立協會	Dongnip hyeophoe
一進會	Iljinhoe
金氏	Gimssi
洪洲	Hongju
古代島	Godaedo
外烟島	Oeyeondo
鄭斗源	Jeong Duwon
李德祚	Yi Deokjo
權哲身	Gwon Cheolsin
鄭若鍾	Jeong Yakjong
李承薰	Yi Seunghun
周文謨	Ju Munmo
黃嗣永	Hwang Sayeong
丁夏祥	Jeong Hasang
모-반	Mo-ban
베-누	Be-nu
메이스트리	Meiseuteuri
羅馬	Roma
葡萄牙	Podugal
德川家康	Tokugawa Ieyasu
大阪	Ōsaka
豐臣秀吉	Toyotomi Hideyoshi
對馬	Daema
慶尙道	Gyeongsangdo
崔水雲	Choe Suun
崔海月	Choe Haeweol
北京	Beijing
翼宗王妃 趙氏	Ikjong wangbi Jossi
李昰應	Yi Haeung
命福君	Myeongbokgun
興宣大院君	Heungseon Daewongun
景福宮	Gyeongbokgung
書院	Seowon
西北人	Seobugin
南人	Namin
丙寅	Byeongin
排佛	Baebul
辛未	Sinmi
排米	Baemi
甲子	Gapja
乙丑	Eulchuk
排露	Baelo
戊辰	Muin
排日	Baeil
庚午	Gyeong-o
排獨	Baedok
南鍾三	Nam Jongsahm
洪鳳周	Hong Bongju
펄누	Peolnu
楊花津	Yanghwajin
江華	Ganghwa
魚在淵	Eo Jaeyeon
辛未洋擾	Sinmi yangyo
大同江	Daedonggang
李玄益	Yi Hyeon-ik
駐淸 米國公使 로-	Jucheong Miguk gongsalo-
廣城鎭	Gwangseongjin
明城皇后	Myeongseong hwanghu
白雲洞書院	Baegundong seowon
豐基郡守	Punggi gunsu
周世鵬	Ju Sebung
安裕	An Yu
宋尤菴 時烈	Song Uiam Siyeol
權尙夏	Gwon Sangha
紹修	Soseu
禮安	Yean
陶山	Dosan
老論	Noron
五家作統	Oga jaktong
英佛聯合軍	Yeongbul yeonhapgun
鄭鑑錄	Jeonggamnok
土亭秘訣	Tojeong bigyeol
鷄龍山	Gyeryongsan
弓乙村	Gungeulchon
兩白	Yangbaek
三豐	Sampung
南京條約	Namgyeong joyak
愛琿條約	Aihun joyak
黑龍	Heukryong
沿海州	Yeonhaeju
浦鹽斯德	Poryeomseudeu
西伯利亞 大鐵道	Seobeullia daecheoldo
中原 全土	Jungwon jeonto
沙萬號	Samanho
平壤	Pyeongyang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제26호
발행일	1930년 02월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮最近史 十三講(一)
필자	金起田
기사형태	논설

朝鮮最近史 十三講
						金起田
第一講 五百年史 大觀
보통으로 (朝鮮近世史)라 하면 李朝 오백 년간을 指한다. 여긔에 다시 (朝鮮最近史)라 하면 어대서브터이라 할가. 만히는 甲子 高宗登極 이후 庚戌合倂까지 47년간을 最近史로 잡는다. 그러나 나는 이 47년간의 역사와 가장 한 圈內에 들미만흔 純祖登極 이후 憲哲 三朝의 63년간을 加添하야 전후 백십 년간 즉 조선의 末期史를 最近史로 잡고저 한다.
李朝 27王 519년의 기간을 分看함에 잇서 그 구분이 各異하나 내 생각에는 최초의 太祖大王으로부터는 定宗, 太宗, 世宗, 文宗, 端宗, 世祖, 睿宗, 成宗 등 9王 102 년간을 第一期, 다음의 燕山君, 中宗, 仁宗, 明宗, 宣祖, 光海君, 仁祖, 孝宗, 顯宗, 肅宗, 景宗, 英祖, 正祖 등 13王 307년간을 第二期, 그 다음의 純祖 以降 憲宗, 哲宗, 高宗, 純宗 등 5王 110년간을 第三期로, 즉 이러케 봄이 最適하다 한다. 이 중의 第一期는 創業, 建設의 시대로서 高麗末의 亂潮를 代하야, 田制, 兵制, 學制 기타 萬般에 亘한 사회제도를 一新하고 미신과 형식에 腐朽된 불교를 排하며 修齊治平의 實踐性에 富한 儒道를 國敎로 확정하는 동시에 文運을 刱造하며 산업을 장려하야 一意 國運의 촉진을 힘썻스니 오백 년 역사 중의 가장 光輝 잇는 시대이엿스며, 第二期는 벌서 現狀 享樂에 자리가 잽히여 대체로 末期의 衰運을 馴釀한 중 이 期에도 燕山君 이하 初頭의 8왕 160년간은 士禍가 頻起하고 外戚의 跋扈와 問題의 東西黨爭이 시작되며 壬辰의 倭亂과 丙子의 胡亂을 連經하야 국력이 大弊하엿스나, 그러틋 不救의 境에는 니르지 아넛고, 其後의 5王 141년간에 朋黨의 政爭이 그 극에 달하고 국가의 政務는 餘地 업시 沮碍되야 이 期末의 英祖, 正祖와 가튼 明主의 匡正的 노력이 업지 아낫스나 대세는 엇지할 수가 업시 第三期의 衰退의 遠因을 준비함이 되엿스며, 第三期는 이야말로 오백 년 역사의 最朊�葉으로서 純祖, 憲宗, 哲宗은 모조리 幼年(卽位의 年이 純祖는 11세, 憲宗은 8세, 哲宗은 19세, 高宗은 12세)으로 位를 繼하야 外戚의 跋扈를＜138＞ 馴致하게 되매 國是와 政令이 그 체계를 엇지 못하고 이 派 저 派의 私黨에 來往하다가 급격히 모라치는 근대의 풍운에 그만 쓰러짐이 되고 마럿다. 말하면 새닙이 밋처 나기 전에 낡은 닙이 風雨에 先落함이라 할가. 이제 順을 따라 이 기간의 事實을 簡記하려니와 이를 연구하기에 몬저 해서 우리가 기억하고 넘어 갈 것은
一, 이 시대는 비록 오백 년 조선의 말엽으로 一意 衰亡의 길을 더듬은 시기라 하나, 이를 전 민족의 消長으로 보면 오백 년 동안 치러온 한 낡은 시대를 結末하고 압흐로 오는 말근 새 시대를 마즈려 하는 際間이엿슴으로 여긔에는 一見 無脉絡, 亂調를 極한 듯하나 자세히 보면 거긔에는 스사로 意義가 잇고 체계가 잇서 한 어려움 한 움즉임이 모다 徒然함이 아닌 것을 발견하게 된다. 이를 좀더 구체적으로 말하면
甲, 종래의 소위 仙逸國民으로브터 근대적 國民意識을 갓는 「活動國民」으로 誘導, 轉換되기 시작한 것.
乙, 초기에는 爲先 재래의 儒的 낡은 사상에 대한 반동으로 天主敎와 가튼 외래의 사상을 飜譯하다가 얼마 아니하야 東西의 先天思想을 대신하야 後天開闢을 주장함과 가튼 世紀末 인간으로의 근본적 歸趨를 말하는 東學思想의 發現을 보게 된 것.
丙, 처음에는 單히 民擾, 邊亂과 가튼 端的 항쟁을 할 뿐이다가 점차 발전되야 朝에 잇서는 근대적 政黨運動, 野에 잇서는 근대적 民衆運動이 된 것.(例如 純祖朝의 洪景來亂, 그 후의 獨立協會, 一進會)
二, 고로 우리가 이 最近史를 연구할 때에는 이것을 한 지나간 녯일로만 볼 것이 아니라 우리의 지금 살고 잇는 이 매듭의 생활과 관계가 잇는 것임을 인식하야, 자기의 현재 생활을 究明함과 가튼 따수한 태도로써 임하여야 할 것이다.

第二講 衰亂과 東學의 創建
英, 正 兩朝의 70여 년간 治世는 힘써 黨爭을 調和하고 文運을 振作하야 적히 부흥의 기운을 보혓스나 歷代의 積弊는 그로써 구원이 되지 못하고 幼弱無爲의 純, 憲, 哲 三朝(63년간)를 지내오는 동안 救할 수 업시 오백 년의 王氣는 衰亂되고 마럿다, 말하면 舊朝鮮의 運氣는 일즉히 여긔에서 끗히 난 것이엿다.
즉 純祖는 正祖의 子로서 11세에 즉위하야 英祖의 金氏가 聽政하며 外戚이 跋扈하는 길을 열엇고 同 11년 12월에는 關西에 洪景來亂이 잇서 翌年 4월에 계우 그를 定州에서 討平하엿스나 國與民의 疲弊가 多하엿고, 그 후로 惡疫, 洪水, 饑饉이 續至하야 民情은 一層 騷嗷하엿스나 朝廷에는 黨流의 排擠가 日盛하야 懲討의 䟽가 山積하엿스며, 純祖의 34년간 治世를 니여서 憲宗이 즉위하엿스나 年纔 8세로 其 母便 되는 趙寅永 一派가 權을 執하야 재위 15년에 아모 한 바가 업섯스며 哲宗은 비교적 성년인 19세에 즉위하엿스나, 江華에 蟄居하던 시골 總角으로 政務의 政 字도 不知하는 바, 재위 14년은＜139＞ 오즉 그 妻便 되는 金汶根, 金炳冀 一派의 勢道를 助長함이 되엿슬 뿐이다.
이 때 朝廷에는 다못 外戚의 勢道와 黨爭이 잇슬 뿐으로 정치가 업섯고 민간에는 兩班 土豪의 橫暴과 직접으로 人民과 접촉하는 地方官 及 吏胥輩의 作虐이 苛甚하야 정치와 사회의 각 방면으로브터 오는 凌壓, 誅求에 그야말로 八域蒼生은 살어날 수가 업섯다, 거긔에 한 번 惡疫이 始하고 年事가 凶하면 어러한 것의 豫防調救에 대한 何等의 施措가 업는지라, 그 患이 곳 전국적으로 彌滿하게 되엿슴이리요, 이에 일반 백성은 幸혀 살아날 道를 어들가 하야 (一) 혹은 직접으로 당시의 執權級과 반항하는 폭동(例如 辛未의 洪景來亂, 哲宗 末年의 全羅, 慶尙, 咸鏡 各地의 民擾와 가튼 것)을 起하고 (二) 혹은 유교의 형식적 허위로브터 一神인 天主를 밋고 또 그 뒤의 세력에 의하야 살아나볼가 하는 생각으로 西來의 天主敎를 환영도 하엿스며 (三) 재래의 鄭鑑錄, 土亭秘訣 가튼 無稽의 讖書類와 山水說 가튼 것을 미더 鷄龍山, 弓乙村, 兩白, 三豐, 긴 山발 등에서 최후의 安住地를 차즈려 하는 哀憐한 景狀을 연출키도 하엿다.
이것은 주로 국내의 형편을 말한 것이여니와 당시의 조선을 휩싸오는 직접 간접의 외국 세력을 보면
영국은 일즉히 憲宗 5년(1839년)에 동양의 대국인 중국과 아편전쟁을 니르켜, 同 8년에 南京條約을 매저 중국의 香港을 취하고 5港을 개방케 하엿스며 후 純祖 7년(1856년)에는 영국은 自國 商船 아로- 號 凌辱사건과 佛國은 其 宣敎師 살해한 이유로 互相聯合軍을 모라 北京을 침입한 바, 淸帝는 熱河로 피하고 露國의 중재로 北京條約을 締結하야 유리한 조건을 奪獲하엿고 露國은 이에 先하야 愛琿條約을 매저 黑龍 以北의 地를 割取하고, 다시 北京條約을 알선한 報酬로 露淸 兩 國民의 雜居地이던 今의 沿海州는 자기 영토로 편입하기에 至한 동시에 그 翌年으로 동방 유일의 출구인 浦鹽斯德으로 軍港을 삼고 西伯利亞 大鐵道를 계획하야 益益 滿洲와 조선으로 진출할 計를 立한 바, 哲宗 12년에는 一時 對馬島를 점령하는 事가 잇섯다.
이와 가튼 서양 諸國의 세력이 동양의 大皇國인 中原 全土를 蹂躙하고 西으로 北으로 浸浸然 모라 드러오는 데에는 당시 조선의 上下로 하여금 異樣의 驚動을 갓게 하엿스며 더욱 純祖 31년(1831년) 英船 1척의 洪洲 古代島 출현, 憲宗 11년(1845년)의 英船 1척 又復 南海岸 廻遊, 同 12년 佛船의 洪洲 外烟島 致書 등은 소위 「異樣船」의 출몰로서 인심을 자극함이 만핫다.
이것은 직접으로 서양의 위력을 늣기게 된 경로이거니와 다시 간접으로 즉 思想上 敎化上으로 西洋式 新勢力을 移入식힌 天主敎를 보면 이 敎는 멀니 壬辰亂 時에 잠간 葡萄牙人 선교사의 入境 布敎를 보앗다 하나 한 이야기꺼리 뿐이요 정말은 仁祖 9년(1631년)에 使臣 鄭斗源이 北京 갓다 오는 길에 舊約聖書를 가저오고, 正祖朝에 李德祚, 權哲身, 鄭若鍾 3인이 가만히 산에 드러가 이를 연구하고(1784년) 同 7년에＜140＞ 李承薰이 冬至使를 쪼차 北京에 드러가 西人 선교사를 차저 洗禮를 맛고 聖書를 갓고 도라옴으로브터 實地의 포교는 시작되야 正祖의 禁遏이 심하얏스나 同 18년(1794년)에 중국인 선교사 周文謨를 迎來하야 경기, 충청 지방에 수천의 신도를 어덧스며, 純祖 元年에는 신도 黃嗣永이가 西力을 비러 朝禁을 막을 음모를 햇다는 혐의로 크게 검거가 開始되야 周文謨, 李承薰, 鄭若鍾(鄭若鏞의 兄) 등 오륙 인이 遭禍하엿다. 이러함에 不拘하고 조선 포교의 유망하다는 소식은 멀니 羅馬 法王에게 밋처 憲宗 2년(1836년)에 佛人 선교사 모-반 등 3인이 入京하야 丁夏祥 家에 숨어서 포교하던 중, 同 5년에 발각되야 선교사 3인 외 丁夏祥 등 주요 信徒가 刑殺되엿스며, 정부에서는 斥邪의 禁令을 下하는 동시에 五家作統의 規約(純祖 元年 創設)을 勵行한 바, 타격이 甚大하엿다. 哲宗 즉위 후는 西學에 대한 방침을 變하야 不問에 附한 바, 베-누, 메이스트리 등 佛人 선교사가 多數가 入城하야 전 조선 主要處에는 殆히 立堂 行道를 보게 된 바, 儒道에 실증이 난 조선 인심에 큰 파동을 주엇다.
일본은 壬辰亂 이후로 누차 修交를 請하얏스나 상대치 아니하던 바, 俘虜 삼천인과 陵墓 發堀犯 2인을 보내온 이후, 더욱 장군 德川家康이 大阪의 豐臣秀吉 家를 전멸하고 그에 代한 이후브타 수교를 始하야 光海 9년에 始로 信使을 보내여, 그 후는 장군이 갈닐 때마다, 대개로 來往이 잇섯는대, 그 行次는 爲先 員數만이 최소 이백칠팔십 명으로 오백 명까지에 달하야 일본의 幕府는 그를 迎하기에 多大한 재화와 인부와 시간을 消失하엿스며 조선에서는 이로써 明에서 밧는 鬱寂을 푸는 동시에 일본에 대한 示威 겸 자랑을 삼음과 가핫섯다. 일본에서도 그것이 문제가 되야 純祖 11년브터 對馬에서 接迎하고 돌녀 보내기로 되자, 兩國의 通交는 휴지부지 踈絶되엿는대, 후 哲宗 4년에 일본 幕府에서는 일즉히 미국 이외 諸國과 連次로 通商하고 후 哲宗 11년에 其意를 조선에 通來하야 근대적 국가를 형성키에 一日의 長을 有한 일본도 諸 外國의 세력과 가티 일즉 조선사람의 꿈을 놀내게 함이엿다.
內憂外患이 이러한 때에 慶尙道 一隅에서 東學이 主唱되엿다, 당시의 그 형편에 대한 朝鮮民人으로서의 유일한 대응책, (和劑) 그것이 東學이엿다, 진리는 人乃天, 목적은 保國, 安民, 布德天下廣濟蒼生, 방법은 各自 爲心으로 同歸一體의 大團圓을 짓는 것, 이것이 그 元祖 崔水雲으로브터 唱道되기는 哲宗 11년(1860년) 庚申 4월 5일, 正히 英佛聯合軍이 北京을 占하고 일본이 開國進取를 傳하던 그 해이다.
崔水雲은 純祖 24년 慶州에 나서, 일즉히 부모와 사별하야 世間의 實苦를 備嘗하고 憲宗 3년경브터 조선 각지를 遊歷하야 人心 風俗을 살피고, 哲宗 9년경브터 收歛內省의 공부를 거듭하야 仍히 東學을 唱하고, 그 主義의 선전, 徒黨의 결합에 盡力하다가 哲宗 말년에 左道亂政의 名으로 잽히워 高宗 元年 甲子(1864년)에 처형되고, 그 이후의 東學은 崔海月 스승에 의하야 지도되여섯다.＜141＞

第三講 高宗의 登極과 大院君의 革政
前 講에서 임의 純, 憲, 哲 三朝의 63년간을 마즈막으로 衰亂을 준비하는 시간이라 하엿거니와 甲子 高宗 登極 이후 純宗 말년에 至하기까지의 63년간이야말로 怒濤와 가티 드러밀니는 외세와 어울니여서 그 동안 준비해온 衰運을 結末지은 시기라 할 수 잇다. 다- 죽어가는 불이 마즈막으로 한 번 반작함과 가티 哲宗이 가고 高宗이 드러서며 其 父 大院君이 執政하면서, 불과 십 년의 短期로써 최후의 革政을 斷行해 보앗슴과 가틈은 그 政見의 正不正은 莫論하고 한 번 留意하지 아니치 못할 일이다. 이제 그간의 경위를 簡記하면 本히 耽色多病의 稱이 잇던 哲宗은 在位 14년 壽 三十三으로 돌연 薨去하고 宮中의 長 되는 翼宗王妃 趙氏의 命으로 英祖의 曾孫 되는 李昰應의 第二子 命福君을 迎하야 王을 삼으니 이가 즉 高宗으로서 당시의 年이 겨우 十二인 바, 역시 大妃 趙 氏의 주장으로 其 親父를 封하야 興宣大院君을 삼고 仍히 그에게 정권을 推讓케 하니 이가 곳 근대의 猛斷政治家로 유명한 大院君이다.
大院君은 哲宗 年間 外戚 金氏가 用事하며 宗室을 박해함을 기피하야 市井間에 雜遊하며 萬難을 備嘗하다가, 一朝에 전국의 정권을 掌握하게 헌즉, 곳 그 前의 權勢者인 金 氏 一派를 배척하고 자기의 신임하는 사람들을 등용하야 陣勢를 정비하고 대내 대외로 大院君 一流의 맹위를 발휘하엿스니 內로 景福宮의 중건과 書院의 철폐 기타 內政의 革新 斷行과 外로 鎖國攘夷의 暴擧를 감행한 것이 그 著例이다. 이를 다시 대내 대외의 것으로 分記하면
一, 對內, (가) 人材 登庸主義를 표방하는 동시에 四色 평등을 선언하야 재래 관리 편중의 弊를 戒하고 西北人, 南人을 擧用하엿스며 (나) 740만 兩의 거금을 모아 壬亂에 燒盡된 景福宮을 再建(乙丑으로 戊辰 夏까지에 畢役)하엿스며 (다) 迷信奢靡의 風을 禁하고 書院 철폐를 단행하엿스며,(이 書院은 中宗 36년 申丑에 豐基 郡守 周世鵬이 고려 大儒 安裕의 舊居에 白雲洞書院을 짓고 유생을 留居케 하야 士氣興發의 資를 삼게 함에 始하얏는대 그 후 其風이 大起하야 각지에 건설되고 거긔에는 田土를 만히 두고 불량한 양반, 유생이 盤踞하야 政治 非議, 黨爭 計謀, 良民 虐待를 恣行하던 바, 大院君은 일즉브터 이를 嫉視하다가(?) 高宗 2년으로 8년에 至하는 間, 華陽書院 萬東廟로브터 전국 書院을 廢盡하고 豐基의 紹修, 禮安의 陶山 등 僅 47書院을 잔존케 하엿슬 뿐이엿다, 다시 附記할 것은 華陽書院은 老論의 巨首 宋尤菴 時烈을 祀하는 것이오 萬東廟는 그 院內에 잇는 것으로서 宋의 高弟 權尙夏의 發記로 明의 神宗 及 毅宗을 祀하는 것이다.) (라) 財政의 充實과 戶布法의 勵行을 圖하야 隱結의 不正과 양반의 탈세를 禁한 等이요.
二, 對外로는 丙寅의 排佛 及 辛未의 排米와 더좀 적은 것을 말하면, 甲子, 乙丑 年間의 排露와 戊辰의 排日과 庚午의 排獨＜142＞ 등 諸鎖國 攘夷의 實例를 들것이다.
가, 丙寅佛亂. 哲宗 이후 자못 포교의 자유를 가진 천주교는 高宗 초에 이르러 其勢大振한 바, 완고하기로 유명한 대원군이 이를 환영할 리가 업섯다, 이를 염려하는 同敎徒 南鍾三, 洪鳳周 등은 때맛츰 露國人이 二次나 咸北地境을 범함을 기회로 하야 英佛의 힘을 비러 露를 制할 것과 그리하려면 在朝鮮 佛人 선교사의 力을 빌어야 할 것을 대원군에게 陳奏하엿다, 즉 이리하야 대원군에 대한 布敎上 호의를 엇고저 함이엿다, 대원군은 적히 귀를 기우리는 듯 하엿스나, 일단 露人이 退去함에 밋처는 政府 大官의 邪敎 排斥 上䟽와 아울너 일층 그를 미워하게 되야, 高宗 3년 12월(陰 正月) 선교사 펄누 등 9명과 敎徒 南鍾三 이외 교도 만여 人을 一時 학살하엿다, 이 중에 겨우 3명의 洋人이 중국으로 도망하야 이를 佛水師 제독에 報한 바, 同年 9월에 군함 3척을 率하고 楊花津까지에 왓섯스나 별일 업시 도라가고 그 후 10월에 다시 군함 6척을 갓고 와서 곳 江華를 점령하고 약 1개월간을 留陳하며 京江 沿岸의 諸所를 侵하엿스나 山砲手로 편성된 强兵에게 만히는 격퇴되고 날도 춥고 해서 그만 중국 방면으로 撤去하엿스니 이것이 丙寅洋亂이라는 것이다.
나, 辛未洋擾, 佛亂이 잇던 丙寅 7월에 米船 샤만 號가 대동강으로 평양 압헤 이르러 통상의 개시와 식량의 공급을 빌엇는대 中軍 李玄益을 船中에 拘禁한 것이 문제가 되야 샤만 호는 결국 燒滅되고 도라가지 못하엿다. 미국은 그 후 兩次 사람을 보내여 샤만 호의 行衛를 審探하엿스나 要領을 엇지 못하엿스며 後 8년 3월에 駐淸 米國公使 로-가 군함 5척을 거느리고 와서 샤만 호 사건을 質하고 鮮米의 通交를 청하얏다, 대원군은 이를 排하엿슴으로 江華水路의 要次인 廣城鎭에서 兩國事의 大衝突을 보게 되야 우리측은 中軍 魚在淵 이하 수백 명의 사상자와 米側은 中尉 이하 3명의 전사자를 내이고 留兵 사십여 일에 米國兵은 撤歸하고 마랏스니, 대원군의 소위 洋夷侵犯非戰則和, 主和賣國이란 碑를 鐘路 大街에 세우면서까지 극단의 쇄국론을 이른킨 때가 곳 이 적이엿다.
요컨대 대원군은 모든 것을 자기의 뜻대로 해보려 하는 政治家의 氣力을 가젓스나 그 政見은 대부분 固陋하야 大勢를 洞察하지 못하얏슴으로 극단, 무모의 鎖國策을 감행하야 조선 維新의 길을 스사로 防過하엿스며, 景福宮의 大修는 民力을 困케하고 內政의 急革은 유생 측의 反威을 惹起하야 집정 불과 십 년에 그만 그 지위를 힐코 오즉 閔妃(明城皇后)의 專權을 誘致케 함이엿다.(게속) ＜143＞
＜138-143＞