잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	戰線三千里!! (Jeonseon Samcheonri!!, Three Thousand Li of Battlefront!! )
기사형태	잡저 (Japjeo, Miscellaneous Essay)

The battlefront stretches three thousand li!

The battlefront spans three thousand li!
However, this refers to our own battlefront of life. Because we are in unique circumstances and living environments, our battlefront of life faces daily chaos and is becoming increasingly dangerous. We must prepare for battle in our daily lives without an inch of carelessness. We must have much preparation and many plans for tomorrow's fight.

The battlefront is three thousand li! From Jeju Island in the south to the Yalu River bordering region in the north, how have we fought over the past year, and how do we intend to fight in the future?

They are fighting today as they did yesterday. At home, in society, in cities, in rural villages... What strategies will they set up in the future, and what combat preparations are they making? Gathering news of their life battlefront, even if only in brief, is what this "Three Thousand Li of Battlefront" is all about.

The Object of Struggle is the Peasant's Feudalistic Mentality

Ma Myeong

In short, I will devote all my strength to fighting the feudalistic mentality (封建的 頭腦) of the peasants as much as I can. This can be said to mean a qualitative shift in our peasant movement. In the past peasant movements, the focus was mainly on economic struggles such as tenancy issues. It is undeniable that this issue, which has a significant relationship with the actual lives of peasants, came to occupy such a position.<22>

However, through the bitter experiences of the past, we have come to realize that we cannot achieve the true purpose of the peasant movement with this alone.

Experience has taught us that while it is necessary to win the benefits of their actual lives, it is even more necessary to strive to win their mentality, rather than just "along with it".

In the past, when the tenant farming movement was at its peak, the spirit of the peasants everywhere was truly extraordinary.

However, whether the movement fortunately subdued the landlords and achieved victory, or conversely, lost its leaders due to the oppression of the authorities, in other words, regardless of the outcome of success or failure, the peasant movement there lost the ability to leap to a new stage and simply came to an end.

Look. How many rural villages in 某某地方, which wrote a glorious history of tenant disputes in the history of the Chosŏn peasant movement, are now as quiet as a mouse?

This undeniably and earnestly tells us that we cannot move towards the original purpose of the movement with just the economic struggle at hand. In general, economic struggles that focus on immediate gains have a quick impact on peasants because they bring numerical results. However, that is just a response induced by immediate gains, and it is by no means a response that comes from thoroughly understanding the peasant movement itself.

How can they correctly understand the movement to create a new era when as much as 98.9% of their dusty topknots are still filled with feudal remnants? Their actions of adopting any organizational form for immediate gains, but then falling apart when that is not the case, are undeniably too consistent with their old mentality. A true movement can only start from conscious awakening, and it can never be brought about by just being drawn to immediate gains.

However, today's peasant mentality not only fails to become ours, but even has the nature to reject our movement. We cannot help but feel that their mentality, which still insists that the Earth is square like a checkerboard or believes that a new society will be built by the appearance of a god who makes water flow from gun barrels, is too far from us. As long as they fail to abandon these feudalistic views of the universe and society, we cannot have any expectations for the peasant movement.

Even in Russia, which is in the process of free construction, we can imagine how much this feudal mentality hinders our work when we see that they are having the most trouble because of the peasants themselves.<23>

Therefore, from now on, the peasant movement must not only win immediate economic gains, but also devote all its efforts to practically winning the peasants' mentality. In other words, we must launch a fierce struggle against their feudalistic mentality, completely conquer and eradicate it, and truly make it ours. From this, we realize how important and urgent the issue of peasant education is.

The issue of peasant education is, of course, not something that is being discussed for the first time now, but rather something that has already undergone many discussions. However, despite this, the fact that this issue has not yet attracted the great attention and effort of general activists is undeniably a major regret in the movement. From the new year, we must by all means launch a fierce new movement in response to this. Then, what should be the concrete method of peasant education - the struggle against the peasant's feudalistic mentality? Due to the limitations of space, it is a great regret that I cannot discuss this in detail, but as I have said on other occasions, I insist that the organization of a village association (里會) with complete administrative functions is most necessary in this regard as well. Only through this can we not only systematically carry out all tasks such as eradicating illiteracy, breaking down superstitions, and reforming customs, but also believe that we can also develop even economic struggles most advantageously.

More Reality than Theory

Chŏng Un-yŏng, Kyŏngsŏng Labor Federation

Looking back on the past year in our movement, I would say that the achievements are very sporadic. However, if we synthesize the situations in various places, we cannot say that there has been no progress from any point of view. I only think that in the New Year, we should not just rely on words, writing, or theory, but more reality. I believe that true movement can only be achieved by each of us actually going out and becoming friends of the masses.

Two Hopes and Efforts

Chu Yosŏp

1. From this year, I will strive to establish the authority of legitimate public opinion.<24> Until now, legitimate public opinion has not been able to spread its influence because of face-saving, money, or power. That has been detrimental to our society. In the future, I will establish public opinion for justice to warn insidious groups and promote humanism.
2. I will strive to instill a sense of justice and humanism into the darkened conscience that has been swept away.

Three New Plans for the New Year

Yongch'ŏn Yi Pyŏnggwan

Let us, from a personal standpoint, strive to invigorate a solid spirit. We have become too enervated. We have become too degenerate. As those of us who bear significant responsibility on our shoulders, what talk is this of enervation and degeneration? We must awaken fiercely and firstly, be liberated from enervation and adopt a principle of consistent vigor and tension; secondly, awaken from frivolousness, levity, laziness, and hedonism and adopt a principle of self-respect, diligence, and thrift; and thirdly, escape from individualism, where we are stingy and cramped only about our own individual, our own family's rights, honor, and life, trampling on each other among compatriots and ultimately ruining society, and move towards a greater egoism (大我主義) filled with the emotion and passion to earnestly worry about society at any time, in every action, in every word, in every silence.

We can invigorate a solid spirit by implementing the above three items. Consequently, we can fully find the value of our personal completion and our life value.

Let us live within our means domestically. Living within one's means is extremely necessary not only for families but also for individuals and organizations.

However, since all organizations practice budget living and each individual belongs to a family, I will only talk about budget living in terms of the family.

Whether they are capitalists, landlords, officials, merchants, farmers, or any other class, they do not practice budget living in their families.

Of course, they consider the overall income and expenses, but it would not be an exaggeration to say that almost all of them do not consider multifaceted production aspects and calculating consumption aspects under precise plans and intentions. This can also be seen as the inability to pursue budget living due to the insecurity and impoverishment of life in this period of transition in capitalist society. However, in this transitional period of new society construction, we must feel the threat to our lives and live within our means more thoroughly in order to prolong our precious remaining lives.<25>

The entirety of human life is not economics, but it is a fact that economics has a significant relationship with human life. Therefore, we will thoroughly establish a budget living plan in our family life and: 1. Prepare a budget table for income and expenses for at least one month to within one year at any time. 2. Strive to increase income more than budgeted income and reduce actual expenses more than budgeted expenses. 3. Establish absolute cashism in income and expenses. 4. Newspapers, magazines, and necessary books are absolutely indispensable for social education. We will set aside a generous expenditure budget for this. We will comply with the above four items. (The following two are omitted)

From Spiritual Awakening

Ch'angnyŏng Im Mun-ho

First, I myself will become a mole and search everywhere, whether it be hillsides, rice paddy ridges, the main room, or the inner room. In doing so, I will first strive to awaken their outdated spirit. Think about it. How much have the unreasonable thoughts and bad habits of the past ruined our national society? The first step in building a new Chosŏn must begin with spiritual awakening.

Next, I will establish economic organizations centered on farmers. The way for Chosŏn people to survive lies in the promotion of rural villages. However, how much are these rural farmers now being exploited by foreign commercial and financial capital, middlemen, and rural usurers? As an immediate emergency measure, we are trying to create an association that engages in purchasing, selling, and utilization as a business, and this is currently in progress.

Third, in order to eradicate illiteracy, we will establish one night school in each village and create a rural education research institute by encompassing the staff of these night schools, who are the vanguard and guiding force of the rural villages. In this way, we will strive to improve the quality of teachers, unify educational policies, and promote the progress and development of education.

More Searchlights than Military Rations

Sunch'ŏn Pak Pyŏng-du

We have been holding hands more tightly with the world's proletarians and combining our strength to attack the fearsome ramparts of the propertied class.

However, they tremble but have abundant preparedness. When we break down the outer walls, there are strong inner walls, and when we strike the east team, the west team also rampages. Therefore, our triumph is only a matter of time. We intend to make our tactics even more fierce and, at the same time, focus on eradicating illiteracy based on past experiences.

More than military rations and weapons, searchlights and telescopes will be even more necessary for combat readiness.<26> Fully aware that we cannot be blind soldiers who cannot distinguish between friend and foe, we will promote latent forces and, at the same time, the most simple method of treating blind soldiers is the illiteracy eradication movement. With just one slogan, "Eradicate the illiteracy in my house with my own hands," we can more than achieve our goals within the set period.

From Emotion to Reason

Taegu Song Tu-hwan

Until now, our actions have all been dominated by emotion. Actions dominated by emotion often lose practical benefits. Let us leave these emotional actions and return to rational actions! If we calmly observe, where exactly do our urgent tasks lie? The eradication of illiteracy and the awakening of the masses, this is it. Those are the things that must be done immediately and urgently, but what I feel most acutely is the promotion of industry. The situation of a nation is no different from the situation of a family. In a family that cannot secure its daily livelihood, what other work can be done besides seeking food? Only those who are affluent can pursue the desire for knowledge, the maintenance of face, and all other pleasures and hobbies. Therefore, I believe that strengthening the economic foundation under the promotion of this industry, more than anything else, is the most urgent of our urgent tasks.

All Efforts for the Peasant Movement
Kurye Chŏng T'ae-jung

From now on, we must concentrate all our energy on the peasant movement. Why? Because peasants make up 90% of the entire population in Chosŏn, so that referring to the Chosŏn people means referring to the peasants. Therefore, we cannot achieve our goals without the assistance of the peasants.

It is not that there was no peasant movement in the past, but the methods of that movement were too disorganized and did not have any effect on the actual interests of the peasants. Furthermore, after the rise of the Singan Movement (新幹運動), the entire Chosŏn activists were concentrated only on the Singan Movement due to the mistaken view of a vague national unified party, and the peasant movement was almost completely forgotten. This is a major mistake in the Chosŏn movement.

We can well understand how great the role of the peasant movement is by looking at the history of other countries in the past.

Then, from now on, we must struggle for the actual interests of the peasant movement more than anything else.<27>

Enlightenment Movement and Economic Movement

Koksan Kim Yŏng-hwan

1. Enlightenment Movement 2. Economic Movement
I think these two are most necessary in our situation. We will try to establish one night school and one training center in every neighborhood as much as possible, or even passively create a consumer cooperative in at least one township. Whether it goes well or not, we will entrust the success or failure of the work to fate and be sure to carry out these two movements from the New Year.

Night School and Cooperative Association

Ŭiju Ch'oe An-guk

From the new year, I will be sure to establish one night school in each village, eradicate illiteracy among the uneducated class, and prepare the weapons of knowledge. I will also organize one cooperative association in each township to obtain the economic power of the propertyless class and prepare economic weapons. With educational training and economic power, I will steadily fight from strict practicism to reaching the great ideal land.

Protect the Nation, Secure the People, and Benefit the World

Tŏkch'ŏn Chŏng Yŏng-t'ae

From the new year of Sinmi (辛末), I will disclose my researched and practiced "Mind-Body Integrated Therapy" (「物心綜合療法」) and spread it to farmers and other groups in various townships and villages to quickly cure various pains and, at the same time, have each family practice the most cutting-edge strengthening techniques to achieve the performance of protecting the nation, securing the people, and benefiting the world internally.

Focus on Illiteracy Eradication

Anch'ŏn Chŏk-da

In Chosŏn, an agricultural country, the peasants, who make up the largest number, are too ignorant of common sense and are at a crossroads, wondering whether to follow the guiding principles. They are wandering and abandoning the benefits they deserve by being intoxicated by the misguided theories of some verbal debaters, solely because they are uneducated. Therefore, in order to give them bright ears and eyes to listen to correct theories and find the right path, I will open the way for teaching above all else and strive to reap many harvests from this.<28>

In the Consumer Cooperative Movement

Iri Pae Hŏn

The labor union that I am involved with had already taken the lead in proposing the establishment of a consumer cooperative as a resolution of the general meeting.
So, we set up a program for its realization and, as the first step in the winter before last, we built a building of over 40 p'yŏng (坪) along the main street four blocks from the union headquarters. As the second stage, we had a plan to start operations on a small scale last fall.

However, rather than being an aftereffect of the so-called recession, we were not without some impatience at being temporarily frustrated due to the small amount of work caused by bad weather. Since the beginning is half the battle, we are not too pessimistic. The path to this point has been truly arduous, but now we are confident that its preservation is due to the firm awareness of all union members and the absolute support of various friendly organizations, and that its birth is imminent, even if late, in the new spring.

The reasons for focusing on this, leaving aside any deep and difficult meanings, are simply: 1. Joint purchase and supply are advantageous. 2. It promotes the spirit of autonomy.

Religion with Ability

Anak Kim Sŏn-ryang

In the new year, we will strive to have a "religion with ability" and to give it to our compatriots. The minds of Chosŏn people are all pathological. Patients demand doctors with ability. Who is the doctor for mental illnesses? I declare that it is "religion with ability". Some say that it is already a stinky word, but it is the greatest of the things that I want to have and give.<29>

From the New Year, Like This

Kusŏng Pae Ch'ang-hwa

First, the education movement. Starting with raising the masses belonging to the large illiterate class as quickly as possible, breaking the concepts of feudal conservatism and superstition, and awakening the peasant class to the sense of the times, scientific beliefs, and historical mission, making them self-reliant mobilizers who can exert great power. Recognizing that it is not difficult to carry out all projects by striving for adult education with the right to control the family and the right to dispose of assets, we will establish an organization in each village and focus on adult education organizationally.
Second, the economic movement. If there is a way to recover the exploitation and current plight of farmers under the current economic conditions, how much of a project would that be for them? If farmers organize their own power, they will be able to liberate themselves from the vicious parasites, the intermediaries. Therefore, it would be good to first establish a consumer cooperative to promote immediate benefits on the one hand, cultivate economic knowledge on the other hand, and foster a sense of unity on the other hand.

Acquisition of Farmers' Rights

Tŏkch'ŏn Ya Sŏng-suk

Born and raised in an agricultural country made up of farmers, we will fight to the end for the acquisition of farmers' rights and freedom. Our county consists of 8 myeon (面) and 63 ri (里), with about 8,700 households. There are currently about 50 farmers' associations (農民社) with about 2,000 member households. From the New Year, we will devote ourselves to the One Farmers' Association - One Academy Principle in each village.

Let's Create a People's Office

Ch'ŏrwŏn Sŏl T'ae-hŭi

Isn't there anything that isn't an urgent task, such as eradicating illiteracy, breaking down superstitions, abolishing white clothing, and consumer cooperatives? Aren't these the words we've been saying day and night and the phrases we've been writing until our brushes wear out? Now, let's actually do the work according to those words and writings. Then, let's organize each local village and<30> have that organization do all kinds of work.

Just like the government office does various things, let's create a people's office (民廳). I believe that doing this organization is laying the groundwork for being able to do all kinds of work in the future.

Three Tasks

Iwŏn Kim Ch'ang-ryŏl

1. Completion of the Fishermen's Organization Based on Production Organizations!
2. Revitalization of the Iwŏn Consumer Cooperative by Enriching Consumer Groups!
3. Commencement of Illiteracy Eradication Project by Printing a Korean Textbook!
I intend to implement these three tasks from the New Year.
4. The world already knows that the production conditions of fishermen are unfavorable. We are currently taking over a factory to abolish the triple or quadruple exploitation by big capitalists - factory owners - shipowners - recruiters - hired soldiers and realize a self-managed factory for fishermen.
5. The Consumer Cooperative will abandon the past foreign capital financing policy and first complete the consumer groups through each organization to enrich the cooperative.
6. The Korean language problem and the illiteracy eradication problem are the basic movements of all movements, and I have already discussed them no less than usual without saying anything new, and I have also organized an illiteracy eradication society with a few comrades to realize them. Since the most simple and easy way to learn Korean is the Korean Language Dissemination Textbook (한글 普及讀本), which was approved three years ago, I hope to publish that book this year.<31>

Consumer Cooperative, Illiteracy Eradication

Kanggye Yi Wŏn-haeng

1. Last year, we tried to provide immediate benefits to farmer members by having designated stores in the city and providing discounts to members. However, since there was still inequality between farmers and stores, we took a step forward and established a farmer-oriented consumer cooperative, set five won per share, and paid two won for the first installment, and the results of opening the business were good.
2. From the new year, since there are farmers' associations (農民社) in each village and town, we will focus on eradicating illiteracy, centering on them. Breaking down superstitions or abolishing white clothing is a secondary problem. Farmers are now receiving immediate benefits from the consumer cooperative, so they trust the words of the leaders, so I am confident that night schools will be easily opened and will go well.

For the Immediate Benefit of Workers

Pukch'ŏng Chu Ik

I have fought with education, with the peasant movement, and with the labor movement. But in reality, the labor movement seems to be better than anything else. Therefore, I will strive for that movement this year as well, and especially fight for the immediate benefits of workers.

Continue the Naval Battle

Cheju Mun Ch'ang-nae

Our Chosŏn is surrounded by sea on three sides. Among them, Cheju is an island, so we must use sea routes no matter where we go or what business we do. However, in reality, our Chosŏn people still do not have our own international shipping vessels and are riding on other people's ships, so we have been paying money as we should and suffering all kinds of contempt and exploitation. Therefore, since last year, we have organized the East Asia Navigation Association (東亞通航組合) and have been fighting to pioneer our own way of navigation with our own strength.

This is not about a few individuals gathering capital to benefit only themselves, but I think it is the work of the entire Cheju people, and further, the work of the entire Chosŏn people. This year as well, we will fight even more in this route development. In other words, it is a naval battle.

In the Movement to Obtain Freedom of Speech

Kilju Kim Ch'ang-yun

I will strive for the Movement to Obtain Freedom of Speech (言論自由獲得運動), which is most necessary for all our movements.<32>

**Named Entities**

馬鳴	Ma Myŏng
某某地方	Mou Mou Chibang
朝鮮農民運動史	Chosŏn Nongmin Undongsa
京城勞總	Kyŏngsŏng Nojong
鄭雲永	Chŏng Un-yŏng
朱요섭	Chu Yosŏp
龍川	Yongch'ŏn
李炳寬	Yi Pyŏng-gwan
昌寧	Ch'angnyŏng
林文虎	Im Mun-ho
順天	Sunch'ŏn
朴炳斗	Pak Pyŏng-du
大邱	Taegu
宋斗煥	Song Tu-hwan
求禮	Kurye
鄭泰重	Chŏng T'ae-jung
谷山	Koksan
金永煥	Kim Yŏng-hwan
義州	Ŭiju
崔安國	Ch'oe An-guk
德川	Tŏkch'ŏn
丁榮泰	Chŏng Yŏng-t'ae
安川	Anch'ŏn
赤朶	Chŏk-da
裡里	Iri
裵憲	Pae Hŏn
安岳	Anak
金善亮	Kim Sŏn-ryang
龜城	Kusŏng
裴昌化	Pae Ch'ang-hwa
德川	Tŏkch'ŏn
夜星淑	Ya Sŏng-suk
鐵原	Ch'ŏrwŏn
薛泰凞	Sŏl T'ae-hŭi
利原	Iwŏn
金昌冽	Kim Ch'ang-ryŏl
江界	Kanggye
李元行	Yi Wŏn-haeng
北靑	Pukch'ŏng
朱翼	Chu Ik
濟州	Cheju
文昌來	Mun Ch'ang-nae
東亞通航組合	Tong A T'onghang Chohap
吉州	Kilju
金昌允	Kim Ch'ang-yun



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	戰線三千里!!
기사형태	잡저

戰線三千里!!
戰線은 삼천리에 뻐첫다!
그러나 이것은 우리들의 생활전선을 일음이다. 남다른 사정과 생활환경에 처해 잇는 우리들이니만치 그 생활전선은 나날이 혼란을 당하고 刻刻으로 危險化해간다. 우리는 여긔서 寸分의 虛가 업시 생활상 전투준비를 하여야 할 것이다. 내일의 싸홈을 위하야 만흔 준비와 만흔 계획이 잇서야 한다.
전선은 삼천리! 남으로 제주도에서 북으로 압록강 연변에 이르기까지 우리들은 지나간 한해 동안을 과연 엇더케 싸워왓스며 또한 압흐로 엇더케 싸워가고자 하는가.
그들은 오날도 어제와 가티 싸우고 잇다. 가정에서 사회에서, 都會에서 농촌에서... 그들은 장차 엇더한 전략을 세우고 엇더한 전투준비를 하고 잇는가. 단편적이나마 전폭적으로 그 생활전선 소식을 모흔 것이 곳 이 전선 삼천리다.

鬪爭의 對象은 農民의 封建的頭腦

馬鳴

간단히 말하면 나는 힘이 밋치는데까지는 농민의 封建的 頭腦와 싸우기에 모든 힘을 다하겟슴니다. 이것은 곳 우리 農民運動의 質的轉換을 의미한 것이라 말할 수 잇는 것임니다. 과거의 농민운동에 잇서서는 주로 소작문제와 가튼 경제적 투쟁에 중점을 둔 것이 사실이엇슴니다. 농민의 實際生活에 큰 관계를 가지고 잇는 이 문제가 그러한 자리를 占하게 된 것을 또한<22> 넘우나 당연한 일이라 안이 할 수는 업는 것임니다. 그러나 과거의 쓸아린 그 경험에 의하야 우리는 이것만으로는 도저히 농민운동의 참다운 목적을 달성할 수 업슴을 알게 되엿슴니다.
경험은 우리에게 그들의 실제생활상의 이익을 戰取하는 것도 필요하지만은 그와 함께-라 함보다도 그보다도 돌이어 그들의 頭腦를 戰取하기에 노력하는 것이 一層 必要함을 가르켜 주엇슴니다.
과거에 소작운동이 한창 熾熱할 때 여기저기의 농민의 氣勢야말로 과연 여간 굉장치 안이 하엿슴니다.
그러나 그 운동이 다행이 지주를 屈服하야 승리를 엇게 되거나 그럿치 안이하고 돌이여 그와 반대로 官憲의 彈壓에 의하야 지도자를 일케 되거나 하면 다시 말하면 성공과 실패의 어느 결과를 물론하고 그곳의 농민운동은 그에서 다시 새로운 段階로 비약할 능력을 失하고 그만 그대로도 終熄되고 마는 것이 常例이엿슴니다.
보십시오. 朝鮮農民運動史上에 光輝잇는 小作爭議의 歷史를 써내인 某某地方의 농촌으로서 이제는 돌이어 쥐죽은 듯이 조용히 잇는 곳이 얼마나 만흔가를.
이것은 하낫 當面의 經濟鬪爭 그것만으로는 運動本來의 목적을 向하야 나아갈 수 업다는 것을 切實히 말하는 것이라 안이 할 수 업슴니다. 大槪當面의 이익을 主眼으로 하는 經濟鬪爭은 그것이 數字的으로 곳 實效를 齎來하는 만큼 농민의 그에 대한 感應이 빨은 것만은 사실임니다. 그러나 그것은 다만 당면의 이익 그것에 誘致됨에 지내지 안이한 감응이요, 결코 農民運動自體를 徹底히 이해함으로부터 오는 감응은 안인 것임니다.
몬지투성이의 그들의 상투 밋헤는 아즉도 98,9%까지가 封建的殘滓로써 꽉 들어찻거니 엇더케 새로운 시대를 창조할 그 운동을 올케 이해 할 수가 잇겟슴닛가. 當面의 이익을 위하야는 엇더한 組織的形態를 갓추다가도 그것이 안이면 돌우 훗터저가는 그들의 행동이야말로 그들의 낡은 두뇌에 넘우나 合致된 것이라 안이 할 수 업슴니다. 진정한 운동은 意識的覺醒에서야 비로소 출발할 수 잇는 것이요 당면의 이익에 끌님만으로는 결코 가저올 수 업는 것임니다.
그런데 오늘의 농민의 두뇌는 다만 우리의 것이 되지 못하얏슬 뿐만 안이라 돌이어 우리의 운동을 拒否할 性質까지를 가지고 잇는 것임니다. 아즉도 地球가 바둑판과 가티 네모반듯하게 되얏슴을 주장하고 또는 총구멍에서 물이 흘으게 하는 神의 출현에 의하야서 새 사회의 건설이 될 것을 밋고 잇는 그들의 두뇌는 우리와 넘우나 거리가 멀다 안이 할 수 업슴니다. 그들이 이러한 封建的宇宙觀, 社會觀을 揚棄치 못하고 잇는 한에는 우리는 농민운동에 아모러한 기대도 가질 수 업슴니다.
자유로운 建設途程에 잇다 할 露西亞에서도 농민 그들로 인하야 가장 몹시 머리를 알코 잇슴을 봄에도 우리는 이<23>봉건적 두뇌가 얼마나 우리의 일을 방해하는 것인가를 짐작할 수 잇슴니다.
그럼으로, 이제부터의 농민운동은 당면의 경제적 이익을 戰取하는 밧게 다시 농민의 두뇌를 實際的으로 戰取하기에 全力을 다하지 안이하면 안이 될 것임니다. 다시 말하면 그들의 封建的 頭腦와 猛烈한 투쟁을 개시하야 그것을 완전히 정복하고 掃淸하야 정말 우리의 것이 되게 하지 안이하면 안되는 것임니다. 이에서 우리는 비로소 농민의 敎養問題가 엇더케 중요하고 急切한가를 놋기게 됨니다.
농민의 교양문제는 물론 이제야 처음으로 云謂되는 것이 안이요 이믜 幾多의 논의를 거듭한남어지의 것이라 할 수 잇는 것임니다. 그러나 그럼에도 불구하고 아즉까지는 이 문제는 一般運動者의 그러케 큰 注意와 노력을 끌지 못하고 잇는 것은 운동상의 한 큰 遺憾이라 안이 할 수 업슴니다. 새해로부터는 모름직이 이에 대하야 맹렬한 새 운동을 일으키지 안이하면 안이 될 것임니다. 그러면 농민의 敎養-농민의 封建的頭腦에 대한 투쟁의 具體的方法은 엇더케 하여야 할 것인가. 이에 대하야는 紙面의 制限으로 인하야 자세히 論及치 못함이 큰 遺憾임니다만은 나는 달은 機會에서도 말하얏슴과 가티 이에서도 또한 완전한 행정적 기능을 具有한 里會의 조직이 가장 필요함을 主張하야 마지 안이함니다. 이에 의하야서라야 비로소 文盲退治, 迷信打破, 風俗改革 등의 모든 일을 조직적으로 遂行할 수 잇슬 뿐만 안이라 그밧게 다시 經濟的鬪爭까지도 또한 가장 有利하게 전개할 수 잇스리라 밋슴니다.

理論보다 實地로

京城勞總 鄭雲永

우리운동에 잇서서 과거 1년을 回顧해보면 戰跡이 아주 零星하다고 하겟지요. 그러나 各地狀況을 綜合해 보면 어느 점으로 보던지 進展안이라고는 못하겟슴니다. 오직 新年에 잇서서는 實地를 떠나서 말노나 글노나 理論뿐만으로는 안이 될줄노 생각함니다. 다각기 실지로 드러가서 大衆의 벗이 되어야만 眞實한 運動이 될 줄노 밋슴니다.

두어가지 希望과 努力

朱요섭

1. 금년부터는 정당한 여론의 권위를 세우는 일에 노력코저 함니다.<24> 지금까지는 정당한 여론이 체면이나 금전又는 권력 때문에 긔운을 펴지 못하엿슴니다. 그만큼 우리사회에 해독이 되엿슴니다. 압흐로는 정의를 위한 여론을 확립식여 간사한 무리들을 경게코저 하는 동시에 인류애를 고취코저 함니다.
2. 쓸어저 어두워진 량심에 정의감과 인류애를 너허주기에 로력하엿겟니다.

新年新案三題

龍川 李炳寬

우리는 個人的見地로서 堅實한 氣風을 振作하기에 힘쓰자. 우리는 넘우도 無氣力化하야젓다. 너무도 墮落되엿다. 중대한 責任을 雙肩에 負擔한 우리로서 無氣力化 墮落이란 말이 웬 말이냐? 우리는 猛烈히 깨달아 첫제 無氣力化에서 解放되야 元氣振作, 緊張一貫主義로 둘재 輕跳浮薄  懶惰享樂에서 각성하야 自重勤儉主義로 셋제 自己個人 自己家庭의 권리, 名譽, 생활에만 苟苟齪齪하야 同胞間自相踐踏하며 나아가 사회를 亡케 하는 個人主義에서 解脫하야 一動 一靜 一語 一黙 그 언제든지 사회를 절실히 염려하는 感激과 情熱로 充濟한 大我主義로 나아가지 안을 수 업는 것이다.
우리는 이상 3조항을 실행함으로서 堅實한 氣風을 振作할 수 잇는 것이요. 딸아 自我의 人格的完成, 自我의 生活價値를 充分히 차즐 수 잇는 것이다.
우리는 家庭的으로 예산잇는 생활을 하기로 하자. 예산생활은 家庭만 안이라 개인이나 團體에 잇서서도 極히 필요한 일이다.
그런데 각 단체에서는 모다 豫算生活을 하는 바요, 各個人은 가정에 속하야 잇슴으로 이에는 다만 가정상의 豫算生活에 대하야 말코저 하는 바이다.
資本家, 地主, 官吏, 商民, 農民, 기타 어느 계급을 물론하고 家庭上豫算生活을 하지 안는다.
물론 大體의 收入과 支出을 考慮하는 바이나 精密한 計劃과 意圖下에서 多角的生産方面과 打算的消費方面을 考慮치 안는 것이 거이 全部라고 하야도 過言이 안일 것이다. 이는 資本主義社會의 轉形期인 此際에 잇서서 생활의 不安全 생활의 窮乏化에 딸아 豫算生活을 도모지 할 수 업는 것이라고도 볼 수 잇는 것이다. 그러나 우리는 新社會建設의 이 過渡期에 잇서서 우리의 귀중한 殘命을 延命하야가기 위하야 生活上威脅을 늣기면 늣길사록 家庭上豫算生活을 더욱더욱 철저히 하야가지 안흘 수 업는 것이다.
人間生活의 全部가 經濟라고는 할 수 업스나 經濟가 <25>人間生活에 중대한 관계를 가지고 잇는 것만은 사실이니 우리는 가정생활에 잇서서 豫算生活策을 철저히 樹立키로 하되 1, 1개월 이상 1개년 이내의 收入支出에 대한 豫算表를 隋時作成할 것 2. 豫算收入보다 수입을 더 늘으고 豫算支出보다 實際支出을 주리도록 노력실행할 것 3. 收入及支出에 잇서서 絶對現金主義를 확립할 것 4. 新聞雜誌必要圖書 등은 社會敎育上 絶對不可缺의 것이다. 이에 대한 支出豫算을 넉넉히 세울 것 이상 四조항을 遵行할 것이다.(二下略)

精神開闢부터

昌寧 林文虎

나는 爲先 나 自身이 두더쥐가 되여서 산기슬 논두렁 사랑방 안방 할 것 업시 삿삿치 뒤지겟슴니다. 그리하야 첫재 그들의 陳腐한 精神을 開闢시키기에 努力하겟슴니다. 생각하여 봅시오. 過去時代의 不合理한 모든 사상과 陃習이 얼마나 우리 민족사회를 亡처 노핫슴닛가 새 朝鮮建設의 第一步는 먼첨 精神開闢에서 비롯할 것임니다.
다음 농민중심의 경제기관을 세우겟슴니다. 조선사람의 살아날 道理는 농촌의 진흥에 잇슴니다. 그런데 이 농촌농민들은 이제 外來商工金融資本과 中間商人及農村高利貸金業者 등 에게 얼마나 搾取를 당하고 잇슴닛가. 우리는 이 當面應急策으로 購買販賣利用을 事業으로 하는 一個組合을 만들여고 하는데 方今着着進行中임니다.
셋재 文盲打破을 爲하야 一村一個所의 夜學設置와 농촌의 前衛隊요 指導分子인 이들 夜學의 職員을 網羅하야 農村敎盲硏究機關을 만들겟슴니다. 이리하야 敎員素質向上 敎育方針의 統一과 함께 敎育의 進步發展을 꾀하겟슴니다.

軍糧보다 探照燈

順天 朴炳斗

우리는 滿天下無産者와 가티 손을 더욱 잡고 힘을 合하야 저 무서운 有産者의 城壁을 突擊하여왓다.
그러나 그들은 벌벌 떨면서도 準備力이 풍부하다. 外城을 부시면 堅固한 內城이 잇고 東隊를 치면 西隊가 또한 跋扈하여왓다. 그럼으로 우리의 凱旋은 오즉 時日問題이다. 이제 戰術을 一層猛勵코자 하는 동시에 과거의 體驗으로 文盲退治에 注力코자 한다.
戰備에는 軍糧과 武器보담도 探照燈, 望遠鏡이 더욱더 필요할 것인데<26> 敵我를 분별하지 못하는 盲兵으로는 안될 것을 濶然自覺하고 潛勢을 助長하는 동시에 盲兵을 치료하는데 治盲運動은 가장 簡易한 방법이다. 「내집 文盲은 내손으로」라는 標語 한마듸면 所定期內에 허고도 남는다.

感情에서 理智的으로

大邱 宋斗煥

現今까지의 우리의 動作은 모다 感情에 지배되엿다. 감정에서 지배되는 동작은 往往히 實益을 失한다. 이 감정적 동작에서 떠나 理智的 동작에 歸하자! 靜觀하면 우리의 急務는 과연 어데 잇는가. 文盲의 퇴치, 大衆의 促醒, 이것이다. 그것이 당면의 할 일이요 또 급한 일이겟지만 내가 절실이 늣기는 것은 산업의 장려에 잇다. 一民族의 處地는 一家族의 처지와 少毫도 다를 것이 업다. 一日의 生計를 安心치 못하는 가정에서 食을 求하는 外에 다른 如何한 일을 행할 수 잇슬가? 생활이 풍요한 者라야만 지식의 욕구, 체면의 유지, 기타 모든 逸樂과 嗜好에 좃츨 수 잇는 것이다. 그럼으로 나는 무엇보담도 이 산업의 장려하에 經濟的土臺를 完固히 함이 우리의 急務中急務가 안일가 생각한다.

農民運動에 全力
求禮 鄭泰重

우리는 일로부터는 農民運動에 全心力을 集中하지 안으면 안이 되겟슴니다. 웨그러냐 하면 朝鮮은 농민이 全民衆의 90%에 達하야 朝鮮民衆이라 하면 곳 농민을 의미할 만큼 되야잇슨즉 농민의 援助가 無하고는 도저히 우리의 목적을 達할 수 업슬 것임니다.
과거에도 농민운동이 업섯든 것은 안이지만은 그 운동방법이 넘우나 비조직적이어서 농민의 實際利益에 하등의 효과를 주지 못햇슬 뿐만 안이라 더욱히 新幹運動이 일어난 후로는 全朝鮮運動者가 漠然한 民族的單一黨이라는 謬見에서 新幹運動에만 집중하고 農民運動은 全혀 망각하다십히 하여 왓슴니다. 이것은 조선운동에 한 큰 錯誤임니다.
농민운동의 역할이 얼마나 위대하다는 것은 과거 다른 나라의 역사를 보드래도 잘 알 것임니다.
그러면 우리는 일로부터 무엇보담도 농민운동의 실제이익을 위해서 투쟁하여야겟슴니다.<27>

啓蒙運動과 經濟運動

谷山 金永煥

1. 啓蒙運動 2. 經濟運動
이 두 가지는 우리 가튼 처지에서는 가장 필요하다고 생각함니다. 될 수 잇는 限에서 洞里마다 一個夜學 一個講習所는 설립하도록 하겟고 또는 消極的이나마 一面에 一個所 以上의 消費組合을 맨들어 볼 작정임니다. 잘 되고 안되는 것은 일의 成敗에 맛기고 이 두 가지 운동을 新年부터 꼭 실행하여 보겟슴니다.

夜學과 協同組合

義州 崔安國

新年度부터 一村에 一夜學씩을 꼭 設立하고 無識階級의 문맹을 退治식혀 지식의 무기를 준비케 하고 一面에 一協同組合씩은 期於히 조직하야 無産階級의 經濟實力을 取成함으로써 경제적 무기를 작만케 하야 敎養訓練과 經濟實力으로 嚴正한 實踐主義에서 위대한 理想鄕에 니르기까지 꾸준히 싸와가겟다.

保國安民廣濟蒼生

德川 丁榮泰

辛末 새해부터는 나의 硏究實行하는 「物心綜合療法」을 공개하야 各部面里農民 其他 團體에 普及케 하야 難易의 諸痛을 速治케 하고 일변 最尖端의 强健術을 各家庭마다 실행케 하야 內體的으로 保國安民廣濟蒼生의 實績을 擧하려 함니다.

文盲退治에 注力

安川 赤朶

農業國인 조선에 잇서 가장 만흔 數를 차지하고 잇는 농민이<28> 너무나 상식에 어두엇던 指導原理를 쫏처야 올흘는지 몰나 岐路에서 彷徨하다가 一部口頭能論者의 그릇된 理論에 醉하여 당연히 바들 만한 이익을 自棄함이 오로지 敎養이 업는 까닭임으로 올흔 이론을 듯고  正道를 찻는 밝은 귀와 눈을 가지게 하기 위하야 무엇보다 몬저 가르치는 길을 열어 주고 이에 만은 收獲을 엇고저 노력하야 마지 안흐려 함니다.

消費組合運動에

裡里 裵憲

내가 관계하는 勞働組合에서는 일즉이 총회의 決議로서 消費組合設置를 率先提唱한 일이 잇슴니다.
그래서 그 실현의 푸로그람을 세워가지고 임이 再昨冬에 第一着으로 組合本館 압 四街里大路邊에다가 40餘坪의 건물을 新築하얏고 第二段으로는 昨秋에는 小規模이나마 업무를 개시하얏든 계획이엿슴니다.
그리다가 所謂不景氣의 餘波이라기 보다도 天氣不調로 일거리가 적어서 暫時挫折狀態임에 多少焦燥한 마음도 업지 안으나 시작이 半으로 그다지 悲觀하지 안슴니다. 여긔까지 이른 經路도 實로 苦心慘憺이엿스나 이제는 全組合員의 確實한 의식과 各友誼團體의 絶大聲援으로 그 保進을 期하는 터이매 느저도 新春에는 誕生在邇하다고 자신하는 터임니다.
이에 주력하는 이유로는 무슨 깁고 어려운 의미를 다 떠나서 단순히 1. 共同購入과 供給이 유리하다는 것 2. 自治的 精神을 助長한다는 것.

能力잇는 宗敎를

安岳 金善亮

새해에 우리는 「能力잇는 宗敎」를 가지기를, 또 同胞에게 주기를 힘쓰고저 함니다. 조선사람의 마음은 모도가 病的임니다, 病人은 能力잇는 醫師를 요구함니다. 마음病의 의사는 누구임닛가? 나는 「能力잇는 宗敎」라고 明言함니다. 엇던이들은 그것은 벌서 냄새나는 말이라 함니다만은 나는 그것이 가지고 십고 주고 십흔 것 中에 第一 큰 것임니다.<29>

新年부터는이러케

龜城 裴昌化

첫재 敎養運動임니다. 만흔 文盲層에 속한 民衆을 하로밧비 세우는 데서 출발하야 封建保守迷信 등의 觀念을 깨트리고 농민계급으로써의 時代的意識, 科學的信念, 歷史的使命에 눈뜨게하야 큰 힘을 쓸 수 잇는 自立的動員이 되게 하되 家庭의 支配權을 가지고 資産處分權을 가진 成人敎育을 힘쓰는 것이 모든 사업을 수행하기에 困難함이 업슬 즐 認하고 村落마다 機關을 說하야 成人敎養에 機關的으로 注力하고자 함니다.
둘재, 經濟運動임니다. 現下經濟狀態에서 農民의 被搾取及現在의 窮狀을 挽回할 길이 잇다고 하면 얼마나 그들을 爲하는 사업이 되겟슴닛가. 萬一 農民들이 자기의 힘을 組織化식힌다면 惡毒한 寄生蟲인 仲介者들에게서 해방되기는 能한 것이다. 그럼으로 爲先消費組合을 설치하야 한편으로는 당면이익을 도모하야 주는 동시에 經濟的知識을을 涵養하며 한편으로는 團結心을 養成하는 것이 조흘 것이다.

農民의 權利獲得

德川 夜星淑

농민으로 일우어진 農業國에서 生於長한 우리는 농민의 權利獲得과 자유를 爲하야 끗까지 싸우려 함니다. 우리 고을은 8면 63개里로 8천7백여 호인데 現在農民社는 50여개소로 社員이 2천여 호임니다. 新年부터는 一部落에 一農民社-一學院主義로 舊鬪盡力하려 함니다.

民廳을 만듭시다

鐵原 薛泰凞

文盲退治, 迷信打破, 白衣廢止, 消費組合 等 事가 하낫도 急務안인 것이 안이며 우리가 平日혀가 달토록 하던 말이요 붓이 달도록 쓰던 文句가 안임닛가. 인제는 그 말과 그 글대로 實際 일을 하게 합시다. 그리하면 地方各洞里를 組織해 가지고<30> 그 組織體로부터 온갓 할 일을 하도록 합시다.
저 官廳에서 各項 일을 하는 것처럼 우리는 民廳을 만듭시다. 이 組織을 하는 것이 장차 온갓 일을 할 수 잇는 原動力을 세우는 것이라고 미듬니다.

세가지 課題를

利原 金昌冽

1. 生産機關을 根據로 한 漁民組織의 完成!
2. 消費班을 充實히 하야 利原消費組合을 復活!
3. 한글 讀本을 印刷하야 文盲退治事業에 着手!
이 세 가지 과제를 新年부터 實行하고자 함니다.
1. 漁民의 生産條件이 不利함은 임이 세상이 다 아는 바외다. 大資本主-工場主-船主-接軍-雇軍의 3중4중의 搾取를 撤廢하고 어민의 自營工場을 實現코저 方今工場을 引受中이요.
2. 消費組合은 過去外資融通政策을 揚棄하고 各組織을 통하야 消費班을 爲先完成하야써 조합을 充實케 하겟슴니다.
3. 한글 問題, 文盲退治문제는 온갓 운동의 基礎運動임은 내가 새삼스럽게 말하지 안트래도 임이 적지 안케 論議된 바이며 그것을 實現해보려고 몃몃 동지들과 文盲退治社도 組織하엿던바 한글을 배우는데 가장 簡便하고 쉽게 쓴 것이 한글 普及讀本으로 三年前에 許可가 난 것이니 今年에는 期於코 그 冊을 出版해 보고자 함니다.

消費組合 文盲退治

江界 李元行

1. 昨年 一年間은 農民社員에게 當面利益을 주려고 市內에 指定商店을 두고 사원에게는 割引하야 提供케 하엿스나, 아모래도 농민과 商店間에 不平이 잇슴으로 一步 進하야 農民本位의 消費組合을 創設하고 一口에 五圓씩 定하고 一回拂込을 二圓으로 하야 開業한 結果 良好한 성적을 보왓섯다.
2. 새해부터는 各洞各村에 農民社가 잇스니 그들을 중심삼아 文盲退治에 注力하려 한다. 迷信을 打破하거나 白衣를 폐지한는 것은 第二次的問題이다. 농민들의 現在消費組合으로 인하야 當面利益을 밧고 잇느니만치 指導者의 말을 신용히고 잇스닛가 夜學가튼 것은 쉽게 開校되며<31> 또 잘 되여 나가리라고 自信한다.

勞働者의 當面利益을 爲하야

北靑 朱翼

나는 敎育으로, 農民運動으로 또는 勞働運動으로 싸워보왓다. 그런데 實際效果는 勞働運動이 무엇보다 나흔 것 갓다. 그럼으로 나는 今年에도 그 운동에 노력하되 特히 勞働者當面利益을 爲하야 투쟁하랴 한다.

海戰을 繼續

濟州 文昌來

우리조선은 三面이 바다이다. 그 중에도 濟州는 섬나라인 까닭에 어듸로 가서 무슨 사업을 하던지 航路를 이용치 안으면 안된다. 그러나 實地에 우리 조선사람은 아즉 우리가 가진 國際的通航船이 업고 남의 배를 타고 다니기 때문에 돈은 돈대로 내면서 가진 賤視 가진 搾取를 다 당하야 왓다. 그리하야 우리는 昨年부터 東亞通航組合이란 것을 조직하야 우리의 힘으로 우리의 通航하는 길을 개척하랴고 싸워왓다.
이것은 몃 個人이 資本을 모와 自己利益만을 위하자는 것이 안이요 濟州人全體의 일이요 進하야는 朝鮮人全體의 할 일로 생각한다. 今年에도 우리는 이 航路開拓에 더욱더 奮鬪하랴 한다. 말하자면 海戰이다.

言論自由獲得運動에

吉州 金昌允

우리의 모든 운동에 제일 필요한 言論自由獲得運動에 노력하겟다.<32>
<22-32>