잡지명	別건곤 第36號
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	吸煙室 (Smoking Room)
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellany)

Even in this recession, when I go to the Jingogae district at the end or the beginning of the year, it's just as prosperous as before, so it seems that the word "recession" is only used among us Koreans.

Among them, Koreans are experiencing a double Lunar New Year, so the saying that you get old quickly by eating two years of age in one year is just a joke, but in reality, it's enough to turn black hair into white hair in just a few years.

Since we are talking about a double New Year, many people who oppose the Gregorian New Year participate in so-called year-end parties at the end of the Gregorian year, so are they only implementing the Gregorian calendar when it comes to playing and eating?

No matter what, the British-Indian Round Table Conference is not reaching a satisfactory resolution, so why not try a Square Table Conference? Whether it's a round table or a square table, unless British ambition disappears, the conference will always be unsatisfactory, so wouldn't a solution with a sword be better than with words?

Feng Yuxiang and Yan Xishan of China, who had been harboring ambition and engaging in various movements for a while, are said to be fleeing to Japan. From now on, will Feng Yuxiang try to gain power in Fengdu Hell (馮都地獄), and Yan Xishan in the Realm of King Yama (閻羅王國)?

Even after hearing the report from the authorities of the Taiwan Governor-General regarding the Wushe Incident (霧社事件) in Taiwan, the truth is still unclear. Since the incident occurred in Wushe, is the truth also hidden in a fog?

There are rumors that Yun Sim-deok (尹心悳), who supposedly committed suicide with Kim U-jin (金祐鎭) in the Genkai Sea a few years ago, is actually alive and that the two of them have gone to Rome, Italy, where Kim is studying playwriting and Yun is studying vocal music.

The truth of the matter will be known after seeing the results of the search, as Kim's younger brother has already submitted a search request to the Foreign Affairs Division of the Governor-General's Office. However, if the search is conducted thoroughly, they might find the bones even if they can't find the living person. However, searching the seabed will be difficult, so what to do?

A group of the Five-Man Gang attacked the Gyeryongsan Shindo Police Box, killing two officers and seriously injuring one. They must be special envoys sent from the Southern Joseon Jeongdoryeong Kingdom (南朝鮮鄭道令國).

It is said that a certain county magistrate of Changwon instructed each township head not to impose forced labor on the people during this recession. From the people's perspective, he is an extraordinary county magistrate, but from another perspective, he is an unruly county magistrate.

It is said that the Naeshin Store (0信商店), which is said to be the largest Korean department store in the Jongno area, is occupied by a friend from overseas from the start, becoming similar to the Second Mitsukoshi or the Second Tejiya. This is truly disheartening.

The farmers in the countryside are so pressured by taxes that they sell all their rice cheaply, but the authorities are still occasionally publishing measures to counter the rice price in the newspapers, so those measures are probably preparatory measures for next fall… maybe… <33>

**Named Entities**

金祐鎭	Kim U-jin
尹心悳	Yun Sim-deok
馮玉祥	Pŏng Uk-hyang
閻錫山	Yŏm Sŏk-san
霧社事件	Musa Sŏgeon
南朝鮮鄭道令國	Nam Chosŏn Chŏngdoryŏngguk
臺灣	T’ai-wan
鍾路	Chongno
昌原	Ch’angwŏn
鷄龍山	Kyeryongsan
玄海灘	Hyŏnhaet’an
日本	Japan
伊太利	Italy
馮都地獄	P’ŏngdo Chiok
閻羅王國	Yŏllawang Guk
진고개	Jingogae



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	吸煙室
기사형태	잡저

吸煙室
不景氣-不景氣하야도 歲末 歲初에 진고개구 경을 하면 그 前보다 조금도 다름이 업시 풍성풍성하니 結局不景氣란 말은 우리 朝鮮사람끼리만 쓰는 말인 것갓다.

그 중에 조선사람은 이중으로 또 陰曆歲末이 갓차워오니 일년에 나히를 두 살식 먹어서 쉬 늙는다는 말은 才談에 不過한 말이지만 참말 빗달년에 검은 머리가 파뿌리가 될 지경이다.

二重過歲 말이 낫스니 말이지 陽曆過歲를 반대하는 사람들도 陽曆歲末에 所謂忘年會에는 참가하는 사람이 만히 잇스니 놀고 먹는 것만은 陽曆實行을 한단 말인가.

英印의 圓卓會議는 암만 하야도 圓滿한 해결이 나지 안으니 다시 角卓會議나 하야보지 圓卓이나 角卓이나 영국의 野慾이 업서지기 前에는 그 회의는 언제나 不圓滿할 것이니 舌보다 칼 解決이 上策이 안일가.

한참동안 野心을 버틔고 별 運動을 다 하던 중국의 馮玉祥과 閻錫山은 日本으로 亡命을 한다나. 이제부터 馮玉祥은 馮都地獄 閻錫山은 閻羅王國에나 가서 세력을 잡아볼가.

臺灣의 霧社事件은 臺灣總督府當局者의 보고를 드러도 역시 그 眞相이 不明하다고 한다. 事件이 霧社에서 發生되엿스닛가 眞相도 五里霧中인가.

몃해 前에 玄海灘에서 金祐鎭과 情死한 尹心悳은 事實죽지를 안코 男女가 共히 伊太利 서울 로-마에 가서 金은 劇作, 尹은 聲樂硏究를 한다는 所聞이 자자하다.

사실의 眞否는 金의 親弟가 이미 總督府外事課에 搜索請願을 提出하얏다닛가 搜索의 결과를 보와야 알겟지만은 수색을 철저하게 잘만 하면 산사람은 못 차저도 주근 뼉다귀는 찻겟지. 그러나 海底搜索까지는 어려울 터이니 奈何.

五人組의 某團이 鷄龍山新都警察官駐在所를 襲擊하야 二名을 죽이고 一명은 重傷케 하얏다니 아마 南朝鮮鄭道令國에서 特派한 사람들인게지.

昌原某郡守는 이런 不景氣時代에 人民에개 함부로 賦役을 식히지 말라고 各面長에게 訓示를 식혓다 한다. 民間으로 보면 奇特한 군수지만은 다른 편으로 보면 不逞郡守-

鍾路一帶에서 朝鮮사람 百貨店으로 제일 크다는 0信商店의 內面에는 별서부터 물건너 친구가 차지를 하고 잇서서 第二三越이나 第二丁子屋 비슷하게 되엿다니 역시 寒心千萬.

시골 농민들은 稅金에 쫄이어서 쌀을 헐가로 별서 다 팔아 업샛는데 當局에서는 只今에도 米價對策講究說을 新聞에 각금 發表하니 그 대책은 明年 가을 豫備對策인 게지-아마...<33>
<33-33>