別건곤 제36호
발행일 1931년 01월 01일
기사제목 辛未洋擾 (Sinmi Western Disturbance)
필자 翠雲生
기사형태 문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Sinmi Western Disturbance
翠雲生

It was the summer of Byeongin Year (3rd year of King Yi) when the sound of cannons shattering French warships on Ganghwa Island shook the peninsula. American people staying in Tianjin, China, had heard that Joseon was rich in gold, ginseng, and other products, and they wanted to see it for themselves and request trade. Preston, an American citizen, loaded the ship General Sherman, owned by him, with goods favored by Joseon people, such as silk, glass utensils, and music boxes, as well as weapons for a show of force. The shipowner Preston, Captain Page, interpreter Thomas (also known as Choe Ran-heon, originally a British missionary), and five others, along with Chinese and Malay natives (烏鬼子), a total of 19 people, departed Tianjin. Passing Zhifu, they toured the coast of Pyeongan and Hwanghae provinces and arrived at the Daedong River on July 11. They sailed upstream to Pyongyang. The Pyongyang Jungyeong (中營) sent officials such as Liygyo Kim Nak-su to the American warship to <74> inquire about the reason for their arrival. The American warship responded through the interpreter Choe Ran-heon, stating the purpose of their visit to Joseon and requesting the opening of trade and food supplies. At that time, Daewongun (大院君), who regarded isolationism as the absolute national policy, was in power and was particularly wary of Westerners' invasion. Pyongyang Jungun Yi Hyeon-ik, after hearing the report, closely monitored the movements of the American warship. On July 18, the American warship came and went near Pyongyang's Mangyeongdae (萬景臺) and Hanseopjeong (閒似亭). In the evening, they recklessly sailed up the Daedong River in a small boat. Yi Hyeon-ik followed their tracks in a small boat, but the enemy ship suddenly attacked Yi Hyeon-ik's boat, imprisoned Yi's crew in their ship, and rudely insulted them, seizing their ornaments, official seals, and official uniforms. When Governor Park Gyu-su heard the news, he was greatly surprised and dispatched Pyongyang Buyun Shin Tae-jeong to demand the release of Hyeon-ik, but they stubbornly refused. They said they would only resolve everything after meeting with the governor. Until then, Joseon officials did not know the enemy's situation well, and because the Jungun (中軍) was on the enemy ship, they could not easily take action. Only the citizens shouted on the riverbank, throwing stones and demanding the release of the Jungun. Then, Park Chun-gwon, a retired military officer, heard the news and was greatly angered. He rushed to the enemy ship with a single sword and a small boat, rebuked their rudeness, and demanded the release of the Jungun. The enemy could not do anything and eventually released the Jungun.

Initially, when the American warship sailed up the Daedong River, heavy rain had caused the water level to rise, making the depth considerable. Because they did not know the geography well, they thought the water depth was always like that and recklessly sailed the large ship upstream. However, after only a few days, the river water gradually decreased, and the heavy ship could not move, making it difficult to advance or retreat. Even the food supplies were running out, and the situation became very desperate. However, because they could not easily obtain supplies from the Joseon people, they resorted to plunder, killing people indiscriminately on land (7 people died), taking property by force, and raping women. Governor Park Gyu-su was greatly angered and urgently reported to the government. He conspired with Baek Nak-yeon, the magistrate of Cheolsan, to load small ships with gunpowder and firewood and set them on fire, floating them downstream. As the ships approached, they collided with the enemy ship, and the enemy ship caught fire at once. On the one hand, the government soldiers and citizens fired guns and threw stones, and those on board could not move and burned to death. Those who landed were cut down with乱刀, and all 19 people in the party died.
At that time, Americans in China were waiting for the return of the General Sherman, but there was no news. They had many doubts. Eventually, soldiers of the French fleet who had been defeated and returned from Joseon transmitted rumors that the American warship had been burned in Pyongyang. The American minister asked the Chinese Office for the Management of the Affairs of All Nations about the truth. At that time, China, as well as the Joseon government, inquired and learned about it in detail, but they feared that it would become an international problem, so they hesitated to answer. In December of that year, they sent the USS Wachusett to Joseon to investigate the whereabouts of the Sherman, but the ship came near O-ujeon (五又鎭) in Hwanghae Province and returned without any results. Later, the USS Shenandoah, commanded by Rear Admiral Febiger, sailed along the coast of Hwanghae Province to the mouth of the Daedong River and directly asked the local officials, but the officials, through interpreter Hong Myeon-jo, replied that the Daedong River was originally shallow and that such a ship could not have come, denying it outright.

Although this Sherman incident was buried in ambiguity and the Americans did not know the truth, they knew very well that the party on the ship had disappeared in Joseon. This was the beginning of the Americans in China always advocating revenge and the need for trade. Then, in the 8th year of King Yi, Sinmi Year, in February, the American minister in Beijing, Mr. Low, and the commander of the Asian Fleet, Rear Admiral Rodgers, notified the Chinese Ministry of Rites in advance that they would lead a fleet to Joseon to achieve their long-cherished desire. China immediately notified the Joseon government of the reason.
At that time, Joseon, after hearing this urgent report, took the Byeongin Western Disturbance as a lesson and strictly guarded the coastal areas. They sternly rejected America, saying that Joseon had no goods to trade, so there was no need to trade with each other. However, the American minister, in order to achieve his desire, boarded the flagship USS Colorado with Naval Commander Rodgers and departed Shanghai in March of the same year. After briefly stopping at Nagasaki, they gathered American warships in Japan, forming two fleets with five ships, and headed for Joseon (at that time, the American Asian Fleet was based in Nagasaki). Their pretext for heading to Joseon was to search for the whereabouts of the Sherman and to demand the opening of diplomatic relations between Joseon and America. These five warships were originally old and slow, so they could not sail quickly. They slowly departed and first measured the depth of Asan Bay and Namyang Bay. Then, they came to Muljido (勿淄島) (also called Boisée Island (뽀아제 本島), where foreign ships always anchored at the time), located north of Incheon, and began reconnaissance of the Gyeong River. They sent Secretary Mr. Drew (then an interpreter and superintendent of the Jiujiang Customs) to request a meeting with Joseon officials, explain the reason for their visit to Joseon, and seek understanding for the measurement of the Gyeong River. The Joseon government monitored the situation of the American warship, delayed the reply by making excuses, and, thinking of the precedent of the French warship attacking the Gyeong River in the Byeongin year, strictly guarded the Gyeong River waterway. They sent Jungun Eo Jae-yeon to Ganghwa, 배치한 배치한 placing many guns and cannons in fortresses such as Chojijin (草芝鎭), Deokjin (德津), and Gwangseong (廣城), which were key points, and prepared for battle by preparing skilled tiger hunters and other elite soldiers in various places.

As the situation became so desperate, a unit of the American warship began measuring the Ganghwa Strait, passing through the dangerous rapids of Sonseokhang (孫石項). A Joseon battery near Gwangseongjin (廣城鎭) (Ganghwa) opened fire first. The American warship also responded and fired back fiercely. This was the first engagement of the Sinmi Western Disturbance. The Joseon army's shelling was quite fierce. Brigadier General Breeze, who was famous as a general in the American Civil War, said that he had never seen such intense shooting before. However, the damage to both armies was unexpectedly small, with only one injured on the American side and one death on the Joseon side. After this conflict, the American warship gave up hope of resolving the issue peacefully between the two countries and prepared for war, blocking the Ganghwa waterway and interfering with the transportation of grain to the capital.
It was April 23. The American army was angered by the sudden shelling by the Joseon army the day before and wanted to wage a war of revenge. With the USS Monocacy and USS Palos as the main force, they sailed up the Ganghwa waterway with many steamboats. They first occupied Chojijin (草芝鎭), the throat of Ganghwa, and set up camp there that night. Although the Joseon army launched a night attack, they did not succeed. On the following day, the 24th, the enemy attacked Deokjinbo (德津堡) and advanced by land and sea, eventually 肉溥 (肉溥) Gwangseongjin (廣城鎭), a strategic point in the Ganghwa waterway. Ganghwa Sunmu Jungun Eo Jae-yeon commanded the cannons and the Ganghwa sailors and fiercely attacked the enemy, but because the enemy's cannons and weapons were far superior to those of the Joseon army, they could not resist. Gwangseongjin fell, and Jungun Eo Jae-yeon, his brother Eo Jae-sun, Oyeong So-gwan Ryu Pung-ro, Gungan Yi Hyeon-hak, Gwangseong Byeoljang Park Chi-seong, and Ganghwa Cheon-chong Kim Gyeong-hyeon were killed in battle. The number of soldiers killed or wounded reached about 350. On the enemy side, including the vanguard commander Lieutenant McKee, there were 10 deaths and many injuries.

At this time, Daewongun was greatly angered by the defeat at Gwangseongjin and summoned volunteer soldiers from each province and tiger hunters from Gangwon and Pyeongan provinces to be dispatched to various key towns such as Ganghwa Tongjin to destroy the Western devils at once. He erected stone monuments engraved with the oath "When Western barbarians invade, if we do not fight, we will make peace, and making peace is selling the country, let our ten thousand years of descendants be warned. Byeongin (Year 3), made. Sinmi (Year 8), erected" on every street in Jongno and in important gatherings in each province. He also wrote such letters in ink and heavily promoted the expulsion of Western barbarians. On the one hand, he carried out a massacre of Catholics, greatly boosting morale, and no one dared to advocate for peace, only advocating for fighting.
The enemy, who had occupied Gwangseongjin, wanted to occupy other towns in Joseon, but because the Joseon army's defense was very strict and their own forces were weak, they dared not advance further. They retreated to Muljido (勿淄島) and observed the situation in Joseon. After about 40 days, they fled to Zhifu (芝罘) in China on May 16, and the Joseon army won without fighting. -(Omitted below)-

At the time of the Sinmi Western Disturbance, Ae-cheop Yangdeok Gisaeng Chae-ran, the beloved concubine of the Lu Jungun, entered the chaos and collected the bodies of the Eo brothers, and the court specially rewarded her.

**Named Entities**

江華島	Ganghwa Island
李太王	King Yi
淸國	Ch'eongguk
天津	T'ianjin
美國	Miguk
普來屯	P'ŭraet'ŭn
巴使	Pasa
崔蘭軒	Ch'oe Ran-hŏn
英國	Yŏngguk
芝罘	Chiboo
平壤	P'yŏngyang
吏校	Igyo
金樂洙	Kim Nak-su
大院君	Taewŏngun
李玄益	Yi Hyŏn-ik
朴珪壽	Pak Kyu-su
申泰鼎	Sin T'ae-jŏng
朴春權	Pak Ch'un-gwŏn
白樂淵	Paek Nak-yŏn
芝罘	Chiboo
美國公使	Miguk Kongsa
總理各國事務衙門	Ch'ongni Kakuk Samu Amun
黃海道	Hwanghae-do
五又鎭	O-ujeon
洪勉祖	Hong Myŏn-jo
李太王	Yi T'aewang
魯籍	No-chŏk
亞細亞艦隊司令官	Asia Hamtae Saryeonggwan
禮部	Yebu
牙山灣	Asanman
南陽灣	Namyangman
勿淄島	Muljido
뽀아제 本島	Ppo-aje Pon-do
京江	Kyŏnggang
魚在淵	Ŏ Chae-yŏn
草芝鎭	Ch'ojijin
德津	Tŏkjin
廣城	Kwangseong
孫石項	Sonseokhang
江華	Kanghwa
모도가시號	Modogasi-ho
파로스 號	P'arosŭ-ho
草芝鎭	Ch'ojijin
德津堡	Tŏkjinbo
廣城鎭	Kwangseongjin
魚在淳	Ŏ Chae-sun
柳豊魯	Ryu P'ung-no
李玄鶴	Yi Hyŏn-hak
朴致誠	Pak Ch'i-sŏng
金璟鉉	Kim Kyŏng-hyŏn
江華通津	Kanghwa T'ongjin
陽德	Yangdŏk
彩鸞	Ch'ae-ran
魯中軍	No Jungun



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	辛未洋擾
필자	翠雲生
기사형태	문예기타

辛未洋擾
						翠雲生


江華島上에서 佛國軍艦을 깨트려바시던 대포소리가 半島의 天地를 진동하던 丙寅年 여름이엿다(李太王 3년). 淸國 天津에 와서 두류하는 米國사람들은 별서부터 朝鮮에 黃金과 人蔘 등 여러 가지의 물산이 풍부하다는 말을 익키 듯고 한번 구경도 하고 兼하야 通商을 요구하야보랴고 同國人 푸레스톤=普來屯=의 소유한 제네랄 써맨호의 선박에다 朝鮮사람의 嗜好하는 비단 琉璃器皿 自鳴種 등 여러 가지의 화물을 가득히 실고 또 示威的으로 가진 武裝을 한 다음에 艦主 푸레스톤 艦長 폐지(巴使) 通譯 도-마스(此卽崔蘭軒인데 원래 영국인선교사) 등 외 5인과 中國人及烏鬼子(馬來土人) 등을 합하야 일행 19인이 天津을 출발하야 芝*를 지나 平黃兩道의 沿海를 回遊하다가 7월 11일에 대동강을 거슬너 올나와서 平壤境內까지 도달하니 그 때 平壤中營에서는 吏校 金樂洙 등을 米艦에 보내서<74> 그 到來한 이유를 詰問한 즉 米艦에서는 통역 崔蘭軒으로 對應하야 조선에 온 목적을 말하고 또 通商開始와 食粮을 요구하얏섯다. 그때로 말하면 鎖國主義로 絶對國是를 삼는 大院君이 當局하야 洋夷의 침범을 특별 경계하던 때이라 平壤中軍 李玄益은 그 보고를 듯고 米艦의 動靜을 非常 監視하더니 7월18일에 니르러 米艦은 平壤의 萬景臺 閒似亭 附近으로 來往하다가 夕陽에는 短艇으로 傍若無人하게 大洞江上流까지 遊弋함으로 李玄益은 小船을 타고 그 踪跡을 追隨하니 敵船은 돌연이 李玄益의 탄 배를 來襲하야 李氏 以外船員一同을 자기의 船中에 감금하고 무례하게 辱을 뵈며 佩物 官印 官服 등을 탈취하엿섯다, 그 소식을 들은 監司 朴珪壽는 크게 놀나 平壤府尹 申泰鼎을 특파하야 玄益의 放還을 요구하얏스나 彼等은 완강하게 듯지 안코 다만 監司와 會見한 다음에 萬事를 해결한다고 하엿섯다. 그때까지 朝鮮의 官憲들은 敵情을 잘 알지 못하고 中軍이 敵船에 잇슴으로 容易히 下手치를 못하고 다만 시민들이 강변에서 돌팔매를 치면서 中軍을 放還하라고 呌號할 뿐이러니 때 맛츰 退校 朴春權이 그 말을 듯고 크게 분개하야 單刀短艇으로 敵船에 돌진하야 그 無禮를<75>힐책하고 中軍의 放還을 요구하니 敵 등도 엇지 하지 못하고 遂히 中軍을 放還하엿다.



츰에 米艦이 大洞江을 올라올 때에 여러 날 큰 비로 漲水가 되야 水深이 상당함으로 地理를 잘 알지 못하는 彼 等이 평소에도 수심이 그런 줄만 알고 大船을 함부로 끌고 上航하엿더니 두류한 지 不過 數日에 강물이 점점 減落되니 묵어운 배가 도저히 이동치 못하야 進退難谷이 되고 粮食좃차 끈어저서 사정이 심히 절박하게 되엿섯다. 그러나 그들은 조선 사람과는 용이이 合意的으로 物資를 어둘 수가 업슴으로 窮餘一策으로 약탈을 하랴고 육지에 나려서 인민을 함부로 죽이며(被死者 7인) 재물을 强取하고 婦人을 凌辱하니 監司 朴珪壽는 크게 분개하야 급히 정부에 上啓하고 鐵山府使 白樂淵과 공모하야 적은 선박에다 火藥薪炭 등을 갓득 실은 다음에 불을 질너서 상류로부터 띄우니 그 배가 가는 쪽쪽 敵船에 부대처서 일시에 적선에 불이 붓고 一方으로 官兵과 市民은 총을 놋고 돌팔매를 치니 船中에 잇는 자는 꼼작도 못하고 그대로 타서 죽고 상륙하 자들은 亂刀로 막 베히니 일행 19인이 全部 沒死하엿다,
그 때 중국에 잇는 미국인들은 쩨네랄 써맨 호의<76> 도라오기를 고대하여도 아모 소식이 업슴으로 만흔 疑念을 가지고 잇더니 마츰 조선에서 敗歸한 佛國艦隊의 병졸들이 米艦의 平壤에서 燒滅되엿다는 風說을 전하매 米國公使는 淸國總理各國事務衙門에 그 眞狀如何를 물엇섯다, 그 때 淸國은 물론 조선정부에 照會하야 그것을 자서이 알엇지만는 그것이 국제의 문제가 될가 念憂하야 우물주물 대답을 함으로 엇지 하지 못하고 그 해 12월에 또 『와-치셋트』號汽船을 조선에 보내서 써맨 호의 行衛를 조사케 하얏스나 그 배는 역시 黃海道 五又鎭 附近까지 왓다가 아모 효과도 업시 空歸하고 또 그 뒤에는 『페비가-費米日』을 사령관으로 한 汽船 시에난드아-호가 黃海道沿海岸을 돌아 大洞江口까지 이르러서 직접 地方官에게 물엇스나 官憲은 譯生洪勉祖로 대답하되 大洞江은 원래에 수심이 엿터서 그러한 배는 오지 못한다고 根本으로 否認하엿섯다.



이 써맨호 사건은 비록 有耶無耶間에 埋沒이 되야 미국인들이 그 진상을 알지 못하게 되엿스나 그 선박의 일행이 조선에 와서 종적이 업서진 것만은 그들도 잘 아는 까닭에 이것을 발단으로 하야 중국에 잇는 미국인들은<77>언제이나 이 復讎를 하고 또 通商의 必要를 主唱하엿다. 그러다가 李太王 8년 辛未 2월에 북경에 駐在하는 米國公使 『로-』와 亞細亞艦隊司令官海軍少將 『로-자스=魯籍』는 다년간 그 宿志를 도달하기 위하야 함대를 인솔하고 조선으로 향할 것을 먼저 淸國 禮部에 통고하니 청국은 즉시 그 사유를 조선정부에 통지하엿섯다.
그 때에 조선은 이 급보를 듯고 丙寅兩擾를 鑑하야 邊海의 방비를 엄수하고 미국에 대하야는 조선은 무역할 만한 貨物이 업슨즉 서로 통상할 필요가 업다고 엄격히 거절하얏섯다. 그러나 미국공사는 자기의 素志를 그대로 관철하기 위하야 水師提督『로-자스』와 共히 旗艦 고로라드호를 타고 同年 3월에 上海를 출발하야 長崎에 잠간 들녀 日本에 잇는 米艦을 집합하야 五隻으로 2함대를 편성하고 조선으로 향하얏다(그 때 미국의 亞細亞艦隊가 長崎에 근거함) 彼 등이 조선으로 향하는 口實은 往年 써맨호 船의 行衛수색과 朝米通交의 요구이엿다. 이 5隻의 군함은 원래 老杇遲鈍한 것들이기 때문에 급속한 항해를 못하고 서서히 출동하야 먼저 牙山灣 南陽灣의 수심 측량을 하고 다시 인천의 북방에 잇는 勿淄島(뽀아제 本島라고도 칭하니<78> 당시 洋舶은 항상 이곳에 寄舶하얏다)에 와서 근거를 두고 京江의 偵察에 착수하며 또 秘書 『또루우』-當時通譯兼九江海關監督-을 보내서 朝鮮官憲과 會見을 청하야 조선에 온 事由를 말하고 京江測水의 諒解를 구하니 조선의 정부는 米艦의 情況을 偵視하며 口實을 하야 회답의 時日을 遷延하고 丙寅年에 佛艦이 京江을 來襲하던 전례를 생각하야 京江水路의 방비를 엄수하고 江華에는 中軍魚在淵을 보내여 要衝되는 草芝德津廣城 등 堡壘에 다수한 銃砲를 배치하고 각지에 熟練한 虎獵砲手와 其他精兵을 整頓하야 萬船의 戰備를 준비하얏섯다.



형세가 이와 가티 절박하게 된 때에 米艦의 一部隊는 江華海峽의 測量에 착수하야 孫石項(손들목)의 險湍을 지내니 廣城鎭(江華) 부근에 잇는 조선의 一砲臺에서는 먼저 맹렬하게 발포를 하니 米艦도 또한 此에 應戰하야 맹렬히 砲擊하얏섯다. 이것은 辛未洋擾의 최초교전으로 조선군의 此砲擊은 자못 격렬하얏는데 米國南北戰爭에 梟將으로 이름이 놉던 『부레-끠』는 이와 가튼 猛射는 전에도 그 예가 보지 못하엿다고 하엿다. 그러나 兩軍의 손해는 의외로 적어서 米軍에는 부상자 1명<80>조선군에는 死者 1명을 내일 뿐이엿다. 이 충돌이 잇슨 이후에 米艦은 兩國間에 평화로 問題解決할 것을 絶望하고 또한 戰備를 하야 江華水路를 遮斷하고 京畿의 漕運을 방해하엿섯다.
4월23일이엿다. 米軍은 전날 조선군에 돌연한 포격을 當하고 此를 憤恨하야 復讎의 戰을 하랴고 『모도가-시號, 파로스 號를 中堅으로 하야 다수한 汽船과 가티 江華水路를 溯航하며 먼저 江華의 咽喉之地인 草芝鎭을 占奪하고 同夜에는 그 地에 路營하니 朝鮮軍이 비록 夜襲을 하얏스나 그 공을 이르지 못하얏다. 그리고 그 翌日인 24일에는 적군은 또 德津堡를 습격하고 水陸으로 竝進하야 遂히 江華水路의 險要地廣城鎭을 肉溥하니 江華巡撫中軍 魚在淵은 官砲와 江華水兵을 호령하야 적군을 맹격하얏스나 원래에 적군의 大砲와 武器가 朝鮮軍의 대포와 무기보다 월등한 까닭에 遂히 抵當치 못하야 廣城鎭이 陷落이 되니 中軍 魚在淵, 그의 아우 魚在淳, 御營哨官 柳豊魯, 軍官 李玄鶴, 廣城別將 朴致誠, 江華千總 金璟鉉 등은 戰死하고 그 외 軍兵의 死傷者 약 350여 人에 達하며 적군은 先鋒將『마쓰케』 中尉를 위하야 戰死者數 10인, 負傷者 다수에 달하얏다.<80>
이때에 大院君은 廣城鎭의 敗報를 크게 분개하야 各道 義勇兵과 江, 平兩道의 虎獵砲手를 召募하야 일거에 洋鬼를 擊滅하랴고 江華通津 등 諸要鎭으로 파견하고 京城 種路거리와 各道重要部會에는 거리마다 『洋夷侵犯, 非戰則和, 主和賣國, 戒我萬年子孫丙寅, (3년)作, 辛未(8년)立』이란 誓辭을 삭인 石碑를 세우고 墨工으로 또 墨에도 그러한 글자를 써서 크게 洋夷排斥을 선전하며 또 一方으로 天主敎徒의 대학살을 하니 사기가 크게 진작하야 누구나 主和의 說을 감히 내지 못하고 싸우기만 주장하게 되엿다.
廣城鎭을 점령한 적군은 다시 조선의 다른 城鎭을 점령코자 하엿스나 원래 조선군의 방비가 심히 엄하고 자기네의 兵力이 약한 까닭에 감히 더 진출하지 못하고 勿淄島로 退하야 조선의 형세만 觀望하다가 凡40여일을 지나 5월 16일에 支那의 芝罘를 逃走하니 朝鮮軍은 이에 不戰自勝하얏다.-(二下略-원문)-

辛未洋亂當時魯中軍의 愛妾陽德妓生 彩鸞이 亂丸中에 드러가서 魚氏兄弟의 屍體를 수습하야 왓슴으로 조정에서 특히 褒賞하엿다.<81>
<74-81>