잡지명	別건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	戱曲 그의 家庭風景(全一幕) (One-Act Play: A Scene of His Home)
필자	蔡萬植
기사형태	희곡·시나리오 (Play/Screenplay)

[PERSONS]
He: About thirty years old
His Wife: About twenty years old
His Son: About thirteen years old
The Landlady: An old woman

[TIME]
Modern Early Autumn Sunset

[PLACE]
Kyŏngsŏng (京城) [Seoul]

[SETTING]
The half-room porch of a dilapidated thatched house faces the front, and a part of a gloomy kitchen is visible to the right. The background shows a glimpse of the inner quarters through double windows leading to the back door. A narrow yard is in front of the porch, and a tilted middle gate is closed to the left of the yard. There is little furniture to catch the eye. To the right of the porch, there is a poorly decorated stand resembling a cabinet, and a pair of worn-out shoes belonging to the couple are placed on the stepping stone. As the curtain rises, he is leaning against the door frame, reading a book, and his wife is sitting next to him, sorting through her sewing.

Wife (After touching the sewing for a while) He said to wait until five o'clock, right?
He (Absently, engrossed in the book) Yeah.

Wife It must be past five o'clock already...
He (After a while, barely raising his head) I don't know...

Wife It's past five.
He (Looking around) Is it...?

Wife Of course. <152>
He Then it won't work out.
Wife What if it doesn't work out? (Untangling the thread)
He What do you mean, what if? There's nothing we can do.
Wife (To herself) He must be having a hard time too...

He What if he's unemployed? (Looking up at his wife) Does he owe us something? Is he obligated to do that? Whether it works out or not, we should be grateful for his willingness to help us...
Wife Grateful? Among the people you call comrades, I don't trust anyone.
He Huh? Is he supposed to help us with our difficult situation because he is our comrade? Or to work with us?
Wife But...

He What do you mean, but?
Wife (Annoyed and frustrated) I don't know.
He (Naggingly) Why pretend to know something you don't?
Wife I don't know, I don't know.
He (Chuckles)
Landlady (Entering from the right, near the kitchen door)
Wife (Putting down the sewing and getting up)
He (Putting down the book and straightening up)
Landlady (Standing in front of the stepping stone) I heard it would be done by five o'clock. Is it done?
Wife (Hesitatingly) Well... someone said they'd bring the money by five o'clock, but they haven't come yet...

Landlady Really... So, if that person doesn't bring the money, it won't work out today either?
Wife No, no. Why would that be the case? Someone said they would bring it, so we're waiting.
Landlady Well, I don't care who brings it or doesn't. I just need to get what I'm owed.
Wife Don't worry. If it's not today, it'll be tomorrow...
Landlady (Exploding) There you go again with that "tomorrow" talk! How many times have I heard that? Huh? Do you think I'm giving you this house for free? How many months has it been already? If you live in someone's house, you have to pay rent. So... who would let you live in their house for free? Huh?
He Look here, ma'am. Who said we wouldn't pay? We’ll pay so why are you acting like this?
Landlady You keep saying you'll pay, but you never do. What good is that?
He Look, if we had money and weren't paying, I wouldn't have anything to say. But as you can see, do we look like we have money? We don't have money, so it's not our fault, is it?
Landlady Are you saying I told you not to be poor! Did I steal your money? You keep making excuses about not having money and not paying the rent. What am I supposed to do?
Wife Look here, no need to say much more. If you go inside, we'll bring it to you as soon as that person brings it. Please wait a little longer.
Landlady Well, if that's the case... (Turning around and leaving) I'll wait one more hour. (Exits to the right)

Wife (Returning to her seat and sitting blankly)
He That damn old woman! What's she going to do with all that money she's so greedy for? She doesn't even have children.
Wife Why are you cursing at her? You can't even pay the rent.
He Don't you hate that old woman?
Wife Of course, I do.
He Then why don't you become her adopted daughter?
Wife (Rolling her eyes) Why don't you become her adopted son?
He I'd rather not.
Wife (Laughing in disbelief)
He Are you hungry?
Wife Why are you asking me if I'm hungry all of a sudden?
He I'm hungry too, but aren't you hungry too?
Wife (Thinking) More than anything, I wonder if the child is hungry!
He He probably ate at the factory.

Wife It doesn't seem like he did. (Pause) If he had gone to his mother who gave birth to him, he wouldn't be suffering like this.
He (Somewhat reproachfully) Don't say useless things.
Wife Even if I didn't give birth to him, I can't bear to see a young child suffering. Don't you feel anything as his own flesh and blood?
He Don't say useless things without knowing what's in my heart.
Wife I don't know what's in your heart.
He (Thinking)
Wife (After a while) Honey.
He Huh?
Wife I always wonder, why do you... not just you, but people like you in the intellectual class... why do you risk your lives and dedicate your whole lives to that movement?
He Why do you ask when you don't understand even if I explain it?
Wife When have you ever explained it in a way that's easy to understand?
He (As if understanding) So, if I explain it in an easy-to-understand way now, you'll listen, learn, and become a comrade?
Wife I really don't want to. I'm asking because I'm so frustrated with what you guys are doing.

He Then don't ask vaguely like that. Ask specifically, and I'll answer clearly and refreshingly.
Wife (Thinking) That... something... an ideal? When will that be realized?
He See, I told you to ask specifically first. Why are you jumping all over the place and asking that first?
Wife Still, I don't know what's what, so I asked whatever came to mind...
He Alright, alright. What is it?

(Omitted eighty lines)

Wife Don't even mention it. (Pause) What sin am I atoning for?
He (His face clouds over, and he says nothing)
Wife You have faith in your cause, so you probably see hardship as pleasure. But what faith do I have? What do I have? To be honest, I can't hope for great wealth, but I just want a steady income so I don't have to be too poor, not get into arguments with others, not cause arguments, and live peacefully raising my children. (Pause) Look, life is as dry as a sandy field.
Besides, I don't know if you'll be arrested today or have to flee somewhere tomorrow. How am I supposed to live in this difficult and uncertain world?
He (Still sadly) That's why I keep telling you, isn't it? Enduring temporary heartache and leaving is better for your future...
Wife (To herself) If only I could.
He Why can't you? Besides, there's even K-kun (K군) who still can't forget you, right?
Wife I'd rather die than live like this.
He An eternal mystery! (Looking at his wife) You're still immature and haven't suffered enough. Get rid of that sentimentality.
Son (Opening the middle gate and entering)
Wife Welcome home.
Son (Standing by the porch)
Wife Are you hungry?
Son (Shakes his head left and right)
He Did you eat lunch?
Son (In a small voice) Yes.
Wife What did you eat?
Son Udon.
He Seven jeon (칠전)? With a ticket? <155>
Son Yes.
He What do you write on the ticket?
Son I write "seven jeon," my name, and the date...
Wife If you don't eat breakfast and don't bring your lunch box in the future...
Son Yes.
He Will they give you udon if you ask for it in the morning?
Son Yes.
He Then if you don't eat at home, go there and eat breakfast.
Son I have to call.
He Ask the older girls to do it for you.
Wife Yes, you said it's five won (오원), so you can eat. Do that from now on, okay? (Strokes his head) Come on up.
Son (Climbing up and hugging her)
Wife Are you hungry?
Son (Shakes his head left and right)
He (Suddenly gets up, goes into the room, gets dressed, and comes out with a few books in his hand)
Wife Where are you going?
He I'm going to get rice.
Wife By selling books?
He Yeah. (Goes down to the stepping stone and puts on his shoes)
Wife (Sighs)
He (Flipping through the pages of the book and mumbling) There's no firewood either, right?
Wife No.
He We need to eat until tomorrow morning, and there will be three or four hungry people coming this evening... (Thinking, he goes back into the room and comes out with a few more books)
Wife Get just enough rice and buy half a sack.
He Yeah. (Leaves)
Wife (Stroking her son's head and sighing) (Curtain)
October 31, 1930

Author's Apology

The most important part in the middle was omitted, so the work lost its life. I tried to get rid of it, but I had no choice but to publish it as it is due to the scheduled page count. <156>

**Named Entities**

京城	Kyŏngsŏng
K군	K-kun



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제36호
발행일	1931년 01월 01일
기사제목	戱曲 그의 家庭風景(全一幕)
필자	蔡萬植
기사형태	희곡·시나리오

戱曲 그의 家庭風景(全一幕)
						蔡萬植
[人物]
그   설흔살가량
그의안해   스무살가량
그의아들   열세살가량
그집主人  老婆
[時代]
現代 초가을 夕陽
[場所]
京城
[舞臺]
으러저가는 초가집의 半間압마루가 正面으로잇고 右手로는 우중충한 부엌의 一部分이보인다. 背景은 열닌 쌍窓으로해서 방을지나 다시 열닌 뒤ㅅ門으로해서 안채가 조곰보인다. 마루압호로는 좁다란 마당이잇고 마당에서 左手로는 기우러진 中門이 닷치어잇다. 살님은 別로 눈에 우는것이업고 마루에서 右手로 장ㅅ목간을 숭내이듯 貧弱하게 여노얏고 대에는 夫婦의 헌 신이노혀잇다. 幕이열니며 그는 門지방에 비슴듬히 기대여안저 冊을보고잇고 그의 안해는 그엽헤안저 내은 것을 노다거리고잇다.

안해 (한참 내를만지다가) 다섯시지 기다려보라고 햇지요?
그 (冊에 정신이팔녀 건성으로) 응
안해 다섯시는 발서 지낫슬텐데……
그 (한참만에 겨우 고개를들고) 글세……
안해 다섯시는 지낫서
그 (사방을둘너보며) 지낫슬가……?
안해 그-럼＜152＞
그 그러면 안되게로군
안해 안되면 어턱허우? (아마를 푸린다)
그 어턱케하다니 할수업지
안해 (혼자말가치) 그이도 퍽은 십얼지……
그 실업쟌허면? (안해를 치어다보며) 그사람이 뭣 우리한테 빗을젓소? 달니 그럴의무가잇소? 되거나 안되거나 그만큼 우리를 보아주겟다는 성의만도 고맙지……
안해 고맙고무어고간에 당신네를 동지라고원 한사람도 미덤직한사람은엄습되다.
그 흥 어려운살님을 보아주라는 동진가? 일하자는 동지가아니고?
안해 그러치만……
그 무에 그러치만이야?
안해 (답답해서 귀챤한 듯이) 몰나요
그 (추근추근하게) 모르는걸 웨 애초에 알은체를 해요
안해 몰나요 몰나요
그 (식 웃는다)
집주인 (右手 부엌문압흐로해서 登場)
안해 (내를노코 일어선다)
그 (책을놋코 새리고안는다)
집주인 (대ㅅ돌압헤와서서) 다섯점에 된다더니 됏수?
안해 (머밋머밋하다가) 저-누가 다섯점에 돈을좀 해다준다고햇는데 아직아니와서……
집주인 원참……그래 그사람이 돈을 못해다주면 오늘도 안될테란말이요?
안해 안얘요 무슨 그럴리가잇나요 갓다준다는 사람이 잇스니 기다리는게지요
집주인 글세 누구가 갓다를주건 저다를주건 내가알메리가잇소 나는 어터케해서든지 나바들것이나 바더야지
안해 염녀말고기세요 오늘못되면 내일이라도…
집주인 (와락) 그 내일소리가 나오는구려! 발서멧번채요? 응? 염체글세 나더러 공으로 집을달나지 응 발서 멧달채요? 남의집을 살엇스면 집세를 내야하는버빚 그래……그래서야 누가 세집을 노아먹고산단말이요 응
그 글세요보시오 마나님 누가 안드린담니? 안드린다고하면 원 그러시겟습니다만은 드린다고안습니?
집주인 준다-준다하고 말만하고 안주니 그게무슨 주는거요?
그 글세이거보시오 그것이 돈을두고서 안드렷스면야 나도할말이 업겟습니다만은 보시는것갓치 어데돈이 잇슴니? 업서서 못드린거야 죄야아니지요?
집주인 글세 당신이 돈이업는 것을 내가 엄스라고식＜153＞혓단말이요! 내가 당신돈을 도적질을해갓단말이요 돈업다는 핑계만하고 집세는 주질아니하니 그래나는 엇저란말이요
안해 이거보세요 여러말슴하실것엄시 드러가게시면 그사람이 가저오는대로 곳 가저다드릴 잠간만 더 참으세요
집주인 원 그러타면 모르거니와 (도라서서 가면서)내한시간만 더 기다릴테요(右手로 退場)
안해 (도루 자리에와서 우둑허니안젓다)
그 배라먹을놈의 늙은이! 그러케 지악스럽게 돈은 모아서 무얼하랴고그래! 자식도엄스면서
안해 괘-니 남더러 욕만해요 돈도못주면서
그 당신은 그놈의 늙은이가 밉쟌소?
안해 말두말어요 괘-니
그 흥 그러면 수양녀로나 들어가구려
안해 (눈을흘긴다) 당신이나 수양아들로 드러가구려
그 해롭쟌햐
안해 (기가맥혀웃는다)
그 배곱흐쟌허우?
안해 괘-니지금 배가곱흐니 남더러
그 나도곱흐지만 당신도 아니곱흐냔말이야?
안해 (생각하다가) 무어나무어나간에 이애가 배가오직 곱흘가!
그 공장에서 먹겟지
안해 눈치가 그러지도 안는것갓태요 (間) 그래도 저를난 저의어머니한테갓스면 이런고생은 안허렷만
그 (좀 준절하게) 괘-니 쓸데업는소리를해
안해 나는 내가낫치안햇서도 어린 것이 고생을 하는을 참아 못보겟데 당신은 당신이난 혈육이면서 그런정도 업소?
그 괘-니 속도모르고 쓸데업는소리를 말어요
안해 나는 당신이 속 속하는 그속이 웬속인지모르겟습데다
그 (생각)
안해 (한참잇다가) 여보
그 응?
안해 일상 뭇는말이지만 무엇문에 당신네……당신아니라 로동자도아닌 당신네 지식게급사람들이 그러케 목숨지 내여걸고 생활을 온ㅅ곳밧처서 그 운동을허우?
그 아모리 이야기를해주어도 모르면서 왜 물어?
안해 밤낫 말해준다는게 언제 알어듯게 조리잇는이야기나 해주엇소?
그 (통하듯이) 그러니 인제는 조리잇게 이야기을해주면 들어서 배워서 동지가될테이지?
안해 그건 제발실혀요 당신네들이 하는속이 하도 답＜154＞답하니 물어보는말이지
그 그러면 그러케 둘여노코 뭇지를말고 대문대문을 들어서 뭇기를 조리잇게물어요 그러면 대답도 조리잇게  불어지게 시원스럽게 해줄테니
안해 (생각하다가) 당신네들이 바라고잇는 그……무엇인가……리상인가?……그것은 언제나 실현이되우?
그 저것봐 조리잇게 뭇기부터하라니 염듯이 훌ㅅ적여서 그것부터물어?
안해 그래도 나는 무엇이무언지 모르니 아무거나 생각나는대로물엇지……
그 그래그래 엇덧탄말이야?

(此間八十行略)

안해 말두망어요 (間) 나도이게 무슨죄다짐이요?
그 (얼골이 흐려지마 말이업다)
안해 당신이야 주의에대한 신념이잇서서 하는일이니 고생도 락으로 녁여지겟지만 나야무슨 신념이잇소? 무엇이잇소? 털어노코말이지 나가튼 사람은 크게 넉넉한것이야 바랄수가업지만 일정한 수입이나 잇서서 과히 군색하지나안코 남의 시비를 밧지안코 남의시비도 하지안코 안온하게 자식이나나어서길느고 그러고살어갈소망밧게는 녀업는데 (間) 자-보시오 생활은 이러케 모래밧갓치 밧삭말넛지요
게다가  당신이 오늘 붓들녀갈지 내일 어데로 망명을 가야할지 모르지요 이런 고달푸고 불안한세상을 어터케 살어가란말이요?
그 (여전히 추렷이) 그러니 내가 각금 말하지안습듸? 한의 마음압흔것을참고 갈녀서는 것이 차라리 당신한테는 압날을 위해서 조흔일이라고……
안해 (혼자말가치) 그럴수가잇스면 작으나조켓소만
그 그러케 못할 것은 무엇잇소? 더구나 지금도 당신을 잇지못하고잇는 K군지 잇지안소?
안해 이대로안저서죽어도 그건실혀요
그 천고의 수수기야! (안해를보고) 아직도 철을모르고 고생을 덜해서 그럿소 그런 센치멘탈은 그만 청산해바리구려
아들 (中門을열고 드러온다)
안해 어서오느라
아들 (마루테 기대여선다)
안해 배곱핫지?
아들 (고개를 左右로흔든다)
그 겸심먹엇니?
아들 (작은소리로) 네
안해 무얼로?
아들 우동
그 칠전리? 표써주고?＜155＞
아들 네
그 표를네가 무어라고써주어?
아들 칠전이라고쓰고 이름쓰고 날자쓰고……
안해 이담에도 아침아니먹고 벤아니가지고 가거든
아들 네
그 아침에도 우동갓다달나면갓다주지?
아들 네
그 그러면 집에서 밥아니먹고가거든 거긔가서 아침도먹어라
아들 전화해야지
그 큰아희들더러 좀 해달나지
안해 그래라 오원이라니 그러케하면 너먹는것은되겟다 이담부터 그래라응 (머리를 어루만저준다) 올나와
아들 (올나가서안는다)
안해 배곱흐지?
아들 (고개를 左右로흔든다)
그 (별ㅅ덕 일어나서 방으로들어가 의관을차리고 손에 책을 두어권 들고나온다)
안해 어데가우?
그 가서 쌀가지고옥게
안해 책팔어서?
그 응 (대ㅅ에 내려서서 신을신는다)
안해 (한숨을쉬인다)
그 (책 뒷장을넘기며 마슬너보다가) 장작도엄지?
안해 네
그 내일아침지는 먹어야하고  오늘저녁에 몹풀 사람이 서넛이올텐데모다 배곱흔사람들인데……(생각하다가 도루방으로들어가서 책을 두어권 더가지고나온다)
안해 쌀은 양쌀히고 반씩사가지고오우
그 응 (나아간다)
안해 (아들의 머리를 어루만지며 한숨을 쉬인다) (幕)
一九三○ㆍ一○ㆍ三一

筆者의 謝

中間에 가장 重要한 部分을 略 하게되고보니 作品의 生命이업서젓다. 여바리랴하엿스나 豫定한 紙面관게로마지못하야 그대로 發表한다.＜156＞
＜152-156＞