잡지명	개벽 제3호
발행일	1920년 08월 25일
기사제목	三十日間의 五千年 (Thirty Days of Five Thousand Years)
필자	一記者
기사형태	소식 (News/Tidings)

Thirty Days of Five Thousand Years
						By One Reporter

That time, beginning from the infinite past and extending into the infinite future—it has been said to be a kind of giant historical tree, a giant tree that bears the extraordinary fruit called history. It must have already borne infinite fruit in the past, and it will also bear infinite fruit in the future. All the people under heaven see the bearing of that fruit and call it endeavors or achievements, or they feel the fruit that has been borne and call it experience, lessons, or perhaps life. Where its fruit is borne in relatively large quantities, the value of time is rich, and the nourishment for human life seems sufficient. In the interval between the publication of this magazine's second issue and the release of the third issue—from July 26th to August 25th—that is, in the time of thirty days, what kind of fruit has been borne? Now, looking through the past and present of five thousand years, I shall pick and offer the notable fruit (history) among them. At this time when the old grain is exhausted and the new grain has not yet ripened, it would be most fortunate if each brother feels it and makes it a help for nourishment.

July 27th: The July Revolution in Paris occurred (1830 AD)
Note: French King Charles X, succeeding the rather lenient Martignac cabinet which resigned, had his favorite minister Polignac form a new cabinet and adopted extreme oppressive measures. In May 1830, he dissolved the National Assembly, and on July 25th of the same year, he issued the infamous Saint-Cloud Ordinances, banning freedom of the press and stripping the lower classes of their voting rights. Thereupon, the representatives of the Paris newspapers resolved that this ordinance was unconstitutional and could not be obeyed, publishing this in the papers on the 27th. The citizens in the city began open violence, and on the 28th, it became a battle between the citizens and the government. As the government forces were utterly defeated, Charles fled to England, and the Duke of Orléans, Philippe, succeeded to the throne. Thus, the Bourbon dynasty finally fell. This is the outline of the July Revolution.

July 28th: The French Revolution and Religion: Robespierre was executed by guillotine (1794)
Note: The French Revolution, which began in July 1789 and largely concluded in 1795, destroyed all existing institutions, sent King Louis XVI to the guillotine, and indulged in the slaughter between opposing parties, truly reaching the extreme of magnificence and tragedy, a great revolution unprecedented in recorded history. <110> Robespierre, as the leader of the Mountain Party at the time, openly advocated radical republicanism and displayed considerable cruelty. In June 1794, he submitted a new bill to the National Convention, seemingly to protect himself from danger, insisting on its application even to ordinary members of the opposing party. Eventually, it was rejected, and on this day in July, he was arrested by a special committee of the Assembly and became dew on the very guillotine (the same machine that killed Louis XVI). Let me introduce a passage from his final speech:
"Ask history, and you will know how the defenders of freedom have met with tragedy in any era. (Omitted) Ah, Frenchmen! Our compatriots! Do not let your enemies injure your virtues with their unjust doctrines. Death is not eternal sleep. Frenchmen, erase this maxim from the tombstones and write: 'Death is the beginning of immortality.' I have words left for the oppressors of the people: 'You shall die.'"

Peru in South America declared independence. (1821)
Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia (1914), the beginning of the previous Great European War.

July 30th: Germany's Iron and Blood Chancellor—Bismarck, particularly renowned for diplomacy, passed away. (1898)
Note: He earned the name Iron and Blood Chancellor from a phrase in his speech to the parliament as Prime Minister: "Our country's current urgent task lies in its actual power; today's great situation cannot be managed merely by speeches and resolutions. In short, it must rely only on iron and blood."

August 1st: Russia and Germany declared war. (1914) Observing a scene from the German Kaiser Wilhelm's declaration of war speech at the time: "Now, the German people have truly encountered a grave crisis. We have reached the unavoidable point of taking up the sword. The sword drawn from its sheath cannot be returned to the sheath without glory. You multitude! You must let the enemy nations know that they cannot recklessly attack our German Empire."

August 3rd: The era name was changed to Yung-hŭi (隆熙) 1st year.
Note: In the 11th year of Kwangmu (光武), July, due to the famous Hague Secret Emissary Affair, Emperor Kwangmu took responsibility and abdicated. Emperor Yung-hŭi succeeded to the throne, held the accession ceremony on this day, and changed the era name to Yung-hŭi 1st year.

August 6th: Qing Empress Dowager Cixi confined Emperor Guangxu and arbitrarily managed state affairs (24th year of Guangxu).

August 12th: Japan and Great Britain further expanded the Anglo-Japanese Alliance. (Meiji 38) <111>
The inventor of the steam locomotive, Stephenson, died.

August 13th: Due to the Boxer Rebellion, the allied forces of five nations entered Beijing. (Meiji 33)

August 15th: The British literary giant Scott was born. (1771)
Note: Born in Scotland, he studied literature at the University of Edinburgh and primarily indulged in reading famous German works, becoming a quite famous novelist. Works like "The Lady of the Lake" are among his most famous writings.
Japan pacified Ezo Island and renamed it Hokkaidō (Meiji year missing).

August 16th: Due to the Imo Incident (壬午軍變), Japanese Minister Hanabusa Yoshitada entered the capital leading two companies of soldiers.
Note: In the Im-o year (1882), there was an event where military camps were merged in the capital city (Kyŏngsŏng, Seoul). Kim Pohyŏn and Min Kyŏmho, who managed the military administration, being greedy and insatiable, took the opportunity to embezzle much of the military provisions, and the military officials below them did likewise. Angered by this, the soldiers first beat the military officials to death. Min Kyŏmho issued a military order to capture and kill the rioting soldiers. The rioting soldiers became enraged and sought to assassinate the various Min family members, appealing to the Taewŏn'gun (Grand Prince). The Taewŏn'gun, already having the intention to plot against the Min clan, secretly instigated this. On the morning of July 24th of the same year, the rioting soldiers killed the Prime Minister Yi Ch'oeŭng and invaded the royal palace. Queen Min fled in disguise to the house of Yun T'aejun. At this time, the rioting soldiers also attacked the Japanese soldiers, killing Lieutenant Horimoto Reizō and 6 others. They further attacked the Japanese legation. Minister Hanabusa and all the legation staff fled overnight to Inch'ŏn, sailed to Nagasaki, and reported the incident to their home government. On July 31st, Foreign Minister Inoue Kaoru personally went to Shimonoseki and gave Minister Hanabusa the inquiry instructions. Minister Hanabusa finally entered the capital on August 16th. At that time, the Chosŏn government appointed Yi Yuwŏn as Plenipotentiary and Kim Hongjip as Vice-Envoy. After repeated negotiations with Minister Hanabusa, the 6-article Treaty of Chemulp'o was concluded, ending the situation. The main points of the treaty were: (1) Strict punishment of the culprits. (2) Payment of 50,000 yen in condolence money for the dead and 500,000 yen for military expenses. (3) Henceforth, Japan shall station troops in the capital city to guard the legation. (4) An ambassador shall be sent to Japan to apologize.

August 17th: Kŏnyang (建陽) was changed to Kwangmu (光武) as the era name.

August 18th: Japan's Toyotomi Hideyoshi (instigator of the Imjin War) passed away (Age 63).

August 22nd: Salvation Army General Booth died.

August 22nd: Yi T'aejo (founder of the Chosŏn Dynasty), receiving the endorsement of Pae Kŭngnyŏm, Chŏng Tojŏn, and others, ascended the throne at Such'ang Palace in Songdo. (Im-sin year, 1392)
The Japan-Korea Annexation Treaty was concluded. (Meiji 43, Yung-hŭi 4) The full text of the treaty is <112> as follows:
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan and His Majesty the Emperor of Korea, in view of the special and close relations between Their respective countries, desiring to promote the common wealth of the two nations and to assure the permanent peace in the East, and being convinced that these objects can be best attained by the annexation of Korea to the Empire of Japan, have resolved to conclude a Treaty of such annexation and have, for this purpose, appointed as Their Plenipotentiaries, that is to say, His Majesty the Emperor of Japan, Viscount Terauchi Masatake, Resident-General, and His Majesty the Emperor of Korea, Yi Wan-yong, Minister President of State, who upon mutual conference and deliberation have agreed to the following Articles:
Article 1. His Majesty the Emperor of Korea makes the complete and permanent cession to His Majesty the Emperor of Japan of all rights of sovereignty over the whole of Korea.
Article 2. His Majesty the Emperor of Japan accepts the cession mentioned in the preceding Article and consents to the complete annexation of Korea to the Empire of Japan.
Article 3. His Majesty the Emperor of Japan will accord to Their Majesties the Emperor and ex-Emperor and His Imperial Highness the Crown Prince of Korea and Their Consorts and Heirs such titles, dignity and honour as are appropriate to Their respective ranks, and sufficient annual grants will be made for the maintenance of such titles, dignity and honour.
Article 4. His Majesty the Emperor of Japan will also accord appropriate honour and treatment to the members of the Imperial House of Korea and their heirs other than those mentioned in the preceding Article, and the funds necessary for the maintenance of such honour and treatment will be granted.
Article 5. His Majesty the Emperor of Japan will confer peerages and monetary grants upon those Koreans who, on account of meritorious services, are regarded as deserving such special recognition.

-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제3호
발행일	1920년 08월 25일
기사제목	三十日間의 五千年
필자	一記者
기사형태	소식

三十日間의 五千年
						一記者
無限의 過去로 始하야 無限의 將來에 亘한 저 時間-그는 一種의 歷史的巨樹卽歷史이라는 異常한 實을 結하는 巨樹라 하엿도다. 그는 過去에서 旣히 無限한 實을 結하얏슬할 것이며 또한 將來에 無限할 實을 結할 것이다. 天下萬衆은 그 實의 結함을 見하야써 事業이라 功績이라하며 또는 그 實의 結한 것을 感하야 써 經驗이라 敎訓이라 或은 生命이라 하도다. 그의 實이 比較的 多量으로 結하는 곳에 時間으로의 價値가 富하고 人生으로의 糧食이 足한 듯이 本紙 第二號가 發行하고 第三號가 出來하는 그 間-自七月二十六日至八月二十五日-卽三十日의 時間에는 如何한 實히 結하얏는지 이제 上下五千年間의 今昔을 通하야 其中에 顯著한 實(歷史)을 摘供하노니 舊穀이 旣盡하고 新穀이 未登한 此際에 兄弟各自가 感하야써 營養의 一助를 삼으면 幸甚
7月27日 巴里七月革命이 起하다 (西曆1830年)
考 佛皇 『카로로』十世는 頗히 寬大의  策을 取하는 『마루티낙크』內閣의 掛冠後를 繼하야 嬖臣 『폴-니낙크』로 하야곰 新內閣을 組織케 하고 極端의 壓迫策을 取하야 1830年 5月 國會를 解散하고 同 7月 25日에는 彼有名한 『산크로-』의 出版의 自由을 禁하고 下級國民의 選擧權을 剝奪하는 勅令을 發하얏다. 於是乎 巴里諸新聞의 代表者는 此勅令의 憲法違反不可服從을 決議하고 27日 紙上에 發布하자 市內의 民中은 公然暴行을 始하며 28日에는 民衆對政府의 戰鬪가 되어 政府軍이 一敗塗地하매 『카로로-』는 英國으로 亡命하고 『올태안』公 『휘리포』가 그 位를 襲하야 『카로로』 朝는 遂히 亡하얏나니 是가 7월 革命의 梗槪
7月 28日 佛蘭西革命과 宗敎『로베스피어』가 斷頭臺에 刑死되다(1794)
考 1789年 7月에 端을 發하야 1795年에 大畧 終結을 告한 佛蘭西革命은 從來의 一切制度를 破壞하고 『루이스』16世 國皇을 斷頭臺에 登케하고 反對黨間의 殺戮을 恣行하야 實로 壯絶悲絶을 極한 有史以後의＜110＞ 大革命이라. 『로베스피어』는 當時山黨의 首領으로 過激共和主義를 正面擁護하야 頗히 殘酷을 逞하던 1794年 6月 自家身上危險에 備함과 如한 新法律案을 國民公會에 提出하야 反對黨되는 一般議員에게까지 適用을 主張하다가 遂히 不容한바 되어 同 7月이날 議會特別委員에게 捕縛을 當하야 仉히 『세로틴』機(룬이스16世를 죽인 그 機)上의 露가 된 것이다. 그의 最後 演說 一節을 紹介하면
歷史에 問하라. 그리하면 엇더한 時代에서나 自由의 擁護者가 如何히 慘劇에 遭遇하얏는 것을 知하리라. (中畧) 아아 佛蘭西人이어. 우리 同胞들이어 너의 敵으로 하야곰 그 非正理의 敎義로써 그대네의 德性을 傷함이 잇지못하게 하라 死는 永遠의 沉眠은 안이다. 佛蘭西人이어 墓石으로부터 此格言을 削하야 『死는 不滅의 始』이라 書하라 나는 人民의 壓制者에게 남겨줄 말이 잇도다. 「汝는 死하리라」고.
南米秘露獨立을 宣하다.(1821)
墺洪國對塞國宣戰(1914)前回歐洲大戰의 始
7月 30日 獨逸의 鐵血宰相-特히 外交로 名高한 比斯麥이 薨하다.(1898)
考 그가 鐵血宰相의 名을 得하기는 首相으로 議會에 演說한 語句中에 「我國現下의 急務는 實力 如何에 在하고 單히 演說과 決議로써 今日의 大局을 如何키 不能하니 要컨대 鐵과 血에 依할 것 뿐이라 함에 依함이라.
8月1日 露獨이 宣戰을 布告하다.(1914) 當時 獨帝 『카이젤』의 宣戰演說의 一幕을 見하면 今에야말로 獨逸國民은 頗히 重大한 危機에 際會하얏나니 吾人은 劒을 杖하고 起하는 不得已에 至하얏도다. 鞘를 脫한 劒은 光榮으로써 再히 鞘에 收치 안이치 못할지니 爾有衆아 汝等은 敵國으로 하야곰 濫히 我獨逸帝國을 攻擊키 不能한 事를 知케 함이 有하라.
8月3日 隆熙元年으로 改元
考 光武11年 7月이라 彼有名한 海牙事件으로 光武皇帝는 引責退位하고 隆熙帝-그 位를 繼하야 써 이날에 卽位式을 行하고 隆熙元年으로 改元
8月 6日 淸西太后 光緖皇帝를 幽閉하고 自擅國政(光緖24年)
8月12日 日英両國은 日英同盟을 更히 擴大하다.(明治38年) ＜111＞
汽車 發明家 『스테분손』이 死하다.
8月13日 義和團匪의 亂으로 五國聯合軍이 北京에 入하얏다.(明治33年)
8月15日 英國文豪『스코트』가 生하다.(1771)
考 蘇格蘭 出生으로 『에팅바라』大學에서 文科를 修하고 主로 獨逸 名著를 耽讀하야 頗히 有名한 小說家가 되엇나니 『湖邊의 美人』과 如함은 그의 著書中 最有名한 것이라.
日本이 蝦夷島를 平하고 北海島라 改稱(明治 年)
8月16日 壬午軍變으로 日本公使花房義質이 二中隊兵을 率하고 入京하다.
考 壬午年이라 京城에서 兵營을 合倂한 事가 有하엿는데 그 軍政을 掌하는 金輔鉉
閔鎌鎬 等이 貪婪無厭으로 그 機를 乘하야 軍餉을 多呑하얏스며 그 以下軍吏가 亦然한 바 是에 怒한 兵士는 爲先 軍吏를 打殺하니 閔鎌鎬는 軍令을 下하야 亂兵을 捕殺한 즉 亂兵을 激昻하야 諸閔을 謀殺코저 大院君에게 訴하매 旣히 閔族을 圖할 志가 有하던 大院君은 陰히 此를 煽動하얏더라 同年 7月 24日 朝 亂兵은 宰相 李最應을 殺하고 王宮을 犯하니 閔后는 變服으로 尹泰駿 家에 逃하얏는데 是時에 亂兵은 一面으로 日本兵을 襲하야 中尉 掘本禮造 等 7名을 殺하고 更히 日本公使館을 襲擊하매 花房公使를 始하야 舘員 一同은 罔夜로 仁川에 奔하야 長崎에 巡航하야 事變을 本國政府에 告한 바 7月 31日 外務大臣 井上馨이 스스로 馬關에 赴하야 詰問案을 花房公使에게 與하야 同 公使는 遂 8月 16日 入京한 것이라. 當時 朝鮮政府에서는 李裕元으로 全權, 金宏集으로 副使를 命하야 花房公使와 累度折衝을 經하야 濟物浦條約 6條를 하고 局을 終하니 그 條約의 要는 (一)兇徒를 嚴懲할 事 (二)死者에게 恤金五萬圓 尙兵費 五十萬圓을 出할 事 (三)今後부터 日本은 京城에 軍隊를 駐屯케하야 公使館을 護衛할 事 (四)大使를 日本에 遣하야 謝罪할 事 等이엇더라.
8月 17日 建陽을 改하야 光武라 改元
8月 18日 日本豐臣秀吉(壬辰亂의 做出者)이 薨하다(年63)
8月 22日 救世軍大將 『뿌드』가 死하다.
8月 22日 李太祖-裴克廉 鄭道傳 等의 推戴를 受하야 松都壽昌宮에서 王位에 登하다.(壬申)
日韓合倂條約을 締結하다.(明治43, 隆熙4) 其條約全文이 ＜112＞ 如左
日本國皇帝陛下 及 韓國皇帝陛下는 兩國의 特殊한 親密關係上 相互의 幸福을 增進하며 東洋의 平和를 確保코저하는 바 此 目的을 達함에는 韓國을 日本帝國에 合倂함이 最可함을 確信하며 茲에 兩國은 合倂條約을 結하기로 決하고 日本皇帝는 統監寺內正毅에게, 韓國皇帝는 總理大臣 李完用에게 各히 全權을 委任하야 左의 條約을 協定함.
一, 韓國皇帝陛下는 韓國全部의 統治權을 完全且永久히 日本皇帝陛下에게 讓與함.
二, 日本國皇帝陛下는 前條所記의 讓與를 承受하며 且 全然히 韓國을 日本帝國에 合倂함을 承認함.
三, 日本國皇帝陛下는 韓國皇帝陛下, 太皇帝陛下 밋 后妃와 後裔에 對하야 各히 相當한 尊稱, 威嚴名譽를 享有하며 且 保全케하기 爲하야 歲費를 供給함.
四, 日本國皇帝陛下는 前條以外의 韓國皇族 及 其後裔에 對하야 各히 相當한 名譽 及 其待遇를 享有 且維持케하기 爲하야 相當資金을 給與함.
五, 日本國皇帝陛下는 功勳잇는 韓人에 對하야 榮爵을 授하고 且 恩金을 給함.
六, 日本政府는 合倂의 結果로 全然히 韓國의 施政을 擔任하며 法規를 遵守하는 韓國人의 身體財産에 對하야 十分保護를 與하며 且 其福利를 增進케함.
七, 日本國政府는 新制度를 忠實히 尊重하는 韓人으로써 相當한 資格을 有한 者에 對하야 事情에 依하야 官吏로 登用함.
八, 本條約은 旣히 日本國皇帝陛下 及 韓國皇帝陛下의 批准을 經한 것인바 公布日부터 施行함.
明治43年 8月 22日 統監子爵 寺內正毅 隆熙4年 8月22日 內閣總理大臣 李完用
仍히 同月 29日에 右條約을 發布施行하얏더라.
露文豪 『툴케넵』이 死하다.(1883) 本誌에 現揭하는 脚本隔夜는 그의 特殊作品中 一이며 『臘人日記』와 如함은 世界的讀物이 되엇다.
8月23日 諸葛孔明이 軍中에서 死하다.
丞相祠堂何處尋,   錦官城外栢森森.
暎階碧草自春色,   隔葉黃鵬空好音.
三顧頻繁天下計,   兩朝開濟老臣心.
出師未捷身先死,   長使英雄淚滿襟.
(右唐詩人杜甫의 孔明追慕詩) ＜113＞
8月25日 神經衰弱이 癲狂으로 化하야 入院하얏던 獨逸 哲學家 『니체』自殺을 遂하다. 年이 56(1900)
사람이란 自己行動에 對하야 怯濡할 것이 안이다. 一度行爲를 하얏거던 그를 否認치말지라 良心煩惱라는 것은 甚히 醜할 것임으로써라.『니체』＜114＞
＜110-114＞