Magazine Title: 삼천리 제11권 제4호
Publication Date: 1939년 04월 01일
Article Title: 「半島山河」을 말하다 (Speaking of the "Peninsula's Mountains and Rivers")
Author: 岸曙 金億, 月灘 朴種和, 春城 盧子泳, 秋湖 田榮澤, 파인 金東煥 (Ansŏ Kim Ŏk, Wŏlt'an Pak Chonghwa, Ch'unsŏng No Chayŏng, Ch'uho Chŏn Yŏngt'aek, P'ain Kim Tonghwan)
Article Type: 대담·좌담 (Dialogue/Roundtable Discussion)

Speaking of the “Peninsula’s Mountains and Rivers”
Ansŏ Kim Ŏk, Wŏlt'an Pak Chonghwa, Ch'unsŏng No Chayŏng, Ch'uho Chŏn Yŏngt'aek, P'ain Kim Tonghwan

As the flowers bloom in March, we decided to speak with poets about the scenery of the Peninsula’s mountains and rivers. While quietly listening to the sound of the ninety days of spring ripening outside the window...<78>

Azaleas Blooming at Yaksan Tongdae

Kim Tonghwan – Time flies, and it’s already March. Facing this fine season when azaleas bloom and skylarks sing, I feel like traveling through beautiful mountains and rivers, reciting poetry and singing songs. That’s why we’ve gathered various poets and writers of this land today to seek out the superb scenic spots of the Peninsula.
In spring, especially in March, the first flower to bloom is the azalea, and for azaleas, Yaksan Tongdae (藥山東臺) in Yŏngbyŏn is extremely famous. Therefore, let’s begin our spring poetry gathering by viewing the azaleas of Yaksan Tongdae. Ansŏ-hyŏng, didn't you once visit Yŏngbyŏn and recite a poem?

Ansŏ Kim Ŏk – Yaksan Tongdae, it’s truly wonderful there. In early spring, when the haze quietly veils the mountains and rivers of Sŏdo (西道), like a bride’s face covered with a thin, soft veil, seeming like a dream, the Yaksan Tongdae in Yŏngbyŏn is covered in a spread of light pink azaleas. Not too garishly red, nor blandly white, but light pink azaleas with a reddish hue cover the mountainside, undulating like waves here and there; it’s truly a spectacle.
It’s been so long since I left my hometown in P'yŏngan Province and became a traveler that my memories of the mountains and rivers there are dim, but the sight of the azaleas at Yaksan Tongdae, which I visited once sometime ago, is unforgettable. About 3 or 4 years ago, on my way back from Andong County (安東縣), I stopped by briefly in March, and the azaleas were in full bloom. The magnificent scenery was just as wonderful then as it was in the past.
On that trip, I composed a song. Shall I recite it?

1. I long to go to Yaksan Tongdae
Where is Yaksan Tongdae?
At the end of the sky, there are clouds,
Beyond the clouds is the void.
On the worn-down rock,
The lonely azalea, light pink,
Unable to resist the spring breeze,
Will flutter and dance.
Ah, my Tongdae, vivid in dreams,
What is it like now?

2. I long to go to Yaksan Tongdae<79>
Where is Yaksan Tongdae?
At the end of the sky, there are clouds,
Beyond the clouds is the void.
Will the crane return to Hakkwiam (鶴歸岩)?
Though I have waited long,
Wild doves seeking mates
Fly over, cooing.
Ah, my Tongdae, vivid in dreams,
What is it like now?

3. I long to go to Yaksan Tongdae
Where is Yaksan Tongdae?
At the end of the sky, there are clouds,
Beyond the clouds is the void.
In the shallow waters of the Kuryong River (九龍江),
Even wooden boats are gone,
As the sun sets and the moon rises,
Only white ripples whisper.
Ah, my Tongdae, vivid in dreams,
What is it like now?

Kim Tonghwan – Wonderful! Perhaps friends from P'yŏngan Province or Hwanghae Province have mostly seen it. Ch'unsŏng, have you been there?

Ch'unsŏng No Chayŏng – I too heard about it in folk songs and longed and longed to go, so years ago, I went to Yŏngbyŏn with friends. Yaksan Tongdae is truly a famous scenic spot of Sŏgwan (西關). The mountain right in front of the town is Tongdae, soaring high into the sky. That Tongdae is the peak of a cliff at the mountain top, and on it lies a large, flat rock like a cushion. On that rock cushion,
A line of Hanja poetry is carved:
大陸群山沒 長空一帶來 (The continental mountains disappear; the vast sky brings it all together)
天下臺名臺 人間無比石 (The world's famous platform; a rock incomparable among humans)
Centered around this layered cliff, azaleas spread out below on the left and right – I don't know if there are thousands or tens of thousands of blossoms. Elders tell a story that long ago, the only daughter of a governor came up to this Tongdae to play, lost her footing, fell, and died, and her spirit became the bright red azaleas.
Below Tongdae, the clear Kuryong River flows abundantly. When the wind blows chillingly, the intensely blooming flowers fall and drift down the river, truly embodying the phrase "滿溪流水泛花來" (A stream full of flowing water floats flowers). I too felt moved and sang a couple of verses.

To climb Tongdae,
I must tread on flowers <80>
Cherishing the flowers,
I cannot climb Tongdae.
E-he-ya, E-he-ya
Tongdae... Tongdae...

Fire burns on Tongdae,
Red flowers burn like fire.
To climb Tongdae,
I must tread on flowers.
Pitying the flowers,
I cannot climb Tongdae.

The lovely lady of Yaksan
Sleeps in Kuryong Mountain.
Even the stars, concerned,
Watch over her hiddenly.
May she never awaken
From her lovely, beautiful dreams.

Ch'uho Chŏn Yŏngt'aek – It seems there are many Hanja poems written about Yaksan Tongdae. Among modern poems, Sowŏl's poem was excellent. Sowŏl, with his gentle and soft folk song style, sang of the azaleas with unbearable longing.

When you leave,
Tired of seeing me,
I shall gently let you go without a word.

From Yaksan in Yŏngbyŏn,
I shall gather armfuls of azaleas
And scatter them on your path.

Step by step,
On the flowers laid before you,
Tread softly, gently, as you go.

Wŏlt'an Pak Chonghwa – Truly wonderful. In his early twenties, Sowŏl poured all his passion into this one poem.

Kim Tonghwan – Wŏlt'an, have you been to Yŏngbyŏn?

Pak Chonghwa – I haven't been able to go. I think about going sometime. If I had gone, I too would have composed a verse or two. Anyway, the old folk song "Yaksan Tongdae" that has been passed down is wonderful. It captures the Korean sentiment so intensely it's breathtaking. The fragrance of the Sŏdo mountains and rivers is richly imbued in that one piece.

Kim Tonghwan – I haven't seen it either, but I can feel its essence, so I once sang like this. I happened <81> to sing it on the Kyŏngbu Line train recently.

In March,
The early flower
Is the Yŏngbyŏn azalea.

Quickly blooming,
Quickly falling,
It remains regrettable, forever.

From the day it blooms,
It is bright red,
Like a blushing Sŏdo bride.

Yŏngbyŏn azalea,
Bloom you must, but
Could some not bloom later?

Wŏlt'an – Do the young ladies of Sŏdo do *hwajŏn nori* (flower pancake game) during azalea season?

Ch'uho – They do. It's probably around the eighth day of the fourth lunar month. Young women dressed in new clothes form groups of three or four and play *hwajŏn nori* below the rocks, frying rice cakes. They sing songs too-.

Wŏlt'an – Are those songs the old folk songs?

Ch'unsŏng – Surely not! Unmarried young ladies would be too shy to sing such romantic tunes! But they do sing melancholic songs, drawing out the notes long and thinly in their lovely voices. When they fry the *hwajŏn*, wisps of smoke from grilling the cakes rise here and there, and what appears red in the bushes is either flowers or the ladies' pink skirts. The most vivid color among them is the pink hair ribbon (*taenggi*). Seeing the young women in yellow shoes with red ribbons, you feel an indescribable joy, thinking, "Ah, the lost old sentiments are found here."

P'ain – How much later do the Sŏdo azaleas bloom compared to Seoul?

Ansŏ – Perhaps about half a month later? Those on the sunny side might bloom almost at the same time as Seoul's.

Weeping Willows of Nŭngnado

Kim Tonghwan – Around the time the flowers fall at Yaksan Tongdae, the green weeping willows droop along the banks of the Taedong River (大同江) and Nŭngnado (綾羅島) island in P'yŏngyang (平壤). Let's now seek out the weeping willows of Nŭngnado. <82> When do the willow catkins fly?

Wŏlt'an – It's the period between late spring and early summer. In Suzhou and Hangzhou of Jiangnan, they say early spring, March or April, but in Korea, it's probably around May. The willow catkins (*yusu*, 柳絮), flying lightly in the breeze as if they could be caught but cannot, truly capture the heart.

Kim Tonghwan – According to Ch'unwŏn (pen name of Yi Kwangsu), Kirin (吉林) also had many willows. So in spring, the willow catkins would fly and fall over the Songhua River (松花江) area, much like the willow catkins from Nŭngnado drift on the waters of the Taedong River.

Ch'uho – Kirin is in the north, could there really be so many weeping willows there? – Anyway, when I was attending Taesŏng School (大成學校) in P'yŏngyang during the time Tosan (pen name of An Ch'angho) was principal, if you climbed up to the high balcony of Pubyŏngnu (浮碧樓) with the students and looked out, the sight of cotton-like tufts scattering over the blue river water was truly lovely. In those days, not only Nŭngnado but also along the Taedong River bank from Yŏn'gwangjŏng (練光亭) far up to Pubyŏngnu, willow trees stood in a long line. It had such charm, but if you go now, besides Nŭngnado, where are the willows (楊柳)? There are only acacia trees, famous for growing fast and being commonplace.

Ch'unsŏng – If Wŏlt'an or Ansŏ became the governor of P'yŏngyang, like Su Dongpo became the governor of Hangzhou, they would surely plant weeping willows along the Taedong River as before. Officials need to understand poetry. Haha (All laugh)

Ansŏ – Of course, if I went, I would plant willows (楊柳) to revive the old charm... But as Ch'uho said, P'yŏngyang truly used to have many weeping willows. They covered the riverbank in green. Now, perhaps only a few remain near Yŏn'gwangjŏng. It's truly regrettable. Speaking of regrettable things, Ch'ŏngnyubyŏk (淸流壁) also used to have just a narrow path barely wide enough for one or two people. So, with a thousand-fathom cliff on one side and the vast river flowing and splashing right below one's feet on the other, the charm was truly remarkable. But now, they've cut away the rock to allow even cars to pass, the weeping willows on the riverbank are all gone (*ta *diga-go* - likely '다 베어지고' - all cut down), and tasteless, totem-pole-like acacia trees stand there... I don't know about other places, but when I go to the Taedong River bank, the saying "mulberry fields turn into blue seas" (桑田碧海) comes to mind.

P'ain – Looking at Chu Yohan's poem "Pulnori" (불노리 - Fire Play), the spectacular view of the Taedong River seems even better during the fire play of the fifth day of the fifth lunar month (Tano) than the scenery of Nŭngnado's silky willows described as "Yangju's thousand threads fail to bind a person" (楊州千絲未繫人).

Ch'unsŏng – The piece "Pulnori" is the most outstanding among his works. Its passion, its fragrance – I don't tire of reading it two or three times.

Wŏlt'an – Well written. Very well written. "In the evening sky <83> fireworks explode. Explode. Fading pink sunset glow..." – in that tone, he skillfully depicted the temperament of a Sŏdo man and the moonlit river scenery, clearly and passionately. By the way, is the P'yŏngyang fire play on the fifth day of the fifth lunar month (Tano) or the eighth day of the fourth lunar month (Buddha's Birthday)?

Ansŏ – Seems like the eighth day of the fourth month. It seems fitting that on the day Buddha was born, all the people of P'yŏngyang city would come out bustling to praise Buddha... Most likely...

Ch'unsŏng – Considering that the Tano festival is best celebrated in Sŏdo cities like Kaesŏng, Chŏngju, and Ŭiju, the P'yŏngyang fire play also seems like a Tano play.

Ch'uho – Yes, the Tano play seems correct. However, since the fire play already disappeared around the time of the Sino-Japanese War (甲午役, 1894-95), neither Tongin (pen name of Kim Tongin) nor Yohan (Chu Yohan) saw it, even though they were from P'yŏngyang. Looking at it that way, it seems like a festivity that disappeared probably 30 years ago already.

P'ain – How is the fire play done? Is "횃불" (torch fire) not today's fireworks (花砲 - 花火)?

Ansŏ – No. In the pitch-black night, dozens, hundreds of boats are floated on the river. The 200,000 citizens all leave their homes; some ride boats, others watch from the riverbank or the railway bridge. The boats are house-boats (屋船) similar to *yant'a* (船 尾形船 - stern-shaped boat?) with roofs. They make bonfires with straw on the boats, and when they reach the middle of the river, they toss the embers high into the sky or throw them onto the river water... So, like billions of stars flying in the sky, flames fly about dazzlingly, "splendidly and brilliantly," in the pitch-black night. Even now, if you hear about it from the elders near Ch'ilsŏngmun (七星門), it seems to have been quite something.

P'ain – Besides the fire play, isn't P'yŏngyang also famous for swinging (鞦韆)?

Ch'uho – Swinging took place on the grassy field rising towards Kija's Tomb (箕子陵), behind Ch'ilsŏngmun, in front of Kwanakmyo (關岳廟). It seems they still do it during Ch'usŏk or Tano festivals, but it's not like before.

P'ain – Which writers captured the P'yŏngyang sentiment?

Wŏlt'an – Tongin's "Paettaragi" (배따라기), Yohan's "Pulnori," Ansŏ's Nŭngnado in "Record Sokyo" (레코-드 俗謠).

Ch'unsŏng – Ch'unwŏn's Yŏngch'ae in "Mujŏng" (無情), Kyewŏrhyang, the students of Paesŏng School – all these people made P'yŏngyang into a city of romance, a city of dreams, a city of longing.

Ansŏ – Ch'uho also set the stage for his novel "Hongnyŏn, Paengnyŏn" (紅蓮, 白蓮) in P'yŏngyang. With the famous *kisaeng* Kyewŏrhyang, he added all the charm he could...

P'ain – What do you think of P'yŏngyang?

Wŏlt'an – It's not majestic. It's like a meticulously crafted garden of a large house. The spirit of Koguryŏ was present when they built <84> the great capital city on a large plain like Ponghwangsŏng in the Liaodong plains. Coming to P'yŏngyang, that spirit rather diminished. P'yŏngyang is just a mountain village by the water with beautiful scenery.

Ch'unsŏng – That's right. It generally blossomed into a pretty and beautiful city of romance, like Venice.

Myŏngsasimni and Ch'ŏnan Samgŏri

P'ain – Having seen the weeping willows of Nŭngnado in late spring/early summer, let's now move on to see the *haedanghwa* (sweetbrier rose) of Wŏnsan's Myŏngsasimni (明沙十里), where the flowers of passion bloom during the height of summer. Everyone must have seen Myŏngsasimni.

Ch'unsŏng – Speaking of Myŏngsasimni, that folk song is wonderful.

Myŏngsasimni *haedanghwa*
Don't grieve that the flowers fall.
When next spring's third month comes,
You will bloom again and meet.

How charming it is. The melody flows naturally in its own style, so it has been sung by tens of thousands of people over hundreds of years. We also want to write such simple and tasteful songs.

Ansŏ – Not just Ch'unsŏng, everyone likes that song.

Wŏlt'an – In Korea, the three songs "Myŏngsasimni," "Yŏngbyŏn Ka," and "Ch'ŏnan Samgŏri" are truly alive. They are truly valuable folk songs (民謠) that contain the fragrance of the earth. Songs that everyone sings, without knowing who composed them.

P'ain – Han Yongun wrote a travelogue about "Myŏngsasimni" and sang a song about it, and Kim Kwangsŏp lamented that there were no *haedanghwa* at Myŏngsasimni.

Ansŏ – If you go looking for *haedanghwa*, you'll be disappointed! I too thought the ten-*li* long bank would be covered like the azaleas in Yŏngbyŏn, but what nonsense – they were blooming only in a few spots, tiny little things amidst stunted pine trees. However, though not numerous, the sparsely blooming reddish flowers are rather appealing.

Ch'unsŏng – For numerous *haedanghwa*, Monggŭmp'o (夢金浦) in Hwanghae Province is excellent. There, a ten-*li* stretch is connected by fine, clear sand, and on the fine sand dunes, so many *haedanghwa* were blooming – Monggŭmp'o might become the famous spot for *haedanghwa* in the future.

Ansŏ – However, the sand on the sand dunes (*moraebŏl*) of Wŏnsan's "Myŏngsasimni" is truly golden sand. If you grab a handful and wash it in the sea water, <85> it seems like all gold grains (*kŭmssaraegi*), flowing away completely, leaving nothing behind. That fine sand (*semosae*) is truly wonderful.

Wŏlt'an – I also visited Myŏngsasimni. The tasteful Western-style villas standing amidst the pine forest, the scenery of the vast waves of the East Sea (東海) rolling in, a single boat returning with the moon reflected on the water, or the white clouds drifting across the blue northern sky as if without a care – those timeless scenes were lovely. With the *haedanghwa* boasting their crimson color within that scene, it adds a touch of charm, which is probably why it's called the *haedanghwa* flower spot. A few blossoms might sometimes be better than thousands...

Ch'uho – It's been so long since I visited Myŏngsasimni that I don't remember well, but anyway, the sea, mountains, seagulls, and flowers – all these things were harmonized very naturally. Not cramped, but all wide-open, masculine, continental.

P'ain – If we compare the two flowers, Yŏngbyŏn's "azalea" and Myŏngsasimni's "*haedanghwa*," to women, how would you describe them?

Ch'unsŏng – If the azalea is a shy country girl turning away bashfully, the *haedanghwa* has the scent of a city woman who knows about oil, powder, and the opposite sex.

Ansŏ – No, rather, if the azalea is a woman, the *haedanghwa* is a boisterous, rowdy man. A playboy (*p'allanbong nyŏnsŏk*). One color is light pink, neither fully red nor fully white, while the other is a deep color like blood – isn't that so?

Wŏlt'an – Definitely not. Comparing the *haedanghwa* to a man doesn't make sense. The azalea is a maiden like a hanging ribbon (*tanggi*), a virgin. The *haedanghwa* is perhaps the eldest daughter-in-law of a family. The azalea is delicate but has charm; the *haedanghwa* seems robust yet lives for passion. The azalea is a country flower, the *haedanghwa* is a Seoul flower.

Ch'uho – Even the light spring breeze, the azalea cannot bear and falls with the wind, but the *haedanghwa* endures even the sea breeze, blooms to its fullest, and withers at the end of its life. If the azalea is an unfortunate maiden (*paghaeng ch'ŏja*), perhaps the *haedanghwa* is like a prostitute (*ch'angnyŏ*), a plaything for a libertine (*tang'a*)?

P'ain – They all seem right... The azalea, shyly hiding and blooming in rock crevices, only to quickly wither in less than ten days, is a pitiful flower. The azalea is a woman living for fragrance, the *haedanghwa* a woman living for style, I'd say. Alright, now let's leave the *haedanghwa* and head towards the weeping willows (*nŭngsu pŏdŭl*) of Ch'ŏnan Samgŏri (天安三巨里), famous from the folk song. Have you seen Ch'ŏnan Samgŏri?

Ansŏ – Only in name; there are no weeping willows (*nŭngsu pŏdŭl*) in Ch'ŏnan anymore. It's just an empty, charmless street. Places like where the Five Pines of Seki (關の五本松) <86> are, the birthplaces of folk songs, usually have some trace left, but Ch'ŏnan lacks those charming weeping willows. There isn't even a stone monument.

Ch'unsŏng – That's right. Fascinated by the fragrance of the folk song that flows smoothly, "Ch'ŏnan Samgŏri, heung, the weeping willows, heung," I always wanted to see it. But when I actually went years ago, there was only the quiet old town (*kuŭp*) of Ch'ŏnan. They say weeping willows stood in the middle of the town where the Samnam highway used to pass, but they are gone now. I expected that horses from the post station (*yŏngma*) would have been tied there, and at least centuries-old willows would be swaying leisurely in the spring breeze, but there wasn't even a shadow of a willow.

P'ain – Surely ten or so trees must remain?

Ansŏ – Perhaps one or two might have been there. In any case, it doesn't feel like a famous place for weeping willows at all. I just returned, imagining they might have stood there long ago and humming the willow tune under my breath.

P'ain – That's truly sad. It's understandable that the Ch'ŏnan county governor might not know about appreciating nature, but if only there had been a youth association or one or two poets there, it wouldn't have turned out like this! It's frustrating.

Ch'unsŏng – How are weeping willows (*suyang pŏdŭl*) and *nŭngsu* willows (*nŭngsu pŏdŭl*) different?

Wŏlt'an – The *nŭngsu* willow is the one seen in Southern School paintings (南畵), with branches upon branches extending softly and drooping deeply. The one that simply hangs down is the weeping willow (*suyang pŏdŭl*). The *nŭngsu* willow is far more charming. In the past, leaving Seoul's Namdaemun Gate, passing through Yangju and P'aju, down the old highway towards Chŏlla Province, Kyŏngsang Province, and Ch'ungch'ŏng Province, lay the old town of Ch'ŏnan. When the *nŭngsu* willows lined both sides of the town, swaying listlessly in the mid-summer breeze, imagine the Namwŏn governor or the Chŏlla governor, traveling in a four-person palanquin (*sain'gyo*), stopping their post horses, sitting beneath them to wipe off sweat, and enjoying leisurely pursuits for half a day – then the charm of Ch'ŏnan Samgŏri becomes known. It must have been truly wonderful. That classical beauty...

Anapchi and Manwŏltae

Kim Tonghwan – Having visited 3 or 4 scenic spots of the Peninsula famous for flowers and willows, let's now seek out those ancient capitals where "spring grass grows green year after year." Since none of the 5 or 6 people present at this gathering tonight have seen Koransa Temple (皐蘭寺) in Paekche's Puyŏ (扶餘), let's then visit Anapchi Pond (雁鴨池) in Kyŏngju (慶州). Standing by Anapchi, what feelings arise?

Ch'unsŏng – I went in autumn. The wide pond was filled to the brim with water as blue <87> as the sky. Around the pond, reeds (*kkalttae*) grown tall stood densely packed, and whenever the autumn wind passed, they rustled and trembled, somehow tugging at the heartstrings of a traveler. Right behind it is Imhaejŏn (臨海殿), the large pavilion of the old palace, and nearby are the newly excavated foundation stones of the old palace site, water pipes made of granite, etc. – all showing the culture of a thousand years ago as if it were yesterday.
On an autumn night, standing by Anapchi as wild geese fly, if the sound of bells from Hwangnyongsa Temple (黃龍寺) far away comes ringing, ding-dong, ding-dong, I wouldn't be able to bear this night and would surely wander by the pond all night long.

Wŏlt'an – Kyŏngju's culture lies more in Pulguksa Temple (佛國寺) and Sŏkkuram Grotto (石窟庵) than in Anapchi. I was amazed when I saw Pulguksa. I don't know how many thousands of monk soldiers fought there, but that dizzyingly high stone platform (石臺), the large, wide stones used to build it – I marvel at where they quarried those massive rocks. It would be difficult to build it like that today.
The exquisite craftsmanship of the Tabot'ap Pagoda (多寶塔) and stone lanterns (石燈籠), the profound atmosphere pervading the Taeungjŏn Hall (大雄殿) as if Shakyamuni Buddha had visited just yesterday, the sound of the temple bell, the scent of incense (香불) – truly, Silla culture came from Buddhism, and if this Pulguksa was the birthplace of the culture of that era of theocratic rule, my head bows instinctively.
Sŏkkuram is the same; using stone, they carved those fine eyebrows, those soft hands as if drawn, and the beauty of the Buddha's expression – if you put your ear close, it feels like you could hear the heartbeat thumping inside the chest, and the lips seem about to part and laugh 'hahaha' – such realistic beauty (逼眞한 美). Here we find Truth, Goodness, and Beauty all at once. Moreover, its location facing the East Sea, the layout of the grotto (庵의 配布), the structure of the grotto (庵의 結構) – nothing is flawed. Indeed, possessing this thousand-year culture gives confidence that we could stand shoulder to shoulder with Greece (希臘).

P'ain – So you recited a poem about it?

Wŏlt'an – I entrusted my welling thoughts to poetry and sang a song.

How beautiful, the Bodhisattva's hand,
Though stone, it's like a white fish.
Was the beauty of old Silla so sacred?
If one kneels and gazes up,
The warm vitality, with a high scent of incense (薰香내),
Seems immediately warm to the touch.
- 12-Faced Avalokiteshvara Bodhisattva (12面觀音菩薩) -

P'ain – Anapchi is one thing, but how about Manwŏltae (滿月臺) in Kaesŏng (開城)? <88>

Ch'uho – When I first saw Kaesŏng, the layout of the city didn't seem like a place where a royal capital had sat at all. It felt more like a fortress zone or some military city where artillery batteries were piled up here and there and tens of thousands of strong soldiers were trained in training grounds (訓練院), with rugged mountains standing densely in front and behind. After passing through such a place for a while, the old palace site of Manwŏltae came into view.
Only when I climbed Manwŏltae and looked around in all directions did I realize it had been a royal capital, as the front and back opened up, and plains came into view. The foundation stones of Manwŏltae, or the roof tile fragments (기와짱) kicked underfoot in the mud of fields and paddies – all are traces evoking nostalgia (懷古) for where the nobles of the Koryŏ Dynasty (麗代衣冠) became ancient mounds (成古丘).

Wŏlt'an – Isn't there a famous *sijo* poem about Manwŏltae?

Five hundred years of the capital city, I return on a lone horse,
Mountains and rivers remain as before, but heroes are gone.
Alas, were the peaceful, hazy moonlit days but a dream?

Ch'uho – That's good too. Yuktang (pen name of Ch'oe Nam-sŏn) also wrote many *sijo* about Songdo (松都 - old name for Kaesŏng). Standing on this old palace site, I somehow recalled Jeremiah's Lamentations. The scene of autumn grass fluttering in the coming and going wind, the willow embankment with only a few willows standing – it felt as if the sound of a four-stringed zither (四絃琴) might be heard from somewhere, truly evoking the songs of Jeremiah.

Ansŏ – When I first set foot in Songdo (松都) and saw Sŏnjukkyo Bridge (善竹橋), and gradually went further into the city streets, I thought, "This layout is inferior even to Seoul's Chang'an, a cramped capital." But once I climbed Manwŏltae, I realized Songaksan Mountain (松嶽山) was situated properly, and Puljohyŏn Pass (不朝峴) had receded to a distance, thinking, "This is correct."
Manwŏltae is located on a high mountain ridge. Thinking that even a single strand of arrowroot vine entwined in the foundation stones has its roots in five hundred years ago truly stirs the heart. Although the Koryŏ Dynasty culture left by King Wang Kŏn's ancestors cannot be found now, its image can be faintly perceived on this site.

Namhansansŏng and T'onggunjŏng

Kim Tonghwan – According to the review by the director of the Yi Royal Household Office after visiting Namhansansŏng (南漢山城), the steep mountains surrounding it form a natural fortress, quite magnificent, like the 203 Meter Hill in Port Arthur (旅順) or the Verdun (벨단) fortress from the Great European War where German casualties were 500,000 and French 350,000. I also think that during the Byeongja War (丙子戰役), the Yi Dynasty army's defeat after only 40 days of siege <89> was likely due to the supply lines (糧道) being cut rather than the military force being weak.

Pak Chonghwa – That's right. Namhansansŏng is a natural fortress (天然 要塞). Originally, Ach'asan Mountain (峨嵯山) on the north bank of the Han River (漢江) nearby was also a strategic point (要害) for Paekche, said to be the site of Tangjinsansŏng Fortress (唐津山城). Namhansansŏng's stone wall (石壁), about 20 *li* in circumference, is excellent, and the Sŏjangdae (西將臺), a two-story pavilion on the fortress wall, and the command post (天守閣) are all magnificent beyond compare, reaching into the clouds. Isn't there a fine poem by the Yi Dynasty poet Hong Yangho about this Sŏjangdae?

千尺層雲廻 曾經百事來 (A thousand-foot layered cloud returns; a hundred affairs have passed)
艱危那忍說 鎖鑼愧非才 (How can I bear to speak of hardship and danger? Ashamed of lacking talent like Suo Luo)
大野茫茫遠 長江曲曲廻 (The great plains stretch vast and far; the long river winds and turns)
煍然撫孤杖 斜日獨徘徊 (Brightly leaning on my lone staff; alone I wander under the setting sun)

Ch'unsŏng – According to historical records (史記), it seems King Onjo of Paekche might have established his capital here. It's also said that Wiryesŏng (慰禮城) was located at Namhansansŏng.

Ch'uho – That seems plausible. Two thousand years ago, north of Seoul was Koguryŏ, which had conquered Nangnang (樂浪); southeast of Seoul was Silla, which maintained diplomatic relations with flourishing Tang China; and southwest of Seoul was Paekche, the nation of culture. So, both Puyŏ and Namhansansŏng likely served as its capitals.

Kim Tonghwan – How is it now?

Ansŏ – In the past, there was a Resident (留守) or Magistrate (府使) here, but now it has become a village of about 300 households with a township office (*myŏnso*) and an elementary school. Anyway, seeing this fortress, didn't even Yu Sŏngnyong recite, "溫朝城堞云云" (Regarding the battlements of Onjo's fortress...)?

Wŏlt'an – Sometime ago, I climbed it on a moonlit night. The image of many people singing songs while guarding this fortress tower, and the figures of the Three Scholars (三學士) who died for righteousness even though they lost the battle, seemed to appear before my eyes. Moreover, thinking about the situation when, after 45 days of siege, the debate between peace and war was settled, and King Injo opened the fortress gate and reached Samjŏndo (三田渡) to make peace with the Qing Emperor Taizong, I couldn't help but straighten my collar.

Ansŏ – Not only that, it's also a place of superb scenery. Though the pavilions and fortress walls (城壁) are half-damaged by 300 years of spring winds and autumn rains, they make one think of times past.
Namhansansŏng is 450 meters above sea level, isn't that quite high?

P'ain – I heard that T'onggunjŏng (統軍亭) in Ŭiju (義州), facing the Yalu River (鴨綠江) and standing on the riverbank, has a very imposing atmosphere. Have any of you been there? <90>

Wŏlt'an – I haven't been there, but isn't there a valiant folk song about T'onggunjŏng? Like,

It catches fire, it catches fire!
At Ŭiju T'onggunjŏng,
Fire catches!

And so on. It's great. Somehow, it's a song that makes you want to slap your knee and let out a long cry towards the barbarian lands in the north wind. Since hearing it once as a child, I've always meant to go, but still haven't managed. Mr. Mun Ilp'yŏng (湖岩 文一平) is probably from Ŭiju, isn't he?

Ch'uho – T'onggunjŏng's superb scenery is enhanced by Wihwado Island (威化島). Isn't Wihwado the historic place where Yi Sŏnggye, who had received the royal command to strike the Liaodong (遼東) plains, turned his army back (回軍)? When I visited years ago, on the wide field where he rested his horses and trained his northern expeditionary force (北伐軍) 500 years ago, a village (*tongni maŭl*) now sits. Climbing T'onggunjŏng, looking out at Wihwado, and contemplating the vast Yalu River flowing below, it's a magnificent place where a true man might want to shout.

Wŏlt'an – Is Wihwado as large as P'yŏngyang's Nŭngnado?

Ansŏ – Much larger. Several times larger, I'd say. For looking out towards the Liaodong plains, T'onggunjŏng is the prime spot.

Ch'uho – T'onggunjŏng is fine, but Paeksangnu Pavilion (百祥樓) on the bank of the Ch'ŏngch'ŏn River (淸川江) in Anju (安州) is also truly excellent. The clear Ch'ŏngch'ŏn River water flows windingly, and Paeksangnu, seeming like "three mountains half-fallen beyond the blue sky" (三山半落靑天外), stands tall amidst the clouds – a place worthy for a poet to take up their brush. I tried writing the beginning of my long novel "Ch'ŏngch'un'gok" (靑春曲 - Song of Youth) with Paeksangnu as the backdrop.

Ch'unsŏng – Paeksangnu is said to be good too, but years ago I visited Chuksŏru Pavilion (竹西樓) in Samch'ŏk (三陟), one of the Eight Scenic Views of Kwandong (關東八景). Although the East Sea is a bit far off, the landscape background was truly wonderful, and the elegant, old-style Chuksŏru building was also fine. For Chuksŏru to exist in a remote place with such layered mountains like Kangwŏn Province (江原道), the elders certainly considered its placement well when they built it.

Men of Taste, Chivalrous Kisaeng, and Righteous Kisaeng

P'ain – Now that we have toured the scenic spots of the eight provinces, let's move on to figures. Looking back over several thousand years of history, if we were to name about three chivalrous *kisaeng* (*hyapkki*, 俠妓), famous *kisaeng* (*myŏnggi*, 名妓), or renowned women of this land, <91> who would they be?

Wŏlt'an – First is Hwang Chini (黃眞伊). Didn't she sing a masterpiece at the old site of Pŏmsajŏng Pavilion (泛射亭) near Pagyŏn Falls (朴淵瀑布) to entice Pyŏkkyesu (碧溪水), a heroic man who was the castle lord?

Blue mountain stream, Pyŏkkyesu, boast not of your swift passage.
Once you reach the vast sea, returning is difficult.
The bright moon fills the sky, so why not rest before going?

Yi T'aejun wrote a novel about Hwang Chini, and I have written about her too. She was beautiful, excelled in song and dance, played the *kŏmun'go* well, and possessed a noble spirit and firm integrity, always channeling the passion in her heart onto the tip of her brush to compose *sijo*. There might have been hundreds of poems, but only a few remain in song collections (*kagokp'yŏn*) now.

Ansŏ – That's right. Hwang Chini was a chivalrous *kisaeng* who understood refinement and literature. Hwang Chini is good, but Kyewŏrhyang (桂月香) of P'yŏngyang was also famous, though she left no literary legacy. If we search for such renowned, refined, chivalrous *kisaeng* in history, after Hwang Chini, we must mention Puyong (芙蓉). Like Xue Tao (薜濤) or Du Qiuniang (杜秋娘) of the flourishing Tang dynasty, she must have composed many famous poems and beautiful verses when overcome by artistic inspiration, but only a few survive today. However, the 19-verse love song (戀歌) starting with

Parting,
I long for you

that catches our eye truly shows astonishing talent. Being so skilled in song and unrestrained in passion, one can imagine how famous she must have been in her time. She was a woman like Sappho of Greece. Shall we say she was like Zhuo Wenjun (卓文君) of the flourishing Tang era?

Ch'uho – Puyong's 19-verse love poem (相思詩) is truly a masterpiece. I wonder if there is any female poet today who could compose such a song. Anyway, she was an astonishingly talented woman.

Ch'unsŏng – Excellence in song and dance ends within one or two generations, and moreover, even a flower-like face cannot last twenty or thirty years. Ultimately, those who live long in history, in our view, are those who leave a literary heritage. In that case, as a female writer shining in history, Hŏ Nansŏrhŏn (許蘭雪) should be counted. Aren't her *sijo* quite numerous? They are also refined and fragrant, truly a person to be highly valued.

P'ain – That's right. Hŏ Nansŏrhŏn. She also holds <92> a high position in our literary history. Then, following your words, the chivalrous *kisaeng* or renowned women from history would be Hwang Chini, Puyong, Hŏ Nansŏrhŏn. Let's consider this selection of these three women as a significant historical record.
Now, let's similarly select three heroic men known for enjoying refinement from among the males.

Chŏn Yŏngt'aek – Kim Sakkat (金笠). Though he wandered the streets leaving behind fragments of poetry that were free-spirited and divinely inspired (神韻), his unfortunate life strikes one's heart.

Pak Chonghwa – That's right. Kim Sakkat should be counted. Kim Sakkat's real name was Kim Pyŏngyŏn (金炳淵). The powerful ministers of the time, Kim Pyŏnghak (金炳學) and Kim Pyŏnggi (金炳冀), were all his relatives. But during the scholars' purges (*sahwa*), when his entire extended family (五族) was exterminated, only he survived, wandering the markets and streets, reciting his feelings. Even while willingly becoming a dependent guest (*mun'gaek*) at the homes of insignificant people, leaving his worn shoes at the gate, his constant lament for the times flowed out as poems and songs.

No Chayŏng – Speaking of heroic men, my eyes first go to the Hwarang groups of the Silla period. History records the Hwarang system – Kim Yusin (金瘐信) was also from the Hwarang. At that time, the powerful ministers and warriors were all said to be Hwarang, but it's sad that there isn't one or two individuals among them who can be singled out like Hwang Chini among women. Therefore, since we cannot find the desired man among the Hwarang, we eventually have to bring up someone like Chŏng Sudong (鄭壽銅) as a humorous poet (諧謔詩人). Chŏng Sudong's personality and legacy are known to the world, so I won't say more-.

Kim Ŏk – That's right. One can think of Pak Munsu (朴文秀) and Chŏng Sudong, but Chŏng Sudong was the refined gentleman (*p'ungnyugaek*) of his generation. And then there's Scholar Yang (楊處士), Yang Pongnae (梁逢來). His lofty integrity, his appearance like an immortal Taoist sage (仙風道骨), and the writings he left for posterity... I went to Naksan (洛山) and Samilp'o (三日浦), and there was the place where Yang Pongnae used to frequent. He was a scholar unparalleled in history, attuned to the native sentiments of Korea.

Kim Tonghwan – That must be so. When I visited Samilp'o, I heard the details from the boatman, climbed the mountain, and even found the site of his relics.
Then, the three heroic men and refined scholars remaining in history would be Kim Sakkat, Yang Pongnae, and Chŏng Sudong. Let's decide on that. Well, this should be enough; we have deeply inhaled the fragrance of these mountains and rivers, so let's conclude this gathering here for now. (End) <93>

**Summary**

This 1939 roundtable discussion features prominent Korean literary figures (Kim Ŏk, Pak Chonghwa, No Chayŏng, Chŏn Yŏngt'aek, Kim Tonghwan) sharing their appreciation for famous scenic locations across the Korean peninsula, such as Yaksan Tongdae, Nŭngnado, Myŏngsasimni, Anapchi, Manwŏltae, Namhansansŏng, and T'onggunjŏng. They discuss the natural beauty, associated legends, folk songs, and poems (including works by Sowŏl, Han Yongun, Chu Yohan, Kim Tongin, Yi Kwangsu, and their own). The conversation extends to nominating notable historical figures: three exemplary women (Hwang Chini, Puyong, Hŏ Nansŏrhŏn) and three exemplary men (Kim Sakkat, Yang Pongnae, Chŏng Sudong) known for their artistic talents, integrity, or refined lifestyles. From a colonial history perspective, the article is significant as it showcases Korean intellectuals actively engaging with and celebrating purely Korean landscapes, cultural heritage (folk songs, poetry, historical sites), and historical figures during a period of intense Japanese assimilation pressure. Their nostalgia for past beauty and traditions, coupled with laments about changes (like the disappearance of willows or modernization altering landscapes), subtly underscores a sense of cultural loss and enduring national identity.

**Named Entities**

岸曙 金億	안서 김억	Ansŏ Kim Ŏk
月灘 朴種和	월탄 박종화	Wŏlt'an Pak Chonghwa
春城 盧子泳	춘성 노자영	Ch'unsŏng No Chayŏng
秋湖 田榮澤	추호 전영택	Ch'uho Chŏn Yŏngt'aek
파인 金東煥	파인 김동환	P'ain Kim Tonghwan
半島山河	반도산하	Pando Sanha (Peninsula's Mountains and Rivers)
藥山東臺	약산동대	Yaksan Tongdae
寧邊	영변	Yŏngbyŏn
西道	서도	Sŏdo
安東縣	안동현	Andonghyŏn (Andong County)
平安道	평안도	P'yŏngan-do (P'yŏngan Province)
九龍江	구룡강	Kuryonggang (Kuryong River)
鶴歸岩	학귀암	Hakkwiam
黃海道	황해도	Hwanghae-do (Hwanghae Province)
西關	서관	Sŏgwan
素月	소월	Sowŏl (Kim Sŏwŏl)
京釜線	경부선	Kyŏngbusŏn (Kyŏngbu Line)
綾羅島	능라도	Nŭngnado
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
大同江	대동강	Taedonggang (Taedong River)
江南	강남	Kangnam (Jiangnan, China)
蘇杭州	소항주	So-Hangju (Suzhou-Hangzhou, China)
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
春園	춘원	Ch'unwŏn (Yi Kwangsu)
吉林	길림	Killim (Jilin, China)
松花江	송화강	Songhwagang (Songhua River)
島山	도산	Tosan (An Ch'angho)
大成學校	대성학교	Taesŏng Hakkyo (Taesŏng School)
浮碧樓	부벽루	Pubyŏngnu
練光亭	연광정	Yŏn'gwangjŏng
蘇東坡	소동파	So Tongp'a (Su Dongpo)
坑州	항주	Hangju (Hangzhou, China)
淸流壁	청류벽	Ch'ŏngnyubyŏk
主要漢	주요한	Chu Yohan
東仁	동인	Tongin (Kim Tongin)
開城	개성	Kaesŏng
定州	정주	Chŏngju
義州	의주	Ŭiju
甲午役	갑오역	Kabo-yŏk (Sino-Japanese War of 1894-95)
七星門	칠성문	Ch'ilsŏngmun
關岳廟	관악묘	Kwanakmyo
箕子陵	기자릉	Kijarŭng (Tomb of Gija)
桂月香	계월향	Kyewŏrhyang
高句麗	고구려	Koguryŏ
遼東	요동	Yodong (Liaodong)
鳳凰城	봉황성	Ponghwangsŏng
元山	원산	Wŏnsan
明沙十里	명사십리	Myŏngsasimni
韓龍雲	한용운	Han Yongun
金珖燮	김광섭	Kim Kwangsŏp
夢金浦	몽금포	Monggŭmp'o
東海	동해	Tonghae (East Sea)
天安三巨里	천안삼거리	Ch'ŏnan Samgŏri
天安	천안	Ch'ŏnan
關の五本松	세키노고혼마쓰	Seki no Gohonmatsu (Japanese place name: Five Pines of Seki)
楊州	양주	Yangju
坡州	파주	P'aju
全羅道	전라도	Chŏlla-do (Chŏlla Province)
慶尙道	경상도	Kyŏngsang-do (Kyŏngsang Province)
忠淸道	충청도	Ch'ungch'ŏng-do (Ch'ungch'ŏng Province)
南原	남원	Namwŏn
百濟	백제	Paekche
扶餘	부여	Puyŏ
皐蘭寺	고란사	Koran-sa (Koransa Temple)
慶州	경주	Kyŏngju
雁鴨池	안압지	Anapchi
臨海殿	임해전	Imhaejŏn
黃龍寺	황룡사	Hwangnyongsa (Hwangnyongsa Temple)
佛國寺	불국사	Pulguksa (Pulguksa Temple)
石窟庵	석굴암	Sŏkkuram (Sŏkkuram Grotto)
新羅	신라	Silla
多寶塔	다보탑	Tabot'ap (Tabo Pagoda)
釋迦牟尼	석가모니	Sŏkkamoni (Shakyamuni Buddha)
希臘	희랍	Huirap (Greece)
觀音菩薩	관음보살	Kwanŭm Posal (Avalokiteshvara Bodhisattva)
滿月臺	만월대	Manwŏltae
麗代	여대	Yŏdae (Koryŏ Dynasty)
六堂	육당	Yuktang (Ch'oe Nam-sŏn)
松都	송도	Songdo (Old name for Kaesŏng)
善竹橋	선죽교	Sŏnjukkyo (Sŏnjuk Bridge)
松嶽山	송악산	Songaksan (Mt. Songak)
不朝峴	불조현	Puljohyŏn (Puljo Pass)
王儉	왕검	Wang Kŏm (Founder of Koryŏ, Wang Kŏn)
南漢山城	남한산성	Namhansansŏng (Namhan Mountain Fortress)
李王職	이왕직	I Wangjik (Office of the Yi Royal Household)
旅順	여순	Yŏsun (Port Arthur)
歐洲大戰	구주대전	Kuju Taejŏn (Great European War - WWI)
獨逸	독일	Togil (Germany)
佛軍	불군	Pulgun (French Army)
벨단	벨단	Peldan (Verdun - phonetic rendering)
丙子戰役	병자전역	Pyŏngja Chŏnyŏk (Byeongja War - Qing Invasion of 1636)
李朝	이조	Ijo (Yi Dynasty/Joseon)
漢江	한강	Han'gang (Han River)
峨嵯山	아차산	Ach'asan (Mt. Acha)
唐津山城	당진산성	Tangjinsansŏng (Tangjin Mountain Fortress)
西將臺	서장대	Sŏjangdae
洪良浩	홍양호	Hong Yangho
溫祚	온조	Onjo (King Onjo of Paekche)
慰禮城	위례성	Wiryesŏng
樂浪	낙랑	Nangnang (Lelang Commandery)
盛唐	성당	Sŏngdang (Flourishing Tang Dynasty)
柳成龍	유성룡	Yu Sŏngnyong
仁祖	인조	Injo (King Injo)
三田渡	삼전도	Samjŏndo
淸太宗	청태종	Ch'ŏng T'aejong (Hong Taiji, Qing Emperor Taizong)
統軍亭	통군정	T'onggunjŏng
鴨綠江	압록강	Amnokkang (Yalu River)
威化島	위화도	Wihwado (Wihwa Island)
李成桂	이성계	Yi Sŏnggye
文一平	문일평	Mun Ilp'yŏng
安州	안주	Anju
淸川江	청천강	Ch'ŏngch'ŏn'gang (Ch'ŏngch'ŏn River)
百祥樓	백상루	Paeksangnu
關東八景	관동팔경	Kwandong P'algyŏng (Eight Scenic Views of Kwandong)
三陟	삼척	Samch'ŏk
竹西樓	죽서루	Chuksŏru
江原道	강원도	Kangwŏn-do (Kangwŏn Province)
黃眞伊	황진이	Hwang Chini
朴淵瀑布	박연폭포	Pagyŏn P'okp'o (Pagyŏn Falls)
泛射亭	범사정	Pŏmsajŏng
碧溪水	벽계수	Pyŏkkyesu
李泰俊	이태준	Yi T'aejun
芙蓉	부용	Puyong
薜濤	설도	Sŏl T'o (Xue Tao)
杜秋娘	두추랑	Tu Ch'urang (Du Qiuniang)
卓文君	탁문군	T'ak Mun'gun (Zhuo Wenjun)
許蘭雪	허난설	Hŏ Nansŏrhŏn
金笠	김립	Kim Rip (Kim Sakkat)
金炳淵	김병연	Kim Pyŏngyŏn
金炳學	김병학	Kim Pyŏnghak
金炳冀	김병기	Kim Pyŏnggi
金瘐信	김유신	Kim Yusin
鄭壽銅	정수동	Chŏng Sudong (often identified with Chŏng Manjo)
朴文秀	박문수	Pak Munsu
楊處士	양처사	Yang Ch'ŏsa (Scholar Yang)
梁逢來	양봉래	Yang Pongnae
洛山	낙산	Naksan
三日浦	삼일포	Samilp'o

**Glossary**

半島山河	반도산하	Peninsula's mountains and rivers (Korea)
詩客	시객	Poet; literary guest
絕勝景槪	절승경개	Superb scenic beauty; magnificent landscape
진달내	진달래	Azalea (Older spelling '진달내')
아지랑이	아지랑이	Haze; heat shimmer
가관	가관	Spectacle; sight worth seeing
민요	민요	Folk song
憧憬	동경	Yearning; longing
넉시	넋이	Spirit; soul (Older spelling '넉시' for '넋이')
花煎노리	화전놀이	Flower pancake game/picnic
처자	처자	Young woman; maiden
아까시야 나무	아까시나무	Acacia tree (Specifically Robinia pseudoacacia)
柳絮	유서	Willow catkins
수양버들	수양버들	Weeping willow (Salix babylonica)
해당화	해당화	Sweetbrier rose; rugosa rose (Rosa rugosa)
모래벌	모래벌	Sand dune; sandy field
금쌀애기	금싸라기	Gold dust; tiny grains of gold (Older spelling '금쌀애기')
능수버들	능수버들	A type of weeping willow, often considered more graceful (Salix pseudolasiogyne or similar)
春草	춘초	Spring grass
古都	고도	Ancient capital
깔대	갈대	Reed
주칫돌	주춧돌	Foundation stone; cornerstone (Older spelling '주칫돌')
僧兵	승병	Monk soldier
石臺	석대	Stone platform; stylobate
彫刻	조각	Sculpture; carving
香불	향불	Incense fire; burning incense
요새지대	요새지대	Fortress zone; fortified area
기와짱	기와장	Roof tile fragment (Older spelling '기와짱')
懷古	회고	Nostalgia; reminiscence of the past
留守	유수	Resident Commissioner (historical title)
要塞	요새	Fortress; stronghold
籠城	농성	Holding a castle under siege; siege defense
糧道	양도	Supply route; provisions line
石壁	석벽	Stone wall
城壁	성벽	Fortress wall
回軍	회군	Turning back an army; withdrawing troops
北伐軍	북벌군	Northern expeditionary force
俠妓	협기	Chivalrous kisaeng (courtesan with noble spirit)
名妓	명기	Famous kisaeng (courtesan)
快男兒	쾌남아	Spirited man; gallant man
風流客	풍류객	Person of refined taste; connoisseur of arts and leisure (Older spelling '風流엣' sometimes used for genitive)
諧謔詩人	해학시인	Humorous poet
仙風道骨	선풍도골	Appearance and manner of an immortal Taoist sage; refined character


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제11권 제4호
발행일	1939년 04월 01일
기사제목	「半島山河」을 말하다
필자	岸曙 金億, 月灘 朴種和, 春城 盧子泳, 秋湖 田榮澤, 파인 金東煥
기사형태	대담·좌담

「半島山河」을 말하다
						岸曙 金億, 月灘 朴種和, 春城 盧子泳, 秋湖 田榮澤, 파인 金東煥
곷 피는 春3월부터 詩客으로 더부러 半島山河의 風光을 말하기로 하다 窓外에 九十春光 무르녹는 소리를 고요히 드르면서...<78>

진달내 핀 藥山東臺

金東煥-세월이 덧없어 어느덧 春三月이라, 진달내꽃 피고 노고지리 우지지는 이 좋은 시절을 當하매 저절로 좋은 산천 두루 찾어 詩도 읇고 노래도 부르고 십슴니다 그려, 그러기에 이제 이 땅 詩人墨客 여러분을 한자리에 모시고 半島의 絶勝景槪를 찻기로 하겠읍니다.
봄에도 春三月, 가장 몬저 피는 꽃은 진달래요 그 진달래로는 寧邊에 藥山東臺가 몹시 유명하지요, 그러기에 賞春詩筵의 맨 첫머리에 이 藥山東臺 진달내꽃 구경부터 나서기로 합시다. 岸曙兄, 언젠가 寧邊가섰다가 詩 읇흔 것이 있지 않엇서요?
岸曙 金億-藥山東臺 참으로 거 조치요, 이른 봄 아지랑이가 西道山川을, 마치 신부의 얼골에 엳고 부드러운 면사포로 가리우드시 꿈결같이 고요히 가리울 적에 寧邊의 그 藥山東臺에는 연분홍 진달래가 한 벌 쭉- 피어 깔니지요 너무 야드러지게 붉지도 않고 그러타고 멋업시 히지도 않은 朱黛를 띤 연분홍 진달내가 山 허리를 타고 이리저리 물결처 흐른 것이 참으로 가관이여요.
平安道 고향을 떠나 길손이 된지 하도 오래서 지금 고향 산천의 기억은 깜아아득하지만 그 어느젠가 한번 발 드디어 본 이 藥山東臺의 진달내꽃 경치만은 이저질 길 업서요. 3,4년 전 어느 春三月에 安東縣 갓다오든 길에 잠간 들었더니 진달내가 한창 피였는데 그 절경이란 예나 지금이나 역시 조터군요.
그 길로 도라서 노래 한 首 읇흔 것이 있지요. 웨어 볼가요.

1. 藥山東臺 가고지고
藥山東臺 어듸메냐.
하늘 끝엔 구름이요
구름 끝은 虛空이다.
야즈라진 바위에
외진달내 연분홍은
봄바람을 못내 반겨
하늘하늘 춤을 추리.
아하 꿈에 선한 내 東臺의
지금은 엇더런고.

2. 藥山東臺 가고지고<79>
藥山東臺 어듸메냐.
하늘 끝엔 구름이요
구름 끝은 虛空이다.
鶴歸岩엔 鶴이 올가
기둘는지 오래건만
들비듥이 짝 찻노라
구개구개 넘어들리.
아하 꿈에 선한 내 東臺의
지금은 엇더런고.

3. 藥山東臺 가고지고
藥山東臺 어듸메냐.
하늘 끝엔 구름이요
구름 끝은 虛空이다.
九龍江의 여튼 물엔
나무배도 간 데 업고
해가 지자 돗는 달에
힌 물살만 소삭이리.
아하 꿈에 선한 내 東臺의
지금은 엇더런고.

金東煥-조쿠만요, 아마 平安道나 黃海道 친구들은 대개 보섰을 걸요. 春城, 가섰댓서요.
春城 盧子泳-나도 민요에서 듯고 가곱허 가곱허 하고 몹시 憧憬해 오다가 年前에 동무들과 더부러 寧邊에 놀너 갓지요. 藥山東臺는 진실로 西關의 名勝地입데다. 邑 바로 압산이 하눌에 웃둑 소슨 東臺지요. 그 東臺란 山 꼭대기에 있는 絶壁山頂인데 그 우에는 크다란 너래방석이 노여 있고 그 방석에는
大陸群山沒 長空一帶來
天下臺名臺 人間無比石
이란 漢詩 한 줄이 싹여 있드군요. 이 層岩絶壁을 중심으로 그 아래 左右에 진달내가 쪽-깔녔서요, 몇 천 송이 몇 만 송이인지 모르지요. 옛날 어느 守領의 외딸이 이 東臺에 올나 놀다가 失足하여 떠러저 죽었는데 그 넉시 샛빨간 진달내가 되었다고 古老들이 이야기 하드군요.
그 東臺 아래에는 九龍江이란 맑은 강물이 양양이 흘너가는데 바름이 으시시하고 지나가면 진하게 피었든 꽃들이 떠러저 강물 우에 떠내려 가는 것이 정말 滿溪流水 泛花來格이더군요. 나도 흥겨워 두어절 불너 보았지요.

東臺에 오를랴니
꽃을 밟고 <80>
꽃을 았기니
東臺에 내 못올으네
에헤야 에헤야
東臺...東臺...

東臺에 불이 타네
빨간꽃 불이 타네
東臺에 올으랴니
꽃을 밟고
꽃이 았가워 東臺에
내 못오르네

藥山의 고흔 님이
九龍山에 잠들었네
별들도 有心하야
순*어 바라거니
고흔 밤 아름다운 꿈을
길이 깨지 말고저

秋湖 田榮澤-藥山東臺를 두고 지은 漢詩도 많은 모양이더군요. 新詩로는 素月의 詩 조왓지요. 素月이는  그 나근나근하고 부드러운 민요조를 가지고 진달내를 못 견듸게 그리웁게 읇엇섰지요.

나 보기가 역겨워
가실 때에는
말없이 고이 보내 드리우리다

寧邊에 藥山
진달내꽃
아름 따다 가실 길에 뿌리우리다

가시는 거름 거름
놓인 그 꽃을
삽분히 드려 밟고 가시옵소서

月灘 朴鍾和-참으로 조쿠만요. 스무 나무 젊은 철에 素月은 제 정열을 이 한 首에 모다 쏘다 노았지요.
金東煥-月灘, 寧邊 가보섰서요?
朴種和-가보든 못했어요. 언제든 한 번 가볼려고는 생각해요. 가보았던들 나두 한 두 절 읇헛슬 것을 어쨋든 옛날부터 흘너오든 「藥上東台」란 그 민요가 조와요. 아조 朝鮮 情調를 숨막힐드시 담었섰지요. 西道山川의 향기는 그 一篇에 듬신 풍겨저 있서요.
金東煥-나두 보지는 못했지만 그 맛은 늣길 수 있서서 이렇게 불너 본 적 있지요. 이번 京釜線 車中서 우연히<81> 불너 보았서요.

春三月
이른 꽃은
영변에 진달내라

얼는 피어
얼는 지니
두고 두고, 았가워라

핀 날부터
샛빨가니
西道 閣氏 붓그려라

영변에 진달내야
피긴 피되
더러는, 더듸 피든 못하든가.

月灘-진달내 철에 西道 각씨들이 花煎노리 하는가요.
秋湖-하지요. 아마 그것이 4월 초파일 전후가 될 걸요. 새 옷 갈아입은 젊은 처자들이 세넷씩 패를 지어  바위 아래서 떡 지지며 花煎노리 하지요. 노래도 부르고-.
月灘-그 노래란 그 옛 민요들인가요.
春城-설마, 시집도 안 간 색시들이 그렇게 風流엣 소리야 수집어서 할나고! 그러나 무엔가 간열피게 길게 빼는 구슬픈 노래를 고은 목청으로 부르드군요. 그 花煎 지질 때 여기저기서 한 가달의 떡 굽는 연기가 기여 오르는데 그 수풀 속에 붉게 보이는 것이 꽃이 아니면 각씨들 분홍치마요. 그 중에도 진한 것은 분홍댕기야요. 노랑 갓신에 빨간 댕기 들인 젊은 처자의 모양을 보면 스러젔든 옛 情調를 예서 찻는구나 하며 어떻게 깃분줄 모르겠서요.
파인- 西道의 진달내는 서울보다 얼마나 놋게 펴요.
岸曙-한 보름 느질가요. 양지 쪽엣 것은 거지반 서울과 같을 걸요.

綾羅島의 수양버들

金東煥-藥山 東臺에 꽃 질 무렵 되면 그제는 平壤 大同江, 綾羅島 섬가에  초록색 수양버들이 느러지지요. 이제는 그 綾羅島의 수양버들을 찻기로 합시다.<82> 柳絮는 언제 날니는가요.
月灘-暮春初夏之節이지요. 江南의 蘇杭州서는 早春 3, 4月이라 했스나, 朝鮮은 아마 5월경 일걸요. 그 잡힐 듯 말 듯 바름에 가볍게 날녀 흐르는 柳絮는 참으로 마음을 끄으러요.
金東煥-春園 말슴을 드르면 吉林도 버들이 만터래요. 그래서 봄철 되면 柳絮가 날너 松花江 一帶에 떠러지는 것이 마치 大同江 물 우에 綾羅島의 버들개지가 흐르듯 하더래요.
秋湖-吉林은 북방인데 게도 수양버들이 그렇게 만이 있을가요- 아무튼 나는 平壤은 옛날 島山께서 校長철에 大成學校에 단닐 적인데 浮碧樓 높은 다락에 학생들과 함께 올나서 바라다보면 푸른 강물 우으로 양털 같은 솜 송이가 흐터지는 것이 참으로 조터군요. 그때 철에는 綾羅島 뿐 아니라 練光亭에서부터 저 멀니 浮碧樓 올나가는 데까지 大同江변에 버드나무가 쭉-느러섰댓지요. 그렇게 멋이 있더러니 지금에 가보면 楊柳는 綾羅島 外에야 어디 있더라고 빨니 자라나기로 유명하고 승겁기로 유명한 아까시야 나무뿐이지.
春城-蘇東坡가 坑州刺使되듯 이제 月灘이나 岸曙가 平壤府尹이 되어 갓드라면 예전 같이 大同江에 수양버들을 심을 터인데 官吏에 詩를 解하는 이가 있어야지. 하하 (一同笑)
岸曙-그야 간다면 楊柳 심어 옛 風趣를 살니고 오지요... 그런데 秋湖 말 같이 참으로 예전에는 平壤에 수양버들이 만했어요. 江岸을 파-랗게 덮엇더랫스니까 지금에야 練光亭 근방에 멋 그루 남았을가 참으로 앗가운 일이지요. 앗까운 일을 말하자면 淸流壁도 녜전에는 겨우 한 두 사람이 지나다닐만하게 오솔길이 노었을 뿐이엇지요. 그래서 한 쪽은 千仞絶壁이요 한 쪽은 양양한 물결이 바로 발 아래에 출넝출넝 흘너 지나서 그 멋이란 참으로 그럴뜻 했었지만 지금은 바위를 깍가내리어 자동차까지 단니게 되고 江岸엔 수양버들은 다 *디가고 숭거운 장숭 같은 아까시야 나무가 서고... 다른 데는 모르나 大同江가에 가보면 桑田碧海란 말이 생각납네다.
파인-주요한君 詩「불노리」를 보면 大同江 絶景은 楊州千絲未繫人이란 능라도 실버들 풍치보다 5월 端午의 불노리가 더 조터군요.
春城-『불노리』一篇은 그 사람 쓴 것 중에도 가장 뛰여나요. 그 정열, 그 향기, 두 세 번 읽어도 실치 않어요.
月灘-잘 썼어오. 잘 썼어요. 잘 썼어요.「저녁 하늘에<83>花砲가 터진다. 터진다. 슬어저가는 분홍빛 놀... 하는 調로 맑고도 뜨거웁게 西道男兒의 氣質과 江月풍경을 잘도 그렸지요. 그런데 平壤 불노리란 5월 端午-」가 4월 패일인가요.
岸曙-4월 패일 가태. 부처님 나신 날에 平壤城中 백성들이 모다 들끄러나와 찬讚佛하는 것이 뜻에 마즐 것 가태 암만 해도...
春城-端午명절을 開城이나 定州, 義州 등 西道에서 가장 잘 노는 것으로 보아선 平壤 불노리도 5월 端午노리 갓구요.
秋湖-그래요 5월 端午노리가 올흔듯 해요. 그러나 불노리도 甲午役 전후에 벌서 없어젔다니까 東仁이나 요한이나 다 평양 지면서도 못봣다니까. 그런 걸 보면 아마 30년 前에 벌서 없서진 노리 갓해요.
파인-불노리를 어떻게 해요? 횃불이라니 오늘날의 花砲(花火)가 아닌가요.
岸曙-아니지요. 까만 밤중에 여러 數十隻 여러 數百隻의 배를 강물에 띠우지요. 20만 市民은 집을 모다 비우고 나와선 더러는 배 타고 더러는 강가나 鐵橋 우에서 구경하고 배라니 그것은 ヤンタ(船 尾形船) 비슷한 집웅을 씨운 집배(屋船)인데, 벳집으로 화토불을 하여서 江中腹에 이르렀을 때 하눌 공중 놉히 뿌리기도 하고 강물 우에 던지기도 하고... 그러니까 여러 億十萬 별들이 하늘에 날드시 까만 밤중에 불꽃이 요란스럽게 「호화찬란하게 날느지요」지금도 七星門 근방의 古老들에게서 드르면 어지간 했든 모양이였드군요.
파인-불노리도 그렇거니와 鞦韆도 平壤이 유명하지 않어요?
秋湖-추천은 저 關岳廟 앞 七星門 뒤에서 箕子陵 오르는 잔디벌판에서 하였지요. 지금도 추석이나 단오명절에 하는 모양이나 前만 못하더군.
파인-文人으로 平壤 情調를 살닌 사람이 누구 일까요.
月灘-東仁의 「배따라기」, 요한의「불노리」, 岸曙의 「레코-드 俗謠」의 능라도
春城-春園의 「無情」속 영채, 桂月香이, 패성학교 학생, 이 모든 사람이 모다 平壤을 로-만스의 都城, 꿈의 都城, 그리운 都城으로 맨드러내엇지요.
岸曙-秋湖도 소설「紅蓮, 白蓮」의 무대를 平壤에 찾엇지요. 원악 名妓 桂月香으로 멋은 붙일대로 다 부첬거니와...
파인-平壤을 어떻게 생각해요.
月灘-雄壯치는 못하지. 큰집 정원 같은 세공품이지. 高句麗의 氣慨는 저 遼東벌 鳳凰城 같은 큰 벌판에<84> 大都城을 싸울 때에 잇섯지. 平壤에 와서야 그 氣宇가 도로혀 주려버렷지 그저 風光 아름다운 山村水廓이 平壤이지요.
春城-그러치요. 대체로 곱고 아름다운 베니스 같은 로-만스의 都會로 피어젔지요.

明沙十里와 天安三巨里

파인-暮春初夏의 綾羅島 수양버들을 보았으니, 이제는 三伏間 정열의 꽃이 피는 元山 明沙十里의 海棠花를 보기로 합시다. 明沙十里는 모다 보섰을걸요.
春城-明沙十里라면 그 민요가 조와요.

明沙十里 해당화야
꽃 진다고 설워를 마라
明年 춘삼월이 오면
다시 피어 맛나리라

얼마나 멋저요. 곡조가 슬슬 제 멋에 흐르게 되고 이러니 여러 백년 사이에 여러 만명이 부르게 되앗고, 우리도 이렇게 소박하고 운치있는 노래를 짓고 싶어요.
岸曙-春城뿐 아니라 다 조와하는 노래지.
月灘-조선에「명사십리」와 「영변가」와「天安三巨里」의 세가지 노래는 정말 살었서요. 흙의 향기를 담문 그야말로 갑가는 民謠들이엇지요. 누가 지은 줄도 모르게 백성이 다 불느는 노래들이지요.
파인-「明沙十里」는 韓龍雲씨가 紀行을 썻고 또 노래 부른 것이 있었고, 金珖燮君이 明沙十里에 해당화 없더라고 慨嘆하였고.
岸曙-해당화 있는 줄 알고 차저 갔다가는 실망하지! 나도 十里長堤에 寧邊에 진달내 피듯 가득 덮했슬가 했더러니 웬걸 겨우 몇 군데에 그것도 앉은뱅이 소나무 틈에 반조고레 조고마케 피고 있더구만-그러나 많치는 안컨만 드문드문 붉으레 핀 것이 그게 되려 마음을 끄으러요.
春城-해당화 많기로는 黃海道 夢金浦가 좃습데다. 거기는 맑은 細砂로 十里를 連했고 細모래벌에 어떻게도 해당화가 많이 피였는지 앞으로 해당화 명소로는 夢金浦가 될걸요.
岸曙-그러나 元山 「明沙十里」의 모래벌의 그 모래는 참으로 금모래얘요. 한줌 가득 쥐어 바다물 속에 해우면<85> 모다 금쌀애기련듯 다 흘너버리고 남는 것이란 없어요. 그 細모새가 참 조와요.
月灘-나도 明沙十里에 가보았는데 운치 있는 서양인 별장이 松林 속에 서고, 바로 東海의 滄浪이 굽실굽실 닥어드는 풍경과, 달 싯고 드러오는 一葉片舟라거나 파-란 北方 하늘에 힌구름이 아모 근심 없는드시 흐르는 그 悠久한 풍경들이 조터군요. 그 속에 해당화가 진홍빛을 자랑하니 一旦 風趣를 더 돕는 대서 아마 해당화 꽃 이랫겠지. 한 두 송이가 오히려 천만 송이보다 더 나슬 법도 있으니까...
秋湖-나도 明沙十里 가본 적이 하도 오래서 잘 기억이 안되나 어쨋든 바다와 산과 갈메기와 꽃과-이 모든 것이 아조 천연스럽게 잘 조화되여 있었서요. 오밀조밀하지 안케 모다 훨-훨- 개방적이고 남성적이고 대륙적이고.
파인-寧邊에 「진달내」와 明沙十里「해당화」의 두 가지 꽃을 여자에 비한다면 어떻게 형용할까요.
春城-진달내를 수접어 수집어서 외면하고 섯는 시골 색시라 하면 해당화는 기름과 粉과 異性을 다 알고 앉은 都會의 여성과 같은 그런 냄새가 난다 할걸요.
岸曙-아니지, 차라리 진달내를 여자라 하면 해당화는 왈가닭, 절가닭하는 사내지요. 팔난봉 년석이지요. 그 빛깔도 하나는 연분홍, 채 붉지도 채 히지도 안코 하나는 피빛같이 어디까지도 진한 색채-그러치 않을가요.
月灘 결단코 안그러치. 해당화를 사내에 비긴단 말 안되지. 진달내는 당기따 하느린 미혼 童貞요. 해당화는 남의 맛며누리랄가. 진달래는 연약하나 풍정이 있고 해당화는 억센 듯 하면서 정열에 사는 꽃이지. 진달내는 시골 꽃이고 해당화는 서울 꽃이고.
秋湖-가비여운 그 봄바람조차 진달내는 못이겨 바람결에 떠러지나 해당화는 바닷바람조차 익여가며 필때로 다 피어 제 命에 지는 꽃이니, 진달내를 簿倖處子라면 해당화는 蕩兒의 노리개같은 娼女라 할가요.
파인-다 올흔 것 갓구만- 수집어 수집어 일부러 바위 틈에 가 숨어 피었다가, 열흘도 못 되어 얼는 저버리는 진달내야 가엽는 꽃이지요. 진달내는 향취에 사는 여자요, 해당화는 멋에 사는 여자라 하겟지요. 자아, 인제 해당화를 떠나서 저 민요로 유명한 天安三巨里 능수버들로 찻어가기로 합시다. 天安三巨里보섰어요?
岸曙-일흠 뿐이지 天安에 능수버들이 인제 없읍더다. 그저 빈 風趣없는 거리더군요. 關の五本松 있는<86> 곳이라든지 모다 민요 발상지엔 무엔가 자최가 남어있는 법인데, 天安은 멋지든 그 능수버들이 없어요. 돌碑石거러도 없어요.
春城-그래요. 나도 「天安三巨里 흥, 능수버들은 흥」하고 柔軟하게 흐르는 그 민요의 향기에 반해서 늘 한 번 보려 가려다가 정작 年前에 가보았드니 한적한 天安 舊邑이 있을 뿐으로 邑 한가운데 三南大路 가든 곳에 능수버들이 서섰다 하지만 지금은 없어요. 驛馬도 매였겠고 하여 적어도 몇 百年生의 늙은 버들이 가고 오는 봄바람에 흥청거릴 줄 알었더니 버들 그림자도 없읍데다.
파인-열 아무 그루야 남었겠지.
岸曙-한 두 구루나 있었을가. 어잿든 능수버들의 名所라고는 조곰도 생각되지 안어요. 그저 녜전 이쯔음에 섰섰으러란 想像이나 하며 입 속으로 버들타령을 부르고 도라왔을 뿐이지요.
파인-그거 참 슬픈 일이구만. 天安郡守가 風月 모르단건 그럴 법도 하겠지만, 그 곳 청년회나 시인 한 둘만 있었드라도 그러치는 않었을 터인데! 분하구만.
春城-수양버들과 능수버들은 어떻게 달는가요
月灘-南畵에 나오는 것 가튼 아지에 또 아지가 버더 軟하게 푹-드러운 것이 능수버들이고, 그양 숙인 것이 수양버들이지, 멋이야 능수버들이 훨신 더 조치요. 예전에는 서울 남대문을 나서 楊州, 坡州지나, 全羅道 慶尙道 忠淸道로 내려가는 녯 大路에 天安 舊邑이 있고 그 읍 좌우 쪽에 능수버들이 축 느러저 三伏 바람에 시름 없이 흔들거릴 제 四人轎에 앉어 行軍하는 南原府使요, 全羅監司가 驛馬 멈추고 그 아래 앉어 땀을 드러면서 한나절 풍류를 즐기다 갓을 것을 생각하면 天安三巨里의 멋은 알녀지지요. 참으로 조왔슬걸요. 그 古典美가...

雁鴨池과 滿月臺

金東煥-꽃으로 버들로 유명한 半島의 勝地 3,4處를 들넛스니 이번에는 春草는 年年綠하는 저 古都를 찻기로 하옵시다. 오늘 저녁 이 좌석의 5,6분이 모다 百濟 扶餘의 皐蘭寺를 보신 이가 한 분도 없다하니 그러면 저 慶州의 雁鴨池를 차저보기로 하옵시다. 雁鴨池畔에 서자 어떤 감개가 나옵뎃가.
春城-가을에 갓섰드니 널다란 못에 하늘빛 같이 샛파란<87> 못물이 넘칠 드시 갑있는데 못 가에는 키나 되게 자란 깔대가 우득허니 직혀 섰다가 갈바람 지날 제마다 우시시 떠는 것이 어전지 遊子의 창자를 끈습데다. 바로 그 뒤가 臨海殿이란 옛 궁궐의 큰 누각이고 그리고 새로 파 내었다는 옛 王宮趾의 주칫돌 노히든 데와 花崗石으로 만든 水道管 등 모다 천년 전 문화가 어제 것이런듯 보여집데다.
가을밤 기럭이 날제 雁鴨池畔에 서서 저 멀리 黃龍寺 있는 데로 풍경소리 뎅그렁 뎅그렁 들려온다면 이 한밤을 참을 수 었어 못가로 거닐며 밤새우고 말걸요
月灘-慶州의 문화야 雁鴨池보다 佛國寺와 石窟庵에 있지. 나는 佛國寺를 보고 놀냇서요. 옛날 僧兵 몇 천명이 싸헛는지는 몰나도 그 깜아아득하게 높은 石臺 그 石臺를 싸흔 크고 넙직한 돌, 그 바위 돌들을 어데서 파내왔는지 놀나워요. 지금 그렇게 싸흘야면 어려울걸요.
多寶塔 石燈籠들의 정교한 솜씨, 바로 어제 낫에도 釋迦牟尼 오섰다 간드시 그윽한 맛이 도는 大雄殿의 누각과 범종 소리 香불 냄새 참으로 新羅文化가 불교에서 왔다거니와 이 佛國寺가 祭政一致의 그 當節 문화의 발상지였겠다 하면 저절로 머리가 수구려 지더군요.
石窟庵도 그러치, 돌을 가지고, 그 가는 눈섭, 그 부드러운 손길을 그린드시 삭여놓았으며 그 부처님의 표정의 美, 금시에 귀를 대면 가슴 속에서 심장 치는 소리 뚝뚝뚝 하고 들닐 것 같으며 입술도 방그려 터지면서 하하하 하고 우슴소리 들닐 것 같은 그 표정의 逼眞한 美-예서 우리는 眞과 善과 美를 한꺼번에 다 차저요. 더구나 東海를 바라서 正面한 그 위치, 庵의 配布, 庵의 結構, 한아 나무랄 것 없어요. 과연 이 千年文化를 가지면 埈及希臘과 억개를 나란히 하리란 자신이 나저요.
파인-그래서 詩 읊은 것 있었지요.
月灘-소사나는 생각을 詩에 托하여 노래 불넜지요.

고흔지고 보살의 손
돌이면서 白魚 같다
新羅 옛 미인이 저러트시 거룩하오.
무롭 꿀어 울 어러만시면
薰香내 높은 훈훈한 살기운
당장 곳 따수할듯 하구나
- 12面觀音菩薩 -

파인-雁鴨池도 그러려니와 開城 滿月臺는 어떠합데가.<88>
秋湖-開城을 처음 보았을 제는 그 도시의 布置가 도모지 王城 앉었든 자리가 아니고 이 구석 저 구석에 砲臺를 무더두고 訓練院을 두어 數萬 壯士를 敎練하든 요새지대나 무슨 군사도시 같이 우락부락한 산들이 앞뒤에 빽빽히 서서 그런 곳을 한참 지내가야 滿月臺의 녯 왕궁터가 보이더군요.
이 滿月臺에 올나 사면을 바라볼 때야 비로소 王都였구나 하게 앞뒤가 탁 터지고 평야도 보이고 합데다. 滿月臺 주칫돌이라거나 논밭 진흙 속에서 발에 채이는 기와짱이거나 모도 다 懷古의 정을 자아내는 麗代衣冠이 成古丘하든 자최지요.
月灘-滿月臺 두고 지은 유명한 시조가 있지 않어요.

오백년 도읍지를 匹馬로 도라드니
山川은 依舊한데 人傑은 간데 없네
어지버 太平煙月이 꿈이런가 하노라

秋湖-그도 조와요. 六堂도 松都두고 지은 시조가 많었지요. 나도 이 舊宮 녯터에 서매 어쩐지「에레미아」哀歌가 연상되더군요. 오고 가는 바람결에 秋草가 나붓기는 그 정경이며 몃낫 안되는 楊柳가 선 버들방축이며-四絃琴 소리가 어디선가 들닐듯 하며 참으로 「에레미아」의 노래를 생각게 합데다.
岸曙-나는 처음 松都에 발드려 善竹橋 보고 차츰 市街를 더 지나 드러갈 제는 서울 長安만도 못한 布置 좁은 都城이구나 하였더니 滿月臺에 올나서야 비로소 松嶽山도 놓일 테 놓였고 不朝峴 고개도 저만치 물너선 것이 올케 되었군 생각되더군요.
滿月臺는 높은 산 등허리에 놓였는데 주칫돌에 잠긴 츩넝쿨 한 가달도 모도 다 오백년 전에 뿌리를 두었거니 하면 진실로 마음이 설네어집데다. 지금에 있여 王儉 어룬께서 끼처 논 麗朝文化야 차즐 길 없지만 이 터전에서 그 面影만은 몽롱하게나마 알려저요.

南漢山城와 統軍亭

金東煥-「南漢山城」을 李王職 장관이 가보고 도라와서 評한 것을 보니 험준한 산악이 덥덥히 싸여 천연의 요새로서 저 旅順의 203高地나 歐洲大戰때 獨逸軍 戰死傷 50만, 佛軍 35만을 내였다는 저 벨단 要塞 같이 아조 훌융하더라는구만. 나도 생각하기에 丙子戰役때에 李朝 군사가 겨우 籠城40일 만에<89> 敗한 것은 軍勢가 약했다기보다 糧道를 끈기여 그랬을 걸요.
朴鍾和-그러치요. 南漢山城은 천연 요새지요, 원래 이 부근에 있는 漢江 北岸의 峨嵯山도 百濟의 要害로서 唐津山城이 예 있든 자리라지요. 南漢山城은 주위 20里 가랑 되는 그 石壁이 조코 또 그 성낭 우에 2층 다락으로 된 西將臺라거나 天守閣이 모도 다 雲霽에 조사 壯麗無比하지요. 李朝 詩客 洪良浩의 좋은 詩도 있지 않어요 이 西將臺를 두고서.

千尺層雲廻 曾經百事來
艱危那忍說 鎖鑼愧非才

大野茫茫遠 長江曲曲廻
煍然撫孤杖 斜日獨徘徊

春城-史記를 보면 百濟 高溫祚께서 여기 都邑 하섯든 듯도 하더군요. 慰禮城 잇든 자리가 南漢山城이라고도 하여요.
秋湖-그럴 걸요. 2천년 전에는 서울 이북엔 樂浪을 정복한 高句麗가 있었고, 서울 東南으로는 盛唐과 국교를 매젔든 新羅가 버티여 있고 그러고 서울 南西에는 문화의 나라 百濟가 있었으는까 扶餘나 南漢山城이나 모다 그 都邑이였들 듯해요.
金東煥-지금은 어떤가요.
岸曙-녜전에는 여기에 留守나 府史이 있었다 하나 지금은 面所와 小學校가 있는 300여 戶 사는 촌락이 되였더군요. 엇잿든 이 城을 보고 柳成龍 그 분도,
溫朝城堞云云이
라고 읆지않었어요.
月灘-그 언젠가 달밤에 올나보았더니 이 城樓 직히면서 여러 사람가 노래를 부르든 모양이며 싸홈에는 젓스면서 義에 殉하든 三學士의 모양이 눈 앞에 보히는 듯, 더구나 籠城 45일 만에 和戰論이 익이여, 仁祖께서 城門을 여시고 三田渡에 이르러 淸太宗과 和議하든 때의 모양을 생각하면 옷깃이 바로 잡혀지더군요.
岸曙-그뿐더러 아조 勝景處얘요. 春風秋雨 3백년에 樓臺, 城壁이 반나마 壞損되였지만 往時를 생각케 하더군요.
南漢山城은 海拔 450米라니 좀 높음니까.
파인-義州 統軍亭이 鴨綠江을 앞에 바라서 강변에 선 것이 그 氣宇-심히 높으다고 드렀는데 더러들 가보섰어요.<90>
月灘-나는 가보지는 못했지만 統軍亭을 두고 豪俠한 민요가 있지안습니까. 저

붙는다  붙는다
義州 統軍亭에
불이 붙는다.

하고요. 좋와요. 엇전지 무릅을 툭치고 北風에 胡地를 향해 長嘯하고 싶은 노래지요. 어릴 적에 이 소리 한 번 드른 뒤로 꼭 가본다는 것이 아직 못 갔어요. 湖岩 文一平씨 아마 義州가 그 고향이지.
秋湖-統軍亭은 威化島 때문에 그 勝景이 놉지요. 威化島란 遼東별판 치기로 朝命을 받들고 가든 李成桂 어룬이 예서 回軍하든 역사적 곳이 아님니까. 년전에 가보았더니 그 때 그 5백년 전 그 시절에 말을 쉬이고 北伐軍을 敎練하든 그 너른 터전에는 지금은 洞里마을이 드러 앉었더군요. 統軍亭에 올나서 이 威化島 바라보며 발 아래 흐르는 양양한 鴨綠江을 想望하면 丈夫 소리치기도 십흔 豪壯한 곳이지요.
月灘-威化島라고 平壤 綾羅島만치나 큰가요.
岸曙-훨신 더 크지요. 여러 갑절 될걸요. 遼東벌판 바라보는 데는 이 統軍亭이 勝地지요.
秋湖-統軍亭도 조커니와 安州 淸川江邊에 있는 百祥樓도 참으로 좃습데다. 그 맑은 淸川江물이 구비처 흐르는데 三山半落靑天外 한듯 百祥樓가 구름 속에 웃둑 소슨 것이 詩客이 詩筆들만 합데다. 나는 「靑春曲」이라는 장편소설 첫머리에 百祚樓를 배경으로 하고 써 보았지만.
春城-百祥樓도 좋다습데다만은 年前에 關東八景 중의 하나인 三陟 竹西樓를 차저가 보았는데 東海 바다가 좀 멀니 떠러저 있어 그러치 그 山水의 배경이 참 조왔고 流雅안 古風 맛이 도는 竹西樓 건물도 조왔어요. 江原道같이 산 첩첩한 벽지에 이 竹西樓 있은 것은 참으로 그 配布를 잘 생각하고 옛 어룬이 지었더군요.

風流郞과 俠妓, 義妓

파인-이만하면 팔도산수를 두루 보앗으니 이제는 인물에 옴깁시다. 여러 천년간의 역사적으로 보아서 이 땅의 俠妓, 名妓라거나 名流女人 세 분쯤 들자면<91>누구누구 될까요?
月灘-첫재 黃眞伊지 朴淵瀑布 泛射亭 옛터에서 碧溪水란, 城主인 豪俠男兒를 홀니고저 絶唱 부른 것 있지 않어요.

靑山裏 碧溪水야 수이 감을 자랑마라
一到滄*하면 다시 오기 어러우니
明月이 滿空하니 쉬어간들 엇더리

黃眞伊는 李泰俊군도 소설로 쓰고 나도 쓴 일이 있지만 인물 잘나고 歌舞 잘하고 거문고 잘타고, 그러고서 높은 뜻 굿은 절개 있어 가슴의 정열을 늘 붓끗에 올려 시조를 지어냇지요. 여러 百首가 있음즉도 한데 지금 남은 것이야 歌曲篇에 數三首가 있든가요.
岸曙-그러치. 黃眞伊야 풍류를 알고 문학을 아는 俠妓였지요. 黃眞伊도 조치만 平壤에 桂月香도 일홈이 있었으나 문학적으로 남긴 것이 없었고 이렇게 史上의 저명한 風流俠妓를 찾아면 黃眞伊 다음에는 芙蓉이를 처야하겟지 그도 盛唐 때 薜濤나 杜秋娘 모양으로 흥에 못이겨 지어놓은 名詩 佳句가 많었을 터이나 지금에 남은 것이야 몇 편 되어야지요. 그러나 우리들의 눈에 띠여지는 저

別하니
思慕한다

에서부터 시작된 19절의 戀歌는 참으로 놀나운 才華가 보이는 것이였지. 그만치 노래에 능하고 정열에 放奔할제야 그가 그 당대에서야 얼마나 盛名을 날렀을넌지 상상할 수 있지요.희랍의 삽포-같은 여성이였지요. 盛唐시대의 卓文君 같은 이였다 할까요.
秋湖-芙蓉의 相思詩 19절은 참으로 絶唱이더군. 지금의 여류시인 중에 그런 노래 지을 분이 있을가. 아무튼 놀라운 才女더군요.
春城-歌舞를 잘한대야 그도 1,2世에 끗치고 더구나 꽃같흔 얼골이라도 2,30년을 못 가려든, 결국 역사적으로 길게 사는 이는 우리 보기에는 문학적 유산을 남기는 이들인데 그런다면 史上에 빛나는 여류작가로 許蘭雪을 처야할 걸요. 그의 시조야 좀 많슴니까. 또 점잔코 향기 있고 참으로 높이 평가할 분이지요.
파인-그러치요. 許蘭雪이지요. 그도 우리 문학사상에<92> 높은 지위를 가진 분이니까. 그러면 여러분의 말슴을 좇아 史上의 俠妓나 名流女人을 들자면 黃眞伊,  芙蓉,  許蘭雪 이러 하군요. 이 세 분 골는 것을 한, 큰, 역사적 기록으로 삼겟습니다.
그러면 이제 다시 남성 속에서 마천가지 의미로 豪俠하고 풍류를 즐기든 快男兒 세 분씩 들어봅시다.
田榮澤-金笠이지. 飄逸하며 神韻이 도는 片片詩歌를 街衢에 흘니고 다녔으나 그 감가 不遇한 一代가 사람의 가슴을 처요.
朴鍾和-그러치요. 金笠을 처야지요. 金笠은 원래 金炳淵이 본명이여서 저 世道宰相 金炳學 金炳冀가 모다 그 친척이였는데 士禍로 모도 다 五族이 멸할 때에 오직 저만 사라-市井에 유랑하며 그 감개를 읆혔지. 허잘 것 없는 사람 집에도 질겨 門客되여 문깐에 신짝을 벗기는 하면서도 늘 慨世의 일념이 시와 노래가 되여 흘넛지오.
盧子泳-豪俠男兒라면 첫재 저 新羅時節 화랑들 무리에 눈이 가지는데-史上에는 화랑이란 제도 있어-金瘐信도 화랑출신이요. 그 당시 世道宰相과 武士가 모다 화랑이라 하였을 뿐으로 그 중에 누구 한 두 사람 여자에 黃眞伊같이 치켜 올닐 사람이 없는 것이 슬퍼요. 그러기에 화랑에선 意中의 사내를 차즐 길 없으니 결국 鄭壽銅같은 이를 諧譃詩人으로 끄집어내여야겠지요. 鄭壽銅의 爲人과 遺跡은 세상 사람이 다 아는 일이기 더 말치 않치만은-.
金億-그러치요. 朴文秀와 鄭壽銅을 생각할 수 있는데 鄭壽銅이 一代 풍류객이였지. 그러고는 楊處士, 楊逢來일걸. 그 높은 절개와 그 仙風道骨같은 용모와 그의 후세에 끼친 글과... 洛山 三日浦에 같더니 거기 梁逢來 노니든 터가 있더군요 조선 향토정서에 어울니는 史上에 둘도 없는 선비였지요.
金東煥-그렇겠어요. 나도 三日浦 노리할 적에 뱃사공에게서 자세히 듣고 山上에 올나 그 유적까지 차즌 적이 있지요.
그러면 史上에 남는 豪俠男兒와 풍류 아는 선비 세 분을 꼽자면 金笠, 楊逢來, 鄭壽銅 이겠군요. 그렇게 정하기로 합시다. 자아, 이만하면 이 산천의 향기를 흠씬 마신 세음이니 이 자리를 일단 이에 끗치기로 하겟슴니다. (끝)<93>
<78-93>