Magazine Title: 삼천리 제11권 제4호
Publication Date: 1939년 04월 01일 (April 1, 1939)
Article Title: 文藝「大振興時代」展望 (Prospects for the "Great Revival Era" of Literature and Arts)
Author: 懷月 朴英熙 (Hoewŏl Pak Yŏnghŭi), 八峰 金基鎭 (P'albong Kim Kijin), 金東仁 (Kim Tongin), 尙虛 李泰俊 (Sanghŏ Yi T'aejun), 本社 金東煥 (Samch'ŏlli's Kim Tonghwan)
Article Type: 대담·좌담 (Discussion/Roundtable Talk)

文藝「大振興時代」展望
(Prospects for the "Great Revival Era" of Literature and Arts)

懷月 朴英熙 (Hoewŏl Pak Yŏnghŭi)
八峰 金基鎭 (P'albong Kim Kijin)
金東仁 (Kim Tongin)
尙虛 李泰俊 (Sanghŏ Yi T'aejun)
本社 金東煥 (Samch'ŏlli's Kim Tonghwan)

新春創作合評
(Joint Review of New Year's Creative Works)

春園의 『無明』과 『사랑』
(Ch'unwŏn's *Mumyŏng* and *Sarang*)

Kim Tonghwan: Ch'unwŏn recently released two noteworthy works. Please start by discussing one of them, *Mumyŏng* (無明) (from *Munjang* No. 1).

Yi T'aejun: It's a short story he wrote after a long time. I saw it last spring at the Medical College Hospital before it was printed. While lying there suffering from that terrible illness, sometimes having a nurse write for him when he lacked energy, he painstakingly crafted this piece. I read a few passages back then. My thought then and my thought now is that it's truly excellent writing <188> and a remarkably unique portrayal of human beings, for which I expressed my respect.
After reading a few lines then, I mentioned something like this: "It would be great if you could take the individual human portrayals here and insert a grand story to create a large-scale novel."
Truly, the depiction of the humans in *Mumyŏng* has many points deserving of triple admiration, such that one might say only Ch'unwŏn could achieve it.

Kim Tongin: This *Mumyŏng* is probably Ch'unwŏn's greatest masterpiece among his long and short works. It's a flawless piece with no faults to pick. All the characters in it are alive. If I were to pick just one flaw in the jade, it's that the consciousness of the character "I" trying to act like a "saint" (聖者-ㄴ 체) and the character "I" itself are altogether unclear, like a fleeting shadow. Other than that, the events, the characters' personalities, they are all alive, and even the scenes from the very bottom of that society are depicted so vividly (逼眞) as to be almost too real.

Yi T'aejun: I also had that thought. In the prison yard scene, when the emaciated, dying Yun is visible far beyond the window, the part where the "I" character tells him to believe in Buddha – I felt it would have been better if that character "I" had shed the pretense of being a saint (聖者然).

Kim Kijin: I've only read the first half, but it seemed like a powerful work born of great effort. Since I haven't finished it, I can't say much, but even in this work, Ch'unwŏn was searching for a way to live a good and lofty life close to gods and Buddhas (神佛), asking how one can become a good person.
Whether believing in gods and Buddhas is right or wrong is a secondary issue. In any case, the spirit of "sacrificing oneself for others," the effort to break free from the futile attachments of human passion (愛慾) and try to save the world and humanity – these points should be highly valued. Not only *Mumyŏng* but also the recent *Sarang* seems consistently imbued with such a spirit.

Pak Yŏnghŭi: Lately, I haven't been able to read much of others' works, so I don't know, but it seems Ch'unwŏn has a tendency to lean towards religious faith.

Kim Tongin: Leaning too much towards faith, trying to become a saint like Buddha but falling short, yet not being evil (性惡) enough to go to hell – perhaps he'll just waver in the middle, unable to reach hell either, ha ha ha (Everyone laughs).

Kim Tonghwan: *Sarang* was the recent sensational work that raised the price of paper in Nangyang (洛陽 - i.e., Seoul). Have you seen it?

Kim Kijin: They say the concluding volume will be out soon, so it would be better to speak after seeing that, but when the first volume came out, I wrote something like this somewhere:
"Reading *Sarang*, I thought, 'This is not a novel.' Yet <189> I couldn't help but read it to the end. Why? Because this book had a strong power to compel reading. It's because, though a bundle of contradictions (矛盾), the precious spiritual state (姿態) of Ch'unwŏn himself, struggling desperately to find release from the agony of life (生), is revealed on every page. The path Ch'unwŏn is seeking now is not to meticulously dissect and penetrate 'what exists and how!' nor is it to find 'how to live well,' but merely to find 'how to become a good person.' Thus, Ch'unwŏn wrote *Sarang* to finally discover the 'path to becoming a good person' and to inform many people of that path. Therefore, if the purpose of conveying the path of *Sarang* into the hearts of many people is largely achieved, then whether the novel is well-written or not is probably not that much of an issue for Ch'unwŏn."

"Originally, Ch'unwŏn was an idealist (理想主義者), a 'sentimentalist' (센티멘타리스트), less a politician (政治家) than a poet (詩人), less a man of the streets (街頭의 人) than close to a monk (僧侶). If this last phrase causes misunderstanding, it's fine to say he was close to a religious figure (宗教家). Twenty-five years ago, when he published *Mujŏng* (無情), *Kaech'ŏkcha* (開拓者), and *Ŏrin pŏsege* (To Young Friends), he was an idealist and poet who passionately resonated with ideas of freedom and civil rights (自由民權思想). However, passing through *Chaesaeng* (再生) and *Yi Sunsin* (李舜臣), starting from *Hŭk* (흙 - Soil), he became a 'sentimental' monk. *Sarang* might be the first confession of the soul he obtained after entering the path (入道). When a person nearing 50, especially one like Ch'unwŏn whose life has been filled with repeated waves (波瀾) of hardship, comes to firmly grasp a single belief (信念), that belief becomes immovable. Therefore, living for 'a spiritual love, not physical; a love dedicated not for myself but for others,' and dying for such love will now be Ch'unwŏn's destined path. Thus, if the entire work *Sarang*, as a guide given to fellow travelers on this path, makes a deep impression, then even if the creation of the protagonist and other characters' personalities, the plot setup, the clarification of the environment, the visualization of actions, etc., are all less than novelistically developed, even if they seem false, it is not fatal to him."

"In conclusion, *Sarang* is a popular edition of a new 'Combined Buddhist-Shinto Bible' (佛, 神이 敎旨合體聖經)."
My thoughts now are still the same. I see it as Ch'unwŏn, having become a fervent seeker, attained the will of the Buddha, and is conveying its truth to the world through Sŏk Sunok.

Kim Tongin: The most grating part in *Sarang* was his excessive fixation on the law of causality (因果律). Ch'unwŏn was once a vanguard figure opposing fatalism (運命論), shouting that everyone is ruined because of complaints about fate (팔자타령). But now, he seems to have become a contemplative fatalist (宿命論者), saying things like ruin happens because there's a cause for ruin, and suffering disgrace happens because of karmic retribution (業報) from a past life. Perhaps this came about because his spirit (心意) weakened from long enduring unfortunate circumstances and weeping through harsh suffering (痛苦). However, I cannot agree with this.<190> I hope this philosophy, this view of life, is cut off as a temporary phenomenon.

Yi T'aejun: If I must say one thing here, I'll put it like this. Regarding *Sarang*, the beautiful name Sŏk Sunok belongs to the heroine of this story. She is a writer and a doctor, An Pin, who lives half in art and half in science, whom she first admires through his works. She sets out on a dreamlike path in reality, sacrificing everything to become the world's most righteous and pure apostle of love. From the beginning, Sunok's heart, holding notions like 'he's another's husband' or 'love triangle,' was far too unwrinkled and straightforward. This naive, passionate, and idealistic maiden appears, opening the beautiful subtitle "Towards the side of the one I admire," as Ch'unwŏn's Beatrice.

月灘의 『錦杉의 피』
(Wŏlt'an's *Kŭmsamŭi p'i* - Blood on the Royal Robe)

Kim Tonghwan: Following Wŏlt'an's earlier *Tanjong aesa* (端宗哀史 - Sad History of King Tanjong), which depicted the young king's loss of the kingdom (失國), there is now *Kŭmsamŭi p'i*, based on the life of Yŏnsan (燕山), who is said to have lost the kingdom due to a personality degeneration into debauchery (荒淫) and tyranny (暴虐). What first sparks our interest is whether Yŏnsan was a Hamlet (함렛트) type or a Nero (네로) type of monarch.

Kim Tongin: Mr. Pak [Yŏnghŭi/Chonghwa?] also took Yŏnsan as a subject, and I too have had the intention for several years. So, when requested by the *Mansŏn Ilbo* (滿鮮日報), I decided to take this opportunity to portray Yŏnsan under the title *Sirŭrŭn Sŏch'ong* (시르른 瑞葱 - Lush Auspicious Onion?). I don't know how Mr. Pak viewed him, but I intend to depict his cruelty and tyranny (暴虐性), which were exceptionally severe even in history (史上), as a tragedy of personality. Beating scholars to death, enjoying the sight of blood, recklessly dragging common women into the palace – beyond a lack of education, deficiency in intellect, absence of morality (道德性), it seems much of it stems from an innate personality degeneration, like Nero who set fire to Rome (羅馬城中) and just jumped for joy.

Kim Kijin: Wŏlt'an wrote from a viewpoint diametrically opposed (對蹠的) to Mr. Tongin's, it seems. He portrayed him as someone originally good (善人) who, due to the slander of treacherous vassals (奸臣) and close relatives (近親), and the growth of vengeful psychology (復讐心理), went through much mental anguish (苦悶) before finally becoming a tyrant who enjoyed blood.

Kim Tongin: *Kŭmsamŭi p'i* seemed somewhat flatly narrated (平面的 敍述). And it seemed lacking in climaxes (크라이막쓰), the crests of waves.

Pak Yŏnghŭi: However, traces of great effort to represent the atmosphere of that era are visible. The historical research (考證) too – whether it be palace etiquette (宮中의 禮儀), commoners' clothing (市井의 衣服), or state rites (國家의 祭禮) – is impeccable in every aspect. In some passages, one might even say the descriptions are detailed and the research abundant to an unnecessary degree.

Kim Kijin: He also put great effort into the writing style. And in depicting the lingering deep sorrow (情恨) of the medieval palace,<191> he employed a unique touch.

Kim Tonghwan: When it comes to historical novels (歷史小說), given the prevailing notion until now – that Korean history itself was staged in the palace with monarchs as protagonists, making palace history almost synonymous with national history – isn't there a tendency to commonly cite works like *Tanjong aesa* or *Kŭmsamŭi p'i*, while sadly neglecting works set among commoners (市井) of the time, such as Pyŏkch'o's *Im Kkŏkjŏng* (林걱정) or Sanghŏ's *Hwang Chini* (黃眞伊)?

Kim Kijin: However, regarding historical novels, it doesn't matter whether the material is taken from the palace or the common streets; there shouldn't be any hierarchy (主從) there.

Kim Tonghwan: Have you read *Im Kkŏkjŏng*?

Pak Yŏnghŭi: How could I read all of something that long? It probably started over 10 years ago. I read a bit back then when it began, and recently I occasionally read an installment or two; the writing style seems much more refined than before.

Kim Tonghwan: How do you see the future path for historical novels?

Yi T'aejun: As Mr. Kim Tongin also mentioned sometime ago, I believe the free territory for us novelists to explore and pioneer lies indeed within the pages of history (歷史의 페-지). If we try to depict contemporary things, the brush is constrained in many ways, and also, isn't the stage somewhat narrow if we seek scenes we can feel realistically? If we have to draw subjects from reality, the author's scope (呼吸) cannot grow large, and passion cannot be freely expressed. Therefore, if one thinks of creating a major work (大作), there's no choice but to dig into the veins of history's mine (歷史의 鑛脈).

Kim Tongin: Reality is certainly narrow. Even in our daily lives, when riding in a car, we immediately identify "That's Min Taesik," "That's Pak Yŏngch'ŏl," and even I find myself looking at the meter, wondering if it's passed 60 chŏn or 70 chŏn, naturally becoming petty. So, if we seek a broader place, we have no choice but to dig into history (史上).

鎭午, 飛石, 朴泰遠, 朴啓周
(Chino, Pisŏk, Pak T'aewŏn, Pak Kyeju)

Kim Tonghwan: Have you seen Yu Chino's *Ihon* (離婚 - Divorce) (*Munjang* No. 1)?

Kim Kijin: It seems there's an issue with models. I haven't read it yet, though.

Kim Tongin: Rumors seem to be circulating. I haven't read it yet either – in the same *Munjang*, there was Yi Hyosŏk's *Sanjŏng* (山精 - Mountain Spirit), which was a vignette (小品), a sketch.

Kim Tonghwan: Then, have you seen Chŏng Pisŏk's *Yoma* (妖魔 - Demon) (*Samch'ŏlli* New Year Issue)?

Kim Tongin: I just finished reading it right now. The handling of events and character portrayal were all good, but the writing style was so rough! How could the novel's events or characters shine through, hampered by that style?

Kim Tonghwan: It seems no one else has seen it. You gentlemen really don't read others' works much.<192> There were several short stories in the New Year issues of *Chogwang* (朝光) and *Pip'an* (批判). Have you seen them? (But nobody had seen them.)

Kim Tonghwan: Well then, Pak T'aewŏn published *Sosŏlga Kuboŭi Ilil* (小說家仇甫의 一日 - A Day in the Life of Novelist Kubo), and *Ch'ŏnbyŏn P'unggyŏng* (川邊風景 - Riverside Scene), and is also serializing the novel *Umang* (愚氓 - Ignorant Masses) in the *Chosŏn Ilbo*. What are your thoughts?

Kim Kijin: I used to read his works sometimes before, but I haven't seen recent ones. I definitely intended to read the newly released *Sosŏlga Kuboŭi Ilil*, and even got the book, but haven't managed to read it yet.

Yi T'aejun: The dialogue is good. The unique rhythm (呼吸) of the writing is good. Unlike us, being someone born and raised in the city called Seoul, he has a monopoly (獨壇場) when it comes to handling the metropolis and city dwellers as subjects.

Kim Tonghwan: Kim Namch'ŏn's *Taeha* (大河 - Great River) has newly come out, they say.

Pak Yŏnghŭi: The title *Taeha* sounds good. Judging from the advertisement, it's said to be accusatory literature (告發 文學), but I haven't seen it yet.

Kim Tonghwan: Please evaluate the prize-winning novels from various newspapers this spring. (Discussion stopped as no one had read them.) Please comment on *Sunaebo* (殉愛譜 - Record of Martyred Love), the 1,000 won prize winner from the *Maeil Sinbo*.

Kim Kijin: I served on the selection committee (考選) and I read it, so I'll speak. The outline (梗槪) is roughly like this:
The young man who appears as the protagonist is good at music, has genius (天才) in art, and on top of that, is even good at literature – a young artist. This young man ends up gathering orphans, teaching them in night school, and doing various other meaningful things, loving others and opening the door to happiness for them. Later, he even takes the blame for someone else's murder and receives the death penalty (死刑) in prison. Reading this novel, I admired how sincerely it was written. The writing is elegant and smooth, and it possesses all the diverse flavors required of a newspaper novel, complexity of story (復雜多端), affinity towards the characters, everything. And the humanism (휴-맨이즘), the Christian spirit (基督情神) of loving others and sacrificing oneself for the world, which runs consistently through to the very end, I thought should be highly valued.
It stood out the most among the 80-odd entries. At first, I was absolutely sure it was an anonymous submission by some famous author (文名 높은 어느 작가).
Later, I had the chance to meet (맛날) the author. I asked, thinking he must have privately studied under Kikuchi Kan (菊池寬) or Katō Takeo (加藤武雄), but he said he liked Kagawa Toyohiko (賀川豊彦). And he mentioned having read many works by Hugo (유-고), Tolstoy (톨스토이), Arishima Takeo (有島武郞), and Yi Kwangsu (李光洙).

Kim Tonghwan: Considering the author is from Pukkan To (北間島 - Jiandao/Gando), can we discover something like the large scale and bold lines (線이 굵은) expected from Sŏhae (曙海)?

Kim Kijin: He follows a completely different tendency from Sŏhae. Also, the scale is rather small, while being woven together very cleanly.<193> That's the tendency.

Kim Tonghwan: Recently, many authors' novels are being serialized in various newspapers. Have you seen them all? (Discussion postponed to a later date as the gentlemen had not seen many.)

文藝振興의 展望
(Prospects for the Revival of Literature and Arts)

Kim Tonghwan: Let's get to the main topic now. Looking at the trend of the last two years, we are witnessing the emergence of a golden age of literature, the first in about 20 years since the literary movement began in Chosŏn. Already 4 or 5 types of collected works (全集) have been published, and the publication of individual books (單行本) is also flourishing. Both in quantity (量) and quality (質), it truly seems the cultural market (文化市場) is covered solely by literary works (文藝物). This should be seen as a very important phenomenon even when considered historically (歷史的). Therefore, in this meeting, I'd like to start by discussing its causes and then extend to future prospects.
As anyone might suggest, today's phenomenon of such a great revival (大振興) in literature and arts can perhaps be explained in three aspects:
First, the advance of publishing capital (出版資本).
Second, the efforts of authors (作家).
Third, the social trend (社會的 潮流).
So, please first discuss the advance of publishing capital.

Kim Tongin: Until a few years ago, the publications dominating the book market were mostly old novels (舊小說) like *Ch'unhyangjŏn* (春香傳), *Simch'ŏngjŏn* (沈淸傳), *Yuch'ungyŏljŏn* (劉忠烈傳), and letter-writing manuals (尺牘類). (Though the publication of genealogies (族譜) was certainly vigorous, it was a family clan matter (門中事業) and not circulated outside (門外不出), so it's outside this discussion). According to booksellers (冊肆), where did these moldy old storybooks (傳冊類) sell well? It's said to be among the Chosŏn laborer class who left their hometowns for Tokyo (東京) or Osaka (大阪), and the peasant class who migrated to Manchuria (滿洲) knowing only rudimentary Ŏnmun (Korean script). (Until 5 or 6 years ago, they were apparently also widely read among the old scholar class (선비 축) in the Samnam (三南) region). But as times changed and the number of leisurely people sitting around reading storybooks decreased, these books stopped selling. They say *Ch'unhyangjŏn* alone used to sell about 400,000 copies a year, but now it barely sells half that, if at all.
At this point, old-style publishers (出版業者) found their path blocked and began to worry.
While these old-style publishers hesitated, just as new figures emerged in other sectors of Chosŏn society, newly educated young capitalists (青年資本家) appeared, shouldering cultural-historical aspirations (文化史的 抱負).<194>
Seeing this trend, even the hesitant old booksellers (書肆) began to step into (投足) the new publishing market. Thus, newcomers (新進) and old-timers (舊進) emerged together, leading to the massive parallel advance (大量的 並進) of publishing capital and publishing figures we see today.

Yi T'aejun: That's right. Even looking at market examples (市場의 實例), there was the publication of literary collected works (文學全集) by Han Sŏng Toso (漢城圖書) through the partnership of Han Kyusang and Kong Chinhang (judging from facts up to the previous year). At Pŏngmun Sŏgwan (博文書館), the owner Mr. No Ikhyŏng's son, after graduating from the Imperial University (帝大), advanced into publishing collected series (全集的 叢書 刊行) backed by his father's capital. Also, Mr. Ko Kyŏngsang of Sam Mun Sa (三文社), who had financially assisted (財的으로) much in the production of earlier literary magazines like *Changjo* (創造), newly undertook the publication of collected works. The combination of Ch'oe Namju and Im Hwa led to the publication of paperbacks (文庫) at Hak Ye Sa (學藝社). Ch'oe Chaesŏ founded In Mun Sa (人文社) and published individual books (單行本). And finally, the advance of the publishing department (出版部) of the *Chosŏn Ilbo Sa* (朝鮮日報社) backed by the newspaper company. Also, Mr. Kim Kanman, a Meiji University (明大) graduate, advanced into publishing literary magazines (文藝雜誌) and individual books (單行本 刊行) (and many others). Counting these up, it seems that both the figures involved in publishing now and their capital represent forces capable of marking an era (一時代를 劃할 만한 陳), 'people and money' (사람과 돈) are all pouring out. Therefore, it feels like a publishing society (出版社會) similar to what you see in the Tokyo or Shanghai markets will begin to form in Seoul from now on. It's truly a joyous thing.

Kim Tonghwan: That observation is correct. It is indeed a very joyous phenomenon. Now, please discuss the next cause, the efforts of authors.

Kim Kijin: That Chosŏn authors are making much more effort in literary production (文藝製作) than before is also a noteworthy fact (特記할 事實) of recent years. The main reasons for this are:
First, the author's self-awareness (自覺) regarding the currents of the times (時代思潮).
Second, the improvement in social treatment (社會的 待遇).
Let's not elaborate further on the first reason. As for the second reason, daily newspapers (including *Mansŏn Ilbo*), each with over 100,000 readers, now widely open their literary pages (文藝面) and welcome authors. From this, at least 10 authors have secured a basis for their livelihood, enabling them to devote their full energy (全力) to creating works. Secondly, as Messrs. Kim Tongin and Yi T'aejun exemplified earlier, culturally aware, new-generation publishers (新進出版業者) who understand literature have emerged and gladly accept their works. Having found such understanding patrons (知己), authors gained courage and all turned to writing. Consequently, manuscript fees (稿料) are several times higher than before, and when works are released, the social response (社會的 反響) is significant. Thus, authors have reached a point where they must strive to fulfill their duty.
Encompassing all these conditions, the dramatic increase (激增) in literary readership (文藝讀者) is, needless to say, <195> an undeniable fact.
Summarizing the above points in one sentence, we are now in an era where we must write, and when we do write, unlike before, the response from the cultural society is significant, and the financial compensation (金錢上 待遇) is good, so it's a time when authors are striving with all their might.

Kim Tonghwan: Excellent points. Now, please discuss the last factor, the trend of the times (時代의 潮流). I believe there are a couple of reasons here. Currently, politicians (政治家) are loudly proclaiming the need for cultural work (文化工作). Post-war recovery (戰後의 回復) everywhere requires full effort towards industrial development and cultural promotion (文化의 振興). Wasn't Europe's (歐羅巴) "Renaissance" (文藝復興), so to speak, a phenomenon that continued after the end of the Hundred Years' War (百年戰爭)? Wasn't the culture of the prosperous Tang Dynasty (盛唐時代), which produced Tu Fu (杜甫), Li Po (李太白), and Han Yu (韓愈), also achieved because the victorious Tang, following the fall of Qin (秦) and Yuan (元 - likely a mistake, should be Sui or preceding dynasties), focused its entire main effort on cultural construction (文化建設) as a post-war measure (戰後對策)? Therefore, in our country too, as the Incident (事變 - Sino-Japanese War) enters its latter phase, the call for cultural construction fills the nation. Isn't the growing fervor (熱) for culture in Chosŏn society, responding to this trend, also pulling along the breath of the literary world (文壇)?

Pak Yŏnghŭi: That point has merit (一理). Even without necessarily linking it to the war, since the most fundamental issue for becoming a powerful nation and people (强大한 國家民族) lies in cultural promotion (文化振興), perhaps this trend (趨勢) is simply aligning its breath with the direction (趨向) of our nation becoming stronger.
Another point is that the suggestive power (暗示의 힘) of this era adds to it, I believe.

Kim Tonghwan: Then, let's conclude with this. Thank you for speaking for such a long time. (End) <196>

**Summary**

This 1939 roundtable discussion features prominent Korean literary figures assessing recent works, particularly those by Yi Kwangsu (Ch'unwŏn) and the burgeoning field of historical novels. They debate Yi Kwangsu's turn towards Buddhist themes and perceived fatalism in *Sarang*, contrasting views on depicting historical figures like Yŏnsan'gun, and the merit of novels focused on commoners versus royalty. The latter half analyzes the contemporary "great revival" of Korean literature, attributing it to increased investment by both old and new publishers responding to market changes, heightened authorial effort driven by better compensation and social recognition (especially via newspapers), and a broader societal/political trend emphasizing "cultural construction," potentially linked to the ongoing Sino-Japanese War and nationalistic aspirations.

For historians, the article offers insights into the colonial literary scene's self-perception during a period of heightened Japanese assimilation pressure and wartime mobilization. The discussion reveals active critical engagement with major writers, debates on literary trends (spirituality, historical fiction), and the tangible impact of changing publishing economics and media (newspapers, book series) on literary production. The participants' framing of the literary boom within a discourse of "cultural construction" possibly linked to wartime needs or national strengthening provides a valuable window into the complex relationship between culture, politics, and economics in late 1930s Korea. The casual mention of Korean laborers in Japan and Manchuria as consumers of older fiction also offers a glimpse into readership demographics.

**Named Entities**

懷月 朴英熙	회월 박영희	Hoewŏl Pak Yŏnghŭi
八峰 金基鎭	팔봉 김기진	P'albong Kim Kijin
金東仁	김동인	Kim Tongin
尙虛 李泰俊	상허 이태준	Sanghŏ Yi T'aejun
本社 金東煥	본사 김동환	Kim Tonghwan (Samch'ŏlli)
春園	춘원	Ch'unwŏn (Yi Kwangsu's pen name)
文章	문장	Munjang (Magazine Name)
醫專病院	의전병원	Ŭijŏn Pyŏngwŏn (Medical College Hospital)
윤	윤	Yun
神佛	신불	Sinbul (Gods and Buddhas)
洛陽	낙양	Nangyang (Luoyang - used metaphorically for Seoul)
石荀玉	석순옥	Sŏk Sunok
安賓	안빈	An Pin
月灘	월탄	Wŏlt'an (Pak Chonghwa's pen name)
燕山君	연산군	Yŏnsan'gun
端宗	단종	Tanjong
滿鮮日報	만선일보	Mansŏn Ilbo (Newspaper Name)
朴	박	Pak (Refers likely to Pak Yŏnghŭi or Pak Chonghwa)
羅馬	로마	Roma (Rome)
碧初	벽초	Pyŏkch'o (Hong Myŏnghŭi's pen name)
林걱정	임걱정	Im Kkŏkjŏng
黃眞伊	황진이	Hwang Chini
閔大植	민대식	Min Taesik
朴榮喆	박영철	Pak Yŏngch'ŏl
兪鎭午	유진오	Yu Chino
孝石	효석	Hyosŏk (Yi Hyosŏk's pen name)
鄭飛石	정비석	Chŏng Pisŏk
三千里	삼천리	Samch'ŏlli (Magazine Name - mentioned in text re: Chŏng Pisŏk)
朝光	조광	Chogwang (Magazine Name)
批判	비판	Pip'an (Magazine Name)
朴泰遠	박태원	Pak T'aewŏn
仇甫	구보	Kubo
朝鮮日報	조선일보	Chosŏn Ilbo (Newspaper Name)
金南天	김남천	Kim Namch'ŏn
朴啓周	박계주	Pak Kyeju
每日新報	매일신보	Maeil Sinbo (Newspaper Name)
菊池寬	국지관	Kikuchi Kan
加藤武雄	가등무웅	Katō Takeo
賀川豊彦	하천풍언	Kagawa Toyohiko
유-고	유고	Hugo, Victor
톨스토이	톨스토이	Tolstoy, Leo
有島武郞	유도무랑	Arishima Takeo
李光洙	이광수	Yi Kwangsu
北間島	북간도	Pukkan To (Jiandao/Gando)
曙海	서해	Sŏhae (Choe Sŏhae's pen name)
漢城圖書	한성도서	Han Sŏng Toso (Publishing House)
韓奎相	한규상	Han Kyusang
孔鎭恒	공진항	Kong Chinhang
博文書館	박문서관	Pŏngmun Sŏgwan (Publishing House)
盧益亨	노익형	No Ikhyŏng
帝大	제대	Che Dae (Imperial University)
三文社	삼문사	Sam Mun Sa (Publishing House)
高敬相	고경상	Ko Kyŏngsang
崔南周	최남주	Ch'oe Namju
林和	임화	Im Hwa
學藝社	학예사	Hak Ye Sa (Publishing House)
崔載瑞	최재서	Ch'oe Chaesŏ
人文社	인문사	In Mun Sa (Publishing House)
朝鮮日報社 出版部	조선일보사 출판부	Chosŏn Ilbo Sa Ch'ulp'anbu (Choson Ilbo Publishing Department)
明大	명대	Myŏngdae (Meiji University)
金諫萬	김간만	Kim Kanman
東京	동경	Tonggyŏng (Tokyo)
大阪	대판	Osaka
滿洲	만주	Manju (Manchuria)
三南	삼남	Samnam (Southern three provinces of Korea)
歐羅巴	구라파	Ouropa (Europe)
杜甫	두보	Tu Fu (Du Fu)
李太白	이태백	Yi T'aebaek (Li Bai)
韓愈	한유	Han Yu
唐	당	Tang (Dynasty)
秦	진	Chin (Qin Dynasty)
元	원	Wŏn (Yuan Dynasty - likely author error, context suggests Sui or earlier)

**Glossary**

文藝	문예	Literature and Arts
大振興時代	대진흥시대	Great Revival Era
展望	전망	Prospects, Outlook
大담·좌談	대담·좌담	Discussion/Roundtable Talk
創作	창작	Creative Work
合評	합평	Joint Review
無明	무명	Ignorance (Buddhist term); Title of Yi Kwangsu's work
文章	문장	Writing, Composition; Name of a magazine
醫專病院	의전병원	Medical College Hospital (Ŭijŏn refers to a Medical College)
代筆	대필	Writing by proxy, ghostwriting
맨들어 내인	만들어 낸	(He) created/made (Older spelling/form of 만들어 낸)
몃	몇	Several, a few (Older spelling)
조흔	좋은	Good (Older spelling)
퍽으나	퍼거나	Very, quite (Older spelling/form)
하섯구나	하셨구나	(He) did/said (polite, admiring) (Older spelling)
경의	경의	Respect, reverence
말슴	말씀	Words, speech (polite) (Older spelling)
조켓다고요	좋겠다고요	(I said) it would be good (Older spelling)
만하요	많아요	(There) are many (Older spelling)
걸요	걸요	Probably is, I suppose (Sentence ending) (Older spelling)
업시	없이	Without (Older spelling)
살았어요	살았어요	Are alive, vivid
玉에 티	옥에 티	A flaw in the jade (idiom: a slight imperfection)
골느자면	고르자면	If one were to choose/pick
업스면	없으면	If not present, if lacking (Older spelling)
代筆을 식혀서까지	대필을 시켜서까지	Even to the extent of having someone write for him
聖者-ㄴ 체	성자인 체	Pretending to be a saint
분명치를 못해요	분명치를 못해요	Is not clear (Slightly older phrasing)
밧게	밖에	Outside of, other than (Older spelling)
그리여젓어요	그려졌어요	Was depicted (Older spelling)
뺏작 마른	빼짝 마른	Extremely skinny, emaciated
미드라고	믿으라고	(Telling someone) to believe (Older spelling)
떼여버렸섰더면	떼어버렸었더라면	If (he) had removed/discarded (Older spelling/form)
조켔다고	좋겠다고	(I thought) it would be good (Older spelling)
力作	역작	Masterpiece, work of great effort
었더케	어떻게	How (Older spelling)
갓가운	가까운	Close, near (Older spelling)
있슬가	있을까	Will there be?, Can it be? (Older spelling)
착한 사람	착한 사람	Good person
있섰서요	있었어요	Was (doing something) (Older spelling)
었잿든	어쨌든	Anyway, in any case (Older spelling)
덧업는	덧없는	Transient, futile, vain
집착	집착	Attachment, obsession
보아요	보아요	I see/think/consider (polite)
일관하여	일관하여	Consistently, throughout
기우러지는	기울어지는	Leaning towards, tilting
떠러지고	떨어지고	Falling short, failing
안녀	아녀	Is not (Older spelling of 아냐/아니야)
말지 안을가	말지 않을까	Won't it end up just...? (Older form of 않을까)
洛陽의 紙價를 올닌	낙양의 지가를 올린	Raised the price of paper in Luoyang (idiom: became a bestseller)
보섯서요	보셨어요	Have you seen? (Older spelling/form)
마저	마저	Even, finishing the last part
쉬이	쉬이	Easily, soon (Older spelling)
나왔슬 적에	나왔을 적에	When (it) came out (Older spelling)
어데에다가	어디에다가	Somewhere (emphatic) (Older spelling)
사모하는	사모하는	Admiring, longing for
삐아토리체	베아트리체	Beatrice (Dante's guide)
가슴속에	가슴속에	In the heart/chest
얼어만주었으면	어루만져 주었으면	If (it) could soothe/caress
이루었다	이루었다	Has achieved/accomplished
고뇌	고뇌	Agony, anguish
삿삿치	샅샅이	Thoroughly, meticulously
뀌어뚫듯이	꿰뚫듯이	As if piercing through
찻고 있다	찾고 있다	Is searching for (Older spelling of 찾고)
그런故로	그런 고로	Therefore (Sino-Korean construction)
움즈길 수 없는	움직일 수 없는	Immovable (Older spelling)
그러타고	그렇다고	Saying so, even so (Older spelling)
宿命論者	숙명론자	Fatalist
心意	심의	Mind, spirit, heart
痛苦	통곡	Suffering, pain, anguish (often intense weeping)
업보	업보	Karma, karmic retribution
蹄觀的	체관적	Resigned, contemplative (Seems related to 諦觀)
부댓겻고	부대꼈고	Having struggled/suffered (Older spelling)
약해저서	약해져서	Having become weak (Older spelling)
끈어 주기를	끊어 주기를	(I hope it) ceases/is cut off (Older spelling)
일음	이름	Name (Older spelling)
여주인공	여주인공	Heroine
반면	반면	Half-face; here: half of one's life/work
사모한다	사모한다	Admires, longs for
올고	옳고	Right, correct (Older spelling)
깨끗한	깨끗한	Clean, pure
사도	사도	Apostle
애초부터	애초부터	From the very beginning
꾸김없이	꾸김없이	Without wrinkle; here: straightforwardly, without complexity
반뜻하고	반듯하고	Straight, upright (Older spelling)
나서는	나서는	Stepping out, embarking on
곁으로	곁으로	To the side of
자막	자막	Subtitles; here: figurative opening scene/introduction
등장하는	등장하는	Appearing, making an entrance
錦衫의 피	금삼의 피	Blood on the Royal Robe (Title)
失國	실국	Losing the kingdom
荒淫	황음	Debauchery, lewdness
暴虐	포학	Tyranny, cruelty
題材	제재	Subject matter, theme
為先	우선	First of all
함렛트 型	햄릿 형	Hamlet type
네로 型	네로 형	Nero type
취재하였지만	취재하였지만	Although (he) took as subject matter
그럴 의도	그럴 의도	Such an intention
었더케	어떻게	How (Older spelling)
史上에	사상에	In history
잔인	잔인	Cruelty
暴虐性	포학성	Tyrannical nature
선비	선비	Scholar (classical)
따려 죽이고	때려 죽이고	Beating to death (Older spelling)
조와하고	좋아하고	Liking, enjoying (Older spelling)
끄으러 드리고	끌어 들이고	Dragging in (Older spelling)
교양	교양	Culture, refinement, education
결함	결함	Defect, flaw
缺如	결여	Lack, absence
點	점	Point, aspect
노코	놓고	Setting (fire), placing (Older spelling)
조와뛰는	좋아뛰는	Jumping for joy (Older spelling)
선천적	선천적	Innate, congenital
변질	변질	Degeneration, deterioration
對蹠的	대척적	Diametrically opposed, antipodal
견지	견지	Viewpoint, standpoint
썻더구만	썼더구만	(He) wrote (indicating observation) (Older spelling)
원악	원악	Originally, fundamentally (Seems to be dialectal or older form of 원래/워낙)
善人	선인	Good person
奸臣	간신	Treacherous vassal/official
近親	근친	Close relative
모함	모함	Slander, false accusation
복수심리	복수심리	Psychology of revenge
增長	증장	Growth, increase
고민	고민	Anguish, worry
끗끗내	끝끝내	Finally, in the end (Older spelling)
폭군	폭군	Tyrant
만들었더군요	만들었더군요	(He) made/portrayed (indicating observation) (Older spelling)
평면적 서술	평면적 서술	Flat narration/description
크라이막쓰	클라이맥스	Climax
구비	구비	Bend, turn; crest (of wave)
자최	자취	Trace, mark (Older spelling)
考證	고증	Historical research/verification
궁중의 예의	궁중의 예의	Palace etiquette
市井의 의복	시정의 의복	Commoners' clothing
國家의 祭禮	국가의 제례	State rites
나무랄 데 없이	나무랄 데 없이	Impeccably, faultlessly
었더케 보면	어떻게 보면	In a way, from a certain perspective (Older spelling)
었든	어떤	Some, certain (Older spelling)
描寫	묘사	Description, portrayal
소상히	상세히	In detail
드렀더군요	들었더군요	(He) included/cited (indicating observation) (Older spelling)
면면한	면면한	Continuous, unbroken; lingering
情恨	정한	Deep sorrow, resentment, grudge
독특한 필치	독특한 필치	Unique style/touch (in writing/art)
물건	물건	Thing, object; here: nature, substance
무대	무대	Stage
주역	주역	Main role, protagonist
一國史	일국사	History of a nation
꾸며저 내려왔는	꾸며져 내려왔는	Has been embellished/constructed and passed down (Older spelling)
이만치	이만치	To this extent, so much
푸대접하는	푸대접하는	Treating poorly, neglecting
主從	주종	Master and servant; hierarchy
압길	앞길	The road ahead, future path (Older spelling)
페-지	페이지	Page (loanword)
붓	붓	Brush (writing)
구속밧는	구속받는	Being restricted/bound (Older spelling)
늣길만한	느낄만한	Worth feeling, palpable (Older spelling)
찻자면	찾자면	If one tries to find (Older spelling)
좁슴니까	좁습니까	Is it narrow? (Older spelling/form)
호흡	호흡	Breath; here: scope, scale (of work)
뿜어지지를 안어요	뿜어지지를 않아요	Is not emitted/expressed freely (Older spelling/form)
大作	대작	Major work, masterpiece
鑛脈	광맥	Ore vein, lode
밧계	밖에	Other than, no choice but (Older spelling)
곱게 되고	곱게 되고	Become identified (likely dialectal/older usage of 꼽게 되고 'be pointed out')
메-타	미터	Meter (taxi) (loanword)
좀스럽게	좀스럽게	Pettily, small-mindedly
너른 곳	넓은 곳	Wide place, broad area (Older spelling)
史上으로	사상으로	Into history
離婚	이혼	Divorce (Title)
모델 문제	모델 문제	Issue regarding the model (person depicted)
항간에	항간에	Among the public, in the streets (rumors)
小品	소품	Vignette, short piece
스켓치	스케치	Sketch (loanword)
妖魔	요마	Demon, evil spirit (Title)
마구	마구	Just now; recklessly
거츤지요	거친지요	(It's) rough! (Interjectory ending) (Older spelling)
걸치어서	걸치어서	Being hampered by, caught up in (Older spelling)
어듸	어디	Where (Older spelling)
發합덱가	발합데까	Will it shine/emit? (Older spelling/form)
업군오	없군요	There isn't/aren't any (indicating mild surprise) (Older spelling)
안 보시는구만요	안 보시는구만요	(You gentlemen) really don't see/read (much)! (expressing observation)
小說家仇甫의一日	소설가 구보의 일일	A Day in the Life of Novelist Kubo (Title)
川邊風景	천변풍경	Riverside Scene (Title)
愚氓	우맹	Ignorant Masses (Title)
었더케	어떻게	How (Older spelling)
유니-크한	유니크한	Unique (loanword)
달나	달라	Different (from) (Older spelling)
도회지	도회지	City, metropolis
獨壇場	독단장	Monopoly, sole domain
大河	대하	Great River (Title)
일홈	이름	Name (Older spelling)
告發	고발	Accusation, indictment
懸賞	현상	Offering a reward, prize contest
당선소설	당선소설	Prize-winning novel
殉愛譜	순애보	Record of Martyred Love (Title)
考選	고선	Selection committee/process (for prize)
梗槪	경개	Outline, summary
天才	천재	Genius
야학	야학	Night school
나종에	나중에	Later, in the end (Older spelling)
뒤집어 쓰고	뒤집어 쓰고	Taking the blame for someone else
死刑	사형	Death penalty
정성드레	정성들여	Sincerely, with great care (Older spelling)
섰다고	썼다고	(That it) was written (Older spelling)
多彩한 맛	다채한 맛	Diverse flavor/appeal
復雜多端	복잡다단	Complex and varied
친화력	친화력	Affinity, appeal
具備해요	구비해요	Is equipped with, possesses
맨-끗까지	맨끝까지	To the very end
끄을고 내려가는	끌고 내려가는	Pulling along, running through (Older spelling)
휴-맨이즘	휴머니즘	Humanism (loanword)
基督情神	기독정신	Christian spirit
놉히	높이	Highly (Older spelling)
나서요	나서요	Stands out, is superior (Older spelling)
文名 높은	문명 높은	Having a high literary reputation, famous (author)
익명투고	익명투고	Anonymous submission
꼭-알었지요	꼭 알았지요	I was absolutely sure (Older spelling)
맛날 기회	만날 기회	Opportunity to meet (Older spelling)
私淑	사숙	Studying privately under someone admired from afar
하였스려니	하였으려니	Thinking/assuming (he) must have done (Older spelling)
조와한대요	좋아한대요	(He) says he likes (Older spelling)
만히	많이	Many, much (Older spelling)
읽엇노라 하더군요	읽었노라 하더군요	(He) said he had read (reporting speech) (Older spelling/form)
스켈	스케일	Scale (loanword)
線이 굵은	선이 굵은	Having bold lines; large-scale, bold (style)
아조	아주	Very, completely (Older spelling)
딴	딴	Different, other
역거가는	엮어가는	Weaving, putting together (Older spelling)
만니	많이	Many, much (Older spelling)
諸氏	제씨	Gentlemen (addressing the participants)
後日로 미루다	후일로 미루다	Postpone to a later date
본론	본론	Main subject/topic
작금	작금	These days, recently
추세	추세	Trend, tendency
약	약	About, approximately
황금시대	황금시대	Golden Age
출현하고	출현하고	Appearing, emerging
전집	전집	Collected works, complete works
발간되기를	발간되기를	Being published
미첫고	미쳤고	Has reached (Older spelling)
단행본	단행본	Separate volume, individual book
융성하여	융성하여	Flourishing, prospering
量으로 質로	양으로 질로	In quantity and quality
文化市場	문화시장	Cultural market
文藝物	문예물	Literary works/products
덮허논 觀	덮어놓은 관	Appearance of having covered (Older spelling)
相考할 때	상고할 때	When considering/examining historically
출판자본	출판자본	Publishing capital
潮流	조류	Tide, current, trend
數年 前	수년 전	Several years ago
지배한	지배한	Dominated
舊小說	구소설	Old novels (pre-modern)
尺牘類	척독류	Letter-writing manuals/collections
族譜	족보	Genealogy book
門中事業	문중사업	Family clan business/affair
門外不出	문외불출	Not to be taken outside the gate (kept within the family/group)
冊肆	책사	Bookseller, bookshop (older term)
드르면	들으면	If one hears/listens (Older spelling)
케케묵은	케케묵은	Old and moldy, antiquated
傳冊類	전책류	Storybook genre (older term for novels like Ch'unhyangjŏn)
어데	어디	Where (Older spelling)
팔리는가 하면	팔리는가 하면	As for where they sell...
노동자 게급	노동자 계급	Worker class
언문	언문	Ŏnmun (Native Korean script, often used pejoratively historically, here refers to basic literacy)
이주하여간	이주하여간	Migrated (Older spelling/form)
농민층	농민층	Peasant class
선비 축	선비 축	The scholar group/class
보았더라는데	보았더라는데	(It's said) they used to read (Older spelling/form)
달너지어	달라지어	Having changed (Older spelling)
안젔을	앉았을	Having sat (Older spelling)
평안한	평안한	Peaceful, leisurely
줄어들자	줄어들자	As (it) decreased
팔이지 안키	팔리지 않기	Not selling (Older spelling/form)
업자	업자	Businessman, operator (publisher)
망서리는	망설이는	Hesitating (Older spelling)
新人	신인	New person/figure
잇드시	있듯이	Just as there is (Older spelling)
교양 있는	교양 있는	Cultured, educated
청년자본가	청년자본가	Young capitalist
문화사적 포부	문화사적 포부	Cultural-historical aspiration
질머지고	짊어지고	Shouldering, bearing (a burden/responsibility) (Older spelling)
등장하였지요	등장하였지요	Appeared, emerged (polite ending)
바라보자	바라보자	Upon seeing/observing
주저하든	주저하던	Who were hesitating (Older spelling)
書肆	서사	Bookshop (older term)
投足하기	투족하기	Stepping into, participating in
新進 舊進	신진 구진	Newcomers and old-timers
엇울너	어울려	Together, mingling (Older spelling)
大體的 並進	대량적 병진	Massive parallel advance
터이지요	터이지요	It is the situation/ground (polite explanation)
그러치요	그렇지요	That's right (Older spelling)
實例	실례	Actual example
제휴	제휴	Partnership, cooperation
館主	관주	Owner (of a bookstore/publishing house)
아드님	아드님	Son (honorific)
背景	배경	Background
全集的 叢書	전집적 총서	Collected works-style series
刊行	간행	Publication
財的으로	재적으로	Financially
원조하든	원조하던	Who used to assist/support (Older spelling)
문고	문고	Paperback series (Bunko)
創設	창설	Founding, establishment
該社	해사	The aforementioned company
헤여보면	헤아려보면	If one counts/considers (Older spelling)
劃할 만한	획할 만한	Capable of marking (an era)
陳	진	Formation, lineup; camp
쏘다저 나온다고	쏟아져 나온다고	(It seems they) are pouring out (Older spelling)
보아저요	보아져요	It seems, it appears (Older spelling)
깁분	기쁜	Joyful, happy (Older spelling)
올타고	옳다고	(That it is) right/correct (Older spelling)
甚히	심히	Very, greatly
원인일	원인인	Being the cause (Older spelling contraction)
特記할	특기할	Worth special mention
煩設	번설	Elaboration, lengthy explanation
영접하여	영접하여	Welcoming, receiving
근거	근거	Basis, foundation (of livelihood)
되였으매	되었으매	As (it) became (Older grammatical form)
마저주니까	맞아주니까	Because (they) welcome/receive (Older spelling)
知己	지기	An understanding friend/patron
어든 데서	얻은 데서	From having obtained (Older spelling)
이러니까	이러니까	Because it is like this
激增	격증	Dramatic increase
드러야할	들어야할	Must raise/mention (Older spelling)
餘地가 업는	여지가 없는	Having no room (for doubt) (Older spelling)
요약하면	요약하면	To summarize
써두어야할	써두어야할	Must write (and keep/publish) (Older spelling)
當했고	당했고	Has faced, has arrived at
待遇	대우	Treatment, compensation
조흐니까	좋으니까	Because (it) is good (Older spelling)
나종에	나중에	Lastly, finally (Older spelling)
부르짓는	부르짖는	Shouting, crying out (Older spelling)
文化工作	문화공작	Cultural work/operations
戰後	전후	Post-war
回復	회복	Recovery, restoration
산업	산업	Industry
主力해야	주력해야	Must focus efforts on
百年戰爭	백년전쟁	Hundred Years' War
게속하여	계속하여	Continuing (Older spelling)
이러난	일어난	Occurred, arose (Older spelling)
對策	대책	Countermeasure, plan
主力하였기에	주력하였기에	Because (they) focused main efforts
안입니까	아닙니까	Is it not? (Older spelling)
事變	사변	Incident (referring to the Sino-Japanese War)
후반기	후반기	Latter half/period
차고 있읍니다	차고 있습니다	Is full of (Older spelling)
響應하여	향응하여	Responding to
바야흐로	바야흐로	Just now, approaching, burgeoning
높아가는	높아가는	Rising, increasing
文壇	문단	The literary world/circles
잇글고 가는	이끌고 가는	Leading, pulling along (Older spelling)
一理	일리	A point, some truth/reason
결부하여	결부하여	Connecting, linking
안트라도	않더라도	Even if not (Older spelling)
강대한	강대한	Powerful, mighty
국가민족	국가민족	Nation-people
근본적	근본적	Fundamental
趨向	추향	Direction, trend
마처 나가는	맞추어 나가는	Aligning with, matching (Older spelling)
趨勢	추세	Trend, tendency
암시의 힘	암시의 힘	Power of suggestion/implication
加하여	가하여	Adding to
끝마추겠읍니다	끝마치겠습니다	Will conclude/finish (Older spelling)
장시간	장시간	Long time


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제11권 제4호
발행일	1939년 04월 01일
기사제목	文藝「大振興時代」展望
기사형태	대담·좌담

文藝「大振興時代」展望
懷月 朴英熙
八峰 金基鎭
金東仁
尙虛 李泰俊
本社 金東煥

新春創作合評

春園의 『無明』과 『사랑』

金東煥. 春園께서 최근에 주목할 창작 두 편을 내어 노섯는데 그 중에 하나인 「無明」(文章第 1號)부터 말슴하여 주서요.
李泰俊. 오래간만에 쓰신 단편인데 나는 이것을 인쇄되여 나오기 전에 작년 봄 醫專病院에서 보았서요. 그 모진 병에 누어 게시면서 또 자신이 긔운 업스면 간호인에게 代筆을 식혀서까지 고심하면서 맨들어 내인 이 一篇을 몃 구절 읽은 적이 있섯지요. 그때 생각이나 지금 생각이나 퍽으나 조흔 문장이구나<188> 퍽으나 특이한 인간묘사를 하섯구나 하고 경의를 표하였어요.
그때 몃절 읽고 나서 나는 이런 말슴을 하였지오. 이걸 개개의 인간을 그리신 우에다가 었든 큰 스토리를 집어 너허서 크다란 장편을 만들었으면 조켓다고요.
진실로 「無明」에 나오는 그 인간의 묘사는 春園 아니고는 못하리라 하리만치 三嘆할 데가 만하요.
金東仁. 이번 「無明」은 아마 春園의 장편 단편 가운데 제일 걸작일 걸요. 티 잡을 데가 없이 완전한 작품이여요. 거기 나오는 인간이 모도 살았어요. 다만 玉에 티 하나 골느자면 「나」라는 인물이 「聖者-ㄴ 체」하는 그 의식과 또 나라는 인물이 얼는 지나간 그림자가치 도모지 분명치를 못해요. 그 밖게는 사건이든 인물의 성격이든 다 살고 그 사회의 맨 밋바닥 광경까지 너무 逼眞하다 하리만치 잘 그리여젓어요.
李泰俊. 나도 그런 생각이 들어요. 감옥 운동장에서 다 죽어가는 뺏작 마른 윤이 저 먼 창 너머 보일 적에 부처님을 미드라고 하는 그런 대목의 「나」란 인물이 聖者然을 떼여버렸섰더면 조켔다고 보앗서요.
金基鎭. 나는 아직 上半밖에 못 보았는데 몹시 노력한 力作이더군요. 다 보지 못했스니 무에라고 말할 수 업지만 이 작품에서도 春園은 었더케 하면 神佛에 갓가운 선하고도 높흔 생활을 할 수 있슬가 었더케 하면 착한 사람이 될 수 있슬가 하는 길을 찾고 있섰서요.
神佛을 밋는 것이 올고 그런 것은 다음 문제로 하고 었잿든 「남을 위해 저를 희생하려」는 정신, 인간의 덧업는 愛慾의 집착에서 떠나 세상과 인류를 구해 보려는 그 노력-이런 점을 높이 평가할 바이라고 보아요. 이 「無明」뿐 아니라 근래의 「사랑」도 그러한 정신으로 일관하여 있더군요.
朴英熙. 나는 근래에는 남의 작품을 별로 읽지 못해서 모르겠으나 春園이 종교적 신앙방면으로 기우러지는 경향이 있더군요.
金東仁. 신앙방면에 너무 기우러저서 부처님가튼 성자 되려다 부족하여 떠러지고 그러타고 지옥에 가도록 性惡한 이도 안녀, 지옥도 못 가고 중가운데서 흔들다가 말지 안을가 하,하,하(一同笑)
金東煥. 「사랑」이 洛陽의 紙價를 올닌 근래의 센세쇼낼한 작품이었지오. 보섯서요?
金基鎭. 下卷마저 쉬이 나오리라니 그것까지 보고 말했으면 조켔지만 나는 上卷이 나왔슬 적에 어디에다가 이러케 쓴 적이 있지요.
나는 『사랑』을 읽으면서 『이것은 소설이 아니다.』하였다. 하면서도<189>끝까지 다 읽지 아니치 못했다. 왜? 이 책엔 강하게 읽히게 하는 힘이 있었던 까닭이다. 그것은 矛盾 덩어리지마는 生의 고뇌에서 解說하고저 부둥부둥 애를 쓰는 春園 자*의 귀한 영혼의 姿態가 책장마다 내배이고 있는 까닭이다. 春園이 지금 찾고 있는 길은 『무었이 어떻게 있는가!』 그것을 삿삿치 비집고 뀌어뚫듯이 보자고 하는 것도 아니오 『어떻게 하면 잘살까』하는 길을 찿아보고저 함도 아니오 다만 『어떻게 하면 착한 사람이 될까』하는 길을 찿고 있다. 그리하여 春園은 『착한 사람이 되는 길』을 마침내 찾아 내고저 그 길을 여러 사람에게 알리기 위해서 이 『사랑』을 썻다. 그런故로 『사랑』의 길을 많은 사람의 가슴속에 얼어만주었으면 목적의 대부분은 이루었다 할 것이오. 소설이 잘되고 못된 것 같음은 春園에게 있어서 그닥지 문제되지 않을 것이라고 생각한다.

원래부터 春園은 理想主義者요 『센티멘타리스트』요 정치가라 하기보담 詩人이오 街頭의 人이라 하기보담 僧侶에 가까웠다. 이 맨 나종 말이 語弊가 있다 하면 종교가에 가까웠다고 말해도 좋다. 『無情』 『開拓者』 『어린 벗에게』를 발표하던 25년 전의 그는 自由民權思想에 열렬히 共鳴하는 理想主義者이었고 詩人이었다. 그러나 「再生」 『李舜臣』을 지나서 『흙』에서부터 그는 『센티멘탈』한 승려가 되어 왔다. 『사랑』은 그가 入道하고서 얻은 최초의 영혼의 고백일런지 모른다. 나이 50에 가까운 사람이 더구나 春園과 같이 생애에 波瀾이 重疊하야온 사람이 한 가지 신념을 굳게 파악하기에 이르렀을 때는 이미 그 신념을 움즈길 수 없는 것이 된다. 그런고로 『육체적이 아닌 정신적인 사랑, 나를 위해서가 아니라 남을 위해서 바치는 사랑』에 살다가 이같은 사랑에 죽는 길을 인제는 春園의 운명의 길이 될 것이며 그럼으로 이 길동무에게 주는 지침으로서의 全作 『사랑』이 깊은 감명을 주는 것이라면 이 소설의 주인공 이하 諸인물의 성격의 창조, 사건의 설정, 환경의 해명, 행동의 구상화 등이 모다 소설적으로 덜 되었다. 거짓같다 한대도 그에게 치명적이 아니다.

결론적으로 말하면 『사랑』은 신작 『佛, 神이 敎旨合體聖經』의 보급판이다.
지금 내 생각도 역시 마천가지얘요. 부처님의 뜻을 춘원이 한 열렬한 구도자가 되어서 어덧고 그것의 진리를 石荀玉이를 통하여 세상에 전하는 글월이라고 보아요.
金東仁. 「사랑」에서 가장 눈을 거츨게 하는 대목은 그가 因果律에 너무 잡힌 점이였어요. 春園은 언제는 運命論을 배격하든 急先峰이더니 그래서 팔자타령 때문에 모든 사람이 망한다고 부르짓더니 이제는 망하는 것도 망하는 원인이 있어 망하고 辱보는 것도 辱볼만한 業報가 전생에 있어 그러타고 하는 식으로 蹄觀的 宿命論者가 되여 버렸더군요. 이것이 아마 오랬동안 불우한 처지에 부댓겻고 또 모진 痛苦에서 울었으니까 心意가 약해저서 생긴 까닭인가 보아요. 그러나 여기에는 찬성할 수<190> 없어요. 이 철학관, 이 인생관이 일시적 현상에 끈어 주기를 나는 바래요.
李泰俊. 나도 이 자리에서 한 마디 꼭 하고 지내야 한다면 이러케나 말하지요. 「사랑」에 대해선 石荀玉이란 아름다운 일음이 이긴 이야기의 여주인공이 된다. 그는 문인이오 醫師인 예술과 과학을 半面씩 생활하는 安賓을 먼저 그의 작품을 통해 사모한다. 세상에 가장 올고 가장 깨끗한 사랑의 使徒가 되려 모든 것을 희생하며 꿈같은 길을 현실에서 나서는 것이다. 남의 남편이니 삼각이니 하는 관념을 갖인 荀玉의 마음이 애초부터 너무나 꾸김없이 반뜻하고 말았다. 이 순진한 情熱과 理想의 처녀 그는 春園의 삐아토리체로서 「사모하는 의 곁으로」라는 아름다운 자막을 열고 등장하는 것이다.

月灘의 『錦杉의 피』

金東煥. 燕山君을 그린 月灘의 「錦衫의 피」 전에 「端宗哀史」가 있어 소년왕의 失國을 그린 것이 있었고 이제 荒淫, 暴虐의 성격적 변질로 하야서 失國하였다는 燕山一代史를 題材로 한 「錦衫의 피」가 있었는데 爲先 우리의 흥미를 끄으는 것은 燕山이 함렛트 型인가요 네로 型의 제왕이었든가요.
金東仁. 朴군도 燕山을 취재하였지만 나도 그럴 의도가 몇 해 전부터 있어 이번에 滿鮮日報의 부탁이 있기에 이 기회에 「시르른 瑞葱」란 제목으로 燕山君을 그리기로 뜻하였어요. 朴군은 었더케 보았는지 모르겠으나 나는 史上에 드물만치 심했든 그의 잔인과 暴虐性을 성격상의 한 비극으로서 그리려 해요. 선비를 따려 죽이고 피를 보고 조와하고 민간부녀를 궁중으로 함부로 끄으러 드리고 여기에는 교양의 부족, 지성의 결함, 도덕성의 缺如 이러한 모든 點보다 羅馬城中에 불을 노코 그저 조와뛰는 네로가튼 선천적 성격의 변질에서 오는 것이 만흔가봐요.
金基鎭. 月灘은 東仁씨와는 對蹠적 견지에서 썻더구만. 원악 善人이든 분이 奸臣과 近親의 모함으로 또 복수심리의 增長으로 만흔 심리적 고민 거치다가 끗끗내 피를 즐겨하는 폭군이 된 거로 만들었더군요.
金東仁. 「錦衫의 피」는 좀 평면적 서술로 되었더군요. 그리고 「크라이막쓰」, 파도치는 구비가 좀 부족한 듯 하더군요.
朴英熙. 그러나 그 시대상을 나타내기에 몹시 노력한 자최가 보여요. 考證든 것도-궁중의 예의라거나, 市井의 의복이라거나 국가의 祭禮라든가 어느 한 가지 나무랄 데 없이-었더케 보면 었든 대목에는 불필요하다고 하리만치 描寫를 소상히 했고 고증도 풍부히 드렀더군요.
金基鎭. 문장에도 몹시 노력하였더군요. 그러고 중세기적인 궁중의 그 면면한 情恨를 그리는 데서는<191> 독특한 필치로 하였더군요.
金東煥. 역사소설이라 하면 지금까지의 관념으론-朝鮮의 역사 그 물건이 궁중이 무대가 되고 帝王이 주역이 되어 宮中史가 곳 그 一國史라 하리만치 꾸며저 내려왔는 이만치 역사소설 하면 흔이들 端宗哀史, 錦衫의 피 등을 들게 되고 그 당철 市井에서 이러난 碧初의 「林걱정」 尙虛의 「黃眞伊」 등은 서글푸게 푸대접하는 경향이 있지안어요?
金基鎭. 그러나 역사소설이라 하면 그는 궁중에서거나 市井에서거나 재료를 취할데야 상관없시 거기에 主從어이 업겠지요.
金東煥. 林巨正을 읽으서요?
朴英熙. 그 긴 것을 었더케 다 읽어요. 처음 시작되든 때 아마 10년도 넘엇을 걸. 그 때 좀 보았고 최근은 었저다가 한두 회 읽는데 문장이 예전보다 몹시 세련되였더군요.
金東煥. 앞흐로 역사소설의 압길을 었더케 보서요.
李泰俊. 金東仁께서도 언제 그런 말슴을 하섯습데다만은 우리들 소설가가 개척하여 나갈 자유로운 천지는 역시 역사의 페-지속에 있는 줄 아러요. 현대 것을 그리자면 붓이 구속밧는 데가 만코 또 우리들이 실감으로 늣길만한 장면을 찻자면 무대가 좀 좁슴니까. 현실에서 취재하라면 작자의 호흡이 커지지 못하고 정열이 제 마음대로 뿜어지지를 안어요. 그러기에 大作을 생각하려면 역사의 鑛脈 속으로 파고 드러가는 수 밖게.
金東仁. 현실이야 좁고 말고요. 우리들이 일상생활에 있어서도 자동차를 타고 다니는 것은 저게 閔大植이다 朴榮喆이다 하고 이내 곱게 되고 내 자신이라도 60錢이 너머가는가 70錢이 너머 가는가 하고 메-타를 보며 자연 사람이 좀스럽게 되고 그러니 좀 너른 곳을 찾자면 史上으로 파고 드러갈 밧계.

鎭午, 飛石, 朴泰遠, 朴啓周

金東煥. 兪鎭午씨의 「離婚」(文章 제1호)를 보섯서요.
金基鎭. 모델 문제가 있는 듯 하더군. 나는 아직 읽지 못했스나.
金東仁. 항간에 말이 있는 모양이더군요. 나도 아직 읽지는 못했스나-가튼 「文章」에 孝石씨의 「山精」이 있었는데 그것은 한 小品이요 스켓치더군요.
金東煥. 그러면 鄭飛石씨의 妖魔(三千里 新年號)를 보었어요.
金東仁. 지금 마구 읽고 왔어요. 사건취급이라거나 인물묘사 모다 다 조왔는데 문장이 었더케나 거츤지요. 그 문장에 걸치어서 어듸 그 소설의 사건이나 인물이 빛을 發합덱가.
金東煥. 다른 분은 보신 이가 업군오. 너무들 남의 작품을<192> 안 보시는구만요. 「朝光」과 「批判」 신년호에 여러 편 단편이 있었는데 보섯슴니까. (그러나 아모도 본 이가 없었다)
金東煥. 그러면 朴泰遠씨가 「小說家仇甫의一日」도 내섯고 「川邊風景」도 내섯고 또 朝鮮日報에 「愚氓」의 장편을 내고 있는데 었더케 보섯슴니까.
金基鎭. 전에는 氏의 것을 좀 보았스나 최근에는 본 적이 없어 이번에 난 「小說家仇甫의 一日」을 꼭 보려고 했는데 책까지 어더다 놓코 아직 못 보았서요.
李泰俊. 대화가 조코. 유니-크한 문장호흡이 조치요. 우리와 달나 서울이란 도시에서 나고 자란 이가 되어서 도회지와 도회인을 題材로 하여 요리하는 데는 獨壇場이지요.
金東煥. 金南天씨의 「大河」가 새로 나왔다는데.
朴英熙. 「大河」라고 일홈이 조와요. 광고문을 보아선 告發 문학이라고 했는데 아직 못 보았서요.
金東煥. 今春 각 신문지상의 懸賞당선소설을 평하여 주서요. (읽은 이가 없어 그만두다.) 每日新報에 1천원 당선작인 「殉愛譜」평을 하여 주서요.
金基鎭. 내가 考選했고 내가 읽었으니 내가 말하지요. 그 梗槪는 대개 이러해요.
주인공으로 등장하는 청년이 음악 잘 하고 미술에 天才 있고 그러고서 문학까지 잘 하는 청년 예술가얘요. 이 청년이 결국 고아들을 모아 노코 야학를 가르치며 그밖게 여러 가지로 남을 사랑하고 남에게 행복의 문을 여러주는 그런 뜻있는 일을 하여오다가 나종에 남의 살인죄까지 뒤집어 쓰고 감옥에서 死刑까지 밧지요. 이 소설을 읽어가면서 퍽으나 정성드레 섰다고 탄복했어요. 문장도 곱고 부드럽고 신문소설이 필요로 하는 多彩한 맛, 스토리의 復雜多端, 등장인물에의 친화력 모든 것이 다 具備해요. 그러고 맨-끗까지 일관하여 끄을고 내려가는 남을 사랑하며 세상을 위해 저를 죽인다는 그 휴-맨이즘 그 基督情神이 놉히 평가하여 조흘 바라고 보았어요.
80여 편 중 가장 나서요. 나는 처음에는 文名 높은 어느 작가가 익명투고한 줄만 꼭-알었지요.
그 뒤 작자를 맛날 기회 있어 나는 꼭 菊池寬이나 加藤武雄이를 私淑하엿스려니 하고 물었더니 賀川豐彦이를 조와한대요. 그리고 유-고, 톨스토이, 有島武郞, 李光洙 이들의 작품을 만히 읽엇노라 하더군요.
金東煥. 그 작가가 北間島라는 점으로 보아 曙海에게서 기대되는 바와 가튼 그런 스켈 크고 線이 굵은 그런 것을 발견할 수 있습덱가.
金基鎭. 曙海와는 아조 딴 경향을 따르는 분이여요. 또 스켈도 조고만치 그러면서 몹시 깨끗하게 역거가는<193> 그런 경향이더군요.
金東煥. 최근에 각 신문지상에 여러 작가의 장편이 만니 실리는데 다 보섯슴니까.(諸氏 보는 것이 만치 못하야 後日로 미루다.)

文藝振興의 展望

金東煥. 이제는 본론에 드러 갑시다. 작금 兩年의 추세를 보면 朝鮮에 문예운동이 있은 뒤 약 20년만에 처음 보는 문학의 황금시대를 출현하고 있읍니다. 이미 전집이 발간되기를 4, 5 種에 미첫고 단행본의 출판이 또한 융성하여 量으로 質로 진실로 文化市場을 오직 文藝物로써 덮허논 觀이 있어요. 이것은 역사적으로 相考할 때에도 심히 중요한 현상이라 볼 것입니다. 그러기에 이 자리에서 그의 원인부터 이야기하고 나아가 장래의 전망에까지 미치려고 생각함니다.
누구나 들 수 있는 모양로 今日의 문예의 이렇듯한 大振興의 현상을 세 가지 방면으로 설명할 수 있겟지요.
첫재는 출판자본의 진출
둘재는 작가의 노력
셋재는 사회적 潮流
그러면 첫재의 출판자본의 진출에 대하여 말슴하여 주서요.
金東仁. 數年 前까지의 서적시장을 지배한 출판물은 그는 대부분이 「春香傳」 「沈淸傳」 「劉忠烈傳」하는 舊小說, 尺牘類였지요.(族譜의 출판이 물론 왕성했으나 그것은 門中事業으로서 門外不出이였으니까 論外로 하고)冊肆의 이야기를 드르면 이 케케묵은 傳冊類가 어데에 많이 팔리는가 하면 제 고장을 떠나 東京 大阪에 가 있는 조선노동자 게급과 언문을 겨우 아는 滿洲 땅에 이주하여간 농민층들이라 하여요.(5, 6년 전까지는 三南 녯 선비 축에서도 많이 보았더라는데) 그러든 것이 시대가 달너지어 傳冊보고 안젔을 평안한 사람이 줄어들자 傳冊이 팔이지 안키 시작했지요. 春香傳만 一年에 40만 部쯤 팔닌다든 것이 그 절반도 팔이나마나 하게 되었다니까.
여기에서 옛날식 출판업자는 길이 막히게 되여 고민하기 시작했지요.
이렇게 舊式 출판업자가 망서리는 사이에 조선의 다른 사회에도 新人의 진출이 잇드시 새로 교양 있는 청년자본가들이 문화사적 포부를 질머지고 등장하였지요.<194>
이 추세를 바라보자 주저하든 舊日의 書肆에서도 새로운 출판시장에 投足하기 시작하여 新進 舊進이 함께 엇울너 나왔기에 今日에 보는 것 같은 출판자본과 출판인물의 大量的 並進이 있게 된 터이지요.
李泰俊. 그러치요. 시장의 實例를 들지라도 漢城圖書에 韓奎相, 孔鎭恒(年前까지의 사실로 미루어)의 제휴로 文學全集의 출판이 있었고 博文書館서도 館主 盧益亨씨의 아드님이 帝大를 졸업하고서 부친의 자본을 배경으로 全集的 叢書 刊行에 進出 또 예전「創造」 등 문예잡지의 産出에도 財的으로 많이 원조하든 三文社의 高敬相씨가 새로히 전집간행 崔南周, 林和씨의 컴비로 學藝社에 문고간행, 崔載瑞씨의 人文社 創設, 단행본 간행, 그리고 최후로 朝鮮日報社 배경으로 한 該社出版部의 進出-또 明大 나온 金諫萬씨의 文藝雜誌 及 單行本 刊行에의 진출, (기타 諸氏도 만치만) 이렇게 헤여보면 지금 나오는 출판관계의 인물이나 그 자본에나 모다 一時代를 劃할 만한 陳을 칠 「사람과 돈」이 모다 쏘다저 나온다고 보아저요. 그러기에 지금으로부터 비로소 東京市場이나 上海市場에서 보는 것 같은 出版社會가 서울에서도 형성되여갈 것 같어요. 참으로 깁분 일이지요.
金東煥. 그 관찰이 올타고 봄니다. 甚히 깁분 현상이올시다. 그러면 그 다음의 원인일, 작가의 노력에 대하여 말슴하여 주서요.
金基鎭. 朝鮮의 작가들이 前日보다 더 훨신 문예제작에 노력되고 있는 것도 近年의 한 特記할 사실인데 그리하는 주요원인은
첫재  時代思潮에 대한 작가의 自覺
둘재  사회적 待遇의 向上
이지요. 첫재의 원인은 더 煩設치 안키로 하거니와 둘재의 이유로 말하면 지금 모다 10여 만의 독자를 가진 일간신문(滿鮮日報까지)이 문예면을 널리 개방하여 작가를 영접하여 주니까 거기에서 적어도 10여명의 작가는 생활의 근거를 얻게 되였으매 全力을 다해 작품제작을 하게 되었고 또 둘재는 아까 金東仁, 李泰俊 兩氏가 든 例와 같이 문예를 이해하는 교양 있는 신진출판업자가 나와 그 작품을 반가히 마저주니까 이렇게 知己를 어든 데서 용기를 내어 모다 글 쓰기로 되였고 그에 따라 稿料가 예전보다는 數倍나 더 생기며, 작품을 내노흐면 사회적 反響이 크고 이러니까 작가들은 꼭 자기의 본분을 다해 노력할 때에 이르렀지오.
이 모든 조건을 전체적으로 싸주는 것으로서 무엇보다 문예독자의 激增을 드러야할 것은 더 말할 餘地가<195> 업는 사실이겟고.
以上의 몇 가지를 한 마디로 요약하면 우리는 지금 글을 써두어야할 시대에 當했고 또 글을 쓰면 前과 달나 문화사회의 反響이 클 뿐더러 金錢上 待遇가 조흐니까 작가가 全力을 다해 노력하는 때라고 볼 수 있겠지요.
金東煥. 조흔 말슴이군요. 그러면 맨 나종에 있는 시대의 潮流에 대하여 말슴하여 주서요. 나는 여기에 대하여는 두어 가지 원인이 있다고 보아요. 지금 정치가들이 소리를 크게 하여 부르짓는 소리가 文化工作의 필요를 말해요. 戰後의 회복에는 어디나 다 산업의 발달과 문화의 진흥에 全力해야 하니까 저 歐羅巴의 「文藝復興」도 말하자면 百年戰爭이 끝난 뒤에 게속하여 이러난 현상이 아니었읍니까. 杜甫, 李太白, 韓愈을 나은 盛唐時代의 문화도 秦이 망하고 元도 망하고 그런 뒤를 이어 戰勝한 唐이 戰後對策으로 문화건설에 全主力하였기에 된 일이 안입니까. 그러기에 지금 우리나라도 事變이 후반기에 들자 문화건설의 소리 전국에 차고 있읍니다. 그러기에 이 추세에 響應하여 문화의 熱이 조선사회에 바야흐로 높아가는 경향이 文壇의 호흡까지 잇글고 가는 것이 아니리까.
朴英熙. 그도 一理가 있요. 반드시 전쟁에 결부하여 설명하지 않트라도 원래 강대한 국가민족이 되자면 가장 근본적 문제가 문화진흥에 있으니까 강대하여 가는 我國의 趨向에 호흡을 마처 나가는 것이 이 趨勢라 하겠지요.
다른 한 가지는 이 시대가 주는 암시의 힘이 여기 加하여 있다고 봄니다.
金東煥. 그러면 이것으로 끝마추겠읍니다. 장시간 말슴하여 주서 감사함니다.(끝)<196>
<188-196>