잡지명	別乾坤 第29號
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	新綠 (New Green)
필자	李泰俊
기사형태	문예기타 (Literature - Other)

The beautiful month of May has returned.

The blossoms have faded, but the remaining fragrance and the new green leaves herald the return of May.

Just when you think it's spring, the spring rain has already disappeared. The heavy humidity in the sky has vanished without a trace, leaving it crystal clear. If you look at any tree branch, not a single one is without its leaves. In spring, while other trees bloom and bend with flowers, some trees haven't even begun to draw water, clinging to their desolate winter appearance. This makes those who look upon them from above feel a lack of passion. But in May, it's different. The flowers, which stirred people's hearts and kept them needlessly busy, have all fallen away. Even the most rugged trees sprout oily leaves, completely covering the world in green. It is finally a time when we can see great harmony.

<46>

Nature stirring people's hearts must be a divine intrusion. I've realized that I often regret things from the past most during spring, and that the opportunities for those regrets often arise when strolling beneath the new green. How can anything be compared to the new green, which calms and soothes the human heart?

The new green is a good friend. It may not have the delicate charm of flowers or women, but its clarity and softness evoke deep emotion within us. When we gaze up at the new green and search for the green beads of unripe fruit, when we see young birds flapping their wings and learning to fly, how deeply do we feel the beauty of life? How beautifully can we wander through the world of meditation? The Romans had a saying, "Memento mori," meaning "Remember death." It's a saying meant to encourage deeper thought in those with shallow wisdom, whose eyes dart about like electric dolls, never settling.

When we can look upon our own lives, we will have the ability to recognize our own happiness and unhappiness with a just sense of value. At that time, we will be able to illuminate both life and death, as the Buddhist scriptures say.

The new green is a good friend.

There is no time like strolling beneath the new green to be stirred by a quiet passion. There is no time like that to talk with oneself, to encounter the reality of one's life and one's own happiness.

Many lascivious poems have been recited beneath flowering trees. But saints like Thoreau always gazed at the new green as they recited poetry.

Every time I see the new green, I am ashamed that I am not a poet.

**Named Entities**

李泰俊	I Tae-jun
羅馬	Roma
타코어	T'akoŏ



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	新綠
필자	李泰俊
기사형태	문예기타

新綠
						李泰俊
아름다운 五月달이 도라옴니다。
은 훗터젓스나 남은香氣오히려 그푸른닙헤새로운 五月달이 도라옴니다。
봄인가하면 봄빗은벌서 사라진올시다 한울에는 텁텁한水蒸氣가 조곰도짓지안코 것치엿슴니다 유리가티 맑지안슴닛가 어느나무가지를 추려보아도 닙이띄지안은나무는 한가지도 업지안슴닛가 봄에는다른나무는이피여 휘여지여도 엇던나무는아직물도올으지안어 쓸쓸한겨울틔를 그대로가지고섯는나무가만슴니다 그래서 놉흔데올나서서 보는사람에게는 情熱의不足을늣기게합니다。 그러나 五月만되면 그러치안슴니다。 사람의마음을 공연히들게맨드러일업시 밧부게하든이모다 러저바리고 아모리험상구진나무라도 모다기름도는닙히피여 完全히 푸른빗츠로 世上을덥허놋슴니다 비로소 大調和를볼수잇는올시다。
自然앞에 사람의마음을들게맨드는것은하나님의誤入일것이외다 나는 지나간일속에서 後悔되는일이 번번히 봄에만흔것을알엇슴니다 그리고 그後悔할機會를흔히 新綠아래를 거니릴 만헛든것을알엇슴니다 新綠이란 사람의마음을 가라안처주고씨서주고하는데 엇지 물에다比할것이겟슴닛가
新綠은 조흔친구외다 처럼 게집처럼아기자기한재미야업지만은 그맑고 부드러움이 얼마나 우리에게 두터운感激을 이르켜줌닛가 新綠을우러보며 푸른구슬가튼 풋열매를차저볼 어린새들의가슴을벌넉거리며 날기를익키는것을볼 얼마나 우리는 生命의아름다움을늣기는것이겟슴닛가 라서 우리는 얼마나아름다운 瞑想의世界를거니릴수잇겟슴닛가 羅馬사람들에게 『메멘모리』라는말이 잇다함니다 『죽엄을記憶하라』하는말이라함니다 적은智慧로 눈알이電氣人形처럼 자리잡지못하고 해반득거리는사람에게 『좀더沈着해보시요』하고 思索을주려는말이겟지요
우리는 우리의목숨을 스스로바라볼수잇슬 自身의 幸福과不幸을 正當한價値率에서 認識할能力이 잇슬것이외다 그우리는 佛書에말과가티生에밝게하고한 死를밝게할수잇슬것이외다
新綠은 조흔친구외다。
新綠아래를 거니릴처럼 고요한 熱情에 부댓겨보는는업슴니다 그처럼 自己自身과말할수잇고 自己生命의實在와自己自身의幸福을 맛나보는는업슬것이외다。
나무 밋헤서는 淫迭한詩가 만히을퍼젓슴니다 그러나 『타코어-』가튼聖者는 늘 新綠을 바라보며 詩를 을펏슴니다。
나는 新綠을볼마다 詩人이못된것을북그러워함니다。