別건곤 제29호
1930년 06월 01일
新綠想華 (Thoughts on New Greenery)
崔泳柱
문예기타 (Literature Miscellaneous)

"Mother! Mother! The bracken is out!"

The voice of my poor younger sister, who has been buried in the woods for a long time, still lingers in my ears as she rushed up to the mountain last year to pick wild greens, crying out as if in a scream. My mother said,

"Okay! Pick it quickly!"

She was picking young chwinamul sprouts that had grown lightly under the pine trees.

It was as blue then as it is now. The whole world was blue. The trees, the mountains, the sky, the fields, everything was blue. And this year, my family went to the big mountain again to pick wild greens.

As I was walking around the mountain slope to pick greens, I saw the newly sprouted bracken shoots, and I was reminded of my young sister who had passed away.

"Mother! Mother! The bracken is out!"

I shouted as if I were replacing my younger sister's voice from last year. My mother said,

"Okay! Pick it quickly!"

I thought she was going to reply with the same words she had said to my sister last year, but unexpectedly she turned around and wiped away her tears. And she forced a smile on her face.

The clear day of new greenery makes me lie quietly on the grass and watch the clouds floating in the blue sky. And it makes me draw the past shadows and the shadows to come in my head.

I remember lying under the alder trees at Munam-dong Falls (門岩洞瀑布) with my friend Sŏkch'ung (石蟲) around this time, reading Kikuchi Kan's "Diary of a Nameless Writer" (無名作家日記) and laughing so hard that we couldn't straighten our backs.

That laughter was roaring and loud. And it was bitter. It was a laughter that poured out from the fact that the writing frankly revealed the feelings that were right for us at that time. That laughter was ironed out like that blue sky today. And we each fell into reverie, breathing the blue air and rolling on the fragrant grass until sunset. Counting those days is like counting the old days when we barely had ten fingers.

My feet, which were picking greens, led me to Munam-dong Falls (門岩洞瀑布). And it made me walk back and forth in front of that alder tree grove several times. And again, I lay down and listened to the faint sound of mosquitoes buzzing from the village below the valley, "Ireo! Edeyeo!"

**Named Entities**

菊池寬	Kikuchi Kan
石蟲	Sŏkch'ung
門岩洞瀑布	Munam-dong P'okp'o



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	新綠想華
필자	崔泳柱
기사형태	문예기타

新綠想華
						崔泳柱
『어머니! 어머니! 고사리가나왓세요』
임이속에무더진지오래되는 나의가엽슨누의동생이 작년이맘 큰산으로나물드러갓다가 외마데소리처럼질느며 반겨하든소리가 지금도 귀가에남어잇다 어머니는
『오냐!　얼는더라!』
하시면서 솔포기밋헤 연하게나온 삽추나물을고게시엿다。
그도 지금처럼 파-랫섯다。 온天下가 모도파-랫섯다。 나무도 산도 하눌도 벌판도 모도파-랫섯다 그리고올에도 우리집안식구는 큰산으로해가지고 산나물드러갓다。
나는나물을 드려고 산기슬그■도라단이다가갓나온고사리순을보닛가 새삼스레 세상을난나의어린누의동생이생각난다。
『어머니! 어머니! 고사리가나왓세요』
나는작년에나의누이동생이부르짓든소리를 대신하는듯이 소리를질넛다 어머니는
『오냐! 얼는더라』
작년에 누이에게대답하시든말슴을 그대로대답하시려니하엿드니 밧게 나를도라다보시면서 눈물을씨스신다 그리고 억지로우슴을입가에우섯다。
新綠의맑은날은 나에게잠잠히 잔듸밧우에들어눕게하고 푸른한울로가는구름이를 바라보게한다。 그리고 지나간그림자와 차저올그림자를 나의머리에 그려노케한다。
그언제 이맘 동무石蟲이와 門岩洞瀑布우에잇는 오리나무숩밋헤들어누어서 菊池寬이의 『無名作家日記』를朗讀하며 허리를못펴고우섯섯다。
그우슴은 暴笑요哄笑엿다。 그리고苦笑이엿다。 그것은그우리들의心思에맛는글을 감추지안코 써노은데서 쏘다저나온우슴이다。 그우슴은 오늘처럼 저러케파-란한울로 다름질첫섯다。 그리고 각각空想에잠들어 파-란空氣를呼吸하며 해점을지 香내도는잔듸우에 딍굴엇섯다。 그를헤이자면 손을열재다ᆸ게하든녯날이다。
나물든나의발은 그대로門岩洞瀑布우로 을고갓다。 그리고 그오리나무수폴 그자리압흐로 몃번이나거닐게하엿다。 그리고 다시들어누어서 저-살골아래마을에서 『이러!에데여!』하고들니는 모기소리보다적은소리에 귀를기우리게하엿다。