잡지명	별건곤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	戱曲 落日 (一幕) (Play Sunset (One Act))
필자	蔡萬植 (Ch'ae Manshik)
기사형태	희곡·시나리오 (Play/Screenplay)

This play should have its dialogue written in the Jeolla dialect, as the setting (場所) is Jeolla Province. However, since the original intention of this play is not to represent regional characteristics, the Gyeong dialect is used as is, avoiding dialects that are difficult or uncomfortable to read or hear... (Author)

Characters
Ch'ambong: Around 50 years old, a landowner
Sang-gŭn: 30 years old, Ch'ambong's child (but Sang-gŭn does not appear)
Sang-ho: 26 years old, Ch'ambong's child
Sang-ch'ŏn: 21 years old, Ch'ambong's child
Sang-hŭi: 18 years old, Ch'ambong's child (but Sang-gŭn does not appear)
Kyŏng-o: 21 years old, Sang-hŭi's husband
Kang saengwŏn: Around 50 years old, a boarder
Song sŏndal: 45 or 46 years old, from Ch'ambong's in-law family
Yongbok: A servant
Western-style gentleman: A banker
Jō-sang: Resident police officer
Criminal investigators A, B, C (A is Japanese)

Setting
A rural village in Jeolla Province

Time
Modern, mid-September afternoon

Stage
A spacious main hall with three bays in the front and back and four pillars. To the left, a partial view of a room with three doors leading to the main hall. To the right and front, glass windows that were once installed have been removed, stacked neatly on the stone steps visible from the rear right.
At the rear, a white plastered wall with a hanging scroll of peonies by Hŏ Soch'i in the center.
On either side of the wall are open doors, through which the setting sun shines diagonally from the left, casting shadows on the floor of the main hall (the actors should be positioned so that these rays of sunlight do not obstruct the view from the audience as much as possible).
Through the rear door and to the right, a partial view of a wide threshing ground.
The floor of the main hall is shiny and smooth. To the right, a newly painted, colorful wooden platform is placed.
Several small reed cushions are placed, and in the center are a Go board, a Korean chess board, a tobacco pipe, an ashtray, a drawer, and writing brushes.
Small signboards hang above the doors to the left, rear, and right. Two round pillars stand on pumpkin foundation stones in the front, and the house seems new, with the scent of pine resin still emanating from the lumber. The curtain rises, and Ch'ambong (with graying hair, wearing a tanggŏn hat, white silk shirt, yellow silk trousers, and cotton socks) is smoking a tobacco pipe and leaning against the wooden platform, facing the scroll on the rear wall. Kang saengwŏn (with his hair in a topknot, wearing a manggŏn headband, cotton shirt, cotton trousers, barefoot, with a hemp waistband) is also sitting on a cushion, looking at the scroll.

Ch'ambong: (Nodding his head, monologuing) Truly a divine brush (靈筆)! He has reached a state of mastery (入神)!
Kang saengwŏn: He has indeed reached mastery! Truly a divine brush! (Pause) So, he was summoned to King Ch'ŏljong and asked to paint a peony before the royal presence. When King Ch'ŏljong saw the painting, he said, "You paint well. There was Hwang Tach'i (黃大痴) in the Great Country (China), so let us call you 'Soch'i (小痴)'..." and used that as his pen name (號). It was a name bestowed by the country. (Pause) Originally, he was of very humble origins.
Ch'ambong: I heard he was from Chindo (珍島)?
Kang: Yes, the son of a very lowly person. (Pause) But because he possessed such talent (包材), the country bestowed a pen name upon him.

While Song sŏndal is listening to their conversation, he enters from the left (wearing an old Mexican hat, a loosely draped ramie overcoat, rubber shoes with socks, and holding an old bamboo fan in his hand), clearing his throat roughly as he steps up to the main hall.

Song sŏndal: Whew, it's hot.
Ch'ambong: (Turning around at the same time) Oh, Uncle, are you here?
Kang: (Turning around at the same time) It's awfully hot, isn't it?
Song: (Looking at Ch'ambong) How are you doing? (Looking at Kang saengwŏn) Whew, don't even mention it. (Takes off his hat and overcoat and hangs them on a pillar) It's like being an old Yang (老陽)! (Pointing to where the sunlight is streaming in) Even the sunlight is streaming into this main hall! (Opens his fan and starts fanning himself)
Ch'ambong: Yes, the sun shines in a little like that in the evening.
Song: (Sitting between the two of them and looking at the scroll) What's this?
Ch'ambong: I bought one.
Song: Oh. (Gets up, goes in front of the scroll, and examines it closely) Soch'i's work, isn't it? (Comes back and sits down, looking at the scroll, speaking to himself) Good. Very good! (Looking at Ch'ambong) How much did you pay?
Kang: (Testing him) If you figure it out, the rascal will be overjoyed.
Song: Oh, you little brat! No manners. (Examines the scroll carefully, shaking his head, speaking to himself) Well, it's worth about 70 or 80 hwan.
Ch'ambong: Kang and I exchange amused glances.
Song: (Looking around) Why? Did you pay more?
Kang: (Turning to face to the left) You blockhead! You pretend to know everything!
Ch'ambong: (Turning to face to the left) I paid 30 won. (Laughs)
Song: (Pretending to be surprised) What? 30 won? That's a steal! A steal!
Kang: It's not exactly a steal, but 30 won is cheap! But...
Song: What do you mean, just cheap? It's practically free (공이지).
Kang: (Scolding him) Don't even say "practically free." How can you say that when money is so scarce in this year of famine?
Ch'ambong: That's right. If you think about how precious money is in this year of famine, even 3 won would be expensive. But still, isn't Hŏ Soch'i a very famous artist?
Song: Of course he's famous. From a humble person in an island (島中之人), he achieved eternal fame (名傳千秋).
Ch'ambong: It's worthwhile to be born into the world.
Song: (Suddenly thinking) But you don't have to envy others so much. (Pause) Now you too...
Ch'ambong: (Hesitantly) What do you mean by that?
Song: You also have such a son.
Ch'ambong: Such a son, you say?
Song: Don't you know? Where is Sang-ho?
Ch'ambong: Yes, Sang-ho?
Song: That child is studying painting.
Ch'ambong: (Interrupting in surprise) Studying painting?
Song: (Exasperated) Doesn't that child want to go to Japan to study painting?
Ch'ambong: (Laughing) Uncle, really... (Pause) What kind of nonsense are you listening to? (Laughing) That child is currently studying law at Tokyo University. He'll become a Doctor of Laws next spring, take the higher civil service examination, and then try to become a county magistrate (郡守). He even told me this morning that he needed to leave, but I told him to stay a few more days!
Song: (Startled) Then what's the news in today's paper?
Ch'ambong: (Suspiciously) In the newspaper? What did it say?
Song: The paper said that Song Mun-gyu from Kimje, Jeolla Province... isn't that you?
Ch'ambong: Yes.
Song: And his second son, Song Sang-ho... Sang-ho is Sang-ho, right?
Ch'ambong: That's right.
Song: That Song Sang-ho made a famous painting... that painting... (Tilting his head) What was it called again? Anyway, he submitted a very famous painting to the exhibition (제전).
Ch'ambong: (Interrupting) What is an exhibition (제전), and what is submitting (출품)?
Song: I don't know because it's a newfangled term, but it seems like they gather paintings from many people and judge them.
Ch'ambong: (Pressing) And so?
Song: And so, that painting was specially selected (特選), and Song Sang-ho is being called the first genius ever to come out of Korea.
Ch'ambong: (Growing more suspicious) That can't be true. (Looking at Kang saengwŏn) Please find today's newspaper.
Kang: (Goes into the room)
Ch'ambong: Is it true?
Song: (Sincerely) Why would I lie about such a thing?
Kang: (Coming out of the room with the newspaper) It's here, it's here.
Ch'ambong: It's here?
Kang: (Places the newspaper in front of Ch'ambong, pointing to the article) Here.
Ch'ambong: (Picks up the newspaper and reads it) Yes, yes. (After reading it, speaking to himself) This is truly strange. (Facing the back of the stage) Yongbok!
Yongbok's voice: Yes! (Enters from the right) Yes?
Ch'ambong: Go to the detached house and tell your second master to come here. (His complexion changes drastically)
Yongbok: Yes! (Exits to the left)

Ch'ambong continues to read the newspaper repeatedly until Sang-ho's voice is heard. Kang saengwŏn and Song sŏndal are quietly smoking. Soon after, Sang-ho and Sang-ch'ŏn appear from the left. Both are wearing white ramie clothing. Sang-ho's hair is long, and his face is bright and serene; his hands and feet are delicate. Sang-ch'ŏn, on the other hand, has his hair cut in a sporty style and is cheerful in his face and manner. There seems to have been an argument, as both of their faces are slightly flushed. The brothers are standing and talking where they cannot yet be seen from the main hall.

Sang-ho: (Stopping and turning to Sang-ch'ŏn) No matter how much you talk, it's all useless. You talk about materialism, dialectics, and class struggle, but we transcend all those things. You can't even dare to set foot in the ecstatic realm (陶醉境) of art that we inhabit. I almost feel sorry for you.
Sang-ch'ŏn: (Mockingly) Oh, I see. So you're full of theory, right?
Sang-ho: We don't even consider things like global economy (地球익이구). How can there be theory in the ultimate realm (究境) of art? Especially not your theories, which are bound by reality.
Sang-ch'ŏn: Our theories come from reality.
Sang-ho: Reality is impossible fantasies?
Sang-ch'ŏn: Russia exists; is that a fantasy?
Sang-ho: It won't last long. Even if it does, even if a hundred or a thousand Russias are created, they cannot dare to intrude into our realm of true art. The ecstasy of art! (Speaking ecstatically to himself) The feeling of being completely intoxicated!
Sang-ch'ŏn: Hmph, it's easier to just take opium.
Ch'ambong: (Hearing his sons' voices, impatiently) Sang-ho, are you there?
Sang-ho: Yes. (Looks at Sang-ch'ŏn as if not knowing what's going on)

Sang-ch'ŏn walks further out, peeks at the stage, sees that Ch'ambong's expression is not good, and quickly turns around, sticking his tongue out at Sang-ho as a warning, and exits to the left. Sang-ho walks up to the main hall and greets Song saengwŏn.

Ch'ambong: (Handing Sang-ho the newspaper) Read this and tell me what's going on.
Sang-ho: (Kneeling down and receiving the newspaper, looking confused)
Kang: (Comes next to Sang-ho and points to the article)
Sang-ho: (As he reads, his complexion changes. After reading, he can't lift his head and just fidgets with the newspaper)
Ch'ambong: (Watching Sang-ho's face, seeing the change in expression, anger rises to his face) What's going on? Do you understand?
Sang-ho: (Barely audible) Yes.
Ch'ambong: Yes? Does that all mean it's true?
Sang-ho: (Silent)
Ch'ambong: Huh?
Sang-ho: (Even quieter) Yes.
Ch'ambong: (Exploding) What?! (Looks at Sang-ho for a while, reaching a state of extreme excitement) Can you believe there's such a son?! So, all this time—until this morning—you were saying you were attending the law department at Tokyo University! (Pause) You rascal! You deceived your father like that? (Pause) So, deceiving is deceiving, but... (Pause) So, spending 70 or 80 won a month on tuition, you were studying painting for four or five years?! To become an artist (畵工)?! Huh? To become a painter?! (Pause) So, Song Mun-gyu's son is going to become an artist (畵工)?! (Anxious) You rascal.
Sang-ho: (Silent)
Ch'ambong: (Picking up the tobacco pipe and banging it hard on the ashtray) Hmph. (Looking at Song sŏndal) Uncle, can you believe this is happening in the world?! Song Mun-gyu's son has to become an artist (畵工)?! (Looking sternly at Sang-ho) You get out of here right now! (Pause) From today, you are not my son. (Puts tobacco in the pipe, lights it, and puffs hard)
Banker: (Enters from the left, wearing white linen clothes, carrying a leather briefcase on his side)
Ch'ambong: (Startled, a look of fear on his face)
Banker: (Standing on the porch, taking off his hat) Is this the residence of Song Mun-gyu?
Ch'ambong: (Faintly) Yes, yes... (His face turns pale)
Banker: Is the master of the house here?
Ch'ambong: I...I... (Signals to Kang saengwŏn)
Kang: (Greatly frightened) Yes, who are you?
Banker: I want to see the master of the house.
Ch'ambong: (Stealthily goes into the room)
Kang: Who are you, sir?
Banker: (Takes out a business card and hands it over) This is who I am.
Kang: (Takes the business card and looks at it, finally feeling relieved) Please come up. (Facing the room) Ch'ambong, come out here! It's someone from the Oriental Development Bank (식산은행)!
Ch'ambong: (Coming out of the room) Who could it be? (Sits in front of the wooden platform and offers a cushion) Please come up.
Banker: (Comes up and sits down) Are you Song Ch'ambong? (Bows)
Ch'ambong: (Returning the greeting) Yes, I am Song Mun-gyu.
Banker: I am Cho Yong-t'aek from the Kunsan branch of the Oriental Development Bank (群山 식산은행지뎜). (Bows again)
Ch'ambong: Yes, you must be tired coming in this heat. (Pause) I thought you were one of those people recruiting for the ×××.
Banker: Haha, I'm sorry. (Pause) The reason I came is because the 35,000 won promissory note (약속수형) that Ch'ambong took out from our bank has passed its due date.
Ch'ambong: (Surprised, interrupting) What? What did you say? (Pause) I took out a 35,000 won promissory note (약속수형)?
Banker: (Equally surprised) Yes.
Ch'ambong: What did I need it for? (Looks around at everyone as if seeking agreement) Tell me, where would I need 35,000 won? (Pause) I don't need it, I don't. (Pause) You must have come to the wrong person. (To himself) I certainly don't have any reason to spend that kind of money.
Banker: (Tilting his head) But Ch'ambong's seal (實印) is affixed, and the guarantor is Song Sang-gŭn, your eldest son, right? (Opens his briefcase, takes out a promissory note (手形), and shows it to Ch'ambong)
Ch'ambong: (Takes the promissory note (手形), looks at both sides, and then throws it down in anger) This rascal, he's doing this again?! This rascal is going to ruin the family! (Doesn't know what to do) This rascal has another mistress (기생첩)! This rascal! (Pause) (To the banker) I don't know anything about this. I don't know. I didn't use this money.
Banker: (Putting the promissory note (手形) back in) But...
Ch'ambong: (Irritated) I don't know! (Pause) I didn't do anything like this. (Pause) I didn't do anything like this, so catch that rascal and put him in jail, or get the money back, do whatever you want! (Pause) Hmph.

Sang-ch'ŏn, Sang-hŭi, and Kyŏng-o enter from the left. Sang-hŭi is wearing a white ramie skirt and blouse, white shoes, and carrying a short parasol. Kyŏng-o is wearing a beige serge suit, a Mexican hat, and white shoes. The couple's clothing is fancy, and their shoes are worn down at the heels, clearly showing the appearance of a wealthy young couple who are spoiled by money.
At this moment, Song sŏndal, Kang saengwŏn, and the banker excuse themselves and go into the room. Sang-ho also nods to the two and goes into the room.

Sang-hŭi: (Standing on the porch) Father. (Bows her head)
Ch'ambong: (After looking at Sang-hŭi, looks at Kyŏng-o, filled with anger, unable to speak, only glaring)
Kyŏng-o: (Standing next to Sang-hŭi, takes off his hat and bows his head)
Ch'ambong: (Jumping up) You! Get out of my sight right now! (Looking at Kyŏng-o) Who are you?! (Pause) I don't want to see you! (Pause) Don't set foot in my house! (Pause) Those who claim to have "free marriage," why don't you live freely instead of coming to my house?!
Sang-ch'ŏn: (Stepping forward, acting spoiled) Father, please forgive them...?
Ch'ambong: (Looking at Sang-ch'ŏn) You rascal. (To himself) Get them all out! All of them. (Pause) I don't want to see them.
Sang-ch'ŏn: (Grinning playfully) Father, if you're going to kick them out, why don't you give them some money...? (Acting even more foolish) Isn't a daughter still a child? She's committed a sin, but isn't it pitiful that she has to suffer outside?
Ch'ambong: (As if about to hit him) I don't want to hear it, you rascal. (To himself) Everyone get out! I don't want to see them. (Pause) Alas, the world is falling apart like this, and the family is ruined like this! Everyone get out.

A police officer and criminal investigators A, B, and C enter from the left. Sang-hŭi and Kyŏng-o move aside to the right.

Ch'ambong: (Trying to hide his anger) Officer Jō-sang? Please come up.
Police officer: (Saluting) Yes.
Sang-ch'ŏn: (Looking at criminal investigator A) It's been a while.
Criminal investigator A: Yō. Actually, I want you to come to the headquarters with me today. Also...
Sang-ch'ŏn: (Nodding, looking at Ch'ambong)
Criminal investigator A: Also, we're going to search the house.
Sang-ch'ŏn: (As if understanding everything) Oh. (Folds his arms and thinks)
Ch'ambong: (Finally realizing that many criminal investigators have come, his eyes widening, speaking to the police officer) What's going on, officer Jō-sang?
Police officer: (Looking embarrassed) Sang-ch'ŏn is being arrested. (Pause) And there will also be a house search.
Ch'ambong: (Losing even the strength to be surprised, slumping down) What? Arrested? A house search? What crime has he committed? Hey, officer Jō-sang?
Police officer: (Looking embarrassed) Apparently, he's involved in the ××× incident.
Criminal investigator A: (Scolding the police officer) Kimi! Sonna kudaranaikoto o, berabera shaberu n ja nai yo, soreyori ka sassoku, shigoto ni torikaguretsu. (Hey! Don't blabber on about such trivial matters. Get to work quickly.)
Police officer: Hai. (Yes.)
Ch'ambong: What is this? Sang-ch'ŏn! The ××× incident? You mean those socialist guys? You rascal, Sang-ch'ŏn. (About to cry)
Sang-ch'ŏn: (Forcing a pale smile, stepping forward)
Ch'ambong: (In a sorrowful tone) You rascal, hey you rascals, hey. (Pause) Does the family have to be ruined like this?! Sang-ch'ŏn, you rascal, what were you so attracted to that you joined those kinds of people?!
Criminal investigator A: (Pointing to Sang-ch'ŏn to criminal investigator B)
Criminal investigator B: (Grabbing Sang-ch'ŏn's arm, heading to the left) Let's go.
Sang-ch'ŏn: (Turning his body to face Ch'ambong, calmly but firmly) Father! That's how it is. Look at the sun. (Pointing to the diagonal shadow of the setting sun on the floor of the main hall) It rises in the morning, stays all day, and then sets like that in the evening, doesn't it?! No matter how sorry you are about today, Father, no matter how much you hate the night, the sun sets. Father—you hate the night, don't you? As a son, I am very sorry for your situation, but even so, the sun sets. (Clearly) The sun sets.

Sang-ch'ŏn is led away by criminal investigator B to the left, and the people gathered there stare after him as if in a daze. The remaining criminal investigators and the police officer step up to the main hall as the curtain falls.
(1930, 2, 16)

**Named Entities**

蔡萬植	Ch'ae Manshik
全羅道	Chŏlla-do
敬五	Kyŏng-o
康생원	Kang saengwŏn
宋선달	Song sŏndal
許小痴	Hŏ Soch'i
珍島	Chindo
宋文奎	Song Mun-gyu
金堤	Kimje
群山	Kunsan
조용택	Cho Yong-t'aek
식산은행	Siksan Ŭnhaeng
丈上	Jō-sang
宋相根	Song Sang-gŭn
宋相浩	Song Sang-ho
宋相天	Song Sang-ch'ŏn
宋相姬	Song Sang-hŭi



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	戱曲 落日 (一幕)
필자	蔡萬植
기사형태	희곡·시나리오

戱曲 落日 (一幕)
						蔡萬植
이 戱曲은 『場所』가 全羅道인만큼 臺詞를 全羅道사투리로 써야만 올을것이다。 그러나 이戱曲의 本來의 이 地方色을 나타내이기爲한것이 아님으로 닑기에나는듯기에 거북하고 難解한 사투리를 避하여 京語를 그대로 써둔다……(作者)

人物
참봉 五十歲가량 地主
相根 三十歲 참봉의子女(但相根은登場치안이함)
相浩 二十六歲 참봉의子女
相天 二十一歲 참봉의子女
相姬 十八歲 참봉의子女(但相根은登場치안이함)
敬五 二十一歲 相姬의男便
康생원 五十歲가량 食客
宋선달 四十五六歲 참봉의손윗一家
龍福이 下人
洋服紳士 銀行員
죠-상 駐在所巡査
刑事 A·B·C (A는日本人)

場所
全羅道 어느農村

時代
現代 九月中旬의午後

舞臺
前後의 三間의 네귀가번하고 드놉흔 넓운대청。 左手로 대청과의 세ㅅ門이 열녀진 방의 一部分이보인다。 右手와前面으로는 原來 유리창을 둘너달엇것을 모조리 여서 右手後方으로보이는 댓돌우에 재곡재곡 세워노앗다。
後面에는 中間에 흰灰壁이잇고 벽에는 許小痴의 牧丹족자가 한벌 걸녀잇다。
벽兩便으로는 열녀진門이잇고 그門으로해서 夕陽에각가운해치 左手便으로부터 비스듬히 여들어 대청바닥에 자국을 내이고잇다 (登場人物은 될수잇는대로 이 해츨 觀客席으로부터 가리지안토록 하여야한다。)
後面門과 右手로는 넓운 타작마당의 一部分이 내어다보인다。
대청바닥은 윤이번치르-흘으고 右手로당겨서 새한 칠을올닌 平床이노혀잇다。
왕골자리로만들은 조고만씩한 방석이 서너개 노히고 가운데는 바둑판 장긔판 담배ㅅ대 재터리 설합 붓채가 노혀잇다。
門위로는 左 後 右로 조고만씩한 懸板이걸녀잇다。 前面으로는 호박주추에 올나선 두개의두리기둥이잇고 집은 材木에서 아직도松진냄새가 나는듯이 새롭다。 幕이열니며 참봉(은머리에 탕건 흰항라적삼에 노-란 도리사고의에 솜버선)이 담배ㅅ대를물고 平床우에 後面벽의 족자를향하야 비스듬히안젓고 康생원(상투에망건 광포적삼에 무명고의에 버슨발에 풀단님)이 방석우에가 亦是 족자를바라보고 안저잇다。

참봉: (고개를 덕덕하며 獨白) 참 영필(靈筆)이다! 입신(入神)햇서 입신!
康생원: 입신햇구말구요! 참 영필이지! (間) 그래서 철종대왕 불녀서 어전에서 모란을 그리쟌햇나요 그 철종대왕서 그린것을보시구서 『잘그렷다 대국에 황대치(黃大痴)가잇섯스니 그러면너는「소치」라구나허자』…허신것을 호(號)로써서 그래「허소치」라구허지안햇나요 나라에서 내리신 호지요 (間) 본시는 퍽 미천헌사란이구
참봉: 진도(珍島)사람이라지?
康: 네 아주 상한의자식이엇더랍듸다 (間) 그래두저런 포재를 지녓기문에 나라에서 호를 다 내려주시구

宋선달이두사람이 이약이하는동안에 左手로등장(낡은맥고모자 휘휘감기는 모시두루막이 고무신에양말 손에는 낡은 合竹扇) 바튼기침을 하며 대청으로 올나선다。

宋선달: 휘-더웁다
참봉: (同時에 도라보며) 아젓씨오시요?
康: (同時에 도라보며) 몹시 더웁지?
宋: (참봉을보고) 어-이 엇더신가? (康생원을보고) 휘-말두말게 (모자와 두루막이를 버서 기둥에건다) 로양(老陽)이이되야서 (해치 여드는곳을가르키며) 이대청두 볏치 들어이는군! (붓채를펴서부친다)
참봉: 네 해질녁이면 저러케 조곰씩 드러는데。
宋: (두사람사이에안저서 족자를바라본다) 웬거야?
참봉: 하나 삿슴니다。
宋: 응- (일어서서 족자압흐로가 굽어다보며) 소치거로구만? (도루와서 안저 족자를 바라보며 傍白) 죠-ㄴ걸! 잘-되얏서! (참봉을보고) 얼마나주엇나?
康: (시험하여보느라고) 알으켜내면 족하놈 요-ㅇ허다지。
宋: 어라이녀석! 버릇업시 (족자를 마슬너보며 고개를 옷거리다가 傍白) 글세 한 칠팔십환가격은 되겟는걸。
참봉: 康 서로보고 핏슥웃는다
宋: (좌우를 둘너보며) 왜! 더쥬엇서?
康: (좌우를 향하야 도라안즈며) 멍텅구리! 아는체는 잘허더라만!
참봉: (左手를向하야 돌아안즈며) 삼십원주엇서요 (웃는다)
宋: (짐짓놀내며) 응? 삼십원? 거참 횡잴세! 횡재!
康: 안인게안이라 삼십원이면 헐키는 헐해! 그러치만。
宋: 원참! 헐키만? 공이지。
康: (핀잔을주어) 공이란말은 내지두말게 이 흉년에 삼십원이면 어듼가?
참봉: 그래요 이 흉년에 돈귀헌것을 생각허면 삼원이라두 빗사기는허지만 그래두 허소치라면 다 유명헌 명인이안이요?
宋: 명인이구말구 일개 미천한 도중지인(島中之人)으로 그야말루 명전천추(名傳千秋)지。
참봉: 세상에 낫든보람이 잇지요。
宋: (문득생각하며) 그러나 참 자네는 남만 그러케 부러워헐것업네 (間) 인제는 자네두。
참봉: (렷렷하며) 그건 무슨말슴이세요?
宋: 자네두 그런아들을 두엇스닛가 말이야。
참봉: 그런아들이라니요?
宋: 몰나? 엇다저-상호가。
참봉: 네 상호가?
宋: 그애가 저- 그림공부를。
참봉: (놀내여 말을 가루막으며) 그림공부?
宋: (답답하여) 엇다그애가 일본가서 그림공부를 허쟌안나?
참봉: 허허허허 아젓씨두 원 (間) 웬 청만 보구다니시요? 허허허허 그놈이지금 일본대학교 법률과를 다니는데그러시요?! (間) 내년봄이면 법률박사가 되여가지구 고등관시험을보아서 군수(郡守)운동을헌다구 악가 아침나절에두 그러니어서 들어가야겟다구 헌는것을 멧칠만 더잇다가 가라구햇는데요?!
宋: (-ㄴ하고 안젓다가)그러면오늘 신문에난건무슨소리야?
참봉: (신어붓쟌케) 신문에? 무어라구?
宋: 신문에 절나도 김제사는 송문규랫스닛가 자네지?
참봉: 네。
宋: 그러구 그 둘재아들 송상호랫스닛가 상호는상호지?
참봉: 그러치요。
宋: 그 송상호가 유명헌 그림-그 그림은 (고개를 웃거리며) 무어라구 햇더라만? 하여간 퍽 유명헌그림을 제전에다 출품햇는데。
참봉: (말을막으며) 제전은무엇이구 출품이라니요?
宋: 신식문자닛가 잘 모르겟네만 아마 여러사람의 그림을모아노쿠 누는것인듯허데。
참봉: (다구서) 그래서?
宋: 그래서 그그림이 특선으로 혓는데 송상호가 아주 조선서 처음생긴 천재라구。
참봉: (의심이 더럭나서) 그럴니가 업지요 (康생원을 보고) 오늘신문좀 차저보시요。
康: (방으로 들어간다)
참봉: 정말이야요?
宋: (참-하게) 원 내가무엇이답답해서 그런일을가지구 거짓말을허겟나?
康: (新聞을지고 방에서나오며) 잇서잇서。
참봉: 잇서?
康: (참봉의압헤 新聞을노코 손ㅅ가락으로 記事가잇는곳을 집허준다)
참봉: (新聞을집어들고 읽으면서) 응 응 (다읽고나서 傍白) 거-참 모를일이다 (舞臺後面을向하야) 용복아-
용복의소리: 네- (右手로登場) 네?
참봉: 너저- 아랫사랑에가서 늬 둘재서방님 오시라구그래라 (氣色이 몹시 좃찬허진다)
용복: 네- (左手로退場)

참봉은 다음 相浩의소리가 들니기지 新聞을 거듭하여 읽고엇고 康생원과 宋선달은 잠잠히 담배를피우고잇다。 조곰後에 相浩와相天이가 左手로부터 나타난다。 옷은 둘이다 흰모시로 우아랫맥이를입엇다。 相浩의머리는 길게길넛고 얼골은 해맑고 고요하며 手足은 섬세하다。 相天은 그反對로 머리는스포-츠타입으로 경쾌하게고 얼골과 거름거리가 쾌활하다。 論爭이잇섯는지 두사람의얼골은 若干씩 흥분이되엿다。 兄弟가 서서 이약이하는곳이 대청에서는 아직 보이지아니한다。

相浩: (거름을멈추고 相天을 도라보며) 늬들이아무리 그래야 다- 소용이업다。 유물론이니 변증이니 게급투쟁이니 애지·푸로니 해싸면서 들어대지만 그런것을 우리는 모-다 초월허구잇다。 늬들은 우리가 들어잇는 그런 황홀헌 예술의도취경(陶醉境)에는 감히 발ㅅ길을 드려노치두못헌다 생각허면늬들이 도리어 불ㅅ상허더라。
相天: (빈정거려) 흥 하여간 리론으로는 진모양이지?
相浩: 지구익이구 그런것은 우리는 문데두 안삼는다 예술의 구경(究境)에 리론이 잇슬택이잇서야지? 더구나 늬들의 그런 실제에 억으러진리론으로。
相天: 우리리론은 실제에서나온걸。
相浩: 현실헐수업는 공상이?
相天: 로시아가잇는데 공상이야?
相浩: 멧칠못간다 설영 그러헌다더래두 백개나 만개의 로시아가 생겨난댓다 그것이 우리의 참된예술경에는 감히 침범을 허지못헌다 예술의도취경! (황홀히傍白) 혼연히 취허는 그맛!
相天: 흥 손쉽게 아편을먹지。
참봉: (아들들의 말소리를듯고 조급해서) 상호 게잇느냐?
相浩: 네- (웬일인지 몰으겟다는듯이 相天을 바라본다)

相天은 더 걸어나와 웃이 舞臺를 내어다보다가 참봉의 긔색이 좃치아니한것을 보고 얼핏 돌아서서 무섭다는의미로 相浩에게 혀를 날늠날늠해 보이고는 左手로 退場 相浩는 대청으로 올나가서 宋생원에게 인사를한다。)

참봉: (相浩에게 新聞을집어주며) 너 이것좀 읽어보아라 거 웬소리냐?
相浩: (러안저 新聞을 바더들고 렷렷한다)
康: (相浩의엽흐로와서 記事잇는곳을 가르켜준다)
相浩: (읽어가는동안에 얼골빗치 변하여진다 다읽고나서 고개를 들지못하고 新聞만 만지작거린다)
참봉: (相浩의 얼골을 살피고잇다가 표정의변화가 생기는것을보고 怒氣가 얼골로 치닷는다) 거 웬소리냐? 알겟느냐?
相浩: (겨우 가느다란소리로) 네。
참봉: 네-라니? 그게모다 정말이란말이지?
相浩: (無言)
참봉: 응?
相浩: (더 작은소리로) 네。
참봉: (총며) 뭐? (한참 相浩를 바라보다가 極度로 흥분이듸야) 원 저런자식이 잇단말인가?! 그래이놈이-오늘아침지 일본대학교 법률과를 다니다는놈이! (間) 이놈! 애비를 그러케속여? (間) 그래 속인것은 속인것이라구 (間) 그래 한달에 칠팔십원씩이나 학자를 갓다쓰면서 사오년동안이나 그림그릴공부를 햇서?! 화공(畵工)이 될량으로?! 응? 그림그리는 공바치가 될량으로?! (間) 그래 이놈 송문규의자식이 화공이되야? (안절부절) 이놈。
相浩: (無言)
참봉: (담배ㅅ대를집어 재터리에 힘 두드리면서)　후유- (宋선달을보고) 아젓씨 원 세상에 원 이럴법이잇소?! 이 송문규의자식이 화공이 되야야올소? (相浩를보고 엄하게) 이놈 당장에 나가거라 (間) 오늘부터는 내자식이안이다 (대에 담배를너허 붓처가지고 ᆨᆨ 피운다)
銀行員: (左手로登場 우아래를 하얀 린네루를입고 장 오리가방을 엽헤다)
참봉: (작놀나 얼골에는 공포의氣色이 돈다)
銀行員: (토방에가서서 모자를벗고) 여긔가 송문규씨 댁임닛가?
참봉: (비실비실하며) 네네 저- (얼골이 햇슥하여진다)
銀行員: 그러면 주인장 게신가요?
참봉: 저- 저- (康생원에게 눈ㅅ짓을한다)
康: (겁이 담북나서) 네-누구신가요?
銀行員: 네- 주인장을 좀 뵈우려구요。
참봉: (방으로 살ㅅ금 들어가바린다)
康: 글세 로형은 누구세요?
銀行員: 네- (명함을내주며) 이러헌사람이올시다。
康: (명함을 바더보고는 겨우안심하고) 네- 올나오시지요 (방을向하야) 참봉- 이리나오시요 저- 식산은행에게신분인데!
참봉: (방에서나오며) 원 나는 누구시라구 (平床압헤안저 방석을 내노며) 올나오시지요。
銀行員: (올나가서 자리에안즈며) 송참봉이신가요? (허리를 굽힌다)
참봉: (답례를하며) 네 송문규올시다。
銀行員: 네 저는 군산(群山) 식산은행지뎜에잇는 조용택이올시다。 (다시 허리를 굽신한다)
참봉: 네 더운데 오시느라구 애쓰섯슴니다 (間) 나는 요새 그 ×××모집허러 다니는 양반인줄 알구…。
銀行員: 허허허허 미안합니다。 (間) 그런데제가온것은 달은일이안이라 참봉서 우리은행에 진출허신 삼만오천원 약속수형이 긔한이 지나서。
참봉: (놀내며 가루막으며) 네? 무엇이요? (間) 내가 삼만오천원 약속수형을 진출해요?
銀行員: (도리어 놀내며) 네。
참봉: 내가 무엇에다 쓰느라구? (사방사람을 둘너보며 同議를 求하듯이) 글세원 내가 삼만오천원돈을 쓸데가잇서야지요? (間) 업지요업서 (間) 아마 로형이 사람을 잘못차저오섯나보이다 (傍白) 원 내가원 그러케돈을 쓸데가잇서야지。
銀行員: (고개를 웃거리며) 그러치만 참봉의 실인이 ᆨ혓고 우라가에는 송상근씨라구햇스닛가 댁의 큰자제지요? (오리가방을열고 手形한장을내여 참봉에게 보인다)
참봉: (手形을 바더들고 압뒤로보다가 성이치밀어 홱 내던지며 傍白) 이놈 이놈이이짓을해?! 이놈이 집안망허는놈이야 (엇절줄을 모른다) 이놈이 기생첩을 어덧서 이놈이 이놈이 (間) (銀行員에게) 여보 나는 이런것은모르오 나는몰나요 나는 이런돈은쓴일업소。
銀行員: (手形을 집어너흐며) 그러치만。
참봉: (역하게) 몰나요나는 (間) 나는 그런일업소(間)。 나는 그런일업스니 그놈을잡어다 징역을살니든지 돈을밧든지 자량대루허우 (間) 후유。

相天 相姬 敬五 左手로登場。 상희는 흰모시치마적삼에 흰구두와 몽창한 파라솔。 敬五는 米色세루양복에 맥고자에 흰구두。 內外는 衣服이 휘휘감기고 구두는 뒤축이달코 통히 돈에들닌 貴童子 貴童女의츄렷한 行色이완연히 나타난다。
이서슬에 宋선달과 康생원과 銀行員은 자리를빗켜 방으로들어가고 相浩도 두사람에게 눈으로 인사를하고 방으로들어간다。

相姬: (토방에서서) 아버지 (고개를숙인다)
참봉: (相姬를본 다음에 敬五를 보고는 분이치밀어 말은못하고 눈만부릅다)
敬五: (相姬와 나란히서서 모자를벗고 머리를숙인다)
참봉: ( 일어스며) 요년! 당장에 내눈압헤서 안이업서저?! (敬五를보고) 이놈 어느놈이냐 늬가?! (間) 안본다 안보아 (間) 내집문안에 들어서지마라 (間) 자유결혼을햇다는 년놈들이 왜 자유로 살지안쿠 내집을차저와?!
相天: (한걸음나서며 어리광비슷하게) 아버지 그만 용서허시지요…?
참봉: (相天을보고) 이놈 (傍白) 다-몰아내라 다- (間) 다-보기실타。
相天: (빈들빈들 우스면서) 아버지 긔왕이면 돈이나좀 주어서 모라내시지요…? (더욱 엉석을부리듯이) ᆯ은 자식이 안인가요? 죄는젓지만 나가서 고생을 허는게 불상허지안해요?
참봉: (릴듯이) 듯기실혀이놈 (傍白) 다-나가거라! 다-보기실타 (間) 에-ㅅ 세상이 이러케망허구 집안이 요위로 망허다니! 다-나가거라。

巡査와 刑事 A,B,C 左手로登場。 相姬와 敬五는 右手로 빗겨선다。

참봉: (怒氣를 애써숨기며) 죠-상이시요? 올나오십시요
巡査: (擧手敬禮) 네。
相天: (刑事A를보고) 오라간만이요。
刑事A: よう。 實は今日 君に本署まで 一緖に來てもらひたいんたがネ。 それから。
相天: (고개를 덕거리며 참봉의 눈치를 살핀다)
刑事A: それから, 家宅搜索もあるんだが。
相天: (모든것을 달엇다는듯이) 응 (팔를고 생각한다)
참봉: (刑事가 만히온것을 비로소 닷고 눈이 동그래저서 巡査더러) 웬일이요 죠-상?
巡査: 네 (난처한듯이) 저-상천씨가 검속이되게되야서 (間) 그러구 가택수색두 잇게되야서。
참봉: (놀낼긔운조차 시진하여 펄석 주저안지며) 응? 검속이라니? 가택수색이라니? 그놈이 무슨죄가잇다구? 응? 여보 죠-상?
巡査: (난처해서) 아마 저- ×××사건에 관련이 됏나바요。
刑事A: (巡査를보고 핀잔을주어) 君! そんなくだらんことを, べらべらしやべるんちやないよ, それよりか早速, 仕事に取りかぐれつ。
巡査: はい。
참봉: 응? 이게웬소리냐? 상천아! ×××사건이라니? 사회주의허는놈들말이지? 이놈아상천아 (방금 울하다)
相天: (蒼白하게우스면서 압흐로나선다)
참봉: (哀調을워) 이놈아 응 이놈덜아 응 (間) 집안이 이러케 망해야 올으냐?! 상천아 이놈아 늬가무엇이 그리워서그런놈들축에 들럿드냐?!
刑事A: (刑事B에게 손으로 相天을가르킨다)
刑事B: (相天의 팔을잡으며 左手를向하야) 갑시다。
相天: (몸을틀어 참봉에게향하야 평탄하게 그러나 힘잇게) 아버지! 그런것임니다 저 (대청바닥에 비스듬히 자국이난 해츨 가르키며) 해를보십시요 (間) 아침에 올나서 왼종일잇다가 저녁가되면 저러케지지안습닛가?! 아버지는 아무리 오늘하로가 섭섭허셔두 아무리 밤이 실으셔두 그러나 해는짐니다。 아버지- 밤이실으시지요? 자식된도리로 아버지의신상이 매우민망은험니다만은 그래두 해는저요 (박박) 해는저요。

相天은 刑事B에게 팔을붓잽혀 左手로거러가고 모힌사람은 失神한것처럼 그뒤를바라보고 남어지刑事와巡査가 쳑쳑 대청으로 올나설에 幕이나린다。
(一九三○, 二, 一六)