별건곤 제29호
1930년 06월 01일
露西亞文學의 新傾向 -田園文學에로 進出- (New Trends in Russian Literature - Advancement into Pastoral Literature)
無笑生
문예평론 (Literary Criticism)

I, with my shallow and unscholarly knowledge, accepted my brother's request and, in the end, mustered the greatest courage to take up my pen.

As you all know, the history of the terrible war of mankind in Europe, known as the World War, has had a significant impact on the material and spiritual lives of mankind today.

This history of conflict appears in the market of our human life today through all forms. Also, it can be seen through novels, poems, films, and all fields of human life.

However, when we look at the literary trends after this great human war, we cannot forget "Internationalism" (인터나쇼날主義), which undoubtedly stimulates our minds in the field of spiritual expression and dominates the entire intellectual current of modern humanity.

Perhaps the wise readers of our Korea cannot help but think about the German soldier who, months ago, went to war under the command of his general with a heroic spirit and excitement to defend his motherland, but who, upon returning, wondered why he fought and what caused the bloody war among his fellow soldiers, among people of the same kind.

A young man, healthy and cheerful until yesterday, returns from this cruel and terrible war as a disabled person. When he faces his elderly mother and siblings, he realizes that it was not the enemy army that made him disabled, and that this misfortune is not only his own, but the misfortune and sorrow of all mankind, and he comes to hate the hateful form of humanity itself.

Before them, the enemy soldiers were by no means enemies, but all unfortunate brothers.

How much drama, novels, and poetry, merging with this Internationalist thought and based on the robust and grand expressionism of human power, have stirred our hearts?

The field of expression of human power, which sings of a new era with thick black lines, has spewed the blood of the dark heart of human life, which had been sealed off until now, to the whole world.

This great "power" has spread to Germany, Russia, France, and England.

The monarchical class, which until now sought to dominate humanity, or controlled hundreds of thousands of troops and thousands of serfs, had no choice but to gradually yield its place to a new class as the protagonist of the countryside.

Dear readers, please read "Evenings on a Farm Near Dikanka" (되칸되카農村마을의저녁빗) and "Old-World Landowners" (녯날의地主들) by Gogol, a figure who cannot be missed in the history of Russian literature, or "A Landowner's Morning" (地主의앗츰) by the great writer Tolstoy.

Here, one can discover the landowner's morning stroll and the entire aspect of the primitive peasant life, content with the landowner's benevolent life.

One will discover that the "love" of national idioms and primitive superstitions firmly sealed their lives only within the realm of their national life.

If you read a tranquil rural poem like "May Night" (五月夜話), you will find only the landowner's reclamation and the serf's sorrow.

However, in this village of the landowner, which had been sealed off, a group of peasants emerged, and a revolutionary drama program called "Mandate" (만다-트(委任狀)) was posted in front of the village church, which had been considered sacred, and powerful words of welcome were posted from German workers and French farmers in anticipation of Labor Day.

The vast manor of the great landowner, which until now had been a haven of superstition and love, has been transformed into a haven for laborers and a factory for new construction.

Here, one can discover a new class's cosmopolitanism. Unlike the literature up to now, which was manor literature and a feudal expression of a particular manor lord, the new countryside can be seen as a global collective of human life and a march towards construction.

The manor of the landowner, the countryside that had been sealed off until now, has no choice but to merge with the city. Apart from the pastoral poems and lyrical poems that a few particular rural and pastoral poets of the past have drawn, the rise of the modern new class has begun to pay attention to this primitive countryside, singing and narrating the construction of a new countryside.

Here, one can discover a new path for humanity that we have not been able to discover until now, and find the great awakening of humanity against the backdrop of this new construction.

In the feudal countryside, which belonged only to an individual, we can find the establishment of the foundation of scientific construction, symbolizing the cutting edge of modern humanity, and one aspect of collective human life, only in the currently open Russian countryside.

In this collective construction, the countryside, along with a new temporal tempo, has been able to produce a culture that represents a new life for mankind, and can discover a step towards global construction.

Here, a culture of scientific new social construction is filled, moving away from a deterministic view of life.

In this sense, the greatest problem in the culture of contemporary human society is the new advancement of this rural culture and its fusion with urban construction, and at the same time, it will be so in reality.

This is an inevitable phenomenon of the modern social process, and the position of the emergence of this common culture and literary expression naturally well symbolizes this new human trend.

The writer Yepkhudokimov (옙흐도키몹흐) expresses the construction of a new human manor through the novel "The Bell" (鍾), and Sholokhov (쇼로홉흐) longs for "Quiet Flows the Don" (平和한「돈」地方), clearly indicating the direction of a new humanity to us.

The literature of the past was the culture of the manor, and its literary products were merely the ashes of landlords and nobles, but the literature of Russia today is the literature of humanity, and does it not well speak of the common trends and cutting-edge tendencies of human life construction, in that it is the purpose of building a new life for humanity?

**Named Entities**

고-고리	Ko-gori
톨쓰토이	T'olssŭt'oi
獨逸	Togil
露西亞	Rosŭsia
佛蘭西	P'ŭransi
英國	Yŏngguk
옙흐도키몹흐	Yep'ŭdok'imobŭ
쇼로홉흐	Syorohŭpŭ



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	露西亞文學의 新傾向 -田園文學에로 進出-
필자	無笑生
기사형태	문예평론

露西亞文學의新傾向 -田園文學에로進出-
						無笑生
淺見한博識한 제가 兄의부탁은밧앗스나 結局 最大勇氣를내여 붓을드럿슴니다。
여러분도다아시다십히 저世界大戰이라고하는 歐羅巴의慘憺한人類의싸홈歷史는 今日의人類의物的生活乃至精神生活에至大한影響을주엇다고볼수가잇슴니다。
이싸홈의歷史는모든形式을通하야 今日의吾等人類生活의市場가운데出現하고잇섯슴니다。한小說로 詩로, 映畵로 모든人類生活의 分野를通하야볼수잇슴니다。
然히 吾等이 이人類大戰後의文學的傾向을보건대確實히 그精神表現分野中에서이즐수업시 吾等의頭腦을刺戟하고 現代人類의全思潮를支配하고할수밧게는업는「인터나쇼날主義」-이것임니다。
아마 賢明한우리朝鮮의讀者諸氏는 멧個月前에는 母國을爲한다는 英雄的氣魂과 感激으로將軍의命令下에出戰하엿든獨逸의一軍人은 나와서도리켜누구문에 싸웟고 무엇문에 軍人同志사이에 아니 다가튼人類의分子間에流血의戰爭이 오게되는가를生覺아니치못하게 되엿슴니다。
어제지 健壯하든快活하든一靑年이 이慘酷하고무서운 戰爭으로부터不具者가되여 도라와 늙은 어마님兄弟를對할 自己自身을不具로맨든것이 敵軍이아니요 이모든不幸이自己만이맛보는 不幸이아니요 世界人類의不幸이요 설음이라고하고 스스로人類의可憎할形狀을미워하게되엿슴니다。
그들의압헤는敵의兵卒이결코敵이아니엿고 다갓치 不幸한兄弟엿슴니다。
이가튼 인터나쇼날主義思潮에合流하고 굿세이고 偉大한人間力의表現主義를基礎로하야 그얼마나만히演劇 小說, 詩歌가 이섧업은 우리들의가삼을놀게하엿슴니?
이굴근黑線으로새로운時代를謳歌하는人間力의表現分野는 只今지封鎖되엿든 人類生活의 시커먼心臟의피를온世界에ᆷ엇슴니다。
이偉大한「力」은 獨逸에도 露西亞에도 佛蘭西에도 英國에도蔓延케되엿든것임니다。
只今지人類를支配하랴든 아니 數十萬의軍隊와 아니數千의農奴를지배하든 君主階級은 農村의主人公은 次第로 새로운階級에 自己의자리를 옴기여주는수밧게업게되엇슴니다。
讀者 여러분 露西亞文學歷史上에 업지못할人物이라고하는「고-고리」의「되칸되카農村마을의저녁빗」이라든지「녯날의地主들」이라든지「톨쓰토이」라고하는文豪의「地主의앗츰」이라는이약이를 읽어보십시오。
이곳에는 地主의앗츰散步와 이地主의慈悲한生活에滿足할름인原始的農民生活의全幅을發見할수가잇슴니다。
民族的俚言과 原始的迷信의「사랑」이 그들의生活을굿게 自己國民生活領域만에서도 封鎖되엿든感이잇슴을發見할수가잇슬것입니다。
「五月夜話」가튼靜閑한農村의詩를읽어보신다면 그곳에는 地主의開拓이잇고 農奴의설음이 잇섯슬름이올시다。
그러나 이갓흔封鎖되엿든地主萬能의農村에는 어느돗 農民一撥가생기고 神聖하다든農村의 敎會堂門前에는「만다-트(委任狀)이라는 革命演劇演出目錄이붓텃고 勞動祭날을期하야는 獨逸의勞働者로부터 佛蘭西의農民으로부터서 힘잇는 환영의말이붓헛슴니다。
只今지迷信과 사랑의安息處이엿든 巨大한地主의莊園은勞働人의安息處이요 새로운建設의工場으로化하엿슴니다。
이곳에서새로운階級的世界主義를發見할수가잇슴니다。只今지의文學은莊園文學이요 特殊한莊園主의封建的表現임에不拘하고 새로운農村은 人類生活의世界的集團과 建設로의邁進하는 그것이라볼수잇슴니다。
只今지 地主의莊園이요 封鎖되엿든 農村은 都會와 融和해가는수밧게는업게되엿슴니다。過去의멧멧特殊한農村 田園詩人이그려온바 田園詩敍情詩以外로近代新階級의擡頭는이原始的農村을注視하기始作하고 새로운農村의建設을 노래하고 敍事하는것임니다。
이곳에는只今지吾等이發見할수업섯든새로운人類의進路를발견할수잇고 이새로운建設을背景으로한偉大한人類의自覺을차질수잇슴니다。
다만一個人의所有엿든 封建的農村에는 現代人類의最尖端을象徵하는科學的建設의基礎의確立과 밋集團的人類生活의一側面을只今現露西亞의開放된農村에서發見할수가잇슴니다。
이갓흔集團的建設에선 農村은 새로운時代的템포와共히 그곳에人類에새로운새살림을表象하는 文化를産出할 수가 잇섯든것이고 世界的建設로의一步를發見할수가잇슴니다。
이곳에는宿命論的 生活觀으로부터科學的新社會建設의文化가充滿하고잇슴니다。
이갓흔意味에서 現人類社會의文化는 이農村文化의새로운進出과 밋都會의建設과融和한다는課題가가장 큰問題라고生覺하는同時에한그事實에잇서 그러할것임니다。
이것은 現代社會科程의必然한現象이요 이共通된文化의出現과 文學的表現의位置는 當然히이새로운人類의趨勢를잘象徵하고잇슴니다。
作家「옙흐도키몹흐」는「鍾」이라는小說을通하야 새로운人類의莊園의建設을表示하엿고「쇼로홉흐」는『平和한「돈」地方』을 그리워새로운人類의方向을 明白히 吾等에指示하고잇슴니다。
過去의文學은莊園의文化이엿고 그文學的所産은 地主와 貴族의殘灰이엿슬이나 今日의露西亞의文學은 人類의文學이요人類의새로운生活建設目的이라는點에서 人類生活建設의共通된趨勢와 一尖端的傾向을잘말하고잇슴이아닌가 生覺함니다。