잡지명	별건곤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	編輯室落書 (Editor's Scribblings)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Notice·Post-Editing)

Editor's Scribblings

It feels like just yesterday we were admiring the cherry blossoms, and already it's the Dano holiday, and the cherries are ripening red. The hermit lamented, "From my jade window, I've seen the cherry blossoms five times without worldly cares," but what of our feelings, having seen the cherry blossoms ripen ten times from our company window without any success?

Next month's issue is a special oversized edition commemorating the 10th anniversary of the company's founding. Not only will there be many pages, but all the eminent figures who have been writing since the inaugural issue of Kaebyŏk will be contributing, creating a grand spectacle unprecedented since the creation of magazines in Korea. We hope that you, along with our staff, will celebrate the 10th anniversary of the company's founding and look forward to reading this commemorative issue with great anticipation. (Ch'a)

In the future, in addition to the work done through the magazine, we have decided to adopt a letter system to promote closeness between Kaebyŏk and our readers. We will write to you often, and we hope that you will feel free to encourage or advise us through letters, and to discuss matters with us. (Ch'ae)

Since this is an editor's note, let me share an old story. One late spring day, the company went on a flower-viewing picnic outside Ch'angŭimun.

We cooked rice and made soup outdoors in a commotion.

Mr. Ch'a was busy braiding a crown of water parsley.

Mr. Pang, in his short jacket, was fussing over seasoning wild chives, and Mr. Roa soaked leeks in flour to make Kyŏngsang-do pancakes, but he failed miserably, and the Kyŏngsang-do pancakes suffered a disgrace. Just as we were about to have a great time showing off our skills, the day we went turned out to be a market day, even though we checked with the weather station. It poured rain. Eating the food we made ourselves in the rain was quite a treat. Let me tell you a secret:

Mr. Pak Chin buried Cupid in the flower bed and sat there getting rained on, while Mr. Ch'ae went into someone else's sarang (men's quarter) to avoid the rain and cried silently. (Kim)

Named Entities

彰義門	Ch'angŭimun
車先生	Ch'a-先生
方先生	Pang-先生
로아先生	Roa-先生
慶尙道	Kyŏngsang-do
朴珍先生	Pak Chin-先生
蔡先生	Ch'ae-先生



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제29호
발행일	1930년 06월 01일
기사제목	編輯室落書
기사형태	사고·편집후기

編輯室落書
櫻桃구경을한지가어제와가튼데벌서端陽佳節이되야櫻桃가긋긋하게익엇다。玉窓五見櫻桃花도뎃사람은실음업는歎息을하엿거던아모성공한것도업시社窓十見櫻桃熟하는우리의感慨는한엇더할가。
來月號는本社創立滿十週年紀念特大號이다。頁數가만흔것도만흔것이어니와開闢誌創刊號부터執筆하던名士諸氏가總執筆을하게되여朝鮮에서雜誌가생긴後初有의大壯觀을이르게되엿다。여러분도우리社員들과가티본사의十週年돌마지를깃버하야주시는同時에만흔企待를가지고이記念號를愛讀하야주기만바란다。(車)
압흐로는 雜誌로써하는일外에開闢社와讀者여러분사이에 親近을 圖謀하기爲하야書信制度를取하기로하엿슴니다。우리도여러분 만히 편지를쓰겟거니와 여러분서도 아모忌탄업시 편지로써 督勵或은 편달을 하여주시며 商議가튼것도 하여주십시오。(蔡)
編輯落書라니 묵은이약이라도하나하자 느진봄어느날 社에서는彰義門밧그로화전노리를하러나갓담니다。
露天에서 밥을짓고 국을리고 법석이엿지요
車先生님은 미나리상투를짜시 느라고정신이업스시고
方先生님은 동저고리바람으로 파장앗지뭇치느라고야단을하시고 로아先生님은慶尙道파적 부치신다고ᆺᆺ한파를밀가루물에담그시드니 그만대실패를하시여서慶尙道파적이그만수치를당하엿담니다。저마큼 솜씨들을내여흥이자못깁헛슬에가는날이장날이라고測候所에問議지하고나갓든것이웬일이겟슴닛가비가퍼부엇지요비를마즈며 손수만든음식을먹는자미도 그럴듯하엿답니다。한가지 비밀을말슴들이면
朴珍先生은큐피-를 밧헤파뭇고 비를마즈며 안저서울고요 蔡先生은남의집사랑에비를거두려드러가서 늣기며울엇담니다。(金)