잡지명	別乾坤 第14號
발행일	1928년 07월 01일
기사제목	現代男女 百멍텅 (Modern Men and Women - A Hundred Simpletons)
기사형태	세태비평 (Social Commentary)

Cha: Hey, Park Dol-i! Who says this world is bright and who says this era is civilized? I don't know about other places, but within our Joseon, I've traveled around as much as anyone else and met as many people as anyone else, but there are more dark sides than bright sides, and more uncivilized aspects than civilized ones. To put it all together, there are so many simpletons (멍텅이) in this world.

Park: Even without you saying so, I, Park Dol-i, am already known as a foul-mouthed, quarrelsome fellow, so why are you bringing up the story of simpletons again? Whose testicles are you going to criticize, or whose woman are you going to use unspeakable insults on? I really hate stories about simpletons or anything else. What if someone grabs me and puts me in jail? I won't be able to drink the booze I want. Hey, the dark scar on the back of your hand is still there. Thinking about it makes me shiver.

Cha: The more it is like that, the more we have to open our mouths. Still, there are some who praise it, so what can we do? Even if the world is going head over heels, we can only watch it go. Can we really bear to see it? Even so, the time will come when someone will say we should erect a monument to Song Deok-bi, so let's gather all the friends who are acting like simpletons to enlighten this world, and have a debate. Booze is booze, after all.

Park: Ugh, no, I don't want to. If we start talking about simpletons, people might see us as simpletons. Even if the world is wide, it's a world full of simpletons, so who isn't a simpleton? To Soba and Hoyu (巢父, 許由), Emperor Yao and Emperor Shun (帝堯帝舜) with their ten thousand chariots would seem like simpletons, and to Heosaeng (虛生) from Meokjeokgol, rich men like Wanggae and Seokseung (王愷, 石崇) would seem like simpletons. To a fortune-telling shaman woman, those with open eyes, the proponents of science, would all seem like simpletons. To a gang of swindlers, the one who gets tricked easily would seem like a simpleton, and to a clever woman, the men who nod their heads and go around would seem like simpletons. If winged beasts who know when the wind will blow were to look down on the world, and insects in holes who know when it will rain were to look down on humans, they would all see a world of simpletons and simpleton humans, wouldn't they? So what are we talking about? The world is just full of simpletons.

Cha: That's too vague, but you know, whether it's because the world is bright or because it's too dark, there's something that makes the word 'simpleton' seem inadequate. A female student at a girls' high school in the city, a modern woman, is staying at an inn and having a very modern love affair, a love triangle or even a quadrangle. She's dating three men at once, and because she's pretty, her methods are so clever that the men who visit her each believe that she loves only him purely. They can't openly brag about it, but secretly they all have the air of being the victor in love. To her, who treats the three men like foolish toys with her cunning, they may not seem like simpletons, but behind her back, people are whispering that all three of them are simpletons. This kind of farce is happening right here in Gyeongseong.

Park: Hey, don't talk about others like that. Can they really be so simple that all three of them don't realize it?

Cha: You say the world is full of simpletons, but you don't believe that? But since it's the truth, what can we do? Then you're not even qualified to talk about simpletons.

Park: Hey, there's a limit to being a simpleton. You mean they're acting that simple?

Cha: That's why we need to show the world that there are so many simpletons like this, so that they can realize they're simpletons themselves.

Park: Hmm, I see. Then it's a case of mass simpleton-ism. Since I don't readily believe such things, the guys involved in this aren't even a problem. The school that's teaching this student probably won't even worry, saying, "There's no such thing in the world," and "Surely there can't be such a bad student in our school," so the school is a mass of simpletons. And at home, they're saying, "My daughter, my daughter," and "She's a rare female student from the province, there's no way she would do such a thing," and they're selling their fields to support her, so the home is a mass of simpletons. And if you think about it generally, no one in the world will believe such a thing, so in the end, isn't the whole world a mass of simpletons? My logic is flawless.

Cha: If you put it that way, there's no one who isn't a simpleton, but even if we point it out specifically, there are still countless simpletons. Why would we go out of our way to make someone a simpleton? No teacher would teach that, and no parent would want that, but it's sad that they're turning out that way, and the men who are being tricked are simpletons. Maybe we shouldn't call the school and home simpletons.

Park: Hey, wait a minute. Listening to your stories about simpletons reminds me of something. There are many old-fashioned women who don't know how to count money, so they hand over money and ask, "Is this a 10-won bill? Is this a 5-won bill?" And they don't know their own address or name, and they don't know how to count the days they've lived. They don't know how many family members they have, how much food they eat in a month, or how much tax they pay on their land, or how the tax is used. They just pay whatever they're told and complain that they can't live because of the taxes. They secretly cut down pine trees that they're not supposed to cut down without permission, and when the police catch them, they pretend not to know and beg for forgiveness. And they say, "What's the point of going to school if I can't even be a police officer?" and they stubbornly deny everything. Whenever I go to the countryside, they seem so clueless that I want to slap them on the back of the head.

Cha: Hey, don't let the simpletons in Seoul make fun of the simpletons in the countryside. Old-fashioned women and rural friends in the countryside are originally ignorant and act like simpletons, so there's a sense of innocence. But the modern women in Seoul know how to count the days and how to count 10 jeon and 1 won, but they don't think about saving and just try to squeeze out money to live luxuriously. The young people and people of Seoul know economics and law, so they're better at cheating and commit more crimes. Among them, those who pretend to be thinkers and activists keep saying that young people should return to the countryside and develop the countryside, but I haven't seen a single person who actually goes down to the countryside and takes up a hoe and works hand in hand with rural friends. Isn't that all being a simpleton? Ignorant simpletons can be forgiven and have redeeming qualities, but knowing simpletons are just hateful beyond measure.

Park: Still, can that be? Isn't it refreshing to see someone knowingly act like a simpleton? When you don't know and act like a simpleton, it burns people up inside. Modern women can just break up with their husbands if they don't like them anymore. <100> Old-fashioned women, whether they're right or wrong, grab you and never let go, and it's a miracle if your insides don't explode. When you say the world is constantly progressing and the times are changing, they just talk about things from the time of Emperor Taego Cheonhwang and sit there. People as impatient as us can't stand those old-fashioned simpletons in the countryside.

Cha: You say it's refreshing to see someone knowingly act like a simpleton? In their maiden days, whether they loved a man or not, they just give love to the person they love at that moment, and then they go around saying, "I'm a virgin, I'm a pure maiden," while smacking their red lips. Is it refreshing to see a knowledgeable young man fall for that and act like a simpleton? Or to see a modern woman, who doesn't know if she'll live or die because she's wasting money and saying she loves you, do everything she can and then later say, "I have a wife, I even have children, I don't want to be a concubine, I was deceived by the devil," and then shed tears and take medicine and try to kill herself, act like a simpleton? Is it refreshing to see someone who studied abroad and is considered an intellectual just hang around aimlessly, looking only for the new civilization of the 20th century, and think that's a philosopher, a thinker, and a successful person?

Park: Hey, isn't that better than the friends who are just sitting around waiting for Jeongdoryeong's Gyeryongsan capital these days?

Cha: Those people have heads that are already rotten with that, so there's nothing we can do. But what about a young man who claims to have new knowledge and is a devout Christian, who says we should borrow American cannons to shoot the Joseon XXX scoundrels? What can we do about a Christian believer like that?

Park: Ugh, I'm against Christianity. There are so many simpletons in Christianity. It's probably been about 100 years since Christianity came to Joseon, and I don't know about before I was born, but ever since I could understand what people were saying, the sermons I heard 10 years ago and the sermons I heard 10 years later, the sermons I heard in the south and the sermons I heard in the north, they're all the same boring, monotonous sermons. On top of that, the pastors and elders who try to imitate Westerners in their speech and gestures are also acting like simpletons. And the young men and women who sit there mindlessly, muttering prayers, are a collection of simpletons. What's so great about it that they go to church three or four times a week, ignoring how busy they are, to hear the same things over and over again? I don't know why.

Cha: Is that all? The evangelist's persistent simpleton act will probably earn her a monument when Jesus comes again. She leads the hymns in such a sweet voice and goes into people's homes and keeps begging them to believe, even when they don't want to, and ends up staying for lunch. What can we do about that?

Cha: Hey, if you insult the Christians too much, you'll only go to hell when you die. But if the Ox God knows that we're urging the pastors not to act like simpletons, he'll definitely switch us to heaven.

Park: Ugh, I've already been rejected from going to heaven, so it doesn't matter what I do. But simpletons aren't just found among Christians. Lately, it seems like Buddhism is losing its effectiveness, and there are more simpletons in the Buddhist community. The head monks are mostly born as simpletons, and they don't do anything new. Since they're not laymen, they just eat, chant, take naps, and say that worldly affairs are not their concern. If they're lucky, that's fine, but as far as simpleton acts go, there's no more typical simpleton than the great masters in the mountains.

Cha: Still, the world is getting more competitive, so the great masters are trying to avoid being simpletons, and there's a new movement to allow them to drink alcohol, get married, have concubines, have sons, and have daughters. But the sound of the 5 o'clock cannon ringing in the heart of Gyeongseong, followed by the sound of the Sicheon Church bells ringing in response, also sounds like a simpleton's sound. Since the sound isn't coming from a human throat, we can't call the people simpletons, but we can only call the ringing bell a simpleton.

Park: I've been agreeing with you quite a bit, but there are definitely a lot of simpletons in the countryside. The county magistrate, who doesn't know how to write a single official document and shaves his head due to the influence of power and has a white stripe where his horsehair hat used to be, sitting in the outhouse and stamping his seal also seems like a simpleton. And the police and clerks who say "Kora baka" to villagers who don't know Japanese and slap the faces of innocent villagers are also acting like simpletons. The village chiefs who barely know the letter "ㄱ" and the postal deliverymen who sell their labor by speaking Japanese and going around with their heads unkempt act like officials when they go to the village and glare at people. Aren't the villagers who suffer that also simpletons, and aren't the friends who see that also simpletons?

Cha: Stop. The city is a swamp of simpletons. Even if you call Incheon the east coast of Joseon and write that Emperor Yang of Sui was a king of the Tang dynasty, the storyteller is still a storyteller. Even if you don't read a single book or magazine, you can still write novels, poems, essays, and miscellaneous pieces and call yourself a prolific writer. Even if you don't know the situation in Joseon, you can still eat Western food and listen to English and German, so a Western student is still a Western student. And even if you just sit in an armchair and stamp your seal all day, you're still a director of a bank if you have money and white hair. Even the Seoul merchants who are good at flattery only care about the immediate profits coming into their pockets, regardless of their future credit. Each of them thinks they're clever and smart from their own perspective, but to others, they're just simpletons.

Park: If we're going to talk about simpletons in the countryside, there's one thing I have to say, but I don't have the freedom to say it here, so I'll stop. But there aren't just a few doctors in the countryside, they're also simpletons. Like the saying, "Shaking the acupuncture needle without knowing the pulse," they always start by shaking the acupuncture needle.

Cha: You think the doctors in Seoul are very skilled? They have names like Doctor of Medicine and Doctor of Philosophy, but in the end, they're the same. They've just replaced the acupuncture needle with a stethoscope and the herbal medicine with liquid medicine and powder. They never don't give medicine when they see a patient, and they never don't charge a high price. Even if they can't cure the disease, they never refer the patient to someone else. If the patient dies, they say it's because the disease was too severe due to some heavenly fault, not because their skills were lacking. I don't know if it's the doctor who's a simpleton or the skill that's a simpleton, but it seems like there are quite a few simpletons in modern medicine as well.

Cha: That's the same thing. These days, schools have math trips and math groups, and whether the weather is hot or cold, they force students and parents to collect money and participate, saying it's the school's policy and they can't be left out. They drag their aching legs along and take them here and there, and what do they get out of it when they come back? The female students just suffer. But if a picture of their group is published in the newspaper, they forget all the suffering. It seems like there's no end to simpleton acts.

Park: Hey, since we're talking about simpletons, let me tell you a story about school simpletons. It seems like the teachers think that all their students are inferior to them, and they don't read any books outside of their own field of study. They may not be simpletons right now because they're so knowledgeable, but I wonder if the number of future simpleton candidates is increasing.

Cha: Shh. You can't say such things carelessly. But since I work at a magazine company, there's one simpleton act that I directly feel. It's the readers who can't write their address and name clearly and just scribble it down so illegibly. If the magazine is late or misdelivered, they'll still call the company simpletons, saying, "Isn't there a single reporter who can read it?" (But please, don't be angry if you're not one of those readers.)

Park: There are quite a few simpletons if you think about it. But there are probably some simpletons missing here. Some might say it's a shame.

Cha: Are there any missing? But let's leave the simpletons we can't talk about and the simpletons who will get too angry for another time, and just do this for now. Only when these simpletons open their eyes a little will our lives open up a little too.

Park: Yeah, the time will come. The day will come when a thunderbolt strikes and everyone's hearts will be the same, and they'll be awakened as if their eyes are popping open. Let's just wait for that day and shout "Hooray for simpletons!" today. Hooray for simpletons!

Written by Cha Dol-i and Park Dol-i.

**Named Entities**

巢父	Soba
許由	Hŏ Yu
帝堯	Cheyao
帝舜	Chesun
王愷	Wanggae
石崇	Sŏkch'ung
虛生	Hŏsaeng
宋德碑	Song Deok-bi
慶城	Kyŏngsŏng
太古天皇氏	T'aego Ch'ŏnhwangssi
正道令	Chŏngdoryŏng
鷄龍山	Kyeryongsan
仁川	Inch'ŏn
隋煬帝	Suyangje
唐	Tang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제14호
발행일	1928년 07월 01일
기사제목	現代男女 百멍텅
기사형태	세태비평

現代男女 百멍텅
차. 여보게 박돌이! 누가 이 세상을 밝다 하며 누가 이 시대를 문명하다고 하는가? 다른데는 모르겟네마는 우리 조선 안은 남만치나 도라다녀 보고 사람도 남만치나 접촉하여 보앗지만 밝은 편보다는 어둔 편이 만코 문명한 것보다도 문명치 못한 편이 만테그려. 퉁틀어 노코 말하자면 이 세상에는 멍텅이가 만탄 말이야.
박. 그러지 아니해도 차돌이 박돌이라면 험구쟁이 입버릇 사난 놈이라고 평판이 자자한데 왜 또 멍텅이 이야기는 끄내나. 어느 놈알에 논총을 맛고 어느 게집알에 입에 못담을 욕을 먹으랴고. 나는 실헤 멍텅이 이야기고 무어고 다 구찬헤. 누가 잡어다가 유치장에 느면 엿더케 하게. 먹고 십흔 술도 못먹고. 여보게 손등위 샛가마케 먹진 흉이 지금도 그대로 잇네. 생각하면 니가 갈리는데.
차. 그럴사록 입은 발터야지. 그래도 한편에서는 조와라고 칭찬하는 군들이 잇스니 엇저나. 세상이 제멋대로 곤두박질을 처도 제멋대로 내러려 두어만 보게. 참말 꼴을 볼 수가 잇겟나. 그래도 나종에는 송뎍비 세워주어야겟다는 소리가 어느 입으로 나오던지 긔어코 나오는 시대가 잇슬 것이니 술도 술이려니와 이 세상을 깨우치기 위하야 멍텅이 짓하는 친구들을 한데 모아 가지고 론박을 좀 해보세.
박. 응-응 실네 실혀. 멍텅이 잡어가지고 이야기하는 우리부터가 다른 사람으로 보면 무슨 멍텅이짓이라할지 누가 알겟나. 이 세상이 아모리 넓다 하지만 세상이 도시 멍텅이 세상이니 누가 멍텅이 아닌 사람이 잇겟나. 소부, 허유(巢父, 許由)로 보면 제요제순(帝堯帝舜)의 만승천자도 멍텅이요 먹적골 허생원으로 보면 왕개, 석승(王愷, 石崇)이 가튼 천석군의 부자도 멍텅일 것일세. 문복쟁이 무당녀로 보면 눈뜬 사람 과학주의자가 모다 멍텅이로 뵐 것. 불량사긔배로 보면 속히여 떠리지는 놈이<98> 도리여 멍텅이로 뵈고 령리한 녀자로 보면 가장 고개짓하고 도라다니는 사네놈들이 멍텅이로 뵐 거 아닌가? 바람불 줄 아는 날 짐승이 세상을 내려다 보고 비 올 줄 아는 구녁드리 짐승이 이 인간을 내여다 보면 모다 멍텅이 세상이요 멍텅이 인간으로 뵐 것 아닌가? 그런데 말이 무슨 말인가. 그저 세상은 모다 멍텅이로 되엿스니.
차. 그것은 너무 막연한 말이지만 여보게 참 세상이 밝어서 그런지 너무 어두어서 그런지 참말로 멍텅이란 말로는 오히려 말이 악가운 일이 하나 잇데. 시내 모 여자고등통학교에 다닌다는 녀학생 말하자면 최신식 여자인데 어느 려관에 잇스면서 연애 중에도 최신 연애로 삼각 사각이나 되는 연애를 하되 한거번에 세 남자와 연애를 하는데 얼골이 괜찬은 만큼 그 연애방법이 엇더케나 교묘한지 일인즉 여자에게는 세 사람의 상대자가 잇것만 거긔 들어부터다니는 남자 녀석들은 그 여자는 순결하게 저의를 다각기 긔막히게 사랑하여 주는 줄 만 알고 것흐로 내여노코 자랑은 못할망정 속으로는 가장 제가 다 각기 사랑의 승리자처럼 자만하는 긔색을 뵈는 것을 보면 감쩍가티 돌나먹는 수단잇는 그녀 학생으로 세 남자를 대할 적에는 설마 멍텅이가 아니라 어엽본 노리개ㅅ감으로 보고 잇게시지만 뒷전에는 보는 사람들은 세놈이 모다 멍텅이라고 수순수군하는 희활극이 갓가운 이 경성시내에도 잇단 말이야.
박. 엑기 남의 말이라고 그러케하지 말게. 아모리 멍텅이기로 세놈이 다 그러케 모르고 지낸다 말인가?
차. 세상이 다 멍텅이라면서 그 말은 미더지지를 안나. 그러나 사실이 사실인 바에야 엇지 하겟나? 그러면 자네는 멍텅이를 이야기할 자격조차 업는 사람일세.
박. 이 사람아. 멍텅이도 분수가 잇지. 그러케까지 멍텅이 노릇을 한단 말인가?
차. 그러닛가 멍텅이가 만흔 중에도 이런 멍청이가 만타는 증거를 세상에뵈여야 자긔가 멍텅인 줄을 알기나 한단 말이야.
박. 흐흥 그래 그려. 그러면 거긔에 관련하야서 떼멍텅이가 생기는 셈일세 그려. 그런 말을 내가 얼른 미더지지 안는 다음에야 그 일을 당하고 잇는 놈팽이들은 원래 문제도 되지 아니할 것 이런 학생을 가르치고 잇는 학교에서는 그 놈들이 공연한 험구지 세상에 그런 일이 어대잇스며 잇기로 서니 설마 우리학교 속에야 그런 불량한 학생이 잇슬리라고 하고 념려도 안흘 것이니 학교 안이 떼멍텅이요 자긔 집 가정에서는 내 딸이야 내딸이야 하며 한 고을에서도 하나가 드믄 여자류학생이니 그런 짓이야 꿈에나 잇스랴 하고 논밧을 팔어 밋천을 대이니 가정안이 떼멍텅이요 그저 범범하게 생각하면<99> 세상 사람이 누구나 그런 말을 밋지 안흘 것이니 결국은 왼세상이 떼멍텅이 아닌가. 내 론리가 안맛는 법은 업느니.
차. 그러케 따지면 멍텅이 아닌 사람이 업지만 요러케 꼭꼭 집어서 조문을 딱딱 붓처서 내세워도 멍텅이가 부지기수인데 왜 생사람을 잡어다가 멍텅이 만들 까닭이야 무엇잇나. 학교에서야 어느 선생이 그러케 가르치며 가정에서야 어느 부형이 그러케 바라겟는가 마는 그러케 돠야가는 그 자신이 가엽고 그러케 속아 넘어가는 사네놈들이 멍텅이란 말이야 하교나 가정까지야 멍텅이라고까지는 안해도 조켓지.
박. 여보게 가만잇게 멍텅이 이야기를 듯고 보니 나도 생각이 나네 마는 구식녀자들 중에 돈 샐 줄을 몰라서 돈을 내여주고 이게 10원짜리요 오전짜리요 하는 부인네가 만코 자긔주소 성명하나 똑똑히 모르고 날수가는 줄을 모르고 살고 자긔집 식구가 몃인지 한달 먹는 량식이 얼마나 드는지 모르고 사는 구식 녀자나 하며 자긔 집 토지가 몃평인데 거긔 대한 세금이 얼마요 그 세금을 엇다가 엇더케 쓰는지도 모르고 달나면 달나는대로 내여주고 덥허노코 세금때믄에 살 수 업서 살 수 잇서야지만 하고 돌탄돌탄하며 일껏 베지 말라는 소나무는 허가도 업시 맘대로 툭툭 베여노코는 순사에게 들키면 모르고 그랫스니 이번만 제발 용서해 달라고 애걸애걸하고 학교는 다녀야 무엇하나 면서 킈순사 하나도 못해 먹는데 하고 딴청을 통통 부리는 농촌 친구들이 엇더케나 천치 바보로 뵈는지 시골 내려가면 그저 왜그러케 세상을 몰르느냐고 뒤국지를 내려갈기고 십흔 때가 여간 만치를 안테.
차. 여보게. 서울 멍텅이가 시골 멍텅이를 흉보지 말게. 시골 구식 여자나 향촌 친구들은 원래부터 모르고나 멍텅이짓을 하지 안나 그런닛가 순진한 맛이나 잇지. 서울 신식녀자들은 날수가고 10전 1원 셀 줄 아는 대신에 날틈은 생각지도 안코 엇더케라도 족여 내여서 호사를 하러들지요. 서울 청년 서울 사람들은 경제를 알고 법률을 알기 때믄에, 사긔는 더 잘하고 범죄는 더 만테. 그 중에도 가장 사상가인체 가장 운동가인 체하며 지금 청년은 농촌으로 도라가야 한다고 농촌을 게발식혀야 한다고 제 입으로 떠들기는 하면서 한 사람도 제가 먼저 시골로 내려가서 호미ㅅ자루를 쥐고 농촌 친구들과 손을 맛잡고 일하는 이는 하나도 못 보앗스니 그게 다 멍텅이가 아니고 무엇인가. 모르는 멍텅이는 오히려 용서하고 볼 점이 잇지만 아는 멍텅이야 말로 가증가증스럽기 한이 업네.
박. 그래도 그럴 수가 잇나. 알고 멍텅이짓 하는 놈은 속이나 시원시원하지요. 모르고 멍텅이짓 하는 놈은 사람의 속이 다 타죽고 말 노릇이니 신식녀자들은 부부생활을 하다가도 한편이 실흐면 그만 의조케 헤여저 버리지<100>  안나. 구식 여자쯤은 오른 말을 하거나 그른 말을 하거나 날 잡어 잡수하고 늘어지는데는 사람의 보ㅅ장을 가지고야 부화퉁이 안터진다면 다행이요 세상은 작구 진보해나가고 세태는 날로 변해간다고 일껏 말하면 뜬뜬하니 태고 천황씨ㅅ적 일만 말하고 안젓는 시골 구식 멍텅이들에게야 우리 가티 승정급한 놈으로는 참아 볼 수가 업네.
차. 여보게 아는 멍텅이는 속이나 시원하다고 그러닛가. 처녀 시대에는 몃 사네를 사랑하엿거나 말엇거나 그 찰나 그 찰나에 사랑하는 사람에게 사랑만 밧치면 그만이라고 나는 멀쩡한 처녀외다 깨끗한 동정녀외다 하고 붉은 입술을 살눅거리고 도라다니는 것을 보고도 지기에 반하야 넘어가는 지식 청년의 멍텅이 짓이 속이 시원하고 돈 쓰는 바람에 말로 흘리는 퉁에 죽을지 살지 모르고 사랑한다고 떠드러대다가 할 짓이라고는 다해노코 나종에 외서는 본처가 잇느니 자식까지 잇느니 첩노릇이 실흐니 악마의 손에 속앗느니하고 눈물 짜내고 약먹고 자살하랴는 신식 녀성의 멍텅이 짓도 속이 시원하단 말인가? 외국 유학햇다고 지식게급이라고 아모 하는 것 업시 뒤번둥 뒤번둥 흥청거리면서 20세긔 신문명만 찻고 안젓스면 그것이 철학자요 사상가요 잘난 사람이란 말인가?
박. 이 사람아 그래도 요새 안저서도 때 지난 그놈의 정도령의 게룡산도읍만 기다리는 친구들 보다는 낫지 안흔가?
차. 그래도 그네들은 아조 그것으로 머리가 저저노코 썩어 노앗스닛가 할 수가 업지만 소위 신지식을 가젓다고 예수를 독실히  밋는다는 모청년가튼 이는 XXXXXXX 미국의 대포를 빌어다가 조선의 XXX꾼을 쏘아 죽여야 하겟다는 예수교 신앙가가 다 잇는데야 엇지 하나?
박. 아이그 나도 예수교에는 반대일새. 참말 예수교에는 멍텅이가 만흐니. 예수교가 그래도 조선에 드러오기는 아마 한 100년 갓가히 될 터인데 내가 생겨나기 전은 모르겟네만은 내가 남의 말긔를 알어 드르면서 부터는 10년 이전에 드러 본 예수교의 설교나 10년 이후에 드러본 예수교의 설교나 남쪽에서 들어 본 설교나 북쪽에서 들어 본 설교나 엇지도 그리 한바리에 실허서 묵업지도 갸밥지도 안흘 똑가튼 진부 막심한 설교를 하는지. 게다가 말흉내, 몸짓 본뜨기까지 가장 서양식인 척하는 목사 장로님들도 무던히 멍텅이짓이라면 짓이지, 그 압헤 멋도 모르고 죽-꿀어 안저서 긔도를 드리느라고 수군거리는 선남선녀들도 꽤 주서 다 모아 노흔 멍텅이라고 아니 할 수 업느니. 무엇이 그리 그룩해서 일주일에도 세 번씩 네 번씩이나 밧븐 것도 불고 하고 교당으로 몰켜 들어 드른 소리를 또 듯고 또 드른 소리를 또또 드르려 가는지 까닭을 모를네.
차. 그뿐인가. 부흥회 때 죄잇거던<101> 자백하라고 일껀식 한 것이 목사와 간음한 죄밧게 업스니 용서해 주십시사는 전도부인의 고백에 자긔 죄가 들러나서 얼골을 못들엇다는 목사의 멍텅이 짓도 이야기ㅅ거리지만 결혼식 때마다 당당히 단상에 나서서 이 남자와 이 여자의 결혼에 대하야 이의가 업소? 하고 뭇는 고 짓이야말로 멍텽멍텽하니 그런 멍텽이 짓이
엇대 잇단 말인가? 엇구지 작난꾼들이 잇서 말한마듸 『이의 잇소』하고 작난삼어 말한다면 그 중대한 결혼식장의 광경이 엇지되고 말것인가! 될 수 잇스면 그런 짓만은 중지하여 두어도 괜찬할 것 갓데마는. 예수교라면 평소에는 반대 반대하던 친구도 례배당 결혼식에는 포주ㅅ간에 드러가는 소처럼 가슴을 버틔고 거름거러 풍금 마치는 광경이란 걸작의 멍텅이니.
박. 또 한가지 잇느니. 전도부인의 추근추근한 멍텅이 짓에는 예수님이 재림하신다면 송덕비 하나씩은 빠지지 안코 도라갈 것일세. 그리 청조흔 목소리로 찬송가를 인도하며 여염집 가청에 들어가서 미드라고 미드라고 졸르다 졸르다 실혀하는 줄도 모르고 점심페까지 낏치고 나오는 꼴에야 엇지하나.
차. 여보게 예수교꾼 보고 너무 욕해서 죽으면 지옥으로 밧게 못 가겟네.그럿치만 예수님의 목자들이 멍텅이 짓을 하지 말라고 권고 한 줄을 한우님이 알으시면 확실히 우리를 천당으로 밧구어 주시겟지.
박. 아이그 나는 천당에 가기에는 벌서 락제를 한 사람이 닛가 아모리 해도 관게치 안이헤. 그럿치만 멍텅이는 하필 예수꾼에게만 잇는 것이 아니니. 근래는 부처님이 령금이 업서 그런지 불교게에도 멍텅이가 상당히 느는 모양이데. 이 산으로 가도 멍텅 저 산으로 가도 멍텅이라고 주지 스님들은 우선 생기기부터 대개 멍텅으로 생겻지만 하는 짓도 하나나 신선한 것이 업서서 속인이 아닌만큼 밥먹고 염불하고 낫잠자고 세상 일은 나의 소관이 아니다 하니 팔자가 좃타하면 좃켓지만 멍텅이짓으로 보면 산중 대사님 이상 전형적(典型的) 멍텅이는 업슬 것 갓데.
차. 그래도 세상이 약어가닛가 대사님들도 免멍텅이을 하시랴는 신운동이 니러나서 지금은 곡차도 맘대로 자시고 장가들고 첩엇고 아들나코 딸나-코 다한다네. 그럿치만 경성 복판에 오포가 웽-하고 울면 거긔 딸어 철석철석하고 쫏차가며 우는 시천교당의 종소리도 꽤 멍텅이 소리갓네. 사람의 목구멍으로 울려 나오는 소리가 아니닛가 사람까지 보고 멍텅이라고는 할 수 업고 우는 종이 멍텅이라고 할 수 밧게.
박. 내가 자네하고 꽤 맛장구를 첫네마는 하여간 멍텅이는 시골이 만흐니 공문 한 장 뀌밀 줄 모르며 세력 바람에 갓머리를 깍고 망건 짜리가 하얏케 난 면장영감이 변소에 안저서 도장을 꾹꾹 찍는 것도 엇지 보면 멍텅이 갓고 일본말 한 모르는 촌민들에게<102> 『고라박아』하며 결핏하면 순량한 촌민의 뺨을 철석붓치는 순사 면서긔들의 횡행도 실은 멍텅이짓이요. 낫노코 ㄱ자 하나 변변히 모르는 구장 나으리들이 머리도 아니 깍고 일본말을 주서하고 길품 팔어 먹는 우편 배달부들까지 촌에 나가면 아조 무슨 관리나 되는 척하고 눈을 부라리니 그 꼴을 당하는 촌낵이도 멍텅이려니와 그 꼴을 뵈는 친구들까지도 멍텅이 아닌가?
차. 말말게. 도회지야 말로 멍텅이구렁이니. 인천(仁川)을 조선의 동해안(東海岸)이라 하고 수양제(隨煬帝)를 당(唐)나라 임금이라고 써도 동화대가는 동화대가요 서적 한권 잡지 한권 아니 읽고도  소설 쓰고 시 쓰고 잡문 쓰고 수필 쓰며 자긔는 다정다한 한 작자라고 자긔 문집을 서문을 써도 긔 자는 긔자 문학자는 문학자요 조선 사정은 몰라도 입으로 양요리를 먹고 귀로 영어 독어를 드를 줄 알으니 서양 류학생은 서양 류학생이고 안락의자에 안저서 점도록 도장만 꾹꾹 찍고 안젓서도 돈잇고 머리 희엿스니 은행회사의 중역이고 심지어 외누리 잘하는 서울 상인(商人)들은 나종의 신용이야 떨어지던 마던 목전의 리익이나 주머니로 드러오면 그만이니 다 각기 자긔 편으로 보면 자긔가 령리하고 자긔가 퍽 똑똑한 것 갓지만, 남이 보면 멍멍이란 말이야.
박. 시골 멍텅이를 톡톡히 말하자면 꼭 한가지 말할 것이 잇네마는 그것은 여긔서 말 할 자유가 업스니 그만두고, 시골은 몃 안 되는 의원까지 멍텅이니 속담에 맥도 모르고 침대롱 흔든다는 격으로 의례 침대롱부터 내여 흔드는 것이 시골 의사니.
차. 의사 말인가. 서울 의사들은 퍽 용한 줄 아네 그려. 무슨 의학사 무슨 의학박사 하닛가 이름이야 훌륭하지만 결국은 맛찬가지야. 침 대롱을 청진긔로 밧구고 탕약을 물약 가루약으로 밧구엇슬 뿐이지. 평생에 병인 보면 약 아니 주는 법 업고 약 갑 단단히 안 밧는 법 업고 못 곳 칠 병이라도 남에게 내여주는 법 업고 죽게되면 천지망아라 비전지 죄로 병이 원흔히 중하야서 그럿치 내 기술이 부족한 것은 아니라 하니 의사 그 사람이 멍텅이여서 그런지 기술 그것이 멍텅이여서 그런지 알 수는 업스나 신식의술에도 꽤 멍텅이가 만흔 모양이데.
박 (16행 삭제-원문)
차. 그거도 맛찬가지니. 요세 학교에서 수학려행이니 수학단이니 해 가지고 날이 덥거나 칩거나 학부형을 울리거나 생도를 울리거나 학교 방침이니 하나도 빠저서는 안된다고 억지억지로 려비를 모아 가지고 압흔 다리를 질질 끄을고 이로 몰고 자로 몰고 다니다가 흭-하고 도라오면 무슨 소득이 그리 만하삿켓나. 더구나 녀학생들쯤이야 그저 죽어만 나지. 그래도 자긔 단체의 사진이 신문에만 나면 대리 압헛던 것도 니저 버리게 되는 것을 보면 가이업는 멍텅이 짓도 갓네.<103>
박. 여보게 긔위라 멍텅이 이야기가 나와스니 말이지 나도 학교멍텅이 이야기 하나하고 말랴네. 그런데 학교 선생들은 자긔가 가르치는 생도면 다 자긔만 못하고 자긔가 가르치는 학과 이외에는 서책 하나 보는 이도 별로 업는 것 가트니 배움이 만흔 만큼 당장 멍텅이야  아니겟지만 훗날의 멍텅이 후보자가 늘어가지나 아니할까 의문일세.
차 쉬쉬. 그런 말은 함부러 못하네. 그런데 나는 잡지사에 잇느니 만큼 직접으로 늣겨지는 멍텅이 짓이 하나 잇네. 자긔 주소 성명 똑똑히 못쓰고 아모러케 흘려 내갈기어서 알어보지 못하게 써논 독자의 글씨일네. 잡지가 늣게 가거나 잘못 가면 그래도 본사를 멍텅이라 하겟지. 그것하나 알어 볼 만한 긔자 녀석이 하나도 업는냐고. (그러나 그럿치 안흔 독자만은 노여워 하지 마십시오.)
박. 멍텅이도 따지고 보면 상당히 만흔데. 그러나 여기에 빠진 멍텅이가 또 잇겟지. 좀 섭섭하다고 할 걸.
차. 잇기로 말뿐인가. 그럿치만 말하면 못쓴다고 할 멍텅이 너무 노여워 할 멍텅이는 두엇다가 다음 긔회로 밀고 이번은 이것만 해두세. 그러고 저러고 이떼 멍텅이들이 좀 열리는 때라야 우리 인생의 전도도 좀 열리련만.
박 응, 그때가 잇느니 벼락불이 번쩍하면 만천하 인심이 똑가티앗질 하고 눈이 홉떠지드시 깨우처지는 날이 잇느니 잇서. 그날이나 기다리고 오늘은 텅텅이만세나 불러주세. 멍텅이 만세!
차돌이, 박돌이 記<104>
<98-104>