잡지명	별건곤 제11호
발행일	1928년 02월 01일
기사제목	博士論文公開(其二)
기사형태	논설

별건곤 第11號
1928년 02월 01일
博士論文公開 (其二) (Public Presentation of Doctoral Dissertations, Part 2)
논설 (Article)

Public Presentation of Doctoral Dissertations

I. Place of Birth
II. Age
III. Education
IV. Date and Department of Obtaining Degree
V. Outline of Dissertation
VI. Hardships Until Obtaining Degree
VII. Current Position

Medical Doctor Yu Il-jun
I. Okjeong-ri, Geumgwang-myeon, Anseong-gun, Gyeonggi-do
II. 34 years
III. Gwanrip Hanseong High School (官立漢城高等學校), Studied 3 years at Private Boseong Middle School (私立普成中學校), Graduated from Gyeongseong Medical College (京城醫專), Majored in Internal Medicine at Kyoto Imperial University Medical School (京都帝國大學醫科大學). Studied Microbiology and Serology for 3 years under Professor Pfeiffer at the University of Breslau, Germany, and Professor Ollenhuth at the University of Freiburg. Received a "Doktor, Medizin" (Dr.Med) degree from the University of Freiburg. Continued to study Microbiology and Serology for 1 year at the Department of Pathology and Bacteriology, Faculty of Medicine, Tokyo Keio University (東京 慶應大學 醫學部 病理細菌學敎室).
IV. December 23, Taisho 10 (1921) from Keio University (慶應大學)
V. Title of Dissertation:
1. Main Dissertation
Part 1. Study on the Variability of Typhoid Bacillus, Paratyphoid Bacillus and Dysentery Bacillus Group. (German)
Part 2. Research on the "Variation" Phenomenon of Typhoid Bacillus. (Japanese)
2. Reference Dissertation
Part 1. Addendum to Knowledge of Pneumonia Bacteria (German) <42>
Part 2. Research on Specific Precipitation Reaction (German)
Part 3. Bacteriological and Serological Studies on Typhoid Bacillus Carriers. (German) This is a German doctoral dissertation.
Part 4. Addendum to Knowledge of Tuberculosis Diagnosis (German)
Part 5. Research on the Specificity of Organ Proteins (German)

Abstract of the Dissertation
Abstract of Main Dissertation Part 1 and Part 2.
(Reference dissertation 5 pieces are omitted due to space limitations)
All biological systems have heredity and variability. This is known to everyone. However, the issue of bacterial variability has only recently attracted the attention of scholars. It has been found that the morphology, biological properties, and serological relationships of bacteria invariably undergo certain changes when their living conditions are unsuitable. This type of bacterial variability not only has a significant impact on serotherapy and disease diagnosis but is also an interesting issue from a general biological perspective.
The author conducted detailed experiments on more than 40 species of Typhoid Bacillus (膓窒扶斯菌), Paratyphoid Bacillus (「파라」窒扶斯菌) and Dysentery Bacillus (赤痢菌族) using his unique method and obtained the following facts.
1. Conventionally, to induce bacterial variability, the nutrient or growth temperature of the bacteria was always changed, or they were treated with various chemical agents. However, the author attempted to induce variability that was as natural as possible by culturing the test strain with bacteria of other species within a certain culture period to induce symbiosis (I.ymbiose). He then observed the variability of the two species when a life competition arose between the two species. As a result, the author succeeded in cultivating accurate variable strains in a fraction of the time compared to the experimental methods of other scholars to date. The author considered that inducing strong variability in a short time due to the symbiosis of different species was likely due to the stimulating effect of the metabolites of the different species.
2. Once variated, the bacteria maintain their properties through hundreds of generations, but when the variated bacteria are cultured with a different species with strong vitality, the variability disappears and returns to the original type (本型). Of course, there are many that do not return to the original type at this time.
3. Most bacteria induce agglutination reactions against homologous immune serum. The nature of this reaction is still not clearly known. The author compared and studied the properties of the variant strains cultured by his method biologically and serologically, while also examining the capillary chemical (Kapillarcheme) properties of the strains in detail and experimenting with their toxicity. The results are as follows: ① The biological properties of bacteria are less variable than serological and capillary chemical properties. ② When the morphology of bacteria changes, serological properties tend to change accordingly (but not necessarily). At that time, its serological body (學體) changes. <43> ③ The electrical charge of bacteria has no relation to serological agglutination or desalination (Aussnlgbarkeit). ④ The stronger the serological agglutination of bacteria, the greater the desalination. ⑤ Bacteria that have lost serological agglutination have weakened surface tension and poor capillary ascension, and the adsorption to various absorbents has increased. ⑥ Therefore, it can be seen that the serological responsiveness of bacteria has a special relationship with the capillary chemical properties of the bacterial cells. ⑦ The toxicity of bacteria has no relation to serological variability.
VI. Thanks to my father's special educational enthusiasm, there were not many hardships. However, I did experience some material difficulties while abroad.
VII. Currently a professor at Gyeongseong Medical College (京城醫專), in charge of Microbiology and Hygiene courses.

Medical Doctor Choe Il-mun
I. Hwajeon-ri, Nokseon-myeon, Gimhae-gun, Gyeongnam
II. 36 years old
III. Private Dongnae Middle School (私立東萊中學校), Graduated from Gyeongseong Medical College (京城醫專), Studied general surgery at Professor Shioda's surgical lab at Tokyo Imperial University Medical School (東京帝國大學 醫學部 鹽田外科敎室), Studied bacteriology at the bacteriology lab at Tokyo Imperial University Medical School (東京帝大 醫學部 細菌學敎室).
IV. June 24, Showa 2 (1927) from Tokyo Imperial University (東京帝國大學) (Dissertation reviewed by the Faculty of Medicine Professor Council of the same university)
V. The main dissertation is a study of noma (水癌).
Abstract of the dissertation:
It is said that "noma" (水癌)(癌疳) is a very severe type of progressive necrotizing disease that mostly affects children after experiencing a febrile infectious disease. Regarding its cause, medical researchers in various countries have long proposed various theories such as bacterial theory, nutritional disorder theory, or nerve disorder theory. Especially towards the end of the 19th century, many scholars paid attention to the bacterial theory, and various theories such as bacillus theory, coccus theory, or filamentous bacteria and spiral bacteria theory were prevalent, and no conclusion was reached due to conflicting arguments. However, the interesting issue is under what conditions these various bacteria, etc., which normally exist in the oral cavity, cause the disease of noma. Some do not see the occurrence of noma even in cases of very poor nutrition, and others do not see the occurrence of this disease even after experiencing the same febrile infectious disease and having a high degree of weakness and stomatitis (口腔炎). In other words, even though it is the same type of bacteria that normally exists in the oral cavity, the fact that it does not cause noma in some people and causes it in others means that there must be some special conditions other than bacteria. In order to clarify this relationship, I observed the general clinical symptoms in detail in patients with noma for a long time, and at the same time, I first conducted bacteriological tests, and then conducted animal experiments <44> to clarify the cause of the occurrence of noma.
In other words, the most potent bacteria in the occurrence of noma are the three types of bacteria that I discovered for the first time: small bacilli, fusiform bacteria, and "streptothrix" (filamentous bacteria), and it was found that the most potent conditions for causing this disease are constitutional abnormalities, systemic malnutrition, and local circulatory disorders (局部血行障碍). Furthermore, no one has yet succeeded in experimenting with noma on animals in the medical community of various countries. However, it is possible to cause the same disease as noma in animals under the bacteria and conditions that I studied, that is, the animal experiment was successful.
Next, knowing that the pathological anatomical changes in patients with noma have not yet been clearly described in the medical community of various countries, I actually studied the results and proved many significant changes. Among them, the interesting ones are atrophy of various hematopoietic organs, thrombus formation in cervical blood vessels, and inflammatory changes in various lymphatic systems.
Next, most patients with noma die, but it is still unclear what the direct cause of death is. However, I discovered a type of small bacillus in the heart blood of patients with noma and, as a result of testing on animals, I learned that this small bacillus enters the heart through the blood from the local area where noma occurred, circulates throughout the body, and eventually causes the patient to die. Therefore, a kind of light was obtained regarding the treatment of noma in the future.
VI. This is very difficult to talk about. Only those who have actually experienced it will know it well, and it is difficult to know the true state of the hardship just by listening to the words. It is said that it is easy if you go to a foreign country or a Japanese university and become a research student and spend a long time, but we are doing something while working a salaried job and using the remaining time that we barely know. It's hard to call it research since even a small hospital in the countryside, let alone a big hospital in Joseon, doesn't have a lab and lacks equipment and books, should I call it suffering, or should I call it struggling? The desire to research something has been there since graduating from school, but due to various unfavorable circumstances, I have been waiting for the right time and preparing for research for several years. The reason I started researching noma is that this disease occurs especially in Joseon, and it often occurs in poor families or children living in unhygienic conditions, so I chose this problem, and I started working directly on noma research in Taisho 13 (1924). However, since I am working at the hospital, I am engaged in treating patients until the afternoon, so the only free time is at night and on Sundays. But what can I do? I continued for two full years. While researching, when I couldn't proceed with bacterial culture tests or animal experiments as I wanted, I can't express what that mental anguish was, but after thinking deeply and changing direction, when the results came out as I wanted, the joy was indescribable compared to the pain. Also, there was a lack of equipment, but the biggest pain was the discouragement due to the lack of reference books. I had no choice but to travel to Tokyo several times to read reference books. <45> Next, the biggest pain I suffered was with pathological anatomy. Would the patients allow us to dissect the bodies of their beloved children? It's easy with foreigners, but especially in Joseon, there is a custom of disliking dissection. Here, both mental pain and material consumption were significant. I wrote the thesis with great difficulty and formally submitted it around April of Taisho 15 (1926). However, I was very worried for a full year whether it would pass the faculty meeting. Only on the day I received the telegram that it had passed the faculty meeting did I really sigh and feel relieved.
VII. Working in the surgery department as a medical officer at the Provincial Hospital (道立醫院).

Medical Doctor Yun Chi-hyeong
I. Jangjin-gun, Hamgyeongnam-do
II. 32 years old
III. Private Myeongmyeong Middle School (私立明明中學), Gyeongseong Medical College (京城醫專), Government-funded study at Kyushu Imperial University Medical School (九州帝國大學 醫科大學), University of Breslau, Germany, Kyushu University Medical School.
IV. June Taisho 13 (1924) Dissertation passed the Kyushu Imperial University Medical School Review Board, Certificate Award Ceremony July 20.
V. ① Action of artificial pneumothorax on healthy lungs and tuberculous lungs ② Pathological histological examination of the route of breast cancer progression with Yun's mammoplasty ③ On partial resection of the liver ④ Qualitative and quantitative examination results of serum protein for various surgical conditions ⑤ On primary sarcoma of the gastrointestinal tract, etc. (Two others omitted)
VI. Abstract of the Dissertation
① Conclusion on the action of artificial pneumothorax on healthy and tuberculous lungs, omitting advanced theories and describing a few that are applied in actual clinical practice.
A. Artificial pneumothorax therapy is the world's best specific therapy for pulmonary hemorrhage, that is, hemoptysis (咯血).
B. Moderate tension and relaxation pneumothorax are specifically effective in chronic pulmonary tuberculosis (pulmonary tuberculosis) (푸로독티베). In short, tuberculosis bacteria die from malnutrition, and tissues are fibrotic, and the disease root is completely cured.
C. Tuberculous lungs can be resected after artificial pneumothorax is performed. That is, artificial pneumothorax can be performed on lung tissue that could not be operated on in the past due to bleeding air embolism, and surgery can be added to this.
D. Due to pneumothorax, the externally injected drug can flow into either the left or right lung as desired.
E. Conclusion that even if one entire lung is removed from animals and humans, it has no effect on respiratory function and the animal can maintain its life.
② In the pathological histological examination of the progression route of breast cancer, first, a new system of lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes where cancer cells <46> progress and erode the most was discovered, and in breast cancer surgery, Yun's skin incision method must be applied to remove the lymphatic vessels and glands where cancer cells are embolized without damage. In other words, the purpose is to prevent the spread of cancer cells in the surgical field and prevent recurrence. Secondly, the route of cancer cells invading the blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, especially muscle fiber bundles, within the pectoralis major muscle tissue was discovered, pointing out that the existing surgical method was incorrect, and the purpose is to perform total resection of the pectoralis major muscle using Yun's surgical method. (The above two types were published in German in Germany.)
③ Experience in actual clinical practice that partial resection of the liver is possible in the human body, the first surgery in Japan, and a paper on actual experience reported to the Japan Medical Association in Taisho 8 (1919) that the result was good and completely cured.
④ Qualitative and quantitative examination of serum protein was performed in various surgical treatments to calculate the combined aesthetic protein amount of "albumin" and "globulin" in the serum, and the inclusion ratio of each of "albumin" and "globulin" was calculated qualitatively and quantitatively. The movement of protein and its content vary depending on the type and severity of the disease and the prognosis, and by converting this into a certain ratio, it is applied to the diagnostic method of judging the type of disease, and further progress is made to measure the prognosis. In other words, it is applied to determining the goodness and badness of the course.
⑤ By comprehensively compiling my own experienced cases and the reported cases of world-renowned scholars regarding sarcoma occurring in the gastrointestinal digestive tract, the theories on the age symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, and causes of occurrence are discussed statistically.
VII. The hardships until I obtained the degree were nothing special, but despite suffering from the pain of hunger and cold due to hard study, and despite the insidious harm and slander from colleagues and seniors, I dedicated myself to the academic world while going east and west with the firm belief that justice and diligence are the final victory, and the byproduct of this is the degree. The hardships were until I achieved learning, but there were absolutely no hardships until I obtained the degree. When I was in Germany, my friend became a German university student and wanted to take the "Doktor" exam, but I laughed it off and explored the truths and theories in the laboratory with "Doktor" etc., side by side. You should infer the hardships of achieving learning from the dangerous situation like setting up a last-ditch defense.
VIII. Current position: Director of Gyeongseong Hoesaeng Hospital (京城回生病院長). Director of the Samsan Research Institute (三山硏究所長).

Regarding the contents of my dissertation, Lee Gwan-yong
Looking at the contents published in the "Abstract of Contents" of my dissertation "Will, the Basic Fact of Consciousness" in the December issue of "Byeolgeongon" (別乾坤), there are more than one or two errors. Since the reporter from your company who visited me did not specialize in psychology, I expected that there would be errors in the terminology or details. Also, knowing that the purpose of "Byeolgeongon" this time was not to publish academic papers, I only told you very simple things for a moment. However, I don't think I need to explain myself again here because my so-called dissertation has been introduced somewhat incorrectly. However, I cannot overlook the fact that this error extends to the basic principles of psychology of my teacher, Professor Lipps. What I said at that time was as follows.
1. Most of the existing psychologists attribute our psychological phenomena to a basic psychological "element" (要素), or attribute all psychological phenomena to the basic element of "intellect" (智) (intellectualism) or to "emotion" (情) (emotionalism) or to intellect and emotion, but at its base, it appears in the form of "will" (意志) (voluntarism). Because even regarding the basic object of psychology, academic theories are inconsistent, my word was that the academic study of psychology is still a young science.
2. Since Kant, scholars such as Jodl, who recognized intellect, emotion, and will as the three basic elements of the mind, claimed that when our psychological phenomena are analyzed, first there is some thought (intellect), then that thought causes a feeling of pleasure or displeasure (emotion), and then, based on that feeling, we "intend" (意) to do something. Therefore, our mental life is established through a cycle of intellect to emotion to will, and from will back to intellect (because after acting, we think about something again).
3. However, our teacher thinks about this problem in this way. Of course, when our psychological phenomena are analyzed, they are divided into three elements: intellect, emotion, and will. However, there is a significant error of recognition in the word "element" (要素). The basic truth of consciousness is only action. There is nothing among intellect, emotion, and will that is not action. Just as the entire universe is action, the mind is dynamic. And it should not be seen that intellectual action is the cause of emotional action and volitional action. Intellectual action is established by the senses caused by external objects stimulating the ego, and in order for the stimulus of external objects to become a sense with subjective qualities, the ego itself must also act to some extent (no matter how many stimulants are around me, I cannot feel them if I am sleeping). If intellectual action is to occur, there must also be volitional action, that is, the action of the ego. Therefore, the existence of intellectual action (external action) necessarily means the activation of volitional action, the action of the ego. Emotional action is a combined action of intellect and will (because one thinks and then intends to feel pleasure or displeasure), so intellect, emotion, and will ultimately mean the three aspects of the basic action of consciousness. This is the claim of Professor Lipps. In arguing this theory, Mr. Lipps cited various facts and truths from physics, biology, and philosophy, and there are various consequences that extend to pedagogy, sociology, and worldviews based on this theory, but I will talk about this again at another opportunity. I explained the development process of mental personality based on this theory and finished the thesis. I don't think it's completely worthless, so I'll try to translate it whenever I have time. (The End) <48>

**Named Entities**

安城郡	Anseong-gun
金光面	Geumgwang-myeon
玉井里	Okjeong-ri
京畿道	Gyeonggi-do
官立漢城高等學校	Gwanrip Hanseong High School
私立普成中學校	Private Boseong Middle School
京城醫專	Gyeongseong Medical College
京都帝國大學	Kyoto Imperial University
獨逸	Dogil
뿌레슬나우	P’ŭresŭllau
파이페루	P’aip’eru
푸라이브루그	P’ŭraibŭrŭgŭ
올넨후-트	Ollenhuth
東京 慶應大學	Tokyo Keio University
東京	Tokyo
慶應大學	Keio University
醫學部	Medical Faculty
鹽田	Shioda
東京帝國大學	Tokyo Imperial University
慶南	Gyeongnam
金海郡	Gimhae-gun
菉山面	Nokseon-myeon
花田里	Hwajeon-ri
私立東萊中學校	Private Dongnae Middle School
昭和	Shōwa
九州帝國大學	Kyushu Imperial University
咸南	Hamnam
長津郡	Changjin-gun
私立明明中學	Private Myeongmyeong Middle School
Breslau 大學	Breslau University
九州大學	Kyushu University
李灌鎔	I Gwan-ryong
칸트	K'ant'ŭ
요들	Yodŭl
립스	Lipsŭ
京城回生病院	Gyeongseong Hoesaeng Hospital
三山硏究所	Samsan Yeon'guso


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제11호
발행일	1928년 02월 01일
기사제목	博士論文公開(其二)
기사형태	논설

博士論文公開
一. 출생지
二. 연령
三. 학력
四. 學位 어든 年月及學部
五. 논문이 梗槪
六. 學位 엇기까지의 苦心
七. 現在職務

의학박사 兪日濬
一. 京畿道 安城郡 金光面 玉井里
二. 34년
三. 官立漢城高等學校, 私立普成中學校 3년 수업, 京城醫專卒業, 京都帝國大學醫科大學에서 內科學專攻. 獨逸 「뿌레슬나우」대학, 「파이페루」교수와 「푸라이브루그」대학 「올넨후-트」교수의 지도를 밧어 3년간 微生物學과 血淸學을 연구. 「푸라이브루그」대학에서 「독토르, 메딘친」(Dr.Med)의 학위수여. 東京 慶應大學 醫學部 病理細菌學敎室에석 微生物學과 血淸學을 1년간 계속연구.
四. 大正 10년 12월 23일 慶應大學에서
五. 논문의 제목.
1. 주논문
제1편. 膓窒扶斯菌 「파라」窒扶斯菌及赤痢菌族의 變異性에 관한 연구. (獨文)
제2편. 膓窒扶斯菌의 「바리아치온」현상에 대한 연구.(日文)
2. 참고논문
제1편. 肺炎菌에 대한 知見補遺(獨文)＜42＞
제2편. 特異性沈降反應에 대한 연구.(獨文)
제3편. 腸窒扶斯菌保菌者에 대한 細菌學的及血淸學的 연구.(獨文) 此編은 獨逸學位論文.
제4편. 結核診斷에 대한 知見補遺(獨文)
제5편. 臟器蛋白質特殊性에 관한 연구(獨文)

論文의 內容梗槪
주논문 제1편, 제2편의 內容梗槪.
(단 참고논문 5편은 지면관계로 생략함)
모든 생물계에는 유전성과 변이성이 잇다. 이것은 누구나 다 아는 바이다. 그러나 세균의 변이성에 대한 문제가 학자간의 주목을 끌기는 근년의 일이다. 그래서 세균의 형태, 生物學性質及血淸學上 관계가 그의 생활조건이 부적당할 시에는 반다시 일정한 변화를 이르키게 되는 것을 알게 되엿다. 이와 가튼 세균의 변이성은 血淸療法에나 질병진단에 큰 영향을 밋치게 될 뿐 아니라 일반생물학상으로 보아서 또한 趣味잇는 문제이다.
저자는 膓窒扶斯菌 「파라」窒扶斯菌及赤痢菌族의 40여 종에 대하야 자기의 특이한 방법으로 자세히 실험하야 左記의 사실을 엇게 되엿다.
1. 종래 세균의 변이성을 現出식킴에는 항상 그 균의 영양물이나 발육온도 등을 변환식키거나 또는 諸種 化學藥品으로 처치를 하엿섯다. 그러나 저자는 될 수 잇는대로 자연적에 각가운 변이성을 現出식키기 위하야 시험균과 他種族의 세균과를 일정한 培養期內에 배양하야셔 공동생활(I.ymbiose)를 식키여 보앗다. 그래셔 그 두 種族간에 생활경쟁이 이러날 때에 그 두 菌種의 변이성 여하를 관찰하엿다. 그 결과 저자는 오날까지 여러 학자덜의 실험방법에 依함보다 幾倍나 단시간 내에 的確한 변이성균을 배양하기에 성공하엿다. 이과 갓티 異種菌의 공동생활로 인하야 단시간내에 강한 변이성을 現出식킴은 필경 그 異種菌의 신진대사물의 자극작용의 영향이라고 看做하엿다.
2. 일차 변이된 세균은 수백代를 통하야 그 성질을 유전하나 그 변이균을 다시 생활력이 왕성한 異種菌과 공동생활을 식킬 때에는 그 변이성이 다시 업서지고 다시 本型에 드러온다. 此際에 물론 本型에 도러오지 안는 者가 만타.
3. 세균의 多大數는 同名菌免疫血淸에 대하야 凝集反應을 이리키는 법이다. 이 반응의 本態는 아즉 분명히 아지 못하고 잇다. 저자는 자기방법으로 배양한 變性菌株의 性狀을 생물학적과 血淸學적으로 비교연구하는 동시게 그 菌株의 毛細管化學(Kapillarcheme)적 성질을 자세히 시험하고 다시 그의 독성을 실험하엿다. 그 결과 아래와 갓튼 사실을 어덧다. ① 세균의 생물학상 성질은 血淸學的及毛細管化學的性狀보다 변이성이 적다. ② 세균의 형태가 변화할 때에는 血淸學적 性狀이 따러서 변하기 쉬웁다. (반다시 따러서 변함은 아니다.) 그때에는 그의 血淸學上學體가 變易이 된다.＜43＞ ③ 세균의 帶電性은 血淸學上凝集性이나 脫鹽性(Aussnlgbarkeit)과 하등관계를 가지지 안은 것이다. ④ 세균은 血淸學的 凝集性이 강할사록 脫鹽性이 크다. ⑤ 血淸學的 凝集性을 일은 세균은 표면장력이 減弱되엿스며 毛細管昇上力이 低劣되엿다. 그리고 諸種吸收劑에 대한 吸着力이 증가되엿다. ⑥ 그럼으로 세균의 血淸學上 應接性이 그 균체의 毛細管化學的 성질과 특수한 관계를 가짐을 알 수 잇다. ⑦ 세균의 독성은 血淸學上 變異性과 하등관계가 업다.
六. 家嚴의 특별한 교육심으로 인하야 별로 큰 고심된 일은 업섯슴니다. 다만 외국에 잇슬 시에 일시 물질적 고통을 맛본적은 잇슴니다.
七. 京城醫專敎授在職 微生物學及衛生學 講座擔任

醫學搏士 崔日文
一. 慶南 金海郡 菉山面 花田里
二. 36세
三. 私立東萊中學校, 京城醫專卒業, 東京帝國大學 醫學部 鹽田外科敎室에서 일반 外科學 연구, 東京帝大 醫學部 細菌學敎室에서 세균학을 연구.
四. 昭和 2년 6월 24일 東京帝國大學에서(논문을 同大學 醫學部 敎授會審査)
五. 주논문은 水癌의 연구.
논문내용의 梗槪
却說 「水癌」(癌疳)은 대개로 熱性傳染病 경과후의 소아를 만이 侵犯하는 극히 맹열한 一種의 進行性 壤疽性 질병이라. 그 원인에 대하야는 자고로 각국 의학자가 諸種의 세균설, 榮養障碍說, 又는 신경장애설 등을 주창하엿스며 특히 19세기말 至하야는 다수학자들이 세균설에 주목하게 되어 혹은 桿菌說, 혹은 球菌說, 혹은 絲狀菌及螺旋狀菌說 등의 諸種학설이 분분하야 甲論乙駁으로 확정이 못되엿섯다. 그러나 그 각종 세균 등은 모다 보통 口腔 內에서 생존하는 者인대 여하한 조건하에서 水癌이란 病症을 발생케 하는지 이것이 매우 흥미잇는 문제이다. 혹자는 영양이 매우 불량한대도 水癌의 발생을 볼 수 업스며 또 혹자는 동일한 熱誠전염병을 경과하여 고도의 쇠약과 口腔炎을 具有함에도 不抱하고 本病의 발생을 볼 수 업다. 즉 말하자면 보통 구강 내에 생존하는 동일종류의 세균이지만은 혹자의게는 水癌을 발생치 아니하며 혹자에게는 발생케 하는 것은 세균이외에 반드시 여하한 특수조건이 잇슬 것이다. 나는 이와 갓튼 관계를 闡明케 하기 위하야 오래동안 수암환자에 취하야 일반 臨床症候를 상세하게 관찰하는 동시에 먼저 세균학적 검사를 행하엿스며 次에 동물시험을＜44＞ 실행하여서 水癌의 발생원인을 천명하게 하엿다.
즉 水癌의 발생원인에 가장 유력한 세균은 余가 처음으로 발견한 小桿菌과 紡錘狀菌과 「스트레퍼토토릭크스」(絲狀菌)의 3종 세균이며 且 本病을 발생케 하는대 가장 유력한 조건은 체질이상과 전신영양불량 及 局部血行障碍인 것이 판명되엿다. 또한 水癌을 동물에게 실험하여서 실지 성공한 자는 아직도 각국 의학계에서 볼 수 업섯다. 그러나 余의 연구한 세균과 조건하에서는 동물의게도 水癌과 갓흔 병을 발생케 할 수 잇스며 즉 동물실험에 성공한 것이다.
다음에는 수암환자의 病理解剖적 변화가 아직 각국 의학계에서 昭詳치 못함을 알고 실지로 연구한 결과에 다수 유력한 변화를 증명하게 되엿다. 其中 흥미잇는 자는 各造血臟器의 萎縮憂性 頸部혈관내의 血栓형성 各淋巴裝置의 炎性變化 등이다.
다음에는 수암환자가 대다수는 사망하는대 그 사망의 직접원인이 여하한지 아직도 소상치 못하엿다. 그러나 余는 수암환자의 心臟血液에서 일종의 小桿菌을 발견하여서 동물에 시험한 결과에 이 小桿菌이 수암발생한 局部로서 혈액을 딸아 심장에 들어가 전신을 순환하여서 맛참내 환자로 하여곰 사망케 하는 것임을 알엇다. 따라서 금후 水癌에 치료방면에 대하야 일종의 광명을 엇케 되엿다.
六. 이것은 말삼들이기 매우 어렵나이다. 실지로 체험하여 본 사람이 나 잘 알 것이지 여간 말듯고는 그 고심의 眞境을 알기 어렵지요, 외국이나 日本大學에 가서 연구생이 되어 장구한 세월을 허비하면 쉽다고 하지만은 우리 가티 一便으로 봉급생활을 하여 가며 만치 아는 餘暇를 이용하여 무엇을 연구하는 것 가티 曲境을 다 지냇지요. 朝鮮서라도 큰 병원이면 몰으지만은 지방에 잇는 적은 병원에서는 연구실도 업고 기구와 도서가 모다 부족한 가온대서야 연구라 하기 보담 고통이라 할까요 몸부림이라 할까요 무엇을 연구하여 보랴는 마음은 학교를 졸업한 후 곳 잇섯으나 여러 가지 형편이 불리하여 시기만 기대리고 수년간 준비연구를 하엿지요. 水癌을 연구하게 된 동기는 이 병이 특별이 朝鮮에 만이 발생이 되며 그 중에도 貧寒한 가정에 소아라든지 비위생적 생활을 하는 가정의 소아의게 다수히 발생되는 점에 대하야 문제를 선택한 것이며 水癌硏究에 직접착수하기는 大正 13년에 시작하엿나이다. 그러나 病院動務임으로 오후까지는 환자치료에 종사하고 보니 여가라고는 야간과 일요일 뿐이라. 그러나 할 수 잇슴닛가. 滿2개년 동안을 계속하엿지요. 연구할 동안에 세균배양시험이라든지 동물실험이라든지 마음먹은대로 진행치 못할 때에 그 勞心焦思야 무엇이라고 말할 수 업지요만은 그러나 깁히 생각한 결과에 방향을 전환하여 시험을 진행할때에 如意하게 成績이 낫허날 때에는 고통의 반면에 그 유쾌한 것이야 형언할 수 업지요. 또한 기구도 부족하엿지만은 제일고통은 참고서 부족에 낙심될때가 적지 안엇슴니다. 부득이 東京을 수차 왕래하여 참고서를 閱覽하엿지요.＜45＞ 다음에 제일고통을 밧은 것은 病理解剖올시다.  환자측에서야 자기들의 사랑하는 자녀의 사체를 해부하도록 허락을 하는가요. 외국 사람들 갓흐면 쉽지만은 특별히 우리 朝鮮서는 해부하는 것을 실혀하는 습관이닛가. 여기에는 정신적 고통과 물질적 소비가 不尠하엿나이다. 千辛萬古로 논문을 작성하여서 대정 15년 4월경 정식으로 제출하엿지요. 그러나 이것이 교수회를 통과가 될는지 滿一個年 동안은 매우 걱정이 만엇지요. 교수회 통과라는 전보를 밧은 그날에야 정말 한숨 내쉬고 안심하엿나이다.
七. 道立醫院醫官으로 外科에 動務

醫學搏士 尹治衡
一. 咸南 長津郡
二. 32세
三. 私立明明中學, 京城醫專, 九州帝國大學 醫科大學 官費留學, 獨逸 Breslau 大學 九州大學醫學部
四. 大正 13년 6월 논문이 九州帝國大學 醫學部審査會에 통과, 7월 20일 證書授與式.
五. ① 健康肺와 結核肺에 대한 人工氣胸의 작용 ② 乳腺癌腫廣進經路의 病理組織學的檢査附尹式乳癌手術法 ③ 肝臟의 부분적 절제에 就하야 ④ 각종 외과적 병환에 就하야 血淸蛋白의 定性的及定量的檢査成績 ⑤ 胃腸管原發性肉腫에 대하야 이상 五種(其外二種은 略)
六. 논문의 內容梗槪
① 健康肺와 結核肺에 대한 人工氣胸의 작용의 결론 중 高遠한 학설은 此를 略하고 實地臨床에 응용되는 멧가지를 기술
甲. 人工氣胸療法은 肺出血즉 咯血에 세계 제일의 特效療法이 된다.
乙. 人工氣胸 中 中等度의 緊張性及弛緩性氣胸은 慢性肺結核에 (푸로독티베)특효적으로 작용된다. 此는 約言하면 결핵균은 영양불량으로 死滅이 되고 조직은 섬유화하야 病根은 全治된다.
丙. 결핵성폐는 인공기흉 시행 후에 此를 절제할 수 가능하다. 즉 在來에는 出血한 空氣栓塞으로 수술치 못하던 폐조직을 인공기흉 시행후 此에 수술을 加할 수 有한 것이다.
丁. 氣胸으로 인하야 외부로 체내주입약이 左右何肺던지 소원대로 多數流入케 할 수 잇는 것.
戊. 動物及人에게 一側肺全體를 摘出하여도 호흡작용에는 관계가 업고 該動物體는 생명을 保持할 수 有하다함에 결론
② 乳癌의 廣進經路의 병리조직학적 검사에서 제일로 癌腫細胞가＜46＞ 廣進侵蝕하는 淋巴管及淋巴腺의 新系統을 발견하야 乳癌手術에는 필히 尹式皮切法을 적용하야 癌腫細胞가 栓塞하여 잇는 淋巴管及腺의 損傷이 無케 此을 摘出할 것이다. 換言하면 手術野에 암세포의 播種이 無케하야 재발이 無케함에 在하다. 第二로는 암종세포가 大胸筋組織內에 廣進하는 혈관, 임파관, 특히 筋纖維束肉 中에 侵蝕하는 경로를 발명하야 在來의 수술법이 誤함을 지적하고 尹式手術法에 의한 大胸筋全摘出을 행케 함에 在하다. (上 二種은 獨文으로 獨逸서 발표한 것.)
③ 인체에서 肝臟의 부분적 절제가 가능한 것을 實地臨床에서 體驗하야 日本서는 최초의 수술이요 또 결과가 양호하야 全治된 것을 大正 8년 日本醫學會에 보고한 실지 경험 논문.
④ 각종 외과적 療患에서 血淸蛋白의 定性的及定量的檢査를 행하야 血淸 中 「알부민」과 「끄로부린」과의 合美的 단백질량을 計出하고 又 「알부민」과 「끄로부린」의 각기 포함비율을 定性定量的으로 計出하야 단백질의 이동과 其含有量이 병의 종류와 輕重과 豫後의 良否에 따라서 各異하고 또 일정한 비율로 환산하야 此를 병의 종류를 판단하는 진단법에 응용하고 다시 진일보하야 豫後를 測하는 환언하면 경과의 良과 否를 단정케 함에 응용케 하엿다.
⑤ 胃腸消化管內에 발생하는 肉腫에 대한 자기경험 例와 세계적 大學者의 報告例를 종합하야 통계적으로  발생하는 年齡症候, 診斷療法, 及發生原因에 대한 학설을 論唱함에 在하다.
七. 학위를 잇기까지의 고심은 별것이 아니라 苦學으로 饑寒의 고통을 受함도 不拘하고 同僚와 선배의 陰害와 中傷이 잇슴에도 불굴하고 정의와 근면은 최후의 승리라는 견고한 신념하에서 之東之西하면서 학계를 위하야 헌신한 결과의 부산물이 즉 학위임니다. 成學하기까지의 고심이지 결코 학위엇기까지의 고심은 無하엿슴니다. 在獨時에 친우가 독일대학생이 되어서 똑틀시험을 受하기를 望함도 一笑에 附하고 똑틀 등과 相肩하야 연구실에서 진리학설을 探索한 其背水陣格의 昌險은 成學의 고심을 推察할 것임니다.
八. 현재 직무는 京城回生病院長. 三山硏究所長.

내 論文의 內容에 對하야 李灌鎔
「別乾坤」 12월호에 내 논문 「의식의 기본사실인 의지」란 것의 「내용의 요점」이란 題下에 揭載된 내용을 보면 錯誤가 한 두 가지가 아님니다. 來訪하신 貴社 記者가 심리학을 전문하시지 안엇다니가, 術語或細目에 드러가 착오가 잇슬 것은 나도 豫期하엿슴닛다. 또 「別乾坤」에서도 금번에 목적하신 바가 학술논문을 발간함에 잇는 것이 아님을 알고 나도 극히 평이한 말슴으로 暫間 들려듸린 것님니다. 그러나 내 소위 논문이란 것이 좀 잘못 소개되엿다고 내가 여긔 다시 변명할 필요는 업겟슴니다. 그러나 이 착오가 내 선생님인 「립스」교수의 심리학적＜47＞ 기본원리에까지 밋치는 것은 도저히 간과할 수 엄슴니다. 내가 그때 말한 것은 아래와 갓슴니다.
1. 在來 심리학자의 大槪는 우리 심리현상을 한 기본적 심리 「要素」에 귀결식히여서 혹은 모든 심리현상을 「智」라는 기본적 요소에 귀결식히고(主智主義) 혹은 「情」에(主情主義) 혹은 智와 情에 귀결식히나 그 근저에는 「意志」의 형태로 나타난다(主意主義). 하야 심리학의 기본적 대상에 대하야까지 학설이 不一함으로 심리학이란 학문은 아직 어린과학이라 함이 내 말이엿고
2. 「칸트」 이후에 심리의 기본적 요소로 智情意 三個를 인정한 예컨대 「요들」 가튼-학자가 잇섯스나 그들은 주장하되 우리 심리현상을 분석하면 처음에 무슨 생각(智)이 나고 그 생각이 快否의 感動(情)을 이릭키고 그 다음에는 이 감동에 의하야 무엇이든지 「뜻」(意)한다고 하엿슴니다. 그럼으로 智로브터 情으로브터 意 또 意로브터 (행동한 후에는 또다시 무엇이든지 생각하게 됨으로) 智 이러한 순환으로 우리의 정신생활이 성립된다고 함니다.
3. 그러나 우리 선생님은 이 문제에 대하야 이럿케 생각함니다. 물론 우리 심리현상을 분석하면 智情意 3요소로 난후어진다. 그러나 「要素」 란 말에 중대한 인식의 착오가 잇다. 의식의 기본적 진상은 오즉 동작이다. 智情意 어느 것이 동작 아닌 것이 업다. 우주전체가 동작인 동시에 마음이란 것은 동적이다. 그리고 智적 동작이 情적 동작과 意적 동작의 원인이 되는 것처럼 보아도 안된다. 智적 동작은 외계사물이 자아에 刺戟을 줌에서 생기는 감각에 依하야 성립되고 또 외계사물의 자극이 주관적 성질을 가진 감각으로 되랴면 자아자체도 다소간 활동하여야 함으로(아무리 내 周圍에 자극물이 만하도 내가 자고 잇스면 감각을 이릭킬 수 업슴으로) 智적 동작이 생기랴면 자아의 동작 즉 意적 동작도 잇서야 하겟다. 그럼으로 智적 동작(외계의 동작)이 잇슨 것은 반드시 意적 동작 자아의 동작의 발동을 의미하는 것이다. 그러고 情적 동작은 智意 合成動作임으로(생각나자 뜻하게 되어 快否를 감동하게 됨으로) 智情意란 것은 결국 의식이란 기본 동작의 세 가지 방면이란 것을 의미하는 것이다. 함이 「립스」교수의 주장임니다. 이 학설을 주장함에 「립스」氏는 물리학적 생물학적 철학적 여러 가지 사실과 진리를 인용하엿고 또 이 학설을 근거를 삼고 교육학, 사회학, 세계관에 밋치는 여러 가지 귀결이 잇스나 이에 대하야는 다른 기회에 다시 말슴하겟슴니다. 나는 이 학설을 기초로 하야 정신적 인격의 발전과정을 설명하고 그 논문을 맛치엿슴니다. 내 생각 갓해서는 아조 무가치한 것이 아닐 것 갓해서 틈잇는 대로 飜譯하야 보겟슴니다. (끗) ＜48＞
＜42-48＞