잡지명	별건곤 제11호
발행일	1928년 02월 01일
기사제목	全朝鮮 怪風俗展覽會, 入場無料 (Exhibition of Strange Customs in All of Joseon, Free Admission)
필자	主催者 觀相者 (Organizer, Observer)
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Exhibition of Strange Customs in All of Joseon, Free Admission
						Organizer, Observer

I. Strange Customs Related to Rituals

In Joseon, rituals mostly consist of the four main ceremonies: coming-of-age, marriage, funeral, and ancestral rites. However, since these are generally similar throughout the country and have changed as a result of the passage of time, there is no need to elaborate. I just want to mention a few things that remain to this day.

Strange customs! Strange customs! But where can you find something as ridiculous as hiring someone to cry at a funeral in Seoul? Foreigners may find it strange that Koreans make loud "Aigo, aigo" sounds when wailing, but Koreans have become so accustomed to it that they don't find it particularly odd. However, hiring someone to cry, especially in Seoul, would be considered a strange custom by anyone. The bereaved remains still while servants and clerks go about their work, wailing "Aigo, aigo," and then suddenly shout, "Bring water! Bring liquor!" and even wail about having to go to the police station. This is a remnant of the past when the yangban (nobility) class could not cry all the time themselves and could not avoid doing so for the sake of appearances, so they had their servants do it for them. And when you see the so-called twelve hanim or whatever at a wedding ceremony, wearing huge, colorful, and ungainly clothes with their hair piled high like Namsan Mountain, parading through the main streets of Jongno, they look like a procession of tokkaebi (goblins) to onlookers, no matter how grand the wedding procession may be. When a woman from the entertainment industry, such as a gisaeng or a clown, dies, men who were fond of her carry her funeral bier, playing the three-stringed and six-stringed instruments and dancing as they go. This is called "junmuji funeral" (준무지장사), and it is a strange custom that cannot be seen in rural villages. In Yeongcheon, Gyeongsangbuk-do, wealthy people carry an empty funeral bier on the day before the funeral, similar to a mock state funeral, and parade it through the town while singing. This is said to be both a way of showing off the funeral paraphernalia to the public and of saying a final farewell to many people. And in some mountain villages in Gangwon-do and some regions of Hamgyeong-do, a bereaved person must run away for tens of li (Korean mile, approximately 393 meters) on the day they remove their mourning clothes in order to be called a filial son (because they are so loath to take off their mourning clothes for their parents, they are called filial sons for running away). There is a funny story about this. In the past, when rewarding filial sons and virtuous women, one man tried to obtain a filial son memorial gate (孝子 旌門) and ran away in the middle of the night before even performing the dawn memorial service, but he slipped and was injured. The villagers praised him as a filial son and reported it to the magistrate, but the magistrate, upon hearing this, not only refused to grant him a memorial gate but also had him flogged, saying, "You rascal! No matter how busy you may be, how could you run away secretly before completing your mother's three-year mourning ceremony and even injure your parents' remains? You are the most unfilial son in the world and deserve to be punished!" The man cried, "Aigo, memorial gate, save me!" This incident alone shows how much Koreans in the past were bound by formality and vanity.

<49>Speaking of ancestral rites, since there are many tigers in Gangwon-do, many people also die from tigers. On the anniversary of their death, they always set up a separate table of offerings outside the door. Also, in Jeolla-do, when the groom's wedding procession takes place, a servant stands in front and shouts encouragement to the horse in the manner of a past government official. There is a similar custom in Hamgyeong-do, especially when a poor groom rides in an ox cart and a person stands in front shouting encouragement to the horse in their local dialect. Anyone seeing this for the first time cannot help but find it strange.

II. Strange Customs Related to Combat

A. Flower Fight. Just the name itself suggests a high-collar (modern) fight, a peaceful fight. In spring, when flowers bloom, there are many men and women enjoying flower viewing everywhere, and children also form groups and pick flowers to have flower fights with flower threads (花絲). This is common everywhere, so it cannot be called a strange custom, but especially in the Gwangju area, when flowers bloom, women prepare food and go to the mountains to have flower fights like children (also with flower threads). Finally, as an after-party, they form a group and, like the women of Daegu clapping and singing "Koejinae chingching nane" (쾌진애 칭칭 난애) while celebrating the moon, they hold hands, play the janggo (Korean drum), sing songs, and parade through the town. This is an annual event, called flower-ssam nori (꼿쌈노리) in that region. Whether it is good or bad is a separate issue, but it is a custom not found in other regions.

B. Stone Fight. The most dangerous and exhilarating fight is pyeonsam (편쌈, a colloquial term for stone fight). It usually takes place around the middle of the first lunar month, and the most popular regions were Gyeongseong (Seoul) and Pyongyang. Pyongyang was centered around areas such as Mansudae (萬壽臺) along the Daedong River, and Gyeongseong was centered around areas such as Jongno, Josan (造山, near present-day Imjeong), and outside the city walls, Manrihyeon (万里峴, including Ahyeon and Gongdeok-ri), Angamcheon, and Mucheon. Riotous strongmen of the city formed two factions of thousands or even tens of thousands of people <50> and threw stones at each other from a designated point. Eventually, they engaged in close combat with clubs (棍棒), and only after one side was completely defeated would they call a truce. There were many casualties, and houses and shops were also damaged. There are various accounts of the origin of this custom, but it seems accurate to say that it is a remnant of the martial spirit of the Goguryeo era (昔日에는 돌로 전쟁을 하얏다.) (See Tangshu Goryeojuan (唐書高麗傳)). Even now, people from the Han River area in Seoul and Pyongyang are good at throwing stones because the influence remains. This custom was even temporarily encouraged during the Daewongun era, but as a result of the changing times, it was eventually banned and became just an old story in the sarangbang (men's quarters).

C. Rope Fight. Rope fight (索戰) is also called gejulssam (蟹索戰, crab rope fight), and this is also a fight that takes place from mid-January to early February. It is not common in northwestern Joseon, but it is more common in central and southern Joseon, especially in the Gyeongsang-do region. Like stone fight, two factions face off at a designated point, each holding a large rope that is several arm spans thick, and they pull on each other to determine the winner, and the victory or defeat is said to predict the abundance or scarcity of the village. The scene of the fight was truly spectacular. Men and women, young and old, all joined their side and exerted themselves to the utmost, and in the end, when things got desperate, they even brought cows and horses to help. On that day, each village formed a group with various percussion instruments such as sogos (small drums), janggus (hourglass drums), buks (drums), and ggaenggwaris (gongs), and they danced and played, creating flags of all sorts of colors to display an imposing military appearance. Then, when they won, they shouted cheers and danced around. Especially in areas such as Changnyeong, Gyeongnam, they shout "O wae seungjeona (오왜승전아)- o wae seungjeona (오왜승전아)" and in the Gyeongbuk region, they shout "Koejina chingching nanwa (쾌진아 칭칭난와)" and dance around. (The above two phrases are dialects of those regions and are said to have originated during the Imjin War, but their meaning is not clear.) There are times when casualties occur in this fight as well, but because it is not as dangerous as stone fight, it has not been banned. Moreover, since schools have recently been holding tug-of-war as a sport, it may become even more popular at some point.

D. Torch Fight. Torch fight (矩火戰) is a fight that takes place on the night of the first full moon of the lunar year, and it is popular in some parts of Gyeonggi and Gangwon-do. On the first full moon, people light torches to greet the moon and climb the hills in their village, setting fire to piles of brushwood and playing various percussion instruments. When they see people from neighboring villages doing the same, they feel animosity and a desire to fight, and they start challenging each other. This challenge is nothing more than the war party facing the group of people from the other village and shouting "Sullyeong-su-ye-ddi-mal (윗말 꼴내꼴내-, meaning upper village, lower village)" Then the other side also challenges them with the same words. After doing this for a while and getting excited, after greeting the moon, they immediately shout the same challenge as before, wave their torches, and begin to engage. Both sides fight each other until the torches are all extinguished, <51> and then they call a truce. That fight is also dangerous, of course. There are people who singe their hair, people who get cuts on their foreheads, people who burn their clothes, and all sorts of other injuries. The writer also participated in one when he was 15 or 16 years old and remembers burning his clothes to this day. It seems that it is now prohibited.

E. Archery Fight. This is a remnant of the past when military officials took exams using bows and arrows. It is held in various places in the capital and countryside in the spring and autumn, but it is not popular among the general public and remains just a form of entertainment for idlers.

F. Cart Fight. This was a custom that took place in January in some counties of Yeongseo, Gangwon-do, and some parts of Gyeonggi-do in the past. They built a tall cart called a yogeon (軺軒) and pushed each other to determine the winner. In Chuncheon, in addition to cart fights, there was also a so-called yogeon taewugi (軺軒 태우기, yogeon riding), which was a prank. If anyone passed through the village in January, the village youth would forcibly put them on the yogeon and carry them around for a while. If they didn't receive a bow or money from that person, they would push them into the snow. This seems to be a remnant of the ancient practice of extorting money from prisoners during cart fights. In addition to this, bullfights similar to those in Spain were popular in Jinju during the full moon of the first lunar month, and kite fights were popular in Seoul. Kickball fights were popular in the north and south during the Dano Festival in May and the Chuseok Festival in August, and the kickball fight in Pyongyang during the Dano Festival in May is famous domestically, but details are omitted.

III. Strange Customs Related to Clothing

The jobaegi (조백이) worn by women in Seoul may look like a tailless hen to those seeing it for the first time, but it is a strange sight to see gisaengs in Daegu and Haeju still wearing satgats (삿갓, traditional Korean hats). It would be shocking to women in southern Korea if women in northern Pyongan-do wore rings in their ears like Qing women and women in southern Pyongan-do often went out without wearing skirts, showing their underwear (this was a common custom in northern and southern Pyongan-do, but it has now been greatly improved). You would be greatly mistaken if you treated a jangdorim (장돌임, a traveling merchant with long hair) with their hair braided in the market of Chungcheong-do or Gyeongsang-do as a young boy (in southern Korea, people with wives and children wear their hair braided for business convenience). If you go to Hamgyeong-do and mistake someone wearing a bugeon (布巾, head cloth) for someone in mourning and offer your condolences (common people wear bugeons like southerners wear towels or hats), you will be embarrassed. If you go to Pyongan-do and think that only government officials wear danggeuns (宕巾, a type of hat), you would say that the claim that Pyongan-do people were never given official positions is completely false (in Pyongan-do, even porters and grooms commonly wear danggeuns). It is a strange extravagance that the cost of the flower crown and ornaments of a newlywed bride in Gaeseong is usually five or six hundred won, but it is a surprising custom that the cost of the langja hair (랑자머리) of a newlywed bride in Pyongyang is two or three hundred won. A farmer in Gyeongsang-do wearing a gat (traditional Korean hat) while carrying a jige (A-frame carrier) is similar to a somori (소모리) or malmori (말모리) in Gaeseong or Jangan wearing a satgat and a durumagi (overcoat). The fondness of women in Hamgyeong-do for silver rings <52> (as big as door rings) or the fondness of women in Pyongan-do for gold rings is a common curiosity. Oh, I forgot! Nuns (尼) wearing men's clothing can also be considered a strange custom in terms of clothing.

IV. Miscellaneous Strange Customs

The house decoration of the Song clan of Hwadeok, the food preparation of the Yun clan of Noseong, and the tomb decoration of the Kim clan of Yeonsan are now old stories, but the tomb decoration of the people of Gaeseong is probably the best in Joseon. Not to mention placing various stone sculptures in front of the tomb, they also dig ponds and make flower gardens near the tomb. This is a custom not seen in other regions. Women in Seoul spend a lot of time decorating the maru (wooden floor) and set up a pottery shop on the maru, preparing dozens of pottery dishes. In Jeolla-do households, they show off their jangdokdae (platform for jars) by leaving forty, fifty, sixty, or seventy ceramic jars in one place.

In Hwanghae and western regions, even if they go hungry, they prepare several sets of silk quilts, and in Hamgyeong-do households, they decorate the kitchen a lot, displaying rows of brassware, pottery, and water jars. People in Gangwon-do boast about their "nakgal-i" (낙갈이, selective planting), carefully choosing trees or grains for planting. Jeju women are good at riding boats and swimming, while Hamgyeong women are good at riding horses and cows, so the old saying "southern boats and northern horses" is not a lie. The sound of farmers plowing the fields in the Gwandong region harmonizes with the sorrowful sound of weeding menari (traditional Korean folk song) of women in the Haeseo region. Abducting widows is a remnant of the ancient era of abduction marriages and was a strange custom that occasionally occurred until about 10 years ago. It's not worth mentioning, but even stranger is the so-called forced name-giving (强制通姓名). Decades ago, if an uninitiated child passed through a village, the children and youth of that village would chase after them and force them to give their name. There are so many things to say about their manner. First, they would call out "Anya (안아) - doryeongnim (도령님)!" three times, and if they didn't answer, they would slap them on the cheek. They would ask all sorts of questions, such as "Did the pine cone of Nambu roll down or slide down? (남‚°의 솔방울이 내리굴넛느냐 치굴넛느냐, meaning is it more important to have parents or siblings) How many sets of spoons do you have at home? (너희집 숫까락이 몃 벌이냐, meaning how many family members are there)". In the end, they would slap them on the cheek and inflict all sorts of humiliation. This was a vicious custom that came from forced homosexual love.

<53>There are also very many strange customs related to superstitions, but as they are gradually disappearing with the development of culture, there is no need to mention them again.

And among the strange customs related to annual events, there are many strange customs in January, the first month of the year, but these are omitted because they were recorded in detail in the article "Exhibition of January Customs" in last year's issue of this magazine.

Named Entities

京城	Gyeongseong
平壤	Pyeongyang
萬壽臺	Mansudae
林町	Imjeong
萬里峴	Manrihyeon
阿峴	Ahyeon
孔德里	Gongdeong-ri
巫川	Mucheon
大院王	Daewon-gun
大邱	Daegu
慶南	Gyeongnam
昌寧	Changnyeong
慶北	Gyeongbuk
春川	Chuncheon
晉州	Jinju
海州	Haeju
咸鏡道	Hamgyeongdo
江原道	Gangwondo
懷德 宋氏	Hwadeok Songssi
魯城 尹氏	Noseong Yunssi
連山 金氏	Yeonsan Gimssi
開城	Gaeseong
黃平	Hwangpyeong
濟州	Jeju
李波仁	Li Pa'in
春川	Ch'unch'ŏn



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제11호
발행일	1928년 02월 01일
기사제목	全朝鮮 怪風俗展覽會, 入場無料
필자	主催者 觀相者
기사형태	문예기타

全朝鮮 怪風俗展覽會, 入場無料
						主催者 觀相者
一. 儀式에 關한 怪風俗
조선에 잇서서 의식이라 하면 의례 冠婚喪祭가 대부분을 차지할 것이다. 그러나 대체로는 전국이 다 비슷하고 또 시대 변천의 결과로 변동된 것이 만흐닛가 장황이 말할 것은 업다. 다만 현재까지 남어 잇는 몃 가지를 말하고저 한다.
怪風俗! 怪風俗! 하지만은 서울사람의 喪家에서 대신 哭하는 것처럼 우스운 일이 어듸잇스랴. 외국 사람은 조선 사람의 소리를 놋코 아이고 아이고 하고 곡하는 것도 怪異라고 하겟지만은 조선사람은 그것이 일반으로 한 습관이 되엿스닛가 별로 이상히 생각할 것이 업스나 특히 서울사람의 대신 곡하는 것은 누구나 怪風이라 할 것이다. 喪人은 가만이 그대로 잇고 하인, 廳直이 등이 일을 하고 다니면서 「아이고 아이고」하다가 별안간 「여보 물떠오, -술가저오.」하고 심지어 아이고 아이고 념병을 하고 보두청에 갈일이라고 까지한다. 그것은 과거의 량반들이 자기가 곡은 시시로 할 수 업고 체면상 아니 할 수도 업서서 자기의 하인을 대신으로 식히는 버릇이 그대로 남은 것이다. 그리고 혼례식 때에 소위 열두한임이니 무엇이니하고 南山덩이 가튼 큰머리에다 울긋불긋한 불체재한 의복을 입고 종로 대도상으로 떼를 지여 가는 것을 보면 제-아모리 호긔스러운 婚行이라 할지라도 남이 보기에는 독갑이의 行列 가티 보인다. 妓生이나 광대가튼 화류계의 여자가 죽으면 평소에 조와하든 외입장이 남자들이 그 여자의 喪輿를 메고 3絃 6角을 치며 춤을 추고 나아간다. 그것이 소위 「준무지장사」 라 하는 것인데 향촌에서는 또한 볼 수 업는 怪風이다. 慶北 永川地方에서는 상당한 재력이 잇는 사람은 葬日前날에 國葬 때에 習儀 비슷하게 빈 喪輿를 메고 노래를 부르며 市中으로 도라다닌다. 그것은 喪家의 긔구가 엇더한 것을＜49＞ 일반에게 자랑식히는 동시에 여러 사람에게 永訣을 하는 것이라고 한다. 그리고 江原道 山邑과 咸鏡道 엇더한 지방에서는 喪人이 三喪을 벗는 날에 수십리식 달어 나야만 효자의 칭호를 듯는다는 데(父母의  喪을 벗기가 시려서 달어 남으로 효자라 칭함) 거긔에 대하야는 한 우스운 이약이가 잇다. 녯날 孝子烈女를 표창할 때에 엇더한 자가 효자 㫌門을 어들가하고 새벽 祭도 지내기 전에 밤중에 미리 도망을 하다가 실족하야 落傷을 하엿슴으로 洞里사람들이 효자라고 떠들고 군수에게 報하엿더니 군수는 그 말을 듯고 㫌門은커녕 그 자를 잡아다가 볼기를 따리며 호령을 하는 말이 「이놈! 아모리 밧분일이 잇기로 어미의 三喪祭도 마치지 못하고 남몰내 달아나다가 父母의 遺體까지 傷하얏단 말이냐. 너는 천하의 불효자이닛가 따려 맛당하다 하니 그 자는 「아이고 㫌門아 사람 살려라」 하고 울엇다 한다. 이 일만 보아도 과거에 우리 조선사람이 얼마나 허례와 허영에 구속이 되엿는지 알 수 잇다.
祭祀말이 낫스니 말이지 江原道에는 호랑이가 만흐니 만큼 호랑이에게 죽는 사람이 또한 만흔데 그 사람의 祭日이면 반듯이 제물 한 상을 따로 차려다가 문밧게 다 놋는 일이 잇다고 한다. 全羅道에서도 신랑의 婚行을 할 때에는 하인이 압헤 서서 과거 官行모양으로 권마성을 지르며 가는 일이 잇지만은 咸鏡道에도 그러한 풍속이 잇는데 특히 貧寒한 집 신랑이 牛車를 타고 사람이 압헤 서서 사토리의 말로 권마성을 지르고 가는 것을 보면 처음 보는 사람은 누구나 이상히 역이지 안을 수 업다.

二. 戰鬪에 關한 怪風俗
甲. 花戰 이름만 들어도 하이카라 싸홈이오 평화적 싸홈이다. 봄이 되고 꼿필 때이면 어느 곳이든지 꼿노리하는 남녀들이 만코 아희들도 동모를 지어 가지고 꼿을 꺽거다가 꼿실(花絲)로 꼿싸홈을 한다. 그것은 도처에 다 잇는 것이닛가 怪風俗이라 할 것이 업지만은 특히 光州지방에는 꼿필 때이면 일반녀자들이 음식을 차려 가지고 산에 가서 아희들 모양으로 꼿싸홈을 하다가 (그것도 역시 花絲로) 최후에는 餘興으로 떼를 지여 가지고 맛치 大邱의 여자들이 달노리를 할 때에 손벽을 치며 「쾌진애 칭칭 난애」를 부르고 市中으로 도라다니듯이 서로 손에 손을 잡고 장고도 치며 노래도 하고 市中까지 도라다닌다. 그것은 例年의 행사로 그 지방에서는 謂之꼿쌈노리라고 한다. 그것이 좃코 그른 것은 별문제이니와 다른 지방에 업는 풍속이다.
乙. 石戰 싸홈 중에 제일 위험하고도 장쾌한 싸홈은 편쌈(석전의 속칭)이니 그 시긔는 대개 정월초 中旬경이오 盛히 유행하든 지방은 京城과 平壤이다. 平壤은 大洞江沿岸 萬壽臺 等地를 중심으로 하고 京城은 城內로는 鐘路 造山(현 林町부근) 城外로는 萬里峴(阿峴, 孔德里包含) 安甘川, 巫川 等地를 중심으로 하야 市井의 無賴壯漢들이 수천 혹 수만식 兩派로＜50＞ 분립하야 일정한 지점에서 서로 돌을 던지고 싸우다가 나종에는 방맹이 (棍棒)로 단병접전을 하야 一便이 아주 참패한 뒤에야 휴전을 한다. 사상자가 다수 나는 것은 물론이오 가옥, 상점 등이 다 파손된다. 이 풍속의 유래에 대하야는 여러 가지의 말이 잇스나 녯적 高句麗 시대의 尙武하든 遺風(昔日에는 돌로 전쟁을 하얏다.)이라는 말이 정확한 듯하다(唐書高麗傳參照) 지금에도 서울의 江대사람이나 平壤사람들이 돌을 잘 던지는 것은 그 餘風이 尙存한 까닭이다. 이 풍속도 大院王 시대에는 일시 장려까지 하얏스나 시대변천의 결과로 그역 금지되야 다만 사랑방의 녯 이약이 거리가 되고 말엇다.
丙. 索戰 索戰은 속칭 게줄쌈(蟹索戰)이니 이것도 역시 정월 중순으로부터 2월초순까지에 하는 싸홈이다. 서북조선에는 별로 업스나 중남부 조선에서 만히 하는데 특히 慶尙道지방에서 성행한다. 그것도 편쌈과 가티 또한 일정한 지점에서 양파가 대립하야 사람의 아람으로도 몃 아람식 되는 큰 줄을 가지고 서로 당기이여서 승부를 決하고 또 승부로써 그 촌락의 풍흉을 점한다 한다. 그 싸홈 할 때야 말로 참장관이엿다. 男女老少할 것 업시 자긔 편에 가담하야 필사의 力을 다함은 물론이고 나종에 급한 때에는 자긔 편에 잇는 牛馬까지도 갓다가 助力을 하게 한다. 그 날에는 小鼓, 長鼓북, 꽹괄이 등 가진 풍물로 촌마다 패를 지여서 뛰고 놀고 별의별 색의 旗를 맨들어서 당당한 軍容을 베푼다. 그러다가 승전을 하면 만세를 부르며 뛰논다. 특히 慶南 昌寧 등지에서는 「오왜승전아- 오왜승전아」를 부르고 또 慶北지방에서는 「쾌진아 칭칭난와」라 부르며 뛰논다. (위의 두 말은 그 지방의 방언인데 壬亂 때에 난 것이라 하나 의미가 명백치 안타) 이 싸홈에도 사상자가 혹 나는 때가 잇스나 石戰처럼 그다지 위험치는 안흔 까닭에 금지가 되지 안흘 뿐 아니라 근래 각 학교에서 운동으로 줄다리기를 하는 일이 잇슨즉 엇던 시기에는 더 성행할지도 알 수 업다.
丁. 矩火戰 횃불쌈은 정월 대보름날 밤에 하는 싸홈이니 京畿 一部 及 江原道에서 만히 유행한다. 정월 대보름날이면 사람마다 달마지를 하느라고 홰를 매여 가지고 그 동리의 동산에 올나 가서 홧토불도 놋코 가진 풍물을 다 치며 놀다가 근동의 사람이 또 그와 가티 노는 것을 보면 적개심이 생기고 격투심이 생겨서 그만 도전행동을 한다. 그 행동은 다른 것이 아니라. 主戰側에서 다른 동리 사람들이 모힌 편에 다 향하야 「술령-수-예-띄-말(上洞則曰웃말 下洞則曰 아래 말이라 함)꼴내꼴내-」 하면 저편에서도 역시 그와 가튼 말로 도전을 한다. 피차 한참 그리하야 興奮이 되면 달마지를 한 다음에 즉시 또 악가와 가튼 도전령을 부르고 홰를 두르며 출동을 하야 교전을 시작한다. 양편이 서로 싸우다가 그 햇불이 다 꺼진 다음에야＜51＞ 휴전을 한다. 그 싸홈도 물론 위험하다. 머리를 끄시르는 사람, 이마가 터지는 사람, 의복을 태우는 사람, 별의별 부상이 다 잇다. 필자도 15,6때에 한번 출전하얏다가 의복을 태워 본 일이 지금까지 긔억된다. 현재에는 그것도 금지된 모양이다.
戊. 射戰 이것은 전일에 弓矢로 전쟁을 할 때에 무관시험을 보는 餘風이 지금까지 남어서 京鄕 각지에서 춘추기에 행하는 것이나 일반 민중적이 아니오 遊散無事者流의 일종 오락에 긋치고 말엇다.
己. 車戰 이것도 前日에 江原道 嶺西 몃 군과 京畿 일부에서 정월에 행하든 풍속인데 軺軒이라는 놉다란 수레를 맨드러 가지고 양편에서 서로 밀어서 승부를 決하는 것이다. 春川에서는 차전 외에 소위 軺軒 태우기라는 作란이 잇섯스니 즉 洞里靑年들이 정월이면 軺軒을 맨드러 놋코 洞里로 지내가는 사람이 잇스면 강제로 태워 한참 실고가다가 그 사람의 절을 밧거나 돈을 밧지 안흐면 눈 속에다 모라 늣는다. 이것은 往古車戰하든 시대에 捕虜에게 돈을 강탈하든 유풍인 갓 갓다. 이 밧게 晋州에서는 정월 望間에 西班牙風과 가튼 鬪牛가 성행하고 서울에는 紙鳶싸홈이 성행하고 5월 단오와 8월 추석 때에는 남북지방에서 脚戱戰이 성행하는 중 平壤의 5월 端午 脚戱는 國內에 유명하나 자세한 것은 다 생략한다.

三. 服飾에 關한 怪風俗
서울 녀자들의 조백이 쓴 것도 처음으로 보는 사람의 눈에는 꽁지 빠진 씨암닭 가터서 그리 美로는 보이지 안치마는 大邱나 海州 妓生들이 아즉까지 삿갓을 쓰고 다니는 것은 한 奇風이다. 平北의 녀자가 淸女모양으로 귀에 고리(耳環)를 달고 단이며 平南의 女子들이 치마를 흔이 아니 입고 속곳바람으로 출입(평남 평북이 공통으로 그런 풍속이 잇스나 지금은 만히 개량되엿다.)을 한다면 南鮮의 여자들은 駭怪하게 녁일 것이다. 충청도나 경상도 시장에서 머리 딴 장돌임을 보고 총각아희로 대접하다가는 큰코를 다칠 것은 물론이어니와 (南鮮에는 有妻有子孫한 사람이 상업상 편리를 위하야 편발을 하고 다닌다. 咸鏡道에 가서 두건(布巾)쓴 사람을 보고 服喪人으로 알엇다가는 吊問인사하다가 볼 일을 잘 못볼 것이오 (보통사람들이 南鮮사람의 수건이나 관쓰듯이 布巾을 쓴다.) 平安道에 가서 宕巾 쓴 사람을 보고 벼슬한 사람으로만 알면 過去시대에 平安道 사람에게 벼슬아니 주엇다는 것이 전혀 거짓말이라고 할 것이다(平安道에서는 벼슬한 사람이외에 지게꾼, 말꾼까지라도 보통으로 宕巾을 쓴다.) 開城新嫁娘의 花冠佩物갑이 보통으로 오륙백원식 된다는 것도 일종의 괴이한 奢侈이지마는 平壤新嫁娘의 랑자머리갑이 이삼백원이나 되는 것은 놀나운 풍속이다. 慶尙道 농군의 갓쓰고 지게지는 것은 開城이나 長湍의 소모리, 말모리꾼이 삿갓쓰고 두루막이 입은 것과 격이 비슷하고 咸鏡道여자의 銀가락지＜52＞(大如門環) 조와하기나 平安道 여자의 금가락지 조와하기나 호기심은 일반이다. 올치-이젓구나. 여자중이(尼) 男服을 하는 것도 복식상으로 보아 한 怪風이라 아니할 수 업는 것이다.

四. 雜同散異 怪風俗
懷德 宋氏의 집치장과 魯城 尹氏의 음식치례와 連山 金氏의 묘치례는 어느듯 녯 이약이가 되엿거니와 開城사람의 묘치장이야말로 조선에서 아마 제일일 것이다. 墓前에 각종 석물을 함은 말도 말고 묘근처에 연못도 파고 화초밧도 맨든다. 그것은 다른 지방에서는 못보는 풍속이다. 서울녀자는 마루 시간치례를 하느라고 마루에다 砂器廛을 벌이다 십히 砂器그릇을 장만하야 놋코 全羅道 가정에서는 장독간 자랑을 하느라고 한곳에다 사오십 내지 육칠십 개의 陶器를 버려노앗다.
黃平 兩西에서는 밥은 굴물지언정 비단금침 몃 벌식은 작만하고 咸鏡道 가정에서는 부엌치장을 만히하야 鍮器, 陶器 두멍 등을 즐비하게 버려놋코 江原道사람은 낙갈이 자랑을 하느라고 나무도 낙갈이 곡식으로도 낙갈이를 잘가린다. 濟州여자가 배를 잘 타고 수영을 잘 하는 대에 咸鏡여자는 말과 소를 잘 타니 南船北馬라는 녯 말이 속임이 업고 關東 농군의 노래 가락으로 밧가는 소리는 海西여자의 곡소리가튼 김매는 메나리 소리와 東西가 相和한다. 寡婦를 동여가는 것은 녯날 약탈 혼인 시대의 유풍으로 10여 년전까지도 간혹 잇섯든 怪風이다. 그것은 구태여 말치도 안커니와 그보다도 더 怪異한 것은 소위 强制通姓名이다. 지금으로부터 수십년 전에는 엇더한 未成冠한 아동이 洞里를 지나가면 그 동리의 아동, 及靑年들이 좃차가서 강제로 통성명을 한다. 그 말투야 참으로 요절 할말이 만다. 먼저 「안아-도령님아-삼 세번 불러서 대답지 안흐면 뺨을 마지럇다. 남‚°의 솔방울이 내리굴넛느냐 치굴넛느냐 (父母가 重하냐 子弟가 重하냐의 뜻) 너희집 숫까락이 몃 벌이냐(食口幾何의 意)」등 가지각색의 소리를 다하다가 나종에는 뺨도 따리고 별 凌辱을 다한다. 그것은 强制同性愛에서 나온 악풍이엇다.
그 외에 迷信에 관한 怪風이야 퍽도 만치만은 그역 文化의 발전을 따라서 점차 소멸되는 터인즉 구태여 새삼스럽게 말치 안는다.
그리고 연중행사에 관한 怪風俗 중에는 1년의 首月인 정월 중의 怪風俗이 甚多하나 그것은 昨年本誌의 正月風俗展覽會記事에 자세히 기록되엿기 이만 略한다.＜53＞
＜49-53＞