잡지명	별건곤 제11호
발행일	1928년 02월 01일
기사제목	名士諸氏 맛나기前 생각과 맛난 後의 印像 (Impressions of Notables Before and After Meeting Them)
기사형태	소식 (News)

崔南善氏
申瑩澈

The most hateful people in the world are those who are impossible to be close to, impossible to approach. Scholars act like scholars, high officials act like high officials, yangban (兩班) act like yangban, the rich act like the rich, and such figures, who are so arrogant, dignified, pompous, and adept at evasion that people in other classes cannot even dare to approach, are the kind of people who are attached to such categories.

However, conversely, there are people who, regardless of their high or low position, much or little learning, make others want to see them once, and who, when met, become inexplicably amiable, creating intimacy at once despite not having deep ties. I don't know if it's because I'm ugly, but I always miss such people and find them amiable. People skilled in social graces, people who are clever at outward embellishment, people who, in reality, are not so amiable but act as if they would give you the food in their mouths, do not give me a good impression. On the other hand, people who seem indifferent on the outside but deeply respect and love in their hearts, people who become amiable despite not having any real reason to be so, always give me a good impression.

Yuktang Ch'oe Namsŏn (六堂崔南善)! As far as I know, it's been a very long time since I knew of him, but it was very late when I finally met him. I probably learned of Yuktang's name about 20 years ago, when I was buried in the countryside and didn't know what the world was like, when I was very young. From the time when Yi Kwangsu, Hong Myŏnghŭi (洪命熹), and Yuktang were famous as the Tokyo Three Geniuses (東京三才), I had a vague idea of him, but at that time, I thought of Ch'oe Namsŏn (崔南善) as a great writer like Li T'aebaek (李太白) or Tu Chaemi (杜子美) (because there was no such thing as a "literary figure" at that time), and that was all I knew. I started to have a direct connection with Yuktang from around the 6th or 7th issue of the Ch'ŏngch'un (靑春) magazine era. <64> So, after reading his articles in the magazine at that time, I deeply admired him, thinking that this man was not a light literary figure but a venerable scholar-like gentleman. However, because I didn't stay in Seoul much and only came to Seoul from the countryside occasionally, I wanted to go out of my way to meet him, but I also had the foolish thought that we, as humble young men from the countryside, could not meet such men of letters and scholars. After that, I heard and knew in detail about Yuktang's personality, actions, business, character, and even his nickname, in all directions, but even during the two or three years that I was in Kyŏngsŏng (京城), I somehow didn't have the opportunity to meet him, and I never saw or heard Yuktang's face or words directly at any gatherings or forums. And only recently, I had just thought that Yuktang, as much as his face is chubby, his mind would be indifferent and he would have no charm, and that if I met him, he would just be indifferent and boring.

I finally met Yuktang, whom I had longed for, drawn, and imagined for nearly 20 years, for the first time when I visited his home in September of last year to gather news material. Piles of books were stacked on the left and right, and he was sitting at his desk, burning incense in a censer in front of him, reading a book, and he welcomed me. I don't know if it's impolite to say this, but he gave me the feeling of a high priest in a deep temple respectfully welcoming a layman at that moment. As Yuktang is originally well-versed in Buddhism, it wouldn't have been unreasonable for him to appear to me like a Taoist monk entering the mountains to practice asceticism when I first met him.

As soon as I met Yuktang, my previous imagination that Yuktang was an indifferent person, a boring person, a difficult person, was completely overturned. As we talked, I inexplicably became fond of him and realized that he was someone who could be approached and befriended. It is after meeting Yuktang that this feeling deepens as I meet him once and twice. I once saw him talking and laughing harmoniously with an old scholar wearing a topknot, and I was deeply impressed by his democratic attitude.

I don't know whether Yuktang's business will succeed or fail. I don't know whether Yuktang's scholarship is good or bad. I don't deeply know what Yuktang's character is like. But I am sure that Yuktang is a rare man of talent and virtue in modern Korea, a scholar of extensive knowledge and learning, a contributor to Korean history and language, and an individual who can be approached and befriended. I will continue to believe so in the future. Forgive my presumptuous words. <65>

李相協氏
李瑞求

Before I met Hamong Yi Sanghyŏp (何夢 李相協) - when he serialized Chŏngbuwŏn (貞婦怨) and Haewangsŏng (海王星) in the Maeil Sinbo (每日新報) - I thought of him as a very generous man at that time. Furthermore, knowing that he had written Hamhŭng Kigi (咸興紀行) in his youth, I also thought that he was a very filial son who followed his mother very well. Before I met him, I had no other thoughts.

I met him in the spring of the year when the Tonga Ilbo (東亞日報) was founded. After playing the role of a literary youth in the countryside, I went to Seoul with the ambition (?) of becoming a reporter for the Tonga Ilbo.

After much begging and pleading, I barely managed to get an order to bring a piece of work.

I brought the work and entered the Tonga Ilbo (where the Chungoe Ilbo (中外日報) is now located). Until then, I had no idea what Hamong looked like.

A middle-aged gentleman wearing a white durumagi (Korean overcoat) and with a frighteningly cold face called me, received the work, and asked me a few words - I have forgotten them now - and then said,

"Well, go now. You will receive a notice later."

Hearing his words, I was disappointed. His tone was so cold that, to a country youth who had never been exposed to people, the words "wait for a notice" sounded like "give up." I went back then and told a few friends about it, and asked who he was. Yi, the president of Munhŭng (文興), who was publishing a magazine called Sŏgwang (曙光) at the time, said, "That's right, that's Hamong." I felt like my desire to be a great reporter disappeared on the spot. I even got angry, saying, "Then it's ruined. He's so cold."

But Hamong didn't abandon me. I became a reporter for the Tonga Ilbo and worked in the social affairs department from the first issue. At that time, Hamong was the concurrent head of the social affairs department, and the reporters were mostly experienced seniors such as Sŏksong Kim Hyŏngwŏn (石松金炯元), Chongsŏk Ryu Kwangryŏl (鍾石柳光烈), and Unt'ing Kim Chŏngjin (雲汀金井鎭), and I was the only new reporter.

"What should I do?"

I had become a reporter, but I had no idea how to get news material or how to deal with people I met. I only intended to act according to the instructions of the department head. A few days after the first issue was published, the so-called "corporal punishment" (笞刑) disappeared. It was raining heavily that day.

Reporters were going to the courthouse and the Justice Bureau <66> to cover the related aspects of the abolished corporal punishment.

Ah, now it's my turn. I sat down with my heart pounding, and indeed, Hamong, who was looking out the window and smoking a cigarette aimlessly, opened his mouth. He wasn't sitting aimlessly. He was picking out news stories from the smoke he was exhaling.

"Mr. Yi Sŏgu (李瑞求)-"

"Yes-"

I jumped up and went to him.

"Go meet the superintendent of the Government-General Hospital (總督府醫院長) by rickshaw now and ask about the relationship between corporal punishment and the human body."

Since corporal punishment has been abolished and there will be no more beatings, he wanted me to hear what the doctors had to say. But at that time, I was dumbfounded.

If I were even a little closer to him, I would have asked again, but I didn't have the courage to ask twice to a man sitting so coldly.

"Yes-" I thought I was going to fail as a reporter without even trying. Anyway, I took a rickshaw and went in the rain. Fortunately, the article passed without incident that day, but there was never a time in my life when I felt as frustrated and bewildered as I did that day. However, as I gradually got to know him, I began to feel the warmth and love that sprang from Hamong's cold personality, even the love that a lover gives.

When I ate two bowls of snack because the days were long, Hamong always paid for one bowl, saying, "I'm saving money on my meager salary (薄俸)." The story of eating may seem a bit vulgar, but this shows a facet of Hamong's subtle kindness. When all the editorial staff went to Hamong's house to threaten a strike (盟休), Hamong cursed and opposed it until the very end. It was then that I began to respect Hamong's cold personality.

Hamong gives the feeling of pouring cold water on marble when you first meet him. But as you get to know him, you realize that the marble has warmth, and you realize that the water flowing on it has a sweet taste.

Once, at a drinking party, I reminisced about the corporal punishment abolition questioning and criticized Hamong's coldness, but Hamong smiled at that time and said, "If you hadn't been so frustrated, would you have become a newspaper reporter?" Hamong is like this, if he opens his heart to his subordinates, he would even cut off his flesh to feed them. But he doesn't bow his head to capitalists. He doesn't flatter ignorant capitalists - those who waste money and drink a lot - but rather gives them the cold shoulder first. This may be the seed of Hamong's hardship today. But even so, it is tearfully refreshing to see him calmly not drink alcohol and walk around. <67>

내가본 安光泉氏
金泳煥

I originally have no personal relationship with him, and therefore have never met him. Now that I am picking up my pen to write an impression of him, I cannot help but feel uneasy about whether I will be rude.

It must have been around the winter solstice last year. When a roundtable discussion was held at the Taesigwan (太西館) hosted by a certain organization, I happened to meet a friend who had come from Tokyo. I was asking about the living conditions of our compatriots in Tokyo, and at the end of talking about the activities of various organizations and key figures, I first heard about An Kwangch'ŏn (安光泉), who is OOOOOOO and OOOO among our compatriots in Tokyo.

When I heard this, I immediately pictured him in my mind. Since he is OOOOOOO, his hair must be twice as long as others, and since he is OOOO, his face must be dark blue, his eyes must be bulging, his arms must be quite thick, and he must be wearing sturdy work clothes.

Around the end of June last year, the Ch'ŏndogyo (天道教) Youth Party hosted a series of academic lectures for four days at the Ch'ŏndogyo church, and I invited him to listen to Marx's materialism.

I had been wanting to meet him, and when I finally met him, it was completely different from what I had imagined before. His hair was long and combed back, but not that long, and his face was pale and emaciated, as if his bones would show if he didn't have a family. His cheekbones were protruding and his chin was pointed, making him seem nervous. However, he was very quiet and meticulous, and his smiling at every word was either a kind of social skill or something else, but it showed a friendly and kind feeling. His slender and weak physique did not make him look like a fighter. (Omitted below - original text)

劉英俊氏
車相瓚

I had heard of her name a long time ago. Even counting the years, it was more than ten years ago - right from when she didn't even dream of studying in China or Japan, and after graduating from a certain girls' elementary school in Pyongyang (平壤), her golden land, she came up to Seoul <68> and lived in the dormitory of Chŏngsin Girls' School (貞信女學校). It was the Dano festival (端午) in May of a certain year. A school in Seoul organized a field trip and went to see Pyongyang, and I went to Pyongyang as one of the members. K, my close friend there, invited me to his house and gave me dinner. Coincidentally, while talking, I praised the fact that the women of Pyongyang were not only naturally beautiful compared to women from other places, but also received education relatively early and were eloquent. He modestly said that it was not the case, but after a while, he said that he did not know the people of the past well, but there were some promising women among the students studying in Kyŏngsŏng (留京學生), and among them, someone named Yu (劉某) (the name at that time was different from now, and I don't remember it) was especially clever and eloquent, and also liked studying Chinese characters very much. From then on, I wanted to meet her, but I didn't have the chance to meet her. After that, while she was studying in China or Japan, I couldn't even hear any news about her. Then, a few years ago, when she was about to return home after studying medicine in Japan, I saw her picture and story in a certain Japanese newspaper. Until then, I thought that since she was born in Pyongyang, a land of beautiful women, her face would be very beautiful, and since she had traveled a lot to China and Japan, she would be a modern "high collar" woman. However, when I first met her at a meeting after her return, it was completely different from what I had imagined before. It was true that she was eloquent with a clear voice, but her plain clothes and calm attitude made her look more like a newly emerging old-fashioned woman than a fashionable high-collar woman. She did not give the impression of being a female doctor, but rather a daughter-in-law of an eldest son who was good at housekeeping. Her remarks also did not seem to be those of a believer in some ideology, but rather those of a reformist. Since then, as I gradually approached her, I found that she was very kind and sociable. As she had experienced a lot of the ups and downs of the world and was of considerable age, her personality was also round like the pebbles of Ayang Island (綾羅島), and she did not seem edgy. The fact that she is always recommended as the chairwoman or head of the group at the Kŭn'uhoe (槿友會) or other women's gatherings and is admired by many women seems to be due to her affability. She loves her peers very much, and she also loves nature, so she always keeps many flowerpots in her room and dreams fragrant dreams amidst the myriad of flowers. Since she does not have children or other conversational partners, she always feels lonely, so after returning home from Ehwa Hakdang (梨花學堂) or other errands, she puts "radio" cords in her ears and seems to console herself with the songs and lectures that are broadcast. People who do not know her might easily think that she is holding a stethoscope to her ears when they see her putting the "radio" cords to her ears because she is a doctor.

She also loves children, so when she goes to her hometown, she gathers the children of her neighbors or relatives and tells them interesting stories, and also gives prizes to children who tell stories well, so when she goes to Pyongyang (平壤), she receives a warm welcome from the children more than anyone else. These few things are all I know about her... ... -End- <69>

**Named Entities**

崔南善氏	Ch'oe Namsŏn
申瑩澈	Sin Yŏngch'ŏl
李光洙	Yi Kwangsu
洪命熹	Hong Myŏnghŭi
李太白	Yi T'aebaek
杜子美	Tu Chaemi
靑春	Ch'ŏngch'un
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
李相協	Yi Sanghyŏp
何夢	Hamong
貞婦怨	Chŏngbuwŏn
海王星	Haewangsŏng
每日新報	Maeil Sinbo
咸興紀行	Hamhŭng Kigi
東亞日報	Tonga Ilbo
中外日報	Chungoe Ilbo
曙光	Sŏgwang
文興社長	Munhŭng Sajang
李君	Yi Kun
石松金炯元	Sŏksong Kim Hyŏngwŏn
鍾石柳光烈	Chongsŏk Ryu Kwangryŏl
雲汀金井鎭	Unt'ing Kim Chŏngjin
總督府醫院長	Ch'ongdokpu Ŭiwŏnjang
李瑞求	Yi Sŏgu
綾羅島	Ayangdo
金泳煥	Kim Yŏnghwan
太西館	T'aesigwan
安光泉	An Kwangch'ŏn
天道教	Ch'ŏndogyo
劉英俊	Yu Yŏngjun
車相瓚	Ch'a Sangch'an
平壤	P'yŏngyang
貞信女學校	Chŏngsin Yŏhakkyo
端午	Tano
槿友會	Kŭn'uhoe
梨花學堂	Ihwa Hakdang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제11호
발행일	1928년 02월 01일
기사제목	名士諸氏 맛나기前 생각과 맛난 後의 印像
기사형태	소식

名士諸氏 맛나기前 생각과 맛난 後의 印像
崔南善氏
申瑩澈

세상에 친할 수 업는 사람, 갓가히 할 수 업는 사람처럼 얄미운 사람은 업는 것이다. 학자는 學者然하야, 大官은 大官然하야, 양반은 兩班然하야, 富者는 富者然하야, 딴 계급에 잇는 사람으로는 감히 접근도 할 수 업시 엇재 오만하고 존엄하고 거드름스럽고 廻避術 잘 쓰는 인물이야말로 그런 종류에 붓친 사람들이다.
그러나 그 반대로 지위가 놉건 낫건 학식이 만건적건 그런 것은 별문제로 하고 그 사람을 한번 보앗스면 하고 남에게 생각키어지는 사람, 맛나면 엇전지 모르게 정다워지고 그러케 因綠이 깁지 못하것만 단번에 친밀성 생기는 그 사람이 잇다. 나는 내가 못생겨서 그런지는 모르지만 언제이고 그런 사람이 그리워지고 그런 사람이 정다워진다. 交際術에 능난한 사람, 外面修刷를 巧妙히 하는 사람, 실상은 그러케 정다웁지 아니하면서도 입에 든 것이라도 내여 먹을 드시 덤비는 사람이 그러케 내게는 호감을 못 주는 반면에 것헤는 덤덤한 것 갓건만 속으로는 심히 敬愛之하고 실상은 그러케 정다울 거리가 업는데 그래도 당하면 제절로 정다워지는 그 사람이 언제나 내게는 호감을 준다.
六堂崔南善氏! 내가 알기로는 퍽이나 오래엿스면서도 맛나기로는 퍽이나 늣게 엿섯다. 六堂의 일홈을 알게 되기는 내가 시골에 뭇처잇서 세상이 무엇인지 모르고 지내든 아마 한 20년전이나 거의 되는 어렷슬 때인가 보다. 東京三才로 李光洙, 洪命熹 兩氏와 아울러 六堂의 聲名이 드날리든 그때부터 어슴푸릇이 들은 듯하나 그때는 어린 내 생각에 崔南善氏는 李太白이나 杜子美가튼 훌듕한 문장(그때는 문학가라는 말도 채 업섯던 때임으로)이거니＜64＞ 그러케만 알다가 직접으로 六堂과 因綠이 생기기 시작하기는 靑春 雜誌時代의 제6호인가 7호인가부터이엇다. 그래 그때에 誌上에 나오는 그의 논문을 읽고는 이 양반이 輕快한 문학자가 아니라 典實한 학자적 君子인이거니 하고 그윽히 흠모하기를 마지 안이 하엿다. 그러나 내가 서울에 별로 잇서 보지도 못하고 잇다금 시골서 서울을 온대야 일부러라도 차저가 맛나고는 십헛지만 그런 文士, 學者는 우리가튼 시골 寒微한 청년으로 맛나 볼 수 업거니하는 반편스러운 생각도 업지 안허 잇섯다. 그래 그후부터는 縱으로서 橫으로 六堂의 인격, 행동, 사업, 性質 심지어 別名까지 자세히 듯고 알고는 잇섯지만 이삼년내 京城에 잇는 동안에도 엇전지 맛날 긔희가 업섯고 또는 會合이나 演壇 가튼데서도 六堂의 얼골이나 말을 직접 보고 듯기는 한번도 못하엿다. 그리고 다만 근래에 와서는 六堂은 얼골이 뚱뚱한 만큼 마음ㅅ세도 뜸뜸하고 별로 風致라고는 업슬 것이어니 맛나야 그저 덤덤하고 아모 자미업는 사람이려니 그러케 그저 泛泛하게 생각키어지기만 햇던 것이다.
그와 가티 근20년이나 두고 사모해 오고 그려보고 상상해 보던 六堂을 실지로 맛나 보기는 내가 記事材料를 모으랴고 작년 9월에야 비로소 그의 자택에 차저간 것이 氏와의 처음 대면이엿다. 左右에 서적을 싸어 노코 책상 압희 香爐에 香火를 질으고 안저서 책을 대하고 잇다가 나를 마저주는 것이 失禮의 말이넌지 모르지만 深寺 高僧이 속인을 공경히 마저 주는 듯한 늣김을 그 刹那 내에게 주엇다. 六堂이 원래 불교에도 造詣가 만흐신만큼 처움 맛난 나에게 入山修禪하는 道僧과 가티 뵈인 것도 또한 무리가 안이엿겟지.
如知間 나는 지금까지 六堂은 뜸뜸한 사람, 자미업는 사람, 어려운 사람이라고 상상되는 것은 처음 六堂을 맛고서 여지업시 飜覆되어 버렷다. 한 말하고 두 말하고 세 말 네 말 하는 가운데 나는 엇전지 정다워지고 갓가히 할 수 잇는 친할 수 잇는 사람일 줄을 절실히 늣기고 도라왓다. 한 번 만나고 두 번 맛나면서 가도록 그 늣김이 깁허지는 것이 내가 六堂을 맛난 이후의 일이다. 어느 때 상투 트든 舊學者와 책상을 대하야 和氣融融한 가운데 談笑如流하는 것을 겻헤서 보고 그윽히 평민적 학자임에도 感服한 바 잇섯다.
六堂의 事業成敗를 나는 모른다. 六堂의 學說善惡을 나는 모른다. 六堂의 心性如何를 나는 깁히 모른다. 그러나 나는 六堂이 조선의 근대에 잇서 드물게 보는 才德所有者요 博識多聞의 학자요 조선력사와 言文의 功勞者요 개인으로 갓가히 할 수 잇고 친할 수 잇는 인물인 것만은 확실히 지금도 밋고 잇다. 압흐로도 그러케 미드랴한다. 妄言 寬恕.＜65＞

李相協氏
李瑞求

내가 何夢 李相協氏를 맛나기 前-그가 매일신보에 貞婦怨 海王星을 連載할 때-그때에 나는 그를 퍽 豪濶한 남자로 아랏섯다. 더욱 청춘에 咸興紀行을 쓴 것을 알고는 어머니를 퍽도 따르는 孝子이라고 생각도 하얏섯다. 내가 그를 맛나기 전에는 이 밧게 생각한 일이 업섯다.
내가 그를 맛나기는 동아일보 창간되는 해 봄이다. 시골서 문학청년 노릇을 하다가 동아일보기자가 되겟다는 야심(?)을 가지고 엇잿든 上京을 하얏섯다.
左請右囑을 너허 겨오 엇잿든 작품을 한가지 가저 오너라는 분부를 드럿다.
작품가지고 동아일보(지금 中外日報자리)로 드러섯다. 그때까지 何夢이 엇덧케 생긴 사람인지 전혀 모를 때이엿다.
왼 흰두르막이 입고 얼골은 무서읍도록 냉담하여 보이는 중년신사 한분이 나를 불르더니 작품을 밧고 몃마듸-이제는 이젓다-말을 무러 보고 나서는
그러면, 가게시지요. 나종에 통지가 갑니다.
그의 말소리를 듯고 나는 낙망을 하얏다. 엇더케 쌀쌀한지 도모지 사람에게 치어나지 못한 향촌청년에게는 통지 기다리라는 말이 단념하라는 말과도 가티 들렷섯다. 나는 그때에 도라와 몃몃 친구들에게 그 이약이를 하고 그게 대관절 누구인가. 햐얏더니 당시 曙光이라는 잡지를 발행하든 文興社長 李君이 「올치 올치 그이가 바로 何夢일세」 하얏다. 나는 고만 그 자리에 大記者의 慾望도 그대로 사라지는 것 갓하얏다. 「그럼 틀녓네 그려 여간 쌀쌀치 안튼걸」하고 火까지 내인 일이 잇섯다.
그러나 何夢은 나를 버리지 안앗섯다. 나는 그럭저럭 東亞日報 기자가 되야 창간호부터 사회부에 종사케 되얏섯다. 당시 사회부에는 부장은 何夢이 兼攝을 하고 기자로는 대개 경험잇는 石松金炯元, 鍾石柳光烈, 雲汀金井鎭의 諸先背들이요 新出記者라고는 나 한아 뿐이엇다.
「엇더케 하면 조흘가」
엇잿든 記者 노릇은 하게 되엿스나 엇더케 記事材料를 구할지 누고를 맛나면 엇더케 대할지 도모지 알 길이 업다. 部長令監의 지시대로 움즉일 작정이 잇슬 뿐이다. 창간호를 내인지 몃칠 못되야 소위 笞刑이라는 것이 업서젓다. 그날은 마츰 큰 비가 나렷다.
裁判所로 가는 기자, 法務局으로 가는＜66＞ 모조리 폐지된 笞刑에 대한 關係方面으로 나섯다.
아아 인제는 내 차레인게로다. 가슴을 두근거리고 안젓드니 과연 窓밧글 바라보고 無心이 담배를 피우든 何夢의 입은 열녓다. 그는 무심히 안젓는 것이 안이다. 입으로 피우는 연기속에서 신문거리를 골나내는 것이엇다.
「李瑞求氏-」
「네-」
나는 벌덕 이러서 갓다.
「지금 곳 人力車를 타고서 總督府醫阮長을 맛나보고 笞刑과 人體와의 관계를 무러보고 오십시오.」
笞刑이 폐지되야 볼기맛는 일이 업게 되엿스니 醫學者의 입에서는 무슨소리가 나아오나 듯고 오라는 말이다. 그러나 그때의 나로서는 고만 어안이 벙벙하얏섯다.
조금만 親해도 한번 다시 뭇기라도 할터인대 쌀쌀스럽게 안즌 이에다 두번 무를 용기가 나지 못 하얏다.
예-라 아마 記者 行勢도 못해 보고 멱국인가 보다. 하고 엇잿든 人力車를 타고 雨中에 갓다왓섯다. 다행히 그럭저럭 그날 기사는 無事通過는 되얏섯스나 내 일생에 그날 그때가티 답답하고 아득할 때는 업섯섯다. 그러나 차차 사괴일사록 냉담한 속에서 인정미가 샘솟는 何夢의 성격에는 애인에게 주는 사랑좃차 늣기게 하얏다.
내가 해가 길어 点心을 두 그릇식 먹을 때 반다시 何夢은 한그릇 갑은 자기가 내여 「薄俸타는 대 세음닷켓소」하얏다. 먹는 이약이는 좀 추하다고 하겟스나 이런데 何夢의 잘게구는 인정의 一面이 보히는 것이다. 편집사원 일동이 何夢의 집에 가서 盟休를 하겟다고 울 때 何夢은 辱까지하며 최후까지 반대하얏섯다. 그때에 비로소 何夢의 쌀쌀한 인격을 존경하얏섯다.
何夢은 처음보면 大理石 우헤 냉수를 붓는 듯한 늣김을 준다. 그러나 차차 알사록 그 大理石에는 溫氣가 잇는 것을 알게 되며 그 흘으로는 물에는 단맛이 잇는 것을 알게 되는 것이다.
어느 때인가 酒席에서 笞刑廢止詰問時의 追懷를 하여 何夢의 쌀쌀한 것을 비난하얏더니 그때에 何夢은 우스며 네가 그럿케나 굴너나지 안엇드면 신문기자꼴이 박히기나 하얏겟늬 하며 우섯섯다. 何夢은 이 갓치 아랫사람에게는 마음만 許하게 되면 살이라도 버혀 먹이게 된다. 그러나 그는 자본가에게는 고개를 숙이지 안는다. 무지한 자본가 -물던벙, 술덤벙하는 자본가들을 얼넝뚱땅-해바리지를 안코 핀잔을 몬저 주어 바리는 것갓다. 이것이 오늘날 何夢의 苦勞의 씨가 되지나 앗는가 한다. 그러나 그러고도 泰然自若히 술을 안 마시고 도라 다니는 것을 보면 눈물겨웁도록 통쾌하기도 한 것이다.＜67＞

내가본 安光泉氏
金泳煥
나는 本來 氏와 친분이 업고 따라서 면담하여 본 일도 업다. 이제 氏에 대한 인상기를 써보랴고 붓을 드니 자연히 실례나 되지 안이할가 하는 未安의 감이 업지안타.
바로 지난해 冬至달인가보다. 某단체의 主催로 太西館에 간담회가 열녓슬 때 우연히 東京으로부터 건너온 엇던 친구를 맛내여 東京 在留同胞의 생활상태를 물어오다가 각 단체의 활동 如何와 주요인물을 말하든 끗헤 비로소 東京에 잇서서 우리 동포 중에 OOOOOOO오 OOOO인 安光泉氏의 말을 들엇다.
나는 이 말을 듯고 그 즉석에서 氏를 그림 그려 보앗다. OOOOOOO라니 머리도 남보다 배나 길넛슬 것이요 OOOO이라니 얼골이 검푸르고 눈이 어글어글하며 팔둑은 상당히 굴굴 것이요 몸에는 튼튼한 勞働服을 입엇슬 것이라고 생각하엿다.
때맛츰 지난 6월 하순경이다. 천도교 청년당 주최로 학술강좌가 4일동안 천도교당내에 열녓슬 때 氏를 請邀하야 맑스의 유물철학을 듯게 되엿다.
氏를 한버 맛나면 맛나면 하든 차에 맛나고 보니 웬걸 내가 전에 상상하든 바와는 아조 딴판이다. 머리는 길너 뒤로 젓첫스나 그러케 길게 길우지 안이하고 얼골은 뺏뺏말나 가족이 업스면 뼈가 헤여질 듯하며 左右뺌은 두두려지고 턱은 뽀족하여 신경질에 갓가운 듯하나 퍽-침묵하고 明細하며 말끗마다 해죽해죽 웃는 것은 일종 交際術인지는 알 수 업스나 다정스럽고 친절한 기분이 낫타나며 키가 호리호리하고 약질인 체격은 그리 鬪士가티 뵈이지는 안는다. (以下略-원문)

劉英俊氏
車相瓚

내가 그의 이름을 듯기는 벌서 이전이엿다. 연수로 따저도 十有여 년 전-바로 그가 아즉 中國이나 日本에 류학 가튼 것을 꿈에도 생각지 안이하고 금수강산인 그의 고향인 평양의 엇든 여자 소학교를 졸업하고 서울에 올너와서＜68＞ 貞信女學校의 寄生舍생활을 하든 그때부터이다. 어느해 5월 단오날이다. 서울의 엇든 학교에서 수학여행단을 조직하야 가지고 平壤구경을 가게 되엿는데 나도 團員의 한 사람으로 平壤을 가섯다. 그곳에 잇는 나의 親友인 K는 나를 자기의 집으로 초대하야 저녁밥을 주엇섯다. 나는 우연이 말을 하는 중에 平壤의 인물 이약이를 하다가 평양여자들이 다른 곳 여자보다 自來로 인물이 고 흘뿐만 안이라 교육도 비교뎍 먼저 밧고 또 辯才가 잇는 것을 예찬하얏섯다. 그는 겸사의 말로 그럿치 못하다고 하더니 한참 잇다가 말하기를 과거의 인물은 자서이 알지 못하거니와 현재 留京學生 중에는 유망한 여자들이 더러 잇는대 그 중 劉某 가튼 이는(그때의 이름은 지금과 달넛섯는대 긔억이 안이 된다.) 특히 두뢰가 령리하고 辯才가 잇스며 또 한문공부를 매우 조아한다고 하엿다. 그때부터 나는 그를 한번 만나보고 십헛스나 만나 볼 긔회가 업섯다. 그 뒤에 그가 中國으로 또는 日本으로 류학을 하는 중에는 아모 소식까지도 드러볼 수가 업섯다. 그러다가 그가 몃해 전에 日本에서 醫學을 공부하고 귀국할 즈음에 엇던 日本新聞에 그의 사진이 나고 그의 이약이까지 난 것을 보왓다. 그때까지도 나의 생각에는 그는 원래 美人鄕인 평양에 태여낫스닛가 얼골도 아주 미인이요 中國으로 日本으로 만히 다녓스닛다 시체에 소위 「모던껄」류의 하이카라 여자이거니 하얏섯다. 그러나 그가 귀국한 후엇던 會席에서 츠음윊�로 맛나보니 前日에 상상과는 아주 딴판이엇다. 명쾌한 음성으로 辯才에 능한 것은 물론 듯던 바와 틀임이 업스나 그의 質素한 의복이라든지 沈靜한 태도는 신식 하이카라여자라 하는니 보다는 도로혀 구식부인의 새로 출세한 이 가티 뵈엿다. 女醫師의 風은 뵈이지 안코 살임사리 잘하는 장손 며누리 風이 잇서 뵈헛다. 언론도 그리 무슨 主義者態가 업고 改良主義者態가 만케 인상되엿섯다. 그 뒤로부터 차차 접근하야 보니 그는 퍽이나 친절하고 交際性이 만타. 세상의 풍상을 만히 적고 年齡도 상당하니만큼 성질이 또한 綾羅島 수밥처럼 둥굴둥굴하야 그리모지지 안허 뵈인다. 그가 槿友會라든지 그他 여러 여성의 모딈에서 항상 委員長이라든지 席長으로 추천되야 여러 여성에게 推崇을 밧는 것도 아마 그 원만성에 基因된 듯하다. 그는 동모를 만히 사랑하는 동시에 자연을 또한 사랑하야 房中에는 항상 花盆을 만히 두어 百花란만한 속에서 향그러운 꿈을 뀌인다. 子女라든지 다른 말벗이 업는 니만치 항상 孤寂을 늣기어서 梨花學堂이나 기타 볼일을 보고 집에 도라온 뒤에는 두 귀에다 「라듸오」 줄을 대고 전해오는 노래와 강연으로 위안을 삼는 듯하다. 모르는 사람은 그가 의사이닛가 「라듸오」줄을 귀에 대힌 것을 보고 청진기을 대고 잇는 것으로 알기도 쉬울 것이다.
그는 어린이를 또한 사랑하야 자기 고향에를 가면 이웃집 아희라든지 친졍족하 아희들을 모아 놋코 자미스러운 이약이도 하야주고 또 이약이도 식혀서 잘하는 어린이에게는 상품까지 줌으로 그가 平壤을 간다하면 누구보다도 어린이들이 만흔 歡迎을 한다고 한다. 이 몃가지가 그에 대한 나의 아는 것이라고 할지... ... -끝-＜69＞
＜64-69＞