Magazine Title	개벽 제31호
Publication Date	1923년 01월 01일
Article Title	文壇의 一年을 追憶하야 現狀과 作品을 槪評하노라 (Recalling the Literary Scene of the Past Year, Generally Reviewing the Current State and Works)
Author	朴月灘
Article Type	문예평론 (Literary Criticism)

文壇의 一年을 追憶하야 現狀과 作品을 槪評하노라
						朴月灘
(Recalling the Literary Scene of the Past Year, Generally Reviewing the Current State and Works)
                        Pak Wŏlt'an

Foreword
I received a request from Gaebyeoksa (開闢社) to write a critique of the literary scene for the New Year's issue, but I picked up my brush only to throw it down again, and threw it down only to pick it up again, hesitating endlessly about whether to write or not. In other words, I simply did not feel inspired to critique everyone's writings. What could I write about this impoverished literary scene, which holds no surprises and shows no progress? Idle complaints need substance; how can one critique when there are no writers and no works? Thus, my mind was sunk in a cold, morbid melancholy. And so, I completely gave up on writing. However, in a corner of my mind, a thought lingered: "Still!" Though there may be no masterpieces to make one's spirit tremble, aren't even crude pieces creations made by our own hands? Though there may be no great developments or surprises, isn't there still a subtle symbolism of pioneering? Hearing this whisper, my slackened pulse seemed to quicken again, and my lost courage seemed to return. Thus, I picked up my brush again, and with a heart both desolate and joyful, reverent, I intend to recall the state of the literary scene over the past year and also discuss the works of various individuals.

Although a year is a long time, the past year for the literary scene was excessively lonely and quiet. Recalling last spring from this point, I cannot suppress the unpleasant, anxious, and disheartening feeling, as if I floundered pointlessly in a dull, insipid dream. It has now become a fleeting, empty thought, but what I hoped for at this time last year was certainly not something so desolate <1> and meaningless. I had hoped that significant goals would be set in the three major areas of the literary scene—poetry, novels, and drama. Of course, I couldn't expect it to be as flourishing as foreign literary scenes, but I thought at least a faint outline would emerge. However, looking back after that hoped-for year has passed, far from a faint outline, there wasn't even a single work among the sparse, scattered pieces, like stars fading in the dawn sky, that could move a person's heart. I can only clutch my chest at the uselessly rising frustration (火症).

The downfall of writers, writers changing professions, writers going into hibernation—in these sorrowful circumstances, the material difficulties that cause the greatest anguish for any Korean further aggravated the miserable state of this pathetic literary scene. Due to these various setbacks, the literary achievements that appeared on the surface last year likely show considerable deficiency compared to what lies dormant beneath the surface of the literary world.
When speaking of the downfall and hibernation of writers, one cannot but recall the Yi Ch'unwŏn (李春園) incident, which caused a great public stir in the literary scene and society last year. Misfortune always piles upon and flows around unlucky men. Ah—how deeply buried in great misfortune he is! His political or social qualities and character are things I do not know in detail, so there is no need to speak of them here, but his natural gift as a man of letters was indeed one to watch with anticipation. He had passion, and he had decisiveness. When he wept, when he sang, his writing seemed to contain tears and spurt blood. When he first danced his pen alone upon the barren literary scene, when the clicking tongues of admiration (嘖嘖한 歎賞) from a thousand people poured onto him alone, who denied him as the foremost pioneer of the literary scene? After the divorce incident occurred, his reputation was damaged once; during the March First Movement (己未運動), his name was shaken again; and in the winter of Sinyu (辛酉 - 1921), he once again became a focus of suspicion. Following this, last summer, due to the two characters "barbaric" (yaman 野蠻) in his *Essay on National Reconstruction* (民族改造論), he fell forever into the pit of ruin. His strong passion, which did not distinguish between water and fire, first destroyed his family, making him gladly a rebel against old morality, and then he did not hesitate to form a new union based on what he believed to be the sole grace of love. Thus, he stirred the unsettled minds of the young people of the time, becoming the vanguard of the trend of the era, such as "One cannot live without love," "Divorce the wife you don't love and seek a new object of affection." This was one <2> of his movements to destroy old morality, he who considered himself a "new man" (新人) at the time, and consequently, one can see how passionate his character was.
Since then, none of his actions lacked passion (I will not detail his actions): the passion of righteous indignation, the passion of deviation, blind passion, neurotic passion—all these passions finally led him to write the *Essay on National Reconstruction*, bringing about today's downfall. His surroundings made him excited; his environment made him crazy; society bid him go mad. Who was it that fanned the flames towards the passionate character, urging him to become even more incandescent (白灼)? Was it not our society? I ask. I ask all those who revile Yi Ch'unwŏn: who is more wrong, the one who instigates theft—that is, makes a person become a thief—or the one who, unable to help himself and unable to die, commits theft? If there are knowledgeable people (識者), they will be able to distinguish.
We have a great evil disposition inherited genetically. This is a feeling that arises whenever anyone thumbs through the pages of our old history: when one person rises and rises to a high position and then slips and falls due to some mistake, they say the fallen one cannot rise again, and they trample and kick him, completely finishing him off without leaving any room. Is this something humans are capable of? If this is naked human nature, one can only be dismayed (愀然).
Society killed one man of letters; it killed one passionate youth; it killed one talented man (才士). It made him an arrogant child full of hot air (熱氣滿滿의 驕傲兒) and then pushed him into the pit of ruin in utter defeat (一敗塗地). There is no need to critique Mr. Yi, who is outside the literary circle (文壇圈外), but one cannot help but grieve for the downfall of a man of letters who held so much promise. Ah—the downfall of Ch'unwŏn! I hope for his resurrection as a man of letters in the future. Ah, at that time, you must leap once like a tiger and roar once like a lion.

That there are not a few who desecrate art in the newly rising literary scene is a most inauspicious sign. I cannot list every instance, but to give the most significant example, there is a serialized novel titled *Hyŏngsanok* (荊山玉) published daily in the *Chosŏn Ilbo* (朝鮮日報), which proclaims itself a major newspaper in the Korean press. Wondering whose work it was, I saw it was grandly credited as "Written by Pyŏkha Saeng" (碧霞生著). Curious about the novel, I read the first three or four lines and strangely felt I had read it somewhere before. Thinking carefully, I realized it was a translation <3> of *Shinju Fujin* (眞珠夫人 - Madam Pearl) by Kikuchi Kan (菊池寬), which was serialized in Japan's *Ōsaka Mainichi Shinbun* (大阪每日新聞). If the translation itself were fluent, there might be some room for forgiveness, but the crudeness of the rhetoric, the awkward phrasing, and the clumsy attempts to patch over the stark differences in customs and human feelings are utterly appalling. Why did they not frankly state it was a translation of *Shinju Fujin* but instead brazenly claim it was written by Pyŏkha Saeng? For what reason do they arbitrarily take a work squeezed from another's heart's blood, pretend it is their own, and defile another's art? Such base hearts, which even a dog wouldn't eat, should quickly be mended to walk the true path. Even stealing someone's short essay is a great crime; how utterly shameless is it to recklessly take another's feature-length novel, born of agony, and publish it in the *Chosŏn Ilbo*, supposedly one of Korea's leading newspapers?
I ask the *Chosŏn Ilbo* company: even if one lacks common sense about literature, isn't it too shameful to publish a plagiarized novel like *Hyŏngsanok* as the representative piece for the fourth page? Though this may seem like a small matter, it not only brings disgrace upon your own newspaper but is also an act that insults the Korean literary scene. If foreigners unfortunately learn of this, how great a shame will it bring upon the Korean people? If the *Chosŏn Ilbo* company has no one who knows what a novel is, they should certainly ask someone who does before publishing. You claim to be a press organization defending the masses, but if you bring shame upon Koreans and throw Korean art into disarray through a single novel, isn't the contradiction severe? You should rightly apologize to the literary scene.

The art we must possess henceforth is the "art of power" (力의 예술). It must be the strongest, hottest, sharpest, most powerful art. Cheap romance literature (歇價의 연애문학), lukewarm realism literature (微溫的의 寫實文學)—these alone cannot salvage our anguish (懊惱) or console the anxieties of the age. What blood of desire boils in the hot hearts of all people, and what deranged agony gasps within the tangled brains of all people? Who is the holder of the spiritual spring (靈泉) that can rescue this anxious agony and soothe this frenzied bloody water? It is the one who possesses the "art of power," the one who chants the "poem of power" (力의 詩). With the most reverent attitude, contemplating that strong, hot place, transcending the realm of meditation—white paper seeming to writhe with thick, squirming lines, like wielding a rafter-sized brush (椽大의 筆) dipped in pitch-black ink—such must be the holder of this art. But unfortunately, our literary scene lacks such novelists and such poets. Recently published are stories like *Hŭkchinju* (黑眞珠 - Black Pearl), tales like *Cho Ung Chŏn* (趙雄傳) and *Yu Ch'ungyŏl Chŏn* (劉忠烈傳) which are worse than archaic novels, and novels in the moldy Yi Hae-cho (李海朝) style like *Kuŭisan* <4> (九疑山) and *Ssangongnu* (雙玉淚), reeking of cheap moralism (勸善懲惡的) from the 15th or 16th century. Even if a million volumes of these were published, what benefit would they bring to our literary scene, and what solace could they offer to the era's agony suffered by all people? They merely trouble the printing house workers and deplete the pockets of those who enjoy reading novels.
Recalling the past year, there is another phenomenon worth remembering. Although there were no public debates in the literary scene, beneath the seemingly silent surface, the nucleus of a confrontation between bourgeois art (뿔조아예술) and proletarian art (푸로레타리아예술) has also taken root in the Korean literary world. The class struggle movement between labor and capital did not stop at the social level but has spread to the theory of artistic value and phenomena, causing turmoil in the literary scenes of various countries. Speaking of the current Japanese literary scene, it is in the midst of a fierce struggle between bourgeois art and proletarian art. It is impossible that such trends would leave our literary scene untouched. It is one of the phenomena that will surface in the not-too-distant future. I will not write about the pros and cons of bourgeois art versus proletarian art in this critique. I merely mention that this phenomenon has begun to germinate.
I must speak once more about newspaper novels. Newspapers, by their very nature, reach the general public much more widely than other magazines and books. Consequently, novels serialized in newspapers also have the greatest opportunity to connect with the general public. If one wants to know the level of a nation's folk art, one can generally gauge the high or low degree of that folk art by first reading the novels serialized in prominent major newspapers. Therefore, newspaper novels speak to the rise and fall of a country's art, serve as the framework for the national art, and bear the crucial responsibility for advancing or hindering the nation's art. Thus, the selection of these novels requires considerable deliberation and effort.
Generally, people say that newspaper novels should be popular (통속적) and entertaining (滋味잇는), but this is said by those who do not know the true meaning of the novel as art. We must not write or read novels in the old way, where the author whimsically scribbled as a form of play, and the reader read just to pass the time (消遣). Setting aside the question of artistic value, if newspapers publish novels that are easily understood by the general public and possess the most base, inferior entertainment value, they might temporarily receive a welcome from low-brow readers, <5> but on the other hand, they cannot escape becoming sinners of the age who implicitly corrupt society, nor can they avoid being a disorderly crowd that insults art and defiles the solemn sanctuary (聖殿). Henceforth, the novels published in our newspapers must break away from the realm of base popular novels and detective stories and must carry truly artistic novels. They must publish novels that will make the nation's cultural flower bloom and lengthen the breeze of the people's art. They must not continue in the current manner, shamelessly altering novels serialized in other newspapers or serializing fabricated detective stories that attract people with cheap curiosity (歇價의 好奇). They must publish strong, passionate original works born from the agony of the age, or if not, even translated novels should be works of considerable artistic value. Seen in this light, the recent serialization of *Resurrection* (復活) in the *Maeil Sinbo* (每日申報) is indeed a joyous event compared to the disgraceful spectacle of *Hyŏngsanok* (荊山玉) in the *Chosŏn Ilbo* (朝鮮日報).

Over the past year, the magazines that made significant contributions to literature were *Gaebyeok* (開闢) and *Paekcho* (白潮). *Paekcho*, being purely a literary magazine, naturally played its part, but *Gaebyeok*, despite being a current affairs magazine, devoted considerable space to literature. Not only that, but its careful selection of works cannot be matched by other magazines that merely lined up cheap, unfinished poems and writings. Unfortunately, due to the material obstacles (物質의 沮戱) that always inflict pain upon us, *Paekcho*, which held great promise for the entire literary scene last year, has fallen into a state of suspended publication. This is truly one regrettable matter. We can only hope that it will once again illuminate the brilliant light of art in the future. With this, I will conclude the discussion of the current state of the literary scene and proceed to discuss the works of various individuals.

Poetry
Mr. Sowŏl's (素月) "Mŏn Hudil" (먼 後日 - Far in the Future) (*Gaebyeok* No. 26) was woven with his usual lyrical, beautiful words and rhythm.
However, one realizes it shows considerable deficiency compared to his poem "Chindallaekkot" (진달래꼿 - Azaleas) in the previous issue of *Gaebyeok*. Quoting the second and third stanzas of "Chindallaekkot":
"Nyŏngbyŏn's (寧邊) Yaksan (藥山) mountains,
Their azaleas,
I shall gather armfuls and scatter them on your path.

Step by step on the path you tread, <6>
Those scattered flowers,
Softly, gently tread upon them as you go."
It was a masterpiece (妙作) that truly brought tears to one's eyes and evoked a feeling of sadness and loss. Below it were beautiful works like "Chebi" (제비 - Swallow), "Changbyŏlli" (將別里), "Kojŏkhan nal" (孤寂한 날 - Lonely Day), and "Kangch'on" (江村 - River Village). Among them, "Changbyŏlli" was especially a poem deserving praise without pause. Its first and second stanzas:
"Pale pink jeogori, a red light kindled,
Famous even in P'yŏngyang (平壤), Changbyŏlli,
Fine rain of gold and silver threads
Falls slantingly, scatters.

On the coarse snake-patterned Western umbrella (洋傘),
The falling fine rain
Falls above, falls below, scatters."
Ah, what beautiful technique lies within that poem, what beautiful rhythm flows, what poignant emotion wells up! I cannot but rejoice that such a work exists in our colorless poetry scene. I only wish for Mr. Sowŏl that, with such skill and observation, he does not sing only within the realm of lyric poetry but writes poems that are more powerful, representing the hotter explosion of agony. His prose poem "Kkumjari" (꿈자리 - Dream Place), published in *Gaebyeok* No. 29, is also filled with the refined, beautiful phrasing and sighs of emotion seen in his poetry.
There is Kim Sŏksong's (金石松) "San'ga-e U'gŏhaya" (山家에 寓居하야 - Residing Temporarily in a Mountain House) (*Gaebyeok* No. 25). Reading it, thinking it was a poem, I found it was a sijo (시조). Following this were "Wŏrha U'yŏng" (月下偶呤 - Impromptu Recitation Under the Moon) and "Siin-ege" (詩人에게 - To a Poet), also similar sijo, and then "Owŏr-ŭi Ach'ŭm" (5월의 아츰 - May Morning). Expecting another sijo, I read it and found it to be a completely ordinary, tasteless, clumsy "raw poem" (풋詩). Next came "Kŭdŭr-ŭn Haengbogida" (그들은 幸福이다 - They Are Happiness), which was neither poetry nor prose, just nothingness written down. Seeing sijo and poetry jumbled together under one title made me feel quite unpleasant. Was this the author's mistake or the editor's error? Should I just laugh it off once?
The same author's "Suin Saenghwal" (囚人生活 - Prisoner's Life) (*Gaebyeok* No. 26), compared to poems like "Owŏr-ŭi Ach'ŭm," cannot but be called a well-made work in terms of its poetic conception and rhythm. However, it fails in its expression. Firstly, the rambling and incoherent exposition (舖舒의 支離滅裂); secondly, the lukewarm and dull stimulation—these two major flaws unfortunately render the poetic conception and melody colorless. Below it, the three poems <7> "Kaŭr-i Oryahal ttae" (가을이 오랴할 때 - When Autumn is About to Come), "Yŏrŭm-ŭi Naril" (여름의 날일 - Summer Days), and "Koeroun Yŏrŭmbam" (괴로운 여름밤 - Agonizing Summer Night) are all cut from the same cloth (千篇一律格), displaying the quintessential Kim Sŏksong style. Having obtained a shallow poetic idea less than an inch deep, he seems to puff himself up with high-minded recitation (高呤自謾), as if it were a song obtained from the most sacred, profound Dharma tower of meditation. Looking at the fourth and fifth stanzas of "Kaŭr-i Oryahal ttae":
"The time for the farmhands' haste,
The time for the farmer's harvest,
The time for summer's ripening,
Has already arrived before our eyes.

But what time is it now?
In the old field called Life,
Have the seeds been sown?
Has summer already ripened,
Become the time for harvest?"
And again, the third and fourth stanzas of the poem "Koeroun Yŏrŭmbam":
"But the room is hot, and bedbugs bite too,
He begins to toss and turn.
Throwing down the fan he was flapping,
He finally runs outside.

Ah! Life conquered by mosquitoes and bedbugs!
What then is your pride?
The pride of the human spawn,
Weakest and most foolish of all things."
What foolishness he spews! Isn't it too much to present such shallow, tiny thoughts, which could emerge even from the mind of a naive elementary school student, as poetry? Also, by the same author, I read "Nagyŏp" (落葉 - Falling Leaves) in the November issue of *Gaebyeok* and "Tanchang Kuje" (短章九題 - Nine Short Pieces) in the December issue of the same magazine. There was nothing particularly admirable in "Nagyŏp," but in "Tanchang Kuje," the three poems "Uri Maŭl" (우리마을 - Our Village), "Maŭm-ŭi Musanja" (마음의 無産者 - Proletarian of the Heart), and "O—nanŭn Pyŏngjada" (오―나는 病者다 - Oh—I am Sick) were, for me, the first praiseworthy poems I had seen from him since his "Mongi" (木乃伊 - Mummy).
Ansŏ's (岸曙) "Taedonggang" (大同江 - Taedong River) (*Gaebyeok* No. 25), a series of six poems, were songs of lyricism, but they lacked the mood to intoxicate one into dizzying bliss (法悅), nor did they possess the symbol (심뽈 - symbol?) of Beethoven's heart-rotting anguish (懊惱) that he favors. His usual "yŏra," "sŏra," "rŏra" endings merely troubled the reader pointlessly. The same author's "Kkum-ŭi Norae" (꿈의 노래 - Song of Dreams) (*Gaebyeok* November issue) was a lovely work, the kind not recently seen in his poetry. Harmonized melody, expression of nameless local sentiment, and a heart-wrenching, trembling rhythm—it was a most pleasing poem. <8> Below it, the poem "Kaŭl" (가을 - Autumn) was also a much better work compared to "Taedonggang." However, the subsequent poem "Sangsil" (喪失 - Loss) cannot escape being called a crude work. Generally, the major flaw throughout his poetry is the excessive effort to pursue technique. For example, in "Kaŭl," stanza 2, lines 1, 2, 3:
"Though now the eyes hold a strange smile,
That face, pale beyond measure,
And those white, sickly weak fingers"
Looking at this, one can see how much he agonizes over crafting words rather than the poetic idea itself.
Also, in the same author's poem "Kaŭl Paramgwa Hamkke" (가을 바람과 함께 - With the Autumn Wind), "Sib'irwŏr-ŭi Chŏnyŏk" (11월의 저녁 - November Evening), "Kaŭl" (가을 - Autumn), and "Sŏrŭn Hŭigŭk" (설은 喜劇 - Unripe Comedy) were all works deserving thanks. Among them, "Sŏrŭn Hŭigŭk" was a strong, sharp, powerful song unlike anything previously seen from him.
I came across Yohan's (요한) "Yennar-ŭi Kŏri" (옛날의 거리 - Street of Old Days) in the December issue of *Gaebyeok*. Encountering the poetry of someone who had long vanished from our poetry scene, I couldn't restrain my gladness and impatience. How had his poetry changed during that time? How had the poetry of this long-promising figure evolved? I read it once, then twice. There, one sees the suffocating symbolism (喘息), heavy like a lead weight sunk at the bottom of water, that was present in his earlier poems. Tears of reminiscence, sorrow of reminiscence, gladness of reminiscence overflowed from "Yennar-ŭi Kŏri" into the poem "Chip" (집 - House). I do not say these two poems are failures. However, I cannot suppress the feeling that something is lacking. It was for no other reason than this: I, who had hoped for something greater from him, could not help but think this way.
Hoewŏl's (懷月) poem "Kkum-ŭi Nararo" (꿈의 나라로 - To the Land of Dreams) (*Paekcho* No. 2) was the most lovely and passionate cry of the soul of a lonely, desolate young person. It was a beautiful poem, like silk brocade woven with alternating threads of blue and red emotional symbolism (情調象徵) and sorrowful romanticism (悲哀浪漫). Furthermore, the poem below it, "Kŭrimjarŭl Nanŭn Tchotchida" (그림자를 나는 쪼치다 - I Chase the Shadow), is a poem like strung beads, refined and polished. Looking at the first three stanzas:
"Night is desolate,
Through the rainy street, trembling,
I chase the sighing shadow.

Night is sorrowful,
Flying through the ruined garden soaked in tears,
I chase the scattered flower shadow. <9>

When the shadow vanishes
Upon the earth glittering in sunlight,
Staggering through the street of darkness,
Upon the tears, I chase the shadow."
What a fine poem it is, how sorrowful it is, how deeply it moves the reader's heart (哀然)!
Next are the poems "Ŏdum Nŏmŏro" (어둠 넘어로 - Beyond the Darkness) and "Yuryŏng-ŭi Nara" (幽靈의 나라 - Land of Ghosts). Especially "Yuryŏng-ŭi Nara" is a passionate song, a powerful song. Its first two stanzas:
"Dreams are the dancing ground of ghosts,
Reality is the blazing red ironworks
That kindles human suffering!"

"Tears are the dregs of suffering
Adhered to the fire,
Love is the goddess calling into the dream!" starting from this, to its final stanza:
"Ah! You!
Extend your white hand and arm
Into this land of darkness!
I shall go, I shall go.
Carefully treading on your white arm!
To the land of ghosts, to the land of dreams,
I shall go! Ah—your arm—." So it says. I pray that your path ahead may be brilliant (煥煥).
Yi Sang-hwa's (李相和) "Kaŭr-ŭi P'unggyŏng" (가을의 風景 - Autumn Landscape) (*Paekcho* No. 2) is like a vivid, realistic painting with strong colors. At a time when there are many writings like prostitutes smeared with makeup, padded with useless fat, this work, sung powerfully with bare bones and no adornment, commands admiration.
Noch'ŏn's (露雀) poem "Pomŭn Kadŏida" (봄은 가더이다 - Spring Went By) (*Paekcho* No. 2) richly expresses the rustic beauty unique to him, depicting a poetic style like the rambling talk (넉두리) of a young bride soaked in sorrow.
Starting with the second stanza's beginning:
"Spring came, and then it went by,
Flowers bloomed, and then they withered."
and observing the fourth stanza:
"The sounds of spring outings,
Chattering 'The season is fine,' are also eerie (을스년스럽다).
Let's go to the mountains, let's go to the water,
And then where else...
'Don't break off, piece by piece, <10>
The sound of the spring flute played idly.
Flower twigs, unsatisfying even if plucked.'
Even the sounds of herb gatherers and vegetable gatherers,
Tears, even those were tears." Seeing this, indeed, as the author wrote in the poem, how eerie and melancholic (시들푼) a feeling it evokes! It is a work that the reader hates to put down, even after reading it two or three times. The same author's short song "Pi Onŭn Pam" (비오는 밤 - Rainy Night) (*Tongmyŏng* No. 7) is also one of his fine works.
Pyŏn Yŏng-no's (卞榮魯) "Pombi" (봄비 - Spring Rain) (*Sin Saenghwal* No. 2) has the flavor of gently stroking a person's weary soul. And its strong melody evokes the feeling of hearing strange music on a riverbank on a summer night steeped in foreign sentiment. Below it, the poem "Ch'uŏngmani" (追憶만이 - Only Memories) evokes a similar feeling, resembling "Pombi." Also, his poem "Ch'ukpok" (祝福 - Blessing) in *Sin Saenghwal* No. 9, compared to the aforementioned works, could arguably be said to barely qualify as poetry. His "Sogok Samp'yŏn" (小曲三篇 - Three Little Pieces), published in *Tongmyŏng* No. 5, cannot but be called one of the rare gems found in recent poetry. Among them, the two poems "Hanulman Poara" (한울만 보아라 - Look Only at the Sky) and "Nimisiyŏra" (님이시어라 - Oh, My Love) could not have been achieved without being sung from the realm of meditation.
Also, his poem "Kŭ Ttae-ga Ŏnjena Omnikka" (그 때가 언제나 옵니까 - When Will That Time Come?) in *Tongmyŏng* No. 9 is not a poem to be glossed over. Strong poetic ideas, strong rhythm, a lovely song that makes one want to choke back sobs and also wipe away tears and smile.
I read Ch'unsŏng's (春城) "Chinju-ŭi Pyŏl" (眞珠의 별 - Star of Pearls) in *Sin Saenghwal* No. 9. Eyebrows gently drawn with ink, face evenly covered with powder, and lips painted with rouge. I passionately advise Ch'unsŏng: you must not write poetry using only such cheap, pretty prose (美文). You must not sing using only phrases like "silver path" (銀길) or "a single flower bud amidst myriad green bushes" (萬綠叢 중에 한 봉아리 꼿). There must be bone; there must be strength. If it's hot, it must be hot; if it's cold, it must be cold. I say once more: for the author of such strong, passionate, and lovely poems as "Kŏmiyŏ Na-ege Chugŭmŭl Chusosŏ" (검이여 나에게 죽음을 주소서 - Oh Sword, Give Me Death) in *Changmich'on* (薔薇村 - Rose Village), to write such a poem today after some years have passed is truly disheartening.
Ch'unsŏng, cry out strongly!
Besides these, a poem by someone named Ha (河) was published in the December issue of *Tongmyŏng*. It is a poem that makes one watch his future path. Also, in *Tongmyŏng* No. 4, there were Ubŏ's (牛步) "Kŏphwa" (劫火 - Conflagration) and Sunsŏng's (瞬星) "Ch'ŏnyŏ-ŭi Charang" (處女의 자랑 - A Maiden's Pride), but they cannot be called successful. Both authors' poems have not escaped the realm of beginners. Another thing that comes to mind from hazy memory is that Ms. Kim Myŏng-sun (金明淳) seems to have published poems once or twice in *Gaebyeok* <11>. However, as I do not have those issues at hand, I cannot discuss them.

Novels
Just as decent poems are scarce in the poetry scene, decent novels are also hard to find. Among them, excluding the raw novels (풋소설) and translated novels, and selecting only reasonably competent ones, the total number for the entire year amounts to only a few.
Na To-hyang's (羅稻香) novel "Pyŏrŭl An'gŏdŭn Ujina Malgŏl" (별을 안거든 우지나 말걸 - If You Embrace a Star, Don't Cry) (*Paekcho* No. 2) was a work that marked a boundary line between his past works and his art, something not previously possessed. Making one feel sorrowful and tearful, like hearing the strumming sound (스르렁 스르렁) of a zither (琴聲) late on a desolate autumn night, or like hearing the rambling talk of a widow under the bright moon, its intensely realistic sentimental style (센티멘타릭한 作風), combined with deep and sharp psychological description, skillfully captivates the reader completely. "Nyesnal Kkumŭn Ch'angbaekhadŏida" (녯날 꿈은 蒼白하더이다 - Old Dreams Were Pale) (*Gaebyeok* December issue), also an original work by the same author, vividly expresses unforgettable childhood impressions from the sorrowful dreamscape of past pursuits (追境). However, the lack of unity throughout the piece cannot but be called a major flaw of this novel. Without any connecting point, all the characters in the story become like phantoms in a dream. Consequently, one cannot discern which character is the protagonist. The reason is that this short story strings together descriptions that would be ample for a full-length novel. Firstly, the description of the relationship between the first-person narrator, a 12-year-old child, his Christian grandmother, and his anti-religious father, which definitely required long and deep portrayal, was extremely brief. Also, the necessary connection between his father and grandmother was missing, and the portrayal of what kind of person his mother was is too weak. In every respect, it shows deficiency compared to the novel "Pyŏrŭl An'gŏdŭn Ujina Malgŏl." Besides these, his original full-length novel *Hwanhŭi* (幻戱 - Phantom Play) is being serialized in the *Tong-a Ilbo* (東亞日報).
Since Yi Ch'unwŏn's (李春園) *Mujŏng* (無情 - Heartlessness), *Hwanhŭi* is the only novel-like novel, especially a full-length one, to appear. That the *Tong-a Ilbo*, which had only serialized detective stories and translated novels since its inception, began publishing a substantial novel written by one of our own is a welcome phenomenon for the world of newspaper novels. In any case, *Hwanhŭi* is a work that, for our utterly impoverished literary scene last year, finally shouted bravely, "Not so! I am here!" and its shout was more than enough to make everyone <12> listen with a reverent heart and be moved by its roar. A massive work close to 1,000 pages cannot be reviewed in this limited space. I hope to review it in detail when the opportunity arises in the future. Here, I will just mention that even in our poverty-stricken literary scene, such a praiseworthy work allowed the year-end literary world to shake out its sleeves and give a loud cough.
Hyŏn P'yŏnghŏ's (玄憑虛) novels *T'arakcha* (墮落者 - The Fallen), *Pinch'ŏ* (貧妻 - Poor Wife), and *Sul Kwŏnhanŭn Sahoe* (술 勸하는 社會 - A Society that Urges Drinking) have been published as a single volume. This marks the first publication of a short story collection by a Korean. The value of *T'arakcha* as a novel is already recognized by the public as a superb masterpiece (傑筆), and since I previously reviewed it in another magazine, there is no need to ramble (呶呶) on about it here. I will only discuss *Pinch'ŏ* and *Sul Kwŏnhanŭn Sahoe*.
*Pinch'ŏ* fully showcases his realistic style. With delicate and beautiful brushwork, like a photograph, it accurately depicts the household of a poor young couple. It was such an engaging work that anyone reading it would hold their breath until the end. Here, the author's meticulous mind and calm personality are vividly suggested. The more one reads, the more a soft fragrance seems to rise from under the molars; the more one recites, the more one feels like embracing and kissing it—an indefinable, formless flavor seems to float and flow. Even Ch'unwŏn's beautiful prose might not match this, and even Satomi Ton's (里見弴) talented writing might not achieve this much. *Sul Kwŏnhanŭn Sahoe*, while the description and style seem plausible, gives the impression that something is lacking. Also, his *Yurin* (蹂躪 - Trampling) (*Paekcho* No. 2), with the bold brushstrokes characteristic of French works, evokes a feeling of stepping into a dimly lit secret room filled with the intense color of red Taria (?), opium smoke, and the scent of absinthe. However, that we could not see its conclusion is truly regrettable. Also, *P'iano* (피아노 - Piano) in the December issue of *Gaebyeok* is not such a well-done work. If the author simply wrote it playfully based on a small hint, then that is something worth mentioning to P'yŏnghŏ. The novel *P'iano* is by no means untalented writing, nor is its description unengaging, but talent and engagement alone cannot heal the deepest wounds of agony (瘡痍) of modern people. Without something most poignant and profound, one cannot console the souls of modern people.
Yŏm Sang-sŏp's (廉想涉) "E Sŏnsaeng" (E 선생 - Mr. E) (*Tongmyŏng*) is an extremely ordinary and commonplace work, suitable for telling as a story during a moment of laughter. When he previously published the novel *Cheya* (除夜 - New Year's Eve) in *Gaebyeok*, witnessing its powerful and passionate style, like the cry of a deviant "heretic" (異端者) seemingly filled with strength (力) and blood (血), my hopes for him were exceedingly high. However, seeing <13> today's "E Sŏnsaeng," all the expectations I had for him have turned into mere foam. Though surroundings and environment might make him so! I grieve for him.
His *Myoji* (墓地 - Graveyard) (*Sin Saenghwal*), while not comparable to "E Sŏnsaeng," was also regrettably unavailable for reading, reportedly having been entirely censored beforehand.
Yang Paekhwa's (梁白華) "Ppallaehanŭn Ch'ŏnyŏ" (빨래하는 處女 - The Laundering Maiden) (*Tongmyŏng*) takes such rich material and casually wields the brush as if merely aiming to entertain womenfolk (於是에 足矣라 하는 듯이), which is a major mistake. Firstly, there is no profound description (referring to both internal and external aspects); secondly, there is no strong, passionate resonance. When depicting King Goujian of Yue (越王句賤), who endured national humiliation to plot revenge (亡國嘗膽), the unparalleled beauty Xi Shi (西施), the loyal Wu Zixu (伍子胥) with his autumn-frost integrity (秋霜節烈日忠), the incompetent and dim-witted King Fuchai (夫差), the resourceful Chancellor Fan Li (范相國), the sorrowful longing in the songs of Wu (吳謳) and Yue (越吹), the cassia oars and magnolia poles heading down the long inlet (桂棹蘭橈下長浦), and the silk skirts and jade wrists lightly rowing (羅裙玉腕輕搖櫓), how freely could one wield the brush? How could one dissect psychology with delicate description, immersing the reader in that vivid, true scene?
"Chŏnjo?" (前兆? - Omen?) (*Gaebyeok* December issue) by someone named P'yŏrang Sonyŏn (漂浪少年 - Wandering Boy) could not have been written to such a standard without considerable accomplishment. The meticulous and unsuperfluous, refined psychological description moves one like being pricked with a sharp needle. The description of the protagonist little girl's mother dressing her once in silk clothes and then letting her continue wearing them, the skillful hidden description (暗面 묘사) regarding the spoon that touched the mouths of her deceased older brother and other brothers—suggestive yet seemingly natural—and the orderly surface description of nature; none of these lacks anything. It is a flawless, sound work. It is most difficult for a novel to be called a masterpiece, but I know it is perhaps even harder for it to be called free of the slightest flaw throughout. I do not hesitate to offer praise time and again for this author's future path.
There is a piece called "Hosang-ŭi Nunmul" (滬上의 눈물 - Tears in Shanghai) (*Gaebyeok* August issue) by someone named Toksan (獨山), but it is still difficult to call it a novel.
Beyond these, a few works were sporadically published in magazines like *Sin Ch'ŏnji* (新天地), *Kong'yŏng* (共榮), *Kyemyŏng* (啓明), *Ch'ŏngnyŏn* (靑年), *Sisa P'yŏngnon* (時事評論), *Sinmin Kongnon* (新民公論), and *Chosŏn chi Kwang* (朝鮮之光), but seeing that not a single one inspires the effort of critique, my spirits merely feel heavy.
One more thing remains in my memory: Chin Sun-sŏng's (秦瞬星) novel "'So'-ŭi Am'yŏng" (『小』의 暗影 - The Shadow of 'Small') was serialized in the *Tong-a Ilbo* last spring. My impression upon reading it then was that I found it quite engaging. Its delicate description and calm style drew me in. However, after later hearing from a reasonably reliable source that it was an adaptation (번안), the thought that it was well-written, which I had held before, melted away like spring snow piled in the yard of a south-facing gatehouse.
Now, though I wish to critique, there are no more works worth critiquing. Let me just utter the customary phrase—"Forgive my reckless critique" (妄評多謝)—and throw down my brush... (1922. 12. 9) <14>

**Summary**

Pak Wŏlt'an delivers a scathing critique of the Korean literary scene of 1922, expressing profound disappointment with the lack of progress, notable works, or significant writers. He laments the "impoverished" state, citing material hardship, writers abandoning their craft, and a general lack of artistic vitality. He specifically condemns the plagiarism of Kikuchi Kan's novel by the *Chosŏn Ilbo* and criticizes many poets (Kim Sŏksong, Ansŏ) and novelists (Yŏm Sang-sŏp, Yang Paekhwa) for perceived mediocrity, technical fixation, or lack of depth, while offering praise for others like Sowŏl, Hoewŏl, Na To-hyang, and Hyŏn Chin-gŏn, albeit sometimes qualified. He discusses the controversial downfall of Yi Kwang-su (Yi Ch'unwŏn), calls for a powerful, profound "art of power," and notes the emerging ideological split between bourgeois and proletarian art. The overall tone is one of intense frustration mixed with a faint, almost desperate hope for future resurgence.

From a historical perspective, the article is revealing about the struggles of Korean intellectuals and artists under colonial rule. Pak's frustration highlights the immense pressure and material difficulties faced by writers, impacting output and quality. The Yi Kwang-su incident and the plagiarism case reflect anxieties about national identity, morality, and cultural integrity in the face of external influences (Japanese literature) and internal crises. The call for an "art of power" and the mention of the proletarian art debate signal the growing politicization of culture and the search for literature relevant to the harsh realities of the colonial period. Historians might find the specific critiques of authors and works, the commentary on newspaper novels' influence, and the explicit articulation of the literary scene's perceived stagnation valuable for understanding cultural production and intellectual currents in 1920s Korea.

**Named Entities**

朴月灘	박월탄	Pak Wŏlt'an
開闢社	개벽사	Gaebyeoksa
李春園	이춘원	Yi Ch'unwŏn (Yi Kwang-su)
己未運動	기미운동	Kimi Undong (March First Movement)
辛酉	신유	Sinyu (1921)
民族改造論	민족개조론	Minjok Kaejoron (Essay on National Reconstruction)
朝鮮日報	조선일보	Chosŏn Ilbo
荊山玉	형산옥	Hyŏngsanok
碧霞生	벽하생	Pyŏkha Saeng
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
大阪每日新聞	오사카 마이니치 신문	Ōsaka Mainichi Shinbun
菊池寬	기쿠치 간	Kikuchi Kan
眞珠夫人	진주부인	Shinju Fujin (Madam Pearl)
黑眞珠	흑진주	Hŭkchinju (Black Pearl)
趙雄傳	조웅전	Cho Ung Chŏn
劉忠烈傳	유충렬전	Yu Ch'ungyŏl Chŏn
九疑山	구의산	Kuŭisan
雙玉淚	쌍옥루	Ssangongnu
李海朝	이해조	Yi Hae-cho
每日申報	매일신보	Maeil Sinbo
復活	부활	Puhwal (Resurrection - likely Tolstoy's)
白潮	백조	Paekcho (magazine)
素月	소월	Sowŏl (Kim Chŏng-sik)
寧邊	영변	Nyŏngbyŏn
藥山	약산	Yaksan
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
金石松	김석송	Kim Sŏksong
岸曙	안서	Ansŏ (Kim Ŏk)
요한	요한	Yohan (Chu Yo-han)
懷月	회월	Hoewŏl (Pak Chong-hwa)
李相和	이상화	Yi Sang-hwa
露雀	노작	Noch'ŏn (Yi Pyŏng-gi)
東明	동명	Tongmyŏng (magazine)
卞榮魯	변영로	Pyŏn Yŏng-no
新生活	신생활	Sin Saenghwal (magazine)
春城	춘성	Ch'unsŏng (No Cha-yŏng)
薔薇村	장미촌	Changmich'on (Rose Village - likely a poetry collection title)
河	하	Ha (Poet's surname/pseudonym)
牛步	우보	Ubŏ (Poet's pseudonym)
瞬星	순성	Sunsŏng (Poet's pseudonym)
金明淳	김명순	Kim Myŏng-sun
羅稻香	나도향	Na To-hyang
東亞日報	동아일보	Tong-a Ilbo
無情	무정	Mujŏng (Heartlessness)
幻戱	환희	Hwanhŭi (Phantom Play)
玄憑虛	현빙허	Hyŏn P'yŏnghŏ (Hyŏn Chin-gŏn)
墮落者	타락자	T'arakcha (The Fallen)
貧妻	빈처	Pinch'ŏ (Poor Wife)
술 勸하는 社會	술 권하는 사회	Sul Kwŏnhanŭn Sahoe (A Society that Urges Drinking)
里見弴	사토미 톤	Satomi Ton
蹂躪	유린	Yurin (Trampling)
불란서	불란서	Pullansŏ (France)
廉想涉	염상섭	Yŏm Sang-sŏp
E 선생	E 선생	E Sŏnsaeng (Mr. E)
除夜	제야	Cheya (New Year's Eve)
墓地	묘지	Myoji (Graveyard)
梁白華	양백화	Yang Paekhwa
빨래하는 處女	빨래하는 처녀	Ppallaehanŭn Ch'ŏnyŏ (The Laundering Maiden)
越王句賤	월왕 구천	Wŏrwang Kuch'ŏn (King Goujian of Yue)
西施	서시	Sŏsi (Xi Shi)
伍子胥	오자서	Ojasŏ (Wu Zixu)
夫差	부차	Puch'a (King Fuchai of Wu)
范相國	범상국	Pŏm Sang'guk (Chancellor Fan Li)
吳	오	O (State of Wu)
越	월	Wŏl (State of Yue)
漂浪少年	표랑소년	P'yŏrang Sonyŏn (Wandering Boy - pseudonym)
前兆?	전조?	Chŏnjo? (Omen?)
獨山	독산	Toksan (Pseudonym)
滬上	호상	Hosang (Shanghai)
新天地	신천지	Sin Ch'ŏnji (magazine)
共榮	공영	Kong'yŏng (magazine)
啓明	계명	Kyemyŏng (magazine)
靑年	청년	Ch'ŏngnyŏn (magazine)
時事評論	시사평론	Sisa P'yŏngnon (magazine)
新民公論	신민공론	Sinmin Kongnon (magazine)
朝鮮之光	조선지광	Chosŏn chi Kwang (magazine)
秦瞬星	진순성	Chin Sun-sŏng
『小』의 暗影	『소』의 암영	'So'-ŭi Am'yŏng (The Shadow of 'Small')

**Glossary**

文壇	문단	Literary world, literary scene
槪評	개평	General review, overall critique
바덧스나	받았으나	Received, but (older spelling of 받았으나)
업고	없고	Not having, lacking (older spelling of 없고)
貧相	빈상	Impoverished appearance, meager state
하얏다	하였다	Did, was (older spelling of 하였다)
차듸찬	차디찬	Icy cold (older spelling/form of 차디찬)
가탓다	같았다	Was like (older spelling of 같았다)
밋바닥	밑바닥	Bottom, lowest level (older spelling of 밑바닥)
하야곰	하여금	Make someone do, cause (older form of 하여금)
李春園	이춘원	Yi Ch'unwŏn (pen name of Yi Kwang-su)
天稟	천품	Natural gifts, innate talent
붓대	붓대	Pen shaft, writing brush (older term)
嘖嘖	책책	Clicking sound (of tongues, expressing admiration or disapproval)
굴헝	구렁	Pit, abyss (older spelling of 구렁)
놉다란	높다란	High, lofty (older spelling of 높다란)
밋그러저	미끄러져	Slipping (older spelling of 미끄러져)
잣바진	자빠진	Fallen down (older spelling of 자빠진)
맨들어	만들어	Making (older spelling of 만들어)
愀然	초연	Sorrowfully, dismally
才士	재사	Talented person, man of talent
驕傲兒	교오아	Arrogant child/person
一敗塗地	일패도지	Utter defeat, crushing failure
文壇圈外	문단권외	Outside the literary circle
暢達	창달	Fluent, smooth (writing style)
彌縫	미봉	Patching up, makeshift repair
恬然히	염연히	Shamelessly, brazenly
歇價	헐가	Cheap price, worthless (often used metaphorically)
微溫的	미온적	Lukewarm, tepid
懊惱	오뇌	Anguish, agony, vexation
靈泉	영천	Spiritual spring, miraculous spring
把持者	파지자	Holder, possessor
椽大의 筆	연대의 필	Rafter-sized brush (metaphor for bold writing)
話說	화설	Storytelling genre (archaic)
却說	각설	Narrative transition marker ("now, to speak of...")
뿔조아예술	부르주아 예술	Bourgeois art (Korean phonetic rendering)
푸로레타리아예술	프롤레타리아 예술	Proletarian art (Korean phonetic rendering)
胚胎	배태	Conception, germination, embryonic stage
滋味	자미	Taste, flavor, interest, entertainment value (often implies popular appeal)
消遣	소견	Passing time, whiling away time
聖殿	성전	Holy temple, sanctuary
濁亂	탁란	Making turbid, throwing into confusion, defiling
沮戱	저희	Obstruction, hindrance (used here for material difficulties)
煌煌	황황	Brilliant, radiant
이듬	이듬	Rhythm (likely dialectal or older form of 리듬)
妙作	묘작	Masterpiece, exquisite work
洋傘	양산	Western-style umbrella
풋詩	풋시	Immature poem, raw poem
舖舒	포서	Exposition, unfolding (of a narrative or argument)
支離滅裂	지리멸렬	Incoherent, disjointed, rambling
高呤自謾	고음자만	Reciting loftily and being self-satisfied
愚痴	우치	Foolishness, stupidity
法悅	법열	Religious ecstasy, bliss (Buddhist term)
심뽈	심볼	Symbol (likely author's phonetic rendering/usage)
喘息	천식	Asthma, gasping (used metaphorically for strained symbolism)
情調象徵	정조상징	Emotional symbolism
悲哀浪漫	비애낭만	Sorrowful romanticism
넉두리	넋두리	Grumbling, lamenting talk, rambling complaint
을스년스럽다	으스스하다	Eerie, uncanny, chilly (older/dialectal form of 으스스하다)
시들푼	시들픈	Wistful, melancholic (possibly related to 시들다 - wither)
美文	미문	Beautiful writing, ornate prose (sometimes pejorative for style over substance)
센티멘타릭	센티멘탈	Sentimental (phonetic rendering)
追境	추경	Recollection of past circumstances/scenes
傑筆	걸필	Outstanding writing, masterpiece
呶呶	노노	Chattering, rambling on
亡國嘗膽	망국상담	Enduring humiliation for future revenge (allusion to King Goujian)
秋霜節烈日忠	추상절렬일충	Integrity like autumn frost, fierce loyalty like the sun (epithets for Wu Zixu)
庸暗昏主	용암혼주	Incompetent and dim-witted ruler
吳謳越吹	오구월취	Songs of Wu and pipes of Yue (representing regional culture/longing)
桂棹蘭橈	계도난요	Cassia oars and magnolia poles (poetic description of boats)
羅裙玉腕	나군옥완	Silk skirt and jade(-like) wrist (poetic description of women)
於斯에 足矣	어사족의	(Classical Chinese phrase) It is sufficient for this purpose.
暗面	암면	Hidden aspect, underlying layer
번안	번안	Adaptation (of a foreign work, often changing setting/names)
妄評多謝	망평다사	Please forgive my reckless critique (conventional closing phrase)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제31호
발행일	1923년 01월 01일
기사제목	文壇의 一年을 追憶하야 現狀과 作品을 槪評하노라
필자	朴月灘
기사형태	문예평론

文壇의 一年을 追憶하야 現狀과 作品을 槪評하노라
						朴月灘
前言
開闢社로부터 신년호에 내일 문단에 대한 평론을 쓰라는 말슴을 바덧스나 붓을 들랴다가는 다시 던지고 붓을 던젓다가는 다시 잡어 써볼가 말가하야 주저하기를 마지 아니 하얏다. 다시 말하면 도모지 모든 이의 글을 評할 감흥이 나지 아니한다. 아무런 驚異도 업고 아무런 진전도 업는 이 貧相의 문단을 향하야 무엇을 쓸고 하얏다. 허튼 주정도 거리가 잇서야 하지 작가도 업고 작품도 업는 評을 어떠케 한단 말인고 하얏다. 이러케 내 마음은 차듸찬 병적 우울에 잠겨 잇섯다. 이리하야 아주 쓰기를 단념하얏다. 그러하나 내 마음 한편 구석에선 그래두! 하얏다. 비록 사람의 영감을 떨게 하는 걸작은 업스나 粗品이나마 우리의 손으로 된 창작이 아니냐. 큰 전개와 驚異는 업슬만정 細微하나마 개척될 상징이 아니냐 하는 속살거림을 들을 때에 비롯오 풀렷든 맥이 다시 도는 듯 하고 업서젓든 용기가 나는 것 가탓다. 이리하야 다시 붓을 들어 쓸쓸한 마음 깃븐 마음 경건한 마음으로 지난 1년의 문단의 현상을 회상하고 아울러 諸氏의 작품을 말슴하랴 한다.

1년 동안의 긴 세월이건마는 문단으로의 1년은 넘우도 쓸쓸하고 한산하얏다. 지금으로부터 지난 봄을 회상해 보면 멋업고 슴슴한 꿈자리 속에서 공연히 허덕어린 것 가튼 불유쾌하고 불안한 정떨어지는 마음을 것잡을 수 업다. 인제와서는 한 물거픔의 헛생각이 되엇지마는 적어도 작년 이맘때에 바라든 바는 이러케 적막하고＜1＞ 무의미한 것은 아니엇섯다. 문단의 계통을 대별하야 ―시―소설―극 이 세 방면으로 상당한 목표가 세워지리라 하얏다. 물론 번화한 외국의 문단, 그만큼은 바랄 수 업스나 적어도 어렴풋한 윤곽은 그려질 것이라 하얏다. 그러나 그 바라든 1년을 보내고 보니 어렴풋한 윤곽은 고사하고 새벽 한울에 슬어지랴는 별과 가튼 겅성드뭇한 작품이나마 한번 사람의 마음을 움직여 줄 만한 것도 업슴을 보면 부즈럽시 소사나는 火症에 가슴만 조일 뿐이다.

작가의 몰락, 작가의 직업변환, 작가의 蟄伏, 이러한 애닯은 경황에 조선 사람치고 누구나 가장 큰 고뇌를 맛보는 물질적 不如意는 더욱이 이 비참한 문단의 景氣를 비참케 하얏다.  이러한 여러 부진으로 인하야 작년 1년에 표면으로 나타난 문단적 성적은 표면에 나타나지마는 다시 말하면 문단 밋바닥에 잠겨잇는 그것에 비하야 돌이어 만흔 손색이 잇슬 것 갓다.
작가의 몰락, 蟄伏을 말할 때에 먼저 작년의 문단으로 또는 사회로 하야곰 큰 여론을 일으키게 한 李春園 사건을 회상치 안흘 수 업다. 불운의 남아에게는 항상 불운이 싸혀 흐른다.  아― 그는 얼마나 큰 비운 속에 무쳐진 사람이냐. 그의 정치적 또는 사회적으로의 자질과 인격은 나의 자세히 아지 못하는 바이라 여긔 말할 필요가 업거니와 문인으로의 그의 天稟은 실로 촉망할 사람의 하나이엇다. 그에게는 열정이 잇스며 그에게는 果斷이 잇섯다. 그가 울며 그가 노래할 때에 그의 글에는 눈물이 잇는 듯 하얏스며 피가 솟는 듯 하얏다. 처음에 호을로 그가 草草한 문단 우에 붓대를 춤출 때에 1,000인의 嘖嘖한 歎賞이 그의 一身에 쏘다 부을 때에 누가 그를 향하야 문단 개척의 제 1인자라 부정하얏드뇨. 이혼사건이 일어난 뒤에 그의 이름은 한번 꺽기엇스며 己未運動에 그의 이름은 다시 흔들리다가 辛酉 겨을에 또다시 의혹의 초점이 되엇섯다. 이래로 작년 여름에 民族改造論에 야만 두 글자로 말미암어 길이 몰락의 굴헝에 떨어저 버리엇다. 물과 불을 헤아리지 안는 그의 강한 열정은 먼저 그의 가정을 破壤하야 질겨히 구도덕의 반역자가 되엇스며 다시 자기의 밋는 바 단 은총의 사랑이라는 새로운 결합을 짓기에 주저치 아니하얏다. 이리하야 당시의 젊은 사람의 안정되지 안흔 마음을 흔들게 하야 『사랑 업시는 살 수 업다.』 『사랑 모르는 본처를 이혼하고 새로운 愛의 대상을 구한다.』 하는 등의 시대적 경향의 急先鋒이 되엇나니 이것이 그때 新人으로 自任하든 그의 구도덕 破壤運動의＜2＞ 하나이며 딸하서 그의 성격이 얼마나 열정적인 것을 알 수 잇는 것이다.
이래에 그의 행동은 열정 아닌 것이 업섯나니(상세한 그의 동작을 말하지 아니하노라) 義憤의 열정, 탈선적 열정, 맹목적 열정, 神經的 열정 이들의 모든 열정은 드듸어 民族改造論을 쓰게 하야 금일의 몰락을 일우게 하얏나니 주위는 그로 하야곰 흥분케 하얏스며 환경은 그로 하야곰 미치게 하얏스며 사회는 그로 하야곰 발광되어라 하엿도다. 열정적 성격자인 그를 향하야 더욱 白灼이 되도록 부채질한 者는 그 누구뇨. 우리 사회가 아니뇨. 나는 뭇노라. 李春園을 詬辱하는 모든 인사에게 뭇노니 도적질을 시키는 다시 말하면 사람으로 하야곰 도적놈이 되게한 자가 그르냐. 스스로 어할 수 업서 죽지 못하야 도적질 하는 놈이 죄가 더 크냐! 識者―잇스면 그 分辨함이 잇슬 것이다.
우리는 유전적으로 전래하는 한 큰 惡根性이 잇다. 이것은 누구나 우리의 옛 역사의 페지를들추어 볼 때마다 일어나는 감회이나 한놈이 올라가고 올라가 놉다란 지위에 잇다가 어떠한 실책으로 인하야 밋그러저 떨어지게 되면 잣바진 놈은 다시 일어나지 못한다 하야 짓밟고 차고 하야 아조 여지도 업시 되게 맨들어 버린다. 이것이 사람으로의 능히 할 바랴. 이것이 적나라한 인간성이라 하면 다만 그 愀然할 뿐이다.
사회는 한 사람의 문인을 죽이엇스며 한 사람의 열정아를 죽이엇스며 한 사람의 才士를 죽이엇도다. 그로 하야곰 熱氣滿滿의 驕傲兒가 되게 하고 또다시 一敗塗地로 몰락의 굴헝에 떨어털이게 하얏도다. 文壇圈外의 李씨를 비판할 필요가 업스나 하여간 촉망이 만튼 문인의 몰락을 위하야 애닯아 하지 안흘 수 업다. 아―春園의 몰락! 다시 압날에 그 문인으로의 부활이 잇기를 바라는 바이다. 아아 그때는 그대가 범가티 한번 뛰어야 하며 사자가티 한번 부르지저야 될 것이로다.

처음으로 일어나는 문단에 적지 안흔 예술의 모독자들이 잇슴은 가장 不祥한 조짐이다. 일일이 그것을 들어 말할 수 업스나 가장 큰 예를 들면 조선언론계에 큰 신문이라 自任하는 朝鮮日報에 매일 연재되는 『荊山玉』이라 하는 장편소설이 잇다. 누구의 작품인가 하고 보니 碧霞生著라고 대서특서하얏다. 어떠한 소설인가 하고 우선 꼭댁이 서너줄을 읽어보니 이상하게도 어대서 한번 읽어본 듯한 생각이 난다. 가만히 생각해 보니 일본 大阪每日新聞에 연재되엇든 菊池寬의 作 『眞珠夫人』의＜3＞ 번역이다. 그나마 그 譯文이 暢達하얏스면 얼마간 용서할 점이 잇겟스나 修辭의 거칠고 말 안되는 것과 風俗人情이 懸殊되는 것을 서투른 솜씨로 彌縫한 데는 더욱 기막힘을 막을 수 업다. 웨 率直하게 眞珠夫人의 번역이라 하지 아니하고 恬然히 碧霞著라 하얏는가. 무슨 까닭으로 남의 심혈을 짜내인 작품을 마음대로 갓다가 제것인 체 하야 남의 예술을 더럽히는가. 개를 주어도 먹지 안흘 그 따위 야비한 심장은 속히 고치어 참다운 길에 나아가야 할 것이다. 남의 小品文을 도적한대도 그 죄가 크거늘 타인의 고뇌의 결정으로 된 장편소설을 함부로 갓다가 소위 조선언론계의 하나라는 朝鮮日報에 게재한다 하면  그 넘우도 철면피가 아니냐.
朝鮮日報社에 뭇노라. 아모리 문예의 상식이 업는 사람이라 할지라도 第4面을 대표하는 소설을 『荊山玉』가튼 절도질한 소설을 실는대서야 그 넘우도 창피하지 안흔가. 이것이 비록 적은 일 가트나 자기 신문을 스스로 욕되게 할 뿐이 아니라 조선문단을 모독하는 행동이라. 불행히 외국사람이 그것을 알게 되면 얼마나 조선 사람에게 큰 수치를 입힐 것인가. 朝鮮日報社에 만일 소설이란 어떠한 것인지 아는 사람이 업스면 맛당히 그 아는 이에게 물어서 실을 것이다. 그대는 自任하야 민중을 옹호하는 언론기관이라 하나 일개소설로 인하야 조선사람을 욕먹게 하고 조선의 예술을 문란케 하면 그 모순됨이 심하지 아니하뇨. 맛당히 그 문단을 향하야 사죄할 바이라.

압흐로 우리가 가저야 할 예술은 『力의 예술』이다. 가장 강하고 뜨거웁고 매운 힘 잇는 예술이라야 할 것이다. 歇價의 연애문학, 微溫的의 寫實文學 그것만으로는 우리의 懊惱를 건질 수 업스며 시대적 불안을 위로할 수 업다. 만사람의 뜨거운 심장 속에는 어떠한 욕구의 피가 끌흐며 만사람의 얼켜진 뇌 속에는 어떠한 착란의 고뇌가 헐덕어리느냐. 이 불안이 고뇌를 건저주고 이 광란의 피물을 눅여줄 靈泉의 把持者는 그 누구뇨. 『力의 예술』을 가진 자이며 『力의 詩』를 읇는 자이다. 가장 경건한 태도로 강하고 뜨거운 그곳에 관조하야 명상의 境域을 넘어 선 꿈틀꿈틀한 국다란 선이 뛰는 듯한 하얀 조희— 시컴한 묵을 찍어 椽大의 筆을 두른 듯한 그러한 예술의 把持者라야 될 것이다. 그러나 불행히 우리 문단엔 이러한 소설가가 업스며 이러한 시인이 업다. 요새이 새로 출판된 『黑眞珠』라는 話說이 却說이때하는 趙雄傳, 劉忠烈傳들의 태고쩍 소설만도 못한 『九疑山』＜4＞,『雙玉淚』와 가튼 李海朝식의 곰팡냄새가 푹푹 나는 歇價의 勸善懲惡的인 15, 6세기의 소설이 백만권이 출판된다사 그 무슨 우리가 문단에 裨益됨이 잇스며 만사람의 시대적 고뇌를 위안해 줄 무엇이 잇스랴. 공연히 그 인쇄소 직공만 괴롭게 하고 소설 보기 조하하는 이의 돈주머니만 궁하게 맨들 뿐이다.
1년 동안을 회상할 때에 또 한가지 기억하야 둘 현상이 잇다. 비록 문단의 표면으로 논쟁된 일은 업스나 소리업시 잠잠한 듯한 그 밋바닥에는 조선문단에도 또한 뿔조아예술 대 푸로레타리아예술의 대치될 核子가 胚胎되엇다. 노동 대 자본의 계급투쟁운동은 사회적 그 뿐에 그치지 아니하고 예술의 가치론과 현상론에도 파급되어 各國文壇의 一渦卷을 일으키게 되엇다. 지금 일본 문단으로 말하면 뿔예술 대 푸로예술의 격렬한 투쟁 중이다. 이러한 추세는 우리 문단을 권외로 할 리 만무하다. 멀지 안흔 압날에 표면으로 나타날 현상의 하나이다. 나는 이 평론 속에 뿔조아예술과 푸로레타리아예술의 肯否論을 쓰지 아니한다.  다만 이러한 현상이 胚胎되엇슴을 말하야 둘 뿐이다.
나는 다시 더 한번 신문소설에 대하야 말하지 안흘 수 업다. 신문이라는 것은 그 자체가 원래 다른 잡지와 서적보다 일반민중에게 가장 만히 접근되는 것이다. 딸하서 신문에 연재되는 소설도 가장 만히 일반에게 접촉될 기회를 가진 것이다. 그 나라 민족예술의 정도를 알랴하면 먼저 저명한 큰 신문에 연재되는 소설을 읽어 보면 대개 그 민족예술의 정도고하를 엿볼 수 잇나니 이러함으로 신문소설은 그 나라 예술의 興廢를 말하는 것이며 그 민족예술의 綱目이 되는 것이며 그 민족의 예술을 발전시키고 못 시키는 가장 큰 중대한 책임을 가젓나니 그 소설의 선택은 여간한 고심과 노력을 갓지 아니하면 아니될 것이다.
대개 사람들은 말하기를 신문소설은 통속적이며 滋味잇는 것이라야 한다 하나 이것은 소설이란 예술의 참뜻을 아지 못하는 者의 말이다. 다만 옛적에 작자는 한 유희적 태도로 멋대로 그적어리고 독자는 消遣한다는 이름 알에 심심하니 읽어볼가 하는 그 때의 그 꼴로 소설을 쓰고 소설을 읽어서는 아니되는 것이다. 예술적 가치의 유무는 고사하고 가장 卑近한 열등의 滋味가 잇고 일반이 알아보기 쉬운 소설을 신문에 게재하면 일시적으로 그 야비스런 滋味는 저급의 독자에게 환영을 바들는지＜5＞ 모르나 일면으로는 은연 중 사회를 좀먹게 하는 시대적 죄인됨을 면치 못할 것이며 예술을 모욕하야 崇嚴한 聖殿을 濁亂시키는 어지러운 무리됨을 면치 못할 것이다. 압흐로 우리 신문에 언저야 할 소설은 야비한 통속소설, 탐정소설의 境域에서 벗어나 참다운 예술적 소설을 실지 아니하면 아니될 것이다. 그 나라의 문화의 꼿을 피게 하고 그 민족의 예술의 바람이 길게 할 그러한 소설을 실어야 할 것이다. 요사이 현상 그 모양으로 뻔뻔하게 남의 신문에 연재되엇든 소설을 改竄하야 언거나 그러치 아니하면 歇價의 好奇로 사람을 끌게 하는 가공적 탐정소설 가튼 것을 연재하야서는 안될 것이다. 적어도 시대적 고뇌의 산출인 강하고 뜨거운 창작을 실어야 할 것이며 그러치 아니하면 번역소설이라도 상당한 예술적 가치가 잇는 소설을 실어야 할 것이다. 이 의미로 보아서 近者에 每日申報에 연재하는 復活은 朝鮮日報에 연재하는 『荊山玉』의 추태에 비하야 얼마나 깃븐 일인가 한다.

작년 1년 동안에 문예에 적지 안흔 공로를 내인 잡지는 開闢과 白潮이엇다. 白潮는 물론 그 자체가 순전한 문예잡지임으로 말할 것이 업스나 開闢은 언론잡지이면서 상당한 지면을 문예에 제공하얏다. 뿐만 아니라 작품에 상당한 선택을 한 것은 다른 모든 잡지에 歇價의 미완성인 詩文을 벌려 논 것으로는 감히 추종할 배 아니다. 불행히 우리에게 항상 고통을 주는 물질의 沮戱로 인하야 작년 전문단에 촉망함이 만튼 白潮가 정간 상태에 쭙흐려 잇게 된 것은 실로 유감의 하나이라 아니 말할 수 업다. 압흐로 다만 다시 그 煌煌한 예술의 빗을 천명시키게 됨을 비는 바이다. 우선 이로써 문단현상론의 끗을 막고 압흐로 諸氏의 작품을 말슴하려 한다.

詩
素月 씨의 『먼 後日』은(開闢 26호) 例의 그 서정적 아름다운 말과 이듬으로 짜내어젓다.
그러하나 그 전달 開闢에 『진달래꼿』이란 시에 비하면 만흔 손색이 잇슴을 깨닷게 한다. 『진달래꼿』의 2절로부터 3절을 옴겨보면
『寧邊엔 藥山
그 진달래꼿을
한아름 따다 가실길에 뿌리우리다.

가시는길 발거름마다＜6＞
뿌려노흔 그꼿을
고히나 즈러밟고 가시옵소서.』
가장 사람으로 하야금 눈물 솟는 그리고 또다시 섭섭하고도 무엇을 일흔 듯한 마음을 갓게하는 妙作이엇다. 그 미테 『제비』 『將別里』 『孤寂한 날』 『江村』들의 아름다운 작품이 잇다. 그 가운대에 더욱이 『將別里』는 실로 입에 춤이 업시 칭찬할 만한 시이엇다. 그 1, 2절에
『軟粉紅저고리 빨간불부튼
平壤에도 이름놉흔 將別里,
金실銀실의 가는 비는
비스듬이도 내리네 뿌리네.

털털한 배암絞儀 도든 洋傘에
나리는 가는비는
우에나 알에나 나리네, 뿌리네.』
아아 그 시 속엔 얼마나 아름다운 기교가 잇스며 얼마나 아름다운 調律이 흐르며 얼마나 안타가운 정서가 솟는가. 우리 無色한 시단에 이러한 작품 잇슴을 깃버하야 마지 아니한다. 다만 素月씨에게 바라노니 그만한 수단 그만한 관찰을 가지고 서정시 그 境域에서만 노래하지 말고 좀 힘잇는 더 뜨거운 고뇌의 爆裂인 그러한 시를 썻스면 한다. 開闢 29호에 同氏의 作인 『꿈자리』란 산문시도 역시 그의 시에서 보든 세련된 아름다운 문구와 情의 한숨으로 채워저 잇다.
金石松씨의 『山家에 寓居하야』(開闢 25호)란 것이 잇다. 시인가 하고 읽어보니 시조이엇다. 그 다음 『月下偶呤』 『詩人에게』란 역시 가튼 시조를 지내 『5월의 아츰』이란 것이 잇섯다. 또 시조일 것이라 하고 읽어보니 아조 평범한 맛업는 셔투른 『풋詩』이다. 그 다음에는 『그들은 幸福이다.』란 시도 아니요 줄글도 아닌 아무 것도 아닌 것이 씨워 잇다. 시조와 시를 한 제목 미테 집어 너허서 뒤범벅을 맨든 것을 볼 때에 나의 마음은 퍽 불유쾌하얏다. 이것이 작자의 실수인가 편집자의 실책인가. 한번 一笑에 부쳐 버릴가?
同氏의 作인 『囚人生活』(開闢 26호)은 『5월의 아츰』 등의 시에 비하야 그 시상이라든지 리름이라든지 잘된 작품이라 말하지 아니할 수 업다. 그러나 그 시를 표현하는데 실패하얏다. 첫재로 舖舒의 支離滅裂, 둘재로 자극의 미온과 둔탁 이 두 가장 큰 하자는 앗가웁게 시상과 선율을 무색케 하얏다. 그 미테 『가을이 오랴할 때』 『여름의 날일』 『괴로운 여름밤』의 세 편의 시는＜7＞ 千篇一律格으로 가장 金石松式을 발휘하얏다. 한치도 못되는 얏고 엷은 시상을 어더 가지고 가장 거룩한 심오한 명상의 法塔 속에서 어든 노래인 것 가티 스스로 高呤自謾하는 풍격이 보인다. 『가을이 오랴할 때』의 4, 5절을 보면
『일군의 바뿐 때가
農夫의 거둘 때가
여름의 익을 때가
눈압헤 이미 왓다.

그러나 只今이 어느 때이냐.
生命이란 묵은 밧에
씨는 뿌리어 젓는가.
여름은 이미 익어
거둘 때가 되엇는가.』
또다시 『괴로운 여름밤』이란 시의 3, 4절을 보면
『그러나 방은 더웁고 빈대조차 물어
그는 부시대기를 시작한다.
툭탁거리든 부채도 집어던지고
그는 마츰내 밧그로 뛰어나왓다.

아! 모긔와 빈대에 征服된 人生아!
너의 의 자랑은 그래 무엇이드냐
모든 것 중에 가장 약하고 미욱한
사람의 새끼의 자랑거리는.』
얼마나 愚痴를 吐하는 소린가. 가장 유치한 小學校 학생의 머리 속에서도 나올 만한 얏고 족으만 생각을 시라 하야 내 노흠은 넘우도 심하지 아니한가. 또한 同氏의 作으론 開闢 11월호에 『落葉』과 同誌 12월 호에 『短章九題』를 읽엇다. 『落葉』 속에는 별로 감탄할 것이 업섯스나 『短章九題』 속에 『우리마을』 『마음의 無産者』『오―나는 病者다』의 세 편의 시는 그의 『木乃伊』 이래에 나로는 처음보는 감사할 만한 시이엇다.
岸曙 씨의 『大同江』(開闢 25호)이라는 여섯 편의 시는 서정의 노래이엇스나 사람으로 하야금 앗질한 法悅 속에 취케 할 만한 무드가 업스며 또한 그의 질겨하는 베토렌의 마음 썩는 懊惱의 심뽈도 업다. 例의 그 「여라」 「서라」 「러라」가 공연히 독자를 苦롭게 할 뿐이다. 同氏의 作인 「꿈의 노래」(開闢 11월 호)는 근래에 그의 시에서 보지 못하든 귀여운 작품이엇다. 諧調된 메로듸 새 일름 업는 향토정조의 표현 그리고 또 가슴 무여지는 느쩌떠는 듯한 리듬 가장 마음에 드는 시이엇다.＜8＞ 그 미테 『가을』이란 시도 『대동강』이란 시에 비하야 얼마나 조흔 작품일지 모른다. 그러하나 그 다음에 『喪失』이란 시는 또한 粗作이라 함을 면치 못할 것이다. 대개 그의 시는 전체를 통하야 앨써 넘우 기교를 취하랴 하는데 큰 흠점이 잇다. 예를 들면 『가을』 제 2절 1, 2, 3행에
『只今이야 야릇하게도 웃음을 뛴 눈이나,
핼금하게 파리한 가이도 업는 그 얼굴과,
하야케도 病的의 연약한 손가락이나마』
이것을 보면 얼마나 그가 시상 그것보다도 말 맨들기에 苦心焦思하는 것을 알 수 잇다.
또한 同氏의 『가을 바람과 함께』란 시 속에 『11월의 저녁』 『가을』 『설은 喜劇』 등은 다 감사를 올릴 만한 작품이엇다.  그 중에 『설은 喜劇』은 氏에게서 보지 못하든 강하고 날카라운 힘잇는 노래이엇다.
요한씨의 『옛날의 거리』를 開闢 12월 호에서 읽게 되엇다. 오래 동안 우리 詩壇에서 그림자를 감추든 그의 시를 접할 때에 나는 반가움과 조급한 마음을 억제치 못하얏다. 그동안 그의 시는 얼마나 변하얏는가. 일즉부터 촉망이 만튼 그의 시는 얼마나 변천되엇는가 하얏다. 한 번 읽고 두 번 읽엇다. 거긔엔 이전에 그의 시에서 보든 납(鉛)덩이가 물밋 바닥에 잠겨진 듯한 무주특한 상징의 喘息이 보인다. 회고의 눈물 회고의 설음 회고의 반가움은 『옛날의 거리』에서 다시 『집』이란 시에까지 넘쳐 흘럿다. 나는 이 두 편의 시를 잘못되엇나 말하지 아니한다. 그러나 어떠한 무슨 부족한 듯한 마음이 솟아남을 것잡을 수 업다.  그것은 다른 까닭이 아니엇다. 이 보담 더 큰 그것을 그에게 바라든 나로는 이러케 생각되지 안흘 수 업섯다.
懷月씨의 『꿈의 나라로』(白潮 제 2호)란 시는 외로웁고 쓸쓸한 젊은 사람의 가장 귀여웁고도 뜨거운 혼의 울음이엇다. 情調象徵과 悲哀浪漫에 서로 엇갈려 짜진 청색홍색의 鋪緞과 가튼 아름다운 시이엇다. 더욱이 그 미테 『그림자를 나는 쪼치다』란 시는 세련되고 세련된 구슬을 뀌어논 듯한 시이다. 그 1, 2, 3절을 보면
『밤은 쓸쓸한
비오는 거리로, 떨면서
한숨쉬는 그림자를 나는 쪼치다.

밤은 구슯흔
눈물에 젓는 廢園으로 날으는
허터진 꼿 그림자를 나는 쪼치다.＜9＞

해빗에 번적이는
大地 우에 그림자가 업서질 때에
어둠의 거리로 비틀거리는
눈물 우에 그림자를 나는 쪼치다.』
얼마나 그 조흔 시이며 얼마나 그 설은 시이며 얼마나 그 읽는 사람의 마음을 哀然케 하는 시인가.
그 다음에 『어둠 넘어로』 『幽靈의 나라』란 시가 잇다.  더욱 이 『幽靈의 나라』는 뜨거운 노래이며 힘잇는 노래이다. 그 1, 2절에
「꿈은 幽靈의 춤추는 마당
현실은 사람의 괴로움 불부치는
싯벍언 철공장 !」

「눈물은 불에 다른
괴로움의 찌꺽지
사랑은 꿈 속으로 부르는 女神!」을 위시하야 그 末節에
「아! 그대여!
그대의 흰 손과 팔을
이 어둠나라로 내밀어 주시오!
내가 가리라, 내가 가리라.
그대의 흰팔을 조심해 밟으면서!
幽靈의 나라로, 꿈의 나라로
나는 가리라! 아―그대의 팔을―.」이라 하얏다. 비노니 그대여 그 압길이 煥煥할지어다.
李相和씨의 『가을의 風景』(白潮 2호)는 색채의 강한 선명한 한 폭의 실화와 갓다. 쓸대업는 군살을 누덕누덕 부티어 분칠한 매춘부 가튼 글이 만흔 이 때에 아무 丹粧도 업시 굵다란 뼈 그대로 힘잇게 노래한 데는 감탄할 따름이다.
露雀씨의 『봄은 가더이다』(白潮) 2호)이란 시는 그에게서만 볼 수 잇는 향토미에 가장 풍부한 그리고 또 시름의 적셔진 젊은 시악시의 넉두리 가튼 그러한 시풍을 표현하얏다.
『봄은 오더니만, 그리고 또 가더이다
꼿은 피더니만, 그리고 또 지더이다.』란 2절의 처음을 위시하야
『「時節이 조타」떠들어 대는
봄나들이 소리도, 을스년스럽다.
山에 가자 물에 가자
그리고 또 어대로...
「봄에 놀아난 호들기 소리를＜10＞
마듸마듸 꺽지를 마소
잡어뜨더라 시원치 안흔 꼿따지」
들 보군이 나물군 소리도
눈물은 그것도 눈물이더라」 읇흔 4절을 보면 그야말로 작자의 시에 쓴대로 얼마나 을스년스럽고 시들푼 마음이 생기게 하는 시인가. 읽는 사람으로 하야금 두 번 세 번 읽어도 손에 노키 실흔 작품이다. 同氏의 『비오는 밤』(東明 7호)이라는 短唱도 조흔 작품의 하나이다.
卞榮魯 씨의 『봄비』(新生活 2호)는 사람의 피로한 혼을 살작 쓰다듬어 주는 듯한 맛이 잇다. 그리고 또 강한 선율은 이국정조가 무르녹은 여름밤 江畔에 이상한 樂聲을 듯는 듯한 늣김을 갓게 한다. 그 알에 『追憶만이』란 시도 「봄비」와 彷佛한 그러한 늣김을 갓게 한다. 또 新生活 9호에 『祝福』이란 시는 압헤 말한 작품에 비하야 시 되기 어렵다 하야도 과언이 아니다. 同氏의 『小曲三篇』이라는 東明 5호에 실린 시는 근래에 엇기 어려운 시 속에 하나라 아니 말할 수 업다. 그 중에 『한울만 보아라』 『님이시어라』는 두 편의 시는 명상의 境域에서 노래한 것이 아니고는 이가티 될 수 업는 것이다.
또 同誌 9호에 『그 때가 언제나 옵니까』란 시도 그대로 덥허 둘 시가 아니다. 강한 시상 강한 리듬 목매처 啜泣하고도 십고 눈물 것고 미소하고도 십흔 귀여운 노래이다.
春城씨의 『眞珠의 별』을 新生活 9호에서 읽엇다. 살살 墨으로 눈섭을 지우고 차닥차닥 분으로 얼굴을 덥고 그리고 입슐엔 연지를 칠하얏다. 春城에게 나는 뜨거웁게 충고하노니 이러한 몃푼짜리 못되는 美文으로만 시를 써서는 아니된다. 銀길이니 「萬綠叢 중에 한 봉아리 꼿」이니 하는 등의 그런 글구로만 노래하야서는 아니된다. 뼈가 잇서야 하며 힘이 잇서야 한다. 熱하다 하면 熱하고 寒하다 하면 寒하여야 한다. 다시 한 번 더 말하노니 薔薇村에 잇는 『검이여 나에게 죽음을 주소서』란 그만한 강하고 熱하고 귀여웁든 시의 작자로 얼마의 세월을 지난 오늘에 이와 가튼 시를 쓴다 함은 실로 낙담함을 마지 안는 바이다.
春城아 그 강하게 울지어다.
이외에 (河)라는 이의 시가 東明 12월 호에 실리엇다. 압흐로의 그의 길을 주시할 만한 시이다. 또 東明 4호에 牛步씨의 『劫火』와 瞬星씨의 『處女의 자랑』이라는 것이 잇스나 잘 되엇다 말할 수 업다. 兩氏의 시가 모두 초보의 境域에서 벗어나지 못하얏다. 또 한가지 몽롱한 기억에서 생각나는 것은 金明淳 여사가 한 두 번 開闢에＜11＞ 시를 발표한 듯 하다. 그러나 마츰 그 책이 손에 업슴으로 인하야 말슴하지 못하게 되엇다.

小說
詩壇에 시다운 시가 드믄이만큼 소설도 또한 소설다운 소설을 볼 수가 업다. 그 중에서 더구나 풋소설을 除하고 번역소설을 除하고 왼만한 소설만 추리고 보니 1년을 통하야 통틀어 몃 가지가 되지 못한다.
羅稻香 씨의 『별을 안거든 우지나 말걸』(白潮 2호)이란 소설은 재래의 그의 작품에 일즉이 갓지 못햇든 다시 말하면 그의 예술과 예술 사이에 한 금의 경계선을 금 그은 작품이엇다. 사람으로 하야금 구슬프게도 눈물나게 하는 가을바람이 처량한 깁흔 밤중에 스르렁 스르렁 하는 琴聲을 듯는 듯한 밝은 달 알에 婺婦의 넉두리를 듯는 듯한 가장 逼眞한 센티멘타릭한 作風은 깁고 날카로운 심리묘사와 함께 독자로 하야금 魅하고야 말게 수단잇게 지엇다. 『녯날 꿈은 蒼白하더이다』(開闢 12월 호)란 역시 同氏의 창작은 지낸 날 애닯은 追境의 꿈터에 이즐 수 업는 어릴 때의 인상을 방불하게 표현하얏다. 그러하나 전편에 통일이 안된 것이 이 소설의 큰 결점이라 아니 말할 수 업다. 어떠한 매친 대가 업시 편 중 인물이 모두 꿈 속의 환영가티 되엇다. 딸하서 그 소설에 어느 것이 주인공이 되는지 알아 볼 수가 업다. 이 원인은 단편인 이 소설에 장편이 되어야 넉넉하다 그릴만한 묘사를 줄이어 쓴 까닭이다. 첫재로 그 소설에 나라고 한 제 1인자의 12살 된 아이와 그 예수 밋는 한머니하고 또 叛宗敎의 인물인 그 아버지와 사이의 반듯이 길게 깁게 그릴 묘사가 퍽 간단하얏스며 또 그의 아버지와 그의 한머니 새이에 잇서야 할 연결이 빠지엇스며 그의 어머니가 어떠한 사람인 것을 표현한 것이 넘우 약한 까닭이다. 어떠한 점으로 보든지 『별을 안거든 우지나 말걸』이란 소설에 비하야 손색이 잇다. 이밧게 또한 그의 창작인 장편소설 『幻戱』가 東亞日報에 연재되는 중이다.
소설다운 소설로 더구나 장편으로 세상에 나타나기는 李春園 의 『無情』이 잇슨 이래에 이『幻戱』가 잇슬 뿐이다. 창간 이래에 탐정소설과 번역소설만 연재하든 東亞日報가 우리의 손으로 된 상당한 소설을 언게 된 것은 신문 소설계를 위하야 깃버할 만한 현상이다. 여하튼 『幻戱』는 가장 貧乏한 작년의 우리 문단을 위하야 마지막으로 그러치 안타! 내가 여긔 잇다 하고 가장 용감하게 소리친 작품이며 또 그 소리친 바가 모든 사람＜12＞으로 하야금 경건한 마음을 가저 그 부르지즌 소리에 감동되게 하고 남엇다. 1,000 페이지에 갓가운 방대한 작품을 이 좁은 지면으로는 평할 수 업다. 압날의 기회를 보아 자세히 평하야 볼까하며 이곳에 다만 貧乏에 싸힌 우리 문단에도 이러한 자랑할 만한 작품이 연말의 문단으로 하야금 한번 소매를 떨치고 큰 기침을 할만하게 맨들엇슴을 말하야 둘 뿐이다.
玄憑虛 씨의 소설『墮落者』 『貧妻』 『술 勸하는 社會』가 단행본으로 출판되엇다. 조선 사람의 손으로 단편집이 출판되기는 이것이 효시이다. 『墮落者』의 소설로의 가치는 일반이 이미 훌륭한 傑筆이라 인정하는 바이며 내가 먼저 번에 어느 잡지에 평하얏슴으로 여긔 또 다시 呶呶히 말할 것이 업다. 다만 『貧妻』와 『술 勸하는 社會』만 말하랴 한다.
『貧妻』는 가장 그의 리아리스틱인 것을 발휘하얏다. 사진을 박아 노흔 듯한 섬세하고 미려한 필치로 貧寒한 젊은 사람의 가정을 고대로 그리어 노핫다. 누구나 한번 이글을 읽고 그 끗을 보기 전에는 숨도 나리쉬지 안코 읽을 만큼 滋味잇는 작품이엇다. 여긔에 작자의 두뇌가 얼마큼 치밀하며 작자의 성격이 얼마큼 安詳한 것이 彷佛하게 나타난다. 읽으면 읽을스록 말신말신한 향내가 어금니 미테서 소사나는 듯하고 외우면 외울스록 껴안어 입마추고도 십흔 이름하야 말할 수 업는 무형의 그 맛이 떠서 흐르는 것 갓다. 春園의 美文으로도 여긔에 따르지 못할 것이며 里見弴 의 才筆로도 이만치는 못쓸 것이다. 『술 勸하는 社會』는 묘사와 작풍이 그러할 듯 하지 안흔 게 아니나 무엇이 좀 부족한 것 가튼 늣김을 준다. 또 同氏의 『蹂躪』(白潮 2호)은 불란서의 작품에서 볼 수 잇는 가장 대담한 필치로 붉은 따리야의 강렬한 색채와 가튼 아편 연기와 압샌트의 냄새가 몽롱하게 떠도는 밀실에 발을 들여 노흔 듯한 그러한 기분이 생기게 한다. 그러나 그 끗을 보지 못하게 된 것은 참으로 유감이라 아니 말할 수 업다. 또 開闢 12월 호에 잇는 『피아노』는 그러케 잘된 작품은 아니다. 다만 작자가 조그마한 힌트를 가지고 작난삼아 썻다하면 그것은 憑虛에게 말슴할 만한 일이다. 『피아노』 그 소설이 결코 才筆 아님이 아니요 또 그 묘사가 滋味업는 게 아니나 才筆과 滋味만으로는 현대사람의 가장 큰 고뇌의 瘡痍를 치료해 줄 수 업는 것이다. 가장 침통하고 심각한 그러한 것이 아니고는 현대사람의 혼을 위로해 줄 수 업는 것이다.
廉想涉 씨의 『E 선생』(東明)은 극히 평범하고 극히 통속적인 한 때 우슴 좌석에서 이약이할 만한 그러한 작품이다. 그가 일즉이 『除夜』란 소설을 開闢에 내엇슬 때에 그 『力』이 솟는 듯한 血이 띄는 듯한 變的 『異端者』의 울움소리 가튼 강하고 뜨거운 작풍을 불 때에 나의 그에게 바라든 바는 가장 두터웟섯다. 그러나 금일＜13＞의 『E 선생』을 볼 때에 그에게 촉망하든 모든 것은 한 물거품이 되고 말엇다. 주위와 환경이 그로 하야금 그러케 맨들지마는! 위하야 애닮아 한다.
同氏의 『墓地』(新生活)는 『E 선생』에 비할 작품이 아니나 그 미리 전부 삭제를 당하얏다 하야 어더 읽지 못한 것은 역시 유감의 하나이다.
梁白華 씨의 『빨래하는 處女』(東明)는 그만한 풍부한 재제를 가지고 다만 부녀자들의 재미를 끌엇스면 於斯에 足矣라 하는 듯이 슬슬 붓을 날린 것은 큰 실수 중에 실수이다. 첫재로 심각한 묘사가 업스며 (내면, 외면을 아울러 말함) 둘재로 강하고 뜨거운 울림이 업다. 亡國嘗膽의 越王句賤을 그리고 萬古絶艶의 西施를 그리고 秋霜節烈日忠의 伍子胥를 그리고 庸暗昏主의 夫差를 그리고 才謀百出의 范相國을 그리고 吳謳越吹相思苦를 그리고 桂棹蘭橈下長浦를 그리고 羅裙玉腕輕搖櫓를 그릴 때에 그 얼마나 마음껏 붓을 놀릴 수 잇스며 섬세한 묘사로 심리를 짝개내어 읽는 이로 하야금 그 彷佛한 眞境에 취하게 할 수 잇는 것이 아닌가.
漂浪少年 이라는 이의 『前兆?』(開闢 12월호)는 상당한 소양이 잇는 이의 솜씨가 아니고는 그만큼 지을 수 업는 것이라. 曲盡하고도 군더덕이 업는 세련된 심리묘사는 날카라운 바늘로 살을 찌르는 거 가튼 감동을 갓게한나 그 주인공 되는 어린 계집아이의 어머니가 비단옷을 한번 입히고 그 뒤에 그대로 입게 내버려 둔다는 묘사라든지 어린 게집아이게 죽은 그 형과 오라비들의 입을 스치고 지내온 술가락에 대한 이상한 암시 갓기도 하고 의레히 그럴 것 가튼 수단 잇는 暗面 묘사라든지 질서정연된 표면의 자연묘사가 어느 것 하나 부족한 것이 업다. 아무러한 하자도 업는 온자한 작품이다. 소설이 걸작이란 소리 듯기가 가장 어려운 일이나 전편을 통하야 조그마한 티가 업다는 소리를 듯기는 돌이어 그보다도 더 어려운 일인 줄 안다. 이 작자의 압길을 위하야 몃 번이라도 찬사올림을 주저치 아니한다.
獨山이라는 이의 『滬上의 눈물』(開闢 8월호)이라는 것이 잇스나 아즉 소설되기에 어려웁다.
이외에 잡지『新天地』 『共榮』 『啓明』 『靑年』 『時事評論』 『新民公論』 『朝鮮之光』의 간헐적으로 몃개 작품이 실리나 힘들여 평하고 십흔 작품은 하나도 업는 걸 보면 돌이어 기분이 맥맥해질 뿐이다.
또 한가지 나의 기억 속에 남어잇는 것은 秦瞬星 씨의 『『小』의 暗影』이란 소설이 작년 봄에 東亞日報에 연재되엇든 것이다. 그 때 나의 읽은 생각은 퍽 滋味잇게 읽엇다 생각된다. 그 섬세한 묘사와 安詳한 필치가 나의 마음을 이끌게 하얏다. 그러나 나종에 상당히 신용할 만한 이에게로부터 그것이 번안이라는 소리를 듯고 난 뒤에는 압서 생각한 잘 지엇다 하든 마음은 남향 대문 집마당에 싸힌 봄눈 슬듯 슬어지고 말엇다.
인제는 평하랴 하나 더 평할 만한 작품이 업다. 예의 말하는―妄評多謝―나 한번 불러보고 붓대를 던진다...(1922. 12. 9) ＜14＞
＜1-14＞