Magazine Title: 개벽 제59호
Publication Date: 1925년 05월 01일
Article Title: 朝鮮의 經濟的 破滅의 原因과 現狀을 述하야 그의 對策을 論함(上) (Describing the Causes and Current State of Korea's Economic Ruin and Discussing Countermeasures (Part 1))
Author: 李民昌 (Yi Minch'ang)
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/Essay)

On the Causes and Current State of Korea's Economic Ruin and Discussing Countermeasures (Part 1)
						Yi Minch'ang

Preface

In publishing this essay, I wish first to make a few points clear.
I consider myself one of those most pained by the economic ruin of Korea (朝鮮). However, it is all useless worry; in reality, I myself have never devoted myself to Korea's economic world, nor consequently do I have any experience, nor do I possess any profound knowledge of modern economics – capitalist economics – in terms of theory. Therefore, it might be said I lack the qualifications to write this presumptuous essay. Nevertheless, as one person worried about Korea's economic ruin, I intend to describe the causes, derived historically and culturally, almost stepping outside the scope of economics, based on what I have long been concerned about.
Discussing rescue measures for the economy in Korea's current situation, there is only one path; besides that, there are no strategies, and even if there were strategies, they could absolutely not be implemented. However, as the entire nation is currently facing the miserable situation of starvation, we cannot do without even temporary relief measures. And we Korean people, who lack almost entirely the concept and consciousness regarding clothing, food, and shelter – the economy – even while starving and shivering, must first painfully awaken to what the economy truly is. Next, in this transitional period as we move towards the completion of a New Life Movement, we cannot avoid devising economic recovery measures by whatever means necessary. Therefore, in this essay, my first aim is to strongly evoke the concept of the economy, and second, to propose and encourage the implementation of even makeshift methods.
Thus, the content of this essay is divided into three parts: First, the causes of economic ruin are divided into remote and recent causes. Second, the current crisis is outlined through general observation (Since I have been abroad for a long time, my observation of the current situation is very dim, and there will likely be many fabrications in my description; I ask for the reader's forbearance). Third, regarding countermeasures, my main proposal, stated simply to convey my full intention, is the convening of a National Economic Conference, and I have added a few other proposals. <20>

I. Causes of Economic Ruin

A. Remote Causes

1. Aversion to Material Life and Weak Economic Consciousness Due to the Nation's Innately Simple Nature and Geographic Factors

Karl Marx (K. MarK) summed up human history in one phrase, saying, "It is the history of class struggle," and interpreted and defined human history through a materialist view – an economic historical view. Compared to the hero-centric observations of shallow historians (like Thomas Carlyle's hero-worship theory), spiritualism, or religious perspectives, and furthermore, the Eastern style of chronicles praising emperors or recording strange events, which fundamentally misinterpret human history, there is no room for further discussion; Marx's materialist historical view – economic historical view – must be called a truly correct historical observation. As modern people witnessing human history undergoing a great transition and changing rapidly, entirely due to economic relationships – production relationships – influencing the whole of humanity, we cannot help but recognize that Marx's materialist historical view elucidates immutable truth.
Human history is the history of materialism, the history of economics. If so, the history of the Korean nation must also be a history of materialism. Looking at the historical records passed down to us, very few are credible even when viewed against other facts. Furthermore, based on that ridiculous Eastern historical view – a very childish one among them – facts that should definitely be included in history were discarded, while valueless materials and facts, such as the praise of an individual emperor and disasters, were treated as the primary historical sources, completely forgetting economic relations or production relations. Thus, such historical records are useless. For us humans, who grasp the direction of human life according to the progress of history, if we do not have a correct historical view of history, we will degenerate and be destroyed according to the erroneous concepts we hold.
We Koreans, in our current environment, feel the sorrow of ruin in every aspect. But nothing is more painful than feeling the agony of economic ruin. Having maintained a national life for over four thousand years, <21> based on past historical records or considering traditional thought and culture, it is impossible to know how we lived in terms of clothing, food, and shelter. For us Koreans, who not only lacked the concepts of production and economy but actively rejected them, we don't know how long that time was, but the further we go, the more we will suffer calamities resulting from economic ruin, and we will keenly feel the relationship between economy, production, and humanity.
The issue of the Korean nation's rebirth will clearly be determined by how our economic problem fares. If so, the economic problem can by no means be easily resolved. As we are pushed to the brink, almost unconsciously rolling towards complete economic ruin with no means of salvation, if this state continues for another 5 or 10 years, the actual producers in the country, the farmers and laborers, will almost all be dispersed, likely becoming a labor force in Japanese coal mines or factories, or wandering in the wilderness of Manchuria. From this, we cannot bear the fear of falling into eternal oblivion. At this point, if we are to have time to cry out and discuss the economic problem finally, we must investigate the fundamental issues, not dwell too much on the current situation, and establish long-term strategies. To do so, for our nation, which avoids material life and lacks almost any economic consciousness, it is essential first to deeply explore the past causes that led to this state and fundamentally grasp the concept of economics.
Now, if we are to discuss our nation's economic problem, it is of course necessary to investigate all records of our past life. Among these, it is most necessary first to consider the common characteristics of the people that are most clearly revealed in life, and also the relationship with the geographical zone. The nature of an individual or the characteristics of a nation are not originally inherent but change due to environmental factors, becoming fixed and, to some extent, forming a fundamental basis that is difficult to change. Thus, due to the nature of these characteristics, great changes occur in direct life, and significant influences are exerted. And environment refers to geographical relations, the trends of the times, and one's own thoughts and culture. Regarding such environmental relations, whether the geographical zone is tropical or frigid, whether the trend of the times is materialistic or spiritualistic, whether one's own thought and culture is spiritualism or materialism, all have a profound relationship with production and economy. Therefore, if we seek the fundamental cause of our nation's economic ruin, although this may sound overly theoretical, we cannot avoid examining the qualities commonly revealed as national characteristics, nor can we avoid tracing back the geographical zone where the nation's life took root, and the central thoughts and culture that governed the nation's life and spirit. At the same time, if we are to devise countermeasures, <22> unless we derive them first from that aspect, they will merely be superficial. If one speaks of human life, economy, and production to a Buddhist undergoing ascetic practices, it will not be heard. That Buddhist will only listen after being liberated from their own thoughts and environment, and only when they listen will they understand and practice.
The history of the Korean nation, constructed with extreme spiritualism – though not just our history – has put all effort into concealing its extreme anti-materialism. However, from the very first page of history, one can see that the lives of the populace were based solely on the foundation of economy and production. But the non-productive class of society, namely the aristocratic class, averse to producing through their own sweat, tempted the pure productive class and, in order to exploit their products, "invoked God," promoted spiritualism, and from there, with clever words and texts, propagated various sophistries: that human supreme good lies not in materialism but only in spiritualism, that humans should not be engrossed solely in clothing, food, and shelter... thus forming the trend of the times, which then became the thought of individuals or the nation, and transformed into character. Such examples are not unique to the Korean nation, but our nation, among others, was further reversed, possessing an extreme simplicity (澹泊性) that sought almost to transcend human life, little different from the national character of a purely Buddhist nation.
This quality of simplicity, utterly indifferent to material things and life, held by the entire nation, is certainly not an innate national trait but has been transformed by environmental pressures. However, it has now formed a deep-rooted nature that seems difficult to change. Therefore, it is necessary to explain this simplicity once more. Simplicity (澹泊), in its literal meaning in classical Chinese, appears in phrases like "澹泊明志" (simplicity clarifies the will) or "澹泊無慾" (simple and desireless), expressing a very pure and desireless meaning. At the same time, it can be considered a term describing the character of the so-called "gentleman" (君子). For this reason, saying that Koreans possess simplicity implies the meaning described above, meaning Koreans are "desireless gentlemen." While this might have been heard as high praise in the past era of spiritualism, in the modern era, it is equivalent to saying one is a straggler in life and economy. Simplicity is neither egoistic nor altruistic; it is neither opposed to nor in favor of human life; simultaneously, it is neither pessimistic nor optimistic; it is neither about becoming rich nor poor – it is a kind of self-sufficiency. However, it is a fact that it is anti-life and anti-economic. For people who express the true meaning of humanity through the beauty and sanctity of life, possessing an anti-life – simple regarding clothing, food, and shelter – nature is undoubtedly the greatest root cause leading to our nation's economic ruin, and the reason for the nationwide decline lies <23> entirely herein.
Looking at it this way, the foundation of the economy or the wealth of the nation were not even issues; rather, an attitude of near aversion towards material life was held. The main perspective on human life was that it was enough just to scrape by, digging the earth to sustain life, and it is no exaggeration to say that they possessed no particular economic concept. Thus, due to this simplicity, they originally held an attitude of almost observing human life from the sidelines, producing a life consciousness of "eat if there's food, manage without if there isn't" and an economic concept of "spend if you get it, give up if you don't."
Therefore, even knowing they could make their own lives and economy a bit more comfortable by moving their hands, they did not. Knowing that digging the earth could yield gold, they did not think of excavating. What is this if not the dictates of their simple and desireless nature, thinking "what does it matter if there is more, what does it matter if there is less?"
Geographically speaking, although we cannot know for sure how things were when the territory included both the peninsula and the mainland, considering only the peninsular region, it is difficult to affirm it as a zone for a nation to possess great national wealth. Even if geographical factors exist, if the nation itself had possessed a proper concept of life and economy, it might not have mattered much, and wealth comparable to Britain's might have been possible. However, not only did we possess a national character of simplicity, almost opposed to wealth and economy, but being intoxicated with spiritualism, and the geographical zone also not being particularly favorable, the foundation of the national economy naturally failed to be fully established.
If we look at our territory from certain aspects, with the sea on three sides and land on one, directly bordering China and the Siberian continent to the north, and directly facing the Pacific coast to the south, it could be said to possess very important value for commerce and industry. However, even though surrounded by water on three sides, the water currents are generally not smooth, there are too many reefs, and there are only a few places capable of accommodating large ships. Marine products can also be said to be few. Then, the land is mostly occupied by mountains, with plains and arable land being extremely small portions. Thus, if the entire peninsula were miniaturized, it would look like a meticulously crafted miniature mountain landscape, becoming either a secluded place suitable for hermits to hide or like a natural park worth visiting for sightseeing. It cannot be called a region <24> capable of producing the wealth and economy of a great nation. In ancient times when people lived by farming, the lack of vast agricultural and pastoral plains further narrowed the scope of the national economy and life.
As the landscape is so splendid and pure, like a hermit's retreat, the people living amidst this scenery naturally received its influence, and the impulses of worldly material desires did not readily arise. Even if geographical factors were originally unsuited for material development and further nurtured a nature of simplicity and desirelessness in the national character, if the population had been large relative to the land and resources, or if there had been frequent competition with other ethnic groups nationally or economically, different changes would surely have occurred. However, contrary to this, regarding external relations, since the Silla period, being oppressed under China's political authority, even if only nominally, not only was there no competition, but even when deeply feeling material scarcity within their own territory, the courage to advance even one step onto the mainland was extremely weak. Internally as well, historically, there was never a time when the population drastically increased, causing great suffering from difficulties in living. Though past life cannot truly be called living, the land and material production were just enough, and the population size, demand, and consumption were also just enough to get by. Even in this situation, if they had possessed a strong national character driven by the impulse for life, or if materialistic thought and ideology had surged, they could have escaped the state of neither life nor death, where life was neither extremely difficult nor affluent. But for those originally possessing a simple nature largely indifferent to material desires, this situation did not cause great suffering; rather, they held an attitude of aversion towards material life.
Even looking only at the two factors extremely briefly mentioned above – the simple nature and the geographical factors – they were highly unsuited for material life. Consequently, it is not that economic consciousness was weak, but rather it seems never to have been deeply felt at any time. This phenomenon can be said to have flowed consistently throughout almost our entire history. If we are to speak of our national economy now, the primary issue must be for our people first to break free from the past concepts and life of pure, desireless hermits, understand the true meaning of human material desires, and fundamentally possess economic consciousness.
The fundamental cause of our current complete economic ruin may be attributed to encountering national misfortune and becoming someone else's colony, but on the other hand, the remote cause lies in originally holding an attitude of aversion towards material life and being completely ignorant of economic consciousness. <25>

2. The Poisonous Harm of Pauperism (淸貧主義) Resulting from the Persecution by Han Culture and Buddhist Thought

Among Eastern nations, none have escaped the dominance of this culture and thought. However, it seems no nation like ours has been bound so long in its shackles, withering away without any change or improvement. The Chinese, the originators of Han culture, possess individual wealth and an economic consciousness as strong as any nation in the world. India, the birthplace of Buddhism, despite being exploited so harshly by the British, has its national economic foundation soundly established, and the people's lives appear rather affluent. Only our nation seems to have become the victim of that culture and thought.
Now, to discuss the evils caused by that culture and thought, one must first dissect their contents. However, since we cannot discuss the core issues themselves here, simply highlighting their central characteristics should suffice for estimation. Han culture can be called Eastern spiritualism, and Buddhist thought can be called extreme anti-materialism. Viewed from a materialistic standpoint, both are rather similar; they generally deny human material life and economic activities, and can be seen as interpreting the universe and human life in an extremely narrow and erroneous way. Thus, these two combined to produce the idea of rejecting the enjoyment of human material life and pauperism (淸貧主義) – the idea of living meagerly if one must live in the world. This pauperism was the common consciousness of our populace and the national policy.
The fundamental meaning of human life and the true essence of living cannot be found in Eastern-style spiritualism and pessimism. Consequently, humanity absolutely cannot sustain human life based on pauperism – desirelessness.
Human life is the authority of matter. Therefore, human history proceeds driven by the fundamental force of human material desires, human society is sustained by economic conditions and production relations, and human life cannot exist apart from economic activities. We keenly feel this greatest truth through our daily life experiences and by examining the course of history. In contrast, spiritualism, anti-material desirelessness, and pauperism are originally rebellious against human nature, deny the reality of human life, <26> and are nothing more than the self-comforting laments of pitiful human stragglers. Moreover, they are merely products derived from the manipulative means and intentions of vicious privileged classes.
The history of the recent past – the Yi Dynasty history – proves that the Korean nation has consistently languished in pauperism. And are not the historical facts of the Koryŏ period, which perished due to Buddhist thought, also evident? Religion is originally a poisonous net, a hypothetical trap created by the privileged class to live idly, aiming to exploit the producers of society. Among religions, Buddhism, which is particularly anti-human and anti-life, became the state religion during the Koryŏ Dynasty, which ultimately perished due to the persecution of Buddhist thought. Subsequently, from the rise of the Yi Dynasty, although Buddhism did not prevail entirely, it maintained an undeniable traditional influence internally. Han culture, which, from an economic consciousness and materialist viewpoint, differs little from Buddhist thought, replaced Buddhism as the national policy and the central thought of the people. Thus, pauperism was strongly evoked from the political level. When officials returned from their posts with "sleeves full of clean wind" (滿袖淸風), it was considered a great honor. The government's finances were no more complex than a small modern society or bank, and extremely poor, yet the monthly salary of a state minister was merely a few bags of rice and a few *ryang* of money. Furthermore, the *Saban* (scholar-official) class and the Confucian scholar class, considered the backbone of the nation at the time, thoroughly advocated pauperism (whether they truly did not covet wealth and position is unknown). Living in a humble alley on simple food and drink without changing their joy was the Confucian scholar's boast, and "maintaining hereditary poverty" (世守淸貧) became the technical term expressing the integrity of the *Saban* class. They thought it was the principle for the "small people" (commoners) to farm in the fields to feed the "gentlemen" (scholars), considering it rather glorious to exploit producers throughout their lives without moving a hand or foot, believing they deserved it due to their own superiority. Not only that, but the *yangban* (aristocrats) considered it a great shame even to hold a straw mat upon death.
Thus, during the 500-odd years of the Yi Dynasty, under the tyranny of pauperism, many ridiculous and strange things occurred. One need only recall the stories of the scholars in Seoul's Namsan valley who starved while reading Chinese texts. We were truly finished by this pauperism. Under pauperism – the principle of deliberate starvation – talking about wealth, economy, and production is truly like dream talk. Due to its extreme poisonous harm, people felt aversion and fatigue towards human life, and the vitality of life almost stagnated. Why? Because even Buddhism, which advocates fasting, acknowledges that humans cannot survive without eating, and humans cannot lack essential human necessities. Therefore, although outwardly advocating pauperism, as long as life continues even for a day, <27> clothing, food, and shelter are indispensable. Also, due to the tendency towards pauperism, the producers in society were extremely few, while consumers were extremely numerous, making it absolutely impossible for production to grow. Therein, even while wearing the masks of pauperism, desirelessness, and anti-materialism, the internal struggle was extremely fierce, and many unjust actions were performed. In this situation, one cannot help but feel aversion and fatigue towards life. Lacking the ability to pioneer the right path of material life based on actual life experience and self-awareness, idleness grew instead, weakening and stagnating the driving force of life, making it no different from the stirring of death. This pauperism ultimately destroyed the existing foundation of life and economy beyond recognition, even swallowing up the concept of economy itself, thus exposing the current economic misery of Koreans.

3. Rejection of Commerce, Industry, and Technology = Disregard for Production

Because pauperism was adopted as the creed of life, commerce, industry, and technology, essential for life and economy, were also rejected. Pauperism, plainly speaking, is equivalent to the "principle of starving." If active pauperism is the main theme, and one actively seeks only to starve, it is natural not only to refrain from laboring with one's own hands and feet but also to disregard the labor of others, and simultaneously, it would be possible to reject general commerce, industry, or technology. Not only that, but such contradictory actions were further exacerbated by being poisoned by Han culture and spiritualism – spirit worship. The rejection of commerce, industry, and technology is something commonly seen in the histories of other nations, so it shouldn't be considered particularly strange. However, leaving aside ancient and medieval times, even looking just at modern history – especially the Yi Dynasty history – the persecution of merchants and industrialists, and the punishment inflicted upon technicians and inventors, is truly deplorable. The motive for this was less about ignorance of the concepts of economy and wealth, and more accurately described as a oppressive scheme by autocratic monarchs and privileged classes to maintain power. Examples include the Yi Dynasty's policy of not appointing officials from the northwest region, and the persecution not only of brilliant talents when they emerged but also extending to their families. This can be seen from the inherited saying, "If a strong man is born, nine generations of his family are exterminated." Likewise, the reason for rejecting and punishing merchants, industrialists, and technicians was primarily the fear that if merchants possessed enormous material power, or if technicians made great inventions or creations, their authority might surpass that of the privileged class themselves. It wasn't necessarily due to venerating anti-material doctrines like the saying from Han studies, "The gentleman employs clumsiness" (君子用拙). <28>
In such an irrational and unnatural state, there was no room for industry, whether handicraft or otherwise, to be born. The few types of tools and products used for clothing, food, and shelter remained unchanged for centuries, preserving their original form from the time of their first creation, without any improvement or development. Even those few items rarely appeared in the market as proper goods competing in quality based on price fluctuations. Most essential tools, like clothing materials and agricultural implements, were manufactured through household industry. Besides that, no effort was made towards specialized industrial manufacturing, nor could courage be mustered due to environmental constraints. Furthermore, although some trade and markets developed due to the unavoidable exchange of goods, it wasn't enough even to arouse the nation's economic consciousness. While agriculture was considered the main source of livelihood, with commerce and industry facing absolute rejection, the imperfection of farming tools and the inconvenience of irrigation hindered its proper development. Simultaneously, since the produced agricultural crops could not be easily exchanged, possessing a large amount of grain beyond one's own consumption was not felt to be necessary. Thus, the reason why commerce, industry, and general technology failed to develop at all was undoubtedly due to the obstructive and inhibiting magical power of the era's privileged classes.
Let's take an example of their rejection. Terms like "merchant folk" (商賈之徒) or "market broker" (市儈) were used to look down upon people, treating them as extremely lowly individuals. Since such insulting terms were applied to merchants themselves, humans, governed by the environment of the times, would not willingly become merchants unless absolutely necessary. As the number of merchants decreased, commerce naturally declined. The essence of commerce was not recognized at all. Regarding industry, the situation was even worse; all manufacturers were treated like the lowest class or slaves. In our language, the suffix "-jaeng" (쟁이) carries a very lowly connotation in some contexts. Ironworkers who cast agricultural tools or other iron goods were called "pulmijaeng" (bellows-worker), leather shoe makers were "kkatsinjaeng" (leather-shoe-worker), makers of horsehair headbands... It is a fact that such manufacturers were treated as the lowest in general society. Furthermore, if by chance a genius of the age emerged in that environment and invented tools or craft items, they were condemned as "bewitching the world and deceiving the people" (惑世誣民) and faced execution. Pak Chiwŏn (朴趾源) was dismissed from office and stripped of his rank for presenting "Recommendations for Agriculture" (勸農小抄) and "Discourse on Machinery" (機械說) and authoring "The Tale of Hŏ Saeng" (許生傳) and "The Tiger's Rebuke" (虎叱). The map created by Kosan-ja (古山子) after traversing the Eight Provinces (八域 - Korea) three times was implicated under the charge of leaking secrets to foreigners. In this way, commerce, industry, and general technology were rejected with all possible force. <29> In other words, life and economic activity itself were rejected.
Furthermore, based on the various facts described above, one can also infer that production was disregarded while consumption, conversely, became excessive. Whether observing the adherence to pauperism as the national policy, the lifelong occupation of reading Chinese classics, or the extreme rejection of commerce and industry, it cannot be denied that production was entirely disregarded. Although phrases like "Agriculture is the great foundation of the nation" (農者國之大本) appeared in royal edicts, and writings like "Exhortation to Farming" (勸耕說) might seem to encourage agricultural production, this was done for the food supply of a segment of the privileged class, not as a recognition of the overall societal production and economic activity.
When societal production is disregarded, society transforms into one of idlers. Thus, consumption becomes truly exceptional and excessive, leading to habits of dissipation and idleness, naturally forming a completely non-productive society. This is the final result of intoxication by Han culture's spiritualism, culminating in a state of benumbed paralysis.
Our past society indeed disregarded production entirely. Our ancestors, even while starving, considered productive labor an absolute disgrace. I remember a story like this. When my father was young and studying Chinese classics, he once went out to the fields, checked the irrigation ditch of a rice paddy, and upon returning, received a severe reprimand from my grandfather. His scolding words were, "A son of a *yangban* looking at a paddy ditch in the field! Are you going to ruin the family? What good does it do for a scholar to know such farming matters or profit-making activities?" Such words were not only the common consciousness of the *Saban* class in past society but also confess the non-productive reality of Koreans in those few phrases, so it's not something to be laughed off lightly. Also, there was a certain high official (大監) in Seoul in the past who, even after returning from serving as the Governor of Kyŏngsang Province, was so poor at home that his family couldn't secure daily meals. In this predicament, his son, out of necessity, gathered collected petitions (訴紙) and official notices (帖紙), went to Chongno market to sell them, bought rice, and prepared breakfast. When his father heard about this, he refused to eat, called his son, and said, "For the son of a scholar-official (士夫) to take goods to the market and trade them defiles the family rules." He then threw his inkstone (硯) at his son, hitting and killing him instantly. Such incidents were quite common in the past, and the consciousness and concepts of officials like that one were common in that era. Hearing such true stories allows us to understand the scope of past life, making it difficult even to raise the issue of production or economy. Therefore, encountering the reversal of times upon the foundation of life built by us Koreans in this manner, <30> suffering economic destruction cannot be called such an unexpected event.
If we list the remote causes, the fundamental causes, of Korea's economic ruin, many more could likely be found beyond what has been mentioned above. However, generally speaking, the meaning of human life was entirely disregarded, and human economic activity was denied. Altogether, it can be called non-productive and anti-life. If so, the first problem is to be liberated from all its errors, and consequently, to possess the conscious concept of what life and economy are.

B. Recent Causes

1. The Inevitable Result of Being in the Position of a Colony and the Original Economic Crisis, and Economic Unawareness

Regarding recent causes, as everyone knows, it is the fact that our territory became a colony for Japan's economic development and capitalist management. Being in the position of a colony, no matter how much economic activity we undertake, it is absolutely difficult to maintain our economic foundation. However, the misfortune we face today, crying out in hunger amidst the current crisis, and seeing the foundation of our lives collapse and disperse merely a little over ten years after becoming a colony, cannot be said to be without fault on our own part. A major reason is certainly the lack of economic concept from our past life, but it can also be said that we were completely unaware of the economic implications of ruin when losing political power. Subsequently, even while suffering economic exploitation, we failed to gain consciousness of the modern economy. The old habit of being non-productive and only consuming became even more dissipated and degenerate in the psychology following the misfortune of the nation and state, focusing solely on consuming what existed and selling off whatever was available. This is a great crime committed by ourselves, which cannot be denied.
Furthermore, our encountering national misfortune means suffering economic ruin, and their (Japan's) true intention also lies solely in economic management. Yet, concerned patriots and elders worried about our nation's misfortune in this sense were almost non-existent, and consequently, the general populace also completely lacked such consciousness. Thus, the economic problem was treated very lightly, and even while suffering the ruin of livelihood daily, people remained unaware of the reasons. <31>
Not only that, but even our movements for survival have largely ignored the economic problem. Then, upon reaching the final precipice of the economy and experiencing economic ruin, through the directly felt pain and experience, and also due to the materialist trend in social movements in recent years, consciousness about the economic problem began to emerge, and its importance seems to be felt to some extent. This is undoubtedly a genuine awakening regarding our New Life movement. From here, we must take another step forward, stand firmly on the correct footing of solid materialist philosophy, possess an economic historical view, and keenly feel that human life is originally built upon an economic foundation. And we must realize that the success or failure of our New Life movement will be judged solely by how the economic problem fares.
It is unnecessary to repeatedly describe here the methods and state of Japan's colonial administration and economic activities since a certain point. (Kitama Censor: 15 lines deleted) Since then, all facilities established by Japan within Korea have solely prioritized economic benefits. (Kitama Censor: 11 lines deleted)
Thus, since their true intention lies in economic management, they will naturally employ any means necessary, and for Koreans under their rule, suffering economic ruin is an inevitable consequence. Furthermore, the fault lies with us Koreans as well. Not only did we live on an overly weak economic foundation in the past, but the adverse factor of originally being in an economic crisis further accelerates the current economic ruin. Additionally, the fact that we still XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX and possess no awakening regarding the modern economy is cause for great concern, not just for the present, but even more so for the future.
If, even after 1910 (庚戌), we had possessed some concept of economy and paid even a little attention to the economic problem, our economic situation might not have fallen into such danger, and the Japanese encroachment might not have been so severe. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX Therefore, from now on, even if makeshift, laws concerning general economy should XXXXX be discussed extensively by specialists with economic insight to initiate, at the very least, an economic movement.

2. Activities of the Oriental Development Company, Industrial Bank, etc., and Unrestricted Immigration <32>

The Oriental Development Company (東拓)! The repository of ten thousand people's grievances. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX What will effectively re-occupy all of Korea is the Oriental Development Company (東洋拓植會社), the Industrial Bank (殖産銀行), and other Japanese individual and corporate predatory institutions! What kind of entity is this so-called Oriental Development Company? It was established 17 years ago when Katsura Tarō (桂太郞 - likely Katsura Tarō 桂太郎) incited Japanese capitalists to gather 10 million yen in capital. The Japanese government pledged an annual subsidy of 3 million yen, marking the first step in the economic management of Korea. As soon as the company was founded, it pressured the old Korean government (舊韓國政府) to contribute 60,000 yen in shares, using this as a pretext to have state-owned lands – post station land (驛), military colony land (屯), and royal domain land (宮) – contributed as capital, thereby acquiring tens of millions of yen in profit instantly. As the first step, poor Japanese farmers were transplanted onto these station and military lands. These three types of land were originally state-owned; although accurate statistics are unavailable, their area exceeded several million *turak* (斗落 - a unit of land area), and their fertility ranked among the best of all farmland in the country. The farmers cultivating these lands and rooted their lives there numbered not just tens of thousands. Furthermore, because these lands were state-owned, the rent was extremely low, and farmers had cultivated them like their own property for decades or even centuries, generation after generation, freely buying and selling tenancy rights. They were essentially semi-public, semi-private lands. When such lands suddenly passed to the Oriental Development Company, and Japanese immigrant farmers took over, the hundreds of thousands of farmers who had lived solely by cultivating these lands abruptly lost their foundation of life. This was the first instance where the economic foundation of the Korean people suffered destruction.
Having succeeded in its initial activities, the Oriental Development Company extended its claws further. First, it purchased privately owned Korean land at high prices (actually, slightly above the low market price at the time). It also preemptively surveyed vast portions of wasteland and reclaimable land throughout the country, obtained internal approval from the authorities, and occupied them as is; the extent of this cannot be accurately estimated. Proceeding with irresistible force, it promulgated immigration regulations and initiated unrestricted immigration.
The area of our territory is 128,808 square *ri*. According to Japanese surveys, the current population is over 17 million. The distribution density is 132 people per square *ri*, more than double that of China, Britain, or Russia. Thus, even for Koreans alone, life and economy would be severely insufficient due to the dense population distribution and underdeveloped commerce and industry. How then can we possibly survive under such an unrestricted immigration policy? Not only that, but one Japanese farming household requires the land equivalent of more than three Korean farming households, and there are numerous other ways Korean farmers are constrained. If just three or four Japanese immigrant farming households settle in a village or township (面), <33> due to legal inequalities and conflicts of interest, the indigenous Korean residents inevitably have to move elsewhere. From there, they naturally disperse, inevitably driven to Japanese labor sites or the wilderness of Manchuria. This is entirely due to the land encroachment by the Oriental Development Company. What destroys the economic foundation of Korea from its roots is precisely the Oriental Development Company (東洋拓殖會社).
Our Korea is originally an agricultural nation. According to recent statistics on farmers, 77% of the total population are farmers, and three-quarters of them are tenant farmers. This clearly shows that Korea's economic foundation was built solely on agriculture; people lived looking only to their fields and paddies. The Oriental Development Company, knowing this reality better than we ourselves, first seized control of our livelihood by focusing its strategy on agriculture and land. Besides this, the Industrial Bank (殖産銀行) and others operate from the enterprise aspect, and other institutions each engage in economic activities in their respective fields. In general enterprise, although Japanese may possess superior capital and also have considerable business knowledge, allowing them to naturally gain monopolistic power, XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX Not only that, but because they control finance single-handedly and engage in manipulation, Koreans cannot undertake any enterprise even if they want to. It has recently become almost a rule in our business circles: anyone who simply holds onto their piece of land can somehow maintain their dilapidated state, but anyone who mortgages their land to institutions like the Industrial Bank and attempts some enterprise with that capital, one hundred out of one hundred people end up ruined. The reason is that loans are granted under harsh conditions, and furthermore, general industry in any region is already monopolized by the local Japanese. Moreover, Japanese merchants and entrepreneurs collude with such banks, so Korean entrepreneurs, attempting business, ultimately lose both the money and the land, which end up belonging to the bank or Japanese merchants. Even if Koreans try to engage in commerce or industry, they are not only under an inherently unfair system but are also rendered completely powerless under the combined manipulation of banks, Japanese entrepreneurs, and merchants.
Suffering this misfortune starting from land and agriculture is the most crucial recent cause of Korea's economic ruin.

3. Unrestricted Sale of Land, Prevalence of Speculative Ventures

Regarding the faults and responsibilities originating from us Koreans ourselves, becoming a colony of others is originally the source of all faults. And indeed, <34> controlled by that environment, there was nothing we could do. However, our carelessness and erroneous mistakes have also been significant contributing factors. Let me list a few:
First, failing entirely to genuinely understand the times and lacking any economic consciousness, remaining paralyzed by past spiritualism and the philosophy of pauperism, we rather rejected materialist principles and science, and simultaneously paid no attention to industry. This tendency was very strong even among foreign students and the general student population studying supposedly to infuse new culture; they considered studying law, politics, etc., as their sole duty, neglecting practical science or economic aspects. Not only that, but even when establishing themselves in society, they leaned towards useless ideologies, and conversely, turned into idle consumers engaging in high-level consumption. In recent years, following direct economic difficulties, there seems to be some trend towards improvement, but it is a fact that our society is still sunk in anti-life, anti-economic darkness. Unless we liberate ourselves from this environment, devising rescue measures for the economy and life might just be another form of dream talk.
Second, the unrestricted sale of land and the extreme prevalence of speculative ventures. Recently, the excessive and unrestricted sale or mortgaging (典執) of land to Japanese individuals, the Oriental Development Company, the Industrial Bank, and others has directly resulted in blows to livelihood and bankruptcy. Under the current system, if Koreans were to sell large amounts of land owned under their name to Americans, British, or other foreigners, the Government-General would probably restrict or prohibit it. However, they would likely encourage selling as much as possible to Japanese people. Regardless of such controls, Koreans who own even a small piece of land under their name should, by their own conscience or from a national perspective, never sell it without limit. Putting aside the fact that the seller themselves faces ruin, the lives of the tenant farmers cultivating that land are consequently destroyed. When one landlord receives a declaration of bankruptcy, hundreds or thousands of farmers suffer the same bankruptcy. Therefore, landlords cannot simply sell the land under their so-called ownership at will. This should not be left to the conscience or morality of those vicious landlords; strict sanctions must be imposed by the tenant farmers or by society.
In our society, such calls have not yet been made, but among the world's weak nations, none seem as fond of selling their so-called property without any hesitation as we are. I haven't seen recent statistics investigating the area of land we currently possess, so I cannot list them here, but <35> if one were to investigate and compile statistics on what has already passed to Japanese individuals, companies, or banks, and what is mortgaged up to the point of disposal, it would likely exceed one-fifth. Houses in various cities are even worse. If, in the current situation of dried-up finances, Japanese people were determined to buy land or houses, it seems likely that more than one-third of all land in Korea could be sold off within just one or two years.
One might argue that due to natural economic difficulties, people have to sell what they have to survive. However, landlords sell land not primarily due to direct livelihood difficulties, but rather to engage in improper speculative ventures or due to their own unrestrained consumption. Mortgaging land cheaply to the Oriental Development Company or the Industrial Bank, hoping to redeem it later, is utterly foolish from the start for anyone whose land has fallen into the hands of these institutions or Japanese individuals through mortgage. Thus, the land isn't even sold at a fair value but disappears for half its worth or less. This unrestricted sale of land is a major problem, but the prevalence of speculative ventures has had a truly poisonous influence. Currently, the speculative ventures undertaken by Koreans can simply be said to consist solely of trading (相場) at the Inch'ŏn (仁川) Rice and Bean Exchange, and next, gold mining, which attracts all sorts of Korean swindlers, also occupies a part. Those who jump into rice and bean trading at the Inch'ŏn Rice and Bean Exchange, considering it speculative commerce, are foolish from the start. Since it follows the market prices of Osaka (大阪), Japan, how laughable is it for Koreans to jump in hoping to make money? Mortgaging land instantly, asking a fortune-teller (占者) how prices will fare in the future, taking their judgment, and pouring everything in at once only to fatten cunning Japanese merchants – what words could possibly describe this? Should we say those who act this way do so out of a vainglorious psychology seeking a fortune overnight (一攫千金)?
Due to the prevalence of such speculative ventures, how many have been ruined at the Inch'ŏn Rice and Bean Exchange? Besides that, those who failed after trying their hand at mining are not few, though trying mining, even if it leads to ruin, is perhaps less problematic. The bankruptcy suffered by Korean landlords and those with some capital was almost entirely due to speculative ventures, it is no exaggeration to say. Furthermore, the motivation behind mortgaging large amounts of land to the Oriental Development Company or the Industrial Bank and taking out loans was almost always to try speculative ventures.
Once undertaken, ruin is certain. The resulting impact on finance and the money supply cannot be said to be insignificant.
Third, the irresponsible behavior of landlords and capitalists. Currently, Korean landlords and capitalists, as long as their personal lives are comfortable, probably have no concern whether the Korean economy collapses or not. Therefore, one cannot reproach them favorably. <36> In other words, unlike the Citizens' Bank of Poland (波蘭), established through the alliance of wise Polish capitalists, which, despite Poland being divided among Russia, Germany, and Austria (俄獨墺三國) and suffering severe economic exploitation, held the vision of Poland's economic revival, absolutely forbade the sale of Polish-owned land to foreigners, bought such land at high prices when sold, and planned other economic developments to build the future economic foundation of a new Poland – such activities cannot be expected here. Instead, Korean capitalists have ruined Korea's rural economy and exerted only immensely negative influences on the entire Korean economy and finances. Why? Because possessing vast amounts of land, they extort heavily from tenant farmers, and their consumption is solely directed towards Japanese or foreign goods. Thus, production is merely exploited from Korean farmers, while the circulation of money resulting from their consumption is entirely absent. Next, when they engage in commerce or other businesses, they deal and associate with Japanese people, leaving Korean small merchants or entrepreneurs unable to do anything due to lack of capital. That those who control Korea's entire financial resources have little interaction with Koreans and primarily deal with Japanese people means they cannot deny responsibility for the destruction of the Korean economy.
Investigating the cause when facing a dangerous situation is just like diagnosing a patient. Therefore, accurately identifying the cause or not determines the entire fate. If we are to discuss emergency measures for our economic ruin, we must first accurately discover its fundamental roots. I have briefly divided the causes into remote and recent ones and described them above. While I cannot boast that my observations are thorough and correct, and it is merely expressing a fraction of my views, I believe that if we devise strategies for the economic problem from the standpoint and arguments described above and manage to implement them, there will be some contribution, however small. <37>

**Summary**

Yi Minch'ang argues that Korea's economic ruin under Japanese rule stems from both deep-seated historical/cultural factors (remote causes) and immediate colonial policies and Korean responses (recent causes). Remote causes include a traditional Korean disdain for materialism influenced by geography, Han culture, and Buddhism, leading to "pauperism" (淸貧主義) and the rejection of commerce and technology. Recent causes involve the inevitable exploitation inherent in colonial status, the predatory actions of institutions like the Oriental Development Company (Tongt'ak) and the Industrial Bank (Chiksangŭnhaeng), unrestricted Japanese immigration displacing Korean farmers, and Korean failures like economic unawareness, the reckless sale of land, and engagement in futile speculative ventures. Yi proposes a National Economic Conference as the main countermeasure, alongside capital concentration, promoting agriculture and industry, banning land sales, relief efforts, and anti-colonial movements targeting exploitative entities and laws. Historians might find Yi's blend of sharp anti-colonial critique with introspective cultural self-criticism particularly interesting. His identification of specific institutions like Tongt'ak and Chiksangŭnhaeng as key agents of economic destruction, the detailed description of land dispossession mechanisms, and the call for a unified national economic strategy offer valuable insights into Korean nationalist thought and perceptions of colonial economic impact in the mid-1920s. The frank admission of Korean complicity through land sales and speculation adds another layer of complexity.

**Named Entities**

朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
李民昌	이민창	Yi Minch'ang
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
東拓	동탁	Tongt'ak (Oriental Development Company)
殖産銀行	식산은행	Chiksangŭnhaeng (Industrial Bank)
滿洲	만주	Manchu (Manchuria)
西伯利	서백리	Sŏbaeri (Siberia)
칼, 마륵쓰	칼 마르크스	K'al Marŭkssŭ (Karl Marx)
도마스, 칼라일	토머스 칼라일	Tomas K'allail (Thomas Carlyle)
東洋	동양	Tongyang (East Asia)
印度	인도	Indo (India)
英國人	영국인	Yŏnggugin (British person)
李朝	이조	Yi cho (Yi Dynasty)
高麗	고려	Koryŏ
南山	남산	Namsan
朴趾源	박지원	Pak Chiwŏn
古山子	고산자	Kosan-ja
八域	팔역	P'aryŏk (Eight Provinces/Korea)
庚戌	경술	Kyŏngsul (1910, year of annexation)
桂太郞	계태랑	Kye T'aerang (Katsura Tarō - likely meant 桂太郎)
舊韓國政府	구한국정부	Ku Han'guk Chŏngbu (Old Korean Government)
波蘭	파란	P'aran (Poland)
俄獨墺三國	아독오삼국	A Dok O Samguk (Russia, Germany, Austria)
仁川	인천	Inch'ŏn
大阪	오사카	Osaka

**Glossary**

破滅	파멸	Ruin, destruction
澹泊	담박	Simple, plain, indifferent (to material wealth)
厭忌	염기	Aversion, dislike
薄弱	박약	Weak, feeble
害毒	해독	Poisonous harm, evil influence
排斥	배척	Rejection, exclusion, boycott
慘境	참경	Miserable situation, tragic state
無覺醒	무각성	Lack of awakening, unawareness
暴惡	포악	Atrocity, brutality
苛稅誅求	가세주구	Oppressive taxes and extortion
梗塞	경색	Blockage, obstruction (here, financial)
樹立	수립	Establishment
獎勵	장려	Encouragement, promotion
啓發	계발	Development, enlightenment
撤廢	철폐	Abolition, repeal
改善	개선	Improvement, reform
施設	시설	Establishment, installation (of organizations/programs)
痛心	통심	Heartache, deep sorrow
由來	유래	Origin, history
餓死	아사	Starvation death
苟且	구차	Makeshift, temporary, poor
案出	안출	Devising, contriving
喚起	환기	Arousing, evoking
惟物觀	유물관	Materialist view
闡明	천명	Elucidation, clarification
歸趨	귀추	Direction, trend, outcome
拘泥	구니	Adhering rigidly to, being preoccupied with
顯著	현저	Remarkable, conspicuous
假構	가구	Fabrication, construction (often deceptive)
欺蔽	기폐	Deception, concealment
汨沒	골몰	Engrossment, absorption
詭辭	궤사	Sophistry, deceptive words
國性	국성	National character
逼迫	핍박	Pressure, coercion, persecution
根性	근성	Deep-rooted nature, disposition
無慾	무욕	Desirelessness
頹敗	퇴패	Decline, decay, corruption
裕足	유족	Affluence, abundance
版圖	판도	Territory, domain
競爭	경쟁	Competition
權威	권위	Authority
剝削	박삭	Exploitation
沉淪	침륜	Sinking into ruin, languishing
桎梏	질곡	Shackles, fetters
厭世主義	염세주의	Pessimism, world-weariness
搾取	착취	Exploitation
橫行	횡행	Rampancy, prevalence (often negative)
士班階級	사반계급	Scholar-official class (Yangban subgroup)
儒生階級	유생계급	Confucian scholar class
陋巷	누항	Humble alley, poor neighborhood
罷官削職	파관삭직	Dismissal from office and stripping of rank
沮戱	저희	Obstruction, hindrance
市儈	시쾌	Market broker (often derogatory)
賤微	천미	Lowly, humble, base
妖物	요물	Bewitching creature, monster (here, figurative for dangerous ideas/inventions)
誅戮	주륙	Execution, severe punishment
詔書	조서	Royal edict
遊民階級	유민계급	Idle class, vagrant class
怠惰	태타	Idleness, sloth
萎微	위미	Withering, declining, weakening
疆土	강토	Territory, land
經略	경략	Management, administration (often with strategic/exploitative connotation)
吸取	흡취	Absorption, sucking up (exploitation)
屢述	누술	Repeatedly stating
頒布	반포	Promulgation, announcement
稠密	조밀	Dense
牽制	견제	Check, restraint, constraint
衝突	충돌	Conflict, clash
根柢	근저	Root, foundation
死命	사명	Life-or-death control, vital point
企業	기업	Enterprise, business
過失	과실	Fault, error, negligence
摠藪	총수	Source, root, nest (often of evils)
灌輸	관수	Infusion, instillation (of ideas)
奚睱	해가	What leisure/time (rhetorical, implying no time)
遊垰	유탕	Dissipation, profligacy (likely a typo for 遊蕩 - yut'ang)
淪沈	윤침	Sinking into, submersion
典執	전집	Mortgaging (often implying eventual loss of ownership)
良心	양심	Conscience
地主	지주	Landlord
忌憚	기탄	Hesitation, scruple
還有	환유	Redemption, recovery (of mortgaged property)
至愚	지우	Extreme foolishness
取引所	취인소	Exchange (market)
相場	상장	Market price, speculation (often stock/commodity trading)
占者	점자	Fortune-teller, diviner
一攫千金	일확천금	Making a fortune overnight
虛榮	허영	Vain glory, vanity
賢明	현명	Wise, sagacious
流通	유통	Circulation (of money)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제59호
발행일	1925년 05월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮의 經濟的 破滅의 原因과 現狀을 述하야 그의 對策을 論함(上)
필자	李民昌
기사형태	논설

朝鮮의 經濟的 破滅의 原因과 現狀을 述하야 그의 對策을 論함(上)
						李民昌
머리말
一. 經濟的 破滅의 原因
甲 遠因
一. 民族的 澹泊의 本性과 地帶의 關係로 因한 物質的 生活의 厭忌와 經濟的 意識의 薄弱
二. 漢文化와 佛敎思想의 迫害로 因한 淸貧主義의 害毒
三. 工商과 技術의 排斥, 生産의 無視
乙 近因
一. 殖民地의 慘境에 在하야 又는 原來의 經濟的 危機로부터 必至의 結果와 經濟上의 無覺醒
二. 東拓과 殖産銀行 等의 暴惡과 無限制의 移民
三. 土地의 無限制의 賣却, 投機事業의 流行 等
二. 現下의 危機에 對하야
1. 日本의 經濟恐慌으로부터 밧는 影響
2. 總督府 財政의 支出偏重과 苛稅誅求
3. 金融의 梗塞
4. 生活의 困難
5. 土地의 不足
三. 對策에 關하야
1. 新生活觀 樹立의 必要
2. 全國 經濟會議의 召集=預備會의 發起
가. 組織的 方面
1. 朝鮮 有産階級의 同盟과 資本集中
2. 經濟調査會의 設置
3. 經濟會議의 議案
1. 朝鮮人 資本集中과 銀行의 聯合
2. 農業의 獎勵 及 農村啓發
3. 物産獎勵와 海外貿易開始
4. 滿洲 及 西伯利의 投資 及 開發
5. 土地의 賣却禁止
6. 現在飢饉同胞 及 日本海外로 移住하는 同胞救濟問題
나. 直接運動方面
1. 東拓의 撤廢 及 移民制限運動
2. 産業 及 經濟에 對한 一切 不平等法令의 廢止運動
3. 勞働 及 小作法의 改善運動
4. 生産組合 消費組合의 施設運動
結論 ＜19＞

머리말

나는 이 論文을 發表함에 在하야 먼저 멧가지 말을 宣明하야두려 한다.
나는 朝鮮의 經濟的 破滅에 對하야 가장 痛心하는 者의 一人이라고 自認한다. 그러나 아무 쓸 데 업는 걱정 뿐이요 實際로 내 自身이 朝鮮의 經濟界에 獻身해 본 적도 업슬 뿐더러 딸아서 아무 經驗도 업고 또는 學理로도 現代의 經濟學-資本主義 經濟學-에 對하야 무슨 造詣를 가지지 못하얏다. 그러면 大膽스럽게 이 論文을 쓸 資格이 업다고 할 것이다. 그럼으로써 나는 朝鮮의 經濟的 破滅에 對하야 걱정하는 한사람으로 平昔에 懸念되는 바를 거의 經濟學 範圍를 뛰여나서 由來의 歷史的으로 又는 文化上으로 그의 原因을 敍述해보려 하며
朝鮮의 現狀에 在하야 經濟의 救濟策을 論한다하면 길은 오즉 한아뿐이니 그밧게는 方略도 업스며 方略이 잇다해도 到底히 實行치 못할 것이다. 그러나 目下에 全民族으로 餓死의 慘境에 在하야 잇슨 즉 一時의 救濟策이라도 업슬 수 업는 것이오 굶고 떨면서도 衣食住-經濟-에 對한 觀念과 意識이 全혀 缺如하다 할 만한 우리 朝鮮사람은 대관절 經濟가 如何한 것인자 痛切한 覺醒을 가저야 할 것이다. 그 다음에는 우리가 新生活運動의 完成期로 나수어 가는 이 過渡期에 在하야 무슨 方法으로던지 經濟挽回策을 講究치 안을 수 업다. 그럼으로 나는 이 論文 中에서 第一에 經濟觀念을 高調로 喚起하자는 것과 第二에 苟且한 方法이라도 案出하야 施設하도록 하자는 것이다.
그러고 이 論文의 內容은 세 部分으로 논우어 第一에 經濟的 破滅의 原因을 遠因과 近因 두 갈내로 논우엇스며 第二, 現下의 危機에 對하야는 一般的 觀察로써 槪論하얏스며(나는 海外에 잇는 지 오랜 故로 現狀의 觀察에 이르러는 매우 暗昧하며 又는 敍述하는 中에 杜撰이 만을 것인즉 讀者의 恕諒을 望함) 第三에 對策에 關하야는 나의 意思를 통털어서 簡單히 말하면 全國 經濟會議를 召集하자는 것이 나의 主案이고 그 外에 멧 안을 添論한 것이 잇다. ＜20＞

一. 經濟的 破滅의 原因

가. 遠因

1. 民族的 澹泊의 本性과 地帶의 關係로 因한 物質的 生活의 厭忌와 經濟的 意識의 薄弱

칼, 마륵쓰(K. MarK)는 人類의 歷史를 一言으로써 論斷하야 말하기를 「階級鬪爭의 歷史라」하얏고 또는 人類의 歷史를 惟物觀-經濟史觀-으로 解釋하며 論定해 노앗다. 이는 淺薄한 다른 歷史家들의 英雄主義的 觀察(도마스, 칼라일의 英雄崇拜論 따위)이나 精神主義 又는 宗敎觀的 觀察과 그 外에 東洋式의 帝王의 頌德記式이나 怪異誌的으로 人類의 歷史를 根本的으로 그릇보는 바와는 비기여 더 말할 餘地도 업스련니와 마륵쓰의 惟物史觀-經濟史觀-은 참으로 正當한 歷史的 觀察이라 할 것이다. 現代의 吾人으로서 人類의 역사가 大轉機에 臨하야 가장 急激하게 變動됨으로좃차 全혀 經濟的 關係-生産의 關係에서 人類의 全軆가 推移됨을 目擊할 때에 마륵쓰의 惟物史觀은 不易의 眞理를 闡明함이라 認치 안을 수 업다.
人類의 歷史는 惟物의 史이다, 經濟의 史이다. 그러타면 朝鮮民族의 歷史도 惟物의 史일 것이다. 現在 우리의 손에 낏쳐 잇는 우리의 歷史記錄이라는 것은 다른 事實로 보아도 밋을 만한 것은 極少數이다. 그러고 그 우숩은 東洋式 歷史觀-그 中에도 매우 幼穉한-에 依하야 歷史에 꼭 編入될 事實은 抛棄하고 도로혀 無價値한 材料와 事實만을 例하면 帝王 一個人의 頌德과 災異 等을 歷史의 金體史料로 잡고 經濟的 關係나 生産關係가튼 것은 全혀 忘却하얏섯다. 그런 즉 그 따위 歷史的 記錄은 아무 쓸 데가 업다. 歷史의 進運에 依하야 人間生活의 歸趨를 잡는 우리 人類로서는 歷史에 對한 正當한 歷史觀을 가지지 안는다면 그 가진 錯誤의 관념에 딸아 退化되며 破滅되는 것이다.
우리 朝鮮사람으로 現在의 環境에 在하야 어느 것이나 破滅의 悲哀를 안 늣기는 것이 업다. 그런데 무엇보다도 經濟的 破滅의 痛苦를 늣기는 것보다 더한 것은 업슬 것이다. 四千餘 年동안을 한 民族的 生活을 維持하야 온 가온데 過去의 歷史的＜21＞ 記錄에 依하야 본다면 뜨는 傳統의 思想과 文化에서 考察하야 본다면 엇더케 衣食住를 하고 살아왓는지 알 수도 업스며 生産과 經濟의 觀念이 업섯다는 것보다 極히 排斥하던 우리 朝鮮사람으로는 그 時間이 얼마나 길넌지는 모르나 가고 갈수록 經濟破滅로부터 이르는 慘禍를 밧게 될 것이며 經濟와 生産의 人類에 對한 關係를 切切히 늣기게 될 것이다.
朝鮮民族의 新生問題는 우리의 經濟問題의 如何에서 判斷될 것이 分明한 事實이다. 그러타면 經濟問題는 決코 容易히 解決할 바이 못되며 마주막 끄트로 거의 意識도 업시 궁굴러가고 가다가 經濟的으로 全혀 破滅에 빠저 救濟의 策이 업는 이 가튼 危險에 처한 우리는 이 모양으로 5年 以上 10年만 더 지낸다 할 지라도 國內에 잇는 實生産者의 農民과 勞働者는 거진 다 流散되야 日本內地의 炭坑이나 工場에 勞働軍으로 될 것이오 滿洲의 荒野에 流落될 것이 分明하고 그로부터 永遠의 淪亡에 빠지지 안나하는 恐怖를 不堪할 바이다. 우리는 이에서 最後로 經濟問題에 對한 부르지짐과 討論할 時間을 가지게 된다면 根本의 問題를 討究하야 너머 現狀에서만 拘泥치 말고 久遠의 方策을 세우도록 하여야 할 것이다. 그러자면 物質의 生活을 厭忌하고 經濟의 意識이 거의 缺乏되다십히 된 우리 民族에게는 過去의 그 가티 된 原因을 깁히 探索하야써 經濟에 對한 根本觀念부터 먼저 가지지 안이할 수 업다.
이제 우리가 우리 民族의 經濟問題를 討論하려고 하면 우리의 過去에 生活해 온 一切의 記錄을 搜査해 보아야 될 것은 勿論이어니와 個中에 生活上으로 가장 顯著하게 들어나는 국민의 共通性과 又는 地帶의 關係를 먼저 考察해 보는 것이 가장 必要할 것이다. 한 個人의 本性이나 한 民族의 特性이라 하는 것이 原來에 固有가 되야 잇는 것이 아니오 環境의 關係로 變化되는 것이며 固定도 되야 어느 程度에서는 變키 어렵은 根本의 바탕이 되기도 한다. 그리하야 그 性質의 關係로 말미암아 直接의 生活 上에 큰 變動이 닐어나며 큰 影響이 밋치게 된다. 그리고 環境이라는 것은 곳 地帶 上 關係와 時代의 思潮와 自家의 思想 及 文化를 가르켜 말한 것이니 이 가튼 環境關係로 말하자면 地帶上으로는 熱帶 或 寒帶라거나 時代의 思潮로는 重肉 或은 重靈의 思潮라거나 自家의 思想 及 文化로는 精神主義 或은 物質主義라거나 그것을 딸아서 生産 及 經濟와의 至大한 關係를 가지고 잇슴으로써 우리 民族의 經濟的 破滅의 根本原因을 차저보자면 이는 너머 理論에 흐르는 말이라 할는지 모르나 民族性으로 共通히 들어나는 性質을 考察해 보지 안을 수 업스며 또는 民族의 生活의 뿌리를 박은 그 地帶와 民族의 生活과 精神을 支配하던 그 中心思想과 文化를 溯究해 보아야만 될 것이라 同時에 그의 對策을 案出한다하면＜22＞ 먼저 그 方面으로부터 導出하여 내지 안이하고는 한갓 皮相에 지내지 못하고 말 것이다. 萬一 苦難涉行하는 佛者에게 人間의 生活과 經濟와 生産을 말한다면 들을 것이 안이다. 그 佛者는 自己의 思想과 環境에 解放되고야만 그 말을 들을 것이오 그 말을 듯는 때에 理解도 하며 實行도 할 것이다.
極端의 精神主義로 假構하야 노흔 朝鮮民族의 歷史-우리 歷史 뿐 안이지만은-는 極端의 非唯物임을 모든 힘을 들여 欺蔽하야 노앗다. 그러나 歷史의 첫 폐지를 들치자부터 民衆의 生活이 다맛 經濟와 生産의 土臺 上에 基着되야 잇는 것을 알 것이다. 그러나 社會의 不生産階級 卽 貴族階級 一流가 自己네는 땀 흘너 生産하기를 厭忌하고 純潔한 生産階級을 誘惑케 하며 그의 生産品을 搾取키 爲하야 「한우님을 부르지지며」 精神主義를 鼓吹하야 그로부터 巧妙한 言辭와 文字로써 사람의 至上善은 物質主義에 잇는 것이 안이오 오즉 精神主義에 잇다는 것과 又는 사람으로 衣食住에만 汨沒하야서는 안된다는 것과...그 他 여러가지 詭辭를 宣傳하야써 時代의 思潮를 이루며 그로써 個人이나 民族의 思想이 되며 性質로 化케 된다. 이 가튼 例는 朝鮮民族에게만 特有한 것이 아니나 우리 民族은 個中에도 더 逆轉되야 純佛敎國民의 國性과 別로 差異업는 人間의 生活로부터 거의 超脫하랴는 極端의 澹泊性을 가지고 잇다.
全民族으로서 物質과 生活에 對한 全혀 等閑한 이 澹泊의 性質은 勿論 民族의 天性이 안일 것이오 環境의 逼迫에 變態되야 온 것이다. 그러나 이제는 고치기 어렵을 만한 根性을 이루어 잇다. 그런 즉 이제 그 澹泊性에 對하야 다시 한번 說明할 必要가 잇나니 澹泊이라 하면 字義上으로는 漢文義로 보면 「澹泊明志」 又는 「澹泊無慾」이니 하야 매우 淸淨無慾한 意味를 表示하야 잇다. 同時에 所謂 「君子」라는 이들의 人格을 그리는 表語라고 할 수 잇다. 이런 故로 朝鮮사람이 澹泊性을 자젓다 함은 以上의 文字義와 가튼 意味를 가지고 잇슴이며 又는 朝鮮人은 「無慾의 君子」라는 말이니 이는 過去의 精神主義 時代에 對하야는 매우 讚賞하는 말로 들을 수 잇스나 現代에 잇서서는 生活과 經濟에 落伍된 者이라는 말과 마찬가지오 澹泊이라함은 利己的도 아니오 利他的도 아니며 人間生活의 反對도 아니오 贊成도 아니오 同時에 悲觀도 아니오 樂觀도 아니며 富하자는 것도 아니오 貧하자는 것도 아인 一種의 私生的이다. 그러나 비생활적이오 비경제적임은 사실이다. 생활의 美와 생활의 神聖에서 인간의 眞義를 표현하는 사람으로써 非生活的-衣食住에 澹泊함-性을 가지게 된 것이 우리 民族의 經濟的 破滅을 招致하는 最大의 根因임은 勿論이어니와 全國民的으로 頹敗된 까닭도 이에 專在하다＜23＞하리라.
이러고 본 즉 經濟의 土臺니 國家의 富니 하는 것은 問題도 업고 도로혀 物質生活에 對하야 거의 厭棄의 態度를 가지고 잇섯스며 겨우 땅이나 파서 延命이나 하고 지내면 고만이라 하는 것이 人間生活의 主觀이오 特히 무슨 經濟的 觀念이라는 것을 가지지 못하얏다 하야도 過言이 아니다. 如斯히 그의 澹泊性으로부터 原來의 人間生活에 對하야 거의 傍觀의 態度를 가지고 잇스며 「먹으면 먹고 못 먹으면 그대로 지내지」하는 生活意識과 「생기면 쓰고 안 생기면 고만두지」하는 經濟的 觀念을 産出해 노앗다.
그런고로 손을 꼼작이여서 自己의 生活과 經濟를 좀더 裕足하게 할 수 잇슴을 알면서도 그러지 안엇다. 땅을 파서 黃金이 나올 줄 알면서 開掘할 생각을 안는다. 이것은 「더잇스면 무엇하며」 더 업스면 무엇하나」하는 그의 澹泊無慾한 本性의 부리움이 안이고 무엇인가.
그러고 地理 上으로 본다면 그 前에 半島와 大陸을 合치여 큰 版圖를 가젓슬 때에는 엇더케 되얏던 지 잘 알 수 업지만은 半島의 地域으로써만 보면 民族的으로 큰 富를 가질 民族의 地帶라고 肯認키는 어렵다. 비록 地帶上의 關係가 잇다할지라도 民族的 自軆로의 生活과 經濟에 對한 正當한 觀念만 가젓다면 別關係가 업슬 것이며 英國과 가튼 富를 가질 수도 잇섯슬 것이지만은 우리는 民族的으로 富니 經濟니 하는 것과는 反對될 만한 澹泊의 國性을 가젓슬 뿐 아니라 精神主義에 魔醉되야 잇는 同時에 地帶좃차 그러케 適好하지 못하고 본 즉 딸아 自然의 勢로 民族的 經濟의 土臺가 完全히 成立되지 안하게 되얏섯다.
우리의 地域을 어느 方面으로써 본다면 3面의 바다와 1面의 陸地로써 北으로 中國과 시베리大陸을 直接하야 잇스며 南으로는 太平洋岸을 卽通하야 잇슨 즉 工商業上으로 매우 重要한 가치를 가지고 잇다 할 것이다. 그러나 3面으로 물이 둘너잇다고 해도 全般히 水勢가 甚히 順平치 못할 뿐더러 岩礁가 너무 만코 또는 巨大한 船舶은 容納할 곳이 멧 군데 못되고 海産物도 少數이라 할 수 잇고 그 다음에 陸地라고는 거의 山岳의 占領한 바이 되야 平原과 農作地는 極少部分이다. 그리하야 半島全軆를 縮寫로 하야 놋는다면 아긋자긋한 假山 맨들어 노은 것 갓고 厭世者의 숨기조흔 山水景을 가진 幽僻한 場所가 안이면 遊覽이나 다닐일 만한 天然의 公園처럼 되야 잇다. 그리고 大國民의 富의 經濟를 産出해 낼 地域은 못된다 ＜24＞ 할 것이며 땅만 파먹고 살랴든 古時에 在하야 廣大한 農牧의 平原이 업는 것이 國民的 經濟와 생활에 그의 範圍를 더욱 狹窄하게 만드러 노은 것이라 하리라.
이 가티 山水의 景이 매우 華麗하고도 淸淨하야 處士의 地帶처럼 되얏슴으로 이 景 가온데 사는 사람도 自然히 그 天然의 影響을 바다서 世間의 物質的 慾望의 衝動이 別로 생기지 안케 되야 잇섯다. 地帶의 關係가 原來에 物質的 發展에 適應치 못하며 한層 더 나아가 民族의 族性에게까지 澹泊無慾의 性을 길우어 주게 되야 잇다 할지라도 對內하야 人口가 만코 그 比例로 土地와 物産이 不足하얏더면 又는 對外하야 民族的으로나 經濟的으로 他族과 競爭이 頻繁하얏섯다면 반드시 다른 變動이 생겻슬 것이다. 그러나 此에 反하야 對外의 關係로 보면 新羅 以後로는 名義上으로나마 中國의 政治的 權威下에 눌려지내게 되고 본 즉 무슨 競爭을 해 봄은 姑舍하고 自領土 內에서 物質的 缺乏을 깁히 늣긴다 할지라도 大陸의 一步地를 進取할 勇力이 甚히 薄弱하얏다 할 수 잇스며 又는 對內하야서도 歷史上으로 어느 때에 人口가 激增하야 大히 生活難의 痛苦를 늣겨 본 적이 업고 過去의 살아온 것이 實로 살앗다 할 것은 업스나 土地와 物質産도 그만하거니와 人口의 數와 需要와 消費의 額도 그만하게 겨우 지내갈 만은 하얏다. 이 가온데에서라도 生의 衝動에 對한 强烈한 族性을 가젓다거나 또는 重肉의 思潮와 物質의 主義가 澎湃하얏섯다면 그 生活上으로 極度의 困難도 업고 裕足도 업는 不死不活의 狀態에서 버서날 수 잇섯슬 것이나 原來에 物質的 慾望에 매우 等閑한 澹泊性을 가진 그이들에게는 그만하야도 무슨 큰 痛苦를 늣기지 안이하얏슬 뿐 아니라 도로혀 物質的 生活에 對하야 厭棄의 態度를 가지고 잇섯다.
以上에 極簡單히 말한 澹泊的 性質과 地帶上의 두 關係로만 볼지라도 物質의 生活에 甚히 適應되지 못하얏다. 딸아서 經濟的 意識은 薄弱하다는 것보다 어느 때에 깁히 늣겨본 적도 잇는 것 갓지 안타. 이 가튼 現象은 거진 우리의 全歷史를 通하야 一貫히 흘너 잇다 할 것이니 우리가 이제 우리 國民經濟를 말한다 하면 먼저 우리 國民으로서 過去의 淸淨無慾의 處士的 觀念과 生活에서 解脫하야 人間의 物質的 慾望의 眞正義를 理解하고 根本的으로 經濟的 意識을 가저야 할 것이 先決의 問題일 것이다.
우리가 現在에 經濟上으로 全軆의 破滅을 밧게 된 根本原因은 民族的 慘厄을 맛나게 되야 남의 殖民地가 되게 된 것이라 할지나 一便으로 그 遠因은 原來에 物質生活에 對한 厭棄의 態度를 가지며 經濟的 의식에 全혀 昧沒하얏슴에 잇다할＜25＞ 것이다.

2. 漢文化와 佛敎思想의 迫害로 因한 淸貧主義의 害毒

東洋民族으로서는 이 文化와 思想에 支配 안바든 民族은 업다. 그러나 그 가온데 우리 民族처럼 그의 桎梏에 길게 束縛되야 아무 變動과 改善이 업시 그대로 거긔에서 말나붓고 말앗버리는 民族은 업는 것 갓다. 漢文化의 本源인 中國사람은 個人으로 富力을 가진 것과 個人으로 經濟的 觀念이 世界에 어느 국민보다도 못하지 안을 만큼 强烈하며 佛敎의 本山인 印度도 英國人에게 그러케 剝削을 當하면서도 國民的 經濟의 土臺는 健全히 樹立되야 잇스며 國民의 生活도 오히려 만히 裕足하야 잇는 現象이다. 우리 民族 뿐이 그 文化와 思想의 犧牲者가 된 貌樣이다.
이제 그 文化와 思想으로 因한 弊害를 論하려하면 먼저 그의 內容을 解剖해 보아야 할 것이나 그의 本身問題를 討論케 못되는 이에서는 簡單히 그의 中心的 表的만 들어낸다 할지라도 可히 짐작할 것이니 漢文化는 東洋的 精神主義라 할 것이고 佛敎思想은 極端의 非物質主義라 할 것이다. 둘을 다 物質主義의 立場으로써 본다면 거진 어둥비둥한데 人間의 物質的 生活과 人間의 經濟的 行爲를 거의 否認하는 것은 一般이라 할 것이오 또는 宇宙와 人生을 極端으로 偏狹하고 錯誤되게 解釋하야 노은 것이라 볼 수 잇다. 그리하야 이 둘이 合처저서 人間의 物質的 生活의 享樂을 排斥하는 思想과 또는 죽지 못하야 世間에 살더래드 업스면 업는대로 살아가자는 淸貧主義를 産出해 노앗나니 이 淸貧主義는 우리 民衆의 共通한 意識이오 國家의 國是이엇섯다.
人生의 本義와 生活의 眞義가 東洋式의 精神主義와 厭世主義에 잇다고 할 수 업다. 딸아서 淸貧主義-無慾主義-에서 人生은 到底히 人間의 生活을 支續할 수 업슬 것이다.
人生은 物質의 權威이다. 그럼으로 人類의 歷史는 人間의 物質的 慾望의 原動力에서 進行되는 것이오 人間의 社會는 經濟的 狀態와 生産의 關係에서 支持되는 것이오 人生의 生活은 經濟的 行爲를 떠나고서는 存在하지 못하는 것이다. 우리가 日常의 生活에서 軆驗해 보는 바 又는 歷史의 進程을 考察해 보는 데로부터 이 最大의 眞理를 痛切히 늣기게 된다. 此에 反하야 精神主義니 非物質의 無慾主義니 淸貧主義니 하는 것은 原來에 人間의 本性에 反逆된 것이며 人間生活의 實際를＜26＞를 否認하는 것일 뿐더러 가련한 人間落伍者의 自慰的 哀號라 할 것밧게 업다. 그러고 萬惡한 特權階級들의 自制의 手段과 意思에 遺出된 것에 不過한 것이다.
우리 朝鮮民族이 一貫히 淸貧主義에서 沉淪되야 온 것은 近世의 史-李朝史-가 證明하야잇다. 그러고 佛敎의 思想으로 滅亡된 高麗時代의 史實도 顯著하야 잇지 안은가. 宗敎라 하는 것은 原來에 特權階級이 놀고 먹기 爲하야 假說的 陷穽을 만들어 노코 社會의 生産者를 搾取코자 하는 毒網이다. 宗敎 中에 더구나 非人間 非生活的인 佛敎가 國敎로 된 高麗朝는 自初至終으로 佛敎思想의 迫害에서 破滅되고 말앗 버렷고 繼하야 李朝가 代興하자부터는 佛敎가 全軆로 橫行하지는 못하얏지만은 內部에 不侮의 傳統的 勢力을 가지고 잇섯스며 經濟的 意識과 唯物的 見地로 본다면 佛敎思想과 別差異가 업는 漢文化가 佛敎思想을 代替하야 國是가 되며 國民의 中心思想이 되얏다. 그리하야 政治上으로부터 淸貧主義를 高調로 喚起하야 베슬하는 사람이 베슬 살고 도라올 적에 「滿袖淸風」으로 돌아온다함을 매우 榮譽롭게 생각하얏고 政府의 살림살이라는 것이 現時의 조그마한 社會나 銀行보다 더 複雜할 것도 업스며 極히 貧乏하얏지마는 一國大臣의 月給이 쌀 멧 말과 돈 멧 兩式에 不過하얏스며 더욱히 一國의 主心을 支持하야 잇다는 當時 士班階級과 儒生階級은 徹頭徹尾히 淸貧主義(참으로 利祿을 貪치 안는지 모르나)를 主張하야 一簞食 一瓢飮으로 陋巷에 在하야 그 樂을 고치지 안는다함이 儒生의 自矜語가 되얏스며 「世守淸貧」이라함이 士班階級의 淸高함을 表示하는 術語가 되얏다. 그러고 小人은 野에 在하야 갈아서 君子를 먹여 살리는 것이 原則이라고 思하야 生平에 一手와 一足을 不動하고 生産者만 剝削해 먹는 것이 도로혀 榮光됨이오 또는 自己가 잘나서 그런 줄로만 안다. 그뿐 아니라 兩班은 죽어도 흐미자리 쥐는 것은 큰 可恥의 事로 안다.
이 가티 李朝 500餘 年동안 淸貧主義의 暴威下에 許多한 우숨거리와 奇怪한 일도 만히 發生되얏나니 다른 例를 들 것 업시 그 前에 서울 南山골에서 굴머가며 漢文 읽던 書房님들의 이약이만 聯想해 보아도 알 것이다. 우리는 참으로 이 淸貧主義에서 永히 결단난 셈이엇다. 淸貧主義-일부러 굼자는 主義-下에서 富를 이약이하는 것과 經濟와 生産 如何를 이약이하는 것은 참으로 夢話이다. 이의 極端의 害毒으로 因하야 사람으로서 사람生活에 對한 厭棄와 疲勞를 늣기게 되고 生의 活力이 거의 停滯되다십히 되얏나니 웨 그런고 하면 斷食主義를 主張하는 佛敎도 人間에 잇서서 안 먹고는 못 백이며 사람으로써 사람의 必需品은 안 가질 수 업는 것임으로 비륵 것트로는 淸貧主義를 주장하지마는 生命이 하로라도 廷支되야＜27＞ 잇는 以上에 衣食住는 하지 안을 수 업스며 又는 淸貧的 경향으로 因하야 社會의 生産者는 極少數이오 消費者는 極多數가 되고 본 즉 生産品은 到底히 자랄 수 업다. 거긔에서 淸貧主義니 無慾主義니 非物質主義니 하는 假面을 外飾은 하얏다 할지라도 內面의 鬪爭은 極히 猛烈하얏고 모든 不正當한 行動이 만히 演出된다. 이에서는 自然히 生活에 對한 厭棄와 疲勞를 안 늣길 수 업스며 正히 生活의 經驗에 基因하야 實際의 自覺으로써 物質的 生活의 正徑은 開拓하지 못하고 反히 怠惰性만 滋長되야 生의 動力이 萎微되며 停滯되야 죽음의 꿈직이는 것이나 다름이 업다. 이 淸貧主義는 마즈막으로 旣有하얏던 生活과 經濟의 土臺를 터문이도 업시 破滅식혀 버렷스며 또는 經濟의 觀念까지 다 집어 삼키고 말아서 現下 朝鮮人의 經濟的 慘狀을 暴露케 할 것이다.

3. 工商業과 技術의 排斥=生産의 無視

淸貧主義로써 生活의 信條를 삼는 까닭에 生活과 經濟에 반드시 잇서야 할 工商品과 技術까지 排斥하얏다. 淸貧主義라는 意味가 똑바로 말하자면 「굼자는 主義」와 一般이닛가 積極的 淸貧主義를 主調로 하며 積極的으로 굼자고만 하면 自己의 手足을 勞働하지 안음은 姑舍하고 다른 사람의 勞力을 無視할 것도 事實이며 同時에 一般工商業이나 技術을 排斥할 수 잇슬 것이다. 그뿐 안이라 이 가튼 矛盾의 行動은 더욱히 漢文化와 精神主義-崇神主義-에 中毒되야서 그러케 된 것이라 工商業과 技術을 排斥한 事實은 다른 民族의 歷史에서도 만히 볼 수 잇는 바이라 그러케 駭怪하게 생각할 바는 못되나 上古나 中古는 고만두고 近代史-特히 李朝史 一로 두고 볼 지라도 工商業者에 對한 迫害와 技術者나 發明者에 對한 誅戮을 加한 事實은 참으로 痛憎할 바이다. 이 가티 된 動機는 經濟와 富에 對한 觀念이 昧沒하야 그런다는 것보다 專制帝王과 特權階級의 權力維持로 因하야 强壓의 毒計라 하는 것이 오히려 正當하니 李朝當年에 西北의 人物을 登用치 안은 것과 그 外에 英明한 天才가 出生하면 그 天才의 自身에 逼迫을 加함은 勿論이오 그의 家族에게까지 迫害가 밋첫나니 俗語에 「壯士나면 九族이 滅한다」는 말만 遺傳된 것을 보아서 알 것이라. 이와 가티 工商業者와 技術者를 排斥하고 誅戮한 까닭도 工商業者로서 巨大한 物質的 能力을 가진다면 技術者로써 偉大한 發明 偉大한 製作이 잇다면 그의 權威가 저이들 特權階級을 凌駕치 안을가 하는 恐怖가 主要의 動機라 할 것이고 所謂 漢學 上에 「君子用拙」이니 하는＜28＞ 말과 非物質的 說法을 奉崇하야 그런 것도 아니라 할 것이다.
이 가튼 不合理하고 부자연한 狀態 中에 在하야 工業이라는 것은 手工業이고 무엇이고 誕生될 餘地도 업섯고 衣食住에 使用되얏던 그 멧 種類 못되는 器具와 製作品은 太古時代 그 모양으로 千年이고 百年이고 아모 改良과 發達이 업시 처음 製作時의 原狀을 그대로 가저 잇고 그것이나마 適當한 商品으로 市場에 出現되야 價格의 高下로 物品의 精緻를 競爭케 되는 것이 極히 少數이오 生活의 器具 中에 大部分인 衣料와 農具 가튼 것을 家庭工業으로 製造해서 쓰고 그 外에 特別히 工業製造를 爲하야 힘도 안 쓰련니와 環境의 關係로 勇氣를 낼 수도 업고 그 外에 不得已의 物品交換으로 因하야 多少間 商品과 市場이 開發되야 왓스나 그로써 國民의 經濟的 意識이나마 이르킬 것까지도 못되얏다. 그러고는 農業으로써 生活의 主源을 삼는다 하얏지마는 工商業이 一邊에 絶對의 排斥을 當하고 보니 爲先 農具의 不完全함과 水利의 不便으로 因하야 잘 發展되지도 못하고 同時에 産出된 農作物도 交換할 수 업슴으로 實로 多數의 穀物을 가진다고 해야 自己의 먹는 以外에 더 必要함을 感得치 안는다. 如斯히 工商業과 一般技術이 全혀 發達되지 못한 原因은 勿論으로 時代的 特權階級들의 排斥하며 沮戱하는 魔力으로 말매움이다.
이제 그이들의 排斥하던 一例를 들어보면 「商賈之徒」라 「市儈」라 하면 사람으로 잘 녀기지도 아니하고 極히 賤한 者로 待하야 商業者 本身에게 이 가튼 侮辱의 辭를 加하고 본 즉 時代의 環境에 支配밧는 人間으로써 그러한 境遇에 在하야 實로 不得已가 아니면 商人되기를 조와하지 안으며 商人이 줄어지는 때에 商業도 自然의 勢로 凋落하야 가려니와 商業의 本軆를 全혀 認치 아니하엿고 그 外에 工業에 이르러서는 더욱 甚하얏나니 一切의 製造者는 마치 至賤한 者와 奴隷로 待하얏다. 우리의 말에 「쟁」이라 하면 어느 意味에서는 매우 賤微한 것을 意味한 것이라 農具나 其他鐵物을 鑄造하는 鐵工을 「불미쟁」이라 하며 또는 革靴製造者를 「깟신쟁」 網巾뜨는 사람...이러한 製造者를 一般社會에서 至賤하게 待遇한 것이 事實이며 그 다음에는 그 時代의 環境에서도 或間 世의 天才가 나서 器具나 工藝物을 發明하는 이가 잇스면 이는 「惑世誣民의 妖物」이라 하야 誅戮을 함을 마지 안엇나니 朴趾源氏가 「勸農小秒」와 「機械說」을 進上하고 「許生傳」과 「虎叱」을 著作하얏다 하야 罷官削職함을 當하얏고 古山子가 세 번이나 八域을 踏破하야 製作한 地圖가 外人에게 秘를 洩하는 罪目에 걸리우게 되얏다. 이 가티 工商業과 一般技術에 對하야 全部의 力을 集中하야 排斥할＜29＞ 수 잇는 대로 排斥하얏섯다. 다시 말하면 生活과 경제적 행위를 排斥한 것이다.
그러고는 以上에 敍述한 여러 事實에 依하야 推定할 수도 잇는 바 生産을 無視하고 消費는 그 反對로 過度히 된 것을 또한 볼 수가 잇다. 淸貧主義를 國是로 가지고 온 것을 보던지 漢文읽는 것이 一生의 事業으로 看做하야 온 것을 보던지 工商을 極端으로 排斥한 것을 보면 生産을 全軆로 無視한 것이라 안이할 수 업고 임금의 詔書 中에 혹 「農은 國之大本」이니 하는 文句와 又는 「勸耕說」가튼 것이 農業的 生産은 獎勵한 것이라 볼 수 잇스나 一部 特權階級의 食料를 爲하야 그리한 것이며 一般社會의 全軆的 生産과 經濟的 行爲를 認한 것은 아니다.
社會의 生産을 無視하는 同時에 社會는 遊民階級의 社會로 化한다. 그리하야 消費는 實로 例外에 過度하고 그로부터 遊蕩과 怠惰가 習慣되야 自然의 勢로 全혀 社會는 不生産의 社會를 이루엇나니 漢文化的 精神主義의 魔醉를 바든 最後의 結果로 아즉 麻木不仁한 慘狀을 이루고 말엇다.
우리의 過去社會는 確實히 生産을 全혀 無視하고 지낸 것이 事實이다. 우리의 祖先들은 굶으면서도 生産하는 勞働을 絶對의 耻辱으로 思하얏다. 나는 이런 이야기가 記憶된다. 나의 家親이 젊어서 漢文을 읽는 때에 하루는 田野에 나가서 논물고를 보고 도라왓다가 나의 祖父에게 큰 戒責을 들엇다 하는데 그의 꾸짓는 말슴은 양반의 자식이 논고에 가서 물을 보다니 네가 들어서 집안을 亡을 터이냐 글 읽는 자가 그따위 농사일이나 生利하는 일을 알어서는 무엇해」 이 가튼 말은 過去社會에 在하야 一般 士班階級의 共通意識일 뿐 아니라 朝鮮人의 非生産的 事實을 그 멧마디로써 告白한 것이닛가 一時에 허허 웃고 들을 말이 아니다. 그러고 以前에 서울에 잇는 엇던 大監은 自己가 慶尙監司를 살고 돌아와서도 家中에는 엇더케 가난하야 朝夕끼를 繼續할 수 업는 때에 그의 아들은 이러한 困境에 잇서서 不得已 「訴紙」와 「帖紙」 모아 노은 것을 가지고 鍾路에 나가서 팔아 가지고 쌀을 사서 아츰밥을 지엇다. 그의 父親은 그 事實을 듯고 곳 밥도 안 먹고 自己아들을 불너 놋코 「士夫의 자식이 물건을 가지고 市場에 나가서 買賣하는 것은 家規를 더럽힌 것이라 하고 이여 베루(硯)들을 집어던지여 그의 아들은 마저 卽死하얏다 한다. 이러한 일이 이전에는 매우 尋常하게 頻出하는 것이엇스며 그 大監과 가튼 의식과 관념도 그 시대의 공통의 하나이다. 이러한 實事를 들을 때에 過去의 모든 生活範圍를 알 수 잇스며 이에서는 生産이니 經濟니 하는 問題를 걸기도 어렵다 할 것이다. 그러면 이와 가티 되야 온 우리 朝鮮人의 生活土臺 우에서＜30＞ 時代의 逆轉에 부다치자 經濟的 破壞를 當하는 것이 그러케 不意의 事라고 말할 수 업다.
朝鮮의 經濟的 破滅의 遠因 곳 根本原因을 들어본다면 以上에 말한 바 以外에도 더 만히 發見할 수 잇슬 것이나 大軆로 말하면 全部로 人生生活의 意義를 沒却하얏스며 人間의 經濟的 行爲를 否認하얏다. 아울너 非生産的이오 非生活的인 그것이라 할 것이다. 그러타면 그의 一切의 錯誤에서 解放되어야 할 것이 첫 문제이며 딸아서 生活과 經濟라는 것이 如何하다는 意識觀念부터 가저야 할 것이다.

나. 近因

1. 殖民地의 處地에 在하야 又는 原來의 經濟的 危機로부터 必至의 結果와 經濟上의 無覺醒

近因을 들어 말한다면 누구나 다 아는 바와 가티 우리의 疆土가 日本의 經濟的 發展과 資本的 經營의 殖民地로 된 그것이오, 殖民地의 處地에 在하야 우리가 勿論 엇더케 經濟的 活動을 한다 할지라도 到底히 우리의 經濟的 土臺를 維持키 어렵다 할 것이나 現下의 危機와 가튼 飢餓에 부르지지게 되며 殖民地된 지 不過 十有餘 年에 벌서 우리 生活의 土臺가 다 넘어저서 流散케 되는 不幸을 目前에 當케 된 것은 우리의 自軆로써도 咎責이 업다 할 수 업나니 곳 過去의 生活에서 經濟의 觀念을 가지지 못하게 된 것도 큰 까닭이라 하겟지마는 政權을 喪失하는 때에 무엇보다도 經濟的 意味에서 破滅을 밧게 되는 바를 全혀 몰낫다 하야도 可하고 그 後로 經濟的 吸取를 當하면서도 現代經濟에 對한 意識조차 엇지 못하고 過去에 無生産하고 消費만 하랴든 그 習性은 家國의 不運을 當하자 一層放浪되고 墮落된 心理에서 잇는 대로 消費만 하려 하얏고 잇는 대로 팔아 먹기만 爲主하얏다. 이것이 우리 自軆로서 犯한 큰 罪惡이라 안이 할 수 업다.
그리고 우리가 民族的 否運을 遭하얏다 함은 곳 經濟的 破滅을 當한다는 것이오 또는 저들의 本意도 經濟的 經營에 專在한 것인데 이러한 意味에서 우리 民族의 不運을 걱정하는 有志者나 先輩가 거의 업섯다 할 것이며 딸아 一般民衆도 全혀 이러한 意識을 가지지 못하얏다. 그리하야 經濟問題에 對하야 매우 等閑에 부치고 말앗스며 말마다 生活의 破滅을 當하면서 무슨 까닭인 지도 모르고 잇섯슬 뿐이엇다.＜31＞
그 뿐 아니라 우리의 살자고 運動하는 것도 經濟의 問題에는 着眼도 안이하야 온 셈이다. 그러다가 經濟上의 마즈막 絶處에 이르게 되며 經濟的 破滅을 當하는 가온데서 直接으로 늣긴 痛苦와 軆驗과 또는 最近年間에 社會運動의 思潮 惟物傾向이 오자부터 비로소 經濟問題에 對한 意識을 가지게 되며 그의 重要를 어느 程度까지 늣겨지게 되는 貌樣이다. 이는 勿論 우리 新生運動에 對한 眞正한 覺悟이라 할 것이다. 이로부터 한거름 더 나아가서 確乎한 唯物哲學의 正脚에 立하야 經濟的 史觀을 가지고 人類의 生活은 原來에 經濟的 土臺 우에서 建設된 것임을 痛切하게 늣겨야 할 것이다. 그리고 우리의 新生運動은 오즉 經濟問題의 如何에서 그의 成否가 判斷될 것임을 알어야 할 것이다.
一自以後의 日本의 殖民的 經略과 經濟的 活動하는 方法과 狀態를 이에서 屢述할 必要가 업슬 것이다. (北間 15行削) 그 以後로 日本의 朝鮮 內에 對한 一切의 施設과 오즉 經濟的 利益을 前提로 하얏나니 (北間 11行削)
이와 가티 저들의 本意가 經濟的 經營에 存在한 것이닛가 勿論 如何한 手段이라도 取할 수 잇슬 것이며 그의 支配를 밧는 朝鮮人으로서 經濟的 破滅을 밧는 것은 必然의 結果이다. 그러고 우리 朝鮮人으로서 가진 過失은 過去에 너머나 貧弱한 經濟의 土臺에 生活하얏슬뿐더러 原來부터 經濟的 危機에 處하여 잇섯다고 할만한 惡因도 더욱히 現下의 經濟破滅을 促成하는 바이라 안이할 수 업고 그 다음에는 우리가 尙今까지도 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 또는 現代의 經濟에 對하야 아무 覺醒을 가지지 못한 것이 現在는 姑舍하고 오히려 將來를 爲하야 더욱 憂懼할배라.
우리가 庚戌 以後부터라도 經濟에 對하야 웬만한 觀念이라도 가지고 잇섯스며 經濟問題에 조곰이라도 着眼하얏섯다면 우리의 經濟的 現狀이 이 가티는 危險에 빠지지는 안이하얏슬 것이오 日人의 橫行도 그러케 甚치 못하얏슬넌지 모르며 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 그런즉 今後로는 苟且하나마 一般經濟에 對한 法令 가튼 것도 XXXX經濟의 眼光을 가진 專門家들이 만히 討論하야 最少限度 內의 經濟運動을 닐으켜 볼 것이다.

2. 東拓殖産銀行 等의 活動과 無制限의 移民＜32＞

東拓! 萬人의 寃府이다. XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 朝鮮의 全軆를  다시금 事實上으로 占有해 버리고 말 것은 東洋拓植會社
殖産銀行 其他 日本個人 及 商會의 侵掠機關이다! 所謂 東拓이라는 것은 엇더한 物件이냐. 距今 17年前에 桂太郞이가 日本의 資本家를 敎唆하야 資本金 1千萬圓을 集資하야 創設하고 每年에 日本政府로서 補助金을 3百萬圓式주기로 하야 朝鮮의 經濟的 經營의 第一步를 내노은 것이다. 該會社가 創立되자마자 舊韓國政府를 迫하야 6萬圓의 株金을 내게 하야 그를 稱托하고 國有地인 驛 屯, 宮 3土地를 그대로 出資케 하야 數千萬圓의 利益을 一時에 取得하고 第一着으로 該驛屯土에 日本의 窮民을 移植하야 노앗다. 該驛屯宮 3種에 土地는 原國有地로서 그의 正確한 統計는 들 수 업지마는 斗落數로도 數百餘 萬에 지나고 又는 土沃하기로는 全國 農作地 中에 第一品이라 할 수 잇스며 該土地를 耕作하고 生活의 뿌리를 박는 農民이 數十萬에 그칠 뿐이 안이다. 그러고 該土地는 國有地인 故로 小作料가 極히 적을뿐더러 數十年 或은 百餘年式 代代로 自己所有와 가티 耕作하야 小作權을 自意로 買賣하기도 하얏나니 이는 半官半私 土地와 一般이엇다. 이 가튼 土地가 一朝에 東拓으로 넘어가게 되며 日本의 移農民이 代農케 되는 同時에 該土地만 耕作하고 生活하던 數十萬 農民이 忽然히 그의 生活의 터를 일코 보니 朝鮮人의 經濟的 土臺가 처음으로 破壞를 밧게 된 것이 곳 이것이다.
東拓은 第一次의 活動에 成功하야 더욱 그의 爪牙를 뻐치여 첫 먼제는 高價로(實로 賤價當時 時價에 少高) 朝鮮人의 私有地를 買入하야 들이고 또는 全國 內의 荒蕪地와 開墾地로 잇는 土地의 大部를 먼저 測量만 하야 노코 內로 當局의 認諒을 어더서 그대로 占有한 것도 그 數를 잘 헤아릴 수 업다. 이 가티 一瀉千里의 勢로 橫行하야 移民案例를 頒布하고 無限制의 移民을 始作하얏나니.
우리 境內의 面積이 12만 8,808方里이다. 日本사람의 調査에 依하야 보드래도 現人口數가 1천 700여 만이라 하니 그의 分布律로 보면 1平方里에 132의 比例이라 中國이나 英國이나 로시아에 比하면 倍 以上이 된 즉 朝鮮사람만으로도 그 分布律의 稠密에 딸아 商工業도 發展되지 못하야 그의 生活과 經濟가 甚히 不足할 것인데 하물며 이러한 無限制의 移民政策 下에서 엇더케 살 수 잇겟는가. 그 뿐 안이라 日本의 한 農戶가 잇다면 朝鮮農戶 3人以上 土地를 要케 되며 其他方面으로 朝鮮農民을 牽制하는 것이 적지 안타. 한 村이나 面이나 日本의 移農民이 三四戶만 되야도＜33＞법률상 不公平과 利害上 衝突로 인하야 朝鮮의  土着民은 부득이 他處로 移住케 되며 그로부터 이리저리 자연히 流散되야 日本의 勞働場으로 滿洲의 荒野로 쫏기여 가지 안을 수밧게 업다. 이것은 전혀 東拓의 土地侵掠으로 인한 까닭이라 朝鮮의 經濟的 土臺를 根柢로부터 破壞하는 것은 곳 東洋拓殖會社 그것이다.
우리 朝鮮은 원래 農業國이니 최근의 농업자의 統計를 보면 전 인구에 7割 7分이 농업하는 자이요 小作者가 4分의 3이다. 이로써 보아 가히 알 것이라. 朝鮮의 經濟的 基礎는 오즉 농업의 上에 建築되야 잇섯슴으로 田畓만 처다보고 살아왓다. 이 가티 살아온 우리 自體보다 먼저 이 내용을 잘 아는 東拓은 최선에 농업과 토지에 대한 經略으로부터 우리 생활의 死命을 制하야 노앗스며 그 外에 殖産銀行 等은 企業의 方面으로부터 其他 各 機關은 各히 제 方面대로 經濟的 活動을 하는데 일반 企業上으로는 일본인들이 優越瓘도 잇스련니와 또한 企業上에 相當한 智識까지 잇스닛가 물론 獨占의 勢力을 가질 수 잇슬 것이나 XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 그 뿐 안이라 金融을 一手에 너놋코 弄奸하는 고로 朝鮮人으로서는 무슨 기업을 해볼래야 할 수 업다. 근래에 우리 기업계의 常例가 되야 잇다십히 물론 누구하고 땅 마지기 잇는 것이나 그냥 꼭 붓들고 잇는 사람은 그대로 殘狀을 保하연 가기는 하지마는 그러치 안코 土地마지기 잇는 것을 殖産銀行 가튼데 잡혀 가지고 그 資本으로 무슨 기업을 해본 사람은 百사람이면 百사람이 다 결단나고 만다. 그 理由는 債欸을 낼 때도 苛酷한 條件下에서 되려니와 일반産業이 이미 어느 지방할 것 업시 그 지방에 잇는 일본인에게 독점하야 잇슬 뿐 안이라 일본상인이나 기업자가 그러한 은행과 짜고 잇슨 즉 조선기업자는 기업을 한다고 하다가 마츰내 그 돈과 그 토지까지 다 은행이나 일본상인의 소유가 되고 말아버린다. 조선인은 상공업을 해볼랴고 할지라도 원래에 불공평한 制度下에 잇슬 뿐만도 안이라 은행, 일본기업자, 상인의 합동적 농간하에서 엇더케 手足을 꼼작일 수 업게 되야 잇다.
토지와 농업상으로부터 이 가튼 불행을 당하게 된 것이 조선경제의 破滅에 대한 가장 核心되는 近因이라 할 것이다.

3. 土地의 無限制의 賣却, 投機事業의 流行

우리 조선사람 自軆부터 발생된 과실과 책임을 말하면 원래에 남의 식민지가 된 것이 모든 과실의 摠藪이다. 그러고 실로＜34＞ 그 環境에 支配되야 가지고는 엇더케 할내야 할 수가 업섯스나 우리의 부주의와 과실된 착오도 적지 안흔 主因이 되야 잇서나니 그 멧가지를 통털어서 말하면
第一. 一切로 시대에 대한 진정한 이해를 하지 못하고 아울너 경제에 대한 아무 의식이 업시 과거의 精神主義와 淸貧哲學에 그냥 麻痺되야 오히려 惟物의 主義와 과학을 排斥하고 동시에 산업에 대하야 전혀 留意치 안엇나니 소위 新文化를 灌輸키 위하야 공부한다는 외국유학생과 일반 학생계부터도 그러한 傾向이 매우 濃厚하야 法律, 政治 等을 공부하는 것을 유일의 임무로 알엇스며 奚睱에 實際的 科學이나 經濟上 方面으로부터는 별로히 着眼치 안이하랴 하얏고 그뿐 안이라 사회에 立脚하야 일을 하는 때도 쓸데없는 사상에 뿐에 기우러지고 그 반면에는 高等消費만 하는 遊垊을 化成케 되얏다. 數年來로 直接生活의 困難한 경제를 딸아 다소의 개선의 風氣가 도는 것 가트나 아즉 우리의 사회는 非生活 非經濟的 暗黑에 淪沈되야 잇는 것이 사실이다. 우리가 自體로부터 이 環境에 해방되지 안코 경제와 생활에 대한 救濟策을 講究한다는 것이 도로혀 일종의 夢話가 안일넌지 모른다.
第二. 토지를 無限制로 賣却하는 것과 投機事業이 甚히 流行되는 것이니 최근에 이르러 토지가 너머나 限制업시 일본인에게나 東洋拓殖會社나 殖産銀行 其他에 賣却하며 又는 典執하는 것이 직접으로 생활상에 打擊과 破産을 바든 바이다. 현재의 제도하에 在하야 自己의 소유라는 名義만 가젓다면 조선사람으로 英米人 其他 外國人에게 다수로 賣渡한다면 아마 總督府에서 制限할 것이며 禁止할 것이다. 그러나 일본사람들에게는 얼마든지 팔더래도 도로혀 贊成할 것이다. 이따위 制裁야 잇고말고 조선사람으로서 自己의 名義로 토지마지기를 소유하야 잇다고 自己의 良心上으로나 又는 민족적 견지로서 결코 無限制하게 賣却할 수 업슬 것이다. 파는 그 자신이 생활의 破滅을 밧는 것은 姑舍하고라도 그 토지를 소작하고 잇는 농민의 생활은 딸아서 결단이 난다. 한 地主가 破産宣告를 밧는 때에 동일한 破産을 밧는 농민은 幾百幾 千餘名이다. 그런즉 지주된 자로서 소위 자기의 명의에 잇는 토지라고 결코 自意대로 賣却할 수 업는 것이다. 이것은 그 萬惡한 지주들의 양심이나 도덕에 부칠 것이 안이요 소작농민으로부터 또는 사회로부터 嚴正한 제재를 주어야 할 것이다.
우리 사회에서는 아즉까지 이러한 叫號도 업섯스나 세계약소의 민족 중에 우리처럼 소위 자기 소유를 아무 忌憚업시 팔기조와 하는 이는 업다. 현재에 우리의 가진 토지평수를 調査한 統計를 마츰 보지 못하야 이에 列表하지는 못하나 임이＜35＞ 일본개인에게나 회사, 은행으로 넘어간 것와 처분까지 典執되야 잇는 것을 조사하야 통계해 본다면 아지 못게라 5分1 이상이 넘을 것이요 그 외에 각 도회지의 家屋은 더 말할 것도 업다. 만일 현재 가티 금융이 枯渴한 때에 일본사람이 토지나 가옥 등을 사자고만 하면 불과 一二年 이내에 조선 전 토지에 3分1 이상을 다 팔게 될 것 갓다.
그런즉 자연의 經濟困難에서 위선 잇는대로 팔아라도 먹고 살아야 하겟다고 할 것이나 지주들이 토지를 賣却하는 것은 직접생활의 困難에서 그러는 것이 안이라 不正當한 投機事業을 하기 위하야서나 又는 자기의 無節制한 消費에서 그러는 것이다. 일시에 東拓이나 殖産에 말조케 典執잡히고 곳차는다고 하다가 한번 東拓殖産이나 일본인의 손에 典執된 이상에 原有主 自己의 還有가 되리라고 바라는 것부터 至愚한 자이다. 그리하야 상당한 가치에 賣渡도 못되고 半에 半갑스로 그리저리 업서지고 만다. 이 가티 토지가 無限制하게 賣却되는 것도 큰 문제려니와 投機事業이 유행케되는 것은 참으로 至毒한 影響을 낏첫나니 현재 조선인의 한다는 投機事業이라는 것은 간단히 말하면 仁川米豆取引所에서 相場하는 것이 유일의 그것이라 할 것이고 그 다음에는 朝鮮挾雜輩는 다 모아드는 金鑛業도 일부를 占한다 할 것인데 仁川米豆取引所의 米豆相場을 그래도 投機商業이라고 하야 덤비는 자부터 얼빠진 자이다. 日本 大阪의 市價를 보아서 하는 것인즉 조선인으로 이에 덤비여 돈을 도로혀 벌자는 것이 얼마나 可笑한 일인가. 토지를 일시에 典執하야 가지고 占者에게 價格이 압흐로 如何히 될 것을 물어서 그의 判斷을 바다가면서 일조에 다 들어부어 日人의 奸商만 배불리는 것은 무어라 말햇스면 조흘넌지 모르겟다. 그가티하는 자는 一攫千金하자는 虛榮의 심리에서 나온 것이라고 할가.
이 가튼 투기적 사업의 유행으로 인하야 仁川米豆取引所에서 망한 자가 얼마나 되며 그 외에 鑛山業을 한다고 해서 거긔에서 失敗를 본 자도 소수가 안이나 찰아리 망할지언정 鑛山을 한다는 것은 오히려 문제가 안된다. 조선의 지주와 자금푼 잇는 자로 파산을 당한 것은 거의 投機事業으로 인함이엇다고 해도 과언이 안이요 더욱히 東拓이나 殖産에 다수의 토지를 일시에 典執하고 債欸을 낸 것은 모도 다 그 동기가 投機事業을 해 보자는 데서 나온 것이다.
하기만 하면 물론 거덜이 나고 만다. 이로 인하야 직접으로 財政과 金融에 파급되는 影響은 적지 안타고 할 것이 안이다.
第三. 地主 及 資本家의 無責任한 所爲이니 현재 조선에서 地主 及 資本家로 보면 아즉 자기 개인의 생활이 裕足하닛가 조선의 경제가 파산되건 안되건 아무 掛念이 업슬 것이다. 그런즉 그이들을 향하야 무어라고 好意的으로 責할 수 업다.＜36＞ 다시 말하면 波蘭市民銀行이 波蘭의 賢明한 자본가들의 동맹으로 성립되야 波蘭內에 俄獨墺三國이 各分하야 가장 經濟的 剝削을 甚히 함을 不拘하고 능히 波蘭의 復興經濟의 이상을 가지여 波蘭人의 소유토지는 絶對로 外人에게 賣却치 못하게 하고 賣渡케 되는 時는 重價로 該銀行에서 사고 其他 經濟的 發展을 圖하야 未來 新波蘭의 經濟的 토대를 이루는 이러한 활동이 잇스리라고 할 수 업스나 조선 자본가는 조선의 농촌 경제를 결단나게 하얏스며 又는 조선인의 전 경제와 재정에는 지대의 惡影響 뿐 끼첫나니 何故오 하면 巨大한 토지를 擁有하야 무리하게 소작농으로부터 重歛하야 가지고 그 消費는 일본인에게나 외국물품에 專在함으로 조선농민에게서는 생산을 剝削만 해가고 그 消費로 인한 금융의 流通이 全無한 것이고 그 다음으로 그이들이 상업을 하던지 又는 其他 實業을 하는 時는 일본 사람들과 거래하며 關係를 짓는 故로 조선의 소상인이나 기업가로서는 자본의 缺乏으로 如何히 할 수 업게 되엇다. 조선의 全財源을 가진 그이들로써 조선인과는 反히 通融이 적고 日人을 主對로 하게 된 것은 實로 朝鮮經濟破壞의 책임을 지지만는다고 할 수 업다.
한 危險한 事態에 臨하야 그의 원인을 探究하는 것은 마치 병자를 診脉하는 것과 일반이다. 그럼으로 그의 원인을 정확하게 발견하고 못하는데서 전체의 운명을 결정하는 것이니 우리 經濟破滅에 대한 救急方을 論하려 하면 먼저 그의 정확한 根本을 探見해내야만 될 것이다. 나는 이에 대하야 간단히 遠因과 近因의 두 갈내로 논우어 이상과 가티 記述하야 본 바 나의 觀察이 충실하고 정당하다고 自矜키 어렵고 다 못 所見의 一端을 씀에 불과한 것이나 이상의 敍述한 바의 입장과 論點에서 經濟문제의 策略을 講究하야 그대로 實現해 본다고만 해도 다소의 貢獻이 업지 안으리라고 밋는다. ＜37＞
＜19-37＞