잡지명	개벽 제59호
발행일	1925년 05월 01일
기사제목	내가 淸帝國을 부시고 새 民國을 세우기까지, 孫中山先生이 自敍傳(孫文學說第八章에서) (How I Destroyed the Qing Empire and Established the New Republic, Autobiography by Mr. Sun Yat-sen (from Chapter 8 of Sun Wen Xue Shuo))
필자	孫文 (Sun Wen / Sun Yat-sen)
기사형태	회고·수기 (Memoir/Recollection)

How I Destroyed the Qing Empire and Established the New Republic, Autobiography by Mr. Sun Yat-sen (from Chapter 8 of Sun Wen Xue Shuo)
						Sun Wen (孫文)
My Era of Revolutionary Rhetoric

Of course, regarding any matter, if that work aligns with Heavenly Principle (天理) and human sentiment (人情), matches the world's trends (潮流), and there is a pioneer (先覺者) to resolutely carry it out, that work will inevitably be accomplished. All kinds of revolutions, restorations (維新), nation-flourishing (興邦), and nation-building (建國) endeavors, past and present, are like this.
In the year Eul-yu (乙酉) (the teacher's age was 20) when our China (中國) suffered a crushing defeat in the war against France (法國), I first conceived the will to overthrow the Qing Court (淸廷) and found a Republic (民國). From then on, I used the schools I attended as grounds for revolutionary advocacy (革命鼓吹) and medicine as an intermediary (仲媒) to associate with people of the world, spending ten years as if they were a single day. When I was studying at the Guangzhou Boji Medical School (廣州博濟醫學校), I had a classmate named Zheng Shiliang (鄭士良). He was gallant (豪俠) and loved righteousness, truly possessing the spirit of a fighter. Therefore, I became close with him and discussed revolution. He immediately agreed to become my comrade (同志) and promised that should the time come for action, he would gather secret societies (會黨) for me anytime.
After just one year in Guangzhou, I heard that an English Medical School (英文醫學校) had opened in Hong Kong (香港). Thinking that place was relatively free and might be convenient for revolutionary advocacy, I immediately transferred schools to Hong Kong. For several years thereafter, during every spare moment from my studies, I devoted all my energy to revolutionary advocacy. I traveled between Hong Kong and Macau (澳門) propagating these ideas, and my efforts were not in vain. In Hong Kong, I gained three comrades: Chen Shaobai (陳少白), You Shao-wan (尤少紈), and Yang Heling (楊鶴齡), and additionally, Lu Haodong (陸皓東) from Shanghai (上海). (Other than these, all my relatives and friends called me a traitor guilty of high treason (大逆不道) and either avoided me or refused to associate with me, calling me a madman suffering from apoplexy.) Thus, Chen, You, Yang, and I were together in Hong Kong, visiting each other morning and evening. Everything we talked about, thought about, and researched <38> was related to the issue of revolution. We four formed a faction like this, feeling no joy unless we spoke of revolution, and several years passed like a single day. Consequently, the relatives, friends, and acquaintances (戚友交游) in Hong Kong and Macau at that time pointed fingers at us, calling us the "Four Great Traitors" (4大逆賊). This was my Era of Revolutionary Rhetoric.

The First Failure of the Revolutionary Movement

After graduating from the same school, I opened practices in Macau and Yangcheng (羊城 - Guangzhou). This was the first step in starting the revolutionary movement (革命運動). At this time, Zheng Shiliang recruited secret societies (會黨) and liaised with garrison camps (防營), establishing the general plan. Together with Lu Haodong, I went north to Tianjin (天津) to spy on the Qing Court's strengths and weaknesses (虛實), then went to Wuhan (武漢) to survey the situation along the Yangtze River (長江). Just then, the Sino-Japanese War of Jiawu (甲午 - 1894) broke out. Believing this opportunity should not be lost, I consequently went to Honolulu (檀島) to establish the Revive China Society (興中會 - perhaps the predecessor of the current Kuomintang (國民黨)) and planned to gather overseas Chinese to support the cause. Unexpectedly, the atmosphere was not yet open (風氣未開), and people's minds were closed off (錮塞). After advocating the ideology in Honolulu for several months, I only managed to gain the approval (贊同) of Deng Yinnan (鄧蔭南) and a few others. At this time, the Qing army suffered a major defeat, Korea (高麗) became independent, Lüshun (旅戚?) was lost, and the Beijing-Tianjin (京津) area became endangered. The corruption (腐敗) of the Qing Court was exposed (綻露), and the people's minds were filled with indignation (激忿). Receiving a message from comrade Song Yaoru (宋躍如) in Shanghai urging my return, I immediately returned with Deng Yinnan and three or five other comrades to plan the progression of the revolution. We intended to raid Guangzhou (廣州) and make it our base. First, we opened the Qianxiang Trading Company (乾享商會) in Hong Kong as the executive office (幹部) and established the Agricultural Study Society (農學會) in Yangcheng as our operational base (機關). After painstaking planning (慘憺經營) for about half a year, all preparations (籌備) were complete. Just as we were about to launch the action (擧事) today or tomorrow, due to carelessness (不愼) in the transport of military supplies (軍機運輸), we were subjected to a search by the customs officials and had over 600 handguns (手槍) confiscated. The plan leaked (漏洩), and tragically, the party's stalwart Lu Haodong died as a martyr (殉死). Everything collapsed (瓦解). This was the failure of my First Revolution.

The Path to the Completion of the Three Principles of the People

A few days after the defeat, I still remained in Guangzhou. Then, together with Zheng Shiliang and Chen Shaobai, I escaped to Japan (日本). There, I cut my hair and changed my clothes (斷髮改裝) for the first time (at age 30). I then moved to Honolulu. I had Shiliang return to our country to gather the remaining followers and plan a comeback (捲土重來). Shaobai remained alone in Japan to investigate the national situation in the East. In Honolulu, I gathered comrades again and expanded (擴張) the Revive China Society, but the people's minds were still not open, and the results were unsatisfactory. Therefore, I decided to cross over to America (美洲) to connect with the Chinese people there. On the way, I stopped in London (倫敦) and was unexpectedly caught in the Qing Court's search net, confined (幽因) in the embassy, unsure if I would live or die. Fortunately, <39> thanks to the strenuous rescue efforts (竭力救援) of my wise teacher (賢師) James Cantlie (康德黎), I escaped that peril. I crossed over to America and stayed (滯留) there for a short time. During these two years, observing the politics and customs of various countries and associating with wise and influential figures (賢豪) from government and society, I saw and felt many things. What struck me particularly was that even the European powers (歐洲列强), said to be rich and powerful with developed people's rights (民權), had not yet brought their people to a state of paradise. Because of this, European patriots were still engaged in social revolution (社會革命) movements. At this point, I also conceived the idea of creating a society where people work together and live well together. I adopted the Principle of People's Livelihood (民生主義) to be resolved simultaneously with the problems of Nationhood (民族) and People's Rights (民權). This is the origin (所由) of how the advocacy of the Three Principles of the People (三民主義) was completed.
At that time in Europe, not only were there no Chinese students studying abroad, but the number of resident Chinese was also extremely small, so there was no way to advocate revolutionary thought, however much I wanted to. However, my lifelong ambition (生平所志) was revolution, and I did not want to merely stay (滯留) in Europe or America and delay (遷延) the time for revolution. Therefore, I returned again to Japan. This was because that land was somewhat closer (稍近) to China, making it convenient to prepare for various matters. However, the Chinese people in Japan at that time numbered in the tens of thousands, but their disposition was weak and timid (柔怯). The moment they heard the word "revolution," they showed fear, no different from displaced people elsewhere. Thus, our comrades spent several years traveling back and forth between Yokohama (橫濱) and Kobe (神戶), advocating the principles of revolution, but the number of sympathizers did not exceed a few hundred. If gathering comrades abroad was this difficult, one can imagine how difficult it must have been to gather comrades within the country. At this time, among our compatriots within the country, those who heard the words "revolution" and "expel the Manchus" (排滿) without being surprised and suspicious (驚怪) were limited to a few people within the secret societies (會黨). However, they too lacked knowledge, their organizations were scattered, and they merely hoped to respond when called upon, possessing absolutely no (毫無) spirit to become the driving force. The five years from the initial defeat in Yi-wei (乙未 - 1895) to Geng-zi (庚子 - 1900) were truly the most difficult period (困苦時代) for the progress of the revolution. In other words, the revolutionary foundation (基礎) built over more than ten years within the country, the base and center of activity, was completely wiped out (全部消滅). Overseas advocacy also yielded no results (效果). Furthermore, a reactionary group (反動團體) called the Protect the Emperor Party (保皇黨) or something similar emerged, opposing revolution and the republic (共和) even more severely (尤甚) than the Qing Court. The future of the revolution was truly bleak (暗澹). Even among the comrades of the past ten years, there were those who became discouraged and disheartened (落心灰心), falling into extreme dire straits (窮境).

My Second Failed Movement

Deciding this was the time for a change of heart and an even greater struggle (奮戰), I ordered Chen Shaobai to return to Hong Kong to launch (創刊) the *China Daily* (中國報) to advocate revolution. I ordered Shi Jianru (史堅如) to go to the Yangtze region to liaise with secret societies (會黨). I ordered Zheng Shiliang to establish an operational base (機關) in Hong Kong <40> and invite secret society members. Just then, the Boxer Incident (義和團事伴), involving the killing of foreigners, occurred, leading the Eight-Nation Alliance (八國聯合軍) to attack Beijing (北京). Seizing this opportunity, I ordered Zheng Shiliang to gather comrades in Huizhou (惠州) and Shi Jianru to do the same in Yangcheng (Guangzhou), each lighting the beacon fire (烽火). I planned to pass through Hong Kong, infiltrate (潛入) the mainland, and personally command the front lines. However, betrayed by a treacherous person's (奸人) secret report (密告), I could not land. I went back through Japan and entered Taiwan (臺灣). I consulted with Kodama Gentarō (兒玉), the Governor-General of Taiwan (臺灣總督), arranging for weapons and ammunition to support Zheng Shiliang and Shi Jianru from behind, and ordered them to launch the uprising immediately. Unfortunately, the Japanese cabinet changed, and Itō Hirobumi (伊藤) became Prime Minister (總理). The policy towards China suddenly shifted, strictly forbidding (絶禁) the Taiwan Governor-General from providing revolutionary aid (革命援助). The supply (應需) of weapons and ammunition was cut off. Zheng and Shi, who had fought and won continuously for nearly a month, ultimately met a heroic and tragic (悲壯) end in defeat and injury (Shi Jianru was killed). This was the failure of my Second Revolution (the Geng-zi year event - 1900).

Great Leap Forward - Establishment of the Revolutionary Alliance (Tongmenghui)!

However, after experiencing the failure of the Second Revolution and looking back (回顧) at the sentiment of the Chinese people, I saw that there was a difference like heaven and earth (天壤の差) compared to before. That is, at the time of the first failure, public opinion (輿論) throughout the country universally condemned me as a rebellious subject and treacherous son (亂臣賊子). Wherever I went, anyone who knew me regarded me as a poisonous snake and fierce beast (毒蛇猛獸) and hesitated to stand near me. But after the Geng-zi failure, at the very least, knowledgeable individuals all lamented (嗟歎) that our work had not succeeded, expressing sympathy with sorrowful hearts (哀心). The joy (欣怏) in my heart at this time was truly indescribable. Furthermore, after the chaos caused by the Eight-Nation Alliance forces, the authority of the Qing Court completely fell to the ground. The imposition of the 900 million tael indemnity (九萬萬兩賠償徵出) provoked the sentiments of the entire nation, and the tide of thought for saving the nation through revolution (救國革命の思潮) suddenly surged. Also, from this time, the dispatch of students abroad, starting with Japan and then to various countries, flourished. These students mostly came to possess revolutionary ideas, and the revolutionary trend burgeoned through overseas channels.
At this time, I again traveled widely through various places where Chinese people resided, advocating the Three Principles of the People and the Five-Power Constitution (五權憲法) that I had cherished throughout my life, organizing revolutionary groups. The first meeting was held in Beijing, the second in Berlin (伯林), the third in Paris (巴里), and the fourth in Tokyo (東京). At the fourth meeting, the number of members who joined reached several hundred, encompassing people from all 17 provinces (seventy provinces? - likely a typo for 17 or 18) of China. This was the beginning of the establishment of the Revolutionary Alliance (革命同盟會). (At the time, the members still hesitated at the two characters for 'revolution' (革命), so it was simply called the Alliance Society (同盟會)). However, from the moment this Revolutionary Alliance was established, my hopes entered a new era. That is, before this, having suffered defeat after defeat and becoming the target of worldwide condemnation (叱罵), the reason I still adventurously pushed forward was not actually to accomplish (成就) the revolutionary cause in my own time, <41> but solely to reverse the collapsing popular sentiment, like ashes, and reawaken the national spirit (國魂), scattering like tiles, hoping that it would be achieved by the hands of later revolutionary successors who would rise in my place. However, reaching the autumn of Yi-si (乙巳 - 1905) and gathering the nation's talents in Tokyo to establish the Revolutionary Alliance, from that day forward, I became convinced for the first time that the great work of revolution could be accomplished by my own hands. Thereupon, I dared to decide on the name Republic of China (中華民國), announced it to the party members, and had them all return to their respective provinces to advocate the principles of revolution and disseminate the idea of the Republic of China. Unexpectedly, the number of members joining exceeded ten thousand, and branches were established in each province. The revolutionary tide advanced by a thousand leagues a day; the speed of its progress was truly beyond expectations.
Shortly after the establishment of this Alliance Society, the *Min Bao* (民報 - People's Report) was published to promote the Three Principles of the People, and the revolutionary ideology pervaded (彌滿) the entire country. Since the existence of magazines, none had achieved such success. At this time, all who admired righteousness rose up upon hearing the news. The Ping-Liu-Li Uprising (萍醴之役) in Bing-wu (丙午 - 1906) was such a righteous action spontaneously undertaken by Alliance members. Unfortunately, because it was a spontaneous action by members, coordination with the leadership (幹部) was insufficient, leading to a defeat involving tragic bloodshed. However, the heroic spirit and righteous indignation of all members at that time were greatly praiseworthy (稱道). As our party's influence grew so rampant (熾盛), the Qing Court's control over us became harsher (酷甚) day by day. They negotiated with the Japanese government to have me expelled (逐出) from Japanese territory. Having no choice, I, along with Han Min (漢民 - Hu Hanmin?) and Jing Wei (精 衛 - Wang Jingwei), took refuge in Annam (安南 - Vietnam), established the headquarters (本部) in Hanoi (河內), and launched the righteous uprising of Chaozhou-Huanggang (潮州黃崗之義師). This also failed to achieve victory. This was my Fourth Failure. Thus, falling down and getting up again, losing and fighting again, thereafter I repeatedly suffered five more crushing defeats in the campaigns of Huizhou (惠州), Lingshan (靈山), Longzhou (龍州), Qinzhou-Lianzhou (欽廉), and Hekou (河口). Wang Jingwei became quite disheartened and finally, with several comrades, entered Beijing intending to emulate the ancient deeds of Jing Ke (荊軻) and Zhang Liang (張良). However, the assassination attempt failed, and he ended up imprisoned.
At this time, the Qing Court negotiated with the governments of all relevant countries to forbid my entry (接屬 - connection/attachment, likely meaning entry/residence) into any territory bordering China. Whether on the East Asian continent or the islands of the South Seas, there was no place for me to set foot. I was forced to flee for my life to America (美洲). Later, on March 29, Xin-hai (辛亥 - 1911), the Guangzhou Uprising (廣州之役) was launched. This uprising gathered the elite of the revolutionary parties from each province to attempt a final decisive battle with the enemy. Although this action ultimately failed to achieve completion, the earth-shattering, heroic spirit (轟轟烈烈한 氣槪) of the 72 martyrs on Huanghuagang (黃花岡) shook the entire globe. The great momentum of the domestic revolution was truly built up by this uprising. This was my Tenth Failure.

After the Guangzhou Uprising, All Blades of Grass Looked Like Enemy Soldiers <42>

After this Guangzhou Uprising, the various provinces showed signs of extreme nervousness, seeing enemies everywhere (風聲鶴唳로 草木皆兵の觀). The Qing officials fell into great panic (慌恐). Among them, Wuchang (武昌) was particularly severe. Ruicheng (瑞徵), the Qing official in Wuchang at the time, had consulted in advance with the consul of a certain country, agreeing on specific actions should a revolutionary party uprising occur. However, things took a skillful turn. The operational base (機關) of the revolutionary party there was exposed (洩露), more than 30 people were arrested, and the membership list (名冊) was confiscated. This list contained numerous soldiers belonging to the Qing army at the time who had infiltrated the revolutionary party. These individuals faced disaster whether the uprising happened or not. Therefore, as a self-defense measure, they decided to attack (衝擊) the Governor-General's office themselves. Faced with this unexpected attack, Ruicheng immediately fled to Hankou (漢口) and requested the dispatch of troops from the consul he had made a prior agreement (豫約) with. However, due to the prior existence of the Boxer Protocol (庚子條約 - Gengzi Treaty), foreign powers involved with China could not freely dispatch even a single soldier without mutual consultation. A consular meeting had to be convened. Among these consular officials, the French consul, having understood our party's revolutionary cause well from before, ultimately proclaimed strict neutrality (嚴正中立). Ruicheng's expected support failed unexpectedly, and he fled to Shanghai. The Qing troops, having lost their commander (統御할 사람), fell into great disorder (迭序大亂). Our Alliance Society members compelled Li Yuanhong (黎元洪) to become the Military Governor of Hubei. Later, Huang Xing (黃克强) also arrived, greatly boosting the revolutionary army's morale. Consequently, other provinces also rose up spontaneously (亦開風自戰), and within a few months, 15 provinces were all liberated (光復).

Restore China, Found the Republic

At this time, I was in America. Receiving Huang Xing's telegram, I learned the full details of the brewing domestic revolution. I visited Britain and France, roughly settling matters related to diplomatic relations, and returned to Shanghai. By then, the tide of revolution was already set, and North-South peace talks were being held, but the form of government (國體) was still undecided. Thereupon, representatives from each province held an election meeting in Nanjing (南京) and chose me as the Provisional President. On January 1, 1912, I assumed office, changed the country's name to the Republic of China (中華民國), and set the era name to Yuanping (元平 - Note: The era name was simply 民國, Republic of China; 元平 seems incorrect). I proclaimed this to the world. Thus, my thirty-year aspiration to restore China (恢復中華) and found the Republic (創立民國) was realized.

Author's Note: This text is an abridged translation (抄譯) of only the main points from Sun Wen's lengthy autobiography. There may be some inconsistencies (齬齬) and errors.

The Principles and Spirit of the Kuomintang

What are the Three Principles of the People (三民主義)?

What are the principles of the Kuomintang (國民黨)? In a word, they are Sun Yat-sen's <43> Three Principles of the People (三民主義). What are the Three Principles of the People? They are the three principles of Nationalism (民族), People's Rights (民權), and People's Livelihood (民生). Let's outline the general meaning (槪義) of these three principles.
(1) Nationalism (民族主義) The Kuomintang's Nationalism has two meanings: one is seeking the liberation of the Chinese nation (中國民族), and the other is making all ethnic groups within China's borders equal (一律平等).
The first aspect, seeking the liberation of the Chinese nation, aims to make the Chinese nation free and independent (自由獨立) in the world. Before Xinhai (辛亥 - 1911), suffering under the control (制裁) of the Manchu ethnicity (滿洲族) and the imperialism (帝國主義) of the Great Powers was severe. Therefore, the nationalist movement at that time focused only on escaping the control of the Manchus and the aggression (侵掠) of the Great Powers. After Xinhai, the power of the Manchus was broken by the nationalist movement, but the imperialism of the Great Powers remained. What was partition turned into joint administration, and armed plunder changed into economic oppression. In terms of causing the Chinese nation to lose its independence and freedom, it was all the same. Domestic warlords (軍閥) colluded with imperialists, and capitalists followed suit. As a result, the rest of the vast populace suffered political and economic oppression, making it utterly impossible to continue efforts to seek the liberation of the Chinese nation. Therefore, Nationalism, for any class (階級), amounts to nothing less than eliminating imperialist aggression. Without Nationalism, even in the business world (實業界), domestic production has no possibility of ever developing due to the economic pressure of the Great Powers. Without Nationalism, even in the labor world (勞働界), life and labor are merely exploited (搾取) and encroached upon by warlords surviving under imperialism and by domestic and foreign capitalists. Thus, the struggle for national liberation must aim to exterminate (滅絕) imperialism. Therefore, if, after overthrowing imperialism through Nationalism, the broad masses consolidate (鞏固) their organization and continue the struggle, the Kuomintang's Nationalism will truly become a sound anti-imperialism. At the same time, it can support the organization of various commoner classes within the country and consequently develop the nation's capabilities. In short, only after the Kuomintang closely unites with the masses can the true freedom and independence of the Chinese nation be hoped for.
The second aspect, as mentioned above, before Xinhai, the Manchus ruled China. After Xinhai, their policies were destroyed. Thus, all ethnic groups within the country should achieve equal union. The Kuomintang's demand lies here. Unfortunately, within the Chinese government, warlords, the old remnants of past despotism, remain, and their rampancy (跋扈) and strife intensify daily. Consequently, all ethnic groups within the country feel uneasy, leading minority groups to suspect that the Kuomintang's assertions <44> might also be insincere (試意 - perhaps a typo for 實意, true intention?). Therefore, the Kuomintang, to carry through (貫徹) the goal of Nationalism again, seeks to propagate the common interests of the Chinese National Revolution movement to all domestic ethnic groups, establish organizational links (組織的聯絡), concretely resolve ethnic issues, and simultaneously organize a free and unified (referring to a free federation of all ethnic groups) Republic of China.
(2) People's Rights (民權主義) The Kuomintang's Principle of People's Rights aims to provide not only indirect popular sovereignty but also direct popular sovereignty. That is, the people should possess not only the right to vote but also rights such as initiative (建議), referendum (議決), and recall (罷官). The method of the nationalist movement adopts the separation of five powers (五權分立) – Legislative, Judicial, Executive, Examination (考試), and Control (監察 - 監案 is likely a typo for 監察) – originated (創制) by Sun Yat-sen, as stipulated in the constitution, as its principle. This has significantly remedied the limitations of representative politics (代議政治) and corrected (矯正) the abuses of the electoral system. However, the so-called systems of people's rights in modern nations often become the exclusive property of the capitalist class, turning into instruments for oppressing the common people. Therefore, the Kuomintang aims for the Principle of People's Rights to be jointly owned (共有) by the general common people and not the private property of any minority. In other words, the Kuomintang's Principle of People's Rights differs from the so-called Natural Rights (天賦人權) and is intended to be suitable for the demands of the current Chinese revolution. That is, the people's rights of the Republic can only be enjoyed (享有) by the citizens of the Republic. They cannot be given to those who oppose the Republic, lest they use them to destroy the Republic. To put it plainly and in detail: individuals and groups who truly oppose imperialism can enjoy all freedoms and rights. However, individuals or groups who sell out the country, deceive the people, and adhere to (附從) imperialism or warlords cannot enjoy these freedoms and rights.
(3) People's Livelihood (民生主義) has only two important principles (原則): one is the equalization of land rights (地權平均), and the other is the regulation of capital (資本節制). The equalization of land rights means that because the inequality of the economic system lies in the occupation <45> of land rights by a few, the state shall regulate the Land Use Law, Land Expropriation Law, and Land Value Tax Law. Even for private land, if the owner reports the value (價) to the government, the state will levy taxes (徵稅) according to that value and, when necessary, purchase (買收) it based on the reported value. Furthermore, enterprises, whether domestic or foreign, that have monopolistic characteristics or are too large in scale (規模) for private individuals to manage, such as banks, railways, and shipping lines (船路), should be managed and operated by the state. This prevents the private capital system from manipulating (操縱) the people's livelihood. This is the gist of regulating capital. If done this way, the progress of the Principle of People's Livelihood will gain a good foundation. Moreover, since China is a nation founded on agriculture, among all classes, the peasant class suffers the most. The Kuomintang advocates that the state should distribute land to peasants for cultivation, manage irrigation and reclamation projects to equalize land fertility, and establish relief institutions like peasant banks for those peasants who are indebted for life due to lack of capital and high-interest loans (高利貸借), supplying their needs (補給). For workers (工人), it proposes relieving the unemployed, enacting Labor Laws (勞工法) to guarantee (保障) workers' livelihoods, and furthermore, striving for the realization of systems like old-age support (養老制), child-rearing support (育兒制), relief for the disabled (廢疾者周恤制), and universal education (敎育普及制). This is the essence (本領) of the Principle of People's Livelihood.
In China, whether in cities or villages, poor peasants and weary workers suffer (被-) almost universally. Therefore, the cry for liberation is loud, and the will to resist imperialism is fierce. Consequently, it is an undeniable fact that the national revolutionary movement can only achieve decisive victory (決勝) after gaining the participation (參加) of peasants and workers. Therefore, the Kuomintang, seeing this, on the one hand, provides much assistance to the peasant and worker movements to enhance the real strength of the national revolutionary movement. On the other hand, it encourages peasants and workers to join the Kuomintang and strive for the progress of the national revolutionary movement. In other words, the Kuomintang opposes imperialism, warlords, and special classes disadvantageous to peasants and workers, aiming to achieve the liberation of peasants and workers. That is, it fights for peasants and workers, and it is also a case of peasants and workers fighting for themselves.
This roughly covers the Kuomintang's Three Principles of the People. After the party's reorganization (改組), it established the foundation of its organization with disciplinary (規律的) spirit. It provides various methods of education and training to party members to propagate the principles, mobilize the masses, and cultivate politically revolutionary personnel (人村 - likely typo for 人材, personnel). Simultaneously, it devotes the party's full strength to universal propaganda among the entire nation's people to encourage participation in the revolutionary movement. It aims to prevent counter-revolutionary movements and the imperialistic schemes of various countries when establishing a government, making the party the center of political power and the headquarters (本領) of the revolutionary masses. <46> This is its aim.

Party Song of the Chinese Kuomintang

The nation's vital spirit: wisdom, courage, benevolence (國民元氣知勇仁), Who then can sacrifice life for benevolence? (殺身成仁誰則能).
Nationhood, People's Rights, and People's Livelihood (民族民權與民生), The revolutionary army of the Three Principles of the People (三民主義革命軍).
On Huanghuagang, the grass is green (黃花岡上草靑靑), Red blood washed clean the Chinese soul (赤血洗淨中華魂).
Nationhood, People's Rights, and People's Livelihood (民族民權與民生), The revolutionary army of the Three Principles of the People (三民主義革命軍).
Red blood washed clean the Chinese soul (赤血洗淨中華魂), The white sun shines upon the bright blue sky (白日照耀靑天明).
Nationhood, People's Rights, and People's Livelihood (民族民權與民生), The revolutionary army of the Three Principles of the People (三民主義革命軍).
The white sun shines upon the bright blue sky (白日照耀靑天明), The Republic of China suddenly arises (中華民國勃焉興 - text has 勃焉與, likely typo for 勃焉興).
Nationhood, People's Rights, and People's Livelihood (民族民權與民生), The revolutionary army of the Three Principles of the People (三民主義革命軍).
The Republic of China suddenly arises (中華民國勃焉興), People's rights are distributed throughout the populace (民權分配遍全民).
Nationhood, People's Rights, and People's Livelihood (民族民權與民生), The revolutionary army of the Three Principles of the People (三民主義革命軍).
People's rights are distributed throughout the populace (民權分配遍全民), A grand alliance of oppressed nations (被壓民族大同盟).
Nationhood, People's Rights, and People's Livelihood (民族民權與民生), The revolutionary army of the Three Principles of the People (三民主義革命軍).
A grand alliance of oppressed nations (被壓民族大同盟), Cooperate for joy and enjoy peace (協作其樂享太平).
Nationhood, People's Rights, and People's Livelihood (民族民權與民生), The revolutionary army of the Three Principles of the People (三民主義革命軍).
Cooperate for joy and enjoy peace (協作其享樂太平 - text has 其享樂太平), The world is for all, the Great Way proceeds (天下爲公大道行).
Nationhood, People's Rights, and People's Livelihood (民族民權與民生), The revolutionary army of the Three Principles of the People (三民主義革命軍).
Forward, forward, ever forward (前進前進更前進), Pledge to sacrifice for the nation's people (誓爲國民作犧牲).
Nationhood, People's Rights, and People's Livelihood (民族民權與民生), The revolutionary army of the Three Principles of the People (三民主義革命軍). <45>

Mr. Sun Wen's Final Testament

Carry Through the Goal of Revolution - To the Comrades of the Kuomintang -

I have devoted myself to the National Revolution for forty years. Its purpose lies in seeking China's freedom and equality. Accumulating forty years of experience, I deeply understand that to achieve this purpose, we must awaken the masses and unite in common struggle (共同奮鬪) with those nations of the world that treat us as equals. Currently, the revolution is not yet successful. All my comrades must, in accordance with the *Fundamentals of National Reconstruction* (建國方畧), *Outline of National Reconstruction* (建國大綱), the *Three Principles of the People* (三民主義), and the *Manifesto of the First National Congress* (第一次全國代表大會宣言) authored by me, continue to strive (繼續努力) to carry it through (以求貫徹). Recently convened, the National Assembly (國民會議) and the abolition of unequal treaties (不平等條約) especially must be realized in the shortest possible time (最短期間). This is my earnest request (是所至囑). March 11th, Sun Wen (孫文)

Save the Oppressed Nations - Last Letter Sent to Worker-Peasant Russia -

This document is the final testament sent to Worker-Peasant Russia (勞農露國 - Soviet Russia), personally signed by Mr. Sun Wen on the 11th, when he perceived (覺) that his death was imminent, at his bedside (枕邊) where he had gathered the leaders of the Kuomintang. The gist is as follows:
Lying ill with a disease beyond human power, my thoughts constantly remain with you all, the Kuomintang, and my homeland. You all are the true legacy left to the world of oppressed nations by the late Mr. Lenin (레-닌). And the nations sacrificed to imperialism will gain their true freedom through Mr. Lenin's legacy, I believe. I believe that the Kuomintang, remaining after my death, will strive together with China and all exploited nations to fully attain their independence. Fate causes me to abandon my work (業) midway, despite my utmost sincerity (赤誠). However, I believe my successors will surely accomplish that task. Therefore, I have entrusted (託) the Kuomintang, instructing (敎託) them to rescue China from its semi-colonial state under imperialism and also to maintain constant contact with you all. I am confident and do not doubt that the aid granted (與) by the Soviet government to my country will be continuous. As a friend and ally, I fervently desire unceasingly (熱望不己) that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (勞農社會主義 共和國聯邦) will stand with an independent China and advance fiercely (猛進) for the victory of oppressed nations.
Sun Wen (孫文) <47>

**Summary**

This article presents an autobiographical account by Sun Yat-sen, detailing his revolutionary journey from his early days advocating the overthrow of the Qing dynasty, through numerous failed uprisings (like the Guangzhou Uprising of 1895 and the Huizhou Uprising of 1900), the development of his core ideology (the Three Principles of the People: Nationalism, People's Rights, People's Livelihood) during exile, the crucial formation of the Tongmenghui (Revolutionary Alliance) in Tokyo in 1905, and culminating in the successful Wuchang Uprising of 1911 which led to the establishment of the Republic of China in 1912. It also includes a separate explanation of the Three Principles, the KMT party anthem, and Sun Yat-sen's final testaments addressed to his party comrades and Soviet Russia, urging continued revolutionary struggle and international cooperation against imperialism.

For Korean readers in 1925 under Japanese colonial rule, this account of China's revolution against the Qing and the fight against foreign imperialism held significant interest. Sun Yat-sen's narrative of persistent struggle despite repeated failures, the development of a coherent nationalist ideology (Three Principles), and the ultimate success in establishing a republic offered a potential blueprint and source of inspiration for the Korean independence movement. Historians might find the specific framing of the Three Principles (especially the anti-imperialist aspects of Nationalism and the emphasis on uniting oppressed peoples) and the direct appeal to Soviet Russia in his final testament particularly revealing about the transnational anti-colonial networks and ideological currents influencing Asian nationalist movements during this period. The Korean translation itself, using terminology of the time, also provides linguistic insights.

**Named Entities**

孫文	손문	Son Mun (Sun Wen/Sun Yat-sen)
清帝國	청제국	Ch'ŏng Cheguk (Qing Empire)
民國	민국	Min'guk (Republic)
孫中山先生	손중산선생	Son Chung-san Sŏnsaeng (Mr. Sun Yat-sen)
中國	중국	Chung'guk (China)
法國	법국	Pŏpkuk (France)
乙酉	을유	Ŭl-yu (Year 1885 or 1945, context indicates 1885)
清廷	청정	Ch'ŏngjŏng (Qing Court)
廣州博濟醫學校	광주박제의학교	Kwangju Pakche Ŭihakkyo (Guangzhou Boji Medical School)
鄭士良	정사량	Chŏng Sa-ryang (Zheng Shiliang)
廣州	광주	Kwangju (Guangzhou)
香港	홍콩	Hongk'ong (Hong Kong)
英文醫學校	영문의학교	Yŏngmun Ŭihakkyo (English Medical School)
澳門	오문	Omun (Macau)
陳少白	진소백	Chin So-baek (Chen Shaobai)
尤少紈	우소환	U So-wan (You Shao-wan / You Lie)
楊鶴齡	양학령	Yang Hak-ryŏng (Yang Heling)
上海	상해	Sanghae (Shanghai)
陸皓東	육호동	Yuk Ho-dong (Lu Haodong)
羊城	양성	Yangsŏng (Guangzhou - literary name)
天津	천진	Ch'ŏnjin (Tianjin)
武漢	무한	Muhan (Wuhan)
長江	장강	Changgang (Yangtze River)
甲午	갑오	Kabo (Year 1894)
清日戰爭	청일전쟁	Ch'ŏng-Il Chŏnjaeng (Sino-Japanese War)
檀島	단도	Tando (Honolulu/Hawaii)
興中會	흥중회	Hŭngjunghoe (Revive China Society)
國民黨	국민당	Kungmindang (Kuomintang/Nationalist Party)
鄧蔭南	등음남	Tŭng Ŭm-nam (Deng Yinnan)
高麗	고려	Koryŏ (Korea)
旅戚	여척	Yŏch'ŏk (Lüshun/Port Arthur - tentative identification based on context)
京津	경진	Kyŏngjin (Beijing-Tianjin area)
宋躍如	송약여	Song Yak-yo (Song Yaoru / Charlie Soong)
乾享商會	건향상회	Kŏnhyang Sanghoe
農學會	농학회	Nonghakhoe (Agricultural Study Society)
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
美洲	미주	Miju (America)
倫敦	윤돈	Yundon (London)
大使舘	대사관	Taesagwan (Embassy)
康德黎	강덕려	K'ang Tŏk-rye (James Cantlie)
歐洲	유주	Yuju (Europe)
橫濱	횡빈	Hoengbin (Yokohama)
神戶	신호	Sin'go (Kobe)
會黨	회당	Hoedang (Secret Societies)
乙未	을미	Ŭl-mi (Year 1895 or 1955, context indicates 1895)
庚子	경자	Kyŏng-ja (Year 1900 or 1960, context indicates 1900)
保皇黨	보황당	Pohwangdang (Protect the Emperor Party)
中國報	중국보	Chung'guk Po (China Daily newspaper)
史堅如	사견여	Sa Kyŏn-yo (Shi Jianru)
義和團	의화단	Ŭihwadan (Boxers)
八國聯合軍	팔국연합군	P'al'guk Yŏnhapkun (Eight-Nation Alliance)
北京	북경	Pukkyŏng (Beijing)
惠州	혜주	Hyeju (Huizhou)
臺灣	대만	T'aewan (Taiwan)
兒玉 臺灣總督	아옥 대만총독	Aok (Kodama) T'aewan Ch'ongdok (Kodama Gentarō, Governor-General of Taiwan)
伊藤總理	이등총리	Itŭng Ch'ongni (Itō Hirobumi, Prime Minister)
伯林	백림	Paengnim (Berlin)
巴里	파리	P'ari (Paris)
東京	동경	Tonggyŏng (Tokyo)
同盟會	동맹회	Tongmaenghoe (Tongmenghui/Alliance Society)
乙巳	을사	Ŭl-sa (Year 1905 or 1965, context indicates 1905)
中華民國	중화민국	Chunghwa Min'guk (Republic of China)
民報	민보	Minbo (People's Report newspaper)
丙午	병오	Pyŏng-o (Year 1906 or 1966, context indicates 1906)
萍醴	평례	P'yŏngnye (Ping-Liu-Li area - Pingxiang, Liling, Liuyang)
漢民	한민	Hanmin (Hu Hanmin - likely identification)
精 衛	정 위	Chŏng Wi (Wang Jingwei)
安南	안남	Annam (Vietnam)
河內	하내	Hanae (Hanoi)
潮州	조주	Choju (Chaozhou)
黃崗	황강	Hwanggam (Huanggang - location of uprising in Chaozhou)
靈山	영산	Yŏngsan (Lingshan)
龍州	용주	Yongju (Longzhou)
欽廉	흠렴	K'ŭmnyŏm (Qinzhou-Lianzhou)
河口	하구	Hagu (Hekou)
荊哥	형가	Hyŏng Ka (Jing Ke)
張良	장량	Chang Yang (Zhang Liang)
辛亥	신해	Sin-hae (Year 1911 or 1971, context indicates 1911)
黃花岡	황화강	Hwanghwagang (Huanghuagang/Yellow Flower Mound)
武昌	무창	Much'ang (Wuchang)
瑞徵	서징	Sŏ Ch'ing (Ruicheng)
漢口	한구	Han'gu (Hankou)
黎元洪	여원홍	Yŏ Wŏn-hong (Li Yuanhong)
黃克强	황극강	Hwang K'ŭk-k'ang (Huang Xing)
南京	남경	Namgyŏng (Nanjing)
建國方畧	건국방략	Kŏn'guk Pangnyak (Fundamentals of National Reconstruction)
建國大綱	건국대강	Kŏn'guk Taegang (Outline of National Reconstruction)
三民主義	삼민주의	Sammin Chuŭi (Three Principles of the People)
第一次全國代表大會	제일차전국대표대회	Cheilch'a Chŏn'guk Taep'yodaehoe (First National Congress)
國民會議	국민회의	Kungmin Hoeŭi (National Assembly)
勞農露國	노농로국	No'nong No'guk (Worker-Peasant Russia/Soviet Union)
레-닌	레닌	Re-nin (Lenin)
勞農社會主義 共和國聯邦	노농사회주의 공화국연방	No'nong Sahoejuŭi Konghwaguk Yŏnbang (Worker-Peasant Socialist Republic Federation / USSR)

**Glossary**

淸帝國	청제국	Qing Empire
民國	민국	Republic
自敍傳	자서전	Autobiography
회고·수기	회고·수기	Memoir/Recollection
革命	혁명	Revolution
天理	천리	Heavenly Principle/Natural Law
潮流	조류	Trend/Current
先覺者	선각자	Pioneer/Forerunner
成就	성취	Accomplishment
淸廷	청정	Qing Court
創建	창건	Founding/Establishment
學堂	학당	School (older term)
鼓吹	고취	Advocacy/Promotion
醫術	의술	Medical art/skill
同志	동지	Comrade
會黨	회당	Secret society/Party
轉學	전학	Transfer schools
宣傳	선전	Propaganda/Promotion
大逆不道	대역부도	High Treason
逆賊	역적	Traitor/Rebel
開業	개업	Open a business/practice
虛實	허실	Strengths and weaknesses / Truth and falsehood
形勢	형세	Situation/Terrain
甲午	갑오	Jiawu (Year 1894)
創立	창립	Establishment/Founding
風氣未開	풍기미개	Customs not yet enlightened/developed (older phrasing)
腐敗	부패	Corruption
綻露	탄로	Exposure/Revelation
激忿	격분	Indignation
歸國	귀국	Return to one's country
襲敗	습패	Raid and fail/be defeated (likely context: attempted raid)
幹部	간부	Cadre/Executive staff
機關	기관	Organ/Base of operations
籌備	주비	Preparation/Planning
擧事	거사	Uprising/Undertaking
漏洩	누설	Leakage/Disclosure
殉死	순사	Martyrdom/Dying for a cause
瓦解	와해	Collapse/Disintegration
斷髮改裝	단발개장	Cutting hair and changing clothes (sign of modernization/rebellion)
捲土重來	권토중래	Stage a comeback
擴張	확장	Expansion
幽因	유인	Confinement/Detention (uncommon term, likely 幽禁/幽囚)
救援	구원	Rescue/Aid
賢師	현사	Wise teacher
滯留	체류	Stay/Sojourn
民生主義	민생주의	Principle of People's Livelihood
民族	민족	Nation/People/Ethnicity
民權	민권	People's Rights
社會革命	사회혁명	Social Revolution
三民主義	삼민주의	Three Principles of the People
所由	소유	Reason/Origin
生平所志	생평소지	Lifelong ambition
遷延	천연	Delay/Postponement
柔怯	유겁	Weak and timid
驚怪	경괴	Surprise and suspicion
毫無	호무	Not at all/Completely lacking
困苦	곤고	Hardship/Distress
基礎	기초	Foundation
效果	효과	Effect/Result
反動團體	반동단체	Reactionary group
尤甚	우심	Even more severe/Worse
暗澹	암담	Gloomy/Dark
窮境	궁경	Dire straits
奮戰	분전	Hard fight/Struggle
創刊	창간	Launch a publication
烽火	봉화	Beacon fire (signal for uprising)
潛入	잠입	Infiltration
援助	원조	Aid/Support
絶禁	절금	Strictly forbid
悲壯	비장	Heroic and tragic
回顧	회고	Look back/Recollect
天壤의 差	천양지차	Difference like heaven and earth (used older genitive form '의')
輿論	여론	Public opinion
亂臣賊子	난신적자	Rebellious subject and treacherous son (idiom)
彌滿	미만	Fill/Pervade
熾盛	치성	Flourishing/Raging
酷甚	혹심	Extremely severe/Cruel
逐出	축출	Expel/Drive out
本部	본부	Headquarters
草木皆兵	초목개병	Seeing enemies everywhere (idiom for paranoia)
慌恐	황공	Panic/Alarm
衝擊	충격	Attack/Assault
豫約	예약	Pre-arranged agreement
嚴正中立	엄정중립	Strict neutrality
統御	통어	Control/Command
光復	광복	Restoration (of sovereignty)
恢復	회복	Recovery/Restoration
筆者曰	필자왈	The author/translator says
抄譯	초역	Abridged translation
槪義	개의	Outline/General meaning
平等	평등	Equality
制裁	제재	Sanction/Control
侵掠	침략	Invasion/Aggression
階級	계급	Class (social)
搾取	착취	Exploitation
滅絕	멸절	Extermination/Annihilation
鞏固	공고	Consolidation/Strengthening
貫徹	관철	Carry through/Achieve
跋扈	발호	Domineering/Rampant
五權分立	오권분립	Separation of Five Powers
代議政治	대의정치	Representative politics
天賦人權	천부인권	Natural Rights (Heaven-bestowed human rights)
共有	공유	Joint ownership/Shared
享有	향유	Enjoy (rights, privileges)
附從	부종	Follow/Adhere to
原則	원칙	Principle
地權平均	지권평균	Equalization of Land Rights
資本節制	자본절제	Regulation of Capital
徵稅	징세	Levy taxes
買收	매수	Purchase/Buy up
操縱	조종	Manipulation/Control
高利貸借	고리대차	Usury/High-interest loan
保障	보장	Guarantee/Security
普及	보급	Diffusion/Spread
本領	본령	True character/Essence/Headquarters
參加	참가	Participation
決勝	결승	Decisive victory
規律	규율	Discipline/Regulation
遺囑	유촉	Last will/Testament
奮鬪	분투	Struggle/Strive hard
不平等條約	불평등조약	Unequal Treaties
最短期間	최단기간	Shortest period
至囑	지촉	Earnest request/Entrustment
勞農露國	노농로국	Worker-Peasant Russia (Soviet Union)
赤誠	적성	Utmost sincerity
敎託	교탁	Entrust/Instruct
猛進	맹진	Fierce advance
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제59호
발행일	1925년 05월 01일
기사제목	내가 淸帝國을 부시고 새 民國을 세우기까지, 孫中山先生이 自敍傳(孫文學說第八章에서)
필자	孫文
기사형태	회고·수기

내가 淸帝國을 부시고 새 民國을 세우기까지, 孫中山先生이 自敍傳(孫文學說第八章에서)
						孫文
나의 革命言論時代

물론 某事하고 그 일이 天理, 人情에 맛고 세계의 潮流에 어울리며 여긔에 그 일을 決行하는 先覺者가 잇스면 그 일은 반드시 成就되고야 마는 것이니 古今各種의 革命, 維新, 興邦, 建國等 事業이 모다 그러한 것이다.
나는 지나간 乙酉(선생의 時年 20) 우리 中國이 法國과 싸와서 慘敗하던 그 해에 비로소 淸廷을 傾覆하고 民國을 創建할 뜻을 두어 그 후부터는 내가 다니는 학당으로써 革命鼓吹의 땅을 삼고 醫術로써 세상사람과 사괴는 仲媒를 삼아 10년을 하루가티 지내여섯다. 내가 廣州博濟醫學校에 재학할 때에 同學中에 鄭士良이라는 동무가 잇서 그의 사람됨이 豪俠하고 義를 조하하야 실로 鬪士의 風이 잇슴으로 仍히 그와 더블어 친하야 革命을 니야기한 즉 그가 곳 나의 同志되기를 許하야 他日 有事時에는 언제던지 나를 위하야 會黨을 지여주기로 하엿다.
廣州에 잇슨 지 겨우 1년에 香港에 英文醫學校가 開設되엿다는 말을 듯고 그 땅이 比較的 자유스워러 革命을 鼓吹하기에 편할 듯 십흠으로 곳 香港으로 轉學하야 그 후 수년동안에는 每樣學課餘暇에 革命鼓吹에 전력하되 香港澳門 새로 다니며 그 뜻을 宣傳한 바 그 功이 뷔지 안하서 香港에서 陳少白 尤少紈, 楊鶴齡 等 3인의 동지를 어든밧게 上海의 陸晧東 1인을 어덧다.(이 밧게 親友들은 모다 나를 大逆不道의 賊이라 하야 避하지 아느면 중풍병든 狂人이라 하야 상대를 해주지 안핫섯다.) 그래서 나는 陳·尤·楊 3인과 가티 香港에 잇서 아츰 저녁으로 서로 차즈며 말하는 것 생각하는 것 硏究하는 것＜38＞ 어느 것이 革命에 관한 문제 아닌 것이 업섯다. 우리 네 사람은 이러케 한편이 되어 革命을 말하지 안흐면 깃붐을 늣기지 못하되 수년이 하루 가탓는 고로 當時 港澳門의 戚友交游들은 우리를 指目하야 4大逆賊이라 하얏스니 이것이 곳 나의 革命言論時代엿다.

革命運動의 第 一次 失敗

그 후 同校를 卒業하고 澳門羊城 兩地에 開業하니 이가 곳 革命運動을 開始하는 첫거름이엿다. 이때에 鄭士良은 會黨을 結納하고 防營을 聯絡하야 大軆經綸을 세우고 나는 陸皓東으로 더블어 북으로 天津에 드러가 淸廷의 虛實을 엿보고 다시 武漢으로 드러가 長江의 形勢를 보살피든 中 때맛츰 甲午의 淸日戰爭이 닐어남으로 이 機를 可히 일치 못할 것이라 하야 仍히 檀島로 드러가 興中會(현 국민당의 前身이라 할가)를 創立하고 해외의 中人을 枓合하야 그 勢를 도우려 하엿는대 意外에 風氣未開하고 인심이 錮塞하야 檀島에 잇서 그 사상을 鼓吹하기 數月에 겨우 鄧蔭南外 몃사람의 贊同을 어덧슬 뿐이엿다. 이떄에 淸兵이 大敗하고 高麗가 獨立되며 旅戚가 니여빠지고 京津이 危急하게 되자 淸廷의 腐敗綻露되야 인심이 激忿한즉 上海 同志 宋躍如로부터 나의 歸國을 促함으로 鄧蔭南 外 三五同志로 더블어 곳 귀국하야 革命의 진행을 策하되 廣州를 襲敗하야 근거지를 삼고저 몬저 香港에 乾享商會를 열어 그 幹部를 삼고 羊城에 農學會를 베풀어써 機關을 삼아 慘憺經營 무릇 半年에 모든 籌備가 完成하야 今日明日로 方將擧事하려는 中, 軍機運輸의 不愼으로 海關의 搜索을 바다 手槍 600餘 桿을 빼앗기우며 事機가 漏洩되야 우려 黨의 健將陸皓東이 殉死되며 萬事가 瓦解되니 이것이 나의 第一次 革命의 失敗이다.

三民主義의 完成된 經路

敗後 數日을 오히려 廣州에서 지내다가 鄭士良, 陳少白으로 더블어 日本에 逃命하야 비로소 斷髮改裝(時年이 30)하고 다시 檀島로 자리를 옴길새 士良은 本國으로 도라가 餘衆을 收拾하야 捲土重來를 策하게 하고 少白은 日本에 獨留하야 東方의 國情을 考察하게 하엿스며 나는 檀島에 잇서 다시 동지를 모아 興中會를 擴張하엿는대 아직도 人心未開로 成績이 시원치 못함으로 다시 美洲로 건너가 그 곳 잇는 中人을 聯絡하기로 하고 행하야 倫敦에 들렷다가 문득 淸廷의 수색망에 걸려 大使舘에 幽因되야 生死가 엇지될지를 모르던 中, 다행히＜39＞ 賢師 康德黎의 竭力救援을 힘닙어 그 화를 면하고 美洲로 건너가서 잠시 滯留하엿는대 이 兩年間 各國의 政治風俗을 보며 或은 朝野의 賢豪와 相從하는 際에 見聞한 바와 감상된 바가 아울너 만흔 中, 특히 생각된 것은 저 국가가 부강하고 民權이 발달되엿다는 歐洲의 列强도 아직도 그 百姓을 極樂의 鄕에 오르게 못하얏스며 이로 인하야 歐洲의 志士는 오히려 社會革命運動을 니르키고 잇는 것이엿다. 이에 나 亦 가티 일하고 가티 잘 살을 社會를 만들 생각으로 民生主義를 취하야 民族·民權問題로브터 同時解決을 하기로 하엿스니 이것이 곳 三民主義의 主張이 완성된 所由이다.
이때 歐洲에는 아직까지 中人의 유학생이 업슬 뿐 아니라 또 中人 在留者도 甚少하야 비록 如何히 革命思想을 鼓吹코저하나 그 길이 업섯다. 그러나 내의 生平所志는 革命으로서 공연히 歐美에 滯留하야 革命의 時日을 遷延하고 십지 안흠으로 다시 日本으로 도라왓스니 이것은 그 땅이 中國과 稍近하야 모든 일을 籌備하기에 편한 所以엿다. 그런대 이때에 日本에 잇는 中人은 其數-萬으로써 算하나 그 風氣가 柔怯하야 革命이란 말만 드르면 怯을 내는 모양이 他處의 流民과 다름이 업섯다. 그래서 우리의 동지가 數年을 두고 橫濱 神戶로 來往하며 革命主義를 鼓吹하얏스나 同意者가 百數十人에 지내지 못하엿다. 外地에 잇서 同志모집이 이만큼 곤란하니 국내의 同志모집이 如何히 因難하엿슬 것을 可知할 것이다. 이때에 內地同胞로 革命排滿의 말을 듯고 驚怪치 안는 者는 다 못 會黨 中의 몃사람에 그첫는대 그들이 역시 지식이 적고 團體가 散漫하야 오즉 향응되기나 바랄 뿐이오, 原動力이 될 意氣는 毫無하엿나니 乙未初敗로부터 庚子에 니르기까지의 5년간은 실로 革命進行上 가장 困苦時代이엿다. 말하면 國內히 근거와 활동의 지위에 잇서 10여 년래에 싸하노흔 革命의 基礎가 全部消滅되엿스며 해외의 鼓吹가 또한 效果가 업고 게다가 保皇黨인가 무엇인가 하는 反動團體가 발생하야 革命, 共和를 반대하기 淸廷에서 尤甚한 바 革命의 前途가 실로 暗澹하야 10년래의 동지 중에도 落心灰心된 이가 업지 안은 極端의 窮境에 빠저섯다.

나의 運動의 第 二次 失敗

心機一轉, 益加奮戰의 때는 이때라 하야 나는 이에 陳少白을 명하야 香港으로 도라가 中國報를 創刊케 하야 革命을 鼓吹케 하고 史堅如를 명하야 長江에 드러가써 會黨을 聯絡케 하고 鄭士良을 명하야 香港에 잇서 機關을＜40＞ 設하고 會黨을 招待케 하엿는대 이때에 맛츰 洋人을 죽인 義和團事伴이 잇서 八國聯合軍이 北京을 銃擊하게 된바 此機會를 타려고 곳 鄭士良을 명하야 惠州에서, 史堅如를 명하야는 羊城에서 各히 동지를 모아 烽火를 들기로 하고 나는 香港을 것처 내지로 潛入하야 친히 戰線을 指揮하기로 하던 바 奸人의 밀고를 입어 나는 上陸을 엇지 못하고 다시 日本을 것처 臺灣에 드러가 兒玉 臺灣總督과 相議하야 武器彈藥으로써 鄭士良 史堅如의 뒤를 대기로 하고 곳 擧事케 하엿는대 불행히 日本內閣이 밧귀며 伊藤總理가 드러서자 中國에 대한 정책을 忽變하야 臺灣總督의 革命援助를 絶禁하매 軍器彈藥의 應需가 끈키여 근1월을 두고 連戰連勝하던 鄭 史 兩人도 그만 戰敗身傷의(史堅如는 被殺) 悲壯한 최후를 짓고마니 이것이 즉 나의 第二次 革命(庚子年事) 失敗이엿다.

大飛躍-革命同盟會의 成立!

그런대 第二次革命의 失敗를 지내고 中國의 인심을 回顧할 때에 스스로 前日과 天壤의 差가 잇슴을 보앗다. 즉 첫 번 失敗를 보던 그때에는 擧國輿論이 다 가티 나로써 亂臣賊子라 하야 내가 니르는 곳에 무릇 나를 아는 者는 다-가티 나를 毒蛇猛獸로 認하야 마조 서기를 꺼리더니 庚子失敗 後로는 적어도 有識之士는 모다 우리 일의 成功되지 못한 것을 嗟歎하야 哀心으로 同情의 뜻을 표하는 바 이때의 中心의 欣怏는 실로 형언할 수가 업섯스며 더욱 八國聯合軍의 亂이 잇슨 후로 淸廷의 권위는 아조 땅에 떠러지고 九萬萬兩의 賠償徵出은 전국의 인심을 刺戟식히여 救國革命의 思潮가 어느듯 엄도 닷스며 또 이때부터 日本을 爲始하야 各國을 향하는 유학생의 파견이 성하엿는대 이 학생들이 대개로 혁명사상을 갓게 되야 革命風潮는 국외를 통하야 勃興되엿다.
이때에 나는 다시 中人의 在留하는 각지를 漫遊하며 내의 生平에 품은 三民主義와 五權憲法을 표방하야 革命團體를 조직할새 第1回를 北京에, 第2回를 伯林에 第3回를 巴里에, 第4會를 東京에 開催하엿는대 第4回에는 加盟者가 수백인에 달하야 중국 70성의 人이 모다 包括되엿스니 이것이 革命동맹회 성립의 始初엿다.(당시의 會衆이 오히려 革命二字를 끄림으로 그저 同盟會라 하엿다). 그런대 이 革命獨盟會가 성립되자부터 내의 希望은 한 新기원을 열엇다. 즉 이 전에 잇서 一敗再敗하야 擧世의 叱罵의 的이 되면서도 오히려 冒險勇進한 것은 其實革命事業을 내 당시에 成就하려 함이 아니오＜41＞ 오즉 재 가티 쓰러지는 인심을 挽回하고 개왓댱 가티 프러지는 國魂을 喚起하야써 나를 代해서 니러나는 後進革命家의 손에 성취됨이 잇기를 期함에 잇섯슬 뿐이다. 그러하던 것이 한번 乙已 秋에 밋처 전국의 英俊을 東京에 모하 革命獨盟會를 성립하는 그날브터는 비로소 革命大業이 내 손에서 성취할 수 잇는 것을 確信하고 이에 감히 中華民國의 명칭을 정하야 黨員에게 公布하고 모다 자기의 省에 도라가 革命主義를 鼓吹히며 中華民國의 사상을 傳布케 한 바 不期에 加盟者가 萬人을 超하며 또 支部가 각 省에 성립되야 革命風潮가 一日千丈에 그 진보의 速이 실로 의외에 出하엿다.
이 同盟會가 成立未久에 民報를 發刊하야 三民主義를 鼓吹하야 革命思潮가 전국에 彌滿한 바 雜誌가 잇는 이후로 이와 가티 성공된 것이 업섯스며 이때에 무릇 義를 사모하는 이는 聞風自起하야 丙午萍醴의 役가튼 것은 同盟會員의 自動한 義師이엿다. 다못 불행한 것은 회원의 自動임과 동시에 幹部와의 聯絡이 부족해서 일시의 慘血을 흘리는 敗北에 도라갓스나 이때 회원전체의 雄心義憤은 크게 稱道할 만한 것이 잇섯다. 吾黨의 形勢가 이만큼 熾盛하매 淸廷의 우리에 대한 取締가 날로 酷甚하야 日本政府에 交涉하야 나를 日本境外로 逐出케 하매 나는 할 수 업시 漢民, 精 衛 2인과 가티 安南으로 避身하야 본부를 河內에 두고 潮州黃崗의 義師를 니르켜 또한 勝利를 엇지 못하니 이것이 내의 第4次 失敗이엿다. 이러케 이러케 업퍼지면 또 니러나고 지면 또 싸우고 하야 이후에도 惠州, 靈山, 龍州, 欽廉, 河口의 役에서 무릇 5次의 慘敗를 거듭하매 精 衛가 자못 실망하야 드대여 同志數人으로 더블어 北京에 드러가 荊哥, 張良의 古事를 취하다가 一擊不中하야 그만 下獄되고 마럿다.
이때 淸廷에서는 關係各國의 정부에 교섭하야 무릇 中國과 鄰境되는 엇던 領土에나 予의 接屬을 許치 못하게 하매 東亞大陸, 南洋島嶼의 어느 지점을 물론하고 내의 발 부칠 곳이 업슴으로 부득이 美洲로 一命을 逃하야 後辛亥 3월 29일로 廣州의 役을 니르키니 이 역은 각 성 革命黨의 精英을 집합하야 적과 더블어 최후의 一薄을 試한 점에서 그 일이 비록 최후의 완성은 엇지 못하엿슬 망정 黃花岡上 72烈士의 轟轟烈烈한 氣槪는 전 地球를 진동하야 국내 革命의 大勢는 실로 이 역으로써 조성됨이 잇섯나니 이것이 나의 第10次의 失敗이엿다.

廣州一役에 草木이 皆兵＜42＞

이 廣州一役이 잇슨 후로 각 성이 風聲鶴唳로 草木皆兵의 觀이 잇서 淸吏가 크게 慌恐에 빠지는 중, 武昌이 尤甚하엿슴으로 당시 武昌淸吏 瑞徵은 미리미리 某國領事와 상의하야 일단에 革命黨의 擧事가 잇는 때는 若此若此하기로 하엿는데 일이 교묘하게 되노라고 이곳 革命黨의 기관이 洩露되야 30여 人이 체포되며 당원의 名冊이 압수되엿는대 이 名冊 中에는 그때의 淸兵에 속한 군인으로서 革命黨에 叅入된 이가 다수한 중, 이들은 擧事 不擧事間에 바들 禍亂을 밧게 되엿슴으로 드대여 自衛策으로서 자진하야 督署를 衝擊하게 되엿다. 不意의 衝擊을 당한 瑞徵은 곳 漢口로 逃하야 豫約한 某領事의 派兵을 청하엿는대 이에 먼저 庚子條約이 잇서 淸國에 관계된 외국은 서로 협의 후가 아니면 비록 一兵이라도 자유출동치 못하게 되야 부득이 영사관 회의를 열게 된즉 이 영사관원 중 법국영사와 가튼 이는 그 전브터 吾黨의 革命事業을 잘 이해한 관계상, 드대여 嚴正中立을 포고하게 되매 瑞徵은 밋던 바가 의외에 실패되야 상해로 도망하며 淸兵은 그만 統御할 사람을 일어서 迭序大亂하매 우리 동맹회원들이 黎元洪을 迫하야 湖北都督을 삼고, 그 후 黃克强이 亦 來到하야 革命의 軍勢-大振한 즉 각 성이 亦開風自戰하야 不數月에 15성이 다-光復되엿다.

恢復中華, 創立民國

나는 이때에 美洲에 잇서 黃克强의 전보를 바다 국내혁명의 책동되는 全容을 알고 英·法의 각국을 들녀 외교관계에 대한 일을 대강대강 정리하고 상해로 도라온 즉 이때에는 벌서 혁명의 대세가 정하야 남북회의가 開催되엿스나 國體가 오히려 미정되여섯다. 이에 各省 대표가 選擧會를 南京에 열고 나를 推하야 臨時總統을 삼음으로 1912년 1월 1일로 就職하야 國號를 中華民國으로 建元을 元平으로 更定하야 이를 천하에 포고하니 내의 30년을 두고 中華를 恢復하고 民國을 창립하려 한 뜻은 이러케 일너졋섯다.

筆者曰, 이 글은 長文의 孫文 自敍傳 中에서 그 要旨 뿐을 抄譯한 바 齬齬한 곳과 잘못된 점이 얼마라도 잇슬 것이다.

國民黨의 主義와 精神

三民主義라 함은 果何?

國民黨의 主義는 무엇이냐 한 말로써 대답하면 孫中山의＜43＞三民主義가 그것이며 三民主義란 무엇이냐. 民族, 民權, 民生의 세 主義가 그것이다. 이제 그 세 主義의 槪義를 들면.
(1)民族主義  國民黨의 民族主義는 두가지의 뜻을 가젓나니 중국민족으로의 해방을 구하는 것이 그 하나이요 중국경내에 잇는 각 민족으로 일률평등케 하는 것이 또 하나이다.
第一方面 즉 중국민족으로의 해방을 구함은 그 목적이 중국민족으로 하야금 世界에 自由獨立케 함에 잇스니 대개 辛亥 이전에는 滿洲族의 제재와 列强의 帝國主義알에 苦楚를 바듬이 심하얏슴으로 그떄 民族主義의 운동은 다만 滿洲族의 制裁와 列强의 侵掠에서 버서나기로만 하얏고 辛亥 이후에는 국민운동으로 하야 滿洲族의 세력이 꺽기엇스나 열강의 帝國主義는 依然히 남어잇서 分割하랴든 것이 共同管理로, 무력적 掠奪이란 것이 經濟압박이라는 말로 변하얏슬 뿐, 중국민족으로 하야금 독립과 자유를 일케하는데 잇서서는 일반이다. 국내의 軍閥이 帝國主義者와 結托하고 자본가가 거긔에 附隨함으로 기타 다수 민중은 정치상 경제상 압박을 당할 뿐이요 도저히 노력을 계속하야 중국민족의 해방을 구할 수가 업슴으로 民族主義는 어느 階級에 대해서나 帝國主義의 侵略을 업새버림에 지나지 못하니 實業界에도 民族主義가 업스면 열강의 경제적 압박때문에 자국의 생산이 영원히 발전할 가능성이 업고 勞働界에도 民族主義가 업스면 帝國主義에 들어부터서 생존하는 軍閥과 국내외의 자본가에게 노력과 생명을 搾取하고 侵蝕할 뿐임으로 민족해방의 투쟁은 그 목표가 帝國主義를 滅絶식히지 안흐면 안될 것이다. 그럼으로 만일 民族主義로 帝國主義를 打破한 후 다수의 민중으로 조직을 鞏固히 하고 투쟁을 계속하면 國民黨의 民族主義가 실로 건전한 반제국주의가 되는 동시에 국내 각종 평민계급의 조직을 贊助할 수도 잇고 따라서 국민의 능력을 發揚할 수도 잇슬 것이니 요컨데 國民黨이 민중과 深切히 결합한 후에야 중국민족의 진정한 자유와 독립을 바랄 수가 잇다 함이다.
第二方面 이상에도 말한 바와 가티 辛亥 이전에는 滿洲族이 중국의 지배를 하얏스나 辛亥이후에 그의 정책이 摧敗하얏슨즉 국내의 모든 민족이 평등의 결합을 어더야 될 것이요 國民黨의 요구도 여긔에 잇슬 것이나 불행히 중국의 정부에는 昔日의 전제적 舊骸인 軍閥 남어잇서 跋扈 爭奪이 날로 심하매 국내의 모든 민족은 불안을 늣기고 따라서 소수민족으로서 國民黨의 주장이＜44＞ 역시 試意가 아닌가 의심케 되얏다. 그래 國民黨은 다시 民族主義의 목적을 貫徹키 위하야 국내 모든 민족에게 중국국민혁명운동의 공동 이익을 선전하고 조직적 聯絡을 취하야 구체적으로 민족문제를 해결하는 동시에 자유 통일적(각 민족 자유 연합적) 中華民國을 조직하랴 함에 잇다.
(2)民權主義  國民黨의 民權主義는 간접민권 외에 다시 직접민권을 갓게 함이니 즉 국민은 선거권을 가질 뿐이 아니라 建議, 議決, 罷官 가튼 권리까지 갓게 함이다. 민족운동의 방식은 헌법에 규정한 바 孫中山의 創制한 「입법, 사법, 행정, 考試, 監案」의 오권분립으로 原則을 삼어 代議政治의 窮한 곳을 구제하고 선거制度의 弊害를 矯正함이 적지 아니하얏다. 그런데 근대 각국의 소위 민권제도가 흔히 자본계급의 전유물이 되야 평민을 압박하는 기구가 되얏슴으로 國民黨에서는 民權主義를 일반 평민이 공유로 하고 어느 소수자의 사유를 삼지 안음에 잇다. 다시 말하면 國民黨의 民權主義는 소위 天賦人權과는 달라서 현재 중국 혁명의 요구에 적합하도록 함에 잇다. 즉 민국의 민권은 오직 민국의 국민이라야 享有할 수가 잇고 민국을 반대하는 사람에게는 그를 주어서 민국을 破壞케 할 수가 업는 것이니 한말로 자세히 말하면 참으로 帝國主義를 반대하는 개인과 團體는 고로 일절의 자유와 권리를 누릴 수가 잇고 나라를 팔고 인민을 속이여 帝國主義나 軍閥에게 附從하는 개인이나 단체를 물론하고 이 자유와 권리를 누릴 수가 업다 함이다.
(3)民生主義는 그 중요한 원칙이 두 가지에 불과하니 하나는 地權을 平圴히 함이고 둘은 자본을 절제함이다. 그런데 地權을 平圴히 한다함은 대개 경제조직의 不平圴한 것이 소수인의＜45＞ 토지권 점령에 잇슴으로 국가에서 토지사용법, 토지징수법과 地價稅法을 규정하고 사유지라도 지주로부터 갑슬 처서 정부에 보고하면 國家에서는 갑세 따라서 징세를 하고 필요한 때에는 보고한 갑세 의하야 매수하도록 함이요 또 본국인이나 외국인의 기업이 독점적 성질이 잇거나 혹은 規模가 과대하야 私人의 힘으로 할 수 업는 은행, 철도, 船路 가튼 것은 국가에서 경영 관리하야 사유자본제도로 하야금 국민의 생계를 操縱치 못하게 하여야 할 것이 자본을 절제하는 요지이니 그와 가티 하면 民生主義의 진행이 양호한 기초를  어들 것이다. 더구나 중국은 농업으로 입국한 바 각 계급 중에도 농민계급이 제일 고통을 바듬으로 國民黨의 주장으로는 국가에서 토지를 분급하야 경작케 하고 수리와 개척사업을 경영하야 地力을 균일케 하고 농민이 자본결핍과 高利貸借로 인하야 부채로 종신케 되는 자에게는 농민은행과 가튼 조제기관을 설립하야 그 결핍을 보급하기로 하고 工人에게는 실업자를 구제하고 勞工法을 제정하야 工人의 생활을 보장하며 이외에도 養老制, 育兒制, 廢疾者周恤制, 敎育普及制 가튼 것의 실현을 노력하랴는 것이 즉 民生主義의 本領이다.
중국도 都會나 향촌을 물론하고 가난한 농부와 피로한 工人들이 고통을 바듬은 거의 일반임으로 해방을 부르짓는 소리가 놉고 帝國主義에 반항하랴는 뜻이 激烈한 까닭에 국민혁명의 운동도 반드시 농부와 工人의 叅加를 어든 뒤라야만 決勝케 될 것은 의심업는 사실이라. 그림으로 國民黨도 여긔에 본 바가 잇서 한편으로는 농부와 工人의 운동에 대하야 만흔 보조를 주어 국민혁명운동의 실력을 增進식히는 동시에 또 한편으로는 농부와 工人으로 國民黨에 참가케 하야 국민혁명운동의 진행에 노력하는 중이니 다시 말하면 國民黨은 帝國主義와 군벌이나 농부와 工人에게 불리한 특수계급에게 반항하야 농부와 工人의 해방을 도모하랴 함이니 즉 농부와 工人을 위하야 분투하는 것이요 또한 한 농민과 工人이 자기자신을 위하야 奮鬪하는 셈일 것이다.
國民黨의 三民主義는 대개 이와 가튼 바 本黨이 改組된 후에 규율적 정신으로 본당조직의 기초를 세우고 당원에게는 여러 가지 방법으로 교육과 훈련을 배푸러서 主義를 선전하고 군중을 운동하야 정치혁명적 人村를 양성하는 동시에 본당의 전력을 다하야 전국 국민에게 普通的 선전으로 혁명운동에 참가케 하고 정부를 세울 때의 반혁명운동과 각국의 제국주의적 음모를 방지하야 본당으로 정권의 중추가 되고 혁명적 민중의 本領이 되랴 함에＜46＞잇다 한다.

中國 國民黨의 黨歌

國民元氣知勇仁, 殺身成仁誰則能.
民族民權與民生, 三民主義革命軍.
黃花岡上草靑靑, 赤血洗淨中華魂.
民族民權與民生, 三民主義革命軍.
赤血洗淨中華魂, 白日照耀靑天明.
民族民權與民生, 三民主義革命軍.
白日照耀靑天明, 中華民國勃焉與.
民族民權與民生, 三民主義革命軍.
中華民國勃焉興, 民權分配遍全民.
民族民權與民生, 三民主義革命軍.
民權分配遍全民, 被壓民族大同盟.
民族民權與民生, 三民主義革命軍.
被壓民族大同盟, 協作其樂享太平.
民族民權與民生, 三民主義革命軍.
協作其享樂太平, 天下爲公大道行.
民族民權與民生, 三民主義革命軍.
前進前進更前進, 誓爲國民作犧牲.
民族民權與民生, 三民主義革命軍.＜45＞

孫文先生의 最後遺囑

革命의 目的을 貫徹하라-國民黨 同志를 向하야-

余致力 國民革命凡四十年, 其目的在求中國之自由平等, 積四十年之經驗, 深知欲達到此目的, 心須興起民衆及聯合世界上以平等待我之民族共同奮鬪. 現在革命尙末成功, 凡我同志須依照余所著建國方畧建國大綱三民主義及第一次全國代表大會宣言 繼續努力, 以求貫徹. 最近張開國民會議及廢除不平等條約尤須于最短期間促其實現是所至囑. 三月 十一日 孫文

被壓制 民族을 救하라-勞農露國에 보낸 遺書-

이 書面은 孫文씨가 11일 死期의 迫함을 覺하고 國民黨領袖 等을 자기 枕邊에 會集케 한 석상에시 自筆로 저명한 勞農露國에 送하는 최후의 遺書인데 大要는 左와 如하다.
인력의 밋치지 못할 病에 누은 余의 생각은 항상 足下 等과 國民黨 及 故國에서 떠나지 안노라 足下 等은 故 「레-닌」씨가 被壓制 民族의 세계에 남겨둔 眞個의 유산이다. 그런데 帝國主義의 犧牲國民은 故 『레-닌』씨의 유산에 의하야 그의 진정한 자유를 獲得할 것을 밋노라. 余의 사후에 남아잇는 國民黨은 中國 及 搾取를 당하고 잇는 諸國과 共히 그의 독립을 완전히 得하기 위하야 노력할 것을 밋노라. 운명은 余로써 赤成 그대로 業을 중도에 버리게 한다. 그려나 余의 후계자는 반듯이 그 사업을 성취할 것을 밋노라. 고로 余는 國民黨에 託하기를 中國을 帝國主義하의 半植民地 狀態로부터 구출하고 또 同黨이 足下等과 부단의 접촉을 保持할 것을 敎託하얏노라. 余는 소비엣트 정부가 余의 國에 與하는 援助가 부단할 것을 자신하야 의심치 안노라. 余는 友人 又는 동맹자로서의 勞農社會主義 共和國聯邦이 독립인 中國과 相持하야 被壓制 民族의 승리를 위하야 猛進할기를 熱望不己하노라.
孫文 ＜47＞
＜38-47＞