잡지명	개벽 第五十九號
발행일	1925년 05월 01일
기사제목	흙의 洗禮 (Baptism of Soil)
필자	星海
기사형태	소설 (Novel/Short Story)

흙의 洗禮
						星海

Myŏngho’s wife, Hyejŏng, after eating breakfast on the front wooden floor, stopped washing the dishes and, facing the inner room, called her husband, “Hey, look here.”

Myŏngho, holding a lit cigarette in his mouth, was squatting and looking down at a newspaper placed before him. At Hyejŏng’s call, his face showed a slight displeasure, as if the absorbing interest he had found had been lost. And so, bending forward, he slid open the front paper door with a noise and asked in a somewhat gruff tone, “Why is that?”

At this reply, “Why is that?”, tinged with displeasure, Hyejŏng suddenly lost more than half the interest in the words she had intended to say next. And so, having only called out, “Hey, look here,” she gazed at her husband’s face for a long while. Hyejŏng guessed that her husband was again engrossed in some thought. When Myŏngho was engrossed in some thought, he often didn’t know how to answer no matter how much he was called, or even if he did answer, a gruff sound would emerge. The fact that such gruff replies had become more frequent since they moved to this village meant that the occasions for Myŏngho to be engrossed in thought were many. And also, the increase in these thinking occasions meant that the times Hyejŏng felt displeasure had increased. Their previous life couldn't be called particularly tense, but their move down to this countryside had been motivated by a desire to spend a somewhat leisurely period. However, 'leisurely' and 'absent-minded' had become almost indistinguishable adjectives for this Myŏngho.

“What should we do about this? Shouldn’t we plow the field today? Shall we try hiring Ch’ilbong’s father from the house in front as a day laborer <44> for just one day?”

Hyejŏng said this, her face showing a troubled expression. Now, this Ch’ilbong’s father was the only neighbor with whom the Myŏngho couple had become friendly since the very day they moved into this village. Whenever a slightly difficult task arose in the house, they often ended up asking Ch’ilbong’s father. For the sake of the young Myŏngho couple, he was a neighbor loyal enough to set aside his own housework and look after Myŏngho’s affairs. Therefore, it was natural for Hyejŏng, worried about the urgent need to plow the field today, to want to hire Ch’ilbong’s father as a laborer.

“Well… we must do something about it…”

Myŏngho barely managed this much of an answer and blew cigarette smoke out past the sliding door.

Hyejŏng was slightly annoyed by this vague answer. And so, her voice naturally became a little louder.

“Is saying ‘well, well’ enough? You should somehow get the work started. Shall I go call Ch’ilbong’s father then?”

Although Myŏngho had, of course, thought since waking up that morning that the field needed plowing, he had almost pathologically formed a habit of only thinking about things and not immediately starting them. Even when pressed again by his wife, he couldn't even give a satisfying answer; perhaps there was some special reason for this. However, it certainly didn't stem from feelings towards his wife. Nor was there any other particular reason besides that. The big question was thinking about where the necessity lay in having to live like this.

After a while, Myŏngho came out onto the front wooden floor and finally opened his mouth to speak.

“Well then, go call him!” And he stretched again, spreading both arms wide. He let out a loud yawn.

Hyejŏng intently glanced sideways at her husband’s face as he stretched and yawned, and let out a deep sigh. This sigh expressed her feelings of that moment without reservation. Then, without a word, she went around the front earthen porch area and entered the kitchen. <45>

“Why the sigh?”

Myŏngho asked in a slightly displeased tone, watching his wife’s back as she entered the kitchen.

“Think about it. Why wouldn’t I sigh—how can you be so absent-minded about everything?”

Hyejŏng answered thus while scooping and pouring water into the lye water container in the kitchen.

“What’s absent-minded? Don’t say things without knowing the situation from now on,” Myŏngho said, stepping down from the wooden floor into the yard. At this time, Hyejŏng came out from the kitchen onto the front wooden floor again, carrying the lye water bowl.

“Just think about it. Do you know what time it is? April is already near. Just look at how other people farm. Is there any house that has left its field untouched until now… If you’re going to live this kind of life anyway, shouldn’t you at least do it meaningfully?”

Myŏngho just stood there listening silently. He had no words to reply. Hyejŏng, waiting for her husband’s answer, opened her mouth again as if disappointed.

“But how can you be so indifferent to everything? Do you know when I first mentioned plowing the field? It’s already been a week. I don’t know the details of farming, but I know that you shouldn’t miss the right time. Haven’t sprouts already appeared in other people’s fields? But our field hasn’t even seen a hoe yet. What’s going to happen? Setting aside whether the field does well or not, isn’t it embarrassing in front of others?”

Hyejŏng chattered on like this for a while without catching her breath, finally stopping when she became breathless.

But again, Myŏngho had no words to reply. If he had anything to say in response, it would undoubtedly have been the kind of harsh attitude or words a tyrant takes when hearing the remonstrance of a loyal subject.

Hyejŏng spoke again. This time, she spoke as if pleading.

“Look here. What need is there to suffer trying to do something in this kind of farming village? How about we quit this life—this inconsistent life—and go to the city that suits us? They say that for people with white, fair hands and feet, trying to live like this <46> is already a mistaken notion. No matter how you look at it, village life doesn't suit your personality…”

These words brought unbearable despair and sorrow to Myŏngho.

“Hey! Stop that useless talk! What good does it do to say such things now? If you want to quit, you quit and go back to living like before!”

Hyejŏng could not reply to these final words. From the past, it was never the case that both sides would adopt an agitated attitude when such arguments arose between the Myŏngho couple. And so, knowing how much insisting on oneself would affect their lives, when one side became agitated, the other would subside. This was one of the major reasons that had prevented their married life from leading to ruin until today. In other words, it was the linchpin that held the couple together, preventing them from separating.

And so, Hyejŏng went outside without another word to call Ch’ilbong’s father.

When the shadow of Hyejŏng, who had gone out forlornly towards the outside without uttering a single word of reply, disappeared beyond the brushwood gate, Myŏngho let out a loud cough. Such a cough from Myŏngho was an expression that substituted for the sighs or tears of ordinary people when he received some impulse or became excited.

However, the cough he just made was not directed at his wife who had gone out the gate, but rather, so to speak, at his own weak personality that he himself acknowledged.

Myŏngho always felt ashamed that his willpower to control his own actions was weak, ultimately making him unable to obtain even a life without tension as he wished. However, he thought this was not only due to his weak willpower, but rather that the various events occurring moment by moment, and the various phenomena that inevitably must be seen and heard as long as his eyes and ears were active, were pushing this lump—a mixture, not a compound, of his flesh and spirit—into the pit of despair, causing ennui towards life, and this ennui, in turn, consumed what little energy remained. And so, he couldn’t help but feel hatred for this frail desire that couldn't overcome anything and advance like many other so-called victors. <47> Feeling such hatred also occurred when he received some impulse due to some motive; normally, he appeared calm as if it never entered his mind. These symptoms, of course, had become much more severe since he suffered from severe neurasthenia three years prior. Therefore, this absent-mindedness was by no means something he himself desired, but resulted from an irresistible force beyond his own power. But on the other hand, it wasn't that there wasn't a hidden melancholy burning his insides. Sometimes—when calmly criticizing himself—he couldn't deny that there was definitely a dual personality expressed in two different forms within him. In the end, while feeling his own impurity, everything else seemed impure too. Consequently, he wanted to view everything from a standpoint of denial. For him, who denied everything, there were no emperors. There was no power. There were no ideals. If there was anything, it was the force of life, which he couldn't control even with his own strength. Even if a sharp dagger were pointed at his chest, it wasn't his entire personality that feared it, but merely the instinct to live that trembled at its threat. While being so bold, at other times, he would easily display emotions of joy and anger, enough to make onlookers laugh. Or, when hearing that a close friend or relative had died, he wouldn't even bat an eyebrow and would appear cold enough for others to doubt whether he had warm blood, saying, “People die, so it can’t be helped. They were bound to die sometime… since they are human…” Instead, at other times, he would shed tears while reading things like novels, showing he also possessed soft emotions.

Now, it was impossible for this Myŏngho, watching his wife go out forlornly beyond the brushwood gate, to feel nothing. It was a time when, among various complex emotions, something specific was about to emerge.

He felt ever more keenly that he shouldn't keep his wife in such suffering indefinitely. He entered the master's room (sarangbang). He changed into old clothes and came back outside.

While he was changing clothes in the master's room, his wife had already returned from visiting Ch’ilbong’s house.

Seeing her husband coming out of the master's room dressed in worn-out clothes, Hyejŏng spoke with a strange thought.

“Ch’ilbong’s father already went out for another job. So, today is ruined again, I suppose!” <48>

“Hey! Don’t worry even if Ch’ilbong’s father isn’t here. Today, I’ll try starting the work myself,” Myŏngho said, taking out old straw shoes from under the front wooden floor, putting them on his feet, and coming out into the yard.

Hyejŏng saw her husband’s attire looked so clumsy that she covered her mouth with one hand and laughed. Her husband's actions seemed increasingly funny. It was unthinkable for the husband of that time, who had just said 'well, well' when she had talked until her tongue wore out about needing to plow the field for a week. However, it wasn't that he never did unexpected things when he received some impulse, but it was something seen perhaps once in a year or two, so she couldn't help but find it strange. And anyway, it was a welcome thing for Hyejŏng. She rather regretted having spoken harshly to her husband in anger earlier. Also, one thing she couldn't help but greatly doubt in her heart was whether he wouldn't just throw down the hoe he was digging the field with, shouting “I can’t plow—it’s annoying…” and run into the room with dirt-smeared feet.

“Really?…” Hyejŏng asked.

“Really!”

“Then shall I go help you too?” Hyejŏng asked, going into the inner room, tying a string tightly around her waist, and covering her head with a towel. Then she came outside. Myŏngho shouldered the hoe, and Hyejŏng held a hand-hoe (homi). And so, the couple went out to their own back field.

The morning sky’s color appeared palely blue and hazy through the thin gauze-like heat haze. The light rays flowing down through it were still quite warm. The occasionally blowing wind rubbed the couple's cheeks, warmed by the spring sunlight, with lukewarm hands. When they stepped on the clods of earth, still moist from the rain a few days ago, they felt a strange tactile sensation. The green grass just sprouting in the sunny spot by the wall, and the color of the poplar <49> branches outside the fence, looking red and lustrous as if painted with purplish “paint,” harmonized with the spring sky’s color, giving a gentle stimulus.

They took off their shoes on the bank of the field ditch and stepped up onto the field barefoot. The color of their white, pale feet and the darkish color of the soil looked extremely disharmonious. When their white and tender flesh touched the gritty and hard field soil mixed with sand and pebbles, they reflexively recoiled their feet. Under the soles of their feet, a cavity opened up. They only trod the ground with their heels and the balls of their feet. As if feeling some reverence in treading this ground for the first time—and so they tried to step on the ground with only one heel or, if not that, the ball of one foot, but the earth’s power seemed to demand the entire surface of their soles, as if trying to pull their whole bodies deep, deep into the soil.

Hyejŏng looked at Myŏngho, saying “Aigo! It’s sharp. It tickles.” Myŏngho also looked back at Hyejŏng with a strangely grimacing face.

Myŏngho said, “Eek! Let’s start quickly…” and, lifting the hoe, began digging from a corner of the field. However, the hoe, swung with full force in his arms, did not bury itself so deeply into the earth that day. Hyejŏng broke up and leveled the clods of earth dug up by her husband with the hand-hoe.

Soon, black soil covered their white insteps. And the nerves that could feel the tickling and sharpness on their feet were already paralyzed. The tips of Hyejŏng’s fine fingers became covered in dirt.

They were intoxicated by the warm light of the spring day and the smell of the earth. In both their hearts, they each embraced a sense of happiness unforeseen in the morning. Rather than being intoxicated by the spring breeze or the smell of the earth, they were intoxicated by this momentary sense of happiness. Hyejŏng regarded her husband, who was working with such courage, like a warrior, just as she always had. And she wished he would forever be a worker showing bravery in whatever he did. And she herself wanted to always follow behind her husband and be the person tidying up behind him. She wanted to discover her own happiness in doing so.

Myŏngho felt as if he had finally received the baptism of the life he had usually yearned for today. He even felt such reverence. And when he looked down at <50> Hyejŏng, sitting and breaking up the clods of earth he had dug up and turned over with his hoe under his feet, without a word, using her hand-hoe, he felt as if he had gained an understanding companion unobtainable until now. He wished in his heart that she would forever be a reliable comrade sharing hardships just like that, without change.

Thinking such happy thoughts, keeping their minds as active as their hands and feet, they continued their work.

Myŏngho’s arms lost their strength. Leaning on the hoe, he turned to look back at his wife who was breaking up and leveling the clods from behind, and let out a warm breath.

“Hey! It’s really hard! No matter how you look at it, people with white hands and feet can’t do this kind of work!”

Saying this, Myŏngho wiped the sweat from his forehead with his right sleeve. Hyejŏng held up her dirt-covered hands high in front of her husband’s eyes and said.

“Look at this. My fingertips seem all worn out. They hurt terribly!”

As she said this, her flushed face from working looked even more beautiful under the white towel. Fine beads of sweat formed on her forehead and around her mouth.

Myŏngho looked at his wife’s sparkling eyes under the towel, then started hoeing again. And he said.

“Hey! It seems people like us are destined not to do this kind of thing! It’s really hard, I can’t stand it! My arms ache and I’m out of breath, I can’t do it! What should we do!?”

“Then take rests as you go.”

“I’ll rest, but…”

“But surely not everyone has to do this kind of work from childhood? If there’s no choice, anyone would end up doing it, right?”

“Who would do this just because they like it? They do it because they have to live.”

Myŏngho said this as he dug up a large stone with the hoe and placed it up on the field ditch.

“Can anyone live just by doing this kind of work?” <51>

“So, since you are digging the field now, will you be able to live just by having done this work? For other people, doing this work is an effort to obtain life, but for us, it seems like nothing more than play or solace. Isn’t that right?”

Hyejŏng said this, catching her breath. At these words, Myŏngho’s chest hurt as if stabbed by some dagger.

“Well then. How about we call the work we are doing now practice in labor, preparing in advance to earn a living in the future? Then our current work wouldn't defile the sanctity of the enterprise that other people consider their lifelong business and strive for. And we would gain some skill related to life.”

As Myŏngho finished speaking, Hyejŏng smiled gently and said,
“Then there wouldn’t be the insult of treating other people’s sacred profession as play. Of course, these aren't just words to defend our attitude, are they?” Myŏngho laughed along.

From the day he returned to the farming village, Myŏngho felt various conflicts and contradictions in his heart. This was the thought that if the reward for his work couldn't sufficiently support their living, and they merely got by on some inheritance from his parents, wasn't it rather an insult to the sanctity of the profession others engaged in for survival? At first, he thought returning to the village was a reckless act. He thought there must be something else more suitable for him than burying himself in the countryside. When he looked down at his hands, where pale blue veins showed through the pale skin—or when he looked at his wife’s fair complexion and delicate demeanor, that feeling became even more intense. And also, for him, who with his ideology had condemned Tolstoy’s playing farmer during his life of repentance, or a certain Japanese general imitating a farmer by carrying a night-soil bucket, as hypocrisy that treated others' professions as play, to now commit this insult himself felt like some kind of life’s retribution.

However, when calm thoughts enveloped him, his conscience denied such <52> passive behavior, born merely from his somewhat numerous complaints about society and his disappointment at not finding understanding among people, which had changed his view of life and led him to seek this farming village. And also, for himself—who had been engrossed in a conceptual life—it was a great regret that he couldn't become a terrorist carrying a bomb in his pocket. His naturally timid personality did not permit it. He always thought that when extremely stimulated by the chaotic society, becoming some kind of terrorist or else living an extremely reclusive life was the way to develop the life force conceived within him.

After thinking long about these two options, Myŏngho ended up returning to T, a warm place in the southern country. His wife had also agreed with this opinion. Thus, having chosen 'retreat' at the crossroads of 'terrorism' or 'retreat', he had hesitated for a long time to pick up the hoe, precisely because of the issue of insulting others' professions.

Then, by chance this morning, Hyejŏng’s impulsive words about being absent-minded gave a stimulus to Myŏngho’s nerves, weary from long thinking, and dragged him out to this field.

And so, they continued working for several hours, dreaming of various future lives.

When the day had advanced somewhat, they had plowed almost the entire field. They felt a newfound joy. They felt the latent energy in having cultivated this piece of land with their own meager strength. And they rejoiced almost enough to forget their bodily fatigue.

“It’s already done. Now we have to sow the seeds, right?”

Saying this, Hyejŏng went to get the seeds.

Myŏngho stood blankly, leaning on the hoe handle, looking at the plowed earth of the field. The smell of the earth rising at this time was extremely fragrant. He wanted to grasp handfuls of earth with both hands and sprinkle it all over his body.

Hyejŏng returned with hurried steps, carrying a box containing seed packets. Setting the box down on the field ditch, she opened the seed packets one by one, telling her husband the name of each seed, “This is onion seed! This is mallow seed! This is lettuce seed!” Then Hyejŏng went along the field ditch again, sowing the seeds. <53>

Myŏngho stood blankly, holding a lit cigarette, watching.

“You sow seeds well! When did you learn that? It seems like I could never sow them so evenly…”

“When I was little, I really liked doing things like this. So even when I was in school, I sowed all the seeds in our large place myself,” Hyejŏng said, bending over and moving here and there, sowing in rows. Then she lightly scattered soil over them with her hands to cover them.

Doing this, she finished sowing seeds in almost all the plowed field, leaving only an area of about one pyeong on one side of the field. Then she dusted off her hands, took a long breath, and came out.

Myŏngho, who had been watching this, found it strange and asked.

“Why are you leaving that part as it is? If you’re sowing, why not just finish it all?”

Hyejŏng replied, smiling.

“I plan to plant flowers!”

“What’s the point of planting flowers?”

Myŏngho thought inwardly that women are indeed always like this.

“Can’t I plant flowers? Things to eat are good, but aren’t things to look at good too?”

Hyejŏng said this and looked at her husband’s face.

The sun had long passed its zenith. The sunlight, however, was still warm. The smell of the earth intoxicated them.

Night came. From their first day of work, the Myŏngho couple was extremely tired. Their arms and legs were stiff. They ached too much to bend or stretch. However, they did not sleep right away but talked in the master's room (sarangbang). Myŏngho and Hyejŏng sat with the desk between them. Hyejŏng looked at the newspaper that had arrived from Seoul that day, and Myŏngho placed his diary before him and wrote today’s entry. <54>

Though called a sarangbang, the name was better than the reality; it was actually inferior even to a servant’s quarters (haengnangbang) in the city. The ceiling was so low that a slightly tall person had to bend their waist or legs to walk around inside. However, since it had been wallpapered not long ago, there was less of the dark and gloomy atmosphere typical of other countryside rooms. The small size of the room and the recent wallpapering made even the tiny lamp seem brighter. The only things arranged in the room were a bookshelf with books neatly placed in it and a desk covered with a white cloth. However, extremely few other villagers had come as guests to this relatively clean room. Only Ch’ilbong’s father had come in a couple of times. And so, Myŏngho often spent the evenings in this room with his wife, passing the time with idle talk or reading. At times, Hyejŏng would bring her sewing and work on clothes late into the night. In reality, it was unclear whether this room was the inner chamber (naesil) or the sarangbang. Hyejŏng came out to this room more often because the lamp was much brighter than in the inner room. Thus, if she had work to do and no visitors had come, she would invariably come out to the sarangbang.

Hyejŏng held the hand holding the newspaper up to the lamp.

“Look at this. My hands have blistered!” she said, holding them out towards Myŏngho.

“That’s too bad! Just leave them alone. Don’t touch them,”

Myŏngho said, then looked down at his own palms. He discovered that his hands too had blistered. He showed his hands to his wife, just as she had shown hers to him.

“I’ve got blisters in two places!”

“Now, whenever we work, our hands will always get blisters, right?”

Hyejŏng said, sounding worried.

“Of course, they will! When they can’t blister anymore, eventually they’ll become like Ch’ilbong’s mother’s hands…”

Myŏngho said this, laughing. Hyejŏng thought of Ch’ilbong’s mother’s hands. She couldn’t even describe those hands in words. Those fingers thick as kindling sticks! The back of the hand wrinkled like a gourd! The finger <55> joints bulging out like fists! She shuddered. Then she looked down again at her own hands, formed of beautifully flowing lines. The plump flesh! The slenderly indented finger joints! The fine fingernails, clear enough to reflect her face like crystal! Ah! Thinking that all this would change like that, she shuddered again. Once more, she looked at her husband. His curly hair, his intelligent-looking eyes, and his wan-looking but still refined face came to mind even more endearingly.

“Then you too will eventually become no different from Ch’ilbong’s father, right? If we live like this for ten, twenty years, I mean?”

“It will be so! People are all the same people—what rule says that only I shouldn't change when in the exact same environment? Changing like that is the natural thing!”

Hyejŏng’s head spun again. Her vision seemed to go dark, and she felt faint.

Ch’ilbong’s father’s rough-looking face! His servile-looking smiling mouth! His pale, watery, lifeless eyes like rotten fish eyeballs! The veins bulging unattractively like fingers on his hands and legs! Everything floated up before her eyes. She let out another low sigh, whoosh.

Myŏngho finished writing the end of his diary entry and, turning to Hyejŏng, said,
“Hey, I’m going to read my diary, so please listen,” and read clearly in a thin voice.

“I could not become a terrorist. It is a great regret that I lack such an adventurous personality. I can never walk the same path with those goblins and monsters (魑魅魍魎) who, solely for fame and profit, obsess over trivial problems far removed from true human life. Rather than becoming a social success by employing such base means of living, I rejoice instead in becoming a social failure in order to respond to the demands of my true inner self without deceiving my conscience.
I defiled the sanctity of others' professions with this first trial. However, because I believed the path to pioneering my life lies only here, I undertook the first practice of living on without regard for the lateness of the hour. I learned the first step! But I cannot believe that this too will eternally put our tormented spirits to rest. This is because I believe in nothing in this world. When that time comes—when our lives are pressured again—let us set fire to this place again, turn the fields upside down, abandon the paddies, <56> and set off on the path of wandering! If there is no one to go with me at that time, let me go alone! To an endless place—then it’s fine to fall down dead in the middle of a field, and fine to fall into the sea! I do not fear that time. Let us rather welcome that time! For that time will surely resolve all internal and external problems… But, but the smell of the earth today was more fragrant than musk. I want to smell such earth fragrance always… I have finally received the baptism of soil. Received the baptism of soil.”

Reading up to here, he folded the diary, placed it on the bookshelf (or desk), and said, “There’s nothing more to read after that, right?”

Hyejŏng seemed to be paying close attention, trying not to miss a single word of the diary. Tears seemed to well up in her eyes.

Myŏngho, facing his wife again, laughed a laugh seemingly enveloped in loneliness and said.

“Hey, I understand! If this kind of life doesn’t suit you, do as you please anytime. Whatever you do, I won’t resent it one bit…”

Hyejŏng silently looked up at her husband’s face without a word, then spoke with a resentful look.

“What’s the point of saying such things now? Of course, it’s like that. If I ever grow weary of this life, or if the need arises to part ways with you, won’t I do as I please anytime, even without listening to your words? Because that’s what we promised each other when we first met. You too, if this Hyejŏng ever becomes burdensome, or if you can’t do what you truly must because of Hyejŏng, please tell me. At that time, for your sake, I will leave you, even while holding back tears…”

Myŏngho looked up at the ceiling for a long while again.

Hyejŏng looked down at the newspaper again with tear-filled eyes. Silence continued between them for a short while.

Hyejŏng looked down silently at the newspaper for a while, then called her husband.

“Look at this. It seems Chŏngsuk has already married and become the respectable mistress of a fine household!” <57>

Saying this, Hyejŏng placed the newspaper before her husband. Myŏngho looked down at the place his wife was pointing to.

In the Home section of the S Newspaper, there was a photo of Chŏngsuk and her husband, taken with a Western-style decorated study as the background. And the article stated, somewhat exaggeratedly, that both were engaged in socially meaningful work. And it especially noted that Chŏngsuk was a female writer.

“Chŏngsuk has already become a renowned female writer in society. People destined for social success are fundamentally different!”

“Why—do you say that?”

“Chŏngsuk is younger than me, but I went through school without knowing her true self. After graduation, of course, that was the end of it, right?”

Myŏngho realized that some desire had prompted his wife's words. He guessed that the instinct to make his own name known more than anything else was still extremely strong in her heart too. Imagining this, the loneliness that occupied Myŏngho’s heart tormented him with its doubled force. Myŏngho closed his eyes again.

Hyejŏng sat quietly looking at the newspaper, then said,
“If we stay here like this until we grow old and die, nobody will know us, right? Except for the people in this village—and nobody will try to know us either. They’ll just say some old man and old woman lived here and died. If perhaps we have descendants, they might feel a little sad for a while, then forget just like that after some time passes. Right?”

Myŏngho said nothing.

They felt fatigue equally in mind and body. The curtain of darkness covered the two souls fighting against loneliness.
-(End)- <58>

**Summary**

The story depicts a day in the life of Myŏngho and Hyejŏng, an educated couple who have moved from the city to the countryside seeking a different life. Hyejŏng pushes the hesitant and introspective Myŏngho to start farming their neglected field. Despite the physical hardship and their awkwardness with manual labor, they experience a moment of connection and happiness working the soil together, a "baptism of soil." However, underlying tensions remain. Myŏngho struggles with feelings of inadequacy, the perceived hypocrisy of 'playing farmer' when it's not for survival, and a deeper existential angst oscillating between retreat and a desire for radical action (symbolized by terrorism). Hyejŏng, while initially supportive, expresses doubts about the suitability of rural life for them and reveals lingering desires for social recognition when seeing a former classmate's success as a writer in the city. The story ends on a note of weary uncertainty, highlighting the unresolved conflicts within Myŏngho and between the couple regarding their chosen path and the meaning of their lives.

From a historical perspective, the story is interesting for its portrayal of the 'return to the land' trope among Korean intellectuals during the colonial period, reflecting disillusionment with urban modernity and potentially colonial society. Myŏngho's internal conflict between passive retreat (隱遁) and radicalism ("테로리스트" - terrorist) mirrors the real dilemmas faced by Koreans seeking ways to respond to their situation under Japanese rule. The critique of intellectuals merely imitating peasants (referencing Tolstoy and a Japanese general) and the questioning of the authenticity of their labor adds nuance to this theme, suggesting a self-awareness of the potential performativity involved. The contrast with the successful urban writer Chŏngsuk highlights the tension between seeking inner truth/authenticity and achieving social success/recognition, a common struggle for intellectuals in constrained circumstances.

**Named Entities**

明浩	명호	Myŏngho
蕙貞	혜정	Hyejŏng
星海	성해	Sŏnghae
칠봉아범	칠봉아범	Ch'ilbongabŏm (Ch'ilbong's father)
T	T	T (a place)
뎡숙	정숙	Chŏngsuk
S신문	S신문	S Newspaper

**Glossary**

압마루	앞마루	Front wooden floor (maru)
설거질	설거지	Washing dishes (older spelling)
자미스럽게	재미스럽게	Interestingly, absorbingly (older form of 재미있게)
미다지	미닫이	Sliding door (paper/wood)
명스특러운	퉁명스러운	Gruff, blunt (likely dialectal/archaic for 퉁명스러운)
하랴든	하려던	Intended to do/say (older spelling)
熱中	열중	Being absorbed in, engrossed in
悠長	유장	Leisurely, slow
흐리무텅한	흐리멍덩한	Vague, hazy, absent-minded (older spelling)
삭군	삯군	Hired laborer, day worker
洞里	동리	Village (older term for 동네)
忠實한	충실한	Faithful, loyal
역벼이낫다	역정이 났다	Got angry, annoyed (older spelling/form)
업섯든	없었던	Which didn't exist (older spelling)
버릇이 되고마른	버릇이 되고 말은	Ended up becoming a habit (older spelling)
理由	이유	Reason
부억	부엌	Kitchen (older spelling)
자숫물	잿물	Lye water (older spelling/term)
農事	농사	Farming
意義	의의	Meaning, significance
等間	등한	Indifference, negligence
붓그럽지	부끄럽지	Embarrassing, shameful (older spelling)
짓거리다가	지껄이다가	While chattering, prattling
暴君	폭군	Tyrant
臣下	신하	Vassal, subject
諫하다	간하다	To remonstrate with a superior
糧暴한	포악한	Harsh, violent (likely archaic/non-standard for 포악한)
態度	태도	Attitude
言辭	언사	Words, speech
不徹底한	불철저한	Unthorough, inconsistent
都會	도회	City, town
夫望	실망/절망	Disappointment/Despair (non-standard Hanja, context suggests 실망 or 절망)
悲哀	비애	Sorrow, grief
거말못	거멀못	Linchpin, large spike/nail holding things together (specialized term)
悄然히	초연히	Desolately, forlornly
衝動	충동	Impulse
認定하다	인정하다	To acknowledge, recognize
性格	성격	Personality, character
意志	의지	Will, volition
박약하다	박약하다	To be weak (of will, constitution)
事像	사상 (事象)	Phenomenon, event
肉	육	Flesh, body
靈	영	Spirit, soul
化合	화합	Chemical compound
混合	혼합	Mixture
絶望	절망	Despair
倦怠	권태	Ennui, boredom, weariness
消耗	소모	Consumption, exhaustion
勝利者	승리자	Victor
纖弱한	섬약한	Delicate, frail
憎惡	증오	Hatred
重症	중증	Severe symptoms
神經衰弱	신경쇠약	Neurasthenia, nervous breakdown
憂愁	우수	Melancholy
二重性格	이중성격	Dual personality
否定하다	부정하다	To deny
匕首	비수	Dagger
本能	본능	Instinct
威嚇	위협	Threat, intimidation
戰慄하다	전율하다	To tremble, shudder
冷酷하다	냉혹하다	Cold-hearted, callous
집신	짚신	Straw shoes
채림	차림	Attire, appearance
서투러워	서투르워	Clumsy, unskilled (older spelling)
뉘치어	뉘우쳐	Regretting, repenting (older spelling)
조력하다	조력하다	To help, assist
끈나풀	끈 나부랭이	Scrap of string/cord (colloquial/older form)
졸내매고	졸라매고	Tying tightly (older spelling)
手巾	수건	Towel, handkerchief
網紗	망사	Gauze, netting
아즈랑이	아지랑이	Heat haze (older spelling)
光線	광선	Ray of light
봄볏	봄볕	Spring sunlight
밧도랑	밭도랑	Field ditch (older spelling)
깔그립고	깔끄럽고	Rough, gritty (older spelling)
反射的	반사적	Reflexive
옴추렷다	움츠렸다	Flinched, recoiled (older spelling)
墜道	굴/공간	Cavity, tunnel, hollow (obscure usage, context suggests a gap underfoot)
敬虔한	경건한	Reverent, devout
깨트리고	깨뜨리고	Breaking up (older spelling)
골랏섯다	골랐었다	Was leveling, smoothing (older spelling)
醉하다	취하다	To be drunk, intoxicated
幸福感	행복감	Feeling of happiness
勇士	용사	Warrior, hero
녁이다	여기다	To consider, regard as (older spelling)
永遠히	영원히	Eternally, forever
追從하다	추종하다	To follow; or 뒤치다꺼리하다 (to clean up after)? Context suggests the latter.
發見하다	발견하다	To discover
憧憬하다	동경하다	To yearn for, long for
洗禮	세례	Baptism
伴侶	반려	Companion, partner
되구려	되군요	It's hard/tough (older polite expression)
上氣하다	상기하다	To be flushed (in the face)
勞働	노동	Labor, work
練習	연습	Practice
技能	기능	Skill
職業	직업	Profession, occupation
冒瀆	모독	Insult, blasphemy, profanity
辯護하다	변호하다	To defend, advocate for
葛藤	갈등	Conflict
矛盾	모순	Contradiction
遺産	유산	Inheritance
生存	생존	Survival
無謀한	무모한	Reckless
핼슥한	해쓱한	Pale, wan
懺悔	참회	Repentance
農夫	농부	Farmer
模倣하다	모방하다	To imitate
僞善	위선	Hypocrisy
報復	보복	Retribution, revenge
良心	양심	Conscience
消極的	소극적	Passive
槪念	개념	Concept, idea
爆彈	폭탄	Bomb
天然	천연	Natural
柔懦한	유나한	Weak, timid
混沌	혼돈	Chaos
極端	극단	Extreme
隱遁的	은둔적	Reclusive
肧胎하다	배태하다	To conceive, be inherent
生命力	생명력	Life force, vitality
伸張시키다	신장시키다	To stretch, develop, expand
躊躇하다	주저하다	To hesitate
微微한	미미한	Meager, insignificant
潛在하다	잠재하다	To be latent, potential
疲困	피곤	Fatigue, exhaustion
우득허니	우두커니	Blankly, vacantly (older spelling)
담숙히	듬뿍이	In handfuls, amply (colloquial/older form)
葱	파	Scallion, green onion
아윽	아욱	Mallow (plant)
상취	상추	Lettuce (older spelling)
휼륭한	훌륭한	Respectable, fine, excellent (older spelling)
家庭	가정	Household, home
主婦	주부	Housewife
書齋	서재	Study room
背景	배경	Background
記事	기사	Article (news)
誇張的	과장적	Exaggerated
려류문학가	여류 문학가	Female writer (older spelling for 여류)
명망	명망	Fame, reputation
卑劣한	비열한	Base, vile, mean
魑魅魍魎	이매망량	Goblins and monsters (metaphor for evil/corrupt people)
開拓하다	개척하다	To pioneer, cultivate
표랑	표랑	Wandering, drifting
解決하다	해결하다	To solve, resolve
麝香	사향	Musk
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제59호
발행일	1925년 05월 01일
기사제목	흙의 洗禮
필자	星海
기사형태	소설

흙의 洗禮
						星海

明浩의 안해 蕙貞은 압마루에서 아침을 먹은 뒤에 설거질을 하다가 손을 멈추고 방안을 행하야 『저 좀 보서요』하고 자긔 남편을 불럿다.
明浩는 담배를 픠어물고 압해다 신문을 노코 쪼그리고 안저서 듸려다 보다가 蕙貞의 부르는 소리에 자미스럽게 보던 흥미를 일허바린 것 가티 얼골에 조곰 불쾌한 비치 나타나 보이엇다. 그리하야 그는 허리를 굽혀 압 미다지를 소리가 나게 열고는 조곰 명스특러운 소리로 『웨 그리우?』하엿다.
이와가티 不快한 뜻이 석기어 들니는 『웨 그리우?』하는 대답에 蕙貞은 어느듯 그 다음에 하랴든 말의 흥미를 절반이상이나 일허바리고 말앗다. 그리하야 「저 보서요」라 부르기만 하여두고 한참동안이나 남편의 얼골을 바라다 보앗다. 그리고 蕙貞은 남편이 또 무슨 생각에 열중한 것을 짐작하엿다. 明浩는 엇더한 생각에 熱中할 때에는 아모리 불너도 대답을 할 줄도 모르고 또는 대답을 한다 하여도 특명스러운 소리가 나오든 것이엇다. 이와가튼 특명스러운 대답이 이 마을로 이사온 뒤로는 더욱 만하여진 것은 明浩가 무슨 생각에 熱中하는 期會가 만타는 것을 意味한 것이엇다. 그리고 또한 이러한 생각하는 期會가 부러젓다는 것이 蕙貞에게 對하야는 不快한 생각을 늣기는 때가 더 부럿다는 것이엇다. 그들의 이전 생활도 그대지 긴장한 생활이라 할 수 업섯스나 이러한 시골로 내려오게 된 것은 조곰 長悠한 時日을 보내어 보자는 것이 動機가 되엇섯다. 그러나 悠長과 흐리무텅한 것은 이 明浩에게서 거의 區別할 수 업는 形容詞가 되고 말엇다.
『이걸 어더케 하면 조화요? 오늘은 밧을 좀 갈어야 할 것이 아니에요. 압집 칠봉아범을 하루동안만 삭군으로 ＜44＞ 어더볼가요?』
蕙貞은 얼골에 수심스러운 비츨 띄워가지고 이러케 말하엿다. 그런데 이 칠봉아범이란 것은 明浩부부가 이 洞里로 이사오든 그날부터 서로 친하게 상종하는 다맛 하나의 이웃사람이엇다. 집 안에 조곰 하기 어려운 일이 생길 때이면 흔히 칠봉아범에게 부탁하게 되엿다. 그는 젊은 明浩夫婦를 爲하야는 自己집 볼 일이 잇서도 그것을 제처노코 明浩의 일을 보살필 만큼 忠實한 이웃사람이엇다. 그럼으로 오날에도 밧 가를 일이 급한 것을 걱졍하는 蕙貞이 칠봉아범을 삭군으로 엇고자 한 것은 自然한 일이엇다.
『글세...엇더케든지 해보아야하지...』
明浩는 겨우 이만한 대답을 하고는 미다지 밧갓흐로 담배연기를 내뿜엇다.
蕙貞은 이러한 흐리무텅한 대답에 조곰 역벼이낫다. 그리하야 그의 말소리는 자연히 조곰 놉핫다.
『글세 글세라 말만 하면 됨닛가? 엇더케던지 일을 시작하도록 하서야지오.』 그러면 제가 가서 칠봉아범을 불너올가요?』
明浩도 아침에 일어날 때부터 밧을 가러야 하겟다는 생각이 물론 업섯든 것은 아니로되 매양 무슨 일에던지 생각만 하고 바로 착수하지 못하는 것이 거의 病的으로 버릇이 되고마른 그가 안해에게 재촉을 다시 당하면서도 속이 시원하도록 대답 한 마듸조차 오히려 하지 못한 것은 엇던 특별한 理由가 잇슴즉도 하엿다. 그러나 勿論 안해에게 對한 感情으로 나온 것은 아니엇다. 그 밧갓헤도 별다른 理由가 잇는 것은 아니엇다. 큰 疑問으로 잇는 것은 이러케 생활을 하여야만 할 必要가 어데 잇슬가라 생각하는 것이엇다.
明浩는 한참 잇다가 압마루로 나오며 겨우 입을 떼어 말하엿다.
『글세 그러면 불너 오구려!』하고 그는 다시 두 활개를 벌리고 기지개를 켯다. 소리를 놉히여 하폄을 크게 하엿다.
蕙貞은 기지개 켜며 하폄하는 남편의 얼골을 유심히 흙게 보고는 숨을 한 번 크게 내쉬엇다. 이 숨은 그 刹郡의 그의 感情을 가리움 업시 表示한 것이엇다. 그리고는 아모 말 업시 압토방을 도라 부억으로 드러갓다. ＜45＞
『한숨은 웨 쉬오?』
명호는 부억으로 드러가는 안해의 뒤를 바라보며 조곰 불쾌한 말로 이러케 무럿다.
『생각해 보서요. 한숨이 아니 나올가-엇저면 모든 것을 그러케 흐리뭉텅하게 하심닛가?』
蕙貞은 부억에서 자숫물통에 물을 떠부면서 이러케 대답하엿다.
『무엇이 흐리뭉텅하다우? 속 모르는 말은 이담부터는 하지도 마오.』하고 명호는 마루에서 마당으로 내려왓다. 이때에 蕙貞은 자숫물그릇을 들고 다시 부억에서 압마루로 나왓다.
『좀 생각해 보서요. 지금이 언제인지 알으심닛가. 벌서 사월이 갓가워 왓담니다. 다른 사람들의 농사짓고 사는 것을 좀 보시지오. 지금까지 아즉도 밧을 그대로 둔 집이 어대 잇는가...이왕에 이러한 생활을 하신다면은 이것이나마 좀 意義 잇게 하여야 할 것이 아니에요?』
明浩는 가만히 듯고만 섯섯다. 그에게 대답할 말이 업섯다. 蕙貞은 남편의 대답을 기다리다가 失望한드시 다시 입을 열엇다.
『그러데 어케떠 그리 모든 일에 等間하서요. 밧 가러야 할 것을 말슴한 지가 언제인지 알으심닛가. 벌서 일주일이나 되엇서요. 저는 農事가 엇더한 것인지 자서히 알 수도 업지마는 때를 일흐면 안된다는 것은 알앗서요. 다른 사람들의 밧헤는  벌서 싹이 나지 안햇서요? 그런데 우리 밧은 아즉 괭이맛도 보지 못하엿지요. 어떼케 되겟슴닛가. 밧이 잘 되고 못되는 것은 그만두고라도 남이 붓그럽지 안해요.』
蕙貞은 이러케 숨도 쉬지 안코 한참동안을 짓거리다가 숨이 차 올나와 겨우 말을 그치엇다.
그러나 또다시 明浩에게는 對答할 말이 업섯다. 대답할 만한 무엇이 잇다하면 그것은 말할 것도 업시 엇더한 暴君이 忠實한 臣下의 諫하는 말을 들을 때에 取하는 糧暴한 態度나 言辭가튼 것이엇슬 것이다.
蕙貞은 다시 말을 내엇다. 이번에는 애원하드시 말하엿다.
『저 보세요. 이러한 農村에서 무엇을 하랴고 고생할 必要가 잇서요. 이런 생활-不徹底한 생활은 그만두고 우리에게 適當한 都會로 가는 것이 엇대요? 손발이 희고 고흔 사람에게는 이러한 生活을 하겟다는 것이 벌서 틀닌 ＜46＞ 수작이라고 함니다. 암만해도 당신 성격에는 農村살님은 適當치 못해요...』
이것은 明浩에게는 참을 수 업는 夫望과 悲哀를 주는 말이엇다.
『여보! 그런 쓸데업는 말은 구만허구려! 지금에 와서 이러한 말을 하면 무슨 소용이 잇소? 구만두려거던 당신이나 그만두고 이전처럼 가서 다시 지내구려!』
蕙貞은 이러한 最后의 말에는 무엇이라 對答할 수 업섯다. 明浩夫婦는 이러한 말다툼이 닐어날 때에 두 편이 다 가티 흥분한 태도를 가지는 일은 이전부터 업섯다. 그리하야 어대까지든지 자긔를 主張함이 自己들 生活에 얼마만한 影響을 줄는지 그것을 그들은 알엇슴으로 한편이 激昻 때에는 한편은 눅우러저 바렷섯다. 이것이 가장 그들로 하여금 오날까지의 結婚生活을 破滅로 引導치 안흔 큰 原因의 하나이엇다. 말하자면 이 夫婦의 새이를 떠러지지 안토록 꼭 붓게한 거말못이엇다.
그리하야 蕙貞은 두말하지 안코 밧가트로 칠봉아범을 불으러 나갓다.
明浩는 아무 대답 한 마듸도 못하고 悄然히 밧갓을 向하야 나아가는 蕙貞의 그림자가 사릿門 밧게로 사라질 때에 그는 기침을 크게 한 번 하엿다. 明浩의 이러한 기침은 그가 엇더한 衝動을 밧거나 또는 興奮할 때에 普通 사람의 한숨이나 눈물을 대신하는 한 表情이엇다.
그러나 이제에 한 기침은 사릿門 밧게로 나아간 안해에게 對한 것이 아니요 말하자면 그가 스스로 認定하는 自己의 弱한 性格에 對한 것이엇다.
明浩는 恒常 自己가 自身의 行動을 操縱할 만한 意志의 힘이 박약하야 필경은 아무 緊張한 맛이 업는 生活조차 마음대로 어들 수 업는 것을 부끄럽게 생각하엿다. 그러나 이것은 自己意志가 薄弱한 것만이 原因이 아니라 時時刻刻으로 일어나는 일과 또는 귀와 눈에 活動이 잇는 以上에는 반드시 아니 뵈이고 아니 들러면 아니될 여러가지 事像이 도리혀 自己라는 肉과 靈의 化合이 아니오 混合인 덩어리를 絶望의 구렁으로 떼미는 것이 생에 대한 倦怠를 이르키고 이 倦怠가 다시 얼마 남어잇지 못한 氣力을 消耗함인 것이라 하엿다. 그리하야 만흔 다른 所謂 勝利者와 가티 무엇이던지 이기고  나아가지 못하는 이 纖弱한 意慾에는 憎惡를 아니 늣길 수 업섯다. 이러한 ＜47＞ 憎惡를 늣기게 됨도 그가 엇더한 動機로던지 무슨 衝動을 바들 때의 일이오 평상시에는 念頭에 올니지도 안흔 것처럼 태연해 보이엇섯다. 이러한 症勢는 勿論 그가 3年前에 重症의 神經衰弱을 알코난 뒤부터 더욱 甚하여 젓섯다. 그럼으로 이러한 흐리뭉텅한 것은 결코 그 자신이 스스로 원하는 것이 아니요 自己의 힘으로는 엇지할 수 업는 不可抗力으로 말미암은 것이엇다. 그러나 이러한 反面에는 남모르게 자긔의 속을 태우는 憂愁가 업는 것은 아니엇다. 엇더한 때에-冷靜히 自身을 批判할 때에는 自身에 반드시 두가지의 다른 形式으로 表現된 二重性格이 잇슴을 否認할 수는 업섯다. 結局은 自己自身의 不純을 늣기는 同時에 다른 모든 것이 不純하여 뵈엇다. 따라서 모든 것을 否定하는 處地에서 바라보고 십헛다. 모든 것을 否定하는 그에게는 帝王도 업섯다. 모든 權力도 업섯다. 理想도 업섯다. 잇다하면 그것은 自己의 힘으로도 엇지할 수 업는 생활의 힘이엇다. 날카운 匕首를 가슴에 대인다하여도 그의 전 人格이 그것을 두려워함이 아니오 다맛 生活하겟다는 本能이 그것의 威嚇에 戰慄할 뿐이엇다. 이러케 大膽하면서도 엇더한 때에 겻헤서 보는 사람이 우슬만큼 쉬웁게 그는 喜怒의 感情을 나타내엇다. 또는 자긔와 친한 친구나 친척이 죽엇다는 말을 드를 때에 오히려 눈섭하나를 깟닥하지안코 『사람이란 죽는 것이니 할 수 업지. 언제든지 반드시 죽을 터이니까...그가 사람인 이상에는...』이라고 다른 사람들이 저 사람에게는 뜨거운 피가 잇는지 업는지 그것을 疑心할 만큼 冷酷해 뵈엇다. 그러한 대신에 엇더한 때이면 소설가튼 것을 보다가도 눈물을 흘니게 되야 보드라운 感情을 가진 것도 뵈엇다.
지금에 이러한 明浩가 悄然히 사릿문 밧게로 나아간 안해를 바라보고 아무 늣김이 업슬 수는 업섯다. 여러가지 複雜한 感情 가운대에 무엇이던지 한가지가 正히 나타날 때엇다.
그는 안해를 언제까지든지 그러한 苦痛에 두어서는 안될 것을 더욱 간절이 늣기엇다. 그는 사랑방으로 드러갓다. 낡은 의복을 가러입고 다시 밧가트로 나왓다.
그가 사랑에서 옷을 가러입는 동안에 안해는 칠봉의 집을 단여서 벌서 도라왓다.
蕙貞은 헌옷을 가러입고 사랑방에서 나오는 남편을 보고 이상스러운 생각을 하며 말하엿다.
『칠봉아범은 벌서 다른 데로 일 나갓서오. 그러면 오늘도 할 수 업시 틀니엇슴니다그려!』 ＜48＞
『여보! 칠봉아범이 업서도 염예말구려. 오닐은 내가 일을 좀 시작해 보겟소』하며 明浩는 압마루 밋헤서 헌 집신을 내어 발에 뀌고 마당으로 나왓다.
蕙貞은 남편의 채림이 하도나 서투러워 뵈어서 한편 손으로 입을 가리우고 우섯다. 남편의 하는 일이 갈사록 우스웁게 생각되엇다. 일주일 전부터 밧을 가러야 하겟다하야 그와가티 혀가 달토록 말할 때에는 글세 글세 하든 그때의 남편으로는 생각할 수 업섯다. 그러나 그는 엇더한 충동을 바들 때에는 意外의 일을 대답하게 하는 일도 업지는 아니하엿스나 그것은 1年이나 2年에 한 번 볼는지 말는지 한 일이라 奇怪히 아니녀길 수 업젓다. 그리고 엇제튼 蕙貞에게는 반가운 일이엇다. 그는 도리혀 몬저 남편에게 성나는 대로 함부로 말한 것을 뉘치어 생각하엿다. 또는 한가지 마음에 적윽히 의심치 아니할 수 업는 것은 『나는 밧갈 수 업서-귀찬하...』하고 밧 파든 괭이를 내던지고 흙 무든 발로 방으로 뛰어 들어가지나 아니할가 하는 것이엇다.
『졍말이세요...』蕙貞은 무럿다.
『졍말이야!』
『그러면 저도 가서 조력해 드리릿가?』하고 蕙貞은 안방으로 드러가 끈나풀로 허리를 단단히 졸내매고 手巾으로 머리를 덥허썻다. 그리고 밧갓흐로 나왓다. 明浩는 괭이를 메엇고 蕙貞은 호미를 들엇다. 그리하야 夫婦는 自己집 뒷밧흐로 나아갓다.

봄날 아침 한울빗흔 엷은 網紗와 가튼 아즈랑이를 通하야 희푸르게 흐릿해 뵈엇다. 그 새이로 흘너내리는 光線은 오히려 호듯호듯 하엿다. 잇다금 불어가는 바람은 미즉한 손으로 봄볏헤 호듯해진 그들 夫婦의 뺨을 문질너 주엇다. 몃칠 前 비에 저진 아즉 물기잇는 흙덩이를 밟을 때에 그들을 이상스러운 觸感을 늣기엇다. 담밋희 陽地에 파릇파릇한 인제야 움나는 풀과 울타리 밧게 자지빗 「평키」를 칠한드시 붉고도 윤택해 보이는 포푸라 ＜49＞ 가지 빗흔 봄한울빗과 調和되야 보드라운 刺戟을 주엇다.
그들은 신발을 밧도랑 언덕에 버서노코 맨발로 밧 우으로 올나섯다. 그들의 희고 파리한 발빗과 흙의 검우충충한 빗과는 너무나 不調和해 뵈엇다. 모래와 돌멩이 석긴 깔그립고 단단한 밧흙 우에 그들의 희고도 연한 살이 다을 때에 그들은 反射的으로 발을 옴추렷다. 발바당 밋헤는 墜道가 뚤리엇다. 그들은 다만 발뒤끔치와 압부리로만 땅을 듸듸엇다. 비로소 이 땅을 밟는 데에 엇더한 敬虔한 마음을 늣긴 것처럼-그리하야 그들을 될 수 잇스면 뒤꿈치나 그러치 안흐면 압부리의 하나로만 땅을 듸듸랴 하엿스나 大地의 힘은 그들의 全體를 흙 속으로 깁히깁히 끄집어 단기랴함인지 발바당의 全面積을 要求하엿다.
蕙貞은 『아이구! 따가워요. 간즈러워요』하며 명호를 바라보앗다. 명호 역시 괴상스럽게 찡그린 얼골로 蕙貞을 바라보앗다.
명호는 『에긔! 얼픤 始作합세다...』하고 괭이를 들어 밧 한 편 구석에부터 파기 시작하엿다. 그러나 팔에 힘을 잔득드린 괭이는 그러케 깁히 그날 이 흙에 파뭇치지 안햇다. 蕙貞은 남편이 파노흔 흙덩이를 호미로 깨트리고 골랏섯다.
그들의 흰 발등에는 어느듯 검은 흙이 덥히엇다. 그리고 발에 간즈러움과 따가운 것을 늣길 만한 神經은 벌서 마비되고 말엇다. 蕙貞의 고흔 손가락 끗흔 흙투성이가 되고 말엇다.
그들은 봄날의 땃듯한 光線과 흙냄새에 醉하엿다. 두 가슴에는 아침에는 뜻도 못하엿든 幸福感을 다 각각 품게 되엇다. 그들이 봄바람이냐 흙냄새에 醉하엿다는 것보다는 차라리 이러한 瞬間의 幸福感에 醉한 것이엇다. 蕙貞은 언제이던지 남편이 이처럼 용긔를 내어 일하는 勇士와가티 녁이엇다. 그리고 永遠히 무슨 일에던지 용맹을 내이는 일군이 되기를 바래엇다. 또 自己는 언제이던지 남편의 뒤를 따라다니며 그 뒤 추중하는 사람이 되고 십헛다. 그러하는 데에서 自己의 幸福을 發見하고 십헛다.
明浩는 自己가 平日에 憧憬한 生活의 洗禮를 오날에야 처음으로 바든 듯하엿다. 그러한 敬虔조차 그는 늣기엇다. 그리고 自己의 발 밋헤서 그의 괭이로 파뒷쳐노흔 흙덩이를 아모 업시 호미로 깨트리고 안젓는 ＜50＞ 蕙貞을 내려다 볼 때에 지금까지에 어들 수 업든 서로 理解하는 伴侶를 어든 듯 하엿다. 어느때까지던지 變함 업시 저와가티 괴로움을 난우는 착실한 동모가 되기로 마음으로 願하엿다.
이러한 幸福스러운 생각으로 손이나 발과가티 머리를 활동식히면서 그들은 일을 이어하엿다.
明浩의 팔에는 힘이 푸러젓다. 그는 괭이로 땅을 집고 뒤에서 흙덩이를 깨트리며 골라오는 妻를 도라다 보며 더운 숨을 한 번 내쉬엇다.
『여보! 졍말 되구려! 암안해도 손발이 흰 사람은 이러한 일은 못 해먹겟소!』
이러케 말하고 明浩는 바른팔 소매로 이마의 땀을 씨섯다. 蕙貞은 흙투성이가 된 두 손을 남편의 눈 압흐로 놉즉히 들고 말하엿다.
『이걸 좀 보셔요. 손가락이 다 다럿나봐요. 몹시 압흔데요!』
이와가티 말할 때에 흰 수건 미트로 일하느라고 上氣한 얼골이 더욱 아름다워 뵈엇다. 그의 이마와 입모슴에는 땀이 가늘게 구실처럼 매치엇다.
明浩는 안해의 반작거리는 눈을 수건 밋흐로 바라보다가 다시 괭이질을 시작하엿다. 그리고 말하엿다.
『여보! 우리가튼 사람은 이런 것은 못 해먹을 팔자인 모양이야! 졍말 되아서 못 견대겟는걸! 팔이 압흐고 숨이 차서 할 수 업는걸! 엇더케 할가요!?』
『그러면 좀 쉬어가며 하시지오』
『쉬기야 쉬겟지마는...』
『그러치마는 누구든지 이러한 일을 어렷슬 때부터서 하여야만 하겟슴닛가. 엇지할 수 업스면 누구든지 다 하게 되겟지오.』
『게 누가 이런 것을 꼭 조화서만 하겟소마는 먹고 살랴니까 하지오.』
明浩는 괭이로 큰 돌멩이를 파서 밧 도랑 우에로 올려노흐며 말하엿다.
『누구던지 이러한 일을 하면 먹고 살 수 잇슬가요?』 ＜51＞
『그러면 당신이 지금 밧을 파고 잇스니까 이러한 일을 한 것만으로 어더먹고 살겟슴닛가? 다른 사람에게는 이러한 일하는 것이 生命을 어드랴는 努力이지오마는 우리들에게는 이것이 遊戱나 慰安거리 밧게 아니되는 것 갓흔데요. 그러치 안슴닛가?』
蕙貞은 갓븐 숨을 쉬어가며 이러케 말하엿다. 이 말에 明浩의 가슴은 무슨 匕首로나 찔닌 것처럼 압헛다.
『그러면이요. 지금 하는 일은 將來에 生活을 어드랴고 미리부터 준비하여두는 勞働의 練習이라하면 엇더할가요. 그러면 우리의 지금 하는 일은 다른 사람들이 일평생 事業으로 녁이고 努力하는 事業의 神聖을 더러피는 일이 업게 되겟지오. 그리고 自己가 生活에 對한 엇더한 技能을 엇게되는 셈이겟지오.』
明浩의 말이 끗나매 蕙貞은 빙그레 우스며
『그러면 다른 사람들의 神聖한 職業을 遊戱로 아는 것과 가튼 冒瀆은 업겟지오. 우리의 態度를 辯護하는 말만이 勿論 아니겟지요.』하엿다. 明浩도 따라 우섯다.
明浩는 農村으로 도라오던 날부터 마음 속에 여러가지 葛藤과 矛盾을 늣기엇다. 이것은 자긔의 일한 보수가 넉넉히 생활을 지탱치 못하고 다못 父母의 若干 遺産으로 그날을 지낸다 하면 돌이혀 다른 사람의 生存을 爲하야 일하는 職業의 神聖한 것을 冒瀆함이나 아닌가 생각함이엇다. 처음에는 自己가 農村으로 도라간다는 것은 無謀한 일이라 하엿다. 농촌에 파무치는 그것보다도 자긔에게는 適當한 다른 무엇이 반드시 잇스리라고 생각하엿다. 핼슥한 살 미테서 새팔한 심줄이 줄기줄기 비최이는 손을 듸려다 볼 때에-또는 自己 안해의 고흔 얼골빗과 연약한 태도를 바라볼 때에 그러한 늣김이 더욱 간절하엿다. 그리고 또 그 思想으로써 「톨스토이」의 懺悔生活 가운대에 農夫 노릇한 것과 또는 日本의 엇더한 將軍이 農夫를 模倣하야 똥통을 메엇다는 것을 다른 사람의 직업을 遊戱視한 것이라 하야 僞善이라 斷定을 내린 自身으로 이러한 冒瀆을 다시 하게된 것을 人生의 엇더한 報復이라 하엿다.
그런데 自身의 이 社會에 對한 조곰 만흔 불평! 또는 여러 사람 가운대에 뜻을 엇지 못하엿다는 失望 그것만으로 온 人生에 對한 自己의 人生觀이 變하야 이러한 農村을 찻게 된 것은 冷靜한 생각이 그를 에워쌀 때에는 그러한 ＜52＞ 消極的인 行爲를 그의 良心은 否認하엿다. 그리고 또는 自身으로-엇더한 槪念生活에 熱中하엿든 그로서 한편 호주며니에 爆彈을 너코 다니는 「테로리스트」가 되지 못한 것은 큰 遺憾이엇다. 그의 天然의 柔懦한 性格이 그것을 허락지 아니하엿다. 그는 항상 混沌한 사회에서 몹시 자극바들 때에는 엇더한 「테로리스트」가 되던지 그러치 안흐면 極端이라 할 말한 隱遁的 生活을 하는 것이 自身에 肧胎한 生命力을 伸張식힘이라 하엿다.
明浩는 이 두 가지를 두고 오랫동안 생각한 결과 그는 T이라는 남쪽 나라의 따뜻한 地方으로 도라오게 된 것이엇다. 이러한 意見에 대하여는 妻도 찬성하엿섯다. 이와가티  『테』냐 「退」냐 하는 갈림길에서 『退』를 取한 그로서도 오히려 다른 사람의 직업 冒瀆함이라 하는 데에서 그동안 오래 괭이 잡기를 躊躇하게 된 것이엿다.
그리다가 오날 아침의 우연한 기회에 蕙貞의 흐리뭉텅하다고 충동이한 한 말이 오래동안 생각하느라고 피곤한 明浩의 神經에 刺激을 주어 그를 이 밧헤로 끄집어 내게 된 것이엇다.
그리하야 그들은 여러 時間을 두고 여러가지로 將來에 對한 生活을 꿈꾸면서 일을 게속 하엿다.
나시 조곰 지내엇슬 때에 그들은 밧을 거의 다 갈엇다. 새삼스럽게 깃붐을 늣기엇다. 자긔들의 微微한 힘에 오히려 이런 한 땅을 갈고 「예너지」가 潛在한 것을 늣기엇다. 그리하야 거의 몸의 疲困한 것을 이저바릴 만큼 깃버하엿다.
『벌서 다 되엇셔요. 인제는 씨를 삐어야 하지요』
이러케 말하고 蕙貞은 씨앗을 가즈러 갓다.
明浩는 괭이자루를 집고 우득허니 서서 파노흔 밧의 흙을 듸려다 보앗다. 이때에 나오는 흙냄새는 몹시 향그러웟다. 그이는 흙을 두 손으로 담숙히 쥐여 왼 몸에 뿌리고 십헛다.
蕙貞은 밧븐 거름으로 씨앗주머니 너흔 상자를 가지고 왓다. 상자를 밧도랑 우에 내려노코 씨앗주머니를 하나식 펴보며 남편을 행하야 『이것은 파(葱)씨! 이것은 아윽씨! 이것은 상취씨!』하고 일일히 그 씨앗의 이름을 일넛다. 그리고 다시 蕙貞은 밧도랑으로 다니며 그 씨앗을 삐엇다. ＜53＞
明浩는 담배를 픠어물고 우득허니 서서 바라보앗다.
『당신은 씨를 잘 뿌리는구려! 언제 그러케 배웟소! 우리는 암만해도 그러케 고로게 뿌리지 못할 것 가튼데...』
『저는이요 어렷슬 때에 이런것 하기를 퍽 조화하엿서요. 그래서 학교다닐 때에도 제 집 넓은 데에 씨는 제가 다 뿌렷서요』하며 蕙貞은 허리를 굽히고 이리로 저리로 도라다니며 줄줄이 삐엇다. 다시 그 우에 흙을 엷게 손으로 허트러 덥헛다.
그는 이러케 하야 갈은 밧헤 거의 다 씨를 삐고 겨우 한 평 쯤 되는 데를 밧하편에 남겨두엇다. 그리고 손을 털고 숨을 길게 쉬고 나왓다.
이것을 보고 섯던 明浩는 이상스러웟든지 무럿다.
『거긔는 웨 그대로 남겨두오? 삐랴면 아조 다 삐어 바리지 그러오?』
蕙貞은 우스면 대답하엿다.
『꼿을 심으랴고요!』
『꼿은 심어 무엇하요』
明浩는 속으로 女子란 것은 역시 언제에든지 이러한 것인가라 생각하엿다.
『꼿은 심으면 못씀닛가? 입으로 먹는 것도 조치마는 눈으로 보는 것도 조치 안해요?』
蕙貞은 이러케 말하고 남편의 얼골을 바라보앗다.
해는 낫이 훨신 지내엇다. 볏은 그러나 아즉 훗훗 하엿다. 흙냄새는 그들을 취하게 하엿다.

밤이 되엇다. 처음으로 하여본 하루동안 일에 명호부부는 대단히 피곤하엿다. 팔다리가 뻣뻣하엿다. 굴신할 수 업시 압핫다. 그러나 그들은 바로 자지안코 사랑방에서 이야기를 하엿다. 명호와 헤정은 책상을 한가운대에 두고 안젓다. 헤정은 그날 서울서 온 신문을 보고 명호는 일기책을 압헤 노코 오늘 일기를 썻다. ＜54＞
사랑방이라 하여도 이름이 조화 사랑방이오 실상은 도회디에 잇는 행낭방만도 못하엿다. 텬정이 나저서 키가 조금 큰 사람은 방 안에서 허리나 다라를 굽혀야 결어다닐만 하엿다. 그러나 도배한 지가 얼마 아니되는 고로 다른 시골방가티 그러케 어둠컴컴한 기운은 적엇다. 방 안의 넓이가 좁고 도배한 지가 얼마 아니되엇다는 것이 조고만한 「란프」불도 오히려 더욱 밝어 보이게 하엿다. 방 안에 느러노인 것은 다만 책을 가조러니 너흔 책장과 흰 보로 덥흔 책상이엇다. 그러나 이와가티 비교뎍 정결한 방에 다른 동리 사람들이 손님으로 온 일이 극히 적엇다. 다못 칠봉아범이 두어번 들어왓슬 뿐이엇다. 그리하야 明浩은 흔히 저녁이면  자긔 안해와 함끠 이 방에서 서로 쓸데업는 이약이나 독서로 날을 보내든 터이엇다. 엇더한 때에는 헤정이 바누질감을 가지고 와서 밤이 깁도록 옷을 짓는 일도 만하엿섯다. 실상은 이 방이 내실인지 사랑인지 알 수 업섯든 것이엇다. 더욱 헤정이 이 방으로 나오게 되는 것은 안방보다는 등불이 훨신 밝은 까닭이엇다. 그러하야 일할 것만이 잇고 다른 차저온 사람이 업스면 반드시 사랑방으로 나왓다.
헤정은 신문들은 손을 등불에다 비추어보더니.
『이것보세요. 손이 부르텃슴니다 그려!』하고 명호의 압헤로 내미럿다.
『안되엇구려! 그대로 가만 두구려오. 건드리면 안되오』
명호는 이러케 말하고는 자긔의 손바닥을 듸려다 보앗다. 그리하야 자긔 손도 부르터 물이 잡힌 것을 발견하엿다. 그는 손을 안해가 자긔 압헤 내어보이드시 자긔의 안해에게로 내어뵈엇다.
『나는 두 군데나 물이 잡혓는결!』
『이제는 일만하면 손이 늘 부르트겟지오!』
헤정은 걱정스러운드시 말하엿다.
『물론 그럴 터이지! 부르터지다 못하면 나종에는 칠봉이 어머니 손가티 되겟지오...』
명호는 우스면서 이러케 말하엿다. 헤정은 칠봉어멈의 손을 생각하엿다. 그 손을 무엇이라고 형용하여 말할 수도 업섯다. 그 장적가비가티 굵은 손가락! 왜호박가티 쭈굴쭈굴한 손등! 주먹가티 툭툭 나불거진 손가락 ＜55＞ 매듸! 그는 몸을 떠럿다. 그리고 다시 그 고흡게 흘는 선과 선으로 된 자긔 손을 내려다보앗다. 그 토실토실한 살븨틈! 잘숙잘숙 들어간 손가락 매듸! 수정처럼 얼골이 비칠 듯한 고흔 손툽! 아! 이 모든 것이 그러케 변한다 생각할 때에 그는 다시 몸을 떨엇다. 또다시 남편을 바라보앗다. 곱슬곱슬한 머리와 총기가 듯는 듯한 눈이며 패려운 듯하나 그래도 高尙하여 보이는 얼골빗이 더욱 귀여웁게 생각낫섯다.
『그러면 당신도 필경은 칠봉아범과 다름업시 되겟지오. 이러케 십년이고 이십년이고 지내면 말이에요?』
『그러케 되겟지오! 사람은 다가튼 사람이니까-똑가튼 環境에 잇서서 나 혼자만 변치 말라는 법이 어데 잇겟소? 그러케 변하는 것이 당연한 일이지!』
헤정은 머리가 다시 휭휭 내둘리엇다. 그리고 압이 캄캄한 듯하고 정신이 앗질하엿다.
칠봉아범의 험상구진 얼골! 卑屈하여 보이는 웃는 닙! 썩은 생선 눈갈가튼 희묽은 영긔업는 눈! 손가락처럼 보기실게 나붉어진 손과 다리에 보이는 심줄! 모든 것이 눈 압헤 떠올낫다. 그는 다시 나즉히 한숨을 휙 내쉬엇다.
명호는 쓰든 일기의 끗을 막고 헤정을 행하야
『여보 내 일기를 읽을 터이니 들어보구려』하고 가늘게 명요하게 읽엇다.
『나는 「테로리스트」가 되지 못하엿다. 그러한 모험할 성격이 업는 것은 큰 유감이다. 명예와 공리만을 위하야 인간의 참생활에서 거리가 너무나 머른 端的 문제만에 拘泥하는 魑魅魍魎과는 언제까지든지 길을 가티 할 수 업다. 나는 그러한 卑劣한 생활수단을 취하야 사회뎍으로 성공자가 되는 것보다 차라리 자긔 량심을 속이지 안코 眞實한 內面의 요구에 應하기 爲하야는 사회뎍으로 失敗者가 됨을 도리혀 깃버한다.
나는 이 첫 試驗을 다른 사람의 職業의 神聖을 드럽픠엇다. 그러나 나는 내의 생을 開拓하는 길은 다못 여긔에 잇슴을 미든 까닭에 때의 늣짐을 도라보지안코 살어가는 첫 練習을 하엿다. 첫 거름을 배웟다! 그러나 이것이 또한 영원히 우리의 시달킨 령을 잠재워 줄 것으로 미들 수는 업다. 나는 이 세상에 밋는 것이 업는 까닭이다. 그때가 되면-우리 생활을 다시 핍박하는 그때가 오면 나는 다시 이곳에 불을 노코 밧을 헤뒤치고 논을 내바리고 ＜56＞ 표랑의 길을 떠나자! 그러할 때에 가티갈 누가 업스면 나는 혼자 가자! 끗업는 곳으로-그리다가 들 가운대에 걱구러저 죽어도 조코 바다에 빠저도 조타! 나는 그때를 무서워하지 안는다. 그때를 도리혀 반겨 마지하자! 그때야말로 내외 모든 問題를 解決하여 줄 터이니까...그러나 그러나 오날의 흙냄새는 麝香보다도 더 향그러웟다. 나는 언제든지 그러한 흙냄새를 맛고 십다...나는 비로소 흙의 洗禮를 바덧다. 흙의 洗禮를 바덧다.』
여긔까지 읽고 그는 일기책을 접어 책상장에다 노흐며 『그 다음은 읽을 것 업지요』하엿다.
헤정은 일기를 한마듸도 빼어노치안코 들으랴고 매우 주의를 하는 듯 하엿다. 그의 눈에는 눈물이 그렁그렁해 뵈엇다.
명호는 다시 처를 행하야 고적에 쌔인 듯한 우슴을 우스며 말하엿다.
『여보 알겟소! 이러한 생활이 당신에게 맛지 안커든 언제든지 당신 조흘대로 하시오. 나는 당신이 엇더케 하든지 그것을 조곰도 원망치 안흘 터이니까...』
헤정은 아무 말 안코 가만히 남편의 얼골을 치여다 보다가 원망스러운 듯한 빗흐로 말하엿다.
『지금에 와서 그러한 말슴을 할 것이 무엇이오. 물론 그러해요. 내가 언제든지 이러한 살님에 실증이 나고 또는 당신과 서로 나노워야 할 필요가 생기면 당신의 말슴을 듯지 안코라도 언제든지 내 마음대로 할 것이 아니에요? 그것은 우리가 처음에 서로 맛날 때부터 서로 약속한 것이니까요. 당신도 언제든지 이 헤정이 주처스럽거나 또 헤정 때문에 당신의 참으로 하여야 할 일을 못하게 되거던 말슴하여 주세요. 그때에 나는 당신을 위하야 눈물을 먹음고라도 당신에게서 떠나갈 터이에요...』
명호는 다시 텬정을 한참이나 치어다 보앗다.
헤정은 눈물이 괴인 눈으로 다시 신문을 듸려다 보앗다. 그들 새에는 잠간동안 침묵이 게속하엿다.
헤정은 신문을 한참 아모 말 업시 굽어 보다가 남편을 불넛다.
『이것 보세요. 정숙이가 벌서 시집을 가서 휼륭한 家庭의 主婦가 된 모양임니다!』 ＜57＞
이러케 말하고 헤정은 신문을 자긔 남편 압흐로 내노앗다. 명호는 안해가 가르치는 곳을 내려다 보앗다.
S신문의 家庭欄에 서양식으로 꿈인 書齋를 배경으로 삼고 박은정의 夫妻사진이 잇섯다. 그리고 記事에는 두 사람이 다 社會的으로 의의잇는 事業을 한다는 것이 조곰 誇張的으로 씨엇섯다. 그리고 특별이 뎡숙은 려류문학가라는 것을 기재하엿다.
『벌서 뎡숙이가 사회에 명망잇는 녀루작가가 되엇서요. 사회뎍으로 성공할 사람들은 근본이 다른 것이야요!』
『웨-요?』
『뎡숙이는 저보다 나희도 어리지마는 학교를 졸업할 때까지 그 사람의 참속은 모르고 지내여 왓서요. 졸업한 뒤에는 몰론 서로 그뿐이엇지오?』
명호는 이와가튼 처의 말에는 엇더한 으욕이 이것을 말하게 한 것을 알앗다. 그의 마음에도 아즉도 자긔 명망이란 것을 무엇보다도 좀더 날리어 보자는 本能이 대단 굿세인 것을 짐작하엿다. 이것을 상상할 때예 명호의 마음을 뎜영한 고적은 그 두 동갑되는 힘으로 그를 괴로웁게 하엿다. 명호는 다시 눈을 감엇다.
헤정은 가만히 안저 신문을 보다가
『우리가 이대로 여긔예서 늙어죽을 때까지 아무 알 사람이 업겟지오. 이 동리 사람 외에는-그리고 알랴고 하는 사람도 업겟지오. 그저 엇더한 늙은이와 늙이가 살다가 죽엇다고 하겟지오. 혹 자손이 생긴다 하면 그것들이 조곰 섭섭한 생각을 하다가 얼마 지내면 그대로 이저바리겟지오. 네?』
명호는 아모 말도 업섯다.
그들은 정신이나 육신에 한 가지로 疲勞를 늣기엇다. 어둠의 장막이 고적과 싸우는 두 혼을 덥헛다.
-(끗)- ＜58＞
＜44-58＞