잡지명	별건곤 제37호
발행일	1931년 02월 01일
기사제목	新幹會解消 可否論 (Discussion on Whether to Dissolve the Shingan Society)
기사형태	설문 (Questionnaire)

Discussion on Whether to Dissolve the Shingan Society
The Dissolution Argument is a Kind of Misunderstanding
Sŏ Chŏng-hŭi

The Shingan Society (新幹會) is a petty bourgeois political movement and a nationalist organization, certainly not a socialist organization engaged in class struggle. Considering the situation in Korea, it is, of course, necessary for socialists to cooperate with nationalists in a united front to achieve the highest ideals, to some extent and for a certain period, but they can never erase or forget their original principles. When the Shingan Society was first established, whether it was due to the general trend or a temporary policy, socialists, both individuals and organizations, in both the capital and rural areas, unanimously supported and aided the Shingan Society, even making public declarations. In some regions, they even dissolved peasant and labor movement organizations and joined the Shingan movement. In the years since, whether due to unfair external forces or insufficient internal capabilities, the Shingan Society has not played a significant role. However, it is not believed that the Shingan Society itself, as argued by those advocating for its dissolution, has hindered or suppressed peasant or other sectoral movements. Even if we concede to the dissolution, can we create a better organization than the current one in the present situation in Korea? If there was a mistake, the primary mistake was the socialists' participation in the nationalist movement at the time of its initial establishment. If they were to unite, they should have strengthened the internal organization more substantially than it is now and actively advanced into labor and peasant movements in each sector. Simply and blindly dissolving it would be a greater mistake. Therefore, I deny the dissolution argument and intend to develop a new path for the Shingan movement based on the labor movement. <12>

It's Good to Have It, Good to Not Have It
Yi Ryang

Even among colonies, our Korea is in a very special position compared to India and Ireland. They have the power to fight with arms in their national movements at times. However, Koreans have nothing but bare bodies without any power. Trying to do something with empty words or on paper (to some extent) with only vague, highest ideals, is it of any use? If the Shingan Society even now corrects its vague platform and faint utopianism and advances into actual struggle, it would be fine. Otherwise, if it continues as it is, what use is an organization that is the same whether it exists or not? Rather than boasting about catching a tiger with bare hands, it would be better to weave even one mesh of a net and catch at least a rabbit first.

If There is a New Movement
Kim Hyŏn-jun

In every affair, a construction movement is necessarily latent on the back side of destruction. The Shingan Society has come out with the signboard of a national united party, but whether it is due to the lack of internal capabilities or severe external pressure, it has not played a role that can be boasted about in the public, and therefore, it is also true that it does not have the power to receive absolute trust from the public. However, the current trend in Korea is that everyone demands a movement with more power and practical benefits, and it must exist. This dissolution movement is emerging on the premise of a powerful new movement arising in the future. If a new movement organization that we can demand and trust arises, I will support the dissolution.

Blind Dissolution is a Problem
Song Chin-u

I am a member of the Shingan Society, but due to my constant busyness with company affairs, I hardly attend the meetings, and therefore, I am not very familiar with the detailed situation of the society. I learned about the issue of dissolution (解消) mainly through newspapers, but the reasons of those advocating for dissolution commonly include, "The Shingan Society is a petty bourgeois political movement group without any active struggle and, under the fine name of a national united party concentrating the total national power, it rather causes the harm of eliminating the desire for labor and peasant mass struggle..." Of course, it is not that there is absolutely no reason for this, but considering the current situation in Korea, I wonder if it is a matter to think deeply about even to the point of dissolution. <13> Since the Shingan Society was established, the reason for not engaging in active struggle is not only the lack of internal capabilities but also the severe external pressure as a major cause. If the authorities' policy of controlling speech and assembly continues as it is now, it will be difficult for any movement to make active progress. Even if the Shingan Society is dissolved, as claimed by those advocating for dissolution, and the movement advances to a class movement, wouldn't its progress be even more hindered and difficult? For the time being, it would be better to leave the Shingan Society as it is and continue even with paper-based movements, and then, depending on the situation, appropriately shift the direction of the movement and move forward.

Dissolution is the Obvious Trend
Ŏ Ku-sŏn

The sole life and banner of the Shingan Society is to concentrate the total power of the nation. However, from the time of its initiation, for whatever reason, not only has it failed to include all influential organizations and figures in Korea, but in practice, it has not engaged in any struggle and has only engaged in lukewarm publicity on paper. With such capabilities and tactics, it is impossible to give practical benefits to the general public and achieve our desires. In that case, it would be better to dissolve it as soon as possible and have the peasant class advance actively into the peasant movement, the labor class into the labor movement, and other sectors into sectoral movements. Each movement organization should then adopt cooperative tactics and form a consultation body, or, to put it simply, something like a "Gambani," to achieve our highest ideals and maximum goals, which I think is the obvious and most obvious path in the situation in Korea.

Dissolution is an Inevitable Fate
Yi In

It is true that the Shingan Society has not shown any particular achievements to our people since its establishment. However, as long as we cannot engage in underground movements, we cannot disregard the existence of the Shingan Society in that it has the form of a national united party, even in name only, and embraces that many people, or in that it can play the role of a transitional process. However, even if those advocating for dissolution list numerous reasons for dissolution, it seems that they have not yet established a concrete plan that can attract the attention of the general public. If that is the case, rather than suddenly dissolving the society and causing the people who have been collectively organized and trained to lose their basis of reliance and trust, it would be better for the old executives to take responsibility for the stagnation up to now and retire bravely. Then, select new leaders who are sharp, energetic, loyal, and upright, and <14> while working within the legally possible range and for immediate interests, even engage in partial economic struggles to alleviate our livelihoods even a little. I hope they will more faithfully fulfill their role and mission until the inevitable dissolution. Politics is more about practice than theory.

Dissolution is Still Regrettable
Kwŏn Sang-no

The Shingan Society has not done anything particularly great up to this point, and it is still unclear whether it will benefit or harm us in the future. However, in this situation where various societies are falling apart, dissolving even that much is a very regrettable thing. Originally, destruction should be based on the premise of construction, and there is nothing more dangerous than just destroying without any plans for construction. If a better movement arises on the other hand, I would be happy. But if not, it would be better to maintain at least the signboard.

Not Easy
Han Yong-un

Not only the Shingan Society, but whatever the name of the society may be, Koreans should always have such an organization. Therefore, setting aside the issue of new political organizations being formed according to the purpose and principles of the society, I do not think that the Shingan Society will be easily dissolved, considering all the objective circumstances of Korea.

It's Regrettable
Sin Hŭng-u

It is a regrettable thing that such a great unity as a unique national political organization in Korea disappears. However, it is difficult to speak about the understanding of the existence and dissolution of the Shingan Society or the pros and cons without knowing the details of the contents and progress of the society itself.

I Do Not Approve of Dissolution
Yu Ŏk-kyŏm

Right now, we Koreans must first unite our strengths above all else. The fact that organizations such as Christianity and Cheondogyo have united since last year is a great awakening for us Koreans and, at the same time, I think it is a happy phenomenon. Whether the Shingan Society has power or not is a separate issue, but it is a fact that it is a group of many people. If a larger organization with more power than that is created now and it is dissolved, that would be fine. But if we just recklessly dissolve it, the people will be divided into four or five pieces, and there is a concern that the phenomenon of distrusting and fighting each other again as before six or seven years ago will be reproduced. <15>

Silence for the Time Being
Chŏng Un-yŏng

There are so many pros and cons right now that I will try to remain silent about it for the time being, both personally and about it. This time, I happened to meet Song Pong-u and agreed to discuss the matter with him candidly, but he made a big fuss in the newspaper about the initiation of a mass rally, causing great trouble to many comrades.

Will Definitely Dissolve
Yi In-ho

Without hesitating, we will resolutely and systematically begin the dissolution.
You want me to briefly state the reasons?
1. In Korea, a national united party for the Korean people's XX (조선민중적 XX) or a medium to transform into a national united party cannot exist in the organizational form of the Shingan Society.
2. A cooperative front based on extremely weak interests, that is, no economic interests whatsoever and abstract interests under concept, cannot exert any combative effect.
3. A simple and sincere concessionary act by the proletarian class, with the vague idea that we should unite, is easily used for the political opportunism of the petty bourgeoisie.
4. Being captured by the pity that it is regrettable to break up our group, which was collectively formed with difficulty, is more harmful than making a decisive decision.
More than anything else, practical theory, there is truth in the fact that the labor class honestly sings about what it has felt in practice, even though it cannot express its opinions in words or writing. Finally, I would like to add Lenin's golden words: "The courage to immediately correct mistakes in action is more precious than anything else."

Dissolution and Timing
Yi Sang-hun

The dissolution of the Shingan Society? The Shingan Society was always going to be dissolved. Therefore, the dissolution of the Shingan Society will not be so surprising. However, even if the dissolution itself is a predetermined process, there will be a time for that dissolution. If it is not dissolved at the right time and in the right way, the harm it receives will also be great. In short, dissolution is definite, but the question is whether this is the right time for dissolution, which is a matter to think about a lot and deeply. <16>

The Dissolution Argument Does Not Fit the Korean Situation
An Chae-hong

I strongly oppose the Shingan Society's dissolution problem as absolutely impossible.
First, it is necessary to exist as a national party and carry out certain movements and struggles, even as a petty bourgeois political movement. Even if the petty bourgeois nationalists' political movement in Korea is in a situation where it is easy to incline to right-wing legalism, the Shingan Society should adhere to the left-wing petty bourgeois position according to the original purpose of its establishment and coexist with legalistic organizations.
Second, even if it is said that it causes the harm of eliminating the desire for labor and peasant masses' struggle under the fine name of concentrating the total national power, it would be better to establish the class camp of the labor and peasant masses separately and concentrate the necessary total power and initiate its actions through allied or momentary cooperation with the Shingan Society until a certain period.
Third, the reason for dissolution is that it hinders the expansion and strengthening of labor unions and peasant unions and their combatization. If the Shingan Society is in a situation where it cannot actively struggle, the labor and peasant unions will not be able to suddenly realize expansion and strengthening through combatization. The strength that labor and peasant unions can have is that they can act more readily in small internal units, and the Shingan Society is more massive and its constituent elements are more mixed, so it only has the difference that its body is too heavy to initiate such solid actions. In this regard, it may be inevitable that the Shingan Society will liquidate and reorganize itself to initiate some kind of decomposition.
Fourth, from the standpoint of class activists, it is feared that the Shingan Society's consolidation of its base and power as a national party will have a great impact in the future, citing the example of the Chinese Nationalist Party, but it is only a groundless fear in Korea. Since the Qing Dynasty, the Xingzhonghui (興中會) and Tongmenghui (同盟會), which were initially grown with the feudal xenophobic other-rejecting ideology of "Destroying the Manchus and Reviving the Han," underwent an era and were dyed with the conquering consciousness of a national republic, or established even a bourgeois dictatorial regime while organizing and seizing a self-defensive army newly emerging on the basis of a national elite that can grow newly under a certain independent sovereignty, and the Chinese Nationalist Party, which can use compromise policies with imperialist powers, cannot be compared to the one in Korea, where the petty bourgeois class is struggling to establish even a certain independent field and camp. In my opinion, it seems that the Korean situation would be more lively if the Korean petty bourgeois intellectuals and petty citizens had a class self-determination spirit and were more courageous in doing their part.
Fifth, if the so-called "synthetic and complex party" exists with people who have different principles and political views mixed together, causing them to harm their internal capabilities by mutually doubting, checking, conflicting, and excluding each other, it would be better for the Shingan Society to liquidate and reorganize itself and plan a cooperative parallelism with a new strategic and comrade-like cooperation.
Sixth, and the most common reason for opposing dissolution is that "what exists can grow and also expect a future of leaps, but what is non-existent is finally non-existent, and dispersion can never allow centralized control to descend from heaven."

Dissolution Reduces Movement Power
Kim Pyŏng-no

The Shingan Society's dissolution argument was proposed in one or two branches. If this is viewed only from the theory of class movement, it may not be without foundation in its fundamental meaning, but originally, the Shingan Society formed a cooperative front through each class and faction in the organization itself, and it does not have a unique creative guiding program. Therefore, the Shingan movement only has the maximum possible combat role up to a certain class based on the cooperative meaning of the organization itself, and it cannot be the exclusive camp of any class, nor can it hinder the consciousness of class movement. If the Shingan movement does not become a class struggle in the immediate future, it is a mistake against the class strategy and cooperative spirit of the Shingan movement to have the worry that the meaning of cooperation is not good or that the consciousness of the class movement is eliminated as the Shingan movement becomes stronger.
In the current situation where the entire movement is suffocated, if the meaning and existence of the Shingan movement are doubted in favor of the theory of class struggle, it is only an act of abandoning the formed camp and collapsing even the concentrated power. If there is no determination here and the theory is divided, it is feared that it will eventually be converted into a differentiation action and reduce the power of our movement. If we have the power to form and there is a misuse or misguidance of that power, the key is to guide and operate it well, not to collapse the power. The meaning of our cooperation must be clearly recognized that it is based on representing the immediate interests of the nation and cooperating in the development of the maximum possible struggle for the achievement of any class, rather than being biased towards a unified consciousness and extreme theory. <18>

**Named Entities**

徐廷禧	Sŏ Chŏng-hŭi
李亮	Yi Ryang
金賢準	Kim Hyŏn-jun
宋鎭禹	Song Chin-u
魚龜善	Ŏ Ku-sŏn
李仁	Yi In
權相老	Kwŏn Sang-no
韓龍雲	Han Yong-un
申興雨	Sin Hŭng-u
兪億兼	Yu Ŏk-kyŏm
鄭雲永	Chŏng Un-yŏng
宋琫禹	Song Pong-u
李仁浩	Yi In-ho
列寧	Lenin
李相薰	Yi Sang-hun
安在鴻	An Chae-hong
金炳魯	Kim Pyŏng-no
興中會	Hŭngjunghoe
同盟會	Tongmenghoe



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제37호
발행일	1931년 02월 01일
기사제목	新幹會解消 可否論
기사형태	설문

新幹會解消 可否論
解決論은 一種誤論
徐廷禧

新幹會는 小뿔조아的 정치운동의 民族主義團體요 결코 계급투쟁의 사회주의단체는 안이다. 조선의 정세로 보아서 어느 정도 어느 시대까지 사회주의자가 민족주의자와 협동 전선에 나서서 최고이상을 到達하도록 상호협력을 할 것은 물론이나 원래에 그 主義를 抹殺하거나 망각할 수는 업는 것이다. 신간회가 츰 탄생할 때에 일반의 大勢가 그리되엿던지 일시적 정책으로 그리하엿던지 京鄕을 물론하고 사회주의자 개인으로나 단체로나 모두 異口同聲으로 日新幹會를 支持하자 援助하자하고 公然宣言을 하고 심지어 엇던 지방에서는 농민운동단체와 勞働운동단체를 해산까지 하고 新幹운동으로 드러왓섯다. 爾來 數箇星霜에 외세의 불리로 그리 되엿던지 內在的 역량의 不及으로 그리되엿던지 新幹會가 큰 역할을 수행치 못한 것으로 사실이나 新幹會자체가 解消論者 등의 云云함과 가티 농민운동이나 기타 각 부분 운동을 방해하거나 말살식힌 것은 안이로 생각된다. 一步를 讓하야 解消를 용인한다 하야도 現下 조선의 정세에 잇서서 그 이상의 더 조흔 단체를 산출할 수 잇슬가. 만일에 誤謬가 잇다면 최초 탄생 당시에 사회주의자가 민족주의운동에 加擔한 것이 제일의 誤謬요 기왕 合同을 하엿다면 그 내부의 조직을 현재보다 더 충실하고 힘잇게 하고 각 부분으로 나아가서 노동운동이나 농민운동으로 적극적 진출을 하도록 하는 것이 당연할 것이오. 그양 盲目으로 解消만 한다면 그보다 이상의 誤謬는 업슬 줄로 안다. 그럼으로 나는 어듸까지 해소론을 부인하는 동시에 노동운동을 土臺로 삼아 新幹運動의 신진로를 전개하랴한다.＜12＞

잇서도 좃코 업서도 좃타
李亮

가튼 식민지라도 우리 조선은 印度와 愛蘭과 아주 特殊한 지위에 잇다. 그들은 민족운동을 하는데도 엇던 時機에는 무력으로 싸우는 실력까지 가지고 잇다. 그러나 우리 조선사람은 아모 실력도 업는 밝안 몸 뿐이다. 그러면서 空然한 최고의 이상만 가지고 빈입이나 紙上(그 亦 어느 정도까지)으로 무슨 일을 하랴고 하니 소용이 잇슴닛가. 新幹會가 만일 只今이라도 그 漠然한 綱領과 희미한 空想主義를 곳치고 실지의 투쟁으로 나아간다면 己어니와 그럿치안코 현상 그대로 나아간다면 잇스나 업스나 一般이지 무슨 소용이 잇는 단체임닛가. 빈손으로 호랑이를 잡겟다고 壯談하는 것보다는 그물 한코라도 매저서 爲先 토기라도 잡는 것이 좃켓지요.

새 運動이 잇다면
金賢準

엇던 일에나 파괴˜ 裏面에는 반드시 건설운동이 潛在한 것이다. 신간회가 민족 單一黨이란 看板을 가지고 只今것 나왓스나 내재적 역량의 부족이라 할지 또는 外壓의 甚한 까닭이라 할지 何如間 민중에서 이럿타고 자랑할만한 역할을 한 것도 업고 따라서 민중의 절대신임을 바들 힘이 업는 것도 사실이다. 그런데 조선의 現下 대세는 그보다 이상의 실력이 잇고 實益이 잇는 운동이 잇기를 누구나 요구하고 또 잇지 안어서는 안이 되게되엿다. 이 해소운동이 擡頭하는 것은 물론 압흐로 힘잇는 새 운동이 이러날 것을 前提로 하는 것이니 만일에 우리가 요구하고 신뢰할만한 신운동단체가 이러난다면 나는 解消를 찬성하겟다.

盲目的解消는 問題
宋鎭禹

나는 신간회의 한 회원이나 社務가 항상 밧분 탓으로 그 會에 출석도 별로 못하고 따러서 그 會의 자서한 상황까지 잘 모 릅니다. 解消云云의 문제는 신문을 通하야 대개 알엇슴니다만은 해소론자의 이유를 보면 공통적으로 『新幹會는 小뿌르的정치운동의 집단으로서 何等의 적극적 투쟁이 업고 全民族的총역량을 집중한 민족 단일당이란 美名下에 돌이여 勞農大衆鬪爭의 欲을 말살식히는 弊害를 끼친다...』는 그것인 것 갓슴니다. 물론 그 이유가 절대로 아주 업다는 것은 안이나 現下조선의 정세로 보아서 해소까지는 깁히 생각할 문제인가함니다.＜13＞ 新幹會가 생긴 이래로 적극적 투쟁을 못한 것은 내재적 역량의 부족도 부족이지만은 외압의 甚한 것이 큰 원인인 것임니다. 당국의 언론집회의 取締방침이 현상과 가티 支續이 된다면 무슨 운동이라도 적극적 진출은 어려울 것임니다. 해소론자의 주장과 가티 신간회를 해소하고 계급운동으로 나아간다하야도 그 진출은 보다 이상으로 더 支障과 困難이 잇슬터이닛가 당분간은 차라리 신간회를 그대로 두고 紙上運動이나마하다가 형편에 따라서 그 운동의 방행만을 適宜하게 轉換하야 나아가는 것이 조흘가함니다.

解消는 大勢의 當然
魚龜善

신간회의 唯一 生命이요 標榜하는 것은 민족의 총역량을 집중한다는 그것이다. 그러나 發起 당시부터 무슨 원인으로 그리되엿던지 조선에서 유력한 단체와 인물을 다 망라하지 못하얏술뿐 안이라 실제에 잇서서 何等의 투쟁이 업고 다만 紙上으로 미지근한 宣傳이나 하고 그러그러하게 역량과 전술로는 도저히 일반 민중에게 實利實益을 주고 우리의 소망을 이르지 못할 것이다. 그럴진댄 차라리 하루라도 조속히 해소하야 농민층은 농민운동, 勞働者層은 勞働運動, 기타 각 부분은 부분운동으로 적극적 진출을 하고 각 운동단체가 다시 협동 전술을 取하야 무슨 協議機關 쉽게 말하자면 감바니와 가튼을 구성하야 우리의 최고이상과 최대 목적을 도달케 하는 것이 조선에 情勢잇서서 당연의 又 당연한 즐로 생각한다.

解消는 必然的 運命
李仁

新幹會가 생긴 이후로 우리 민중에게 別般業績을 낫하내지 못할 것은 사실임니다. 그러나 우리가 潛行運動을 하지 못하는 이상 일흠만이라도 민족 단일당의 형태를 가지고 그만한 민중을 포용하고 잇다는 의미에서 또는 過渡期的 한 과정의 역할을 수행할 수 잇다는 점으로 보아서 신간회의 존재를 그리 무시할 수는 업슬 줄 암니다. 그럿타 하더래도 객관적정세와 운동의 진전에 딸아서는 早晩間 必然的으로 해소될 운명까지도 가진 바임니다. 그러나 이제 해소론을 주장하는 便에서는 비록 열거하는 다수의 해소이유가 잇다하나 아즉도 일반의 주목을 끄을만한 구체안이 서지 못한 모양임니다. 그럿타하면 이제 갑작이 該會를 해소하야 집단적으로 조직되며 훈련되여오든 민중으로 하여금 依據信憑할 곳을 일허바리게 하는 이보담은 오늘날까지 沈滯해 온 責을 그 舊幹部들이 가지고 勇退한 後에 精銳潑剌하며 忠實强直한 새 指導冀†子를 선정하야＜14＞ 합법적으로 가능한 範圍와 당면의 이익을 위하야서는 부분적 경제 투쟁이나마 하야서 우리들의 생로를 幾分間이라도 타개해 가면서 필연적으로 해소될 때까지의 역할과 사명을 좀더 충실히 履行해 주엇스면 함니다. 政治은 이론보담도 실제이니까요.

解消는 그래도 섭섭
權相老

新幹會가 이때까지 이럿타고만활 한일을 한 것도 업고 또 장래에 우리에게 이익을 줄지 奚毒을 줄지 그것까지도 아즉 알 수 업슴니다. 그러나 각 사회가 모도 支離滅裂하야가는 이 판에 그것이나마 해소를 한다는 것은 퍽 섭섭한 일이올시다. 원래 破壞란 것은 건설을 전제로 하고 파괴하여야되지 건설에는 何等 方策이 업시 그양 파괴만 한다고 그보다 위험한 일은 업는 줄로 압니다. 신간회의 해소운동이 이러나는 반면에 보다 이상으 조흔 운동이 이러난다면 己에니와 그럿치안타면 다만 간판만이라도 유지하는 것이 좃켓지요.

容易치는 안타
韓龍雲

非但 新幹會가 안이라 會의 명칭이야 何如間에 조선사람으로서는 언제든지 그만한 단체가 잇서야 할줄 압니다. 그럼으로 會의 목적과 주의에 딸아서 새로운 정치단체가 생기는 것은 별문제로 하고 아즉까지는 조선의 모든 객관적 정세로 보아 신간회가 그리쉽게 해소되리라고는 생각하지 안슴니다.

섭섭한 일이다
申興雨

조선에서 민족적 유일한 정치단체로써 그만한 단결이 잇섯다가 업서진다는 것만은 섭섭한 일인줄 압니다. 그러나 신간회의 존재와 해소에 대한 이해라든지 可否에 대해서는 그 會자체의 내용과 경과 如何를 仔細히 알기 전에는 말하기 어려운 일임니다.

解消는 不贊成
兪億兼

現下 우리 조선사람은 무엇보다도 먼저 힘을 合하여야 하겟슴니다. 작년 이래로 기독교와 천도교가튼 그 단체가 合同을 한 것은 우리 조선사람의 큰 각성인 동시에 깁분 현상이라고 생각합니다. 신간회가 실력이 잇고 업는 것은 별문제로 하고 다수 민중의 집단인 것은 사실임니다. 只今에 그보다＜15＞ 이상의 실력 잇는 큰 단체가 생기고 해소가 된다면 己어니와 그냥 함부로 解消만 한다면 민중은 四分五裂로 더 分散이 되야 다시 六七年이전에 서로 疾視反目하고 서로 格鬪하던 현상을 다시 연출 할 念慮가 업지 안슴니다.

當分間은 沈黙
鄭雲永

只今에는 是非波蘭이 하도 만흐닛가 나는 나 개인으로나 거긔에 대하야 당분간 침묵을 직히랴고 함니다. 이번에도 宋琫禹씨를 우연히 만나, 거긔에 대한 일을 懇談的으로 논의하자고 하기에 승낙을 하엿더니 신문에다 민중대회발기니 소집이니 떠드러서 여러 동지에게 큰 곤란을 당하얏슴니다.

當然히 解消할 것
李仁浩

우물쭈물하지 말고 斷然히 秩序整然하게 해소에 착수할 것임니다.
이유를 간단히 말슴하라구요?
一. 조선에 잇서서 조선민중적 XX을 위한 민족단일당이란 또는 민족단일당으로 轉化할 媒介體란 신간회의 조직형태로서는 존립하기 不能함.
二. 아조 薄弱한 이해관계 즉 何等 경제적 이해관계는 업고 觀念下의 추상적 이해관계를 土臺로 한 협동전선이란 하등의 투쟁적 효과를 발휘하기 不能함.
三. 막연하게 咸하여야겟다는 관념으로 프로階級의 단순한 誠意的 讓步的 행동이 도리혀 소뿔으조아의 정치적 投機에 이용되기 용이함.
四. 못처럼 집단되엿든 우리의 모듬을 헤치기는 哀惜하다는 憐憫性에 捕捉되여 우물쭈물하는 것은 도리혀 斷乎한 처분을 나리는 것보다 더 큰 해독을 가젓슴.
무엇보다도 실천적 이론, 勞働階級이 언어나 문필로는 의사 발표치 못하면서라도 실제에서 눗긴 바를 솔직히ㅅ 안대로 高唱함에는 진리가 잇는 것이다. 마즈막으로 『犯한 과오를 즉시 행동에서 곳치는 용기가 무엇보다도 귀중하니라』하는 레닌의 金言을 附記함니다.

解消와 時期
李相薰

신간회의 해소임니까. 언제나 신간회는 해소될 것이엿지요. 따라 신간회의 해소란 그리 驚異도 아닐 것임니다. 다만 해소 그것은 기정적의 과정이라 할지라도 그 해소에는 스사로 시기가 잇슬 것임니다. 적당한 시기에 적당한 방법으로 해소하지 안으면 그 밧는 奚毒이 또한 클 것이외다. 요컨댄 해소만은 결정적이나 해소의 시기가 과연 이때일가 아닌가 만히 그리고 깁히 생각할 문제이갓슴니다.＜16＞

解消論은 朝鮮情勢에 안 맛는다
安在鴻

新幹會解消問題는 나로서는 斷然不可타고 반대함니다.
첫재 小부르적 정치운동으 단체으로서라도 민족당으로서 존재하야 일정한 운동 및 투쟁을 하는 것은 필요함니다. 조선의 小부르的 민족주의자의 정치운동이 右傾的인 合法主義로 기울기 쉬흔 情勢下에 잇다할진대 신간회는 그 최초 창립의 趣意에 딸어 左翼 小부르的인 지위를 固守하고 合法主義단체와 竝立하야 나갈 것임니다.
둘재 全민족적 총렬을 집중한다는 美名下에 勞農대중의 鬪爭慾을 말살하는 弊害를 끼친다고 할진대 勞農대중의 階級陣營을 따로히 수립하고 신간회와 일정한 시기까지의 동맹적 혹은 순간적인 협동으로 필요한 總力量 集中 밋 그 행동을 닐으키어도 조흘 것이다.
셋재 勞働組合 農民組合의 확대강화와 그의 전투화를 방해한다고하는 것이 해소이유이다. 신간회의 적극적 투쟁이 못되는 情勢이면 勞農農民組合으로서도 猝然히 전투화에 의한 확대강화를 실현할 수 엄슬 것임니다. 勞働農民組合으로서 가능한 강점은 部內的인 猝小한 단위에서 좀더 갓든하게 행동할 수 잇는 것이오 신간회는 좀더 尨大하고 또 그 構成分子가 雜駁味가 잇느니 만큼 그러케 견고한 動作을 닐으키기에 제 몸이 무겁다는 차이가 잇슬 뿐이다. 이 점으로는 신간회가 그 자체를 淸算整理하여서 어느 의미의 分解作用을 닐으키는 것쯤은 안 올 수 업슬 것임니다.
넷재 階級運動者의 견지로서 신간회가 민족당으로서의 地盤 밋 그 세력을 鞏固히 함으로 장래에 큰 영향이 미츨 것을 근심하야 중국 국민당의 예를 드는 터이나 그는 조선에 잇서 다만 杞憂임니다. 前淸이래 40년에 처음에는 滅滿興漢이라는 봉건적 賤他排他主義로 生長된 興中會 同盟會 등 시대를 거치어 민족공화라는 정복적 의식으로 염색되며 또는 일정한 독자적인 주권의 알에 신흥한 생장할 수 잇는 민족적 纂閥의 기반의 우에서 新銳한 자위적 군대를 편제 밋 장악하면서 부르的 독재정권까지로 수립하고 帝國主義 列國과 各個 타협적인 정책을 사용할 수 잇는 중국의 국민당 그것과 조선의 일정한 독자적인 분야와 陣營을 수립하기에도 힘이 부치는 小부르層의 그것과는 한나절 벗으로 비교할 수도 업슬 것임니다. 나로 보기에는 차라리 조선의 小부르層의＜17＞ 識者, 小市民 등이 즘더 階級自決的의 氣魄을 가지고 자기들의 할 노릇을 하기에 용감스러윗스면 조선의 시국이 좀더 활기를 잇게 되리라고 생각될 쯤임니다.
다섯재 甲과 乙 緩과 急이 各主義者와 또 政見을 달리하는 사람들이 混淆되어 잇서 석겨잇서 所謂 『合成雜煩黨』的 존재로 잇서 서로 懷疑牽制 軋轢排除함으로써 돌이어 내재적으로 그 역량을 損耕함이 잇다면 차라리 신간회로서 그 자체를 정리청산하고 새로은 정략적 밋  同志的 협동으로 기획적 병립을 하는 것이 오히려 나흐리라고 봄니다.
여섯재 그리고 가장 상식적인 解消 반대의 이유는 『有는 生長할 수 잇고 또 飛躍의 미래도 期할 수 잇지만은 無는 드듸어 無이오 分散은 언제나 집중통제를 天降하게 할 수 엄다』는 것임니다.

解消는 運動力量을 減少
金炳魯

新幹會解消論이 一二支會에서 제창된 것임니다. 이것이 계급운동으 이론으로만 본다면 근본적 意義에 잇서서는 근거가 엄는 것도 안이겟지오만은 원래 新幹會난 조직 자체에 잇서서 各層各派를 通한 협동전선을 형성한 것으로 독특한 창조적 지도강령을 가진 것도 안임니다. 그럼으로 新幹運動은 조직자체의 협동의의에 기준하야 어느 계급까지 가능한 최대한도의 투쟁역할을 가질 뿐이오 엇던 계급의 專用陣營이 될 수도 엄는 동시에 계급운동의 의식을 저애할 리도 엄는 것임니다. 만일 신간운동이 직면에서 계급투쟁화되지 못한다면 협동의 의의가 엄다던지 新幹운동이 强大化될사록 계급운동의 의식이 말살된다는 杞憂를 갓는 것은 신간운동의 계급전략과 협동정신에 대한 誤謬를 밧게 될 것 엄는 것임니다.
現下 全般運動이 窒息된 情勢에 잇서 계급투쟁으 이론에 편의하야 신간운동의 意義와 존재를 의심한다면 이는 결성된 진영를 棄하야 집중된 역량까지 潰散하는 행동밧게 업는 것임니다. 만일 여긔에 각오한 바이 업시 이론이 분립된다면 결국 分化作用에 轉化되여 우리 운동의 역량을 감소함에 이를 것을 우려하는 바임니다. 우리에게 결성된 역량이 잇고 그 역량을 誤用忘導하는 바 잇다면 要는 그것을 善導運用함에 잇는 것이오 역량의 潰散에 잇슬 것이 안임니다. 우리의 협동의의는 단일적 의식과 極致的이론에 편중함보다 민족의 당면이익을 대표하야 가능한 최대한도의 투쟁을 협력전개하야 어느 계급의 달성을 期함에 근거가 잇는 것을 명백히 인식하여야 할 것임니다.＜18＞
＜12-18＞