잡지명	別乾坤 第37號
발행일	1931년 02월 01일
기사제목	世界를 威脅하는 中國赤色共産軍, 그 組織과 活動 (The Chinese Red Communist Army Threatening the World: Its Organization and Activities)
필자	金世鎔 (Kim Se-yong)
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

The Chinese Red Communist Army Threatening the World: Its Organization and Activities
						Kim Se-yong

I
Regarding the simple analysis of the subordinate nature of Chinese national capital, the inevitable development of the democratic Red Revolution into a socialist class struggle, and at the same time, labor and farmers becoming the fundamental driving force of the entire revolutionary process, and thus the bird's-eye view of the rural revolution expanding to the national scope along with the urban worker struggles <52>, I will first introduce the economic and significance of the communist army's occupation of Changsha on July 30 last year, and the activities of the Soviets in the occupied areas in this magazine.

"Consciousness that does not keep pace with changing reality reflects yesterday's reality"... "At the same time, if you do not grasp and observe the fundamental conditions and overall characteristics of the changing reality, you will fall into confusion and deformed consciousness."

Not to mention all the media outlets mobilized by the imperialist class and their spokespersons, those who have not understood and grasped the fundamental driving force in the changing reality of China consciously (the former) or unconsciously (the latter) regard the peasant revolutionary army sweeping across China as bandits aiming for plunder and slaughter, and see their actions as irregular and aimless, like bandits or robbers. However, the imperialist powers and Chinese warlords are terrified of these so-called bandits and robbers and are making every effort to eradicate them. If the reason why the Nationalist government has virtually submitted to the imperialist powers (no matter how it outwardly appears) and the reformist faction such as Wang Jingwei have betrayed and colluded with the warlords Yan Feng is to suppress and eradicate these bandits, then these bandits are such a terrifying existence to Chiang Kai-shek that he betrayed Sun Yat-sen's will, sold the national revolution to the powers, and received their military aid, with 500,000 troops and the capitalist class with capital of hundreds of millions of yuan in the background.

The actions of these awakened bandits and robbers are a fundamental premise for understanding the changing reality of China and, at the same time, possess the mission of China's revolution and construction as the sole fundamental force dominating reality. Bourgeois politicians and commentators with a consciousness reflecting yesterday's reality know today's Chiang Kai-shek as the Chiang Kai-shek of the Northern Expedition era and still regard him as the leader of the Chinese revolution, cheering his every move.

However, among the bourgeois journalists, the clever ones said that the Changsha incident was an organized red terror that threatened all of China, advocating thorough countermeasures by imperialist countries, and that the organized <53> communist army is a fundamental existence that promotes social organization in war-torn China, screaming in horror, and some said that the essence of the communist army in the Changsha incident was more than the North-South war of Yan Feng's generals, and that capitalism had more significance and terror than the Guangdong revolution and the Soviet government organization in December 1928, and that the Changsha incident promoted it in reality.

The reason is that the communist army's occupation of Changsha has a regional significance in that it has virtually occupied the southern provinces and concentrated its main force in the central region, approaching Chiang Kai-shek's power base.

Also, the fact that the true nature of the communist army, which was not accurately known until the occupation of Changsha, was finally revealed by the Changsha incident, and the fact that the surface means of the situation in which foreign consulates were attacked, foreign exploitation institutions were ruthlessly burned, and the military bands and stationed troops of the powers clashed at the time of the Changsha incident had unprecedented violence, but also the first plan among the basic plans of the communist revolution resolved and passed at the Communist Party National Congress and the Soviet National Congress Revolutionary Military Committee held secretly in Shanghai in May 1930 was put into practice with this occupation of Changsha, and in the future, as it will be, the fact that the communist army's military law was so elaborate and powerful due to the meticulous planning and preparation for about two months to occupy Changsha, made the imperialists tremble and revealed that the true nature of the communist army and its activities are the force that dominates and changes the Chinese reality.

II
The plan of the Communist army - the special unit of the Communist Party - that had been coiled up in the Yangtze River area to seize Hunan, Hubei, and Jiangxi provinces was to take advantage of the chaos caused by the North-South war and the mobilization of most of the government troops to the front lines to rise up simultaneously, and a meticulous plan had been made three months in advance.

The Chinese Communist Party and the Revolutionary Military Commission repeatedly held major meetings from the beginning of last year, and <54> consulted on the establishment of Soviet power through continuous armed uprisings by the central party and local communist organizations and peasant communist parties on a nationwide scale. In late May of last year, it convened a conference of representatives from Soviet districts scattered in various places in Shanghai, and there were concrete resolutions regarding the establishment of a national Soviet government, the political program of the Soviet government, and the important laws to be implemented by the government. In early June, it held a meeting of the Communist Party Central Political Bureau and consulted on the decisive methods for establishing a national Soviet government. According to the resolutions after the consultation, the Communist Army Military Commission was convened in Shanghai around late June to discuss the military strategy of the Red Army with the goal of establishing a Soviet government. In order to explain the progress of the Changsha incident, what the various plans that the Chinese Communist Party intends to realize in the future are, and how important this basic plan is, I will briefly introduce the declarations and resolutions of each meeting before telling the truth about the Changsha incident.

The above declarations and resolutions are said to have been published in the "Red Army Daily" (紅軍日報), the organ of the Chinese Communist Party, and the secret document "The Red Army in the Soviet Border Region" (蘇維境區域之紅軍) published by the same party, so I believe they can be trusted.

According to the declaration of the National Soviet Congress, the congress held in May was convened under the auspices of the Chinese Communist Party and the All-China Federation of Trade Unions to complete the Soviet project that had been established in Guangzhou, Guangdong Province in 1927 and to achieve the independent freedom and proletarian liberation of China. Representatives of revolutionary organizations composed of representatives from each Soviet district, workers, farmers, soldiers, the poor, and revolutionary youth from the national industrial centers attended the meeting and agreed on the tasks and strategies for establishing a national Soviet regime. At the same time, they passed the program of the Soviet government and many important laws to be implemented under the regime.

Battle Road for Establishing a National Soviet Regime

The establishment of a national Soviet regime will inevitably intensify a serious class struggle, and the military pressure from the government army and various countries will become even more fierce. As a countermeasure, it is necessary to increase the revolutionary armed forces, that is, to expand the Red Army, and to maintain close contact with the revolutionary struggles of various countries around the world. As a detailed method for realizing the above principles, <55>

1.  No matter what faction the Kuomintang, the Northern Warlord Government-Building Faction, or the Western Mountain Faction is, they are all running dogs of imperialism, and it is necessary to thoroughly engrave in the minds of the masses that China cannot be independent from the great powers and the peasant masses cannot be liberated unless they are eliminated.

2.  Recognize that the domestic ethnic minorities who are invaded by the great powers have complete autonomy in separation and free association, and support the ethnic liberation struggle of each ethnic minority, such as anti-militarism, anti-Han landlords, and anti-feudal forces. Arm the masses as much as possible by having the existing Red Army acquire as many weapons as possible, regardless of the means.

3.  Have the Red Army and the workers and the poor in each city who are currently organized continue to cause riots at any time and place, thereby disturbing the public sentiment and gradually expanding this trend of riots nationwide to create a basis for a national armed rebellion.

4.  The leaders of each organization and the military members of the Red Army should constantly pay close attention to the national situation and maintain close contact with the central party.

At the next meeting, ten items were decided as the basic platform to be implemented directly in the Soviet areas currently existing and as the basic platform when the national Soviet regime is established, and the outline is as follows.

1.  Invalidate all treaties concluded between China and the great powers, cancel foreign debts, and confiscate all banks, enterprises, and factories established by imperialist great powers in Chinese territory.
This is a fatal blow to imperialism, the same political program implemented in Labor Russia after the October Revolution of 1917.

2.  Implement the arming of workers and farmers, and give land and labor to soldiers to have the councils of representatives of workers, farmers, soldiers, the poor, and soldiers manage the government.

3.  Set a minimum wage system to improve working conditions, implement unemployment, insurance, and social insurance, and establish labor inspection offices.

4.  Confiscate land owned by landlords, churches, temples, and shrines, implement land nationalization, and then distribute land use rights reasonably.

5.  Based on the principle of national self-determination, grant all ethnic minorities the right to complete separation and free association.

6.  All propertyless masses have the freedom of assembly, association, speech, and strike.

7.  Abolish all cruel taxes and forced taxes and implement progressive income taxes.

8.  The government will establish agricultural banks and organize various cooperatives to exterminate usury and speculative merchants.

9.  The government will complete water facilities, supply new agricultural tools, improve seeds, and organize cooperative farms.

10. The Soviet government will unite with the proletariat around the world to support the revolutionary movements of all oppressed nations.

The above political programs have already been implemented in the Soviet areas, and were immediately implemented as soon as Changsha was occupied, and this basic program will be implemented without exception in the areas occupied by the communist army in the future. The discussions at the same conference regarding the basic methods of land revolution and the labor protection law are also quite important, so I will add them as notes, but the land law has a latent nature for the time being, and it is being implemented in Hunan, Hubei, Fujian, Guangdong, Jiangxi, Anhui, and others, and it will become the basic law of proletarian dictatorship when the national Soviet government is established.

A. Basic Methods of Land Revolution

1.  Confiscate land from landlords, warlords, monks, etc. who exploit farm rent.

2.  Confiscate the land of those who have actively participated in the counter-revolutionary movement.
However, middle farmers under the deceptive influence of landlords and local bullies are not regarded as the same as rich farmers.

3.  The confiscated land will be vested in the Soviet government, and the government will distribute land use rights according to the equal distribution law, and prohibit all sales, leases, tenancies, and mortgages of land, and invalidate existing land ownership certificates <57>, tenancy contracts, and mortgage certificates.

4.  Land distribution is decided at the village Soviet representative conference.
However, large-scale farms will not be divided and will be used as intensive cooperative farms.

5.  Large-scale forests, rivers, lakes, salt fields, farms, and mulberry gardens that were previously state-owned will all be under the jurisdiction and management of the Soviet government.

6.  All taxes on previously collected fields, taxes on land ownership certificates, and all harsh taxes will be abolished at once. Farmers who have received land distribution will pay a considerable public service fee, and the amount will be determined according to the principle of progressive tax rates established by the local Soviet government.

7.  If this ordinance cannot be implemented due to special circumstances in each county, the method will be decided at the county Soviet conference.

B. Labor Protection Law

1.  Establish an 8-hour workday, a 6-hour workday for underage workers, shorten the time for underground work and special work, and have night work last for a maximum of 4 hours, and have a continuous rest period of 24 hours or more once a week.

2.  Give holidays on various revolutionary anniversaries and other traditional holidays, and pay wages during this period.

3.  Set the minimum wage at 40 yuan per month.

4.  Abolish the use of underage workers under the age of 16 and the increase in working hours for female workers doing violent and unsanitary work.

5.  Female workers will be given 6 weeks after childbirth and 5 days of rest per month once a month, and wages will be paid during this period. The employer will establish daycare centers for babies and allow female workers to breastfeed freely, and abolish the apprenticeship system.

The following policies regarding the protection and relief of workers have extreme regulations that make it impossible for employers to manage their businesses. This promotes the nationalization of industry and has the same points as those adopted in Russia after the New Economic Policy <58>.

In other words, employers must make every effort to maintain the health of workers by installing the most complete sanitation, insurance, and prevention facilities in the factory and preventing unfortunate events from occurring.

When a worker or his family member suffers from illness or injury, the employer will bear the cost and pay wages for the period. And the employer must pay the expenses necessary for the cultural projects managed by the labor union, and pay wages to workers who cannot work as union affairs. In addition, the same law stipulates that workers must be notified one month in advance when closing or reorganizing the business, and two months' severance pay must be paid, and the lives of retired workers must be maintained for two months. In addition, the representative rights of labor unions are recognized, collective agreements are approved, and the union elects labor and production inspectors to supervise labor protection projects. The same law stipulates that employers who violate the labor protection law will be subject to administrative or judicial sanctions by the government. And for workers' illness, disability, death, childcare, marriage, etc., social protection will be implemented, and the insurance premium will be borne by the employer. If the employer implements the above reporter's regulations, the employer will have no choice but to be destroyed, and if he does not implement it, he will be destroyed. In other words, such regulations are enacted on the premise of the socialization of enterprises.

III
Based on the various decisions of the aforementioned 1st National Soviet Congress, the Central Party of the Chinese Communist Party newly discussed the implementation methods of establishing the Soviet regime, passed a lengthy resolution on the current political tasks, and then summarized this into 65 outlines in an easy-to-understand manner, calling it the Outline for Discussion, and had each party member and related organization report the results of the discussion to the Central Party. As a principle, this resolution states that the current task of the Communist Party is to call on the propertyless masses to organize the struggle against warlord warfare, unite with various revolutionary movements, incite a general riot, seize the power of the warlords, and achieve the victory of the revolution. In order to carry this out, it was decided to focus on the armed riots of urban workers along with the riots of the armed communist peasant army in the countryside <59>, to capture one or several provinces centered on Wuhan, and to create the first step in seizing national power. However, it was argued that the focus should be placed on political strikes by urban workers, general strikes, training of armed workers, etc. to organize the central force of the armed rebellion, while more emphasis should be placed on the expansion of the Red Army in the countryside in light of the current situation.

1.  Expand the Red Merchants' Association among urban workers and organize large factory committees to cause political strikes whenever the opportunity arises.

2.  Local riots are one of the main tasks in the current general course. The purpose of the local riots is to seize local cities and establish local Soviet regimes, and to unite with future central cities to serve as the basis for national rebellion and national Soviet organization.
However, the essence of the local riot is to seize the locality, organize the Soviet regime, and immediately mobilize the expanded masses to advance towards neighboring areas again.

3.  The rapid expansion of the Red Army is the main task at present. In particular, China, which is under the rule of the warlord system, cannot achieve a national revolution without a large-scale Red Army. Currently, the party in the Soviet areas must mobilize the masses on a large scale to participate in the Red Army.

4.  The Red Army should first develop towards major cities and transportation roads, and the past guerrilla tactics (partisan-style tactics) should be fundamentally avoided.

5.  The soldier movement is also one of the main tasks, and the purpose is to cause mutiny in the warlord army. In addition, it is necessary to go one step further and plan a soldier riot against the warlords after having them participate in the Red Army.

Again, the military experts from each Red Army representative who participated in the 1st National Soviet Area Representatives Conference cooperated with the military members belonging to the Chinese Communist Party around late June to hold an expanded military committee meeting in Shanghai in extreme secrecy and resolved to implement the decisions of the aforementioned conference and the Central Party of the Communist Party mainly in the military aspect. The results were kept secret in the countryside <60>, and when the Red Army representatives returned to their posts, the Red Army in Hunan, Jiangxi, Hubei, etc. suddenly began activities and occupied Changsha. It was seen that they attempted to capture Wuhan and advance along the Nanxun Line. Before and after the Changsha activities, the Soviet Representatives Conference of employees of the Longhai, Jinpu, Huning, and Huhan four railways was held in Shanghai, and a lengthy declaration on armed rebellion was passed and eight articles of the struggle platform were resolved to decide on the tactics of the railway riot. Thus, various communist organizations in Shanghai completed the organization of an armed regulatory team of about 500 people and are working to increase it to 3,000, and organized armed groups in Nanjing, Wuhu, Anqing, etc. After August, the communist army, which raised its momentum by occupying Changsha and Nanchang, advanced towards Hankou and Jiujiang, bombarded Wuhan, and occupied Huachang and Anxiang north of Dongting Lake, and the main force of the communist army is invading Jiangxi and approaching the capital Nanchang. It is said that the strategy decided in June of last year has continued with constant riots, attacks, and seizures, and will be further expanded in the future. On the other hand, the Manchurian branch of the Chinese Communist Party, which was encouraged by the news of the occupation of Changsha, held the All-Manchurian Communist Party Congress on August 1, planned to cause riots in various places, and has been continuously causing riots in the North Manchurian Harbin and Jilin Province regions to this day. The Jilin Province incident was the result of the machinations of the Manchurian Communist Party after that, although it was so before August.

IV
The communist army that attacked Changsha, the capital of Hunan Province, on July 27 was the 5th Army of Peng Dehuai, which was attacking Daye County and Yuezhou. About 600 members of the 5th Army's plainclothes unit infiltrated Changsha City collectively on the 25th and began to carry out a plan to disrupt the city from the 26th. Among the plainclothes unit, there were also women's armies and boys' armies, all of whom drew white stars on red cloth and decorated Soviet badges with crossed sickles and mallets in black in the center, and after creating a state of no police with flags, they set fire to the Provincial Government, the courthouse, the prison, the Provincial Bank, He Jian's residence, and other houses that were not likely to be burned, causing extreme <61> chaos. At the same time, they shot more than 50 counter-revolutionaries and the wealthy who had been investigated in advance. On the 28th, they published the Red Army Daily, announcing the confiscation of foreign-capital enterprises and banks and 16 Soviet principles, and at the same time, they posted posters everywhere to incite the propertyless masses of Changsha. On the 29th, regular troops of about 300 people entered the city, attacking and looting Japanese consulates, English, American, Italian, German, and French commercial companies and banks. Changsha was completely occupied by the communist army, and on August 1, the Hunan Provincial Soviet Government was established, and Li Lisan, a famous figure, was elected as the chairman, Peng Dehuai and Ga Yong and 7 others were elected as the Revolutionary Military Committee, and Yuan Guoping was elected as the head of the Political Department. They placed a portrait of Lenin instead of Sun Yat-sen's portrait in the auditorium, decorated the hall with red flags, and made the city hang red revolutionary flags.

After the establishment of the government, the organization of each labor union committee and the city administration propaganda in each field began to operate quickly, and after ordering a ban on arson and guaranteeing security to stores, banks, shops, and wealthy people's houses, they paid three months' house tax in advance. They confiscated property without warning from valuable stores, ordered compulsory procurement from grain and food stores, distributed the levied goods to the poor, and sold the rest to the general public at the lowest price to exchange for cash. Of course, the Soviet government monopolized foreign rice and ½, banks, etc., and officials appointed by the Soviet government proceeded with the work.

Political propaganda department members held various public gatherings, and the tasks of the propertyless class, Soviet power, etc. were actively publicized in the Chinese revolution, and the government continued to implement various policies day and night. It is said that the swift and organic activities of the Soviet institutions within just five days from the occupation to the retreat and the achievements and influence they left behind were only amazing. The week-long experience that He Jian taught the citizens of Changsha, although it was a week long, will never disappear from the citizens' minds, and since the propertyless class has learned and seen what they <62> want to learn and desire before their eyes, even after the communist army retreats, the general public will admire the communist army and welcome it as a true leader and city administrator when the communist army reoccupies it. This can be said to be the effect of the Chinese communist army's famous "guerrilla warfare method."

When the Changsha incident reached the central government, the Nationalist government held an emergency cabinet meeting on August 4 to take countermeasures.

1.  Even if He Jian has some circumstances, it is difficult to not question his responsibility for abandoning Changsha and causing international problems by retreating without a fight, and he will be summoned for questioning after investigating the incident as the person in charge. (After the end of the North-South war, He Jian was imprisoned and questioned.)

2.  Send three divisions including Xia Douyin urgently and appoint Xia Douyin as the commander-in-chief of bandit suppression in northern Hunan and Jiangxi.

3.  At the political meeting on the 6th, formally apologize for the protests from Japan and the United States with official documents.

4.  Chen Shaokuan, the vice minister of the Navy, was ordered to assist in suppressing bandits in the upper reaches of the river, etc., and Japan dispatched 200 Shanghai Marines to Hankou to prepare four destroyers in Sasebo to be dispatched at any moment, citing the protection of the lives and property of Japanese residents in southern China. England, the United States, and other powers also dispatched marines and warships to the upper reaches of the Yangtze River to faithfully suppress the revolutionary army.

The communist army, which made He Jian, the only tactician of the central army and a veteran general who had been polished in hundreds of battles, collapse, was already retreating as planned when He Jian was betting his life to launch a general offensive on Changsha. After the recapture, He Jian's white "terror" was beyond words. Martial law was established with one brigade, absolutely prohibiting passage, and about 300 innocent citizens were shot on suspicion of being remnants of the plainclothes unit, and the anger of the general public reached its peak. Young men flocked to the communist army that had retreated.

The communist army succeeded in achieving its initial plan by occupying Changsha, which is the avant-garde battle of the national armed rebellion, and by shaking the public sentiment through the occupation and riot of one city, and by obtaining as much cash and <63> weapons and ammunition as possible. The government army declared that the situation had stabilized after recapturing Changsha about 10 days later, but the communist army would not insist on staying in Changsha, and when the government army recaptured it after achieving its intended purpose, the power of the Red Army was when Changsha was temporarily useless land. In fact, the Red Army had about 10,000 people join the Red Army by occupying Changsha, and acquired about 5,000 rifles and about 10,000 rounds of ammunition by occupying the Public Security Bureau and disarming the government army, and obtained about 8 million won in cash through compulsory collection and looting.

"The guns in Nanchang and Guangdong have already been used by us many times, but Changsha still has new guns full, so this tempted us. However, Changsha is not suitable as our first base because there are imperialist warships," which is said to be the reason for their retreat from Changsha.

And after sweeping and destroying the imperialist warlords without leaving any roots, they shot more than 90 well-known figures, including He Jian's biological brother He Shil, Cao Bowen, the head of Hunan Civil Rights, and Luo, a staff officer of the Qingxiang Command, as well as wealthy people and foreign missionaries, in the week before and after the retreat. On the Japanese side, 22 places including the consulate and official residences, Mitsui Yoko, elementary schools, financial associations, Zaishengchang Steamship Bureau, Nisshin Steamship Company, and naval residences, as well as 3 stores and hospitals, were burned and looted, and on the British side, 7 places including the British-American Tobacco office and warehouse were looted. On the American side, the Texas Oil Company office, the same warehouse, the Standard office and the same warehouse, schools, hospitals, churches, and tobacco companies were destroyed, and 3 stores run by Germans and the Italian Catholic Church were all looted and burned, and about 10 other dominant cultural institutions of other foreign countries were destroyed. It can be said that the communist army's retaliatory destructive actions were thorough enough.

And indirectly, by causing international problems and undermining the dignity of the Nationalist government, and by exposing his position and identity through Chiang Kai-shek's submissive <64> apology and huge compensation to the imperialist powers, thereby undermining public trust, and by exposing the disagreement of the imperialist powers due to the attitude of non-interference by the United States, which reserves future rights for damage to residents, the communist army had additional gains in causing and inducing conflicts of interest and emotional deterioration between the imperialists.

The communist army bombarded the rice market, but the United States only questioned the responsibility with a protest letter for the sake of appearances, and both Japan and England also could not do what they had in mind in order to avoid startling the fish they were trying to catch with "mitt".

V
Due to paper relations, I will only write an outline of the current situation of the communist army and the Soviet forces and activities. The communist army usually cultivates unmarried workers and strong farmers with few relatives as key units, followed by unemployed workers and vagrants, and prisoners of war from the White Army and reactionary people. Poor farmers are the first, accounting for 60%, followed by soldiers accounting for 15%, workers accounting for 30%, and unemployed workers and vagrants accounting for 22%.

In mid-May of last year, the communist party's organ published the current state of the Red Army. According to this, the current Red Army, from the 1st to the 14th, has more than 80,000 rifles, more than 150 cannons, 900 machine guns, 6,700 pistols, more than 170 mortars, and 6 aircraft (3 Korean youths are active as pilots), so the soldiers are almost armed, and it is clear how solid their military power and combat power are compared to the fact that the government army usually has only 2,000 to 3,000 firearms for every 5,000 soldiers. The occupation of Changsha saw an increase of more than 7,000 rifles and more than 50 machine guns, and an increase of more than 10,000 communists, so the military power must have been greatly expanded as of November.

Red Army 1st Army - Commanded by He Jizhen, a graduate of the Huangpu Military Academy, a veteran communist army with experience in armed struggle since 1923, based near Hubei and Henan provinces, with 5,000 soldiers.

Red Army 2nd Army - The heroic army of the Red Army commanded by He Long, who became famous by capturing Guangdong the year before <65>, with more than 6,000 soldiers and many Korean youths participating. The weapons are the most solid among the Red Army, based in the Soviet area in western Hubei Province.

Red Army 3rd Army - Commanded by Cai Shenxi, a graduate of the Huangpu Military Academy, who recently merged with the Red Guard Army, which is gaining power in western Jiangxi Province, with about 4,000 soldiers.

Red Army 4th Army - The so-called Zhu Mao's Red Army, the most powerful and fierce among the communist armies, is a terrifying magic army that is shocking the Chinese ruling class. The leaders are the famous Mao Zedong and Zhu De. Zhu De became inclined to communism while studying at the German Military Academy and joined the Communist Party after returning home. Mao Zedong is a talented man who is known as Kongming (Zhuge Liang) in tactics. With 14,000 troops, it is the brave armed worker and peasant center, equipped with aircraft squadrons, machine gun squadrons, artillery squadrons, etc., and is based on the border between Fujian and Jiangxi provinces, moving around Guangdong, Hunan, and Jiangxi provinces, destroying the government army and causing the central government and the imperialist powers to tremble.

Red Army 5th Army - The Peng Dehuai Army that advanced on Changsha and Jiujiang, with about 3,000 soldiers.

Other small but elite 11th Army, organized by Guang Jixun, a graduate of the Japanese Army Academy, the 6th Army, and the Soviet area in the Haifeng Lufeng area near the Dongjiang River in Guangdong Province.

The 12th Army with 6,000 soldiers, led by Deng Zihui, a famous Marxist as a youth from a student background.

The 14th Army, with only 2,000 soldiers, is based in eastern Jiangsu Province and is a headache for Chiang Kai-shek.

In addition to the powerful armed peasant armies in Henan, Hebei, and Anhui provinces, the total number of Red Army soldiers is tens of thousands, and the determination and supernatural tactics trained with their elite weapons and class spirit will never be destroyed by Chiang Kai-shek's armies. This can be seen from the fact that He Jian, the brain of the central army and the top military strategist, could not resist the 5th Army with only 3,000 soldiers with his army of 7,000 soldiers and hid in a rat hole.

The above communist army is organized and planned in everything, uses modern tactics, and completely communicates with friendly forces by wireless telegraph <66>. After infiltrating the attacked area with plainclothes units in advance, a meticulous and detailed attack map and blacklist are created based on their investigation reports, and the methods of demanding money from local bullies, inferior gentry, landlords, banks, large stores, and foreigners, arson, massacre, etc. are decided and implemented according to the program at the same time as the occupation.

And as much as possible, the focus is on occupying prosperous cities, looting all weapons, and during this time, making the greatest effort to promote the goals and attention of the communist army to the citizens, making the propertyless citizens aware and sympathetic, and guaranteeing their interests and rights. Even after retreating, it succeeds in gaining their spiritual support, so the communist army's "guerrilla" tactics have a truly ingenious and dual effect.

VI
China is gradually turning into a Soviet area of red territory, and its map is changing color. The areas dyed red are fundamentally transforming social organization, and creative facilities are reorganizing the lives of the people and leading them to new ideas and systems. The most new test that humanity encounters, such as the equal distribution of land, the guarantee of autonomous rights, various socialist cultural facilities, and the training of true revolutionary spirit and forces, is being warned by them.

This Soviet area is expanding day by day, and Soviet regimes are being established everywhere in the south-central region. Recently, it has penetrated northward, and it is in a situation to encompass all of China soon.

At the end of 1929, an area embracing a population of 70 million was calculated to be within the Soviet area, so this year it will reach twice that number. According to the communist party's announcement, the national Soviet area is roughly as follows.

Jiangxi Province: In 1928, 40 out of 81 counties were in the Soviet area, but as of May of last year, all 67 counties in Jiangxi Province, except for the area near Nanchang, are red territory, and since March of last year, 100,000 farmers have joined the struggle. The Gan River basin in the central part of the province is not a Soviet area from Ji'an to Xiajiang, or an activity area of armed workers and farmers. In June of last year, the capital Nanchang was facing a crisis as it saw the advance of the communist army. You will know from this news that the governor of Jiangxi Province could not suppress the communist army and submitted his resignation.

Hubei Province...In 1928, 30 out of 72 counties were Soviet areas. As of May of last year, the entire province except for the Wuhan Three Towns is a Soviet area.
The Red Army is active dozens of miles outside the Hankou area, so this is also in crisis.
Hunan Province...In 1928, 40 out of 75 counties were Soviet areas.

Guangdong Province...At the end of 1928, 39 out of 94 counties
In May of last year, 26 counties including Hailufeng increased.

Henan Province...At the end of last year, 7 parts out of 89 counties were Soviet areas.
In May of this year, there are Soviet areas in the south and Hubei Province, and Guangshan Luoshan in Nanzheng have been newly incorporated.

Guangxi Province...At the end of 1928, the Soviet area in 83 counties was 10 counties.
At the end of May of last year, Baiyi Yanglisi and about 10 other counties increased.

Sichuan Province...This province, where large and small warlords are in power, is only in contact with the so-called <67> "Divine Army Movement" and the Red Army, so there is still no large-scale Soviet area, but 67 counties will still be red territory.

Fujian Province...All counties in the west are Soviet areas and are gradually expanding to the north and south, and the areas in complete red territory are 13 counties in the west, 7 counties in the south, and 9 counties in the north.

Anhui Province...There are Soviet areas in Yingshan, Huoshan, and Liushan, and the entire northern region has been redized.

Jiangsu Province...More than 20 counties including Xuanxing, Wuxi, and Jingjiang are Soviet areas.

Zhejiang Province...Peasant troops in 38 out of 78 counties have risen, and more than 10 counties have already been incorporated into the Soviet area.

In each of the above Soviet areas, the land platform decided at the National Soviet Congress held in May of last year is being fully implemented, and various facilities are being successfully operated under the Soviet regime. In each county, the peasant committee, the Communist Youth League, the Communist Children's Corps, the Artificial Association, and clubs and organizations from all walks of life are organized, and political schools, labor industrial schools, adult schools, and soldier schools are established in the area to cultivate communism and practical knowledge.

And there are many places where collective farming systems are implemented to organize cooperative farms, but the Soviet activities and facilities are omitted due to space limitations.

VII
On November 7, the leader of the Chinese Communist Party, who attended the revolutionary anniversary ceremony in Ryeong, "Avatovsk," declared the establishment of the Chinese Soviet government to the world on November 11.

This is immediately after Chiang Kai-shek defeated Yan Ping's Northern Army and promised the people peace and good governance with the National Assembly as the military unification of China with the triumphant song of victory.

However, Chiang Kai-shek knows well what the fatal obstacle to peace and good governance is. The Red Devil of the Soviet


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제37호
발행일	1931년 02월 01일
기사제목	世界를 威脅하는 中國赤色共産軍, 그 組織과 活動
필자	金世鎔
기사형태	논설

世界를 威脅하는 中國赤色共産軍, 그 組織과 活動
						金世鎔
一
中國國民資本의 예속적 성질에 관한 단순한 분석과 민주주의적 赤色革命이 필연적으로 사회주의적 계급투쟁으로 전개되는 동시에 勞働과 농민이 全革命行程의 근본적 동력이 되며 따라서＜52＞ 都市工人투쟁과 함께 전국적 범위로 확대되여가는 농촌혁명의 대한 鳥瞰은 먼저번 本誌에서 맛 첫음으로 이로부터 昨年 7월 30일 공산군의 長沙占領의 經濟 及 의의 밋 점령지역 소붸트 활동에 대하야 소개하겟다.
「변화하는 현실에 병행치 못하는 의식은 昨日의 현실을 반영한다」...「동시에 변화하는 현실의 근본적 조건과 전체적 특징을 파악관찰치 못하면 混迷에서 기형적 의식에 빠진다.」
제국주의계급으로부터 動員된 一切 언론기관과 이의 대변자는 말할 것도 업고 변화하는 중국의 현실에 그 근본적 推進力을 이해 파악치 못한 자는 전자는 의식적으로 후자는 무의식적으로 중국의 전국토를 風痱하고 잇는 농민혁명군을 掠奪殺戮을 목적하는 匪徒라고 보며 그의 행동을 규칙업고 목표업는 것이라 하야 馬賊이나 강도로 본다. 그러나 제국주의 열강과 중국군벌은 그들이 말하는 土匪와 강도에 공포를 눗기고 이를 절별코저 최대한 노력을 한다. 국민정부가 열강제국에게 外飾는 엇덧든지 사실상 屈徒한 것과 汪精衛 等 개량주의파가 변절하야 軍閥閻馮과 야합한 것은 土匪와 강도를 진압하고 적한 것이 이유라면 이 土匪는 50만의 군대와 幾億萬圓의 자본계급을 배경한 장개석으로 하여금 손문의 遣囑을 변절하고 국민혁명을 열강에게 밀매하야 그의 무력적 원조를 밧게하리만치 장개석에게 다시 업는 공포의 존재일 것이다.
이 자각한 土匪와 강도의 행동은 변화하는 중국의 현실을 이해하는데 근본적 전제가 되는 동시 현실을 지배하는 유일한 기본적 세력으로써 중국의 혁명과 건설의 임무를 가젓다. 昨日의 현실을 반영한 의식을 가진 브로조아 정치가와 時事論者는 今日의 장개석을 북벌시대의 장개석으로 알고 아즉도 중국혁명의 領奪者로 하야 이의 一擧一動에 북장구친다.
그러나 부로조아 언론가 중에도 怜悧한 자는 去般長沙사건은 중국 전토를 위협한 조직적 적색공포라 하야 제국주의국가의 철저한 대책을 역설하고 조직된＜53＞ 공산군은 전란의 중국에 잇서 사회조직을 촉진하는 근본적 존재라 하야 비명을 하며 엇던 자는 長沙사건으로 공산군의 정체는 閻馮將의 남북전쟁보담다 더욱 자본주의는 1928년 12월 광동혁명과 쏘벳트 정부조직보담 이상의 의의와 공포를 去번 長沙사건에서 그야말노 촉진하고 잇다.
그 이유는 공산군이 長沙를 점령한 것은 南方諸省을 거이 점령하고 주력을 중부지방에 집중하야 장개석의 주권기반에 逼迫하엿다는 지역적 의의로다.
또 長沙점령시까지 정확하게 알지 못하든 공산군의 정체가 長沙사건으로 비로소 알게 되엿다는 사실보다 더욱 長沙사건발기 당시 외국영사관을 습격하고 외국 착취기관을 여지 업시 소각하는 동시 열강의 軍盤과 주둔군과 交火하엿다는 사태에 표면적 수단이 전례업는 暴虐性을 가젓다는 것보다도 1930년 5월 上海에서 비밀히 개최되엿든 공산당 전국대회와 쏘붯드 전국대회 혁명군사 위원회에서 결의 통과된 공산혁명의 기본계획 중 제 1차 계획이 이 長沙점령으로 실행케 된 점에 또 금후도 그럿켓지만 長沙점령을 위하야 그 2개월여나 치밀한 계획과 준비를 하야 공산군의 군법이 얼마나 교묘하고 강력한 것을 나타낸 점에 잇서 제국주의자의 心膽을 떨게 하고 공산군의 정ㅊ와 그의 활동이 중국현실을 지배하는 힘이고 변화케 하는 근본적 추진력임을 표면에 들어내게 한 것에 大重性이잇다.

二
長江일대에 蟠蜛하든 공산군-공산당의 별동대가 湖南湖北江西 三省을 탈취코저 한 계획은 남북전쟁이 이러나고 정부군의 대부분이 전선으로 동원된 虛罅을 타서 일제히 봉기하고저 3개월전부터 면밀한 계획을 하여섯다.
중국공산당과 혁명군사위원회에서는 작년 初頭로부터 展次 重大회의를 거듭하야 중앙당부와 지방공산계 단체 밋 농민공산당이 전국적 범위로 계속적 무장폭동 쏘뷧드 정권수립에 관한 협의를 하고＜54＞ 작년 5월 하순에는 상해에서 각지에 산재한 쏘뷧트구역 대표자 대회를 소집하야 전국 쏘빗트 정부수립과 쏘뷧트 정부의 政綱 밋 同 정부의 실시할 중요법령에 관한 구체적 결의가 잇섯고 6월 상순에는 공산당 중앙정치국회의를 열고 엇더케하야 전국적 소베트 정부를 수립할가하는 결정적 방법에 대하야 협의를 한 후의 결의에 따라 6월 하순경에 상해에서 공산군 군사위원회를 소집하야 소베트 정부수립을 목표로 한 紅軍의 군사적 방략에 대한 토의를 하얏는데 長沙사건의 경과와 중국공산당이 今後 실현코저 하는 諸계획이 엇떠한 것이며 이 기본계획이 얼마나 중대성을 가진 것을 아가 위하야 長沙사건진상을 말하기 전에 각 회의의 선언결의를 간단히 소개하겟다.
이상 선언결의는 중국공산당 기관지인 「紅軍日報」와 同黨에서 출판한 비밀문서 「蘇維境區域之紅軍」 등에 발표되엇든 것이라고 하니 信憑할 수 잇슬 줄 안다.
전국 소베트 대회의 선언에 의하면 5월에 개최된 同대회는 민국 16년 광동성 廣州에 건립되엿든 소베트 사업을 완성하고 중국의 독립적 자유와 무산계급해방을 期하기 위하야 중국공산당과 中華全國總工會議 주권 하에 개최되고 각 소베트 구역대표와 전국산업중심지의 노동자 농민 병사 貧民 혁명청년 등으로 조직된 혁명단체의 대표가 출석한 席上에서 전국 소베트 정권수립을 위한 임무와 전략을 협정하는 동시에 소베트 정부의 강령과 정권하의 시행될 幾多중요한 법령을 통과하엿다고 한다.
전국적 소베트 정권수립의 戰路
전국 소베트 정권수립은 필연적으로 심각한 계급투쟁을 激成하고 정부군과 列國의 군사적 逼迫은 보다 더욱 맹렬하게 될 것이니 이에 대항책으로써 혁명적 무장역량의 증대 즉 홍군의 확장을 도모하고 세계각국의 혁명투쟁과 밀접한 연락을 가저야 할 것이며 이상의 원칙적「코-스」를 실현하기 위한 細目的 방법으로써는＜55＞
一. 국민당 北方軍閥政造派 西山派給 제3당이 如何한 一派라도 모도 다 제국주의의 走狗임으로 이들을 소멸식키기 전에는 중국을 열강으로부터 독립케 하고 농민군중을 해방치 못할 것이라는 것을 철저하게 군중의 뇌리에 刻銘케 할 것.
二. 열강이 침략을 밧고 오는 국내소수 민족은 분립과 자유연합의 완전한 자치권이 잇슴을 승인하고 각 소수민족의 軍國主義반대 漢族地主反對 封建세력반대 등 민족해방투쟁을 찬조, 현재 존재하는 紅軍으로 하여금 그 수단 여하를 불문하고 될 수 잇는대로 그 만흔 무기를 취득케 하야 군중의 무장에 부족이 업도록 할 것.
四. 현재 편성되여 잇는 紅軍 及 각 도시에 잇는 노동자 빈민으로 하여금 수시 隨所의 폭동을 續起케 함으로써 인심을 擾亂하고 점차 이 폭동적 趨勢를 전국적으로 확대하야 전국적 무장 반란의 소지를 만들 것.
五. 각 단체의 책임자 及 홍군이 군사위원은 전국적 정세에 부단히 면밀한 주의를 하고 중앙당부와 밀접 연락을 할 것.
다음 대회에서는 현재 각지에 존재한 소베드 구역에서 직시로 실시하는 동시에 전국 소베트 정권이 수립될 때 기본정강으로서 十項을 결정하얏는데 그 개요는 아래와 갓다.
一. 종래 중국과 열강제국 내에 체결적 一切 조약을 무효로 하고 외채를 취소하며 제국주의적 열강이 중국영토 내에 설치한 一切의 은행과 기업공장을 몰수할 것.
이는 제국주의에 대한 치명적 타격을 주는 것으로 1917년 10월 혁명 이후 勞農로서아에서 실행한 것고 동일한 政綱이다.
二. 노동자 농민의 무장을 실행하고 병사에게도 토지와 노동을 주어서 노동자 농민 병사 빈민의  대표자회의에서 정권을 관리케함.
三. 노동조건을 개선하는 最低債銀制를 정하며 실업, 보험, 사회보험을 실시하고 노동검사소를 설치할 것.
四. 지주, 교회, 廟宇, 祠堂의 소유토지를 몰수하고 토지국유를 실행한 후 합리적으로 토지사용권을 분배함.
五. 민족자결의 원칙에 근거하야 一切 소수민족에게 완전한 분립과 자유연합의 권리를 갓게함.
六. 一切 무산군중은 集合, 結社, 언론, 파업, 자유를 가짐.
七. 一切 酷稅 强稅를 폐지하고 累進的 소득세를 실행케 함.
八. 정부는 농민은행을 설립하고 각종 조합을 조직하야 고리대업, 투기상인을 總滅케함.
九. 정부은 水利시설을 완전케 하야 신식의 농구를 공급하고 종자를 개량하야 협동농장을 조직함.
十. 소베트 정부는 전세계 무산계급과 연합하야 一切 被壓迫민족의 혁명운동을 원조함.
이상 諸政綱은 임이 소베트 지대에서 실시되엿스며 長沙에서도 점령하자 즉시 실행하고얏고 今後 공산군에게 점령되는 지역에는 이 기본 정강이 남김업시 실시될 것이다. 토지혁명의 기본방법과 노동보호법에 관한 同대회의 협의도 頗히 중대함으로 附記하겟스나 토지법은 당분간 잠행적 성질을 가지고 잇고 노동보호법과 아울너 湖南 湖北, 福建 廣東, 江西, 安徵 등 기타에도 속속 실행되여 가고 전국적 소베트 정부가 수립될 때 무산계급독재의 기본법이 될 것이다.
가. 토지혁명의 기본방법
一. 토지, 군벌, 승려 등 소작료를 착취하는 토지는 몰수함.
二. 반혁명운동에 적극적 잠가한 자의 토지는 몰수함.
단 지주와 土豪의 欺瞞的 영향 밋데 잇는 中農은 부농과 동일하게 見做치 안음.
三. 몰수한 토지는 이를 소베트 정부에 귀속케 하고 정부는 평등지배법에 의하야 토지사용권을 분배하며 一切토지으 매매 임대차 小作抵當 등을 금지하고 종래의 토지소유증＜57＞ 소작 계약서 저당권증서는 무효로 함.
四. 토지분배는 향촌 소베드 대표회의에서 이를 결정한다.
단 대규모의 농장은 불할치 안코 집약적 협동농장으로 할 것.
五. 대규모의 산림, 河道, 湖沼, 염전, 농장, 桑園으로써 종래 국유이든 것은 전부 소베트 정부의 관할 경영에 歸케 함.
六. 이전 징수된 田地의 조세 토지소유증에 관한 租稅 及 一切 苛稅는 일제히 페지함. 토지분배를 바든 농민은 상당한 公益費를 지출할 것이며 그 數目은 當該 지방 소베트 정부에서 제정한 누진세의 원칙에 의하야 결정함.
七. 각 縣에 잇서 특수한 사정에 의하야 본 법령을 실행치 못할 시는 縣소베트 대회에서 該방법을 議定함.
나. 노동보호법
一. 8시간노동제확립 未成年工 6시간노동제 지하작법 특수작업의 시간단축 夜業은 최장 4時間一週日 1차는 24시 이상의 계속적 휴식시간.
一. 각종 혁명기념일 기타 종래의 절기에는 휴가를 주고 이동안 임금도 지불할 것.
一. 最低賃銀 1개월 40원을 제정할 것.
一. 16세 미만의 미성년공의 사용과 과격하고 비위생적 작업을 하는 女工의 時間 增作 등을 폐지할 것.
一. 女工에게는 産兒 이후 6주간과 월 1회 계획 5일간 休養日을 주는 동시 그동안 임금도 지불하고 산아를 위하야 雇主는 탁아소를 설립하고 여공의 哺乳자유를 주며 徒弟제도를 폐지함.
다음 노동자의 保障救恤에 관한 정책을 雇主로 하야곰 기업경영을 불가능케 할 극단한 규정을 하엿다. 이는 공업의 국영과정을 촉진하는 것으로 新경제정책실시 후 露西亞에서＜58＞ 채용한 것과 동일한 점이 잇다.
즉 雇主는 공장내에 가장 완비한 위생 보험방지 등 시설을 하야 극력 노동자의 健康保持에 노력하며 불행한 사태발생을 방지하여야 한다.
노동자 又는 그의 가족이 질병상해가 발생한 때는 雇主는 同용을 부담하고 右기간의 賃銀을 지불하게 할 것이다. 그리고 雇主는 노동조합이 관리하는 문화사업에서 필요한 비용을 지출하고 조합사무로서 작업에 종사치 못하는 노동자에게는 임금을 지불하여야 한다. 기타 同法은 停業 정리할 때는 一箇月전에 노동자에게 통지하며 이개월분의 토직금을 급여하고 퇴직한 노동자의 생활을 2개월간 保持케 될 것을 규정하얏다. 이외에 노동조합의 대표권 단체계약을 호가인하고 조합에서는 노동과 生産監察員을 선출하야 노동보호사업을 감독케하며 노동보호법의 위반한 雇主는 정부의 行政又는 사법 처분을 바들 것을 규정하엿다. 그리고 노동자의 질병, 廢殘, 사망, 양육, 결혼 기타를 위하야 사회보호를 실시하며 보험금은 雇主가 부담할 것이라 하얏스니 上記者 법규대로 雇主가 실행한다면 雇主는 멸마알 도리박게 업고 또 실행치 아니치 못할 것임으로 멸망하게 될 것이다. 즉 如此한 법규는 기업의 사회주의화를 전제하고 제정한 것이다.

三
중국공산당 중앙당부에서는 前記 1회 전국 소베트대회의 諸種決定을 기본으로 하야 소베트 정권수립의 실행방법에 관하야 신둥 토의한 결과 목전 정치임무에 관한 결의한 장문으 결의문을 통과하고 다시 이것을 65綱으로 평이하게 요약하야 토론대강이란 일홈으로 各黨員 及 관련단체로 하여금 토의한 결과를 중앙당부로 보고케 하얏는데 이 결의는 먼저 원칙으로써 공산당의 당면 임무는 무산대중을 號召하야 군벌전쟁 반대투쟁을 조직하고 각종 혁명운동과 합파케 하야 總暴動을 激發하며 군벌의 정권을 탈취하야 혁명의 승리를 획득함에 잇다고 한 후 이를 실행함에는 향촌의 무장공산농민군의＜59＞ 폭동에 따러 도시공인의 무장폭동에도 주력하야 武漢을 중심으로 一省 又난 數省을 공략하야 전국적 정권탈취의 第一步를 만들기로 하엿다. 그러나 도시노동자의 정치파업 총동맹휴업노동자무장의 훈련 등에 치중하야 무장폭동의 중심역량을 조직하는 한편 목하 정세로 보아서 향촌의 홍군 호가장에 일층 주력할 것을 주장하얏다.
一. 도시노동자 중에 赤商工會을 확장하고 大工場위원회를 조직하야 기회 오는대로 政治罷工을 이르키게 할 것.
二. 지방폭동은 목전 총 코-스 중 주요임무의 하나이다. 지방폭동의 목적은 地方城市를 탈취하야 지방소베트 정권을 수립함에 잇고 장래 중심 도시와 합동하야 전국반란 전국소베트조직의 기초로 할 것이다.
단 지방폭동의 본질은 지방의 탈취와 소베트 정권을 조직하고 즉각으로 확대한 군중을 동원하야 다시 인접지역에 향하야 진공함에 잇다.
三. 紅軍의 맹렬한 확대는 목전의 주요임무이다. 특히 군벌제도의 지배하에 잇는 중국은 대규모의 홍군이 업고서는 전국적 혁명을 성취할 수 업다. 현재 소베트 구역의 당부는 막대한 범위로 군중을 동원하야 紅軍에 참가케 하여야 한다.
四. 紅軍은 먼저 주요도시와 교통도로를 향하야 발전하고 과거의 遊擊전술-(빨지산식 전술)은 근본적으로 피하여야 한다.
五. 병사운동도 주요임무의 하나로서 그 목적은 군벌군대의 兵變을 이르키는 此 외에 一步 나아가 이들을 홍군에 참가케 한 후 군벌반대의 병사폭동을 계획하여야 한다.
다시 제1회 전국 소베트 구역대표자대회에 참가하엿든 각 紅軍대표의 군사전문가는 6월 하순경 중국공산당에 소속되여 잇는 군사위원과 협동하야 확대군사위원회를 상해에서 극바ㅣ밀리에 개최하고 前述대회와 공산당 중앙당부의 각 결정을 主로 군사적 방면에서 이의 실행전술로 옴길 것을 결의하엿다. 이 결과는 향촌 비밀로서＜60＞ 외부에 알니지 안이하엿스니 홍군대표자가 任地에 도라간후 湖南, 江西, 湖北 등지의 홍군이 俄然 활동을 개시하야 長沙점령걀¼ 武漢공략 南潯沿線의 진출을 보게 되엿고 長沙활동을 전후하야 상해에서는 隴海, 津浦, 滬寧, 滬沆, 四鐵道 종업원의 소베트 대표대회가 개최되여 무장폭동에 관한 장문의 선언ㅇ 통과되고 투쟁강령 8개조를 결의하야 철도폭동의 책략을 결정하엿다. 그리하야 在상해의 각종 공산계단체에서는 5백여 명의 무장규찰대의 조직을 완성한 후 3천명까지 증원에 노력하고 南京 蕪湖 安慶 등에도 무장단을 조직하엿다. 8월 이후 長沙 南昌을 점령함으로 기세를 올닌 공산군이 漢口 九江으로 진격하고 武漢을 포격하엿스며 洞庭湖의 北方 花昌 安鄕 등지를 점령하고 다시 공산군주력부대가 江西에 침입하야 수도 南昌을 逼迫하고 잇는 중이라 하니 이상 작년 6월에 결정된 전략은 부단한 폭동, 공략, 탈취로 계속되여 나왓스며 今後로 더욱 확대될 것이다. 一方 長沙점령으 飛報에 활기를 어든 중국공산당 만주지부에선 8월 1일 全滿공산당대회를 열고 각지에 폭동을 이르키고저 획책을 한 후 今日까지 北滿 哈爾賓 間島지방에서 계속적으로 폭동을 이르키고 잇다. 間島사건을 8월 이전에도 그러하엿지마는 그 후는 만주공산당의 책동으로 이러난 사변이다.

四
7월 27일 湖南省 수도 長沙를 습격한 공산군은 大冶縣城과 岳州를 공략하든 彭德懷의 제5군이다. 제5군 便衣隊 6백여 명은 25일 집단적으로 長沙城內에 잠입하야 26일부터 시내 擾亂의 계획을 실행하얏는데 便衣隊 중에는 娘子軍 少年軍도 잇서 모두 赤地에 白色의 별(星)을 描出하고 중앙에 흑색으로 낫(鎌) 맛치(槌)를 交又한 소베트 徵章을 팔에 감고 장식한 충기를 가지고 無警察상태에 이르게 한 후 省政府, 재판소, 감옥, 省은행 何健 住宅 기타 類燒할 우려가 업는 가옥에 방화하야 극도한＜61＞ 혼란한 상태에 빠지게 하는 한편 미리 조사하엿든 반동분자 富豪 50여 명을 총살하엿다. 28일에는 홍군일보를 발행하야 외국자본의 企業 及 은행의 몰수 기타 소베트 정강 16개를 발표하는 동시에 도처에 포스타-를 貼付하야 長沙의 무산대중을 선동하고 29일에는 일본영사관을 비롯하야 英, 米, 伊, 獨, 佛 등 각 商事會社銀行을 습격약탈하는 同안에 정규군 3백여 명이 입성하야 長沙는 완전히 공산군에게 점령되고 8월 1일에는 湖南省소베트 정부를 수립하야 위원장으로는 유명한 李立三, 혁명군사위원으로는 彭德懷
駕龍 등 7명 정치부주임으로 袁國平이 選擧되엿는데 이들은 모두 新進氣銳한 공산주의자다. 공회당에 걸닐 孫文 초상대로 「레-닌」초상을 안치하야 滿堂을 赤旗色으로 장식하고 시내도 적색혁명기를 달게 하엿다.
정부수립후 각 工會위원회의 조직 각 방면의 시정선전에 敏速한 활동을 개시하고 상점은행전포 부호가옥에 放火禁止 命令와 보장담보로 3개월분 가옥세를 선납케 한 후 불응하는 자는 학살파괴방화를 하야 철저한 약탈을 하엿스며 귀중상점은 無警告로 소유물을 몰수하고 잡곡식료품점에는 강제조달을 명하야 징발품은 빈민의게 分給하고 남어지는 최저가격으로 일반시민의게 投賣하야 현금으로 박구엇스며 外米와 ¹½의 독점, 은행 독점은 물론이고 官公省 등 전부는 소베트 정부에서 임명된 관리로 사무를 진행하여 나갓다.
정치선전부원은 각종 민중집회를 개최하야 중국혁명에 대하 무산계급의 임무와 소베트 권력 기타의 선전이 機敏하게 활동하고 정부는 각종 施政의 실행에 晝宵를 계속하얏는데 점령이후 퇴각까지 불과 5일내에 소베트 기관의 敏速한 유기적 활동은 또 그들이 남긴 공적과 영향은 오즉 驚歎할 뿐이엿다한다. 何健이가 비록 長沙시민에게 가르킨 일주간의 경험은 시민의 뇌리에서 결코 소멸되지 안을 것이며 더욱 무산게급에 대하야 그들이＜62＞ 배우고저하는 바 또 欲求하든 것을 목전에 배우고 보고 하엿슴으로 공산군이 퇴각한 후라도 일반시민은 공산군을 欽慕하고 공산군이 再점령할 때는 참다운 지도자 시정자로서 환영할 것이다. 이는 중국공산군의 유명한 「게리라전법」의 효과라고 할 수 잇다.
長沙사변이 중앙정부에 도달되자 8월 4일 국민정부는 긴급각의를 열고 이 대책으로써
一. 何健이 다소 사정이 잇다하더라도 不戰퇴각하야 長沙를 放棄하고 국제문제를 惹起한 것은 불문에 附키 難하니 책임자로서 사건조사후 심문에 附함. (남북전쟁 종료후 何健의 감금심문이 잇섯다)
一. 夏斗寅 등의 三個師를 급파하고 夏斗寅을 湖南北과 江西의 土匪토벌총지휘에 명함.
一. 6일 정치회의에서 日米항의에 대하야 정식공문으로 사죄함.
一. 海軍部차장 陳紹寬으로써 上流 土匪토벌을 원조케 함 등 철저한 鎭滅책을 하고 일본측은 上海陸戰隊 2백명을 漢口에 급파하야 南支在留日人의 생명재산보호란 이유로 佐世保에 잇는 四驅逐艦을 명령 一下에 출동준비를 하엿스며 英米 기타 열강에서도 陸戰軍艦을 楊子江상류로 출동하야 혁명군 토벌에 충실하엿다.
중앙군 유일의 전술가로 百戰硏磨의 驍將 何健으로 하여금 潰走케 한 공산군의 비밀하고 기민하고 新出鬼沒한 행동을 何健이가 사명을 賭하야 長沙를 총공격할 때는 임이 주력부대는 예정 퇴각을 한 후이다. 탈환한 후 何健의 백색 「테로」는 언어에 絶하야 一旅團으로 계엄령을 設하여 통행을 절대금지하고 잔류편의대의 嫌疑로 無辜한 시민 3백여 명을 총살하엿슴으로 일반시민의 격앙은 극도에 달하엿스며 壯丁들은 퇴각한 공산군의 뒤를 쪼처 가입하는 자 속출하엿다.
공산군은 長沙점령으로써 전국적 무장폭동의 前衛戰인 一도시점령과 폭동으로써 인심을 동요하고 現金 及＜63＞ 武峯彈藥을 될 수 잇는대로 만히 획득함에 성공하야 당초 계획을 완전히 수행하엿다. 정부군이 약 10일후에 長沙를 탈환하여 사태안정이라고 선전하엿스나 공산군은 반드시 長沙에 머물너 잇기를 고집할 것이 안이고 예기목적을 달성하고 정부군이 奪回하엿슬 때는 임이 홍군의 세는 長沙가 일시적으로 무용한 토지로 되어 잇슬 때이다. 사실 홍군은 長沙점령으로 약 1만의 군중을 홍군에 참가케 하고 공안국 점령과 정부군의 무장해제로 약 5천 挺의 보병총과 약 1만발의 탄환을 획득하엿스며 强制徵收 及 약탈노서 8백여 만원 현금을 어덧섯다.
「南昌과 廣東의 총포는 임이 여러번 우리가 사용하엿스나 長沙에는 아즉 새 총기가 가득 잇섯슴으로 이것이 우리를 유혹케 하엿다. 그러나 長沙는 제국주의의 군함이 잇슴으로 우리의 최초 근거지로는 부적당하다」는 것이 이들의 長沙를 퇴각한 원인일 것이다.
그리고 제국주의군벌을 여지업시 掃蕩的 파괴를 하야 遺根이 업도록 하고 전후 일주일간에 何健의 實兄인 何實을 비롯하야 湖南民權長 曹伯聞 淸向司令部 참사 羅某 등 知名의 인사와 부호, 외국 선교사 등 90여 명을 총살하얏스며 일본측으로는 영사관 及 관원숙사 三井洋行 소학교 금융조합, 載生昌汽船局 日淸汽船회사 해군숙사 6개소의 대상점 3개소의 병원 기타 料理屋사진관 등 22개소가 소각약탈되고 영국측은 英米煙草사무소 창고 등 7개소가 할킨 듯 약탈되엿스며 미국측은 텍사스 석유회사사무소, 同창고, 쓰탄다-드 사무소와 同창고, 학교, 병원, 교회당, 연초회사 등이 전멸하고 독일인의 경영하는 대상점 3개소와 伊太利의 천주교당이 전부 약탈소각되엿스며 기타 외국의 지배적 문화기관 등 10여 개소가 전멸하엿스니 이만하면 공산군의 보복적 파괴행동도 철저하엿다 할 것이다.
그리고 간접적으로는 국제문제를 분규케하야 국민정부의 신위를 실패케 하고 제국열강에 대하야 장개석의 굴복적＜64＞ 陳謝와 거액의 배상으로 그의 위치와 정체를 폭로하야 민중적 신망을 추락케 하엿스며 居留民손해에 대하야 장래의 권리를 보류한다는 미국의 불간섭태도로 인한 열강제국의 태도불일치를 폭로하야 제국주의간에 이해모순과 감정악화를 초래유발한데 공산군으로 보아서는 부산적 收獲을 가젓다.
공산군이 米盤을 포격하엿스되 미국은 체면상 항의적 공문으로 그 책임만 물음에 불과하엿스니 日英 양국도 또한 「밋기」를 물고저 하는 고기를 놀내다라다지 안키 위하야 마음에 잇는 노릇을 다 못하엿다.

五
紙面관계로 공산군의 현세와 소베트 세력 밋 활동은 개략만 쓰겟다. 공산군은 未婚한 工人과 係累가 적은 屈强한 농민을 평소 양성하야 중견부대로 하고 다음은 失業工人과 流氓이며 其外 白軍과 반동민중의 俘虜兵임으로 빈농이 제1위로서 6할 군대출신이 1할5분 工人이 3분 실업공인이 流氓이 2할 2분의 비율이다.
작년 5월 중순, 공산당 기관지에 홍군의 현세에 대한 발표가 잇섯느데 此에 의하면 현재 제 1군으로부터 14군을 통하야 소총 8만정 이상 대포 150좌 이상, 기관총 900臺, 권총 6700. 박격포 170座 이상, 비행기 6대(비행사로서 조선청년 3명이 활약함)나 된다고 하니 병사는 거이 무장하고 잇서서 관군이 대개 5천명에 2천내지 3천박게 총기를 가지지 못함에 비하야 얼마나 무력과 전투력이 충실함을 알 것이다. 長沙점령으로 소총 7천여 정과 기관총 50여 대이상 밋 공산 1만여 명의 증가를 보게 되엿스니 11월 현재는 군력이 훨신 확장되엿슬 것이다.
홍군 제1군-黃浦軍官學校출신의 許繼眞의 軍長으로 23년이래 무장투쟁에 경험 잇는 고참 공산군이며 湖北 河南省 부근에 근거하야 병사 5천.
홍군 제2군-年前 광동을 함락하야 유명하여진 賀龍統率의 홍군 중 雄兵＜65＞수 6천 이상 조선청년 다수 참가하야 무기는 홍군 중 가장 충실학 호북성 서부 소베트 구역에 근거함.
홍군 제3군-黃浦軍官학교출신의 蔡申熙가 군장으로 최근 강서성, 서부에서 위세를 뜰치는 적위군을 합편하야 병수 4천여 명.
홍군 제4군-소위 朱毛의 홍군으로 공산군 중 가장 유력하고 慓悍하야 공포적임 중국통치계급을 震駭하고 잇는 魔軍이다. 銃率者은 유명한 모택동과 朱德으로 朱德은 독일사관학교 재학 당시 공산주의에 경도하야 귀국후 공산당 입당한 당 중 최선봉이며 모택동은 전술에 잇서 孔明의 일홈을 듯는 俊傑이다. 병력 1만 4천으로 용감한 武裝工 農 中樞가 되고 비행대, 기관총대, 포병대 등 무기 완비하엿스며 福建 江西省境을 본거로 하야 광동 호남강성에 전전출몰하야 관군을 궤멸하고 중앙정부 及 제국열강의 心膽을 戰慄케 한다.
홍군 제5군-前記 長沙九江은 진격한 彭德會군으로 병수 3천여 명.
기타 일본육군사관학교출신의 廣繼勛의 제6군과 광동성 동강부근 海豐陸豐 방면에 소베트 구역을 조직한 小軍이나마 精悍無比한 제11군.
학생출신의 청년으로 유명한 맑스주의자 鄧子恢가 통솔하는 병수 6천의 12군.
병수 불과 2천으로 江蘇省 동부에 본거하야 장개석의 두통꺼리가 되어잇는 14군 등.
이외 하남성과 하북성 安徵 諸省에 잇는 강력한 무장농민군을 합하야 홍군 총병 수십여 만이나 되니 이들의 정예한 무기와 계급적 정신으로 훈련된 투지와 신출귀몰한 전술은 장개석등 군대로서 절대로 궤멸치 못할 것이다. 3천여 명에 불과한 제5군에게 중앙군의 知囊이요 최고군략가인 何健이 7천여의 군대로도 당적치 못하고 鼠穴을 차저 출행낭을 노은 것을 보면 알 것이다.
이상 공산군은 모든 것이 조직적이고 게획적으로 근대적 전법을 이용하며 무선전신으로 友軍과 연락을 완전이 하야＜66＞ 습격지구역에 대하야 미리 변장편의대를 잠입케 한 후 이들의 조사통보에 의하야 면밀상세한 공략도와 부렉리스트를 작성하고 土豪, 劣紳, 지주, 은행 대상점, 외국인 등에게 금품요구, 放火 屠殺 기타의 방법을 결정하엿다가 점령하는 동시에 푸로그람대로 실행하다.
그리고 될 수 잇는대로 豊饒한 도시 점령을 위주하야 무기전부를 약탈하고 이 동안 시민에게도 최대 노력으로 공산군의 목표와 주의를 선전하고 무산시민을 자각공명케 하며 이익과 권리를 보장한 후 퇴각 후라도 이들의 정신적 지지에 성공하니 공산군의 「게리라」전법이란 실로 교묘학 이중적 효과를 가진다.

六
중국은 점점 한 赤色의 판도의 소베트구역으로 그의 지도가 변색하여가고 잇다. 적색으로 물들인 지역은 사회조직이 근본적으로 변혁하야 창조적 시설이 민중의 생활을 재조직하고 새로운 관념과 체계에 인도하고 잇다. 토지의 평등적 분배와 자주적 권리의 보장 각종의 사회주의적 문화시설, 진정한 혁명정신과 세력의 양성 등 인류가 조우하는 가장 새로운 시험을 그들이 경고하고 잇다.
이 소베트구역은 날이 갈사록 더욱 확대하야 남중부는 도처에 소베트정권이 건립되고 최근에는 북방으로 치입하야 未久에 전중국을 포괄할 형세이다.
1929년 말에는 7천만의 인구를 포옹한 지역이 소베트구역 내에 계산되엇다하니 금년에는 이 倍에 달할 것이다. 공산당측의 발표에 의하면 전국소베트구역은 대략 아래와 같다.
江西省 재작년에는 81현 중 40현이 든 것이 작년 5월 현재에는 南昌부근을 제외한 江西全省67현이 적색판도이며 작년 3월 이래 10만의 농민이 투쟁에 가입하엇다. 성내 중앙부의 장贛강 유역은 吉安부터 峽江까지 동서북부 각 향촌이 蘇區가 아니면 武裝 工農의 활동구역이며 去 6월에는 수도 남창이 공산군의 진격을 보게 되어 위기에 잇다한다. 강서성長이 공산군을 진정할 수 업서 사표를 제출하엿스니 這間 소식을 알 것이다.
湖北省 재작년에 72현 중 30현이 蘇區이던 것이 작년 5월에는 武漢 三鎭을 제외한 全省이 蘇區지역이다.
漢區교외 수십리에 홍군이 활약하야 이것도 위기에 잇다.
湖南省...재작년에 75현 내 40여 현이 蘇區
廣東省...재작년 말 94현 내 39현
작년 5월 海陸兩豐 등 26현이 증가
河南省...작년말 89현 내 7部이 蘇區
금년 5월 남부와 湖北省에 蘇區가 잇고 남성 光山羅山 등이 새로 편입됨.
廣西省...재작년말 83현 내의 蘇區가 10현
작년 5월말 百邑 養利寺 10여 현이 증가
四川省...大小군벌의 군립한 本省은 소위＜67＞ 「神兵운동」과 홍군이 연락만 하고 잇서 아직도 대규모의 蘇區는 업다하나 67현은 아직 적색판도 일 것이다.
福建省...서부 각현은 전부 蘇區이고 점차 남북부로 확대하여가며 완전한 적색판도에 잇는 지방은 서부 13현과 남부 7현 북부 9현.
安徵省...英山, 霍山, 六山지방에 蘇區가 잇고 북부지방은 전부 적화하엿다.
江蘇省...宣興, 無錫, 靖江 등 20여 현이 蘇區
浙江省...78현 중 38현의 농민군이 봉기하야 임이 10여 현이 蘇區로 편입됨.
이상 각 소베트구역에는 전술한 작년 5월 전국 소베트대회에서 결정한 토자ㅣ정강을 완전히 실시하고 소베트 정권하에 각종 시설이 활박이 성공되여간다. 각현에는 농민위원회, 공산창년단, 공산소년단, 인공협회, 각계 俱樂部, 단체를 조직하고 구역 내에는 정치학교, 勞工實業學校, 成人學校외, 兵士학교를 설립하야 공산주의와 실제 지식을 양성한다.
그리고 농작도 집경제도를 실시하야 협동농장을 조직한 곳도 만으나 소베트적 활동내용과 시설은 지면관계로 略한다.

七
지난 11월 7일 露領 「아바톱스크」에서 혁명기념식에 참석한 중국공산당 수령은 同 11월 11일을 기하야 중국소베트 정부수립을 세계에 향하야 선언하얏다.
이는 蔣介石이가 閻憑의 北軍을 격파하고 승전의 凱歌와 함께 중국의 군사적 통일과 국민회의로서 국민에게 平知와 善政을 약속한 직후의 일이다.
그러나 장개석은 平知와 선정의 치명적 장해가 무엇인지 잘 알 것이다. 소베트 정권과 공산군의 赤魔는 장개석의 최대한 적이고 악몽이며 국민에게 약속한 治國의 장해이고 평화의 攪亂者로서 개선한 장개석과 통치계급에게 사멸의 폭탄으로 선전을 포고하엿다. 이는 소베트정권과 공산군의 赤魔가 장개석으로 대표된 중국통치계급을 總滅하기 전에는 그들의 소위 공산혁명이 성취도리수 업슴으로 장개석도 또한 이에 사명을 賭하야 이를 擊滅코저 할 것이니 이는 제국열강의 침략과 군벌적 주권유지를 위함으로서 치국평화를 약속하엿슴에 충실코저 하는 까닥일 것이다.
11월 7일, 전국 소베트정부수립의 선언을 혁명과 반혁명의 결사적 투쟁의 봉화로서 중국의 운명을 점치게 한다.
그러나 장개석의 기반인 국민당도 신군벌화한 장개석과 국민당군벌은 최초 그들의 적이든 열강제국에게 매수되여 외국자본의 新侵略路개척과 利權保持의 압잡이가 되어 다시 업는 범죄를 하얏다.
暫行 反革命治罪法의 일홈으로 수년내 幾십만의 혁명대중을 살육하고 勞資조정법이란 일홈으로 파업의 자유를 탈취하엿스며 地租 2분5厘의 감세를 취소하고 苛稅難捐를 가중하엿스며 무산군중의 운동에 야만적 탄압을 한 후＜68＞ 지반확장을 위한 부단한 내란으로써 금융재정의 紊亂, 水利灌漑의 파괴, 시장의 攪亂, 농촌의 황폐, 산업과 諸생산과정에서 기천만의 실업군제조 공채된 수억만의 군비로 외국자본에게 새로운 이권의 제공 세계자본주의는 이 내란의 虛罅를 타서 또는 銀價慘落으로 침략의 毒牙를 더욱 날카롭게 하는 등 이것이 국민정부의 신군벌치하에 구제하지 못할 만성적 위기에 잇는 중국의 현실이다. 즉 장개석 등 신군벌의 선정의 治積이며 장개석의 약속하는 선정은 이와 가튼 치적의 계속이다. 남북전쟁의 몰락은 군벌통치의 일시적 안정을 보게 하며 제국열강은 일시적 안정을 이용하야 매수와 사기와 일홈조흔 투자를 하고 잇다.
그러나 날이 갈사록 세력이 강화하여 가는 공산군과 확대하여가는 소베트 활동은 중국혁명의 불가항적 怒濤가 되어 외국자본과 군벌 정치 등 一切지배력을 격파하야 그들의 역사적 창업을 수행할 것이다.
11월 7일 전국 소베트 정부수립선언은 결코 宣傳이 아니다. 소베트는 전국적 범위로 조직되고 紅軍이 거쳐가는 곳에는 반듯이 소베트가 건립되고만이 최근 홍군의 각 支隊와 諸軍은 정규 적군의 궤도로 옮기여 중앙통제기관을 조직하여 잇스며 소베트구역정부도 중앙집권적 기운이 濃熟하야 전국적 통제조직을 요구하니 不遠하야 중국 소베트 정부가 출현될 것은 前號에 서술한 중국의 객관적 諸조건과 공산혁명의 군사적 발전과 강력한 소베트 조직을 보아 중국혁명의 본질을 정당히 파악하는 자는 누구나 예측하는 바이다. 소베트조직은 완전한 토지혁명을 의미함이다.
토지혁명은 중국의 革命 途程에 엇더한 의의를 가지는지 贅言할 필요가 업시 근본적 핵심문제이다. 따러서 이는 봉건군벌의 사회적 존재의 기초를 잔별하고 제국주의의 철쇄를 절단케 하는 유일한 힘이다. 제국주의는 중국에 대하야 대외적으로 약하고 대내적으로 강한 정부를 요구한다. 이는 지대한 모순이며 또 이 모순을 충실히 대행하지 아니치 못하는 국민정부는 임의 국민혁명을 완전히 포기하고 예속적 국민자본주의와 봉건세력과 연결하야 斷末魔的 반동을 한고 잇다.
산업적 경제적의 파국에 瀕한 조직은 국민정부치하에서 가속적으로 심각화하고 전국적으로 붕괴하는 사회는 오직 소베트정권하에서만 조직을 돌파하고 붕괴된 사회의 재조직이 가능할 것이다.
이들은 三民주의와 孫文을 骨董品으로써 역사의 쓰레기통에 放棄하고 공산주의와 「레-닌」을 창조적 위업의 목표로 하고 잇다. 중국에 대한 제국열강의 정책적 모순과 협조적 태도의 분열 기타 공산군과 소베트정권에 대한 고심은 후기에 모루고 중국 18省을 석권하는 공산홍군의 투쟁과 소베트 정권수립에 대한 결론적 전망도 略하고 다못 이상에 소개적 서술노 독자가 중국혁명의 객관적 조건과 혁명세력의 현세 밋 작년 5월과 6월에 개최되엿든 소베트전국대회와 공산당 전국대회 밋 혁명군사위원회의 결의에 準하야 금후 중국혁명의 행정과 파동을 정당히 이해하기를 바랄 뿐이다.(完)＜69＞
＜52-69＞