별건곤 제4호
1927년 02월 01일
因襲打破 新生活創造의 第一步, 내가 새로 實行하는 일 (The First Step in Breaking with Tradition and Creating a New Life: What I Am Newly Practicing)
白南奎 외 (Baek Nam-gyu et al.)
설문 (Questionnaire)

The First Step in Breaking with Tradition and Creating a New Life: What I Am Newly Practicing
						Baek Nam-gyu et al.

In today's ever-changing world, merely seeking and singing of the old ways is evidence of being left behind! As people trapped by tradition in ethics, morals, and even lifestyle, wouldn't it be beneficial to hear about your actual experiences in bravely and decisively putting new things into practice? -A Reporter-

Not wearing gaiters, wearing socks up high

Baek Nam-gyu, Central High School

Since you ask for my impressions of putting this into practice, I will simply say a word. It has already been ten years since I returned from Tokyo. I can't say there are any particularly noteworthy feelings. I'll just say what comes to mind.

First, I'll talk about how I started feeling this way.

I. One day in Tokyo, I went to see a group of aborigines (生蕃) from Taiwan, who were said to have arrived. I happened to meet them on the street as they were coming out of the artillery factory (砲兵工廠) after a tour.

Their appearance was like "driving a pack of fierce dogs," with Japanese policemen ordering them around in between.

The first thing that caught my eye was that they had made the "danim (單任)" that we wear around our ankles very long, wrapping it around and up their legs, covering the entire leg.

II. After returning to Korea, I had various feelings. There were many, but one of them was this. <2>

a. The way we make our pants legs wide, dragging them along, unable to manage our clothes. In other words, the bottom half of our clothes droops so much that it reveals a lazy aspect (something only old men in the countryside do now).

b. Those who try to be fashionable use colorful things—reddish, bluish—for the "danim (單任)" to show off. It flutters in the wind like a woman's coat string. In other words, they are trying to put a woman's beauty on a man's legs (something many young men in the countryside do).

If I were to explain why it has become like this, it is because after we abandoned the formal wear (禮服) and leggings (行纏) that we used to wear when going out, without any improvement (改良), it simply regressed (退化).

I will tell you about my feelings during these ten years.

I. I received a lot of ridicule (嘲笑), but my mind was not particularly disturbed.

a. That I look like a horse driver (馬夫) and am not dignified.

b. That I am strange (異常).

c. That I look like a monk (僧侶).

d. That if you want to know the reason, just look at my lower half.

I heard various things like this. However, when I go out on rainy days (雨日), I have quite a few companions.

Also, many of those who are traveling are my companions. Isn't it because doing this is lively (活潑), simple, and convenient? Or, that's how we see it, but what would people around the world think?

In short, I don't think this is a good thing yet, but I just want to shout (絶呌) that "if there is something we need to fix now, we should fix it quickly." Ah, I always cherish the picture of my former Central School principal, the late Yu Gil-jun (兪吉濬) with his rounded collar (團領). Or, when I meet Yi Beom-seung (李範昇), one of my close friends and a member of the clothing reform faction (衣服改良派), we always talk about this.

Besides this "danim (單任)," there are many other things, but my feelings about this are as follows. <3>

Fourth, a Namawi made by one's own master
Originally, we make them ourselves. Others may rather imitate it.

Kim Hwal-ran, Ewha Women's College

The namawi (남바위) is something our people originally wore and still wear a lot. Since so-called modern women abandoned wearing their hair in a Western style or tying it up in a bun, they unconsciously thought Western things were better and abandoned this without looking back. And some wear hats, and wearing scarves has become very popular.

However, it's not uncomfortable or unsightly, but I don't know why people reject it without even considering it. I thought it would be good for protecting a woman's head from the cold in extremely cold weather, so I tried to wear it last winter, but I hesitated and couldn't. This winter, I'm trying it out.

Since it's the first time, others might think I'm a little nervous and embarrassed, but I don't feel that way at all. And people who see me wearing this might say it doesn't go well with shoes, but I don't feel embarrassed or have the courage to do something that others criticize. It's just that it's made by our hands, something we used to wear, and it's good for keeping warm, it doesn't look ugly, and it's convenient. Also, I think it's better in terms of economy and time to just wear this than to make and wear a hat and scarf.

However, if it has such advantages, who knows, in the future, not only Korean women but also Western women might imitate this and make and wear something similar? <4>

I use honorifics even to servants and children

Bang Jeong-hwan

Some people and I talked about using the same language to everyone, and five years ago, I stopped using "hage (하게)" and "haera (해라)" to anyone. Just because someone is younger than me, is it right to say "hasipsio (하십시오)" and "haseotseumnikka (하셨습니까)" to others, but "hayera (하여라)" to that person? It's an unnecessary distinction and the biggest mistake caused by the bad ethics of the past. Moreover, it is absolutely wrong for a young person to say "haera (해라)" and "hage (하게)" to an old person just because they have less knowledge or less money. As a way to establish a new ethic, we decided to use the same language to everyone, and especially not to speak down to children. I have been striving to do this since that day five years ago.

Of course, it felt very awkward at first. Suddenly saying "hasio (하시오)" and "haseosso (하셨소)?" softly to servants or children whom I had been saying "hage (하게)" and "haera (해라)" to until yesterday, the sound didn't come out smoothly, and I felt very awkward. However, more than that, I often saw their faces brighten up when they heard those words. And when calling a child or servant passing by on the street, they didn't realize I was calling them when I said "yeobo (여보), yeobo (여보)," but only turned around and said "ne (녜)" when I said "iyaeya (이애야), iyaeya (이애야)" or "yeoboge (여보게), yeoboge (여보게)," so I almost changed my mind every time. But now, even if I try to say "haera (해라)" or "hage (하게)" to anyone on purpose, it doesn't come out well. However, I am still worried because it is difficult for me to use "hao (하오)" to the babies who are still learning to speak among the children growing up in my house, although I use "hao (하오)" to those who go to school. It is also true that my efforts are more difficult because my family does not all use honorifics. In this regard, Kim Gi-jeon (金起田), who is with me in the company, has been much <5> more established in using honorifics. We started together, but Kim (金) comfortably uses honorifics to his own children (sons) without feeling any awkwardness.

Many people laugh when they hear our story, saying, "If you can't say 'haera (해라)' to your own son, who can you say it to?" But those people are the ones who stubbornly hold on to the terribly wicked and doomed idea that "If I can't do what I want with the children I bore, what can I do?" They will receive disaster.

Wearing layered clothes, abolishing ironing

Kim Yeong-sun, Jeongsin Girls' School

It has been three years since I started doing this. If I say that I spend even this cold winter wearing only layered clothes without wearing padded clothes, everyone will think it's strange, but it's because those who think it's strange already have the preconceived notion (先入見) that they can't live in winter without padded clothes. Cold also works like "it's cold, it's cold (치워치워)," making the body feel colder. Our psychological actions directly affect our lives in many ways in everything. So, when I first started doing this, it seemed a little difficult, but now it has become a habit, and I feel uncomfortable seeing people wearing padded clothes. So, in the end, anything is possible if you have a firm determination to endure and try to do it.

There are several reasons why I abolished padded clothes, but first of all, it is very good hygienically. If you are going to make padded clothes at home, it would be better to fluff the cotton that has been stored for years, but most women re-fluff it by hand, don't they? The cotton they always wear actually contains many bad germs, and if they eat that dust and rub it with their hands, they will naturally be exposed to those germs, which can be dangerous to their health without them knowing it. Or, instead of spending money on cotton for padded clothes, if you wear one more layer of cotton or Western-style clothes underneath, the clothes will fit snugly against the body <6> without looking bulky, and it will be warmer than wearing padded clothes. And compare the effort and time it takes to make padded clothes. Anyone can easily guess that, so considering the hygiene, economy, efficiency (能率上), and time, I don't think there is anything bad about it.

I also completely abolished the practice of ironing (다듬이), and now I hate even hearing the sound of ironing being done elsewhere. Our madams (政府人) consider ironing clothes a big chore that they can't avoid, but that's not true at all. From my experience, even cotton clothes can be washed and ironed without starching, but not on the outside but on the inside. Then it looks much better than ironing, and even if it looks good, it doesn't look vulgar like ironing and making it shiny. And clothes made of silk (明紬) etc. can be washed, slightly starched, and ironed on the inside without drying completely, and they will look great. Of course, you have to abolish white clothes first. White clothes are originally easy to get dirty and don't look good, so after washing them, you starch them stiffly and iron them a lot, and even then, you still iron them. But I dye three or four colors of plain cotton fabric and wear them in turn, replacing the collar or trim on the jeogori (저고리) as needed. Then the clothes don't get dirty or wrinkled easily, and they look much better than flashy clothes, and they are convenient and economical in every way.

I have been doing these two things since the movement to encourage the use of Korean products (물산장려) started in Joseon, and I will continue to do them without changing. Dyeing clothes and abolishing ironing have been implemented among our school students, but it seems that students have difficulty abolishing padded clothes right away. A Western woman who lives with me wears only a single layer of clothing in the same room, so how can we not get through wearing layered clothes? Our housing system is Western style, so I don't know what it's like in Korean houses, but anyway, we have to abandon the cold with our minds and abandon the heat with our minds in order to make any improvements in our actual lives.

Staying Short-Haired Until the End

Hyun Deok-sin, Dongdaemun Women's Hospital

Short hair was quite popular for a while, but these days it seems like many people are growing it out. But most of them are female advocates, so when I asked why they were growing it out again, they said that short hair has not yet become popular among the masses (民衆化), so if they want to work with the masses, they have to follow the masses.

However, I cut my hair short from the beginning not to pursue beauty, nor because of any ideology, nor to follow the trend, but simply because it was economical in terms of time, so I have no intention of growing it out again. It is very convenient when washing my face, combing my hair, and going out. And the back of my jeogori (저고리) doesn't get dirty, so it doesn't look bad. In winter, it's not a problem because I wear a hat, but in spring, when the wind is strong and I don't wear a hat, my hair might fly around and be a little inconvenient. However, it is very uneconomical for women to comb their hair every day in terms of time and labor efficiency (能率), and if they save that time and use it well in other areas, they could do very beneficial things.

Starting to wear hats as a woman, it was very funny at first.

Shin Albert, Joseon Women's Academy

Wearing a hat as a woman! This would be a strange thing for a Korean woman to do, but when I think about the history of when I first started wearing hats, I can't help but laugh.

Because I have been at school for a long time, I made wool hats for the female students and saw them wearing them. I thought that it would be good for women to make things with their own hands, and that wearing them would be much better than wearing those cheap and strange jobaegi (조박이). So I made one. But that was many years ago, and you couldn't see any Korean women wearing hats at that time, so even though I made it, did I have the courage to wear it? So at first, I put it in a drawer, and then I started wearing it out. At first, everyone who saw me would smile and come over laughing from across the street. Once, I was even thoroughly "hiyakkashi (히야까시)" by prisoners working on the street. So, I couldn't help but not go out on the main street wearing it at first, and I would take it off and carry it. If I went out and met someone I knew, I would quickly take it off and hide it. When I went to someone's house, I would take it off and carry it from the moment I entered the gate. So, after a year or two, it naturally became a habit, and I wasn't so embarrassed to wear it. They say that it is polite for women not to take off their hats even when entering a room, but even a few years ago, I was still too shy to just sit there wearing it. So I always took it off and sat down, but now I can do that comfortably and wear it often.

However, I am not trying to be luxurious or stylish by wearing a hat. My hair is now this way, all white, but I have never put oil in my hair or powder on my face in my life. If all the women in the world were like me, the cosmetics (化粧品) merchants would all starve to death. But this hat is very good for blocking the wind in cold weather, and it is very convenient for women with Western-style hair or short hair, and it looks much better than the old-fashioned and strange jobaegi (조백이) worn by old-fashioned women. And if you make one and wash it often and replace the inner band or trim, it will be neat and tidy and can be used for many years. I think it would be good if this were widely adopted.

And in fact, I've heard that some women wear hats to imitate Western women or follow a trend, but someone like me, who is originally a simpleton (숙맥) who doesn't even know how to look stylish, is certainly not wearing it for that reason. I just wear it because I think it's good for hygiene and practicality.

From my experience of wearing this hat, it seems that if you want to improve anything, you can't do it easily because you are stuck in that habit. But if you change an old habit and make the new one a habit, it will be the same for everyone. <9>

Named Entities

白南奎	Baek Nam-gyu
東京	Tokyo
臺灣	Taiwan
兪吉濬	Yu Gil-jun
李範昇	Yi Beom-seung
金活蘭	Kim Hwal-ran
方定煥	Bang Jeong-hwan
金起田	Kim Gi-jeon
金英順	Kim Yeong-sun
玄德信	Hyun Deok-sin
申알베트	Shin Albert
梨花女子專門學校	Ihwa Women's College
貞信女學校	Jeongsin Girls' School
東大門婦人病院	Dongdaemun Women's Hospital
朝鮮女子學院	Joseon Women's Academy
中央學校	Central School



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	因襲打破 新生活創造의 第一步, 내가 새로 實行하는 일
필자	白南奎 외
기사형태	설문

因襲打破 新生活創造의 第一步, 내가 새로 實行하는 일
						白南奎 외
나날이 새로워가는 오늘에 안저서 다만 녯날을 찻고 노래함은 낙오의 증거! 윤리나 도덕이나 생활방식까지 인습에 갓처잇는 우리로서 용기잇시 果斷잇시 새것을 실행하는 여러분의 실제 체험담을 드름은 또한 無益의 事가 안닐까 함니다. -一記者-

단임 안치고 양말 올려 신는것

中央高普 白南奎

나의 이것 실행(實行)에 대한 감상(感想)을 물으시니까 간단히 한마듸 말슴하겟슴니다. 이것이 내가 東京에서 도라온 뒤이니까 발서 십년이올시다. 별로 들으실만한 늣김이라고 할 수 업슴니다. 다못 생각나는대로 말슴하면 이러합니다.
먼저 시작한 늣김을 말하겟슴니다.
一. 東京에서 어느날이든가 대만(臺灣)에서 생번(生蕃)의 단톄가 왓다하기에 사람구경 갓슴니다. 마침 포병공창(砲兵工廠)을 구경시키고 나오는 거리에서 맛낫슴니다.
그 모양이 비젓이 「사나운 김생의 떼를 몰고 다니는 것」처럼, 日本巡査가 사이사이에서 호령하면서 끌고 감니다.
그런데 가장 먼저 내의 눈에 보기 슬케 띄이는 것은 우리가 발목에 매고 다니는 「단임」을 썩 길게 만들어서 발목에서 친친 감어 올라와서 다리 전부를 잠맷습듸다.
二. 우리나라에 도라온 뒤에 여러 가지의 늣김이 잇섯슴니다. 이것도 한두가지가 아니지마는 其 中에 하나인 것이 잇슴니다.<2>
ㄱ. 우리가 바지통을 넙게 만들어 가지고 질질 끌면서 옷주체를 못하는 모양 다시 말슴하면 옷 입은 아래도리가 말할수 업시 축처저 가지고 게우른 쌍이 들어나는것(지금만히 시골어른네가 하는 것)
ㄴ. 좀 모양을 내는 이는 「단임」에다가 호사를 내려고 무색것을 씀니다-붉으스름-파르스름-한 것이 부인네옷 고롬가티 바람에 날립니다. 말하자면 남자의 다리에다 女子의 미를 냄니다.(시골 젊으신네가 만히 하는 것)
이와가티 되여진 까닭을 말슴하고 보면 지금부터 몃해나 되엿는지는 모르지마는 우리가 외출할 때에 닙고 다니든 례복(禮服)이며 다리에 감든 행전(行纏)을 제절로 버서 버리게 된 뒤에 아모 개량(改良) 고만 고대로 퇴화(退化)가 되고 말어 버린것입니다.
이러케 하여온 십년동안의 늣김을 말슴합니다.
一. 남의 조소(嘲笑)를 만히 바닷슴니다마는, 나의 마음에는 별로 불안이 업섯슴니다.
ㄱ. 마부(馬夫)처럼 되여 점잔치 못하다고.
ㄴ. 이상(異常)하다고.
ㄷ. 증(僧侶))갓다고.
ㄹ. 그 이유를 알려면 아랫도리만 보라고.
이와가튼 여러 가지의 말슴을 들엇슴니다. 그러나 내가 비올때(雨日)나서보면 내의 동무가 꽤 만습듸다.
또는 여행하는 분 중에 나의 동무가 만습듸다. 아마 이러케 하는 것이 활발(活潑)하고, 간단하고, 편리하기에 하시는 것 안닙니까? 또는 우리가 보니까 그러치 만일 세계사람이 볼 때는 엇덜넌지오...
몰아 말슴하면 내가 이것이 잘된 것으로 아직 생각지 못함니다마는 다못 『우리가 지금 고칠 필요가 잇는 것이면 빨리 빨니 고처 나가야 하겟다는것』만을 웨치(絶呌)고저 함니다. 아-나의 다니든 옛날 中央學校長 故 兪吉濬 先生의 團領(옷깃을 동글게 만든 옷)의 사진을 늘-귀하게 두고 봅니다. 또는 나의 친고에 衣服改良派의 하나인 李範昇과 맛나면 늘-이런 말슴을 함니다.
이 「단님」 외에도 여러 가지가 잇슴니다마는 이것에 대한 늣김이라고는 이러함니다.<3>

넷 主人차진 남바위
원래부터 우리 손으로 만드는 것 남이 도리여 본바들지도 모릅니다

梨花女子專門學校 金活蘭

남바위는 원래 우리 사람이 쓰던 것이요 지금도 만히 씁니다. 소위 신식 녀자로 양머리를 틀고 쪽찌던 것을 페지하면서부터 무의식적으로 서양것이 조커니 하고 이것을 집어 내던지고 도라보지 안케 된 것이지요. 그리고는 모자를 쓰는 이도 약간 잇고 목도리를 두르는 것은 아조 류행이 된 것입니다.
그러나 그것이 불편한 것도 아니요 보기 실흔 것도 아닌데 덥허노코 집어내 버리는 것이 엇덜넌지도 모르고 또는 극히 치운때 녀자의 머리를 방한(防寒)하는데는 이것이 조켓다고 생각하야 작년 겨울부터 써보랴고 하엿스나 주저하다가 못하고 말엇다가 올겨울부터 실행해 보앗슴니다.
처음 하는 일이니까 남의 생각에는 좀 조마조마하야 붓그러우리라고  추측할넌지도 모르지만 조금도 그런 생각이 업슴니다. 그리고 이것을 쓰고 다니는 것을 보고 구두 신은 우에 모양이 어울리지 아니하다고는 할넌지 모르지만 내 생각에는 아모러한 붓그런 생각이나 또는 남이 흉보는 것을 긔어코 단행해 보겟다는 그런 용긔를 가지고 하는 것도 아닙니다. 다만 우리 손으로 만드는 것이요 그전부터 쓰던 것이요 또는 방한이 잘되고 모양이 흉업지 안코 편리할 뿐 아니라 모자 만들어 쓰고 목도리 만들어 두르는 것보다는 이것 하나만을 쓰는 것이 경제나 시간으로 보아서도 괜찬켓다고 생각한데 지나지 못함니다.
그러나 이것에 그와가튼 장점이 잇다면 장래에는 우리 朝鮮녀자들 뿐만 아니라 서양녀자들까지라도 이것을 모방하야 그와 근사한 것을 만들어 쓰게 될넌지도 누가 압니까?<4>

힘부름하는 사람과 어린 사람에게도 존대를 함니다

方定煥

아모에게라도 갓흔 말을 쓰자고 몃사람이 이약이하고 오년 전브터 나는 누구에게던지 『하게』 『해라』를 쓰지 아니함니다. 나희가 나보다 어리다는 리유로 남에게는 하십시오 하섯슴니까 하는 말을 그 사람에게는 하여라 햇느냐 하는 것은 아모 까닭업는 차별이요 지난 날의 낫븐 륜리가 시킨 가장 큰 잘못입니다. 더구나 지식이 자긔만큼 업다거나 돈이 자긔만큼 업다는 리유로 젊은 사람이 늙은 사람을 보고 해라 하게를 하는 일은 말할 여지도 엄는 잘못임니다. 새로운 륜리를 세우는 한가지로 우리는 누구에게나 갓흔 말을 쓰자 더욱이 어린 사람에게 하대를 하지 말자고 질심하고 질심하든 오년전 그날브터 실행하여 오느라고 힘을 썻슴니다.
물론 처음에는 대단한 거븍을 느겻슴니다. 어제까지 하게 해라 하여오든 힘브름꾼이나 어린 사람을 보고 별안간에 『하시오』 『하섯소?』소리가 부드럽게 나오지도 안코 하면서도 자긔  마음에 몹시도 어색하엿슴니다. 그러나 그것보다도 그 말을 듯는 그가 어골이 밝-애지는 것을 처음에는 자조 보앗슴니다. 그러고 길거리에 지나가는 어린 사람이나 힘브름꾼을 부를 때에 여보 여보 하고 부른즉 자긔를 부르는 소리인줄 모르고 『이애야 이애야』 하거나 『여보게 여보게』 하여야 비로소 『녜』 하고 도라서는고로 그러는 때마다 까닥하면 변절이 될번 하엿섯슴니다. 그러나 지금은 아모 보고라도 일부러 해라나 하게를 하려도 잘 나가지 아니함니다. 그런데 나는 아즉까지도 우리 집에서 자라는 어린 사람 중에 학교에 다니는 사람에게는 하오를 쓰나 아즉 말 배호는 아기에게는 하오를 쓰기가 힘이 들어 걱정임니다. 가족이 모도 다 경어를 쓰지 안는고로 나 혼자의 노력이 더 힘드는 것도 사실임니다. 이뎜에 잇서서 社에 가티 잇는 金起田氏는 나보다 훨신 <5> 먼저 경어쓰기에 자리가 잡혓슴니다. 시작은 가티 하엿는데 金氏는 자긔집 어린사람(아들)에게도 조곰도 거북거림을 늣기지 안코 경어를 편히 쓰고 잇슴니다.
『자긔 아들보고도 해라를 못하면 누구에게 하느냐』고 우리의 이약이를 듯고 웃는 이가 만치마는 그런이 일수록 뎡해노코 『내가 나은 자식을 내 마음대로 못하고 무얼 한단 말이냐』하는 아조 괴악한 망할 생각을 가진 이임니다. 재앙 바들 일이지요.

겹옷실행, 다듬이페지

貞信女學校 金英順

이것을 실행해 온지가 삼년째임니다. 이가티 치운 겨울에도 솜옷을 아니입고 겹옷만으로 지낸다 하면 누구나 해괴하게 알넌지 모르지만 해괴하게 아는 그 사람부터도 벌서 마음에 솜옷이 아니면 겨울에는 살 수 업다하는 선입견(先入見)이 드러안기 때문이지요. 치위도 「치워치워」하면 공연히 몸이 더 치워지는 심으로 무슨 일에던지 우리의 심리작용이 직접 생활에 영향하는 수가 만슴니다. 그래 나도 이것을 실행하기 시작할 때에는 다소 어려운 점이 잇는 듯 하더니 지금은 아조 습관이 되여서 도리여 솜옷입은 사람을 보면 퍽이나 거북해 뵈입니다. 그러니까 결국은 무슨 일이나 자긔가 참고 나가겟다 실행해 보겟다 결심만 구드면 되기는 되는 것이지요.
그런데 솜옷을 페지한 리유는 여러 가지지만 첫재 위생상으로 보아서도 아조 좃슴니다. 가정에서 솜옷을 해 입으랴면 몃해씩 몃해씩 묵은 솜을 솜틀에다 틀기나 하면 오히려 좃치만 대개는 부인네들 손으로 일일히 다시 피여서 두지 안슴니까. 그러면 늘 입던 그 솜에는 낫분 병균이 만히 잇슬것도 사실인데 그 먼지를 먹고 손으로 비집고 하느라면 자연히 그런 균이 따라 드러서 건강상 위험한 일이 부지중 만흘것이요 또는 솜옷 하는데 솜갑 드는 대신 무명옷이나 양속으로 만든 것을 하나 속에 더 입으면 의복이 몸에 착 달라 부<6>터서 퉁퉁해 뵈이지도 안코 따뜻하기도 솜옷 입은 폭보다 낫슴니다. 그러고 솜옷 만드는 공력과 시간을 비교해 보십시요. 그것은 누구나 다 얼는 짐작할 수 잇는 것이니 그러고 보면 위생상으로보나 경제상 능률상(能率上) 시간상 어느 점으로보나 하나도 낫불 것이 업다고 생각함니다.
그러고 다듬이 하는 법도 아조 페지해 버렷는데 지금은 다른 데서 다듬이 하는 소리만 드러도 듯기가 실코 미운 생각이 납니다. 우리가 정부인들은 의례 옷에 다듬이 하는 것을 큰일거리를 삼고 잇서서 안하면 안 될 줄 알지만 질코 그러치 안슴니다. 내가 경험해본 바로 보면 무명옷 가튼 것도 빠러서 풀을 먹이지 안코 다듬이 질을 하되 것흐로 하지 안코 안으로 합니다. 그러면 다듬이질 한 것보다 훨신 태가 나고 태가 나도 다듬이질해서 빤질빤질한 것 처럼 야하지를 안슴니다. 그리고 명주등 속의 의복도 빠러서 풀을 족음만 먹여 가지고 아조 말리지를 안코 제물에 안으로 다듬이질만 하면 아조 훌륭하게 됨니다. 그러랴면 물론 흰옷을 먼저 페지해야 되겟서요. 흰옷은 원래 드럽기가 쉽고 태가 잘 안나서 빨은 뒤에 풀을 뻣세게 먹이고 다듬이질을 막 하고 또 그러고도 다듬이 질을 하는 것이지만 나는 질긴 무명옷감으로 수수한 빗 세네가지를 드려서 그와가티 하야 련해 번가라 입는데 저고리는 동정이나 각금 가라 달고 하면 옷이 쉬 더럽지도 안코 구기지도 안코 태도 훨신 나서 세루이상 조아 뵈이며 어대로보나 역시 간편하고 경제적입니다.
이 두가지를 실행해 오기는 朝鮮에 물산장려의 소리가 나면서부터 자긔는 실행하고 압흐로도 변치 아니하랴 하며 염색옷과 다듬이 페지는 우리 학교생도에게도 실행이 되엿스나 솜옷만은 학생들도 얼는 페지하기가 어려운 모양이여요. 나와 가티 잇는 서양부인은 가튼 방에서도 그 사람은 홋옷을 입고 지나는데 우리들이야 겹옷 입고 못 지날 리가 잇겟슴니까. 나잇는 곳이 가옥제도가 서양식이니까 혹 朝鮮가옥에서는 엇덜넌지 모르지만 하여간 우리는 마음으로 치위를 바리고 마음으로 더위를 바려야 실지생활에도 무슨 개선을 할 수가 잇스리라고 밋슴니다.

끗까지 斷髮

東大門婦人病院 玄德信

단발도 한참은 꽤 류행이더니 요세는 만히 기르는 모양입니다. 그런데 그는 대부분 주의자측의 녀자들이<7> 그런바 엇재 다시 기르느냐고 물은즉 아직 단발 그것이 민중화(民衆化)가 못되얏기 때문에 민중과 가티 일을 하랴면 민중을 따라 가야 되겟다구 그래요.
그러나 나는 처음부터 단발한 것이 무슨 미(美)를 취하랴 그럼도 아니요 무슨 주의로 그런 것도 아니며 류행을 따르랴고 그런것도 아니요 단순히 시간경제로 보아서 깍근 것이기 때문에 다시 길니랴는 생각도 업슴니다. 그런데 세수하는 데라던지 머리 빗는 데라던지 기타 외출할 때에도 여간 편리한 것이 아닙니다. 그러고 저고리 뒤가 검어지지 아니하니 보기에도 츄하지 아니하고 겨울가튼 때는 모자를 쓰니까 문뎨가 업지만 봄이 되야 바람이나 심하고 모자를 안 쓴다면 바람에 머리털이 날려서 다소 불편한 점이 잇슬넌지는 모르겟슴니다. 그러나 하여간 녀자들로서 매일 머리를 빗는다는 것은 시간과 로동의 능률(能率)로 보아서 퍽이나 불경제인데 고시간만 절약해 가지고 다른 방면에 잘 리용한다면 매우 유익한 일을 할 수도 잇스리라고 생각합니다.

女子로 帽子쓰기 시작, 처음에는 무던히 웃기기도 햇습니다.

朝鮮女子學院 申알베트

녀자로 모자쓰기! 이것이 朝鮮녀자로는 좀 괴상한 짓이라 하겟지만 내가 처음 모자 쓰던 때의 래력을 생각하면 웃음이 지금도 제절로 터저 나옵니다.
이것은 내가 오래 학교에 잇든 관게로 해서 녀학생 아이들로 털모자를 만들어서 아이들에게 씨우는 것을 보고 녀자도 자긔 손으로 만드는 것이 요하니 그것을 썻스면<8>그천해 보이고 야릇한 조박이 쓰는 것보다는 훨신 낫겠다 하는 생각으로 하나를 만들기는 만들엇지요. 그러나 그때만 해도 벌서 무근 년전 일이니 모자 쓰고 다니는 朝鮮녀자라고는 볼 수가 업는 판이라 만들기는 만들엇지만 쓰고 나설 용긔가 잇서야 합니까. 그래 처음에는 롱속에 너두엇다가 고다음에는 쓰고 나서기를 시작햇지요. 쓰고 나선 처음에는 보는 사람마다 싱글벙글하고 저 건너서부터 우스면서 오겟지요. 심지어 한번은 길가에서 일하는 감옥 죄수들에게까지 실컷 「히야까시」를 당햇습니다. 그래 할수업시 처음에는 그걸 쓰고는 큰길에는 나서지도 못하고 버서서 끼고 다니고 혹 나섯다가 서도 아는 사람을 만나면 얼는 버서서 감추고 남의 집을 차저 갈때에도 행랑문안에 드러서면서 부터 버저서 들고 들어 갓습니다. 그래 한해 두해 되니까 자연히 버릇이 되어서 쓰고 나서도 그러케 붓그럽지 안코 녀자는 방에 들어가도 모자를 안 벗는 것이 례라는데 요몃해전만해도 좀 열 적어서 남의 방에 가 그저 쓰고 안젓슬수가 잇서야지요. 그래 의례 벗고 안젓더니 지금은 그것까시도 넉넉히 할 수가 잇고 쓰기도 늘-씁니다.
그런데 모자를 쓴다고 무슨 사치를 하랴거나 모양을 내랴는 것은 결코 아님니다. 나는 지금 머리가 이 모양으로 하-야케 되얏지만 평생에 기름이라고는 머리에 발라 보지를 아니하고 분이라고는 얼골에 대여 보지를 아니 햇는데 세상 녀자가 다 나가트면 화장품(化粧品)장사들이 다 굶어 죽을것 가태요. 그러나 이 모자만은 치운 때에 쓰면 아조 방풍도 되고 더구나 양머리튼 녀자나 머리 깍근 녀자에게는 더할수 업시 편리할 뿐더러 모양으로 해도 구식녀자들의 고 얄구진 조백이 쓴 것 보다는 훨신 낫슴니다. 그리고 하나를 만들어서 각금 세탁하고 안의 테나 가라쓰고 하면 깻굿하고 간편하고 몃해던지 쓸 수 잇슴니다. 이것이 만히 보급된다면 물론 조켓다고 생각함니다.
그러고 사실로 세상녀자 중에는 일부러 서양녀가 흉내를 내랴거나 한류행을 따라보랴고 모자를 쓰는 이도 잇다고 들엇슴니다마는 나가튼 사람이야 원래가 모양을 볼래야 볼 줄도 모르는 숙맥이니까 그런 의미로 쓰는 것은 결코 아닙니다. 다만 위생상 실용상으로 조켓다고 생각해서 쓰는데 지나지 못함니다.
내가 이 모자 쓴 경력으로 보아도 무엇이나 개선하랴면 그 습관이라는 것에 저저서 얼는 되지를 안는 모양입니다. 그러나 무근 습관을 고처서 새것이 습관으로 되면 역시 일반이겠지요.<9>
<2-9>