잡지명	별건곤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	懸賞讀物 南北隊 競爭記事, ,殺人魔·刺身鬼 阿片窟 大探査記, 烈風酷寒七晝夜에 單身으로 冒險大探査 (Prize-Winning Article: Competition Report of the North and South Teams, Great Exploration Report of Murder Demons, Sashimi Ghosts, and Opium Dens, A Solitary Adventure and Great Exploration in Seven Days and Nights of Fierce Wind and Bitter Cold)
필자	南隊記者 石火生 (Namdae Reporter Seokhwasaeng)
기사형태	소식 (News Report)

Mobilization Order! Mobilization Order!!

A mobilization order was issued. A mobilization order was issued to reporters from both teams. Snow mountain climbing is not suitable because there is no work to be done, and dark night exploration is meaningless, so the exploration of inaccessible secret caves was the internal decision for the mobilization order.
The first day I received the order was January 17th.
Exploration! Exploration! A great exploration of secret caves! Where should I go? On the first day, I stayed up all night calculating in bed. But no place to go immediately came to mind. Ah, this is a headache.

"If the net is open, at least one knot will catch something." As I kept thinking, an idea came to me! An opium den! At times like this, I wanted to shout "hurray." But I had only heard the word opium and never seen either opium or morphine, so this was no easy task. But if I could find and expose to the world the lair of this terrible demon that ruins individuals and families on a small scale and countries and peoples on a large scale, then people with eyes and ears would at least have some sense of self-control and caution. When I realized that doing this was more meaningful than any other exploration, I finally felt a sense of self-esteem, thinking, "Hey! Your brain is not bad." I immediately sought out Mr. Yun, who had returned from Manchuria after many years, at his house in Cheong 0-dong. This was because opium generally comes through Chinese hands, and Mr. Yun had spent a long time in the Chinese region, so I wanted to gain knowledge about it as the first step in preparation.

That was the second day, January 18th! After eating breakfast, I went straight to the company, acted busy, muttered to myself, and then said I had some business to take care of. I rode my bicycle and met Mr. Yun. As if on a casual visit, I made small talk and then subtly brought up the topic of opium, asking how it is made since the Chinese cultivate it a lot, and how morphine is made. Mr. Yun was not stingy with his knowledge. He explained it in detail as follows, but I cannot write down all the details here, so I will just write the gist of it.

Real Opium and Fake Opium

Everyone knows that opium is extracted from the poppy flower (罌粟), which in slang is called Yang Guifei, but there are several types. Chinese people generally call the opium from Guangdong province Guangtu (廣土), the opium from Dalian province Datu (大土), and the opium from Manchuria Bientu (邊土). The sap is collected from the flower with a large knife and dried in the shade or sun until it turns black. Then, it is boiled in a copper pot (other pots cannot be used) with water, like simmering medicine. As it thickens, it becomes like taffy. Stir it with a large stick, and all of it sticks to the stick. When it cools, it becomes like black taffy. It is kneaded by hand and made into large lumps the size of bricks, wrapped in oil paper, and sold. That is opium. Then, it is further refined to make a white powder like salt, which is morphine. They call one of those lumps a "bo" (보). Guangtu and Datu are 20 *ryang* (량) in weight per *bo*, while Bientu is 50 *ryang* per *bo*. The price per *ryang* is about seven or eight *won*, which was very cheap until recently, but now it has increased tenfold. There is also a lot of fake opium, called "nawi" (나휘), such as melon *nawi*, pumpkin *nawi*, and gourd *nawi*. This involves hollowing out a fairly large oriental melon, pumpkin, or gourd, filling it with about one *ryang* of real opium, sealing the hollowed-out part, and then burying it in a hot compost heap during the hottest part of summer. After about a week, when you take it out, it has all turned into opium, so one *ryang* of real opium becomes one or one and a half *bo* of opium. This means that there is 20 to 50 times more fake opium than real opium. Of course, it is less effective as medicine, and the price should be fake, but the well-known Chinese can tell the difference at a glance. However, inexperienced merchants buy it at a high price without knowing. Even with the same opium, the best and worst are separated when it is first harvested, and there are distinctions of high, medium, and low quality <65>.

Since this is not a botanical lecture or a pharmacology lecture, there is no need to linger here. I didn't want to show Mr. Yun any suspicious signs, so I pretended to be busy, thinking that I now had a good understanding of opium, and bid farewell to Mr. Yun's house.

Disguise and Arduous Exploration

I came out, but how was I to find that lair squeezed into some corner of the vast 67,000-household metropolis of Gyeongseong? Even if I knew where it was, how could I infiltrate the lair where ghostly beings were swarming in darkness and secrecy, using all sorts of means and tricks? However, a ray of light suddenly shone in my mind. I remembered hearing a rumor that there was something like that near Seosomun.
"That's it. I'll find it." I steered my company bicycle toward the area, but then I thought that wearing a suit and coat wouldn't work no matter what. I returned to the company, put my bicycle away, and quietly went home again. I changed into old cotton pants and a jacket that I had been wearing, borrowed Mr. C's silk sash with black stains on the collar, smoothed out the wrinkles a little, put on a dignified muffler, and kept my fedora. Looking in the mirror, my clothes were like those of a bumpkin who had just come up from the countryside, my hair was disheveled and ungreased, my face was gaunt, and my complexion was pale. Even the shrewdest opium dealer would think, "This guy will be easy prey if he has money." Even healthy people would sneer when I wandered around the opium den, thinking, "Huh, this guy must have smoked two or three doses." I was definitely qualified. In addition, I wore a *mobondan* sash, took off my shoes, and put on old rubber shoes, so anyone would give me eight or nine points as an opium addict.
"This is good enough," I said and went out on the street. It was funny, but I also had scary thoughts. What should I do when I get there? If I acted rashly, I could get beaten up by the vagrants there. Or if they suspected I was a detective, those ignorant people might attack me and kill me, and bury my body somewhere. That would be the end of me, and my unmarried children would be miserable! At the same time as these funny and scary thoughts arose, the exhilarating thought that this was a great adventure also arose.
I planned my strategy alone, and took a streetcar from Anguk-dong intersection <66> to Jongno 1-ga station. I walked along the main street of Mugyo-dong, passed the wide square in front of the newly built Government-General building, and entered the alley where many Chinese lived in Seosomun. But it wouldn't be on the main street. I entered a side street with a faded sign that seemed to read "Uideoknu" (義德樓), a Chinese restaurant, and pretended to be disabled, limping and looking around slowly. If anyone I knew had seen me in this state, they would have died laughing on the spot.
Sure enough, there were friends who were really limping, friends wearing tattered clothes, friends with pale yellow faces, and even beggars wrapped in straw mats. It was definitely there. It was definitely in this neighborhood. It was a fact that a devil's lair that ruins bodies, homes, countries, and peoples was hidden here. But how could I find this lair? I stood on the street for no reason, sighing, "Whew, whew," panting as if I was out of breath, and just observed the surroundings. Across the street, there was a water stand, and someone was sitting inside, looking through a hole. They say opium dens have lookouts, so I wondered if that guy was the lookout for the opium den. As I stared intently, an old woman wearing a black kitchen apron came with a bucket and gave a token to the friend sitting inside the booth and drew water. As long as the police were cracking down, they couldn't openly set up a booth and watch the street like that, so it was clear that my thinking was due to the nervous tension at the time. However, if you look at the surface of society, there are all sorts of secrets and strange things, so who knows if that rascal was making money by selling water and taking bribes for being a lookout?
In an alley where the filth was so bad that you wanted to throw up and the gloom was as dark as the gloomiest den, half-wits who couldn't even be called beggars were bustling in and out in front of houses that were just big enough for a doghouse. It was definitely there, but I couldn't pinpoint which house it was.

Found it! Got it!!

Wait, I will definitely find it. The sun has already set. Why is the weather so cold and the wind so harsh? Even streetlights are hard to find in this dark alley. "Then it's night. The clue to this road is at night." I turned to go to a Chinese restaurant to eat a bowl of noodles. Then, from behind, a friend wearing a winter hat and a Japanese haori or a black Korean overcoat – it was hard to see in the dim light – dragging his straw shoes, looked like he had sold rice paddies or pawned his belongings. <67> I could not hide the fact that even in the dark, I could recognize his face and gait. I didn't need to know the details of his life, but I thought I could get him to treat me to something, so I spoke to him.
"Hey, I came to Seoul from the countryside to cure a disease, but I only heard that there is a place that sells good medicine for it near here. I've been looking all day and haven't found it. It's getting dark, and I'm in trouble. Do you happen to know?"
The rascal, as if he had found something to eat, listened to me and said, "Oh, that's too bad! I don't know the details, but let's look for it together later, and let's go somewhere warm first."
He took my hand and led me to the Chinese restaurant right next door. I thought he was going to treat me to a big meal, but what a surprise! What could he possibly afford? All he ordered was two bowls of soybean paste noodles. Anyway, it was cold and I was hungry, so I ate a bowl. When I tried to pay, he insisted on paying because he had brought me there. I thought things were going well and let him pay. He took out forty *jeon* in bronze coins from a wallet that a crow would have pecked at. On the one hand, I felt sorry for him, but on the other hand, I was watching him. Then, the guy said, "Ah, seeing your face, you must have some kind of disease. There is a place near here that sells very effective medicine for internal diseases. I almost died of such a disease about three years ago, but I bought the medicine and got better. I don't know if they have moved, but let's go and see. But the truth is, you don't eat the medicine. It's like when they vaccinate children in the countryside, they put some liquid in a needle and prick their arm. It's a similar method of injection, and the medicine is much more effective than eating it. Anyway, let's go together."
He got up, pretending to be clever.
Dear readers! You can guess that Seokhwasaeng's success is near. Even Seokhwasaeng, who is full of tricks, considers it a miracle that things are progressing so quickly.

Infiltration of the Sashimi Ghost's Main Lair

This rascal pretends to be clever, asking, "Is it this house? Is it that house? It was definitely near here. Ah, maybe it's this house." He went to a door and called out, "Is anyone home?" It was dark, so I couldn't see clearly, but a short young man's voice came from a shack where a tall person would have bumped their head on the ceiling. The voice also had a limping gait. He came out and said, "Oh! Mr. Lee, how have you been? Are you still at Chief Im's house in Mugyo-dong? Why have you come?" He was more welcoming than on New Year's Day. I had even eaten a meal with this friend without asking his name, and now I knew he was Mr. Lee from Chief Im's house in Mugyo-dong. Mr. Lee said, "Well, that's how it happened. I brought an acquaintance who needs some medicine." He was trying to flatter him.

Even though the rascal was using clumsy tricks, he was acting within reason. But a friend who didn't even know the house well was suddenly being so friendly with the owner's son. I wanted to spit in his face and say, "Hey, you've already messed up," but I was grateful that he had guided me well. The young rascal said, "My father has been bedridden for three years due to illness. He can't move at all, but I use the medicine myself." "Huh. Like father, like son! Your family is doing well!" The thought immediately popped into my head.
The young rascal said that the room was too shabby to sit in, and he kept saying "I'm sorry" and dragged me into the inner room. It was indeed as shabby as he said. At the lower end of the room, an old man with disheveled hair was using a blanket and groaning in pain. At the upper end of the room, there were two pieces of furniture that must have been passed down for generations, and three people were squeezed in to sit there. Even a prison cell would be better than this. Then he introduced himself, saying that the young rascal was called "Wiyeong" (위영). Then he asked how many doses I wanted to inject right away. My heart pounded. I didn't know the method of injection or how to calculate the number of doses. <69> So I said that this was my first time and I had no experience, so I would come back tomorrow and watch how it was done and what kind of illness it was effective for. Then the young rascal told Mr. Lee to try a dose first. He opened a small drawer dusty desk drawer, took out a powder wrapped in old paper, scooped a little of the powder into a small glass bottle with a knife, pumped it with a syringe to dissolve it in water, then loaded it back into the syringe. He held my arm up to the dim light of a small kerosene lamp and pricked it with the needle. It was only for a moment. Mr. Lee closed his eyes slightly and leaned against the wall for a while, as if he felt refreshed. Ah! This is the taste that melts everything away! In this oblivion, in this dreamlike world, both joy and sorrow are forgotten. In this taste, even the integrity of loyal subjects melts away, and even the individuality of great men disappears. Yet, it is impossible to endure or resist. They sell their land and homes, sell their wives and daughters, commit theft, and continue to do this to live even for a day. They become addicted and become beggars, eventually becoming garbage or corpses on the street. How terrible is this! And how many people secretly sell, buy, give, inject, and ruin themselves in every corner of the countryside and Seoul? Readers with eyes and ears must have heard and seen a lot.

Since You're Trying a Dose

After injecting Mr. Lee, the young rascal gave me a medical lecture. "I have had an internal illness since I was young. Something like a fist would rise from my stomach to my chest. I suffered for many years, but after injecting this once, it cleared up like clouds revealing a blue sky. But once you start, you can't stop. Why don't you try to cure it another way if you can?" He seemed to still have a spark of conscience, and he explained it for a long time as a warning. When he talked about how he almost died from chest pain, he put his fists to his chest and described the pain. It was the most dramatic moment, and it would be enough to make a whole film reel. "But since you're here, why don't you try a dose?" He urged me, but I knew that if I refused, I would arouse his suspicion. I had to gain his trust in order for the exploration to go smoothly. Or maybe one dose wouldn't hurt. So I asked him to lower the dose and just give me one dose. The rascal then injected my arm in the same way. It's true that my flesh tingled and my stomach felt queasy, and I felt like I was going to vomit. I don't know what kind of effect it had, but it is true that I felt a little dizzy. I asked the price. Mr. Lee's was 30 *jeon*, and mine was only half the dose, so it was 15 *jeon*, totaling 45 *jeon*. I paid for both Mr. Lee's and mine. Since I needed to explore a little more, I came up with a plan.
"Hey! The police are cracking down hard. What happens if we get caught?"
I asked the young rascal this. Then, "That's why respectable gentlemen don't come here. They all send errand boys to bring it to their homes," was his answer.
I thought to myself, "That's it. It's done."
"Then anyone can do it?" I asked. He said, "Of course. Anyone can do it. If you just buy a needle and the medicine, you can do it as much as you want." He looked like he was saying, "You should buy it too." But since there were more things to find out, I said I would come back tomorrow to buy it. I asked how much the needles cost and how much the medicine cost per *don* (돈). He said the needles were 17 or 18 *jeon* each, and the medicine was about 1 *won* and 20 *jeon* per *don*. Then someone called from outside, saying that they had come to get the medicine from Mr. No's house. "That's it. I caught one," I thought, waited for him to give the medicine, and said I would come back tomorrow. I went outside, memorized the house well, said goodbye to Mr. Lee, and followed the errand boy. The guy went out onto the wide street of Taepyeong-tong and headed straight towards Namdaemun. I guessed that he wasn't from nearby and asked,
"Hey, where are you going?" The guy seemed to know that I had come from there and told me everything without suspicion.
"I'm going to buy medicine from Mr. No's house beyond Muhakjae, outside Seodaemun."
"Then what does Mr. No do?"
"He's unemployed. He raises chickens, rents out rickshaws, and stuff like that."
"Then is he rich?"
"He's not a big rich man, but he has a Japanese-style house and lives well enough."
The guy answered all my questions quite frankly. I asked a few more questions.
"How old is the owner?"
"Well, I don't know exactly, but he must be over fifty."
"How often do you come to buy medicine? And do you always come to buy it?"
"Sometimes I come once a week, sometimes twice, and sometimes <71> the owner comes himself."
"Do you always buy the medicine from that house?"
"No. Sometimes I go to the Chinese house over there on the main street. I guess the medicine is different."
I got another new clue here. The rascal's house is a morphine den! The Chinese guy's house is an opium den! I decided to go into that place as well. For no reason, I felt happy and tried to pull him into a tavern to buy him a drink, but he said he was in a hurry and said goodbye. He was probably worried about the train! I looked at my watch and it was already 10:45. The train to Bongcheon departed at 10:55, so there were only ten minutes left. It was clear that the guy would take the train from Gyeongseong Station and go to Sinchon Station and head towards Mr. No's house beyond Muhakjae. I took a streetcar from the Namdaemun stop and got off at Anguk-dong. The clock was already half past eleven, and the wind from Bukak Mountain was relentlessly blowing against my ears. Almost all the stores were closed, but only the "yakiiimo" (焼き芋 - roasted sweet potato) vendor was leaning against a telephone pole, warming his hands and making meaningless noises.
It was already midnight when I got home! My body was cold, but when I thought about today's success, I couldn't help but smile with joy.

The Chinese Murder Den

It's the third day. Today, I didn't go to the company and dressed as I did yesterday. I went to that place again to check the house number and investigate the owner. The address was 3-chome, Taepyeong-tong, OO2, and the owner's name was O Hong O and O Yu O. But it was no use knowing the underlings. If I could find out about the young rascal who gave me the injection last night, that would be enough. But what could such impoverished rascals have that would be worth knowing? Still, I thought that there might be a story behind this rascal, just as there are former rich men's sons who ruin their families with opium addiction and actors who were once praised by theater audiences but fall into disgrace. But there was no way to know. So I wrote the names in my notebook and returned to the office. I asked if anyone knew O Hong O, even though I knew that no one would know. I could not believe my ears when I heard the reply. Anyone who heard me would think I was lying. But what could I do about the truth?
In our company, Cheongo (靑吾) -gun, who was known for his knowledge of modern Korean history and people, stroked his balding head and said, "O Hong O (O洪O) was famous for being fluent in Chinese. He was an interpreter at the Chinese consulate from the time Yuan Shikai (袁世凱) was in Korea to the era of Futo Ei (富士英) as the Gyeongseong consul. It hasn't been ten years since then. Why are you asking about him?" He seemed suspicious, but I decided not to reveal anything about this investigation, so I dismissed it as nothing. Of course, he must have been talented, sociable, and spent a lot of money as an interpreter at a foreign consulate. But now he lives in a shack, groaning in pain under a worn-out blanket, and his son is ruining his young body and becoming disabled. He and his son are disabled, and even though they don't have enough food to eat, they can't live a day without this thing to inject into their bodies. And if there are still ignorant people who don't know how terrible this is, then the world is coming to an end.
So, late in the evening, I went to that rascal's house again. I called out, "Is anyone here?" But no one came out of the house. Instead, a beggar-like friend wearing a tattered Japanese haori came out of nowhere and asked who I was looking for. I asked him to tell the young owner that the person he had promised to meet had come. While I was waiting outside, a girl who looked to be sixteen or seventeen years old went in, and then a girl who looked to be twelve or thirteen years old went in with a small bundle of firewood. It seemed that they were all guards.
After a while, the young rascal came out and welcomed me in.
I went into the room where you couldn't even stand up properly. Now, the opium-addicted elderly former Chinese consulate interpreter was groaning in pain. Next to him was a friend, probably also an addict, wearing a tattered suit that he must have picked up somewhere. He had probably just taken a dose and was staring at the ceiling, dreaming. The young rascal asked in a friendly way, "How are you?" asking about the medicine. I couldn't say that it wasn't working, and I had to gain his trust, so I said,
"Oh, it's amazing. I couldn't sleep a wink at night, but last night I slept so well. It's a wonderful medicine."
I gave him a compliment.
He was also excited and said, "Of course. It's the best thing for that kind of internal illness. That's why everyone does it. Are you going to take another dose today?" He was trying to make a sale. I thought that if I kept pretending, I might actually become addicted and become a genuine addict. I came up with a plan to find out who was coming and going and to see the Chinese opium den across the street.
"Hey. Isn't it dangerous here with the police cracking down? So I'm going to buy a needle and medicine from today and do it at home. Give me one needle for 80 *jeon* and 50 *jeon* worth of medicine."
As soon as I said that, he said, "Oh, that's a good idea. If you get caught, the police will tell you to come and go. It's a lot of trouble. The other day, my uncle came from the countryside and got caught by a policeman. He had to go to the police station and suffered a lot before going back."
He took a syringe from the dusty desk drawer and wrapped the morphine powder in newspaper.

Attack! Attack on the Chinese Demon Den

I took it and put it in my pocket and asked again,
"Hey, where do you get this medicine, and who uses it? There must be some people I know."
The rascal seemed to know what I was up to and didn't answer right away.
"Why do you need to know? You don't need to know who uses it. No one inside the gate uses it. Only the people outside the gate and the people in Dongmak use it."
I pressed him again, "You must get it from the Chinese. Also, Lee, a rich man in Naksan, and the owner of the OOO pawnshop on Gyeongno also get it from here. What's the point of lying? I'm going to use the medicine all the time. And there are a lot of places that do this around here."
I was trying to find out what he knew. When I said that he got it from the Chinese, he said, "That's not all. There are other places that sell it." But when I mentioned Lee, the rich man, and the OOO pawnshop owner, he jumped up and denied it. It seemed that there was something behind it. Finally, he relaxed about the fellow addicts nearby and told me about them.
"This neighborhood is full of lairs. There are about four or five places. If you go out of here, the house across the street is one. If you go out and turn left, there's a house tucked away. And they do it at the Chinese bathhouse."
I wanted to check out the Chinese opium den. I thought I could drag it out of this rascal.
"Hey, this medicine isn't working very well. I want to try smoking opium. Do you have any?"
The rascal said, "Instead, you'll get addicted. The Chinese sell the black stuff (opium) across the street, but the crackdown is more severe there. You can't get in unless you're a regular. If a stranger goes in, the lookout will give a code signal from the moment you enter, and they'll hide everything. It's impossible for anyone else to get in. And they're especially careful in the evening."
"You must be friends with those people. I'll buy you a few doses. Let's go together and see if it's good. I'll buy some to smoke too."
The rascal seemed worried that he would lose me, his customer, to the Chinese, and he said with concern, "That's very addictive, and once you're addicted, you can't quit. And the ashes (재 - residue) are dangerous. You can die from it. The first time you smoke it, your stomach will be so queasy that you won't be able to stand it."
He gave me a lot of advice and warnings. "Hey, I know that better than you do. Stop worrying," I wanted to say, but I just wanted to see the den.
"Is that so? Then I'll just watch you smoke and I'll pay. Show me around."
He hesitated for a moment, and then he got excited about the opium and said, "Let's go."
He got up right away. Another friend who was next to him followed us. The three of us went out onto the main street of Seodaemun. He said that the other friend was headed to Taepyeong-tong, and we two turned towards Seodaemun. I asked who that was, and he said that he kept two well-known courtesans, O Hyang (O香) and O Hyang (O香), in Gyeongseong, and gave his eldest daughter as a concubine to a rich man named O Chang O in Dongmak. He said that in the summer, he would tell them to quit opium and go to Seokwang Temple, and then he would spend the money his two daughters gave him and have a great time. He said that it was more of a loss than smoking opium at home.
It's shocking. It's scary. Even though he sells his daughters and sends them away as concubines, he has to do this. Ah! What should I do with these people?

Sleeping with a Beauty and Taking a Dose

Following the rascal, we walked a few steps west. Right next to the main street on the right, there was a small empty yard. A little further in, there was a house built in a style similar to a Japanese "nagaya" (長屋 - row house). The sign said "Naeumok Gongindae Gong" (內寓木工人大工 - Carpenter Master Craftsman). We went to the left and walked in. It was like entering a cave in the mountains. There was a lookout in front of the door, but he didn't seem to suspect anything because the rascal was leading the way.
I don't know how far we walked, but we were led into a narrow room where the walls seemed to be about to burst, walking carefully. It was a Chinese beauty of about seventeen or eighteen years old. Her Korean was clumsy, but her voice was enchanting enough to steal your soul. "Have you come to smoke? How many doses shall I bring?" I quickly told her to bring two doses. The woman went out somewhere and came back with a *krumi* (끄럼이 - smoking paraphernalia) and a pipe. She brought a small brazier with burning charcoal. She lay down first and asked, "Who will smoke?" Before I could say "That gentleman," the rascal lay down next to the woman. The brazier was in the middle, the rascal held the pipe, and the woman put something (this is opium) on the pipe and lit it with a piece of iron wire. Of course, there was no light, so I couldn't see everything clearly, but the pipe wasn't like a regular tobacco pipe. The tobacco compartment was in the middle, and it made a gurgling sound as he smoked.
After a while, the rascal told the woman to smoke. She took it without hesitation and smoked it. Then the woman asked me to smoke it. Since I had come this far, I thought, "Let's just try it once." I took a couple of puffs, but I didn't taste anything special. I just didn't like the taste. But the smell of the smoke was somewhat sweet and pungent.
When we had almost finished one dose, a Chinese guy, maybe a servant, came in with a bowl and left. I couldn't see clearly in the dim light, but it was probably *tanggwa* (唐菓子 - traditional Korean sweets). They each ate a few, and then they gave the rest to me. Then they started smoking another dose. It took about an hour from start to finish. The rascal seemed to be getting more and more dazed, and the woman was singing a gibberish song. I urged the rascal to leave and asked for the bill. The opium was 50 *jeon* and the sweets were 20 *jeon*, totaling 70 *jeon*. I quickly gave it to the woman and left the den. The strange thing was the beauty. I asked the rascal what kind of woman she was, and he said that she was the owner's wife. I wondered why a sly Chinese rascal would send his wife out to do this kind of thing. He said that the business was special, and that he showed the beauty to attract customers. Once they were addicted, they wouldn't care about the beauty or anything else. They wouldn't even care about sex, so they would trust their own wives, like Yang Guifei, and send them out to the customers.
This is how I visited this lair. I said goodbye to the rascal, telling him to meet me again when he came to buy more, and walked alone, singing a song of success, along the wide street of Taepyeong-tong, past the New Government Building and the *Maeil Shinbo* (每日申報) newspaper office, and got off the streetcar at the Gwanghwamun stop. I walked along the wall of Gyeongbok Palace and returned home. The cold moonlight of the sixteenth night shone brightly on the old house of the Jongchinbu (宗親府 - Office of Royal Genealogy).

Investigating Those Who Smoke and Those Who Eat

Dear readers! What do you think? I have heard a song that is popular in Manchuria, but I can't remember it exactly, so I'll just tell you the gist of it. Please forgive me if I make any mistakes.
If you call it a flower, it is Yang Guifei
Even the name is cute
Who wouldn't get drunk
On the fragrance that blooms
With tortoise-shell pipe and jade water bowl
Even the sound of gurgling
Beats in time with the song
A beauty by the side and a brazier
Burning brightly with white charcoal
After smoking a dose
A mist swirls inside
After smoking another dose
I forget about the world

However, if any of you know a little about the history of the Orient, you will lament the history of China, which eighty-seven years ago suffered the consequences of Britain's vicious means, which ultimately led to the Opium War and the Treaty of Nanjing, losing 21 million in indemnity and the important port of Hong Kong. Then you will remember that there was a song at the beginning of that Opium War.
Sparkling, sparkling, sparkling
In that fragrant fire
Even if all the houses and fields burn down
Not a single ash remains
Floating, floating, floating
At the end of the rising smoke
Even if all the heroes die
Not a single drop of blood remains
How heartbreaking is this sound? I will not speak at length.

However, I have not ended my exploration of the devil's lair with this. Success may be seventy or eighty percent complete, but there is still a responsibility left.
It's the fourth day. From today, there is no rush. I slept until noon. In the evening, I wandered around that lair again, checking the people who went in and out, and decided to follow anyone suspicious. For four days, from the extremely cold 20th to Daehan (대한 - The Great Cold), I did this. I can't list all the addicts who came and went, but I added one suspicious person to my notebook each day.
The first person I caught was the errand boy from a store. He was carrying something wrapped in paper, so I followed him. Dear readers! Don't be surprised. He went straight into OO Sanghoe,


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	懸賞讀物 南北隊 競爭記事, ,殺人魔·刺身鬼 阿片窟 大探査記, 烈風酷寒七晝夜에 單身으로 冒險大探査
필자	南隊記者 石火生
기사형태	소식

懸賞讀物 南北隊 競爭記事, ,殺人魔·刺身鬼 阿片窟 大探査記, 烈風酷寒七晝夜에 單身으로 冒險大探査
						南隊記者 石火生
動員令! 動員令!!

동원령이 내렷다. 兩隊記者에게 동원령이 내렷다. 雪中 등산은 눈이 아니오니 할 일이 업고 暗夜탐험은 의미가 적으니 그만 두라는 것이요 그러면 갈 데 업는 비밀굴의 탐사가 동원령의 내정이엇다.
령을 밧던 첫날이 일월십칠일이다.
탐사! 탐사! 비밀굴의 대탐사! 어느 곳을 차저 갈가? 첫날은 밤새도록 니불 속에서 구구를 대여 보앗다. 그러나 얼는 갈 곳이 아니 나섯다. 아아 머리 압흔 노릇이다.
『그물이 열코면 한코라도 걸닌다』고 하도 생각하닛가 꾀가 나는누나! 阿片窟이다』 이럴때에는 벌서 만세를 부르고 십헛다. 그러나 말만 들엇지 阿片이 무엇인지 모두히 네가 무엇인지 구경도 못한 나로서 이건 여간 난사가 아니엇다. 그러나 적게는 일신일가를 망치고 크게는 일국가 일민족을 망치는 이 무서운 악마의 굴혈을 차저 내여 세상에 공개한다면 눈 잇고 귀 잇는 놈이야 그려도 무슨 자제하고 경계하는 마음이 생기겟지. 이러케 생각함에 엇더케라도 해서 이것을 하는 것이 무슨 탐험보다도 의의 잇는 일인줄을 깨닷고 보니 그때야말로 『야! 네 두뇌가 괜찬구나』하는 자존심이 생기며 직각적으로 滿洲에 가 다년 잇다가<64> 도라온 尹군을 그의 집 잇는 淸0洞으로 찻게 되엿다. 그것은 대개 阿片이라는 것이 支那인의 손을 것처서 나오고 尹군이 支那방면에 오래 잇섯기 때문에 거긔 대한 지식을 알고 십허서 爲先第一着의 준비로 尹군을 차진 것이다.
그것이 제이일인 일월 십팔일! 아침을 먹고는 바로 社으로 드러가서 시침이를 뚝 따며 무엇을 하나 하고는 혼자말처럼 두런두런하다가 어대 좀 볼 일이 잇다 하고는 자전거를 모라타고 尹군을 차저 맛낫다. 보통방문하러 온 것 처럼 例事로 이런 이약이 저런 이약이 하다가 슬적 阿片 이약이를 끄내며 그것을 淸人들이 만히 재배한다는데 엇더케 阿片은 만들고 모두히네는 만드느냐고 물엇더니 尹군이야말로 거긔에 대하야는 과히 소매치 아니한지라. 다음과 가티 차근차근히 설명을 하여 주엇스나 여긔에다 그 설명을 다 쓸 수는 업고 대강만 적자.

眞阿片·假阿片

그런데 아편이 罌粟이라는 속어에는 楊貴妃라는 꼿에서 채취하는 줄이야 세상사람이 거의 다 알지만 그것에도 종류가 여러 가지 잇서서 中國사람들은 보통으로 廣東지방에서 나는 것을 廣土, 大蓮지방에서 나는 것을 大土, 滿洲지방에서 나는 것을 邊土라 하야 꼿에서 대칼로 진(汁)을 글거 모아 가지고 陰乾 혹은 陽乾하면 새까맛케 되는데 그것을 구리남비(다른 남비는 못쓴다고)에다가 약 다리드시 물을 붓고 다려서 조리면 엿과 가티 되는데 대막대기 가튼 것을 휘휘 저으면 그것이 전부 막대기에가 붓는데 그놈이 치차 냉각하면 검은 엿처럼 되는 것을 손으로 잘 만저서 벽돌ㅅ장만큼씩 크게 뎅이를 만들고 유지에다가 잘 싸서 매매를 하는데 그것이 아편이요 거긔서 다시 정제하여 소금가티 하-얀 가루를 만드는데 그것이 모두히네라 한다. 그리고 그놈 한뎅이를 거긔서는 한「보」라고 하는데 廣土나 大土는 이십兩重이 한보요 邊土만은 오십兩重을 한보라 하고 매 兩重가격은 칠팔원 가량 이어서 조금전만 해도 매우 싸던 것이 근래는 그 열배나 올라가고 그 중에도 갓ㅅ자 아편이 만하야 참외나휘, 호박나휘, 박나휘라고 「나휘」라는 것이 잇는데 그것은 어지간히 큰 애참외나 호박이나 혹은 박을 따서 속을 족음 도리고 그 속에다 眞阿片 한 兩重쯤 늣코 도린 곳을 다시 막은 후에는 녀름철  한참 더운때 더운 짐이 훅훅 나는 풀두엄 속 가튼데다 무더 두엇다가 한 일주일만에 내여보면 그것이 전부 아편이 되야서 한 兩重의 것이 한보 혹은 한보반의 아편을 엇게되니 元아편보다 이십배 내지 오십배의 假아편이 느는 셈이 라 물론 그것이 약으로 해도 효험이 적고 갑시 가짜야만 할 것은 정칙이지만 거긔에 이름이 난 淸人놈들은 한번 보면 진가를 턱턱 알어내여도 섯불은 장사친구들은 멋도 모르고 그대로 고가를 주고 사게 된다하며 가튼 아편에도 처음 딸 때에 조코 나즌 것을 갈라서 상중하의 구별이 잇<65>다한다.

이것 식물강의가 아니요 약학강의가 아닌 이상, 여긔서 길게 노다거릴 필요는 업다. 무슨 수상하 눈치를 尹군에게 뵈여서는 안되겟슴으로 속으로는 그만하면 나도 아편상식은 상당히 가젓다 하면서도 말로는 밧브다는 층락을 하고 尹군의 집으로부터 작별을 하고 나왓다.

變裝하고 苦心探査

나오기는 나왓스나 넓으나 넓은 육만칠천호 대京城안에 어느 구퉁이에가 그놈의 굴혈이 찡겨 잇스며 잇는 곳을 안다 하기로 별별 수단, 별별 짓을 다하여 암흑하고 비밀한 속에 귀신떼들이 꾸물거린다니 그놈의 굴혈을 차저낼 장사가 잇스며 그놈의 굴혈을 드러가 계책이 잇느냐 말이다. 그러나 일조의 서광이 얼는 내 머리에 빗치는 것은 일즉이 風便으로나마 西小門 근처에 그런 무엇이 잇다는 소문을 드룬 기억이 나는 것이엇다.
「올타. 그러며 차저낸다.」하고 직장 자전거를 그 근처로 몰랴다가 언뜻 생각하니 양복에 외투 입은 것이 아모리 하여도 안되엿서다. 社에로 다시 도라와서는 자전거를 갓다노코 역시 슬그먼머니 와서 집으로 도라왓다. 마침 입다가 둔 솜바지 저고리를 가라입고 동정에 검은 때가 조르르 무든 무근 두루막이를 입고 가티 잇은 C군의 띄고 잇는 명주허리띄를 비러서 조금 구김살을 피여 가지고 목도리를 으젓하게 하고 모자는 그대로 중절모자를 썻것다. 면경을 한번썩 드려다 보니 의복은 두말도 할 것 업시 시골서 처음 올나온 얼칙이 하이카라 비슷도 하고 머리라야 덥헐덥헐 기름 한점 안 바르고 얼골조차 마른데다가 혈색조차 창백색을 띄웟스니 아모리 약은 아편장사라도 「이놈이 돈만 잇스면 밥이로구나」하고 덤빌만도 하고 아편굴 근처에 가 도라다니면 성한 사람이 보아도 「흥 이놈 두세네대 한 모양이로구나」하고 빈정거려줄 만큼은 확실히 자격을 가젓다. 게다가 모본단 단임을 치고 구두를 벗고 헌고무신을 신어노니 아모가 보아도 팔구점은 줄만한 아편장이 자격이 넉넉하엿다.
「이만하면 되엿다」하고 길ㅅ가에 썩 나서니 우습기도 우습지만 내 속으로는 무서운 겁나는 생각도 낫다. 가서 엇지 할 것인가? 만일 섯불리 굴다가 거긔는 별별 부랑자 놈들이 다 모여든다는데 잘못해서 그 놈들한테 뚜드려 맛기나 하면 엇저나? 또는 무슨 탐정하러 온 놈이라고 긔수를 채이여 그 무지한 놈들이 대들어서 참살을 하여 가지고 시체조차 어느 땅 속에다가 집이 치워바리면 나는 萬事休矣요 독신자식 불상하구나! 하는 우스운 듯하고도 그 무서운 의심이 작고 생기는 동시에 이것 모험이야 큰 모험이다!하는 통쾌한 생각도 가티 일어낫다.
혼자서 작전계획을 꾸며가며 安國洞 네 거리에서 전차를 <66> 타고 鐘路 一丁目 정류장에가 내려서 武橋町 큰길로 해서 새로진 府廳 압 널은 마당을 지나서 西小門으로 나가는 支那인 만히 사는 골목으로 드러섯다. 그러나 잇서도 큰 길겻흔 아니려니 하고 風磨雨洗에 글자가 잇는 듯 업는 듯한, 義德樓라는 支那요리집 간판걸은 새이길로 드러서며 다리를 좀 절늠거려가며 천천히 끼웃끼웃하여가며 병신행세를 하엿다. 만일 아는 사람이 이 꼴을 보앗다면 그 자리에서 요절을 하고 말엇슬 것이다.
아니나 다를가 정말 다리를 저는 친구, 새꼄언 의복을 입은 친구, 얼골이 새-노란 친구, 심지어 거적을 들써쓴 걸인까지 이 골목에서 나가고 드러가고 법석이다. 분명 잇다. 잇기는 이 근처이다. 무섭게 몸을 망치고 집을 망치고 나라를 망치고 민족을 망치는 마굴이 정녕히 이곳에 숨겨잇는 것만은 사실이다. 그러나 무슨 도리로 이놈의 굴혈을 차저내나?하며 나는 공연히 길가에 가서서 「휘유휘유」하며 숨길이 갓분드시 헐덕어리며 근처의 기색만 보고 잇섯다. 큰길에서 바로 댓집째 드러가서 水筒이 잇고 水筒겻해 널판으로 막을 짓고 그 속에서 누가 안저서 뚤어 노은 구멍으로 망을 보고 잇다. 아편굴에는 망직이를 대 세운다더니 저 놈이 아편굴의 망을 보는 놈인가 하고 눈이 뚜러저라 하고는 처다보고 잇노라닛가 어느새 껌언 행주치마를 입은 중늙은이 녀편네 하나가 바게쓰를 들고 와서는 그 막 속에 드러 안진 친구에게 물표를 내여주고 물을 길어가는 것을 보니 물 파는 水筒直이엇다. 잘하거나 못하거나 경찰의 취체가 잇는 이상 그러케 공공연하게 길가에다 막까지 치고 망을 못볼 것은 정한 이치인데 내가 이러케 생각한 것은 물론 그때의 신경과민이엇던 것이 분명하다. 그러나 사회의 표면을 드려다 보면 별의 별 비밀이 다 만코 별의 별 꼬락산이가 다 만흔 세상이라 이 놈팽이 친구인들 물팔어 화리 먹고 망보아 주어 뇌물 먹는 일이 잇는지 누가 아느냐?
더러웁기란 도맛허 다 가더러 웁고 음침하기란 대표가게 음침한 놈의 골목에서 집이라고는 게딱지가 尊丈노릇을 넉넉히 할 만한 문 압헤서 꼴로도 볼 수 업는 반거지의 친구들이 여긔서 쑥덕, 저긔서 비틀비틀하며 드나든다. 분명히 잇기는 잇는데 엇던 놈의 집인지는 집어낼 수가 업섯다.

차젓다! 걸렷다!!

가만 잇거라, 찻기는 긔어코 찻고 만다. 해는 이미 젓다. 날은 왜 그리도 치우며 바람조차 왜 그리 지독한지? 음침한 이 골목에는 어둠이 와도 전등빗조차 구경하기가 어려웁다. 「그러면 밤이다. 이 길의 단서를 잡기는 밤이다」하고 爲先나와서 청요리 집에가 만두나 한그릇 먹으리라 하고 발길을 도르키랴닛가 뒤에서 방한모를 쓰고 日本하오리를 입엇는지 검은 朝鮮 두루막이를 입엇는지 어둠침침하야 잘 뵈이지는 안흐나 집신짝을 질질 끌고 오는 품이 논마직이나 팔어먹고 전당 가지나 잡혀 먹어본 듯한<67> 모양이 감출수 업시 어둔 속에서도 그 얼골이나 하며 거름거리에서 더듬어 차저낼 수가 잇섯다. 놈팽이의 내력이야 일부러 알랴고 애탈것도 업지만 아모려나 이 놈팽이 녀석을 붓잡고 한턱 먹엿스면 될 수 잇겟다는 생각이 나서 척하니 말을 한번 건넷것다.
『여보시오. 난 시골서 속병을 고치랴고 서울로 왓는데 이 근처에 속병에 조흔 약을 파는 집이 잇다는 말만 듯고 오늘 점도록 찻다가 못찻고 그저 말엇스니 엇더케 하여야 올소. 밤은 어두어 오고 이것 탈 낫습니다. 혹 당신이나 아십닛가?』
놈팽이는 무슨 먹을 떡이나 생겻다는드시 내 말을 듯던 길로 아조 제깐에는 친절하다는 셈치고
『아이그 안되엿습니다그려! 나도 자세히는 모릅니다마는 나종에 가티 차저보기로 하고 위선 치우신데 여긔가 요긔나 하십시다.』
하고는 정다웁게 손목을 끌고 바로 그 엽헤 잇는 청요리 집으로 드러가더니 나는 무슨 큰 요리대접이나 할랴고 그러논가 한 것이 웬걸웬걸 제 주제에 무슨 대접이냐? 긔껏 시키는 것이 된장국수 두 그릇이다. 하여간 치웁기도 하고 시장도 한판이라 한그릇을 해 내고는 내가 돈을 내랴닛가 아니 자기가 다리고 왓스닛가 자기가 낸다고 주착을 댄다. 일이 무던히 되얏다 하고 못익이는체 해 바렷더니 까마귀가 「아저씨!」하고 덤빌만한 지갑에서 백전동전 석거서 사십전을 내 주는 셈이다. 한편으로는 불상한 생각도 나나 한편으로는 하는 꼴을 보아 주리라 하고 잇는 판인데 작자가 『아-참 당신의 얼골을 보닛가 무슨 병이 잇는 것이구료. 이 근처에 아조 속병에는 신효한 약을 파는 집이 잇서서 나도 한 삼년전에 그런 병으로 죽을 번 하다가 그 약을 사다 먹고 나흔 일이 잇는데 그 간에 어대로 떠나지나 아니 햇는지 하여간 가 봅시다. 그러나 사실인즉 그 약을 먹는 것이 아니라 왜 시골서도 아이들에게 우두 늣는다고 침 속에다 무슨 물을 느어 가지고 팔뚝에다 찌르고 누르지 안해요. 꼭 그와 가튼 방법으로 주사하는데 약효험이 먹는 것 보다 훨신 낫대요. 아모려나 가티 가 봅시다.」
하고는 능청을 부리며 일어선다.
독자제군! 이만하면 石火生의 성공도 압 길이 갓가워옴을 짐작하겟지요. 이러케 길이 速할줄이야 아모리 꾀 만흔 石火生이지만 石火生 자신부터도 한 기적으로 알고 잇소이다.

刺身鬼의 本窟侵入

이 놈팽이가 아조 능청을 부리며 이 집일넌가? 저 집 일넌가? 확실히 요 근처에 잇섯는데, 시-아마 요 집이지 하고는 어느 문 압헤 가서 「주인게시요」하고 찻는데 어두어서 자세히 뵈지는 안호나 키 큰 사람이면 천장이 이마하고 벗을 하자고 덤빌 지경인 오두막 집에서 키가 작달막한<68> 젊은 사람의 목소리가 나는데 역시 절늠바리의 토라진 거름이다. 나오더니 「아! 李主事세요. 엇재그러케 몃해ㅅ동안 뵐 수가 업습닛가? 지금도 武橋町 任主事댁에 그대로 게시지요. 엇재 오섯서요」하고는 정월 초하로 이상이다. 요리까지 어더 먹고도 성명조차 뭇지 안흔 이 친구가 인제야 武橋町 任主事 집에 잇는 李主事인줄을 알엇다. 李主事라는 작자는 「글세 자연 그러케 되엿네. 나아는 친구 어른 한 분이 약을 좀 쓰시겟다고 해서 가티 모시고 왓는데 어른신네 게신가?」하고 아조 그드럼을 빼여 문는다.
놈팽이가 서투른 수작을 붓처도 분수가 잇지 악가까지 집도 자세히 모른다던 친구가 주인 아들보고 「하게」를 맛 붓치고 잇스니 「에라 이놈. 벌서 틀려먹엇다」하고 얼골에다 춤을 탁 배터주고 십지만 일이 잘 되랴고 길 인도를 잘 해 준것만이 고마웠다. 젊은 놈팽이 하는 말이 「저의 가친은 벌서 병으로 누으신지가 삼년째인데 무엇 꼼작 못하시고 누어 게십니다마는 약은 제가 그대로 씁니다.」한다. 『흥. 부전자득! 너의 집구석이 잘두 되는구나!』하는 생각이 직각적으로 내 머리에 떠 올낫다.
젊은 놈팽이는 방이 누추해서 도모지 드러 안질수가 업는데 안되엿다고 連해 連방 修人事말을 쓰며 안방으로 끌고 드러가는데 아닌게 아니라 제 말과 가티 누추한 것은 사실이다. 알엣목에는 머리 헙수룩한 늙은이가 니불을 들써 쓰고는 엄살을 부리여 알는 고함을 치고 누엇고 웃목에는 몃대나 전해 내려온 장롱인지 두채를 버려노코 고새 이에가 사람 셋이 끼여 안젓스니 형무소의 감방이기로 이보다야 더 기가 차랴. 그래 소개를 하는데 그 젊은 놈팽이는 「위영」식이라고 한다. 그리더니 닷자곳자로 몃호나 마지랴느냐고 뭇는다. 나는 가슴이 뜩금하엿다. 맛는 방식도 모르고 호수도 엇더케 따지는지 알어야 안느냐 말이다.<69> 그래 나는 이번이 처음이요 경험도 업스니 내일이나 와서 맛고 오늘은 대강 엇더한 병에 효력이 잇고 또는 엇더케 맛는 것인가 구경이나 좀 하겟다고 한즉 젊은 놈팽이 녀석은 그러면 李主事부터 한 대 마저보시라고 하고는 몬지가 케케무든 조그만 책상설합에서 미다지를 열고는 헌 조희로 싼 가루봉지를 내여 놋터니 조그만 류리병에다가 그 가루를 조금 칼로 갈라느코 주사침으로 뽐푸질을 하여 물을 타서 녹인 후에 그것을 주사침에 다시 느어 가지고 팔뚝을 거드라 하드니 꿀종지만한 람푸등잔 빗헤다 팔을 대고는 침을 꾹 찔은다. 잠간동안이다. 李主事는 아조 상쾌한 긔운이 나는지 눈을 슬며시 감고 한참 벽을 기대고는 누어 잇다. 아! 이 맛에 모다 녹는 모양이로구나! 세상을 이저 바리고 사회를 이저 바리고 혼수세계, 몽유세계에 즐김도 근심도 다 이저바리는 이 맛에 지사의 의절도 녹아나고 위인의 개개도 다 살아진다. 그럿컨만 참을래야 참을 수가 업고 금할래야 금할 수가 업서 田土家庄은 그만두고 게집을 팔고 딸을 팔고 절도질을 해서라도 이것만은 계속하고야 하로라도 살고 그리고 중독되고 거지되야 필경은 쓰럭이통이나 길가의 시체가 되고 만다. 이 얼마나 무서운 노릇이냐! 그러고도 이것이 시골 서울 구석구석에서 비밀히 팔고 사고 주고 맛고 패하고 망하는 현상이 얼마나 만흔지 눈 잇고 귀 잇는 독자 제군으로서는 듯고 본 바가 반드시 만흐리라고 생각한다.

한대 마저 보니까

젊은 놈팽이가 李主事에게 주사를 하고는 나를 향하야 의학강연을 한다. 저도 어려서부터 속병이 잇서서 주먹가튼 것이 배에서부터 가슴까지 치미러 오르는데 몃해를 고생햇는지 모르다가 이것 한 대를 맛고는 雲捲靑天으로 낫기는 낫서스나 이것을 한번 시작하면 계속하지 안코는 못 견듸는 법입니다. 그건 무엇하러 마지시랴고 그러슈. 달리 고칠 수가 잇스면 달리 고치지요」하고 그래도 그 속에는 양심의 싹이 아직 다 말나 붓지는 아니 햇는지 주의 삼어 훈계삼어 한참을 설명하는데 그 중에도 제가 가슴 압허서 죽을 번 햇다는 그때 이약이를 할 때에는 두 주먹을 가슴에다 대고 압헛다는 형용을 하는 것이야말로 극중에도 대활극이요 활동사진을 박어도 한 권의 필림은 넉넉히 될 지경이엇다. 「그러나 긔왕 오섯스면 한 대 마저 보시지요」하고 덤비는 통에 그저 뼛대면 저 놈팽이의 의심을 살 터이니 하여간 놈팽이의 신용을 어더야만 모든 탐사가 순서조케 나갈듯도 하고 또는 한 대쯤이야 엇더랴 하고 그러면 호수를 낫추어서 爲先 한 대만 노아 달나고 하엿더니 놈팽이가 역시 아까 하던 방법으로 주사를 내 팔뚝에 하여 준다. 아닌게 아니라 살이 쩌를하고 속이 느싯느싯하며 금방에 구역이 나올 듯 하더니 엇전지 정신이 혼혼해지는 듯 만십헛다. 그것으로 금방에 무슨 효과가 그러케 낫슬넌지는 모르지만<70> 하여간 잠시 혼혼해 진것만은 사실이엇다. 나는 약갑슬 무르니 李主事것은 삼십전이요 내 것은 호수를 그의 반만 썻기 때문에 십오전, 합계가 사십오전이라 함으로 나는 李主事의 것까지 합해서 갑슬 치러주고 얼마 좀 탐사할 필요가 잇슴으로 한 꾀를 내엇다.
『여보! 이것 경찰서에서 취체가 심하다는데 이러다가 들키게 되면 엇더케 하오?』
젊은 놈팽이에게 이러케 물어 보앗다. 그런즉
『그러기에 점잔은 양반들이야 어대 여기 와서 하오. 다 심부름꾼을 시켜서 자기 집으로 갓다가들 하시지요.』하는 것이 그의 대답이엇다.
나는 벌서 심중으로 「올타. 되엿다.」하고
『그러면 이것 아모나 할 수 잇소』하고 물은즉 그자는 『그러면요. 아모나 되지요. 이 침 하나만 사고 약만 사다가 쓰면 얼마던지 할 수가 잇슴니다.』하고 「너도 얼는 그것을 사가거라」하는 표정이 완연하엿다. 그러나 다시 알어볼 것도 잇고 함으로 내일와서 사 갈터인데 침은 한 자루에 얼마씩이고 약은 한돈중에 얼마씩이냐 한즉 침은 십칠전짜리와 십팔전짜리가 잇고 약은 한돈중에 일원이십전가량 된다고 한다. 그러자 문 밧게서 누가 차지며 盧主事댁에서 약을 가질너 왓다고 한다. 「올탓구나. 한놈 걸렷다」하고 약 내주기를 기다려서 나도 갓다가 내일 다시 오겟다 하고 밧게 나가서 집을 잘 눈 익혀 두고는 李主事도 작별하고 그 심부름꾼의 뒤를 대여섯다. 그랫더니 이 자가 太平通널은 길거리로 나서더니 南大門을 바라보고는 곳장 다라난다. 나는 물론 갓가운곳 사람이 아닌줄 짐작하고
『여보 당신은 어대로 가시요』하고 물은즉 그자 역시 내가 거긔서 나온 줄은 알고 의심이 업시 막 터러노코 말을 함부로 해 주는 모양이다.
『저 西大門밧 무학재 넘어 盧主事댁에서 약을 사러왓다 감니다.』
『그러면 그 盧主事어른은 무얼 하시는 양반인가요』
『실업하시지요. 양계도 하고 구루마를 두고 세도 주고 한담니다.』
『그러면 부자신가요?』
『부자야 무슨 큰 부자겟습닛가마는 집도 일본식 오로짓고 괜찬케 지나지요.』
하고 이자는 꽤 싹싹하게 대답을 뭇는대로 잘 해 준다. 거긔에 끌려서 나는 몃마듸 더 문답을 하엿다.
『그러면 그 주인 어른은 몃살이나 되섯나요?』
『글세 저도 자세이는 모름니다마는 한 오십 넘으섯슬걸요.』
『그러고 약은 몃칠만에 한번씩이나 사러 다니나요. 그리고 또 당신이 사러 다니시오?』
『일주일에 한번 오는 때도 잇고 두 번 오는 때도 잇고 혹은<71> 주인영감님이 친히 와서 가지고 오시는 때도 잇나봐요.』
『그러면 약은 늘 그 집에서만 사나요.』
『아니지요. 고길로 나와서 큰길 바로 저쪽 淸人의 집에서도 더러 가저가는데 약이 아마 다른가 봐요.』
나는 여기서 새 단서 하나를 또 다시 잡엇다. 놈팽이 집은 모두히네窟! 淸人놈의 집은 阿片窟! 이러코나 그러면 그놈의 곳까지 드러가 본다 하고 적이 결심을 하매 까닭업시 깃분 생각이 나서 그자를 선술집에 다리고 드러가서 한잔 먹이랴고 끄닛가 이 자는 차 시간이 밧브다고 생각은 잇는 모양이나 사양 비슷하게 작별인사말을 하고는 南大門밧그로 줄행랑을 친다. 시계를 빼여보니 벌서 열시 사십오분, 그도 그럴듯한 일! 奉天행의 열차가 열시 오십오분 출발이닛가 겨우 십분밧게 아니남고 이 자가 京城역에서 차를 타고 新村驛에 가 나리여 먹재 넘어 盧主事 집을 향해 가는것도 의심업는 사실 이엇다. 나는 南大門안 정류장에서 전차를 타고 安國洞에 와서 나리니 시계는 열한시 반이나 되고 삭삭 귀밋을 갈기는 바람은 北岳山에서 쉬일새 업시 내려분다. 상점마다 전 문을 거의 다 덧는데 「야끼이모」장사만 전신ㅅ대를 의지하고 서서 손을 쬐이며 실음업는 소리를 지르고 잇다.
집에 온 때는 이미 열두시! 두 몸은 치우나 오늘의 성공을 도라볼 때 혼자서 깃븜의 우슴이 제절로 일어남을 금치 못하엿다.

中國人의 殺人窟

제삼일이다. 오늘은 社에도 드러가지 아니하고 역시 어제 모양을 차리고 그곳을 차저가니 그 집 문패를 보고 그 집 주인의 뒤를 좀 파 보기도 하엿다. 가서 보니 번지는 太平通 三丁目 OO二요 주인은 O洪O이와 O有O이라는 두 일홈이 붓허잇다. 그러나 아래사람은 알 것 업고 웃사람의 성이 어제 저녁에 주사를 하여 주던 젊은 놈팽이와 가틀진대 이 친구의 뒤만 들춰낸다면 그만이나 이러케도 영락해 바린 놈팽이들로서 세상에 무슨 일홈 알만한 것이 잇슬나고 하는 생각도 나나 그래도 한참 당년 천석군이 부호자식으로 아편중독에 패가망신을 하는 놈이 잇고 당당한 호평으로 극장관중의 大喝采를 밧던 배우가 一朝에 타락하야 유치장의 신세를 낏치는 판국인즉 이 놈팽이의 전신엔들 무슨 수수꺽기가튼 내력이 혹 잇슬넌지도 누가 아느냐? 그러나 알 도리는 망연하엿다. 그래 그 일홈을 수첩에다 적어 가지고는 본사로 도라왓다. 물론 아는 이가 업스리라고는 짐작하면서도 시험삼어 O洪O이라고 하는 사람을 혹 아는 이가 잇느냐고 지나가는 말처럼 해 본 것이 요러케도 일이 잘 되는 수가 잇느냐? 듯는 사람은 날 보고 반드시 거짓말이라 하리라. 그러나 사실임을 엇지 하리요.
우리 社안에서도 근대朝鮮사정 잘 알고 인물 잘 알기로 평판잇는 靑吾君이 버서진 머리를 씨다드므며 「O洪O」<72> 이라고 淸語 잘 하기로 유명하고 한참 당년에 袁世凱가 朝鮮 와 잇던 때부터 富土英이 京城領事시대까지 支那領事館의 통역생으로 잇던 사람인데 그게 십년도 다 못되얏소 하며 그 사람은 왜 뭇느냐고 수상스럽게 아는 모양이나 나는 이 진상을 다 알어내기까지는 우리 社안에서도 절대로 입을 열지 안키로 작정햇슴으로 그저 누가 뭇기에 그런다고 시침이를 다 버렷다. 그러나 외국영사관의 통역생으로 재조잇고 교제 잘 하고 돈 잘 쓰고 햇슬 것은 물론인데 그놈의 신세 지금에 와서는 오두막 살이 헛니불 속에서 통성을 치르며 알코누은 병신이 되고 그의 자식까지 젊은 몸을 망처 불구자가 되고 말엇다. 제가 병신이 되고 자식이 병신이 되고 입에 드러 갈 밥은 업서도 몸에 찌를 이것이 업고는 하로를 살지 못할 오늘의 운명을 이루고 말엇다. 그러고도 이것이 무서운 것인줄을 모르는 멍텅이들이 세상에 잇다면 세상은 말세다.
그래 오늘도 저녁때 느지막해서 바로 그 놈팽이 집을 다시 차젓다. 막 그 집압헤 가서 「이로 오너라」를 차즈니 그 집에서는 나오는 이가 업고 엉뚱한 곳에서 싯검은 日本현 하오리를 주서 입은 걸인 비슷한 친구가 쫓차오더니 누구를 찻느냐고 뭇는다. 그래 드러가서 어제 맛나자고 약속한 사람이 와서 젊은 주인을 찻는다고 엿주라 하고 밧게서 기다리는 동안에 열 육칠세 되여 보이는 색시 하나가 드러가고 또 열두세네살 되는 색시 하나가 조그만 장작 한 다발을 들고 드러가나 이것이 알고 보면 다들 파수 병정인 모양이다.
그래 조금 잇다가 젊은 놈팽이가 나오더니 나를 보고는<73>아조 반가히 마저 드러간다.
변변히 일어설 수도 업는 그 방안에 드러가니 지금은 아편중독 노령감전 支那領事館 통역생이 역시 엄살의 고함을 치고 잇고 엽헤는 낫 모르는 역시 이분일중독자는 되는 친구 하나가 주제에 헌 양복은 어대서 주서 입엇는지 아마 한 대를 맛고 난 끗친 모양이라. 무슨 꿈을 꾸는지 천정만 처다보고 안젓다. 젊은 놈팽이 녀석은 아조 정다운드시 『그래 엇대요?』하고 약효험의 경과를 뭇는다. 거짓말이라도 효험이 업다고 할 수는 업고 또는 놈팽이의 신용을 좀 사노아야만 만사가 다 여의할 듯 함으로 나는
『아이구 아조 여간 신기한 것이 아니야요. 이때껏 밤이면 잠 한숨 못 자고 괴롭던 것이 어제 저녁은 엇더케 잠을 달게 잣는지 몰라요. 참 신약입니다.』
하고 비행기를 한번 태위 주워것다.
이자도 신이 나는드지
『암 그러코 말고요. 그런 속병에야 무엇 더 말할 것 업지요. 그 맛에 모다들 한담니다. 그런데 오늘 또 마즈시겟서요』하고 위선 제장사 할 계산을 대는 셈이다. 나느 「弄假成眞」이라고 작난하다가 도리여 중독자나 되면 이것이야말로 진품의 대진사가 될 염려도 잇스나 또는 이 놈팽이의 신용을 엇는데는 별 수가 업는지라. 한 꾀를 내여서 엇던 놈들이 여긔를 왕래하고 또는 고 건너 淸人놈의 아편굴까지 보랴면 이 놈팽이를 축여 세여만 되겟슴으로
『여보. 이것 여긔서는 경찰서의 취제도 심하고 위험치 안소? 그러니 나도 오늘부터는 침하고 약을 사 가지고 집에 가서 하겟소. 그러면 침팔십전짜리 한 대하고 약 오십전의 치만 주시오』
하닛가 그 자는 말이 떠러지기가 밧브게
『암 그러치요. 그게 좃슴니다. 들키면 경찰서에서 오느라 가거라 하고 여간 성화가 아님니다. 요전에도 시골서 우리 당숙어른이 오섯다가 맛침 순사에게 들려가서 공연히 경찰서에 드러가 얼마 고생을 하시다가 내려가신 일도 다 잇서요. 그리십쇼.』
하고 그 케케묵은 장미다지 속에서 주사침과 책상 미다지에서 모두히네 가루를 난 우어 신문지에 싸 준다.

襲擊!中國人魔窟襲擊

나는 그것을 바더서 호주머니에 늣코 다시
『여보 그런데 이 약은 어대서 갓다쓰고 또 엇던 사람들이 만히 갓다쓰오. 아마 알만한 사람들도 더러 잇겟지요.』
하고 슬적 물엇스나 이 놈팽이 역시 그런 눈치는 아는 모양이라 얼는 吐情을 아니하고
『그거야 알어 무엇하심잇가. 갓다쓰는대야 아실 것 업고 門안에서는 갓다 쓰시는 이들이 업고 저 門밧 로들 하고 東幕에서 갓다쓰는 분밧게 엄슴니다.』<74>
한다. 나는 다시 덜미를 치며
『아마 淸人에게서 갓다 쓰겟지요. 그러고 駱山 밋 李富者도 여긔서 갓다쓰고 鏡路 OOO전당포 주인도 여긔서 갓다 쓴다던데 무얼 속일 것 잇소. 내야 늘 약을 갓다쓰고 할 사람인데. 그리고 이 근처에 이것을 하는 집이 만탑되다그려.』
하고 속을 떠 보앗더니 이 자가 처음에 청인에게서 갓다 쓴다는 말에는
『그뿐 아니요. 다름데서도 파는 대가 잇지요』하더니 李부자, OOO전당포 주인소리에는 그만 펄적 뛰며 그런 일이 업다는 것을 보면 분명히 무슨 까닭이 드러 잇는 것도 사실 갓햇다. 그리고 끗흐로 근처 동업자에 대하야는 안심하고서 일너준다.
「이 근처가 아조 굴혈입니다. 한 사오군대 되는데 여긔서 나가면 바로 요도라 저편 건너집도 기요 밧그로 나가다가 좌편으로 쏙 드러 안진집도 김니다. 그러고 청인목욕탕집에서도 합니다.』
그래 나는 여긔서 청인의 아편굴을 한번 차저 보고 십흔 생각이 낫다. 이 놈팽이를 붓들고 느러지면 넉넉히 그것이 될 줄을 알고
『여보시오. 이건 약효가 들 합듸다그려. 아편을 한번 먹어보고 십흔데 댁에는 업소』
하고 무럿더니 이 자의 하는 말
『그 대신 중독이 들되지요. 검은것(阿片)은 저 건너 청인 집에서 하는데 그건 취제도 더 심하고 하야서 거긔 늘 낫익게 드나드는 사람이 아니면 드러갈 수가 업고 낫 모르는 사람이 드러가면 드러가는 머리서부터 망을 보는 이가 잇서서 암호군호를 쓰면 그 안에서 벌서 모다 집어치고 형적도 업시만드는 고로 도저히 딴 사람으로는 못 드러갑니다. 그러고 어슬어슬할 저녁이면 특별히 더 주의를 함니다.』
『그러면 당신이야 그 사람들 하고 늘-친케 상종하겟소그려. 그러면 나가 몃대 사 줄것이니 가티 가 보아서 조흘 것 가트면 나도 그것까지 좀 사다먹겟소.』
하닛가 이 자는 그래서는 제 고객인 나를 그 청인놈에게 빼앗길가봐 그러는지 아조 동정하는드시
『그건 참 중독되기 쉽고 중독만 되면 그것을 폐할 수는 업고 그 재(灰)가 또 무서운 것이어서 그것으로 혹 죽는 수가 잇고 처음으로 먹으면 속이 느싯그려서 참말 못 견딥니다.』
하고 매우 주의와 경계를 친절히도 해 준다. 「이놈아. 너보다도 내가 먼저 안다. 걱정을 맙시라고 내가 도리여 주의를 시키고 십헛지만 하여간 그 굴을 보기만 할 욕심으로
「그럿슴닛가. 그러면 나는 당시느이 먹는 것이나 구경하고 돈은 내가 낼 것이니 좀 가티 가서 구경이나 시켜주구려.」
하고 재촉을 하엿더니 그 자는 아편 사 준다는 바람에 회가 <75> 동하엿는지
「그럼 가 봅시다.」
하고 얼는 일어선다. 엽헤 잇던 친구도 따라나서서 세 사람은 西大門 通 큰 길로 나와서 딴 친구는 太平通으로 향해가고 우리 두 사람은 西大門편으로 꺽기엇다. 그게 누구냐고 뭇고 보니 京城안에서도 일홈 잇는 O香이 O香이 두 기생을 따로 두고 큰 딸을 東幕사는 O昌O이라는 부자에게 첩으로 주어 녀름철이면 아편을 끈코 釋王寺를 갓다 오라고 두 딸이 모아준 돈을 털어 가지고는 가서 실컷 질탕하게 놀고 도라오면 집에서 아편 먹는 것 보다도 셈은  더 손해라 하며 이 놈팽이 좃차 애석해 하는 모양이다.
놀나운 일이다. 무서운 일이다. 딸을 人肉市에 내여 보내고 딸을 남의 첩으로 보내면서도 이것을 하야만 되는 모양이다. 아! 이 무리들을 엇지할고?

美人과 마조 누어 한 대 먹고

놈팽이를 따라 서쪽으로 몃거름을 아니가니 바로 큰 길겻 우편으로 조그만 뷘마당이 잇고 족음 드러가서 일본 「ナガヤ」(長屋)비슷하게 지은 집이 잇는데 그 속이 문패에는 「內寓木工人大工」이라고 썻다. 좌편으로 드러가서 쑥 드러가니 밤도 밤이지만 이거야 말로 산중 암굴에 드러가는 셈이나 조금도 다를 것이 업다. 문 압헤는 아닌게 아니라 망직이가 대 선 모양인데 눈 익은 놈팽이가 압헤 선 것을 보고는 조금도 의심을 안는 모양이다.
얼마를 드러 왓는지 눈만 크게 떠도 벽이 터저 잠바질 듯한 좁은 방으로 배틀 배틀 經足거름을 거르며 인도하여 드러가는 것은 십칠팔세 쯤 된 淸人미인이다. 서투른 朝鮮말소리지만 말소리는 姸艶하게도 사람의 혼을 빼슬만큼 「담배 잡스러 오셋서요. 몃대나 가저 올가요?」한다. 나는 얼는 두 대만 가저오라고 하엿더니 그 女子는 어대가는지 나갓다 드러오며 무슨 끄럼이와 대를 가지고 오고 숫피운 조그만 화로를 가저 오더니 먼저 자리에 누으며 「누가 잡스세요?」하고 뭇는다. 나는 놈팽이를 가르치며 「저 양반이야」할 새이도 업시 놈팽이 역시 게집하고 나란히 눕는다. 화로불은 가운데 노코 놈팽이는 대를 물고 게집하고 나란히 눕는다. 화로불은 가운데 노코 놈팽이는 대를 물고 게집은 무엇(이것이 아편이다)인지 대에다가 끼인 후에 철선으로 불을 찝어서 대여 주는데 물론 전등도 람푸도 업는 방이라 모든 것이 분명하게 뵈이지는 안치만 이놈의 대가 보통담배대 갓지를 안코 담배 늣는 통이 중간에 가 잇는 것이 불에 비칠 뿐이요 빠는대로 찌르륵 찌르륵 소리가 나는 것이 특색이다.
놈팽이가 한참 잇다가는 게집보고 빨라 하닛가 사양도 아니하고 바더 빨더니 그 게집은 다시 나를 보고 빨기를 청한다. 아모러 나온 것이니 「한번 맛이나 보자. 이 약이 ㅅ거리삼어」그러케 생각하고 두어번 바더 빨아 보앗스나 별 맛을 모르겟고 비위가 잘 맛지 안는 것만은 사실이다. 그 연기<76> 피여 오르는 냄새만은 未嘗不香긋한 맛이 코를 찌른다.
한 대를 거의 피우자 하인인지 무엇인지는 몰나도 淸人놈 하나이 무슨 그릇을 노코 나가는데 숫불 빗으로 보라 보지도 못하던 아마 唐菓子인 모양이다. 저의도 각기 몃개씩을 먹더니 그것은 내게로 다 맛기고 또 다시 한 대를 피우기 시작한다. 그것이 끗나가까지는 전후 약 한시간이나 걸닌 모양이다. 놈팽이는 점점 정신이 혼취하는 모양이요 게집은 알어도 듯지 못 할 깽깽이 코노래를 부르고 잇다. 나는 놈팽이에게 가기를 재촉하고 계산을 무럿더니 아편담배가 오십전, 과자가 이십전 합계 칠십전이라 한다. 그것을 얼는 게집에게 내여주고 얼는 그 굴을 다시 거러 나왓다. 이상한 것은 미녀의 일이다. 놈팽이보고 그게 엇던 게집이냐고 무르닛가 그 주인놈의 마누라라 한다. 강짜 만흔 淸人의 놈팽이로 제 게집을 내여 보내여 이런 짓을 하는고 하엿더니 놀나지를 마라 장사가 別한 장사인만큼 미인의 모양을 보여 손의 마음을 끄나 중독만 되면 미인 아니라 별별 진기한 것을 압헤 갓다 노아도 마음이 업서지는 판이니 성욕 가튼 것은 문제도 아니 됨으로 楊貴妃가튼 제 본처라도 밋고서 손님 압헤 내 보낸단다.
나는 이러케 하여 이 굴혈을 다녀 나왓다. 놈팽이에게는 「또 다시 사러 올 때 맛나자」고 작별하여 돌려보내고  혼자서 어실렁어실렁 성공의 코노래 부르며 太平通 넓으나 넓은 거리로 전등에 빗치는 新府廳, 每日申報社 압흘 지나 光化門정류장에서 전차를 타고 도청 압헤서 나리여 景福宮담을 끼고 집으로 도라왓다. 차듸찬 십육야 달빗은 宗親府 커나컨 무근 집 위에 샛 맑아케도 빗치고 잇섯다.

빠는 놈 먹는 놈 조사

독자제군! 제군은 엇더케 생각하는가? 나는 일즉이 드러두엇던 滿洲지방에서 유행한다는 노래 드른 일이 잇슴으로 그것을 제군에게 들려주고 십흐나 고대로 기억을 못하기 때문에 대강만 들러주랴 하니 틀닌 것은 용서하여 다오.
꼿으로 일러도 楊貴妃라
일흠조차 귀엽거던
피여나는 향내에야
뉘아니 취할소냐
玳琩설대 翡翠물통에
찌르륵찌르륵 소리조차
장단맛춰 노래를 한다.
미인 겻헤 청동화로
백탄 숫불을
이글이글히 니러노코
한 대를 먹고보니
속에서 실안개가 돈다
또 한대를 먹고나 보니
세상 풍진을 나 몰라라
그러나 제군은 東洋의 역사를 조금이라도 아는 이가 잇다면 팔십칠년전 오래인 녯날에 영국의 악랄한 수단이 필경은 阿片戰爭을 야기하고 南京條約으로 이천일백만의 <77> 상금과 보고요 요충인 香港을 빼앗긴 支那의 역사를 통석치 아니하는 이가 업스리라. 그러면 제군은 그 아편전사 첫 머리에 이런 노래가 잇는 줄을 다시 기억하랴.
빤작빤작 빤작빤작
향내나는 그 불끗헤
전토가옥 다 타가도
재 한 나치 아니남고
몽실몽실 몽실몽실
피여나는 연기 끗헤
영웅호걸 다 죽어도
피 한 점이 아니난다.
이 얼마나 마음 압흔 소리이냐? 나는 말을 길게 하려 하지 안는다.

그러나 나는 이것으로 마굴탐사의 끗을 막은 것은 아니다. 성공은 이만하면 십분칠팔이 되얏슬넌지 모르지만 오히려 남은 책임이 잇다.
第사일이다. 오늘부터는 급할 것도 업고 한 나절 잠잣다. 저녁때야 또다시 그 마굴근방으로 슬슬 도라다니며 고집 고집에 나가고 드러가는 사람만 점검해서 수상한 놈이면 뒤를 대여 서기로 하엿다. 지독히 치웁던 이십일부터 대한날을 걸처서 연 나흘동안 고짓을 하엿다. 들고 나는 거지떼가튼 중독자야 이로 다 할 수가 업지만 그럴듯한 놈만 붓잡힌 것이 하로에 하나씩 내 수첩에 늘어왓다.
첫날에 붓잡힌 놈이 어느 상점 뽀이놈의 뒤인데 그 놈이 무엇을 조희에 싸 가지고 나오기에 어대로 가는가 하고 뒤를 대여서니 제군! 제군! 놀나지 마라. 京城안에서도 지명할 만한 큰 廣橋다리 근처에서 銀房을 하고 잇는 OO상회로 쑥 드러간다. 그만하면 알 것 아니냐?
다음날은 漢城券番에 妓籍을 두고 잇는 李O蓮이라는 기생집의 심부름꾼이 붓들리고 고 다음날이야말로 일즉이 日本유학까지 갓다는 淸進洞에 사는 金O濟란 자인데 이 자는 돈이 업서 그런지 자기 손으로 그것을 가지러 왓던 모양이다. 생긴 품이 하도 수상하기에 뒤를 따라본 것이 鐘路一丁目정류장 근처에 잇는 宜壽堂약방 뒤골목으로 해서 드러가는 것이 자기자택인 것을 들켜 나고 맨 끗날이야말로 壽松普通學校 뒤편 戶曺다리 근처에 사는 기생아범이요 기생올아비인 신신치 못한 康0信이다. 이자 역시 제 손으로 가지러 온 것을 내 손에 들켜나고 만 것이다. 그 뒤의 뒤를 파본 경로야 다 말하여 무엇하리요.
이와가티 그 굴혈에는 영사관 통역생의 전신도 잇다. 駱山 밋 부호, 廣橋 겻 大商店主도 왕래하며 먹재 넘어 실업가, 淸進洞의 日本유학생, 漢城券番의 명기도 출입하고 그 중에도 제 딸을 팔고 제 살을 팔어가며 針질을 하고 연기를 마시는 기생아범, 기생년이 더욱 만타. 그나 그뿐이겟느냐? 시골지방에서도 잇다금 그런 굴혈이 경찰의 손에 들켜난다한다. 경찰의 눈을 속이고 세인의 눈을 속여가며 제라 제 몸을 망치고 제라 제 집을 망치고 제라 제 민족을 망치는 악마의 무리가 더 만흔 줄을 제군은 기억하라. 깁히 기억하라. 그리고 나에게 성공의 축배나 한잔씩 갓가웁거던 손소 들고 오고 멀거던 우편국의 신세를 빌어서 보내주게! 石火生은 그것을 눈이 깜아케 기다리고 잇네.(끗)<78>
<64-78>