別건곤 第四號
1927년 02월 01일
文士講演 印像寸言 (Impressions and Brief Comments on Literary Figures' Lectures)
一記者 (A Reporter)
만화 (Cartoon)

Impressions and Brief Comments on Literary Figures' Lectures
A Reporter

Cho Myŏng-hŭi – A deep insight and reasoning, and his expression seemed to have a burning passion. He didn't move, as if he had the weight of a thousand pieces, and his posture was standing with one arm on his waist. Like a 捲土重來 (kwŏntojungnae – resurgence), dignified, it seemed like thousands of words would flow, but in reality, he stammered, and he seemed to deliberately feign politeness, and a collection-like, funny taste – is the humorous point arising from this feeling of contradiction the point of being a poet? It was white.

Pak P’al-yang (Kim Yŏsu) – A posture, voice, and expression that seem to be trying to create a kind of dignity by recognizing that his physique is small. But wouldn't it have been better to have stood firmly on the floor? The pathetic feeling received from the forced emphasis of his short vocal volume. – But a great success for her debut speech.

I Ik-sang – I don't know if it was because he was in a hurry and wanted to finish quickly and go down, but it was difficult to understand because of his hurried tone, and furthermore, his intonation was not clear, and the expression in his eyes denying the smiling expression of his mouth was like seeing an immature writer's novel with a chaotic expression.

<100>

Pak Yŏng-hŭi – A short vocal volume. Only a smoothly flowing narrative. After leaving the platform, what did I hear? It was faint and I couldn't remember it in detail, but it seemed like I had gained something.

Kim Tong-hwan – The first sound of poetry reading is loud and plausible. It seems full of passion. But why does it seem frivolous?

I Yang – Capellaum - the original market - a demagogic speaker.

Pang Chŏng-hwan – A chubby physique, humorous gestures, funny stories – the face of a master of this path is clear. By the way, I have an idea that I would like to hear him give a speech on a slightly different topic than a narrative story about children and youth issues. The reason is that I wanted to hear how he could make difficult problems that need to be thought about and chewed over sound so easy and fun.

Hong Ki-mun – Suitable for lectures in a vocational school auditorium.

Ch’oe Sŭng-il – A handsome man – an affectionate voice, a posture that seems to sway back and forth, an actress imitating a female voice, a solid interlude. But there is no passion.
<101>

Named Entities

趙明熙	Cho Myŏng-hŭi
朴八陽	Pak P’al-yang
金麗水	Kim Yŏsu
李益相	I Ik-sang
朴英熙	Pak Yŏng-hŭi
金東煥	Kim Tong-hwan
李亮	I Yang
方定煥	Pang Chŏng-hwan
洪起文	Hong Ki-mun
崔承一	Ch’oe Sŭng-il



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	文士講演 印像寸言
필자	一記者
기사형태	만화

文士講演 印像寸言
						一記者

趙明熙씨-기픈 통찰과 추리, 그리고 불붓는 듯한 열정이 잇슬 듯한 그의 표정. 천편의 무게를 가진 듯 움즉이지 안코 한편 팔을 엽구리에 세우고서 잇는 자세. 捲土重來하는 듯 당당 수천어가 도도히 흘를 것 가트면서도 기실, 더듬더듬하고, 일부러 존대를 꾸미는 듯한, 또한 수집은 듯한 웃으운 맛.-이러한 늣김의 모순에서 생기는 웃으운 점이 시인다운 점인가?하얏다.
朴八陽(金麗水)씨-자기의 體수가 적은 것을 인식하고서 일종 위엄을 내기 위하야 노력하는 듯한 자세, 음성, 표정. 그러나 마루바닥을 꽉 드듸고-잇서든 것이 오히려 낫지 안핫슬가? 氣短한 성량의 무리한 강조에서 밧는 애색한 정. -그러나 처녀연설로는 대성공.
李益相씨-시간이 밧바서 얼른 마치고 내려 갈려고 그러하얏는지는 몰으나 밧븐 어조에 더구나 억양이 선명치 못하야 알아듯기 어려울뿐더러, 웃는 듯한 입귀의 표정을 부정하는 눈의 <100> 표정은, 혼돈한 표현으로 된 미숙한 문사의 소설을 보는 듯.

朴英熙씨-氣短한 성량. 다만 도도히 흐르는 설화. 연단을 나린 뒤에는 무엇을 들엇는가? 희미하야서 자세히 생각나지 안흐나 무엇을 어든 듯.
金東煥씨-시 낭독은 첫재 소리가 커서 그럴 듯. 열정이 넘치는 듯. 그러나 경박하야 보이는 것은 무슨 까닭?
李亮씨-카펠라움-원고시장-선동연설가다.
方定煥씨-뚱뚱한 體수, 익살마진 못짓, 웃으운 이약이-斯道의 달인의 면목이 확여. 그런데 소년소녀문제에 관한 설화적 이약이 말고 족음 질이 다른 문제에 대하야서 연설하는 것을 한번 들엇스면 하는 생각이 낫다. 무슨 이유이냐 하면, 사고하야 가면서, 咀嚼하야 가면서 들을만큼 어려운 문제도 이러케 쉬웁게 재미잇게 들리어 주는 그것을 듯고 십엇든 까닭이다.
洪起文씨-전문학교강당 강의에 적당.
崔承一씨-미남자-애교잇는 목소리, 전후로 흔들리는 듯한 자세, 배우 흉내내는 女聲 단단한 여흥일막. 다만 열이 업다.<101>
<100-101>