잡지명	別乾坤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	京城名物男女 新春誌上大會 (Famous Men and Women of Gyeongseong: New Year's Paper Convention)
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

Famous Men and Women of Gyeongseong: New Year's Paper Convention

Opening Remarks

Gyeongseong has many people, so there are also many famous men and women. There are short famous people and tall famous people. There are, of course, chubby famous people and pockmarked famous people, as well as gentle famous people, ugly famous people, famous people who marry well, famous people who are good at romance, famous people who drink well, famous people who eat rice cakes well, famous people who look good, and famous people who don't look good. If you were to gather all these famous people in one place at one time, even a large meeting hall would not be able to accommodate them. Therefore, we have borrowed the particularly large and wide space of Byeolgeongeon to hold this convention. The qualifications for membership are, of course, limited to famous men and women who have resided in Gyeongseong for many years and are known to everyone. The entrance fee is specially waived, and anyone who is qualified, regardless of their class, ideology, age, or youth, is welcomed.
However, one thing to keep in mind as a member is not to think that just because you are called a famous person means you should not know anything. At first glance, calling a person a famous person may seem frivolous, but in reality, it is not. The "myeong" (名) in "myeongmul" (名物, famous person/thing) is the "myeong" in "myeongindalsa" (名人達士, famous and accomplished people), "myeonghyeon" (名賢, wise men), and "yumeonghan" (有名한, famous). The "mul" (物) is the "mul" in "manmuljijunge yuini choegwi" (萬物之衆에 唯人이 最貴, among all things, humans are the most precious) and "inmul" (人物, person). In other words, it means a famous person. If you understand this much, there should be no misunderstandings. And one more request is that those who could not join this time will have another opportunity to participate in the future, so please do not complain too much. I am sorry that the opening remarks are too long due to the busy schedule. Now, let's begin the convention. There are too many people and it is too crowded, so let's discuss each section and proceed in order. Shh- please organize your seats! (Organizer Gwansangja)

Eight Short Bodies and Nine Tall Bodies

It is a fact that short people usually stand behind others at gatherings, but at this meeting, we have made it convenient for short people by having them attend first. Then, who among them is qualified to be a member? Choe Seong-u, the managing editor of Jungoe Ilbo, Park Pal-yang, the local news editor, and Kim Jeong-jin, who is unaffiliated, would be Ji-ja-pa (只字派, those who have a tongue in their mouth) (meaning they have a silver tongue). Lee Gil-yong of the Chosun Ilbo and Ryu Jang-ho (current position unknown), who graduated from Bogo and sold Western shoes in Andong, would be Gu-ja-pa (具字派, those who have eyes in their heads) (meaning they are observant). Ahn Jun-yeong, the owner of Yeongchang Store in Andong, and Park Chi-hwa, the owner of Jehwadang Pharmacy in Jae-dong, would be Hyeol-ja-pa (穴字派, those who have holes/hats in their heads) (meaning they are well-dressed). Also, Hong Yu-jeong of Dongdeok Girls' School is also Hyeol-ja-pa, but it is a shame to hear that she was denied membership because she is a woman and cannot wear a hat. Among these people, if you were to recommend a chairman, Ahn Jun-yeong, who is four cheok and seven chon (尺寸, a traditional Korean unit of length) tall even among the Hyeol-ja-pa, would be selected. In order, Park Chi-hwa would be the vice-chairman, and Choe Seong-u would likely be the general manager, based on age, eloquence, printing and correction career, or drinking prowess. However, fortunately, Doctor Park Jong-hwan is away in the provinces. If he were in Gyeongseong, it would be difficult to predict that Choe Seong-u would monopolize the position of general manager. It would be appropriate to present Pyeongyang chestnuts and short smoking pipes (短煙竹) as souvenirs of this meeting, and it would be good to quote the famous line from someone in the past: "Wearing a hat, the tassel sweeps the ground, shoes cover both shoulders. If you encounter a cow track in the water, wave your hand and call a boat." How about watching a "dwarf" dance for entertainment?
<104>
Now, let's close the meeting for short people and open the meeting for tall people again. The order sheet is posted on the signboard of Yuchang Store in Jongno, and the telephone poles are temporarily used as hat racks. For entertainment, let's call the six-cheok female entertainers Bae Jung-yeop, Yun Ok-yeop, Kim Il-jimae, and Park Ok-hwa. Who will be the chairman? Kim Jeong-sik, an old man who is five cheok, nine chon, and seven bun tall, is famous for his extensive experience in the Christian church and for going around with his wife. And as committee members, Im Gyeong-jae and Lee Seung-gyu of Hwimun High School, Cha Man-jae and Jeong Hyeon of the Joseon Infantry, Kim Hong-sik of Gyesan Boseong School, Seon-u Jeon of Samgwangdang, and Liang Baihua, an expert in old Chinese novels, would all be suitable. Also, Principal Gun Rui-bin of Gyeongsin School, who is famous for being the tallest foreigner residing in Gyeongseong, is worthy of recommendation as a special advisor. In any case, this meeting is truly a gathering of giants. Even if they were to go on a tour to some Western country, they would not be too ashamed. These nine people can be called the Nine Tall Bodies of Gyeongseong.

Name of Pockmarked Ones: Hwaeun (花隱) Society

渡江魚驚網 若非牛千葉
登山鳥㤼羅 疑是馬蜂家

This was a poem that some cynical person used to mock someone with a pockmarked face in the past. There have been various nicknames for pockmarked people since ancient times, such as "gombo" (곰보, pockmark), "kkulbyeong" (꿀병, honey jar), and more recently, nicknames like "gada bang" and "Gyeongpa teacher" have emerged. However, at this convention, we are especially removing all those past dishonorable nicknames for all of you pockmarked people and giving you the new pen name "Hwaeun teacher." (Pockmarked people are also called "Gwaeseok" (怪石, strange stone), but calling them Gwaeseok is too harsh and obvious, so we named them Hwaeun, meaning that strange stones are abundant in flower gardens.) Then, who is qualified to be a member of this Hwaeun Society? Even if we were to recruit generally, there would be the most members in the medical profession, followed by the teaching profession. Let's roughly mention some names!
<105>
How about Ji Seong-yun of Gyeongseong Hospital? How about Kang Won-yeong of Taeseong Hospital? If we do not allow Ahn Sang-ho, Park Gye-yang, Hong Seok-hu, and Yu Byeong-pil to join, it will cause opposition to this convention. And Jeong Se-yun, who opened a practice in Pyeongyang, and Kim Ik-nam, who opened a practice in Bukgando, may not be able to join due to regional relations, but if they only know about it, they will send congratulatory telegrams to the opening. Also, as for schools, Principal Choe Myeong-hwan of Gopo School, Principal Kim Hyeong-bae of Hwigo School, and the three teachers of the same school, Im Gyeong-jae, Lee Seung-gyu, and Lee Byeong-gyu, and Lee Gwang-jong of Jungang Gopo School, would all be qualified as councilors. (We especially reject the membership of Son Niang, a teacher at Gyeongseong Girls' High School, because she is a woman.) Oh, Jang Jae-hap (nickname Jang Gombo), who used to be at the Sincheonji Company, and Han In-su, who is currently repairing "Nura" at the Daedong Printing House, are also quite something. However, if you were to recommend a chairman at this meeting, it would be from among the doctors because there are many members in the medical profession. In other words, Ji Seong-yun will be publicly elected as chairman without anyone objecting. Ahn Sang-ho will be the perfect vice-chairman, and Lee Byeong-gyu of Hwigo will probably be the general manager. By the way, Chairman Ji is good at curing other diseases, but he is particularly good at curing malaria in children. It is not cured with medicine or injections, but with his face. No matter how strong-minded or clever the children are, if they see him once, they will have a seizure and their malaria will go away. It is said that Ahn Sang-ho broke a stone mirror while looking at his own face with it because it was so difficult when he was studying in Tokyo. With that much, the chairman and vice-chairman are certainly qualified, and although the world does not yet know much about General Manager Lee Byeong-gyu, students routinely call Lee Byeong-gyu "Bak teacher" when they see him. In any case, this society has a considerable number of members and a considerable number of officers.
Oops- I forgot- If Han Sang-yong of Hanseong Bank were to join, he would get a councilor position without having to campaign with money. By the way, if they were to hold a formal social gathering, the facility and food preparation for the venue should be like this to match the occasion. Set up rush mats with gauze curtains, put Cheonyeop sashimi and gada bang on the table, pour the liquor that was presented from Gangwon-do the other day into a lumpy Yanggu Bangsan porcelain cup, drink until drunk, listen to Park Chun-jae's Pockmarked Ballad, strike the ancient stone mill with corn stalks to match the rhythm, and play a matching game of bones. This is something for all Hwaeun members to keep in mind.

Fatty Magnates and Emaciated Gentlemen

After the late Yangju Magistrate Hong Tae-yun passed away, there was great concern because there was no one fit to be chairman in the Gyeongseong fat people group, but another fat nobleman has emerged from the Hong family. He is Hong Seok-hyeon, who used to be the principal of the government-run Higher Common School. When he was at the school, he was not very fat and was quite tall, so people did not realize he was that fat, but recently his body has become so large that people like Cho Nam-hui of Dongyang Seowon or Kang Dae-ryeon of Gakhwangsa Temple cannot even have their names mentioned, and Sobha Bang Jeong-hwan is very promising as a young man, but he is not yet comparable to him. Now, in terms of weight, Hong Seok-hyeon is 28 guan (貫, a unit of weight), Cho Nam-hui is 25 guan. Bang Jeong-hwan is 20 guan, and Kang Dae-ryeon is 21 guan.
<106>
Don't be surprised. There is another magnate who is 65 years old and weighs 32 guan. He is Lee Tae-seon, who has been working at the Hwapyungdang Pharmacy in Jongno for thirty years without a single day off. In terms of weight compared to Hong Seok-hyeon, they are on par, but considering his age, anyone would recommend him as chairman. Not only that, but he also has a good beard and is in good health, and he still writes small letters under the lamp without glasses. He also drinks well, but he has moderation and eats two cups of side dishes three times a day. Hong Tae-yun broke a horse's waist while riding drunk, but he once broke a rickshaw wheel while riding drunk. In any case, he is the undisputed chairman in the fat people group. By the way, if the people mentioned above were to organize a sightseeing tour of Eunjeong Gwanchoksa Temple and take a picture in front of the Maitreya Buddha, people who only see the picture would wonder why there are so many Maitreyas. If they were to go to the Japanese Sumo Hall, they would be greatly welcomed as the Joseon Sumo Troupe. In any case, they are the great famous men of Gyeongseong.

While people with a lot of money worry that they cannot digest gourmet food (膏梁珍味) after eating it, it is common to see people in society who cannot even get a bowl of porridge three times a day and make gurgling noises. Similarly, some people worry about being obese, while others strive to become honorary advisors to the Wonsan Buk-eo Company and the "Gang Merry" Company because they are too emaciated. After Jeong Young-taek (current name Jeong An-rip), who was the principal of Boseong Vocational School at the time, went to Bukman to establish Manchuria, and Nam Hyeong-woo (self-proclaimed Sooseok), the school's supervisor, drifted to Shanghai, the Emaciated Body Society of Gyeongseong became very fragmented.
However, in recent years, Lim Gyu, who is considered the best Japanese grammar scholar in Joseon, will become the revival chairman of the society. The vice-chairman will be Lee Gi-yeong, a rising writer who is nicknamed "Malneruski" for being so skinny, and the general manager will likely be Hong Woo-man of the Haedong Bank, based on his financial credibility and other experiences. By the way, it is a pity that we did not measure the weight of these three, but if they were to go out on a windy day, they would not have to practice flying to be good at aviation.
<107>

Three Famous Things: Big Heads and Long Feet

Grand Duke Yoon of A-fang Palace's (阿房宮) head is famous not only in Gyeongseong but also at home and abroad, but the north-south head of Min Gang, the owner of Donghwa Pharmacy, is not something that ordinary people can easily see. He runs a pharmacy, so he even got the nickname Min Bok-ryeong, and when he was imprisoned for the Gihae Movement incident years ago, the prison guards called him Min Du-gong (閔頭公) (Japanese prison guards called him "Adama Ryo Ban Sarami"). And after Hong Chung-hyeon of Commercial Bank passed away, we have not yet discovered anyone with big feet among Koreans, but it seems that Karl-Ro, the French consul, with twelve inches, is the best among foreigners.

Five Irritating and Five Meddlesome People

Jang Du-hyeon of Heungilsa is a good-natured person no matter who looks at him, but his "irritating remarks" are quite something. Whenever he starts talking, the house becomes noisy and there are fights, but when his irritating remark comes out, it is like someone with a stomach ache taking Leejungtang (理中湯, a herbal medicine), and their stomach feels peaceful, so the fight naturally subsides. And Kim Mi-risa of Gwonhwa and Seong Eui-gyeong of Sukmyeong Girls' High School originally have the nickname "Irritating Teacher," so their irritating remarks are certainly considerable, but Kim Sosa, who sells side dishes at the corner of Myodong, will be the greatest of the irritating remarks.
With her pockmarked face and pursed lips, she makes irritating remarks while saying things like, "Chukchuk kudasaiyo kuryeo, if you bring money, I'll give you liquor for free. Cow dung mara," so even if someone comes to drink because they fought with their wife and are angry, they cannot help but be stunned and burst into laughter.

Meddlesome! Meddlesome! Lee Seo-gu of Mae-shin and Shim Woo-byeon of Gye-myeong are treated well as "bunglers" in the journalist society, but Ahn Jae-hong of the Chosun Ilbo, Lee Jong-rin of the Cheondogyo Committee, Lee Gap-seong of Semuranseu Hospital, and others like Yeo Un-hong are famous meddlesome people in Jangan. Regardless of the success or failure and the size of the matter, it seems that no inauguration, social gathering, or welcome party can be established without them. It is as if they have been contracted to give congratulatory speeches and replies. However, I am impressed that it is different from Grand Duke Cho, who is busy doing nothing, or Councilor Rye Hyo-ui, who is the originator of all things.

Two Supervisors of Trouble and Eloquence

If you forget Kwon Deok-gyu of Jungang Gopo and Cha Sang-chan of Gaebyeoksa in Gyeongseong for trouble and eloquence, you will not be able to withstand the terrible verbal attacks and condemnations. Kwon, who allegedly said, "Eat the Buddha and shit him out" while giving a Buddhist lecture in response to the requests of Buddhist youths, tries to cover up any lecture with eloquence, and Cha, who gets arrested by the police but clears the situation with eloquence, only scratches others with any manuscript. The two are small in stature, and Kwon's pockmarked face and Cha's frizzy hair are also a good contrast. It is customary for the two to burn all the other guests' snacks when they meet at the Songhyeon Churang House and compete in trouble-making and eloquence. I cannot give them preferential treatment because I am afraid of the aftermath, so it would be best to give them supervisory positions to avoid trouble.

Many-Bearded Party and Little-Bearded Party

After Grand Duke Min Yeong-gi, the advertiser for University Eye Medicine, became a permanent guest last month, the Many-Bearded Party in Gyeongseong lost a great deal of power. However, it is fortunate that his successor, Little Grand Duke, is also Many-Bearded. Choe Yeong-mok, the managing editor of the Chosun Ilbo, has a beautiful face, but his beard is also a beautiful beard. Because he has worked in printing houses for many years and has a lot of experience in the newspaper's correction department, he rivals Choe Seong-woo of Jungoe Ilbo in terms of correcting well. The two also drink well, so at the Min Sun-ja's house in Da-dong or the Aeshidang in Jangsa-dong, they are welcomed by saying, "The Choe teacher from the newspaper with a lot of beard has come," or "The Choe teacher with a small stature has come."
<108>
And Kim Woo-haeng, who works as an interpreter at the Chinese Consulate, is also a considerable member of the Many-Bearded Party. It would not be difficult for them to seek priesthood even if they go to Catholic churches. Song Jin-woo of the Dong-A Ilbo represents the Beardless Public, and then probably Kwon Dong-jin and Shim Eui-seong.

Handsome Men and Ungroomed Gentlemen

After Yoon Chi-oh, who wore mink shoes with pearl soles, ran out of money, and Ko Won-hoon, who claimed to be the representative of the high collar in Gyeongsang-do, went to a local government office, there are not many people in Gyeongseong who can be touted as style-conscious. In order, perhaps Baek In-gi of Paradise Cave and Shin Heung-woo of Central Christian Church. Baek In-gi's styling is a common thing for the Paradise Cave, so it is not a big deal, but Shin Heung-woo is originally a Western-style handsome man and is quite concerned with his appearance. He changes his suits frequently, and half of his office hours are spent looking in the mirror. He shaves every day, but even if he shaves his beard with a knife, it leaves a bluish mark, so he plucks them out one by one with tweezers. The barbers at Central Barber Shop worry when they see him coming, saying, "Oh, I guess I have to do his hair again." Oops- there is another regret. Since he is now in Tokyo, he is not qualified to participate in this Gyeongseong Famous People's Society, but if the prostitute literature writer No Ja-young were in Gyeongseong, he would definitely have a part to play. If you see him with his Negro-like face, wearing makeup every day, and walking around spreading incense, or the various cosmetics on his desk arranged like a beauty salon, no matter how much he tries to explain, he will not be able to. Oops- there is someone else. There are friends Hyun Hee-woon, Hyun Cheol, and Hyun Moon-jong-cheol who wear powder on their faces. But because he has so many names, no one will remember even if I mention them. And since he is originally a great expert in beauty and the former director of the beauty salon, there is no problem. The people who style themselves well are roughly like this, but what about the people who do not style themselves well? Some people might first mention Yukdang Choe Nam-seon, who wears a cow dung hat and rubber shoes or straw sandals, but in reality, Yukdang does not not care about his appearance. He does it to look like he does not care about his appearance to others. I am not saying this forcefully, but even if you look at how he dresses, he is definitely not someone who does not care about his appearance. If you want to see people who truly do not style themselves, it is Ryu Gwang-ryeol of Jungoe Ilbo and Kim Gi-jeon of Gaebyeoksa. The two of them, regardless of whether their clothes are torn, dirty, or worn out, wear them as they are, and of course, they never shine their shoes after buying them. It is common for the belt to hang loosely between their legs or for them not to button their pants when wearing a suit. When wearing Joseon pants, they wear mismatched drawstrings, one side being a rope and the other side being a piece of old cloth. Eye mucus, nasal mucus, and earwax never divorce their faces. That is enough to make them central figures in this society.
<109>
And another funny thing is that when the two of them take a "pass" to the second-class seats on the train or to the library, the "pass" inspector sometimes asks them, "Honin desuka? Honin desuka?" (本人デスカ 本人デスカ, Are you the person in the picture?) just by looking at their appearance.

Rice Cake Tiger and Liquor Whale

I briefly introduced the story of Yu Jin-tae of the Korean Education Association eating white rice cakes well recently. But Kim Il, the former supervisor of Boseong High School, eats five bowls of cold noodles at once like a crab hiding its eyes, and after eating dinner, he can eat forty-eight pieces of "injeolmi" (small ones, not big ones), and Kim Hak-seon, who is in the Leehyeon market, drinks fifty-three cups of hangover liquor before breakfast and does not even flinch. But he is a hidden person in the market, so the world does not know him well, but Doctor Hong Seok-hu is originally a Christian and a doctor, but he drinks so well that he usually drinks more than fifty cups of strong liquor at a time. Gwanjae Lee Do-young, former Principal Jeong Dae-hyeon of Boseong High School, and Lee Sang-hyeop of Jungoe Ilbo are all worthy of being awarded in the liquor kingdom, but if you drink with Hong Seok-hu, you will have to offer a small glass in just a few turns, so no matter what, Hong Seok-hu is the president of the liquor kingdom. How about the small liquor parties holding a presidential inauguration congratulatory drinking party?

Not Twins but Like Twins

In the old days, Emperor Gaozu of Han had Ji Sin who looked like him, and King Taejo Wang Geon of Goryeo had Shin Sung-gyeom who looked like him, so they had them die in their place and survived themselves. Now, there are several people in Gyeongseong who are not twins but look like twins. Park Seung-bin, the principal of Boseong Vocational School, has no blood relation with the Hanseong Gwonbeon entertainer Yeongsan Hong, but their foreheads, noses, and facial features are so similar that people who frequent the entertainment district call Yeongsan Hong "Lawyer Park" when she comes. It is fortunate that Park does not frequent the entertainment district. If he were to bring an entertainer who looks like a delinquent youth, if he were to bring Yeongsan Hong, anyone would call them siblings no matter who looked at them. And Kim Ha-jeong, the dean of academic affairs at Gwonhwa Girls' School, and Lee Sang-jun, the song teacher at Boseong High School, have some height difference, but their faces are so similar that the new students at Geunhwa Girls' School see Lee Sang-jun on the street and whisper, "That's our school's dean of academic affairs teacher," and the new students at Boseong School often mistake Kim Ha-jeong for Lee Sang-jun and salute him. Also, Gu Ja-ok of the Christian Youth Association looks like Lee Byeong-soo, the grandson of Lee Wan-yong, so some people ask Lee about the news of the Youth Association when they see him. Im Gyeong-jae and Lee Seung-gyu of Hwimun High School have somewhat different skin tones, but their heights, elongated faces, and gaits are all similar, so when students try to say something to Teacher Im, they go in front of him and realize that he is actually Teacher Lee, so they often laugh. Also, Kim Eul-han of the Chosun Ilbo is similar to Lee Gwan-hee of the same company, so people who see them for the first time cannot tell who is who. Once, Kim's close entertainer mistook Lee for Kim and greeted him happily at a restaurant, but when she looked again, she realized it was someone else, so the entertainer made a cackling sound and laughed. This is also a story of Gyeongseong.

<110>

Female Masters of Polygamous Love

Oops- a commotion has broken out- There is great dissatisfaction in the women's member section. They say that it is a men and women famous people's convention, but they only invite men and hold meetings among men. Among them, a woman with wisdom holes all over her face and half-old, skinny woman stood up and said, "Listen, ladies! What is the point of doing this or that? Let's do it among ourselves. I have experience as the chairman of other societies, so I will volunteer to be the chairman of this society as well. I am Jeong 00. Now listen to me. I am a famous woman who marries well. We proletarians must unite even if it is only two people, so we cannot live a single life even for a moment. And because I have a lot of future potential, even if I marry a husband, he must always be younger than me. How about my hardships? With that much, I am qualified to be the chairman, right?" Before she finished speaking, another woman came out. With a round face like a watermelon from Ryangnando and twinkling eyes, she said, "You are a famous woman who marries well, right?
I am a famous woman who divorces well." These words are like saying that there are more women's weddings than men's weddings this year at someone else's wedding. Marrying well and divorcing well are ultimately the same thing. But I am especially good at divorcing. So, I even published a new Jeongjo theory in a newspaper. It is said that if one leaf falls when the autumn wind blows once, you can guess the autumn of the world, so if you see even a little sign that your husband's love is changing, it is best to divorce quickly. After that, another woman with newly cut hair stood up and spoke in the Pyeongyang dialect, "Hey! Your divorce and marriage are all funny stories. I have never had a wedding, but I have had others praise my divorce. I have gone through all sorts of hardships, so even my face, which was not too bad a few years ago, now has Lee Dong-baek's bones sticking out, and the dead freckles are small and scattered, and my whole face is the color of Pyeongyang seagull eggs, and my twinkling eyes have become kimchi jars that have been eaten up by the February wind. I have given up on marriage and divorce, and I just want to have romance at every moment. So, I followed the students of a certain vocational school, and I sometimes shook hands with German exchange students. Also, because I write poems and novels, I have associated with all so-called writers, but in the end, I only supplied materials for public chapters in other people's magazines. Anyway, there is no one besides me who is good at romance." While this was happening, a woman with a body like a hair and a face like a jujube came out briskly and shook her short, bobbed hair like a horse's mane, saying, "I can't live in Joseon. There are many pebbles on the riverbanks in the city, but there are so many rumors in Joseon that I can't live here. Russia has recognized free love between men and women, so at the time, a station worker divorced fifteen times a week. I had four or five romances a year, and there are many criticisms. There are so many squabbles even among siblings. It's enough to have close friends play together."
<111>
As soon as those words were finished, another bobbed, tonsured woman next to her pursed her lips and said, "I've heard some funny things. You're proud of having been to Russia? I only ate Nakssansa watermelons and grew up, but you're going to be good at romance. In the OO Party incident, my house was searched and all sorts of incidents arose from the mountain of love letters. You think I can't snatch your lover, huh? Are you dying, dying, dying?" At this time, the organizer said, "Shh- stop it. At this rate, all the secrets of women will be spilled out. If we are not careful, it may become a disruption of public morals. Let's postpone the unfinished matters to the next opportunity and close the meeting! Shh! Stop." (End)

<112>

**Named Entities**

崔誠愚	Choe Seong-u
朴八陽	Pak Pal-yang
金井鎭	Kim Jeong-jin
李吉用	Lee Gil-yong
柳章浩	Ryu Jang-ho
安洞	Andong
安俊永	Ahn Jun-yeong
齋洞	Jae-dong
濟和堂	Jehwadang
朴致和	Pak Chi-hwa
同德女校	Tongdeok Yeoja Gyo
洪莜亭	Hong Yu-jeong
朴宗桓	Pak Jong-hwan
平壤	Pyeongyang
鐘路	Jongno
裕昌	Yuchang
裵竹葉	Bae Jung-yeop
尹玉葉	Yun Ok-yeop
金一枝梅	Kim Il-jimae
朴玉花	Pak Ok-hwa
金貞植	Kim Jeong-sik
徽文高普	Hwimun Gopo
任璟宰	Im Gyeong-jae
李昇圭	Lee Seung-gyu
朝鮮	Joseon
車萬載	Cha Man-jae
鄭鉉	Jeong Hyeon
桂山普成校	Gyesan Boseong Gyo
金弘植	Kim Hong-sik
三光堂	Samgwangdang
鮮于全	Seon-u Jeon
梁白華	Liang Baihua
儆新學校長	Gyeongsin Hakgyojang
君芮彬	Gun Rui-bin
渡江魚驚網	Dogang Eojingmang
登山鳥㤼羅	Deungsan Jora
池成允	Ji Seong-yun
京城病院	Gyeongseong Byeongwon
泰成病院	Taeseong Byeongwon
姜元永	Kang Won-yeong
安商浩	Ahn Sang-ho
朴啓陽	Pak Gye-yang
洪錫厚	Hong Seok-hu
劉秉泌	Yu Byeong-pil
鄭世胤	Jeong Se-yun
北間島	Bukgando
金益南	Kim Ik-nam
高普校長	Gopo Gyojang
崔鳴煥	Choe Myeong-hwan
徽高校長	Hwigo Gyojang
金亨培	Kim Hyeong-bae
李炳奎	Lee Byeong-gyu
中央高普	Jungang Gopo
李光鍾	Lee Gwang-jong
京城女高	Gyeongseong Yeoja Gyo
孫孃	Son Niang
張載洽	Jang Jae-hap
大同印刷所	Daedong Insweaso
韓仁洙	Han In-su
漢城銀行	Hanseong Eunhaeng
韓相龍	Han Sang-yong
江原道	Gangwondo
楊口方山	Yanggu Bangsan
朴春載	Pak Chun-jae
楊州牧使	Yangju Moksa
洪泰潤	Hong Tae-yun
洪奭鉉	Hong Seok-hyeon
官立高等普通學校長	Gwanrip Godeung Botong Hakgyojang
東洋書院	Dongyang Seowon
趙男熙	Cho Nam-hui
覺皇寺	Gakhwangsa
姜大蓮	Kang Dae-ryeon
小波	Sobha
方定煥	Bang Jeong-hwan
鍾路	Jongno
和平堂	Hwapyungdang
李泰善	Lee Tae-seon
洪泰潤	Hong Tae-yun
恩津	Eunjeon
灌燭寺	Gwanchoksa
日本國技館	Ilbon Gukgi-gwan
朝鮮	Joseon
鄭永澤	Jeong Young-taek
普成전문학교장	Boseong Jeonmunhakgyojang
滿洲國	Manjuguk
北滿	Bukman
南亨祐	Nam Hyeong-woo
滬上	Hosang
瘦石	Sooseok
林圭	Lim Gyu
李箕永	Lee Gi-yeong
海東銀行	Haedong Eunhaeng
洪祐晩	Hong U-man
尹대감	Yun Taegam
尹다가리	Yun Tagari
同和藥房	Donghwa Yakbang
閔橿	Min Gang
閔茯苓	Min Bongryeong
己未運動	Gimi Undong
商業銀行	Sangeop Eunhaeng
洪忠鉉	Hong Chung-hyeon
佛國	Bulguk
張斗鉉	Jang Du-hyeon
興一社	Heungilsa
金美理士	Kim Mi-risa
權花	Gwonhwa
成義敬	Seong Eui-gyeong
淑明女高	Sungmyeong Yeoja Gyo
廟洞	Myodong
金召史	Kim Sosa
每申	Mae-sin
李瑞求	Lee Seo-gu
啓明	Gye-myeong
沈友變	Shim U-byeon
朝鮮日報	Joseon Ilbo
安在鴻	Ahn Jae-hong
天道敎	Cheondogyo
李鍾麟	Lee Jong-rin
세무란쓰병원	Semuranseu Byeongwon
李甲成	Lee Gap-seong
呂運弘	Yeo Un-hong
芮協	Rye Hyeop
權悳奎	Kwon Deok-gyu
中央高普	Jungang Gopo
車相瓚	Cha Sang-chan
開闢社	Gaebyeoksa
松峴	Songhyeon
閔泳綺	Min Yeong-gi
崔榮穆	Choe Yeong-mok
朝鮮日報社	Joseon Ilbosa
中外日報	Jungoe Ilbo
崔誠愚	Choe Seong-u
茶洞	Dadong
閔淳子	Min Sun-ja
長沙洞	Jangsa-dong
愛市堂	Aeshidang
金佑行	Kim U-haeng
天主敎	Cheonjugyo
宋鎭禹	Song Jin-woo
東亞日報	Donga Ilbo
權東鎭	Kwon Dong-jin
沈宜性


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	京城名物男女 新春誌上大會
기사형태	잡저

京城名物男女 新春誌上大會
開會의 첫인사

京城은 인구가 만흐니만큼 명물의 남녀가 또한 만타. 키 적은 명물도 잇고 키 큰 명물도 잇다. 는 둥뚱한 명물과 곰보 명물도 잇는것은 물론이고 내지 얌전한 명물, 못난 명물, 결혼 잘 하는 명물, 연애 잘 하는 명물, 술 잘 먹는 명물, 떡 잘 먹는 명물, 모양 잘 내는 명물, 모양 안이 내는 명물 등 별의 별 명물이 다 잇다. 이 허다한 명물을 일정한 장소에서 일시 회합 하랴면 여간한 회당으로는 도저히 수용할 수 업슬 것이다. 그리하야 특별히 넓고도 큰 別乾坤의 지면을 비러서 개회하게 되엿다. 회원의 자격은 물론 京城에서 다년간 거주하야 누구나 알만한 명물남녀에 한할 것이오 입회금은 특별히 면제하고 유자격자이면 엇더한 계급과 엇더한 주의자와 노소를 불구하고 다 공개환영한다.
그러나 회원으로서 한가지 주의할 일은 명물이라고 하엿다고 엇지 알지 말나는 그것이다. 잠간 생각하면 사람을 명물이라 하는 것이 輕忽한 듯하나 실상은 그런 것이 안이다. 명물이란 명자는 명인달사, 명현, 유명한 명자요 물자는 만물지중에 唯人이 最貴라는 물자와 인물이라는 물자다. 다시 말하면 유명한 인물이란 말이다. 이만큼 알면 오해는 별로 업슬 것이다. 그리고 또 한가지 부탁은 이번회에 밋처 입회치 못한 이는 다음 엇더한 기회에 또 참가할 수가 잇슬터이니 과히 불평을 부르지 말나는 그것이다. 밧분 시간에 개회사가 너무 길어서 미안하다. 자-그만 개회하자-人數가 하고 만허서 너무 복잡하니 각부분을 논하서 순차로 개회하자-쉬-좌석정돈하시요!(주최자 관상자)

八短軀와 九長身

보통 會席에서는 키 적은 이가 매양 남에 뒤에 서는 것이 사실이나, 이 회에서는 특별히 키 적은 이의 편리를 위하야 맨 먼저 참석하게 하얏다. 그러면 그 누구 누구가 회원될 자격이 잇슬가. 中外日報의 정리부장 崔誠愚씨와 지방부장 <104> 朴八陽씨와 무소속 金井鎭씨는 只字波는 될 터이오(입에 발이 달녓다는 뜻) 朝鮮日報의 李吉用씨와 普高출신으로 安洞에서 洋靴商하든 柳章浩(현직미상)씨는 具字派는 될 터이오(눈에 발이 달녓다는 뜻) 安洞 永昌商店주인 安俊永씨와 齋洞濟和堂 약국주인 朴致和씨는 穴字派가 될 것이다(갓에 발이 달녓다는 뜻). 그러고 同德女校의 洪莜亭씨도 穴字派인데 女子라고 갓을 못 쓴다고 입적사절을 당한 것은 듯기에 미안한 일이다. 그런데 이 여러분 중에서 회장을 추천하라면 穴字派 중에도 물론 사척칠촌 되는 安俊永씨가 被選될 것이오 순차로 부회장은 朴致和씨요 총무는 년령으로 하든지 재담 잘하기로든지, 인쇄교정계이력으로든지 酒德으로든지 崔誠愚씨가 최다 점일 것이다. 그러나, 다행이 의사 朴宗桓씨가 지방에 가 잇게 그럿치 만일 京城에 잇다면 崔誠愚씨의 총무석도 역시 독점한다 예언하기 어려울 것이다. 이 회의 기념품으로는 平壤栗과 곰방대(短煙竹)를 증정하는 것이 적당하겟고 축사로는 전일 엇던 사람의 「着冠纓掃地, 履鞋沒兩肩. 若逢牛跡水, 揮手喚來船」이란 명구를 그대로 인용하는 것이 조켓다. 여흥은 또 「난장이」 춤 뵈기가 엇더할지.
자-키 적은 이의 회는 그만 폐회하고 키 큰 이의 회를 또 열자-순서지는 鐘路 裕昌상회의 간판에다 부치고 전선주는 모자거리로 임시 이용하고 여흥으로는 六尺妓裵竹葉, 尹玉葉, 金一枝梅, 朴玉花를 부르자-위원장은 누구실가 기독교회에서 이력도 만코 년령도 상당하고 同夫人하고 다니기로도 유명한 오척구촌칠분 장신의 金貞植 노인이다. 그리고 위원으로는 徽文高普의 任璟宰, 李昇圭, 朝鮮보병대의 車萬載, 鄭鉉, 桂山普成校의 金弘植, 三光堂의 鮮于全, 支那舊小說通梁白華등 제씨가 다 상당할 것이오. 또 京城거류 외국인 중에 제일 키 크기로 유명한 儆新學校長 君芮彬씨는 특별 찬성원으로 추천할 만하다-하여간 이 회는 참으로 大人會이다. 서양 어느나라에 유람을 간다고 하야도 과히 붓그럽지 안을 것이다. 이 九人을 京城의 九長身이라 할지.<105>

이름 조혼 花隱會

渡江魚驚網 若非牛千葉
登山鳥㤼羅 疑是馬蜂家

이것은 전에 엇던 險口家가 얼골 얼근 이를 조롱한 시엿다. 얼근이의 별명은 自來로 여러 가지가
잇서서 혹은 곰보 혹은 꿀병이라 하엿고 또 근래에는 가다 방이니 鏡破선생이니 하는 별명까지 생겻다. 그러나 이번 이대회에서는 특히 얼근이의 여러분을 위하야 그러한 과거 불명예의 별명을 다 업새 버리고 새로 花隱선생이라 아호를 드리게 되엿다.(얼근이를 怪石이라고도 하는데 怪石이라 하기는 너무 미안하고 露骨이닛가 괴석이 화초밧헤 만히 잇는 것을 의미하야 특히 花隱이라 함이다.) 그런대 이 花隱會의 회원은 과연 누구가 유자격자일가 아모리 일반적으로 모집한다 하야도 의사계에 회원수가 제일 만흘 것이오 그 다음은 교원계일 것이다. 대강대강 氏名을 드러 말하야 보자!
京城病院의 池成允씨는 엇더하며 泰成病院의 姜元永씨는 엇더한가. 其外에 安商浩, 朴啓陽, 洪錫厚, 劉秉泌씨도 입회를 불허한다면 이 대회의 반대운동을 야기할 것이다. 그리고 平壤에서 개업한 鄭世胤씨와 北間島에서 개업한 金益南씨도 지방적 관계로 입회는 못 할지언뎡 알기만 하면 개회축전은 할 것이다. 또 학교로는 高普校長 崔鳴煥씨와 徽高校長 金亨培씨와 또 同校교원 任璟宰, 李昇圭, 李炳奎 삼씨, 中央高普 李光鍾씨도 평의원 자격은 상당할 것이다.(京城女高교원 孫孃은 女子이니 특히 입회를 사절한다) 올치 전일 新天地社에 잇든 張載洽군과(별명張곰보) 현재 大同印刷所에서 「누라」수선하는 韓仁洙군도 어지간하다. 그런데 이 회에서 회장을 추천한다면 의사계에 회원이 다수인 까닭에 의사 중에서 피선이 될 것이다. 즉 池成允씨는 누구나 이의 업시 회장으로 公選될 것이오, 安商浩씨는 안성마침의 부회장이오 총무는 아마 徽高의 李炳奎씨일 것이다. 그런데 이 池회장은 다른 병도 잘 고치지만 소아의 학질은 백발백중으로 잘 고치는데 무슨 약이나 주사로 고치는 것이 안이라 그의 얼골로 고치는데 아모리 마음이 단단하고 약은 아해들이라도 그를 한번만 보면 아주 驚風을 하야 고만 학질이 떠러지고 만다하며 安商浩씨는 東京에서 고학할 시대에 하도 곤란하닛가 石鏡가지고 자기관상을 보다가 石鏡까지 깨트린 일화가 잇다고 한다. 이만하면 회장, 부회장이야 자격이 물론 상당할 것이오 총무 李炳奎씨는 아즉 세상사람이 잘 알지 못하지만은 학생계에서 李炳奎씨를 보면 의례 縛선생이라고 한다. 하여간 이 회는 회원도 상당하고 임원도 상당히 뫼엿다.
앗차-이젓구나-漢城銀行 韓相龍씨도 입회만 하면 金力으로 선거운동을 하지 안어도 평의원 한아는 엇어 할 것이다. 그런데 그들이 만일 정식으로 懇親會를 한다하면 그 장소의 설비와 음식의 준비는 이럿케 하얏스면 격이 마질 것 갓다. 芒席우에 망사휘장을 치고 술상에는 千葉膾와 가다방을 노코 술은 전날 江原道에서 <106> 진상오는 끌병에다 두릅두릅한 楊口方山 사기잔을 놋코 취토록 먹은 다음에 朴春載의 곰보타령을 드르며 강낭이 속대로 古石맷돌을 치며 장단도 맛치고, 골패의 짝마치기도 하얏스면 조흘 것 갓다. 이것은 花隱會員 여러분의 유의할 일이다.

肥滿大家와 瘐身先生

楊州牧使 洪泰潤씨가 작고한 이후에 京城내 뚱뚱한 이 축에서는 회장감이 업서서 매우 걱정이 되더니 洪씨 문중에 뚱뚱보 양반 한 분이 또 생겻스니 그는 전일 官立高等普通學校長으로 잇든 洪奭鉉씨이다. 그가 학교에 잇슬 때에는 그다지 뚱뚱치 안코 키도 상당히 큰 까닭에 남들이 그다지 뚱뚱한 줄을 모르겟더니 근래에는 엇지나 몸이 낫는지 東洋書院의 趙男熙씨나 覺皇寺 姜大蓮씨나 가튼 이로는 名啣도 못 드릴것이오 小波 方定煥씨도 청년 축으로는 매우 유망하지만은 아즉 그와 비교하자면 어림도 업다. 이제 체중으로 따저보면 洪奭鉉씨는 이십팔관, 趙男熙씨는 이십오관. 方定煥씨는 이십관, 姜大蓮씨는 이십일관이란다.
익크 놀나지 마시오. 당년 육십오세의 노인으로 삼십이관 되는 대가가 또 잇스니 그는 鍾路 和平堂 洋藥房에서 삼십년 간을 하루도 쉬지안코 시무하는 李泰善씨다. 洪奭鉉씨와 중량으로 비하면 伯仲 간이지만은 년령에 비하야 보면 아모라도 그를 회장으로 추천할 것이다. 뿐만 안이라 그는 수염의 풍채도 조코 신체도 건강하야 지금도 안경을 안이쓰고 燈下에서 細書를 쓴다한다. 술도 잘 자시지만 절조가 잇서서 일회에 두곱 부식 매일 삼회를 자신다 한다. 洪泰潤씨가 취중에 말을 타다가 말허리를 부러트린 일이 잇섯다더니 그는 언제인가 취중에 인력거를 탓다가 박휘를 깨인 일이 잇다한다. 하여간 그는 뚱뚱한 이 축에서는 갈 데 업는 회장이다. 그런데 이 우에 말한 분으로 恩津 灌燭寺의 觀光團을 조직하야 가지고 미륵불 압헤서 사진을 백힌다하면 사진만 보는 사람은 엇전 미륵이 그럿케 만흐냐 할 것이요 日本國技館을 갈 것 가트면 朝鮮相撲團이라고 대환영할 것이다. 엇잿든 京城의 大名物男들이다.

돈 만흔 사람은 膏梁珍味를 잔뜩 먹고서 소화가 안이 된다고 걱정하는 반면에 삼시에 죽 한그릇도 잘 어더먹지 못하야 끼룩끼륙 하는 것이 현 사회에서 흔이 보는 일이다. 그와 마찬가지로 남은 몸이 비만하야 걱정을 하는데 엇던 사람은 몸이 너무 수척하야 元山北魚會社와 「강메리」상회에 명예고문이 되랴고 애쓰는 이도 잇다. 한참 당년에 普成전문학교장으로 잇든 鄭永澤씨(現名鄭安立)가 滿洲國을 창건한다고 北滿으로 가고 同校校監南亨祐(自號瘦石)씨가 滬上으로 漂遊한 이후에 京城의 瘦身會가 매우 零星하얏다.
그러나 이 근래로 말하면 朝鮮에서 日本문법학자로 제 일지를 屈하는 林圭씨가 그 회의 中興회장이 될 것이다. 부회장은 넘어 말러서 「말너스키」의 별명을 듯는 신진문인 李箕永씨가 후보가 되겟고<107> 총무는 재정상 신용이나 기타 이력으로도 海東은행의 洪祐晩씨가 상당할 것이다. 그런데 이 세분의 체중이 몃 관이나 되는지 측량 못한 것은 유감이지마는 그들이 만일 回旋風 부는 날에 외출을 할 것 가트면 비행기 연습을 하지 안어도 항공 잘 하기는 염려 업슬 것이다.

巨頭長足의 三名物

阿房宮 주인 尹대감 尹다가리의 머리 큰 것은 京城뿐 안이라 내외국 간에도 평판이 만치만은 同和藥房 주인 閔橿씨의 남북머리도 구경복엄는 여간 사람으로는 잘 어더 보지 못 할 머리다. 그는 약업을 하는 까닭에 閔茯苓이라는 별명까지 어덧섯는데 년전에 己未運動사건으로 入監되엿슬 때에 간수들이 閔頭公(日本간수는 『아다마 량반 사람이』)이라고 불러섯다. 그리고 商業銀行의 洪忠鉉씨가 작고한 후로는 朝鮮사람 중에는 발 큰 사람을 아즉 발견하지 못하얏스나 외국인으로는 佛國영사 칼-로씨의 십이吋가 居甲일 것 갓다.

五괘사 五多事

興一社의 張斗鉉씨는 아모가 보와도 好好爺이지만은 그의 「괘사」야말로 어지간치 안타. 엇던 주석이던지, 그가 석기기만 하면 집안이 떠들석하고 쌈이 나도 그의 괘사 한마듸가 나오면 배 알는 사람의 理中湯 먹은 것 처럼 속이 다 평화하게 되야 싸홈이 저절로 가러 안는다. 그리고 權花의 金美理士씨와 淑明女高의 成義敬씨는 별명이 원래 괘사선생이닛가 괘사가 물론 상당하겟지만은 廟洞모퉁이에서 바침술장사 하는 金召史는 괘사중 대괘사일 것이다.
그 얼근 얼골에다 입을 빗죽빗죽하며 「척척 구다사이요 구려, 돈만 가저오시면 술은 그저 줌니다. 쇠똥마라」, 등 별의 별 겻말을 다 써가면서 괘사를 부리면 아모리 자긔집 녀편네와 싸움을 하고 화김에 술 먹으러 온 사람이라도 눈이 멍하야 껄껄 우슴을 내 놋치 안을 수 업슬 것이다.

多事! 多事! 每申의 李瑞求씨와 啓明의 沈友變씨는 『덜렁이』로 기자사회에서 상당한 대우를 밧지만은 朝鮮日報의 安在鴻씨와 天道敎 위원회의 李鍾麟씨와 세무란쓰병원의 李甲成씨와 그외 呂運弘씨는 長安에서 이름이 놉흔 다사가이다. 事의 성패와 대소 여하에는 별로 불구하고 무슨 발기회 무슨 간친회, 무슨 환영회든지 그들이 빠지면 성립이 되지 안는것 갓고 축사, 답사도 그분들이 청부를 한 것 갓다. 그러나 무사분주의 趙대감이라든지 사면발기의 芮協의원과는 취지가 다른 것을 감복한다.

말성 才談 두 都監

말성 재담으로야 京城에서 中央高普의 權悳奎씨와 開闢社의 車相瓚씨를 니저 버린다면 그 무서운 口討聲討에 백여 나지를 못할 것이다. 佛敎청년들의 소청을 밧아, 佛敎강연을 하다가 『부처를 잡아먹고 똥을 싸라』하엿다는 權씨는 아모 강연도 재담으로 범으려 넘기고 경찰서에 잡혀 가서도 재담으로 해를<108> 지우는 車씨는 아모런 원고라도 남을 긁어노코야 만다. 두 분이 키도 갓치 작거니와 權씨가 얽은 대신에 車씨가 곰실머리인 것도 조흔 대조이다. 두 분이 각금 松峴추랑집에서 맛나면 말성다툼 재담내기에 다른 객의 안주를 다 태우고 마는 것이 의례이니 뒤가 무서워 차별대우는 못하겟고 도감벼슬이나 바치는 것이 후환이 업겟다.

多鬚黨과 小鬚黨

大學目藥 광고주 閔泳綺 閔대감이 월전에 不歸客이 된 뒤로 京城 내의 多鬚黨은 일대 세력을 失하얏다. 그러나 그의 상속인 소대감이 역시 多鬚인 것은 幸事이요 朝鮮日報社의 정리부장 崔榮穆씨는 얼골도 美容이지만은 수염이 또한 美수염이다. 그가 인쇄소에 다년간 종업하고 신문사 교정계에 이력이 만흔 까닭에 교정 잘 하기로는 中外日報의 崔誠愚씨와 伯仲을 다투는데 두 분이 술도 다 잘 마시여서 단골로 다니는 茶洞 閔淳子집이나 長沙洞 愛市堂에서는 그들이 가면 의례히 신문사의 수염만흔 崔선생이 오시엿느니 키 적은 崔선생이 오시엿느니 하고 환영을 한다.
그리고 또 中國영사관의 통역으로 잇는 金佑行씨도 상당한 多수당원이다. 그들은 천주교당에를 가도 신부직을 구하기는 어렵지 안을 것이다. 無鬚公으로는 東亞日報의 宋鎭禹씨가 대표요 其次는 아마 權東鎭, 沈宜性 양씨일 것이다.

美粧名男과 非粧紳士

貂皮신에 진주바닥을 깔어신든 尹致旿씨의 수중이 텅 비게되고, 慶尙道의 대표 하이카라로 자처하든 高元勳씨가 지방관청으로 간 뒤에는 京城에 별로 이럿타고 내세울 모양쟁이가 업다. 아순대로 말하자면 樂園洞 뿔조아 白寅基씨와 中央基督敎會의 申興雨씨라고나 할가, 白寅基씨의 모양 내는 것은 뿔조아의 보통하는 일이닛가 별로 문제가 되지 안치만은 申興雨씨는 원래 拜洋式  미남자인 동시에 상당히 모양보는 축이다. 양복을 각금각금 갈어 입는 것은 물론이고 사무시간에도 石鏡보는 시간이 半部를 점령하고 면도를 날마다 하는데도 수염을 칼로 깍으면 시퍼럿케 자국이 난다고 족지게로 한아씩 둘씩 뽑으며 이발하는데도 엇지나 잔말슴이 만흐신지 中央이발소의 이발사들이 그의 오는 것을 보면 「아이고-머리고 또 시겟구나」하고 걱정을 한다고 한다. 앗차-또 한가지 유감이 잇다. 지금 그가 東京에 가 잇는 까닭에 이 京城名物會에는 참가할 자격이 업지만은 賣0문학자 盧子泳군이 만일 京城에 잇섯더면 한목은 단단이 볼 것이다. 그-네그로족 갓흔 얼골에 날마다 화장을 하야서 향내를 피우고 도라 다니는 것이라든지, 그의 책상에 각종 화장품이 미용술연구소 모양으로 벌녀 엇는 것을 보면 氏가 아모리 변명을 하랴 하야도 못 할 것이다. 앗차-또 잇구나. 얼골에 분바르고 다니는 친구 玄僖運, 俔蜇, 玄門宗哲, 안이 玄哲씨가 또 잇구나. 그러나 그는 이름이 하도 만흐닛가 말하야도 기억함 사람이 업슬 것이요<109>. 또 원래가 미용술연구대가로 전 미용원장이닛가 문제도 업다. 모양 잘 내는 이는 대강 이러하거니와 모양 안이내는 사람은 또 엇더한가. 잠간 생각하는 사람은 쇠똥모자에 고무신이나 집석이 신고 다니는 六堂 崔南善씨를 먼저 말하겟지만은 六堂으로 말하면 실상은 모양을 보지 안는 것이 안이라. 남 보기에 모양 안이 보는 사람갓치 하랴고 그리 하는 것이다. 그것은 억지로 하는 말이 안이라 그의 옷 입은 매무새를 보아도 결코 모양 안이내는 이가 안이다. 진짬 모양 안이 내는 사람을 보랴면 中外日報의 柳光烈씨와 開闢社의 金起田씨다. 그 두분은 의복이 다 타젓든지 드러웟든지, 해 젓든지 도시 불구하고 그대로 단니는 것은 물론이고 신발은 사 신은 뒤로는 한번 도 닥거 신는  일이 업다. 양복 입고 다닐때에 혁대가 두 다리 새이로 척 느러지거나 바지의 단추를 끼지 안는 것은 예사이요, 朝鮮바지에 짝짝이 다임을 매되 한쪽은 노끈, 한쪽은 헌겁나부랑이를 일 수 *** 눈금과, 코물과, 귀지가 그의 얼골과 이혼할 날이 업다. 그만하면 이 회의 중추인물은 될 것이다.
그리고 또 한가지 우서운 일은 그 두분이 기차 이등석이나 도서관에 「파스」를 가지고 가면 「파스」검사하는 사람이 각금 그의 외모만 보고는 「本人デスカ 本人デスカ」한다고.

떡호랑이와 술고래

朝鮮敎育會의 兪鎭泰씨가 흰떡 잘 먹는 이약이는 요전에 잠간 소개한 일이 잇것다. 그런데 전일 普成高普 敎監 金馹씨는 냉면 사오그릇을 한무릅에 게(蟹) 눈 감추듯 먹는 것은 물론이고 저녁밥 먹은 뒤에 「인절미」사십팔개(小者도 안이)를 능히 먹고 梨峴시장에 金學先이라는 이는 식전 해장술을 오십삼배나 하고도 끗덕을 안이 한다고 한다. 그러나 그는 시장에 숨은 사람인 까닭에 세상이 잘 아지 못하지만은 의사 洪錫厚씨는 원래 基督敎 신자요 의사이지만은 술을 엇지나 잘하는지 독주가 양을 일차에 오십배 이상은 보통이라고 한다. 貫齋 李道榮씨라든지, 전 普成高普 교장 鄭大鉉씨라든지, 中外日報의 李相協씨가 다 酒國의 작위 들어들만 하지만은 洪錫厚씨와 대작하면 불과 몃순에 소인을 바치소야 마니 아무리 하여도 酒國 대통령은 洪錫厚씨이니. 여러 小酒黨은 대통령취임축하주회를 排設이 何如오.

雙童이 아닌 雙童이

옛적에 漢太祖가 紀信이와 얼골이 갓고 高麗 王建 太祖가 申崇謙과 가태서 代死까지 식히고 자기가 살어난 일이 잇다더니 지금 京城에는 쌍동이가 아니고도 쌍동이가튼 인물이 몃분 잇다. 普成專門學校長 朴勝彬씨는 漢城券番 기생 暎山紅이와는 하등의 혈연관계가 업지만은 그 이마라든지 코라든지 얼골전형이 피차 가태서 화류계에 놀라 다니는 사람들이 暎山紅이 오면 朴辯護士라고 한다, 朴씨는 원래 화류계출입을 안이하는 이게 망정이지 만일에 부랑청년모양으로 기생을 다리고 다니되 暎山紅이를 다리고 다닐 것 가트면 아무가<110> 보와도 남매라고 할 것이다. 그리고 權花女學校의 교무주임 金夏鼎씨와 普成高普 창가교사 李尙俊씨는 키가 좀 차이가 잇스나 얼골이 비슷하야 槿花女學校의 신입학생들은 李尙俊씨를 노상에서 보고는 저이가 우리 학교의 교무주임 선생님이라고 하고 수군수군하며, 普校의 신입학생들은 金夏鼎씨를 李尙俊씨로만 알고 경례를 각금 한다. 또 基督敎靑年會의 具滋玉씨는 李完用候의 종손 李丙壽군과 얼골이 비슷하야 李씨를 보고 청년회 소식을 각금 뭇는 이가 잇다하고 徽文高普의 任璟宰씨와 李昇圭씨는 얼골ㅅ빗은 다소 異色이 잇스나 키라든지 면장한 것이라든지 보법이라든지 다 비슷하야 뒤로 보면 두 분을 잘 분간할 수가 업서서 학생들이 任선생에게 무슨 말을 하랴고 갓다가 압흐로 가 자세히 보면 딴판의 李선생인 고로 각금 웃는 일이 만타고 한다. 또 朝鮮日報의 金乙漢군은 同社 李觀熙군과 비슷하야 처음 보는 사람은 누가 누구인지 잘 분간 못하는데 한번은 金군의 친한 기생이 李군을 金군으로만 보고 엇든 요리집에서 반가히 인사를 하고는 다시 보닛가 딴 사람인 고로 그 기생이 까투리 날리는 소리를 치며 우섯다고 한다. 이것도 京城의 한 이야기거리다.

多角愛의 女流大家

익크-야단법석이 낫다-女子회원석에서 대불평이 일어낫다. 소위 남녀명물대회라 하야 남을 모다 청해노코는 이때까지 남자끼리만 會를 한다고. 그 중에도 얼골에 슬기구멍이 담상담상 잇고 반나마 늙은 앙상한 女子 한 분이 일어나더니 여보시오 우리 女子 여러분! 이러구 저러구 할 것 무엇잇쇼. 우리는 우리끼리 합시다. 나는 다른 會에서 회장노릇한 경력이 잇스니 이 회의 회장도 내가 자천하겠소. 나는 鄭00임니다. 자 내 말슴 드러보시오. 나는 결혼 잘하는 명물녀올시다. 우리 無産者는 다만 두사람이나마 단결을 하야만 되겟기에 잠시라도 독신생활을 못함니다. 그리고도 장래성이 만흔 까닭에 남편을 어더도 꼭꼭 나보다 년하자만 엇지오. 나의 천신만고가 엇덥시요. 이만하면 회장자격이 되겟지요. 말이 끗나기 전에 또한 女子가 나오는데 綾羅島 수박모양으로 둥구수름한 얼골에다가 어글어글한 두 눈을 껌벅껌벅하며 하는 말이 당신은 결혼 잘 하는 명물녀라지요.
나는 이혼 잘하는 명물녀요. 이 말은 마치 남의 혼례식에 가서 금년은 女子의 혼례식이 남자의 혼례식보다 만타는 말과 마찬가지지오, 결혼 잘 한다는 말이나 이혼 잘한다는 말이나 결국은 가튼 말임니다. 그러나 나는 특히 이혼을 잘 함니다. 그리하야 신정조론까지 엇던 신문지상에 발표하얏지요. 金風이 한번 불 때 一葉이 떠러지면 천하의 가을을 짐작한다고 남편의 사랑이 조곰이라도 변하는 기색이 뵈이면 그저 속히 이혼하는 것이 상책이지요. 그 뒤에 새로 단발한 女子 한 분이 또 일어나서 平壤사토리를 쓰며 하는 말이 여보! 당신네 이혼이고 결혼이고 다 우수운 말이요 나는 결혼식은 못해 보앗서도 이혼은 남만 <111> 치하야 보앗소. 별의 별 풍상을 다 격거서 몃해 전까지도 과이 밉지는 안타든 얼골이 지금은 李東伯이의 뼉다귀가 쑥 나오고 죽은 깨가 작고 소사서 온 얼골이 平壤갈맥이 알빗이 되고 어글어글하든 눈이 이월 동풍에 다 파 먹은 김치독이 되엿소. 나는 결혼이 되고 이혼이고 다 그만두고  찰나찰나라도 연애만 하얏스면 조켓소. 그리하야 모전문학교학생 뒤도 쫏차보고, 獨逸유학생들과 각금 악수도 하야 보앗지요. 또 시구나 소설줄도 쓰는 까닭에 소위 문인이란 문인은 다 교제하다가 결국은 남의 잡지의 공개장 자료만 공급하얏지오. 엇지 하얏든 연애 잘 하기로야 나 외에 더 잇겟소. 한참 이러는 판에 몸집이 호말과 갓고 얼골빗이 대초빗가튼 女子 한 분이 활발하게 쑥 나오더니 깍것다 기른 머리를 말갈기 가티 흔들면서 하는 말이 「우리 朝鮮에서는 살 수 업서요. 시내 강변에는 조약돌이 만타더니, 우리 朝鮮에는 말성이 만어서 못 살어요. 露西亞에서는 남녀자유연애를 공인한 까닭에 한참 당년에는 정거장 역부가 일주일에 이혼을 열다섯번도 하얏소. 나는 일년에 사오인 연애를 하얏다고, 비평이 만쿠려. 동모간에도 강짜는 웨그리 만어요. 아근이 자근이 정답게 놀기만 하면 그만이지요.
그말이 끗나자 그 엽헤 잇든 단발 退俗 女子 또 한분이 입을 빗죽빗죽하는 말이 우서운 소리도 다 드럿소, 露西亞에 갓다온 것이 자랑이요. 나는 露西亞는 카녕 洛山寺수박만 먹고 자랏것만 연애만 잘하겟데. OO당사건에도 내 집 수색을 하야 산덤이 가튼 연애편지 속에서 여러 가지 事端이 다 생겻네. 자네 애인은 내가 못빼 슬 줄 아나, 앙앙 죽겟니. 용용 죽겟니-이 때에 주최자 -쉬- 그만들 두시오. 이러다가는 女子의 비밀이란 비밀은 다 쏘다저 나오겟소. 잘못하면 풍기문란이 될 지도 모르겟소. 미진한 사항은 다음 기회로 밀고 그만 폐회합시다! 쉬! 중지.-(끗)<112>
<104-112>