잡지명	別乾坤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	正月도 大보름 (New Year's Day is Also the Great Full Moon)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Notice/Post-Editing Note)

New Year's Day is Also the Great Full Moon!
It's New Year's, which should be a time of joy, but how do you spend the long nights with your family?

Life is difficult and families are weary, so before the Great Full Moon, it is very necessary to create an opportunity for the whole family to sit together and enjoy themselves, even if only for a moment. Don't you think so? Whether it's four, five, seven, or eight family members, whether they are old, women, or young children, we offer each of you the "Latest Animal Competition Board Game" (最新式 動物競爭말판) to sit together and have fun without realizing how late it is.

◇

This is several, several tens of times more fun and beautiful than the "Success Board Game" (出世말판) that appeared in the January issue. Rather than reading many advertisements, you will know how good it is just by going to a nearby bookstore and looking at it.

It is good to give it to children, but it is also beneficial for you to read it first, and it is very interesting to play with friends for the first time.

◇

We give you the board game, we give you the newspaper, we give you the book, and the price is only 15 jeon! (錢) It's just the price of a pack of cigarettes. Thinking of it as the price of a pack of cigarettes, send only 15 jeon to Kyŏngsŏng Kaebyŏksa (京城開闢社), and we will send you all three things the next day.

◇For details on children's books, please read the advertisement on the back cover of this book. <120>

Named Entities

京城開闢社	Kyŏngsŏng Kaebyŏksa



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	正月도 大보름
기사형태	사고·편집후기

正月도 大보름
지외다! 즐거워야할 正月에, 거나긴밤에 당신의 댁에서는 무얼로 가족이즐겁게 지내심닛가…….
생활에 기여 하도 고닯흔식구드리니 大보름전, 한나만이라도 왼가족이 한자리에안저 즐겨볼긔희를 짓는일은 대단히 필요한일임니다. 그것치안을가요? 四人이나 五人이나 七人이나 八人이나 식구수효대로 老人이나 婦人이나 어린사람이나 모다모혀안저서 밤이깁는줄모르고 자미잇게놀수잇는『최신식 動物競爭말판』하나씩 이저드림니다.
◇
그것은 一月호에 낫든『出世말판』보다도 몃갑절 몃十갑절 자미잇고 아름다운 신식中에도 최신식 말판임니다. 여러말의 광고보다도 한번 갓가운 册에가서 구경만하여도 엇더케 조흔것인지를 아실것임니다.
어린사람들에게 주어서 조흔 것은 물론이어니와 먼저 당신이 닑으서도 유익하고 친구들과 가티노르서도 처음보게자미잇는 것임니다.
◇
말판드리고 신문드리고 册드리고 그러고 갑은단 十五錢! 겨우 담배한갑 임니다. 담배한갑산셈치고 돈 十五錢만 京城開闢社로보내십시오 잇흔날로 죽 세가지를 보내드림니다.
◇어린이册에대한 자세한 것은 이冊뒤것강에잇는 광고를 닑으십시요＜120＞
＜120＞