잡지명	별건곤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	京城各商店 陳列窓品評會 (Gyeongseong Storefront Display Appraisal)
필자	審査 安碩柱, 權九玄 (Judges An Seok-ju, Kwon Gu-hyeon)
기사형태	대담·좌담 (Discussion/Roundtable)

Gyeongseong Storefront Display Appraisal
						Judges An Seok-ju, Kwon Gu-hyeon

(Reporter) Since we're here, shall we start from the Tanhseonghsa (團成社) front? It's very cold, so it must be difficult to appraise. Or shall we start with the Deogeunhyeong Store (徳永商店, dry goods store)?
(An) Anything is fine.
(Kwon) Whatever is convenient for you.

(An) This store is located on a four-way intersection, right in front of a streetcar stop, so it's in a very busy area. Therefore, they must think about their display windows a lot. But I don't know if this store is under contract with some movie theater, but they've put up photos showing scenes from movie previews. I suppose they're trying to attract attention with unusual materials. But isn't it a bit ridiculous that they're using their valuable display window for the duties of another movie theater, instead of using it for advertising their own store's products?

(Kwon) Well, I don't know. It is true that the location of this store, at a crossroads where traffic flows in all directions, is very important. Therefore, they must think carefully about how they set up their display windows. However, like Mr. An said, putting up movie advertisement pictures as a background is a big mistake. Of course, they may have done it to make the inside of the window look more fancy, but since the eyes of the people passing by aren't so low, they can't help but laugh at the store's intentions. I hope they think more about it and arrange the inside of the window in a new style. This will be more beneficial for them than anyone else. <125>

(Reporter) Let's leave that as it is. Then how about the Yeolbyeon (越便) Seonil Women's Association (鮮一婦人商會)? Oh, they don't have a display window. It's a shady place, but to not have a display window in such a prime location? But instead of a display window, there are peculiar, painted gourds that catch the eye. Well, then, that's worth more than several display windows, right? Oops, that was a bit vulgar. Let's take that as a joke. Is there anything worth appraising? Hahaha.

(Kwon) Well, it's a bit strange that such a large association doesn't have a display window. It may sound out of place, but these days, it seems like a trend to put the words "women's store" (婦人商店) in the names of stores, whether in Seoul or in the countryside. Is a women's store a place where only women can buy things, or is it a place where only men can come? Isn't it funny? If you interpret it favorably, it's just the name of the store. But if you look deeper, the truth is that they're using the name "women" to try to sell more goods than others. This association probably named their association with the same underhanded thinking. So, they may not have installed a separate display window because they thought it was okay not to have one. But they don't know the meaning of gilding the lily (錦上添花). If they only know one thing and don't know the other, I'd say they're a bit lacking in intelligence. Hahaha.

(An) Perhaps because of its name, strange fragrance, or the fact that it's located in a shady place, they don't feel the need for a display window. But the building is also originally cramped, so that may be a reason as well.

(Reporter) The Hyeongpyeong Hat Store (和平帽子店) is too small, but they have a display window in name at least, so shall we appraise it?
(An) Well...
(Kwon) It's not even worth considering.

(Reporter) Eek. The display window of the Choseon Phonograph Company (朝鮮蓄音機商會) looks quite decent, doesn't it? What do you think? You two...

(An) I don't know what it looks like from up close, but it seems like they've avoided using it as a storage room. However, if they could isolate the background, it would have a rather novel and refreshing feel, but the colors seem a bit too strong to clearly show off the phonographs displayed in front. Moreover, the background and the picture are too bright, so it would be good to add some shadows there. And the white wrapping cloth on the bottom where the phonographs are lined up doesn't seem to have any connection to the background, the picture, or the color of the phonographs themselves. Those are the shortcomings. But overall, if they put a little more effort into the harmony of colors, it wouldn't be an embarrassing display window. But I wonder how that picture will affect our feelings. <126>

(Kwon) The display window of this company is eye-catching at first glance. The arrangement of the goods shows a relatively visible effort. However, not only is the overall color scheme clumsy, but the content is also too monotonous. It's not that monotony doesn't have its own merits, but since they're putting effort into decorating the display window, they need to do more research. Moreover, since Korean people don't run many phonograph stores like this, I think it would be good to appeal to the "Jingogae" (진고개, an old district in Seoul) friends as much as possible by putting in the effort. As much as possible, don't use things like cloth for the background, but use pictures that match the product to give it a new feel. In Japan, they use this method. It seems that most people in Korea don't know how to use pictures. Is this a matter of insufficient effort?

(Reporter) This is the An Byeong-il Store (安柄一商店), which only sells Korean needlework supplies. Needle cases, scissors, etc. What do you think of this display window?

(An) It doesn't even resemble a display window. There's no background, and it's just piled up haphazardly, like looking into the trousseau of an unmarried (kugajeong, 구가정) virgin. It's the store of someone with a dull personality.

(Kwon) You can't really call it a display window, but the scale of the arrangement has a neat taste, and it looks somewhat like a cute young woman's household goods, which isn't too unsightly to see.

(Reporter) This is the Dongsin Company (東新商會), a smokeless stove store. What do you think of this place?

(An) It seems that putting a thermometer in the background was a thoughtful touch, but because the color of the background is white, the color of the smokeless coal looks ugly, and somehow, a chill seems to be circulating inside the window. That's probably because the light of the background and the light of the stove are all cold colors. However, since the product is originally black, a bright background is inevitable, but I hope they will improve the color of the background.

(Kwon) I agree. However, since the products displayed in front are black, a bright background is necessary, but if you use a light that is too bright, as is the case now, it will kill the color of the products. I think it would be good to divide the left and right sides here and use "red" and "blue" as background colors.

(Reporter) Hong Seong-yeon Department Store (洪性淵百貨商店) - wow - baskets, bundles, and other miscellaneous goods. This place doesn't have a display window, but how would you appraise it?

(An) Since we're appraising display windows, let's just skip places that don't have them from now on... or just give a warning... But wouldn't it be better to get rid of those piles of stuff that are spread out on the street? If there's no place to put them, hang them from the eaves... Let's just pass by here with a joke. <127>

(Kwon) I agree. It looks like the belongings of a family that is going bankrupt and moving. Haha...

(Reporter) This place is, as you can see, the Dong-A Women's Association (東亞婦人商會). Since it's sunset and the sun is shining, I wonder if they've covered it with curtains because the color of the products will fade. Since they've covered it up so much, it seems like the products that have been displayed once will only be replaced with products for the new season when that season is over. Let's take a look, even if we have to hold a torch. Eek, this place is like a hospital with gynecology, pediatrics, internal medicine, and otolaryngology departments. Here too, there's a gold and silver department, a children's toy department, a trendy miscellaneous goods department, a watch and eyeglasses department, a Western art department, and an Oriental embroidery department - it's truly a department store of a hundred flowers and a thousand aspects. So - how would you appraise this?

(Kwon) Well, I don't know. It doesn't matter whether it's a department store or a ten-thousand-item store, but as I said somewhere before, this place is also a "women's" store. However, this association has added "display windows" (陳列窓) to the "women" (婦人) label, so it is smart. It's a smart association that knows one thing and isn't fooled by two things. However, it's not enough to just know and imitate. In other words, you have to cook the ingredients well. First of all, the arrangement of the eastern display window, the children's toy department, is wrong. If it's toys, you should only display toys and harmonize them with the background, but they've brought in unrelated items and stuck them in there, like a ghost in a virgin's room. Moreover, they've displayed too many items indiscriminately, so there's a risk that it will confuse the "children's" minds. And the display method in the gold and silver department is too childish. Do they think that just piling up a lot of goods is a good display? A display window is not just for advertising the store's goods, but it also has the greatest effect in guiding customers (guests). Therefore, in Japan, ordinary stores deliberately hire professional artists and change the window displays two or three times a month. I've even heard that Mitsukoshi Department Store (三越吳服店) has dozens of window display specialists. Of course, we can't expect to reach that level now, but it's necessary to change the goods often, and to put some effort into the background and other decorations, don't you think? I don't want to say any more. It would be better to remain silent - so, Mr. An, why don't you say something?

(An) The watch and eyeglasses department seems a bit more organized. There's nothing to say about the background. As Mr. Kwon said, instead of thinking about confusing the sign with pictures, they should definitely use pictures in the display window. And not only the background, but also the things that are laid on the bottom (all of the display windows) should be something that doesn't damage the products in various ways and that harmonizes with them. In any case, the background or the things that are laid down should be suitable for the light - that is, the constantly changing light of morning and evening, or day and night - and the products that are arranged should all be from the store's goods, so that the display window isn't made into a warehouse, but only the most important things, in other words, the best-selling and best-looking things, are selected and displayed, so that they can avoid such ugliness. Other than that, there's nothing more I want to say. <128>

(Reporter) Deogweon Store (德元商店) has two branches, so let's appraise all three stores at once.
(Kwon) (An) Let's do that.

(An) The things at Deogweon Store aren't very appealing. They may say that they don't focus on signs or display windows, but that while other stores are withering away, they are opening branches and running another big store together, but if they are complacent in that position, they will be like a frog in a well (井 안에 개구리). (I don't think that store would do that), but if they envy the prosperity of the other side of the big water or other distant places, they need to carefully consider where their development came from. In this sense, I hope they will be more faithful to the display windows. But the Deogweon second branch has a rabbit turning a waterwheel, like the Fuyi Store (富一商店) next door. I don't know if it's imitating the way the word "Jeongmyo (丁卯)" was drawn by putting rabbits upside down and arranging them on the top of the first page of a newspaper's New Year's issue this year, but that kind of window display is already outdated, or it's just advertising the power of electricity that makes it turn. It's not a request from the electric company, but...

(Kwon) That's right. Not to mention the main branch, none of them have anything that resembles a window display. Not only Deogweon Store, but more than half of the other stores seem to have made or drawn rabbits and used them as the entirety of their window displays, which of course means "Jeongmyo (丁卯)," but that's something to try out for a short time in early January, but to leave it as it is until the end of the month, thinking that it's a big window display, is a tasteless thing to do. If they don't have any other materials for the window display, that would be a pity, but if not, they're being too foolish. I have nothing else to say.

(Reporter) There are so many eyeglasses and watch stores, and they're all so similar, so let's appraise them all together. Myeongantang main branch (明眼堂), Gwangmyeongtang (光明堂), Seoul Watch Store (서울時計店), Jungangtang (中央堂), Bosintang Watch Shop (普信堂時計鋪), etc.

(Kwon) Even if we appraised each one separately, we'd just be saying the same thing, so it's good to appraise them all together. Not only is there not a single place that has a noticeable window display, but in some ways, it would be better if they didn't have a display window at all. Why? Because even if it's just a display window in name, there should be some effort put into displaying the products, but it's a common practice to line them up in a row, like a diagram of calisthenics (體操法圖解格, 체조법도해격), and even if it's a display window, there should be a background that complements the color of the products, but they're using old rags (헌「넉마」) as the only background, and that's the norm for them. I don't know if they're doing it to show the inside of the store so that they don't get robbed, but it's really unpleasant to see the dark interior of the store through the display window. They're all doing the same thing as if they've made a promise, so wouldn't it be better to make a promise and pay attention to the window displays? This is probably something that they need to do for themselves more than anyone else. <129>

(An) Mr. Kwon has said a lot, so I'll stop. I agree.

(Reporter) Fuyi Store is similar to the second branch of Deogweon Store, so let's skip it and appraise the Goryeo Foreign Goods Company (高麗洋行).

(Kwon) This store is well-located, and the structure of the display window is divided into left and right sides, which is quite store-like. However, as I've always said, the technique of window display is not only childish, but it's also so inferior that it's not even worth considering. Leaving aside everything else, first of all, in the east window, they've displayed children's toys as the main focus, but they've also hung women's parasols - and even vulgar summer clothes (夏陽洋, 하양양) sloppily, which is one of the blunders, and they've drawn and put up a fashionable new woman (新女子, 신여자) from a movie billboard on the right wall, which is a meaningless act that has nothing to do with children. Of course, the purpose of window display is to attract the attention of customers, but I think you should pay attention to the arrangement of the products to some extent, according to their nature and use.

(An) Moreover, they've hung brown jackets (「고동색」 「짜켓」) on a black background in the west window, so I think they need to have some knowledge of color. Will a brown jacket stand out against a black background? Wouldn't a red jacket (붉은「짜켓」) be warmer and stand out more? It's not enough to just have a form (型) in the window display, you need to have a background, and even if you just put up anything as a background, or draw a picture, you need to pay attention to the colors, even if you hang or stick other things instead of pictures. If you pay attention to this, you'll see much better results.

(Reporter) The Sechang Western Shoe Store (世昌洋靴店) is a rather large store, so shall we appraise it?

(An) Judging by the fact that the display window is large and high, they should be able to use it as they please, so why is the neglect so severe <130>? They've put out piles of leather covered in layers of dust, and next to it, they've made a small building model, so I'd like to ask what the meaning is.

(Kwon) That's right. It's a mistake to just pile up piles of black leather in the display window. People who pass by won't even think it's a shoe store. Since the name of the store is so well-known, they should take some responsibility for the window displays, which would be much more effective for their own development.

(Reporter) What about the Hong Seok-hu Clinic (洪錫厚診察所), also known as Gwangansa (光眼社)?

(An) The entrance itself looks very clean, but the display windows attached to the pillars on the left and right sides have a somewhat cramped feel. That's probably because the space is cramped. But if they made a separate and clean stand for things like foreign magazines that are spread out there, and made a background, or put a curtain behind it, it would cover the pillars and the products displayed in front would be seen more clearly.

(Kwon) Well, I don't know. They've made small display window-shaped fixtures on the left and right sides of the clinic entrance, and they've displayed things like glasses and fountain pens, and they've also written the name "Gwangansa (光眼社)" in a special font, so I don't know if it's run directly by the clinic, but in any case, I can only see it as a cramped act.

(Reporter) Then, what about the fountain pen store, Dongweon Company (東元商會)?

(An) Displaying a large fountain pen in the display window is eye-catching at first, but it would be better to hang it horizontally. Even if you put it up, if you put it up sideways like that, wouldn't it be awkward if you didn't fill the empty space with something else? If you insist on putting it up, it would be better to put it up in the middle and change the background to a different color.

(Kwon) I agree.

(Reporter) This time, it's a gold and silver shop, and there are several of them, so let's appraise them all at once. Changsin Company (昌信商會), Hwasin Company (和新商會), etc.

(Kwon) Gold and silver shops are places that especially fascinate the eyes of women, both in the capital and in the countryside. Moreover, gold and silver jewelry is probably the only product that Korean people still manage with power. However, if they are complacent in this situation, they will soon lose their central power to others. In this respect, I believe that the managers of this industry should pay attention and make concrete efforts to decorate things like display windows. However, it is a pity for them that it seems that there is not a single place that has put effort into window display when you look at it in general.

(An) It seems that there is a deep connection with watch and eyeglass stores, and it's a bit of a point to think about that they always put up mosquito net curtains that are used in the summer in the background. <131> Luxury goods are always for people with money, and if you want to take a lot of their money, you need to have a satisfactory or seductive window display. Gold and silver's shine alone cannot attract the eyes of rich people who are tired of splendor...

(Reporter) Let's put the Western clothing stores together as well. They're all so similar.

(An) Whatever you want. Western clothing stores' display windows are mainly used as warehouses. And it seems like they're using them as a place to prop up the Western clothes that have already been ordered. It's good to kill two birds with one stone, but that's just exposing the poverty of the contents to others. Among them, the Bosin Western Clothing Store (普信洋服店) seems a bit better because of its large display window or the arrangement of the products.

(Kwon) I agree.

(Reporter) Let's put the paper stores together as well. Gyeongseong Paper Store (京城紙物店) and several other places, I mean.
"An" "Kwon" Not worth seeing.

(Reporter) Then let's put the Western shoe stores together as well.
"Kwon" "An" They're all the same.

(Reporter) Isn't the Baek Company (白商會) worth looking at separately? The display, or something...

(An) There are few places that display this much as a fabric store. It's not that it's equipped with everything, but the color matching of the silk that's lined up is plausible.

(Kwon) Well, I don't know. The window display is made up of simple products, but the color arrangement is worth seeing. I hope they research and change the color of the floor.

(Reporter) What about the Geumgang Company (金剛商會)?

(An) The Geumgang Company has a large window display for a general store. The arrangement itself seems a bit more organized. But isn't the arrangement a bit too complicated? And I hope they focus on the selection of the background. This is what I mean about the north window. The south window is vastly different from the north window.

(Kwon) The window display of this store, the left window is not worth seeing, but the right window shows some effort in window display that makes it worth seeing to some extent. Among the general store display windows that I've seen so far, it's probably the best. However, it would be good to put a picture (「그림」) or something on top of it to add a more beautiful taste.

(Reporter) This time, it's the Hwanggeumjeong branch of Cheonil Pharmacy (天一藥房 黃金町), but there are so many pharmacies, so let's just say it all together.

(An) Among the pharmacies, there are few that have display windows, but this place is a bit better. If there was just a background, it would be worth looking at.

(Kwon) However, they've used mirrors to hide the pillars, and the arrangement of the medicines shows a considerable amount of effort.

(Reporter) This time, it's a bit out of the way, but since there's nothing impressive among the things we've seen so far <132>, let's appraise the Jeondong Samgwangtang (典洞三光堂).

(An) Other than that, there's nothing to talk about, but the white letters that are cut out and stuck on the black background are a bit noticeable, but it's a bit funny that they seem to be calmly leaving the letters with missing strokes as they are.

(Kwon) There's nothing else to talk about.

(Reporter) By the way, it's a bit late, but what do you think of the photo studios you've seen so far?

(An) It's common for them to only display photos of kisaeng (기생), fake female students, and vagrants, so it seems like they only take pictures of those people, and ordinary people might feel awkward entering. Among them, the Taehwa Photo Studio (泰化寫眞館) has put out a picture of a naked woman with only a swimsuit covering her waist in this cold weather, so it looks cold to people in winter and the effect of the display will be lost.

(Kwon) Displaying the beauty of the people who were photographed before showing the photographic skills, centering on the photos of women or delinquent teenagers, may be an unavoidable thing in terms of business policy, but it's an obscene means that can only be seen as having the head and tail intertwined. I hope they'll pay attention to it in the future.

(Reporter) Wouldn't it be good to appraise the hat stores all at once this time?
"An" "Kwon" Not worth seeing.

(Reporter) What about the Yuyak drugstore (柳屋) in Gwanhun-dong (寬勳洞)?

(An) It's very cozy. The intersection of the colors of the background and the arrangement of the products looks very calm and elegant. It wouldn't be easy to decorate such a small display window that much.

(Kwon) I agree.

(Reporter) Then, now that it seems like there's nothing worth appraising no matter how much we look, what was the best thing you've seen so far? And how about you give your impressions as well?

(An) I'd say the Joseon Phonograph Company (朝鮮蓄音機商會) near Pagoda Park (빠고다 공원) and the Yuyak (柳屋) in Gwanhun-dong (寬勳洞).

(Kwon) Well, I don't know. Even if we just compare it to the nearby "Jingogae" (진고개), it seems that it hasn't escaped the childish level in general. But among them, if you want me to say something better, I'd like to mention the Geumgang Company (金剛商會) and the Baek Company (白商會) in Namdaemun-tong (南大門通) in addition to what Mr. An said. But if I say so, in the end, it's just something that people with money can talk about. I can't feel any other interest.

(An) That's right, what's so interesting about appraising display windows that have nothing to do with people who don't have money? And there's nothing to say about impressions, and I know that it's rather embarrassing.

(Reporter) I'm sorry for making you suffer so much in this harsh cold. - (End) - <133>

**Named Entities**

團成社	Tanhseonghsa
徳永商店	Deogeunhyeong Store
鮮一婦人商會	Seonil Buin Sanghwe
越便	Yeolbyeon
和平帽子店	Hyeongpyeong Mojajeom
朝鮮蓄音機商會	Choseon Chukeumgi Sanghwe
安柄一商店	An Byeong-il Sanghoe
東新商會	Dongsin Sanghwe
洪性淵百貨商店	Hong Seong-yeon Baekhwajeom
東亞婦人商會	Dong-A Buin Sanghwe
三越吳服店	Mitsukoshi Department Store
德元商店	Deogweon Sanghoe
富一商店	Buil Sanghoe
明眼堂	Myeongantang
光明堂	Gwangmyeongtang
서울時計店	Seoul Sigejeom
中央堂	Jungangtang
普信堂時計鋪	Bosintang Sigyepo
高麗洋行	Goryeo Yanghaeng
世昌洋靴店	Sechang Yanghwajeom
洪錫厚診察所	Hong Seok-hu Jinchalso
光眼社	Gwangansa
東元商會	Dongweon Sanghwe
昌信商會	Changsin Sanghwe
和新商會	Hwasin Sanghwe
普信洋服店	Bosin Yangbokjeom
京城紙物店	Gyeongseong Jimuljeom
白商會	Baek Sanghoe
金剛商會	Geumgang Sanghwe
天一藥房	Cheonil Yakbang
黃金町	Hwanggeumjeong
典洞三光堂	Jeondong Samgwangtang
泰化寫眞館	Taehwa Sajingwan
柳屋	Yu-yak
寬勳洞	Gwanhun-dong
빠고다 공원	Ppagoda Gongweon
南大門通	Namdaemun-tong



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	京城各商店 陳列窓品評會
필자	審査 安碩柱, 權九玄
기사형태	대담·좌담

京城各商店 陳列窓品評會
						審査 安碩柱, 權九玄
(기자) 어대 기왕이면 團成社 압부터하십시다. 이거 날이 몹시 추어서 평하시기에 퍽 곤란하시겟슴니다. 그러면 德永商店(양품점)부터 해보실까요.
(안) 아무리나 하십시다.
(권) 편한대로 하시지오.
(안) 이 商店은 네거리에 선 만큼 또는 전차정류장 바로 압힌 그만큼 사람 왕래가 자진 고로 퍽 주요한 목새 처한 까닭에 진열창에 대하야서도 여러 가지로 생각하여야 할 商店이올시다. 그런데 이 商店은 어느 활동사진상설관의 촉탁격의 商店인지는 모르겟지만 영화예고의 엇던 「씨-ㄴ」을 백히인 사진을 붓처 노앗스니, 자기따는 이상한 재료로서 사람들의 시선을 끌랴는 목적인지도 모르겟슴니다. 상당히 쓸모잇는 그만한 진열창이 자기네 商店의 상품광고 하는데에 사용하는 것 보다도 다른 상설관 임무에만 충실한대서야 좀 우숩지 안슴닛가.
(권) 글세올시다. 안인게 안이라 이 商店의 위치는 사통오달한 일각에 잇는이 만치 상당이 중요한 곳임니다. 따라서 진열창의 장치갓흔 것도 깁히 생각하야서 하지 안으면 안이 될 것임니다. 그런데 지금 安군의 말과 갓치 활동사진광고 그림을 배경삼아 걸어 논 것은 큰 실책임니다. 그야 물론 창내를 좀더 화려케 하자는 의미에서 그랫겟지마는 지나 단이는 사람들의 안목이 그다지 低劣하지 안은 이상 商店의 용의에 비웃지 안을 수 업겟지요. 압흐로 좀 더 생각을 하야서 새로운 형식으로 창내 배치를 하기 바라고 십슴니다. 이것은 아마 누구보다도 자기네를 위한 이익이 되겟지요.<125>
(기자) 그건 그럿타고 하시고 그러면 그 越便인 鮮一婦人商會는 엇더하신지요. 저런, 진열창이 업네. 그늘진 곳은 그늘진 곳이지만 저만한 要路一隅를 점령한 곳에 진열창이 업다니? 그러나 진열창이 업는 대신, 분 칠한 박아지갓흔 진기한 體가 얼는거리네. 올치 그럿타면 진열창의 용무 몃배를 능가하겟군-앗차 이건 좀 쌍스런 소리햇군. 그건 우슴의-ㅅ소리로 치고라도, 무엇 평해 보실만 한가요? 하하하하
(권) 글세올시다. 저만큼 큰 商會에서 진열창이 업다는 것은 좀 이상스런 노릇이올시다. 말이 좀 동떠러짐니다마는 요새들 흔이 보면 서울이나 시골이나 할 것 업시 무슨 부인商店 무슨 부인商店들 하고 부인 二字를 내 걸어 놋는게 한 유행갓치 보입듸다. 부인商店이니 女子만 와서 물건을 사 달라는 말인지 부인商店이니 남자만 오라는 말인지-우습지 안슴닛가? 그야 선의로 해석할라면 그 商店의 「일홈」에 불과하지요. 그러나 그 속을 다시 한번 드려다 보면 女子라는 일홈을 팔아서 남보다 좀 더 만히 물건을 팔아보자는 야심이 속에 숨어 잇는 것은 사실일 것임니다. 지금 이商會도 아마 그와 갓흔 비열한 생각에서 商會일홈을 지은 것 갓슴니다. 그러니까 따로 진열창 갓흔 것은 업서도 좃타는 의미에서 설치를 안이 햇는지 모를 노릇이지요. 그러나 錦上의 添花라는 격을 모르는 商會임니다. 하나만 알고 또 둘을 모른다면, 생각이 좀 저능하다고 보겟지요. 하하하하
(안) 그 일홈으로나 이상한 芳臭로나 또는 그늘진 곳에 처한만큼, 진열창의 필요를 늣기지 안는 모양인지요. 그러나 집이 원래가 협착한 까닭도 까닭일 것도 갓슴니다.
(기자) 和平帽子店은 너무 적지만 명색이라도 진열창이 잇스니 평하실까요.
(안) 글세요.
(권) 문제도 안이 됨니다.
(기자) 이-크. 朝鮮蓄音機商會의 진열창은 제법 그럴 듯 하지 안슴닛가. 엇더 하신지오. 두분은...
(안) 이 압흐로 보아가면 엇덜지 모르지만 대개 창고 대용의 진열창은 면한 것 갓슴니다. 그러나 그 배경만 독립시킨다면 좀 기발하고도, 청신한 맛이 잇슴니다마는 그 압헤 진열해 노흔 축음기를 확실히 드러 내기에는 색채가 좀 강열한 듯 함니다. 그뿐 안이라 그 배경과 그 그림이 너무 광명하여서 거긔에 「影色」을 너헛스면 조흘 듯 함니다. 그리고 축음기를 느러노흔 그 밋바닥에 흰 褓는 배경과, 그림과 축음기 자체와의 색조에 대한 아무런 관련이 업는 듯 함니다. 결점을 말하자면 그런데 통트러 말하자면 색의 諧調에 대하야 조곰만 힘을 더하얏스면 그리 붓그럽지 안은 진열창이올시다. 그러치만 그 그림이 우리네들의 감정에 엇더 할지요.
(권) 이 商會의 진열창은 선 듯 보기에 사람의 시선을 끌만치 <126> 되얏슴니다. 그 물품의 배열갓흔 것은 비교적 노력한 빗히 보임니다. 그러나 전체로 보아서 색조가 좀 서투르게 되얏슬 뿐만 안이라 내용에 잇서서도 너무 단조한 嫌이 잇슴니다. 그야 단조한데에도 一理를 갓지 안는 것은 안이로되 이왕 진열창飾에 用心을 하는 이면 좀 더 연구를 하야서 할 필요가 잇슬 것임니다. 더구나 축음기기商店 갓흔 우리 朝鮮사람의 경영이 별로 업는 이때이니 될 수 잇는대로는 노력을 하야서 「진고개」 친구들에게 하는 것이 조흘줄 암니다. 배경 갓흔 것은 될 수 잇는 대로는 포목갓흔 것을 쓰지말고 그 상품과 조화될 만한 「그림」을 사용 하는 것이 새로운 맛이 잇슬 것 임니다. 日本 갓흔데에는 이런 방법을 취함니다. 朝鮮서는 대개가 「그림」을 이용할 줄 모르는 모양입듸다. 이만한 정도불급이라 할까요!
(기자) 이 곳은 安柄一商店인데 朝鮮 구가정 바누질고리거리만 파납지오. 수버선, 가위, 등...이 진열창은 엇덤닛가.
(안) 진열창다웁지도 안슴니다. 배경이라는 것도 업고 그저, 버려논 것도 차국차국 싸하 논 것이라던지, 모든 게 다-시집 안 간(구가정)처녀의 세간 속 드려다 보는 격이올시다. 따분-한 성격을 가진듯한 이의 商店이로군요.
(권) 진열창이라고 볼 수는 업슴니다마는 물건을 배치한 규모가 아담한 맛이 만치 귀여운 새악씨의 살림사리 되는 듯한 맛이 보기에 과히 숭업지 안케 된 것 갓슴니다.
(기자) 이 곳은 無煙竈商인 東新商會로군요. 이 곳은 엇덧습닛가?
(안)배경에 온도표 갓흔 것이 좀 생각한 점이라 할 수 잇슬 듯 하나, 그 배경의 색이 흰바탕이 되여서 그 무연탄의 색이 추해 보이고-엇잿던지 그 창 안에 냉기가 도라 보임니다. 그것은 배경의 빗치나, 竈의 빗치 다-寒色이 되여서 그러켓지요. 그러나 상품이 원래가 검은 빗인 고로 배경의 밝은 비츤 피치 못 할 일이지만 배경의 비츨 좀 개량하얏스면 함니다.
(권) 동감이올시다. 그런데 압헤 진열한 물품이 검으니만치 배경의 빗이 밝은 것은 필요할지나, 지금과 갓치 너무 밝은 빗을 사용하게 되면 도로혀 물건의 빗을 죽이게 됨니다. 여긔에는 아마 좌우를 난와서 「紅」 「靑」 이색으로 배경빗을 삼앗스면 좃켓슴니다.
(기자) 洪性淵百貨商店-야-광주리며 보구니며 따는 백화상이로군. 이 곳은 진열창은 업스나, 엇더케 평해 보시렴닛가.
(안) 진열창평이니까, 창이 업는 곳은 이제부터는 그대로 너머 가지오...권고만에 그처 버리던지...그러나 길가에 우불령 좌불령 벌려노흔 산덤이 갓흔 그것들은 일즉이 치워 버리는 것이 엇덜지오. 치울대가 업스면 추녀끄테 <127> 죽-매다라노커나...여긔는 그저 농담으로 지내 갑시다.
(권) 동감임니다. 엇지 보면 망해 가는 집의 이사짐갓슴니다그려. 하하...
(기자) 이 곳은 보시다십히 東亞婦人商會올시다그려. 석양이 되어서, 해가 빗최이니까 상품의 색이 퇴색할가 바서 휘장으로 가린것인가, 휘장으로 잔득 가려노핫스니, 아마한번 진열해 노흔 상품은 그 계절이 다 가야 새 계절맛는 상품을 진열해 놋는 모양이로군. 자-처들고라도 보십시다. 익크 이 곳은 병원에도 부인과니 소아과이니, 내과이니, 이과이니 하는 세음으로 여긔도 金銀科, 소아완구과, 유행잡화과, 시계안경과, 泰西미술과, 동양수예과-그야말로 백화만화점이오 다방면점이로군. 자-이것은 엇더케 평하시겟슴닛가?
(권) 글세올시다. 그야 百貨든 萬貨든 따로문제될 것 업겟지마는 먼저도 어대서 말하얏거니와 이 곳도 「부인」商店이올시다그려. 그러나 이 商會는 「부인」이라는 錦上에 「진열창」이라는 添花가 된 새음임니다. 한가지도 알고 두가지 마긔 안 영리한 商會올사다. 그러나 알고서 흉내만 내여서는 안이 되는 법임니다. 즉 말하자면 안 그 물건을 잘 요리해야겟지요. 첫재로 동편진열창 즉 소아완구부의 그 배열이 글넛슴니다. 완구면 완구만을 가지고 배경과 조화되도록 진열하얏스면 조흘터인데 얼토당토 안은 딴 물건을 내여 끼워 노앗스니 처녀방에 「몽다리」귀신이 나와선 것 갓슴니다. 그 뿐만 안이라 물건을 너머도 함부로 만히 늘어 노앗슴으로 「어린이」들이 보면 고흔 정신을 현혹케 할 염려가 업지 안슴니다. 그러고 金銀部엗 그 진열방법이 너머도 유치함니다. 아마 물건만 만이 싸노흐면 조흔 진열인 줄로 아는 모양이지요? 진열창이라는 것은 그 商店의 물품을 광고하는데에만 그치는 것이 안이라 곳손님(객)을 안내하는데에 가장 큰 효과를 갓는 것이올시다. 그럼으로 日本갓흔데에를 보면 웬만한 商店에서는 일부러 전문미술가를 두고서 일개월에도 이삼차식을 고처서 窓飾을 함니다. 三越 吳服店에는 窓飾전문가를 수십여명이나 두엇다는 말까지 들엇습니다. 물론 거긔까지 밋츠기야 지금 안저서 바랄 수는 업겟지마는, 물건갓흔 것도 좀 자조 밧구어서 노코 또 배경이라던지 기타 장식 갓흔 것도 좀 用心을 할 필요가 잇지 안겟습닛가? 나는 더 말하고 십지 안슴니다. 차라리 침묵을 지키는 편이 날 것 갓슴니다-그러면 安군이나 말슴해 보시지요?
(안) 그 중에 시계안경부가 조금 정돈이 된 듯 십슴니다. 배경에 대하여서는 말 할 건덕지가 업슴니다. 權군 말슴모양으로 간판에 그림을 혼란하게 할 생각말고 진열창에 『그림』을 반드시 사용하도록 하엿스면 좃켓슴니다. 그리고 배경뿐 아니라 그 밋바닥에 (진열창전부)까는<128> 것도 그 상품을 여러 가지 모로 抵傷되지 안는 조화되는 것으로 깔고, 엇잿던지 그 배경이거나 까는 것이거나 광선-즉 조석이나 주야의 쉴새 업시 변하는 광선에다-해당한 것으로 하엿스면 조흘 줄 알며 배열하는 상품도 그 商店물품으로 전부 내여 노하서 진열창을 창고로 맨들지 말고 그 중에 제일 중요한 것 다시 말하자면 제일 만히 팔리고 보기에 제일 조흔 것만 몃개 선택하여서 진열하엿스면 그런 추태를 면할 것 갓슴니다. 그 외에는 더 말하고 십흔 것이 업슴니다.
(기자) 德元商店은 지점이 두 개나 잇스니 三店을 통트러서 한꺼번에 평하시지오.
(권) (안)그럽시다.
(안) 德元商店읫 것은 별로히 그리 탐탁치 안슴니다. 자기네 말은 간판이나 진열창에 주력치 안어도 다른 商店이 시드러 가는 동안에 지점이들이오 다른 큰 商店 하나도 함께 경영해 나간다고 氣焰을 토할지 모를 일이지만 그만한 지위에 올라서서, 자만자족한다면 우물 안에 개고리 격일터이니까(그 商店이 그럴리는 만무하겟지만) 큰 물 건너 편이라던지 그 외의 더 먼곳의 번창을 부러워할진댄, 그들의 그만한 발전이 어대서 원인한 것인가를 신중히 고려할 필요가 잇다고 함니다. 이런 의미에서 진열창에 더 충실하엿스면 함니다. 그런데 德元 제이지점의 것은 그 엽집 富一商店 모양으로 「톡기」가 레물박휘를 돌리는 것을 해 노앗스니, 금년 정초에 모신문 신년호 제일항 꼭대기에다가 톡기를 업드려 노코, 깍꾸로 세워노코 재처노코 해서 『정묘』라는 글자를 그려노흔 그것을 모방함인지는 모르지만 그러한 飾窓式은 벌서 시대 뒤진 방식이요, 또는 그것을 돌리게 하는 전기의 힘만을 광고하여 줄 뿐, 전기회사의 부탁은 아니겟지마는...
(권) 그럿슴니다. 본지점을 따로 말 할 것 업시 통틀어 노코 하나도 진열창식다운 것이 업슴니다. 德元商店 뿐만 안이라 다른 商店에서도 반수이상이나 모다가 『톡기』를 혹은 만들어서 혹은 그려서 이것으로 창식의 전부를 삼은 모양들이나, 그것은 물론 『정묘』를 의미한 것이라고 하겟지마는, 그것도 일월 상순에나 잠간들 시험삼아 해 볼 노릇이지 이게 무슨 큰 창식이나 되겟다고 달을 넘기기까지에 그대로 둔다는 것은 滋味업는 일이라고 생각함니다. 달리 창식재료가 업서서 그대로 둔 것이라면 가엽슨 일일 것이오 그럿치 안타면 너무나 우둔한 짓들이겟슴니다. 달러는 아무것도 말할거리가 업슴니다.
(기자) 안경시계商店은 하도 만코 또 비슷비슷하니 다-함께 평을 하시지오. 明眼堂 본지점, 光明堂, 서울時計店, 中央堂, 普信堂時計鋪 등이올시다.
(권) 한 개식 뛰여서 평을 한 대도 갓흔 말 밧게는 나올 것이 업슴니까 합평을 하는 것도 좃켓슴니다. 한 곳도 눈에 띄일만치 <129> 창식이 된 곳이 업는 것은 그만두고라도 엇던 의미로 보아서는 차라리 진열창 갓지 안타고 해도 좃켓슴니다. 웨 그러냐 하면 그래도 명색이 진열창이거든 다소간이라도, 상품을 진열하기에 용심한 맛이 잇서야 하겟는데 體操法圖解格으로, 일례이례삼례사례로 꼬리를 마조 물러서 늘어노흔 것이 통례의 하나이요, 진열창이거든 반듯이 그 상품의 빗을 보조할 만한 색 가진 배경이 잇서야겟는데 헌「넉마」갓흔 「카-텐」자락만으로 유일한 배경을 삼앗스니 이것이 통례의 그들임니다. 밧겟 물건을 도적마즐가봐 뵈이도록 하느라고들 그랫는지는 모르나 진열창을 통하야 껌껌한 商店의 속이 다 들여다 보이는 것은 참으로 불쾌하기 짝이 업는 노릇임니다. 일제히 약속이나 한 것처럼 다 갓치 이러하니 참으로 일제히 약속을 한번 하고서 창식에 주의를 하는 것이 엇덜넌지요. 아마 이것은 누구보다도 자기네 위하야서 필요한 일이겟지요.
(안) 權군이 만히 말하엿스니 고만 두렴니다. 동감임니다.
(기자) 富一商店은 德元 제이지점과 비슷하니 고만 두시고 高麗洋行을 평해 보시럄닛가.
(권) 이 商店은 위치도 위치어니와 진열창도 그 구조는 좌우에 난우어 잇는 맛이 상당히 商店격으로 되야 잇슴니다. 그러나 늘 말해온 것과 맛찬가지로 창식상 그 수법이 유치하다는 이보다도 아주 문제거리도 되지 안을만치 졸열하기 짝이 업슴니다. 다른 것은 구만 두고라도, 첫재로 동창에는 소아들의 완구를 중심삼아 진열해 노은데다가 부인용의 양산-게다가 도철겨운 夏陽洋을 너접은하게 걸어 노앗스니 그것도 失態의 한가지요, 우편벽에 다는 활동사진간판의 유행식 신女子를 배경삼아 그려 붓첫스니 그것도 아동들과는 하등의 관련이 업는 무의미한 짓이 안이라고는 볼 수가 업슴니다. 물론 진열창식의 목적이 고객의 시선을 끄으는 데에 잇다고는 하겟지마는, 그래도 어느 정도까지는 상품의 그 성질과 용도를 따라서 상당히 배열상 주의를 하지 안으면 안이 될 줄로 압니다.
(안) 그뿐 아니라 서편 飾窓에는 흑배경에 「고동색」 「짜켓」을 거러 노핫스니 색채에 대한 상식이 필요한 줄 생각함니다. 검은 바탕에 「고동색」 「짜켓」이 얼는 시각에 부듸칠 것인가? 바로 붉은「짜켓」갓흔 것이 퍽 溫味가 잇슬 것 갓고 얼는 띌 것 갓지 안슴닛가. 식창에는 『型』만 잇서도 안되고 배경이 잇서야 하며 배경이라고 아무거나 처놋는다던지, 또는 그림을 그려 붓친다 하드래도 그뿐 아니라 그림 대신 다른 물건을 달거나 붓척놋는다 하드래도 색소에 대한 주의가 필요할 것임니다. 여기에 주의하엿스면 훨신 조흔 효과를 볼 줄 암니다.
(기자) 世昌洋靴店이라면 좀 큰 商店이니 어대 좀 평해 보실까요.
(안) 그 진열창은 큰 것이라던지, 그 놉히가 놉흔 것을 보아서는 뜻대로 이용할 수가 잇슬터인데 저러케 학대가 심할가요<130>. 먼지가 켜켜로 안즌 피혁뭉치를 내여노코, 그 엽헤 소형의 건물모형을 해여 노핫스니, 그 의미가 어대 잇는지 좀 무러보고 십슴니다.
(권) 그럿슴니다. 검으충충한 피혁뭉치만을 진열창에다 싸하놋는다는 것은 좀 잘못임니다. 못처럼 지나가는 사람이 보면 양화商店이라고 보지 못하게 되얏슴니다. 商店의 일홈이 그만큼이라도 널리 들어나니만치 진열창식갓흔 것이라도 좀 책임을 지고 하얏스면 자기네의 발전을 위하야서라도 훨신 효과가 잇슬줄로 암니다.
(기자) 洪錫厚診察所 즉 光眼社는 엇덧슴니까?
(안) 드러가는 문 갓흔 것은 퍽 깨끗해 보이나 그 좌우편 기둥에 붓쳐서 맨든 진열창은 좀 군색한 감이 업지 안슴니다. 그것은 장소의 협착한 까닭이겟지요. 그런데, 거긔에 외국잡지 펴 논 것 갓흔 「캐특폭」을 다른 형식으로 깨끗하게 따로 맨들어서 세우고 배경을 맨드러 세우던지, 휘장갓흔 것을 뒤에다 처 노핫스면 기둥도 가리우고 그 압헤 진열한 물품이 선명히 보힐 것 갓슴니다.
(권) 글세올시다. 진찰소 입구 좌우편에다가 조고마하게 진열창형의 장치를 맨들어 노코 안경과 만년필 갓흔 것을 진열한데다가 「光眼社」라고 상호를 특서하야 노핫스니, 진찰소의 직영인지 안인지는 모르나 엇잿든 군색한 짓들이라고 밧게 불 수 업슴니다.
(기자) 그러면 이번에는 만년필상 東元商會는 엇덧슴닛가.
(안) 대형의 만년필을 진열창에 내여 논 것은 얼는 띄우나, 그것을 가로 다라 놋는 것이 좃슴니다. 세운다 하드래도 그러케 엽흐로 세워 놋는다면 그 빈 공간을 다른 것으로 채우지 안으면 어색하지 안슴닛가. 반다시 세워노하야 한다고 고집하면 가운대로 세워노코 그 배경을 다른 빗으로 고첫스면 좃켓슴니다.
(권) 동감임니다.
(기자) 이번에는 금은상인데 그것도 여러개이니 한껏번에 평해 보시지요.
昌信商會 라던지 和新商會 등이 올시다.
(권) 금은상이라 하면 경향을 물론하고 특히 부인들의 이목을 황홀케 하는 곳임니다. 그 뿐만 안이라도 아즉까지 朝鮮사람의 경영으로 세력을 지지하는 상품은 금은패물일것임니다. 그러나 이러한 현상에서 自衿自足을 하얏다가는 未久에 남의 손으로 중심세력을 빼앗기고 말 것임니다. 이 점에 잇서서 斯界의 경영자들은 맛당히 주의를 하야써 진열창 갓흔 것이라도 좀 구체적으로 장치에 노력을 하지 안으면 안될 줄로 밋슴니다. 그러나 대개 살펴보면 한 곳도 창식에 用心한 곳이 업는 듯 십흔 것은 그네들을 위하야 애석한 노릇이라고 하겟슴니다.
(안) 시계안경과 무슨 깁흔 인연이 잇는 것 갓치 항용배경에 여름에 쓰는 망사휘장을 처 논 것이 좀 생각할 점이 올시다<131>. 사치품이란 항상 돈 잇는 사람들의 소용인데 그네들의 돈을 만히 빼아스랴면 그네들의 눈에 흡족하도록 또는 혹 다른 유혹적 식창이 필요함니다. 금은의 광채만으로는 華美에 저진 배부른 사람들의 눈을 끌 수 업는 고로...
(기자) 양복점도 한데 모라서 하시지요. 다 -비슷비슷하니요.
(안) 아모리나 하십시다. 양복점들이야 창고대용을 주체로 한 진열창이올시다. 그리고 이미 주문맛흔 양복을 骨키워서 세우는 곳으로 대용하는 세음갓슴니다. 일거양득도 조흐나, 그것은 남에게 내용빈약의 폭로에 불과할 것이지요. 그 중에 普信洋服店이 그 진열창이 큰 탓으로 또는 그 물품배치만이 좀 나흔 듯 십흠니다.
(권) 동감이올시다.
(기자) 紙物商도 다-갓흐니 함께 평하시지요. 京城紙物店 외 여러곳 말슴이올시다.
「안」 「권」 보잘 것 업슴니다.
(기자) 그러면 양화점도 함께 하시지요.
『權』 『安』 그것도 다 그 류이올시다.
『기자』 白商會는 따로 해 볼만 하지 안어요? 그 진열한 것이라던지...
(안) 포목전으로는 이만큼 진열한 곳이 드믐니다. 구비하게 되엿다는 것이 아니라, 그 비단을 느러노흔 그 색조맛침이 그럴 듯 함니다.
(권) 글세올시다. 진열장식은 단순한 상품만으로 된 것이면서도 그 색조적 배열에 잇서서 볼 맛이 잇슴니다. 바닥의 빗만을 좀더 연구하야 밧구어 노앗스면 조켓슴니다.
(기자) 金剛商會는 엇더하심닛가.
(안) 金剛商會는 잡화상으로는 규모잇는 식창이올시다. 그 배치만이 좀 정돈된 듯하다는 말슴이올시다. 그러나 그 배열이 너무 복잡한 감이 업는지오. 그리고 배경의 선택에 주력만 하엿스면 조켓슴니다. 이것은 북창말슴이올시다. 남창은 북창에 비하야 아조 현격한 차이가 잇슴니다.
(권) 이 商店의 진열창식은 향하야 좌창은 볼 것 엄스나 우창만은 얼마쯤 볼 맛이 잇슬만치 창식상 用心을 한 공적이 보임니다. 잡화점 진열창 치고는 지금까지 보아온 중에서 아마 제일 나흔 모양이올시다. 그러나 그 위에다가 「그림」갓흔 것을 노아서 좀더 優美한 맛을 가하얏스면 조흘 것 갓슴니다.
(기자) 이번에는 天一藥房 黃金町지점인데 약방도 하-도 만흐니 통트러 말슴하지요.
(안) 약방 중에는 진열창 잇는데도 드믈지만 이곳이 좀 낫슴니다. 배경만 잇스면 그저 눌러 볼 만 함니다.
(권) 그런데 기동을 감추기 위하야서 掛鏡을 사용한 것이라던지 약품의 배치만은 상당히 노력한 맛이 보임니다.
(기자) 이번에는 동떠러진 곳이지만 그동안 본 것 중에 <132> 신통한 것이 업스니 典洞三光堂을 평해 보시지요.
(안) 다른 것은 문제거리도 안되는데 그 검은 배경에 흰 글시를 오려 부친 것이 조금 눈에 띄우나 글시 획이 떠러진 것을 그대로 두고도 坦平히 잇는 듯 한 것이 좀 우숩슴니다.
(권) 달리는 문제될 거리도 엄슴니다.
(기자) 그런데, 좀 뒤느진 것 갓지만 지금까지 보신 사진관들은 엇더하세요.
(안) 대개가 기생, 假녀학생, 부랑자 격의 사진만 진열한 것이 통례이니, 그러한 인물만 촬영하는 곳 가트니 보통사람은 드러가기 서먹서먹할 것 갓지 안은지오, 그 중에도 泰化寫眞館은 이 혹한에 해수욕복으로 허리만 가리운 빨가숭이 女子를 박힌 사진을 내여 노핫스니 겨울사람은 보기에 추어 보여서 그 진열의 효과가 업서질 것 갓슴니다.
(권) 그 사진기술을 보이기 전에 촬영된 인물의 미모를 표창하는 격으로 女子나 불량소년들의 사진을 중심삼아 진열한 것은 영업정책상 부득이한 노릇이라고는 할는지 모르나 頭尾가 교착된 嫌이 업지안은 야비한 수단이라고 볼 수 밧게 업슴니다. 압흐로는 좀들 주의하야 주엇스면 조흘 것 갓슴니다.
(기자) 이번에는 모자점을 한꺼번에 평하시는 것이 좃치 안을까요.
「安」 「權」 보잘 것 업슴니다.
(기자) 이 곳은 寬勳洞 화장품상 柳屋은 엇덧슴닛가.
(안) 퍽 아담함니다. 그 배경의 색조의 교착이라던지 물건배열이 퍽 침착해 보이고 優美함니다. 그러케 적은 진열창을 그만콤 장식하기도 쉬웁지 안을 것 갓슴니다.
(권) 동감이올시다.
(기자) 그러면 이제는 암만 보아도 평할만 한 것이 업슬 것 갓흐니 지금까지의 보신 것 중에 제일 잘 된 것은 엇던 것이겟슴닛가. 그리고 감상도 말슴하섯스면 엇더세요.
(안) 빠고다 공원 越便 朝鮮蓄音機商會와 寬勳洞 柳屋이라고 할까요.
(권) 글세올시다. 멀리는 그만두고 갓가운 「진고개」에만 비하야 본다할지라도, 전반적으로 아즉 유치한 정도를 버서 나지 못한 것 잣슴니다. 그러나 그 중에라도, 좀 나흔 것을 말하라면 지금 安군이 말슴한 외에 南大門通金剛商會와 白商會이 두 곳을 더 말하야 두고 십슴니다. 그러나 말하자면 결국은 돈 잇는 분들끼리만 이약이 할 노릇이닛가. 별 다른 흥미는 늣길 수 업슴니다.
(안) 그야그럿치, 돈 업는 사람들과는 아무런 관련이 업는 진열창을 평한다는 것이 무슨 흥미잇는 일이겟소. 그리고 감상을 말할 것도 업거니와 도리혀 쑥스러운 일인줄 암니다.
(기자) 이러케 혹독히 치운데, 수고를 너무 낏처서 미안함니다.-(끗)-<133>
<125-133>