잡지명	別乾坤 제10호
발행일	1927년 12월 20일
기사제목	新年劈頭의 大偉觀 (Grand Prospect at the Beginning of the New Year)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Notice/Post-Editing)

A Grand Prospect at the Beginning of the New Year

The magazine's New Year's edition will be even more magnificent!!
In addition to a special feature, a gift will be presented.
The best New Year's reading material! Spend the year-end laughing with one copy of Pyŏl Kŏn'gon (別乾坤).

Records of Eccentrics and Strange Deeds from the East and West

In this world, obsessed with petty wealth and honor, Eastern and Western eccentrics of ancient and modern times, who cast aside even the myriad chariots of the Son of Heaven and the millions of fortunes of the wealthy, wandering leisurely in the world! History outside of history, the strangest of the strange!!

"Scandals on the Stage" by Famous Figures and Notables

Famous figures and notables shouting on stage before thousands of listeners! Don't be surprised! They had such failures and scandals. Many readers in Kyŏngsŏng (京城) and the countryside must have witnessed them!

"Strange Tales of Four Great Facts," Secret Stories of Life

Facts from the house next door that we don't know! The writers are skilled reporters from various newspapers and magazines! How much will these living stories of life, stories stained with blood, move our hearts? It is a valuable story that everyone should read.

A Modern Exhibition of Strange Customs and Bizarre Practices Held in the Magazine

Incomparably delightful! The cutting satire pierces the bones ＜64＞

World Exhibition of Strange Marriage Customs

Strange and unusual!! Look at these unfathomable strange customs.

Special Reading Material 『○○○○』……

A very special and large reading material that this magazine has been planning for half a year!
The content is absolutely secret until the New Year's edition is published. We will tell you in advance that it will be a new point of pride for this magazine. Readers! Wait for the New Year's edition!!

"Forecast of New Trends" for the New Year

What new things will be in fashion in the coming year...? Truly an interesting forecast article. A precious article full of satire and hints!

Article Compilation "○○ Great Investigation"

Unique to this magazine!! An extraordinary activity by the entire reporting team!! What is ○○? We've caught it all! See the strange harvest that we offer to the readers.

Special New Year's Supplement Offered Free

It's not much, but it's the first "gift" Pyŏl Kŏn'gon (別乾坤) offers to its readers. Something beautiful and substantial! Given free to everyone who buys the New Year's edition.

In addition, over seventy kinds of new and unique articles are fully loaded!!
The price is also 52 chŏn (錢). Order quickly!! ＜65＞

**Named Entities**

京城	Kyŏngsŏng



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제10호
발행일	1927년 12월 20일
기사제목	新年劈頭의 大偉觀
기사형태	사고·편집후기

新年劈頭의 大偉觀
더욱 宏壯할 本誌新年號!!
內容大特輯外에 附錄品進呈
新年讀物로 天下第一! 別乾坤一冊으로 우스면서 過歲
東西奇人奇行錄
조그만 富貴와 榮譽에 汲汲해하는 이 世上에 훌노 萬乘天子도 百萬巨富도 헌신가티집어내버리고 世外에 逍遙, 悠悠히 放浪한 東西古今의 奇人들! 史外의 史요, 奇中의 奇奇!!
名流名士『壇上風波錄』
千餘의 聽衆을 압헤두고 壇上에 叫呼하는 名流名士! 놀라지말라! 그들에게 이런 失敗로 이런 風波가잇섯다. 京鄕讀者의 目睹한것도 만히잇슬것!
人生秘話『四大事實奇談』
우리가모르는 엽헷집의 事實! 筆者들은 各新聞雜誌의 手腕記者! 살아잇는 人生이지여낸 피무든이약이는 얼마나 우리의 가슴을 를것이냐 다가티 닑어야할 貴重한이약이이다.
誌上開催
現代奇風怪俗博覽會
痛快無比! 奇拔한 諷刺는 를른다＜64＞
世界結婚怪習博覽會
怪常怪常!! 奇怪莫測의 이 怪習을보라
特別讀物『○○○○』…………
本誌가 半箇年이나 두고 計劃해오던 特別中의 特別大讀物!
內容은 新年號發行日지 絶對秘密, 本誌의 새로운 자랑거리일것만미리 말해둔다 讀者여!
新年號를가다리라!!
新年『新流行豫想記』
새로오는 一年에는 무엇이새로流行하겟는가……實로 興味津津한 豫想記事이다. 諷刺만코 暗示만흔 珍珍記事!
記事總出『○○大探査記』
本誌獨特!! 記事總出의 非常活動!! ○○은 무엇? 一網打盡하여다! 讀者의 압헤밧칠 奇怪한 收獲을보라.
特別新年附錄 無料進呈
大端한 것은 못되나 別乾坤이 讀者에 처음드리는 『선물』이다 美麗하고도 重實로운것! 新年號사는이에게 一一히 無料進呈
以外 新珍記事 七十餘種滿載!!
定價亦五十二錢 注文을 速히!!＜65＞
＜64-65＞