別건곤 第10號
1927년 12월 20일
警告 女學生과 結婚하면
双S生
세태비평 (Social Critique)

Warning: If You Marry a Female Student
By S S

The Alumnae Association of a Girls' School

The alumnae association of a girls' school! It's an enviable gathering that even whiskered gentlemen, not just unmarried students, want to attend.
That's because only lovely women in their early twenties gather there intimately. Women who graduated this spring, women who graduated last year, even women who graduated the year before last, all with the beauty of young blossoms and fragrant youthfulness. Until they graduate, they are tormented by their studies and self-conscious, but once they graduate, they bloom freely and become the most beautiful they will ever be in their lives. Even they themselves are surprised at how much more beautiful their friends have become during the short time they haven't seen each other since graduation.

"Oh my, what's this!"
"What did you do to become so pretty?"
"Oh, and you...!"
What stories do these lovely and adorable angels of the earth share with each other...? If you listen, you'll hear a few phrases that men can't imagine, which are repeated at every alumnae association as if they're predetermined. ......
"Oh my, what's this..."
"It's me, so-and-so. How have you been?"
"Oh, really, you're already married."
"Who's married?"
"Did you have a good time?"
"Who said I'm married... seriously."
"I heard everything. Who stole you away?"
"Try stealing me."
"Oh, so you really did get married... So, what does he do?" <134>
"Who are you talking about?"
"Who else? Your lover. Your husband!"
"I don't know."
This is the initial greeting for everyone you meet.
"Oh, isn't that the one who was the class president in the 4th grade when we were in the 3rd grade?"
"Look at her now, wearing her hair up in a bun - she looks so pretty, and she's wearing such pretty clothes..."
"Did she marry a newspaper reporter?"
"The newspaper reporter must be happy!"
"Happy? What's so good about it? I heard she has to cook her own meals because she doesn't have a servant."
"Oh my - are newspaper reporters really that poor?"
"And she even has a mother-in-law."
"Oh, that sounds like drudgery."
This is what they whisper amongst themselves, examining each other one by one like inspectors.
"You haven't gotten married yet, have you? Really, you haven't?"
"Why would I be in such a hurry? What's so good about marriage?"
"Still, you have to get married eventually."
"It seems like marriage must be pretty good. I'm not interested."
"She's just saying that on the outside; she must have something up her sleeve."
"Who would come after someone like me? Really, no one!"
"I heard rumors that the men are talking about it a lot. My husband told me that his friends are begging him to introduce them to you..."
"Oh, you sly thing-"
"No, really. If I really thought there was no one, I'd introduce you..."
"Oh, stop it. I don't want to hear it."
"That's right; why wouldn't a queen like you have an adjutant? You do, don't you? What does he do? Tell me."
"What are you talking about? There's no one."
"Is he a writer? An educator? A businessman? An artist? Tell me something."
"I don't know - I don't know."
"Of course, he's probably a writer or an artist. She's always had so many hobbies since she was a student... But please, don't date or marry anyone who's a salaryman or has a mother-in-law. You'll just rot. You'll rot!"
"I'd rather live alone than go to someone like that-"
"Exactly. Especially someone like O-ja, who's being courted from everywhere, isn't going to go to someone like that-"
In this way, their friends' gossip causes their vanity, like an inflated balloon, to soar above the clouds.
"Still, if you're going to have a modern life, you have to at least have a piano and a radio for people to see when they come over, and you have to be able to serve a cup of coffee. What else is modern!"
"That's right - unless you're going to go live alone in the deep mountains, how can you go to school for ten years and then have a modern marriage where you're sewing your mother-in-law's socks and stoking the fire-"
The fact is that these kinds of conversations are central to girls' school alumnae associations, no matter when or where they are held.

Their Married Life

The Pitiful Adjutant
While there are "queens" who are cultivating and nurturing their vanity in this way, there are also considerable numbers of men who are willing to make any sacrifice to become their adjutants, chasing after them with all their might, hoping to be envied by everyone on the street if possible. This is a playful prank of the Creator.
Sacrificing a lot of money, time, face, and energy, and dedicating three or six months of effort, they barely manage to win the favor of the picky queen. Then, they must use all their talents and money to put on a wedding ceremony that is worthy of the queen, boasting about their extensive social circles and wealth (money), even if they have to force it.
The wedding must have many guests and several cars so that the queen's school friends can also be taken along, and there must be many congratulatory speeches and a grand reception... The honeymoon is not really meaningful, but for appearances, they must go, and they must make sure to let many people, especially the queen's school friends, know that they are going on a honeymoon.
What comes next? Upon returning, they leave their luggage at a newly decided home, hire a cook, and although the room shouldn't be like a hostess room, they arrange their belongings, and although they wear a holuk coat and wooden clogs on the veranda, they set up a round table with rattan chairs around it and fill the bookshelf with books with gold lettering, because it's modern. Then, the household is roughly set up.
However, every time they meet a friend, they hear things like,
"How's the love nest? I'll have to come visit sometime."
And they even receive letters like that from distant friends. So, they feel that they need to decorate the "love nest" even more.
At such times, the queen of the nest puts down the ball of yarn she was knitting for a moment, smiles sweetly, and says,
"Oh dear, my friends are coming to see our little home, what should we do? If we're going to live here anyway, let's buy a piano first. And after I finish knitting this vest, I'll make a lampshade and knit a tablecloth, so let's go to Chin-gae and buy a few picture frames. It's supposed to be a love nest, but how can we do that if it's so shabby-" <136>
The "how can we do that" sound is almost nasal, and the way she wiggles her head and shoulders is so coquettish that even the remaining gentlemanliness of the gentleman, which hadn't melted away before the marriage, melts away, and he complies without any objection. There's no need to write any longer.

The Dangerous Era of Female Student Wives, What's Scary is Boredom with Life

After about half a year of married life, the shadow of fallen leaves falls on the love nest, and the queen of love begins to decline.
What is the queen's daily routine? The seeds of tragedy begin to grow from here.
When she wakes up, will she even make her own bed...? The maid brings her the water to wash her face, and there's someone else to cook the rice and make the side dishes. Her husband goes to work after breakfast. She doesn't know how to sew, but there's someone else to do it. There's a piano, but she's not studying it, so she gets tired of repeating the same tunes over and over again. She could turn on the phonograph, but even that hurts her ears when she's alone.
There's no reason for her to get a job as a rubber worker or go to a ladies' tailor shop, and her husband feels it's dangerous to send her to a school or newspaper/magazine company. He's afraid and hates the idea of her cutting her hair or shaking hands with men if she joins a women's movement. Since she can't be left alone in a place with other men until she's a bit older, it's best to keep her comfortably at home, where she has plenty to eat and spend, and if she's really bored, she can go to movies or concerts with other women in the evening, and go for walks in the suburbs on Sundays. The man thinks that this is the way to care for and cherish his wife, and he leaves her alone without interest, but that's a big mistake.
For a person who is alive and whose mind is moving, living without doing anything is more painful than forced labor.
After eating breakfast and sending her husband off to work, she sits alone sadly and rummages through the newspaper. She's never read the politics or economics sections, so they're irrelevant to her. She's read the novels and articles twice over while smoking a cigarette, and even though the maid sitting next to her starts a conversation, it's not about love stories or movies, so it doesn't interest her... It would be nice if her friends came to visit, but they only come once to praise the piano and the phonograph, so what <137> friend would come every day like she's going to school? She takes naps, but she doesn't sleep for seven or eight hours... She has no idea how to get through the day, and she yawns and stretches often because she's so bored.
She can't stand the boredom, so she thinks she should read a book, but she can't find any thought-provoking or philosophical books interesting, so she has nothing to read but romance novels. The more she reads them, the more she wants to experience the kind of troubles that happen in novels. She even wants to become a woman who has been heartbroken and cries quietly, so why wouldn't she wish that there was another young man who came to her fence every day and longed for her, instead of being tied to just one man like this...? A thoughtful man doesn't even want his wife to read romance novels when she's alone.
Because she's bored, unbearably bored, her body sits idly, and her thoughts, which can't be tied down anywhere, wander here and there. Since she doesn't even have the strength to explore new territory, she starts to search for the dreams of her past student days. That's because there are many interesting and beautiful memories there that comfort her bored and lonely heart.
However, the dangerous thing is that her aimless memories also have the power to make her feel more lonely and sad.
Wasn't the married life that her classmates dreamed about in the corner of the schoolyard or sitting around the stove on snowy days supposed to be more interesting than this...? Among those classmates, isn't there someone who is having a better married life than me...? No, no, even if she doesn't have as much money as me or as good a piano as mine, isn't there someone who has a husband who is truly affectionate and makes her laugh often...? At the end of thinking, "So-and-so was like this, and so-and-so was like that" to find out how her friends are doing, she suddenly remembers that there was a student at OO College who always blushed and passed by when he saw her outside the alley when she was in school... There was a poet who wrote sincere letters in beautiful handwriting, even though she didn't reply... What would they think if they knew I was living like this now...? Would they laugh at me? Would they envy me...? These thoughts don't necessarily come from a bad heart, but her boring and lonely life makes her think that way. Since the world isn't all Jesus, how can you scold her for just thinking these thoughts and say that she's committing adultery in her heart?
Even if her thoughts reach this point, if nothing else comes up to do, her thoughts will continue to drift along.
If I hadn't married this man and had married the one who begged me so sincerely, how would my life be now...? Like me, he must be married to someone else by now... If he is, what kind of woman <138> did he marry...? A better woman than me? A worse woman? What would happen if our couples met on the street or at a concert? Would they envy us? Would I envy them...? The rambling thoughts, like writing a novel, continue endlessly until the sound of her husband returning in the evening puts an end to them.
When we occasionally leave Gyeongseong (Seoul) and go to a quiet countryside for a few days, we feel a sudden curiosity and longing for what's happening in Seoul every time we see the newspapers that are delivered every two or three days, with news of concerts, dances, and male-female discussion groups. When we were in Gyeongseong, we didn't even look at those things even if they were happening next door, but when we see them in the newspaper in the countryside, we feel strangely drawn to them, and we can see the faces of the people who are coming and going there in our mind's eye.
A beautiful female student, a modern beauty who draws the attention of everyone while coming and going in a bustling manner, suddenly becomes someone who is guarded by only one man, and when she sits alone bored in a large house where no one comes to visit, she experiences the same kind of emotional turmoil. As a result, she spends her days idly in a yard where only the sunlight shines, thinking about and longing for everything in the outside world while idly flipping through newspapers, and eventually, she starts to wish for some kind of commotion to occur in her unchanging life.
How scary is that? How frightening is that? If someone knows her feelings and takes advantage of the opportunity to beckon her, the happiness of that house will begin to crumble from that day on. The sorrow of a broken mirror! Will it not end with someone else's misfortune?

Preventative Measures, Several Things I Want to Advise!!

A widow who amasses wealth finds enjoyment in increasing the amount of money she has, leaving her no time for other thoughts. Uneducated old-fashioned women had no time for other thoughts because they were busy managing the household, and women from poor families had no time because they were chased by their livelihood.
What reason could a beautiful woman from a female student background, who doesn't get her hands wet, have for not having time for other thoughts? She has no time to do anything but dream up romance novels in her head, think about men she used to meet, and think about things outside the house that she shouldn't be thinking about.
Since it's a scary thing to overcome, women themselves should strive to create things to do for themselves, and those who have such wives should work hard to create things for them to do.
If they don't want to put them out in public, they could hold small-scale classes for neighborhood women in an empty guest room, or they could step forward for the sake of general women's society.
(11 lines deleted from original)
I can't just cover it up and say nothing because it's embarrassing to talk about, so I wrote this with the special intention that it might serve as a source of reflection for some. I hope for the generous understanding of those who have read this poor piece to the end, and I will stop here. <139>

**Named Entities**

경성	Kyŏngsŏng
O자	O-ja
진고개	Chin-gae



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제10호
발행일	1927년 12월 20일
기사제목	警告 女學生과 結婚하면
필자	双S生
기사형태	세태비평

警告 女學生과 結婚하면
						双S生
女學校同窓會

녀학교의 동창회! 총각학생 아닌 수염 난 신사라도 누구나 가보고 십허하는 부러운 회합이다.
거긔에는 20내외의 꼿다운 녀자들만 오붓하게 모여드는 까닭이다. 금년 봄에 졸업한 녀자 지난해에 졸업한 녀자 지지난해에 졸업한 녀자까지도 꼿송이 가티 젊은 향내나는 아름다움을 가진 이들만 모여드는 까닭이다. 학교에 다니는 날까지는 공부에 시달리고 남의 눈 꺼리든 몸이 졸업을 하고 나서는 마음대로 활작활작 피여나서 일평생에 제일 아름다워지는 때라 자긔네들끼리도 졸업 후에 잠간 못 맛난 동안에 딴사람과 갓치 아름다워진 데에 깜작깜작 놀낸다.
『아이고 읏저면!』
『읏저면 저러케 엽버젓소?』
『아이고 자긔는?......』
이 어엽브고 사랑스러운 땅우의 선녀들이 모여서 무슨 이약이들을 서로 하는가... ... 하고 들어보면 남자들은 상상 못하는 몃 마듸의 문답이 어느 동창회에던지 뎡해 잇는 것처럼 니러난다. ......
『아이고 읏저면......』
『나는 누구라고. 그래 그동안 잘 잇섯소?』
『아이고 참 벌서 갓다지.』
『가긴 누가 가-』
『그래 좃습뎃가?』
『가긴 누가 갓다구 그래... 참』
『내가 다 들엇는데 무얼 속여요. 누가 빼서가?』
『빼서 가보지.』
『으응 그럼 가기는 참말 갓구먼... 그래 무얼하우.』<134>
『누가 무얼하느냐고 그래.』
『누군 누구야 애인께서 말야. 서방님!』
『나는 몰-나.』
이것은 맛나는 이마다의 초벌인사고
『아이고 저긔 저이가 우리 3년 급적에 4년 급에 반장으로 잇던 이지?』
『그런데 읏저면 쪽을 찌고 왓서- 퍽 엽버젓는데 옷도 엽브게 지여입구......』
『저이가 신문긔자한테루 갓다지?』
『신문긔자는 좃켓네!』
『좃키는 무에 조와. 하인 하나 업시 조석도 자긔가 짓는다는데.』
『아이고 읏저면-신문긔자가 그럿케 껄넝껄넝한가.』
『거긔다 싀어머니까지 잇다는 걸.』
『아이고 아조 증역살이로구료.』
이것은 한사람씩 한사람씩 검사하듯 따저가면서 여긔서 저긔서 패패끼리 속살거리는 말이요
『입대 안 갓구면. 정말 안 갓소?』
『무에 조흔거라구 그럿케 급히 굴것잇소?』
『그래두 갈 것은 가야해요.』
『아이가가 결혼맛이 꽤 조흔가보이. 나는 시들합데다.』
『공연히 것흐로만 저러지 속으로는 다 치부가 잇슬터인데.』
『나가튼 것을 누가 쪼처다니겟소. 정말 업서!』
『내가 소문 들으닛가 남자들 새에 소문이 야단이라는 걸. 우리집 사람도 그럽데다. 친구들이 엇더케 소개해달라고 야단들이라구......』
『아이구 이 능-청-』
『안야 정말이야. 정말 꼭 업는 줄 알면 조흔데 소개라두 할테야......』
『아이그 다 그만두어요. 듯기 실여요.』
『그럿치 저럿케 잘 생긴 녀왕님의 뒤에 왜 시종무관이 업슬 리가 잇나. 잇지. 응? 잇지. 무엇하는 량반요? 좀 아르켜 주어요.』
『잇기는 숭업게 무에 잇다구 그래요.』
『문학가요- 교육가요- 실업가요 예술가요. 말을 좀 해요.』
『몰라- 몰라.』
『물론 문학가나 예술가겟지. 원래 학생쩍브터 취미가 만헛스닛가...... 그런데 제발 월급쟁이나 싀어미 잇는데는 련애 아니야 아모거래도 가지를 마라요. 사람이 그냥 썩어요. 썩어!』
『혼자 살면 혼자 살지 누가 그런데루가-』
『그럼. 더군다나 O자 갓흔이야 여긔저긔서 모시여 가겟다는 데가 좀-만어서 그런데루가-』
이럿케 동무들의 비행긔가 그들의 고무풍선(風船)가티<135> 불어커진 허영심을 한울 위 구름 위에까지 자라 올나가게 한다.
『그래두 지금 신식살림이라구 누가 와서 보드래두 피아노나 하나 하고 라디오나 하나 매놋코 카피차 한잔이라도 내놋케 돼야지. 무에 신식이란말요!』
『그러케말야- 깁흔 산속에 드러가서 혼자 산다면 모르지만 10년 동안이나 학교를 다니고 나서 신식결혼이라구 해가지구 누가 싀어미 버선짝이나 꿰매구 아궁이에 불이나 때구잇단말요-』
녀학교 동창회란 것은 어느 때 어대서던지 이따위 대화가 중심이 되는 것은 사실이다.

그들의 結婚生活

可憐한 것은 侍從武官
이럿케 저의들끼리 허영심을 잔-뜩 불리여가지고 길러가지고 잇는 『녀왕님』들이 계신 한편에 될 수만 잇스면 길거리에서 보아도 누구나 부러워할 미인이면 아모런 희생을 밧처가면서라도 그의 시종무관이 되겟다고 긔를 쓰고 쪼차 다니는 상당한 남자들이 만히 잇는 것은 조물주의 재조잇는 작란이다.
만흔 돈과 시간과 톄면과 졍력을 희생하야 석달 또는 반년의 노력을 밧치여 간신히 성미 까다라운 녀왕님의 총애를 엇게 되면 이번에는 잇는 재조 잇는 돈을 다하야 우선 맨먼저 억지로라도 자긔의 교제 넓은 것을 자랑하고 실력(돈) 만흔 것을 자랑하야 녀왕님의 마음에 찰만한 결혼식을 꾸며야 한다.
손님 만코 자동차가 여러 채여서 녀왕님의 학우(學友)들까지 태여모시고 축뎐축문이 만코 피로연회가 성대하고... 신혼려행은 실상은 별로 의미잇는 것 아니지만 톄면상 가기로 하는대 가되 신혼려행 간다는 것을 여러 사람에게 더욱 녀왕님의 학우들에게 골고로 알려 놋코 가야한다.
그 다음에는? 그 다음에는 도라오는 길로 미리 뎡해논 새 개와집에 행낭 두고 찬모 두고 방 속에는 기생집 갓해서 안 되엿지만 자개의거리 놋코 마루에는 후룩고투 입고 나막신 신는 격이지만 신식이닛가 둥근테불에 등걸상(藤椅子) 둘너놋코 책장에는 금글씨 잇는 책만 골나다 놋코 그러면은 대강은 살림이 짜여젓다.
그러나 때때로 맛나는 친구마다
『사랑의 보금자리가 엇던가 한번 가겟네.』
하는 소리가 귀에 처지고 먼데 잇는 친구에게서도 그따위 편지까지 오는 고로 『사랑의 보금자리』 사랑의 보금자리란 말에 자긔가 생각하여도 좀 더 엇더케 꾸며노아야 할 것을 늣긴다.
그런 때 보금자리의 녀왕님이 무언지 짯코잇든 털실뭉치를 잠간 놋코 생끗우스시면서
『애그 여보 내 동무들이 작고 살림구경하러 온다는<136> 데에 엇더커우. 긔왕 살 것이면 피아노 먼저 사다 놉시다. 그러구 내가 이 족긔를 얼는 짯코나서 뎐등(電燈)덥게를 맨들고 테불덥개를 짜을 터이니 진고개 가서 사진틀(그림) 몃 개만 사옵시다. 사랑의 보금자리 사랑의 보름자리 하는데 이럿케 힌쟉구(貧弱)해서 엇더케해-』
엇더케해- 하는 해- 소리가 코ㅅ소리 비슷하고 고개와 억개를 빗트는 몸짓이 어리광 가튼 만큼 결혼 전에 녹다가 남은 점잔흔 신사의 간장이 마저 녹아서 한마듸 반마듸 이론(異論)이 잇슬리 업시 그대로 다령을 한다. 더 길다랏케 쓸 필요가 업겟지.

女學生夫人의 危險時代, 무서운 것은 生活권태

결혼생활도 반년쯤 지나면 사랑의 보금자리에도 락엽의 그림자가 날러서 사랑의 녀왕님이 하폄을 하기 시작하신다.
대톄 녀왕님이 날마다 하고 지내일 사무가 무어냐? 비극의 씨알은 여긔서브터 커가기 시작하는 것이다.
자고 니러나면 자리를 치우는 것쯤이나 자긔 손으로 할가...... 세수물도 어멈이 떠다노아주어, 밥을 지여블가 반찬을 맨드는 사람도 따로히 잇서. 남편은 아츰을 잡수시면 사무보러 나아가시여. 바누질은 할 줄도 모르지만 하는 사람이 따로 잇서. 피아노가 잇스나 연구하는 것이 아니닛가 가튼 곡조 되풀니기도 할 맛 업서, 류성긔를 틀어노을가 그것도 혼자서는 귀만 압흐시다.
직업을 가지자니 고무직공이나 부인양복뎜에 갈 까닭업고 학교선생이나 신문잡지사에 보내보자니 남편의 생각에 위험을 늣기는 바 잇서, 부인운동에 내여세우자니 머리깍거나 뭇남자와 손목잡아 흔들겟스니 그것이 무섭고도 실흰 일이요. 나희 좀 더 먹기 전에는 다른 남자석기는 곳에 외따로 내여 노을 수 업는지라 먹을 것 잇고 용돈 넉넉하니 집에 편히 두는 것이 제일상책이요 정히 갑갑하면 저녁에 동부인하야 활동사진이나 음악회에 가고 일요일이면 시외산보나 다니면 그만 안인가 하야 남자는 그것이 안해를 위하는 길이요 앗기는 일이라 하야 무관심하고 냇버려두지만은 그것이 큰일이다.
살아서 몸이 움즉이고 생각이 움즉이는 사람이 하는 것 업시 그냥 살기는 증역생활보다도 더 괴로운 것이다.
아츰을 먹고 남편을 사무소로 전송하고 혼자서 쓸쓸히 안저서 신문지나 뒤적거리자니 정치난(政治欄) 경제난(經濟欄)은 애초브터 보아본 적이 업는지라 상관업는 세상이고 소설과 긔사는 담배 한 대 필 동안에 두 번씩 닑엇고 엽헤 안즌 침모가 잇서서 이약이를 걸지만 그것은 련애 이약이나 활동사진 이약이가 아니니 마음끌니지 안코...... 동모들이나 차저왓스면 좃켓것만은 처음와서 피아노 찬미 류성긔 층찬이나 몃번 하고 갓스면 그만이지 무슨<137> 동모가 날마다 학교에 다니듯 와줄리 업고 낫잠을 자지만 날곱시간 여덜시간씩 자지지 안코...... 무얼로 오늘 해를 엇더케 지워보낼가 지리하기 한이 업서서 하폄과 긔지개가 자조 나오게 되는 것이다.
심심해 못 견대겟다니 책이나 보라 하지만 사상서류나 철학서류는 자미 업서서 련애소설 밧게 닑을 것이 업스니 그것 닑으면 닑을스록 소설 가튼 풍파를 격거보고 십게 된다. 더러는 실련을 당하야 작고작고 울어보는 녀자도 되여보고 십어지거던 읏지하야 꼭 이럿케 한 님자에게 매달려 잇는 몸을 울타리 밧게 날마다 와서 자긔 몸을 그리워 해주는 다른 청년이 잇서 보앗스면 하는 마음만 생겨 보지 말라는 법이 잇슬 것이냐...... 렴려 만흔 남자는 혼자 잇는 안해에게 련애소설만도 닑히고 십지 안어 하는 것이다.
심심하닛가 견듸지 못하게 심심하닛가 몸은 계을리 안저서 아모데도 붓잡어 맬 수 업는 생각이 이리로 저리로 헤매여나려하는데 새로운 경역을 더듬어 볼 힘조차 업스닛가 뎡해놋코 지나간 날 학생시대ㅅ 때의 꿈을 차저나기 시작한다. 거긔에서는 여러 가지의 자미잇고 아름다운 추억이 그의 심심하고 고적한 마음을 위로해주는 까닭이다.
그러나 위험한 일로는 그 하염업는 추억이 한편으로는 그의 지금 마음을 더 쓸쓸하게 더 슯흐게 하는 힘을 만히 가진 것이다.
그때에 학교운동장 구석에서 또는 눈 나리는 날 란로 둘네에 안저서 동모들이 꿈가티 이약이 해주든 결혼생활은 이보다는 좀 더 자미잇는 것이 아니엿슬가...... 그때의 그 동모들 중에는 나보다 더 조흔 결혼생활을 하고 잇는 사람이 잇지 아니할가...... 아니 아니 돈은 나만 못하고 피아노는 내 것만 못하더라도 정말 어글어글하고 정말 자조 웃켜주는 남자를 엇은 사람이 잇지 안이할가...... 동무의 신상을 알고 십어서 『이런 동모도 잇섯거니 엇던 엇던 동모도 잇섯거니』하던 끗헤는 자긔도 모르는 종에 저절로 학교에 다닐때에 골목 밧게서 반듯이 나를 보고 얼골을 붉히고 지나던 OO전문학생도 잇섯거니...... 답장도 안하는 편지를 어엽분 글씨로 지성스럽게 하던 시인도 잇섯거니...... 그이들이 내가 지금 이럿케 살림을 하고 잇는 줄 알면 엇더케 생각할고...... 피- 하고 우서버릴가 부러워해줄가...... 이런 생각이 반듯이 마음이 낫버서 나는 것이 안이라 그의 심심적막한 생활이 저절로 그럿케 식이는 것이다. 세상이 모두다 예수가 아니어던 엇더케 이런 생각만을 하는 것으로 마음속에 간음을 한 것이라 꾸지즐 수 잇슬가보냐.
생각이 여긔까지 밋처도 다른 일거리가 얼른 생긔지 안으면 생각은 또 뒤에 뒤를 니어나간다.
내가 만일 이이와 결혼하지 안코 그럿케 지성으로 조르던 그와 결혼을 하엿다면 지금 생활이 이보다 엇댓슬고...... 내가 이럿케 결혼생활을 하는 것과 가티 그이도 지금은 누구하고 결혼을 하엿겟지...... 하엿스면 엇던 녀자와<138> 하엿슬고...... 나보다 나흔 녀자? 못한 녀자? 혹시 그이 내외하고 우리 내외하고 길거리에서나 어느 음악회에서나 맛나게 되면 엇더케 될고 저편이 우리를 부러워하게 될가 내가 저편을 부러워하게 될가...... 소설 쓰듯 니여나가는 헷젓는 생각은 한이업시 니여나가다가 저녁때 남편이 도라오는 발소리에야 막을 닷친다.
우리들이 간혹 경성을 떠나서 한적한 시골에 가서 수일 때에 일부러 틈을 지여 수이러 간 것이면서도 2, 3일만에씩 배달되는 신문을 볼 때에 경성에서 음악회 무도회 남녀토론회 한다는 소식들을 볼 때마다 갑작이 서울 일이 궁금해지고 그리워지는 것을 늣긴다. 경성에 잇슬 때는 엽집에서 그러한 것이 잇다해도 도라다 보지도 안코 지내든 몸이 시골와서 신문지로 볼 때에는 이상하게도 그런 것들에 마음이 끌리여 거긔에 드나들며 축석어리는 사람들의 얼골이 눈 압헤 보힌다.
녀학생 처녀학생 현대뎍 미인으로 모든 사람들의 주목을 껄면서 번화하게 드나들던 미인 녀학생이 갑작이 한 남자 뿐의 직히는 사람이 되야 차저오는 이도 업는 커다란 집 속에 심심히 혼자 안젓슬 때 꼭 그와 가튼 마음의 동요를 보게 된다. 그리하야 그는 햇볏만 굥연히 쬬이는 마당에 무료히 지내면서 신문지나 작고 들칠 때에 밧갓 세상의 모든 것을 생각하게 되고 그리워하게 되고 나종에는 아모 변화업는 자긔생활에 엇던 파동이 일기를 스스로 바라게 된다.
엇더케 무서운 일이냐. 엇더케 두려운 일이냐. 만일 그의 이러한 심정을 아는 자 잇서 틈을 타서 손짓을 한다면 그 집의 행복은 그날부터 믄허지기 시작하는 것이다. 파경(破鏡)의 비애! 그것이 남의 일에만 긋치지 안을 것 안이겟느냐.

末然의 防止策, 勸告하고 십흔 여러 가지 일!!

돈 모으는 과부는 돈 수효 느는데에 자미를 붓처서 마음에 딴 겨를이 업는 것이다. 무식한 구식부녀는 세간작만하기에 마음에 딴 겨를이 업섯고 가난한 집 부녀는 살님에 쫏기여 딴 겨를이 업시 지내는 것이다.
녀학생 출신으로 손에 물 안 뭇치고 사는 미인은 무엇 때문에 딴 겨를이 업슬 것이냐? 머리 속에 련애소설 꿈여보고 안해도 조흔 밧갓 생각하기에 예전에 맛나던 남자 생각하기에 딴 겨를이 업다.
넘어도 두려운 일이니 녀성 자신도 스스로 일거리를 지여가즈기에 노력할 일이요 그러한 안해를 가즌 이는 그의 일거리를 작만해 주기에 힘써야 할 것이다.
밧갓에 내여세우기 실흐면 텅텅브인 사랑방에 리웃부녀들의 소규모 강습을 식혀도 좃켓고 일반녀성의 사회를 위하야 나서도 조흘 것이 아니냐.
(11행 삭제 -원문)
말하기 거북한 일이라고 아니하고 덥허둘 수만도 업서서 내딴에는 특별한 생각으로 일부의 반성의 자료나 될가하야 써 본 것이다. 이 변변치 안흔 글을 끗까지 닑어 준 이의 너그러운 량해를 바래고 그만둔다.<139>
<134-139>