**Header Section:**
Magazine Title: 개벽 제47호
Publication Date: 1924년 05월 01일
Article Title: 떠드는 世上. 變하는 세상 이것을 츄려서 쓰면 이러케 된다 (The Noisy World, The Changing World; Summarizing It Makes It Like This)
Author: 起瀍 抄 (Kich'an Ch'o - Likely a pen name or signifies 'Selected by Kich'an')
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/Commentary)

**Body Text Translation:**
The Noisy World. The Changing World; Summarizing It Makes It Like This
Selected by Kich'an

We dedicated our previous April issue as a special "World Situation Issue," stating the need for us, the Korean people, to be particularly well-versed in the major trends of the world. Based on this spirit, starting yesterday, this journal will, in each issue, present the key points of global phenomena and discern their characteristics, serving as an essential mirror for those who continue to read this journal.

Among the events of the past April world, the one that became a global issue first was perhaps the passage of the Japanese Immigrant Exclusion Bill by the US Senate and House. The commencement of Anglo-Russian talks, the breakdown of Russo-Romanian talks, the new decision on the German reparations plan, the victory of the Italian Fascist Party in the general election, the dragging on of Russo-Chinese and Russo-Japanese negotiations, Germany's refusal of military supervision, the establishment of the Greek Republic, and the concretization of the Korean social movement are all events worthy of worldly attention. And among things still in the state of 'about to appear but not yet appeared' (欲現未現中), further attention is drawn to the rumor that a defensive alliance has been concluded between Japan and Romania, the rumor that Sun Wen's government in China is moving to Harbin, especially the trend of France and Japan drawing closer, Italy convening a World Migration Conference, the planned Far Eastern Peoples' International Communist Party Congress in Shanghai (May 10th), the growing mood for monarchist restoration in Germany, the British Labour Party cabinet gradually moving away from the support of the Liberal Party, the situation in US politics where a third party might emerge besides the Republican and Democratic parties, and the daily intensification of reactionary forces promoting official-civilian collusion (官民和姦) in Korea. Now, writing more concisely about the various issues, both apparent and latent, mentioned above: <28>

Germany's Rightward and Leftward Tilts
In early April, the German government sent a reply regarding the Allied issue of military supervision over Germany. According to the reply, regarding the Allied proposal to investigate the state of military preparedness within Germany, Germany stated, "This should be handled by the League of Nations," and demanded that the current Allied supervisory committee be immediately replaced by a body subordinate to the aforementioned League Council. In this reply, Germany, for the first time, used independent language seeking not to be bound by the treaty. The French government reportedly views this as a rather significant development. Furthermore, German industrialists in the Ruhr region, since the 15th, have shown signs of discontinuing their agreement with the Allied factory and coal mine supervisory committee and resuming their previous passive resistance, making the Ruhr issue dangerous again. That is to say, Germany's momentum is becoming this active. Consequently, the issue of restoring the monarchy arises. Given the upcoming general election scheduled for the 4th (May), this issue is being discussed even more vigorously. Parties like the National Party openly advocate for monarchist restoration, and even the People's Party has abandoned its previous stance and come to advocate for the establishment of a democratic monarchy. Although the current Chancellor, Herr Marcus, is one of the leaders of the Centre Party, he repeats the phrase "The revolution has failed." The current Foreign Minister, Herr Stresemann, leader of the People's Party, also seems intent on accommodating the intentions of reactionary nationalist elements. It is said that the upcoming general election shows a significant rightward trend. Of course, even if the right-wing parties win, the issue of immediate monarchist restoration might not arise, but they will certainly mount fierce opposition to the reparations and disarmament issues. This will make relations with the Allies, or rather Franco-German relations, very precarious, and consequently lead to pronounced left-wing movements within the country, making the problems increasingly complex.

The Defendant in Full General's Uniform
Another event in April's Germany that cannot be overlooked is the verdict on the Beer Hall Putsch incident in München on the 1st. The main figure of this incident, Marshal Ludendorff, was acquitted, while several others were declared guilty to some extent. At that time, Marshal Ludendorff, standing in court in his full general's uniform, faced the judge and declared, "To sentence my comrades and declare me alone innocent is an insult to my military uniform!" He then strode out of the courtroom spiritedly (意氣揚揚), and the crowd welcomed him enthusiastically. From this, one can glimpse the recent tendencies of public sentiment, high and low, in Germany. <29>

Left or Right? = France's Power Struggle (逐鹿戰)
France's general election is set for May 11th. It follows Germany's May 4th election by one week. There's talk that the date was set this way thinking that if the German election results demonstrate an increase in reactionary power, the French people's vote might favor the government. This French general election is not one held after a dissolution, like in Italy and Germany, but is due to the expiration of the term of the representatives elected in November 1919. However, the 1919 general election was when the "Old Tiger" Clemenceau, who had gained unprecedented influence during the Great War, sat in the position of Prime Minister and Minister of War. He skillfully utilized the post-war reactionary period to forge a grand coalition of various right-wing factions (so-called 'patriotic reactionaries' - 憂國憂世의 反動的 頑兒) and achieved a surprising victory, suppressing the Radical and Socialist parties. Therefore, although the person is different, the reason why today's French Prime Minister Poincaré can maintain his position while pursuing such a hardline policy is entirely due to the support he receives from the various right-wing factions. So, will the current situation of the grand coalition of the traditional right-wing factions be maintained in this May election, or will the Radical Party, which suffered a major defeat in 1919, achieve a comeback victory (捲土重來) in this return match (雪辱戰)? According to rumors, the French Radical Party plans to form a grand coalition with the Communist and Socialist parties, i.e., the left-wing parties, to challenge the government party. If the left-wing parties take power, significant changes will be seen in France's domestic and foreign policies. For example, regarding policy towards Germany, following the opinions of leader M. Caillaux, they would abandon the traditional revanchism and advocate for revising the Treaty of Versailles with Germany, while at the same time, the current pro-Japanese sentiment in France would also see some fluctuation. Prime Minister Poincaré reorganized his cabinet at the end of March, bringing in some new talent and even winning a vote of confidence, but whether he will achieve victory in the general election is questionable. In any case, France's May general election deserves great attention.

Lawlessness and Misconduct of the Italian Government Party
In Italy, the kingdom of reactionary forces, a general election was held on April 6th, resulting in a major victory for the Fascist Party, the government party. Prior to this, the 'arrogant child' Mussolini, in order to suppress his political enemies in today's Italy—the Socialist Party, the Communist Party, and especially the Popolari Party which holds latent power among peasants and religious believers—and to increase the number of his own party's representatives, pushed through the upper and lower houses between July and November last year a so-called "nationwide proportional system." This bizarre electoral law, unprecedented in history, stipulated that the single political party obtaining the most votes gets two-thirds (356) of the total seats (535), while all <30> other political parties proportionally share the remaining seats. He dissolved parliament on January 24th of this year, and finally, in the general election on the 6th, the Fascist Party achieved a stunning victory, securing 64% of the total votes. The next largest was the Popolari Party, followed by the Unitarian Socialist Party. However, according to recent reports, the Fascist Party, after the general election, engages daily in increasingly violent and unlawful acts, assaulting, imprisoning, and burning the publications of opposition media outlets or writers. Their atrocities are truly beyond words. The overthrow of Italy's reactionary forces is indeed not far off.

Newly Decided German Reparations Plan
- Generally Fails to Resolve German Resentment

The so-called Treaty of Versailles, the greatest document displaying the full extent of 20th-century imperialism, and within that treaty, the issue of German reparations, which is its core element, is commonly recognized as the pivotal issue of the entire European political situation. The Allied Reparations Expert Committee, while investigating Germany's capacity to pay reparations, published its report on April 9th. It was a lengthy document of 60 pages, the main points of which are summarized below:
1. Immediately demand payment of 16 billion Goldmarks (1 Goldmark is about 40 sen) from Germany, and thereafter have them pay an annual minimum ranging from 1.4 billion to 2 billion Goldmarks.
2. As an alternative to the above, have Germany pay 1 billion Goldmarks in the first year, 1.2 billion Goldmarks in the second year, 1.75 billion Goldmarks in the third year, 2.46 billion Goldmarks in the fourth year, allow payment in the same proportion for the fifth year, and from the sixth year onwards, based on the proportion of improvement in Germany's financial situation, allow additional annual payments of approximately 5.6 billion Goldmarks.
3. Hand over Germany's railways to an international company for the next 50 years. This international company would have a capital of 26 billion Goldmarks, of which 11 billion Goldmarks would be borne by the Reparations Committee. The company would issue bonds with 6% interest, and after four years, it is expected that half the profit, 605 million Goldmarks, would be distributed as dividends.
4. Establish a Permanent Allied Committee to manage German capital that has temporarily flowed abroad. The Permanent Committee will consist of 5 experts, with the chairman appointed by the Reparations Committee.
Furthermore, the Committee made no mention of the military supervision issue, and regarding France's occupation of the Ruhr region, <31> it advised a self-restrained withdrawal. In response, France has, in principle, approved this plan and intends to propose conditions in return for abandoning the Ruhr. Britain, of course, and the German government have also agreed to discuss matters based on this reparations plan as a principle.
Of course, this reparations plan offers no reduction whatsoever in the total amount of reparations, but in terms of the payment method, it has become somewhat lenient, taking Germany's situation into consideration. However, the German people cannot resolve their resentment through this. The only question in the minds of Germans today is whether to resolve this resentment by returning to the old imperial system or by realizing a thorough communist state to kick away this burden. Lately, the side favoring a return to the old imperial system seems to be gaining strength. Moreover, hearing that the German government expressed its intention to accept such a reparations plan in principle primarily to preempt the French government's tactic of using German obstinacy as propaganda material for the general election, one can infer how complex the minds of the German authorities are. However, what if French statism (國家至上主義) collapses before Germany transitions to an imperialistic reaction? The conclusion is not far off, so let's wait and see how everything unfolds.

The Struggle for Supremacy among Britain, France, and Italy Centered on the Mediterranean
- Recently Worsening Steadily

The clandestine maneuvering (暗中 飛躍) of Britain, France, and Italy seeking to gain maritime and political superiority in the Mediterranean Sea and its littoral states has recently intensified, and now not only the Near Eastern countries but also Russia, India, and the entire Muslim world (回回敎國) are being drawn into the vortex of this conflict. Britain's objective in dominating the Mediterranean is, needless to say, the protection of British trade with India, Egypt, and the Far East. When Britain concentrated its naval power in the Mediterranean, Italy's Mussolini responded by announcing plans to strengthen Italian naval power. Furthermore, Italy planned a major expansion of its air force, increasing its aircraft from 300 to 1,000, and there are reports that it has concluded a treaty with Spain for mutual naval assistance regarding the Mediterranean. In response, France, needing to maintain the Mediterranean sea routes connecting the homeland with its colonies in Africa and the Far East, is paying close attention. Previously, when conflict arose between Italy and Greece over the Corfu issue, France aided Italy <32> because it feared that if Italy's power in the Mediterranean weakened, Britain would dominate the Mediterranean instead, ultimately adversely affecting French trade with Africa and the East. What is particularly noteworthy now is that Turkey's domestic situation remains unstable due to the Islamic issue, and under the current circumstances, it is unknown on which day the provisions defined by the Treaty of Lausanne might be overturned. If an incident were to break out in Turkey now, the struggle for supremacy among Britain, France, and Italy would become even more complicated. Its impact would undoubtedly reach not only Turkey and Asia Minor but also the entire Muslim world and Russia, which controls the Black Sea. Therefore, one must pay close attention to the changes in this situation. In short, one sign that the capitalist world is heading for one last round of turmoil exists on the waters of the Mediterranean.

The Problematic World Migration Conference
Starting May 15th, a World Migration Conference, hosted by the Italian government, will be held in Rome, the capital of Italy. The US government has decided to send representatives to participate unofficially in this conference, and it is reported that numerous delegates from Japan will attend. With the US immigration exclusion issue being vigorously debated, and both Italy and Japan currently protesting the new US immigration bill, this World Migration Conference is expected to have a significant impact on future international relations.

The Japan-Romania Alliance and Japan-France Rapprochement
Will the Anglo-Japanese Alliance be replaced by a Franco-Japanese-British Alliance?

The conference between Romania and Russia, held in Vienna for over a month, broke down on April 2nd over the Bessarabia issue. The problematic Bessarabia was originally territory under Romanian rule but was annexed by Russia as a result of the Russo-Turkish War (1877). However, when Russia was in turmoil due to the revolutionary chaos, Romania recaptured it. The Allied Council of Prime Ministers, especially the French government, took the lead in recognizing this annexation. At the recent Russo-Romanian conference, the Romanian representative argued that since the Allied Council of Ambassadors had already approved this matter, there was nothing further to discuss. In response, the Russian representative asserted that the Allied approval was merely a self-serving private act (自家便의 私行). Since the Russian government had never approved it, the issue should be decided from an extremely fair standpoint by holding a plebiscite among the people of Bessarabia to determine its affiliation. However, the Romanian representative stated that this was absolutely impossible, leading to the eventual breakdown.
Related to this, a rather significant issue arises: <33> the rumor that a defensive alliance treaty has been concluded between Romania and Japan. Japan promises to defend against a Russian invasion of Romanian Bessarabia, while Romania promises to defend against a Russian invasion of Japanese Sakhalin (樺太), with both countries agreeing to mutual defense. This has already become an issue in the British House of Commons, attracting public attention. Even more noteworthy is the emergence of a new atmosphere of closeness between France, which stands behind Romania, and Japan. Regarding this, a certain British newspaper previously reported on the impending visit of the Governor-General of French Indochina to Japan and commented as follows:
"This visit by the Governor-General of Indochina to Japan has significant political meaning. Why? Because the purpose is to promote rapprochement between Japan and France, centered on the French colonies in the Far East."
And so on. Looking at this from Japan's perspective, having drifted apart from Britain due to the abrogation of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, being excluded by the United States, and even facing threats from Russia, trying to join hands with a continental European power seems like an inevitable course of action. Especially since France has irreconcilable (冰炭의 不容) relations with both Russia and Britain, Franco-Japanese intimacy seems highly plausible. Is another alliance, a Franco-Japanese one, emerging to parallel the Anglo-Japanese Alliance? The only regrettable thing is that the world today is somewhat markedly different from the time of the Sino-Japanese War (甲午) and Russo-Japanese War (甲辰).

General Strike in Worker-Peasant Russia
Recently in Worker-Peasant Russia, new domestic issues arising first are likely Trotsky's reinstatement as Commissar for Military Affairs, the major purge of Communist Party members, and the slight strengthening of private capital within the country. Whether Trotsky's reinstatement will cause discord with Kamenev's faction remains to be seen. It is true that his return brings a certain sense of heightened tension (强味) to Worker-Peasant Russia's atmosphere. He has already boasted at the Railway Workers' Congress that Russia can now maintain its position as the world's foremost government even without foreign aid. Taking a step further, he insinuated that a large-scale war is bound to occur in Europe, and should it happen, Russia will undertake the final settlement of that war, emphasizing the need for its own workers to learn how to use poison gas. Furthermore, the Communist Party gained about 150,000 new members after Lenin's death. At the same time, the Central Executive Committee of the Communist Party carried out a major cleanup of undesirable elements within the party, <34> sweeping away bad habits such as infighting among comrades, struggles for position, and cronyism (緣故的結託). Currently maintaining about 450,000 members, the number of workers among party members has also increased since last autumn. Regarding private enterprise in Russia, while foreign trade has certainly become a government business, on the domestic commercial front, the activity of private capital has recently flourished. It holds a clear advantage in competition with state-run purchasing cooperatives, implicitly tending towards restoring the old phenomenon of capitalist exploitation. As evidence, a general strike (the first since the revolution) recently occurred at a privately run factory. Observing this, the Soviet government is currently striving to manage this phenomenon. It has reorganized the previously small-scale Domestic Trade Committee into a ministry-level organization similar to the Ministry of Trade and is trying to form a united front between state enterprises and purchasing cooperatives to first drive private capital out of the wholesale market. Due to these circumstances, the issues of domestic trade and purchasing cooperatives are expected to be major agenda items at the Communist Party Congress scheduled to convene from May 20th.
Russia's recent external issues concerned Britain, China, and Japan. With Trotsky's return, Russian diplomacy adopts a more confident stance, making future developments even more interesting.

The Labour Cabinet Unable to Act (措手足을 못하다)
- Is Revolution Unavoidable in Britain Too?

Having barely preserved the Labour Party cabinet's face by abandoning the Singapore naval base construction plan, Britain's MacDonald cabinet submitted the Rent Act Bill on April 2nd (its main point being that landlords do not have the right to demand immediate eviction even if tenants fall behind on rent due to unemployment). Faced with opposition from both the Conservative and Liberal parties, which prevented discussion, the government then submitted an amended version of the bill. This amendment stipulated that before a court issues an order allowing a tenant facing eviction due to rent arrears to continue residing in the rented property, the court must be provided with proof that the said tenant is eligible to receive relief funds from the poor relief authorities of their residential area. However, this too was rejected due to opposition from both Conservative and Liberal parties (by a narrow margin of 9 votes). This is because Liberal MPs, who initially supported the government when the Labour Party first took office, have recently changed their stance, saying "Hey, look at this!" as the government's foundation gradually solidifies and it attempts to truly display the characteristics of a Labour cabinet. Consequently, people like Lloyd George have publicly expressed their intention to oppose the government party from now on, <35> and Asquith seems to be of the same mind. Thus, they are closely watching the government's actions from now on, waiting for an opening based on the outcome of the Anglo-Russian conference and the handling of strike issues. Of course, even so, the Labour cabinet will probably not suddenly lose hope. However, it is true that in Britain's current situation, particularly facing opposition from both the Conservative and Liberal parties, they will keenly feel anew how little they can actually accomplish. Is revolution unavoidable in Britain too?

Alas, the End of the Possessing Class
On April 10th, perhaps, the leader of German finance, Stinnes, died. It is no exaggeration to say that the one holding real political power in today's Germany was not President Ebert, nor Chancellor Marcus, nor the parliament or political parties, but solely the single wealthy man, Stinnes. After the assassination of his political rival Rathenau, he established immense power both internally and externally as the foremost figure in German politics, a kind of German dictator.
He was 55 this year. From a young age, he detested school studies, barely graduating from middle school before immediately starting a commercial apprenticeship. At 23, he received 50,000 Marks from his father and started a coal sales and transport business. Possessing the trait of never giving up once he started something, he forged ahead single-mindedly, accumulating a fortune of 40 million Marks even before the war. During the war, he acted shrewdly, amassing an unknown amount of wealth, but deposited all the money in neutral country banks, avoiding even a single penny of wartime income tax. Once elected to parliament, using the more than 200 newspapers he owned as vanguards, he established a formidable presence in parliament. Furthermore, extending his reach into the financial world, he suddenly trampled upon the political sphere. Even when the German Mark plummeted so drastically during that period, he suffered no loss at all, having already deposited his money in foreign banks. Instead, exploiting such changes in currency values, he multiplied his wealth several times over. The German populace, especially the National Party (國粹黨), even wanted to kill him, but he believed that having money and power was enough and continued his avarice.
Though so greedy and stubborn, he could never rest easy due to the constant attacks by communists. According to his attending physician, even when he was gravely ill and his breathing was faint (氣息이 奄奄), he grimaced, cried out, and showed signs of agonizingly trying to repel some terrifying apparition (幻影). Even when death was imminent, he hallucinated (幻覺) something sitting on him and strangling his neck (목아지), struggling against it until his breath stopped and he collapsed. <36> Then, consciousness briefly returned, and he again seemed to fight against the apparition of communists before finally breathing his last. Alas, what use was possessing the greatest wealth and power in Germany if he couldn't even die peacefully, but was instead crushed (壓殺) by the apparition of communists? Oh, wealthy people of the world, seeing Stinnes's final moments, can you not feel dread (恐懼)?
(Remainder deleted - original text) <37>

**Summary**

This article from the May 1924 issue of *Kaebyŏk* provides a Korean perspective on global affairs in April 1924. It covers the US exclusion of Japanese immigrants, European political instability (German reparations, right-wing trends, potential monarchist restoration; French elections and potential shift left; Italian Fascist consolidation and violence; UK Labour government struggles), Russo-Romanian tensions over Bessarabia, potential new alliances (Japan-Romania, Japan-France), developments in Soviet Russia (Trotsky's return, party purges, rise of private capital), and the death of German industrialist Hugo Stinnes, portrayed as a cautionary tale about wealth and power. The piece emphasizes the need for Koreans to understand these global trends, implicitly linking them to Korea's own situation under colonial rule. For historians, the article is valuable for showing how contemporary international events were interpreted and presented to a Korean audience during the colonial period. It highlights concerns about imperialism, nationalism, political instability, and the rise of new ideologies (fascism, communism), reflecting the turbulent global context and perhaps subtly commenting on Korea's own search for independence and identity amidst these larger power struggles. The mention of "official-civilian collusion" (官民和姦) as a growing reactionary force in Korea is particularly noteworthy.

**Named Entities**

개벽	개벽	Kaebyŏk
起瀍	기찬	Kich'an
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
世界	세계	World
米國	미국	United States (USA)
日本	일본	Japan
英國	영국	Great Britain (UK)
露國	노국	Russia (Often referring to Soviet Russia)
羅馬尼	나마니/루마니아	Romania
獨逸	독일	Germany
伊太利	이태리	Italy
希臘	희랍	Greece
中國	중국	China
孫文	손문	Sun Wen (Sun Yat-sen)
哈爾賓	합이빈	Harbin
佛國	불국	France
上海	상해	Shanghai
極東民族 國際共産黨大會	극동민족 국제공산당대회	Far Eastern Peoples' International Communist Party Congress
羅馬	나마/로마	Rome
國際聯盟	국제연맹	League of Nations
聯合國	연합국	Allied Powers / Allies
루-얼	루르	Ruhr
帝政	제정	German Empire / Monarchy
國民黨	국민당	National Party (Germany - DNVP)
人民黨	인민당	People's Party (Germany - DVP)
마루쿠스	마르크스	Marx (Wilhelm Marx, Chancellor)
中央黨	중앙당	Centre Party (Germany - Zentrum)
스트레제만	슈트레제만	Stresemann (Gustav Stresemann)
뮨헨	뮌헨	München (Munich)
루덴또루푸	루덴도르프	Ludendorff (Erich Ludendorff)
크레만소	클레망소	Clemenceau (Georges Clemenceau)
포앙카레	푸앵카레	Poincaré (Raymond Poincaré)
急進黨	급진당	Radical Party (France)
社會黨	사회당	Socialist Party (France / Italy)
共産黨	공산당	Communist Party (France / Italy / Russia)
카이요	카요	Caillaux (Joseph Caillaux)
國粹黨	국수당	Fascist Party (Italy - PNF, lit. National Essence Party)
뭇소리니	무솔리니	Mussolini (Benito Mussolini)
포포라-레黨	포폴라레당	Popolari Party (Italy - PPI)
유니테리안 社會黨	우니타리안 사회당	Unitarian Socialist Party (Italy - PSU)
벨사이유和約	베르사유화약	Treaty of Versailles
歐洲	구주	Europe
金馬克	금마르크	Goldmark
地中海	지중해	Mediterranean Sea
印度	인도	India
埃及	애급	Egypt
極東	극동	Far East
回回敎國	회회교국	Muslim World / Islamic Countries
西班牙	서반아	Spain
亞弗利加	아프리카	Africa
土耳其	토이기	Turkey
로싼누條約	로잔조약	Treaty of Lausanne
小亞西亞	소아시아	Asia Minor
黑海	흑해	Black Sea
維也納	유야나/빈	Vienna
벳사라비야	벳사라비아	Bessarabia
露土戰爭	노토전쟁	Russo-Turkish War
樺太	화태	Sakhalin
印度支那	인도지나	Indochina
勞農露國	노농노국	Worker-Peasant Russia (Soviet Russia)
뚜로쯔키	트로츠키	Trotsky (Leon Trotsky)
카메넵	카메네프	Kamenev (Lev Kamenev)
레닌	레닌	Lenin (Vladimir Lenin)
쏘벳트政府	소베트정부	Soviet Government
新嘉坡	신가파	Singapore
막드날드	맥도널드	MacDonald (Ramsay MacDonald)
保守黨	보수당	Conservative Party (UK)
自由黨	자유당	Liberal Party (UK)
로이드쪼지	로이드 조지	Lloyd George (David Lloyd George)
아스키스	애스퀴스	Asquith (H. H. Asquith)
스친네스	슈티네스	Stinnes (Hugo Stinnes)
에벹트	에베르트	Ebert (Friedrich Ebert)
라테나우	라테나우	Rathenau (Walther Rathenau)

**Glossary**

世上	세상	World; society
變하다	변하다	To change
츄려서	추려서	Summarizing; selecting (Older spelling of 추려서)
通曉하다	통효하다	To be well-versed in; understand thoroughly
大勢	대세	General trend; situation
擧示	거시	To present; list; point out
看取하다	간취하다	To discern; grasp; perceive
緊要하다	긴요하다	Essential; crucial
排斥	배척	Exclusion; boycott; rejection
會議	회의	Conference; meeting
破裂	파렬	Breakdown; rupture
賠償	배상	Reparations; compensation
國粹黨	국수당	Fascist Party (lit. National Essence Party); used for nationalist/ultranationalist parties
交涉	교섭	Negotiation
延引	연인	Delay; postponement
否認	부인	Denial; refusal
共和國	공화국	Republic
社會運動	사회운동	Social movement
具體化	구체화	Concretization; becoming concrete
欲現未現中	욕현미현중	State of being about to appear but not yet appeared; latent
攻守同盟	공수동맹	Defensive alliance
締結	체결	Conclusion (of a treaty)
接近	접근	Approach; drawing closer
傾向	경향	Trend; tendency
移民會議	이민회의	Migration conference
召集	소집	Convening; summoning
極東	극동	Far East
王政復舊	왕정복구	Restoration of monarchy
勞働黨	노동당	Labour Party
自由黨	자유당	Liberal Party
支持	지지	Support
反動勢力	반동세력	Reactionary forces
日熾하다	일치하다	To intensify daily
右傾	우경	Rightward trend; leaning to the right
左傾	좌경	Leftward trend; leaning to the left
軍事管理	군사관리	Military supervision/control
回 favorables	회답	Reply; answer
國際聯盟	국제연맹	League of Nations
條約	조약	Treaty
拘束	구속	Binding; restriction
獨立	독립	Independence
語調	어조	Tone (of voice or writing)
現狀	현상	Current situation; status quo
工業家	공업가	Industrialist
協定	협정	Agreement; pact
從前	종전	Previously; formerly
消極的抵抗	소극적 저항	Passive resistance
再起	재기	Resurgence; comeback
形勢	형세	Situation; circumstances
險惡하다	험악하다	Dangerous; perilous
惹起되다	야기되다	To be caused; arise
總選擧	총선거	General election
盛傳되다	성전되다	To be widely rumored/discussed
唱道하다	창도하다	To advocate; champion
樹立	수립	Establishment
首相	수상	Prime Minister
領袖	영수	Leader
革命	혁명	Revolution
反復하다	반복하다	To repeat
外相	외상	Foreign Minister
首領	수령	Leader; chief
意嚮	의향	Intention; inclination
迎合하다	영합하다	To cater to; curry favor with
得勝하다	득승하다	To win; be victorious
當場에	당장에	Immediately; on the spot
軍備縮少	군비축소	Disarmament; arms reduction
激烈하다	격렬하다	Fierce; intense
馴致하다	순치하다	To lead to; bring about (gradually)
看過하다	간과하다	To overlook; ignore
判決	판결	Verdict; judgment
元帥	원수	Marshal (military rank)
無罪	무죄	Innocence; acquittal
有罪	유죄	Guilt
宣言하다	선언하다	To declare; proclaim
法廷	법정	Courtroom
大將	대장	General (military rank)
正服	정복	Full dress uniform
判事	판사	Judge
同志	동지	Comrade
侮辱	모욕	Insult
意氣揚揚	의기양양	Triumphant; elated
群衆	군중	Crowd
熱狂的	열광적	Enthusiastic; fervent
逐鹿戰	축록전	Struggle for power (lit. deer-chasing battle)
滿期	만기	Expiration of term
曠古未有	광고미유	Unprecedented in history
博하다	박하다	To gain; win; achieve
右黨各派	우당각파	Various right-wing factions
頑兒	완아	Stubborn child; used pejoratively for reactionaries
大同團結	대동단결	Grand coalition; great unity
壓頭하다	압도하다	To overwhelm; suppress
奇勝	기승	Surprising victory
維持하다	유지하다	To maintain
支持	지지	Support
밧다	받다	To receive (older spelling of 받다)
今次	금차	This time
雪辱戰	설욕전	Revenge match; battle to redeem oneself
捲土重來	권토중래	Staging a comeback (lit. roll up the earth and come again)
勝捷	승첩	Victory
엇다	얻다	To obtain; get (older spelling of 얻다)
大聯合	대연합	Grand coalition; great alliance
圖하다	도하다	To plan; attempt
肉迫하다	육박하다	To close in on; press hard
天下	천하	World; rule; dominance
內外政策	내외정책	Domestic and foreign policy
對獨政策	대독정책	Policy towards Germany
쪼차서	쫓아서	Following (older spelling of 쫓아서)
復讎主義	복수주의	Revanchism; vengefulness
버리다	버리다	To abandon; discard
더부러서	더불어서	With; together with (older spelling of 더불어서)
改訂	개정	Revision
親日氣勢	친일기세	Pro-Japanese sentiment/atmosphere
動搖	동요	Shaking; wavering; fluctuation
改造	개조	Reorganization; reshuffle
網羅하다	망라하다	To include comprehensively; gather
信任投票	신임투표	Vote of confidence
亂法亂行	난법난행	Lawlessness and misconduct
政敵	정적	Political enemy
潛勢力	잠재력	Latent power; potential influence
壓迫	압박	Oppression; pressure
黨派	당파	Faction; party clique
比例制	비례제	Proportional system
總議席	총의석	Total seats (in parliament)
三分二	삼분의 이	Two-thirds
分當하다	분당하다	To share proportionally
奇怪하다	기괴하다	Bizarre; strange
選擧法案	선거법안	Electoral bill
通過하다	통과하다	To pass (a bill)
解散하다	해산하다	To dissolve (parliament)
占하다	점하다	To occupy; account for
日復日	일부일	Day by day
亂暴	난폭	Violence; brutality
不法	불법	Illegal; unlawful
是事하다	시사하다	To make something one's business; engage in
反對便	반대편	Opposition side
言論機關	언론기관	Media outlet
執筆者	집필자	Writer; author
毆打	구타	Beating; assault
投獄	투옥	Imprisonment
燒棄	소기	Burning; destruction by fire
凶狀	흉상	Atrocity; horrible state
顚覆	전복	Overthrow; downfall
遠하다	멀다	To be far
怨恨	원한	Resentment; grudge
侵略主義	침략주의	Imperialism; aggression
全容	전용	Full picture; entirety
骨子	골자	Core; essence; gist
核心問題	핵심문제	Core issue; key problem
共認하다	공인하다	To commonly recognize; acknowledge
支拂能力	지불능력	Capacity to pay
調査	조사	Investigation; survey
報告書	보고서	Report
要項	요항	Main points; summary
摘記하다	적기하다	To summarize; write down excerpts
年額	연액	Annual amount
最低	최저	Minimum
別案	별안	Alternative plan
許하다	허하다	To allow; permit
比例	비례	Proportion; ratio
標準	표준	Standard; criterion
更히	다시	Again; further (older spelling of 다시)
追加支拂	추가지불	Additional payment
鐵道	철도	Railway
國際會社	국제회사	International company
引渡	인도	Handover; transfer
資本金	자본금	Capital fund
負擔하다	부담하다	To bear (a cost); take responsibility for
六分利附	육푼이부	With 6% interest
社債	사채	Corporate bond
配當	배당	Dividend
形便	형편	Situation; circumstances
一時	일시	Temporarily
流失	유실	Outflow; loss
常設委員會	상설위원회	Permanent committee
設置	설치	Establishment; installation
專門家	전문가	Expert; specialist
指名하다	지명하다	To nominate; appoint
論及하다	논급하다	To mention; refer to
占領	점령	Occupation
自制的	자제적	Self-restrained
撤兵	철병	Withdrawal of troops
勸하다	권하다	To advise; recommend
原則	원칙	Principle
承認하다	승인하다	To approve; recognize
抛棄	포기	Abandonment; renunciation
代償條件	대상조건	Compensatory condition
提議하다	제의하다	To propose; suggest
心事	심사	Intention; plan; mind
商議하다	상의하다	To consult; discuss
承諾하다	승낙하다	To consent; agree
總額	총액	Total amount
減損	감손	Reduction; decrease
엇지 못하다	얻지 못하다	Cannot obtain/get (older spelling)
參酌하다	참작하다	To consider; take into account
緩和	완화	Easing; relaxation; mitigation
國民	국민	People; nation; citizens
풀다	풀다	To resolve; untie; relieve
心中	심중	In one's heart; mind
舊時	구시	Old times; former days
復하다	복하다	To return to; restore
鐵杵	철저	Thorough; exhaustive
實現	실현	Realization; actualization
負擔	부담	Burden
蹴破하다	축파하다	To kick away; break through
近來	근래	Recently; lately
便	편	Side; party; way
勝하다	승하다	To win; prevail
갓다	같다	To be like; seem (older spelling of 같다)
意思	의사	Intention; will
表明하다	표명하다	To express; declare
頑强	완강	Obstinate; stubborn
煽傳	선전	Propaganda; incitement
資料	자료	Material; data
利用하다	이용하다	To use; utilize
制先하다	제선하다	To preempt; forestall
當局者	당국자	Authorities; person in charge
如何히	어떻히	How; in what way (older spelling of 어떻게)
複雜하다	복잡하다	Complex; complicated
推察하다	추찰하다	To infer; guess
帝國主義的	제국주의적	Imperialistic
轉化하다	전화하다	To transform; change into
先하다	선하다	To precede; come before
國家至上主義	국가지상주의	Statism; nationalism prioritizing the state
解體	해체	Dismantlement; dissolution
結局	결국	Eventually; in the end
爭覇戰	쟁패전	Struggle for supremacy/hegemony
沿岸諸國	연안제국	Coastal states; littoral countries
海運	해운	Maritime transport; shipping
優越權	우월권	Superiority; dominance
獲得하다	획득하다	To acquire; obtain
暗中飛躍	암중비약	Clandestine maneuvering; leaping in the dark
近東諸國	근동제국	Near Eastern countries
勿論	물론	Of course; needless to say
葛藤	갈등	Conflict; strife
渦中	와중	Vortex; turmoil
支配하다	지배하다	To dominate; control
目的	목적	Purpose; objective
通商保護	통상보호	Protection of trade
主力	주력	Main force; main strength
集中하다	집중하다	To concentrate
海軍力	해군력	Naval power
充實	충실	Strengthening; replenishment
圖하다	도하다	To plan; aim for
發布하다	발포하다	To announce; proclaim
對抗하다	대항하다	To oppose; counter
加之而	가지이	Furthermore; moreover
空軍	공군	Air force
大擴張	대확장	Major expansion
計劃하다	계획하다	To plan
飛行機	비행기	Airplane
增加하다	증가하다	To increase
海軍相互援助	해군상호원조	Mutual naval assistance
植民地	식민지	Colony
連絡하다	연락하다	To connect; link
航路	항로	Sea route; shipping lane
必要上	필요상	Out of necessity
深甚하다	심심하다	Profound; deep
先者	전자	Previously; the former
紛爭	분쟁	Dispute; conflict
生기다	생기다	To arise; occur (older spelling of 생기다)
援助	원조	Aid; assistance
理由	이유	Reason
代身	대신	Instead; in place of
影響	영향	Influence; effect
저퍼한 故	두려워한 까닭	Because of fearing (older spelling/form)
國情	국정	National situation; state of affairs
依然	의연	Still; as before
安定	안정	Stability
規定되다	규정되다	To be stipulated; defined
知하다	알다	To know
事變	사변	Incident; emergency
勃發하다	발발하다	To break out; erupt
一屬	한층 더	Even more; further
紛糾	분규	Complication; entanglement
밋츨 터	미칠 터	Will likely reach/affect
要컨대	요컨대	In short; to sum up
資本主義	자본주의	Capitalism
最後	최후	Final; last
어즈러울	어지러울	To be chaotic; disorderly (older spelling)
徵兆	징조	Sign; omen
海上	해상	On the sea; maritime
非公式	비공식	Unofficial
叅列하다	참렬하다	To participate; attend (older spelling/usage)
代表者	대표자	Representative; delegate
派送하다	파송하다	To dispatch; send
多數	다수	Majority; large number
參加하다	참가하다	To participate; join
傳하다	전하다	To be reported; conveyed
盛論되다	성론되다	To be vigorously debated/discussed
抗議	항의	Protest
提出中	제출중	In the process of submitting
將來	장래	Future
國際上	국제상	Internationally; on the international stage
日羅同盟	일라동맹	Japanese-Romanian Alliance
日佛接近	일불접근	Japanese-French Rapprochement
代하다	대하다	To replace; substitute
決裂되다	결렬되다	To break down; rupture
治下	치하	Under the rule of
領地	영지	Territory
革命亂	혁명란	Revolutionary chaos
紛紜하다	분운하다	To be chaotic; confused
脫還하다	탈환하다	To recapture
首相會議	수상회의	Prime Ministers' conference
倂合	병합	Annexation
率先承認하다	솔선승인하다	To take the lead in recognizing
一卽	일찍이	Already; previously
大使會議	대사회의	Ambassadors' conference
論議하다	논의하다	To discuss
公平하다	공평하다	Fair; impartial
見地	견지	Standpoint; viewpoint
人民投票	인민투표	Plebiscite; popular vote
行하다	행하다	To conduct; carry out
所屬	소속	Affiliation; belonging
決하다	결하다	To decide
防守同盟條約	방수동맹조약	Defensive alliance treaty
侵入	침입	Invasion
互相	호상	Mutually
防禦	방어	Defense
約束하다	약속하다	To promise; agree
알즉	벌써	Already (older form/dialect?)
下院	하원	Lower house (of parliament)
世間	세간	The world; public
잇글다	이끌다	To draw; attract (older spelling of 이끌다)
一層	일층	Even more; further
背後	배후	Behind; background
새삼스러운	새삼스러운	Renewed; fresh; sudden
親接	친접	Closeness; intimacy
氣運	기운	Atmosphere; spirit; tendency
엇던	어떤	Certain; some (older spelling of 어떤)
新聞	신문	Newspaper
總督	총독	Governor-General
訪問	방문	Visit
니여써	이어서	Following; continuing (older spelling/form)
論하다	논하다	To discuss; argue
政治的意義	정치적 의의	Political significance
何故오	하고오	Why; for what reason (older form of 왜냐하면)
圖謀하다	도모하다	To plan; plot; scheme
云云	운운	And so on; et cetera
便	편	Side; perspective
廢棄	폐기	Abrogation; abolition
멀어지다	멀어지다	To become distant; drift apart
威脅	위협	Threat
밧는	받는	Receiving (older spelling of 받는)
必然	필연	Inevitable; necessity
勢	세	Momentum; force; situation
共히	같이	Together; commonly (older usage, now usually 같이)
冰炭不容	빙탄불용	Incompatible (like ice and charcoal)
關係上	관계상	Due to the relationship; in terms of relations
親近	친근	Intimacy; closeness
實現되다	실현되다	To be realized; materialized
妥當性	타당성	Plausibility; validity; appropriateness
恨스럽다	한스럽다	Regrettable; lamentable
甲午	갑오	Gap'o year (1894 - Sino-Japanese War)
甲辰	갑진	Gapjin year (1904 - Russo-Japanese War)
조곰	조금	A little; somewhat (older spelling of 조금)
判異하다	판이하다	Markedly different; distinct
勞農露國	노농노국	Worker-Peasant Russia (Soviet Russia)
同盟罷業	동맹파업	General strike; joint strike
國內的	국내적	Domestic
軍事委員長	군사위원장	Commissar for Military Affairs
復職	복직	Reinstatement
共産黨員	공산당원	Communist Party member
大淘汰	대도태	Major purge; elimination
個人資本	개인자본	Private capital
優勢	우세	Superiority; dominance
意思疏隔	의사소격	Estrangement; alienation of opinion
氣勢	기세	Spirit; vigor; momentum
緊張	긴장	Tension
强味	강미	Strong taste; intensity; sharpness
늣기다	느끼다	To feel; sense (older spelling of 느끼다)
鐵道從業員大會	철도종업원대회	Railway Workers' Congress
露西亞	러시아	Russia
外國	외국	Foreign country
援助	원조	Aid; assistance
업슬지라도	없을지라도	Even if there isn't (older spelling of 없을지라도)
스사로	스스로	Oneself; by oneself (older spelling of 스스로)
最高政府	최고정부	Highest government; supreme government
能保하다	능보하다	To be able to maintain/preserve
豪語하다	호어하다	To boast; talk big
一步	일보	One step
進하다	진하다	To advance; proceed
반드시	반드시	Surely; certainly
大規模	대규모	Large-scale
戰爭	전쟁	War
닐어날 것	일어날 것	Will happen/occur (older spelling of 일어날)
最終決算	최종결산	Final settlement; final reckoning
擔行하다	담행하다	To undertake; carry out
隱喩하다	은유하다	To imply; hint; use metaphor
自國	자국	One's own country
勞働者	노동자	Worker
毒瓦斯使用法	독가스사용법	Method of using poison gas
習得	습득	Learning; acquisition
必要	필요	Necessity
强調하다	강조하다	To emphasize; stress
死後	사후	After death
新入黨員	신입당원	New party member
中央執行員會	중앙집행위원회	Central Executive Committee
黨內不良分子	당내불량분자	Undesirable elements within the party
大掃除	대소제	Major cleanup; purge
斷行하다	단행하다	To carry out decisively
同僚間	동료간	Among colleagues
暗鬪	암투	Infighting; secret strife
爭奪	쟁탈	Struggle; scramble
緣故的結託	연고적 결탁	Cronyism; collusion based on connections
弊習	폐습	Bad habit; evil practice
一掃하다	일소하다	To sweep away; eradicate
昨秋	작추	Last autumn
個人企業	개인기업	Private enterprise
外國貿易	외국무역	Foreign trade
確實히	확실히	Certainly; surely
內國商業	내국상업	Domestic commerce
戰線	전선	Front line; front
盛行하다	성행하다	To be prevalent; flourish
國營事業	국영사업	State-run enterprise
購買組合	구매조합	Purchasing cooperative
競爭	경쟁	Competition
隱然히	은연히	Implicitly; secretly
資本家搾取	자본가 착취	Capitalist exploitation
녯현상	옛 현상	Old phenomenon (older spelling of 옛)
復하다	복하다	To restore; return to
證據	증거	Evidence; proof
私人經營	사인경영	Privately managed
工場	공장	Factory
니러나다	일어나다	To happen; occur (older spelling of 일어나다)
目下	목하	Currently; at present
整理	정리	Arrangement; management; putting in order
腐心하다	부심하다	To rack one's brains; strive hard
小規模	소규모	Small-scale
貿易省	무역성	Ministry of Trade
同樣	동양	Same; similar
宮廳組織	궁청조직	Ministry-level organization (lit. palace-office)
곳치다	고치다	To fix; repair; reorganize (older spelling)
共同戰線	공동전선	United front; common front
作하다	작하다	To make; form
爲先	우선	First; for the time being
都賣市場	도매시장	Wholesale market
擊退하다	격퇴하다	To repel; drive back
努力中	노력중	In the process of making efforts
事勢	사세	Situation; state of affairs
議題	의제	Agenda item
國外	국외	External; foreign
興味	흥미	Interest
措手足을 못하다	조수족을 못하다	To be unable to act; be helpless (lit. unable to place hands and feet)
勞働內閣	노동내각	Labour Cabinet
不可免乎아	불가면호아	Is it unavoidable? (archaic interrogative form)
建設案	건설안	Construction plan
抛棄하다	포기하다	To abandon; give up
體面	체면	Face; dignity
僅保하다	근보하다	To barely maintain/preserve
借家法案	차가법안	Rent bill; Tenant Act
要意	요의	Main point; gist
借家人	차가인	Tenant
失業하다	실업하다	To be unemployed
場合	경우	Case; situation
家賃	가임	Rent (for a house)
滯納하다	체납하다	To be delinquent (in payment); fall into arrears
家主	가주	Landlord; house owner
即時	즉시	Immediately
立退	입퇴	Eviction; moving out
權利	권리	Right
提出하다	제출하다	To submit; present
保守黨	보수당	Conservative Party
討議	토의	Discussion; deliberation
不得하다	부득하다	To be unable to obtain/do
修正案	수정안	Amendment; revised bill
緣하다	연하다	To be due to; stem from
絕迫하다	절박하다	To be imminent; desperate
裁判所	재판소	Court
居住	거주	Residence
許하다	허하다	To permit; allow
命令	명령	Order; command
發하다	발하다	To issue
先하다	선하다	To precede; before doing
該	해	The said; aforementioned
地方	지방	Region; locality
貧民救助官憲	빈민구조관헌	Poor relief authorities
救濟金	구제금	Relief fund; aid money
受領하다	수령하다	To receive
족하다	족하다	To be sufficient; enough
證明	증명	Proof; certificate
與하다	여하다	To give; grant
案	안	Plan; proposal; bill
否決되다	부결되다	To be rejected; voted down
差	차	Difference; margin
僅	근	Barely; merely
當初	당초	Initially; at the beginning
政府便	정부편	Government side
基盤	기반	Foundation; base
漸次	점차	Gradually
튼튼하다	튼튼하다	Strong; solid; sturdy
色彩	색채	Color; characteristic; hue
正말	정말	Truly; really (older spelling of 정말)
發揮하다	발휘하다	To display; demonstrate
變하다	변하다	To change
까닭	까닭	Reason; cause
公然히	공연히	Openly; publicly
亦然하다	역연하다	To be the same; likewise
模樣	모양	Appearance; shape; manner
自今	자금	From now on
所爲	소위	Act; deed; conduct
注視하다	주시하다	To watch closely; pay attention to
結果	결과	Result; outcome
罷業問題	파업문제	Strike issue
對策	대책	Countermeasure; plan
如何	여하	How; what; nature of
틈	틈	Gap; opportunity; crack
기다리다	기다리다	To wait
落望하다	낙망하다	To be disappointed; lose hope
形便	형편	Circumstances; situation
英國에도	영국에도	In Britain too
可히 免치 못할 것인가	가히 면치 못할 것인가	Is it truly unavoidable?
噫	희	Alas! (interjection of sorrow or regret)
有産者	유산자	Person of property; the wealthy; bourgeoisie
末路	말로	End; final moments; fate
財界	재계	Financial world; business circles
首領	수령	Leader; head
죽엇다	죽었다	Died (older spelling of 죽었다)
實際	실제	Reality; actuality
政權	정권	Political power; regime
富漢	부한	Wealthy man
過言	과언	Exaggeration
政敵	정적	Political rival
暗殺되다	암살되다	To be assassinated
第一人	제일인	Foremost person; number one figure
內的外的	내적 외적	Internal and external
一大勢力	일대세력	Great power; major force
樹立하다	수립하다	To establish
一種	일종	A kind of; a sort of
獨裁者	독재자	Dictator
若干	약간	Some; a few; somewhat
어려서	어려서	From childhood; when young
學校工夫	학교공부	School studies
끔즉히	끔찍이	Terribly; extremely (older spelling of 끔찍이)
실혀하다	싫어하다	To dislike; hate (older spelling of 싫어하다)
卒業하다	졸업하다	To graduate
商業	상업	Commerce; business
見習하다	견습하다	To apprentice; learn by observation
親父	친부	Biological father
資金	자금	Funds; capital
어더가지고	얻어가지고	Having obtained/received (older spelling)
石炭販賣	석탄판매	Coal sales
運送業	운송업	Transport business
始作하다	시작하다	To start; begin
지지 안켓다	지지 않겠다	Will not lose; determined not to lose (older spelling/form)
特性	특성	Characteristic; special quality
一意勇進하다	일의용진하다	To push forward single-mindedly
戰前	전전	Pre-war
旣히	이미	Already (older spelling of 이미)
富	부	Wealth; fortune
戰爭中	전쟁중	During the war
狡猾하게	교활하게	Shrewdly; cunningly
數 모르는	수 모르는	Innumerable; countless
致하다	치하다	To amass; achieve
中立國銀行	중립국은행	Neutral country bank
預入하다	예입하다	To deposit
戰時所得稅	전시소득세	Wartime income tax
賦課	부과	Imposition (of tax)
分錢	푼전	Penny; small coin
물지 아니하다	물지 아니하다	Did not pay
當選되다	당선되다	To be elected
所有하다	소유하다	To own; possess
先驅	선구	Vanguard; precursor
堂堂히	당당히	Majestically; confidently
陣容을 버리다	진용을 벌이다	To set up a formation; establish a presence (older spelling of 벌이다)
너허	넣어	Putting in; inserting (older spelling of 넣어)
一朝에	일조에	Suddenly; overnight
蹂躪하다	유린하다	To trample upon; violate
暴落하다	폭락하다	To plummet; crash
일즉히	일찍이	Already; previously (older spelling)
損害	손해	Loss; damage
밧지 안코	받지 않고	Without receiving (older spelling of 받지 않고)
도로혀	도리어	Rather; instead; on the contrary (older spelling)
金錢時勢	금전시세	Monetary situation; currency exchange rates
數倍	수배	Several times; manifold
民衆	민중	The masses; populace
特히	특히	Especially; particularly
죽이려고까지 하다	죽이려고까지 하다	To even try to kill
權勢	권세	Power; authority; influence
慾心	욕심	Greed; avarice
부리다	부리다	To exercise; display (greed)
만코	많고	Being many/much (older spelling of 많고)
頑强하다	완강하다	Stubborn; obstinate
不斷하다	부단하다	Constant; incessant
襲擊	습격	Attack; raid
언제던지	언제든지	Always; whenever (older spelling of 언제든지)
마음을 못 놓다	마음을 못 놓다	Cannot be at ease; feel anxious
主治醫	주치의	Attending physician
依하다	의하다	According to
病	병	Illness; disease
篤하다	독하다	To be severe; critical (illness)
氣息	기식	Breath
奄奄하다	엄엄하다	Faint; feeble (breath)
얼골	얼굴	Face (older spelling of 얼굴)
찡그리다	찡그리다	To frown; grimace
소래	소리	Sound; voice (older spelling of 소리)
지르다	지르다	To shout; scream
무서운	무서운	Frightening; terrifying
幻影	환영	Apparition; phantom; illusion
擊退하다	격퇴하다	To repel; drive back
苦悶하다	고민하다	To agonize; suffer anguish
뵈이다	보이다	To be seen; appear (older spelling)
臨終	임종	Moment of death; deathbed
갓가와	가까워	Being close (older spelling of 가까워)
타고 안저서	타고 앉아서	Riding and sitting; sitting astride (older spelling of 앉아서)
목아지	목	Neck (older/colloquial spelling)
쪼르다	조르다	To strangle; choke
幻覺	환각	Hallucination
그리다	그리다	To depict; imagine; feel
抵抗하다	저항하다	To resist
숨이 끈어지다	숨이 끊어지다	Breath stops; die (older spelling)
꺽구러지다	거꾸러지다	To collapse; fall down (older spelling)
잠간	잠깐	Briefly; for a moment (older spelling)
意識	의식	Consciousness
도라서	돌아서	Returning; coming back (older spelling)
싸우다	싸우다	To fight
듯하더니	듯하더니	Seemed to... and then
졍말	정말	Truly; really (older spelling)
끈키다	끊기다	To be cut off; stop (older spelling)
슬프다	슬프다	Sad; sorrowful
가젓스면	가졌으면	If one possessed (older spelling)
무엇할고	무엇할고	What use is it? (archaic interrogative)
壓殺되다	압살되다	To be crushed to death; overwhelmed
만흔	많은	Many; much (older spelling of 많은)
恐懼하다	공구하다	To fear; dread
업슬가	없을까	Will there not be?; Is there not? (older spelling)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제47호
발행일	1924년 05월 01일
기사제목	떠드는 世上. 變하는 세상 이것을 츄려서 쓰면 이러케 된다
필자	起瀍 抄
기사형태	논설

떠드는 世上. 變하는 세상 이것을 츄려서 쓰면 이러케 된다
						起瀍 抄
우리는 前 4월호를 특히 世界風雲號로 하야 우리 朝鮮사람은 특히 세계의 大勢에 通曉할 필요가 잇슴을 말하엿다. 이 정신에 의지하야 本誌는 어제브터 每號에 세계 現像의 要項을 擧示하며 또 其 특징을 看取하야 本誌를 繼讀하는 이의 緊要한 거울이 되게 하겟다.

지나간 4월의 세상에서, 여하간 세계적으로 문제가 된 것은 米國 上下院에서 日本 移民 排斥法案을 통과한 것이 그 첫재일지며, 英露의 회의 開始, 露羅間의 회의 破裂, 獨逸賠償案 新決定, 총선거에 대한 伊太利 國粹黨의 승리, 露中, 露日交涉의 延引, 獨逸 軍事 管理 否認, 希臘 共和國 성립, 朝鮮 社會運動의 구체화와 가튼 사건은 다-가티 世間의 주목을 잇글만한 일이며. 그리고 아직 欲現未現中에 잇는 것으로서 다시금 주의가 되는 것은 日本과 羅馬尼間에 攻守同盟이 締結되엿다는 말, 中國의 孫文 정부가 哈爾賓으로 올며가리는 말, 특히 佛國과 日本의 새가 접근하는 경향이 잇는 것, 伊太利가 世界移民會議를 소집하게된 것, 上海에 極東民族 國際共産黨大會(5월 10일)가 열니리라는 것, 獨逸에 王政復舊의 기분이 농후해 가는 것, 英國의 勞働黨 內閣이 점점 自由黨의 지지로브터 멀어저가는 것 米國政界에 共和, 民主 兩黨 이외에 제3당이 생길 형세가 잇는 것, 조선에 官民和姦의 반동세력이 日熾함과 가튼 등이 잇겟다. 이제 右에 나타나고 또는 나타나지 아니한 여러 가지 문제에 대하야 더 좀 簡明히 적으면＜28＞

獨逸의 右傾·左傾
獨逸政府는 4월초에, 연합국의 獨逸에 대한 군사 관리 문제에 대하야 회답을 발송하얏는대 그 회답에 의하면 獨逸은 연합국이 獨逸國 內의 軍備狀態를 조사한다는 제안에 대하야 「右는 國際聯盟이 행할 것이라」하고, 따라 현재의 聯合國 관리위원은 前記 聯盟理事會에 종속하는 단체와 즉시 更代케 하라 하야, 獨逸은 今回의 회답에서 처음으로 條約에 구속되지 아니하려 하는 독립의 語調를 사용한 바, 佛國 政府에서는 이것을 자못 중대한 現狀으로 본다고 하며, 더욱히 루-얼 지방의 獨逸 工業家는 지난 15일 이후브터 聯合國의 공장 及 炭玩 관리위원과의 협정을 계속치 아니하고, 종전의 소극적 저항을 再起하려하는 形勢인 바, 루-얼문제는 다시 險惡하게 되얏다. 즉 獨逸은 이만큼 기세가 활발해 가는 셈이다. 이에 따라서 야기되는 것은 즉 帝政復舊問題인대, 오는 4일(5월)로써 施行될 총선거를 압헤 둔 관계상, 이 문제는 一層 盛傳되야, 國民黨과 가튼 것은 공연히 王政復舊를 唱道하고, 人民黨도 역시 종래의 주장을 버리고, 민주적 王政政治의 수립을 主唱하기에 니르럿스며, 現 首相 마루쿠스氏는 中央黨 領袖의 一人이나 「革命은 실패하엿다」는 말을 반복하며, 現 外相 스트레제만氏는 人民黨 首領인대 역시 반동적 國家主義 分子의 意嚮에 迎合하려하는 바, 今回의 총선거에는 현저히 右傾의 기세를 보이며 잇다는 말이다. 물론 右黨이 得勝한다 할지라도 당장에 王政復舊問題는 닐지 못할 것이나, 여하간 賠償問題, 軍備縮少問題에 대하야는 격렬한 반대를 행할 것인 바, 聯合國과의 관계, 아니 獨佛의 관계는 매우 험악하게 될 것이며, 延하야 국내에는 현저한 左傾運動을 馴致케 하야, 문제는 점점 복잡해갈 것이다 .

大將의 正服을 입은 被告
4월의 獨逸에 잇서 또 한 가지 看過치 못할 것은 1일 「뮨헨」에서 復辟暴動事件의 판결이 잇섯는대, 이 사건의 주인공인 루덴또루푸 元帥는 無罪로 판결되고 其餘의 몃 사람에 대하야 약간의 有罪를 선언하엿는대, 이 때의 법정에 선 루텐또루푸 元帥는 大將의 正服을 닙고, 판사에게 향하야 「나의 동지를 죄에 處하고, 오즉 나 혼자만을 無罪로 言渡함은 나의 軍服에 대한 모욕이라」하며 意氣揚揚히 법정을 나선즉, 군중은 열광적으로 그를 환영하엿다 하는 바, 獨逸 上下 人心의 최근 경향 如何를 이로써도 엿볼 수 잇다.＜29＞

左乎右乎=佛國의 逐鹿戰
佛國의 총선거는 5월 11일로 결정되얏다. 즉 獨逸의 5월 4일에 비해서 1주간을 뒤떠러젓는대, 이것은 獨逸 총선거의 결과가 반동파 세력의 증가를 證하게 되면 佛國民의 투표가 정부 편에 유리하리라는 그것을 생각해서 日字를 그러케 정햇다는 말도 잇다. 이번 佛國의 총선거는 伊太利와 獨逸과 가티, 解散 후의 선거가 아니라 1919년 11월에 선거된 의원의 滿期에 의한 것이다. 그런대 1919년의 총선거는 例의 大戰 중에 曠古 未有의 기세를 博한 老虎 「크레만소」氏가 首相 兼 陸相의 지위에 안저서, 교묘히 戰後의 反動時代를 이용하야 右黨 各泒(所謂 憂國憂世의 反動的 頑兒)의 대동단결을 행하야써, 急進黨 社會黨을 壓頭하는 奇勝을 博한 것이엿다. 그래서 사람은 비록 다르나, 今日 佛國 首相 포앙카레氏가 그와 가튼 頑强政策을 감행하면서도 그만큼한 지위를 유지하는 것은 전혀 右黨 各泒의 지지를 밧는 까닭이다. 그러면 이번 5월의 선거에도 종래의 右黨 各泒의 大同團結이라는 그 現勢를 유지할 것인가 혹은 1919년에 大敗한 急進黨은 今次의 雪辱戰에서 과연 捲土重來의 勝捷을 엇을 것인가. 소문에 의하면 佛의 急進黨은 共産黨 社會黨, 즉 左黨과의 大聯合을 圖하야, 政府黨에 肉迫하리라 한다. 이리하야 左黨의 天下만 되면 佛國의 內外政策에 중대한 변화를 볼지니, 예하면 對獨政策에 잇서도 首領 「카이요」氏의 의견에 쪼차서, 종래의 復讎主義를 버리고, 獨逸과 더부러서 벨사이유和約의 改訂을 주장하게 되는 동시에 今日 佛蘭西의 親日氣勢에도 一種 動搖를 보게 될 것이다. 포 首相은 3월 末에 內閣을 개조하야 다소의 신인재를 망라하야, 信任투표에까지 得勝하엿스나 총선거에 대한 승리를 엇을가 못엇을가는 문제의 문슠�이다. 여하간 佛國의 5월 총선거는 크게 注目할 가치가 잇다.

亂法 亂行의 伊太利 政府黨
反動勢力의 왕국인 伊太利에서는 지난 4월 6일로써 총선거를 行하야 國粹黨 즉 政府黨이 크게 승리를 어덧다. 이에 先하야 驕兒 뭇소리니는 今日의 伊太利에서 자기의 政敵되는 社會黨, 共産黨, 특히 농민과 宗敎信徒에게 潛勢力을 有한 포포라-레黨을 壓迫하고, 자기 黨派의 의원을 증가하기 위하야, 작년 7월로 11월까지에, 所謂 全國的 比例制라는, 즉 최다수의 투표를 어든 1 政黨이 總議席(535)의 3分 2(356)를 가지고, 다른＜30＞ 모든 政黨은 그 남아지 의석를 가지고 비례적으로 分當한다는, 今古 未有의 奇怪한 選擧法案을 上下院에 통과케 하고, 금년 1월 24일로써 의회를 해산하야, 드대여 今 6일의 총선거에, 國粹黨이 全 투표의 6割 4分을 占하는 奇勝을 어덧스며, 그 다음이 人民黨이오, 또 그 다음이 유니테리안 社會黨이엇다. 그런대 최근의 보도를 보면 伊太利 총선거 후의 國粹黨은 日復日亂暴, 불법의 행위를 是事하야, 반대편의 언론기관, 또는 집필자를 歐打, 投獄 후 燒棄하는 등 其 凶狀은 실로 말할 수가 업다하는 바, 伊太利 反動勢力의 顚覆도 사실 멀지는 아니하엿다.

새로 決定된 對獨逸 賠償案
-獨逸사람의 怨恨을 못풀기는 一般

20세기 침략주의의 全容을 표시한 최대 문자인 所謂 벨사이유和約, 그 和約 중에서도 최대 골자가 되는 獨逸 賠償問題는 全 歐洲政局의 핵심문제가 되는 것은 일반이 共認하는 바이거니와, 聯合國 賠償專門委員會는 其後 獨逸의 배상 支拂能力을 조사하던 중, 4월 9일에 그 보고서를 발표하엿는대, 그는 全文 60頁의 長文으로 된바 그 要項을 摘記하면
1. 獨逸에 대하야 즉시 160억金馬克(1金馬克,는 약 40錢)의 支拂을 요구하고 其後는 年額 最低 14억으로부터 20억金馬克을 支拂케 함.
2. 右의 別案으로 獨逸에 대하야 제1년에 10억金馬克 제2년에 12억金馬克, 제3년에 17억 5천만金馬克, 제4년에 24억 6천만金馬克, 제5년에도 右비례의 지불은 許하고, 6년 이후는 獨逸의 재정상태 개선의 비례를 표준하야 更히 年額 약 56億金馬克의 추가지불을 許함.
3. 獨逸의 철도를 今後 50개년 국제회사에 引渡함. 그러면 그 국제회사는 자본금을 260억金馬克으로 하고 其中 110억金馬克을 賠償委員會가 부담하며, 同會社는 六分利附의 社債를 발행하야 4년 후부터는 半額 6억50만金馬克의 이익은 배당할 형편이오.
4. 一時 國外에 流失한 獨逸資金을 관리하기 위하야 聯合常設委員會를 설치함. 常設委員會는 5명의 전문가로써 조직하고, 위원장은 賠償委員會로부터 指名함.
그리고 委員會는 군사관리문제에 대하야는 一言도 論及치 아니하고, 佛國의 루-얼지방 占領에 대하야는,＜31＞ 自制的으로 撤兵할 事를 勸하엿다. 이에 대하야 佛蘭西는 원칙으로 이 案을 승인하고, 루얼 抛棄의 代償條件을 提議하려는 心事이며, 英國은 물론, 獨逸政府도 이 賠償案을 원칙으로 하야 商議할 事를 承諾하엿다.
물론 이 賠償案은 배상총액에 대하야는 하등의 減損을 엇지 못하엿스나 其 지불방법에 잇서, 얼마큼 獨逸의 情形을 參酌한 緩和의 것이 되엿다. 그러나 獨逸 국민은 이로써 怨恨을 풀 수는 업는 것이다. 다못 今日 獨逸人의 心中은 舊時의 帝政에 復하야써 이 怨恨을 풀을가 또는 철저한 共産國을 실현함에 의하야써 이 부담을 蹴破할 것인가 하는 두 가지의 문제인대, 근래에는 舊時의 帝政에 復하야써 이리이리 하겟다는 편이 勝해가는 것 갓다. 더욱이 獨逸政府가 이런 賠償案을 원칙으로 승인한다는 意思를 표명한 것도 佛蘭西政府가 獨逸政府의 頑强을 煽傳의 資料로 삼아 총선거에 이용하려는 其 心思를 制先키 위함이라 함을 들을 때에 獨逸 當局者의 心中이 如何히 복잡한 것을 推察할 수가 잇다. 그러나 獨逸이 帝國主義的 反動으로 轉化하기에 先하야 佛國의 國家至上主義가 몬저 해체되면 엇덜 터인가. 결국이 머지 아니하니 모든 것은 두고보기로 하쟈.

地中海를 中心으로 하는 英佛伊 三國의 爭覇戰
-近來에는 漸漸 더 甚惡해간다

地中海 及 沿岸 諸國에서 海運 及 政治上의 優越權을 획득코저 하는 英佛伊 3國의 暗中 飛躍은 최근에 점점 심해가며, 이제는 近東諸國은 물론, 露國, 印度로부터 回回敎國 전부가 其 葛藤의 渦中에 들고저 한다. 英國이 地中海를 지배코저 하는 목적은 더 말할 것도 업시 英國의 印度 埃及 또는 極東과의 通商保護에 잇는대, 英國이 그 海軍의 主力을 地中海에 집중한 때에, 伊國의 뭇소리니는 伊太利 海軍力의 충실을 圖할 事를 發布하야 이에 대항하엿스며, 加之而伊國은 空軍의 대확장을 계획하야 비행기 300臺를 1,000臺로 증가하엿스며, 尙又 西班牙와 地中海에 대한 海軍 상호원조의 條約을 체결하엿다는 말이 전한다. 이에 대하야 佛國은 本國과 亞弗利加 밋 極東에 잇는 식민지와를 연락하는 地中海 항로를 유지할 필요상 深甚한 주의를 가지고 잇다. 先者 伊太利 希臘 兩國間에 콜푸島문제에 관하야 갈등이 생겻슬 때에, 佛國이 伊太利를＜32＞ 원조한 이유는 伊太利의 地中海에 대한 세력이 약하게 되는 때에는 英國이 대신 地中海의 세력을 지배하게 되야, 결국 佛國의 亞弗利加 밋 東洋에 대한 通商上 惡影響을 입을 것을 저퍼한 故이엿다. 지금 특히 주의되는 것은 土耳其의 國情이 回敎問題로 引하야 依然 안정을 엇지 못하야, 현재의 형세로는 로싼누조약에 의하야 규정듼 것이 어느 날에 顚覆될넌지를 알지 못하는 바, 이제 土耳其에 한 번 事變만 勃發한다 하면 英佛伊 3國의 爭覇戰은 一屬 분규를 생기여, 그 영향은 土耳其 小亞西亞는 말할 것도 업고 回回敎國 전체 밋 黑海를 控한 露國에까지 밋츨 터인 바, 이 형세의 변화는 특히 주의하지 아느면 안된다. 要컨대 자본주의의 세계가 최후로 더 한번 어즈러울 徵兆는 地中海의 海上 에도 하나가 잇다.

問題의 世界移民會議
5월 15일부터 伊國 서울 羅馬에서 伊國政府의 주최 하에 世界移民會가 열니는대, 米國政府에서는 非公式으로 이 회의에 叅列할 대표자를 派送하게 되얏스며, 日本에서는 다수의 대표자가 참가하리라 전하는대, 이번 米國의 이민 배척문제가 盛論되며, 伊太利와 日本이 다 이가티 米國의 新移民法案에 항의를 제출중인 바, 이 世界福民會議는 장래 國際上에 중대한 영향을 밋츨 것이 되리라고 한다.

日羅同盟과 日佛接近
日英同盟에 代할 日佛英同盟이 되려나

달포를 두고 維也納에서 회의하던 羅馬尼와 露西亞의 회의는 벳사라비야문제로 해서, 4월 2일에 決裂되고 마럿다. 문제의 벳사라비야는 본래는 羅馬의 治下에 잇든 領地이던 露土戰爭(1877)의 결과로 露國에 병합되엿다. 그런대 露國이 革命亂으로 紛紜할 때에 羅馬尼는 이를 탈환하고, 聯合國의 首相會議, 특히 佛國의 정부가 이 倂合을 率先承認한 바, 이번 露羅會議에 羅國代表는 본문제는 일즉히 聯合國 大使會議에서 이를 승인한 것인즉 다시 논의할 것이 업다 함에 대하야 露國代表는, 聯合國의 승인은 一個 自家便의 私行에 불과한 것이오. 우리 露國정부로부터 그를 승인한 일이 업는 이상, 이 문제는 지극히 공평한 견지에서, 벳사라비야의 인민투표를 行하야 其 소속을 決하자고 주장하얏는대, 羅國대표는 도저히 그러케 할 수는 업다하야 결국 破裂된 것이다.
그런대 여긔에 관련해서 자못 크다라하게 문제되는 것은＜33＞羅馬尼와 日本의 양국간에 防守同盟條約이 체결되야 日本은 露國의 羅馬尼領 벳사라비야 침입에 대하야, 羅馬尼는 露國의 日本領樺太 침입에 대하야, 양국이 서로 방어에 당할 것을 약속하엿다는 소문이다. 이것은 알즉 英國 下院의 문제가 되야 벌서 세간의 주의를 잇글고 잇스며, 또 이보다도 한층 더 주의되는 것은 이 羅馬尼의 배후에 잇는 佛國과 日本의 새에 새삼스러운 親接의 기운이 생기려 하는 그것이다. 이에 대하야 英國의 엇던 신문은 일즉히 佛의 印度支那 총독이 日本을 방문할 事를 전하고 니여써 이와 가티 論하얏다.
이 印度支那 총독의 日本 방문의 중대한 정치적 의의가 잇는 것이다. 何故오 하면 그 목적은 極東에 잇는 佛國 식민지를 중심으로 하야 日佛의 접근을 도모함에 잇는 故이라
云云하엿다. 이를 日本의 便으로써 본다할지라도 일즉히 日英同盟의 廢棄로 하야 英國과 멀어지고, 또 米國으로부터 배척되고 露西亞에게까지 위협을 밧는 今日에 잇서, 歐洲大陸의 나라와 손을 잡아보려하는 것은 생각컨대 必然의 勢일지며, 특히 佛蘭西는 露英兩國에 대하야, 共히 冰炭의 不容을 가진 관계상, 日佛의 친근은 지극히 실현될 타당성을 가젓다고 하겟다. 日英同盟에 대하야 日佛同盟이 또 하나 생길 모양인가. 다못 恨스러운 것은 今日의 세상이 甲午 甲辰의 그때와는 조곰 判異한 그것이다.

勞農露國에 同盟罷業
근래의 勞農露國에 잇서, 몬저 국내적으로 새로운 문제가 될 것은 뚜로쯔키氏의 軍事委員長 復職과 共産黨員의 大淘汰와, 국내 개인자본이 작고 優勢를 가지게 되는 것들일 터이다. 뚜로쯔키 氏의 復職으로 해서 카메넵氏 一派와의 意思疏隔이 생길지 안 생길지 그것은 두고보아야 알 일이다. 그의 復職으로 해서 勞農露國의 氣勢가 얼마큼 긴장되는 强味를 늣기게 되는 것은 사실이다. 그는 벌서 철도종업원대회에서 露西亞는 이제는 비록 외국으로의 원조가 업슬지라도 스사로 세계중 최고정부의 지위를 能保할 것을 豪語하고, 一步를 進하야, 歐洲에는 반다시 대규모의 전쟁이 닐어날 것과, 닐어나기만 하면 露西亞는 그 전쟁의 최종결산을 擔行할 事를 은유하야, 自國 노동자 毒瓦斯 사용법 습득의 필요를 강조하얏다. 그리고 共産黨은 레닌 死後로 약 15만인의 新入黨員을 어덧는대, 이와 동시에 共産黨 中央執行員會는 黨內 不良分子의 大掃除를 단행하야, 당원중 동료간의 암투,＜34＞ 지위의 쟁탈, 緣故的 결탁 등의 弊習을 一掃하고, 현재 약 45만 내외의 黨員을 유지하는대, 당원중 노동자의 數도 昨秋보다 증가하얏스며, 露國의 개인기업으로 말하면, 외국무역은 확실히 정부의 사업으로 되엿스나 內國商業의 戰線에서는 최근부터 개인자본의 활동이 盛行하야, 國營事業인 購買組合과의 경쟁에서 확실한 優勢를 가지고 잇서, 隱然히 자본가 搾取의 녯현상을 復하려 하는 등 그 증거로는 최근에 某私人 經營의 공장에서 同盟罷業(혁명 후 처음이다)이 니러나기까지 하엿다. 이를 보는 쏘벳트정부는 目下 이 현상의 정리에 부심하야, 종래 소규모이던 內國 商業委員會를 貿易省과 同樣인 宮廳조직으로 곳치고, 국영사업과 購買組合과의 劅�同戰線을 作하야, 개인자본을 爲先 都賣市場으로부터 擊退코저 노력중이다. 事勢가 이러한 관계상, 內國商業과 購買組合문제는 5월 20일부터 개최될 共産黨大會에 주요한 議題가 되리라 한다.
최근 露西亞의 國外에 대한 문제로는 英國, 中國, 日本에 관한 것이엇는대, 뚜로쯔키氏의 復職과 共히 露國의 외교는 一層 자신의 태도를 가지는 바, 自今의 事가 一層興味가 잇슬 것이다.

措手足을 못하든 勞働內閣
-革命은 英國에도 不可免乎아

간신히 新嘉坡軍港 建設案을 포기하야, 勞働黨 內閣의 체면을 僅保한 英國의 막드날드 內閣은 지난 4월 2일에 借家法案(其 要意는 借家人이 失業할 경우에는 家賃을 滯納할지라도 家主는 즉시 立退를 要할 권리가 업다 함이다)을 제출하야, 保守 自由 兩黨의 반대로 토의를 不得한 바, 정부는 다시 그 법안에 대한 修正案, 즉 借家人이 家賃滯納으로 緣하야 立退의 경우에 절박된 때에 재판소에서 右借家人에게 借家에 거주를 許하는 명령을 發하기에 先하야, 재판소는 該借家人이 其 거주지방의 빈민구조 官憲으로부터 救濟金을 수령하기에 족한 경우에 잇다는 증명을 與할 事라는 案을 제출하엿스나 역시 보수 자유 양당의 반대로 否決(差는 僅 9표)되얏다. 이것은 勞働黨이 성립되든 당초에 잇서는 정부편을 지지하던 自由黨 의원도, 정부의 기반이 점차 튼튼하며 노동당 내각의 색채를 정말 발휘하려 하는 근래에 와서는, 야, 이것 봐라하고 태도를 一變한 까닭이다. 그래서 로이드쪼지 氏와 가튼 사람은 公然하게 이제부터는 政府黨에 반대하겟다는＜35＞ 의사를 표명하얏고, 아스키스氏가 亦然한 모양이다. 그래서 그들은 自今으로 정부의 所爲를 注視하야, 英露會議의 결과, 파업문제에 대한 대책의 如何로써 정부의 틈을 기다리고 잇다. 물론 이러하다 하야, 노동 내각이 문득 落望을 하지는 아늘 것이다. 그러나 英國의 今日 형편에 잇서, 특히 보수, 자유의 兩黨과 상대하야서, 자기의 할 일이 얼마나 적은 것을 새삼스럽게 늣길 것은 사실이다. 英國에도 혁명은 可히 免치 못할 것인가.

噫, 有産者의 末路
4월 10일인가, 獨逸 財界의 首領 스친네스가 죽엇다. 오늘의 獨逸에 잇서 실제의 정권을 잡은 자는 대통령 에벹트도 아니오 또는 首相 마루쿠스도 아니오 의회도 정당도 아니오, 오즉 한 개의 富漢 스친네스이엿다고 해도 過言이 아니다. 政敵 라테나우가 암살된 후로 그는 獨逸政界의 第一人으로 內的 外的에 一大 勢力을 樹立한, 一種 獨逸의 독재자이엿다.
그는 금년 55세로, 어려서부터 학교 공부는 끔즉히 실혀하야 겨우 중학교쯤을 졸업하고는 곳 商業을 見習하야, 23세때에는 親父로부터 5만馬克의 자금을 어더가지고 석탄 판매와 운송업을 시작하엿다. 무엇이나 하면 지지 안켓다는 특성을 가진 그는 一意勇進하야 戰前에 旣히 4천만馬克의 富를 어덧고, 전쟁 중에는 교활하게도 활동하야, 數 모르는 富를 致하엿스되, 그 돈은 모다 中立國은행에 예입하야, 戰時 所得稅의 賦課에도 한 分錢을 물지 아니 하엿고, 한번 의원에 당선되쟈부터는 자기가 소유한 200여의 신문을 先驅로 하야, 의회에 당당히 陣容을 버리고, 더욱히 財界에 손을 너허, 一朝에 政界를 蹂躙하엿다. 獨逸의 馬克은 그동안 그러케 폭락하는 때에도 그는 자기의 가진 돈을 일즉히 외국은행에 예입하야 一分도 손해를 밧지 안코, 도로혀 그와 가튼 金錢時勢의 변화를 이용하야, 數倍의 富를 致한 바, 獨逸의 민중 특히 國粹黨은 그를 죽이려고까지 하엿스나, 그는 돈만 잇고 權勢만 잡앗스면 그만이라 하야, 그대로 욕심을 부렷다.
그러케 욕심 만코 완강하던 그도 공산주의자의 不斷한 습격에는 언제던지 마음을 못 노핫던지, 主治醫의 말에 의하면 그가 병이 篤하야, 氣息이 奄奄할 그때에도 얼골올 찡그리고 소래를 지르며 무슨 무서운 幻影을 擊退하려고 고민하는 모양을 뵈엿스며, 臨終이 바로 갓가와 온 때에도 그는 무엇이 자기를 타고 안저서 목아지를 쪼르는 幻覺을 그리며 그에 저항코저 하엿스나 숨이 끈어저서 꺽구러젓스며,＜36＞ 그 다음에도 잠간 의식이 도라서 또 다시 공산주의자의 幻影과 싸우는 듯하더니, 졍말 숨이 끈키고 말엇다 한다. 슬프다, 獨逸 第一의 富와 勢를 가젓스면 무엇할고, 죽을 때에조차 편히 죽지를 못하고 공산주의자의 幻影에 壓殺되엿단 말가. 세상의 돈 만흔 사람들아, 스친네스의 臨終을 볼 때에 恐懼함이 업슬가.
(以下削除-원문)＜37＞
＜28-37＞