잡지명	別乾坤 第5號
발행일	1927년 03월 01일
기사제목	二十年前 韓國學界이약이, 내가 入學試驗치르던 때, 當時는 無試驗 入學이 普通 (A Story of the Korean Academic World Twenty Years Ago, When I Took the Entrance Exam, Admission Without Examination Was Common at the Time)
필자	崔斗善
기사형태	회고·수기 (Recollections/Memoir)

A Story of the Korean Academic World Twenty Years Ago, When I Took the Entrance Exam, Admission Without Examination Was Common at the Time
						Ch'oe Tu-sŏn

Are you asking about when I entered middle school? I don't have much memory of it. At that time, admission without examination was common. Now, there's talk of entrance exam difficulties and exam difficulties, and everyone is racking their brains when the semester starts, but back then, there were no exams and not many students, so schools were worried that there wouldn't be enough applicants. So, anyone who said they wanted to enter the school was accepted regardless of age, academic ability, or financial status.

The first time I entered a school was twenty-one years ago, when I was fourteen years old. Until then, I had only studied Chinese classics in a private village school (書堂) , but with the new trend, I decided to learn modern education and entered the preparatory course of Hwimun Ŭisuk (徽文義塾). After a year in the preparatory course, I entered the regular course. What kind of exam was there then? Students were admitted according to their academic ability and their wishes. I think they just had you read some Korean written in Chinese and Korean. The subjects were not as difficult and <21> complicated as they are now. Japanese and arithmetic were common, and there were also history, geography, science, drawing, and songs.

Are you asking about when I entered Waseda University (早稻田大學)? There weren't really any exams then either. That was when I was eighteen years old. I majored in English at the Chŏngsŏk English School (正則英語學校) for about half a year. So, when I entered Waseda, there was no other exam, only an English exam, which consisted of sight translation and composition.

This is how it was when I entered middle school and university. There's not much to tell.<22>

**Named Entities**

徽文義塾	Hwimun Ŭisuk
早稻田大學	Waseda University
正則英語學校	Chŏngsŏk English School



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제5호
발행일	1927년 03월 01일
기사제목	二十年前 韓國學界이약이, 내가 入學試驗치르던 때, 當時는 無試驗 入學이 普通
필자	崔斗善
기사형태	회고·수기

二十年前 韓國學界이약이, 내가 入學試驗치르던 때, 當時는 無試驗 入學이 普通
						崔斗善
내가 중학교에 입학하든 때 말임닛가. 별로 이럿타 할 기억이 업슴니다. 그 때는 여하간 무시험 입학이 보통이엿스닛까요. 지금은 입학난이니 시험난이니 하고 학기만 되면 모다 머리를 싸매고 덤비지만 그 때는 시험도 업고 또한 학생도 만치 안어서 학교에서는 입학지원자가 적을가봐서 염려하든 때임니다. 그래 누구나 그 학교에 입학만 하겟다 하면 년령, 학력, 금전유무를 불문하고 막 바더 드렷슴니다.
내가 학교라고 처음 입학하든 때는 이십일년전 즉 내가 열네살 나든 때임니다. 고 전 까지는 글방에 단이며 한문만 배우다가 신풍조 바람에 신학문을 배워 볼가하고 비로소 徽文義塾 예과에 입학햇슴니다. 예과에서 일년하고나서 본과에 드러갓슴니다. 그 때 시험이 무슨 시험임닛가. 자기 학력에 따라 지원대로 입학을 식켯슴니다. 국한문으로 된 朝鮮語를 일켜 보이든가요, 그 때 학과로 말해도 지금과 가티 그러케 어렵고<21> 복잡하지 안엇슴니다, 일어, 산술이 보통이엿고 역사, 지리, 리과ㅡ 도화, 창가등 그런 것이엇슴니다,
早稻田大學에 입학하든 때 말임닛가. 그 때도 별로 시험이라고는 업섯슴니다. 그 때가 바로 심팔세 때임니다. 正則英語學校에서 약 일학기간 영어전문을 하얏지오 그리하야 조도전에 입학할 때는 시험이라고 다른 것은 업고 다만 영어 뿐 시험을 보는데 서취와 작문이엿슴니다.
나의 중학 及 대학에 입학 하든 때는 이럿슴니다. 별로 이럿타 할 거리가 업슴니다.<22>
<21-22>