잡지명 別乾坤 제5호
발행일 1927년 03월 01일
기사제목 요새 朝鮮의 七. 七 不可思議!! (Seven Imponderables of Modern Korea!!)
기사형태 잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

Seven Imponderables of Modern Korea!!
Seven Imponderables of the Academic World

That middle school students' short jackets are like corpses – did a telegram come from the British Empire about this? Is it really because there isn't enough fabric for Western-style clothes, so they wear them in such an unsightly way? Anyway, wearing them like that doesn't look neat at all. Or is this some kind of buttock-showing-off to someone?

Newspaper tours for female students: Of course, student tours are necessary, but it seems that female students' newspaper tours are quite frequent. As soon as class time comes, they plead, "Teacher! I want to be a newspaper reporter. Teacher! Please let me tour the newspaper company?" Perhaps that's why they often gather female students and head to this newspaper company and that newspaper company. Is it to broaden their knowledge, or is it for taking photos for advertisements? It's questionable.

The use of informal language (常말): Nowadays, some people advocate using honorifics even to children and servants, and some even practice it. But why do middle and high school teachers use informal language to regular students during class? Is it to show authority with words instead of wearing a sword? Is it that teaching is better with informal language, or is it to clearly distinguish between teacher and student? Anyway, it's questionable.

Academic doctorates from foreign countries: Foreign countries seem to be good. If you go to a foreign country, you mostly become a doctor. Whether you've been there for a year or two, whether you've attended school or not, whether you have knowledge or just waste in your belly, if you just go there, you usually get some kind of doctorate or academic degree and shrug your shoulders. How do you become an academic doctorate in a foreign country? It's a mystery.

Scholars pretending to be ignorant of the world (學究僞名者): A school is a school, a professor is a professor, and they should just focus on their subject, whether it's math or geography. If they're like this, there's no need to say more, but so-called Korean scholars seem too out of touch with the world. Then what are they teaching? Is it something from the underground or something from heaven? No matter how hard I try, I can't figure it out.

Professors' financial difficulties (敎授級의 生活難): Professors' income is the best among salaried Koreans, but they are the first to cry about financial difficulties. Then is their pocket money shrinking because of Western-style clothes? Or is it shrinking because of drinking expenses? ...? It's still a mystery.

Many disputes in religious schools (宗敎 學校의 粉糾만흔 것): Religious schools should advocate love and peace, but in reality, disputes and conflicts are more frequent than in other schools. Why is that?

Seven Imponderables of the Literary World

How to become a member of the literary world (文人國 入籍手績): How do you get into the literary world? Do you just write a poem like, "Ah! My love!" "Ah! Love!"? Do you translate an old novel like, "In the early days of King OO's reign in Joseon..." to be admitted? How many times does your name have to appear in the short story section of a newspaper? Should you put "Writer" on your business card? How do you become a citizen of the literary world? Should you write a rebuttal like, "To Mr. K, a free love advocate"? The standards for entering the literary world are generally unknown. Don't forget to participate in the current public offering! Are there any fees or taxes?

So many conflicts (風波는 何其多): Is it because emotions are extremely developed, or because nerves are extremely sensitive? It seems that the literary world has the most trouble. They can't stand even the slightest thing, and if someone farts loudly, they jump at them, saying, "Hey, that's not how you fart!" Does fighting well increase a writer's value? Is that place made of arguments? Anyway, it's a mystery.

Writers' living expenses (文人의 生活費): They're as thin as glued-on brushes. There's no place for them in society, and newspaper and magazine companies can't even pay them properly for their manuscripts, but writers still maintain their lives. How do they live? It's one of the things I can't figure out.

Writing love poems without ever having been in love (戀愛도 못 해본 사람이 戀愛 詩 文 쓰는 것): You have to eat something to know its taste, and you have to cross water to know its depth. You have to be in love to at least understand its essence and describe it, but now and then, people who write love poems and love stories write well even without experience. It's an amazing talent. Writing love stories, even by bachelors who haven't even smelled a virgin's room <109>, is definitely one of the mysteries.

So many poets (詩人 만흔 것): Ugh, another poet is coming out.
"Ah - my beloved..."
"Ah - the moonlight is white and the frost is cold." Ugh, here's another one coming out.
"Sister! I'm going. Far away, to the north, to the north... I'm going to the end of the sky." Many friends write like this. New poetry? In other words, there are many amateur poets. Is it because emotions are greater than reason in youth, or is it easy to write like a rabbit's dropping, "Ah - my love," "Ah - love!" (Actually, it's supposed to be difficult), or is it that you get a lover if you do that? I can't figure it out at all.

Using English words in the era of Hanja (漢字代에 英字): Those who are against using Hanja readily use English or Japanese words even when they can say it in Korean. Is it because new literature was imported from the West and Japan? Do writers have to use English words to pretend to be modern writers? That's also a mystery.

Even chastity here is difficult (여긔에도 貞操難): A writer's chastity may be different from a woman's chastity, but today they advocate pro-literature and tomorrow they support pour-literature. Last year they contributed to OO-ist newspapers and magazines, and this year they contribute to OO-ist newspapers and magazines. Is it due to financial difficulties or a change of principles? It's one of the things I can't figure out.

Seven Imponderables of the Religious World

It's not that there can't be fat monks, but most abbots (住持) at any temple are usually fat. Is it the Buddha's blessing? Is it because they play and eat among the mountains and streams? Is it because they eat vegetarian food (菜食)? Is it because they live a life of abstinence (禁慾)? But if you listen closely, some monks secretly eat meat and drink alcohol and have two or more concubines. I can't believe that either, and I can't figure it out no matter what.

The Bible (聖經) says, "It is harder for a rich man to enter heaven than for a camel to go through the eye of a needle," and "If someone asks for your coat, give them your undershirt as well." But pastors and elders who preach that from the pulpit (講道壇) are not qualified unless their Western suits have at least two layers of padding. I can't figure that out either.

They have lived and grown up in Joseon, speak Korean, and follow the Korean way of life, but when they become Christians, the prayer style of foreign missionaries, who stammer, suddenly increases in gatherings, meetings, and congregations of Koreans. Is that how they become devout believers? Can they go to study in America? I don't know.

How many hundreds or thousands of years will it take for the world to become a little cleaner? <110> There is so much fraud even in the so-called sacred religious world. Sangtu-wearing guys are also swindlers. Hokbori is also a great teacher: Hwalbocheon-gyo, Hwal Jeungsan-gyo, Hwal Baekbaek-gyo, Hwal Cheongnim-gyo! They all come out, so what do they do and what doctrines do they advocate? Still, they make a living, and there are many who blindly follow (盲從), so that's a mystery.

They preach about heaven, heaven, and believe in it, and they preach about the paradise world, so have they ever been to heaven or the paradise world? I want to know, but I can't.

That's right, a society with many women is prosperous, but a society with only men is lonely. Is that why churches thrive near girls' schools? In Seoul, it's near Jeongdong, and in Pyongyang, it's near Jangdae. Then is it not that churches thrive near girls' schools, but that girls' schools thrive near churches? Oh, why are there more male and female students at night services? I can't figure out all these things.

It's good to confess your sins to God at a revival meeting. However, sometimes shameful things about adultery are revealed among believers due to revival meetings. Is the purpose to reveal those shameful things, or is it to prevent them? Everything is a mess, and I can't figure it out.

Seven Imponderables of the Publishing World

Those who don't seem capable of writing anything on their own have their names on this book and that book as authors when you go to a bookstore. Why is that?

Many books have different titles but the same content when you read them. That's also one of the things I can't figure out.

In legitimate journalism, when you ask for opinions as material for articles or news, they refuse to talk and evade the question. However, in the business games of love novelists, many women give out photos and write beautiful and pitiful poems like the colors of a golden peacock (金孔雀). That is truly the greatest mystery of all mysteries.

Even famous Western masterpieces or excellent works by modern celebrities struggle to sell 2,000 copies, but old novels like Shimcheongjeon, Chunhyangjeon, Ryu Jungnyeoljeon, and Jo Ungjeon are printed 10,000 copies at a time. That's also a solid mystery.

Other publications are all suppressed and shrinking, but the publication of family genealogies (族譜) increases every year. I don't know if it's a begging act or a ruining act, but anyway, it's a mystery.

They say they don't have money and that books don't sell, <111> and even though the first issue is the last issue... why are so many magazines coming out? (It's not much compared to foreign countries.) There are ideology magazines, literary magazines, self-cultivation magazines, children's magazines, women's magazines, and courtesan magazines. Magazines are pouring out quite a bit. Anyway, it's a good phenomenon. Even if the first issue becomes the last, it's better than nothing. Even if it dies in the womb, you'll hear the mother's cry... But where does the money come from, and who reads them all? It's still a mystery.

Children's magazines should be written with children in mind, but nowadays, children's magazines often use difficult words that children can't even understand. They string out incomprehensible words and put them together, clearly picking up unknown characters and putting them in. They copy love stories from difficult journalistic magazines and put them in, serializing them as original fairy tales, and write absurd geography and history that is completely different from the facts. If there are children who read such things, it's a pity, but who are they telling to read such things? Do parents read them? Do teachers read them? Does the writer himself just read them? I don't know what happens to those books in the end and how they are disposed of.

Seven Imponderables of the Women's World

There are so many mysteries in Joseon that I can't figure them out, but let's participate in the women's world as well. So, let's list seven mysteries of the women's world as a way of branching out. However, there is a slight regret that seven is not enough, but if that's the limit, I can't help but be sad!

They give passionate speeches on the platform in their prime, receiving applause from the audience, and write poems in newspapers and magazines that amaze the world, but once they get married, they disappear somewhere, and you don't hear from them at all. That's a mystery.

When modern women (시체 부인네) walk around on streetcars or on the streets, they carry "opera bags" (오페라 빡) made of steel balls or woven with wool or silk thread on their wrists, or pockets that we don't even know the name of. What do they carry inside? It's a mystery.

It's good to show off style and beauty, but some female students draw eight (八) characters on their eyebrows with ink and curl their hair (잇는 머리에도 다리 꼭지를 드리고). Who are they trying to look good for? Who taught them to do that? Who told them to do that? One thing I can't figure out.

I thought that only married women could give birth, and that they give birth after ten months of pregnancy, but recently, young women who have not yet tied their hair (머리 딴 색씨들) are giving birth. Some give birth five or six months after getting married, and some give birth as early as two or three months, or even in the same month. That's also a mystery.

They know for sure that they are not related or relatives, but female students call male students "oppa" (옵바) and "dongsaeng" (동생), and they receive the words "nuna" (누이) or "nunim" (누님) from those male students, seek them out, exchange letters, and give and receive things. Why is that?

They say they don't get money or anything bought for them at home, but some female students wear gold watches on their wrists and fancy shoes on their feet. That's also a mystery.

On Sundays, schools usually don't have classes, but female students who don't even believe in Jesus leave their homes with their books. Why is that? I thought they were going to ask teachers or friends about difficult subjects, but if they say they didn't come there, then where are they going? I can't figure it out at all.

Seven Imponderables of the Business World

Korean stores should naturally attract Korean customers, but they also don't attract foreign customers, and they even lose their own customers to Chinese and Japanese people. That's one thing I can't figure out.

They should keep their stores clean first, but they spit phlegm right in front of their stores and sometimes accidentally drop the owner's phlegm or urine from the chamber pot on the feet of passersby, startling them. Why is that?

Advertising skills are supposed to be important in business, but you can't even see Korean stores' advertisements even if you look at the three major Korean newspapers every day. If they do, it's so embarrassing. One of the things I can't figure out.

They know they're losing money, but they still continue to do business. Why is that?

Japanese and Chinese people buy goods with cash, but many Korean customers ask for goods on credit and nag if they know your face. This is a great mystery from the perspective of business owners.

Business is of course customer-centered. Advertising boasts of speed and service, but when you actually face them, you can't stand the sight of their behavior. "What do you want to buy?" "We're closing." "We don't have it." "Why are you here when we said it's not available?" "Just leave it." "Oh, damn it." They treat customers like their own servants or horses, being so curt and blunt. Ordinary country people can't even approach them, and sophisticated people can't even start a conversation. Even though they act like this, they still get to eat. Korea is still a backward society. That's probably why bankruptcies are so frequent. After all, if customers stop coming, there's no other way than bankruptcy. They know this, but they still act like that. That's a mystery.

It's even more wicked to pretend to be kind and then overcharge. They inflate the price three or four times and argue for ten or twenty minutes, and then finally, when the customer leaves the store and walks away, they rush after them, saying, "Hey, come back and take it." They pretend to be very generous. It wastes time, damages dignity, and damages the goods because they are picked up and put down. Korean merchants don't seem to know that! Does that mean business won't be good if you sell goods honestly at a fair price? One of the things I can't figure out.

Miscellaneous Seven Imponderables

People with perfectly good eyes pay money to blind people (盲人) who don't even know what their own noses look like and ask them about good fortune and misfortune. That's also strange.

Lawsuits are decreasing every year, but the number of lawyer signs is only increasing. Most lawyers have mistresses and go to fancy restaurants several times a week. Where does that money come from?

Courtesans who can't even write a letter write well in magazines like Janghan and Sinchun. Where do those writings come from? Did they buy them with smiles from amateur writers? Did they buy them with money? Also incomprehensible.

Umbrellas are for rain and parasols are for sunlight, but some women in Seoul carry umbrellas at night when it's not raining or sunny. That's something I can't figure out.

If there are many business operators in any business and they compete with each other, the prices are usually low, but hospitals, in particular, are increasing every year, but the cost of medicine and examination fees are getting more expensive. Doctors' business is completely incomprehensible.

Wealthy nobles go bankrupt before others. What did they spend their money on? Gambling or women? That's also something I can't figure out.

They say they have no money and are dying, but restaurants and bars are crowded every day. Is it because they eat and drink to relieve their frustration because they have no money? Did something else happen? Completely incomprehensible. <114>

**Named Entities**

朝鮮	Joseon
定洞	Jeongdong
長大	Jangdae
張恨	Janghan
新春	Sinchun
柳忠烈傳	Ryu Jungnyeoljeon
沈清傳	Shimcheongjeon
趙雄傳	Jo Ungjeon
증산교	Jeungsan-gyo
백백교	Baekbaek-gyo
청림교	Cheongnim-gyo


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제5호
발행일	1927년 03월 01일
기사제목	요새 朝鮮의 七. 七 不可思議!!
기사형태	잡저

요새 朝鮮의 七. 七 不可思議!!
學界의 七不可思議

中學生들의 웃저고리 짤븐 것 그것이 시체라고 大英帝國으로부터 전보가 왓는지, 정말 양복감이 모자라서 숭하지만 그대로 입고 다니는지? 엇잿든 보기에 그닥 산듯치 안은 것을 그대로 걸치고 다닌다 안이 이것은 어느 누구에게 볼기ㅅ짝 자랑인가?

여학생들의 신문사 견학 학생의 견학이 물론 필요는 하지만, 여학생의 신문사 견학이 꽤 만흔 모양이다. 상학시간만 되면 『선생님! 신문 기자가 되고 십허요. 선생님! 신문사 구경 좀 식켜 주서요? 』하고 간청이 만해 그런지, 걸핏하면 여학생을 모라 이 신문사 저 신문사로 향해가기가 일수 엿다. 상식상 문견을 널피기 위함인지 사진 광고를 하기 위함인지 역시 의문?

문제의 常말 사용 지금 엇던 사람들은 아동급 하인들에게도 경어를 쓰자고 주창도 하고 혹 실행도 하는데, 소학은 물론, 중등 고등학교에서도 교수시간에 까지 일반 생도에게 常語를 씀은 엇쩐 까닭인지? 칼 못 차는 대신에 말로 위엄을 뵈이라 함인가 상말이라야 교수가 잘 되고 또는 사제의 분이 확별되는지? 여하간 의문?

外國서 오는 學博士 외국이란 대체 좃키도 한 모양, 외국만 갓다 오면 대개 학박사엿다. 일년을 잇섯거나 잇태를 잇섯거나 학교에 다녓거나 말엇거나. 뱃속에 똥이 잇거나 지식이 잇거나, 거긔만 갓다 오면, 의례로 무슨 박사니 학사니 하고 억개를 읏슥거리니, 도대체 외국의 학박사는 엇더케 해서 되는 것인지? 불가사의?

學究僞名者의 沒世情 학교면 학교, 교수면 교수, 그 중에도 담임한 대로 수학이면 수학이기,지력이면 지력이기이지 원가에 이것 저것을... 이럿타면 더 말할 필요가 업지만, 그러나 조선의 소위 학구열하는 자들은 너머도 세상과는 몰교섭인 듯 그러면 그네들의 가르치는 것은 도대체 무엇인지? 지하의 일인가? 천상의 일인가? 아모리 하여도 알 수가 업는 일.

敎授級의 生活難 조선 사람의 월급생활하는 이로는 아모리 하여도 교수급의 수입이 제일 나을 것인데, 생활난의 부르지짐은 그 분들의 입에서 먼저 <108> 나온다. 그러면 그의 주머닛속은 양복 치레로 주러드는가? 술갑으로 주러드는가? ...? 역시 불가사의.

宗敎 學校의 粉糾만흔 것 종교 학교면 물론 사랑과 평화를 표방할 것인데, 실제는 그와 딴 판으로 紛糾과 軋轢이 다른 학교보다는 이상으로 만흐니 그것은 무슨 까닭?

文人界의 七不可思議

文人國 入籍手績 엇더케 하면 문인국에 入籍을 하는가? 『아 ! 님이여! 』『아! 사랑이여! 』하고 시나 한 편 쓰면 되는지? 『각설이 때 조선국 OO대왕 즉위 초에 ...』 하고 고대 소설이나 한 편 번역하면 入籍을 식히는지? 신문 사면 단편란에 일홈이 몃 번이 나야 되는지? 명함에다가 문사 모라고 肩書를 해야 되는지? 엇더케 해야 문인국 백성 노릇을 하는가? 『자유 연애 부인론자 K군에게』 하고 反駁文이라도 하나 써야 되는지 문인국 입적 표준은 대개 알 수가 업다. 올치 현상 모집때 빠지지 말나구! 수수료나 세금은 업는가요?

風波는 何其多 극단으로 감정이 발달되야 그런지, 신경이 극도로 과민해서 그런지, 다른 무슨 계보다도 문인계가 제일 말성이 만흔 모양... 바늘 끗 만한 일도 참는 것이 업고 누가 방긔만 크게 꾸어도 『이놈 그러케 꾸는 것이 아니다. 』라고 덤븨는 모양이다. 싸홈을 잘 해야 문사의 가치가 올나가는지 그 곳이란 되기를 시비로 된 곳인지? 여하간 불가사의?

文人의 生活費 밧작 말너 붓흔 요 사회 할 곳도 업고 신문 잡지사라야 원고료 지불도 변변히 못하는 판이나 그래도 문인들의 생활은 그대로 유지되야 나가니, 도대체 무엇으로 엇더케 지나는 지 알 수 업는 일의 한 가지.

戀愛도 못 해본 사람이 戀愛 詩 文 쓰는 것 괴기는 먹어보아야 맛을 알고, 물은 건너 보와야 깁히를 안다고, 연애도 해 보와야 그 진경을 대개라도 알어서 묘사를 할 터인데, 전이나 지금이나 연애시, 연애문 쓰는 사람들은 체험업고도 잘 쓰는 모양이니 재조중에는 신통한 재조이다. 연애- 안이 처녀의 방 <109> 귀냄새도 맛터 보지 못한 총각들 까지도 연애소설을 곳잘 쓰는 것은 확실이 불가사의의 하나이다.

詩人 만흔 것 잇크, 시인이 또 하나 나온다.
『아 -사랑하는 님이여...』
『아- 달 빗은 희고 서리는 차구나.』 익크 요긔 또 하나 나온다.
『누님! 나는 감니다. 저- 멀니 북으로 북으로... 하늘 끗 단데까지 나는 가람니다.』이런 글 쓰는 친구가 퍽 만히 나오겟다. 新詩? 즉 얼칙이 시인이 만탄 말이다. 청년시기라 의지보다 감정생활이 만어 그런지 『아-님이여』 『아-사랑이여-! 』 하고 톡기똥갓치 쓰기가 쉬워 그런지 (실상은 어렵다는데) 안이 그래야 애인이 생긱는지? 도모지 알 수 업는 일?

漢字代에 英字 한자불가를 떠드는 그들로서 응당 조선말로 할 수 잇는 말도 영자나 일문으로 닥근 콩 주어 먹듯한다. 아니 신문학이 서양으로 일본으로 그러케 수입되야서 그런지? 문사치고 영자를 안 쓰면 신문학자 행세를 할 수가 업서서 그런지? 그도 불가사의.

여긔에도 貞操難 문인의 정조가 여자의 정조와는 다를 지 모르지만 금일에는 푸로 문학을 주창하다가 명일에는 뿌르 문학을 찬동하며 작년에는 OO 주의 신문잡지에 투고하다가 금년에는 OO 주의 신문잡지에 투고하니 생활의 곤란인가 주의의 변절인가. 알수 업는 일의 한 가지?

宗敎界의 七不可思議

중이라고 뚱뚱보 업스란 법은 아니겟지만 어느 절에나 주지(住持)를 보면 대개 뚱뚱보가 만타. 부처님의 음덕인지? 山水간에 놀고 먹는 연유인지? 채식(菜食)을 해서 그런지? 금욕(禁慾)을 생활을 해서 그런지? 그러나 속으로 듯고 보면 술 고기를 막 먹고 첩을 두엇씩 거느리는 스님도 잇다니, 그도 미들 수 업고 아모리 해도 불가사의

성경(聖經)애는『부자가 텬당에 가기는 락타가 바늘 구멍으로 나가기보다 더 어렵다. 』하고 『남이 것옷을 달나거든 속옷까지 버서주라. 』하엿다. 그러나 그것을 강도단(講道壇)에 올나서서 설교하는 목사나 장로님은 양복 밋천이나마 두둑하지 안하면 자격이 업다니 그도 알 수 업는 일.

이 때껏 조선에서 생장하야 조선말을 하고 조선의 생활양식을 하야 왓건만 야소교 신앙자가 되면 조선 사람끼리 뫼이는 데나 연단이나 교단에서도 목 떨니는 서양 선교사의 긔도식이 별안간에 만허지니, 그래야 독실한 신자가 된단 말인가. 미국 류학을 갈 수 잇단 말인가? 아모려나 그도 모를 일.

아직도 몃 백년 몃 천년이나 더 지나야 <110> 세상이 좀 깨끗해 질넌지? 소위 신성하다는 종교계에도 웬 협잡은 그리 만흐며 상투쟁이도 왈련자. 혹보리도 왈대 선생 왈보천교, 왈 증산교, 왈 백백교, 왈 청림교! 하고 모다 나서니 그들의 하는 일은 무엇이며 표방하는 교리는 무엇인가? 그래도 밥버리가 되고 거긔에 맹종 (盲從) 하는 자들이 만흐니 그도 불가사의.
텬당 텬당하고- 미드며 극락 세계 극락 세계하고 설교를 하니, 혹 텬당이나 극락세계에 가 본이가 잇서서 그러는지? 알고 십허도 알 수 업는 일.

그도 그려렷다 녀자가 만허야 흥성흥성하지, 남자만 잇는 사회는 아무래도 쓸쓸한 법이다. 그래 그런가? 녀 학교 근처에라야 교회가 잘 되는 모양. 서울로도 뎡동 근처가 그럿코, 평양으로도 장대 근처가 그럿타. 아니 그러면 녀학교 근처에 교회가 잘 되는 것이 아니라 교회 근처에 녀학교가 잘 된다는 증거인가? 앗차, 밤 례배에는 무슨 까닭으로 남녀 학생이 더 만흔구? 이런 것이 다 알 수 업는 일.

부흥회를 하여 전과를 한우님 압헤 자백하는 것까지는 좃타. 그러나 간음 가튼 문제로 신자 새이에 츄태가 각금 폭로되는 것은 부흥회로 인하야 만히 되니, 그러면 그런 츄태를 드러내는 것이 목적인지, 그것을 예방하랴는 것이 목적인지 도모지 뒤범벅이여서 알 수가 업시 되고 만다.

出版界의 七不可思議

응당 자긔 두뢰로 는 무슨 저작(著作)을 할 듯 십지도 못한 이가 책사에 가 보면 이 책 저 책에 그의 일홈이 저작자로 박혀 잇스니, 그것은 무슨 까닭?

책일홈은 달너도 내용을 읽어 보면 꼭 가튼 책이 만흐니 그것도 알 수 업는 일의 한 가지.

정당한 언론계에서 원고나 긔사 재료로 의견을 무르면 죽여라고 말을 아니하고 요리회피, 저리회피 하건만 련애 문학자의 장사노리에는 사진까지 내여 주며 아름답고 애처롭기 금공작(金孔雀)의 빗갈 가튼 시문을 써주는 녀자가 만흐니, 그야말로 불가사의 중에도 큰 불가사의.

서양의 유명하다는? 걸작품 번역이나 현대적 명사의 훌늉한 저작이라도 단 이천권을 팔어 먹으랴면 진땀을 빼는데, 심청전, 춘향전이나 류중렬전, 조웅전 가튼 고대 소설은 한번에도 만여권씩 인쇄를 한다니 그도 단단한 불가사의의 하나.

다른 출판은 모다 긔를 못 펴고 쪼라드는데, 그 놈의 족보(族譜) 출판만은 해마다 더 느러 간다니, 비러를 먹을 짓인지 망해를 먹을 짓인지 는 몰나도 하여간 불가사의는 불가사의.

돈은 업다면서도 책은 안 팔린다면서도 <111> 창간호를 종간호로 하면서도... 웬 잡지가 그리 만히도 나오는지? (외국에 비하면 만흔 것도 안이지만) 사상잡지, 문예잡지, 수양잡지, 소년잡지, 부녀잡지, 기생잡지, 잡지도 어지간히 쏘다져 나온다. 엇잿든 조흔 현상이다. 창간이 종간이 될 망정 업는 것보다는 낫다. 뱃속에서 죽는다 해도 애 어미소리는 듯게 될 터이닛가... 그런데 대관절 돈은 어대서 나오고 읽기는 누가 다 읽는지 역시 불가사의.

아동 잡지면 아동을 본위 삼고 나와야 할 터인데 요새 아동 잡지를 보면 아동으로는 땅뗌도 못할 어려운 말을 쓰기가 일수요, 그나마 동이 닷지 안케 느러놋는 것을 보면 여긔도 모르는 문자를 주서다 놋는 것이 분명하고 어려운 언론 잡지에 낫든 련애 소설을 벗겨다 놋코 창작동화라고 련재(連載)해 나가고 엉터리 업는 지리력사를 사실과는 딴 판으로 써 노흐니 그런 것을 닑는 소년이 잇다면 가엽슨 일이거니와 도대체 누구더러 그런 것을 읽으란 말인가? 부모가 읽는가? 선생이 읽는가? 글 쓴 그 자신이나 읽고 마는가? 그 책의 말로는 엇더케 되고 처치는 엇더케 하는지 알 수 업는 일.

女子界의 七不可思議

조선에는 불가사의가 하도 만흐닛가- 도모지 까닭을 알수 업지만 엇잿든 녀자계도 하나 참예하여 보자. 그래 가지에 가지를 치는 셈으로 녀자계의 일곱가지 불가사의를 들어보자. 그러나 일곱 가지로는 좀 부족지탄이 잇다만은 제한이 그러타 하면 섭섭하여도 할 수 업는 일!

한창 시절에는 연단에 나서서 열변을 토하야 만장 청중의 박수 갈채를 밧고 신문 잡지에 시문을 써내여 세인의 이목을 놀내게 하다가도 시집만 가면 어느 구석에 가 드러끼는지 도모지 소식이 강감하야지니 그것이 불가사의.

요새 시체 부인네 들이 전찻간이나 길거리에 다니는 것을 보면 손목에다 쇠 불알가튼, 털이나 명주실로 짠『오페라 빡』이라던가 우리는 일홈도 잘 모르는 주머니를 들고 다니니 도대체 그 속에는 무엇을 느 가지고 다니는지 불가사의.

모양을 내는 것 도 좃코 미를 나터내는 것도 좃치만 요세 녀학생은 잇는 머리에도 다리 꼭지를 드리고 거문 눈섭에도 먹으로 여달 八자(字)를 그리는 이가 잇스니 누구에게 잘 뵈랴는 뜻인지? 뉘게서 배운 짓인가? 누가 식힌 짓인가? 알 수 업는 한가지.

시집간 녀자라야만- 애를 낫코, 애를 배이면 열달만에라야 애를 낫는 줄 아럿더니, 근래는 머리 딴 색씨들이 애를 낫코 시집간 지 다섯달 여섯달 빠르면 두달 석달 더 속하면 바로 그 달에도 애를 낫는 이가 잇다금 잇다금 잇다고 한니 그도 불가사의.

확실히 일가간도 아니요 인아 친척간도 아닌 줄을 아는데 녀학생이 남학생 보고 『옵바』 『동생』하며 그 남학생에게 자긔는 『누이』『누님』소리를 바더가며 차저다니고 편지질을 하고 물건을 주고 밧고 하니 그는 무슨 까닭.

자긔집에서는 돈 준 일도 업고 사 준 일도 업고 하다는데 팔뚝에 금시계를 차고 발에는 깃도 구두를 신는 녀학생들이 잇다니 그도 불가사의.

일요일이면 학교도 의레 수업을 아니 하는데, 예수도 안 밋는 녀학생이 책보를 끼고 자긔집을 나서니 무슨 까닭인고? 선생이나 동무에게 모르는 과졍이나 무르러 간줄 아랏더니, 거듸도 온 일이 업다고 하면 그야말로 어대를 다니는 지 알 수 업는 일.

商業界의 七不可思議

조선 상점이면 의례히 조선 손님을 만히 끄러야 할 터인데 그럿타고 외국 손님을 끄는 법도 업고 자긔 나라 손님까지 청인 일본인에게 다 빼앗기는 것은 알 수 업는 한가지.

자긔 상점은 자기네가 먼저 깨끗이 해 노아야 할 것인데, 자긔 상점 압헤 자긔가 먼저 코를 탁탁 푸러 붓처노코 잇다금 지나가는 행인의 발등에다 주인 영감의 가래춤이나 요강속의 오줌이 떠러 질번 하야 깜작 놀내주는 수가 만흐니 그건 또 무슨 까닭.

상업에는 광고 술이 교묘하여야 한다는데 교묘하기는 고사하고 조선 삼대 신문을 매일 들고 보아야 조선 상점의 광고라고는 도모지 볼 수가 업고, 잇다금 난다야 쑥스럽기 한이 업스니, 알 수 업는 일의 하나.

하면 밋지는 줄은 번히 알면서도 그래도 영업은 그대로 게속하니 그것은 무슨 까닭.

일본 사람이나 청인에게는 맛돈 잡이로 착착 물건을 사며, 조선 사람에게는 얼골만 알게 되면 의레 외상으로 물건 달나고 졸느는 손님이 만타니 이것은 상업자 측으로 보아서 일대 불가사의라고.

장사는 물론 손님 중심 이다 .광고는 소위 칠절 뎡녕이니 신속 수응이니 하면서 정말 당면하고 보면, 그 꼴이야 눈 꼴이 틀녀 볼 수가 업다. 『뭣 사려요? 』『문 닷치요.』『업소.』『그리 안된다는데 왜 이리오.』『그만 두구려.』『압다- 제기 썩어진답딋가.』등 엇지도 뚝뚝하고 퉁명스러운지 손님을 자긔집 하인이나 말모양으로 대하것다. 여간 시골 사람은 부접도 못 해 보고 여간 어룰 한 사람은 말 두마디도 못 븟처볼 지경이다. 이러고도 입에 밥이 드러가니 조선이야말로 아직 억꾸수룩한 사회것다. 그래서 파산이 자즌 지도 모르지 하긴 손 <113>님의 발자국 끈치면 파산이지 별 수 잇나. 이런 줄 알면서도 그 모양이니 이것이 불가사의.

친절한 체 하면서도 에누리 너무하는 자 이야말로 괫심하겟다. 삼곱 사곱을 불너놋코 십분 이십분이나 닷흐다가 결국은 손님에 문 밧께 나서서 저만큼 가면 헐네벌덕 쫏차와서 『여보시오. 그대로 가저 갑시요.』하고 무던히 인심이나 쓰는 척한다. 시간 허비도 되고 인격 손상도 되고 물품도 드럿다 노앗다 하는 바람에 퍽이나 손상되련만. 그것을 조선의 상인들은 모르는 모양! 그런대 정직하게 정당한 가격으로 물건을 만히 파르면 상업이 잘 안 된단 말인가? 알 수 업는 노릇의 한가지.

雜同散異 七不可思議

두 눈이 멀정하게 잘 보는 사람들이 자긔 코가 엇지 생기엿는지도 아지 못하는 장님(盲人) 에게 돈을 주어가며 吉凶禍福을 물어보니, 그것도 이상한 일.

訴訟 事件 은 해마다 줄어가도 변호사 문패는 작구 느러갈 뿐 안이라 변호사치고는 대개 첩을 두고 요리집 출입이 일주일에도 몃 번씩 되니, 그 돈의 출처는 何處.

편지 한 장도 잘 못 쓰는 기생들이 長恨과 新春이란 잡지에다 글들은 곳잘 쓰니 그 글은 대체 어대서 나온 것인가. 얼치기 문사에게 우슴을 주고 사 온 것 인가. 돈을 주고 사온 것인가. 또한 不可思議.

우중에 바드면 우산이요, 햇빗에 바드면 양산인데, 서울의 녀자들은 해도 지고 비도 안이 오는 밤중에 우산을 밧고 다니는 이가 잇스니 알 수 업는 일.

무슨 영업이든지 영업자가 만허서 경쟁적으로 영업을 하면 가격이 저염한 법이지만은 특별히 병원 가튼 것은 해마다 느러가도 약갑과 진찰비는 오히려 더 빗싸다니 의사의 영업은 도모지 불가사의.

돈 만흔 귀족들이 남보다 먼저 파산을 당하니 그 돈은 무엇에 다 쓴 모양인가 도박인가  기집인가 그것도 알 수 업는 일.

돈은 업서서 죽네사네 하면서도 요리집 술집에는 날마다 사람이 만원이 되니 돈이 업서서 화푸리로 먹는 세음인가. 무슨 딴수들이 생긴 모양인가. 도대체 不可思議.<114>
<108-114>