잡지명: 別乾坤 제5호
발행일: 1927년 03월 01일
기사제목: 萬年샤쓰, 朝鮮의자랑, 五人同侔 (Man-Nyeon Syatsu, Pride of Joseon, Five People in Partnership)
기사형태: 사고·편집후기 (Advertisement/Editorial Postscript)

Man-Nyeon Syatsu
『Man-Nyeon Syatsu』 is a novel so interesting that anyone will read it without shedding tears. In the midst of the tragic event of a great fire that burned down thirty houses in one night, see how such a beautiful fact arises and makes the readers cry. It could even be called a scripture…

Pride of Joseon
The pride of Joseon! It is easy to know the shame of Joseon, but it is difficult to know its pride. The pride of Joseon, the pride of Joseon, what could it be? You must read this at least.

Five People in Partnership
This is a collaborative novel by Wu Mae-song, Son Jin-tae, Ko Han-seung, Pang Jeong-hwan, and five others, totaling nine people. Writing one novel with the skills of nine people is endlessly interesting, and the change in content is unparalleled, so anyone who reads the beginning will not be able to stop until the end. All these interesting articles are published in this month's (March) 『Children's』 magazine.

The March issue of Children's is a special issue commemorating the 4th anniversary of its founding. In addition to the three items introduced above, there are fifteen or sixteen other masterpieces, and as a special supplement, we are giving away two beautiful 『Three-Color Art Photo Books』 (good for notebooks or diaries, or good for hanging on the wall), which are the first of their kind in Joseon, and we also provide the March issue of Children's Newspaper for free.

The price is only 15 jeon! Think of it as the price of a pack of cigarettes and send only 15 jeon (postage stamps are also acceptable) to Gaebyeoksa. See how wonderful it is when you receive it.
<166>

**Named Entities**

禹梅松	U Mae-song
孫晋泰	Son Jin-tae
高漢承	Ko Han-seung
方定煥	Pang Jeong-hwan
朝鮮	Joseon
開闢社	Gaebyeoksa



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제5호
발행일	1927년 03월 01일
기사제목	萬年샤쓰, 朝鮮의자랑, 五人同侔
기사형태	사고·편집후기

萬年샤쓰, 朝鮮의자랑, 五人同侔
萬年샤쓰
『萬年샤쓰』이것은 아모라도눈물업시는 닑지못할 처음보게자미잇는소설임니다 一夜에 三十여 戶를태워버린 大火災가 나아노은 悲慘事中에 이럿틋 아름다운 사실이 生기여 讀者를 울니는 것을 보십시오 一篇의 聖書라고한여도조흘 것………
朝鮮의자랑
조선의자랑! 조선의흉은알기쉬워도 자랑은 알기가어렵슴니다 조선의 자랑 조선의 자랑 그것은 무엇일 당신도 이것만은 닑어야할것임니다.
五人同侔
禹梅松 孫晋泰 高漢承, 方定煥 外五人合九人의 連作小說이니 아홉사람의 솜씨로 한가지 小說을쓴것이라 興味잇기 限이업고 內容의 變化가 無雙한것이라 누구나처음을 닑고서 지안닑고 못백일것임니다 이여러가지 자미닛는 記事는 모다이번 『어린이』雜誌三月號에 실려잇슴니다.
어린이 三月호는 창간 四周年紀念特別號이라 우에 紹介한세가지 外에도 十五六篇의 名篇이갓득잇고 特別附錄으로 朝鮮서는 처음보게 美麗한『三色美術寫眞書表』(手帖이나 日記帳에너어도좃코 壁에붓처도조흔것)를 二枚색드리고, 어린이 新聞三月號도 無料進呈함니다.
갑은 단 十五錢! 담배한갑산셈치고 十五錢만(郵票도 可)開闢社로 보내보십시요 엇뎌케 훌륭한 것을 보내나.
＜166＞