Magazine Title: 삼천리 (三千里) 제12권 제3호
Publication Date: 1940년 03월 01일 (March 1, 1940)
Article Title: 小說 太祖(滿洲國 民生部 大臣賞) (Novel: Taejo (Manchukuo Ministry of People's Livelihood Minister's Award))
Author: 穆儒丐 (Muk Yu-gae)
Article Type: 소설 (Novel)

Novel: Taejo (Manchukuo Ministry of People's Livelihood Minister's Award)
						Muk Yu-gae (穆儒丐)

The Jurchen people (女眞族), a Manchurian nation (滿洲 민족) that left many glorious achievements in the history of the Goguryeo (高句麗), Balhae (渤海), and Jin (金朝) periods, mostly returned to their ancestral lands in Northern Manchuria (北滿) after the fall of the Jin Dynasty. Lacking outstanding leaders, they lived dispersed in various regions, contending for supremacy among themselves. However, they were warlike and brave.

Manchuria's largest mountain is Changbai Mountain (長白山), one ridge of which extends to Xingjing (興京). On the mountain peak is a lake overflowing with beautiful blue water, called Heaven Lake (天池). In some past era, three fairies descended; they were three sisters. One day, a magpie (鵲) flew by and left a red fruit (實果) on the clothes of the youngest sister, Fekulen (佛庫倫). Fekulen ate the fruit, became pregnant, and soon gave birth to a baby boy. The baby spoke as soon as he was born, and his appearance was strange.<339> He was named Aisin Gioro (愛親覺羅). When he became a dignified young man, his mother said, "You were born to bring order to a turbulent country. Go and pacify it." She led him to a certain riverside (河畔), put him in a boat to go downstream, and then ascended to heaven herself.

Aisin Gioro traveled a short distance and reached a place where three major clans (三大 호족) were fighting amongst themselves. Perceiving Aisin Gioro's extraordinary nature (비범함), they made him their ruler (國主), and the nation's power grew strong. However, during the era of his descendants, governance became disordered, and this lineage nearly died out. But in the 38th year of the Ming (明) Jiajing (嘉靖) era (1559), Nurhaci (努爾哈齊) was born, and the declining fortunes gradually began to recover. This "Nurhaci" is Taejo (太祖, Grand Ancestor).

In the 11th year of the Ming Wanli (萬歷) era (1583), Taejo, at the age of 25, raised troops and subjugated Nikan Wailan (尼堪外蘭). He captured Tulun (圖倫) and Giyaban (嘉班), and his valor became widely renowned. Some among his own people were jealous and secretly plotted to harm him, but he repelled them. He showed magnanimity (寬客性), such as capturing assassins but then releasing them.

Later, hearing of internal strife (內訌) in the Sokha (?) tribe (梀刊部), he attacked Qijita Fortress (齊吉達城) and then Onggolo Fortress (翁刊洛城). During the attack on Onggolo, he personally urged on the fierce battle (激戰), was wounded, and temporarily retreated, but then attacked fiercely (猛攻) again and captured it. Two enemies who had wounded Taejo were captured, but Taejo said, "When two enemies clash (交鋒), it is to gain victory. These men shot at me for their master; now I shall have them shoot the enemy for me," and rewarded them accordingly.

Taejo subjugated the neighboring tribes, cherished and nurtured them, and his territory expanded, and wealth became abundant. The country produced Eastern pearls (東珠), ginseng (人蔘), sable (紫貂), black fox (黑狐), and *sari* (舍利, Buddhist relics?). These were consumed domestically, and the surplus was traded with the Ming state (明國). At that time, the trading posts were at Fushun (撫順), Qinghe (淸河), Kuandian (寬甸), and Aiyang (靉陽) – four locations. However, the tribes of Yehe (葉赫, iehe), Ula (烏拉, ura), Hoifa (輝發, hoipa), and Hada (哈達, hada) were powerful and did not submit; Yehe was particularly disrespectful. Yehe gathered troops from nine tribes, 30,000 strong, and attacked. But Taejo, using skillful tactics, defeated them. From then on, the Mongol (蒙古) tribes also became deeply friendly with Taejo.

Until that time, the Mongols had a Mongol script, but the Manchu language (滿洲語) consisted only of dialects and had no writing system. Taejo decided this would not do.<340> He ordered Erdeni (額爾德尼, E-rŭ-de-ni) to adapt the Mongol script to represent the Manchu language. This was Taejo's focus on culture. Thereafter, military proclamations and communications became swift, greatly benefiting state affairs (國事).

In the 3rd year of Tianming (天命, 1618), Taejo resolved to conquer the Ming and gathered a large army, exposing Ming's tyranny (暴戾). "My ancestors never touched even a blade of grass or inch of soil belonging to Ming, yet Ming, without reason, initiated hostilities (兵端) in my territory and harmed my father and grandfather. This is the first grievance. Though Ming initiated hostilities, my side sought friendly relations (修好) and concluded a non-aggression pact (不可侵 約條), yet Ming gathered troops, crossed the border (越境), and aided Yehe. This is the second grievance. Ming people south of Qinghe and north of the riverbank cross the border every year to plunder (掠奪), and they captured my envoys and killed them at the border (邊境). This is the third. Ming crossed the border to reinforce Yehe and married off to the Mongols a woman already promised to me. This is the fourth. The three routes of Chaihe (柴河), Sancha (三岔), and Fu'an (撫安) have been held (保守) by my ancestors for generations (累世); we cultivated (耕作) the numerous fields in the territory and managed the grain harvest (收穀 營爲), but Ming forbade this and sent troops to drive us out (驅逐). This is the fifth grievance (恨事). The Yehe beyond the border (邊外) sinned against Heaven, yet Ming trusted their words, sent envoys who hurled insults (詬詈) and inflicted humiliation (凌侮). This is the sixth grievance. In the past, Ming aided Hada and Yehe, invading twice. My response to this is that Heaven had already entrusted Hada to me. Yet Ming again allied with them, threatening me to return their state, even though the Hada people had repeatedly suffered Yehe's aggression. When states conquer each other, those who follow Heaven's will (天心) win and survive (存立), while those who oppose Heaven's will (天意) are defeated and perish (敗亡). How can those killed in battle be resurrected (更生)? How can their people be returned again (更히)? Heaven establishes the ruler of a great nation to be the common lord (共主) of the world; why should it bear resentment only towards my country? Initially, the Hulun (呼倫) states combined forces to invade me, but Heaven detested the Hulun forces and protected me. Now, Ming aids the Heaven-condemned (天譴) Yehe, thus opposing Heaven's will and confusing right and wrong (是非 倒置). This is the seventh grievance. The bullying (欺凌) is truly severe, and the situation (情) is truly unbearable. Because of these Seven Great Grievances (七大恨), I intend to conquer (討征) them."

Thus, he strictly ordered (嚴明) that captured enemies should not have their clothes stripped (버끼지), women should not be raped (姦淫), spouses (配偶) should not be separated (分離), and those who surrendered should not be executed (誅戮). He printed pamphlets detailing the Seven Great Grievances and distributed them everywhere; Taejo also endeavored in propaganda warfare (宣傳戰).

The large army advanced (行進) and reached the walls of Fushun (撫順 城下), sending a letter urging surrender (投항 勸告書) to the Ming general Li Yongfang (李永芳). Receiving this, Li Yongfang consulted his colleagues (同僚),<341> but their opinions were inconclusive (議論이 歸結되지 않어). Ultimately, they decided internally (內定) to fight a decisive battle (決戰) while outwardly feigning surrender and secretly rushing war preparations (戰備). This pretense (假裝) was seen through (간파), and Taejo attacked all at once (一齊히 進擊). The Ming army was no match for the trained Eight Banner cavalry (八旗兵), suffered numerous casualties (死傷者), and Li Yongfang finally raised the white flag (白旗) and surrendered. Taejo entered Fushun Castle in dignity (堂堂히 入城). Taejo rewarded his meritorious troops (論功行賞) and also gave travel expenses (旅費) to merchants residing (在住) in Fushun from Shandong (山東), Shanxi (山西), Jiangnan (江南), and Zhejiang (浙江) provinces to return to their hometowns (本籍地).

On the way back in triumph (凱旋), bad news (悲報) arrived: Zhang Cheng'yin (張承陰), the Regional Commander (總兵) of Guangning (廣寧); Po T'ing-sang (?) (頗廷相), the Vice Commander (副將) of Liaoyang (遼陽); and P'u Se-fang (?) (蒲世芳), the Assistant Commander (參將) of Haizhou (海州), having heard of Fushun's fall (失陷), were leading a large army in pursuit (追擊). Zhang Cheng'yin was the very person (張本人) who had seized much farmland by force.

Taejo's generals (諸將) were greatly enraged (奮擊) and decided to turn the army around and attack the enemy. At that time, the Manchu army primarily used bows and arrows (弓矢), while the Ming army possessed firearms called Hongyipao (紅夷砲), made in Portugal (葡萄 牙). However, the enraged Manchu army proved too much for the Ming forces, who suffered heavy casualties and were utterly defeated (大敗). Li Yongfang also submitted, received the post of regional commander (總兵官), and governed the surrendered populace (降民). Taejo not only rescued his own people but also saved the people of the Ming Dynasty.

The Ming Dynasty perceived a great threat (脅威) in this rise of the Manchus, but its military was already corrupt (腐敗), unable to afford huge military expenditures (軍備), while Taejo's management (經營) of the border regions (邊境) proceeded steadily (着着). Lost territories (失地) were recovered, and strategic points (諸要衝) fell into Taejo's hands (手中). In the 7th month of autumn, they entered Yajiao Pass (鴉鳥關) and besieged Qinghe City (淸河城). This was a key route (要道) in Liaodong (遼東), with Shenyang (瀋陽, present-day Fengtian 奉天) within sight (指顧 之 間).

The Ming court (明廷) assigned General Zou Chuxian (?) (鄒儲賢) with heavy troops (重兵) to defend Qinghe City. Believing this strong defense (堅固한 防禦) had to be broken in one stroke (一擧), the Manchu army dug trenches (壕) around the city's four sides (四圍) and advanced fiercely (猛進) with ladders. The defenders fired intensely (猛射) with firearms from the city, but being old-style cannons (舊式 大砲) of the time, they took time to fire. The Manchu soldiers, watching for these gaps (間隙), set up hundreds of ladders and pressed into (迫入) the city. Firearms (cannons) were already useless (無用之物), leaving only fighting with bows and arrows (弓矢) and thrown logs and stones (木石). Taejo's large force also began shooting with strong bows and crossbows (强弓勁弩). They also engaged in close combat (白兵戰) using shields (牌) and covered wagons (輴車). Finally, the Ming army was routed (大敗). The following year, the first month of Tianming 4 (1619), Taejo crossed the frozen river (氷上 踏破) and personally led a large army to attack Yehe (葉赫).<342> The intention was not to destroy Yehe but to show resolve to fight the Ming troops stationed (在) in Yehe. Before this, Taejo dispatched 5,000 troops to defend Zhaka Pass (?) (扎喀關) and block (防禁) Ming reinforcements. Thus, Taejo penetrated deep (深入) into Yehe territory and captured over twenty fortresses (城塞) in one go. They were already closing in (迫進) on Yehe City. Jin Taiji (錦台什), the ruler of Yehe, realizing he could not resist (抗戰), requested aid (救援) from Ma Lin (馬林). However, Ma Lin, knowing field battles (野戰) were disadvantageous (不利) for him, dared not (敢히) advance (前進). Meanwhile, Taejo ordered the construction of fortifications (要塞) upon returning to the border (境界).

Only then did Ming finally strive to preserve Liaodong (遼東 保全) through General Liu Ting (劉廷). Ming then appointed Yang Hao (楊鎬) as commander-in-chief (主將), stationing him in Shenyang (瀋陽). They planned a strategy (作戰) to surround Xingjing (興京) from four directions: Li Rubai (李如栢) as commander (主帥) of the left wing northern route (左翼 北路), Ma Lin (馬林) for the [other] left wing northern route, and Liu Ting (劉廷) as commander of the right wing southern route (右翼 南路). It was said to be a grand army of 400,000, but the actual number (實數) was 200,000, perhaps half of whom were non-combatant attendants (附屬人). However, the operation proceeded in extreme secrecy (極히 秘密히).

Against this, Taejo deployed a secret intelligence network (諜報網), remained utterly unafraid (秋毫도 두려워 하지 않고), made accurate judgments (判明), and devised appropriate countermeasures (對策). The Ming general Du Song (杜松) was famed as a fierce commander (猛將). Setting out from Fushun (撫順), he reached Sarhū (薩爾滸) Mountain. Hearing that the Manchu army had built a fort on the opposite bank (對岸) across the Hun River (渾河), he plunged (跳入) into the river and advanced like a drowned rat. The Manchu army, knowing the terrain (地利), met and attacked them (迎擊) in a pincer movement (挾攻), achieving a great victory. Du Song perished (歿) in the battle (陣中).

The Ming general Ma Lin advanced from Kaiyuan (開原) to Shangjianyai (尙間崖) but was also defeated. Meanwhile, Liu Ting's army, unaware of the defeat (敗北) of the other two generals, penetrated deep into enemy territory (深入) and was also annihilated (壞滅).

The news (報道) of the great Ming defeat shocked (震感) the Ming court (朝廷). Taejo, on the one hand, established friendly relations (修好) with Joseon (朝鮮), while the unification (統一) of his own domain progressed (進步). Since Yehe was an obstacle (障碍) to unification, he decided to attack it. First, he captured Kaiyuan (開原), then also took Tieling (鐵嶺), and subsequently destroyed Yehe as well. Witnessing this, Ligdan Khan (林丹汗) of the Chahar (察哈爾) Mongols sent an arrogant letter, but Taejo refuted (駁擊) it and pressured him with force (實力).

As a countermeasure, Ming appointed Xiong Tingbi (態廷弼 - later referred to as 熊廷弼) to manage (經略) Liaodong. Upon assuming his post (就任), he inspected (檢閱) the troops and was so appalled by their corruption (腐敗) that he urgently petitioned (上奏) for reforms. However, Ming, suffering from terminal decline (末期 症狀), lacked the strength for it, and eventually, Xiong Tingbi resigned (辭職) and returned home (歸鄕).<343>

In the 3rd month of Tianming 6 (1621), Taejo led a large army to attack Shenyang (瀋陽), capturing it, then attacked Liaoyang (遼陽) and occupied it as well. When Taejo entered Liaoyang, merchants and citizens (商民) hung colored lanterns (彩燈) to welcome (歡迎) him, shouting "Long live!" (萬歲 歡呼). Women also dressed up (丹粧) and went out to see the spectacle, showing no fear, as if they had anticipated this day and waited for it. This was because the fact that Taejo cherished and protected (愛撫) the people of Liaodong had been well publicized, winning over their hearts (人心 歸還).

In this way, all the seventy-odd large and small cities east of the Liao River (遼河) – Aiyang (靉陽), Anshan (鞍山), Shihe (石河), Xindian (新甸), Kuandian (寬甸), Zhenjiang (鎭江), Fenghuang (鳳凰), Puhe (蒲河), Xiongyue (熊岳), Gaizhou (蓋州), Fuzhou (復州), Jinzhou (金州), Haizhou (海州) – were made to surrender completely, becoming subjects (子臣) of Taejo. Consequently, Taejo moved the capital (首都) to Liaoyang, which prospered greatly. Taejo also promoted agriculture (農業 振興), gave wasteland (荒田) to soldiers to cultivate, assigned farmland owned by large clans (大族) to the poor (貧人) for farming, and carried out a major reform (大改革) of the land system (田制).

At that time, the Ming general Mao Wenlong (毛文龍) secretly appeared on the Yalu River (鴨綠江) causing disturbances (擾亂), but Taejo suppressed him (討伐).

Ming reappointed Xiong Tingbi (熊廷弼), but Wang Huazhen (王化貞) in Guangning (廣寧) was at odds (不和) with Xiong, advanced independently (獨進) into battle, was ultimately defeated and fled (敗走), and the cities of Liaoxi (遼西) also surrendered.

In Tianming 10 (1625), the capital was moved again (更히 遷都) to Shenyang (瀋陽, Fengtian 奉天). Later, Ming's Yuan Chonghuan (袁崇煥) built fortifications at Ningyuan (寧遠) and defended it. Taejo again attacked Jinzhou (錦州) and then Ningyuan, but the Ming army's weaponry was superior this time. Taejo himself was wounded (負傷), temporarily retreated (退還), but soon fell ill (病) and died (崩) at the age of 68. Taizong (太宗) succeeded to the throne (位).

Taejo had 16 imperial sons (皇子). The eldest son (長子) died early (早死). Daisan (大見勒代善), Amin (二見勒阿敏), and Manggūltai (三見勒莽古爾泰) were born of concubines (庶出). The legitimate eldest son (嫡長), Taizong, ascended the throne (立位). Taizong's heavenly endowment (天奇) was outstanding (偉出), his complexion (顔色) like the red sun (赤日). He did not need to cover his ears in severe cold (嚴寒). His gait (步行) was like a dragon and tiger. His bearing (擧止) was extraordinary (異常). He possessed Heaven-bestowed wisdom (天錫睿智), reverence, filial piety, benevolence, and kindness (恭孝仁惠), sincerity, trustworthiness, generosity, and harmony (誠信寬和). He had saintly virtue (聖德). His speech was clear and sharp (言辭明敏), his deportment solemn and dignified (成儀端重). He never forgot what he heard once (一聽不忘) and understood things at first sight (一見卽知). He also possessed great strength (勇力), never missed a shot in mounted archery (騎射), his strategies (謀略) were far-reaching (宏遠), his use of troops (用兵) was like a god's (神), and his nature (性) was to love reading the classics (典籍). From childhood (幼時), he excelled in many aspects (諸點 特出), and Taejo deeply favored (寵愛) Taizong. His brothers (諸兄弟) also respected and loved (敬愛) Taizong.

At this time, the Ming Dynasty (明朝), based on Yuan Chonghuan's (袁崇煥) proposal, decided to send envoys (使節) to Shenyang (瀋陽) to offer condolences (吊) for Taejo and congratulations (祝賀) for the new ruler (新君).<344> Among the delegation of about 30 people, they decided to include (加하기로) the great Lama (大喇麻) Nam Mu-jwa (?) (*南木座) from Mount Wutai (五臺山). The stated purpose (名目) was to mourn the old ruler and congratulate the new one, but there was an intention (意思) to seek reconciliation (和好), hence the inclusion of a renowned Lama to borrow the power of religion (宗教) for a smooth outcome (圓滿 效果). Lamaism (喇嘛敎) had already entered Manchuria and was greatly expanding its influence (擴勢) in the Mongol territories (版圖).

When the delegation arrived in Shenyang, Taizong's army, returning victorious (凱旋) from a Mongol expedition, was holding a celebratory banquet (祝宴) outside the city (城外). Thus, the envoys unexpectedly witnessed the army's imposing might (威容). After Taejo's retreat from Ningyuan, the Dörbet (?) Mongols (杜魯特) had looked down upon (蔑視) the Manchu side, killing their envoy, prompting Taizong to order their subjugation (討伐).

Taizong granted an audience (引견) to the Ming envoys. Nam Mu-jwa (*南木座) from the delegation bowed (拜) to Taizong and said, "Excellent, excellent (善哉善哉)! In the sixty-odd years since this humble monk (貧僧) entered the world, I have seen not a few wise people (善知識) under Heaven, but I have never seen such a virtuous presence (善相?) as Your Majesty. Your Majesty and all the princes (皇子) are clearly reincarnations (轉世) of Bodhisattvas (菩薩) and Arhats (羅漢). If you display great compassion (大慈悲) and manage (經綸) great enterprises (大事業), your future fortune and virtue (福德) will surely be immeasurable (헤아리기도 어려울가)." The same monk also conveyed the hope for friendly relations (修好), saying that weapons (干戈) should be replaced with gifts (幣物). Taizong looked back at his brothers, smiled to himself, acknowledged the Lama's goodwill (善意), but thought one couldn't know what someone like Yuan Chonghuan was thinking. He felt the need for caution (戒愼). Furthermore, with the urgent tasks (急務) of pressuring the Mongols and Joseon, he decided to agree to friendly relations for the time being (一旦) and replied that he would dispatch his own envoys to discuss the matter in detail (詳細).

Due to these circumstances (如斯한 사정), Taizong had two officials, Bakhsi (?) Yuan (巴支什遠) and Haigûrsan (?) (海庫爾禪), draft a state letter (國書) and decided to dispatch two officials, Fangginai (?) (方吉納) and Wengkeshen (?) (溫克什), as envoys (使臣).

The two officials reached Ningyuan (寧遠), met (閱見) with Yuan Chonghuan, and requested to present (執奏) the state letter. At that time, although the Ming Dynasty had lost its former power (勢力 失墜), it still held the pride (自負心) that "Under Heaven, the only Empire (帝國) is our Ming." Therefore, Yuan Chonghuan first raised objections (難*을 부처서) to the state letter written from a position of bilateral equality (雙方 平等), refusing (拒絶) to forward such a letter.

In response, the two envoys alternately (번가러) argued, "Arguments from 100 years ago are invalid today. Our country may be inferior (不及) in territory and population, but it is a strong (强盛) nation. It is perfectly justifiable (正當) to be mentioned alongside (並稱) the Ming Emperor. Moreover, if we are to establish peace through friendly relations (修好), it must be mutually beneficial (相互 利益) and based on equality (相互 平等). Only then can negotiations (交涉) be established.<345> With your attitude (貴官과 같은 태도), reconciliation (和議) is unthinkable." This rebuttal (反駁) made Chonghuan blush (赤面). However, due to Yuan Chonghuan's firm stance (强한 태도), the two envoys returned to Shenyang with the state letter.

However, Taizong, preoccupied with dealing with Joseon (朝鮮 處置), revised the format (方式) of the state letter, sent the two envoys again, and focused entirely (專心) on the conquest of Joseon (朝鮮 征討). Since Ming's Mao Wenlong (毛文龍) was then present in Joseon, he was also a target (目標) of the conquest. Among the generals dispatched (出征 諸將), Amin (阿敏) was the most valiant (驍勇), but he also had a strong desire for personal glory (功을 탐하는 마음). The large army captured (陷落) Ŭiju (義州), Ch'ŏlsan (鐵山), Chŏngju (定州), and Kwaksan (郭山), advancing rapidly (進軍). King Injo (李浣) of Joseon panicked (唐惶), sent envoys, and after some complications (曲折), made peace (和議), but Amin was dissatisfied (不滿) with this. Meanwhile, Mao Wenlong fled but was executed (斬殺) by his superior officer Yuan Chonghuan, who was angered (憤) by his misconduct (非道).

Thus, the letter the two envoys carried this time to Yuan Chonghuan pointed out (指摘) seven instances (七項目) of Ming's wrongdoing (非理). It stipulated that if Ming desired friendly relations (修好), they should provide 100,000 taels of gold (黃金), 1,000,000 taels of silver (銀), 1,000,000 bolts of satin (緞), and 10,000,000 bolts of cloth (布) as gifts (禮物) for reconciliation (和好). After reconciliation, our side would send 10 Eastern pearls (東珠), 1,000 sable pelts (貂皮), and 1,000 catties (斤) of ginseng (人蔘) annually. In return (報償), Ming should provide 10,000 taels of gold, 100,000 taels of silver, 100,000 bolts of satin, and 300,000 bolts of cloth.

It was difficult (여렵다) for the Ming court officials (群臣), who considered themselves the Celestial Dynasty (天朝), to comprehend (理解) this letter. This time, Yuan Chonghuan sent a letter to Shenyang asking, "Why did your country attack Joseon? As long as you conquer Joseon, reconciliation is problematic (困難)." In response, Taizong sent back another dignified rebuttal (反駁書). It was truly (宛然) like a modern telegraphic exchange (電報戰).

Shortly after (未久), the Joseon expeditionary force returned in triumph (凱旋). Taizong accused Yuan Chonghuan of bad faith (信義없다) and in the 5th month, summer of the first year of Tiancong (天聰元年, 1627), personally led a large army westward (西進). In four days, he reached Guangning (廣寧), scouted the enemy situation (敵情 探知), divided the army into three routes (三路), first captured Dalinghe (大凌河), and then besieged (包圍) Jinzhou (錦州). However, the defense (守備) of Jinzhou, equipped with numerous cannons, was strong (堅固), and reinforcements (援軍) were approaching. So, Taizong changed his plan (方針) and decided to attack Ningyuan (寧遠) in one swift move (一氣). En route, he defeated a large enemy force and achieved significant military gains (戰果). However, facing the summer heat (炎熱) and the signs (兆候) of popular hardship (國民 困窮) due to years of warfare (年來 戰事), Taizong decided to return (還軍). Subsequently, he devoted great effort to restoring the domestic economy (國內 經濟 回復), relieving the poor (貧民 救濟), purging corrupt military officials (軍官 肅正), and the following year, attacked and occupied (占領) various places in Liaoxi (遼西) with fresh elite troops (新銳).<346>

In the 4th month, summer of Tiancong 3 (1629), Taizong established the Hundred Offices (百職司) for civil officials (文官). He selected (擇) ten Confucian scholars (儒臣) – Hae (*海), K'u-rŭ-sŏn (庫爾禪), Kang Rim (剛林), So Kae (蘇開), Mu Pa-si (武巴什), Cha So-k'a (扎素喀), Ko Ŭr-ga-hun (古爾嘉琿), T'o Pu-ch'i (托布齊), Ku (*球), and Ku Pa (古巴) – and put them in charge (掌理). Civil officials were divided into two shifts (兩直), and their duties (職責) were categorized into two main areas: translation (飜譯) and record-keeping (記注). The translation task involved selecting necessary materials from Mongol (蒙古), Joseon (朝鮮), and Chinese texts (漢籍) – classics, histories, philosophical works, and literary collections (經史子集) – translating them, and presenting (提供) them for imperial review (御覽). Record-keeping involved creating detailed records (詳細한 記錄 作成) concerning all state affairs (國家 政事). Later, in the first year of Chongde (崇德, 1636), the scope of civil official affairs was significantly expanded (擴充) into three offices: the Hongwenyuan (弘文院, Office of Literature), the Bishuyuan (秘書院, Secretariat), and the Guoshuyuan (國書院, Historiography Institute). Literary affairs (文事) flourished brilliantly (燦然히), and the great achievements (大業) of the Kangxi (康熙) and Qianlong (乾隆) eras (聖代) originated (創始) here.

Concurrent with establishing (家함과 동시에) the civil official system (文官制度), efforts were also made towards educating talented individuals (人材敎育). Although well-organized schools (學校) did not yet exist, Taizong stressed (力說) the necessity of educating the youth (子弟敎育), awarded prizes to outstanding individuals (優秀者), and established (創定) an official examination system (官吏試驗制度).

Taizong attempted to establish friendly relations (修好) with Ming, but the Ming court, high and low (上下), mired in old habits (積習), remained arrogant (依然히 輕侮) and unwilling to treat them as equals (平等). It seemed that without delivering a severe blow (痛烈한 打擊), reflection (反省) was unlikely (可望). Fortunately (多幸히), the Mongol tribes gradually submitted (歸順), and the remnants of Mao Wenlong's former subordinates (舊部下) entrenched (盤據) on islands (海島) were completely purged (肅淸). In the 10th month of winter, when the rivers froze (河水 結氷), Taizong personally led (親率) the six armies (六師), first going to the Kharachin (喀喇沁) Mongol tribe to convene (會合) the various tribes and discuss (討議) the matter of conquering Ming (征明之事).

For this, Taizong spent three months preparing the military (軍備 整頓). He sent some officers and soldiers (將兵) to the Jinzhou (錦州) and Ningyuan (寧遠) areas to draw the attention (耳目) of Yuan Chonghuan and others southward. Before initiating the action (行動 이르키기 전에), Taizong issued an imperial edict (勅諭):
"I reverently (짐이 우러러) receive Heaven's mandate (天命) to raise an army (師) and attack Ming. Those who resist (拒戰) must be executed (誅殺). Those who surrender (歸降), do not plunder (侵略) even a chicken or pig (鷄豚). For those captured (俘獲), let fathers and sons, husbands and wives not be separated (相別). Do not rape (姦淫) others' women. Do not seize (掠取) others' clothing. Do not destroy (破損) dwellings or shrines (廬舍祠宇). Do not break (破毁) utensils (器皿). If anyone violates these orders, kills surrendered people (降을 살하고?), or violates women, they shall be beheaded (斬). Anyone who fells fruit trees (果木 伐), steals clothing, enters villages (村落) for private plunder (私掠), shall receive 100 lashes (鞭). Also, do not eat cooked food (熟食) prepared by Ming people, do not drink their wine; I have heard there is poison (鴆毒) within the Shanhai Pass (山海關). Be doubly cautious (再三 愼愼). Horses may become thin (*瘦); feed them cooked beans (煮豆). For fat horses, appropriately withhold fodder (秣草).<347> When gathering firewood (柴草), always gather many people together with one person in charge (首班). Those who leave the group and ride off (馳往) shall be investigated (擧究)." Etc. (云云)

The mention of "poison" (鴆毒 云云) likely refers to opium (阿片). By the late Ming (明末), it had penetrated not only common society (民間) but also the imperial court (宮廷). The wise (賢明) Taizong had warned against it in advance (警戒).

Wherever the large army went, Longjing Pass (龍井關) was captured first, and Hanwanzhuang (?) (漢完莊) also surrendered. The army garrisoned within the city walls caused no disturbance (秋毫도 요란치 않고), and life continued as usual (平日). From this point, officials and civilians (官民) from all directions flocked (接踵) to surrender. Those among them holding official rank (官階) were promoted one grade (一級 陞賞). Taizong then entered Hongshanguo (?) (洪山國), captured Malanying (馬蘭營), advanced to Shimen (石門), and Beijing (北京) was within sight (指顧之間). Taizong positioned himself at Zunhua (遵化) and heavily rewarded (重賞) Samhatu (?) (薩木哈圖), famous for the Zunhua attack. He also executed (斬罪) soldiers in the Mongol army who had engaged in looting (掠奪).

Taizong reorganized his battle formation (陣容 整備) and prepared to seize (奪取) Beijing.

Hearing of Beijing's critical situation (危急), Yuan Chonghuan rushed there with Regional Commander (總兵) Zu Dashou (祖大壽). He had focused solely on firmly defending (堅守) Ningyuan and had not expected (막상) an attack from the northern border (北邊). Even this time, he thought they would attack from the north and then proceed towards Shanhai Pass (山海關). However, Taizong had other plans (用意) and immediately pressed towards (迫到) Beijing. Furthermore, due to Taizong's secret maneuvers (秘密히 策略), Yuan Chonghuan incurred the suspicion (疑心) of the Ming court, was imprisoned (投獄), and eventually executed (斬罪).

Taizong advanced the main army to Fangshan (房山) and performed rites (祭) at the Jinling tombs (金陵). Afterwards, he defeated the large Ming army at Lugou Bridge (蘆淸橋, Noch'ŏng-gyo) and finally advanced on Beijing. Taizong himself had earlier passed through Tongzhou (通州) heading towards Suzhou (蘇州) [likely a typo, perhaps referring to another location near Beijing or a strategic move].

Having been on campaign (出師) for over 130 days and with the spring thaw imminent (海氷 臨迫), he decided to return in triumph (凱旋). Amin (阿敏), who lost four cities during this war, was punished (罰).

In Tiancong 5 (1631), Taizong cast cannons (大砲 鑄造), and these cannons soon displayed great power (威力 發揮) in the attack on Dalingcheng (大凌城). The war with Ming continued.

There is also an anecdote (逸話) about a captured Ming official, Zhang Chun (張春), who maintained the honor (名譽) of a Ming official, upholding his integrity (潔白) by refusing to serve two masters (二君), and died of illness (病死), earning praise (嘉讚) from Taizong.<348>

Afterwards, peace negotiations (和議) with Ming proceeded again but were not successful (成就). Ming's power (威勢) gradually declined (衰), the tide of the state (國勢) turned in favor of the Manchu side, and Taizong thereupon established the state name (國號), calling it the Qing State (淸國). He attacked Joseon again and finally entered the Chinese heartland (支那 本部).

Here, this historical narrative (史話), having described the activities of Taejo and Taizong entirely within Manchuria and spoken of the foundational work (基礎 工作) for the subsequent prosperity (隆昌) of the Great Qing Empire (大淸帝國), concludes (完결).<349>

**Summary**

This article, a novel awarded by the Manchukuo government in 1940, recounts the rise of the Manchu (Jurchen) people under Nurhaci (Taejo) and Hong Taiji (Taejong). It details their legendary origins, military campaigns against rival Jurchen tribes and the Ming Dynasty, the consolidation of power, the creation of the Manchu script, the proclamation of the "Seven Great Grievances" against Ming, administrative reforms, diplomatic maneuvering with Ming and Joseon, and the eventual establishment of the Qing state, laying the groundwork for conquering China. From a colonial history perspective, the article is interesting as it was published in Japanese-occupied Korea and received an award from the Japanese puppet state of Manchukuo. This suggests its narrative, emphasizing Jurchen/Manchu distinctiveness, grievances against the Chinese Ming dynasty, and military prowess, likely aligned with Japanese imperial interests in promoting a separate Manchurian identity and legitimizing Manchukuo, potentially drawing parallels between Manchu ascendancy and contemporary Japanese expansionism.

**Named Entities**

高句麗	고구려	Koguryŏ
渤海	발해	Parhae
金朝	금조	Kŭmjo Dynasty
滿洲	만주	Manju (Manchuria)
女眞族	여진족	Yŏjinjok (Jurchen people)
北滿	북만	Pungman (Northern Manchuria)
長白山	장백산	Changbaek-san
興京	흥경	Hŭnggyŏng (Xingjing)
天池	천지	Ch'ŏnji (Heaven Lake)
佛庫倫	불고륜	Pul K'o-ryun (Fekulen)
愛親覺羅	애친각라	Aech'in Kangna (Aisin Gioro)
明나라	명나라	Myŏng nara (Ming Dynasty)
嘉靖	가정	Kajŏng (Jiajing Era)
努爾哈齊	노이합제	Noihapche (Nurhaci)
太祖	태조	T'aejo (Nurhaci)
萬歷	만력	Manryŏk (Wanli Era)
尼堪外蘭	니감외란	Ni-k'an Oe-ran (Nikan Wailan)
圖倫	도륜	Toryun (Tulun)
嘉班	가반	Ka-ban (Giyaban)
梀刊部	속간부	Sokkan-bu (?)
齊吉達城	제길타성	Chegil-t'a-sŏng (Qijita Fortress)
翁刊洛城	옹간락성	Onggan-nak-sŏng (Onggolo Fortress)
東珠	동주	Tongju (Eastern Pearls)
人蔘	인삼	Insam (Ginseng)
紫貂	자초	Chach'o (Sable)
黑狐	흑호	Hŭkho (Black Fox)
舍利	사리	Sari (Buddhist relics)
撫順	무순	Musun (Fushun)
淸河	청하	Ch'ŏngha (Qinghe)
寬甸	관전	Kwanjŏn (Kuandian)
靉陽	애양	Aeyang (Aiyang)
葉赫	엽혁	Yŏphyŏk (Yehe)
이에헤	이에헤	Iehe (Yehe - phonetic Hangul)
烏拉	오랍	Orap (Ula)
우라	우라	Ura (Ula - phonetic Hangul)
輝發	휘발	Hwibal (Hoifa)
호이파	호이파	Hoip'a (Hoifa - phonetic Hangul)
哈達	합달	Haptal (Hada)
하다	하다	Hada (Hada - phonetic Hangul)
蒙古	몽고	Monggo (Mongol/Mongolia)
額爾德尼	액이덕니	Aegidŏkni (Erdeni)
에루데니	에루데니	Erudeni (Erdeni - phonetic Hangul)
天命	천명	Ch'ŏnmyŏng (Tianming Era)
我祖父	아조부	A Chobu (My Grandfather - used contextually as ancestor)
我父祖	아부조	A Pujo (My Father and Grandfather - used contextually as ancestors)
柴河	시하	Siha (Chaihe)
三岔	삼차	Samch'a (Sancha)
撫安	무안	Muan (Fu'an)
呼倫	호륜	Horyun (Hulun)
李永芳	이영방	I Yŏng-bang (Li Yongfang)
山東	산동	San-dong (Shandong)
山西	산서	San-sŏ (Shanxi)
江南	강남	Kangnam (Jiangnan)
浙江	절강	Chŏlgang (Zhejiang)
廣寧	광녕	Kwangnyŏng (Guangning)
張承陰	장승음	Chang Sŭng-ŭm (Zhang Cheng'yin)
遼陽	요양	Yoyang (Liaoyang)
頗廷相	파정상	P'a Chŏng-sang (Po T'ing-sang?)
海州	해주	Haeju (Haizhou)
蒲世芳	포세방	P'o Se-bang (P'u Se-fang?)
紅夷砲	홍이포	Hongip'o (Hongyipao cannon)
葡萄牙	포도아	P'odoa (Portugal)
瀋陽	심양	Simyang (Shenyang)
奉天	봉천	Pongch'ŏn (Fengtian - old name for Shenyang)
鄒儲賢	추저현	Ch'u Chŏ-hyŏn (Zou Chuxian?)
鴉鳥關	아조관	Ajo-kwan (Yajiao Pass)
遼東	요동	Yodong (Liaodong)
扎喀關	차가관	Ch'a-k'a-kwan (Zhaka Pass?)
馬林	마림	Ma Rim (Ma Lin)
劉廷	유정	Yu Chŏng (Liu Ting)
楊鎬	양호	Yang Ho (Yang Hao)
李如栢	이여백	I Yŏ-baek (Li Rubai)
杜松	두송	Tu Song (Du Song)
薩爾滸山	살이호산	Sarhō-san (Sarhū Mountain)
사루후	사루후	Saruhu (Sarhū - phonetic Hangul)
渾河	혼하	Honha (Hun River)
開原	개원	Kaewŏn (Kaiyuan)
尙間崖	상간애	Sanggan-ae (Shangjianyai)
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Joseon/Korea)
鐵嶺	철령	Ch'ŏllyŏng (Tieling)
察哈爾	찰합이	Ch'arhap'i (Chahar)
林丹汗	임단한	Im Tan-han (Ligdan Khan)
態廷弼	태정필	T'ae Chŏng-p'il (Xiong Tingbi - likely typo in text)
熊廷弼	웅정필	Ung Chŏng-p'il (Xiong Tingbi)
鞍山	안산	Ansan
石河	석하	Sŏkha (Shihe)
新甸	신전	Sinjŏn (Xindian)
鎭江	진강	Chin'gang (Zhenjiang)
鳳凰	봉황	Ponghwang (Fenghuang)
蒲河	포하	P'oha (Puhe)
熊岳	웅악	Ung'ak (Xiongyue)
蓋州	개주	Kaeju (Gaizhou)
復州	복주	Pokchu (Fuzhou)
金州	금주	Kimju (Jinzhou)
毛文龍	모문룡	Mo Mun-nyong (Mao Wenlong)
鴨綠江	압록강	Amnokkang (Yalu River)
王化貞	왕화정	Wang Hwa-jŏng (Wang Huazhen)
遼西	요서	Yosŏ (Liaoxi)
袁崇煥	원숭환	Wŏn Sung-hwan (Yuan Chonghuan)
寧遠	영원	Yŏngwŏn (Ningyuan)
錦州	금주	Kŭmju (Jinzhou)
太宗	태종	T'aejong (Hong Taiji)
大見勒代善	대견륵대선	Tae Kyŏl-lŭk Tae Sŏn (Daišan)
二見勒阿敏	이견륵아민	I Kyŏl-lŭk A Min (Amin)
三見勒莽古爾泰	삼견륵망고이태	Sam Kyŏl-lŭk Manggoit'ae (Manggūltai)
五臺山	오대산	Odae-san (Mount Wutai)
大喇麻*南木座	대라마*남목좌	Tae Rama *Nam Mok-chwa (Great Lama Nam Mu-jwa?)
巴支什遠	파지십원	P'a Chi-si-wŏn (Bakhsi Yuan?)
海庫爾禪	해고이선	Hae Ko-i-sŏn (Haigûrsan?)
方吉納	방길납	Pang Kil-lap (Fangginai?)
溫克什	온극십	On Kŭk-sip (Wengkeshen?)
李浣	이완	I Wan (King Injo of Joseon)
天聰	천총	Ch'ŏnch'ong (Tiancong Era)
百職司	백직사	Paekchik-sa (Hundred Offices)
儒臣*海	유신*해	Yusin *Hae (Scholar Hae?)
庫爾禪	고이선	Ko-i-sŏn (Kûrsan? - same as 海庫爾禪?)
剛林	강림	Kang Rim
蘇開	소개	So Kae
武巴什	무파십	Mu P'a-sip
扎素喀	차속객	Ch'a Sok-kaek
古爾嘉琿	고이가혼	Ko I-ka-hon
托布齊	탁포제	T'ak P'o-je
*球	*구	*Ku (Scholar Ku?)
古巴	고파	Ko P'a
弘文院	홍문원	Hongmun-wŏn (Hongwenyuan)
秘書院	비서원	Pisŏ-wŏn (Bishuyuan)
國書院	국서원	Kuksŏ-wŏn (Guoshuyuan)
康熙	강희	Kanghŭi (Kangxi Emperor/Era)
乾隆	건륭	Kŏnnyung (Qianlong Emperor/Era)
喀喇沁部	객라심부	Kaengnasim-bu (Kharachin Tribe)
龍井關	용정관	Yongjŏng-kwan (Longjing Pass)
漢完莊	한완장	Hanwan-jang (Hanwanzhuang?)
洪山國	홍산국	Hongsan-guk (Hongshanguo?)
馬蘭營	마란영	Maran-yŏng (Malanying)
石門	석문	Sŏkmun (Shimen)
北京	북경	Pukkyŏng (Beijing)
遵化	준화	Chunhwa (Zunhua)
薩木哈圖	살목합도	Salmokhapto (Samhatu?)
祖大壽	조대수	Cho Tae-su (Zu Dashou)
山海關	산해관	Sanhae-kwan (Shanhai Pass)
房山	방산	Pangsan (Fangshan)
金陵	금릉	Kŭmnyŭng (Jinling - Nanjing Tombs)
蘆淸橋	노청교	Noch'ŏng-gyo (Lugou Bridge)
通州	통주	T'ongju (Tongzhou)
蘇州	소주	Soju (Suzhou - likely error in text)
大凌城	대릉성	Taerŭng-sŏng (Dalingcheng)
張春	장춘	Chang Ch'un (Zhang Chun)
淸國	청국	Ch'ŏngguk (Qing State/Dynasty)
支那	지나	China (China - older term)
滿洲國 民生部	만주국 민생부	Manjuguk Minsaengbu (Manchukuo Ministry of People's Livelihood)

**Glossary**

광휘	광휘	Splendor, brilliance
수령	수령	Leader, chief
호상 간	호상 간	Mutually, between one another
쟁패	쟁패	Struggle for supremacy
호전적	호전적	Warlike
지맥	지맥	Mountain ridge, branch range
미려	미려	Beautiful
하강	하강	Descent, coming down
비래	비래	Flying in
말녀	말녀	Youngest daughter
실과	실과	Fruit
미구	미구	Soon, before long
남아	남아	Baby boy, male child
기이	기이	Strange, peculiar
산란	산란	Disorder, confusion
다사리기	다스리기	To govern, bring order to (older form of 다스리기)
평정	평정	Pacification, suppression
하반	하반	Riverside
인도	인도	Guidance, leading
나려가게	내려가게	To make go down (older form of 내려가게)
마렀다	말았다	Finished, stopped (older form of 말았다)
호족	호족	Powerful clan, local magnate
상쟁	상쟁	Mutual conflict, strife
비범함	비범함	Extraordinariness
간파	간파	Seeing through, penetration (of disguise, etc.)
국주	국주	Ruler of a state
국세	국세	National power/strength
강대	강대	Powerful, mighty
계통	계통	Lineage, system
퇴세	퇴세	Decline, downturn
회복	회복	Recovery, restoration
기병	기병	Raising troops, starting an uprising
정벌	정벌	Subjugation, conquest
함락	함락	Fall (of a city), capture
용무	용무	Valor, martial prowess
떨치었다	떨쳤다	To become renowned (older form of 떨쳤다)
질시	질시	Jealousy, envy
위해	위해	Harm, danger
자객	자객	Assassin
붇들었으나	붙들었으나	Caught, captured (older form of 붙들었으나)
석방	석방	Release
관객성	관객성	Magnanimity (likely intended meaning, lit. 'guest nature')
뵈였었다	보였었다	Showed (older form of 보였었다)
내홍	내홍	Internal strife, internal conflict
공략	공략	Attack, assault
격전	격전	Fierce battle
독려	독려	Encouragement, urging on
부상	부상	Injury, wound
퇴각	퇴각	Retreat
재차	재차	Again, secondly
맹공	맹공	Fierce attack
포로	포로	Prisoner of war
교봉	교봉	Clash (of armies), engagement
수호	수호	Friendly relations, amity
불가침	불가침	Non-aggression
약조	약조	Pact, agreement
월경	월경	Crossing the border
원조	원조	Aid, assistance
약탈	약탈	Plunder, looting
사신	사신	Envoy, messenger
변경	변경	Border region
누세	누세	Generations
보수	보수	Maintain, hold, preserve
경작	경작	Cultivation
수곡	수곡	Grain harvest
영위	영위	Manage, conduct (an activity)
불허	불허	Disallow, forbid
파병	파병	Dispatch of troops
구축	구축	Expulsion, driving out
한사	한사	Grievance, cause for resentment
변외	변외	Beyond the border
구려	구려	Insult, revile
능모	능모	Humiliation, insult
내침	내침	Invasion
천심	천심	Heaven's will
존립	존립	Existence, survival
천견	천견	Heavenly punishment, divine wrath
조원	조원	To aid, support (an ally)
시비	시비	Right and wrong
도치	도치	Inversion, reversal
기릉	기릉	Bullying, oppression
토정	토정	Subjugation, punitive expedition
버끼지	벗기지	Not strip off (clothes) (older form of 벗기지)
간음	간음	Adultery, rape
배우	배우	Spouse
분리	분리	Separation
주륙	주륙	Execution, slaughter
엄명	엄명	Strict order
책자	책자	Pamphlet, booklet
살포	살포	Distribution, scattering
선전전	선전전	Propaganda warfare
성하	성하	Below the castle walls
투항	투항	Surrender
권고서	권고서	Letter of recommendation (here: urging surrender)
의론	의론	Discussion, opinion (older form of 의논)
귀결	귀결	Conclusion, outcome
결전	결전	Decisive battle
내정	내정	Internal decision, private determination
가장	가장	Pretense, disguise
전비	전비	War preparations
일제히	일제히	All at once, simultaneously
진격	진격	Advance, charge
팔기병	팔기병	Eight Banner Cavalry
대적	대적	To oppose, confront (an enemy)
사상자	사상자	Casualties
백기	백기	White flag
입성	입성	Entering a castle/city (often victoriously)
논공행상	논공행상	Rewarding meritorious service
재주	재주	Residing (in a place)
여비	여비	Travel expenses
본적지	본적지	Place of origin, registered domicile
개선	개선	Triumphant return
비보	비보	Sad news, report of misfortune
도래	도래	Arrival
총병	총병	Regional Commander (Ming military rank)
부장	부장	Vice Commander (Ming military rank)
참장	참장	Assistant Commander (Ming military rank)
실함	실함	Fall, loss (of a city/fortress)
추격	추격	Pursuit
장본인	장본인	The very person, originator
제장	제장	Generals
분격	분격	Be enraged, furious
궁시	궁시	Bow and arrow
화기	화기	Firearms
대패	대패	Crushing defeat
항복	항복	Surrender, submission
강민	강민	Surrendered people
통할	통할	To govern, control
건질	건지다	To rescue, save (older form of 건지다)
인민	인민	The people
흥기	흥기	Rise, emergence
협위	협위	Threat, menace (older form of 위협)
감지	감지	Perception, sensing
부패	부패	Corruption, decay
군비	군비	Military expenditures
지출	지출	Expenditure
경영	경영	Management, administration
착착	착착	Steadily, step-by-step
진행	진행	Progression, advancement
실지	실지	Lost territory
제요충	제요충	Various strategic points
수중	수중	In one's hands, under control
요도	요도	Key route, important road
지관	지관	Within sight, nearby
중병	중병	Heavy troops
견고	견고	Solid, firm, strong (defense)
방어	방어	Defense
일거	일거	One stroke, one move
파격	파격	Breaking, smashing
사위	사위	Four sides, surroundings
호	호	Trench, moat
맹진	맹진	Fierce advance
맹사	맹사	Intense firing
구식	구식	Old style
대포	대포	Cannon
발사	발사	Firing (a weapon)
간극	간극	Gap, interval
박입	박입	Pressing into, forcing entry
무용지물	무용지물	Useless thing
목석	목석	Wood and stone
강궁경노	강궁경노	Strong bows and powerful crossbows
패	패	Shield
순차	순차	Covered assault wagon
백병전	백병전	Close combat, hand-to-hand fighting
일우웠다	이루었다	Achieved, accomplished (older form of 이루었다)
빙상	빙상	On the ice
답파	답파	Treading across, crossing over
통솔	통솔	Command, leadership (of troops)
재한	재한	Stationed in, present in
방금	방금	Prohibition, prevention
심입	심입	Deep penetration
성새	성새	Fortress, stronghold
박진	박진	Advance upon, close in on
항전	항전	Resistance (in battle)
구원	구원	Rescue, reinforcement
야전	야전	Field battle
불리	불리	Disadvantageous
감히	감히	Daringly, venturing to
전진	전진	Advance
경계	경계	Border, boundary
요새	요새	Fortress, stronghold
보전	보전	Preservation, conservation
주재	주재	Stationing, residing
좌익	좌익	Left wing (of an army)
주수	주수	Commander, leader
우익	우익	Right wing (of an army)
포위	포위	Encirclement, siege
작전	작전	Military operation, strategy
실수	실수	Actual number
부속인	부속인	Attendant, subordinate personnel
극히	극히	Extremely
첩보망	첩보망	Intelligence network
추호	추호	Tiny amount, slightest degree (often in negative: ~도 없다)
판명	판명	Judgment, determination
강구	강구	Devising (a plan), considering (a measure)
맹장	맹장	Fierce general
상거	상거	Facing each other across (a distance/river)
대한	대한	Opposite bank
도약	도약	Leap, jump
영격	영격	To meet and attack, intercept
협공	협공	Pincer attack
진중	진중	In the midst of battle, in the camp
몰	몰	Death, perish
일방	일방	Meanwhile, on the one hand
패북	패북	Defeat (older form of 패배)
적지	적지	Enemy territory
괴멸	괴멸	Annihilation, destruction
보도	보도	Report, news
조정	조정	Royal court
진감	진감	Shock, tremor
통일	통일	Unification
진보	진보	Progress, advancement
장애	장애	Obstacle, hindrance
박격	박격	Refutation, rebuttal
실력	실력	Real power, force
압박	압박	Pressure
기용	기용	Appointment (to a position)
경략	경략	Management, administration (esp. of territory)
취임	취임	Assuming a post
검열	검열	Inspection
상주	상주	Memorialize the throne, report to the emperor
말기 증상	말기 증상	Terminal symptoms, end-stage condition
사직	사직	Resignation
귀향	귀향	Returning to one's hometown
채등	채등	Colored lantern
환영	환영	Welcome
만세	만세	Long live!, Banzai
환호	환호	Cheers, shouts of joy
단장	단장	Adornment, dressing up
애무	애무	Cherish, care for, protect (lit. love and stroke)
귀환	귀환	Return, submission (of allegiance)
농업	농업	Agriculture
진흥	진흥	Promotion, encouragement
황전	황전	Wasteland, uncultivated land
빈인	빈인	Poor person
전제	전제	Land system
대개혁	대개혁	Major reform
단행	단행	Carrying out decisively
요란	요란	Disturbance, commotion
토벌	토벌	Subjugation, suppression (of rebels, etc.)
불화	불화	Discord, disagreement
독진	독진	Advancing alone
패주	패주	Fleeing after defeat
천도	천도	Moving the capital
퇴환	퇴환	Retreat, withdrawal
붕	붕	Death of an emperor
계승	계승	Succession
황자	황자	Imperial prince
장자	장자	Eldest son
조졸	조졸	Early death
서출	서출	Born of a concubine
적장	적장	Legitimate eldest son
입위	입위	Ascend the throne
천기	천기	Heavenly endowment, natural gifts
위출	위출	Outstanding, prominent
안색	안색	Complexion
적일	적일	Red sun
엄한	엄한	Severe cold
보행	보행	Walking, gait
거지	거지	Bearing, demeanor
이상	이상	Extraordinary, unusual
천석예지	천석예지	Heaven-bestowed wisdom
공효인혜	공효인혜	Reverence, filial piety, benevolence, kindness
성신관화	성신관화	Sincerity, trustworthiness, generosity, harmony
성덕	성덕	Saintly virtue
언사명민	언사명민	Clear and sharp speech
성의단중	성의단중	Solemn and dignified deportment
일청불망	일청불망	Never forgetting after hearing once
일견 즉 지	일견 즉 지	Understanding at first sight
용력	용력	Physical strength
기사	기사	Mounted archery
실시	실시	Missed arrow/shot
모략	모략	Strategy, stratagem
용병	용병	Use of troops, military command
성	성	Nature, disposition
전적	전적	Classics, historical texts
애독	애독	Loving to read
유시	유시	Childhood
특출	특출	Exceptional, outstanding
총애	총애	Favor, affection (esp. from a superior)
제형제	제형제	Brothers
경애	경애	Respect and love
조	조	To offer condolences
신군	신군	New ruler
축하	축하	Congratulations
사절	사절	Envoy, delegation
명목	명목	Stated reason, pretext
의사	의사	Intention
명망	명망	Renown, reputation
라마교	라마교	Lamaism (Tibetan Buddhism)
판도	판도	Territory, domain
확세	확세	Expansion of influence
개선	개선	Triumphant return
성외	성외	Outside the city/castle walls
축연	축연	Celebratory banquet
채리었었든	차렸었던	Had prepared/set up (older form of 차렸었던)
예기치 않어	예기치 않아	Unexpectedly (older form of 예기치 않아)
위용	위용	Dignified appearance, imposing presence
뵈이게	보이게	To be shown (older form of 보이게)
멸시	멸시	Contempt, scorn
살해	살해	Murder, killing
인견	인견	Granting an audience
배	배	Bow, act of reverence
빈승	빈승	Humble monk (self-deprecating term)
선지식	선지식	Wise person, virtuous friend (Buddhist term)
불소	불소	Not few, considerable number
선한 상대	선한 상대	Virtuous appearance/physiognomy (善相)
보살	보살	Bodhisattva
나한	나한	Arhat
전세	전세	Reincarnation
자비	자비	Compassion
경륜	경륜	Management, administration (of affairs)
복덕	복덕	Fortune and virtue
간과	간과	Weapons (spear and shield)
패물	패물	Valuables offered as gifts (esp. silk and jade in diplomacy)
희망	희망	Hope, wish
선의	선의	Goodwill
계신	계신	Caution, vigilance
급무	급무	Urgent task
일단	일단	For the time being, first
응하다	응하다	To agree, consent
상의	상의	Consultation, discussion
여사한	여사한	Such, like this
국서	국서	State letter, diplomatic credential
닦에 하여	닦게 하여	To have (someone) draft/prepare (older form of 닦게 하여)
파송	파송	Dispatch (of envoys)
열견	열견	To meet, have an audience with
집주	집주	To present (a memorial/letter) to the throne
왕년	왕년	Past years, former times
실추	실추	Loss (of power, prestige)
자부심	자부심	Pride, self-esteem
쌍방	쌍방	Both sides, bilateral
평등	평등	Equality
난을 부처서	난을 붙여서	Raising an objection, finding fault (older form of 붙여서)
거절	거절	Refusal
번가러	번갈아	Alternately (older form of 번갈아)
강성	강성	Strong and prosperous
병칭	병칭	Being mentioned together, named alongside
비로소	비로소	Only then, for the first time
교섭	교섭	Negotiation
성립	성립	Establishment, formation
귀관	귀관	You (formal, addressing an official)
화의	화의	Peace negotiations, reconciliation
반박	반박	Rebuttal, refutation
적면	적면	Blushing face
처치	처치	Handling, dealing with
방식	방식	Format, method
개정	개정	Revision, amendment
전심	전심	Wholehearted focus, concentration
정토	정토	Conquest, subjugation (older form of 정벌)
효용	효용	Valiant and brave
비리	비리	Wrongdoing, injustice
지적	지적	Pointing out
예물	예물	Gift
초피	초피	Sable pelt
보상	보상	Compensation, reward
자임	자임	Self-appointment, considering oneself as
군신	군신	Ruler and subjects, court officials
여렵다	어렵다	Difficult (older form of 어렵다)
곤란	곤란	Difficult, problematic
반박서	반박서	Written rebuttal
완연	완연	Truly, clearly, vividly
전보전	전보전	Telegraphic exchange/warfare
미구	미구	Shortly after
신의	신의	Trust, faith, fidelity
서진	서진	Westward advance
탐지	탐지	Detection, scouting
염열	염열	Scorching heat
연래	연래	Recent years, spanning years
곤궁	곤궁	Poverty, hardship
조후	조후	Sign, indication
뵈임으로	보임으로	Because it was seen/appeared (older form of 보임으로)
환군	환군	Returning the army
빈민 구제	빈민 구제	Poor relief
군관 숙정	군관 숙정	Purging/disciplining military officials
신예	신예	New and elite (troops)
문관	문관	Civil official
백직사	백직사	Hundred Offices (administrative body)
유신	유신	Confucian scholar/official
장리	장리	To manage, be in charge of
양직	양직	Two shifts/duties
번역	번역	Translation
기주	기주	Record-keeping, chronicle
한적	한적	Chinese books/texts
경사자집	경사자집	Classics, Histories, Philosophers, Collections (categories of Chinese literature)
어람	어람	Imperial review
정사	정사	Government affairs
확충	확충	Expansion
문사	문사	Literary affairs, cultural matters
찬연히	찬연히	Brilliantly
이러나고	일어나고	Arose, occurred (older form of 일어나고)
창시	창시	Founding, initiation
가함과	더함과	Along with adding/establishing (older form of 더함과)
인재	인재	Talented person
자제	자제	Children, sons and younger brothers, youth
역설	역설	Emphasize, stress
우수	우수	Excellence
관리	관리	Official
창정	창정	Establishment, creation (of a system)
적습	적습	Deep-rooted custom, ingrained habit
저저	젖어	Soaked in, mired in (older form of 젖어)
의연히	의연히	Still, as before, resolutely
경모	경모	Contempt, disdain (older form of 경멸)
통렬	통렬	Severe, scathing
타격	타격	Blow, strike
반성	반성	Reflection, introspection
가망	가망	Hope, prospect
귀순	귀순	Submission, allegiance
구부하	구부하	Former subordinate
해도	해도	Island
반거	반거	Entrenchment, occupying a place as a base
숙청	숙청	Purge
결빙	결빙	Freezing (of water)
육사	육사	Six Armies (representing the entire army)
친솔	친솔	Personally leading (troops)
회합	회합	Meeting, assembly
토의	토의	Discussion
군비	군비	Military preparations
정돈	정돈	Arrangement, organization
칙유	칙유	Imperial edict
우러러	우러러	Looking up to, reverently
천명	천명	Heaven's Mandate
거전	거전	Resistance (in battle)
주살	주살	Execution by killing
귀항	귀항	Surrender (alternate form of 투항)
계돈	계돈	Chicken and pig
침략	침략	Aggression, invasion, plunder
부획	부획	Capture (of people or goods)
상별	상별	Mutual separation
약취	약취	Looting, seizure
여사	여사	Dwelling, hut
사우	사우	Shrine
파손	파손	Damage, destruction
기명	기명	Utensil, vessel
파훼	파훼	Destruction, breaking
참	참	Beheading, execution
과목	과목	Fruit tree
벌	벌	Felling (trees)
촌락	촌락	Village
사사로히	사사로이	Privately, personally (older form)
편	편	Lash, whip
숙식	숙식	Cooked food
해독	해독	Poison (older term, 鴆毒 refers specifically to a mythical poisonous bird)
신신	신신	Caution, prudence (older form of 신중)
수하리라	수척해지리라	Will become thin/emaciated (瘦)
자두	자두	Cooked beans
말초	말초	Fodder
모름즉이	모름지기	Necessarily, by all means (older form of 모름지기)
수반	수반	Leader, head (of a group)
치왕	치왕	Riding forth quickly
거구	거구	Investigation, questioning
운운	운운	Etc., and so on
아편	아편	Opium
궁정	궁정	Royal court
현명	현명	Wise, sagacious
경계	경계	Warning, caution
요란치 않고	요란치 않고	Without disturbance
접종	접종	Following one after another
관계	관계	Official rank
승상	승상	Promotion and reward
중상	중상	Heavy reward
병졸	병졸	Common soldier
참죄	참죄	Crime punishable by beheading
진용	진용	Battle formation
탈취	탈취	Seizure, capture
위급	위급	Critical situation, emergency
견수	견수	Firm defense
막상	막상	Unexpectedly, contrary to expectation
북변	북변	Northern border
책략	책략	Stratagem, scheme
투옥	투옥	Imprisonment
제	제	Rites, ceremony
부향	부향	Proceeding towards
출사	출사	Setting out on a military campaign
임박	임박	Imminent approach
주조	주조	Casting (metal)
불원	불원	Not far off, soon
위력	위력	Power, might
발휘	발휘	Display, demonstration (of power/ability)
명예	명예	Honor, reputation
지지	지지	Upholding, maintaining
이군	이군	Two masters/lords
결백	결백	Integrity, purity
병사	병사	Death by illness
가찬	가찬	Praise, commendation
일화	일화	Anecdote
성취	성취	Accomplishment, success
위세	위세	Power, influence
쇠하여	쇠하여	Declining, weakening
국새	국새	National situation/power (older form of 국세)
전승	전승	Turning victory (tide turning in favor)
국호	국호	Name of a country
칭하고	칭하고	Calling, naming
본부	본부	Heartland, main part (of a country)
진입	진입	Entry into
사화	사화	Historical narrative, story from history
융창	융창	Prosperity, flourishing
기초 공작	기초 공작	Foundation work
완결	완결	Conclusion


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제12권 제3호
발행일	1940년 03월 01일
기사제목	小說 太祖(滿洲國 民生部 大臣賞)
필자	穆儒丐
기사형태	소설

小說 太祖(滿洲國 民生部 大臣賞)
						穆儒丐
高句麗, 渤海, 金朝 시대에 광휘있는 많은 사업을 역사에 남긴 滿洲 민족인 女眞族도 金朝가 멸망한 후 대부분은 北滿 故土로 도라가고 걸출한 수령도 없어 각지에 分住하여 호상 간에 爭覇하고 있었다. 그러나 그들은 호전적이고 용감하였었다.
滿洲 최대의 산은 長白山인데 그 일 지맥은 興京에 이르러 있다. 山上에 미려한 水色의 넘치는 天池라고 부르는 호수가 있다. 어느 시대에던가 세 선녀가 하강하였었는데 그들은 세 자매로 어떤 날 까치(鵲) 一首가 飛來하여 말녀인 佛庫倫의 의복에다가 붉은 實果를 두고 갔섯다. 佛庫倫은 그 實果를 먹고 임신하여 未久에 남아로 낳었었는데 그 애기는 나오자 곧 말을 하였고 모양이 기이하였었다.<339> 愛親覺羅라고 이름 하였다. 그가 당당한 청년이 되자 그의 모친은 「너는 나라가 산란한 것을 다사리기 위하여 났다. 가서 이것을 평정하여라.」라고 말하고 어떤 河畔에 인도하여 배를 태우고 나려가게 한 후 자기는 하늘로 올라가고 마렀다.
愛親覺羅는 게서 얼마 되지 않은 곳에 다다르니 거기는 三大 호족이 있어 상쟁하고 있다가 愛親覺羅의 비범함을 간파하고 그를 國主로 삼어 국세가 강대하게 되었었다. 그러나 그의 자손의 시대가 되어서는 治政이 문란하고 이 계통이 끊어질 번 한 일도 있었으나 明나라 嘉靖 38년 努爾哈齊가 나서 頹勢가 점차 회복되게 되었는데 이 「누루하치」가 즉 太祖이다.
明朝 萬歷 11년 태조는 25세에 기병하여 尼堪外蘭을 정벌하였었다. 圖倫, 嘉班 등을 함락하고 勇武는 크게 떨치었다. 동족 중에 이를 질시하여 비밀리에 위해를 가하려고 하는 자도 있었으나 물리치고 자객을 붇들었으나 석방하는 것 같은 寬客性을 뵈였었다.
그후 梀刊部에 內訌이 있다는 말을 듣고 齊吉達城을 공략하고 다시 翁刊洛城을 칠제 친히 격전을 독려하여 부상하고 일시 퇴각하였으나 재차 猛攻하여 이를 함락하였다. 태조를 부상시킨 적 2명을 포로하였으나 태조는 「양적이 交鋒함은 승리를 얻을려는 것이어든 그 주인을 위하여 나를 쏜 자를 이번에는 나를 위하여 적을 쏘게 하리라」고 말하고 그를 授賞한다는 태도였었다.
태조는 近隣諸部를 토벌하고 이를 愛育하고 境土는 광대되고 재부도 풍부하여젔다. 국내로부터는 東珠, 人蔘, 紫貂, 黑狐, 舍利 등을 산출하고 국내에서 소비하고 잉물은 明國과 교역하였다. 당시의 교역소는 撫順, 淸河, 寬甸, 靉陽 4개소였없다. 그러나 葉赫(이에헤), 烏拉(우라), 輝發(호이파), 哈達(하다) 등 諸部는 세력이 있어 귀순치 않고 葉赫는 더욱 무례하였다. 그 葉赫에서 9부락의 병대 30,000을 합하여 공격하여 왔으나 태조는 교묘한 전술로써 이를 격파하고 이후부터는 蒙古 諸部도 깊이 태조와 친하게 되었었다.

그때까지 蒙古에는 蒙古 문자가 있었으나 滿洲語는 방언 뿐이요 문자가 없었다. 태조는 이래서는 안 되겠다 하고<340> 額爾德尼(에루데니)를 시켜 蒙古 문자를 빌려 滿洲語를 표현하게 하였었다. 이것은 태조가 문화에 착안한 것인데 그 이후 군사상 포고, 통달은 민첩히 되고 크게 國事에도 편리를 받었다.
天命 3년 태조는 明을 征討하기로 결의하고 대군을 모라 明의 暴戾를 적발하였다. 我祖父 아직 明의 一草 寸土도 건드리지 않었는데 明은 이유없이 我江土에 兵端을 이르켜 我父祖를 해친, 이 원한이 하나. 明 兵端을 이르키었으나 我方에서는 수호를 類하고 상호 불가침 약조를 結하였으나 明은 兵을 모라 越境하여 葉赫을 원조하였었다. 이 원한이 둘. 明人은 淸河의 이남, 江岸 이북에 있어 매년 越境 약탈을 행하고 또 我 사신을 잡어 이를 변경에서 죽였었다. 이가 셋. 明이 越境하여 葉赫를 원군하고 我가 이미 언약한 여자를 蒙古로 시집 보냄이 넷. 柴河, 三岔, 撫安 3로는 我가 累世 保守하고 강토의 衆田을 경작하고 收穀을 營爲하였드니 明이 이를 불허하고 파병하여 구축함, 이가 恨事의 다섯. 변외의 葉赫은 죄를 하늘에 얻고, 明 그 언약을 믿고, 사신에 派遺하여 詬詈하고 凌侮를 행함이 其 恨의 여섯. 昔日 哈達, 葉赫을 도아 2회나 내침하였다. 我 이에 報하는 것은 天이 이미 我에게 哈達을 맡긴 바인지라. 明은 또 이와 結黨하고 我에게 其 國을 반환하기를 협박함으로 이미 哈達人이 葉赫의 침략을 누누히 받었다. 列國 서로 정벌하매 天心에 순하는 자는 승하여 존립하고, 천의에 역하는 자는 패하여 망하는 지라. 豈 兵에 死한 자를 更生케 하고, 그 人을 更히 반환할 수 없으랴. 天이 대국의 군주를 세움은 천하의 共主로 하려 함인지라 어찌 홀로 我國에다 원한을 가지랴. 처음에 呼倫 諸國이 兵을 합하여 我를 침략하되, 天은 呼倫兵을 싫여하여 我를 보호하니, 이제 明이 天譴인 葉赫을 조원하는 지라 천의를 거스려 시비를 도치함이라. 이 원한의 일곱. 欺凌 실로 심하고 情 정히 참기 어려운 바이라. 이 7대 恨에 인하여 이를 討征하려는 것이었다.
이렇게 하여 포로를 얻으나 의복을 버끼지 않고, 부녀를 간음하지 않고, 배우있는 자를 분리하게 하지 않고, 귀순자를 誅戮치 아니하기를 엄명하였다. 7대 恨을 고하는 책자를 인쇄하여 각지에 살포하고 태조는 선전전에도 노력하였다.
대군은 行進하여 撫順 城下에 이르러 明將 李永芳에게 투항 권고서를 보내었다. 이것을 받은 李永芳은 동료에게<341> 무렀으나 의론이 귀결되지 않어 결국 결전을 하기로 내정하고 겉으로 투항을 가장하고 戰備를 비밀히 급히 하였다. 그 가장은 간파되어 태조는 일제히 진격하였다. 훈련된 팔기병에게는 明軍이 도저히 대적할 수 없어 다수의 사상자를 내이고 李永芳은 마침내 백기를 들어 투항하여 태조는 당당히 撫順城에 입성하였다. 태조는 그 군에게 論功行賞하고 또 撫順 在住의 山東 山西 江南 浙江 각 성 출신 무역 업자에게는 여비를 주어 본적지로 도라가게 하였다.
개선 도중에 비보가 도래하니, 明의 廣寧의 총병 張承陰 遼陽의 부장 頗廷相 海州의 참장 蒲世芳 등이 撫順을 失陷함을 듣고 대군을 거느리고 추격하여 온다는 것이다. 張承陰은 무력으로 많은 농지를 탈취한 장본인이었다.
태조측 諸將은 크게 분격하여 군을 돌려 적을 공격키로 하였다. 당시 滿洲軍은 전혀 弓矢를 사용하였는데 明軍은 紅夷砲라는 葡萄 牙製의 화기를 갖었었다. 그러나 분격한 滿洲軍에는 明軍이 대항할 수 없어 다수의 사상자를 내고 대패하고 마렸다. 李永芳도 항복하고 총병관의 직을 얻어서 降民을 통할하였다. 태조는 자기의 민족을 건질 뿐만 아니라 明朝의 인민도 구하였었다.
明朝는 이 滿洲의 흥기에 크게 협위를 감지하였으나 이미 그 군사 방면은 부패하였었고 거액의 군비를 지출할 수도 없었고 태조의 변경 경영은 착착 진행하여 갔었다. 失地는 회복되고 諸要衝은 태조에 수중에 드러왔었다. 秋 7월에는 鴉鳥關에 드러가 淸河城을 포위하였다. 이는 遼東의 要道로 瀋陽(금일의 奉天)은 指觀 새이에 있다.
明廷은 淸河城을 鄒儲賢이라는 장군에게 重兵을 주어 지키게 하였다. 이 견고한 방어에 대해서는 일거에 이를 파격치 않으면 안 된다고 생각하고 滿軍은 성의 四圍에 壕를 묻고 또 사다리를 가지고 맹진하였다. 성에서 화기로 猛射하여 왔으나 당시의 구식 대포였음으로 발사하기에 시간이 걸리없없다. 滿兵은 이 간극을 노려 보아서 수백개의 사다리를 세워 가지고 성에 迫入하였다. 화기(대포)는 벌써 무용지물이 되었고 弓矢와 목석을 던저 싸우는 수 밖에 없었다. 태조의 대병도 强弓勁弩로 쏘기 시작한다. 또 牌, 輴車로써 白兵戰을 일우웠다. 드디어 明兵은 대패하고 翌 天命 4년 정월, 태조는 氷上을 踏破하여 친히 대병을 통솔하고 葉赫을 공격하였었다.<342> 葉赫을 멸하려 함이 아니고, 葉赫에 在한 明兵과 싸울 결의를 뵈였었다. 그 전에 태조는 5,000兵을 파견하여 扎喀關을 수비하고 明兵을 防禁하였다. 그리하여 태조는 葉赫에 深入하여 일거에 성새 20여개를 함락하였다. 벌서 葉赫城에 迫進하고 있다. 葉赫의 主 錦台什 등은 항전하지 못 할 줄 알고 구원을 馬林에 청하였으나 馬林은 野戰이 자기들에게 불리할 줄 알고 감히 전진하기 못하고 있을제 태조는 도라가 경계에다 요새을 쌓기를 명하였다.
그때서야 明은 겨우 劉廷 장군으로 하여금 遼東을 보전하기에 노력하였고, 明은 다시 楊鎬를 主將으로 삼어 瀋陽에 주재케 하고, 좌익 북로에는 李如栢을 主帥로, 좌익 북로에는 馬林, 우익 남로에는 劉廷을 主帥로 하고 사방에서부터 興京을 포위하려고 하는 작전을 세웠었다. 400,000 대병이고 하였으나 實數는 200,000, 아마 그 반수는 무력한 부속인 듯 하다. 그러나 작전은 극히 비밀히 진행하였었다.
여기에 대하여 태조는 남 모르고 첩보망을 펴고, 추호도 두려워 하지 않고 정확한 판명을 내리어 적당한 대책을 강구하였다. 明將 杜松은 맹장으로 유명하였는데 撫順을 나서 薩爾滸(사루후)山에 다다러 渾河를 相距한 對岸에 滿軍城을 쌓았다 함을 듯고 河 중에 跳入하여 물에 빠진 쥐가 되어 진격하여 왔다. 地의 利를 아는 滿軍은 이를 迎擊하여 협공하고 대승하였다. 杜松은 陣中에서 歿하였다.
明將馬林은 開原에서 尙間崖에 진군하였으나 이도 패하고 마렸다. 일방 劉廷의 군은 他2將의 敗北을 알지 못하고 적지에 深入하였다가 또한 괴멸을 당하였다.
明軍 대패의 보도에 明 조정은 震感하였다. 태조는 일방으로 朝鮮과 수호하고 국내의 통일은 진보하였다. 葉赫이 통일의 장애가 됨으로 이를 치기로 하고 먼저 開原을 공락하고, 更히 鐵嶺도 파하고 그 후에 葉赫도 멸하였다. 이것을 본 察哈爾의 林丹汗이 오만한 글을 보내었으나 태조는 이것을 駁擊, 실력으로써 압박하였다.
明은 대책으로 態廷弼을 기용하고 遼東을 經略하였다. 그는 취임하여 그 군병을 검열 너무도 그 부패에 놀라 지급히 개선하기를 상주하였으나 말기 증상의 明으로서는 그 힘도 없고 마침내 態廷弼은 사직 귀향하여 버렸다.<343>
天命 6년 3월, 태조는 대병으로서 瀋陽을 처 이를 얻고 遼陽을 처 이도 점령하였다. 태조가 遼陽에 입성하자 商民은 彩燈을 달고 환영하고 만세를 환호하였다. 부녀들도 단장하고 나가 이 광경을 보았으나 조금도 두려워하는 빛도 없이 마치 미리 짐작하였든 것처럼 그 날이 있을 것을 기다림과 같었었다. 이는 태조가 遼東의 인민을 애무한 사실이 선전되어 인심을 귀환케 한 까닭이다.
이렇게 하여 遼河의 東, 靉陽, 鞍山, 石河, 新甸, 寬甸, 鎭江, 鳳凰, 蒲河, 熊岳, 蓋州, 復州, 金州, 海州 등 대소 70여성을 모조리 투항시키고 태조의 子臣이 되게 하였엇다. 그리해서 태조는 수도를 遼陽에 옮기어 遼陽은 크게 번영하게 되었다. 태조는 또 농업을 진흥시키고, 荒田을 군사에게 주어 농업에 힘쓰게 하고 大族 소유의 농지를 빈인에게 주어 농사케 하고 田制의 대개혁을 단행하였었다.
당시 明將 毛文龍이 몰래 鴨綠江에 나타나 擾亂을 이르켰으나 태조가 토벌하였다.
明은 재차 熊廷弼을 기용하였으나 廣寧에 있던 王化貞은 熊과 불화하여 獨進하여 전쟁타가 마침내 敗走하고 遼西의 諸城도 항복하여 버렀다.
天命 10년 更히 瀋陽(奉天)에 천도하고 그 후 明의 袁崇煥은 성을 寧遠에 쌓고 지켰으나 太制가 또 錦州를 공략하고 寧遠을 치다가 明軍의 무기가 우량하여 이번에는 태조 자신이 부상하고 일차 퇴환하였으나 未久에 태조는 병드러 68세에 崩하고 太宗이 位를 계승하였다.

태조에게 皇子가 16인 있었는데 장자는 早死하고, 大見勒代善, 二見勒阿敏, 三見勒莽古爾泰는 서출이고 嫡長인 태종이 立位하였다. 태종은 天奇가 偉出하고 안색이 赤日과 같고, 엄한에 耳를 뜨쉴 필요 없고 龍虎가 보행함 같고 擧止가 이상하고, 天錫睿智, 恭孝仁惠, 誠信寬和, 聖德이 있고, 言辭明敏, 成儀端重 一聽不忘 하였고 一見 즉 知하였다고 한다. 또한 용력이 있고 騎射에 失矢가 없고, 모략이 宏遠하고 用兵함이 신과 갖고 性 典籍을 애독하고 幼時로부터 諸點이 특출하여 태조도 태종은 심히 총애하고, 제형제도 태종을 경애하였었다.
이때 明朝에서는 袁崇煥의 제안에 의하여 태조를 吊하고 新君을 축하하려고 사절은 瀋陽에 보내기로 하였다.<344> 일행 30여인 중에는 五臺山의 大喇麻*南木座를 가하기로 하고 舊君을 吊하고 新君을 祝하려는 명목이 었었으나 그것은 和好를 구하는 의사가 있어서 명망있는 喇麻를 참가케 하여서 종교의 힘을 빌어 원만한 효과를 얻을려는 의도였다. 喇麻敎는 벌서 滿洲에 드러 왔고 蒙古 版圖에서도 크게 擴勢하였었다.
일행이 瀋陽에 이른 때, 태종의 蒙古 원정군이 개선하여서 성외에 축연을 채리었었든 때라 예기치 않어 사절 일행에게 군의 위용을 뵈이게 되었다. 태조가 寧遠에 물러선 후 蒙古의 杜魯特은 滿洲 측을 멸시하고 그 사자를 살해하는 등 태도에 나옴으로 태종은 이를 토벌케 하였든 것이다.
태종은 明國 사신을 인견하였다. 일행 중의 *南木座는 태종을 拜한 후 「善哉善哉, 貧僧이 세상에 나와 60여년이 되도록 천하에 善知識도 不少히 보았아오나 皇上과 같은 선한 상대는 아직 보지 못 하였나이다. 황상 及 諸 황자는 분명히 菩薩 羅漢의 轉世이오며 크게 자비를 발하여 대사업을 經綸하오면 장래의 복덕은 정히 헤아리기도 어려울가 하나이다.」하고 말하였다. 同僧은 또한 干戈을 대신하되 패물로써 말 할 것이라고 수호의 희망을 전하였다. 태종은 그 형제를 도라보며 혼자 웃고, 喇麻僧의 선의는 인정하지만 袁崇煥 같은 것은 무엇을 생각하고 있는지 모른다. 戒愼할 필요가 있다고 생각하였다. 또한 蒙古와 朝鮮을 압박할 急務도 있어서 일단 수호를 응하기로 하고 이 편에서도 사신을 파견하여 상세히 그 일에 대하여 상의하기로 답하였다.
如斯한 사정으로 태종은 巴支什遠, 海庫爾禪, 2臣에게 국서를 닦에 하여 方吉納, 溫克什 2臣을 사신을 삼어 파송하기로 되었다.
2臣은 寧遠에 이르러 袁崇煥에게 閱見하고 국서를 執奏하기를 청하였다. 당시 明朝는 왕년의 세력을 실추하긴 하였으나 아직 천하에 帝國은 我 明이 있을 뿐이라는 자부심을 가지고 있었다. 까닭에 쌍방 평등의 입장에서 쓴 국서에다 우선 袁崇煥이 難*을 부처서 이러한 국서는 전할 수 없다고 거절해 버렀다.
여기 대하여 兩使는 번가러 「100년 전의 의론은 지금 했던 들 무효다. 我國은 국토와 인민의 수에 있어서는 不及한다 할지라도 강성한 일국이다. 明帝와 병칭하여도 정당하다. 그런데 수호로써 和를 결하려는 이상 상호의 이익이 되도록 하고 또한 서로 평등하게 되지 않으면 안 된다. 이리하여 비로소 교섭이 성립되는 것이다.<345> 貴官과 같은 태도로는 화의라는 생각도 못 할 일이다.」라고 반박하여 崇煥을 赤面케 하였다. 그러나 袁崇煥의 강한 태도에 兩使는 국서를 가지고 瀋陽으로 도라 왔었다.
그러나 태종은 朝鮮 처치로 급하여, 국서의 방식을 개정하여 다시 兩使를 보내고 朝鮮 征討에 전심하였다. 당시 朝鮮에는 明의 毛文龍이 건너 와 있었음으로 이도 征討의 목표로 하였다. 출정 諸將 중에는 阿敏이 가장 驍勇하였으나 그는 또한 공을 탐하는 마음이 강하였다. 대군은 義州, 鐵山, 定州, 郭山을 함락하고 진군함으로 朝鮮王 李浣은 당황하여 사신을 보내어 약간의 曲折을 지나 화의를 하였으나 阿敏은 이것으로는 불만하였다. 일방 毛文龍은 도망하였으나 그 非道를 憤한 상관 袁崇煥에게 참살되었다.
그래서 이번 兩使가 갖어 간 袁崇煥에게 부치는 서신에는 明의 비리를 7항목을 들어 지적하고 만약 수호를 類할진대 황금 100,000냥, 은 1,000,000냥, 緞 1,000,000疋, 布 10,000,000疋로써 和好의 예물로 하라 和好 후 我方은 東珠 10顆, 貂皮 1,000張 인삼 1,000斤을 매년 보내겠으니 여기에 대하여 明은 금 10,000냥, 은 100,000냥, 緞 100,000疋, 布 300,000疋로써 보상할 지어다 라는 조문이었다.
天朝로써 자임하는 明의 군신들이라 이 서신을 이해하기 여렵다. 袁崇煥은 이번에는 귀국은 何故로 朝鮮을 치느냐 朝鮮을 정벌하는 이상 화의는 곤란하다는 서신을 瀋陽에 보내었다. 이에 대하여 태종은 또 당당한 반박서를 보냈다. 宛然 금일의 전보전과 비슷하였다.
未久에 조선정벌군이 개선하였다. 太宗은 袁崇煥에 대하여 신의없다고 하고 天聰元年 夏 5월 친히 대군을 통솔하고 西進, 4일 만에 廣寧에 달하여 敵情을 탐지하고 3路로 分하여 먼저 大凌河를 함락하고 이에 錦州를 포위하였다. 그러나 다수의 대포를 갖인 錦州 수비는 견고하였고 원군도 오려고 함으로 태종은 방침을 변하여 一氣에 寧遠을 공격키로 하였다. 그 도중에서도 적의 대군을 파하고 크게 전과를 얻었었다. 단지 炎熱에 처하여 또 年來의 戰事로 인해 국민의 곤궁한 兆候도 뵈임으로 태종은 환군키로 하고 그 다음에는 크게 국내 경제의 회복, 빈민 구제, 군관 숙정 등에 노력하고 그 익년 更히 신예의 군으로써 遼西 각지를 치고 이를 점령하였다.<346>

天聰 3년 夏 4월, 태종은 문관의 百職司를 정하고 儒臣*海, 庫爾禪, 剛林, 蘇開, 武巴什, 扎素喀, 古爾嘉琿, 托布齊, *球, 古巴 등 10인을 택하여 이를 掌理케 하였다. 문관은 兩直으로 분립하고, 其 직책도 번역과 記注 2대 항목으로 나누어 있었다. 번역의 任은 蒙古, 朝鮮 及 漢籍 중의 經史子集으로 필요한 것을 모아 譯하여 어람에 제공하기로 된 것이었다. 記注라는 것은 무릇 국가의 정사에 관하여 상세한 기록을 작성하는 일이었다. 그후 崇德 원년에는 문관 사무는 자못 확충되어 弘文院, 秘書院, 國書院인 3원으로 되었다. 문사는 찬연히 이러나고 康熙, 乾隆 聖代의 대업은 여기서 창시된 것이었다.
문관제도를 家함과 동시에 인재교육에도 노력하기로 하였다. 아직 정비된 학교는 없었으나 태종은 자제교육의 필요를 힘써 설명하고 우수한 자에게는 상을 주고 또 관리시험제도를 창정하였다.

그리고 태종은 明과 수호하려고 하였으나 明廷의 상하는 積習에 저저 의연히 輕侮하고 평등으로 상대치 않으려고 하였다. 통렬한 타격을 가하기 전에는 반성은 가망이 없었다. 다행이 蒙古 諸部는 점차로 귀순하고 毛文龍의 구부하가 海島에 盤據하고 있던 무리도 모조리 숙청되었다. 冬 10월이 되어 河水가 결빙되자 태종은 六師를 친솔하고 먼저 蒙古 喀喇沁部에 이르러 諸部를 회합하고 征明之事를 토의하였다.
그 일로 태종은 3개월을 드려 군비를 정돈하게 하였다. 그래 약간의 장병을 錦州 寧遠 지방에 보내어 袁崇煥 등의 이목을 남방에 주목케 하였다. 행동을 이르키기 전에 태종은 勅諭를 발하였다.
짐이 우러러 천명을 받들어 師를 이르키어 明을 치되, 拒戰하는 자는 주살하지 않이치 못할 것이고, 귀항하는 자는 鷄豚이라도 침략치 말지며, 부획된 자 其 부자 부부로 하여금 상별치 말게 하라, 남의 부녀를 간음치 말라, 타인의 의복을 掠取치 마라, 廬舍祠宇를 파손치 말라, 器皿을 破毁치 말라, 만약 명을 반하여 降을 살하고 부녀를 淫하는 자 있으면 참하리라, 과목을 벌하고 의복을 탈취하고 촌락에 드러가 사사로히 약탈하는 자 있으면 鞭 100을 가하고, 又 明人의 熟食을 먹지 말고, 술을 마시지 말며, 山海關 내에는 鴆毒이 있다고 들은 바 있다. 재차 마땅히 謓愼할 지어다. 말(馬)이 혹 *瘦하리라, 煮豆를 먹일지며, 살진 말은 적당히 秣草를 중지할지며,<347> 무릇 柴草를 채취하되 모름즉이 衆人을 모아 일인을 수반으로 할지라, 衆을 떠나 馳往하는 자는 擧究하리라 운운.
이 중에 鴆毒 운운이라 함은 아편을 말함 인 듯 하다. 明末에는 민간뿐 아니라 궁정에도 이것이 드러가게 되었다. 현명한 태종은 미리 이를 경계하였든 것이다.
대군 이르는 곳에 먼저 龍井關이 함락되고 漢完莊도 항복하였다. 대군은 성내에 주둔하였으나 추호도 요란치 않고 평일과 마찬가지였다. 이 때부터 사방의 관민이 接踵하여 투항하였다. 그 중에 官階있는 자는 일급을 陞賞하였다. 태종은 다시 洪山國에 드러가고 馬蘭營도 함락하고 다시 石門에 나아가고 北京도 指顧之間이 되었다. 태종은 遵化에 위치하고 遵化 공략에 유명한 薩木哈圖에게 重賞을 주었다. 또 蒙古軍 중에 약탈한 병졸을 斬罪에 처하였다.
태종은 다시 진용을 정비하고 北京을 탈취하려고 하였다.
北京의 위급을 듣고 袁崇煥은 총병 祖大壽와 함께 달려 갔섯다. 그는 寧遠만 堅守하고, 막상 북변으로부터 공격해 오리라고는 생각지 않었었다. 금회만 하더래도 북변으로부터 처드러 오고 다시 山海關 쪽으로 나아올 줄 생각하였다. 그러나 태종은 따로 용의한 바 있고, 즉시 北京에 迫到한 것이었다. 오히려 태종이 비밀리에 책략하기 때문에 袁崇煥은 明朝의 의심을 사 투옥 斬罪에 처하게 되었다.
태종은 대군을 房山에 나아가게 하고 金陵의 祭를 행하였다. 그 후 蘆淸橋에서 明의 대군을 파하고 드디어 北京을 처드러 갔다. 태종도 그보다 앞서 通州를 지나 蘇州로 赴向하였다.
출사 이래 130여일을 지나 해빙이 임박하였음으로 개선하기로 하였다. 이번 전쟁에서 4성을 잃은 阿敏은 벌을 당하게 되었다.
天聰 5년, 태종은 대포를 주조하고 이 대포는 不遠 大凌城을 공략할 시에 크게 위력을 발휘하였다. 明과의 전쟁은 계속하였다.
明臣으로 포로된 張春이 明臣인 명예를 지지하여, 2군을 섬기지 않은 결백을 가지다가 病死하여 태종에게<348> 嘉讚된 일화도 있다.
그 후, 明과 재차 화의를 진행하였으나 성취치 못 하고 明의 위세 점차 쇠하여 국새는 滿洲 측에 전승되고 태종은 이에 국호를 세워 淸國이라 칭하고 다시 朝鮮을 치고, 마침내 支那 본부에 진입하게 되었다.

여기서 史話는, 태조 及 태종의 전혀 滿洲에 있어서의 활약을 기술한 것이고 그 후에 오는 大淸帝國 隆昌의 기초 공작을 말하고 완결하게 된 것이다.<349>
<339-349>