Magazine Title	三千理 第8巻 第1号 (Samch'ŏlli Vol. 8, No. 1)
Publication Date	1936-01-01
Article Title	天下大小人物評論會 (Roundtable Critique of Figures Great and Small in the World)
Author	Participants: Cha Sangch'an (開闢社 主幹 - Kaebyŏk Publishing Chief Editor), Yu Kwangnyŏl (新聞社 編輯局長 - Newspaper Editing Bureau Chief), Song Pongu (批判社 主幹 - Pip'an Publishing Chief Editor), Yi Sŏgu (新聞社 前社會部長 - Former Newspaper Society Section Chief), Kim Tonghwan, Kim Sŏngmok (本社 - This Company [Samch'ŏlli])
Article Type	대담·좌담 (Interview/Roundtable Discussion)

**Roundtable Critique of Figures Great and Small in the World**
Participants

Cha Sangch'an - (Kaebyŏk Publishing Chief Editor)
Yu Kwangnyŏl - (Newspaper Editing Bureau Chief)
Song Pongu - (Pip'an Publishing Chief Editor)
Yi Sŏgu - (Former Newspaper Society Section Chief)
This Company: Kim Tonghwan, Kim Sŏngmok
December 13th, from 6 PM
at Myŏngwŏlgwan, Seoul, until 11 PM

Topics

1. First Impressions of Gentlemen and Ladies
2. Figures Worthy of a Social Funeral
3. Tales of Hardship Regarding Misreporting Incidents
4. Female Reporters' Gossip about Figures

**First Impressions of Notables**

Kim Tonghwan (This Company's Chief Editor) - Harsh words are fine, satire is fine, and humor is also fine. Please speak candidly about your first impressions when meeting the many distinguished figures of our society. And let's agree to omit all honorifics like "Mr." (ssi) and "Teacher" (sŏnsaeng) in this discussion. Alright then, please start by telling us about meeting An Ch'angho for the first time.

Cha Sangch'an (Kaebyŏk Publishing Chief Editor) - It was when I was attending Posŏng Middle School, so it must have been 30 years ago already. Notices were posted all over the capital saying An Ch'angho, just arrived from America, would be speaking at Wŏngaksa Temple outside Sŏdaemun Gate in Seoul. In those days, middle school students, even old students who already had sons, daughters, and grandchildren, were all buzzing about politics and society. So, I rushed to the wide field of Wŏngaksa, and a bright young scholar stood on the platform, waving his arms and giving a speech. It wasn't so much eloquent oratory like flowing water, but truly a passionate speech stemming from sincerity, without a hint of falsehood. Though unadorned, each word and phrase he uttered boiled with blood and sincerity, deeply moving the entire audience. Rather than using abstract phrases like 'world situation' or 'millions of brethren,' his speech content drew upon appropriate and easy-to-understand examples.

This Company's Chief Editor - Can't you recall even a little of the speech content from back then?

Cha Sangch'an - I remember. Even though it was 30 years ago, it left such a deep impression that it's still clear now. It was something like this. The title was "Everyone, Do Not Despair." He used a parable: even if a sparrow mistakenly lands on a snake's back, it's fine if it just flies away startled. But if the sparrow thinks, 'Now I'm in big trouble, big trouble,' getting scared, it will inevitably end up being eaten. He spoke with quite skillful logic using such analogies. And also, at the end of his speeches, that gentleman would sing a song he composed himself called "Simjuga" (心舟歌 - Song of the Mind-Boat), which goes "Ganda ganda nanŭn kanda" (간다 간다 나는 간다 - Going, going, I am going), and then come down from the platform. At that time, it was, so to speak, a political speech sponsored by the Taehan Hyŏphoe (大韓協會)<30>. Later, I went with Cho Wangu, who was in Shanghai, to meet An Ch'angho. Hearing he was staying at the house of Pastor Kim Hangna's daughter in Tabang-gol, Yŏndong Church, we went. The reason was, at that time, academic societies like Kiho Hakhoe (畿湖學會) and Honam Hakhoe (湖南學會) were arising like wildfire. I also became a promoter, organizing the Kwandong Hakhoe (關東學會) centered around exchange students from our Kangwŏn Province. We went to ask Tosan (An Ch'angho's pen name) to be a speaker for a lecture meeting sponsored by the society. He agreed to speak and then pulled 30 wŏn from his pocket to donate. There was no gentleman more gracious. When I met him after his release from prison this time, he had aged considerably. His former appearance was gone, the image from the Wŏngaksa speech.

Song Pongu (Pip'an Publishing Chief Editor) - Some months ago, I went to the Chungang Hotel with friends and saw him sitting far off in the distance, just observed him and left.

Kim Tonghwan - Without even greeting him?

Song - Yes, there were so many people, was there even a chance to greet him? So I just watched from afar, and while I got the feeling that his physique and features suggested a man of strong character, he didn't particularly give the impression of a great man.

Yu Kwangnyŏl (M Newspaper Editing Bureau Chief) - Is that so? I met him quite a long time ago. As a reporter for the Tonga Ilbo, I went to Shanghai, and the first meeting was a session where, for about 30 minutes, he laid bare the statecraft in his heart. My first impression then was strongly that he was a "Man of Utmost Sincerity" (至誠의 人).

Yi Sŏgu (Former Newspaper Society Section Chief) - Previously, I went to the Hwayŏl Restaurant, and Ch'unwŏn (Yi Kwangsu's pen name), Yi Kŭnjong, and four or five others were having lunch centered around some old gentleman. I went and sat nearby, thinking to myself what kind of mistake a scholar like Ch'unwŏn was making, starting to associate with such a money-grubbing old man. Just then, Yi Kwangsu rushed over and insisted I greet him, so I did, and that person turned out to be An Ch'angho. Before the greeting, my thought was that he looked like a well-off gentleman from the countryside involved in making money.

Kim Tonghwan - It was shortly after he came out from Taejŏn, so his dark, sun-deprived face must have given that impression. But "money-grubber" is going too far. Well then, what about the impression of Sŏng Chinu?

Yu Kwangnyŏl - I went to interview Sŏng Chinu for the Tonga Ilbo when he must have been around twenty-three or four. I was acting as a reporter for the Manchuria Daily News. At that time, he didn't have the mature<31> air he has now, nor was he particularly vigorous; he just gave the impression of a scholar devoted to his studies. Rather, the one who left a deep impression on me there was Chang Tŏksu. Before that, I heard he had been in Tokyo with Yo Unhyŏng and then came out to start a newspaper company. With the desire to see this young politician (靑年政客), I went looking for him at the Pasŏnggwan Hotel outside Namdaemun Gate where he was staying, but he was out, and I couldn't meet him. So, in the Tonga Ilbo editorial office, I asked a friend which room I could find Chang Tŏksu in. That friend pointed to one man amidst a circle of people, a man with a beard covering his chin and cheeks, and gesturing, said, "That person is Chang Tŏksu." I was quite startled. I had imagined either a figure of imposing dignity or a sharp, swift steed-like slender gentleman, but instead, there was this disheveled black hair and bushy beard...

Yi Sŏgu - Were you surprised?

Yu Kwangnyŏl - Truly surprised. And beside him was a man with delicate features like a young lady, wearing a bright jade-green turumagi (Korean traditional coat). I wondered who it was, and it turned out to be Hamong (pen name) Yi Sanghyŏp. Although he had been known as a prodigy (才子) since sixteen or seventeen for writing novels and beautiful prose (美文), my impression at that time was also of a naive and innocent person.

Yi Sŏgu - Chang Tŏksu didn't know how to be "oshare" (stylish). When we society section reporters gathered, using all sorts of cutting-edge words in lively discussion (論談風發), he would come nearby, listen intently for a while as if envious, and when trendy words or "oshare" came up, he'd sincerely ask, wanting to know, "What does that mean?" He seemed like a plain fellow who had likely never even walked down the Ginza street in Tokyo.

Kim Tonghwan - I also saw him when I was a middle school student, but he gave good speeches.

Yi Sŏgu - He's a masterpiece when giving speeches too. Like Ch'oe Namsŏn advocating for domestic products, he'd come wearing rubber 'economy shoes' (고무經濟靴), but when stepping onto the platform, he'd deliberately take off the rubber shoes and stand barefoot. The audience would burst into laughter and applause at this reverent yet naive gesture. It's a clever way to capture the crowd's psychology.

Song Pongu - Back then, Chang Tŏksu was decent enough, but in speechmaking, he couldn't match Pak Ilbyŏng. If you had grabbed Pak and set him up at the Kwanghwamun intersection for a speech, he surely possessed the eloquence (辯才) to stir the masses of the world.

Yi Sŏgu - In terms of agitational speeches, there was Pak Ilbyŏng ten years ago, and today, ten years later, there's Yo Unhyŏng; they are truly formidable figures (一當百). However, Pak Ilbyŏng had the flaw of lacking knowledge, so his speeches were always the same<32> old thing.

Kim Tonghwan - A clearer impression of Sŏng Chinu--

Song Pongu - I also met him back in the early days of my social activism. At that time, he had a rustic (촌부) air, lacking any polish.

Yi Sŏgu - Oh yes! He's much more polished now. Fifteen years ago, he was more like a scholar or a naive young man (샌님).

Kim Tonghwan - First impression of Pang Ŭngmo?

Cha Sangch'an - I first met him at the Choson Ilbo when Cho Pyŏngok was there. He didn't look like a great tycoon (富者) said to possess 100 wŏn or however much. Because he was dressed very modestly.

Yi Sŏgu - I saw him at a Choson Ilbo reception held at the Chosŏn Hotel. The thought that this was the great man who had made a fortune in gold mining (金鑛) and abruptly threw 500,000 out of 1 million wŏn into the newspaper business struck me, leaving a deep impression.

Song Pongu - Yes, me too. I first went to see him right after the Choson Ilbo and Tonga Ilbo had a fierce battle that broke their horns. His face, ruddy like iron and blood (鐵血色), made him seem like an unpretentious figure. And thinking, 'Did this person throw away 50 wŏn [Note: likely a typo for 500,000 wŏn mentioned earlier]?', somehow made me want to express respect.

Yu Kwangnyŏl - Seven or eight years ago, I met him at Changch'un Inn in Kyŏnji-dong through an introduction by a friend from Chŏngju. I thought, 'He's a very solid gentleman.' Later, there was an occasion for congratulatory speeches at the Chosŏn Sports Association (朝鮮體育會). First Yun Ch'iho spoke, then I spoke, then Pang Ŭngmo, followed by Sŏng Chinu. I had always heard that Pang and Sŏng quarreled over seating order, so I wondered how it would be, but at that time, there was no sign of that, and he seemed like a very humble person.

Kim Tonghwan - Yo Unhyŏng?

Yu Kwangnyŏl - I also met him when I went to Shanghai. He was plump, full of fiery passion (滿身 熱血), a imposing figure (軒軒丈夫). We ate lunch together, and the way he just grabbed and devoured beef ribs like a hero from the *Water Margin* (水滸誌), his booming voice, going around hatless, wearing truncated Western trousers rolled way up his legs, carrying a thick stick, and striding about energetically—it gave me the feeling, "Here is the very image of a contemporary gallant hero (當代 豪俠男兒)." Weren't you the same?

Yi Sŏgu - Why wouldn't I be? He's the best. Doesn't put on airs, doesn't stand on ceremony. Moreover, his eyes are the best among Koreans. Whichever way you look at him, he's a man's man.

Song Pongu - I haven't formally met him yet, but I know who he is, and he surely knows who I am. As a person, he's excellent. Unpretentious,<33> without arrogance, his speech, actions, and overall demeanor seem destined to lead many notables (名).

Cha Sangch'an - About 30 years ago, before he went to Shanghai, I met him at the house of Yo Hwajŏng, a scholar of Chinese classics. Even then, he was vigorous and a sportsman (運動客) good at football.

Kim Tonghwan - Was he good at speeches back then too?

Cha Sangch'an - He wasn't that articulate at the time. But among the youth figures, everyone foresaw (囑目) his future prospects.

Kim Tonghwan - How about Hamong Yi Sanghyŏp?

Yu Kwangnyŏl - The first time I met Hamong must have been about 20 years ago. At the Kwangmunhoe building by Sup'yogyo Bridge, contemporary debaters and talents (論客才士) like Ch'oe Namsŏn, Yi Kwangsu, An Chaehong, Kwŏn Tŏkkyu, etc., used to gather frequently, exchanging historical talks (史談) and passing the time (消日) with Baduk (Go) and Changgi (Korean chess). One day, I went to Kwangmunhoe, and two people, whose names I've forgotten, were playing Baduk. Beside them sat a bright young scholar giving kibitzing advice (훈수). His advice seemed to be poor, not good, and because of it, one player suddenly lost the game. At that point, that person looked at the young scholar and said, "You, sir, are not Hamong (何夢 - What Dream) but Chinmong (眞夢 - True Dream)." That's how I knew he was Hamong. Anyway, at first glance (一見), I recognized his talent outweighed his virtue (才勝於德).

Song Pongu - That's right. He was a refined scholar. His old appearance (風貌).

Yi Sŏgu - I went before him to take the Tonga Ilbo reporter examination. The test conditions he asked about were only the extremely difficult ones. He seemed to have a sharp personality; I sweated buckets back then.

Cha Sangch'an - Even after becoming active in society, he has a chilly and sharp side to his personality, and it was the same during his student days. Back then, Hamong also attended Posŏng Middle School, as did I. With his thin face, slender body, and piercing eyes, his nickname was "Cat" (캣). While we would just laugh it off if called by a nickname, this person had a venomous streak (毒質); if someone called him by his nickname, he'd chase them down, kick them, and absolutely had to get revenge. Anyway, in middle school, he was a handsome youth (紅顔美少年) and a talented child (才童) who studied well.

Kim Tonghwan - Now that we've covered the newspaper people enough, how about Yun Ch'iho?

Yu Kwangnyŏl - He gave the impression of a dignified scholar. I first met him at the Youth Hall (靑年會館) during Yi Sangjae's time...

Song Pongu - Yun Ch'iho has never been in a position to receive public criticism, so I don't know how much mettle (氣骨) he possesses, but externally, he gives an overly static (靜的) impression<34>.

Cha Sangch'an - He was raised gently. And like an evergreen (滿年靑) that stays green year after year, although he's in his 70s, he still seems like a youth.

Yi Sŏgu - One flaw is that when walking, if dust settles on his shoes, he stops and brushes it off. It seems unbecoming of a rugged man (丈夫).

Kim Tonghwan - Is that so? Alright, now, without naming specific individuals, please tell us your first impressions of various figures in the religious, educational, and financial circles. Mix in some of that top-notch sharp critique (險口).

Song Pongu - Shall we talk about Cho Mansik? When we stormed into P'yŏngyang during the time of the Labor Federation (勞働總同盟), he invited us to a restaurant called "Changch'unkwan" (長春館) below Pubyŏngnu Pavilion. Many distinguished figures from P'yŏngyang gathered, and the topic of discussion was the convergence and divergence (離合) of nationalism and socialism. Cho Mansik meticulously noted down what others said but ultimately didn't utter a single word himself. At that time, I thought he was a very clever (怜悧) person. Anyway, he gives the impression of a truthful person. Though usually, he gently avoids stepping up to handle just any matter—

Cha Sangch'an - Cho Mansik always tackles things that are bound to fail. If you visit his house for a while, you'll see three signboards posted, each listing something impossible to achieve. Namely: Preparatory Committee for a People's University (民立大學期成會), Society for Practicing Prohibition and Abstinence from Smoking (禁酒斷煙實行會), and something else— Since when was a People's University ever feasible? How can one live 60 years of life without alcohol (酒) and tobacco (草)? This gentleman always picks impossible tasks like these and tackles them. A frustrating gentleman. Does he still wear that "Chosŏn frock coat" (朝鮮후록코-트) [likely a durumagi] that comes down to his shins?

Song Pongu - For a while, rumors of a love affair (戀愛事件) were circulating. They said it happened when he attended a certain church near Mt. Moran— But would such an upright person have the courage (勇氣) for a 20th-century style love affair?

Yi Sŏgu - It must be slander (中傷). He wouldn't dare dream of it.

Yu Kwangnyŏl - During my Tonga Ilbo days, on the day the issue of the non-acceptance of appeal (控訴不受理) for 48 people caused a great stir, I first met Hŏ Hŏn at the courthouse. Although the public made such a fuss, the impression I received then was, "What a gentle and amiable (溫厚) gentleman." This first impression remains the same even now.

Yi Sŏgu - Hŏ Hŏn became famous for the "non-acceptance of appeal." When the High Court sent a closed case (己末事件) to the District Court, the official document lacked the two characters "送致ス" (Sōchi su - meaning 'to transfer' in Japanese legal context). He argued that since the document couldn't have just blown in on the wind, the District Court could not try this case.<35> Therefore, all defendants should be released. How simple and laughable it sounds now! Anyway, with this non-acceptance, he instantly became a famous defense lawyer (名辯護士), became principal of Posŏng College, auditor for Tonga Ilbo, chairman of the Singanhoe (新幹會), and president of the Bar Association. He was a fortunate child (辛運兒) whose luck suddenly turned.

Cha Sangch'an - Speaking of defense lawyers, Kim Pyŏngno has passion (熱誠). When I was attending the law department at Posŏng College, he taught classes part-time back then. Even long after the dismissal bell rang, seeing him lecture, sputtering saliva around his mouth trying to impart even one more phrase, gave the feeling not of a renowned lecturer (名講士), but of an earnest lecturer (熱心). After becoming active in society, he showed passion when heading the Singanhoe, passion when appearing in court; in any case, he is a person of sincere effort (誠力).

Yu Kwangnyŏl - No matter who you mention, in courtroom arguments (辯論), the ones who speak most logically (條理) are likely Kim Pyŏngno and Sin T'aeyak.

Song Pongu - Yi In also has fervor (熱), but to others, he seems to view and handle everything too easily, like a snake slithering over a wall.

Yu Kwangnyŏl - He does give that impression in every matter (每事). But isn't that mostly a stratagem (術策)?

Yi Sŏgu - No matter how you look at it, the eternal "Taoist sage" (道士) is Kwŏn Tongjin.

Yu Kwangnyŏl - Yes, I remember something. For some incident, he was serving time in Kyŏngsŏng Prison, and upon release after completing his sentence, I saw Kwŏn Tongjin walking towards Seoul along the main road of Aeogae, wearing an old wide-brimmed hat (삿갓) as large as a cartwheel, walking with a splayed gait (八字거름). He looked utterly calm and composed (泰然自著). A steadfast (剛直) elder. Also, though he is an eighty-year-old man, listening to him speak even now, breathing the same air as us youth (青年), holding hope, and acting in a way that suggests 'If I learn the Way in the morning, I can die content in the evening' (朝聞道夕死可矣), commands respect (敬意).

Song Pongu - While steadfast, isn't there a point where he fails to fully grasp the world situation (天下大勢)? Like the incident where he was president of the Choson Ilbo for only two hours.

Kim Tonghwan - I saw some harsh critique saying Sŏng Chinu is dull-witted (愚鈍), Hŏ Hŏn has gaps (빈 데 잇고), Yo Unhyŏng dances to all four winds (東西南北 네바름에 다 춤을 추고), Yi Kwangsu is a mere scholar (書生), and An Chaehong is a country bumpkin scholar (村夫子). Is there some validity (妥當性) to these words?

Yi Sŏgu - Is there just *some*? An Chaehong clearly has a naive side (愚直) that makes him seem likely to be deceived by Seoulites.

Cha Sangch'an - In writing, alongside Kim Myŏngsik, he is a top debater (論客) of the era.<36>

Song Pongu - Hong Myŏnghŭi's writings appear as rarely as beans in a drought, a chapter or phrase every few years, making them indeed rare masterpieces (稀文章) of the time. But I wish he would emerge as a debater instead of just battling with "Im Kkŏkjŏngjŏn" (林巨正傳).

Yi Sŏgu - Han Yongun too now only shows his face as a novelist (小說家). Both Hong Myŏnghŭi and Han Yongun are engaged in pursuits unsuited (格에 맛지안는) to them.

柳光烈 - Still, Han Yongun, though seeming arrogant at first sight, has weight (무게). And while Sin Hŭngu easily gives the impression of being artificial (假飾), in my view, he seems like a very sincere person. His attire (衣服) and outward appearance (外飾) are probably influenced by the bright American style.

Yi Sŏgu - Listening to Sin Hŭngu speak, too, although he speaks with sincerity and earnestness, it unfortunately gives the audience the feeling that it's not all truly coming from the heart (心臟). Firstly, a man in his 50s (五十客) wearing a red necktie is ridiculous.

Song Pongu - Not just the red necktie. Seeing him walk around the Chongno intersection wearing a jade-green turumagi and patent leather shoes (에나멜구두), no matter how I think about it, it seems excessive.

Cha Sangch'an - Speaking of the Sin family, Sin Sŏgu's protruding lower lip gives the first impression of a spiteful (심술) person.

Song Pongu - Not just spiteful. He seems gutsy (뱃심조코) and resilient (버티는 힘), projecting a pressing force onto the opponent that cannot be lightly dismissed (輕視) in any situation.

Yu Kwangnyŏl - That's right. He gives the impression of being a spiteful grump (심술구레기) and someone who won't easily bow his head. And that's how he actually is.

Yi Sŏgu - However, as a person with warm human feeling (人情味), I hear he takes good care of the dozens of struggling people who gather in the sarangchae (men's quarters) of his house now. Easier said than done; in times like these when human feeling is like blank paper (白紙張), how remarkable is such an act?

Song Pongu - There must be about one percent meaning of 'cultivating retainers' (養士 - inferred from 養x) mixed in, intending to use them when he makes a comeback (再擧), right? This is beside the point, but Kim Sŏngsu has a generous (상냥한) air.

Yu Kwangnyŏl - That's right. He's affectionate (多情). The way he receives guests (應待).

Cha Sangch'an - It's the Chŏlla Province style. Isn't he quite affectionate?

Yi Sŏgu - Are all people from Chŏlla Province affectionate? Look at his younger brother Kim Kyesu. There's hardly another person so blunt (무뚝뚝).

Kim Tonghwan - How about Yu Chint'ae, Sŏ Chŏnghŭi, Kim Kosu, Wŏn Sehun?

Song Pongu - The first impression of Sŏ Chŏnghŭi and Kim Wŏn [likely Kim Kosu] is that they give the feeling of battle-hardened old generals (百戰老將).<37>

Cha Sangch'an - Yu Chint'ae is also like that. He appears to be a person of considerable deep planning (深謀).

Yu Kwangnyŏl - Seeing how he worked carrying Han Kyugo on his back, Yu Chint'ae is certainly an old man skilled in plotting (策謀).

Kim Tonghwan - Good heavens! In our conversation, we've missed the female notables (女流名士). Let's start with Pak Indŏk. Tell us your first impressions.

Song Pongu - In the end, we'll have to start praising beauties (美人타령), so wouldn't it be better to just drop it?

Yi Sŏgu - That's right. Criticizing women is rather tricky. Let's omit it entirely. It's easy for trouble (말성) to arise later.

Kim Tonghwan - You're all weaklings (弱卒). Acting like you 'respect them from a distance' (遠而敬之). Then shall we move on to school principals? How about Yu Ŏkkyŏm, vice-president of Yŏnhŭi College (延專)?

Yi Sŏgu - I don't remember clearly what incident was occurring in society at that time, but anyway, there was a need to get comments from educators, so I went to Yŏnhŭi College to find Yu Ŏkkyŏm. He seemed like a 'peaceful and uneventful' (無事太平) sort of person. Through several contacts after that, what I always felt wasn't much different from the first impression. I wonder if he would be where he is today if he weren't the son of Mr. Yu Kilchun and also related by marriage (同婿) to the late Emperor Sunjong.

Yu Kwangnyŏl - While thinking he's a good-natured (善良) person, one also gets the feeling that he's not a 'sharp knife' (드는 칼이), meaning he's not a workman fit for turbulent times (亂世). He's a workman for times of peace (平和之世).

Cha Sangch'an - Shall I talk about my first impression of O Kŭngsŏn, the head of Severance (세부란쓰校長)? He doesn't seem like someone who truly believes in Jesus, nor does he seem like a social activist (社會客) who forgets sleep and food over world affairs (天下事), and even though he's a doctor (醫師), he doesn't quite seem like one. How is my observation?

Song Pongu - Seems plausible. He's been to the West, but lacks much of a Western air (洋風), yet also has little pure Eastern flavor (純東洋味)...

Kim Tonghwan - Kim Yongmu, principal of Posŏng College (普專校長)?

Song Pongu - Like silk thread before it's woven. Meaning, the thread is silk, but it gives the feeling of not yet being complete (完成).

Yi Sŏgu - Kim Yongmu is a lawyer (辯護士), where is he an educator (敎育家)? Having met him several times, he lacks the air (臭) of an educator.

Kim Tonghwan - Kim Hwallan of Ewha College (梨花專門)?

Yu Kwangnyŏl - She seemed like a knowledgeable (博職) person.

Yi Sŏgu - A Doctor of Agriculture—

Song Pongu - The first impression is not frivolous (輕薄).

Yi Sŏgu - The fact that at 40 years of age (40當年), no scandals (艶聞) have been heard speaks to how noble (高潔) her character is as an educator. On the other hand, viewed as an individual woman, it seems somewhat lonely (寂寞).<38>

Kim Tonghwan - How about Ch'oe Kyudong, Hyŏn Sangyun?

Song Pongu - Ch'oe Kyudong, whichever way you look at him, is an educator. He has character (人格). Also, whether meeting him for the first time or the tenth time, his sincerity (眞情) pours out just the same, making one naturally bow one's head in respect.

李瑞求 - He seems dignified (점잔코) and truly concerned about the educational world of the Peninsula (半島敎育界), a person with tears (눈물).

柳光烈 - In terms of talent (才操) too, he was reportedly one of the three geniuses (朝鮮三天才) of Korea in mathematics. Finding both talent and virtue (才德) combined is something first found in him.

車相瓚 - Hyŏn Sangyun also is not flippant (경박하지 안코), is handsome (준수하고), diligent (부지런하여), giving the feeling of being a good educator. He and I are alumni of the same Posŏng College—I was in the first graduating class, and he was in the third or fourth, but from his student days, he was extremely diligent and steady (渟實). He speaks well too.

宋奉瑀 - Is Hyŏn Sangyun also considered an eloquent speaker (雄辯家)?

李瑞求 - Not an eloquent speaker, but his manner of speaking is truthful (眞實답고) and skilled.

金東煥 - Alright, now let's leave the men of action (風雲客) and turn to the financial world (財界). How about Pak Yŏngch'ŏl, Han Sangnyong?

李瑞求 - Pak Yŏngch'ŏl had the physiognomy of an elephant (코키리 相). His large frame (巨軀), always vigorous (식식하며) and sitting composedly (泰然하게), carried weight (무게). Also, the decoration of his house, the famous paintings (名畵) hanging in the reception room (應接室), the arrangement (配布) of ornamental rocks (水石) in the garden (庭園)—all show that this person doesn't just know money but is capable of understanding art (藝術).

車相瓚 - And his tastes (趣味) are unusual. The house number of his Hwa-dong home is 144, his private car number is 144, and his phone number is Kwanghwamun 144; he collected them all.

金東煥 - Besides them, please tell us about your first impressions of Yi Yongmun, Min Yŏnghwi, Min Taesik, Im Chongsang, Ch'oe Ch'anghak, Kim Kidŏk, Pak Hŭngsik, and other contemporary magnates (諸當豪).

李瑞求 - Hey, let's stop talking about the rich (富者). Since we are all poor folks (가난방), speaking well might seem like flattery (아첨). Also, as people in the media world (言論界人), our connection (因緣) with the financial world is distant, and we haven't had many opportunities to meet them. Let's just stop.

諸氏 (All Gentlemen) - All agree (同感).

金東煥 - Then let's postpone the impressions of millionaires (百萬長者) to the next opportunity.<39>

**Figures Worthy of a Social Funeral**

金東煥 - Like Yi Sangjae, who among the figures going forward in our society would be worthy of a social funeral (社會葬)?

宋奉瑀 - A social funeral means the collective mourning (哀悼) of society's masses. Looking at the paths people have taken in the past and up to today, I believe there is absolutely no one worthy of a social funeral. Not a single person. To deserve a social funeral, one must have used their wealth and sincerity much more illustriously, becoming someone behind whose bier everyone would unconditionally stand. Only then should the issue of a social funeral be raised. But looking at the present situation up to today, does such a figure catch the eye?

李瑞求 - I also disagree. In the future, the practice of social funerals should be completely abolished (廢止). I am strongly opposed. If a funeral is to be held, it's acceptable to have it as a school funeral (學校葬) for a school principal, or a newspaper company funeral (新聞社葬) for a newspaper president, or some other organizational funeral (團體葬). But one encompassing all strata (各層) of the entire society cannot exist.

車相瓚 - I agree with that statement too.

柳光烈 - I share the same opinion.

**Tales of Hardship Regarding Misreporting Incidents**

金東煥 - Having been in newspaper or magazine companies for a long time, you must have often been beaten with clubs by aggrieved parties for writing incorrect articles. Please share stories of those difficult, sweat-inducing moments.

李瑞求 - In over ten years as a newspaper reporter, I've faced countless instances of abuse from outsiders due to misreports or for writing the truth correctly. Among them, two incidents still make me break out in a cold sweat when I recall them. First, when I was at the Tonga Ilbo,<40> a dispute arose between the family of Viscount Yi Kŭnt'aek's younger brother, Yi Kŭnho, and the house of a widow over his son, each claiming the child was theirs. While writing the article, I sought out the son, told him I'd write favorably about him in the newspaper, and asked to borrow a photograph. After much persuasion, I managed to get the photo he was reluctant to give. In the middle of the article, I published a cartoon depicting the person from the photo being pulled by the arms by members of both families standing on either side. Then one day, it was raining steadily. Sitting in the editorial office, I casually looked outside and saw Yi Kŭnho's son entering, stooping, his eyes filled with murderous intent (殺氣), carrying a dagger (短刀) hidden in his chest. My heart froze. So I quickly slipped away and hid in the printing plant (工場). Then this man entered the editorial bureau, looked for me, and when he couldn't find me, grabbed Yi Sanghyŏp, who was the editorial bureau chief at the time, shouting, "Bring out Yi Sŏgu! I'll kill that bastard before I leave!" He was absolutely furious. I was truly terrified. Only that evening was I finally released from the printing plant and secretly went home to sleep.

金東煥 - And what was the other incident?

李瑞求 - This happened when I was the society section chief at the Maeil Sinbo. One day, about ten members of the Kaltophoe (갈돕회 - a self-help student group) came rushing in masse. They claimed some article was wrong – it was an article someone else wrote that I had edited. Anyway, when I went down to the reception room, all the students looked furious (殺氣騰騰). At that moment, I remembered that I had also been a committee member and worked hard (奔走) when Chŏng Paek and Ch'oe Hyŏn originally founded the Kaltophoe. So, before taking their questions, I flung the door wide open and started, "Do you gentlemen know how the Kaltophoe for struggling students (苦學生) came to be?" I then recounted the entire story of its founding, how I also put in effort to create it, and concluded, "Could I, having struggled so hard for you, have written maliciously about your affairs? I will correct it properly, so please leave." As I spoke, the faces of the people gradually showed understanding (諒解), and that day's incident ended peacefully.
Besides these, I've been confronted harshly by dozens of people many times.

宋奉瑀 - There are many, many such incidents. Since we've all experienced it, shall I add a word? There was this incident. It was two or three years ago— My body was ailing, and my temper flared up (心火), so I went to Sinch'ŏn Hot Springs (信川溫泉) and was resting for a few days when a telegram arrived from the company. Someone was threatening to sue (告訴) because of an article, demanding I come back immediately to handle it. Because telegrams kept arriving repeatedly, I figured something big had happened, so I ambled back to Seoul. Upon arrival, I heard that a certain person<41> carrying a knife had come looking for me several times. I thought, 'Let's see,' and waited. Then one morning around four, someone came and violently shook the door to my room. Startled awake, I opened the door, and indeed, a terrifying man filled with murderous intent rushed in, shouting, "You bastard Pongu! Will you take my knife or a lawsuit summons (告訴狀)?" He then slammed a three-foot dagger (三尺 비수) into the floor. I thought to myself, "Wow, this guy is quite the actor (演劇)," but also felt that if I didn't handle him carefully, something terrible might happen.

柳光烈 - Right—if you don't handle them carefully, things can easily get out of hand. Didn't Pak Wŏllyŏm of Ch'ŏndogyo get assassinated (刺殺) because he underestimated someone?

車相瓚 - However, as seen during former Prime Minister Inukai's time, someone who comes with a deadly weapon (凶器) must strike immediately. If they start talking first, they can't go through with it. Because the realization that killing someone else will lead to a murder charge (殺人罪) arises, they lose their nerve (大膽).

宋奉瑀 - That's right. Look at this fellow. He suddenly grabbed the knife again and, quick as lightning, thrust the knife-wielding arm straight at my chest. In that instant, I dodged sharply and grabbed the man's chest, and the knife struck the wall with a thud. Hey people, I'm laughing now as I tell this, but it was truly precarious (아슬아슬) then.
Only then did I feel a real crisis (危機) was upon me, and my mind cleared instantly. So I used every possible word to soothe his heart. As dawn broke, Pak Ilhyŏng, Yi Kaptil, and several other company employees arrived. Anyway, we managed to send him away. After that, fully expecting to be sued, I sat waiting for a summons (呼出狀) from the prosecutor's office, but there was no news. Much later, one day as I was walking up towards the Andong intersection, someone near a tavern (선술집) called out,
"Hey, you bastard Pongu!"
Turning around, I saw it was that same fellow, drunk and shouting loudly (高聲大呼). He then asked for a drink, so we went into that tavern together, had 7 or 8 cups, and eventually parted laughing. Now we greet each other when we meet.

車相瓚 - Turning calamity into fortune (轉禍爲福), I see. During my 60 years [Note: likely a typo, perhaps meant 6 or 16 years] at Kaebyŏk Publishing, I was sued and brought to the prosecutor's office 13 or 14 times. When sued, if you prepare yourself for being summoned a few times and paying a fine of several tens of wŏn,<42> it's manageable. But the real trouble comes when people don't resort to lawsuits but try to retaliate (制裁) with violence (暴力). Once, we wrongly criticized "medicine peddlers" (賣藥商) in "Pyŏlgŏngon" (別乾坤 - Another World, a magazine title), and a group of 15 or 16 medicine peddlers came storming in. When I met them in the reception room, about ten of them started clamoring, each acting as they do when selling medicine on the street. After listening silently, I said I would investigate and asked them to come back the next day. The following day, 7 or 8 came. After listening to their clamoring again, I told them to come back the next day. The day after, 3 or 4 came. Usually, when people gather on their own initiative rather than based on a resolution from some organization (團), they tend to be disorganized (無秩序) and lack persistence (持久力). After dragging it out for 4 or 5 days, they finally seemed exhausted and just asked me to make corrections as I saw fit, then left. Judging by their initial fervor (氣勢), it seemed like they might break a few employees' ribs, but sensing their nature and employing delaying tactics (持久戰), we fortunately avoided trouble.

柳光烈 - During my Tonga Ilbo days, I was severely beaten with a sakura wood club because of an article about a labor association (勞働會). Some person came out of nowhere and just hit me hard. The article described a fight between two organizations as a "squabble" (야료), and they were angry, saying, "We acted for the people (民衆), how dare you call it a 'squabble'?"

李瑞求 - In Tokyo, there are actual gangster groups (暴力團). If something like this happens, two or three professional toughs (職業的 壯漢) visit and say, "We've come for your arm,"
placing a knife firmly on the desk, apparently. They claim the fault lies not with the person who wrote the article, but purely with the arm that held the pen. So they demand that arm.

金東煥 - Then what do they do?

李瑞求 - You have to give them a thousand wŏn to make them leave. Before the crackdown (檢擧 - Kenkyo, arrest/roundup), they ran rampant (跋扈) magnificently. I heard even Ma Hae-song (馬海松 - possibly a Japanese name read in Korean), the president of a Japanese company, once had trouble with a gangster group. Anyway, in Korea too, many newspaper presidents and magazine presidents have run into trouble with gangster groups. Probably no company president hasn't experienced this misfortune (逢變). Among them, Sŏng Chinu of Tonga Ilbo must have experienced it the most.

**Critique of Female Reporters<43>**

金東煥 - It's been over 10 years since the history of private newspapers and magazines began. During that time, many female reporters (女流記者) have been active in each company. Please give us your candid critique (漫評) of these female reporters.

李瑞求 - Song Kye-wŏl was a loss. When she used to come asking for manuscripts during her time at Kaebyŏk Publishing, I met her several times. Her character was sincere (淳實), she was talented (才操), and had strong willpower (意志). If she had been granted just 10 more years of life, she would have become a great worker for our society. Truly a pity.

宋奉瑀 - That's well said. It's often the case that one feels the grief more strongly after someone dies, but Song Kye-wŏl is truly regrettable. Looking at her writing, her arguments (論旨) were clear, and listening to her speak, her logic (條理) was sound. If she had developed further, she could have grown into a prominent female activist (女流運動客).

車相瓚 - Having worked with her at the company, she was a bright-minded (頭腦明敏) and composed, good reporter. And in terms of writing skill, Ch'oe Ŭnhŭi probably ranks highest. A fast writer (速筆) and eloquent (達辯).

李瑞求 - Not just writing, her speech also flows like clear water from a blue mountain (靑山流水). Her voice not being quite musical (音樂的) is a flaw (缺), though.

柳光烈 - In terms of talent (재조), Kim Myŏngsun might be the one. Looking at the poems or short stories she wrote.

李瑞求 - I knew Kim Myŏngsun since her time in Tokyo. Back then, she was living with the poet Im Nowŏl. Even among several friends, she would peel an apple, pick the very best piece, give it to Im Nowŏl first, and only then offer it to the guests. She was a woman of astonishing courage (勇敢性).

車相瓚 - During her time as a female reporter at Maeil Sinbo, there was even the famous Black Tea Incident (紅茶事件). Anyway, perhaps because she became a female artist (女流藝術家), she has a free-spirited air (漂漂逸).

金東煥 - How were the reporters from the middle period (中世紀 - likely refers to mid-1920s/early 30s), like Hŏ Yŏngsuk, Ch'oe Paegwŏl, Yi Hyŏn'gyŏng, Hŏ Chŏngsuk?

李瑞求 - Hŏ Yŏngsuk was Yi Kwangsu's wife (마누라), who would dare criticize her?

金東煥 - How about the current active ones? Chŏng Ch'ilsŏng of Choson, Hwang Sindŏk, Pak Sŭngho of Tonga, No Ch'ŏnmyŏng of Chungang, etc., etc. (諸諸 記者)?

李瑞求 - Criticizing women is uncomfortable, let's stop.

金東煥 - Thank you for speaking for such a long time.
(Ends at 10:30 PM)<44>

**Summary**

This roundtable discussion from a 1936 issue of Samch'ŏlli magazine features prominent journalists and editors sharing their candid first impressions and critiques of major Korean figures in politics, media, academia, business, and the arts. They discuss personalities like An Ch'angho, Sŏng Chinu, Yo Unhyŏng, Yi Kwangsu, Kim Sŏngsu, and others, often with sharp humor and unflattering observations. The conversation also touches upon the idea of who deserves a "social funeral," the difficulties reporters faced due to misprints or critical articles (including threats of violence), and brief assessments of female journalists. The participants ultimately reject the idea of social funerals for anyone at that time and express reluctance to critique women further.

From a colonial history perspective, the article is revealing for its frank discussion of contemporary Korean elites under Japanese rule. The participants, themselves influential figures in the media, offer insights into the reputations, perceived strengths, weaknesses, and political leanings (or lack thereof) of key individuals navigating the complex social and political landscape. The mention of specific incidents, like Hŏ Hŏn's legal tactics or the journalists' encounters with threats and violence (including from organized groups), highlights the pressures and dangers faced by the Korean press and intelligentsia during this period. Historians might find the candid, sometimes critical, assessments of nationalist figures, educators, and businessmen valuable for understanding internal dynamics, personal reputations, and the atmosphere within the Korean elite circle in the mid-1930s. The discussion about social funerals also reflects a critical perspective on the achievements and unity of the national movement at the time.

**Named Entities**

三千理	삼천리	Samch'ŏlli
開闢社	개벽사	Kaebyŏk Publishing
新聞社	신문사	Newspaper Company
批判社	비판사	Pip'an Publishing
車相瓚	차상찬	Cha Sangch'an
柳光烈	유광렬	Yu Kwangnyŏl
宋奉瑀	송봉우	Song Pongu
李瑞求	이서구	Yi Sŏgu
金東煥	김동환	Kim Tonghwan
金性睦	김성목	Kim Sŏngmok
서울	서울	Seoul
明月館	명월관	Myŏngwŏlgwan
安昌浩	안창호	An Ch'angho
普成中學校	보성중학교	Posŏng Middle School
美國	미국	United States (America)
西大門	서대문	Sŏdaemun
圓覺寺	원각사	Wŏngaksa Temple
大韓協會	대한협회	Taehan Hyŏphoe
上海	상해	Shanghai
趙琬九	조완구	Cho Wangu
茶坊谷	다방곡	Tabang-gol
畿湖學會	기호학회	Kiho Hakhoe
湖南學會	호남학회	Honam Hakhoe
江原道	강원도	Kangwŏn Province
關東學會	관동학회	Kwandong Hakhoe
島山	도산	Tosan (An Ch'angho's pen name)
中央호텔	중앙호텔	Chungang Hotel
東亞日報	동아일보	Tonga Ilbo
花月食堂	화월식당	Hwayŏl Restaurant
春園	춘원	Ch'unwŏn (Yi Kwangsu's pen name)
李肯鍾	이긍종	Yi Kŭnjong
李光洙	이광수	Yi Kwangsu
大田	대전	Taejŏn
宋鎭禹	송진우	Sŏng Chinu
滿州日報	만주일보	Manchuria Daily News (Manjoo Ilbo)
張德秀	장덕수	Chang Tŏksu
呂運亨	여운형	Yo Unhyŏng
東京	동경	Tokyo
南大門	남대문	Namdaemun
巴城館 호텔	파성관 호텔	Pasŏnggwan Hotel
李相協	이상협	Yi Sanghyŏp
何夢	하몽	Hamong (Yi Sanghyŏp's pen name)
崔南善	최남선	Ch'oe Namsŏn
朴一秉	박일병	Pak Ilbyŏng
光化門	광화문	Kwanghwamun
趙炳玉	조병옥	Cho Pyŏngok
朝鮮日報	조선일보	Choson Ilbo
朝鮮호텔	조선호텔	Chosŏn Hotel
堅志洞	견지동	Kyŏnji-dong
長春旅館	장춘여관	Changch'un Inn
定州	정주	Chŏngju
朝鮮體育會	조선체육회	Chosŏn Sports Association
尹致昊	윤치호	Yun Ch'iho
水滸誌	수호지	Water Margin (Shuihu Zhuan)
水標橋	수표교	Sup'yogyo Bridge
光文會	광문회	Kwangmunhoe
安在鴻	안재홍	An Chaehong
權悳奎	권덕규	Kwŏn Tŏkkyu
李商在	이상재	Yi Sangjae
靑年會館	청년회관	Youth Hall
曹晩植	조만식	Cho Mansik
勞働總同盟	노동총동맹	Labor Federation
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
浮碧樓	부벽루	Pubyŏngnu Pavilion
長春館	장춘관	Changch'unkwan Restaurant
許憲	허헌	Hŏ Hŏn
普成專門學校	보성전문학교	Posŏng College
新幹會	신간회	Singanhoe
金炳魯	김병로	Kim Pyŏngno
辛泰嶽	신태악	Sin T'aeyak
李仁	이인	Yi In
權東鎭	권동진	Kwŏn Tongjin
京城監獄	경성감옥	Kyŏngsŏng Prison
애오개	애오개	Aeogae
金明植	김명식	Kim Myŏngsik
洪命熹	홍명희	Hong Myŏnghŭi
林巨正傳	임꺽정전	Im Kkŏkjŏngjŏn (The Story of Im Kkŏkjŏng)
韓龍雲	한용운	Han Yongun
申興雨	신흥우	Sin Hŭngu
亞米利加	아메리카	America
申錫雨	신석우	Sin Sŏgu
金性洙	김성수	Kim Sŏngsu
全羅道	전라도	Chŏlla Province
金季洙	김계수	Kim Kyesu
兪鎭泰	유진태	Yu Chint'ae
徐廷禧	서정희	Sŏ Chŏnghŭi
金苦水	김고수	Kim Kosu (likely misprint or less common name, usually Kim Wŏn'gŭn/김원근 is mentioned with Sŏ Chŏnghŭi)
金元	김원	Kim Wŏn (appears once, likely referring to Kim Kosu)
元世勳	원세훈	Wŏn Sehun
韓圭高	한규고	Han Kyugo (Likely Han Kyu-bok/한규복, prominent independence activist, name variations existed)
朴仁德	박인덕	Pak Indŏk
延專 (延禧專門學校)	연전 (연희전문학교)	Yŏnhŭi College (Yŏnchŏn)
兪億兼	유억겸	Yu Ŏkkyŏm
兪吉濬	유길준	Yu Kilchun
純宗	순종	Emperor Sunjong
세부란쓰校長 (세브란스)	세브란스 교장	Severance Head/Principal (Sebŭransŭ Kyojang)
吳兢善	오긍선	O Kŭngsŏn
金用茂	김용무	Kim Yongmu
梨花專門	이화전문	Ewha College
金活蘭	김활란	Kim Hwallan
崔奎東	최규동	Ch'oe Kyudong
玄相允	현상윤	Hyŏn Sangyun
朴榮喆	박영철	Pak Yŏngch'ŏl
韓相龍	한상룡	Han Sangnyong
花洞	화동	Hwa-dong
光化門	광화문	Kwanghwamun (telephone exchange)
李容汶	이용문	Yi Yongmun
閔泳徽	민영휘	Min Yŏnghwi
閔大植	민대식	Min Taesik
林宗相	임종상	Im Chongsang
崔昌學	최창학	Ch'oe Ch'anghak
金基德	김기덕	Kim Kidŏk
朴興植	박흥식	Pak Hŭngsik
李根澤	이근택	Yi Kŭnt'aek
李根浩	이근호	Yi Kŭnho
每日申報	매일신보	Maeil Sinbo
갈돕회	갈돕회	Kaltophoe
鄭栢	정백	Chŏng Paek
崔鉉	최현	Ch'oe Hyŏn
信川溫泉	신천온천	Sinch'ŏn Hot Springs
朴日馨	박일형	Pak Ilhyŏng
李甲基	이갑길	Yi Kaptil (or Kapkil)
天道敎	천도교	Ch'ŏndogyo
朴來源	박래원	Pak Naewŏn (or Raewŏn)
犬養前首相	견양전수상	Former Prime Minister Inukai (Ken'yō zenshusō - referring to Inukai Tsuyoshi)
別乾坤	별건곤	Pyŏlgŏngon (Magazine Title)
宋桂月	송계월	Song Kye-wŏl
崔恩喜	최은희	Ch'oe Ŭnhŭi
金明淳	김명순	Kim Myŏngsun
林蘆月	임노월	Im Nowŏl
許英肅	허영숙	Hŏ Yŏngsuk
崔白月	최백월	Ch'oe Paegwŏl
李賢卿	이현경	Yi Hyŏn'gyŏng
許貞淑	허정숙	Hŏ Chŏngsuk
丁七星	정칠성	Chŏng Ch'ilsŏng
黃信德	황신덕	Hwang Sindŏk
朴承浩	박승호	Pak Sŭngho
盧天命	노천명	No Ch'ŏnmyŏng

**Glossary**

主幹	주간	Chief Editor
編輯局長	편집국장	Editing Bureau Chief
社會部長	사회부장	Society Section Chief
本社	본사	This company (referring to the publisher, Samch'ŏlli)
濟濟名士	제제명사	Many distinguished figures/notables
맛나든	만나던	(Older spelling) Met (relative clause)
밧	밖	(Older spelling) Outside
올나서서	올라서서	(Older spelling) Stepping up onto
밧엇든지	받았든지	(Older spelling) Received (so much that...)
업스나	없으나	(Older spelling) Although there isn't
끌고	끓고	Boiling (with emotion)
불느고	부르고	(Older spelling) Singing (and then)
잇지	있지	(Older spelling) There is/was
잇슬	있을	(Older spelling) Who was at
밧어지데	받아지데	(Older spelling) Received (the impression)
밧엇네	받았네	(Older spelling) Received (impression)
엇더튼가요	어떻던가요	(Older spelling) How was it?
맛나기는	만나기는	(Older spelling) As for meeting
엇잿든	어쨌든	(Older spelling) Anyway
밧어지데나	받아지데나	(Older spelling) Gives the impression
맛낫는데	만났는데	(Older spelling) Met, and...
이약이나	이야기나	(Older spelling) Story, talk (particle suggesting 'let's talk about...')
밧겟거든	받겠거든	(Older spelling) If one is to receive
쓰고서	쓰고서	After using
업다	없다	To not exist, lack
아네만	아네만	(Older spelling) Only know that... (implies agreement/concession)
밧은	받은	(Older spelling) Received
업슨즉	없는즉	(Older spelling) Since there isn't
마즌	맞은	(Older spelling) Was hit/beaten
彼此에	피차에	Mutually, between us/them
괴롭던	괴롭던	Was painful/difficult
하여주세요	하여주세요	Please do (request)
십허	싶어	(Older spelling) Wanting to
만흔지	많은지	(Older spelling) So many that...
때에야	때에야	(Older spelling) Only at that time
붓잡고	붙잡고	Grabbing, holding onto
갓고	같고	(Older spelling) Like, similar to
짓거리듯	짓거리듯	As if doing (often implies repetitive or annoying action)
했더니	했더니	Did so, and then...
왓겠지	왔겠지	(Older spelling) Came (conjecture)
모아온	모아온	Gathered and came
없거던	없거든	(Older spelling) Since there isn't/aren't
분질를	분지를	(Older spelling) Break/snap
채리고	차리고	(Older spelling) Sensing, becoming aware of
썼다고	썼다고	That (someone) wrote
爲하여	위하여	For the sake of
壮漢	장한	Sturdy fellow, tough guy
왔노라	왔노라	(Archaic/Formal) Have come
내놓는다는구만	내놓는다는구만	They say (he) puts down... (reportive ending)
붓을	붓을	Brush (writing implement)
있다나	있다나	They say it is... (reportive, slightly skeptical)
한다는구면	한다는구만	They say (he) does... (reportive ending, dialectal/older form of -구만)
하는고	하는고	(Archaic/Question) What does one do?
물러가지	물러가지	Retreats, withdraws
있었지요	있었지요	(Older spelling/polite) There was
마누라라고	마누라라고	Because (she is) the wife
했나	했나	Did (someone) do? (question)
엇던가요	어떤가요	(Older spelling) How about...?
諸諸	제제	Various, all sorts of (used here like etc.)
오랜	오랜	Long (time)
하여 주시서	하여 주셔서	(Older spelling/polite) Thank you for doing
하였읍니다	하였습니다	(Older spelling/formal) Did (formal ending)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제8권 제1호
발행일	1936년 01월 01일
기사제목	天下大小人物評論會
기사형태	대담·좌담

天下大小人物評論會
出席者

車相瓚-(開闢社 主幹)
柳光烈-(新聞社 編輯局長)
宋奉瑀-(批判社 主幹)
李瑞求-(新聞社 前社會部長)
本社 金東煥, 金性睦
12월 13일 오후 6시부터
서울 명월관에서 同 11시까지

話題

1. 신사숙녀의 初印象
2. 社會葬할 인물
3. 誤報事件에 대한 苦心談
4. 여류기자의 인물 잡담

名士의 初印衆

金東煥(本社 主幹)- 險口도 조코, 풍자도 좋고, 해학도 또한 조흐니 우리 사회의 濟濟名士에 대하여 그 처음 맛나든 인상을 기탄업시 말슴하여 주세요. 그리고 이 좌석에선 「씨」와 「선생」이라는 一切 경어의 사용을 빼기로 합시다. 자아 그러면 처음으로 安昌浩를 맛나든 이약이를 하여 주세요.
車相瓚(開闢社 主幹)- 내가 普成中學校에 단닐 때 일이니 벌서 30년 전은 될 걸요. 米國서 금방 나온 安昌浩가 서울 西大門밧 圓覺寺에서 연설한다는 방문이 장안 곳곳에 부텃겟지. 그때 중학생이라하면 아들 딸 손자까지 둔 노학도들로 모다 정치니 사회니 하고 떠들고 도라다니든 패엿지. 자아 그래서 원각사 너른 들로 달려가니 샛파란 젊은 선비가 연단에 올나서서 팔을 휘휘- 저어가며 연설하는데 그 연설이 어듸 청산유수식 변설이라기보다 정말 조곰도 거짓을 꾸미지 안는, 진정에서 나오는 열변이겟지요. 言言句句 토할 때마다 수식이 업스나 피가 끌고 정성이 끌는 그 설법에는 滿堂이 그저 감격햇지요. 연설내용도 무슨 세계대세니 멧천만동포니 하는 추상적 어구사용보다 적절하고도 알기 쉬운 예를 끄으려다가 말슴한단말이지.
本社 主幹- 조곰인들 지금 기억 못하겟서요. 그때 연설내용을-
車相瓚- 알지 30년 전 일이지만 어덧케도 깁히 인상을 밧엇든지 지금도 분명해요. 이런 이약이엇지요. 「여러분아 낙심말나」하는 제목인데 참새가 구렁이 허리우에 잘못 올나 안젓더래도 와락 나라만 가면 괜찬은데 그 참새가 이제는 큰일낫구나 큰일낫구나 하는 식으로 즐거겁을 집어먹으면 끗끗 내 X혀먹고 만다는 이런 비유를 써가며 퍽 교묘한 논리로 말하지요. 그릭고 또 그 어룬은 연설끗헤가면 「心舟歌」라는 「간다 간다 나는 간다」 운운하는 저 혼자 지은 노래를 연단에서 불느고는 내려오지요. 그때 그것이 말하자면 정당연설로써 大韓協會가<30> 주최햇지요. 그 뒤 上海잇는 趙琬九와 함 安昌浩를 만나려 간 일이 잇지. 가운데 茶坊谷 연동 예배당 목사 따님 김항라 집에 유숙하고 게시다기에 용건은 그때 畿湖學會니 湖南學會니 하고 학회가 불길가치 이러날 지음에 나도 發起人이 되어 우리 江原道 유학생을 중심으로 關東學會를 조직하고 學會主催로 연설회를 개최하려 島山을 연사로 청하러 갓더니 연설하여 주고 그리고는 주머니에서 돈을 30원을 끄내어 기부하여 주겟지 이러케 고마운 양반이 업섯서. 그러든 분을 이번 출감 후에 가서 맛나니 아조 늙엇겟지요. 녯날 모습이 업더구만. 圓覺寺에서 연설하든 그 모습이.
宋奉瑀(批判社 主幹)- 나는 몃달 전인가 中央호텔에 동무들과 갓다가 먼 발충에 안저 게신 것을 그저 구경만하고 왓서.
金東煥- 인사도 업시
宋- 응, 사람이 엇더케 만흔지 인사할 틈이나 잇던가. 그래서 10리 밧게서 구경만 하고 왓는데 골격이 생김샘김이 강직한 사람이겟구나 하는 늣김은 밧어지는데만은 별로 큰 사람이란 인상은 빗어지지 안테나.
柳光烈(M新聞 編輯局長)- 그럴가. 나는 퍽- 녯날에 맛나 뵈엇지. 東亞日報 기자로서 上海로 갓슬 때에 한 30분간 동안 그 분이 심중에 잇는 經倫을 터러놋는 말슴을 드른 그 좌석이 初會見이엇는데 그 때 初印象은 퍽이나 「至誠의 人」이구나 하는 늣김이 나데.
李瑞求(前, 新聞社會部長)- 나는 전번에 花月食堂에 가니 春園과 李肯鍾 등 四五人이 웬 노인 한 분을 중심으로 하고 점심을 자시고 잇겟지. 나는 그 겻테- 불에 가 안저 春園가튼 선비가 무슨 誤入을 하느라고 저런 금점꾼 노인과 교제를 시작하는고 하고 심중에 혼자 생각하고 잇는 판에 李光洙가 달려와서  인사하라기 인사햇더니 그 분이 安昌浩엇서. 인사하기 전 내 생각에는 시골서 돈양 가진 양반으로 금점하는 그런 분으로 보엿단 말이야.
金東煥- 大田서 나오신지 얼마 안된 철이기에 日光 못 본 거문 얼골에서 그런 인상을 밧엇든게지. 그러나 금전꾼은 과하네 그려. 그러면 宋鎭禹의 인상은
柳光烈- 宋鎭禹는 그가 스물삼사나 되엇을가 할 때에 東亞日報로 인터뷰-하려 차저간 일이 잇지. 나는 滿州日報 기자 자격으로. 그랫더니 지금가치 老成한<31> 풍미도 업고 팔팔하지도 안코, 그저 공부하는 선비가튼 인상을 주더구만. 오히려 그 자리에서 인상깁게 맛난 이는 張德秀야. 그 전에 그가 東京서 呂運亨이 허고 갓치 갓다가 나와서 신문사를 하나 만든다기에 이 靑年政客을 願一見之하려든 심리로 그가 留한다는 南大門밧 巴城館 호텔로 차자갓드니 외출하고 못 맛낫단 말이야. 그래서 이 東亞日報 편집실에서 어느 친구더러 張德秀를 어느 방에 가면 맛날 수 잇겟느냐고 무르니까 그 친구가 여럿이 쭉 둘너 안즌 자리 속에 수염이 턱이고 볼에 가득난 한 분을 손까질하며 「저 분이 張德秀야」 하기에 깜작 놀낫지. 내 생각에는 위풍당당한 장부의 態가 안나면 俊銳 천리마와 가튼 간얄핀 어룬으로 상상햇더니 黑頭蓬蓬에 수염텁석이에...
李瑞求- 놀랏든가.
柳光烈- 정말 놀낫네. 그런데 그 엽헤 새파란 옥색 두루막이를 입은 색시가튼 眉目秀麗한 남자가 잇겟지. 누군가 햇더니 그가 何夢 李相協이 엇서. 그는 十六七부터 소설 쓰고 美文 쓰고 하여 才子의 일홈을 듯던 사람이지만 그때 인상도 天眞漫滿하고 無邪氣한 사람으로 보엿네.
李瑞求- 張德秀는 「오샤레」를 몰낫네. 우리들 사회부 기자가 모여 온갖 첨단어를 써가며 論談風發 할 에 그 겻헤 와서 부러운 듯 한참 듯다가 시대 첨단어와 「오샤레」가 나오면 「그게 무슨 소리냐」고 진정으로 알고 십허 뭇는단 말이야. 東京 銀座通은 한번도 지나본 것 갓지안는 털털한 분이야.
金東煥- 나도 중학생 때에 보앗는데 연설은 잘 하데나.
李瑞求- 연설할 때에도 걸작이지. 崔南善이 모양으로 土産장려한다고 고무經濟靴를 신고 와서는 연단에 올나설 때에는 일부러 고무신을 벗고 맨발로 올나선단 말이야. 이 경건하고도 천진스러운 자태에 청중들은 그만 깔깔 웃스며 박수하지. 군중심리를 용하게 붓잡는 방법이야.
宋奉瑀- 그 때 當節 張德秀도 웬간햇지만 연설에는 朴一秉을 못따랏지. 朴를 붓잡어다가 光化門通 네거리 세워노코 연설 한바탕 식혓더면 그는 분명 천하군중을 끌케할 辯才를 가젓섯건만.
李瑞求- 선동연설에는 10년 전에 朴一秉이 잇고 10년 후 오늘에 呂運亨이 잇다하리만치 一當百들이지. 다만 朴一秉이는 아는 것이 쩔너서 밤낫하는 소리가 그<32> 소리가 그 소리 뿐인 欠点이 잇기는 햇스나.
金東煥- 宋鎭禹 인상을 좀 더 분명히--
宋奉瑀- 나도 사회운동하든 초기인 넷날에 맛난 적 잇는데 그 때는 촌부 態가 잇섯서, 기름끼도 돌지안코.
李瑞求- 암! 지금이야 만히 닥겻지. 15년 전에야 선비나 샌님이랄가.
金東煥- 方應謨의 初印象은.
車相瓚- 趙炳玉이 잇슬 때에 朝鮮日報에 가서 나는 처음 맛낫는데 100원인가 얼마를 가젓다는 큰 富者로는 보이지 안엇서. 아조 검소하게 차렷스니까.
李瑞求- 나는 朝鮮호텔에서 열닌 朝鮮日報 招待적에 보앗는데 金鑛하여 100만원중 50만원을 뚝잘나 新聞事業에 던젓다는 큰 분이란 생각이 들며 깁흔 印象이 밧어지데나.
宋奉瑀- 응 나도 그랫서. 朝鮮日報 東亞日報가 뿔이 빠지게 한바탕 싸홈하고난 뒤끗에 처음 차저 갓지. 얼골이 鐵血色인 것이 假飾업는 人物로 보이데. 그러고 저분이 50원을 내던젓나 하면 엇전지 敬意를 表하고 십데나.
柳光烈- 나는 七八年前 堅志洞 長春旅館에서 定州 親舊 紹介로 맛낫는데 대단히 단단한 양반이구나 햇지. 그 뒤 朝鮮體育會에서 祝辭하는 마당이 잇섯는데 처음 尹致昊가 하고 그 다음 내가 하고 그 다음 方應謨가 하고 뒤이어 宋鎭禹가 한 일이 잇섯지. 늘 듯기에 方과 宋은 席次다툼을 한다 하기에 엇던가 햇더니 그때에는 그런 빗치업고 퍽으나 謙遜한 분 갓데나.
金東煥- 呂運亨은
柳光烈- 亦是 上海갓슬 적에 맛낫는데 살이 둥둥찌고 滿身 熱血이 솟는 軒軒丈夫엇서. 점심을 함께 먹는데 水滸誌에 나오는 豪傑처럼 소갈비떼를 그양쥐고 훌터자시는 품이라든지 말소리 우럭우럭하고 모자도 안쓰고 다리를 훨신 거더 저친 바지 짜른 洋服을 입고 굵은 몽동이 집고 훨-훨- 활개치며 다니는 모양이 「當代 豪俠男兒 그대로구나」하는 늣김을 밧엇네. 자넨 안 그러튼가.
李瑞求- 웨 아니래. 第一 조흔이야. 젠체 안하고 버티지 안코. 더구나 그 사람 눈은 조선사람 중 第一가는 눈이야. 어디로 봐도 사나히지.
宋奉瑀- 나는 아직 인사를 못햇네만은 나는 젠줄 알고 저도 낸줄 알기야 알지. 人物로는 조테. 소탈하고<33> 자만성 업고 언어동작 등 모든 사람된 품이 여러 名을 거느리게 생겻데나.
車相瓚- 나는 한 30년전 그가 上海로 가기전 漢文선비인 呂荷汀宅에서 맛나는데 그때도 씩씩하고 풋뽈 잘하는 運動客이더구만.
金東煥- 그때도 演說을 잘 햇든가요.
車相瓚- 그때는 말을 그러케 잘하지는 못햇지. 그러나 靑年層人物 가운데는 다 그 將來를 囑目햇섯지.
金東煥- 何夢 李相協은 엇더튼가요.
柳光烈- 내가 何夢을 처음 맛나기는 한 20년전될거야. 水標橋다리 光文會집에 그 崔南善 李光洙 安在鴻 權悳奎 等 當代 論客才士가 늘 모여서 史談도 주고밧고 바둑 장긔로 消日도 하던 철에 하로는 光文會을 간즉 누구와 누구던지 일홈은 이젓스나 둘이 바둑을 두는데 겻헤서 샛파란 少年선비가 안저 훈수를 한단 말이야. 그 훈수가 잘하는 훈수가 못되고 잘 못하는 훈수인 모양으로 그 훈수를 밧다가 바둑한판을 덜커덕 젓단 말이야. 그때 그분이 少年선비를 보고 하는 말이 「이 사람 자네는 何夢이 아니라 眞夢일세」한단 말이야. 그래서 그분이 何夢인줄 아럿는데 엇잿든 一見에 「才勝於德」인줄 알엇지.
宋奉瑀-  그러치. 아담한 선비엇지. 녯날 風貌는
李瑞求- 나는 東亞日報 記者試驗 보려고 그분 압에 달려갓는데 試驗條件이란 아조 꼭어러운 것만 가리어 뭇겟지. 性格이 매서운 이로 보엿서 그때 땀뺏네.
車相瓚- 社會客이 된 뒤에도 그 性格이 쌀쌀하고 매서운 一面이 잇지만 學生철에도 그랫지. 그때 何夢도 普成中學에 나도 普成中學에 다녓는데 홀쪽한 얼골 간얄핀 몸 쏘는 눈. 이래서 別名을 캣(고양이)이라고 불넛지. 우리는 別名을 불니어도 허허 웃고 말지만 이 사람은 毒質이어서 제 別名불는다고 쪼처와서 발길로 차서 꼭 復讎하고야 말앗다네. 엇잿든 中學生때는 紅顔美少年에 工夫잘하는 才童이엇지.
金東煥- 인제 신문사축은 그만치 훌트고 尹致昊는 엇든가.
柳光烈- 점잔은 선비란 印象을 밧어지데. 李商在 當節 靑年會館에서 처음 맛낫는데...
宋奉瑀- 尹致昊는 民衆의 批判을 밧을 만한 자리에 서 본적이 업서 그분에게 얼마나한 氣骨이 잇는지는 모르겟스나 外觀으로는 넘어 靜的이란 印象을 <34> 주데나.
車相瓚- 곱게 자라는 이지. 그리고 年年歲歲 늘푸른 滿年靑가치 70客이건만 아직도 靑少年갓데나.
李瑞求- 한가지 缺点은 거를 때에 구두에 몬지 올너 안지면 서서 툭툭 터는 것이 무텁텁한 丈夫답지 못한 것 갓데 그려.
金東煥- 그런가. 자아 이제는 누구누구 指名 아니할 터이니 宗敎界, 敎育界, 財界의 여러 人物을 생각나는대로 初印象을 말슴하여 주세요. 一流의 그 險口를 석거서
宋奉瑀- 曹晩植 이약이나 할가. 勞働總同盟때에 平壤에 우리들이 와-쓰러갓더니 浮碧樓아래 「長春館」이란 料理店에 우리를 招請하여노코 平壤 濟濟名士가 만히 모혀서 話題가 民族主義와 社會主義의 離合에 關한 討議를 하는데 曹晩植은 남이 하는 말은 일일이 注意하여 적으면서 저는 結局 한마디도 말을 끄내지안코 만단말이야. 그때 이 분은 퍽으나 怜悧한 분이구나 하는 생각을 가젓지. 엇잿든 眞實한 사람이란 印象을 주지. 요지간은 살살- 아무 일도 들고메고 나서지 안치만-
車相瓚- 曹晩植이는 꼭 안될 일만 하자고 덤벼들지. 한동안 그 집에 가보면 세 가지 看板을 부첫는데 한나 되지 안을 일만 골나 부첫지. 曰 民立大學期成會 曰 禁酒斷煙實行會 曰 또 무에무에- 어듸애 當初에 民立大學이란 될 것이든가. 人生 酒草가 업고 60平生을 엇더케 살아갈 것이든가. 이 양반은 이러케 꼭 안될짓만 가리어가며 하자고 덤벼들지. 딱한 양반이야. 요지간도 정강이까지 올너오는 「朝鮮후록코-트」 周衣를 입고 다니는지요.
宋奉瑀- 한동안 戀愛事件의 소문이 들니데나. 모란봉 근처 어느 례배당 단닐 때 난 말이라고- 그러나 그 고지식한 분이 20세기식 戀愛인들 할 勇氣잇슬가.
李瑞求- 中傷이겟지. 엄두도 못낼 분이야.
柳光烈- 나는 東亞日報 48인의 控訴不受理問題가 요란이 이러나든 날 裁判所에서 許憲이를 처음 맛낫는데 世上에서는 그러케 떠들엇지만 그 때 내가 밧은 印象은 퍽으나 「溫厚한 紳士구나」햇서. 이 初印象은 지금도 한모양이야.
李瑞求- 許憲이는 「控訴不受理」로 일홈낫지. 高等法院에서 地方法院에 己末事件을 보내는데 그 公文 속에 「送致ス」하는 두 글자가 업다고 이것은 公文이  바람에 날나왓슬 수 업슨즉 地方法院에서 이 事件을 裁判할 수 업다.<35> 그러니 被告들을 모다 釋放하라 하는 論旨엇지. 지금 드르면 오직 單純하고 우수운가! 아무튼 이 不受理로 一躍 名辯護士가되고 普成專門學校校長 東亞日報監査役이 되고 新幹會長이 되고 辯護士會長이 되고 運이 마구 튼 辛運兒엿서.
車相瓚- 辯護士 말이 낫스니 말이지 金炳魯는 熱誠이 잇서. 내가 普專法科에 다닐때 그가 그때 講師로 時間을 보앗는데 下學鐘이 친 지 한참 되도록 한 句라도 더 알려 줄려고 입가에 춤을 티티 티우면서 講義하는 것을 보면 名講士라고는 못해도 熱心스러운 講師란 늣김을 주데. 그 뒤 社會客이 되면서도 新幹會를 마트면 거기 熱誠, 法廷에 나서면 거기 熱誠, 左右間 誠力잇는 분이야.
柳光烈- 누구누구해도 法廷에서 하는 辯論에는 가장 條理잇는 말을 하는 이가 金炳魯와 辛泰嶽일걸.
宋奉瑀- 李仁이도 사람은 熱이 잇는데 남이 보기엔 구렁이 담넘어가듯 너무 모든 일을 쉽게 보고 쉽게  處理하는 것갓데.
柳光烈- 每事에 그런 늣김을 주는 弊가 잇지. 그러나 大部分은 그게 術策이 아닐가.
李瑞求- 암만봐도 萬年 「道士」는 權東鎭이야.
柳光烈- 응 생각나는 일이 잇서. 무슨 事件으로든가 京城監獄에서 징역하다가 滿期되어서 出獄하는데 애오개 큰거리로 幅이 넓은 수레박휘만한 녯날 삿갓을 쓰고 八字거름을 거르며 서울로 向해 드러오는 權東鎭을 보앗는데 아조 泰然自著하단 말이야. 剛直한 어룬이야. 또 팔십 노인이면서도 지금도 말하는 것을 드르면 우리들 靑年의 呼吸을 쉬고 希望을 갓고 朝聞道面夕死라도 可也라는 式으로 活動하시는데는 敬意를 表하여지데.
宋奉瑀- 剛直은 하면서도 天下大勢를 채 못살피는 点이 잇지 안는가. 朝鮮日報社長을 겨우 두 시간하고 만 일이라든지.
金東煥- 엇든 險口가 宋鎭禹는 우둔하고 許憲은 빈 데 잇고 呂運亨은 東西南北 네바름에 다 춤을 추고 李光洙는 書生이고 安在鴻은 村夫子고-하고 집어 세우는 것을 보앗는데 이 말에 妥當性이 좀 잇는가요.
李瑞求- 잇다 뿐인가. 安在鴻은 分明 서울사람에게 속아넘어갈듯한 愚直한 一面이 잇지.
車東瓚- 글은 金明植으로 더부러 當代最高奉의 論客이야.<36>
宋奉瑀- 洪命熹의 文章은 가물에 콩나듯 몃해에 한 章 한 句씩 나와서 果然 當代 稀文章이라 하겟스나 「林巨正傳」과만 싸홈말고 論客으로 나왓스면 조켓데.
李瑞求- 韓龍雲이도 이제는 小說家로만 얼골을 내미데. 洪命熹나 韓龍雲이나 다 格에 맛지안는 誤入들을 하고 안젓지.
柳光烈- 그래도 韓龍雲은 처음 보기에 교만한 것갓지만 무게잇네. 그리고 申興雨는 假飾이란 印象을 주기 쉽다지만 나 보기에는 퍽 진실한 분으로 보여지데. 衣服이 外飾은 陽明한 亞米利加 風때문에 아마 그러켓지.
李瑞求- 申興雨 연설하는 걸 드러도 저는 진작 정성과 열심히 하는 것인데, 그만 聽衆에게는 저게 모다정말 心臟에서 울어나오는 소리 아니거니하는 늣김을 주는 弊가 잇서. 첫재 50十客이 빨간넥타이라는 것이 말이 아니야.
宋奉瑀- 빨간 넥타이 뿐인가. 옥색두루막이 하여입고 에나멜구두 신고 종로 네거리 다니는 걸 보면 암만 생각해도 過하데나.
車相瓚- 申氏 말이 낫스니 말이지만 申錫雨는 아랫입술이 쑥 나온 것이 첫 印象에는 심술잇는 분이다 하는 늣김을 주데.
宋奉瑀- 심술뿐인가. 뱃심조코 버티는 힘 잇서 보여서 엇든 境遇에든지 輕視못할 누르는 힘을 相對方에게 던저주지.
柳光烈- 그러치. 심술구레기요 만만하게 머리숙이지 안는 분으로 印象을 주지. 또 實際가 그러니까.
李瑞求- 그러나 多情한 人情味 잇는 분으로서 지금 그 집 舍廊채에 모히는 수십 명 어러운 사람들 사정을 잘 보아준다데. 말이 쉽지 人情이 白紙張가튼 이런 철에 이러하기 오직한가.
宋奉瑀- 再擧할 때 쓰려고 養ｘ의 意味도 百分一쯤 섯겻겟지그려. 이건 딴말이지만 사람은 金性洙가 상양한 風味가 잇데나.
柳光烈- 그러치. 多情하지. 그 應待하는 품이.
車相瓚- 全羅道풍이지. 좀 多情한가 덜.
李瑞求- 全羅道사람이라고 다 多情하든가. 그 동생 金季洙를 보라고 그러케 무뚝뚝한 사람은 또 업지.
金東煥- 兪鎭泰, 徐廷禧, 金苦水, 元世勳는 엇든가.
宋奉瑀- 徐廷禧 金元의 初印象은 百戰老將이란 늣김을 주데.<37>
車相瓚- 兪鎭泰도 다그러치. 퍽으나 深謀잇는 사람으로 보여지데.
柳光烈- 韓圭高이를 업고 일한 것을 보면 兪鎭泰는 確實히 策謀잘하는 老人이야.
金東煥- 앗불사. 이약이 하다가보니 女流名士들을 노첫구만. 어듸 朴仁德이부터 첫 印象을 말해주게나.
宋奉瑀- 結局 美人타령부터 하여야 할 터이니 차라리 그만두는 게 엇든가
李瑞求- 그러치 女子批評하기 좀 까다로운가 一切그만두지. 뒤에 말성잇기도 쉬운즉.
金東煥- 다덜 弱卒이군. 遠而敬之하는양이. 그럼 學校長축으로 너머갈까요, 延專副校長 兪億兼이는.
李瑞求- 그 때 무슨 事件이 社會에 잇서든지 잘 記憶이 나지안치만 左右間 敎育家의 談을 드러낼 일이 잇서서 延專에 兪億兼이를 차저간 적 잇는데 사람은 「無事太平」한 분가치 보이더군. 그 뒤 數次 接觸하는 사이에 늘 늣기는 것은 初印象과 別로 다르지 안어. 그 분이 兪吉濬선생의 아드님이 아니고 또 도라가옵신 純宗께서와 同婿가  아니엇더라면 오늘이 잇섯슬가 하고 생각되데나.
柳光烈- 善良한 분이다하면서도 「드는 칼이」 아니구나하는 말하자면 亂世의 일꾼이 아니구나하는 늣김을 주지. 平和之世의 일꾼이지요.
車相瓚- 나는 세부란쓰校長 吳兢善의 初印象 이약이나 할가. 그는 진실이 예수밋는 이갓지도 안코 그러냐하면 天下事에 寢食을 잇는 社會客갓지도 안코 또 醫師라면서 醫師갓지도 안코 내 觀察이 엇던가.
宋奉瑀- 그럴듯하구만. 西洋갓다왓스나 洋風냄새도 덜하고 그러타고 純東洋味도 적고...
金東煥- 普專校長 金用茂는.
宋奉瑀- 아직 짜노키전 비단실 갓지. 말하자면 실은 비단실인데 아직 完成되지 안은 늣김을 주데나.
李瑞求- 金用茂야 辯護士지 어듸 敎育家인가. 數次 맛나봐도 敎育家臭가 업데나.
金東煥- 梨花專門의 金活蘭은.
柳光烈- 博職한 분이드군.
李瑞求- 農學博士고-
宋奉瑀- 初印象은 輕薄지는 안데.
李瑞求- 40當年에 아직까지 艶聞이 아니들니는 것이 敎育者로써 얼마나 人格이 高潔한가함을 알게 하나. 한편 한 個의 女性으로 바라볼 때 多少 寂寞도 하이.<38>
金東煥- 崔奎東, 玄相允은 엇던가.
宋奉瑀- 崔奎東은 어듸로 보던지 敎育者다. 人格이 잇서 또 처음 맛나나 열 번 맛나나 그 眞情이 그대로 소사 나와서 참으로 저절로 머리가 숙여지데.
李瑞求- 점잔코 眞實로 半島敎育界를 생각하는, 눈물이 잇는 분으로 보여지데.
柳光烈- 才操도 數學으로 朝鮮三天才의 한 분이엇대. 才德이 兼備하기는 이 분에게서 처음 찻는 일이야.
車相瓚- 玄相允도 경박하지 안코 준수하고 부지런하여 조흔 敎育者구나하는 늣김을 주지. 그와 나는 가튼 普成專門의-同窓인데 나는 1회고 그는 3회던지 4회던지 됏지만 學生時代부터 퍽으나 勤勉하고 渟實하엿지. 말도 잘하고.
宋奉瑀- 玄相允도 雄辯家로 치나.
李瑞求- 雄辯家는 아니나 말하는 風이 眞實답고 잘하데나.
金東煥- 자, 이제는 風雲客들은 말고 財界로 올마서 朴榮喆, 韓相龍은 엇던가.
李瑞求- 朴榮喆는 코키리 相이더구만. 그 巨軀에 늘 식식하며 泰然하게 안즌 것이 무게가 잇데. 또 집 치장한 것이라든지 應接室에 名畵를 건 것이라든지 庭園에 水石을 配布한 것이라든지 이 분은 돈만 아는 것이 아니라 藝術을 能히 理解하는 분이야.
車相煥- 또 趣味가 別다르지. 花洞집 戶數도 144번지오 자가용 자동차번호도 144오 전화도 光化門 144로 몰아 모엿단 말이지.
金東煥- 그 밧게 李容汶, 閔泳徽, 閔大植, 林宗相, 崔昌學, 金基德, 朴興植 等 當代 諸當豪의 初印象 이약이를 하여주세요.
李瑞求- 여보게 富者 이약이는 그만두세. 우리들이 모다 가난방인지라 조케 말하면 아첨하는 듯도 하고 또 우리는 言論界人들이라 財界와 因緣이 먼 터에 맛날 機會도 別로 업섯스니 그만두세나.
諸氏- 모다 同感.
金東煥- 그럼 百萬長者의 印象은 다음 機會로 미루기로 하지요.<39>

社會葬하여줄 人物

金東煥- 李商在 모양으로 앞으로 우리 社會에서 社會葬하여 줄만한 人物이 누구누구 일까오.
宋奉瑀- 社會葬이라하면 社會民衆의 總*를 묶어 삼가 哀悼한다는 것인데 過去나 오늘까지의 지내온 經路를 바라보면 社會葬하여 줄만한 人物이 全혀 없다고 보네. 한 사람도 없네. 社會葬밖겟거든 그 가진 돈과 精誠을 더욱더욱 빛있게 쓰고서 누구나 그 사람이면 無條件하고 喪擧 뒤에 서줄만한 人物이 된 뒤에야 社會葬問題를 비로소 끄내야 옳을 것 아닌가. 그런데 오늘까지의 現在로 보아야 그런 人物이 어디 눈에 띠우나.
李瑞求- 나도 反對네. 앞으로는 社會葬이란 것은 全然 廢止할 바야. 나는 斷然 反對이네. 할라거던 學校長이면 學校葬으로 新聞社長이면 新聞社葬으로 하는 등 무슨무슨 團體葬으로 하는 것은 無妨할 줄 아네만 全社會 各層을 綱羅한 것이란 있을 수 없는 것이네.
車相瓚- 나도 그 말에 贊成이네.
柳光烈- 나도 同一意見이네.

誤報事件에 對한 苦心談

金東煥- 신문사나 잡지사에 오래 계신이만치 가끔 가다가 記事를 잘못 썼다거나 하야 被害者로부터 몽둥이로 얻어마즌 일이 彼此에 많지 않습니까, 어디 彼此에 그 괴롭던 땀빼던 말슴이나 하여주세요.
李瑞求- 新聞記者 十數年에 誤報 또는 옳은 말을 옳게 썼다는 罪로 外間으로부터 욕을 當한 적이 수두룩하였지만 그중에도 꼭 두 가지가 지금 回想하기에 찬땀이 흘렀네. 첫재는 내가 東亞日報에 있을 때<40> 子爵 李根澤의 동생 리근호 아들을 사이에 두고 방과부집과 리씨집과 사이에 서로 자기 아이라는 係爭事件이 일어났는데 나는 그 記事를 쓰는 한편 그 아들되는 이를 찾어가서 新聞에 좋게 내어줄터이니 寫眞을 빌려달라하여 안 주자는 사진을 가까스로 理解시켜 가져다가 記事 복판에다가 그 寫眞속 사람을 가운데 두고 兩家에서 서고 팔을 쥐어 당기는 모양의 漫畵를 내었더니 하로는 비가 줄줄 오는날이야, 編輯室에 앉었다가 無心코 밖을 내어다보니 리근호 아들이 몸을 굽히고 드러오는 것이 두 눈에선 殺氣가 일고 가슴에는 短刀를 품고 들어온단 말이야, 가슴이 선듯하겠지. 그래서 얼른 나는 工場으로 몰래숨어 들어갔지. 그랬더니 이 사람이 編輯局에 들어와서 나를 찾다가 없으니까 編輯局長이던 李相協을 붓잡고 「李瑞求를 내어놓으라고 그 놈을 죽이고 가겠다고」 펄펄 뛰데나. 참 혼이 났다네. 그 날 저녁에야 겨우 工場에서 解放되어 몰래 집에 와 잤다네.
金東煥- 그리고 또 한 가지란 무엔가.
李瑞求- 이것은 每日申報 社會部長때 이야기인데, 하로는 갈돕회 苦學生 십여명이 우- 몰려왔단 말이야. 무슨 記事인가 잘못되었다고 남이 써온 記事를 내가 編輯한 것인데, 左右間 應接室로 내려가니 모다 學生諸君이 殺氣騰騰하단 말이야. 그 때에 내가 생각한 것은 갈톱會는 元來 鄭栢이와 崔鉉 등이 創立할 때에 나도 함께 委員되어 奔走하던 생각이 난단 말이지. 그래서 저쪽 질문을 받기 前 門을 쫙 열어제치면서 「여러분은 苦學生 갈톱회란 것이 어떻게 하여 된 줄을 하오」하고 創立草草 나도 함께 盡力하여 만드든 全部이야기를 내리하면서 「이렇게 애쓰든 내가 여러분일을 惡意로 썼을 리가 있겠요. 잘 訂正하여 드릴 터이니 가시오」 한 즉 여러 사람의 얼굴빛에서 漸漸 諒解하는 빛이 흐르며 그 날 일이 무사하게 되었었지요.
이 밖에도 수십 명에게 혼난 일이야 몇 번 있었지.
宋奉瑀- 많지 많어. 彼此에 다 겪는 일이니 나도 한마디할까. 이런 일이 있었어. 數三年前일인데- 몸도 因하고 心火도 나기에 信川溫泉에 가서 몇일 드러 누었는데 社로부터 電報가 왔단 말이야. 記事까닭에 告訴하겠다는 사람이 있으니 곧 올라와서 處理해달라 함이지, 하도 여러 번 電報가 오기에 큼직한 일이 터젔구나 하고 어슬렁어슬렁 서울 와보니 어떤 사람이<41> 칼을 품고 나를 여러 번 찾어 왔더라 하겠지. 어디 보자 하고 있는데 하로는 새벽 네시쯤 해서 누가 와서 나 자는 방문을 요란스럽게 흔들단 말이지. 놀라서 자던 잠을 깨서 문을 열어주었더니 그야말로 殺氣가 가득 찬 무시무시한 한 남자가 뛰어들어 오면서 「이  놈 봉우야 네가 내 칼을 받겠니, 告訴狀을 받겠니.」하면서 三尺 비수를 방바닥에 탁 꽂는단 말이지. 나는 속으로 「아따 그 놈 연극되게 하는 놈이로군.」하기는 하면서도 잘못 달래다가는 큰 變이 날 것 같겠지.
柳光烈- 암- 잘못 달래면 야단나기 쉽지. 天道敎 朴來源이도 옷웁게 알다가 刺殺당하지 않었나.
車相瓚- 그러나 犬養前首相때 보아도 凶器가지고온 사람이 대번에 찔러야하지. 그렇지 않고 이야기를 먼저 끄내놓으면 질르지 못하네. 저도 남 죽이면 殺人罪에 걸릴 判斷이 생기니까 大膽해 못지거던.
宋奉瑀- 그 말이 옳은데 이 년석 보지. 다시 칼을 턱 집더니 그제는 내 가슴을 탁 찌르려고 번개같이 칼잡은 팔을 내 가슴에 확- 몰라치겠지. 그 순간 나는 몸을 홱 피하여 그 놈의 가슴을 탁 안었던니 칼은 벽에 가서 탁 꽂히겠지. 이 사람들아, 지금은 웃고 이야기 하네만은 그 때는 참으로 아슬아슬하데.
그때에야 나는 정말 危機가 온듯 정신이 번적 차려지겠지. 그래서 별에 벌 말을 다하여 마음이 눅으러지게 하는 판인데, 이럭저럭 날이 휘- 밝으니 朴日馨이고 李甲基고 여러 社員들이 몰려온단 말이야. 그래서 좌우간 그를 돌려보냈네. 그 뒤 나는 꼭 告訴당하는 줄만 알고 檢事局에서 呼出狀이 오기를 기다리고 앉었는데 아무 소식이 없겠지. 한참 뒤에 하로는 안동네거리로 올라가는데 선술집 부근에 누가
「이 놈 봉우야」
하고 불르겠지. 돌려다보니 그 작자가 술이 취하여 高聲大呼한단 말이네. 그런면서 술 한 잔 먹자고 하기에 함께 그 선술집에 드러가 7,8杯하고 나종에는 웃고 갈러젔는데 지금은 서로 인사하고 지내는 사이가 되었다네.
車相瓚- 轉禍爲福이로구만. 나도 開闢社 60년동안에 檢事局에 告訴當하기를 13,4차하였는데 告訴를 當하면 檢事局에 몇번 불려가고 罰金 몇십원할 覺悟를 하면<42>  괜찮은데 이러한 告訴도 아니하고 暴力으로 制裁한다고 넘비는 데는 큰 탈이지요. 한번은 「別乾坤」에다가 「賣藥商」을 잘못 건드렸다하여 賣藥商패가 15,6명 - 와 - 몰려와겠지. 應接室에서 만났더니 십여 명이 제가끔 거리에서 藥팔 때 짓거리듯 한참 떠든단 말이지. 잠잣고 듣다가 나도 調査하여 보겠으니 來日 다시 오라고 했더니 그 이튼날은 7,8명 왔겠지. 또 한참 떠드는 이야기를 다 듣고 나서 또 來日오라고 했더니 이튼날은 3,4명이 왔겠지. 元來 무슨 團에서 決議하여 온 것이 아니고 저이끼리 모아온 것은 대개 이렇게 無秩序하고 持久力이 없거던. 한 4,5일 끌었더니 나종에는 氣盡했는지 좋도록 訂正하여 달라고 하고 가겠지요. 처음 氣勢같애서는 社員 몇 명의 갈비때나 분질를 듯 하였지만 그 눈치를 채리고 持久戰을 쓴 까닭에 요행 모면했지요.
柳光烈- 나도 東亞日報때 勞働會記事까닭에 사구라몽둥이에 되게 얻어마졌지. 웬 사람이 무시로 와서 딱 따린단 말이지. 記事는 두 團體 싸우는 것을 「야료」 라고 썼다고 우리는 民衆을 爲하여 한 일인데 「야료」라니 무슨 말이냐 하고서.
李瑞求- 東京에서는 아조 暴力團이 있어. 이런 일이 있으면 職業的 壯漢이 둘 셋이 찾어가서 「팔을 가지러왔노라」
하며 칼을 冊床우에 턱 내놓는다는구만, 記事를 쓴 것이 사람의 잘못이 아니고 순전히 붓을 잡고 쓴 팔의 罪에 있다나. 그래서 그 팔을 달라고 한다는구면.
金東煥- 그럼 어떻게 하는고.
李瑞求- 돈 천원 주어야 물러가지. 캥 檢擧있기 전에는 宏壯히 跋扈하였지요. 모던 日本社長 馬海松이한테도 한 번 暴力團이 와서 쩔쩔맨 일이 있었다데. 아무튼 朝鮮서도 暴力團에게 걸리운 新聞社長도 많고 雜誌社長도 무던히 많지. 아마 어느 社長치고 이 逢變 안 본 사람이 없을거야. 그 중에도 東亞 宋鎭禹가 第一 많이 겪었을거야.

女流記者 人物評<43>

金東煥- 오늘까지 民間 新聞雜誌歷史가 있은 지 벌서 10년을 넘는데 그 동안 各 社마다 女流記者가 많이 活躍하였지요. 그 女流記者들 漫評을 하여주세요.
李瑞求- 宋桂月이 아까웠어. 開闢社때에 原稿 請하러 오는 것을 여러 번 만나보았는데 사람된 품이 淳實하고 才操있고 또 意志가 굳어서 앞으로 10년의 목숨만 빌려주었던들 우리 社會의 좋은 일꾼이 될 것을 참으로 아까운 이야.
宋奉瑀- 그 말이 오래 누구나 죽고 난 뒤에 哀痛한 생각이 더욱 나는 법이지만 宋桂月만은 정말로 아까웁데. 글쓴 것을 보아도 論旨가 分明하고 말하는 것을 보아도 條理가 있고 좀더 자라면 女流運動客으로 長成할 분이엇는데.
車相瓚- 가치 社에 있어 보았지만 頭腦明敏하고 덤비지 않은 좋은 記者었지. 그리고 글 잘 쓰기론 崔恩喜가 웃듬갈걸. 速筆이고 達이고.
李瑞求- 글뿐 아니고 말도 靑山流水지. 목소리가 좀 音樂的이 아니어서 缺이지만.
柳光烈- 재조는 金明淳일걸 그가 쓴 詩를보거나 短篇小說을 보거나.
李瑞求- 東京 있을 때부터 金明淳은 알았는데 그 때는 詩人 林蘆月이 하고 가치 살던 때지 여러 친구 있는 속에서도 사과를 벗겨선 맨 좋은 놈을 골라선 林蘆月이부터 주고 그리고 그 다음에 손님에 주는 놀라운 勇敢性을 가진 女性이었어.
車相瓚- 每申女記者 時代에는 有名한 紅茶事件까지 있고 어쨌던 女流藝術家가 되어 그런지 漂漂逸하고 있어요.
金東煥- 中世紀때 記者로 許英肅, 崔白月, 李賢卿, 許貞淑 等은 어떠했는고.
李瑞求- 許英肅이야 李光洙 마누라라고 누가 감히 批評인들 했나.
金東煥- 現役은 엇던가요. 朝鮮의 丁七星, 東亞의 黃信德, 朴承浩, 中央의 盧天命 等等 諸諸 記者는.
李瑞求- 女性批評은 거북하니 그만두세.
金東煥- 오랜 時間을 두고 말슴하여 주시서 感謝하였읍니다.
(오후 10시반 끝)<44>
<28-44>