잡지명	별건곤 제3호
발행일	1927년 01월 01일
기사제목	各新聞·社會部記者의 苦心談, 날마다 새로나는 소식은 엇더케 모흐나 (The Hardships of Newspaper and Society Reporters, How Do You Gather New News Every Day?)
필자	柳光烈, 柳志永, 朴八陽, 馬濠
기사형태	회고·수기 (Recollections and Essays)

The Hardships of Newspaper and Society Reporters, How Do You Gather New News Every Day?
						Yu Kwang-ryeol, Yu Ji-yeong, Park Pal-yang, Ma Ho

The Story of Suffering as a Newspaper Society Section Chief = The Story of the Insan Incident, Hardships Without Money =
Yu Kwang-ryeol

I received a request to write about some of the hardships I faced when I was the Society Section Chief, but I'm always wrestling between manuscripts and type, so I'm not in a position to write anything properly, but the urging is extreme and it's hard to refuse, so I'll write a few things.
In general, the Society Section Chief is a very important position within a newspaper company. The person who is on the front lines with other newspapers and commands the society section's charge into battle is the Society Section Chief, and therefore has a lot of contact with real society. It was four years ago when I first took the position of Society Section Chief at the Dong-A Ilbo. The people who were with the Society Section at that time were Chunseong No Ja-yeong, who is now a well-regarded young writer, Seol Eui-sik, the current Society Section Chief of the Dong-A, Lee Seo-gu, the current Society Section Chief of the Mae Shin, and Park Pal-yang, who until recently was the Local Section Chief of the Chosun Ilbo. For some reason, when I was at the Dong-A, I had many memorable experiences as a reporter in the field, but as a section chief, I didn't encounter any particularly significant events, and except for Park Pal-yang among the former reporters, everyone else was an old hand at field work, so I was barely able to manage the materials that they brought in <24> and spent about a year like that.

After that, I was also in the Society Section Chief position for a while when I went to the Chosun Ilbo. The people who were with the Society Section at that time were Kim Dan-ya, who is now drifting overseas, Jeong In-ik, who is now at Jung-oe, Kim Dal-jin, who is at the Mae Shin, Park Pal-yang, who is at Jung-oe, Lee Gil-yong, who is at the Chosun, and Seo Beom-seok, who is at Jung-oe. Everyone was a great figure, so what hardships could there be when I was just cleaning up after them at the end? If I had to pick one, it would be the time of the great flood in the summer two years ago. Most of the reporters were out in the field, and the flood was increasing every minute, so the manuscripts that had been made an hour ago were all unusable. The phone lines were on fire, and the phones were ringing like rain, all with news of the flood. The material that had to be reported to the readers every minute was all different from what was coming in on the phone every minute. As soon as the extra edition was set in type, another phone call would come. It feels like I stayed up all night for three or four days like that. At times like this, we decided to include two different reports that contradicted each other, unless the later report seemed more reliable than the earlier one. Not only at this time, but it was always difficult when phone communication with the field reporters was not good. Moreover, it was not easy for field reporters to go outside the city. It was a question of how to compete with each company with a small number of lines. After that, it was the time when I was at the Sidae Ilbo, which no longer exists, and I was struggling with the Insan Incident. At that time, my close friend Jo Gang-hui was the section chief and I was only in charge of editing, and the Sidae Company was in extreme financial difficulty. (Shortly after, the company went bankrupt due to financial difficulties.) At that time, each company was almost staging a paper demonstration movement with articles and photos, but the Sidae Company couldn't even afford a single copperplate material, so how could they publish photos? At this time, I had no choice but to list the Insan-related copperplates that I had used before to deceive the readers' eyes and decided to report the news first.

The day before the Insan Incident, I didn't know what would happen that day, so I flattered the branch managers and branch reporters who came up from the countryside to see the Insan scene, saying, "If you watch the scene as a newspaper reporter, you can do it better," and placed about 30 people along the route where the Insan procession passed. So, I placed one person each under the control of several police officers and told them to call the headquarters immediately if anything happened. I thought that I couldn't possibly beat the other companies that were spending a lot of money while using current expenses, so if there was an incident, I would publish it as an extra edition first and inform the citizens. Indeed, when the student protest incident occurred in Sueung-dong, the first phone call came and I tried to publish it as an extra edition, but it was spoiled by the intervention of the police authorities. However, I investigated the eight incidents that occurred from the entrance of the neighborhood to outside Dongdaemun without any errors on that day at that time, and reported it to the citizens about two hours earlier than other companies, taking the lead in informing the citizens of this incident. At that time, some of the branch reporters who came from the countryside performed hilarious comedies that broke their backs. When making a phone call,
"Hello. Is this OO Company? I am OOO. There is a crowd making a commotion somewhere now, but I don't know what happened <25>. I asked the police, but they said they didn't know, and I asked the crowd, but they said they didn't know either. But something must have happened."
There were people who made these kinds of phone calls. If you're going to make these kinds of phone calls, why would you need to stand there as a newspaper reporter! Even though I was busy, I couldn't help but laugh bitterly and said,
"Please investigate again quickly. Find out - those kinds of phone calls are useless."
At that time, the people who were with the Sidae Society Section were Ryu Wan-hui, who is currently imprisoned for a sedition case, Park Sun-byeong, who was arrested for a certain incident and died of illness, and Kim Dong-hwan, who is currently at Jung-oe. Even as I write these few words, my heart aches when I think of my friends who have had a life of separation and death.
Should I say a few more things? This is not about worrying about the outside, but about the inside, so it seems that all the brothers who are in the Society Section Chief position at each company have experienced it. Without exception, there are many people who are sanguine or nervous who work as newspaper reporters. Therefore, they are easily angered by even minor things, and they are easily angered when they have become sharp from seeing things that constantly stimulate their nerves in the field and then hear something disagreeable.
When the material that they have worked so hard to obtain seems to have little "news value" in the eyes of the Society Section Chief and is not published, they often get angry, so in this case, the section chief explains well and seeks understanding. Also, if there is something that is more advanced than other newspapers, if you expose the mistake in front of many people, they are likely to get angry, so if you say it quietly with the most regret possible, they will gladly accept the blame. Also, news material comes from the field and also comes by communication, but if you don't know it from the field, don't hand out such communication and say,
"Did you know about this incident?"
Instead of saying that you didn't know about it first, say,
"Please refer to this communication."
If you say that you knew about it, but please refer to it if there is anything to refer to, they will listen to the same words with great pleasure.
Also, when a field reporter goes out to investigate an incident, there are many things to worry about. If the place is dangerous, haven't they been injured? Also, isn't it difficult because the "pocket money" they have is small? I'm always worried, like I've sent a child to the beach, even though it might be rude. When I was at the Chosun Ilbo, I sent Seo Beom-seok to the flood-stricken Yongsan, and he had been out since morning, the day was getting dark, traffic was cut off, and the water was rising every minute, and it was a summer day, but it was even chilly. I doubted how much "pocket money" Seo had in his pocket. At that time, Seo happened to call, so I first received the news material and then asked at the end,
"Did you eat anything?"
He replied, "Yes, I have 10 jeon in my pocket now, so I skipped all day and bought and ate some bindaetteok (mung bean pancake)." <26>
My heart stung. I regretted that I should have let him take some money with him when he went out... Also, when I was at the Sidae, other companies were spending money without regard for expenses, but the Sidae couldn't even pay the field reporters' transportation expenses properly, so I sometimes emptied my "pocket money" for them to use in the field.

Five Pains of a Reporter's Life
Yu Ji-yeong

They say to write about the hardships of a newspaper reporter = society section reporter. Seeing as they're asking me, it seems they want to hear about the hardships of field reporters in the society section. But Chunpa, Sopa, and Cheongo, the three brothers, took turns asking me, and I couldn't refuse, so I agreed, but the days are passing by vaguely and time is running out, and I have so much to do for my own job that it's really hard to write even a few lines. Moreover, Chunpa-hyung asked me to write about an experience in which I used a plausible method to find out something plausible, because I've been a newspaper reporter for so long and have investigated many strange cases. But I suddenly couldn't decide which one to pick out of so many, and I couldn't even pick out one fact. Or, if I were to write in the society section style, it would be very long, so I'll try to find my old notebook when I have a chance and write it well in order. For now, I'll just write this much.
In Korea today, our job as a newspaper reporter is an occupation that many young people envy. If you go to a place where a hundred young people are gathered, about 50% of them will be envious to the point of drooling, and about 30% of them will be secretly envious without saying anything. About 10% of them are envious because they don't have a job and wish they could do something like that. So, it's true that 70% of a hundred people envy our job, excluding those who envy it because they don't have a job. <27> It's probably not an exaggeration to say that our job looks extremely good to others. But what job doesn't have its pains? Our job has all the pains that people with other jobs feel, but also has pains that others can't feel.

I. Temporal Pain
A. Others think that it's easy because you can go to work late around 10 AM and leave around 2 or 3 PM, but in reality, whether you're at the newspaper company, at home, at a playground, walking on the street, or having fun with friends, you can't let your guard down for a moment. You never know when you'll be ordered to run somewhere, or you're constantly looking for something big to happen.
B. In the morning, you go out and focus on the afternoon of the day before and the morning of that day, wondering if anything has happened in the world lately. You try to find out and hear about even one more thing than your colleagues at other newspaper companies, and when you come to the newspaper company, you have to judge the length of the article and write it within the deadline, even if your wrist makes the sound of a pipa (Korean lute).
Therefore, because we are always competing against the clock in terms of time, we don't even know that a full hour has passed when others have spent it properly. So, if other people live for two hundred years and then die, newspaper reporters should live for two hundred years and then die to be the same as those who lived for a hundred years and then died.
C. When there is a sudden incident, you are pulled out without time to sleep deeply at night or in the cold dawn like today, like a firefighter running to put out a fire.

II. Mental Pain
A. Whether others like you or hate you, you have to bow your head to children, adults, beggars, yangban (noblemen) and rich people, small girls, big adults, high-ranking officials, and police officers without shame.
B. You can't not write about other people's boasts or slanders, even if you don't want to. You can't not do what you're told to do, even if it's something you don't want to do or can't do.
C. You have to write in a way that pleases the readers or is in line with your own intentions. You have to write this phrase this way and use this character for this word, but you can't write as you please because there might be a sales ban, a suspension of publication, or even a ban on publication. You can only live in frustration and have to be careful even with a single character.

III. Physical Pain
A. You can end up in jail if you make a mistake.
B. You can't not go to dangerous and unpleasant places that you don't want to go to. <28>
C. When something happens, you have to fight with your life on the line, depending on the situation.

IV. Financial Pain
Others see you dressed smartly and think that your income is considerable, but in reality, you're terribly underpaid. You go to the homes of both the rich and the poor, and you never know when or where you'll be going. You're always dealing with people, so you have to dress neatly. In some cases, you have to do things that wealthy people do, so you spend your entire salary on that and end up living like a pauper in your own home. There's a good "episode" about this: In America, a newspaper reporter's son was playing with his friends outside when a nice car passed by. He pointed at it and said to his friends, "Look at that! My dad drives a car too!" I think this story explains our financial pain simply and well.
I'll stop writing here for now. But in conclusion, what we consider to be the greatest pain of all is that Koreans treat newspaper reporters differently on the outside and on the inside. They treat us well to our faces, but they try to avoid us if possible. That's why our work is hampered and there are many obstacles. Another thing is that once a person leaves the job of a newspaper reporter, there is no other suitable job.

The Story of Suffering Over Three Major Incidents
Park Pal-yang

A newspaper reporter – especially a society section reporter – is someone who lives in a constant state of tension. They always have a very tense awareness, like soldiers or officers on the battlefield, as they handle the complex events that occur every day. Therefore, the Japanese proverb "negligence is the greatest enemy" (放心大敵) applies to the military, but also most appropriately applies to the society section reporters, the vanguard on the front lines of the newspaper war. In fact, unless you are a prophet or a seer, who knows when and at what time <29> a shocking major event will occur? Therefore, it should be said that social awareness is something that never leaves the minds of society section reporters, even while sleeping and eating. If you are negligent even for a moment and a unexpected major event occurs within your area of responsibility and you fail miserably because you were not prepared, it would be a great shame for a newspaper reporter. In that case, according to the spirit of Japanese Bushido, you would have no choice but to atone for the failure with seppuku (割腹自決). Anyway, a newspaper reporter is someone who lives under a strict sense of responsibility.
Therefore, the suffering of a reporter largely arises from that, and the honor and pride of a reporter are also found in that. Someone who fulfills their responsibilities sincerely, promptly, and without compromising their integrity as a reporter is a good reporter.

My introduction to newspaper reporters has been too long. The request I received from the editor of this magazine was not such useless words, but rather the question of "What was the most stinging pain you felt when you were handling a certain incident with the job of a newspaper reporter?"
By the way, I have not been a newspaper reporter for very long, and lately, due to various circumstances, I have been doing more internal editing work than external society section work. Therefore, my social activities to the outside have naturally been limited. Therefore, in today's newspaper society where there are many veterans and seniors in that field or other fields, I, who have not accumulated much experience, may seem to be writing this article out of place. However, I have had some impressions while working as a field reporter, so I will write them as they are. First of all, the pain that a field reporter feels is when they visit someone who has been unfortunate. For example, when it is necessary to hear the words of a mother whose son has died tragically, or when visiting a wife who is crying over her husband's misfortune and asking questions relentlessly even while holding onto someone who is immersed in sorrow, or when visiting those who have suffered unfortunate events in various other ways. At such times, the job of a newspaper reporter turns a person with tears and blood into a heartless person. You just close your eyes and ask all the questions you can't ask.
Among the things I have experienced are
-( 이하 60행 삭제 - 원문; Below 60 lines deleted - original text)-<30>
Another thing that is painful for field reporters is the pain of being delayed by time. When reporting a new fact, if it doesn't make it into today's newspaper, it will go into tomorrow's newspaper = that is, it will be reported a full day late. That is a truly important issue for newspaper reporters who are racing against time.
I felt the pain of being delayed by time when sending a telegram from Gupo during the Nakdong River Great Flood years ago. At that time, the large embankment of the village of Daejeo Island across from Gupo Station had collapsed and was almost submerged in water, so traffic with the island was cut off, and there were even rumors that 200 bodies had floated away. To find out if that was true, I took a boat and crossed the raging muddy waters of the Nakdong River and looked at Daejeo Island. Of course, the distance was too far to see well with the naked eye. Then, after a while, the first boat from Daejeo Island came and gave a definite report that no evacuees from Daejeo Island had died. The people of Hyangdo, who had been very worried that all 3,000 residents of Daejeo Island had been annihilated, were all delighted. I rushed to report that fact in the evening edition of that day, buying a boat at a high price and urging "hurry, hurry!" while watching the clock, which was already half past one in the afternoon, and crossed the Nakdong River to Gupo and walked to the post office, where I sent a telegram saying, "It has been determined that all 3,000 residents of Daejeo Island, who were unknown to be alive or dead, have survived." When I saw that telegram being published in large letters in the society section of the newspaper that day before the 3:00 PM closing (shimekiri) while lying comfortably in a Busan hotel a few days later, I recalled the days when I was walking through puddles of water that were up to my thighs and suffering from being delayed by time, and I felt a certain pleasure, of course.
This useless story has become too long, but in addition to these hardships, there are also pains of a slightly different meaning for newspaper reporters. There is the pain of dealing with people who hate you more than criminals if you are a newspaper reporter, or the pain of seeing the arrogant behavior of so-called high-ranking officials when you meet them, or when you can't find out what you want to know, or when you have a big failure within your area of responsibility.
However, it is also true that there are also pleasant times in exchange for the many hardships.
However, I am also a newspaper reporter, and there are many times when I gradually get sick of it. <31>

The Story of Searching for an Embezzlement Case
Ma Ho

My hardships as a Society Section Reporter – I received this manuscript request and sat down in a corner of the chaotic editorial office to think about it, but I haven't had many opportunities to require much effort in gathering materials because my life as a newspaper reporter is short. However, perhaps no society section reporter at a newspaper company has a day without suffering. To others, it looks like we're always wearing Western suits, going up and down trains and streetcars as if they were our private property, frequenting restaurants and theaters every day, and exchanging opinions and criticizing anyone from great scholars to high-ranking officials with just a business card under the alias of "Uncrowned Emperor." It seems like a truly manly and pleasant job, a luxurious job, but we who are directly involved always feel that it is the most pitiful job. Ordinary jobs have holidays and fixed commuting hours, but this job is entirely working time from 0:00 AM to 0:00 PM, 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. And that's not all. There is competition for materials among the newspapers. This is perhaps the absolute activity of society reporters in Korea, and it seems that this is where the question of hardship arises. Much effort is put into not getting materials stolen from each other and into reporting them in one's own newspaper first, that is, into obtaining "tokkudane" (特種, special scoops). The time when the results of such efforts are judged is around 5:00 PM every day when each newspaper is published. After worrying all day long, we finally compare each newspaper. If there are no stolen materials and something is only published in our newspaper that is not published in other newspapers, our minds are relieved. But if there is a stolen article, regardless of the importance of the incident, then we feel extremely ashamed and lose face to the editor and the executives of the company = our apologies to the readers at that time are put off until later = and our minds are unpleasant. If we hear words like "Who is the reporter in charge of the OO Station?" or "Why wasn't the OO article published in our newspaper?", we reply, "I'm very sorry. I have nothing to say." But we lose all our strength and even if we wrote several special articles the day before, they all disappear.

Now, shall I describe one or two things that I remember as hardships in gathering materials for miscellaneous incidents in the city at my usual field office? = One summer day, <32> I went to the OO Station, which was my field office, and seven or eight colleagues were giggling and wandering around this room and that room. "What happened?" "Nothing?" They started to go back one by one. I took "nothing!" as a matter of course, as a morning greeting, and I looked around this room and that room on my own and went down to the basement, which was the Detective Room. I saw a detective saying, "If you're going to borrow money from a bank, you should borrow it nicely, you bastard!" and dragging a criminal in a suit out of the interrogation room and into the detention cell after finishing the interrogation. At that time, more than anything else, I first memorized the name of the criminal written on the detention warrant that the detective had, and then waited for the detective to come out and asked him, but he didn't tell me as if he wanted to kill me. I asked every station employee I knew, including the judicial chief, and tried to figure it out, but they remained silent = from that time on, "cho-ma-jjong" (nervousness) began to arise. In the meantime, the "shimekiri" time was approaching, and on the one hand, regardless of the importance of the incident, the suspect was a bank employee, so it was not an incident to be treated lightly. The question of whether to report this to the readers was a later issue, and I couldn't go back to the company as it was, thinking about how it would be published in other newspapers all at once and how I would lose face to the editors and executives. Even if I didn't know anything about the incident at all, I would have been somewhat relieved, but since I knew that he was a bank employee and even knew his name, I couldn't leave it as it was. However, it was impossible to investigate each of the dozens of banks in Gyeongseong in a short amount of time, and I didn't even know if he was a bank employee in Gyeongseong. Then, thinking, "Whatever!", I first called the OO Bank, where embezzlement cases frequently occur, to find the person. But I failed. The second time, I called a certain bank, and I was overjoyed when they told me to look for the person at the Chosun Bank. I then found out that he was a disbursement clerk and immediately called the Chosun Bank to find the person, but they said that he was indeed absent. Now, I was somewhat relieved to think that he was alive, and at the same time, I assumed that he must have embezzled money from the bank since he was a disbursement clerk. I visited the branch manager of the bank, but he denied it altogether, trying to cover up the facts with a few words. However, I couldn't accept his denial, so I went back and found out his address from the doorman and investigated his family situation. At the same time, I bribed a servant at the bank and barely found out the amount of embezzlement. When I went to the company, the editor was annoyed that I was late. If the material was a "tokkudane," he would have tried to use it, but he said that he was worried that other newspapers might have more detailed investigations. Without saying anything, I just wrote the article and waited for the evening editions of each newspaper that day with a nervous heart. Finally, I compared each of the seven newspapers published in the city one by one, and only our newspaper had an article with a three-column headline that said, "Embezzlement Incident Exposed at Chosun Bank Main Branch, Perpetrator Under Investigation at Bonjeong Station." Only then was my mind relieved.

However, in that case, the criminal had already been arrested and his name and occupation were known, so if he had been a skilled reporter, he could have figured out the truth of the incident without much effort. Moreover, such incidents are sometimes encountered by field reporters. In addition to that, there are special incidents in which each newspaper reporter puts all their efforts into the same area, where the incident has already been revealed to the world and general readers are expecting the truth of the incident to be reported in the newspaper every day. For example, even this year, there have been the OOO Incident, the OO Gate Incident, the OO Party Incident, and the Gun Incident, where the origin of the incident has already been known to the world, and the effort and activity to search for and quickly report the sequel material is a pain and activity that people who have no experience in reporter life cannot even imagine. Even with the Changdeok Palace Incident, it is impossible to satisfy the expectations of readers with just the officially announced information. Therefore, by taking into account all the details of the palace, adding speculation and creation, and combining the words of the people who come and go, we can finally create reliable material. Also, we even infiltrate the restricted area at night to detect the words and scenery coming out of the palace and stay up all night listening. In addition to that, it is very difficult to report the exact facts about the Gun Incident or the OO Party Incident unless you are the criminal or an accomplice, so it takes a lot of effort to find out the exact details. (In these incidents, Korean reporters always feel that their position is difficult. The police authorities may not know the details of the incident until the criminal is arrested and interrogated, but newspapers cannot wait until then. In these cases, we try to get even a shred of information and investigate the criminal's lineage, and then follow all the points and activities of the police at the time of the crime to finally reveal the outline of the truth of the incident. Or, there are cases where the publication of the incident on the newspaper is prohibited at the same time as the occurrence of the incident. <34>

**Named Entities**

東亞日報社	Dong-A Ilbosa
春城盧子泳	Chunseong No Ja-yeong
薛義植	Seol Eui-sik
李瑞求	Lee Seo-gu
朝鮮日報	Chosun Ilbo
朴八陽	Park Pal-yang
金丹冶	Kim Dan-ya
鄭寅翼	Jeong In-ik
中外	Jung-oe
金達鎭	Kim Dal-jin
李吉用	Lee Gil-yong
徐範錫	Seo Beom-seok
時代日報	Sidae Ilbo
趙岡熙	Jo Gang-hui
授恩洞	Sueung-dong
東大門	Dongdaemun
柳完熙	Ryu Wan-hui
朴純秉	Park Sun-byeong
金東煥	Kim Dong-hwan
龍山	Yongsan
洛東江	Naktonggang
龜浦	Gupo
大渚島	Daejeo-do
釜山	Pusan
本町署	Bonjeongseo
昌德宮	Changdeokgung
朝鮮銀行	Chosun Eunhaeng



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제3호
발행일	1927년 01월 01일
기사제목	各新聞·社會部記者의 苦心談, 날마다 새로나는 소식은 엇더케 모흐나
필자	柳光烈, 柳志永, 朴八陽, 馬濠
기사형태	회고·수기

各新聞·社會部記者의 苦心談, 날마다 새로나는 소식은 엇더케 모흐나
						柳光烈, 柳志永, 朴八陽, 馬濠
新聞社會部長으로 苦心하든 이약이 =因山때 이약이, 돈 업는 고생=
柳光烈

내가 社會部長으로 잇슬 때에 고심하든 일을 몃 가지 쓰라는 부탁을 바닷스나 날마다 원고지와 활자 사이로 다니며 씨름하기에 도모지 무엇하나 된 것을 슬 처지가 못 되것마는 독촉은 非常하고 拒絶하기도 박절하야 몃가지 쓴다.
대저 社會部長이란 新聞社 안에서는 매우 중요한 자리이다. 다른 新聞과 제일 정면에 나서서 白兵戰을 하는 社會部面의 총지휘를 하는 사람이 社會部長이며 따라서 實社會와 접촉도 퍽- 만타. 내가 처음 社會部長의 자리에 안기는 4년 전 東亞日報社에 잇슬 때 일이다. 그때 社會部에 가티 잇섯든 분은 지금 靑年文士로 世評잇는 春城盧子泳氏와 現 東亞社會部長 薛義植氏, 現 每申社會部長 李瑞求氏와, 전까지 朝鮮日報 地方部長이든 朴八陽氏가 잇섯섯는 듯하다. 엇전 일인지 내가 東亞에 잇슬 때에 외근으로는 여러 가지의 감회 깁흔 사건을 맛낫섯스나 部長으로는 별로 이럿타 할 사건을 맛나지 못하엿슬 뿐 아니라 前 記者氏 中 朴八陽氏를 빼고는 모다 그때에도 외근에 老將이라 諸氏가 가저오는 재료를 料理하기에도 猶恐不及이엇슴으로＜24＞ 그럭저럭하는 중에 한 1년을 지낫섯다.
그후 朝鮮日報에 가잇슬 때에도 역시 社會部長 자리에 얼마간 잇섯는데 그때에 社會部에 가티 잇든 諸氏는 현재 해외로 漂浪하는 金丹冶氏, 지금 中外에 잇는 鄭寅翼氏, 每申에 잇는 金達鎭氏, 中外에 잇는 朴八陽氏, 朝鮮에 잇는 李吉用氏, 中外에 잇는 徐範錫氏가 함끠 잇섯는 듯하다. 諸氏들은 다- 쟁쟁한 분들이라 諸氏의 末席에서 뒷수습이나 하고 잇섯스니 무슨 고심이 잇스랴. 구태어 차저낸다면 재작년 녀름 大洪水때 일일 것이다. 기자 대부분이 모다 외근으로 나가고 시시각각으로 증가하는 홍수는 한 시간 전에 만드러 노흔 원고가 모다 못 쓰게 되여 버린다. 전화통이 불이 나거라 하고 비발가티 오는 전화가 모다 水害이요. 그것을 시시각각으로 독자에게 보도는 하여야 할 재료가 시시각각으로 전화로 오는 것이 모다 다르다. 號外를 금시에 採字를 식이어 놋코 잇스면 또 딴 전화가 온다. 이럿케 밤을 새이기를 三四日한 것 가티 생각난다. 이런 때이면 먼저 온 報道보다 나종 온 것이 확실성 잇시 보히는 것 외에는 대개 別報로 前後相異한 두 報道를 넛키로 하엿다. 이때 뿐 아니라 엇던 때이든지 외근 기자와의 電話聯絡이 잘 안 될 때가 어려웟섯다. 더구나 외근이 市外에 나가서는 여간 어려운 일이 아니요. 數爻적은 전화를 가지고 各社에서 경쟁할 때에 엇더케 할가가 문제이엇다. 그후 지금은 업서진 時代日報에 잇술 때 因山日을 당하야 애쓰든 일이다. 그때는 畏友趙岡熙氏가 部長이엿고 나는 編輯만 할 때 이엿는데 마참 時代社는 경비가 극도로 困難하든 때이다. (그후 얼마 안 되여 社가 경영난으로 破綻이 生함) 그때에 各社가 모다 기사도 기사이려닊�와 사진으로 거의 紙面示威運動을 할 때인데 時代社만은 동판 재료 하나 사지를 못하야 쩔쩔매이니 무슨 수로 사진을 내일 수 잇스랴. 이때 나는 하는 수 업시 이전 쓰든 因山關係銅板을 羅列하야 독자의 눈을 얼숭덜숭 속이고 기사로 보도나 먼저 하리라 하엿다.
因山 전날에 그날에 무슨 일이 잇슬는지 모른다 하야 싀골서 因山求景 올라온 支局長이나 支局 기자들을 『신문 기자로서 求景을 하면 더 낫게 할 수가 잇다』 고 꿀을 먹이어 30여 명을 因山行列 지나는 沿道에 배치하엿섯다. 그래서 取締하는 巡査 몃 명 하이에 한 명씩 배치를 하고 무슨 일이 잇거던 곳 本社로 전화를 걸라 하엿다. 내 생각에는 다른 것으로는 도저히 현재 경비를 퍽퍽 쓰면서 경쟁하는 他社를 익일수 업스니 무슨 사건이 잇스면 그 사건이나 먼저 號外로 발행하야 시민에게 알리리라 하엿다. 과연 授恩洞에서 學生萬歲事件이 나자 제일 먼저 전화가 와서 그것으로 號外를 발행코자 하엿스나 그 亦警察當局의 간섭으로 썩이고 말앗다. 그러나 洞口 안부터 東大門 밧까지 가는 동안에 8차나 나는 일을 그날 그時로 一毫錯誤업시 조사하야 본지를 他社보다 약 2시간 가량 일르게 하야, 此 사건을 시민에 알리는데는 先鞭을 내인 일이 잇섯다. 그때에 싀골서 오신 지국 기자 몃 분 중에는 허리가 부러질 우수은 희극을 演하엿섯다. 전화를 걸되
『여보세요. OO社입닛가. 저는 OOO이올시다. 지금 어대서 무슨 일이 잇는 것가티 群衆이 소란한데 무슨 일인지는＜25＞ 모르겟습니다. 巡査에게 무러 보아도 모르다고 하고 群衆에게 무러도 모른다고 하옵니다. 그러나 무슨 일이 나기는 낫습니다.』
이런 전화를 거는 사람도 잇섯다. 이런 전화를 하려면이야 신문 기자로 그곳에 섯슬 필요가 무엇이랴! 나는 밧분 중에도 苦笑를 不禁하고
『어서 다시 조사하십시요. 아시도록- 그런 전화는 아모 소용 업습니다.』
하엿섯다. 그때에 時代社會部에 가티 잇든 분은 현재 筆禍事件으로 入監 중인 柳完熙兄, 某事件으로 체포되엿다가 병사한 朴純秉兄, 현재 中外에 잇는 金東煥兄이엇섯다. 이 몃자를 草하면서도 벼루를 가티하든 친구가 生離死別한 것을 생각하면 가슴이 다 압흐다.
그 외에 몃가지 더 말할가. 이것은 對外로 고심하는 것은 아니나 對內로 외근에 대한 것이니 各社 社會部長으로 잇는 諸兄이 모다 당하섯슬 듯하다. 내남직 할 것 업시 신문기자 다니는 분은 多血質이나 神經質이 만타. 그래서 사소한 일에도 怒하기 쉬운데다가 더구나 외근에서 늘- 神經을 몹시 刺戟하는 일을 보고 도라와서 날카로웁게 된데다 무슨 不合한 말을 하면 怒하기 쉬웁다.
자기가 일껏 애서서 어더가저온 재료가 案外로 社會部長 눈에 『뉴-스밸류』 가 적게 보히어 기재치 아니할 때에는 흔히 怒하기 쉬우니 이런 때는 部長이 잘 설명하야 諒解를 구하게 된다. 또 무슨 재료를 딴 신문보다 진 것이 잇슬 때에도 여러 사람 압헤 그 실수를 적발하면 怒하기 쉬우니 아모조록 조용히 가장 遺憾의 뜻을 添하야 말하면 그 責을 달게 밧는다. 또 기사 재료가 외근 가는데서도 어더 오고 또 통신으로 올 때도 잇는데 만일 외근에서 못 알아온 때라도 그런 통신을 내주며
『이 사건을 아르섯습닛가?』
하야 먼저 모르고 왓다는 것을 前提로 말하지 말고
『이 통신을 참고하야 쓰십시요.』
하야 알고 오기는 하엿스나 혹 참고할 것이 잇거던 참고 하라고 하면 가튼 말이라도 퍽-깃부게 듯는다.
또 외근 기자가 무슨 사건을 조사하러 나갓슬 때에는 여러 가지로 念慮되는 일이 만타. 그곳이 위험한 곳이면 무슨 부상이나 하지 아니하엿나? 또 携帶한 『포켓, 모늬』 가 적어서 고생이나 하지 아니하나? 늘- 失禮될는지 모르나 어린애를 해변에 내 보낸 것 가티 마음이 씨인다. 朝鮮日報에 잇슬 때에 水害地 龍山으로 徐範錫兄을 보내고 아츰부터 나가잇는데 날은 저물고 교통은 끈허지고 시시각각으로 물은 더 나고 녀름날이엇만 으스스하게 춥기까지 하는 때인데 徐兄의 주머니에 『포켓, 모늬』 가 얼마나 되는지 의심이다. 그때 마참 徐兄의 전화가 왓기로 먼저 기사 재료부터 밧고 끄트로
『무엇이나 좀 자섯소.』
하고 무르니
『네-지금 주머니에 돈 10錢이 잇서서 종일 굼다가 비지를 사다 먹엇습니다.』＜26＞
하는 대답에 가슴이 뜨끔하엿다. 나갈 때에 돈을 좀 가지고 나가도록 하엿드면 하고...... 後悔하엿다. 또 時代에 잇슬 때는 다른 社는 경비를 不顧하고 돈을 쓰는데 時代만은 외근 기자에게 車馬費 하나 똑똑이 못 치를 때이라 때때로 나의 『포켓, 모늬』 를 터러서 외근에서 쓰게 한 일도 잇섯다.

記者사리 다섯 苦痛
柳志永

신문긔자=사회부 긔자의 고심담을 쓰라고 한다. 필경 나더러 청하는 것을 보니 사회면 긔자 중에도 외근 긔자의 고심담이 소용되는 모양이다. 그러나 춘파
소파
청오 세형이 번가러가며 부탁을 하는데 참아 거절할 수가 업서 승락은 해노앗스나 흐지부지 시일은 촉박해지고 내 본직을 위해서 할 일이 압흐로 태산가터 실로 다만 몃 줄이나마 쓰기가 매우 힘드는 터이요 더군다나 춘파형의 요구는 신문긔자질을 오래동안 해먹엇스니 남의 무슨 괴상한 사건들도 만히 탐뎡해보앗슬 것이니 탐뎡하든 중 가장 복잡다단하고 자미 진진한 것, 그럴 듯한 수단으로 그럴 듯이 알어내인 경험담을 하나 쓰라는 요구를 바덧스나 갑작히 허다한 중에 엇던 것을 잡어 끌어내 써야 할지 갈팡질팡으로 어느 사실 한 가지를 잡어 내지도 못하얏스며 또는 참말 사회면 긔사식으로 오밀조밀하게 쓰자니 굉장히 길어질 모양임으로 또 다시 긔회잇스면 묵은 수첩을 뒤저가지고 순서를 밟어서 한 번 잘 써 볼 료량잡고 이에는 위선 이만큼 써보자 한다.
우리 신문 긔자의 업이란 방금 조선에 잇서서는 만흔 청년들에게 적지 안는 선망을 밧는 업이다. 백 사람의 청년이 모힌 곳에 가면 입끗헤까지 내어 가지고 부러워하는 사람이 약 오할=오십 명 가량은 되고 입으로는 말이 업스나 속으로 은근히 불어워하는 사람이 약 삼할=삼십 명 가량이나 되고 직업이 업서서 그것이라도 좀 해보앗스면 하고 부러워하는 사람이 약 일할=열 명은 된다. 그리고 보니 백 명에서 마흔 명은 우리의 업을 부러워하는 모양이나 그 중에서 직업이 업서서 부러워하는 사람은 빼여놋코 입끗헤 내부치고나 입 안에 늣코서나 우리 업을 부러워하는 사람만이 약 칠할=칠십 명＜27＞이나 되는 것은 사실이요. 조곰도 과장이 업는 것이겟스며 우리 업은 남보기에 끔직이 조와 보이는 것이 틀님 업슬 것이라고 생각한다. 그러나 무슨 업엔들 고통이 업스랴마는 우리 업에는 다른 업을 가진 사람들이 늣기는 고통도 모다 조곰식 맛보면서도 덧거리로 남이 늣겨 보지 못하는 이와 가튼 고통이 잇다.

一. 시간상 고통
가, 남보기에는 아침 느지막히 열뎜쭘 출근하야 오후 두세 시 가량이면 퇴사를 할 수가 잇스니까 그만큼 편하거니 하나 실상은 신문사에 잇스나 집에 잇스나 어느 노리터에 가잇스나 길을 것고 잇는 중이나 남과 자미잇는 작란을 하고 잇는 중이나 한시도 마음을 놋치 못하고 어느 시간에 어듸로 뛰어가라는 명령이 나릴는지도 몰으겟스며 또는 스사로 무슨 펄펄 날뜀직한 일이 업는가 하는 것을 한시도 방심치 못하고 찻고 잇는 것.
나, 아침에 밧게 나아가 그 전날 오후와 그날 오전을 중심으로 잡고 요사이 세상에 무슨 일이나 잇지 아니한가 하야 아못조록 다른 신문사 동모들보다 한 가지라도 더 알고 한 가지라도 더 듯고 신문사에 들어오면 기사의 장단을 불게 하고 당한 원고 마감 시간 안으로 손목에서 비파 소리가 날찌라도 써노야하는 일.
그리하야 시간상으로는 늘 분초를 다토아가며 잇기 때문에 남이 온전한 한 시간을 지내면 우리들은 그 한 시간을 반 시간 턱으로도 알지 못하고 지내는 까닭에 다른 사람 이백 년을 살고 다 죽으면 신문 긔자들에 한하야는 이백 년이나 살고 죽어야 남의 백 년 살고 죽은 이만큼 되는 일.
다, 무슨 돌발 사건이 잇는 때는 불끄러 단이는 소방대 모양으로 깁흔 밤이나 요사이가치 서리 바람 찬 새벽이나 단잠을 자지 못하고 시간 업시 끌녀 나오는 일.

二. 정신뎍 고통
가, 남이 조와하나 미워하나 그저 텰면피로 아희들에게나 어른에게나 걸인에게나 량반부자에게나 조고만 게집애에게나 커다란 어른에게나 고위고관에게나 순사고원에게나 죄업시 머리를 숙여야 되는 일.
나, 남의 자랑이나 험담이나 참아 쓰기 실흔 것이라도 알고서는 아니 쓸 수 업스며 참아 하기 실흔 일이며 참아 할 수 업는 일에도 식히는대로 아니 할 수 업는 일.
다, 독자들의 뜻에 합하도록이나 자긔 뜻대로 이 말귀는 이러케 써야만 하겟스며 이 글자는 이 자를 써야만 꼭 되겟것마는 발매금지 발행뎡지 심지어 발행금지 등이 잇슬까바서 마음대로 못쓰고 오직 안탁갑게 지내며 글자 한 자도 주의해 써야만 되는 일.

三. 육신상 고통
가, 깟닥 잘못하면 감옥에 가게 되는 일.
나, 참아 가기 실흔 위험한 곳이며 험상스러운 곳이라도 아니 갈 수 업는 일.＜28＞
다, 무슨 일이 잇는 때는 일에 따라 목숨을 내어놋코 싸와야만 되는 일.

四. 금전상 고통
남들 보기에는 저만치 반주구레하게 차리고 다니니 금전상 수입이 상당할 것갓치 뵈이나 실상은 끔직이 박봉이요. 부자ㅅ집 가난뱅이집 어듸 아니가는 데 업시 어느 때에 어듸를 가게 될른지 몰으며 늘 남과 대하는 몸이라 차림차림이도 불가불 깨긋이하여야 하며 어는 경우에 잇서서는 돈 만흔 사람들이 하는 일도 아니할 수 업는 경우가 잇는 까닭에 월급은 전부 그리 쓰러놋코말고 정작 자긔집안 사람에는 가난뱅이짓을 하게 된다. 이에는 조흔 「에삐쏘트」 가 하나 잇스니 미국서 엇더한 신문긔자 아들이 길밧게서 동리아이들과 놀고 잇다가 그 압흐로 조흔 자동차 한 채가 지내가는 것을 보고 이애들아! 저것 봬라. 우리 아버지도 자동차를 다 타고 간다! 하고 자랑을 흠신 한 일이 잇다고 한다. 이약이가 우리의 금전상 고통에 대한 것을 간단히 잘 말한 줄 샐각한다.
이번에는 아직 이만 쓰고 끈코자 한다. 그러나 끗흐로 우리가 무엇보다도 큰 고통으로 역이는 것은 엇지하야 그리하는지 우리 조선 사람들은 신문긔자들을 대할 때는 외면과 내심이 달으게 대하는 것이다. 얼골로는 좃케 대하나 마음으로는 될 수 잇스면 피하고자 하는 것이다. 그 까닭에 우리 일에 착오가 생기고 우리 일에 방해가 만흔 것이며 또 한 가지는 신문긔자로 잇든 사람은 그 직업을 내어 노흐면 다른 뎍합한 업이 업는 것이다.

三大事件에 苦心하든 이약이
朴八陽

新聞記者-더욱이 社會部記者란 언제든지 긴장한 공기 속에서 사는 사람임니다. 그들은 늘 자기자신이 전쟁 마당에 나선 兵卒이나 將校와 갓흔 몹시 긴장한 의식을 가지고서 그날그날 일어나는 복잡한 여러 가지 사건을 料理하여 나가는 것임니다. 따라서 『放心大敵』이라는 日本 격언은 군대에 적용되는 동시에 新聞戰線第一線에 나선 前衛隊 社會部記者에게 가장 적절히 적용될 말인 줄 암니다. 사실 선지자나 예언자가 안인 이상에 어느 날 어느 時에＜29＞ 어떠한 天下를 놀래일 大事件이 이러날지 누가 엇떠케 암닛가. 그럼으로 사회부 기자야 社會的感覺이란 놈은 寢食중에라도 일시를 그의 신경에서 떠나지 안는 것이라고 말슴하여야 되겟지오. 만일 일시라도 방심하엿다가 자기가 맛흔 책임권 내에서 의외의 대사건이 이러나서 평소에 用意가 업섯든 탓으로 보기조케 실패를 하엿다면 그야말로 신문기자 일대의 恥辱이라 할 것임니다. 만일 그런때 日本武士道의 정신으로 본다면 맛당히 割腹自決로써 그 실패에 辯答할 밧게 다른 아모 도리도 업겟지요 엇떠튼 신문기자란 지독한 책임 관념 하에서 생활하는 사람입니다.
그럼으로 보도기자의 고통이란 것도 대개 그러한 곳으로부터 이러나는 것이요 또 보도기자의 명예와 자랑이란 것도 또한 그러한 곳에 잇는 것이라 할 것임니다. 성의잇게 기민하게 그리고 기자로서의 인격을 손상하지 안이하고 자기 책임을 다 하는 사람=그런 사람이라야 훌륭한 기자라 하겟지요.

신문기자에 대한 서두가 너무 길어젓슴니다. 本誌 編輯者로부터 바든 부탁은 그러한 쓸데업는 말보다도 『新聞記者라는 직업을 가지고 그대가 어떠한 사건을 취급할 때에 제일 스라린 고통을 늣겻나?』 하는 문제엿슴니다.
그런데 필자로 말하면 원래 신문기자 생활 시작한지도 그리 오래지 안이하지만 또 근래에는 여러 가지 사정으로 사회부 외근보다는 내근 편집을 만히 하게 된 관계상 자연 對外部 社會的活動이란 것이 적엇섯슴니다. 그럼으로 그 방면이나 또 다른 방면이나 老將과 先輩가 만흔 오늘날 우리 신문사회에서 별 경험을 싸허 보지 못한 내가 이 글을 쓴다는 것이 어떤 의미로 보아 들린 수작일는지 몰음니다. 그러나 외근 기자로 활동하여 본 동안에 당한 몃 가지 감상이란 것이 아조 업지는 안엇스닛까 그대로 써 보겟슴니다. 제일 첫재 외근 기자의 늣기는 고통은 불행하게 된 사람을 방문하는 때임니다. 가령 아들이 慘死를 하엿는데 그 어머니의 말을 들을 필요가 잇서 그를 방문할 때라든지 혹은 남편의 불행에 울고 잇는 부인을 방문하고 비애에 잠겨 잇는 이를 붓잡고서라도 념치 업시 말을 물어 보아야 하게 된 때라든지 그 외에도 여러 가지 방면으로 불행한 일을 당한 이들을 방문할 때임니다. 그런때 신문기자란는 직업이 눈물 잇고 피 잇는 멀정한 사람을 鐵面皮를 만들어 줌니다. 그저 눈 꽉 감고 물을 말 못 물을 말 죄 뭇고야 맘니다.
내가 경험한 일 중에는
-(以下 60행 삭제-원문)-＜30＞
그러고 또 한 가지 외근 기자에게 고통되는 것은 『時間 대이는 고통임니다. 어떠한 새로운 사실을 보도하는데 이것이 오늘 신문에 들어가지 안이하면 來日 신문으로 들어가게 된다=즉 滿 하로를 늦게 보도가 된다. 그것은 시각을 다투는 신문기자에게 잇서서 실로 중대한 문제임니다.
年前 洛東江大洪水 때 龜浦에서 本社=지금은 中外日報에 잇슴니다만은 그때는 朝鮮日報에 잇섯슴니다.=이 電報를 노을 때 시간 대이는 고통을 늣겻슴니다. 그때 龜浦驛 건너편의 大渚島의 촌락의 큰 제방이 문허저서 거의 물 속에 잠긴 형편에 잇서 그 섬과의 교통은 끈허지고 시체 200개가 떠나려왓다는 풍문까지 잇든 때라 나는 그 眞否를 알려고 배를 타고 거세인 洛東江의 탁류를 헤치며 向島에 건너가서 大渚島를 바라보앗슴니다. 물론 거리가 너머 멀어서 肉眼으로는 잘 보이지 안엇슴니다. 그리자 조곰 잇댜가 大渚島로부터의 최초의 배가 와서 大渚島이 避難民은 한 사람도 죽지 안엇다는 확실한 보고를 하엿슴니다. 大渚島 3000 주민 全滅이라고 몹시 근심하고 잇든 向島 사람들은 모다 깃버하엿슴니다. 나는 그 사실을 그날 夕刊에 보도하려고 急急히 고가의 賃金을 주어 배 한 척을 사서 『어서어서!』  재촉하며 일변 시계가 오후 한 시 반이나 된 것을 노려보면서 洛東江을 건너 龜浦에 와서 郵便局까지 驅步를 하야 郵便局에서 『生死不明이든 大渚島의 三千住民 全部生存한 것으로 判明』  이라는 電報를 노앗슴니다. 그날 오후 세 시 본사 사회면 締切(시메끼리) 前에 이 전보가 드러가서 그날 신문에 큰 활자로 그 사실이 大書特書된 것을 수일 후 釜山 어늬 旅館에 편히 드러누어서 볼 때에 당시에 넙적 다리까지 빠지는 물구덩이 속으로 단이며 또 시간 대이느라고 고생하든 것을 회상하고 엇떠한 愉快를 늣긴 것은 물론 임니다.
쓸데업는 이약이가 길어젓슴니다만은 이러한 고생 외에 신문기자에게는 좀 다른 의미의 고통이 이슴니다. 신문기자라면 刑事 이상으로 실혀하는 사람과 대하는 고통이라든지 소위 高官이란 이들을 맛나면 그들의 거드름 빼는 모양을 보는 고통이라든지 그 외에도 무엇을 알려는데 알 수 업는 때라든지 자기책임권 내에서 큰 실패를 한 때라든지 말슴하랴면 한이 업슴니다.
그러나 괴로움이 만흔 대신에 愉快한 때도 잇는 것만은 또한 사실임니다.
그러나 나도 신문 기자라면 차차 엇전지 실症이 날 때가 만히 잇슴니다.＜31＞

橫領事件 차저 헤매든 이약이
馬濠

社會部記者로서의 나의 고심담-이러한 原稿 부탁을 밧고 錯亂한 편집실 한 모통이에 안저서 생각하여 보앗스나 나에게는 신문 기자 생활이 짧은 것만치 材料蒐集에 그리 고심을 要할 만한 기회가 별로히 업섯다. 그러나 아마 신문사의 사회부 기자처노코 어느 날 고심하지 안는 날은 업슬 것이다. 남보기에는 洋服땍이나 걸치고 기차 전차를 專用物가치 오르락나리락 料亭劇場을 매일가치 드나들고 『無冠의 帝王이라는 別名알에 아모리 大家名士요 高位高官이라도 명함 한 장으로 당당하게 의견을 교환하고 비판을 뜻고 이것을 보도하게 되니 실로 男子다웁고 愉快한 직업이요. 호강스러운 직업가치 보이나 직접 당면자인 우리들은 가장 설흔 직업인 것을 항상 서로 늣긴다. 보통 직업은 공휴일이나 잇고 출근 퇴근 시간이나 일정하지만 이 직업은 오전 零時부터 오후 零時까지 一時 24時間 一年 365日이 전혀 직무 시간이다. 그나 그뿐이리요. 각 신문의 재료 경쟁이 잇다. 이것이 아마 朝鮮의 社會記者들의 절대의 활동인 동시에 이로 인하야 문제의 고심이라는 것이 생기는 듯 십다. 서로 재료를 빼앗기지 안흐댜고 또 자기 신문에 먼저 빨리 보도하랴는 즉 「도꾸다네」(特種)를 엇고저 하는데 만흔 고심이 생긴다. 이와 가치 고심 활동한 결과가 심판되는 때는 매일 각 신문이 발행되는 오후 5시 頃인데 종일 마음을 조려 가면서 필경 각 신문을 대조한 후 빼앗긴 재료가 업고 다른 신문에 게재되지 안흔 것이 자기 신문에만 기재되엿슬 때는 마음이 비로소 노히나 만일에 사건의 경중을 물론하고 빼앗긴 기사가 잇고 보면 그때야말로 마음이 붓그럽기가 짝이 업고 편집자에 대하야 社의 幹部에 대하야 얼골이 업서=그때 독자에게 대하야 미 안한 것은 나종으로 돌려진다=마음이 不愉快한데다가 혹시 『OO署出入記者가 누구요?』 또는 『OO記事가 우리 신문에는 게재되지 안헛더라면!』 이러한 말을 들을 때에 『퍽 미안함니다. 할 말이 업슴니다.』 이쯤 대답은 하엿스나 전신에 풀ㅅ긔는 하나도 업서지고 前日에 몃 가지 특종을 썻다 할지라도 그것은 모다 살어지고 마는 형편이다.

이제 내가 평소 外勤處에서 市中雜事件의 재료 수집에 고심이라할는지? 한두 가지 기억나는 것을 그려볼가 한다=지난＜32＞ 첫 녀름 어느 날이라 담당 外勤處이엿든 OO署에 갓더니 七八名의 동업자들은 선우슴을 처가면서 이방저방으로 도라다닌다. 「무엇이 잇섯나?」 「아무것도?」 하면서 한명식 두명식 도라가기를 시작한다.「아무것도!」 하는 말을 의례히 하는 말이니 그저 아츰 인사격으로 뜻고 나는 나대로 이방저방을 둘러본 후 刑事室인 地下室로 나려갓더니 刑事 한 명이 「이 자식 은행에서 빌어 먹으면 곱게 빌어먹지!」 하면서 양복입은 죄인 한명을 取調室에서 취조를 마치고 留置場으로 끄을고 드러가는 것을 보앗다. 나는 그 당시 무엇보다도 먼저 형사가 가진 留置命令狀에 쓰인 죄인의 성명을 기억한 후 同형사가 도라나오는 것을 기다려 무러보앗스나 죽여라는 듯이 가르처 주지 안는다. 司法主任을 위시하야 알만한 署員들에게 일일히 물어도 보고 넘겨 집허도 보앗스나 역시 緘口不言=그때부터는 『조마쭝』 이 생기기 시작하엿다. 그러는 동안에 「시메끼리」시간은 점점 臨迫하고 한편으로는 사건의 대소는 물론하고 被疑者가 은행원인 만큼 그리 적게 취급할 사건은 아닌데 이것을 독자에 보도할 것은 뒤ㅅ문제이고 다른 신문에만 일제히 기재될 것과 편집자와 밋 간부들에게 대하야 면목이 업슬 것을 생각하고는 도저히 그대로 社에 드러갈 수는 업섯다. 그나마 사건을 전연히 몰랏드면 어느 정도꺼지 안심이나 되겟지만 은행원이라는 것을 알고 또 성명까지 알은 이상 도저히 그대로 둘 수 업섯다. 그러타고 수십개소나 되는 京城의 은행을 단시간에 일일히 조사할 수는 업고 또 과연 京城의 은행원인지도 알 수 업섊�다. 그러다가 엇젯든! 하는 생각으로 第一着手로 橫領사건이 頻發하는 OO은행에 전화로서 그 사람을 차젓다. 그러나 실패를 당하고 第二次로 某은행에 전화를 걸엇더니 그 사람은 朝鮮銀行으로 차즈라는 대답에 반갑기가 한량이 업섯다. 니어서 出納係員이라는 것까지 알고는 즉시 朝鮮銀行에 전화로서 그 사람을 차젓든 바 과연 欠勤이라하엿다. 그제는 살엇다는 생각에 다소 안심하는 동시에 出納係員이니 行金橫領에 틀님이 업다는 것을 認定하고 同은행 지배인을 방문하엿더니 응 이 몃 마듸로 사실을 묵살코저 전연 否認할 뿐이다. 그러나 그의 否認을 認할 수는 업섯슴으로 그대로 도라나와서 門衛에게 그의 주소를 탐지하고 그의 가정상태를 조사하는 한편으로 同은행의 給仕를 매수하야 겨우 橫領金額만을 탐색하여 가지고는 社에를 들어 갓더니 이제는 편집자가 늣게 드러왓다는 짜증에 그 재료가 『特種』 이나 되는 것 갓흐면 한 번 긔운이나 폐보겟지만 다른 신문사에서는 이 이상 상세한 조사가 잇지나 안이한가하야 두 말 못하고 그저 기사를 쓴 후 조마조마한 마음으로 그날 각 신문의 석간을 기다렷다. 그리하야 시내에서 발행되는 7개 신문을 일일히 對照하엿더니 오즉 우리 신문에만 「朝鮮銀行本店에 不正事件暴露 犯人은 本町署에서 取調中」 이라는 3단 제목의 기사가 게재되엿슬 때에 비로소 마음이 노혓다.

그러나 그 사건은 범인이 이미 체포되고 성명과 직업을 알엇스니＜33＞ 능란한 기자이엇드면 그리 고심하지 안트라도 사건의 진상을 탁색할 수 잇는 일뿐더러 그만한 사건은 외근 기자로서는 때때로 접촉되는 일이다. 그 외에 사건이 임이 세상에 드러나고 일반 독자들은 사건의 진상을 알고저 매일 신문을 기대되는 각 신문 기자가 동일한 방면에 全力을 다하는 特殊事件이 잇다. 가령 금년만 하드라도 OOO事件, OO門事件, OO黨事件, 拳銃事件 등이 잇서서 사건의 발단은 이미 세상에서 알게 되고 그 續報의 재료를 탐색하야 敏速하게 보도할랴는 고심과 활동은 적어도 기자 생활에 경험이 업는 사람은 상상할랴도 상상할 수 업는 고심과 활동이 잇다. 昌德宮事件만 하드라도 정식으로 발표하는 것으로만은 도저히 독자의 기대를 만족하게 할 수가 업다. 그러기 때문에 궁중의 모든 凡節를 參酌하야 推測에 創作을 加하고 출입하는 이 사람 저 사람의 말을 종합하여 가지고 비로소 확실한 재료를 만들기도 하고 또 밤중에 궁중에서 새여나오는 말과 정경을 탐지코저 이 禁止區域에 潛入하야 귀를 기우리고 밤을 새우는 일까지 업지 안타. 또 그 외에 拳銃事件이라든지 OO黨사건 가튼 것은 자기가 범인이 안이고 共犯者가 안인 이상에는 도저히 정확한 사실를 보도하기가 어려운 것만치 그 정확한 사실 내용을 탐색하기에 여간 고심이 들지 안는다.(이러한 사건에는 朝鮮人기자는 立場이 困難한 것을 늣길 때가 恒例이다. 범인을 체포하야 취조하기 전까지는 警察當局者들도 사건의 내용을 아지 못할 것인데 그러하다고 신문으로는 그때까지 기다릴 수는 업다. 이러한 경우를 당한 우리들은 털끗만한 정보라도 엇기에 노력하야 범인의 계통을 탐지한 후 범행 당시의 모든 점과 활동하는 경찰의 踪跡을 尾行하야 비로소 사건의 진상의 大槪을 揭載할 때가 잇다. 또는 사건의 발생과 동시에 신문 지상의 揭載를 금지할 경우도 잇다.＜34＞
＜24-34＞