잡지명	別乾坤 第65號
발행일	1933년 07월 01일
기사제목	털보哲學, 人物哲學 第2講 (Bearded Philosophy, Philosophy of Character - Lecture 2)
필자	講師 多鬚黨鬚領 毛博士
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellany)

털보哲學, 人物哲學 第2講
						講師 多鬚黨鬚領 毛博士

I. Ahem, Beard, Beard

Ahem—doing a philosophy lecture on beards, beards, and bushy beards in this hot weather seems like it will make both the speaker and the audience unusually hotter. However, just like the theory that wearing cotton pants and jackets in the hot months of May and June makes one feel cooler in the shade, having a bushy beard in hot weather might actually create shade and let the wind in, making it cooler. So, there's no need to worry too much. Fellow members of the Universal Many-Bearded Party (多鬚黨諸君), and beautiful ladies with hair (有毛娥) ! Please listen carefully to this philosophy lecture with peace of mind. And if you have any long whiskers in your beard, I hate to say it, but secretly pluck out a few beforehand and tightly tie your belly button strings without anyone noticing. If you accidentally laugh too hard during the lecture and your belly button string breaks, it will be very difficult to tie it back up in this hot weather.

Also, if any of the following people are in the audience—Song Jin-u (宋鎭禹), president of the Donga Ilbo; Shin Heung-u (申興雨) of the YMCA; as well as Messrs. Lee Sang-hyeop (李相協), Jeong Dae-hyeon (鄭大鉉), and Lee Gwang-su (李光洙)—I'm sorry, but please leave beforehand. Furthermore, if you're ordered to leave during the beard screening of the audience because you are a member of the Beardless Party (無鬚黨), it will be easy to lose face. Also, Miss Mo Yun-suk (毛允淑孃) on the women's side, please feel free to listen to the lecture. Just having the surname is enough to make you a considerable hairy woman (有毛娥), and if necessary, even if you were said to be siblings with Dr. Yi (虱博士), the person doing the screening wouldn't dare treat you poorly. As for the other women—Mrs. Song (宋社長 媽媽), Choi Eun-hee (崔恩喜), Dr. Kim Hwal-lan (金活蘭博士), and the courtesans Lee Chun-hong (李春紅) and Rim Aeng-mu (林鸚鵡=前妓生, former gisaeng)—if you apply a couple of bundles of hair growing water (毛生水), you'll have enough qualifications to join the Many-Bearded Party (多鬚黨), so please don't leave and just listen in.

II. Twelve Boasts of a Bushy Beard

1. A beard is like a decoration; first of all, it enhances one's appearance.
2. At banquets (宴會席), it makes one look dignified, so the wine cup comes first.
3. Even if you accidentally get slapped in the face, it hurts less.
4. In winter, you don't need a scarf and won't feel cold.
5. In summer, it provides shade and the wind blows well, keeping you cool.
6. It blocks dust well in windy weather, which is good for hygiene.
7. When you don't have money for alcohol, you can sell it at a hair shop (毛物廛) and have enough for drinks.
8. When you're bored, you can just stroke it to pass the time.
9. When hiding (避身), you can slightly cover your face and stand next to a corn (玉蜀藜) stalk, and no one will recognize you (limited to old beards). <20>
10. When acting in a play, there's no need to worry about attaching a fake beard (假수염).
11. If you go to a Catholic church (天主敎堂), you have the qualifications to become a French priest (佛神父).
12. When you're hungry, you can just lick what's stuck in it to satisfy your immediate hunger.

III. Ten Dangers of a Bushy Beard

1. It's dangerous to be near fire when lighting a cigarette or anything else.
2. If you pass by a house where a puppy has been lost, you're likely to be suspected of stealing it.
3. If you go to a pharmacy (藥局), it's easy to sell it as areca peel (大腹皮) (limited to long whiskers).
4. If you go to a wallpaper hanger's (塗背匠이) house, they might catch you as a glue brush.
5. It's easy to get grabbed and pulled when arguing with someone.
6. If you kiss in winter (冬節) and it freezes together, it won't come off until the following year.
7. It becomes economically disadvantageous to shave frequently.
8. When eating, the food gets stuck and disappears.
9. It easily collects snot when you have a cold.
10. It's easy for children to grab and mock when you hold them.

IV. Bushy Beards from a Physiognomic Perspective (觀相學上)

Beards, growing on the lower part of the face, an important part of the human body, are greatly related to a person's destiny. A triangular beard (三角鬚) like that of Guan Yu (關雲長) is prone to dying a violent death, a bushy beard like that of Zhang Fei (張飛) has a fierce and hasty temperament and harms others easily, a drooping beard (채수염) that is also purple (紫髥) like that of Sun Quan (孫權) holds military power (兵權), and a mustache (팔자염) in the style of Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany in recent times has a personality that seeks to intimidate others. A beard that supports the chin in a circular shape is a sign of wealth (富格). A so-called radish root beard, which is dull and has many hair roots (毛根) is a sign of low status (천격), an exposed philtrum and splits to the left and right is a sign of poverty (빈격), and a so-called stiff corn beard, which is stiff and yellow, has a picky personality, and a beard that is long only on the left and right and short in the middle means that one has few children. And a beard that grows as a drooping beard (채수염) and also has a luster, so-called dragon beard (龍鬚) or serpent beard (蛟髥), is extremely precious and is called the beard of an emperor (帝王之髥). To give an example, in ancient China (支那), Han Gaozu (漢沛公), Liu Bei (劉玄德), Emperor Taizong of Tang (唐太宗), and Emperor Taizu of Song (宋太祖), and in Joseon, King Taejong Muyeol of Silla (新羅太宗武烈王) all had such beards. However, in this era where beards are shaved and the shape of the beard is freely changed, such words cannot be completely believed.

V. Bushy Beards and Korean Celebrities (名人)

It is said that bushy beards are not associated with great people, but in fact, there are many famous people among those with bushy beards. Leaving aside foreigners, even in Korea, Kim Chwi-ryeo (金就礪-彦陽金氏), who was a military commissioner (兵馬使) during the reign of King Gojong of Goryeo (高麗高宗時) and suppressed the Khitan (契丹) invasion, was famous for both his character and his beard. His beard was so long and thick that even with his tall height of six feet and five inches, his beard came down to his belly button, and when he put on his clothes, there would be a maid (婢女) on each side holding up his beard. The Mongol general Hachin (蒙古元帥哈眞) was impressed by his handsome appearance with a good beard and said that his father had conquered six countries (六國) and met all the noble people in the world, but he had never seen such a handsome figure as him, and he treated him as an older brother and even held his stirrups when he rode a horse. And Choe Chi-won (崔孤雲致遠), An Yu (安文成公裕), Yi Jae-hyeon (李益齊齊賢), and Yi Saek (李牧隱穡) of Goryeo also had notable beards, and Hwang Hui (黃喜), the prime minister (黃政承) of the Joseon Dynasty (李朝), also had quite a lot of beard. Because he was a very gentle elder, there is an anecdote that even when his servant children (婢子 아희들) pulled on his beard, he would just laugh. It is said that Ju Se-bung (周世朋), the founder of the Joseon Seowon (朝鮮書院), had such a frightening beard that children would cry and run away when they saw it. Jeong Gap-son (鄭甲孫-鄭昌孫의 兄), who was the Second State Councillor (左贊成) during the reign of King Taejong (太宗朝), was famous for his handsome beard, and it is said that whenever he got angry, the hairs of his beard would always stand on end, so that his opponent would have a fit of convulsions just by looking at his beard and run away. And Heo Jong (許悰), who was famous as a brilliant prime minister (名宰相) during the reign of King Seongjong (成宗朝), was also famous for his good beard, and even though he was tall at six feet and two inches, his beard came down to his chest, so his appearance was very good, and when he was admitted to the palace, King Seongjong would first ask if his beard was still the same overnight. Hwang Jeong-uk (黃廷彧) in the time of King Seonjo (宣祖時) also earned the nickname Miyeomgong (美염공) and Yi Hang-bok (李漢陰) was also a considerable bearded gentleman. Kim Sang-yong (金尙容) during the reign of King Injo (仁祖) was also famous as Jangsu Gong (長鬚公), and Song Si-yeol (宋九菴) during the reign of King Sukjong (肅宗朝) was also a considerable bushy beard, and Heo Mok (許眉壽穆) was famous for his clear beard, and among the four great ministers of the Noron faction (老論四大臣) during the reign of King Yeongjo (英宗朝), there were Yi I-myeong (李頤命), Kim Hui-ro (戶參金希魯), Hong Nak-seong (洪樂性), and Yi Bong-sang (李鳳祥=李忠武公 五代孫), who died in the Lee In-jwa (李麟佐) rebellion as the Chungcheong military commissioner (忠淸兵使), Oh Myeong-hang (吳命恒), the commander-in-chief (都元帥) who suppressed the rebellion, and Yi Hu (右相李후) were also famous many-bearded men (多鬚公). Kim Seung-jip (金昇集-右世) during the reign of King Cheoljong, and Choe Hae-wol (崔海月), the second leader (天道敎第二世敎祖) of Cheondogyo, were also men with considerably many beards. <21>

VI. Many-Bearded Party of Recent Times (近來)

In recent times, it seems that beards have become very rare, perhaps because they have been affected by the fact that people shave their heads a lot. Min Yeong-gi (閔泳琦), who used to be called a member of the aristocracy (귀족중), a college eye medicine advertisement board (大學目藥廣告板), or *bang*, has enough qualifications to be the chairman of the aristocratic council because of his beard, but he became a small person and his son Min Geon-sik (閔健植) also has internal *etc*, so he plays a considerable bearded role, and Kim Yun-sik (金允植) can hold a Heolbeon house social funeral (헐번댁 社會葬) just for his beard, and if Yi Yong-jik (李容稙) had lived, he would have been called a member of the Hair-Lee (毛李之輩) along with Yi Jae-gon (李載崑), and the late Yi Jong-seok (李鍾奭) was also one of the short-bearded men (단염공중). Choe Yeong-mok (崔榮穆) of the Donga Ilbo (東亞報) was a unique figure in the press at the time, but unfortunately he passed away, and Mukwon Pal (墨源八) of the former Hwimun High School (徵文高普) was good enough to be a beard specimen when teaching physiology, but it is a great pity that he cannot be seen again after his death. Currently living people include Chun-gok Go Hui-dong (春谷 高莪東), Yi Jeong-ho (李定鎬君), Yi Gyo-hong (李敎鴻), father of Lee Jeong-ho, and Hakbo Kim Jin-gu (鶴步 金振九). Yi Heon-gun (李憲君), who has considerable beard but turned his back on the Many-Bearded Party (多鬚黨) and newly joined the Short-Bearded Party (斷鬚黨) and was a fierce commander in the socialist camp during his prime, has recently defected to China after being considered a rare figure among young people, and is now said to be naturalized in Manchuria and playing a major role. He eats Manchurian sorghum (高*) well, and his good beard will grow better than sorghum roots in the June-July rainy season—and the beard of Noh Heon-yong (盧憲容), the grandfather of Noh Su-hyeon (盧壽鉉) of the JoongAng Ilbo, also has the qualifications to be the secretary-general of the Many-Bearded Party, and Kim U-haeng (金佑行), who is a translator (?) at the Chinese consulate, also has the qualifications to be a diplomat if he joins the Many-Bearded Party (多鬚黨). In addition, Kim Yeon-guk (金演局) of Su-un religion (水雲敎) can become a fake emperor (假天子) even if he doesn't go to Gyeryongsan (鷄龍山) and enters the Short-Bearded Party (단수당), and Kim Seong-gi (金性璂) of the East-West Medical Research Association (東亞醫學硏究會), who has the nickname of Areca Peel (大腹皮) teacher, is qualified to be the chairman of the association just for his beard, and Seo Byeong-hyo (徐丙孝) of Dongnam Pharmacy (潼南局) is also qualified to be the secretary-general. Oh, I forgot again. Kim Chang-ryeol (金昌烈), a Pyeonggang Cheondoist (平康天道敎中金昌烈) who passed away a few years ago, had a beard that was about 1 foot and 5 inches long, so that when he sat down, his beard would drag on the ground, and Jeon Pung-su (全風水), who was called Jeonji-gwan (全地官=別名全風) in Pyeongchang, was tall and had a beard of about 2 feet, so he always carried his beard tied up, and sometimes his young grandchildren would grab his beard and swing on it. That's a pretty good beard, isn't it? Myeong Je-se (明濟世) of the Korea Products Promotion Society, Cho Jin-tae (趙鎭泰) and Yun Gap-byeong (尹甲炳), father and son of the Commercial Bank, and Yu Bang-ju (兪邦柱), who used to be in the business department of the Chosun Ilbo, are also modern Many-Bearded (多鬚公). (Omitted below-original text) <22>

**Named Entities**

宋鎭禹	Song Jin-u
申興雨	Shin Heung-u
李相協	Lee Sang-hyeop
鄭大鉉	Jeong Dae-hyeon
李光洙	Lee Gwang-su
毛允淑	Mo Yun-suk
虱博士	Ssal Baksa
宋社長	Song Sajang
崔恩喜	Choi Eun-hui
金活蘭	Kim Hwal-lan
李春紅	Lee Chun-hong
林鸚鵡	Rim Aeng-mu
關雲長	Kwan Un-jang
張飛	Chang Pi
孫權	Son Kwon
漢沛公	Han P'ae-gong
劉玄德	Yu Hyŏn-dŏk
唐太宗	Tang T’aejong
宋太祖	Song T’aejo
新羅太宗武烈王	Silla T’aejong Muryŏl-wang
金就礪	Kim Ch'wi-ryŏ
彦陽金氏	Ŏnyang Kimssi
高麗高宗	Koryŏ Kojong
契丹	Kyech'an
蒙古元帥哈眞	Monggo Wŏnsu Hachin
崔孤雲致遠	Ch'oe Koun Ch'iwŏn
安文成公裕	An Munsŏnggong Yu
李益齊齊賢	Yi Ikche Chihyŏn
李牧隱穡	Yi Mongŭn Saek
黃喜	Hwang Hŭi
黃政承	Hwang Chŏngsŭng
周世朋	Chu Sep'ŏng
鄭甲孫	Chŏng Kapson
鄭昌孫	Chŏng Ch'angson
許悰	Hŏ Ch'ong
黃廷彧	Hwang Chŏnguk
李漢陰	Yi Hanŭm
金尙容	Kim Sang-yong
宋九菴	Song Kuam
許眉壽穆	Hŏ Misumu
李頤命	Yi Imyŏng
金希魯	Kim Hŭiro
洪樂性	Hong Naksŏng
李麟佐	Yi Injwa
李鳳祥	Yi Pongsang
李忠武公	Yi Ch'ungmugong
吳命恒	O Myŏnghŏng
李후	Yi hu
金昇集	Kim Sŭngjip
崔海月	Ch'oe Haewŏl
閔泳琦	Min Yŏng-gi
閔健植	Min Kŏn-sik
金允植	Kim Yun-sik
李容稙	Yi Yong-jik
李載崑	Yi Chae-kon
李鍾奭	Yi Chongsŏk
崔榮穆	Ch'oe Yŏngmuk
高莪東	Ko Ŏdong
李定鎬	Yi Chŏng-ho
李敎鴻	Yi Kyo-hong
金振九	Kim Chin-gu
李憲君	Yi Hŏn-gun
盧壽鉉	No Su-hyŏn
盧憲容	No Hŏn-yong
金佑行	Kim U-haeng
金演局	Kim Yŏn-guk
鷄龍山	Kyeryongsan
金性璂	Kim Sŏnggi
徐丙孝	Sŏ Pyŏnghyo
金昌烈	Kim Ch'angnyŏl
全風水	Chŏn P'ungsu
明濟世	Myŏng Che-se
趙鎭泰	Cho Chin-t'ae
尹甲炳	Yun Kap-pyŏng
兪邦柱	Yu Pang-ju



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제65호
발행일	1933년 07월 01일
기사제목	털보哲學, 人物哲學 第2講
필자	講師 多鬚黨鬚領 毛博士
기사형태	잡저

털보哲學, 人物哲學 第2講
						講師 多鬚黨鬚領 毛博士
一. 에-헴, 털털
에-헴- 이러케 더운 때에 털보- 털보- 텁석부리 철학강연을 하게 되니 말하는 이 사람이나 듯는 여러분이나 남유달리 더 더운 것 갓다. 그러나 5, 6월 더운 때에 솜바지 적고리를 입으면 응달이 저서 덥지 안타는 그 리론대로 말한다면 더운 때에 텁석부리는 그늘이 지고 바람이 더 잘 드러와서 도로혀 서늘할는지도 알 수 업스니까 그다지 념녀될 것은 업다. 만천하 다수당제군(多鬚黨諸君) 유모아(有毛娥) 제씨! 안심하시고 이 철학의 강연을 잘드러주시요. 그리고 수염중에 기다란 수염이 잇거던 조곰 거복한 말슴갓지만은 미리 몃개만 슬그머니 뽑아서 남모르게 배곱줄을 단단이 졸라 매두시요. 청강중에 함부로 잘못 웃다가 배곱줄이 끈어진다면 이 더운때에 다시 꾸여매기도 대단이 어려운 일이니까.
그리고 또 청강원중에 동아일보사장 송진우씨(東亞日報社長 宋鎭禹)나 긔독교 청년회 신흥우씨(基靑 申興雨), 그외 이상협(李相協), 정대현(鄭大鉉)씨, 이광수(李光洙)씨 가튼 분이 오섯스면 미안하나마 미리 퇴장하십시요. 게다가 청강원 사격심사 중에 무수당(無鬚黨)이라고 퇴장 명령을 당한다면 체면상 창피하기 쉬울 터입니다. 또 녀자측에 모윤숙양(毛允淑孃)은 안심하시고 청강하십시요, 성자(姓字)만 가저도 상당한 유모아(有毛娥)이시고 엿차하면 이박사(虱博士)와 남매간이라 하여도 심사하는 사람이 과히 괄세는 아니할 터입니다. 그외 녀자측으로 송사장 마마유씨(宋社長 媽媽) 최은희(崔恩喜), 김활란박사(金活蘭博士), 기생의 리춘홍(李春紅), 림앵무(林鸚鵡=前妓生) 제씨는 모생수(毛生水) 두어 꾸람식만 더 바른다면 다수당(多鬚黨)에 입단할 자격이 상당이 잇는 터이니 부듸 퇴장마시고 방청이라도 하십시요.

二. 텁석부리의 열두 가지 자랑
一. 수염은 표장부라니 첫재에 풍신이 조코
二. 연회석(宴會席)에서는 점잔타고 술잔이 먼저 가니 조코
三. 잘못 실수하야 남에게 뺨을 맛게 되더라도 덜 압흐니 조코
四. 겨울에는 목도리를 아니하야도 춥지 안코
五. 여름에는 응당이 지고 바람이 잘 불어서 서늘하고
六. 바람 불 때에 먼지를 잘 막으니 위생에 조코
七. 술갑 업슬 때에 모물전(毛物廛)에 비여 팔어도 행정거리는 넉넉하고
八. 심심한 때에 그것만 씨다듬어도 소일은 잘되고
九. 피신(避身)할 때에 얼골만 슬적 가리고 옥수수나무(玉蜀藜) 엽헤가 섯스면＜20＞ 남이 감쪽가티 모를 것이요(단 늙은 수염에 限함).
十. 연극할때에 가(假)수염 부칠 념녀가 업고
十一. 천주교당(天主敎堂)에 가면 불란서 신부(佛神夫)될만한 자격이 잇고
十二. 배곱흘때에 거긔에 무든것만 빠라먹어도 급한 요긔는 된다.

三. 텁석부리 열 가지 危險
一. 담배 불을 부치거나 그 외 불근처에 갈 때에 화재가 위험하고
二. 강아지 일어버린 집근처에 지나간다면 강아지 흠처간다는 혐의를 밧기 쉽고
三. 약국(藥局)에 가면 대복피(大腹皮)로 팔어먹기쉽고(단, 고랑수염에 한함)
四. 도배쟁이(塗背匠이) 집에 가면 풀솔감으로 잡아 두기 쉽고
五. 남과 시비할때에 잡혀 끄들니기 쉽고
六. 동절(冬節)에 키스를 하다가 잘못하야 얼어부트면 그 이듬해에야 떠러질 것이요.
七. 면도를 각금하게 되니 경제상으로 손이 되고
八. 음식 먹을 때에 좀처 음식은 무더서 다 업서지고
九. 강긔들때에 코물 잘 뭇고
十, 어린애를 안으면 조롱감으로 끄들니기 쉽다.

四. 觀相學上으로 본 텁석부리
수염은 인체의 중한 부분인 얼골의 하부에 나는이 만치 사람의 운명과도 크게 관게가 된다. 관운장(關雲長)과 가튼 삼각수(三角鬚)는 비명횡사를 잘하고 장비(張飛)와 가튼 다박수염은 성질이 산압고도 급하야 남을 잘 해치고 손권(孫權)이 가티 채수염이고도 자염(紫髥)은 병권(兵權)을 잡고 근래의 독일페제카이잴식의 팔자염(八字髥)은 남을 위압하랴는 성격을 가지고 원형(圓形)으로 턱을 밧친 수염은 부격(富格)이요. 광채가 업시 모근(毛根)만 만흔 소위 수수뿌리 수염은 천격이요, 인중이 드러나고 좌우로 분렬된 것은 빈격이요, 수염이 빳밧하고 노란 소위 틩수수염은 성질이 까다럽고 좌우만 길고 중간이 짜른 것은 자손이 귀하다고 한다. 그리고 수염이 채수염으로 나고도 광채가 잇서서 소위 룡수(龍鬚)니 교염(蛟髥)이니 하는 것은 극히 귀이여서 제왕지염(帝王之髥)이라 하나니 레하야 말하자면 녯날 지나(支那)의 한패공(漢沛公), 류현덕(劉玄德), 당태종(唐太宗), 송태조(宋太祖) 조선으로 말하면 신라 태종 무렬왕(新羅太宗武烈王)가튼 이들의 수염이 다 그러한 것이다. 그러나 요새와 가티 수염을 깍고 또 자유자재로 수염의 형체를 변하는 시대에 와서는 그런 말도 곡 미들 수 업게 되엿다.

五. 텁석부리와 朝鮮의 名人
덥석부리 사람된데 업다고 하지만은 사실에 잇서서는 텁석부리 중에 명인이 만타. 외국은 그만두고 우리 조선만 하야도 고려 고종때(高麗高宗時) 兵馬使로 거한(契丹)외란을 평정하던 김취려(金就礪-彦陽金氏)는 인물도 유명하거니와 수염조키로 유명한 분이다. 그는 수염이 엇지나 길고 좃턴지 六尺 五寸이나 되는 그 큰 키에도 수염이 뱃곱까지 나려와서 의복을 입을 때이면 좌우에 비녀(婢女)가 한사람식 잇서서 수염을 갈너 붓잡고야 옷을 입엇섯다. 몽고원수합진(蒙古元帥哈眞)은 그의 수염조흔 상모를 보고 탄복하야 왈 자긔 가친이 6국(六國)을 정복하야 천하 귀인을 다 만나 보왓스나 당신가티 풍채조흔 인물은 처음 보왓다 하고 형님으로 성기여서 그가 말을 탈때이면 부액까지 하엿섯다. 그리고 고려의 최고운치원(崔孤雲致遠), 안문성공유(安文成公裕), 리익재제현(李益齊齊賢), 리목은삭(李牧隱穡)가튼 여러분도 한 수염이 낫섯고 리조(李朝)에 잇서서 황희 황정승(黃喜 黃政承)도 수염이 꽤 만헛섯는데 그는 성질이 퍽 온후한 장자인 까닭에 비자(婢子) 아희들이 그의 수염을 끄드러도 그저 웃기만 하얏다는 일화가 잇다. 조선서운(朝鮮書院)의 창설자 주세붕(周世朋)선생도 엇지나 수염이 무섭게 낫던지 아희들이 보고는 울고 다러 낫다는 이야기가 잇다. 태종조(太宗朝)에 좌찬성(左贊成)으로 잇던 정갑손(鄭甲孫-鄭昌孫의 兄)은 장시 미염으로 유명하야 노할 때이면 수염털이 의레히 우으로 거슬너 스는 까닭에 상대자가 그의 수염만 보고도 미리 경풍을 하야 다러 낫섯다 한다. 그리고 성종때(成宗朝) 명재상(名宰相)으로 유명한 허종(許悰)씨도 수염이 조키로 유명하야 六尺 二寸이나 되는 그 큰키에도 수염이 가슴까지 나려와서  풍채가 퍽 조흔 까닭에 궐내에 입시를 하게되면 성종대왕이 먼저 그 수염이 밤새 여전하냐고 물으섯다. 선조때(宣祖時) 황정욱(黃廷彧)도 미염공의 아호를 어덧고 리한음(李漢陰)도 역시 상당한 털뽀선생이다. 인조(仁祖)때 김선원상응(金尙容)도  장수공(長鬚公)으로 유명하고 숙종때(肅宗朝) 송우암(宋九菴)도 상당한 텁석부리요, 허미수목(許眉壽穆)도 수염이 청수하기로 유명하고 영종조(英宗朝) 로론사대신(老論四大臣)중 리이명(李頤命)이라던지 호참 김희로(戶參金希魯), 병판 홍낙성(兵判 洪樂性), 충청병사(忠淸兵使)로 리인좌(李麟佐)란에 절사한 리봉상(李鳳祥=李忠武公 五代孫) 그 란을 토평한 도원수 오명항(都元帥吳命恒), 우상이후(右相李후)도 저명한 다수공(多鬚公)이요, 철종때 김정증(金昇集-右世) 천도교의 제2세 교주 최해월(天道敎第二世敎祖崔海月)도 수염이 상당히 만흔 분들이다.＜21＞

六. 近來의 多鬚黨
근래에는 머리를 만히 깍는 까닭에 수염까지 그 연좌(連坐)를 입어서 그러한지 수염이 매우 귀한 모양이다. 소위 귀족중(貴族中)으로 대학목약광고판(大學目藥廣告板)이나 *방*아니하는 층호를 듯던 민영긔(閔泳琦)는 수염으로서 귀족회의 회장자격은 상당하지만은 이 작고인이 되고 그 아들 민건식(閔健植)도내부지 *등이 잇서서 상당한 털보 노릇을 하며 운양 김윤식(雲養金允植)은 수염덕만으로도 헐번댁 社會葬은 할만하고 리용직(李容稙)도 생존하얏다면 리재곤(李載崑)과 가티 가원 모리지배(毛李之輩)라 하겟스며 작고한 리종석(李鍾奭)도 또한 단염공중의 한 사람이다. 동아보(東亞報)에 잇던 최영목(崔榮穆)씨는 당시 신문게에 한 이채엿스나 불행 작고하고 전날 희문그보(徵文高普)의 묵원팔(墨源八)씨는 생리학 가르칠 때에 수염표본은 될만 하지만은 작고한 후 다시 볼 수 업는 것이 큰 유감이다. 현재 생존한 분으로 춘곡 고희동(春谷 高莪東), 리정호군(李定鎬君) 부친 리교홍(李敎鴻), 학보 김진구(鶴步 金振九)씨 등이다. 상당한 수염을 가젓지만은 다수당(多鬚黨)에 반긔를 들고 단수당(斷鬚黨)에 새로 입당을 하고 한참 당년에 사회주의자 측에서 쟁쟁한 맹장이던 리현군(李憲君)은 근래 소장인물측에서 보기 어려운 대궐보다 군은 중국으로 망명을 한 후 한참 소식이 업더니 근래에는 만주에 귀화하야 대활략을 하는 모양이다. 만주수수(高*)를 배불니 잘먹으며 그 조흔 수염이 6, 7월 장마통에 수수뿌리 자라덧 더 잘자랄 걸- 그리고 중앙일보 노수현(中央日報盧壽鉉)씨의 조부 노헌용(盧憲容)씨의 수염도 다수당의 총무자격은 되고 중국 령사관 통역(?)으로 잇는 김우행(金佑行)씨도 다수당(多鬚黨)에 입당을 한다면 외교관 자격 이이 잇다. 이박게 수운교 김연국(水雲敎 金演局)씨는 계룡산(鷄龍山)에 안이가고 단수당으로 입참을 하야도 가천자(假天子)는 넉넉히 될 수 잇고 대복피(大腹皮)선생의 아호를 가진 동서의학연구회 김성긔(東亞醫學硏究會 金性璂)씨도 수염만으로도 그 회의 회장이 될만하고 동남약국 서병효(潼南局 徐丙孝)씨도 총무자격이 상당하다. 올치 또 이젓구나. 몃해 전에 작고한 평강천드교인중 김창열(平康天道敎中金昌烈)이라 하는 이는 수염이 약 1척 5촌이 되야 안지면 수염이 땅에 끌니고 평창에 전지관(平昌全地官=別名全風)이라 하는 전풍수(全風水)는 키가 큰데다가 수염이 약 2척 가량이나 되야 수염을 항상 땃코 다니는데 엇던 때에는 어린 손자 아희들이 그 수염을 붓잡고 그-네(추천)를 띄는 일까지 잇섯다. 그만하면 그 수염도 꽤 어지간한 수염이지 그러코 물산장려회 명제세(明濟世), 상업은행의 조진태(趙鎭泰), 윤갑병(尹甲炳)씨의 부자, 전날 조선일보 영업국에 잇던 유방주(兪邦柱) 제씨도 현대의 다송공이다. (下略-원문)＜22＞
＜20-22＞