잡지명	별건곤 제6호
발행일	1927년 04월 01일
기사제목	學窓을 떠나면서......... 내가 만약 그 일을 한다면 (Leaving School... If I Were to Do That Job)
기사형태	설문 (Questionnaire)

學窓을 떠나면서......... 내가 만약 그 일을 한다면 (Leaving School... If I Were to Do That Job)
내가 만약 新聞記者가 된다면 (If I Were to Become a Newspaper Reporter)
吳鳳彬 (O Pong-bin)

The newspaper is the ears and eyes of its era and society. To fulfill the responsibility of these ears and eyes, the most important thing is to report fairly and impartially. However, when I look at Korean newspapers, I feel that the articles are not fair. To give an example, articles about their own newspaper company and friendly organizations are reported with large headlines and special fonts, while articles about groups with relatively small memberships or those with differing opinions, or even individuals, are either not published at all, even if they are newsworthy, or, even worse, events sponsored or supported by their own newspaper are heavily promoted on the front page day after day, while events sponsored or supported by other newspapers are not reported at all, regardless of the nature of the event. This is too much emotion. To fulfill the true mission of a newspaper, such factionalism and discrimination must be abandoned. If I were to become a newspaper editor, first, I would report the facts as they occur in society fairly and impartially. I would write more about practical issues in the editorials and provide more comprehensive foreign news so that people can better understand international affairs. I would avoid publishing articles that are harmful to readers on page 3 as much as possible. Newspapers are not only news organizations but also institutions with tremendous power to promote social development, so special attention should be paid to this point. <38>

내가 만약 醫師가 된다면 (If I Were to Become a Doctor)
河泰鏞 (Ha Tae-yong)

"If I become a doctor!?" From the day I received my graduation certificate, regret, anguish, impatience, and skepticism created a tumultuous mental state, as if the unmoving universe was about to be created? Or not? At this time, I am determined to write down some of my foolish and absurd thoughts in response to the topic given by the reporter from Kaebyoksa (개벽사), even though I have tried to avoid it in every way possible. Whether this topic will stimulate me or cause me trouble is a question I myself have.
Reporter!
As you know, it is more difficult to act and behave as a Korean doctor targeting Korean society than any other doctor, regardless of time and space. Making a living from the legacy of Shin Nongssi (神農氏) who "tasted a hundred herbs," and facing a popular society that does not lack market customs (令市例), in this era when not even one smokestack of a company engaged in chemical industry research stands, and not even one sign for a medical equipment manufacturing plant is painted, to boldly come forward, perform surgery, and prescribe—.
Reporter!
Wouldn't you also consider that it is not easy for a doctor who talks about cells and recognizes germs to find a place in a society where middle school lecturers believe in the morphology of the five viscera and the five elements (금수화목토, metal, water, fire, wood, earth) and advocate the theory of demons (病魔說)? Today, when the vice of imitating all cultures in a formal and ritualistic way rather than exploring and absorbing them in a truthful and realistic way has accumulated over the years, wouldn't it seem ridiculous and pitiful to see a sentimental child clutching the materially and mechanically developed Western medical skills in his bare hands and complaining about tradition and convention?
Reporter!
Ultimately, opening a practice means entering society on the premise of a profit relationship. You will be put in a profit-oriented position. Like a puppet, like a doll, even more docile and calm! As if unconsciously deciding your direction, and unconsciously engaging in your profession.
Reporter!
The ideal of someone who becomes a doctor is simply a countermeasure against the shortcomings listed above. Although it will not be thoroughly implemented, we cannot brightly wait for the time when our society organically and concretely idealizes (the situation) in a passive way, and in an active way, we must sacrificially endure for the future and take on the responsibility of a semi-enlightened pioneer for society (limited to phenomena). If I engage in this with this much determination, I believe I can transcend being a doctor who is similar to Rousseau or the doctor-denial theory of ꮀ„듸 and exist. Since an individual is related to society to some extent, a doctor, as an individual, will be in a position of being related to society. The concept of a doctor's benevolence (仁術) will disappear according to the concept that society has toward doctors, and the doctor's achievements will be proportional to the degree of understanding that society has toward medicine. However, will the modern era tolerate such reciprocity between us?
Reporter!
I am still a student of graduation certificates and licenses. I am not a doctor, and I don't have the余裕 to吐out a relaxed ideal of "if I were to become a doctor". Therefore, I believe it is more rational to talk about the methods and ideals of "if I were to become a doctor". For a society rife with superstition and heresy, by establishing even one clear achievement, we can dispel the doubts caused by past medical errors (醫師自錯) and strive to ensure that the understanding, which was based on a culturally intoxicated state, has objective certainty and permanence, and this should be the goal of the new recruits who want to see a new society. Therefore, the ideal of becoming one is that the best way is to get the opportunity and circumstances to study, but, as you understand, where are such good opportunities and circumstances found? If I had enough money to go abroad, I don't know, but staying here will only increase the worries of those who are interested. Among our seniors, there are those who have a doctorate degree and are in schools that treat graduates of vocational schools as professors, acting as assistant professors, our classmates are overwhelmed by the difficulty of finding a job and do not know what to do, and the number of our juniors entering school decreases every year. I am hesitant and wandering because I do not even have the money for the trip to go abroad.

내가 만약 辯護士가 되면는 (If I Were to Become a Lawyer)
京城法專學校卒業生 金尙澮 (Kim Sang-hoe, graduate of Kyŏngsŏng Law School)

The issue I am going to discuss here is not an aspiration that I am currently in a position to implement as a lawyer, as anyone can easily guess from the issue itself, but rather a purely idealistic discussion of what kind of ideals and attitudes I would have and how I would fulfill my calling and mission as a lawyer if I were to attain that position in the future. As such, it is only an idealistic discussion that deviates from reality, so I cannot help but base it on the assumption that I will become a lawyer, and therefore, I am aware that some of you readers may give it a cold assessment as empty talk without practical application. Therefore, I am also one of those who do not enjoy discussing such issues. However, (1) I believe that while it is not necessary for everything to be realized, the first step in realization is to establish a thorough and organized ideal, and (2) I do not doubt that by having our young people, who will be working in various fields of society in the future, frankly express their innermost thoughts about their future and compare and contrast them with each other, the path for our young people to take will be further clarified to some extent. I would like to briefly state my opinion on the left and humbly seek the honor of having it reviewed by you readers.
I believe that regardless of what kind of work I do - regardless of the type of work - there is a inherent good or ultimate ideal in each work, and I do not doubt that it is indeed the duty of the worker to make every effort to realize that good or ultimate ideal. As long as we do not forget that a lawyer, whom I am going to discuss here, is also a type of worker, there must be a corresponding good or ultimate ideal. Therefore, it is natural that there is a duty to realize it. Then, what is the good or ultimate ideal of a lawyer, and what is his duty? This is the inevitable question that follows.
When answering this question, I simply believe that the good or ultimate ideal of a lawyer is justice and love of humanity. Therefore, I am convinced that his duty lies in realizing this.
Therefore, if I were to be in the position of a lawyer in the future, I would make every effort to realize the aforementioned justice and love of humanity, and I constantly hope that this time will come before my eyes as soon as possible.
Therefore, I would like to explain below the relationship between justice and love of humanity and the duties of a lawyer, as I understand it.

(1) Justice and the Duties of a Lawyer
In general, as long as we live in this world with our lives, protect our honor, and enjoy property rights and other various benefits, we cannot promote happiness, pleasure, peace of mind, and development in this world unless our lives, honor, property, and benefits are fully protected. Therefore, the state, which is the central force of society, always enacts something called law, orders the people to obey these laws, and if they do not obey them, it inflicts unfavorable consequences with various sanctions and protects the lives and property of the people directly or indirectly. The law, which was created in response to these needs and to fulfill these duties, must necessarily be consistent with justice in its nature. In other words, only when the law and justice are in agreement will social order be maintained and the state and the people will both increase happiness.
In the same way that the law must be consistent with justice, the actions of a lawyer, who defends the lives, property, and interests of the people in accordance with this law and is worthy of that position, must also be governed by a consistent concept of justice. However, when looking at the general situation of the legal profession today, it is regrettable that this crucial concept of justice is very weak. In other words, I think there is a great lack of a tendency to establish this ideal of justice and move forward.

(2) Love of Humanity and the Duties of a Lawyer
And I want to emphasize that at the same time as I emphasize that a lawyer must act in accordance with the concept of justice, and to the same extent, a lawyer must always be the owner of a burning love of humanity. In other words, I want them to treat the cases of those who are unhappy with compassion and kindness, with a sympathetic heart for all who are hungry, thirsty, abused, suffering, or bitter. On the other hand, I also want them to take a fiercely stern attitude toward unjust robbers who inflict such unhappiness on the weak, or those who are not only cold and unfeeling toward such unhappy people but also despise them, deceive orphans and widows, and try to exploit them, and to make every effort to give them a corresponding retribution.
As described above, justice and love of humanity are truly the good and ultimate ideals of a lawyer, and making every effort to realize them is his duty. Therefore, if he is tempted by material things or fame and ignores or neglects these, there is no doubt that he is a fool who violates the law of the world by desecrating his sacred position.

내가 만약 商業家가 된다면 (If I Were to Become a Businessman)
朴元植 (Pak Wŏn-sik)

How can a fresh-faced scholar just leaving school talk about his aspirations and plans for business? In this place called Chosŏn (朝鮮), even if you have practical experience in this field, it is difficult to define what a businessman should be. This is because you have no independent or free rights regarding any business, whether it is capital or goods. Capital is someone else's, goods are someone else's, and all you do is run errands or imitate others with someone else's things, so what is truly business-like? The state offers no guarantee, and you have no confidence as an individual, so all you do is borrow high-interest loans and resell someone else's leftovers, so what kind of grand ambition can you have?
Even so, if you want me to briefly say what I have thought about, even if it's just empty ideals, I think like this.
Business requires capital, product selection, accurate assessment of the times, frequent customer visits, location, store layout, and many other necessary conditions. However, I don't want to borrow capital from others. I want to run my own business independently with my own capital, even if it is small. I don't want to do it under someone else's building, even if it's just one location. If you do business in someone else's capital and someone else's building, you will fail a hundred times out of a hundred. Even if there is some profit, it will all go to the capitalist. Even if I'm selling old rags, I want to do it with my own strength. And it seems most effective to focus on the selection of goods, the rise and fall of market prices, to meet the supply and demand of the society at that time, to approach customers with kindness and care, and to accumulate small profits into large ones through low-profit sales.
Whenever I read Byŏlgŏn'gŏn (別乾坤), they talk about the unfriendliness of Korean businessmen to customers, but in reality, how can you do business if you are so unfriendly? Isn't the customer the most important thing in business? What can you do without customers? In other words, what can you do if you turn your back on customers, who are the lifeblood of business? The rise and fall of business depends entirely on the number of customers.
If you have enough capital, select enough products, and win the hearts of customers according to the market price, how can you fail? Even if you do that, you may fail due to sudden changes in the market or unexpected disasters, but in most cases, there will be no failure.
However, most Korean businessmen today rely on someone else's capital, sell someone else's leftover goods, focus on appearances, pursue high-interest small sales, and drive away customers with unkindness, so how can they not fail? These are vague words, but this is how I think.

내가 만약 農夫가 된다면 (If I Were to Become a Farmer)
金永玉 (Kim Yŏng-ok)

In our Korea, there is no problem that is not an urgent problem, and there is no business that is not a priority. This is true in the intellectual field and in the material field. However, the most urgent and priority issue is rural development.
Our Korea is an agricultural nation, and it is true that we have relied on it for our food, clothing, and shelter for the past 4,000 years. It is also true that we will rely on it for thousands and tens of thousands of years in the future. In our society, where everything is in a transitional period, I find it very regrettable that there is a strange tendency to treat the rural problem as insignificant. Even more strange is the attitude of the agricultural students who bear the responsibility of solving the rural problem. After sacrificing 6 or 8, 9 years, which is not a short time, and spending some money, they specialize in and actually study agriculture, and then immediately become busy getting jobs in government offices and focus on that. Of course, it is not unnecessary to have a role to supervise and direct the general farmers under the jurisdiction of the supervisory authority. However, 80 to 90 percent of the agricultural students in Korea seek jobs in government offices as soon as they leave school, and they feel happy to have done this, feel that they have succeeded and made a name for themselves, and are satisfied. This is due to a kind of deeply rooted habit of respecting officials and despising the people (官尊民卑), and it is also a phenomenon that comes from the difficulties of life.
If it is from the difficulties of life, then it is a different matter. However, it is meaningless for those who have enough ability to work in their local area, in other words, to realize what they have studied, to seek public office as soon as they leave school. I also think that it does not contribute to our society in any way.
At the very least, they left school with a lot of ambitions and great plans, so they should return to their hometowns, take care of the stubborn elders, and work with the weak children to implement land improvement, fertilizer improvement, afforestation, promotion of side jobs, agricultural training, and various facilities such as farmers' associations. They should also wear towels on their heads, straw shoes on their feet, hoes and spreaders in their hands, and wander around the fields or forests, pairing up with woodcutters and farmers, singing Yosan-do (兩山道) in a cheerful voice while weeding and cleaning irrigation ditches. After working happily for a while, if they spread a mat on the rice paddies, stretch their legs, sit down, and drink a cup of takju (濁酒, Korean rice wine), then paradise is here, and there is no better place than this.
These days, due to the threat of the difficulties of life, people are packing up their belongings, leaving their relatives and old friends, and going to the unfamiliar land of Kando (間島) in the north. They don't want to be hired servants, they hate seeing the old men shouting in the village, and the innocent farmers in the village who are seasick from the old morality take their wages and go to Japan. The news reports every day about the labor groups rushing to the port of Pusan (釜山), longing for foreign mountains and rivers, like the tides.
If we give our beautiful land and good homeland to others and scatter to the north and south, longing for cold and hot lands, what will be left of our society in the future? It is truly a terrifying phenomenon to think about. This is all because there is no interest in our rural areas and it is a desolate mountain with little practical benefit. In other words, the shadows of the pioneers and leaders in our rural areas are faint.
When I return to my hometown, I am determined to restrain the stubborn elders from abusing their authority, which is a manifestation of the old morality, and to work with the pure, hardworking farmers to develop our inexhaustible fertile land.

**Named Entities**

吳鳳彬	O Pong-bin
河泰鏞	Ha Tae-yong
神農氏	Shin Nongssi
Kaebyoksa	Kaebyoksa
金尙澮	Kim Sang-hoe
京城法專學校	Kyŏngsŏng Pŏpchŏn Hakkyo
朴元植	Pak Wŏn-sik
朝鮮	Chosŏn
金永玉	Kim Yŏng-ok
Pusan	Pusan
間島	Kando



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제6호
발행일	1927년 04월 01일
기사제목	學窓을 떠나면서......... 내가 만약 그 일을 한다면
기사형태	설문

學窓을 떠나면서......... 내가 만약 그 일을 한다면
내가 만약 新聞記者가 된다면
吳鳳彬

신문은 그 시대 그 사회의 耳目입니다. 其 이목의 책임을 다하자면 무엇보다도 기사를 공명정대히 하야야 될 것임니다. 그런데 우리나라 신문지를 보면 기사가 공평하지 못한 감이 업지 안이합니다. 그 예를 드러 말하면 자기 신문사와 友誼團體의 기사는 針小棒大格으로 特號 활자로 보도하고 그러치 안이한 즉 비교적 단체가 적고 그 의사가 不合하는 단체나 혹 개인에 관한 기사는 반듯이 게재할 만한 사실이나 그러나 전연 불문에 付하게 되며 더욱 甚함에 至하야는 자기 신문사가 주최하거나 후원하는 일은 굉장하게 연일 전면을 잡아 대대적으로 선전하나 다른 신문사에서 주최하거나 후원하는 일은 그 일의 성질 여하를 불문하고 일회의 보도도 업스니 이것은 너머나 감정에 흐르는 일이라 할 수 잇슴니다. 신문지의 진정한 사명을 다하자면 이러한 派別 差別을 버리여야 되겟삼니다. 내가 만약 신문 편집자가 된다면 第一 사회에서 발생하는 사실 그대로 엄정 공평히 보도하고 그 사설에는 실제 문제를 좀더 만히 쓰고 外報를 좀 더 충실히 하야 외국 사정을 잘 알게 할 필요가 잇슴니다. 3면 기사는 독자의게 害毒을 밋칠 것은 되도록은 피할 것임니다. 신문은 보도기관인 동시에 사회 발육상으로 막대한 힘을 가진 기관이니 이 점에 특히 주의하여야 겟삼니다. ＜38＞

내가 만약 醫師가 된다면
河泰鏞

『내가 의사가 되나!?』 하고 졸업증서를 밧어다 놋튼 날부터, 후회, 번민, 조급, 회의 여러 가지 心象이 巴的 動亂을 이러키어서 움즉이지 안는 우주가 개벽될 듯? 말 듯? 하는 이 지음에 개벽사 기자 선생이 表題한 과제로 나의 愚感痴想을 무릇 음으로 회피하려 하여도 하지 못할 형편을 각오하고, 몃가지 들어서 적어 보려 한다. 이 과제가 내게 한 자극이 될넌지 또는 한 곤욕이 될런지는 쓰는 자신부터 의문이다.
記者足下!
아시는 바와 가치 朝鮮 사회를 대상으로 한 朝鮮人 의사처럼 처신과 행동에 곤란한 의사는 時空을 말할 것 업시 다시 업겟슴니다. 『嘗百草』하신 神農氏 유업을 유일의 경제적 근거로 하고 令市例를 缺치 안는 대중적 사회를 향하야 화학공업 연구에 종사하는 회사의 煙突 한 개도 서지 안은 이 시대에 의료 기계 제작소의 간판 하나도 붓지 안은 이 국면에 담대히 드러서서 수술을 하고 처방을 하고-.
記者足下!
중학교 강사님이 오장육부의 형태설과 금수화목토의 五行哲理를 신념하고 病魔說을 주장하는 사회에 세포를 말하고 세균을 인정하는 의사의 容身이 용이치 안음도 勘作하시겟지요? 凡百文化를 眞理實相的으로 討究하여 흡수하엿다기 보다 形式儀規的으로 模凝한 弊가 積年한 오늘에 材料的으로 기계적으로 발달된 歐人의 의술을 赤拳에 움키어쥐고 전통을 향하여 인습을 향하여 呶呶하는 感傷兒가 우습기도 하고 가엽기도 하겟지요?
記者足下!
결국 개업한다는 것은 한 이익 관계를 전제하고 사회에 투입한다는 것이겟슴니다. 이익 관계적 입장에 세워지고 말겟슴니다. 傀儡와 가치, 인형과 가치, 그 우에 더 업시 얌전하게 또 잔잔하게! 무의식적으로 자기의 방향을 결정한 것처럼 또 무의식적으로 직업에 종사하게 됨니다.
記者足下!
의사가 되는 자의 理想이래야 우에 列記한 缺陷에 대한 대책만이 한 끗이겟슴니다. 그것도 철저히 하지 못할 것이나, 소극적으로는 우리 사회도 유기적으로 구체적으로 理想化하는＜39＞ 시기를 기다릴 수 밝게 업고 적극적으로는 장래를 위하여 희생적으로 忍從하고 또 사회(현상에 한하여)에 대하여는 半啓蒙的 선구자의 責을 메고 나아가야 하겟슴니다. 이만한 각오를 가지고 종사한다면 루소-나 ꮀ„듸 선생의 醫師否認論에 類人될 의사를 초월하여 존재할 수 잇슬 줄 밋슴니다. 개인은 사회에 대하여 어데까지던지 關係的이니까 의사도 개인인 이상, 사회에 대하여 被關係的 지위에 설 것이외다. 의사의 仁術 관념은 사회가 의사에 대하여 가지는 관념에 따러서 消現을 가치할 것이고 의사의 업적은 사회가 醫에 대하여 가지는 이해 정도에 비례할 것이외다. 그러나 현대란 현대가, 彼我間 그만한 상호성이라도 가지고 支蕩하게 容許할넌지요?
記者足下!
참 아즉 졸업증서나 면허장의 修業者요. 의사이지 『의사가 된다면』하는 여유잇는 理想讀을 吐할 여지도 업슴니다. 그럼으로 『의사가 되랴면』•˜는, 方法 理想을 말함이 합리할 줄 밋슴니다. 미신과 이단이 거덕한 對象社會에 대하여, 한가지라도 똑똑한 업적을 세워서 종래와 가튼 醫師自錯이 초래하는 의혹을 풀고, 또한 끗하여서 기분적으로 文化心醉한 상태의 조응으로 가젓든 이해를 떠나 그 객관적 확실성과 영원성이 잇게 노력을 함이 신사회를 보려는 新役軍의 목표라야 하겟슴니다. 그럼으로 되랴는 理想은, 연구할 기회나, 형편를 엇는 것이 最好한 방편이지만은 足下의 이해하시는 것과 가치 어데 그런 好機會, 好形便이 바득이라도 잇슴닛가? 경제적으로 여유가 잇서 해외라도 떠낫스면 모르나 이곳에 남어서는 有心者 고민만 더할 뿐이외다. 우리의 선배 중에는 박사라는 학위를 가지고 전문학교 출신자를 교수로 우대하는 학교에 助敎授格으로 잇고 우리의 동창은 취직난에 몰리어서 엇지 할 바를 모르고 우리의 후진은 년년히 입학자 수가 低減되여 감니다. 필자는 외국으로 가 볼가 하여도 路費만도 업서서 주저하고 방황할 뿐이외다.

내가 만약 辯護士가 되면는
京城法專學校卒業生 金尙澮

여긔에서 논하랴고 하난 문제는 누구나 問題 自身으로 보아서 곳잘 推想하실 바와 갓치 결코 내가 현재 변호사의 지위에 잇서서 실행하랴고 하는 포부가 아니고 만일 장래에 그 지위가 엇게 된다면 如何한 이상과 如何한 태도를 가지고＜40＞ 자기의 변호사인 천직과 사명을 다할가하는 순전한 일개 理想論에 지나지 못함니다. 이와 갓치 현실을 떠난 일개의 理想論에 지나지 못함으로 자연 변호사가 되면 이란 가정 우에 서지 안을 수 업스며 따라서 독자 여러분한태 실행이 並伴하지 못하는 공리공론이라는 冷評을 가하실 분도 게실 줄 암니다. 그럼으로 나도 역시 이러한 문제를 가지고 논의하기를 즐겨 하지 안는 한 사람이올시다. 마는 나는 (1)에 만사를 실현이 필요하지 안는 것은 아니지만은 실현의 제일의 단계는 반다시 면밀한 조직적 이상을 확립함에 잇슴을 미드면 (2)에 장차 사회의 각 방면에 셔서 각자의 소신에 향하야 정진하랴고 하난 우리 일반 청년이 각자의 前途에 대한 흉금을 긔탄업시 피력하야 서로 比較照合함으로 말매암아 우리 청년의 취할 바 길이 어느 정도까지 더욱 闡明하야지리라는 것을 의심하지 아니함으로 인하야 左에 나의 의견을 略記하야 독자 諸賢의 一覽의 영광을 畏蒙코져 하난 바임니다.
나의 如何한 사업을 막론하고 - 사업의 종류의 여하를 논할 것 업시 - 각각 그 사업에 고유한 至善 혹은 최고 이상이 잇다는 것을 밋으며 또한 그 至善 혹은 최고 이상을 실현하기 위하야 一意努力하난 것이 과연 그 사업가의 本務임을 의심하지 안슴니다. 여긔에서 논하랴고 하난 변호사도 역시 일종의 사업가임을 일치 안는 이상 반다시 그에 상당한 至善 혹은 최고 이상이 이슬 것이다. 따라서 그를 실현하기 위한 本務가 잇을 것은 당연한 일임니다. 그리면 변호사의 至善 혹은 최고 이상은 무엇이며 그의 本務는 무엇인가 하난 것이 다음에 올 필연의 문제임니다.
나는 이 문제에 대답할 때에 간단히 변호사의 至善 혹은 최고 이상주의와 인간애요. 따라서 그의 本務는 此를 실현하는 대 잇다고 확신함니다.
於是乎 내가 장래에 변호사의 지위에 서게 되면 상술한 정의와 인간애를 실현하기 위하야 終是必死의 노력을 다하리라고 생각하며 하로라도 밧비 이때가 눈압에 도래하기를 끈침업시 바람니다.
그럼으로 나는 左에 나의 생각하난 바와 정의 및 인간애와 변호사의 本務와의 관계를 分說하려 함니다.

(1) 正義와 辯護士의 本務
大凡 吾人이 생명을 가지고 명예를 安保하며 재산권이라든가 기타 여러 가지의 이익을 향유하며 서로 이 세상에서 공동생활을 하는 이상 그 생명 명예 재산 이익을 완전하게 보호하지 안으면 이 세상에 이서서 행복과 유쾌와 안심과 발달을 도모하지 못할 것은 정한 이치임니다. 고로 사회의 중심 세력인 국가는 항상 법률이라고 하난 것을 제정하야 인민으로 하야금 이런 법률에 복종함을 명하고 만일 이에 복종하지 아니하는 경우에는 여러 가지 제재로써 불이익한 결과를 生케 하며 직접 혹은 간접으로 인민의 생명 재산을 보호하난 것이올시다. 이러한 필요에 應하며 이러한 직분을 다하기 위하야 발생된 법률은 그 성질에 보아서 반다시 정의와 일치하지 안으면 안이 될 것입니다.＜41＞ 즉 법률과 정의가 일치하라야 비로소 사회의 질서는 유지되고 국가와 민중은 다갓치 행복을 증진할 것이올시다.
이와 갓치 법률이 정의와 일치해야 한다면 이 법률에 준거하야 인민의 생명과 재산과 이익을 옹호함으로써 그 位에 當하난 변호사의 행동도 역시 일관한 정의의 관념에 의하야 지배되지 안으면 안이될 것은 자명의 理올시다. 그런대 現下 변호사계의 일반 상황을 보면 유감이지만 이 肝緊한 정의의 관념이 대단이 菲薄한 줄 암니다. 즉 이 정의이란 최고 이상을 수립하고 나아가랴는 경향이 심이 부족하다고 생각함니다.

(2) 人間愛와 辯護士의 本務
그리고 나는 변호사가 정의의 관념에 의하야 행동하지 안으면 아니되갓다고 하난 것을 역설하난 동시에 그와 갓튼 정도에 이서서 변호사는 항상 熖熖히 타다시피 하난 인간애의 소유자가 아니면 아니되겟다고 하난 것을 高唱하고 십슴니다. 다시 말하면 불행한 자를 가련하게 생각하며 모든 주린 자, 목마른 자, 학대밧는 자, 고통에 못 이겨 하는 자, 쓰라려 하는 자의게 동정하는 마음으로 그의 사건을 親切叮嚀히 취급하며 또한 그 반면에 이서서 이러한 불행을 약자의게 주는 부정한 도배에 대하야 혹은 이러헌 불행자의게 다만 냉혹하고 한 방울의 동정하난 눈뭉이 업슬 뿐 아니라 도로 여그 이들을 멸시하며 고아와 과부 등을 기만하며 고혈을 빼아사 먹으랴고 하난 포학무도한 자의게 대하야는 어대까지나 격렬 준엄한 태도로써 그에 상당한 응보를 주도록 노력하지 안으면 아니되겟슴니다.
이상에서 서술한 바와 갓치 정의와 인간애는 실로 변호사의 至善이요 최고 이상이며 이를 실현하기 위하야 懸命하난 것은 本務임으로 말매암아 만일 물질 혹은 명예욕에 유혹을 바다 此等을 無視沒却한다고 하면 이는 두말할 것 업시 자기의 신성하야만 할 지위를 모독하난 이라는 천하의 법을 스스로 범하난 어리석은 자임을 의심하지 안슴니다.

내가 만약 商業家가 된다면
朴元植

學窓을 막 떠나는 일개 白面書生이 상업에 대한 포부와 경륜을 엇더케 말함닛가. 朝鮮이란 이 곳에서는 斯界에 대한＜42＞ 실지 경험이 잇섯다 해도 상업가로써 如何如何를 槪定해 말하기가 어렵슴니다. 그는 두말할 것도 업시 자본이든지 상품이든지 모든 상업에 대한 엇더한 독립권 자유권이 업는 까닭임니다. 자본도 타인의 것 상품도 타인의 것 모든 것을 남의 것을 가지고 한갓 심부림이나 숭내내는 데서 지내지 못하니 무엇이 제법 商業家 다운 것이 잇슴닛가. 국가로 무슨 보장이 업고 개인으로 무슨 자신이 업고 다만 남의 高利를 貸하야 남의 殘品을 轉賣하는 데 지내지 못하니 무엇이 시원한 포부가 잇겟슴닛가.
그나마 나로부터 헛 理想이나마 간단히 생각한 바를 말하라면 나는 이럿케 생각함니다.
상업에는 母論 자본이 필요하고 상품 선택이 필요하고 時勢善察이 필요하고 顧客頻煩이 필요하고 위치 及 점포 배열 등 여러 가지 필요한 조건이 만슴니다. 그런데 나는 남의 자본을 引用해서는 하고 십지 안슴니다. 적든 만튼 비록 소규모나마 내 자본으로 독립 경영을 하고 십슴니다. 위치 하나라도 결코 남의 건물 하에서는 하고 십지 안슴니다. 남의 자본 남의 건물에서 商事行爲를 하다가는 백이면 백 번 실패를 보게 됨니다. 如干 利가 잇다 해도 資本主에게로 다 드러가고 말게 됨니다. 비록 넉마젼을 한다 해도 나는 내 힘으로 하고 십슴니다. 그리고 상품의 선택, 시세의 고하에 착안하야 그때 그 사회의 수요 공급에 적중하도록 해 가지고 親切叮寧으로 고객과 접근하고 薄利多賣로써 積小成大를 함이 가장 得策인 것 갓슴니다.
언제도 別乾坤을 보닛가 朝鮮 상업가들의 고객에 대한 불친절을 말햇습듸다만은 실상 그러케 불친절하고야 엇지 商事를 할 수가 잇슴닛가. 상업에는 무엇보다도 고객이 첫재가 안임닛가. 고객이 업고서 무엇이 되겟슴닛가. 즉 상업의 생명체라 할 수 잇는 고객을 등지고야 무엇이 되겟슴닛가. 상업의 흥패는 고객의 다소에 全在하얏슴니다.
상당한 자본을 가지고 상품만 상당히 선택해 가지고 시세 따라 고객의 환심만 만히 사면 패할 리가 잇슴닛가. 그러케 해도 시세의 急轉直下로 또는 불시의 災變으로 敗를 당하기도 하지만 대개는 실패가 업슬 듯함니다.
그런데 현재 朝鮮 상업가들은 대개가 남의 자본이요 남의 商店殘品代賣이요 게다가 看板主義요 高利小賣主義 不親切逐客主義이니 그러고 안이 실패할 리가 잇슴닛가. 朦朧한 말임니다만은 나는 이러케 생각하고 잇슴니다.

내가 만약 農夫가 된다면
金永玉

우리 朝鮮에 잇서서는 무슨 문제가 긴급 문제 아닌 것이 업고 무슨 사업이 선결 사업 아닌 것이 업다. 지적 방면이＜43＞ 그러하고 물적 방면이 그러하다. 그러나 무엇보다도 緊切 또 선결 문제는 농촌 계발 그것일 것이다.
우리 朝鮮은 農本國인 만콤 4천년이라는 장구한 세월을 지나오면서 우리의 의식주를 여긔 依賴한 것도 사실이며 이로부터 몃천년 몃만년의 미래에도 또한 여긔 의뢰할 것은 사실일 것이다. 모든 방면이 과도기에 잇는 우리 사회에서 농촌문제를 等閑에 붓치는 듯한 기괴한 경향이 보히는 것은 나는 대단히 유감으로 생각한다. 그것보다도 또 하나 기괴한 것은 농촌문제 해결의 책임을 두 억개에 메고 잇는 農學生 그네들의 태도이다. 6년 혹은 8, 9년이라는 짜르지 안은 세월을 희생하고 다소의 물질을 소비해 가며 農學을 전문으로 실지로 연구하고 나와서는 대번에 관공서에 취직하기에 분주하고 여긔 열중한다. 물론 감독 관청에 籍을 두고 일반 농민을 지휘하는 역할도 필요하지 안은 것은 아니다. 그러나 朝鮮 내에 잇는 農學生의 8, 9할은 교문을 썩 나서서는 바로 관공서 취직을 窮求하며 이것을 해노와야 마음에 快하고 비롯오 성공햇다는 出身햇다는 것을 늣기며 또 만족해 한다. 이것은 일종 官尊民卑의 陋習이 그저 남어 잇는데 원인한 것이며 생활난에서 나온 현상인 것도 또한 사실이다.
생활난에서 나온 그것이면 문제밧게어고 상당히 자긔 지방에서 활동할 만한 다시 말하면 자긔가 연구한 것을 실현할 만한 실력을 가진 그네가 학창을 나와서 바로 관공리를 求하는 것은 하등의 의미가 업는 것이다. 또 우리 사회에 조곰도 공헌이 업는 일이라고 나는 생각한다.
적어도 그네는 만흔 포부와 큰 경륜을 한 짐 잔득 질머지고 교문을 나선 것인즉 그 길로 향촌에 도라가서 頑迷하신 父老를 모시고 연약한 子弟를 다리고 토지 개량, 비료 개선, 조림 실행, 부업 장려, 농사 강습, 농민 조합 등 제반 시설을 해노코 자긔도 머리에 수건 쓰고 발에 집신 신고 손에 광이나 살포 집고 田園에 혹 산림에 도라다니며 樵軍農夫 짝을 지어 兩山道 륙자박이 어울너가며 풀매기 보ㅅ도랑치기 이리 한참 자미스럽게 일하다가 논두렁에 자리 깔고 다리 뻣고 안저서 탁주 一杯 마시고 나면 극락이 여긔이며 泰平勝地가 이 외에 다시 업슬 것이다.
요사이 생활난의 위협으로 남부여대 보찜 싸고 親戚故舊 떼버리고 산 설고 물도 설은 間島 북방 차저 가기, 고용사리 하기 실코, 소리 빽빽 질너대는 동리ㅅ 늘근이 보기 실타, 舊도덕에 멀미내든 촌락의 순진한 농부님들 새경돈 밧어 들고 日本에 버리 조타 異域山川 동경하며 부산 부두에 조수밀 듯 내미는 勞働群은 매일 보는 신문의 보도이다.
금수강산 조흔 향토 남에게 밀어 주고 寒邦熱帶 그리워서 남으로 북으로 散之四方 허터지고 나면 장래의 우리 사회는 무엇이 남을 것인가? 생각하면 실로 가공할 현상이다. 이것은 모다 우리 농촌에 취미 업고 實益 적은 寂寞江山인 까닭이다. 다시 말하면 우리 농촌의 선각자와 지도자의 그림자가 엷은 까닭이다.
나는 우리 향촌에 도라가면 頑冥하신 우리 父兄으로 하야금 넘우 舊도덕의 행사 즉 노인권 남용을 牽制하고 純實無垢하며 굿세게 일 잘하는 농촌 형제로 더부러 우리의 무궁무진한 옥포를 잘 개척하는 데 노력하려고 결심한다.＜44＞
＜38-44＞