잡지명	別乾坤 第6號
발행일	1927년 04월 01일
기사제목	살팔너 다니는 사람 (The Person Who Sells Herself)
필자	*南
기사형태	소설 (Fiction)

The Person Who Sells Herself
						*Nam

1
It was when I was in the port of S.

I wasn't a wanderer (放浪), nor was I like a tree branch blown by the wind, with roots but swaying back and forth. I was living a life like that.

At the time, I had a job in name only, and I was working as a secretary in the house of someone known as Gunsanjip, as it was called by everyone.

It was a Sunday about two months after I had gone to that house.

It was a warm and cool autumn day, and in the afternoon, I felt endless boredom with my decadent life and I was basking in the autumn sunlight slanting towards the west on the veranda, exposing my whole body and cheeks to the warmth, rolling around and around.

"At times like this, others would smoke," I said, lamenting that I had no such pleasure, vaguely gazing up at the endlessly clear blue autumn sky, just lying there.

There were no other guests staying at this inn, and the owner and I had run out of things to say to each other, so repeating stories we had already told was no fun, and I hesitated to call the owner. ＜146＞

"At times like this, only a woman could cure my heart's illness."

I diagnosed my own heart, feeling no interest in anything, neither pessimistic nor jaded, and considered a prescription for this numb life.

"If only a gentle girl would fall from that blue sky," I thought, foolishly expecting such a thing, and for some reason, I was drawn to this absurd expectation, even as I tried hard to deny (否定) it.

"Oh my, what is this?" If there were someone here, even a dog, I would pour out all this joy and surprise.

My heart, like countless stretched-out threads, regained a strong elasticity, tensing up tightly like a turtle's neck, and I began to have foolish expectations.

It was just then that a young woman appeared at the gate.

I doubted whether this was reality or a dream.

Reader, I was definitely rolling around on the veranda at the time, and the sun was shining brightly in the sky, so how could this be the work of a goblin?

Knowing that it was reality, and having no room for doubt, I remembered that I had been so devoted to God for several years, preparing to go to Heaven by attending church. I wondered if God had sent down an angel to amuse me? I almost jumped for joy. If I had jumped, the woman would have had a good laugh, but I couldn't jump.

What did she look like? Was she a beauty?

Now I must explain this.

What should I say? I'm not Yi Doryeong, but seeing Chunhyang leaping across Gwanghallu made me as happy as when Yi Doryeong and Bangja sang "Geumilgaok."

Straining to calm my excited and intoxicated heart, I calmed my racing heart and remained still.

From now on, I had to watch every move she made, leaving nothing unnoticed.

For me, this was a meaningful undertaking. The boring moment instantly turned into something great.

The woman cleared her throat a couple of times as she passed in front of where I was lying, rustling her skirt, and went inside where the owner was.

Before I knew it, I had jumped up and was sitting up, like a hawk watching for a mouse. ＜147＞

"Are you here, sir?"
"Yes, come in. Where are you from?" From this first exchange, I knew that the woman was coming to this house for the first time and was a guest.

This place is a port near Jeolla-do, even though it's in Gyeongsang-do. It has a fairly large population, but many people make a living by fishing, and there aren't many people coming and going from the inn, so it's a remote place.

No one without a special purpose would come here, especially not a woman.

I wasn't hiding anything, but I was a little disappointed. The reader who has read this far has probably already guessed that she is a "kisaeng."

To be honest, I was endlessly saddened that she wasn't a "female student" or a so-called "modern girl."

But the woman wasn't ugly, and she seemed to be in her early twenties, and besides, kisaeng were easy to approach, and I could even hope for something more, so I was happy that she was a kisaeng.

Here, I can't help but be amazed at how well people compromise.

But that seems like it would be a distraction from the main story, so let's stop there and take a closer look at the woman sitting on the veranda.

The woman had a long face and didn't seem to be wearing makeup. Her face was pale, her shoulders were slightly sloped, and her large, bright eyes made her look cool.

As for her clothes, I don't know the names of the fabrics, but even though I'm a hack writer and claim to be telling stories to others, I'll just say that she wore clothes that weren't too dirty in a stylish way, and overall, she looked decent.

Score! You want me to give her a score? Well, since you insist, I'll give her about a 7.

2
That evening.

For some reason, people who hadn't come to this house before were coming in one by one, two by two.

In the end, there were six of them, some of whom I knew, and some of whom I didn't.

At first glance, it was clear that they had come to play with the new bird. In fact, that's what it was.

They were the kind of guys who, though it was a bit unfair to call them adulterers, would drink cheap rice wine and roam around like male dogs after women. ＜148＞

They were drinking and the woman's thin, mosquito-like voice singing mixed with the loud voices of the men, fragmented, echoing in my ears through the walls.

I was frustrated that they had taken the woman away from me, but I couldn't concentrate on reading my book, and I couldn't fall asleep. The moon was so bright that it was like daylight, so I ran outside.

After wandering around, I came back inside. The men were gone and the lights were all off. Only the young man who worked at the inn was sitting on the veranda next to my room, staring blankly at the moon.

"Kim Doryeong, what are you doing? The moon is nice, makes you think of someone," I teased him in a not-unpleasant way. "Should I tell you about someone?"

Of course, I said this with the woman who had come during the day in mind.

For some reason, he jumped in surprise at my words, and without answering properly, he ran away to his room, which was like a cave in the kitchen, laughing or crying, I couldn't tell.

I thought it was a bit strange, "There's no reason for him to be angry at what I said." I calmed myself down and was about to go into my room when I noticed a pair of small women's shoes and a pair of large men's shoes placed side by side.

I took it for granted and relieved my mind, happy that the woman's visit wasn't in vain, even though it's a silly thing to say.

I was lying alone on a moonlit night, and from the room next door, I could hear the drunken, meat-craving men's heavy breathing and the weak, trampled woman's shallow breathing, a symphony.

I tried hard not to imagine what they were doing, but for some reason, the more I tried to resist, the more curious I became, and I couldn't help but taste the ugliness of humanity.

But why was the young man still lingering and wandering around in front of that room?

Here, I need to give an account and introduction of the young man.

There's something more urgent to say. I can't help but be amazed at how well this innkeeper advertises women, and how his skills ensure his and the woman's livelihood.

There will be many more stories about this owner.

Well, I'll tell you everything little by little.

It was a short autumn night, but I thought about the woman who had come to sell herself, the man who bought her, and the world that not only approved of it but ＜149＞ created such a situation.

The young man in his thirties who was wandering around in front of the door must have wandered around all night, and the owner must have been unable to sleep, trying to figure out how to get money from the man he had brought in. Anyway, this house was an interesting place that night.

3
The next morning.

I tried to forget everything, but when I saw the owner, when I saw the young man, when I thought of the man who had run away early in the morning, there was no shortage of things to laugh about here and there.

I was sitting at the breakfast table on the veranda.

I was facing the east, where the sun was rising, and reluctantly chewing the tasteless rice.

Then, the woman came out of her room.

She was listlessly dragging her feet, her hair disheveled and her eyes heavy with exhaustion.

Was the sharp morning sunlight of autumn silently scolding and tormenting her?

Exposed to the sunlight, she looked endlessly dirty. To me, who knew what had happened last night, it seemed even worse.

But I had no right to call her dirty.

My heart was too afraid to see her as dirty or hateful.

I was just letting my heart, like a loosened spring, be known, without any judgment or reflection.

Now, let's stop recording my feelings of self-pity for her.

And let's just talk about the course of events. Isn't that what the reader wants?

As the woman came down from the veranda into the yard, she cleared her throat, coughing and coughing, and held her chest with her arms bent.

With her head slightly lowered and tilted slightly to the left, the painful expression on her face was visible to me, even from behind.

She dragged her shoes and walked slowly, and when she came to the wall, she stopped and stood facing the sun.

I could only see the back of her head, but her thin neck was long and pale, and her back and shoulders seemed to be nothing but bone. The clothes she was wearing were touching her skin, and there was no softness at all.

The woman lowered her face and spat out phlegm, wiping it away with her shoe. ＜150＞

She did this several times, and then, perhaps feeling the cold in the pre-Chuseok autumn weather, she seemed to shiver.

Sparrows were chirping happily from the roof, and they flew out energetically to the endlessly open fields in search of their food.

The clear sunlight, like laughter and dance, was full of the morning air, and the yard was swept clean, so everything in nature was at its most beautiful.

Whether the woman spat out blood or phlegm, it's not worth arguing about here.

In front of the wall, cosmos flowers were blooming white and red, dancing in the gentle breeze.

Again, nature was healthy and beautiful. There was no prostitution or rape there.

The woman's body, consumed by illness and with little left, seemed to be in its final stage, so it wouldn't be long.

When the woman came back up to the veranda, "Kim Doryeong" came out with a basin of water for her to wash her face.

Because I had seen what had happened the night before, I took a closer look at him.

I saw one thing that had changed in him.

It was that the clothes he was wearing were different, and his hair, which he had combed, was shiny, and his towel was pure white.

That surprised me a little.

Another thing was that he was trying hard to hide his left hand under the basin.

This was something he had done when I first came to this house, but this morning it seemed more serious.

Let me tell you why.

As I said before, "Kim Doryeong" is over thirty years old.

He has a strong and healthy body, but he doesn't know how to work, and he's even more ignorant of farming.

With his strong body, he fetches water and cooks rice at this house morning and evening. And he works as a servant.

He doesn't get any pay from the owner, and he's been at this house for over ten years. Even when this house couldn't make a living in Gunsan and moved to this port, he followed the owner's house here along with the dog.

His name is "Kim Ryukson."

Having this name, in addition to poverty, was another reason that saddened him.

He must have had more grace from the "mountain spirit" (山神) than others, because he was born with an extra finger on his left hand.＜151＞

The reason for his behavior when he handed the basin of water to the woman is now clear.

The woman seemed to hate putting her hands in the cold water.

The young man didn't leave his spot even after putting down the basin of water. He turned his left arm behind his back to hide his hand and put the cutest expression he knew on his face, as if he was begging for the woman's love, sending meaningful and pitiful eyes to the woman.

I was about to clear the breakfast table, but I felt so sorry for giving "Kim Doryeong" work that I just watched, holding my spoon.

Whatever the woman thought, she seemed to send a flirtatious glance to the man.

The man seemed to feel endless satisfaction, and he ran into the kitchen with a shaky gait.

It's not that I really wanted to see him, but when my eyes turned to follow him, he hid his body inside the kitchen door, only sticking his face out. He couldn't take his eyes off his pitiful love—I don't know if that's the right word, but he certainly thought of her that way. His eyes were slyly moving and his mouth was slightly open, and his shoulders were dancing.

I felt bad for seeing that, so I turned my eyes away and went outside to take care of my business.

4

As the sun set, I returned.

As the sun was setting in the west, I felt the endlessly fleeting sands of my youth while feeling the cool sea breeze, and I was sad that I couldn't hold on to it.

Perhaps it was because my sweet thoughts hadn't faded yet and I hadn't escaped from strange "sentimentality."

Just as I came in and was about to sit down on the veranda, the owner ran towards me, his face blue with anger. I was surprised. Doubt arose, too.

"Oh my, that guy, that damned fellow, he just ran off with her."

From his breathless words, I understood everything.

How frustrating it must be to have a woman run off without paying the price. The owner, who shared his interests with her, was also frustrated.

The guy who took the woman didn't even pay, and he tricked the woman and ran off somewhere. ＜152＞

He said that he was a fisherman who traveled by boat to Japan, the East Sea, and the West Sea.

"Oh my, that's too bad."

I didn't say much.

The owner said that there was another kisaeng coming today.

I no longer had any interest in seeing her.

I just answered and listened to his words. He said that the woman who came yesterday was lying in her room, running a high fever, spitting phlegm, and then vomiting blood, and he looked surprised.

The woman who came yesterday was called "Hongdo," and she was twenty years old and a kisaeng from Jinju.

Feeling a little sorry for his enthusiastic words, I asked.

"Then where is today's woman from?"

"That girl is from Tongyeong. She's very pretty, really well-made. Her name is 'Maehwa.' She's eighteen years old, they say. I don't know about her singing and dancing, but she's definitely got the looks."

"Oh, so you're going to hook her up with some other guy."

"No, these guys here are crazy about it. Ah, I'll never do it again."

"Shall I take a look at her?"

When I seemed to show some interest in his words, he clung to me and started bragging about the new woman.

How could I not know his mind? I knew all his plans for me.

Even so, I slyly said to him.

"Hey, owner, I'm very lonely, so would you introduce her to me for one night?"

"Of course, no question about it. The new person has to learn about the pleasure quarters." He seemed very pleased with my words, and he went back to the tone he used to lecture me in.

"A man has to indulge in pleasure. We, you know, even when we were over thirty, we spent our days lavishly in drinking, women, and gambling. 'Kim-ssang' is wrong. He's already an old man. Haha. He's really an old man. In our day, 'Kim-ssang,' that was a good time. Back then, I was in Chungcheong-do... Our extravagance was really something. But now, I've fallen and I'm begging here. Ah, life is so fleeting."

He seemed to be lost in the pleasure quarters of the old days, reminiscing about his youth, his eyes looking far away, and he vividly shared his memories with me.

"So, you're telling me to drink alcohol, smoke cigarettes, and indulge in pleasure tonight. And start smoking opium, too. No, it's more like an order or command."

According to what he usually said, he was born into a wealthy family in Chungcheong-do, and he opened his eyes to pleasure from a young age, squandering his fortune in drinking and women, learning to smoke "morphine" and inject it. Now he's a wanderer who has drifted to this place.

I don't know if it's all made up, but I have to take some of it as true.

I'm originally a gloomy and quiet person, so he thinks that I'm greatly lacking as a young man because I don't drink with him, pass the time noisily, or know how to flirt with women.

He must really believe that I'm greatly lacking as a young man. He must think that he's doing me a favor since I always pay my bills on time and seem calm and generous.

He calls me "Kim-ssang" and boasts that I'm not like other lustful young men.

I know that when he tells me to "drink alcohol" and "smoke cigarettes," it's because he wants to get something out of me, but I think it's cute rather than hateful.

But I was uncomfortable with him recommending a woman to me today, given what had happened last night.

After selling a woman to someone else and having her run away this morning, he must be thinking that if he can get me, who lives in his house, to buy a woman, I won't run away, and he's confident that he'll get the money out of me. Even if it means ruining my reputation, he must be confident that he can get something out of me.

Thinking about this, I wanted to spit on his face.

But I still jokingly told him to bring the woman here.

The "owner" must have been hopeful because of my words, and he mustered up the courage to go get the woman.

As he stood up and ran off, I couldn't help but look closely at the back of his head.

He's over forty years old this year. His hair is already half gray, and there's no fat on the back of his neck, it's completely dry.

He's a person with only bones and skin.

His skin is burnt black and blue.

It must be because he misused his body when he was young, and also because he can't get his hands on the "morphine" that he usually smokes and relies on for his life, so he's become a mess.

The woman followed the owner and came out in front of me.

She was now standing in front of me, the person who would buy her flesh.

She smiled sweetly and sat politely next to me.

I have to give the reader a detailed description of the woman, but I'm sad that I can't help but tell you about the terrifying impression I had of her first.

The woman already had a strange, dull color on her nose, bluish, dark, and reddish.

I wasn't as surprised as I was when I first got the impression that the woman who came first had third-stage tuberculosis. Isn't it natural that this woman has the disease as well?

I've been wandering around for a long time, and my body has become like this. I've been craving the laughter of women and the smell of their makeup in my lonely boarding life, but now, with both women, I can't even smell their flesh and oil, and all my expectations have turned into disillusionment.

I talked to her about this and that, and I was sad that my personality was so cold.

Inwardly, the owner was encouraging me to cheat on the woman and inciting her to be coy.

I always stopped them with a laugh.

But what I found strange was that the two women looked almost alike, and they spoke in the same dialect. Seeing the younger one deeply sympathizing with the older one's illness, I couldn't help but think that these two were siblings or from the same hometown.

The one called "Maehwa" had more flesh on her face and looked strong and lively, so she had the power to attract men.

I followed the owner's request to play Hwatu with him, and I felt sorry for "Hongdo," who was lying in the room, her face pale and haggard, her cheeks sunken, tears welling up in her large eyes, and spitting bright red blood.

5
That night. I heard the sound of
"Seong-ah, Seong-ah" in my sleep.

I couldn't help but slap my knee in joy that my observations were complete.

I was awake, and I strained my ears and held my breath, listening to what they were saying, not wanting to miss a single word. ＜155＞

"Seong-ah, Seong-ah, don't be too tired."
"Hey, do you think I want to do this? I'm in a lot of pain, too, because I can't help it. Cough cough cough..."
"Oh my, you're spitting blood again."
"Yeah, it's really bad today."
"I think Seong-i is going to die."
"...Cough cough cough, yeah, I'm going to die."
"Mom spat blood and died at thirty-two, they say. Dad died at twenty-nine."
"Cough cough... I'm going to die at twenty-two. Death is the same for the gray-haired and the young."
"So, Seong-i wants to die?"
"...Cough cough..."
"I don't want to die. He's coming out soon."
"Oh, Park-seobang is coming out in September, they say."
"Yeah, that's right. Maybe at the beginning of the month."
"It's already been six months. He's a goner, too. Stealing other people's things and eating prison food. And you're foolish to trust a man like that."
It was clear that they were sisters and that they were hiding their names and going around separately as a business strategy.

We can guess that "Park-seobang" is a swindler and a con artist who makes a living by swindling and embezzling, and that he's "Maehwa's" husband.

And I was sad that there was no man to hold them and sleep with them tonight.

Their story continued. I heard the sister's cough and long sighs, heart-wrenching laments, and I felt sorry for them.

In other words, they were getting my sympathy for free.

Would a cynical and fickle "humanitarian" like me be angry or happy that they were shedding tears of sympathy for their grievances?

"Hey, who did you sleep with at that house last night? There must have been a guest."
"Yeah, there was. I slept with an old Japanese man. He was really something. But he gave me 5 won in the morning and forgave all my debts."
"Good job. Good job. Don't even talk about me. There was some dark guy who traveled by boat, and he ran away in the morning after seeing something terrible. Cough cough..."
"That guy, that son of a bitch should fall and die in the sea. May his throat burst."
"Hmm, what's the point of complaining?"＜156＞
"Men are all like that. They're all like that. But I guess we'll be resting at this house for Chuseok."
"Yeah, we'll rest somewhere. What good is the holidays for a woman like us? Ugh."
"Oh my. Ipi! Seong-i is going to die. I'm going to die."
"…Sigh… Sigh."
"…"
"Sis, how much money do you have?"
"About a hundred nyang."
"20 won, huh? What are you going to do with that money?"
"Park-seobang. When our Park-seobang comes out, I'm going to buy him a new outfit."
"Hmph. You're crazy. You can't forget a guy like that, so you're even giving him money. You're going to spit blood and save every penny, and then give all that money to that dog?"
"Augu, augu, Seong-i is being nosy. Stop it. Don't say that. Please don't say that. Sob sob sob."
The younger one seems to be crying.

Outside, the moon is brighter than the day, and I've needed to go to the bathroom for a long time, and now I can't stand it anymore.

But I'm not losing any interest in their comedy, so I can't get up and interrupt their story with my movements or questions. Aren't they mercilessly cursing the world and men?

I'm also cursing the world, and their curses are included in my curses of the world.

But when it comes to cursing men, I'm the one who's taking all the arrows that they're sending to all the men in the world.

I laughed alone at the strange fate I was now facing, even for a single night or a brief moment.

"Hey, you're wrong. You should take that 10 won and go to the hospital and get a couple of shots. That's the right thing to do."
"Yeah, you're right. Seong-i's words are right, definitely right. But if it's not me, who will take care of that useless guy who's coming out of prison? Even though my nose is rotting and it hurts, can I afford to give 50 nyang for a single shot of medicine?"
"That's right. Those doctor bastards are greedy. They say that a single shot of medicine doesn't cost more than 1 won, but they charge 10 won. Robbers. Robbers."
"The pharmacies are getting rich because of us. The guy who slept with me last night will need a shot in a few days."
"Yeah, that's right. You're going to pass the disease on to this man and that man, and then you're going to die a sinner."
"Hmph, who's the sinner? It's the man who gets the disease from me."＜157＞
I had room to think about their argument.

In fact, the woman passed the disease on to the man, so it's the woman's fault. The man gets the disease from the woman, so it's the man's fault.

"But good job. Giving 5 won and also paying for the room and board. Cough cough cough... Ugh. Ugh..."
"…Augu. I hate it. Please don't cough. That's right, the old Japanese man is generous. Korean and Chinese bastards only give 2 won, what's there to say?"
"Yeah, what about the Westerners? That Chunsun used to sleep with them in Busan and get 500 nyang - 100 won, that is. They would give it to her."
"Haigu, really…."
"Aigu. Let's go to sleep. I don't think I'll live much longer. It's not far off. I think I'm going to die. Ugh. Cough cough. Hem hem."
"…"
"…Ugh…"
"Che. Che."
I can hear the sound of the younger sister sticking out her tongue.

Perhaps the sister's cough and the blood and phlegm she's spitting out are making her very uncomfortable.

I couldn't bear it anymore. I coughed loudly and went outside.

The wind is cool, the moon is bright, and the stars are sleeping, and it feels like the empty field is filled with soft glass. The sound of crickets crying under my feet evokes my melancholy even more and makes me think more deeply about the fate of life and the ugly side of society that I have just heard.

I came back into the room and couldn't fall asleep for a long time, planning to leave this house before seeing a corpse tomorrow morning, and then I spent the night trembling from a terrible dream.

6
Now, as of today, that was already 4 or 5 years ago.

But what I occasionally think about is the world that is hungry for something and the eyes of Kim Doryeong, who has an extra finger.

The older woman must have become a ghost.

The younger one's nose must be rotting and sunken, and how could the fate of the owner's family be easy?

Even now, I'm still wandering around, just like I was back then, but is writing and selling stories like this a change or just something trivial?

As the owner said, life is fleeting. —The End—
—27, 2, 28, came to Seoul— ＜158＞ ＜146-158＞
**Named Entities**

S	S
군산집	Gunsanjip
이도령	Yi Doryeong
방자	Bangja
금일가옥	Geumilgaok
경상도	Gyeongsang-do
전라도	Jeolla-do
김도령	Kim Doryeong
김륙손	Kim Ryukson
진주	Chinju
홍도	Hongdo
통영	T’ongyŏng
매화	Maehwa
긴상	Kim Sang
충청도	Ch’ungch’ŏng-do
박서방	Pak Sŏbang
부산	Pusan
춘션	Ch’un Sŏn
서울	Sŏul



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제6호
발행일	1927년 04월 01일
기사제목	살팔너 다니는 사람
필자	*南
기사형태	소설

살팔너 다니는 사람
						*南
1
내가 S라는 항구에 잇슬 때이엇슴니다.
나는 방랑(放浪)도 안이오. 또 안임도 안인 바람에 날리는 나무가지처럼 뿌리는 잇스면서도 흔들흔들하는 생활을 하고 잇섯슴니다.
그 때 나는 일음만은 직업을 가젓스며 혼자서 군산집이라는 떠들어 온 사람의 집에 사관이라고 졍하고 잇섯슴니다.
그 집에 간지 두어 달 되여서 어느 일요일이엇슴니다.
따끈따끈하고 서늘한 가을날이 엇는데 하오가 되여서 나는 아모 하는 일업시 퇴페한 나의 생활에 끗업는 겨을함을 얼ㅅ들히 늣기면서 압마루에서 서편에 기우러저가는 가을해ㅅ빗흘 온 몸과 두 뺨에 확근 확근하게 바더 쪼이면서 대글 대글 굴느고 잇섯슴니다.
「이럴 때는 남들은 담배나 피우건만은」 나는 그러한 자미도 업는 것을 설어하면서 막연히 끗엄시 개인 가을하늘 푸른 것만 처다보고 그대로 누어 잇섯슴니다.
이 려관에 따로 들어 잇는 손님도 업고 주인과는 서로 할 이야기도 인제는 씨가 떨이저서 하든 이야기를 뒤푸리하는 것도 자미업는 일이라 나는 주인을 불으기도 주저하엿슴니다. ＜146＞
「이때는 게집애라는 약이라야만 마음의 병을 곳치겟구나.」
나는 내 마음의 아모 일에 흥미도 업고 비관도 염세도 안인 무감각의 이 생활을 스스로 진단하고 처방을 생각하고 잇섯슴니다.
「푸른 저 하눌에게 어듸 얌전한 게집애나 하나 떠러젓스면 마음으로 이러한 얼빠진 긔대를 가지고도 내 자신 얼토당토 안한 밋친놈의 긔대에 왼일인지 내 자신이 힘써 부뎡(否定)하면서도 이상한 긔대에 마음이 솔니고 잇섯슴니다.
「야이 이게 왼일임닛가.」 여긔 사람이 안이면 하다 못해 개색기라도 한 마리 산 것만 잇스면 나는 이 깃븜과 놀나움은 모조리 하소연하고 십흠니다.
내 마음은 천발 만발 늘어진 실이 다시 힘센 탄력(彈力)을 어더 자리의 모가지처럼 아주 단단하게 긴쟝되고 움추려들어 도화빗 긔대를 가지게 된 것이다.
그것은 맛춤 그때 대문에서 젊은 게집이 하나 낫하난 것이외다.
나는 이것이 현실인가 혹은 몽환인가 먼첨 그것을 의심하엿슴니다.
독자여 나는 그때 확실이 마루에 내 륙톄를 대굴고 잇섯스며 력력하게 해가 하늘에 밝게 빗처 잇섯스니 어이 이것이 조곰이라도 독개비 작란이라 하겟슴닛가.
나는 그것이 현실인 줄 알고 의심할 여지가 업슴으로 과거에 몃해 동안 하느님이라는 양반에게 바로 밋처서 텬당 갈 준비로 례배당에 다닌 일이 잇섯드니 졍말 이런 때에 하누님이 나의 심심푸리로 선녀를 내두워 주섯나? 하고 조와라고 뛸 번 하엿슴니다. 뛰엇드면 그 게집에 큼직한 우숨꺼리가 되엿겟지요 만은 나는 뛰들 못햇슴니다.
그 게집의 모양이 엇던지 말하자면 미인이던가.
이것을 이제 나는 설명할 의무를 저야 하겟슴니다.
무어라하면 좃켓슴닛가. 나는 리도령은 안이지만은 바로 광한루에서 건네 뛰는 춘향을 보고 방자와 둘이서 금일가옥인가를 노래하든 그만큼은 나도 깃벗스며 조왓슴니다.
나는 흥분하고 취한 내 맘을 힘써서 가란추면서 뛰는 가슴을 진정식히고 가만히 잇섯슴니다.
나는 이제부텀은 온 신경과 온 정신이 일거일동을 남기지 안코 그 게집의 하는 노릇을 살피지 안으면 안되게 되남슴니다.
그것이 나에게는 아주 더업는 뜻잇는 사업이요. 척직이 한순간에 말되고 엇슴니다.
그 게집은 내가 누어잇는 압흘 잔기침을 두어 번하면서 치마를 사르랑사르랑 글면서 주인이 잇는 안으로 들어감니다.
나는 발서 나도 몰으게 닐어나 안저서 굉이가 쥐를 삽을 듯이 도사리고 안저 잇섯슴니다. ＜147＞
「주인 기심닛가 예-」
「네, 둘오세요. 어데서 오신 손님이시요.」 게집은 이 집에 처음 오는 것이며 손님이 것을 나는 이 두 사람의 첫 마데 문답으로 그만 알어채엇슴니다.
이곳은 경상도라도 전라도에 갓가운 바다가이며 사람 수로는 상당히 살지만은 고기잡기로 업으로 하는 이가 만흐며 려관에라도 사람의 출입이 별로히 업는 외진 곳이 엇슴니다.
특별한 목뎍이 업는 이가 안이면 더구나 녀자가 이러케 올리는 만무한 것이외다.
나는 감추여 둔 것도 안이지만 조곰 섭섭하기로 그 게집이 엇더한 부류의 사람인 것은 여긔까지 읽어 주신 독자는 그것이 「긔생」이라고는 발서 즘작하섯스리다.
정말 고백을 하면 나는 그 게집이 「녀학생」이나 소위 「모던껄」이 안인 것을 끗업시 설허하엿슴니다.
만은 그 게집이 그리 밉게 생기지 안엇스며 나히 심울이 한둘 넘엇슬만한 때이엇고 게다가 긔생이라는 것이 쉬웁게 갓가워진 것이며 또 더 한층 나아가서 엇더한 바램도 바랠 수 잇다는 것으로 나는 그것을 그 게집이 긔생인 것을 깃버하게 되엿슴니다.
그런데 여긔서 한가지 늣기는 것은 사람놈의 성질이 엇더케 요처름 타협을 잘하나 하는 것에 나는 놀나지 안을 수 업섯슴니다.
그러나 그것은 내가 곳처름하는 이야기에 틔가 될 듯하니 그만두고 마루에 안즌 게집의 꼴이나 더 좀 살펴 봅시다.
게집은 얼굴이 길줌하고 분을 발느지 안은 듯한데 얼굴은 새하얏코 두 억개가 착 나즈며 감수레한 두 눈이 훨신 커서 싀원해 보입데다.
차림차림은 내가 비단 일음을 몰으니 그레도 소설 날치나 쓰고 남에게 얘기라고 한다는 자가 넘친 듯하나 여긔서는 거저 그 게집이 옷도 그리 드럽지 안은 것을 맵시잇게 닙엇스며 이모저모 보아서 왼만하다는 것까지만 말해 둡시다.
뎜수! 뎜수를 맥이라고요. 하아. 자 아수우닛간 그만 일굽 뎜쯤 주어두쥀€요.

2
그날 저역이엇슴니다.
왠일인지 이 집에 사람이 전에 안 오더니 하나식 둘식 들어오지 안슴니가.
그들은 나종 여섯 사람이나 되엿는데 그들 중에는 나의 안면 잇는 이도 잇고 낫설은 이도 잇섯슴니다.
얼는 보기에 그들은 새로온 이 적은 새를 농락하러 온 것에 틀님이 업섯스리라. 사실 고렛슴니다.
오입쟝이라 하기에는 조곰 원통한 모주 잔이나 빨고 함부로 ＜148＞ 게집이라면 숫개처름 돌아다니는 그런 페들이엇슴니다.
그들은 슬을 버리엇고 게집에 모긔소리 가튼 가늘다른 노래가 억세고 우렁찬 사내들의 지저귀는 소리에 석기어 토막 토막움´ 벽을 건너서 내 귀에 울니어 들어왓슴니다.
나는 그네들에게 게집을 빼앗긴 것을 원통하여 하면서 책을 드니 분주해 글을 읽지 못하고 잠이 또 오지 안는데 달은 밝어서 낫갓해서 그만 밧갓흐로 뛰여나갓슴니다.
이러 저리 도라다니다가 들어와 보니 사내들도 업고 불을 모다 껏는데 나 잇는 녑 방의 압마루에 사환하는 총각이 맥업시 달만을 치어다보고 안저 잇슬 뿐이엇슴니다.
「김도령, 무얼하요. 달이 조흐니 생각이 나는구만.」 나는 그를 미웁지 안케 우스게를 걸엇슴니다. 「언제 어데 하나 말해 줄까.」
내가 이러케 말한 것은 낮에 온 그 게집을 마음에 두고 한 것인 것은 물론이외다.
그는 왼일인지 나의 이 말에 온몸을 감짝 놀나면서 말대답도 올케 하지를 안코 「히히히히」하면서 웃는지 우는지 몰으게 그만 실금실금 부억간 안에 잇는 토굴 가튼 제 방으로 도망을 하여 가버리엇슴니다.
나는 좀 이상하게 생각하면서 「내 말에 성낼 리유는 업지.」 이러케 혼자 마음을 놋코 방으로 들어가려고 하니 그념헤 게집에 자그만한 신과 사내에 큼직한 구두가 하나 나란히 노히어 잇섯슴니다.
나는 그것이 당연한 것이라고 그 게집의 이번지름이 공행이 안인 것을 깃버한다는 것도 우수운 소리나마 내 마음을 노앗슴니다.
달 밝은 밤에 나 혼자 누엇는데 념헤 방에서는 술에 취하고 고기로 탐낸 사내의 덜응 덜응하는 숨소리와 약하듸 약한 짓밟힌 게집의 가는 숨소리 교향이 되여 들니움니다.
나는 힘써서 그들의 정경을 생각하지 안으려 하것만은 왠일인지 불사하려니 더욱 고 모양에 호긔심이 끌니고 생각이 나서 인간의 추악을 나는 배불느게 맛보지 안을 수 업섯슴니다.
그러나 총각이 아즉 그 방 압헤을 어물어물하고 도라 다니는 것은 왠일이겟슴닛가.
나는 여긔서 그 총각에 대한 고찰과 소개를 하여야 하겟슴니다.
그 보담 급한 말이 또 하나 잇스니 이 집주인이 이러케 댁극 게집의 광고를 잘한 것이며 그 효과가 자긔와 게집의 생활을 보장하게 되는 처지와 수완에 한번 놀나지 안을 수 업슴니다.
이 주인에 대해서도 만흔 이야기가 얍흐로 나올 것이외다.
자 나는 차츰차츰 아주 죄다 하오리다.
짜른 가을밤이엇지마은 나는 살을 팔너 온 게집 그것을 사는 사내 더 한층 나아가서 세상이 그것을 승인할 뿐이라 ＜149＞ 그러케 만든 세상을 나는 가만히 생각해 보앗슴니다.
방문 얍헤서 도라다니는 삼십이 넘은 총각은 밤이 다하도록 도라 다녓겟넌지 주인은 끌어다 부처노은 사내에게서 돈 바들 방법을 궁리하노라고 잠을 자지 못하넌지 엇젯든 이 밤에 이 집안은 자미잇는 곳이엇슴니다.

3
다음 날 아침이엇슴니다.
나는 모든 것을 니즐랴 하엿스나 주인을 볼 때 총각을 볼 때 새벽에 잇즉이 달아낫슬 사나히를 생각할 때에 젹지안은 우숨꺼리가 여긔저긔에 질펀 하엿슴니다.
내가 아침 밥상을 대하고 압마루에 안저 잇슬 때이엇슴니다.
나는 동편 해 돗는 곳을 향하고 맛업는 밥은 실흐면서 근근히 씹고 잇섯슴니다.
그제야 게집은 제 자든 방에서 밧갓흐로 나왓슴니다.
그는 머리를 실실이 허틀고 괴로운 눈을 힘업시 뜨고 잇섯슴니다.
살세게 쏘아보내는 가을 아침 해ㅅ빗치 말업시 그를 꾸짓고 괴로히 하는 것이라 하겟슴닛가.
해빗 압헤 내여논 그는 한업시 드러웟슴니다. 간밤의 지난 것을 알고 보는 나에게야 그것이 더 한층 심햇다 하릿가.
만은 내야 그를 드러웁다고 말할 권리는 조곰도 업는 사람이엇슴니다.
그를 드럽다 미웁다고 보기는 내 마음은 너므도 두려웟슴니다.
나는 아-모 판단도 성찰도 업시 풀어진 용수텰 가튼 내 마음을 알리게만 하고 잇섯슴니다.
자 이제 여긔서 내가 그에 대하야 작욕하는 마음을 긔록하기도 그만둡시다.
그리고 엇더케 되여가는 사실의 추의만을 얘기합시다. 독자도 이것을 구하지 안켓슴닛가.
게집은 마루에서 뜰로 내려오면서 연애 기침을 골골 캥캥 하면서 두 팔을 굽히어 가슴을 부여 안엇슴니다.
고개를 약간 수구리고 왼편으로 조곰 기우러지게 하며 쓰리는 듯할 아리는 듯한 표졍이 뒤에서 보는 나의 눈에도 전신에 낫하나 보이엇슴니다.
그는 신을 끄을고 가만가만히 내려오도니 담쟝이 잇는 얍헤 와서 해를 대하고 멈추고 섯슴니다.
뒤꼴만 나에게는 보이지만은 가느다른 목이 길줌하게 하이하게 말너서 늘어젓스며 잔등과 억개에는 뼈만이 남엇는지 닙은 옷이 살에 다허서 보들보들한 맛이 조곰도 업섯슴니다.
게집은 얼굴을 숙이어서 가늘게 가래를 배앗드니 신으로 그것을 문질어 업셋슴니다. ＜150＞
그는 여러 번 이러케 하더니 아즉 추석이 되지안은 가을 긔후에 치움을 늣기는지 몸을 아실아실 떠는 듯 하엿슴니다.
집웅에서는 깃브게 참새가 지저귀면서 한업시 열니어 잇는 들판으로 그들의 밥을 차저서 활긔잇게 날너갓슴니다.
웃는 듯한 춤줄 듯한 맑은 햇빗치 아침의 외누리에 가득하고 마당은 깨끗하게 쓸어노아서 자연의 모든 것은 가장 아름다웟슴니다.
게집이 피를 배앗헛넌지 담을 토하엿는지 그것은 여긔서 시비할 것이 업겟슴니다.
담쟝 압헤는 「코쓰모쓰」 꼿이 희고 빩앗케 가득히 픠여 산들산들 바람에 날니면서 힘업는 듯키 춤을 추고 잇섯슴니다.
다시 말합니다. 자연은 건강하고 아름다웟습니다. 거긔는 매음이나 강간은 업섯슴니다.
병마에 먹히고 조곰 남아 잇는 게집의 몸은 이제 삼긔에 들은 것 가트니 멀지 안엇겟슴니다.
게집이 다시 마루 우로 올너올 때 「김도령」은 대야에다 게집의 세수물을 가지고 나왓슴니다.
나는 간밤에 본 일도 잇슴으로 자세히 그의 꼴을 살피어 보앗슴니다.
댁걱 그에게 한가지 변한 것을 보앗슴니다.
그것은 그의 닙은 옷이 달너진 것과 그가 길우에서 땃코 잇는 머리에 번들번들 하엿스며 수건이 새하얀 것이엇슴니다.
그것은 조곰 나로서 놀나게 하엿슴니다.
또 하나는 그가 애써서 그의 왼편 손을 대야 밋헤 다 감추는 것이엇슴니다.
이것은 내가 처음 이 집에 왓섯슬 때에도 그가 한 일이지만은 오늘 아침에 하는 노릇은 좀 더 심각하게 보이엇슴니다.
그 유례를 여긔에 이야기하기로 합시다.
「김도령」은 앗가도 말한 바와 가치 나히는 설은이 넘엇슴니다.
그는 몸은 실하고 튼튼히 생겻스나마 일을 할 줄 모르고 농사에는 더구나 까막이람니다.
그는 실한 몸으로 이 집에서 아침저녁에 물을 길으고 밥을 짓슴니다. 그리고 사환을 함니다.
그는 주인에게 한푼 보수가 잇는 것이 아니며 이 집에 십 년이 넘도록 잇섯고 이제 이 집이 군산서 살지 못하여서 이 항구로 흘너 들어오든 때에도 그는 주인 집 개와 함끠 멀니 이곳으로 딸아 온 것이외다.
그의 일음은 「김륙손」이엇슴니다.
이 일음을 가지게 된 것이 가난 이외에 그를 설읍게 하는 리유가 되엿슴니다.
그는 남보담 「산신」의 은헤가 만핫는지 손구락을 한 개 왼편 손에＜151＞ 더 가지고 낫다 함니다.
대야에 물을 게집의 압헤 내밀 때의 하든 노릇의 리유는 이제 설명이 되엿겟슴니다.
물을 바든 게집은 얼는 손을 찬물에 넛키를 죽기로 실혀하는 듯 함니다.
총각은 대야물를 놋코도 그 자리를 닐어서지 안코 왼편 팔은 뒤로 돌녀서 손을 숨기고 그가 평생에 알고 잇는 가장 귀여운 표정을 그의 얼굴에 낫하내이면서 게집의 사랑을 구하야마지안는지 뜻잇고 알ㅅ들한 눈안을 게집에게로 보내고 잇섯슴니다.
나는 밥상을 치우려다가 「김도령」에게 일을 주어서 그 자리를 닐어서게 하는 것이 하도 미안해서 그냥 술을 잡고 보고 잇섯슴니다.
게집은 엇더케 생각햇든지 사내에게 추파를 보낸 모양이외다.
사내는 끗업는 만족을 늦기엇는지 흔들거리며 허느적거리는 자국으로 버억간으로 달녀 들어감니다.
나는 그를 보랴고 한 것도 사실 안이지만은 내 눈이 그의 뒤로 향하야 딸아 갓슬 때 그는 부억문깐에서 몸은 안으로 숨기고 얼굴만 내밀어서 알ㅅ들한 그의 님- 이 말이 맛지 안을넌지는 몰으지만은 제 딴에는 틀님업시 그러한 그 게집에 자태에서 눈을 옮기지 못하넌지 게집의 몸뚱이가 뚤어질 듯키 내여다 보면서 눈이 실죽실죽하고 입이 벙글벙글할 뿐 안이라 두 억개가 춤을 추더이다.
나는 그것을 본 것이 도루 미안하게 되여서 눈을 도르키고 나의 일을 볼 양으로 밧갓흐로 나갓슴니다.

4

석양이 되여서 나는 도라왓슴니다.
해는 서으로 넘어가려하는데 사늘사늘한 바다의 바람을 쏘이면서 나는 끗업시 다라나는 나의 청춘의 해수를 늦기면서 공연히 차지 못함에 설어하고 잡지 못함에 허덕이엇슴니다.
아마 그때가 나의 달콤한 생각이 아즉 떨어지지 안코 이상한 「센틔멘탈」에서 버서나지 못하는 때이엇섯나 봄니다.
내가 들어와서 마루에 걸터 안즈랴 할 쯤에 주인은 싯퍼럿케 성이 나서 내게로 달녀왓슴니다. 나는 놀낫슴니다. 의심도 낫섯지요.
「허어, 그 놈을 그 염병할 녀석을 그만 떨구어 버리엇서.」
숨이 헐떡거리면서 하는 그의 소리에 나는 모든 것을 알아채엿슴니다.
갑슬 밧지 못한 게집이야 얼마나 원통하릿가. 그와 리해를 가치하는 주인의 원통함도 그 말은 하리다.
게집을 다리고 간 놈은 주쵀도 내지 안코 게집을 속이고 어데로 가버리엇슴니다. ＜152＞
그가 배를 타고 고기잡이로 일본으로 동해로 서해로 다니는 자라함니다.
「하아, 그것 참 원통하게되엿소이다.」
나는 길게 말하지 안엇습니다.
주인은 오늘 또 긔생이 하나 더하다는 말을 함니다.
나는 이제는 그를 보려는 흥미도 조곰도 가지지 안앗슴니다.
거저 그의 말에 코대답이나 하여주고 듯고 잇섯슴니다. 그는 언제 온 게집이 방에 누어서 온몸에서 열이 만히 나고 담을 바다내다가 피를 토하엿다고 하며 놀난 빗츨 보이엿슴니다.
어제 온 게집은 「홍도」라 하며 슴우살인데 진주의 긔생이라 하엿슴니다.
나는 그의 열심하는 말에 조곰 미안하여서 뭇기도 하엿슴니다.
「그러면 오눌은 게집의 곳은 어덴고.」
「그 애는 통영 아희람니다. 아주 입부게 생겻서 썩 잘낫단 말이야. 그애는 「매화」라 그런다오. 열여덜살이라나. 가무는 엇던지 몰나도 맵시 하나만은 꼭 취함 적한데.」
「흥 또 어느 놈을 끌어다 붓치어 주오구려.」
「안이 여긧놈들 막 화뎍이야. 애- 인제 다시는.」
「어듸 그 애를 좀 볼까?」
내가 그의 말에 조곰 흥미를 가지는 듯키 보이니 그는 나에게 밧작 닭여 붓흐면서 한갈가치 그 새로 온 게집애의 자랑을 함니다그려.
내가 어이 그의 마음을 아지 못하엿겟슴닛가. 말큼 그의 나에게 하려는 모든 게획은 알어섯슴니다.
그러고도 나는 엉큼하게 그에게 이런 말을 하엿슴니다.
「여보 주인 내가 몹시도 고적하고 보니 그 애를 하로밤 내게 소개해 주시겟소.」
「아모렴, 그게야 여부가 잇소. 올래 새 사람이란 화류를 알어야 한다닛가.」 그는 나의 이 말이 몹시도 그의 마음에 마젓던지 평소에 그가 나에게 설법(說法)을 하던 그 어됴로 도라갓슴니다.
「사람이란 오입을 해야 한단 말이엇다. 우리야 말이지요 삼십이 넘어서도 아주 호화로히 주색잡긔에 화창한 세월을 보내엇다 말이지요. 「긴상」은 틀엿서. 사람이 발서 로인이 되엿서. 하하. 영 바로 로인이 되엿단 말이야. 우리 갓해서는 「긴상」이 시대야 그것 참 조화섯지. 그때 내가 충청도 **잇섯겟지 바루 우리 호화라* *성** 덜석덜석 햇드란 말이지. 그러나 지금은 락조해서 이곳에 구걸이라 말이지. 아아 참 인생이 무상(無常)이로구만.」
그는 정말 녯날의 화류쟝에 빠저서 즐거웁게 지나든 그의 ＜153＞ 청춘을 회상하는지 눈알을 저 먼 곳으로 아득히 도리키면 나에게 렬실히 이런 추억을 함니다.
「그레 그러면 내게 술이나 담베나 먹고 오늘밤에 오입을 하란 말이지. 그리고 아편도 곳 피우기 시작하라신 말슴이로구만. 안이 바로 명령이나 분부이시로구만.」
그는 그가 평소에 하든 말에 의지하면 충청도의 부호에 집에 나서 어려서부터 화류에 눈을 뜨고 주색에 침몰하여서 가산을 탕진 하엿고 「몰핀」을 빨고 찔느기를 배와서 이제는 적수로 이곳으로 흘너 떠들어 왓다함니다.
그의 가쟝인지 몰으나 얼마쯤은 사실로 들을 수밧게 업섯슴니다.
내가 원래 성질이 침울하고 고요한 사람이라 그에게 술잔이나 바다주고 떠들석하게 지나며 게집이라도 희롱을 할 줄 몰으는 것을 그는 나 가튼 젊은 사람으로는 아주 크게 부족한 뎜이라고 그는 아주 밋엇는 모양이외다.
어느 때라도 내가 밥갑을 제때 꼭꼭 칠어주고 침착하고 관대한 듯한 그런 외면의 내 가식을 그는 참으로 나의 특쟝인 줄 알고
「긴상」 「긴상」하면서 나를 요색 젊은 사람이 안이라고 자랑을하여 나왓슴니다.
나는 그가 「술을 먹어라」, 「담배를 피워라」하는 것들은 제가 내턱에 조곰 어더 먹으려 하는 것이 그 동긔인 줄 알지만은 차라리 귀여웁게 생각하고 그리 미웁게 보지는 안엇섯슴니다.
그러나 오늘 나에게 게집을 권하는 것만은 간밤에 꼴도 잇고 하여서 불쾨하엿슴니다.
딴 곳 놈에게 계집을 팔고 보니 오늘 아침 가치 도망을 하는 그러한 불상사가 나고 보니 그는 제 집에 잇는 내에게 게집의 살을 사게 해서 내가 달아나지 안은 것과 그가 꼭 바다내리라는 자신에다가 내가 여긔서 그레도 젊지 안흔 교재를 하고 잇스니 엇더한 경우에는 나의 명예를 유린하여서라도 나에게는 바더먹을 자신이 그에게는 잇섯겟슴니다.
이런 것을 생각하고 보니 나는 그의 낫반닥이에 침을 배앗허 버리고 십헛슴니다.
그러나 아즉 우스게로 게집을 이곳으로 다리고 오라고 하엿슴니다.
「주인」은 나의 이 말에 팔구분의 바램을 가지게 되엿넌지 용긔를 내여서 게집을 다리려 감니다.
그가 닐어서서 뛰여 가는데 나는 그의 뒤ㅅ골을 자세히 보지 안을 수 업섯슴니다.
그는 올해 사십이 넘엇슴니다. 발서 머리가 반백이 되고 목 뒤에는 살 한뎜 업시 밧삭 말넛슴니다.
그는 뼈와 껍질만을 가진 사람이라 하겟지요.
살은 타서 깜앗코 푸레죽죽하엿슴니다.
모도가 젊은 때의 몸을 잘못가진 탓이겟스며 또 더구나 요사히는 늘 피우고 나려오는 그 목숨과 가튼 「몰핀」갓지도 ＜154＞ 어더 맛낼 수가 업서서 그는 모양업게 되엿슴니다.
게집은 주인의 뒤를 딸아 내 압흐로 나왓슴니다.
그는 이제 자긔의 살을 팔어 살 사람인 나의 압헤 나온 것이외다.
그는 상긋상긋 지은 우슴을 우스면서 공손히 내 엽헤 안젓슴니다.
나는 독자에게 그 게집에 모양을 자세히 보고하여야 하겟건만은 먼첨 그에게서 맨 처음에 인상된 무서운 소리를 하지 안을 수 업는 것은 나 혼자도 설허함니다.
그 게집은 발서 코에 푸르고 검고 붉으수리한 이상한 탁한 빗치 보입데다.
나는 먼첨 온 게집에게서 펫병이 삼긔가 되엿스리라는 인샹을 밧고 놀낫든 것보담은 이번에는 놀남의 도수가 훨신 적엇나이다. 이 게집이 그한병을 가지는 것이 그 또한 당연한 일이 안이겟슴니가.
내가 오래오래 동안을 도라다니면서 몸이 이만큼 되여서 고적한 하슉생활에 게집의 우슴과 그 지분의 냄새를 탐하고 긔달이다가 이제 두 게집에게서 그 살과 기름의 냄새도 조곰도 맛하보도 못하고 발서 모든 긔대가 환멸에 도라가고 말은 셈이외다.
나는 그이와 이런저런 이야기를 하면서 나의 셩격이 어데까지던지 랭랭한 것에 설허하엿슴니다.
게집은 속으로 쥬인은 것흐로 나에게 사기를 권하고 헝졍을 붓침니다.
나는 늘 우슴으로 그들의 입을 막고 말엇슴니다.
그런데 내가 이상하게 생각한 것은 두 게집애가 얼울이 거반 닮엇고 말새도 한곳 말새에 틀님업스며 젹은 애가 먼첨 온 애에게 그의 병을 만히 애닯게 동졍하는 것을 보아서는 이 두 애가 형제이거나 그러치 안으면은 한 고향 사람이리라고 나는 생각하지 안을 수 업섯슴니다. 「매화」라는 애는 얼울에 살도 만흐며 튼튼해 보이고 활발하여서 하는 노릇이 씩씩함으로 사내를 끄을 힘이 잇섯슴니다.
나는 화투를 하자는 쥬인의 청대로 갓치 하면서 방에 누워잇는 희푸르고 핼쭉한 얼울에 뺨이 홀쪽하게 들어가고 크다른 눈에 눈물을 떠으트리면서 입에서 샛밝안 피를 토할 「홍도」의 운명을 가여히 생각하엿슴니다.

5
그날 밤이엇슴니다. 나는 잠결에
「성아 성아」하는 소리를 들엇슴니다.
나는 나 혼자서 내가 관찰한 것이 마쳤다는 깃븜에 무릅을 탁 치지 안을 수 업섯슴니다.
나는 잠은 깨이 엇고 그들이 하는 말이 들님으로 귀를 긔우리고 숨을 죽이고 가만히 듯지를 안엇슴니가. 한마듸라도 흘니지 안으리라는 쥰비를 하면서. ＜155＞
「성아 성아, 지침마그라 응.」
「야야(이애) 내가 어데 하고 십허 하는 줄 아느냐. 하지을 안수업는 나도 몹시 괴로웁단다. 캥캥캥....」
「아이구 또 피를 내놋는구나.」
「그래 오늘은 왠일인지 이러케 심하네.」
「아모레도 성이 죽겟다.」
「...캥캥캥캥 그렷치 죽을 수밧게-.」
「엄마도 피을 뱃고 설은둘에 죽엇다데. 아바지(아바지)도 숨을아홉살에 도라갓다네.」
「캥캥... 나는 심을두살에 죽는구나. 백발이나 청츈이나 죽엄은 매일반이지.」
「그러면 성이는 죽고집나.」
「...캥캥...」
「나는 죽기는 실터라. 그이가 나와할데.」
「오오 참 박서방이 9월에 나온다지.」
「응 그레. 초셩에 나올넌지.」
「발서 6달이나 되엿나. 그이도 틀녓더라. 남의 거 훔쳐 먹고 나서는 콩밥 먹고 콩밥이 끗나면 또 훔쳐먹고 너년도 어리석지 그까짓 놈의 사나히를 밋고서.」
그들이 형제인 것과 이름을 속하고 그것을 감초고 자긔의 상업정책으로 따로따로 갈녀서 도라 다니는 것은 틀님업는 사실이엇슴니다.
「박서방」이라는 자는 협잡군이요 샤긔횡령이나 햐여서 먹고사는 부랑자로서 「매화」의 남편인 것을 우리는 즘작하고도 남을 것이외다.
그리고 오늘밤에는 그들을 안어주고 갓치 자줄 사내가 업는 것을 나는 섭섭히 하엿슴니다.
그들의 이야기는 다시 니여 남니다. 간간이 형의 기침과 길다른 한숨 눈물겨운 하소연을 가슴 아리게 나는 들엇슴니다.
나는 말하자면 그들의 신세타령은 그들이 몰네 돈 안주고 듯는 셈이지요.
내 갓흔 설닉고 갑헐한 「인도쥬의자」가 저욱히 그들의 하소연에 동정의 눈물을 흘니는 것을 노여워 할넌지 깃버할는지요.
「얘야 간밤에는 그 집에서 누구하고 잣늬. 손님은 잇섯겟지.」
「그레 잇섯고 말고. 일본 영감이상하고 갓치 잣단다. 그 놈에 자식 엇더케 지독한지. 그레도 아침에 돈 5원 주고 내 식쵀 다 감허주엇서.」
「잘햇다. 잘햇다. 나는 말도 말어라. 엇던 배타고 다니는 식검은 놈인데 죽을 변을 보고 새벽에 달아 낫단다. 캥캥....」
「그놈 그놈 쌔(현)가 만발이나 빠저 죽을 놈. 당쟝에 목줄데가 불어저 죽을 놈하지.」
「흠 원망을 하니 무엇을 하나.」＜156＞
「사내ㅅ놈 다 그러치. 다 그래. 그러치만은 츄석은 우리 이 집에서 쉬일가부다.」
「그레 아모데서나 쉬이지. 우리 가튼 년에게 명졀이 오기로 무순 소용잇나. 악악.」
「아이구. 이피! 성이 아모레도 죽겟다. 죽겟네.」
「...휴우...휴우.」
「....」
「아가 네 돈 얼마나 가젓나.」
「한 백량되지.」
「20원이가. 그 돈가 머리할네?」
「박서방. 우리 박서방 나오면 차림옷이라도 한벌 해닙혀여지.」
「흥. 너년도 밋친 년이다. 그까짓 놈을 못니저서 돈까지 주어. 빼(뼈) 빠지게 한푼 두 푼 피를 토하고 모든 돈을 그 개가튼 놈을 준단 말인가.」
「아우구 아구 성이도 얘속하지. 그만아조. 그 말 마소. 제발 그 말 마소. 흑흘흑.」
적은 애는 우는 모양이다.
밧갓흔 낫보담 달이 밝고 나는 뒤ㅅ간에 몹시도 가고 십흔 지가 오래이라 이제는 견듸디지 못하게 되엿습니다.
그레도 나는 그들의 희화에 흥미가 조곰도 일허지지 안어서 닐어나지 못하며 몸짓이나 문녀는 소리에 그들의 이야기를 긋치게 할 수가 업섯슴니다. 그들은 세상과 사내를 여지업시 저주하지 안슴닛가.
나 역시 세상을 뎌주하는 데는 그들이 하는 그 내용도 나의 하는 세상의 뎌주에도 포함이 되어잇슴니다.
그런데 사나히를 뎌주하는 데는 나는 세상의 모든 남자에게 보내는 화살을 내가 모도다 대표의 격이 되여서 밧고 잇는 셈이 되엿슴니다.
나는 하루밤이나마 잠간이나마 이제 당하는 긔구한 운명을 혼자서 우섯슴니다.
「얘야 네 생각이 글넛다. 그 돈이 10원 가지고 가서 병원에 가서 주사침 두우방 마저라. 그것이 올흐니라.」
「그레 그럿키는 하다. 성이 말심이 올키야 꼭 올타. 그레도 깜악소에서 나오는 어지가지 업는 그이가 내 안이면 누가 밧들어 줄 사람이 잇슬가. 코야 석어지고 압흐기야 하지만은 침 한데에 쉰량이나 주고야 돈이 앗갑어 마줄 수가 잇단말가.」
「그럿타. 의사ㅅ놈들 화뎍가혼 놈들. 그놈들 침 한데 갑이 1원도 못친다는대 그것을 10원이나 바더. 도뎍놈. 도뎍놈.」
「약국놈들 우리 때문에 부자 만히 된다. 간밤에 나하고 잠자리 한 놈도 멧칠 안 잇스면 주사침이지.」
「그레 그럿타. 너도 이 사내 저 사나히에게 병을 옴겨주고 죽으면 죄 만흔 년이지.」
「흥 누가 죄가 만흘고. 본시 내게 올닌 놈은 사나히ㅅ놈이지.」 ＜157＞
그들의 의론을 나는 가만히 생각해 볼 여지가 잇섯슴니다.
사실 게집이 병을 사내에게 옴기엇스니 게집의 허물이겟지요. 사내가 게집에게 올놋스니 사내의 허물이 됨니다.
「그러나 장하나. 5원 주고 또 식쵀 주고 하니. 캥캥캥... 악. 으악...」
「...아우구. 내사 실어. 제발 기침하지 말어라. 그럿치 아모레드 일분 영감이상이 후하다 말이다. 조선 깍쟁이 청국 돼놈들이야 과직 2원이지 말할 것이나 잇나.」
「그레 셔양놈은 엇던지. 거시기 말이다. 「춘션」이가 그전에 부산서 그놈들하고 하릿밤 잣는데 오백량―백원 말이다. 그러첨 주드란다.」
「하이구참아―.」
「아이구. 애라 자자. 나는 아모레도 오래 못살겟다. 멀지 안엇다. 죽는가부다. 으악. 캥캥. 햄햄.」
「...」
「...으악...」
「체. 체.」
아우의 혀차는 소리가 납니다.
아마 형의 기침이 실흐며 토하는 피와 담에서 소사올으는 생비러가 몹시도 괴로운 모양이겟슴지요.
나는 이제 처참을 수가 업섯슴니다. 그만 큼직하게 기침을 한 번 하고 밧갓흐로 나갓슴니다.
바람은 산늘하고 달이 밝으며 별들이 잠을 자고 왼련디는 보드라운 류리를 갓득히 채원 둔 것가튼데 발 밋헤서 실솔이 우는 소리가 더 한층 나의 애수를 자아내며 이제 들은 바의 인생의 운명 사회의 추면을 더 박히게 생각게 하엿슴니다.
나는 다시 방에 들어와서 래일 아침에 이 집에서 싀톄를 보기 전에 떠날 게획을 하노라고 오랫동안 잠을 일우지 못하다가 몹슬 꿈에 가슴을 떨면서 하루밤을 지낫슴니다.

6
이제 오늘로서 보면 그때는 발서 4, 5년 전 일이 되고 말엇슴니다.
만은 간간히 생각하는 것은 무엇에 주린텬디요 손구락 하나 더 가진 김도령의 눈알이 늘 생각이 납니다.
큰 게집은 꼭 도라간 손이 되엿겟지요.
적은 애도 코가 석어서 내려 안젓슬 것이스며 주인의 일가의 운명인들 어이 순됴로 나와갓스릿가.
내 자신도 그때나 지금이 다 가튼 다름업는 방랑이건만은 이런 이야기를 써서 먹고 살아가자는 것이 변함이 변변함이라 할까요.
주인이 한 말과 가치 인생은 무상이겟슴니다.―끗―
―27, 2, 28, 서울에 와서― ＜158＞ ＜146-158＞