잡지명	別乾坤 第41號
발행일	1931년 07월 01일
기사제목	千古悲壯, (野談) 錦山 七百義士塚 (Eternal Tragedy, Anecdotes of the Seven Hundred Patriots' Tomb in Geumsan)
필자	金振九
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Eternal Tragedy,
						Kim Jin-gu

This anecdote was previously published in Student magazine, but its publication was discontinued due to the magazine's hiatus. Therefore, the content has been revised and will be published serially in this magazine. We thank the author and hope that readers will enjoy it. (Editor)

People say this: After the downfall of King Ch'o Pa (楚覇王), the vassal of King Ch'o, the generals died one after another in foreign lands, and the remaining 500 soldiers gathered at an altar on a remote island in the eastern sea, offering incense to console their king and generals. Then, sitting in a circle, they stabbed themselves to death in a single act of martyrdom, the valiant death of Tŏn Hoeng (田橫) and his 500 righteous men... People also speak of the tombs of the 47 righteous retainers (義士) of Akaho (赤穗) at Sengaku-ji (泉岳寺) in Tokyo, who, for the sake of their wronged master, disguised themselves as beggars, fools (白痴), or madmen (狂人) to deceive their enemies, bid farewell to their parents, wives, and children, and crawled 700 li to Edo (江戶) while clutching their bellies and eating dirt. After ambushing, slaughtering (鏖殺), and annihilating (全滅) their master's enemies in a cathartic act of revenge, they all committed suicide by disembowelment...

But it is heartbreaking! It is agonizing! That people do not know of our ancestors’ deeds... The three thousand li of beautiful Korean land was swept away as if it were being rolled up, and everywhere there was the stench of blood and mountains of corpses! Even in the midst of homes being swept away and families collapsing, they shook off their hemp clothes (布衣) and formed a united army (聯合軍) of Confucius (孔子) and Buddha (釋迦), and they were victorious in every battle, without ever losing after launching an offensive; after recovering the Hoseo (湖西, Ch'ungch'ŏng Province) region and advancing anew into the Honam (湖南, Chŏlla Province) region, they engaged in a great battle at the foot of Kŭmsan Fortress (錦山城). Even when their arrows were exhausted and their strength waned, and no reinforcements came, and the fortress crumbled and the enemy's bullets rained down to hasten the deaths of the 700 allied forces, they all straightened their attire (衣冠), performed four bows facing north (北向四拜), praying for the peace (安泰) of the nation and the people. That people do not know the deeds of the 700 righteous men (義士) of Kŭmsan (錦山), whose time was more extraordinary (非常時), whose task was greater (大事業), and whose death was several times more valiant than that of Tŏn Hoeng (田橫) of China and Ōishi (大石) of Japan! And that people do not know where their tombs are...

It is truly heartbreaking! If this is our defect, it is a great one! Few people try to know, and it is even more heartbreaking if there are those among our own blood (血族) who hinder those who try! It is deplorable! It is lamentable!

1. Five-Year-Old Oddity, Sandalwood Incense Emanating (五歲奇重旃檀放香)

The sun! The summer sun! The scorching heat of midsummer (三伏)! Even iron melts and jade burns, let alone living creatures (生物)! In the fields and paddies, among the lush crops, the farmers weeding in the fields have backs the color of black bronze (烏銅), and their faces are covered in sticky sweat. The sensation of receiving the sun at that time was more stinging than hot. The scorching sun was almost bearable. But the hot steam rising from the ground made it hard to breathe. A large ox, the size of a house, tied under a willow tree on the opposite hill, did not even think about eating the grass it was supposed to eat. It raised its head so that its neck was in a straight line, drooped its long, dripping tongue (長舌), and opened its mouth wide, panting heavily, its huge body moving back and forth. Even for a person just sitting and watching, it felt suffocating, and their whole body ached as if it were collapsing.

Even in this terrible furnace hell (洪爐地獄), there was still an unspeakably cool and refreshing paradise (仙境): the celestial beings of the branches (枝上仙) and the celestial beings of the earth (地上仙).

From the armpits of the jujube tree (大棗) branches and in the shade of the willow leaves, the cicadas sang saa-ram! saa-ram!, the cicadas whirred tsururu! tsururu!, the cicadas roared o-yong o-yong! o-yong! Each different kind of cicada competed with each other, showing off their clear voices and refreshing songs. Who would not envy them? Therefore, the ancients called cicadas the gods of the branches.

In the depths of the verdant mountain valley, there was a small pavilion (亭子) where four or five children were studying. Inside, some read "On horseback, I meet Hansik (寒食), on the road, I encounter late spring" (馬上逢寒食, 途中屬暮春) from the T'ang Poems (唐音), while others recited loudly "The fog has lifted from Mt. Kye (稽山), the peaks are rugged; the mirror-like water is without wind, yet ripples on its own" (稽山罷霧㭗嵯峨, 鏡水無風也自波) from the Yonju Poems (聯朱詩). The sound of their reading mingled with the clear sound of the flowing spring water (石澗水) in front of the pavilion (亭子), and the refined (淸高) and pure (潔白) sentiment was truly not of the human world, the sea of suffering (苦海). I, no, the farmers in the field, sweating blood as they weeded, called them, those who were reading, the terrestrial deities.

This terrestrial paradise was a corner of a rural village in Okch'ŏn County (沃川郡), Hoseo (湖西), 370 years ago. The celestial beings of the branches and the terrestrial deities did not know the sweet and bitter flavors of the dusty world, and they were drawing out their clear voices to create natural music. At that time, the first-class road from Okch'ŏn to Yŏngdong (永同) passed right in front of the village, right next to the pavilion (亭子). Suddenly, in front of the village, <30>

pee! paa! ninani kungdŏkkung! The sound of the three-stringed instrument (三絃), walgŭrang jŏlgŭrang! The sound of horse bells, "Hey jjiru! Get out of the way!" The high-pitched command resonated sharply. The people passing by the village prostrated themselves on the spot, and the old men standing on the side of the road quickly pulled out their tobacco pipes and threw them into the rice paddies. The scene was exactly like the procession (巨動=行幸) of the king. The dignified appearance and solemn majesty!

"Hey! Hey, kids! The magistrate's procession is passing by! Let's go watch! Let's go watch..."

A child who had gone down to the stream to fetch water for the inkstone suddenly jumped up and shouted, his voice catching in his throat. He threw the inkstone case (硯滴) onto the floor and ran off without looking back. Hearing this cry, several other children, echoing his excitement, dashed out. Without even closing their books, they threw down the brushes they were using and the ink they were grinding, and rushed out in a group.

Pee! paa! ninani! kungdŏkkung! walgŭrang jŏlgŭrang! shwi- eijjiru! Get out of the way! The magistrate (原님) sat tall and dignified in his sedan chair (長笰橋) under a parasol (日傘), reveling in his grandeur and splendor, a smile on his face, admiring the summer scenery of the surrounding mountains and rivers. This was the height of extravagance (豪華之極) for officials in the old feudal era, and a good example of the respect for officials and disdain for the common people (官尊民卑).

Though it was a terrifying magistrate's procession, as it turned onto the winding path at the foot of the mountain, all the wind instruments (吹打) and various music stopped abruptly, and with a shwi-shwi sound, it quickly passed by. When the procession reached right next to the pavilion (亭子), it suddenly stopped all at once, and the magistrate's sedan chair (長笰橋) was lowered to the side of the road. The sedan chair carriers (轎軍) and grooms (馬夫), thinking they were finally getting a break, sighed deeply, took out their towels, and turned around to wipe the sweat from their faces.

"Call the attendant (通引=給仕)!"
"Aye-yi-"
A boy in blue robes (靑衣童子), gathering his sleeves, prostrated himself on the roadside, and the magistrate gave his order:
"Go right up to that pavilion (亭子) and bring the child who is reading and sitting there!"
As soon as the order was given, the attendant quickly crawled up to the pavilion (亭子). Only then did the magistrate's procession (六房官屬) and the spectators (觀光群) watching from the front, back, left, and right look in that direction. It was there a child, whom they had assumed was empty (亭子), = a remarkable (긔골이 俊秀) child who looked about five or six years old, was sitting upright and reading the Thousand Character Classic (千字文), "Houses are sealed off in eight counties, families are given a thousand soldiers" (戶封八縣 家給千兵).
郡守驚歎! (The magistrate was astonished!)

The magistrate = in those days, a magistrate (軍守) held the power of a local king (一郡王). It was a time when he held in his hands the power to save and kill, give and take (生殺與奪). Therefore, in the eyes of the magistrates of that time, the people were not seen as people but as food (食). The titles of "Lord of a Thousand Households" (千戶候) and "Lord of Ten Thousand Households" (萬戶候) meant squeezing out all the rights (利權) and interests of the people of 1,000 or 10,000 households to feed themselves. And the people were always prepared to offer whatever was left over after feeding themselves to the magistrate. At that time, the procession of the Okch'ŏn magistrate included musicians (樂師=花郞) to perform music, but also carried instruments of torture (刑具) such as ropes (捕繩), stocks (周利), and paddles for beating. His majesty was so solemn that even flying birds would fall, and his power was enough to intimidate 10,000 people. The Okch'ŏn magistrate, sitting high and proud in his sedan chair (長笰橋) and passing by, thought to himself,

"Isn't my luxury pretty good? There is no one who is not envious of my grandeur (偉觀), and there is no one who is not afraid when they see my majesty..."

And, full of pride (滿心), said

"Oh! This wide plain and fertile land (沃土) is my territory (陣地), and these lush and verdant mountains and trees are my thousand and ten thousand soldiers (千兵萬馬)!"

As he was muttering to himself, his eyes happened to fall on the small pavilion (亭子) nestled in the verdant valley. His gaze fell on the face of the child reading a book. Seeing this, the magistrate thought, "There is no one who does not watch my magnificent procession, and there is no commoner who is not afraid of my power. How can this young child, who does not even know iron, not watch this good show and just sit there reading..." He felt very indignant and also curious. That is why he stopped the procession and called the attendant to bring the child. <31>
"The child who was reading is here."

Looking at the child kneeling in front of the sedan chair (長笰橋), he was a remarkable child (奇童) with refined features (眉目) and a robust physique (骨格).

"What is your name?"
"Paekch'ŏn (白川) Cho clan (趙氏)..."
"What is your given name?"
"Tae-bok (大福=兒名)..."
"How old are you?"
"Five years old..."
"Where is your home?"
"That Pa-rae X village..."
"You rascal! You must be a Seoul nobleman (兩班)! Speaking in banmal (informal speech) like that... hahahaha... hat!"
The magistrate was very pleased with the child's face and his answers and burst out laughing.
"But you rascal, such a magnificent and wonderful spectacle is passing by, and because the magistrate of this district is passing by, all the people in the village have come out to watch, and even those big children who were studying with you in the same pavilion (亭子) have all come out, but you are the only one who did not come out to watch and just read. What is the reason for that?"
Hearing these words, Tae-bok rose again, bowed (拜), straightened his collar, knelt down respectfully, and said,
"Yes, Father says that glancing aside while reading, or getting up to look at other things, and letting one's mind wander is not something a student should do. So, as my father told me, when I read, I focus my mind only on the book and read..."
Is that the word of a five-year-old child? More serious and precious than an adult who is wearing old clothes and has a tinny sound to them. One cannot help but admire him. The Okch'ŏn magistrate was so impressed by Tae-bok's attitude and words that he grabbed the child's wrist, placed him on his lap, and stroked his hair.
"Hey, Tae-bok! What do you do by reading so much?"
"Father says that if you read, you will become a great person and do great things."
"What do you do if you become a great person?"
"Ah! What do you do? Do great things?"
"What is a great thing?"
"Working for the country is a great thing."
"Hehe- if this child is raised and taught well, he will become a great figure in the future..."
After admiring and praising him for a while, he said,
"Call the Hojang (戶房)!"
"Yes-yi-"
The magistrate said to the Hojang (戶房), who had been crawling in from about five or six steps away, bending his upper body 90 degrees,
"Do you have any gold or jewels (珠玉) with you?"
"Yes, I have some gold (金子) that weighs several kŭn (斤)."
"Then bring me one kŭn (斤) of it!"
He received one kŭn (斤) of gold that the Hojang (戶房) brought and opened the waist pouch (葉囊) that he wore around his waist. After putting it inside, sealing (密封) it, he called the attendant, brought brush and ink, and clearly wrote the three characters "Hong Chong-dŏk (洪種德)" on the silk pouch containing the gold. He gave it to Tae-bok, saying,
"This is a reward I am giving you. Please grow up well and do many great things for the country in the future, okay..."
Then, the magistrate's procession started up again with all the music and various entertainments and departed. This extraordinary child, Cho Tae-bok, later changed his given name to Hŏn (趙憲) and used the pen name Chungbong (趙重峯). 30 years later, he would become the commander of the righteous army (儒僧聯合軍) that defeated the strong Japanese soldiers (强敵倭兵) in the east-west battles across Hoseo and Honam. He was the seed of the magnificent ending of the 700 righteous men (義士) at the foot of Kŭmsan Fortress (錦山城下) in Honam. Who at that time and place could have imagined that the one kŭn (斤) of gold given by Magistrate Hong Chong-dŏk would become the three-foot long sword (三尺長劍) that swept through the millions of troops, appearing in the east and west, rushing left and right, stirring up a whirlwind and red dust? <32>

**Named Entities**

楚覇王	Ch'o Pa-wang
田橫	Tŏn Hoeng
赤穗	Akaho
泉岳寺	Sengaku-ji
江戶	Edo
湖西	Hoseo
忠淸道	Ch'ungch'ŏng-do
湖南	Honam
全羅道	Chŏlla-do
錦山城	Kŭmsan-sŏng
沃川郡	Okch'ŏn-gun
永同	Yŏngdong
洪種德	Hong Chong-dŏk
趙憲	Cho Hŏn
趙重峯	Cho Chungbong



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제41호
발행일	1931년 07월 01일
기사제목	千古悲壯, (野談) 錦山 七百義士塚
필자	金振九
기사형태	문예기타

千古悲壯,
						金振九
이 野談은 일즉이 學生잡지에 계속 발표하다가 學生이 휴간되야 續稿를 발표치 못하얏슴으로 그 내용을 다시 수정하야 本誌에 계속 발표하게 되엿다. 필자에게 감사를 드리는 동시 독자 여러분에게 만히 애독하야 주기를 바란다.(編者)

세상사람은 말한다. 초패왕(楚覇王)의 번신(藩臣)으로 패왕이 망한뒤에 주장(主將)은 니어딸아 객사(客死)하고 남어지의 500장사(壯士)- 동쪽 바다 한복판의 외로운 섬속에서 제단을 모아노코 왕님과 장군님께 향을 피워 위로후에 그 자리에 둘러안저 일시에 목을 찔러 순사(殉死)하든 뎐횡(田橫) 500의사의 장쾌한 죽엄을... 세상사람은 또 말한다 원통한 죽엄을한 주인을 위하야 원수를 갑프려고 거지로, 바보(白痴)로, 혹은 광인(狂人)으로 거짓 꿈여 원수를 안심식힌 후에 부모처자 이별하고 배를 쥐고 흙을 먹어가면서 강호(江戶) 700리를 서슴업시 기어드러 습격, 오살(鏖殺), 전멸(全滅)의 주인의 원수를 통쾌하게 갑푼후에 일제히 배를 갈러 죽엇다는 동경 천악사(泉岳寺)에 잇는 적수(赤穗) 47의사(義士)의 무덤을......
그러나 애닯은 일이다! 절통한 일이다! 우리 조상의 그것을 알지 못하는 일이... 삼천리 금수강산이 자리말리듯 휘말려 드러가고 간데마다 피비린내 죽엄의 산! 집채는 쓸어지고 식구는 걱구러지는 그통에도 베옷(布衣)을 떨처입고 공자(孔子)와 석가(釋迦)의 연합군(聯合軍)을 편성하야 싸우면 닉이고 처서 빼내지 못한 적이 업시 승승장구(乘勝長驅)의 형세로 호서(湖西는 忠淸道)를 회복하고 호남(湖南은 全羅道)를 세로 나려 뚤르는데 금산성(錦山城)알에서 일대 격전을 시험타가 화살이 다하고 힘이 쇠진해것만은 구원병은 종시 오지를 안는지라 성은 문허지고 적군의 총알은 우박되어 700련합군의 목숨을 재촉할제 일제히 의관(衣冠)을 정제하고 북향사배(北向四拜) 국가와 민족의 안태(安泰)를 축원한 연후에 중국의 전횡과 일본의 대석(大石)보담 때가 비상시(非常時)이며 일이 대사업(大事業)이엿스며 죽엄이 몃갑절 더- 장쾌한 최후이엿든 금산(錦山) 700의사(義士)의 그것을 모르는 것이! 또 그네의 무덤이 어대인지 알지 못하는 것이......
정말로 애닯은 일이다! 이것이 우리의 결뎜이라면 큰 결뎜일 것이다! 알려고 애쓰는 사람도 적으려니와 애쓰는 그네를 저해하는 사람까지도 우리 혈족(血族) 가운대에 새로 생긴다면 엇지 절통한 일이 아니겟느냐? 한심한 일이다! 통탄할 일이다!

1. 五歲奇重旃檀放香
볏! 녀름볏! 쨍쨍 나려 쪼이는 삼복녀름! 무쇠가 녹어나고 옥석(玉石)이 불타는대 하물며 생물(生物)이랴? 논밧, 곡식 욱어진 속에서 김매는 농부들은 등떨미는 오동(烏銅)이오 얼골에는 비지땀이라 뜨겁다기 보다도 차라리 따겁다는 것이 그때 그 볏을 밧는 촉감이엿다. 나려쪼이는 따거운 그 볏뿐이면 오히려 약과이다. 땅으로서 푹푹 올려치미는 뜨거운 김은 사람의 숨을 턱턱 막히게 한다. 건너편 언덕 버드나무 밋테 매여노흔 집채 가튼 큰 황소는 먹으라는 풀을낭은 뜨더먹을 생각도 하지안코 고개를 등땍이와 일직선이 되도록 번쩍 들고 늣침 흐르는 긴 혀(長舌)를 느러트려 입을 딱 벌린채로 씩은 헐떡헐떡 그 큰 몸둥이가 압흐로 뒤으로 움직움직하는 거동은 가만이 안저서 보고만 잇는 사람으로도 가슴이 답답 온몸이 허무러질 듯이 욱신 확근해 올라온다.
이러케 무서운 홍로디옥(洪爐地獄) 가운대에도 그래도 말 못하게 시원 상쾌한 선경(仙境)이 잇다. 지상선(枝上仙)과 디상선(地上仙)이다.
대추나무(大棗)가지 겨드랑에서 버드나무 입사귀 그늘에서 싸-람! 싸-람 매미(蟬), 쓰르르! 쓰르르 매미, 오용 오용-오용 매미, 가지각색의 매미들은 청아한 소리와 상량(桑凉)한 노래의 목청빼기를 서로서로 닷툴적에 그 누라서 부러워 아니하리? 그럼으로 녯사람은 매미를 가르처서 가지우의 신선이라고 일커러왓다.
산꼴잭이 녹음 욱어진 그속에 조고만한 뎡자(亭子)를 지어노코 공부하는 아희들이 4, 5명, 그안에서 『마상에 봉한식하니- 도중에 속모춘=馬上逢寒食, 途中屬暮春 唐音』을 읽는 아희도 잇고 혹은 『계산파무울차아요- 경수무풍야자파라=稽山罷霧㭗嵯峨, 鏡水無風也自波=聯朱詩』를 큰 소리로 외우는 사람도 잇다. 글 읽은 소리는 뎡자압헤 흘러나리는 석간수(石澗水)의＜30＞맑은 소리와 한데 어우러저 그 청고(淸高)하고 결백(潔白)한 흥취란 정말로 고해(苦海)의 인간사회는 아니다. 나는, 안이- 그때 그 알에ㅅ 들판에서 피땀 흘리며 김매는 농부들은 글 읽는 그네들을 가르처서 땅우의 신선이라고 불른다.

이 땅우의 선경은 호서(湖西) 옥천고을(沃川郡) 어느 농촌 한 귀퉁이엿스며 때는 지금으로부터 370년전이엿다. 지상선과 디상선은 띄끌세상의 달고 쓴맛을 알지 못하고 이리한 참목청을 뽑어내어 텬연(天然)의 음악을 짓고 잇슬 그때이다. 옥천에서 영동(永同)으로 뚤려잇는 그때의 일등도로가 그 알에ㅅ 마을 압흐로해서 바로 뎡자 엽흐로 지나가게 되엿다. 별안간 그 알에ㅅ
삐! 빠!니나니 쿵덕쿵! 삼혐(三絃)소리, 왈그랑 절그랑! 말방울소리, 에이찌루! 물럿거라! 권마성이 놉흔 소리에 서슬이 십퍼럿타. 마을압헤 왕래하든 사람 그 자리에 꾸러업치고 길가에 섯든 로인 담배ㅅ대를 얼는 빼서 논ㅅ귀에 집어던지는 그 광경이란 완연이 임금님의 거동(巨動=行幸)이나 지나는 것 가태엿다. 풍채가 당당하고 위의가 엄숙하다.
『얘! 얘들아! 원님행차 지나간다! 구경가자! 구경가......』
시내가으로 벼루ㅅ물 길으려 나려갓든 아희 하나가 별안간 뛰어올라 오면서 숨이 턱에 닷는 목소리로 이러케 웨치며 연뎍(硯滴)을 방바닥에 집어 팽개치고서는 뒤도 도라보지 안코서 쏜살가티 나려뺀다. 이 소리에 맛소리를 치고 뛰어 내닷는 여러 아희들- 읽든 책도 덥흘새 업시 쓰든 붓, 갈든 먹도 냅다 집어던지고서 우루루 화당탕 뛰어나려 몰려간다.
삐! 빠! 니나니! 쿵덕쿵! 왈그랑 절그랑! 쉬- 에이찌루! 물럿거라! 일산(日傘)미테 장둑교우에 덩그럿케 놉히 안즌 저 원님은 그 위풍과 그 호사에 취하여서 만심희열(滿心喜悅), 미소를 띄우고 엽눈으로 좌우 산천의 녀름풍경을 구경한다. 이것이 녯날녯적 봉건시대의 관리들의 호화의극(豪華之極)이엿스며 관존민비(官尊民卑)의 조흔 표본이엿다.
그 무서운 원님의 행차엿만 산기슭 삐뚜리ㅅ길 접어들ㅅ제는 가진 취타(吹打) 온간 풍류 뚝 끄치고 쉬-ㅅ 소리와 한가지로 스르르 얼는 그냥 지나간다. 그리하야 그 행차가 뎡자 엽헤 딱 다드리니 별안간에 일제히 가든 발을 멈추고서 원님타신 장둑교가 길가에 나려 노인다. 교군(轎軍)이며 마부(馬夫)들은 고단하기 쉬이라는 줄로만 알고서 긴숨을 냅다 뽑고 수건내어 도라서서 얼골의 땀을 씻는다.
『통인(通引=給仕) 불러라!』
『에-이-』
청의동자(靑衣童子) 한사람이 옷자락을 거듭거듭 가드면서 길가에 업치인즉 원님이 분부말슴
『네- 저기 저 뎡자에 바로 올라가서 글읽고 안저잇는 저 아희를 다리고 오렷다!』
분부가 한마듸 뚝 떠러지자 통인놈은 불끈 닐어 뎡자로 향하야 썰썰 기어올라간다. 그제야 원님행차 일행들(六房官屬)이며 전후좌우에서 구경하든 구경ㅅ군까지가 그쪽을 치어다 보게 되엿다. 의례 비어잇스리라고 생각햇든 뎡자안에 웬 아희 하나가=다섯살이나 여섯살쯤 먹어 보이는 긔골이 준주(俊秀)한 어린 아희 하나가 단정히 안저서 『홍봉팔현이요 가급천병이라=戶封八縣 家給千兵』의 천자문을 읽고 잇는 거둥이 눈에 뜨이엿다.
郡守驚歎!
원님이라는 것은=그때 서슬에 군수라는 것은 염연(儼然)이 일군왕(一郡王)의 위권(威權)을 가젓다. 백성을 살리고 죽이고 주고 뺏고(生殺與奪)하는 모든 권세의 자루를 두손에 갈러쥐고 잇는 그때이다. 그럼으로 그때의 원님의 눈에는 백성이 백성으로 보이지 안코 밥(食)으로만 보엿다. 천호후(千戶候)니 만호후(萬戶候)니 하는 것은 1천호나 1만호의 백성들의 모든 이권(利權)을 짜내여 먹으라는 것이다. 또 백성들도 의례 자긔네 먹고 남은 것은 원님에게로 밧칠줄로만 각오하고 잇는 것이다. 이때 옥천 원님의 행차에도 풍류를 갓추는 고인(樂師=花郞)도 잇지만은 한편에는 오라ㅅ줄(捕繩), 주리ㅅ대, 볼기책 가튼 형별하는 긔계(刑具)가 실려간다. 위의가 가장 엄숙하엿다. 행차 압흘 가로건너가는 백성, 원님 압헤 담배ㅅ대든 백성, 술취하여 주정하는 백성, 웃통버서 붓치고 싸움하는 백성의 무례한 행동을 하는 놈은 모조리 잡어업허 뒷ㅅ결박에 주리틀기, 이삼십도 볼기치기, 그의 위풍이란 나는 새라도 떠러질뜻, 그의 호긔란 1만 백성을 능히 위압하엿다. 그때 장둑교에 놉히 안자 의긔양양 지나가는 옥천군수의 생각에는
『내가 이만하면 내 호강이 무던하지? 나의 위관(偉觀)을 보고서 부러워하지 안는 이 업스며 나의 위풍을 볼 적에 무서워하지 안는 놈도 업스니......』
이러케 만심하고
『오! 저 넓은 평야 옥토(沃土)는 나의 진터(陣地)이며 저- 울창하고 무성한 산천초목은 나의 천병만마(千兵萬馬)이로구나!』
이처럼 조와라고 혼자말로 읇는 중에 그의 안광(眼光)은 우연이 산꼴잭이 록음 알에 가로걸처 서서 잇는 조고만 뎡자에게로 쏘게 되엿다. 글 읽는 아희의 얼골을 쏘게 되엿다. 그것을 본 그 원님은 직각적으로 『나의 이 굉장한 행차를 구경안는 이 업고 나의 이 위권을 무서워 안는 백성이 업거늘 아무리 철모르는 어린 아희기로서니 이 조흔 구경을 안코서 글만 안저 읽다니......』 매우 쾟심하게 생각하는 동시에 일변 긔이하게도 생각하엿기 때문에 가든 행차를 멈추고서 통인을 불러 그 아희를 불러온 것이엿다.＜31＞
『글 읽든 아희 대령이요-』
장둑교 압헤 꿀어안즌 그 아희를 바라보니 미목(眉目)이 청수(淸秀)하고 골격(骨格)이 장대(壯大)한 일개의 긔동(奇童)이엿다.
『네- 성명이 무엇이냐?』
『백천(白川) 됴가(趙氏)...』
『일음은 무엇이고?』
『대복(大福=兒名)...』
『나희는 몃살이고?』
『다섯살...』
『너의 집은 어대여?』
『저- 알에 X동네...』
『너 이놈! 서울 량반이로구나! 반말하는 것보니...... 하하하하...... 핫!』
원님은 그 얼골에 그 대답! 마음에 퍽이나 긔특히 생각하야 너털웃음을 한번 첫다.
『그런데 너 이놈 이러케 굉장이 조흔 구경이 지나가고 이 고을 원님이 오섯기 때문에 온 동리 사람이 죄다 저럿케 나와서 구경을 하고 또 너하고 한 뎡자에서 공부하든 저런 큰 아희들도 모두 나왓는대 너 혼자만 구경도 나오지 안코 글만 읽으니 그건 웬 까닭인고?』
대복이는 이 말을 듯고서는 다시 일어 절(拜)한 후에 옷깃을 염의고 공손이 꿀어안저 하는 말이
『네- 아버지가요 글 읽다가 한눈을 파든지 다른 일을 보려 일어난다든지해서 마음을 헛트러지게 하는 것은 공부하는 사람의 할 짓이 아니라고 하세요. 그래서 아버지가 일러주신대로 저는 글 읽을 적에는 책에다만 마음을 모으고 읽어요...』
다섯살 먹은 어린 아희의 말이냐고 나희 차고 철때기 낫다는 어른보담도 그말이 진중하고도 귀인성이 뚝뚝 떤는다. 보는 사람으로 하여곰 탄복하지 안을 수 업게 한다. 대복 소년의 그 태도와 그말에 옥천군수는 엇지나 감탄이 되든지 그 아희의 손목을 쥐어 자긔 무릅우에 올려안치고 머리를 나려 쓰다듬으면서
『얘 대복아! 너- 글은 그러케 작구 읽어서 무엇하늬?』
『아버지가요 글을 읽어야 훌륭한 사람이 되고 큰사람 노릇을 한다구 하세요.』
『훌륭한 사람이 되면 무엇하늬?』
『아! 무어해요? 큰일을 하지요?』
『큰일이라는 것은 무슨 일이냐?』
『나라를 위해서 일하는 것이 큰일이래요.』
『허허- 이 아희가 잘 길러서 잘 가르키기만 햇스면 후일에 큰 인물이 되겟군......』
이리 한참 탄복하고 칭찬하든 끄테
『호방(戶房) 불러라!』
『예-이-』
벌서 오륙간 밧게서부터 웃몸을 90도(度)나 꿉으리고 썰썰 기어드러오는 저 호방에게 원님은
『얘 금은이나 주옥(珠玉)이나 가저온 것이 잇느냐?』
『네- 금자(金子)가 몃근 가저온 게 잇습니다.』
『그럼 그것을 한근(一近)만 이리로 가저오너라!』
호방이 가저온 황금 한근을 바더 자긔 허리에 찻든 엽낭주머니를 끌러서 그속에 집어넛어 밀봉(密封)후에 통인 불러 붓과 먹을 가저다가 『홍종덕=洪種德』의 석자를 황금싼 비단주머니에 두렷이 써서 대복 소년에게 주면서
『이것은 내가 주는 상금이다. 부듸 잘커서 다른날에 나라를 위해서 큰일 만이해라 응......』
그리고나서 원님의 행차는 다시 모든 취타와 가진 풍류가 시작되며 떠나갓다. 이 긔이한 아희 됴대복 소년은 그후에 일음을 헌(趙憲)으로 곳치고 당호(號)를 중봉(趙重峯)이라 하야 30년 뒤ㅅ날에 호서와 호남을 종횡으로 동서격전(東西激戰)하야 강적왜병(强敵倭兵)을 처서 물리치든 유승연합군(儒僧聯合軍)의 대장이 될 새싹이엇스며 호남 금산성알(錦山城下)에서 700의사가 장쾌한 최후를 짓는 첫압(初卵)이엿스며 군수 홍종덕의 끼처준 황금 한근이 백만 군중에서 동에 번쩍 서에 번쩍 좌충우동(左衝右突)하며 미친 바람과 붉은 띄끌을 휩쓰러 일으키든 삼척장금(三尺長劍)이 될 줄이야 그때 그자리에서 그 누라서 꿈에나 생각하엿스랴.＜32＞
＜30-32＞