잡지명	개벽 제57호
발행일	1925년 03월 01일
기사제목	땅속으로 (Into the Ground)
필자	抱石
기사형태	소설 (Novel/Fiction)

땅속으로
						抱石

Though I learned from a newspaper article that Seoul, a city of two hundred thousand people, has one hundred eighty thousand unemployed poor, point out another such place on the world map if it exists. Just hearing about it makes one imagine the streets strewn with those dying of starvation and beggars. With beggars numbering 180,000 in a population of 250,000, it’s like the belly button being bigger than the belly!

I, too, have naturally become one of the newcomers to this colossal band of beggars.

Excluding the special zone of Namch'on, a settlement area for foreigners, nearly all the rest are decaying old buildings and declining streets. In an atmosphere seemingly filled with the smell of parched dust, this land called Seoul, no, this entire land called Chosŏn, day by day treads the path of destiny towards ruin and decay—within it stirs the white-clad people (白衣人), a starving multitude (飢餓群) fallen into a near-death state (頻死狀態).

They have nothing. No love, no food, no XX. Nor do they have effort (努力), reflection (反省), courage (勇氣), or resilience (半撥力). Nor do they have the self-awareness (自意識) of profound (沈痛) endurance (忍耐). No firm belief. What they do have is falsehood (虛僞), deceit (欺瞞), oppression (暴壓), starvation (飢餓)... nothing else but this.

Nothing! Nothing! In this desert (沙漠), in this scorched land (焦地), there is nothing!
Nothing but dry land and dry bones!
What shall come to this land in the future?!
What shall befall this multitude in the future?!<15>
Death! Yes. There is nothing but death.
Death! Death! This multitude gazing into the pit of death. This multitude, like a flock of sheep (羊) or a pack of dogs, merely waiting for death.

Among them, there is no one who cries out. No one who suffers.
Not a single one cries out, 『Will fire not fall upon this land!
Upon this scorched land (焦地), would that fire fall!』

What they stand upon is dry land.
What they possess are the bones of this body.
Can one not melt sand to make gunpowder?
Can one not grind bones to forge spears?
Caught by this band of ghouls (餓鬼),
Let us dance into the pit of death.

Now—let me briefly write down the things I have experienced in Seoul, or the way things will likely proceed from now on.
When I arrived in Seoul, I found there was hardly a place to rest my body. At first, I followed friends around, getting food and lodging where I could, but that couldn't last long. Needing at least cheap boarding house meals (상밥), I entered a boarding house on a friend's advice, only to eventually be kicked out for not paying the meal fee. Next, I went to stay with a friend who was lodging in someone else's detached guest room (사랑방), living as an add-on, eating boarding house meals, beef bone soup (설넝탕), or sweet pancakes (호떡), or going hungry if even those weren't available.—

In this manner, spring passed, and summer was also drawing to a close. How I survived those five or six months feels as hazy as a dream. Introspective life (內省生活), artistic creation (藝術創作), whatever it might be, there was no time to think or look back amidst this atmosphere and this life. At first, even if there were occasional times of starvation, I endured the pangs of hunger, considering them sweet,<16> but as it happened too often and I grew weary, there was nothing to be done. A person becomes an animal living solely for the stomach (口腹). Even so, there were times I lamented my weakness. But it couldn't be helped! I degenerated into an animal like a dog or a pig. To give one example—when I wasn't excessively hungry, walking the streets might still spark some poetic thoughts (詩想) or reflections (思索). But past that point, there was none of this. Everything strewn on the streets appeared as food. Lumps of stone or pieces of wood looked like pieces of rice cake or cotton cloth (면보?).—Then, when good fortune struck and I could fill my belly, I felt a kind of joy (喜悅) and satisfaction like an idiot (白痴) or a child (小兒). I could well understand the psychology (心理) of a beggar (乞人). Then, suddenly looking back at myself, a smile of cold ridicule (冷嘲) would slip out. Sadness was mixed in that smile too. It couldn't be helped. The self-righteous (自慢心) of this unreflective (無反省) and shallow (淺薄) humanitarian (人道主義者)—idealist (理想主義者), who until now had tried to emulate the wise (賢者) and force himself to be a gentleman (君子), completely deflated. (Of course, I know I'm pathetic.) Sometimes, during a famine period (饑饉期) lasting three or four days where I ate perhaps one meal a day or none at all, the thought of people, friends or anyone, became bothersome. I would seek out places like Ch'wiunjŏng (翠雲亭) or Samch'ŏngdong (三淸洞) with good tree shade and grassy spots, and spend the day from noon till night hunched over alone, blinking my sunken, dark eyes. But one cannot endure like that forever. Like a dog, I would dart back out to the streets, drawn by the smell of food. To escape the pain of hunger, to get even one meal from others, one cannot avoid humiliation (구차). To escape humiliation in this world, there is no way other than suicide (自殺) or escape (逃避). So, I commit a humiliating act once and feel sick (배알코?), do it twice and feel sick; sometimes life feels so sordid that I resolve, 『I won't do such things even if I starve to death』, but then, humiliation again. Well—as a person lives like this, eventually even conscience (良心) wavers. Only then can one understand the suffering (苦痛) of the world's propertyless masses (無産群), who, due to the heavy pressure (壓迫) of external life (外的生活), have no leisure to look back at their inner life (內的生活).

From this point, the motive (動機) for a turn (轉換) in my thought life (思想生活) arose. Until now, I had cried out, 『Let the worldly masses (俗衆) of this world, who know only food, sex, and fame (食, 色, 名譽), <17> fare as they may, I alone must quickly go on the path of soul-improvement (靈魂向上)!』 But after discovering the dog and the pig within myself,
I cried out, 『Not upwards, let's dig downwards! Into the suffering of dogs and pigs! Into the suffering of the world's propertyless masses (無産大衆)! Especially into the suffering of the white-clad people (白衣人)! Down into the subterranean dark caves (地下 멧 千 重暗窟)!』

In this land, there is no love (戀愛). No friendship (友情). No human love (人間愛). No blood, no tears, no *, no passion (熱). Nothing to eat. Limbs are bound.
What squirms on the dry land is merely "people of bone," no, "bones of people."
Let's burn the bones, let's rot the bones, let the seeds of love sprout from within them. Let new life burst forth.
「The suffering (苦痛) of the white-clad people (白衣人),
The suffering (苦痛) of the white-clad people (白衣人),
Let's draw a line in the earth just once!」

It was at this time. W, a person who had been waiting and waiting for some good news from the countryside, could endure no longer and came to Seoul looking for me, bringing the young children.
Meeting him at a relative's house, I said,
『Let's try living somewhere.』
What is love, anyway? Does love exist even for blood-dried Koreans? Let's try living with a loveless wife (안해). How great is the bitter taste? Can beggars not manage a household (살님)? How great is the taste of hardship? Let's endure it for a while. Such thoughts arose defiantly (反撥的), and I boldly said I would set up a household and live.

So, first, shamelessly entrusting them to a poor relative's house, I planned to somehow arrange for money within a few (멧 칠) days, get a rented room (셋방), and start a household. But there was no way to secure funds. Nothing could be done. Until now,<18> saying 『This, I cannot publish yet』, upholding the integrity of my conscience, I had kept my poetry manuscript (詩集原稿) firmly buried. Now, I hastily gathered it from the draft (草稿) and took it to a bookstore (책사), shamelessly putting it out like selling cheap goods. I was rejected there. My face burning (확근확근하는), I slapped the back of my head and rushed out the door. Straight away, I went to find a friend, and together we went to a bookstore he knew. Fortunately, we succeeded there. I sold the publishing rights for sixty won, received twenty won as an advance, and agreed to receive the remaining forty won after the publication permit (出版許可) was issued.

There—that should do it. After reporting back to W, I set out to find a rented room. The search for a room eventually led to this back alley rented room (겻방) at the edge of Pukch'on, in Samch'ŏngdong—the one I'm in now.
Ten won was the advance for two months' rent (방세). The remaining ten won went for a pot, dishes (솟개 그릇개), a bundle of wood (나무ㅅ단), and a measure of rice (쌀말).
With this, the four of us could live without worry for about a week.
This was the first night of this household life, worth marking with a pencil scratch on the page (패지) of my life.
Inside the room dimly lit by a kerosene lamp (석유 등잔불) (I am a person who receives too few benefits of civilization (문명). Even living in Seoul, it's still a kerosene lamp), the floor paper (장판방) was hole-ridden (구녁나고) and stained with grime (때끼인). The walls, papered at some unknown time, were soot-stained (끄른) yellowish-black. The only furniture (세간) was a bundle (보통이) in one corner and a shabby box fragment (흔 상자땍이) in another. Three people sat in the upper part of the room (웃목), and I sat in the lower part. The gloomy atmosphere (분위긔) inside and outside the room harmonized well with the hearts of these four people. The flickering lamp (둥불), seeming to hint (암시) at their future fate (압 운명). The mosquito swarm (문군), their weapons (무긔) sharpened (强銳) by the late season (느진철), responding to each other from here and there (여긔저긔서).

Raising a fan, I swatted away a mosquito (모긔) that had landed on my left shoulder (억개) and was injecting its needle (주사침), then glanced up at the three people sitting side-by-side in the upper part of the room. W, whose mood (마음세) seemed to have met an unseasonal spring, like a warm south wind (남풍) blowing in winter due to this strange turn (變軆) of fortune (氣潮), showed it clearly in her expression and actions.
Oblivious to the heat, she held her young daughter on her lap (무릅), stroking her hair with a sweaty hand. Her face (얼골) showed an expression of peace (平和) and virtue (賢淑) I hadn't seen before. Her eyes were large, but because their color (눈빗) was dark—let's say, not the eye color of someone with a spring or autumn personality (성걱), but one with a wintery feel (겨울 맛)—they were not quite suited <19> to displaying such an expression (표졍). However, her mouth and its corners (가성?) showed such an expression. One can see a richer expression on the face (얼골) of Mary (마리아) (in paintings) holding the infant Christ (긔독).
Seeing that expression, I felt somewhat pleased (쾌하엿다). But in the deep corners of my heart, I felt increasingly anxious (서마서마하여 진다). It felt like stroking an unlovable beast (김생) by force to tame it (길드릴). I quickly turned my face away. I had never once looked closely (자서히) at her face until now. When speaking to her, it had become a habit not to raise my head. This was perhaps the first time I had looked closely. But I didn't have the energy (긔운) to look for long. She stood her young daughter up and pushed her towards me, saying,
『Go to your father. Go to father.』
The young daughter hesitated, then came towards my side (내엽흐으). I held her. I touched her hand and pressed my cheek against hers. This too was probably the first time. Animal instinct (본릉) makes parental affection unavoidable. I pressed my other cheek against hers again.
Sitting on my lap (무릅), blinking (까막까막하고) and looking at the lamp, her eyes were extremely cute (귀여웟다). They were clear as glass beads (유리알). She parted her tightly closed (담으린?), lovely (어엽분) lips slightly and said,
『That mosquito (모긔) over there... it makes sounds, strange sounds only it knows!...』 saying such fairytale-like (동화) words. Hearing those words, I felt greatly impressed (신통한) and was about to kiss her lips. But I stopped myself.
Look at this! Where could there be such a heartbreaking thing? Even if this child were someone else's, hearing such cute (긔여운) words would surely evoke a sense of mystery (신비감) and reverence (경근감) towards cosmic life (宇宙生命). How much more so for one's own offspring (소생), yet to think that such feelings do not arise...
Instinctively (본릉), affection arises, but spiritually (心靈), this is denied (否定)... Ah, this malicious fate (惡戱) that blocks the light (빗) of the spirit!
『Cosmic life (宇宙生命) rejects (拒否) me!』<20>
I cried out inwardly, clenching my fists (부르르 움키여 쥐엿다). Twisted thoughts arose, wanting to kill and destroy (업새고) every life visible before my eyes.
Rejection (拒否) of life (生命)! Rejection of life! There is only nothingness (虛無) here.
Destroy everything! Burn everything down (불사러 바려라)! Only nothingness. It is rebellion (反逆) against nothingness.
Yet, I don't want (실타) to commit suicide (自殺). I don't want (살타) to escape (逃避) either. Let's try to endure (견뎨여 나가보자) somehow! Let's live stubbornly (억지를 쓰고)! Like a polar bear (백웅) in the Arctic Ocean (빙양), like a polar bear in the Arctic Ocean... even if in the end, I spill my blood on the ice (어름) and die (죽드라도)...
『They've taken even this away from Koreans, no, from me! I am a child cast out (내여 바린) from cosmic life (宇宙生命). But let's try to endure somehow』 Thinking this, I rolled my eyes back (뒤박고아 굴녀) and closed them (감엇다). I let out a cough that seemed to rumble deep inside my chest. That coughing sound echoed like a groan (呻吟聲) resonating from underground (땅속). And towards my young daughter, a sudden feeling of aversion (걸닌 생각) arose. Holding her tightly (밧삭 끼안고) and pressing my cheek against hers once more, I gently set her down.
The child went towards her mother (저의 모). On the way, she stepped on a water bowl (물그릇) placed nearby (엽헤). The bowl tipped over (업퍼지고), and water spilled (쏘다젓다) profusely onto the floor. Her mother's usual habit flared up again. She smacked (훔처 갈긴다) the young child. The child cried out loudly. I frowned (상을 징그리고) and turned my head aside (엽흐로 돌니엿다).
『Aigoo, you exasperating (직읏직읏한) wench, may you die suddenly (급살을 마질 년)!』 she said, hitting the child again. An uncultured (無敎養), unrefined (無洗鍊), and tenacious (악착한) expression appeared on her face (얼골). The child's crying grew louder (놉하 간다). I thought,
『The start of this household life (살님사리) is the entrance (초입) to hell』, and flaring up in anger (화를 펄젹 내이며), I darted outside (밧그로 튀여 나가), went to the edge of the wooden verandah (퇴마루 끗헤), and sat down dangling my legs (거러안젓다). She continued,
『Aigo, so exasperating (지긋지긋)...』 she said.
That "exasperating (지긋지긋)" sound seemed like a curse (저주). Unable to bear it any longer,
I yelled, 『Enough (에잇)...』, and almost struck her with a shoe (구두작) but stopped myself. I thought of going far away (아조 밧그로 멀니 가 바리랴다가),<21> but then thought, 『Endure it, endure it. Endure until marrow (제물?) seeps from dry bones』, and sat with my eyes closed. Seeing the room quiet down, I said, 『You all go to sleep now』, and closed my eyes again. I wanted to spend the night like this, sitting with my eyes closed, for who knows how long. The habit of closing one's eyes is a bad (압흔?) habit. Inside is a world like a black sky (한을빗).

Thus, a week passed. A month passed. Another month passed. I couldn't collect my thoughts to grasp how time was passing. I couldn't count how many times I starved or ate. I had become a person living solely striving to fill the next mealtime. Beyond that, I could find no meaning (意義) in life (生活).
Stagnation (沈滯) of life (生命). Utter stagnation. The time before, when I supposedly engaged in introspection (內省生活), feeling the pain of reflection (反省), whining about aches and pains, was truly a golden age (黃金時代). The time months ago when I lived alone was rather a utopian period. Such glory (榮光) of starvation (飢餓), such a paradise (樂土) of solitude (孤寂), sitting here now, I cannot possibly wish for.
Yesterday evening, the landlord came demanding the rent, saying various things like move out or else. Unable to stand it, I raised my voice and said a few harsh words, only to end up thoroughly humiliated. Fuming, I skipped dinner and rushed outside.
『Why aren't you making dinner? Is there no rice?』 I asked W.
『Why wouldn't there be rice? I'll get to it soon』 she replied.
I left immediately, went to a friend's place, got dinner there, stayed late playing around, then collapsed and slept there, returning home only late the next morning. Entering the room, I found W sitting, combing the older daughter's hair. It seemed they hadn't had breakfast yet.
『Why haven't you made breakfast yet?』 I asked.
She gave no answer.<22>
『Why haven't you cooked breakfast?』 I asked again.
Still no answer. I realized there was no rice.
『Where is Kyesuk (the younger daughter)?』
『I don't know. She went out somewhere. She left a while ago...』
I stepped out of the door and peered towards the landlady's quarters. A breakfast table was currently spread out in their house. And look, Kyesuk was standing blankly, watching the landlord's family eat, crouching beside their stepping stone. Just like a starving dog... (This too was something I'd never seen before). Seeing this, my heart felt pierced, as if my intestines were churning downwards. I quickly gestured for her to come. Then I snatched her up, carried her into the room, and sat her on my lap.
『Are you hungry? You ate dinner yesterday, what's there to be so hungry about?』
『No, I didn't eat』, the little daughter replied, blinking her sunken eyes.
『Ah, really, you didn't eat yesterday evening?』
『Of course, I didn't eat』, she repeated in a faltering voice. I could now guess the intentions of W, who yesterday evening, despite having no rice, lied that she did to lessen my worries. At the end of the little daughter's words, W turned her face to the wall and let out a long sigh. My chest ached as if a stone was being rolled inside. If I could cut off my own flesh to feed them, I felt I readily could. Truly, one might endure starving for ten meals oneself, but seeing those innocent, weak ones starve for even one meal is unbearable. One who hasn't experienced poverty-stricken family life with dependents doesn't know this. Or one can imagine how the vast majority of weak humans in this world, crushed by this terrifying bloodline (피ㅅ줄) of life (生命), struggle to live, committing sins against conscience (良心)).
At that moment, from inside, the landlady's voice called out,
『Is Kyesuk's mother there?』
A humiliating thought instantly arose that perhaps she was calling to give the child some food. Forget food,<23> this is what she said:
『What about the rent (방세)? I absolutely need to use it today.』
『Well, it seems it hasn't worked out yet』 was Kyesuk's mother's reply.
『What do you mean it hasn't worked out? You neither vacate the room nor pay the rent』 she said in an unpleasant tone.
I clenched my fists, stood up, and cried out,
『Ah, this world...』 then dashed outside.
Outside, chaos had broken out. The chaos of late autumn. In the endlessly high sky, the wind whipped through its center and rolled onward. Look, from the peak of Pugaksan mountain's sky too, autumn cries 『Auuu-』, and from the peak of Inwangsan mountain's sky too, autumn cries 『Auuu』. Those 『Auuu-』 cries intertwine, echoing 『Auuu-』 through the vast expanse (大空) watched over by Seoul, like human voices echoing in an empty jar. Under that painful autumn command, the leaves of the trees lined up at the foot of this mountain and that tumble wildly onto the ground, somersaulting.
Somersaulting! Somersaulting onto the ground! Everything is somersaulting onto this ground.
The people squirming on the road all seem about to somersault. Walking along the long wall of Kyŏngbokkung Palace, I too wanted to somersault once.
I stamped my foot.
『Now is not the time for such thoughts. It's food. Money』 I thought, quickening my pace, crossing the Sukchugam Bridge (?), passing the Andong intersection, heading down towards Chongno. The thought occupying me all this way was how to get money from the bookstore.
『It would be fortunate if the permit came through during this time. Even if not, I'll insist stubbornly and squeeze out at least ten won』 Thinking this, I headed straight for the bookstore. Facing the bookstore owner, who looked like a quintessential example (典型) of a cunning and heartless petty person (小人間), was more distasteful than anything. Normally, he would roll his mouse-like eyes this way and that, using his piddling intellect to try and argue even with someone considered respectable, or pretending affection, smiling slyly, and making annoying small talk,<24> but for some reason, today he wasn't like that. He sat stiffly composed,
『Ah, Mr. O, you've come at just the right time』 he said, glancing up once. The way his eyes looked was contemptuous. It was the true nature of a Seoul slicker's (서울깍정이) mindset, turning sour the moment self-interest (利害) slightly clashes. Koreans have much of this fox-nature (狐性) and mouse-nature (鼠性). Especially Seoul people. Among Seoul people, merchants. They can certainly be called "mouse-humans (생쥐인간)." Like the saying, if a dragon's (龍) seed cannot become a dragon, it becomes a loach (미꾸리), the degenerate descendants of a rational people (理性民族) have fallen thus.
He spoke again,
『Look at this』, pulling out a piece of paper, about the width of a ring and somewhat thick, from his desk drawer. 『The poetry collection (詩集) sent for censorship (금열) has been confiscated (압수)』 he said, spreading it on the stained desk.
『Confiscated (압수)?』 My heart sank, and my eyes went to the paper. At the top, it said Notification (통지서), then something something... scrolling down, what jumped out was "Disapproved" (불허가)... At the end, some Bureau, some Section, Censorship Seal (금열게ꃡ).
『For what reason is it disapproved?』 I asked.
『Never mind disapproved, they even said they want to investigate the author (著作者) a bit.』
In my mind's eye flashed the image of those XXX sitting there, their arrogant eyes, mouths, harsh tone. If they were before me now, I felt I could punch them out; I realized my face was flushing (상긔됨).
『For what reason?』 I asked.
『What reason? Because it's subversive (블온하다고)...』
『Subversive? What's subversive? I already took out anything that seemed even slightly problematic...』
『Anyway, somehow, somewhere... maybe they did it because they dislike you...』 This was the owner's remark.
『Dislike me? Me?』 My face flushed hotter, and I said such words.
『They say if a master dislikes a servant, he finds fault even saying the heel of his foot looks like a chicken egg; it must be like that』 said the clerk<25> beside him, tying up a parcel with string.
『Well, that's how it turned out, but what about the ten won you took, sir?』
『That money? If I had the means to repay it now, I would. But frankly, I have no money now. So if you could wait a bit, when I find an opportunity, I'll at least do some translation or something for you...』 I said curtly.
『When will that be...』
『It's not a matter of when, just as soon as there's a chance...』 I said and immediately dashed out of the bookstore door.
The flush rising on my face didn't subside, seeming to grow even hotter. It felt like the sky was collapsing to the earth, and the earth rising to the sky. I wanted to beat down every person I saw on the street.
Just then, the clatter of wooden clogs came from behind, followed by a sharp, piercing voice, 『Hey, idiot (빠가)!』 I whipped my head around.
Beside me was a man in an inverness coat (임바네쓰) carrying a briefcase, clearly a Japanese moneylender or merchant who had lived in this land for over ten (十數年) years. Next to him was a Korean man who looked like his clerk, and a few steps ahead was a shabbily dressed Korean porter (지개군) with an A-frame carrier. It seemed the porter, rushing towards Chongno Market (鍾路市場) for a load, had bumped rather hard against the Japanese man walking beside him. The Japanese man struck the porter's shoulder with his hand,
『Hey, idiot (빠가), bad person (납분 사람이)... going that way, why this way...』 he glared at the porter with murderous eyes.
『Sir (영감상), it was my mistake』 the porter said, simply stepping aside without any resistance.
That inverness-clad man's eyes, his mouth, everything revealed all the cruelty (殘忍性) of the petty evil animal (小惡動物) he possessed. Already, the expression of habitual arrogance from freely sucking the blood of these foolishly obedient (愚順) white-clad people and abusing them was imprinted (印) on his face. He looked exactly like some plump, bristly poisonous insect (毒虫). The urge to stomp him dead with my foot surged up violently (왈칵). My fists clenched (부르르 움키여 쥐여지며), and I started to follow him. My mind<26> went blank (앗득하다). The ground spun (핑 돈다). I felt like I would collapse onto the ground. Somehow, they dispersed and went their separate ways. To regain my senses, I went into the public toilet across from the market, barely managed to urinate, but couldn't collect my thoughts. I leaned against the wall, stood there, and only later, realizing the stench of urine stinging my nose, came back out.
Now, the thought of finding money took precedence. Passing the bookstore again, I went up the alley beside it to find H, who was staying at an inn (旅舘). Thanks to having some money, he had even been to Tokyo (동경) and was now staying in Seoul, bustling about with ambition (功名熱).
Just as I entered the alley, I met him on the street.
『Well, it's been a long time. Where are you going?』 asked H, looking up at me through his black celluloid-rimmed glasses with greedy yet sly-looking, half-closed eyes.
『It has been a long time. I was just coming to see you...』 I replied.
『Oh, me? You came looking for me...』 His words held suspicion, and also mocked that someone who wouldn't normally visit had come. Indeed, since coming to Seoul, I hadn't visited him. The two of us walked side-by-side out of the alley. The intended words didn't come out easily. As we left the alley, he went into a nearby shop to buy cigarettes. Seeing him pay with a five-won bill and get change, I secretly felt hopeful about succeeding. After a moment's hesitation, I cut straight to the point (斷刀直入的):
『Hey, I need some money urgently, could you lend me some?』
Stunned (어안이 벙벙해서), he looked at me with wide eyes, then readily replied,
『Sure, how much?』 A truly unexpected answer. I had never asked him for such a thing before, and perhaps lending me money would give him a story to brag about to our hometown friends about how he helped me. More than that, he had just been caught with money. I could clearly see through the calculations in the mind of such a cunning and sly person.
『However much you can spare...』
『I really need this money for something... Every penny is precious to me right now, but...』 he said, handing me<27> a single one-won note. His expression clearly showed he couldn't give more.
『Thanks』 I said without another word, took it, and turned away. I headed home with urgent steps.
This wasn't the first time I had done such a begging act. It had happened several times already. But the feeling of humiliation and wretchedness was the same now. Living felt humiliating.
『I can't do this again』 I resolved. Suddenly, it felt like cold water was poured down my back, and my whole body shivered (읏솔읏솔한다).
『My body feels strange』 I muttered to myself, walking faster. When the body feels like this, thoughts tend to arise more readily and flow better.
『Then what should I do? Kill them?... Like Master Samyŏngdang (사명당) in the old days, shut the family in a room, lock the door from the outside, and burn them to death?』 My body shivered more intensely. 『Could I do such a thing?... I couldn't. I don't have that kind of superhuman (超人) will (意志). I can't. Then what should I do? Maybe try this? Put the children in an orphanage (孤兒限) and send W off to be someone's housekeeper (안잠자기)... But, that too would be quite a tragedy (悲劇) for them. This tragedy...』 Though I resolved this way, when I would carry out this resolution remained a pending matter (保留案).
After walking for a while, I couldn't tell if my feet were moving quickly or slowly. The flat ground sometimes looked sunken, sometimes raised. People approaching from afar looked blurry. I couldn't understand what force kept the houses, trees, walls, and utility poles standing so straight. My legs felt weak (허진허전하여지며), and I couldn't walk further. I stopped. Leaning against the wall of Kyŏngbokkung Palace, I shut my eyes tightly. My ears felt blocked. Only a ringing sound (잉잉 소리) came through. Collecting myself,
『Let's go quickly』 I thought, forced strength into my weak legs, and walked on. Rushing home, I found the youngest child collapsed asleep, while the mother and older daughter, who had been huddled together, stood up to greet me. They seemed much more resilient<28> to starvation than I. Though their faces were pale, they looked more vital than mine. I stumbled into the room as if about to collapse, sat down heavily, pulled the one-won note from my pocket, placed it down and said,
『Here—quickly buy rice, buy wood...』
Then I pulled the blanket and quilt together over myself and lay down in the lower part of the room (아래ㅅ목). The chills intensified. My body began to tremble violently (덜니기 시작한다). It felt like my body was being dragged deep into the earth, then suddenly, as if on a boat, my whole body and the whole world seemed to sway. My forehead and eyes felt as if a hot brazier, in anger, was pressed against them, sometimes burning hot (훅근훅근하기도), sometimes stinging (뜩금뜩금하기도). When I rubbed the tip of my thumb against the tips of my other fingers, what I felt seemed like touching some extremely rough and uneven stone wall (석벽). When I wondered if it was a stone wall, suddenly an endlessly high castle wall appeared before my eyes. Then, as the castle wall crumbled with a crash (와그르), the scattered fragments of the wall were not stones, but instantly became ripples (파툰(波紋)) spreading in a bottomless pool of water. At such times, what I felt at my fingertips became soft like silk ribbon (명주고름) or waves. Then, it was neither this nor that, only something like sunlight or lightning flashing on and off before my eyes. Then, I lost consciousness completely. I fell into a coma (昏睡狀態).
After some time passed, unaware if I had slept or not, someone shook me awake. Before me, under the dim lamplight, the children were sitting slumped in the upper part of the room (우ㅅ묵).
『Did you eat?』 I asked, looking over the children.
『Yes』 『The children ate already』 answered the older daughter and her mother softly.
『Please eat. I cooked some rice porridge』 said W.
I ate several spoonfuls of the porridge. I couldn't eat more. I stood the spoon upright in the bowl on the tray.
『Please eat a little more. You must have fallen ill after working so hard and being so hungry. Please force yourself to eat』.
I forced down a few more spoonfuls<29>
『Aigo, I can't eat any more』 I said, put down the spoon, and collapsed again. My mind seemed clearer than before. But it was a state where the slightest stimulation to my nerves (神經) would cause extreme agitation. The young children were nodding off. It was because they ate after being extremely hungry.
『If you're sleepy, lie down and sleep』 came the unexpected voice of W, who was sitting holding the dinner tray. The children slumped over one by one. The way they collapsed reminded me (련상) of a litter of piglets in a pen. The slum (貧民窟) which I had once regarded with curiosity had now become my own reality. Looking at the children lying side-by-side in the upper part of the room, a sudden feeling of pity arose. I realized tears were welling up in my burning eyes.
『Eh, why have I become so sentimental. My nerves must have weakened』 I thought, turning my eyes to look at the lamp. Though it was a lamp whose light (光力) was as dim as a firefly's, it suddenly pierced me with a long, sharp awl of light (光線). My eyes stung (뜩금하여지며), and I closed them.
The day's events weighed heavily on my mind. Begging for money from that man in that way felt extremely humiliating.
『Begging is truly humiliating』 I muttered to myself.
『Humiliation! Humiliation!... Rather than begging, I should steal. That's less humiliating』 I muttered again under my breath. Theft is less humiliating than begging.
『But that too is humiliating. Because it involves deceiving others' eyes... Robbery (강도) is more honorable (떠떳하다) than that... Yes, honorable. According to the conscience of the times (時代良心), there's nothing to be ashamed of』 I thought.
『However, there is one anguish even there. Even if one succeeds in robbery, one anguish that will exist is the contradiction with truth (眞理)—the anguish of whether one cannot live without resorting to such means (手段). But that anguish, I will accept as a queen (여왕?) and bear it. It is a great (偉大) anguish. The highest (最高) anguish』 I continued thinking.
『Then, should I commit robbery instead of going bankrupt (파산)? Bankruptcy? Robbery?』 I opened my eyes and looked at the young children.<30>
『If I send them to an orphanage where they have no one to rely on...』 As I thought this, my heart twinged. The memory of visiting an orphanage in Sugamo (소압), Tokyo (동경), flashed before my eyes. Those orphans (孤兒) with sallow complexions (노랑꼿이 피는), looking dazed and wandering aimlessly, had seemed extremely pitiful. More than anything, they were children starved for love. Because they couldn't grow up embraced in a warm mother's bosom, they became withered like plants grown in the shade. Thinking this far, I suddenly felt even greater pity. Looking once more at their desolate sleeping forms, I realized tears were welling up (핑 도름). I thought how weak and pathetic I was, but it couldn't be helped) I closed my eyes again.
『Bankruptcy? Robbery?... Robbery! Robbery!』 I clenched my fists (부르르 움키여 쥐엿다).
『Then, can I actually commit robbery? Do I have the courage to jump over someone's wall with a knife or some tool, threaten them, and take their money? That courage is questionable... I am cowardly (비겁하다)... Also, such an act is eight or nine times out of ten likely to end in failure rather than success. If so, it will only cause a worthless tragedy. In the end, it just becomes an ignorant (無智) adventure (冒險)』 At such times, so-called rational calculation (지헤의 타산) tends to defend one's character flaw (性格의 결함) of cowardice (卑怯) and reinforce that tendency.
『Then what should I do? Is it neither this nor that?... How can I live?... Also, what about my resolution to dig into the pit of the suffering of the times (時代苦痛)? Instead of following the guidance of wisdom, cowardly (卑怯) thoughts arise more strongly... Cowardice, truly pathetic! Am I really this cowardly?』 I clenched my powerless fist. I remained in a state of unconsciousness (無義識狀態) for a while.
『Robbery is a great rebellion! An act of rebellion (反逆的 行爲) towering higher than Mount Everest (에베레스트고봉) in this world! A posture (姿勢) as if shouldering the burden of suffering of all humanity! An unknown (無名) Christ (긔독)!』 Thinking like this, romantic feelings also arose. Clenching my fists, I sat bolt upright,<31>
『Robbery! Robbery!』 I resolved, my mouth twitching convulsively (경련적). The room seemed to stir. The 'iron' (인두) stuck in the brazier flashed in my eyes.
『With that... no. With the kitchen knife (식칼) from the kitchen』... Thinking this swiftly, I wanted to dash out immediately. W, who had been sleeping near the threshold, startled awake, sat up, and with wide eyes said,
『Aigo, what's wrong? I thought you were just talking nonsense in your sleep, but now you're sitting up like that...』
『No, no, just... couldn't sleep...』
『Aigo, what should I do?』
『No, go back to sleep. I'll sleep soon too...』 I lay down again. Clenching my fists again,
『Robbery! Robbery!』 I cried out inwardly.
『Where do I go with the knife... Yes, the brick-walled house uphill from here... jump over that wall... break into the detached guest house (사랑)... threaten them and take the money... then jump back over the wall... flee to the mountains... then come back home...』 Thinking this, I briefly lost consciousness (無意識).
『Ah, this is not what I should be thinking now. After my body recovers... first, I need to get well.』

The night is pitch black. But in the eastern sky, the space between dark clouds brightens, as if the waning crescent moon of dawn is about to rise. The high wall along the barely visible road shows a faint outline (輪廓). The pine trees standing at the foot of the nearby mountain also look like an ink wash painting (水墨畵).
『Ah, what if this moonless night...』 As I thought this, suddenly the moonlight that had briefly appeared seemed completely covered by dark clouds, and it became pitch dark again.
『Perfect!』 I thought, and tried to jump over the wall, but the moonlight still made me uneasy. Nevertheless, I climbed onto the wall. The knife in my left hand scraped against the wall with a 'thud-' sound. My heart leaped into my throat. Straddling the wall,<32> I looked inside. About two kan away, the corner of the detached guest house (사랑) was half-lit by an electric light. But this side of the wall was not illuminated.
『Inside there must be the main guest room』 I thought, and slipped down. Fortunately, my landing made no sound. But my heart was pounding. Something kept catching on my body, clinging (직웃직웃) and pricking sharply. Touching it, I found it was a plant stem. Probably a thorny climbing rose (蔓生薔薇). After removing the branch stuck to my clothes, I transferred the knife from my left hand to my right and moved stealthily. I reached the middle of the back garden. Suddenly, a 'tang-tang' sound came from somewhere. Startled, I froze. My heart pounded. Listening closely, I realized it was the sound of a clock striking. It seemed to be striking three. I moved again. I reached the corner of the building. Hiding my body in the dark shadow, I peeked inside. Right nearby was the large guest room (사랑방). The light was on in that room. Half of the outer shutter (덧문) was closed, half was open. The lights in the other rooms seemed to be off. Only the lamp in the room below the courtyard shone outwards. I realized the lamplight I saw from the wall was this lamp. Quietly stepping one foot inside, I peered into the room. In the lower part of the room (아래목), a sallow-faced old man, likely the master, lay sleeping covered by a thin silk blanket (얄분 천의). Beside him lay a chamber pot (요강) and an ashtray (재ㅅ더리). A large, shade-covered electric light (전동) hung from the center of the ceiling. On impulse, I rushed forward and tried to open the door. The sliding door (미다지) was not closed but open. I strode boldly into the room, pointing the knife directly at the sleeping person, and sat down. The person opened his eyes, began trembling violently, sat up, and without a word, opened the wall closet door, took out a small safe (금고), opened the safe door with trembling hands, and laid out a thick bundle of ten-won notes. I stuffed it into my pocket (주머니 슆�?), and when that wasn't enough, stuffed more into my trouser legs, then dashed outside. Once outside, I found myself not by the wall I had climbed, but on the main street. The street was bright. People were coming and going.
『This is terrible! It's already dawn!』 I threw away the knife I was holding, clutched my pounding chest, and tried to walk, but my feet wouldn't move properly. Shouts erupted from the house behind the wall I had jumped. Suddenly, a policeman (순사) came running. I picked up the nearby knife and stabbed the policeman. He collapsed. Right behind him, countless policemen came running.<33> Frantically, as I tried to swing the knife, someone struck me hard from behind. I collapsed forward. Several policemen rushed to grab me. 『Aigo!』 I screamed.

I snapped my eyes open. My whole body was drenched in sweat (땅이 줄-흐룀¸다).
The lamp still illuminated the room. They were still collapsed in the upper part of the room (우ㅅ목). Sleeping peacefully, shouldering an unknown (未知) fate, enveloped by the dark night, which, like a慈母 (慈母, benevolent mother) or an 악마 (惡魔, demon), seemed to caress (愛撫) and watch sharply (睨視).
A terrible dream. The night is so long. (End) <34>

**Summary**

This bleak story, "Into the Ground," portrays the utter destitution and psychological disintegration of an impoverished intellectual, likely the author himself using the pen name Po Sŏk (Cho Myŏnghŭi), in 1920s colonial Seoul. Driven by starvation and the inability to support his family, the narrator experiences profound despair, loss of ideals, and alienation. He grapples with his perceived descent into an animalistic state, contemplates abandoning his family, and is ultimately tormented by violent thoughts, culminating in a nightmare where he commits robbery and murder. The story starkly depicts the crushing poverty and hopelessness faced by many Koreans under Japanese colonial rule.

Historically, the story is significant for its raw depiction of urban poverty and the resulting psychological toll during the colonial period. The narrator's internal conflict—between his former idealistic self and the desperate creature hunger has made him, his critique of the passive "white-clad people," his contemplation of extreme measures like robbery as a potentially more "honorable" act than begging, and the final descent into a violent nightmare—offers historians insight into the social conditions, the crisis of identity among intellectuals, and the undercurrents of desperation and potential for resistance or breakdown within colonized Korean society. The specific details about daily life, like the cost of living, the struggle for food and shelter, and interactions with figures like the dismissive publisher and the arrogant Japanese man, provide valuable texture to the historical understanding of the era.

**Named Entities**

서울	서울	Seoul
조선	조선	Chosŏn
남촌	남촌	Namch'on
취운정	취운정	Ch'wiunjŏng
삼청동	삼청동	Samch'ŏngdong
W	W	W
북촌	북촌	Pukch'on
긔독	기독	Kristo (Christ)
마리아	마리아	Maria (Mary)
게숙	게숙	Kyesuk
H	H	H
안동	안동	Andong
종로	종로	Chongno
일본사람	일본 사람	Japanese person
북악산	북악산	Pugaksan
인왕산	인왕산	Inwangsan
경복궁	경복궁	Kyŏngbokkung
숙주감 다리	숙주감 다리	Sukchugam Bridge (?)
동경	동경	Tonggyŏng (Tokyo)
소압	소압	Soab (Sugamo)
에베레스트고봉	에베레스트 고봉	Eberesŭt'ŭ Kobong (Mt. Everest)

**Glossary**

빈민	빈민	Poor people
아사자	아사자	Person dying of starvation
걸식자	걸식자	Beggar
퇴락	퇴락	Decay, decline
영쇠	영쇠	Decline, wither away
패멸조잔	패멸조잔	Ruin and decay
백의인	백의인	White-clad people (term for Koreans)
긔아군	기아군	Starving multitude
반성	반성	Reflection, introspection
인내	인내	Endurance, patience
자의식	자의식	Self-awareness
허위	허위	Falsehood
긔만	기만	Deceit (older spelling of 기만)
폭압	폭압	Oppression
긔아	기아	Starvation (older spelling of 기아)
사막	사막	Desert
초지	초지	Scorched land
아괴	아귀	Ghoul, hungry ghost (餓鬼)
상밥	상밥	Cheap boarding house meal
설넝탕	설렁탕	Beef bone soup (older spelling of 설렁탕)
호떡	호떡	Sweet Korean pancake
내성생활	내성 생활	Introspective life
구복	구복	Lit. mouth and belly; needs of the stomach
시상	시상	Poetic thought/inspiration
냉조	냉조	Cold ridicule, sarcasm
긔근긔	기근기	Famine period
구차	구차	Humiliation, awkwardness, poverty
량심	양심	Conscience (older spelling of 양심)
무산군	무산군	Propertyless masses/proletariat
령혼향상	영혼 향상	Soul-improvement, spiritual progress
속중	속중	Worldly masses (俗衆)
암굴	암굴	Dark cave
우정	우정	Friendship
인간애	인간애	Human love/philanthropy
얼거매엿다	얽어매였다	Was bound, tied up (older spelling/form)
돗치게	돋치게	To sprout (older spelling of 돋게)
거어노코	그어 놓고	Having drawn (a line) (older spelling/form)
안해	아내	Wife (older term)
살님	살림	Household, living (older spelling of 살림)
셋방	셋방	Rented room
멧 칠	며칠	A few days (older spelling)
책사	책사	Bookseller, bookstore (冊肆)
판권	판권	Publishing rights
출판허가	출판 허가	Publication permit
솟개 그릇개	솥이며 그릇이며	Pots and dishes (colloquial/older form)
나무ㅅ단	나뭇단	Bundle of wood (older spacing/form)
쌀말	쌀 말	A 'mal' (unit of volume) of rice
패지	페이지	Page (loanword, older spelling)
세간	세간	Furniture, household goods
보통이	보퉁이	Bundle wrapped in cloth
웃목	윗목	Upper part of a room (warmer part of ondol floor)
아래목	아래목	Lower part of a room (cooler part of ondol floor)
분위긔	분위기	Atmosphere (older spelling of 분위기)
둥불	등불	Lamp (dialectal/older form of 등불)
문군	문군	Swarm of mosquitoes (蚊群)
억개	어깨	Shoulder (older spelling)
처다보앗다	쳐다보았다	Looked up at (older spelling)
현숙	현숙	Virtuous and gentle (feminine quality)
눈빗	눈빛	Glint in the eye, eye color (older spelling)
표졍	표정	Facial expression (older spelling of 표정)
긔독	기독	Christ (基督) (older usage for 그리스도)
깁흔	깊은	Deep (older spelling)
김생	짐승	Beast, animal (dialectal/older form of 짐승)
늣김	느낌	Feeling, sensation (older spelling)
자서히	자세히	Closely, in detail (older spelling)
본릉	본능	Instinct (older spelling)
심령	심령	Spirit, soul
악희	악희	Malicious prank/fate (惡戱)
허무	허무	Nothingness, vanity, nihilism
빙양	빙양	Arctic/Antarctic Ocean (氷洋)
백웅	백웅	Polar bear (白熊)
퇴마루	툇마루	Narrow wooden porch/veranda along the outside of a room
저주	저주	Curse
무산대중	무산대중	Propertyless masses (無産大衆)
압수	압수	Confiscation, seizure
불허가	불허가	Disapproval, non-permission
저작자	저작자	Author
블온하다	불온하다	To be subversive, dangerous (politically) (older spelling)
서울깍정이	서울깍쟁이	Seoul slicker, sharp city person (often derogatory) (older spelling)
지개군	지게꾼	A-frame carrier porter
영감상	영감님	Sir, old gentleman (deferential term used towards the Japanese man)
임바네쓰	인버네스	Inverness coat (loanword)
소악동물	소악동물	Petty evil animal
우순하다	우순하다	Foolishly obedient, simple and docile
지헤	지혜	Wisdom (older spelling)
려관	여관	Inn, traditional hotel (older spelling)
공명열	공명열	Desire for fame and achievement
단도직입적	단도직입적	Direct, straight to the point
파산	파산	Bankruptcy
고아원	고아원	Orphanage
안잠자기	안잠자기	Live-in female servant/housekeeper
혼수상태	혼수 상태	Coma
강도	강도	Robbery, robber
시대량심	시대 양심	Conscience of the times
비겁하다	비겁하다	To be cowardly
모험	모험	Adventure, risk
륜곽	윤곽	Outline, contour (older spelling)
순사	순사	Policeman (term used during colonial period)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제57호
발행일	1925년 03월 01일
기사제목	땅속으로
필자	抱石
기사형태	소설

땅속으로
						抱石
서울은 이십만 인구(人口)의 도회(都會)로서 무직업(無職業)한 빈민(貧民)이 십팔만이라는 말은 신문긔사(新聞記事)를 보고 알엇지마는 세게지도(世界地圖)가운대 이러한 대가 또 잇거던 잇다고 가리켜 내여 보아라. 말만 드러도 곳 아사자(餓死者) 걸식자(乞食者)가 길에 널닌 것 갓다. 배보다 배ㅅ꼽이 더 크다는 셈으로 이십오만 인구에 걸식자(乞食者)가 십팔만!
나도 물론 이 거대(巨大)한 걸식단(乞食團) 가운대 신래자(新來者)의 한사람이 되엿다.
남촌이라는 이방인 집단지(集團地)인 특수지대(特殊地帶)를 제해 노코 그의는 다 퇴락(頹落)하여 가는 옛 건물(建物), 영쇠(零衰)하여 가는 거리거리 밧삭 말는 먼지냄새로 꽉 찬듯한 긔분(氣氛) 속에서 날로 날로 더 패멸조잔(敗滅凋殘)의 운명의 길로 드러가는 서울이란 이 땅, 아니 전조선(全朝鮮)이라는 이 땅, 그 속에 굼질대는 백의인(白衣人)-빈사상태(頻死狀態)예 빠진 긔아군(飢餓群).
그들에게는 아모 것도 업다. 사랑도 업고 밥도 업고 XX도 업다. 또는 로력(努力)도 반성(反省)도 용긔(勇氣)도 반발력(半撥力)도 업다. 그러타고 또는 침통(沈痛)한 인내(忍耐)의 자의식(自意識)도 업다. 굿센 미듬도 업다. 잇다는 것이라고는 허위(虛僞), 긔만(欺瞞), 폭압(暴壓), 긔아(飢餓)... 이 밧게는 아모 것도 업다.
아모 것도 업다! 아모 것도 업다! 이 사막(沙漠)에는 이 초지(焦地)에는 아모 것도 업다!
마른 땅과 마른 뼈 밧게는 아모 것도 업다!
이 땅에 장차 무엇이 오랴노?!
이 무리에게 장차 무엿이 닥치랴노?!＜15＞
죽음! 올토다. 죽음 밧것는 아모 것도 업다.
죽음! 죽음! 이 죽음의 구덩이를 바라다 보고 잇는 이 무리. 다만 죽음을 기다리고 잇는 양 (羊)의 떼나 개떼 가튼 이 무리.
그들 가운대에는 부루지지는 이도 업다. 괴로하는 이도 업다.
『이 땅에 불을 내리지 안나!
이 초지(焦地)에는 차라리 불을 내리지 안나』하고라도 부루지지는 이는 한아도 업다.
듸듸고 선 것은 마른 땅
가지고 잇는 것은 이 몸의 뼈,
모래 녹여 화약 맨들 수 업나?
뼈 갈아 창 치울 수 업나?
이 아괴의 무리에게 들녀가지고
죽음의 구덩이에 춤이나 추어 보게.

자-이제부터는 내가 서울서 지내여 온 일, 또는 압흐로 지내여 가는 모양, 그것을 대강 좀 적어보자.
내가 서울와서 보니 몸 한아 둘 곳도 별로 업다. 처음에는 친구의 뒤꿍문이를 따라다니며 어더 먹고 끼여 자고 하다가 그도 오래 할 수 업는 일이라 우선의 상밥이라도 먹어야 하것기에 어나 친구의 지시로 하숙에 드러가서 잇다가 필경에는 거긔서도 밥갑으로 인하야 쪼겨나고 마럿다. 그 다음에는 또 주인잇는 남의 사랑방에 가서 부처잇는 친구를 쪼처가 덥부치기 노릇을 하여가며 사먹는 것이라고는 상밥 설넝탕 호떡 그도 업스면 굼꼬.-
이 모양으로 봄을 내고 여름도 또한 다가게 되얏다. 나는 오륙삭 동안을 엇지 지내여 왓는지 꿈결 가티 아득하다. 내성생활(內省生活)이고 예술창작(藝術創作)이고 무엇이고 다 이 긔분과 이 생활 속에서는 생각하고 도라다 볼 겨를이 업섯다. 그것도 어츰에는 쿰는 때가 간혹 잇다하더라도 그 배곱흔 고통을 달게 여기고 참어나 잇지마는＜16＞ 그것도 너머 시들하도록 도수가 지내여 가닛가 별 수 업다. 사람이 그만 구복을 위하여 사는 동물(動物)이 되고 마럿다. 그리하면서도 자긔의 약함을 뉘우치는 때도 잇섯다. 그러나 하는 수 업다! 그만 개나 도야지 가튼 동물로 타락되고 마럿다. 여긔에 한가지 예를 드러 보면-그다지도 수가 지나도록 배가 곱흐지 아니할 때에는 길에 나서면 그래도 무슨 시상(詩想)도 나고 사색(思索)도 이러나고 하더니 그 곱이를 지내고 보면 이것도 저것도 업다. 길에 널닌 것이 모도 다 먹을 것으로만 보인다. 돌덩이고 나무 쪼각 가튼 것이 무슨 떡 조각이나 면보 조각으로 보인다.-그러다가 조흔 운수가 터저서 배를 채우고 나게 될 때에는 백치(白痴)나 소아(小兒) 모양으로 일종의 희열(喜悅)과 만족을 늣기게 된다. 걸인(乞人)의 심리(心理)를 잘 짐작할 수 잇다. 그리다가 갑작이 자긔라는 것을 도라다 볼 때에는 냉조(冷嘲)의 우숨이 슬적 터져 나온다. 그 우숨 속에는 슬흠도 석기여 잇다. 별 수 업다. 잇때것 현자(賢者)를 배우랴하고 군자(君子)를 강작(强作)하랴던 무반성(無反省)하고도 천박(淺薄)한 인도주의자(人道主義者)-이상주의자(理想主義者)가 그만 자만심(自慢心)이 쑥 드러가 바리고 마럿다. (물론 자긔가 못생긴 줄은 알지마는) 엇던 때는 하로에 한끼쯤 먹거나 말거나 할 삼사일을 게속하는 긔근긔(饑饉期)가 닥처올 때에는 친구고 무엇이고 사람이라면 귀치 안은 생각이 나서 취운정(翠雲亭)이나 삼청동(三淸洞) 가튼 나무그늘 조코 잔듸밧 잇는 곳으로 차저가서 낫으로부터 밤까지 혼자 꿉흐리고 안자 쑥 드러간 검은 눈을 끄먹끄먹하고 지낼 때도 잇섯다. 그러나 그도 언제까지 그 모양으로 견뎨여 나갈 수는 업는 일이다. 다시 개 모양으로 음식냄새를 맛흐러 거리로 튀여 나오게 된다. 그 배곱흔 고통을 면하랴고 한끼라도 남에게 어더 먹자면 구차를 떠나서는 그도 될 수 업다. 이 세상에서 구차를 떠나랴면 자살(自殺이나 도페(逃避) 밧게는 다른 수 업다. 그래 구차한 짓을 한 번하고 배알코 두 번하고 배알코 엇던 때는 사는 것이 드러워서 『굴머 죽드라도 그따위 짓은 아니하겟다』고 결심하엿다가도 또 구차. 자-사람이 이 모양으로 사러 나가니 나증에는 그만 량심(良心)까지 흔들닌다. 잇때서야 비로소 외적생활(外的生活)의 무거운 압박(壓迫)으로 인하야 내적생활(內的生活)을 도라다볼 여가가 업는 왼 세게 무산군(無産群)의 고통(苦痛)을 알 수 잇다.
잇때부터 내 사상생활(思想生活)의 전환 轉換)의 동긔(動機)가 생기엿다. 잇땟것 『식, 색, 명예(食, 色, 名譽만＜17＞ 아는 개 도야지 가튼 이 세상 속중(俗衆)들이야 엇지 되거나 말거나 나 혼자만 어서 가자 령혼향상(靈魂向上)의 길로라고 부루지지던 나는 내 자신 속에서 개를 발견(發見)하고 도야지를 발견한 뒤에는
『우로 말고 알에로 파 드러 가자. 개 도야지의 고통 속으로! 왼 세게 무산대중(無産大衆)의 고통 속으로! 특(特)이 백의인(白衣人)의 고통 속으로! 지하(地下) 멧 천 중암굴 (暗窟) 속으로!』라고 부르지젓다.
이 땅에는 연애(戀愛)도 업다. 우정(友情)도 업다. 인간애(人間愛)도 업다. 피도 눈물도 *도 열(熱)도 업다. 먹을 것도 업다. 사지도 얼거매엿다.
마른 땅 우에 꿈질대는 것은 다만 「뼈의 사람」, 아니 「사람의 뼈」 뿐이다.
뼈를 태우자, 뼈를 썩이자, 그 속에서 사랑의 씨가 돗치게 하자. 새 생명이 터저 나오게 하자.
「백의인(白衣人)의 고통(苦痛),
백의인(白衣人)의 고통(苦痛),
땅에 금 한번 거어노코 보자!」

이때이다. 이때에 시골서 무슨 깁분 소식이나 오기만 기다리고 기다리던 W란 사람이 견듸다 못하야 어린 아해들을 끌고 나를 차저 서울로 왓다.
어나 일갓집에서 그를 만나본 나는
『어대 사러 나가 봅시다』하고 말하엿다.
연에가 다 무엇이야 피 마른 조선사람에도 연애가 잇나? 애정업는 안해하고 사러 나가 보자. 쓴맛이 얼마나 대단한가? 거지는 살님 못하나. 고생 맛이 얼마나 대단한가. 좀 견듸여 보자. 하는 생각이 반발적(反撥的)으로 이러나는 나는 살님하고 살겟다고 대담히 말하엿다.
그러하고 우선 그들은 염치불고하고 가난한 일가ㅅ집에 맛기여 놋코 엇더케 하던지 멧 칠 내로는 돈을 주선하여 가지고 셋방이나 하나 어더 살님을 시작하여 볼 작정이다. 그러나 돈 구처할 도리는 업다. 별 수 업다. 잇때것＜18＞ 『이것이야 내가 아직 발표할 수 업지』하고 량심의 지조를 직히여 내려오느라고 꾹 파무더 두엇던 시집 원고(詩集原稿)를 불이야 불이야 초고(草稿)에서 주어 모데여 가지고 어나 책사를 차저가서 염치조케 싸구려장사 물건 팔듯기 내여 노앗다. 거긔서 거절을 당하엿다. 얼골이 확근확근하는 나는 뒤통수를 두다리고 문박그로 뛰여 나왓다. 그 길로 어나 친구를 차저가 그 친구의 아는 책사로 갓치 차저갓다. 다행이 거긔서는 성공하엿다. 판권을 륙십원에 파러 가지고 선금 이십원을 찻고 그 남어지 사십원은 출판허가(出版許可)가 나온 뒤에 찻기로 하엿다.
자-이만하면 되얏다. 하고 W란 사람에게로 달녀와 보고를 맛친 뒤에 세ㅅ방을 차지랴고 나섯다. 방을 구한다는 것이 필경에 이 북촌 막바지 삼청동-지금 드러잇는 이 겻방이엿다.
두달치 방세 선금이 십원. 남어지 십원은 솟개 그릇개 나무ㅅ단 쌀말.
이만하면 네 식구가 일주일 가량은 걱정업시 지내게 되얏다.
내 생애의 패지에 연필 따위로나 한 금을 글만한 이 살님사리 최초일 밤이엿다.
석유 등잔불의 희미하게 밝힌 방안에 (나는 문명의 해택을 넘우나 밧지 못하는 사람이다. 서울살님에도 역시 석유등블), 구녁나고 때끼인 장판방, 어나때에 도배한 것인지 검누르게 끄른 벽, 세간이라고는 한구석에 노인 보통이 하나 흔 상자땍이 하나, 우ㅅ목에 안진 세 사람 아래목에 안진 나, 이 네 사람의 마음과 잘 조화된 방안 방 밧게 우울(憂鬱)한 분위긔(雰圍氣), 이들의 압 운명을 암시(暗示)하는 듯한 까막어리는 둥불. 느진철 더 강예(强銳)하여진 무긔(武器)를 가지고 여긔저긔서 호응(呼應)하는 문군(蚊群).
나는 부채를 드러 왼편 억개에 붓허 안자서 주사침을 내려박는 모긔를 탁 때려 쪼치며 웃목에 나란히 안진 세 사람을 슬적 처다보앗다. 아닌 겨울에 훗훗한 남풍이 부러오는 셈으로 변체(變軆)의 긔조(氣潮) 가튼 내 마음세에 그만 때아닌 봄철을 만난 듯한 W란 사람은 그의 표정과 행동을 보아도 넉넉히 알 수 잇다.
더운 줄도 모르고 어린 딸을 무릅 무에 안치고 땀난 손으로 그의 머리를 쓰다듬어주는 그의 얼골은 여전예 보지 못하던 평화(平和)와 현숙(賢淑)의 표정이 드러나 보인다. 그의 눈은 크지마는 눈빗이 검은 까닭으로-말하자면 봄이나 가을 맛의 성걱(性格)을 가진 사람의 눈빗이 아니요 겨울 맛이 잇는 눈빗이다.-그러한 표졍을 드러냄애는 ＜19＞ 넘우 적당치 못하다. 그러나 그의 입과 그 가성이에는 그런 표정이 드러낫다. 어린 긔독(基督)을 안고잇는 「마리아」의 얼골(그림)에는 이보다 더 농후한 표정을 볼 수 잇다.
그 표정을 본 나는 적이 마음이 쾌하엿다. 그러나 마음의 깁흔 구석에서는 늘히 서마서마하여 진다. 마치 귀여웁지 못한 김생을 억지로 길드릴 양으로 손으로 쓰다듬어주는 늣김과 갓다. 나는 얼골을 얼는 돌니엿다. 나는 잇때것 그의 얼골을 한번이라도 자서히 처다본 적은 업다. 혹시 무슨 말을 할 때에도 늘 고개를 들지 안코 말하는 것이 그에 대한 버릇이 되얏다. 특빌히 지금 와서 자서히 본 셈이다. 그러나 오래 처다 볼 긔운은 업다. 그는 어린 딸올 이르켜 새워 내게로 미러 보내며
『저 아버지한태로 가거라. 아버지한태 가』한다.
어린 딸은 주저주저하며 내엽흐으 온다. 나는 그를 안엇다. 그의 손을 만저보기도 하고 볼을 대여보기도 하엿다. 아마 이것도 처음일 것이다. 동물의 본릉(本能)으로 자식 귀여운 생각이 아니 날 수 업다. 나는 거듭 이쪽 빰을 대여 보앗다.
내 무릅 우에 안자 까막까막하고 등불을 처다보는 그 눈은 몹시 귀여웟다. 유리알 가티 맑은 눈이엿다. 그는 꼭 담으린 어엽분 입을 방긋이 벌니여
『저긔 저 모긔... 소리해 남 모르는 소리두 하지!...』하고 이런 동화(童話) 가튼 말을 한다. 그 말을 드른 나는 신통한 생각이 매우 나서 곳 입을 한번 대이랴 하엿다. 그러나 그만 두엇다.
이것을 보라! 이런 긔막힌 일이 어대 잇슬가? 이 아이가 남의 아이 갓드라도 이런 긔여운 말을 드를 때에는 곳 우주생명(宇宙生命)에 대한 신비감(神秘感), 경근감(敬虔感)이 이러날  터인대, 더구나 제 소생에 대하여 이런 생각이 안이러난다는 일을 생각하면...
본릉(本能)으로는 귀여운 생각이 나나, 심령(心靈)으로는 이것을 부정(否定)... 아, 심령에 빗을 가라막는 이 악희(惡戱)의 운명!
『우주생명(宇宙生命)이 나에게는 거부(拒否)를 하는구나!』＜20＞
하고 나는 속으로 부르지지며, 주먹을 부르르 움키여 쥐엿다. 비트러진 생각이 나서 눈압헤 보이는 생명이라고는 모조리 죽여 업새고 십헛다.
생명(生命)의 거부(拒否)! 생병의 거부! 여긔에는 허무(虛無) 밧게 업다.
모든 것을 다 부시여라! 모든 것을 다 불사러 바려라! 다만 허무다. 허무에 대한 반역(反逆)이다.
그러타고 자살(自殺)하기는 실타. 도페(逃避)하기도 살타. 어대 좀 견뎨여 나가보자! 억지를 쓰고 사러보자! 빙양(氷洋)의 백웅(白熊) 가티, 빙양(氷洋)의 백웅(白熊) 가티... 최후에는 피를 어름 우에 쏘다노코 죽드라도...
『조선사람에게는, 아니 내게는 이것조차 빼서갓구나! 우주생명(宇宙生命)으로부터 내여 바린 자식이로구나. 그러나 어대 좀 견데여 보자』이러케 생각하고 나는 속눈동자를 뒤박고아 굴녀 내려감엇다. 가슴 속으로 울녀드러가는 목기침을 한번 하엿다. 그 기침소리는 땅속을 울니는 신음성(呻吟聲) 가티 들니엿다. 그리고 어린 딸에게 대해서는 갑작이 더 걸닌 생각이 낫섯다. 밧삭 끼안고 볼을 한번 대이고 나서는, 슬그머니 내려노앗다.
그 아이는 저의 모에게로 향하야 간다. 가다가 엽헤 노인 물그릇을 밟앗다. 그릇은 업퍼지고, 물은 방바닥에 흥근히 쏘다젓다. 그의 모든 그 버릇이 또 튀여나왓다. 어린 아해를 훔처 갈긴다. 아해는 소리처 운다. 나는 상을 징그리고 고개를 엽흐로 돌니엿다.
『에이그, 직읏직읏한 년, 급살을 마질 년!』하고 그는 또 아이를 때린다. 무교양(無敎養) 무세련(無洗鍊)하고도 악착한 표정이 얼골에 드러난다. 아이의 울음소리는 더 놉하 간다. 나는
『이 살님사리 시작이 지옥의 초입(初入)이로구나』하고 화를 펄젹 내이며, 밧그로 튀여 나가, 퇴마루 끗헤 가 거러안젓다. 그는 더 게속하며
『아이고, 지긋지긋...』한다.
그 「지긋지긋」소리가 저주(咀呪)에 이가는 소리 가티 들닌다. 나는 참다 못하야
『에잇...』소리를 치고는, 구두작으로 그를 훔처 때리랴다가 그만 두엇다. 아조 밧그로 멀니 가 바리랴다가＜21＞ 『참자 참어. 마른 뼈에 제물이 울어날 때까지 참자』하고, 눈감고 안자 잇다가, 방안이 조용한 것을 보고 『인자들 자거라』하고 나는 다시 눈을 감엇다. 어나 때까지이고, 눈감고 안진 이 모양으로 밤을 보내고 십헛다. 눈감는 버릇은 압흔 버릇이다. 그 속에는 검은 한을빗과 가튼 세게이다.

이리하야 일주일이 지내엿다. 한 달이 지내엿다. 또 한 달이 지내엿다. 엇지 지내여 가는 모양인지 정신차릴 수가 업다. 어나 때를 굴멋는지 어나 때를 먹엇는지 세아릴 수 업다. 다만 끼를 때우기에 힘을 쓰고 사는 인생이 되고 마럿다. 그 밧게는 생활(生活)의 의의(意義)를 차질 수 업게 되엿다.
생명(生命)의 침체(沈滯)다. 아조 침체(沈滯)다. 예전쯤 해서 무슨 내성생활(內省生活)을 한다고 반성(反省)의 고통을 늣기며, 쓰리니 압흐니 하던 때는 참으로 황금시대(黃金時代)이다. 멧 달전 자긔 혼자 지낼 때는 오히려 유토피아시절이다. 그런 긔아(飢餓)의 영광(榮光), 고적(孤寂)의 락토(樂土)를 지금 안자서는 도저히 바랄 수 업는 일이다.
어제 저녁 때, 집주인이 방세를 내라고 여러 말을 하며 나가라 엇지하거라 하기에, 나 역시 참다 못하야 큰 소리 멧 마대를 하엿더니 도리혀 그만 창피한 꼴을 톡톡이 당하고 마럿다. 화낌에 저녁도 아니 먹고 박그로 튀여 나가며
『왜, 저녁은 아니하오. 쌀이 업소?』하고 W라는 사람보고 무럿더니
『쌀이 업기는 왜 업서요. 인자 차차 하지요』한다.
나는 그 길로 나서서, 어나 친구를 차저가서 저녁을 어더 먹고, 밤이 늣도록 놀다가 이내 그곳에 쓰러저 자고 느진 아츰 때나 되여서 집으로 도라왓다. 방에 드러와 보니 W라는 사람은 큰 딸아이의 머리를 빗기고 안저잇다. 그저 아츰을 아니한 모양이다.
『아츰을 그저 왜 아니해?』하고 무럿다.
그는 아모 대답도 업다.＜22＞
『아츰을 왜 안지여?』하고 또 무럿다.
또한 대답이 업다. 나는 쌀이 업는 줄을 알엇다.
『게숙(작은 딸)이는 어대가?』
『몰나요. 어대 갓는지. 고대 나간는데...』
나는 방문 밧그로 나와, 안주인 집 쪽으로 기웃이 드려다 보앗다. 그 집에는 지금 한참 아츰상이 버러젓다. 이것 보아 게숙이가 주인집 식구 밥 먹는 꼴을 우둑허니 바라다보고 그 집대ㅅ돌 엽헤 죽으리고 안젓다. 마치 주린 개모양으로... (이런 것도 처음 보는 일이다) 그것을 본 나는 가슴이 찌르르하며 창자까지 울녀 내려오는 것 갓핫다. 빠르게 손짓을 하여 그를 불너 내엿다. 그리고는 번쩍 안고 방으로 드러가 무릅 우에 안치고
『너 배곱흐냐? 어제 저녁밥 먹엇는대 그러케 배곱흘 것이 무엇잇담』
『아니, 안먹엇서요』하고 어린 딸은 눈자위가 꺼진 눈을 까막까막하며 대답한다.
『아, 참으로 안먹엇서, 어제 저녁을?』
『그럼, 안먹엇지. 똑똑지 못한 말로 거듭 대답한다. 어제 저녁에 쌀이 업스면서도 잇다고 거짓말을 하야 내 걱정을 들냐던 W란 사람의 심사를 인자서 짐작할 수 잇다. 어린 딸 말 끗헤, W란 사람은 벽으로 고개를 외면하며, 긴 한숨을 쉬인다. 나는 가슴 속이 무슨 돌덩이나 집어느어 굴니는 것 가티 압헛다. 내 살이라도 비여서 먹일 수 잇다면 넉넉히 그리 할 수 잇슬 것 갓다. 과연 말이지, 자긔가 열끼 굴물지언정, 그 죄업고 약한 것들의 한끼 굼는 것이란 것은 참아볼 수 업는 일이다. 처자 거나리고 빈궁한 살님사리 하여본 사람이 아니면 이런 것을 보른다. 또는 이 세상 다대수의 약한 인간이 이 무서운 생명(生命)의 피ㅅ줄에 눌니여, 량심(良心)의 죄를 지어가며 살냐고 애쓰는 것을 짐작할 수 잇다)
이때에 안으로서, 주인 마누라장이의 목소리 나며
『게숙어머니 잇수?』한다.
나는 혹시 어린 아해 먹이랴는 밥이나 주랴고 부르는 듯 십은 구차한 생각까지 얼는 이러 난다. 밥은 고사하고＜23＞ 이따위 말이다.
『방세 엇더케 되얏수? 오날은 불가불 좀 써야 하겟는대』한다.
『글세 아직 안되얏나봐요』게숙모의 대답이엿다.
『안되면 엇지한단 말이요. 방도 아니 내노코, 세도 아니 내고』하는 아니꼽살스러운 말투엿다.
나는 주먹을 불끈 쥐고 이러스며
『참, 이 세상...』하고 박그로 튀여 나갓다.
밧게는 지금 야단이 낫다. 느진 가을의 야단이 낫다. 한업시 한업시 놉흔 한울에, 바람은 그 복판을 치며 굴너 나간다. 보라, 북악산 꼭닥이 한울에서도 가을이 「아우-」소리치며, 인왕산꼭닥이 한울에서도 가을이 「아우」소리친다. 그 「아우-」소리는 서로서로 엇결녀, 서울이 바라다 보고 잇는 대공(大空)의 궁게를, 뷘 독슉에 울니는 사람소리가티 「아우-」하며 울녀 나간다. 그 압푼 가을의 호령아래에, 이 산밋 저 산밋 느러선 나무의 입입들은 함부로 땅 우에 내려 구르며 곤두박질한다.
곤두박질이다! 땅 우에 곤두박질이다! 모든 것이 다 이 땅 우에 곤두박질이다.
길 우에 꿈질대는 사람이 모도 다 곤두박질할 듯 십다. 경복궁 긴 담을 안고 내려오는 나도 한번 곤두박질하고 십헛다.
나는 발을 탁 구르며
『지금은 이런 생각할 때가 아니다. 밥이다. 돈이다』생각하고는, 발을 빨니 내여 노으며, 숙주감 다리를 건너서 안동 네 거리를 지나, 종로로 향하고 내려 갓섯다. 여긔까지 오며 한 생각은 책사에 돈차저 낼 궁니엿다.
『그동안 허가가 나왓스면 다행이요. 그러치 못하더라도 억지로 떼쓰고 다만 십원이라도 빼서내자』하고 이러케 생각한 나는 바로 책사를 차저가게 되얏다. 고 교활하고도 야박한 소인간(小人間)의 전형 典型)으로 생긴 책사주인 얼골 대하기는 무엇보다 실혓다. 그는 전일 갓흐면 생쥐 가튼 눈을 요리조리 굴니며, 쥐꼬리만한 지혜를 가지고, 점잔타는 사람이라도 한번 다투어 보랴고, 또는 정다운 체하느라고, 뱅글뱅글 우스며, 얄굿한 말성을 부릴＜24＞ 터인대, 웬 셈인지 오날은 그리치도 안타. 시침을 뚝 떼고 다스리고 안자서
『아, O선생 마침 잘 오섯구려』하고 할끗 한번 처다본다. 그 처다보는 눈찌는 사람은 경멸히 여기는 눈찌이다. 고리하는 것이 조곰만 리해(利害)가 틀니면 빼끗 도라가는 서울깍정이 마음세의 본색이다. 조선사람에게는 이 여호성(性)과 생주성(性)이 만타. 그 중에도 서울사람. 서울사람 중에도 장사아치, 그들은 확실이 「생쥐인간」이라고 할 수 잇다. 룡(龍)의 색기가 못되면 「미꾸리」가 된다는 셈으로, 리성민족(理性民族)의 망골자손이라는 것은 이와 가티 타락되고 마럿다.
그는 거듭 말을 내며
『이것 보시요』하고 책상 설합속으로 반지 널비만한 좀 둑거워 보이는 조희쪽을 끄내이며, 『금열하러 드려보낸 그 시집(詩集)이 압수를 당하엿담니다』하고 때무든 책상우에 펼처 논는다.
『압수?』하고 나는 가슴이 덜썩 내려 안지며 그 조희쪽으로 눈이 갓다. 그 첫머리에는 통지서, 그 다음에는 무엇무엇... 중간에 내려가다가 눈에 번쩍 떼이는 것이 불허가... 그 끗흐로 무슨 국 무슨 과 금열게ꃡ.
『무슨 까닭으로 불허가랍듸가?』하고 나는 무럿다.
『불허가는 고사하여 노코, 저작자(著作者)를 좀 취조하여 보겟다고까지 합듸다』
내 눈에는 그 XXX들의 거러안진 모양, 고독살스러운 눈, 입, 매몰스러운 말투, 그런 것이 번쩍 떠오르며, 눈압해 잇스면 곳 주먹으로 내여 갈닐 듯 십게, 얼골에 상긔됨을 깨닷겟다.
『무슨 까닭으로?』하고 무럿다.
『무슨 까닭으로요? 블온하다고...』
『볼온이라니, 무엇이 불온? 그러지 아니하여도 조곰이라도 끄럴 듯 십은 것은 최다 빼엿는대...』
『좌우간 어대가 엇더키에... 당신이 미운 생각이 나서 그리하엿는지도 모르지...』 이 말은 주인의 말이엿다.
『미워, 내가 미워?』 얼골이 확근확근하여지며 나는 이런 말을 하엿다.
『상전이 종이 미우면, 발뒤ㅅ굼치가 왜 닭알 갓흐냐고 트집을 잡는다더니, 그 셈인게로군』하고 말하는 사람은＜25＞ 그 엽헤서 위편 소포물을 노끈으로 얼꼬잇는 차인군의 말이엿다.
『그래, 그것은 그리 되엿지마는, 선생 갓다 쓴 돈이 십원 조건은 엇지한단 말심이요』
『그 든이요. 지금 내가 갑흘 도리가 잇슬 것 갓흐면 곳 갑하드리겟쇠다. 마는 바로 말이지 지금 내가 돈이 업소. 그리하니 조곰 참으면 내가 결을을 타서 하다 못하야 무슨 번역 가튼 것이라도 하여 드릴 터이니...』하고 쾌쾌히 말을 하엿다.
『언제 그것은...』
『언제일 것이 아니라, 틈만 잇스면...』하고 나는 바로 그 책사문 박그로 튀여 나왓다.
얼골에 올으는 상긔는 가라안지 안코 점점 더 놉하지는 것 가다. 한울이 땅으로 내려안는 것 갓고, 땅이 한울로 올나가는 것 갓다. 길에 보이는 사람을 모조리 때려 뉘이고 십다.
그럴 즈음에 뒤로서 나막신소리가 딸각딸각 나더니, 별안간 『요보, 빠가』하는 콕 찌르는 둣한 소리가 난다. 난는 고개를 홱 돌녀왓다.
엽헤는 손가방을 들고 임바네쓰를 입은 사람은, 얼는 보아도 십수년(十數年) 이 땅에서 사러온 고리대금업자나 장사하는 일본사람이다. 그 엽헤는 그 자의 차인군 가튼 조선사람, 또 압흐로 서너발작되는 거리에선 사람은 헙수룩한 조선사람의 지개군. 아마 그 지개군이 짐지러 종로시장(鍾路市場)으로 달녀가다가, 엽흐로 오는 일본사람의 몸을 좀 몹시 부다첫던 모양이다. 그 일본사람은 손으로 지개군의 억개를 훔처 때리며
『요보, 빠가, 납분 사람이... 조리 갓는데 와이이리...』하고 살긔 떼인 눈으로 지개군을 노려본다.
『영감상이, 잘못해서』하고 아모 반항도 업시 엽흐로 슬적 피하는 것은 지개군이다.
그 임바네쓰입은 사람의 그 눈, 그 입, 모든 것이 다 제가 가지고 잇는 소악동물(小惡動物)의 잔인성(殘忍性)을 잇는대로 다 드러낸다. 그러지 아니하여도 이 우순(愚順한 백의인 피를 제멋대로 빠라먹고 제멋대로 학대한 관의 표정이 그 얼골에 인(印) 박혀잇다. 마치 무슨 살이 볼녹하게 진 털이 가칠까칠한 독충(毒虫) 갓허 보인다. 나는 그만 발로 웅깨여 죽이고 십흔 생각이 왈칵 낫다. 주먹이 부르르 움키여 쥐여지며 쪼처가랴 하엿다. 정신이＜26＞ 앗득하다. 땅이 핑 돈다. 나는 그 땅에 쓰러질 듯 십다. 어나 결을에 그들은 어대로 허여저 갓다. 나는 정신을 좀 돌니랴고, 시장 건너편에 잇는 공동변소로 드러가, 겨오 오좀을 누고 나니 정신을 꼰을 수 업섯다. 그대로 벽에 기대고 섯다가, 나종에야 지린 냄새가 코를 질음을 깨닷고 밧그로 나왓다.
인제는 돈 구처할 생각이 압흘 슨다. 다시 책사 압흘 지나 그 위ㅅ 골목안 려관(旅舘)에 드러잇는 H란 사람을 차저 갓다. 그는 돈푼 잇는 덕택에 동경까지 갓다 와서, 지금은 류경을 하면서 공명열(功名熱)에 날뛰인 사람이다.
그 골목에 드러가자마나 길에서 그를 만낫다.
『참, 오래감만일세 그려. 그래 어대를 가나?』하고 세루로이드 검은테 안경 속으로 게슴츠레한 탐욕적이면서도 엉큼스러워 보이는 눈을 우로 지르떠서 처다보며 말하는 사람은 H엿다.
『오래간만일세. 내가 지금 자네를 만나랴고...』하고 대답하엿다.
『응, 나를 ? 자네가 나를 차저와...』하는 말은 의심도 끼이고, 또는 차저오지 아니할 사람을 차저왓다는 비웃는 말이다. 실상 나는 서울 온 뒤로 그를 차저 본 적이 업섯다. 두 사람은 나란히 서서 그 골목을 나온다. 마음먹은 일은 넹큼 말이 아니 나온다. 골목 밧글 나슬 때, 그는 엽 가개에 가서 담배를 산다. 오원짜리 지페를 내여 주고 박구는 것을 본 나는 은근히 속으로 성공의 가망이 잇슴을 미덧다. 잔간 주저하다가 그만 단도직입적(斷刀直入的)으로
『여보게, 내 급히 쓸 대가 잇스니, 돈 좀 꾸여주게』하엿다.
어안이 벙벙해서 지르 뜬 눈으로 나를 처다보던 그는 쾌연히 대답하며
『그러지, 얼마나?』하다. 참 의외의 대답이다. 잇때것 내가 그에게 그런 말을 하여본 쩍이 업고, 또는 나를 구제하여 주엇다는 말을, 한 고향친구들에게 자랑하자는 이약이거리도 된다. 또는 그보다도 당장에 돈 가진 것을 들킨 터이다. 이만큼 음흉하고 엉큼한 사람의 배ㅅ속을 뻔히 짐작할 수 잇다.
『얼마던지 자네 여유잇는대로...』
『내가 이 돈을 꼭 쓸 대가 잇서서... 내게는 한푼이라도 여간 새로운 때가 아닐세 마는...』하고 일원 한 장을＜27＞ 내여 준다. 그 밧게 더할 수 업다는 눈치가 력력하다.
『고마웨』하고 두 말 아니하고는 바다가지고 도라섯다. 급한 거름으로 집을 향하얏다.
내가 이런 구걸의 짓을 한 것이 지금 처음 한 것이 아니다. 발서 여러 번이다. 그러나 구차하고 녹녹한 생각이 나기는 지금도 마찬가지다. 사라 나가는 것이 구차스러웟다.
『인자 이 노릇은 다시 할 수 업다』하고 나는 결심하엿다. 별안간 등에 물을 끼언는 것 가치 선뜻하여지며, 왼 몸이 읏솔읏솔한다.
『몸이 야릇하군』혼자 말하고, 거름을 더 빨니 내여노앗다. 몸이 이런 때에는 무슨 생각이 더 잘 일어나고, 더 잘 돌아가는 법이다.
『그러면 엇지 하노? 그들을 죽이나?... 녯날 사명당 모양으로 식구를 방안에 집어 처느코, 문을 박그로 거러 장그고 불살너 죽여바리나. 몸이 더 선뜻하여진다. 『내가 그런 짓을 할 수 잇슬가... 할 수 업다. 내게는 그런 초인(超人)의 의지(意志)가 업다. 할 수 업다. 그러면 엇지 할고? 그러면 이러케나 하여 볼가. 아이들은 고아원(孤兒限)에나 갓다두고 W란 사람은 남의 안잠자기로 드려보내고... 그러나, 그도 그들에게 대하야 여간치 안은 비극(悲劇)이다. 이 비극을...』 이 모양으로 결심을 하엿다마는, 어나 때에 이 결심을 실행한다는 것은 아직 보류안(保留案)이다.
한참 것고 보닛가, 발이 속히 떼여 노아지는지 더듸 떼여 보아지는 지도 알 수 업다. 평평한 땅이 쑥 드러가 보이기도 하고, 쑥 나와 보이기도 한다. 멀니 오는 사람도 어른어른하여 보인다. 집이나 나무나 담이나 전간목이나 그들은 무슨 힘으로 저러케 뻣대고 서잇는지를 알 수 업다. 다리가 허진허전하여지며 더 거를 수 업다. 발을 멈추엇다. 경복궁 담을 손으로 집고 눈을 딱 감고 섯다. 귀가 막막하다. 무슨 소리인지 잉잉 소리만 들녀 드러온다. 정신을 차려
『어서 가자』하고는 허전허전한 다리에 힘을 주어 꼬느며 내여거럿다. 집에를 쪼처 드러와 보니 긋헤 아이는 쓰러저 잠이 들고, 그 위 모녀는 한대 쪽으리고 안젓다가 이러서 맛는다. 그들은 굼기를 버릇하기는 나보다 훨신＜28＞ 굿센 것 갓다. 파리한 얼골들이지마는 나보다는 싱싱하여 보인다. 나는 방문 안에 쓰러질 듯이 드러와 주저안지며 주머니 속에서 일원 한 장을 끄여내여 노으며
『자-어서 쌀 사고 나무 사고...』
하고는 그만 담요와 이불을 한대 겹처 들처쓰고, 아래ㅅ목에 누엇다. 한긔는 점점 더 심하여 간다. 몸이 들석들석하도록 덜니기 시작한다. 몸이 깁흔 땅속으로 끌녀드러가는 것 갓다가도, 별안간 무슨 배나 탄 모양으로 왼 몸 왼 천지가 흔들니는 것 갓기도 한다. 이마와 눈은 마치 뜨거운 화로가 성이나 대인 것 가티 훅근훅근하기도 하고 뜩금뜩금하기도 한다. 엄지손가락 끗과 다른 손가락끗을 마조대여 문지러 볼 때에는, 그 손가락 끗헤 만저지는 것이 무슨 몹시 억세고도 두툴두툴한 석벽을 만지는 것 갓핫다. 그럿이 석벽이냐 하고 생각할 때에는 별안간 무슨 끗업시 놉흔 성벽이 눈압헤 낫하난다. 그리다가 그 성벽이 와그르하고 문허질 때에는, 그 문허저 헛터진 성벽의 돌 쪼각쪼각이 돌이 아니요, 금방 내로 가업는 물구덩이에 일어나는 파툰(波紋)이 되고 만다. 그럴 때는 손가락 끗헤 만지는 것이 무슨 명주고름이나, 물결 가티 보드르워진다. 그리다가는 이것도 저것도 아니고, 다만 햇살이나 번개 가튼 것이 눈압헤 왓다갓다 사러젓다 껴젓다한다. 그리다가는 그만 정신을 일코 마럿다. 혼수상태(昏睡狀態)에 빠지고 마럿다.
잣는지 알엇는지 분간할 수 업시, 얼마동안을 지낸 뒤에, 흔들어 깨는 이가 잇서 압헤 노여 잇다. 희미한 등불 밋헤 아해은 우ㅅ묵에 느러 안잣다.
『너희들 밥 먹엇늬?』하고 아해들을 거더떠 보고 무러보앗다.
『네』 『저 아해들은 발서 먹엇서요』하고 연하게 대답하는 사람은 큰딸과 그의 모엿다.
『어서 잡수서요. 밥을 좀 끄렷더니』 하고 W란 사람은 말한다.
나는 그 끄린 밥을 서녀번 떠먹엇다. 더 먹을 수가 업다. 수저를 상 우에 딱 세워잡엇다.
『좀 나우 잡수서요. 넘우 애쓰시고 시장하신 끗헤 병환이 나섯는 가봐요. 억지로라도 잡수서요』
나는 서너번 더 떡먹고＜29＞
『아이고 더는 못 먹겟다』하고 수저를 노코 그만 다시 쓰러젓다. 정신이 악가보다는 돈 모양갓다. 그러나 신경(神經)을 조곰만 근드리여도 막우 흥분이 될 상태이다. 어린 아해들을 꾸벅꾸벅들 조은다. 몹시 시장하던 끗헤 밥을 먹은 까닭인 것이다.
『졸니거던, 드러누어들 자렴으나』하는 사람은 뜻밧게 안자 인자 밥상을 붓들고 인진 W라는 사람의 소리다. 아이들은 툭툭 쓰러진다. 그들의 쓰러지는 꼴이 마치 우리 안의 되야지 색기떼를 련상(連想)하게 된다. 예전에는 자긔가 한 호긔심을 가지고 대하던 빈민굴(貧民窟)이 지금 자긔가 당하게 되고 마럿다. 우ㅅ목에 나란이 누은 아이들 처다 불 때에는 갑작이 불상한 생각이 난다. 확근확근한 눈에 눈물이 믈을 깨닷겟다.
『에, 내가 왜 이러케 센티멘탈하여 젓나. 신경이 약하야 젓군 하고, 눈을 돌녀 등볼을 처다 보앗다. 그 광력(光力)이 미미하기 반듸불 가튼 등불이엿마는 별안간 길고도 날카라운 광선(光線)의 송곳으로 내여 지른다. 눈이 뜩금하여지며 눈을 감엇다.
낫일이 몹시도 마음에 거리킨다. 그 자에게 돈을 그 모양으로 구걸한 것이 몹시도 구차하엿다.
『구걸이란 것은 참 구차한 것이야』하고 혼자 중얼거리엿다.
『구차! 구차!... 구걸하느니 차라리 도적짓을 하지. 그보다는 덜 구차하다』하고 또 입 속으로 중얼거리엿다. 절도가 구걸보다는 들 구차하다.
『그러나 그 역시 구차한 일이야. 남의 눈을 속이는 것이닛가... 그보다 찰아리 강도가 떠떳하다... 그러타 떠떳하다. 시대량심(時代良心)으로는 조곰도 부ㅅ그러울 것이 업다』하고 생각하엿다.
『그러나, 거긔에도 한가지 번민은 잇다. 설사 강도질을 하야 성공한다하더라도 한가지 번민이 잇슬 것은 진리(眞理)에 대한 모순이다-이 가튼 수단(手段)을 부리지 안코는 살 수가 업느냐 하는 번민이엿다. 그러나 그 번민찜은 여왕으로 알고 가지고 지낼 것이다. 그것은 위대(偉大)한 번민이다. 최고(最高)의 번민이다』하고 잇대여 생각하엿다.
『그러면, 파산(破産)을 하지 말고 강도질을 할가? 파산일가? 강도일가?』하고 눈을 떠 어린 아해들을 처다 보앗다.＜30＞
『만일에 저것들을 아모도 의지할 곳 업는 고아원에다 보내면...』하고 생각할 때에 가슴이 찌르르 한다. 예 동경서 소압(巢鴨)에 잇는 고아원에 드러가 구경하던 일이 번뜻 눈에 떠오른다. 그 얼골에 노랑꼿이 피는 고아(孤兒)들, 어릿어릿하고 이리저리 몰너 다니는 모양이, 몹시 걸녀 보엿섯다. 그들은 무엇보다 사랑에 주린 아해들이다. 따듯한 어머니 품에 안겨 자라나지 못한 까닭으로 그 가티 응달에서 자라난 풀삭모양으로으 시들버들하게 되얏다. 이까지 생각한 나는, 잡작이 더 불상한 생각이 낫섯다. 다시 한번 그들의 쓸쓸하게도 누어잇는 모양을 처다보고는, 눈에 눈물이 핑 도름을 깨닷겟다. 내가 약하고 못생겻다는 생각도 낫것마는 하는 수 업다) 나는 다시 눈을 감엇다.
『파산? 강도?... 강드다! 강도!』하고 주먹을 부르르 움키여 쥐엿다.
『그러면 내가 강도질 할 수가 잇슬가? 칼이니 무슨 연장을 가지고 남의 집 담을 뛰여 넘어가서, 을느고 돈 빼서낼 용긔가 잇슬가? 그 용긔가 의문이다... 나는 비겁하다... 또는 그 일이 성공보다 십의 팔구는 실패에 도라갈 것이다. 그리고만 보면 갑업는 비극극만 일으킬 것이다. 결국은 무지(無智)한 모험(冒險)만 되고 만다』 이런 때에 소위 지헤의 타산이란 것이 자긔 성격(性格)의 결함(缺陷)인 비겁(卑怯)을 옹호(擁護)하게 하고 그쪽 긔세를 더 도읍게 된다.
『그러면 엇지 할고? 이것도 저것도 만다 말이야?... 엇더케 살어나가고?... 또는 자긔가 시대(時代苦痛)의 구덩이률 파고드러 가자던 결심이 무엇인가? 이 모양으로 지헤의 가리침이라는 것보다는 오히려 비겁(卑怯)한 생각이 더 나서... 비겁, 참 지지리 못낫다! 내가 이 모양으로 비겁하단 말인가?』하고 힘업는 주먹을 쥐여 보앗다. 한참 무의식상로(無義識狀態)잇섯다.
『강도란 것은 위대한 반역! 이 세상에셔는 에베레스르고봉(高峯)보다가 더 놉히 내여 뽑든 반역的 행위! 전세게 인류의 고통의 짐을 혼자 지고 선 듯한 자세(姿勢)! 무명(無名)의 긔독(基督)!』 이갓치 생각할 때에는 로맨틱한 감정도 따러오르는 것이다. 주먹을 붉근 쥐고 벌떡이러나며＜31＞
『강도다! 강도!』하고 경련적(痙攣的)으로 입을 옴으리며 결심하엿다. 방안이 움질하여지는 것 갓다. 화로에 꼬친 「인두」가 눈에 번뜻 떼이며
『저것을 들고... 아니다. 부억에 잇는 식칼을 들고』... 하고 속으로 번개 가티 생각하고는, 당장 곳 튀여 나가고 십헛다. 방문턱에 드러 누어 자던 W란 사람이, 깜짝 놀내여서 이러나며 후둥그러케 뜬눈으로
『아이고 왜 그러세요? 헛소리만 하시는 줄 알앗더니 저 모양으로 일어나 안지서서...』한다.
『아니야, 아니야, 좀... 잠이 안 와서...』
『아이고 엇더케 하나』
『아니야, 어서 드러 누어 자. 나도 곳 잘 터이니...』하고 다시 누엇다. 주먹을 또 움키여 쥐고
『강도다! 강도!』하고 속으로 부르지젓다.
『칼을 들고 어대로 가나... 올타 이 우ㅅ집 벽돌담한 집... 그 담을 넘어가서... 사랑을 뛰여드러가... 울느고 돈을 빼서... 그리고는 다시 그 담을 뛰여 넘어와... 산으로 도망질하여... 그리다가 집으로 드러와...』 이러케 생각하고는 잠간 무의식(無意識).
『아, 지금 내가 이러케 생각할 것은 아니다. 몸이 성한 뒤에... 우선 병이 나아야 하겟다』

밤은 어둠컴컴하다. 그러나 동쪽 한울에는 금음 새벽달이 도드랴는 셈인지 검은 구름사이가 휜하여 진다. 잘 보이지 안턴 길로 놉흔 담이 희미한 륜곽(輪廓)이 드러다 보인다. 그 엽 산 밋흐로선 소나무도 수묵화(水墨畵) 가티 보인다.
아, 이 달도 업는 밤이 엇더면...』하고 생각할 때에, 별안간 그 도드랴고 얼빗치엇던 달빗이 검은 구름으로 아조 덥힌 까닭인지 그만 캄캄하여지고 만다.
『잘 되얏다!』생각하고 담을 뛰여 넘으랴 하얏스나, 종시 그 달빗이 의심스러읍다. 그러나 담을 뛰여 올낫다. 왼손에 드럿던 칼이 담에 「득-」하고 글키는 소리가 난다. 가슴이 덜석 내려 안젓다. 담 우에 몸을 걸치고 서서 그＜32＞ 안을 드려다 보앗다. 두어간 드리 건너편으로 사랑모퉁이에 전등불이 반찜 내여 빗친다. 그러나 이 담 쪽에는 빗치지 아니한다.
『고 안으로는 바로 사랑방이어니』생각하고는 슬적 뛰여 나렷다. 다행이 발구르는 소리는 아니 낫섯다. 그러나 가슴은 두두근근하엿다. 무엇이 몸에 직웃직웃 잡어 달니며 꽉꽉 찌르는 것이 잇다. 손으로 만저 보아도 화초 남기다. 아마 가시 달닌 만생장미(蔓生薔薇)인 듯 십다. 옷에 붓흔 나무 가지를 떼고 나서, 왼손의 칼을 바른 손에 옴기여 잡고는 발을 가만가만히 옴기여 노앗다. 뒷들 한가운대까지 왓다. 별안간 어대서 「탕탕」소리가 난다. 깜작 놀내며 발을 멈추고 섯다. 가슴이 뚝딱뚝딱한다. 자서히 듯고 보니 그 소리는 시게치는 소리다. 석점을 치는 듯 십다. 다시 발을 옴기여 노앗다. 방 모통이까지 왓다. 몸은 어두운 그늘에 감추고 고개만 내여 미리 그 안을 엿보앗다. 바로 고 엽히 큰 사랑방이다. 그 방에는 불이 켜 잇다. 반쪽 덧문은 다다 잇고, 반쪽 덧문은 열녀잇다. 다른 방에는 모다 블은 끈 것 갓다. 다만 뜰아래ㅅ방 등불이 밧겻흐로 내여 걸녀 잇다. 악가 그 담에서 보이던 등불 빗이 곳 이 등불임을 알겟다. 가만히 발 한아를 듸려노아 방안을 엿보앗다. 방 아래목에는 얄분 천의를 덥고 누어자는 녹스그레한 영감장이가 아마 주인인 듯 십다. 그 엽흐고는 요강 재ㅅ더리가 노여 잇다. 큼직한 갓을 씨운 전동이 천정 복판에 걸녀 잇다. 나는 그만 얼결에 쑥 올나가며 방문을 열냐 하얏다. 그 방문 미다지가 다친 것이 아니라 열녀 잇다. 나는 방안으로 성큼 드러가며 칼을 바로 누은 사람에게 견우고 안젓다. 누은 사람은 눈을 떠보더니 벌벌 떨며 일어나 안더니만, 두 말 아니하고 벽장문을 열어, 작은 금고를 끄내여 노코, 떠는 손으로 금고문을 열더니, 십원짜리 지페 뭉턱이를 수북하게 내여 논는다. 나는 그것을 주머니 슆�에 너코, 그도 모잘나서 바지가랑이 속에다 집어너코, 박그로 튀여나왓다. 박글 나시고 보니 악가 그 담이 아니요 바로 큰 길이다. 길이 훤하다. 사람이 왓다갓다한다.
『이것 큰일 낫고나! 발서 날이 다 새엿고나』하고 가젓던 칼을 업헤 집어던지고, 두근거리는 가슴을 안고 거름을 거르랴 하나 발이 잘 떠러지지 안는다. 담 넘어 뒤ㅅ집에서 아우성소리가 이러난다. 별안간 순사 하나가 달녀온다. 나는 엽헤 노인 칼을 집어 그 순사를 찔넛다. 그는 고러젓다. 그리면서 바로 그 뒤로 수 업는 순사가 달녀온다.＜33＞ 나는 황황히 칼을 내여두르랴 할 제, 뒤에서 누가 나를 냅다 때린다. 나는 압흐로, 고러젓다. 여러 순사는 나를 붓잡으러 드러 덤빈다. 『아이고!』소리를 질넛다.

눈을 번쩍 떳다. 왼 몸에 땅이 줄-흐룀¸다.
등불은 그저 방안을 빗치고 잇다. 그들은 그저 우ㅅ목에 쓰러저 잇다. 미지(未知)의 운명을 질머지고 고히 누어 자는 그들, 그들을 에워싼 어두운 밤은 자모(慈母) 가티 또는 악마(惡魔) 가티 애무(愛撫)하는 듯 예시(睨視)하는 듯.
고약한 꿈이다. 밤은 길기도 하다.     (끗)＜34＞
＜15-34＞