Magazine Title	三千理 제9권 제1호
Publication Date	1937년 01월 01일
Article Title	著名人物 一代記 (Biographies of Notable Figures)
Article Type	설문 (Survey/Questionnaire)

丁丑新春
1, How old are you, Sir, where are you and what are you doing as you greet the New Year, and what do you plan to do in the New Year? Please write down your feelings, whether it be the lament of 'Body old, but spirit not old' (身老心不老) or otherwise.
10 Years Ago
1, How old were you 10 years ago, Sir, where were you then (Kyŏngsŏng or Tokyo), and what was your occupation as you passed the year?
2, What major events happened in Chosŏn that year?
20 Years Ago
1, How old were you then, Sir, where were you, and what were you doing?
2, What major events happened in Chosŏn society that year?
30 Years Ago
1, How old were you then, Sir, where were you, and what were you doing?
2, What major events happened in Chosŏn society that year?
40 Years Ago
1, How old were you then, Sir, where were you, and what were you doing?
2, What major events happened in Chosŏn society that year?
50 Years Ago
1, How old were you then, Sir, where were you, and what were you doing?
2, What major events happened in Chosŏn society that year?
60 Years Ago<28>

Chwaong Yun Ch'iho (佐翁 尹致昊)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = I turn 74 in the New Year. As I become so old, I feel the loneliness of being pushed year by year into the ranks of the elderly in our society, and at the same time, I often find myself reflecting on my past 80 years, which were full of storms and waves.

10 Years Ago = I was 64 then. I went to Kaesŏng and was serving as the principal of Songdo High Common School (松都高普). In Chosŏn society, the illiteracy eradication movement by the Tonga (東亞) and Chosŏn (朝鮮) newspapers was gaining momentum and vitality.

20 Years Ago = I was 54 then. I was in Seoul, working as the General Secretary of the Christian church. Wŏllam Yi Sangjae (月南 李商在) was also there with me. In the world, the Great War in Europe was raging, and in the East, the Siege of Tsingtao (靑島功衛戰) had begun, causing turmoil.

30 Years Ago = I was 44 then. For several years before that, I had been the principal of Taesŏng School (大成學校) in P'yŏngyang with An Tosan (安島山), and I also looked after the Songdo Hanyŏng Academy (松都 韓英書院). At that time, the political scene on the peninsula was eventful and turbulent, with various political incidents causing shocks to the public sentiment emerging one after another. The Sŏbuk Hakhoe (西北學會) and Kiho Hakhoe (畿湖學會) were at their peak.

40 Years Ago = I was 34 then. After 10 years of exile abroad, upon returning to the country, I served as a Councillor (參議) in the State Council (議政府) and Secretary to the Cabinet (內閣祕書官), then again as Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs (外部協辯). I think it was around that time that I also served as the Superintendent (監理) in Wŏnsan. Then came King Kojong's refuge at the Russian legation (俄館播遷), and rumors of conflict between Japan and Russia became increasingly alarming.

50 Years Ago = I was 24 then. It was when King Kojong took direct control of the government, and I was also serving as Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs (外部協辯). Two years later, when the Korean government sent a diplomatic mission (修信使) to Japan, I went to Tokyo with Pak Chŏngyang (朴定陽).

60 Years Ago = I was 14 then. I went to Japan with Yu Kilchun (兪吉濬) as an attendant (從員) to the envoy Ŏ Yunjung (魚允中) on a diplomatic mission (修信使). Consequently, Yu Kilchun entered Fukuzawa Yukichi's (福澤諭吉) Keiō Gijuku (慶應義塾), and I entered Nakamura Masanao's (中村正直) Dōjinsha (同人社) to study.

70 Years Ago = At age 4, I studied the Four Books and Five Classics (四書五經) at Paengnyŏn Hermitage (白蓮庵) in Ch'ungch'ŏng Province. At age 10, I read through Romance of the Three Kingdoms (三國誌) and Water Margin (水許誌) in classical Chinese.

Tasan Pak Yŏngch'ŏl (多山 朴榮喆)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = I turn 59. In the New Year too, I'll just be sitting guarding the Chosŏn Commercial Bank; I have no other business. My state of mind is 'Year after year the flowers are similar, but year after year the people are different' (歲歲花相似, 年年人不同).

10 Years Ago = I was 48, serving as the Governor of North Hamgyŏng Province. In April of Taishō 15 (1926), His Majesty King Yi (李王殿下) passed away.

20 Years Ago = I was 38, serving as the Governor of Iksan County. Chosŏn Governor-General Terauchi (寺內大將) became the Prime Minister of the Cabinet, General Hasegawa (長谷川大將) was appointed Governor-General, and His Majesty King Yi went to Tokyo to pay respects.<29>

30 Years Ago = I was 28, serving as an Army Major (陸軍參領). The Residency-General (統監府) was opened, Itō Hirobumi (伊藤博文公) was appointed Resident-General, the palace was purged, and political organizations included the Taehan Hyŏphoe (大韓協會), Ilchinhoe (一進會), Kongjinhoe (共進會), and Chaganghoe (自强會).

40 Years Ago = I was 18, studying at a private village school (私塾) in my hometown of Chŏnju. The pro-Russian faction, including Yi Pŏmjin (李範晉), had King Tae (李太王, Kojong) and the Crown Prince take refuge in the Russian Legation. They killed Prime Minister Kim Hongjip (金弘集) and Minister of Agriculture Chŏng Pyŏngha (鄭秉夏). Minister of Finance Ŏ Yunjung (魚允中) was also killed by a mob while fleeing. Minister of Home Affairs Yu Kilchun (兪吉濬), Minister of War Cho Ŭiyŏn (趙義淵), and Minister of Justice Chang Pak (張博) sought exile in Japan.

Tosan An Ch'angho (島山 安昌浩)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = My age this New Year is, alas, 60. I am recuperating from illness in the mountains of Taegwan-san, South P'yŏngan Province, gazing at the clouds floating in the Asian sky.

10 Years Ago = I was 50 then. I was in the French Concession in Shanghai. In the year I turned 54, I set foot on the soil of my homeland for the first time in over 20 years. I won't say more about my state of mind in Shanghai back then or the situation in Chosŏn at that time.

20 Years Ago = I was 40 then. Based in Los Angeles, USA, I believe it was the year before that I traveled around Mexico for several months giving speeches to the compatriots residing there. And around the age of 42 or 43, while in Shanghai, I traveled for inspection to places like the Philippines and Australia.

30 Years Ago = I was 30 then. Until the age of 28, I worked at Taesŏng School in P'yŏngyang, then crossed over to North America with Yi Kang (李剛) and others. We formed an organization called the "Hyŏphoe" (Association) and also published a newspaper. Meanwhile, I briefly participated in the labor of digging the Panama Canal. Anyway, my late twenties and early thirties were a time burning with passion.

40 Years Ago = I was 20 then. At 18 or 19, with my hair tied in a topknot, I followed political groups like the Independence Club (獨立協會) and the Tae X Hyŏphoe (大X協會). I frequently took the stage in Seoul and P'yŏngyang. Especially then, I gave speeches several times at Pubyŏngnu Pavilion (浮碧樓) in P'yŏngyang, and the memory of weeping overcome with emotion still remains unforgettable.

50 Years Ago = I was ten then. With my uncle (舍伯), I was farming on a small island near Nŭngnado (綾羅島) in P'yŏngyang, while also reading the Four Books and Five Classics.

Kwŏn Tongjin (權東鎭)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = I am 77. I hold the position of Taejong Sajang (大宗司長) of Ch'ŏndogyo (天道敎). Regarding worldly affairs, I prefer to maintain silence.

10 Years Ago = I was 67 then. While in Seoul, I assumed the post of Vice Chairman of the Sin'ganhoe (新幹會) Headquarters. The following year, I also took on the role of Chairman of the Inspection Committee at the Sin'ganhoe Headquarters, dedicating myself to the Sin'gan Movement<30> for several years before and after. At that time, the Sin'gan Movement was gaining significant momentum within Chosŏn.

20 Years Ago = I was 57 then. During that year, while involved with Ch'ŏndogyo, I served Son Ŭiam (孫義庵) and worked diligently to expand the religion's influence. It was also the heyday of Ch'ŏndogyo, and I joined two years after that.

30 Years Ago = At age 47. I was appointed Vice Councillor (副贊議) of the former Korean Privy Council (中樞院) and also worked as the head of the Industry Department for the Taehan Hyŏphoe (大韓協會).

40 Years Ago = At age 37. Due to the infamous Queen Min Incident (閔妃事件), I went into exile in Tokyo and spent about 10 years looking at the moon from my place of exile (配所).

50 Years Ago = At age 27. Having passed the military examination (武科及第) several years prior, I was appointed to a special military post (別軍職). After serving as the Magistrate of Haman County (咸安郡守), I was serving as the Anmu Chunggun (按撫中軍, Pacification Middle Commander) and Tobosa (討捕使, Bandit Suppression Commander) of Hamgyŏng Province before being transferred to the post of Naegŭmjang (內禁將, Royal Guard Commander) in the Privy Council (中樞府). It was also around this time that I served as the Magistrate and Defense Commander (僉使兼守防將) of Kŏmundo Island (巨文島).

60 Years Ago = At age 17, I was attending the Military Academy (陸軍士官學校) of the former Korean Empire.
Reflecting like this, I realize my turbulent life passes by like fragments of summer clouds.

Ch'unwŏn Yi Kwangsu (春園 李光洙)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = My age will be 46 in the New Year. It's a floating life, so how can I know where I'll be and what I'll be doing as I pass the year? It feels like drifting, but I have no particular feelings about my age.

10 Years Ago = 10 years ago, I was in Seoul, likely suffering from a serious illness. I have no memory of what happened in Chosŏn, but it's certain that nothing significant occurred, as I don't remember. Because I have no memory.

20 Years Ago = At 25, studying at Waseda University (早大) in Tokyo. Wrote *Mujŏng* (無情). Edited *Hakchigwang* (學之光). Director of the Christian Youth Association (基督靑年會), etc.

30 Years Ago = At 16. Attended middle school in Tokyo.
The year after the Eulsa Treaty (乙巳新條約).

40 Years Ago = At 5. Two years after the Sino-Japanese War (日淸戰爭). In Chŏngju<31>, North P'yŏngan Province, I played with my sword and lantern, picked up acorns, read the Thousand Character Classic (千字文) and untitled poems (無題詩), read storybooks to my maternal grandmother. The Independence Club (獨立協會) must have been in full swing.

50 Years Ago = The end of my previous life, preparing where to be born next. Old Chosŏn was walking the path of self-destruction.

60 Years Ago = I don't know where I was or what I was doing then. It must have been when the Taewŏn'gun (大院君) was actively involved in affairs.

Haeam Kim Yŏsik (海岩 金麗植)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = Sighing, "Already 48 years old," I am busy preparing to pass the year with my responsibilities of school affairs. In the New Year too, I will strive to expand the school business, which is my duty. However, as the years pass one by one, with 'time not waiting for me' (歲不與我), I lament my lack of significant achievements in both public and private matters and reflect deeply, striving to fulfill my responsibilities in life somehow.

10 Years Ago = I was 38. After wandering abroad for about 15 years, my first job upon returning home was as the principal of Hyŏpsŏng School (協成學校) in Kyŏngsŏng. However, due to about half a year of unpaid staff salaries and excessive debt, the school was forced to close. I was striving hard to raise funds and overcome the difficult situation. At that time, there were no major events within Chosŏn, but popular movements based on newly imported foreign ideologies continued, causing public anxiety.

20 Years Ago = I was 28, enrolled at a university in Iowa, USA. Although it was a life of studying while working hard, I was filled with hope, forgetting all hardships and focusing solely on my studies. That year too, there were no particularly noteworthy major events within Chosŏn, but due to the influence of the Great War in Europe, price hikes and public agitation were considerable.

30 Years Ago = I was 18. With the changing times, I neglected the classical Chinese books I had been studying. My peers and I chased each other morning and evening, engaging in frequent secret discussions (密議) about abandoning the old and embracing the new, aiming to change the direction of our studies. I practiced mathematics, the most important subject for new learning at the time, and plotted to study in Kyŏngsŏng.<32>
At that time, following the conclusion of the Eulsa Treaty (乙巳協約) where Korea ceded its diplomatic rights to Japan, the first major incident occurred: the Hague Secret Emissary Affair (海牙密使事件). After Emperor Kwangmu (光武) abdicated and Emperor Yunghŭi (隆熙) ascended the throne, the Chŏngmi Treaty (丁未協約) was concluded, leading to the disbandment of the Korean army. Thus, the turbulent situation at the end of the Korean Empire (韓末風雲) became tense.

40 Years Ago = I was 8. At the village school (漢文書齋), besides studying and memorizing texts like the *Tongmong Sŏnsŭp* (童蒙先習), I spent my leisure time flying kites and playing stone-fighting games (石戰) with my peers, just running around. At that time, King Kojong ascended to the imperial throne, upgrading Chosŏn from a kingdom to an empire, and changing the era name from Kŏnyang (建陽) to Kwangmu (光武). Domestic and foreign affairs became complicated, and consequently, the public sentiment shifted somewhat, but I passed my days as an ignorant child.

Yŏ Unhyŏng (呂運亨)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = I am 52. I passed the year with the newspaper company in that state. I will remain silent about worldly affairs.

10 Years Ago = I was 42 then, in Shanghai. I went to Tokyo in Taishō 8 (1919). When I was 45, things happened at the Far East Sports Ground in Shanghai, and I returned to Chosŏn. I remember that perhaps the First Communist Party Incident occurred in Chosŏn that year.

20 Years Ago = I was 32 then, studying at Nanjing University. Due to the Great War in Europe, the Japanese-German conflict was happening in Tsingtao (靑島), causing much commotion.

30 Years Ago = I was 22 then, farming in my hometown, a rural village in Yangp'yŏng, Kyŏnggi Province. After that, I traveled through Kangwŏn Province and came up to Seoul.

Pyŏkch'o Hong Myŏnghŭi (碧初 洪命憙)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = Age 50. Not even capable of ruling the world (爲天下者), I am ignorant of my family's productive work, facing hardship. Where is the Debt Evasion Platform (避債臺)? I shall go there to pass the year. I lack the skill to write my state of mind concisely, so shall I substitute a line from Du Fu's (杜子美) poem?
"How long does youth last, what to do about old age? How numerous have been the sorrows and joys hitherto!" (少壯幾時奈老何. 向來哀樂何其多)

10 Years Ago = After settling the complicated newspaper company life that had troubled me for 2-3 years, I passed the New Year peacefully in mind and body for the first time this year.<33>

20 Years Ago = Leaving my hometown behind, I embarked on a long journey of wandering. After roaming by boat in the south and horse in the north (南船北馬) for 6-7 years, although no particular hope had arisen, I decided to return to my homeland. I was in the Malay Peninsula, then came to Shanghai where I spent the New Year with Nigwan (睨觀). Then I came to Beijing, spent about a month with Tanjae (丹齋), and then went out to Fengtian (奉天). My parting with Nigwan and Tanjae this year became an eternal farewell in death.

30 Years Ago = I lived what is called a "four-and-a-half tatami mat life" (四疊半生活) in Tokyo. I learned well from this time that hatred is a necessary emotion for our people.

40 Years Ago = I lived buried in the affection of my great-grandmother. I lived knowing only this world as my own. It's my dream. The dream has already vanished like smoke, but traces of its disappearance sometimes still pain my heart.

Hwangsan Yi Chongnin (凰山 李鐘麟)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = I am 54. As I gradually approach sixty, I tried to capture this feeling in a New Year's Eve poem:
My old wife regrets the night's end, / My young child awaits the morning's arrival.
Looking at each other, we can smile, / For time is hard to hasten.
(老妻惜夜盡 稚子待朝來 / 相看堪一笑 歲月爲難催)
Let me record one more poem. I went to Pagoda Park, saw the year-end snow scene, and tried to record my feelings:
Holding a snow-covered branch, / Spring's light greens upon my brow.
Lingering, I cannot let it go, / Who knows this feeling?
(手把雪中枝 春光翠上眉 / 移時終不捨 此意有誰知)

10 Years Ago = At age 44. I was in Seoul then, responsible for the Chosŏn Products Promotion Association (朝鮮 物産獎勵會) and busy with that movement. Also that year, there was the Ŭlch'uk Year Flood (乙丑年 水災) in Chosŏn, so a Famine Relief Committee (飢饉救濟會) was organized, collecting a large sum of over 100,000 Wŏn, which was capably gathered and distributed. And I believe the All-Chosŏn Journalists' Conference was held in Kyŏngsŏng around that time.

20 Years Ago = At age 34. Involved with Ch'ŏndogyo, I served Son Ŭiam (孫義庵) and was busy with church affairs. That time, so to speak, was the golden age of Ch'ŏndogyo, with about 3 million followers and funds of approximately 1 million Wŏn. What I remember now is something from Taishō 7 (1918). Observing the turbulent world situation, I composed a poem at Ponghwanggak Pavilion (鳳凰閣), where Master Son Pyŏnghŭi (孫秉熙先生) stayed, to record my feelings:
Yellow leaves in the west wind blow ever more urgently, / The master silently descends the library stairs.<34>
(黃葉西風吹更急 / 主人無語下書樓)

30 Years Ago = At age 24. I became a Doctor (博士) at Sŏnggyun'gwan (成均舘) in Seoul then. At that time, I edited the bulletin of the Taehan Hyŏphoe (大韓協會). Meanwhile, under President O Sech'ang (吳世昌氏 社長), I served as the chief editor of the Tae O Minbo (大O民報), engaging in political commentary.

40 Years Ago = At age 14. I studied the Four Books and Five Classics under Master Yi Sŏl (李卨先生).

Och'on Sŏl T'aehŭi (梧村 薛泰熙)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = I am currently at Changsa-chō 224, taking medicine and recuperating. I have no plans for the New Year either. I just feel like 'ten thousand thoughts are like ashes' (萬念如灰).
Regarding the questions asked, if it were just about objective facts, I could answer about the events of each time as I know them. But when asked to speak subjectively, everything I did or initiated was not particularly noteworthy, and in some respects, it's embarrassing, so I don't want to open my mouth at all. Please understand. Perhaps if there's an opportunity in the future, I might speak in the form of reminiscences, but in today's format, I lack the shamefacedness to speak.

Kim Hwallan (金活蘭)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = I was born in the Kihae year (己亥生), so in the Chŏngch'uk year, I will be 39. I plan to pass the year still dreaming of the future of Ewha College (梨花專門) and Childcare (保育) in Kyŏngsŏng.
'Body not old, spirit not old' (身不老心不老), so what lament could there be?

10 Years Ago = 10 years ago, I would have been 29. I was also working at Ewha College and in Childcare.

20 Years Ago = 20 years ago, I was 19 and a graduating student at Ewha University College (梨花大學).

30 Years Ago = 30 years ago, I was a 9-year-old elementary student attending Inch'ŏn Yŏnghwa Girls' Common School (仁川永化女子普通學校).

40 Years Ago = I have no way of knowing about 40 years ago.

Kŭng'in Hŏ Hŏn (兢人 許憲)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = 52 this year. Already having reached this age, I truly feel that 'time flies like an arrow' (歲月 如矢). Observing the turbulent world situation,<35> I intend to strive for self-cultivation this year.

10 Years Ago = I was 42. That year, seeking to see world culture and study the judicial systems of various European and American countries, I embarked on a world tour. I was staying in Peekskill, USA, studying English.
That year, Chosŏn society showed lively movement; the Sin'ganhoe (新幹會) emerged, and the momentum of popular movements surged across the entire country.

20 Years Ago = I was 32. At that time, I was working as a lawyer (辯護士) in Seoul. Speaking of the social phenomena then, the fervor for education grew greatly, middle schools sprang up everywhere, and leaders loudly proclaimed the need for education.

30 Years Ago = I was 22. Until the previous year, I had been a Junior Official (主事) at the Kyujanggak (奎章閣) in the Royal Household Department (宮內部). From that year, I transferred to the position of Junior Official (主事) in the Ministry of Justice (法部). The Minister of Justice was the famous Chang Pak (張博氏). At night, I attended English night school. At that time, before the annexation (合倂), there were various political negotiations between Japan and Korea, causing great public tension.

40 Years Ago = I was 12. It was my time as a 4th-grade elementary school student at the Government Elementary School in Chaedong (齋洞), Seoul.
Young politicians like Sŏ Chaep'il (徐載弼), Yi Sangjae (李商在), Kim Okkyun (金玉均), and Yun Ch'iho (尹致昊氏) gathered to organize the Independence Club (獨立協會) and were initiating cultural reform movements.

Yudang So Wan'gyu (悠堂 蘇完奎)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = 36 years old! I greeted the New Spring in Kyŏngsŏng without doing anything particularly special. Without any specific plans, in vague hope, adhering to the principle of slow progress like an ox (牛步主義), without great optimism or pessimism, I intend to move forward.

20 Years Ago = At 26, studying law in Tokyo. I have no memory of world affairs.

30 Years Ago = At 16, I was serving Master Chŏn Yangjae (田良齋 先生) on Kyehwa Island (界火島), Puan (扶安). I have no memory of world affairs.

Kim Ch'angje (金昶濟)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = Age 57. As a teacher at Ewha Girls' High Common School (梨花女子高等普通學校), I will just continue working in the New Year. I don't have any particular feelings.<36>

10 Years Ago = 10 years before Pyŏngja (丙子, likely refers to 1936, so 10 years before 1937 is 1927), I was 47. I was also teaching at Ewha High Common School and Ewha College (梨門專門). I went to mainland Japan as the head of an academic inspection group. The Tonga Ilbo (東亞日報社) held a ceremony for the completion of its new building, honoring individuals with over 15 years of meritorious service in private education, and I was one of them.

20 Years Ago = At age 37, I was a teacher at Yŏngsaeng Middle School (永生中學校) (now High Common School). Since my home was also in Kyŏngsŏng, I passed the year in Kyŏngsŏng. The World War was raging. The Japan-Germany conflict (日獨戰爭) was ongoing. That summer, I attended an Imperial University lecture series in Tokyo for the first time.

30 Years Ago = Around age 27, while serving as the principal of Kyŏngsŏng Public Common School (鏡城公立普通學校), I also assisted Sŏngil School (成一學校).
It was when the Russo-Japanese War (日露戰爭) had just ended and Residency-General politics (統監政治) began. The public's passion for education surged tremendously.

40 Years Ago = At age 17, in T'aech'ŏn (態川), Poryŏng (保寧), South Ch'ungch'ŏng Province, I studied classical Chinese and associated with Confucian scholars (儒學者).
After the defeat of the Kabo (甲午) and Ŭlmi (乙未) reformist government, it was a kind of era of terror and chaos where the old conservative party ran rampant. The Independence Club (獨立協會) existed among the people.

50 Years Ago = At age 7, also in my hometown Poryŏng, I entered a classical Chinese school (漢學書堂) and read 'Heaven Earth Black Yellow' (天地玄黃 - first line of Thousand Character Classic).
There was a strange epidemic in the Pyŏngsul year (丙戌年, 1886). And politically, after the Kapsin Coup (甲申政變), things were very unsettled.

60 Years Ago = 4 years before birth. It was the infamous Pyŏngja year famine (丙子年 凶年, 1876).

Ch'un'gok Wŏn Sehunj (春谷 元世勳)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = I am currently living at 140-8 Ch'angsin-dong, outside East Gate (東大門外), Seoul, attending to my seventy-year-old mother. I turn 50 this year. My wife cooks for students and gets by on scorched rice (누릉지), fretting daily about candy money for our young daughter. Recently, I've made writing manuscripts for the Chungang Ilbo (中央時報社) my daily task, passing each day like that.
There are things I'd like to do in the New Year, but what's the point of talking about things unlikely to succeed? If only there were no illness in the family and we could have peace amidst our household poverty, I'd consider it fortunate. "Body old, spirit not old" (身老心不老) is a lie. An old fellow simply cannot have a young spirit.<37> As the body ages, it seems only the kind of mind likely to earn the scorn of youth arises. Sometimes, everything feels bothersome, and I think of seeking out a deep mountain valley or a deserted island, cutting ties with human society, and just quitting. This might be a part of my recent state of mind.

10 Years Ago = I was in Beijing, partly enrolled in studies, delving into Russian literature, and partly busy with some movement. Eventually, I ended up in Sinŭiju Prison for several years, spending New Year's there. After being released from prison, as those who know me can see, I have been continuing this life for 6 or 7 years.

20 Years Ago = I was in the Russian Maritime Province (露領 沿海州), living a kind of wandering life. Around the time of the Kiminyŏn (己未年, 1919) March First Movement, I was ceaselessly busy with some movement or other in various parts of China and Russia.

30 Years Ago = I studied at Taedong Law College (大東法律專門學校) in Kyŏngsŏng. Soon after graduating, I followed my seniors and comrades abroad. I cannot list one by one what I engaged in after going abroad.

40 Years Ago = I studied classical Chinese texts like *Sohak* (小學), *Tonggam* (通鑑), and *Analects* (論語) at the village school (書堂). At age 18, I cut my hair and came up [to Seoul] to study, which was my first step away from my hometown.

50 Years Ago = Let's leave my experiences from then onwards, as my mother would know them in detail. As for what major events occurred in Chosŏn at those times, ask the recent history of Chosŏn.

Yi Sŭngman (李承晩)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = My age this year is 60. Having already wandered abroad for over 30 years, dreams flow towards the green mountains and white clouds across the distant Pacific Ocean. I was a youth when I left my homeland; now white hair rests upon my head. I will pass the New Year in Los Angeles, North America.

10 Years Ago = My age then was 50. I was in Honolulu, Hawaii (布哇), with my brethren. At that time, I exerted my humble efforts to unite all the forces in Hawaii. I also published a newspaper in Hawaii.<38>

20 Years Ago = My age then was 40. After traveling and giving speeches throughout the United States for several years, I returned to Hawaii. At that time, we reclaimed the Korean Church, which had been in the hands of Westerners, bringing it under the control of our people. Thus, we established a Korean school and church in Hawaii. And the world was amidst the Great War in Europe, so everyone was tense in various ways.

30 Years Ago = My age then was 30. My memory is hazy, so I'm not sure, but I think it was around the time I finished Princeton University (푸린스톤大學) in the US and was attending Harvard University (하-버드大學) in the Department of Politics and Economics. I received my doctorate in 1911, so it seems to have been after the Russo-Japanese War and immediately after Yun Ch'iho's 105-Man Incident (尹致昊氏의 101人事件 - Note: The text says 101, but it's commonly known as the 105-Man Incident). I had left my homeland and crossed the Pacific.
*Forty Years Ago= When I was twenty, I attended Hansŏng Foreign Language School (漢城外國語學校) in Seoul. Then, along with Yi Sangjae (李商在), Kim Chŏngsik (金貞植氏), and others, I believe I spent time in prison due to some incident, and after that, I worked at the Christian Youth Association (基督敎靑年會). It was a time when there was talk of some treaty (協約) being concluded.

Sim'gang Yi Kŭnjong (心崗 李肯鍾)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = I have now turned 42. Since taking over the management of the Chosŏn Sang'gong Sinmunsa (朝鮮商工新聞社), I spend my days busily, so I expect to pass this New Year somehow or other in Kyŏngsŏng. In the New Year, I intend to strive even harder for the world of journalism. The lament that 'though the will exists, the deed is not accomplished, and the years do not wait for me' (有志事不成에 歲不與我留) is keenly felt daily.

10 Years Ago = I was in Kyŏngsŏng. I passed the New Year working at the Kyŏngsŏng Chongno Library (京城 鐘路圖書舘).
20 Years Ago = My age was 22! It was truly a good time. Having graduated from Law College (法專學窓), I decided to study further and spent this year in Kyoto (京都). At that time, my heart was burning with hope and ambition. There were splendid dreams, grand fantasies, and indignant resolutions. Then, the following year, I crossed over to North America.

Chŏng Ch'ilsŏng (丁七星)

As I recall = 30 years ago from now, during the late Yi Dynasty (李朝 末葉), by chance, I got to see the dignified presence of the then Taegu Governor (大邱 관찰사). Envying his position, I started frequenting a neighboring kisaeng house (妓生집) and began what I called studying. I even came to be called a genius, so my parents inevitably allowed me onto that path.<39> I was 8 years old then. My skills, which others said improved daily and monthly (日就月將), gradually led me to be called upon at banquets hosted by the Provincial Office (영문(도청)), the County Office (본관 (군청)), and the magistrate (삿도). Once, following my teacher kisaeng (先生되는 妓生), it was the disciple's usual duty to guard her shoes and watch. Whenever that happened, word would spread among the high seats that the child sang sijo (時調) well, and the magistrate would soon summon me. Upon being called, without hesitation, I would go up holding the shoes and sit as if ready to fly away, causing everyone great laughter. As soon as the order "Sing a line of sijo" was given, even with my young mind, I would fearlessly sing the verse about the famous generals serving Han Gaozu (漢高祖) – the one I thought I sang best – receiving much praise and laughter. Then, the next year or the year after, when Emperor Sunjong (純宗) made his southern tour (南巡) to Taegu and stayed at Talsŏng (達城), I, along with many high officials and kisaeng, had the honor of paying respects.

10 Years Ago = 20 years ago from now, I was known as a top-tier (一流) kisaeng in Kyŏngsŏng and made a name for myself as the concubine (소실) in two or three renowned households. (Strangely enough, I even became the daughter-in-law in the house of that same magistrate I saw when the Taegu governor Ch'oe retired [최감사 退任時]).

20 Years Ago = 10 years ago from now, i.e., at age 21. At that time, right after the March 1st Movement (3.1運動), Chosŏn was in turmoil. Though I didn't understand the deep meaning, standing at the Chongno intersection (鐘路 네거리) and watching, my young heart overflowed with excitement and shed hot tears, and I sometimes followed the crowds. The things I saw in various motion pictures and the impulse I received at this time eventually led me to cross the Genkai Sea (玄海). There, I learned the language, prepared to go to the West by learning English, and also learned typing. In the meantime, as my awareness of society grew, I crossed back to Chosŏn. I organized the Women's Youth Association (女靑) in Taegu and the Women's Comrades Association (女性同友會) in Kyŏngsŏng. As one of the representatives of the All-Chosŏn Youth Conference (全鮮靑年大會), I was active. Then I crossed over to Tokyo again at age 25. In Tokyo, while active as an officer of the Women Students' Study Promotion Association (女學生學興會幹事), I also participated in the March Association (3月會), published a pamphlet titled "Rosa Luxemburg (로자룩젠붉크) - Women and Society," and exerted all my efforts. At that time, female orators (女流 雄辯家) like Yu Yŏngjun (劉英俊), Pak Sunch'ŏn (朴順天), and Kim Sŏn (金善氏) were feeling retired, so following them, I was the only woman at the time who appeared on the lecture platform almost daily, even traveling around the Tokyo region giving speeches. Meanwhile, after finishing the technical school (技藝學校), which I could only attend a few times a week, I returned to Seoul and founded the Kŭn'uhoe (槿友會) with several comrades. At that time, as the head of the Organization Department, I toured various parts of the country. Then, also taking responsibility for the Publication Department, the Kŭn'uhoe, a women's organization bearing historical significance that remains in memory, was my (her) decision. Later, I served as the Chairwoman of the Kŭn'uhoe Central Executive Committee, an executive of the Sin'ganhoe (新幹會), and one of the representative committee members of the Sin'ganhoe All-Chosŏn Representative Conference.<40>

Yŏ Unhong (呂運弘)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = is forty-seven. Since there should still be 30 years left, I don't feel anxious. What special plans could there be for the New Year? I'll just watch the world situation a bit longer.

10 Years Ago = Then 37 years old. Having returned from Shanghai, I was just staying in Seoul without any particular work. At that time, the Northern Expedition (北伐) was completed under Chiang Kai-shek (蔣介石), unifying [China].

20 Years Ago = Then 27 years old. I was studying in the Philosophy Department at Wooster College (우스도大學) in the USA. The Great War in Europe was raging. I watched daily as American university students who were studying with me left for the European battlefield.

30 Years Ago = Then 17 years old. In my hometown, a rural village in Yangp'yŏng, Kyŏnggi Province, after my parents passed away, I was performing ancestral rites (奉祭祀) and farming with my elder brother. From the news coming from Seoul, I guessed that various political changes were occurring.

Ilsŏng Sin T'aegak (一星 辛泰嶽)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = This year my age is 36. Currently, I work as a lawyer (辯護士) handling legal affairs in Kyŏngsŏng. Besides my connection with the Chosŏn Ilbo (朝鮮日報社), I have no affiliation with any other company or organization. Last year passed without any meaning, so what special things could happen in the New Year? For the time being, I intend to be prudent and focus on self-cultivation.

10 Years Ago = At age 26, I was in Tokyo. Though called studying abroad (留學), activities in other fields constituted my entire life then, rather than campus life. Thinking back now, that life seems to have been the most noble and vibrant. If the present life is a dead one, then that life was a living one. Right after the March First Movement (三一運動) in Chosŏn, youth organizations sprouted like mushrooms after rain across the country. When their umbrella organization, the Chosŏn Youth Federation (朝鮮靑年聯合會), was founded, I, along with Messrs. Chŏng Nosik (鄭魯湜) and Kim Ch'ŏlsu (金喆壽), served as a Central Executive Committee member. Later, the Youth General Alliance (靑年總同盟) emerged. Seeing impure dark clouds of ideological groups like the Seoul Faction (서울派), Tuesday Faction (火曜派), and North Wind Faction (北風派) hovering over the social movement line, I worried alone and opposed this. Whenever I met the leaders of each faction, lacking eloquence, I bluntly stated that we should abandon minor differences and unite for the greater cause (大同團結). However, this only aroused suspicion from each faction,<41> leading to situations where the Seoul Faction mistook me for Tuesday Faction, Tuesday Faction for North Wind Faction, and North Wind Faction back to Seoul Faction. I realized my weak strength could not mediate these factional disputes. Consequently, Tokyo's January Association (一月會), whose principle was to remain detached from these factional struggles within Korea, matched my sentiments, so I joined it. This was the first time I joined an ideological group. At that time in Tokyo, besides the January Association, there was the women's group March Association (三月會) and the youth group, the Federation of Korean Proletarian Youth in Tokyo (在東京 朝鮮無産靑年同盟). I also took responsibility as the Chairman of the Executive Committee of this Youth Federation and published its organ "Ch'ŏngnyŏn Chosŏn" (靑年朝鮮). Later, within the January Association, some elements plotted to shift the Association, originally aimed at remaining detached from factional strife, into a struggling organization confronting activist groups within Korea – essentially, a silent struggle group. Perceiving this infiltrating parts of the March Association and the Youth Federation, I vehemently opposed it, which eventually led to the so-called "Bloody Tragedy" (流血의 慘劇) in Tokyo. Thinking back, there must have been many regrettable aspects to my actions then, but from my subjective perspective at the time, it seemed the most righteous course. I believed that this was the way to set the Korean social movement on the right path, and only when it was set right would a genuine path for Koreans open up. In all these thoughts, there was not a shred of falsehood or strategy. I firmly believed in my determined thoughts without doubt, and thus, courage and passion arose in everything I did. My entire life, reflected in my conscience, was truly noble and vibrant. Even now, recalling that life, I quietly plan for the next opportunity, wondering, "When again?"

20 Years Ago = Let's skip the events before that, as they were from my childhood.

Yi Taewi (李大偉)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = I will be 43. While working at the Christian Youth Encouragement Association (基督靑年勉勵會), I plan to travel around the South Manchuria region.
Next year, I'm thinking of going abroad and staying for a while.

10 Years Ago = I was 32, studying at Yale University (예일대학) in the USA. It was a time when the socialist movement was making a lot of noise.

20 Years Ago = I was 22, studying abroad in Beiping (北平), China. I even considered going as an interpreter for the Chinese Labour Corps (中國勞工兵). Due to the Qingdao Problem (靑島問題), Japan engaged in battle with Germany (日獨交戰), and after Japan's swift victory, there were lantern parades (提燈行列) everywhere.<42>

30 Years Ago = I was 12, studying at elementary school in Yongch'ŏn (龍川), North P'yŏngan Province. There was a New Rise Movement (新興運動), establishing schools everywhere. Western drums and trumpets were played freely. The Short Hair Edict (斷髮令) was issued, and I also cut my hair without my parents' permission. For about a week, I had to get meals from other people's houses.

Sŏ Chaep'il (徐載弼)

Chŏngch'uk New Spring = I am currently in Philadelphia, USA. My work these days involves traveling to various universities giving lectures. My age this year is 68.

10 Years Ago = I was 58. While in Washington D.C., USA, I was publishing an English magazine. And I believe I was traveling around various places giving speeches at that time.

20 Years Ago = At age 48. I was trying to raise money in the US to use for Korean people's businesses. Also, having obtained my medical doctorate (醫學搏士), I believe I was also practicing medicine. As for world affairs, it was during the Great War in Europe, so the world was in quite an uproar.

30 Years Ago = At age 38 [Note: text says 18歲時 but context suggests 38 based on other dates]. I was in exile in the USA. At that time, I heard news via letters from my homeland that Mr. Yang Kit'ak (梁起鐸氏) and others were very active.

40 Years Ago = At age 28. I went to Chosŏn, founded the Independence Club (獨立協會), and together with various comrades, initiated reform movements in various aspects of the peninsula's politics and culture. It was a time when I myself was burning with passion. At that time, we also published the Hwangsŏng Sinmun (皇城新聞) to promote civil rights.
Anyway, writing this piece now, outlining a fragment of my past life in my distant homeland, fills me with deep emotion. Furthermore, your magazine's November issue did not arrive. Please send it soon.<43>

**Summary**

This 1937 article from *Samch'ŏlli* magazine presents a series of interviews with prominent Korean figures under the title "Biographies of Notable Figures." Each individual responds to a set of questions about their current age, activities, and feelings, as well as their circumstances and significant events in Korea at 10-year intervals stretching back up to 60 years prior (roughly 1877). The interviewees include well-known independence activists (An Ch'angho, Sŏ Chaep'il, Yi Sŭngman), intellectuals (Yun Ch'iho, Yi Kwangsu), politicians, religious leaders (Kwŏn Tongjin), educators (Kim Hwallan, Kim Ch'angje), journalists (Hong Myŏnghŭi, Wŏn Sehunj), a lawyer (Hŏ Hŏn), a businesswoman/activist (Chŏng Ch'ilsŏng), and others. They recount personal milestones, locations (Korea, Japan, China, USA, Europe), occupations, and reflect on major historical events like the Eulsa Treaty, the Hague Secret Emissary Affair, the disbandment of the Korean army, the March 1st Movement, the rise and fall of various political and social organizations (Independence Club, Sin'ganhoe, Kŭn'uhoe, Ch'ŏndogyo), colonial governance changes, wars (Sino-Japanese, Russo-Japanese, WWI), and social phenomena like the illiteracy eradication movement or educational fervor, all from their unique perspectives at different stages of their lives.

This article is historically significant as it captures the first-hand recollections and contemporary (1937) views of a diverse group of influential Koreans who lived through the tumultuous late Joseon Dynasty, the Korean Empire, and the Japanese colonial period. Historians can find valuable insights into how these major figures perceived and experienced key historical turning points, their personal involvement in various movements (independence, social, cultural, educational), their periods of exile or imprisonment, their changing sentiments over decades, and the social atmosphere of different eras. The inclusion of figures like Yun Ch'iho, Yi Kwangsu, and Pak Yŏngch'ŏl alongside independence activists provides a complex tapestry of perspectives from within colonial society. The details about specific organizations, publications, locations, and personal anecdotes offer rich material for understanding the lives and networks of the Korean elite and activists during this critical period.

**Named Entities**

三千理		삼천리		Samch'ŏlli
著名人物 一代記	저명인물 일대기	Biographies of Notable Figures
丁丑		정축		Chŏngch'uk (Year, 1937)
京城		경성		Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul)
東京		동경		Tokyo
朝鮮		조선		Chosŏn (Korea)
佐翁 尹致昊	좌옹 윤치호	Chwaong Yun Ch'iho
開城		개성		Kaesŏng
松都高普		송도고보	Songdo High Common School
東亞		동아		Tonga (Ilbo)
基督敎		기독교		Christianity
月南 李商在	월남 이상재	Wŏllam Yi Sangjae
歐羅巴		구라파		Europe (Europa)
靑島功衛戰	청도공위전	Siege of Tsingtao
安島山		안도산		An Tosan (An Ch'angho's pen name)
平壤		평양		P'yŏngyang
大成學校	대성학교	Taesŏng School
松都 韓英書院	송도 한영서원	Songdo Hanyŏng Academy
西北學會	서북학회	Sŏbuk Hakhoe
畿湖學會	기호학회	Kiho Hakhoe
議政府		의정부		State Council (Uijŏngbu)
內閣		내각		Cabinet
外部		외부		Ministry of Foreign Affairs
元山		원산		Wŏnsan
高宗		고종		King/Emperor Kojong
俄館播遷	아관파천	King Kojong's refuge at the Russian legation
日露		일로		Japan-Russia
朴定陽		박정양		Pak Chŏngyang
修信使		수신사		Diplomatic Mission (to Japan)
兪吉濬		유길준		Yu Kilchun
魚允中		어윤중		Ŏ Yunjung
福澤諭吉	복자와 유키치	Fukuzawa Yukichi
慶應義塾	경응의숙	Keiō Gijuku
中村正直	나카무라 마사나오	Nakamura Masanao
同人社		동인사		Dōjinsha
忠淸道		충청도		Ch'ungch'ŏng Province
白蓮庵		백련암		Paengnyŏn Hermitage
三國誌		삼국지		Romance of the Three Kingdoms
水許誌		수호지		Water Margin
多山 朴榮喆	다산 박영철	Tasan Pak Yŏngch'ŏl
朝鮮商業銀行	조선상업은행	Chosŏn Commercial Bank
咸鏡北道	함경북도	North Hamgyŏng Province
大正		대정		Taishō (Era)
李王殿下	이왕전하	His Majesty King Yi (Sunjong)
益山郡		익산군		Iksan County
朝鮮總督	조선총독	Governor-General of Chosŏn
寺內大將	데라우치 대장	General Terauchi
長谷川大將	하세가와 대장	General Hasegawa
陸軍		육군		Army
統監府		통감부		Residency-General
伊藤博文公	이토 히로부미 공	Itō Hirobumi
大韓協會	대한협회	Taehan Hyŏphoe
一進會		일진회		Ilchinhoe
共進會		공진회		Kongjinhoe
自强會		자강회		Chaganghoe
全州		전주		Chŏnju
親露派		친로파		Pro-Russian Faction
李範晉		이범진		Yi Pŏmjin
李太王		이태왕		King Tae (Kojong)
金弘集		김홍집		Kim Hongjip
鄭秉夏		정병하		Chŏng Pyŏngha
兪吉濬		유길준		Yu Kilchun
趙義淵		조의연		Cho Ŭiyŏn
張博		장박		Chang Pak
日本		일본		Japan
島山 安昌浩	도산 안창호	Tosan An Ch'angho
平南 大寬山	평남 대관산	Taegwan Mountain, South P'yŏngan Province
亞細亞		아세아		Asia
上海		상해		Shanghai
佛租界		불조계		French Concession
米國		미국		United States (America)
로샌젤스市	로스앤젤레스시	Los Angeles City
墨西哥		묵서가		Mexico
比律賓		비율빈		Philippines
濠洲		호주		Australia
李剛		이강		Yi Kang
北米		북미		North America
協會		협회		Hyŏphoe (Association)
巴奈馬運河	파나마운하	Panama Canal
獨立協會	독립협회	Independence Club
大X協會		대X협회	Tae X Association (Unclear)
浮碧樓		부벽루		Pubyŏngnu Pavilion
綾羅島		능라도		Nŭngnado Island
權東鎭		권동진		Kwŏn Tongjin
天道敎		천도교		Ch'ŏndogyo
新幹會		신간회		Sin'ganhoe
本部		본부		Headquarters
孫義庵		손의암		Son Ŭiam (Son Pyŏnghŭi's pen name)
中樞院		중추원		Privy Council
閔妃事件	민비사건	Queen Min Incident
咸安郡		함안군		Haman County
咸鏡道		함경도		Hamgyŏng Province
巨文島		거문도		Kŏmundo Island
陸軍士官學校	육군사관학교	Military Academy
春園 李光洙	춘원 이광수	Ch'unwŏn Yi Kwangsu
早大		조대		Waseda University
無情		무정		Mujŏng (Novel Title)
學之光		학지광		Hakchigwang (Publication)
基督靑年會	기독청년회	Christian Youth Association (YMCA)
乙巳新條約	을사신조약	Eulsa Treaty (1905)
日淸戰爭	일청전쟁	Sino-Japanese War
平北 定州	평북 정주	Chŏngju, North P'yŏngan Province
千字文		천자문		Thousand Character Classic
大院君		대원군		Taewŏn'gun
海岩 金麗植	해암 김려식	Haeam Kim Yŏsik
協成學校	협성학교	Hyŏpsŏng School
아이요와州	아이오와주	Iowa State
歐洲大戰亂	구주대전란	Great War in Europe
海牙密使事件	해아밀사사건	Hague Secret Emissary Affair
光武		광무		Kwangmu (Era Name/Emperor Kojong)
隆熙		융희		Yunghŭi (Era Name/Emperor Sunjong)
丁未協約	정미협약	Chŏngmi Treaty (1907)
建陽		건양		Kŏnyang (Era Name)
童蒙先習	동몽선습	Tongmong Sŏnsŭp (Textbook)
呂運亨		여운형		Yŏ Unhyŏng
南京大學	남경대학	Nanjing University
日獨戰役	일독전역	Japanese-German Conflict (at Qingdao)
楊平		양평		Yangp'yŏng
京畿道		경기도		Kyŏnggi Province
江原道		강원도		Kangwŏn Province
碧初 洪命憙	벽초 홍명희	Pyŏkch'o Hong Myŏnghŭi
杜子美		두자미		Du Fu
睨觀		예관		Nigwan (Pen name?)
丹齋		단재		Tanjae (Sin Ch'aeho's pen name)
北京		북경		Beijing
奉天		봉천		Fengtian (Shenyang)
凰山 李鐘麟	황산 이종린	Hwangsan Yi Chongnin
빠고다 公園	파고다 공원	Pagoda Park
朝鮮 物産獎勵會	조선 물산장려회	Chosŏn Products Promotion Association
乙丑年 水災	을축년 수재	Ŭlch'uk Year Flood (1925)
飢饉救濟會	기근구제회	Famine Relief Committee
全朝鮮記者大會	전조선기자대회	All-Chosŏn Journalists' Conference
孫秉熙先生	손병희 선생	Master Son Pyŏnghŭi
鳳凰閣		봉황각		Ponghwanggak Pavilion
成均舘		성균관		Sŏnggyun'gwan
吳世昌氏	오세창 씨	Mr. O Sech'ang
大O民報		대O민보	Tae O Minbo (Newspaper, unclear)
李卨先生	이설 선생	Master Yi Sŏl
梧村 薛泰熙	오촌 설태희	Och'on Sŏl T'aehŭi
長沙町		장사정		Changsa-chō (District name, likely in Seoul)
金活蘭		김활란		Kim Hwallan
己亥生		기해생		Born in Kihae Year (1999, 1939, etc. - context suggests 1899)
梨花專門	이화전문	Ewha College
保育		보육		Childcare
梨花大學	이화대학	Ewha University College (earlier name)
仁川		인천		Inch'ŏn
永化女子普通學校	영화여자보통학교	Yŏnghwa Girls' Common School
兢人 許憲	긍인 허헌		Kŭng'in Hŏ Hŏn
辯護士		변호사		Lawyer
픽스킬		픽스킬		Peekskill (USA)
歐米		구미		Europe and America (Euro-America)
宮內部		궁내부		Royal Household Department
奎章閣		규장각		Kyujanggak (Royal Library/Archive)
法部		법부		Ministry of Justice
張博氏		장박 씨		Mr. Chang Pak
齋洞		재동		Chaedong (Neighborhood in Seoul)
官立小學校	관립소학교	Government Elementary School
徐載弼		서재필		Sŏ Chaep'il
金玉均		김옥균		Kim Okkyun
悠堂 蘇完奎	유당 소완규	Yudang So Wan'gyu
扶安		부안		Puan
界火島		계화도		Kyehwa Island
田良齋 先生	전량재 선생	Master Chŏn Yangjae
金昶濟		김창제		Kim Ch'angje
梨花女子高等普通學校	이화여자고등보통학교	Ewha Girls' High Common School
梨門專門	이문전문	Ewha College (Abbr./alt name?)
學事視察團長	학사시찰단장	Head of Academic Inspection Group
東亞日報社	동아일보사	Tonga Ilbo Company
民間敎育	민간교육	Private Education
永生中學校	영생중학교	Yŏngsaeng Middle School
鏡城公立普通學校	경성공립보통학교	Kyŏngsŏng Public Common School
成一學校	성일학교	Sŏngil School
統監政治	통감정치	Residency-General Politics
忠南 保寧	충남 보령	Poryŏng, South Ch'ungch'ŏng Province
態川		태천		T'aech'ŏn
甲午		갑오		Kabo (Year, 1894)
乙未		을미		Ŭlmi (Year, 1895)
丙戌年		병술년		Pyŏngsul Year (1886)
甲申政變	갑신정변	Kapsin Coup (1884)
丙子年 凶年	병자년 흉년	Pyŏngja Year Famine (1876)
春谷 元世勳	춘곡 원세훈	Ch'un'gok Wŏn Sehunj
東大門外 昌信町	동대문외 창신정	Ch'angsin-chō, Outside East Gate (Seoul)
中央時報社	중앙시보사	Chungang Ilbo Company (Chungang Sibo Sa)
露西亞		로시아		Russia
新義州刑務所	신의주형무소	Sinŭiju Prison
露領 沿海州	노령 연해주	Russian Maritime Province
己未年		기미년		Kiminyŏn (Year, 1919)
中露		중로		China-Russia
大東法律專門學校	대동법률전문학교	Taedong Law College
小學		소학		Sohak (Textbook)
通鑑		통감		Tonggam (Historical Text)
論語		논어		Analects
李承晩		이승만		Yi Sŭngman (Syngman Rhee)
太平洋		태평양		Pacific Ocean
布哇		포와		Hawaii (older transliteration)
호놀루루	호놀룰루	Honolulu
푸린스톤大學	프린스턴대학	Princeton University
하-버드大學	하버드대학	Harvard University
101人事件		101인 사건	101-Man Incident (Usually 105-Man Incident)
漢城外國語學校	한성외국어학교	Hansŏng Foreign Language School
金貞植氏	김정식 씨	Mr. Kim Chŏngsik
心崗 李肯鍾	심강 이긍종	Sim'gang Yi Kŭnjong
朝鮮商工新聞社	조선상공신문사	Chosŏn Sang'gong Sinmunsa (Newspaper)
鐘路圖書舘	종로도서관	Chongno Library
法專		법전		Law College
京都		경도		Kyoto
丁七星		정칠성		Chŏng Ch'ilsŏng
李朝 末葉	이조 말엽	Late Yi Dynasty
大邱		대구		Taegu
妓生		기생		Kisaeng
漢高祖		한고조		Han Gaozu
純宗		순종		Emperor Sunjong
南巡		남순		Southern Tour
達城		달성		Talsŏng (in Taegu)
3.1運動		3.1운동	March 1st Movement
鐘路		종로		Chongno (in Seoul)
玄海		현해		Genkai Sea (Korea Strait)
女靑		여청		Women's Youth Association (Yeoch'ŏng)
女性同友會	여성동우회	Women's Comrades Association (Yŏsŏng Tong'uhoe)
全鮮靑年大會	전선청년대회	All-Chosŏn Youth Conference
女學生學興會	여학생학흥회	Women Students' Study Promotion Association
3月會		3월회		March Association (Samwŏrhoe)
로자룩젠붉크	로자 룩셈부르크	Rosa Luxemburg
劉英俊		유영준		Yu Yŏngjun
朴順天		박순천		Pak Sunch'ŏn
金善氏		김선 씨		Ms. Kim Sŏn
槿友會		근우회		Kŭn'uhoe
呂運弘		여운홍		Yŏ Unhong
蔣介石		장개석		Chiang Kai-shek
北伐		북벌		Northern Expedition
우스도大學	우스터대학	Wooster College
一星 辛泰嶽	일성 신태악	Ilsŏng Sin T'aegak
朝鮮日報社	조선일보사	Chosŏn Ilbo Company
朝鮮靑年聯合會	조선청년연합회	Chosŏn Youth Federation
鄭魯湜		정노식		Chŏng Nosik
金喆壽		김철수		Kim Ch'ŏlsu
靑年總同盟	청년총동맹	Youth General Alliance
서울派		서울파		Seoul Faction
火曜派		화요파		Tuesday Faction (Hwayop'a)
北風派		북풍파		North Wind Faction (Pukp'ungp'a)
一月會		일월회		January Association (Irwŏrhoe)
三月會		삼월회		March Association (Samwŏrhoe)
在東京 朝鮮無産靑年同盟	재동경 조선무산청년동맹	Federation of Korean Proletarian Youth in Tokyo
靑年朝鮮	청년조선	Ch'ŏngnyŏn Chosŏn (Publication)
李大偉		이대위		Yi Taewi
基督靑年勉勵會	기독청년면려회	Christian Youth Encouragement Association
南滿		남만		South Manchuria
예일대학	예일대학	Yale University
北平		북평		Beiping (Beijing)
中國勞工兵	중국노공병	Chinese Labour Corps
靑島問題	청도문제	Qingdao Problem
日獨交戰	일독교전	Japan-Germany Conflict
龍川		용천		Yongch'ŏn
新興運動	신흥운동	New Rise Movement
斷髮令		단발령		Short Hair Edict (Bobbed Hair Order)
徐載弼		서재필		Sŏ Chaep'il (Philip Jaisohn)
빌라델피아市	필라델피아시	Philadelphia City
華盛頓		워싱턴		Washington D.C.
梁起鐸氏	양기탁 씨	Mr. Yang Kit'ak
皇城新聞	황성신문	Hwangsŏng Sinmun

**Glossary**

著名人物	저명인물	Notable figure
一代記		일대기		Biography, life story
설문		설문		Survey, questionnaire
春秋		춘추		Age (honorific, literary)
어듸서		어디서		Where (older spelling)
무얼		무엇을		What (colloquial contraction, older form)
마젓사오며	맞으사오며	Greeting, welcoming (older humble/polite form)
압소서		하십시오	Please do (older formal command ending)
身老心不老	신로심불로	Body is old, but the spirit is not old (Chinese phrase)
嘆		탄		Lament, sigh
心境		심경		State of mind, feelings
過歲		과세		To pass the New Year
있었습니까	있었습니까	Was there? (formal question)
얼마섯는데	얼마셨는데	How old were you (honorific, older connective form)
있섯는데	있었는데	Was/were there (older spelling)
하시며		하시며		While doing (older connective form)
지내섰읍니까	지내셨습니까	Did you spend time? (honorific past formal question, older spelling)
있섰읍니까	있었습니까	Was/were there? (formal question, older spelling)
됨니다		됩니다		Become, turn (older spelling/pronunciation)
만허지매	많아지매	As (I) get older/increase in number (older spelling and grammatical form)
늣겨지는	느껴지는	Is felt
同時		동시		At the same time
平生		평생		Lifetime
風浪		풍랑		Wind and waves, trials and tribulations
자조		자주		Often
回想		회상		Recollection, reminiscence
高普		고보		High Common School (abbreviation for 고등보통학교)
在職		재직		In office, employed
打破		타파		To break down, overcome
이러나서	일어나서	Arising, starting
띄고 있었음니다	띠고 있었습니다	Was showing, exhibiting (older spelling)
있섯움니다	있었습니다	Was/were (older spelling)
功衛戰		공위전		Siege battle
騷亂		소란		Disturbance, turmoil
더부터		더불어		Together with
書院		서원		Private academy (traditional)
半島		반도		Peninsula
政界		정계		Political world
多事多端	사사다단	Eventful and troublesome
衝激		충격		Shock, impact
疊出		첩출		To occur repeatedly, one after another
全盛		전성		Peak, heyday
海外		해외		Overseas, abroad
亡命		망명		Exile, seeking asylum
귀국		귀국		Return to one's country
后		후		After
歷		력		To pass through, experience (used like 'served as')
協辯		협판		Vice-Minister (older term)
監理		감리		Superintendent, supervisor
俄館播遷	아관파천	King's refuge at the Russian legation
風聞		풍문		Rumor
告急		고급		To report urgency, become critical
親政		친정		Direct rule (by the monarch)
從員		종원		Attendant, retainer
修學		수학		To study, pursue learning
四書五經	사서오경	Four Books and Five Classics (Confucian canon)
通讀		통독		To read through
亦是		역시		Also, likewise, indeed
經營		경영		Management, business, plan
薨去		훙거		Death (of a king or high-ranking person)
總督		총독		Governor-General
任命		임명		Appointment
東上		동상		Going east (often specifically to Tokyo/Japan)
參內		참내		To visit the palace/emperor
參領		참령		Major (military rank, older term)
統監府		통감부		Residency-General
開廳		개청		Opening of an office
公		공		Duke, public; suffix for respect (e.g., 伊藤博文公)
宮禁		궁금		Royal palace precincts
肅淸		숙청		Purge
政治團體	정치단체	Political organization
私塾		사숙		Private village school
讀書		독서		Reading books, studying
及		급		And
世子		세자		Crown Prince
播遷		파천		To move the capital/court (often under duress)
總理大臣	총리대신	Prime Minister
農大		농상공부대신	Minister of Agriculture, Commerce, and Industry (abbreviation)
殺戮		살륙		Massacre, slaughter
度大		탁지부대신	Minister of Finance (abbreviation)
避亂		피란		To flee from war/chaos
暴民		폭민		Mob, rioters
被殺		피살		To be murdered
內大		내무대신	Minister of Home Affairs (abbreviation)
軍大		군부대신	Minister of War (abbreviation)
法大		법부대신	Minister of Justice (abbreviation)
於焉		어언		Alas, before one knows it
身病		신병		Physical illness
治療		치료		Treatment, cure
當時		당시		At that time
事情		사정		Circumstances, situation
根據		근거		Base, foothold
在留同胞	재류동포	Compatriots residing (abroad)
遊說		유세		Stumping, giving speeches while traveling
視察		시찰		Inspection, observation tour
勞働		노동		Labor, work
從事		종사		To engage in, be occupied with
情熱		정열		Passion, enthusiasm
타든 때외다	타던 때외다	Was a time of burning (older past descriptive form)
상투		상투		Topknot (traditional male hairstyle)
조차다니며	쫓아다니며	Following around
演壇		연단		Platform, stage (for speeches)
올나섯고	올라섰고	Stepped up onto (older spelling)
演說		연설		Speech, address
이저지지 않읍니다	잊혀지지 않습니다	Is not forgotten (older spelling, negative passive)
舍伯		사백		Father's elder brother, uncle (honorific)
조고마한	조그마한	Small, little (older form)
職任		직임		Duty, office, position
맛고		맡고		Taking charge of, undertaking (older spelling)
世事		세사		Worldly affairs
차라리		차라리		Rather, preferably
沈黙		침묵		Silence
就任		취임		Assumption of office
檢査		검사		Inspection
委員長		위원장		Chairman
努力		노력		Effort, endeavor
運動		운동		Movement
몹시		몹시		Very, extremely
氣勢		기세		Spirit, vigor, momentum
모시고		모시고		Serving, attending (honorific)
敎勢		교세		Religious influence/power
擴張		확장		Expansion
奔走		분주		Being busy, bustling about
이듬해		이듬해		The following year
入		입		Entered (likely context: 入敎 - joined the religion)
舊韓國		구한국		Former Korea (referring to Korean Empire/Joseon)
副贊議		부찬의		Vice Councillor (Privy Council rank)
被任		피임		To be appointed
實業		실업		Industry, business
部長		부장		Department head
配所		배소		Place of exile
武科及第	무과급제	Passing the military service examination
別軍職		별군직		Special military post
按撫中軍	안무중군	Pacification Middle Commander (military/regional title)
討捕使		토포사		Bandit Suppression Commander (title)
轉任		전임		Transfer (to another post)
僉使		첨사		Military official title (naval/local defense)
守防將		수방장		Defense Commander
波爛		파란		Ups and downs, vicissitudes
깨달어짐니다	깨달아집니다	Is realized (older spelling)
浮生		부생		Floating life, transient existence
센터럭이는	떠내려가는(?)	Drifting, floating (unclear/colloquial form)
生覺		생각		Thought, idea (older spelling of 생각)
年令		연령		Age
記憶		기억		Memory
確實		확실		Certain, sure
編輯		편집		Editing, compilation
理事		이사		Director, board member
翌年		익년		The following year
알암		밤		Acorn (likely dialectal or older form for 밤 - chestnut/nut)
줍고		줍고		Picking up
外祖母		외조모		Maternal grandmother
前生		전생		Previous life
末端		말단		End, extremity
自滅		자멸		Self-destruction
一路		일로		One road, path
걸고 있었다	걷고 있었다	Was walking
들날릴 때	드나들 때(?)	Time of coming and going frequently, being active (uncertain interpretation)
벌서		벌써		Already (older spelling)
歎息		탄식		Sigh
職責		직책		Duty, responsibility
校務		교무		School affairs
奔忙		분망		Being busy
擴張		확장		Expansion
애쓰게		애쓰게		To strive, make effort
歲不與我	세불여아	Time does not wait for me (classical phrase)
於公於私	어공어사	In public and private matters
成果		성과		Result, achievement
愧歎		괴탄		To lament with shame
何如間		하여간		Anyway, somehow
猛省		맹성		Deep self-reflection
奮勉		분면		Striving hard, exertion
流浪		유랑		Wandering, roaming
還土		환토		Return to homeland soil
作業		작업		Work, task
職員		직원		Staff member
俸給		봉급		Salary
未拂		미불		Unpaid
負債		부채		Debt
過多		과다		Excessive
不得已		부득이		Unavoidably, inevitably
閉門		폐문		Closing the gates (of a school/business)
基金		기금		Fund
鳩聚		구취		Gathering, collecting (funds)
難局		난국		Difficult situation
打開		타개		Breakthrough, overcoming
腐心		부심		Great effort, racking one's brains
盡力		진력		Utmost effort
外來		외래		Foreign, imported
新思潮		신사조		New currents of thought, new ideologies
依然		의연		Still, as before
繼續		계속		Continuation
焦燥		초조		Anxiety, impatience
在籍		재적		Being enrolled
苦學		고학		Studying under hardship (working one's way through school)
싸이여		싸여		Wrapped in, surrounded by
苦勞		고로		Hardship, toil
學究		학구		Scholarly pursuit, study
熱中		열중		Being absorbed in, engrossed in
何等		하등		Any kind of, whatsoever
特記		특기		Special mention
影響		영향		Influence, effect
物價		물가		Prices (of goods)
高貴		고귀		High price, expensiveness (older term for 高騰 - soaring prices)
興奮		흥분		Excitement, agitation
變還		변환		Change, transition
等閑視		등한시		To neglect, treat lightly
同輩		동배		Peers, contemporaries
追逐		추축		Chasing
密議		밀의		Secret discussion, conspiracy
紛紛		분분		Frequent, numerous
捨舊取新	사구취신	Abandoning the old and adopting the new
修業		수업		Study, learning
最重		최중		Most important
課目		과목		Subject (of study)
數學		수학		Mathematics
演習		연습		Practice, exercise
꾀하고		꾀하고		Planning, plotting
成立		성립		Formation, conclusion (of treaty)
讓渡		양도		Cession, transfer
初次		초차		First time
重大		중대		Serious, grave
事件		사건		Incident, affair
發生		발생		Occurrence
禪位		선위		Abdication
登極		등극		Ascension to the throne
解散		해산		Disbandment
韓末風雲	한말풍운	Turbulent situation at the end of the Korean Empire
緊張		긴장		Tension, strain
漢文書齋	한문서재	Classical Chinese schoolroom
餘暇		여가		Leisure time
동모		동무		Comrades, friends (also 동무)
紙鳶		지연		Kite (literary term)
날리고		날리고		Flying (kites)
石戰		석전		Stone fight (traditional game)
날뛰었을	날뛰었을	Would have run around wildly
皇位		황위		Imperial throne
昇級		승급		Promotion, upgrade
年號		연호		Era name
改稱		개칭		Renaming
內政		내정		Domestic affairs
外交		외교		Diplomacy
複雜		복잡		Complex, complicated
趨向		추향		Trend, tendency
달러가지만	달라지지만	Although it changes (older spelling)
兒孩		아해		Child (archaic)
新聞社		신문사		Newspaper company
그리되어	그리되어	Became like that, things turned out that way
記憶		기억		Memory
第1次共産黨事件	제1차공산당사건	First Communist Party Incident
在學中		재학중		While enrolled in school
수선수선 하엿읍니다	수선수선 하였습니다	Was bustling, was in commotion (older spelling)
故鄕		고향		Hometown
農村		농촌		Farming village
農事		농사		Farming
짓고		짓고		Building, making; here: farming
돌아		돌아		Turning, traveling around
올너왔지요	올라왔지요	Came up (to Seoul) (older spelling)
爲天下者	위천하자	One who rules the world (classical phrase)
主題		주제		Subject, topic; here: status, position (colloquial)
家人		가인		Family members
生産		생산		Production
作業		작업		Work
몰라서		몰라서		Not knowing, being ignorant of
逢變		봉변		Meeting misfortune, hardship
避債臺		피채대		Debt Evasion Platform (likely metaphorical)
가리라		가리라		Shall go (future intent form)
杜子美		두자미		Du Fu (Chinese poet)
句		구		Phrase, line (of poetry)
少壯幾時奈老何	소장기시내로하	How long does youth last, what to do about old age? (Quote)
向來哀樂何其多	향래애락하기다	How numerous have been the sorrows and joys hitherto! (Quote)
紛雜		분잡		Complicated, messy
淸算		청산		Liquidation, settlement
心身		심신		Mind and body
安靜		안정		Peace, tranquility
등지고		등지고		Turning one's back on
멀니		멀리		Far away (older spelling)
放浪		방랑		Wandering, vagrancy
南船北馬	남선북마	Traveling extensively (lit. boat south, horse north)
끄테		끝에		At the end (older spelling)
이러타 할	이렇다 할	Particular, noteworthy
맘		마음		Mind, heart (colloquial)
먹게 되엇섯슴니다	먹게 되었었습니다	Came to decide (older spelling, past perfective)
馬來半島	말레이반도	Malay Peninsula
작별		작별		Farewell
千古		천고		Through eternity, forever
死別		사별		Parting by death
所爲		소위		So-called
四疊半		사첩반		Four and a half tatami mats (typical small room size)
憎惡		증오		Hatred, detestation
必要		필요		Necessary
曾祖母		증조모		Great-grandmother
귀염		귀염		Affection, cuteness
파무처		파묻혀		Buried in
지냇슴니다	지냈습니다	Spent time (older spelling)
살아젓건만	사라졌건만	Although it disappeared (older spelling)
자취		자취		Trace, vestige
갓가워지매	가까워지매	As (it) gets closer (older spelling and grammatical form)
除夜		제야		New Year's Eve
詩		시		Poem
首		수		Counter for poems
心懷		심회		Feelings, thoughts in one's heart
담어		담아		Putting into, containing (older spelling)
老妻		노처		Old wife
惜		석		To regret, lament
稚子		치자		Young child
待		대		To wait for
朝來		조래		Morning's arrival
相看		상간		Looking at each other
堪		감		To bear, be worthy of
一笑		일소		One smile, a laugh
歲月		세월		Time, years
爲難催		위난최		Difficult to hasten
記錄		기록		Record
雪景		설경		Snow scene
把		파		To grasp, hold
枝		지		Branch
春光		춘광		Spring light
翠		취		Jade green color
眉		미		Eyebrow
移時		이시		For a while, lingering
終不捨		종불사		Cannot let go in the end
此意		차의		This feeling/meaning
有誰知		유수지		Who knows?
責任者		책임자		Person in charge
物産		물산		Products, produce
獎勵		장려		Encouragement, promotion
分主		분주		Being busy
水災		수재		Flood damage
飢饉		기근		Famine
救濟		구제		Relief, aid
組織		조직		Organization
圓		원		Won (currency) / Yen
能聚能散	능취능산	Capable of gathering and dispersing (funds effectively)
當節		당절		At that time, around then
열니어진	열려진		Was opened, held (older spelling/form)
博士		박사		Doctor (academic title); Scholar (Sŏnggyun'gwan title)
會報		회보		Bulletin, report
編輯		편집		Editing
社長		사장		Company president
主筆		주필		Chief editor, lead writer
政論		정론		Political commentary
일삼었읍니다	일삼았습니다	Made it one's business, habitually did (older spelling)
모시고		모시고		Attending, studying under (honorific)
배웟슴니다	배웠습니다	Learned (older spelling)
服藥		복약		Taking medicine
療病		요병		Recuperating from illness
萬念如灰	만념여회	Ten thousand thoughts are like ashes (utter despair/apathy)
惠問		혜문		Your esteemed question(s)
諸項		제항		Various items/questions
所答		소답		Answer, reply
客觀的		객관적		Objective
事狀		사장		Facts, state of affairs
其時其時	기시기시	At each respective time
所知		소지		What is known
對答		대답		Answer
主觀		주관		Subjective view
神通치 못할	신통치 못할	Not remarkable, unimpressive
外라		외라		Besides, other than (older form)
엇던		어떤		Some, certain (older spelling)
開口		개구		To open one's mouth, speak
諒解		양해		Understanding, comprehension
日後		일후		In the future
機會		기회		Opportunity
回顧談		회고담		Reminiscences, memoirs
形式		형식		Form, format
廉恥		염치		Sense of shame, decency
己亥生		기해생		Born in the Kihae year (usually 1899 in this context)
豫定		예정		Plan, schedule
專門		전문		Specialized school, college (abbr. for 전문학교)
梨花專門	이화전문	Ewha College
保育		보육		Childcare, nursery education
將來		장래		Future
꿈구면서	꿈꾸면서	While dreaming
勤務		근무		Work, service
하였나이다	하였습니다	Did (formal, slightly archaic ending)
卒業		졸업		Graduation
小學生		소학생		Elementary school student
出入		출입		Attending, going in and out
알 길조차	알 길조차	Even a way to know
없나이다	없습니다	There is not (formal, slightly archaic ending)
如矢		여시		Like an arrow (swiftly)
實感		실감		Real feeling, actual sense
늣겨짐니다	느껴집니다	Is felt (older spelling)
自體		자체		Oneself, itself
修養		수양		Self-cultivation, moral training
코저 합니다	하고자 합니다	Intend to do
歐米		구미		Europe and America
各國		각국		Various countries
司法		사법		Judicial
制度		제도		System
硏究		연구		Research, study
周遊		주유		Tour, travel around
滯在		체재		Staying, residing
活潑		활발		Lively, active
움지김		움직임		Movement (older spelling)
보아서		보아서		Seeing that, because (it) showed
이려나고	일어나고	Arising, emerging (older spelling)
全鮮的		전선적		Throughout Korea, All-Korea
民衆		민중		The masses, people
떨치었읍니다	떨치었습니다	Was displaying, wielding (power/influence) (older spelling)
辯護士		변호사		Lawyer
社會現象	사회현상	Social phenomenon
敎育熱		교육열		Fervor for education
끌어서		끓어서		Boiling, surging
各處		각처		Various places
中學校		중학교		Middle school
생기고		생기고		Appearing, being established
先導者		선도자		Pioneer, leader
부르짓든	부르짖던	Were crying out, advocating (older spelling)
奎章閣		규장각		Royal library/archive
主事		주사		Junior official (rank)
轉職		전직		Change of post/job
夜學		야학		Night school
단겻였읍니다	다녔습니다	Attended (older spelling)
合倂		합병		Annexation, merger
日韓		일한		Japan-Korea
兩國		양국		Both countries
交涉		교섭		Negotiation
緊張		긴장		Tension
小學校		소학교		Elementary school (older term)
時節		시절		Time, period, days
政客		정객		Politician
組織		조직		Organization
文化		문화		Culture
更張		갱장		Reform, renovation
이르키고	일으키고	Starting, initiating (older spelling)
잇든		있던		Was (existing/doing) (older spelling)
별노		별로		Particularly, specially (older spelling)
마지 하였소이다	맞이 하였습니다	Greeted (older formal ending)
特別		특별		Special
計劃		계획		Plan
희미한		희미한		Dim, vague
希望		희망		Hope
牛步主義	우보주의	Principle of slow but steady progress (like an ox)
樂觀		낙관		Optimism
悲觀		비관		Pessimism
나가보려는 중이외다	나가보려는 중외다	Am intending to go forward (older formal ending)
專攻		전공		Major (field of study)
世事		세사		Worldly affairs
田良齋		전량재		Chŏn Yangjae (name)
先生		선생		Teacher, master
모시고		모시고		Attending, serving (honorific)
敎員		교원		Teacher, faculty member
所感		소감		Impression, feeling, thoughts
亦是		역시		Also, likewise
内地		내지		Mainland (usually referring to Japan proper from Korea)
學事		학사		Academic affairs
視察		시찰		Inspection
團長		단장		Group leader
新築		신축		New construction
落成		낙성		Completion (of a building)
功勞者		공로자		Person of merit
表彰式		표창식		Commendation ceremony
本人		본인		Myself, the person in question
亦是		역시		Also, likewise
집		집		House, home
때문에		때문에		Because of
講習會		강습회		Lecture series, workshop
다니였소	다녔소		Attended (older formal ending)
쩍인대		적인데		Around the time when (colloquial/older form)
公立		공립		Public (established by government)
普通學校	보통학교	Common School (colonial era elementary school)
一方		일방		On the one hand, meanwhile
助力		조력		Assistance, help
熱		열		Heat, fever; here: fervor, passion
昻騰		앙등		Soaring, rising high
漢文		한문		Classical Chinese
儒學者		유학자		Confucian scholar
相從		상종		To associate with, keep company with
改革黨		개혁당		Reform party
一敗塗地	일패도지	Utter defeat, crushing loss
完固黨		완고당		Stubborn party, conservatives
발호		발호		To become rampant, gain power unchecked
恐怖		공포		Terror, fear
混亂		혼란		Chaos, confusion
狀態		상태		State, condition
있것슴니다	있었습니다	There was/were (older spelling)
書堂		서당		Village school (traditional)
入學		입학		Entering school
天地玄黃	천지현황	Heaven Earth Black Yellow (first line of Thousand Character Classic)
怪疾		괴질		Strange disease, epidemic
政界		정계		Political world
뒤숭숭 하엿지요	뒤숭숭 하였지요	Was unsettled, restless (older spelling)
出生		출생		Birth
凶年		흉년		Year of bad harvest, famine year
老母		노모		Aged mother
모시고		모시고		Attending to, looking after (honorific)
안해		아내		Wife (slightly older term)
밥 지어주고	밥 지어주고	Cooking rice for
누릉지		누룽지		Scorched rice (older spelling)
어더먹고	얻어먹고	Getting and eating (older spelling)
어린 딸년	어린 딸년	Young daughter (slightly rough/colloquial term '년')
날마다		날마다		Every day
菓子		과자		Sweets, snacks
갑		값		Price, cost (older spelling)
졸이는 中	졸이는 중	In the midst of being pressed/nagged for
最近		최근		Recently
原稿		원고		Manuscript
쓰는 것		쓰는 것		Writing
日課		일과		Daily task, routine
삼ㅅ고		삼고		Making it, considering it as (older spelling 'ㅅ' insertion)
덜어		더러		Some, several
있겠지만	있겠지만	Although there might be
될 것같지 아니한	될 것 같지 아니한	Unlikely to succeed/happen
집안살님	집안살림	Household affairs, livelihood
구차한		구차한		Poor, needy, difficult
가운데		가운데		Amidst, among
家族		가족		Family
疾病		질병		Disease, illness
和平		화평		Peace, harmony
幸		행		Fortune, luck
거즛말		거짓말		Lie, falsehood (older spelling)
늙은 놈		늙은 놈		Old fellow (derogatory/familiar term '놈')
젊은 마음	젊은 마음	Young spirit/mind
도저히		도저히		Simply cannot, absolutely not
辱 먹기	욕 먹기	To be insulted, cursed
貴치 않어서	귀찮아서	Being bothersome, annoying (older spelling/form)
深山幽谷	심산유곡	Deep mountains and secluded valleys
無人絶島	무인절도	Uninhabited remote island
차저가서	찾아가서	Going to seek out (older spelling)
人間社會	인간사회	Human society
絶綠		절연		Cutting off ties (older form of 절연)
그만 둘 생각	그만 둘 생각	Thought of quitting/stopping
나니		나니		Arises, occurs (older connective form)
一部分		일부분		A part, portion
學窓		학창		School window; fig. place of study
籍		적		Registry, enrollment
學究		학구		Scholarly pursuit
奔走		분주		Being busy with, running about for
結局		결국		Eventually, in the end
刑務所		형무소		Prison
몃해		몇 해		Several years (older spelling)
나온 뒤로는	나온 뒤로는	After coming out
아시는 분들	아시는 분들	Those who know
보시는 바와 갓치	보시는 바와 같이	As you can see (older spelling)
繼續		계속		Continuation
放浪生活	방랑생활	Wandering life
前後		전후		Around (a certain time)
낫낫치		낱낱이		One by one, in detail
校門		교문		School gate
나온 뒤로	나온 뒤로	After exiting (graduating)
곳		곧		Soon, right away (older spelling)
先輩		선배		Senior (person)
同志		동지		Comrade
뒤를 따라서	뒤를 따라서	Following behind
經歷		경력		Experience, career history
자세히		자세히		In detail
어머니께서나	어머니께서나	My mother (honorific + 'or the like')
그만둡시다	그만둡시다	Let's stop, let's leave it at that
近世史		근세사		Recent history, modern history
물어보시오	물어보시오	Ask (formal command)
나히		나이		Age (older spelling)
올에		올해에		This year (older form)
미첫스매	미쳤으매	Having reached (older spelling and grammatical form)
멀니		멀리		Far away (older spelling)
건너의		건너의		Across the ~
靑山白雲	청산백운	Green mountains and white clouds (scenic nature)
감금		가끔		Sometimes (likely typo for 가끔)
흘너감니다	흘러갑니다	Flows (older spelling)
故土		고토		Homeland
떠날 때		떠날 때		When leaving
靑年		청년		Youth
머리 우엔	머리 위엔	On top of the head
白髮		백발		White hair
언게 되였소이다	얹게 되었소이다	Came to have placed upon (older spelling and formal ending)
兄弟		형제		Brothers; here: brethren, compatriots
묵느라고	묶느라고	While trying to tie/bind together
微力		미력		Humble effort, limited ability
다하느라 하였음니다	다하느라 하였습니다	Tried to exert all (effort) (older spelling)
西洋		서양		The West, Occident
손		손		Hand
올마왓섯지요	옮아왔었지요	Had moved/transferred (control) (older spelling)
세웟슴니다	세웠습니다	Established, founded (older spelling)
모다들		모두들		Everyone (older spelling)
히미하야	희미하여	Being dim, hazy (older spelling)
모르겟슴니다만은	모르겠습니다만은	Although I don't know (older spelling)
마치고		마치고		Finishing, completing
政治		정치		Politics
經濟科		경제과		Department of Economics
博士		박사		Doctorate
學位		학위		Academic degree
엇기가		얻기가		Getting, obtaining (older spelling)
엇던		어떤		Some kind of (older spelling)
協約		협약		Treaty, agreement
締結		체결		Conclusion (of a treaty)
云云		운운		So and so, et cetera
인체		이제		Now (older form)
經營		경영		Management
日常		일상		Daily, everyday
奔走		분주		Being busy
지내므로	지내므로	Because (I) spend time
그럭저럭	그럭저럭	Somehow or other
言論界		언론계		The world of journalism
一層더		일층더		Even more
努力		노력		Effort
有志事不成	유지사불성	Though the will exists, the deed is not accomplished (phrase)
歲不與我留	세불여아류	The years do not wait for me (phrase)
日常		일상		Daily
간절합니다	간절합니다	Is keen, earnest
圖書舘		도서관		Library
조흘		좋을		Good (older spelling)
때였슴니다	때였습니다	Was the time (older spelling)
學窓		학창		School window; fig. place of study
나와		나와		Coming out of
作定		작정		Decision, intention
이 해		이 해		This year
가슴 속		가슴 속		Inside the chest/heart
雄圖		웅도		Grand ambition, great plan
타고 있섰읍니다	타고 있었습니다	Was burning (older spelling)
華麗		화려		Splendid, gorgeous
壯快		장쾌		Grand and delightful, exhilarating
空想		공상		Fantasy, daydream
悲憤		비분		Grief and indignation
決心		결심		Resolution, determination
근너가 뱌렸읍니다	건너가 버렸습니다	Crossed over (and went away) (older spelling)
至今		지금		Now
當時		당시		At that time
末葉		말엽		End period
우연한		우연한	Accidental, chance
期會		기회		Opportunity (older form of 기회)
觀察使		관찰사		Governor (Joseon title)
진체		진체		Dignified presence, true form (unclear term, likely 진체(眞體)?)
구경		구경		Watching, sightseeing
地位		지위		Position, status
부리워하야	부러워하여	Envying (older spelling/form)
이웃		이웃		Neighboring
妓生		기생		Kisaeng (female entertainer)
차저다니면서	찾아다니면서	Going around looking for (older spelling)
工夫		공부		Study, practice
시작		시작		Start, beginning
天才		천재		Genius
듯게		듣게		To hear, be called (older spelling)
부득이		부득이		Unavoidably
내노케 되였는대	내놓게 되었는데	Was put forth/allowed (older spelling)
日就月將	일취월장	Daily progress and monthly advance (rapid improvement)
技藝		기예		Artistic skill, craft
차츰		차츰		Gradually
영문		영문		Provincial office (감영) (older term)
도청		도청		Provincial office (modern term, used parenthetically)
본관		본관		County office (possibly 동헌?) (older term)
군청		군청		County office (modern term, used parenthetically)
삿도		사또		Magistrate (colloquial/older term)
잔체		잔치		Banquet, feast (older spelling)
들니게 되였다	들리게 되었다	Came to be called upon/visit (older spelling)
先生		선생		Teacher
직키고		지키고		Guarding, watching (older spelling)
弟子		제자		Disciple, student
上坐		상좌		High seat(s), seat(s) of honor
돌게 되자	돌게 되자	As (word) spread
곳		곧		Soon, immediately (older spelling)
부름을 밧고는	부름을 받고는	Upon receiving the call (older spelling)
서슴지 않코	서슴지 않고	Without hesitation (older spelling)
쥔 채로	쥔 채로	While holding
올나가		올라가		Going up (older spelling)
날너갈 뜻이	날아갈 듯이	As if about to fly away (older spelling)
안즈면		앉으면		When (I) sit (older spelling)
모다들		모두들		Everyone (older spelling)
대소		대소		Great laughter
한마대		한마디		One word, one verse (older spelling)
불너라		불러라		Sing! (older spelling, command form)
분부		분부		Order, command (from a superior)
떠러지기	떨어지기	Falling, being given (an order)
무섭게		무섭게		As soon as (lit. frighteningly fast)
어린 소견	어린 소견	Young thought/opinion
第一		제일		Number one, the best
생각키우는	생각하는	Thinking (older form/spelling?)
漢高祖		한고조		Han Gaozu (founder of Han Dynasty)
모신		모신		Served (honorific)
名將		명장		Famous general
역금		엮음(?)	Verse, composition (unclear term, possibly related to 엮다?)
붓그럼 없이	부끄럼 없이	Without shame/shyness (older spelling)
불너		불러		Singing (older spelling)
만흔		많은		Many, much (older spelling)
층찬		칭찬		Praise (older spelling)
밧고		받고		Receiving (older spelling)
우슴		웃음		Laughter (older spelling)
밧었다		받았다		Received (older spelling)
다음해		다음 해		Next year
南巡		남순		Southern tour (by a king)
坐하섰는데	좌하셨는데	Was seated, stayed (honorific, older spelling)
大官		대관		High official
參拜		참배		Paying respects (at shrine/tomb/royal presence)
一流		일류		First-rate, top class
부름 밧는	부름 받는	Being called, known as (older spelling)
名門大家	명문대가	Renowned household, prestigious family
소실		소실		Concubine, secondary wife
일홈		이름		Name (older spelling)
날였다		날렸다		Made famous, spread (name) (older spelling)
異常스터운	이상스러운	Strange, peculiar (older form)
退任		퇴임		Retirement (from office)
며나리		며느리		Daughter-in-law (older spelling)
卽		즉		Namely, that is
卽後		직후		Immediately after
수선수선하든 판이라	수선수선하던 판이라	Was a situation of being in commotion
기푼		깊은		Deep (older spelling)
뜻		뜻		Meaning
모르나		모르나		Although (I) don't know
네거리		네거리		Intersection (four-way)
절문		젊은		Young (older spelling)
가삼		가슴		Chest, heart (older spelling)
興分		흥분		Excitement (older form of 흥분)
넘치는		넘치는		Overflowing
뜨거운		뜨거운		Hot
눈물		눈물		Tears
흘니면서	흘리면서	Shedding (tears) (older spelling)
따라 단닌	따라 다닌	Followed around (older spelling)
活動寫眞	활동사진	Motion picture (older term)
밧든		받든		Received (older spelling)
충동		충동		Impulse
마츰내		마침내		Finally, eventually (older spelling)
건느게 되여	건너게 되어	Came to cross (older spelling)
語學		어학		Language study
배호고		배우고		Learning (older spelling)
西洋		서양		The West
準備		준비		Preparation
타이푸라이다	타이프라이터	Typewriter
배웠으나	배웠으나	Although (I) learned
차차		차차		Gradually
눈 뜨게 되에	눈 뜨게 되어	Came to open eyes (become aware)
組織		조직		Organization
代表		대표		Representative
活動		활동		Activity
幹事		간사		Officer, secretary (of an organization)
參例		참례		Participation (in a meeting/group)
팜푸렛		팜플렛		Pamphlet
發刊		발간		Publication
全力		전력		All one's effort
當時		당시		At that time
女流		여류		Female (adj.), woman
雄辯家		웅변가		Orator
隱退		은퇴		Retirement
기분		기분		Feeling, mood
뒤를 이어	뒤를 이어	Following after
演壇		연단		Platform, stage
每日		매일		Every day
오르며		오르며		Ascending, getting on
地方		지방		Region, locality
演說		연설		Speech
者		자		Person
뿐이였다	뿐이었다	Was only
中		중		Middle; in the process of
週日		주일		Week
몃 번		몇 번		Several times (older spelling)
못하든		못 하던	Could not do (older spelling)
技藝學校	기예학교	Technical/Arts School
맛치자		마치자		Upon finishing (older spelling)
동모		동무		Comrade, friend
創立		창립		Founding, establishment
組織部		조직부		Organization Department
責任者		책임자		Person in charge
全鮮		전선		All of Korea
各地		각지		Various places
순廻		순회		Tour, circuit
出版部		출판부		Publication Department
兼		겸		Concurrently serving as
기억		기억		Memory
사라지지 않는	사라지지 않는	Unforgettable
歷史的		역사적		Historical
意味		의미		Meaning
띈		띤		Bearing, having
女性團體	여성단체	Women's organization
결정		결정		Decision
中央		중앙		Central
執行		집행		Execution, implementation
委員長		위원장		Chairperson
幹部		간부		Executive, cadre
代表大會	대표대회	Representative Conference
委員		위원		Committee member
마흔 일곱	마흔 일곱	Forty-seven
터이기		터이기		Because it will be (the case)
焦燥		초조		Anxiety, impatience
計劃		계획		Plan
있아오리까	있사오리까	Would there be? (older humble/polite interrogative)
形便		형편		Situation, circumstances
完成		완성		Completion
統一		통일		Unification
哲學科		철학과		Department of Philosophy
在學		재학		Being enrolled in school
들끌튼		들끓던		Was boiling, raging (older spelling)
學窓		학창		School window; fig. place of study
戰場		전장		Battlefield
나가는 것	나가는 것	The act of going out
朝夕		조석		Morning and evening, constantly
兩親		양친		Both parents
도라가신	돌아가신	Passed away (honorific, older spelling)
奉祭祀		봉제사		Performing ancestral rites
兄님		형님		Elder brother (honorific)
더부러		더불어		Together with
變*		변		Change (character obscured)
짐작		짐작		Guess, conjecture
現在		현재		Currently
法律		법률		Law
事務		사무		Affairs, business
關係		관계		Relation, connection
以外		이외		Other than, besides
엇던		어떤		Any (older spelling)
當分間		당분간		For the time being
謹愼		근신		Being prudent, acting cautiously
自身		자신		Oneself
修養		수양		Self-cultivation
힘쓰랴고	힘쓰려고	Intending to strive for
留學		유학		Studying abroad
學窓生活	학창생활	Campus life, student life
方面		방면		Field, aspect
活動		활동		Activity
全 生活		전 생활		Entire life
高潔		고결		Noble, lofty
活達		활달		Lively, vibrant
갔읍니다	같습니다	Seems like (older spelling)
죽은 生活	죽은 생활	Dead life
산 生活		산 생활	Living life
直後		직후		Immediately after
雨後		우후		After rain
竹筍		죽순		Bamboo shoot
 이러나는	일어나는	Arising, springing up
總合體		총합체		General association, aggregate body
諸氏		제씨		Messrs., gentlemen (plural honorific)
中央		중앙		Central
執行委員	집행위원	Executive committee member
思想		사상		Thought, ideology
團體		단체		Organization, group
不純		불순		Impure, seditious
暗雲		암운		Dark clouds
社會運動	사회운동	Social movement
線上		선상		On the line of
배회		배회		Wandering, hovering
혼자서		혼자서		Alone
근심하고	근심하고	Worrying
反對		반대		Opposition
領袖		영수		Leader
만나면		만나면		When meeting
小異		소이		Minor differences
버리고		버리고		Abandoning
大同團結	대동단결	Uniting for the greater cause
語재가 없는	말주변이 없는	Lacking eloquence (older form of 말주변?)
正言直射	정언직사	Speaking frankly and directly
疑惑		의혹		Suspicion
사게 되어	사게 되어	Came to buy/incur
가라처		가리켜		Pointing to, referring to (older spelling)
誤認		오인		Misunderstanding, misidentification
미약한		미약한		Feeble, weak
힘		힘		Strength, power
派爭		파쟁		Factional strife
調停		조정		Mediation
식힐 수 없음	시킬 수 없음	Cannot make (it) happen
알었고		알았고		Knew (older spelling)
따라서		따라서		Therefore, consequently
鮮內		선내		Within Korea
超然		초연		Detached, aloof
主旨		주지		Main point, principle
合致		합치		Agreement, conformity
加擔		가담		Participation, joining
加入		가입		Joining
以外		이외		Besides
執行委員長	집행위원장	Chairman of the Executive Committee
責任		책임		Responsibility
機關紙		기관지		Organ (publication of an organization)
刊行		간행		Publication
其後		기후		After that
內部		내부		Internal part
一部分子	일부분자	Some elements/individuals
目標		목표		Goal, objective
몰아서		몰아서		Driving, pushing
鬪爭		투쟁		Struggle, fight
抗爭		항쟁		Resistance, contention
無言		무언		Silent
전환		전환		Conversion, shift
음모		음모		Conspiracy, plot
浸潤		침윤		Infiltration
看破		간파		Seeing through, detecting
猛烈		맹렬		Fierce, vehement
드듸여		드디어		Finally, eventually (older spelling)
流血		유혈		Bloodshed
慘劇		참극		Tragedy
이러나게 된 것	일어나게 된 것	Came to happen
遺憾		유감		Regret
主觀		주관		Subjective view
正當		정당		Just, righteous
하여야		하여야		Must do
正道		정도		Right path
바로 잡힐	바로 잡힐	Will be set right
眞正		진정		True, genuine
活路		활로		Way out, path to survival
열닐 것		열릴 것		Will open (older spelling)
一毫		일호		A tiny bit, slightest amount
허위		허위		Falsehood, fabrication
手段		수단		Means, measure, trick
內定		내정		Inner decision, private determination
確信		확신		Conviction, firm belief
疑心		의심		Doubt, suspicion
每事		매사		Everything, every matter
勇氣		용기		Courage
熱誠		열성		Zeal, enthusiasm
생겻습니다	생겼습니다	Arose, occurred (older spelling)
良心		양심		Conscience
비치어		비추어		Reflecting upon
참말		참말		Truly, indeed
只今		지금		Now (older form)
回顧		회고		Recollection
고요히		고요히		Quietly
次機		차기		Next opportunity
計劃		계획		Plan
以前		이전		Before
어린 때		어린 때		Childhood
일		일		Matter, affair
그만두지요	그만두지요	Let's stop here
勉勵會		면려회		Encouragement association (often Christian context, CE)
돌아볼가	돌아볼까	Shall I look around / travel around?
海外		해외		Overseas
있어볼가	있어볼까	Shall I try staying?
社會主義	사회주의	Socialism
한창		한창		Peak, height
소리치던	소리치던	Was shouting, clamoring
北平		북평		Beiping (Beijing's name 1928-1949)
留學		유학		Studying abroad
勞工兵		노공병		Labour Corps soldier
通譯官		통역관		Interpreter (official)
가기로 했읍니다	가기로 했습니다	Decided to go (older spelling)
問題		문제		Problem, issue
交戰		교전		Engagement in battle
捷勝		첩승		Swift victory
四方		사방		All directions, everywhere
提燈		제등		Paper lantern
行列		행렬		Procession, parade
하든 때		하던 때		Time when (they) were doing (older spelling)
小學校		소학교		Elementary school
洋鼓		양고		Western drum
喇叭		나팔		Trumpet, horn
마음대로	마음대로	As one pleases, freely
물고		불고		Blowing (instrument) (older spelling)
父母		부모		Parents
承諾		승낙		Approval, consent
單發		단발		Bobbed hair (older spelling/form of 단발)
얻어먹다싶이	얻어먹다시피	Almost like begging for food
하였는걸요	하였는걸요	(I) did (colloquial ending expressing mild surprise/recollection)
講演		강연		Lecture, speech
雜誌		잡지		Magazine
아마		아마		Perhaps, maybe
各地		각지		Various places
遊說		유세		Stumping, giving speeches
醫學		의학		Medicine (study of)
博士		박사		Doctorate
學位		학위		Academic degree
어든 뒤인지라	얻은 뒤인지라	Because it was after obtaining (older spelling/form)
醫業		의업		Medical practice
從事		종사		To engage in
世上事情	세상사정	World affairs
떠들석 하였읍니다	떠들썩 하였습니다	Was noisy, boisterous (older spelling)
亡命		망명		Exile
듯기에는	듣기에는	According to what I heard
만히		많이		Many, much (older spelling)
活躍		활약		Activity, being active
消息		소식		News
風便		풍편		Rumor, hearsay (lit. news on the wind)
듯고		듣고		Hearing (older spelling)
創立		창립		Founding
同志		동지		Comrade
더부러		더불어		Together with
政治		정치		Politics
文化		문화		Culture
各方面		각방면		Various fields/aspects
改革		개혁		Reform
이르킨		일으킨		Initiated, started (older spelling)
自身		자신		Oneself
熱		열		Heat; here: passion, fervor
끌튼		끓던		Was boiling, surging (older spelling)
때로소이다	때로소이다	Was the time (older formal ending)
우리들		우리들		We, us
發行		발행		Publication
民權		민권		Civil rights, people's rights
鼓吹		고취		Advocacy, promotion
아무튼		아무튼		Anyway, in any case
먼		먼		Distant, far
過去		과거		Past
一片		일편		A piece, fragment
草하는		초하는		Drafting, writing
感概		감개		Deep emotion, feeling
無量		무량		Immeasurable, boundless
더욱		더욱		Furthermore, moreover
貴誌		귀지		Your esteemed magazine
왔읍니다	왔습니다	Came, arrived (older spelling)
보내주소서	보내주소서	Please send (it) (older formal request ending)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제9권 제1호
발행일	1937년 01월 01일
기사제목	著名人物 一代記
기사형태	설문

著名人物 一代記
丁丑新春
1, 先生의 春秋 얼마시며, 어듸서 무얼 하시면서 새해를 마젓사오며 또 新年에는 무얼 하시겠읍니까? 身老心不老의 嘆이나 其他 心境을 적어 주시압소서)
10年 前
1, 10年 前은 先生의 春秋 얼마섯는데 그 때 어듸서(京城 又는 東京) 무얼(職業) 하시면서 過歲하섰읍니까.
2, 그 해에는 朝鮮에 어떤 큰 일이 있었습니까.
20년 前
1, 그 때 선생의 춘추 얼마신데 어듸서 무얼하시며 지내섰읍니까.
2, 그 해에는 조선 사회에 어떤 큰 일이 있섰읍니까.
30年 前
1, 그 때 先生의 春秋 얼마신데 어듸서 무얼 하시며 지내섰읍니까.
2, 그 해에는 朝鮮社會에 어떤 큰 일이 있섰읍니까.
40年 前
1, 그 때 先生의 春秋 얼마신데 어듸서 무얼 하시며 지내섰읍니까.
2, 그 해에는 朝鮮社會에 어떤 큰 일이 있섰읍니까.
50年 前
1, 그 때 先生의 春秋 얼마신데 어듸서 무얼 하시며 지내섰읍니까.
2, 그 해에는 朝鮮社會에 어떤 큰 일이 있섰읍니까.
60年 前<28>

佐翁 尹致昊

丁丑新春= 新春에는 74歲가 됨니다. 이러케 나히가 만허지매 우리 社會의 高齡者 축에 한 해 두해 밀녀가는 寂寞을 늣겨지는 同時에 80平生 風浪 多하든 내 過去를 자조 回想하게 됨니다.

10년 전= 그 때 64歲 때인대 開城가서 松都高普校長으로 在職하고 있었으며 朝鮮 社會에는 東亞 朝鮮 各 新聞의 文盲打破運動이 이러나서 活氣를 띄고 있었음니다.

20년 전= 그 때 54歲엇는데 서울 있으면서 基督敎 總務로 일을 보고 있섯움니다. 月南 李商在氏도 함께 있었음니다. 世界에는 歐羅巴大戰이 方濃했고 東洋서도 靑島功衛戰이 시작되여 騷亂했음니다.

30년 전= 그 때 44歲엇는데 그 전 數年을 安島山과 더부터 平壤 大成學校長으로 있었고 松都 韓英書院일도 보았음니다. 그때의 半島政界에는 多事多端하야 人心에 衝激을 주는 여러 가지 政治的 事件이 疊出하엿고 西北學會
畿湖學會 등이 全盛했읍음니다.

40년 전= 그 때 34歲엇는데 海外 10年間의 亡命生活로써 귀국 后 議政府叅議 內閣祕書官歷, 다시 外部協辯으로 있섯고 또 元山서 元山 監理하든 때도 그 前後인가 합니다. 그러다가 高宗께서의 俄館播遷 日露의 風聞이 점점 告急했읍니다.

50년 전= 그 때 24歲 高宗께압서 親政하시든 때인데 나도 外部協辯으로 있었슴니다. 그 뒤 2年 만에 日本에 修信使를 韓國政府에서 보낼 때에 朴定陽氏를 따라 東京에 갔었오이다.

60년 전= 그 때 14歲 兪吉濬氏와 함께 修信使 魚允中의 從員이 되어 日本에 가다. 그래서 兪吉濬氏는 福澤諭吉의 慶應義塾에 나는 中村正直의 同人社에 入學修學.

70년 전= 4歲時, 忠淸道 白蓮庵에서 四書五經을 工夫, 10歲時, 漢文으로 三國誌, 水許誌를 通讀.

多山 朴榮喆

丁丑新春= 59歲가 되요. 新年에도 亦是 朝鮮商業銀行을 지키고 앉었쓸 뿐이요 다른 經營은 없소. 心境은 歲歲花相似, 年年人不同이요.

10년 전= 48歲 咸鏡北道 知事在任, 大正 15年 4月 李王殿下 薨去.

20년 전= 38歲 益山郡守在任, 朝鮮總督 寺內大將이 內閣總理大臣이 되고 長谷川大將이 總督任命되고 李王殿下가 東上參內하시다.<29>

30년 전= 28歲 陸軍參領在任, 統監府開廳 伊藤博文公 統監任命, 宮禁肅淸, 政治團體는 大韓協會
一進會, 共進會, 自强會가 있었고.

40년 전= 18歲 全州故鄕 私塾 讀書, 親露派 李範晉 등이 李太王 及 王世子를 俄國公使舘에 播遷하시게 하고 總理大臣 金弘集과 農大 鄭秉夏를 殺戮하고 度大 魚允中도 避亂途中 暴民에게 被殺되고 內大 兪吉濬 軍大 趙義淵 法大 張博은 日本에 亡命하였다.


島山 安昌浩

丁丑新春= 새해에 내 나이 於焉 60이외다. 平南 大寬山 산속에서 亞細亞의 하늘에 흐르는 구름 짱을 바라보면서 身病을 治療하고 있읍니다.

10년 전= 그 때 50이외다. 上海 佛租界에 있었읍니다. 54歲되는 해에, 故土의 땅을 20여년만에 처음 발버 보앗지요. 上海에서 지난 때의 心境과 그 當時 朝鮮事情은 더 말지 않기로 함니다.

20년 전= 그 때 40이외다. 米國 로샌젤스市에 根據를 두고 그 전해인가 墨西哥의 在留同胞을 차처 여러 달 遊說로 단녀왔고 그리고 42, 3세 되든 해에 上海에 있다가 比律賓과 濠洲 等地로 視察을 단녀 왔소이다.

30년 전= 그 때 30이외다. 28歲까지 平壤 大成學校 일을 보다가 李剛氏 등과 함께 北米로 건너가서 「協會」라는 團體도 만들고 新聞도 發行하는 한편 巴奈馬運河 파는 勞働에도 조곰 從事하였는대 아무튼 나의 30前後는 情熱에 타든 때외다.

40년 전= 그 때 20이외다. 18, 9歲때 상투 튼 이 몸이 獨立協會요 大X協會요 하는 政治團體를 조차다니며 서울과 平壤에서 演壇에 같금 올나섯고 더구나 그 때 平壤 浮碧樓에서 여러번 演說하다가 感이 極하야 울든 생각이 지금도 이저지지 않읍니다.

50년 전= 그 때 열살이외다. 舍伯으로 더부러 平壤 綾羅島까에 있는 조고마한 섬 속에서 農事짓고 있는 한편, 四書五經을 읽고 있었소이다.


權東鎭

丁丑新春= 77歲외다. 天道敎 大宗司長의 職任을 맛고 있읍니다. 世事에 대해선 차라리 沈黙을 지키기로 하지요.

計10년 전= 67歲때 외다. 서울 있으면서 新幹會 本部 副會長에 就任하였고 그 이듬해에는 또한 新幹會 本部 檢査委員長에 就任하여 前後 數年間 新幹運動에<30> 努力했읍니다. 그리고 그때에는 朝鮮 안에 新幹運動이 몹시 氣勢를 올리고 있었지요.

20년 전= 57歲때 외다. 그 해에는 天道敎에 있으면서 孫義庵를 모시고 敎勢擴張에 奔走했고 또 그때가 天道敎의 全盛時代었는데 그 이듬 이듬해에 入했읍니다.

30년 전= 47歲時. 舊韓國 中樞院 副贊議에 被任되였고 大韓協會 實業部長으로도 일하였지요.

40년 전= 37歲 저 有名한 閔妃事件으로 東京에 亡命하여 약 10年을 配所의 달을 처다보며 지냇소이다.

50년 전= 27歲時. 數年 前에 武科及第. 別軍職에 被任. 咸安郡守를 지나 咸鏡道 按撫中軍兼 討捕使로 있다가 다시 中樞府 內禁將으로 轉任했고 그리고 巨文島의 僉使兼守防將으로 있든 때외다.

60년 전= 17歲時, 舊韓國 陸軍士官學校에 다니든 때외다.
이러케 回顧함에 波爛만튼 내 一生이 여름날 구름조각같이 片片히 지나감을 깨달어짐니다.


春園 李光洙

丁丑新春= 나이는 새해되면 46, 浮生의 일이라 어디서 무었을 하며 過歲할는지 알 수 있읍니까. 센터럭이는 것같이 生覺되나 年令에 대해서는 아무 感想도 없읍니다.

10년 전= 10年 前에는 서울에 있었는데 아마 重病으로 알코 있었던 듯 합니다. 朝鮮에 어떤 일이 낳는지 記憶에 없으나 시인한 일이 없었던 것만 確實하겠지요. 記憶이 없으니까.

20년 전= 25歲, 東京早大에서 工夫. 無情을 쓰다. 學之光編輯, 基督靑年會 理事 등.

30년 전= 16歲. 東京서 中學에 다니다.
乙巳新條約 翌年.

40년 전= 5歲. 日淸戰爭 後 2年. 平北 定州에서 내<31> 劍과 초롱을 가지고 놀고 알암 줍고 千字文, 無題詩를 읽고 外祖母 이야기 책 보아 드리고 獨立協會가 한창이었을 것임니다.

50년 前= 나의 前生의 末端, 어디 가서 태어날 것을 準備하던 때다. 옛 朝鮮이 自滅의 一路를 걸고 있었다.

60년 前= 그 때에 나는 어디서 무었울 하고 있었는지 모른다. 大院君이 한창 들날릴 때일 것이다.


海岩 金麗植

丁丑新春= 「벌서 48歲로구나」하는 歎息을 하며 職責인 校務에 奔忙히 過歲準備를 하고 있읍니다. 新年에도 職務인 學校事業을 좀 擴張하려고 애쓰게 되겠지요. 그러나 歲不與我로 한해, 두해 지내는 동안 於公於私에 이렇다 할만한 成果가 없음을 愧歎하며 何如間 人生의 責任을 다하려고 스서로 猛省과 奮勉을 다함니다.

10년 전= 38歲이였는데 약 15年間 海外에 流浪하다가 還土 후 첫 번 작업으로 京城에서 協成學校長의 任에 在하었으나 약 半年間의 職員俸給未拂과 負債過多로 不得已 閉門케 된 學校에서 基金 鳩聚와 難局打開에 腐心盡力 중에 있었읍니다. 그 때 朝鮮 內에 어떤 큰 일은 없었으나 外來 新思潮에 基한 民衆運動이 依然 繼續되여 人心은 焦燥하었읍니다.

20년 전= 28歲 이었는데 米國 아이요와州 大學에 在籍 중으로 비록 苦學生活이었으나 希望에 싸이여 모든 苦勞를 잊고 오로지 學究에 熱中하고 있었음니다. 그 해에도 朝鮮 내에는 何等 特記할만한 큰 일은 없었으나 歐洲大戰亂의 影響을 받아 物價의 高貴와 人心의 興奮은 적지 않었읍니다.

30년 전= 18歲詩인데 時代의 變還에 따라 工夫하던 漢學書籍을 等閑視케 되고 同輩들과 朝夕追逐하며 密議가 紛紛하던 것은 捨舊取新으로 修學의 方向을 轉換하려고 當時 新學修業에 最重課目이던 數學을 演習하며 京城 留學을 꾀하고 있었읍니다.<32>
그때는 乙巳協約의 成立으로 韓國의 外交權을 日本에 讓渡한 後 初次의 重大事件으로 海牙密使事件이 發生되여 光武께서 禪位와 隆熙께서 登極이 있은 다움 丁未協約이 成立되여 韓國軍隊가 解散되고 等 韓末風雲이 緊張하였읍니다.

40년 전= 8歲이였는데 漢文書齋齊에서 童蒙先習등을 學習暗誦한 餘暇에는 동모들과 같이 紙鳶이나 날리고 石戰이나 하는 것 등으로 날뛰었을 뿐임니다. 그 때는 高宗께서 皇位에 올라 朝鮮을 王國으로부터 帝國으로 昇級하는 同時에 年號도 建陽을 光武로 改稱하고 內政 外交에 問題가 複雜하였으니 이에 따라 人心의 趨向도 얼마큼 달러가지만은 철모르는 兒孩 生活로 지내였읍니다.


呂運亨

丁丑新春= 52歲외다. 新聞社가 그러케 된 채로 過歲했슴니다. 世事에 대해서는 沈黙지키지요.

10년 전= 42歲 때인데 上海에 있었읍니다. 大正 8年에 東京 갔었고 내가 45歲 되든 해에 上海 遠東運動場에서 그리되어 朝鮮에 도라왔으며 朝鮮에는 아마 그 해에 第1次共産黨事件이 있었든 줄 記憶함니다.

20년 전= 32歲 때인데 南京大學에 在學中이었으며 歐洲大戰으로 靑島에선 日獨戰役이 있어 수선수선 하엿읍니다.

30년 전= 22歲 때인데 故鄕인 京畿道 楊平農村에서 農事짓고 있었읍니다. 그리다가 江原道를 도라 서울 올너왔지요.


碧初 洪命憙

丁丑新春= 나이 50입니다. 爲天下者도 못 되는 주제에 家人의 生産作業을 몰라서 逢變입니다. 避債臺 어듸 있는가. 過歲하러 가리라. 心境을 간단하게 쓸 재주 없으니 杜子美詩나 한 句 써서 대신 할까요.
「少壯幾時奈老何. 向來哀樂何其多」

10년 전= 2, 3年동안 골치알튼 紛雜한 新聞社生活을 淸算하고 이 해에 비로소 心身安靜하게 過歲하였읍니다.<33>

20년 전= 故鄕를 등지고 멀니 放浪길을 떠나서 6, 7年間 南船北馬로 돌아다닌 끄테 이러타 할 希望이 생긴 것은 아니로되 故土로 다시 들어오랴고 맘을 먹게 되엇섯슴니다. 馬來半島에 있다가 上海에 와서 睨觀과 같이 설을 쇠고 北京에 와서 丹齋와같이 달포 지내고 奉天으로 나왔었읍니다. 睨觀 丹齋 두 분과는 이 해 작별이 곧 千古死別이 되었읍니다.

30년 전= 東京서 所謂 四疊半生活을 하였읍니다, 우리 사람 心情의 憎惡이 必要한 것임은 이 때부터 잘 알게 되었읍니다.

40년 전= 曾祖母 귀염 속에 파무처 지냇슴니다. 이 세상을 내 세상으로만 알고 지냇슴니다. 넷 꿈입니다, 꿈은 벌서 연기같이 살아젓건만 살아진 자취가 지금도 내 맘을 아프게 할 때가 있읍니다.


凰山 李鐘麟

丁丑新春= 54歲외다. 점점 六旬이 갓가워지매 除夜詩 한 首에 이 心懷를 담어 보앗읍니다.
老妻惜夜盡 稚子待朝來
相看堪一笑 歲月爲難催
또 한 首 더 記錄하지요. 빠고다 公園에 갔다가 歲暮 雪景을 보고 心懷를 記하여 보앗지요.
手把雪中枝 春光翠上眉
移時終不捨 此意有誰知

10년 전= 44歲 時 그 때 서울 있었으며 朝鮮 物産獎勵會責任者되어 그 運動에 분주했고 또 그 해에 朝鮮에는 乙丑年 水災가 있어 飢饉救濟會를 組織하여 100,000圓 以上의 큰 돈을 거두어 能聚能散하였지요. 그리고 아마 全朝鮮記者大會도 그 當節에 京城에 열니어진 줄 암니다.

20년 전= 34歲 時 天道敎에 있으면서 孫義庵을 모시고 敎會 일에 분주하였지요. 그 때가 말하자면 天道敎의 全盛時代로서 敎徒도 300萬, 돈도 약 100萬圓을 가지고 있었지요. 지금 생각나는 것은 大正 7年 일인데 世上風雲을 바라보며

孫秉熙先生 게시든 鳳凰閣樓上에서 一首詩를 지어 心懷를 記하여 보앗지요.
黃葉西風吹更急
主人無語下書樓<34>

30년 전= 24歲. 그 때 서울 成均舘 博士가 되었고 그 當時 大韓協會 會報 編輯을 내가 하였고 그리하는 한 편 吳世昌氏 社長아래 大O民報主筆로 있으면서 政論을 일삼었읍니다.

40년 전= 14歲 李卨先生을 모시고 四書五經을 배웟슴니다.


梧村 薛泰熙

丁丑新春= 나는 只今 長沙町 224番에서 服藥療病 중임니다. 새해에도 아모 經營도 없읍니다. 그저 萬念如灰함니다.
惠間諸項의 所答은 客觀的 事狀뿐이라면 其時其時의 事件을 所知대로 對答할 수 있지마는 主觀을 말하라는데는 무었을 했느니 무었을 일으컷느니 하는 일이 모다 神通치 못할 뿐 外라 엇던 점으로는 남 부끄러운 일이어서 都是 開口하고 싶지 안슴니다. 잘 諒解해 주옵소서. 日後 무슨 機會있으면 回顧談 形式으로나 한다면 몰나도 今日의 이 形式으로는 開口할 廉恥가 없읍니다.


金活蘭

丁丑新春= 나는 己亥生이니 丁丑年에는 39歲가 될 것이외다. 여전히 京城에서 梨花專門과 保育의 將來를 꿈구면서 過歲할 豫定이외다.
身不老心不老이니 무슨 恨歎이 있으리이까.

10년 전= 10年 前에는 29歲었을 것이오. 亦 梨花專門과 保育에서 勤務하였나이다.

20년 전= 20年 前에는 19歲이였고 梨花大學 卒業班學生으로 지냇나이다.

30년 전= 30年 前에는 9歲의 小學生으로 仁川永化女子普通學校에 出入하며 지냇나이다.

40년 전= 40年 前 일은 알 길조차 없나이다.


兢人 許憲

丁丑新春= 올에 52歲, 벌서 이러케 되니 歲月이 如矢란 정말 實感으로 늣겨짐니다. 世上風雲을 바라보며<35> 이 한해에는 自體의 修養에나 努力코저 합니다.

10년 전= 42歲였소이다. 그 해에는 世界文化를 볼겸 歐米各國의 司法制度를 硏究코저 世界周遊의 길에 올라 米國 픽스킬에 滯在하면서 英語工夫를 하고 있었읍니다.
그 해에 朝鮮 社會는 活潑한 움지김을 보아서 新幹會가 이려나고 全鮮的으로 民衆運動의 氣勢가 크게 떨치었읍니다.

20년 전= 32歲 때외다. 그 때에는 서울에서 辯護士로 있었는데 그 當時의 社會現象으로 말하면 敎育熱이 크게 끌어서 各處에 中學校가 생기고 先導者들은 敎育을 시켜야 한다고 높이 부르짓든 때외다.

30년 전= 22歲 때외다. 그 전 해까지 宮內部의 奎章閣 主事로 있다가 그 해부터 法部主事로 轉職하여 있었읍니다. 法部大臣은 有名한 張博氏었지요. 밤에는 英語夜學을 단겻였읍니다. 그 當時는 合倂 전으로써 日韓兩國間에 여러 가지 政治的 交涉이 있어 人心이 몹시 緊張하고 있었읍니다.

40년 전= 12歲 때외다. 서울 齋洞 官立小學校 4年級에 다니든 小學生 時節이외다.
徐載弼, 李商在, 金玉均 尹致昊氏들 靑年政客들이 모여 獨立協會를 組織하고 文化更張運動을 이르키고 잇든 때외다.


悠堂 蘇完奎

丁丑新春= 36歲! 京城에서 별노 하는 일이 없이 新春을 마지 하였소이다. 그저 特別計劃없이 희미한 희망 속에서 牛步主義로 큰 樂觀도 큰 悲觀도 없이 나가보려는 중이외다.

20년 전= 26歲 때 東京에서 法學專攻 中 世事는 記憶 없소이다.

30년 전= 16歲 때 扶安 界火島에서 田良齋 선생을 모시고 있었읍니다. 世事는 記憶 없소이다.


金昶濟

丁丑新春= 年 57, 梨花女子高等普通學校 敎員으로 新年도 그저 일을 하겠지요. 별로 所感도 없고요.<36>

10년 전= 丙子부터 10년 前에는 47歲이며, 亦是 梨花高普와 梨門專門에서 교편을 잡고 있었고 日本內地에 學事視察團長으로 갔오. 東亞日報社 新築落成이 있어 民間敎育 15년 以上 功勞者 表彰式이 있었는데 本人도 그 中의 1人이였오.

20년 전= 37歲時 永生中學校(現高普) 敎師로 있었고 집은 亦是 京城에 있기 때문에 京城서 過歲하구요. 世界大戰亂이 한참이요. 日獨戰爭 中이었는데, 本人은 그 해 여름에 처음으로 東京에서 帝國大學講習會에 다니였소.

30년 전= 27歲 쩍인대 鏡城公立普通學校長으로 있으면서 一方으로 成一學校를 助力하였소.
日露戰爭이 막 끝나고 統監政治가 시작될 때인데 民間의 敎育熱은 非常히 昻騰하였지요.

40년 전= 17歲인데 忠南 保寧 態川에서 漢文을 읽으면 儒學者님도 相從하였지요.
甲午 乙未改革黨政府가 一敗倒地한 後 舊 완고당들이 발호하는 一種 恐怖時代 混亂狀態이엇지요. 民間에는 獨立協會가 있것슴니다.

50년 전= 7歲時에 亦是 故鄕인 保寧에서 漢學書堂에 入學하야 天地玄黃을 읽엇지요.
丙戌年 怪疾이 있었지요. 그리고 政界로는 甲申政變이 있는 後 매우 뒤숭숭 하엿지요.

60년 전= (出生) 前 4年인데 有名한 丙子年 凶年이엇지요.


春谷 元世勳

丁丑新春= 나는 至今 京城 東大門外 昌信町 140의 8에서 七旬老母를 모시고 지내는데 나는 금年에 滿 50세이며 나의 안해는 學生들에게 밥 지어주고 누릉지나 어더먹고 어린 딸년에게 날마다 菓子 갑에 졸이는 中이며 나는 最近에 中央時報社에 原稿 쓰는 것으로 日課를 삼ㅅ고 그날그날을 보내고 있소.
새해에 하고 싶은 일이 덜어 있겠지만 잘 될 것같지 아니한 일을 말한들 무었하겠소. 집안살님이 구차한 가운데라도 家族에게 疾病이나 없고 和平이나 하였으면 幸인가 하겠오. 「身老心不老」란 것은 거즛말이오. 늙은 놈에 젊은 마음이 도저히 있을 수가 없는<37> 것이오. 몸이 늙으면 靑年에게 辱 먹기 좋을 만한 마음만 생기는가 하오. 엇던 때는 모든 것이 貴치 않어서 深山幽谷이나 無人絶島를 차저가서 人間社會와 絶綠된 生活을 하다가 그만 둘 생각도 나니 이것이 最近 나의 心境의 一部分인가 하오.

10년 전= 의 나는 北京에서 한편으로는 學窓에 籍을 두고 露西亞 文學도 學究하는 한편으로는 또 무슨 運動에도 奔走하다가 結局은 新義州刑務所에 들어가서 몃해 설을 지내고 刑務所에서 나온 뒤로는 아시는 분들이 보시는 바와 갓치 이 생활을 6, 7年 繼續하는 중이지요.

20년 전= 의 나는 露領 沿海州에서 亦是 一種 放浪生活이라는 그 生活을 하다가 己未年 前後하야 中露兩國의 各地로 나딴은 그 무슨 運動에 쉬지 안코 분주하였지요.

30년 전= 나는 京城에서 大東法律專門學校에서 工夫하였고 校門을 나온 뒤로 곳 나는 나의 先輩와 同志들의 뒤를 따라서 海外로 나가게 되고 海外에 나간 뒤에 무엇무엇에 從事한 것은 낫낫치 말할 수 없오.

40년 전= 나는 書堂에서 小學 通鑑 論語 등의 漢學을 工夫하다가 18세 때에 머리 깍고서 올와서 工夫하게 된 것이 내가 鄕里를 떠난 첫거름이지요.

50년 전= 서 그 以後의 나의 經歷은 나의 어머니께서나 자세히 아시는 일이니 그만둡시다, 그때그때에 朝鮮에 무슨 큰 일 있었든 것은 朝鮮 近世史에 물어보시오.


李承晩

丁丑新春= 내 나히 올에 60이외다. 이미 海外에 나돈지 30餘年에 미첫스매 멀니 太平洋 건너의 靑山白雲 속으로 감금 꿈이 흘너감니다. 故土를 떠날 때에는 靑年이더니 이제 머리 우엔 白髮을 언게 되였소이다. 過歲는 北米 로샌절스市에서 하겠오이다.

10년 전= 그때 내 나이 50, 布哇 호놀루루에서 내 兄弟들과 함께 잇섯슴니다. 그리고 그 때는 布哇에 잇는 모든 勢力을 한데 묵느라고 微力을 다하느라 하였음니다. 布哇서는 新聞도 發行했슴니다.<38>

20년 전= 그 때 내 나이 40, 數年 동안 米國 各地로 遊說하고 도라다니다가 다시 布哇에 도라와서 그 때까지 西洋 사람 손에 있든 朝鮮人 敎會를 우리 사람 손으로 올마왓섯지요. 그래서 布哇에 朝鮮人 學校와 敎會를 세웟슴니다. 그리고 世上은 歐州大戰 中이 되야 여러 가지로 모다들 緊張되어 있었지요.

30년 전= 그 때 내 나이 30. 기억이 히미하야 잘 모르겟슴니다만은 아마 米國 푸린스톤大學을 마치고 다시 하-버드大學 政治經濟科에 다니든 때인 듯 함니다. 博士學位를 엇기가 1911年이엇스니까 그 때는 日露戰爭 후이고 尹致昊氏의 101人事件 卽後인 듯. 나는 故土를 떠나 太平洋을 건너 왓든 것이외다.
*年十년 전= 스무살 나든 해인데 서울서 漢城外國語學校를 다녓고 그리고 李商在, 金貞植氏 등과 함께 아마 무슨 事件으로 獄中生活을 하고 그런 뒤 基督敎靑年會에서 일 보든 때인 줄 아옵니다. 世上은 무슨 協約이 締結된다 云云하든 때지요.


心崗 李肯鍾

丁丑新春= 인체 42世가 되였슴니다. 朝鮮商工新聞社를 經營하게 된 後 日常 奔走히 지내므로 今年도 過歲는 京城서 그럭저럭 할까 합니다. 新年에는 言論界를 위하야 一層더 努力하야 볼까 합니다. 有志事不成에 歲不與我留의 歎이 日常 간절합니다.

10년 전= 에는 京城에 있어지오. 京城 鐘路圖書舘에서 일을 보면서 過歲하였읍니다.
20년 전= 2에는 내 나이 22歲! 참 조흘 때였슴니다. 法專學窓을 나와 다시 더 工夫할 作定으로 京都에 가서 이 해는 지내였슴니다. 그때는 가슴 속이 모다 希望과 雄圖로써 타고 있섰읍니다. 華麗한 꿈도 잇고 壯快한 空想도 하고 悲憤한 決心하고 있을 때였슴니다. 그리다가 그 다음해 北米로 근너가 뱌렸읍니다.


丁七星

생각건대 나는= 至今으로부터 30年 前 當時 李朝 末葉, 우연한 期會로 當時 大邱 관찰사의 진체를 구경하게 되여 그 마마의 地位를 부리워하야 그 길로 이웃 妓生집에 차저다니면서 工夫라고 시작한 것이 天才란 말까지 듯게 되자 부득이 부모님이 그 길에 내노케 되였는대 <39> 그 때 8歲였다, 남들이 日就月將한다는 내 技藝는 차츰 영문(도청) 본관 (군청) 삿도 잔체 때마다 들니게 되였다. 한번은 先生되는 妓生을 따라가서 그 신발을 직키고 구경하는 것이 그 弟子로써 늘 하는 일이라 그럴 때마다 저 애가 時調를 잘 부른단 말이 上坐에 돌게 되자 삿도는 곳 부른다. 부름을 밧고는 서슴지 않코 신을 쥔 채로 올나가 날너갈 뜻이 안즈면 모다들 대소하였다. 너 시조 한마대 불너라 하는 분부가 떠러지기 무섭게 어린 소견에도 자기가 第一 잘 한다고 생각키우는 漢高祖 모신 名將이란 역금을 붓그럼 없이 불너 만흔 층찬도 밧고 우슴도 밧었다. 그러다가 그 다음 그 다음해 순종께서 南巡時大邱라 達城에 坐하섰는데 그 때 여러 大官과 여러 妓生과 함께 나도 參拜한 일이 있었다.

10년 전= 至今으로부터 20年前 當時  一流라고 부름 밧는 京城의 妓生으로 2, 3處 名門大家의 소실노 일홈을 날였다. (異常스터운 것은 大邱에 최감사 退任時 보든 그 삿도집 며나리가 된 일도 있었다)

20년 전= 至今으로부터 10年前 卽 21歲 時 當時는 3.1運動 卽後 朝鮮 안은 수선수선하든 판이라 기푼 뜻은 모르나 鐘路 네거리에 서서 바라보는 절문 가삼은 興분에 넘치는 뜨거운 눈물을 흘니면서 그 뒤를 따라 단닌 일도 있었다. 여러 가지 活動寫眞에서 본 것과 이 때에 밧든 충동은 마츰내 玄海를 건느게 되여 거기서 語學도 배호고 西洋 갈 準備로 英語도 배호고 타이푸라이다도 배웠으나 그러는 中 차차 社會에 눈 뜨게 되에 다시 朝鮮에 건너와 大邱에 女靑을 組織하고 京城에 女性同友會를 組織하며 全鮮靑年大會代表의 한 사람으로 活動하다가 다시 東京으로 건너간 때는 25歲였는대 東京에서 女學生學興會幹事로 活動을 하는 한便 3月會의 參例하야 로자룩젠붉크女性과 社會란 팜푸렛을 發刊 全力하였고 當時는 劉英俊
朴順天
金善氏 등 女流 雄辯家들이 隱退 기분을 가질 때어서 그 뒤를 이어 그 當時 女性으로써의 演壇에 每日같이 오르며 東京地方에까지 단니면서 演說을 한 者는 女性으로써는 나 뿐이였다. 그러는 中 1週日에 몃 번 가지 못하든 技藝學校을 맛치자 서울 도라와서 여러 동모와 함께 槿友會를 創立하고 當時 組織部 責任者로 全鮮 各地 순廻 다음 出版部 責任을 兼하야 기억에 사라지지 않는 歷史的 意味를 띈 女性團體 槿友會는 그의 (나) 결정이다. 다음 槿友會 中央執行委員長으로 新幹會 幹部로 新幹會 全鮮代表大會代表委員의 한 사람 등이였다. <40>


呂運弘

丁丑新春= 은 마흔 일곱이외다. 아직 歲月이 30年은 남어 있을 터이기 焦燥한 생각을 가지지 않고 있읍니다. 새해 計劃이라야 별 것 있아오리까. 世上 形便을 좀 더 두고 보지요.

10년 전= 그 때 37歲. 上海에서 도라와서 별 일없이 그대로 서울 있었읍니다. 그 當時 蔣介石의 손으로 北伐이 完成되여 統一되었읍니다.

20년 전= 그 때 27歲. 米國 우스도大學 哲學科에 在學하였는데 歐洲大戰이 한참 들끌튼 때외다. 가치 學窓에 있든 米國大學生들이 歐羅巴戰場으로 나가는 것을 朝夕으로 보고 있었읍니다.

30년 전= 그 때 17歲. 故鄕인 京畿道 楊平農村에서 兩親 도라가신 뒤 奉祭祀하며 兄님으로 더부러 농사 짓고 있든 때이며 서울서 오는 소식에 여러 가지 政治的 變*이 생기는 줄 짐작을 했읍니다.


一星 辛泰嶽

丁丑新春= 今年 내 나이 36歲외다. 現在 京城에서 辯護士로서 法律事務를 보고 있는데 朝鮮日報社에 關係를 가진 以外에는 엇던 會社나 엇던 團體에 關係를 가진 곳이 없읍니다. 지난 해는 아모 意味 없이 보내었으니 새해인들 별 일이 있겠읍니까. 當分間 謹愼하야 自身의 修養이나 힘쓰랴고 합니다.

10년 전= 26歲 時에는 東京에 있었읍니다. 말이 留學이었으나 學窓生活보다도 다른 方面의 活動이 그 때 나의 全 生活이었읍니다. 只今 생각하야도 그 때 生活이 가장 高潔活達한 生活이던 것 갔읍니다. 現在의 生活을 죽은 生活이라고 하면 그 때 生活은 산 生活이었읍니다. 朝鮮에 三一運動이 있은 直後 全鮮 각지에 우후의 죽순같이 이러나는 청년단체 그 總合體인 朝鮮靑年聯合會가 創立되자 나는 鄭魯湜, 金喆壽 諸氏와 함께 그 中央執行委員으로 있다가 그 뒤 靑年總同盟이 생기고 思想團體로는 서울派, 火曜派, 北風派 등의 不純한 暗雲이 社會運動線上에 배회함을 보고 나는 혼자서 이를 근심하고 이에 反對하야 各 派 領袖을 만나면 小異를 버리고 大同團結하여야 한다고 語재가 없는 나로서 正言直射하다가 各派에 疑惑만 사게<41> 되어 나를 가라처 서울派는 火曜派로 火曜派는 北風派로 北風派는 다시 서울派로 誤認하던 일까지 있었읍니다. 나의 미약한 힘. 이들 派爭을 調停식힐 수 없음을 알었고 따라서 이 鮮內의 派爭에 超然함을 主旨로 하는 東京의 一月會가 나의 心情에 合致되기에 그에 加擔하였읍니다. 이것이 나의 思想團體에 加入한 첫 일이외다. 그 때 東京에는 一月會 以外에 女子團體로 三月會가 있었고 靑年團體로 在東京 朝鮮無産靑年同盟이 있었는데 나는 이 靑年同盟의 執行委員長의 責任도 가지게 되어 그 會의 機關紙로 「靑年朝鮮」을 刊行하였는데 其後 一月會 內部에서 그 一部分子가 派爭에 超然하기를 目標로 한 一月會를 몰아서 鮮內의 鬪爭團體와 抗爭하는 團體, 卽 無言의 투쟁단체로 전환식힐 음모가 있게 되어 이것이 三月會 靑年同盟의 一部에 浸潤됨을 看破하고는 이에 猛烈히 反對한데서 드듸여 東京의 所謂 「流血의 慘劇」 까지 이러나게 된 것입니다. 생각하면 그때의 나의 行動에는 遺憾된 일도 많었겠지마는 그 때의 나의 主觀으로는 그것이 가장 正當한 일이고 그러케 하여야 朝鮮의 社會運動이 正道에 바로 잡힐 것갔고 이것이 바로 잡혀야 朝鮮 사람의 眞正한 活路가 열닐 것갔했고 이 모든 생각에 一毫의 허위나 手段이 없었고 나의 內定한 생각을 그대로 確信하야 疑心함이 없었고 따라서 每事에 勇氣가 나고 熱誠이 생겻습니다. 生活全體가 양심에 비치어 참말 高潔하고 活達하였었습니다. 나는 只今도 그 때 生活을 回顧하야 「어느 때에나 다시?」 하고 고요히 次機를 計劃하고 있읍니다.

20년 전= 以前의 일은 어린 때 일이니 그만두지요.


李大偉

丁丑新春= 43歲가 되겠읍니다. 基督靑年勉勵會에서 일하면서 南滿地方을 돌아볼가 합니다.
오는 해에는 海外에나 나가서 좀 있어볼가 합니다.

10년 전= 32歲이었는대 米國 예일대학에서 工夫하고 있었읍니다. 社會主義運動이 한창 소리치던 때입니다.

20년 전= 22歲였는대 中國北平 留學하다가, 中國勞工兵 通譯官으로까지 가기로 했읍니다. 靑島問題로 하야 日獨交戰에 日本이 捷勝하야 四方에서<42> 提燈行列 하든 때입니다.

30년 전= 12歲이였는대 平北 龍川에서 小學校 工夫, 新興運動 잇서 各處에서 學校를 設立하고 洋鼓喇叭 마음대로 물고 斷髮令이 나려서 나도 父母 承諾없이 單發을 하였다가 1週間이나 남의 집에서 밥을 얻어먹다싶이 하였는걸요.


徐載弼

所丁丑新春= 지금은 米國 빌라델피아市에 있읍니다. 요지음 하는 일이라고는 여러 大學을 도라다니며 講演을 하고 있읍니다. 올에 나이는 68歲외다.

10년崙 전= 은 58歲. 米國 華盛頓에 있으면서 英文雜誌를 내고 있었읍니다. 그리고 아마 各地로 遊說하고 있든 때인가 합니다.

20년 전= 48歲. 米國서 돈을 모아 朝鮮 사람 事業에 쓰느라 하였고 또 醫學搏士의 學位를 어든 뒤인지라 醫業에도 從事한 듯 하오며 世上事情은 歐洲大戰 때이기 世上이 한참 떠들석 하였읍니다.

30년 전= 川 18歲時. 米國에 亡命하여 있을 때외다. 그때 듯기에는 梁起鐸氏 등이 만히 活躍하고 있다는 消息을 故土로 오는 風便에 듯고 있었읍니다.

40년 전= 28歲時. 朝鮮에 나가서 獨立協會를 創立하고 여러 同志로 더부러 半島의 政治 文化 各方面에 改革運動을 이르킨 때이니 가장 내 自身으로도 熱이 끌튼 때로소이다. 그때 우리들은 皇城新聞도 發行하여 民權을 鼓吹하였읍니다.
아무튼 먼 故土에 이제 내가 지내온 過去 一片을 草하는 이 글을 쓰게 되매 감개가 무량하외다, 더욱 貴誌가 11月號가 아니 왔읍니다. 곧 보내주소서.<43>
<28-43>