Magazine Title: 삼천리 제9권 제1호
Publication Date: 1937년 01월 01일
Article Title: 新劇運動에 대한 나의 構圖 (My Plan for the New Drama Movement)
Author: 柳致眞 (Yu Ch'ijin), 李軒求 (Yi Hŏngu), 徐恒錫 (Sŏ Hangsŏk), 金恍燮 (Kim Kwang'sŏp)
Article Type: 설문 (Survey/Questionnaire Response)

My Plan for the New Drama Movement
Yu Ch'ijin

1. Regarding the question of whether the small theater system is effective in Chosŏn, or if the large theater system is better, or about traveling theaters, or open-air pageants... I have no detailed plan, but here are my thoughts.

a. The small theater drama (小劇場演劇) has almost become established as a distinct theatrical form in the present day—its influence is fatally embedded even in the drama I myself am involved in—but if possible, I would like to escape from the small theater style of drama. The reason is that while small theater drama is highly respectable in the sense of being a laboratory for theater, the stage conditions inherent in small theaters often feel like they have castrated the inherent vitality of drama.
It seems we should completely hand over the small-theater elements of drama to film and search for the inherent vitality that today's drama possesses.
It is a fact that in modern times, theater is being overshadowed by film. The breakthrough for this should perhaps start anew by abandoning the detrimental habits associated with the small theater system we currently have.
In this sense, I do not attach much hope to small theater drama; rather, I am one of those who oppose it. <152>

b. Therefore, ideally speaking, I would like to newly experiment with a Greek pageant (希臘의 페-젠트). In this vein, we would like to hold a grand, nationwide drama festival once a year, utilizing something like the Yŏnhŭi Professional School (延專) outdoor theater, under the banner of a "Chosŏn Drama Festival." I have discussed concrete plans for this with Mr. Ma Haesong (馬海松氏) in Tokyo, and I believe it wouldn't be too difficult if we could secure active support from some newspaper organization.

c. Regarding "pageants," they should be experimented with based on the intentions mentioned above. For theater movement centered around playhouses, adopting the large theater (大劇場) seems most appropriate.
In the large theater, we first want to reclaim the "theatricality" (演劇性) that was stripped away in the small theater. For instance, the theatrical exploration based on Meyerhold's (메이엘호리드氏) Meyerhold Theater seems to be our most ideal method.
Fortunately, we can borrow the large performance venue called Pumin'gwan (府民舘). If we refine our drama centered around this performance venue, I believe we will see new development, even from the perspective of theater theory.
Economically speaking as well, the large theater system will likely allow us to meet the demand of a large audience with lower ticket prices (料金) compared to the small theater system. Therefore, I opt for the large theater system.

d. Traveling theater (移動劇場) will likely be utilized as a wing of political movements, so I will omit discussion here.

2. To achieve financial stability for theaters or troupes, what about organizing the audience into a membership system? Are there any other ideal plans?

a. I believe a membership organization is absolutely necessary.
The reason is that organizing the audience into members not only establishes an audience network (觀客網), thereby securing financial stability for the troupe, <153> but also, I think, makes it easier to reflect the inclinations (意嚮) of the audience that the troupe embraces.

b. As for other ideal plans, one could wish for a benefactor (特志家) who understands the cultural mission of theater and contributes money, but that can only be hoped for as a fluke, so there's no need to discuss it here—.

c. First of all—
1. Someone who truly understands theater,
2. Is active,
3. Is resourceful (手腕家),
4. Has social credibility (信望).
I wish we had at least one such theater manager (劇團經理者). Then, I believe we could manage to balance the books to some extent while doing conscientious work.
Even in Tokyo, the most substantial new drama troupes generally mobilize only 5,000-6,000 audience members per performance (usually performing for 2 weeks). However, this time, the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society's tenth performance (劇藝術硏究第十*公演) mobilized 5,000-6,000 audience members over just two days (two evenings, one matinee).
Our audience does not skimp on good theater. If we can produce qualitatively good drama, the untapped virgin territory (未耕의 處女地) of the audience can be said to be limitless.
From this perspective, the future of the Chosŏn New Drama movement (朝鮮新劇體動) is relatively not despondent (落望되지 않는).

3. Regarding plans for training actors (俳優養成) and directors (演出家養成), such as an "Actor School" or "Director Association"?

a. Training actors and directors is obvious, but beyond that, specialized research (專門的 硏究) in various theater departments (stage design, lighting effects, costumes, etc.) is urgent—this seems to be the most fundamental issue.
It is a fact that without having solid specialists in each department as soon as possible, the development of the Chosŏn New Drama world (朝鮮新劇界) will be perilous.

b. So, what policy should be established for their training?
Establishing a drama school (演劇學校) (encompassing the training of actors, directors, playwrights, stage artists, musicians, etc.)? Very good. I approve.
However, even if a drama school is established, it is a useless extravagance (無用之奇物) as long as there are no theater groups capable of absorbing its graduates.

c. Therefore, while a drama school might be urgent, the most urgent thing is for us to have several (at least a few) substantial theater groups (演劇團體).
"Make the theater groups substantial. Then let's build <154> a drama school."

d. However, even if a drama school is established, the curriculum (敎材) and instructors (指導者) are currently problematic. If we try to find specialized instructors for each department of theater, we feel no small amount of deficiency (窮乏) and difficulty (困難).
Looking at the new drama circles in mainland Japan (日本內地), they lack specialized instructors in that field, so while it's called actor training, they are actually struggling greatly. In our poor circumstances, finding suitable candidates in that field seems無理 (unreasonable) in the first place.
Even if an actor school were established, we would have to be prepared (覺悟) to invite some instructors from places like Russia (露西亞), France (逸蘭西), or Germany (佛獨).

e. Therefore, my private plan (私案) for training technicians is, first, to make the theater groups economically substantial.
1. By doing so, provide them with a foundation (土臺) for living that allows them to conduct specialized research in each theater department.
2. Send the outstanding individuals among them to observe theater in China (支那), mainland Japan, and various countries in Europe and America (歐米 各 國).
3. Then, when those individuals can emerge as fully qualified specialists, it seems managing a drama school will finally become easier.

f. The above is stated from the perspective of the theater troupe, but I wish the authorities (當局) at various professional schools in Chosŏn would actively support (밧드러 주었으면) their drama departments.

4. Hopes or thoughts you wish Chosŏn writers (文士) would have regarding the New Drama movement, or plans for fostering playwrights (劇作家).

a. Not just writers, but I hope the general public (一般社會人) will more thoroughly realize (깨맛고) the aesthetic beauty of theater and its cultural mission, and actively endeavor to support the theater movement.

b. Especially writers, I hope they will write many good plays (戱曲). And I wish the literary world (文壇) would maintain a more organic, connected (連帶的) relationship.

c. To foster playwrights, those dedicated to playwriting should band together, encouraging each other to produce good works. Furthermore, I believe they must collaborate with a certain theater group and possess the sincerity, passion, and talent to lead that group with their repertoire (레파-호).
That is, playwrights must first maintain a close relationship with the group that performs their works, leading the group while simultaneously overcoming practical theatrical issues (constraints related to the stage, understanding the audience).

d. The above relates to issues concerning groups, but the key point seems to be that individuals aspiring to playwriting possess good talent, make good efforts... then there should be no problem. <155>

6. [Question 5 seems missing in the original text] Regarding patrons (돈 가진 有志) you hope would especially rise to support the New Drama movement—

a. In Chosŏn, it's impossible to know who has money and, among them, who might spend it for theater, so I cannot name anyone specifically.
However, we must first eradicate those who donate money out of impure motives (in the past, there were those who donated money after seeing female actors).
And nominating people who have no intention of donating money to please donate is also pointless, so for this cause, I hope Mr. Hong Sunŏn (洪淳彦氏) of the Tongyang Theater (東洋劇場), who has already contributed a huge sum, would take a more active interest in our theater movement (especially the movement).
Ah! There's one more person. I wish Mr. Kim Susan (金水山氏), who is said to have died, would come back to life somewhere and take charge of this movement.

a. [Re-labeled as 'a' in the original] Writers (文士), Playwrights (劇作家氏名) you hope would rise to the occasion for the New Drama movement.
I wish all writers calling themselves writers and playwrights calling themselves playwrights would fully mobilize (總動員).

b. Directors (演出家) you hope would rise to the occasion?
I hope for the rise of Messrs. Chang Kit'ae (張起悌) and Hong Haesŏng (洪海星). Besides them, I hope everyone, old and new, would show enthusiasm.

Yi Hŏngu

Regarding this entire survey, as the writer, I have expressed a few opinions, albeit minor, in the past, so I don't seem to have any particularly new ideas here. In short, to achieve the process of theater permeating daily life as quickly (時急히) as possible, rather than a sacrificial spirit, perhaps if sharp business minds (營利的 明敏한 頭腦) that accurately grasp (把持) today's cultural phenomena act boldly, a new dawn (光明) for the New Drama—nay, the theater movement—can be anticipated (豫想).

1. Given the historical origins (發生的 事實) of the small theater, it finds its life in the literary elements of drama, in the development (啓發) of new intellectual insights from ideological history or social perspectives. Therefore, it should be seen as an experimental stage for the chosen intellectual class of that era, a birthplace (發祥地) of the new spirit for a new age. However, considering the essential meaning of theater, it cannot solely possess the privilege (特權) granted (許與) only to a limited audience. Nevertheless, one cannot forget the fact that the pioneering role (先驗的 役割) of the age nurtures (배胎) the driving force of great epochal life in this small space. Thus, in the current situation of Chosŏn, rather than taking commercial risks, the small theater movement holds absolute significance in order to first solidify (鞏固히) the foundation of theater to a truly theatrical level. This does not mean that large theaters are unnecessary, but in Chosŏn, considering the choice of plays (戱曲), the actors' performances, and the nature of the audience, it can be inferred (推斷) that the sufficient conditions for their establishment are not yet met. <156>

2. If the small theater movement is necessary as the immediate task (當面한 課題) facing Chosŏn's theater movement, then the history of theater movements in both East and West teaches (敎與) the legitimacy (正當性) of naturally adopting a membership system (會員制) for the most complete economic method (經濟的 方途) of this movement and for organizing the audience base. That is, rather than people attending vaguely and indifferently, it should be composed of individuals who possess active interest and fervent support (積極的 關心과 支持의 熱誠) for the movement. Although the current Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society (劇硏) may not be fully utilizing this system, I know this organization must operate more organically and closely (有機的 으로 緊密하게) in the future.

3. First, for theater to perfectly express (完美하게 發揮) fresh artistic inspiration (生新한 藝術的 感興), it is utterly impossible without outstanding directors and performers (actors). Furthermore, for the artistic cultivation and personal improvement of actors, they must fully experience that theater is truly the highest and most difficult (最高至難) path and undergo arduous self-discipline (苦*한 刻苦) [asterisk in original], dedicating their lives to it. Therefore, it goes without saying that directors need greater and deeper extraordinary effort (非凡한 努力) and outstanding intelligence (絶倫한 聰慧) regarding life and theater itself, and an organized system (體系) for polishing (琢磨) and cultivating (涵養) the actors' spirits is desperately needed (切實히 必要하다). Thus, the first stage (第一階段) of the New Drama movement must involve the vital cultivation (산 敎養) of acting trainees (演技硏究生). As the trainee system (硏究生制度) of the past Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society is revived (復活) and, consequently, meetings for constant mutual cultivation (相互敎養을 恒常的 으로 實踐하는 會合) among performers become substantial, Chosŏn theater can possess the future potential (未來性) for development, even if just one step at a time.

3. [Re-labeled as '3' in original] Understanding the difficulty (困難) of playwriting (劇作), writers (文士되는 이는), with the effort to fully absorb (攝取) the life of theater, should naturally maintain a close relationship with the theater movement. Ireland's (愛蘭) New Drama movement, through the full expression of this spirit, even acquired the distinct characteristics of Irish literature. Not just Ireland, but if modern drama has indeed developed amidst the fervent support and solidarity (熱烈한 支持團結) of literary figures, as history's course (歷史의 行程) shows, then the attitude Chosŏn writers should adopt is largely prescribed here. The artistic characteristics (藝術的 特性) possessed by a nation can be represented by visual arts (造型美術), literature, or plays (戱曲). If Chosŏn's national character (民族性), entering the issue of its artistic disposition (藝術的 禀性問題), could be represented by theater above all else, then the proper development of Chosŏn art should be sought in theater. However, this requires more profound critical insight (批判力) and connoisseurship (鑑識力), so it cannot be asserted (論斷) in a single word. Yet, looking ahead, although the development of theater is still slight (微微), I see it as having the greatest potential for development. In this respect, Chosŏn's literary students (文學徒) need a new awareness (認識).

4. We yearn (渴望) for the appearance of individuals who recognize (認識) that the position of theater manager (演劇場 經營者 支配人) is the highest honor (最高의 榮*) [asterisk in original] among all cultural institutions. Until that time comes, we inevitably long for cultural entrepreneurs (文化的 企業家) who believe that establishing one such institution entails effort and honor greater than establishing an educational institution or a media outlet. In this regard, we eagerly await (苦待) the emergence of businesspeople (實業家) possessing sincerity comparable to those currently managing prominent (有數한) cultural institutions. <157> However, if asked who in Chosŏn today possesses the understanding (理解性) to particularly focus (着服) on this point, it is difficult to answer readily (얼는). Why (웨요)? Because theater has not yet been recognized as part of our daily lives.

5. I hope Mr. Chang Kit'ae (張起悌氏) emerges from his long silence (多年의 沈黙) and produces new plays (戱曲創作). Considering his age (年代), couldn't Mr. Yi Kwangsu (李光洙氏) harbor new ambitions (野心) for creative work?

6. Among those who possess mature acting skills (圓熟된 演技) and extraordinary talent (非凡한 手腕) but have retired (隱退) into hardship (苦難) as unfortunate souls (不運兒) of society or have turned to other paths for personal reasons (一身上 理由), and especially among the numerous emerging performers and directors discovered through student dramas and amateur plays (學生劇, 素人劇), I recommend and eagerly await (推獎待望) Messrs. Yun Paengnam (尹白南氏), Chang Kit'ae (張起悌氏), and Chŏng Insŏp (鄭寅燮氏).

Sŏ Hangsŏk

Samch'ŏlli magazine (三千里誌) requested my opinion as a newspaperman (新聞人). However, I am a member of the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society (劇藝術硏究會) and a soldier (兵卒) directly participating (直接 參加) in the movement to establish (樹立) Chosŏn's New Drama culture. For five years, I have dedicated almost all my time outside my public duties (公務 以外의 거이 全時間) to the growth of the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society (劇硏). I advocate for a "Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society First" (劇硏第一主義) approach. I believe that the Chosŏn New Drama movement is currently possible only through the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society. Even if some other group claims (標榜) to pursue an orthodox (正統的) New Drama movement, it will ultimately either align with the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society's course (코-쓰) or its claim will prove to be nothing more than a pretense (擬態) for commercial policy. Therefore, I think the Chosŏn New Drama movement can be concretely achieved (成就) by planning for (圖謀) the growth of the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society. This is my opinion as a member of the Society, and my opinion as a newspaperman coincides with this. Therefore, in the following items, I intend to state my detailed plan (腹案) with the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society in mind (念頭).

1. I think the small theater system (小劇場制) is preferable. This is considering, first, that Chosŏn theater has not yet fully completed the experimental laboratory stage (實驗室的 인 階段), and second, that even if there were just one 5,000-seat large theater (大劇場) in Kyŏngsŏng (京城), Chosŏn's largest city, and all theater enthusiasts were mobilized, it would inevitably fall into a state of closure (休業狀態) for more than half (過半) of the month. Furthermore, even with a small theater system, it should not cater only to a special audience (特殊觀客) but should occasionally attempt the selection of popular scripts (大衆的 인 劇本) and ventures into popular theaters (大衆的 인 劇場) to draw the unorganized audience (未組織觀衆) to the New Drama stage. This is understandable considering that even in a place like Kyŏngsŏng, the number of New Drama fans is insufficient to support even a single small theater. Moreover, I believe this small theater movement will progress more vigorously (活潑히 進展) if research groups (硏究團體) of like-minded theater enthusiasts, similar to the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society, and several trial performances (試演) per year exist not only in Kyŏngsŏng but also in various provincial cities (各 地方都市).

2. Organizing the audience into a membership system (會員制) <158> for the small theater to achieve financial stability is something that has been tried early on in the New Drama movements of other countries and has achieved considerable results. The Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society also established a so-called supporter system (찬助員制) and has been actively soliciting members (勸誘募集에 活演) for some time, but the collection results (수금성적) are very poor (不量), failing to achieve the desired effect. The rules (會規) state that contributions should be given before each performance, yet there are quite a few people who receive invitations to designated seats (指定席) for the performance but still don't pay their contributions even after the show. Even among personages who supposedly have an understanding of the New Drama movement, very few come to watch the performances, and even if they do, it's often only when they get free tickets (無料券). Therefore, it seems the membership system might have some degree of possibility only when based on self-interest (利害) rather than understanding (理解).

3. For training actors and directors, establishing an institution like an Art Academy (藝術學院) where not only theatrical arts but also music, dance, film, painting, etc., are taught fundamentally at first, with specialization (專攻) in various fields (各 分科) in higher years, would lead to the emergence of true stage professionals (舞臺人) in Chosŏn. Establishing such an academy would have cultural significance greater than establishing any number of secondary schools (中等學校). Yet, the perspective (眼目) of those with money seems too narrow. While people think of donating money to media outlets or educational projects if someone else has done so, trying to follow suit (追隨), it is very regrettable (遺憾) that few, or rather none, focus their attention (着眼) on new fields (新方面) like this.

4. I wish Chosŏn writers (朝鮮文士) would show more understanding (理解) towards the New Drama movement. While they might be expected to have more understanding than anyone, in reality, they are often too lacking in understanding (沒理解). To give an example, a performance by the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society is a noteworthy cultural event—this holds true even if the performance is clumsy—and for writers who present themselves (自處) as cultural figures (文化人) to overlook (看過) this fact is, to put it extremely, a disqualification (失格) as a cultural figure. Chosŏn writers should pay close attention (注視) to every performance and offer fair criticism. This is earnestly desired today not only by the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society but by all stage professionals. Furthermore, Chosŏn writers should exert more effort in playwriting (劇作方面) in the future. Nowadays, once a play (戱曲) is staged (上演), it gains more viewers (鑑賞者) than a novel or poem. Writing one play and giving it to a theater troupe is appreciated by more people than writing one novel published in a magazine with a circulation of 5,000-6,000.

6. [Question 5 seems missing again] There are quite a number of wealthy patrons (돈 가진 有志) whom I hope would especially rise to support the New Drama movement, even within the scope of my acquaintance across all of Chosŏn. I won't mention their names specifically, but they should step forward at this time and meet our expectations (期期에 副함). Does society know how much hardship (苦難) the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society (劇藝術硏究會), Chosŏn's only non-commercial (非商業主義的) New Drama movement group, has endured (격거 왔는지) during the five years since its founding? If the influential figures (有力者諸位) of this society remain unaware of these hardships and offer no assistance in the future, it would be a cruel thing. (Remainder omitted) <159>

Kim Kwang'sŏp

1. "New Drama" (新劇), in both its content and form, has a clear boundary line (確然한 境界線) drawn from traditional drama (在來의 劇). Things like interest (興味), pleasure (快樂), or being fun—these are not the central focus for attracting audiences. Rather, it starts from making certain concepts (觀念), certain consciousnesses (意識), certain enlightenments (啓蒙), or the analysis (解剖) of certain groups (集團) the main theme (主題) of the play—in any case, dealing with the various dynamics (諸動力), phenomena (諸現象), and contradictions (諸矛盾) of modern society. Therefore, in a place like Chosŏn, attracting a large mass audience (大衆을 觀衆으로 가진다는 것) is quite a difficult (困難한) task.
In other words, shall we say that the content possessed by New Drama is not yet outdated (낡어지지 안타고 할가요) enough to easily gain mass appeal (大衆性)?
Therefore, unless one nicely labels it a "New Drama movement" (일홈조케 新劇運動이라고 붓처노코) and produces commercial plays (興行劇), it cannot escape the small theater (小劇場). And large theaters (大劇場) can never be established and sustained (維持될) without exhibiting a significant degree of commercialism (興行性). Therefore, perhaps something like a revue company (레뷰사) might work in a place like Chosŏn.
Traveling theater (移動劇場), regarding the popularization of drama, is one of the tasks (課題) laid out for the theater movement that should be experimented with and paid attention to (留意) in the future, but the question is how feasible (可能할가) it is to realize it now.
As for outdoor theater (野外劇), the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society (劇藝術硏究會) has been wanting to try it out on a large scale (大大的*) [asterisk in original] for several years, but it is still under consideration (숙제중에 있음니다).
Using a place like the Yŏnhŭi Professional School outdoor stage (延禧專門學校野外場) would be most convenient, but there are some inconveniences regarding transportation (交通關係).
If possible, in a forested area (山林) with convenient transportation, fresh air, and relatively flat terrain (比較的 平坦한)—say, somewhere like behind Chungang Normal High School (中央古普 뒤) (though I don't know if permission would be granted)—admission should be free, and the script (脚本) should be something large-scale like a Greek play (希臘劇) or Romain Rolland's mass plays (로망, 로랑의 群衆劇).

2. Financial stability for a theater or troupe seems difficult to hope for unless someone considers it either a business enterprise (企業) or invests (투자) in it knowing it's a cultural project (文化事業).
The audience membership system (觀客會員制) might help somewhat (一助), but do people generally (一般이) become theater members like that? At the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society, members take responsibility, each recruiting 5 or more people who sympathize with (贊同) and understand us as supporting members (贊助會員). Although there are regrettable shortcomings (遺憾) due to geographical factors (地域上 關係) causing inconvenience for supporting members, it is generally successful. However, this is more about establishing a spiritual, organic connection (精神的 有機作用) with fellow theater enthusiasts (演劇同好人) and perhaps covering the expenses (經費支障) for each performance, rather than something that provides stability (安定). Besides this, things like audience leagues (觀客리-그) targeting professional schools or other groups, advance ticket sales (豫賣), or special offers for newspaper/magazine readers (新聞雜誌의 讀者優待)—all are beneficial (有益無害), but none provide financial stability. <160>

3. Regarding actor training (俳優養成) and director training (演出家養成), establishing an actor school or director association suddenly is difficult. The only way is to gather renowned figures (名士) in the field (斯界), establish something like a Culture Academy (文化學院), include a theater department (演劇科) within it covering creation, acting, and theory comprehensively. Additionally, something your magazine (貴社) could easily do well, like a "Theater University Lecture Series" (誌上 演劇大學講座) in its pages, would be a great contribution (寄與) to the field.

4. It might sound like I'm saying this because I'm a member (會員) of the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society, but currently, the only group talking about a "New Drama movement" (「新劇運動」 운운) in Chosŏn is the "Kyŏngyŏn" (「劇硏」). While most writers (文人) are not like this, some, if they have their own group's magazine (그룹에 雜誌), just harbor resentment (掅忌) and sling insults from the start. Considering both sides (我情彼情), I wish even reprimands (責言) could be delivered not with scorn (鼻笑) but with a tearful pen (눈물 있는 붓); then, perhaps courageous playwrights would also emerge.

5. a. It would be good enough if theater movement groups or theaters were recognized as cultural institutions (文化機關). If money were offered, I'd jump at it with bare feet (발을 벗고라도 뛰여 가겟음니다만), but does it happen like that? I hope cultural entrepreneurs like Mr. Kim Sŏngsu (金性洙氏) or Mr. Pang Ŭngmo (方應謨氏) would give some money and also pay attention (留意) to its development (發展).

6. b. [Original uses '나' which usually means 'I' or 'or', but context suggests it's re-labeling the point, similar to how '가' was used before] Do writers (文士), playwrights (劇作家), actors (俳優), directors (演出家) have that kind of money? If they had the financial resources (資力) to undertake cultural projects, our society today, thanks to this good race (善良한 種族), would possess a much higher degree (훨신 高度의 文化) of culture, or at least cultural fervor (文化熱). -(End)- <161>

**Summary**

This 1937 survey article in *Samch'ŏlli* magazine gathers opinions from four prominent figures in the Korean New Drama (Sin'gŭk) movement—Yu Ch'ijin, Yi Hŏngu, Sŏ Hangsŏk, and Kim Kwang'sŏp—on its future direction. Key debates include the merits of small versus large theaters (with Yu favoring large theaters for reclaiming "theatricality" and reaching wider audiences, while others see small theaters as essential for experimentation and foundation-building in Chosŏn's current context), the need for financial stability (advocating membership systems despite practical difficulties, and desperately hoping for philanthropic support from wealthy patrons), the urgent requirement for professional training institutions for actors, directors, and technicians (though acknowledging the severe lack of qualified instructors and resources), and the crucial role of writers in producing quality plays and engaging actively with the movement. All respondents emphasize the precarious state of New Drama, struggling with financial hardship, lack of public understanding, and insufficient infrastructure, yet they express hope for its potential if given proper support and if artists commit fully.

From a historical perspective, the article offers valuable insights into the aspirations and frustrations of Korean cultural figures operating under Japanese colonial rule. The desire to develop a modern, distinctly Korean theatrical identity (even while referencing Western models like Meyerhold or Greek pageants) is palpable. The constant struggle for funding, the lament over the lack of support from both the public and potential patrons (including specific named entrepreneurs), and the perceived indifference or even hostility from parts of the established literary world highlight the challenging environment for indigenous cultural movements. The mention of needing to potentially import instructors from Europe underscores the perceived gap between Korean aspirations and colonial realities. The explicit identification of the Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society (Kŭgyŏn) as the primary, non-commercial vehicle for the movement by Sŏ Hangsŏk and Kim Kwang'sŏp reveals the concentration of efforts and the fragility of the enterprise. The pragmatic discussions about audience development, repertoire choices (balancing artistic ideals with popular appeal), and the need for dedicated managers reflect the practical difficulties of building a sustainable cultural institution in colonized Chosŏn.

**Named Entities**

柳致眞	유치진	Yu Ch'ijin
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
東京	도쿄	Tokyo
馬海松氏	마해송씨	Ma Haesong-ssi
延專野外劇場	연전야외극장	Yŏnjŏn Open-Air Theater (Yŏnhŭi Professional School Open-Air Theater)
新聞機關	신문기관	Newspaper Organization
메이엘호리드氏	메이엘호리드씨	Meyerhold-ssi
府民舘	부민관	Pumin'gwan
劇藝術硏究	극예술연구	Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society (Kŭgyesul Yŏn'gu / Kŭgyŏn)
露西亞	노서아	Russia (Nosŏa - older transliteration)
逸蘭西	일란서	France (Illansŏ - older transliteration)
佛獨	불독	France & Germany (Puldok - abbreviation)
支那	지나	China (China - older/potentially derogatory term)
日本內地	일본내지	Japan mainland (Ilbon Naeji)
歐米 各 國	구미 각 국	Various countries in Europe and America
東洋劇場	동양극장	Tongyang Theater
洪淳彦氏	홍순언씨	Hong Sunŏn-ssi
金水山氏	김수산씨	Kim Susan-ssi
張起悌	장기제	Chang Kit'ae
洪海星	홍해성	Hong Haesŏng
李軒求	이헌구	Yi Hŏngu
愛蘭	애란	Ireland (aeran)
尹白南氏	윤백남씨	Yun Paengnam-ssi
鄭寅燮氏	정인섭씨	Chŏng Insŏp-ssi
徐恒錫	서항석	Sŏ Hangsŏk
三千里誌	삼천리지	Samch'ŏlli Magazine
劇藝術硏究會	극예술연구회	Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society (Kŭgyesul Yŏn'guhoe)
劇硏	극연	Kŭgyŏn (Abbreviation for Kyŏngsŏng Arts Research Society)
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Colonial name for Seoul)
金恍燮	김광섭	Kim Kwang'sŏp
延禧專門學校	연희전문학교	Yŏnhŭi Professional School
中央古普	중앙고보	Chungang Normal High School (Chungang Kobo)
로망, 로랑	로망, 로랑	Romain Rolland
金性洙氏	김성수씨	Kim Sŏngsu-ssi
方應謨氏	방응모씨	Pang Ŭngmo-ssi

**Glossary**

新劇運動	신극 운동	New Drama Movement
小劇場制	소극장제	Small theater system
大劇場制	대극장제	Large theater system
移動劇場	이동 극장	Traveling theater
페-젠트	페전트	Pageant
腹案	복안	Detailed plan, scheme
이럿읍니다	이렇습니다	It is like this (Older spelling)
버서나섯스면	벗어났으면	If one could escape (Older spelling)
만키	많기	Being many/much (Older spelling/dialectal)
去勢	거세	Castration
讓渡	양도	Transfer, handover
打開策	타개책	Breakthrough measure, solution
棄揚	기양	Abandoning, discarding
希腦	희랍	Greece (Likely typo for 希臘)
擧行	거행	To hold (an event)
後援	후원	Support, backing
어드면	얻으면	If one obtains/gets (Older spelling)
안울 줄 압니다	않을 줄 압니다	I think it won't be (Older spelling)
演劇性	연극성	Theatricality
奪還	탈환	Recapture, reclaim
根據하야	근거하여	Based on
練磨	연마	Refining, polishing
밋습니다	믿습니다	Believe (Older spelling)
料金	요금	Fee, charge (Japanese borrowing/usage)
需用	수용	Demand, accommodation
割愛	할애	Omit, set aside
會員組織	회원 조직	Membership organization
確立	확립	Establishment
內包	내포	Implication, inclusion; Embrace
意嚮	의향	Intention, inclination
特志家	특지가	Benefactor, philanthropist
요향	요행	Fluke, piece of luck (Older form of 요행)
手腕家	수완가	Resourceful person, person of ability
信望	신망	Trust, confidence, credibility
劇團經理者	극단 경리자	Theater troupe manager/accountant
맡습니다	믿습니다	Believe (Typo/older form for 믿습니다)
주으리지 않읍니다	주저하지 않습니다	Do not hesitate (Older spelling/form)
未耕의 處女地	미개의 처녀지	Untapped virgin territory
落望되지 않는	낙망되지 않는	Not despondent, not disappointing
俳優養成	배우 양성	Actor training
演出家養成	연출가 양성	Director training
專門的	전문적	Specialized
급하다	급하다	Urgent
맨듭시다	만듭시다	Let's make (Older spelling)
消化	소화	Digestion; Absorption (of graduates into jobs)
無用之奇物	무용지물	Useless thing, white elephant
充實한	충실한	Substantial, solid, faithful
敎材	교재	Teaching materials, curriculum
指導者	지도자	Instructor, leader
窮乏	궁핍	Poverty, deficiency
困難	곤란	Difficulty
覺悟	각오	Resolution, preparedness
私案	사안	Private plan, personal idea
土臺	토대	Foundation, basis
視察	시찰	Inspection, observation tour
經營	경영	Management, operation
當局	당국	The authorities
밧드러 주었으면	받들어 주었으면	Wish they would support/uphold (Older spelling)
文士	문사	Literary man, writer
戱曲	희곡	Play, drama script
連帶的	연대적	Joint, collective, connected
레파-호	레퍼토리	Repertoire (Loanword transliteration)
리-드	리드	Lead (Loanword transliteration)
關聯的	관련적	Related
總動員	총동원	Total mobilization
陳述	진술	Statement, testimony
浸透	침투	Permeation, infiltration
時急히	시급히	Urgently, promptly
達成	달성	Achievement, accomplishment
把持	파지	Grasping, holding firmly; Understanding
營利的	영리적	Profit-oriented, commercial
明敏	명민	Sharpness, acuity, sagacity
頭腦	두뇌	Brain, mind
光明	광명	Bright light, dawn, hope
豫想	예상	Expectation, anticipation
發生的	발생적	Related to origin/genesis
思想史的	사상사적	Related to the history of thought
啓發	계발	Development, enlightenment
選擇된	선택된	Chosen, selected
發祥地	발상지	Birthplace, cradle
許與	허여	Granting, bestowing
特權	특권	Privilege
先驗的	선험적	A priori, transcendental; Pioneering
役割	역할	Role
배胎	잉태	Conception, gestation (Figurative)
鞏固히	공고히	Solidly, firmly
推斷	추단	Inference, deduction
當面한	당면한	Facing, immediate
課題	과제	Task, problem, issue
方途	방도	Method, means, way
正當性	정당성	Legitimacy, validity
敎與	교여	Teaching, instruction
積極的	적극적	Active, positive
支持	지지	Support
熱誠	열성	Zeal, fervor, enthusiasm
緊密하게	긴밀하게	Closely, tightly
生新한	생신한	Fresh, new
感興	감흥	Inspiration, artistic urge
完美하게	완미하게	Perfectly, flawlessly
發揮	발휘	Display, demonstration (of skill)
至難	지난	Extremely difficult
刻苦	각고	Painstaking effort, self-discipline
聰慧	총혜	Intelligence, wisdom
琢磨	탁마	Polishing, refining (skills, spirit)
涵養	함양	Cultivation, fostering (character, ability)
體系	체계	System
切實히	절실히	Keenly, acutely, desperately
階段	계단	Stage, phase; Stairs
復活	부활	Revival, resurrection
恒常的	항상적	Constant, regular
實踐	실천	Practice, implementation
會合	회합	Meeting, gathering
未來性	미래성	Future potential
攝取	섭취	Intake, absorption
團結	단결	Unity, solidarity
行程	행정	Course, process, itinerary (of history)
造型美術	조형 미술	Plastic arts, formative arts
禀性	품성	Disposition, nature
批判力	비판력	Critical insight, power of criticism
鑑識力	감식력	Connoisseurship, discernment
論斷	논단	Judgment, decisive statement
認識	인식	Recognition, awareness, perception
支配人	지배인	Manager
榮譽	영예	Honor, glory
施設	시설	Establishment, institution; Facility
企業家	기업가	Entrepreneur
渴望	갈망	Yearning, craving
有數한	유수한	Prominent, leading
着服	착복	Appropriation; Focusing on (Figurative)
理解性	이해성	Capacity for understanding
얼는	얼른	Quickly, readily (Older spelling)
沈黙	침묵	Silence
年代	연대	Age, era
野心	야심	Ambition
圓熟된	원숙된	Matured, perfected
非凡한	비범한	Extraordinary, uncommon
不運兒	불운아	Unlucky person, unfortunate child
苦難	고난	Hardship, suffering
隱退	은퇴	Retirement
一身上	일신상	Personal (reasons)
素人劇	소인극	Amateur play (Soin'gŭk, possibly from Japanese 'shirouto')
推獎	추장	Recommendation, commendation
待望	대망	Eagerly awaited, long-expected
新聞人	신문인	Newspaperman, journalist
樹立	수립	Establishment
參加	참가	Participation
兵卒	병졸	Private soldier, foot soldier
公務	공무	Public duty, official business
以外	이외	Outside of, besides
거이	거의	Almost, nearly (Older spelling)
第一主義	제일주의	Principle of putting something first
正統的	정통적	Orthodox, legitimate
標榜	표방	Claiming, advocating
結局	결국	After all, in the end
코-쓰	코스	Course (Loanword)
擬態	의태	Mimicry, pretense
成就	성취	Achievement, accomplishment
圖謀	도모	Planning, scheming
念頭	염두	Mind, consideration
實驗室的	실험실적	Experimental, laboratory-like
修了	수료	Completion (of a course/stage)
過半	과반	Majority, more than half
休業	휴업	Temporary closure (of business)
特殊觀客	특수 관객	Special audience
大衆的	대중적	Popular, mass
進出	진출	Advance, venture into
未組織觀衆	미조직 관객	Unorganized audience
同好者	동호자	Person with the same hobby/interest, enthusiast
試演	시연	Trial performance, preview
活潑히	활발히	Actively, vigorously
進展	진전	Progress, development
찬助員制	찬조원제	Supporter system
勸誘募集	권유 모집	Solicitation and recruitment
活演	활연	Active performance; Active effort (in context)
수금성적	수금 성적	Collection results (for money)
不量	불량	Poor, bad, deficient (Older usage, now 불량하다)
會規	회규	Membership rules/bylaws
指定席	지정석	Reserved seat
招待	초대	Invitation
無料券	무료권	Free ticket/coupon
利害	이해	Interests (benefit and harm), stakes
學院	학원	Academy, institute
基礎的	기초적	Fundamental, basic
高學年	고학년	Upper grades/years (in school)
分科	분과	Branch, department, section
專攻	전공	Major, specialization
中等學校	중등 학교	Secondary school
眼目	안목	Perspective, discerning eye
追隨	추수	Following suit, emulating
新方面	신방면	New field, new area
着眼	착안	Focusing one's attention
遺憾	유감	Regret
沒理解	몰이해	Lack of understanding
自處	자처	Presenting oneself as, claiming to be
看過	간과	Overlooking, disregarding
失格	실격	Disqualification
注視	주시	Paying close attention, watching carefully
切實히	절실히	Earnestly, keenly
上演	상연	Staging, performance (of a play)
鑑賞者	감상자	Appreciator, viewer, audience member
唯一	유일	Only, sole
非商業主義的	비상업주의적	Non-commercial
期期에 副함	기대에 부응함	Meeting expectations (Older phrasing)
격거 왔는지	겪어 왔는지	Whether one has experienced/endured (Older spelling)
在來	재래	Traditional, conventional
境界線	경계선	Boundary line
興味	흥미	Interest
快樂	쾌락	Pleasure
觀念	관념	Concept, idea, notion
意識	의식	Consciousness, awareness
啓蒙	계몽	Enlightenment
集團	집단	Group, collective
解剖	해부	Dissection, analysis
動力	동력	Motive force, power, dynamics
現象	현상	Phenomenon
矛盾	모순	Contradiction
主題	주제	Theme, subject
大衆性	대중성	Popular appeal, mass appeal
낡어지지 안타고 할가요	낡아지지 않았다고 할까요	Shall we say it hasn't become old-fashioned? (Older spelling/phrasing)
일홈조케	이름 좋게	Nicely named, well-labeled (Older spelling)
興行劇	흥행극	Commercial play
레뷰사	레뷔 회사	Revue company (Loanword + Hanja)
留意	유의	Paying attention, bearing in mind
베프러진	베풀어진	Given, laid out (Older spelling)
현실화	현실화	Realization, making real
大大的*	대대적	On a large scale (* likely indicates emphasis)
숙제중	숙제 중	Under consideration ('homework' stage)
交通關係	교통 관계	Transportation situation/matters
平坦한	평탄한	Flat, level
山林	산림	Forest, woods
希臘劇	희랍극	Greek play
群衆劇	군중극	Mass play, crowd play
投資	투자	Investment
一助	일조	Help, assistance, contribution
一般이	일반이	The general public (Older particle usage)
贊同	찬동	Approval, sympathy, agreement
地域上	지역상	Geographically, regarding location
不備	불비	Incompleteness, inadequacy
精神的 有機作用	정신적 유기 작용	Spiritual organic function/connection
經費支障	경비 지장	Expense hindrance; Covering expenses
리-그	리그	League (Loanword)
豫賣	예매	Advance sale/booking
讀者優待	독자 우대	Reader preferential treatment/discount
斯界	사계	This field, this world (e.g., the literary world)
名士	명사	Renowned figure, celebrity
誌上 講座	지상 강좌	Lecture series in a magazine
寄與	기여	Contribution
운운	운운	Et cetera, and so on (quoting speech/claims)
그룹	그룹	Group (Loanword)
雜誌	잡지	Magazine
掅忌	청기	Resentment, ill will (Less common Hanja)
我情彼情	아정피정	Considering both sides' feelings ('my feelings, his feelings')
責言	책언	Reprimand, rebuke
鼻笑	비소	Scornful laugh, sneer
發展	발전	Development
資力	자력	Financial resources, means
善良한 種族	선량한 종족	Good/virtuous race/people
훨신	훨씬	Much more (Older spelling)
高度	고도	High degree


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제9권 제1호
발행일	1937년 01월 01일
기사제목	新劇運動에 대한 나의 構圖
기사형태	설문

新劇運動에 대한 나의 構圖
柳致眞

1. 朝鮮에서 小劇場制가 効果的이냐? 大劇場制가 좋을까? 또는 移動劇場, 野外 페-젠트에 대한...腹案은 없느냐?는 質問에 대해서는 이럿읍니다.

가. 小劇場演劇이란 것은 그것으로써 한 演劇形式이 構成되다십히 되어 있는 現在-내 自身이 하고 있는 演劇에도 그 小劇場의 影響이 致命的 으로 못백혀 있읍니다마는 될 수만 있으면 小劇場式演劇에서 버서나섯스면 합니다. 그 이유는 小劇場演劇이란 演劇의 한 實驗室이란 意味에서는 매우 尊敬할 바 있으나 小劇場이 가지는 그 舞臺的 條件이 演劇의 그 本然的 生命을 去勢시킨 감이 만키 때문입니다.
演劇이 가지는 小劇場的 要素는 完全히 映畵에다가 讓渡시켜 버리고 今日의 演劇이 가지는 바 그의 本然的 生命을 차저야 할 것 갔읍니다.
現代에 있어서 연극이 映畵에 눌려 있는 것은 事實입니다. 여기 대한 打開策은 現在 우리가 가진 小劇場的 惡弊를 棄揚하는데서 새로히 出發되어야 할 것이 아닌가 함니다.
이런 意味에서 나는 小劇場演劇에 대해서는 별 希望을 부치지 안코 오히려 反對하는 자의 하나입니다.<152>
나. 그럼으로 理想的 으로 말하면 希腦의 페-젠트를 한 번 새로히 試驗해보고 십습니다. 이런 意味에서 우리는 「朝鮮演劇祭」라는 것을 가지고 延專野外劇場가튼 것을 利用하야 年1次의 全鮮的 인 大演劇祭를 擧行해보고 십습니다. 이에 대한 具體案은 東京서 馬海松氏와 이야기 해 본 일이 있지마는 어떤 新聞機關의 積極的 後援만 어드면 그다지 어럽지 안울 줄 압니다.
다. 「페-젠트」에 대해서는 以上과 같은 意圖에서 試驗될 것이오. 劇場中心의 演劇運動은 大劇場을 취하는 것이 가장 좋을 듯 함니다.
大劇場에서 위선 우리는 小劇場에서 剝奪 당한 「演劇性」을 奪還해보고 십습니다. 예컨댄 「메이엘호리드」氏의 메이올호리드 劇場을 根據하야 活動하는 演劇探求가 가장 우리의 理想的 인 方法인가 합니다.
마츰 우리는 府民舘이란 大演劇舞場을 빌려쓸 수 있읍니다. 이 演舞場 中心으로 장차 우리의 演劇을 練磨시키면 演劇論的 見地에서라도 우리의 새로운 發展이 있을 것을 밋습니다.
經濟的 으로 말하야도 小劇場制로 하는 것보다 大劇場로 하는 것이 싼 料金으로 많은 觀客의 需用에 응할 수 있을 것입니다. 그럼으로 나는 大劇場制를 취합니다.
라. 移動劇場은 政治的 運動의 一翼으로 利用될 것임으로 여기에서는 割愛합니다.
2. 劇場 又는 劇團의 財政安定을 얻기 위하야 觀客을 會員組織으로 함이 如何? 그 박게 무슨 理想案은?
가. 會員組織은 絶對로 必要할 줄 생각합니다.
그 理由는 觀客을 會員組織으로 하여 놓으면 그 덕으로 觀客網이 確立되어서<153> 劇團의 財政的 安定을 얻을 수 있음은 물론이려니와 그 劇團이 內包하는 바 觀客의 意嚮을 反映시키기 쉬울 것인줄 생각하는 까닭입니다.
나. 그 박게 理想案은 누구나 演劇의 文化的 使命을 理解하고 돈을 내어주는 特志家가 있었으면 허나 그런 것은 요향으로나 바랠 것이니 여기서는 말할 여지도 없고-.
다. 위선-
1. 참된 演劇을 理解하고
2. 活動的 이오.
3. 手腕家요.
4. 社會的 信望이 있는
이러한 劇團經理者나마 한 사람 있서 주었으면 합니다. 그러면 우리가 良心的 일을 하면서라도 어느 程度까지의 收支를 마처볼 수 있으리라고 맛습니다.
東京의 가장 充實한 新劇團이라도 大槪 한 公演에 動員되는 觀衆이 5, 6천名(普通 2週日間 公演) 밖에 않되는데 이번 劇藝術硏究第十*公演에서는 二日間(이틀은 밤. 그 中 하로는 낮) 公演에 5, 6천名의 觀客이 動員되였읍니다.
우리 觀客은 좋은 演劇에 여간 주으리지 않읍니다. 우리가 質的 으로 좋은 演劇만 할 수 있으면 觀客의 未耕의 處女地는 無限하다 하겟읍니다.
이 점으로 보면 朝鮮新劇體動의 前途는 比較的 落望되지 않는 것입니다.
3. 俳優養成, 演出家養成을 위한 「俳優學校」 「演出家協會」등에 대한 腹案如何?
가. 俳優 演出家는 물론이지마는 其外에도 演劇 各 部門(舞臺裝飾, 照明効果, 衣裳 등)에 대한 專門的 硏究가 급하다는 것은 가장 根本的 인 問題일까 합니다.
各 部門의 堅實한 專門家를 하로라도 빨리 가지지 않고는 朝鮮新劇界는 그 發展이 위태할 것은 事實입니다.
나. 그러면 그 養成에 대해서는 어떤 方針을 세워야 할 것인지?
演劇學校(俳優, 演出家, 劇作家, 舞臺美術家, 音樂家 등 養成을 全部 包含함)의 創立? 매우 좋읍니다. 찬성입니다.
그러나 演劇學校를 創立한대도 위선 그 卒業生을 消化시킬만한 演劇團體가 없는 이상 그것은 無用之奇物입니다.
다. 그러니까 演劇學校도 급하겟지마는 第一 급한 것은 充實한 演劇團體를 우리가 몃 개(적어도 몃 개) 가저야 할 것입니다.
「演劇團體를 充實히 해라. 그 다음에 演劇學校를<154> 맨듭시다.
다. 그러나 演劇學校가 된대두 지금 現狀으로 敎材와 指導者가 問題입니다. 演劇 各 部 내의 專門指導者를 구하자면 우리는 여간 큰 窮乏과 困難을 느끼는 것이 아닙니다.
日本內地의 新劇界를 보아도 그 方面의 專門指導者가 없어서 이름은 俳優養成이지마는 事實은 대단히 쩔쩔매고 있는 形便인데 우리 같은 궁한 살림에 그 方面에 대한 適任者를 구하는 것이 첫재 無理일까 합니다.
俳優學校를 創立한대도 指導者의 一部分은 露西亞나 逸蘭西佛獨같은데서 모셔올 覺悟를 해야 할 것입니다.
라. 그럼으로 技術者養成에 대한 나의 私案은 위선 演劇團體를 經濟的 으로 充實히 할 것.
1. 그리하야 그 團體를 하여금 演劇 各 部門에 대하야 專門的 으로 硏究할 수 있을만한 生活的 土臺를 만들어 줄 것.
2. 그 중에서 憂秀한 者를 支那, 日本內地, 歐米 各 國의 演劇을 視察시킬 것.
3. 그리하야 그 분들이 充分한 專門家로써 나설 수 있을 적에 그때 비로소 演劇學校의 經營도 쉬울 것 갔읍니다.
마. 以上은 劇團中心으로 말한 것이지마는 나는 朝鮮 各 專門學校演劇部를 學校當局에서 좀 積極的 으로 밧드러 주었으면 합니다.
4. 朝鮮文士들이 新劇運動에 대하여 가저주었으면 하고 생각되는 希望, 혹은 劇作家의 輩出을 위한 案.
가. 文人뿐 아니라 一般社會人께서도 演劇의 演劇美와 演劇의 文化的 使命을 좀 더 철저히 깨맛고 演劇運動에 積極的 援助를 꾀하여 주었으면 합니다.
나. 특히 文人께서는 좋은 戱曲을 만히 써 주었으면 합니다. 그리고 文壇은 좀 더 有機的 으로 連帶的 關係를 가저 주었으면 합니다.
다. 劇作家輩出를 위하여서는 劇作에 힘쓰는 분이 한 덩어리가 되어서 좋은 作品이 나오게 서로 激勵할 것은 물론이려니와 어느 劇團體와 서로 짜고 그의 레파-호로써 그 劇團體를 리-드해 나갈만한 誠意와 熱情과 才質을 가지지 않으면 않될 줄 암니다.
즉 劇作家는 위선 自己作品이 상연되는 團體와 密接한 關係를 가지면서 그 團體를 리-드하는 同時에 演劇의 實際的 問題 (舞臺에 대한 구속, 觀衆에 대한 理解)를 극복하지 않으면 안될 것인줄 암니다.
라. 以上은 團體와의 關聯的 問題이고 要는 劇作을 希望하는 개개인이 좋은 天才를 가지고 좋은 努力을 하고... 그러면 문제없을 것 갔읍니다.<155>
6. 新劇運動을 위하야 특히 궐기하여주기를 바라는가, 돈 가진 有志-
가. 朝鮮서 누가 돈을 가젓스면 그 중에 누가 演劇을 위해 돈을 쓸 사람인지 알 수 없으니 指名할 수 없읍니다.
그러나 不純한 動機에서 돈을 내는 사람(過去에는 女俳優를 보고 돈을 내는 者가 있었으니까) 맨처음 그런 者를 撲滅하지 않으면 안되겟읍니다.
그리고 돈 낼 생각도 없는 사람에게 돈을 내줍시사고 指名하는 것도 싱거운 일이니 나는 이 일을 위해서 巨資를 이미 내신 東洋劇場의 洪淳彦氏나마 우리 演劇運動(특히 運動)에 좀 더 積極的 關心을 가저주었으면 합니다.
참! 또 한 분 있읍니다. 죽었다는 金水山氏가 어듸서 살어와서 이 運動을 마터 주었으면 합니다.
가. 新劇運動을 위하야 궐기하여 주었으면 하는 文士, 劇作家氏名.
文士라는 文士 劇作家라는 劇作家가 總動員하여 주었으면 좋겟읍니다.
나. 궐기를 바라는 演出家는?
張起悌, 洪海星, 兩氏의 궐기를 바랍니다. 그 외에 舊新人을 물론하고 熱을 내주었으면 합니다.

李軒求

이번 說問 全般에 대해서는 微微하나마 筆者로서 過去에 몃 개의 意見을 陳述한 바 있었기에 특히 여기 새로운 構想이 없을 듯하다. 요컨대 演劇이 日常生活에까지 浸透되는 過程을 可及的 時急히 達成하기 위하야는 위선 犧牲的 精神이라기 보담도 오늘의 文化現象을 正確히 把持하는 營利的 明敏한 頭腦가 대담스러히 活動한다면 新劇-乃至 演劇運動의 새로운 光明이 豫想될 것이 아닐까?
1. 小劇場이란 그 劇場의 發生的 事實로 보아 연극의 文學的 要素, 思想思的 又는 社會的 새로운 지성의 啓發에서 그 生命을 찾게 되는 까닭에 그는 그 時代에서 選擇된 知識層의 實驗舞臺요, 새로운 時代의 새 精神의 發祥地로 볼 것이다. 그러나 演劇의 本質的 意義로 보아서는 결코 演劇이 국한된 觀衆에게 許與되는 特權만을 가질 수는 것이다. 그러타고 時代의 先驗的 役割이 이 적은 공간에서 偉大한 時代的 生命의 原動力을 배胎식히는 事實을 忘却할 수 없으니 朝鮮의 現下情勢로서는 興行的 모險보다도 眞實로 演劇을 演劇다운 地帶에까지 그 基礎를 鞏固히 하기 위하야 위선 小劇場運動이 절대의 意義를 가질 것이다. 그러타고 大劇場이 不必要하다는 것은 아니로되 朝鮮에 있어서는 大劇場은 그 戱曲의 選擇과 俳優의 演技와 觀客層의 性質로 보아 아직은<156> 成立될 充分한 條件을 가지지 못하였다고 推斷된다.
2. 朝鮮의 演劇運動이 당면한 課題로써 小劇場運動이 必要하다면 이 運動의 가장 完全한 經濟的 方途와 또는 觀客層의 組織에 있어서 當然히 會員制로 되어야 할 것은 東西洋演劇運動史가 그 正當性을 敎與하고 있다. 즉 막연히 無關心하게구 오는 것보다도 그 運動에 대하야 積極的 關心과 支持의 熱誠을 가진 人員으로써 構成되어야 할 것이다. 現在劇硏은 이 制度를 十分利用은 못할망정 앞으로도 이 組織이 더 有機的 으로 緊密하게 運行되어야 할 줄 안다.
3. 위선 演劇은 그것이 生新한 藝術的 感興을 完美하게 發揮하기 위하야는 우수한 演出家와 演技者(俳優)를 가지지 아니하면 도저히 不可能하다. 더욱 俳優의 藝術的 교양과 人格的 向上을 위하여는 단연 演劇이란 실로 最高至難의 길이라는 것을 충분히 體驗하고 이를 위하야 生命을 바치는 苦*한 刻苦가 있어야 한다. 그러므로 演出家의 더 크고 더 깊은 人生에 대한 또 演劇自體에 대한 非凡한 努力과 絶倫한 聰慧가 있어야 할 것은 물론이요 演技者의 心靈을 琢磨하고 涵養하는 體系있는 機關이 切實히 必要하다. 그래서 新劇運動의 第一階段으로 演技硏究生의 산 敎養이 있지 않으면 안된다. 過去 劇硏의 硏究生制度의 復活과 따라서 演技者間의 상호敎養을 恒常的 으로 實踐하는 會合이 充實해짐에 따라 朝鮮의 演劇은 하한거름이라도 發展될 未來性을 가질 수 있는 것이다.
3. 劇作의 困難은 理解하며 演劇의 生命을 充分히 攝取하랴는 努力을 가지고 文士되는 이는 당연히 演劇運動과 密接한 關係를 가저야 한다. 愛蘭의 新劇運動은 이 精神의 充分한 發揮에서 愛蘭文學의 特殊性까지를 띄이게 되였다. 愛蘭뿐 아니라 近代劇은 실로 文學者間의 熱烈한 支持團結속에서 發展되여 왔음이 歷史의 行程이였다면 朝鮮의 文士로서 취할 바 態度도 여기 다분히 規定될 것이다. 한 民族의 가지는 바 藝術的 特性은 그것이 造型美術로 代表될 수도 있고 文學으로 代表될 수도 있고 또 戱曲으로 代表될 수도 있다. 만일 朝鮮의 民族性이 그 藝術的 禀性問題에 드러가 무었보다도 演劇으로 代表될 수 있다면 朝鮮藝術의 正當한 發展은 演劇에서 차저야 될 것이다. 그러나 여기에는 좀 더 深刻한 批判力과 鑑識力을 必要로 하기에 一言으로써 이를 論斷될 수 없으나 이 앞으로 演劇의 發展은 아직 微微하기는 하나마 가장 發展된 可能性을 가젓다고 본다. 이 점에서 朝鮮의 文學徒는 새로운 認識이 있어야 할 것이다.
4. 演劇場 經營者 支配人이라는 地位가 모든 文化機關의 最高의 榮*라는 것을 認識하는 人士가 出現되기를 바라며 그러케 되는 때까지 한 개의 敎育機關이라거나 言論機關을 施設하는 以上의 苦心과 명예가 오리라고 確信하는 文化的 企業家가 必然的 으로 渴望된다. 이런 점에서 現在 有數한 文化機關을 經營하는 이에 지지 아니하는 성의를 가진 實業家의<157> 出現을 苦待하거니와 오늘 朝鮮에 있어서 그 누가 특히 이 점에 着服할 理解性을 가젓느냐 하면 얼는 對答하기 困難하다. 웨요? 演劇은 아직도 우리 日常生活의 一部와 같이 認識되지 못 하였으니까.
5. 張起悌氏가 그의 多年의 沈黙에서 뛰여나와 새로운 戱曲創作이 있기를 바란다. 李光洙氏는 그의 年代로 보아 創作에 대한 새로운 野心을 가질 수 있지 않을까?
6. 圓熟된 演技와 非凡한 手腕을 가지고도 社會의 不運兒로 苦難속에 隱退되거나 또는 一身上 理由로 다른 길로 轉向한 이들 중 특히 幾多의 學生劇, 素人劇에서 發見된 數多한 新進 演技者와 演出家로써 尹白南氏, 張起悌氏, 鄭寅燮氏를 推獎待望한다.

徐恒錫

三千里誌는 나에게 新聞人으로서의 意見을 要求하였다. 그러나 나는 劇藝術硏究會의 일원으로서 朝鮮의 新劇文化樹立運動에 直接 參加하여 있는 한 兵卒이다. 나는 5개년 동안 나의 公務 以外의 거이 全時間을 劇硏의 成長을 위하야 바처왔다. 나는 劇硏第一主義로 나가고 있다. 朝鮮의 新劇運動은 現在에 있어서는 오직 劇硏을 통하여서만 可能하다고 나는 보고 있다. 다른 어떤 團體가 있어 正統的 인 新劇運動을 標榜한다 할지라도 그것은 結局 劇硏의 코-쓰와 일치하거나 그러치 아니하면 그 標榜은 한개의 商業政策的 擬態에 지나지 안는 것이 되고 말리라. 그러므로 朝鮮의 新劇運動은 具體的 으로는 劇硏의 成長을 圖謀함으로써 成就된다고 나는 생각한다. 이것은 劇硏人으로서의 나의 意見인 同時에 新聞人으로서의 意見도 여기에 일치한다. 그러므로 다음의 各 項에 있어서 나는 劇硏을 念頭에 두고 나의 腹案을 말하려 한다.

1. 小劇場制가 좋을까 한다. 이것은 우선 朝鮮의 演劇이 아직도 實驗室的 인 階段을 완전히 修了하지 못하였다는 점과 설사 朝鮮의 최대도시인 京城에 5,000인 級의 大劇場이 단 하나만 있다 하고 연극류의 愛好者를 總動員시킨다 할지라도 한달의 過半은 休業狀態에 빠질 수 밖에 없으리라는 점을 생각하고서 하는 말이다. 그러고 小劇場制라 할지라도 特殊觀客만을 상대로 할 것이 아니라 때로 大衆的 인 劇本의 選擇과 大衆的 인 劇場에의 進出을 試驗하야 未組織觀衆을 新劇舞臺 앞으로 끌어 오도록 하여야 하겟다. 이것은 京城 같은 곳에서도 新劇팬의 수는 단 하나의 小劇場을 支持하기에도 넉넉지 못함을 보아서 수긍되는 일이다. 그러고 이 小劇場制의 運動은 京城뿐만 아니라 各 地方都市에 있어서도 劇硏과 같은 演劇 同好者끼리의 硏究團體와 年數回의 試演이 있으면 더욱 活潑히 進展될 줄로 생각한다.
2. 小劇場이 財政的 安定을 얻기 위하야 觀客을 會員制로<158> 組織하는 것은 다른 나라의 新劇運動에 있어서 일즉부터 試驗한 일이오. 상당한 成果는 얻은 일인지라 劇硏에서도 소위 찬助員制를 두어 가지고 얼마 전부터 勸誘募集에 活演하여오지마는 수금성적이 대단 불량하야 소기의 효과를 얻지 못하고 있다. 會規에는 찬조금은 매 공연 전에 주기로 되어 있건만 공연시에 指定席의 招待를 받고도 찬助金은 公演 후에도 잘 내지 안는 사람이 더러 있다. 소위 新動運動에 理解를 갖는다는 人士로도 公演시에 구경을 와주는 이가 극히 적고 설사 온다 할지라도 無料券이나 생긴 때에 한함을 흔히 본다. 그러므로 會員制는 理解의 우에 세울 것이 아니라 利害의 우에 세운 때에만 어느 정도의 可能性이 있을 것 같다.
3. 俳優養成, 演出家養成을 위하야 藝術學院 같은 機關을 두고 演劇術뿐만 아니라 音樂, 舞踊, 映畵, 繪畵 등에 관한 것까지를 우선 基礎的 으로 배우게 하고 高學年에 이르러 각 分科를 專攻하도록 하면 朝鮮의 참된 舞臺人의 輩出을 볼 것이며 이러한 學院 하나를 設立함은 여간 中等學校 하나 設立한 것 以上의 文化的 意義가 있을 줄로 안다. 그러컨만 돈 가진 이들의 眼目은 너무도 좁은 것 같다. 누가 言論機關에나 敎育事業에 돈을 내었다면 自己도 또 그러한 것에 돈을 내어서 거기에 追隨하여 볼까 하는 생각들은 하면서 이와 같은 新方面에 着眼하는 이가 적은 것은 아니 없는 것은 매우 遺憾이다.
4. 朝鮮文士들은 新劇運動에 좀 더 理解를 가저 주었으면 한다. 누구보다도 理解를 가젓음즉 하면서도 事實에 있어서는 너무도 沒理解하다. 일례를 될면 劇硏의 公演이 있다는 것은 한 개의 注目할 만한 文化的 事實이 어늘- 이것은 그 演劇이 서투르면 서투른대로라도 그러하다- 文化人으로서 自處하는 文人들이 이 事實을 看過하는 것은 極言하면 文化人으로서의 失格이다. 朝鮮의 文人은 마땅히 公演이 있을 적마다 이를 注視하야 정당한 批判을 나리어야 한다. 이것은 오늘날 劇硏뿐만 아니라 일반 舞臺人들의 切實히 바라는 바이다. 또 朝鮮의 文人들은 今後 劇作方面에 많이 注力하여 주어야 하겟다. 오늘날은 벌서 戱曲은 舞臺에 上演되기만 하면 小說이나 詩보다도 더 많은 鑑賞者를 가지게 되어있다. 小說 한 편을 써서 5,6干部나가는 雜誌에 실리는 이보다는 戱曲 한 편을 써서 어느 劇團에 주는 편이 더 많은 사람에게 鑑賞된다.
6. 新劇運動을 위하야 특히 궐기하여 주기를 바라는 돈 가진 有志는 내가 아는 範圍에서도 전 朝鮮에 상당히 만히 있다. 구테어 그 氏名을 들지 안커니와 이 때에 있서나와 우리들의 期期에 副함이 있어주어야 하겟다. 朝鮮의 唯一의 非商業主義的 인 新劇運動團體 劇藝術硏究會가 創立以後 5개년동안에 얼마나 많은 苦難을 격거 왔는지 안는가. 이대도록 이 社會의 有力者諸位가 그 苦難을 몰라주고 앞으로도 援助가 없으려 한다면 殘忍한 일이다. (下略)<159>

金恍燮

1. 「新劇」이란 그 內容으로나 形式으로나 在來의 劇과는 確然한 境界線이 서 있음니다. 興味라던지 快樂이라던지 또는 재미있다는-이러한 것이 觀衆을 끄으는 中心이 안이고 었더한 觀念 었더한 意識 었더한 啓蒙 또한 었더한 集團에 이 解剖 등-如何턴 近代社會의 諸動力 諸現象 諸矛盾을 劇의 主題로 함에서 出發한 것인것만큼 朝鮮같은 데서 많은 大衆을 觀衆으로 가진다는 것은 퍽으나 困難한 일임니다.
다시 말하면 新劇이란 그 가진바 內容이 아직도 大衆性을 가지기 어려울만치 낡어지지 안타고 할가요.
그러므로 일홈조케 新劇運動이라고 붓처노코 興行劇을 한다면 모르거니와 그러치 않은 한 小劇場을 버서날 수가 없음니다. 그리고 大劇場이란 언제던지 興行性을 多分히 發揮하지 안코 成立되고 維支될 수 없는 것임니다. 그러므로 朝鮮같은 데서는 레뷰사하면 될런지요.
移動劇場은 演劇의 普及에 있어서 將次試驗하며 그 方面에 留意하여할 劇運動에 베프러진 課題의 하나이지만 현실화하기에 얼마나 可能할가가 問題갔음니다.
그리고 野外劇에 있어서는 劇藝術硏究會에서 여러 해 전부터 大大的*로 한 번 試驗해보고 저 하면서도 只今 숙제중에 있음니다.
延禧專門學校野外場 같은 것을 쓰는 것이 第一 편하겟으나 交通關係가 多少 불편한 점이 있음니다.
될 수 있으면 交通이 편하고 空氣가 맑고 比較的 平坦한 山林속- 말하자면 中央古普 뒤 같은 곳-(이것은 허가가 될지 몰으겟음니다만)에서 入場은 無料로 하고 脚本은 規模가 큰 希臘劇이나 로망, 로랑의 群衆劇 같은 것이 좋을 것임니다.
2. 劇場 또는 劇團이 財政的 安定이라는 것은 그것을 企業으로 알던지 혹은 文化事業으로 알고 투자하지 안는 以上 바라기 어려운 일인가 함니다.
觀客會員制도 一助가 되기는 하겟지만 一般이 그러케 演劇의 會員의 돼줌니까.? 劇 藝術硏究會에서는 會員이 責任지고 한사람이 5명이상 우리에게 贊同하여주며 理解하여 주시는 분으로 贊助會員을 募集하야 地域上 關係로 贊助會員에게 혹시 不備한 점이 만케 되는 遺憾은 있으나 大體로 成功은 함니다. 하나 이것은 財政的 安定이라는 것보다 우리와 精神的 有機作用을 가질만한 演劇同好人을 었자는 것과 또 하나는 每回의 公演에 대하야 經費支障이나 좀 면하여 보자는 것이요. 무슨 安定을 바라리만큼 한 것은 못 됨니다. 이 밖에 專門學校나 기타의 集團에 대하야 觀客리-그 組織같은 것 그 外 豫賣 혹은 新聞雜誌의 讀者優待같은 것- 다 有益無害한 것이나 財政的 安定性까지 있는 것은 못됨니다.<160>
3. 俳優養成 演出家養成에 있어서는 俳優學校나 演出家協會같은 것은 갑작이 되기 어려운 일이요 오직 斯界의 名士를 모다 文化學院같은 것을 세우고 그 속에 演劇科를 두어 創作, 演技, 理論方面을 종合하는 以外에 貴社에서 능히 잘 할 수 있는 誌上 演劇大學講座같은 것을 하면 斯界에 대한 않은 寄與가 될 것임니다.
4. 내가 劇藝術硏究會의 會員이라고 해서 하는 말 같을런지 모르겟으나 只今 朝鮮서 「新劇運動」 운운하는 團體로는 「劇硏」 하나뿐인 바 文人가운데의 大部分은 그러치 안치만 었던 분은 自己들 그룹에 雜誌같은 것이 있으면 그냥 첨부터 掅忌하며 욕만 하는 이가 각금 있음니다. 我情彼情이라고 責言이라도 鼻笑않이고 눈물 있는 붓으로 하여주면 좋겟고 그러면 또 한편 勇氣있는 劇作家도 나올 것임니다.
5. 가 演劇運動團體 혹은 늑場을 文化機關으로 알어 주시기만해도 좋겟음니다. 돈만 준다면 발을 벗고라도 뛰여 가겟음니다만 그러케 됨니까? 金性洙氏나 方應謨氏 같은 文化事業家가 돈도 좀 주고 그 發展을 위하야 留意도 좀 하여주었으면 함니다.
6. 나 文士 劇作家, 俳優, 演出家에게 그러케 돈이 있음니까? 그들에게 文化事業을 할만한 資力만 있으면 오늘의 우리 社會가 이 善良한 種族으로 말미아마 훨신 *度의 文化 乃至 文化熱을 가젔을 것입니다. -(끝)-<161>
<152-161>