잡지명	별건곤 제8호
발행일	1927년 08월 17일
기사제목	男女痛罵 誌上大論爭!! 懸賞, 이 男女兩便의 痛罵文 여섯가지 중에 가장 適切하고 痛快한 것을 投票하시오. (A Great Debate on the Criticism of Men and Women!! A prize will be awarded; vote for the most appropriate and satisfying of these six articles criticizing both men and women.)
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

Men are full of hypocrisy and ambition
Shim O-suk

Are you asking about the shortcomings of men? When I think about it, the scope seems somewhat vague. Therefore, I thought like this. Of course, people who know nothing are not without their problems, but what I want to talk about now is the so-called intellectual class, those who claim to know something and talk about social problems, women's issues, and so on. And I ask you to understand one thing in advance. I am not saying that I know more than others when I talk about the shortcomings of men. Therefore, I don't know all of their shortcomings, and even if I did, I don't have the confidence to tell you everything without reservation. Therefore, I will simply mention only the points that I find most glaring and regrettable. Also, what I am going to say here does not mean that all men are like that. It is only generally true.

If I were to easily evaluate under this topic, the most ambitious and hypocritical people in the world are men. Among them, the men of the intellectual class, who claim to know something, are particularly so. This is by no means my new discovery, and it is commonly said in the world, so I think you probably know it well before I explain it in detail. That's right. Men are full of ambition. They are also full of hypocrisy. All of these shortcomings are most evident in their behavior towards women. To give the closest example, the principles and ideologies they proclaim are truly wonderful. However, if you look at their actual behavior, which is completely the opposite, you cannot help but be surprised at the distance between their words and actions. It is truly disgusting and annoying to watch. The stale feudal ideology is still erupting in their heads. They act like tyrants in their homes. With unwarranted superiority, they try to bind and restrain women. Even if you look at the married life of a couple who are said to be ideally married, isn't it obvious that the tyrannical men will be most satisfied and happy if the woman always caters to their tastes, sews their clothes, does their laundry, cleans the house, and raises the children? At the same time, when they treat women, they often act as if women are originally objects to be absolutely submissive, subordinate, and obedient to men, and exist only for their satisfaction. Also, apart from the relationship of husband and wife, when they treat women as ordinary comrades, they often seem to treat them hypocritically with some impure feelings. In other words, they treat them apart from the meaning of humans treating humans. It is always about the woman. So, before anything else, they first try to praise their beauty and treat them like playthings. Moreover, they seem to think it's normal to flirt (ヒヤカシ - *hiyakashi*) with young women on the street. When I see all of their disgusting, ambitious, and hypocritical behavior, I cannot help but feel pessimistic and disappointed. Everyone knows this well, so there is no need to repeat it, but can't they break free from hypocrisy and transcend ambition a little more?

Men who are rotten but pretend not to be

Lee O-kyung

Since I was asked to vehemently criticize the gentlemen, the male aristocrats, I thought about what points to criticize them for. In general, they are as rotten as they can be. However, some of them pretend that they are not yet rotten. To give one example, there are those among them who always talk about women's liberation and gender equality. There is no room for vehemently criticizing those who are completely rotten, but I want to vehemently criticize those who pretend not to be rotten while they are actually rotten. They advocate for women's liberation while they themselves bind women. They talk about gender equality while they themselves dominate women. They always emphasize that women should bravely revolt, but they want their wives to be gentle slaves as before. They demand that women keep their chastity, but they think of breaking their own chastity as a natural right. How hateful and painful is that? How much is there to vehemently criticize?

Men are not human in these five ways
Yun O-suk

I received a request to attack the shortcomings of men, but I thought it would be more useless than telling Hang Woo that he is strong or telling a madman that he is out of his mind to point out the shortcomings of men who were born with only bad things. I initially flatly refused.
However, I heard that some men are making women attack the shortcomings of women, so I couldn't just let their shameless, fault-finding, and unpleasant voices be heard, so I took back my refusal and decided to expose a few things to promote their reflection. Some men may not be like that, but I consider it unfortunate to be among so many vulgar men and can only listen briefly.

In general, men open their mouths and say that women are full of vanity and good at decorating themselves, but is there any animal in the world that is as vain and good at decorating themselves as men? If you see from the side how much vanity they have and how well they decorate themselves for the so-called "honor," you will be amazed and fall down. What vanity is more severe than a man not being faithful to his work and thinking only of his honor first? Some women are criticized for selling their smiles to satisfy their vanity, but how many dirty smiles have the men who criticize them smiled and how much spiritual prostitution have they done to gain honor and status? They offer tributes under the nose to the arrogant놈 (nom) who unconditionally regards them as slaves to those who covet their wives, and their cowardly submission, which is called beautiful 교제 (kyoje), is not the way for men to get ahead? In their own sarangbang (guest room in a traditional Korean house), they clench their fists and plan to kill that놈 (nom) all night long, but the next morning they discuss with their wives about sending gifts to that놈 (nom)'s house, and they are the diligent and prominent men who are not ashamed. They are dignified men.
There is a telephone in our house. Sometimes a call comes from a superior. When it's annoying, I'm next to the telephone, but I'm told to say, "He's not here. He went out and hasn't come back yet." So, even though I'm next to him, I lie that he's not there. Then, as an excuse, the old man says that he is trying to use me like his slave, and then he talks about how he criticized him to other people. Then, as soon as the phone rings again, he answers it himself, and if it's the old man, he immediately lowers his voice and can't help but say, "Yes, yes, I just got back. Yes, yes, did the rain cause any damage? Yes, yes, I'm sorry I haven't been able to visit you since the rain." How can such obedient words come out of the mouth that was just cursing so smoothly? What excuse can he use to criticize women with that mouth?
There's no end to writing about such things one by one, but even if you look on the street, are there more men or women who starve their wives and make their sons cry because they can't pay their tuition fees, and then cut their hair again after only ten days, put on white shoes and powder, and walk around with a neat appearance, nodding their heads? Apart from a few very depraved women, there are no such bold people, but ninety-five out of a hundred men are in that state.
Women know how to keep their place. Even if they reform, they try to do it realistically, starting from small things. They spend ten years planning but can't fix a single habit, and they go around stirring up trouble by saying they're reforming big things day and night. Ah, the vain덩어리 (tteong-eori) are really the bold men who only have knowledge.

Men shamelessly laugh and say that they sell their flesh to get money, but selling love cheaply for their vanity is what young female students who imitate men are doing after learning from men. Really, all the women who have become kisaeng (*female entertainers*) or are in Shinmachi (a red-light district) are people who were sold because of men's greed for money. Men sold them.
Men are driven by money and keep saying money-money, saying things like, "I wonder if a rich family will take me as a son-in-law" or "I wish I could find a rich widow..." "There are even ways to get an old 퇴기 (twaegi - old kisaeng) who has collected money..." The dirty and pitiful ones are men.

Men act like they are seeing jealousy for the first time in women, but how can women's jealousy be half of men's jealousy? People with different fields may sometimes understand and help each other, but 문사 (munsa - men of letters) are jealous of each other. In school offices, teachers are jealous of each other. Newspaper reporters are jealous of each other. Politicians are jealous of each other. Even athletes and musicians, if they are awkward with each other, their jealousy is more fierce than a love affair (시앗쌈 - *siatssam*) in bad words. Who says that it is a business competition and that they are not disgustingly jealous over love issues like women? It is the men who put a knife in their eyes and make a fuss even if their betrothed goes to their uncle's house. Even if it's a woman who has no relationship at all, who is not married or in love, and is not next to her husband, try praising a man next to her. In such cases, they either burst out, "Why do you respect such a person?" and bring out his faults, or they cunningly say, "He's good, but..." and secretly advertise that they are better than him, or they do one of the two. How can you say that women are only jealous?

How many men can guarantee that they have never dreamed of holding the hand of their friend's wife? There is nothing as dirty and mean as men. Even after going to their close friend's wedding, they talk about the bride's buttocks or make some kind of lewd remark. Men are so dirty that they think vulgar thoughts even at their friend's wedding. And no matter how dignified a man is, no matter how broad-minded a man is, even after five or six years of respecting him as a person with personality, you will eventually realize that he has been treating you with vulgar desires. It's really, really disgusting to think about. With what mouth do those animals criticize others?

Where is there a person without flaws? Men have flaws, and women have flaws. But the biggest flaw of men is that they can't see their own faults and are busy looking for the faults of others. Even women who are loose-lipped will keep their mouths shut about things that they have done wrong or that they know are flaws. Are men bold or cunning? They talk and make a fuss about the faults of others as if they have no faults of their own.
This is the biggest flaw of all flaws. I didn't want to talk about this today, but I hate it so much that I wrote a few lines because I didn't want to see such shameless behavior. I hope it will be helpful if you reflect on it, even if it's just like listening to a child's words.

Five shortcomings of new women
Kim O-chun

I am not trying to point out the bad points of women. I am just taking this opportunity to say what I have always wanted to say about today's women.
First, women have little concept of taking responsibility for themselves in everything and going out to live. To put it mildly, even when it comes to managing a household, they leave all the matters of whether the household is doing well or not, whether there is income or not, entirely to the men, and they seem to stand outside and either indulge in luxury or nag. To put it broadly, they seem to have a tendency to act as if they have nothing to do with politics, economy, and all other social problems.
Second, they have little profound taste and even less creativity, so they are busy following trends in vain.
Third, they have little sociality, and their psychology of suspecting, criticizing, and building walls between themselves and others seems to be more pronounced than that of men.
Fourth, they have a foolishness (痴氣 - *chigi*) to really and truly accept the pretense of treating women well and respecting them as a tactic by men to despise and ridicule women, and they are elated.
Fifth, they lower their own personality with a lot of talk, a lot of embellishment, and useless gestures and coquetry.
If I were to list the conditions, small and trivial things would come out. Those things are the same for men and women. In short, if today's women have special shortcomings as women, it is because of the inevitable things that come from the living environment of women who have lived until today. This is not something that women alone should take responsibility for, nor is it something that each woman should take responsibility for. However, that doesn't mean that women should be unconscious of it.
Therefore, today's enlightened women must study their historical life up to today and obtain strict criticism and a clear path from it, and then move forward vigorously in a truly active way. To do this, if there are ten million women in Joseon, they must somehow first be put into social gatherings, and the gatherings must be a movement-oriented group that is aware of its historical mission and has the purpose of realizing that awareness in the current society, rather than ordinary social or educational gatherings. Without such enlightenment and such practice, the shortcomings that women have today will never be corrected. Of course, individual awareness and effort may have some effect on the individual and the few people related to that individual, but that is not the issue. From this thought, I do not want to criticize women or hope for anything from them individually. I only want to consider and strive to examine the historical living environment and develop the effort socially and movementally under the thoughts and purposes obtained by criticizing everything from that perspective. Only here can women's shortcomings be corrected and their strengths be demonstrated.

Second-rate Humans?
Kang O-hwan

Now, women are different from the women of the past, and when they see their faults, they say, "That's true. But whose fault is it that they made us like that?" And they also say, "Isn't it because men have been oppressing us and locking us up for a long time that they have made us cripples? Therefore, it is by no means the fault of the women themselves." They have become quite clever.
However, if you can avoid blame by explaining why you became bad or why you went wrong, then even those who have committed the most heinous crimes in this world will not be blamed.
Moreover, what this *Byulgongon* magazine is asking me to do is to vehemently attack the shortcomings and faults of women. I am not going to talk about why they became like that in the first place, and I am going to write down a few of the shortcomings that women have now in a raw way. Since I am not going to cut their heads off to be satisfying, nor am I going to swear at them to be satisfying, I will put aside shame and manners and write down the shortcomings as they are, just as we want to, which I think will be somewhat satisfying and will also have the power to prick the ears of the women themselves, so I will put aside the silk cloth of shame and gentleness and write it down as it is.

"Women are liars, have no truth, do not know gratitude, and on top of that, they do not know anything about music, poetry, or sculpture. In the end, women are second-rate humans," said Schopenhauer. Even though it is the words of a foreigner, second-rate human is a satisfying word. In fact, women seem to live without self-awareness.
It is not a question of whether life suits them or not. The question for them is how they look in the eyes of others. Women do more meaningless housekeeping than the savages who eat people and pile up human skulls and boast about them. One or two chamber pots in a room would be enough to pee in at night... but they line up large chamber pots, medium chamber pots, small chamber pots, and egg chamber pots on the floor and boast about them when guests come. They put empty flower vases on the rice chest like a swindler and are satisfied when the guests who come envy them. They put heavy jewelry on their heads and hang it on their chests, whether they need it or not, and sweat profusely, wanting to hear people say that they look good.
The women of the past were ignorant, but the holy new women, who purse their lips and say that people who have received modern education do not do that, keep a piano that they do not even know how to play like a guardian spirit, and collect phonograph records of songs that they do not even know the titles of, and are satisfied when their peers who come to visit envy them. But even if you turn a blind eye to that, if you don't even think about whether the man meets all the conditions as your spouse when you get married, and you get married just thinking about whether people will envy you or not, it becomes pitiful. (Isn't that why the number of new women who can't get married and cry in their blankets is gradually increasing?) Ah, pitiful people! People who can't live a day without someone to look at them. When will they ever know themselves well and when will they ever try to be true to themselves?

There is a proverb in Russia that "women have long hair and short wisdom." But now women will say, "Our hair has become shorter and our wisdom has become longer."
However, their lengthened wisdom only appears in making excuses for going here and there to serve their in-laws, and there is not even a rat's tail to be seen.
Not to mention young female students, sit down and have a serious discussion with a female figure who claims to have considerable knowledge and is recognized by others. Before thirty minutes have passed, she will be massaging her feet and starting to complain, and she will only be touching her clothes, so you can't treat her as a person among women with considerable respect. You can't even drag a serious conversation out for thirty minutes. Instead, continue to talk about who is in love with whom, who married whom, who bought a piano for a few hundred won, and who bought a ring for a few hundred won. You can sit and talk from morning to evening and still not know when to get up.
Don't be too impressed if there are women who pretend to be female leaders and enter music society or lecture halls in a strange way. If you ask them later, they will know that so-and-so came and so-and-so came with their wives, but they will not know what the speaker said or how they ended it, but they are very generous. I don't know if they are going around advertising themselves or looking for a famous groom to show off, but anyway, it's a pity.

Among women, talented friends sometimes appear like comets. Women who are good at writing novels, women who are good at writing poems, women who are good at giving speeches, and women who are good at drawing pictures all sometimes appear and receive the love of many people. Those people are all people who have opened their eyes to individuality and whose reason is alive. I am so-and-so's faction, I am so-and-so's ism, and they stand like a knife, insisting that the land of Joseon is too small.
However, they shouldn't change husbands, but on the day they only give 새서방 (saeseobang - new husband), they will change completely from the dawn of the next day and become a completely different believer. They change to all the beliefs of their husbands faster and more clearly than the fact that the surname of a Japanese woman changes to her husband's surname from the day she gets married. If they get married five times, they change five times, and if they get married nine times, they change nine times. Is the power of 새서방 (saeseobang - new husband) so great? Is the spirit of women originally so good at showing off their talents?
"Modern women have shorter hair. And their wisdom has become even shorter!"

There is a proverb in Germany that "the woman a woman likes is the woman in the mirror." Of course, it means that they are full of jealousy.
No matter how beautiful a woman is, the jealous heart of a woman thinks that she is not as beautiful as herself reflected in the mirror. Because of this heart, because of this disposition, all their shameless efforts are born.
Even a foolish man knows that praising him without reason is rather an insult, but a woman is happy if you praise her even if it's a nonsensical compliment. "So-and-so calls me beautiful every time he meets me, so I'm dying of laughter." The words "I'm dying of laughter" are shameless lies, and they melt away without knowing how far the hand of the person who is praising them is reaching. If you want to have a cheap love affair, you have to learn a lot of words to praise a woman. You won't even be able to touch the jealous heart of a woman with the right words... .
A woman's jealousy is an attempt to have a shallow sense of superiority. Frequently, they purse their lips, and if they are a little dignified, they have a heart that says, "Humph! That's all it is."
To have that sense of superiority, women often break into their friends' love affairs and try to win. And many cases of adultery in which they steal their friends' husbands are not because their love is cooling, but because their desire to have a sense of superiority is cooling.
"Humph! No matter how beautiful you are, your husband is more infatuated with me than with you..."
Ah, it's scary.
"A thousand women can live together without fighting, but even two women, even if they are siblings, cannot live without fighting," as Tami-Re said.

Laughter and tears are still women's weapons.
And there is no woman who does not act like a prostitute with these two things. It is their prostitute-like talent to laugh as much as the situation is good and to shed tears as much as possible.
On the day they have an affair with another man, they laugh diligently at their husband. When their talent for laughter is not enough and they are exposed, they bring out sobbing tears. You can't feel sorry for them because you think they are tears of regret. Just as the laughter they laugh diligently was not really laughter, their tears are not really tears either.
It's a weapon that they bring out when they try to deceive with laughter and fail, saying, "Aren't you going to be deceived even with this?"

In the end, should we put aside the second-rate human, saying that it is impossible to know its essence unless we study it with different efforts... .
"I like men more than I like women even though I am a woman. Don't laugh at me for saying that. The reason I like them is not because they are men, but because they are not women," Queen Christina said out of frustration.

There's no end to writing, so I'll stop here, but as I said at the beginning, you shouldn't say, "The words are true, but who made women like that?" You shouldn't say, "Do you think men don't have such flaws?"
Whether men have more flaws than that is a separate issue, and how women came to be like that in the first place is also a separate issue. I have only pointed out without hiding that women currently have these flaws.
When will you ever become a first-rate human? From now on, how will you create a new style? I want to hear it. I want to know it.

Old women who devour men
Park O-han

A poor wretch is wretched even in this situation. What's the point of talking to a hardheaded, short-skirted new woman who will listen if you talk to her and turn red if you scold her? What's the point of getting caught up with an old woman who can't feel anything if you talk to her or if you scold her, whether it hurts or stings? But anyway, it's a fortunate thing. No matter how much you argue, there will be no opposition. Let's try to be blunt.
However, I will not talk about the issue of the character of old women or the issue of their social status here. If I were to talk about that, the moral issues of the past, the issues of social systems, the sins of men, and even the ugly true colors of women would come out, and a really great argument would break out.
Therefore, I will leave everything to the responsibility of the morals or social systems of the past, and after acknowledging that much, I will cut off the past and cut off the future (去頭截尾 - *geo du jeol mi*) and just draw the true colors that old women have had up until now as they are.

Getting angry easily and sulking and crying loudly when very angry is the true color of old women, smiling brightly when a little happy and laughing out loud when very happy is the true color of old women (new women too). Hating daughters-in-law and liking daughters, and liking their husbands more than their sons, is the true color of women. The only places they go are their daughters' houses or their own homes, and the only places they sit are in front of the stove or at the end of the porch.
Thinking that having morning rice and evening porridge is the ultimate happiness, thinking that their husbands not drinking or gambling is the ultimate happiness, thinking that having only sons, brothers, and daughters is the ultimate happiness, thinking that they have done everything they need to do when they get a son-in-law and a daughter-in-law, thinking that they have the best fortune when they have a grandson and a grandson in front of them, and thinking that they have everything they need with a gold hairpin and a silver ring, so day after day, night after night, in the corner of the room and the corner of the kitchen, nagging their husbands, cursing their sons, talking about their daughters-in-law, being bothered by their daughters... in this way, they fight with flies, fight with dust, fight with rags, fight with needles, fight with fire pokers, fight with gourds, fight with puppies, fight with pigs, fight with chicks, and that's all they do besides eating, shitting, shitting, eating, wearing, taking off, taking off, and wearing.
Closing the gate and running into the inner room when someone comes, sulking and turning away when someone asks for directions, yelling at their husbands even if a son's friend eats a bowl of rice for free, turning red when their husbands go out and sleep for one night... that's all they think about. They don't know whether there's a disturbance outside the gate, whether a thief is coming behind the house, whether the world is collapsing or prospering, or whether society is rotting or dissolving.
To put it more briefly, the old women of Joseon have no people other than their own sons, daughters, husbands, or fathers, that is, their blood relatives. It's just familyism. And it's just nagging and tears. There is no conservatism or cowardice, not to mention creativity, and there is no sense of obligation to benefit society a little more. They like regression but hate progress, and they like to creep inside but hate to go outside. This is the total true color that the old women of Joseon have. To put it more briefly once again, the old women of Joseon have nothing on their own except to eat their husbands or sons.

**Named Entities**

沈O淑	Shim O-suk
李O卿	Lee O-gyeong
尹O淑	Yun O-suk
金O春	Kim O-chun
康O煥	Kang O-hwan
朴O漢	Park O-han
Hang Woo	Hang Woo



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제8호
발행일	1927년 08월 17일
기사제목	男女痛罵 誌上大論爭!! 懸賞, 이 男女兩便의 痛罵文 여섯가지 중에 가장 適切하고 痛快한 것을 投票하시오.
기사형태	논설

男女痛罵 誌上大論爭!! 懸賞, 이 男女兩便의 痛罵文 여섯가지 중에 가장 適切하고 痛快한 것을 投票하시오.
男子는 僞善과 野心뿐이다
沈O淑

남자들의 단점에 대하야 말슴임니까? 그러고 보니 엇재 좀 범위가 막연한 것 갓치 생각됨니다. 그런 까닭에 저는 이러케 생각햇슴니다. 물론 아모것도 모르는 사람도 문제가 되지 안는 것은 아니겟지만 제가 지금 말코저 하는 것은 소위 지식계급인 다시 말하면 무엇을 안다고 하며 사회문제이니 부인문제이니 무엇이니 하고 떠드는 그들을 대상하야 말슴하는 것임니다. 그리고 여러분께 이것 하나만은 이해해 달나는 것을 미리 부탁해 둠니다. 제가 남자에 대한 단점을 말슴함은 남보다 잘- 안다고 해서 함은 걸코 못 됨니다. 그럼으로 그들에 대한 단점을 일일이 다-알지도 못하거니와 또는 안다고 하더라도 사실 다- 들어서 유감 업시 말슴할 만한 자신조차 업슴니다. 그런 까닭에 가장 눈에 거실니고 유감된다고 생각한 점만을 간단이 들어 말슴하겟슴니다. 또 제가 여기에 말슴들일려는 것은 결코 남자 전체가 모두 그러하다는 것도 아니외다. 다만 일반으로 그러하다 함에 불과함니다.
이와 갓흔 題下에서 쉬웁게 평한다면 세상에 잇서서 제일 야심이 만코 제일 위선이 만은 인간은 남성임니다. 그 중에도 무엇을 안다고 하는 지식게급의 남성인 그네들이 특히 그러함니다. 이것은 결코 제의 新發見이 아니요 세상에서 흔히 말하는 바임으로 제가 자세하게 설명하기 전에 여러분도 아마 잘-알고 게시지 아니할가 생각됨니다. 과연 그럿슴니다. 남성들은 야심이 만슴니다. 또 위선이 만슴니다. 그들의 이 모든 단점은 특히 여성들을 대할 때의 행동으로써 가장 현저하게 볼 수 잇슴니다. 가장 갓가운 사실을 들면 그네들의 입으로 高唱하는 주의와 사상은 실로 훌륭함니다. 하지만은 그와는 全然이 반대로 그들의 실지의 행동을 살피여 본다면＜62＞ 넘우도 말과 행동의 거리가 먼-것을 놀내지 아니할 수 업슴니다. 실로 가증스럽고 얄미워서 볼 수가 업슴니다. 아직도 캐캐묵은 냄새가 나는 봉건적 『이데올로기』가 그들의 머리 속에서는 발작하고 잇슴니다. 그들은 가정에 잇서서 폭군의 행세를 함니다. 당치도 안는 우월감을 가지고 여자를 구속하고 절제하려 듬니다. 가장 이상적으로 결혼하엿다고 하는 가정의 부부생활을 볼지라도 여자란 언제든지 남성인 그네의 비위나 맛처주고 의복이나 꾸어매 주고 빨내나 해주고 집안이나 치우고 아해나 길으면 폭군인 그 남성들은 가장 만족해 녀기며 조와할 것이 넘우나 명백한 사실이 안임기까? 동시에 그들은 여성을 대할 때에 여자란 원래가 남자에게 절대 복종하며 예속, 屈從할 물건인 동시에 자기네의 만족을 위해서만 존재하는 것 갓흔 행동을 흔이 함니다. 또 부부라는 관게를 떠나서 보통 동지로써의 여성을 대할 때에도 그들은 흔히 엇던 불순한 감정을 가지고 위선적으로 대튕�는 때가 잇는 것 갓틈니다. 즉 인간이 인간을 대하는 의미를 떠나서 대하게 됨니다. 반듯이 여자시함니다. 그래서 무엇보다도 몬저 미의 예찬과 玩弄물 취급을 하려 듬니다. 더군다나 길에 가다가 젊은 여자들을 보고 『ヒヤカシ』하는 것 즘은 예사로 아는 것 갓틈니다. 그네들의 이와 갓흔 모든 가증스러운 야심적 위선적 행동을 볼 때에 과연 비관, 실망하지 안을 수 업게 됨니다. 누구나 다-잘 아는 사실임으로 중언할 필요도 업거니와 그들은 좀 더 위선에서 해탈하며 좀 더 야심에서 초탈할 수 업슬넌지요?

썩고도 아니썩은 톄하는 男子

李O卿

바든 주문이 紳士閥男性을 痛罵하여보라는 것임으로 그들을 痛罵할 점을 생각하여 보앗다. 그들은 대체에 잇서서 다 썩을 대로 썩엇다. 그러나 그 중 일부분은 스스로 아즉 아니 썩은＜63＞ 체한다. 그 한가지 례를 들면 그들 중에 항상 입으로 여성해방 남성평등을 운운하는 자가 잇다. 아조 다 썩은 자들은 痛罵고 무엇이고 할 여지도 업거니와 입으로는 안이 썩은 체 하면서도 기실은 썩은 자들이야말로 痛罵하고 십다. 그들은 여성해방을 주장하면서 그 자신은 여성을 구속한다. 남녀평등을 운운하면서 그 자신은 여성에 군림한다. 그들은 항상 여성이 용감히 반역하기를 高調하면서 자기 부인은 전과 가치 유순한 노예가 되기를 요망한다. 그들은 여성에게 정조를 직히기를 요구하면서 그 자신은 정조를 깨트리는 것으로써 당연한 권리와 가치 생각한다. 얼마나 可憎可痛한 일이냐? 얼마나 痛罵할 일이냐?

이 다섯가지로 男子는 사람 못된다
尹O淑

남자의 결뎜을 공격하라는 요구를 밧앗스나 항우보고 긔운세다 하는 것보다도 밋친 사람보고 정신업다하는 것보다도, 전후 못된 것만도 차지하고 생겨난 남자보고 결뎜을 지적하기는 더 소용 업는 짓이겟스닛가 나는 처음에 깻굿이 거절하엿슴니다.
그러나 이번에 엇던 남자들에게는 녀자의 결뎜을 공격식인다 하닛가 그 렴치업시 남의 험담만 잘하는 뻔뻔하고 비위 틀니는 소리를 제대로 하게 바려 둘 수 업겟서서 거절햇든 것을 다시 맛하가지고 몃 가지만 들추어 그들의 반성을 촉진식여 보기로 하엿슴니다. 남자들 중에는 그럿치 안흘 이가 더러는 잇기도 하겟으나 그러나 추잡한 사람들만 만흔 남자틈에 끠이게 된 것을 불행으로 녁이고 잠간 갓치 들어줄 밧게 업슴니다.

대톄 남자들은 입만 벌니면 녀자는 허영이 만흐니 가짓으로 꾸미기를 잘하느니 하지만 세상에 남자들처럼 허영만코 꾸미기 잘하는 동물이 또 잇겟슴닛가? 그들이 소위 『명예』라는 것을 위하야 엇더케 만흔 허영을 가젓스며 엇더케 잘 꾸미는지 엽헤서 보면 참 놀나 쓰러질 것임니다. 남자가 일에 충실하지 안코 명예만 먼저 생각하는 그것보다 더 심한＜64＞ 허영이 어데 잇게슴닛가. 허영심을 채우기 위하야는 우슴도 파는 녀자가 잇다고 비난하지만은 비난하는 그 자신이 명예 지위를 엇기 위하야는 얼마나 더러운 우슴을 우섯스며 얼마나 정신뎍 매음을 만히 하고 잇슴닛가? 자긔의 안해를 욕심내는 자에게는 무조건으로 자긔를 종놈갓치 녁이고 잇는 거만한 놈에게도 그저 코아래 진상을 밧처가면서 너털우슴을 웃고 다니는 것이 소위 남자의 출세하는 방법이요 교제라 하는 아름다운 일홈으로 불으는 비겁한 굴종이 아님닛가? 자긔집 사랑방에서는 주먹을 부르쥐고 그놈 죽일놈하고 밤새도록 별르다가도 잇흔날 쓀„츰에는 그놈의 집에 선사 물건 사 보낼 의론을 안해에게 하면서도 붓그러운 줄을 모르는 것이 출세에 부즈런한 유지남자임니다. 점잔흔 남자들이지요.
우리집에는 뎐화가 잇슴니다. 뎐화가 더러는 웃사람에게서 옴니다. 귀찬은 때는 뎐화통 엽헤 잇스면서도 『업다고 밧게 나가고 아즉 안드러왓다』고 하라고 나를 식이지요. 그래서 엽헤 잇는데도 업다고 내가 그짓말을 함니다. 그러면 변명처럼 그놈의 령감은 공연히 나를 자긔 종처럼 알고 부려먹으려고 그런다고 하면서 그가 다른 사람들에게 자긔의 비평을 하엿다는 둥 별소리를 다하지요. 그러다가 금방 뎐화가 또 오면 자긔가 직접 밧다가 또 그 령감이 하는 것이면 고만 목소리를 잡혀 노아서 읏저지 못하고 『녜- 녜- 지금 막 드러온 길이올시다. 녜- 녜- 장마에 상하신 데나 업슴닛가? 녜- 녜- 장마후에는 가서 뵈지도 못하고 죄송함니다.』 고분고분한 말이 엇더케 금방 욕을 하고 섯든 입으로 그럿케 부드럽게 나옴닛가? 무슨 탈을 쓰면 그 입으로 녀자의 흉을 볼 수가 잇겟슴닛가?
그런 것을 일일히 쓰자면 한이 업겟지만 길거리에서 보드래도 집에서는 안해를 밥을 굶기고 아들의 월사금을 못 주어 울니고도 자긔는 열흘도 못된 머리를 또 깍고 흰구두에 분발러 신고 제법 조촐한 맵시로 고갯짓하고 나서는 이가 남자가 더 만흠닛가- 녀자가 더 만흠닛가? 녀자는 아조 타락한 일부 녀자의 몃 사람 외에는 그럿케 대담한 사람이 업지만은 남자는 백이면 아흔다섯 사람이 다 그 지경임니다.
녀자는 분수를 직힐 줄 암니다. 개혁을 헤도 적은 데서브터라도 실삭퀴잇게 해가려 함니다. 십년을 별너도 거름거리 하나 못 곳치면서 밤낫 큰 일을 개혁한다고 바람을 불고 다니지요. 아아 허영 허영덩어리란 참말 지식개나 잇다는 대담한 남자들임니다.

돈을 엇기 위하야는 살을 베여 판다고 남자들은 뻔뻔스럽게 비웃지만은 제 허영에 련애를 싸구료로 파는 것은 요사이 남자를 달머가는 녀학생 찌그럭지가 남자에게 배워서 하는 짓이요. 정말 기생이 되엿거나 신맛지에 잇는 녀자는 모다 남자의 돈욕심 때믄에 팔녀간 사람들임니다. 남자가 파라먹은 것이야요.＜65＞
남자들이야말로 돈에 몰려서 돈-돈-하다가 『돈잇는 집에서 데릴사위로 안 데려가나』하거나 『어데 돈 만흔 과부하나 어덧스면-』함니다. 『더러 돈 모은 퇴기(기생 늙은 것)를 엇어가지고 수가 나는 일도 잇것만은...』 더럽고 불상한 것은 남자임니다.

시긔심이란 것은 뻔뻔한 남자들이 녀자에게서 처음 구경하는 것처럼 뱃장을 부리지만은 아무럿키로 녀자의 시긔가 남자의 시긔의 반절이나 되겟슴닛가? 방면이 달른 사람끼리는 더러  리해도 해주고 도와주기도 하는 이가 잇는지 모르지만 문사(文士)는 문사끼리 시긔하지요. 학교 사무실에서는 교원끼리 시긔하지요. 신문긔자는 신문긔자끼리 시긔하지요. 정치가는 정치가끼리 시긔하지요. 운동가끼리도 음악가끼리도 서로 엇슥빗슥하면 그 시긔가 낫븐 말로 시앗쌈보다 더 맹렬함니다. 그것은 사업상 경쟁심으로 그러는 것이지 녀자처럼 연애문뎨 갓흔 걸로 다럽게 시긔하지는 안는다고 누가 그 따위 소리를 함닛가. 약혼한 녀자가 외삼촌 집에를 가도 눈에 칼을 꼿고 야단을 하는 것이 남자임니다. 남편의 엽흔 고사하고 약혼도  련애도 하지 안은 전혀 관계업는 녀자라도 그 엽헤서 녀자가 어느 남자를 칭찬을 해 보십시요. 그런 때에는 단작스럽게 『그까짓 사람을 무엇을 존경하세요』하고 날뛰면서 그의 험담을 꺼내거나 능청스럽게 『그 사람도 잘하기는 잘하지만』 해 놋고 슬금슬금 그보다도 자긔가 더 나으니라 하고 자가 광고를 부즈런히 하거나 둘 중에 하나임니다. 엇더케 녀자를 시긔만타고 할 수가 잇슴닛가?

남자 중에 친구의 안해의 손목을 잡는 꿈을 한번도 안 꾸엇다고 장담할 이가 몃 사람이나 잇슬가요? 남자들처럼 더럽고 야비한 것은 업슴니다. 자긔의 절친한 친구의 혼인에 갓다와서도 신부의 궁둥이 이약이를 하거나 무슨 말이던지 음담을 꼭 함니다. 친구의 결혼식장에서도 잡스런 생각을 하도록 남자들은 그럿케 더러워요. 그러고 아무리 점잔타는 남자도 아모리 대범한 남자도 오년 륙년 대범하고 점잔케 존경해 오던 인격 잇는 남자도 엇던 긔회에 보면 결국 잡스런 욕심을 가지고 대해온 것을 알게 됨니다. 참말 참말 생각하면 구역이 나게 더러워요. 그 따위 동물들이 엇던 입으로 남의 흉을 보는지요.

사람치고 허물 업는 사람이 어데 잇겟슴닛가? 남자에게도 결뎜이 잇고 녀자에게도 결뎜이 잇지요. 그러나 남자의 뎨일 큰 결뎜은 자긔의 흉을 못보고 남의 흉만 밧브게 보려하는 그것임니다. 녀자는 입이 가벼운 사람도 자긔가 잘못햇거나 자긔가 결뎜으로 아는 일에는 입을 담음니다. 남자는 대담해서 그런가요 능청해서 그런가요, 자긔 죄는 자긔 결뎜은 털끗만치도 업는 것 갓치 남의 흉을 떠들고 날뛰지요.＜66＞
이것이 결뎜 중에도 뎨일 큰 결뎜임니다. 오늘 이 이약이도 아니하려고 그런 것이것만은 그것이 미워서 뻔뻔한 꼴 보기 실혀서 몃 줄 쓴 것임니다. 어린애 말도 들어 두랫다고 공연히 욕만 마시고 더러 반성하심이 잇스면 다행하겟슴니다.

새로운 女性의 다섯가지 缺點
金O春

구태여 녀자 편에 대한 납븐 뎜을 들녀는 것은 아니다. 다못 평소브터 오늘의 녀자편에 대하야 말슴하고 십던 바를 이 긔회에 한 말 하려는 것뿐이다.
첫재, 녀자들은 모든 일에 자긔 스사로가 책임을 지고 사러 나가려 하는 감념이 적다. 적게 말하면 한집안 살님에 대하야도 그 집안의 잘되고 못되고 또 슈입이 잇고 업고한 모든 문뎨를 전혀 남자편에 맛기고 자긔는 판 밧게 서서 호사(豪奢)를 하거나 잔소리하기가 일수인 것 가트며, 크게 말하면 정치·경졔·그밧게 잇는 모든 사회문뎨에 대하야 자긔는 상관업는 태를 것는 혐의가 잇스며.
둘재, 크고 깁흔 맛이 적고 더욱 창조성(刱造性)이 적으며 그래서 부질업시 류행(流行)을 따르기에 분주하며.
셋재, 사회셩(社會性)이 적어서 남을 의심하고 시비하고 나와 담을 가루는 심리(心理)가 남자보다 드러나게 심한 듯 하며.
넷재, 남자들이 녀자를 멸시하고 롱락하는 정책으로서 녀자를 우대하고 공경하는 척하는 것을 정말 참말로 바다드러 의긔양양하는 치기(痴氣)가 잇스며.
다섯재, 말이 만코 꾸밈이 만코 쓸데없는 작태·애교에 자긔의 인격을 스사로 낫추고 잇는것.
이러케 됴건을 들자면 작고 시시한 말이 나올 것이다. 그런 것은 남녀가 맛찬가지일 것이다. 주려 말하면 오늘 녀자에게 녀자로서의 특별한 결뎜이 있다 하면 그것은 오늘날까지 살아온 녀자의 생활환경 거긔에서브터 온 할 수 업는 것들일 것인바, 이것은 녀자 한편만으로서 책임을 질 성질의 것이 안인 동시에 녀자 한 사람 한 사람으로서 책임을 질 것은 물론 아니다. 그러타고 해서 녀자들이 그편에 무의식(無意識)하고 지낼 것이냐 하면 또 그럴 수는 업는 것이다.＜67＞ 그럼으로 오늘의 깨달음 잇는 녀성은 자긔의 오늘까지 살어온 자긔의 력사뎍 생활을 잘 연구하고 거긔에서 엄격한 비판과 분명한 진로(進路)를 어더서 그야말로 운동뎍으로 굿세게 나가지 아느면 안될 것이다. 이리함에는 됴선에 쳔만 명의 녀성이 잇다하면 무슨 방법으로나 몬져 그 사람들을 사회뎍 회합에 집어넛치 안으면 안되며, 그 회합은 보통의 사교뎍 슈양뎍 회합보다도 자긔의 력사뎍 사명을 의식하고 그 의식을 현 사회에 실현식힐 목뎍의식을 가진 운동뎍 단톄임을 필요하다 할 것이다. 이러한 깨달음 이러한 실행이 아니면 오늘날 녀자가 가지고 잇는 결뎜이라 하면 뎜결 그것은 영원히 고쳐지지 못할 것이다. 물론 개인인개으로의 자각과 로력으로 어느 뎡도까지 그 개인 또 그 개인과 관계 가진 몃사람에 대하야 다소의 효과를 거두지 안음도 아니나 그것은 그러케 문뎨가 못되는 것이다. 이러한 생각에서 나는 잇던 녀자에 대해서나 그를 개인뎍으로 시비하고 십지 안은 동시에 그에게 개인뎍으로 무엇을 희망하고 십지도 안타. 다못 생각할 것은 힘쓸 것은 력사뎍 생활환경을 살피고 그 견디에서 모든 것을 비판하야 어든 사상 목뎍밋헤서 사회뎍으로 운동뎊�으로 그 로력을 뎐개하는 그것뿐이다. 여긔에서 뿐 녀자의 결뎜을 수정하고 댱쳐(長處)를 발휘할 수 잇슬 것이라 한다.

第二號 人間들?
康O煥

지금 녀자들은 예전 녀자와 달너서 자긔들의 흉을 보면 『그것은 참말임니다. 그러나 그럿케 맨들어 논 것은 누구의 죄임닛가?』한다. 그러고 또 『오랫동안 남자들이 압박을 하고 가두어 놋코하야 무리로 그럿케 병신을 맨들어 논 것이 아님닛가. 그러닛가 녀자 자신의 죄는 결코 아님니다』한다. 꽤 영악해젓다.
그러나 엇지해서 낫바젓다 읏지해서 잘못되엿다 하는 까닭을 들어 놋는 것으로써 그 허물을 피할 수 잇다 하면 이 세상에서 엇더한 지둑한 죄를 지은 자라도 책망을 듯지 안케 될 것이다.＜68＞
더구나 이번 『別乾坤』잡지가 나에게 요구하는 것은 녀자들의 결뎜 잘못을 통쾌하게 공박하라는 것이다. 아초에 읏지해서 그럿케 되엿다는 것은 여긔서 이약이할 것이 아니요 지금 녀자들의 가지고 잇는 결뎜 몃 가지를 고대로 로골뎍으로 써보기로 한다. 목을 베여 통쾌할 것이 아니요 쌍소리로 욕을 하여 통쾌할 것이 아닌즉 톄면 인사 집어치우고 결뎜 고대로 우리가 하고 십흔 말을 고대로 쓰는 것이 조곰쯤은 통쾌할 것도 갓고 또 그리하는 것이 녀자들 자신의 귀에 찔니는 힘도 잇슬 것 갓해서 톄면 점잔의 비단보자긔는 집어치우고 맨살대로 써본다.

『녀자는 가짓말장이고 진실이 업고 은혜를 모르고, 그 우에 음악이나 시가(詩歌)나 조각(彫刻)갓흔 것은 전혀 알지 못한다. 결국 녀자는 뎨이호(第二號)의 인간이다』라고 쇼펜하웰이 말한엿다. 외국 사람의 말일망정 뎨이호 인간이란 것은 통쾌한 말이다. 사실로 녀자들은 자긔의식이 업시 사는 것 갓다.
생활이 자긔 자신에게 맛고 안 맛는 것이 문뎨가 아니요. 남의 눈에 엇더케 보이나가 그들에게는 문뎨다. 사람을 잡아먹고 사는 야만인종이 사람의 해골을 만히 느러놋코 자랑을 삼는 그것보다도 더 의미업시 살림치레를 하는 것이 녀자들이다. 밤에 방속에서 오좀을 누기 위하야는 한방에 하나나 둘쯤 잇스면 족하겟지...그런데 큰요강 중요강 작은요강 알요강 길을 맛추어 재판 우에 좍-느려 놋코 안저서 손님이 오면 자랑을 한다. 뒤주 우에는 텅텅 브인 꼿항아리를 사긔전처럼 느러놋코 오는 손님이 부러워하는 것을 보고 만족해한다. 필요가 잇거나 업거나 묵어운 패물을 머리에 꼿고 가슴에 매달고 땀을 뻘뻘 흘니면서 남이 보고 조와하는 말을 듯고 십어한다.
그건 예전 무지한 녀자의 말이지 현대 교육을 밧은 사람이 어데 그러냐고 입끗을 뺏죽하는  거륵하신 신녀성께서는 칠 줄도 모르는 피아노를 터줏대감처럼 모시여 놋코 곡목도 모르는 류성긔 소리판을 모아 놋코 차저오는 동모들의 부러워하는 것을 보고 만족해 한다. 그러나 그것쯤은 눈감ㅅ고 보고라도 결혼을 할 때에 그 남성이 자긔의 배우자로서 모든 조건이 맛느냐 안 맛느냐는 것은 넷재 다섯재로도 생각 안하고 그 남자와 결혼을 한다면 남들이 부러워 할가 안 할가만 생각하고 만족해 결혼하는 것을 보면 도리혀 불상해진다.(늙도록 결혼을 못하고 이불속에서 우는 신녀성이 차차 늘어가는 것도 그것이 아니냐.) 아아 불상한 사람들이여! 엽헤서 보아줄 사람이 업스면 하로도 못살 사람들이여. 언제나 자긔를 잘 알게 되고 언제나 자긔에게 충실해보려나.

『녀자는 머리가 길고 지혜가 짜르다』는 말(俚諺)이 러시아에 잇다. 그러나 지금 녀자들은 『머리가 짧어지고 그 대신 지혜가 길어젓다』고 하리라.＜69＞
그러나 그들의 길어진 지혜라는 것은 마음대로 싀집사리를 이리저리 뛰여다니는 변명을 꿈여내는 데만 나타날 뿐이요. 달니는 쥐꼬리만큼도 보이지 안는다.
아즉 나희 어린 녀학생은 말도 말고 상당한 지식이 잇다고 자처도 하고 남이 알아주기도 하는 녀류 인물을 마주하고 안저서 좀, 진중한 의론을 하여 보아라. 삼십분이 못되여서 그는 발을 주무르고 하폄을 시작하면서 옷맵시만 만지고 잇슬 것이니 녀류 중의 인물이라고 상당한 대접을 해서는 못쓴다. 진중한 이약이를 삼십분씩 끌어도 못쓴다. 그 대신 누구는 누구와 련애를 하고 누구와 결혼한 누구는 엇지엇지되엿고, 누구집 피아노는 몃백 원짜리요, 누구는 면백 원짜리 반지를 삿다고 이약이를 계속해 보아라. 아츰브터 맛나 안저서 저녁해 지는 것을 보면서도 오히려 니러날 줄을 모를 것이니.
녀류 유지인 척하고 희한스럽게 음악희 안인 강연회에 입장하는 녀자가 더러 잇다고 함부로 감복하여서도 못쓴다. 나종에 물어보면 아모개도 오고 아모씨도 동부인하야 왓드라는 것은 알어도 어느 연사가 무슨 말을 엇더케 끗울 맛첫는지는 전혀 모르면서 배포가 유하시다. 자긔 광고를 하러 다니는지 남에게 내여 세워 자랑할만한 유명한 신랑을 물색하러 다니는지 그것까지는 몰나도 엇잿던 딱한 일이다.

녀자중에도 각-금 재조잇는 동무가 헤성갓치 생긴다. 소설을 잘 쓴다는 녀자도, 시를 잘 쓴다는 녀자도, 연설을 잘 한다는 녀자도, 그림을 잘 그린다는 녀자도 모다 각-금 생겨나와서 뭇사람의 귀염을 밧는다. 그런 사람들은 다, 개성에 눈떳고 리성이 산 사람들이라. 나는 무슨 파야요 나는 무슨무슨 주의야요 하고 칼날갓치 마섭게 딱 밧틔고 서서 조선땅이 좁다고 주장을 해댄다.
그러나 그들이 남편을 갈지 말아야지 새서방만 갈어 드리는 날이면 그 잇흔날 새벽브터 홱 변해버리고 아조 딴 주의자가 된다. 일본 녀자의 성(姓)이 싀집가는 잇흔날브터 남편의 성으로 변하는 것보다 더 속하게 더 똑똑하게 남편의 가즌 주의로 변해버린다. 결혼을 다섯 번 하면 다섯 번 변하고 아홉 번 하면 아홉 번 변한다. 새서방이란 것이 가즌 힘히 그럿틋 위대하단 말인가. 녀자의 정신이란 것이 원래 그럿틋 재조를 잘 브리는 것이란 말인가.
『현대 녀자는 머리가 짧어젓다. 그리고 지혜는 더 짧어젓다!』

『녀자가 조와하는 녀자는 거울 속의 녀자』라고 하는 리언(俚諺)이 독일에 잇다. 물론 시긔가 만타는 말이다.
아모리 잘 생긴 녀자를 볼지라도 거울 속에 빗치는 자긔처럼 잘 생기지는 못햇다고 생각하는 것이 녀자의 시긔 만흔 마음이다. 이 마음 때문에 이 근성 때믄에 그들의 온갖 염체업는 로력이 생긴다.＜70＞
남자도 그럿치만 분수 업시 층찬하면 도리혀 모욕인 줄을 어리석은 남자라도 안다. 그러나 녀자란 인물은 딴청의 층찬을 해주어도 층찬이면 깃버한다. 『아모씨는 나를 만나는 때마다 날더러 미인이라고 그래 우수어 죽겟서』한다. 우수어 죽겟다는 말은 염체 업는 가짓말이고 층찬해 주는 이의 손이 어데까지 긔여드는 줄 모르고 그냥 녹아버린다. 갑싼 련애를 하려면 계집을 층찬해 줄 말을 만히 배화 가저야 된다. 바른 말을 해 가지고는 녀자의 시긔 만흔 마음을 근드려보지도 못할 것이닛가... .
녀자의 시긔심은 속알지 업는 우월감(優越感)을 가즈려 한다. 툭하면 입끗이 뺏죽 조곰 점잔 차리는 녀자면 마음이 뺏죽 『흥! 그까짓 것이』하는 마음씨다.
그 우월감을 갓기 위하야 녀자들은 흔히 동무의 련애에 틈을 베집고 뛰여 들어 우승긔를 엇으려 한다. 그러고 동모의 남편을 뺏아서 가지는 간통죄도 만히는 련애가 식이는 것이 아니라 우월감을 가즈려는 욕심이 식인다.
『흥! 네가 암만 미인이라고 해도 너의 서방은 너에게보다도 나에게 더 반한 걸...』
아아 무서운 일이다.
『천 사람의 녀자는 싸홈 업시 한테 살 수 잇서도 단 두사람의 녀자는 비록 한 형뎨간이라도 싸홈 업시 살지 못한다』고 따미-르가 잘러 말한 것이 잇느니라.

우슴과 눈물이 두 가지가 아즉까지도 녀자들의 무긔(武器)노릇을 한다.
그러고 이 두 가지를 가지고는 창기(娼妓)노릇을 하지 안는 녀자가 업다. 형편이 조흘대로 얼마던지 우서주고 얼마든지 눈물을 흘려보이는 것이 그들의 창부뎍 재조다.
딴 남자 상관을 한 날은 본남편보고 부즈런히 웃는다. 우슴 재조가 모자라서 탄로가 된 때에는 홀작홀작 눈물을 꺼낸다. 후회의 눈물인 줄 알고 측은히 녁여서는 못쓴다. 부즈런히 웃는 것이 정말 우슴이 아니엿든과 갓치 그 눈물이 참말 눈물이 아니다.
우슴으로 속이랴다 못 속이고 『이래도 안 속을 터이냐』하고 꺼집어내는 무긔다.

결국 뎨이호의 인간이라 하면 따로히 딴 로력으로 연구하지 안흐면 도뎌히 그 본질을 알 수 업는 것이라고 미루어 버려둘가... .
『나는 내가 녀자이면서 녀자보다도 남자를 조와함니다. 그런다고 웃지는 말아요. 조와하는 리유는 남자이닛가 조흔 것이 아니라 녀자가 아니닛가 조흔 것임니다』고 오즉 갑갑해서 크리스챠나 녀왕(女王)이 이런 말을 하엿스랴.

쓰자면 한이 업겟스닛가 그만두거니와 처음에 말한＜71＞ 것처럼 『말은 참말이지만 녀자를 누구들이 그럿케 맨들어 노앗느냐』하여서는 안된다. 『남자에게는 그런 결뎜이 업는 줄 아느냐』하여서도 안된다.
남자에게 그보다 더한 결뎜이 잇느냐 하는 것도 별문뎨요 녀자들이 애초에 누구의 잘못으로 그리되게 되엿느나 햐는 것도 별문뎨다. 지금 현재 녀자들에게 이러한 결뎜이 잇다는 그것만을 숨김업시 지뎍한 것뿐이다.
언제나 뎨일호 인간이 되려는가? 이제브터라도 엇더케 해서 새 시긔를 지으려는가. (다른 변명보다도) 그것이 듯고 십다. 알고 십다.

男子 잡어먹는 舊女子
朴O漢

신수 궁한 놈은 이런데도 신수가 궁하다. 말하면 듯기나 하고 욕하면 성이라도 빨근 낼만한 트레머리 깡둥치마 신녀자가 걸리지 안코 말을 하면 먹엇는지 드럿는지 욕을하면 압흔지 쓰린지 감각도 못하는 구녀자가 하필 걸닐 것이 무엇이랴? 그러나 엇잿든 다행한 일이다. 아무리 시비를 거러도 반대한 마대가 업슬 터이닛가. 톡톡이 덤비여보자.
그런데 구녀자에 대한 인격 문뎨나 또는 사회상 지위문뎨에 대해서는 여긔서 말하지 안켓다. 그것을 말하랴면 물론 과거의 도덕문뎨가 나오고 사회제도 문뎨가 나오고 남성들의 죄악이 나오고 녀자들의 못생긴 본색까지 나오게 되야 정말 굉장한 시비가 버으러 질 것이다.
그러닛가 모든 것을 과거의 도덕 또는 사회제도에 책임을 맛겨두고 그만한 것을 시인한 우에서 뒤도 끈고 압도 끈고(去頭截尾) 다만 지금까지에 구녀자가 가지고 잇는 그 본색을 고대로 그려놋키로 한다.

조곰 성나면 샛듯하고 만히 성나면 콜작콜작 우는 것이 구녀자의 본색이요, 좀곰 깃부면 방그레 웃고 크게 깃부면 목졋이 넘어가게 깔깔 웃는 것이 구녀자의 본색이요(신녀자 亦然) 메누리 미워하고 딸을 고와하며 아들보다 영감을 고와하는 것이 녀자의 본색이다. 가는 곳은 딸네집 안이면 자긔의 본가 뿐이요 안는 곳은 아궁압이 안이면 마루끗치엿다.＜72＞
朝飯夕粥이나 하면 더업는 행복으로 알고, 남편이 술이나 투젼이나 안하면 더업는 행복으로 알고, 아들형제 딸형제만 두면 더업는 행복으로 알고, 사위 엇고 메누리 엇으면 할일 다한 것으로 알고 외손자 업고 친손자 압세우면 至上의 팔자로 알고 금비녀 은指環이면 소지물은 다된 듯히 하야 日日夜夜 방구석 부억구석에서 영감 조르기 아들을 욕하기 메누리 흉보기 딸에게 니잡피기...이리하야 파리와 싸우고 몬지와 싸우며 걸네와 싸우고 바늘과 싸우고 부집깽이와 싸우고 박아지와 싸우고 강아지와 싸우고 도야지와 싸우고 병아리와 싸우고 그리해서 먹고 싸고 싸고 먹고 입엇다 버섯다 버섯다 입엇다 하는 밧게는 아무것도 보잘 것이 업다.
누가 가면 대문 닷고 안방으로 뛰여들기, 누가 길을 무르면 샛듯하고 도라서기, 아들의 친구가 밥 한 그릇만 공으로 먹고 가도 박아지 긁기, 영감이 하로밤만 나아가 자고 와도 붉으락푸루락...하는 즛 생각하는 즛이 이런 것밧게는 아무 것도 업다. 문밧게 란리가 나는지 집 뒤에 도적이 오는지 세상이 망하는지 흥하는지 사회가 썩어지는지 푸러지는지 도모지 모르고 잇다.
이것을 다시 주려서 간단히 말하면 조선의 구녀자는 자기의 아들이나 딸이나 남편이나 아버지나 즉 친혈족 밧게는 다시 사람이 업다. 단순히 가족주의 그것뿐이다. 그리고 잔소리와 눈물 그것뿐이다. 보수와 비겁, 창조성은 毋論 업고 좀더 사회를 이롭게 하겟다는 의무심은 조곰도 업다. 퇴보는 조와하나 진취는 실혀하며 안으로 기여 들기는 조와하나 밧그로 나아가기는 실혀한다. 이것이 됴선 구녀자들이 가지고 잇는 총본색이다. 이것을 다시 한번 주려서 말하면 됴선의 구녀자는 자기의 남편이나 아들이나 그것을 뜻어먹는 외에는 자력으로의 무엇은 업다.＜73＞
＜62-73＞