잡지명	별건곤 제8호
발행일	1927년 08월 17일
기사제목	男女交際史 (History of Male-Female Relationships)
필자	講師 崔鉉培
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

History of Male-Female Relationships
						Lecturer Ch'oe Hyŏn-bae

The term "male-female relationships" sounds very new these days, and the idea of making male-female relationships free seems like something only new people do, but in reality, since men and women make up half of humanity each, it is unreasonable for men and women to only associate with their own half. Therefore, the freedom of male-female relationships seems like the newest thing, but in reality, it has existed since the beginning of humanity. In the West, Adam and Eve were interacting without any relevance to each other until they were tempted by a snake, ate the fruit of wisdom, and felt ashamed of being naked, so they covered their private parts. This can be said to be the moment when they became aware of sex in the primitive male-female relationship. The Old Testament says that Adam and Eve, who lived in the Garden of Eden, fell into the world of suffering because they ate the fruit of wisdom, but because they ate this fruit, they became aware of sex, and for thousands of years, talented men and beautiful women have been whispering sweet nothings under the flowers and moon. Lovers should hold a thanksgiving meeting for this snake.

Primitive Male-Female Relationships

In the history of every country, there is a myth that the ancestor of humankind or the founder of the country was born from the primitive relationship between men and women. In the case of Korea, there is a story that Hwanung Ch'ŏnwangg (桓雄天王) and a woman who transformed from a bear after eating mugwort and garlic gave birth to Tangun (檀君), the founder of the Korean people. In Japan, there is a story that the male god Isanagi-no-mikoto (イサナギノミコト) and the female god Isanami-no-mikoto (イサナミノミコト) chased each other around a pillar, and if he filled her deficiencies, the country would prosper. In other words, this is the primitive state of male-female relationships, and it is said that this is how the land of Japan, called Ōyashima-kuni (大八洲國), was created. From this, it can be seen that male-female relationships are the basis for creating the universe and humanity. <112>

Men Also Pretended to Give Birth

In this primitive era, male-female relationships were free, and women chose men as they pleased and had sexual intercourse with them, so women's rights were very strong, and our men followed women, saying, "Please love me!" As women's rights gradually increased, men became followers. Men did not know how to produce, but women knew how to produce, so women became the mothers of many men and sat firmly, boasting, "You men are all children of us women." Because of this, men did not know the relationship between sexual intercourse and childbirth, and they were only amazed by women's childbirth. They constantly observed and researched it. Eventually, they saw that women were in great pain when giving birth, and they realized the relationship between this pain and childbirth. When a woman covered herself with a blanket and groaned in labor, men, even though they did not feel pain, pretended to have stomachaches, covered themselves with blankets, and lay down. When the woman gave birth, they would claim,
"I gave birth to this child."
Then the woman would say to the man,
"I have been in pain and given birth until now. What does it have to do with you?"
The man would say,
"Were you the only one in pain? I was in pain too."
But in the end, the man was defeated, and women's rights increased even more, and women were also the masters of society. This is the so-called era of matriarchy.

From Women's Rights to Men's Rights

Later, the private property system gradually emerged, and physical strength became necessary to protect private property. Since men had more physical strength, men naturally became the masters of society in order to protect property rights, and women's rights plummeted. Women also became men's possessions, and men chose women, locked them in rooms, and said, "You are my property." After this, women became appendages of men, and other than giving birth, they tried to please men. Because of this, all the men of that time went around plundering women, just as they plundered other properties. In this way, free marriage based on free male-female relationships became marriage by abduction. In that era, when men found out that there was a virgin or a widow in a house, they would light lamps in the dark of night and go to the bride's house to abduct her. Even now, when people get married during the day, they carry lanterns, which seems to be a relic of the time when they carried lamps when they abducted brides in the dark of night. Therefore, it was from this era that male-female relationships became unfree.

The Beginning of Women's Restraints

After that, in order to confine women, in places like China, they cut off women's toes when they were young and made leather pouches to put on them. While other parts of the body developed, their feet did not grow, so even after they became adults, they could only hobble around with feet the size of bird eggs, struggling to go from the room to the main gate, making it physically impossible for women to move freely. Also, the unreasonable so-called morality that "men and women should not sit together after the age of seven" and "women should stay inside and not speak outside" arose, and the issue of chastity became a nuisance. <113>

Forcibly Maintaining Chastity

The issue of chastity arose from the idea that men owned women, and although each country is somewhat different, it has become a great nuisance in every country. In some parts of China, when a man went on a long journey, he would give the woman medicine to eat. If the woman ate the medicine, red rashes would appear all over her body, and it was said that if she had sexual intercourse with any man, the rashes would disappear, so she had to keep her chastity until the man returned, otherwise the man would find out immediately. In Europe, when merchants went on long journeys, they made chastity belts to keep women chaste, locked the woman's private parts, and the man who went on the journey would take the key with him.
However, the issue of male-female relationships that I am talking about is a separate issue from this issue of chastity. I am only pointing out that there are such problems in a society that blocks male-female relationships and views women as possessions. Also, it is not a question of whether men are better or women are better. Some people say that women are born to be playthings for men and that men should choose women, but I do not think so. When I was studying in Japan, I went on a field trip somewhere and saw ducks playing in a pond on my way back. Among them, the males were much more beautiful than the females. This became a problem after I returned to the dormitory, and we discussed why the males of all birds and animals were more beautiful than the females. If there had been someone in the group who knew a lot about natural history at that time, the problem would have been solved immediately, but since there was no such person, we argued for several hours. Eventually, we concluded that the reason why males are more beautiful than females is that they want to win the favor of the females.

Men Are More Beautiful Than Women

However, the question became why men are not more beautiful than women. Again, we argued back and forth, but eventually, we came to the conclusion that men are more beautiful than women. First of all, even if you look at the body naked, the man's body is better. Not only that, but even if you compare the private parts, the man is better. Also, beards and mustaches are a kind of decoration that men have but women do not. The reason why women look more beautiful is that women put on powder and oil to look beautiful to men. The starting point of putting on powder and oil is that they are originally less beautiful than men, so they have to pretend. This is just a digression, and I will return to the main issue of male-female relationships.

Male-Female Relationships Are the Law of Nature

As I said above, male-female relationships have been free since the primitive era, but they have been made unnatural artificially in the middle. If it was artificially blocked like that, would the so-called undesirable things that arise between men and women, which scholars point out, have disappeared? Absolutely not. It is human nature to want to do more of what you are told not to do. Because it was blocked like this, men thought of women as even more mysterious, and because men have not seen women as people but as sexual objects, there have been even more victims.

Let Them Interact From a Young Age

Then, when men and women engage in male-female relationships, what both men and women should think about is that they should not associate each other with sexual issues, but treat each other as people to people. In this way, both parties should have a thorough understanding that this relationship is an extremely ordinary thing between people and that there is nothing mysterious about it. To do this, we should throw away the idea that men and women should not sit together after the age of seven and let boys and girls interact from a young age. That is, we should have co-education from elementary school to middle school to university, and we should allow boys and girls to interact freely at home. What does it have to do with the children interacting when the parents interact with each other? If male-female relationships become a habit from a young age, there will be no thought of seeing each other as mysterious.

Discarding Mysterious Notions

If male-female relationships are primarily interactions between people and there is nothing mysterious about them, and if love issues arise from understanding each other in terms of personality, thought, and other aspects, then it will be a love between self-aware men and women. Looking at the current state of male-female relationships, because male-female relationships have been blocked for a long time and then broken open, they treat each other with mysterious thoughts, associate each other with sexual issues, and fall into promiscuity or rash marriages. Because the original starting point was so unfounded, so-called love marriages mostly fall into unfortunate situations where they feel disillusionment.

Promiscuity Is a Major Taboo

However, my words about the freedom of male-female relationships and free love do not mean that men and women should be promiscuous with regard to the issue of chastity. If the issue of chastity is promiscuous between men and women, various harms and misfortunes will arise. I will postpone talking about this because it is too long, and here I will only emphasize the freedom of male-female relationships. Since humans are half male and half female, 10 million of the 20 million Koreans are women. If these 10 million women stay inside and cannot display their characteristics, it will have a great impact on the improvement of national culture. Therefore, we should all open the doors and the 20 million brothers and sisters should all come out and strive to improve culture, which is to adapt to the laws of the universe and nature. <115>

**Named Entities**

崔鉉培	Ch'oe Hyŏn-bae
桓雄天王	Hwanung Ch'ŏnwangg
檀君	Tangun
イサナギノミコト	Isanagi-no-mikoto
イサナミノミコト	Isanami-no-mikoto
大八洲國	Ōyashima-kuni
朝鮮	Chosŏn



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제8호
발행일	1927년 08월 17일
기사제목	男女交際史
필자	講師 崔鉉培
기사형태	논설

男女交際史
						講師 崔鉉培
男女交際라고 하면 퍽- 요사이 새로 난 말 갓고 男女交際를 自由로 한다면 바로 무슨 新人이 하는 것 갓지만 實相 人類中 男女가 半分씩 난호인 以上 男子나 女子가 各 半分끼리만 交際를 한다는 것은 不合理한 일이다. 이러기 때문에 이 男女交際의 自由라는 것이 가장 새로운 일 갓지만은 實相은 人類가 처음 생기면서부터 잇든 일이다. 西洋으로 보면 『아담』과 『이브』가 서로 아모 相關 업시 交際를 하다가 배암에게 꼬임을 바다 智慧의 果實을 따 먹고 男子나 女子가 서로 벌거버슨 것이 羞恥스런 생각이 나서 局部를 가리엿다 하니 말하자면 이것이 男女元始交際에서 性에 눈이 띈 것이라 하겟다. 舊約에는 그 智慧의 果實을 먹엇기 때문에 樂園에 살든 『아담』과 『이브』가 現世의 苦界로 墮落하엿다 하나 이 果實을 따먹엇기 때문에 性에 눈이 떠서 人類가 생긴지 멧 千年間 花朝月夕에 才子佳人이 꿀 가튼 戀愛를 속살거리게 되엿스니 戀愛至上主義者들은 이 배암에게 謝恩會라도 하여야 할 것이다.

原始男女의 交際
어느 나라 歷史를 보든지 男女의 原始交際로 或 入類의 始祖를 나앗느니 或 國土를 나앗느니하는 神話가 잇다. 朝鮮으로 보아도 桓雄天王이라는 이와 熊이 쑥과 마늘을 먹고 變成한 女人과 朝鮮民族始祖 檀君을 나앗다는 말이 잇고 日本에는 『イサナギノミコト』라는 男神이 『イサナミノミコト』라는 女神을 기둥을 둘러서 쫏차다니며 내남는 것으로 네 不足한 곳을 채이면 國家각 昌盛한다는 말이 잇스니 말하자면 이것이 男女交際의 原始狀態이고 이 때문에 大八洲國이라는 日本의 國土를 創造하엿다는 말이 잇다. 이로보면 男女交際는 宇宙人類를 創造하는 根本이다.＜112＞

男子도 生産한체
이 原始時代에는 男女交際가 自由로웟고 女子가 男子를 보아서 마음대로 골라서 性交를 하엿기 때문에 女子의 權利가 여간 세이지 안이하여 우리 男子는 女子를 따라다니며 나를 좀사랑하여 주오! 하엿섯다. 이럴수록 女子는 漸漸 權利가 增長하야 男子는 隨從軍이 되엿고 男子는 生産할 줄을 모르는데 女子는 生産을 할 줄 알기 때문에 女子는 만흔 男子의 母가 되여 가지고 아조 떡 버틔고 안저서 『너희 男子는 모다 우리 女子의 子이다』하고 뽑내엿섯다. 이 때문에 男子는 다만 性交와 生産이 어떠한 關係가 잇는지를 모르고 다만 女子의 生産하는 것만이 神奇하여 恒常 보면서 硏究를 하다가 畢竟 女子가 生産할 때이면 몹시 압하하는 것을 보고 이 苦痛과 生産이 무슨 關係가 잇는 줄 알고 女子가 애를 나으려고 배가 압하서 니불을 쓰고 알는 것을 보면 男子는 배도 안압흔 것을 空然히 배압흐다고 니불을 쓰고 누엇다가 女子가 生産을 하여 노으면
『이 아이는 내가 낫다고』
主張하엿다. 그리면 女子는 男子에게
『나는 이 때까지 배가 압흐고 나앗는데 네가 무슨 相關이냐』하면 男子는
『너만 배가 압핫느냐? 나도 배가 압핫섯다』
하고 겻고 트러보앗스나 畢竟 男子가 慘敗를 하여 女子에게 權利가 더가고 女子는 亦是 社會의 主人이엇섯스니 이것이 이른바 母權中心의 時代이다.

女權에서 男權에
그 後로 次次 私有財産制度가 생기고 그 私有를 保護하기 위하야 腕力이 必要하게 되엿고 腕力은 男子가 더 만흐닛가 自然 男子가 所有權을 保護하느라고 社會의 主人公이 되닛가 女子의 權利가 뚝 떠러지어 女子도 男子의 所有物 가티 되여서 男子가 女子를 골라서 房에 가두어 노코 『너희는 내 物件이다』 하엿스니 이 後로 女子는 男子의 附屬物가치 되여 生産하는 以外에 男子의 마음을 맛치려고 모양을 내게 되엿다. 이 때문에 其時代의 모든 男子들이 다른 財産을 掠奪하듯이 女子도 掠奪을 하러 다니엿다. 이리하야 男女自由交際의 結婚은 掠奪結婚이 되엿다. 그 時代에는 어느 집에 處女가 잇든지 寡婦가 잇는 줄 알면 男子들이 暗夜에 燈을 켜 가지고 새악씨 집에 가서 掠奪을 하엿스니 只今도 婚姻하는데 白晝에 婚行을 하면서도 燈籠을 가지고 다니는 것이 모다 暗野에 掠奪結婚할 때에 燈불을 켜 가지고 다니든 遺物인 것 갓다. 그럼으로 男女交際가 自由롭지 못하게 되기는 이러한 時代부터이다.

女子束縛의 初期
그 後로 女子를 가두어 두느라고 中國 가튼데서는 女子＜113＞의 발가락을 어릴 때 자르고 가죽 주머니를 해 신기여 身體의 다른 部分은 모다 發達이 되면서도 발은 자라지를 안이하야 어른이 된 후에도 새알만한 발을 됫둑거리며 房에서 大門間을 나가려도 애를 쓰게 되여 女子出入의 自由를 肉體上으로부터 못하게 하고 또 男女七歲면 不同席이니 『婦人은 居內而不言外』이니 하는 不合理한 所謂 道德이라는 것이 생기고 貞操問題라는 것이 싯그럽게 되엿다.

貞操를 强制로 守節케
이 貞操問題에 對하야는 男子가 어떤 女子를 所有한다는 觀念에서 생긴 것이니 各國이 多少는 모다 다르지만 어느 나라에든지 非常히 싯그럽게 되엿다. 中國 어떤 地方에서는 男子가 遠行을 하려면 女子에게 藥을 먹이는데 女子가 그 藥을 먹으면 온 몸에 붉은 發瘢이 되고 이것이 어떤 男子와 한 번 性交를 하면 이 發瘢이 곳 업서 지는 것임으로 男子가 도라오기까지 꼭 貞操를 직히어야지 萬一 他男子와 交接을 하면 男子에게 곳 發見이 된다는 말이 잇고 歐洲에서는 遠行할 際 商人들이 女子에게 貞操를 직히게 하기 爲하야 貞操帶라는 것을 만들어서 女子의 局部을 채어노코 遠行하는 男子가 그 열쇠를 가지는 일까지 잇섯다.
그러나 내가 말하는 男女交際問題와 이 貞操問題와는 別問題이다. 다만 男女交際를 막고 女子를 所有物視하는 社會에 이러한 病瘼이 잇다는 것을 말하여 둘 뿐이다. 또 男子가 나으니 女子가 나으니 하는 것도 問題가 안이다. 或人은 女子는 男子의 玩弄物로 天生생기고 男子가 女子를 골라야 한다는 말이 잇스나 나는 그러치 안타고 생각한다. 내가 日本留學할 때 어느 곳에 修學旅行을 하고 도라오는데 어떤 池塘에서 오리가 노는 것을 보앗다. 그 中에 雄이 훨신 雌보다 美가 잇서 보히엿다. 이것이 寄宿舍에 도라온 後에 한 問題가 되여 모든 禽獸에 雄이 雌보다 낫게 생긴 것은 엇지한 일이냐? 하는 것으로 討論이엿는데 이 때 만일 그 座中에 博物을 잘 아는 사람이 잇섯드면 금방 解決될 問題이엇만 그러치 못하야 여러 時間을 서로 다토다가 畢竟은 雄이 雌보다 더 곱게 생긴 것은 雄이 雌의 歡心을 사려는데서 나왓다는 말로 歸結되엿다.

男子가 女子보다 美人
그러나 人類는 어찌하야 女子보다 男子가 더 美하지 못하냐? 하는 것이 問題가 되여 亦是 甲論乙駁하다가 畢竟은 男子가 女子보다 더 美하는데로 結論이 되고 말앗는데 爲先 肉體로 보드래도 발가벗고 나서면 男子의 肉體가 더 나을 뿐 아니라 局部를 比較하여도 男子가 더 낫다고 볼 수 잇스며 鬚髥도 一種裝飾인데 男子는 잇스되 女子는 업스며 女子가 더 곱게 보히는 것은 女子가 男子에게 곱게 보히려고 粉을 바른다 기름을 바른다 하기 때문에 그런 것이니 粉 바르고 기름 바르는 그 出發이 어대서 낫느냐 하면 原來 男子＜114＞만 못 하닛가 假裝하느라고 그런 것을 하게 되엿다는 말까지 낫섯다. 이것은 一揷話에 不過하고 다시 本 問題인 男女交際에 드러가려한다.

男女交際는 自然之理
우에도 말한 바와 가티 男女交際라는 것은 原始時代에서부터 自由交際가 잇섯든 것인데 그것을 中間에 人爲的으로 不自然하게 만들어 노앗든 것이다. 人爲적으로 그러케 막앗스면 男女間에 생기는 바=所謂 道學者가 指稱하는 바=不美한 일이 업서젓느냐 하면 絶對로 그러치 안타. 무엇이든지 하지 말라면 더하고 십흔 것이 人情이다. 이러케 막아노앗기 때문에 男子가 女子를 보면 더욱 神奇하게 생각하고 從來에 男子가 女子를 사람으로 보지 안코 性問題로 보기 때문에 犧牲者가 더욱 만히 생기엿든 것이다.

幼少時부터 交際케
그러면 男女交際하는데 男子나 女子나 다 各各 생각할 것은 男女間 서로 볼 때에 性問題를 聯想하며 서로 對하지 말고 彼此 人과 人의 交際로 對하는 것이 조켓다. 그리하야 彼此間 서로 이 交際가 人과 人 間에 하는 極히 平凡한 일이요 아모 神奇한 것이 업다는 觀念이 徹底하여야 할 것이다. 이러자면 男女七歲不同席이니 어쩌니 하는 말은 집어치우고 少年時代부터 男女交際를 식이여야겟다. 卽 小學校, 中學校, 大學에까지 男女共學을 하게 하고 家庭에서도 少年少女의 交際를 自由로 식히는 것이 조흐니 父母들끼리 서로 交際하는데 그 子女가 交際하기로 무슨 相關이 잇스랴 이러케 少年時代부터 男女交際가 習慣이 되면 彼此에 아모 神奇롭게 아는 생각이 업서질 것이다.

神奇觀念破棄
이러케 男女交際가 첫재 人과 人과의 交際요 아모 神奇로울 것이 업다는 觀念으로 交際하다가 그 中에서 性格, 思想 其他 여러 가지 方面으로 서로 理解하게 되여 戀愛問題가 생긴다면 그야말로 自覺한 男女間의 戀愛가 될 것이다. 只今 男女交際의 現狀을 보건대 男女間 交際가 오래 막히엿다 터진 것이기 때문에 彼此 神奇로운 생각으로 서로 對하고 彼此 곳 性問題를 聯想하며 곳 野合 又는 輕率한 結婚으로 떠러지는 것이니 原來 出發이 너무도 根據가 업섯기 때문에 所謂 戀愛結婚이라는 것이 大槪 幻滅을 늣기는 不幸한데로 떠러지고 마는 것이다.

放縱은 一大禁物
그러나 나의 男女交際의 自由 及 自由戀愛에 對한 말은 決코 貞操問題에 對하야 男女가 放縱하라는 意味는 안이다. 男女間에 貞操問題가 放縱한다면 여러 가지 弊害와 不幸이 생긴다. 이에 對한 말은 極히 長遑하니 뒤로 미루고 여긔는 男女交際의 自由만을 力說하야둔다. 人間에는 男女相半하니 朝鮮 2千萬 中에도 1千萬이 女子이다. 그런데 이 1千萬이라는 女子가 안에 잇서서 그 特色을 發揮하지 못한다면 民族文化 向上에도 큰 關係가 잇슬 것이니 다가치 門를 열고 2千萬 兄弟姉妹가 모다 나서서 文化向上에 힘쓸 것이니 이것은 宇宙自然의 理에 順應하는 것이다.＜115＞
＜112-115＞