잡지명	별건곤 제8호
발행일	1927년 08월 17일
기사제목	풍장이 선교사 (Missionary Who Became a Corpse in the Wind)
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellany)

Missionary Who Became a Corpse in the Wind

A certain American missionary who had been in China (中國) for a long time and returned, said in a speech after prayer, "Everyone, there is no country in the world that kills people as much as China (中國) does (execution). They kill them at the drop of a hat. However, if you have money, you can buy someone else to be executed in your place, so wealthy people usually buy poor people to die for them. Therefore, in China, there are many people who make a living by being executed in place of others and live comfortably."

A Thrifty Mind

Mr. Heolleong, who is known for being clumsy, went outside with his wife late at night for an errand. Because it looked like it was going to rain, his wife said, "Honey, I'm afraid it will rain, so go inside and change into an old overcoat and come out." He said, "Okay, I will," and ran inside, but he didn't come out again until the night was far gone. His wife, unable to wait any longer, went inside to see what was going on. As clumsy as he was, as soon as he took off his overcoat, he took off his vest, and as soon as he took off his vest, he took off his socks, and as soon as he took off his socks, he took off his trousers and jacket, and as soon as he was naked, he covered himself with a blanket and lay down comfortably in bed. <127>

Named Entities

中國	China



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제8호
발행일	1927년 08월 17일
기사제목	풍장이 선교사
기사형태	잡저

풍장이 선교사
풍장이 선교사
중국(中國)에 오래 잇다가 도라 온 미국선교사(宣敎師) 한 분이 긔도 올닌 후에 연설하는 말 『여러분 세계에서 중국이란 나라처럼 사람 만히 죽이(死刑)는 나라는 업슴니다. 툭하면 죽여버리닛가요. 그러나 돈만 잇스면 다른 사람을 사서 대신 사형을 밧게 할 수 잇는고로 대개는 돈 잇는 사람은 가난한 사람을 사서 대신 죽게함니다. 그래서 중국에는 남의 대신 사형 밧는 것으로 직업을 삼어서 안락한 생활을 하는 사람이 만히 잇슴니다』

알뜰한 정신
덤벙대기 잘하는 헐넝이 선생이 느진 밤에 볼일이 잇서서 부인과 함께 대문 밧글 나스는데 비가 올 듯한지라 부인이 『여보 비가 올가 무서우니 드러가서 헌 두루마기와 밧구어 닙고 나오시요』하닛가 『응 그러지』하고 뛰여 드러가더니 밤이 다 깁도록 영영 다시 나오지 안는지라 행길에서 기다리다-못하야 부인이 드러가 보닛가 엇지 헐넝이든지 두루마기 버슨 김에 족기까지 벗고, 족기 버슨 김에 버선까지 벗고, 버선 버슨 김에 바지저고리까지 벗고, 발가버슨 김에 이불을 덥고 자리에 누어 편안히 자드란다.＜127＞
＜127＞