Magazine Title: 삼천리 제5권 제10호
Publication Date: 1933년 10월 01일
Article Title: 地下三千里에 무친 金鑛脈과 有望金鑛 (Gold Veins Buried Under Three Thousand Ri and Promising Gold Mines)
Author: 調査局 (Investigation Bureau)
Article Type: 소식 (News/Report)

地下三千里에 무친 金鑛脈과 有望金鑛
						調査局

Gold is buried and weeping beneath the land of our Peninsula. Governor-General Ugaki dispatched investigation teams of mining engineers to the 13 provinces, had them investigate everything thoroughly, and then boasted that at least 100 million won worth of gold could be dug up annually. Whether this statement is true or false remains to be seen, but in any case, it seems to be a fact that the geology of the Three Thousand Ri land is rich in ore deposits. That's why, in the past, during the old Korean Empire era, quick-witted Americans and Frenchmen (美國人 seems repeated, likely meant French and Americans) obtained mining rights for Unsan, Suan, and other mines from the Korean government before anything else, and Yi Yongik, who was merely a pushcart laborer (推夫) in the mountain valleys, went into Kapsan, dug up a golden calf, presented it to King Kojong, and later rose to the high position of Director of the Royal Treasury (內藏院卿). This fact can be seen not just by looking into the past, but by observing the present.

The eyes of Messrs. Ch'oe Ch'anghak, Pang Ŭngmo, and Kim T'aewŏn, who wandered from valley to valley with just a sledgehammer, becoming prospectors ("德大" - *tŏktae*, prospector/mine speculator), saw the yellowish gold veins spread out, and they instantly became magnates who didn't envy the wealth of the Min family. We don't know for sure, but if luck holds, perhaps dozens or hundreds of second and third Ch'oe Ch'anghaks and Pang Ŭngmos might emerge in the future!

So, when did the Golden Age come to Chosŏn? Or at least, when did the gold mining fever (金鑛熱) begin? After the Great European War, when there was a shortage of gold for specie (正貨), Japanese capitalists first took notice of Chosŏn's mines. Thus, Koga, the king of the Kyūshū mining industry, Kuhara, currently the Secretary-General of the Seiyūkai party and former Minister of Communications, and Fujita of steamship nouveau riche fame—these three major conglomerates (資閥)—brought huge sums of capital and tried their hand at several mines in Hwanghae and P'yŏngan Provinces. However, this first attempt failed. The reasons were the lack of skill among the dispatched engineers and the excessively large investments made, which prevented profitability (採算). Consequently, they all soon withdrew. Thus, in the 11th year of Taishō (1922), Chosŏn's annual gold production was merely around 5.3 million won. Then, the year before last, that is, the 6th year of Shōwa (1931), the Mitsubishi Company suddenly invested funds in the Uik Mine (祐益鑛山) in Hwanghae Province and began operations. This suddenly attracted the attention of Japanese mining entrepreneurs. Subsequently, the Sumitomo Company started work at the Sŏngch'ŏn Gold Mine (成川金鑛) in North P'yŏngan Province, Mr. Ato (后宮氏), a famous mining tycoon from Taiwan's Kinkaseki (金瓜石), took over the Kŭmjŏng Gold Mine (金井金山), and the Naigai Kōgyō Kabushiki Kaisha (內外鑛業株式會社), run by the former South Manchuria Railway president Yamamoto Jōtarō, started work at the Sangju Gold Mine (尙州金鑛). Besides these, countless smaller operators entered the scene. Furthermore, adding fuel to the cries of "Gold mine! Gold mine!" was the Oriental Development Company (東洋拓殖會社), which suddenly invested a huge sum to directly manage the Yŏnghŭng Gold Mine (永興金山) in South Hamgyŏng Province. Thus, the Chosŏn gold mining industry, which had been producing around 5.3 million won annually, experienced unprecedented tension and prosperity, reaching an annual production exceeding double that amount, totaling 10 million won in the 6th year of Shōwa (1931).

And this year, it has shown even greater vitality, jumping from 21 million won in the 7th year of Shōwa (1932) to an estimated 36 million won. This is based on calculating the gold price at 7 won. <40> If calculated based on the recent Chosŏn Bank purchase price of 9 won 35 chŏn, it will break the 40 million won mark. Compared to the 11th year of Taishō (1922), this is exactly 8 times stronger; where else could such an astonishing thing happen?

Moreover, the standards for evaluating gold mines have now changed. In the past, unless the grade reached the ten-thousandths range (萬分臺), or at least 3 parts per hundred thousand (10萬分之 3), people wouldn't even try to mine that gold deposit, nor could it be sold even if they wanted to. However, with the development of the gold mining industry, if only Ashio-style rock drills (足尾式 鑿岩機) are installed, even grades of 1 part per hundred thousand (10萬分之 1) or a few parts per million (100萬分의 몃) can be profitable. Thus, today, gold mines that were abandoned because their gold content was deemed too low are gradually being revived.

The gold mining industry is even more promising for the future. The Government-General strongly encourages gold production as a matter of national policy. The price of gold is steadily rising. Also, for mines with an annual production of 10,000 won or more, the Government-General provides subsidies (보조금). Furthermore, to protect mining operators, they are set to provide all sorts of conveniences, such as expanding assay offices (分折所) and conducting surveys of gold deposits (金床調査), and there's talk that they have even budgeted 3 million won annually for promotion expenses (장려비). It seems plausible.

The introduction has become too long. From now on, we will examine all the gold veins and promising gold mines of the Peninsula. Although there may be distinctions between large and small veins, even just the currently known ones in Chosŏn number in the thousands, and the gold mines currently employing laborers for excavation number over 1,600. Therefore, since it's impossible to list them all individually, our investigation team has surveyed only those mines currently excavating
"Annual production of 10,000 won or more."
And this survey aimed for utmost accuracy. That is, the sources from which the materials were obtained are generally accurate. For example, most of this information comes from the Ministry of Commerce and Industry's Mining Bureau (商工省 鑛山局), or from the Government-General's Mining Division (총독부 광산과), or from the records of major mining entrepreneurs (大鑛業家).
Although stated as a recent survey, much of it is based on the standard date of March 15th of this spring. This is noted as an addendum. (Cut photo is of Mr. Pang Ŭngmo)

Distribution Status of Gold Veins in the 13 Provinces and Promising Gold Mines with Annual Production of 10,000 Won or More

P'yŏngan North Province (平安北道)
First, let's look starting from the northernmost part of the Three Thousand Ri and move downwards. First is the one in Kusŏng (龜城), North P'yŏngan Province <41>.

Samsŏng Gold Mine (三成金鑛)
This is the famous gold mine that made Mr. Ch'oe Ch'anghak a magnate worth 3 million won. It's a common saying that the mountain ranges of Sakchu (朔州), Kusŏng (龜城), Sŏnch'ŏn (宣川), etc., are made not of earth and stone, but of gold and silver, but among them, the land of Kusŏng is particularly good. It seems as though the gold veins that were about to spread into Manchurian territory didn't cross the Yalu River (鴨綠江) water but instead remained in large quantities in North P'yŏngan Province for tens of thousands of years.
This gold mine was sold years ago to the Mitsubishi Mining Co., Ltd. (三菱鑛山株式會社), and its current annual gold production value reaches 430,000 won, employing 534 miners daily. It is a promising gold mine with an unknown amount yet to be mined.

Kyodong Mine (橋洞鑛山)
This is in Sakchu (朔州). This gold mine also has a history of producing a Chosŏn plutocrat (甲富). It produces gold and silver, with an annual output value called at 660,000 won (매년 648千瓦이 産하야 그 가격 66만원을 呼하며 - literally: annually producing 648 thousand *kwa* with its value called at 660,000 won), and employs 1,076 workers daily. Registration number 4,404.
This was owned by the current president of the Chosŏn Ilbo, Mr. Pang Ŭngmo, but is said to have been sold into the hands of Yamamoto Jōtarō. In any case, it is one of the mines where gold is pouring out.

Tae'yudong Mine (大楡洞鑛山)
This is also in Tae'yudong, Ch'angsŏng County (昌城郡 大楡洞), North P'yŏngan Province, and is managed by the Tae'yudong Kwangsan Kabushiki Kaisha (大楡洞鑛山株式會社). It employs 1,505 workers daily and counts an annual value of 590,000 won.

Unsan Gold Mine (雲山金鑛)
This is also an amazingly good gold mine with an annual value of 270,000 won. It employs 1,643 miners daily and has complete facilities such as rock drills (鑿岩機). However, it is not managed by Koreans.

Ŭiju Mine (義州鑛山)
This is in Ŭiju (義州). Owned and managed by the Ŭiju Kŭmgwang Kabushiki Kaisha (義州金鑛株式會社), its performance is good, producing 250,000 won worth of gold annually and employing 383 workers.

Sinyŏn Gold Mountain (新延金山)
This is in Sakchu (朔州). Managed by Mr. Pak Yong'un, it is a large gold mine reaching an annual production value of 240,000 won. It employs 340 workers, and it is said that if put up for sale, it would command a price of over 1 million won. If we continue writing about each gold mine like this, who knows when it will end, so the rest will be listed collectively.
Mine Name: Kilsang Mine (吉祥鑛山), Sŏnch'ŏn Mine (宣川鑛山), Songnim Gold & Silver Mine (松林金銀鑛), Yonghŭng Gold Mine (龍興金鑛)
Owner: Kusŏng Chosŏn Mining Development Co. (龜城朝鮮鑛業開發會社) in Kusŏng, Sŏk Ku (續鳩) in Sŏnch'ŏn, Yi Yŏngch'an (李泳贊) & 1 other in Sŏnch'ŏn, Yi Yŏngch'an (李泳贊) & 3 others
Annual Production Value: 120,000 won, 10,000 won, 10,000 won, 19,000 won
Daily Employed Workers: 323, 227, 95, 55
Besides these, there are several other places, but they are omitted as it would become too long. North P'yŏngan Province is foremost in having the most good gold veins.

P'yŏngan South Province (平安南道)
South P'yŏngan Province doesn't have gold mines as good as North P'yŏngan's. Instead, South P'yŏngan has anthracite coal, etc., but is poor in gold and silver. The major gold mine to mention is

Samdŏk Mine (三德鑛山)
This is in Sŏngch'ŏn County (成川郡), South P'yŏngan Province. Owned and managed by Mr. Kubo Yojirō (久保與二郞氏), the annual value is 65,000 won, and it employs 590 workers daily. This is the largest gold mine in South P'yŏngan Province, and the next one is

Hamhŭng Mine (咸興鑛山)
Owned by Nihon Kōgyō Kabushiki Kaisha (日本鑛業株式會社), its annual production value is 51,000 won, and it employs 83 workers daily. This is also quite large. And others include:
Mine Name: Chasŏng Gold Mine (慈城金鑛), Samch'ŏn Mine (三川鑛山), Yongdŏk Mine (龍德鑛山), etc.
Owner: P'yŏngwŏn Chosŏn Mining Development Co. (平原朝鮮鑛業開發會社) in P'yŏngwŏn, Shida Reizō (紫田鈴三) in Sŏngch'ŏn, Kim Pyŏnggyu (金炳圭) in Yangdŏk
Annual Production Value: 13,000 won, 10,000 won, 15,000 won
Daily Employed Workers: 47, 50, 72

Hwanghae Province (黃海道)
Since ancient times, Hwanghae Province has been famous for producing a lot of gold. Among them,

Suan Gold Mine (遂安金鑛)
is particularly famous. This is the mine that Americans persuaded the Korean government to give them. <42> It is owned and managed by the "J. Seoul Company" (서울鑛山株式會社), organized purely by Westerners. The annual production value is 480,000 won, and it employs 568 workers daily. Also, its state-of-the-art machinery and equipment are worth mentioning (불만하다 - likely means 'worth mentioning' or 'impressive' in context, not 'dissatisfactory').

Holdong Gold Mine (笏洞金鑛)
This is in Suan (逐安 - likely a typo for 遂安). Managed by Mr. Chŏng Seyun (鄭世胤), it is a large gold mine reaching an annual production of 290,000 won. It employs 413 workers. It is a huge gold mine valued at over 1 million won. Besides this,

Naksan Mine (樂山鑛山)
Located in Changyŏn (長淵). Owned and managed by Nihon Kōgyō Kabushiki Kaisha (日本鑛業株式會社), it has an annual production of 10,000 won and employs 170 workers.

Onch'ŏn Mine (溫泉鑛山)
Located in Songhwa County (松禾郡). Managed by Mr. Chŏng Wan'gyu (鄭完圭). The annual production reaches 12,000 won, and the number of daily employed workers reaches 34. Hwanghae Province is roughly like this. The number of promising gold mines is on the smaller side.

Kyŏnggi Province (京畿道)
Although there are several gold and silver mines in Kyŏnggi Province, there isn't really a large gold mine that would startle the world. As evidence, one has yet to hear of anyone from Kyŏnggi Province becoming a magnate through gold mining.

Samjŏn Mine (三田鑛山)
This is in Yangp'yŏng County (楊平郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Cho Chinwŏn (趙鎭元), it's not very large, but the vein is said to be quite promising, with an annual production of 12,000 won and employing 40 workers daily.

Sindo Mine (信道鑛山)
This is in Puch'ŏn County (富川郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Cho Pyŏngsang (曺秉相), its annual production of 55,000 won makes it one of the leading mines in Kyŏnggi Province in terms of output. The number of daily employed workers is 176.

Yŏngjung Mine (永中鑛山)
This is in P'och'ŏn County (抱川郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Kaizuki Zenroku (皆月善六氏), the annual production value is 75,000 won, and the number of employed workers is 49.

Yŏsu Gold Mountain (麗水金山)
Located in Yŏju County (驪州郡) and owned by Mr. Kajiwara (梶原氏). Annual production value is 47,000 won, and the number of daily employed workers is 129.

Unsi Mine (雲西鑛山)
This is in Puch'ŏn County (富川郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Obata Toyoshichi (小畑豊七氏), its annual production value is 400,000 won (40,000만원 - typo? Likely 40,000 won based on context/worker count), and the number of employed workers is 114, which puts it in a considerable category. (Assuming 40,000 won based on 114 workers compared to Yŏngjung Mine's 75,000 won/49 workers and Sindo Mine's 55,000 won/176 workers. 400,000 seems too high).

Ch'ungch'ŏng North Province (忠淸北道 - note: article uses 忠淸南道 header for this section, but lists 忠北 location)
Just as Ch'ungbuk (忠北 - Ch'ungch'ŏng North Province) lags behind in all cultural and economic power within all of Chosŏn, the mountains and rivers of Ch'ungch'ŏng also seem poor in the amount of gold they hold buried. Thus, there are only three mines with annual production in the 10,000 won range. Namely,

Wŏljŏn-ri Gold Mountain (月田里 金山)
Located in Yŏngdong County (永同郡), Ch'ungbuk (忠北). Owned and managed by Mr. Min Inbok (閔仁復), the annual production is 10,000 won, and about 10 miners are employed daily. If mined on a larger scale, the production value might increase.

Taehae-ri Gold Mountain (大海里 金山)
Also in Yŏngdong (永同). Owned and managed by Mr. Kim Kyŏngjik (金敬直), the annual gold production value reaches 10,000 won, and 68 workers are employed daily.

Taerŭng Mine (大菱鑛山)
Located in Ch'ungju County (忠州郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Yamashita Junpei (山下順平氏), it has an annual production of 16,000 won. 37 workers are employed daily. <43>

Ch'ungch'ŏng South Province (忠淸南道)
While Ch'ungbuk is poor, Ch'ungnam (忠南 - Ch'ungch'ŏng South Province) is not. The number of mines is large, and the gold mining industry is quite active. Perhaps it was the land of old Puyŏ (扶餘) and had a lot of gold.

Chungang Mine (中央鑛山)
Located in Ch'ŏn'an County (天安郡). Owned by the Chosŏn Chungang Kwang'ŏp Kabushiki Kaisha (朝鮮中央鑛業株式會社), it is a considerably large gold mine reaching an annual production of 130,000 won. And it employs a large number of 357 workers.

Sŏnggŏsan Gold Mine (聖居山 金鑛)
Located in Ch'ŏn'an County (天安郡), owned by Mr. Pae Myŏngsŏn (裵明善), it counts an annual production value of 11,000 won. It employs 280 workers.

Puyŏ Gold Mountain (扶餘金山)
Located in Puyŏ County (扶餘郡), owned and managed by Mr. Yamada Kumakichi (山田隈吉氏), with an annual production of 10,000 won, employing 32 workers daily.

Kŭmji Mine (金池鑛山)
Located in Puyŏ County (扶餘郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Fujii Kantarō (藤井寬太郞氏), the annual production value is 13,000 won, and the number of employed workers is 95.

Poryŏng Gold Mountain (保寧金山)
Located in Poryŏng County (保寧郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Nakajō Heizaburō (中條平五郞氏), the annual production value is 43,000 won. In terms of production value, it ranks first among Ch'ungnam gold mines. The number of daily employed workers is 32.

Kubongsan Gold Mine (九峰山 金鑛)
Located in Ch'ŏng'yang County (靑陽郡). A gold mine owned by Mr. Tonojō Shirō (外城市郞氏). The annual production is 38,000 won, which is considerable. The number of employed workers is 43.

Ch'ŏng'yang Gold Mountain (靑陽金山)
Also located in Ch'ŏng'yang County (靑陽郡). Managed by Mr. Oyama Shigeru (尾山茂氏), the annual production is 22,000 won. The number of employed workers is 36.

Hwangbo Gold Mine (黃寶金鑛)
Located in Hongsŏng County (洪城郡). Owned and managed by Tōbō Yūjirō (當房有次郞), the annual production is 32,000 won, and about 60 workers are employed daily. This roughly covers the promising gold mines in Ch'ungch'ŏng South Province.

Chŏlla North Province (全羅北道)
There are two famous gold mines in Chŏlla North Province. Both have annual production values in the hundreds of thousands of won. However, the number of mining districts (鑛區) is not large.

Kimje Placer Gold Mine (金堤砂 金鑛)
Not a lode mine (石鑛) but an earth mine (土鑛), specifically a placer gold mine (砂金鑛), this placer mine in Kimje (金堤) is famous throughout all of Chosŏn. Because the managing company has large capital and complete machinery facilities, the annual production value is high; anyway, last year it produced 270,000 won. It employs 57 workers. The owner-manager is Mitsubishi Mining Co., Ltd. (三菱鑛業株式會社).

Kwangyang Mine (光陽鑛山)
Located in Kwangyang County (光陽郡). Owned by the Chosŏn Kwang'ŏp Kaebal Kabushiki Kaisha (朝鮮鑛業開發株式會社), this is even larger scale than the aforementioned Kimje Placer Gold Mine run by the Mitsubishi Company. The number of workers employed daily is 433, and the annual production value reaches the huge sum of 640,000 won. In terms of annual output, it likely ranks within the top 10 gold mines in all of Chosŏn.

Kyŏngsang North Province (慶尙北道)
Recent public opinion says Kyŏngbuk (慶北 - Kyŏngsang North Province) follows P'yŏngbuk (平北 - P'yŏngan North Province), indicating Kyŏngbuk has many mining districts. However, there are still no earth-shattering large gold mines yet. Among them, the largest is

Sangju Gold Mine (尙州金鑛)
Located in Sangju County (尙州郡), owned and managed by Saga Tankō Kabushiki Kaisha (佐賀炭鑛株式會社), it reaches an annual production of 60,000 won and employs 285 workers.

Taeya Gold Mountain (大也金山)
This is located in Kimch'ŏn County (金泉郡) and is owned and managed by the Kimch'ŏn Kwang'ŏp Hapcha Hoesa (金泉鑛業合資會社). It counts an annual production value of 10,000 won and currently employs 73 workers.

Kŭmjŏng Gold Mountain (金井金山)
Located in Ponghwa (奉化), Kyŏngbuk. Owned and managed by Mr. Kim Yonggye (金庸桂), the annual production value reaches 100,000 won. This is <44> the foremost large gold mine in Kyŏngbuk. It employs a large number of 89 workers. If large capital were invested to fully modernize machinery and facilities, it could become a promising gold mine drawing attention from all over Chosŏn.

Tŭgik Mine (得益鑛山)
Located in Sŏnsan County (善山郡). Owned by Mr. Kōno Hanpei (河野半平氏), the annual production is 11,000 won, and the number of employed workers is 29.

Kyŏngsang South Province (慶尙南道)
Mining in Kyŏngsang South Province is also poor. There are only three districts with annual production exceeding 10,000 won.

Pong Mine (鳳鑛山)
Located in Hapch'ŏn County (陜川郡), Kyŏngnam. Owned and managed by Mr. Kim Sŏngch'ang (金成昌氏), it has an annual production value of 34,000 won. It employs 57 workers daily.

Taeya Mine (大也鑛山)
Located in Kŏch'ang County (居昌郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Kim Ch'angsu (金昌守氏), the annual production value is 11,000 won, and the number of employed workers is 15.

Masan Mine (馬山鑛山)
Located in Ch'angwŏn County (昌原郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Morita Kikuzō (森田菊藏氏), the annual production value is 16,000 won, employing 13 workers.

Kangwŏn Province (江原道)
While Kangwŏn Province falls hopelessly behind in agricultural products, when it comes to mineral products, especially gold and silver mines, it holds a major source of wealth. Thus, the number of mining districts is large, and there are even mines like the Ch'ŏnp'o Gold Mountain (泉浦金山) reaching an annual production of 240,000 won (text says 34만원 earlier, but 24만원 here; using value listed with mine).

Anp'ung Gold Mountain (安豊金山)
Located in Chunyang County (准陽郡 - likely typo for 通陽 T'ongyang or similar, but keeping as written), Kangwŏn Province. Owned by Mr. Ishida Kameichi (石田龜一氏), it reaches an annual production of 18,000 won, and the number of employed workers is 90.

P'almi Gold Mine (八彌金鑛)
Located in P'yŏngch'ang County (平昌郡). Owned and managed by Mr. O Yunyŏng (吳允泳氏), the annual production value is 22,000 won, and the number of employed workers is 55.

Chodun Mine (鳥屯鑛山)
Located in P'yŏngch'ang County (平昌郡). A mine owned by Mr. Chŏng Yŏngsŏk (鄭永錫氏), it has an annual production value of 19,000 won. The number of employed workers is 19.

Ch'ŏnp'o Gold Mountain (泉浦金山)
This gold mine is already famous. Located in Sŏnsŏn County (旋善郡 - likely typo for 旌善 Chŏngsŏn?), owned and managed by Ms. Kim Chŏngsuk (金貞淑氏), it boasts an annual production of 240,000 won. The number of employed personnel is 75.

Pukdong Gold Mountain (北洞金山)
Located in Sŏnsŏn County (旋善郡). Owned by Inaba Ume (稻葉 ウメ), the annual production is 80,000 won, and 167 workers are employed.

Morun Gold Mine (沒雲金鑛)
Also located in Sŏnsŏn County (旋善郡). Owned by Mr. O Chaeŭn (吳在殷氏), the annual production is 25,000 won, and the number of employed workers reaches 90 daily.

Wŏndong Gold Mountain (遠東金山)
Located in Kimhwa County (金化郡). A mine owned by Mr. Chŏng T'aegyu (鄭泰圭氏), the annual production value is 10,000 won, and the number of employed workers reaches 95.

Samgwang Mine (三光鑛山)
Located in T'ongch'ŏn County (通川郡), a mine owned by Ogi Yasaburō (小木彌三郞). The annual production is 11,000 won, and it employs 246 workers.

Uik Mine (佑益鑛山)
Located in P'yŏngwŏn County (平原郡 - context suggests this P'yŏngwŏn is in Kangwŏn-do, not P'yŏngnam), Kangwŏn Province, owned and managed by the famous Mitsubishi Mining Co., Ltd. (三菱鑛山株式會社). The annual production value reaches 27,000 won, employing 90 personnel.

Samhwa Mine (三和鑛山)
Located in Hongch'ŏn County (洪川郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Sin Hyŏn'gak (申鉉珏氏) & 1 other, the annual production value is 11,000 won, and the number of employed workers is 65. <45>

Chŏnggok Mine (井谷鑛山)
Located in Hoengsŏng County (橫城郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Son Pongsan (孫鳳祥) & 1 other. The annual production value is 10,000 won, employing 291 personnel.

Hamgyŏng South Province (咸鏡南道)
Since the time of the golden calf of Naejangwŏn Director Yi Yongik, the gold veins of Hamgyŏng South Province have already been famous. Recently, it's said a mine was sold for 650,000 won, and there are several mines whose annual production value is steadily increasing. It seems P'yŏngan North Province and Hamgyŏng South Province are the most promising among all Chosŏn gold mines.

Inhŭng Mine (仁興鑛山)
Located in Yŏnghŭng County (永興郡). Owned by Mr. Nishiyama Kichibē (西山吉兵衛氏), the annual production value reaches 12,000 won, and it is claimed that 180 workers are employed.

Handong-ri Mine (翰洞里鑛山)
Located in Yŏnghŭng County (永興郡). Owned by Fujita Kōgyō Kabushiki Kaisha (藤田鑛業株式會社), the annual production is 30,000 won (萬 3만원 - typo? likely 13,000 or 30,000. Given 40 workers, 30,000 seems plausible), employing 40 personnel.

Taeryŏng Mine (大嶺鑛山)
Located in Anbyŏn County (安邊郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Kim In'gyu (金仁圭氏), the annual production value is 10,000 won, employing 69 workers.

Hwangnyong Gold Mountain (黃龍金山)
Also located in Anbyŏn County (安邊郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Saitō Yoshiyuki (齋藤義行氏), the annual production reaches 37,000 won. The number of employed workers is 149.

Hwangjŏng Gold Mine (黃井金鑛)
Also located in Anbyŏn County (安邊郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Hong Sŏnggwan (洪性寬氏), the annual production value is 15,000 won, and the number of employed workers is around 10.

Taedong Gold Mine (大同金鑛)
Located in Tanch'ŏn County (端川郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Noguchi Kinnosuke (野悖 金之助氏 - 野悖 likely typo for 野口 Noguchi), the annual production value reaches 52,000 won, employing a large number of 611 workers.

Myŏngt'aedong Gold Mountain (明太洞金山)
Located in Sinhŭng County (新興郡). Owned by Mr. Im Chin'gyu (林晉圭氏), with an annual production of 20,000 won, employing 196 workers. And besides this, a large mine corresponding to registration number 8,298 is also owned by the same person, with an annual production value of 150,000 won and employing 402 personnel.

Changhŭng Gold Mine (長興金剛 - 金剛 likely typo for 金鑛 Kŭmgwang)
Located in Changjin County (長津郡). Owned and managed by Mr. Pak Un (朴雲外 3氏) & 3 others, the annual production value is 11,000 won, employing 56 workers. Besides these, considerably promising mines like Taesan Gold Mine (大山金鑛) exist throughout Hamnam, but are omitted due to length.

Hamgyŏng North Province (咸鏡北道)
Hambuk (咸北 - Hamgyŏng North Province) is famous for iron and coal. For iron, the Musan Iron Mine (茂山鐵山) owned by the Mitsubishi Company is famous as the best in the East, said to surpass Manchuria's Anshan. Preparations for an ironworks (製鐵所) are already underway at Ch'ŏngjin Port (淸津港). Before long, Musan iron will become world-famous. Coal mines like Saenggiryŏng (生氣嶺), Shōwa (昭和), and Yongjŏn (龍田) are also famous. However, the resources of gold and silver are meager (薄하야), with only 1 or 2 gold mines.

Ch'ŏng'am Gold Mountain (靑岩金山)
Located in Puryŏng County (富寧郡). Owned and managed by Mitsubishi Mining Co., Ltd. (三菱鑛業株式會社), it possesses a huge ore vein reaching an annual production value of 270,000 won. Currently, the number of daily employed workers reaches 443.

With this, we have generally surveyed the promising gold mines throughout Chosŏn. In summary, the above only includes mines with an annual production of 10,000 won or more; it's impossible to know how many lode mines (石鑛) or placer mines (土鑛) producing 7-8 thousand won down to 1-2 thousand won exist.
In any case, looking at the facts above, we cannot help but reflect deeply. Out of the annual production worth 20-30 million won, how much is the value of gold extracted by Korean hands? Also, among the aforementioned mining districts, isn't it true that not many are owned and managed by Koreans?
Our attention and activity towards natural resources must race against time. <46>

**Summary**

This 1933 article from *Samch'ŏlli* magazine reports on a burgeoning gold mining boom in colonial Korea, fueled by Japanese capital and government encouragement. It highlights the perceived vastness of Korea's gold deposits, citing Governor-General Ugaki's claim of a potential 100 million won annual output. The article details the history of Japanese corporate investment (Mitsubishi, Sumitomo, etc.) starting around 1931, leading to a rapid increase in production value, estimated at 36-40 million won for 1933. It lists numerous "promising" gold mines (defined as producing over 10,000 won annually) across all 13 provinces, detailing their location, owner/operator (often Japanese companies or individuals, but also some Koreans like Ch'oe Ch'anghak and Pang Ŭngmo), annual production value, and daily workforce size. The piece concludes by lamenting the low proportion of mines owned and operated by Koreans and urging Koreans to become more involved in exploiting these natural resources. From a historical perspective, the article vividly illustrates the colonial economic structure, where Japanese capital dominated resource extraction, even while celebrating the potential wealth of Korea's land. It provides specific data points (mine names, owners, production figures) valuable for economic historians and reveals the colonial administration's policy of encouraging gold production (likely tied to Japan's economic needs) alongside a Korean nationalist undercurrent regretting the lack of Korean control over this wealth.

**Named Entities**

三千里	삼천리	Samch'ŏlli
宇垣總督	우가키 총독	Ugaki Sōtoku (Governor-General Ugaki)
13道	13도	13 Provinces
舊韓國時代	구한국시대	Old Korean Empire Era
米國人	미국인	American
佛蘭西 美國人	프랑스 미국인	Frenchmen, Americans (likely error, meant French and Americans)
韓國政府	한국정부	Korean Government
雲山	운산	Unsan
遂安	수안	Suan
李容翊	이용익	Yi Yongik
甲山	갑산	Kapsan
高宗	고종	Kojong
內藏院卿	내장원경	Director of the Royal Treasury
崔昌學	최창학	Ch'oe Ch'anghak
方應模	방응모	Pang Ŭngmo
金台原	김태원	Kim T'aewŏn
閔家	민가	Min Family
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
歐洲大戰	구주대전	Great European War
日本	일본	Japan
九州	규슈	Kyūshū
古河	고가	Koga
政友會	정우회	Seiyūkai
久原	구하라	Kuhara
藤田	후지타	Fujita
黃海道	황해도	Hwanghae Province
平安道	평안도	P'yŏngan Province
大正11年	대정 11년	Taishō 11 (1922)
昭和6年	소화 6년	Shōwa 6 (1931)
三菱會社	미쓰비시 회사	Mitsubishi Company
祐益鑛山	우익광산	Uik Kwangsan (Uik Mine - Hwanghae)
住友會社	스미토모 회사	Sumitomo Company
平北	평북	P'yŏngan North Province (P'yŏngbuk)
成川金鑛	성천금광	Sŏngch'ŏn Kŭmgwang (Sŏngch'ŏn Gold Mine)
臺灣	대만	Taiwan
金瓜石	김과석	Kinkaseki
后宮氏	고쿠 씨	Mr. Ato (Gokū/Kokū?)
金井金山	금정금산	Kŭmjŏng Kŭmsan (Kŭmjŏng Gold Mountain - Ponghwa, Kyŏngbuk)
滿鐵總裁	만철총재	South Manchuria Railway President
山本條太郞	야마모토 조타로	Yamamoto Jōtarō
內外鑛業株式會社	내외광업주식회사	Naigai Kōgyō Kabushiki Kaisha
尙州金鑛	상주금광	Sangju Kŭmgwang (Sangju Gold Mine)
東洋拓殖會社	동양척식회사	Tōyō Takushoku Kaisha (Oriental Development Company)
咸南	함남	Hamgyŏng South Province (Hamnam)
永興金山	영흥금산	Yŏnghŭng Kŭmsan (Yŏnghŭng Gold Mine)
昭和7年	소화 7년	Shōwa 7 (1932)
朝鮮銀行	조선은행	Chosŏn Bank
足尾式 鑿岩機	아시오식 착암기	Ashio-style rock drill
총독부	총독부	Government-General
商工省 鑛山局	상공성 광산국	Shōkōshō Kōzan-kyoku (Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Mining Bureau)
총독부 광산과	총독부 광산과	Government-General Mining Division
平安北道	평안북도	P'yŏngan North Province
龜城	구성	Kusŏng
三成金鑛	삼성금광	Samsŏng Kŭmgwang (Samsŏng Gold Mine)
朔州	삭주	Sakchu
宣川	선천	Sŏnch'ŏn
滿洲	만주	Manchuria
鴨綠江	압록강	Amnokkang (Yalu River)
三菱鑛山株式會社	미쓰비시 광산주식회사	Mitsubishi Kōzan Kabushiki Kaisha (Mitsubishi Mining Co., Ltd.)
橋洞鑛山	교동광산	Kyodong Kwangsan (Kyodong Mine)
朝鮮日報	조선일보	Chosŏn Ilbo
昌城郡 大楡洞	창성군 대유동	Ch'angsŏng County, Tae'yudong
大楡洞鑛山	대유동광산	Tae'yudong Kwangsan (Tae'yudong Mine)
大楡洞鑛山株式會社	대유동광산주식회사	Tae'yudong Kwangsan Kabushiki Kaisha
雲山金鑛	운산금광	Unsan Kŭmgwang (Unsan Gold Mine)
義州	의주	Ŭiju
義州鑛山	의주광산	Ŭiju Kwangsan (Ŭiju Mine)
義州金鑛株式會社	의주금광주식회사	Ŭiju Kŭmgwang Kabushiki Kaisha
新延金山	신연금산	Sinyŏn Kŭmsan (Sinyŏn Gold Mountain)
朴龍雲氏	박용운 씨	Mr. Pak Yong'un
吉祥鑛山	길상광산	Kilsang Kwangsan (Kilsang Mine)
宣川鑛山	선천광산	Sŏnch'ŏn Kwangsan (Sŏnch'ŏn Mine)
松林金銀鑛	송림금은광	Songnim Kŭmŭngwang (Songnim Gold and Silver Mine)
龍興金鑛	용흥금광	Yonghŭng Kŭmgwang (Yonghŭng Gold Mine)
龜城朝鮮鑛業開發會社	구성조선광업개발회사	Kusŏng Chosŏn Kwang'ŏp Kaebal Hoesa
續鳩	속구	Sŏk Ku
李泳贊	이영찬	Yi Yŏngch'an
平安南道	평안남도	P'yŏngan South Province
平南	평남	P'yŏngan South Province (P'yŏngnam)
三德鑛山	삼덕광산	Samdŏk Kwangsan (Samdŏk Mine)
成川郡	성천군	Sŏngch'ŏn County
久保與二郞氏	구보 요지로 씨	Mr. Kubo Yojirō
咸興鑛山	함흥광산	Hamhŭng Kwangsan (Hamhŭng Mine)
日本鑛業株式會社	일본광업주식회사	Nihon Kōgyō Kabushiki Kaisha (Japan Mining Co., Ltd.)
慈城金鑛	자성금광	Chasŏng Kŭmgwang (Chasŏng Gold Mine)
三川鑛山	삼천광산	Samch'ŏn Kwangsan (Samch'ŏn Mine)
龍德鑛山	용덕광산	Yongdŏk Kwangsan (Yongdŏk Mine)
平原朝鮮鑛業開發會社	평원조선광업개발회사	P'yŏngwŏn Chosŏn Kwang'ŏp Kaebal Hoesa (P'yŏngwŏn, P'yŏngnam)
平原	평원	P'yŏngwŏn (P'yŏngnam)
成川	성천	Sŏngch'ŏn
紫田鈴三	시다 레이조	Shida Reizō
陽德	양덕	Yangdŏk
金炳圭	김병규	Kim Pyŏnggyu
遂安金鑛	수안금광	Suan Kŭmgwang (Suan Gold Mine)
서울鑛山株式會社	서울광산주식회사	Sŏul Kwangsan Kabushiki Kaisha (Seoul Mining Co., Ltd.)
笏洞金鑛	홀동금광	Holdong Kŭmgwang (Holdong Gold Mine)
逐安	축안	Ch'ukan (Typo for 遂安 Suan)
鄭世胤	정세윤	Chŏng Seyun
樂山鑛山	낙산광산	Naksan Kwangsan (Naksan Mine)
長淵	장연	Changyŏn
溫泉鑛山	온천광산	Onch'ŏn Kwangsan (Onch'ŏn Mine)
松禾郡	송화군	Songhwa County
鄭完圭	정완규	Chŏng Wan'gyu
京畿道	경기도	Kyŏnggi Province
三田鑛山	삼전광산	Samjŏn Kwangsan (Samjŏn Mine)
楊平郡	양평군	Yangp'yŏng County
趙鎭元	조진원	Cho Chinwŏn
信道鑛山	신도광산	Sindo Kwangsan (Sindo Mine)
富川郡	부천군	Puch'ŏn County
曺秉相	조병상	Cho Pyŏngsang
永中鑛山	영중광산	Yŏngjung Kwangsan (Yŏngjung Mine)
抱川郡	포천군	P'och'ŏn County
皆月善六氏	가이즈키 젠로쿠 씨	Mr. Kaizuki Zenroku
麗水金山	여수금산	Yŏsu Kŭmsan (Yŏsu Gold Mountain)
驪州郡	여주군	Yŏju County
梶原氏	가지와라 씨	Mr. Kajiwara
雲西鑛山	운서광산	Unsi Kwangsan (Unsi Mine)
小畑豊七氏	오바타 도요시치 씨	Mr. Obata Toyoshichi
忠淸北道	충청북도	Ch'ungch'ŏng North Province (Ch'ungbuk)
忠北	충북	Ch'ungbuk
月田里 金山	월전리 금산	Wŏljŏn-ri Kŭmsan (Wŏljŏn-ri Gold Mountain)
永同郡	영동군	Yŏngdong County
閔仁復	민인복	Min Inbok
大海里 金山	대해리 금산	Taehae-ri Kŭmsan (Taehae-ri Gold Mountain)
永同	영동	Yŏngdong
金敬直	김경직	Kim Kyŏngjik
大菱鑛山	대릉광산	Taerŭng Kwangsan (Taerŭng Mine)
忠州郡	충주군	Ch'ungju County
山下順平氏	야마시타 준페이 씨	Mr. Yamashita Junpei
忠淸南道	충청남도	Ch'ungch'ŏng South Province (Ch'ungnam)
忠南	충남	Ch'ungnam
扶餘	부여	Puyŏ
中央鑛山	중앙광산	Chungang Kwangsan (Chungang Mine)
天安郡	천안군	Ch'ŏn'an County
朝鮮中央鑛業株式會社	조선중앙광업주식회사	Chosŏn Chungang Kwang'ŏp Kabushiki Kaisha
聖居山 金鑛	성거산 금광	Sŏnggŏsan Kŭmgwang (Sŏnggŏsan Gold Mine)
裵明善	배명선	Pae Myŏngsŏn
扶餘金山	부여금산	Puyŏ Kŭmsan (Puyŏ Gold Mountain)
扶餘郡	부여군	Puyŏ County
山田隈吉氏	야마다 구마키치 씨	Mr. Yamada Kumakichi
金池鑛山	금지광산	Kŭmji Kwangsan (Kŭmji Mine)
藤井寬太郞氏	후지이 간타로 씨	Mr. Fujii Kantarō
保寧金山	보령금산	Poryŏng Kŭmsan (Poryŏng Gold Mountain)
保寧郡	보령군	Poryŏng County
中條平五郞氏	나카조 헤이자부로 씨	Mr. Nakajō Heizaburō
九峰山 金鑛	구봉산 금광	Kubongsan Kŭmgwang (Kubongsan Gold Mine)
靑陽郡	청양군	Ch'ŏng'yang County
外城市郞氏	도노조 시로 씨	Mr. Tonojō Shirō
靑陽金山	청양금산	Ch'ŏng'yang Kŭmsan (Ch'ŏng'yang Gold Mountain)
尾山茂氏	오야마 시게루 씨	Mr. Oyama Shigeru
黃寶金鑛	황보금광	Hwangbo Kŭmgwang (Hwangbo Gold Mine)
洪城郡	홍성군	Hongsŏng County
當房有次郞	도보 유지로	Tōbō Yūjirō
全羅北道	전라북도	Chŏlla North Province (Chŏnbuk)
金堤砂 金鑛	김제사 금광	Kimje Sa Kŭmgwang (Kimje Placer Gold Mine)
金堤	김제	Kimje
光陽鑛山	광양광산	Kwangyang Kwangsan (Kwangyang Mine)
光陽郡	광양군	Kwangyang County
朝鮮鑛業開發株式會社	조선광업개발주식회사	Chosŏn Kwang'ŏp Kaebal Kabushiki Kaisha
慶尙北道	경상북도	Kyŏngsang North Province (Kyŏngbuk)
慶北	경북	Kyŏngbuk
尙州郡	상주군	Sangju County
佐賀炭鑛株式會社	사가탄광주식회사	Saga Tankō Kabushiki Kaisha
大也金山	대야금산	Taeya Kŭmsan (Taeya Gold Mountain - Kimch'ŏn)
金泉郡	김천군	Kimch'ŏn County
金泉鑛業合資會社	김천광업합자회사	Kimch'ŏn Kwang'ŏp Hapcha Hoesa
奉化	봉화	Ponghwa
金庸桂	김용계	Kim Yonggye
得益鑛山	득익광산	Tŭgik Kwangsan (Tŭgik Mine)
善山郡	선산군	Sŏnsan County
河野半平氏	고노 한페이 씨	Mr. Kōno Hanpei
慶尙南道	경상남도	Kyŏngsang South Province (Kyŏngnam)
鳳鑛山	봉광산	Pong Kwangsan (Pong Mine)
陜川郡	합천군	Hapch'ŏn County
金成昌氏	김성창 씨	Mr. Kim Sŏngch'ang
大也鑛山	대야광산	Taeya Kwangsan (Taeya Mine - Kŏch'ang)
居昌郡	거창군	Kŏch'ang County
金昌守氏	김창수 씨	Mr. Kim Ch'angsu
馬山鑛山	마산광산	Masan Kwangsan (Masan Mine)
昌原郡	창원군	Ch'angwŏn County
森田菊藏	모리타 기쿠조	Morita Kikuzō
江原道	강원도	Kangwŏn Province
泉浦金山	천포금산	Ch'ŏnp'o Kŭmsan (Ch'ŏnp'o Gold Mountain)
安豊金山	안풍금산	Anp'ung Kŭmsan (Anp'ung Gold Mountain)
准陽郡	준양군	Chunyang County (Possible typo)
石田龜一氏	이시다 가메이치 씨	Mr. Ishida Kameichi
八彌金鑛	팔미금광	P'almi Kŭmgwang (P'almi Gold Mine)
平昌郡	평창군	P'yŏngch'ang County
吳允泳氏	오윤영 씨	Mr. O Yunyŏng
鳥屯鑛山	조둔광산	Chodun Kwangsan (Chodun Mine)
鄭永錫氏	정영석 씨	Mr. Chŏng Yŏngsŏk
旋善郡	선선군	Sŏnsŏn County (Possible typo for 旌善 Chŏngsŏn)
金貞淑氏	김정숙 씨	Ms. Kim Chŏngsuk
北洞金山	북동금산	Pukdong Kŭmsan (Pukdong Gold Mountain)
稻葉 ウメ	이나바 우메	Inaba Ume
沒雲金鑛	몰운금광	Morun Kŭmgwang (Morun Gold Mine)
吳在殷氏	오재은 씨	Mr. O Chaeŭn
遠東金山	원동금산	Wŏndong Kŭmsan (Wŏndong Gold Mountain)
金化郡	김화군	Kimhwa County
鄭泰圭氏	정태규 씨	Mr. Chŏng T'aegyu
三光鑛山	삼광광산	Samgwang Kwangsan (Samgwang Mine)
通川郡	통천군	T'ongch'ŏn County
小木彌三郞	오기 야사부로	Ogi Yasaburō
佑益鑛山	우익광산	Uik Kwangsan (Uik Mine - Kangwŏn)
平原郡	평원군	P'yŏngwŏn County (Kangwŏn)
三和鑛山	삼화광산	Samhwa Kwangsan (Samhwa Mine)
洪川郡	홍천군	Hongch'ŏn County
申鉉珏氏	신현각 씨	Mr. Sin Hyŏn'gak
井谷鑛山	정곡광산	Chŏnggok Kwangsan (Chŏnggok Mine)
橫城郡	횡성군	Hoengsŏng County
孫鳳祥	손봉상	Son Pongsan
咸鏡南道	함경남도	Hamgyŏng South Province
仁興鑛山	인흥광산	Inhŭng Kwangsan (Inhŭng Mine)
永興郡	영흥군	Yŏnghŭng County
西山吉兵衛氏	니시야마 기치베 씨	Mr. Nishiyama Kichibē
翰洞里鑛山	한동리광산	Handong-ri Kwangsan (Handong-ri Mine)
藤田鑛業株式會社	후지타 광업주식회사	Fujita Kōgyō Kabushiki Kaisha
大嶺鑛山	대령광산	Taeryŏng Kwangsan (Taeryŏng Mine)
安邊郡	안변군	Anbyŏn County
金仁圭氏	김인규 씨	Mr. Kim In'gyu
黃龍金山	황룡금산	Hwangnyong Kŭmsan (Hwangnyong Gold Mountain)
齋藤義行氏	사이토 요시유키 씨	Mr. Saitō Yoshiyuki
黃井金鑛	황정금광	Hwangjŏng Kŭmgwang (Hwangjŏng Gold Mine)
洪性寬氏	홍성관 씨	Mr. Hong Sŏnggwan
大同金鑛	대동금광	Taedong Kŭmgwang (Taedong Gold Mine)
端川郡	단천군	Tanch'ŏn County
野悖 金之助氏	노구치 긴노스케 씨	Mr. Noguchi Kinnosuke (野悖 likely typo for 野口)
明太洞金山	명태동금산	Myŏngt'aedong Kŭmsan (Myŏngt'aedong Gold Mountain)
新興郡	신흥군	Sinhŭng County
林晉圭氏	임진규 씨	Mr. Im Chin'gyu
長興金剛	장흥금강	Changhŭng Kŭmgang (Changhŭng Gold Mine?)
長津郡	장진군	Changjin County
朴雲	박운	Pak Un
大山金鑛	대산금광	Taesan Kŭmgwang (Taesan Gold Mine)
咸鏡北道	함경북도	Hamgyŏng North Province (Hambuk)
咸北	함북	Hambuk
茂山鐵山	무산철산	Musan Ch'ŏlsan (Musan Iron Mine)
滿洲鞍山	만주 안산	Manchuria's Anshan
淸津港	청진항	Ch'ŏngjin Port
製鐵所	제철소	Ironworks
生氣嶺	생기령	Saenggiryŏng
昭和	소화	Shōwa (Mine Name)
龍田	용전	Yongjŏn (Mine Name)
靑岩金山	청암금산	Ch'ŏng'am Kŭmsan (Ch'ŏng'am Gold Mountain)
富寧郡	부령군	Puryŏng County

**Glossary**

地下	지하	Underground
三千里	삼천리	Three Thousand Ri (Metaphor for Korea)
무친	묻힌	Buried (Older spelling/form of 묻힌)
金鑛脈	금광맥	Gold vein
有望	유망	Promising
半島	반도	Peninsula
밋헤	밑에	Beneath, under (Older spelling)
황금	황금	Gold
무치어 울고 잇다	묻히어 울고 있다	Is buried and weeping (Older spelling/form)
總督	총독	Governor-General
鑛山技師	광산기사	Mining engineer
파견	파견	Dispatch
조사대	조사대	Investigation team
일일히	일일이	One by one, individually
파내다	파내다	To dig out, excavate
장담하엿다	장담하였다	Boasted, guaranteed (Older spelling)
江土	강토	Land, territory
地質	지질	Geology
鑛床	광상	Ore deposit
풍부하다	풍부하다	To be abundant, rich
舊韓國時代	구한국시대	Old Korean Empire Era
채굴권	채굴권	Mining rights
어더내엇고	얻어내었고	Obtained (Older spelling)
山谷	산곡	Mountain valley
推夫	추부	Pushcart laborer, manual laborer
드러가서	들어가서	Entered (Older spelling)
금송아지	금송아지	Golden calf
內藏院卿	내장원경	Director of the Royal Treasury (historical title)
올낫섯다	올랐었다	Rose to, ascended (Older spelling)
녯날	옛날	Old days, past
업시	없이	Without (Older spelling)
쇠망치	쇠망치	Sledgehammer
德大	덕대	Prospector, mine speculator (mining jargon)
도라다니든	돌아다니던	Who wandered around (Older spelling)
누-럿케	누렇게	Yellowishly
깔니다	깔리다	To be spread out
보여저서	보여져서	Was seen (Older spelling)
일약	일약	Suddenly, at one bound
巨富	거부	Magnate, tycoon
모르기는 하겟지만	모르기는 하겠지만	Although one doesn't know
運數	운수	Fortune, luck
압흐로	앞으로	In the future (Older spelling)
쏘다저 나오다	쏟아져 나오다	To pour out, emerge in great numbers (Older spelling)
金鑛熱	금광열	Gold mining fever/boom
歐洲大戰	구주대전	Great European War (World War I)
正貨	정화	Specie, hard currency
不足	부족	Shortage, lack
資本家	자본가	Capitalist
着目하다	착목하다	To notice, pay attention to
幹事長	간사장	Secretary-General
遞相	체상	Minister of Communications
汽船成金	기선성금	Steamship nouveau riche
資閥	자벌	Conglomerate, zaibatsu
거액	거액	Huge sum (of money)
질머지다	짊어지다	To carry on one's back, shoulder (burden)
착수하다	착수하다	To embark on, start (a business/project)
기술	기술	Skill, technology
不足	부족	Lack, insufficiency
드려한 까닭에	들여 한 까닭에	Because of spending/investing (Older spelling)
採算	채산	Profitability
마저서지 안엇다	맞춰지지 않았다	Did not match, was not met (Older spelling)
未久	미구	Soon, before long
손을 떼고 마렷다	손을 떼고 말았다	Withdrew, gave up (Older spelling)
産金年額	산금년액	Annual gold production value
불과하엿다	불과하였다	Was merely, only amounted to (Older spelling)
재작년	재작년	The year before last
돌연히	돌연히	Suddenly
자금	자금	Funds, capital
投하다	투하다	To invest
경영	경영	Management, operation
俄然	아연	Suddenly, abruptly
주목	주목	Attention
끄으러	끌어	Attracting (Older spelling/form of 끌어)
계속하야	계속하여	Continuously (Older spelling)
광산부자	광산부자	Mining tycoon
其外	기외	Besides that, other than that
적으마한	자그마한	Small, minor
착수자	착수자	Operator, one who starts (a business)
만헛는지	많았는지	How many there were (Older spelling)
형세	형세	Situation, circumstances
이르럿다	이르렀다	Reached (Older spelling)
부르짓는	부르짖는	Shouting, crying out (Older spelling)
拍事	박차	Spur, impetus (typo for 拍車?)
空前	공전	Unprecedented
活況	활황	Boom, prosperity
呈하다	정하다	To show, display, present
數함에 至하엿다	셈함에 이르렀다	Reached the count of (Older spelling/form)
금년	금년	This year
至하여는	이르러서는	Reaching, as for this year
一躍	일약	Leap, jump
推定	추정	Estimate, estimation
金價	금가	Price of gold
買入高	매입고	Purchase price/amount
돌파하다	돌파하다	To break through, exceed
强	강	Strong (suffix indicating 'more than')
놀나운	놀라운	Astonishing, surprising (Older spelling)
鑑定標準	감정표준	Evaluation standard, appraisal criteria
달너젓다	달라졌다	Has changed (Older spelling)
녯날	옛날	Old days
萬分臺	만분대	Ten-thousandths range (1/10,000)
達하다	달하다	To reach, attain
채굴하다	채굴하다	To mine, excavate
팔니지도 안엇다	팔리지도 않았다	Was not sold either (Older spelling)
採金業	채금업	Gold mining industry
발달	발달	Development
따라서라	따라서	Following, according to (Older form?)
鑿岩機	착암기	Rock drill
설비	설비	Facilities, equipment
막게 되엇다	맞게 되었다	Became profitable/suitable (Older spelling)
함유량	함유량	Content, percentage content (ore grade)
내어버렷든	내어버렸던	Which had been discarded/abandoned (Older spelling)
부활되다	부활되다	To be revived
압흐로	앞으로	In the future
국가정책상	국가정책상	As a matter of national policy
極力	극력	Strongly, with all one's might
장려하다	장려하다	To encourage, promote
보조금	보조금	Subsidy, grant
교부하다	교부하다	To grant, issue, provide
광업자	광업자	Mining operator
보호	보호	Protection
分折所	분석소	Assay office, analysis center (Older term?)
확장	확장	Expansion
金床調査	금상조사	Survey of gold deposits
편의	편의	Convenience
장려비	장려비	Promotion expenses
예산	예산	Budget
세웟다는	세웠다는	Established, set up (Older spelling)
잇섬즉한	있음직한	Plausible, likely
서론	서론	Introduction
점검하다	점검하다	To inspect, check
모조리	모조리	All, entirely
알니어진	알려진	Known (Older spelling)
現에	현(재)에	Currently
人夫	인부	Laborer, worker
기록하다	기록하다	To record, list
본사	본사	This company/magazine
정확	정확	Accuracy
期하다	기하다	To aim for, strive for
재료	재료	Materials, data
구하다	구하다	To obtain, seek
출처	출처	Source, origin
대개	대개	Mostly, generally
예컨대	예컨대	For example
가운데	가운데	Among
혹은	혹은	Or
大鑛業家	대광업가	Major mining entrepreneur
그뤀¬고	그리고	And (Likely typo/OCR error)
최근	최근	Recent
표준	표준	Standard, basis
만타	많다	Is numerous, many (Older spelling)
附記하다	부기하다	To add a note, append
分布狀態	분포상태	Distribution status
定評	정평	Established reputation, common saying
머물너	머물러	Remained, stayed (Older spelling)
내려온 듯하다	내려온 듯하다	Seems to have come down through
팔녓는데	팔렸는데	Was sold (Older spelling)
달하다	달하다	To reach
從業鑛夫	종업광부	Employed miner
前途有望	전도유망	Having a promising future
甲富	갑부	Plutocrat, very rich person
내인	낳은	Produced, gave birth to (Older spelling/form of 낳은)
등록번호	등록번호	Registration number
소유	소유	Ownership
賣渡되다	매도되다	To be sold off
쏘다지다	쏟아지다	To pour out
경영	경영	Management
사용하다	사용하다	To use, employ
긔막히게	기막히게	Amazingly, breathtakingly
조흔	좋은	Good (Older spelling)
설비	설비	Facilities, equipment
완비하다	완비하다	To be fully equipped
단	단	However, but
성적	성적	Results, performance
양호하다	양호하다	To be good, favorable
呼價	호가	Asking price
잇스리라	있으리라	Will likely be (Older spelling)
一括하여	일괄하여	Collectively, all together
박게도	밖에도	Besides (Older spelling)
略하다	약하다	To omit, abbreviate
웃듬이다	으뜸이다	Is the best, foremost (Older spelling)
빈약하다	빈약하다	To be poor, meager
곱을	꼽을	To count, point out (Older spelling)
제일	제일	Most, number one
상당히	상당히	Considerably, quite
크잘 것은 업스나	크달 것은 없으나	Although not particularly large (Older spelling)
頗히	파히	Quite, considerably
屈指하다	굴지하다	To be prominent, leading (lit. finger-bending)
축에 든다	축에 든다	To belong to the category of
떠러지는 모양으로	떨어지는 모양으로	As if falling behind
埋藏하다	매장하다	To bury
분량	분량	Amount, quantity
대규모	대규모	Large scale
증가하다	증가하다	To increase
활기	활기	Vigor, activity
띄다	띠다	To show, display (vitality)
됏든지도	됐던지도	Might have been (Older spelling)
상당히	상당히	Considerably
부치고 잇다	부리고 있다 / 쓰고 있다	Is employing (Older spelling/usage)
만치 못하다	많지 못하다	Is not many
石鑛	석광	Lode mine (mining from rock)
土鑛	토광	Earth mine (placer mining from soil)
砂金鑛	사금광	Placer gold mine
全鮮的	전선적	All-Korea, nationwide
巨資	거자	Large capital
완전하다	완전하다	To be complete, perfect
엇잿든	어쨌든	Anyway, in any case
낫다	났다	Was produced, came out (Older spelling of 났다)
使役하다	사역하다	To employ, put to work
거액	거액	Huge sum
世評	세평	Public opinion, common talk
驚天動地	경천동지	Earth-shattering, world-shaking
合資會社	합자회사	Limited partnership
及하다	급하다	To reach, amount to
投하야	투하여	Investing (Older spelling)
주목 밧는	주목 받는	Receiving attention (Older spelling)
빈약하다	빈약하다	Poor, meager
區	구	District, area
사역하다	사역하다	To employ
농산물	농산물	Agricultural products
어림 업시	어림 없이	Hopelessly, without comparison
떠러지지만은	떨어지지만은	Although falling behind (Older spelling)
鑛産物	광산물	Mineral products
大富源	대부원	Great source of wealth
及하는	급하는	Reaching
가튼	같은	Like, such as (Older spelling)
칭하다	칭하다	To claim, call, name
 역시	역시	Also, likewise
내외	내외	Around, about
잇스나	있으나	Although there are (Older spelling)
철	철	Iron
석탄	석탄	Coal
능가하다	능가하다	To surpass, exceed
東洋一	동양일	Best in the East
벌서	벌써	Already
준비	준비	Preparation
不遠	불원	Soon, before long
일홈이 날 것이다	이름이 날 것이다	Will become famous (Older spelling)
富源	부원	Source of wealth
薄하야	박하여	Being meager, thin (Older spelling)
불과하다	불과하다	To be merely, only
거대하다	거대하다	Huge, immense
가젓다	가졌다	Possessed (Older spelling)
일감하엿다	일람하였다	Surveyed, looked over (Older spelling/form of 일람하다)
요컨대	요컨대	In short, to summarize
엇더케 만흔지	어떻게 많은지	How many there are (Older spelling)
바라 볼 때	바라볼 때	When looking at
吾人	오인	We, us (Literary/formal)
猛省하다	맹성하다	To reflect deeply, introspect seriously
손	손	Hand
採金하다	채금하다	To extract gold
天然	천연	Natural
富源	부원	Source of wealth
着目	착목	Attention
활동	활동	Activity
시각	시각	Moment, time
다투어야 하겟다	다투어야 하겠다	Must contend/race against (Older spelling)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제5권 제10호
발행일	1933년 10월 01일
기사제목	地下三千里에 무친 金鑛脈과 有望金鑛
필자	調査局
기사형태	소식

地下三千里에 무친 金鑛脈과 有望金鑛
						調査局
우리 半島의 땅 밋헤는 황금이 무치어 울고 잇다. 宇垣總督은 鑛山技師의 조사대를 13道에 파견하여 일일히 조사하여보고 난 뒤 적어도 1년에 1억만원의 金을 파낼 수 잇다고 장담하엿다. 이 말이 참말인지 거짓말인지는 아직 두고보아야 알 일이나 엇잿든 이리하야 三千里江土의 地質이 鑛床에 풍부한 것만은 사실인 것 갓다. 그러길내 과거에 잇서 舊韓國時代에도 눈치 빠른 米國人과 佛蘭西 美國人들이 韓國政府에서 雲山 遂安 기타의 광산채굴권을 무엇보다 몬저 어더내엇고 山谷의 推夫에 불과하든 李容翊이 甲山 드러가서 금송아지를 파내어 高宗께 드리고 뒷날 內藏院卿의 현직에까지 올낫섯다. 이러한 사실은 녯날을 차질 것 업시 바로 현재를 보아도 알 수 잇다.
쇠망치 한 개를 가지고 「德大」가 되어 이 山谷 저 山谷을 도라다니든 崔昌學, 方應模, 金台原 氏 등의 눈에 누-럿케 깔닌 金脈이 보여저서 일약 閔家富를 부러워하지 안는 巨富들이 되엇다. 모르기는 하겟지만 運數만 잘 마치면 이 압흐로도 몃 십명 몃 백명의 제2 제3의 崔昌學, 方應模 氏 등이 쏘다저 나올는지 모른다!
그러면 언제부터 朝鮮에 黃金時代가 왓든고. 적어도 金鑛熱이 생기기는 언제부터인고? 歐洲大戰後에 正貨에 쓸 황금이 부족할 때에 日本의 자본가들이 처음 朝鮮鑛山에 着目하엿다. 그래서 九州鑛業界의 王이라는 古河와 지금 政友會의 幹事長이요 前遞相이든 久原이와 汽船成金의 藤田 등 3大 資閥이 거액의 자금을 질머지고 黃海道와 平安道의 몃몃 광산을 착수하여 보앗다. 그러나 이때의 첫 시험은 실패하엿슴니. 그 이유는 파견기사의 기술 부족과 너무 거액의 자금을 드려한 까닭에 採算이 잘 마저서지 안엇다. 그런 까닭에 未久에 모다 손을 떼고 마렷다. 이리하야 大正11년 시대에는 朝鮮의 産金年額이 겨우 530만원 내외에 불과하엿다. 그리든 것이 재작년 즉 昭和6년에 이르러 三菱會社에서 돌연히 黃海道祐益鑛山에 자금을 投하여 경영하기를 시작하자 俄然 日本의 鑛山企業家의 주목을 끄으러 계속하야 住友會社에서 平北 成川金鑛에 착수하고 臺灣의 유명한 광산부자 金瓜石의 后宮氏가 金井金山을 또 前滿鐵總裁 山本條太郞이 하는 內外鑛業株式會社에서 尙州金鑛을 착수하엿고 其外 적으마한 착수자는 얼마나 만헛는지 모를 형세에 이르럿다. 더구나 이러케 「金鑛이다 金鑛이다 부르짓는 소리에 일층 拍事를 가한 것은 東洋拓殖會社에서 돌연히 巨資을 投하야 咸南永興金山을 직영함이라. 이리하야 年産 530만원 정도의 朝鮮金鑛界는 空前의 긴장과 活況을 呈하야 昭和6년에는 그 倍額을 넘는 年産 1,000만원을 數함에 至하엿다.
그리고 금년에 至하여는 일층 활기를 呈하야 昭和7년의 2,100만원에서 一躍하야 3,600만원의 推定이라한다. 이것은 金價를 7원 계산으로하여 ＜40＞ 이미 이러타 한 즉 최근 朝鮮銀行의 買入高 9원 35전으로 계산할진대 4,000만원 대를 돌파하리라. 大正11년에 비하야 正히 8倍 强이니어 이런 놀나운 일이 어대 잇슬가.

더구나 이제는 금광에 대한 鑑定標準이 달너젓다. 녯날에는 萬分臺에 달하거나 적어도 10萬分之 3이상에 達치 안으면 그 금광은 채굴하려고도 하지 안엇고 팔려고 하여도 팔니지도 안엇다. 그러든 것이 採金業의 발달에 따서라 足尾式 鑿岩機만 설비하게 되면 10萬分之 1 100萬分의 몃도 능히 採算이 막게 되엇다. 그리하야 今日은 지금에 함유량이 적다고 내어버렷든 金山들이 작고 부활되어 간다.
産金業은 압흐로 더욱 유망하다. 총독부에서는 국가정책상 極力産金을 장려한다. 金價는 작고 오른다. 또한 年産 1만원 이상의 광산에 대하여는 총독부에서 보조금을 교부한다. 그리고 광업자의 보호를 위하야 分折所의 확장 金床調査 등 온갓 편의를 보아주기로 되어 장려비까지 年 300만원을 예산에 세웟다는 말이 잇다. 잇섬즉한 일이다.
서론이 너무 길어젓다. 이제부터 半島의 金鑛脈과 有望金鑛을 모조리 점검하리라. 鑛脈이라하여도 적고 크고의 구별은 잇슬지언정 朝鮮엔 현재 알니어진 것만 해도 몃 천脈인지 모르고 現에 人夫을 너허 채굴을 시작하는 금광만 하여도 1,600여 금광이 된다. 그래서 이것을 일일히 다 기록할 수 업기에 본사 조사대에서는 이제
「年産 10,000원 이상」
의 채굴을 現에 하고 잇는 광산에 한하여 조사하엿다. 그리고 이 조사는 어듸까지 정확을 期하엿다. 즉 재료를 구하되 그 출처가 대개 정확한 곳이다. 예컨대 이 가운데 대부분은 商工省 鑛山局에서 나온 것이고 혹은 총독부 광산과 又 혹은 大鑛業家의 기록에서 나온 것이다.
그뤀¬고 최근 조사라 하엿지만 그 중에는 今春 3월 15일 현재가 표준이 된 것이 만타. 이를 附記하여 둔다. (캇트 사진은 方應模 氏)

13道 黃金鑛脈 分布狀態와 年産 10,000이상의 有望金鑛

平安北道
몬저 三千里의 맨 북쪽에서부터 압흐로 나오면서 보자. 첫재 平北龜城에 잇는 ＜41＞이다.

三成金鑛
이것이 崔昌學 氏를 300만원의 거부를 만든 유명한 금광이다. 朔州龜城 宣川 等地의 산맥은 土石으로 아니되고 金銀으로 되엇다 함이 定評잇지만 그 중에도 龜城 땅이 더욱 조타. 아마 滿洲땅으로 펴지려든 金脈이 鴨綠江 물을 건너지 아니하고 그냥 대량으로 平北에 머물너 수만년을 내려온 듯하다.
이 금광은 年前에 三菱鑛山株式會社에 팔녓는데 지금 매년 産金額이 43만원에 달하고 매일의 從業鑛夫가 534명을 數한다고 한다. 그리고 아직 얼마를 파면 다 팔는지 모르는 前途有望한 금광이다.

橋洞鑛山
이것은 朔州에 잇다. 이 금광이 또한 朝鮮甲富 한 사람을 내인 역사적 금광이다. 金銀이 나는데 매년 648千瓦이 産하야 그 가격 66만원을 呼하며 인부 매일 1,076명을 사용하고 잇다. 등록번호는 4,404번.
이것이 現朝鮮日報社長 方應模 氏의 소유이엇는데 山本條太郞의 손으로 賣渡되엇다고 한다. 엇잿든 금이 마구 쏘다지는 광산 중의 하나이다.

大楡洞鑛山
이것도 平北昌城郡 大楡洞에 잇는데 大楡洞鑛山株式會社의 경영이다. 매일 인부 1,505명을 사용하며 年額 59만원을 數한다.

雲山金鑛
이것도 27만원의 年額이 잇는 긔막히게 조흔 금광이다. 매일 1,643명의 鑛夫을 부치고 鑿岩機 등의 설비가 완비하여 잇다. 단 朝鮮人의 경영이 아니다.

義州鑛山
이것은 義州에 잇다. 義州金鑛株式會社의 소유 경영으로 성적이 양호하여 年額 25만원의 金을 産하고 또 383명의 인부를 사용한다.

新延金山
이것은 朔州에 잇다. 朴龍雲氏 경영으로 年産額 24만원에 달하는 큰 금광이다. 340명의 인부를 쓰고 잇는데 팔자면 100만원 이상의 呼價가 잇스리라 한다.  이러케 일일히 금광마다 적어가자면 언제 끗이 날는지 모르겟기에 이하의 一括하여 적으리라.
鑛山名  吉祥鑛山 宣川鑛山 松林金銀鑛 龍興金鑛
所有者 龜城朝鮮鑛業開發會社 宣川續鳩 宣川 李泳贊 外 1人同 李泳贊 外 3人
年産額  12만원 만원  만원  19,000원
每日使用人夫  323인 227 95 55
이 박게도 몃곳이 잇지만 너무 길어지기에 略한다. 조흔 金鑛脈이 가장 만키는 平北에 웃듬이다.

平安南道
平南에는 平北만치 조흔 금광이 업다. 그 대신 平南은 무연탄 등이 잇스나 金銀에 이르러는 빈약하다. 큰 금광으로 곱을 것이

三德鑛山
이것은 平南 成川郡에 잇다. 久保與二郞氏 소유경영으로 年額 65,000원이요 매일 사용인부 590명이다. 이것이 平南서는 제일 큰 금광이요 그 다음이.

咸興鑛山
이다. 日本鑛業株式會社의 소유로 年産額 51,000원이요 인부 83인을 매일 사용한다. 이것도 상당히 크다. 그리고 그 外는
鑛山名 慈城金鑛 三川鑛山 龍德鑛山 等等이다.
所有者 平原朝鮮鑛業開發會社 成川 紫田鈴三 陽德 金炳圭
年産額 13,000원 10,000원 15,000원
每日使用人夫  47인 50 72

黃海道
녯날부터  黃海道는 금이 만이 나기로 유명하다. 그 중에도

遂安金鑛
은 더욱 유명하다. 이것이 米國人이 韓國政府를 꾀여 어더가진 鑛山이다. 「제, 서울컴파니」 ＜42＞ (서울鑛山株式會社)라는 純西洋人 조직의 소유경영이다. 1년 産額이 48만원이요 568명의 인부를 매일 사용한다. 그리고 참신한 기계의 설비 등 불만하다.

笏洞金鑛

이것은 逐安에 잇다. 鄭世胤 氏의 경영으로 年産 29만원에 달하는 큰 金鑛이다. 413명의 인부를 쓰고 잇다. 呼價 100만원 이상 하는 거대한 금광이다. 이 박게

樂山鑛山
長淵에 잇다. 日本鑛業株式會社의 소유경영인데 年産 10,000 인부 170명을 쓰고 잇다.

溫泉鑛山
松禾郡에 잇다. 鄭完圭 氏의 경영이다. 年産 12,000원에 及하며 매일 사용인원 34명에 達한다. 黃海道는 대략 여하하다. 有望金鑛의 數父는 적은 편이다.

京畿道
京畿道에는 金銀鑛이 여럿이 잇기는 하나 그러케 세상을 놀낼 만한 큰 금광이라고 업다. 그 증거로 京畿道 사람 속에 금광으로 거부되엇다는 말을 아직 못 드럿다.

三田鑛山
이것은 楊平郡에 잇다. 趙鎭元 氏의 소유 경영으로 그리 크잘 것은 업스나 鑛脈은 頗히 유망하다고 하는데 年産 12,000원이요 사용인부 매일 40명을 數한다.

信道鑛山
이것은 富川郡에 잇다. 曺秉相 氏의 소유 경영으로 年産 55,000원으로 京畿道內에선 産額에 잇서 屈指하는 광산이다. 매일 사용인부 수 176명이다.

永中鑛山
이것은 抱川郡에 잇다. 皆月善六氏의 소유 경영으로 年産額 75,000원이요 사용인원이 49인이다.

麗水金山
驪州郡에 잇서 梶原氏의 소유다.  年産額 47,000원 매일 사용 인부 수가 129명이다.

雲西鑛山
이것은 富川郡에 잇다. 小畑豊七氏의 소유 경영으로 年産額 40,000만원이요 인부 사용수 114명이라면 상당한 축에 든다.

忠淸南道
모든 문화적 경제력 세력이 全朝鮮에 잇서 忠北이 떠러지는 모양으로 忠淸山川은 황금을 埋藏하여잇는 분량도 빈약하다. 그리하야 年産10,000대의 광산이라고 겨우 세 곳 박게 업다.즉

月田里 金山
忠北永同郡에 잇다. 閔仁復 氏의 소유 경영으로 年産 10,000원이요 광부를 매일 사용함이 10명 가량이다. 좀더 대규모로 채굴한다면 産額이 증가할 것이다.

大海里 金山
亦永同에 잇다. 金敬直 氏의 소유 경영으로 産金年額 10,000원에 달하며 인부는 매일 68명을 사용한다.

大菱鑛山
忠州郡에 잇다. 山下順平氏의 소유 경영으로 16,000원의 年産이 잇다. 인부는 매일 37人을 쓰고 잇다.  ＜43＞

忠淸南道
忠北은 빈약하지만 忠南은 그러치 안다. 鑛山數도 만코 금광업이 퍽 활기를 띄고 잇다. 녯날 扶餘땅이 되어 금이 만헛든지도 모른다.

中央鑛山
天安郡에 잇다. 朝鮮中央鑛業株式會社의 소유 광산으로 年産 13만원에 달하는 상당히 큰 金山이다. 그리고 인부도 357명이란 다수를 부치고 잇다.

聖居山 金鑛
天安郡에 잇는데 裵明善 氏의 소유로 年産額 1만1천원을 數한다. 인부는 280명을 사용.

扶餘金山
扶餘郡에 잇는데 山田隈吉氏의 소유 경영으로 年産 10,000원 32명의 인부를 매일 사용한다.

金池鑛山
扶餘郡에 잇다. 藤井寬太郞氏의 소유 경영으로 年産額 13,000원이요 사용인원 95명이다.

保寧金山
保寧郡에 잇다. 中條平五郞氏의 소유 경영으로 年産額 4만3천원이다. 産額에 잇서서는 忠南金山 中 第一에 속한다. 매일 사용 인부 수는 32명.

九峰山 金鑛
靑陽郡에 잇다. 外城市郞氏의 소유 金山이다. 年産 38,000원이니 상당하다. 사용인부는 43인이다.

靑陽金山
역시 靑陽郡에 잇다. 尾山茂氏의 경영으로 年産2만2천원이다. 인부 사용 수는 36인.

黃寶金鑛
洪城郡에 잇다. 當房有次郞의 소유 경영으로 年産 32,000원이며 인부는 약 60명식 쓴다. 이상으로 대략 충청남도에 잇서 유망한 금광을 든 셈이다.

全羅北道
全羅北道에는 유명한 금광이 두 곳이나 잇다. 모다 年産額 수십 만원짜리다. 그러나 鑛區數는 만치 못하다.

金堤砂 金鑛
석광이 아니고 土鑛으로 즉 砂金鑛으로 金堤의 이 砂金鑛은 全鮮的으로 유명하다. 경영자가 巨資를 가진 큰 회사인 까닭에 기계설비 등이 완전한 까닭에 年産額도 만켓지만 엇잿든 작년 1년에 27만원이 낫다. 인부는 57인을 사용하고 잇다. 소유 경영자는 三菱鑛業株式會社이다.

光陽鑛山
光陽郡에 잇다. 朝鮮鑛業開發株式會社의 소유로 이것은 前記 三菱會社에서 하는 金堤砂金鑛보다도 더더 대규모다. 매일 使役하는 인부 수가 433명 그리고 年産額 64만원의 거액에 달한다. 年産高에 잇서서는 全鮮金鑛中 10指 속에 들 것이다.

慶尙北道
최근 世評은 平北 다음에 慶北이라 하리만치 慶北에는 鑛區가 만타. 그러치만 아직 驚天動地할 만한 큰 금광은 아직 업다. 그 중에서도 크다는 것이

尙州金鑛
이다. 尙州郡에 잇는데 佐賀炭鑛株式會社의 소유 경영으로 年産 6만원에 달하며 사용 인부가 285명이 잇다.

大也金山
이것은 金泉郡에 잇는데 金泉鑛業合資會社의 소유 경영이다. 1만원의 年産額을 數하며 현재 사용 인부수 73명이다.

金井金山
慶北 奉化에잇다. 金庸桂 氏의 소유 경영으로 年産額 10만원에 及한다. 이것이 慶北에 잇서선 ＜44＞  第1屈指하는 大金鑛이리라. 사용 인부가 89명의 다수에 達한다. 巨財를 投하야 기계설비 등을 완전히 한다면 全鮮에서 주목 밧는 有望金鑛이 되리라.

得益鑛山
善山郡에 잇다. 河野半平氏의 소유로 年産 11,000원이요 사용인부 수 29명이다.

慶尙南道
慶尙南道의 광업도 빈약하다. 年産 10,000원 이상은 겨우 세區 밧게 업다.

鳳鑛山
慶南 陜川郡에 잇다. 金成昌氏의 소유 경영으로 34,000원의 年産額이 잇다. 57명의 인부를 매일 사역하고 잇다.

大也鑛山
居昌郡에 잇다. 金昌守氏의 소유 경영으로 年産額 11,000원이요 사용인부 수가 15名이다.

馬山鑛山
昌原郡에잇다. 森田菊藏 氏의 所有經營으로 年産額 16,000원이요 사용인부 13명이다.

江原道
농산물에 잇서서는 江原道가 어림 업시 떠러지지만은 鑛産物 그 중에도 金銀鑛에 이르러는 일약 大富源을 차지하고 잇다.  그래서 鑛區數도 만코 年産 34만원에 及하는 泉浦金山가튼 것이 다 잇다.

安豊金山
江原道 准陽郡에 잇다. 石田龜一氏의 소유로 年産 18,000원에 及하며 사용인부 수가 90명이다.

八彌金鑛
平昌郡에잇다. 吳允泳氏의 소유 경영으로 年産額 22,000원이며 사용인부 수 55명이다.

鳥屯鑛山
平昌郡에 잇다. 鄭永錫氏의 所有鑛山으로 19,000원의 年産額이잇다. 사용인부수 19명.

泉浦金山
이 金鑛은 벌서 유명하다. 旋善郡의 金貞淑氏 소유 경영으로 年産 24만원을 稱한다. 사용인원 數가 75명이다.

北洞金山
旋善郡에 잇다. 稻葉 ウメ의 소유로 年産 8만원이며 人夫는 167명을 사용하고잇다.

沒雲金鑛
역시 旋善郡에 잇다. 吳在殷氏 所有로 年産 2만5,000원이며 사역인부수가 매일 90명에 달한다.

遠東金山
金化郡에 잇다. 鄭泰圭氏의 所有鑛山으로 年産額 10,000원이요 사역인부수 95명에 達한다.

三光鑛山
通川郡에잇서 小木彌三郞의 所有鑛山이다. 年産11,000원이며 인부 246명을 使役한다.

佑益鑛山
江原道 平原郡에 잇는데 유명한 三菱鑛山株式會社의 소유 경영이다. 年産額 27,000원에 達하며 사용인원 90명이다.

三和鑛山
洪川郡에 잇다. 申鉉珏氏 外 1人의 소유 경영인데 年産額 11,000원이며 使用人夫數 65명이다. ＜45＞

井谷鑛山
橫城郡에 잇다. 孫鳳祥 外 1人의 소유 경영이다. 年産額 10,000원 사용인원 291명이다.

咸鏡南道
內藏院卿 李容翊氏 금송아지 이래 咸鏡南道의 金脈은 벌서 유명하다. 최근에도 65만원에 鑛山이 팔리엇다 하며 또 年産額이 작고 느러가는 鑛山이 여러개 잇다고 한다. 平安北道와 咸鏡南道가 全朝鮮金鑛 중 제일 유력한가보다.

仁興鑛山
永興郡에 잇다. 西山吉兵衛氏의 소유로 年産額 12,000원에 達하며 使用人夫 180명이라 稱한다.

翰洞里鑛山
永興郡에 잇다. 藤田鑛業株式會社의 소유인데 年産萬 3만원이요 사용인원 40명이다.

大嶺鑛山
安邊郡에 잇다. 金仁圭氏의 소유 경영으로 年産額 10,000원이며 使用人夫 69명이다.

黃龍金山
역시 安邊郡에 잇다. 齋藤義行氏의 소유 경영으로 年産 37,000원에 及한다. 使用人夫數가 149명이다.

黃井金鑛
역시 安邊郡에 잇다. 洪性寬氏의 소유 경영으로 年産額 15,000원이며 使用人夫는 10명 내외이다.

大同金鑛
端川郡에 잇다. 野悖 金之助氏의 소유 경영으로 年産額 52,000원에 達하며 使用人夫 611명의 다수가 잇다.

明太洞金山
新興郡에 잇다. 林晉圭氏의 소유로 年産 20,000원 사용인부 196명이 잇고 그리고 이 밧게 등록번호 8,298호에 해당하는 큰 광산이 同氏 소유로 또 잇는데 年産額 15만이요 사용인원 402인에 及한다.

長興金剛
長津郡에 잇다. 朴雲外 3氏의 소유 경영으로 年産額 11,000원이요 사용인부 56인이 잇다. 이밧게 大山金鑛 등 상당히 유력한 鑛山이 함남 處處에 잇스나 너무 길어저서 略한다.

咸鏡北道
咸北은 철과 석탄으로 유명하다. 철로는 三菱會社 소유인 茂山鐵山가튼 것은 滿洲鞍山을 능가하리라 하게 東洋一로 유명하다. 벌서 淸津港에다가 製鐵所의 준비 등을 하고 잇다. 不遠에 茂山鐵은 세계적으로 일홈이 날 것이며 석탄도 生氣嶺 昭和 龍田 다 유명하다. 그러나 金銀의 富源은 薄하야 金山은 1, 2處에 불과하다.

靑岩金山
富寧郡에 잇다. 三菱鑛業株式會社 소유 경영인데 年産額 27만원에 及하는 거대한 鑛脈을 가젓다. 현재 매일 사용인부가 443명에 及한다.
이상으로써 全鮮의 有望金鑛을 대개 일감하엿다. 요컨대 이상은 年産 10,000원 이상의 광산 뿐이고 7, 8천원 내지 1, 2천원하는 鑛山은 石鑛이나 土鑛이 엇더케 만흔지 모른다.
엇잿든 이상의 사실을 바라 볼 때 吾人은 猛省하지 아니치 못하겟다. 年産 2, 3천만원 하는 중에 朝鮮人의 손으로 採金하는 産金高가 얼마나 될가. 又는 前記 鑛區中에 朝鮮人의 소유 경영이 만치 못하지 안은가.
天然의 富源에 대한 吾人의 着目과 활동은 시각을 다투어야 하겟다. ＜46＞
＜40-46＞