Magazine Title: 개벽 제65호
Publication Date: 1926년 01월 01일
Article Title: 美術과 音樂 (Art and Music)
Author: Kim Pokchin (金復鎭), Yun Kŭgyŏng (尹克榮)
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/Essay)

Art and Music
Regarding the fields of art and music—can we truly neglect these indefinitely? In other words, how long shall we overlook the chaotic dance of those few trend-chasing, goblin-like amusement seekers?

The Outline of Chosŏn Art, a Reflection of Chosŏn History Itself
Kim Pokchin
Historically, the art of Chosŏn (朝鮮) has a very deep connection with the aggressive policies of imperialism. That is to say, from the era of the Four Commanderies (四郡時代), considered the dawn of Chosŏn art, until the present day, it has frequently endured invasions alongside military conquests.
From the Four Commanderies era—Nangnang (樂浪), Hyŏndo (玄菟), Chinbŏn (眞蕃), Imdun (臨屯)—through Silla (新羅) to present-day Chosŏn, art was transmitted following invasion and massacre. Furthermore, the art that grew and matured here in Chosŏn is this transmitted art.
Of course, this does not mean there was no art in Chosŏn before the Four Commanderies era. We can easily assume today that the people (native tribes) of Chosŏn at that time also had their own splendid <66> art. Why? Because we know all too well that even in Egypt (埃及) or Greece (希臘), and even earlier among the reindeer peoples of France (佛蘭西) and Spain (西班牙) (during the prehistoric Stone Age), art existed.
The origin of art—I do not intend to write about this—but for primitive people, only life itself existed, and only what life necessarily and indispensably required existed. Therefore, art necessary for the life of the individual and the entire group must naturally have existed. Readers and I alike know clearly that painting and sculpting were done for the needs of life—to facilitate the reproduction of memory, to aid the convenience of interpretation, as memorials, or as codes—among any primitive tribe.
With this, we can sufficiently conclude that even before the Four Commanderies era, the native peoples of Wiman Chosŏn (危滿朝鮮) or Kija Chosŏn (技子朝鮮), or further back before Tan'gun Chosŏn (檀君朝鮮), possessed the art they needed to have.
However, the art possessed by the native peoples fundamentally changed in its function and effect due to the invasion of imperialist culture. The state of life in primitive society inevitably led to class division, a regrettable stage in the process of human life history. From this point, the art of Chosŏn became a means for the exploiting class, the conquerors, to anesthetize and enslave the exploited class, the native peoples. It was used for the repentance and self-consolation of the conquerors who habitually committed the crimes of conquest and slaughter, becoming religious and turning into an excellent policy of appeasement (懷柔政策) by the exploiting class towards the conquered. Thus, this politicized art became art detached from reality, having no connection whatsoever with inherent human life. Yet, it prospered and existed substantially, attempting instead to dominate and sublimate life—reality. Due to the imperialist aggression and force regularly pushing out from the Chinese mainland (支那本土), the culture that followed in its wake, and the hedonistic desires fermented within the native ruling class itself, self-aggrandizement occurred. The illusory mirage, the ivory tower, gradually solidified its foundation but increasingly distanced itself from life and the masses. This state persisted, and upon it was added Chosŏn's unique sentiment of defeat and decline (敗頹 心情) ("Being a nation unfortunately situated geographically, and additionally having suffered frequent conquests, the entire sentiment of the people became powerless and exhausted. Besides this, <67> factors of climate, customs, and geology are not absent, but the main cause is seen in the former."). What is called the art of Chosŏn is the result of painting and dancing with brush and ink, flavored with this sentiment.
The art of Chosŏn possesses such a rich history and lineage (族譜). Let us then examine the state of Chosŏn art today. At some point (I won't write when, as the reader knows it too well), a major political upheaval occurred. A transformation as drastic as, or even more rapid than, that of the Four Commanderies' rule era—the dawn of art history 2,000 years ago—took place. As a result, Western (歐米) civilization—in other words, the civilization of mature capitalism—came flooding in via Japan (日本), carrying a new mission of stratification, along with countless immigrants.
Here, a portion of the privileged class, which had most nurtured and savored the traditional art, collapsed. Chosŏn art, having lost its mother Womb, exerted all its strength to find its own nutrients. Just as the art of the native peoples before the Four Commanderies era, the art of primitive people, sought to separate from and rebel against the native peoples or primitive people, it became obsessed with welcoming a new master. The foreign conquerors, too, intended to use art as a traditional policy to perpetuate their hedonistic lives, appease the conquered, and anesthetize them. Thus, these two entities, with different objectives, engaged in this illicit union (野合). Each experienced a different kind of pleasure. Present-day Chosŏn art, possessing equal parts flattery, subservience, and arrogance, continues to exist and be cultivated in this manner.
However, the times and circumstances are very different from the past. Consequently, foreign art, immigrant art, unseen before, has arisen vigorously. Here, the art of Chosŏn has met a new, formidable rival. It has been forced into confrontation with foreign art—immigrant art. It has come to contend with immigrant art, which holds a superior position politically.
Parts of Chosŏn's nature are gradually being altered to suit immigrant tastes as time passes. The civilization of capitalism permeates the fields and villages everywhere. Thanks to this, the local character (鄕土性) (or national character, 民族性) of Chosŏn art is being extinguished. The problem lies here. The local character, upon which Chosŏn art most relied and prided itself in its confrontation and struggle with immigrant art, stands on the path of having its boundaries eroded by capitalist civilization and being altered by immigrant tastes. The sole weapon of Chosŏn art is thus <68> being eaten away daily like this. (There are those who stubbornly insist on the eternal immutability of local character. However, we see more than anyone how it is vanishing due to the civilization of mature capitalism. Herein lies the achievement of capitalist civilization.) Due to the conquests and massacres suffered repeatedly throughout history, and because this alone has been inherited from ancestors for generations, the heartstrings of the entire Chosŏn populace have taken on a peculiar dissonance. (I call this the 'sentiment of defeat and decline' (敗頹 心情).) Only this sentiment is increasing in intensity at an accelerating rate. (It deepens at a speed not directly proportional to the maturation of capitalism.) When this decadent sentiment deepens further and its accumulation collapses, that will be the time when the national character, which Chosŏn art relied upon until the very end and considered its lifeline, is obliterated from its foundations. It collapses. Consequently, Chosŏn art loses any reason for its existence. While fawning (呵*) upon the newly emerging ruling class and simultaneously being used strategically, it is forced into confrontation and struggle with immigrant art.
The painful battle occurs less due to artistic principles than because of the proportion of favor from the ruling class and the distribution rate of profits. Thus, seeking sympathy for the unfortunate status of being a native people, it enters the fray armed with the weapon of local character and national character, which rusts away day by day. This is the desperate situation of the art of Chosŏn, the illusory mirage (蜃氣樓) before our eyes right now.
From Kija (箕子) of old, through Wiman (衛滿), Emperor Wu (武帝) of the Later Han (後漢), the Sui and Tang (隋唐) dynasties, down to the Ming and Qing (明淸), envoys and culture were exchanged. Through this, the art of the native peoples, detached from life and the majority populace, was refined and purified (靜燈). After being colored by the so-called 'sentiment of defeat and decline,' it marked out the unique realm of Chosŏn art. Its foundation was solidified by the Buddhist statues of Silla, the paintings of King Kongmin (恭愍王) and Chang Sagong (張思恭), the powerful styles of the Samje (三齊), and the vigorous brushwork of Tanwŏn (檀園) and Owŏn (吾園). Adding to this in recent times were Simjŏn (心田) and Sorim (小琳), and besides them, hordes of trifling painters (弄彩畵士) entrenched within the虚荒한 (hŏhwanghan - desolate/empty) ivory tower, concealing and decorating the life of the masses with the twilight gauze (薄明의 面紛布) of sentimentalism. They had no thoughts or reflections on the immediate 'human suffering' (人間苦) and 'social evil' (社會惡), nor any preparation for life—for realization—passively engaging in trifling brushwork (弄腕戱墨) strategically. To give a common example, the murals of Van Eyck (팡·에이·크) or the works of Michelangelo (미게란체로) aimed not so much to artistically decorate Christian temples and enhance the grandeur of their architecture, but rather to boast of the glory of heaven and the happiness of the afterlife—in other words, to curry favor with believers and intimidate the masses of heathens. The presence or absence of artistic value was an entirely separate issue. Achieving artistic effect was merely a secondary byproduct. Art that divorced itself from primitive people and became independent from life—decorated art—art estranged and detached from life—the art of the past—the art of the present—all were shaped in this same manner—by strategy—by faith. The question of artistic value was never even considered. It merely faithfully—adhered to politics—to religion—to the privileged class—willingly endured servitude—believed in art for art's sake (藝術至上性) for self-consolation, and used this to anesthetize the masses, and thus it has existed.
It is said that the reason for the existence of present-day Chosŏn art also lies here. This is why the art circle (畵壇) was formed, and the Calligraphy and Painting Association (書畵 協 會), Koryŏ Art Academy (高麗美術院), Sammihoe (三美會), and Ch'angmisa (創美社) were organized. They banded together solely due to the distribution rate of spoils (番餌). They did not diverge based on differences in artistic assertion, principle, or even ideology, but were established purely out of jealousy and animosity to monopolize the favor of the privileged class. In painting, they are identical in rigidly adhering to the directly imported, undigested legacies (遺訓) of Tang and Song China. They are identical in being sweetly asleep in the backward dream of classical idealism. They are identical in their indifference towards 'social evil' (社會惡).
I understand it this way. For the art of Chosŏn, which is in its period of self-destruction (自滅期), there is no other way out but to rapidly undergo its own decomposition. However, simply demanding that it tread the gradual historical path in art trends—from classical idealism to realism, from realism to subjectivism, from subjectivism to the guillotine—is a belated order that cannot be made, nor can it be complied with. Why? Because one cannot wait for it to pass through eras like these: from the period of self-consoling confessions, declarations, and sentimental, idealistic warnings regarding life, social evil, and a humanitarian, idealistic stance; to the era of attempting analysis in realism, and further, casting judgment reflected in small subjectivities; until the time of skeptical and agitated self-negation, self-excavation, and subjective rebellion. Such a leisurely journey cannot be undertaken, dragging along heelless hemp sandals (麻鞋) with a cripple's gait. The situation is urgent. If one can run, one must run. For this reason, I hope that the self-decomposition of the current Chosŏn art circle, indeed Chosŏn art itself, manifests itself quickly, even by a single day.<70>
I only wish it were understood that art is the superstructure of society. Therefore, when there is a change in the foundational structure of society—in the economic organization, in politics—when changes occur in class, art itself inevitably undergoes self-dismantlement—performs its own suicide (*死).
So, what about the masses of Chosŏn now? The masses of Chosŏn, having been deceived far too much historically by the appeasement-politicized art of the conquerors, are neither tempted nor attracted in any way by the art that possesses excessive arrogance—the art that is frantically contending with immigrant art. They severed ties with art detached from life long ago—just as the primitive people of antiquity broke away from the art that sought to rebel against the life of the native peoples. The masses of Chosŏn know the inner substance of Chosŏn art all too well. Thus, they gaze, far too magnanimously, upon the chaotic dance of the legless goblins (독갑이).

Looking Around the Current Music Scene (Above all, I hope for the emergence of a musician who can profoundly express the blood-soaked soul of Chosŏn)
Yun Kŭgyŏng

One
I've given it the plausible-sounding title "Impressions of the Music Scene," but I really can't figure out what I should write. If I'm going to write anyway, shouldn't I record something about the state of music? But just as there needs to be a mountain for a tiger to exist, doesn't there need to be a music scene (악단) for there to be anything to say about it? In the ruins of Chosŏn, where everything is declining and nearing extinction, it's utterly impossible that only the music scene would remain. And in the current state, even new sprouts cannot emerge. In any case, talking about impressions or anything else regarding a non-existent music scene in Chosŏn seems like nonsensical chatter.
However, just as goblins (독개비) might come out into an empty, dilapidated house <71> and try to emulate the old man next door by wearing a hat (갓), or call the servants and command them with feigned authority, trying hard to mimic human actions, so too in the empty house that is Chosŏn, while there is no genuine music scene, one can perceive a faint presence, like its shadow, truly like goblins. But everyone knows that this presence is unsound and not permanent. What more needs to be said? Originally, goblins (saying this makes me sound like I have profound research on goblins, truly like a scholar of goblinology) are beings of extraordinary talent (才操), appearing and disappearing mysteriously. And they have an innate disposition (天質) to enjoy everything. For instance, if they see someone weeping sorrowfully at a parent's funeral, they immediately mimic it, but do so with extreme cheerfulness. It seems that in the eyes of a goblin, all human sorrow and suffering appear as mere play. When the mourner wears a hood (頭巾), they wear one too; when the ritual officiant (祭官) bows twice (再拜), they also follow suit, but they cannot even conceive of mimicking the single drop of bitter tears welling up from the depths of the heart. If they happen to see tears falling, it seems they only know to dab saliva or water near their eyes. Isn't this the characteristic trait of a goblin?
Well, leaving that aside, let's now examine Chosŏn's music scene! Truly, it is grand in scale. What is grand? The mimicry is grand. That mimicry is goblin-like mimicry. It's not even genuine imitation, but unsound mimicry like that of goblins who know only how to enjoy everything. In any case, among those currently called musicians (樂家), there is far too much of a hedonistic mood. It wouldn't be an exaggeration to say they lack artistic conscience. Surely, the mood of an artist when creating something was never playful. Look! At Beethoven's (베-도펜) "Moonlight Sonata"! You've likely heard the anecdotes associated with the "Moonlight Sonata," and it seems to have been introduced several times in Chosŏn, so I won't repeat them. But where in its phrases (樂句) is there even a hint of a dissipated (流蕩) mood? I believe that the suffering Beethoven endured when creating the "Moonlight Sonata," spiritually and physically, surpassed that of childbirth. That must have been the reality. Perhaps someone might counter-argue: unlike other composers, Beethoven often blended humorous phrases even into extremely mysterious and awe-inspiring (敬畏的) musical pieces! However, the humorous nature of those phrases is absolutely not a mood of dissipation or hedonism. It is a most precious phrase that gently calms the fiercely rising emotions—in other words, it gently rests the wildly beating heart (鼓動). From this, one can understand how profound <72> the surrounding phrases are. When a skilled performer, a pianist (피아니스트), plays such a profound piece of art, it's not demanded that they express Beethoven's exact spirit of that time, but the profoundness, the rich emotion befitting an artist, and his tense spirit should be shared in common.
Three or four years ago, I attended a recital by the "world-class pianist" Mr. Paderewski (파르다스). At that time, my understanding of piano music was particularly limited, so I didn't have a deep impression of him. However, his composed demeanor and heightened emotion remain unforgettable even now. After Mr. Paderewski sat down at the piano bench, gently lifted his heavy hands, and slowly struck the keys, he no longer seemed human. He seemed to have become fire itself. The piano sound and he burned together. Even after finishing the piece, he did not rise hastily but showed infinite attachment to the melody and the piano, his face and body filled with a truly artistic mood, as if departing reluctantly. Saying this might make me sound like someone ignorant of musical substance, just babbling after seeing a musician's facial expression, but unless the expression is a false representation, if it's a natural expression flowing from a state of selflessness (無我의 境), how can one not pay attention to it! Anyway, all people entering the path of music, whether beginners or masters, should first cultivate their character (性格) rather than just learning notes like "dung-dang" or "dong-dang." When I say cultivation (수양), don't worry, it's not the kind of cultivation of Confucian scholar types (道學者類) who can't even tap their feet to the rhythm, nor the uncomfortable cultivation found in some sections of the preaching methods (傳道法) of trendy pastors (牧師) or elders (長老). This may sound presumptuous, but I cry out: who in our Chosŏn is such a profound and revolutionary musician? I have seen musicians drunk on alcohol, but I have yet to see anyone with more blood. Recently, the passion for music (音樂熱) in Chosŏn seems to be increasing. That in itself is truly a joyous thing. However, it seems everyone is falling into a hedonistic mood. And they are too caught up in technique (기교) alone. Though nominally existing (有名無實), our music scene seems to be increasingly leaning this way lately. This is not to say technique is unnecessary. Of course, for an artist, technique cannot be omitted. Pianists need scales (스켈) and pedals (페달), string players (提琴家) need bowing technique and positions (포시숀), vocalists (성악가) need vocal production methods (發聲法)—I am not unaware that all these various techniques are necessary and must be infinitely refined. But this must not be forgotten: rather than these techniques being revealed meaninglessly and mechanically, a terrifying bloodline, life itself, must surge <73> forth above the technique! This must not be forgotten. In any case, those without blood don't need to be kept alive, and even if left alone, they won't live long anyway. Truly, anemia (貧血症) is a terrifying illness!
Last month, a world-class singer like Mrs. Kathleen Howard (캐티슨 夫人) did come to Chosŏn. The Public Hall (公會堂) was packed to capacity, a great success. But how many people understood her art? Besides her, the tenor Mr. Johnson (쫀손) also came. Anyway, we have directly or indirectly encountered such great artists. What gives us the greatest lesson whenever we encounter such art is first their artist-like personality (인격), and then their expression (엑쓰프레-숀). The artist-like personality mentioned here signifies a passionate disposition (氣風) arising from a composed character.

Two
Generally, the introduction of Western music to Chosŏn is known to be thanks to American missionaries (米國 선교사). Truly a grateful deed. First, hymns (讚頌歌) emerged from their mouths and hands. Consequently, for a while, there were hymns in churches, hymns in bars and kisaeng houses—anyway, music at that time invariably meant hymns. A person who sang hymns well was inevitably a musician (so you had to be a good believer in Jesus too), and someone who didn't know them was pointed at as having no understanding of music. The great authorities (大權力者) who bestowed and revoked the title of musician at that time were the American missionaries. Therefore, if one wanted to become a musician, one had to catch the eye of those missionaries; and trying to mimic everything to fit their expectations led to lamenting one's own congenital deficiencies (先天 不足). Even in singing, twisting the tongue (舌) to touch the roof of the mouth and producing sound nasally felt awkward, and it was regrettable not having deep-set eyes and a high nose (深目高準). I don't know if anyone who harbored such resentment (寃恨) is still alive, but if they knew about the recent invention of nose-stretching devices (鼻伸器), their feelings would be immense (感慨 無量). And if so-called civilization advanced further to invent eye-deepening devices (深眼器), and if they could somehow even stretch their height to become just like Westerners, they would nod their heads back and forth (搖頭轉目) with joy, whether in this life or the next. Truly a lamentable thing. This might sound like a very old story, but it was merely 5 or 6 years ago, and it seems the residual poison (餘毒) still lingers today.
Originally, America (美國) is a tremendous country, and Americans are quite something. The world-class musicians gathering in America annually are not just one or two, and many <74> musicians reside there permanently. With that much stimulation, even a nation of monkeys might produce something! But there's nothing! There isn't a single person worth mentioning. Occasionally, music magazines or newspapers report, "Ms. So-and-so living somewhere in America has the widest vocal range in the world." Thus, being number one for wide range, number one for volume—they seem to really enjoy hearing "world's number one." The musician's character or their sentiment (정서) is disregarded. Let's open a music history book. Beethoven (베-토렌), Sohŏ (소허 - possibly Schubert or another composer, unclear phonetic rendering), Liszt (리스트), the "King of Lieder" Schubert (벨트 - Schubert), or Schumann (슈만), besides them Wagner (왁녈), Rossini (로시니), Gounod (쿠-노), Mozart (모잡트), Weber (웨벨), Mendelssohn (멜텔손) — among these composers, was even one born in America? Even renowned vocalists like Haydn (하이톤 - likely Haydn) or Handel (헨델) were not born in America. And even among contemporary musicians, famous singers like Caruso (카루소), Imusŭ (이무스 - unclear), Alma Gluck (아루마그륵), McCormack (막코막), Martinelli (마틔넬나차로 - likely Martinelli), Ppori (뽀리 - unclear), Melba (멜바), Schumann-Heink (쉬만하잉크), or pianists like Paderewski (파트리에푸스키), Godowsky (고도-에푸스키), Paderewski (파루따스 - appears again), or violin masters like Elman (엘만), Heifetz (하이프에스), Zimbalist (짐바리스트), Kreisler (크라이슬라) — none were born in America. (Even if one or two were, that would be the exception). Anyway, it seems that in America, past or present, musicians have rarely emerged, and even if they did, they weren't impressive. Recently, America has composed much imitative music (模寫音樂), which can be considered the lowest form in terms of art. The purpose of imitative music is to mimic natural sounds exactly. For example, putting the sound of thunder (雷聲) directly onto the piano, or expressing the sound of a car exactly. Therefore, it has little artistic value. Such music, though called music, can only be seen as a form of play. America has not just one or two deficiencies regarding music, no, regarding art. Their lives are so affluent, and the dissipated, hedonistic mood arising from a constant state of satiety is expressed directly as music—what strength or boiling blood could be there? Missionaries who learned in a corner of such a country come here, strut around throwing their weight about (네 활개를 치며), try to interfere in everything, and attempt to conduct whether they know anything or not. If they were going to teach, they should have just taught Jesus; why meddle even in music! It's joyful that something arose from nothing, but sometimes it's better for something new not to appear at all if it's worse than nothing. Recently, the Chosŏn music scene seems to have barely escaped the missionaries' hands, unlike before, but perhaps a few people still need that nose-stretcher.
Well then—how should the Chosŏn music scene proceed? <75>
Before addressing this, I intend to very briefly outline the general trend of the contemporary European (歐洲) music world. Like all arts, music art also has distinct regional colors. Just as within the small confines of Chosŏn, there are P'yŏngyang (平壤) Susimga (愁心歌) and Namdo (南道) Tanga (단가), so too in Europe, there are the German School (獨逸 樂派) and the French School (佛蘭西 樂派), each with different musical styles (樂風). The modern German school focuses on pure music (純音樂) and program music (標題樂). Their profound principle (主義) is to express this in an extremely German (獨逸的) way. In other words, to powerfully express national characteristics (국민적 특성) through pure or program music. The fervent desire (熱望) to display national characteristics is likely unmatched anywhere in the world compared to Germany. Not only the modern German school, but since Germany came into existence, their music has called out Germany, and unless the existence of Germany completely disappears in the future, as long as it remains even faintly, the music of that country will surely not change its color. Much music from various countries flowed into Germany. However, once it entered the gates of Germany, it became Germanized. Truly, German music is global precisely because it is German. The modern French school is similar to the Italian School (伊太利 樂派), with its research entirely focused on operatic methods (歌劇法). Therefore, it is said that French music schools send their graduates to the local Grand Opéra (그란드오페라座) as performers. Besides these, it's not that other national schools don't exist, but they are ultimately branches of these two major schools, so I won't record them separately. Then, returning to the initial question, where and how should the Chosŏn music scene proceed? There are things I fear most. These influences likely affect more than just the music world! On one hand, the comical, hedonistic musical style of the American type, mentioned earlier, is blowing in. Furthermore, it's the swaggering influence (억깨바람) of the imperfect missionaries blowing in. Both the teachers who believe this implicitly and teach it, whether effectively or not, and the students who learn it indirectly and barely manage—truly, their situation (身勢) is pitiful.

Three
On the other hand, Japanese popular songs (日本 가요) are stealthily creeping in.
Truly, the "Yamato spirit" (大和魂) creeps in day by day. Even if it flew in without crawling on its own, would it pose any threat to us? But trying to digest food that doesn't even suit our palate—that's what worries me. They set the fundamental policy of their education enterprise on Japan-Korea harmonization (일선융화) and aim to create shared moods and emotions as much as possible. Therefore, even now, ordinary school students (보통학생) are taught Japanese children's songs (日本 동요), especially Japanese-style popular songs (日本적 가요) that seem to taste better when plucked on a shamisen (三味線) or koto (고도). <76> Since this is all by order of the Educational Affairs Authorities (學務 當局), one cannot disobey (拒逆) even if it means grinding one's bones to powder (粉骨쇄身), but isn't there room for deep, deep consideration? Is it only elementary schools (小學校)? The teaching of singing (唱歌) even in places called girls' higher common schools (여자고등보통학교) is the same. Let's take Sungmyŏng Girls' School (淑明여학교) as a good example. By any measure, it's a place that should teach Chosŏn-style songs. First, the school belongs to Chosŏn people, and the head music teacher is a Chosŏn person who should know better, so I had thought all along that if there was a trustworthy place, it was there. But don't be surprised. Chinmyŏng (進明), which has a Japanese music teacher unable to speak Chosŏn language, paradoxically has more Chosŏn sentiment (朝鮮 정서) than Sungmyŏng, which has a Chosŏn person as head music teacher. If one is an artist, isn't it necessary to know what art education is? And furthermore, if one intends to be a school teacher, isn't it necessary to go to the library and read about art education? Let's think about it. Let's judge even by common sense. Even with the same lullaby (子守歌), sung in the same place by the same person with the same expression, the sentiment already differs depending on whether the lyrics are in a foreign language or the national language. Here is a humble thatched house (草家집), where even the crock stand (쟝독간) is visible. On the floor of the room's wooden porch (마루), a young lady of this precious nation, wearing a turquoise top (남끗동저고리) and navy skirt (남치마), gently, gently cradles her cherished baby Kŭmja Tong'i (金子童) in her arms and peacefully sings in a soft, fine voice, "Sleep, sleep, baby! On mama's breast (자장 자장 아가야! 엄마 가슴에)." Endless national sentiment flows from there. If, in such an environment, other words like the Japanese "Nemure, nemure, waga ko yo (네무레ねむれ我子よ)" or the English "Sleep oh! Sleep My Darling (Sheer oh! Sleeh My Dalling - sic)" were uttered, it would truly be a great killjoy (殺風景). Isn't this like wearing Western clothes with a topknot (상토)? Those in Chosŏn who prattle on about sentiment education (정서 교육) or art education (예술 교육) seem to be racking their brains on how to better stage such unnatural killjoys even in the future. Listen, music teachers in various schools! If you have mouths to make excuses, open them. A monthly salary of over 100 won isn't small, but even a salary of 40-50 won is state pay (國祿), yet spending day after day like this must be truly difficult.

Five
My nagging has gone on too long. Anyway, currently in Chosŏn, American-style music and Japanese-style music are incessantly blowing in. This influx is very welcome, and I even wish more would come. However, if we are to build a genuine music scene, not a goblin's game (독개비 장난), in the future, we must knead and <77> pound all these incoming musical styles with our own hands, infuse them with Chosŏn flavor (朝鮮味), and ultimately create Chosŏn's original music. Otherwise, it will be utterly impossible to establish a Chosŏn music scene. And such a Chosŏn music scene must pulsate even more intensely with blood. I see present-day Chosŏn as like the roar of a lion (獅吼) behind iron bars (鐵窓). It fights against its environment, the iron bars, to the utmost. It rebels fiercely. It scratches the iron bars with sharp claws until sparks fly and lets out a roar ("어흠"). The music of Chosŏn must be like this roar ("어흠") emerging from the lion's mouth (獅吼口). Otherwise, it is a lie. We are, in fact, more tormented than that lion's roar. If that lion, in its constrained iron cage like ours, also lacked food, it would have already fought a final battle—either the bars break or its head shatters. If our current music must be like that lion's roar, what should our future music be like? In any case, if we intend to construct our music scene, we must not forget the blood-stained soul of Chosŏn. In other words, the scene must be filled to the brim with musicians who know how to profoundly express the blood-soaked Chosŏn soul (피에 엉킨 朝鮮魂). <78>

**Summary**

Kim Pokchin argues that Korean art has historically been shaped and distorted by foreign imperialist powers (Chinese, then Japanese) and used by ruling classes as a tool for pacification and control, detaching it from the life of the masses and imbuing it with a "sentiment of defeat." He sees contemporary Korean art as continuing this subservient tradition, merely mimicking foreign styles (Chinese legacy, Western/Japanese imports) or vying for colonial patronage, devoid of genuine connection to Korean reality or spirit ("local character," "national character"), and calls for its self-destruction to clear the way for something new. Yun Kŭgyŏng similarly critiques the Korean music scene as non-existent or populated by "goblins" merely mimicking Western (especially American missionary-introduced hymns and superficial techniques) and Japanese styles (promoted through colonial education) for hedonistic pleasure or colonial favor, lacking authentic depth or connection to Korean suffering. He calls for musicians who can powerfully express the "blood-soaked Korean soul," comparing the needed intensity to a lion's roar against its cage.

These articles are historically significant for their sharp critique of colonial cultural influence and assimilation policies just a few years into the "cultural policy" (bunka seiji) era. They reflect a strong nationalist consciousness among intellectuals, viewing traditional art forms as compromised by historical subservience and contemporary art/music as lacking authenticity due to ongoing colonial domination and superficial imitation of foreign trends. Historians would find the explicit linking of artistic expression (or lack thereof) to political subjugation, the critique of both Western and Japanese cultural imports, the identification of a "sentiment of defeat" (패퇴 심정), and the impassioned call for art rooted in national suffering ("blood-soaked soul," "lion's roar") particularly revealing of the cultural anxieties and aspirations within colonized Korea during the 1920s.

**Named Entities**

金復鎭	김복진	Kim Pokchin
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
四郡時代	사군시대	Sagun Sidae (Four Commanderies Era)
樂浪	낙랑	Nangnang
玄菟	현도	Hyŏndo
眞蕃	진번	Chinbŏn
臨屯	임둔	Imdun
新羅	신라	Silla
埃及	애급	Aegŭp (Egypt)
希臘	희랍	Hŭirap (Greece)
佛蘭西	불란서	Pullansŏ (France)
西班牙	서반아	Sŏbana (Spain)
危滿朝鮮	위만조선	Wiman Chosŏn
技子朝鮮	기자조선	Kija Chosŏn
檀君朝鮮	단군조선	Tan'gun Chosŏn
支那	지나	China
歐米	구미	Kumi (Europe and America)
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
後漢	후한	Huhan (Later Han)
武帝	무제	Muje (Emperor Wu)
隋唐	수당	Sudang (Sui and Tang dynasties)
明淸	명청	Myŏngch'ŏng (Ming and Qing dynasties)
恭愍王	공민왕	Kongminwang (King Gongmin)
張思恭	장사공	Chang Sagong
三齊	삼제	Samje
檀園	단원	Tanwŏn (Kim Hongdo)
吾園	오원	Owŏn (Chang Sŭngŏp)
心田	심전	Simjŏn (An Chungshik)
小琳	소림	Sorim (Cho Sŏkchin)
書畵 협회	서화 협회	Sŏhwa Hyŏphoe (Calligraphy and Painting Association)
高麗美術院	고려미술원	Koryŏ Misurwŏn (Koryŏ Art Academy)
三美會	삼미회	Sammihoe
創美社	창미사	Ch'angmisa
팡·에이·크	판 에이크	Jan van Eyck (Phonetic)
미게란체로	미켈란젤로	Michelangelo (Phonetic)
尹克榮	윤극영	Yun Kŭgyŏng
베-도펜	베토벤	Beethoven (Phonetic)
파르다스	파데레프스키	Paderewski (Phonetic)
캐티슨 夫人	캐슬린 하워드 부인	Mrs. Kathleen Howard (Phonetic, likely referring to her 1925 visit)
公會堂	공회당	Konghoedang (Public Hall)
쫀손	존슨	Johnson (Phonetic, likely Edward Johnson or similar tenor)
美國	미국	Miguk (America/USA)
소허	소허	Sohŏ (Unclear composer, phonetic)
리스트	리스트	Liszt
벨트	슈베르트	Schubert (Referred to as "King of Lieder")
슈만	슈만	Schumann
왁녈	바그너	Wagner (Phonetic)
로시니	로시니	Rossini
쿠-노	구노	Gounod (Phonetic)
모잡트	모차르트	Mozart (Phonetic)
웨벨	베버	Weber (Phonetic)
멜텔손	멘델스존	Mendelssohn (Phonetic)
하이톤	하이든	Haydn (Phonetic, plausible)
헨델	헨델	Handel
카루소	카루소	Caruso
이무스	이무스	Imusŭ (Unclear singer, phonetic)
아루마그륵	알마 글룩	Alma Gluck (Phonetic)
막코막	매코맥	McCormack (Phonetic)
마틔넬나차로	마르티넬리	Martinelli (Phonetic, plausible)
뽀리	뽀리	Ppori (Unclear singer, phonetic)
멜바	멜바	Melba
쉬만하잉크	슈만하인크	Schumann-Heink (Phonetic)
파트리에푸스키	파데레프스키	Paderewski (Phonetic)
고도-에푸스키	고도프스키	Godowsky (Phonetic)
파루따스	파데레프스키	Paderewski (Phonetic, variant spelling)
엘만	엘만	Elman
하이프에스	하이페츠	Heifetz (Phonetic)
짐바리스트	짐발리스트	Zimbalist (Phonetic)
크라이슬라	크라이슬러	Kreisler (Phonetic)
歐洲	구주	Kuju (Europe)
獨逸	독일	Togil (Germany)
伊太利	이태리	It'aeri (Italy)
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
南道	남도	Namdo
大和魂	대화혼	Taehwahon (Yamato-damashii / Yamato Spirit)
三味線	삼미선	Sammisŏn (Shamisen)
고도	고토	Koto
學務 當局	학무 당국	Hakmu Tangguk (Educational Affairs Authorities)
淑明	숙명	Sungmyŏng (Sungmyŏng Women's School)
進明	진명	Chinmyŏng (Chinmyŏng Girls' School)

**Glossary**

美術	미술	Art
音樂	음악	Music
논설	논설	Editorial, essay, discourse
方面	방면	Field, area, aspect
등한시	등한시	Neglect, disregard
독갑이	도깨비	Goblin, sprite (used metaphorically for frivolous trend-followers)
遊興輩	유흥배	Pleasure-seeking crowd, amusement group
亂舞	난무	Wild dance, chaotic dance
輪廓	윤곽	Outline, contour
帝國主義	제국주의	Imperialism
侵略	침략	Invasion, aggression
인연	인연	Connection, relation, tie, karma
발생	발생	Occurrence, generation, genesis
征伐	정벌	Conquest, subjugation
竝肩	병견	Side-by-side, alongside (older usage)
侵入	침입	Invasion, intrusion
번거로히	번거로이	Troublesomely, frequently (older adverbial form)
바덧다	받았다	Received (older past tense form)
니어	이어	Following, connecting (older form of 이어)
전래	전래	Transmission (from the past)
생장	생장	Growth, development
圓熟	원숙	Maturity, ripeness
百姓	백성	People, populace (often implying commoners or subjects)
土着民族	토착민족	Indigenous people, native tribes
넉넉히	넉넉히	Sufficiently, amply
想定	상정	Assumption, supposition
埃及	애급	Egypt (older name)
希臘	희랍	Greece (older name)
佛蘭西	불란서	France (older name)
西班牙	서반아	Spain (older name)
馴鹿民	순록민	Reindeer people
起源	기원	Origin, source
原始人	원시인	Primitive people
必然的	필연적	Inevitable, necessary
必須的	필수적	Essential, indispensable
個體	개체	Individual
全群	전군	Entire group
기억	기억	Memory
再現	재현	Reproduction, reenactment
해석	해석	Interpretation
편의	편의	Convenience
紀念	기념	Commemoration, memorial
暗號	암호	Code, cipher
作畵	작화	Painting (as an act)
조각	조각	Sculpture, carving
種族	종족	Race, tribe
危滿朝鮮	위만조선	Wiman Chosŏn (Ancient Korean state)
技子朝鮮	기자조선	Kija Chosŏn (Ancient Korean state, traditionally)
檀君朝鮮	단군조선	Tan'gun Chosŏn (Mythological first Korean state)
斷案	단안	Conclusion, decisive judgment
文化	문화	Culture
근본적	근본적	Fundamental, basic
작용	작용	Function, action, effect
효과	효과	Effect, result
달르게	다르게	Differently (older form)
마럿다	말았다	Ended up (doing something), ceased (older past tense form)
원시사회	원시사회	Primitive society
과정	과정	Process, course
불행하게도	불행하게도	Unfortunately
계급	계급	Class (social)
分裂	분열	Division, split
착취	착취	Exploitation
정복자	정복자	Conqueror
피착취	피착취	Exploited
마취	마취	Anesthesia, anesthetize (used metaphorically)
노예화	노예화	Enslavement
수단	수단	Means, method
殺戮	살륙	Massacre, slaughter
죄	죄	Sin, crime
무시로	무시로	At any time, frequently
범행	범행	Commit crime
懺悔	참회	Repentance, confession
自慰	자위	Self-consolation
이용	이용	Use, utilization
종교화	종교화	Becoming religious
피정복자	피정복자	The conquered people
懷柔政策	회유정책	Appeasement policy
何等	하등	Any kind of, whatsoever (often used in negative contexts)
交涉	교섭	Connection, negotiation, relation
遊離	유리	Separation, detachment
번영	번영	Prosperity, flourishing
實在	실재	Real existence, substance
지배	지배	Domination, control
氣化	기화	Sublimation, spiritualization (used metaphorically)
支那	지나	China (older, sometimes derogatory term)
本土	본토	Mainland
정기적	정기적	Regular, periodic
밀리여 나오다	밀려 나오다	To be pushed out, emerge under pressure (older form)
追從	추종	Following blindly, subservience
酵生	효생	Fermentation, arising from within
향락적	향락적	Hedonistic
욕망	욕망	Desire, craving
擴充	확충	Expansion, augmentation
虛妄	허망	Vain, futile, illusory
蜃氣樓	신기루	Mirage
象牙塔	상아탑	Ivory tower
地盤	지반	Foundation, ground
민중	민중	The masses, populace
떠러지게	떨어지게	To become distant, fall away (older form)
지속	지속	Continuation, persistence
獨自	독자	Unique, independent, original
敗頹	패퇴	Defeat and decline, decadence
심정	심정	Sentiment, feeling, heart
地理上	지리상	Geographically
처지	처지	Situation, circumstances
繁勞	번로	Troublesome, laborious (older term)
무기력	무기력	Lethargy, powerlessness
退疲	퇴피	Exhaustion, fatigue, decline
기후	기후	Climate
풍토	풍토	Natural features, climate and soil, local customs
地質	지질	Geology
主因	주인	Main cause
加味	가미	Adding flavor, adding (an element)
筆歌墨舞	필가묵무	Singing with the brush, dancing with the ink (metaphor for artistic creation)
일캇는	일컫는	Called, named (older form)
族譜	족보	Genealogy book, lineage record
現今	현금	Present time, nowadays
点察	점찰	Inspect, scrutinize
動變	동변	Upheaval, disturbance
統治	통치	Rule, governance
급격한	급격한	Rapid, drastic
변혁	변혁	Revolution, radical change
階帶	계대	Stratum, level (possibly intended context: carrying a mission for a new era/class)
사명	사명	Mission, calling
移民	이민	Immigrant, emigration/immigration
在來	재래	Traditional, conventional
成育	성육	Nurturing, raising
玩味	완미	Savoring, appreciating with relish
특권	특권	Privilege
몰락	몰락	Collapse, downfall
모태	모태	Mother's womb, origin
영양소	영양소	Nutrient
전력	전력	Full power, all one's might
謀返	모반	Rebellion, treason (used metaphorically for art separating from people)
집념	집념	Obsession, preoccupation
영원화	영원화	Perpetuation, making eternal
魔酸	마산	Anesthetize, stupefy (likely related to 마취)
傳統的	전통적	Traditional
野合	야합	Illicit union, collusion
快感	쾌감	Pleasure, pleasant feeling
아첨	아첨	Flattery
追隨	추수	Following subserviently
교만	교만	Arrogance, pride
等分	등분	Equal parts
존속	존속	Continuation, survival
배양	배양	Cultivation, nurturing
연유	연유	Origin, reason, cause
勃起	발기	Sudden rise, vigorous emergence
敵手	적수	Rival, opponent
대립	대립	Confrontation, opposition
항쟁	항쟁	Struggle, resistance
우월	우월	Superiority
改變	개변	Alteration, change
취미	취미	Taste, hobby, preference
田園	전원	Fields and gardens, countryside
鄕村	향촌	Rural village
浸潤	침윤	Infiltration, permeation
덕분	덕분	Thanks to, owing to
향토성	향토성	Local character, regional flavor
민족성	민족성	National character
滅却	멸각	Extinction, annihilation
域線	역선	Boundary line
道程	도정	Journey, process, course
무기	무기	Weapon
좀이 먹다	좀이 먹다	To be moth-eaten, decay
固持	고지	Stubbornly maintaining, adhering to
소멸	소멸	Extinction, disappearance
功課	공과	Achievement, result, task
祖先	조선	Ancestor
대대로	대대로	Generation after generation
상속	상속	Inheritance
심금	심금	Heartstrings
특이한	특이한	Peculiar, unique
變調	변조	Modulation, change of tune/tone
농도	농도	Concentration, density
가속도	가속도	Acceleration
정비례	정비례	Direct proportion
심화	심화	Deepening, intensification
推積	퇴적	Accumulation, pile-up
붕괴	붕괴	Collapse, breakdown
기대	기대	Expectation, anticipation
명맥	명맥	Lifeline, thread of life
根底	근저	Foundation, root, basis
消沈	소침	Sinking, depression, decline
이유	이유	Reason
붓지 안케	붙지 않게	Does not attach, is not applicable (older form)
신흥	신흥	Newly rising
呵*	아*	Fawning, flattering (*obscured character, likely related to 阿附)
정략적	정략적	Strategic, political
동정	동정	Sympathy, compassion
녹이 슬다	녹이 슬다	To rust
陳頭	진두	Front line, vanguard
절박한	절박한	Urgent, desperate
사정	사정	Situation, circumstances
後漢	후한	Later Han Dynasty
武帝	무제	Emperor Wu
隋唐	수당	Sui and Tang Dynasties
明淸	명청	Ming and Qing Dynasties
使節	사절	Envoy, diplomatic mission
교환	교환	Exchange
탈각	탈각	Shedding, breaking away from
세련	세련	Refinement, sophistication
靜燈	정등	Purification, refinement (uncommon term, possibly related to refining lamp oil or metaphorical purification)
染彩	염채	Coloring, dyeing
경지	경지	Realm, state, level
佛像	불상	Buddhist statue
繪畫	회화	Painting
豪腕	호완	Powerful arm, skill, prowess
健筆	건필	Vigorous brushwork, strong writing style
근세	근세	Modern times, recent ages
弄彩畵士	농채화사	Trifling color-painter (derogatory term for artists)
寵城	총성	Favored castle/stronghold (metaphor for being entrenched in privilege)
감상주의	감상주의	Sentimentalism
薄明	박명	Twilight, dusk
面紛布	면분포	Gauze, thin cloth (possibly 'face powder cloth')
隱覆	은복	Concealment, covering up
장식	장식	Decoration, ornamentation
직면	직면	Facing directly, confrontation
人間苦	인간고	Human suffering
社會惡	사회악	Social evil
사고	사고	Thought, consideration
반성	반성	Reflection, introspection
이러타는	이렇다는	Being like this (older form)
준비	준비	Preparation
피동적	피동적	Passive
弄腕戱墨	농완희묵	Playing with the wrist, trifling with ink (derogatory for insincere art)
卑近	비근	Commonplace, familiar
壁畫	벽화	Mural, wall painting
基督敎	기독교	Christianity
寺院	사원	Temple
장엄함	장엄함	Grandeur, magnificence
도으랴	도우랴	Intending to help (older volitive form)
榮華	영화	Glory, splendor
來世	내세	The next world, afterlife
歡心	환심	Favor, goodwill
異敎徒	이교도	Heathen, infidel
공갈	공갈	Threat, intimidation
유언	유언	Groundless rumor, false words (perhaps used here for 'deception')
표적	표적	Target, aim
가치	가치	Value, worth
유무	유무	Presence or absence
엉뚱한	엉뚱한	Unrelated, irrelevant, absurd
別問題	별문제	Separate issue
效果	효과	Effect
第二義的	제의의적	Secondary
부산물	부산물	Byproduct
離緣	이연	Divorce, separation
獨立	독립	Independence
화장한	화장한	Made-up, decorated (like cosmetics)
遠離	원리	Estrangement, separation
脫去	탈거	Removal, detachment
同樣	동양	Same way, same manner
政略	정략	Political strategy, stratagem
신앙	신앙	Faith, belief
造形	조형	Shaping, formation, creation (in art)
염두	염두	Mind, consideration
충실하게	충실하게	Faithfully, loyally
阿附	아부	Flattery, sycophancy
노역	노역	Servitude, hard labor
甘受	감수	Willing acceptance (of hardship)
藝術至上性	예술지상성	Art for art's sake, supremacy of art
밋어	믿어	Believing (older form)
存在	존재	Existence, being
畵壇	화단	Art circle, painting world
형성	형성	Formation
협회	협회	Association
조직	조직	Organization
番餌	번이	Spoils, bait, distributed benefits (likely specific usage)
結團	결단	Banding together, forming a group
주장	주장	Assertion, claim, principle
주의	주의	Principle, -ism
사상	사상	Thought, ideology
주견	주견	Opinion, view
分立	분립	Separation, standing apart
오로지	오로지	Solely, exclusively
총애	총애	Favor, patronage
專단	전단	Monopolize (斷 likely intended for 斷)
질시	질시	Jealousy, envious gaze
反目	반목	Animosity, discord
성립	성립	Establishment, formation
直輸入	직수입	Direct import
消化	소화	Digestion
遺訓	유훈	Behest, teachings left behind
고전적	고전적	Classical
이상주의	이상주의	Idealism
逆夢	역몽	Troubling dream, nightmare (metaphor for outdated ideals)
무관심	무관심	Indifference
自滅期	자멸기	Period of self-destruction
生路	생로	Way out, path to survival
급속히	급속히	Rapidly
분해	분해	Decomposition, dismantling
작용	작용	Action, process
사조	사조	Trend of thought, current (in art/philosophy)
점진적	점진적	Gradual, progressive
현실주의	현실주의	Realism
主觀主義	주관주의	Subjectivism
단두대	단두대	Guillotine
歷路	역로	Historical path, course trodden
발바 달나는	밟아 달라는	Asking to tread/follow (older form)
뒤물근	뒤늦은	Belated, late (dialectal/older form?)
注文	주문	Order, request
응접	응접	Reception, response
人道主義的	인도주의적	Humanitarian
태도	태도	Attitude, stance
告白	고백	Confession
宣言	선언	Declaration
감상적	감상적	Sentimental
경고	경고	Warning
해부	해부	Dissection, analysis
비최여	비추어	Reflecting, in light of (older form)
비판	비판	Criticism
나리랴	내리랴	Intending to deliver/pass down (judgment) (older volitive)
통과	통과	Passage, transit
懷疑	회의	Skepticism, doubt
흥분	흥분	Excitement, agitation
부정	부정	Negation, denial
掘窟	굴착	Excavation, digging (metaphor for self-destruction)
暴動	폭동	Riot, uprising (used metaphorically for subjective outburst)
悠長	유장	Leisurely, slow, protracted
行程	행정	Journey, itinerary
뒤축	뒤축	Heel (of a shoe)
麻鞋	마혜	Hemp sandals
안질배이거름	앉은뱅이걸음	Cripple's walk (older form)
상부 구조	상부구조	Superstructure (Marxist term)
기초 구조	기초구조	Base structure (Marxist term)
변화	변화	Change
경제 조직	경제조직	Economic organization
政治	정치	Politics
解體	해체	Dismantlement, dissolution
*死	*사	Death (obscured character, likely 自死 - suicide)
수행	수행	Performance, execution
詐欺	사기	Fraud, deception
과대히	과대히	Excessively, exaggeratedly
驕慢	교만	Arrogance, haughtiness
狂躁	광조	Frantic agitation, mania
미혹	미혹	Temptation, bewitchment
誘引	유인	Attraction, inducement
절연	절연	Severance of ties
遮絶	차절	Cutting off, blocking
內容相	내용상	Content, substance, inner aspect
寬大	관대	Magnanimity, generosity
응시	응시	Gazing at, watching intently
樂壇	악단	Music scene, musical world
소감	소감	Impressions, thoughts, feelings
악장	악장	State of music, musical situation
갈피를 차리다	갈피를 차리다	To get one's bearings, figure things out
산이 잇서야	산이 있어야	There must be a mountain (proverbial)
衰退	쇠퇴	Decline, decay
멸망	멸망	Ruin, destruction, extinction
폐허	폐허	Ruins
유독히	유독히	Particularly, only
萬無	만무	Impossible, out of the question
갓해서는	갓해서는	In the current state (older form/colloquial?)
새싹	새싹	New sprout
如何間	여하간	Anyway, in any case
맹랑한	맹랑한	Absurd, nonsensical
허수룩 하다	허수룩하다	Dilapidated, shabby
이웃집	이웃집	Neighboring house
영감	영감	Old man, Excellency (title)
본을 뜨다	본을 뜨다	To emulate, model after
갓	갓	Traditional Korean hat
下人	하인	Servant
위풍당당	위풍당당	Imposing, majestic, authoritative air
호령	호령	Command, order loudly
一動一靜	일동일정	Every move, action and inaction
숭내	흉내	Imitation, mimicry (older spelling)
거림자	그림자	Shadow (older spelling)
참	참	Truly, very
희미한	희미한	Faint, dim
건실치	건실치	Unsound, unhealthy (older form)
永久的	영구적	Permanent
更言	갱언	Repeating words, saying again
才操	재조	Talent, skill
비상해서	비상해서	Being extraordinary (older form)
奇奇妙妙	기기묘묘	Strange and mysterious
天質	천질	Innate disposition, natural talent
父母喪	부모상	Funeral for parents
슯히	슬피	Sadly, sorrowfully (older spelling)
울다	울다	To cry, weep
극히	극히	Extremely, exceedingly
유쾌허게	유쾌하게	Cheerfully, pleasantly (older form)
엊덧튼	어떻든	Anyway, however it may be (older spelling)
悲哀	비애	Sorrow, grief
고통	고통	Pain, suffering
작난	장난	Play, mischief (older spelling)
뵈는	보이는	Appearing, seeming (older form)
喪人	상인	Mourner
頭巾	두건	Hood, head covering
祭官	제관	Ritual officiant
再拜	재배	Two bows (ritual obeisance)
깁흔	깊은	Deep (older spelling)
우러 나오다	우러나오다	To well up from
쓰라린	쓰라린	Bitter, stinging
눈물	눈물	Tear(s)
감히	감히	Daringly, boldly (often used in negative sense: not daring to)
떠러짐	떨어짐	Falling (older nominalization)
침	침	Saliva
눈가	눈가	Around the eyes
칠해	칠해	Painting, applying (older form)
특성	특성	Special characteristic, trait
들처내보자	들춰내보자	Let's examine, reveal (older form)
대체	대체	Generally, on the whole; what on earth
宏壯	굉장	Grand, magnificent
진실한	진실한	True, sincere
모방	모방	Imitation, copy
健實	건실	Soundness, healthiness
樂家	악가	Musician, composer
향락	향락	Hedonism, pursuit of pleasure
기분	기분	Mood, feeling
과언	과언	Exaggeration
양심	양심	Conscience
원래	원래	Originally
창작	창작	Creation (artistic)
결코	결코	Never, by no means
遊戱的	유희적	Playful
月光의 曲	월광의 곡	Moonlight Sonata
大概	대개	Generally, mostly
일화	일화	Anecdote
소개	소개	Introduction
更言치	갱언치	Not repeating words (older form)
樂句	악구	Musical phrase
조곰이나	조금이나	Even a little (older form)
流蕩	유탕	Dissipation, debauchery, wandering
靈	영	Spirit, soul
肉	육	Flesh, body
산모	산모	Woman in childbirth
實相	실상	Reality, actual state
反問	반문	Counter-question, retort
신비적	신비적	Mysterious
敬畏的	경외적	Awe-inspiring, reverential
滑稽	골계	Humor, comicality
融和	융화	Harmony, fusion, blending
식혓다고	시켰다고	Caused to, made to (older causative form)
극렬히	극렬히	Fiercely, intensely
感情	감정	Emotion, feeling
가다 듣는	가다듬는	Composing oneself, calming down (older form?)
몹시	몹시	Extremely, severely
뛰노는	뛰노는	Jumping about, palpitating
鼓動	고동	Beating, pulsation (of heart)
휴식	휴식	Rest, repose
귀중한	귀중한	Precious, valuable
만콤	만큼	As much as (older spelling)
심각한	심각한	Serious, profound
妓巧家	기교가	Technician, virtuoso (can have negative connotation of mere skill)
卽	즉	Namely, that is
피아니스트	피아니스트	Pianist
연주	연주	Musical performance
정신	정신	Spirit, mind, consciousness
고대로	고대로	As it was,そのまま (older form)
농후한	농후한	Rich, dense, strong
긴장	긴장	Tension
공통	공통	Commonality, sharing
세계적	세계적	World-class, global
독주회	독주회	Solo recital
견해	견해	View, opinion, understanding
적엇섯슴으로	적었으므로	Because it was little/few (older form)
깁흔	깊은	Deep (older spelling)
인상	인상	Impression
침착한	침착한	Composed, calm
태도	태도	Attitude, demeanor
高潮	고조	Climax, high tide, heightened state
엿태것	여태껏	Until now, hitherto (older form)
니저지지	잊혀지지	Not be forgotten (older passive form)
의자	의자	Chair
안즌	앉은	Seated (older form)
무거운	무거운	Heavy
찬찬히	찬찬히	Carefully, slowly, deliberately
건반	건반	Keyboard (piano)
울닐	울릴	To make sound, resonate (older form)
벌서	벌써	Already (older spelling)
갓햇다	같았다	Was like (older form)
끌코	끓고	Boiling (older form)
끗내고도	끝내고도	Even after finishing
경솔이	경솔히	Rashly, hastily (older adverbial form)
曲調	곡조	Melody, tune
무한한	무한한	Infinite, limitless
애착	애착	Attachment, affection
억지로	억지로	Forcibly, against one's will
얼골	얼굴	Face (older spelling)
표정	표정	Facial expression
허위	허위	Falsehood, untruth
無我의 境	무아의 경	State of selflessness, ecstasy
흘너 나오다	흘러 나오다	To flow out
自然한	자연한	Natural (older form)
착안	착안	Paying attention to, focusing on
初學者	초학자	Beginner
大家	대가	Master, great expert
물론허고	물론하고	Regardless of, not to mention (older form)
둥당	둥당	Onomatopoeia for simple musical sound
동당	동당	Onomatopoeia for simple musical sound
익히는	익히는	Learning, mastering
보담	보다	Than (older comparative particle)
먼저	먼저	First, beforehand
性格	성격	Character, personality
수양	수양	Cultivation, training (moral/mental)
이라닛가	이라니까	Because it is called (older form)
치고도	치고도	Even when playing (instrument)
뛸 줄 모르다	뛸 줄 모르다	Not knowing how to jump/dance (metaphor for stiff/unfeeling)
道學者	도학자	Confucian moralist scholar
類	류	Type, kind, class
유행	유행	Trend, fashion
牧師	목사	Pastor, minister
長老	장로	Elder (church)
傳道法	전도법	Method of preaching/proselytizing
몃	몇	Several, few (older spelling)
거북한	거북한	Uncomfortable, awkward
염려	염려	Worry, concern
주저 넘다	주제 넘다	Presumptuous, arrogant (older spelling/form?)
소리처	소리쳐	Shouting (older form)
불으노니	부르노니	I call out (older literary form)
혁명적	혁명적	Revolutionary
잇때 것	이때껏	Until now (older form)
최근	최근	Recently
音樂熱	음악열	Music fever, passion for music
너머	너무	Too, excessively (older spelling)
기교	기교	Technique, skill (often implying superficial)
팔니고	팔리고	Being sold, being absorbed in (older form)
有名無實	유명무실	In name only, nominal
이려케	이렇게	Like this (older form)
기우러지는	기울어지는	Leaning, declining
빼슬	빼앗을	To take away, omit (older form?)
以上	이상	Above, more than; being (a certain status)
提琴家	제금가	String player (violinist, etc.)
활	활	Bow (for string instrument)
포시숀	포지션	Position (musical term, phonetic)
성악가	성악가	Vocalist, singer
發聲法	발성법	Vocal production method
세련	세련	Refinement, polish
헐 것	할 것	Thing to do (older form)
니저서는	잊어서는	Forgetting (older form)
無意味	무의미	Meaningless
기계적	기계적	Mechanical
露現	노현	Revelation, appearance
우에	위에	Above, on top of (older form)
뻣치는	뻗치는	Stretching out, extending
생명	생명	Life
욱어나라야	우러나와야	Must well up, emerge (older form)
貧血症	빈혈증	Anemia
月前	월전	Last month
가수	가수	Singer
滿員	만원	Full house, capacity crowd
성황	성황	Great success, prosperity
이해	이해	Understanding
테노	테너	Tenor (phonetic)
접해	접해	Encountering, contacting (older form)
교훈	교훈	Lesson, moral instruction
인격	인격	Personality, character
엑쓰프레-숀	익스프레션	Expression (phonetic)
열광적	열광적	Enthusiastic, fervent
氣風	기풍	Disposition, spirit, style
선교사	선교사	Missionary
덕택	덕택	Owing to, thanks to
爲先	위선	First of all
讚頌歌	찬송가	Hymn, psalm
술집	술집	Bar, tavern
기생집	기생집	Kisaeng house (traditional entertainment house)
의레히	으레	Usually, customarily (older spelling)
별 수 업시	별 수 없이	Inevitably, having no choice
예수	예수	Jesus
밋어야지	믿어야지	Must believe (older form)
손고락질	손가락질	Pointing one's finger at (criticism)
칭호	칭호	Title, designation
뺏고	빼앗고	Taking away, snatching
大權力者	대권력자	Person of great power, authority
눈에 들다	눈에 들다	To find favor with, catch someone's eye
맛도록	맞도록	To fit, suit (older form)
先天 不足	선천 부족	Congenital deficiency, innate lack
한탄	한탄	Lamentation, regret
舌	설	Tongue
꼬부려	꼬부려	Bending, twisting (older form)
입천정	입천장	Roof of the mouth (palate)
붓치고	붙이고	Attaching, sticking (older form)
코 긔운	코 기운	Nasal energy/sound
어수하긴	어색하긴	Being awkward (older form?)
深目高準	심목고준	Deep-set eyes and high nose (Western features)
한	한	Regret, resentment
寃恨	원한	Grudge, resentment, rancor
맷치고	맺히고	Forming, gathering (resentment) (older form)
살엇는지	살았는지	Whether (someone) lived (older form)
근래	근래	Recently
鼻伸器	비신기	Nose-stretching device (likely humorous/sarcastic)
感慨 無量	감개 무량	Overwhelmed with emotion, deeply moved
深眼器	심안기	Eye-deepening device (humorous/sarcastic)
마저	마저	Even, as well
키	키	Height (stature)
느릴 수 잇도록	늘일 수 있도록	So that one can lengthen/stretch
搖頭轉目	요두전목	Shaking one's head and rolling one's eyes (expression of joy/excitement)
깃버	기뻐	Being happy, joyful (older form)
애석한	애석한	Regrettable, sad
퍽	퍽	Very, quite
餘毒	여독	Residual poison, lingering harmful influence
 굉장한	굉장한	Tremendous, grand
쑥스러운	쑥스러운	Embarrassing; formidable, impressive (contextual)
年年히	연년히	Year after year
모혀	모여	Gathering (older form)
永住	영주	Permanent residence
자극	자극	Stimulus, provocation
원숭이	원숭이	Monkey
알만한	알 만한	Worth knowing, notable
각금	가끔	Sometimes, occasionally
잡지	잡지	Magazine
신문	신문	Newspaper
음 구역	음 구역	Vocal range
제일	제일	Number one, the best
넙기	넓기	Width, wideness (older form)
량이 만키로도	양이 많기로도	Also for having great quantity/volume (older form)
度外視	도외시	Disregarding, ignoring
펴노코	펴놓고	Opening and spreading out (older form)
가곡왕	가곡왕	King of Lieder (art songs)
이박게도	이밖에도	Besides this
작가	작가	Composer, writer, artist
출생	출생	Birth
일홈	이름	Name (older spelling)
놉흔	높은	High, renowned (older spelling)
所生	소생	Birthplace, born in
현대	현대	Contemporary, modern era
한대도	한다 해도	Even if one limits it to
명가수	명가수	Famous singer
提琴 大家	제금 대가	Great master of string instruments (violin, etc.)
시원치 못한	시원치 못한	Unsatisfactory, unimpressive
최열등	최열등	The lowest rank, worst
模寫音樂	모사음악	Imitative music, program music (descriptive)
자연음	자연음	Natural sound
목적	목적	Purpose, objective
雷聲	뇌성	Sound of thunder
놋는	놓는	Placing, putting (older form)
갓흔	같은	Like, such as (older spelling)
자동차	자동차	Automobile, car
표현	표현	Expression
유희	유희	Play, amusement
결핍	결핍	Lack, deficiency
풍족허고	풍족하고	Being abundant, affluent (older form)
언제던지	언제든지	Always, whenever
포만 상태	포만 상태	State of satiety, fullness
끌는	끓는	Boiling (older form)
구석	구석	Corner
배워오던	배워오던	Who used to learn (older form)
네 활개를 치다	네 활개를 치다	To strut about, swagger
意氣揚揚	의기양양	Triumphant, elated
간섭	간섭	Interference, meddling
모르나 아나	모르나 아나	Whether knowing or not
지휘	지휘	Conducting (music); command
기왕	기왕	Since it is already the case; in the past
가르키랴거든	가르치려거든	If one intends to teach (older volitive form)
웬	웬	What sort of, why (colloquial)
손을 대다	손을 대다	To touch, meddle in
숫쩨	숫제	Rather, preferably (older spelling)
안 생기니 만도 못한	안 생기니만도 못한	Worse than not coming into existence
요사이	요사이	Recently, these days
간신히	간신히	Barely, narrowly
떠러저	떨어져	Falling away, separating (older form)
자-	자	Well then, now (interjection)
어떠케	어떻게	How (older spelling)
악계	악계	Music world
대세	대세	General trend, situation
極히	극히	Extremely
간단히	간단히	Simply, briefly
말하랴	말하랴	Intending to speak (older volitive form)
지방색	지방색	Local color, regional characteristics
현저하다	현저하다	Remarkable, conspicuous
愁心歌	수심가	Susimga (a type of sorrowful folk song)
단가	단가	Tanga (a type of narrative song)
함	함	Saying, doing (nominalizer, older usage)
樂派	악파	Musical school/faction
樂風	악풍	Musical style
純音樂	순음악	Pure music, absolute music
표제	표제	Title, program (in program music)
方面	방면	Aspect, field
獨逸的	독일적	German (style)
主義	주의	Principle, -ism
국민적	국민적	National
특성	특성	Characteristic, special feature
發揮	발휘	Display, demonstration
熱望	열망	Ardent desire, aspiration
全世界	전세계	The entire world
뎨	데	Place, spot (older form/dialect?)
업슬	없을	Will not be, lack (older form)
상 십다	성싶다	Seems likely, appears to be (older form)
이후	이후	Since, after
압흐로	앞으로	In the future, henceforth (older spelling)
업서지면	없어지면	If it disappears (older form)
확실히	확실히	Certainly, surely
빗	빛	Color, light (older spelling)
변치	변치	Not changing (older form)
집대문	집대문	Main gate of a house
드러 가기만	들어가기만	Just by entering (older form)
독일화	독일화	Germanization
伊太利	이태리	Italy (older name)
흡사	흡사	Similar, alike
연구	연구	Research, study
전혀	전혀	Entirely, completely
歌劇法	가극법	Operatic method/style
音樂學校	음악학교	Music school
졸업생	졸업생	Graduate
그 곳	그곳	That place
그란드오페라座	그랜드 오페라좌	Grand Opéra House (phonetic + 座 for theatre)
배우	배우	Actor, performer
各國	각국	Each country
결국	결국	Eventually, in the end
分枝	분지	Branch, branching off
달니	달리	Differently, separately (older form)
기록지	기록지	Not recording (older form)
올흘가	옳을까	Would it be right/correct? (older form)
무서운	무서운	Fearsome, terrible
영향	영향	Influence, effect
음악계	음악계	Music world
米國風	미국풍	American style
滑稽的	골계적	Comical, humorous
악풍	악풍	Musical style
불어 오다	불어 오다	To blow in
완전치 못한	완전치 못한	Imperfect, incomplete
억깨바람	어깨바람	Shoulder wind (swagger, arrogance - older form?)
절석 갓치	절석같이	Like a stone statue, implicitly (older form?)
되나 안되나	되나 안되나	Whether it works or not, regardless of competence
선생님	선생님	Teacher
직접	직접	Directly
간접	간접	Indirectly
어더	얻어	Getting, obtaining (older form)
배호는	배우는	Learning (older form)
身勢	신세	One's situation, circumstances; indebted state
가련한	가련한	Pitiful, pathetic
한편	한편	On the other hand; one side
日本 가요	일본 가요	Japanese popular song
살금 살금	살금살금	Stealthily, furtively
긔여들어 오다	기어들어 오다	To crawl in (older spelling)
날로 달로	날로 달로	Day by day
긔지 안어	기지 않아	Not crawling (older form)
날러 들어 온대도	날아 들어 온대도	Even if it flies in (older form)
조곰이나	조금이나	Even a little (older spelling)
무서움	무서움	Fear, dread
입에 맛지	입에 맞지	Not suiting the palate (older form)
소화	소화	Digestion
식히랴닛가	시키려니까	Because trying to make (digest) (older volitive form)
걱정	걱정	Worry, concern
교육사업	교육사업	Education enterprise/business
근본방침	근본방침	Fundamental policy
일선융화	일선융화	Japan-Korea harmonization/assimilation
될수 잇스면	될 수 있으면	If possible
맨들어	만들어	Making (older form)
보통학생	보통학생	Ordinary student (often referring to primary/common school)
동요	동요	Children's song
고도	고토	Koto (Japanese instrument)
뜨더야	뜯어야	Must pluck/strum (older form)
敎授	교수	Teaching, instruction
當局	당국	The authorities
명령	명령	Order, command
粉骨쇄身	분골쇄신	Grinding one's bones to powder (exerting utmost effort)
拒逆	거역	Disobedience, defiance
고려	고려	Consideration, deliberation
여지	여지	Room, scope
비단	비단	Not only (used like 'not only A but also B')
小學校	소학교	Elementary school (older term)
여자고등보통학교	여자고등보통학교	Girls' Higher Common School (colonial era secondary school)
唱歌	창가	Singing (class), song
조흔	좋은	Good (older spelling)
음악주임선생	음악주임선생	Head music teacher
밋을	믿을	Trustworthy, believable (older form)
엿해것	여태껏	Until now (older form)
놀나지	놀라지	Not being surprised (older form)
통치 못하는	통치 못하는	Unable to understand/speak (language)
日本人	일본인	Japanese person
도로혀	도리어	Rather, on the contrary (older spelling)
정서	정서	Sentiment, emotion, atmosphere
예술 교육	예술교육	Art education
도서관	도서관	Library
을 필요	읽을 필요	Need to read
판단	판단	Judgment
자장歌	자장가	Lullaby
子守歌	자장가	Lullaby (Hanja version)
남끗동저고리	남끝동저고리	Jeogori (upper garment) with turquoise sleeve cuffs
남치마	남치마	Navy blue skirt
귀한	귀한	Precious, noble
앗끼는	아끼는	Cherishing, treasuring (older spelling)
金子童	금자동이	Precious child (term of endearment)
고히 고히	고이 고이	Gently, carefully
얼싸안고서	얼싸안고서	Hugging tightly
보드라운	보드라운	Soft, tender
고흔	고운	Fine, beautiful (older spelling)
평화롭게	평화롭게	Peacefully
끗	끝	End (older spelling)
흘너 나온다	흘러 나온다	Flows out (older form)
만약	만약	If, supposing
환경	환경	Environment, surroundings
네무레	네무레	Nemure (Japanese: sleep)
영어	영어	English language
살풍경	살풍경	Killjoy, unpleasant sight/atmosphere
상토	상투	Topknot (traditional male hairstyle)
양복	양복	Western suit/clothes
떠드는	떠드는	Chattering, making noise about
부자연한	부자연한	Unnatural
장래	장래	Future
연출	연출	Production, staging, presentation
머리가 시다	머리가 쉬다	Hair turns white (idiom for racking one's brains)
변명헐	변명할	To make excuses (older form)
월급	월급	Monthly salary
봉급	봉급	Salary
國祿	국록	Government salary, state stipend
허구한 날	허구한 날	Day after day, endlessly
어려우렷다	어려우리었다	Must have been difficult (older conjectural past)
잔소리	잔소리	Nagging, idle talk
쉬지도 아니허고	쉬지도 아니하고	Without resting (older form)
깃븐	기쁜	Joyful, happy (older spelling)
도로혀	도리어	Rather, on the contrary (older spelling)
안인	아닌	Not being (older form)
몰녀	몰려	Flocking, crowding (older form)
비비고	비비고	Rubbing, mixing
다저서	다져서	Pounding, consolidating (older form)
朝鮮味	조선미	Chosŏn flavor/taste
느어	넣어	Putting in, adding (older form)
맨들어야	만들어야	Must make (older form)
독창적	독창적	Original, creative
세울 수	세울 수	Can establish/build
되	된	Become, completed (older form)
더욱 더욱히	더욱더욱이	More and more
피가 뛰다	피가 뛰다	Blood pulsates/races
鐵窓	철창	Iron bars (of a prison/cage)
獅吼	사후	Lion's roar
어긔까지던지	어기까지든지	To whatever extent (older form?)
싸와	싸워	Fighting (older form)
그여코	기어코	By all means, definitely (older spelling)
반역	반역	Rebellion, treason
날카로운	날카로운	Sharp
발톱	발톱	Claw
글그며	긁으며	Scratching (older form)
어흠	어흠	Sound of clearing throat; a roar (onomatopoeia)
獅吼口	사후구	Lion's roaring mouth
괴롭다	괴롭다	Painful, distressing
윌와	우리와	With us (older form?)
부자유한	부자유한	Unfree, constrained
깨지거나	깨지거나	Or breaking/shattering
최후	최후	The last, final
決戰	결전	Decisive battle
엿°리	우리	Our (typo/older form?)
하여야 헐가	하여야 할까	What should be done? (older form)
건설헐	건설할	To construct, build (older form)
피 뭇은	피 묻은	Blood-stained (older spelling)
이저서는	잊어서는	Forgetting (older form)
피에 엉킨	피에 엉킨	Tangled/matted/clotted with blood
뿌듯허게	뿌듯하게	Satisfyingly full, packed (older form)
들어서야만	들어서야만	Must enter and stand (idiom for filling a place)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제65호
발행일	1926년 01월 01일
기사제목	美術과 音樂
기사형태	논설

美術과 音樂
미술과 음악의 方面-우리가 이것을 영영 등한시 할 수가 잇슬가 다시 말하면 저 유행의 몃 개 『독갑이』 가튼 遊興輩의 亂舞를 언제까지라도 간과하고 잇슬 것인가.

朝鮮 歷史 그대로의 反映인 朝鮮 美術의 輪廓
金復鎭
朝鮮의 미술은 역사적으로 제국주의의 침략 정책과 그 인연이 대단이 깁다. 다시 말하면 조선 미술의 발생 시대라 하는 4郡 시대로브터 지금에 일으기 까지 征伐라 竝肩하게 그 侵入을 번거로히 바덧다는 것이다.
4郡時代 『樂浪, 玄菟 眞蕃, 臨屯』로부터 新羅를 거처 現今의 朝鮮에 일으기까지 침략과 학살의 뒤를 니어 미술이 전래 되엿스며 또 이 전래된 미술이 생장되고 圓熟된 것이 이 곳 朝鮮의 美術이다.
물론 4郡 時代 이전에는 朝鮮에 美術이 업섯던 것을 안을 것이다. 그 때의 朝鮮 百姓(土着民族)에게도 훌륭한＜66＞ 자기네의 미술이 잇섯슬 것은 지금 우리가 넉넉히 想定할 수 잇는 것이다. 엇제 그러냐 하면 埃及이나 希臘에 또 더 그 이전에 佛蘭西 西班牙(前 석기 시대) 의 馴鹿民에게도 美術이 잇섯든 것을 우리가 너무나 잘 아는 까닭이다.
예술의 起源, 이것을 내가 쓰자는 것은 아니다만은 原始人에게는 다만 생활이라는 것만 존재해 잇고 이 생활이 必然的 必須的으로 요구하는 것만 존재해 잇섯던 것이다. 따라서 個體와 全群의 생활에 필요한 美術은 당연이 잇섯슬 것이다. 엇겟던 생활의 필요 상 기억의 再現을 쉽게 하려고 해석의 편의를 도읍게다랴고 또는 기념으로 暗號로 作畵하고 조각 하엿던 것은 엇더한 원시 種族에게나 다 가티 잇섯다는 것을 독자나 내나 맛찬가지로 똑똑히 알고 잇는 것이다.
이만하면 4郡時代 이전 危滿朝鮮이나 技子朝鮮이나 더 나가서 檀君朝鮮 이전의 토착 민족에게도 자기네가 가저야만 할 美術은 가젓섯스리라는 斷案은 넉넉히 내릴 수가 잇는 것이다.
그런데 토착민족의 가지고 잇던 美術은 帝國主義 문화의 침입으로 말미암아 근본적으로 그 작용이, 효과가, 달르게 되고 마럿다. 원시사회의 생활 상태는 인간 생활사의 과정에 잇서, 필연적으로 그럿치 마는 불행하게도 계급 分裂이 생기게 되엿다. 여긔서 조선의 미술은 비로소 착취계급인 정복자가 피착취계급인 토착민족을 마취 식히고, 노예화 식히랴는 수단으로 또는 정복 殺翼의 죄를 무시로 범행한 정복자의 懺悔自慰에 이용되고 종교화 되여 버리여 착취계급의 한 개의 훌융한 피정복자의 懷柔정책이 되고만 것이다. 그래서 이 정책화 된 美術은 인간 본래의 생활과 何等의 交涉이 업는 현실에서 遊離된 藝術-미술이 되엿스나 졔대로 번영되고 實在되여 가지고서 도로혀 생활을-現實을-지배 하려고 하며 氣化하려고 하기 시작 하엿던 것이다. 支那 본토에서 정기적으로 밀리여 나오는 帝國主義의 침략과 무력의 뒤를 追從하는 문화와 또 토착민족 자체의 內部에서 酵生된 지배 계급의 향락적 욕망으로 말미암아 자기 擴充이 되여서 虛妄 蜃氣樓 象牙塔은 점점 그 地盤이 굿는 대신에 생활로 부터 민중으로 부터 거리가 작고만 떠러지게 된 것이다. 이것을 그대로 지속하여 가지고서 이 위에다가 朝鮮의 獨自한 敗頹 심정 『국가로 잇서 지리상 불행한 처지에 잇섯고, 이 위에 繁勞하게 정벌을 입은 까닭으로 민족의 감정 전체가 무기력하게 退疲하게 되엿다. 이외에 ＜67＞ 기후나 풍토나 지질의 관계도 업지안치 만은 主因을 전者에 잇다고 본다)을 加味하여서 筆歌墨舞하여 노은 것이 소위 조선의 미술이라 일캇는 것이다.
조선의 미술은 이와 갓흔 유복한 역사를 族譜를 갓고 잇는 것이다. 그러면 現今의 조선 미술은 엇더한가를 点察하여 보기로 한다. 그 어느 때인가 (이것은 독자가 너무나 잘 아는 것이라 쓰지를 안켓다) 정치적으로 일대 動變이 생기엿나 2천 여년 전 美術史에 잇서 발생 시대라 하는 4郡 統治 시대와 꼭 갓흔 또는 그보다도 더 급격한 변혁이 일어 낫다. 이로 말미암아 歐米의 문명이 밧구어 말하면 *熟된 자본주의의 문명이 일본을 거처서 새로운 階帶 사명을 띄이고 수만은 移民과 갓치 몰려들어 오게 되엿다.
여긔에서 가장 만히 在來의 미술을 成育식히여 주고 玩味하던 일부의 특권 계급이 몰락하게 된 것이다. 모태를 일흔 조선의 미술은 자신의 영양소를 구하려 전력을 다하엿던 것이다. 맛치 4군시대 이전 토착민족의 미술이 원시인의 미술이 토착민족이나 원시인에게서 遊離하려고 하며 謀返하던 거와 갓치 새로운 主人을 마지하는데 집념하엿다. 외래의 정복자에 잇서서도 자기네의 향락생활을 영원화식려히고 피정복자를 회유식히고 魔酸식히자는 전통적 정책으로 예술을 -미술을 이용하랴던 것이다. 그래서 이 두 개가 별다른 목적을 갓고서 서로 이 野合을 하게 되엿다. 제각기 색다른 快感을 늣기게 되엿다. 아첨과 追隨와 교만을 等分이 갓고 잇는 現今의 조선 미술은 이와 갓치 하야 존속되며 배양되는 것이다.
그럿치만 시대가 사정이 녯날과 매우 달르다. 그러나 이 연유로 그 전에 보지도 못한 外來 미술이 이민 미술이 勃起한 것이다. 조선의 미술 여긔서 새로운 커다란 敵手를 맛나게 되엇다. 외래 美術-이민미술과 대립하지 아니치 못하게 되엿다. 정치 상 우월한 지위에 잇는 이민미술과 항쟁을 하게 된 것이다.
조선의 자연의 일부는 時日을 거듭하는데 잇서 移民 취미에 적합하도록 改變되여 간다. 자본주의의 문명이 田園에 鄕村의 곳곳마다 浸潤해 드러온다. 이 덕분에 조선미술의 향토성 (혹은 민족성)이 滅却하여 가게 된다. 문제는 여긔에 잇다. 조선의 미술이 이민 미술과 대립하며 항쟁하는데에 가장 만히 그 힘을 의탁하고 자부하엿던 향토성은 자본주의 문명으로 하야 域線이 문어지며 이민 취미로 말미암아 改變되여 가는 道程에 서 잇다. 朝鮮 미술의 유일한 무기는 이와 갓치 하야＜68＞ 나날이 좀이 먹어가는 것여다.(鄕土性의 영원 불변설을 固持하는 사람 잇도다. 그러나 圓熟된 자본주의의 문명으로 인하야 이것이 소멸되여 가는 것을 우리는 누구 보다도 가장 만히 보는 것이다. 여긔에 자본주의 문명의 功課가 서게 되는 것이다) 역사적으로 여러 번 당한 征伐과 학살로 인하야 또한 祖先 대대로 이것 만을 상속 바든 까닭으로 해서 조선 백성 전체의 심금은 특이한 變調를 띄게 되엿다. (이것을 나는 敗頹 심정 이라고 한다) 이 심정 만이 가속도로 농도를 증가하고 잇다.(자본주의의 圓熟되여 가는 것과 정비례를 일치 안는 속도로 심화되여 가는 것이다) 이 頹廢 心情이 그 농도가 심화하게 된 뒤에 그 推積이 붕괴하는 때에는 조선의 미술이 최후 까지 기대하고 명맥으로 역이던 바의 민족성은 根底로 부터 消沈 되여 버리는 때이다. 붕괴 되여 버런다. 따라서 조선의 미술은 그 존재해 잇슬 아무러한 이유가 붓지 안케 되는 것이다. 신흥 지배 계급에 呵*하는 동시에 또는 정략스으로 이용을 당하면서 한편으로는 이민 미술과 대립상 抗爭을 하지 아니치 못하게 되엿다.
예술상 주장으로 보다도 지배 계급의 총애의 비율과 이윤의 분배율 때문에 괴로운 對戰을 하게 되는 것이다. 그래서 토착민족이라는 불행한 처지로 동정을 사며 나날이 녹이 쓰러가는 향토성 민족성이라는 무기를 가지고 陳頭에 나서게 되엿다. 이것이 지금 우리의 눈 압헤 잇는 허구의 蜃氣樓인 조선 미술의 절박한 사정이다.
녯적 箕子로 부터 衛滿으로 부터 後漢의 武帝로 부터 隋唐을 거처 明淸에 일으기 까지 使節과 문화와 교환을 하며 나려 왓섯다. 이로하야 토착 민족의 미술은 생활서 부터 다수 민중으로 부터 탈각되어 세련되고 靜燈 되여 소위 頹敗心情으로 染彩찬 뒤에 獨自한 조선 미술의 경지를 그어 노흔 것이다. 신라의 佛像 恭愍王 張思恭의 회화 三齊의 豪腕 檀園 吾園의 健筆로 地盤이 굿게 된 것이다. 여긔다가 근세에 와서 心田 小琳잇 이섯고 이외에도 弄彩畵士의 무리 虛荒한 상아탑 속에 寵城하야 가지고 민중 생활을 감상주의의 薄明의 面紛布로 隱覆하고 장식하고 잇섯다. 직면하고 잇는 『人間苦』, 『社會惡』에 대하야 아모러한 사고가 업섯고 반성이 업고 생활에-實現에-이러타는 준비도 아모 것도 업시 피동적으로 정략적으로 弄腕戱墨을 하여 나려 왓다. 卑近한 예를 들면 팡·에이·크의 벽화가 미게란체로의 작품이 기독교 사원으 예술적으로 장식하고, 그 건축의 장엄함을 도으랴 함 보다도, 천국의 영화와 來世의 행복을 밧구어 말하면 信者의 歡心을 異敎徒의 무리들은 공갈 유언하고자 하는데 그 표적이 엇섯던 것이다. 예술적 가치의 유무는 엉뚱한 別問題이엿던 것이다. 예술적 효과를 어든 것은 第二義的 부산물에 지나지 안는 것이다. 원시인에게서 離緣하고 생활에서 독립하여 가지고-화장한 미술은-생활에서 遠離 되고 脫去한 미술은-과거의 미술-現今의 미술은-다 이와 갓흔 同樣에서-政略에서-신앙으로 하야 造形된 것이다. 예술적 가치라는 문제는 염두에도 업섯던 것이다. 다만 충실하게-정치에-종교에-특권계급에-阿附하고 노역을 甘受하고-藝術至上性을 밋어 자위하며 이것으로 민중을 마취하여 나려 왓고 또한 존재하 여 잇는 것이다.
현재의 조선 미술도 여긔에 그 존재 이유가 잇다고 한다. 그래서 畵壇이 형성된 것이며 書畵 협회가 高麗美術院이 三美會가 創美社가 조직된 것이다. 다만 番餌의 분배율 까닭에 서로 이 結團된 것이다. 예술 상에 잇서 주장이나 주의나 더 나가서 사상 상 주견이 다름으로 하야 分立된 것이 아니라 오로지 특권 계급의 총애를 專단하려고 질시 反目으로 하야 성립한 것이다. 繪畵에 잇서서 直輸入한 消化되지 안은 唐宋의 遺訓을 固持하는 것은 똑 갓다. 고전적 이상주의의 逆夢 속에 잠이 달게 들어 잇다는 꼭 갓흔 것이다. 『社會惡』에 대하야 무관심하기도 똑 갓흔 것이다.
나는 이러케 안다. 自滅期에서 잇는 朝鮮의 미술에는 별다른 生路가 업고 급속히 자체의 분해 작용을 하여 버리는 것 뿐일 것이라고 생각한다. 그런데 다만 美術 사조에 잇서서 점진적으로 고전적 이상주의로부터 현실주의에 現實主義로 부터 主觀主義에-主觀主義에서 단두대에-이러한 歷路를 발바 달나는 뒤물근 注文은 할 수도 업고 또한 이에 응접할 수 업다는 것이다. 엇재 그러냐 하면 생활에 대하야 社會惡에 대하야 人道主義적 理想主義的 태도로 自慰에 갓가운 告白, 宣言, 감상적 이상적인 경고 시대로 부터 現實主義에서의 해부하려 하고 또 그나마 조고마한 主觀에 비최여 비판을 나리랴 하는 이와 갓흔 시기를 통과하야 懷疑와 흥분으로 자기 부정 자기 掘窟의 주관 暴動을 할 때 까지를 기다릴 수가 업다는 것이다. 이 갓흔 悠長한 行程을 도저혀 뒤축 업는 麻鞋를 끌면서 안질배이거름을 거를 수가 업다. 절박하엿다. 事情이-뛸 수만 잇스면 뛰어야 되겟다. 이 까닭으로 現今의 조선 畵壇 乃至 조선 미술의 자체의 분해 작용이 하로라도 속히 발현 되기를 바란다는 것이다.＜70＞
藝術은 사회의 상부 구조 이라는 것만 알아 주엇스면 한다. 그래서 사회의 기초 구조인 생활에 변화가 잇게 되면은-경제 조직에 政治에-계급에 改變이 생기게 되는 때에는 예술 자체도 엇지 할 수 업시 자기 解體를-자신 *死를 수행하지 아니치 못하게 되는 것이다.
그런데 지금의 조선의 민중은 엇더하냐는 말이다. 朝鮮의 민중은 征服者네의 회유政策化 한 미술 역사적으로 넘어도 만히 詐欺를 바든 까닭에 미술 자신이 과대히 가지고 잇는 驕慢- 이민 미술과 대립하여 가지고서 狂躁하고 잇는 美術에 아모러한 미혹도 誘引도 밧지 안는 것이다. 생활에서 유리된 미술에-上古에 原始人이 토착 민족의 생활에서 謀叛하랴는 미술과 절연을 하듯이 아조 미술과 인연을 遮絶한 지가 오래 되엿다. 朝鮮의 민중은 너무나 조선의 미술의 內容相을 잘 알고 잇다. 그래서 그들은 다리 업는 독갑이의 亂舞를 너무나 寬大 하게도 응시하고 잇다.

現下의 樂壇을 돌아 보면서 (무엇 보다도 피에 엉킨 조선의 魂을 심각하게 표현할 樂家가 나오기를 바란다)
尹克榮

一
일흠은 그럴 듯 하게 붓처서 樂壇 소감 이라 하엿다 만은 무엇을 써야 올흘넌지나 역시 갈피를 차릴 수가 업다. 기왕 쓸 바에야 악장에 대한 그 무엇을 기록해야 올흘가 하는데 산이 잇서야 호랑이가 잇는 격으로 악단이란 것이 잇서야 그 무엇이라는 것도 잇슬 것이 아닌가? 모든 것이 衰退하고 멸망에 갓가운 조선이란 폐허에 유독히 樂壇만이 남어 잇슬 리가 萬無요 또 지금 갓해서는 그의 새로운 싹도 나올 수 업게 되엿다. 如何間 악단의 존재가 업는 조선에 잇서서 그의 소감이니 무엇이니, 하는 것이 맹낭한 소릴가 한다.
그러나 허수룩 하게 빈 집에 「독개비」들이 나와 이웃집 ＜71＞ 영감의 본을 떠서 갓을 써 보느 등 下人을 불너 제법 위풍당당하게 호령도 해 보는 등, 어떳튼 사람의 一動一靜을 숭내 내보랴고 애쓰는 것과 갓치 조선이란 空家에도 진정한 樂壇은 업스나 그의 거림자 갓흔 참 독개비 갓흔 희미한 존재는 알 수 잇다. 그러나 그것이 건실치 못허고 永久的이 아닌 것은 누구나 다 아는 바이라. 更言할 여지가 또 어듸 잇스랴! 元來 「독개비」 라는 것이 (이리 말 허면 독개비에 대하야 굉장한 연구나 가진 것 갓해서 그야 말로 「독개비」 학자 갓다 만은) 참 才操가 비상해서 잇다가도 업서지고 업다가도 생겨나는 奇奇妙妙한 者이다. 그리고 그들에겐 모든 것을 향락하랴는 天質이 잇다. 가령 父母喪을 당해서 슯히 우는 것을 보면 곳 그것을 숭내내되 극히 유쾌허게 낸다. 엊덧튼 독개비 눈에는 인간의 모-든 悲哀와 고통이 한 작난으로 뵈는 모양이다. 喪人이 頭巾을 쓰면 갓치 두건을 쓰고 祭官이 再拜를 하면 역시 따라 再拜는 하되 가슴 속 깁흔 곳에서 우러 나오는 쓰라린 눈물의 한 방울은 감히 숭내 낼 생각도 못하고 만약 눈물의 떠러짐을 보앗다 하면 침이나 물을 눈가에 칠해 본다는 것 밧게는 모르는 모양이다. 이것이 독개비의 특성이 아닌가 한다.
그러면 그것은 그대로 두고 이제는 조선의 樂壇을 한 번 들처내보자! 그야 말로 대체 宏壯하다. 무엇이 宏壯한고 하니 숭내가 宏壯하다. 그 숭내야 말로 독개비的 숭내다. 진실한 모방도 못 되는 健實치 못한 모-든 것을 향락으로만 아는 「독개비」 갓흔 숭내다. 如何間 지금 소위 樂家라는 그네들에겐 향락기분이 너무도 만타. 그야말로 예술 양심이 업대도 과언은 아닐 듯 십다. 원래 예술가가 무엇을 창작 할 때의 기분 그것이 결코 遊戱的은 아니엿을 것이다. 보아라! 「베-도펜」 의 「月光의 曲」을! 月光의 曲이라면 大槪 그의 일화로 들엇슬 터이요 또 조선에도 여러번 소개된 듯 십허 更言치는 아니 한다 만은 그의 樂句 樂句에 대하야 어듸에 조곰이나 流蕩 기분이 잇단 말이냐! 나는 생각 하기를 氏가 「月光의 曲」을 낼 그 때의 고통은 靈으로 보아 또는 肉으로 보아 산모 이상에 고통이엿다고 한다. 그 實相이 그랫슬 것이다. 혹은 反問할 사람이 잇슬넌진 모른다. 다른 樂家와 달라 「배도펜」은 극히 신비적 하고 敬畏的한 악곡 속에도 흔히 滑稽한 樂句를 만히 融和 식혓다고! 그러나 그 樂句의 滑稽的한 것은 절대로 遊蕩 氣分이 향락 기분은 아니다. 극렬히 일어나는 感情을 가만히 가다 듣는 달리 말하면 몹시 뛰노는 가슴의 鼓動을 가마니 휴식식히는 가장 귀중한 樂句다. 이것을 보아 그 前後의 樂句가 얼마나 심각하다는＜72＞ 것을 알 수 잇슬 것이 아니냐. 이 만콤 심각한 예술품을 어느 妓巧家 卽 「피아니스트」가 연주할 時에 「베-도펜」 그 때의 정신을 고대로 꼭 표현 하라는 것은 아니다 만은 그 심각한 점이라 든가 예술가다운 농후한 감정 그의 긴장된 정신은 공통 되여야 될 것이다.
3,4년 전에 나는 「세계적 피아니스트」 「파르다스」씨의 독주회를 들은 적이 잇섯다. 그 때의 나는 더욱이 「피아노」 음악에 대한 견해가 적엇섯슴으로 그에 대한 깁흔 인상은 업섯다. 그러나 氏의 침착한 태도와 高潮한 감정 만은 엿태것 니저지지 아니한다. 씨가 「피아노」 의자에 안즌 후 무거운 손을 가만히 들어 찬찬히 건반을 울닐 때 그이는 벌서 사람 갓지는 안엇다. 곳 불이 된 것 갓햇다. 피아노」 소리와 그는 갓치 끌코 타고야 말엇다. 악곡을 다 끗내고도 그는 경솔이 일어나지 아니하고 그 曲調와 「피아노」의 무한한 애착을 두고 억지로 떠나는 것 갓흔 참 예술적 기분이 얼골에 몸에 가득히 보엿다. 이러케 말허면 음악 實質은 모르는 놈이 樂家의 표정만 보고 와삀œ 떠드는 것 갓다만은 표정이 허위의 표현이라면 모를가 그럿치 아니하고 無我의 境에서 흘너 나오는 自然한 표정이라면 엇지 거긔에 착안치 아니하랴! 여하튼 初學者나 大家를 물론허고 음악이 한 길에 들어서는 모-든 사람은 처음부터 「둥당」이니 「동당」이니 하고 음을 익히는 것 보담 먼저 性格을 수양해야만 한다. 수양 이라닛가 음 치고도 뛸 줄 모르는 道學者類의 修養이거나 유행하는 牧師나 長老 類의 傳道法 몃 조에 잇는 거북한 수양은 아니니까 염려할 필요는 업다. 이러 말하면 참 주저 넘다만은 나는 소리처 불으노니 우리 朝鮮에 이만콤 심각하고도 혁명적인 「樂家」가 그 누구란 말이냐? 술에 취한 「樂家」라면 나도 보앗노라 만은 좀 더 피 잇는 사람은 잇때 것 보지를 못하엿다. 최근 조선의 音樂熱은 그 度를 더하는 것 갓다. 참 그것으로 만은 깁쁜 일이다. 그러나 모도가 향락 기분에 빠지는 것 갓다. 그리고 너머 기교에만 팔니고 만다. 芙�名無實 하나마 우리의 樂壇은 근래에 와서 더욱이 이려케 기우러지는 것 갓다. 그럿타고 기교가 필요치 아니하다는 것은 아니다. 물론 예술인 以上 技巧을 빼슬 수는 업는 것이다. 「피아니스트」 에겐 「스켈」이나, 「페달」, 提琴家에겐 활 쓰는 법이나, 「포시숀」, 성악가에겐 「發聲法」 갓흔 각각 모-든 기교이 잇서야 하고 그를 무한히 세련식혀야 헐 것 까지도 모르는 것은 아니다. 그러나 이것 만은 니저서는 아니 된다. 이런 모- 든 기교가 無意味하게 거저 기계적으로 露現 된다는 것 보다 기교 우에 무서운 피 줄기가 뻣치는 생명이＜73＞ 욱어나라야 한다는 것! 이것만은 니저선 아니 된다. 如何튼 피 업는 그 者는 살녀 둘 필요도 업고 내바려 둔대야 얼마 살지도 못헉 것이다. 참 貧血症이라는 병은 무서운 病 이야!
月前에 朝鮮에도 「캐티슨」 夫人 갓흔 세계적 가수가 오기는 왓섯다. 公會堂도 滿員에 성황 이엿다. 만은 그의 예술을 이해한 자가 몃 사람이나 되엿나? 이 외에「테노」 가수 「쫀손」 씨도 왓다. 엇덧튼 우리는 직접 간접으로 이런 큰 예술가에 접해 보앗다. 이런 예술에 접할 때 마다 먼저 우리에게 큰 교훈을 주는 것은 그들의 예술가 다운 인격이고 그 다음에야 「엑쓰프레-숀」이다. 여긔에 말한 예술가다운 인격이라는 것은 침착한 성격에서 나오는 열광적 氣風을 의미한 것이다.

二
대체 조선에 西洋 음악이 들어 오게 된 것은 米國 선교사들의 덕택인 줄 안다. 참 고마운 일이다. 爲先 讚頌歌라는 것이 第一 먼저 그들의 입과 손에서 울어 나온 것이다. 그러기에 한참 때엔 예배당에서도 찬송가 술집이나 기생집에서도 찬송가 어떳튼 그 때의 음악! 하면 의레히 찬송가 엿섯다. 찬송가를 잘 하는 사람은 별 수 업시 음악가요(그러닛가 예수도 잘 밋어야지) 그것을 모르는 사람은 아주 음악의 견해가 업다고 손고락질을 허엿섯다. 그 때에 음악가란 칭호를 주고 뺏고 하든 大權力者는 米國 선교사들 이엿다. 그러기에 「예수를 잘 못 밋다가 音樂家의 칭호마저 뺏기는 사람도 적지 안은 모양이지! 일이 이러케 되고 보니 음악가가 되여 보랴면 그들 선교사 눈에 들어야 할 것이요 그러케 모든 것을 맛도록 숭내를 내랴닛가 자기네의 先天 不足을 한탄하게 되엿다. 성악만 하드라도 혀(舌)를 꼬부려 입천정에다 붓치고 코 긔운에 소리를 내보니 어수하긴 하나 深目高準이 못 되여 한이라. 이러케 寃恨이 맷치고 맷첫던 사람이 지금까지 살엇는지는 모르나 근래 鼻伸器가 생긴 것을 안다면 感慨가 無量일 터이요 소위 문명이란 것이 더 되여 深眼器라는 것이 마저 생겨 본다면 어떳튼 키마저 느릴 수 잇도록은 느려 보아서 고만 西洋人이 되여 버린다면 그들은 生時에나 저승에서나 搖頭轉目을 하며 깃버 하렷다. 참 애석한 일이다. 이리 말하면 퍽 오랜 일 갓다만은 이것이 불과 5,6년 전 일이오 지금도 역시 그 餘毒이 잇는 모양이다.
원래 米國이란 나라가 굉장한 나라요 또, 미국인이란 그것이 쑥스러운 자들이다. 年年히 米國에 모혀 드는 세계적 樂家들만 하여도 한 두 명이 아니요 또 그곳에 永住하는＜74＞ 樂家들도 만히 잇서 그 만큼 자극을 한다면 원숭이 나라래도 무엇이나 하나 될 듯 하것만! 업다! 알만한 사람은 한아도 업다. 각금 음악 잡지나 신문에 보면 「米國 어듸 어듸 사는 ㅇㅇ양은 그의 음 구역이 세계 제일 이라」고 한다. 이 갓치 음이 넙기로 第一이요 량이 만키로도 第一이요 모도가 세계 第一이란 소리는 퍽도 듯기 조와 하는 모양이요 음악가 다운 성격이라던가 그의 정서라든가는 度外視해 버린다. 지 부터 音樂史를 펴노코 보자. 「베-토렌,」 「소허, 리스트,」 나 가곡왕 이라는 「벨트」 또는 「슈만」 이박게도 「왁녈로시니」, 쿠-노, 모잡트, 웨벨멜텔손,」 등 작가 중 어듸 하나나 米國 출생이 잇느냐. 성악에 일홈 놉흔 「하이톤이나」, 헨델도 역시 米國 所生은 아니다. 또 현대 樂家로만 한대도 「카루소,」 부터 「이무스, 아루마그륵, 막코막, 마틔넬나차로, 뽀리, 멜바, 쉬만하잉크」 갓흔 名歌手난 「파트리에푸스키, 고도-에푸스키, 파루따스 갓흔 「피아니쓰트」나, 「엘만, 하이프에스, 짐바리스트, 크라이슬라, 갓흔 提琴 大家가 다 米國 출생은 아니다.(혹 한아나 둘 쯤 잇다 하드래도 그것은 예외이겟지) 如何間 미국이란 나라엔 전에나 지금이나 음악가란 난 적이 별로 업섯고 잇다 하드래도 시원치는 못한 모양이다. 근래에 와서 米國에서는 예술상 最劣等 이라 할만한 模寫音樂을 만히 작곡 하엿다. 원래 묘사음악이라는 것은 자연음을 그대로 模寫해 보랴는 것이 그의 목적이다. 가령 雷聲 갓흔 것을 고대로 「피아노」 에 올녀 놋는 ꊲ�, 혹은 자동차의 소리를 고대로 표현 해 보는 것 갓흔 것이다. 그러기에 예술적 가치는 조곰도 업다. 그런 음악은 말이 음악이지 한 유희로 볼 수 밧게 아무 수도 업다. 이다지 미국이 음악엔, 아니 예술에 대하야 결핍한 점이 한 둘이 아니다. 그들의 생활이 그다지 풍족허고 언제던지 포만 상태에서 나오는 遊蕩的 향락적 기분을 곳 음악으로 표현하니 거긔에 무슨 힘이 잇스며 끌는 피가 잇스랴. 이런 나라 한 구석에서 배워오던 선교사들이 여긔 나와선 네 활개를 치며 意氣揚揚 하야 모든 것에 간섭하려 들고 모르나 아나 지휘를 해 보려고 한다. 기왕 가르키랴거든 「예수」나 가르켜 볼 것이지 웬 음악에 까지 손을 대드람! 그나마도 업는 것이 생겻스니 오작이나 깃브랴만은 새로 생기는 것이 숫쩨 안 생기니 만도 못한 적이 혹 잇스닛가 말이다. 요사이 조선 樂壇은 그 전과는 좀 달라 선교사 손에서는 간신히 떠러저 나온 것 갓다만은 몃 사람은 모를나 여전히 鼻伸器가 필요한 모양이다.
자-그러면 朝鮮의 樂壇은 어떠케 나아가야 겟느냐?＜75＞
나는 이것을 말하기 전에 歐洲 현대 악계 대세를 極히 간단히 말하랴 한다. 모-든 예술과 갓치 음악예술도 그 지방색이 현저하다. 좁은 조선 안에도 平壤 愁心歌니 南道단歌니 함  갓치 歐洲에서도 獨逸 樂派니 佛蘭西 樂派니 하고 그의 樂風이 다- 다르다. 독일 현대 악파라는 것은 純音樂 方面과 표제의 方面이다. 그리하야 이것을 極히 獨逸的으로 표현하랴는 것이 그들의 깁흔 主義다. 다시 말하면 국민적 특성을 純音樂으로 혹은 標題樂으로 힘 잇게 표현 한다는 것이다. 국민적 특성을 발휘해 보겟다는 熱望은 전세계를 통해서 독일만한 뎨가 아마 업슬 상 십다. 독일에 현대 樂派 뿐 아니라 독일이란 나라가 생긴 이후로는 그들의 음악도 독일을 불넛고 압흐로 독일이란 존재가 아조 업서지면 모를가 희미하게라도 남어 잇기만 한다면 그 나라 음악은 확실히 그 빗을 변치 아니할 것이다. 독일에는 이 나라 저 나라에 樂風이 만히 굴너 들어 갓다. 그러나 독일이란 집대문에를 드러 가기만 하면 그는 벌서 독일화 되여 버리고 만다. 참 독일의 音樂은 독일적 임으로써 세계적이다. 佛蘭西 현대 樂派는 伊太利 樂派와 흡사해서 그의 연구가 전혀 歌劇法에 잇다. 그러기에 佛蘭西音樂學校 에서는 졸업생을 그 곳 「그란드오페라座」에 배우로 보낸다 한다. 이 외에도 各國의 악파가 업는 것은 아니나 결국은 이 두 큰 樂派의 分枝이라 달니 기록지 아니한다. 그러면 처음 문제로 돌아가 조선의 樂壇은 어듸로 엇더케 나아가야 올흘가! 나는 第一 무서운 것들이 잇다. 이것이 음악계만에 영향을 주는 것은 아니겟지만은! 한 편으로는 처음 말하던 米國風의 滑稽的 향락적 악풍이 불어 오는 것이다. 그나마도 완전치 못한 선교사류의 억깨바람이 불 어오는 것이라. 이것을 절석 갓치 밋고 되나 안되나 가르켜 보는 선생님들이나 그나마 직접도 못 되고 간접으로 간신히 어더 배호는 학생들이나 참 그들 身勢야말로 가련한 일이다.

三
또 한편으로는 일본 가요가 살금 살금 긔여들어 오는 것이다.
그야말로 「大和魂」이 날로 달로 기여든다. 제가 긔지 안어 날러 들어 온대도 우리에게야 조곰이나 무서움이 잇스랴만은 입에 맛지도 아니하는 음식을 소화마저 식히랴닛다 걱정이 돼서 말이다. 그들은 교육사업의 근본방침을 일선융화에 두고 될수 잇스면 기분이나 감정 까지라도 갓치 맨들어 보겟다는 것이다. 그럼으로 지금 각 보통학생도들에게는 일본 동요 더욱이 「三味線이나」 「고도」로 뜨더야 맛이 더 날 듯이＜76＞ 일본적 가요를 敎授한다. 이것이 다 學務 當局에서의 명령 이닛가 粉骨쇄身이 되드라도 「拒逆」 할 수는 업는 일이지마는 깁히 깁히 고려할 여지는 잇지 아니할가? 비단 小學校이랴. 여자고등보통학교 라는데에 唱歌 교수만 하드라도 그럿타. 조흔 예를 들어 淑明여학교를 보자. 무엇으로 보던지 조선적인 노래를 가르킬만한 곳이다. 爲先 학교가 조선 사람의 학교요 음악주임선생이 그것 쯤은 알 듯한 조선 사람이라 밋을 만한곳은 그래도 그 곳이라고 나는 엿해것 생각 하여 왓섯다. 그러나 놀나지 마라. 조선 사람의 음악 담임 선생을 둔 淑明보담도 조선어를 通치 못하는 日本人 음악 선생을 가진 進明이 도로혀 조선 정서가 난다. 예술가라면 예술 교육이 무엇인가도 알 필요가 잇고 더욱이 학교 선생 노릇을 하랴거든 도서관에 가서라도 예술 교육에 대한 것을 보고 을 필요가 업슬가? 생각해 보자. 그저 상식으로 라도 판단해 보자. 갓흔 자장歌 (子守歌)라도 갓흔 장소에서 갓흔 인물이 갓흔 표정으로 노래한다 허여도 가사가 외국어냐 국어냐 허는 데 벌서 심정을 달니 한다. 여긔에 음푹한 草家집이 잇서 쟝독간 마조 뵈는 거는 방 마루에 남끗동저고리에 남치마 입은 귀한 나라 이 나라의 젊은 부인이 그이의 앗끼는 金子童이를 고히 고히 두 팔에 얼싸안고서 가만 가만 보드라운 고흔 소리로 「자장 자장 아가야! 엄마 가슴에」라고 평화롭게 노래를 불늘 때에 거긔엔 끗 업시 이 나라 정서가 흘너 나온다. 만약 이와 갓흔 환경 속에서 「네무레ねむれ我子よ」나, 「Sheer oh! Sleeh My Dalling」과 갓치 일어나 영어 갓흔 다른 말이 나온다면 참 큰 殺風景 이다. 이야말로 상토틀고 양복 입는 격이 아닌가? 朝鮮에서 정서 교육이니 예술 교육이니 떠드는 그네들은 이런 부자연한 殺風景을 장래 까지 엇덧케 하면 더 잘 연출해 볼가 허는데 머리가 시는 모양이다. 각 학교 음악 선생님들 들어 보소! 변명헐 입이 잇거든 벌여 보소. 백여원 월급도 적지는 안치만 4,50원 봉급도 國祿은 國祿이지만 허구한 날을 이럭케 보내기도 참 어려우렷다.

五
너머 잔소리가 오래 되엿다. 여하간 지금의 조선에는 米國風의 음악과 日本風의 음악이 쉬지도 아니허고 불어 들어 온다. 이럭케 불어 오는 일은 대단 깃븐 일이나 도로혀 더 좀 불어 왓스면 허는 생각도 업지는 아니허다. 그러나 이 압흐로 「독개비」 장난이 안인 진정한 樂壇을 세우랴면 이 갓치 몰녀 오는 모-든 樂風을 우리의 손으로 비비고＜77＞ 다저서 朝鮮味를 느어 결국은 조선의 독창적 음악을 맨들어야 한다. 그럿치 안코는 도저히 조선의 樂壇이란 것은 세울 수가 업슬 것이다. 그리고 이럭케 되 조선의 樂壇이면 더욱 더욱히 피가 뛰여야만 한다. 나는 지금의 조선을 맛치 鐵窓 속의 獅吼로 본다. 그는 어긔까지던지 자기의 환경인 철창과 싸와 본다. 그여코 반역해 본다. 날카로운 발톱으로 불이 나도록 철창을 글그며 「어흠」 소리를 친다. 조선의 음악은 이 獅吼口 에서 나오는 「어흠」 소리와 갓허야 헌다. 그럿치 안타면 그는 거짓말이다. 우리는 도로혀 저 獅吼 이상으로 괴롭다. 만약 저 獅吼가 윌와 갓치 부자유한 철창에서 먹을 것 마저 업섯다면 그는 벌서 「철창이 부서지거나 머리가 깨지거나 최후의 決戰을 하고야 말엇슬 것이다. 지금의 우리 음악이 저 獅吼聲과 갓해야 한다면 장래의 였°리 음악은 엇더 하여야 헐가! 엇덧튼 우리의 樂壇을 건설헐 양이면 피 뭇은 조선의 혼을 이저서는 아니 된다. 다시 말허면 피에 엉킨 朝鮮魂을 심각하게 표현헐 줄 아는 樂家가 뿌듯허게 들어서야만 헌단 말이다.＜78＞
＜66-78＞