Magazine Title: 개벽 제65호
Publication Date: 1926년 01월 01일
Article Title: 無産作家와 無産作品 (Proletarian Writers and Proletarian Works)
Author: 尙火 (Sanghwa)
Article Type: 문예평론 (Literary Criticism)

無産作家와 無産作品 (Proletarian Writers and Proletarian Works)
						尙火 (Sanghwa)
-Please consider this more as reading material than an introduction.-

Even if we only speak of contemporary writers, their number is limitless. Furthermore, the environments that influenced them in the modern era must each be different. If one could classify through detailed statistics the kind of environment from which they arose, it would probably not be a useless endeavor. In an age like the present, how differently would the various aspects of modern society or the meaning of life be expressed due to the distinction between an artist born into the propertied class who received an orderly school education, and an artist born into the propertyless class who came to possess a beautiful spirit (心靈) amidst tears and sweat? This is undoubtedly a task that must be considered, but for now, I lack both the time and the knowledge. As thoughts come to mind, I intend to first briefly discuss a few writers among many who possess the distinct characteristics of modern or contemporary proletarian writers, and then briefly discuss works that take the proletarian class as their subject. Among the four writers I will discuss below, only George Gissing is, chronologically speaking, from an earlier period than the others. He was born in 1857 and died in 1903. However, the other writers are still alive today. Of course, even though they are alive, their vigorous creative power has mostly passed. If one demands new writers who can represent the new era, that is a necessity, but I have decided to omit them here.

Writers
This story occurred in the editorial office of the *Politiken* newspaper company in Copenhagen (코팽하갱), the capital of Denmark (댄말크).<120>
One day, a young man entered the editorial office carrying a bundle of manuscripts. Inside the room was the editor, Edvard Brandes (애드와드·부란대스). Following the usual custom of journalists, he was about to reject the manuscript under the pretext that it was too long, without even looking closely at its contents. However, what prevented him from uttering those words was taking another look at the young man's face. Among those who had frequented the *Politiken* newspaper office until then, likely no one had ever come in such a miserable state, so emaciated. Yet, hidden within the expression of that pale and gaunt face was something unspeakable. His eyes, like the sea visible nearby behind the glass window, inexplicably captivated Brandes' heart. So, Brandes took the manuscript home. As he began to read it, he inwardly reproached (叱辱) himself for his initial neglect and indifference. Why? Because the young genius, like the protagonist in the work, was suffering from exhaustion of both mind and body due to lack of food. Therefore, he quickly put a 10 krone banknote into an envelope addressed to the unfamiliar author and mailed it. While he was reading the manuscript again, the young man arrived. He said he was so overjoyed upon receiving the money that he almost went mad. It must have been so, as that amount was the most money the protagonist had ever possessed.
That night, Brandes met the Swedish critic Axel Lundegård (아키새르·룬대갈드) and spoke of his deep impression of the work by this strange, unknown young writer. "It's not just that he has literary talent; there's a profoundness, like wringing the neck of life itself. So to speak," "He has a certain power, like Dostoevsky (떠스토이애프스키)..." At these words, Lundegård asked, "Ah, is it truly that magnificent! And what's the title?" "The title is 'The Hunger' (飢餓), and the author is Knut Hamsun (쿠누트·함즌)," he replied.
In the autumn of 1920, Knut Hamsun, the contemporary Norwegian (諾威) writer who received the Nobel (노벨) Prize for Literature from the King of Sweden (수웨댄), was first discovered in the foreign land (異國) of Denmark. Like the protagonists of his works "The Wanderer" (방랑자) and "Hunger" (飢餓), he was discovered as a great artist, a propertyless man with nothing but his bare hands (赤身空拳). Thus, through Brandes' goodwill (好意), his debut work (處女作) "Hunger" came to be published in "New Soil" (新士), a magazine representing the most progressive thought in Copenhagen. This was around 1888, when Hamsun, in extreme despair, had returned from America (米國) and wandered through Denmark for three months.<121>

In England (영국), there is a short story titled "The House of Cobwebs." The story begins with a strange young man trying to rent a room in a dilapidated, cobweb-filled house from another young man who also has a strange personality and philosophy of life. The young man wanting to rent is still lying in bed in his previous lodging, even though he woke up an hour ago, thinking these thoughts. It is six o'clock on a June morning. The morning sunlight filtering through the wallpaper seems to paint flower shadows on the paper. Though they were strange flowers unknown to any botanist, he simply associated them with flowerbeds, fields, or green hedges from the gently flowing summer sunlight. "It will likely be three months, but how will I get through? At 15 shillings a week – for room rent, food, laundry – how can I survive? Should I leave this house then? In truth, this isn't extravagant (奢侈) either, but here, no matter how much I economize (節約), I can't survive on 25 shillings... Besides, I'll have to spend three months writing this work. If I still can't finish it, I might as well hang myself. Then I'll have to meet the publisher (出版商) – until then, all I have to do is sit quietly and wrestle with this work. It's fortunate (萬幸) that it's summer. I don't need the stove. Any place is fine as long as it's quiet and the sun shines in. Is there really no place around here that offers room and board for about 15 shillings a week? It's fate (팔자소관). Let's just wander about and see (쏘대 보자)."
Thus, he cleverly found the house of cobwebs. "I'm being completely honest. Although I look somewhat presentable, I have very little money. I plan to live on that for three months. It's because I'm writing a book now; if I finish it and sell it, there will be no problem, but it seems I'll have to spend three months writing it. Therefore, any room is fine as long as it's quiet. What do you say, will you rent it to me?"
As the man listened to these words, a look of increasing surprise spread across his face. His eyes showed signs of apprehension (動靜). Then, pursing his lips as if to whistle, he said, "A book—you—you write books! Then are you a man of letters (文士)...?" "Eh—are you kicking me out? But they say, if you want company, go with the poor!"<122> "Then, like Dr. Johnson (죤손), like Chatterton (쵀터톤)... Ah—I trust you won't end up like Chatterton in his final moments... Then like Goldsmith (골드스미트)!" "In any case, I possess about half the fame of Oliver. I'm not Goldsmith, I'm Goldthorpe (골드솔프)." And so, he managed to rent the room. After the manuscript he lived on for three months circulated from bookstore (冊肆) to bookstore, he received a letter from a publishing house (出版會) offering to buy it for 50 pounds. It was a day in January (正月). That day was an unforgettable day in Goldthorpe's literary history. Thus, the following month, this writer went on a leisurely trip (漫遊) to London (런돈).
Truly, few writers have struggled with poverty (貧窮) and evoked poverty itself as much as this writer. He was a propertyless man (無産者) who lived almost his entire life in poverty. Only for a short period (短期) in the latter half of his life (後半生) did he have enough to live on, but even that was not abundant. Despite this, he was a believer in supermanism (超人主義者) and an aristocratist (貴族主義者). Therefore, he always hated poverty. If circumstances had allowed (容認), who knows what aristocratic pleasures (享樂) he might have indulged in. Or, if he had worked (勞働) just a little harder, couldn't he have achieved a decent life? But instead, he was lazy, constantly drawn to the poverty he despised. Therein lay his constant obscurity (暗昧), hurt (傷*), and rebellion (反抗) against poverty. For this reason, some critics called him a writer who lived while enjoying poverty. So, who is this writer? It is England's George Gissing (조-지·기씽). He was a champion (雄將) of the realist school (現實主義派) in the English literary world (英國文壇) at the end of the 19th century.

He was born in Norway (諾威) in March 1872. He was the son of a maidservant (女婢), like Strindberg (스트린드벌그). His mother, unable to raise (養育) him, gave him away to a farming family (農家) in a mountain village (山村). His miserable life there is realistically depicted (猫現 -> 描現?) in "The Great Hunger" (거대한 飢餓) and other works. "Whenever people talked about his birth mother (生母), why did they say (Poor child!)? When his friends got angry, why did they curse him as (Fatherless child!) and laugh? Yet, that child named Per (필) called the kind-hearted, pockmarked(?) wife of Troen (트로앤) 'Mother,' and called that woman's tiger-like husband (家長)<123> 'Father.' Thus, whether being beaten at the blacksmith's (대정깐) or going out to sea in a small boat (쪽배) to fish, he followed their orders as instructed. Consequently, his childhood (幼年) was spent among villagers who seemed to consider laughter a sin (罪惡). These villagers were gloomy (陰鬱) people, like the dark sea fog, their minds entirely preoccupied with deep-rooted poverty (貧窮), singing hymns (讚美), and the fear of hell (地獄)," thus describes the life story (生歷) of Per, the protagonist of "The Great Hunger."
He fished in the fjords (포르드). In the summer, he herded goats and cows in the fields. He went to church (敎會) only once a week—on Sundays (日曜日). He was fifteen when he first attended the mountain village elementary school (山村 小學校), and only then did he realize that things like literature (文學) and poetry (詩) existed in this world (現世). After finishing that school, he became a hired hand (庸人) for a wealthy farmer (富農), but his desire to study did not cease. Then, somehow obtaining permission (許諾), he enrolled (入學) in a private school (私立 學校) run (經營) by a non-commissioned officer (下士官). Since they provided tuition (月謝), clothing (衣服), and the like, he stayed there for three years. His heart desired to acquire knowledge (知識) anywhere he could get an education (敎育) without paying. Around that time, a hotel doorman(?) (호탤 문직이) who was learning English (英語) with him was imprisoned (入獄) for murder (殺人罪). That model (모댈) appears in his novel (小說). And whenever there were public lectures (公開 講義), he made sure to attend; lectures by Herman Bang (핼만방) and Knut Hamsun gave him a special (特別) impression (印象). However, his hope (希望) at that time was merely to become a small landowner (地主) or a sergeant (軍曹). Why? Because if he became a sergeant and a war (戰爭) broke out, there was a chance to be promoted (昇進) even to the rank (地位) of general (將官). But now, such ambitions (野心) had all vanished, and he came to possess only the fervent wish (焦願) to become a poet (詩人).
As these dreams (夢想) collided with the hardships (苦) of reality (現實), he could no longer just gaze at beautiful dreams of poetry and song (詩歌). The persecution (迫害) of life (生活) pushed in without any mercy (容恕). Thereupon, leaving the non-commissioned officer's school, he went into business and, until the following year, experienced various occupations (職業). He worked as a fisherman (漁夫) in the Faroe Islands (포로트 群島?) and as a laborer (人夫) here and there. He was also a salesman (外交員) for a sewing machine company (裁縫機商) and a clerk (書記) for a trading company (貿易 會社). While working at the company, he studied (研究) French grammar (불어 文典), wrote poetry (詩), and at night, worked on plans (稿案) to adapt (脚色) plays (戲曲) or novels (小說), often suffering from headaches (頭痛) the next day that prevented him from performing his duties (執務)—this was a common occurrence. Consequently, the ledgers (帳簿) he kept were laughably and pitifully messy, covered in ink stains.
The writer Johan Bojer (요한·보앨), who stands alongside Knut Hamsun in the contemporary Norwegian literary world (諾威文壇), is indeed a writer of strong will (意志) with such a past (過去).<124>

When he was nine, he was an apprentice slave (雇奴) to a Western shoe repairman (洋靴修繕商). The master (主人) was an exceedingly cruel (殘忍) man. This writer stated thus: "One day, while boiling water, I dropped a bowl(?) (보시기) and severely injured my hand. That night, I ran away from the house, was scolded by a(?) father (한 아버지), and then became an apprentice to a lacquer (漆) merchant." However, he could not stay there long either. From this time, his spirit (心靈) was entirely captivated by a wandering nature (漂浪性). He became an apprentice to a sculptor (彫刻師). He also worked as a gardener (정원 직이) for someone else. Then, he settled down (定着) for a while working as a cook (廚夫) on a steamship (汽船) traveling the Volga (뽈가). Drawn by curiosity (好奇心) about printed letters (文字), the sixteen-year-old boy came to the university village (大學村) in Kazan (카잔). Then, an irresistible desire (慾望) to "learn these beautiful things for free (無料)" led him to visit (訪問) the university (大學). But what cruel deception (虛僞)! Due to the stubborn insistence (頑冥) that "free tuition (無料 敎授) is absolutely not in the school regulations (學校 規則)," his precious wish (希願) turned into an empty dream. The equality (均等) of education (敎育) was discriminated (差別) based on property (有産) and lack of property (無産). This shows the extent of the irrationality (不合理) of society (社會). How much must the injustice (不合理) of such an unforgettable(?) society have wounded and corrupted the heart of this abused (虐待) boy? The despairing (絕望) boy became a bread seller (팡장사) in some village (洞里) a couple of months later. For a wage (料給) of 4 won (圓) per month, he ate food (飮食) and lived in a dirty, stuffy room off the main floor (마루턱). "My life back then, baking bread (팡) at the bread seller's house, was the most painful (苦痛) two years of my entire life (一生); thinking about it gives an impression (印象) of how miserable (悲慘) that life was," he mentioned in a short story (短篇).
Soot and cobwebs completely filled the ceiling (天井). Under the ceiling that seemed about to collapse, six stout(?) (장군 가튼) fellows lived inside that wooden plank enclosure(?). At night, they were wedged between walls covered in mud and mold. They woke up at five in the morning. Before they knew it, it was six o'clock. Then, work began again. The work was nothing else but kneading dough, made from flour prepared while we slept, from dawn until nine or ten at night, leaning against the table (테불) all day long to bake bread (팡). We often had to constantly sway and twist our waists and backs forwards and backwards to relieve the numbness in our entire bodies. A huge cauldron, like a monster (怪物),<125> spewed hot steam at us, opening its large mouth as if spitting out blazing flames. And two ventilation holes drilled through the side, like round, staring eyes, constantly watched over our endless work. "Thus, amidst flour, dust (몬지), mud clinging heavily to the soles of our feet, and suffocating hot steam, we squeezed out our sweat daily, kneading flour, making biscuits (비스캐트), and baking bread. We hated this work indescribably. Perhaps because of that, we couldn't eat the bread we made ourselves; instead of such fragrant things, we lived on stuff like dog biscuits (개떡)."
The living quarters (居處) were dreadful (흉악), and the food (飮食) was dreadful. His health (健康) did not allow him to stay there much longer. Thus, he became a dockworker (埠頭人夫), and the next day, a woodcutter (樵夫). He wandered all over Russia (러시아) like this. If he had even one kopeck (코패크) in his pocket, he bought books (冊) and newspapers (新聞) and read them until dawn. In summer, he slept in fields; in winter, he slept in empty houses or dugouts(?) (옹굴). In 1889, when he was twenty-one, he even attempted suicide (自殺) by shooting himself in the chest (胸部), but he did not die. Having endured such hardships (嘗苦), he finally came to view worldly morals (世間 道德) like dust (띄끌), becoming a writer with a free spirit (自由魂) unbound by anything, declaring war (宣戰) against the irrationality (不合理) of society – Maxim Gorky (막심·골키), who would eternally convey the pride (豪誇) of the proletarian class (無産 階級) artist (藝術家).

Works

The propertyless people (無産者) appearing in "Hunger" (飢餓) or "The Wanderer" (放浪者) are mostly rootless(?) underground men (地下人). The protagonists (主人公) of both works (兩篇), having no possessions (所有), are abandoned (抛棄) by civilized society (文明 社會) and wander through splendid (輝煌) cities (都市) in a state of near starvation. Furthermore, the protagonist of "Hunger" starves for several days. Cursing Providence (神明), he gets bones (뼉다구) from a butcher shop under the pretext of feeding a dog. Hiding them under his clothes, he tries gnawing on them behind someone's gate, but his intensely hungry innards (五腸) wouldn't accept them. So he vomited (嘔吐). Tears streamed from his eyes. His whole body trembled violently. Unable to endure, he finally chewed on tree bark and forgot his hunger (虛飢) for a short while. The taste of that tree bark appeared as a distinct sensation (感覺). Even a psychologist familiar with the psychological sensations (心理 感覺) of hunger would likely not have studied it so profoundly (深刻). He merely experiments (實驗) with the meticulousness (細心) of a scientist (科學者) on the specific pains of how an empty gut torments the nerves (神經) and senses (感覺). He has no interest (關心) or curiosity (興味) whatsoever as to why the cells (細胞) of society (社會) do not possess the empty gut that causes this suffering (苦痛).<126> There, it is only about showing the clinical diary (臨床日誌) of a certain starving person as it is. What connection could the social structure (社會 組織) have with this person? Therefore, this work (作品) has neither beginning nor end. Then, perhaps finding it unsatisfactory to just have the protagonist wander around Kristiania (크리스촤늬) city (市中), the author (作家) regretfully(?) has the starved protagonist say, "Kristiania, so dazzlingly bright in the windows of every house, farewell!" and states that he "went to England (英國) as a sailor (水夫)."
However, this can be readily understood if one considers the author's tendencies (傾向). Generally, there are two typical patterns (典型) in the Norwegian (諾威) national character (國民性). One, stemming from the hereditary nature (遺傳性) of the pirate era (海賊 時代), constantly seeks new aspirations (憧憬) and resists external oppression (抑壓), striving for a life of perpetual wandering (永久 流轉). Thus, they become explorers (探檢者), sailors (水夫), or anything else. In other words, they seek absolute freedom (絕對 自由). The other type clings to their native land (國土), seeking to further cultivate (耕堀) the sacred earth (大地) received from their ancestors (祖先). Hamsun's works show these two tendencies divided between his early (前期) and later (後期) periods. Works like "Hunger," "The Wanderer," and "Pan" (牧羊神) all center on the pleasure (享樂) of the wanderer (漂迫者). This is because they adopt (採用) parts of his own experience (體驗)—namely, for the propertyless (無産者), rather than fiddling with meager earnings in civilized cities (文明 都會), wandering freely even without a penny is their true desire (本望). Therefore, their being propertyless is, in a sense, freely redeemed by such a capricious nature (變氣性?). Of course, it goes without saying that works with such a psychology (心理) are entirely different in quality (質) from those focusing on contemporary class struggle (階級 鬪爭).

The protagonist of Gorky's (골키) "Makar Chudra" (마킬·츄드라) said, "Listen. Until today, at fifty-eight, I've seen all sorts of things. There's probably no place (츤?) I haven't been. That's my way of living. Wander, wander. Then you see everything. You can't stay put sluggishly in one place. If you make it a habit, anything becomes useless. So, if you want to truly(?) experience the human world (世上), cast off the same daily life (生活) and just roam around. Just like night and day eternally run their course..." Gonarov(?) (고놔로프) continues, "Hey. I've decided to wander the world (世上). I don't know what, but<127> there's always something new in the world. Don't think about anything. They say the wind blows away all the impurities (잡틔?) in a person's heart. Fine. Do as you please. It's carefree. No one bothers you, and if you're hungry (시장), you rest there and earn money for two days. Even if there's no work, if you just wander, someone will give you something. This way, you get to see many new sights."
Look at the protagonist of "Mother," called the mother of the Prophet (預言者). After her son Pavel (파웰), a worker (勞動者) and socialist (社會主義者), was exiled (放逐) to Siberia (西伯利亞) like a martyr (殉教者) on the cross (十字架), the lady's (夫人) spirit (心靈) finally saw the light (光明) of truth (眞理). "This Earth (地球) is sick (厭症) of carrying too much injustice (不正) and sorrow (悲哀). So it secretly trembles, longing to see(?) (보고저워) the new sun (太陽) rising from the human heart." As the lady tried to do her absent son's work – going to the neighboring village to spread (宣傳) the good word – she was caught by the police (警官) while trying to board a train (汽車). Thinking this was the end, the old mother (老母) cried out to the crowd (群衆): "Listen! They punished (處罰) my son and your comrades because they tried to tell you the truth (眞理). We are all dying from labor (勞働). We cannot bear the hunger and cold. We are always submerged in mire. And(?) we are always in injustice (不正). Our lives (人生) have become death and dark night." "Long live (萬歲) the lady!" someone shouted. Then a policeman struck (줴질러서?) the lady's chest, causing her to stagger and fall onto a chair, yet she cried out again. "Everyone, you must unite all your strength (全力) under one leader (指導者)!" The policeman's large, rough, red hand then seized the lady's neck, and she hit the back of her head against the wall (壁). "Shut up, you damn(?) old hag!" he yelled. As the policeman cursed her, the lady's eyes opened wider and shone. Trembling chin, she cried, "Who can kill the resurrected (復活)?" The policeman became fiercer and this time struck her straight across the face. Then dark red liquid blinded the lady's eyes, and blood flowed freely from her mouth. "The blood(?) that kills(?) the righteous is not..." the old mother cried out, losing strength and staggering, when she suddenly saw the crowd's eyes gleaming fiercely. Especially the eyes of someone the lady knew personally.
Also "...No matter how large a sea of blood they create, the truth will not be caught by them..." As the lady finished speaking, the policeman violently seized her neck again. From the lady's gurgling(?) (깨르깨르하는) throat, faintly, she managed to say, "Poor people," when one person replied to the lady with a deep<128> sigh.
In "Confession" (懺悔), there is Matvei (맛츠뵈-), who sought God (神), despaired of the Christian God (크리스트 神), entered among the workers (勞動者) and suffered, and finally discovered (發見) his one and only ideal God (理想神) in the masses (民衆).
"O Masses (民衆), you are indeed my God (神). In your troublesome quest of labor (勞役), you have created your beautiful spirit (心靈). You, the creator (創造者) of all Gods, are indeed my God. Let no other god be placed on earth besides you. For you are the only God, the creator of miracles (奇蹟)."

Such revolutionary spirit (革命魂) and rebelliousness (反逆性) cannot be seen in the other three writers. However, the strange thing is the writer George Gissing (조지·기씽), known as the author (作者) of "The Private Papers of Henry Ryecroft" (핸러·라이크로프트 日記), the author of "New Grub Street" (新俱樂部街), and called a sympathizer (同情者) of "The Nether World" (現世地獄). What contradiction (矛盾) is it that, despite his works taking poverty (貧窮) as their theme (主題), he disliked the poor (貧民) even in his heart? It is not strange (異狀). It is because he was an individualist (個人主義者) and a poor man who longed for aristocratic tastes (貴族 趣味). With his novel (長篇) "Demos," he contemplated the essence(?) (體体) of democracy (데모크라시). Democracy, he thought, is nothing more than a great assembly (大集) of the lower classes (賤民). Thought (思想) and art (藝術), he believed, seemed to have acquired (許得) the authority (權威) to look down upon (脚下) those lower classes. Therefore, the poor, the lower class (下流 階級), are an ignorant (無知) mass whose tastes and knowledge have never once been refined (洗鍊). Having lived almost half his long (長久) life (半生) with such a class, he thought he saw their ignorance (無知) twice as clearly (明瞭). Here we find the opposite of Matvei in Gorky's "Confession." So where is the origin (本源) of this ignorance? Gissing, like Hamsun, did not have the interest (興味) to focus his sight (視力) along this single line (一線). He never dreamed of traveling through a city (都會) like London by carriage (馬車). He was too poor, so without considering the time it took or his blistering feet, he walked for twelve or fifteen hours (時間), as he mentioned in the "Ryecroft Papers." In the latter half of his life, when asked by a magazine (雜誌) to write an article (論文) on the labor problem (勞動 問題), he even said, "I no longer have any interest (興趣) whatsoever (一切) in problems of the life of the poor." However, known as a "historian (歷史家) of the middle class (中流 階級)," as he wrote in "By the Ionian Sea" (이 오늬 안 海畔에서), he could not forget "the unseemly... miserable sight of women, perhaps middle-aged(?)(중나희), crippled(?) (병신이 된다 십 히?) by labor (勞動) and unemployment(?)(실업슨 말?), with hands covered in scars (傷處), hair long uncombed (리숫?), wearing dirty, torn rags that no one would consider clothes." Only, the poverty and misfortune (不幸) that had been his burden(?) (길음?) for too long secretly(?) made him feel an inexplicable weary sadness(?) (시들픈 마음) towards all humanity (人間), while at the same time, being a man of strong cultivation (敎養), he lacked the taste to descend into the so-called ignorance of the masses and merely mix among them (?). <129>

As for Johan Bojer (요한· 보앨), he has yet another distinctive feature (特採). Having grown up for a long time in the propertyless class (無産階級), he tasted the hardships (苦勞) of that oppressed (虐待) class (階級). However, in overturning (顚倒) that phenomenon (現象), he did not try to reform (改造) society (社會) through industrial revolution (産業 革命) and socialism (社會主義) like Gorky. While contemplating (考察) the irrationality (不合理) of the oppressed side, he also discovered (發見) within that class itself an ignorance (無知) that needed to be remedied (救援). The world's (世界) suffering (煩惱), needless to say, arises from the struggle (鬪爭) between the ignorance of these two sides (便). Since the knowledge problem (知識 問題) is fundamental (根本), he thought that pressing(?) (當迫된) social reform (社會 改造) must first lie in spiritual reform (心靈 改造), followed by structural reform (樣式 改造). Trying to bring about that spiritual reform through religious (宗教) faith (信仰) is "The Great Hunger," and trying to march forward in a humanitarian (人道的) spirit (精神) is "The Face of the World" (世界의 얼골) or "Our Kingdom" (우리 나라). "Mother, do you know what kind of people the oppressed are? It refers to(?) (가르친 것임니다) those people who try to ride(?) (업히려고) on top of the oppressed to oppress them. What happens when workers (勞動者) often receive high wages (賃金)? Their work performance (成績) is even poorer (不良). Look at the world (世上) we roam and boast of its progress (進步)! Continents (大陸) clamor alone with ethnic hatred (民族 憎惡). Various groups (團體) within political parties (政黨) hate each other, and members (團員) assassinate (暗殺) each other. That is because I alone try to conquer (征服) other groups from above them. I intend to reform (改造) all such things. I—myself!" This is Bojer's conviction (信念) for world reform (世界 改造). -Continued-<130>

**Summary**

This 1926 article by Sanghwa introduces four writers—Knut Hamsun, George Gissing, Johan Bojer, and Maxim Gorky—as examples of "proletarian writers," though noting Gissing predates the others. It recounts biographical anecdotes emphasizing their impoverished origins and struggles (hunger, harsh labor, lack of education, social rejection) and connects these experiences to the themes and characters in their works, such as Hamsun's "Hunger," Gissing's tales of London poverty, Bojer's "The Great Hunger," and Gorky's "Mother" and "Confession." The article contrasts the writers' attitudes: Hamsun's focus on the individual psychology of suffering and wandering, Gissing's aristocratic disdain for the masses despite writing about them, Gorky's revolutionary spirit and faith in the masses as divine, and Bojer's belief in spiritual/intellectual reform over societal revolution.
For colonial Korean history, this article is significant as it reflects the intense interest in proletarian literature and socialist ideas among Korean intellectuals in the 1920s. It introduces major European figures associated with depicting the lives of the poor and oppressed, providing models and points of comparison for Korean writers grappling with similar themes under Japanese rule. The discussion of class, poverty, education inequality, and different approaches to social change (individualism, revolution, spiritual reform) highlights the complex intellectual currents influencing Korean thought during this period.

**Named Entities**

尙火	상화	Sanghwa
애드와드·부란대스	에드와드 브란데스	Edvard Brandes
아키새르·룬대갈드	악셀 룬데고르	Axel Lundegård
떠스토이애프스키	도스토옙스키	Dostoevsky
쿠누트·함즌	크누트 함순	Knut Hamsun
조지·끼씽	조지 기싱	George Gissing
죤손	존슨	Johnson
쵀터톤	채터턴	Chatterton
골드스미트	골드스미스	Goldsmith
골드솔프	골드소프	Goldthorpe
스트린드벌그	스트린드베리	Strindberg
트로앤	트로엔	Troen
필	페르	Per
핼만방	헤르만 방	Herman Bang
요한·보앨	요한 보예르	Johan Bojer
막심·골키	막심 고리키	Maxim Gorky
고놔로프	고나로프?	Gonarov?
파웰	파벨	Pavel
맛츠뵈-	마트베이?	Matvei?
댄말크	덴마크	Denmark
코팽하갱	코펜하겐	Copenhagen
포리치캔 新聞社	폴리티켄 신문사	Politiken Newspaper Company
수웨댄	스웨덴	Sweden
노벨	노벨	Nobel
異國	이국	Foreign land
米國	미국	America
New Soil	뉴 소일	New Soil
영국	영국	England
런돈	런던	London
出版會	출판회	Publishing house
諾威	노르웨이	Norway
포르드	표르드	Fjord
카잔	카잔	Kazan
뽈가	볼가	Volga
러시아	러시아	Russia
크리스촤늬市	크리스티아니아시	Kristiania City
西伯利亞	시베리아	Siberia

**Glossary**

無産作家	무산작가	Proletarian writer
無産作品	무산작품	Proletarian work
限量	한량	Limit, bounds
環境	환경	Environment
無用	무용	Useless
有産階級	유산계급	Propertied class
無産階級	무산계급	Proletarian class, propertyless class
心靈	심령	Spirit, soul, mind
社會諸相	사회제상	Various aspects of society
人生意義	인생의의	Meaning of life
特調	특조	Distinctive characteristic, special tone
略說	약설	Brief explanation
創作力	창작력	Creative power
原稿	원고	Manuscript
編輯室	편집실	Editorial office
慣例	관례	Custom, practice
長遑하다	장황하다	Lengthy, verbose (older form/usage)
拒絕	거절	Rejection
姿態	자태	Appearance, figure, bearing
쇠약한	쇠약한	Emaciated, weakened
파려지고	파리해지고	(Becoming) pale, gaunt (older form)
햇슥해진	해쓱해진	Pale, wan (older form)
表情	표정	Facial expression
俸給	봉급	Salary (used here for payment/money)
감동	감동	Deeply moved, impressed
文才	문재	Literary talent
深刻味	심각미	Profoundness, depth
表題	표제	Title
作者	작자	Author
諾威	노르웨이	Norway (older Hanja representation)
異國	이국	Foreign land
赤身空拳	적신공권	Bare-handed, having nothing
好意	호의	Goodwill, kindness
處女作	처녀작	Debut work, first work
彷徨하다	방황하다	To wander, roam
短篇	단편	Short story
性格	성격	Personality, character
生活哲學	생활철학	Philosophy of life
壁線紙	벽선지	Wallpaper (likely older term)
野릇한	야릇한	Strange, peculiar (older spelling '야릇하다')
녀름	여름	Summer (older spelling)
奢侈	사치	Luxury, extravagance
節約	절약	Economizing, saving
出版商	출판상	Publisher
萬幸	만행	Great fortune, good luck
팔자소관	팔자소관	Matter of fate, destiny
쏘대다	쏘다니다	To roam around, wander about (dialectal/older form)
冊肆	책사	Bookstore (less common term)
漫遊	만유	Leisurely trip, excursion
貧窮	빈궁	Poverty, destitution
後半生	후반생	Latter half of one's life
短期	단기	Short period
超人主義者	초인주의자	Believer in supermanism (Nietzscheanism)
貴族主義者	귀족주의자	Aristocratist, believer in aristocracy
容認하다	용인하다	To permit, allow, accept
享樂	향락	Pleasure, enjoyment
勞働	노동	Labor, work (older spelling/Hanja usage)
暗昧	암매	Obscurity, darkness, ignorance
反抗	반항	Rebellion, resistance
現實主義派	현실주의파	Realist school/faction
雄將	웅장	Great general, champion, leading figure
女婢	여비	Maidservant
養育	양육	Raising, upbringing
農家	농가	Farming family/house
참혹하다	참혹하다	Miserable, wretched, cruel
生母	생모	Birth mother
애비	애비	Father (colloquial/slightly derogatory)
가장	가장	Head of household
대정깐	대장간	Blacksmith's forge (older spelling)
유년	유년	Childhood
죄악	죄악	Sin, vice
讚美	찬미	Praise, hymn
지옥	지옥	Hell
음울	음울	Gloomy, somber
生歷	생력	Life story, biography
庸人	용인	Hired hand, common person
許諾	허락	Permission, approval
下士官	하사관	Non-commissioned officer
經營	경영	Management, operation
私立學校	사립학교	Private school
入學	입학	Enrollment, entering school
月謝	월사	Monthly tuition fee
衣服	의복	Clothing
敎育	교육	Education
知識	지식	Knowledge
入獄	입옥	Imprisonment
公開講義	공개강의	Public lecture
講演	강연	Lecture, speech
希望	희망	Hope, wish
地主	지주	Landowner
軍曹	군조	Sergeant
將官	장관	General officer
昇進	승진	Promotion
野心	야심	Ambition
詩人	시인	Poet
焦願	초원	Fervent wish, earnest desire
夢想	몽상	Dream, fantasy, reverie
現實苦	현실고	Hardships of reality
詩歌	시가	Poetry and song
迫害	박해	Persecution
容恕	용서	Forgiveness, mercy
職業	직업	Occupation, job
漁夫	어부	Fisherman
人夫	인부	Laborer
裁縫機商	재봉기상	Sewing machine dealer/company
外交員	외교원	Salesman, canvasser (older term)
貿易會社	무역회사	Trading company
書記	서기	Clerk, secretary
文典	문전	Grammar book
硏究	연구	Research, study
戲曲	희곡	Play, drama
腳色	각색	Adaptation (of a story for stage/screen)
稿案	고안	Plan, draft, design
執務	집무	Office duties, work
頭痛	두통	Headache
帳簿	장부	Ledger, account book
竝立	병립	Standing side-by-side, coexisting
意志	의지	Will, volition
洋靴修繕商	양화수선상	Western shoe repair shop/man
雇奴	고노	Hired slave, indentured servant (strong term for apprentice/worker)
殘忍	잔인	Cruel, brutal
漆	칠	Lacquer
漂浪性	표랑성	Wandering nature, vagrant disposition
彫刻師	조각사	Sculptor
弟子	제자	Disciple, apprentice
정원直이	정원지기	Gardener (older spelling '지기')
定着	정착	Settling down
汽船	기선	Steamship
廚夫	주방/주부	Cook (older term, 주방 is kitchen)
印刷	인쇄	Printing
文字	문자	Letter, character, writing
好奇心	호기심	Curiosity
無料	무료	Free of charge
慾望	욕망	Desire, craving
訪問	방문	Visit
虛僞	허위	Falsehood, deception
敎授	교수	Teaching, instruction (here refers to tuition)
學校規則	학교규칙	School regulations
頑冥	완명	Stubborn, obstinate
希願	희원	Wish, hope (less common variant of 희망)
均等	균등	Equality
差別	차별	Discrimination, distinction
不合理	불합리	Irrationality, absurdity
虐待	학대	Abuse, mistreatment
絕望	절망	Despair
洞里	동리	Village (older term)
팡장사	빵장사	Bread seller (older spelling '빵')
料給	요급	Wages, pay (older term)
飮食	음식	Food and drink
마루턱	마루턱	Edge of a wooden floor, threshold area
一生	일생	Entire life
苦痛	고통	Pain, suffering, agony
悲慘	비참	Misery, wretchedness
印象	인상	Impression
短篇	단편	Short story/piece
天井	천정	Ceiling
몬지	먼지	Dust (older spelling)
개떡	개떡	Coarse rice cake (implying poor quality food)
居處	거처	Living place, residence
凶惡	흉악	Dreadful, atrocious (used here for living conditions/food)
健康	건강	Health
埠頭人夫	부두인부	Dockworker, longshoreman
樵夫	초부	Woodcutter
嘗苦	상고	Experiencing hardship (literary term)
世間	세간	The world, society
道德	도덕	Morals, morality
티끌	티끌	Dust particle, mote (older spelling '띄끌')
拘束	구속	Restriction, restraint
自由魂	자유혼	Free spirit
宣戰	선전	Declaration of war
階級	계급	Class (social)
藝術家	예술가	Artist
豪誇	호과	Pride, boastfulness (less common term)
永遠	영원	Eternity, forever
地下人	지하인	Underground man (possibly referring to Dostoevsky's character type or socially marginalized person)
兩篇	양편	Both works/pieces
主人公	주인공	Protagonist, main character
所有	소유	Possession, ownership
文明社會	문명사회	Civilized society
抛棄	포기	Abandonment, giving up
輝煌	휘황	Brilliant, splendid
神明	신명	Providence, divine spirits
詛呪	저주	Curse
뼉다구	뼈다귀	Bone (older spelling)
五臟	오장	Five viscera (internal organs)
嘔吐	구토	Vomiting
虛飢	허기	Hunger
心理	심리	Psychology
神經	신경	Nerve
感覺	감각	Sensation, feeling
科學者	과학자	Scientist
細心	세심	Meticulousness, carefulness
實驗	실험	Experiment
細胞	세포	Cell (biological)
關心	관심	Interest, concern
興味	흥미	Interest, curiosity
臨床日誌	임상일지	Clinical diary/journal
組織	조직	Organization, structure
交涉	교섭	Connection, relation, negotiation
水夫	수부	Sailor
傾向	경향	Tendency, inclination
國民性	국민성	National character
典型	전형	Typical example, model, archetype
海賊時代	해적시대	Pirate era
遺傳性	유전성	Hereditary nature
憧憬	동경	Yearning, aspiration
外部	외부	Outside, exterior
抑壓	억압	Oppression, suppression
永久流轉	영구유전	Perpetual wandering/flow
探檢者	탐험자	Explorer (older term/spelling)
絕對自由	절대자유	Absolute freedom
國土	국토	Native land, territory
祖先	조상	Ancestor
神聖	신성	Sacred, holy
大地	대지	Earth, land
耕堀	경굴	Cultivation, digging (less common term)
前期	전기	Early period
後期	후기	Later period
漂迫者	표박자	Wanderer, vagrant
享樂	향락	Pleasure, enjoyment (can have negative connotation)
體驗	체험	Experience
採用	채용	Adoption, use
都會	도회	City, metropolis
本望	본망	True desire, cherished wish
變氣性	변기성	Capricious nature, whimsicality (?) (Uncommon term, likely means 'changeable disposition')
救援	구원	Salvation, rescue, relief
階級鬪爭	계급투쟁	Class struggle
主題	주제	Theme, subject
預言者	예언자	Prophet
勞動者	노동자	Worker, laborer
社會主義者	사회주의자	Socialist
十字架	십자가	Cross
殉教者	순교자	Martyr
西伯利亞	시베리아	Siberia
放逐	방축	Exile, banishment
夫人	부인	Lady, Mrs., wife (here refers to the mother)
眞理	진리	Truth
光明	광명	Light, brightness
地球	지구	Earth (planet)
不正	부정	Injustice, wrongdoing
悲哀	비애	Sorrow, grief
運搬	운반	Transport, carrying
厭症	염증	Disgust, weariness, aversion (lit. inflammation)
太陽	태양	Sun
宣傳	선전	Propaganda, publicity, spreading (a message)
汽車	기차	Train
警官	경관	Police officer
老母	노모	Old mother
群衆	군중	Crowd, masses
處罰	처벌	Punishment
人生	인생	Human life
萬歲	만세	Hurrah, long live
全力	전력	Full strength, all power
指導者	지도자	Leader
結合	결합	Union, combination
復活	부활	Resurrection, revival
懺悔	참회	Confession, repentance
理想神	이상신	Ideal God
最後	최후	The end, final moment
民衆	민중	The masses, the people
勞役	노역	Toil, hard labor
探究	탐구	Quest, inquiry, search
創造者	창조자	Creator
奇蹟	기적	Miracle
革命魂	혁명혼	Revolutionary spirit
反逆性	반역성	Rebelliousness, treasonous nature
日記	일기	Diary
作者	작자	Author, writer
同情者	동정자	Sympathizer
矛盾	모순	Contradiction
個人主義者	개인주의자	Individualist
貴族趣味	귀족취미	Aristocratic taste/hobby
長篇	장편	Long novel/work
思想	사상	Thought, idea, ideology
賤民	천민	Lowly people, outcasts
大集	대집	Large gathering, assembly
脚下	각하	Beneath one's feet, looking down on
權威	권위	Authority
許得	허득	To obtain permission/recognition (less common)
下流階級	하류계급	Lower class
洗鍊	세련	Refinement, polish
無知	무지	Ignorance
長久	장구	Long time, eternity
半生	반생	Half a lifetime
明瞭	명료	Clarity, distinctness
本源	본원	Origin, source
一線	일선	Single line, forefront
視力	시력	Eyesight, vision (here metaphorical for focus)
馬車	마차	Carriage
時間	시간	Time, hour
勞動問題	노동문제	Labor problem/issue
論文	논문	Thesis, article, paper
雜誌	잡지	Magazine, journal
依賴	의뢰	Request, commission
一切	일체	All, entirely, whatsoever
中流階級	중류계급	Middle class
歷史家	역사가	Historian
病身	병신	Cripple, disabled person (offensive term)
傷處	상처	Wound, scar
누더기	누더기	Rags, tatters
人間	인간	Human being, humanity
敎養	교양	Culture, refinement, education
特採	특채	Distinctive feature, special color (literary)
現象	현상	Phenomenon
顚倒	전도	Overturning, reversal
産業革命	산업혁명	Industrial Revolution
社會主義	사회주의	Socialism
改造	개조	Reform, remodeling, reorganization
考察	고찰	Consideration, examination
世界	세계	World
煩惱	번뇌	Worldly desires, suffering, anguish
便	편	Side, party
鬪爭	투쟁	Struggle, fight
根本	근본	Root, basis, foundation
心靈改造	심령개조	Spiritual reform/reconstruction
樣式改造	양식개조	Structural reform/remodeling
宗教	종교	Religion
信仰	신앙	Faith, belief
人道的	인도적	Humanitarian
精神	정신	Spirit, mind, mentality
行進	행진	March, procession
賃金	임금	Wages
成績	성적	Results, performance, record
不良	불량	Poor, bad, defective
進步	진보	Progress, advance
大陸	대륙	Continent
民族憎惡	민족증오	Ethnic hatred
政黨	정당	Political party
團體	단체	Group, organization
團員	단원	Member (of a group)
暗殺	암살	Assassination
征服	정복	Conquest, subjugation
信念	신념	Belief, conviction
續	속	Continued
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제65호
발행일	1926년 01월 01일
기사제목	無産作家와 無産作品
필자	尙火
기사형태	문예평론

無産作家와 無産作品
						尙火
-이것은 紹介로보담도 다만 讀物 턱으로 보기 바람니다.-

현대 작가라고만 하여도 그 수는 限量이 업다. 그리고 또는 그들의 현대에서 영향된 환경도 다 각기 다를 것이다. 만일 상세한 통계로 그들이 엇던 환경에서 생성이 된 가를 분류만 할 수 잇다면 그것은 아마도 無用한 事業이 아닐 것이다. 현대와 가튼 시대에서 유산 계급에 나서 질서 잇는 학교 교육을 바든 예술가와 무산계급에 나서 눈물과 땀 속에서 아름다운 心靈을 가지게 된 그 예술가와의 차별로 말미암아 현대의 사회 諸相이 또는 인생 意義가 얼마나 틀리는 각도로 표현이 될 것인가. 그것은 반다시 고찰하지 안을 수 업는 한 가지의 사업이겟스나 지금은 시간도 識量도 그만큼 가지지 못하얏다. 몃 가지 생각나는 대로 여러 작가들 가운데서 먼저 格別하게 근대 혹은 현대 무산계급 작가의 特調을 가진 작가 몃 사람과 다음에 무산계급을 주제로 한 작품을 略說하려고 한다. 以下에 쓰랴는 4작가 가온데서 「조지·끼씽」만은 年代로 보아도 다른 작가 보담 오래 전 사람이다. 그는 1857년에 나서 1903년에 죽엇다. 그러나 다름 작가들은 아즉도 현대에 생존하얏다. 물론 살아 잇대도 그들의 왕성한 창작력은 다- 지나갓다. 만일 신시대를 대표할만한 신작가를 요구한다면 그는 必然한 일이나 그것은 여긔서 빼기로 하얏다.

作家
「댄말크」의 首府인 「코팽하갱」 「포리치캔」의 신문사 편집실에서 니러난 이야기다.＜120＞
어느날 청년 한 사람이 原稿한 묵검을 가지고 편집실 안으로들어왓다. 室內에는 편집 기자인 「애드와드·부란대스」가 잇섯다. 아모러한 기자들의 慣例로 그 원고내용을 자세히 보지도 안코 넘어 長遑하다는 구실로 거절하려고 하얏다. 하나 참아 그 말을 입 밧게 내지 못한 것은 그 청년의 얼골을 한 번 것 더 본 때문이엇다. 그때끗 그 「포리치캔」新聞社를 드나들든 사람 가온데서 그러케도 비참한 姿態를 그러케도 쇠약한 사람이 온 일이 업섯슬 것이다. 그러케도 파려지고 햇슥해진 얼골의 표정에는 말 못할 무엇이 그래도 감초여 잇섯다. 유리窓 뒤에서 갓가히 보이는 바다와 가튼 그 눈동자가 까닭도 업시 「부란대스」의 마음을 끄은 것이엇다. 그래서 「부란대스」는 그 원고를 집으로 가저가서 읽기를 비롯하자 等閑하고 냉정하얏든 자신을 혼자 속으로 叱辱을 하얏다. 웨 그러냐하면 그 작품에 주인공 가튼 졂은 천재는 먹을래야 먹을 것이 업서 심신이 共疲가 되여 잇슬 때이엇슴으로 거긔서 그는 처음 보는 작가의 주소 쓰인 봉투에 10크오내 지폐를 너헛서 빨리 붓치고 다시 그 글을 읽고 잇슬 때에 그 청년이 왓든 것이다. 그 돈을 밧고 엇더케 반가웟든지 밋칠 번이나 하엿다고 하든 것이엇다. 그럴 것이다. 그 만한 금액은 그 주인공이 처음 가저 보는 만흔 돈이엇스니까.
그 날 밤에 「부란대스」가 「수웨댄」의 비평가 「아키새르·룬대갈드」를 맛나 이상한 일홈도 업는 청년 작가의 작품에 자기의 감동된 것을 이야기하엿다. 『그건 다못 文才가 잇서 그럼이 아니라 영위 목구멍을 쥐여짜는 듯한 深刻味가 잇서 말이다. 말하자면」 『떠스토이애프스키」와 가튼 그런 무슨 힘이 잇단 말이다...』 이 말에 「룬대인드」가 『응 참으로 그러케 굉장한 것이든가! 그래 表題는 무엇이던지?』 무럿다. 「표제는 “The Hunger"(飢餓)이고 作者는 “Kunut Homsen" 「쿠누트·함즌」이란 사람이라』고 하엿다.
1920년 가을에 「수웨댄」왕에게 「노벨」문학상을 바든 諾威의 현대 작가 「쿠누트·함존」은 異國 댄말크」에서 비로소 발견이 된 것이엇다. 그의 작품 「방랑자」“The Wanderer"나 또 「飢餓」의 주인공과 가티 그는 赤身空拳의 무산자로서 위대한 예술가로 발견이 된 것이엇다. 이리하야 그는 「부란대스」의 호의로 처녀작 「飢餓」를 「코팽하갱」에서 가장 新思想을 대표한다든 "New Soil"「新士」란 잡지에 게재하게 되엿다. 그것은 188년경 「함즌」이가 극도의 절망으로 米國에서 도라와 「댄말크」를 석달 동안이나 방황할 때이엇다.＜121＞

영국에 “The House of Cobweb" (거미줄 집)이란 단편이 잇다. 이상한 청년이 역시 이상한 성격과 생활 철학을 가진 청년에게 거미줄 투성이가 된 다 뿌서진 집 방을 빌리려고하는 대서 이야기가 시작된 것이다. 빌리랴는 청년이 그 전 하숙방에서 한 시간 전에 잠은 깻서도 아즉 누은 채 이런 생각을 하고 잇다. 시절은 6월 달 어느 아침 여섯시 엿다. 壁線紙로 빗초이는 아침해비치 조희 우에다 꼿 그림자를 그리는 듯하얏다. 그것은 엇던 식물 학자라도 한아 모를 야릇한 꼿 뿐이엇스나 그는 다맛 부드럽게 흘러 나리는 녀름 해살에서 꼿밧이라든들판이라든 풋나무 울타리 가튼 것을 연상만하고 잇섯다. 『아모래두 석 달 동안은 될텐대 엇재 지나갈까.- 한 週日에 15쉴링식으로야 방셰 밥갑 빨래싹- 엇재 살아 나가나. 그러면 이 집을 떠날까. 실상인즉 이것두 奢侈는 아니지마는 예서야 아모리 절약을 한대두 25쉴링으로는 살아날 수 업지... 게다가 이번 작품은 석 달 동안 써야 할테지. 만일 그래두 못 쓴다면 목 매 죽어도 주타. 그러면 出版商을 맛나야 할텐데- 그 때까지 내 할 일은 가만이 드러 안저서 이 작품을 물고 너흘 것 뿐이다. 녀름 쳘이 되여셔 萬幸이다. 난로가 쓸 대 업다.고요만하고 해ㅅ살만 비초이는 구석이면 아모러한 대라도 괜찬타. 대채 이 바닥에서는 방셰와 밥갑 얼러서 한 주일에 15쉴링 쯤 해 주는 대는 업나. 팔자소관이다. 한 번 쏘대 보자』
이리하야 용하게 차진 것이 거미줄 집이엇다. 『나는 꼭 참말로 함니다. 내가 조곰 반즈러하게 차렷지마는 가진 돈은 몃 푼 못 됨니다. 그나마라도 석 달 동안을 먹고 살랴구 해요. 그것은 내가 지금 책을 지으니 그것만 다 되여서 판다면 아모 일이 업슬 테지요 마는 그게 아모래도 석 달 동안은 써야 할 것임니다. 그러기에 고요만 하다면 엇던 방이라두 괜챤슴니다. 엇드시우 빌려 주실테요』
이 말을 듯든 사람의 얼골에 차즘 놀나는 기운이 더하여 첫다. 눈동자가 두려워하는 動靜 이엇다. 그리자 휘파람이나 불려는 듯이 입설을 뽀족하게 모후면서 『책을요- 당신- 당신은 책을 쓰신다구요! 그러면 당신은 文士이심니까...』『애- 쪼처 내는 판임니까. 하지만 동행을 하랴거든 가난한 사람끼리 가란 말도 잇습지요!』＜122＞『그러면 「죤손」박사 가트신 「쵀터톤」가트신...아- 니 「쵀터톤」의 임종 때와 가트실량 반이 아니실 줄은 밋슴니다마는...그러면 「골드스미트」가트신!』 『아모래튼 「올리버」의 명망을 반 쯤은 가젓슴니다. 「골드 스미트」가 아니라 나는 「골드솔프」니까요』 이래서 방은 빌리게 되얏다. 그럭저럭 석 달 동안 살 원고가 冊肆에서 冊肆로 도라다니든 끄테 엇던 出版會에서 50폰드에 매수하랴는 편지를 바덧는데 그 때는 正月의 어느 달이엇다. 그 날은 「골드솔프」의 文壇的 역사에 나저 바리지 못할 그하로ㅅ날이엿다. 이리하야 이 작가는 그 다음 달에 「런돈」으로 漫遊를 하얏다.
참으로 이 작가만큼 貧窮과 싸우고 貧窮 그것을 연상케하는 작가도 듬을 것이다. 그는 생활의 거의를 빈궁에서만 사라난 無産者이엿다. 다못 後半生의 短期는 먹고 지날만 햇섯스나 그것도 그리 충분한 것은 아니엿다. 그리면서도 그는 超人主義者요 貴族主義者이엇다. 그래서 언데까지든지 貧窮이란 것을 미워하얏다. 만일 경우만 容認햇드면 엇던 귀족적 향락을하엿슬런지. 또는 조곰만 더 勞働하얏드면 위연만한 생활이야 못하얏슬까. 그러치 만은 게름을 부리면서 항상 실어하는 빈궁에 끄을리고 잇섯다. 거긔에서 그의 빈궁에 대한 暗昧와 傷*과 반항이 느-ㄹ 잇게 된 것이엇다. 이럼으로 어느 비평가는 그를 빈궁을 향락하면서 살든 작가라고 하얏다. 그러면 이 작가는 누궐까. 英國의 「조-지·기씽」이다. 19세기 발 英國文壇에서 現實主義派의 雄將이든 그 작가이엇다.

그는 1872년 3월에 諾威에서 낫다. 그는 「스트린드벌그」와 가튼 女婢의 아들이엇다. 어머니는 그를 양육할 수 업서 어느 산촌 農家에 주어 바렷다. 거긔서 참혹하든 그의 생활이 「거대한 飢餓」라든지 또는 다른 작품에 여실하게 猫現이 되엿다. 『그의 生母 이야기를 여러 사람이 할 때마다 웨 그들은 그 애를 (불상한 자식이다!) 하느냐. 동무들이 골이 나면 웨 그를 (애비도 업는 자식!)이라고 욕질을 하얏스며 웃섯느냐. 그러면서도 그 「필」이란 애는 마음세 됴흔 얼굼백이 「트로앤」의 妻를 어머니라고 불럿고 또 그 여자의 호랑이 가튼 가장은 아버지＜123＞라고 불럿다. 이리하야 대정깐에서 매질을 할 때도 쪽배로 바다에 고기 잡으려 갈 때도 식히는 대로 그들의 말을 쪼첫다. 그랫서 그의 유년 시대는 웃는 것을 죄악이라고 생각한 듯한 그런 村民 속에서 지낫다. 이 村民들은 뿌리 박힌 빈궁과 讚美나 부르기와 지옥의 두려움에만 마음이 다- 빼앗겨저서 어둠 침침한 바다 안개와 가티 陰鬱한 사람들이엇다라고 “The Great Hunger." (거대한 飢餓)에 주인공 「필」의 生歷을 이러케 썻다.
그는 「포르드」에서 고기를 잡엇다. 녀름은 들에서 염소와 소를 먹엿다. 학교는 한 주일에 한 번식- 일요일에만 교회를 가게 되엿다. 山村 小學校를 처음 갈 때는 그가 열 다섯 살 이엇는데 그 때야 비로소 문학이니 詩니 하는 것이 現世에 잇는 줄 안 것이엇다. 그 학교들 맛치자 그는 어느 富農의 庸人이 되엿스나 공부를 하려는 마음이 끈허지지 안헛다. 그리다가 엇재 허락을 어더서 어느 하사관이 경영하든 사립 학교에 입학하얏다. 거긔서는 月謝 衣服 가튼 것을 줌으로 3년 동안이나 잇섯다. 그의 마음에는 어대든지 돈 안드는 교육이면 어대서든지 지식을 어드려고하얏다. 그 때 가티 영어를 배우든 「호탤」문직이가 살인죄로 入獄 이 되얏다. 그 「모댈」이 그의 소설에 나온 것이다. 그리고 公開 講義 가튼 것이 잇스면 엇재섯든지 다니든 판에 「핼만방」과 「쿠누트·함즌」의 강연이 그에게 특별한 인상을 주엇다. 그런데 그 때 그의 희망으로 말하면 작그만한 地主나 또는 軍曹가 되려고만하엿다. 웨 그러냐하면 軍曹만 되야 전쟁만 나면 장관의 지위까지도 승진할 기회가 잇스니까. 그러나 이제는 이 따위 野心이 다 사라지고 그는 다못 詩人이 되랴는 焦願을 가지게 되얏섯다.
이러케 夢想을 하든 것이 현실 苦에 부듸치자 그만 그는 아름다운 詩歌의 꿈을 보고 잇슬 수 업섯다. 생활의 박해가 아모 용서업시 드러 밀엇다. 거긔서 그는 하사관의 학교을 나오면서 장사를 해서 그 다음 해까지에 여러 직업을 격것다. 「포로트」群島에서 어부 노릇도 하고 여긔 저긔서 人夫 짓도 하얏다. 裁縫機商의 외교원도 하얏고 무역 회사의 서기도 하얏다. 회사에 다닐 때는 불어 文典을 연구하더니 詩를 쓰느니 밤에는 희곡이니 소설을 각색하려고 稿案을하느니 하다가 그 이튼날 집무도 못하게스리 두통으로 알튼 일이 예사이엇다. 그래서 그가 쓰는 장부란 것은 우습고도 불상하게 볼만큼 지저분한 먹투성이엇다.
현대 諾威文壇에서 「쿠누트·함즌」과 병립한 작가 「요한·보앨」이야 말로 이런 과거를 가진 의지의 작가이다.＜124＞

그가 아홉 살 때는 洋靴修善商의 雇奴이엇다. 주인은 지극하게도 잔인한 사람이엇다. 이 작가는 이러케 말하얏다. 「나는 어느 날 물을 끄리다가 보시기를 떠러 트려서 손을 만히 닷첫다. 그 날 밤에 그만 그 집을 다러 나왓슴으로 한 아버지에게 꾸중을 듯고 그 다음에 또 漆 장사의 종놈이 되얏다」고. 그러나 그는 거긔도 오래도록 잇지 못하얏다. 이 때 부터도 그의 心靈은 송도리재 「漂浪性」에게 빼앗겻든 것이다. 彫刻師의 제자도 되얏다. 남의 집 정원 직이도 되엿다. 그리다가 한참 동안 정착이 되기는 「뽈가」로 다니는 汽船에서 廚夫 노릇을 한 때이엇다. 인쇄된 문자에 대한 호기심에 끄을려서 열 여섯살 되는 소년의 몸으로 「카잔」의 대학촌에 와 보앗다. 그러자 「이런 아름다운 것을 無料로 배와 보자」는 말래야 말 수 업는 욕망이 그로 하야곰 대학을 방문하게 하엿다. 그러나 얼마나 참혹한 虛僞인가. 「無料 敎授란 것이 학교 규칙에는 절대로 업다」는 그 頑冥으로 말미암아 귀여운 그의 希願은 헛 꿈이 되고 만 것이다. 有産과 無産으로 교육의 균등이 차별이 되얏다. 그것으로 사회의 불합리한 것이 얼마 만큼인 것을 알 것이다. 그러케 잇지 못할 사회의 불합리가 얼마만치나 학대 바든 이 소년의 가슴을 상해 섯슬 것이며 썩혓슬 것인가. 절망된 그 소년은 그만 두어 달 뒤에 어느 洞里에서 「팡」장사가 되얏다. 한 달에 4원이라는 料給으로 그는 음식을 먹으면서 더럽고 숨 막히는 집 마루턱 방에서 살앗다. 「팡장사 집에서 「팡」을 구어 주고 잇슬 그때의 내 생활은 일생 가온대서 가장 고통스럽든 2년인 것을 생각하면 얼만큼이나 비참한 인상을 가진 듯한 생활이엇다」고 어느 단편에 말하얏다.
天井에는 끄으름 거미줄이 꽉 끼엿다. 곳 내려 안즐 듯한 쳔정 미테서 장군 가튼 여섯 놈이 그 나무 판자울이 속에서 살엇다. 밤이 되면 진흙과 곰팡 투성인 벽 사이에 끼엿다. 일어나기는 새벽 다섯시엇다. 이러니 저러니 할 동안에 여섯 시가 된다. 그려면 또 일을 시작한다. 일이란 것은 다른 게 아니라 우리가 자는 동안에 만드러 둔 가루로 먼 동이 튼 때 부터 밤 아홉시나 열시나까지 「테불」에 기대 선채 하로 종일 「팡」을 굽게스리 반죽을 익이는 것이다. 우리는 각끔 왼 몸이 저리는 것을 업새려고 줄곳 허리와 등을 압 뒤로 흔들기도하고 틀기도 해야만 한다. 괴물과＜125＞ 가튼 크다란 가마솟이 이글이글한 불꼿을 큰 입을 버리듯이 버리고 더운 김을 우리에게 뿜는다. 그리고 그 엽흐로 뚤린 바람이 드나듯는 구멍 두개가 둥글게 뜬 눈깔 가티 끗도 업시하는 우리의 일을 언제든지 살피고 잇다」 「이러케 우리는 밀가루와 몬지와 발바닥에 무겁게 달여 다니는 진흙과 숨막히는 더운 김 속에서 날마다 가루를 익이고 「비스캐트」를 만들고 「팡」을 굽기에 우리의 땀을 짜 낸 것이다. 우리는 이런 일이 말 못하게스리 미웟다. 그래 그럼인지 우리는 손수 만든 「팡」은 먹지 못하고 그런 향긋한 것 보담도 개떡 가튼 것만 먹고 살엇다.
居處가 흉악하엿고 음식이 흉악하엿다. 그의 건강은 더 오래도록 거긔에 잇지 못하게 하얏다. 이래서 그는 埠頭人夫로 되얏다가 그 이튼날은 樵夫가 되얏다가 하얏다. 이러케 온 「러시아」를 떠도라 다녓다. 그는 주머니에 한 『코패크』만 잇서도 책과 신문을 삿서 그날 밤이 새도록 읽엇다. 녀름이면 들판에 자고 겨울이면 빈 집이나 옹굴에서 잣다. 1889년 그가 수물한살 때 자살까지 하려고 흉부를 쏘앗스나 죽지를 안헛다. 이러케 嘗苦를 하든 그야말로 드듸여 世間 道德이란 띄끌 가티 보고 무엇에든 구속되지 안는 自由魂으로 사회의 不合理를 향하야 선전을 하든 작가 無産 階級의 예술가의 豪誇를 영원히 전할 「막심·골키」엿다.

作品

「飢餓」나 「放浪者」에 나온 無産者는 거의 다 배속이 편한 地下人들이다. 兩篇의 주인공은 다 소유한 것이 업슴으로 문명 사회에서 抛棄가 되야 먹는 듯 마는 듯한 꼴로 輝遑한 도시를 헤맨다. 더군다나 「飢餓」의 주인공은 몃칠 동안이나 굶엇다. 그는 神明을 저주하면서 개 먹인다는 핑계로 고기 집에서 뼉다구를 어더 온다. 옷자락 미테다 그것을 감초어 가지고 남의 집 문간 뒤에서 뜨더 먹어 보앗스나 진이 나게스리 주린 五腸이 밧지를 안핫다. 그래서  구토를 하얏다. 눈에서 눈물이 쏘다젓다. 왼 몸이 부르를 떨렷다. 견듸다 못해서 필경은 나무껍질를 씹어 잠간 동안 허기를 니젓다. 그 나무 껍질 맛이 똑똑한 감각으로 보엿다. 배곱흔 心理 감각을 잇던 심리학자라도 이러케 심각하게 연구한 사람이 업슬 것이다. 그는 다못 창자 빈 것이 신경과 감각을 못 견대게 구는 그 고통의 낫낫츨 과학자의 細心으로 실험만 할 뿐이다. 그 고통을 주는 빈 창자를 사회의 세포가 웨 가지지 안흔 것인가 함에는 아모러한＜126＞ 관심과 흥미를 갓지 안핫다. 거긔서는 오즉 엇던 주린 사람의 臨床日誌를 잇는 대로 보일 것 뿐이다. 사회 조직이 엇더하단 것이 이 사람과 무슨 교섭이 잇스랴. 그럼으로 이 작품에는 머리도 끗도 업다. 그러다가 주인공을 「크리스촤늬」市中으로 도라만 다니게만 함이 무엇하든지 작가는 섭섭하게도 까지 굼주린 주인공에게 『집집마다의 들창에 눈부시게도 밝은 「크리스촤늬」여 잘 잇거라』라고 시키고 『英國으로 가는 배에 水夫가 되여 갓다』고 하얏다.
한데 이것은 작가의 경향을 생각해 보면 곳 해결이 될 것이다. 대개 諾威 국민성에는 2種의 전형이 잇다. 한아는 해적 시대의 유전성으로 항상 새로운 동경을 찻고 무엇인지 외부에서 抑壓하려는 것에 반항을 해서 永久 流轉의 생활을 하려 한다. 이럼으로 探檢者도 되고 水夫도 되고 아모게라도 된다. 말하자면 절대 자유를 찻는 것이다. 남아지 한아는 출생한 국토에 달라 부터서 祖先에게서 바든 신성한 大地를 더욱더 耕堀하려는 것이다. 「함존」의 작품은 그 두 가지 경향이 전기 후기로 난호여 보이는대 「飢餓」라든 「放浪者」라든 「牧羊神」이란 것은 다- 漂迫者의 향락을 중심으로 한 것이다. 그것은 자신의 체험을 어느 부분까지 採用햇슴으로- 곳 無産者에겐 문명 都會에서 코기럭기 만한 돈버리에 깐작깐작하기 보담 차라리 한 푼 업시라도 맘대로 다니는 것이 그들의 本望이기 때문이다. 그럼으로 그들이 無産者인 것은 그런 變氣性으로 말미암아 자유롭게 구원이 되는 셈이다. 물론 이런 心理를 가진 작품이 현대의 계급 투쟁을 주제로 한 것과 전혀 질이 다른 것은 잔말을 할 것이 아니다.

「골키」의 「마킬·츄드라」의 주인공은 말햇다. 『자-들어봐. 쉬흔여들 되는 오늘까지 가는 가즌 것을 만히 보앗다. 내가 안가본 츤이라곤 업슬테야. 그려는 것이 내가 살아 가는 방법이라네. 다녀라 다녀라. 그러면 왼갓 것이 다 보인다. 한곤대 지룩하게 잇서선 못써. 버릇 만들면 아모게라두 다- 못쓴다. 그러니 사람의 세상을 실찬케 녀길라면 달마다 가튼 생활은 치어 버리고 거저 빙빙 도라 다녀라. 꼭 밤과 낫이 영원히 다름박질을 하는게나 맛찬가지고 말이야...」 「고놔로프」가 말을 닛는다. 여보게. 난 세상을 도라 다니기로 작정을 햇네. 뭔지 두 모르지만＜127＞ 세상에는 느일 새 것이 잇서. 아모 것도 생각지 마러라. -바람이 불어 사람의 마음에 잡틔를 다 씰어 준다는데 그래. 맘대로다. 속편하다. -누구 한아 괴롭게 구는게 업구 배가 시장하면 거긔 쉬면서 이틀 동안 돈버리를 하지. 일터 돈 벌일이 업대두 도라만 다니면 아모나 줄테지. 이래서 여려곤대 첨 보는 구경도 할 수 잇다는 게지』
預言者의 어머니라고 하는 「어머니」의 주인공을 보아라. 노동자이오 사회주의자의 자식 「파웰」이 십자가의 순교자처럼 西伯利亞로 放逐이 된 뒤 夫人의 心靈이 비로소 진리의 광명을 보게 되얏다. 『이 地球는 넘어 만흔 부정과 비애를 운반하기에 염증이 낫다. 그래서는 사람의 가슴에서 도다 오르는  새 태양이 보고저워 남몰래 떨고 잇다』 그 부인은 업는 아들의 할 일을 하려 - 이웃 마을로 가서 『착한 말을 선전하려고 - 기차를 타려 할 때에 警官에서 잡혓다. 이제는 그만이라고 생각한 그 老母는 군중에게 이러케 불으지젓다. 『들어 보시요. 저들은 내 아들이며 당신 동두들이 여러분에게 진리를 일러 드리려고 한다고 그들을 처벌 햇슴니다. 우리는 勞働으로 말미암아 다- 죽어 감니다. 배곱흐고 치위로 못 견대고 잇슴니다. 우리는 언제든지 흙탕 속에 잠겨 잇슴니다. 그래서도 언제든지 不正한 속에 잇슴니다. 우리 인생은 죽음이 되고 어둔 밤이 되얏슴니다』 『마님 만세』라고 한 사람이 떠드럿다. 그리자 警官이 그 부인의 기슴을 줴질러서 부인은 비틀 거리다가 의자 우에 넘어 젓서도 또 불으지젓다. 『여러분 여러분의 모든 全力을 한 사람의 지도자 미테다 결합을 식혀야만 됨니다』 警官의 붉고 억센 큰 손이 이번에는 부인의 목을 줴질럿슴으로 부인은 뒤 꼭지를 벽에다 부듸쳣다. 『입 닷처 비러먹든 늙은 년!』하얏다. 이러케 警官이 욕질을 하자 부인의 눈은 더 크게 뜨면서 반들반들 하얏다. 그리고 턱을 바르르 떨면서 『뉘가 復活한 사람을 죽일 수 잇느냐』고 부르지졋다. 警官은 더욱 험상스러위지며 이번에는 바로 얼골을 내려 갈겻다. 그리자 검붉은 물이 그 부인의 눈을 캉캄하게 하면서 입으로 피가 좔좔 흘늟�다. 『올흔 사람을 빠저 죽이는 것은 피가 아니다...』고 老母는 부러지즈면서 힘을 일코 비틀거리다가 문득 群衆의 눈들이 사납게 번들거림을 보앗다. 더욱은 그 夫人의 친히 아는 눈이.
또 『...아모러케 크게 피바다를 만든대도 저들에게는 진리가 잡히지 안는다...』고 夫人이 말을 맛치자 警官이 또 몹시 목을 줴질럿다. 그 부인이 깨르깨르하는 목에서 겨오 가늘게 『불상한 사람들』이라고 할 때 한 사람이 깁흔＜128＞ 한숨으로 부인에게 대답을 하얏다.
『懺悔』에서는 神을 찻다가 크리스트 神에 절망을 하고 노동자 속으로 드러가 고생을 하다가 오즉 한아일 자기의 理想神을 최후에 민중에게서 발견한 「맛츠뵈-」가 잇다.
『民衆이여 네야 말로 나의 神이다. 너의들의 번거로운 勞役인 탐구 속에서 너의 아름다운 心靈을 만드럿다. 모든 神의 創造者인 너의들이야말로 곳 나의 神이다. 너의들 말고는  땅우에 다른 신은 한아라도 두지말게 하여라. 웨 그러냐하면 너의들이야말로 기적의 창조자인 오죽 한아인 神이니까』

이 만한 革命魂과 反逆性은 남아지 3 작가에선 못 볼 것이다. 그런대 이샹한 것은 「핸러·라이크로프트 日記」作者로 「新俱樂部街」 作者로 「現世地獄」의 동정자라고 부르는 「조지·기씽」이란 작가이다. 그는 자기가 그러케도 작품은 빈궁을 주제로 햇슴에도 불구하고 마음 속까지 빈민을 실혀 햇슴은 엇던 모순일까. 이상한 게 아니다. 그는 個人主義者엿고 귀족 취미를 그리워하든 가난한 사람인 까닭이다. 그는 장편 「데모스」“Demos"로 「데모크라시」의 體体를 思想한 것이다. 「데모크라시」란 것은 천민의 大集에 지나지 안는다. 思想이며 예술은 그 천민을 脚下에 두고 볼 권위를 許得한 듯이 생각하엿다. 그래서 貧民은하류 계급은 취미도 지식도 한 번 세련이 못된 무지의 떼다. 자기는 장구한 반생을 더 그런 계급과 살아 왓슴으로 갑절 명료하게 그들의 無知를 보앗다고 생각하얏다. 「꼴키」의 「懺悔」에 잇는 「맛츠뵈-」와 여긔서 반대되는 것을 발견한 것이다. 그러면 이 無知의 本源이 어대 잇느냐. 「기씽」은 「함즌」과 가티 이런 一線으로 시력을 모라 넛는 흥미를 갓지 안핫다. 「런돈」가튼 都會를 마차로 다닐 것은 생각도 못하얏다. 그는 너머도 가난햇섯슴으로 시간이 드는 것도 발이 부르틈도 헤아리지 안코 열두 시간 열다섯 시간이나 거러 다녓다고 「라이크로프트 日記」에서 말하얏다. 그는 그의 후반생에 노동 문제에 대한 논문을 써 달라는 엇던 잡지의 의뢰를 바덧슬 때 『나는 이제 빈민 생활의 문제 가튼 것은 일체 흥미가 나지 안는다』고까지 하얏다. 그러나 그는 「中流 계급의 역사가」라고 불릴 만큼 「이 오늬 안 海畔에서」 속에 쓴 것처럼 『노동과 실업슨＜129＞ 말로 말미암아 병신이 된다 십 히 상처 투성이가 된 손과 오래도록 빗질을 니저 버린 리숫과 아모라도 옷으로는 보지 못할 더럽고 해여진 누덕이를 입은 중나희나 된 안악네의 그 사람다워 뵈지 안는... 비참한 꼴은 니저바리 지 못하얏다. 다못 너머나 오래도록 그ㅡ이 길음도 하든 빈궁과 不幸이 언젠지도 몰래 그로 하야곰 모든 인간에 대하야 알 수 업는 시들픈 마음을 가지게 하는 동시에 굿센 교양을 가진 그는 이른바 군중의 무지 속에까지 내려가서 그 속에 뒤석기고만 말고 그런 취미를 가지지 못한 것이다.

「요한· 보앨」로 말하면 또 다른 特採가 잇다. 그는 오래도록 무산계급에 자라서 학대 밧는 그 계급의 苦勞를 맛엇다. 하나 그는 그 현상을 顚倒식힘에 「꼴키」와 가티 산업 혁명과 사회주의로 사회를 개조하려고 안햇다. 그는 학대 밧는 편의 불합리를 考察한 동시에 그 계급 자신에게도 또 구원하여야만 할 그 無知를 발견하얏다. 세계의 번뇌란 것은 말할 것도 업시 이 두 편의 무지와 무지와의 투쟁에서 나는 것이다. 그것은 지식 문제가 근본이 됨으로 當迫된 사회 개조는 먼첨 心靈 改造에 잇고 다음이 樣式 改造일 것이라고 그가 생각하얏다. 그 心靈의 改造를 종교의 신앙에 가저 오랴든 것이 곳 「거대한 飢餓」이고 人道적 정신에서 행진을 하랴든 것이 “The face of the World" (世界의 얼골) 이나 또는 ”Our Kingdom" (우리 나라) 이다. 『어머님 당신은 학대 밧는 사람이 엇던 사람들인지를 아심니까. 그것은 학대 밧는 사람을 학대하게스리 밧는 사람 우에 업히려고 하는 그 사람들을 가르친 것임니다. 노동자가 흔이 빗산 임금을 바들 때에는 엇덧슴니까. 그들의 일하는 성적은 더욱 不良합니다. 우리가 도라 다니는 세상을 보고서 그 진보되여 가는 것을 자랑하시요! 대륙은 민족증오으로써 혼자 떠들고 있슴니다. 정당 내의 각 團体는 서로 미워하고 團員끼리 암살을 함니다. 그것은 내 혼자만 다른 단체 우에서 그 단체를 정복하려고 하기 때문임니다. 나는 그런 모든 것을 향하야 그것을 개조하려고 함니다. 이- 내가!』 하는 이 것이 「보앨」의 세계 개조의 신념이다.-續-＜130＞
＜120-130＞