잡지명	개벽 제65호
발행일	1926년 01월 01일
기사제목	沒落 (Decline/Fall)
필자	八峰 (P'al Pong)
기사형태	소설 (Fiction)

沒落
						八峰 (P'al Pong)
1

Although the door was shut tight, for some reason the space under her pillow felt cool, and feeling a chill as if her head were completely filled with wind, the wife pulled the blanket up again, covering her face completely. However, her two shoulders and the nape of her neck under the blanket still felt chilly, as if exposed to the wind. Turning this way and that, unable to overcome the persistent chill, the wife reached out from under the blanket, touched the towel wrapped around her head, and felt her forehead. Her head was still burning hot.
‘I must be seriously ill...’
Thinking this inwardly, the wife gathered strength in her upper body and tried to swallow the saliva in her mouth. Her tongue and gums were bone dry, without even a drop of saliva. Her nose was completely blocked, making breathing difficult, and as her head burned, her limbs and entire body felt hot too. The doctor had said it was a cold accompanied by body aches and left, but as the wife heard his words, she wondered if the cause of this illness wasn't just a cold or body aches, but if there might be a more serious underlying reason.
And now, feeling her head, she couldn't help but think so even more. She could clearly sense that her own symptoms were not ordinary.
‘No matter how I think about it, this is no ordinary illness... Although I have no energy, I still have some fortitude and wouldn't usually take to bed so easily, but this time I can't move an inch and am confined to bed! I’ve rarely experienced such severe fever or body aches... It must be a serious illness... this illness is—’ It must be because I’m old. It wasn't like this even last year, but now, inevitably having aged, my bones must have hardened and my circulation weakened.’
As the wife thought this, she suddenly felt sadness for this world. Wasn't she now just getting old, with no way to stop it? What happens when you get old? When you get old, like this, or even more helplessly, if you get sick just once, don't you lie unable to move and then go to the afterlife? When will that moment come for this body? Perhaps not sometime in the future, but right now, lying under this blanket, perhaps it will happen right here. As she thought this far, the wife's two eyes, sunken deep within their hollow sockets, became wet with tears.
The wife pushed the blanket down with one hand, covering only up to her chest, and moved her limbs, which felt stuck to the bedding, turning onto her left side. Outside in the darkness, the wind howled madly, rattling the main gate door whenever it blew past, and the paper covering the storm door behind the main hall whined—oong—oong. Each time, a bone-chilling cold wind seeped through the door cracks and the gaps left in the patched-up paper, crawling under the blanket and licking her skin, which felt hot as a ball of fire.
The wife's mind became blank again, her two eyes staring vacantly at the ceiling. The walls and door panels, which hadn't been freshly papered since winter began, showed their dirty and torn paper, harmonizing with the wife's complexion. The wife lowered her gaze again, scanning from the ceiling to the walls, from the walls to the floor. Before seeing the spittoon, medicine bowl, and pipe placed by her head, or the scattered tissues used for blowing her nose near the pillow, what caught the wife's eye was the sleeping face of her granddaughter, now just seven years old. Her mother had passed away from postpartum illness before the traditional twenty-one days (samch'ilil 三七日) after giving birth, and her father, a *yangban*'s son who indulged in dissipation, had been in prison for two years already. Thus P'ilsun, reaching an age where she should start understanding things, couldn't even clearly remember her parents' faces. Consequently, the fact that she, having met with misfortune through her parents, was growing up in her maternal grandmother's house was a significant reason that evoked pity in the wife daily, whenever she had a moment. <25>
Seeing the adorable face of P'ilsun sleeping peacefully beside her, her eyes lightly closed, the wife felt an urge to grab her and press her cheek against hers. Overcome by a poignant pity for the child's innocence, she couldn't bear the chill spreading through her chest. Her sunken eyes, lacking vitality, blinked weakly! Blinked! And then, as she always did, the wife thought again that even if this P'ilsun was, arguably, without a mother and father, she absolutely had to stay alive somehow, endure, see her grow up and get married, and only after seeing her settled could she die with her eyes closed. If she couldn't do that, she wouldn't be able to die with her eyes closed.
‘I need to get over this illness quickly...’
With a long sigh—hwiiyu—the wife muttered this under her breath. As she thought this, her already uncomfortable body felt even more stuck to the bed, unable to move an inch. Her upper and lower jaws felt stiff, her mouth was even drier, breathing was difficult, and swallowing even a drop of saliva became harder. The medicine—she had already been taking it for two days, and hadn't even paid for today's dose. In these times, just before the end of the twelfth lunar month and the New Year, it seemed unlikely they'd give medicine worth over one won on credit. How would she manage to get medicine even tomorrow? From neighboring houses, she could hear the sound of pounding rice cakes for the year-end, and the chatter of people returning from shopping, drifting over the fence. Forget rice cakes, she hadn't paid rent for three months, and her son was facing trouble from the landlord every day. What was she to do about this situation? Her husband (Yŏnggam 령감)—perhaps senile in his old age, or maybe it's the *yangban* way, who knows—had taken a young concubine (ch'ŏp 쳡) in the countryside late in life and was squandering their already dwindling assets. Far from contributing a penny to the Seoul household where his main wife lived, it would be fortunate if he didn't take away their meager belongings. Having taken in her motherless granddaughter with tears and sighs, raising her through difficult summers without sleep, her grown son, Sŏngch'il, heedless of his old mother's circumstances, chased his wife back to her parents' home just because she didn't suit his fancy, disregarding the family lineage and ethics of a *yangban* house. He himself just roamed around without a thought for his mother. What was she to do? Even so, until a couple of months ago, his monthly bank salary of sixty or seventy won was enough to barely scrape by until the next month after paying the ten won rent for their few family members. But what <26> kind of son, what kind of calculation had he learned, to quit that precious salary job? Now he's talking nonsense like doing manual labor, running off to a foreign country, like a dog or a pig. Isn't it pitiful? He says he was kicked out of the bank because his performance was poor and they told him to leave with his first-half bonus. But no matter how I think about it, since the son of Pak Tae-sin (박대신), a friend of my husband, is an executive at that bank, there's no way my son would have been kicked out. It's clear that darned fellow, acting all stiff-necked and pretending to know everything, ignoring his elders' words like farts, puffing out his nose, and especially lately, acting like a madman, talking incomprehensibly about some ideology (chuŭi 주의) this, traditional coats (turumagi 두루막이) that, and how this damned land must quickly collapse—it's obvious he fell out of favor with wealthy people because of that ideology, or whatever it is that ruins people. If a grown son had any sense, he wouldn't read such bad books and run wild thoughtlessly, without considering the hardship of his old mother who relies on him like a mountain... Still, if I, feeling frustrated for him, try to say even a word,
‘Mother, you don't know anything... why are you like this! People like you, soaked in a rotten life, should just wait for your time to pass and crawl along! What’s with all the nagging!’
he rebukes me sharply. Does he think no one is better than him? I should just hurry up and die, close my eyes, and forget all these sights. This wretched life—
Having thought this far, she suddenly saw P'ilsun sleeping beside her, snoring softly, "saek saek." The wife's nostrils flared a couple of times, and from her weary eyes, pearl-like tears poured down like rain, flowing onto the stained pillow. Unable to bear the wrenching pain, as if her intestines were being torn and her bones were collapsing joint by joint, the wife let out a choked sob, "Kkik-k." Perhaps trying to suppress the welling tears herself, she pulled the blanket over her face completely and sobbed, "Heuk heuk." The wife's two shoulders, and not just her shoulders but her entire body, thin and stiff like a bundle of sticks, began to tremble violently under the blanket like an aspen leaf. <27>

2

Perhaps an hour seemed to pass when the wife kicked off the blanket and, like someone waking from a terrible nightmare, opened her eyes wide, throwing her arms out over the blanket. The wife's forehead, wrapped in a towel, and not just her forehead but her entire body, was drenched in hot sweat. Her head ached even more than before, as if being pounded relentlessly with the end of a club. The fever spirit (yŏlsin 렬신) had fiercely attacked the wife's body.
Still lying down, the wife lifted her head slightly and began to untie the towel around it. Not only did she lack strength in her neck, but her fingers were stiff and wouldn't untie it easily. The wife dropped her head back onto the pillow several times after trying to lift it, then lifted it again, finally managing to untie the towel and wipe her forehead once with it. Then, this time, she took a narrow piece of old cloth lying by her head and tied it firmly around her head. Then she closed her eyes.
However, just as the mind of a person suffering from a fever works ceaselessly, the wife's mind, too, brought chaotic dreams whenever she closed her eyes even for a moment, and when she awoke, it produced rambling thoughts. Thus, the wife's mind could not find restful peace.
The night was quiet. Only the occasional sound of the wind rustling the door paper made the limbs of the awake person curl up. And so, the wife could not fall asleep as the long, long winter night passed three o'clock, and the sporadic crowing of roosters began to be heard from nearby places as well.
The wife managed to sit up, relieve herself, readjust P'ilsun's blanket, and then retied the strings of her own clothes. She then sat hunched, drawing her legs up, placed her palms on her knees, lowered her head, and rested her forehead upon them.
‘Surely I won't die, but how will I manage this household... P'ilsun needs to grow up quickly— The new year <28> approaches day by day, and things become increasingly uncertain, how pathetic...’
Before finishing her thought, a long sigh escaped the wife's lips. The only knowledge she possessed was the experiential knowledge gained from living for over fifty years in the society of the past—living within the corners of a house, as a woman, as the wife of a household. And now, the experiential knowledge of society, life, and existence accumulated over those fifty years, though certainly not insignificant, offered the wife no observation or answer regarding the changes in the state of Korean society today, nor the direction in which this society was sliding. However, it did make her realize, albeit vaguely and uncertainly, that the gap between herself and this world had widened dramatically, to the point where her experiential knowledge could no longer measure or understand this era. If "realize" is not the right word, then it made her *feel* that way. And whenever she felt that she and the world in which she was now sustaining her aging body were completely mismatched, disparate things—things that could never mutually agree—the wife invariably experienced boundless and inexplicable, heart-wrenching sorrow.
Just ten years ago, though not much, there was fertile land (okt'o 沃土) before their gate in the countryside, so they had no worries about food. There were dependents under their care, and besides the dependents, distant relatives, wives who couldn't just eat free meals and thus helped with all sorts of chores. Although they didn't live in great wealth, they weren't destitute. But then, somehow, while the household members were unaware, it began to disappear, one penny, two pennies at a time. The mulberry field went, the only small mountain plot went, the field in the front village and the rice paddy before the gate went. Yet, the wife, and of course her husband (Yŏnggam 령감), were oblivious to the reason why these fields and paddies had to be sold.
‘Well, don't we have to send money to the son in Japan? And we need to repay the three hundred won borrowed from Scholar Pak the month before last, with interest... And we need money for household expenses too!’
After selling a plot of land, the husband would say this to the wife. But the next time he sold another plot, they couldn't remember where the money from the previous sale had gone. That's how much the same <29> uncomprehended circumstances drove them. And so, dwindling without them noticing when, the harvest that used to yield over a hundred *sŏk* (석, a unit of volume) was reduced by more than half.
One day, the husband, drunk but with a serious expression, said,
‘My dear, there's nothing we can do now. The child in Japan will graduate the year after next, but what good is graduating... So, after I find him a place in some bank in Seoul, you, the daughter-in-law, and the child, and also that little one—P'ilsun—can move to Seoul and live frugally, even in a rented house (setchip 세ㅅ집), wouldn't that be nice? Uh—I still have some land, and since it's my lifeline now, I can't sell it, so I'll stay here and find a woman (kyĕjip 게집) to look after me...’
At that time, the wife wanted to make a scene, saying it was wrong for him to stay behind here, and moreover, to get a woman. But thinking on the other hand, her husband wasn't as old as she was, so getting a woman at this point wouldn't be shameful by the standards of men in the world. Furthermore, since the remaining land couldn't be sold and the husband had to stay behind in the countryside with the land, it was also true that he would need a woman to look after him. This sympathetic understanding began to grow, and she finally agreed. However, the underlying significant motive that led the wife to agree with her husband's opinion was, in fact, the hidden, immense pleasure she anticipated in old age: living with her son and daughter-in-law in a modest rented house, living a life so happy it would be like sesame seeds scattering everywhere, seeing it as fitting for her station and blissful.
However, less than a month after forcing her reluctant son to come, begging and pleading to get him a position squeezed into S Bank (S 은행), and starting their household, one dawn, the son chased his wife back to her parents' home.
‘Really, Sŏngch'il! Do you have no mother, no family?...’
The wife tried threatening her son with these words several times. But Sŏngch'il refused to listen. <30>
‘Fine—then I’ll leave this house! You had a son and a daughter-in-law... Ah—so is someone the son doesn't consider his wife still a daughter-in-law? Fine—if you can't send her away, I'll leave! Try living well with a daughter-in-law who has no son...’
he retorted angrily, trying to go outside. The wife, feeling her insides churn violently as if rotting, frowned and grabbed her son, saying:
‘My boy! What's the need for this! But who abandons the wife of his youth (chogangjich'ŏ 조강지처)? Even if she doesn't please you, unless she has committed one of the seven grounds for divorce (ch'ilgŏjiak 칠거지악), there's no custom of abandoning the wife of one's youth! Is a man meant for only one woman? There can be left wives and right wives, and if need be, you can even take a concubine (ch'ŏp 쳡). How can you be so heartless as to cut ties and reject a person so coldly? Stop it, it's bad for your fortune...’
‘Who asked you to say such things? I hate hearing it. I hate it all! Concubine! Concubine! Concubine—what is all that?! Only people like Father or Uncle take concubines. Who says people like me want to take concubines!’
‘If you don't want a concubine and only want to chase away the wife you have—ah—so you plan to grow old as a widower?’ the wife asked, moving closer.
‘I won't take anyone!’
‘Really, son!’ The wife tugged at Sŏngch'il's clothes and continued. ‘So you chase away the wife you have and grow old as a widower. Your own life, you manage according to your stubborn will, so whether it's comfortable or uncomfortable doesn't matter. But what about your old mother, who can no longer hold a needle or sew a handspan's length? What is the point of cherishing a son?... If I say this, you'll rebuke me for talking rot again, but isn't it true that a woman relies on her parents when young, her husband after marriage, and her children when she's old and her bones grow stiff? Don’t say such undutiful things, son! Until your old mother closes her eyes, don't show such wretched sights before my eyes! They say, ‘Ilbu hamwŏn O-wŏl pisang (一夫含怨 五月飛霜 - If one husband bears resentment, frost falls in May).’ If you chase that girl away, isn't she now a broken vessel (p'agwi 파긔)? How many more years will I live <31> that you can't listen to my words....’
Saying this, the wife began to weep right there.
‘I don't know! If you want to keep her, keep her as you please. Go on!’
Sŏngch'il shot back curtly, as if throwing words. The wife wept for a while, then said,
‘You child! You unfilial child! If you were going to do this, why didn't you say you disliked her from the start? Why did you take someone's precious daughter only to create such a situation? Huh? Why did you get married? Huh?’
‘Who got married? I was *made* to marry! Did I go willingly? When did I ever ask to be married? This person and that person,’ he gestured, ‘made such a fuss, saying they would die—live—and so, in my ignorance, thinking it was filial piety, I got married!... Who made the mistake? Mother and Father made the mistake! Did I make the mistake? No. Even if the world ends, I will send her away.’
Sŏngch'il said this, stood up abruptly, dragged his wife, who was crying in the opposite room, to her feet, threw the bundles of belongings he had tied up into the yard, put her in a rickshaw just as she was, in the clothes she was wearing, and drove her off to the station. The wife beat the floor and cried. She lamented endlessly. The clueless P'ilsun joined in, crying and shouting.

3

The wife thought about the events of the past few months. That her son, whom she had trusted and relied on so much, would defy her like this was something she had never imagined, not even in dreams, and it made the wife feel sad anew.
‘Now, that son is also a stranger to me. A citizen of another country!’
The wife thought this.—Now there is nothing left to hope for. My bones are stiff, I'm sick, unable to move my limbs, yet there's no one to brew a bowl of hot rice gruel for me, no one to sit with needle in hand and mend my torn clothes, no one to stay by my bedside and attend to me when I'm on the verge of death, gasping for breath—no one at all. There is only this motherless granddaughter, now just <32> seven years old, who knows nothing but playing pranks, whining for snacks when hungry, and fussing to have her bed made when sleepy. If I'm sick, will my husband come to see me? Will my son show any deep concern? —Now, I am all alone. The only one attached to me is that child—P'ilsun—and no one else. Everyone else is—a stranger. Was there ever such a wretched fate? Was there ever such misfortune? What are children! What is family!
The wife felt a desolate chill around her, her body involuntarily shivering. Only then did she stretch her stiff, hunched legs, massage them, and crawl back under the blanket.
Her head felt numb, beyond knowing if it ached or not. Even so, a thousand thoughts, ten thousand thoughts, overwhelmed her mind. The rooster had crowed three times.
‘If only it were like the old days!’
Suddenly, this thought surfaced. Then, dreamlike scenes of past times—peaceful, luxurious, splendid days—seemed to appear before her eyes. The property her husband had inherited from his parents wasn't vast, but instead, he had entered government service (kwan'ge 官界) from a young age and, for about ten years until annexation, had lived off the nation's stipend. Meanwhile, the *yangban* luster shone even brighter, allowing them to live without envy among their peers. On the other hand, unlike other *yangban*, he didn't engage in extortion, so although he didn't accumulate wealth, he earned praise for his integrity (ch'ŏngnyŏm 청렴). That too came to mind. And thinking even of the recent ten years after annexation, fragments of a comfortable, peaceful, and enjoyable family life, lived without envying others, appeared before her eyes.
‘Truly, back then it felt like living... like human beings living...’
Oh! How intensely the wife yearned for the past times to return with all their old customs and systems. The wife felt an infinite attachment to the past. She couldn't suppress an endless longing and yearning for the past society—in other words, for the past family. Yes. The wife could not suppress an endless longing and yearning for the family. <33> (*Note: Page number <34> appears twice in the original*)
However, the wife did not forget to consider her current family situation. She thought of her husband in the countryside and her son, who had chased out his wife and was now not even earning a living. How could a family (kadjŏng 가뎡) possibly function smoothly like this? If the husband does his own thing and the son does his own thing, the family will inevitably break down completely. A family cannot exist after chasing out the wife of one's youth.—All this, the wife thought, was a sign that the family was collapsing, that the *yangban* class was finally ruined. But the wife did not understand for what reason, for what cause her family—just like other families of similar status and circumstances—had to be ruined; she did not grasp the social reason (sahoejŏk riyu 社會的 理由) for it, nor did she comprehend the cause and effect (in'gwa 因果) regarding her own individual fate.
The only thing the wife found infuriating and pathetic was the disappearance of the morality that had been upheld since the time of her ancestors. The fact that commoners looked down on and overtook *yangban* was something she had seen to the point of her eyes aching for a long time now, so her nerves regarding class morality (kyegŭp<0x335D>chŏk todŏk 階級的 道德) were almost numb, and she now considered it commonplace. However, regarding the gradual disappearance of the so-called Five Relations and Three Bonds (Oryun Samgang 五倫三綱), she couldn't help feeling pathetic every time she witnessed such facts. Why are humans called human? It is because humans, unlike beasts (chŭmsaeng 즘생), uphold the Five Relations and Three Bonds, the wife thought. A son who disobeys his father's command, is not filial to his old mother, and chases away his innocent wife is completely failing to act as a human; he is a beast, she thought.
...The husband (songnang 松郞) is the master of the daughter (nyŏa 女兒). The daughter's life and death depend on the husband, and the husband holds the power of life and death over the daughter, so how could I quibble about her being driven back to her home? But now, hearing that you intend to abandon my daughter forever and have sent her away with her belongings, this is more shocking and terrifying than witnessing a thunderbolt from a clear blue sky or a sudden fire break out in a serene green pine forest. How can I not lament the heavens and resent this cruel fate? Moreover, since the Seven Grounds for Divorce (ch'ilgŏjiak 七去之惡) are the laws of the ancient kings, what point is there for my daughter, who has returned home without any accusation and lies weeping, to continue living? A man taking concubines (ch'ukch'ŏp 蓄妾) is a common human affair, so I would not call it sorrowful, but expulsion without cause is unheard of in a family. Where else could such a depraved and senseless thing exist? It would be right for us, mother and daughter, to rather die and resolve this endlessly resentful, heaven-piercing grudge. The heavens... <34>
The wife vividly remembered this passage from the long letter received from her daughter's in-laws three days after Sŏngch'il had chased his wife away. —Ah, how could such a thing happen? How could such humiliation exist? Now the world is completely ruined, utterly ruined. It's because my own fortune has declined that I witness even this... The wife just wanted to clutch her chest and weep until she felt relief.
‘Now, there's nothing pitiful about the world, nor is dying difficult. If I just close my eyes tight and die, what is there to long for that prevents me from dying? I've seen it all!’
The wife muttered this to herself. A long sigh escaped. At that moment, the wife suddenly felt envious of the early death of her beloved daughter, who had passed away before her samch'ilil (三七日) after giving birth to P'ilsun, lying beside her. ‘If only I had died following that child—’ the thought arose. How peaceful and happy must be the state of her only daughter, buried deep in the mountains where the wind sighs through the pines, snow piles thickly on the dry turf paths, human traces are cut off, and only the footprints of wild animals searching for food remain? Though her body must have decayed during these six or seven years, isn't her state more peaceful than this old mother's?
Thinking this, she muttered,
‘Hmph! Her fate alone is good! The only regrettable thing is that the only sign she left of having been in this world is just one girl child!’
And then the wife once again looked down at the peacefully sleeping P'ilsun. Her oval face, her straight nose, her perfectly drawn eyebrows, her pretty and neat lips—everything was the spitting image of her dead mother. Lost in thought, gazing at the resemblance for a long while, the wife let her weakly lifted head fall back onto the pillow, her eyes filling with hot tears.
‘Oh yes! P'ilsun! How could I possibly die leaving you behind? Poor P'ilsun!...’
The wife pulled the sleeping P'ilsun closer, forgetting even the discomfort of her own stiff body, and hugged her tightly, still wrapped in the blanket. <35>

4

Three days later, the wife rose from her sickbed.
Past midday, Sŏngch'il, who had gone out, returned. Seeing Sŏngch'il go straight into his own room and slam the door shut without even glancing into the room where she was, the wife felt a surge of anger rise within her, but she suppressed it and continued sewing the jacket (chŏgori 저고리) for P'ilsun that she had started earlier. Since New Year's Day was only five nights away, it didn't matter for adults, but if even the child couldn't wear new clothes for the occasion (sŏlbim 설비음), the wife thought how much that child would envy the new clothes of other children. Just yesterday evening,
‘Hanmŏni (Grandma), will you make me a pretty new jacket (kkokka chŏguri 꼬까 저구리)?’
P'ilsun had whined, and the wife had indeed felt pity and even held back tears.
‘Sŏngch'il, are you studying in your room? Come over here and warm yourself by the fire. Don't sit alone in a chilly room—’
The wife called Sŏngch'il from the opposite room. After a while, Sŏngch'il came over to the main room (anbang 안방), a book in his hand.
‘You're completely recovered now, aren't you?’
Sŏngch'il asked as he sat down before her.
‘At times like this, you seem like a human child.—’
‘My, what strange things you say—. What was I like before?’
‘Look here, son. Your old mother was deathly ill for four or five days and just got up. If you saw that, even if you had things to see outside, you should have come back early and opened your mother’s door to check on her. Isn't that the duty and courtesy of a son? Even if you can't be like other people's sons who buy food to stimulate the appetite after illness and urge, ‘Mother, please try some of this,’ can't you at least show common courtesy like other people's sons? This is all like bowing after poking someone in the side. It’s useless to talk... Seeing how you acted last night and your <36> behavior today, it's completely hopeless now. What joy is there in living together with a son who considers his mother an enemy and doesn't think of her as a mother!’
The wife paused mid-sentence and let out a quiet sigh. Then, having finished sewing the jacket sleeve, she removed the needle and began to turn it inside out to finish the seam. She then continued speaking.
‘If he considers his mother an enemy, then that son is no son...’
‘My goodness, who considers Mother an enemy? You say the strangest things, Mother. Eventually...’
‘Then don't you consider me an enemy? When did you ever treat me as a mother? If you had known and served me as a mother, would you have opposed my words tooth and nail? Even just for appearances, you couldn't have acted like that. What was it? ‘If you want to try being a missionary lady (chŏndo puin 전도 부인), go ahead and try,’ was it? You said that to me last night, didn't you? Well—was that something said acknowledging your mother as your mother?’
‘That's not what I meant. You were insisting on something impossible, Mother, and furthermore, you kept telling me to bring back the woman I had already sent away. When I said I couldn't do that, you said with your own lips, ‘Then I won't live in this house; I'll abandon both husband and son, go to the church (yebadang 례배당), become a missionary lady, earn my own keep, and pave my way to heaven.’ When did I ever say those words?’
‘Then why can't you bring the woman back?’
‘Haven't I always told you? The Seven Grounds for Divorce or whatever is old talk. Whether her education was lacking, her appearance was displeasing, her heart—whatever it was, first and foremost, she has to appeal to *my* heart for me to live with her, don't you see? If I forcibly bring back someone I have no feelings for, I'll treat her like a cow or a horse. She, because of a husband who has no love for her, will end up living her whole life as an unpaid servant. Where is there greater evil than that? Mother, you think *not* doing so is evil, but I think *doing* so is evil, and sending her away and divorcing her is actually the right thing for her. Mother and I, our perspectives are that different, aren't they?’ <37>
‘Fine, well said. Since we're so different, how can we live in the same house! That's why I said I'd go to the church! ‘Jesus, Jesus, my Lord’ (Yesu Yesu nae chuyŏ 예수 예수 내 주여) must be this woman's fate... A missionary lady is my fate!’
The wife muttered this. Her emotions were now agitated beyond measure. It was a state close to madness.
‘Ah! This pitiful life, the pitiful life of a declining class, this miserable life that can never revive—what can be done? Can we unite? It's utterly impossible. Then can I abandon myself and join Mother? Utterly impossible. Then let's leave it alone. This is the fate burdened by history!’
Sŏngch'il, contemplating his mother's mind, which was developing into chaos (nanjo 亂調), muttered this inwardly.
‘Hanmŏni, Hanmŏni, give me food (pap 밥)—’
P'ilsun shouted from outside as she came in. The wife put aside the jacket she was working on, and as her motherless granddaughter burst in, untying her frozen shoes, she hugged her and lifted her onto her lap. Then, holding the child's brightly frozen hands to her own mouth, she blew warm breath on them, ho—ho—, and said:
‘P'ilsun! Where did you go play? Hmm? Now, when I make you a new jacket, play gently and listen well to what I say. When you get a year older, you gain sense, understand?’
‘Uh-huh, okay, I’ll listen well, okay, Hanmŏni.’
Sitting on her lap, the child cuddled, pressing her reddish cheeks against her grandmother's face. Overflowing with endless affection, the wife said in a trembling voice,
‘Eh—how cute this little one is! Motherless child—eh—this little one...’
Saying this, she hugged her tighter once more. Then suddenly, sad thoughts gathered chaotically, blocking her throat tightly. The wife let out a gulping sound, "Kkul-kkŏk," and began shedding hot tears onto the child's head. <38>
‘Ah-ha...’
Sŏngch'il, sighing deeply as if unbearably troubled, scratched his head vigorously, rushed outside, and slammed the door shut. Seeing this dimly, the wife murmured into the ear of the child who understood little,
‘P'ilsun-ah! You'll live with me, won't you? Hmm? Let's go live together at the church, okay?...’
As she murmured this, suddenly, all the scenes of past days and her own future destiny unfolded before her eyes at once. The sight of hundreds of men and women singing hymns following the holy harmonium music in the church seemed visible, and her own figure, carrying the Gospels wrapped in a cloth bundle, going door-to-door selling them or proselytizing, also seemed visible. And then again, her own appearance from past days, even her appearance before she married, seemed visible. The wife finally broke down and cried aloud. It was because she was infinitely sad. Everything else—she didn't know. Only, she herself was sad.
‘Hanmŏni—’
P'ilsun, who had been sitting on her lap, slid down to the floor and began to wail loudly, "Ŭa-," joining in. Amidst her sorrow, hearing the child's cries made it even more unbearable, and on the other hand, unable to overcome the surging pity for the child, she said,
‘Okay, don't cry. Hmm? Don't cry!’
She pulled P'ilsun close again, but her welling sobs only grew louder.
(End) <39>

**Summary**

The story "Decline" (沒落) depicts the inner turmoil of an elderly *yangban* woman in 1920s Seoul. Lying ill and impoverished near the New Year, she reflects on her family's downfall: her husband's abandonment for a concubine, the loss of their ancestral land, and her modern-thinking son Sŏngch'il's rejection of traditional values, culminating in his dismissal of his arranged wife and loss of his bank job (likely due to socialist leanings). Feeling alienated from the changing world and abandoned by her family, her only solace and remaining tie is her young, orphaned granddaughter, P'ilsun. The story ends with the grandmother weeping in despair, contemplating becoming a Christian missionary (chŏndo puin) as her only path, highlighting the disintegration of the traditional Korean family structure and the *yangban* class under colonial modernity. From a historical perspective, the story vividly portrays the economic ruin of the traditional elite, the sharp generational conflict fueled by new ideologies clashing with Confucian norms (filial piety, arranged marriage, class distinctions), and the personal despair resulting from rapid social change during the Japanese colonial period. The son's vaguely mentioned "ideology" (주의) and talk of the land collapsing hint at the growing influence of socialism or nationalism among the younger generation, seen as dangerous and incomprehensible by the traditionalist mother.

**Named Entities**

開闢	개벽	Kaebyŏk (Magazine Name - excluded as per instruction)
八峰	팔봉	P'al Pong (Author's Pen Name)
필순	필순	P'ilsun
S 은행	S 은행	S Bank
박대신	박대신	Pak Tae-sin
성칠	성칠	Sŏngch'il
조선	조선	Chosŏn (Korea - implied context of society)
일본	일본	Ilbon (Japan)

**Glossary**

沒落	몰락	Decline, fall, ruin
부인	부인	Wife, married lady, Mrs.
벼개	베개	Pillow (older spelling)
밋흔	밑은	Underneath (older spelling/form of 밑에는)
늣기고	느끼고	Feeling (older spelling)
억개	어깨	Shoulder (older spelling)
뒤ㅅ목아지	뒷목아지	Nape of the neck (uses older sai-siot form)
하얏다	하였다	Did, was (older spelling/form of 했다)
업슴으로	없음으로	Because there isn't/wasn't (older spelling)
자긔	자기	Oneself, self (older spelling)
끌코	끓고	Boiling (older spelling)
알는게야	앓는게야	Is sick/ailing (older spelling/dialectal)
강긔	감기	Common cold (older spelling)
량반	양반	Yangban (traditional gentry class)
나희	나이	Age (older spelling)
뼉다구	뼈다귀	Bone (colloquial/older form)
굿고	굳고	Hardening, stiffening (older spelling)
밧갓헤서는	바깥에서는	Outside (older spelling/form)
밋친드시	미친 듯이	Like crazy, madly
덧문	덧문	Outer door, storm door
조희	종이	Paper (older spelling)
훌터	훑어	To scan, look over (older spelling)
맛헤	맡에	Near, beside (older spelling/form of 맡에는)
나 노차	낳자마자	As soon as (she) gave birth (older form)
량친	양친	Both parents (Hanja term)
얼골	얼굴	Face (older spelling)
긔역하지	기억하지	Remember (older spelling)
하야금	하여금	Make someone do something, cause to (older form)
만콤	만큼	As much as (older spelling)
견듸지	견디지	Endure, bear (older spelling)
엇더케든지	어떻게든지	Somehow, in any way possible (older spelling)
나어야	나아야	Must get better (older spelling)
ㅅ말로	입말로	Inwardly, under one's breath (older form)
업슬	없을	Will not be, without (older spelling)
섯달	섣달	Twelfth lunar month
금음께	그믐께	Around the end of the lunar month
령감	영감	Old man, husband (term of address/reference)
쳡	첩	Concubine
녀름	여름	Summer (older spelling)
륙칠십원	육칠십원	Sixty or seventy Won (currency)
어룬	어른	Adult, elder (older spelling)
밧게	밖에	Outside of, except for (older spelling)
낫븐	나쁜	Bad (older spelling)
밋고	믿고	Believing, trusting (older spelling)
렬신	열신	Fever 'spirit', high fever
오좀	오줌	Urine (older spelling)
곳처	고쳐	Fixing, adjusting (older spelling)
무룹	무릎	Knee (older spelling)
사희	사회	Society (older spelling)
녀자	여자	Woman (Hanja term)
옥토	옥토	Fertile land (Hanja term)
량식	양식	Food provisions, grain (Hanja term)
업스니까	없으니까	Because there isn't/wasn't (older spelling)
밧	밭	Field (dry field)
엇재서	어째서	Why, for what reason (older spelling)
긔억하지	기억하지	Remember (older spelling)
낫비츠로	낯빛으로	With a facial expression of (older spelling)
래후년이면	내후년이면	The year after next (older spelling)
더리구	데리고	Taking (someone) along (older spelling)
세ㅅ집살님	셋집살림	Living in a rented house (older spelling/form)
게집	계집	Woman (often derogatory, but common historically)
싀골	시골	Countryside (older spelling)
한엽흐르	한편으로	On the other hand (older spelling)
숭	흉	Fault, disgrace (older spelling)
함끠	함께	Together (older spelling)
드듸어	드디어	Finally, at last (older spelling)
동긔	동기	Motive, reason (Hanja term)
조강지처	조강지처	Wife married in poverty; first wife (Hanja term)
칠거지악	칠거지악	Seven grounds for divorcing a wife (Hanja term)
안해	아내	Wife (older spelling)
파긔	파기	Broken vessel/pottery (Hanja term)
즘생	짐승	Animal, beast (older spelling)
례배당	예배당	Church, chapel (older spelling)
한머니	할머니	Grandmother (colloquial/dialectal/child speech)
꼬까 저구리	꼬까 저고리	Pretty clothes, new clothes (child's term); jacket
설비음	설빔	New clothes for New Year's Day
전도 부인	전도 부인	Female missionary worker, Bible woman
난조	난조	Chaos, disorder, discordant tune (Hanja term)
밥	밥	Rice, meal
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제65호
발행일	1926년 01월 01일
기사제목	沒落
필자	八峰
기사형태	소설

沒落
						八峰
1

문은 꼭 다덧건만 웬일인지 벼개 밋흔 선선하고 머리 속에는 바람이 하나 가득히 차잇는 거 가튼 치움을 늣기고서 부인은 다시 이불을 끄러 얼굴까지 푹 덥허 써 버렷다. 그러나 이불 밋흐로 두 억개와 뒤ㅅ목아지는 그래도 바람 마지에 내 노힌 것 가티 선듯 선듯 하얏다. 이리 돌아 눕고 저리 돌아 눕다가 암만하야도 선듯선듯함을 익일 수 업슴으로 부인은 이불 속에서 손을 들어 수건을 동긴 위로 자긔의 이마를 더듬어 가며 집허 보앗다. 머리는 아직도 펄펄 끌코 잇섯다.
『내가 아마 크게 알는게야...』
속으로 이러케 생각 하고서 부인은 상반신에 힘을 모아 가지고 입 안의 침을 삼켜 보앗다. 혀ㅅ바닥과 입몸이 밧작 말나서 침이라고는 한 방울 쯤도 업섯다. 코ㅅ속은 꽉 막히어서 숨이 갑갑하고 머리가 펄펄 끌음에 따라서 수족과 왼 몸도 더웟다. 강긔에 몸살이 껴 들엇다고 의사는 말하고 갓지만은 부인은 그 말을 들으면서 이 병의 원인은 강긔 뿐만이 아니요 몸살 뿐만이 아니라 더 중대한 원인이 잇는 것이 아닐까 하고 생각 하얏섯다.
그리하야 지금 머리ㅅ 몸을 더듬어 보고서는 더욱 그가티 생각 하지 아니치 못하얏다. 자긔로서는 심상치 안은 자긔의 병증세를 능히 깨달을 수 잇섯든 것이다.
『암만 하야도 심상치 안은 병이야... 내가 긔운은 업지만은 그래도 강단이 잇서서 그러케 쉽사리 자리 깔고 눕지를 안햇는데 이번에는 내가 꼼작을 못하고 둘어 누엇고나! 여간 곱불이나 몸살로는 알아 본 적이 별로＜24＞ 업는데... 필연코 심상치 안흔 병이지...이 병이-』 내가 늙어서 그런게로군-. 작년만 해도 이러치는 안핫는데 인저는 해 보는 수 업시 나희를 집어 먹어서 뼉다구가 굿고 혈맥이 시들은 모양이다.』
부인은 이러케 생각하자 불연드시 이 세상이 슬펏다. 자긔는 인저는 고만 엇더케 해 보는 수 업시 늙어버리고야 말지 안는가? 늙어버리면 엇더케 되나? 늙으면 이 모양으로 또는 이 모양 보다도 더 여지 업시 한 번 병에 걸니기만 하면 꼼작 못하고 둘어 누엇다가 저승으로 가는게 안닌가? 그러면 그것이 언제나 이 몸에 닥처 올 것인가? 언제가 아니라 지금 이불을 쓰고 누어잇는 지금 이 자리에 닥처올는지도 몰른다-. 이만콤 생각하엿슬 때에 부인의 이마에 움펑 들어가서 그 안침 퀭한 곳에 박히어 잇는 두 눈동자는 눈물에 저저 버렷다.
부인은 이불을 한 손으로 거더 내려서 가슴까지만 덥고 자리 우에 구더 붓흔 듯한 사지를 움즈기어 가지고 왼편으로 돌아 누엇다. 캄캄한 밧갓헤서는 바람이 밋친드시 울부짓고 돌아 단일 때마다 대문 짝이 덜거덕 덜거덕 하고 대청 뒤 덧문의 문풍지는 웅-웅 하고 운다. 그럴 때마다 문 틈으로 또는 누덕 누덕 지워 노코서 남은 문 구멍 틈으로는 살을 어이는 듯한 찬 바람이 새여 들어 와서 이불 속으로 긔여 들며 불뎅이 가티 달은 살을 할터 주는 것이엇다.
부인의 머리는 다시 아모 생각도 업서지고 다만 두 눈이 멍하니 천정에 못 백히엇슬 뿐이다. 겨울에 들어선 이후로 한 번 맑앗케 발러 보지 못한 바람벽이며 문발는 조희의 더러웁고도 찌어진 모양이 이 부인의 얼굴 빗과 조화되어 보혓다. 부인은 다시 눈을 내려 천정으로부터 바람벽 바람벽으로부터 방바닥 까지 더듬어 가며 훌터 보앗다. 머리 맛헤 노인 타구 요강 약대접 그리고 벼개 겻흐로 허트러 진 코 푼 조희가튼 것을 보기 전에 부인의 눈에 들어 온 것은 인저 겨우 일곱살 된 외손녀의 자는 얼굴이엇다. 어머니는 그 애를 나 노차 산후의 병으로 삼칠일 이 다 되기 전에 이 세상을 떠나고 아버지는 양반의 자식으로 방탕을 일삼다가 감옥에 들어 간 지 벌서 이태가 지낫슴으로 철이 날 나희에 다닥친 필순이는 량친의 얼골도 자세히 긔역하지 못하게 되얏스며 따라서 이것이 제 부모를 잘못 맛나서 외가에 와서 자라게 되엿다는 사실이 이 부인으로 하야금 날마다 때마다 틈 잇는대로 측은한 생각을 일으키게 하는 중대한 리유이엇다. ＜25＞
자긔가 누은 겻헤 누어서 눈을 부친 듯만 듯하게 감고 고요히 잠든 필순이를 덤석 안아 가지고 뺨을 대이고 십흘 만콤 귀여운 얼골을 보자 부인은 새삼스럽게 철 모르는 것에 대한 측은한 생각이 가슴 속을 서늘하게 함에 견듸지 못하야 움펑 들어 가고 그리고 풀끼 업는 두 눈을 힘 업시 꿈벅! 꿈벅하얏다. 그리고서는 부인은 항상 생각하듯기 지금도 또 어미도 업고 애비도 업다 하야도 과언이 아닌 이 필순이가 장성하야서 시집 갈 때 까지만은 엇더케든지 목숨을 부지 하야 가지고 살아서 그 뒤를 다 보아 준 뒤에 죽어도 눈을 감고 죽지 만약 그러치 못하면 죽어도 눈을 감고 죽지는 못하리라고 생각하얏다.
『얼는 이 병이 나어야 하겟는데...』
휘유- 긴 한숨을 쉬고서 부인은 입 안의 ㅅ말로 이러케 중얼거려 보앗다. 이러케 생각하자 불편하든 몸은 더 한층 꼼짝을 못할 만콤 자리 우에 구더 부튼 듯하고 아래 위 턱이 뻑뻑한 우에 더구나 입 안은 조하고 숨은 갑갑하야 침 한방울을 삼키기도 더 어려웟다.- 약은 발서 이틀동안이나 먹어 오는 중에 오늘 먹은 약갑은 주지도 못하얏스니 섯달 금음께가 다 된 이 설 못 밋처의 시절에 약갑을 일원 이상이나 외상으로 줄 리치도 업슬 듯하니 내일은 또 엇더케 약이나마 어더 먹을 수 잇나? 남의 집에서는 섯달 금음께라고 떡방아 찟는 소리도 들니고 장도 보고 와서 서로 짓걸대는 소리가 판장 넘어로 들니어 오는데 떡은 고사하고 집세를 석달치나 못 주어서 날마다 집 주인에게 자긔 아들이 봉변하야 오는 형편이니 이 노릇은 엇더케 하노? 령감 이래야 늙어서 망령이 낫는지 량반의 집 행세인지는 몰르나 다 늣게 시골서 젊은 쳡을 어더 가지고 업는 가산을 훌터 먹고 안젓스니 소위 큰마누라가 잇는 서울 살림에 한푼 보태기는커녕 가난뱅이 세간살이나 빼아서가지 안는 것이 오히려 다행하다고 나 할까. 어미 업는 외손녀를 눈물과 한숨으로 바다 가지고 그 몹슬 녀름 단야에 잠도 자지 못하야 가며 키워 오거든 자식이라는 장성한 위인은 늙은 어미의 그런 사정도 생각하지 안코 제 마음에 맛지 안는다고 량반의 집 가문과 윤리를 도라 보지도 안코 조강지처를 친정으로 쪼차 버리고서 저는 저할대로 어미 생각도 안코 도라 다니기만 하니 이 노릇을 엇더케 하나? 그러나마 두어달 전 까지만 하야도 한달 은행 월급이 륙칠십원 잇서서 그럭저럭 집 세 십원 주고 나면 몃 식구 되지 안는 살님은 이듬달 까지 꾸러 매여 갓섯는데 어짠 놈의＜26＞ 자식이 엇더케 배워 먹은 셈인지 그 목숨 가튼 월급 자리도 내 노코 지금은 무어 육체로동하겟다는 둥 외국으로 다라 나겟다는 둥 개 돼지 가튼 소리만 하고 잇스니 딱한 일이 아닌가? 제 말에는 성적이 낫바서 상반긔 상여금을 주며 나가라고 해서 은행에서 쫏기어 낫다고 말하지만은 아모리 생각해 보아도 그 은행에 령감의 친구 박대신의 아들이 중역으로 잇는 것으로 보아도 그 자식이 쫏기어 날리 치는 업는데 꼭 그 놈이 되지 못하게 뻣뻣한 체 하고 아는 체 하고 어룬이 하는 말은 방구가티 알고 코 뚱도 뀌지 안을 뿐 더러 더구나 근자에 와서는 실성한 사람 모양으도 무슨 주의가 엇더니 두루막이가 엇더니 이 놈의 땅뎅이가 얼른 깨어저 버리어야만 하느니 하는 알 수 업는 수작이 자라게 된 까닭으로 그 놈의 주의인지 망하게 하는 것인지 때문에 돈 잇는 사람들의 눈에 밧게 난 것이 분명하다. 장성한 자식이 졔가 철딱선이가 낫다면 저만 태산가티 밋고 바라는 늙은 어미가 고생 사리 할 것도 생각 하지 안코 그 따위 낫븐 책을 읽고서 함부로 날 뛸 리치가 업지... 그래도 내가 무어라고 그 자식이 안타거워서 말 마듸나 할 것이면
『어머니는 괘-니 아모 것도 몰르면서... 왜 이리시우! 어머니가티 썩어 빠진 생활에 물저진 사람들은 그저 도라가실 때나 기대리고 국으로 기세요! 잔말이 무슨 잔말이람!』
하고 핀잔을 통통히 주니 저 외에는 잘난 사람이 업다는 말인가? 그저 어서 죽어서 눈을 감아야지. 이런 꼴 저런 꼴을 다 니즈련만. 웬수의 목숨이-
여긔 까지 생각해 오다가 문득 겻헤 누은 필순이의 색색 코를 고을고 자는 모양을 보자 부인의 코ㅅ방울은 두어 번 벌늠 벌늠하드니 꾀죄죄한 두 눈초리로부터는 구슬 가튼 눈물방울이 비 오듯기 쏘다저 때무든 벼게로 흘러 나렷다. 부인은 창자가 끈어지고 마듸 마듸의 뼈가 내려 안는 듯한 압흐고 제림을 익이지 못하야 끽-ㄱ 하고 목 메이는 소리를 내드니 자긔도 스스로 북바처 나오는 울음을 억제하려고 하엿든지 이불을 끌어다 얼굴을 푹 덥허 버리고 흙흙 늣기어 울엇다. 부인의 두 억개 그리고 두 억개뿐이 아니라 부인의 장작개비 가티 밧작 말느고 딱딱한 왼 몸은 이불을 덧혼 우으로 사시나무 떨듯기 격렬하게 떨기 시작 하엿다.＜27＞

2

한 시간 쯤 지난 듯 십흔 때 부인은 이불을 거더 차고 맛치 괴악한 꿈을 꾸다가 깨여 나는 사람 모양으로 눈을 번적 뜨고 두 팔을 이불 우으로 내던젓다. 부인의 수건으로 동긴 이마는 이마 뿐만이 아니라 왼 몸이 더운 땀으로 흔줄근 하게 적시여 젓다. 머리는 악가 보다도 더 한층 맛치 방망이 끗흐로 꽝 꽝 어더 맛는 것 가티 압핫다. 렬신이 맹렬하게 부인의 몸을 엄습 하엿든 까닭이다.
부인은 두러 누은 채 고개만 조곰 일으키어 가지고 머리에 동긴 수건을 끌느기 시작하얏다. 고개에 힘이 업슬 뿐더러 손고락이 뻣뻣하야서 잘 끌너 지지 아니하는 것이엇다. 부인은 서너 번이나 일으켯든 머리를 다시 벼개 우에 떨어트리고는 다시 일으키고 하다가 긔어코 수건을 끌르고서 그 수건으로 이마를 한 번 닥갓다. 그리고서 이번에는 머리 맛헤 노인 조봇한 헌겁으로 머리를 지긋이 동겨 매어 보앗다. 그리고는 눈을 감앗다.
그리나 렬병은 걸닌 사람의 대가리가 쉬이지 안코 작용을 하는 거나 맛찬 가지로 부인의 머리도 눈을 잠시라도 붓치면 어수선 산란한 꿈을 가저 오고 잠이 깨이면 또한 갈피 업는 생각을 일으키는 것이엇다. 그리하야 지금 부인의 머리는 편안히 쉬임을 엇지 못하얏다.
밤은 고요하얏다. 다만 이따금식 문풍지 울니는 바람소래만이 잠깨인 사람들의 사지를 오구라 붓게 할 뿐이다. 그리하야 길고 긴 겨울밤이 새로 세시가 지나서 드문 드문이 들니든 닭의 고함이 갓가운 곳에서 까지 들니게 되도록 부인은 잠들지 못하엿다.
부인은 간신히 몸을 일으키어 오좀을 누고서 필순이의 이불을 곳처 덥허 주고 나서는 자긔의 입은 옷도 다시 고처서 끈을 매엿다. 그리고 두 다리를 세우고 쪼굴트리고 안저서 무룹 우에 두 손 바닥을 노코 고개를 숙으리어 이마를 그 우에 노앗다.
『설마 내가 죽지야 안을 터이지만 이 살님을 엇더케 해가나... 필순이나 어서 장성하여야 겟는데- 세해는＜28＞ 나날이 달나가고 점점 알 수 업게 되어 가니 이런 한심할...』
생각을 다 맛치지도 못하고서 부인의 입으로 부터는 긴 한숨이 새여 흘럿다. 자긔가 가지고 잇는 지식이라고는 오늘날까지 오십여년 동안 지나간 사희에서 살어 온- 집안 구석에서 녀자로서 가정의 부인으로서 살어온-경험의 지식이 잇슬 뿐이다. 그리하야 지금에 일으러서 그 오십여년 동안 싸아온, 결코 적다고는 하지 못할 생황에 대한 사회에 대한 그리고 인생에 대한 경험의 지식은 오늘날 조선 사회 상태의 변동과 또한 이 사회가 압흐로 엇더케 밋그러저 간다는 그 방향에 대하야서 부인에게 아모러한 관찰과 해답을 주지는 못하얏다. 그러나 다만 부인으로 하여곰 그 경험의 지식으로는 이 세태를 저울질하고 알아 볼 수가 업슬 만콤 자긔와 이 세상과는 현격하게 상거가 멀어젓다는 사실만은 비록 확실치 못하고 희미하게 나마 깨닷게 하얏다. 깨다랏다는 말이 적당하지 못할 것이면 그와 가티 늣기게 하얏든 것이다. 그리하야 자긔와 자긔가 지금 늙어 가는 몸을 부지하고 잇는 이 세상과는 아조 얼토당토 안은 별달은 물건 - 도저이 서로 합하지 못할 물건인 것을 늣길 때 마다 부인은 한량도 업는 그리고 설명할 수도 업는 애끗는 슯흠을 맛보는 것이 항상이엇다.
불과 십년 전만 가지고 말하드라도 싀골서 얼마 되지는 안으나마 문전에 옥토가 잇서서 량식의 근심이 업섯고 수하에 더부사리가 잇고 더부사리 외에도 공밥만 먹고 잇슬 수가 업스니까 가진 일을 다 보아 주든 먼 촌 일가 부인들이 잇서서 그다지 부유한 살님은 못하엿슬 망정 막막하지는 안앗는데 그것이 우연이 집안 사람이 깨닷지 못하는 동안에 한푼식 두푼식 나가기 시작 하드니 뽕나무밧이 나가고 한 개 밧게 업는 산 쪼각이 나가고 압 마을에 잇는  밧과 문전에 노힌 논이 나아가고야 마랏다. 그러나 부인은 물론이어니와 령까감지도 엇재서 이 논밧이 나가지 안으면 안된다는 리유에 대하야는 흐리멍덩 하얏든 것이다.
『글세 일본 가 잇는 자식놈에게도 돈을 부치어야 하지 안소? 그러구 박생원 한테서 지지난 달에 어더온 삼백원도 변리 합해 갑하야 하겟구... 그러구는 집안에서도 쓰야지!』
땅 한 마지기 팔고 나서는 령감은 이런 소리를 부인에게 하는 것이엇다. 그러나 그 다음번엔 또 한 마지기를 팔 때에는 먼저번에 판 것은 어대다가 썻는지를 그들은 긔억하지 못하얏다. 그 만콤 그들은 깨닷지 못하는 똑가튼＜29＞ 사정이 그들을 몰고 오든 것이엇다. 그리하야 어느 틈에 줄엇는지 모르는 동안에 백여석 바라보든 추수는 반 넘어 줄어 젓다.
어느 날 령감은 술이 취해 가지고 그래도 정색한 낫비츠로
『여보 인저는 엇더케 하는 수 업스니 일본 잇는 아이도 래후년이면 졸업이겟스나 졸업 하면 별 수 잇소... 그러니 그 애나 내 어다가 서울 어느 은행에나 들어 가도록 한 후에 마누라랑 며누리 더리구 그 애하고 또 그리구 저 어린 것- 필순이나 더리구 세ㅅ집살님 이라도 알뜰하게 하면 재미 잇슬 터이니 서울로 올러가구려. 어- 나는 땅마지기나 잇스니 인저는 이것을 목숨으로 아는 처지닛가 팔수야 업고 하닛가 예서 수발이나 거둘만한 게집이나 하나 어더 가지고 지내겟소...』
하는 것이엇다. 부인은 그 때에 당신이 여긔 떨어저 잇고 게다가 게집을 엇다니 못 될 말이라고 한바탕 야단도 부리어 보고 십헛스나 또 한엽흐르 생각하면 령감은 자긔 보다는 늙지도 안핫스니까 지금쯤 게집을 엇는다는 것을 세상 남자들의 법으로 보드라도 숭 될 것이 업슬 뿐더러 이왕 그나마 남은 땅을 팔 수 업는 형편에 령감이 그 땅 하고 함끠 싀골에 떨어저 잇는 이상 수발 드러주는 게집이 필요할 것도 사실이라는 통사정 하는 마음이 일기 시작하야 드듸어 그러케 하자고 찬성하야 버리엇섯다. 그러나 그 대신 자긔는 로래에 아들 내외를 더리고 얌전한 세ㅅ집을 어더 가지고 깨가 쏘다지리 만콤 사는 것이 얼마나 분수에 맛고 행복한 것인지 몰른다는 그러한 즐김이 은연중에 마음 속에 가득 하얏든 것이 부인으로 하여곰 령감의 이견에 찬성하도록 한 중대한 동긔이엇든 것이 사실이엇다.
그러나 안 오겟다는 자식을 억지로 끌어 내다가 비지 발괄을 하다 십히 하야 S은행에 갓가스로 자리 하나를 비집어 가지고 들어 가게 한 후 살님이라고 시작한 지가 한 달이 다 못 돼서 어느 날 새벽에 자식은 며누리를 친정으로 쪼처 보냇든 것이다.
『글세 성칠아! 너는 어미두 업고 가정이라는 것도 업느냐?...』
부인은 몃 번이나 이 말을 가지고 자식을 위협도 하여 보앗다. 그러나 성칠은 종시 듯지 안코 ＜30＞
『즈-ㅇ 그러면 제가 이 집에서 나가지요! 자식 잇고 며누리 잇섯지...아- 그래 자식이 안해로 알지 안는 사람이 며누리 입니까? 즈-ㅇ 못 보내신다면 내가 나가요! 자식 업는 며누리 더리고 잘 살보아시우...』
하고 골을 부리며 밧그로 나아갈녀고 하엿다. 부인은 속이 뭉척 뭉척 썩는다는 드키 상을 찝프리고서는 자식을 붓잡으며 이러케 말하는 것이엇다.
『얘야! 이럴 거 뭐- 잇니! 그리치만 누가 조강지처를 버리드냐? 설사 마음에 들지 안키로서니 칠거지악이 업는 이상에 조강지철ㄹ 버리는 법은 업느니라! 사애자식이 한 게집 뿐이겟느냐. 좌부인 우부인도 잇고 증 무엇하면 쳡을 어더도 무관한 터에 엇더케 야박하게 맷고 끗는 드시 사람을 박찬단 말이냐. 아서라 복에 해롭다...』
『글세 그 까진 소리 하시라고 누가 청햇습니까? 듯기 실혀요. 다- 듯기 실혀요? 쳡! 쳡! 쳡이란 다 무에요?! 아버지 가튼 사람이나 당숙 가튼 사람이나 쳡을 엇지 누가 나 가튼 사람이 쳡을 엇고 십다고 합듸까!』
『쳡도 엇구 십지 안코 잇는 게집만 쫏고 십다면 아- 그래 홀애비로 늙을 작졍이냐?』 부인은 이러케 무르며 더 다가 안젓다.
『아모 것도 안 어더요!』
『글세 이 자식아!』 부인은 성칠의 옷자락을 잡아 단기면서 말을 니엇다. 『그래 잇는 게집은 쫏고 홀애비로 늙는다면 너 한 몸은 네 고집대로 하는 일이닛가 편하든 불편하든 상관 업겟지만 늙어서 인저는 바눌 하나를 들지 못하고 한 뼘을 꼬매지 못하는 이 늙은 네 에미는 엇더케 하란 말이냐? 자식 조타는 것이 무엇 때문이냐?... 이런 말을 하면 또 썩어 빠진 소리를 한다고 핀잔하겟지만 그래도 녀자라는 것은 어려서 부모를 밋고 자라서 시집 간 뒤에는 남편을 밋고 늙어서 골육이 구들 때에는 자식을 밋고 사는 것이 아니냐?- 이 자식아 그런 불효의 말을 하지 말고 늙은 어미 눈 감을 때 까지만 내 눈 압헤서 악착한 꼴을 보히지 마러다고! 「일부 함원에 오월 비상」 이란다. 그 애를 쫏츠면 그 애는 인저 깨진 파긔가 아니냐! 내가 살면 몃 해나 더 살리 라고＜31＞ 내 말을 못드준러단 말이냐....』
부인은 이러케 말하고서 그 자리에서 늣기어 울기 시작 하얏다.
『몰나요! 더리고 게시고 십거든 마음대로 더리고 게서 보십시요. 그려!』
성칠이는 메여다 붓치 듯키 탁 내쏘앗다. 부인은 한참 울다가
『이 자식아! 이 불효의 자식아! 그럴테면 왜 애초에 실타고 그리지 남의 귀중한 딸을 다려다가 이런 꼴을 맨드느냐 응? 왜 장가는 갓서? 응?』
『누가 장가를 가? 장가를 보냇지? 내가 갓나? 언제 내가 장가 들이어 달나고 햇서요? 이 놈 저 놈』 하고서 「죽는다- 산다-」 하고야 단을 치니까 철 몰으는 마음에 그것도 효도라고 장가를 들엇지!... 도대체 누가 잘 못 햇서요? 어머니 아버지가 잘못햇지? 내가 잘못햇서요? 안 됩니다. 세상 업서도 보내고야 맙니다.』
성칠이는 이리케 말하고서 벌떡 니러나드니 건너방에서 눈물을 흘니고 잇는 안해를 끌어 일으키어 노코 묵거 노앗든 짐을 마당으로 동댕이를 처서 입고 잇든 옷을 그대도 입은 채 인력거에 태워서 정거장으로 내몰아 버렷든 것이엇다. 부인은 방바닥을 치고 울엇다. 수 업시 탄식하얏다. 철몰으는 필순이는 덩다러 울고 부르짓고 하얏다.

3

부인은 이 몃 달 동안 지내 온 일을 생각하여 보앗다. 그러케 밋고 바라든 자식이 그 모양으로 자긔를 거사릴 줄은 꿈에도 생각 못하엿든 것이 새삼스럽게 부인을 슬프게 하얏다.
『인저는 그 자식도 나하고는 딴 남이다. 다른 나라 백성이다!』
부인은 이러케 생각 하얏다.- 인저는 아모 것도 바랄 것이 업다. 뼉다구가 굿고 병이 들어서 수족을 못 놀니나 더운 미음 한 그릇 끄려다 줄 사람도 업고 잇는 옷이 터지나 바눌 들고 안저서 꼬매여 줄 사람도 목숨이 껄덕껄덕 넘어 갈 지경에 일으럿스나 머리 맛흘 떠나지 안코 시탕하야 줄 사람도 아모 사람도 업다. 다만 인저 겨오＜32＞ 일곱살된 천 몰으고 작난하고 배곱흐면 군것질 하겟다고 칭얼대며 잠 오면 자리 펴 달나고 짜징이나 부릴 줄 아는 어미 업는 외손녀 하나가 잇슬 따름이다. 몸이 압흐다니 령감이 와 볼터인가 자식이 끔찍하게 알아나 줄터인가- 인저는 나 한 몸뿐이다. 내게 딸닌 것이라고는 저것- 필순이- 하나 밧게는 업다. 그리고는 다- 딴 남이다. 이런 년의 팔자가 잇느냐! 이런 년의 운수가 잇느냐! 자식이 다 무어냐! 가정이 다 무어냐!
부인은 둘레가 썰넝하고 몸이 제절로 읏슥읏슥 치워지는 것을 깨닷고서 그제서야 비로소 구더부튼 쪼굴트리고 안젓든 다리를 펴서 주물르고서 이불 속으로 긔여들어 갓다.
머리는 압흔지 엇던지 몰를 만콤 띄-ㅇ 하얏다. 그런 중에도 천가지 생각 만가지 생각은 머리를 뒤덥허 떠올르는 것이엇다. 닭은 세홰나 울엇다.
『그저 녯날 세상만 가탯스면!』
별안간 이런 생각이 떠올러 왓다. 그러자 온갓 지나간 세월의 편안하고 호화롭고 으리으리하게 지내든 꿈 가튼 광경이 눈 압헤 보히는 것 가탯다. 자긔의 령감이 부모로 부터 물니어 바든 재산은 그다지 만치는 못하엿스나 그 대신 젊어부터 관게(官界)에 출신하야 합방 전 까지 십 여년 동안 나라의 록을 먹어 오는 한편으로 량반의 빗은 더욱 빗나서 가튼 족속들 사이에서도 남 부럽지 안케 지내든 것이며 한 편으로는 다른 량반 들과 가티 토색질을 일삼지 안은 고로 재산은 모으지 못하엿스나마 그 대신 청렴하다는 송덕(頌德)을 들어 오든 것도 생각낫다. 그리고 합방 후 최근 십 년 동안을 가지고 말하드라도 남 부럽지 안케 살든 온갓 안락하고 평화하고 재미 잇든 가정 생활의 토막 토막이 눈 압헤 나타낫다.
『참말로 그 때는 사든 것 가탯는데... 사람 사는 것 갓탯는데...』
오오! 얼마나 부인은 지나간 세월이 다시 그 모든 전과 가튼 풍습과 제도를 가지고 도라 오기를 열망하엿스랴. 부인은 과거에 대하야 무한한 애착을 늣기엇든 것이다. 지나간 사회에 대한 다시 밧구어 말하면 지나간 가정에 대한 끗 업는 동경과 열망을 금하지 못하얏다. 그러타. 부인은 가정에 대해서 끗 업는 동경과 열망을 금하지 못하얏든 것이다. ＜34＞
그러나 부인은 현재의 집안 형편을 살피는 것을 니저 버리지 아니하얏다. 시골 잇는 령감과 며누리를 쫏고 지금은 밥버리도 안코 잇는 자식을 생각해 보앗다. 이러케 해가지고서야 가뎡이라 것이 원만히 되어 갈 수 잇슬 리치가 잇스랴. 령감은 령감대로 자식은 자식대로 딴 짓만 하고 잇스면 가뎡이라는 것은 언제든지 깨어저 버리고야 말 것이다. 조강지처를 쫏처 버리고 가뎡이 될 리치가 업다.- 이것이 모도 다 집안이 망하고 마주막 량반이 망해 버릴 증조라고 부인은 생각하얏다. 그러나 부인은 엇더한 까닭으로 무슨 연유로 자긔 집 가뎡이 다른 자긔들과 지체가 갓고 형편이 똑 가탯든 집안이나 맛찬가지로 망하지 안니 하면 아니된다는 그러한 사회적 리유(社會的 理由)를 알지 못하얏슬 뿐더러 자긔 일 개인의 운명에 대해서도 그 인과(因果)를 깨닷지 못하얏다.
다만 부인이 분하게 생각하고 한심하게 생각한 것은 오즉 조상 때 부터 직히어 오든 도덕이 업서저 가는 것이엇다. 상놈이 량반을 업수히 보고 익이고 나는 것은 이미 오래 전부터 눈이 시도록 보아 내려 온 사실임으로 거지 반이 게급뎍 도덕(階級的 道德)에 대한 부인의 신경은 마비 되야서 지금은 례사의 일로 생각하게 되앗스나 그외에 소위 오륜삼강이 점점 자최를 끈케 되는 것에 대하야는 그러한 사실을 볼 때마다 한심한 늣김을 금하지 못하는 것이엇다. 사람은 엇지하야 사람이라느냐? 그것은 사람은 즘생과 달나서 오륜삼강을 직히는 까닭이라고 부인은 생각하얏다. 애비의 명령을 복종하지 안코 늙은 어미에게 효도하지 안코 죄 업는 안해를 쫏는 자식은 완전히 사람으로서 사람 노릇을 못하는 즘승이라고 생각하얏다.
...송랑은 녀아의 가군이라. 녀아의 생사는 송랑에게 달니엇사 오며 송랑은 녀아의 생살지권을 잡고 잇삽거든 어찌 본 집으로 쪼치섯슴을 구구히 말삼하 오릿가 만은 이제 듯자옵건대 녀아를 영영 버리실 작정으로 세간과 함께 보내신 것이라 하오니 이 곳은 청천에 벽력이 나리고 청청 정정한 송림에 난데 업는 불이 난 것을 당하야 보는 것 보다도 더 한층 놀라고 끔찍함을 견듸기 어렵사오니 어찌 한울을 원망하고 심술구진 연분을 원망치 안켓사오며 하물며 칠거지악은 선왕지법 이거늘 이제 아모 죄명도 업시 집에 와 업대여 우는 녀아의 신세야 살아 무엇 하오릿까. 남아의 축쳡은 인간 상사라 설다 하지 안켓사오나 무죄 축출은 가문에 업는 일이오니 이런 패덕 몰상한 일이 어대 잇삽 우리 모녀 찰하리 죽어서 통분 무쌍한 철천지 한을 풀음이 올켓삽 한울이... ＜34＞
부인은 성칠이가 안해를 쪼친지 사흘만에 사둔댁으로 부터 온 만리장서의 한 구절이 력력히 긔–µ나는 것이엇다. - 아아 이런 일이 어대 일슬까? 이런 봉욕이 어대 잇슬까. 인저는 아조 망할대로 다 망한 세상이다. 내신 수글러서 이 모양까지 보는 것이지... 부인은 다만 가슴을 쥐여 뜻고 속이 싀원하도록 울고 십흘 뿐이엇다.
『인저는 세상이 안타가울 것도 업고 죽기가 어려울 것도 업다. 눈 딱 감고 죽으면 죽는 것이 무엇이 그리워 못 죽겟느냐. 다- 본 세상인데!』
부인은 이러케 혼자 중얼 거렷다. 긴 한숨이 흘럿다. 그 때에 부인은 겻헤 누은 필순이를 나아노코 삼칠이 되지 못하야서 이 세상을 떠난 사랑하든 딸의 일즉 죽은 신세가 부러운 생각을 불연드시 일으키엇다. 그 애나 따러서 나도 죽엇드면-』 하는 생각이 머리를 들고 일어섯다. 솔닙에 부는 바람 소리가 요란하고 말른 떼짱 우에 눈이 길로 싸이어 인적은 끈치고 밥을 찻는 날즘생 길즘생들의 발자최만 잇는 깁흔 산 중에 파뭇친 다만 하나 뿐이든 딸의 신세는 얼마나 편하고 행복한가? 그동안 륙칠년 동안에 신체는 썩엇다 할지라도 그 신세야 늙은 이 어미 보다 편하지 안이한가?
이러케 생각하고서
『흥! 제 팔자 하나 조치! 다만 한 되는 것은 이 세상에 왓다 간 표적이라고 게집아이 하나 밧게 업는 것이지!』
라고 중얼 거렷다.
그리고서 부인은 또 한번 고요히 잠자는 필순이를 드려다 보앗다. 그 갸름한 얼굴판, 그 반듯한 코, 그린 듯한 눈섭, 예쁘고도 단정한 입매 모든 것이 죽은 어미를 박아 노은 듯한 모습에 정신이 빠저서 한참이나 드려다 보다가 부인은 고만 긔운 업시 처들엇든 고개를 벼개 우에 떨어트리면서 뜨거운 눈물을 눈으로 가득히 담엇다.
『오냐! 필순아! 너를 두고 내가 죽을 리치가 잇니. 가엽슨 필순아!...』
부인은 자는 필순이를 끄러다가 자긔의 몸이 뻣뻣 하야서 불편한 것 까지도 니저버리고 이불에 싸인 채로 꼭 끄러 안엇다. ＜35＞

4

사흘 뒤에 부인은 병석에서 일어낫다.
한나절이 지나서 밧게 나아 갓든 성칠이가 도라왓다. 부인은 자긔가 잇는 방은 들여다 보지도 안코 제 방으로 들어가서 문을 탁 다더버리는 성칠이의 모양을 보고서 저윽이 마음 속에 부화가 일어나는 것이엇스나 참고서 악가부터 꼬매고 잇든 필순이의 저고리를 게속 하야 짓기 시작하얏다. 오늘밤까지 닷새 밤만 자면 새해의 첫날이엇슴으로 어룬이야 상관 업지만 어린 아이까지 설비음이라는 것을 입히지 못하면 그 어린 아이가 다른 집 아이들의 설비음을 얼마나 불어워 할 것인가를 부인은 생각하엿든 것이다. 어제 저녁 때
『한머니 나 꼬까 저구리 해 주우?』
하고 필순이가 어리광을 부리는 것을 부인은 측은하게 생각하고서 눈물까지 먹음엇든 것이 사실이다.
『성칠아 너그 방에서 공부하니? 이라로 건너와서 불이나 쬐려무나. 써늘한 방에 혼자 들어 안젓지 말고-』
부인은 건너 방에 잇는 성칠이를 불럿다. 한참 만에 성칠이는 책 한권을 손에 쥐인 채 안 방으로 건너 왓다.
『인제는 아주 쾌차하시지요?』
성칠이는 그 압헤 안즈면서 이러케 말햇다.
『그런 때는 사람의 자식 갓다.-』
『원 별 소리를 다-. 언제는 내가 엇쨋서요?』
『글세 이 자식아 늙은 에미가 사, 오일 동안 죽도록 알타가 일어난 것을 보앗거든 어대를 볼 일이서 나갓다가도 일즉이 돌아 와서 어미 방문을 열어 보아야지. 자식된 도리고 인사가 아니냐. 남의 집 자식 가티 알코 난 뒤에 입맛이 붓흐라고 먹을 것을 사다 어머니 이거 좀 잡서 보시우 하고 권하지는 못할 망정 남의 자식들만양 인사 채릴 줄도 모르니? 이게 다 엽 찔러 절 밧기지. 말해야 소용도 업지만... 어제밤에 하는 모양과 오늘 네＜36＞ 행세를 보니까 인저는 아주 글럿다. 무슨 재미에 웬수로 알고 어미로 생각하지 안는 것을 자식이라고 더리고 가티 산단 말이냐!』
부인은 한 번 말을 중둥에서 끈코는 은근한 한숨을 내쉬엇다. 그리고는 저고리 소매를 다 꼬매고 난 바늘을 빼고서 안을 뒤집어 붓치기 시작하얏다. 그리고 다시 말을 니엇다.
『어미를 웬수로 아는 바에야 그 자식은 자식이 아니지...』
『원 어머니를 누가 어머니를 원수로 안답듸까? 별 말슴을 다하십니다. 나종에는...』
『그럼 원수로 알지 네가 나를 원제 에미로 알앗니? 어미로 알고 섬기엇슬 것이면 내말이라면 긔를 쓸고 반대 햇단 말이냐? 대접상으로 해도 그러치는 못하엿슬 텐데. 무엇이엇재? 「전도 부인 노릇이 그러케 해 보고 십거든 해 보시우」 라고? 너 어제밤에 나더러 그러케 말햇지? 아-니 그게 에미를 에미로 알고 한 소리냐?』
『글세 그러케 말슴할 것이 안예요. 어머리가 하도 되지도 안을 일을 고집만 하시고 더군다나 인저 와서 보내논 게집을 다시 데려 오너라 마러라 하시니까. 그러케 할 수 업다구 말슴햇드니 「그러면 나는 이 집에서 안 살고 령감두 자식두 다 버리구 례배당에 가서 전도 부인이 되어 가지고 나 한 몸이나 어더 먹고 천당길이나 닥겟다」고 당신의 입으로 말슴 하섯지. 언제 그 말이 제가 한 말임니까.』
『그럼 왜 게집은 못 데려 온다니?』
『글세 늘 말하지 안아요. 칠거지악인지 무엔지는 녯날 소리고 공부가 업든 인물이 밉든 마음이- 햇든 엇잿든 간에 첫재 이놈의 마음에 들어야 데리고 살지 안아요? 마음에도 업는 것을 억지로 갓다 노으면 내가 저를 소닥 보듯키 할 터이니 저는 사랑도 업는 남편이라는 것 때문에 평생을 문서 업는 종노릇만 하고야 말 것이니 그런 적 악이 어듸 잇습니까? 어머니는 그러케 안하는 것이 적악이라고 생각하시지만 저는 그러케 하는 것이 적악이고 보내 뻐버고 리혼하는 것이 그 사람에게 도로혀 정당한 일이라고 생각해요. 어머니하고 저하고는 그만콤 뜻이 다르지 안습니까. ＜37＞
『오냐 잘 말한다. 그러케 달느니 어티 한 집에서 살 수 잇니! 그러기에 내가 례배당으로 간댓지! 「예수 예수 내 주여」가 이 년의 팔자지... 전도부인이 내 팔자지!』
부인은 이러케 중얼대엿다. 부인의 심정은 지금 어지러웁기 한량업시 흥분되얏다. 그것은 거지반 밋친 것에 갓가운 심정이엇다.
『아-하! 이 불새한 인생 망해가는 게급의 불상한 인생 영원이 다시 살아나지 못할 이 가련한 인생을 엇더케하면 조흔가? 가티 합할 수 잇느냐? 도저히 되지 못하낟. 그리면 내가 나를 버리고 어머니에게 합하여 들어 갈 수는 잇는냐? 도저히 되지 못한다. 그러면 내버려두자. 이것이 녁사가 질머지워 노은 운명이다!』
성철인는 란조(亂調)로 발전하고 잇는 어머니의 심정을 생각하면서 입속으로 이러케 혼자ㅅ 말하얏다.
『한머니 한머니 나 밥 주우-』
필순이가 밧게서부터 소리를 질르면서 드러왓다. 부인은 저고리하든 것을 엽흐로 치워노코서 언 발을 끌르며 튀여 들어오는 어미업는 외손녀를 안어서 무릅 우에 올녀 안첫다. 그리고는 그 밝앗케 언손을 자긔 입에 대이고서 호-호-하고 입김을 부러주면서 이러케 말햇다.
『필순아! 어듸가서 작란을 하고 왓니? 응 인저 새 저고리를 지어주거든 점잔케 놀고 내 말 잘 들어라. 나희를 한 살 더 먹으면 철이 나는게다 응』
『응 그래 내 말 잘들읏게 응 한머니』
무룹 우에 안즌 것은 응석을 부리느라고 붉으레한 뺨을 한머니의 얼골에 갓다대이엇다. 부인은 끗업는 애정이 넘처서 떨니는 목소리로
『에- 고것 귀엽기도 하다! 어미도 업는 것이-에-고것...』
이러케 말하고서 한 번 더 힘껏 끄러 안엇다. 그러자 별안간 슬픈 생각이 어지러웁게 뭉게뭉게 모혀들어서 목구녕을 콕 막엇다. 부인은 한번 꿀-꺽하는 소리를 내드니 어린 것의 머리우에다 더운 눈물을 쏫기 시작하얏다.＜38＞
『아-하...』
성칠이는 말할 수 업시 괴롭다는 드시 깁흔 한숨을 쉬이고서 머리를 둑북 긁고서 밧갓흐로 휙 나아가버리고 문을 탁 다다버리엇다. 이 모양을 본 듯 만 듯 부인은
『몰순아! 넌 나하고 가틔 살지 응? 나하고 가타 례배당으로 가서 살자 응?...』
철리으는 것의 귀에 대이고 이러케 중얼거릴 때 문득 왼갓 지나간 날의 광경과 또는 압흐로 열닐 자긔의 운명이 일시에 눈압헤 낫하낫다. 례배당에서 거룩한 풍금 소리를 따라서 찬송을 하는 수 백명의 남녀의 모양도 눈에 보히는 것 가탯고 복음전서를 책보에 싸가지고 집집으로 다니며 팔고 또는 전도하는 자신의 모양도 눈에 보이는 것 가탯다. 그리고는 다시 지나간 날의 자긔의 모양이며 또는 싀집 오기 전의 자기의 모양까지도 보히는 듯 하얏다. 부인은 고만 목을 노코 울어버렷다. 무한히 슬퍼든 까닭이다. 다른 것은 다- 몰른다. 다만 자긔 자신이 슬펏든 까닭이다.
『한머니-』
무룹 우에 안젓든 필순이는 방바닥으로 내려안지면서 덩다러 으아-하고 소리내어 울기 시작하얏다. 부인은 슬픈 중에 어린 것의 우름소래를 드르매 더욱 견딀 수 업고 한엽흐로는 또한 어린것에 대한 측은한 마음이 용소슴하는 것을 익이지 못하야.
『오냐 울지마라  응 울지마라!』
하면서 필순이를 다시 끄러안엇스나 북밧치는 울음은 더욱 커지고야 마랏다.
(完)＜39＞
＜24-39＞