잡지명	別乾坤 第22號
발행일	1929년 08월 01일
기사제목	結婚儀式當選發表 (Announcement of Winning Wedding Ceremony Proposals)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Notice/Editor's Afterword)

Announcement of Winning Wedding Ceremony Proposals

As old customs disappear and new ones to replace them have not yet clearly emerged, everyone is at a loss when their wedding approaches. The wedding ceremony proposals that this company previously solicited from the public have gathered a total of seventy-nine entries. After examination and re-selection:

Second Prize (Prize Money: 50 Yen): Ko Kwang-san, 20 Pyeong-dong, Gyeongseong
Second Prize (Prize Money: 50 Yen): Eo Yeong-seon, Danyang (Please notify us of your address in your own handwriting)
Third Prize (Prize Money: 30 Yen): Park Hyeon-gak, Cheonbuk-dong, Seoncheon-myeon, Seoncheon-gun
Third Prize (Prize Money: 30 Yen): Kim Sang-ho
Honorable Mention: Lee Seung-gang, Yudeung-dong, Hwayang-myeon, Cheongdo-gun
Honorable Mention: Lee Myeong-u, Gyeongsang-ri, Pyeongyang

The selections are as above. The reason there was no First Prize winner is because the First Prize winning proposal should be a completely equipped one that anyone can commonly implement. The submitted proposals each had their own strengths and weaknesses, so we felt the need to gather only the strengths of each proposal and create a proposal that embodies only the strengths, and recommend it to the public as a practical, usable proposal.

Therefore, the editorial department will extract the strengths from each submitted proposal, and, taking into account the opinions of people from various fields, create a public proposal and publish it in the next issue of the magazine. In addition, we will donate the First Prize amount of 100 Yen to the first newlywed couple to actually use this proposal. For details, please see the next issue of this magazine.

The winners of the 500 Yen prize for children's reading material were announced in the August issue of Children, and the winners of the student cover competition were announced in the June issue of Students. <97>

Named Entities

高光山	Ko Kwang-san
京城	Gyeongseong
平洞	Pyeong-dong
魚永善	Eo Yeong-seon
丹陽	Danyang
朴鉉珏	Park Hyeon-gak
宣川郡	Seoncheon-gun
宣川面	Seoncheon-myeon
川北洞	Cheonbuk-dong
金相鎬	Kim Sang-ho
李承綱	Lee Seung-gang
淸道郡	Cheongdo-gun
華陽面	Hwayang-myeon
柳等洞	Yudeung-dong
李明瑀	Lee Myeong-u
平壤	Pyeongyang
慶上里	Gyeongsang-ri



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제22호
발행일	1929년 08월 01일
기사제목	結婚儀式當選發表
기사형태	사고·편집후기

結婚儀式當選發表
녯式은 사라지면서 그에 대신할 새것이 분명히 스지 못하야 누구나 結婚를 닥처서 어리둥절하는 이 本社가 일즉이 天下에 公募한 結婚式新案은 모다 七十九篇모인바 考選 再選하야
二等(賞給 五十円) 高光山 京城平洞二○
二等(賞給 五十円) 魚永善 丹陽(自筆로 住所通知하시요)
三等(賞給 參拾円) 朴鉉珏 宣川郡宣川面川北洞
三等(賞給 參拾円) 金相鎬
等外 李承綱 淸道郡華陽面柳等洞
等外 李明瑀 平壤慶上里
이와가티 選定하얏습니다 一等의 選定이업는 것은 적어도 一等當選案은 누구나 共通으로 實行할수잇는 完全具備한것이라야 하겟는데 應募名案이 다 各各一長一短이잇서서 그 各案의 長點만을 取하야한데 모아서 長點만 具備한 案을 맨드러 實際實用案으로 天下에 推薦해야할 必要를 늣긴 닭임니다.
그리하야 編輯室에서 應募된 各案에서 一一히 長點을 取하고  各方面人士의 意見을 參酌하야써 公用案을 지여서 來號誌上에 發表하겟슴니다. 그리고 一等賞金額壹百圓. 무엇다가 이 案을 第一 먼저 實用하는 婚家에 寄贈하겟습니다. 자細한 것은 本誌次號를 자세보십시오
五百圓懸賞中의 少年讀物當選者는 어린이 八月號에 學生表紙當選은 學生六月號에 一一히 發表하엿습니다＜97＞
＜97＞