別건곤 第22號
발행일 1929년 08월 01일
기사제목 大諷刺·大諧謔, 朝鮮近世大名人 鄭壽銅 (Great Satire and Humor: Jeong Su-dong, A Great Modern Figure of Joseon)
필자 鶴步生
기사형태 문예기타 (Arts and Culture Miscellaneous)

The World is a Lie

This world is nothing but lies (虛僞), nothing but contradictions (矛盾), nothing but formalities (形式), nothing but pretense (假飾)... It's a world filled to the brim with these things. Therefore, success and happiness lie in being good at lying and skilled at pretense, and those who skillfully wear masks (假面) and come forward quickly rise to prominence and live glorious lives. Conversely, honest and upright people spend their entire lives struggling and failing to escape misfortune, which is a common example in the world of humans and a deeply rooted iron rule (鐵則) that is hard to change.

Those who linger at or below the horizon live content with a life of flattery (阿O) and shifting fortunes in this false world, but those who are born as extraordinary figures with ideals that are high and far, and with a broad and great mind, stand out above the horizon, do not adhere to the wrong systems created by ambitious people, and the candid character and fierce courage to break the mask of falsehood that cunning people have established satirize the system of the time and laugh at the successful people of the day, thus jumping out of the trap and derailing (脫線) from the rail, inevitably clashing with the people of the world. Such people are called traitors (逆賊), heretics (異端), or madmen (狂人) by the world.

The Birth of a Great Madman

How many traitors jumped out of the trap and how many madmen derailed from the rail were there historically in Joseon? But among those who satirized the wrong system of the time, ridiculed the successful, and acted as great madmen (狂人(?)), no one was greater than our teacher Jeong Su-dong (鄭壽銅). He was the greatest madman (大狂人) in the world (in the eyes of some aristocrats) and the greatest master (大名人) of satire (諷刺劇) of all time.

He was born (出生) one hundred and twenty years ago, in the year of Mu-jin (戊辰), near Baeugae (배우개) below Gyeongseong (京城), and cried for the first time. His family was neither Yangban nor commoner, but of the middle class (中人). His given name was Ji-yun (芝潤), and Su-dong was his pen name. It is said that when he was first born, the character for "longevity" (壽) was written on his left palm, so people called him Su-dong. He lost his father at a young age, and only the income his widowed mother, Mrs. Choi (崔氏), earned by saving every penny from her needlework kept the poor mother and son alive. Because he came from a poor family and lived a humble life, his personality was defined by integrity (介潔), which was a special characteristic of his entire being. Secondly, his writing and drinking skills surpassed those of Li Bai (李太白), and thirdly, his humor (諧謔) and wit (才談) were full of strange and clever satire and jokes (滑稽). Every word satirized the power of the noble families (權門), and his every laugh and every move sent shivers down the spines of the high-ranking officials (高官大爵) of the time, becoming a piercing warning (警句) and a source of fear. Therefore, he brought pleasure to those who heard and saw him.

Until His Madness (狂症) Broke Out

He was born with a nature as pure as crystal (水晶) and a integrity as clear and cold as ice (淸寒). As he grew up innocently, he saw the whole world outside of himself as a sewer (汚泥溝) and everyone wearing a mask (탈박아지). If you took off the mask, you would see cunning devils and lumps of sin, and the sewer would only give off a nose-stinging smell if you dug it up. Yet, in that world, only such people could become rich and high-ranking officials and enjoy all sorts of blessings, while the upright and honest were always trampled in the mud. Moreover, in those days, if one's family background was good, even a fetus in the womb was guaranteed to become a prime minister or governor, and no matter how outstanding a person was, if he was born into a commoner's or middle-class (中人) family, he would never be able to use the talent and power he possessed, and would simply wither away like a plant. That was the flaw in the system at the time.

Jeong Su-dong originally possessed the talent to take the sky as his roof and the earth as his mat, and the magnanimity to swallow Mount Tai and the East Sea (東海), but the fact that he was born into the despised middle class (中人) meant that no one would ever look to him. Moreover, if a person was too outstanding, people would worry that he might cause some big trouble, so they would always try to suppress him and forcibly restrain him. Teacher Jeong Su-dong was one of those who were suppressed and restrained, so he always harbored resentment in his heart and went around the houses of the nobles in Bukchon and the powerful officials of the present day, watching what they were doing. He observed foolish guests (門客) who brought hundreds or thousands of bags of rice from the countryside and offered them to the minister in hopes of getting a governorship (守令=원님), and the brigand-like ministers who tricked people from the countryside, eating the gold nuggets made with their blood and sweat, and only fattening their bellies. Watching their lackeys was his daily routine (日課) and great business. And on the way back, he would get drunk on three cups of alcohol at the Supyo Bridge (水標橋) and return home, which was his daily pleasure (娛樂).
慶尙監司孰爲之. Who becomes the Gyeongsang Governor?
弘文提學我不知. I do not know the Hongmun Deputy Scholar.
水標橋上三杯酒. Three cups of wine on the Supyo Bridge
正是男兒得意時. Is exactly the time when a man is satisfied.

From this poem alone, one can understand his feelings, and from the fact that he wrote one hundred verses of five-character poetry (五言詩百韻) in one night at the request of Jo Du-sun (趙斗淳), one can understand how much of a genius he was and what kind of feelings of sorrow and indignation (悲憤慷慨) he had. (Poetry omitted) <173>

One Pun is Candle Money

He was Jeong Su-dong (뎡수동) who was good at telling stories, Jeong Su-dong (뎡수동) who was good at joking, and Jeong Su-dong (뎡수동) who was a terrible verbalist (毒舌家) who stabbed people's stomachs with sharp satire.

Once, he went into a tavern, drank a glass of alcohol, and it seemed to be very sour (酸). He closed his eyes, swallowed his saliva, paid two pun (푼) for two glasses of alcohol without saying a word, and ran away without looking back. The tavern owner called out, "Hey! Hey!" picked up the one pun (푼) he'd overpaid, and chased after him. After a while, he grabbed him and returned the one pun (푼) saying he'd overpaid. But he waved his hand.
"Hey! One pun (푼) is for the alcohol..."
"That's right! Then what is the other pun (푼) for?"
"The other pun (푼) is for candle money..." <175>

Thousands and Tens of Thousands of Nyang, Gulp Gulp

A high official's house where he lived was being built in front of his house. One day, there was a commotion in the outbuilding of that house, with people shouting as if they were dying. He was sitting in his private quarters when, out of curiosity, he sent someone to call the servant from the high official's house who was making the commotion and asked what the reason was. The servant, with his voice catching in his throat, said
"The young master of the house put a pun (푼) in his mouth and swallowed it. What should we do?"
"Whose money is it?"
The composed Jeong Su-dong (뎡수동) asked this. The servant said
"He swallowed his own money!"
"Then just rub his stomach! Nothing will happen..."
The servant, being in a hurry, didn't ask why and went back. After a while, the servant came running back with a group of people, complaining to Jeong Su-dong (뎡수동).
"Hey! I can't seem to get it to go down no matter how much I rub his stomach. Why didn't you tell me properly?"
Jeong (뎡) was furious and said
"Hey! You fool! Your master gulps down thousands and tens of thousands of nyang (냥) of other people's money, and nothing happens if he just rubs his lower belly. How can you be so worried that your son swallowed one pun (푼) of his own money? Just rub his stomach and it will go down..."

Even a Credit is a First Sale

One year, on the first day of the New Year, he came to a tavern where he usually got credit. The owner, unlike other days, warmed the alcohol well and served rice cake soup. He didn't even glance at the rice cake soup or fruit, only looking at the weight of the alcohol bottle and drinking as he poured, pouring and drinking, until it seemed like a whirlwind was blowing on the table. After he made such a fuss, the heavy alcohol bottle became light at some point. The owner said, "I'm sorry, the alcohol is all gone." As soon as the owner finished speaking, he clapped his knees as if he had been waiting and began to speak.
"Perhaps the only person in this world who understands other people's situations is the owner of this house..."
The owner, not knowing what he meant, stared at his face and asked what situation he understood so well. He laughed again and said
"Didn't the owner just say that he was sorry because there wasn't much alcohol left? That's truly a way to understand other people's situations... If it were anyone else (안인개), I would be sorry too because I only got to tickle my throat with the few glasses of alcohol..."
Hearing this, the owner was speechless and dumbfounded. He continued to speak, saying that since the owner understood his situation so well, he should take good care of him. When asked how he should take care of him, he said
"I can't ask for more New Year's alcohol out of consideration, so from now on, bring me the alcohol you sell."
So, he started drinking the alcohol that was brought again, and after getting quite drunk, he pretended not to know anything and quietly got up and left. Seeing this, the owner couldn't bear it and asked
"How about the alcohol bill?"
"Alcohol bill? I don't have any money..."
"Hey! Who puts credit on the first sale of the New Year?"
"Hey owner! Because it's the first day of the New Year, even credit is a first sale... Look at this pitiful situation..."

The Smaller the Gallbladder (肝膽), the Better

Once, Jeong Su-dong (뎡수동) went sightseeing in Mount Myohyang (妙香山). A rumor spread among the villagers that he had gone to Mount Myohyang (妙香山) to become a monk (僧), and it eventually reached his wife, Mrs. Kim (金氏), who was very curious. A few days later, he came home, and his wife was so happy that she quickly led him into the room and said
"Oh, welcome back. I heard a rumor that you went to Mount Myohyang (妙香山) to become a monk, and I was so worried."
Hearing this, he nodded.
"Yes! That's indeed fortunate... The smaller the gallbladder (肝膽), the better..."
"The smaller the gallbladder (肝膽), the better?"
"If a woman has a large gallbladder (肝膽), she is likely to be unfaithful, and if a commoner has a large gallbladder (肝膽), he will only get his buttocks beaten and be exiled. If a nobleman (양반) has a large gallbladder (肝膽), he will only steal the wealth of the people and the positions of the country..."
How much satire and philosophical words (哲言) are contained in these three sentences about the system of the time!

The Pig Thought it Paid for the Taste

One day, he went to a tavern where he usually got credit and pleaded with the owner, saying
"I'm very hungry for alcohol right now, but I don't have any money. If you give me credit this one time, I'll come back in a few days and pay for everything at once."
But the owner immediately gave him a harsh look and went inside. Seeing his attitude, he was disappointed (락망) and sat down at the edge of the porch, staring blankly at the distant mountains. Then, a pig came running out of nowhere and started eating the scattered rice mash in the yard. He watched silently, and after a while, the owner came out from inside, saw it, was shocked, hurriedly chased the pig away, and looked at Jeong (뎡)
"Hey! Are you just watching the pig eat the rice mash? You should have chased it away."
"Huh! I thought the pig was paying for the taste..."

It's the Minister's Manggeon (網巾)

One minister was about to wash his face and put on his manggeon (網巾) before breakfast, but the manggeon (網巾) was nowhere to be found, causing a commotion and panic among all the servants in the manor. Amidst the chaos, Jeong Su-dong (뎡수동), who had gotten drunk the night before and slept, remained calm. Then, someone found a manggeon (網巾) with worn-out horsehair in a corner and shouted, asking whose tattered manggeon (網巾) it was. Only then did Jeong Su-dong (뎡수동) say
"Oh! That's my manggeon (網巾)!"
"Then whose manggeon (網巾) are you wearing now?"
"This is the minister's manggeon (網巾)..."
The clerk was so dumbfounded that he couldn't speak, but finally said
"Hey, why are you wearing the minister's manggeon (網巾)?"
"My manggeon (網巾) is lost, and yet you're making such a fuss and having the whole family search for it..."

Tears at the Thought of My Older Brother

Once, he went to visit a friend, and the host served him alcohol, but the glass was so small that he couldn't drink comfortably. After drinking a few glasses, he suddenly started sobbing while holding the glass, which made the host feel strange.
"Why are you crying all of a sudden while drinking?"
"I'm crying at the thought of my deceased older brother."
"Why? What happened to your brother...?"
"My older brother was drinking alcohol, and the glass was so small that he swallowed the glass out of frustration and died..."

A Tiger-Riding Noble Thief

This also happened at the manor of a certain high official in Bukchon. The host and several guests (門客=people who came from the countryside with land to sell in order to get a government position) were sitting in a room, bored and wondering, "What is the most frightening thing in the world?" They each gave their answers, saying that centipedes, poisonous snakes (毒蛇), tigers, thieves, and noblemen (량반) were frightening. However, Jeong Su-dong (뎡수동), who was good at talking, sat on the side without saying a word, so the host looked at him and asked
"Why don't you say anything?"
He finally opened his mouth and said
"I'm most afraid of a tiger-riding noble (량반) thief!"

I Only Knew it with My Mouth

One day, he went to visit a friend who was known for being stingy (吝嗇). When it was evening, the room was so dark that they couldn't see each other's faces, but the host didn't turn on the light. Even when dinner was served, he didn't turn on the light, which made Jeong Su-dong (뎡수동) feel uncomfortable. As they were eating at the same table, he grabbed a huge lump of rice, as big as a wooden pillow, and, pretending not to know anything, shoved it into the host's mouth. The host was startled and spat out the rice.
"Hey, what's going on?"
"Huh? I only knew it with my mouth..."

He's Gone! Gone, Who? Jeong Su-dong (뎡생원) is Gone!

A certain powerful minister (재상) was so fond of old stories (녯날 이약이) that every night he would gather guests in a room and tell stories, among which he liked the stories of Jeong Su-dong (뎡생원) the most. So, the various guests were trying to find ways to please the minister (대감) by bringing interesting stories to match his taste. Among them, one guest (문객) was not good at speaking and was mentally dull, so he couldn't tell a single story. Seeing the others flattering and telling interesting stories that made the minister laugh, he was envious and jealous. After trying everything he could, he sought out Jeong Su-dong (뎡생원), treated him to drinks several times, and begged him to teach him just one good story. Jeong Su-dong (뎡생원) taught him one story, but no matter how many times he repeated it, he couldn't remember a single word. So, he came up with a plan. Jeong Su-dong (뎡생원) would hide outside the sliding door of the main hall (큰 사랑), and the guest would sit right in front of the sliding door and repeat the words that Jeong Su-dong (뎡생원) whispered through the door. They made a firm promise to do so, and that night, when the story-telling began, the guest was the first to say
"Minister (대감), tonight, this servant (侍生) will also tell a story."
The other guests and the host were amazed
"So, you're going to tell a story?"
Jeong Su-dong (뎡생원) whispered from outside the door, "There was a guy who was doing the same thing!"
The guest followed and said
"There was a guy who was doing the same thing!"
"That's right! And so..."
"He was going on a long journey... He encountered deep mountains... Suddenly, a tiger as big as a house roared and charged at him!"
"And so..."
Having said this much, Jeong Su-dong (뎡생원) quietly left. The guest was speechless. The minister (대감) kept urging him to tell what happened next. The guest kept looking at the door, dumbfounded. Unable to withstand the minister's (대감) urgent prodding, he blurted out
"He's gone!"
"Gone? Who? Where did he go?"
"Jeong Su-dong (뎡생원) is gone!"
Only then did they realize what was going on, and everyone, including the minister (대감) and the guests, burst into laughter.<62>

**Named Entities**

鄭壽銅	Jeong Su-dong
鶴步生	Hak Bo-saeng
李太白	Li T'aebaek
趙斗淳	Cho Tu-sun
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
崔氏	Ch'oe-ssi
妙香山	Myohyangsan
金氏	Kim-ssi
水標橋	Supyo-gyo



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제22호
발행일	1929년 08월 01일
기사제목	大諷刺·大諧謔, 朝鮮近世大名人 鄭壽銅
필자	鶴步生
기사형태	문예기타

大諷刺·大諧謔, 朝鮮近世大名人 鄭壽銅
						鶴步生
세상은 거짓

이 세상은 거짓(虛僞)뿐! 어그러진 일(矛盾)뿐! 형식(形式)뿐! 가식(假飾)뿐... 만 잔뜩-뻑뻑하게 채여잇는 것이 이 세상이란다. 그러키 때문에 거짓을 잘 하고 가식에 능한데서 성공이 잇고 행복이 잇스며 탈(假面)을 잘 꿈여쓰고 나아오는 놈이 속히 출세(出世)하고 얼는 영광스러운 생활을 하는 법이다. 그와 정반대로 정직하고 청렴(淸廉)한 사람은 한평생 고생사리와 불운(不運)에서 헤여나지를 못하게 되는 것이 사람놈 세상의 허다한 실례(實例)가 되엿스며 또한 얼핏 변경하기 어려우리만치 뿌리 깁게 박혀 잇는 텰측(鐵則)이라면 텰측이 되여 잇다.
디평선(地平線)이나 디평선 이하에서 헤매는 사람은 이 거짓의 세상 어그러진 텬하에서 그냥 그대로 국죽을 쑤어가면서 아첨(阿O)의 생활, 추이(推移)의 행세에 감심(甘心)하고 만족해 살지만은 원악 사람됨이 디평선 우으로 어긔뚱하게 뛰여나서 리상(理想)이 놉고 멀며 흉도(胸度)가 넓고 크게 생겨난 걸물(傑物)이고 보면 야심가(野心家)들이 만드러내는 틀린 제도(制度)에 억매이지 안코 간특한 몸들이 전례를 지어노은 거짓의 탈을 한주먹으로 때려 부스려는 솔직한 성격과 맹렬한 용긔의 발로는 때의 제도를 풍자(諷刺)하고 당대의 득의자(得意者)를 비웃나니 이럼으로 통발에서 뛰여나오고 레-루에서<173> 탈선(脫線)하야 세상놈들과 충돌하고야 마는 것이니 이런 사람을 때의 세상에서는 역적(逆賊)이니 이단(異端)이니 혹은 광인(狂人)이니 하는 것이다.

大狂人의 出生

통발에서 뛰여난 역적이며 레-루에서 탈선한 광인이 조선에서 력사뎍으로 보아서 그 얼마나 만엇더냐? 만은 때의 그릇된 제도를 풍자하고 득의자를 비우스며 광인(?) 중에도 대광인의 짓을 하든 이는 누구보담도 우리 뎡수동(鄭壽銅)선생일 것이다. 그는 텬하에 대광인(一部貴族의 눈으로 보아서)이엿스며 풍자극(諷刺劇)에는 만고에 대명인(大名人)이엿섯다.
그가 낫(出生)키는 지금으로부터 일백이십 년 전 무진(戊辰)년에 경성 아래대(배우개) 근처서 비로소 첫소리를 웨치고 나아왓다. 그의 나흔 집은 양반도 상놈도 안이오 중인(中人)계급이엿다. 그의 일음은 지윤(芝潤)인대 수동은 그의 별호이다. 그가 처음 낫슬 적에 왼쪽 손바박에 목숨수(壽)ㅅ자가 쓰여 잇섯더라고 해서 세상사람이 수동이 수동이로 불러왓다. 그는 어려서 아버지를 여의고 다만 청상과부의 어머니 최씨(崔氏)의 바늘 끄테서 한푼 두푼 모으는 수입으로 불상한 모자의 잔명을 니어 나아갓다. 이러케 빈한한 집에서 빈천한 생활을 해나려 왓든이만치 그의 성격은 개결(介潔)이라는 것이 온 인격의 특뎜이며 둘재로는 글 잘하고 술 잘먹는 것이 리태백(李太白)을 압도하고 셋재로는 긔긔묘묘한 풍자와 골계(滑稽)를 느러놋는 해학(諧謔)과 재담(才談) 그것이다. 말끗마다 권문(權門)의 세도를 풍자하고 그의 한번 웃고 한번 움지기는데 때의 고관대작(高官大爵)으로 하여금 소롬이 쪽쪽 낏치고 살을 찔르는 듯한 경구(警句)이며 두려움이 되엿다. 그럼으로 듯는 사람 보는 사람에게 통쾌를 늣기게 하엿다.

그가 狂症, 發하기까지

그는 텬성이 수정(水晶)과 가티 깨끗하고 어름과 가티 청한(淸寒)한 절개를 가지고 태여나서 그대로 가만이 순진하게 커나고 보니 자긔몸 밧게는 온 세상이 시궁창(汚泥溝)이오 사람마다가 꿈여논 탈박아지 뿐이다. 탈만 훌떡 벗기고 보면 간특한 마귀이며 죄악떵어리이고 시궁창은 들추기만 하면 코를 찔으는 냄새뿐이엿다. 그러면서도 그런 세상에서 그런 놈이라야 부귀도 하고 고관대작도 하야 가진 복록을 다 누리지만은 개결하고 정직한 사람은 언제나 진창구렁에서 여지업시 짓밟히기만 한다. 더구나 그때 그 세월에는 그 집 문벌만 조흐면 배ㅅ속에 드러잇는 태떵어리만이라도 발서 정승판서와 경상감사는 떼논 당상이고 제아무리 두드러지게 잘난 인물이라도 아무의 자손이 안인 상놈이나 중인의 집에서<174> 나흔 놈이고 보면 제한평생 품은 재조와 뿜내는 힘을 한번도 써보지도 못하고 그만 그대로 초목과 한가지 살어저 업서지고 마는 것이 그 때 그 제도의 결뎜이엿다.
뎡수동의 사람됨이 원래 한울을 날로하고 땅을 씨로 할만한 재조와 태산과 동해(東海)를 집어삼킬 만한 도량(度量)을 몸에 가젓 것만 그 원수의 중인의 집에 태여낫다는 것이 한가지 험절로 영영 도라다 보는 이가 업슬 뿐 안이라 사람이 그러케 두드러지게 잘나고 보면 무슨 큰일이나 닐으켜 낼ㅅ가 념려하야 어대까지든지 나려누르고 억제로 잡어꺽그려고 애를 쓰는 것이다. 뎡수동 선생도 여긔 나려눌리고 잡어꺽긴 이의 한 사람이엿슴으로 항상 울분한 정회를 가슴에 품고 양반놈들과 현재 요로대관(要路大官)놈들이 엇더한 짓거리를 하는가 하고 날마다 날마다 남북촌 재상의 집으로만 도라단이며 시골서 몃 백 석 몃 천 석 하는 재산을 톡톡 터러 송도리채 갓다가 재상께 밧치고 수령(守令=원님)개나 어더할려는 어리석은 문객(門客)들이며 벼슬 식혀 주겟다고 꾀여가지고 싀골 사람의 피땀 흘려 만드러 노은 황금떵어리를 널늠널늠 집어먹고 나서 뱃심만 부리는 날도적놈의 대감의 꼴악신이를 보려 단이는 것이 그의 일과(日課)이며 큰 사업이엿다. 그리고 도라오는 길에는 수표교(水標橋) 다리가에서 석잔 술에 취흥을 도도며 도라오는 것이 그의 날마다의 오락(娛樂)이엿다.
慶尙監司孰爲之. 경상감사를 누가 햇느냐.
弘文提學我不知. 홍문뎨학은 나는 모른다.
水標橋上三杯酒. 수표교우의 석잔 술이
正是男兒得意時. 정히남자의 득의 한때더라.
이 글만 보아도 그의 심사를 알 수가 잇스며 됴정승(趙斗淳)의 청으로 하로밤 사이에 오언시백운(五言詩百韻)을 지은 것만 보아도 그가 얼마나한 텬재이며 어떠한 비분강개(悲憤慷慨)의 정회를 가젓든 것을 살필 수 잇다.(詩略)

한푼은 초ㅅ갑

그는 이약이 잘하는 뎡수동이며 재담 잘하는 뎡수동이엿스며 날카라운 풍자술로 사람의 배창사를 드려찔으는 무서운 독설가(毒舌家)의 뎡수동이엿다.
언제인가 어느 술집에 드러간 그는 술 한 잔을 마시고 나서보니 대단이 맛이 시든(酸) 모양이라 눈을 감으며 침을 드려마시며 두말 업시 술 두 잔 갑 돈 두 푼을 내어노코 뒤로 도라보지 안코 쏜살가티 나아간다. 술집 주인은 『여보! 여보!』 불으다가 그 돈 한 푼을 집어들고 줄다림질로 쪼차온다. 얼마와서 그를 붓들고 술 한잔 갑 더 왓다고 도로 내어주니 그는 손을 홱 뿌리면서
『여보! 한 푼은 술갑이지...』
『그럿치요! 그런데 또 한 푼은 무엇이오?』
『또 한 푼은 초ㅅ갑이지...』<175>

千兩萬兩, 꼴딱꼴딱

그가 살고 잇는 집 압헤 어느 대감집이 사는데 어느 날 그 집 행랑에서 별안간 죽느니 사느니 야단법석이 낫다. 그때 자긔 사랑에 안저 잇다가 하두 궁금중이 나서 사람을 보내어 지금 한참 떠드러대는 대감집 하인을 불러서 무슨 까닭인가를 무러보앗섯다. 그 하인은 숨이 턱에 닷는 목소리로
『집의 어린 것이 돈 한 푼을 입에 넛다가 그냥 꼴딱 삼키엇스니 이것을 엇지 함닛가.』
『돈은 뉘 돈이란 말이냐?』
태연한 뎡수동은 이러케 무럿다. 하인은
『제 돈을 삼켯답니다!』
『그러면 배만 문질러라! 아무 탈도 엇슬 것이니...』
이 말을 들은 그 하인은 워낙 일이 급한지라 그 까닭을 물어물 새도 업시 그만 도로가더니 한동안 잇다가 그 하인 우루루 쪼차와서 뎡수동을 원망하는 말투로
『여보세요! 나 원 배를 암만 나려문질러야 종시 나려가지는 안는 모양인데 생원님은 왜? 잘 가프처주지를 안코서...』
뎡생원! 화를 버럭 내면서
『얘! 이 미련한 자식아! 너의 집 주인대감은 남의 돈을 몃 천 량 몃 만 량 꼴딱꼴딱 삼키고도 아래배만 슬슬 나려문질르면 아무 탈이 업는데 네 자실이 제 돈 한 푼쯤 삼켯기로 그게 무슨 큰 탈이 날 것이라구 그리 걱정이냐? 배만 문질르면 그만 나흘걸...』

외상도 마수거리

어느 해 정월 초하로ㅅ날, 단골로 외상 먹든 술집을 차저왓다. 주인은 다른 날과 다르다고 술을 두둑히 데우고 떡국을 내어 대접한다. 상을 바든 그는 떡국이니 과실이니 하는 것은 눈꽁댕이로도 거듭떠보지 안코, 다만 술ㅅ병 무게만 바라보면서 딸으면 마시고 마시곤 또 딸으고 부어라 먹자 타령으로 잔대에서 회리 바람이 닐어나리만치 부산하게 딸으고 부산하게 마신다. 이와 가티 한참 동안 부스대기를 친 끄테 묵직하든 술병은 어느 틈에 갓분하게 되엿다. 주인은 그만 『약주가 다 되어서 미안함니다.』 주인의 말이 막-끗나자 기다리고 잇섯든 것처름 무릅을 탁 치면서 말문이 열리기 시작한다.
『아마 이 세상 사람 중에 남의 사정 잘 알어 주기는 이 집 주인 한 사람 뿐일ㅅ걸...』
주인은 무슨 말인지 몰라서 그의 얼골을 뻔이 치어다보면서 내가 무슨 사정을 그러케 잘 아느냐고 도로 물은즉 그는 또 한 번 너털우슴을 치면서
『지금 주인의 말이 몃 잔 안 되여서 미안하다고 말하지 안 엇소? 그게 참말 남의 사정을 잘 아는 말이지... 안인개<176> 안이라 약주가 몃 잔 못 되여서 목구멍만 간질간질하다 말엇스니 나 역시 미안한걸...』
이 말을 들은 주인은 긔가 막혀서 어안이 벙벙 말이 나오지를 안는다. 그는 연송 말끗이 줄달아 나아오는데 이왕 주인이 내 사정을 잘 알엇스니 사정을 톡톡이 잘 보아 달라고 한다. 사정을 보랴면 어떠케 보느냐고 물은즉
『세배ㅅ술은 내톄면에 더 달랄 수 업스니 지금부터는 파는 술로 가저오시우.』
이리해서 다시 차려드러 온 술을 또 딸아먹기 시작을 하더니 어지간이 취한 뒤에는 시침이를 뚝 떼이고 슬그먼이 그냥 닐어 나아간다. 이 거동을 본 주인은 참다못해서
『술갑은 어떠케 하고 가십닛가?』
『술갑? 돈이 업는걸...』
『여보세요! 정월 초하로ㅅ날 마수거리에 누가 외상을 놋켓슴닛가?』
『여보 주인! 정월 초하로ㅅ날이기 때문에 외상도 마수거리이지...이런 딱한 말 보아...』

담(肝膽)은 적을수록 조타

뎡수동은 언제인가 묘향산(妙香山) 구경을 갓는데 동리사람 중으로서 그가 이번에 묘향산으로 중(僧)이 되려고 드러갓다는 말이 핑핑 돌아서 급기야 그 부인 김씨의 귀에까지 그 말이 드러가 몹시 궁금해하든 차에 몃칠 후에 집으로 도라오는지라 그 부인은 엇지나 반갑든지 얼는 방으로 모시어노코
『아이구 반가워라. 나는 그 동안에 중이 되랴고 묘향산으로 가섯다는 소문을 듯고 간이 콩알만 하엿섯담니다.』
이 말을 들은 그는 고개를 끄덕끄덕
『응! 그건 과연 다행이로군...간은 적을스록 조흔데...』
『간이 적을스록 조타니요?』
『녀자가 간이 크며 행실이 부정하기 쉬운 법이고 상놈이 간이 크면 볼기만 맛고 귀양만 가는 법이요 양반이 간이 크면 백성의 재물과 나라의 벼슬만 도적질하는 법이지...』
이 세 마듸가 얼마나한 그때의 제도를 풍자함이며 텰언(哲言)이 되엿는가!

도야지는 맛돈 낸 줄 알엇지

어느 날 그는 단골로 외상 술 마터 먹는 술집에 드러가서 주인에게 사정하는 말이
『내가 지금 술배는 몹시 곱흐나 돈은 한푼도 업스니 이번 한번만 외상을 주고 보면 전후세음은 일간 와서 한목에 하겟소.』
하엿더니 주인은 대번에 핀잔을 십퍼럿케 주고는 그냥 안으로 드러갓다. 그는 그 무텸을 보고 그만 락망을 하고<177> 마루 끄테 거러안저 먼산만 머-ㅇ하니 바라보고 안젓노라니 어대서인지 도야지 한 마리가 쿨쿨 뛰여나아와 마당에 널린 술ㅅ밥을 터벅터벅 집어 먹는다. 그는 아무 말 업시 물그럼이 바라보고만 잇스니까 조곰 잇다가 안으로서 나아오는 주인은 그것을 보고서 대경질색 급히 도야지를 후둘겨 쪼차노코서 뎡을 치어다 보면서
『여보시요 원! 도야지가 술밥 먹는 것을 뻔이 보고만 잇단 말이요? 좀 쪼처줄 것이지.』
『흥! 나는 도야지는 맛돈 내고 먹는 줄로만 알엇지...』

대감 망건(網巾)이지

어느 재상이 식전에 세수를 하고 망건(網巾)을 쓰랴는데 망건이 간 곳이 업는지라 야단법석이 닐어나며 온 사랑 사람들은 불끈 뒤집어 업고 매우 황황급급 하엿다. 그러는 중에도 어적게 밤에 한 잔 잔뜩 취하여 와서 자던 뎡수동은 꼼짝도 안코 태연이 안저잇다. 그리다가 어느 구석에 청직이가 다 떠러진 망건 하나를 차저 내들고 이 걸네 가튼 망건은 뉘것이냐고 웨치니까 그제야 뎡수동
『응! 그것 내 망건이요!』
『그러면 지금 생원님 쓰시고 게신 것은 웬 망건임닛가?』
『이것은 대감 망건이지...』
청직이는 하도 긔가 막혀서 말문이 막히다가
『여보세요 도대뎨 대감 망건은 왜 쓰시고 게십닛가?』
『내 망건이야 일허버렷다기로 이러케 야단스럽게 온 집안 사람이 뒤끄려 차저주나...』

우리 형님 생각에 눈물

한 번은 어느 친구를 차저 갓더니 그 주인이 술이라구 대접을 하기는 하는데 대톄 술잔이 적어서 갑갑증이 나서 마실 수가 업다. 몃잔 마신 뒤에 잔을 들고 별안간 훌쩍훌쩍 울고 잇스니까 주인이 이상스러워서
『약주를 잡수시다가 별아간에 웬일임닛가?』
『도라가신 우리 형님 생각에 눈물이 남니다.』
『왜? 백씨께서 엇재섯기에...요?』
『우리 형님이 술을 마시다가 술잔이 적어서 갑갑한 김에 술잔 채 집어 삼키고 도라가섯다우 ...』

호랑이 탄 량반 도적놈

이것도 북촌 어느 대감집 사랑에서 한 일이다. 주인 대감과 여러 문객(門客=벼슬어더하랴고 시골서 땅파러 가지고 온 사람들)들이 한방 잔뜩 도라안저서 일이 업서 심심은 하고 『이 세상에서 무엇이 뎨일 무서운 것이냐?』 라는 문뎨를 내여 가지고 제각기 답안을 뎨출하는데 지네가 무섭다, 독사(毒蛇)가 무섭다, 호랑이가 무섭다, 도적놈이 무섭다, 량반이 무섭다는 등 별의별 소리가 다 만이 나아오나<178> 그 말 잘하는 뎡생원은 한 엽헤 안진 채 열 입을 열지 안음으로 주인대감 그를 건너보면서
『자네는 왜? 한마듸 업는가?』
그는 그제야 입을 떼여
『나는 호랑이 탄 량반 도적놈이 뎨일 무서웁듸다!』

나는 내 입으로만 알엇지

하로로 어느 인색(吝嗇)하기로 유명한 친구를 차저갓다. 저녁때가 되여서 방안은 서로 얼골을 알어볼 수 업스리만치 어둠캄캄하것만은 주인은 불도 켜지 안코 잇다가 저녁상이 나아와도 종시 불을 켜지 안는지라 뎡생원은 마음에 괫심하게 생각하든 차에 마침 겸상을 해서 먹게 되어서 한참 먹다가 밥을 한 숙갈 목침뎅이만하게 꾹꾹 뭉치어 가지고 시침 딱 떼고 주인의 입에다가 콱 트러 너엇다. 주인은 깜짝 놀라서 그 밥을 도로 탁 배트면서
『여보게 이게 웬일인가?』
『응? 나는 내 입으로만 알엇지...』

갓슴니다! 가다니, 누가? 뎡생원이 갓슴니다!

어느 세도하는 재상이 녯날 이약이를 엇지나 질기는지 밤이면은 문객들을 온 방안으로 하나 갓득 모아노코 이약이를 식히는데 그 중에도 잇다금 놀러가는 뎡생원의 이약이를 뎨일 조아한다. 그런데 여러 문객들은 어떠케 하면 주인대감의 마음을 사볼ㅅ가하고 별의별 짓을 다해서래도 자미스러운 이약이ㅅ거리를 가지고 대감의 비위를 맛추려고 서로서로 애를 쓴다. 그 가운데 한 사람의 문객은 워낙 말 재조가 업고 정신이 흐리여서 이약이란 한마듸도 할 줄을 몰으는지라. 다른 사람의 아첨하는 얼골 빗으로 자미잇는 말을 해서 대감이 깔깔 웃는 꼴을 보고는 무한 부럽기도 하고 심술도 나서 별 애를 다 써보다가 모도 안되니까 곰곰 생각하든 끄테 뎡생원을 차저서 여러 번이나 술대접을 하고 조흔 이약이를 하나만 꼭 가르처 달라고 성화를 대임으로 한가지를 가르처 주엇더니 몃번씩 되집허 가르처야 도모지 한마듸를 옴기지 못하는지라 할 수 업시 연구한 결과 한 계교를 내여 뎡생원은 큰 사랑의 미닫이 밧게 숨어 안고 그 문객은 미닫이 바로 미테 안저서 문 밧그로 뎡생원이 가만이 드려보내는 말을 그 문객이 그대로 바더 옴기기로 하엿다. 그와 가티 약됴를 단단이 하고 그날 밤에 이약이 판이 시작될 적에 그 문객이 뎨일 먼저
『대감 오늘 밤에는 시생(侍生)도 이약이 한마듸 하겟슴니다.』
여러 문객이며 주인대감은 엇지나 신긔하든지
『그래 자네가 다 이약이를 한단 말인가?』<179>
뎡생원은 문 밧그로서 『예도 한 놈이 잇더람니다그려!』
하니까 그 문객도 딸아서
『예도 한 놈이 잇더람니다그려!』
『그러치! 그래서...』
『머-ㄴ 길을 가는데... 첩첩산중을 당햇슴니다...그런데 별안간에 집태 가튼 호랑이가 어흥하고 달래드러 덤빔니다그려!』
『그래서...』
이만치 해 노코서 뎡생원은 슬그먼이 나아가 뻐리엿다. 그만 문객은 말문이 막혓다. 대감은 그래서 엇지 되엿느냐고 작구만 재촉을 한다. 문객은 그랄스록 문틈만 내어다 보면서 벙벙이 안젓다가 대감의 성화 가튼 재촉에 견대다 못해서 얼는 쑥 나오는 말이
『갓슴니다!』
『가다니? 누가? 가기는 어대를 가?』
『뎡생원이 갓슴니다!』
그제야 그 내막을 알어채고서 대감 문객할 것 업시 일시에 빠구르르 우슴보가 터저서 왓작 한바탕 우슴판이 되엿섯다.<62>
<173-179>