Magazine Title: 삼천리 제13권 제12호
Publication Date: 1941년 12월 01일
Article Title: 二十五萬の志願兵應募者へ寄す＝軍官民の熱烈なる期待＝ (To the 250,000 Volunteer Soldier Applicants = Fervent Expectations from Military, Government, and People =)
Author: Various Contributors
Article Type: 잡저 (Miscellaneous writing)

To the 250,000 Volunteer Soldier Applicants = Fervent Expectations from Military, Government, and People =

(Inspection by former Army Minister Hata in Tokyo in a previous year)

Towards the 250,000 youths of the Peninsula who applied as volunteer soldiers this year, fervent expectations from various quarters of the military, government, and populace were gathered as follows. Incidentally, looking at the applicants by province:

Total Applicants / Graduates of Middle School or Higher
Kyŏnggi: 27,845 / 53
Ch'ungbuk: 10,469 / 29
Ch'ungnam: 28,016 / 120
Chŏnbuk: 13,148 / 19
Chŏnnam: 31,973 / 46
Kyŏngbuk: 37,801 / 128
Kyŏngnam: 12,220 / 74
Hwanghae: 19,005 / 31 <6>
P'yŏngnam: 11,637 / 34
P'yŏngbuk: 10,093 / 29
Kangwŏn: 10,116 / 92
Hamnam: 19,872 / 83
Hambuk: 7,818 / 4
Total: 250,013 / 742
Previous year's total: 144,745,348 (Note: This number seems incorrect/typo in the original, likely intended to be just 144,745)
Furthermore, in the Diet in late November, the Vice Minister of the Army made the following statement.

(Volunteer soldier unit disembarking at Tokyo Station)

Volunteer Soldier System Generally Favorable
Statement by Army Vice Minister Kimura at the House of Representatives Special Committee

Since the outbreak of the current Incident (China Incident), the people of the Peninsula and this island (Taiwan) have cooperated with the Mainland, acting as one body, which is truly moving. Regarding these soldiers, the volunteer system was implemented in Korea in Showa 13 (1938) and has progressed extremely smoothly since then. Furthermore, the performance of the volunteer soldiers is generally favorable. Regarding the implementation of conscription, we are currently studying it, considering the possibility that the need for it may arise in the future. As for whether we are actively encouraging applications, due to the number of personnel to be accepted, the required number is sufficiently met without necessarily doing so actively. However, the Army certainly intends to recruit volunteer soldiers even more actively <7> through the Government-General.
◇

Become a Strong Mainland-Peninsula Bond
Keijō Division Commander (Army Lieutenant General) Nagatsu Sahishige

At this time when the waves of the Pacific are rising ever higher, the patriotic fervor of 250,000 Peninsular youths surges forth vigorously. The bond between the Mainland and the Peninsula becomes ever stronger, and the iron wall pushes back the great waves of the ocean. I believe the ideal of the sun rising from the East to save all of Asia and the world begins with the harmonious unity of our Mainland and Peninsula, and I cannot suppress my deep emotion.
◇

To the Forefront of National Defense
Director-General of the Korean Wartime Patriotic Association (朝鮮臨戰報國團), Itani Keifuku

You gentlemen number a great many, 250,000, and many are sons of upper-class families and the intelligentsia. I am truly delighted by the patriotic fervor of such gentlemen.
It is, of course, crucial that you gentlemen enter the volunteer soldier training centers with the spirit of serving the nation and stand on the front lines of national defense. It goes without saying that even when you go to the regions, I want you to become the core figures of the populace and work with all your might for the development of the total mobilization movement.
◇

Learn the Spirit of Kusunoki Masashige
Director of the Colonial Production Bureau, Government-General, Kamitaki Motoi

I hope that not only those who passed but also those unfortunately not selected will learn well the spirit of the great Kusunoki Masashige (大楠公), discard the desire for fame, and truly achieve self-annihilation for the public good (滅私奉公).
◇

May the Remaining 1,350,000 Also Rise Up!
Chairman of the Korean Volunteer Soldier Support Association, Itō Chiyuki

In the first year the volunteer soldier system was established, there were merely 2,900 applicants. After three years passed, last year there were 144,000, and then this year, taking an even greater leap, the large number of 250,000 <8> has emerged. This is due to the fervent patriotism of you gentlemen, and I am immensely grateful.
Being born male, it is natural to entrust one's life to the Emperor and the country. Even so, I feel heartfelt joy that you gentlemen have taken the lead and stood up. However, it is said there are 1,600,000 men of eligible age in Korea. Following your example, I hope that the remaining 1,350,000 young men will also be inspired and apply quickly.
◇

On the Honor of the Peninsular Populace
Head of the Korean Wartime Patriotic Association (朝鮮臨戰報國團長), Yoshiyama Lin (佳山麟)

In Korea, as a result of the extreme rejection of martial thought for 500 years under the Yi Dynasty, the nation drifted into irredeemable civilian weakness. When national crises came, people did not step forward to repel them; instead, it became customary for both officials and the populace to simply flee. However, since the new administration began 30 years ago, and especially in the three or four years since the implementation of the volunteer soldier system, patriotic fervor has permeated the entire Peninsula. Now, the fact that people are burning with the spirit to bear a wing of national defense is truly something to celebrate.
Especially today, in the fifth year of the Holy War (聖戰), securing 250,000 of you gentlemen provides immense reassurance. Furthermore, even if one unfortunately fails to pass, I earnestly hope you will not be discouraged but will firmly and enduringly maintain this single-minded devotion to serving the nation.
◇

Praise for the Volunteer Soldiers
Vice Chairman of the Central Council (中樞院), Ri Ka Shinkō (李家軫鎬)

(Poem in Classical Chinese)
Departing, aspiring volunteer heroes, fine young men,
For the nation, a shield (干城), righteousness high.
Repaying Imperial grace (皇恩), the first resolve,
Grand plans, tempering martial skills, imposing and majestic.

In the camp by day, honing martial prowess,
Under the tent's blue lamp at night, studying strategy.
Once deployed to the frontier mountains, no enemy can resist,
Wherever the Imperial Army goes, welcoming feasts abound.

Sweeping away the miasma, the seas and mountains clear,
Triumphant return of valiant warriors, their heroic names resounding.
Victory report respectfully presented at the Purple Imperial Palace (紫宸殿),
Amidst five-colored clouds, the auspicious sun shines brightly.
◇

Keep Three Items in Mind
Governor of North Chŏlla Province, Ri Ka Genho (李家源甫)

To the 250,000 applicants, you have done well to come forward! From the bottom of my heart <9>, I express my gratitude and respect, and shouted "Banzai!" Gentlemen! You have come forth for the sake of the nation, but are your preparedness and resolve sufficient? As your senior, out of grandmotherly concern (老婆心):
1. Peninsular youth are born for His Majesty the Emperor.
2. They work for His Majesty the Emperor.
3. They die for His Majesty the Emperor.
I venture to advise you to act while firmly keeping in mind these three glorious points you bear.
◇

Be Good Warriors for the Times
Chairman of Tōichi Bank, Min Kyūshoku (閔奎植)

Since the volunteer soldier system was opened, the number of applicants has surged year by year. Especially this time, the number of applicants reaching over eighty times the quota is truly joyous. This is the overflow of sincerity of our Peninsular youth as subjects of the Imperial Nation (皇國臣民), their correct understanding of the current situation, and their loyal comprehension of the volunteer soldier system. When I contemplate the noble feelings of the applicants who offer their bodies to fulfill the path of the subject, I cannot help but be moved. I pray that all Peninsular youth will hold this sentiment and possess the spirit to become warriors in this time of emergency.
◇

Resolve to Die and Advance
Advisor to the Central Council (中樞院), Pak Chungyang (朴重陽)

Resolve to die and advance. Before death, there is nothing fearful.
◇

The Glory of Standing on the Front Line
Chief of Keijō Seodaemun Police Station, Tani Shige-eisaku (谷重榮作)

I express my heartfelt respect for the fact that you gentlemen have courageously applied to become volunteer soldiers, holding the glory of standing directly on the front line of national defense as shields for His Majesty (陛下ノ御盾).
Indeed, although only four years have passed since the volunteer soldier system was established in our Korea, seeing applications from one percent <10> of the twenty-five million people of the Peninsula clearly demonstrates how fervent the patriotism of the Peninsular populace is. Here, the reality of *naisen ittai* (內鮮一體 - Japan-Korea oneness) is naturally elevated, which is truly moving beyond words. Henceforth, your every action will serve as a model for the general populace. Therefore, I earnestly desire that you take good care of your health and devote yourselves solely to your duties as soldiers for the sake of the nation.
◇

Currently Recuperating
President of Keijō Imperial University, Shinoda Jōsaku (篠田治策)

Dear Sir, I have been hospitalized due to illness recently and am still recuperating, thus I am unable to comply with your request.
◇

Strike Off the Heads of Disguised Patriots!
President of Chōsen Shinbun (朝鮮新聞), Kanai Kōjun (金井甲淳)

We are each children (赤子), one among a hundred million compatriots. The rise and fall of the Empire concerns our own prosperity and decline. We are not just given rights. Especially under the New Order (新體制), individual rights are almost denied, and the right of the people to exist is guaranteed by the rights of the state. The state, to expand and strengthen its own rights, demands obligations from the people even more strongly. The obligations of the people! Yes, among obligations, the obligation of military service is what the Empire most fervently demands of us today. In any case, the 250,000 applicants this time are by no means a satisfactory record. More, more must come out! One million, two million must come out, it's no good otherwise. And thus secure the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere (大東亞共榮圈). We must cross over to the continent, fly to the south. You 250,000 volunteer soldiers! You are the sharpest vanguard of twenty-four million. Your duties and the expectations upon you are great. You must strike off the heads of disguised ideologues (僞裝思想者), and then each and every one must become like the late Superior Private Ri In Sŏk (李仁錫). Forgive my rash words.
◇

Military Life is Necessary for Everyone
Member of the Central Council (中樞院), Maruyama Ryūjun (also known as Ch'oe Chun-jip 崔準集 from Kangwŏn Province)

Even in peacetime, military life, which forges disciplined, strong responsibility and sound <11> mind and body, seems absolutely necessary for youth whose principles are not yet firm. How much more so now, encountering this grave crisis, on the Peninsula which bears the heavy and great role as a logistical base (兵站基地)? It is autumn (秋 - metaphorical time) to step forward and serve. You gentlemen chosen for this are truly the honor of your families and the pride of your hometowns. I pray that you will exercise self-respect and self-care, and for the honor of the Peninsula, fulfill your service more than sufficiently.
In response to your inquiry, I offer the above fragment of my thoughts on "Words to the 250,000 Volunteer Soldiers."
◇

The Resolve of National Defense Warriors
President of Keijō Severance Union Medical College, O Kyŏngsŏn (吳兢善)

At this time when we are moving one step beyond the wartime footing (臨戰體制) to proclaim the decisive battle footing (決戰體制), the firm resolve of the young gentlemen who, aware of the responsibility of Peninsular youth towards accomplishing the great mission of the Imperial Nation, aspire eagerly to stand as warriors of national defense, is immensely gratifying. You must not forget, even for a moment, the great responsibility on your shoulders to construct the New East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere (新東亞共榮圈), make the Orient belong to Orientals, and establish eternal peace.
◇

With Righteous Mind and Righteous Spirit
Tendo-kyō (天道敎) Missionary, Chŏng Kwangjo (鄭廣朝)

Time, oh time! With righteous mind and righteous spirit (正心正氣).
Time that will not come again! Utmost loyalty, repaying the nation (盡忠報國).
◇

An Autumn for Shanghai Youth Also to Rise
President of the Shanghai Jihō (上海時報), Kanazawa Hideo (金澤秀雄)

Among the happy news reaching us from the homeland, none surpassed the report that this year's volunteer soldiers reached 250,000. We compatriots residing in Shanghai were overjoyed upon hearing this number.
We want to send more and more from Shanghai from now on.
Now, the winds and clouds over the Pacific urgently call for one hundred million to arms. I hope you gentlemen will fulfill your loyalty well and perform <12> splendid service in this autumn (秋 - metaphorical time) of the military nation. "Strongly, Righteously, Cheerfully!"
◇

Answer the National Expectations
Representative Director of Mansen Nippōsha (滿鮮日報社), Ri Sŏngjae (李性在)

(Words to the Volunteer Soldiers)
As self-aware elements of Korea's youth stratum, representing us, you have stepped forward proactively towards the front line of national defense. To your spirit and grand undertaking, I offer my heartfelt gratitude.
Be fully aware and recognize that your every move is not only watched intently by the nations of East Asia but is also an unparalleled opportunity for our future development. Please exercise further self-respect, train yourselves in martial arts, and polish yourselves. I pray that you will answer the expectations placed upon you.
◇

The Spirit of My Brother Who Died in Battle Also...
Professor at Keijō Imperial University, Karashima Takeshi (辛島驍)

Thank you.
My younger brother who died in battle must also be clasping his hands in gratitude towards you gentlemen from the underworld. Thank you.
◇

Embody the Field Service Code
Vice President of Chōsen Shinbunsha (朝鮮新聞社), Nozaki Shinzō (野崎眞三)

What is called the Japanese Spirit (日本精神) or Yamato Spirit (大和魂) is the so-called military spirit (軍人精神).
The reading method of the Imperial Rescript (勅諭讀法) and the Field Service Code (戰陣訓) in the military show the complete picture of the military spirit. It is necessary for you volunteer soldiers to increase your military capabilities and enhance combat power, but embodying and realizing the military spirit—this is the greatest duty imposed upon you gentlemen.
◇

Follow the Example of Ri In Sŏk
Vice Chairman of the Keijō Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Chang Ushik (張友植)

Under the wartime footing (臨戰體制), obtaining 250,000 brilliant volunteer soldier applicants from our Peninsula's patriotic youth stratum is nothing less than <13> the revelation of your sincere loyalty to the Emperor and love for the country (忠君愛國). For the sake of the nation, I consider this truly a matter for mutual congratulation, and at the same time, I express my heartfelt gratitude and deep emotion towards you gentlemen who have risen up and applied. Please, with the military spirit of offering one's life to repay the nation (一死報國), take your senior, the late Superior Private Ri In Sŏk (故李仁錫上等兵), as your model (龜鑑), overcome the national crisis through dedicated service, establish brilliant military exploits that will last for a thousand years, become models and examples for the twenty-four million compatriots of the Peninsula, and fulfill your duties as subjects of the Imperial Nation (皇國臣民). I also pray for your continued good health.
◇

The Glory of the Military Gates
General Secretary of the Korean Christian Literature Society, Ryang Wŏn Chusam (梁原柱三)

At this time when the Imperial Nation (皇國) is striving to establish the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere (大東亞共榮圈), your courageous spirit in wanting to become soldiers and dedicate yourselves to the Holy Undertaking (聖業) fills us with nothing but deep emotion. Your sincere love for the Imperial Nation (皇國) and profound gratitude for Imperial favor (皇恩) have made you joyfully step through the military gates (軍門). Truly, the Imperial Army (皇軍) consists of those who support the nation founded by divine decree (神勅) and the Imperial Household (皇室) succeeded through an unbroken line. They are those who fulfill the honorable duties and responsibilities as citizens (國民). You intend to offer the hot blood of your youth to become such glorious soldiers; who could fail to be deeply moved? In the future, I hope not just 250,000, but all Peninsular youth will have the same spirit as you. I hope you will strive further and become models for those lacking your courage and spirit.
◇

Be Pillars of the Empire
General Secretary of the Keijō YMCA, Ku Kajok (具家滋玉)

It is truly a matter beyond congratulation that over 250,000 Peninsular youths have applied for the Army Volunteer Soldier program this time. I wish that the volunteer soldiers, after entering the training center, will strictly observe all regulations, accumulate training, and later become pillars (柱石) of our Empire, promoting the national prestige (國威) throughout the world. <14>

Live Up to Society's Expectations
Cultural Director of the Chōsen Alliance (朝鮮聯盟), Yanabe Eizaburō (矢鍋永三郎)

Given the current situation, anyone would probably want to apply for the volunteer soldier program, but it is quite difficult to make the decision. Among those, the individuals who have applied to be volunteer soldiers have taken a step forward compared to others. I express deep respect for their profound spirit of public service (奉公) and earnestly hope they will conduct themselves with self-respect and self-exertion so as not to betray society's great expectations.
◇

Be Shields with Sincerity
President of Mainichi Shinpō (毎日申報), Kanamaru Shō (金川聖)

Respectfully reading a poem by Emperor Meiji, there is a gracious verse that says: "If duty calls, I wish I could enter fire or water; this thought is precisely the Yamato Spirit (大和魂)."
To not hesitate even amidst fire and water once an emergency arises is the essence of the Japanese warrior (日本武人) and the substance of our peerless Yamato Spirit.
Fortunately, if your wish comes true and you gain the glory of becoming soldiers of the Empire, keep this gracious Imperial poem constantly in mind and thereby fulfill your sincerity as shields (干城) of the Imperial Nation.
◇

Reflection of the Peninsular Populace
Chairman of the Korean Broadcasting Association, Kansho Yoshiho (甘蔗義邦)

This is an excellent opportunity to show sincerity to the Emperor and the country. Your every action is believed to be a direct reflection of the twenty-four million compatriots of the Peninsula. Please exercise self-respect and self-care and strive towards accomplishing your mission.
◇

Wield the Righteous Destiny of Heaven and Earth
Tendo-kyō (天道敎) Leader, Yi Tonhwa (李敦化)

This self, non-existent in ten thousand ages past, nor in ten thousand ages to come; this self, born once and dying once in infinite time; riding the opportune moment of the righteous destiny of heaven and earth (天地正運), it is not easy to be born. You gentlemen are truly born in a good era of Time, oh Time! <15> Reconstruction of the entire world, construction of a New East Asia—just hearing these words makes one's shoulders rise with pride. It is fortunate for you gentlemen to be born in this era, fortunate to be born in East Asia, fortunate to be born in the Great Japanese Empire, and fortunate to have become volunteer soldiers before others. Gentlemen, reverently embrace the heroic spirit of East Asian men and the Bushido spirit of Imperial Japan in your hearts and souls, and brandish the righteous spirit of Heaven and Earth (天地正氣) of *Hakkō Ichiu* (八紘一宇 - Eight Corners of the World Under One Roof) throughout the universe.
◇

The Autumn to Rise Up Has Come!
Director of the Korean Wartime Patriotic Association (朝鮮臨戰報國團), Sin T'aegak (辛泰嶽)

In the event of a national emergency (國家ニ一旦緩急アル場合), serving the public with righteous valor (義勇公ニ奉スル) is a national obligation (國民的義務). Unfortunately, we Peninsular people have long regretted lacking the opportunity to fulfill this obligation. Fortunately, obtaining the glory of sharing the responsibility for national defense through volunteering is the sole guiding beacon leading the future of us Peninsular people to brightness, and I believe the autumn (秋 - metaphorical time) for our Peninsular youth to rise up is precisely now. Seeing 250,000 applicants this time, their spirit must indeed be called magnificent. I believe the future of our twenty-four million people will be bright due to the manifestation of your patriotic sincerity. Indeed, your responsibility must also be called heavy and great. I only pray that you repay the Emperor and the country with one death through utter sincerity (赤誠).
◇

Towards the Forging of Imperial Subjects
President of the Taikyū Nippō (大邱日日新聞), Kawai Toda-o (河井戸田雄)

On the path of the Holy War (聖戰) aiming for the construction of a New Order in East Asia and the establishment of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, witnessing the magnificent sight of 250,000 volunteer soldiers, burning with patriotic hot blood, single-mindedly advancing in the forging of Imperial Subjects (皇國臣民), I am truly overcome with joy. In the name of the nation, I express my congratulations from afar and pray for the good health of the volunteer soldiers.
◇

If a Flower, Then Cherry Blossom
President of the Zenpoku Shinpō (全北新報), Matsunami Senkai (松波千海)

The flag is the Hinomaru; if a flower, the cherry blossom; men, look and see the volunteer soldier! <16>

Just Four Characters
Principal of Keijō Posŏng Middle School, Makiyama Kenkyū (牧山軒求)

Utmost loyalty, repaying the nation (盡忠報國).
◇

Warriors, One in a Hundred!
Member of the Central Council (中樞院), Kasan Shigeru (夏山茂)

The holy undertaking (興亞聖業) to make the Orient truly the Orient of Orientals is a mission that must be accomplished by us Japanese. When the one hundred million Imperial subjects (皇民) rise up together to do this, 250,000 Peninsular youths—that is, one out of every hundred Koreans in Korea—have resolved to join the ranks of the Imperial Army and become warriors for the holy undertaking. How imposing is the majesty of the Imperial Nation! How stern is the spirit of the Peninsular youth!
To the 250,000 applicants burning for the Rise of Asia (興亞)! The number selected to enter training is extremely small. Regardless of whether you enter or not, may your burning patriotism not fade. As individual Japanese <17> Imperial Subjects (皇國臣民), let us do what must be done and thereby accomplish the holy undertaking for the Rise of Asia with our own hands, shall we not? Nay, shall you 250,000 gentlemen not become the pivot and driving force to achieve it?
◇

Become Completely Japanese
Chairman of the Hambuk Volunteer Soldier Support Association, Chōma Kenshirō (張間憲四郎)

Approach this with the resolve to truly become completely Japanese.
◇

Young Heroes
Director of the Korean Wartime Patriotic Association (朝鮮臨戰報國團), Yi Sŏnghwan (李晟煥)

To the 250,000 Special Volunteer Soldier Applicants!
You have gained the glorious qualification to become shields (杆城) of the Great Japanese Empire.
You can become young heroes of the Peninsula who can fight bravely against the world.
You have become warriors for the establishment of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. How magnificent! You are our strong pride. Please resolve to sacrifice the small self (小我) to fulfill the mission of the century.
◇

Our Touchstone
Principal of Hansŏng Commercial School, Kanamoto Noriaki (金本憲明)

Gentlemen! You are brave warriors who have well understood the spirit of the volunteer soldier system. You must not forget that you are the touchstone that will determine the future development of Korea, nay, the future development of the Peninsular people.
Henceforth, the youth of the Peninsula should all courageously rush to volunteer. You must engrave in your hearts that this path is the shortest way (最捷徑) for the Peninsular people towards becoming Imperial Subjects (皇民化).
◇

The True Aspect of Oneness Embodied
Governor of South Ch'ungch'ŏng Province, Matsumura Motohiro (松村基弘)

The spirit of the 250,000 volunteer soldiers <18> is precisely the mindset Peninsular youth should have under the decisive battle footing (決戰軆制), and it is the true aspect (眞相) of *naisen ittai* (內鮮一體 - Japan-Korea oneness) embodied.
◇

Become Sacrificial Stones in Place of Your Elders
Samch'ŏlli Company, Paek San Ch'ŏngsu (白山靑樹)

I also recently spoke for about an hour and a half about the purpose of the volunteer soldier system to a certain youth group within Keijō city, and I have the experience of gaining seven applicants on the spot from that meeting. At that time, I truly didn't think the number would reach 250,000.
What I felt then was that your eyes, gentlemen, were burning, and everyone was struck by your seriousness. Based on this seriousness, and also looking at your physique and academic ability, you gentlemen have the potential to become splendid soldiers if only you are educated. I am grateful that you have become pillars of the Imperial Nation in this time of emergency with great hope and confidence. Gentlemen! For the sake of the honor of us, the elders of the Peninsular populace, please work hard. I implore you, I implore you. <19>

**Summary**

This article from December 1941 compiles numerous statements of praise and expectation directed at the 250,000 Korean applicants to the Japanese Army's volunteer soldier program. Figures from the Japanese military, colonial government, Korean elite collaborators (businessmen, academics, council members, association heads), media presidents, and religious leaders uniformly laud the applicants' patriotism, loyalty to the Emperor, and willingness to serve. The act of volunteering is framed as a glorious duty, a path towards achieving *naisen ittai* (Japan-Korea oneness), and proof of overcoming the perceived past "weakness" of Korea. The rhetoric emphasizes sacrifice, martial spirit, becoming "true" Imperial subjects, and contributing to Japan's "Holy War" and the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.

For historians, this article is highly revealing. It showcases the intense propaganda effort surrounding military mobilization in late colonial Korea, just before the Pacific War escalated. The sheer number and variety of prominent figures (both Japanese and Korean) endorsing the volunteer system underscore the pressure and the complex dynamics of collaboration. The specific language used – emphasizing Imperial favor, contrasting with the Chosŏn past, demanding complete assimilation ("become completely Japanese"), and even violent rhetoric against dissenters ("strike off the heads of disguised patriots") – provides valuable insight into the ideology and coercive nature of Japanese rule and the expected role of Koreans within the Empire's war effort. The statistics on applicants by region are also notable.

**Named Entities**

畑	ハタ	Hata
東京	トウキョウ	Tokyo
京畿	ケイキ	Kyŏnggi
忠北	チュウホク	Ch'ungbuk
忠南	チュウナン	Ch'ungnam
全北	ゼンホク	Chŏnbuk
全南	ゼンナン	Chŏnnam
慶北	ケイホク	Kyŏngbuk
慶南	ケイナン	Kyŏngnam
黃海	コウカイ	Hwanghae
平南	ヘイナン	P'yŏngnam
平北	ヘイホク	P'yŏngbuk
江原	コウゲン	Kangwŏn
咸南	カンナン	Hamnam
咸北	カンホク	Hambuk
木村	キムラ	Kimura (Army Vice Minister)
朝鮮	チョウセン	Korea (Chōsen)
永津佐比重	ナガツ サヒシゲ	Nagatsu Sahishige (Keijō Division Commander)
京城	ケイジョウ	Keijō (Seoul)
朝鮮臨戰報國團	チョウセンリンセンホウコクダン	Korean Wartime Patriotic Association
井坦圭復	イタニ ケイフク	Itani Keifuku (Director-General, Korean Wartime Patriotic Association)
總督府	ソウトクフ	Government-General
上瀧基	カミタキ モトイ	Kamitaki Motoi (Director, Colonial Production Bureau)
大楠公	ダイナンコウ	Kusunoki Masashige
朝鮮志願兵後援會	チョウセンシガンヘイコウエンカイ	Korean Volunteer Soldier Support Association
伊東致昊	イトウ チユキ	Itō Chiyuki (Chairman, Korean Volunteer Soldier Support Association)
李朝	リチョウ	Yi Dynasty
佳山麟	カヤマ リン	Yoshiyama Lin / Ka San-in (Head, Korean Wartime Patriotic Association)
中樞院	チュウスウイン	Central Council
李家軫鎬	リ カ シンコウ	Ri Ka Shinkō / I Ka Chin-ho (Vice Chairman, Central Council)
全羅北道	ゼンラホクドウ	North Chŏlla Province
李家源甫	リ カ ゲンポ	Ri Ka Genho / I Ka Wŏn-bo (Governor, North Chŏlla Province)
東一銀行	トウイチギンコウ	Tōichi Bank
閔奎植	ビン ケイショク	Min Kyūshoku / Min Kyu-sik (Chairman, Tōichi Bank)
朴重陽	ボク ジュウヨウ	Pak Chungyang / Pak Chung-yang (Advisor, Central Council)
京城西大門警察署	ケイジョウセイダイモンケイサツショ	Keijō Seodaemun Police Station
谷重榮作	タニ シゲエイサク	Tani Shige-eisaku (Chief, Keijō Seodaemun Police Station)
京城帝國大學	ケイジョウテイコクダイガク	Keijō Imperial University
篠田治策	シノダ ジョウサク	Shinoda Jōsaku (President, Keijō Imperial University)
朝鮮新聞	チョウセンシンブン	Chōsen Shinbun (Newspaper)
金井甲淳	カナイ コウジュン	Kanai Kōjun (President, Chōsen Shinbun)
大東亞共榮圈	ダイトウアキョウエイケン	Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere
李仁錫	リ ジンシャク	Ri In Sŏk / Yi In-sŏk (Late Superior Private)
丸山隆準	マルヤマ リュウジュン	Maruyama Ryūjun (Member, Central Council)
崔準集	サイ ジュンシュウ	Ch'oe Chun-jip (Korean name associated with Maruyama Ryūjun)
京城セブランス醫學專門學校	ケイジョウセブランスイガクセンモンガッコウ	Keijō Severance Union Medical College
吳兢善	ゴ キョウゼン	O Kyŏngsŏn / O Kyŏng-sŏn (President, Keijō Severance Union Medical College)
天道敎	テンドウキョウ	Tendo-kyō / Ch'ŏndogyo
鄭廣朝	テイ コウチョウ	Chŏng Kwangjo / Chŏng Kwang-jo (Tendo-kyō Missionary)
上海時報	シャンハイジホウ	Shanghai Jihō (Newspaper)
上海	シャンハイ	Shanghai
金澤秀雄	カナザワ ヒデオ	Kanazawa Hideo (President, Shanghai Jihō)
滿鮮日報社	マンセンニッポウシャ	Mansen Nippōsha (Newspaper Company)
李性在	リ セイザイ	Ri Sŏngjae / Yi Sŏng-jae (Representative Director, Mansen Nippōsha)
辛島驍	カラシマ タケシ	Karashima Takeshi (Professor, Keijō Imperial University)
朝鮮新聞社	チョウセンシンブンシャ	Chōsen Shinbunsha (Newspaper Company)
野崎眞三	ノザキ シンゾウ	Nozaki Shinzō (Vice President, Chōsen Shinbunsha)
京城商工會議所	ケイジョウショウコウカイギショ	Keijō Chamber of Commerce and Industry
張友植	チョウ ユウショク	Chang Ushik / Chang U-sik (Vice Chairman, Keijō Chamber of Commerce and Industry)
朝鮮基督書會	チョウセンキリストショカイ	Korean Christian Literature Society
梁原柱三	リョウゲン チュウサン	Ryang Wŏn Chusam / Yang Wŏn Chu-sam (General Secretary, Korean Christian Literature Society)
京城基督敎靑年會	ケイジョウキリストキョウセイネンカイ	Keijō YMCA
具家滋玉	グ カ ジギョク	Ku Kajok / Ku Cha-ok (General Secretary, Keijō YMCA)
朝鮮聯盟	チョウセンレンメイ	Chōsen Alliance (Korean Federation/League)
矢鍋永三郎	ヤナベ エイザブロウ	Yanabe Eizaburō (Cultural Director, Chōsen Alliance)
毎日申報	マイニチシンポウ	Mainichi Shinpō (Newspaper)
金川聖	カナマル ショウ	Kanamaru Shō / Kim Ch'ŏn-sŏng (President, Mainichi Shinpō)
明治天皇	メイジテンノウ	Emperor Meiji
朝鮮放送協會	チョウセンホウソウキョウカイ	Korean Broadcasting Association
甘蔗義邦	カンショ ヨシクニ	Kansho Yoshiho (Chairman, Korean Broadcasting Association)
李敦化	リ トンカ	Yi Tonhwa / Yi Ton-hwa (Tendo-kyō Leader)
辛泰嶽	シン タイガク	Sin T'aegak / Sin T'ae-ak (Director, Korean Wartime Patriotic Association)
大邱日日新聞	タイキュウニチニチシンブン	Taikyū Nippō (Newspaper)
河井戸田雄	カワイ トダオ	Kawai Toda-o (President, Taikyū Nippō)
全北新報	ゼンポクシンポウ	Zenpoku Shinpō (Newspaper)
松波千海	マツナミ センカイ	Matsunami Senkai (President, Zenpoku Shinpō)
京城普成中學校	ケイジョウフセイチュウガッコウ	Keijō Posŏng Middle School
牧山軒求	マキヤマ ケンキュウ	Makiyama Kenkyū (Principal, Keijō Posŏng Middle School)
夏山茂	カサン シゲル	Kasan Shigeru (Member, Central Council)
咸北志願兵後援會	カンポクシガンヘイコウエンカイ	Hambuk Volunteer Soldier Support Association
張間憲四郎	チョウマ ケンシロウ	Chōma Kenshirō (Chairman, Hambuk Volunteer Soldier Support Association)
李晟煥	リ セイカン	Yi Sŏnghwan / Yi Sŏng-hwan (Director, Korean Wartime Patriotic Association)
漢城商業學校	カンジョウショウギョウガッコウ	Hansŏng Commercial School
金本憲明	カネモト ノリアキ	Kanamoto Noriaki / Kim Pon Hŏn-myŏng (Principal, Hansŏng Commercial School)
忠淸南道	チュウセイナンドウ	South Ch'ungch'ŏng Province
松村基弘	マツムラ モトヒロ	Matsumura Motohiro (Governor, South Ch'ungch'ŏng Province)
三千里社	サンゼンリシャ	Samch'ŏlli Company
白山靑樹	ハクサン セイジュ	Paek San Ch'ŏngsu / Paek San Ch'ŏng-su (Samch'ŏlli Company)

**Glossary**

志願兵	しがんへい	Volunteer soldier
應募者	おうぼしゃ	Applicant
半島	はんとう	Peninsula (referring to Korea)
軍官民	ぐんかんみん	Military, government, and people
閱兵	えっぺい	Troop inspection
道別	どうべつ	By province
總〜	そう〜	Total ~
〜數	〜すう	Number of ~
中等學校	ちゅうとうがっこう	Middle school
卒業者	そつぎょうしゃ	Graduate
前年度	ぜんねんど	Previous fiscal year
議會	ぎかい	Diet, assembly
陸軍次官	りくぐんじかん	Vice Minister of the Army
言明	げんめい	Statement, declaration
衆議員	しゅうぎいん	Member of the House of Representatives
委員會	いいんかい	Committee
今次事變	こんじじへん	Current Incident (referring to the Second Sino-Japanese War)
勃發	ぼっぱつ	Outbreak
內地	ないち	Mainland (referring to Japan proper)
一體	いったい	One body, unity (*naisen ittai*)
感激	かんげき	Deep emotion, impression
堪へない	たえない	Cannot bear, unable to suppress
實施	じっし	Implementation, enforcement
爾來	じらい	Since then
順調	じゅんちょう	Favorable, smooth
進行	しんこう	Progress
成績	せいせき	Results, performance
槪ね	おおむね	Generally, mostly
良好	りょうこう	Good, favorable
徴兵制	ちょうへいせい	Conscription system
將來	しょうらい	Future
必要	ひつよう	Necessity
考慮	こうりょう	Consideration
目下	もっか	Currently
研究中	けんきゅうちゅう	Under investigation/study
積極的	せっきょくてき	Actively, positively
採用	さいよう	Adoption, employment, acceptance
人員	じんいん	Personnel
關係上	かんけいじょう	Due to the relationship/circumstances
所要	しょよう	Required amount/number
充す	みたす	To fill, satisfy
狀况	じょうきょう	Situation, circumstances (older form of 状況)
總督府	そうとくふ	Government-General (of Korea)
通じて	つうじて	Through, via
募集	ぼしゅう	Recruitment
紐帶	ちゅうたい	Bond, tie
强靱	きょうじん	Strong, tough, tenacious
鐵壁	てっぺき	Iron wall
亞細亞	アジア	Asia
融洽	ゆうこう	Harmony, concord
禁する能はず	きんするあたわず	Cannot suppress/prohibit (classical expression)
國防	こくぼう	National defense
第一線	だいいっせん	Front line
理事長	りじちょう	Director-General, Chairman of the Board
諸子	しょし	Gentlemen, you (plural, polite)
多數	たすう	Large number
上流家庭	じょうりゅうかてい	Upper-class family
識者階層	しきしゃかいそう	Intelligentsia, educated class
子弟	してい	Sons, children
樣な	ような	Such as, like
衷心	ちゅうしん	From the bottom of one's heart
次第	しだい	Circumstance; as soon as; depends on (here: expresses reason/feeling)
訓練所	くんれんじょ	Training center
入所	にゅうしょ	Entering an institution/center
精神	せいしん	Spirit, mind, soul
肝要	かんよう	Essential, vital
勿論	もちろん	Of course
了つて	おわって	Having finished (older form/spelling of 終わって)
地方	ちほう	Region, locality
國民	こくみん	People, nation, citizen
中堅人物	ちゅうけんじんぶつ	Core figure, mainstay
總力運動	そうりょくうんどう	Total mobilization movement
發展	はってん	Development, growth
全力を盡して	ぜんりょくをつくして	Doing one's utmost, with all one's might
殖産局長	しょくさんきょくちょう	Director of the Colonial Production Bureau
合格	ごうかく	Passing (an exam, selection)
元より	もとより	From the beginning, needless to say
不幸	ふこう	Unfortunately, misfortune
選に洩れる	せんにもれる	To be left out of selection, not chosen
名譽心	めいよしん	Desire for fame, sense of honor
眞に	しんに	Truly, genuinely
滅私奉公	めっしほうこう	Self-annihilation for the public good
實を擧る	じつをあげる	To achieve results, bear fruit
〜んことを望む	〜んことをのぞむ	To hope that ~ (classical desiderative)
後援會長	こうえんかいちょう	Chairman of a support association
創設	そうせつ	Establishment, foundation
初年	しょねん	First year
僅に	わずかに	Merely, only
三個年	さんkanen	Three years (箇年 is a counter for years)
經過	けいか	Passage (of time)
昨年	さくねん	Last year
飛躍	ひやく	Leap, jump, rapid progress
然らしむる處	しからしむるところ	That which makes it so (classical causative)
堪えない	たえない	Cannot bear, unbearable
男子	だんし	Male
一命	いちめい	One's life
君國	くんこく	Emperor and country
預ける	あずける	To entrust
當然	とうぜん	Natural, matter of course
率先	そっせん	Taking the initiative
滿腔	まんこう	Whole heart, full breast
適齡者	てきれいしゃ	Person of eligible age
倣って	ならって	Following the example of
發憤	はっぷん	Being inspired, rousing oneself
速かに	すみやかに	Quickly, promptly
〜せらる	〜せらる	Passive/honorific verb ending (classical)
民衆	みんしゅう	Populace, masses
李朝	りちょう	Yi Dynasty (Korea)
尙武思想	しょうぶしそう	Martial spirit, militaristic thought
極端	きょくたん	Extreme
排斥	はいせき	Exclusion, rejection
結果	けっか	Result, consequence
救へない程	すくえないほど	To the extent of being irredeemable
文弱	ぶんじゃく	Civilian weakness, effeminacy
國難	こくなん	National crisis
擊退	げきたい	Repulse, drive back
只管	ひたすら	Earnestly, intently
逃げる	にげる	To escape, flee
通例	つうれい	Custom, common practice
新政	しんせい	New administration/government
以來	いらい	Since
漲亘る	みなぎりわたる	To spread throughout, permeate
國防の一翼	こくぼうのいちよく	One wing of national defense
分擔	ぶんたん	Sharing (responsibility)
意氣	いき	Spirit, enthusiasm
燃え立つ	もえたつ	To blaze up, burn with
誠に	まことに	Truly, indeed
慶賀	けいが	Congratulation, celebration
殊に	ことに	Especially
聖戰	せいせん	Holy War
心强うする	こころづようする	To feel reassured (older form)
不運	ふうん	Unfortunate, bad luck
不合格	ふごうかく	Failure (to pass)
落擔	らくたん	Discouragement, disappointment
御奉公	ごほうこう	Service (to the state/emperor)
一念	いちねん	Single-minded devotion
堅持	けんじ	Firmly maintaining
己まぬ	やまぬ	Does not cease (classical negative)
贊	さん	Praise
羽休郞	うきゅうろう	(Classical Chinese term for young man/hero, likely phonetic use)
爲國干城	いこくかんじょう	(Classical Chinese) Shield for the country
義氣	ぎき	Righteous spirit
揚	よう	Raise, uplift
報答	ほうとう	Repayment, requital
皇恩	こうおん	Imperial favor/grace
先決	せんけつ	First priority
意	い	Intention, will
雄圖	ゆうと	Grand plan/ambition
鍊武	れんぶ	Tempering martial skills
勢	せい	Power, force, vigor
堂々	どうどう	Majestic, imposing
營中	えいちゅう	Inside the military camp
白日	はくじつ	Daytime, broad daylight
身揚武	しんようぶ	(Classical Chinese) Raising oneself through martial arts
帳下	ちょうか	Under the tent
靑燈	せいとう	Blue lamp
夜讀兵	やどくへい	(Classical Chinese) Reading military strategy at night
一出	いっしゅつ	Once one goes out
邊山	へんざん	Frontier mountains
無抗敵	むこうてき	(Classical Chinese) No resisting enemy
皇軍	こうぐん	Imperial Army
到處	とうしょ	Everywhere reached
簟壺迎	たんこげい	(Classical Chinese) Welcoming with food and drink (as for troops)
掃盡	そうじん	Sweep away completely
氛■	ふんあい	(Obscured character, likely 氛埃 - dust, miasma)
海岱	かいたい	(Classical Chinese) Seas and Mount Tai (representing the world/land)
淸	せい	Clear, pure
凱還	がいかん	Triumphant return
壯士	そうし	Valiant warrior
振	しん	Shake, display, flourish
英名	えいめい	Heroic name, fame
捷書	しょうしょ	Victory report
謹奏	きんそう	Respectfully report (to the Emperor)
紫宸殿	ししんでん	Shishinden (Hall in the Imperial Palace)
五色雲	ごしきぐも	Five-colored clouds (auspicious sign)
瑞日	ずいじつ	Auspicious sun
明	めい	Bright
項目	こうもく	Item, clause
銘記	めいき	Engrave in one's mind
行動	こうどう	Action, behavior
敢へて	あえて	Daringly, venture to
進言	しんげん	Advice, counsel
時局	じきょく	Current situation
戰士	せんし	Warrior, soldier
取締役會長	とりしまりやくかいちょう	Chairman of the Board of Directors
開カレテ	ひらかれて	Being opened (older katakana use)
以來	いらい	Since
年ト共ニ	としとともに	Along with the years
應募者	おうぼしゃ	Applicant
激增	げきぞう	Sharp increase
殊ニ	ことに	Especially
今回	こんかい	This time
定員	ていいん	Fixed number, quota
八十餘倍	はちじゅうよばい	Over eighty times
達シタルハ	たっしたるは	Reaching (classical form)
喜ビニ堪ヘナイ	よろこびにたえない	Cannot contain joy
是ハ	これは	This is (older katakana use)
我	わが	Our
皇國臣民	こうこくしんみん	Subject of the Imperial Nation
赤誠	せきせい	Sincerity, true heart
溢レデアリ	あふれであり	Is the overflow of
正確	せいかく	Accurate, correct
認識	にんしき	Recognition, understanding
忠直	ちゅうちょく	Loyal and honest
理解	りかい	Understanding
身ヲ挺シテ	みをていして	Risking one's life, throwing oneself into
臣道	しんどう	The way/duty of a subject
盡サントスル	つくさんとする	Trying to exhaust/fulfill (classical volitional)
尊キ	とうとき	Noble, precious (older form)
心情	しんじょう	Feelings, sentiment
察スル	さっする	To perceive, guess, sympathize
感激措ク能ハザル	かんげきおくあたわざる	Cannot help but be moved (classical expression)
願クバ	ねがわくば	Hopefully, I wish that
氣慨	きがい	Spirit, mettle
祈ル	いのる	To pray
死ヲ決シ	しをけっし	Resolving to die
前進	ぜんしん	Advance, move forward
恐シキモノナシ	おそろしきものなし	There is nothing fearful (classical form)
光榮	こうえい	Glory, honor
御盾	みたて	Shield (for the Emperor)
勇躍	ゆうやく	Courageously leaping, eagerly
對シ	たいし	Towards
滿腔	まんこう	Whole heart
敬意	けいい	Respect
表スル	ひょうする	To express
抑	そもそも	To begin with, in the first place
僅々	きんきん	Merely, only
四個年	よんkanen	Four years
過ギザルニ	すぎざるに	Although not passing (classical negative)
早クモ	はやくも	Already, as early as
民衆	みんしゅう	Populace, masses
百分ノ一	ひゃくぶんのいち	One percent
如何ニ	いかに	How, in what way
物語ル	ものがたる	To tell, narrate
明カニ	あきらかに	Clearly
玆ニ	ここに	Here, at this point
內鮮一體	ないせんいったい	Japan-Korea oneness
實	じつ	Reality, truth
期セスシテ	きせずして	Unexpectedly, without planning
擧揚セラル	きょようせらる	To be elevated, raised up (passive/honorific)
寔ニ	まことに	Truly, indeed
惜ク能ハサル	おしくあたわざる	Cannot help but feel (classical expression)
今後	こんご	Henceforth
一擧一動	いっきょいちどう	Every single action
擧ゲテ	あげて	All, entirely
一般	いっぱん	General, ordinary
師表	しひょう	Model, example
充分	じゅうぶん	Sufficiently, fully
健康	けんこう	Health
注意	ちゅうい	Attention, care
邦家	ほうか	Nation, country
只管	ひたすら	Solely, intently
本分	ほんぶん	One's duty
盡サレム事	つくされんこと	That (duty) be fulfilled (passive desiderative)
切望	せつぼう	Earnest desire
次第ナリ	しだいなり	Is the circumstance (classical copula)
靜養中	せいようちゅう	Recuperating, convalescing
拜啓	はいけい	Dear Sir/Madam (epistolary opening)
小生	しょうせい	I, myself (humble term)
先般來	せんぱんらい	Since the other day, recently
病氣	びょうき	Illness
入院	にゅういん	Hospitalization
致シ居リ	いたしおり	Am doing (humble, older form)
今尙ホ	いまなお	Still now
貴需	きじゅ	Your request
應ジ難ク候	おうじがたくそうろう	Difficult to comply (polite, epistolary style)
僞裝愛國者	ぎそうあいこくしゃ	Disguised patriot
首	くび	Head, neck
叩落セヨ	たたきおとせよ	Strike off! Knock down!
赤子	せきし	Infant; subjects (of the Emperor)
一人	ひとり	One person
一億同胞	いちおくどうほう	One hundred million compatriots
帝國	ていこく	Empire
興衰	こうすい	Rise and fall, prosperity and decline
盛衰	せいすい	Rise and fall, ups and downs
係はる	かかわる	To concern, affect
權利	けんり	Right, privilege
與へられではゐない	あたえられではいない	Are not given (older form)
就中	なかんずく	Especially, particularly
新體制	しんたいせい	New Order, new system
個人	こじん	Individual
否定	ひてい	Denial, negation
國家	こっか	State, nation
依り	より	By, according to
在存權	ざいそんけん	Right to exist
保障	ほしょう	Guarantee, security
自體	じたい	Itself
擴大	かくだい	Expansion
强化	きょうか	Strengthening
一層	いっそう	More, further
强ク	つよく	Strongly
義務	ぎむ	Duty, obligation
要求	ようきゅう	Demand, request
兵役	へいえき	Military service
熱烈	ねつれつ	Ardent, fervent
何はともあれ	なにはともあれ	In any case, be that as it Katta	かった	Bought
記錄	きろく	Record
滿足	まんぞく	Satisfaction
出でよ	いでよ	Come forth! (imperative)
百萬二百萬	ひゃくまんにひゃくまん	One million, two million
確保	かくほ	Secure, ensure
大陸	たいりく	Continent (referring to mainland Asia)
南方	なんぽう	South, southern region
飛バナクテハナラヌ	とばなくてはならぬ	Must fly/go
最尖銳	さいせんえい	Sharpest vanguard, forefront
任務	にんむ	Duty, mission
期待	きたい	Expectation
僞裝思想者	ぎそうしそうしゃ	Disguised ideologue/thinker
叩き落し	たたきおとし	Striking down
〜たらざるベからず	〜たらざるべからず	Must be ~ (classical double negative)
忘言多謝	ぼうげんたしゃ	Forgive my rash words, many thanks
軍隊生活	ぐんたいせいかつ	Military life
誰ニモ	だれにも	For anyone
平素	へいそ	Usually, ordinarily
於テスラ	においてすら	Even in (older katakana use)
規律正しく	きりつただしく	Disciplined, orderly
强キ	つよき	Strong (older form)
責任感	せきにんかん	Sense of responsibility
健實	けんじつ	Sound, steady, reliable
心身	しんしん	Mind and body
鍜へらるゝ	きたえられる	To be forged, tempered (passive, older form)
志操	しそう	Principle, integrity
未ダ	いまだ	Not yet (older katakana use)
固まらざる	かたまらざる	Not yet solidified (classical negative)
况んや	いわんや	Much more, still less
現下	げんか	Present time, currently
重大難局	じゅうだいなんきょく	Grave crisis, serious difficulty
際會	さいかい	Encountering
兵站基地	へいたんきち	Logistical base, supply base
重且ツ大ナル	おもかつだいなる	Heavy and great
役割	やくわり	Role, part
荷フ	になう	To bear, carry (responsibility)
秋	とき	Time, occasion (metaphorical use, referring to the right time)
其ノ選ニ當レル	そのせんにあたれる	Being chosen for that selection (passive potential)
實ニ	じつに	Truly, indeed
家門	かもん	Family lineage, house
榮譽	えいよ	Honor, glory (older form of 栄誉)
鄕黨	きょうとう	Hometown, native place
誇リ	ほこり	Pride
云フベキデアル	いうべきである	Should be called, can be said
希クバ	ねがわくば	Hopefully, I wish that
自重自愛	じちょうじあい	Self-respect and self-care
面目	めんぼく	Honor, reputation, prestige
十二分	じゅうにぶん	More than enough, fully
■ス樣	〜すよう	(Obscured character, likely 果たす - fulfill) In order to fulfill
祈願	きがん	Prayer
己マナイ	やまない	Does not cease
御照會	ごしょうかい	Your inquiry
依ル	よる	According to
所懷	しょかい	One's thoughts/impressions
一端	いったん	One part, a fragment
如上	じょじょう	As above
通リ	とおり	As, according to
御返事	おへんじ	Reply (polite)
申上候	もうしあげそうろう	Humbly state (polite epistolary)
覺悟	かくご	Resolve, readiness
臨戰體制	りんせんたいせい	Wartime footing/system
一步進ンデ	いっぽすすんで	Advancing one step
決戰體制	けっせんたいせい	Decisive battle footing/system
高唱	こうしょう	Advocating loudly, proclaiming
際	さい	At the time of, occasion
大使命	だいしめい	Great mission
完遂	かんすい	Accomplishment, completion
對スル	たいする	Towards
責任	せきにん	Responsibility
自覺	じかく	Self-awareness, realization
〜ベク	〜べく	In order to ~ (classical purpose form)
熱望	ねつぼう	Eager desire
鞏固	きょうこ	Firm, solid, strong
同慶	どうけい	Mutual congratulation
堪エナイ	たえない	Cannot bear, unbearable
新東亞共榮圈	しんとうあきょうえいけん	New East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere
建設	けんせつ	Construction, establishment
東洋人	とうようじん	Oriental, East Asian person
永遠	えいえん	Eternity, perpetuity
平和	へいわ	Peace
樹立	じゅりつ	Establishment
雙肩	そうけん	Both shoulders
瞬時ナリトモ	しゅんじなりとも	Even for a moment
忘レテハナリマセン	わすれてはなりません	Must not forget
正心正氣	せいしんせいき	Righteous mind and righteous spirit
不再來	ふさいらい	Not coming again
盡忠報國	じんちゅうほうこく	Utmost loyalty and repaying the nation
奮起	ふんき	Rousing oneself, vigorous effort
故土	こど	Homeland, native place
傳はる	つたわる	To be transmitted, conveyed
喜しき便	うれしきたより	Happy news/tidings
殊に	ことに	Especially
勝る	まさる	To surpass, excel
喜報	きほう	Joyful news
在住同胞	ざいじゅうどうほう	Compatriots residing (abroad)
數字	すうじ	Number, figure
狂喜	きょうき	Wild joy, ecstasy
太平洋	たいへいよう	Pacific Ocean
風雲	ふううん	Winds and clouds (turmoil, troubled times)
一億皆兵	いちおくかいへい	One hundred million all soldiers
促かす	うながす	To urge, press
切なる	せつなる	Earnest, pressing
忠誠	ちゅうせい	Loyalty, allegiance
軍國	ぐんこく	Military nation
立派	りっぱ	Splendid, fine
務め	つとめ	Duty, service
果して	はたして	To fulfill, carry out
貰ひたい	もらいたい	Want (someone) to do (for me)
〜し구	〜しぐ	(Korean exclamation) How ~!
期待に答へよ	きたいにこたえよ	Answer the expectations
〜으로서	~(u)roso	(Korean particle) As, in the capacity of
代表하야	taep'yohaya	(Korean) Representing (older form)
率先	sonson	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Taking the lead
第一線으로	che'ilsŏnŭro	(Korean particle) Towards the front line
向하야	hyanghaya	(Korean) Heading towards (older form)
나오신	naosin	(Korean) Who came out/stepped forward (honorific)
氣魄	k'ip'aek	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Spirit, vigor
壯擧	chang'gŏ	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Grand undertaking
衷心으로서	ch'ungsimŭrosŏ	(Korean) From the bottom of one's heart
謝意를	saŭirŭl	(Korean) Gratitude (object particle)
올립니다	ollimnida	(Korean) Offer (humble polite)
擧手一投足	kŏsuilt'ujok	(Sino-Korean) Every single move
이야말로	iyamallo	(Korean particle) Indeed, precisely
東亞各國이	tong'agakkugi	(Korean) Each country of East Asia (subject particle)
注視하야	chusihaya	(Korean) Watching intently
마지안는바일뿐더러	majiannŭnbailppundŏrŏ	(Korean) Not only something that doesn't cease
우리의	uriŭi	(Korean) Our
今後發展에	kumhu palchŏne	(Korean) To future development
다시없는	tasiŏmnŭn	(Korean) Unparalleled, unique
契機임을	kyegiimŭl	(Korean) That it is an opportunity (object particle)
充分	ch'ungbun	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Fully
自覺認識하시와	chagakinsik'asiwa	(Korean) Please be aware and recognize (honorific, older connective)
모조록	majorok	(Korean) Please, by all means
一層	ilch'ŭng	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Further, more
自重하시며	chajunghasimyo	(Korean) Being self-respectful (honorific connective)
鍊武琢磨하시며	yŏnmut'akmahasimyo	(Korean) Training in martial arts and polishing oneself (honorific connective)
바라고있는	parago'innŭn	(Korean) Hoping for, expecting
期待에	kidae'e	(Korean) To the expectation
報答하심을	podap'asimŭl	(Korean) Repaying (honorific nominalizer object particle)
祈願합니다	kiwŏnhamnida	(Korean) Pray, wish
戰死	せんし	Death in battle
地下	ちか	Underworld, afterlife
掌を合せて	てをあわせて	Clasping hands (in prayer/gratitude)
感謝	かんしゃ	Gratitude
戰陣訓	せんじんくん	Field Service Code
日本精神	にほんせいしん	Japanese Spirit
大和魂	やまとだましい	Yamato Spirit (Spirit of Old Japan)
所謂	いわゆる	So-called
軍人精神	ぐんじんせいしん	Military spirit
勅諭讀法	ちょくゆどくほう	Method of reading the Imperial Rescript
全貌	ぜんぼう	Complete picture, full view
示スモノ	しめすもの	That which shows
軍事能力	ぐんじのうりょく	Military capability
增大	ぞうだい	Increase, augmentation
戰力	せんりょく	Combat power
增强	ぞうきょう	Enhancement, reinforcement
體得	たいとく	Mastery through experience, embodiment
體現	たいげん	Embodiment, realization
課せられた	かせられた	Imposed, assigned (passive)
最大	さいだい	Greatest
責務	せきむ	Duty, responsibility
俲へよ	ならえよ	Follow the example of! Emulate!
臨戰體制下	りんせんたいせいか	Under the wartime footing
我が	わが	Our
愛國靑年層	あいこくせいねんそう	Patriotic youth stratum
輝かしき	かがやかしき	Brilliant, glorious (older form)
應募者	おうぼしゃ	Applicant
得タル	えたる	Having obtained (classical form)
忠君愛國	ちゅうくんあいこく	Loyalty to the Emperor and love for the country
發露	はつろ	Revelation, manifestation
外ならず	ほかからず	Nothing other than
邦家ノ爲メ	ほうかのため	For the sake of the nation
洵ニ	まことに	Truly, indeed
御同慶	ごどうけい	Mutual congratulation
至極ニ存上ゲルト共ニ	しごくにぞんじあげるとともに	Consider it the utmost, and at the same time (polite)
奮起應募	ふんきおうぼ	Rising up and applying
對シ	たいし	Towards
哀心	あいしん	(Likely typo for 衷心 - heartfelt feeling)
何卒	なにとぞ	Please, kindly
一死報國	いっしほうこく	Repaying the nation with one's death
先輩	せんぱい	Senior, predecessor
故	こ	The late
龜鑑	きかん	Model, example
挺身	ていしん	Throwing oneself into, volunteering
克服	こくふく	Overcoming
千載不滅	せんざいふめつ	Imperishable for a thousand years
赫赫	かくかく	Brilliant, glorious
武勳	ぶくん	Military exploits, distinguished service
樹テ	たて	Establish, set up
同胞	どうほう	Compatriots
儀表	ぎひょう	Model, example
範	はん	Example, model
示シ	しめし	Show, demonstrate
本分	ほんぶん	Duty
盡サレムコトヲ	つくされんことを	That (duty) be fulfilled (passive desiderative)
希上ゲル	ねがいあげる	Humbly wish/hope
益々	ますます	More and more
御壯健	ごそうけん	Good health (polite)
程ヲ	ほどを	Degree, extent (object particle)
御祈リ	おいのり	Prayer (polite)
申上ゲマス	もうしあげます	Humbly say/do (polite)
軍門	ぐんもん	Military gates, joining the army
榮光	yonggwang	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Glory, honor
確立	hwangnip	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Establishment
爲하여	wihayŏ	(Korean) For the sake of (older form)
邁進하는	maejinhanŭn	(Korean) Striving, pushing forward
이때	ittae	(Korean) At this time
勇敢히도	yonggamhido	(Korean) Bravely
되어	toeŏ	(Korean) Becoming
聖業에	sŏng'ŏbe	(Korean) To the Holy Undertaking
盡瘁하여보려한	chinch'wihayŏporyŏhan	(Korean) Who tried to dedicate oneself
그	kŭ	(Korean) That
志慨에	chik'ae'e	(Korean) To the spirit/mettle
우리는	urinŭn	(Korean) We
오직	ojik	(Korean) Only, merely
感激할뿐이다	kamgyŏkhalppunida	(Korean) Can only be deeply moved
사랑하는	saranghanŭn	(Korean) Loving
赤誠과	chŏksŏnggwa	(Korean) Sincerity and
皇恩을	hwang'ŭnŭl	(Korean) Imperial favor (object particle)
感謝하는	kamsahanŭn	(Korean) Grateful
深情은	simjŏngŭn	(Korean) Deep feelings (topic particle)
으로하여금	ŭrohayagŭm	(Korean) Causing/making (someone) do
발거름을	palgŏrŭmŭl	(Korean) Steps (object particle)
들여놓기를	tŭryŏnok'irŭl	(Korean) Stepping into (object particle)
즐거우하게	chŭlgŏuhage	(Korean) Making it joyful/pleasant
한것이다	han'gŏsida	(Korean) Is what did
實로	sillo	(Korean) Truly
神勅으로	sinch'yŏgŭro	(Korean) By divine decree
받은	padŭn	(Korean) Received
國土와	kukt'owa	(Korean) Land and
一系로써	ilgyerossŏ	(Korean) Through an unbroken line
繼承하옵시는	kyesŭnghaopsinŭn	(Korean) Inheriting (super-honorific)
皇室을	hwangsilŭl	(Korean) Imperial Household (object particle)
扶翼하는	puyŏk'anŭn	(Korean) Supporting
者들이다	chadŭrida	(Korean) Are the people who
國民으로서	kungminŭrosŏ	(Korean) As citizens
榮譽있는	yŏng'ye'innŭn	(Korean) Honorable
義務와	ŭimuwa	(Korean) Duty and
責任을	ch'aegimŭl	(Korean) Responsibility (object particle)
修行하는	suhaenghanŭn	(Korean) Carrying out, performing
이런	irŏn	(Korean) Such
榮光의	yŏnggwang'ŭi	(Korean) Of glory
되려고	toeryŏgo	(Korean) Intending to become
靑春의	ch'ŏngch'unŭi	(Korean) Of youth
熱血을	yŏrhyŏrŭl	(Korean) Hot blood (object particle)
바치려 하는데	pach'iryŏ hanŭnde	(Korean) Intending to offer, but
누구가	nuguga	(Korean) Who (subject particle)
다	ta	(Korean) All
아니하지못할	anihajimot'al	(Korean) Cannot not do (double negative)
것이다	kŏsida	(Korean) Is the thing
將來에는	changnae'enŭn	(Korean) In the future
뿐아니라	ppunanira	(Korean) Not only
全半島靑年이	chŏnbandŏch'ŏngnyŏni	(Korean) All Peninsular youth (subject particle)
氣慨가	kigae'ga	(Korean) Spirit (subject particle)
있기를	itkirŭl	(Korean) To exist (object particle)
바라며	paramyŏ	(Korean) Hoping
앞으로	ap'ŭro	(Korean) Forward, in the future
더욱	tŏuk	(Korean) More, further
精進하며	chŏngjinhamyŏ	(Korean) Devoting oneself, striving
勇氣와	yonggiwa	(Korean) Courage and
없는者의	ŏmnŭnjaui	(Korean) Of those who lack
模範이	mobŏmi	(Korean) Model, example (subject particle)
되기를	toegirŭl	(Korean) To become (object particle)
바라는바이다	paranŭnbaida	(Korean) Is what (I) hope for
帝國	ていこく	Empire
柱石	ちゅうせき	Pillar, cornerstone
今度	こんど	This time
〜名以上	〜めいいじょう	More than ~ people
陸軍志願兵	りくぐんしがんへい	Army Volunteer Soldier
志願シタコトハ	しがんしたことは	The fact of applying
誠ニ	まことに	Truly
慶賀ニ堪ナイ	けいがにたえない	Cannot bear the congratulations (joy)
願クハ	ねがわくば	Hopefully, I wish that
入所ノ後	にゅうしょののち	After entering the training center
諸般規律	しょはんきりつ	Various regulations
嚴守	げんしゅ	Strict observance
訓鍊	くんれん	Training (older form of 訓練)
積ンテ	つみて	Accumulating (older form)
後日	ごじつ	In the future, later days
我ガ	わが	Our
國威	こくい	National prestige
全世界	ぜんせかい	Whole world
宣揚シテ	せんようして	Proclaiming, enhancing
貰ヒ度イ	もらいたい	Want (someone) to do (polite, older katakana)
期待ニ副ヘヨ	きたいにそえよ	Live up to expectations!
時局柄	じきょくがら	Given the current situation
何人モ	なんびとも	Anyone
〜たいのであろふが	〜たいのであろうが	Probably wants to ~, but (older form)
なかなか	なかなか	Quite, rather, very
決心	けっしん	Determination, resolution
〜し難きもの	〜しがたきもの	Something difficult to do (classical form)
其ノ中ニありて	そのなかにありて	Among those
方々	かたがた	People, persons (polite)
他ヨリモ	たよりも	Than others
一步	いっぽ	One step
前進セラレタ	ぜんしんせられた	Have advanced (passive/honorific)
事ニナル	ことになる	It means that, it turns out that
深ク	ふかく	Deeply
其ノ	その	That
奉公	ほうこう	Public service
厚キ	あつき	Profound, deep (older form)
志ニ對シ	こころざしにたいし	Towards the aspiration/will
敬意	けいい	Respect
表スルト共ニ	ひょうするとともに	While expressing, and at the same time
世間	せけん	The world, society
多大	ただい	Great, large
期待ニ背カサル樣	きたいにそむかさるよう	So as not to betray expectations (negative passive desiderative)
自重自奮	じちょうじふん	Self-respect and self-exertion
切望	せつぼう	Earnest desire
干城	かんじょう	Shield, bulwark (of the nation)
赤誠	せきせい	Sincerity
社長	しゃちょう	Company president
御製	ぎょせい	Imperial poem
拜シ奉ルニ	はいしたてまつるに	Respectfully reading/seeing
事しあらぱ	ことしあらば	If something happens, if duty calls (older form)
火にも水にも	ひにもみずにも	Into fire or water
入らばや	いらばや	Wish I could enter (classical desiderative)
思ふは	おもうは	Thinking is (older form)
やがて	やがて	Soon, eventually; precisely
大和魂	やまとだましい	Yamato Spirit
申された	もうされた	Was said (honorific passive)
有リ難キ	ありがたき	Grateful, precious (older form)
一首	いっしゅ	One poem
一旦緩急	いったんかんきゅう	Once an emergency arises
水火	すいか	Water and fire (danger, hardship)
辭シナイ	じしない	Not decline, not refuse
〜といふのが	〜というのが	That which is called ~
日本武人	にほんぶじん	Japanese warrior
精華	せいか	Essence, flower, glory
比類なき	ひるいなき	Peerless, unparalleled
本質	ほんしつ	Essence, true nature
幸ヒニシテ	さいわいにして	Fortunately
諸君	しょくん	Gentlemen, you (plural)
願	ねがい	Wish, desire
叶ヒテ	かないて	Being granted, coming true (older form)
光榮ニ浴スレバ	こうえいにょくすれば	If bathed in the glory
眷眷服膺	けんけんふくよう	Keep constantly in mind, cherish
以て	もって	Thereby, with
盡サレヨ	つくされよ	Fulfill! (imperative, passive/honorific nuance)
反影	はんえい	Reflection
放送協會長	ほうそうきょうかいちょう	Chairman of the Broadcasting Association
絕好	ぜっこう	Best, ideal
機會	きかい	Opportunity
信セラル	しんせらる	Is believed (passive/honorific)
何卒	なにとぞ	Please, kindly
以て	もって	With, thereby
使命達成	しめいたっせい	Accomplishment of mission
邁進	まいしん	Strive forward
天地正運	てんちせいうん	Righteous destiny of heaven and earth
振へ	ふるえ	Wield! Brandish!
前萬古	chŏnman'go	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Ten thousand ages past
後萬古	human'go	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Ten thousand ages future
〜업고	~ŏpko	(Korean) Not having, without (older form)
이몸	imom	(Korean) This body/self
無窮의	mugung'ŭi	(Korean) Of infinity
時間中에	siganjung'e	(Korean) In time
단한번	tanhanbŏn	(Korean) Just once
낫다죽는	natta'chungnŭn	(Korean) Being born and dying (older form)
好時機를	hosigirŭl	(Korean) Opportune moment (object particle)
타고	t'ago	(Korean) Riding
나기쉽지안타	nagiswipchiant'a	(Korean) Not easy to be born (older form)
참으로	ch'amŭro	(Korean) Truly
時乎〱	siho siho	(Sino-Korean/Repetition Mark) Time, oh Time!
조흔時代에	choŭn sidae'e	(Korean) In a good era (older form)
낫다	natta	(Korean) Was born (older form)
全世界의	chŏnsegye'ŭi	(Korean) Of the whole world
改造	kaejo	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Reconstruction
新東亞建設	sin'dong'a kŏnsŏl	(Korean/Sino-Korean) New East Asia Construction
말만들어도	malman tŭrŏdo	(Korean) Even just hearing the words
억게가	ŏkke'ga	(Korean) Shoulders (subject particle, likely typo for 어깨가)
웃습올나간다	usŭp ollaganda	(Korean) Rise up proudly (possibly 웃쓱 - proudly, smugly)
幸이요	haeng'iyo	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Is fortunate (connective)
大日本帝國에	tae'ilboncheguge	(Korean) In the Great Japanese Empire
남먼저	nammŏnjŏ	(Korean) Before others
된것이	toen'gŏsi	(Korean) Becoming (subject particle)
삼가	samga	(Korean) Reverently, carefully
東亞男兒의	tong'anamaŭi	(Korean) Of East Asian men
英雄的氣慨와	yŏng'ungjŏk kigae'wa	(Korean) Heroic spirit and
日本皇國의	ilbonhwanggugŭi	(Korean) Of Imperial Japan
武士的精神을	musajŏk chŏngsinŭl	(Korean) Bushido spirit (object particle)
膽에엿코	tame yŏk'o	(Korean) Putting in the gallbladder (heart/courage) (older form)
魂에실어	hone sirŏ	(Korean) Loading onto the soul
八紘一宇의	p'arhongoing'uŭi	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Of Hakkō Ichiu
天地正氣를	ch'ŏnjijŏnggirŭl	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Righteous spirit of Heaven and Earth (object particle)
宇宙에	uju'e	(Korean) In the universe
떨치라	ttŏlch'ira	(Korean) Brandish! Display vigorously!
來レリ	きたれり	Has come (classical perfective)
一旦緩急アル場合	いったんかんきゅうあるばあい	In case of emergency
義勇公ニ奉スルハ	ぎゆうこうにほうずるは	Serving the public with righteous valor is
國民的義務ナリ	こくみんてきぎむなり	Is a national duty (classical copula)
吾等	われら	We
此ノ義務ニ	このぎむに	To this duty
服スルノ機會ヲ	ふくするのきかいを	The opportunity to submit to/perform
得ザリシヲ	えざりしを	Not having obtained (classical negative perfective object)
遺憾トスル	いかんとする	Regret
久シキモノアリ	ひさしきものあり	Has been for a long time (classical form)
幸ヒニ	さいわいに	Fortunately
〜ニ依リ	〜により	According to, by means of
責任ヲ	せきにんを	Responsibility (object particle)
分擔スルノ	ぶんたんするの	Of sharing
光榮ヲ	こうえいを	Glory (object particle)
得タルハ	えたるは	Having obtained is (classical form)
前途ヲ	ぜんとを	Future prospects (object particle)
光明ニ	こうみょうに	To brightness
導ク	みちびく	To lead, guide
唯一ナル	ゆいいつなる	Sole, only (classical form)
道標ニシテ	どうひょうにして	Being a guidepost, and
秋ハ	ときは	The time/occasion is (older topic particle)
正ニ	まさに	Precisely, exactly
此ノ際ナリト	このさいなりと	Is this occasion (classical assertion)
信ズ	しんず	Believe
見ルニ至リタルハ	みるにいたりたるは	Having reached the point of seeing is
實ニ	じつに	Truly
其意氣壯ナリト	そのいきそうなりと	That spirit is magnificent (classical assertion)
謂ハザルべカラズ	いわざるべからず	Must be said (classical double negative)
精誠	せいせい	Sincerity, earnestness
依リテ	よりて	Because of, by means of
輝シキモノアルヲ	かがやしきものあるを	That there is something brilliant (classical object)
思フ	おもう	Think
重且ツ大ナリト	おもかつだいなりと	Is heavy and great (classical assertion)
唯	ただ	Only, merely
以テ	もって	With, by means of
一死君國ニ	いっしくんこくに	One death for Emperor and country
報ゼンコトヲ	ほうぜんことを	That (one) will repay (classical volitional desiderative)
祈ルノミ	いのるのみ	Only pray
鍊成	れんせい	Forging, tempering, training
〜ヲ目指ス	〜をめざす	To aim for ~
聖戰途上	せいせんとじょう	On the path of the Holy War
於イテ	おいて	In, at, on
熱血	ねっけつ	Hot blood, passion
燃ユル	もゆる	Burning (older form)
一路	いちろ	Single path, straight
邁進	まいしん	Strive forward
偉容	いよう	Magnificent figure/appearance
接シ	せっし	Encountering, meeting
欣快	きんかい	Joy, delight
堪ヘズ	たえず	Cannot bear (classical negative)
名ニ於イテ	なにおいて	In the name of
遙カニ	はるかに	From afar
祝意	しゅくい	Congratulations
表シ	ひょうし	Express
花なら櫻よ	はなならさくらよ	If it's a flower, it's cherry blossom!
旗	はた	Flag
日の丸	ひのまる	Hinomaru (Japanese flag)
見て見よ	みてみよ	Look and see!
只た四字を	ただたよじを	Just four characters
盡忠報國	じんちゅうほうこく	Utmost loyalty, repaying the nation
百人中一人	ひゃくにんちゅうひとり	One person out of a hundred
〜ヲシテ	〜をして	Making ~ do (causative particle)
眞ニ	しんに	Truly
〜タラシメンガタメノ	〜たらしめんがための	For the purpose of making ~ be (classical causative desiderative)
興亞聖業	こうあせいぎょう	Holy undertaking for the Rise of Asia
我等	われら	We
日本人ニ依ツテグ	にほんじんによってぐ	(Likely typo for よって - by) By the Japanese
成シ遂ゲザルベカラザル	なしとげざるべからざる	Must be accomplished (classical double negative)
使命ナリ	しめいなり	Is the mission (classical copula)
齊シク	ひとしく	Equally, all together
起チテ	たちて	Standing up (older form)
之レヲナスノトキ	これをなすのとき	When doing this
即チ	すなわち	Namely, that is
在鮮々人	ざいせんせんじん	Koreans in Korea
〜ヅツハ	〜ずつは	Each (topic particle)
皇軍ノ一員ニ	こうぐんのいちいんに	Into a member of the Imperial Army
加ハリ	くわわり	Joining
勇士タランコトヲ	ゆうしたらんことを	To be warriors (classical volitional desiderative)
決意セリ	けついせり	Have resolved (classical perfective)
莊然タリ	そうぜんたり	Is solemn, imposing (classical adjectival verb)
皇國威容	こうこくいよう	Majesty of the Imperial Nation
嚴然タリ	げんぜんたり	Is stern, strict (classical adjectival verb)
〜ニ燃エル	〜にもえる	Burning for ~
選バレテ	えらばれて	Being chosen
入所スル	にゅうしょする	To enter the training center
極メテ	きわめて	Extremely
僅少ナリ	きんしょうなり	Is very small (classical copula)
〜ト否トニ不拘	〜といなとにかかわらず	Regardless of whether ~ or not
燃エ上ガル	もえあがる	Blazing up
戀ハルコトナク	こわれることなく	Without breaking/fading (恋 typo for 壊?)
一個ノ	いっこの	One single
盡スベキヲ盡シ	つくすべきをつくし	Doing what must be done
〜デハナイカ	〜ではないか	Isn't it ~?; Let's ~! (rhetorical question/invitation)
否	いや	Nay, rather
樞軸トナリ	すうじくとなり	Becoming the pivot/axis
推進力トナツテ	すいしんりょくとなって	Becoming the driving force
〜ヤロデハナイカ	〜やろうではないか	Let's do ~! (stronger invitation)
眞に	しんに	Truly
〜ニナリ切ル	〜になりきる	To become completely ~
覺悟	かくご	Resolve
持テ	もて	Having, with (older form)
臨メ	のぞめ	Face! Approach! (imperative)
若き英雄等	わかきえいゆうら	Young heroes
〜이여	~iyŏ	(Korean vocative) O ~!
그대는	kŭdaenŭn	(Korean) You are (topic particle)
杆城이될	kansŏng'idoel	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Will become shields
榮光스러운	yŏnggwang'sŭrŏun	(Korean) Glorious
資格을	chagyŏgŭl	(Korean) Qualification (object particle)
가젓고	kajŏtko	(Korean) Have and (older form)
世界를	segyerŭl	(Korean) World (object particle)
相對로	sangdaero	(Korean) As opponent
勇敢하게	yonggamhage	(Korean) Bravely
戰鬪할수잇는	chŏnt'uhalsu'innŭn	(Korean) Who can fight
젊은	chŏlmŭn	(Korean) Young
英雄이	yŏng'ungi	(Korean) Hero (subject particle)
될수잇고	toelsu'itko	(Korean) Can become and
確立의	hwangnibŭi	(Korean) Of establishment
戰士가	chŏnsaga	(Korean) Warrior (subject particle)
된것이니	toen'gŏsini	(Korean) Because (you) have become
壯할시구	chang'halsigu	(Korean exclamation) How magnificent!
튼튼한	t'ŭnt'ŭnhan	(Korean) Strong, sturdy
자랑이다	charang'ida	(Korean) Is pride
世紀的使命을	segijŏk samyŏng'ŭl	(Korean) Mission of the century (object particle)
다하기爲하야	tahagi'wihaya	(Korean) In order to fulfill
小我를	so'arŭl	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Small self (object particle)
犧牲할	hŭisaenghal	(Korean) Will sacrifice
覺悟를	kagorŭl	(Korean/Sino-Korean) Resolve (object particle)
가지어지이다	kajiŏjiida	(Korean) Please have (archaic polite imperative)
試金石	しきんせき	Touchstone
汲ンデ吳レタ	くんでくれた	Understood/grasped (and gave benefit)
勇士	ゆうし	Brave warrior
今後	こんご	Henceforth, future
否	いな	Nay, rather
決スル所ノ	けっするところの	That which decides
〜タルコトヲ	〜たることを	Being ~ (classical nominalizer object)
忘レデハナラナイ	わすれてはならない	Must not forget
擧ツテ	こぞって	All together, unanimously
勇躍馳セ參ズベキ	ゆうやくはせさんずべき	Should courageously rush to participate
此ノ道コソ	このみちこそ	Precisely this path
皇民化	こうみんか	Imperialization (making into loyal subjects)
〜ヘノ	〜への	To, towards
最捷徑	さいしょうけい	Shortest path/shortcut
肝銘	かんめい	Deeply impressing on one's mind
〜セネバナラナイ	〜せねばならない	Must do ~
一軆具現	いったいぐげん	Embodiment of oneness (older form of 一体具現)
眞相	しんそう	True aspect, reality
決戰軆制下	けっせんたいせいか	Under the decisive battle footing (older form)
持ツベキ	もつべき	Should possess
心構ニシテ	こころがまえにして	Being the mental preparedness, and
父老	ふろう	Elders
代リ	かわり	Instead of, in place of
捨石	すていし	Sacrificial stone (in Go); foundation stone; sacrifice
先日	せんじつ	The other day
京城府內	けいじょうふない	Within Keijō city limits
或ル	ある	A certain
靑年隊員集團	せいねんたいいんしゅうだん	Youth group member gathering
向ヒ	むかい	Facing, towards
約一時半ばかり	やくいちじはんばかり	About an hour and a half
趣旨	しゅし	Purpose, aim
就イテ	ついて	About, concerning
話シタラ	はなしたら	When (I) spoke
其ノ席デ	そのせきで	At that occasion/seat
たちまち	たちまち	Instantly, suddenly
七人	しちにん	Seven people
經驗	けいけん	Experience
〜トハ思ハナカツタ	〜とはおもわなかった	Did not think that ~
感じたこと	かんじたこと	What I felt
瞼	まぶた	Eyelids (perhaps used metaphorically for eyes/gaze)
燃エテ居リ	もえている	Are burning
眞劍さ	しんけんさ	Seriousness
誰モガ	だれもが	Everyone
打タレル	うたれる	To be struck, impressed
體格	たいかく	Physique
學力	がくりょく	Academic ability
上カラ見テ	うえからみて	Looking from the perspective of
敎育	きょういく	Education
〜サヘシタナラ	〜さえしたなら	If only ~ were done
立派	りっぱ	Splendid, fine
素質	そしつ	Potential, aptitude
大ナル	だいなる	Great (classical form)
希望	きぼう	Hope
自信	じしん	Confidence
非常時	ひじょうじ	Time of emergency
皇國ノ柱	こうこくのはしら	Pillar of the Imperial Nation
〜ナツテ下レタ	〜なってくれた	Became ~ (for our benefit)
感謝ス	かんしゃす	Give thanks
我等	われら	We
働キテ下レヨ	はたらいてくれよ	Please work (for us)! (imperative)
賴ム賴ム	たのむたのむ	I implore you, I implore you


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제13권 제12호
발행일	1941년 12월 01일
기사제목	二十五萬の志願兵應募者へ寄す＝軍官民の熱烈なる期待＝
기사형태	잡저

二十五萬の志願兵應募者へ寄す＝軍官民の熱烈なる期待＝


(先年東京にて畑前陸相閱兵)

今年の志願兵志願者二十五萬の半島靑年に對し、軍官民各方面より熱々なる期待が左の如くあつた、因に志願者を道別に見れば
總志願者數 　　中等學校以上の卒業者數
京畿　　二七,八四五　　　五三
忠北　　一○,四六九　　　二九
忠南　　二八,○一六　　一二○
全北　　一三,一四八　　　一九
全南　　三一,九七三　　　四六
慶北　　三七,八○一　　一二八
慶南　　一二,二二○　　　七四
黃海　　一九,○○五　　　三一＜6＞
平南　　一一,六三七　　　三四
平北　　一○,○九三　　　二九
江原　　一○,一一六　　　九二
咸南　　一九,八七二　　　八三
咸北　　　七,八一八　　　　四
合計　二五○,○一三　　七四二
前年度の總數　一四四,七四五,三四八
尙十一月下旬議會に於て左の如き陸軍次官の言明があつた。


(東京驛にて降りた志願兵部隊)

志願兵制度 槪ね良好
衆議員特別委員會に於て 木村陸軍次官言明

今次事變勃發以來半島人および本島人は內地と協力しまして一體となり活動してゐることはまことに感激に堪へないところで御座います、これらの兵士に關しましては昭和十三年朝鮮においては志願兵制度が實施せられまして爾來極めて順調に進行してをります、また、志願兵の成績は槪ね良好で御座います、徴兵制の實施に關しては將來その必要の起るべきことを考慮し目下研究中で御座います、なほ積極的に志願を勸めてゐるかといふ御話で御座いますが、採用人員の關係上必ずしも積極的にやらなくても充分にその所要を充してゐる狀况でありますが、もちろん軍と致しましてはさらに積極的＜7＞に總督府を通じて志願兵を募集する考へで御座います。
◇

强靱な內鮮紐帶たれ
京城師團長(陸軍中將) 永津佐比重

太平洋之浪愈々高からむとする之時半島靑少年二十五萬愛國之熱氣は湧然として盛上り、內地と半島之紐帶は益々强靱となり鐵壁は洋之大波浪を押返心持陽光は東より諸亞細亞と世界を救ふの理想は先づ我等の內地と半島之一體融洽と信じ感激禁する能はす。
◇

國防の第一線へ
朝鮮臨戰報國團理事長 井坦圭復

諸子は二十五萬の多數であり、又上流家庭や識者階層の子弟も大分入つて居りこの樣な諸君の愛國熱には衷心から喜ぶ次第である。
諸子は志願兵訓練所に入所して國家に盡くすところの精神を以て國防の第一線に起つといふことが肝要であることは勿論了つて地方に行かれても國民の中堅人物となつて總力運動の發展に全力を盡して働いて貰ひたい。
◇

大楠公の精神を學べ
總督府殖産局長 上瀧基

合格せる人々は元より不幸にして選に洩れる人々も大楠公の精神をよく學び名譽心を捨て眞に滅私奉公の實を擧られんことを望む。
◇

百三十五萬も奮起せよ
朝鮮志願兵後援會長 伊東致昊

志願兵制度創設初年には僅に志願者二千九百名であつたのが、三個年を經過した昨年は十四萬四千人それから、今年はもつともつと飛躍して二十五萬の＜8＞多數を出したことは、諸君の愛國熱誠の然らしむる處で、感謝に堪えない。
男子と生れたからには一命は君國にお預けるのが當然であるが、それにしても諸君が率先して立ち起つて下れたことには滿腔の喜びを感する、然し朝鮮には百六十萬の適齡者が居ると云ふ、諸君に倣つてあとの百三十五萬の靑年諸君もとうぞ發憤し速かに志願せらることを望む。
◇

半島民衆の名譽にかけて
朝鮮臨戰報國團長 佳山麟

朝鮮は李朝五百年來尙武思想を極端に排斥した結果救へない程の文弱に流れ、國難が來れは出てて進んで擊退せようとはせず、官民共に只管逃げるのが通例となつて居つたのであるが、新政三十年以來、それも志願兵制度實施以來三四年間に愛國熱が全半島に漲亘り今や國防の一翼を迄分擔せむとする意氣に燃え立つ様になつたことは誠に慶賀に堪えぬ。
殊に聖戰五年の今日、二十五萬の諸子を得たることはとれ程心强うするか知らぬこの上はたとへ不運にも不合格になるも落擔せず國家に御奉公するこの一念を堅く長く堅持せられんことを望んて己まぬ。
◇

賛志願兵
中樞院副議長 李家軫鎬

出身志願羽休郞、爲國干城義氣揚報答皇恩先決意雄圖鍊武勢堂々。
營中白日身揚武、帳下靑燈夜讀兵、一出邊山無抗敵、皇軍到處簟壺迎。
掃盡氛■海岱淸、凱還壯士振英名、捷書謹奏紫宸殿、五色雲中瑞日明。
◇

三項目を銘記せよ
全羅北道知事 李家源甫

二十五萬ノ志願者諸君良クモ出テ吳レタ私ハ衷心＜9＞ヨリ感謝ト敬意ヲ表スルト共ニ萬歲ヲ高唱シタ。諸君ヨ、御國ノ爲出ルニハ出タモノ、其ノ用意ト決心ハ大丈夫カ、私ハ諸君ノ先輩トシテ老婆心カラ。
一、半島靑年ハ 天皇陛下ノ御爲ニ生レ
一、仝 天皇陛下ノ御爲ニ働キ
一、仝 天皇陛下ノ御爲ニ死ス
ベキ三項目ノ榮譽ヲ擔ツテ居ルト云フコトヲ確ク銘記シテ行動セラレンコトヲ敢へテ進言スル次第デアル。
◇

時局の良き戰士たれ
東一銀行取締役會長 閔奎植

志願兵制度ガ開カレテ以來年ト共ニ應募者ガ激增シツゝアリ殊ニ今回ノ應募人員ハ定員ノ八十餘倍ニ達シタルハ喜ビニ堪ヘナイ次第デアル、是ハ我半島靑年ノ皇國臣民タルノ赤誠ノ溢レデアリ時局ニ對スル正確ナル認識又ハ志願兵制度ニ對スル忠直ナル理解デアツテ身ヲ挺シテ臣道ヲ盡サントスル應募諸君ノ尊キ心情ヲ察スルトキ感激措ク能ハザルモノガアル、願クバ半島靑年皆が此ノ心情ヲ持チ非常時局ノ戰士トナルノ氣慨アランコトヲ祈ル次第デアル。
◇

死を決し前進せよ
中樞院顧問 朴重陽

死ヲ決シ前進セヨ、死ノ前ニ恐シキモノナシ。
◇

第一線に立つ光榮
京城西大門警察署長 谷重榮作

諸氏は陛下の御盾として直接國防の第一線に立つ光榮ある志願兵に勇躍應募されたる事に對し滿腔の敬意を表するものである。
抑、我朝鮮に志願兵制度を創設されてより僅々四個年に過ぎざるに早くも半島二千五百萬民衆の百分＜10＞の一の應募を見たるは如何に半島民衆の愛國心の熱烈なるかを明かに物語るものにして玆に內鮮一體の實は期せすして擧揚せられ寔に感激惜く能はさるものあり今後諸氏の一擧一動は擧げて一般民衆の師表となる處なれは充分健康に注意し邦家の爲只管軍人として本分を盡されむ事を切望する次第なり。
◇

靜養中にて
京城帝國大學總長 篠田治策

拜啓小生先般來病氣にて入院致し居り今尙ほ靜養中に付き貴需に應じ難く候。
◇

僞裝愛國者の首を叩落せよ
朝鮮新聞社長 金井甲淳

我々は赤子の一人であり一億同胞の一人である帝國の興衰は我々の盛衰に係はる我々は權利ばかり與へられではゐない、就中新體制には個人の權利は殆んど否定せられ國家の權利に依り國民の在存權が保障せられる國家はそれ自體の權利を擴大强化せしむるには一層强く國民に義務を要求するのである。國民の義務！そうた義務の中でも兵役の義務こそ今日の帝國が最も熱烈に我々に要求するのである。何はともあれ今度の應募者二十五萬は決して滿足すべき記錄でないモツト〱出でよ百萬二百萬出なくては駄目たそうして大東亞共榮圈を確保するのた我々は大陸へ渡り南方へ飛ばなくてはならぬ、二十五萬の志願兵諸君！諸君は二千四百萬の最尖銳である諸君の任務と期待は大きい諸君は僞裝思想者の首を叩き落しそれから一人一人故李仁錫上等兵たらざるベからず。忘言多謝。
◇

軍隊生活は誰にも必要た
中樞院參議 丸山隆準(江原道崔準集)

平素に於てすら規律正しく强き責任感と健實なる＜11＞心身とに鍜へらるゝ軍隊生活は志操の未だ固まらざる靑年には是非必要だと思はるゝ次第だが况んや現下この重大難局に際會し兵站基地としでの重且つ大なる役割を荷ふ半島に於では進んで奉公すべき秋其の選に當れる諸子は實に家門の榮譽であり鄕黨の誇りと云ふべきである。希くば自重自愛し半島の面目にかけて十二分の御奉公を■す樣祈願して己まない次第である。
御照會に依る「二十五萬志願兵諸子へ寄する言葉」の所懷の一端を如上の通り御返事申上候
◇

國防勇士の覺悟
京城セブランス醫學專門學校長 吳兢善

臨戰體制ヨリ一步進ンデ決戰體制ノ高唱セラルゝ際皇國ノ大使命ヲ完遂スルニ對スル半島靑年ノ責任ヲ自覺シ國防勇士トシテ立ツべク熱望スル靑年諸君ノ鞏固ナル覺悟ハ同慶ニ堪エナイ新東亞共榮圈ヲ建設シテ東洋人ノ東洋タラシメ永遠ノ平和ヲ樹立セシムルニ諸君ノ雙肩ニアル大責任ハ瞬時ナリトモ忘レテハナリマセン。
◇

正心正氣にて
天道敎宣道師 鄭廣朝

時乎時乎 正心正氣
不再來時 盡忠報國
◇

上海靑年層と奮起の秋
上海時報社長 金澤秀雄

故土より傳はる喜しき便の中にも殊に今年の志願兵二十五萬に達したとの報せに勝の喜報はなかつた我々上海在住同胞はこの數字を聞いて狂喜した。
上海からもこれからもつともつと出したい。
今や太平洋の風雲は一億皆兵を促かすや切なるものがある。諸子は良く忠誠を盡して軍國の秋に立派＜12＞な務めを果して貰ひたいゝ「强ク正シク明朗ニ！」。
◇

國家的期待に答へよ
滿鮮日報社代表取締役 李性在

(志願兵諸子へ寄する言葉)
朝鮮靑年層의自覺分子로서、우리를代表하야、率先國防第一線으로向하야、나오신諸君의氣魄과壯擧에、衷心으로서謝意를올립니다。
諸君의擧手一投足이야말로東亞各國이注視하야마지안은바일뿐더러、우리의今後發展에다시없는契機임을充分自覺認識하시와、모조록一層自重하시며鍊武琢磨하시며、諸君에게바라고있는期待에報答하심을祈願합니다。
◇

戰死した弟の靈も
京城帝大敎授 辛島驍

有り難う。
戰死した私の弟も地下から掌を合せて諸君に感謝してゐるだらう。有り難う。
◇

戰陣訓を體現せよ
朝鮮新聞社副社長 野崎眞三

日本精神とか大和魂とかいはれてゐるものは、所謂軍人精神である。
軍隊でいふ勅諭讀法と戰陣訓こそ、軍人精神の全貌を示すものであつて、志願兵諸子は軍事能力を增大して戰力を增强することも必要であるが、軍人精神を體得して體現すること、これこそ諸子へ課せられた最大な責務である。
◇

李仁錫に俲へよ
京城商工會議所副會頭 張友植

臨戰體制下我が半島愛國靑年層より二十五萬の輝かしき志願兵應暮者を得たることは諸君の忠君愛國＜13＞の赤誠發露に外ならず邦家の爲め洵に御同慶至極に存上げると共に奮起應募せる諸君に對し哀心より感謝感激の意を表する所なり何卒一死報國の軍人精神を以て諸君の先輩故李仁錫上等兵を龜鑑として挺身國難を克服し千載不滅の赫赫たる武勳を樹て半島二千四百萬同胞の儀表となり範を示し皇國臣民たる本分を盡されむことを希上げると共に諸君の益々御壯健の程を御祈り申上げます。
◇

軍門の榮光
朝鮮基督書會總務 梁原柱三

皇國이 大東亞共榮圈을 確立하기 위하여 邁進하는 이때 勇敢히도 諸君이 軍人이되어 聖業에 盡瘁하여보려한 그志慨에 우리는 오직 感激할뿐이다諸君의 皇國을 사랑하는 赤誠과 皇恩을 感謝하는 深情은 諸君으로하여금 軍門에 발거름을 들여놓기를 즐거우하게 한것이다。實로 皇軍은 神勅으로받은 國土와 一系로써 繼承하옵시는 皇室을 扶翼하는者들이다。國民으로서 榮譽있는 義務와 責任을 修行하는者 들이다。諸君은 이런 榮光의 軍人이 되려고 靑春의 熱血을 바치려 하는데 누구가 다感激하지 아니하지못할 것이다. 將來에는 二十五萬뿐아니라. 全半島靑年이 다 諸君과같은 氣慨가 있기를 바라며 諸君은 앞으로 더욱 精進하며 諸君과같이勇氣와 志慨가 없는者의 模範이 되기를 바라는바이다。
◇

帝國の柱石たれ
京城基督敎靑年會總務 具家滋玉

今度二十五萬名以上ノ半島靑年が陸軍志願兵ヲ志願シタコトハ誠ニ慶賀ニ堪ナイコトデス、願クハ志願兵諸君ハ入所ノ後諸般規律ヲ嚴守シ訓鍊ヲ積ンテ後日我ガ帝國ノ柱石トナリ國威ヲ全世界ニ宣揚シテ貰ヒ度イノデアリマス。＜14＞

世間の期待に副へよ
朝鮮聯盟文化部長 矢鍋永三郎

時局柄何人も志願兵に應募したいのであろふがなかなか決心し難きものでなる。其の中にありて志願兵に應募せられたる方々は他よりも一步前進せられた事になるのである。深く其の奉公の厚き志に對し敬意を表すると共に世間の多大なる期待に背かさる樣自重自奮せられん事を切望する。
◇

干城として赤誠を
毎日申報社長 金川聖

明治天皇の御製を拜し奉るに「事しあらぱ火にも水にも入らばやと思ふはやがて大和魂」
と申された有り難き一首がある。一旦緩急が起れば水火の中をも辭しないといふのが日本武人の精華であり世界に比類なき我が大和魂の本質である。
幸ひにして諸君の願が叶ひて帝國の軍人となるの光榮に浴すれば此の有り難き御製を眷眷服膺し以て皇國の干城としての赤誠を盡されよ。
◇

半島民衆の反影
朝鮮放送協會長 甘蔗義邦

赤誠を君國に示す絕好の機會たり、諸子の一擧一動は直ちに半島二千四百萬同胞の反影と信せらる、何卒自重自愛以て使命達成に邁進せられんことを。
◇

天地正運を振へ
天道敎幹部 李敦化

前萬古에도업고、後萬古에도업는이몸、無窮의時間中에、단한번낫다죽는、이몸、天地正運의好時機를타고、나기쉽지안타、諸君은참으로時乎〱의조＜15＞흔時代에낫다。全世界의改造新東亞建設、말만들어도、억게가웃습올나간다、諸君은이時代에난것이幸이요、東亞에난것이幸이요、大日本帝國에난것이幸이요、남먼저志願兵된것이幸이다、諸君는삼가、東亞男兒의英雄的氣慨와、日本皇國의、武士的精神을膽에엿코、魂에실어、八紘一宇의天地正氣를、宇宙에떨치라。
◇

奮起の秋來れり
朝鮮臨戰報國團理事 辛泰嶽

國家ニ一旦緩急アル場合、義勇公ニ奉スルハ國民的義務ナリ、不幸ニシテ吾等半島民衆ハ此ノ義務ニ服スルノ機會ヲ得ザリシヲ遺憾トスルコト久シキモノアリ、幸ヒニ志願ニ依リ國防上ノ責任ヲ分擔スルノ光榮ヲ得タルハ吾々半島民衆ノ前途ヲ光明ニ導ク唯一ナル道標ニシテ我半島靑少年ノ奮起ノ秋ハ正ニ此ノ際ナリト信ズ。今回二十五萬ノ志願者ヲ見ルニ至りタルハ實ニ其意氣壯ナリト謂ハザルべカラズ。諸子ノ愛國的精誠ノ發露ニ依リテ我二千四百萬民衆ノ前途ハ輝シキモノアルヲ思フ。實ニ諸子ノ責任タルヤ又重且ツ大ナリト謂ハザルベカラズ。唯赤誠ヲ以テ一死君國ニ報ゼンコトヲ祈ルノミ。
◇

皇民の鍊成へ
大邱日日新聞社長 河井戸田雄

東亞新秩序の建設と大東亞共榮圈の確立を目指す聖戰途上において愛國の熱血に燃ゆる二十五萬の志願兵諸君が皇國臣民の鍊成に一路邁進される偉容に接し誠に欣快に堪へず。邦家の名において遙かに祝意を表し志願兵諸君の御健康を祈る。
◇

花なら櫻よ
全北新報社長 松波千海

旗は日の丸 花なら櫻 男見て見よ志願兵。＜16＞

只た四字を
京城普成中學校長 牧山軒求

盡忠報國。
◇

百人中一人の勇士よ
中樞院參議 夏山茂

東洋ヲシテ眞ニ東洋人ノ東洋タラシメンガタメノ興亞聖業ハ我等日本人ニ依ツテグ成シ遂ゲザルべカラザルノ使命ナリ一億ノ皇民ハ齊シク起チテ之レヲナスノトキ半島靑年ニ十五萬即チ在鮮々人百人中一名ヅツハ皇軍ノ一員ニ加ハリ聖業ノ勇士タランコトヲ決意セリ 莊然タリ皇國威容 嚴然タリ半島靑年ノ意氣。
興亞ニ燃エル二十五萬ノ志願者諸君ヨ選バレテ入所スル數ハ極メテ僅少ナリ入所スルト否トニ不拘燃エ上ガル諸君ノ愛國心ハ戀ハルコトナク一個ノ日本＜17＞皇國臣民トシテノ盡スベキヲ盡シ以テ興亞聖業ヲパ我々ノ手ニ依ツテ成シ遂ゲヨウデハナイカ、否二十五萬ノ諸君ガ樞軸トナリ推進力トナツテヤロデハナイカ。
◇

日本人になり切れ
咸北志願兵後援會長 張間憲四郎

眞に日本人になり切る覺悟を持て臨め。
◇

若き英雄等
朝鮮臨戰報國團理事 李晟煥

二十五萬의特別志願兵應募者諸君이여
그대는 大日本帝國의 杆城이될榮光스러운資格을가젓고
그대는 世界를相對로 勇敢하게 戰鬪할수잇는 半島의젊은 英雄이 될수잇고
그대는 大東亞共榮圈確立의 戰士가된것이니 壯할시구〱 그대는 우리의 튼튼한 자랑이다. 世紀的使命을 다하기爲하야 小我를犧牲할覺悟를가지어지이다。
◇

我等の試金石
漢城商業學校長 金本憲明

諸君！諸君はよく志願兵制度の精神を汲んで吳れた勇士である。諸君は今後の朝鮮否今後の半島人の發展を決する所の試金石たることを忘れではならない。
今後半島の靑年は擧つて志願兵に勇躍馳せ參すべきである。此の道こそ半島人の皇民化への最捷徑であることを肝銘せねばならない。
◇

一軆具現の眞相
忠淸南道知事 松村基弘

二十五萬志願兵ノ氣慨コソ＜18＞
決戰軆制下半島靑年ノ持ツベキ心構ニシテ內鮮一體具現ノ眞相ナリ
◇

父老に代り捨石たれ
三千里社 白山靑樹

私も先日京城府內の或る靑年隊員集團に向ひ約一時半ばかり志願兵趣旨に就いて話したら、その席でたちまち七人の應募者を得た經驗があるが、このときの考へてはまさか二十五萬にも達するとは思はなかつたのです。
そのとき感じたことですが、諸君の瞼は燃えて居りその眞劍さには誰もが打たれる、諸子にはこの眞劍さの上に又體格や學力の上から見て、敎育さへしたなら立派な軍人になる素質がある、諸君は大なる希望と自信を以て、この非常時に皇國の柱となつて下れたことに感謝す、諸君よ 我等半島民衆の父老の面目にかけても大いに働きて下れよ賴む賴む。＜19＞
＜6-19＞