잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	偉業은 靑春에 잇다, 東西偉人의 靑春時代, 二十六歲陸軍大將으로 滿洲를 드리친, 南怡將軍의 靑春時代 (Great Achievements Lie in Youth, The Youth of Great Men of the East and West, General Nami's Youth, Who Shook Manchuria as a 26-Year-Old Army General)
필자	車相瓚
기사형태	문예기타 (Literature and Other)

General Nami's Youth, Who Shook Manchuria as a 26-Year-Old Army General
						Cha Sang-chan

If you want to know about General Nami's youth, you should first read this poem by General Nami. Although the poem is only a simple twenty-eight-character quatrain, it openly reveals his grand aspirations, magnanimous spirit, and bold and heroic character during his youth. He went to war at the age of seventeen and died unjustly at the age of 28, so his entire life was only his youth, and all his actions were as delightful and unparalleled as his age. However, the most triumphant time in the ten years or so that he made his name known to the world was when he wrote this poem. Because of the poem, his name became even more famous, and because of the poem, he was falsely accused by treacherous villains such as Yu Jagwang and died under the false charge of treason. The poem and General Nami shared the same fate. It is also a strange coincidence that the general's lifespan of 28 years coincides with the twenty-eight characters of the poem. The time when the general wrote the poem was when the boiling blood of youth was at its peak, at the age of 26 - precisely the year Sejo 12, Dinghai (정해, the year of the fire pig).

At that time, in May, Yi Si-ae (이시애), the former governor of Hoeryeong Prefecture (회령부사), raised the banner of rebellion with his younger brother Si-hap (시합) in the area of ​​Gwanbuk (관북), and attacked and captured various counties with the force of a broken bamboo, causing a major disturbance. At that time, the court appointed Gu Seong-gun Jun (구성군준) as the Supreme Commander of the Four Provinces of Hamgil, Gangwon, Pyeongan, and Hwanghae to suppress it, and Jo Seok-mun (조석문), the Minister of the Ministry of Taxation, as the Deputy Commander, and Heo Jong (허종) as the Hamgildo Military Commissioner, and Kang Sun (강순), Eo Yu-so (어유소), and Nami (남이) as generals to subjugate Si-ae. In particular, Sejo greatly cherished and trusted Nami, who had extraordinary martial prowess and was a man of outstanding talent since he was young, and appointed him as the former Brigade Commander (前 部隊長). He fought bravely in Hongwon (홍원), Bukcheong (북청), and other places, and eventually defeated the enemy and captured its leader, Yi Si-ae, and beheaded him in front of the army, shaking the entire nation with his prestige.

Before the victorious government army reached the capital - in the winter of that year, Yi Man-ju (이만주) of Jianzhou Wei (건주위) (奉天, 吉林 - Bongcheon, Jilin) (a Jurchen tribe) also caused disturbances <14> and made the border uneasy, so the court ordered the victorious army to move as it was to subjugate Yi Man-ju. The poet General Nami, taking advantage of the momentum, led the government troops like a whirlwind and thunder, crossed the Yalu River, and directly attacked the enemy's lair in Bajo River (婆猪江) Wolmipo (兀彌府) (near present-day Heunggyeong (興京)) northeast of Jianzhou, and wiped it out in one fell swoop. After capturing Yi Man-ju's father and son alive and beheading them in front of the army, he carved on a large tree, "On this day, this month, this year, Kang Sun (강순), the Great General of the West of Joseon, Eo Yu-so (어유소), the Left General, and Nami (남이), the Right General, destroyed Jianzhou Wolmipo," and returned in triumph. The general, full of pride, composed the above poem and recited it loudly on horseback. The grand voice was like the roar of a fierce tiger in a deep mountain and the weeping of an azure dragon in the blue sea, causing the entire army to tremble and admire at once. When his memorial was presented to the court, Sejo was greatly pleased and bestowed the title of "Loyal and Patriotic Merit Subject (精忠出氣敵愾功臣)," recorded him in the first class, and appointed him as Minister of War (兵曹判書) (the current Minister of the Army), so it was rare among historical figures to achieve such great achievements and early success and honor as a 26-year-old youth.

However, as every era has its virtuous men, so too does every era have its villains who cannot be tolerated by all, who curse and harm those who are praised by all. At that time, a man named Yu Jagwang (유자광) had gone on an expedition with the general to subjugate Yi Si-ae, but because he had not made much contribution, his merit was recorded below the general. Jagwang, who hated those who surpassed him, always tried to harm the general in secret. Just as Sejo ascended to heaven and Yejong (예종) ascended the throne, a comet happened to appear. While the general was on duty in the forbidden palace, he discussed the good and bad omens of the comet with his colleagues, saying that it was a symbol of removing the old and establishing the new. Yu Jagwang overheard this from the side and falsely accused him to Yejong, saying that the general had the intention of rebellion. Also, he changed the poem the general had written the other day, "If a man is twenty, he has not pacified the country (男兒二十未平國)," to "If a man is twenty, he has not obtained the country (男兒二十未得國)," etc. Yejong, who had always been wary of the general, believed Jagwang's words and immediately arrested the general and interrogated him. At that time, Chief State Councilor Kang Sun (강순) entered the court, but he did not offer a single word of defense. The general initially refused to comply, but the torture was so severe that his shin bones were broken. The general realized that everything was over for him and calmly confessed his crimes (of course, they were false), saying that Chief State Councilor Kang Sun had instigated him. Kang Sun was also subjected to interrogation. At first, Sun made various excuses and was almost released, but the general insisted that they had conspired together, so Yejong could not help but conduct a personal interrogation. Sun also could not endure the severe torture and confessed. The general laughed loudly and turned to Sun and said, "I initially refused to comply for the sake of the future, but now my shin bones are broken and I have become a useless cripple, so I see no point in living, so I will just confess to crimes I did not commit and not care about dying, but why are you, an old man like you, making such pathetic excuses? <15>"

And then the two of them were taken to the execution ground. Sun saw the general and shouted loudly, "What grudge do you have against me that you are dragging me to my death?" The general laughed again and said, "You fool, your grievances and mine are all the same, but what crime have I committed? You are the so-called Prime Minister of the country, and you know that there is such an injustice as mine, but you do not offer a single word of defense or relief, so isn't it right for you to die with resentment?" And he laughed loudly and went to the execution ground. Ah! How tragic and heartbreaking this is. An ordinary person would desperately try to defend their innocence until their death, shedding tears of sorrow, anger, and resentment. However, he did not bother to defend his false charges, but simply regarded death as a return home with a laugh. In particular, his daring to say that Chief State Councilor Kang Sun had conspired with him and to spit and curse at him was how much he was ridiculing the court at the time! The tragic death of the poor young general! Even if it were for thousands of generations, how could his regrets ever be fully expressed! The general also had the talent to see ghosts since he was young. Once, he saw a ghost woman walking beside a woman who was carrying food, and when he chased after her, the woman entered the house of a certain Prime Minister. Indeed, the daughter of that house ate the dried persimmons she had brought and died suddenly, so the general knew that it was the ghost's doing and tried to save her. The Prime Minister was none other than Gwon Lam (권람). Because of this, the Gwon clan made him their son-in-law. <16>

**Named Entities**

南怡	Nami
車相瓚	Cha Sang-chan
李施愛	Yi Si-ae
施合	Si-hap
會寧府使	Hoeryeongbusa
關北	Kwanbuk
龜城君浚	Ku Sŏng-kun Chun
咸吉	Hamgil
江原	Kangwŏn
平安	P'yŏngan
黃海	Hwanghae
四道都摠使	Sado Dots’ongsa
戶曹判書	Hojop’ansŏ
曺錫文	Cho Sŏng-mun
副摠使	Puts’ongsa
許悰	Hŏ Chong
咸吉道節度使	Hamgildo Chŏltosa
康純	Kang Sun
魚有沼	Ŏ Yu-so
洪原	Hongwŏn
北靑	Pukch’ŏng
建州衛	Kŏnjuwi
李滿住	Yi Man-ju
女眞族	Yŏjinjok
奉天	Pongch’ŏn
吉林	Killim
鴨綠江	Amnokkang
婆猪江	P’ajo Kang
兀彌府	Ŏlmi Pu
興京	Hŭnggyŏng
朝鮮國	Chosŏn-guk
征西大將軍	Chongsŏ Taejanggun
柳子光	Yu Chagwang
睿宗	Yejong
康純	Kang Sun
領相	Yŏngsang
權攬	Kwŏn Ram



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	偉業은 靑春에 잇다, 東西偉人의 靑春時代, 二十六歲陸軍大將으로 滿洲를 드리친, 南怡將軍의 靑春時代
필자	車相瓚
기사형태	문예기타

二十六歲陸軍大將으로 滿洲를 드리친, 南怡將軍의 靑春時代
						車相瓚
白頭山石磨刀盡
豆滿江水飮馬無
男兒二十未平國
後世誰稱大丈夫

남이 장군의 청춘시대를 알고 십흔 사람은 누구나 먼저 이 南怡將軍의 시를 읽을 것이다. 그 시는 비록 간단한 二十八字의 절구에 불과하나 그의 청춘시대에 웅대한 포부와 磊落한 氣宇와 壯快 豪勇한 성격을 조금도 숨김업시 적나나하게 드러내인 것이다. 그는 十七歲에 出馬하야 28세에 冤柱이 죽엇슨즉 그의 일생은 오즉 청춘시기 뿐이엿고 모든 행사도 그의 연령에 伴하야 또한 痛快無雙한 것뿐이엿다. 그러나 그가 英名을 세상에 뜰친 지 10여년간에 가장 득의양양한 때는 이 시를 짓던 때엿다. 그 시로 인하야 그의 이름이 세상에 더욱 놉하젓고 그 시로 하야 또한 柳子光등 奸細輩에게 誣訴되야 反逆의 죄명으로 抑冤이 죽엇섯다. 그 시와 南怡將軍과는 운명을 가티 하엿다. 장군의 28세라는 수명이 그 시의 이십팔자와 수가 부합하는 것도 한 奇緣이다. 장군이 그 시를 짓던 때는 청춘의 끌는 피가 가장 왕성하던 26세 때-바로 世祖十二年丁亥엿다. 그 때 오월에 關北一帶에서는 前任 會寧府使이던 李施愛가 其弟 施合과 가티 反逆의 旗를 들고 破竹의 勢로 列郡을 攻陷하야 一大騷亂을 이르키매 당시 조정에서는 그것을 討滅하랴고 龜城君浚으로 咸吉, 江原, 平安, 黃海 四道都摠使를 삼고 戶曹判書 曺錫文으로 副摠使를 삼고 許悰으로 咸吉道節度使를 삼고 康純, 魚有沼
南怡 등으로 대장을 삼어 施愛를 討伐할 새 특히 南怡는 少時로부터 武勇이 絶倫하고 爲人이 英達魁偉한 까닭에 世祖가 극히 총애 신임하야 前 部隊長을 삼으니 그는 洪原 北靑 등지에서 용감히 싸워서 필경 적군을 대파하고 其魁 李施愛를 사로잡아 軍前에서 참수하니 그의 威名이 일국을 진동하얏다. 凱旋의 관군이 國都에 이르기 전-그 해 겨울에 建州衛(奉天, 吉林) 李滿住(女眞族)가 또한<14> 擾亂을 이르키여 국경을 불안케 하니 조정에서는 다시 凱旋軍을 그대로 옴기여서 李滿住를 토벌하라 명하얏다. 그 詩 南怡장군은 乘勝의 勢로 疾風迅雷와 가티 官軍을 몰고 鴨綠江을 건너서 建州東北의 婆猪江 兀彌府(今 興京 부근)를 直躊하야 적의 소굴을 일거에 소탕하고 李滿住의 父子를 生擒하야 軍前에서 鳧首한 후 大樹를 깍거서 『某年某月某日朝鮮國征西大將軍康純, 左大將魚有沼, 右大將南怡滅建州兀彌府』라고 大書特書하고 凱旋할새 장군은 得意滿滿하야 上記의 詩를 지며 馬上에서 놉히 을푸니 洪大한 聲音이 맛치 深山猛虎의 부르짐도 갓고 碧海蒼龍의 읍조림도 가터서 萬軍이 일시에 震慴驚歎하얏다. 그의 捿書가 조정에 한 번 을너오매 世祖는 크게 깃버하야 『精忠出氣敵愾功臣』의 號를 나리고 一等에 錄勳하며 兵曹判書(현 陸軍大臣)를 超拜하니 26세의 청년으로 이러한 豐功偉烈을 세우고 早達榮貴하기는 歷代人物 중에 其比가 듬으럿다.
그러나 何代無賢이라고 어느 시기던지 이러한 위인이 잇서서 만인의 칭찬을 밧는 반면에는 만고에 不容할 奸細의 무리가 또 잇서서 그를 저주하고 陰害하는 것이 죄악 만흔 인간사회의 通例이다. 그 때 柳子光이라 하는 자는 장군과 가티 李施愛을 토벌하랴고 出征하얏스나 공이 별로 업는 까닭에 勳錄이 將軍以下에 잇섯다. 勝己者를 忌嫌하는 子光은 항상 음으로 양으로 장군을 謀害코자 하더니 마츰 世祖가 昇遐하고 睿宗이 登極한 초에 우연이 慧星이 출현하매 장군은 禁中에 숙직하다가 동료과 가티 慧星의 길흉을 논평할 새 장군은 그것이 除舊布新의 象이라 하엿더니 柳子光이 겻방에서 엿듯고 그것을 誣陷하야 睿宗에게 밀고하되 장군이 반역의 意가 잇다 하고 또 前日 장군의 지은 詩中에 『男兒二十未平國』이라 한 것을
變作하야 『男兒二十未得國』 운운하니 평소부터 장군을 기탄하던 睿宗은 子光의 말을 信聽하고 즉시에 장군을 拿致 鞠問하니 때에 領相 康純이 入參하얏스나 일언의 辨解라 업는지라 장군이 츠음에는 불복하얏스나 악형이 너무도 혹독하야 脛骨이 붙어지매 장군은 만사가 己休한 것을 깨닷고 神色 自若하야 죄를 自服(물론 업는 죄이다.)하되 領相康純의 敎唆한 바라하니 康純이 또한 鞠問을 당하게 된지라 純은 츠음에 여러 가지로 변명하야 거의 放免케 되엿더니 장군이 절대로 同謀하엿다고 주장하니 예종도 또한 엇지 하지 못하고 親鞠하니 純이 또한 악형을 익이지 못하야 自服하니 장군이 크게 우스며 純을 도라보와 갈오되 내가 최초에 불복한 것은 장래를 위함이 엿스나 이제 脛骨이 불어 저서 無用의 폐인이 되고 본즉 살어도 소용이 업느 까닭에 업는 죄도 그저 自服하고 죽기를 액기지 안커니와 너가튼 연로한 자야 죽어도 그만인데<15>구구한 변명은 왜 하느냐고 하얏다. 그리고 나여서 두 사람이 斬刑場에 나가게 되매 純이 장군을 보고 크게 소리를 질너 갈오되 너와 내가 무슨 원한이 잇서서 나까지 죽을 죄로 끌어 늣느냐 하니 장군은 또 우스며 갈오되 이놈아 너나 내가 원통하기는 다 일반이지 나는 무슨 죄가 잇느냐. 네가 소위 일국의 首相으로 잇서서 나가튼 冤柱한 일이 잇는 것을 알면서도 일언반구의 辨解 救濟하는 말이 업스니 너도 원통이 죽는 것이 맛당치 안으냐 하고 또 크게 우스며 斬刑場으로 나아갓섯다. 아! 이것이 얼마나 장렬하고 비통한 일이냐. 凡庸의 무리 가트면 자기가 죽을 때까지라도 그 죄를 변명하너라고 안탓갑게 애를 쓰며 悲憤怨恨의 눈물을 흘릴 것이다. 그러나 그는 자기의 冤罪를 구구히 변명치 안코 그저 한 판의 우슴으로 視死如歸할 뿐이나 특히 領相康純을 자기와 同謀하얏다고 敢言하고 唾罵한 것은 그 얼마나 당시 조정을 鼻笑冷諷한 것이냐! 가련한 청년 장군의 원통한 죽엄! 비록 千秋萬代인들 그 遺恨이 엇지 다 할 수 잇스랴! 장군은 幼時부터 귀신을 보는 재조가 또 잇섯는데 한 번은 엇던 여자가 음식을 니고 가는데 鬼女가 안저 가는 것을 보고 쫏차 간즉 그 여자가 엇던 宰相의 집으로 드러가더니 과연 그 집 처녀가 그가저온 乾柿를 먹고 急死하엿슴으로 장군은 그것이 귀신의 탈로 알고 구하니 그 宰相은 곳 權攬이엿다. 인하야 權氏는 그를 사우로 삼엇섯다.<16>
<14-16>