잡지명	別乾坤 第21號
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	偉業은 靑春에 잇다, 東西偉人의 靑春時代, 十七歲에 千里賊陣을 突破獨行, 鄭忠信의 靑春時代 (Great Achievements Lie in Youth, The Youthful Days of Great Figures of the East and West, Breaking Through a Thousand-Li Enemy Camp Alone at Seventeen, The Youthful Days of Chŏng Ch’ung-sin)
필자	翠雲生
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Breaking Through a Thousand-Li Enemy Camp Alone at Seventeen, The Youthful Days of Chŏng Ch’ung-sin
						Ch’wīun-saeng

People of the world admire Kwan Yunchang (關雲長) of the Three Kingdoms period of China for single-handedly killing the fierce generals of the Five Passes and traveling a thousand li alone on horseback. However, although Kwan Yunchang is said to have been alone on horseback, he still had some brave generals as subordinates. Moreover, he himself was a veteran of a hundred battles, had the red rabbit horse (赤兎馬) that could travel a thousand li, and had the Green Dragon Crescent Blade (靑龍刀), the treasure sword of the world. But if there were someone who did not have an inch of iron on his body <16> and who, as a single 17-year-old fair-faced boy still smelling of milk, regarded the million-strong enemy camp stretching a thousand li as if it were an uninhabited place, and who single-handedly traveled to and fro to fulfill his mission, how much of a bold and invincible young man would he be? He is none other than Kimnam-gun Chŏng Ch’ung-sin (錦南君 鄭忠信), whose fame was resounding during the Imjin War. He was from Kwangju, Chŏlla Province, and was a descendant of the famous Koryŏ general Chŏng Chi (鄭地). His father had once worked as the head of the village council (鄕座首) and was on duty at the local office (鄕廳). One day, while taking a nap, he dreamed that a large black dragon was wriggling up from the kitchen. Startled, he woke up and went to the kitchen, but there was nothing there except a kitchen maid cooking rice. Chŏng became naturally moved and had relations with the woman. From that day on, she became pregnant, and at the same time, she developed large boils all over her body, so that no one dared to approach her. After ten months, she gave birth to a great and brilliant child (英馨兒), who was none other than Chŏng Ch’ung-sin, and strangely enough, his mother's boils completely healed immediately after childbirth. Chŏng Ch’ung-sin was short in stature, but his eyes shone like stars, and his face was beautiful. From a young age, he was eloquent, bold, and courageous, and he was also good at planning. However, because his maternal lineage was humble (his paternal lineage was of course a local gentry (鄕班)), he belonged to the garrison soldiers (節度營正兵) in his youth and also served as a clerk (知印/通引) in the government office (府). Originally, because of his intelligence, he was much loved by the military commissioner (節度使) and other officials. When he was at the military camp, his clothes and bedding were ragged, and he always said to his colleagues, "If I had just one roll of white cotton cloth (白木), I would make a new set of clothes and bedding." This word spread to the military commissioner, who gave him one roll of white cotton cloth to test him. He made a durumagi (두루막, overcoat) out of the white cotton cloth and said, "A durumagi covers the upper and lower body, so it is of course a set of upper and lower clothes, and at night I cover myself with it to sleep, so it is also bedding." The military commissioner was greatly impressed when he heard this. Once, an old female entertainer (官妓) gave him leftover food from the military commissioner's banquet, but he refused to eat it, saying, "A true man should become a military commissioner and give his leftovers to others, so how can I humbly eat other people's leftovers?" The old entertainer also guessed that he was no ordinary young man and loved him especially.

It was during the reign of King Sŏnjo, during the Imjin War. Kwŏn P’yo (權慓) was the magistrate of Kwangju, and as he was raising troops to suppress the rebels, one day he was looking for someone to scout the enemy's situation. At that time, Ch’ung-sin was only seventeen years old, and he bravely came forward and volunteered to go. Kwŏn P’yo scolded him, saying, "What important task is this that a child like you dares to go?" Ch’ung-sin became even more valiant and insisted on going, so Kwŏn P’yo could not stop him and sent him. By this time, the rebels had already retreated from the province. Ch’ung-sin looked around the village houses, but the surroundings were quiet, and only a poisoned arrow (强弓) was left lying there. Ch’ung-sin became suspicious and shot the poisoned arrow. The poison was broken, and a wounded rebel soldier who had been hiding inside immediately died. Ch’ung-sin then beheaded the rebel leader <17> and hung it on the flagpole and returned. Kwŏn Kong (權公) was greatly impressed. Later, when King Sŏnjo fled to Ŭiju and appointed Kwŏn Kong as a circuit commander (巡察使) and ordered him to suppress the enemy with the troops of Ryŏngho, Kwŏn Kong wanted to report the military affairs to King Sŏnjo. At that time, the enemy forces were scattered throughout the eight provinces, and the roads were blocked, and not only that, but they killed any Korean, regardless of age or gender, if they encountered them. Therefore, even brave warriors dared not go. However, only the wonderful young man Chŏng Ch’ung-sin bravely stepped forward and volunteered to go. Kwŏn P’yo was even more impressed by Ch’ung-sin's loyalty, courage, and decisiveness, and gave Ch’ung-sin the written report (狀啓文) and other confidential military documents. Ch’ung-sin was worried that they might be discovered by enemy soldiers on the way, so he twisted all the documents into a rope and made a carrying strap (멜비/擔繩) and set off. Who would have known that it was a secret document? Alone and solitary, he traveled day and night and reached the temporary palace (行在所) in Ŭiju, which was thousands of li away. At that time, Minister of War Yi Hang-bok (李恒福) was greatly impressed by Chŏng Ch’ung-sin at first sight and had him stay at his house, treating his clothes and food like his own nephews. He also taught him history, and Ch’ung-sin understood ten things from hearing one, and in just a few months, his literary skills greatly improved, and there was almost nothing he did not know. When faced with a task, he dealt with it without any difficulty, so O-sŏng (鰲城) loved him even more, and their closeness was like that of a father and son. The famous scholars such as Yi Si-baek (李時白), Chang Wi (張維), and Ch’oe Myŏng-gil (崔鳴吉) who were in his circle all became brothers with him. In the autumn civil service examination of that year, he passed the military examination (武科), and King Sŏnjo personally summoned him to the royal presence and said to O-sŏng, "You always spoke of Ch’ung-sin's talent, and now he has risen in the world. However, he is still young, so if he grows up a little more, he will be greatly used in the future." These are just a few of the events of Chŏng Ch’ung-sin's youth, but how many people were as brave and valiant as he was? He later grew up and became a general who defended the country (一國于城), and he performed great deeds during the Chŏngmyo Horan and the Yi Kwal Rebellion during the reign of King Injo. In particular, during the Yi Kwal Rebellion, all the strategies came from Chŏng Ch’ung-sin. If Chŏng Ch’ung-sin had not been there, Chang Man (張晩) would not have achieved his merits, and Chosŏn might have become Yi Kwal's world. <18>

**Named Entities**

關雲長	Kwan Yunchang
錦南君 鄭忠信	Kimnam-gun Chŏng Ch’ung-sin
鄭地	Chŏng Chi
權慓	Kwŏn P’yo
義州	Ŭiju
李恒福	Yi Hang-bok
李時白	Yi Si-baek
張維	Chang Wi
崔鳴吉	Ch’oe Myŏng-gil
張晩	Chang Man
李适	Yi Kwal



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	偉業은 靑春에 잇다, 東西偉人의 靑春時代, 十七歲에 千里賊陣을 突破獨行, 鄭忠信의 靑春時代
필자	翠雲生
기사형태	문예기타

十七歲에 千里賊陣을 突破獨行, 鄭忠信의 靑春時代
						翠雲生
세상 사람들은 支那의 삼국시대에 關雲長이 匹馬單身으로 五關의 猛將을 참살하고 千里獨行한 것을 장하게 녁인다. 그러나 關雲長은 말만은 匹馬單身이라 하지만은 그래도 부하에 상당한 勇將이 多少잇고 겸하야 자신도 百戰老將으로 千里駿駿의 赤兎馬가 잇고 천하의 寶劍인 靑龍刀가튼 무기도 잇섯지만은 몸에 一寸의 鐵도<16> 가지지 안코 입게서 아즉까지 젓내가 날만한 一個 17세의 白面 소년으로 千里延瓦한 백만의 賊陳을 無人之境과 가티 보고 孑孑單身으로 獨往獨來하야 자기의 사명을 다한 사람이 잇다면 그 얼마나 大膽無敵의 壯快한 소년이라 하랴. 그는 다른 사람이 안이라 壬亂 당시에 명성이 琤琤하던 錦南君 鄭忠信이다. 그는 전라도 광주 사람이니 高麗名將 鄭地의 후엿다. 그의 아버지는 일즉이 鄕座首로서 鄕廳에 入直하얏섯는데 낫잠을 자다가 우연이 꿈을 꾼 즉 주방에 一大黑龍이 굼트러저 올나감으로 놀나 깨여 가보니 주방에는 아모 것도 업고 다만 飯婢가 잇서서 밥을 짓고 잇슬 뿐이다. 鄭氏는 자연이 마음이 동하야 그 여자와 정을 통하게 된 바 그 날부터 胎氣가 잇고 또 동시에 그 여자는 全身에 腫瘡이 大發하야 누구가 敢近치 못하게 되엿더니 十朔만에 一大 英馨兒를 나흐니 그는 곳 정충신이오 그의 어머니는 이상하게도 산후 즉시에 그 腫瘡이 또한 全快하엿다. 鄭忠信은 위인이 短小하나 눈이 새별갓고 얼골이 미려하며 어려서부터 구변이 능하고 大膽勇敢한 外에 料事를 잘 하얏다. 그러나 元來 母閥이 微賤(父閥은 물론 鄕班이다.)한 까닭에 소년 시대에 節度營正兵에 속하야 府의 知印(通引)을 兼隷하엿섯는데 원래 爲人이 英敏함으로 節度使나 其他 官憲들에게 만흔 사랑을 바덧섯다. 그는 營門에 잇슬 때에 의복과 衾具가 남루하야 항상 자기의 동료와 가티 말하기를 내가 만일에 白木한 疋만 잇스면 의복 一襲과 衾具를 새로 작만하겟다 하엿더니 그 말이 굴너 節度使에게까지 들리게 되매 절도사는 시험하기 위하야 白木 1필을 주엇더니 그는 그 白木으로 두루막을 하야 입고 말하야 갈오되 두루맥은 上下體를 다가리는 것인즉 上下衣一襲이 되는 것은 물론이요 밤에는 그것을 덥고 자닛가 또한 衾具가 된다 하니 절도사가 듯고 크게 기특히 녁이엿다. 한 번은 늙은 官妓가 절도사의 연회에서 남은 음식을 주엇더니 그는 또 먹지 안코 갈오되 대장부가 맛당이 節度使가 되어 자기의 먹던 것을 남을 줄지 언정 엇지 구구하게 남의 먹든 찍걱이를 먹겟느냐 하니 그 老妓가 또한 그가 凡常한 소년이 안인 것을 짐작하고 또한 특히 사랑하엿섯다.
선조 임진란 때이다. 권표이 광주 목사로 잇서서 討賊의 兵을 이르킬세 一日은 賊情을 探하기 위하야 인물을 물색하얏는데 그 때 忠信의 나히 겨우 십 칠 세라 奮然히 나와서 가기르 자청하니 권표이 呵叱하야 曰 이것이 엇더한 중요한 일이기로 너가튼 小兒가 당돌이 가랴고 하느냐 한 즉 忠信이 더욱 奮然하야 가기를 固請함으로 權慓도 抑止치 못하고 보냇더니 때는 賊이 벌서 州境을 退去한 지라 忠信이 두루 村家를 살펴본즉 사방에 인적은 고요하고 强弓만 독 한 개만 업혀노혀 잇슴으로 忠信이 의심하고 强弓으로 猛射하엿더니 그 독이 께여지며 그 속에 숨어 잇던 賊의 부상병이 만저 죽는지라 忠信이 遂히 賊首를 베혀<17>旗때에 달어가지고 도라오니 權公이 크게 기특히 녁엿섯다. 그 뒤에 宣祖가 義州로 播遷을 升하야 巡察使를 삼고 嶺湖의 兵으로 적을 토벌하게 되매 권공이 군사에 관한 事를 선조께 狀啓코자 하니 때는 적군이 팔도에 散在하야 도로가 杜絶할 뿐 안이라 朝鮮사람이라면 老少婦女를 막론하고 逢輒則殺하니 비록 强壯한 용사라도 누구나 감행하는 자가 업섯다. 그러나 유독 妙少年의 鄭忠信은 挺身獨出하야 가기를 자청하얏다. 權慓은 忠信의 忠勇果敢한 것을 더욱 기특히 녁여 狀啓文과 기타 군사에 관한 비밀서류를 忠信에게 주니 忠信은 그것이 中途에서 賊兵에게 발견될 가 염려하야 모든 서류로 종희 노끈을 꼬아 멜비(擔繩)를 맹기러 가지고 길을 떠나니 누구나 그것이 비밀서류인지 알엇스랴. 孤身隻影으로 晝夜兼行하야 수천 리가 되는 義州의 行在所까지 이르니 때에 병조판서 이항복은 정충신을 한 번 보고 크게 기특히 녁여 자기집에다 留宿을 식히고 의복 음식을 다 자기의 子姪과 가티 대우하고 또 史書를 가르치니 忠信이 聞一知十으로 불과 몃 달에 文義가 大進하야 모를 것이 별로 업고 일을 당하매 조금도 難色이 업시 處決하니 鰲城이 더욱 사랑하야 그 친함이 부자와 갓고 그 문하에 잇는 李時白, 張維, 崔鳴吉가튼 名流人士가 모다 형제와 가티 許交하얏섯다. 그 해 秋期에 武科에 及第하니 宣祖大王이 친히 어전으로 불너 보시고 鰲城에게 말슴하야 갈오대 卿이 항상 忠信의 才를 말하더니 이제 出身하얏도다. 그러나 아즉 연령이 어리니 조금만 더 잘아면 장차 크게 쓰겟다고 하엿다. 이것은 정충신의 청춘시대의 일 중에 몃 가지만을 抄出한 것이지만은 이와 가티 勇壯한 인물이 몃 사람이나 잇슬고-. 그는 그 뒤 장성하매 엄연히 一國于城의 將이 되어 인조 정묘호란과 이괄란 때에 大功을 세웟섯다. 특히 이괄란 때에는 前後謀事가 모다 정충신에게 나온 것이다. 만일에 정충신이 업더면 張晩도 그 공을 이르지 못할 것이오 조선도 李适의 천하가 되엿슬넌지 알 수 업다.<18>
<16-18>