별건곤 제21호
1929년 06월 23일
二十一歲때에 進步會員으로 貪官汚吏롤 膺懲하든일 (Punishing Corrupt Officials as a Jinbo Association Member at the Age of Twenty-One)
李敦化
회고·수기 (Recollections and Essays)

If I were to talk about the most exhilarating thing in my youth, it would be the time when I punished corrupt officials in P'yŏngyang at the age of 21. I joined the Tonghak in 1903 - the year of Kye-myo, and the following year, 1904, the Russo-Japanese War broke out, sweeping through the Far East. In Korea, the Tonghak Party, which had been operating underground for over 40 years due to government oppression, reformed its policies and raised the banner of a grand political party called the Jinbo Association (進步會). They scheduled a meeting for September 1904. There were many obstacles until the opening, but they summoned a crowd of 20,000 people and commanded the magistrates (守令) of 44 provinces in P'yŏngan Province. Inevitably, the authorities lowered their flags and approved all conditions. As a result, Na Yong-hwan became the chairman, and about 30 councilors and inspectors were appointed. I became a councilor at that time, and when I asked someone what a councilor does, they said it was like a secretary (主事) of the Observation Office, so I thought it was a good position and took it. I didn't even know what a councilor did, but at that time, in that situation, it had more power than a secretary of the Observation Office.

When the Jinbo Party (進步黨) was established, seven political platforms were announced: 1. Cutting hair (斷髮), 2. Wearing black clothes (黑衣着用), 3. Establishing schools (學校設立), 4. Reforming official corruption (官弊를 革新), 5. Resolving popular grievances (民怨을 雪寃), 6. Clarifying the great way (大道를 彰明), 7. Supporting the country and securing the people (輔國安民). And when we made a general assault on the Observation Office, after the P'yŏngan Governor (平安觀察使) Yi Chung-ha came down to the stairs and surrendered, the Tonghak Army headquarters, the People's Assembly Hall, became perfectly like a police station, and the Taedong River was like a prison.

<62>We arrested and punished Han Hyŏng-no, the magistrate (郡守) of Sunan, who collected wealth from the people under the pretext of his birthday; we arrested Magistrate (郡守) O of Kangdong, who took thousands of *nyang* of unjust money and gave unfair trials to rapists of widows, and gave him a beating with a club and made him give fair trials; we made the magistrate (郡守) of Taedong, who prohibited the felling of trees in the Ch'angdong School forest managed by the Tonghak Army, apologize with a bundle of branches on his back (負荊謝罪); we bound a man named Pang, a staff member of the Royal Household Ministry (宮內府), who came down from Kyŏngsŏng and forcibly collected 1 *wŏn* 50 *chŏn* per household for national flags, and a man named Kim Myŏng-je, a *kukcha* (麴子) sales committee member who also came from Kyŏngsŏng, and threw them together into the Taedong River; and we arrested Hong, the chief patrol officer (總巡), who beat people for suing over eating a neighbor's chicken, and had him beaten with a bundle of twigs and dismissed and expelled. After that, it was hard to see such things happen.<63>

**Named Entities**

李敦化	I Tun-hwa
平壤	P'yŏngyang
東學	Tonghak
癸卯	Kye-myo
甲辰	Kap-chin
日露戰爭	Illo Chŏnjaeng
進步會	Chinbohoe
平安道	P'yŏngando
羅龍煥	Na Yong-hwan
平安觀察使	P'yŏngan Kwanch'alsa
李重夏	Yi Chung-ha
大洞江	Taedonggang
順安郡	Sunan-gun
韓亨魯	Han Hyŏng-no
江東郡	Kangdong-gun
吳某	O-mo
昌東學校	Ch'angdong Hakkyo
大同郡	Taedong-gun
宮內府	Kungnae-bu
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
方主事	Pang Chusa
金明濟	Kim Myŏng-je
洪總巡	Hong Ch'ongsun



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	二十一歲때에 進步會員으로 貪官汚吏롤 膺懲하든일
필자	李敦化
기사형태	회고·수기

二十一歲때에 進步會員으로 貪官汚吏롤 膺懲하든일
						李敦化
내가 청춘시대에 뎨일 통쾌하엿든 일을 말하라면 내가 21세 때에 平壤서 탐관오리를 懲治식히든 일일 것이다. 東學에 入敎하기는 20세 - 癸卯년이엿는대 그 이듬해 甲辰년에는 日露戰爭이 닐어나서 東洋風雲을 흽쓸엇고 朝鮮 안에서는 이 때까지 정부의 壓迫을 못닉이어 40여년 동안 隱道로 나려오든 東學黨이 정책을 刷新하야 進步會라는 당당한 일대 정당의 旗ㅅ발을 달고 甲辰년 9월을 기하야 개회를 하엿다. 개회까지는 모든 난관이 만헛지만 2만명 군중을 招集하야 平安道 44州 守令을 號令하엿는지라. 할 수 업시 관헌에서 降旗를 들고 모든 조건을 승인하엿다. 그리하야 羅龍煥 氏가 회장이 되고 평의원과 司察이 30여명이 낫다. 나는 그 때 평의원이 되엿는대 누구더러 평의원이 무엇 하는 것이냐고 물은 즉 觀察府主事가튼 벼슬이라고 해서 이게 조흔 벼슬이라고 그것을 단엿다. 평의원이 무엇 하는 것인지도 몰랏지만 그 때 그 판에는 觀察府主事 이상의 권리엿섯다.
進步黨이 개회되자 一, 斷髮 二, 黑衣着用 三, 學校設立 四, 官弊를 革新 五, 民怨을 雪寃 六, 大道를 彰明 七, 輔國安民의 七條 政綱이 발표되엿다. 그리고 나서 觀察府 總襲擊을 할 적에 平安觀察使 李重夏가 階下에 나려 항복한 후에는 民衆會所인 東學軍 本營은 완연이 警視廳이엿스며 大洞江은 형무소이엿다.
생일을 빙자하야 民財를 거두웟다는 順安郡守 韓亨魯를 잡어 懲治하고, 과부를 强姦한 범인에게 몃 천 량 不正金을<62> 바더먹고 불공평한 재판을 해주엇다는 江東郡守 吳某를 잡어다 주리때꾹을 먹이고 공평한 재판을 해 주든 일이며 東學軍이 경영하는 昌東學校林의 伐採를 금지한 大同郡守를 負荊謝罪 식히든 일이며 宮內府國旗派員이라고 京城으로서 나려와서 한 개에 1원 50전 式하는 것을 민가 各戶에 강제로 징수하는 方主事라는 자와 역시 京城서 왔다는 麴子都賣委員 金明濟라는 궐자를 한가지로 大洞江 물에 묵어 거넛튼 일이며 이웃집 닭 잡어 먹엇다고 소송하는 사람을 도로 잡어다가 볼기 때려보낸 洪總巡이란 작자를 잡어다가 다발경을 치이고 免職 逐出 식히든 일 가튼 것은 도뎌히 그 후로는 보기 어려웟다.<63>
<62-63>