잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	始興郡에새로생긴 驚異 珍中珍寧 洪氏家의 烈女竹-그것은 果然眞正한대인가- (The amazing Yeollyeo Bamboo of the Hong clan in Jinjungnyeong, Siheung-gun - Is it really true bamboo?)
필자	尹丙燮
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

Science is developing day by day, and even things like the world of Venus or Mars and even the world of amoeba-like lower animals are now almost clearly understood. But even in this world, a mythical event that happened hundreds or thousands of years ago has occurred. That is, in Yangjae-ri, Sindong-myeon, Siheung-gun, Gyeonggi-do (the small place name is Anseondang, about 15 li from Seomigo Station), at the house of Hong Hwan-gun (a farmer), whose address is 69, his mother, Gwangsan Kim clan, was originally a young widow who maintained her chastity for over forty years. She died of illness last April at the high age of seventy. But suddenly, around 7 a.m. on the first day of the third lunar month of this year, a so-called bamboo shoot began to grow on the south wall of the clothes chest (inside room above the door of the main room) of Kim's usual bedroom. In just one day, it grew to about two feet, and after two or three days, it reached the ceiling (now it is bent again from the ceiling and extended, about eight feet and five inches - May 19 standard). The people of the house, as well as the people of the whole village, are amazed and say to each other that Kim was originally a virtuous woman, so bamboo grew in her deceased room, and they all call it Yeollyeo Bamboo (烈女竹) or Yeoljuk (烈竹). Once the rumor spread, countless men and women from the capital and countryside who enjoy sightseeing flocked to the place every day, creating a sea of people in the village, ruining crops. Certain groups in Gyeongseong (京城) who are greedy for money are trying to use it to make some money by printing pictures of the bamboo and selling them for one won and thirty jeon per sheet, also using it as an admission ticket, prohibiting people without the picture from viewing it. This reporter also heard the rumor and, in order to investigate the truth and origin of the bamboo in detail, invited Yun Byeong-seop (尹丙燮), a great scholar of botany, on May 19 and went on a field inspection together. As a result, Mr. Yun made research and criticism as follows, dispelling the temporary cloud of doubt. (One reporter) <105>

Hong's Family (洪■君의 家族)

In temperate regions like our Joseon, evergreen trees are originally rare, so pine, cypress, and bamboo are considered precious trees. It has been compared to the fidelity of loyal subjects, martyrs, or virtuous women, saying "High pine, chaste cypress" or "Righteous bamboo, faithful bamboo." Among them, bamboo is especially precious in central and northern Joseon, so bamboo is even more highly regarded. Due to this concept, there is a legend that a large royal bamboo grew where Jeong Po-eun (鄭圃隱), a loyal subject of the late Goryeo Dynasty, died faithfully, and the blood bamboo of Min Chung-jeonggong (閔忠正公) also grew at the end of the Korean Empire. The so-called Yeoljuk (烈竹) that has grown in the Hong clan's house is also nothing more than a result of this concept. Whether it grew because of a virtuous woman or not is a separate issue, but the fact that it grew on the wall of a person's residence is a fact, and if it's strange, it's strange. However, from a scientist's point of view, it's not that strange. Any plant can propagate and live in a place where it can live, not to mention a wall, but even inside the human body. The only problem here is that it happens to be bamboo, but if it were ordinary grass, there would be no problem. So, the only question is whether it is really bamboo as the world proclaims. However, no matter how I look at the so-called Yeoljuk, I cannot find any characteristics of real bamboo. Although reeds and bamboo are similar in kind, bamboo is perennial and rarely flowers, and once it flowers, it dies. Reeds, on the other hand, are annual and sprout and grow from the rhizome every year and always produce ears (节花). The nodes of bamboo are noticeably thick and large, and usually three or four leaves grow on each node, but the nodes of reeds are the opposite, not so thick, and a single leaf grows on each node. Since it is still summer, it is difficult to know whether it is annual or not, and the presence or absence of ears is also unknown, but even judging by the state of the nodes and leaves, this so-called Yeoljuk is not real bamboo but a reed. It is a true reed. That is, it belongs to the reed genus Phragmitis of the grass family. There are two species of this genus in Korea. One is 葦 or 廬 〓 Phragmitis communis 〓 called Yoshi or Ashi in Japanese. The culm is upright, the ear is large, and the glume is also large. The second is (Phragmitis Japonica) 〓 Chishipari in Japanese. The culm creeps on the ground, the ear is a little smaller, and the glume is also small (the Japanese name Chishipari is also the name of a species in the chrysanthemum family). The one that grew in this house belongs to the former. Any plant of this genus is a perennial herb, and new culms sprout and grow from the rhizomes under the ground every year. At the time of budding, it resembles the appearance of bamboo shoots of the Sasa class emerging above ground wrapped in bracts, so it is difficult to distinguish in areas where it is mixed with Sasa bamboo. However, since it is a herbaceous plant, it produces new culms from its rhizomes every year and produces panicles of the unique shape of reeds at the end of the culm. The rhizome of this plant has a very strong vitality. Even if the rhizome of the plant is cut into two or three nodes and buried in the ground, it will sprout and grow again the following year. Even if it is in dry and solid ground and cannot easily obtain the moisture and air required for germination, its vitality does not disappear, and it remains in the ground for four or five years, and if it gets a chance, it will sprout and grow. It was also discovered during this investigation that there are quite a few of these reeds near this house. Perhaps the reed that grew in this house, like this, was mixed in the soil used when repairing the hearth or the barnyard of this house two or three or four or five years ago. Did bamboo originally grow on Seonjukgyo (善竹橋), or did later generations create this nonexistent thing? I do not know, but how could there only be bamboo on Seonjukgyo (善竹橋) if the loyal spirit of Poun (圃隱) transformed into bamboo? I witnessed the so-called blood bamboo at Min Chung-jeonggong's house. At that time, there was also bamboo in the back garden of Min Chung-jeonggong's house, and some people at the time said that the roots spread and grew in that room, but that was probably not the case either. It must have been done by some curious person who believed in the bamboo of Seonjukgyo (善竹橋). - (Continued on page 88) <107>
- (Continued from page 105) -
Such things undoubtedly expose the lack of scientific knowledge of the Korean people, so how can it not be a shameful thing? To put it strongly, it should be called Yeolro (烈蘆), but Yeoljuk (烈竹) is fundamentally wrong. The Hong clan may feel upset when they hear this, but what can they do when science proves it? <90>

**Named Entities**

京畿道	Gyeonggi-do
始興郡	Siheung-gun
新東面	Sindong-myeon
良材里	Yangjae-ri
安仙堂	Anseondang
西米庫驛	Seomigo Station
洪煥君	Hong Hwan-gun
光山金氏	Gwangsan Kim clan
京城	Gyeongseong
尹丙燮	Yun Byeong-seop
朝鮮	Joseon
鄭圃隱	Jeong Po-eun
閔忠正公	Min Chung-jeonggong
善竹橋	Seonjukgyo
葦	wi
廬	ryeo
ヨシ	Yoshi
アシ	Ashi
チシパリ	Chishipari



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	始興郡에새로생긴 驚異 珍中珍寧 洪氏家의 烈女竹-그것은 果然眞正한대인가-
필자	尹丙燮
기사형태	논설

始興郡에새로생긴 驚異 珍中珍寧 洪氏家의 烈女竹-그것은 果然眞正한대인가-
						尹丙燮
科學이 날로發達하야 金星世界나 火星世界의 일로부터아메바가튼 下等動物世界의일지도 거의 明白하게 알게된이세상에도 아즉지 몃 百年前이나 몃千年前에잇던 神話가튼 事實이 생겨낫다 卽 京畿道始興郡新東面良材里(小地名은 安仙堂이니 西米庫驛에서 約十五里가된다) 六九番地에사는 洪煥君(農民)의 母親 光山金氏는 元來少年寡宅으로 四十餘年守節을하다가 昨年四月에 七十餘歲의 高齡으로 病死하얏는대 今年陰三月一日午前七時頃에 突然히 그金氏의 平素居處하던 寢室의 옷묵 南壁(안방위 門중방)에 난데없는 所謂竹筍이 發生하기 始作하야 不過하루동안 約二尺假量이나되게 잘아고 二三日後에는 天井지닷게되엿는데(只今은 天井에서 다시굽어서 延長되엿는데 約八尺五寸假量이나된다〓五月十九日標準) 그집안사람은 勿論이고 윈 洞里사람들이 모도 驚異하게 생각하야 서로말하기를 金氏는 本來 烈女이기 문에 그의죽은 房안에서 대(竹)가낫다고하야 모도이를말하기를 烈女竹 는 烈竹이라고한다. 그 所聞이 한번나매 구경조와하는 京鄕의 一般男女들은 날마다 數百數千식 를지여 그곳으로몰켜드니 그동리는 자못 人山人海를이르럿 農作物이 모도발펴망거지고 돈먹는데 눈이희인 京城의 某某무리들은 그것을 利用하야 돈을좀먹으랴고 그대의 寫眞을박어서 一枚에 一金三十錢也를밧되 아주 入場券으로 兼用하야 그寫眞을가지지안은사람은 觀覽을不許한다고한다 本記者도한 그所聞을듯고 그대의 眞僞如何와 그대의 出處如何를 자서히 調査하기 爲하야 去五月十九日에 植物學의 硏究大家인 尹丙燮氏를 邀請하야 現場에가치 出張視察한 結果 氏는 左와 如히 硏究批判을하야 一時의 疑雲을 깨트리게되엿다. (一記者)＜105＞

洪■君의 家族
우리 朝鮮과가튼 溫帶地方에는 元來常綠樹가 稀貴한 닭에 松柏인나 대(竹)가튼 常綠樹를 天下珍木으로 생각하야 曰 高松貞柏이니 曰 義竹, 節竹이니하고 自來忠臣烈士나 或은 烈女의 節介에 比하야왓다 그 中에도 中北部朝鮮에는 一竹木이 特貴함으로 竹을더욱 貴重히녁엿다. 그 觀念으로 因하야 高麗末의 忠臣인 鄭圃隱의 節死한곳에 큰王竹이낫다는 傳說도생기고 韓末에 閔忠正公의 血竹도생긴것갓다. 只今이 洪氏家에생겨난 所謂烈竹이라는것도 亦是이 觀念에서나온데지나지못한것이다. 이것이 烈女로하야서 생겨나고 안이난것은 別問題로하고 다만 사람이 居處하는 防壁에난것만은 事實이오  珍奇하다면 珍奇한것이다 그러나 科學者의눈으로본다면 그다지 珍奇할것도없는것이다 엇더한 植物이던지 自體가 生活할수만잇는곳이면 防壁은그만두고 人體內에서도 繁殖生活하는것이 當然한일이다 여긔에도 그것이 공교히 대(竹)라하는닭에 問題이지 普通의풀이낫다면 別로 問題도 업슬터이다. 그러면 다만問題는 이것이 世人의 喧傳하는바와가티 果然대인지 안인지 그것을 論評할인가한다 그런데 나는 그 所謂烈竹이라는것을 이리로살펴보고 저리로살펴보아도 도모지 眞正한대의 特徵을 發見치못하얏다. 蘆나竹이나 種類는 비슷한것이지만은 竹은 多年生으로 發花하는 일이 少하고 一次發花하면 그만 枯死하는 特徵이 有하나 蘆는 一年生으로 每年根莖에서 發芽成長하야 반듯이 穗(節花)를 發하며 竹의 節은 顯著히 厚大하고 每節마다 葉이 普通三四葉식 生하나 廬의 節은 此와 反對로 그리厚大치안토 每節에 單葉이 生한다 只今은 아즉夏期이닛가 그것이 一年生이고 안인것도 잘알 수 없고 穗의 有無가 한알수업지만은 節과 葉의 狀態로만보아도 이 所謂 烈竹이라는것은 眞正한대가안이오 갈대이다. 갈대 中에도 참정말갈대이다 卽 禾本科의 갈대 屬프라그미티스(Phragmitis)에 屬하는것이다 此屬에 朝鮮에 産＜106＞하는것은 二種잇스니 其一은 葦或廬〓프라그미티스컴뮤니스(Phragmitis communis)〓日名ヨシ或アシ라 稱하는 者니 稈이 直立하고 穗가 大하고 頴〓겁질도 大하며 其二는 (Phragmitis Japonica)〓日名チシパリ이니 稈이 地上으로 葡匐하고 穗가좀 小하고 頴도小하다(日本名チシパリ는 菊科에도 一種同名이잇다) 이집에난이것은 卽前者에 屬하는것이다 이屬의 植物은 어는것이던지 宿根草木으로 每年其地下에 잇는 根莖에서 싹이나서 成長한다 出芽하는 當時에는 怡似히 笹竹(Sasa)類의 竹筍이 苞에싸인채로 地上으로 出芽하는 貌樣과 類似하야 笹竹과 混生되는 地方에서는 容易히 區別할수가업다 그러나 이것은 草本인 故로 每年其根莖에서 新稈을 發生하야 其稈端에갈대의 固有形의 穗狀花를 發한다 이 植物의 根莖은 生活力이 참 强大함으로 有名하다 植物의 根莖을 二三節식 切斷하야 地中에 埋置하여도 翌年이면 再次發芽成長하고 或乾燥堅固한 地中에잇서서 容易히 發芽에 要하는 水分과 空氣를 웃지못하여도 生活力은 消失되지안코 四五年이라도 其地中에잇다가 엇던 機會만어드면 꼿發芽成長한다 이집 附近에 이갈가 相當히잇는것도 이번 調査할에 發見하얏다 아마이집에난 이갈대도한이와가티 二三年或四五年前에 이집에서 화방밋헤나 或은 퇴아레를 改修할 時에 使用하든 泥土中에 이 植物의 根莖의 一片이 混在되엿든것이다 데전에 善竹橋에대가낫섯는지 元來잇섯는지

洪氏家의 烈竹
는잇지도안이한것을 後人이 이것을맨드러냇는지는 알수업스나 圃隱先生의 忠魂이 대로 化한대서야 이 世上에엇지 善竹橋에만대가잇스랴 나는 閔忠正公집에서로 所謂血竹이라는것을 目覩하엿다 그에는 閔忠正公집뒤꼇에도 대가잇서서 其當時에 엇던이는 그뿌리가버더서 그 房에난것이라하지만은 그것도그런것이안이겟지 그것은 善竹橋의대를 確信하는■엇던 好奇者의 手段으로된것이겟다. -(八八頁에 績)-＜107＞
-(一○五頁의 繼續)-
이러한 일은 다― 朝鮮사람의 科學的 知識의 缺乏을 餘地업시 暴露시키는 것이니 엇지 羞恥되는 일이 안이겟스랴 이것을 强잉히 말하자면 烈蘆라고는 할지언정 烈竹이라는 것은 根本으로 틀닌 일이다 洪氏家에서 이런 말을 드르면 섭섭히 녁일는지 알수 업스나 科學이 證明하는데야 엇지하랴. ＜90＞
＜90, 105-107＞