별건곤 제21호
1929년 06월 23일
今年 己巳月 己巳日 登極한다든 車景錫會見記 (A Record of Meeting Cha Kyŏng-sŏk, Who Was Said to Ascend the Throne on Kisa Year, Kisa Month, Kisa Day)
海金剛
문예기타 (Miscellaneous Literature)

A Record of Meeting Cha Kyŏng-sŏk, Who Was Said to Ascend the Throne on Kisa Year, Kisa Month, Kisa Day
Hae Kŭmgang

The world knows of famous painters and renowned writers, but few know that there are artists and writers who hide under the strange rocks of Pukhan Mountain (北漢怪岩) and devote themselves to their work unnoticed. It is regrettable! It is pitiable!

However, I have never tried to make myself known to the world, and no one has ever come to find me. I have simply lived my life as a recluse, spending my remaining years with poetry and art. But whether flowers bloomed at my ancestors' graves, unexpectedly, on the first day of the fifth month, an angel, no, a messenger, descended upon me. One day, as I was busy building a slightly larger house, Cho Man-shik (趙晩植), a precious guest, suddenly visited. This guest was a friend I had met ten years ago, and I had not seen him since. How glad I was to see him again! I immediately opened the gate and welcomed him into the guest room. After a long time, as we were catching up, Cho suddenly said:

"The reason I have come to see you this time is not as an individual, but as a messenger of Cha Kyŏng-sŏk (車景錫), carrying a great mission."

Hearing these words, which were completely unexpected, my heart pounded and I didn't know what to do. I quickly regained my composure, composed myself, and said:

"I didn't know that the messenger was coming, and I have been very rude until now. Please forgive me."

"If you are so humble so suddenly, I won't be able to sit here for a moment! That was all a joke. In fact, this time, Ch'a Ch'ŏnja (車天子, Emperor Ch'a) is specially inviting the greatest writer in Korea, Kim Sŏnsaeng (金先生), and sent me as a messenger, even paying for the round trip. Would you please listen to what I have to say?"

"What is it about...?"

"This time, Ch'a Kyŏng-sŏk (車景錫) has built a very large palace in Chŏngŭp (井邑) (Ibam-myŏn Taeang-ri (笠岩面大央里)). It is much larger than the Kŭnjŏng Hall (勤政殿) here. It is really magnificent. But, Ch'a Kyŏng-sŏk (車景錫) said,"

"This house is very large, but it needs to have plaques with good calligraphy hung up. If it is not the divine calligraphy of Kim Sŏnsaeng (金先生), the greatest writer in Chosŏn (朝鮮), it will not do. So, he ordered me to bring the Sŏnsaeng (先生) here. Isn't it right that the house is the largest building in Chosŏn (朝鮮), and the plaques should be written by the greatest writer in Chosŏn (朝鮮)?"

"Is that so? Then I cannot go. If the other party were our friend, and we could meet to exchange writings or have a drinking party, I could go and even visit him. But if it is Ch'a Kyŏng-sŏk (車景錫), who is the leader of tens of thousands of people today, if I were to go immediately just because he called me, people would think that I was summoned by Ch'a Kyŏng-sŏk (車景錫). It is difficult to agree to that in terms of a scholar's integrity. Also, if I were to write the plaques, he should measure the silk according to the size of the plaques and come to receive the calligraphy. Why would he need to bring me there or invite me?"

"No, that is not it. If it were just about receiving the plaques, then what you said is correct, but in fact, it is not just about the plaques. He has built such a magnificent house, but no one knows the decoration or the overall style of the house. He thought that he needed to bring a Sŏnsaeng (先生) with exceptional insight. In this regard, he concluded that there is no Sŏnsaeng (先生) more enlightened than you, and that is why he is inviting you."

Hearing this, I felt a little better. I was always resentful in my heart that the world did not recognize me, so I was disheartened and lonely, and I resented the world. In my heart, I thought, "Ch'a Kyŏng-sŏk (車景錫) is indeed an extraordinary person. Just the fact that he recognizes a hidden calligrapher and painter like me, buried in a remote mountain, whom the world does not know, shows that he is indeed worthy of being the leader of tens of thousands of foolish people!" I was impressed. After several formal refusals, I eventually pretended to give in.

<108>

Reception in a Thatched House

Following the messenger Cho, I boarded the Honam Line express train at 10:20 PM, placing my old body on it. The next day at 8:00 AM, I got off at Chŏngŭp Station (井邑驛), where Pukpangju (北坊主) Yun (尹) and two or three others came to greet me. From there, I got into a car and arrived in twenty minutes at the center of Taeang-ri (大央里) (the foolish people call it Iltae Hwang-ri (日大皇里)), a village in the middle of a crossroads. A newly built bell tower, similar to the Chonggak (鐘閣) in Kyŏngsŏng (京城), stood there. Inside, there was a huge bell made by melting down the spoons (匙) of the believers. It is said that they ring this bell three times a day to signal prayer. From there, as guided, I entered the so-called Grand Palace (大闕). Looking around at the mountains and rivers on the left and right, I saw a magnificent mansion facing south, backing against Ipam Mountain (笠岩山, Katbawi) and Namsan (南山) (the reason for this is that the fortune has now turned over and become T'aeŭl Fortune (太乙運數), so the orientation is opposite to that of the past). In front of it was a large village of over five hundred households. The streets were neatly arranged in a "well" (井) shape, giving it a beautiful appearance. On the mountain slopes, there were tile-making factories (造瓦工場) and paper mills (製紙所) lined up. It is said that over four hundred workers, including earthworkers, carpenters, and stonemasons (Chinese people), all belong to the church (敎人). All the inns, restaurants, and grocery stores are run by church members, creating a thriving atmosphere like the gold stores in Shinhŭng (新穴). Seeing the officials in their official hats and belts (峨冠博帶) and the men with their topknots (럼이상투쟁이), it was as if I were seeing the golden age of Yao (堯) and Shun (舜) in ancient times. Following the Pukpangju (北坊主), who was welcoming us, I entered the main gate, passed through the second and third gates (Changdŏk (昌德) and Kyŏngbok (景福) Palaces (景福二宮) have three gates, but here there are five), and settled in a small hall called Ch'ŏngch'ŏnggak (靑靑閣), where they served wine and food to entertain us. After a while, the gatekeeper (閤門) (fourth gate) opened, and another imperial envoy (勅使) came out, saying:

"The exalted Sŏnsaeng (先生) must be very tired from the long journey."

I was grateful. I sent a reply and spent the night in my lodging with Cho Man-shik (趙晩植). Around five o'clock in the morning, when the bell rang, the sound of chanting rose from every room and house. The next day, around ten in the morning, a message came from inside the gate (閤門) telling me to enter. I went with Cho Man-shik (趙晩植) to meet Ch'a Ch'ŏnja (車天子)! The person who cunningly tricked the foolish people of the world, making them sacrifice their wealth and all their interests. The problematic figure of the time! The monster of the era! The one who was rumored to ascend to the throne in Kisa year, Kisa month, Kisa day, Kisa hour (己巳年己巳月己巳日己巳時), deceiving the foolish people. The road to glory! The road to happiness!

What greater honor could there be than to meet Ch'a Kyŏng-sŏk (車景錫), whom few people in the world have met?

I thought I would be led to a very large palace, but in the end, I was guided to a not-so-large thatched house.

<109>

The Appearance and Personality of Ch'a Kyŏng-sŏk

Ascending to the main hall (大廳) and looking around, the women in the upper room and the servants, including the main lady (內主人公) of the house, were all sitting casually, busy with their work, without even standing up to greet the guests. I immediately looked down. The Pukpangju (北坊主) said,

"The Sŏnsaeng (先生) is not feeling well," and indeed, his feet, which looked swollen as if they had been treated with medicine, were bare. He was leaning against a cushion on the lower side, and he bowed forward as he greeted us. After the greeting, he glanced up and down once. His hair was thinning, and his topknot was tied to the back of his head. His face was square and bright, and his eyes shone sharply, as if piercing through people. His beard was sparse, and his fingers were thick. He was neither tall nor short, and he looked to be about forty-five or forty-six years old. His body was like a crane's body and a turtle's stance (鶴身龜局). To the right of the Ch'ŏnja (天子) was a beautiful (美) old man in his sixties, fanning him with a large red fan (大紅團扇). His appearance was not as strange as I had imagined; rather, he looked too ordinary.

The Problematic Ch'a Kyŏng-sŏk

Then, the conversation began quietly.

"A distinguished guest has come from afar, and I know that I should have gone out to greet you to show respect, but I am very sorry that I could not come out to meet you because I am not feeling well."

His voice was loud and clear, and he seemed very considerate. I replied with the usual greetings, and Ch'a (車) asked again,

"How old is the Sŏnsaeng (先生)?"

"I am sixty this year."

"Oh, you are an old man... You have probably heard most of the story, but the reason I invited you here is not just to ask for the plaques, but also to have the house looked at by the Sŏnsaeng (先生). None of my subordinates are smart. They are all foolish, so whenever I try to do something big, I have to interfere in every detail!"

"How many plaques will there be in total?"

<111>

"There are about twenty halls (殿), pavilions (閣), and buildings (堂), but the most important are the Sipil Hall (十一殿) and the Chŏnghwa Hall (井華堂). I am sure the Sŏnsaeng (先生), the greatest writer in the world, will write them well, but it will be very difficult for you to write the Sipil Hall (十一殿)."

"What characters make up the Sipil Hall (十一殿)?"

"Yes! Ten (十) and one (一). So, the character "hall" (殿) has many strokes, but the characters "ten" (十) and "one" (一) have very few strokes. No matter how well you write them, the three characters will not harmonize, will they?"

"Why does it have to be Sipil Hall (十一殿)? If it hasn't been put up yet, you can change the name. Wouldn't it be better to change it to another name?"

"No. It means "ten is the ultimate (十無極), one is the origin (一太極)." It has already been decided, so I cannot change it."

"Then I will write it."

"I am sure there will be many inconveniences in the Sŏnsaeng's (先生) residence and food. All my subordinates are ignorant, and no one knows how to treat a distinguished guest, so I am sure you will be very uncomfortable."

Ch'a (車) looked at Cho Man-shik (趙晩植) again and asked,

"What did you have him eat? How was it?"

"It was just so-so. I couldn't give him a grand treat."

Ch'a (車) opened a cabinet and took out a package of ginseng (人蔘), giving it to the old attendant fanning him, saying,

"I haven't thought of any special treatment yet, so first, have him make samgyetang (蔘鷄湯) three times a day. Okay!"

"Yes, I understand."

The old attendant bowed and carefully took the ginseng (人蔘) and went out. As a person, he did not seem like the dull and sinister person I had imagined. He was considerate and kind, and it was surprising that he had an extraordinary intelligence and remembered almost all the numbers of rooms and sizes of the houses. He seemed to have a relatively good knowledge and capacity, at least in terms of Chinese studies (漢學). He was enough of a monster to deceive tens of thousands of foolish people. He could be the leader who creates a superstition den of mysteries.

<112>

A Demon's Den of Extreme Luxury

As I was leaving the room, Ch'a Ch'ŏnja (車天子) deliberately dragged his sick leg and escorted me to the front gate. There were guards at every gate, investigating and questioning everyone who came and went, making the authority strict and solemn. That night, we played with poetry and wine until late at night. The next day, I accompanied the Pukpangju (北坊主), Cho Man-shik (趙晩植), and three others to inspect the palaces.

The Sipil Hall (十一殿) is a two-story house with nine spans (九) and seven bays (七) (Kŭnjŏng Hall (勤政殿) has seven spans (七) and five bays (五)). The width between spans (usually one span is eight feet, but here one span is sixteen feet) and the depth of five bays add up to a total of five hundred and sixty feet, or ninety-three spans (九十三間). It is said to be a grand palace with a total of one hundred and eighty-six spans (一百八十六間) including the two stories. The dragon and phoenix patterns (龍鳳), danch'ŏng (丹靑, traditional Korean multicolored paintwork), magnolia (玉蘭), and beadwork (珠覆) dazzle the eyes, and the roof tiles are Chinese-style yellow tiles (支那式黃瓦). (In China, yellow tiles are traditionally used for the emperor's palace.) The Chŏnghwa Hall (井華堂), which is like a brother to the Sipil Hall (十一殿), has green tiles (綠瓦).

The wood used here is all red pine from the Amnok River (鴨綠江) coast, and it is said that eight large pillars were brought from Russia (露領), each being six feet tall (people could only see the topknots of people standing next to them) and seventeen feet long. The stone used for the stairs was brought from Hwangdŭng (黃登). Like the old palaces, it is divided into eastern and western classes so that all the officials can pay their respects to the Sŏnsaeng (先生). The Sipil Hall (十一殿), as well as the Chŏnghwa Hall (井華堂) and all the other pavilions (閣), halls (殿堂), and buildings (院), are built side by side in a magnificent style. It is the epitome of luxury and extravagance. The buildings alone have an impressive appearance.

A Lock-Picking Thief

In this way, I stayed for a week and wrote dozens of large plaques. The calligraphy that is still hung there is my work. The three characters "Mirŭkbul (彌勒佛, Maitreya Buddha)" written at Kuryongyŏn (九龍淵) in Kŭmgang Mountain (金剛山) and this calligraphy are the products of my life's effort. When leaving, I believed that they would not begrudge a reward of five or six thousand won, or even ten thousand won. Moreover, according to the words of the holy messenger Cho Man-shik (趙晩植), the results of the top executives' closed-door meeting were said to be three thousand won, five thousand won, or even ten thousand won. I was relying on that, and finally, the day came when I had to leave. The Pukpangju (北坊主) came to Chŏngŭp Station (井邑驛) to see me off, and at the farewell, he put a hundred won in an envelope and gave it to me, saying that it was just for travel expenses and that the reward would be sent later. I didn't say anything in person and came back. After that, there was no news, and I was even deceived by Cho Man-shik's (趙晩植) smooth talk for twenty or fifty won. Even if I send a direct letter, there is no reply. After being scammed for the plaques of the palaces by Ch'a Kyŏng-sŏk (車景錫), who claimed to rule the world with T'aeŭl Fortune (太乙運數), I was dumbfounded and speechless. It is like the old saying: "He who steals the country becomes the king, and he who steals the key becomes a prisoner." If you deceive a large sum, there may be some justification, but deceiving a few thousand won is nothing more than being a lock-picking thief.

Ch'a Kyŏng-sŏk (車景錫)—P'och'ŏn-gyo (普天敎)—the great demon's den (大魔窟) sucks the blood of foolish people in this way. The five hundred or so church members (敎人) living in Taeang-ri (大央里) are all local wealthy farmers (地方豪農) who used to own hundreds or thousands of bags of rice. They were tempted and bewitched by Ch'a Kyŏng-sŏk (車景錫) to the Jade Emperor (玉皇上帝), and they paid everything without leaving anything to nibble on. They are people who gathered from all over the country, carrying their belongings on their backs, like people setting fire to a pile of hay and picking up fallen grains of rice.

Ah! It is disheartening! The world is developing scientifically, and material civilization is advancing with great fanfare. Airplanes that peek at the moon goddess (月宮媗娥) and submarines that startle the sea dragon king (水中龍王) conquer nature with great scientific civilization and shatter the maze of the ancient millions of years in one fell swoop. But in inverse proportion to that, on the one hand, the sinister and monstrous playground is still open, and in the dark demon's hall (妖魔殿), a scene of a hundred ghosts dancing wildly (百鬼亂舞) is unfolding. Where else is this contradiction, and where else is this civilization! It is lamentable!

The Ōmoto (大本敎) in Japan, the Red Swastika Society (紅卍敎) in China, and the P'och'ŏn-gyo (普天敎) in Chosŏn (朝鮮) are all demon's dens (伏魔殿) that suck the blood of foolish people and are great criminal dens of the 20th-century civilized world! A large gang (大黨) runs rampant in broad daylight! Tch! Pitiable! (End)

<113>

**Named Entities**

Pukhan Mountain	Pukhan Mountain
趙晩植	Cho Man-shik
車景錫	Ch'a Kyŏng-sŏk
車天子	Ch'a Ch'ŏnja
井邑	Chŏngŭp
笠岩面	Ibam-myŏn
大央里	Taeang-ri
勤政殿	Kŭnjŏng Hall
朝鮮	Chosŏn
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
鐘閣	Chonggak
日大皇里	Iltae Hwang-ri
笠岩山	Ibam Mountain
南山	Namsan
太乙運數	T'aeŭl Unsu
昌德	Changdŏk
景福	Kyŏngbok
靑靑閣	Ch'ŏngch'ŏnggak
金剛山	Kŭmgangsan
九龍淵	Kuryongyŏn
彌勒佛	Mirŭkbul
Pukpangju	Pukpangju
鴨綠江	Amnok River
黃登	Hwangdŭng
普天敎	P'och'ŏn-gyo
大本敎	Ōmoto
紅卍敎	Kōmanji-kyō



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	今年 己巳月 己巳日 登極한다든 車景錫會見記
필자	海金剛
기사형태	문예기타

今年 己巳月 己巳日 登極한다든 車景錫會見記
						海金剛
세상에는 名聲들날니는 무슨 畵伯某某名筆이잇는줄은 알지만은 北漢怪岩미테 숨은 畵家筆家가남모르게 螢伏해잇는줄은 아는사람이적다. 애석한일이다! 가엽슨일이다!
그러나 나는억지로 세상사람에게 알리려고 애를써본적도없고 딸아서누구하나 차저오는사람도업시 그저그냥 閒雲野鶴으로짝을지어 詩韻墨趣로써 餘生을 보내여오든터인데 우리집 先瑩에 꼬치피엿는지 千千萬뜻박게 지난 五月초생에는 나에게 天使가 안이 使者가 나려왓다. 하로는 내가 새로집을 더좀크게 얼거보느라고 대단분주하든차에 忽然趙晩植이라는 珍客이 訪問을왓다 이손님은 내가 十年前에만나보든친구로서 그후일절 만나지못하다가 오래간만에 만나게되니 엇지나반갑든지 바로 柴門을열고 客室에마지하야 오래ㅅ동안 그립든정회를풀다가 별안간 趙의말이
『내가이번에 先生을차저온것은 나의 一個人으로 訪問한것이안이라 車景錫의 使者로 重大使命을띄고왓습니다.』
千萬夢寐之外에 이런말을드르니 一時는가슴이두군두군엇지할는지모르다가 문득 정신을가담듬어 容色을 整肅하고
『使者께서 枉臨하신것을모르고 이지 넘우 無體하엿습니다 용서하십시오』
『그러케별안간 謙遜하시면 여긔잠시도 안젓슬수업구료! 그것은 죄다 弄談이고 事實로이번에 車天子께서 天下名筆金先生을특별히 招聘하는대 나를 使者로 往復旅費지보내며 꼬좀모시고오래서일부러왓슴니다 드러주시겟는지?』
『그건무슨일로………』
『이번에 車景錫께서 井邑(笠岩面大央里)에다가 굉장＜108＞이큰宮殿을 지엿슴니다 여긔 勤政殿보담도 훨신더큼니다 정말로 굉장함니다 그런데요 車景錫의말이』
『이러케 굉장이큰집은되엿스나 額字를한번씩잘써부처야겟는데 朝鮮에 第一名筆 金先生의 神筆이안이면 도뎌히안되겟스니 그先生을 모시고오라』는명령이니 집이 朝鮮에서 第一大建物인데다가 額字도 조선에서 뎨일 名筆이신 先生의글씨라야 하지안케슴닛가』
『그레여?그러타면 나는못가겟소 相對者가 우리의 친구여서만나면 글을옮겨다 술추렴을하거나하는것가트면 놀너도가고 일부러 尋訪도할수잇지만 車景錫이라면 오늘날 몃 萬名頭目되는 그런 人物인즉나더러오란다고 바로나가고 보면 누가보든지 車景錫에게 불려갓다고할것이니 선비의 節操로 그것은 承諾하기어려운문뎨이며  額字를써가겟다면 懸板尺數대로비단을재가지고 올와서 글씨를바더갈것이지 무얼 모시여가고 招聘해가고할것이잇습닛가?』
『안이올시다 그런게안이라 額字만밧는다면 과연지금 先生의하신말슴과가티 와서바더가도조켓지만 사실인즉 額字만아니라 그러케굉장한집을 지어는노왓스나 그집의 裝飾이라든지 其他모든모양보는 體裁를아는사람이업서서 識見이 卓越한 先生한분을 모시여와야겟다는 생각끗헤이 點에잇서서도 先生만한 高明하신 先生이임겟다는 結論으로 이러케 請聘하게되엿슴니다』
이말을듯고보니 아인게안이라 마음이 조곰상쾌하엿다. 세상이알아주지안는다는것을항상 內心에 不平이엿기 문에 寒心하고 寂寞하야슬몃이 세상을원망하든나인지라 마음속으로『車景錫이란 果然非凡한 人物이다 나와가티 深山僻地에 파뭇처서 세상사람이 알지못하는 이런 숨운 書畵家를알어주는것만보아도 果然數萬名愚氓의 頭目이될만은하구나!』이러케 感歎하엿다. 이리하야 몃번 形式的으로 謝絶이라고하다가 畢竟은 슬며시못닉이는척딸아섯다.

草家室內에서 接見

나는 趙使者를따라 저녁열시 二十分 湖南線特急列車에 老軀를넌찟언저 이튼날여덜시에 井邑驛에 下車한즉 北坊主尹某外二三人이 出迎한다. 거긔서다시 自動車에 몸을실어 二十分만에 大央里(愚民稱日大皇里)都邑한가운대 鐘路네거리에대이엿다. 京城鐘閣비슷하게새로지은 鐘閣이 덩그러케세워잇고 그속에는 敎徒들의술가락(匙)을한개씩모아서부어맨드럿다는 巨鐘이달려잇다이것을하로에 세 번씩 처서울려 祈禱의 信號를한다고한다. 거긔서바로 案內하는대로 所謂大闕로드러가는대 左右山川을 잠간둘러보니 笠岩山(갓바위)〓南山〓을등지고 午坐子向으＜109＞로 宏傑한 巨厦가 벗틔여잇스며 (그 理由는 運數가 인저는뒤집혀서 太乙運數가되엿기 문에 往古와는 坐向을 反對로한다고) 그압흐로 五百餘戶의 大部落이되여잇다 市街는 아주대번에『井』字로 整理를해서 美觀을가지고잇스며 山기슬기로는 기와굿는 造瓦工場이잇고 製紙所가즐비하여 土工 木工 石工(支那人)의 合四百餘名이여긔서저긔서 뚝딱뚝딱이것도모도다 敎人이라고하며 旅人宿 飮食店 雜貨商店할것업시 죄다敎人들만모와서 끼리끼리 營業을한다하는데 엇지보면 新穴의 金점판처럼 繁昌한 殷盛한 氣分이 旺溢한다. 峨冠博帶와 럼이상투쟁이를보나 드러보나 堯舜古代의 太平聖世를보는듯하다. 구부텅구부렁거러가는 坊主外出迎人을따아 正門에드러 第二門 第三門 을지나서(昌德景福二宮은 三門인데대하야 여긔는 五門이다) 靑靑閣이라는 一小殿堂에다가 나의 宿所를 定해노코 酒肴를 드려 疑待한다. 조곰잇노라니 閤門(第四門)이열리며 한 勅使가나아와서』
『高名하진 先生께서 遠路에얼마나 疲困하시냐』
는 전갈이나려온다. 마음에황송하엿다. 여긔대한 답전갈을해올리고 그날밤은 宿所에서 趙晩植과 同宿하엿다. 새벽다섯시쯤해서 鐘소리가뗑!하고나니 이방저방 이집저집서무엇 인지중얼 중얼 呪文읽는소리가 우렁우렁난다. 이튼날오전열시쯤되니가 閤門안으로서 드러오라는통긔가 나아온다. 나는 바로 趙晩植과한가지로 車天子! 세상의 어리석은 백성들을 교묘히꾀여내여가젓든재산은물론이고 모든리익을 희생해밧치게하는 당시 問題의 人物!當代의 怪物! 己巳年己巳月己巳日己巳時에 ××位에 登極한다고 세상에 喧傳 愚民을 迷惑하는 車景錫이를 面謁하려드러가는길이다. 榮光의 길 幸福의길!
세상에 몃사람만나보지못하든 車景錫을만나게되는것이란이우에 더큰 榮福이어대잇스리요.
나는 굉장이 큰 殿閣으로 인도하는줄알엇더니 급기야 드러가고보니 웬크지도적지도안한 草家집안방으로 案內한다.

車景錫의 面相과 人格

大廳에올나서서 周圍를살펴보니 우ㅅ방 건너방에는 師母님이라고부르는지 그집 內主人公以下 심부름하는 侍女들지 그냥주느러안저서 손님이드러오신다고 起坐하는법도업시 제각기 제일에 분주한다. 썩드러서자나의눈은 아래ㅅ묵으로 나려쏘인다. 北坊主의말이
『先生님〓께서 몸이편치안타』고하더니만 과연 무슨약칠을해서 퉁퉁하게부어잇는발을 버슨채로 아래ㅅ묵 보료우에 안석에비슥이누어잇다가 몸을압흐로숙이면서 인사를한다. 인사가맛친후에 한번 우알에를쓱나려흘터보니 머리는 조곰버서젓는데 꼬초상투를뒤똑지＜110＞에붓쳐노코 얼굴은 네모가번뜻한데 코에눈한가지가반짝반짜사람을 내다쏘는것이 凡한듯할이다. 수염은 성기고 손꼬락은 독긔로턱찍은듯 키는 길도짤으도안으며 나희는 四十五六歲쯤되여보이는 體局은 鶴身龜局으로되여잇다. 天子님의 윈편에는 나희가 六十餘歲나나되는 美■老人이 大紅團扇을들고부채질한다. 人相으로는내가 平日에 想像하든바와가티 怪形으로 생기지는안을안이라 寧히넘우 平凡하게되엿잇다.

問題의 車京錫
그리고나서는 조용히이약이가시작된다.
『멀니서 貴客이오섯는데 마중이라도 나아가서위로를드려야 人事體面에올흔줄도잘알지만은몸이불편한소치로 나아가뵈입지못해서대단히 죄송합니다』
목소리가 우렁우렁하며 사람됨이 매우 자상해보인다. 나는 항용쓰는인사투로 대답을한즉 車는다시
『先生年歲가얼마나되십닛가?』
『네-今年이 還甲이올시다』
『아이구 老人이시로구면……말슴은대강 드르섯슬터이지만 이번에 모시어온 뜻은 額字만 請할려는것이 아이라 집의모양을 좀 先生께보줍소소고 그런것이 올시다 部下의ㅅ들이하나도 똑똑한사람이없 죄다 미련하게되여먹어서 무엇 큰일을하나하자면 똑이러게 一一히 간섭을해서함니다그려!』
『대관절 額字는몃개나되겟슴닛가』＜111＞
『殿이니 閣이니 堂이니하는것이 모두 二十餘개될섯임니다만은제일 重要한것은십일 殿과 井華堂이올시다그런데 天下名筆이신 先生께서 어련이 잘쓰실배안이지만 십일殿은아마쓰시기가 대단히어려우시겟슴니다』
『무슨字무슨字해서 십일뎐인데요』
『네!열十字 한一字올시다. 그러니 집殿字는 덜석 劃數 가만흔데다가 十字一字는 획수가 넘우적어서 아무리 잘슨대도 석자(三字)가 터아울리지는안울터이지요?』
『그것엇재하필 十一殿인가요?아직써붓치기전이닛가 일홈은 곳칠수잇스니 다른일홈으로 곳치는게 엇더할닛가』
『안이요. 十無極 一太極의 意味올시다 벌서정해노은것이니 곳칠수업슴니다.』
『그러면 쓰기는하겟슴니다』
『先生의 居處와 飮食에 不便하신일이 만켓슴니다. 部下가 모두미거해노아서 尊貴하신손님을 대접할줄 아는 사람이 한사람도업스니 오작이나 불편하시겟슴닛가?』
車는 다시 趙晩植을치어다보면서
『무엇을 어더케 잡수시게 해드렷나? 엇잿는가?』
『그저그럿치요 무어그러케 굉장이 대접할수는 엄섯슴니다』
車는 문갑을열더니만 人蔘을 斤 집어내여 엽혜서 붓채질하는 老侍人을주면서
『무엇 별대접은 아직생각도나지안으니 우선이것갓다가 蔘鷄나하로 세 번식해드리게하게 응!』
『네-알엇슴니다』
老侍人은 몸을굽혀바더들고조심조심나아간다 人物로는 내가 平素에생각하든 愚鈍陰凶한사람으로보이지안코 인정답고자상하며 총긔가비상해서 그여러집 間數와 尺數를 거의다 暗記하는것은 意外이엿다. 漢學的이나마 比較的智識과 度量은잇서보힌다. 그만하면 愚夫愚氓 몃 萬名을 후려드릴만한 怪物은된다. 수수꺽기의 迷信窟을 만드러노을만한 首魁는될수잇다.

豪華의 極侈의 伏魔殿

그방에서 물너나아올적에 車天子는 일부러병든다리를끌면서 대령끗지 전송한다. 나아오는데 大門마다 守衛하는사람이잇서서들고나는사람들을 一一히 調査檢問하야 威權을 森嚴하게한다. 그날밤은밤이깁도록 詩酒로놀고 그이튼날이엿다. 北坊主와 趙晩植外三人을 同伴하야 殿宇를 視察하얏다.
十一殿은 九보七間의 二層집이다.(勤政殿은 七보五間) 間口間(普通은 一間八尺인데 此一間은 十六尺)奧行五間이니 合計五百六十尺〓九十三間이며 二層지 總計一百＜112＞八十六間의 大殿閣이라고한다. 龍鳳丹靑이며 玉蘭과 珠覆은사람의 耳目을 恍惚燦爛케하며 집옹은 支那式으로 黃瓦로이엿다.(支那에서 天子宮에는 依例黃瓦를쓴다고) 그알에 十一殿과 伯仲間되는 井華堂에는 綠瓦를썻다.
여긔쓴 木材는 全部鴨綠江沿岸의 紅松이며 대즐보 여덜개는 露領에서실어왓다는 高가 六尺(사람이마주서서상투끗만보인다고) 長 十七尺되는것을썻다고한다. 올너가는 層階에쓴 石材는 黃登서왓다는데 녯날의 宮闕가티 滿朝百官이 先生께 朝會하도록 東西兩班으로갈녀잇다. 十一殿은물론이고 井華堂以下 무슨閣무슨 殿堂院할것업시 櫛比宏壯하게세워잇는데 豪華의 極이며 奢侈의 極이다. 建物의 威容만으로는어대로보든지 威福이 堂堂하다.

열쇠도적놈

이리햐야 一週日間滯留中에 數十幅大額字를써내로렷다. 지금거긔 儼然히 붓터잇는것이나의붓자최이다. 金剛山九龍淵에 써붓친『彌勒佛』三字와 이것은 나의 畢生의 精力을드려서쓴 筆力이다. 날적에는 謝禮金으로 五六千圓乃至一萬圓씀은 악기지안을줄밋고  趙晩植이라는거룩하신 使者의 말로도 重要幹部의 鳩首會議한 結果三千圓說五千圓說 或은 一萬圓說지도잇섯다고한다. 나는그것만밋고잇다가 급기야따나든날이다. 北坊主가 井邑驛지 送別을나아와서작별하는마당에 封套에다 돈 百圓을집어너어주면서 우선이것만 旅費로드리는것이라고하며 차차 謝金은 追後送呈하겟다는 意味를 暗示함으로 體面上아무말도업시 올라왓다. 그후는다시아무 消息이업슬만안이라 趙晩植의 巧言令色에넘어서 二十圓, 五十圓을도리어 詐欺만당하고말엇다 直接書信을해야 何等의 回報가업다. 天下를 太乙運數로 다사리겟다는그런거룩하신 車景錫에게 殿閣額字의 詐欺를당하고나니 어안이벙벙 무엇이라고할말이나오지안는다.『나라를 도적하는놈은 王이되고 열쇠를도적하는놈은 囚人이된다』는녯말과가티 큰덩어리를 詐欺한다면 오히려 보아줄 點이나잇지 몃千圓에지나안지는것을 속이는것은열쇠도적놈박게될수업다.
車景錫―普天敎―大魔窟은 모든 것이 이런 筆法으로 愚民의 ■血을빨어올린다. 大央里도읍안에사는 五百餘戶敎人들은 죄다 몃百石 몃 千石하든 地方豪農으로서 車景錫에게 玉皇上帝에게 誘惑되고 魔醉되여 새양쥐볼가심할것도 남기지안코 톡톡터러밧치고나서 男負女戴, 八道江山의 各邑各處로서 몰려드른무리로서 로적가리에 불지르고 쌀애기주서먹으러온사람들이다.
아! 寒心한일이다! 세상은 科學發達이 엇하니 物質文明이 되엿느니 굉장은하게는 밝어간다. 우으로 月宮媗娥를 엿보는 飛行機와 알에로 水中龍王을 놀랫키는 潛航艇가큰 무엇무엇의 科學文明은 自然을 征服하고 往古億萬年의 迷宮魔窟을 一擧에깨트려버렷건만은 그와 反比例로 一方에서는 아직도 陰凶한 怪物의 惡戱場이 公開되여잇고 컴컴한 妖魔殿에서 百鬼亂舞의 場面이 展開되여잇는 이런矛盾이어대잇스며 이따위 文明世界가어대잇겟느냐! 痛嘆할일이다!
日本의 大本敎 中國의 紅卍敎 朝鮮의 普天敎는모다 愚夫愚民의 ■血을빨어드리는 伏魔殿이며 二十世紀文明世界의 大罪惡窟이다! 大黨×억 白晝橫行이다! 咄!可歎! (끗)＜113＞
＜108-113＞