잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	九十年後에 發見된 린커―ㄴ의 戀愛편지 (Lincoln's Love Letters Discovered Ninety Years Later)
필자	P․C 生
기사형태	문예기타 (Literature and Other)

Lincoln's Love Letters Discovered Ninety Years Later
						P․C 生
The pure love of a solemn great man in his youth

Abraham Lincoln, a great figure, a father of humanity, and worshiped worldwide, also had a romance in his youth. His partner was a lovely young woman named Miss Mary Owens. She liked Lincoln's sincerity and kindness, but because he was not handsome and his circumstances were poor, she, as a Yankee girl accustomed to luxury, could not be satisfied and struggled, finally giving Lincoln the bitter cup of heartbreak. This is a well-known fact, but only today, ninety years later, has the tearful letter that Lincoln sent to his lover at that time, appealing for his earnest love, been discovered, causing great excitement in American society.

One letter, sent in 1836 when he was twenty-six years old and a member of the Illinois State Legislature, contains the following line at the end:
"I hope you will reply as soon as you receive this letter, and I wish you would write a word of joy. How satisfied would I be? Since we parted, I have had no joy."

Although simple, it shows his anxious and yearning feelings. Mrs. Bennett Abell, the sister of Miss Mary Owens, who trusted Lincoln, strongly mediated their marriage. However, the inconsiderate woman could not agree.

The next letter was sent in May of the following year, and during that time, their spiritual relationship seemed to have deepened. It was full of emotion, roughly as follows:

"These days, I cannot bear the loneliness. I only miss the time when I sat face to face with you and talked. However, I am always worried that I will give you dissatisfaction because the people here drive carriages and live luxuriously, but I do not even have the means to cover up my poverty. Can you endure that life? However, I will do my best for the happiness and satisfaction of women, and I am sure that I will finally achieve it. How happy would I be if you were satisfied with everything about me? If what you said the other day was not a joke, I would consider it my misunderstanding. Then, should I forget that? Miss Mary! Please think carefully and decide about marriage after much thought..." <118>

Looking at this, it seems that they could not go any further, whether in words or letters. Rather, the reins of their love were loosening. Lincoln wished day and night for his marriage with Mary to come true and waited for a joyful reply from Mary. Finally, one day in August of the same year, he seemed to have made a decision and visited Miss Owens. Immediately after returning, he picked up a pen and sent a letter with the following meaning, and this was the last letter Lincoln sent to his lover, Mary. "It hasn't been a few hours since I said goodbye, but you may think it is very strange that I am writing a letter again. However, if you know that my heart has always been dominated by you, it will not be so strange that I am writing this letter now.
Moreover, I have always been unable to treat you with an open mind when I am with you, so even when I met you today, I could not express my true feelings and just said goodbye in a daze, so I am now sending you this letter... I have always tried to act justly in everything, especially towards women. Therefore, if it is right for me to leave it to you to handle everything alone, I will, of course, do so! If you can feel more comfortable and at peace even a little by entrusting everything to yourself, I will truly be happy.
However, this is the whole question for me. Apart from this question, there is nothing that can make me more pitiful or more happy.
As mentioned above, if you think it is appropriate not to give me an answer... stop! And may there always be happiness for you... But if you come to the conclusion that you will give me an answer, Miss Mary! I beg you to tell me clearly! Miss Mary! I only believe in God. Regards to your sister (Mary's sister)..."

As can be seen from these letters, even though his whole body was burning with passionate love in his youth, his solemn and careful appearance is vivid. However, there was no reply from Miss Owens. However, if that woman had known in advance that Lincoln would become a famous president in the future, she would certainly not have made Lincoln cry over heartbreak.

Therefore, these three letters were secretly hidden in a basket by the woman during her lifetime, and her descendants are still keeping them carefully. (P․C 生) <119>

**Named Entities**

아브라함린커―ㄴ	Abeurahamlink'ŏn
미쓰메―리 오엔	Missŭ Meri Oen
양키―껄	Yank'i-kkŏl
이리노이洲	Irinohi-ju
베넷트 에―벨夫人	Benettŭ E-bel Pujin
오엔孃	Oen-nyang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	九十年後에 發見된 린커―ㄴ의 戀愛편지
필자	P․C 生
기사형태	문예기타

九十年後에 發見된 린커―ㄴ의 戀愛편지
						P․C 生
謹嚴한 偉人의 靑春時節의 짝사랑

偉大한 人格者로서 人道의 아버지로서 世界的으로 崇拜를밧는 아브라함린커―ㄴ에게도 한靑春時節에는 사랑의로마―ㄴ스가잇섯다 그의 相對는 미쓰메―리 오엔이라는 어엽분시약시 린커―ㄴ의 誠實과 親切한것은 마음에들엇섯스나 그의얼골이 잘나지 못한데다가 形勢가 貧窮함으로 華美를일삼는 양키―껄노서는 到底히 滿足할수가업서 煩悶하고 煩悶한테 린커―ㄴ에게 失戀의쓴술잔을주엇다. 이것은 一般이 周知하는 事實이지만 九十年이지난오늘에야 그의린커―ㄴ이 그 愛人에게보냇든 눈물겨운 그러나 엄연한 사랑을 呼訴하든 書蘭이 發見되여 米國의 社交界에 大端한 感興을주고잇다.
그 一通은 一八三六年 그가 二十六歲에 이리노이洲 會議員이엿든에 보낸 것으로 다른 文句의 테 이러한 한마듸가잇다.
『이書翰이 손에쥐여지는 卽時로 回答을주시기바라며  願컨대 한마듸깃거운말슴을 적어보내주시면 얼마나 滿足하겟습닛가 作別한 以來 나는 眞實로 아모런즐거움이업습니다』
이것이 비록 簡單하나 애니며 思慕하는 情을 呼訴한것을알수가잇다 미쓰메―리오엔 의 형(姉)으로 린커―ㄴ을 信用하는 베넷트 에―벨夫人이 極力으로두사람의 結婚을 斡旋하엿다 그러나 思慮가 不足한 그 女子는 아모리하여도 承諾을할수가업섯다.
다음 書簡은 그이듬해 五月에보낼것이고 그동안에 두사람의 精神的交際가 親密의 度를더한것가터 大강다음과가티 情緖纏綿한것이엿다.
『요사이는 寂寞을견듸지못함니다. 다못그대와 마조안저 니약이하든 그가 그리울이외다 그러나 그대에게 不滿足을줄가 늘걱정되는것은 이곳사람들은 馬車를달니며 豪奢로운 生活을하고잇스나 나에게는 나의 貧窮을덥고 가리리만한 手段조차 엄는것이외다 그대는 그 生活에 견듸여내일수가잇나잇가 그러나 나는 婦人의 幸福화 滿足을 爲』하야서는 잇는힘을다할냐하며 그러고그것이 끗끗내 達하고야말것이라고 確信하나이다 그대가나의모―든것을 滿足하게녁여준다면 얼마나나는 幸福한사람이릿가 지낸날의 그대의한말이 戱談이아니엿다면 나의 誤解로녁이려하나이다 그러면 그말을니저바리고말것나이다 미쓰 메―리여! 아모조＜118＞록 생각하고 거둡생각한후에 結婚에 對한것을 決斷하여주기를 바라나이다……』
이것을보면 말노나 書間으로나 이以上더 나아가지는 못한것가탓다. 도리혀 두사람의사랑의곱비는 주러지는것이엿다 린커―ㄴ은 晝■로 메―리와의 結婚이이루어지기만을바라며 메―리에게서 깃거운 回答이오기만을 기다리고잇다가 드되여 同年八月의 어느날 무엇인지뜻을 決하고 오엔孃을 訪問하고 도라오자 卽時로붓을들어 다음과가튼 意味의편지를보내엿다 그러고이것이 린커―ㄴ이그의 愛人 메―리에게보낸 最後의편지이엿다.『作別하고온지가 몃시간이되지안니하엿건만 곳다시편지를쓴다는것이 아마퍽 異常하게 生覺이들것이외다 그러나 나의마음은 언제나 그대에게 支配를 當하고잇섯든것을 알아준다면 내가지금 이편지를쓰는것이 그다지 이상할것도 업슬것이외다.
아니라 나는늘 그대와마조잇슬 는 虛心坦懷로 그대를 待하지못함으로 오늘도 그대를 面會하엿슬에도 나의 眞情을다내여노치못하고 그저눈부시인 中에 作別을하고말엇슴으로 이제편지를 드리는것입니다……나는항상 모든일에잇서서 그中에도 婦人에 對하여서는 行爲를 正當히하려햇씀니다 그러함으로 그대를그대혼자서 모든일을 處理하도록 一任하여바리는것이 正當하다면 나는 勿論그러케하것소이다! 모든 것을 그대 自身에게 一任함으로 因하야 多少라도 마음이편안하고  平和할수가잇다면 眞實노나는 깃거워하는바이외다.
그러나 이것은 나에게잇서서는 全問題이외다 이問題를제하고는 나를보다더 可憐하게만들어줄수도잇고 는보다더 幸福하게만들어줄수잇는 것은 달니업슬것이외다.
우에말한바와가티 그대가만약 나에게 回答을아니주는것이 適當하다고생각하거든……고만두시요! 그러고 그대에게 늘 幸福이잇기를……그러나 만약 回答을주시겟다는 結論에이르거든 미쓰 메―리여! 바라노니 明確하게 말하여주시요! 미쓰 메―리여! 나는다만 神을밋슴니다 형님(메―리의 姉)께 安候말슴……』
이들 書簡을보아도 알수잇지만 靑春時節에 애니는사랑에 온몸은 불부터잇스면서도 오히려 沈摯謹嚴한 그의 面目이 躍如하여잇다. 그러나 오엔孃에게서는 끗끗내 回答이업섯다 그러나 만약에 그 女子가 린커―ㄴ이 後日의 名大統領이되리라는것을 미리알엇든들 물논 린커―ㄴ으로 하여봄 失戀에울지안케 하엿슬것이다.
因하야 이 三通의 書簡은 그 女子가 生前에 筐底에 秘藏을 하엿든것이고 지금도 그 子孫들이 重하게 감추어두엇다고한다. (P․C 生)＜119＞
＜118-119＞