잡지명	別乾坤 第21號
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	天下奇聞珍說講述 世界『키쓰』大學
필자	外遊生
기사형태	문예기타

Magazine Title: 別乾坤 第21號
Publication Date: June 23, 1929
Article Title: 天下奇聞珍說講述 世界『키쓰』大學 (Lectures on the World's "Kiss" University, a Collection of Strange and Wonderful Stories)
Author: 外遊生
Article Type: 문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

The Origin of Kissing

Kissing – that is, the habit of touching lips – where did it originate?
Some scholars say that kissing is a remnant of carnivorous animals. They mean that kissing is just a mitigation of biting each other. That makes sense. You can prove it by looking at dogs (犬) growling, baring their teeth (齒), and biting when they are affectionate and playful with each other.

Professor Ronproso said that the origin of kissing began with the relationship between mother and child in primitive times. In the old days, there were no wells. When people were thirsty, they went to the stream and drank with their mouths like animals. However, while adults could drink like this, young children could not. So when a child asked for water, the mother would hold water in her mouth and pour it into the child's mouth. It is said that even after growing up, this habit was used when people were loving and affectionate, and that it was also used by people in love.

Besides these, many debaters speak of the origin in various ways, but since they all say the same thing, I will omit them here. Even without going back to such primitive times, kissing has been used in the Orient, especially among the Chinese, to express respect. You can tell by reading the Bible that the word "kiss" appears from time to time, and among Jews and during Jewish visits, kissing was a common form of greeting to the same extent as today's handshake. Arabs do not bow to the images of the gods they worship, but kiss them, and they always kiss God when they go out or return home.

Kissing was a public habit among Persians. There is such a record in Herodotus' writings.
"When two Persians happen to meet, you can easily tell their positions. If they are of the same rank, they greet each other with their lips. If one person is of lower rank, they kiss the cheek (頗). If a person is of very low rank, they prostrate themselves on the ground."

When Arabs express their affection, it is customary to kiss the soles of the other person's feet and the forehead. In India, kissing is a common expression of respect.

Countries That Don't Know Kissing

The early Christians regarded kissing as extremely sacred. Until the end of the fifth century, they always kissed each other during the sacrament, and even today in the Greek Church, they have what is called "Easter Kiss (이―스터․키쓰)," which is to swear mutual faithfulness.

Also, in the current Roman Church, it is common for the Pope to kiss the cross or the back of the bishop's hand. It is also a common Western custom to kiss the Bible when swearing something legally, and when the US president was newly elected and held the inauguration ceremony this spring, he also kissed the Bible and swore allegiance to the Constitution and the people.
The reason why kissing has become such a global habit is probably because the customs of the Near East, rather than Christianity itself, have been expanded to the present day along with Christianity. At first, it was not as commonly abused as it is now, but once young men and women have tried kissing, isn't it overly pleasant?
As evidence, the Eskimos, the natives of Madagascar, the residents of the South Seas, and most of the African natives, who do not know Christianity, do not use kissing even in love games.

Among the Greenlanders and Malays, there is a habit of rubbing noses as a substitute for kissing. Regarding this, Darwin has the following in his records of Malay life.
"......The women knelt down and raised their faces upward. My servants bent over their faces and began to rub their noses against the women's noses at right angles. It lasted a little longer than the time it takes us to shake hands warmly. They seemed very satisfied."

<134>

Kissing That Smells

I don't know what the current New China is like, but until before, the Chinese did not like kissing.
Moreover, the Chinese in French territory scold their children when they don't listen:
"If you don't listen, I'll kiss you like a white person." It is the same as when we Koreans scare children by saying that a goblin or some deity is coming, and the children are terrified. Even Mr. Kiss, who is sweeping the world, will lose face in that place.

The tribes living in the highlands of India have a kind of kissing that smells, where they bury their noses in the other person's cheeks (頰) and smell them to their heart's content. That tribe will probably say, "Please let me smell the kiss from your lover." Since we're at it, let's write a little about Korea! In Korea, if you mention kissing, the authorities cut out scenes from foreign movies, so foreigners might think that there is no kissing in Korea, seeing that they only imitate it in those scenes, while in their own countries they can kiss to their heart's content in such scenes. Therefore, a certain foreigner once said:
"They do not know that kissing and embracing are expressions of affection.
Only with one exception—mothers, like all mothers in the world—sometimes put their own cheeks against their babies' cheeks or kiss them. There is no kissing except towards very young babies. Embracing or kissing is considered indecent, and there is no kissing even between virgins or between a mother and a child who has learned to walk." This cannot be said to be a big lie. However, he forgot one thing: is it really true that there is no kissing in Korea except between mothers and babies?

Kissing Strictly Prohibited on the Sabbath

About five hundred years ago, a Greek traveler's record of visiting England contains a story about kissing among the British.
"In England, customs toward women and children are extremely generous. For example, when a person visits a friend, the first thing he does is kiss his friend's wife. Only after this can he officially become a guest. Or, when they meet a friend on the street, they greet each other in this way. But no one says it's indecent." However, as times change, customs also change. Even if England is a country of freedom, kissing someone else's wife as the first greeting would not be considered etiquette in modern England.
It is no wonder that the Greek traveler was bewildered by this custom. In ancient Greek law, anyone who kissed a woman in public was punished with the death penalty. Not only in Greece, but also in the old laws of Massachusetts in the United States, there is a clear statement: "If anyone, regardless of who they are, kisses their husband or wife on the Sabbath, they will be punished according to the judgment of the judge." However, if one were to ask, "What if both parties kiss at the same time?", it would be difficult for someone who has only heard of it to answer.

<135>
Kissing is also used in Christian rituals in no small way. Even now in England, there is something called the Tandan Ceremony (탠탠쎄레모니), and ancient books say:
"During the Maundy Thursday foot washing ceremony, the King and Queen of England personally wash the feet of the poor people corresponding to the King's age, kiss them, and then give them gold. Queen Elizabeth fulfilled her imperial duties at Greenwich in the year she turned thirty-nine. First, the feet of thirty-nine poor people were washed with warm water and licorice by the Queen's gentlemen, then the public officials washed them, and finally the Queen herself washed them—every time the person washed the feet, they drew a cross on the poor person's foot and kissed each one, and the Queen, supported by thirty-nine gentlemen and ladies, knelt down and performed this ceremony before giving clothes and gold to the poor."
James II was the last to personally perform this ceremony.

Kissing Festival and Fair

Even now in the English countryside, there is something that can be called the Festival of Hock Tide (The fustival of Hock Tide), commonly known as Kissing Day. This has been passed down from a very long time ago and is held every year on the third week from Easter Sunday.
On this day, the person in charge of directing wears special clothes and stands on the courthouse steps, ringing a bell and gathering the general villagers to solemnly and ceremoniously open the curtain on the day.
Then, two young men called Tuttimen (先導者) carry a pole (杖竿) decorated with crepe paper and wreaths, and go around the village, barging into any store or house and demanding a fine of one pence (three or four jeon). At this time, if the people of the house hesitate or are slow to pay, they have the right to knock them down and kiss the mistress of the house or the young maiden as much as they want.
Therefore, when this time comes, young men are said to be engaged in fierce competition to obtain the glorious position of these leaders.
I thought that only England had a kissing festival, but Romania has an annual kissing fair (An annual kissing fair) that is held every year in Helmagen. At this fair, newly married brides gather with their mothers, holding bottles of wine. The gathered new wives give a sip of wine and a kiss to anyone who passes by, and if someone does not receive the kiss, it is interpreted as a great insult to the woman and her family, so men and women alike have no choice but to force themselves to kiss once, even if they hate it.

During World War I, America collected donations in various ways. The phrase "Help win <136> the war" was plastered everywhere. One day, an advertisement appeared in the newspaper that a fairly famous actress was selling a kiss for ten dollars (it seems uncertain, but around that amount), and that all the proceeds were donated to the war effort.
In the old days, the women of Athens said that they would not kiss their husbands if they did not end the war, so they had no choice but to end the war. It might be better to swear "by the lips of women" rather than shouting about the Kellogg-Briand Pact and so on "in the name of the people."
On the other hand, kissing is unsanitary and harmful to health, so kissing rejection alliances have sprung up in various places in the West. Also, in Soviet Russia, which opposes the current system, kissing is prohibited due to the opposition and arguments of the Health Committee, saying that it is unsanitary and a bourgeois custom. However, they do not forget to hang mistletoe branches from the ceiling on Christmas Day and kiss each other as in the old custom.

Kissing Trial in America

Recently, in a movie theater in the United States, a young couple was caught kissing in the dim light by the unusually sharp eyes of a night-vision policeman, and the couple was dragged to the police station. The problem escalated and they were even dragged to court for allegedly destroying public morals. In court, the kissing theory was discussed grandly, witnesses were summoned, and after the debate, the judge handed down the following solemn verdict.
"If the people cannot take their loved ones to the movie theater and kiss them, it would be better to eliminate kissing and love altogether from this world... For these reasons, the defendant is found not guilty."
There is no detailed report on whether the defendant, who received the acquittal, kissed again on the spot, but I just wanted to say that even in the country of origin, the United States, kissing is still a matter of concern—<137>

**Named Entities**

猶太人	Yudaein
希臘敎會	Hŭirak Kyohwe
羅馬敎會	Roma Kyohwe
美國	Miguk
에스키모	Eskimŏ
마다카스카르	Madak'asuk'arŭ
아푸리카	Ap'urik'a
그리인란드	Kŭriinrandŭ
馬來	Mallae
따―원	Tta-wŏn
支那	China
朝鮮	Chosŏn
希獵	Hŭiryap
英國	Yŏngguk
마사츄세스洲	Masach'wusesu-ju
째임스 二世	Tchaeimsŭ Ise
에리사뱃女王	Erisabaet Yŏwang
루―마니아	Ru-mania
행마갠	Haengmagan
아렌스婦人	Arensŭ buin
露西亞	Rosia



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	天下奇聞珍說講述 世界『키쓰』大學
필자	外遊生
기사형태	문예기타

天下奇聞珍說講述 世界『키쓰』大學
						外遊生

□키쓰의 起源

키쓰―卽입을맛추는 習慣그것이인제어느곳에서부터 始作되엿는가.
어느 學者는 키쓰를 肉食動物의 遺物이라고 한다 그의 意味는 키쓰는 서로물어뜻는것을 緩和식힌것일에지나지안는것이라는것이다 그도 그럴뜻한말이다 개(犬)가 저희따는 情답고 滋味잇께놀는 으르렁거리며 니(齒)를허엿케내여놋고무러뜻는것을미루어보아 證明할수잇다.
론푸로ㅅ소―敎授는 키쓰의 起源을 野蠻時代의 母子의 關係에서 始한것으로말하얏다 옛날옛쩍 原始쩍에는그틋이라고는업섯다 목이말으면 내ㅅ가에가서말이나소와가티입을대이고물을먹엇다 그러나 큰사람들은이러케먹을수가잇지만어린아해는이럿케마실수가업슴으로어린아해가물을 請할는 그어머니가입에다물을물고서어린아해입에다흘녀주엇다 이 習慣으로 長成한뒤라도사랑스러운 귀여운에는입을마추며이것이 戀愛하는사람에게도 利用된것이라한다.
이外에도 여러 가지로 起源을말하는 論者가만히잇스나 그말이그말이닛가 여기에는 略하려한다 그러케 原始쩍아지더듬어가지안이하여도 東洋그中에부터칫쓰라는것이잇서가지고 그것이 敬意를 表하는데에씨여왓섯다 聖經을읽으면키쓰의 文字가 간간히나오는것을보아도알것이며 猶太人과듀―론 訪問에서는 키쓰가 요새 幄手와가튼 程度로 一般의 人事法이엿다 아라비아人은 自己가 信奉하는 神의 像에절을하지안코키쓰를하며 外出時나 歸家時에는 반듯이 神에게키쓰를한다고한다.
페르시아人의의키쓰는 公公然한 習慣이엿다 헤로테터스의 記錄한 中에이러한것이잇다.
『페르시아사람이 偶然히두사람이맛낫을에 그두사람의 位置를 容易히 發見할수가잇다 그들이 萬若同格의사람이면입과입으로인사를하며 萬若한사람이 地位가야즌사람이면 빰(頗)에 키쓰를한다 地位가아조야즌사람은 따에업드린다』
아라비아人들이 愛情을 表現할에는그 相對者의 달듸듼압헤마루에키쓰를하는것이 常例이며  印度에서도 키쓰 尊敬을할에 普通의 表現이라한다.

□키쓰를모르는나라

初代의 基督敎人들은 키쓰라고하는것을 極히 神聖한것으로녁엿다 五世紀의 末지 聖餐拜學의 式에는 반듯이서로키쓰를하엿든것이며 現今에도 希臘敎會에서는 이―스터․키쓰 라고하야 相互의 忠實함을 誓明하는것이라한다.
 現在羅馬敎會에서는 法王이 十字架나 監督의손ㅅ등에키쓰하는것은 普通이다  法律上 무엇을 盟誓할에 聖書에키쓰 를＜134＞하는것은 西洋사람이 普通하는 風習이고 요전에 米國大統領이 새로 選擧되여서 今春에 就任式을 擧行할도 역시 聖書에키쓰를하고 憲法과 國民에게 盟誓를하얏다.
키쓰가이와가티 世界的으로 習慣이되여버린것은 基督敎―라는것보다도 近東方面의 習慣이 基督敎의 따라서 今日과가티 擴延된것이안인가한다 當初에는 現今과가티 흔하게 濫用되지안이하엿섯스나젊은 男女가키쓰를해본즉 過히 不愉快한것이안이닛가……………………
그 證據로 基督敎를모르는 에스키모―나마다카스카르의 土人이나 南洋의 住民 아푸리카土人의 大部分은 戀愛遊戱에도 키쓰를 使用치안는다.
그리인란드나 馬來의 土人사이에는 키쓰 代用으로 보를코에대이고문지르는 習慣이 잇다 이에 對하야 따―원이 馬來人의 生活을 記錄한中에는이러한것이잇다.
『…………女子들은무릅을끌코얼골을 우호로치여들엇다 나의 從子들은 그들의얼골우에허리를굽히고 自己코를 女子코에 直角으로대이고문지르기 始作하얏다 그것은 우리들이 熱이잇는 幄手를하는 時間보다도 조곰동안에 오래엿다 그들은 매우 滿足한듯이보엿다』

□냄새맛는키쓰

現 新興中國은엇더한지모르나 그前지의 支那사람은 키쓰를조와하지는안엇다
더구나 佛領에잇는 支那사람들은아해들을따지줄에는
『말을듯지안으면 白人種처럼키쓰를할테이다』라고딱딱어린다 그것은맛치 우리 朝鮮에서어린아희들에게 망태하라범이온다든다 무억신이가온다든가하는말과가티아희들이진저리처무서워하는것이다 世界를 風痱하는 키쓰君도 그롯에가서는 顔色이업슬것이다.
印度의 高原地方에 住居하는 種族은냄새맛는키쓰것이잇서서 相對者의빰(頰)에코(鼻)를트러박고실컷냄새를맛는다 그 種族은 아마 戀人에게키쓰를하여달나는것을마터주서요라고할것이다 긔왕이면 朝鮮이약이도좀써보자! 朝鮮서는 키쓰라고하면 外國사람의 映畵라도 當局에서쌍동짤나노시닛가 外國사람이볼에 自己네들나라에서는 반듯이그러한 場面이면마음껏실컷키쓰를할터인데 흉내만내이고마는것을보고 아마 朝鮮에는키쓰가업는줄생각할는지도모른다 그럼으로어느 外國사람이이러한말을하는사람이엇다.
『키쓰와 抱擁하는것은 愛情의 表現인것을몰은다
다만 한 例外로 어머니가—世界의 모든어머니와가티—로 아기의빰에 自己빰을대이고 或은입맛추는것을 除外하고는 키쓰라고는업다 아조어린아기에 對한 以外에 抱擁이나키쓰하는것은 不品行한 것으로 녁이고 處女끼리에도 는그어머니가거러단이게된어린아기에게도 키쓰하는일이업다』이것은 크게거짓말이안이라고할수잇다 그러나 그는 問題하나를니저버린것이잇다 朝鮮에는 어머니와어린아기 以外에는 정말키쓰가업느냐하는것을…………

□安息日에는키쓰 嚴禁

只今부터 한 五百年쯤前에 希獵의 어느 旅行家가 英國을 訪遊한 記錄中에 英國人의 키쓰에 關한이약이가잇다.
『英國에서는 婦人과어린이에 對한 風習은 極 히 寬大하다 假令한사람이어느 親舊를 訪問하엿슬에 第一먼저 그는 그親舊의 안해에게키쓰를한다이런뒤라야 正式으로 客이될수잇는것이라한다 는 路上에서親＜135＞舊를맛낫을날에도 이러한式으로인사를한다그러나 아모도 이를 不謹愼하다고하는사람이업다』그러나 時代가 變하면 習慣도 變하는것이다 英國이아모리 自由의 國이라할지라도 맛나는첫인사가남의안해를입을맛추는것이라면 近來의 英國에서는 禮儀라고안이할것이다.
希獵의 旅行家가 이習慣에 ■愣햇다는것도 無理는안일것이다 希獵의 古法에는 公然한 道上에서 婦人을 키쓰하는 者는 死刑으로 罰을한다는 法律이 希臘만이 아니라 米國마사츄세스洲의 古法律에도『萬若 누구를 莫論하고 安息日에 男便을 키쓰하거나 或은안해를키쓰하는는 裁判官의 判斷에 依하야 處罰을한다』는 明文이잇다 그러나 兩便이 同時에입을맛대인에는하고 反問을한다면듯기만한나로는 答辯에 困難할것이다.
키쓰를 基督敎의 禮式에도쓰는것이적지안이하다 只今도 英國에는 殘存해잇는 탠탠쎄레모니 라는것이잇스며 古書를보면
『木曜日의 洗足式에 英國의 皇帝와 女王은 皇帝의 享年에 該當하는 貧民의발을 親이씻고거기에키쓰를한 後에 그들에게 金品을준다에리사뱃女王은 三十九歲되든해에 린윗치에서 帝王으로서의 義務를다햇다 처음에 三十九人의 貧民의발을 女王의 紳士의손으로 溫■와 甘草로씻기우고다음에 ■行官■가 그를씻고 最后에 女王自身이 親히씻섯다― 이발을씻는사람은 씻을마다 그貧民의발에 十字를긋고 一一히키쓰를하며 女王은 三十九人의 紳士와 淑女에게 扶축을바더 무릅을끌고 이式을밧친後에 衣服과 金品을 貧民에게주엇다』
이式을親히하기는 째임스 二世로 最後를막엇다.

□키쓰祭와 共進會

只今도 英國의시골에는 혹 타이드의祭(The fustival of Hock Tide) 普通말로하면(Kissing day) 키쓰하는날이라고할만한것이잇다 이것은 퍽오래前부터나려오는것이며 每年復活祭日부터 三週日째되는날로되여잇다.
이날에 指揮하는 責任을가진사람은 ■안 衣服을입고 裁判所와 階段우에서서 鍾을울니며 一般村民을 召集하야서 嚴肅하고 禮節잇게 이날의 幕이열인다.
그러면 先導者(Tuttimen)라고할 靑年두사람이 래다 花環을 달은장대(杖竿)을들고 洞里를도라단이며 어느 商店이나 住宅에뛰여드러가서 한팬스(三四錢)의 罰金을달나고한다. 이에그집에서우물우물하고끝내지안는다든지 더디게굴면 그들은 어퍼놋고 主人女子나 젊은색시나 다는대로 입을마치고나올 權利가잇는것이다.
그럼으로 이가되면 靑年들은 이先導者의 光榮스러운벼슬을어더하랴고 猛烈한 運動을한다고한다.
英에만키쓰祭가잇는줄알엇드니 루―마니아에는 키쓰의 共進會(An annual kissing fair)가 잇서서 每年 행마갠(Helmagen)에서 開催된다이共進會에는 서로 結婚한 새색시가 그의어머니와함께 葡萄酒甁 을들고서 모혀드는것이다 모혀든 새안해들은 지나가는누구에게든지 葡萄酒한잔에 키쓰를한목음식준다하며 만약에 그키쓰를밧지안는사람은 그婦人과 그 家族에 對해서 큰 侮辱을주는것이라고 解釋을하닛가 男女된者 누구든지 밧기실흔키쓰라도 無理로 體面上엇절수업서서 한번쭉맛치게되는것이다.
世界大戰當時 아메리카에서는 여러 가지 方法으로 義損金을 그앗다 “Help win＜136＞the war."라는 文字가거리거리에부터잇섯다 어느날은 新聞에 廣告가낫는데 相當히 有名한 女俳優가 키쓰한번에 十不〓미심하나그가량인듯하다〓에판다고하엿고 그收入을 全部戰爭을 爲해서 寄附하엿다는말이잇다.
예날 아렌스婦人들은 男便들이 戰爭을치지안이하면 키쓰를하지안캣다 고해서할수업시戰爭을 첫다고한다요새건생드는 不戰條約이니 무엇이니뒤들고『人民의 일흠으로써』라는것보다도『婦人의입술로써』宣誓를하는것이 조흘는지도모른다.
이러한 一面에 키쓰는 非衛生的이고 保健上害롭다하여서 西洋에서는 各地에서 키쓰 排斥同盟會가생겨잇다  現在의 制度는무엇이고 反對하는 쏘비에트 露西亞서에서는 保健委員의 反對와 主張으로 키쓰는 非衛生的이고 뿌루주아의 慣習이라하여서 禁止를하엿다 그러나 크리스마스날만은 마이스르트 가지를 天井에서부터느러트리고옛날 習慣그대로 男女가 키쓰하는것을잇지안는다한다.

□米國의 키쓰裁判

最近 米國의어느 映畵館에서 침침한 光線을 利用하야 젊은 男女가쪽하고입을맛추다가올뱀이외딴치게밤눈밝은 警官의눈에들키여 男女는 警察署로을려갓다 醇風良俗을 破壞하는 行爲라고하여 裁判所에지 을려나가게 問題가버러젓다 法廷에서는 키쓰論이 宏壯히 討論되여 證人아지물너세우고 辯論을맛친뒤에 判事는아래와가티 嚴正한 言渡를나렷다.
『萬若人民이 自己의사랑하는사람을 映畵館에다리고가서 키쓰를할수가업다하면 이 世上에서 키쓰나 戀愛를 一切업새여버리는것이좃켓다………이러한 理由로 被告를 無罪로한다』
無罪의 言渡를바든 被告는 그 卽席에서다시입을맛추엇는지엇지 하엿는지 詳細한 報道가업슴으로알수는업스나 그원고장인 米國에서도 키쓰를하는것이아즉 問題거리로잇다는것만말하려고―＜137＞
＜134-137＞