별건곤 第21號
1929년 06월 23일
展望車 (Observation Car)
잡저 (Miscellany)

The Church Also Becomes a Movie Theater

At the Aiwei-Konwei Church in the United States, when the discussion arose about closing the church because so few people were coming to worship, one clever member of the committee suggested gathering people by showing motion pictures. The idea was adopted, and the church was equipped with a screen and projector, suddenly becoming a movie theater. Thanks to this, the church is packed every evening, the offerings are collected at the entrance, people watch kissing scenes and pray to God, and the church's finances have greatly improved.

Child Consuming Three Cabinets of Whiskey

On the small island of Pahama, the closest British territory to Florida, America, whiskey is imported at a rate of two "daths" (a unit of liquid measure) per person per year for women, children, and the sick, amounting to three cabinets. Moreover, this trend is increasing, but the islanders, who are supposed to be the consumers, show no signs of drinking it. However, there are always mysterious sailboats and steamships gathering around the island. The United States is a prohibition country!

Kaiser Mustache

A mustache with both ends twisted to the sides is called a Kaiser style. This mustache was invented by Count Hersen Heistem in the 1890s. In Germany <150> it was impossible to make a name for oneself without a Kaiser mustache. However, with the fall of the German Empire, the Kaiser mustache also fell out of fashion, and now it has reached the point where it can only be seen on lower-class old men. Consequently, Mr. Puransoi Hautfi, who invented the tools to groom this Kaiser mustache and made a fortune, has also fallen into ruin.

Snakeskin Raincoat

In London, daily necessities made of snakeskin have been very popular for the past three or four years, including shoes, gloves, and various other items. Recently, further research has been conducted, and they have succeeded in manufacturing excellent raincoats. The finished product doesn't look bad, is shiny, doesn't leak in the rain, and looks quite good.

World Population Survey

The international statistics for various countries after the Great War, which had been surveyed and compiled by the League of Nations in Geneva, have finally been released recently. Among them, the most interesting is the population. The world population in 1913 was 1.88 billion, which increased to 1.932 billion at the end of 1926, an increase of approximately 7 percent. <151> When this distribution is divided geographically, Asia has 1.026 billion, Europe has 514 million, America has 232 million, Africa has 146 million, and Australia has 9 million people.

New Motto for Women

The new motto for women in the Egyptian women's rights expansion movement is: "Married men, regardless of status, should each have an image of their wife tattooed on their arm."

American Students Earning Money

It is well known that American students work during their spare time from school. The student supervisor at Yale University announced that about one-third of the students earned a total of $594,180 last year (1928). The person who earned the most made $3,000! The jobs included peddling, guiding, washing dishes, cleaning stones and windows, and various other things!

Suspension of Death Penalty

The Minister of Justice of the German Republic issued a recommendation to all courts and prisons nationwide to suspend executions until the new criminal law, which the government is drafting, abolishing the death penalty, is promulgated. In effect, the death penalty has been suspended.

Animal Brains

According to Professor Waikanre's presentation at the Hamburg Natural Science Conference, whales (鯨) have the largest brains, weighing 7,000 grams. The average human male brain weighs 1,280 grams to 1,400 grams, and the average female brain weighs 1,040 grams to 1,340 grams! <152>

**Named Entities**

美國	Miguk
아이위―콘웨이	Aiwi-K’onwei
푸로리다州	P’uroda-ju
英領	Yŏngnyŏng
小島파하마	Sodo P’ahama
훼르젠 해이스템伯	Hwep’ŏjen Haeisŭt’em-paek
獨逸	Togil
푸란소이쓰 하피―君	P’uransoit’ŭ H’api-kun
倫敦	Nŏndon
제네―바	Cene-ba
國際聯盟	Kukche Yŏnmaeng
亞細亞	Asia
歐羅巴	Oropa
아메리카	Amerik’a
亞弗利加	Ap’ŭllika
오―스트라리아	O-sŭt’ŭrallia
埃及	Aegŭp
에일大學	Eil Taehak
獨逸共和國	Togil Konghwaguk
함불크	Hambulkh
와이깐르敎授	Waikanrŭ-kyosu



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제21호
발행일	1929년 06월 23일
기사제목	展望車
기사형태	잡저

展望車

◇敎會도 映畵化

米國아이위―콘웨이의 敎會에서는 禮拜보러오는사람이적음으로 할 일업시 廢堂을하자는 議論이니러낫을 委員中의한 怜悧한사람의 活動寫眞을놀너서사람을모아보자는 案이 登用이되여 敎會안에는 映寫幕과 機械가 裝置되고 별안간에 活動寫眞館이되고말앗다 德澤으로 每日저녁 大滿員이되여 연보돈은 敎會入口에서내이고 키쓰場面을바라보고 하나님께 祈도를하며 敎會의 財政도퍽느럿다한다.

◇휘스키―세櫃먹는 小兒

아메리카의푸로리다州에가장갓가운 英領의 小島파하마에서는 女子나 小兒나 病人이나 한사람이 一年에 二다쓰씩드른 휘스키―를세퀘식먹는 比例로 輸入된다 더구나갈수록 增加하는 傾向이잇스나 그러나 번 主人인섬사람은 먹은 形跡이업다든가 그러나 이섬에는 닭모를 帆船蒸氣船이 항상 群集해잇다나 米國은 禁酒國이어늘!

◇카이제르鬚髯

兩端이 左右로 쪽든 수염을 카이제르式이라고한다 이수염은 千八百九十年代에 훼르젠 해이스템伯이 發明한 것으로＜150＞ 獨逸서는 카이제르수염이안이면 행세를못하엿섯다 그러나 獨逸帝國沒落과함께 카이제르수염도 廢하게되여 지금은 下級의 老人以外에는 그 面影을볼수가업는 悲境에니르럿다 따라서 이카이제르수염을치장하는 器具를 發明하여 千金을모앗든 푸란소이쓰 하피―君도 悲境에께지게듸엿다든가.

◇蛇皮로레인코―트

倫敦서는 三四年來 구렁이껍줄노맨든 日用品이 大流行을하여 洋靴 手袋 外에여러가지가만히잇다 그러나 最近에는 다시여러가지 硏究를더하여 훌륭한 레인코―트를 製造하는데 成功하엿다 그러고맨드러내인것을보면 보기에도흉하지안코 번즐번즐하야비도새이지안코 外見으로 그럴듯하다든가.

◇世界人口調査

제네―바 國際聯盟의 손으로 調査整理中에잇든 大戰後의 世界各國國際的統計를 겨우요새야손을띄엿다 그中에서 興味잇는것은 人口이다 一九一三年의 世界人口는 十八億八百萬이엿든것이 一九二六年末에는 十九萬三千二百萬人約七파―센트가 增加되엿다 이 分布狀態를 地理的으로난호아보면 亞細亞十億二千六百萬 歐羅巴가 五億一千四百萬 아메리카가 二億三千二百萬 亞弗利加 一億四千六百萬 오―스트라리아가 九百萬＜151＞人

◇新女子의 못토―

埃及의 女權擴張運動婦人의 新못토―에 曰『旣婚男子는 上下貴賤의 別업시 各自그 妻의 肖像을팔에색여라』.云云

◇米國學生의 돈버리

米國學生이 學業의 餘暇의 勞動을한다는것은 有名한일이다 에일大學의 約三分의 一이 昨年中(一九二八年)에버러드린돈이 全部五十九萬四千百八十弗이라고 學生監이 發表하엿다 그中에한사람이대일만히버튼사람은 三千弗! 일인즉 行商 案內者 집시(皿)씻기 돌 窓훔치기等外에여러가지!

◇死刑執行中止

獨逸共和國司法長官은 政府가스사로 起草中인 新刑法은 死刑을 廢止하자는것임으로 新法典이 發布할지는 死刑執行을 中止하자는 勸告狀을 全國裁判所 刑務所에 發布하엿스니 事實上 死刑은 中止된것이나 同樣.

◇動物의 腦漿

함불크의 自然科學大會에서 와이깐르敎授가 發表한데 依하면 腦漿이 대일만흔것은고래(鯨)이면 七千그람 사람은 平均男子는 千二百八十그람으로 千四百그람 여자는千四十그람으로 千三百四十그람이라고!＜152＞
＜150-152＞