**Header Section:**
Magazine Title: 개벽 第70號
Publication Date: 1926년 06월 01일
Article Title: 回顧二十七歷代 (Retrospect on Twenty-Seven Reigns)
Author: 車相瓚 (Ch'a Sang-ch'an)
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/Article)

**Body Text Translation:**
Retrospect on Twenty-Seven Reigns
						Ch'a Sang-ch'an

T'aejo's Reign, When All Things Were First Created
It was 534 years ago from today, on the 16th day of the 7th month of the Imsin year (Tangun Era 3725), that Yi T'aejo ascended the throne. The country was named Chosŏn starting from the following Kye'yu year. The details of his ascension have been discussed in a separate topic, so I will not repeat them here. As that era was still the founding period, general systems and culture were largely unchanged from Koryŏ. However, because a revolution is a revolution, many aspects of domestic and foreign affairs underwent a complete change. Domestically, first, to suppress Buddhism and the military officials who had become entrenched evils of Koryŏ, academic fields (*hakchŏn*, 學田) were established and a Confucian shrine (*Munmyo*, 文廟) was built (Mu'in year) to promote Confucianism. At the same time, land belonging to various temples was attached to military funds, the *Pyŏngbuje* (兵符制, military tally system) was established to prohibit military officials from mobilizing troops freely, the *Kyŏngje Yukchŏn* (經濟六典, Six Codes of Governance) was compiled (Ŭlhae year), and the capital was moved to Hanyang (5th year, Pyŏngja year) where the city walls were built. Diplomatically, Cho Pan and Han Sang-jil were sent to Ming China to conclude a treaty of amity. To the east, Tsushima Island was subjugated, and to the north, the Jurchens were pacified (6th year, Chŏngmi year). Ryukyu and Siam referred to themselves as vassals and presented tribute. However, after only seven years on the throne, a conflict among kinsmen arose over the issue of succession. Meritorious subjects like Chŏng To-jŏn and Nam Ŭn, along with his two sons Pang-sŏk and Pang-bŏn, were killed by T'aejong. T'aejo consequently abdicated and temporarily retired to Hamhŭng before returning to the palace. He remained as King Emeritus for ten years before passing away at the advanced age of 74 and was buried at Kŏnwŏnnŭng tomb on Hŏmam Mountain in Yangju. The chief ministers of that time included Pae Kŭng-nyŏm, Cho Chun, Kim Sa-hyŏng, Chŏng To-jŏn, Kwŏn Chung-hwa, Sim Tŏk-pu, and Yu Man-su. Among them, Yu Man-su particularly cracked down severely on female shamans (*munyŏ*, 巫女), either banishing or executing them, which is why even today, when shamans (*mudang*) perform rites (*kut*), they say *ŏrhamansu* or *ŏrha taesin*. (Refer to <4> "One Hundred Stories of Yi T'aejo's Founding" below)

Chŏngjong's Reign, Entering a Period of Reform
Chŏngjong (personal name Kyŏng, T'aejo's second son, Prince Yŏngan, Pang-gwa) received the throne from T'aejo but abdicated again to his younger brother T'aejong after only two years, so he had no particularly great achievements. However, as the period was one of innovation, there are some things worth noting. First, the official system was revised: the Top'yŏng'ŭisasa (都評議使司), established during T'aejo's reign, was renamed Ŭijŏngbu (議政府, State Council), and the Chungch'uwŏn (中樞院) was renamed Ŭihŭng Samgunbu (義興三軍府, Righteous and Rising Three Armies Command) (these two offices were first established at this time). Second, the military system was reformed: the private armies of powerful officials, prevalent in late Koryŏ, were abolished and placed under the Samgunbu. Third, the financial and economic systems were renewed: mulberry paper currency (*chŏp'ye*, 楮幣) was created, and marketplaces (*sijŏn*, 市廛) were newly established (from Hyejŏng Bridge to Ch'angdŏk Palace entrance). Fourth, the education system was changed: schools were established in each of the five districts (East, West, Central, South, North) within the capital city, called the Obu Haktang (五部學堂, Five District Schools) (later, during Sejong's reign, the North District School was abolished, leaving only four). The Chiphyŏnjŏn (集賢殿, Hall of Worthies) was established (later renamed Pomun'gak, 寶文閣). Fifth, punishments were made lenient, and excessive penalties were forbidden. Additionally, internationally, King Ch'atto of Ryukyu sent envoys with tribute, the northern barbarians (*pukchŏk*, 北狄) Wudiha (兀狄哈) came to court, and the Japanese pirates (*waegu*, 倭寇) who had been raiding the northwestern border submitted. However, instigated by Pak P'o, his younger brother Prince Hoean (Pang-gan)'s rebellion occurred, and thus conflict among kinsmen could not be avoided. The chief ministers included Sŏng Sŏng-nin, Yi Sŏ, Min Che, and Ha Yun. He was King Emeritus for nineteen years, passed away at age sixty-three, and was buried at Hŭnggyo-dong in P'ungdŏk (Hŭrŭng tomb).

T'aejong's Reign, an Era of Consolidation
The various systems and foundations of the Yi Dynasty were fully formed and consolidated during this T'aejong era. Originally, T'aejong was T'aejo's fifth son (Prince Chŏngan, Pang-wŏn). Among the brothers (eight in total), he was the most brilliant, possessed great strategic wisdom and political insight, and had contributed the most to T'aejo's founding of the dynasty. After the founding, the handling of the Koryŏ royal family and remaining loyalists was entirely planned by T'aejong. Also, the three brothers Pang-sŏk, Pang-bŏn, and Pang-gan were <5> killed by T'aejong, for which he cannot escape later criticism. However, from the perspective of the Yi royal family or from the political and cultural standpoint of Chosŏn, his contributions cannot be denied as being immense. Listing his important achievements:
In the 1st year, Sinha, the Munhabu (門下府, Secretariat-Chancellery, the Koryŏ office handling general administration) was abolished and merged into the Ŭijŏngbu, and the mulberry paper currency created during Chŏngjong's reign was implemented. In the 2nd year, Imo, the Sinmun'go (申聞鼓, Petition Drum) was installed to allow the people's sentiments to be heard, and the *hop'ae* law (號牌法, identification tag system) was implemented to clarify the population registry. In the 3rd year, Kyemi, the Chujaso (鑄字所, Type Foundry) was established, and Yi Chik and Pak Sŏng-myŏng were ordered to cast several hundred thousand bronze movable type characters. This was the world's first invention of movable type and can be called a great boon for the development of Chosŏn culture. In the 5th year, Ŭlyu, the farmland in the eight provinces was resurveyed.
In the 8th year, Muja, the military examination (*mukwa*, 武科) was first established, called Yonghobang (龍虎榜, Dragon and Tiger List) alongside the civil examination (*munkwa*, 文科). Also, following Hwang Hŭi's counsel, the remarriage of women was prohibited, and the descendants of remarried women were barred from holding office (*sap'an*, 仕版). From a modern viewpoint, this is certainly a bad system, but it had a great effect in cleaning up the disordered customs since the end of Koryŏ and encouraging the ethics of the newly rising Confucianism. In the 10th year, Kyŏngin, the collection of *hop'o* (戶布, household cloth tax, a type of tax collecting ramie cloth for military supplies) was abolished. In the 13th year, Kyesa, the boundaries of the eight provinces were defined. In the 14th year, Kabo, the Alsŏngkwa (謁聖科, special examination held at Sŏnggyun'gwan) was first established, and the Tonnyŏngbu (敦寧府, Office of Royal Relatives) was established to provide for royal relatives who had not received enfeoffment and maternal relatives. In the 15th year, Ŭlmi, following Sŏ Sŏn's advice, it was decided that descendants of concubines (*sŏŏl*, 庶孼) would not be appointed to official positions.
Besides these, agriculture was encouraged, books of divination (*toch'am*, 圖讖) were burned to break superstition, military exercises (*kangmu*, 講武) were held in various places like Haeju, Imsil, and T'aean to foster the nation's martial spirit, and envoys were sent to Japan and Ming China to cultivate good neighborly relations. The chief ministers of that time were Yi Kŏ-yi, Yi Mu, Yi Chik, Cho Yŏng-mu, Prince Ŭian Hwa (T'aejo's half-brother), Yu Ryang, Nam Chae, Yu Chŏng-hyŏn, Pak Ŭn, Han Sang-gyo, and Sim On. His reign lasted eighteen years. His tomb is at Taemo Mountain in Kyŏngju (Hŏllŭng).

Sejong's Reign, the Golden Age of the Yi Dynasty <6>

Sejong (personal name To) was T'aejong's third son. He was the most outstanding monarch among the successive kings of the Yi Dynasty, and his era can be called the golden age of modern Chosŏn. It goes without saying that domestic and foreign affairs were extremely vibrant, and culture also developed remarkably. Let's outline this:

I. Domestic Affairs
A. Relief for the People: At the beginning of his reign, the country suffered frequent floods, droughts, and hail disasters, causing severe famine among the people. Sejong made utmost efforts in relief work, allowing the people to escape starvation.
B. Promotion of Agriculture: Sejong paid special attention to agricultural policy. In the 11th year, Kiyu, he had provincial officials inquire about proven techniques from experienced old farmers. Then, he ordered Chief Compiler Chŏng Ch'o to compile the *Nongsa Chipsŏl* (農事集說, Collected Sayings on Farming) and distribute it domestically and abroad. In the 19th year, Chŏngsa, he established the tribute tax law (*kongbupŏp*, 貢賦法) and land grades (*chŏnp'um*, 田品). In the 26th year, Kapcha, he detailed the land system (*chŏnje*, 田制), dedicating efforts to protecting farmers.
C. Leniency in Punishments: In the 8th year, Pyŏng'o, he established the three-review system (*sambokpŏp*, 三覆法) for the Ŭigŭmbu (義禁府, Royal Investigation Bureau, handling interrogation matters) (like today's three-trial system). In the 12th year, Kyŏngsul, he abolished the punishment of flogging on the back (*ch'ibae*, 笞背) and the law prohibiting the imprisonment (*kŭmsin*, 禁身) of the elderly and young (those under 15 and over 10 were exempt from imprisonment except for murder or robbery; those over 80 and under 10 were exempt from punishment even for capital offenses).
He ordered Ch'oe Ch'i-un to annotate the *Mu'wŏnnok* (無寃錄, Book on Avoiding Grievances) and explain the legal texts. He also prohibited the evil custom of arbitrarily killing slaves (*noye*, 奴隷).
D. Special Encouragement of Education: In the 2nd year of his reign, Kyŏngja, he established the Chiphyŏnjŏn (Hall of Worthies) within the palace, having talented scholars research precedents. He also opened royal lectures (*kyŏngyŏn*, 經筵), where the king personally discussed academics with Confucian officials. He established the system for the Crown Prince to begin schooling at age eight. In the 8th year, Pyŏng'o, he established the Toksŏdang (讀書堂, Reading Hall) (later, during Sŏngjong's reign, a study hall was built at the scenic Tongho site in Yongsan and named Hodang (湖堂), which was considered highly prestigious at the time), granting young civil officials leave for extended reading. He also established the Chonghak (宗學, Royal Clan School) for the education of royal relatives. Furthermore, he newly established the *Toch'ŏnbŏp* (道薦法, Provincial Recommendation System) to select and employ individuals with talent, skill, and virtue from the provinces. <7>
E. Compilation of Books: Besides promoting scholarship, Sejong also ordered various officials to compile books. Notable examples include: *Hyohaengnok* (孝行錄, Record of Filial Deeds), *Orye'ŭi* (五禮儀, Rites for the Five Ceremonies), *Chach'i T'onggam Hun'ŭi* (自治通鑑訓義, Explanations of Zizhi Tongjian), *Ch'ip'yŏng Yoram* (治平要覽, Essentials for Governing Peace), *Yongbiŏch'ŏn'ga* (龍飛御天歌, Songs of Flying Dragons), *Koryŏsa* (高麗史, History of Koryŏ) (completed the year after Sejong's death, totaling 139 volumes), *Myŏnghwang Kye'gam* (明皇誡鑑, Mirror of Admonitions for Ming Emperors), *Ch'iljŏng Naeoep'yŏn* (七政內外篇, Inner and Outer Chapters on the Seven Governors [celestial bodies]), *Samgang Haengsiltok* (三綱行實錄, Illustrated Conduct of the Three Bonds), *Nongsa Chiksŏl* (農事直說, Straight Talk on Farming), *Kyŏngsŏ Ŭmhae* (經書音解, Phonetic Explication of Classics), *Yŏktae Pyŏng'yo* (歷代兵要, Essentials of Military Strategy Through the Ages), *Kyŏngnyun Chŏnjip* (經綸全集, Complete Collection on Statecraft), *Ch'iljŏng Chu Naeoep'yŏn* (七政籌內外篇, Inner and Outer Chapters on Calculations of the Seven Governors), *Yŏksangjip* (曆象集, Collection on Calendrical Phenomena), *Mu'wŏnnok* (無寃錄, Book on Avoiding Grievances), etc.
F. Research on Music, Astronomy, Calendrical Science, and Related Instruments: The king always paid attention to music. In the 15th year, Ŭlmi, court ritual music (*aak*, 雅樂) was first used in ancestral rites. Pak Yŏn, a great musician and Grand Academician (*taejehak*, 大提學) of the time, was ordered to create new stone chimes (*kyŏng*, 磬). Music pieces like *T'aep'yŏng* (太平, Great Peace) and *Palsang* (發祥, Auspicious Manifestation) were composed. In the 14th year, Kabo, Yemun'gwan Chehak (藝文舘提學) Chŏng In-ji and Taejehak Chŏng Ch'o were ordered to create astronomical observation instruments. The two, along with Chungch'ubusa (中樞府事) Yi Chang and Hogun (護軍) Chang Yŏng-sil, spent a total of 7 years creating a North Pole measuring device, various types of sundials (*ilhwi*, 日晷), and water clocks (*nugak*, 漏刻). Their ingenious designs were mostly originated by Chang Yŏng-sil. In the 15th year, Ŭlmi, referencing ancient and modern astronomical charts, a new chart was created and engraved on stone. In the same year, the two Chŏngs were ordered to compile the *Ch'iljŏngsan Naep'yŏn* (七政算內篇, Inner Compendium of Calculations of the Seven Governors) by referencing the Yuan dynasty's Shoushi calendar (授時曆) and the Ming dynasty's Datong calendar (大統曆). Later, upon obtaining the Islamic calendar (回回曆), Yi Sun-ji and Kim Tam were tasked with creating the Outer Compendium (*Oep'yŏn*, 外篇) (these two were leading experts in astronomy and calendrical science at the time). Calendar officials were dispatched to Mani Mountain on Kanghwa Island, Paektu Mountain, and Halla Mountain on Cheju Island to measure the altitude of the North Pole (the measurements are not extant today). In the 24th year, Imin, a bronze rain gauge (*ch'ŭgugi*, 測雨器) was made to measure rainfall.
G. Creation of the National Script: Another particularly noteworthy achievement is the creation of the Korean national script. Sejong deeply felt the great difficulty and inconvenience of the *idu* script (吏讀) and Classical Chinese, which had been used in Chosŏn, recognizing them as major obstacles to national education and cultural development. In the 28th year, Pyŏng'in, he established the National Script Bureau (*Kungmun'guk*, 國文局) within the palace and ordered Chŏng In-ji, Sŏng Sam-mun, and Sin Suk-chu to create the *Hunminjŏng'ŭm* (訓民正音, Correct Sounds for Instructing the People) and promulgate it throughout the country. (To discuss phonetics, Sŏng Sam-mun and others traveled back and forth thirteen times to consult Huang Zan (黃瓚), a Ming Hanlin scholar then exiled in Liaodong). This was a monumental achievement in Chosŏn's cultural history, not only bringing immense benefit to the people but also an invention worthy of great pride internationally. <8>

II. Foreign Affairs
While excelling in domestic governance, Sejong also managed foreign affairs well. Specifically:
With Ming China: Since the beginning of T'aejo's reign, Chosŏn had been sending 10,000 cattle annually and large amounts of gold and silver, causing significant hardship. During T'aejong's time, Sŏl Chang-su was sent to request a reduction, but it ultimately failed. In the 11th year of Sejong's reign, Prince Hamyŏng (䄄, Sejong's younger brother) was sent to negotiate, resulting in the abolition of these tributes. Instead, only simple local products were sent annually.
Regarding relations with Japan: Since the late Koryŏ period, sea raiders (so-called *waegu*, 倭寇) had been raiding the borders. T'aejo repelled them. Later, in T'aejo's 5th year, Iki and Tsushima islands were attacked again. In the 1st year of Chŏngjong, Tsushima was also attacked. In the 1st year of Sejong, Japanese ships, claiming to be heading to China, came to Hwanghae Province requesting provisions, and subsequently raided frequently. T'aejong, who was then King Emeritus but still held military authority, consulted with Yu Chŏng-hyŏn, Pak Ŭn, Cho Mal-saeng, Hŏ Cho, and others, planning to conquer them. He dispatched Yu Chŏng-hyŏn and Yi Chong-mu with 277 warships and 17,000 soldiers to attack Tsushima. They achieved initial victories but were halted by the joint resistance of the feudal lords of Kyushu. When Sejong fully assumed political power, he deemed mutual friendship advantageous and sent envoy Pyŏn Chung-gyo and secretary Sin Suk-chu to conclude a treaty with the lord of Tsushima, Sō Sadamori (宗貞盛). Chosŏn opened three ports in Kyŏngsang Province (Ungch'ŏn Chep'o (薺浦, Nengi Harbor), Tongnae Pusanp'o, Ulsan Yŏmp'o) for mutual trade and fishing. Sō Sadamori was limited to sending fifty ships annually, but special ships could be sent separately if needed. Furthermore, if feudal lords from other Japanese provinces wished to send one or two ships, they had to obtain a permit (*mun'in*, 文引, certificate) from the Sō clan before Chosŏn would receive them. This was the Kyehae Treaty (癸亥條約), which restored relations between the two countries. Next, Sejong particularly focused on relations with the Jurchens (*Yain*, 野人). In the 15th year, Kyech'uk, the renowned general Ch'oe Yun-dŏk was dispatched to conquer the Jurchens near the P'ajŏ River (婆猪江), a long-standing issue. In the 16th year, Kabin, Kim Chong-sŏ was ordered to develop the northern regions. Then, in the 19th year, Chŏngsa, six new garrisons (*yukchin*, 六鎭) – Kyŏnghŭng, Hoeryŏng, Chongsŏng, Onsŏng, Kyŏngwŏn, and Puryŏng – were established, greatly expanding territory along the Tuman River. <9> Additionally, Sejong conducted military exercises (*kangmu*) at Haeju and Kangnŭng and established shrines for Kija (箕子) and Silla's founder, Pak Hyŏkkŏse. In any case, Sejong's era cannot but be called the period of peak governance in the Yi Dynasty. The famous chief ministers of that time were Hwang Hŭi and Hŏ Cho.

The Tearful and Regretful Reigns of Munjong and Tanjong
The reigns of Munjong and Tanjong were the most tearful and regretful periods since the beginning of Yi Dynasty history. Munjong (Hyang) was Sejong's eldest son, a wise king known for his magnanimity, filial piety, fraternal love, love of learning, and affection for the people. However, due to his frail health, he passed away after only two years on the throne. The Crown Prince succeeded him at the tender age of twelve (error in original, should be 12 lunar age, not 20); this was the tragically fated King Tanjong (Honghwi). At that time, Tanjong had seven powerful uncles. Munjong, anticipating the precariousness of Tanjong's isolated position upon his death, personally grasped the hands of Chief State Councilor Hwangbo In, Right State Councilor Kim Chong-sŏ, and Left State Councilor Nam Chi, tearfully entrusting the young emperor to them. He also entrusted the task of assistance to Chiphyŏnjŏn scholars Pak P'aeng-nyŏn, Ha Wi-ji, Sŏng Sam-mun, and others. However, among the grand princes, Prince Anp'yŏng (Yong) and Prince Suyang (Yu, later Sejo) were the two major power holders. Yong was skilled in poetry, calligraphy, and painting, attracting many talented individuals, but Prince Suyang harbored great ambitions and the desire to stage a coup (*panjŏng*, 反正). He had connections with numerous discontented figures like Hong Yun-sŏng, Hong Tal-son, Yang Chŏng, Han Myŏng-hoe, Kwŏn Nam, and many warriors. However, among the three high councilors at the time, Chief State Councilor Kim Chong-sŏ was a respected minister combining wisdom and courage, referred to by contemporaries as the "Great Tiger" (大虎). As long as he was in court, Suyang found it difficult to dare make a major move. Therefore, Prince Suyang conspired with Han Myŏng-hoe, Kwŏn Nam, and others to eliminate him first. On the 10th day of the 10th month of Tanjong's 1st year, he personally led Yang Chŏng, Yu Su, Hong Yun-sŏng, Im Un, and others to Kim Chong-sŏ's house. Hong Yun-sŏng unexpectedly struck down Kim Chong-sŏ and his son Sŭng-gyu with a mallet. Simultaneously, he reported an emergency to Tanjong, falsely claiming that Kim Chong-sŏ, Hwangbo In, Cho Kŭk-kwan (Minister of Personnel), Yi Yang (Vice Councilor), P'yŏngan Governor Cho Su-ryang, Ch'ungch'ŏng Governor An Wan-gyŏng, and Hamgil Province Commander Yi Ching-ok were conspiring internally and externally to rebel. Falsifying a royal command, he summoned various high officials unexpectedly. Han Myŏng-hoe stood at the gate with a list of names (*saengsalbu*, 生殺簿, life-and-death register), checking them off as hidden warriors struck them down one by one. The aforementioned officials all perished on the spot. Left State Councilor Chŏng Pon, Cho Su-ryang, Prince Anp'yŏng, and others were exiled <10> and later executed following Chŏng In-ji's advice. (Later, Yi Ching-ok rebelled, proclaimed himself Great Jin Emperor, but was killed by Chongsŏng Commander Chŏng Chong). After thus brutally murdering all of Tanjong's supporting ministers, Prince Suyang became Chief State Councilor and Commander-in-Chief of Internal and External Military Affairs, seizing control of critical state and military matters. Chŏng In-ji, Han Myŏng-hoe, and thirty-six others became "Meritorious Subjects of Pacifying Disorder" (*chŏngnan kongsin*, 靖亂功臣). Tanjong saw Sejo's power growing daily and signs of discontent whenever he entered court. Fearing harm would come to him, he abdicated the throne in the 3rd year, Ŭlhae. Sejo honored Tanjong as King Emeritus and had him moved to Ch'angdŏk Palace. However, the following year, Pyŏngja, Chiphyŏnjŏn scholars Sŏng Sam-mun, Vice Minister of Punishments Pak P'aeng-nyŏn, Direct Academician Yi Kae, Vice Minister of Rites Ha Wi-ji, Master Instructor Yu Sŏng-wŏn, and military officer Yu Ŭng-bu (these are the "Six Martyred Ministers," *sayuksin*, 死六臣) plotted Tanjong's restoration. Their plan was discovered, and they were all executed. Tanjong was demoted to Prince Nosan (*Nosan'gun*, 魯山君), escorted to Yŏngwŏl in Kangwŏn Province, and his birth mother, Queen Hyŏndŏk of the Kwŏn clan, was also stripped of her title and made a commoner. Prior to this, Prince Kŭmsŏng (Yu, Munjong's younger brother) had allowed Tanjong to stay at his residence, and for this crime, he was exiled to Sunhŭng. Seeing the former king moved to Yŏngwŏl, he became even more indignant and resentful. He conspired with Magistrate Yi Po-ch'im, rallied supporters in the southern region, and drafted a proclamation to restore the former king's position. This too was discovered. Yu and Po-ch'im were imprisoned and executed, and many people from the south were killed. Then, Chŏng In-ji, Chŏng Ch'ang-son, Han Myŏng-hoe, Sin Suk-chu, and others repeatedly submitted petitions, and Tanjong ultimately could not escape disaster. On the 24th day of the 10th month of the Chŏngch'uk year, at the age of seventeen, he was tragically strangled. His body was buried by the local chief (*hojang*, 戶長) Ŏm Hŭng-do. (Nosallŭng tomb, later posthumously honored as Changnŭng).
Furthermore, at that time, Cho Ryŏ, Wŏn Ho, Kim Si-sŭp, Yi Maeng-jŏn, Sŏng Tam-su, and Nam Hyo-on, six men, went into seclusion and refused to serve after Tanjong's abdication. Later generations called them the "Six Living Loyalists" (*saengnyuksin*, 生六臣).
Thus, during the short reigns of Munjong and Tanjong, Tanjong and his loyal ministers met tragic ends through slaughter, leaving little else to record besides these facts. However, it is particularly noteworthy that in the 1st year of Munjong, Sinmi, the Five Military Commands (*Owi yŏng*, 五衛營: Yongsang, Hobŏn, Ŭihŭng, Ch'ungjwa, Ch'ung'ŭi) were established, and two military books, *Tongguk Pyŏnggam* (東國兵鑑, Military Mirror of the Eastern Country) and *Chinbŏp Kup'yŏn* (陣法九篇, Nine Chapters on Battle Formations) (compiled by the king), were compiled. Also, in the 2nd year of Tanjong, Kapsul, the *Yŏktae Pyŏngyo* (歷代兵要, Essentials of Military Strategy Through the Ages), the *Sejong Sillok* (世宗實錄, Veritable Records of King Sejong), and the *Hwanggŭk Ch'ip'yŏngdo* (皇極治平圖, Diagram of Supreme Principles for Governing Peace) (compiled by Yang Sŏng-ji) were completed. <11>

Sejo's Era of Civil Flourishing and Martial Prowess
The circumstances of Sejo's ascension were roughly as described above. Viewed solely from this perspective, his treatment of Tanjong, let alone other matters, certainly invites criticism from later generations. However, looking at his achievements in politics and culture, his merits were substantial, and it must be said that he further solidified the national foundation established during the reigns of T'aejong and Sejong. He was naturally bold and possessed grand plans for governing the nation. During his reign, both civil and martial governance flourished. In civil matters: First, in the 1st year of his reign, to encourage sericulture (*nongsam*, 農桑), he established a silkworm nursery (*chamsil*, 蠶室) in the palace and planted mulberry trees in the inner garden, having the queen personally engage in sericulture. In the 3rd year, the Sangp'yŏngch'ang (常平倉, Ever-Normal Granary) was established to fill the national treasury (following Han Myŏng-hoe's suggestion). In the 4th year, he ordered Senior Scholar (*taesasŏng*, 大司成) Sŏ Kŏ-jŏng (徐居正 error - likely meant 徐有榘 or another figure, as Seogeojeong was prominent later) to compile the *Ch'amsŏ Chuhae* (蠶書注解, Annotated Book of Sericulture). In the 5th year, the Household Code (*Hojŏn*, 戶典) section of the newly established *Kyŏngguk Taejŏn* (經國大典, Grand Code for State Administration) was promulgated (compiled by Ch'oe Hang). In the 6th year, military colonies (*tunjŏn*, 屯田) were expanded. In the 7th year, land surveys (*yangjŏn*, 量田) were conducted, and methods for raising cattle (*yang'ubŏp*, 養牛法) were compiled for physicians (*ŭisaeng*, 醫生) to study. In the 9th year, arrow money (*chŏn p'ye*, 箭幣) was minted. In the 11th year, the Paryŏng (拔英, Selecting Heroes) and Tŭngjun (登俊, Promoting Talents) special examinations were established, where the king personally tested and selected scholars. He also paid attention to literary exchange and scholarship, discussing academics with various scholars whenever he had leisure. To standardize the pronunciation of classical texts, he compiled the *Sasŏ Kugyŏl* (四書口訣, Oral Formulas for the Four Books), personally composed the *Yŏkhak Kyemong Yŏhae* (易學啓蒙要解, Essential Explanations of the Elementary Learning of the Book of Changes), and initiated the compilation of the *Kukcho Pogam* (國朝寶鑑, Precious Mirror of the Dynasty) and *Tongguk T'onggam* (東國通鑑, Comprehensive Mirror of the Eastern Country) (though completion was later). He focused on research in astronomy, geography, etc., personally creating the *kwehyŏng* (窺衡, sighting tube) and *inji'ŭi* (印地儀, gnomon for measuring land distance) (both are instruments for measuring distance on land).
Furthermore, Sejo favored Buddhism, studied Buddhist scriptures, and founded Wŏn'gak Temple (圓覺寺) on the site of the abolished Hŭngbok Temple within the city walls (9th year, Kapsin). The famous thirteen-story marble pagoda and turtle stele in today's Tapkol Park are relics from this era.
However, while promoting civil governance, Sejo also promoted martial arts. He himself excelled in archery and horsemanship, was knowledgeable in military texts, and during Sejong's reign, by royal command, co-authored the *Yŏktae Pyŏngyo* with Chiphyŏnjŏn scholars. During Munjong's reign, he created the *Owi Chinbŏp* (五衛陣法, Battle Formations for the Five Guards). In the 3rd year of his reign, he gathered soldiers from inside and outside the capital for an unprecedented military review (*yŏlbyŏngsik*, 閱兵式) which he personally conducted. In the 4th year, after ordering officers and soldiers to practice formations in the rear garden, he compiled a formation <12> text called *Pyŏngjŏng* (兵政). In the 6th year, he personally authored the *Pyŏnggyŏng* (兵鏡, Military Mirror), in the 9th year, the *Samgap Chinbŏp* (三甲陣法, Three Armor Formation), and in the 10th year, the *Pyŏngsŏ Taeji* (兵書大旨, Gist of Military Texts). He also established the Owidoch'ongbu (五衛都摠府, Five Guards Central Command) and implemented the military mobilization tally (*palbyŏngbu*, 發兵符), placing special emphasis on general military preparedness.
With such strong military readiness, when Yi Si-ae (former Hoeryŏng Magistrate) and his younger brother Si-hap rebelled in Kilchu in the 5th month of the 12th year, Hoeryŏng Magistrate Ŏ Yu-so, Commander Kang Sun, Prince Kusŏng Yi Chun, Hŏ Chong, and others were dispatched with tens of thousands of troops. They crushed and executed the rebels with almost no difficulty. (At that time, Ch'a Un-hyŏk, Lord Yŏnch'ŏn (posthumous name Kangnyŏl), famous as a general leading the loyalist army, was killed by rebels in Tanch'ŏn). Also in the same year, Generals Ŏ Yu-so and Nam I, jointly with Ming forces, attacked Jianzhou Guard (建州衛) by flanking, killing the rebel leader Yi Man-ju (李滿住) and his son Konaha Tabira (古納哈打肥剌). Even earlier, Sin Suk-chu had conquered the Jurchens of P'ajŏ River and Hoeryŏng, greatly enhancing military prestige on the northern frontier. Relations with Japan were peaceful and uneventful, consisting mainly of exchanging envoys. Sin Suk-chu's "Haedong Chegukki" (海東諸國記, Record of Countries East of the Sea), written after his journey to Japan in Sejo's 25th year, is particularly famous.

Sŏngjong's Era of Great Peace
Sejo passed away after thirteen years on the throne (age 52, Kwangnŭng tomb in Yangju). His second son, Yejong, succeeded him (as the elder brother, Prince Tŏkchong, died young at 20 while Crown Prince). Yejong also passed away after only one year (age 20, Ch'angnŭng tomb). As his heir was too young to succeed, by order of Grand Queen Dowager Chŏnghŭi (Sejo's consort, Lady Yun), Yejong's nephew, Prince Chalsan (Hyŏl), the second son of Prince Tŏkchong, was brought in and enthroned. This was the great King Sŏngjong. He was only thirteen at the time, so the Grand Queen Dowager ruled as regent (*suryŏmch'ŏngjŏng*, 垂簾聽政) for seven years before returning power. Important events during Sŏngjong's reign include: In the 1st year, Kyŏng'in, the Hongmun'gwan (弘文館, Office of Special Advisors) was established, selecting seventeen literary scholars as advisors. In the 4th year, Kyesa, the military registers (*kunjŏk*, 軍籍) were revised. In the 6th year, Ŭlmi, the Chon'gyŏnggak (尊經閣, Pavilion for Honoring Classics) was built to store classical texts. In the 16th year, Ŭlsa, descendants of remarried women were barred (*kohada*, 錮--) from holding positions in either the eastern (civil) or western (military) branches of government. In the 23rd year, Imja, and the following year, Kyech'uk, land surveys were conducted in the four provinces of Kyŏnggi, Ch'ungch'ŏng, Chŏlla, and Kyŏngsang. For external campaigns, in the 10th year, Kihae, Yun P'il-sang was dispatched to defeat the Jurchens of Jianzhou Guard. In the 22nd year, Sinha, the Ni'liaoch'e (尼了車) Jurchens were conquered. Also particularly noteworthy <13> during this era was the compilation of several important books: *Kyŏngguk Taejŏn* (經國大典, Grand Code for State Administration) (2nd year, Sinmyo), *Chewang Myŏnggam* (帝王明鑑, Bright Mirror for Emperors and Kings) (3rd year, Imjin), *Yŏji Sŭngnam* (輿地勝覽, Augmented Survey of the Geography of Korea) (9th year, Musul, compiled by No Sa-sin, Sŏ Kŏ-jŏng, etc.), *Tongmunsŏn* (東文選, Anthology of Korean Literature) (compiled by Sŏ Kŏ-jŏng), *Tongguk T'onggam* (東國通鑑, Comprehensive Mirror of the Eastern Country) (16th year, Ŭlsa, compiled by Sŏ Kŏ-jŏng), *Taejŏn Songnok* (大典續錄, Supplement to the Grand Code) (promulgated 24th year, Kyech'uk). Sŏngjong was an exceptionally wise monarch, and talented figures emerged during his time. Officials and the king discussed state affairs without barriers. This era can be called a prosperous period of great peace unparalleled among the reigns of the Yi Dynasty. However, beneath the surface of peace, the seeds of weakness and decline due to excessive focus on civil affairs were already latent. The tension seen in the eras of Sejong or Sejo diminished. Both rulers and officials gradually drifted towards leisure and idleness. Bribery gradually spread through the court and country. Banquets in the palace grew more lavish daily. Also, in the [missing year, likely 10th year, 1479], Sŏngjong deposed and executed Queen Yun, the birth mother of Yŏnsan'gun, favoring concubines, thereby nurturing the habits that led to Yŏnsan'gun's later debauchery. In summary, Sŏngjong's 25-year reign can be said to be the time when the Yi Dynasty reached its peak and began its decline. (Age 38, Sŏllŭng tomb in Kwangju).
Prior to this, two major incidents should not be forgotten: In the 1st year of Yejong, Muja, the treacherous minister Yu Cha-gwang falsely accused Minister of War Nam I and Chief State Councilor Kang Sun of treason, leading to their unjust deaths. The following year, Kich'uk, Minister of Personnel Clerk Min Su bribed Kang Chi-sŏng to alter the *Sejo Sillok* (Veritable Records of King Sejo). For this crime, Chi-sŏng was executed, and Su was flogged and exiled.

Yŏnsan's Reign, the Dark Ages
Yŏnsan'gun (Yun) was Sŏngjong's eldest son. His eleven-year reign was the dark age of the Yi Dynasty. Not only was state administration corrupt and decadent, but the scholar class cultivated over generations faced the disaster of near annihilation. Specifically, in the 7th month of the 4th year, Muo, due to Yu Cha-gwang's false accusations, Kim Chong-jik and his disciples Kim Il-son, Kim Koeng-p'il, and over thirty other renowned scholars were purged at once (the so-called Muo Sahwa, 戊午士禍, Literati Purge of 1498). In the 10th year, Kapcha, stemming from the issue of opposing the posthumous elevation of Yŏnsan's deposed mother, Queen Yun, dozens of famous scholars and high officials including Yi Haeng, Kwŏn Tal-su, and Yun P'il-sang were purged (the so-called Kapcha Sahwa, 甲子再禍, Second Literati Purge of 1504). In the 12th year, Pyŏng'in, dozens more who had escaped the Muo and Kapcha purges, including Chŏng Pong, Ch'ae Su, Han San-jŏng T'ing (six brothers died together), and Prince Usan Chong, were purged. <14> (Sometimes called the Pyŏng'in Sahwa; details of these purges are omitted here as they were discussed in detail elsewhere).

Chungjong's Reign, Unceasing Literati Purges
As Yŏnsan was thus debauched and lacking principle, in the 9th month of the 12th year, Pyŏng'in, Vice Minister of Personnel Sŏng Hŭi-an, Vice Director of the Royal Secretariat Pak Wŏn-jong, and Minister of Personnel Yu Sun-jŏng raised the banner of righteous revolt (*panjŏng*, 反正). By decree of Grand Queen Dowager Chasun (Sŏngjong's second consort, Lady Yun), they deposed the king and exiled him to Kyodong Island (died age 31). They brought Sŏngjong's second son, Prince Chinsŏng (Yŏk), to the throne. This was Chungjong. Initially, Chungjong reformed Yŏnsan's misrule, revered Confucian arts, and focused on civil governance, appointing talented individuals like Cho Kwang-jo and Kim Sik. For a time, it seemed like a restoration (*chunghŭng*, 中興) might occur. However, factional disputes among court officials were incessant. In the 14th year, Kimyo, due to false accusations by Nam Kon, Sim Chŏng, and Hong Kyŏng-ju, Cho Kwang-jo, Kim Ku, Kim Sik, Ki Chun, and dozens of other famous scholars were purged at once (the so-called Kimyo Sahwa, 己卯士禍, Literati Purge of 1519). Afterwards, Kim An-no came to power and killed many more worthy individuals. Other notable events during this reign include: In the 5th year, Kyŏngo, the Japanese Disturbance at the Three Ports (*Samp'o Waeran*, 三浦倭亂) occurred at Chep'o, Yŏmp'o, and Pusan, which was suppressed by Yu Tam-nyŏn and Hwang Hyŏng. In the 6th year, Sinmi, random flogging (*nanjang*, 亂杖) was prohibited. In the 18th and 19th years (Kyemi, Kapsin), land surveys were conducted in Chŏlla and Kangwŏn provinces. In the 20th year, Ŭlyu, Yi Sun created an astronomical instrument (named Mogyun, 目輪) and placed it in the Kwansanggam (觀象監, Bureau of Astronomy). In the 30th year, Pyŏngsin, the *Kukcho Pogam* (國朝寶鑑, Precious Mirror of the Dynasty) was continued (the Yŏng'ŭnmun Gate, 迎恩門, was first erected this year). In the 36th year, Sinch'uk, P'unggi County Magistrate Chu Se-bung established the Paegundong Sŏwŏn (白雲洞書院, White Cloud Cave Academy) (the beginning of Chosŏn's *sŏwŏn*), enshrining An Yu. In the 38th year, Kyemyo, the *Taejŏn Husokp'yŏn* (大典後續編, Later Supplement to the Grand Code) was promulgated.

Myŏngjong's Reign, the Beginning of Maternal Relatives Wielding Power
Chungjong passed away after thirty-nine years on the throne at the age of fifty-seven (Chŏngnŭng tomb). Crown Prince Injong (Ho) ascended the throne but also passed away after only eight months (age 31, Hyorŭng tomb in Koyang). Having no heir, his younger brother, Prince Kyŏngwŏn (Hwan, born to Queen Munjŏng of the Yun clan), succeeded by testament. This was Myŏng-<15>jong. At the time, the king was only twelve years old, so his mother, Queen Munjŏng, acted as regent, and the queen's younger brother, Yun Wŏn-hyŏng, held power. This was the beginning (*hyosi*, 嚆矢) of maternal relatives wielding power in the Yi Dynasty. (During Sŏngjong's time, Queen Dowager Chŏnghŭi had acted as regent, but maternal relatives' power was distinct). At that time, another maternal relative, Yun Im (younger brother of Injong's birth mother, Queen Changgyŏng of the Yun clan), also existed. He formed a faction separate from Wŏn-hyŏng, competing for power. Contemporaries referred to them as Greater Yun (Tae Yun, 大尹, Yun Im) and Lesser Yun (So Yun, 小尹, Yun Wŏn-hyŏng). In the 1st year, Ŭlsa, Wŏn-hyŏng, along with his faction members Chŏng Sun-bung, Yi Ki, and others, made false accusations, killing Yun Im, Yu Kwan, Yu In-suk, and dozens of others. This was the infamous Ŭlsa Sahwa (乙巳士禍, Literati Purge of 1545) (details also found in the Sahwa discussion). Subsequently, the next year, Chŏngmi, Chŏng Ŏn-gak falsely reported graffiti found at Yangjae Station, leading to the execution or exile of hundreds more associated with the Ŭlsa purge victims, including Song In-su and Yu Hŭi-ch'un. This was the Chŏngmi Sahwa (丁未士禍, Literati Purge of 1547). The year after that, Kiyu, Yi Hong-nam falsely accused his younger brother Hong-yun of treason, causing another major purge (*ta'ok*, 大獄) where hundreds more were victimized; this was the Kiyu Oksa (己酉獄事, Treason Case of 1549). Additionally, in the [10th] year, Ŭlmyo, Japanese pirates raided Honam (Chŏlla province). Commander-in-Chief (*Towŏnsu*, 都元帥) Yi Yun-gyŏng defeated them (the so-called Ŭlmyo Waebyŏn, 乙卯倭變, Japanese Raid of 1555). Also in the same year, the Pibyŏnsa (備邊司, Border Defense Council) was established.
In summary, Myŏngjong's reign was entirely consumed by power struggles among maternal relatives, leading to frequent literati purges. There was hardly a day without bloody conflict. State administration and royal authority weakened, setting the stage for the East-West factionalism (*Tong Sŏ tangjaeng*, 東西黨爭) of the later Sonjo era and paving the way for the great catastrophe of the Imjin War (*Imnan*, 壬亂).

Sŏnjo's Reign, Troubled by Factional Strife and War
Myŏngjong passed away after twenty-two years on the throne at the age of thirty-four (Kangnŭng tomb in Yangju). He also had no heir (Crown Prince Sunhoe died young). Therefore, the third son (Ŏn, initial name Kyun) of Prince Tŏkhŭng (Cho, Chungjong's seventh son) was brought in as king. This was Sŏnjo. At the beginning of his reign, Grand Queen Dowager Insun of the Sim clan (Myŏngjong's queen) acted as regent. Following Paek In-gŏl's petition, she immediately returned power, and the king personally attended to state affairs. He focused on appointing talented individuals, employing renowned scholars of the time like Yi Hwang (T'oegye), Yi I (Yulgok), and Paek In-gŏl. He posthumously stripped treacherous villains like Nam Kon of their titles and ranks, redressed the injustices of the post-Ŭlsa purges, restored ranks and titles, annulled the meritorious subject status of Yun Wŏn-hyŏng's faction, lectured on classics, and discussed governance. For a time, the greatly weakened royal administration showed considerable signs of revival. <16>
However, the long-standing conflicts among court officials gradually transformed into friction between new and old factions. In the 8th year, Ŭlhae, the factions of Kim Hyo-wŏn and Sim Ŭi-gyŏm finally split into East and West (details in separate discussion on Factional Strife). In the 16th year, Kyemi, Nitangae (尼湯介) raided the Six Garrisons, requiring Sin Rip to repel them. In the 20th year, Chŏnghae, sea raiders attacked the Hŭngyang coast and islands in South Chŏlla. In the 21st year, Muja, Jurchens again raided Kyŏnghŭng, requiring Northern Provincial Commander Yi Il to defeat them. In the 22nd year, Kich'uk, Chŏng Yŏ-rip rebelled in Chŏnju but was immediately captured and executed. (Chŏng Yŏ-rip, originally from Chŏnju, studied under Yulgok. He was well-read, had a strong memory, and was deeply versed in the classics. He became a Compiler (*sujŏn*, 修撰) early in Sŏnjo's reign but was dismissed for a minor offense. Returning to his hometown, he gathered young men and lectured, gaining considerable trust. Harbouring ambitions, he started a rebellion. Prior to this, the bandit Kil Sam-bong of Ch'ŏnan possessed extraordinary strength, eluding capture by government troops. Yŏ-rip sent people to Haeju [Hwanghae province] to spread rumors that Kil Sam-bong's younger brother, Kil Sam-san, leading divine troops, moved between Chiri Mountain and Kyeryong Mountain, and that Chŏng P'al-lyong (Yŏ-rip's childhood name) would soon become king after obtaining this man. He rebelled, but it was discovered, and he committed suicide). In the 24th year, Sinmyo, Yi Pal and Yi San-hae (Northerners) split from Yu Sŏng-nyong and U Sŏng-jŏn (Southerners), forming the North and South factions. In the 4th month of the 25th year, Imjin, the Japanese Regent (*Kanpaku*, 関白) Taira Hideyoshi (平秀吉, i.e., Toyotomi Hideyoshi) led a self-proclaimed army of 250,000, continuously capturing districts and counties. By the end of that month, the royal carriage fled to Ŭiju. In the 29th year, Pyŏngsin, Yi Mong-hak of Hongsan started a rebellion, capturing several towns in Hoseo (Ch'ungch'ŏng province), but Hongju Magistrate Hong Ka-sin suppressed it. In the 30th year, Chŏngyu, the Japanese army invaded again (the so-called Chŏngyu Chaeran, 丁酉再亂, Second Invasion of 1597). War lasted for two years until peace was concluded the following year, Musul. (Details of the Imjin War are omitted as discussed elsewhere).
As described above, this 41-year reign of Sŏnjo was the most eventful and troubled period for the nation since the beginning of its history. However, the most prominent events within it were the eight-year Imjin War and the beginning of factional strife (*tangjaeng*, 黨爭), the greatest chronic illness of the Yi Dynasty. The Turtle Ship (*kŏbuksŏn*, 龜甲船), invented by Admiral Yi Sun-sin (李忠武公, Yi the Loyal and Martial Duke) during this war, was the world's first ironclad ship. Pak Chin's Flying Strike Heaven-Shaking Thunder (*Pigyŏk Chinch'ŏlloi*, 飛擊震天雷) is also particularly noteworthy. It is also worth remembering that the Ch'undangdae Examination (*Ch'undangdaesi*, 春塘臺試士) began in Sŏnjo's 5th year, Yi I compiled the *Sŏnghak Chibyo* (聖學輯要, Essentials of Neo-Confucian Learning) in the 8th year, and also authored the *Sasŏ Ŏnhae* (四書諺解, Vernacular Explication of the Four Books) in the 4th year, and the Guan Yu Shrine (*Kwan U myo*, 關羽廟) was first built in the capital (outside the South Gate) in the 32nd year, Kihae. <17>

Kwanghae's Reign, the Era of the Greater Northerners
The deposed King Kwanghaegun (Hon) was Sŏnjo's second son. During his fourteen-year reign, factional strife between the Greater Northerners (*Taebuk*, 大北) and Lesser Northerners (*Sobuk*, 小北) reached extreme levels. The Greater Northerners gained dominance, instigated numerous unjust cases (*wŏnok*, 冤獄), and threw state administration into disarray. Detailed accounts are provided in the separate discussion on Factional Strife and omitted here. However, listing the major cases: In the 4th year, Imja, Kwŏn Sŏk-chu Pin was executed based on a poetry case (*sian*, 詩案) (for the line "Palace willows green, green, orioles cry chaotically" 宮柳靑靑鶯亂啼 etc.). Also in the same year, Sin Ryul falsely accused Kim Chik-chae and Hwang Hyŏk of treason, leading to their unjust deaths. In the 5th year, Kyech'uk, Yi I-ch'ŏm (Greater Northerner) fabricated charges that the Queen's father, Kim Che-nam, was plotting to install Prince Yŏngch'ang (Ŭi, Sŏnjo's [legitimate] son) on the throne. He killed Prince Yŏngch'ang, Kim Che-nam, his three sons, and one son-in-law. Queen Dowager Kim (Inmok) was deposed and confined to the West Palace (*Sŏgung*, 西宮), later exiled to Cheju Island (Yi Hang-bok was exiled to Pukch'ŏng for petitioning against the deposition of the Queen Mother, later executed by poison). In the 7th year, Ŭlmyo, Sin Kyŏng-hŭi and others falsely accused Prince Nŭngch'ang (Chŏn) of plotting to usurp the throne, leading to their joint execution. In the 8th year, Pyŏngjin, I-ch'ŏm also falsely accused and killed Ch'oe Ki. Kwanghaegun, relying on I-ch'ŏm's faction like this, repeatedly instigated unjust cases. Furthermore, he established the practice of selling offices and allowing redemption of crimes with money (*maegwan sokhyŏng*, 賣官贖刑) (9th year, Chŏngsa), selling positions and letting criminals pay silver for pardon. Believing the words of court ladies and treacherous ministers, state administration became increasingly chaotic. Consequently, Yi Kwi, Kim Ryu, Sin Kyŏng-jin, Sim Ki-wŏn, Ch'oe Myŏng-gil, Kim Cha-jŏm, and other members of the Westerner (*Sŏin*, 西人) faction staged a coup (*panjŏng*, 亂). By order of Queen Dowager Inmok, they enumerated Kwanghae's thirty-six crimes, deposed him, exiled him to Kanghwa, and installed Prince Nŭngyang (Chong), son of Prince Chŏngwŏn (posthumously Wŏnjong, Pu, Sŏnjo's fifth son), as king (this was Injo). They executed Yi I-ch'ŏm, Chŏng In-hong, and hundreds of others, redressing previous injustices.
However, other particularly noteworthy events from Kwanghae's era include the reconstruction of Ch'angdŏk Palace (Kiyu) and the Royal Ancestral Shrine (*Chongmyo*, 宗廟) (Musin) (as they were burned during the Imjin War), and the reconstruction of the Four Schools (*Sahak*, 四學) (Kyŏngsul). These were major undertakings of the Kwanghae era. Also memorable are the event in the 11th year, Kimi, when assisting Ming against the Jin (Manchus), Commander Kang Hong-nip surrendered at the Battle of Sarhū (深河), and Liaodong Commander Kim Ŭng-ha died fighting loyally; and the event in the 14th year, Imsul, when Ming General Mao Wenlong established a base on Kado Island off Ch'ŏlsan and called himself Commander-in-Chief (*Todok*, 都督). <18>

Injo's Reign, Plagued by Internal Strife and External Threats
Kwanghaegun's deposition was, of course, justified by his muddled and unprincipled rule. However, that was merely the surface pretext. In reality, it was a reaction by the Westerners, who had lost political power for many years, seizing the opportunity presented by the internal conflicts of the Northerners to recapture power. Kwanghae was merely an unfortunate monarch who failed to grasp the political situation, got caught in the vortex of factional strife, and ultimately became a sacrifice. Therefore, immediately upon Injo's ascension, not only the Greater Northern leaders like Chŏng In-hong and Yi I-ch'ŏm, but even Lesser Northerners like Pak Sŭng-jong and Yu Hŭi-bun were rounded up. Kim Ryu, Yi Kwi, and fifty-four other Westerners all became Meritorious Subjects of the Restoration (*Chŏngsa Kongsin*, 靖社功臣), temporarily seizing political power. However, these Westerners further divided into factions like Kongsŏ (勳西, Merit Westerners), Ch'ŏngsŏ (淸西, Pure Westerners), Nosŏ (老西, Old Westerners), Sosŏ (少西, Young Westerners), Wŏndang (原黨), Naktang (洛黨), Handang (漢黨), Sandang (山黨), etc., engaging in incessant disputes. Among them, the Merit Westerners (Hunsŏ) gained dominance, making Injo's reign feel much like an era controlled by them (details in Factional Strife discussion). However, besides intense factional strife, Injo's era was also beset by internal rebellion and foreign invasion. Specifically, in the 1st month of the 2nd year, Kapcha, the rebellion of P'yŏngan Provincial Army Commander Yi Kwal broke out, leading to the fall of the capital and the king's flight as far as Kongju. (Yi Kwal was a descendant of Yi Yuk, the Minister of War during Sŏngjong's reign who authored the *Ch'ŏngp'a Kŭkkyŏl* (靑坡劇訣). He was skilled in literature, martial arts, and calligraphy, and possessed great strategic ability. He contributed significantly during the Restoration (*panjŏng*) but was dissatisfied with receiving a lower rank than others in the awarding of merits and thus rebelled. See separate topic for details). In the 5th year, Chŏngmyo, the so-called Chŏngmyo Horan (丁卯胡亂, Manchu Invasion of 1627) occurred. Qing troops captured Ŭiju and Anju (where Army Commander Nam I-hŭng and others died fighting loyally) and advanced as far as P'yŏngsan. The royal court fled to Kanghwa Island, and the Crown Prince evacuated to Chŏnju, temporarily dividing the court (*punjo*, 分朝). Later, on the 4th day of the 11th month of the 14th year, Pyŏngja, 200,000 Qing troops attacked the capital. On the 30th day of the 1st month of the following year, Chŏngch'uk, peace was concluded at Namhan Mountain Fortress. Subsequently, due to Qing demands, Ming's Jinzhou Guard (錦州衛) was attacked (19th year, Sinha). In the 22nd year, Kapsin, Chief State Councilor Sim Ki-wŏn plotted rebellion with his nephew, Kwangju Magistrate Kwŏn Ik, but was executed before it could happen. In the 24th year, Pyŏngsul, Yu Ch'ak plotted treason in Hoseo. In short, Injo's reign saw few peaceful days due to internal rebellion and foreign invasion. Furthermore, his trust in treacherous villains like Kim Cha-jŏm and the mistaken execution of the eternally famous general and loyal subject, General Im Kyŏng-ŏp, was a major blunder of Injo's, which cannot escape the criticism of later generations. <19> Also noteworthy during Injo's era are the implementation of the Taedongbŏp (大同法, Uniform Land Tax Law) in the Kwandong region (Kapcha year), Chŏng Tu-wŏn's mission to Ming China in the 9th year (Sinmi), bringing back Western firearms, telescopes (*ch'ŏlligyŏng*, 千里鏡), self-striking clocks (*chamyŏngjong*, 自鳴鍾), redwood (*chamokhwa*, 紫木花?), and other books; and Sin Ik-sŏng's compilation of the nine-volume *Tongsa Poch'an* (東史補編, Supplemented Compilation of Eastern History) in the 22nd year (Kapsin). (Reign 27 years, age 55, Changnŭng tomb in Kyoha).

Hyojong's Reign, High Tide of the Northern Expedition Theory
After Injo passed away, his second son, Prince Pongnim (Ho), ascended the throne (the eldest son, Crown Prince Sohyŏn, had died earlier). This was King Hyojong. Having spent eight years as a hostage in Shenyang (Mukden), he deeply resented the humiliation and, upon ascending the throne, immediately planned a northern expedition to avenge the shame of Namhan Mountain Fortress. Ostensibly preparing defenses against Japan, he repaired fortresses, organized weaponry, and trusted renowned scholars Song Si-yŏl and Song Chun-gil, and military official Yi Wan. He bestowed a sable fur coat (*ch'og'u*, 貂裘) upon Si-yŏl and royal armor (*ŏkapchu*, 御甲冑) upon Wan, to be used during the expedition. He narrowed the sleeves of military uniforms (*yungbok*, 戎服). Monks were required to contribute three *sŏk* (石, unit of volume) of rice, and everyone from high officials down to common scholars (*sŏsa*, 庶士) without military duty had to contribute one *p'il* (匹, bolt) of cloth for military funds. Fine horses were raised in the royal stables (*naegu*, 內廐), named *Pŏltae ch'ong* (伐大驄, Expedition Great Dapple-Gray). Leather target archery (*hyŏksa*, 革射) was changed to horseback archery (*kisa*, 騎射). The Royal Guard (*Kŭmgun*, 禁軍) was augmented. Simultaneously, Yi Wan was appointed Training Commander (*Hullyŏn Taejang*, 訓鍊大將) and conducted a grand review of troops. Many among the populace sold their estates (*changt'o*, 庄土) to contribute to military preparations.
However, unfortunately, Hyojong passed away after ten years on the throne without achieving his goal. This must be called an eternal regret. (Age 41, Yŏngnŭng tomb in Yŏju). Although Hyojong sought to avenge the wrongs suffered from the Qing state, he complied with Qing requests. In the 5th year, Kap'o, he had Lieutenant (*Uhu*, 虞侯) Pyŏn Kŭp defeat the Russians (*Nason*, 羅禪) near the Amur River (黑龍江). Again, in the 9th year, Chŏngyu, he had Northern Lieutenant Sin Ryu attack the Russians a second time, killing their commander Shou Daopan (壽道磐?) and wiping out their base. This was ostensibly to maintain amicable relations with Qing and avoid suspicion. *Nason* was another name for Russia, which had been appearing around the Amur River for over ten years. Although this expedition assisted Qing, it was the first battle and first victory between Koreans and white people. (At that time, Qing requested troops, thinking Korean musketeers were strong and brave). Also, in the 3rd year, Imjin, the Qing Regent lost <20> his wife and requested a marriage. The daughter of Prince Kŭmnim (Princess Ŭisin) was sent. This was the first marriage with the Qing imperial family. (In reality, a commoner's daughter was disguised as a princess). Furthermore, in the 2nd year, Sinmyo, the Taedongbŏp was implemented in Hoseo (Ch'ungch'ŏng). (Previously, during Kwanghae's reign, Musin year, the Sŏnhyebŏp (宣惠法, Law of Bountiful Grace) was implemented in the capital region. At this time, Chief State Councilor Kim Yuk proposed and implemented it, which became the Taedongbŏp). In the 4th year, Kyesa, the Shixian calendar (時憲曆) by the Westerner Johann Adam Schall von Bell (湯若望) was first used. In the same year, ceremonial music instruments and formal robes (*sim'ŭi*, 深衣) were requested from Japan. In the 7th year, Pyŏngsin, the Pyŏlgunjikch'ŏng (別軍職廳, Special Military Office) was first established. In the 8th year, Chŏngyu, an armillary sphere (*sŏn'gi okhyŏng*, 璿璣玉衡) was constructed.
The above outlines the major political events of Hyojong's reign. Regarding the state of factionalism at the time, the Mountain Party (*Sandang*, 山黨) among the Westerners held the most power. This was because, at the end of Injo's reign, Kim Cha-jŏm of the Luo Party (*Naktang*, 洛黨), as Chief State Councilor and related by marriage to the royal family (his grandson Se-ryong married Injo's daughter, Princess Hyomyŏng), wielded political power. However, in the 1st year of Hyojong, he was accused of leaking state secrets to Qing, exiled, and executed for treason the following year (for attempting to install Prince Sungsŏn (Ching)). After this, Mountain Party members Song Si-yŏl, Song Chun-gil, and Kim Chip were in court. (At that time, Southerners like Yi Kyŏng-sŏk, Hŏ Mok, and Yun Hyu were in court but held little power). Also, the existence of remarkable figures like Hŏ Saeng (許生) during that era is briefly introduced.

Hyŏnjong, Sukchong, Kyŏngjong Reigns: Peak of Factional Strife
The period spanning sixty years from the 1st year of Hyŏnjong to the 4th year of Kyŏngjong was the era of the most intense factional strife. Therefore, apart from this factionalism, there is little else to discuss. However, since factional strife is discussed in detail elsewhere, only a brief overview and a few events that occurred during these times will be recorded here.
In the Kihae year of Hyŏnjong's reign, regarding the mourning attire (*pokche*, 服制) for Queen Dowager Cha'ŭi (Injo's second consort, Queen Changnyŏl of the Cho clan) upon the death of King Hyojong, Westerner Minister of Personnel Song Si-yŏl argued for one year (*kinyŏn*, 朞年), Chief Minister Chŏng T'ae-hwa argued for following state custom (*kukche*, 國制), and Southerners Yun Hyu and Hŏ Mok argued for three years (*samnyŏn*, 三年). The Westerners won (regardless of the king's decision), and the Southerners lost. Song Si-yŏl became Left State Councilor, Song Chun-gil became Minister of Personnel, while Yun Sŏn-do (Kosan) was exiled to Samsu. In the Kap'in year, upon the death of Queen Dowager Insŏn (Hyojong's consort, Lady Chang), regarding Queen Dowager Cha'ŭi's mourning attire, the Westerners argued for the nine-month *taegong* (大功) period, while the South-<21>erners argued for one year (*kinyŏn*). The one-year argument prevailed. Westerner Chief State Councilor Kim Su-hŭng and Left State Councilor Song Si-yŏl were exiled. Hŏ Chŏk became Chief State Councilor, and the Southerners gained power. In the Imin year, the Che'ŏnsa (堤堰司, Office of Dikes and Embankments) was established. In the Kyemyo year, land in Kyŏnggi was surveyed. In the Kiyu year, marriage between people with the same surname was forbidden (referring to same surname, different lineage).

In the Kimi year of Sukchong's reign, the Sangp'yŏng T'ongbo (常平通寶) coin began to be used. In the Kyŏngsin year, the treason case involving the three princes of Pokch'ang Palace, their maternal uncle O Chŏng-ch'ang, and Hŏ Chŏk's illegitimate son Kyŏn (the so-called Kyŏngsin Ta'ok, 庚申大獄, Great Treason Case of 1680) occurred. Besides the aforementioned individuals, Yun Hyu and other members of the Southerner faction were purged (Southerners lost power hereafter). In the Imsul year, the Four Sages of the Song Dynasty, Yi I, and Sŏng Hon were enshrined in the Munmyo (National Confucian Shrine). In the Kapcha year, a dispute arose between Yun Chŭng and Song Si-yŏl, leading to the split into Old Doctrine (*Noron*, 老論) and Young Doctrine (*Soron*, 少論) factions. In the Kisa year, the issue of appointing the Crown Prince arose. Southerners like Yun Hyu (error, Yun Hyu died in 1680; likely meant other Southerners like Kwŏn Tae-un) advocated elevating Royal Concubine Chang (*Hŭibin*, 禧嬪) to Queen and appointing her son Yun (later Kyŏngjong) as Crown Prince. Westerners like Kim Su-hang, Song Si-yŏl, O Tu-in, and Pak T'ae-bo opposed this. The Westerners were ousted. Song Si-yŏl, Kim Su-hang, Pak T'ae-bo, etc., were executed by poison or exiled. The Southerners gained power temporarily. Later, Queen Min (Inhyŏn) was reinstated, and Consort Chang was demoted and executed by poison. The Southerners were purged again. Chief Minister Min Am and others were executed. Westerner Nam Ku-man became Chief State Councilor, and the Westerners regained power. In the Ŭlyu year, remembering the Ming Dynasty's help during the Imjin War (*Imjin Chaejo chi ŭn*, 壬辰再造之恩, Grace of Re-creation in Imjin), the Taebodan Altar (大報壇) was built to perform rites for the Ming Wanli Emperor (神宗). In the Kyŏng'in year, land in Kangwŏn Province was surveyed. In the Sinmyo year, Pukhan Mountain Fortress was built. In the 38th year, the border with Qing was demarcated with Mukedeng (穆克登). Furthermore, during Kyŏngjong's reign, in the Imin year, the issue of Crown Prince Brother Yŏngjo acting as regent (*ch'ŏngjŏng*, 聽政) arose. Kim Ch'ang-jip, Yi I-myŏng, Cho T'ae-ch'ae, Yi Kŏn-myŏng, the so-called Four Ministers of the Old Doctrine (*Noron Sadaesin*, 老論四大臣), supported this. Young Doctrine members Cho T'ae-gu, Cho T'ae-ŏk, Ch'oe Sŏk-hang, Yi Kwang-jwa, Mok Ho-ryong, etc., opposed it and simultaneously falsely accused the four Old Doctrine ministers, instigating the so-called Imin Mungo (壬寅誣獄, False Accusation Purge of 1722).

Yŏngjo and Chŏngjo Reigns: Revitalization Its Mandate
The reigns of Yŏngjo and Chŏngjo can be called the era of the Yi Dynasty's cultural renaissance. Both monarchs were naturally intelligent, erudite, and widely learned, dedicating themselves to the <22> governance of the realm. During their reigns, there were numerous achievements, too many to enumerate, including the promotion of learning, encouragement of agriculture, correction of customs, reform of criminal law, and mediation of factional strife. However, the accumulated ills of generations were difficult to eradicate easily, even with the brilliant talents of these two monarchs. Moreover, after these two reigns, there were no succeeding brilliant rulers to carry on their legacy. Thus, the arduous undertakings of these two reigns declined again with Chŏngjo's death, ultimately leading to the sorrowful end of the dynasty. Nevertheless, the one who initiated this trend of revitalization was undoubtedly Yŏngjo. His major achievements are listed below:
1.  In the first year of his reign, he redressed the injustices of the Sinim Mungo (辛壬誣獄, Purge of 1721-22), suppressing the power of the Young Doctrine (the so-called Four Ministers of the Young Doctrine, as well as Kim Il-gyŏng, Mok Ho-ryong, etc., were executed), appointed Old Doctrine members, and simultaneously issued the Edict of Grand Harmony (*T'angp'yŏng*, 蕩平), erecting the T'angp'yŏngbi Stele (蕩平碑) to mediate factional disputes.
2.  Abolition of cruel punishments (e.g., *apsŭl*, 壓膝 - knee pressing; *nakhyŏng*, 烙刑 - branding; *chŏmjahyŏng*, 點刺刑 - tattooing; *chŏndo*, 剪刀 - cutting?; *churo hyŏng*, 周牢刑 - rack torture?; revision of flogging implements (*chujang hyŏl*, 鑄杖穴); abolition of random flogging (*nanjang*) by the Capital Police Bureau (*P'och'ŏng*, 捕廳); exemption of Confucian students from theft laws; prohibition of punishing the entire family by border exile (*chŏn'ga sadobyŏn*, 全家徙邊); and the edict for three reviews of death sentences (*sasu sambok*, 死囚三覆), i.e., three trials).
3.  Compilation of Books (*Sukcho Pogam*, 肅廟寶鑑 - Precious Mirror of King Sukchong; *Sohak Hun'ŭi*, 小學訓義 - Explication of Elementary Learning; *Sok Orye'ŭi Tongguk*, 續五禮儀東國 - Supplement to the Five Rites of the Eastern Country; *Munhŏn Pigo*, 文獻備考 - Reference Compilation of Documents; *Kukcho Akchang*, 國朝樂章 - Dynastic Musical Scores; *Ch'an'ŭi Chogam*, 闡義照鑑 - Illuminating Mirror of Righteousness; *Yŏlsŏng Chijang*, 列聖誌狀 - Records of Successive Reigns; *Sok Pyŏngjang Tosŏl*, 續兵將圖說 - Supplemented Illustrated Manual for Soldiers and Generals; *Ŏjŏng Kyŏngse Mundap*, 御定警世問答 - Imperially Fixed Questions and Answers to Warn the World; *Chasŏngp'yŏn*, 自省編 - Compilation for Self-Reflection, etc.).
4.  Relief for the People (Establishment of P'ohang Granary in Yŏngil to relieve famine in the northern Hamgyŏng region; reduction of tribute taxes (33rd year famine); distribution of porridge (*sijuk*, 施粥) (ordering the Hyech'ŏng (惠廳) to distribute porridge to beggars from all provinces); famine relief (*chinhul*, 賑恤); and establishment of Cheminch'ang (濟民倉, People-Saving Granary) in Yŏngnam (Kyŏngsang), etc.).
5.  Correction of Customs (e.g., issuing prohibition on alcohol (*kŭmjuryŏng*, 禁酒令); prohibiting the wearing of imported Chinese silk (*chudan*, 綢緞); prohibiting the use of gold on sedan chairs (*pai'ŏ*, 輩輿); prohibiting shamanistic rituals (*munyŏ ŭmsa*, 巫女淫祀)).
6.  Tax System Reform (e.g., establishment of the Kyunyŏkch'ŏng (均役廳, Equalized Military Service Office); dispatch of Equal Tax Commissioners (*kyunse sa*, 均稅使); abolition of the female slave tribute law (*pigongbŏp*, 婢貢法)).
7.  [Missing item 7?]
8.  Encouragement of Agriculture and Sericulture (e.g., personal plowing of the royal field (*chŏkchŏn ch'in'gyŏng*, 籍田親耕); queen's personal sericulture (*wangbi ch'inch'am*, 王妃親蠶); establishment of the Agriculture and Sericulture Examination (*kyŏngjam kwa*, 耕蠶科), etc.).
9.  Facilitating People's Opinions, Standardizing Measures, Revising Calendar (e.g., reinstallation of the Sinmun'go Petition Drum; distribution of standard cloth rulers (*p'obaek ch'ŏk*, 布帛尺) (these were first made in Sejong's reign, abolished later, but Right State Councilor Yu Ch'ok-ki petitioned to model and distribute copies stored in Samch'ŏk Prefecture); production of brass measuring containers (*yuhok*, 鍮斛), etc.). <23>
Yŏngjo reigned for fifty-two years and passed away at the advanced age of eighty-three (personal name Kŭm, Wŏllŭng tomb in Yangju). He was the longest-reigning and longest-lived monarch in Yi Dynasty history. However, in his later years, he committed some political errors and failed to discern the schemes of petty individuals, leading to the tragic incident of killing Crown Prince Changjo (i.e., Crown Prince Sado) (killed by being confined in a wooden rice chest, *twiju*, 木櫃(두주)).
Chŏngjo (San) was the son of Changjo. He was installed as Royal Grandson Heir (*wangseson*, 王世孫) in Yŏngjo's 25th year, directly succeeding the line of Crown Prince Hyojang (posthumously Chinjong Chae). Exceptionally intelligent from childhood and fond of learning, Yŏngjo greatly cherished him. In his 51st year, realizing he was over eighty and finding it difficult to manage state affairs, Yŏngjo had the Royal Grandson Heir act as regent (*taeri*, 代理). However, Left State Councilor Hong In-han, the maternal uncle of the Royal Grandson Heir's mother, Queen Kyŏng'ŭi (Lady Hong), was greedy, base, and unlearned. He had always been looked down upon by the Royal Grandson Heir and constantly harbored resentment. When the Royal Grandson Heir began acting as regent, Hong not only vigorously obstructed him but also colluded with Chŏng Hu-gyŏm (Yŏngjo's maternal grandson, son of Ilsŏng Hong Ch'i-dal), who held power in the palace, to undermine the Eastern Palace (Crown Prince's residence). Sim Sang-un also attached himself to Hong and Chŏng, attempting to harm those close to the Eastern Palace, but failed (Sim was exiled). After Yŏngjo passed away and Chŏngjo ascended the throne, Hong, Chŏng, and their faction were exiled or executed by poison.
As described above, Chŏngjo's position as Crown Prince was very precarious, but those who protected him diligently were palace official Hong Kuk-yŏng and Yi Chin-hyŏng, among others. Upon ascending the throne, Chŏngjo appointed Kuk-yŏng as Commander of the Royal Guard (*Sugwi Taejang*, 宿衛大將), leading the palace guard, and simultaneously granted him political authority. This was the beginning of the so-called *sedo* (勢道, In-law Politics). *Sedo* refers to wielding political power based on the monarch's entrustment. Once a monarch granted *sedo*, even if the person held a sinecure or low position, everyone from the household steward (*kajae*, 家宰) downwards had to obey his orders. (Even if a powerful minister manipulated politics by force, it wasn't *sedo* unless entrusted by the monarch). Therefore, all state affairs were first discussed with the *sedo* figure before being reported to the king, and the king decided after consulting the *sedo* figure. (Like today's regency system). However, Kuk-yŏng relied on this *sedo* status and wielded power arbitrarily, surpassing even Chŏng Hu-gyŏm. Consequently, people at the time called Hong "Great Hu-gyŏm" (*Tae Hugyŏm*, 大厚謙). But Chŏngjo could certainly not overlook his tyranny. Soon, he too was dismissed for crimes, and after Chŏngjo, maternal relatives eventually held *sedo* power. <24>
The circumstances of Chŏngjo's ascension are roughly as above. Continuing Yŏngjo's will, he strove for factional harmony and governance for the people, achieving numerous accomplishments during his twenty-four-year reign. The important ones are as follows:
1.  Achievements in Culture and Education: First, the Kyujanggak (奎章閣, Royal Library) was newly established in the inner garden, and Compiler-Redactors (*kŏmsŏgwan*, 檢書官) were appointed to store the writings and teachings of past masters. Second, wooden movable type was manufactured (modeled after the *Saengsaengja* type (生生字); in the 20th year, 160,000 large characters and 140,000 small characters were made, called *Chŏngnija* type (整理字)). Third, compilation of books: (*Ilsŏngnok*, 日省錄 - Daily Reflection Record; *Kukcho Pogam*, 國朝寶鑑 - Precious Mirror of the Dynasty; *Kaengjangnok*, 羹墻錄 - Records of Longing [for ancestors]; *Munwŏn Pobo*, 文苑黼黻 - Embroidered Ornaments of the Literary Garden; *Tongmun Hwigo*, 同文彙攷 - Compilation and Study of Identical Scripts [Sino-Korean relations]; *Hŭmhyul Chŏnch'ik*, 欽恤典則 - Rules for Careful Punishments; *Ch'ŏnse ryŏk*, 千歲曆 - Thousand Year Calendar; *Taejŏn T'ongp'yŏn*, 大典通編 - Comprehensive Grand Code (combining Kyŏngguk Taejŏn and Sok Taejŏn); *Muye Topo T'ongji*, 武藝圖譜通志 - Comprehensive Illustrated Manual of Martial Arts; *Hyejŏng Nyŏnp'yo*, 惠政年表 - Chronology of Benevolent Governance; *Myŏng'ŭirok*, 明義錄 - Record Clarifying Righteousness; *Sok Myŏng'ŭirok*, 續明義錄 - Supplement to the Record Clarifying Righteousness; *Chonju Hwip'yŏn*, 尊周彙編 - Compilation Honoring the Zhou Dynasty; *Chusŏ Paeksŏn*, 朱書百選 - Hundred Selections from Zhu Xi; *Ogyŏng P'yŏn*, 五經篇 - Chapters on the Five Classics; *Taehak Yu'ŭi*, 大學類義 - Classified Meanings of the Great Learning; *Hongjae Chŏnsŏ*, 弘齋全書 - Complete Works of Hongjae [Chŏngjo's pen name]; *Kyujanggak chi*, 奎章閣志 - Annals of the Kyujanggak; *Ch'ugwanji*, 秋官志 - Annals of the Ministry of Punishments; *Hongmun'gwanji*, 弘文舘志 - Annals of the Hongmun'gwan; *Kyujang Chŏnun*, 奎章全韵 - Complete Rhymes of the Kyujanggak; *Oryun Haengsiltok*, 五倫行實錄 - Illustrated Conduct of the Five Relationships, etc. (Many composed by the king himself).
2.  Achievements in Military Preparedness: First, the Martial Arts Detachment (*Muye Pyŏlgam*, 武藝別監) was established. (Initially, during Sŏnjo's reign, brave soldiers were selected to learn six martial arts techniques (*yukki*, 六技) from Ming General Xu Guowei (許國威). After Changjo became regent, twelve techniques (*sibi ki*, 十二技) were added. During Chŏngjo's time, six cavalry techniques (*kigi yuk*, 騎技六) were further added, totaling twenty-four techniques (*isipsa ki*, 二十四技). Proficient individuals were assigned to the Royal Guard and called *Muye Pyŏlgam*). Second, the Changyongyŏng (壯勇營, Capital Garrison) was established (attached to the Howich'ŏng, 扈衛廳, Escort Office). Third, the system of Changyong Outer Garrisons (*Changyong Oeyŏng Owi*, 壯勇外營五衛) was established, and Suwŏn Fortress was built.
3.  Relief for the People: (e.g., Ordering the Royal Infirmary (*Nae'ŭiwŏn*, 內醫院) and Medical Office (*Ŭigam*, 醫監) to treat sick people; purchasing private fields outside the city walls to establish cemeteries for the poor (like today's public cemeteries); distributing tribute money and cloth (*kongjŏn p'o*, 貢錢布) to the Sŏnhyech'ŏng (宣惠廳, Office of Tribute Management) and ordering payments in rice instead, etc.).
4.  Moral Cultivation: First, mediating factional strife (naming his bedchamber *Tangtang P'yŏngp'yŏngsil*, 蕩蕩平平室 - Vast and Even Room, to signify harmony). Second, prohibiting women's elaborate wigs (*kadol*, 加髢) and shamans from entering the capital; printing regulations (*chŏlmok*, 節目) banning patterned silk (*mundan*, 紋緞) to curb luxury. Third, banning foreign books to control ideology (at that time, Catholic books were imported from China, so they were banned as heterodoxy, *chwado*, 左道). Fourth, strictly prohibiting encroachment on provincial towns by various palace bureaus and offices (*kak kungbang tosŏ*, 各宮房圖署) and predatory lending by palace functionaries (*naesa pangch'ae*, 內司放債). <25>
Additionally, Chŏngjo standardized the Map of the Eight Provinces (*P'alto Yŏdo*, 八道輿圖) based on Hanyang's meridian, measured the North Pole altitude for each provincial town to determine seasonal terms (*chŏlgi*, 節氣) and time for each province. He also performed rites for and honored past sages and loyalists (e.g., rites for Mun Ik-chŏm, Ch'a Osan Ch'ŏllo, honoring the Six Martyred Ministers) and appointed their descendants. Furthermore, particularly noteworthy during Chŏngjo's era are Yi Kŭng-ik's authorship of the *Yŏllyŏsil Kisul* (燃藜室記述, Narratives from Yŏllyŏsil), Pak Chi-wŏn's authorship of agricultural texts (*nongsŏ*, 農書) and the *Yŏrha Ilgi* (熱河日記, Jehol Diary), and the commissioning of palace scholar Hong Yang-ho to compile the *Hŭngwang Chosŭng* (興王肇乘, Records of Dynastic Founding) and the *Ch'a Osanjip* (車五山集, Collected Works of Ch'a Osan).

Sunjo, Hŏnjong, Ch'ŏlchong Reigns: Rampant Maternal Relatives
Chŏngjo passed away after twenty-four years on the throne in the Kyŏngsin year at the age of forty-nine (Kŏllŭng tomb at Hwasan, Suwŏn). Sunjo ascended the throne, only eleven years old at the time. Vice Director (*Chisa*, 知事) Kim Cho-sun assisted the young ruler according to the late king's will, and Queen Dowager Chŏngsun (Yŏngjo's consort) acted as regent. Soon, Cho-sun's daughter became queen, and Queen Dowager Chŏngsun returned power. From this point, the power of maternal relatives gradually grew. Although the rampancy of Yi Dynasty maternal relatives began, as mentioned earlier, at the start of the 12th monarch Myŏngjong's reign, when the king was young, Grand Queen Dowager Munjŏng Yun acted as regent, and her maternal uncle Yun Wŏn-hyŏng wielded power, this phenomenon had almost disappeared in subsequent reigns after Wŏn-hyŏng's fall. Now, it reared its head again. They formed factions and competed for power. State affairs were neglected, discipline slackened, and the national fortune revived by Yŏngjo and Chŏngjo gradually declined and stagnated. Added to this, the evils of private academies (*sŏwŏn*, 書院) and local functionaries (*isŏ*, 吏胥) reached extremes. The people could not live in peace and thought of rebellion. Seizing this opportunity, a major rebellion broke out in the Kwansŏ region (P'yŏngan province) - the famous Hong Kyŏng-nae Rebellion of the 12th year of Sunjo, Imsin. This rebellion was suppressed before long, and its details are discussed elsewhere and omitted here, but its motive stemmed entirely from the evils of maternal relatives and factional strife.
It was the 27th year of Sunjo. The king had the Crown Prince (Ikchong Tae) act as regent. The Crown Prince was benevolent, intelligent, and loved learning, acclaimed as a wise ruler-to-be. Unfortunately, in the 30th year, Kyŏng'in, he passed away prematurely at the young age of twenty-two. The king had no choice but to resume governing until his own death. Afterwards, Hŏnjong ascended the throne (son of the Crown Prince, Hwan). He was only eight years old, so Grand Queen Dowager Sunwŏn of the Kim clan (Sunjo's consort) acted as regent, and his mother, Queen Dowager Cho, became Empress Dowager (*Hwangt'aehu*, 皇太后). Political power <26> always resided with the Queen Mother's maternal relatives. (The Queen Mother was the daughter of Lord Yŏngdŏnnyŏng Cho Man-yŏng, so her younger brother In-yŏng became Chief State Councilor). Hŏnjong reigned for fifteen years and also died young at twenty-three without an heir. Grand Queen Dowager Sunwŏn convened the ministers to discuss succession. Chief State Councilor Chŏng Wŏn-yong proposed enthroning the third son (later Ch'ŏlchong) of Prince Chŏn'gye (Hwang, son of Prince Ŭnŏn P'yon, Yŏngjo's grandson). Left State Councilor Kwŏn Ton-in proposed enthroning Prince Yi Ha-jŏn (descendant of Prince Tŏkhŭng, Chungjong's seventh son). Opinions differed. Wŏn-yong, acting on Grand Queen Dowager Sunwŏn's inner directive, brought Ch'ŏlchong from Kanghwa Island. At that time, Prince Chŏn'gye had already died, and the family was extremely poor, personally farming and weaving shoes (*ch'ŏk*, 屨). Seeing Wŏn-yong arrive, the entire household was alarmed and dared not set out. Wŏn-yong earnestly conveyed the Empress Dowager's order and immediately escorted him for enthronement. This was Ch'ŏlchong (Pyŏn), aged nineteen at the time.
Early in Ch'ŏlchong's reign, Grand Queen Dowager Sunwŏn continued to rule as regent. However, after Ch'ŏlchong married the daughter of Kim Mun-gŭn, made her queen, enfeoffed Mun-gŭn as Prince Yŏng'ŭn Puwŏn'gun, and had him assist in major state affairs, all matters came to be decided by Mun-gŭn. Consequently, Mun-gŭn's nephew Kim Pyŏng-guk became Training Commander, Kim Pyŏng-hak became Grand Academician, Kim Pyŏng-ik became Left Vice Councilor (*Chwach'ansŏng*, 左贊成), his maternal nephew Nam Pyŏng-ch'ŏl became Royal Secretary (*Sŭngji*, 承旨), and his son Pyŏng-p'il became Attendant (*Taegyo*, 待敎). They held power both inside and outside the court. The court at that time felt like the Kim clan's domain. (Pyŏng-ch'ŏl was learned, skilled in writing, and proficient in mathematics. Not only did Mun-gŭn particularly favor him, but Ch'ŏlchong also showed him favor. His influence naturally rivaled that of the other Kims. Kim Pyŏng-ik grew jealous and had him sent out as Chŏlla Provincial Observer. Pyŏng-ch'ŏl was unhappy. Later, when a secret royal inspector (*amhaengŏsa*, 暗行御史) was touring the province and came to the provincial office (*kamyŏng*, 監營) to investigate the magistrate's aide (*p'an'gwan*, 判官), he first arrested and interrogated his clerks. Pyŏng-ch'ŏl became furious and ordered his subordinates to beat up the inspector. The inspector fled in fear over the wall. The court dismissed Pyŏng-ch'ŏl but soon recalled him as Direct Academician (*chikchehak*, 直提學)).
Ch'ŏlchong had five sons and six daughters, but all died young except for one daughter (married Pak Yŏng-hyo). The king wished to select a wise person from the royal clan as Crown Prince. However, due to power struggles among the Kims, a decision was not easily reached. Moreover, some even plotted to eliminate reputable members of the royal family to eradicate future trouble. Just then, someone claimed treason was being plotted. During the investigation, Prince Yi Ha-jŏn was implicated. The ringleader was torn limb from limb (*ch'ayŏl*, 車裂), and Ha-jŏn was also executed by poison. This was because, early in Ch'ŏlchong's reign, Kwŏn Ton-in had proposed Ha-jŏn for succession, making the Kims wary and wanting to eliminate him through false charges. In reality, he was <27> innocent and unjustly wronged. Additionally, Prince Kyŏngp'yŏng (Yi Uk) was exiled to Cheju Island under the pretext of greedy and tyrannical behavior. The power of the Kims at that time was truly absolute and unparalleled. All royal relatives merely held their breath, fearing disaster would befall them. Amidst such chaotic state administration, the Three Administrations (*samjŏng*, 三政) (land tax, military service registry, grain loan system) became even more disordered, causing immense hardship. Furthermore, famine and major epidemics occurred annually. In the 2nd month of Ch'ŏlchong's 13th year, several thousand residents of Chinju rose up, destroying government offices in a major popular disturbance (*minyo*, 民擾). In the summer, 4th month of the same year, a popular disturbance occurred in Iksan, North Chŏlla, followed by disturbances in Kaenyŏng, North Kyŏngsang, and Hamp'yŏng, South Chŏlla. The king issued an edict establishing the Samjŏngch'ŏng (三政廳, Office for the Three Administrations) to discuss remedies, but it remained mere paperwork, and the people were utterly exhausted.
However, noteworthy here are the spread of Catholicism (*Ch'ŏnjugyo*, 天主敎) and the founding of Tonghak (東學, Eastern Learning). Catholicism's entry into Chosŏn is said to have occurred during the Imjin War under Sŏnjo, when the Portuguese missionary Cespedes (세스페데스) accompanied the Japanese army and proselytized. However, its actual spread within the country began in the 7th year of Chŏngjo, when Yi Pyŏk, Yi Sŭng-hun, and others went to Beijing (as part of the winter solstice embassy) and brought back Christianity. Later, in the 12th month of Chŏngjo's 18th year, Zhou Wenmo (周文謨), a native of Suzhou, China, entered secretly in disguise and spread the religion. As followers became numerous in the Ch'ungch'ŏng region, in the 1st year of Sunjo, believer Hwang Sa-yŏng was arrested and tried for high treason (because Hwang had spoken of borrowing foreign power to spread the faith). Zhou Wenmo was also identified as the ringleader and beheaded. Yi Ka-hwan, Yi Sŭng-hun, Chŏng Yak-chong (丁若鍾 error - likely Yak-yong's brother Yak-chong) were all executed. Yak-chong's elder brother Yak-chŏn and younger brother Yak-yong were exiled to Kangjin. While believers were thus persecuted and prohibitive laws became stricter, the followers gradually increased. In the 31st year of Sunjo, Bruguière (리유겔), a Frenchman and Vicar Apostolic of Siam, reached Manchuria via Xiamen, China, intending to enter Chosŏn, but died of illness before succeeding. Later, in the 12th month of the 2nd year of Hŏnjong, French missionary Maubant (모반) entered Ŭiju with five Korean believers and proselytized. Subsequently, Chastan (챠스단) and Imbert (암벨) came to the capital, met Maubant, and secretly resided at the home of Chŏng Ha-sang (son of Chŏng Yak-chong) to propagate the faith. In the 5th year of Hŏnjong, they were discovered. Not only the three missionaries mentioned above, but also Yu Chip-kil, Chŏng Ha-sang, and Cho Sin-ch'ŏl were executed, and even their property was confiscated. However, by the beginning of Ch'ŏlchong's reign, enforcement against Western Learning (*Sŏgyo*, 西敎) became considerably lenient. Missionaries Maistre (메이스롤), Berneux (베루누), and Aumetre (오-＜28＞메롤) entered the country, and the number of followers increased temporarily. This was because the legal net had loosened at the time, and enforcement was not as strict as before. (Additionally, in the 31st year of Sunjo, a British ship anchored at Kodae Island in Hongju, requesting to trade Western cloth, telescopes, etc., for Chosŏn local products, but was refused. Also, in the 12th month of the 11th year of Hŏnjong, British and French ships anchored, conducted surveys, and sent letters, but all were rejected).
Furthermore, Tonghak was founded on the 5th day of the 4th month of the 11th year of Ch'ŏlchong, Kyŏngsin, by Ch'oe Che-u of Kyŏngju. Its followers reached several hundred thousand at one point. In the 14th year, Kyehae, he was arrested for heterodoxy (*chwado*, 左道) and executed in the 3rd month of the following year, Kapcha. This was Master Suun (水雲先生), the first leader of what is now Ch'ŏndogyo (天道敎).

The Kwangmu Era, Full of Troubles and Hardships
Ch'ŏlchong passed away after fourteen years on the throne (age 32, Hŭirŭng tomb in Koyang). Having no heir, Queen Dowager Sinjŏng Cho (趙人妃, Hŏnjong's mother) convened the ministers and proposed enthroning the second son of Prince Hŭngsŏn (Haŭng). This was Emperor Kojong. Chief State Councilor Kim Chwa-gŭn and Lord Yŏngdonnyŏng Kim Hŭng-gŭn disagreed, saying, "The state has never had a living Daewongun (大院君, Prince of the Great Court). If Prince Hŭngsŏn relies on the dignity of being the father of the king (*t'aesangwang*, 太上王 - technically 'retired king', but used here for king's father) and alters state administration, the country will be unstable." Discussion remained unresolved. Then, Queen Dowager Hong (Hŏnjong's consort), Councilor Cho Tu-sun, and Minister Hong Sun-mok (head of Queen Hong's clan) supported the new king. Former Chief State Councilor Chŏng Wŏn-yong was appointed Wŏnsang (院相, regent overseeing affairs after a king's death). After bringing in the new king, Queen Dowager Cho took his hand, entered the inner palace, set up the throne, and summoned the ministers behind the screen (*suryŏm*, 垂簾). She issued an unannounced decree: "The succeeding king continues the line of Ikchong," and proclaimed it domestically and abroad. The ministers were astonished but dared not object, merely obeying. The king ascended the throne, succeeding Ikchong's line, at age twelve. The time was the 13th day of the 12th month of Kyehae. (At that time, Queen Dowager Kim, Ch'ŏlchong's consort, was in mourning. Moreover, since the Kim clan was powerful, it was believed the new king would naturally succeed Ch'ŏlchong's line, but this failed). <29>
After the king's ascension, Queen Cho was honored as Grand Queen Dowager (*Tae Wang Taehu*, 大王太后), Queen Hong as Queen Dowager (*Wang Taehu*, 王太后), and Queen Kim as Dowager Queen (*Taehu*, 太后). Prince Hŭngsŏn was enfeoffed as Daewongun, and his wife Lady Min as Pudae Bu'in (府大夫人, Grand Internal Princess Consort). Prince Hŭngsŏn's residence was named Unhyŏn Palace. By decree of Queen Dowager Cho, the Daewongun was treated with the etiquette due to a non-subject (*pusin chi rye*, 不臣之禮), and the king visited Unhyŏn Palace once at the beginning of each month. This was intended to prevent the Daewongun from interfering in state affairs. However, soon, based on Cho Tu-sun's proposal and by Queen Dowager Cho's decree, the Daewongun was made to assist in major state affairs. Simultaneously, all officials were ordered to follow the Daewongun's directives. Soldiers from the Three Army Camps (*Samgunyŏng*, 三軍營) were selected to guard him. He rode in a blue sedan chair (*namyo*, 籃輿) entering and exiting the palace gates. Political power thus fell into the Daewongun's hands, and the power of the Kim clan, rampant for many years, instantly collapsed.
◇ Daewongun's Rise to Power and His Achievements: The circumstances of Emperor Kojong's ascension are roughly as described. After becoming regent, the Daewongun displayed his unique, bold, and decisive policies. He first carried out dismissals and appointments of high officials (Cho Tu-sun as Chief Councilor, Kim Pyŏng-hak as Right Councilor, Yi Ŭi-ik, Chŏng Ki-se, Kim Se-gyun as Ministers of Personnel, War, and Revenue; Yi Sŭng-bo as Sŏnhye Tangsang; Yi Kyŏng-ha as Training Commander; Yi Chang-yŏm as Kŭmwiyŏng Commander; Yi Kyŏng-u as Ŏyŏngch'ŏng Commander; Yi Pang-hyŏn as Ch'ongyungsa; Sin Myŏng-sun as Right P'odoch'ŏng Commander). He suppressed the long-entrenched clan politics (*pŏljok chŏngch'i*, 閥族政治), advocated meritocracy, appointed people from the four factions (*sasaek*, 四色), northwesterners, and Kaesŏng people equally. He rebuilt Kyŏngbok Palace (started Ŭlch'uk, completed Chŏngmyo). He demolished private academies (*sŏwŏn*) and local shrines (*hyangsa*, 鄕祠), the hotbeds of disputes among yangban scholars (the Mandongmyo shrine was also demolished at this time). He revived the State Council (政府) and the Three Army Command (三軍府). He compiled genealogies and legal codes (*Sŏnwŏn Poryak*, 璿源譜略 - Outline Genealogy of the Royal Family; *Ch'ŏlchong Sillok*, 哲宗實錄 - Veritable Records of King Cheoljong; *Taejŏn Hoet'ong*, 大典會通 - Comprehensive Collection of Grand Codes; *Yukchŏn Chorye*, 六典條例 - Regulations of the Six Codes). He implemented the household cloth tax law (*hop'obŏp*, 戶布法) (at the time, yangban customarily did not pay taxes, so it was collected under slave names). He also reorganized taxes on foreign goods imported through borders like Ŭiju and Tongnae, and the local grain loan system (*sahwanjedo*, 社還制度) to strengthen state finances. (During the Kyŏngbok Palace construction in Pyŏng'in, *tangbaekchŏn* (當百錢, 100-cash coin) was issued, and in Chŏngmyo, Qing currency was used). Also, in Pyŏng'in, due to the issue of massacring over ten foreign missionaries and tens of thousands of Korean believers, French warships attacked Kanghwa, causing the so-called "Western Disturbance" (*Yangyo*, 洋擾). He mobilized brave soldiers from the eight provinces and repelled them. In Muchin, Magistrate Pak Kyu-su destroyed the American ship General Sherman (*syamanho*, 샤만號) in P'yŏngyang. Consequently, in the 8th year, Sinmi, five American warships came demanding accountability, causing the so-called "Sinmi Yangyo" (辛未洋擾, Western Disturbance of 1871) (at that time, Commander O Chae-yŏn and his brother fought and died). This too was repelled. The Daewongun's power at that time truly shook both domestic and foreign spheres. No one dared <30> to oppose him, and the royal authority, weakened since the Sunjo and Ch'ŏlchong reigns, was expanded again.
◇ Queen Min's Ascendancy and the Political Situation: However, behind the scenes of the Daewongun's active stage, a major political rival lay hidden: Empress Myeongseong of the Min clan, known to all. This Queen Min was the daughter of Min Ch'i-rok. She had a relationship as adopted siblings with Min Sŭng-ho, the actual younger brother of the Daewongun's wife, Lady Min. The Pudae Bu'in arranged her marriage, and she was formally installed as Queen Consort in the 3rd year of Emperor Kojong's reign at the tender age of sixteen. (Min Ch'i-rok had only one daughter from his principal wife and no sons, so he adopted Min Sŭng-ho, son of his clan relative Min Ch'i-gu, as his heir; Sŭng-ho was the Pudae Bu'in's actual younger brother). She was naturally sharp-witted and well-versed in literature and history. Not only Emperor Kojong, but also the various Queen Dowagers and the Pudae Bu'in favored her. However, six years after entering the palace, she remained childless (having borne one son and one daughter, both dying young). Meanwhile, a court lady, Yi, gave birth to a son (Prince Wanhwa, later allegedly poisoned by Queen Min). The Daewongun particularly cherished this child and intended to install him as Crown Prince (this was the first source of friction between the Daewongun and Queen Min). Later, in Kapsul, the Crown Prince (Emperor Sunjong) was born. In Ŭlhae, he was formally installed as Crown Prince. The previous year, Kye'yu, due to Emperor Kojong reaching maturity and petitions from Ch'oe Ik-hyŏn and other scholars opposing the Daewongun's misrule, the Daewongun retired from the political scene. (At that time, the Daewongun, angered, exiled Ch'oe Ik-hyŏn to Cheju, but returned power on the advice of State Councilor Pak Kyu-su). The situation changed abruptly, and Queen Min came to wield power. Queen Min immediately changed the cabinet, appointing Yi Yu-wŏn as Chief Councilor, Yi Ch'oe-ŭng as Left Councilor, Kim Pyŏng-guk as Right Councilor, Min Kyu-ho as Minister of Personnel and Commander of the Muwiso (武衛所, Military Guard Directorate). She released Ch'oe Ik-hyŏn and restored the Mandongmyo shrine to appease the scholars. Additionally, Min Kyŏm-ho, Min T'ae-ho, Min Yŏng-mok, Min Sŭng-ho, etc., were all placed in key positions. The royal authority, briefly restored during the Daewongun's era, fell back into the hands of maternal relatives. (In Kapsul, a box containing explosives was delivered to Min Sŭng-ho's house. When Min opened it, Sŭng-ho, his son, his mother, and his wife died in the explosion. There was also an arson attempt at Yi Ch'oe-ŭng's house. People said the Daewongun instigated it). Queen Min not only reformed domestic politics but also reversed the Daewongun's previous policy of seclusion and expelling foreigners (*swaguk yang'i*, 鎖國攘夷). In Pyŏngja, she concluded the Treaty of Amity with Japan. (Previously, when the Japanese warship Un'yō (雲揚號) was returning from China and anchored at the mouth of the Han River, Kanghwa soldiers fired upon it. Japan sent Ambassador Kuroda Kiyotaka and Vice-Ambassador Inoue Kaoru to negotiate with the Chosŏn government, resulting in this treaty). <31> Following this treaty, Pusan port was opened in Kimyo. In Kyŏngjin, Envoy Kim Hong-jip was dispatched. In Sinha, Pak Chŏng-yang, Cho Pyŏng-jik, Ŏ Yun-jung, and Hong Yŏng-sik were sent to tour Japan. Japanese envoys also visited frequently. In Imo, Japanese Army Lieutenant Horimoto Reizō was invited to train the guards. Relations with Japan became very close. However, officials and scholars mostly distrusted Japan. Yi Man-son, Ch'oe Ik-hyŏn, and others strongly opposed it. The Daewongun, after losing power, always disliked the Enlightenment Party (*Kaehwadang*, 開化黨). At the same time, the tyranny of Queen Min and her relatives was severe, leading many people to hope for the Daewongun's return to power.
Then, in Imo, soldiers' rations were unpaid for several months, leading to a military mutiny (*pyŏngjol'ŭi nan*, 兵卒의 亂). They killed key officials like Yi Ch'oe-ŭng, Min Kyŏm-ho, Kim Po-hyŏn, and Min Ch'ang-sik. They also attacked the Japanese legation, massacred Japanese residents and Horimoto, etc., and sought to harm Queen Min. The Queen disguised herself and fled to Min Ŭng-sik's house in Changhowŏn, Ch'ungju (no one knew this at the time). Japanese Minister Hanabusa Yoshitada and others fled to Inch'ŏn. (The so-called Imo Kullan, 壬午軍亂, Military Mutiny of 1882). At this time, the Daewongun heard of the upheaval, rushed into the palace, quelled the riot, abolished the Muwi and Chang'ŏ camps, and reinstated the old Training (Hullyŏn), Royal Guard (Kŭmwi), and [Ŏ]yŏng camps. He announced the Queen's death and held a funeral with her clothes, seemingly restoring his power across the land.
However, Kim Yun-sik, then on a mission to Qing China, heard of the mutiny in Tianjin and requested aid from Li Hongzhang. Li Hongzhang, originally unwilling to let Chosŏn be independent, saw this as a perfect opportunity for intervention. Under the pretext of quelling internal disorder, he ordered Admiral Wu Changqing (吳長慶) to lead 5,000 land and sea troops to the capital. Japan also sent Hanabusa Yoshitada with four warships and one army battalion to Inch'ŏn. The landing of both Qing and Japanese troops in Chosŏn cleverly occurred on the same day. A few days later, Minister Hanabusa had an audience with the Emperor and demanded several conditions. Due to the Daewongun's opposition, negotiations dragged on for days without resolution. Then, on the 15th day of the 7th month, the Daewongun was suddenly abducted by Qing troops and sent under escort to [Baoding]. (Under the pretext that the Daewongun instigated the Imo Mutiny). The situation turned sharply. Japan's demands were immediately accepted. Yi Yu-wŏn and Kim Hong-jip became plenipotentiaries, and on the 17th day of the 7th month, a treaty was finally concluded with Japan - the Chemulp'o Treaty (濟物浦條約). (Indemnity of 500,000 yen, dispatch of an apology mission, <32> punishment of mutiny leaders, stationing of legation guards, etc.). According to this treaty, Yi Kyŏng-ha and Sin Chŏng-hŭi were immediately dismissed. The Hullyŏn Togam (訓練都監, Military Training Command) was abolished. Pak Yŏng-hyo was dispatched to Japan as Ambassador, with Kim Man-sik as Vice-Ambassador (Sŏ Kwang-bŏm and Kim Ok-kyun accompanied them at that time). The Queen was brought back from Ch'ungju. The political situation thus took another sudden turn.
However, Qing China still stationed large forces under Wu Changqing and Yuan Shikai, interfering in internal affairs with increasing arrogance. Moreover, Min T'ae-ho and Min Yŏng-ik held power, and state administration deteriorated daily. Young members of the Independence Party (*Tongniptang*, 獨立黨), Kim Ok-kyun, Pak Yŏng-hyo, and others, were greatly angered and planned a major revolution. After consulting with the Japanese minister, in the 10th month of Kapsin, using the Post Office opening banquet as an opportunity, they conspired with Sŏ Kwang-bŏm, Hong Yŏng-sik, Sŏ Chae-p'il, Pyŏn Su, Sin Pok-mo, and others. They wounded Min Yŏng-ik and others. Then, using a forged order, they brought in Japanese troops to guard the palace. They executed members of the conservative faction (*Sugudang*, 守舊黨) including Min Yŏng-mok, Min T'ae-ho, Han Kyu-jik, Yun T'ae-jun, Yi Cho-yŏn, and Cho Yŏng-ha. They then formed a cabinet: Hong Yŏng-sik as Right State Councilor, Kim Ok-kyun as Vice Minister of Revenue, Pak Yŏng-hyo as Commander of Front and Rear Camps, Sŏ Kwang-bŏm simultaneously Commander of Left and Right Camps, and Sŏ Chae-p'il as Front Camp Commander (*Chŏnyŏng Chŏngnyŏng*, 前營正領). For a moment, the world belonged to the Independence Party. However, the conservative faction again requested protection from Yuan Shikai, who led large forces into the palace. Chosŏn's Left and Right Camp soldiers supported them from behind, engaging the Japanese troops simultaneously. The outnumbered Japanese forces retreated outside the city walls, and Kim Ok-kyun's faction eventually fled to Japan (at that time, the Emperor took refuge at the Pukkwanwangmyo shrine). This was the so-called Kapsin Coup (甲申十月의 變, Incident of the 10th Month, Kapsin year).
Afterwards, maternal relatives like Min Ŭng-sik, Min Yŏng-hwan, Min Yŏng-jun, etc., returned to the political scene. The conservative faction regained its strength. Japanese and Qing troops both withdrew according to the Treaty of Tianjin (乙酉 天津條約) in Ŭlyu. Later, in Muja, a commercial treaty was concluded with Russia. In Kich'uk, the Korea-Japan Fishery Agreement (*Cho-Il T'ong'ŏ Changjŏng*, 朝日通漁章程) was established. In Imjin, the Korea-Austria Treaty of Amity and Commerce (*Han-O Suho T'ongsang Choyak*, 韓墺修好通商條約) was concluded. In Kyesa, Hong Chong-u assassinated Kim Ok-kyun in Shanghai. In Kap'o, Chŏn Pong-jun's faction started the Tonghak Rebellion (*Tonghak nan*, 東學亂) in Kobu, leading to the Sino-Japanese War. As a result, the Treaty of Shimonoseki (*Magwan Choyak*, 馬關條約) was concluded in Ŭlmi, declaring Chosŏn an independent nation to the world. The Eight Ministries (*P'al Amun*, 八衙門) system revised in Kap'o was changed to Seven Ministries (*Ch'il Amun*, 七衙門). In the 1st month of the same year, the Kim Hong-jip cabinet was formed. On the 20th day of the 8th month, [Japanese] soldiers violated the palace, Queen Min was assassinated, and the Daewongun re-entered the palace (having returned from Qing earlier). The following year, Pyŏngsin, <33> the era name was changed to Kŏnyang (建陽, Establishing Yang). In the 2nd month, the Emperor and Crown Prince, supported by the pro-Russian faction, fled to the Russian Legation (*Ro Konggwan*, 露公舘). Kim Hong-jip's cabinet faction was killed by the pro-Russian faction led by Yi Pŏm-jin. In the 8th month of Chŏngyu, the country's name was changed to Taehan (大韓, Great Han), and the era name was changed to Kwangmu (光武, Martial Brilliance). In the [3rd] year, Kihae, the Korea-Qing Commercial Treaty (*Han-Ch'ŏng T'ongsang Choyak*, 韓淸通商條約) was concluded. In the 5th year, Sinch'uk, the Korea-Belgium Commercial Treaty (*Han-Pi T'ongsang Choyak*, 韓比通商條約) was concluded. In the 6th year, the Korea-Denmark Commercial Treaty (*Han-Paek T'ongsang Choyak*, 韓白通商條約) was concluded. On the 23rd day of the 1st month of the 8th year, Kapchin, the Korea-Japan Protocol (*Han-Il Ŭijŏngsŏ*, 韓日議定書) was signed. On the 7th day of the 11th month of the 9th year, Ŭlsa, the new Korea-Japan Agreement (the so-called Protectorate Treaty of Five Articles, 保護五條約) was concluded. Min Yŏng-hwan and four or five other figures martyred themselves. On the 8th day of the 7th month of the 10th year, Chŏngmi, due to connection with the Hague Incident (*Haeya Sakŏn*, 海牙事件), the Emperor abdicated the throne and became Emperor Emeritus (*T'aesang Hwangje*, 太上皇). In any case, this Kwangmu era was the time of greatest hardship and difficulty for Yi Dynasty Chosŏn. (Events after the Kapsin Coup are difficult to discuss in detail, so only the main points are recorded).

Alas, the Yunghŭi Reign of the Twenty-Seventh Generation
Emperor Yunghŭi (隆熙皇帝) was the last emperor of the Yi Dynasty. He received the throne on the 18th day of the 7th month of the 10th year of Kwangmu (i.e., 1st year of Yunghŭi). On the 13th day of the 8th month, the era name was changed to Yunghŭi (隆熙, Prosperous Felicity). After only four years, on the 22nd day of the 8th month of Kyŏngsul, the Japan-Korea Annexation Treaty (*Il-Han Hapaeng Choyak*, 日韓合倂條約) was concluded. On the 29th day of the same month, he finally issued the edict of abdication (*yangguk*, 讓國). The life story of this emperor and the circumstances surrounding the conclusion of the annexation treaty are already well remembered by the general public, so I do not wish to repeat them needlessly. I will merely briefly introduce the text of the treaty at that time and lay down my pen.
Japan-Korea Annexation Treaty Text
Article 1
His Majesty the Emperor of Korea makes complete and permanent cession to His Majesty the Emperor of Japan of all rights of sovereignty over the whole of Korea.
Article 2
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan accepts the cession mentioned in the preceding article and consents to the complete annexation of Korea to the Empire of Japan.
Article 3
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan will accord to Their Majesties the Emperor and Emperor Emeritus of Korea and His Imperial Highness the Crown Prince, and their Consorts and Heirs, such titles, dignity, and honour <34> as are appropriate to their respective ranks, and sufficient annual grants will be made for the maintenance of such titles, dignity and honour.
Article 4
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan will also accord appropriate honour and treatment to the members of the Imperial House of Korea and their heirs other than those mentioned in the preceding article, and the funds necessary for the maintenance of such honour and treatment will be granted.
Article 5
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan will confer peerages and monetary grants upon those Koreans who, on account of meritorious services, are regarded as deserving such special recognition.
Article 6
In consequence of the aforesaid annexation the Government of Japan assume the entire government and administration of Korea, and undertake to afford full protection for the persons and property of Koreans obeying the laws there in force, and
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제70호
발행일	1926년 06월 01일
기사제목	回顧二十七歷代
필자	車相瓚
기사형태	논설

回顧二十七歷代
						車相瓚
萬事初創인 太祖朝
李太祖가 卽位하기는 距今 五百三十四年前 壬申 七月 十六日이오(檀紀三七二五) 國號를 朝鮮이라 稱하기는 그 翌年 癸酉부터엿다. 그의 登極顚末은 別題로 論及하얏슴으로 다시 말치 안커니와 그 時代는 아즉 初創의 時期인 까닭에 一般制度文物이 대개 高麗와 다름이 업섯다. 그러나 革命이 革命인 故로 內治外交가 국면을 一新한 것이 만핫다. 즉 內治로는 爲先 高麗의 積弊되던 佛敎와 武臣을 抑壓하기 爲하야 學田을 置하고 文廟를 設하야(戊寅) 儒敎를 振興시키는 同時에 諸寺刹에 屬한 土地를 軍資에 附하며 兵符制를 設하야 武臣의 自由動兵을 禁하고 經濟六典을 編纂(乙亥)하며 漢陽에 遷都(五年丙子)하야 都城을 築하얏고 外交로는 明에 趙胖韓尙質을 送하야 修好條約을 結하고 東으로 對馬島를 征討하며 北으로 女眞을 招安하고(六年丁未) 琉球와 暹羅諸國은 臣이라 稱하야 方物을 獻하얏다. 그러나 在位 僅七年에 易儲問題로 骨肉의 變이 起하야 功臣 鄭道傳, 南誾 等과 兩子 芳碩 芳蕃이 太宗에게 被殺하매 太祖는 遂히 遜位하고 一時 咸興에 退居하얏다가 다지 還宮하야 十年間 上王位에 在하다가 七十四歲의 高齡으로 崩御하야 楊州 險岩山(健元陵)에 葬하얏다. 그리고 그 때의 相臣으로는 裵克廉, 趙浚, 金士衡, 鄭道傳, 權仲和, 沈德符, 柳曼殊 等 諸人이니 其中 柳曼殊는 특히 巫女를 嚴禁하야 或은 放逐 或은 殺戮하얏슴으로 지금까지 巫堂이 굿을 할 때에 얼하만수 또는 얼하大臣이라고 한다. (在下＜4＞ 李太祖 建國百話 參照)

改革期에 入한 定宗朝
定宗 (諱 曔 卽 太祖 第二子 永安大君 芳果)은 太祖에게 受禪한 後 僅히 二年만에 其弟 太宗에게 또 禪位한 故로 特別한 大治績은 업섯다. 그러나 시기가 革新의 際에 在하얏슴으로 多少 可記할 者가 잇스니 第一은  官制를 改正하야 太祖時에 置하얏던 都評議使司를 議政府라하고 中樞院을 義興三軍府라 稱하얏스며(兩府가 此時 始設) 第二는 兵制를 改革하야 麗朝末期에 盛行하던 權臣의 私兵을 罷하야 三軍府에 屬케 하고, 第三은 金融과 經濟制度를 一新케하야 楮幣를 造하고 市廛을 新設하며(自惠政橋至昌德宮洞口) 第四는 敎育制度를 變更하야 京城內 東, 西, 中, 南, 北 五部에 學校를 各設하고 五部學堂이라 稱하며(後 世宗時에 北部學堂을 廢止하고 四部만 置함.) 集賢殿을 置하고(復 改名 寶文閣) 第五는 刑罰을 寬히 하야 濫刑을 禁하얏다. 其外에 國際上으로는 琉球國王 察度가 使를 遣하야 箋을 奉하고 北狄兀狄哈이 來朝하고 西北面을 侵하던 倭寇가 來服하얏다. 그러나 朴苞의 煽動으로 弟 懷安大君 芳幹의 亂이 起하야 또한 骨肉의 變이 有함을 免치 못하얏다. 그리고 相臣은 成石璘, 李舒, 閔霽, 河崙 등이며 上王位에 在하기는 十九年으로 六十三歲에 昇遐하야 豊德興敎洞(厚陵)에 葬하얏다.

整頓時代의 太宗朝
李朝의 諸般制度와 基礎는 이 太宗의 시대에 와서 완전히 形成되고 整頓되엿다. 원래 太宗은 太祖의 第五男(靖安大君 芳遠)으로 諸兄弟中(凡八兄弟) 가장 英邁하고 智畧과 政見이 多하야 태조의 창업에도 其功이 最多하얏고 建國後 高麗王族과 及 遺臣 處置에도 전혀 이 太宗이 계획하얏스며 또 芳碩 芳蕃 芳幹 등 三兄弟도 이 太宗이＜5＞ 殺戮한 故로 後世의 非難을 免치 못한다. 그러나 李朝의 王家로 보던지 朝鮮의 政治上 及 文化上으로 보면 그의 功獻이 多大하다고 안이 할 수 업다. 이제 그 事業의 重要한 者를 擧하면
元年 辛巳에는 門下府(麗朝時 一般 行政을 掌하던 官府)를 罷하야 議政府에 合하고 定宗時에 造한 楮幣를 施行하얏스며 二年 壬午에는 申聞鼓를 設하야 人民의 情을 通하게 하고 又 號牌法을 실행하야 戶口를 明白히 하얏스며 三年 癸未에 鑄字所를 置하고 李稷
朴錫命 等으로 銅製活字 數十萬을 鑄하얏스니 此는 世界 初發明의 活字로 朝鮮文化 發展上에 一大  恩賜라 可謂하겟고 五年 乙酉에는 八道의 田地를 改量하고
八年 戊子에는 武科를 始設하야 文科와 幷히 龍虎榜이라 稱하고 또 黃喜의 言에 從하야 婦女의 改嫁를 禁하고 再嫁子孫은 仕版에 置치 안케하얏다. 이것은 현재 眼目으로 보면 물론  惡制度이나 麗末이래 紊亂하던 風紀를 肅淸하고 또 其時 新興하는 儒敎의 倫理를 獎勵함에는 큰 效果를 得하얏다. 十年 庚寅에는 戶布의 征을 罷하고(租稅의 一種이니 苧布를 收歛하야 軍需에 當하는 者) 十三年 癸巳에는 八道의 境界를 定하고 十四年 甲午에는 謁聖科를 始設하고 敦寧府를 設하야 宗親의 封君을 不得한 者와 外戚諸親을 安堵케하고 十五年 乙未에는 徐選의 言을 從하야 庶孼의 子孫은 正職을 敍치 안키로 하고
此外에느 農을 권하고 圖讖의 書를 焚하야 迷信을 打破하고 또 海州 任實 泰安 等 각지에서 講武하야 國民의 武風을 養하얏스며 日明 兩國에 使를 遣하야 交隣의 好를 修하얏다. 그 때의 相臣은 李居易, 李茂, 李稷, 趙英茂 義安大君 和(太祖異母弟) 柳亮, 南在, 柳廷顯, 朴訔, 韓尙敎, 沈溫 等이엿고 在位는 十八年 陵所는 慶州大母山(獻陵)이엿다.

李朝의 黃金時代인 世宗朝＜6＞

세종(諱 祹)은 太宗의 第三子니 李朝 歷代 帝王中 最英傑의 君主로 其 時代는 近世 朝鮮의 黃金時代라 可謂하겟다. 內治 外交가 極히 振作됨은 勿論이고 文化도 顯著히 발전되엿스니 이제 此를 槩論하면

一. 內治
甲. 人民救恤 卽位의 初에 국내에는 水, 旱, 雹災가 荐臻하야 人民의 饑饉이 甚하엿섯는데 世宗은 極力賑恤하야 人民이 飢餓를 면하고
乙. 農事振興 世宗은 특히 農政에 留意하야 十一年 己酉에는 道臣으로 老農已驗의 術을 採問케 한 후 摠制 鄭招로 農事集說을 編하야 中外에 頒하고 十九年 丁巳에는 貢賦法과 田品을 정하고 二十六年 甲子에는 田制를 詳定하야 농민보호에 專力하얏스며
丙. 刑獄을 恤하야 八年 丙午에는 義禁府(推鞠의 事를 掌한 官府)三覆法을 立하고(如今之三審制) 十二年 庚戌에는 笞背의 刑과 老幼禁身의 法을 除하고(십오세 이하 십세 이상은 殺人强盜이외는 禁身의 刑을 除하고 팔십세 이상 십세 이하는 死罪를 범한 자도 刑을 免케 함.)
崔致雲을 命하야 無寃錄을 注釋하며 律文을 講解하고 又 奴隷의 濫殺하는 惡習을 禁하얏스며
丁. 敎育을 특히 獎勵하야 卽位 2년 庚子에 集賢殿을 禁中에 置하야 才學이 有한 者로 典故를 討究케하고 又 經筵을 開하야 왕이 친히 儒臣과 學을 講하고 世子의 八歲入學制를 設하며 八年 丙午에는 讀書堂(其後 成宗時에 龍山 東湖勝地에 서당을 建하고 名曰 湖堂이라 稱하얏스니 當時에 最히 榮華로 知하얏다.)을 設하야 年少文臣의 長睱讀書의 暇를 賜하고 또 宗親의 교육을 위하야 宗學을 設하고 또 道薦法을 新設하야 地方의 才藝와 德行이 有한 인물을 選用케 하얏다.＜7＞
戌. 도서편찬 세종은 학문을 장려한 외에 又 諸臣을 명하야 圖書를 編纂하얏스니 其 著名한 者는 孝行錄, 五禮儀, 自治通鑑訓義, 治平要覽, 龍飛御天歌, 高麗史(此는 世宗崩후 翌年에 완성되엿스니 全部 百三十九卷) 明皇誡鑑, 七政內外篇, 三綱行實錄, 農事直說, 經書音解, 歷代兵要, 經綸全集, 七政籌內外篇, 曆象集, 無寃錄, 等이라.
己. 音樂, 天文, 曆數의 연구와 此에 관한 기구의 施設. 왕은 嘗히 음악에 留意하야 십오년 乙未에 비로소 朝祭에 雅樂을 用하고 當時 大音樂家인 大提學 朴堧으로 新磬을 作케하고 또 太平, 發祥 等 樂을 作하며 십사년 甲午에는 藝文舘提學 鄭麟趾 大提學 鄭招로 天文을 觀하는 器械를 作케 함으로 兩人은 中樞府事, 李藏, 護軍 蔣英實과 共히 凡 7년을 費하야 北極測定器 及 各種의 日晷(日時計) 漏刻(水時計) 등을 製하얏스니 其工案은 다 蔣英實의 所創이오. 15년 乙未에는 古今의 天文圖를 參酌하야 新圖를 作하야 石에 鐫刻하고 同年에 又 兩鄭으로 元의 授時歷 及 明의 大統曆을 參酌하야 七政算內篇을 選하고 次에 回回曆을 得하야 李純之, 金淡 兩人으로 同外篇을 作케하고 (兩人은 當時 天文曆數의 大家) 又 曆官을 江華 摩尼山과 白頭山 及 濟州 漢挐山에 遣하야 北極의 高度를 測하고(其 度數는 今 不傳) 二十四年 壬寅에는 銅으로 測雨器를 製하야 雨量을 測하얏다
庚, 國文의 創作 此에 又 特記할 者는 朝鮮國文의 創作이니 世宗은 自來 朝鮮에서 施行하던 吏讀와 漢文이 極히 難解 不便하야 國民敎育 及 文化發展 上 大障礙가 有함을 크게 痛感하고 二十八年 丙寅에 禁中에 國文局을 設하고 鄭麟趾, 成三問, 申叔舟 等 三人을 命하야 訓民正音을 作하야 國中에 頒布하얏스니(音韻을 討議하기 爲하야 成三問 等이 當時 遼東에 竄在한 明 翰林 黃瓚에게 凡 十三回를 往來함) 此는 朝鮮文化史上에 一大業으로 國民이 便益을 得함이 多大함은 勿論이고 世界的으로 크게 자랑할 만한 發明이엿다＜8＞

二, 外治
世宗은 如斯히 內治를 잘하는 同時에 外交를 한 잘하얏스니 卽
明國과는 太祖 開國初로부터 每年 牛 萬匹과 多數의 金銀을 送하게되야 其弊가 甚多함으로 太宗 時에 偰長壽를 遣하야 그 減額을 要求하얏스나 結局 失敗에 歸하얏더니 世宗 十一年에 至하야 諴寧君 䄄(世宗의 弟)을 送하야 交涉한 結果 此를 廢하고 但히 簡易한 土産으로 歲送하게 되고
又 日本과의 關係는 麗末 以來로 海寇(所謂 倭寇)가 邊地를 侵함으로 太祖가 此를 擊退하고 其後 太祖 五年에는  一岐와 對馬島를 討하얏스며 定宗 元年에도 對馬島를 討하고 世宗 元年에는 日船이 支那에 向한다 稱하고 黃海道에 來하야 粮食을 求하고 其後에  頻頻 侵掠함으로 當時 上王으로 在하야 兵權을 尙執한 太宗은 此를 攻滅하랴고 柳廷顯, 朴訔, 趙末生, 許稠 等과 相議하고 柳廷顯 李從茂로 兵船 二百七十七隻, 兵士 一萬七千人을 率하고 對馬島를 討하야 乘勝長驅하다가 九州 諸侯의 戮力拒戰으로 中止한바 世宗이 政權을 完全이 執함에 及하야는 彼此 修好함이 得策이라 思하고 通信使 卞仲交, 書狀官 申叔舟를 遣하야 對馬島主 宗貞盛과 通交條約을 結하야 朝鮮은 慶尙道의 三浦(熊川 薺浦(냉이浦), 東萊 釜山浦, 蔚山 鹽浦)를 關하야 互市釣魚케 하고 宗盛은 歲船 五十艘를 限하야 送來케 하되 或 有事하면 別로 特送船을 特來케 하며 此外 日本 各州 諸侯■ 或 一二船을 遣來코자 하면 반듯시 宗氏의 文引(證書)을 受한 后 朝鮮이 接待하기로 하얏스니 此가 卽 癸亥條約으로 兩國의 交際가 다시 復古되고 次에 世宗의 特히 注力한바는 對 野人關係니 卽 十五年 癸丑에는 當時 有名한 將軍 崔潤德을 遣하야 世世로 問題되던 婆猪江 附近의 野人을 征服하고 十六年 甲寅에는  金宗瑞를 命하야 北方 諸地를 開拓한 後 同 十九年 丁巳에 慶興, 會寧, 鍾城, 穩城, 慶源, 富寧 等 六鎭을 新設하야 豆滿江 沿岸의 領土를 大擴張하얏다＜9＞ 此外에 世宗은 又 海州의 江陵에서 講武하고  箕子祠와 新羅始祖 朴赫居世祠를 立하얏다 엇지하얏던 世宗의 時代는 李朝의 極治時代라 안이할 수 업다 그러고 그의 名相은 黃喜, 許稠엿다

多淚多恨한 文端 兩宗朝
文端 兩宗朝는 李朝 有史以後 가장 多淚多恨한 時代엿다 文宗은(珦) 世宗의 長子로 寬仁孝友하고 好學愛人한 賢君이엿스나 平素에 身이 虛弱함으로 在位한지 纔 二年에 崩御하고 世子가 僅히 二十歲의 幼齡으로 位를 繼하니 此가 卽 千古悲哀의 王 端宗이엿다(弘暉) 에 端宗의 叔父는 七人이 有하야 勢力이 强大함으로 文宗은 崩御 時에 미리 端宗의 身邊이 孤危할 것을 생각하고 當時 領相인 皇甫仁와 右相 金宗瑞, 左相 南智의 手를 親執하고 幼帝를 泣托하며  集賢殿學士 朴彭年, 河緯地, 成三問 等에게도 協贊의 任을 托하얏다 然而 諸 大君 中 安平大君 瑢과 首陽大君 瑈(卽 世祖)는 當時 兩大 勢力家로 瑢은 詩文書畵에 能하야 交人 才士가 多歸할 이엿스나 首陽大君은 平素부터 大志를 抱하고 反正할 野心이 有함으로 洪允成, 洪達孫, 楊汀, 韓明澮 權攬 等 不遇의 徒와 武士를 多數 連結하얏섯다 그러나 其時 三公 中 領相 金宗瑞는 智勇이 兼備한 重臣으로 時人이 大虎라 指目하는바 그가 朝廷에 잇는 以上에는 大事를 敢謀키 難함로 首陽大君은 먼저 그를 除去하랴고 韓明澮 權攬 等과 陰謀하고 端宗 元年 十月 十日에 楊汀, 柳洙, 及 洪允成, 林芸 等을 親率하고 宗瑞의 家에 往하야 洪允成으로 宗瑞와 及 其子 承珪를 不意에 椎殺하고 一方으로 端宗에게 告急하되 金宗瑞, 皇甫仁, 趙克寬(吏判) 李穰(贊成),과 平安監司 趙遂良 忠淸監司 安完慶 咸吉道節制使 李澄玉 等이 內外 連絡하야 謀反한다 稱하고  王命을 矯하야 諸 宰臣을 不時에 招한 後 韓明澮로 生殺簿를 持하고 門內에서 姓名을 檢하야가며 埋伏한 武士로 一一히 椎殺하니 上記한 諸 朝臣은 現場에서 다 被害하고 左議政 鄭笨, 趙遂良, 安平大君 等은 竄謫되얏다가＜10＞ 後에 鄭麟趾의 議에 從하야 被死하얏다(後 李澄玉은 反하야 大金皇帝라 稱하다가 鍾城節制使 鄭種에게 被殺함) 首陽大君은 如斯히 端宗의 輔弼之臣을 다 虐殺한 後 領相 兼 內外兵馬都統使가 되어 軍國重事를 掌握하고 鄭麟趾, 韓明澮 等 三十六人은 靖亂功臣이 되니 端宗-世祖의 威權이 日로 盛하며 入朝할 時마다 不平의 氣色이 有함을 見하고 禍가 及할가 恐하야 三年 乙亥에 位를 遜하니 世祖가 端宗을 尊하야 上王이라 稱하고 昌德宮에 移御케 하얏다 그러다가 翌年 丙子에 集賢殿學士 成三問, 刑參 朴彭年, 直提學 李愷, 禮參 河緯地, 司藝 柳誠源 武人 兪應孚(卽 死六臣) 等이 端宗의 復位를 謀하다가 發覺되야 다 刑殺을 當하니 端宗도 魯山君으로 降封되어 江原道 寧越에 護送되고 其 生母 顯德王后 權氏도 한 廢하야 庶人이 되얏다 이에 先하야 錦城大君 瑜(文宗의 弟)는 端宗을 其第에 留御케 함으로 坐罪하야 順興에 被竄하엿더니 是에 至하야 上王이 寧越에 移遷됨을 見하고 더욱 慷慨悲憤하야 府使  李甫欽과 相謀하고 南中人士를 結托하야 上王의 位를 復하랴고 檄을 草하다가 한 發覺되어 瑜 及 甫欽이 下獄被死하고 南中人이 多數 誅戮되니 例의 鄭麟趾, 鄭昌孫, 韓明澮, 申叔舟 等이 다시 交交上啓하야 端宗도 遂히 禍를 免치 못하고 丁丑 十月 二十四日에 十七歲를 一期로 하고 悲慘이 絞殺을 當하고 其 屍軆는 戶長 嚴興道가 收葬하얏다(魯山陵, 後 追尊 爲 莊陵)
尙又 其時 趙旅, 元昊, 金時習, 李孟專, 成聃壽, 南孝溫 等 六人은 端宗의 退位 後에 隱節不仕함으로 後人이 生六臣이라 稱한다
如斯히 文 端 兩朝는 在位의 時日이 未久한 中 端宗의 君臣은 共히 殺戮의 慘變을 當한 故로 其 事實 以外에는 可記할 者가 업다 그러나 文宗 元年 辛未에 五衛營(龍驤, 虎賁, 義興, 忠左, 忠義)을 設하고 東國兵鑑과 陣法九篇(御製)의 兩 軍書가 編纂되고 端宗 二年 甲戌에 歷代兵要, 世宗實錄, 皇極治平圖(梁誠之 纂)가 編成된 것은 特히 注意할 일이다＜11＞

文烈武揚의 世祖時代
世祖 卽位의 事情은 大略 上述함과 如함으로 單히 此點으로만 見하면 王의 端宗에 對한 處置는 勿論이고 其他에 關하야도 後世의 非難을 免치 못하지나 그의 政治 上이나 文化 上의 事業으로 보면 功績이 多大하야 太宗 世宗의 世에 確定된 國家의 基礎를 一層 堅固케 하얏다 云치 안이치 못하겟다 그는 天性이 豪邁하고 經國의 雄圖가 有하야 在位 中에 文武의 治가 共히 振揚되얏스니 卽 文治로는 第一 卽位 元年에 農桑을 獎勵하기 爲하야 宮中에 蠶室을 置하고 內苑에 桑을 種하야 王妃로 親蠶케 하얏스며 三年에는 常平倉을 設하야 國庫를 充實히 하고(從 韓明澮 議) 四年에는 大司成 徐■를 命하야 蠶書注解를 撰하고 五年에는 新定經國大典 中 戶典을 頒하고(崔恒 纂) 六年에는 屯田을 增設하고 七年에는 量田을 行하고 養牛法을 抄錄하야 醫生으로 學習케 하고 九年에 箭幣를 鑄造하고 十一年에는 拔英 登俊 兩試를 設하야 王이 親히 士를 試問擢用하고 又 文交學問에 留意하야 餘暇가 有하면 諸儒와 學을 講하며 經傳의 語音을 一定하게 하기 爲하야 四書口訣을 撰한 外에 易學啓蒙要解를 親製하고 且 國朝寶鑑, 東國通鑑 編纂에 着手하며(完成은 勿論 其後) 天文地理 等 硏究에 着力하야 親히 窺衡 及 印地儀를 製하얏다(兩器는 다 地의 遠近을 測하는 儀象이다)
尙又 世祖는 佛敎를 好하고 佛典을 硏究하는 同時에 城內 興福寺 廢址에 圓覺寺를 創建하얏스니(九年 甲申) 彼 有名한 塔洞公園의 十三層 理石塔과 龜碑도 此 時代의 遺物이다
然而 世祖는 文治를 尙하는 同時에  武를 尙하야 自己가 射御를 善히 함은 勿論이고 兵書에 通曉하야 世宗 時에는 王命으로 集賢殿 諸儒와 가티 歷代兵要를 著하고 文宗 時에는 五衛陣法을 作하고 卽位 三年에는 中外의 軍士를 集하야 前古 未曾有의 閱兵式을 親行하고 四年에는 將士를 令하야 後苑에서 習陣한 후 兵政라 云하는 陣＜12＞法을 纂述하고 六年에는 兵鏡. 九年에는 三甲陣法. 十年에는 兵書大旨를 親作하고 又 五衛都總府를 置하며 發兵符를 施行하야 一般武備에 特히 注力하얏
如斯히 武備가 充實함으로 十二年 五月, 吉州人 李施愛(元 會寧府使)와 其弟 施合의 反亂에 會寧府使 魚有沼, 節制使 康純, 龜城君 李浚, 許琮 等으로 數萬의 兵을 發하야 此를 擊破 誅戮하되 困難이 殆無하고(當時 勤王 軍大將으로 著名한 延川君 車云革이(謚 剛烈) 端川에서 賊에게 被害함) 又 同年에 魚有沼 南怡 兩 將軍으로 明과 共히 建州衛를 夾攻하야 賊魁 李滿住 及 其子 古納哈打肥剌를 斬殺하고 尙又 是보다 先하야는 申叔舟로 婆猪江과 會寧의 野人을 征服하야 北邊에 武威를 크게 揚하얏다 其外 日本과의 關係는 平穩無事하고 서로 使節이 來往이엇스니 世祖 二十五年에 申叔舟가 日本에 往하얏■기 著한 「海東諸國記」는 特히 著名한 者이다

泰平天下인 成宗時代
世祖는 在位 十三年에 崩御하고(壽 五十二, 楊州 光陵) 第二子 睿宗이 繼位하야(兄 德宗 以 世子 年二十 早夭故) 僅히 一年에 한 昇遐하고(壽 二十, 昌陵) 嗣子가 幼沖하야 王位를 繼하기 不能함으로 貞熹大妃(世祖妃 尹氏)의 命으로 睿宗 兄 德宗의 第二子, 者乙山君(娎)을 迎하야 位에 卽케하니 此가 卽 成宗大王이오 時年이 纔 十三歲임으로 大妃가 垂簾聽政하다가 凡 七年에 還政하얏다 成宗時代의 重要事實로 말하면 元年 庚寅에는 弘文館을 設하■ 文學의 士 十七人을 選 야 顧問을 삼엇섯고 四年 癸巳에는 軍籍을 改하고 六年 乙未에는 尊經閣을 建設하야 經籍을 藏하고 十六年 乙巳에는 改嫁의 子孫을 錮하야 東西班에 勿齒케하고 二十三年 壬子와 其 翌年 癸丑에는 京畿, 忠淸, 全羅, 慶尙 四道의 量田을 하얏다 又 外征으로는 十年 己亥에 尹弼商을 遣 야 建州衛의 野人을 討破하고 二十二年 辛亥에 尼了車 野人을 征服하얏스며 尙又 此 時代에 特記＜13＞할 것은 經國大典.(二年 辛卯) 帝王明鑑.(三年 壬辰) 輿地勝覽(九年 戊戌 盧思愼 徐居正 等 纂定). 東文選(徐居正 纂定) 東國通鑑(十六年 乙巳 徐居正 纂定) 大典續錄(二四年 癸丑 頒布) 等 重要 諸 書籍이 編纂된 것이다 然而 成宗은 稀有한 賢明의 君主로 當時 人物이 한 輩出하야 上下가 間隔이 업시 國事를 論治하얏스니 此 時代는 李朝 歷代 中 其比가 無한 泰平의 盛代라 可謂하겟다 그러나 太平의 裏面에는 벌서 文弱衰微의 勢가 潛在하야 世宗時代나 世祖時代와 如한 緊張의 氣分이 少하고 上下가 漸次 遊■惰怠에 流하야 賄賂■ 朝野가 漸行하고 宮中에는 宴樂이 日로 盛하며 또 十■年에는 成宗이 燕山의 生母 王后 尹氏를 廢位 賜死하고 後宮을 寵愛하야 後日 燕山君의 荒淫하는 習을 馴致하얏다 摠而言之하면 成宗의 在位 二十五年 間은 李朝의 極盛將衰의 時라 云함이 可할 것이다(壽 三十八, 廣州 宣陵)
是에 先하야 睿宗 元年 戊子에 奸臣 柳子光이 兵判 南怡와 領相 康純을 謀反한다고 誣告하야 寃死케 한 것과 翌年 己丑에 吏曹正郞 閔粹가 康致成을 囑하야 世祖實錄을 改修한 罪로 致成은 被誅하고 粹는 杖流한 兩 獄事가 有한 것은 한 忘却할 수 업다

暗黑時代인 燕山朝
燕山君(㦕)은 成宗의 長子엿다 그의 在位 十一年間은 李朝의 暗黑時代로 國政이 濁亂荒廢함은 勿論이고 歷代에 養成한 士類가 一時■ 全滅의 禍를 當하얏스니 卽 四年 戊午 七月에는 柳子光의 誣告로 金宗直 及 其 門人 金馹孫 金宏弼 等 一流名士 三十餘人이 一時 被禍하고(所謂 戊午史禍) 仝 十年 甲子에는 燕山의 廢母 尹氏 追崇反對問題로 起端하야 李荇, 權達手 尹弼商 等 數十의 名士 及 重臣이 被禍하고(所謂 甲子再禍) 仝 十二年 丙寅에는  戊午, 甲子 黨籍 中에 遺漏된 者 鄭鵬, 蔡壽, 韓山正 挺(六兄弟 幷死) 牛山君 踵 等 數十人이 被禍하얏섯다＜14＞(或稱 丙寅士禍니 此及 以上 士禍의 詳細한 事는 別題로 詳論하얏기 略함)

士禍不絶한 中宗朝
燕山은 如斯히 荒淫無道함으로 十二年 丙寅 九月에 吏參 成希顔, 知中樞 朴元宗, 吏判 柳順汀 等이 反正의 旗를 擧하고 慈順太后(成宗 繼后) 尹氏의 詔로 君을 廢하야 喬桐에 遷하고(壽 三十一) 成宗의 次子 晋城大君(懌)을 迎하야 位에 卽케하니 此가 卽 中宗이엿다 中宗은 初에 燕山의 弊政을 革하고 儒術을 尙하며 文治에 專意하야 趙光祖, 金湜 等 人材를 登用하얏슴으로 一時는 殆히 中興의 治가 有하얏섯다 그러나 朝臣 間에 分爭이 不絶하야 十四年 己卯에는 南袞, 沈貞, 洪景舟 等의 誣告로 趙光祖, 金絿, 金湜 奇遵 外 數十餘名의 名士가 一時 被禍하고(所謂 己卯士禍) 其後에는 金安老가 用事하야  賢良을 多數 殺害하얏섯다 此外에 同朝의 可記할 事로 말하면 五年 庚午에는 薺浦, 鹽浦, 釜山 等 所謂 三浦의 倭亂이 起하야 柳聃年, 黃衡 等이 討平하얏고 六年 辛未에는 亂杖을 禁하고 十八年 十九年에는(癸未, 甲申) 全羅, 江原 兩道의 田을 改量하고 二十年 乙酉에는 李純이 觀天器(名曰 目輪)를 製하야 觀象監에 置하고 三十年 丙申에는 國朝寶鑑을 續撰하고(是年始立 迎恩門) 三十六年 辛丑에는 豐基郡守 周世鵬이 白雲洞書院을 創設하야(朝鮮書院 自此始) 安裕를 祠하고 三十八年 癸卯에는 大典後續編을 頒하얏다

外戚用權의 始期인 明宗朝
中宗은 在位 三十九年만에 五十七歲로 昇遐하고(靖陵) 世子 仁宗(峼)이 卽位하야 한 八月만에 昇遐하고(壽 三十一, 高陽 孝陵) 無嗣함으로 其弟 慶原大君(文定王后 尹氏 所生 諱 峘)이 遺命으로 位에 卽하니 此卽 明＜15＞宗大王이엿다 時에 王은 年이 僅히 十二에 不過함으로 母后 文定王后가 ■政하고 王后의 弟 尹元衡이 當國하니 此는 李朝의 外戚이 ■■한 嚆矢엿다(成宗 時 貞熹王后가 德政하얏스나 外權이 別 하얏다) 當時 外戚에는  尹任이 잇섯스니(仁宗 生母 章敬王后 尹氏의 弟) 元衡과 分黨하야 權■爭함으로 時人이 大尹, 尹任) 小尹(元衡)이라 目하얏다 元年 乙巳에 元衡은 其黨 鄭順鵬, 李芑 等과 誣告하야 尹任, 柳灌 柳仁淑 等 數十人을 殺害하엿스니 此卽 有名한 乙巳士禍요(詳細事는 亦見 士禍論) 繼하야 翌年 丁未에는 鄭彦慤이 良才驛 壁書를 誣告하야 乙巳士類의 一派 宋麟壽, 柳希春 等 數百人을  誅戮 或 竄流하얏스니 此가 卽 丁未士禍오 其 翌年 己酉에는 李洪男이 其弟 洪胤이 謀逆한다 誣告하야  數百人이 被禍하는 大獄을 起하얏스니 卽 己酉獄事다 此外에 年 乙卯에는 湖南에 倭寇가 來襲하야 都元帥 李潤慶이 擊破하고(所謂 乙卯倭變)  同年■ 備邊司를 設하얏다
摠而言之하면 明宗朝는 全히 外戚의 爭權으로 士禍가 屢起하야 穀■의 變이 止할 日이 別無하고 國政 及 王權이 式微하야 後日 宣祖時代의 東西■黨의 ■을 啓하고  壬亂의 大兵禍를 招하게 되엿다

黨爭과 兵亂에 苦惱한 宣祖朝
明宗은 在位 二十二年, 壽 三十四歲로 昇遐하고(楊州 康陵) 後嗣가 한 無함으로(順懷世子 早夭) 德興君 岹(中宗 第七子)의 第三子(昖, 初諱 鈞)를 迎하야 王을 삼으니 此卽 宣祖엿다 卽位의 初에는 仁順大妃 沈氏(明宗王后)가 垂簾聽政하더니 白仁傑의 疏啓에 ■하야 卽時 返政하고 上이 親히 政에 臨하■ 人材登用에 專力하야 當時 士林에 名望이 多한 李滉(退溪) 李珥(栗谷), 白仁傑 等을 任用하고 南袞 等 奸凶의 官爵을 追奪하며 乙巳 後의 冤獄을 伸하야 官爵을 復하는 同時 尹元衡 一派 勳籍을 削하고 學을 講하며 治를 論하니 一時 ■■■ ■하엿던 王政이 다시 振作하는 氣色이 頗有하엿섯다＜16＞
그러나 積年間 朝臣의 抗爭은 漸次 新舊 兩派의 軋轢으로 化하야 八年 乙亥에 金孝元, 沈義謙 兩派가 遂히 東西로 分黨하고(詳見 別題 黨爭論) 十六年 癸未에는 ■胡尼蕩介가 六鎭을 寇하야 申砬으로 擊破케 하고, 二十年 丁亥에는 海寇가 全南의 興陽海岸 及 島嶼를 侵하고 二十一年 戊子에는  野人이 慶興을 來侵함으로 北兵使 李鎰로 擊破하고, 二十二年 己丑에는 全州에서 鄭汝立이 反逆하얏다가 卽前 伏誅하고(鄭汝立은 元 全州人으로 栗谷를 師事하고 博覽强記하야 深히 經傳에 通함으로 宣祖 初 修撰이 되엿다가 微罪로 被黜하야 鄕里에서 靑年을 聚集하고 學을 講하니 一時 信望이 多함으로 異志를 抱하고 亂을 起하얏다 先是에 天安賊 吉三峰이 勇力이 絶人하야 官卒이 能히 捕拿치 못함으로 汝立은 人을 海西에 遣하야 揚言하되 吉三峰의 弟 吉三山이 神兵을 領하고 或은 智異山 或은 鷄龍山으로 來往하는데 鄭八龍(汝立의 幼號)이 此人을 得하야 未久에 王이 된다 云云하고 反逆하다가 發覺되야 自殺하얏다) 二十四年 辛卯에는 李潑 李山海 等과(北人) 柳成龍, 禹性傳(南人)이 南北으로 分黨하고 二十五年 壬辰 四月에는 日關伯 平秀吉이 自號曰 二十五萬의 兵을 率하고 州郡을 連陷하야 仝月 晦日에 車駕가 義州로 播遷하고 二十九年 丙申에는 鴻山人 李夢鶴이 亂을 起하야 湖西 諸邑을 陷하얏다가 洪州牧使 洪可臣이 討平하고 三十年 丁酉에는 日兵(所謂 丁酉再亂)이 復侵하야 二年 間을 戰爭하다가 翌年 戊戌에 講和되엿다(壬亂記事는 別題로 論함으로 略함)
上述함과 如히 此 宣祖의 在位 四十一年 間은 有史以後 國家가 가장 多事多端한 時代엿다 그러나 其中 顯著한 事實은 八年을 亘함 壬辰兵亂과 李朝의 最大 痼疾인 黨爭이 始起한 그것이오 此 戰亂 中에 李 忠武公이 發明한 龜甲船은 世界初有의 鐵甲船이엿스며 朴晋의 飛擊震天雷도 한 特記할 者이다 그러고 宣祖 五年에 春塘臺試士를 始한 것과 八年에 李珥가 聖學輯要를 ■하고  四年에 四書諺解를 著한 것과 三十二年 己亥에 京城에(南門 外) 關羽廟를 始建한 것도 亦是 記憶할 일이다＜17＞

大北의 天下인 光海朝
廢主 光海君 琿은 宣祖 第二子로 그의 在位 十四年間에는 大北小北의 黨爭이 極熾한 中 大北이 優勢를 得하야 許多의 冤獄을 起하고  國政을 紊亂케 하얏다 其 詳細한 事는 別題 黨爭論에 詳述하얏슴으로 玆에 省略하거니와 獄事의 重要한 者를 擧하면 四年 壬子에 權石洲 鞸은 詩案에 坐하야 被死하고(宮柳靑靑鶯亂啼 云云의 句)  同年에는 申慄이 金直哉와 黃赫을 謀反한다 誣告하야 寃死케 하고 五年 癸丑에 李爾瞻은(大北) 國舅 金悌男이 永昌大君 㼁(宣祖의 一男)를 推戴한다 構誣하야 永昌大君 外 金悌男과 及其 三子 一婿를 皆殺하고 大妃 金氏를 廢하야 西宮에 幽閉하얏다가 後에 濟州로 流配하고(廢母反對疏로 李恒福이 北靑에 竄하얏다가 後 賜死) 七年 乙卯에는 申景禧 等이 綾昌君 佺을 推戴한다 誣하야 一幷 誅戮하고 八年 丙辰에는 爾瞻이  崔沂를 誣殺하얏다 光海君은 如斯히 爾瞻의 一黨을 信用하야 冤獄을 屢起한 外에  賣官贖刑의 科를 立하야(九年 丁巳) 官을 賣하고 銀으로 罪를 贖케 하며 尙宮과 奸臣의 言을 信하야 國政이 日로 紊亂함으로 李貴, 金瑬, 申景禛, 沈器遠, 崔鳴吉, 金自點 等 西人一派가 反正의 亂을 起하야 仁穆大妃의 命으로 光海의 三十六罪를 數하고 廢하야 江華에 放하고 宣祖 第五男 定遠君(元宗 琈)의 子 綾陽君(悰)을 立하야 王을 삼고(卽 仁祖) 李爾瞻 鄭仁弘 等 數百人을 誅戮하고 前日의 冤枉을 伸하얏다
然而 光海 時代의 事로 又 特記할 者는 昌德宮과(己酉) 宗廟(戊申)를 重建한 事와(壬亂에 燒失된 故로) 四學을 重建한 事이니(庚戌) 此는 光海 時代의 一大事業이라 하겟고 又 十一年 己未에 明을 助하야 金을 伐하다가 深河의 役에서 元帥 姜弘立이 投降하고 遼東伯 金應河가 節死한 事와 十四年 壬戌에 明將 毛文龍이 鐵山 椴島에 鎭을 設하고 都督이라 稱한 事는 한 記憶할 일이엿다＜18＞

內禍外患이 幷起한 仁祖時代
光海君의 廢位는 勿論 그의 昏亂無道함을 理由로 함이다 그러나 그것은 表面의 口實이요 其實 內面은 多年間 政權을 失■ 西人이 北人內訌의 虛機를 乘하야 政權을 奪取하랴는 反動으로 光海는 但히 其 時局를 能察하지 못하고 黨爭의 渦中에 入하야 遂히 犧牲이 된 不幸의 君主에 不過하다 그럼으로 仁祖 卽位 直時에 鄭仁弘, 李爾瞻 等의 大北巨頭는 勿論이고 朴承宗, 柳希奮 等의 小北지도 一網打盡되고 金瑬, 李貴 等 五十四人의 西人이 다 靖社功臣이 되야 一時 政權을 執하게 되엿다 然而此 西人은 又 功西(勳西), 淸西, 老西, 少西, 原黨, 洛黨, 漢黨 山黨 等으로 分派되야 紛爭이 不止하얏스나 其中 勳西의 勢力이 優勝되야 仁祖 一代는 자못 勳西의 天下와 如한 感이 잇섯다(詳載 黨爭論) 然而 仁祖時代는 如斯히 黨爭이 激烈한 外에 又 內亂外寇가 幷至하얏스니 卽 二年 甲子 正月에는 平安兵使 李适의 亂이 起하야 京城이 陷落되매 上이 公州에지 播遷하얏고(李适은 成宗 時 兵判으로 靑坡劇訣을 著한 靑坡居士 李陸의 後裔니 能文能武, 能書한 外에 謀略이 多하야 反正 時 其功이 甚多하얏스나 叙功 時 官爵이 人下에 在함으로 不平을 抱하고 亂을 起하얏다 詳細는 別題 參照) 五年 丁卯에는 所謂 丁卯胡亂이 起하야 淸兵이 義州, 安州, (兵使 南以興 等 節死)을 陷하고 平山에지 至함으로 大駕는 江華로 播遷하고 世子는 全州로 避難하야 一時分朝하얏스며 其後 十四年 丙子 十一月 四日에는 淸兵 二十萬이 京城을 犯하야 翌年 丁丑 正月 三十日에 南漢山城에서 遂히 講和하고 又 其後에는 淸의 要求에 因하야 明의 錦州衛를 攻하고(十九年 辛巳) 二十二年 甲申에는 相臣 沈器遠이 其甥 廣州府尹 權澺과 亂을 起코자하다가 伏誅하고 二十四年 丙戌에는 柳濯이 湖西에서 謀反하얏다 要컨대 仁祖의 一代는 內亂外寇로 寧日이 少無하얏고  金自點과 如한 奸凶을 親信하야 그 萬古名將이오 忠臣인 林慶業 將軍을 誤殺한 것은 仁祖의 一大 失策으로 後人의 非難을 免치 못하겟다 그＜19＞리고 甲子에 大同法을 關東에 行하고, 九年 辛未에 鄭斗源이 明國에 使하얏다가 西洋火砲, 千里鏡, 自鳴鍾, 紫木花 及 其他 圖書를 持來하고 二十二年 甲申에 申翊聖이 東史補編 九卷을 著한 事는 이 仁祖時代에 特記할 者라 云치 안이치 못하겟다(在位 二十七年, 壽 五十五, 交海 長陵)

北伐論이 高調된 孝宗時代
仁祖가 崩御하고 次子 鳳林大君(淏)이 位에 卽하니(長子 昭顯世子 先是 卒逝) 此卽 孝宗大王이엿다 孝宗은 瀋陽에 留質한지 八年에 其 屈辱을 甚히 憤慨히 思하야 卽位 後에 卽時 南漢의 恥를 雪하랴고 北伐의 計劃을 하얏섯다 外面으로 日本을 防備한다 稱하고 城池를 修하고 兵器를 整理하며 當時 名士 宋時烈 宋浚吉과 武臣 李浣을 信任하야 時烈에게는 貂裘를 賜하고 浣에게는 御甲冑를 賜하야 伐의 時에 供用케 하고 戎服의 袖를 窄케 하며 僧은 米 三石을 出하고 公卿으로부터 庶士지 軍役이 無한 者는 布 一匹을 徵出하야 軍資에 充케 하며 內廐에 良馬를 飼하야 伐大驄이라 名하고 革射를 改하야 騎射라 하며 禁軍을 增募하고 同時에 李浣으로 訓鍊大將을 拜하야 軍士를 大閱하니 人民 中에 庄土를 賣하야 軍備를 獻納하는 者가 多하얏다
그러나 不幸히 孝宗은 在位 十年에 其志를 達치 못하고 遂히 崩御하니 이것은 千古遺恨의 事라 云치 안이치 못하겟다(壽 四十一, 驪州 寧陵) 孝宗은 如斯히 淸國의 怨讎를 報復코자 하얏스나 淸의 要求에 依하야 五年 甲午에 虞侯 邊岌으로 하얏금 羅禪을 黑龍江邊에서 擊破하고  九年 丁酉에는 北 虞侯 申瀏로 再次 羅禪을 伐하야 其 將壽道磐을 殺하고 巢穴을 掃蕩하얏스니 此는 表面 上 淸國과 和好하야 疑치안케 함이오 羅禪은 卽 露西亞의 別稱으로 十 數年 前부터 黑龍江에 出沒하얏스니 此回의 征伐은 비록 淸을 助함이나 朝鮮人과 白人 間의 最初交戰이오 最初勝利엿다(其時 淸國이 朝鮮의 銃士를 强勇함으로 思하야 請兵함이라) 그리고 三年 壬辰에는 淸 攝政王이 喪＜20＞配하고 婚을 求하야 錦林君 女(義信公主)를 送하니 此는 淸 皇族과 初有한 結婚이다(其實은 庶人의 女를 公主로 假粧함) 尙又 二年 辛卯에는 湖西에 大同法을 行하고(先是 光海 戊申에 宣惠法을 畿甸에 行하다가 至是하야 領相 金堉이 建言施行하니 此卽 大同이다 四年 癸巳에 西洋人 湯若望의 時憲歷을 始用하고 仝年에 又 日本에서 祭樂器, 深衣를 求法하고 七年 丙申에 別軍職廳을 始設하고 八年 丁酉에는 璿璣玉衡을 造하얏다
以上은 孝宗 一代政治의 大槪를 論함이어니와 當時 黨爭의 勢로 言하면 西人 中 山黨이 最히 勢를 得하얏스니 此는 仁祖 末年에 洛黨 金自点이 領相으로 土家의 姻戚(自点의 孫 世龍이 仁祖의 女 孝明翁主를 尙함)이 되야 政權을 弄하다가 孝宗 元年에 國事를 淸國에 密洩함으로 坐罪流竄하얏다가 翊年에 謀逆으로 被誅한 後(欲 推戴 崇善君 徵) 山黨 宋時烈, 宋浚吉, 金集 等이 在朝한 닭이엿다(當時 南人은 李景奭, 許穆, 尹鐫 等이 在朝하얏스나 勢가 別無함) 그리고  그 時代에 許生과 如한 奇人物이 잇던 것도 잠간 紹介한다

黨爭激甚한 顯, 肅 景 三宗時代
顯宗 元年으로부터 景宗 四年지 凡 六十年間은 黨爭의 最 激烈한 時代인 故로 此 黨爭을 除하고는 別로 可論할 者가 업다 然而 黨爭은 別題에 詳論하얏슴으로 玆에는 其 大略과 及其時代에 發生한 몃 가지 事實을 記錄코자 한다
顯宗 己亥에는 孝廟의 國喪에 慈懿大妃(仁祖 繼妃 莊烈王后 趙氏)의 服制에 關하야 西人 吏判 宋時烈은 朞年說, 首相 鄭太和는 依國制說, 南人 尹鐫 許穆은 三年說을 主張하다가 西人이 勝利하고 南人이 敗北하야 勿論 王의 聽許 如何를 言함) 宋時烈은 左相, 宋浚吉은 吏判이 되는 同時에 尹善道(孤山)는 三水로 流竄되고 甲寅年 仁宣大妃(孝宗王妃 張氏) 喪에 慈懿大妃의 服制에 關하야는 西人은 大功說(九介月)을 主張하고 南＜21＞人은 朞年說을 主張하다가 朞年說이 勝利하야 西人領相 金壽興 左相 宋時烈이 流竄되고 許積이 領相이 되야 南人이 勢力을 得하고 壬寅에는 堤堰司를 設하고 癸卯에는 京畿의 田을 量하고 己酉에는 同姓의 婚姻을 禁하얏스며 (指同姓異貫)

肅宗己未에는 常平通寶를 始用하고 庚申에는 福昌宮 三兄弟와 其舅吳挻昌及許積의 庶子 堅의 逆獄(所謂 庚申大獄)이 起하야 上記諸人外 尹鐫 等 南人一派가 被禍하고 (自此南人失勢) 壬戌에는 宋朝四賢과 李珥及成渾을 文廟에 從祀하고 甲子에는 尹拯과 宋時烈 間에 分爭이 起하야 老小가 分黨되고 己巳에는 世子冊封問題가 起하야 尹鐫, 權大運 等 南人一派는 張禧嬪을 王妃로 陞하고 其子 昀을 (景宗) 世子로 冊封할 事를 主張하고, 金壽恒, 宋時烈, 吳斗寅, 朴泰輔 等 西人派는 此를 反對하다가 西人이 被斥하야 宋時烈, 金壽恒, 朴泰輔 等이 賜死或流竄되고 南人이 一時得勢하다가 閔妃가 復位되고 張嬪이 降封賜死되매 降封賜死되매 南人이 다시 被斥하야 相臣閔黯等이 被誅하고 西人 南九萬이 領相이 되야 西人이 更히 執權하얏다 그리고 乙酉에는 明에 壬辰再造의 恩을 思하야 大報壇을 築하고 明의 神宗 祀하며 庚寅 는 江原道의 量田을 하고, 辛卯에 北漢山城을 築하고 三十八年에 는 淸의 穆登과 國界를 定하얏다 且 景宗時에는 壬寅에 世弟 英宗의 聽政問題가 起하야 金昌集, 李頤命, 趙泰釆 李健命 所謂 老論四大臣은 此를 主張하고 少論 趙泰耉, 趙泰億, 崔錫恒, 李光佐, 睦虎龍 等은 此를 反對하는 同時에 老論四大臣을 誣告하야 所謂 壬寅誣獄을 起하얏다

其命維新의 英·正兩朝
英·正兩祖의 世는 李朝文化의 復興時代라 可謂하겟다 兩朝는 天資가 聰明하고 博學多聞하야 意를 天下의＜22＞治에 致함으로 其在位中에는 學問의 獎勵, 農業의 勸獎, 風俗矯正, 刑法의 改正, 黨爭調和 等 實로 枚擧키 不遑한 治績이 多하얏다 그러나 累代의 積幣는 비록 兩朝의 英資로도 容易히 此를 除去하기 難하고 且兩朝以後에는 此를 繼承하는 英主가 無함으로 艱難辛苦한 兩朝의 事業은 正祖의 崩御와 共히 再次衰頹에 陷하야 遂히 末季의 悲哀를 見하게 되엿다 然而此復興氣運의 端을 啓한 이는 勿論 英宗인 바 其 事業의 重要한 者를 擧하면 如左하다
一, 卽位元年에 辛壬誣獄을 伸하야 少論의 權勢를 抑하고 (所謂 少論四大臣及金一鏡 睦虎龍 等 被誅) 老論을 登庸하는 同時에 다시 蕩平의 敎를 下하고 蕩平碑를 立하야 明黨의 爭을 調和하얏스며
二, 惡刑을 廢止하고 (例如壓膝, 烙刑, 點刺刑, 剪刀, 周牢刑의 廢止. 刑杖의 改正(鑄杖穴) 捕廳의 亂杖廢止, 儒生의 治盜律免除, 全家徙邊律의 禁止, 又死囚三覆의 敎 卽 三審 等)
三, 圖書編纂 (肅廟寶鑑, 小學訓義, 續五禮儀東國, 文獻備考, 國朝樂章, 闡義照鑑, 列聖誌狀, 續兵將圖說, 御定警世問答, 自省編 等)
四, 人民販恤 (浦項倉을 延日에 設하야 北關飢饉을 救한 外에 貢稅減額(三三年凶歲) 施粥(命惠廳施粥各道乞民) 販■及濟民倉(嶺南) 設立等)
五, 風俗矯正 (列如禁酒令을 下하고, 支那輸入綢緞着用禁止, 輩輿의 用金禁止, 巫女淫祀禁止)
六, 租稅整理 (例如均役廳設置, 均稅使派遣, 婢貢法의 廢止,)
八, 勸獎農桑 (例如籍田親耕, 王妃親蠶, 耕蠶科設置, 等)
九, 民義暢達及量尺改量, 曆書改正 例如申聞皷復設, 布帛尺頒布(此는 世宗朝에 始造하야 其後廢止하얏는데 右相兪拓基가 上啓하야 三陟府에 藏한 것을 模造頒布하얏다) 鍮斛의 製造, 等)＜23＞
英祖는 在位五十二年에 八十三歲의 高齡으로 崩御하니 (諱吟楊州元陵) 此는 李朝歷代以來로 踐祚가 最長하고 壽가 最高한 君主엿다 然而 老來에 多少失政이 有하고 群小의 情을 能察치 못하야 世子莊祖(卽 思悼世子)을 殺하는 慘變을 起하얏다 (木櫃(두주)에 入하야 殺함)
正祖(祘)는 莊祖의 子로 英祖二十五年에 王世孫으로 冊立되야 直히 孝章世子(眞宗縡)의 統을 承하얏다 幼時로부터 特히 聰明하고 學을 好함으로 英祖가 크게 鍾愛하고 五十一年에 自己의 老年이 벌서 八十을 過하야 聽政하기 難함을 知하고 世孫으로 하야금 代理케 하얏다 然而左相 洪麟漢은 世孫의 母 敬懿王后洪氏의 叔父로 貪卑無學하야 平素에 世孫이 卑視함으로 恒常 快快不快하더니 世孫의 代理聽政에 臨하야 極力沮害할 안이라 宮中의 威力이 有한 鄭厚謙 (英祖外孫이오 日城 洪致達의 子)과 結托하야 東宮을 傾危코자 하고  沈翔雲이 洪鄭 兩人에게 附하야 東宮의 左右를 害코자 하다가다 不果하고 (沈은 被竄) 英祖崩御後에 正祖가 卽位하매 洪鄭兩人外 其一派를 流竄賜死하얏다
上述함과 如히 正祖가 東宮으로 在할 時에 身邊이 매우 危險하얏스나 此를 極力保護한 人은 宮僚 洪國榮과 李鎭衡 等이엇다 正祖가 卽位하매 國榮으로 宿衛大將을 삼아 禁軍을 率하고 宮中護衛를 當하는 同時에 政權을 附與하니 此가 卽所謂 世道의 始初■다 世道라 함은 君主委托에 依하야 政權을 掌握함을 謂함이니 一次君主가 世道를 命한 以上에는 비록 其人이 散官卑職이라도 家宰以下가 다 그 命을 聽치 안이치 못하얏다 (權臣이 乘勢하야 政權을 弄할지라도 君主의 委托이 ■하면 世道가 안이다) 그럼으로 國家百般의 政務는 先히 世道를 訪한 後에 王 奏하고 王은 世道에 詢한 後에 此를 決하얏다 (如今攝政制) 然而國榮은 此世道를 恃하고 權勢를 恣行함이 鄭厚謙以上인 故로 其時世人이 洪을 目하야 大厚謙이라 稱하얏다 그러나 正祖는 決코 彼의 專橫을 黙視하기 不能함으로 未久에 한 罪로 放하고 正宗以後는 遂■外戚이 世道를 執하얏다＜24＞
正宗의 登極顚末은 대개 以上과 如하거니와 그는 英祖의 志를 繼하야 黨論蕩平과 治民에 努力함으로 在位二十四年間에 治蹟이 甚多하니 其重要한 者는 如左하다
一, 文敎上事業은 第一內苑에 奎章閣을을 新設하고 檢書官을 置하야 先生의 文章敎諭를 藏하고 第二는 木活字를 製造하고 (所謂 生生字를 模造한 者이니 二十年 大字十六萬, 小字十四萬을 制하야 整理字라 稱함) 第三은 圖書編纂함이오 (日省錄, 國朝寶鑑, 羹墻錄, 文苑黼黻, 同文彙攷, 欽恤典則, 千歲曆, 大典通編(經國大典과 續大典合部) 武藝圖譜通誌, 惠政年表, 明義錄, 續明義錄, 尊周彙編, 朱書百選, 五經篇, 大學類義, 弘齋全書, 奎章閣志, 秋官志, 弘文舘志, 奎章全韵, 五倫行實錄, 等 (此中御製가 多함)
二, 軍備上事業 第一은 武藝別監을 置하고 (初에 宣祖時에 勇士를 選하야 明將 許國威에게 武藝六技를 習케 하다가 莊宗이 代理後 十二技를 增하고 正宗時에 又騎技六을 增하야 合二十四技를 學케 하고 其能者를 侍衛에充하야 號曰 武藝別監이라 함) 第二는 壯勇營을 設하고 (屬扈衛廳) 第三은 壯勇外營五衛의 制를 設하고 水原城을 築하얏스며
三, 人民의 救恤 (例如內醫院·醫監을 命하야 病民을 治療하고 城外民田을 買하야 墓地를 設하야 貧民의 葬地로 充케 하며 (如今共同墓地) 宣惠廳에 貢錢布를 頒하고 米로 代給을 命한 事 等)
四, 風化上으로는 제일 黨爭을 調和하고 (寢室을 蕩蕩平平室이라 稱하야 黨爭調和를 示함) 第二는 婦女의 加髢, 巫女의 入城을 禁止하고 紋緞을 禁하는 節目을 印領하야 奢侈를 禁하고 第三은 外來書籍을 禁하야 思想을 取締하고 (時에 天主敎書가 自中國輸入故로 以左道로 禁止함) 第四는 各宮房圖署의 外邑侵漁와 內司放債를 嚴禁하얏다＜25＞
此外에 正宗은 又 八道輿圖로써 漢陽의 子午線을 準하야 此를 量正하고 各道州郡의 北極高度를 測하야 各道의 節氣, 時刻을 定하며 且 前日의 賢人達士에게 致祭表旌하고 (如致祭文益漸, 車五山天輅, 表旌死六臣等) 其子孫을 登用하엿스며 尙又 正宗時代에 特記할 것은 李肯翊이 燃藜室記를 述한 것과 朴趾源이 農書와 熱河日記 述한 것과 閣臣 洪良浩로 興王肇乘과 車五山集을 命編한 것이다

外戚이 跋扈한 純, 憲, 哲 三宗朝
正宗이 在位한 지 二十四年 庚申에 四十九歲로 昇遐하고 (水原花山健陵) 純祖가 卽位하니 時의 年이 僅 十一歲엿다 知事 金祖淳이 先王의 遣詔로 幼主를 輔하고 貞純王后(英祖后)가 聽政하더니 未幾에 祖淳의 女가 王后가 되고 貞純王后가 歸正하니 此로부터 外戚의 權이 漸次 盛하얏다 然而 李朝 外戚의 跋扈는 上述한 第十二代 明宗 卽位의 初에 王이 尙幼하야 大妃 文定王后 尹氏가 聽政하고 其外 舅尹元衡이 用事함으로부터 其端을 啓하얏스나 元衡의 沒落한 以後에는 歷代에 其跡이 殆無하더니 是에 至하야 다시 頭를 擡하고 서로 黨을 樹하고 權을 爭하니 政務가 閒却되고 綱紀가 弛廢하야 英正 兩祖의 復興한 國運이 漸次衰微不振함에 至하고 加之書院及吏胥의 弊가 極度에 達하야 人民이 安堵를 不得하고 다 亂을 思하얏다 此機를 乘하야 關西에서 一大反亂이 起하얏스니 卽 有名한 純祖 十二年 壬申의 洪景來의 革命亂이엿다 此亂은 未久에 討平하고  그 顚末은 別로 論及하엿기 玆에 略하거니와 그 動機는 全혀 이 外戚明黨의 弊로 由함이라 하겟다
純祖二十七年이엿다 王은 東宮(翼宗 旲)에게 政事를 代理케 하니 東宮이 仁明하고 學을 好함으로 賢君이라 稱하더니 三十年 庚寅에 不幸히 二十二歲의 靑年으로 早崩하니 王이 不得已 다시 聽政하다가 崩御한 後 憲宗이 卽位하니 (東宮의 子 奐) 年이 纔八歲인 故로 純元王后金氏가 (純祖의 后) 聽政하고 母后 趙氏는 皇太后가 되니 政權이 ＜26＞恒常母后의 外戚에 在하얏다(王母는 領敦寧 趙萬永의 女인 故로 其弟 寅永이 領相이 됨) 憲宗은 在位十五年에 二十三歲로 早崩하고 嗣가 無함으로 純元太后가 大臣을 會하야 王位繼統을 議하니 領相 鄭元容은 全溪君 璜(英祖孫 恩彦君 昪의 子)의 第三子(卽 哲宗)를 迎立하랴하고 左相 權敦仁은 都正 李夏銓(中宗第七子 德興大院君 岵의 宗孫)을 立하랴하야 議論이 不一하더니 元容이 純元皇后의 內旨를 奉하야 哲宗을 江華로서 迎入하니 에 全溪君은 己卒하고 家가 極貧하야 親히 田을 耕하고 履를 ■하다가 元容의 來함을 見하고 擧家가 驚惶하야 敢히 上途치 못하니 元容이 이이 皇太后旨를 懇諭하고 곳 迎立하니 此가 卽 哲宗(䄄)이오 時年 十九歲엿다
哲宗의 卽位初에는 純元皇后가 依然이 垂簾聽政하얏스나 哲宗이 金汶根의 女를 迎하야 王妃를 삼고 汶根을 封하야 永恩府院君이 되고 大政을 協賛케한 後에는 萬機가 다시 汶根의 手에 決하게 되엿다 이에 汶根의 侄金炳國은 訓練大將, 金炳學은 大提學, 金炳翼는 左賛成, 外侄 南秉哲은 承旨, 其子 炳弼은 待敎가 되야 內外의 權을 執하니 當時의 朝廷은 金氏의 天下와 如한 感이 잇섯다(秉哲은 博學能文하고 數學에 能함으로 汶根이 特히 愛할 안이라 哲宗도 한 寵愛함으로 其勢가 自然諸金과 上下하니 金炳翼는 此를 猜忌하야 全羅觀察使로 外出케 하엿더니 秉哲이 快快不樂하다가 其后 暗行御史가 管內를 巡視할 際에 監營에 至하야 府의 判官을 按함에 先히 其屬吏를 捕하야 此를 鞠問하니 秉哲이 大怒하야 部下로 御史를 亂打하니 御使가 驚怖하야 越墻逃走함으로 朝廷이 其職을 罷하얏다가 未久에 다시 召하야 直提學이 되엿다)
哲宗은 五男六女를 生하얏스나 다 早夭하고 오즉 一女임으로 (朴泳孝에게 嫁함) 王은 王族中 賢者를 選하야 世子를 삼고자 하얏섯다 그러나 諸金間에는 勸力의 爭이 有하야 容易히 決定이 되지 안을 안이라 其中에는 宗室中 名望이 有한 人을 除하야 後患을 根滅코자 하는 陰謀者지 잇섯다 그러자 마츰 謀反한다 稱하는 者가 有하야 其罪를 鞫하매 都正 李夏銓에게 及함으로 其 首謀者는 車裂하고 夏銓도 한 賜死하니 此는 哲宗의 卽位 初에 權敦仁이 夏銓을 繼位하기로 提議한 事가 有함으로 諸金이 此를 忌하야 除去하랴고 構誣함이오 其實은 何等의 罪가＜27＞無한 寃枉이엿다 此外에 景平君 李昱이  貪橫의 行이 有한 口實로 濟州에 被竄하니 當時 諸金의 勢力은 實로 專橫無雙하야 宗室의 諸親이다 唯唯喘息하고 禍가 及할가 恐할 이엿다 當時의 國政이 如斯히 紊亂한 中 三政(田賦, 軍籍, 還穀)이 더욱 紊亂하야 其弊가 甚大할  안이라 且飢饉과 大疫이 每年 交至하야 哲宗十三年二月에는 晋州民數千이 起하야 官衙를 破壞하는 大民擾가 起하고 仝年夏四月에는 全北益山에서 民擾가 起하고 繼하야 慶北開寧, 全南咸平에 民擾가 起함으로 王은 敎를 下하야 三政廳을 設하고 此救弊를 講케 하얏스나 但히 虛文에 不過하고 人民은 極度로 疲弊할 이엿다
然而 玆에 注意할 것은 天主敎의 傳播와 東學의 創出이니 天主敎가 朝鮮에 入하기는 벌서 宣祖壬辰亂時에 葡萄牙宣敎師「세스페데스」(Cespedes)가 日軍과 同來하야 傳敎하얏다 稱하나 實際 國內로 傳布되기는 正祖七年에 李 李承薰 等이 (冬至使) 北京에 徃하야 基督敎를 持來함으로부터 始하얏고 其後 正祖十八年十二月에는  淸國蘇州人 周文謨가 變服하야 其敎를 密布함으로 忠淸一帶에 其信徒가 多하다가 純祖元年에 信徒 黃嗣永이 逮捕되야 大逆律로 治하게 되매 (其時黃이 外力을 借하야 傳道한다 云한 故로) 周文謨가 한 巨魁로 梟首되고 李家煥 李承薰, 丁若鏞 等도 다 被誅하고 若鍾의 兄 若銓, 弟 若鏞은 康津에 竄하얏다 如斯히 信徒가 被害하는 同時에 禁法이 더욱 嚴格하얏스나 其敎徒는 漸益熾盛하야 純祖三十一年에는 佛國人으로 暹羅의 副主敎인 「리유겔」(Brugiere)이 中國厦門을 經하야 滿洲에 寄留하며 朝鮮에 入하랴다가 未果病死하고 其後 憲宗二年十二月에는 佛國宣敎師 「모반」(Maubont)이 朝鮮人 信徒 五人과 義州에 入하야 傳敎하고 次에 「챠스단」(Chastyn) 「암벨」(Imbert) 兩人이 京城에 來하야 「모반」과 會合하고 丁若鍾의 子 夏祥의 家에 潜居하야 布敎하더니 憲宗五年에 發覺되야 上記 三 宣敎師는 勿論이고 劉集吉, 丁夏祥, 趙信喆이 다 被誅하고 家産지 籍沒을 當하얏다 然而哲宗初에 至하야 西敎에 對한 取締가 頗히 寬大하야 「메이스롤」(Maistre)「베루누」(Berneux)「오-＜28＞메롤」(Aumetre) 等 三 宣敎師가 入國하고 敎徒가 한 一時增加되얏스니 此는 當時法網이 解弛하야 前日과 如한 取締를 하지 못함이엿다 (此外에 純祖三十一年에는 英船一艘가 洪州古代島에 泊하야 西洋布, 千里鏡 等과 朝鮮土産과 交換을 請하되 不許하고 又 憲宗十一年十二月에는 英佛의 船이 來泊하야 測量도 하고 書를 致하얏스나 다 拒絶하얏다)
且東學은 哲宗十一年庚申四月五日에 慶州人 崔濟愚가 創設하야 其 信徒가 一時屢十萬에 達하다가 仝十四年癸亥에 左道律로 逮捕하야 翌年甲子三月에 刑殺되엿스니 卽今 天道敎의 第一世敎祖 水雲先生이 是다

多事多艱한 光武時代
哲宗이 卽位한지 十四年에 崩御하고(壽三十二, 高陽禧陵) 嗣子가 無함으로 神貞翼皇后趙氏(憲宗母后趙人妃)가 諸大臣과 會議하고 興宣君(是應)의 第二子를 迎立코자 하니 此卽高宗太皇帝 다 領■事 金左根과 領敦寧 金興根이 不肯하야 曰하되 國家가 自來로 生存한 大院君이 無하니 萬一興宣君이 太上王의 尊位를 恃하고 朝政을 變更하면 國家가 不安하리라 하야 議論이 未決하더니 憲宗王后洪氏와 ■相 趙斗淳과 判書 洪淳穆(洪大妃族長)이 新王을 援하야 前領相 鄭元容으로 院相(王의 死後大小事를 掌하는 職)을 拜하고 新王을 迎入한 後 趙皇后가 新王의 手를 執하고 內殿에 入하야 王座를 設하고 垂簾後大臣을 召하야 不詔曰 嗣王은 翼宗의 統을 承한다하고 中外에 布告하니 諸大臣이 驚愕하나 敢히 何치 못하 但히 承命하고 王은 翼宗 統을 承하야 位에 卽하니 年이 十二오 時는 癸亥十二月十三日이엿다 (時에 哲宗后 金大妃는 喪中에 在할  안이라 金氏宗族이 有勢함으로 新王이 當然 哲宗의 統을 承할줄로 信하엿다가 失敗하얏다)＜29＞
上이 卽位한 後에 趙后는 大王太后, 洪后는 王太后, 金后는 太后로 尊하고 興宣君을 封하야 大院君이라 하고母夫人閔氏는 府大夫人이라 하며 興先君邸를 號하야 雲峴宮이라 하고 翼皇后의 詔로 大院君은 不臣의 禮로 待하고 上이 每月初에 一次식 雲峴宮에 往覲하니 此는 大院君으로 政事를 干與치 못하게 함이엿다 그러나 未久에 趙斗淳의 發論으로 趙后의 詔에 依하야 大院君으로 大政을 協賛케 하는 同時에 百官有司로 大院君의 指揮를 聽케 하고  三軍營의 兵勇을 選하야 護衛하며 籃輿를 乘 고 闕文에 出入케 하니 政權이 遂히 大院君의 手에 歸하고 多年間跋扈하던 金氏의 權이 一時墮地하얏다
◇大院君의 得勢와 其功業  高宗太皇帝의 卽位顚末은 대개 述함과 如하거니와 大院君은 攝政以後로 그의 獨特한 勇斷果敢한 政策을 發揮하야 먼저 大官의 黜陟을 行하고 (趙斗淳은 領相 金兵學은 右相, 李宜翼鄭基世, 金世均은 吏兵戶判書, 李升輔는 宣惠堂上, 李景夏는 訓練大將, 李漳濂은 禁衛大將, 李景宇는 御營大將, 李邦鉉은 總戎使, 申命純은 右捕盜大將) 多年를 弊되던 閥族政治를 抑破하야 人才登庸主義를 標榜하고 四色西北及開城人을 平等으로 敍用■코 景福宮을 再建하며(乙丑起工 丁卯落成)兩班儒生의 爭論巢窟인 書院鄕祠 等을 毁撤하고 萬東廟도 此時毁撤) 政府와 三軍府를 復活하고 系譜, 法典(璿源譜略, 哲宗實錄, 大典會通, 六典條例 等)을 編纂하여 戶布法 勵■하■ (當時 兩班은 租稅 不納하는 慣習이 有함으로 奴名으로 徵收함 且 義州■萊等國境으로 輸入하는 外資稅와 各地 社還制度를 整理하야 國財의 充實을 圖하얏다(丙寅 景福宮工事中 當百錢을 發行하고 丁卯에는 淸錢을 用하얏다) 且丙寅에는 外國宣敎師 十餘人과 朝鮮人信徒數萬을 虐殺한 問題로 佛艦이 江華를 來襲하야 所謂 洋擾를 惹起한 바 八道의 勇兵을 募하야 擊破하고 戊辰에는 平壤에서 監司 朴珪壽가 美艦 샤만號를 擊破한 故로 八年 辛未에 美艦五隻이 問責來侵하야 소위 辛未洋擾를 起한바(其時中軍魚在淵兄弟戰士) 此를 한 擊破하니 當時 大院君의 威力은 實로 內外를 振撼하야 誰가 敢히 抗爭하＜30＞는 者가 無하고 純哲朝以來로 衰微하얏던 王權이 다시 擴張되얏다
◇閔妃의 乘勢와 그 政局  然而 大院君이 活躍하는 舞臺의 內幕에는 一帶政敵이 潜在하얏스니 此는 世人이 皆知하는 明成皇后 閔氏다 이 閔后는 閔致祿의 女로 大院君夫人閔氏의 實弟 閔升鎬와 養家男妹의 關係가 有함으로 府大夫人이 斡旋하야 李太皇三年에 十六歲妙齡으로 王妃에 冊封되엿스니 (致祿이 嫡妻의 女 一人만 有하고 無子함으로 其族兄 致久의 子 升鎬를 養子로 繼하얏스니 卽 府大夫人의 實弟다) 그는 元來에 天性이 機敏하고 書史를 能通함으로 高宗太皇帝는 勿論이고 當時 諸王太妃와 府大夫人의 寵愛를 受하얏다 그러나 入宮後 六年을 經하야도 一子가 無한 中(一男一女를 生하얏스나 皆 早夭함) 當時 宮人 李氏가 一子를 生함으로 (卽 完和宮이니 後日 閔妃가 毒殺함) 大院君은 此를 特히 鍾愛하야 世子로 冊封할 意를 有하더니 (此가 大院君과 閔妃間에 生한 最初 感情이다) 其後 甲戌에 皇子가 誕야(卽 隆熈皇帝) 乙亥에 世子로 冊封되고 其前年 癸酉에는 高宗太皇帝의 長成과 밋 崔益鉉 等 儒生一派의 大院君의 失政論疏反對로 大院君이 政界를 退하니(其時 大院君이 怒하야 崔益鉉을 濟州에 竄하얏스나 議政 朴珪壽의 勸告로 還政함) 局面은 俄然一變하야 閔后가 用事하게 되얏다 閔后는 劈頭에 內閣을 變更하야 李裕元으로 領相, 李最應으로 左相, 金炳國으로 右相, 閔奎鎬로 吏判兼武衛所都統使를 삼고 崔益鉉을 釋하고 萬東廟를 復設하야 儒生을 懷柔하며 其外 閔謙鎬, 閔台鎬, 閔泳穆, 閔升鎬 等이다 要位에 在하게 되니 大院君時代에 一時回復되엿던 王權은 다시 外戚의 手中으로 入하얏다(甲戌에 閔升鎬家에 爆物을 入한 凾이 來하야 閔이 開見하다가 升鎬父子와 其母及妻가 暴死하고 李最應家에 防火한 事가 有한데 世人이 大院君의 使囑이라 云함) 閔后는 如斯히 內政을 變革할  안이라 前日 大院君의 鎖國攘夷의 主義를 一變하야 丙子에는 日本과 修好條規를 結하고(先是에 日本軍艦雲揚號가 中國으로부터 歸國하는 路次에 漢江口에 碇泊한 것을 江華兵이 砲擊함으로 日本에서 大使 黑田淸隆과 副使 井上馨을 使送하야 朝鮮政府와 談辦한 結果 此條規를 ＜31＞結함이다)自此로 條規에 依하야 己卯에는 釜山港을 開하고 庚辰에는 修信使 金宏集을 遣하고 辛巳에는 朴定陽, 趙秉稷, 魚允中, 洪英植을 遣하야 日本에 遊覽케 하고 라서 日使도 屢次 來往하여 壬午에는 日本陸軍中尉 堀本禮造를 招聘하야 衛兵을 操鍊케하니 日本과 關係가 甚히 親密하게 되엿다 그러나 朝野人士는 대개 日本을 忌嫌하야 李萬孫, 崔益鉉 等이 極히 反論을 하고  大院君도 失政後 恒常 開化黨을 不喜하는 同時에 閔妃及外戚의 跋扈가 甚함으로 人民이 大院君의 復政을 企望하는 者가 多하얏다
그러다가 壬午에 兵卒의 粮食을 屢月不給함으로 兵卒의 亂을 起하야 李最應, 閔謙鎬, 金輔鉉, 閔昌植 等 要路大官을 殺하고  日公舘을 襲擊하며 日本居留民及堀本 等을 虐殺하고 閔后를 害코자 하니 閔后는 變服하고 忠州 長湖院 閔應植家로 逃避하고 (其時에 此를 知한 者가 無함)日本公使 花房義質 等은 仁川으로 逃避하얏다(所謂 壬午軍亂) 此時에 大院君은 變을 聞하고 宮中에 馳入하야 亂을 鎭撫하고 武衛, 壯禦 兩營을 罷하는 同時에 訓練, 禁衛, ■營 等 舊營을 復設하며 王妃의 喪을 ■하야 其衣巾으로 葬禮를 行하니 大院君의 勢가 다시 一世를傾하얏다
然而 當時 金允植이 淸國에 使하얏다가 天津에서 其變을 聞하고 李鴻章에게 救援을 請하니 李鴻章은 元來 朝鮮의 自由放置를 不肯하던 中 此는 干涉의 絶對好時機라 思하고 內亂鎭撫의 名으로 水師提督 吳長慶을 命하야 水陸五千兵을 率하고 京城에 出케 하고 又 日本은 花房義質로 軍艦四隻, 陸軍一大隊를 率하고 仁川에 來케 하니 日淸兩軍의 朝鮮上陸이 巧히 同日이엿다 幾日後에 花房公使가 皇帝를 陛見하고 數個條件을 要求하얏스 大院君의 反對로 屢日을 連拖未決하다가 七月十五日에 大院君이 突然이 淸軍에 誘拉되야 促定으로 護送되니(壬午軍亂을 大院君이 煽動하얏다는 口實로) 形勢가 急轉되야 卽時 日本의 要求를 聽하고 李裕元, 金宏集이 全權이 되야 七月十七日에 遂히 日本과 條約을 結하니 此卽 濟物浦條約이다 (賠償金 五十萬圓, 謝罪使派遣, 軍＜32＞亂主動者處罰, 公使保護兵駐屯 等) 此條約에 依하야 李景夏, 申正熈는 卽時 罷免하고 且 訓練都監을 廢하며 朴泳孝를 修信大使, 金晩植을 副使로 하야 日本에 派遣하고 (徐光範, 金玉均 其時 隨行) 且王妃를 忠州에서 迎立하니 時局은 玆에  突變이 되얏다
그러나 淸國은 依然히 吳長慶과 袁世凱로 大兵을 駐屯케 하고 內情을 干涉하야 橫暴가 滋甚하고 且 閔台鎬 閔泳翊이 當路用事하야 國政이 日非하니 靑年의 獨立黨 金玉均 朴泳孝 等이 크게 憤慨하고 一大革命의 亂을 起코자 하야 日本公使와 相議한 後 甲申十月에 郵政局 祝宴을 機會로 하야 徐光範, 洪英植, 徐載弼, 邊燧, 申福模 等과 共謀하야 閔泳翊 等을 刺傷하고  僞命으로 日本兵을 招致하야 宮中을 護衛케 하고 閔泳穆, 閔台鎬, 韓圭稷, 尹泰駿, 李祖淵, 趙寧夏 等 守舊黨 一派를 斬殺한 後 內閣을 組織하야 洪英植은 右相, 金玉均은 戶叅, 朴泳孝는 前後營使, 徐光範은 左右營使를 兼帶하고 徐載弼은 前營正領이 되니 天下는 一時 獨立黨의 手中으로 歸하얏다 그러나 守舊黨은 다시 袁世凱에게 保護를 請하야 大兵을 率하고 宮中으로 入하고  朝鮮左右營兵이 其後를 援하야 一齊히 日兵과 交火함으로 日軍이 勢寡雜敵하야 城外로 退却하고 金玉均一派는 遂히 日本으로 亡命하니 (其時 皇帝는 北開王廟에서 避亂하얏다) 이것이 所謂 甲申十月의 變이다
其後 閔應植, 閔泳煥, 閔泳駿 等 外戚이 다시 政局에 當하니 守舊黨이 其勢를 回復하고 日淸兩國의 兵은 乙酉 天津條約에 依하야 다 撤回하얏다 其後 戊子에는 露國과 通商條約을 結하고 己丑에는 朝日通漁章程이 成하고 壬辰에는 韓墺修好通商條約이 成하고 癸巳에는 洪鍾宇가 金玉均을 上海에서 暗殺하고 甲午에는 古阜에서 全琫準一派가 東學亂을 起하야 日淸戰爭을 誘致하고 其結果 乙未에 馬關條約이 成立하야 朝鮮이 獨立國인 것을 世界에 宣言하고 甲午에 改한 八衙門의 制度를 七衙門으로 變하고 仝年一月에 金宏集 內閣이 成立되엿스며 八月二十日에는 ■兵이 闕을 犯하야 閔后가 被殺하고 大院君이 다시 宮內에 入하얏다(先是自淸還國) 其翌年丙申에＜33＞는 年號를 建陽이라 하고 二月에는 皇帝及皇太子가 親露派의 擁護로 露公舘에 播遷하고 金宏集 內閣一派가 親露派 李範晋 等에게 被殺하얏다 丁酉八月에는 國號를 改하야 大韓이라 하고 年號를 光武라 改하얏스며 一年 己亥에는 韓淸通商條約 五年 辛丑에는 韓比通商條約 六年에는 韓白通商條約이 成하고 八年 甲辰 一月 二十三日에 는 韓日議定書가 成하고 九年 乙巳 十一月 七日에는 韓日新協約(所謂 保護五條約)이 成立되야 閔泳煥 外 四五人士가 殉國하고 十年 丁未 七月 八日에는 海牙事件으로 關聯이 되야 皇帝의 位를 禪하고 太上皇이 되엿다 何如間 이 光武時代는 李朝 朝鮮에 第一 多事多艱한 이엿다(甲申十月變 以後는 詳論하기 困難한 事가 有하야 其 槪点만 記載함)

噫二十七代의 隆熙朝
隆熈皇帝는 李祖最後의 皇上이엿다 光武十年(卽 隆熈元年)七月十八日에 位를 受하야 八月十三日에 年號를 隆熈라 改하고 僅히 四年되는 庚戌八月二十二日에 日韓合倂條約이 成立되야 仝二十九日에 遂히 讓國의 詔를 下하얏다 이 皇帝의 一生來歷과 合倂條約의 成立經路如何는 一般이 이미 잘 記憶하는 바인즉 새삼스러이 다시 말하고 십지 안타 다만 當時 條約文을 잠간 紹介하고 筆을 擲한다
日韓合倂條約文
第一條
韓國皇帝陛下는 韓國全部에 關한 一切의 統治權을 完全且永久히 日本國皇帝陛下에게 讓與함
第二條
日本國皇帝陛下는 前條에 揭한 讓與를 受諾하고 且 全然韓國을 日本帝國에 倂合함을 諾함
第三條
日本國皇帝陛下는 韓國皇帝陛下, 太皇帝陛下, 皇太子殿下並其后妃及後裔로 하야금 各其地位에 應하야 相＜34＞當한 尊號, 威嚴及名譽를 享有케 하고 且此를 保持함에 充分한 歲費를 供給하기로 約함
第四條
日本皇帝陛下는 前條以外의 韓國皇族及其後裔에 對하야 各相當한 名譽及待遇를 享有케 하고 且此을 維持함에 必要한 資金을 供與함을 約함
第五條
日本國皇帝陛下는 勳功이 有한 韓人으로서 特히 表彰함이 適當함으로 認하는 者에 對하야 榮爵을 授하고 且恩給을 與함
第六條
日本國政府는 前記倂合의 結果로서 全然韓國의 施設을 擔任하고 同地에 施行하는 法規를 遵守하는 韓人의 身軆及財産에 對하야 充分保護를 與하고 且其福利의 增進을 圖함이 可함
第七條
日本國政府는 誠意忠實하게 新制度를 尊重하는 韓人으로서 相當한 資格이 有한 者를 事情이 許함에 限하야 韓國에서 帝國官吏로 登用함이 可함
第八條
本條約은 日本皇帝陛下及韓國皇帝陛下의 裁可를 經한 者임으로 公布日로부터 此를 施行함
右證據로서 兩全權委員은 本條約에 記名調印함
明治四十三年八月二十二日
隆熈四年八月二十二日
統監子鬱 寺內正毅 ㊞
內閣總理大臣 李完用㊞＜35＞