Magazine Title:	개벽 제70호
Publication Date:	1926년 06월 01일
Article Title:	李太祖의 建國百話 (Tales of Yi T'aejo's Founding of the Nation)
Author:	車賤者
Article Type:	논설 (Editorial/Essay)

李太祖의 建國百話
						車賤者

His Family Lineage of Heroes Through Generations
T'aejo's progenitor (始祖) was Sagong Yi Han (李翰) of Silla. His 6th generation descendant, Kŭnghyu (兢休), first served Koryŏ and became a Sagong. Later, in the 18th generation, there was one named Yi Ansa (李安社) (Mokcho, 穆祖). He was originally from Chŏnju (全州) and also served Koryŏ, becoming the Chisa (知事) of Sŏnju (宣州) (present-day Tŏkwŏn, 咸南德源). However, he committed a minor crime (killing the beloved concubine of the governor in Chŏnju) and fled, relocating to Hwal*dong (活*洞) in Samch'ŏk County (三陟郡), Kangwŏn Province. But there too, he incurred the wrath of the Chihyŏn (知縣, county magistrate) and fled far away to Yuan's Nanjing (南京) (present-day Júzǐjiē, 間島局子街). He then served the Yuan dynasty and became a Darughachi (達魯花亦, a Yuan local official title, originally pronounced 'darughači') overseeing 5,000 households. His son, Yi Haengni (李行里) (Ikcho, 翼祖), also became a Ch'ŏnho (千戶, Commander of a Thousand) in Nanjing. As the subordinates of various Jurchen Ch'ŏnho all submitted to him, the other Ch'ŏnho grew jealous and hostile, seeking to kill him. Consequently, he fled and resided on Chŏkto (赤島) (Kyŏnghŭng East, 鏡興東) in the lower reaches of the Tuman River (豆滿江), later moving back to Tŏkwŏn Prefecture (德源府).
Ikcho's son, Tojo (度祖) Ch'un (椿), whose Mongolian name was Bayan Temür (李顔帖木兒), also served the Yuan, inheriting his father's position. During the reign of Koryŏ's King Ch'ungnyŏl, he finally had an audience with the king. Tojo had three sons. The second son, Chasun (子春), whose Mongolian name was Ulus Buqa (吾魯思不花), resided in Ssangsong (雙城) (present-day Hŭngsu, 水興) and also became a Ch'ŏnho. He is none other than Yi T'aejo's father, Hwanjo (桓祖). In the 4th year of Koryŏ's King Kongmin, he came to the king's court and became a Sobuyun (少府尹). At that time, the northern part of the Korean peninsula was largely a den (巢窟) of the Jurchen tribes (so-called Yain, 野人), and the Yuan dynasty had established the Ssangsong General Directorate (雙城總管府) to rule over it. However, taking advantage of the gradual decline of Yuan's old power and the fact that Ming's new power was not yet established, King Kongmin sought to reclaim the old northern territories. He appointed Milchik Pusa (密直副使) Yu Inu (柳仁雨) as Tongbungmyŏn Pyŏngmasa (東北面兵馬使) to attack the Yuan's General Directorate. Hwanjo <36> acted as an inside collaborator (內應), suddenly attacking and capturing the General Directorate, recovering the lands north of Hamju (咸洲). For this achievement, Hwanjo became Sakpangdo Manho kyŏm Pyŏngmasa (朔方道萬戶兼兵馬使) and pacified (鎭撫) the northeastern border region. Unfortunately, in the 4th month of the 9th year of King Kongmin's reign, he passed away at the age of 46. From Mokcho to Hwanjo, these four are collectively referred to as the Four Ancestors (四祖) of the Yi Dynasty.

A Myriad-Household Marquis Versed in Both Literary and Martial Arts
Hwanjo also had three sons: the eldest was Wŏn'gye (元桂) (Wanp'unggun, 完豊君), the second was Sŏnggye (成桂) (Yi T'aejo, 即李太祖), and the third was Hwa (和) (Ŭian Taegun, 義安大君). Among them, the second son, Sŏnggye, possessed extraordinary natural talent, a brilliant and heroic spirit, excelled in archery with the skill to pierce a willow leaf at a hundred paces (百步穿楊), and was also proficient in literary arts (文), truly a heroic man accomplished in both civil and military virtues. He let out his first cry (呱呱의 聲) in Hŭksŏk-ri, Yŏnghŭng County, on the 11th day of the 10th month of the Ulhae year, the 4th year after King Ch'ungsuk's reign in Koryŏ. In the 5th year of King Kongmin's reign, as a young man of 22, he became the Tongbungmyŏn Sang Manho (東北面上萬戶). He repeatedly achieved military merit on the northern border and soon became Munhabu Chisa (門下府知事). At that time, the peninsula suffered incessant troubles from the northern Yain (野人) and frequent raids by Japanese sea rovers (日本汎海의 邊寇) (so-called Waegu, 倭寇) in various provinces and counties in the south, preventing the people from living in peace. However, the Koryŏ court, plagued by political corruption and dilapidated military preparedness, lacked anyone capable of repelling them. Then, in the 1st year of King U's reign, Yi T'aejo was ordered to subjugate the sea rovers (at that time, he was Chŏn-Kyŏng-Yang-Kwang-do Tosunch'alsa Ch'ansŏngsa, 全慶楊廣道都巡察使贊成事). Together with the famous General Yi Chiran (李之蘭) (originally Tong Turan, 佟豆蘭), he dispatched troops to Unbong (雲峯) in Chŏlla Province. At Inch'ŏn Station (引月驛), he shot and killed the incomparably valiant enemy general Ajibaldo (阿只拔都) (Chiran shot off his helmet (兜), and T'aejo shot him in the mouth) and pacified the remaining forces. This is the renowned Hwangsan Great Victory (荒山大捷) (a victory monument exists today). Furthermore, in September of the same year, he also heavily defeated the Waegu* (왜*) in Haeju (海州) (the historic site Yakmach'i, 躍馬池古跡, exists). From this point on, foreign threats within the realm ceased, and T'aejo's fame grew daily, leading to his leap to the position of Munha Sijung (門下侍中) in the 14th year of the same king's reign.

Securing the State with a Three-Foot Sword
However, the Koryŏ court at that time had two pillars of state: one was Ch'oe Yŏng (崔瑩), a military official who, like Yi T'aejo, held the position of Munha Sijung; the other was Chŏng Mongju (鄭夢周), a civil official holding the position of Chŏngdang Munhak (政堂文學). These two men were not only ministers from families who had served the Koryŏ dynasty for generations but also enjoyed widespread trust and managed all major and minor state affairs. Therefore, even though Yi T'aejo occupied a seat in the State Council (政堂), he could not freely wield power, making it difficult to achieve his ambition of seizing the throne. Consequently, Yi constantly thought that if only Ch'oe and Chŏng were gone, the world (天下) would fall into his hands. Conversely, Ch'oe and Chŏng thought that once the northern barbarians and southern bandits were subdued and peace reigned, if only Yi were gone, they <37> could restore the royal house and accomplish the great task of reviving the Koryŏ dynasty. Thus, they suspected and envied each other. However, since Chŏng P'oŭn (鄭圃隱) was originally a civil official, he did not overtly try to eliminate Yi T'aejo (until before the Wihwado Retreat, 威化島回軍). But Sijung Ch'oe, being a military man, sought opportunities to eliminate Yi T'aejo whenever possible. When T'aejo was Sijung, one day at some gathering, linked verses were composed. T'aejo composed the line "With a three-foot sword, I secure the state (三尺劒頭安社稷)." Sijung Ch'oe responded with the line, "With a single whip, the universe (乾坤) is not yet settled (一條鞭未定乾坤)." Everyone present realized the great ambitions of both men, and the two also understood each other's intentions and guarded themselves against each other. Prior to this, in China, the Yuan dynasty had fallen, and the Ming dynasty had newly risen (Yuan fell in the 17th year of King Kongmin). The shockwaves of this revolution reached the peninsula, creating pro-Ming and anti-Ming factions within the Koryŏ court. King U and the Yi Inim (李仁任) faction, considering historical international relations with Yuan, advocated the anti-Ming stance, while Yi T'aejo's faction, considering the larger strategic situation, argued for a pro-Ming stance. Amidst such unresolved disputes, in the 2nd month of the 14th year of King U's reign, a Koryŏ envoy went to Ming but was refused diplomatic ties. Furthermore, Ming established the Ch'ŏllyŏng Guard (鐵嶺衛) and intended to annex the land north of Ch'ŏllyŏng (鐵嶺) to Liaodong (遼東). The Koryŏ king and officials were momentarily enraged and proposed an invasion of Liaodong; the chief proponent was Ch'oe Yŏng. At that time, Yi T'aejo strongly argued against it, pointing out the unfavorable strategic situation, but the king did not listen. He appointed Ch'oe Yŏng as P'alto Tot'ongsa (八道都統使, Commander-in-Chief of the Eight Provinces), appointed Ch'angsŏng Buwŏn'gun (昌城府院君) Cho Minsu (曹敏修) and Yi T'aejo as Left and Right Tot'ongsa (左右都統使) to lead a large army towards Liaodong. The king and Ch'oe Yŏng personally stayed in P'yŏngyang (平壤) to command the army from afar. However, this expedition was, in reality, less about conquering Liaodong and more about being wary of T'aejo's growing power, sending him on an external campaign to seize the opportunity to eliminate him. (If Ming questioned the military expedition, they intended to blame T'aejo, and if defeated in battle, they also intended to punish him for the crime.)

The Six Armies Halt at Wihwa Island
Meanwhile, Yi T'aejo, together with Cho Minsu, led the left and right armies to Wihwa Island (威化島). It happened to be the 5th month of summer. Whether by Heaven's blessing or divine intervention, unexpected rain began and continued for several days, causing the river water to rise significantly (漲溢), making it impossible for the army and horses to cross. Many soldiers were unwilling to go on the expedition, and nearly half deserted midway. Assessing this situation, Yi T'aejo became greatly concerned and discussed countermeasures with his subordinate generals. Subordinates like Nam Ŭn (南誾) and Nam Chae (南在) proposed a plan (獻策), saying, "Attacking the powerful, newly risen Ming country with our weak army is a foolish strategy like throwing weak flesh into the mouth of a hungry tiger. It is better to quickly turn back the army (回軍) and initiate an internal political revolution." T'aejo was greatly pleased and turned the entire army back towards the capital. At that time, the king was in P'yŏngyang. Hearing of the change, he and Ch'oe Yŏng <38> hastily returned to the royal palace with barely 50 horsemen. Thereupon, T'aejo unleashed his troops, surrounded the royal palace, accused Ch'oe Yŏng, whom he had long sought to eliminate, of being a treacherous minister (奸臣), and executed him. (When Commander Ch'oe faced death, he cried out in a stern voice, "If I am guilty, grass will grow on my grave; otherwise, no grass will grow." His grave is in Koyang, and to this day, no grass grows; it is called Chŏkpun, 赤墳, the Red Tomb.) He deposed the king and exiled (放하야) him to Kanghwa Island (江華島) (later transferred to Kangnŭng, 江陵, and then killed). Following Cho Minsu's plan, he enthroned U's son, Ch'ang (昌) (only 9 years old at the time). The following year, he immediately exiled Ch'ang to Kanghwa and killed him, then enthroned Chŏngch'anggun Yo (定昌君瑤), the 7th generation descendant of King Sinjong. This was Koryŏ's last monarch, King Kongyang (恭讓王).

His Policy Focused on Protecting Farmers
Then as now, it is common practice for those intending to undertake great enterprises to first win the hearts and minds of the people of that era and society. At that time, Koryŏ, an agricultural nation, suffered from great disorder in its land system (田制), with numerous abuses of land annexation and encroachment (*攘*) by large landowners. Consequently, tenant farmers faced extreme hardship, unable to live securely, merely hoping for turmoil to arise. Yi T'aejo, perceiving this, plotted with Cho Chun (趙浚) and others, first attempting land system reform. However, many court officials, ignorant of the times and popular sentiment, opposed it. T'aejo forcefully pushed for it, even banishing the opponent Cho Minsu. In the 9th month of King Kongyang's reign, he finally achieved a major land reform. The people all praised (歌*) T'aejo's virtue. Furthermore, a prophecy (讖言) saying "Mokcha (木子, meaning Yi 李) will become king" circulated among the people, causing public sentiment to increasingly favor T'aejo. Like adding wings to a fierce tiger, Cho Chun, Nam Ŭn, Chŏng Tojŏn (鄭道傳), Ha Ryun (河崙), Pae Kŭngnyŏm (裵克廉), Cho Inok (趙仁沃), Cho Pak (趙璞), and over 50 other civil and military officials all sought to enthrone (推載) T'aejo. The revolutionary atmosphere gradually thickened throughout the capital. However, one person remained an object of apprehension: Chŏng P'oŭn. Although he had lost a wing (羽翼) with the death of Commander Ch'oe, his virtue and reputation were still high in the court and country. Moreover, his thoroughly loyal heart dedicated to the king and country could not be swayed even by the force of ten thousand horses. As long as he lived, no matter T'aejo's military strength, no one dared to covet (覬窺) the Wang family's throne. Therefore, although T'aejo harbored ambitions, he could not make the first move and merely awaited the right moment. However, the radical faction, including Taejong (太宗, Yi Pangwŏn) and Cho Yŏnggyu (趙英珪), knew they had to kill Chŏng P'oŭn first. On the 4th day of the 4th month of the Imsin year, they bludgeoned (椎殺) Chŏng P'oŭn to death at Sŏnjuk Bridge (善竹橋). Chŏng P'oŭn's death was the final tragic act of the Koryŏ dynasty and simultaneously the celebratory cannon fire (祝賀砲) for the banquet marking Yi T'aejo's ascension. On the 16th day of the 7th month of the same year, Yi T'aejo, due to the backing (推載) of the aforementioned Pae Kŭngnyŏm, Nam Ŭn, and others, deposed King Kongyang and ascended the throne (卽位) at Such'ang Palace (壽昌宮) in Kaesŏng (開城). The sovereignty of the peninsula, sought for many years, finally passed to the Yi clan. T'aejo was 58 years old at the time. (The Wang dynasty lasted 34 reigns, 475 years).

Pitiable Dragon Descendants Buried in Fishes' Bellies <39>
Originally, Yi T'aejo was neither from a well-founded, prestigious noble family (根據잇는 名門遺族) nor a virtuous and renowned scholar, but a military commander who had drifted in the frontier regions. He seized the peninsula's sovereignty through temporary military force. At that time, Kaesŏng still had many members of the Wang royal family and loyal retainers of the Koryŏ dynasty, and popular sentiment still tended towards the old dynasty. T'aejo realized the extreme difficulty in ruling and managing this and pondered deeply. Revealing the ambition typical of feudal era heroes without reservation, he first implemented a policy of exterminating (撲滅策) the royal family and loyal retainers, while also employing appeasement tactics (懷柔策). The month after his ascension, he dismantled the ancestral shrine of the Koryŏ kings and moved it to Madyŏn County (麻田郡).
(T'aejo destroyed the Wang family's ancestral shrine, loaded its spirit tablets (木主) onto a large boat, and set it afloat on the Imjin River. The boat floated upstream against the current and docked itself in front of a Buddhist temple on the river in Madyŏn County. T'aejo moved the Buddha statue elsewhere, enshrined (安置) the spirit tablets, and named the place Sungŭijŏn, 崇義殿.)
The deposed King Yo was demoted (降封) to Kongyanggung (恭讓君) and moved to Wŏnju (原州), then later transferred to Kansŏng (杆城). The entire Wang clan was dispersed between Kanghwa (江華) and Kŏje (巨濟) islands. In the 5th month of the following year, an order was issued allowing the Wang clan members on Kŏje to come ashore, stating the intention to employ those with talent. However, in the 3rd year, Kim Kahaeng (金可行), the magistrate of Tongnae County, and Chang'gwan (場官) Pak Chungjil (朴仲質) were discovered consulting Yi Hŭngmu (李興茂), a blind man from Milsŏng (密城), about the fate of the state and the Wang clan. Also, someone reported that Ch'amch'an (參贊) Pak Wi (朴葳) had connections. These individuals were arrested and punished. King Kongyang and his two sons were transferred to Samch'ŏk (三陟). The Wang clan members who had come ashore were all sent back to Kŏje. Soon after, persuaded by his scheming advisors (the Ministry of Punishments (刑曹) and the Censorate (臺聯) submitted memorials 12 times), he had the three, King Kongyang and his two sons in Samch'ŏk, strangled. He then had the entire Wang clan on Kanghwa and Kŏje thrown into the sea and killed.
(Initially, T'aejo wanted to kill the Wang clan but lacked a pretext. He loaded the Wangs onto boats, placing skilled swimmers among them. Midway, the swimmers dove into the sea and bored holes in the boat bottoms, causing them to sink and drown. At that time, a monk close to one Wang member stood on the shore, raised his hand, and called out. That Wang member wrote a linked verse in blood on his sleeve and threw it ashore. The poem said: "A single oar's sound beyond the blue waves, I ask the mountain monk, are you well?" (一聲搖櫓滄波外 借問山僧泰爾何 云云) Seeing the poem, the monk wept bitterly.)
Only the deposed King Yo's younger brother, U (瑀), whose daughter was married to T'aejo's seventh son, Pangbŏn (芳蕃), narrowly escaped death. He was enfeoffed as Kŭiŭigun (歸義君) and tasked with overseeing the rites at the Madyŏn shrine. However, T'aejo still could not rest easy. He repeatedly issued orders throughout the country to search out and execute (誅戮) the remaining members of the Wang clan. Furthermore, even those with the surname Wang who were not descendants (裔) of the Koryŏ royal family were forced to adopt their maternal surnames. (T'aejo consulted the Wang clan genealogy register and hunted down Wangs one by one. In a dream, Wang Kŏn, founder of Koryŏ, appeared greatly angered, saying, "I unified the Three Han states. Why do you not recognize my merit and instead exterminate me and my descendants? Your family too will face a terrible calamity soon." T'aejo awoke alarmed and spared the Wangs remaining on just one page. Later, after three of his own sons died violent deaths, T'aejo regretted his actions.) Moreover, renowned and virtuous officials of the old Koryŏ dynasty were all executed or banished. Among those who suffered the most cruel fate were Ch'a Kanŭi Wŏn* (車諫議原*) (at the time, the so-called four meritorious subjects Ha Ryun, Cho Yŏnggyu, Ham Chŏllim <40>, Chŏng Tojŏn were all sons-in-law of the Cha family門*婿; they conspired with Taejong and massacred over 80 members of the Cha clan overnight at Songma and Yangwŏn fields, and their relatives by marriage were also exiled to remote frontiers.), Yi Mogŭn's (李牧隱) son Chonghak (種學) and his disciples Yi Sungin (李崇仁), the family of Master U Yidong (禹易東先生家), and others. Besides them, Kil Chaeŭn (吉治隱), Wŏn Ch'ŏnsŏk (元天錫), Cho Kyŏn (趙狷), Nam Ulchin (南乙珍), and the so-called 70-odd men of Tumun-dong (杜門洞) all hid in the mountains and forests, upholding their integrity. Because the people of Kaesŏng did not participate in the state examination celebrating the ascension, they were implicated collectively and barred from taking exams for several hundred years. Also, because T'aejo himself was a military man from the northern provinces and the people of the northwest were considered strong-willed and fierce, he feared they might cause trouble for his descendants later and prohibited their prominent employment. This must be called an unprecedentedly vicious policy in history. (In reality, much of this was carried out by Taejong and his scheming advisors, with T'aejo directly doing less.)

The Country Named Chosŏn
As described above, T'aejo conquered the people's hearts through policies of coercion and appeasement, while simultaneously seeking to reform all manner of systems. First, considering a change of the country's name, discussions were held between Hwaryŏng (和寧) and Chosŏn (朝鮮), finally settling on Chosŏn, which was promulgated throughout the realm. He also considered that keeping the capital in Kaesŏng presented various obstacles to governance. He sought a location with the least connection to the Koryŏ dynasty, selecting a site at the foot of Kyeryong Mountain (鷄龍山) near Kongju (公州) (the place now called Sindo, 新都). Work began in the 3rd year, Kapsul. However, the water supply was insufficient, and transportation was inconvenient, making it entirely unsuitable for a capital. He stopped the work, citing a divine dream (fearing that stopping construction after wasting state funds would harm national prestige and control over public sentiment, he fabricated a story about a divine being appearing in a dream saying, "Kyeryong Mountain is the capital for the Chŏng clan after 500 years; the Yi clan's capital is Hanyang"). Following the advice of the monk Muhak (神僧武學) and Chŏng Tojŏn (鄭道傳) (at that time, Ha Ryun also petitioned for Hanyang to be the capital), he immediately designated Hanyang as the new capital, completed the palace, and moved the capital in the 10th month of winter, leading all the officials. Furthermore, T'aejo compiled a catalog concerning the successes, failures, and historical evolution of Koryŏ's administration and legal system, discussed it with his vassals, and modeled new institutions on the old official system, establishing the Topyŏngŭisasa (都評議使司, overseeing state affairs) and the Ŭihŭng Samgunbu (義興三軍府, overseeing military affairs). He also established a supply depot (備庫) to provide military supplies and instituted a system of military tallies (兵符), ordering that troops could not be mobilized without the authority of the tally, whether inside or outside the country. Additionally, he compiled the Kyŏngje Yukchŏn (經濟六典, Six Codes of Governance: Governance, Rites, Education, Administration, Punishment, Public Works; compiled by Chŏng Tojŏn and revised by Ha Ryun), built the capital city walls (築都城) (Pyŏngja year). In foreign relations, he naturally established friendly ties with Ming China and also pacified the Jurchens. At that time, countries like Ryukyu (琉球) and *Ra (*羅) observed the trends, presented local products, and came to court.
However, T'aejo's political revolution was as described above, but his revolution in social systems and cultural edification can be seen in two aspects: one was the suppression <41> of Buddhism and the promotion of Confucianism; the other was despising the military (武) and esteeming the literary (文). This ultimately stemmed from recognizing that Koryŏ had declined and fallen due to Buddhism and military figures. However, these two aspects brought about a major transformation in the overall social landscape, while also, it must be said, planting the seeds for the later decline and fall of the Yi Dynasty due to Confucianism and civil weakness (文弱).

Who Knew Disaster Would Arise Within the Palace Walls?
T'aejo had eliminated the Wang clan of Koryŏ and the old retainers in one fell swoop, eradicating the threat of external covetousness. He thought to himself that the realm was now utterly peaceful and secure, and he could rest easy on his high dragon throne and govern effortlessly. However, not long after his ascension, disaster arose from within the palace walls (蕭牆之內), staging a tragic drama of fratricidal conflict. Originally, T'aejo had eight sons. Six (Chinan Taegun Pang'u 鎭安大君芳雨, Yŏngan Taegun Panggwa 永安大君芳果 (King Chŏngjong 定宗), Igan Taegun Pangŭi 益安大君芳毅, Hoean Taegun Pangan 懷安大君芳幹, Chŏngan Taegun Pangwŏn 靖安大君芳遠 (King Taejong 太宗), Tŏgan Taegun Pangyŏn 德安大君芳衍) were born to Queen Sinŭi of the Han clan (神毅王后韓氏). Muan Taegun Pangbŏn (撫安大君芳蕃) and Ŭian Taegun Pangsŏk (宜安大君芳碩) were born to Queen Sindŏk of the Kang clan (神德王后康氏). However, early in T'aejo's reign, meritorious subjects like Pae Kŭngnyŏm, Cho Chun, and Chŏng Tojŏn petitioned for the appointment of a crown prince. Pae and others advocated for Chŏngan Taegun (Pangwŏn) because of his contributions to the founding of the dynasty, but T'aejo favored Pangbŏn and did not decide immediately. After repeated discussions between the king and his ministers, the youngest son, Pangsŏk, was finally confirmed as the crown prince, naturally causing great discontent among the other princes. Chŏng Tojŏn, Nam Ŭn, and their ilk, who always knew how to curry favor with power, suddenly attached themselves to Pangsŏk. To secure his succession, they planned to eliminate the other princes, requesting that the princes be enfeoffed in various provinces, similar to the Ming practice of enfeoffing imperial princes. However, T'aejo did not listen. They then resorted to a final conspiracy. In the 8th month of the 7th year, Muin, taking advantage of T'aejo being ill in bed, they planned to ambush soldiers inside and outside the palace gates, summon the princes, and assassinate them. However, Yi Mu (李茂), one of their party, revealed the plot. Taejong immediately consulted with Cho Chun and Kim Sahyŏng (金士衡), then personally led warriors to attack the homes of Tojŏn, Ŭn, and Pyŏn Chungnyang (卞仲良), executing the three men and dozens of their followers before the army. The next morning, Cho Chun (then Chief State Councilor, 左政丞) and others led the officials to report the crimes of Chŏng, Nam, etc., to T'aejo and strongly requested a change of crown prince. T'aejo reluctantly permitted this. The ministers then nominated Taejong as crown prince. However, due to his firm refusal, Yŏngan Taegun (Panggwa) was finally appointed crown prince. Furthermore, Taejong and the ministers again strongly urged T'aejo to send Pangsŏk and Pangbŏn away, and they were killed on the road. The following month, T'aejo finally abdicated (禪位) in favor of King Chŏngjong. Later, in the 2nd year of Chŏngjong's reign, Pak P'o (朴苞), Vice Director of the Royal Secretariat (知中樞), and Hoean Taegun Pangan, harboring resentment towards Taejong, started a rebellion but were also executed. This was the first <42> tragic incident of fratricide after the founding of the Yi Dynasty.

The So-Called Hamhŭng Envoy
With his two beloved sons, Pangsŏk and Pangbŏn, dead by violence, followed by Pangan's death, T'aejo's animosity towards Taejong reached an extreme, unable to pass even a single day peacefully. (Also, Princess Kyŏngsun (慶順公主), Pangsŏk's full sister, saw her husband Hŭngan'gun Yi Che (興安君李濟) implicated in Pangsŏk's rebellion and executed. T'aejo personally shaved the princess's head and wept silently.) Immediately after abdicating, T'aejo intended to go to Kŭmgang Mountain (金剛山) but was unsuccessful. Later, in the 3rd month of the 1st year of Taejong's reign, when the capital was moved back from Hanyang (the capital had been moved to Hanyang in T'aejo's 3rd year, then returned to the old capital Kaesŏng in Taejong's 1st year), he claimed he was going on a tour, went to Kŭmgang Mountain, and ended up staying in Anbyŏn (安邊) for several months, refusing to return to the palace. Taejong sent Tosŭngji (都承旨, Royal Secretary) Pak Sŏngmyŏng (朴錫命) to request his return, but he wouldn't listen. He was finally compelled to return to the palace only through the strong persuasion of various ministers. However, harboring lifelong resentment, T'aejo was constantly depressed and dissatisfied. On a night in the 11th month of the 2nd year of Taejong's reign, he abruptly left the royal palace, went to Soyo Mountain (逍遙山) in Yangju (楊洲), built a detached palace, and stayed there before going again to his original palace (本宮) in Hamhŭng (咸興). At that time, Taejong repeatedly sent envoys (問安使) to inquire after T'aejo's well-being, but they were all killed by T'aejo and did not return alive. Thus, the term "Hamhŭng Ch'asa" (咸興差使, Hamhŭng Envoy) arose in the world, and even today, it refers to someone from whom no news is heard. Among the envoys who went at that time, the notable ones were Sŏng Sŏktok (成石璘) (Sŏng Takkok, 成獨谷), Pak Ch'ungmin Sun (朴忠愍 淳), and the divine monk Muhak (神僧 無學). Sŏng Rin, dressed as a traveler in a white horse-hair coat (白馬布衫), went near the main palace and started cooking rice. T'aejo saw him from afar and sent a eunuch to ask his reason for being there. Rin replied that he had come on private business and was staying overnight as dusk had fallen. T'aejo, unsuspicious, summoned and met him. Rin calmly explained the principles of human relations and dealing with change. T'aejo's expression changed, and he angrily asked, "Are you not defending your lord?" Rin replied, "If I were doing so, my descendants would surely be blind." T'aejo believed him, listened to his words, and changed his mind. (Later, Rin's eldest son Chido (至道) became blind, and Chido's son Kusu (龜壽) and his grandson were also blind. His second son had no children. People called it a prophetic utterance (言讖).)

Half in the River, Half on the Boat
Also, Pak Sun (朴淳) (from Ŭmsŏng, 陰城), Vice Director of the Royal Secretariat (知中樞), used the stories of a mother horse and foal neighing mournfully when separated, and a mother rat and her young falling to their death while clinging together, to indirectly persuade (諷勸) T'aejo, obtaining his permission to return to the capital. As he was leaving, T'aejo's attendants again asked to kill Sun. T'aejo gave someone a sword (釰) and said, "If Sun has already crossed the Yonghŭng River (龍興江), do not pursue him; if he has not crossed, kill him." This was because T'aejo presumed Pak Sun would have already crossed the river. <43>
However, when the messenger pursued him, Sun was just crossing the river. The messenger quickly stopped the boat and cut Sun in half at the waist. As Sun was dying, he recited a line of poetry: "Half in the river, half on the boat (半在江中半在船)." Later, Taejong had painters paint his portrait (畵像) and placed it before the throne. His wife, Lady Im (任氏), upon hearing the news of his death, killed herself by cutting her throat.
Furthermore, Muhak initially met T'aejo and spoke at length about Taejong's crimes for several tens of days. T'aejo believed him. Seizing the opportunity, Muhak then said, "It is true that Taejong has committed wrongs, but all of Your Highness's beloved sons are dead. The only capable person remaining is Taejong. If you reject him too, to whom will Your Highness entrust the great enterprise you worked so hard for your entire life?" T'aejo finally repented and returned to the capital, it is said.
However, on the day T'aejo returned, Taejong went to the outskirts of the city to welcome him. Ha Ryun submitted a memorial, saying, "As the Retired King's anger has not yet completely subsided, we cannot be at ease. Prepare large wooden pillars for the sun-shading canopy (遮日) as a precaution for hiding, just in case." Taejong adopted his suggestion and went to greet T'aejo in formal attire (*服). Upon seeing him, T'aejo indeed flew into a great rage, took a red bow and white-feathered arrow (彤弓白羽箭), and shot at Taejong. Taejong quickly took cover behind a large pillar (高柱). T'aejo finally threw down his bow and sighed, saying, "Heaven's will indeed cannot be resisted," and father and son embraced and wept.
Prior to this, when T'aejo had returned to Hamhŭng, old friends and elders brought beef and wine to congratulate him. T'aejo improvised a poem on the spot and gave it to the elders. The poem read:
"Speak not of the soaring dragon in the North Sea, / Say not I return today in brocade robes. / My journey is not to sing of Feng and Pei [like Liu Bang], / Rather, I am ashamed like Emperor Minghuang fleeing to Shu."
(休道騰鱗北海間, 莫言今日錦衣還. 我行不是歌豊沛, 却愧明皇蜀道難.)

Meeting a Fair Maiden before Kŭmgi-dong
This happened during T'aejo's youth. T'aejo was inherently heroic and unconventional. From childhood, when playing with other children, he would form military ranks (軍伍), acting as the general, commanding and directing the group of children. Everyone thought him extraordinary. When he was 15 or 16, he made a daily habit of cutting firewood (樵伐) in other people's forests like a woodcutter boy. In this too, he took the lead, and if any among the group of children disobeyed his orders, he would decisively punish them, making all the children submit in fear (慴伏). One day, he made an agreement with the group: "Tomorrow, we will cut firewood in the forest of a certain wealthy family. Anyone who doesn't arrive at the agreed time will have their head cut off." The children agreed and went. However, the next day, one child arrived late. He hung the child's head on an A-frame carrier (지개) and killed him. All the children fled in terror, and he also fled to escape punishment. Wandering here and there to hide, one day he reached Kŭmgi-dong (琴基洞) in Anbyŏn County (安邊郡) (south of present-day Kosan Station, 高山驛南方). It happened to be summer, the weather was extremely hot, and he was thirsty. He asked a maiden drawing water (汲水) by the roadside for water. The maiden gave him water but put willow leaves in it. T'aejo, being thirsty <44>, drank it without a word. But upon reflection, he found it strange and offensive, rebuking her, "Since you are already giving water to someone, why put willow leaves in it and make it unclean?" The maiden replied, "Seeing your appearance, you look like someone fleeing urgently. Also, I feared that drinking cold water rapidly in this extreme heat might cause illness, so I put in willow leaves, intending for you to rest your breathing (喘息) while blowing away the impurities." T'aejo was greatly surprised and impressed. He ended up going to her house, stayed for several days, and they pledged marriage to each other. This was Queen Sinŭi (神懿皇后), the daughter of Anchnŏn Buwŏn'gun Han Kyŏng (安川府院君韓卿).

Ten Thousand Roosters Crowing at Once
This also happened when T'aejo was obscure. T'aejo was staying overnight at a village house in Anbyŏn. In a dream, he entered someone's house and carried out three roof beams (三椽). He also dreamt of ten thousand household roosters crowing simultaneously, the sound of spring plowing (春杆) shaking the neighborhood, a mirror breaking, and flowers falling. He told the hostess (主婆) about it. The hostess said, "This is an extremely auspicious dream. Keep it secret and go ask the strange monk on Sŏlbong Mountain (雪峯山)." T'aejo did as she said, went to Sŏlbong Mountain, and asked the monk Muhak (僧無學). The monk replied, "Carrying three beams (三椽) signifies the character 'King' (王字). The rooster crowing means a high and noble position (高貴位), so you will ascend the throne. The sound of spring plowing means 'virtue spreads eastward' (德加東), so you will spread virtue in the East. Flowers falling means fruit will form (花落成實), and a broken mirror makes a sound (鏡破有聲). This is surely an omen that you will become the king of Chosŏn." T'aejo was inwardly pleased and confident. From then on, he treated Muhak as his teacher. Later, after ascending the throne, he founded Sŏgwang Temple (釋王寺) on Sŏlbong Mountain to commemorate this, it is said.

Yi Chiran and Yi T'aejo
Yi Chiran's (李之蘭) original name was Tong Turan (佟豆蘭). His family had lived among the Jurchen tribes for generations (said to be descendants of Yue Fei, 岳武穆後裔云). At the end of the Yuan dynasty, he fled chaos and moved to Pukch'ŏng (北靑). Like T'aejo, he excelled at horsemanship and archery from a young age. While out hunting, he met T'aejo, and they took to each other at first sight, becoming closer day by day. When T'aejo and he were in Hamhŭng, they tested their archery skills against each other. Seeing village women carrying water jars (汳水) on their heads, T'aejo shot and hit a jar. Chiran shot a clay pellet (泥丸) to plug the hole before the water could spill out. Everyone admired them. However, Chiran constantly envied T'aejo and sought to harm him. One day, seeing T'aejo go to the latrine, Chiran shot three arrows in succession. T'aejo caught all three arrows in his hand, laughed calmly, and said, "Why does a grown man engage in childish games?" Chiran was greatly impressed and respected him, no longer harboring treacherous thoughts. He pledged loyalty until death and always accompanied T'aejo on his southern campaigns and subjugations, achieving great merit. Later, after T'aejo ascended the throne, he resigned from his post, shaved his head (祝髮) to become a monk, showing his intention to sever ties with worldly fame and achievement. T'aejo felt relieved, and among the meritorious subjects, Chiran alone escaped calamity. <45>

Focusing on Mental Cultivation Above All
Yi T'aejo not only specialized in both literary and martial arts but also particularly devoted himself to mental cultivation (精神修養). There was hardly a famous mountain, great river, renowned temple, or ancient monastery where his footprints did not reach. He spent many years reading books, praying frequently to Heaven, and also praying to the sun, moon, stars, and constellations, especially at Kŭmgang Mountain in Kangwŏn Province, Sŏlbong Mountain in Anbyŏn, Chiri Mountain (智異山) and Wŏlch'ul Mountain (月出山) in Chŏlla Province, and Songak Mountain (松岳山) in Kaesŏng. This was certainly not superstition, but a form of mental cultivation. Many strange omens occurred during his prayers, but one incident happened during a mountain ritual (山祭) on Songak Mountain. After performing the ritual on Songak Mountain, he was sleeping in a village house when someone came and said that the previous night, while traveling, he couldn't find lodging and slept at the village tutelary shrine (城隍堂). In the dead of night, someone came, nudged the tutelary deity (城隍), and said, "Tonight, Yi Sŏnggye is performing a mountain ritual to become king of the Three Han states, let's go together." The deity replied, "I have a guest tonight, so I cannot go. Go alone." A little later, that person returned and said, "Sŏnggye prepared magnificent ritual offerings (祭物), but they were unclean, so none of the gods partook (歆饗)," and left. T'aejo found this strange. He observed ritual purification (齋戒) for another week, performed the offerings (致祭) again, and had that same man stay overnight at the shrine. Indeed, the visitor from the previous night came again and said, "Tonight, the offerings were all pure (淨潔), and the gods partook well. Soon, the Yi clan will become the kings of Chosŏn." Hearing this, T'aejo was inwardly pleased and confident, and from then on, he resolved to seize the throne, it is said.

Alas! Where is That Spirit of Yesteryear Now?
However, today, 535 years after T'aejo's ascension, the mountains and rivers remain as before, and the pines he planted at the main palace and on Sŏlbong Mountain are evergreen through the four seasons, but his royal dynasty's great enterprise has already vanished like floating clouds and flowing water. The last emperor, Yung-hŭi-je (隆熙帝), has also accompanied the pear blossoms falling in the spring wind and suddenly departed for the land of white clouds (仙御). Reflecting on the past and looking at the present, who can restrain tears of boundless emotion? If T'aejo's spirit still exists today, he would surely shed a handful of tears, even from the underworld. Finally, I introduce two poems by Yi T'aejo written upon climbing Samgak Mountain.
Climbing Paegun Peak (登白雲臺)
Pulling myself up by vines, I ascend the green peak, / A hermitage rests high amidst the white clouds. / You take the horizon as my domain, / Ch'u, Yüeh, Chiangnan - vast, yet insufficient.
(引手攀蘿上碧峯 一菴高臥白雲中. 君將眼界爲吾土 楚越江南豊不容.)
The towering high peak touches the Dipper, / Hanyang's scenic beauty, naturally heavenly. / Mountains coil across the continent, holding up Samgak, / The sea pulls the long river, emerging from Otae. <46>
(突丌高峯接斗魁 漢陽形勝自天台 山蟠大陸擎三角 海曳長江出五臺)
<36-46>

**Summary**

This article recounts the rise of Yi T'aejo, founder of the Joseon Dynasty. It details his ancestry tracing back to Silla, his family's service under Koryŏ and Yuan, his military prowess in defeating Jurchens and Japanese pirates (Waegu), and his strategic maneuvering, including the Wihwado Retreat and the elimination of rivals Ch'oe Yŏng and Chŏng Mongju. It covers the establishment of the new dynasty, key policies like land reform, moving the capital to Hanyang, naming the country Chosŏn, suppressing Buddhism for Confucianism, and the brutal consolidation of power involving the massacre of the Koryŏ Wang clan and purging of loyalists. The narrative also includes the internal strife among T'aejo's sons (Strife of the Princes), his subsequent estrangement from his son Taejong (leading to the "Hamhŭng Envoy" incident), and several anecdotes about his youth, personality, relationship with Yi Chiran, and omens predicting his kingship. The author concludes with a lament on the fall of the Yi dynasty, contrasting T'aejo's achievements with the dynasty's end under Emperor Sunjong (Yung-hŭi-je).

From a colonial history perspective, this 1926 article is interesting for its detailed, somewhat romanticized yet also critical portrayal of Joseon's founder during Japanese rule. The emphasis on T'aejo's martial background, his struggles, the violence inherent in the dynasty's founding (Wang clan purge, fratricide), and the concluding somber reflection on the dynasty's demise could be interpreted in various ways within the context of Korea's lost sovereignty. Historians might find the specific details provided (like the dream interpretations, anecdotes, poems, and the mention of specific locations and figures) and the author's tone (using the pen name "Humble One Cha") revealing about how Koreans in the 1920s narrated and understood their pre-colonial past and the legacy of the Joseon state.

**Named Entities**

李翰	이한	Yi Han
兢休	긍휴	Kŭnghyu
高麗	고려	Koryŏ
李安社	이안사	Yi Ansa
穆祖	목조	Mokcho
全州	전주	Chŏnju
宣州	선주	Sŏnju
咸南德源	함남덕원	Hamnam Tŏkwŏn
江原道	강원도	Kangwŏn Province
三陟郡	삼척군	Samch'ŏk County
元	원	Yuan Dynasty
南京	남경	Nanjing
間島局子街	간도국자가	Kando Kukchaga (Júzǐjiē)
達魯花亦	달로화역	Tarughachi
李行里	이행리	Yi Haengni
翼祖	익조	Ikcho
女眞	여진	Jurchen
豆滿江	두만강	Tuman River
赤島	적도	Chŏkto
鏡興東	경흥동	Kyŏnghŭng East
德源府	덕원부	Tŏkwŏn Prefecture
度祖	도조	Tojo
椿	춘	Ch'un
李顔帖木兒	이안첩목아	Yi An Ch'ŏpmoga (Bayan Temür)
忠烈王	충렬왕	King Ch'ungnyŏl
子春	자춘	Chasun
吾魯思不花	오로사불화	Orosa Pulhwa (Ulus Buqa)
雙城	쌍성	Ssangsong
水興	수흥	Suhŭng
桓祖	환조	Hwanjo
恭愍王	공민왕	King Kongmin
朝鮮半島	조선반도	Korean Peninsula
柳仁雨	유인우	Yu Inu
咸洲	함주	Hamju
朔方道	삭방도	Sakpangdo
元桂	원계	Wŏn'gye
完豊君	완풍군	Wanp'unggun
成桂	성계	Sŏnggye
李太祖	이태조	Yi T'aejo
和	화	Hwa
義安大君	의안대군	Ŭian Taegun
忠肅王	충숙왕	King Ch'ungsuk
永興郡黑石里	영흥군흑석리	Yŏnghŭng County, Hŭksŏk-ri
東北面	동북면	Tongbungmyŏn
門下府	문하부	Munhabu
日本	일본	Japan
倭寇	왜구	Waegu
王禑	왕우	King U
全羅道	전라도	Chŏlla Province
雲峯	운봉	Unbong
李之蘭	이지란	Yi Chiran
佟豆蘭	동두란	Tong Turan
引月驛	인월역	Inch'ŏn Station
阿只拔都	아지발도	Ajibaldo
荒山	황산	Hwangsan
海州	해주	Haeju
躍馬池	약마지	Yakmach'i
崔瑩	최영	Ch'oe Yŏng
鄭夢周	정몽주	Chŏng Mongju
鄭圃隱	정포은	Chŏng P'oŭn (pen name of Chŏng Mongju)
李仁任	이인임	Yi Inim
明	명	Ming Dynasty
鐵嶺衛	철령위	Ch'ŏllyŏng Guard
鐵嶺	철령	Ch'ŏllyŏng
遼東	요동	Liaodong
曹敏修	조민수	Cho Minsu
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
威化島	위화도	Wihwa Island
南誾	남은	Nam Ŭn
南在	남재	Nam Chae
京都	경도	Kyŏngdo (Capital City, Kaesŏng)
高陽	고양	Koyang
赤墳	적분	Chŏkpun (Red Tomb)
江華島	강화도	Kanghwa Island
江陵	강릉	Kangnŭng
昌	창	Ch'ang (King Ch'ang)
神宗	신종	King Sinjong
定昌君	정창군	Chŏngch'anggun
瑤	요	Yo (King Kongyang)
恭讓王	공양왕	King Kongyang
趙浚	조준	Cho Chun
鄭道傳	정도전	Chŏng Tojŏn
河崙	하륜	Ha Ryun
裵克廉	배극렴	Pae Kŭngnyŏm
趙仁沃	조인옥	Cho Inok
趙璞	조박	Cho Pak
趙英珪	조영규	Cho Yŏnggyu
善竹橋	선죽교	Sŏnjuk Bridge
開城	개성	Kaesŏng
壽昌宮	수창궁	Such'ang Palace
王氏	왕씨	Wang Clan
麻田郡	마전군	Madyŏn County
臨津江	임진강	Imjin River
崇義殿	숭의전	Sungŭijŏn
恭讓君	공양군	Kongyanggun
原州	원주	Wŏnju
杆城	간성	Kansŏng
巨濟	거제	Kŏje
東萊縣	동래현	Tongnae County
金可行	김가행	Kim Kahaeng
朴仲質	박중질	Pak Chungjil
密城	밀성	Milsŏng
李興茂	이흥무	Yi Hŭngmu
朴葳	박위	Pak Wi
三陟	삼척	Samch'ŏk
刑曹	형조	Hyŏngjo (Ministry of Punishments)
臺聯	대련	Taejŏn (Censorate)
瑀	우	U (Wang U)
芳蕃	방번	Pangbŏn
歸義君	귀의군	Kŭiŭigun
王建	왕건	Wang Kŏn
車原*	차원*	Ch'a Wŏn*
咸傳林	함전림	Ham Chŏllim
李牧隱	이목은	Yi Mogŭn
種學	종학	Chonghak
李崇仁	이숭인	Yi Sungin
禹易東	우역동	U Yidong
吉治隱	길치은	Kil Chaeŭn (Kil Chae)
元天錫	원천석	Wŏn Ch'ŏnsŏk
趙狷	조견	Cho Kyŏn
南乙珍	남을진	Nam Ulchin
杜門洞	두문동	Tumun-dong
和寧	화녕	Hwaryŏng
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
公州	공주	Kongju
鷄龍山	계룡산	Kyeryong Mountain
漢陽	한양	Hanyang
武學	무학	Muhak
都評議使司	도평의사사	Topyŏngŭisasa
義興三軍府	의흥삼군부	Ŭihŭng Samgunbu
經濟六典	경제육전	Kyŏngje Yukchŏn
琉球	유구	Ryukyu
*羅	*라	*Ra (Possibly Silla reference, or another state?)
鎭安大君	진안대군	Chinan Taegun
芳雨	방우	Pang'u
永安大君	영안대군	Yŏngan Taegun
芳果	방과	Panggwa
定宗	정종	King Chŏngjong
益安大君	익안대군	Igan Taegun
芳毅	방의	Pangŭi
懷安大君	회안대군	Hoean Taegun
芳幹	방간	Pangan
靖安大君	정안대군	Chŏngan Taegun
芳遠	방원	Pangwŏn
太宗	태종	King Taejong
德安大君	덕안대군	Tŏgan Taegun
芳衍	방연	Pangyŏn
神毅王后	신의왕후	Queen Sinŭi
韓氏	한씨	Han Clan
撫安大君	무안대군	Muan Taegun
宜安大君	의안대군	Ŭian Taegun
芳碩	방석	Pangsŏk
神德王后	신덕왕후	Queen Sindŏk
康氏	강씨	Kang Clan
李茂	이무	Yi Mu
金士衡	김사형	Kim Sahyŏng
卞仲良	변중량	Pyŏn Chungnyang
朴苞	박포	Pak P'o
慶順公主	경순공주	Princess Kyŏngsun
興安君	흥안군	Hŭngan'gun
李濟	이제	Yi Che
金剛山	금강산	Kŭmgang Mountain
安邊	안변	Anbyŏn
朴錫命	박석명	Pak Sŏngmyŏng
楊洲	양주	Yangju
逍遙山	소요산	Soyo Mountain
咸興	함흥	Hamhŭng
成璘	성린	Sŏng Rin
成獨谷	성독곡	Sŏng Takkok (pen name of Sŏng Rin)
朴淳	박순	Pak Sun
朴忠愍	박충민	Pak Ch'ungmin (posthumous name of Pak Sun)
陰城	음성	Ŭmsŏng
龍興江	용흥강	Yonghŭng River
任氏	임씨	Im Clan
豊沛	풍패	Feng and Pei (hometown of Liu Bang)
明皇	명황	Emperor Minghuang (Emperor Xuanzong of Tang)
蜀道	촉도	Road to Shu
琴基洞	금기동	Kŭmgi-dong
高山驛	고산역	Kosan Station
韓卿	한경	Han Kyŏng
安川府院君	안천부원군	Anch'ŏn Buwŏn'gun
雪峯山	설봉산	Sŏlbong Mountain
釋王寺	석왕사	Sŏgwang Temple
岳武穆	악무목	Yue Fei (Yue Wumu)
北靑	북청	Pukch'ŏng
智異山	지리산	Chiri Mountain
月出山	월출산	Wŏlch'ul Mountain
松岳山	송악산	Songak Mountain
隆熙帝	융희제	Yung-hŭi-je (Emperor Sunjong)
三角山	삼각산	Samgak Mountain
白雲臺	백운대	Paegun Peak
楚	초	Ch'u (Ancient Chinese state)
越	월	Yüeh (Ancient Chinese state)
江南	강남	Chiangnan
五臺	오대	Otae (Possibly Odaesan Mountain)

**Glossary**

始祖	시조	Progenitor, founder of a lineage
仕하야	사하여	Serving (in office); older form of 사하여 (serving)
豪傑	호걸	Hero, outstanding figure
微罪	미죄	Minor offense/crime
逃하야	도하여	Fleeing; older form of 도망하여 (fleeing)
遠避	원피	To flee far away
達魯花亦	달로화역	Darughachi (Yuan dynasty local official title)
千戶	천호	Commander of a Thousand (military/administrative unit)
忌惡	기악	To be jealous and hate
巢窟	소굴	Den, nest, stronghold (often with negative connotation)
總管府	총관부	General Directorate (Yuan administrative office)
內應	내응	Inside collaborator, responding from within
鎭撫	진무	To pacify and comfort, to garrison and control
呱呱의 聲	고고의 성	The first cry of a newborn baby
穿楊	천양	To pierce a willow leaf (signifying exceptional archery skill)
邊寇	변구	Border raiders, coastal pirates
倭寇	왜구	Japanese pirates/raiders (term used from 13th-16th C.)
兜	두	Helmet
社稷	사직	The state, the nation (lit. altars to gods of land and grain)
乾坤	건곤	Heaven and earth, the universe
親明	친명	Pro-Ming (dynasty)
節制	절제	To command, control (especially military forces)
漲溢	창일	To overflow, inundate (river flooding)
獻策	헌책	To propose a plan or strategy
回軍	회군	To turn back an army, retreat
奸臣	간신	Treacherous minister, disloyal subject
放하야	방하여	To exile, banish; older form of 방면하여 (releasing) or 추방하여 (exiling)
田制	전제	Land system
兼倂	겸병	Annexation, taking over (land)
讖言	참언	Prophecy, prophetic saying
推載	추재	To support for enthronement, back someone for the throne
覬窺	기규	To covet, spy upon with desire (especially the throne)
羽翼	우익	Wings; supporters, assistants
椎殺	추살	To bludgeon to death
祝賀砲	축하포	Congratulatory cannon fire
卽位	즉위	To ascend the throne
根據	근거	Basis, foundation, grounds
撲滅策	박멸책	Extermination policy
懷柔策	회유책	Appeasement policy
宗廟	종묘	Royal ancestral shrine
木主	목주	Ancestral spirit tablet (made of wood)
安置	안치	To enshrine, place safely
降封	강봉	To demote in rank or title
全族	전족	Entire clan/family
誅戮	주륙	To execute, put to death (often implying punishment for treason)
裔	예	Descendant
門*婿	문*서	Son-in-law of the family/household (* represents illegible character)
顯用	현용	Prominent employment, use in high office
頒布	반포	To promulgate, announce officially
築都城	축도성	To build the capital city walls
招安	초안	To pacify, appease (often used for foreign groups/tribes)
方物	방물	Local products, tribute goods
抑壓	억압	Suppression, oppression
振興	진흥	Promotion, encouragement, revitalization
尙함	상함	Esteeming, valuing highly; older form of 숭상함
蕭牆之內	소장지내	Within the palace walls (idiom for internal strife)
冊封	책봉	To appoint (officially, e.g., a crown prince)
禪位	선위	To abdicate the throne
差使	차사	Envoy, messenger (often on official mission)
諷勸	풍권	To persuade indirectly, admonish through allegory or hints
遮日	차일	Sunshade, canopy
高柱	고주	High pillar, large post
彤弓白羽箭	동궁백우전	Red bow and white-feathered arrow (symbolic of authority/punishment)
樵伐	초벌	Cutting firewood
慴伏	습복	To submit in fear, cower
汲水	급수	Drawing water
喘息	천식	Panting, gasping for breath; asthma (here: catching one's breath)
椽	연	Rafter, roof beam
雪峯山	설봉산	Seolbong Mountain
釋王寺	석왕사	Seogwang Temple
汳水	변수	Carrying water on the head (in a jar)
泥丸	이환	Clay pellet/ball
祝髮	축발	To shave one's head (to become a Buddhist monk/nun)
精神修養	정신수양	Mental cultivation, spiritual training
齋戒	재계	To purify oneself (abstaining from meat, etc.) before rituals
致祭	치제	To perform a ritual offering
歆饗	흠향	(Of gods/spirits) To accept and enjoy offerings
仙御	선어	(Euphemism) Death of an emperor (lit. 'immortal departure')
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제70호
발행일	1926년 06월 01일
기사제목	李太祖의 建國百話
필자	車賤者
기사형태	논설

李太祖의 建國百話
						車賤者
世世豪傑인 그의 家閥
太祖의 始祖는 新羅의 司空李翰이다. 그의 6世孫 兢休가 비로소 高麗에 仕하야 司空이 되고
其後 第18대에 至하야 李安社(穆祖)라 하는 이가 잇섯스니 그는 本來 全州의 人으로 또한 高麗에 仕하야 宣州(今咸南德源)知事가 되엿다가 微罪를 得하고 (全州에서 監司의 愛妓를 斬殺함) 逃하야 江原道 三陟郡 活*洞으로 移住하얏섯다. 그러나 그곳에서도 또한 知縣에서 罪를 得하고 元의 南京(今間島局子街)으로 遠避한 後元에 仕하야 5천戶의 達魯花亦(元의 地方官名이니 本音 따로카치)이 되엿섯다. 그리고 그의 子 李行里(卽翼祖)는 또한 南京의 千호가 되매 女眞諸千戶의 部下가 다 歸附함으로 千戶等이 그를 忌惡하야 사살코자 하니 遂히 逃亡하야 豆滿江의 下流赤島(鏡興東)에 住居하다가 후에 다시 德源府로 移住하얏섯다.
翼朝의 子度祖椿은 蒙古의 名으로 李顔帖木兒이니 또한 元에 仕하야 父職을 襲하고 高麗忠烈王때에 비로소 王에게 謁見하얏스며 度祖는 또 三子가 잇섯스니 次子 子春은 蒙古名으로 吾魯思不花라 稱하는 바 雙城(今水興)에 居하야 亦是 千戶가 되엿스니 그가 곳 李太祖의 父 桓祖다. 그는 高麗恭愍王 4년에 王에게 來朝하야 少府尹이 되엿스니 當時 朝鮮半島의 北部는 대개 女眞族(所謂 野人)의 巢窟로 元國에서 雙城에 總管府를 置하야 此를 支配하엿섯다. 然而元의 舊勢力이 점차 衰微하고 明의 新勢力이 아즉 扶植되지 안이함을 기회로 하야 恭愍王은 北方의 舊領土를 다시 개척하랴고 密直副使 柳仁雨로 東北而兵馬使를 삼아 元의 總管府를 攻擊하매 桓祖는＜36＞ 此에 內應이 되야 불시에 總管府를 攻陷하고 咸洲 以北의 諸地를 회복하얏다. 其時에 桓祖는 그 功으로 朔方道萬戶兼兵馬使가 되야 東北境을 鎭撫하더니 恭愍王 9년 4월에 불행히 46세를 一期로 하고 逝去하얏스니 以上 穆祖로부터 桓祖까지를 稱하야 李朝의 四祖라 한다.

文武兼全萬戶侯
桓祖는 또 3子가 잇섯스니 長은 元桂(完豊君) 次는 成桂(卽李太祖) 又其次는 和(義安大君다. 然而其中 次子成桂는 天資가 奇偉하고 神釆가 英邁하며 射術에 長하야 百步穿楊의 才가 有할 뿐안이라 또한 文이 能하야 可謂文武兼全한 豪傑男兒엿다. 그는 高麗忠肅王後 4년 乙亥 10월 11일에 永興郡黑石里에서 呱呱의 聲을 發하야 恭愍王 5년에 22세의 少年으로 東北面上萬戶가 되엿다가 北邊에서 軍功을 屢建하야 未久에 門下府知事가 되엿섯다. 當時 半島에는 北方에 野人의 患이 不絶하고 南方에는 日本汎海의 邊寇(所謂 倭寇)가 各 州郡을 頻頻히 侵掠하야 人民이 安堵치 못하나 政治가 腐敗하고 武備가 頹廢한 高麗朝廷은 此를 擊攘할 人物이 別無하얏다. 그러다가 王禑 1년에 李太祖로 海冠征討를 命하매(其時爲全慶楊廣道都巡察使贊成事) 그는 彼有名한 李之蘭將軍(本佟豆蘭)과 共히 全羅道雲峯에 出兵하야 引月驛에서 當時驍勇無比한 敵將阿只拔都를 射殺하고(之蘭은 其 兜를 射落하고 太祖는 其 口를 射中하얏다.) 餘衆을 討平하니 此가 卽有名한 荒山大捷이다.(今有大捷碑) 그리고 同年 9월에는 또 海州에서 왜*를 대파하니(有躍馬池古跡)이로부터 宇內에 外患이 근절되고 太祖의 聲望이 日로 振揚하야 同王 14년에는 門下侍中으로 躍進하얏다.

三尺劒頭安社稷
然而當時 高麗朝廷에는 二大柱石의 臣이 잇섯스니 一은 李太祖와 가티 門下侍中으로 잇는 武臣의 崔瑩이오 一은 政堂文學으로 잇는 文臣의 鄭夢周엿다. 이 兩人은 麗朝世祿의 臣일 뿐안이라 일반의 信望이 多하야 國家의 大小事를 다 요리함으로 비록 李太祖가 政堂의 椅子를 占하고 잇슬지라도 감히 自由로 威權을 行使치 못하고 따라서 王位占奪의 野心을 遂하기 어러웟섯다. 그럼으로 李는 恒常 崔鄭兩人만 업스면 당시의 天下는 自己手中으로 入하리라 생각하고 또 崔鄭兩人은 생각하기를 北賦南寇를 다 討平하야 天下泰平한 그 시기에 李만 업스면 자기네가＜37＞ 다시 王室을 復興하야 麗朝中興의 大業을 可成하리라 하고 서로 疑懼하며 서로 猜忌하얏다. 그러나 鄭圃隱은 원래 文臣인 故로 露骨로는 李太祖를 除害코자 안이하얏스나(威化島回軍 以前까지는) 崔侍中은 武臣인 故로 기회만 잇스면 李太祖를 除害하랴고 하얏다. 太祖가 侍中으로 잇슬 때에 一日은 엇던 會席에서 聯句를 占하되 「三尺劒頭安社稷」이라 하엿더니 崔侍中은 口를 應하야 대하되 「一條鞭未定乾坤」이라 하니 一座가 다 그 兩人의 大志가 有한 것을 알고 兩人도 또한 그 心事를 相通하야 서로 身邊을 警戒하얏다. 이에 先하야 支那에는 元이 亡하고 明이 新興하매(恭愍 17년에 元이 亡함) 그 革命의 波動은 半島에까지 及하야 高麗朝廷에도 排明親明兩派가 生하얏스니 卽 禑王及李仁任一派는 元과 自來國際上關係를 思하야 排明論을 唱하고 李太祖일파는 大勢上關係로 親明論을 주장하얏다. 如斯히 紛議가 不一하다가 禑王 14년 2월에 高麗의 使節이 明에 往하얏다가 通聘拒絶을 당하고 또 明이 鐵嶺衛를 設하야 鐵嶺以北의 地 를 遼東에 屬코자하니 麗朝의 君臣은 一時激憤하야 攻遼의 議를 發하니 그 主謨者는 卽 崔瑩이엿다. 其時 李太祖는 極力으로 그 大勢의 불리함을 陳言하나 王은 듯지 안코 崔瑩으로 八道都統使를 삼고 昌城府院君 曹敏修와 李太祖로 左右都統使를 삼어 大兵을 率하고 遼東으로 向케 하고 王과 崔瑩은 平壤에 親히 留陣하야 遙히 大兵을 節制하얏섯다. 그러나 이 出兵은 실은 遼東을 征伐코자 함보다 太祖의 威權이 日盛함을 忌하야 그를 外征케 하고 其 機를 乘하야 除害하랴 함이다. (明이 出兵을 問責하면 其 罪를 太祖에게 歸하고 又 戰敗하야도 其 罪를 罰코자 함이다.

六軍不發威化島
却說-李太祖는 曹敏修와 共히 左右軍을 率하고 威化島에 至하니 때는 마츰 夏5월이엿다.
天祐라 할지 神助라 할지 不知하거니와 의외에 시작한 비가 數日을 繼續하야 江水가 크게 漲溢하매 軍馬가 渡하기 不能하고 兵士 中에는 出征을 喜치 안이하는 者가 多하야 中途에 도망하는 자가 태반이나 되엇섯다. 이 形勢를 삷힌 李太祖는 크게 근심하야 部下諸將과 善後策을 議하니 南誾 南在等 諸部下가 獻策하되 우리의 弱軍으로 新興하는 明의 强國을 攻함은 餓虎의 口에 弱肉을 投함과 가튼 愚計인즉 早遠히 回軍하야 內政革命을 起함이 可하다 하니 太祖가 크게 깃버하고 이에 全軍을 返하야 京都로 向하니 때에 王은 平壤에 잇다가 變을 듯고 崔瑩과＜38＞ 僅僅 50餘旗를 率하고 蒼皇이 王宮으로 還하얏다. 이에 太祖는 兵을 縱하야 王宮을 包圍하고 평소에 除코자 하던 崔瑩을 奸臣으로 모라 刑殺하고(崔都統臨死時 厲聲曰我若有罪墓上生草 不然則墓不生草 墓在高陽至今不生草號曰赤墳) 王을 廢하야 江華島에 放하고(其後 江陵으로 遷하얏다가 殺함) 曹敏修의 計를 聽하야 禑의 子昌을 立하얏다가(時年 僅9歲) 翌年에 卽時 江華에 放하야 殺하고 神宗의 7世孫 定昌君瑤를 立하야 王을 삼으니 此가 卽 高麗最後의 君主恭讓王이엿다.

農民保護에 着眼한 그의 政策
녯이나 지금이나 무슨 대사업을 하랴는 사람은 먼저 그 時代 그 社會의 人心을 收拾하는 것이 通例이다. 당시 農業國인 高麗는 田制가 크게 紊亂하야 大地主의 兼倂攘*의 弊가 多함으로 小作農民은 극히 생활이 困難하야 安堵하기 不能하고 다만 亂이 起하기를 思하얏다. 그것을 洞察한 李太祖은 趙浚 等과 謀하고 먼저 田制의 改革을 企圖하얏섯다. 그러나 時勢民情을 不知하는 朝臣 中에는 此를 반대하는 자가 多함으로 太祖는 極力主張하야 심지어 反對者曹敏修는 竄遂까지하고 恭讓王 9월에 遂히 田制를 크게 改革하니 人民이 다 太祖의 德을 *歌하고 또 當時 民間에는 「木子爲王」이라는 讖言이 유행하야 일반의 人心이 太祖로 歸順함이 多한 中猛虎有翼과 가티 趙浚 南誾
鄭道傳
河崙
裵克廉
趙仁沃
趙璞 等 50人餘文武官이 다 太祖를 推載코자 하니 革命의 氣雰은 점차 滿都에 濃厚하게 되엿다. 그러나 한가지 忌博되는 人物은 鄭圃隱이엿다. 그는 崔都統의 死한 後로 일개 羽翼을 失하얏스나 아즉 德望이 朝野에 多하고 또 그의 徹底히 忠君愛國의 心은 비록 萬馬의 力이라도 能히 挽回치 못하얏다. 아모리 太祖와 가튼 武力은 업슬지라도 그가 在世한 以上에는 王氏의 寶位를 누가 감히 覬窺치 못할 形勢이엇다. 그럼으로 太祖는 평소에 야심이 有하나 먼저 下手치 못하고 다만 시기의 到來를 企望할 뿐이엿다. 그러나 急進派인 太宗과 趙英珪 等은 먼저 鄭圃隱을 殺害하지 안으면 안이될 줄 알고 壬申 4월 初4일에 善竹橋에서 鄭圃隱을 椎殺하얏다. 이 鄭圃隱의 死는 高麗王朝의 最後悲幕인 동시에 李祖登極宴의 祝賀砲이엿다. 同年 7 월 16일에 李太祖는 上記 裵克廉 南誾外諸人의 推載에 因하야 恭讓王을 廢하고 開城壽昌宮에서 位에 卽하니 多年企圖하던 半島의 主權은 遂히 李氏에게 歸하고 太祖의 時年은 58歲엿다(王氏 34世 凡475년)

可憐龍孫葬魚腹＜39＞

원래 李太祖는 무슨 根據잇는 名門遺族이거나 德望家學者도 안이요 一個塞外에 漂流하던 武將으로 一時 武力에 의하야 半島의 主權을 掌握하고 當時 開城에는 王氏의 宗族과 麗朝의 遣臣이 基多하야 人心이 아즉 舊朝를 思하는 傾向이 有함으로 此를 統治하고 經持함에 太祖는 극히 困難한 것을 覺悟하고 若心講究하얏다. 例의 封建的 時代의 英雄의 野心을 遺憾업시 發露하야 먼저 王族과 遺臣의 撲滅策을 實現하고 一方으로 그의 懷柔策을 採用하얏다. 그는 卽位翌月에 高麗王祖宗廟를 撤毁하야 麻田郡에 移하고
(太祖가 王氏의 宗廟를 毁하고 其 木主를 大船에 載하야 臨津江에 浮하얏더니 其船이 逆浮하야 麻田縣江 上佛寺前에 自泊함으로 太祖가 其 佛像을 他處로 移한 後 木主를 安置하고 名하야 曰崇義殿이라 하얏다.)
廢王瑤는 恭讓君으로 降封하야 原州에 移하얏다가 다시 杆城에 遷하고 또 干氏의 全族은 다 江華 巨濟兩島에 分置하엿다가 翌年 5월에 命을 下하야 王氏의 巨濟에 在한 자를 出陸케 하고 才藝가 有한 자를 登用할 旨를 전하더니 3년에 至하야 東萊縣令 金可行 場官 朴仲質 等이 國家의 安危와 王氏의 運命을 密城盲人 李興茂에게 卜하다가 發覺되고 또 叅贊 朴葳도 關孫가 有하다 告하는 자가 有함으로 此를 捕拿治罪하고 恭讓王 及 其二子는 三陟으로 移遷하고 出陸한 王氏를 전부 巨濟로 復遷하더니 未幾에 謀臣의 勸誘에 의하야(刑曹 及 臺聯 凡12回上言) 三陟에 在한 恭讓王三父子를 絞殺하고 江華 及 巨濟에 在한 王氏一族을 다 海에 投하야 殺하고
(初에 太祖가 王氏를 殺코자 하되 罪名이 無함으로 諸王氏를 舟에 載하고 水泳 잘하는 자를 同乘케 하다가 中流에서 海中에 잠입하야 其 舟底를 穿하야다 沈死케 하엿는데 其 時에 一王氏와 親한 僧이 海岸에 在하야 手를 擧하고 呼하니 그 王氏가 一聯句를 衫袖에 血書하야 海岸에 投한바 其 詩曰一聲搖櫓滄波外借問山 僧泰爾何云云이라 하니 僧이 詩를 見하고 통곡하얏다.)
惟獨 廢王瑤의 弟瑀는 其女가 太祖七男芳蕃에게 嫁한 故로 僅히 免死하야 歸義君으로 封하고 麻田의 廟祀를 奉케 하얏다. 그러나 太祖는 아즉 안심하기 不能하야 隊히 令을 中外에 下하고 王氏의 餘族을 盡索하야 誅戮하고 또 麗朝의 裔가 안이로서 王姓인 자도 其 母姓을 從케 하얏다. (太祖가 王氏의 族譜를 按하야 王氏를 일일이 搜殺하는데 夢에 王建太祖가 大怒하야 曰 余가 三韓을 統合하얏거늘 그 功을 知치 못하고 我와 子孫을 滅族함은 何故이냐 汝家도 酷禍를 당할 日이 不遠하리라 하니 太祖가 警覺하고 僅히 一頁에 殘在한 王氏를 免除하얏는데 그 后其子三人이 被死한 후에 太祖가 後悔하얏다.) 그리고 또 麗朝舊臣中에 名德이 有한 者는 擧皆誅竄하니 其中 最히 酷禍를 被한 이는 車諫議原*(당시 소위 4功臣 河崙
趙英珪
咸傳林＜40＞ 鄭道傳 等은 다 車門*婿인데 太宗과 陰謀하고 松麻兩原에서 一夜에 門族 80餘人을 虐殺하고 其 姻婭族戚도 다 極邊에 流竄하얏다.) 李牧隱의 子 種學 及 其門弟 李崇仁
禹易東先生家 等이오. 其外 吉治隱
元天錫
趙狷
南乙珍 等 所謂 杜門洞 70餘人은 모도 山林에 隱遁하야 節을 守하고 開城人은 登極慶科에 不應함으로 連坐하야 幾百年停擧를 命하고 또 太祖自身이 北道武人出身이오 西北의 인심이 强悍함으로 後日子孫에게 遺虞가 잇슬가 恐하야 顯用을 禁하얏스니 이것은 千古에 其比가 無한 惡辣政策이라 云치 안이치 못하겟다.(其實은 太宗과 謀臣輩의 做出할 일이 만코 太祖가 직접으로 한 일은 적엇다.)

國號曰朝鮮
上述함과 如히 太祖는 威壓과 懷柔의 정책으로 인심을 정복하는 동시에 萬般의 制度를 一新코자하야 먼저 國號를 改할새 和寧 朝鮮兩者로 論議하다가 朝鮮이라 改하야 天下에 頒布하고 또 國都를 開城에 仍置하는 것은 統治上 여러 가지 障害가 有함을 생각하고 高麗王朝와 인연이 最遠한 地方을 선택하다가 公州 鷄龍山下(只今 所謂 新都)에 地를卜하고 3년 甲戌에 役을 始하얏다. 그러나 水源이 不足하고 교통이 또한 불편하야 도저히 國都에 적합치 안이함으로 神夢을 托하야 중지하고(國費만 허비하고 공사를 중지하면 國家威信이나 人心統御에 관계가 有할가 恐하야 이에 夢에 神人이 言하되 鷄龍山은 500년후 鄭氏의 所都요 李氏의 都邑은 漢陽이라고 하얏다고 稱托하얏다.) 神僧武學과 鄭道傳의 言을 從하야(當時 河崙이 또한 漢陽에 都하기를 䟽請하얏다.) 卽時 漢陽에 新都를 定하야 宮闕을 成하고 冬10月에 百官을 率하고 移都하얏다. 그리고 太祖는 또 高麗의 政令 及 法制의 得失沿革等에 關한 書目을 具錄하야 群臣과 討議하고 舊官制를 倣하야 都評議使司(掌國政) 義, 興三軍府(掌軍政)를 置하고 또 備庫를 置하야 軍需를 供케 하고 兵符의 制를 設하야 國內國外를 물론하고 兵符의 信이 업스면 兵을 擅動히 못하게 命하며 尙又 經濟六典(治, 禮, 敎, 政, 刑, 工典 等이니 鄭道傳이 纂하고 河崙이 訂正함)을 纂하며 都城을 築하고(丙子) 外交는 明國과 修好를 함은 물론이고 또 女眞을 招安하니 당시에 琉球 及 *羅 等 國이 風을 望하고 方物을 獻하며 來朝하얏다.
然而太祖의 政治革命은 上述과 如하거니와 社會制度上 及 敎化上革命은 두가지로 볼 수가 잇섯스니 一은 佛敎를＜41＞ 抑壓하고 儒敎를 振興케 함이오. 一은 武를 賤히 하고 文을 尙함이다. 이것은 結局 高麗가 佛敎와 武人으로 인하야 國家가 衰亡한 것을 鑑함에 불과한 것이다. 그러나 이 두가지는 一般社會의 局面을 일대변혁하는 동시에 후일 李朝가 또 儒敎와 文弱으로 하야 衰亡케 하는 端緖를 啓하얏다 云치 안이치 못하겟다.

誰知禍起蕭牆內
太祖는 高麗王氏의 一族과 及 舊臣을 一網打盡하야 外間覬覦의 患을 根滅하얏슴으로 스스로 생각하기를 天下는 아주 泰平無事하야 龍樓의 高枕을 安히 하고 臥而治之할 줄로 알엇섯다. 그러나 登極한지 未久에 禍가 蕭牆의 內에 起하야 骨肉相爭의 悲慘한 劇을 연출하얏다. 원래 太祖는 8人의 王子가 잇섯스니 6人(鎭安大君芳雨 永安大君芳果(定宗) 益安大君芳毅 懷安大君芳幹 靖安大君芳遠(太宗) 德安大君芳衍)은 神毅王后韓氏의 소생이오 撫安大君芳蕃 及 宜安大君芳碩兩人은 神德王后康氏의 소생이엿다. 然而 太祖 卽 位初에 功臣 裵克廉 趙浚 鄭道傳 等이 世子冊封하기를 䟽請한바 克廉 等은 靖安大君이 開國의 功이 有함으로 그를 世子로 封하기를 主張하얏스나 太祖는 芳蕃에게 意가 在함으로 즉시 결정치 못하다가 君臣이 屢次相議한 결과 遂히 末子 芳碩으로 世子를 확정하니 諸王子의 불평이 물론 多大하얏섯다. 何時던지 見權趨勢를 能事로 知하는 鄭道傳
南誾의 徒는 忽然히 芳碩에게 附隨하고 其 承位를 안전케 하기 위하야 諸王子를 除却하랴고 明國의 諸皇子封土의 例와 가티 諸王子를 各道로 分封할 事를 청하얏섯다. 그러나 太祖가 聽치 안이함으로 다시 최후의 陰謀를 하야 7년 戊寅 8월에 太祖가 병석에 잇슴을 奇貨로 思하고 殿門 內外에 兵士를 埋伏하고 諸王子를 召하야 殺害하기로 計畫하얏섯다. 然而其黨 李茂潛이 變을 고하매 太宗은 卽時 趙浚
金士衡과 상의한 후 武士를 親率하고 道傳及誾과 卞仲良家를 襲하야 三人 及 其黨수십인을 軍前에 斬殺한 後 翌朝에 趙浚等이 百官을 率하고(其時左政丞) 太祖에게 鄭南 等의 죄를 고하고 또 世子改封할 事를 强請하니 太祖가 不得已 此를 允許함으로 諸臣은 이에 太宗으로 世子를 推戴하얏다. 그러나 그는 固辭함으로 인하야 永安大君으로 遂히 世子를 封하고 또 太宗 及 諸臣은 다시 太祖에게 芳碩 芳蕃의 出外를 强請하야 路上에서 擊殺하니 翌月에 太祖는 遂히 定宗에게 禪位하고 其後定宗 2년에는 知中樞 朴苞와 懷安大君芳幹이 太宗에게 불평을 抱하고 亂을 起하다가 또 被誅하니 此는 李朝開國後初有의＜42＞ 骨肉慘變이엿다.

所謂 咸興差使
芳碩芳蕃 等 兩愛子가 非命에 死하고 또 繼하야 芳幹이 死하매 太祖의 太宗에 대한 惡感은 실로 극도에 달하야 一日이라도 安過하기 不能하얏다.(又 芳碩의 同腹妹慶順公壬의 夫興安君李濟가 芳碩의 亂에 連坐되야 被死하얏슴으로 太祖가 친히 公主의 髮을 削하고 潛然이 流涕하얏다) 太祖는 位를 禪하는 卽時에 金剛山으로 往코자 하다가 不果하고 其後 太宗元年 3월에 新都漢陽(太祖 3년에 漢陽에 遷都하얏다가 太宗元年에 舊都開城으로 還하매 遊한다 稱하고 金剛山에 往하얏다가 遂히 安邊에서 留하야 屢月이 되도록 還宮치 안이하니 太宗이 都承旨朴錫命을 遺하야 還宮을 請하되 聽치 안이 하다가 諸臣의 極勸에 의하야 强히 歸宮하얏다. 그러나 평생의 怨恨을 抱한 太祖는 恒常鬱悒不平하더니 太宗 2년 11月 夜에 飄然이 王宮을 떠나 楊洲 逍遙山에 가서 別殿을 設하고 居留하다가 다시 咸興本宮으로 갓섯다. 그때에 太宗은 太祖의 問安使를 履次 送하얏스나 다 太祖에게 被殺하고 生還치 못하니 世에 仍히 咸興差使라는 말이 생겨서 至今까지 消息업는 사람을 가르처서 咸興差使라고 한다. 其時 問安使로 往한 人中 著名한 이는 成獨谷 璘과 朴忠愍 淳과 神僧 無學 等이니 成璘은 白馬布衫으로 過客의 行色을 하고 本宮附近에 가서 飯을 炊하엿더니 太祖가 望見하고 宦官을 送하야 來故를 問하니 璘이 答하되 私事가 有하야 來하얏다가 日이 暮하야 滯宿한다 하엿더니 太祖가 疑치 안이하고 召하야 見하니 璘이 從容이 人倫處變의 道를 陳함으로 太祖가 變色하고 怒하야 曰汝가 汝主를 杜護함이 아니냐고 하니 璘이 曰하되 臣이 만일 그러하면 臣의 子孫이 반듯이 目이 盲하리라 하니 太祖가 信하고 其 言을 聽하야 意를 回하얏다.(劅�後 璘의 長子至道가 盲目하고 至道의 子龜壽 及 其孫이 다 盲目하고 次道는 또한 無子하니 世人이 言讖이라 稱하얏다.)
半在江中半在船
又知中樞 朴淳(陰城人)은 子母의 馬가 相離哀鳴함과 子母의 鼠가 相抱墮死하는 事로 諷勸하야 太祖의 回都할 允許를 得하고 歸하는데 太祖의 近臣이 또 淳을 殺하기를 청하니 太祖가 이에 人에게 釰을 賜하고 曰하되 淳이 만일 龍興江을 渡하얏거던 追치 말고 渡치 안이하얏거던 殺하라하니 이것은 太祖가 대개 朴淳이 이미 江을 渡하엿슬 줄로 推測하고 한 일이엿다.＜43＞
그러나 使者가 追한즉 淳은 僅히江을 渡하는지라 使者가 급히 舟를 停케 하고 其腰를 斬하니 淳이 死에 임하야 一句의 詩를 吟하야 曰 半在江中半在船이라 하얏다. 후에 太宗은 畵工으로 其像을 畵하야 御前에 置하고 其妻 任氏는 訃를 聞하고 自刎하야 死하얏다.
그리고 또 無學은 초에 太祖를 보고 수십일을 두고 太宗의 죄악을 極言하니 太祖가 信함으로 其機를 乘하야 다시 言하되 太宗이 罪過가 有함은 사실이나 殿下의 愛子가 다 죽고 但히 有爲의 人物이라고는 太宗뿐이니 그까지 마주 棄遠하면 殿下平生에 辛苦한 大業을 將次 誰에게 托하리요 하엿더니 太祖가 遂히 悔하야 還都하얏다 한다.
然而 太祖가 歸還하는 日에 太宗이 郊外에 往하야 迎할새 河崙이 上啓하되 太上皇의 怒가 아즉 全然永解치 안이한 이상에는 안심할 수 업스니 遮日의 高柱를 大木으로 하야 避身하는 만일의 備를 하라 하니 太宗이 其言을 採用하고 *服으로 太祖를 迎謁하니 太祖가 一見하고 과연 怒氣가 大發하야 彤弓白羽箭으로 太宗祖을 射함으로 太宗이 卽時 避身하야 高柱에 隱하니 太祖가 遂히 弓을 投하고 歎하야 曰 天意는 역시 할 수 업다 하고 父子相抱하고 泣하얏다.
이에 先하야 太祖가 咸興에 歸하얏슬 時에 故舊父老가 牛酒를 持하고 來賀함으로 太祖는 卽席에서 詩一首를 吟하야 諸老에게 與하야스니 其詩에 曰
「休道騰鱗北海間, 莫言今日錦衣還. 我行不是歌豊沛, 却愧明皇蜀道難.」

琴基洞前逢佳人
이것은 太祖少年時代의 일이엿다. 太祖는 元來豪俠不凡함으로 幼時로부터 兒童과 遊戱하되 軍伍를 作하고 自己가 大將이 되야 群兒를 號令指揮하니 衆人이 다 非凡히 思하얏나 그가 15, 6세때엿다. 그는 樵童과 가티 날마다 남의 森林을 樵伐하기로 일삼앗섯다. 그런데 그것도 역시 자기가 先導가 되고 群童中命令에 不服하는 자가 잇스면 處罰을 斷行하니 群兒가 모다 慴伏하얏섯다. 그런데 一日은 群牧과 約束하되 明日은 某富豪家의 山林을 樵伐할더이니 약속시간에 來치 안이하면 首를 斬한다 하니 群兒가 應諾하고 往하얏다. 그러나 그 翌日에 一兒가 遲參함으로 그는 其兒의 首를 지개에 懸하고 斬殺하니 群兒가 다 驚走하고 그도 또한 罪를 피하야 逃走하얏섯다. 이리 저리 隱避하다가 一日은 安邊郡琴基洞(今高山驛南方)에 至하니 때는 마츰 夏月이라 일기가 甚熱하고 口가 渴함으로 路傍에서 汲水하는 處女에게 水를 청한즉 그 처녀가 水를 與하되 柳葉을 入하야 與하니 太祖는 口渴한＜44＞ 판이라 아모 말도 안이하고 먹엇스나 다시 생각한즉 이상도 하고 괫심도 하야 責하는 말이 이미 人에게 水를 給하면서 엇지 柳葉을 入하야 不潔케 하느냐 하니 그 처녀는 答하되 당신의 形色을 본즉 급히 逃避하는 사람과 갓고 또 極熱한 時에 冷水를 급히 飮하면 病이 生할가 恐하야 柳葉을 入하야 不潔을 吹棄하는 동안에 喘息을 休케 하노라고 그리하얏다 하니 太祖가 크게 놀나고 敬服하야 遂히 其家에 往하야 數日을 留宿하고 彼此婚約을 結하얏스니 此가 卽 安川府院君韓卿의 女 神懿皇后엿다.

萬家鷄一時鳴
이것도 역시 太祖의 微時의 일이엿다. 太祖는 安邊 엇던 村家에서 留宿하는데 夢에 人家에 入하야 三椽을 負出하고 또 萬家의 鷄가 一時에 鳴하며 春杆의 聲이 四隣을 動하고 鏡이 破하고 花가 落하는 것을 보고 主婆에게 言하니 主婆가 言하되 이것은 極히 貴夢인즉 秘密에 付하고 雪峯山에 가서 異僧에게 問하라 하니 太祖가 其 言과 如히 雪峯山에 가서 僧無學에게 問한즉 僧이 답하되 「三椽을 負함은 王字요. 鷄聲은 高貴位니 王位에 登할지요. 春聲은 德加東이니 德을 東方에 펼지며 花落成實하고 鏡破有聲이니 당연히 朝鮮의 君王이 될 夢兆라 하니 太祖가 心獨喜自負하야 이로부터 無學을 師로 事하고 후일 登極 후에 그 기념으로 雪峯山에 釋王寺를 창건하얏다 한다.

李之蘭과 李太祖
李之蘭의 本姓名은 佟豆蘭이니 女眞部落에 世居하다가(岳武穆後裔云) 元末에 亂을 피하야 北靑에 移住하얏섯다. 그도 역시 太祖와 가티 少時부터 騎射를 잘 하얏섯는데 出獵하다가 太祖와 相遇하고 一見에 心을 許하야 日로 交遊하얏다. 太祖와 그가 咸興에 在할 時에 서로 射를 試하기 위하야 村家婦女의 汳水하는 것을 보고 太祖는 其盆을 射中하고 之蘭은 某水가 出하기 전에 泥丸을 射하야 補充하니 人이다 歎服하얏다. 그러나 之蘭은 恒常 太祖를 猜忌하야 害코자 하얏슴으로 一日은 太祖가 便所에 往함을 見하고 之蘭이 三矢를 連射하엿더니 太祖가 그 三矢를 다 手에 持하고 泰然 笑하야 曰丈夫가 무슨 小兒의 作戱를 하느냐 하니 之蘭이 크게 敬服하야 다시는 異心을 두지 안코 死生의 誼를 結하고 太祖의 南征 정벌할 時에 항상 同往하야 大功을 成하엿섯다. 其後 太祖 登極 후에 그는 職을 辭하고 髮을 祝하야 僧이 되고 世上의 功名을 斷絶할 意를 示하니 太祖가 안심하고 諸功臣 中에 之蘭이 獨히 禍를 면하얏다.＜45＞

무엇보다도 精神修養에 注力
李太祖는 文武兩藝를 專攻할 뿐 안이라 특히 精神修養에 전력하야 名山大川과 名刹古寺에 足蹟이 가지 안은 곳이 업섯다. 특히 江原의 金剛山, 安邊의 雪峯山, 全羅의 智異山, 月出山, 開城의 松岳山에서 그 多年間 書도 讀하며 天에 祈禱도 만히 하고 또 日月星辰 등에도 다 祈禱를 하얏다. 그것은 물론 迷信的이 안이요 一個 精神修養이엿다. 그가 祈禱를 하던 중에 異蹟이 만헛지마는 其中에 한가지는 松岳山山祭時 일이엿다. 그는 松岳山에서 山祭를 지내고 왓서 엇던 村家에서 자는데 엇더 한 사람이 와서 말하기를 자기가 그 前夜에 旅行을 갓다가 旅舘이 업서서 城隍堂에서 잣더니 深更에 누가 와 城隍을 차지며 말하기를 今夜에 李成桂 三韓의 王이 되랴고 山祭를 지내니 가티 가자고 한즉 그 城隍이 答하기를 今夜는 客이 잇서서 가지 못하니 獨行하라 하더니 조금 잇다가 그 사람이 또 와서 하기를 成桂가 祭物은 굉장히 차리엿스나 不潔하야 諸神이 다 歆饗치 안이하얏다 하고 가더라고 云云하니 太祖가 怪異히 생각하고 다시 일주간 齋戒를 하고 致祭를 하며 또 그 사람으로 城隍堂에 가서 留宿케 하엿더니 과연 그 前夜에 왓던 손이 또 와서 말하기를 今夜에는 祭物이 다 淨潔하야 諸神이 잘 歆饗하엿는데 未久에 李氏가 朝鮮의 王이 되게 한다 하더라 하니 太祖가 듯고 心獨喜自負하야 其後부터 王位占奪의 決心을 하얏다 한다.

嗚呼·當年意氣今安在
然而太祖登極後 535년인 금일에 山河는 依舊하고 그의 手植한 本宮과 雪峯의 松은 四時蒼然하나 그의 王家大業은 벌서 浮雲流水와 如히 痕跡이 업게 되고 최종의 皇上인 隆熙帝가 또한 春風에 零落하는 李花를 伴하야 奄然히 白雲의 鄕으로 仙御하섯스니 녯을 생각하고 이제를 볼 때에 誰가 능히 感慨無量의 淚를 금할 수 잇스랴. 만약 太祖의 靈靈이 今日까지 잇다하면 비록 地下에서라도 一掬의 淚를 下치 안이치 못할 것이다. 최후에나 다시 李太祖의 三角山登臨詩二首를 소개한다.
登白雲臺
引手攀蘿上碧峯 一菴高臥白雲中. 君將眼界爲吾土 楚越江南豊不容.
突丌高峯接斗魁 漢陽形勝自天台 山蟠大陸擎三角 海曳長江出五臺＜46＞
＜36-46＞