잡지명	개벽 제68호
발행일	1926년 04월 01일
기사제목	黃禍냐? 白禍냐? - 兩大勢力의 昔今觀(其二) (Yellow Peril? Or White Peril? - A View of the Past and Present of the Two Great Powers (Part 2))
필자	金良洙 (Kim Ryangsu)
기사형태	논설 (Editorial/Argumentative Essay)

Yellow Peril? Or White Peril? - A View of the Past and Present of the Two Great Powers
						Kim Ryangsu

a. The Strange Sophistry of Blaming the Victim (賊反荷杖式)
Perhaps because the chronic illness of his megalomania (誇大妄想) is still uncured, the former German Emperor, Mr. Wilhelm, began last winter to once again spout his usual nonsensical "Yellow Peril" theory.
The only new color added to his argument was the forced association (牽强附會) of the new material of "Red Peril" (赤禍) to the original source of the "Yellow Peril," vehemently asserting that these two perils would inevitably inflict profound harm upon the authority of "sacred Western culture."
Of course, for anyone possessing common sense, such dark and murky theories (冥論濁說) are not even worth a chuckle, and moreover, in today's world, no matter how much Mr. Wilhelm, now a lone tyrant (一個獨夫), displays his prophetic childishness, it might be no different from a mad dog barking at the moon.
However, it seems an undeniable fact that, just as vulgar words easily enter vulgar ears, such inflammatory popular theories (煽動的俗論) unexpectedly receive much applause and cheering from the great majority of the foolish masses (衆禺) in the world.
Furthermore, the white race in general, who delusionally regard the entire world as their rightful exclusive stage (獨擅舞臺), tend to be easily infected, unknowingly, by such prejudice and biased arguments (偏見과 僻論). <8>
Let me cite one seemingly unbelievable but true example I heard directly from a certain elder of our country, who was an assistant (助事) at an American mission board in some region when I was back in my home country.
That elder, in a low voice as if revealing a great secret, citing the chapter and verse from the Christian Bible, said, "Under Japheth's tent, the two peoples of Shem and Ham, down to their descendants, shall serve Japheth for ever and ever." Here, the so-called Japheth is the ancestor of today's white race, and the remaining Shem and Ham are the ancestors of the general colored races.
Thus, the legal argument (法論) of this elder, who is destined to receive many blessings, is clear: in short, it is the doctrine of the Bible, beyond any doubt, and the holy word of God (하나님), that the general colored races faithfully obey the white race.
Ah—when words reach such a point, it is better to say nothing! But the Western missionary (양고자宣敎師) who is imagined to have instilled such wicked nonsense, disguised as the true words of the Bible, into this elder's head is also quite the missionary.
In any case, they speak nonsensically of the superiority of the white race, as if they were specially molded from different clay. It seems such preconceived notions (先入主見), large or small, are firmly and immovably rooted (牢乎不拔) in their marrow (骨髓) to some extent.
That is, based on this inherent preconceived notion, if there is "anything whatsoever" that contradicts it even in the slightest, it is considered a heinous crime, like high treason. It is from the root of such thinking that the sophistry of blaming the victim (賊反荷杖式), like the usual Yellow Peril theory, was conceived (胚胎). And it is also why such sophistry, despite being a case of blaming the victim, has managed to gain considerable worldwide agreement and conformity (附和雷同). Seen from this perspective, perhaps Kaiser Wilhelm merely gave a "frank confession" (實吐談) of what was already in the hearts of the white race in general, being the stubborn man he was.
Ah—what a disaster (禍), truly, this delusion (妄) of the white man!

b. Their Sins Are Thus
We need not bother here to distinguish whether the Yellow Peril is right or the White Peril is wrong. Simply by observing directly the respective situations <9> and the actions taken, the distinction between right and wrong will become self-evident without explanation (不解而自明). In this regard, we only wish to reflect a little here on what the actions of the white race are today.
I regret that I am not prepared here to provide the numerical data that would explain in detail the proportions of population and occupied territory between the white and colored races on the map of the entire world (全世界의 版圖).
However, we can easily infer a general outline of the actual situation, even if roughly (槪括的). Even excluding the entirety of Europe (歐羅巴), the original base of the white race, if we consider the remaining continents of the world, the amount of land under the grasp of the white race likely reaches well over three-fourths of the entire globe, currently occupied (奄有).
In other words, among the world's territories, the parts belonging to colored races not under the rule and domination of the white race can be counted on one's fingers (屈指할 바), comprising only a few ethnic groups. Almost all the rest are either their territories and colonies, or protectorates, or under the constraints of mandate rule. This is the undeniable reality (實現象) of today.
Then, what does it mean, conversely, that such a large part of the world's map has come under their control? Does it not explain that under the incessant conquest and aggression (征服과 侵略) of the white race, other races are subjected daily to unspeakable suffering and groaning, manipulated by the cursed, miserable fate of expulsion, subjugation, and elimination (洶汰)?
In short, they have employed all unjust and malicious methods and strategies (手段方略), sometimes by force, sometimes by deceit (詭譎), continuing their ceaseless encroachment (蠶食) and aggression to this day. Their monstrous sins (滔天한 罪業) need no further clamor here.
What is particularly detestable amidst this is that they always invoke peace and diplomatic relations (平和와 修交) or frequently use justice and humanity (正義와 人道) as pretexts (假託), and whenever an opportunity arises, they do not rest until they seize it without a hair's breadth of tolerance (間一髮의 容貸함이 업시). They just watch eagerly like a tiger (虎視耽耽), only fearing they might be too late (唯恐不及).
Ah—then, if their actions like these are not called sins, what else could possibly be called a sin!

c. Various Aspects of Deceitful and Wicked Ruling Methods <10>

Once unfortunately caught in the claws and fangs (爪牙) of these vampire-like beings, once fallen into their grasp, the methods of suppression are so extremely vicious (惡辣) that one cannot move again.
That is, the standard methods (常套手段) they employ are as follows: First, they take suppressive measures. Second, they use appeasement tactics (懷柔策). Then, once something is in their grasp, they make every effort to seal it off, preventing others from even peeking at (窺窬) or sharing equally (均霑) the last drop.
Look at the nearly identical process of colonial policies in various countries. In the first stage, they employ extreme repressive policies of arbitrary military rule (武斷專制), crushing and eliminating (挫折剪除) even the slightest sign of rebellious spirit (銳氣) among the ruled people. The result is that these ruled peoples are forced into either self-destructive despair (自暴自棄的 絶望) or subservience aimed at barely surviving (苟命偸生的 屈從).
Then, the next stage, the appeasement policy, occurs in two kinds of situations: either when the spirit of the ruled people has been broken, or alternatively, when the repulsive force of the ruled people is so strong that suppression is impossible, forcing an unavoidable strategic shift to test the aforementioned appeasement policy.
In any case, regardless of which of the two situations applies, the ruling class makes various efforts (腐心) to accommodate the will of the ruled people to some extent. As a result, they adopt semi-autonomous conciliatory measures (緩和手段).
Of course, the degree of these conciliatory measures may vary depending on the specific mutual relationship between the ruling and ruled peoples, but the fundamental spirit behind adopting such measures is always the same (同歸一轍): even if they take such conciliatory steps, the fundamental policy of their rule remains unshaken, merely aiming to win the favor of the ruled people and paralyze or extinguish (麻痺滅殺) their rebellious spirit (離叛的 氣勢).
Anyway, by alternating these hard and soft ruling policies as needed, they invariably proceed to the exploitation (搾取) of the ruled people, leaving no hidden potential untapped (餘蘊이 업는), which is their ultimate goal. The primary strategy of this exploitation begins with the monopolistic sealing off (獨占的封鎖) of all rights and interests (利權).
In this way, they unscrupulously usurp (橫奪) the pre-existing rights and interests of the indigenous peoples. Such methods of usurpation are made possible through all sorts of coercive and legal <11> means. Taking another step forward, through the transplantation (移植) of large-scale commerce and industry and the adoption of narrow-minded discriminatory policies (差別主義의 政策), they stage merciless tragedies of the strong devouring the weak (大呑强食).
Needless to say, the vast majority of colored peoples today are, in effect, the "food" (밥) of the white race. Ah—the fate today of these colored peoples who have become food!

d. Preserve Integrity Like Broken Tile (瓦全) or Shatter Like Jade (玉碎)?
Under the same heaven, regardless of race or region, if they are human beings, they should all possess the precious mission of living and prospering (生生榮榮). Why then is it that certain peoples are particularly in positions of dominance and exploitation, while other peoples, conversely, have unfortunately fallen into the pitiful, sad fate (可痛할 悲運) of being ruled and exploited?
Of course, countless complex reasons have led to this situation, but in essence, the greatest cause seems to be that "this relationship of ruler and ruled has been formed due to the strength or weakness of real power (實力)."
Therefore, the ultimate solution to rectifying the unreasonable and inhumane ills (弊瘼) of today's human society inevitably lies either in expecting the voluntary self-reflection (自進的 反省) of the strong, the ruling class peoples, or else in promoting the awakening and uprising (覺醒과 奮起) of the weak, the ruled peoples. There seems to be no other way.
However, expecting the correction of these ills by waiting for the self-reflection of the strong, as hypothesized above, is not only a mere dream close to impossibility, but its clear precedent (昭昭한 前鑑), as already detailed (縷縷히 說破) previously, is made unmistakably clear just by looking at the results of the Paris Peace Conference (巴里講和會議) immediately after the end of the Great European War.
Not only that, but historically, whether in the case of an individual, a family, a company, or a nation, whenever they sought to recover from the misfortune of decline and achieve revival and prosperity, they invariably succeeded only by initiating it themselves (自進), undertaking it themselves (自取), and helping themselves (自助). Never has a problem been solved solely through dependent, unearned gain (依他的 不勞而得).
In any case, for all oppressed peoples under the domination and oppression of other different peoples (異民族), there is only one path (方途) in determining their destiny (運路). <12> That is, on one hand, there is the path of shattering like jade (玉碎主義), seeking complete liberation from the fetters (羈絆) of the foreign people through desperate righteous indignation (敢死의 義憤) and indomitable effort (不屈不撓). On the other hand, there might also be the path of preserving integrity like broken tile (瓦全主義), inwardly disliking it but having no choice but to endure the domination and oppression of the foreign people meekly.
However, regardless of whether one chooses the Jade Shattering principle or the Tile Preserving principle classified above, as long as a reasonably unified national consciousness (民族的 意識) exists, there is absolutely no difference in the desire to shed the rule and domination of another foreign people.
Therefore, to break free from these unsatisfactory foreign fetters and pioneer a new national destiny of self-reliance and independence (自主自立), it is imperative, as asserted above, that the oppressed nation itself first achieves awakening and rises up before reaching its goal.
Ah—is it a peril (禍) to strive to achieve the self-reliance and independence of one's own nation by shedding the fetters of another nation? Or is it a peril to unreasonably force another nation under the coercion of one's own nation and then regard the attempt to break free from this bondage as presumptuous (僭越視)? We conclude here that the logic of which is the true peril and which is the false peril is self-evident, requiring no further elaboration.

4. The Conflict Between the Two Powers Has Begun (火蓋가 開始)
a. Deep-Rooted Anti-Imperialism
One way or another, between any two nations, one nation infringes upon another, and another nation is infringed upon by another. Setting aside for a moment the various debates about right and wrong (是是非非論) concerning which side is right or wrong among these two nations—one harming and one being harmed—the fact itself that these two opposing forces throughout the world today are gradually proceeding towards an inevitable path of conflict where they cannot coexist (兩立치 못할) is something anyone can perceive (看取) without difficulty.
To put it directly, this conflict has already reached a white-hot boiling point (白熱的으로 沸騰), and the opening shot (火蓋) of the clash must have caused <13> those violent aggressors submerged in greed (慾焰) to secretly feel a scorching flash (灼熱的 섬광) in a corner of their hearts. Although the start of hostilities may be recent (尙淺), the brewing of this atmosphere (氛圍) seems to have been happening for a long time.
Look! Setting aside the various earlier conflicts—long before the true nature of their ambition for encroaching on rights and interests became increasingly exposed (綻露) from the moment they first forced the opening of the doors (門戶開放) of Eastern nations, compelling general Eastern nations to adopt the instinctive policy of caution and exclusion known as 'expel barbarians and close the country' (攘夷鎖國)—even considering only the phenomena since the recent Great European War, the majority (太半) of all the tumultuous waves (粉粉擾擾한...波瀾) across the world have mostly arisen from the continuous friction (軋轢) and collision between the imperialism of the white race and the oppressed colored peoples.
However, the first challenge initiated purely against the imperialism of the world powers, with a clearly distinct ideological color, began with the anti-imperialist movement that arose in China (中國) within the last few years.
Of course, judging by the nature of the movement itself or its growth process in the early stages, since it was merely an ideological movement or at most a demonstrative movement (示威運動), it is likely common for most people viewing it externally to have only a vague and faint impression. Furthermore, the imperialist nations, satiated with power, might not have felt even the slightest pain or itch (痛痒), perhaps less than a horsefly on an ox's back.
Or perhaps, far from feeling any pain or itch, they might have secretly calculated (九九하얏슬는지) that this was a good opportunity not to be missed (勿失할 好機), providing a fine pretext for fabricating various nonsensical excuses. As a real example, when this anti-imperialist movement was raging last year, the powers had scheduled a tariff conference regarding China, and the extent to which they directly and indirectly constrained the Chinese government using this situation as an excuse is likely explained by recent news (這般의 소식).
In short, even if they view the anti-imperialist movement, whose sprouts began to appear in China over the past two or three years, with utmost suspicion, they probably consider it nothing more than a temporary disturbance (一時의 惹鬧) caused by a portion of young students with immature judgment and a small number of ambitious intellectuals, bought off by propaganda funds disbursed by Labor Russia (勞動 露西亞), merely echoing others (附和雷同).
Consequently, they might disregard it, thinking they can completely eradicate (根除) such a movement with a single shout (一喝). <14>
However, we know that such anti-imperialist thought, fused with hostile xenophobic fervor (敵愾적 排外熱), has deep roots (根底), not something formed overnight (一朝一夕).

b. Passive Resistance and Violent Resistance
Looking now at the ideological origins (源流) from which anti-imperialism was conceived (胚胎), it aligns with the so-called "Passive Resistance principle" (消極的 抵抗主義) commonly adopted by oppressed peoples in general.
So, what is the conceptual content of this so-called Passive Resistance principle mentioned here? It refers to the spirit and actions of non-compromise (非妥協) and non-cooperation (非協同) by the weak against the strong, a general ideological trend. The most fitting examples are our March First Movement (三一運動) of yesteryear, and later, the Swadeshi (수아데시) and Swaraj (수아라지) movements led by the great sage Gandhi (깐듸), which swept across India (印度). These seem to represent this ideological trend.
In this respect, China's anti-imperialist movement offers nothing particularly novel here; its origins trace back to our Korea (朝鮮), then swept through India, and now shakes the 400-odd prefectures of China.
However, this deeply rooted Passive Resistance movement became richer in conceptual content through China's anti-imperialist movement. The reason is none other than that the target of China's anti-imperialist movement was not a single imperialist nation, as was the case in Korea or India, but all imperialist nations as a whole.
Another fact worth noting is that while the Passive Resistance movements in Korea and India were perhaps more political than economic—or if they included some economic significance, it seemed to be secondary, subordinate to the political objective—the direct target of China's anti-imperialist movement was rather the capitalist economic policies (資本主義的 經濟政策) of the Powers, which constituted its main focus. Even if it included political significance beyond this, it was not something that overshadowed the economic significance.
In short, although they were the same passive resistance movements, there were some variations (經程) in actual movement strategies <15> depending on their respective positions and environments. Broadly speaking (統以言之), the ideological content of the Passive Resistance movement, as we see it, seems to encompass the thought and actions of non-compromise and non-cooperation by the weak against the strong in political, economic, and other ideological aspects.
However, we wish to state here that the methods of resistance by the weak against the strong are by no means limited to the Passive Resistance movement demonstrated above.
In other words, it is possible to adopt resistance movements involving various methods that are more active and practical, going a step further than the conceptual and passive Passive Resistance movement mentioned above. That is, sometimes breaking the limits of the Passive Resistance movement, which often remains merely conceptual or a temporary demonstration, they do not hesitate to take various forms of direct action (直接行動) when necessary.
The direct action taken out of such necessity is bluntly called violent resistance movement (暴力的 抵抗運動) by the strong; following their customary terminology, we will also conveniently use this term here.
Anyway, the strategies for carrying out such violent resistance movements are too numerous and varied (諸多의 雜相) to list exhaustively here, but they generally refer to all kinds of usable armed actions taken according to need, ranging from intermittent or sudden acts of terrorism (텔토이즘) to sustained or rebellious combat actions (持久的 又는 反亂的 戰鬪行爲). A fitting example is how bravely the two Islamic peoples, the Rif (립프) and the Druze (드리스), resisted the French (佛國) garrison troops during the past year.
Furthermore, the passive and violent resistance movements mentioned above, employed by the weak against the strong, each have their specific significance and utility. Consequently, these two types of resistance movements are preferably linked together, serving to intensify the overall momentum of the resistance movement.

c. The Movement's Goal and Means
In any case, regardless of which of the two resistance movements—passive or violent, briefly described above—is chosen, the purpose of the resistance is nothing other than the weak seeking to break free (解脫) from the fetters (羈絆) imposed by the strong in all aspects. In other words, it is about overthrowing the unsatisfactory current state (現狀). <16>
This goal of overthrowing the current state, in its psychological process, is based on a view of life, society, nation, and state founded on the conviction of "all or nothing" (玉碎主義 즉 올· 오아· 낫듸. [全乎無乎]) rather than preserving integrity like broken tile (瓦全主義). In this respect, the desire for the liberation of such a nation is tantamount to the highest and greatest supreme command (至上 命令).
Therefore, since it is tantamount to the highest and greatest supreme command, all means and strategies (手段과 方畧) may be employed without discrimination (不擇) to achieve this goal. In this sense, the rather "opportunistic-like" (기회주의 비슷한) theory of action rationalization, "the end justifies the means," becomes applicable.
In other words, the position of the weak under the XX [censored/illegible?] of the X [censored/illegible?] has destroyed the independent foundation of personhood. Consequently, even if life exists, it cannot be called life in the complete sense. Ultimately, until this inherent right to life (本然한 生의 原權) is restored, demanding any necessary sacrifice to any extent is a natural right (當然한 權利) and also morality.
In short, we cannot but acknowledge here the bestowal of the privilege upon the weak to employ, without hesitation (忌憚업시), all necessary means and strategies as the weak.
What is the reason? It is not based on a principle of retaliation (報復主義的 原理)—arguing that just as the strong follow the principle of "power is right" (權力權利說), believing they can take any action whatsoever for their own benefit, the weak should also take such freedom of action in a manner of "meeting violence with violence" (以暴易暴). Rather, it is based solely on the principle of "natural right" (當然한 權利) to correct and restore (矯正하며 復舊) all the evils and errors committed by the strong, who had no grounds (權原) for them in the first place, back to their original state. This is how we conclude the weak's freedom of action.
However, when a hair's breadth difference leads to a thousand-mile error (毫釐之差가 千里之謬), the very basis from which the strong and the weak each assert their freedom of action differs vastly, as mentioned above. Yet, for the strong, who are abusers of inappropriate actions, to address the weak, who are users of legitimate rights, with names like "violent resistance" or "presumptuous rebellion" (僭濫한 反逆), is the most baseless logic of putting the cart before the horse (冠履轉倒). In this regard, against the strong's "power is right" theory, we wish to assert the weak's "right is power" theory (權利權力說). We declare that the former "power is right" theory, as advocated by the strong, truly lacks any rational basis. <17>

5. The Political Process of All Oppressed Peoples
To reiterate and synthesize what has been discussed from various angles in the preceding sections: Despite encountering an excellent opportunity for world reorganization, like the Paris Peace Conference of yesteryear, the so-called advanced great powers (强大列國), boasting of their momentary advantage (一日의 長), ultimately obfuscated (糊塗) the principle of national self-determination (民族自決主義)—the most crucial item in the world reorganization plan—with utterly inadequate deceptive means (瞞着 수단). As a result, the oppressed peoples worldwide grew increasingly dissatisfied with the attitude of the powers, continuing their ceaseless resistance movements up to the present day. Among these, the "Anti-Imperialist Movement" that emerged in China (中國) in the last two or three years, although seemingly a rather faint ideological movement in form, is considered by us, upon examining the fundamental causes behind the conception of such principles and movements, as having initiated a major close-quarters battle (一大의 白兵戰) against all current phenomena worldwide. That is, this challenge is truly a kind of declaration of war (宣戰布告狀) issued collectively by all oppressed peoples groaning under the trampling (蹂躪) of the great powers, directed against these very powers representing worldwide capitalist imperialism.
Analyzing this further from the perspective of the interests of both sides, the clash of conflicting interests—between the stance of the capitalist imperialism of the great powers seeking to maintain the current world order and structure as it is (現狀 以此), and conversely, the stance of the oppressed peoples seeking to deny and destroy it and reorganize it into a new order and structure—ultimately led to this beginning. In this respect, if we expand on the clash between these two forces, we inevitably reach the final conclusion of "worldwide revolution or not?" (全世界의 革命이냐 否이냐).
In this regard, the cry for worldwide revolution demanding the political liberation of oppressed peoples should not conflict in the slightest with the ideal of world revolution for which Bolshevism (볼스뷔키즘) fights, aiming for the economic liberation of the proletariat (無産階級).
In other words, the capitalist great powers' imperialism worldwide is truly in a situation of being attacked from both front and rear (腹背受敵). Thus, the political liberation movement of the oppressed peoples naturally cannot avoid aligning its steps (步調) with the worldwide economic movement. This is not only due to the common strategy <18> of both liberation movements aiming to realize the world revolution together, but also because today's oppressed peoples worldwide are all similarly groaning under political fetters on one hand, and suffering relentless exploitation through economic aggression on the other. Therefore, the interests of these two liberation movements ultimately coincide. That is, the worldwide political and economic liberation movements, sharing the same goal and interests, have an inseparable relationship like shape and shadow (形影相隨). Consequently, they inevitably adopt, and are likely already adopting, close methods of contact without gaps for their common mission.
Furthermore, since the political organization is considered the superstructure (上部建築) of the economic organization, if we broadly classify the groups of nations with differing interests in the current international political situation by their characteristics, just as the two major classes of capital (資本) and proletariat (無産階級) confront each other in the economic structure with the middle class (中山階級) interposed, today's national forms worldwide also consist of three types: large capitalist class nations (大資本階級的 國家), small capitalist class nations (小資本階級的 國家), and proletarian class nations, commonly called underdeveloped countries (未開國이라 통칭하는 無産階級的 國家).
These three types of nations each have differing interests. As a result, nations with identical interests naturally align their actions (步調의 去就).
Moreover, ever since the emergence of the socialist new state (社會主義的 新國家), which constantly presses the capitalist nations of the world in various ways, the large capitalist class nations have built strong defensive walls (防杜城) among themselves and remain vigilant against each other. Look! Weren't all the numerous international conferences since the Paris Peace Conference essentially apprehensive efforts (戰戰兢兢의 腐心策) aimed at fundamentally defending against Labor-Farmer Russia's (勞農露西亞) cancellation of national debt (國債의 廢棄) and its other various anti-capitalist policies?
Thus, on the verge of a decisive great drama (乾坤一擲의 大活劇) unfolding between the large capitalist imperialist states and socialist Labor-Farmer Russia, the proletarian oppressed peoples of the world naturally appear as the vanguard (前衛隊) of Labor-Farmer Russia. In contrast, the various small capitalist class nations, the generally intermediate-colored nations (一般 中間 色彩的 國家), are forced to cling to the coattails (驥尾에 付하야) of the large capitalist nations, barely managing to sustain their remaining breath (餘喘).
In any case, the current state of the world, viewed politically or economically, can be broadly divided into the two major forces mentioned above: maintaining the status quo (現狀維持) and overthrowing the status quo (現狀打破). And among them, the oppressed peoples stand at the primary focal point (第一線的 焦点) of the clash between these two forces, both politically and economically. <19>
Now, as pointed out at the very beginning (劈頭) of this article, in the year 1925, the capitalist and imperialist nations achieved a temporary respite (小康) in their painstaking efforts to maintain the status quo thanks to the establishment of the Locarno Treaties (로카노조약), creating a new safety valve (安全瓣). On the other side, among the oppressed peoples, there were anti-imperialist demonstrations in China and even armed combat actions in Africa (亞弗利加) and Asia Minor (小亞細亞), which secretly emboldened (人意를 强케 하는) the weak and small nations worldwide, unleashing a burst of spirit (一場의 氣焰).
In any event, these two incidents of 1925 vividly clarified (闡明) the true nature (正軆) of the two deepest-rooted opposing forces in the world today, appearing before our eyes (眼裏) like a living picture (一幅의 活畵).
Thus, the unfolding and waxing/waning (展開와 消長) of these two forces will inevitably reach their destined conclusion through the necessary historical process. Now, finally, we intend to enter the camps (帳內) of both battle lines (兩 戰陣) and examine a glimpse of their formations (陣勢).

6. A Glimpse of the Two Formations
a. The Agonized State of the Great Powers
It requires no fresh explanation here that the Great European War of 1914 was a prelude (一序幕) signifying the rupture and collapse (破綻과 崩解) of capitalist imperialism.
And observing the result after this war ended, moving beyond the localized phenomenon of one side losing and the other winning, and looking from a higher, broader perspective (高處大局), we assert that the overall power of global imperialism has declined and diminished (凋落減殺) compared to before.
Consequently, they all uniformly faced various breakdowns (破綻) emerging everywhere in their domestic and international relations. Thus, the agonized state (苦悶相) of the great powers has become clearly visible before our eyes.
Look! Are not the domestic situations of each country today uniformly precarious, like sitting on a pile of eggs (汲汲然한 危卵의 지위)? The economic devastation (經濟的 頹廢), struck severely by the wounds (瘡痍) of an unprecedented war (曠古未有의 戰亂), inevitably triggered unprecedented social unrest and chaos (社會的 不安과 混亂), <20> leading to increasingly persistent struggles between labor and capital (勞資의 衝突), leaving hardly a peaceful day (寧日).
Is that all? On the other hand, as already explained above, all the oppressed peoples under the fetters (羈絆) of each great power only increase their tendency towards rebellion (離叛) day by day. Thus, the flames have already started burning at the feet of these great powers.
Furthermore, glancing at the perilous international situation (國際的 險相) among the powers also gives much food for thought (思有過半). The Treaty of Versailles (벨사이유강화조약), which exhausted the world's wisdom (一世의 智囊) to adjust the post-war configuration among the powers, has today become merely a nominal shell (有名無實의 形骸), which is excessively ironic (風刺的).
Thus, almost like an annual event, the powers held conference after conference, but ultimately only produced numerous treaties that were dead letters and mere formalities (死文徒例). Mutual jealousy and conflict (互相의 嫉視와 衝突) seemed even worse (尤甚) than before the war. Only through the salvation of the United States (米國), the world's number one capitalist nation, did the Dawes Plan (도스案) for German reparations reach a conclusion, followed by the smooth birth (順娩) of the Locarno Treaties last year.
However, dark gray clouds still dominate the global atmosphere (氣壓). Ultimately, the problem leaves these powers with only two paths: either slavishly serve (奴隷的으로까지 僕事) this "God of Gold of the whole world" (全世界의 金神인), the United States, to barely secure temporary peace (一時의 苟安), or else naturally abandon everything and resolutely carry out the self-destruction (自遂自決) of capitalist imperialism. But do they possess such decisive courage (大死一番적 頓智와 勇氣)?

b. The Stagnation (低迷) of the Oppressed Peoples
The only way out (活路) for those who are trampled upon by others is to break through this situation by their own strength (自力).
However, reaching this path of breakthrough inevitably involves various twists and turns (迂逶曲折). Thus, the XX [censored/illegible?] process of passive and violent resistance will be necessary, and perhaps political movements advancing slowly (緩進) through some degree of compromise will also be unavoidable.
Not only that, but fundamentally, a contingent of cultural movements (文化運動) promoting the enlightenment (敎化) and self-awareness (自覺) of the general populace must also strive ceaselessly <21> for its distant mission (遼遠한 使命).
In any case, internally, there is a need for a comprehensive (though not necessarily unified - 綜一的임을 不要) associated movement (關聯運動) that concentrates and coordinates these various forces as much as possible into a common network (網目), reduces wasteful expenditure of energy (精力의 낭비), and enhances mutual refinement (磨琢) and admonition (警督).
Externally, solidarity (同氣相求의 結束) among the oppressed peoples themselves is necessary, and it requires no further explanation here that they must strive for cooperation (提携) with XXXXXXXXXX [censored/illegible? likely related to international socialist/communist movements] which shares the same fundamental tone (基調) as the world XX [revolution?] desired by the world's oppressed peoples.
However, speaking of the undisguised current situation (現狀) faced by the oppressed peoples today, although external pressure and the immaturity of the times (時期의 未熟) are certainly major factors, internally, far from the coordination and unity of the various forces mentioned above, conflicts (軋轢) and internal strife (內紛) among themselves often lead to misguidedly harming the larger interests (大局의 理解).
Furthermore, the secondary connections between oppressed peoples also seem to have a long way to go (前途 頗히 遙遠한 觀). Only through the ceaseless worldwide XX [revolutionary?] impulse of XXXXX [Soviet Union/Comintern?] is some vitality (生氣) barely injected into the ideological movements of each nation.
In short, considering the insufficient awakening (覺醒의 未洽) of the oppressed peoples worldwide today, and the fragmented state (支離滅裂한 狀態) of their liberation movement strategies, it is a fact that their current state is far from capable of deciding a major showdown (一大의 雌雄을 決할) against global imperialism. The current reality seems to be limited to passive resistance movements aimed at disturbing the status quo (現狀攪亂), preparing for the final stage of world revolution.

c. Conclusion
In short, the entire world is currently agonizing (苦悶) and, on the other hand, indulging in wandering and stagnation (彷徨과 低迷). The cries arising from this agony appear to us <22> through the futile, desperate efforts (하욤이 업는 必死의 努力) to uphold the ghost-like "two ancestral tablets" (兩神主) of the League of Nations (國際聯盟) and the International Court of Justice (國際裁判).
And first-rate countries like France (佛國) or Italy (伊太利) or others (某某), as if possessed by some plague demon (疫鬼), are flying the untimely banners of reactionary politics (反動政治), displaying all sorts of foolish antics (痴態) while stuck in a feverish delirium (人事不省적 焦熱), which seems quite pathetic even though it concerns others. Ah—while the entire world is thus in discord (變調) and chaos (亂脈), only the two major Anglo-Saxon bourgeois (뿔조아) nations, Britain and America (英米 兩大), stand calmly (悠悠然) with their ponderous steps (鈍重한 步調), firmly blocking the way like a pillar in midstream (中流의 砥柱).
However, the wind is indeed fierce and the waves are rough. Gradually, moment by moment, a great +X [storm/change?] capable of shattering the earth's axis (地軸) and obscuring the heavens will ultimately XXX [arrive/erupt?]!
January 5, 1926 - Pen put down (擱筆) <23>
<8-23>

**Summary**

Kim Ryangsu argues against the Western concept of the "Yellow Peril," countering it with the idea of a "White Peril" stemming from Western imperialism's relentless global expansion, exploitation, and oppression of colored races. He critiques the hypocrisy of Western powers using justifications like religion or civilization to mask their greed and violence. Kim discusses various resistance strategies for oppressed nations, including passive resistance (like the March First Movement and Gandhi's movements) and violent resistance, arguing that the oppressed have a moral right to use any means necessary for liberation. He analyzes the post-WWI global situation as a clash between status quo imperialist powers (weakened but still dominant, led by Anglo-American capital) and anti-imperialist forces (including oppressed nations and Soviet Russia), seeing anti-colonial struggles as part of a larger, inevitable world revolution against capitalist imperialism.

For historians, this article is significant as it showcases a Korean intellectual actively engaging with and contributing to global anti-imperialist discourse during the colonial period. It demonstrates a clear awareness of international events (Paris Peace Conference, Locarno Treaties, events in China, India, Middle East), ideologies (Imperialism, Bolshevism, Nationalism), and figures (Wilhelm II, Gandhi). The framing of "White Peril," the justification of resistance, and the linking of national liberation with anti-capitalist revolution (aligning with Soviet Russia) provide valuable insight into the ideological currents among Korean nationalists and intellectuals under Japanese rule. The explicit mention and positive framing of the March First Movement is also noteworthy.

**Named Entities**

獨逸廢帝 윌리헴君	독일폐제 윌리헴군	Former German Emperor, Mr. Wilhelm (Wilhelm II)
耶蘇敎	야소교	Christianity (lit. Jesus Teaching)
耶蘇	야소	Jesus
야벳	야벳	Japheth
셈	셈	Shem
햄	햄	Ham
米國	미국	United States (America)
歐羅巴	구라파	Europe
中國	중국	China
印度	인도	India
朝鮮	조선	Korea (Chosŏn - contextually implied for March First Movement, not explicitly named elsewhere as the primary subject)
勞動 露西亞	노동 러시아	Labor Russia (Soviet Russia)
깐듸	깐디	Gandhi
佛國	불국	France
립프	리프	Rif (Region/People in Morocco)
드리스	드리스	Druze (People in the Levant)
巴里	파리	Paris
로카노	로카노	Locarno
亞弗利加	아프리카	Africa
小亞細亞	소아세아	Asia Minor
벨사이유	베르사유	Versailles
英米	영미	Britain and America
國際聯盟	국제연맹	League of Nations
國際裁判	국제재판	International Court of Justice (referring likely to the Permanent Court of International Justice)

**Glossary**

黃禍	황화	Yellow Peril
白禍	백화	White Peril (term coined in contrast to Yellow Peril)
賊反荷杖式	적반하장식	The manner of a thief turning and holding the stick (idiom: blaming the victim, brazen impudence)
誇大妄想	과대망상	Megalomania, delusions of grandeur
牽强附會	견강부회	Forced reasoning, strained interpretation
獨擅舞臺	독단무대	An exclusive stage; a place one dominates alone (older form: 獨擅)
宣敎師	선교사	Missionary
骨髓	골수	Bone marrow; the very core
胚胎	배태	Embryo; conception, brewing
附和雷同	부화뇌동	Blindly following others, echoing sentiments without independent thought
版圖	판도	Territory, map
奄有	엄유	To possess completely, occupy
詭譎	궤휼	Deceit, trickery
蠶食	잠식	Silkworm eating (mulberry leaves); encroachment, gradual invasion
假託	가탁	To use as a pretext
爪牙	조아	Claws and fangs; cat's paw, henchman
惡辣	악랄	Vicious, malicious, ruthless
常套手段	상투수단	Conventional methods, usual tricks
武斷專制	무단전제	Arbitrary military rule, despotism based on force
懷柔策	회유책	Appeasement policy
均霑	균점	Equal sharing (of benefits)
窺窬	규유	To peep through a hole or crack; to spy upon, seek an opportunity illicitly
橫奪	횡탈	Usurpation, seizure
移植	이식	Transplantation (here, of industries)
瓦全	와전	To preserve (integrity) like a whole tile (idiom: choosing survival/compromise over noble sacrifice)
玉碎	옥쇄	Jade shattering (idiom: choosing noble death/sacrifice over dishonorable survival)
羈絆	기반	Fetters, shackles, bondage
實力	실력	Real power, actual strength
弊瘼	폐목	Deep-seated ills, chronic evils, maladies
昭昭	소소	Clear, evident
縷縷	누누	In detail, repeatedly
巴里講和會議	파리강화회의	Paris Peace Conference
火蓋	화개	Firing cap (of a gun); the start (of a conflict)
帝國主義	제국주의	Imperialism
攘夷鎖國	양이쇄국	Expel barbarians and close the country
勞農露西亞	노농러시아	Labor-Farmer Russia (Soviet Russia)
消極的 抵抗主義	소극적 저항주의	Passive Resistance principle/ideology
三一運動	삼일운동	March First Movement (1919 Korean independence movement)
수아데시	스와데시	Swadeshi (Indian self-sufficiency movement)
수아라지	스와라지	Swaraj (Indian self-rule/independence movement)
資本主義	자본주의	Capitalism
텔토이즘	텔토이즘	Terrorism (likely transcription)
勞資	노자	Labor and Capital
瘡痍	창이	Wounds, scars (esp. of war)
頹廢	퇴폐	Decadence, degeneration, ruin
로카노조약	로카르노조약	Locarno Treaties
앵글로삭손	앵글로색슨	Anglo-Saxon
中流의 砥柱	중류의 지주	A pillar in midstream (idiom: someone who stands firm in turbulent times)
擱筆	각필	To put down one's writing brush; to finish writing
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제68호
발행일	1926년 04월 01일
기사제목	黃禍냐? 白禍냐? - 兩大勢力의 昔今觀(其二)
필자	金良洙
기사형태	논설

黃禍냐? 白禍냐? - 兩大勢力의 昔今觀
						金良洙
가. 賊反荷杖式의 奇怪한 强辯
前獨逸廢帝 윌리헴君은 그 本症인 誇大妄想의 惡業이 아즉도 未愈함인지 작년 겨을에 이르러 또 例의 黃禍論의 怪氣焰을 다시 되푸리하기 시작하얏다.
다만 그 논조에 새로운 色彩가 加味된 것은 『黃禍』의 本方에 『赤禍』의 新材料를 牽强附會하기까지하야 「神聖한 西洋文化」의 權威에 반다시 以上 兩禍의 深切한 危禍가 밋치게될 것을 大히 力說하야마지 아니하얏다.
勿論 以上과 가튼 彼一流의 冥論濁說이 웬만한 常設의 所有者이면 足히 一笑에 付할 價値도 업스려니와 하믈며 오늘날에 잇서서는 一個 獨夫인 彼윌리헴君이 如何히 豫言者的 稚氣를 盛히 發揮한다하더래도 或은 밋친개의 달짓거리와 다름이 업슬 것이다.
그러나 卑言은 俚耳에 들어가기 쉽다는 분수로 이러한 煽動的 俗論이 案外에 世間多大數인 모든 衆禺들의 拍手喝采를 만히 밧게 되는 것도 또한 否認치 못할 사실인가 한다.
더욱히 전세계를 저의들의 당연한 獨擅舞臺와 가티 妄想하는 一般白色人種은 動輒則 이러한 偏見과 僻論에 不知不識中 감염되기가 쉬울 것이다. ＜8＞
이제 그 거짓말 갓기도 한 一實例를 들면 내가 일즉히 本國에서 어느 地方에 米國宣敎會의 助事로 잇는 우리나라 사람의 某長老에게 드른 一實談에 관한 말이다.
그 장로는 나직한 목소리로 무슨 큰 秘密이나 알리우는 거와 가티 耶蘇敎의 聖經 가운대 그 句節의 章까지 引證하면서 「야벳의 帳幕하에 셈과 햄의 두 사람은 그 子孫에 이르기까지 永永世世토록 야벳을 섬길 것이라」 하얏다 하는데 여긔에 云하는바 야벳은 오늘날 白色人種의 祖上이며 其餘의 셈과 햄은 卽 一般有色人種의 조상들이라 한다.
그런즉 이 福만히 바들 장노의 法論은 明瞭하니 다시 말할 것 업시 一般有色人種이 白色人種에게 忠誠되이 服從하는 것은 곳 이것이 一點不疑할 聖經의 도리요 또 한우님의 거룩한 말이라 하는 것이다.
아- 辭至如此에 寧欲無言이 可하다! 다만 이 장로의 머리에 이러한 야살구진 聖經의 참된 말슴이라는 것을 鼓吹하얏스리라고 想像되는 그 양고자宣敎師도 宣敎師이다.
엇던튼 저의들은 특별한 흙으로나 비저낸 거와 가티 일반이 白色人種의 優越을 망언하는 것이니 이러한 先入主見이 적으나크나 다 어느 程度까지는 牢乎不拔하게 그 骨髓에 사못처 잇는가 한다.
즉 이러한 固有의 先入主見에 의하야 一毫一末이라도 이것에 牴觸될만한 「엇더한 무엇이」 잇스면 그것이 곳 大逆不道인 다시 업는 罪惡과 가티 생각되나니 이러한 사상의 根底下에서 例의 黃禍論가튼 賊反荷杖式의 强辯이 胚胎된 것이며 또 이러한 賊反荷杖式의 强辯일망정 頗히 擧世의 附和雷同을 전하게 된 所以이니 이러한 점으로 보면 彼카이젤 윌리헴은 도로혀 一般白色人種의 胸憶에 잇는 바를 다만 剛腹한 彼로 하야곰 「實吐談」한 것에 不過한 것인가 한다.
아- 禍인저, 참으로 이 白人의 妄이여!

나. 저의들의 罪業은 이러하다
우리는 여긔서 黃禍가 是인지 혹은 白禍가 非인지 구타여 그 黑白을 가릴 필요가 업다. 다만 서로 彼此의＜9＞ 당한 바 處地와 또 그 行하는 바 事實을 事實 그대로 直觀하면 그 시비의 分辨은 不解而自明이 되리니 이 점에 잇서 오늘날 白色人種의 행사가 如何한 것을 다시 여긔서 우리가 조금 생각코자 하는 것뿐이다.
나는 지금 여긔서 全世界의 版圖中에 白色人種과 有色人種과의 그 人口의 數量과 占有된 領土의 比例를 상세하게 설명할만한 數字의 提供을 豫備치 못한 것을 遺憾으로 안다.
그러나 우리가 자못 槪括的이나마 그 實勢의 一班을 가히 推知키 不難하니 백색인종의 本來의 根據地인 歐羅巴 全幅은 여긔서 論外로 하더래도 其餘의 全世界 各州를 擧하야 저의들 백색인종의 掌握하에 잇는 土地가 果然 얼마나한 分量에 달하는가하면 아마 優히 全地球의 四分之三 以上을 方今 奄有하고 잇는가 한다.
다시 말하면 全世界의 版圖中에 有色人種으로 白色人種의 統治와 支配를 밧지안는 部分은 도로혀 數三民族으로 可히 屈指할 바이요 殆히 그 餘의 全部가 저의들의 領土와 식민지가 아니면 保護地 又는 委任統治의 拘束下에 在한 것이 즉 오늘날 감출 수 업는 實現象이라 할 것이다.
그러면 이러케 전세계의 大部分 版圖를 저의들의 掌握에 占領케 되얏다 하는 것이 그 反面에 무엇을 意味하는가하면 즉 저의들 白色人種의 間斷업는 征服과 侵略下에 다른 種族들은 驅逐과 屈服과 洶汰의 咀呪할 바 모든 悲慘한 運命의 飜弄으로 因하야 말할 수 업는 苦痛과 呻吟을 나날이 밧고잇는 것을 설명함이 아니고 무엇일가.
요컨대 저의들은 모든 不義와 惡毒한 手段方略을 다하야 혹은 武力으로 혹 詭譎로써 間斷업는 蠶食과 侵略을 오늘날까지 繼續하고 잇스니 그 滔天한 罪業이야 다시 여기셔 噪噪할 必要가 업다.
그러는 중에도 더욱이 可憎한 것은 저히들은 言必稱 平和와 修交에 藉口하거나 혹은 每每히 正義와 人道에 假託하야 可乘할 機會만 잇스면 間一髮의 容貸함이 업시 不奪하야는 不休하나니 다만 虎視耽耽하야 오즉 唯恐不及할 뿐이엿다.
아- 그러면 저이들의 이러한 行事를 罪業이라 아니하고 足히 또 무엇을 罪業이라 할가!

다. 詐惡한 統治手段의 諸相＜10＞

吸血鬼가튼 저의들의 爪牙에 이미 잡히기가 不幸이지 한번만 저의들의 掌中에 드러가기만 하면 다신 꼼작할 수가 업슬 만큼 그 抑制의 手段이 자못 惡辣한 것이다.
즉 저의들의 取하는 바 常套手段이 이러하니 第一着으로 抑壓手段을 取하고 第二段으로는 懷柔策을 쓴다 그러고 이미 저의들의 掌中에 歸한 以上 이것을 極力하야 封鎖한 후에 그 最後의 一滴까지라도 他의 窺窬와 均霑을 不得케 하는 바이다.
보라 각국의 植民政策의 거의 同一한 過程을, 어느 곳이고 그 第一期에는 武斷專制의 極端한 抑壓政策을 취하야 그 被支配人民의 毫末이라도 反抗할만한 銳氣가 잇스면 그것을 어듸까지 挫折剪除하야 마지아니하나니 그 결과는 이러한 피지배인민들의 自暴自棄的 絶望과 그러치 아니하면 苟命偸生的 屈從을 마츰내 强要하게 되는 것이다.
그러고 그 다음 第二期의 懷柔策은 즉 피지배인민의 풀이 한겹 죽엇거나 그러치 아니하면 아무리 抑壓하랴도 抑壓할 수 업슬만큼 피지배인민의 反撥力이 강렬한 남아지에 不得已한 一轉換策으로 以上의 懷柔策을 試驗하야보는 두 가지 境遇가 잇다.
엇덧튼 이상 두 가지 境遇의 어느 便임을 勿論하고 저의들 統治階級은 어느 程度까지 피지배인민들의 意思를 迎合코자하야 여려가지로 腐心하나니 그 結果로 因하야 半自治的 緩和手段을 취하게 되는 것이다.
물론 이상의 緩和手段은 各個의 支配民族과 피지배민족간의 특수한 互相關係에 따라 그 程度가 不一할지나 緩和手段을 取하는 그 根本的 精神에 잇서서는 다 同歸一轍일지니 즉 저의들이 비록 그러한 정도의 緩和手段을 취한다 하더래도 그 통치의 근본방침에는 조금도 動搖함이 업시 다만 피지배민족의 歡心과 피지배민족의 離叛的 氣勢를 麻痺滅殺케 할 뿐인 정도에 그친다.
엇덧튼 이럿케 剛柔兩樣의 統治方針을 때로 交行하면서 그 最後의 目的인 피지배민족의 餘蘊이 업는 搾取를 반드시 着手하야 마지아니하나니 이 착취의 第一方針은 먼저 모든 利權의 獨占的封鎖로써 비롯한다.
이리하야 原住民族의 先占利權을 忌憚이 업시 橫奪하나니 이러한 橫奪方法은 모든 强制的 밋 法制的 ＜11＞ 手段으로써 可能할 바이며 다시 한거름 나아가 大規模的 商工業의 移植과 밋 偏狹한 差別主義의 政策의 採用으로 인하야 大呑强食의 無慈悲한 慘劇을 연출케 된다.
다시 말할 것 업시 오늘날 多大數의 有色民族은 즉 저의들 白色人種의 「밥」이라 한다. 아-이와 가티 밥이 된 이 有色民族의 오늘날 運命이여!

라. 瓦全乎 玉碎乎
그러면 同一한 一天의 下에서 그 種色의 如何와 그 地域의 遠近을 勿論하고 苟히 人類일진대 다 가튼 生生榮榮의 尊貴한 生의 使命이 잇슬 것이어늘 엇지하야 엇더한 民族은 특히 支配와 搾取의 地位에 잇고 또 이에 反한 엇더한 民族은 不幸히 그 被支配, 被搾取의 可痛할 悲運에 陷하야 잇게 되얏슬가.
물론 이러한 形勢를 짓게 되기까지는 幾百千種의 여러가지 複雜한 原因이 不無할지나 요컨대 그 最大의 原因은 즉 「實力의 强弱으로 因하야 이러한 支配被支配의 關係를 짓게된 것인가」한다.
그런즉 結局 問題는 이러한 不合理, 不人道한 오늘날의 인류사회의 弊瘼을 矯正하는 데에는 不可不 强者인 支配級民族의 自進的 反省을 期待하거나 그러치 안흐면 弱者인 被支配민족들의 覺醒과 奮起를 促成하는 外에 別方途가 업슬 것이다.
그러나 이상에 假說한 거와 가티 强者의 反省을 待하야 이러한 弊瘼의 矯正을 期待코자 한다함은 到底히 不可能에 갓가운 一片의 夢想일 뿐 아니라 또 그 昭昭한 前鑑은 이미 縷縷히 說破한 거와 가티 往年의 歐洲大戰亂이 끗난 直後의 巴里講和會議의 결과에만 照하야도 다시 容疑치 못할만큼 明瞭한 것이다.
그 뿐 아니라 일즉히 一人一家와 一社一國의 엇더한 경우임을 물론하고 그 몰락의 비운에서 挽回와 또 진흥을 圖코자 할진대 모름이 自進하얏스며 自取하얏스며 또 自助하야서야 비로소 그 所期의 목적을 달하얏던 것이요 결코 의타적 불로이득 뿐에 의하야 그 문제의 해결을 得한 것은 未有하얏다.
엇던튼 다른 異民族의 지배와 압박 하에 잇는 모든 피압박 민족은 그 運路의 결정에 잇서 오즉 그 거취의 方途가 한아＜12＞ 잇슬 뿐이니 卽 어듸까지 敢死의 義憤과 不屈不撓의 노력으로써 이민족의 羈絆을 완전히 해탈코자 하는 類의 玉碎主義가 一方에 잇슬 뿐이고 또 이에 반하야 내심으로는 실흐나 불득이 하는 수 업시 이민족의 지배와 압박을 꼬박꼬박 참고 지내랴는 瓦全主義도 잇슬 것인가 한다.
그러나 이상에 분류한 玉碎主義나 瓦全主義 중 어느 것임을 물론하고 웬만히 단일성을 가진 민족적 의식이 苟有한 이상에는 도저히 다른 이민족의 통치와 지배를 밧기 스려하는 一点에 잇서서는 조금도 다를 것이 업는 것이다.
그런데 이러한 不滿足한 이민족 羈絆을 벗고 自主自立의 민족적 新運路를 개척하랴면 불가불 이상에 斷言한 거와 가티 일반 壓迫民族 자체의 각성과 奮起를 도모한 후에 비로서 그 목적을 到할 바인가 한다.
아 이러케 자기 민족의 자주자립을 실현하기 위하야 남의 민족의 羈絆를 버스랴 함이 禍이냐 혹은 남의 민족을 어듸까지 無理하게도 자기 민족의 강박 하에 넛코 도로혀 이 구속을 벗고자 함을 僭越視 하는 것이 禍이냐 우리는 여긔서 그 어느 것이 眞禍이고 假禍인 것을 구타여 가려 말할 필요도 업슬 만큼 그 사리가 자명한 것을 결론할 뿐이다.

4. 火蓋가 開始된 兩勢力의 衝突
가. 뿌리 깁흔 反帝國主義 이러나 저러나 엇더한 민족과 민족과의 사이에 엇더한 민족과 민족은 남의 민족을 침해하며 또 엇더한 민족은 남의 민족에게 침해를 밧게 되나니 이와 가티 남을 해하고 혹은 남에게 침해를 밧는 兩個 민족 중에서 어느 편이 그르고 올은지의 여러 가지 是是非非論은 여긔서 暫置하야 不問한다 하드래도 오늘날 전세계를 擧하야 이상과 가튼 양편의 세력이 漸一漸으로 서로 兩立치 못할 필연한 갈등의 途程을 향하야 진행하는 사실 그 자체는 누구나 이것을  看取하기에 不難할 바인가 한다.
바로 말하면 이러한 갈등이 이미 白熱的으로 沸騰하야 마츰내 그 충돌의 火蓋는 慾焰에 잠긴 저 强暴者들로 하여곰＜13＞ 窃히 灼熱的 섬광을 그 胸裏의 일부에 感하게 되얏슬 것이니 비록 그 戰端의 開始는 시일이 尙淺하다 하더라도 이러한 분위기가 醞釀되기는 이미 오래 전부터의 일이엇든가 한다.
보라. 처음으로 東方民族의 門戶開放을 강요하면서부터 저의들의 利權浸蝕에 대한 야심의 본색이 점점 綻露하게 되매 일반 동방민족들은 다 - 一樣으로 攘夷鎖國의 본능적 敬遠策을 취하지 아니할 수 업섯든 훨신 以前의 여러 가지 충돌은 다 그만두고 자못 최근의 사실인 歐洲大戰亂 이후의 現象만 가지고 보더래도 그 粉粉擾擾한 전세계의 모든 波瀾의 太半은 거의 다 이러한 白色人種의 帝國主義와 被壓迫民族인 有色人種과의 사이에 서로 間斷이 업는 軋轢과 충돌의 결과로써 니러난 種種의 紛競이엿다.
그러나 여긔서 순전히 전세계 열강들의 帝國主義를 상대로 하야 思想上으로 자못 색채가 선명하게 그 최초의 도전을 始하기는 수삼년내로 中國에서 니러난 反帝國主義 운동의 그것으로써 비롯한 것이다.
물론 이러한 운동은 운동 자체의 本領으로 보나 또는 그 초기시대의 성장발달의 과정으로 보아서나 단순한 사상운동이 아니면 혹은 어느 정도까지의 시위운동에 그칠 뿐임으로 누구나 외관으로써 이것을 보면 자못 漠然하고도 미미한 감상 밧게 날 것이 업는 것이 일반 사람의 통상이 되리라. 하믈며 오즉 强力의 飽滿者인 여러 帝國主義의 국가로서는 오히려 소 등에 쉬파리 한 마리의 존재보다도 그 痛痒을 感치 아니하얏슬는지 알 수 업다.
또 혹은 이러한 다소의 痛痒은 커녕 이것을 勿失할 好機와 가티 이용하야 여러 가지의 엉터리를 장만하는 조흔 구실거리나 생긴 것 가티 속으로 九九하얏슬는지 알 수 업스니 그 실례를 들면 작년에 이 反帝國主義 운동이 바야흐로 흉흉할 그때 적히 열국이 中國에 대한 관세회의를 개최하기로 예정하엿든 것을 이 시국을 핑게하야 직접 간접으로 中國정부를 얼마나 견제하얏든 것인지는 대개 這般의 소식을 가히 설명함이 잇는가 한다.
요컨대 中國에서 兩3년 내로 점차 그 싹이 돗기 시작하는 저 反帝國主義 운동을 흠뻑 저히들이 돗뜨게 본다 하야도 노동 露西亞의 지출한 선전비에 팔려서 思量이 미정한 일부분 연소학생과 밋 소수의 야심이 잇는 지식계급이 한갓 附和雷同하는 일시의 惹鬧로 밧게 생각되지 아니할 것이다.
따라서 저의들은 一喝의 下에 족히 이러한 운동을 모조리 根除할 수가 잇슬 것 가티 경시할는지 알 수 업다.＜14＞
그러나 이러한 反帝國主義적 사상은 一方으로 敵愾적 排外熱과 서로 융합하야 자못 그 根底가 一朝一夕의 事가 아닌 뿌리 깁흔 그 무엇이 잇는 것을 우리는 안다.

나. 消極抵抗과 暴力抵抗 이제 反帝國主義의 胚胎된 사상상 源流를 보면 일반 被壓迫民族들의 공통적으로 취하야 온 소위 「消極的 抵抗主義」와 그 맥락이 일치되는 것이다.
그러면 여긔서 말하는 소위 消極的 抵抗主義라는 것의 관념상 내용이 엇더한가 하면 약자로서의 강자에 대한 비타협 及 비협동의 정신과 행동을 가르처 통칭하는 사상의 경향을 일카름이니 이제 그 最適한 실례를 들면 왕년의 우리 三一運動이 그것이며 또 그 후 전 印度를 풍미한 聖雄 깐듸의 수아데시 及 수아라지의 兩 운동이다. 이러한 사상의 경향을 대표함인가 한다.
이 점에 잇서 中國의 反帝國主義적 운동은 여기셔 특히 참신한 것이 업다 할 것이니 즉 그 최초의 기원은 이미 우리 朝鮮에서 發하야 다시 印度를 席捲하얏고 이제 또 中國의 4백여 州를 振蕩케 된 것이다.
다만 이와 가티 그 淵源이 깁흔 消極的 抵抗運動이 中國의 反帝國主義 운동을 통하야 더욱 그 관념상 내용이 풍부하게 되얏스니 그것은 非他라. 中國의 反帝國主義적 운동의 상대목표는 曾히 朝鮮이나 印度에서와 가티 단순한 일개의 帝國主義 국가가 아니요 즉 전체로서의 모든 帝國主義 국가를 상대로 한 것이엿다.
그러고 또 한 가지 특기할 사실로 말하면 朝鮮과 印度의 消極的 抵抗運動은 그 목표가 경제적이라 하는 것보다 차라리 정치적이엿고 적어도 엇더한 경제적 의의까지 포함하얏다 하면 그것은 곳 정치적 목적에 종속한 第二義的 의의에 불과하얏든 觀이 잇스나 中國의 反帝國主義적 운동의 직접 목표는 도로혀 列國의 資本主義的 경제정책에 대항한 그것이 그 주체가 되얏스니 설사 이외에 정치적 의의를 포함하얏다 하더래도 그것은 경제적 의의를 凌駕할 만한 무엇은 아니엿섯다.
요컨대 동일한 소극주의적 저항운동이면서도 그 각각 처한 바 지위와 환경에 따라 실제의 運動方略에 다소의 經程이＜15＞ 잇섯든 것이니 統以言之하면 우리의 보는 바 消極的 抵抗運動의 이념상 내용은 즉 약자의 강자에 대한 정치적 경제적 及 기타 사상적의 모든 비타협 비협동의 사상과 행동을 통칭하는 그것인가 한다.
그런데 약자로서의 강자에 대한 저항방법이 다만 이상에 증명한 消極的 抵抗運動에 그치는가 하면 결코 그러치 안한 것을 여긔서 一言코자 한다.
다시 말하면 관념적이요 소극적인 이상의 消極的 抵抗運動보다 더 한 거름 나아가 적극적이며 또 현실적인 여러 가지 방법의 저항운동을 능히 취할 수가 잇다. 즉 관념적 又는 일시의 시위운동에 그칠 뿐이든 이상의 消極的 抵抗運動의 한계를 때로 버서나서 필요에 의하야는 종종의 직접행동을 취하야 마지 아니하는 것이다.
이러한 필요에 의하야 취하는 바 직접행동을 강자는 誙言하되 즉 폭력적 저항운동이라 하나니 이제 저의들의 용어의 관례에 의하야 우리도 여긔서 이 말을 편의상 습용한다.
엇더튼 이러한 폭력적 저항운동의 진행 方略은 일일히 여기서 그 諸多의 雜相을 다 열기치 못할 바이나 間歇的 又는 돌발적 텔토이즘의 모든 행동으로부텨 持久的 又는 반란적 전투행위에 이르기까지 필요에 응하야 모든 사용할 수 잇는 각종의 무력행위를 통칭하야 일카름이니 작년 1년 중에 립프 及 드리스의 兩 이스람 민족이 如何히 용감하게 佛國의 주둔병을 대항하얏는지는 즉 그 一 適例이다.
그러고 약자로셔의 강자에게 대한 이상의 소극적 又는 폭력적의 兩 저항운동이 각각 특수한 의의와 효용이 잇스며 따라서 이상의 양 저항운동이 되도록 셔로 관련하야 전 저항운동의 형세를 더욱 더욱 激致케 하는데 서로 用意하게 된다.

다. 運動의 目的과 手段 엇더튼 이상에 약술한 소극적 及 폭력적의 저항운동의 兩者 중에 그 어느 것임을 물론하고 그 저항의 목적은 즉 약자가 강자로부터 바든 모든 방면의 羈絆을 해탈코자 함에 不外하니 이것을 다른 말로 밧구워 말하면 즉 불만족한 현상을 타파하랴 함인가 한다.＜16＞
그러면 이러한 현상타파의 목적은 그 심리적 과정에 잇서 瓦全主義보다 玉碎主義 즉 올· 오아· 낫듸.(全乎無乎)의 신념 상에 기초한 인생관 사회관 내지 민족국가관이니 이 점에 잇서 이러한 일민족의 해방에 대한 욕구는 그것이 곳 최고 최대의 至上 명령에 不異하다.
따라서 최고 최대의 至上 명령에 不異한 이상 이 목적을 달하기 위하야는 모든 수단과 方畧을 不擇할 바이니 이 의미에 잇서 목적은 수단을 정당화 한다는 자못 「기회주의 비슷한」 行動合理說의 적용을 밧게 된다.
다시 말하면 X자의 XX 하에 잇는 약자의 지위는 즉 인격으로서의 독립적 토대를 파멸케 되얏는지라. 따라서 生이 잇서도 그것은 완전한 의미의 生이라 할 수 업슬 것인 즉 결국 이와 가튼 本然한 生의 原權을 회복하기까지는 모든 의미의 필요한 희생을 어듸까지 요구하야도 그것은 당연한 권리이요 또 도덕이다.
요컨대 약자는 약자로서의 모든 필요한 수단과 方略을 忌憚업시 채용할 수 잇는 그 특권의 부여를 우리는 여기서 시인치 안할 수 업다.
그 이유는 무엇인가 하면 강자가 제멋대로 엇더한 행동이든 저히들의 이익을 위하야 취하지 못할 것이 업다는 예의 「權力權利說」에 倣하야 일종의 以暴易暴적 논법으로 약자도 이러한 행동의 자유를 취하지 아니치 못할 것이다 하는 보복주의적 원리로써가 아니고 다만 강자로부터 이미 저즈러 노흔 하등의 權原이 업는 모든 악과 과실에 대하야 이것을 본연의 상태대로 矯正하며 復舊코자 하는 「당연한 권리」의 원리로써 이러한 약자의 행동의 자유를 결론함에 불과한다.
그런뎨 毫釐之差가 千里之謬로 강자와 약자가 각각 자기네들의 행동의 자유를 주장하는 그 근거부터서 이상에 말한 거와 가티 그 기준이 판이하거늘 도로혀 부적당한 행동의 濫用者인 강자의 처지로 잇서 정당한 권리의 사용자인 약자를 향하야 비록 명칭까지라도 폭력적 저항이니 또 난 僭濫한 반역이니 하는 것은 가장 無稽한 冠履轉倒의 논법인가 한다. 우리는 이 점에 잇고 강자의 「權力權利說」에 대하야 약자의 「權利權力說」을 주장코자 하는 바이요 강자의 주장하는 바와 가튼 前者의 權力權利說이야 말로 참으로 아무러한 합리적 근거가 업는 것을 단언한다.＜17＞

5. 모든 被壓迫民族의 政治過程
이상 각 항에 여러 가지 방면으로 논술한 것을 다시 여긔서 종합하야 말하면 오늘날 소위 一日의 長이 잇다고 하야 선진국이라고 칭하는 저의들의 强大列國이 왕년의 巴里강화회의와  가튼 전세계의 개조를 위하야 絶好한 기회를 際會하얏스면서도 世界改造案 중의 가장 큰 안목이 되는 民族自決主義를 자못 불철저한 瞞着 수단으로 糊塗한 결과 전 세계의 일반 피압박 민족들은 더욱 더욱 열강의 태도에 불만을 품어 以來 오늘날 이르기까지 間斷업는 저항운동을 계속하는 것인데 就中에도 특히 兩3년 내로 저 中國에서 대두케 된 「反帝國主義運動」이 비록 그 형태로 말하면 자못 미미한 사상운동에 그치는 것 가트나 이러한 주의와 운동의 배태된 근본적 원인을 고찰하면 즉 오늘날 전세계의 모든 현상에 대하야 一大의 백병전을 시행한 것으로 우리는 간주하는 것이다. 즉 이러한 도전은 졍말 전세계의 資本主義的 帝國主義를 대표하는 여러 列大强國에게 대하야 이러한 列大强國의 蹂躪 하에서 신음하는 모든 被壓迫民族들로부터 보통적으로 發한 일종의 宣戰布告狀인가 한다.
이것을 다시 쌍방의 이해로써 해부하면 오늘날 전세계의 질서와 조직을 현상 이대로 어듸까지 유지코자 하는 저 列大强國의 資本主義的 帝國主義의 입장과 이에 反하야 어듸까지 이것을 부인하며 파괴하야 새로운 질서와 조직으로 개조코자 하는 저 被壓迫民族들과의 불일치한 이해의 충돌이 마츰내 이러한 발단을 짓게 한 것이니 이 점에 잇서 이 양 세력의 충돌을 다시 우리가 확충하야 말하면 즉 「전세계의 혁명이냐 否이냐」의 최후 결론에 도달하고 만다.
이 점에 잇서 被壓迫民族들의 정치적 해방을 위하야 絶呌하는 전세계 혁명의 욕구는 볼스뷔키즘이 無産階級의 경제적 해방을 위하야 奮鬪하는 세계 혁명의 理想과 조금도 背馳할 것이 업슬 것이다.
다시 말하면 전세계의 資本主義적 列大强國의 帝國主義는 실로 腹背受敵의 이중 공격을 밧고 잇는 형세에 처하야 잇다. 엇더튼 이러하야 被壓迫民族의 정치적 해방운동은 자연히 전 세계의 경제적 운동과 그 步調를 일치하게 취하지 아니할 수 업게 되얏스니 이것은 전세계의 혁명을 다 가티 실현코자 하는 兩 해방운동의 공통한 전략으로써＜18＞ 그러할 뿐 아니라 오늘날 전세계의 被壓迫民族이 다 가튼 모양으로 한쪽으로는 정치적 羈絆下에 신음하며 또 한쪽으로는 경제적 침략에 의하야 여지 업는 搾取를 밧게 됨으로 이 두 가지 해방운동이 결국에 잇서 서로 이해가 일치하기 까닭이다. 즉 목표가 갓고 이해가 일치하는 전세계의 정치 及 경제의 兩 해방운동이야말로 서로 떠나랴 하야도 떠날 수 업는 形影相隨의 관계가 잇다. 따라서 그 공통한 사명을 위하야 서로의 간격이 업는 밀접한 연락방법을 취하게 되며 또 취하고 잇는 것이 아닌가.
그러고 또 여긔서 경제조직의 上部建築이라고 보는 정치조직인지라. 따라서 오늘날 國際政局의 이해를 달리 하는 각 國家群을 그 색채에 의하야 大別하면 마치 경제조직에서 자본 及 무산계급의 양대 계급이 서로 대립하고 그 중간에 중산계급이 介在한 것과 가티 오늘날 전 세계 列國의 국가적 형태도 大資本階級的 국가와 小資本階級的 국가와 또 未開國이라 통칭하는 無産階級的 국가의 3종류의 국가가 잇다.
이상의 3종 국가가 다 각각 그 이해가 不一하나니 그 결과로 말미암아 동일한 이해를 가진 국가와 국가와의 사이는 자연 그 步調의 去就를 또한 가티 한다.
더욱이 전세계의 資本主義 국가를 여러 가지 방면으로 항상 肉迫하야 마지 아니 하는 사회주의적 신국가가 출현한 후로부터셔는 일반 大資本階級的 국가와 국가와의 사이는 셔로 공고한 防杜城을 쌋고 互相 경계하기를 마지 아니 하나니 보라 巴里강화회의로부터 諸多의 국제회의가 다-勞農露西亞의 國債의 폐기와 밋 기타 여러 가지의 反資本主義的 정책을 根底로부터 防禦코자 하는 戰戰兢兢의 腐心策이 아니엿든가.
즉 이와 갓티 大資本階級的 帝國主義 국가와 사회주의적 勞農露西亞의 사이에 장차로 乾坤一擲의 대활극이 연출되랴 함에 際하야 전 세계의 無産階級적든 被壓迫民族은 자연 勞農露西亞의 前衛隊인 觀이 잇고 또 이에 대하야 각개 소자본계급 일반 중간 색채적 국가는 부득이 대자본 국가의 驥尾에 付하야 근근히 그 餘喘을 지속코자 함에 이른다.
엇더튼 오늘날 전 세계의 상태는 정치적으로 보나 경제적으로 보나 大別하야 이상의 현상유지와 현상타파의 양대 세력으로 對之케 할 수가 잇스며 그러고 그 중에 被壓迫民族은 정치적으로나 경제적으로나 이러한 양대 세력＜19＞ 충돌의 第一線的 焦点에 서 잇다.
그런데 本稿의 劈頭에 이미 지적한 거와 가티 1925년인 작년 1년 중에 資本主義 及 帝國主義 국가는 로카노조약의 성립으로 인하야 그 현상유지의 고심책에 일시 小康을 엇게 되는 새로운 安全瓣이 생기게 되얏고 또 이 反面의 被壓迫民族들로 말하면 中國의 反帝國主義적 시위운동과 또 亞弗利加와 小亞細亞 방면에서는 무력적 전투행위까지 잇서 자못 전세계의 약소민족으로 하야곰 竊히 人意를 强케 하는 一場의 氣焰을 토케 된 것이다.
엇더튼 1925년의 이상 양 사건은 오늘날 전세계의 가장 뿌리 깁흔 양대 상대세력의 正軆를 여지 업시 闡明한 一幅의 活畵와 가티 우리의 眼裏에 彷彿한 것이다.
이리하야 이상 양 세력의 전개와 消長은 다만 그 필요한 역사적 과정에 의하야 마츰내 그 도달할 바에 도달하고 말 것이어니와 이제 우리는 최후로 兩 戰陣의 帳內에 드러가 그 陣勢의 一斑을 玆에 살피고자 한다.

6. 兩陣勢의 一斑
가. 强大列國의 苦悶相 여긔서 새삼스러운 설명을 요할 것도 업시 1914년의 歐洲大戰亂은 資本主義적 帝國主義의 파탄과 崩解를 의미한 一序幕이엿다.
그러고 이 戰亂이 終熄된 결과로서는 一方이 敗하고 또 一方이 勝한 것의 局部的 현상을 떠나서 이것을 高處大局으로써 관찰하면 즉 전세계 帝國主義의 전체로서의 세력이 比前하야 凋落減殺된 것을 우리는 단언한다.
이리함으로 저의들은 다 同歸一轍의 형세로 그 국내와 국제적 관계에 다 一樣의 여러 가지 破綻이 百出하게 되얏스니 於是에 저의들 强大列國의 苦悶相이 역력하게 우리의 목전에 전개케 된 것인가 한다.
보라 오늘날 각 국의 국내사정이 다한 모양으로 汲汲然한 危卵의 지위에 처하야 잇지 아니한가를! 즉 曠古未有의 전란의 瘡痍로부터 그 타격이 甚巨하얏든 경제적 頹廢는 마츰 無前한 사회적 불안과 혼란을 激致케 하야＜20＞ 더욱 더욱 勞資의 충돌이 殆히 寧日이 업슬 만큼 持久的으로 그 투쟁을 계속하고 잇다.
엇지 그 뿐이랴. 한쪽으로는 이상에 이미 說破한 거와 가티 각 强大列國의 羈絆 하에 在하는 모든 피압박 민족이 날로 그 離叛의 형세를 더할 뿐이니 이와 가티 뭇 强大列國은 그 발뿌리서 이미 불낄이 타오르기를 시작하얏다.
그러고 加之하야 列國과 列國과의 국제적 險相을 一覽하면 또한 思有過半일지니 戰後의 새로운 列國 간의 형세를 조정하기 위하야 一世의 智囊을 다한 예의 벨사이유강화조약이 또한 오늘과 가티 유명무실의 形骸만 남기게 된 것도 너무나 풍자적이다.
이리하야 殆히 연중행사와 가티 列國은 여러 가지의 회의에 회의를 거듭하얏스나 마츰내 死文徒例의 幾多 條約만 産出하얏고 互相의 嫉視와 충돌은 도로혀 戰亂 이전의 상태보다 더욱 尤甚한 感이 잇섯다. 다만 세계 제일의 자본국인 米國의 구원으로 인하야 도스案의 獨逸배상문제가 일단락을 告하게 되매 니어서 작년과 가튼 로카노조약의 順娩을 得한 것이엿다.
그러나 암담한 회색 구룸은 의연하게 전세계의 기압을 지배하고 잇스니 결국 문제는 이러한 열강국들이 「全世界의 金神인」 이 米國에 노예적으로까지 僕事하야 겨우 一時의 苟安를 圖하든지 그러치 안하면 자연적으로 모든 것을 내던지고 資本主義적 帝國主義의 自遂自決을 단연코 결행케 하는 兩途밧게 업다. 그러나 이러한 大死一番적 頓智와 용기가 저의들에게 잇슬가?

나. 被壓迫民族의 低迷 남에게 짓밟힌는 자의 유일한 活路는 오즉 自力으로 이러한 현상을 타파하는 수밧게 업다.
다만 이러한 打破의 途程을 도달하기까지는 여러 가지의 迂逶曲折이 업지 안할지니 이리하야 소극적 及 폭력적 저항의 XX 과정도 필요할 것이며 혹은 어느 정도까지의 타협에 의하야 緩進하는 정치운동도 업지 아니치 못할 것이다.
그뿐 아니라 근본적으로 일반 민중의 敎化와 自覺을 촉진하는 문화운동의 一部隊가 그 遼遠한 사명을 위하야 또＜21＞ 間斷업시 노력함도 잇서야 한다.
엇더튼 안흐로 이러한 모든 각 부분의 세력을 될 수 잇는 데까지 한 공통한 網目으로 집중케 하며 또는 협조케 하야 무익한 精力의 낭비를 덜며 또 서로 서로의 磨琢과 警督을 더하는 종합적(구타여 綜一的임을 不要) 관련운동이 필요하다.
그러고 外로는 이상과 가튼 각 被壓迫民族과 민족과의 사이에 서로 同氣相求의 結束이 필요할 것이며 또 전세계의 被壓迫民族이 慾求하는 세계 XX과 그 基調를 동일히 하는 XXXXXXXXXX 과의 提携를 圖치 아니할 수 업는 것도 여긔서 다시 새로운 註釋을 가할 필요가 업다.
그러나 오늘날 被壓迫民族들의 處하고 잇는 감춤 업는 현상을 가지고 말하면 물론 주위의 압박과 또 시기의 未熟으로도 만흔 관계가 잇겟지마는 저의들 내부에는 이상에 말한 바와 가튼 각 방면 세력의 협조와 통일은 커녕 도로혀 互相의 軋轢과 內紛으로 인하야 徒히 大局의 이해를 그릇치는 便이 만타.
뿐만 안이라 또 被壓迫民族과 민족과의 第二段的 연락관계도 아즉 그 전도 頗히 遙遠한 觀이 잇스니 다만 XXXXX의 間斷이 업는 세계 XX적 충동으로 인하야 겨우 각 민족의 사상운동에 다소의 生氣를 뛰게 하는 것 뿐이다.
요컨대 오늘날 전세계의 被壓迫民族이 아즉 그 覺醒의 未洽한 점으로 보나 또는 그 해방운동의 方略이 여러 가지로 支離滅裂한 상태에 잇는 것으로 보나 도저히 오늘날과 가튼 현상으로서도 전세계의 帝國主義를 상대로 하야 능히 그 一大의 雌雄을 決할 만한 정도에는 達치 못할 것이 사실이다. 다만 세계혁명의 최후 과정을 豫備하는 現狀攪亂의 消極的 抵抗運動에 그치는 것이 곳 오늘날 실정인가 한다.

다. 결론 요컨대 전세계는 바야흐로 고민하고 잇스며 또 한쪽으로 彷徨과 低迷를 일삼는다. 그 苦悶相으로부터 니러나는 비명이 國際聯盟과 國際裁判의 유령과 가튼 「兩神主」를 어듸까지 밧드러 보랴는 하욤이 업는 필사의 노력으로써＜22＞ 우리에게 나타나 보인다.
그러고 佛國이나 伊太利나 某某 第一流의 국가는 무슨 疫鬼에 붓잡혓는지 때 아닌 반동정치의 旗ㅅ발을 날리면서 자못 人事不省적 焦熱에 빠저 가진 痴態를 연출하고 잇는 것도 남의 일이나 매우 딱하게 보인다. 아- 이러케 擧世가 다 變調와 亂脈에 처하야 잇거늘 유독히 앵글로삭손 英米 兩大 뿔조아 국가뿐이 悠悠然 그 鈍重한 步調로 中流의 砥柱와 가티 딱 가로막고 잇다.
그러나 워낙 바람은 모지고 물결은 사나옵다. 漸一漸刻一刻으로 地軸을 문허터리고 한울을 가리울 만한 큰 +X이 畢竟也 XXX 만다!
1926-1. 五擱筆＜23＞
＜8-23＞