Magazine Title	개벽 제68호
Publication Date	1926년 04월 01일
Article Title	甲午東學亂의 自初至終 (The Kapo Tonghak Rebellion from Beginning to End)
Author	一記者 (One Reporter)
Article Type	논설 (Editorial/Commentary)

甲午東學亂의 自初至終
						一記者

The Kapo Tonghak Rebellion was the largest popular movement since the beginning of Korean history. Speaking of the more distant past, Yi T'aejo's raising of troops at the end of Koryŏ, and the uprisings of Kyŏn Hwŏn, Kung Ye, and Wang Kŏn at the end of Silla; and speaking of the nearer past, the uprisings of Yi Kwal and Hong Kyŏngnae were all revolutionary movements against the phenomena of their respective times. However, such movements were generally initiated and concluded based on the heroic psychology of their leaders and the desire for power among their followers. Typically, they lacked genuine emotion for the true Way of the world and struggle for principles. However, the Kapo Tonghak Rebellion differed in nature from previous dynastic revolutionary movements. It was based on the Tonghak ideology of "Man is Heaven" (人乃天) and aimed for the policy of "Supporting the Country and Securing the People" (輔國安民). It was driven almost entirely by revolutionary emotion and passion, and herein lies the significance of the Tonghak Revolution. It is heard that the Ch'ŏndogyo Youth Party plans to commemorate the 32nd anniversary of the Tonghak Revolution on the 7th of this month. However, Korea's Tonghak and the Tonghak movement are not merely the Tonghak of its believers. Its ideology and movement were produced as a historical necessity of modern Korea. Therefore, all Koreans should seek the significance of this revolutionary movement. Herein, I briefly describe the Tonghak Revolution from beginning to end.

The Distant and Proximate Causes of This Movement
1. Distant Cause   As briefly mentioned in the preceding section, Yi T'aejo's revolutionary movement against the Koryŏ dynasty was merely a movement to acquire political power. The reforms of existing misrule and the implementation of some new facilities were merely policies to appease the populace in order to maintain that power. Not only Korean rulers acted this way, but the behavior of the ruling class in feudal societies was generally like this. However, <36> during the early Yi dynasty, for about 300 years, the ills of Koryŏ were not far removed from memory, and there were benevolent kings and famous ministers who displayed humanitarianism. Thus, virtue and benevolence centered on the royal family deeply permeated the populace. But in the late Yi dynasty, for about 200 years, even that traditional benevolent rule was swept away. Only the despotism, cruelty, and extortion of the privileged ruling class of the time (officials, Confucian scholars, and local gentry centered around the royal family) occurred repeatedly. The degree of their tyranny reached its peak in the last 50-60 years, since the Min clan seized power. Consequently, popular disturbances arose in various places to punish corrupt officials (貪官汚吏), and general public sentiment was extremely restless (恟恟). For about 20-30 years before the Tonghak Revolution arose, there was truly a sense of "the wind fills the tower before the mountain rain comes" (山雨欲來風滿樓). Thus, the indescribable misrule of the late Yi dynasty became both the distant and proximate cause of the Tonghak Revolution.
2. Proximate Cause   The proximate cause of the Tonghak Rebellion naturally lies in the emergence of "Tonghak." Tonghak is a kind of ideological group and principled association founded 66 years ago in Kyŏngju, Kyŏngsang Province, by Ch'oe Suun (崔水雲, given name Cheu 濟愚). Its creed is:
"Man is the highest being in this heaven and earth, and apart from man, there is no other master of heaven and earth. In other words, man is heaven, and among such heaven-like people, no discrimination, insult, or exploitation can be acknowledged. There is only the establishment of a new world of 'One family under four seas, all races as one person' (四海一家萬族一人)."
Thus, they first advocated "Supporting the Country, Securing the People" (輔國, 安民) as a domestic issue and asserted "Spreading virtue throughout the world, Widely saving the masses" (布德天下, 廣濟蒼生) as a world issue, actively gathering comrades throughout the three southern provinces (三南). This incurred the displeasure (忌諱) of the rulers of the time. The Tonghak leader Ch'oe Suun was executed by beheading (處斬) in Taegu on March 10th of the Kapcha year (甲子), the 5th year after founding the doctrine, under the charge of "Disturbing the government with heterodox ways" (左道亂政). However, its influence spread fiercely like wildfire (燎原의 火). Under a new central figure named Ch'oe Hae'wol, by the period just before the Kapo Revolution, the number of adherents distributed across Chŏlla, Ch'ungch'ŏng, Kyŏngsang, Kyŏnggi, Kangwŏn, and Hwanghae provinces reached approximately one million. As the influence of Tonghak grew daily (日張), the suppression by officials and denunciation by local gentry intensified daily. Particularly, the corrupt officials and local gentry of the time arbitrarily deprived Tonghak followers of their lives and property under the pretext of suppressing Tonghak, further intensifying their fervor for resistance (反抗熱).
Consequently, they made preparations for a major uprising (擧事). Initially, they started a petition movement (訴願運動) directed at the authorities of the time, requesting redress for the wrongful execution of Master Suun in Taegu years ago and a ban on the current oppression by officials. This began with Yi P'ilche's (李弼濟) mobilization of believers in Yŏnghae and Yŏngdŏk in the Sinmi year <37> (1871). Later, in the 7th month of the Imjin year, Sŏ Inju (徐仁周) and Sŏ Pyŏnghak (徐丙鶴) submitted similar petitions for redress (伸寃之訴) to the Ch'ungch'ŏng governor Cho Pyŏngsik (趙秉式) and the Chŏlla governor Yi Kyŏngjik (李耕稙). The following year, Kyesa (癸巳), in the first month, it was decided to leap forward and petition the central government for redress (呈䟽伸寃). A petition headquarters (奉䟽都所) was established at Songsan-ri, Ch'ŏngju county, and all preparations were made (整). In early February, Sŏ Pyŏnghak, Son Ch'ŏnmin (孫天民), and Kim Yŏn'guk (金演局), leading tens of thousands of followers, presented their petition (陳疏) outside Kwanghwamun Gate. Among the followers, discussions became prevalent about changing into military uniforms (兵服) from this time and cooperating with soldiers (兵隊) to overthrow (顚伏) the government. However, this did not materialize as the time was deemed not yet ripe (時機未熟). They merely received the royal message (傳批) stating, "If you return home and pursue your livelihoods peacefully, your wishes will be granted" (歸家安業則依願施之), and dispersed. However, the tyranny (橫暴) of officials and the arrogance (跋扈) of local gentry grew ever deeper (去去益深). In March of that year (是歲), it was decided to hold another demonstration (示威運動), and a circular notice (通諭) was sent to the followers in the eight provinces to assemble simultaneously. Its summary stated:
"Since the declining years of the dynasty, domestically, the policy of cultivating virtue and repelling invaders has not been implemented, while externally, the momentum of encroachment grows stronger daily. Officials are tyrannical and arbitrary, wielding power at will; the powerful and wealthy oppress and extort without limit. Learning is careless and fragmented, with each establishing their own school; public sentiment is withdrawn and withered, unable to resist. The disaster of stripping the bed planks, the calamity of overturning the city walls, is imminent, yet they remain blissfully unaware. This is truly what people with purpose worry about and lament. We are all survivors of the misfortune that befell our master's school, the remaining people nurtured by our ancestors. Having failed to redress our master's grievance, we betray the nation's grace-(omitted)-Thinking it unavoidable, we shall again raise our voices loudly, presenting our case and pleading our grievance. Thus, we announce this, gather all followers of the teaching, assemble on the appointed date, firstly for the great cause of protecting the Way and honoring the master, and secondly as a measure to support the country and secure the people. We earnestly hope for this." (降自叔季, 內而修攘之政未擧, 外而侵軼之勢益張. 官吏焉暴戾恣睚, 任行威福, 强豪焉凌轢徵索, 罔有紀極 學問焉鹵莽滅裂 各立門戶, 民情焉退嬰萎縮, 莫可牴牾. 其剝床之災覆隍之禍, 迫在朝夕而恬不覺悟, 此誠有志者之所懷憂長嘆者也, 吾儕俱以師門禍釁之餘生, 祖宗培養之遺民, 未伸師寃, 辜負國恩-(中略) 思不獲己 將復大聲疾呼, 陳章控寃事 如是布喩, 各包敎徒, 屈期齊集, 一以爲衛道尊師之大, 一以爲輔國安民之策, 寔切厚望」云云)
On March 11th, followers from the eight provinces (八路) who received the above circular assembled at the designated location, the Poeun camp (報恩帳內). Their number reached several hundred thousand. Each held a staff (棒) as a banner (旗), gathered stones to build fortifications, maintained orderly formations (威儀) when receiving commands (行號受令), and felt a mix of joy and emotion (欣感) while singing hymns and chanting spells (歌詠誦呪), displaying a force that seemed poised to shake heaven (天) and earth (地). Hearing this news, the central authorities (中央當局) were alarmed and unsure what to do (驚懼莫措). They dispatched the Ch'ungch'ŏng Provincial Army Commander (忠淸兵使) Hong Kyehŏn (洪啓薰) with troops to station (駐屯) in Poeun, while also sending Ŏ Yunjung (魚允中) as a Royal Emissary (宣諭使) to investigate (探知) the situation (動靜). At this, the Tonghak leader Ch'oe Haewŏl personally went before the ranks (行列) of followers, inspecting (慰閱) them one by one. He separately appointed the leaders (大接主) of each *P'o* (包, the name of the small units of the association at that time) and assigned *P'o* names. Im Kyuho (林奎鎬) was appointed Ch'unggyŏng Taejŏpchu, Son Ch'ŏnmin (孫天民) as Ch'ŏng'ŭi Taejŏpchu, Son Pyŏnghŭi (孫秉熙) as Ch'ung'ŭi Taejŏpchu, Im Chŏngjae (任貞宰) as Munch'ŏng Taejŏpchu, Pak Sŏkkyu (朴錫奎) as Og'ŭi Taejŏpchu, Yi Wŏnp'al (李元八) as Kwandong Taejŏpchu, Nam Kyech'ŏn (南啓天) as Honam Taejŏpchu, and Yi Kwan'yŏng (李觀永) as Sanggong Taejŏpchu. They decided to directly pressure the Royal Court (廟堂). After demonstrating (示威) for over ten days (旬餘), they postponed action once more due to Ŏ Yunjung's persuasion under royal command (奉勅挽留).
Seeing the frequent demonstrations (示威) and imposing momentum of the followers, people from various regions joined Tonghak in succession (陸續入道). Consequently, the leaders (接主) of each *P'o* established their respective <38> *P'o* headquarters (包所) and carried out all affairs, giving the impression that revolutionary committees had been hastily established in each county (郡). Among them, Pak Sŏkkyu of Okch'ŏn (沃川), Im Kyuho of Poeun (報恩), Pak Hŭiyin (朴熙寅) of Yesan (禮山), Im Chŏngjae of Mun'ŭi (文義), Pak Wŏnch'il (朴元七) of Ch'ŏngsan (靑山), Kim Nakch'ŏl (金洛喆) of Puan (扶安), Son Hwajung (孫華仲) of Mujang (茂長), Kim Kaenam (金開南) of Namwŏn (南原), Sŏng Tuhwan (成斗煥) of Ch'ŏngp'ung (淸風), Ch'a Kisŏk (車基錫) of Hongch'ŏn (洪川), and Kim Ch'iun (金致雲) of Inje (麟蹄) each organized their main *P'o* (本包) in their respective counties and established separate headquarters (都所). Chŏn Pongjun (全琫準) stationed himself at Wŏnp'yŏng, Kimje county, with the followers under his command. In this manner, the believers gathered and dispersed (或聚 或散), awaiting the opportune moment, wondering if it would be today or tomorrow, from the 7th month of Imjin until the end of Kyesa. This erupted the following year, Kapo (甲午), as the unprecedented (曠古未有) Tonghak Rebellion (東學亂).

The Tonghak Combat from Beginning to End
January 5th, Kapo year. Chŏn Pongjun, a believer from Kobu county, North Chŏlla, issued a proclamation (布告文) within his county borders, summoning 5,000 believers and non-believers to the headquarters (本部) at Mahang Market. Then, on the 16th, he moved his camp (移屯) to Paeksan Mountain (白山, located 10 *ri* east of Kobu). Meanwhile, on the 17th, Son Hwajung of Mujang, also leading several thousand followers, toured areas like T'aein and Puan, embarking on the same course of action as Chŏn. Consequently, the Chŏlla Governor (全羅監司) Kim Munhyŏn (金文鉉), leading 2,000 artillerymen (砲軍) and 1,000 peddlers (負商), engaged Chŏn Pongjun's forces at Hwangt'ohyŏn (黃土峴), 20 *ri* west of Kobu, on April 7th. He suffered over a thousand casualties and was utterly defeated (敗退). This was the first beacon (烽火) of the Tonghak revolutionary movement. Considering this, Tonghak was founded (創道) more than 30 years before Kapo. With the principle of "Man is Heaven" (人乃天) and the goal of "Supporting the Country and Securing the People" (輔國安民), it had gathered comrades and continued demonstrations until then. Of course, the plan was to rise up (蹶起) simultaneously at some point, completely eliminate (撲滅) the privileged class (特權階級) of the time, and build a new Korea (新朝鮮) of non-discrimination and no classes based on the principle of treating people like Heaven (事人如天). However, there were differences of opinion regarding the timing of the uprising. That is, Ch'oe Haewŏl, the sole leader (唯一 領首) of Tonghak at the time, advocated waiting and observing the situation calmly as it was a major undertaking, whereas figures like Chŏn Pongjun and Son Hwajung disagreed and acted swiftly (急直) as described. In other words, one side was calculative (打算的), while the other acted purely on impulse (衝動). Since the action was intended eventually, all the followers ultimately mobilized, but much disadvantage stemmed from this.
Having achieved the first victory in the Hwangt'ohyŏn battle, the revolutionary army toured through counties like Chŏng'ŭp and Hamp'yŏng, reaching Changsŏng county. Everywhere, the populace gathered like wind and clouds (風從雲集), numbering in the tens of thousands. They formed military units (軍伍), adopting formations (陳法) of threes and fives to resemble the constellations in the sky (滿天의 星象). Their banners (旗幟) used the five colors <39> of blue, black, white, yellow, and red (靑黑白黃紅). They cut bamboo to make spears (鎗) and fashioned shoulder bags (鉢囊), which each carried. Chŏn Pongjun, dressed in a white hat and white clothes (白笠白衣, as he was in mourning for his father who had died during a popular disturbance in Kobu), held 105 prayer beads (念珠) in his hand, chanted the 37-character holy spell (聖呪, 至氣今至願爲大降 侍天主造化定永世不忘萬事知), and had each gunner (砲士) attach the characters "Kung'ŭl" (弓乙) to their shoulders and carry the four characters "Tongsimŭimeng" (同心義盟, Alliance of Shared Hearts and Righteousness) on their bodies. The banner faces (旗面) flew the seven characters "Oman'nyŏn Suun Taeŭi" (五萬年受運大義, Great Righteousness Receiving Fortune for 50,000 Years). They were truly unprecedented (空前絶後), unpredictable (變化莫測), divine generals and wondrous troops (神將奇兵). From then on, the hearts of the people in the various counties followed them like the wind (望風響從). Chŏn Pongjun lectured on the Way (道) on one hand and trained soldiers (兵) on the other, his influence gradually expanding (其勢-漸張). The entire country was agitated, and the situation in East Asia (東亞) became critical (迫急) because of this. Consequently, the government appointed Hong Kyehŏn as Pacification Commissioner (招討使), ordering him to lead 600 Kanghwa troops (江華兵) south overnight (星夜南下). He clashed with them at Hwangnyong Market street south of Changsŏng but was also soundly defeated (慘敗), losing even three cannons (大砲), and fled into Yŏnggwang county (靈光郡). The revolutionary army then pursued victoriously (乘勝長驅), attacked (突擊) the Chŏnju Garrison (全州營), expelled (逐出) Governor Kim Munhyŏn, and subsequently occupied (占領) Chŏnju. This was around the middle of the 4th month of Kapo. Three days later, Hong Kyehŏn returned to besiege (來圍) Chŏnju Castle. After fighting (交戰) for a total of seven days, he found he could achieve nothing and consequently made peace (和) with the revolutionary army and withdrew (退歸). Chŏn Pongjun also led his followers (徒衆) back temporarily (暫還) to Changsŏng.

The Defeat of the Government Army and the Dispatch of Troops by Japan and Qing
Triggered (導火) by the uprising (起動) in Kobu, Tonghak groups everywhere rose up, proclaiming "Support the Country and Secure the People" (輔國安民). Realizing that the government could not suppress them by its own strength (力), the conservative (守舊黨) authorities (當局者) of the time consulted with the Qing Consul-General stationed in Seoul, Yuan Shikai (袁世凱), and telegraphed a request to the Viceroy of Zhili, Li Hongzhang (李鴻章), asking for Qing troops (淸兵). Japan, citing the Treaty of Tientsin (天津條約), also dispatched troops (兵) to Korea. Ultimately, the troops (兵丁) of the three nations joined forces (合勢) to confront (抵當) the Tonghak army (東學軍).
On May 19th, Chŏn Pongjun arrived in Tamyang county, rejected (拒) the peace proposal (和議) from the Qing General Liu Yongqing (劉永慶), and issued another righteous proclamation (倡義檄文), spreading the cause of "Supporting the Country and Securing the People." Consequently, Kim Kaenam rose up in Namwŏn, Yi Yuhyŏng (李裕馨) in the Hoseo region (湖西), Son Hwajung in Mujang, Kim Tŏngmyŏng (金德明) in Kimje, Ch'a Ch'igu (車致九, father of Ch'a Kyŏngsŏk of P'och'ŏn'gyo 普天敎) in Chŏng'ŭp, and Chŏng Chin'gu (鄭進九) in Kobu (高敞). They united (連合) with Chŏn Pongjun's forces, made Chŏnju their center (中心址), and proclaimed temporary military rule (軍政). They ordered the return of all civilian property extorted (勒奪) by officials, liberated all unjustly imprisoned convicts (罪囚) and commoners (賤民), and reformed other centuries-old misrule (弊政) uniformly (一例). The people's allegiance (歸順) flowed like water seeking lower ground (水의 就下함과 가탯다). <40>
At this time (between June 22nd and July 20th), a major transformation (一大變革) occurred in the central government in Seoul (京城). The conservative Min party (閔黨), backed by Qing (淸國) influence, withdrew. The enlightenment party (開化黨) including Cho Ŭiyŏn (趙義淵), Kim Kajin (金嘉鎭), and Yu Kilchun (兪吉濬), backed by Japanese (日本) influence, supported the Taewŏn'gun (大院君), organized a new cabinet (新內閣), and carried out (斷行) the so-called Kapo Reforms (甲午의 庶政改革). This was entirely a byproduct (副産物) of the ripples (波動) from the Tonghak Revolution. Thus, this new government debated whether to make peace (講和) with the Tonghak party or subjugate (討伐) it. Considering external pressure from neighboring countries (隣國) and internal self-interest (自己의 理解), they ultimately decided on subjugation. Yi Tuhwang (李斗璜) was ordered to lead about a thousand Seoul troops (京兵) to conduct a major subjugation campaign (大討伐) in the three southern provinces (三南).

The Failure at the Battle of Kongju and Its Tragic Aftermath
Having pacified the Chŏnju area, the Tonghak army decided to march north with a large force, occupy the Hoseo region, then press close (肉迫) to Seoul (京城), overthrow the central government, and simultaneously complete the great task of renovation (革新). In September of the same year, they gathered a large army of 100,000 on the Samnye Plain (參禮平野) near Chŏnju, completed all preparations, and Chŏn Pongjun himself became the Commander-in-Chief (都元帥). As they advanced north (北進), crossing the Kŭm River (錦江), the boundary of the Sŏho region, on foot (徒涉), their first action (第一着) was to attack (擊) the forces of Yŏnsan Garrison Commander Kim Kaptong (金甲東軍) and Kongju Confucian General Yi Yusang (李有尙軍), capturing them alive (生擒). Passing through the Kanggyŏng Plain (江景平野), they stationed the main army camp (大軍營) at Nonsan (論山). They divided the army into three routes (三路) to advance and capture (進陷) Kongju (公州), the capital (首府) of the Hoseo region. Their banners obscured the sky (旌旗-蔽天) and armor shone in the sun (兵甲이 耀日), their imposing presence (威風의 堂堂) truly chilling one's liver and gallbladder (肝膽).
As the revolutionary army advanced directly towards Kongju Castle, the generals (諸將) under the command (麾下) of Ch'ungch'ŏng Governor Pak Chesun (朴齊純) – Yi Kyut'ae (李圭泰), Sŏng Hayŏng (成夏泳), Hong Unsŏp (洪運燮), etc. – joined forces (並力) with Japanese troops (日本軍) and formed lines (列陣) at Iin (利仁), Hyop'o (孝浦), and Ponghwangsan (鳳凰山) to block (防) the revolutionary army's advance. The revolutionary army therefore changed direction (方向), secretly crossed (潛渡) the river at T'aejin behind Ponghwangsan on October 25th, and pressed directly (直迫) on Kongju Castle. At this point, battle commenced with the government forces. Fierce battles (血戰) involving close combat and raining bullets (肉彈血雨) were fought a total of seven times at Namwŏlch'on (南月村), Ch'wip'yŏng (翠屛), Chich'wi (智翠), Kŭmbansan (金盤山), etc. They captured Hyop'o at dusk (薄暮) that day. Fierce battles continued for a total of seven days at Tae'gyo (大橋), Ugŭmch'i (牛金峙), Ungch'i (熊峙), Kŭmjin (錦津), etc. Casualties on both sides reached the tens of thousands (累萬), staging a great tragedy (一大 慘劇) of truly a sea of blood and mountain of corpses (血海屍山). Ultimately, they were defeated (敗) by the government army, which was combined with trained Japanese soldiers (日兵) under Suzuki (鈴木) and Morio (森尾), and retreated (退陣) to Nonsan. The fatal blow (치명상) to the revolutionary army truly occurred here.
Prior to this, the Tonghak Teacher (東學先生) Ch'oe Haewŏl had fully mobilized (總動員) the believers (道人) from each *P'o*, appointing Son Pyŏnghŭi to lead (統率) the main army. He arranged to meet (會) Chŏn Pongjun <41> at Nonsan and agreed (約) to advance north together (同路北上). As the main army departed from the Poeun camp (報恩帳內) and passed Iin Station (利仁驛) in Kongju, they clashed (接戰) with government troops from Seoul (京城) and achieved a temporary victory (得勝). However, the government troops, reinforced (援助) by Japanese forces, attacked again (來戰). After engaging in about ten fierce battles (血戰), they were ultimately unsuccessful (不利) and proceeded to Nonsan as initially agreed (所約), where Chŏn Pongjun's forces had also arrived after being defeated (見敗來屯). The two great leaders (巨頭) and the two large armies wept together and consoled (慰撫) each other, staying there for several days. On one hand, they lectured on the Way (道) and chanted spells (誦), while on the other, they trained soldiers (練) and devised strategies (策). The scene (光景) at that time was truly tragic and heroic (悲絶壯絶). At this moment, Chŏn Pongjun looked towards Son Pyŏnghŭi and sighed lamentingly (憮然히), saying:
"Thinking only of the gravity and urgency of the matter, I hastily started this affair, destroying countless civilian properties and lives, and the situation has reached this point. My own life is now forfeit, which is no regret, but what shall become of the countless lives (生民) plunged into misery (塗炭)? Even now, if we carefully consider countermeasures (善後策) and make a final, unified push (一心) directly towards Kongju, there is ample hope. However, looking at the Honam believers (湖南道人), they are exhausted from numerous battles. I hope the believers from the Kyŏnggi and Hoseo regions (畿湖의 道衆) will cooperate wholeheartedly (同心協力) to achieve (協成) our great cause (大事)."
Thereupon, the two men grasped each other's wrists and said, "Success or failure (成不成) lies with Heaven (天) and fate (運). It is beyond our control. We can only do what we wish to do, as much as we can." They then generously feasted (犒饋) the three armies (三軍) to restore their energy (元氣). On the early morning (早朝) of November 3rd, they advanced again, soundly defeating (大破) the government troops led by Sŏng Hayŏng at Iin Station. Like a swift wind and sudden thunder (疾風迅雷), they pursued (追擊) the government forces, besieging and attacking (包圍攻擊) the key fortresses (要塞) of Ugŭmch'i, Kyŏndunbong (犬蹲峯), Chubong (周峯), and Ungch'i for six full days and nights (晝夜). They fought the best and final fierce battle (最善最後의 血戰) to the utmost (盡). However, due largely to inadequate weaponry (武器의 不備) and untrained soldiers (士卒의 不練), they were unfortunately defeated and retreated (不幸 敗退). The remaining large army, realizing the great cause (大業) was lost (已非), dispersed (歸散) in all directions (四處). Later, in December, Chŏn Pongjun was captured (잡히여) by government troops at Kuro-ri (龜老里) in Sunch'ang (淳昌) and sent under guard (押送) to Seoul. Kim Kaenam was captured (被捉) in T'aein (泰仁), and Son Hwajung in Mujang. Kim Pongjun (金琫準, likely a typo for 全琫準 Chŏn Pongjun) and Son Hwajung were executed (刑殺) in Seoul. Kim Kaenam was beheaded and his head displayed (梟首) in Chŏnju. Ch'oe Haewŏl fled towards the Kangwŏn Province region but was later caught in the Musul year (戊戌) and also hanged (絞殺) in a Seoul prison (監獄). Son Pyŏnghŭi later fled into exile (亡命) to China. Other leaders (頭領) or soldiers (兵士) involved in the movement were mostly killed by cannon fire (砲殺), hanging (絞殺), buried alive (埋殺), burning (焚殺), beheading (斬殺), dismemberment (裂殺), beating (打殺), or drowning (投水殺). Their tragic plight (慘狀) defies description. Furthermore, their parents, wives and children (妻孥), siblings (兄弟), farmlands (田畓), and livestock (畜類) were also confiscated or punished (沒刑 또는 沒收). The horrific spectacle (慘劇) in the three southern provinces (三南) at that time was truly a scene where heaven and sun seemed to dim together (天日이 俱冥).
The actual combat (實戰) of the Tonghak Rebellion has been described roughly as above, but this is certainly not even one ten-thousandth (萬一) of the reality. At that time, the movement erupted (蜂起) wherever there were Tonghak believers, making it impossible to record it sequentially. What I must add as a concluding remark <42> is that in Hwanghae Province, in areas like Kangsŏng (康翎), Munhwa (文化), and Chaeryŏng (載寧), believers such as Im Chonghyŏn (林鍾玄), Kim Yuyŏng (金裕泳), Wŏn Yong'il (元容馹), Han Hwasŏk (韓華錫), O Ŭngsŏn (吳膺善), and Pang Ch'andu (方粲斗) also gathered tens of thousands of followers and engaged in dozens of battles (接戰) with government and Japanese troops, suffering heavy casualties (死傷이 甚衆). In P'yŏngan Province, believers like Kim Sayŏng (金士永) in Kangso (江西) and Yonggang (龍岡), Kim Haksu (金學水) in Hamhŭng (咸興), and Yi Paekch'o (李白草) in Kanggye (江界) also established *P'o* and gathered followers (起包聚衆). Furthermore, in South Kyŏngsang Province, near Chinju (晋州), tens of thousands of believers fought government troops on Tangsan mountain near Kosŏng (孤僧) county and were defeated with many casualties (見敗多傷); this is also an unforgettable event.

"You are my enemy, and I am yours" (너는 나의 讎요 나는 너의 讎)
The Tonghak Revolutionary Movement arose thus and was tragically defeated (慘敗) thus. It is estimated (槪算) that the masses sacrificed (犧牲) in this movement exceeded 100,000. Despite this failure, the influence (影響) of the Tonghak Revolution on the political situation (政局) of Korea and the state of affairs (時局) in East Asia (東洋) at the time was truly immense (굉장). Furthermore, its influence on the general public sentiment (民心) of Korea was even greater. That is, because the Tonghak Rebellion occurred, the conservative central government was soon reformed, opening the way (端緖) for Korean modernization (朝鮮維新). It subsequently triggered the Sino-Japanese War (日淸의 戰爭), causing the situation in East Asia (東洋의 風雲) to change rapidly (急轉). The fortress (城壘) of the yangban (兩班) and local gentry (土豪), entrenched for 500 years in Korea, collapsed (崩壞) as a result, and equality among the four classes (四民 平等) was realized (實現) because of it. Moreover, more than anything, the great significance this revolution left us is the lesson that this is the power of the masses, and these are the demands of the masses. Although temporarily defeated, our masses will someday build a new world centered on the masses like this, and until it is built, they will always fight like this. This most important lesson was conveyed to us, the remaining masses, through blood and fire. The last words left by Chŏn Pongjun as his throat was cut are sufficient to convey this spirit (氣魄) and meaning (意趣). These were no other words than when the official (官人) interrogating (取調) Chŏn tempted him with a high government post (高官), he raised his voice and rebuked him, saying:
"You are my enemy (怨讐), and I am your enemy (怨讐)! You should just kill me. What more is there to say (多言)?"
He maintained his resistance until the end (終命). That's right. The masses and the privileged class (特權階級) are absolute enemies (絕對의 仇讐) and cannot coexist in opposition.
Alas! Failure is the mother of success (失敗는 成功의 母). The failure of the popular movement then will surely become the mother that brings success to the popular movement hereafter. O descendants (後昆) of Tonghak, O masses of the future! What are your feelings (感懷) today as you silently contemplate (黙想) the 32nd anniversary of the Tonghak Revolution? (To be continued next issue 以下次號) <43>

**Summary**

This 1926 editorial recounts the Tonghak Peasant Revolution of 1894 (Kapo year), framing it as Korea's greatest popular movement, distinct from earlier power struggles. It attributes the uprising to the extreme misrule of the late Yi dynasty, particularly under the Min clan, and the revolutionary Tonghak ideology ("Man is Heaven," "Support the Country, Secure the People"). The article details the movement's origins with Ch'oe Suun, its growth under Ch'oe Haewŏl, early petitions, the major uprising led by Chŏn Pongjun, initial victories, the intervention of Qing and Japanese forces, the Kapo Reforms as a byproduct, the crucial defeat at Kongju (Ugŭmch'i), and the brutal suppression that followed, resulting in massive casualties and the execution of leaders like Chŏn Pongjun and Ch'oe Haewŏl. Despite the failure, the author emphasizes the revolution's lasting impact: sparking modernization, shifting East Asian power dynamics, dismantling the old class structure, and leaving a powerful legacy of mass resistance against oppression, epitomized by Chŏn Pongjun's defiant last words.

From a colonial history perspective, the article is significant for its portrayal of the Tonghak Rebellion not just as a religious uprising but as a foundational event in modern Korean national consciousness and resistance against oppressive structures (both domestic aristocracy and implicitly, foreign influence, though Japan's role is complexly presented as both aiding the government forces and enabling reform). Written under Japanese rule, its framing of the rebellion as a "popular movement" (民衆運動) seeking a "mass-based new world" (民衆 本位의 새 세상) and its concluding call to the "masses of the future" carry strong nationalist and potentially anti-colonial undertones, emphasizing internal Korean agency and the enduring spirit of resistance despite past failures. Historians might find the detailed account of the movement's organization (*P'o*, *Taejŏpchu*), the specific grievances listed in the petition, the description of the battles, and the explicit link made between the rebellion and the subsequent Kapo Reforms and Sino-Japanese War particularly valuable. The author's identity as "One Reporter" (一記者) and the publication in *Kaebyŏk*, a journal associated with Ch'ŏndogyo (the institutional successor to Tonghak), also provide crucial context.

**Named Entities**

李太祖	이태조	Yi T'aejo
高麗	고려	Koryŏ
新羅	신라	Silla
甄萱	견훤	Kyŏn Hwŏn
弓裔	궁예	Kung Ye
王建	왕건	Wang Kŏn
李适	이괄	Yi Kwal
洪景來	홍경래	Hong Kyŏngnae
東學	동학	Tonghak
天道敎	천도교	Ch'ŏndogyo
靑年黨	청년당	Ch'ŏndogyo Youth Party
李朝	이조	Yi Dynasty
閔家	민가	Min Clan
慶尙道	경상도	Kyŏngsang Province
慶州	경주	Kyŏngju
崔水雲	최수운	Ch'oe Suun
濟愚	제우	Cheu (Ch'oe Suun's given name)
三南	삼남	Three Southern Provinces (Ch'ungch'ŏng, Chŏlla, Kyŏngsang)
甲子	갑자	Kapcha year (1864)
大邱	대구	Taegu
崔海月	최해월	Ch'oe Haewŏl
全羅	전라	Chŏlla Province
忠淸	충청	Ch'ungch'ŏng Province
京畿	경기	Kyŏnggi Province
江原	강원	Kangwŏn Province
黃海	황해	Hwanghae Province
李弼濟	이필제	Yi P'ilche
盈海	영해	Yŏnghae
盈德	영덕	Yŏngdŏk
辛未年	신미년	Sinmi year (1871)
壬辰	임진	Imjin year (1892)
徐仁周	서인주	Sŏ Inju
徐丙鶴	서병학	Sŏ Pyŏnghak
忠淸觀察使	충청관찰사	Ch'ungch'ŏng Governor
趙秉式	조병식	Cho Pyŏngsik
全羅觀察使	전라관찰사	Chŏlla Governor
李耕稙	이경직	Yi Kyŏngjik
癸巳	계사	Kyesa year (1893)
中央政府	중앙정부	Central Government
淸州郡	청주군	Ch'ŏngju County
松山里	송산리	Songsan-ri
光化門	광화문	Kwanghwamun Gate
孫天民	손천민	Son Ch'ŏnmin
金演局	김연국	Kim Yŏn'guk
報恩	보은	Poeun
忠淸兵使	충청병사	Ch'ungch'ŏng Provincial Army Commander
洪啓薰	홍계훈	Hong Kyehŏn
宣諭使	선유사	Royal Emissary
魚允中	어윤중	Ŏ Yunjung
林奎鎬	임규호	Im Kyuho
孫秉熙	손병희	Son Pyŏnghŭi
任貞宰	임정재	Im Chŏngjae
朴錫奎	박석규	Pak Sŏkkyu
李元八	이원팔	Yi Wŏnp'al
南啓天	남계천	Nam Kyech'ŏn
李觀永	이관영	Yi Kwan'yŏng
沃川	옥천	Okch'ŏn
禮山	예산	Yesan
朴熙寅	박희인	Pak Hŭiyin
文義	문의	Mun'ŭi
靑山	청산	Ch'ŏngsan
朴元七	박원칠	Pak Wŏnch'il
扶安	부안	Puan
金洛喆	김낙철	Kim Nakch'ŏl
茂長	무장	Mujang
孫華仲	손화중	Son Hwajung
南原	남원	Namwŏn
金開南	김개남	Kim Kaenam
淸風	청풍	Ch'ŏngp'ung
成斗煥	성두환	Sŏng Tuhwan
洪川	홍천	Hongch'ŏn
車基錫	차기석	Ch'a Kisŏk
麟蹄	인제	Inje
金致雲	김치운	Kim Ch'iun
全琫準	전봉준	Chŏn Pongjun
金溝郡	김구군	Kimje County (likely Kimje, 金堤, not 金溝)
院坪	원평	Wŏnp'yŏng
甲午	갑오	Kapo year (1894)
全北	전북	North Chŏlla (Jeonbuk)
古阜	고부	Kobu
馬項市	마항시	Mahang Market
白山	백산	Paeksan Mountain
泰仁	태인	T'aein
金文鉉	김문현	Kim Munhyŏn
黃土峴	황토현	Hwangt'ohyŏn
井邑	정읍	Chŏng'ŭp
咸平	함평	Hamp'yŏng
長城郡	장성군	Changsŏng County
江華	강화	Kanghwa
黃龍市街	황룡시가	Hwangnyong Market street
靈光郡	영광군	Yŏnggwang County
全州	전주	Chŏnju
日淸兩國	일청양국	Japan and Qing, the two countries
淸國	청국	Qing China
駐京淸國總理	주경청국총리	Qing Consul-General Stationed in the Capital (Seoul)
袁世凱	원세개	Yuan Shikai
直隷總督	직례총독	Viceroy of Zhili
李鴻章	이홍장	Li Hongzhang
日本	일본	Japan
天津條約	천진조약	Treaty of Tientsin
潭陽	담양	Tamyang
淸將	청장	Qing General
劉永慶	유영경	Liu Yongqing
李裕馨	이유형	Yi Yuhyŏng
湖西	호서	Hoseo Region (Ch'ungch'ŏng Province)
金德明	김덕명	Kim Tŏngmyŏng
車致九	차치구	Ch'a Ch'igu
普天敎	보천교	P'och'ŏn'gyo
車京錫	차경석	Ch'a Kyŏngsŏk
高敞	고창	Koch'ang (Written as 高敝, likely a typo for 高敞)
鄭進九	정진구	Chŏng Chin'gu
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul)
趙義淵	조의연	Cho Ŭiyŏn
金嘉鎭	김가진	Kim Kajin
兪吉濬	유길준	Yu Kilchun
開化黨	개화당	Enlightenment Party (Kaehwadang)
大院君	대원군	Taewŏn'gun
李斗璜	이두황	Yi Tuhwang
公州	공주	Kongju
參禮平野	삼례평야	Samnye Plain
錦江	금강	Kŭm River
礪山營將	여산영장	Yŏnsan Garrison Commander
金甲東	김갑동	Kim Kaptong
公州儒將	공주유장	Kongju Confucian General
李有尙	이유상	Yi Yusang
江景平野	강경평야	Kanggyŏng Plain
論山	논산	Nonsan
忠淸觀察使	충청관찰사	Ch'ungch'ŏng Governor
朴齊純	박제순	Pak Chesun
李圭泰	이규태	Yi Kyut'ae
成夏泳	성하영	Sŏng Hayŏng
洪運燮	홍운섭	Hong Unsŏp
利仁	이인	Iin
孝浦	효포	Hyop'o
鳳凰山	봉황산	Ponghwangsan Mountain
態津	태진	T'aejin
南月村	남월촌	Namwŏlch'on
翠屛	취병	Ch'wip'yŏng
智翠	지취	Chich'wi
金盤山	금반산	Kŭmbansan
大橋	대교	Tae'gyo
牛金峙	우금치	Ugŭmch'i
熊峙	웅치	Ungch'i
錦津	금진	Kŭmjin
鈴木	스즈키	Suzuki (Japanese name)
森尾	모리오	Morio (Japanese name)
利仁驛	이인역	Iin Station
犬蹲峯	견둔봉	Kyŏndunbong Peak
周峯	주봉	Chubong Peak
淳昌	순창	Sunch'ang
龜老里	구로리	Kuro-ri
金琫準	김봉준	Kim Pongjun (Likely typo for 全琫準 Chŏn Pongjun)
戊戌	무술	Musul year (1898)
中國	중국	China
康翎	강령	Kangsŏng (Kangnyŏng)
文化	문화	Munhwa
載寧	재령	Chaeryŏng
林鍾玄	임종현	Im Chonghyŏn
金裕泳	김유영	Kim Yuyŏng
元容馹	원용일	Wŏn Yong'il
韓華錫	한화석	Han Hwasŏk
吳膺善	오응선	O Ŭngsŏn
方粲斗	방찬두	Pang Ch'andu
平安道	평안도	P'yŏngan Province
江西	강서	Kangsŏ
龍岡	용강	Yonggang
金士永	김사영	Kim Sayŏng
咸興	함흥	Hamhŭng
金學水	김학수	Kim Haksu
江界	강계	Kanggye
李白草	이백초	Yi Paekch'o
慶南	경남	South Kyŏngsang (Gyeongnam)
晋州	진주	Chinju
孤僧	고승	Kosŭng (Likely Kosŏng 固城)
堂山	당산	Tangsan

**Glossary**

東學亂	동학란	Tonghak Rebellion
自初至終	자초지종	From beginning to end
一記者	일기자	One reporter
論說	논설	Editorial, commentary
民衆運動	민중운동	Popular movement, mass movement
갓가이	가까이	Near, close (older spelling)
李适	이괄	Yi Kwal (Person's name)
洪景來	홍경래	Hong Kyŏngnae (Person's name)
蹶起	궐기	Uprising, rising up
英雄心理	영웅심리	Hero mentality/psychology
追從者	추종자	Follower, adherent
世道	세도	The way of the world; political power/influence
主義	주의	Principle, ideology
人乃天	인내천	Man is Heaven (Tonghak core doctrine)
東學思想	동학사상	Tonghak ideology/thought
輔國安民	보국안민	Support the country and secure the people (Tonghak slogan)
革命	혁명	Revolution
天道敎	천도교	Ch'ŏndogyo (Religion, successor to Tonghak)
靑年黨	청년당	Youth Party
밋는	믿는	Believing (in) (older spelling)
듯건대	듣건대	It is heard that, reportedly (older spelling)
차즐	찾을	To find, seek (older spelling)
잇스리라	있으리라	There will be, should be (older spelling)
簡述	간술	Brief description
遠因	원인	Distant cause
近因	근인	Proximate cause
弊政	폐정	Misrule, maladministration
執權者	집권자	Ruler, person in power
執權階級	집권계급	Ruling class
잇섯스나	있었으나	Although there was (older spelling)
仁政主義	인정주의	Benevolent rule principle
特權階級	특권계급	Privileged class
官吏	관리	Government official
儒生	유생	Confucian scholar
土豪	토호	Local gentry, powerful local figure
專制	전제	Despotism, autocracy
殘虐	잔학	Cruelty, brutality
誅求	주구	Extortion, exploitation
疊出	첩출	Occurring repeatedly, one after another
暴虐	폭압	Tyranny, oppression
世道	세도	Political power/influence (here refers to the Min clan's control)
膺懲	응징	Punishment, chastisement
民擾	민요	Popular disturbance, riot
恟恟	흉흉	Restless, agitated, ominous
닐기	일기	To rise, occur (older spelling)
업는	없는	Non-existent, without (older spelling)
創道	창도	Founding a doctrine/religion
主宰者	주재자	Ruler, master, presiding deity
四海一家萬族一人	사해일가만족일인	One family under four seas, all races as one person (Idealistic phrase)
布德天下	포덕천하	Spread virtue throughout the world
廣濟蒼生	광제창생	Widely save the masses
糾合	규합	To gather, rally
忌諱	기휘	Displeasure, aversion, taboo
首領	수령	Leader
處斬	처참	Execution by beheading
燎原의 火	요원의 화	Prairie fire (metaphor for rapid spread)
道人	도인	Follower of the Way (Tonghak believer)
日張	일장	Growing daily
壓迫	압박	Pressure, oppression
指彈	지탄	Denunciation, criticism
官憲	관헌	Government authorities, officials
取締	취체	Control, crackdown, regulation (Japanese loanword context)
貪官汚吏	탐관오리	Corrupt official
剝奪	박탈	Deprivation, stripping (of rights, property)
反抗熱	반항열	Fervor for resistance
擧事	거사	Uprising, major undertaking
伸寃	신원	Redress of grievances, clearing false charges
訴願運動	소원운동	Petition movement
事端	사단	Origin of an affair, starting point
揮動	휘동	To mobilize, command
觀察使	관찰사	Governor (provincial)
呈䟽伸寃	정소신원	Submitting a petition for redress of grievances
奉䟽都所	봉소도소	Headquarters for submitting petitions
整	정	To arrange, prepare, put in order
陳疏	진소	To present a petition/memorial
兵服	병복	Military uniform
換着	환착	To change clothes
協同	협동	Cooperation, collaboration
顚伏	전복	Overthrow, subversion
時機未熟	시기미숙	The time is not yet ripe
不果	불과	Did not happen, did not materialize
傳批	전비	Royal message/reply (on a petition)
橫暴	횡포	Tyranny, violence
跋扈	발호	Arrogance, dominance, rampancy
去去益深	거거익심	Becoming deeper/worse as time goes on
是歲	시세	This year
示威運動	시위운동	Demonstration movement
通諭	통유	Circular notice, proclamation
叔季	숙계	Declining years (of a dynasty)
修攘	수양	Cultivating virtue and repelling barbarians/invaders
侵軼	침軼	Encroachment, invasion
暴戾恣睚	폭려자애	Tyrannical and arbitrary
威福	위복	Power and blessings (arbitrary use of power)
凌轢徵索	능력징색	Oppress and extort
罔有紀極	망유기극	Without limit or discipline
鹵莽滅裂	노망멸렬	Careless and fragmented
門戶	문호	School (of thought), faction
退嬰萎縮	퇴영위축	Withdrawn and withered
牴牾	저오	To resist, oppose
剝床之災覆隍之禍	박상지재복황지화	Disaster of stripping bed planks, calamity of overturning city walls (metaphors for imminent danger/collapse)
恬不覺悟	염불각오	Blissfully unaware
懷憂長嘆	회우장탄	To harbor worries and sigh deeply
吾儕	오제	We, us (literary)
師門禍釁	사문화흔	Misfortune/calamity that befell the master's school
祖宗培養之遺民	조종배양지유민	Remaining people nurtured by the ancestors
辜負國恩	고부국은	To betray the nation's grace
控寃	공원	To plead one's grievance
布喩	포유	To announce, proclaim
敎徒	교도	Follower, believer
屈期齊集	굴기제집	To gather on the appointed date
衛道尊師	위도존사	Protect the Way and honor the master
齊會	제회	To assemble together
棒	봉	Staff, stick, club
行號受令	행호수령	Receiving commands by signal/number
威儀	위의	Dignity, imposing manner, orderly formation
整齊	정제	Orderly, neat, well-arranged
歌詠誦呪	가영송주	Singing hymns and chanting spells
欣感	흔감	Joy and emotion/gratitude
交集	교집	To converge, mix
驚懼莫措	경구막조	Alarmed and unsure what to do
駐屯	주둔	To be stationed, garrisoned
探知	탐지	To investigate, find out
動靜	동정	Situation, movements, state of affairs
行列	행렬	Rank, line, procession
慰閱	위열	To inspect and console
包	포	*P'o* (Tonghak organizational unit)
小團軆名	소단체명	Name of a small group/body
大接主	대접주	Leader of a large *P'o* unit
廟堂	묘당	Royal court, government council
直衡	직형	To directly pressure/confront
旬餘	순여	Over ten days
奉勅挽留	봉칙만류	To persuade to stay by royal command
陸續入道	육속입도	Joining Tonghak one after another
接主	접주	Leader of a *P'o* unit
包所	포소	Headquarters of a *P'o*
革命委員會	혁명위원회	Revolutionary committee
急施	급시	Hasty implementation
該郡	해군	The respective county
本包	본포	Main *P'o*
都所	도소	Headquarters, central office
別置	별치	To establish separately
駐在	주재	To be stationed, reside
或聚 或散	혹취 혹산	Sometimes gathering, sometimes dispersing
曠古未有	광고미유	Unprecedented in history
實戰	실전	Actual combat, real battle
布告文	포고문	Proclamation, public notice
發	발	To issue, dispatch
召集	소집	To summon, convene
移屯	이둔	To move camp
巡回	순회	To tour, patrol
監司	감사	Provincial Governor
砲軍	포군	Artillerymen, cannon troops
負商	부상	Peddler, itinerant merchant (often organized into guilds)
接戰	접전	Battle, engagement
敗退	패퇴	Defeat and retreat
烽火	봉화	Beacon fire (signal); outset of hostilities
創道	창도	Founding a doctrine/religion
撲滅	박멸	Extermination, eradication
事人如天	사인여천	Treating people like Heaven
無差別	무차별	Non-discrimination
無階級	무계급	Classless
打算的	타산적	Calculative, self-interested
衝動	충동	Impulse, urge
歷巡	역순	To tour through (places)
風從雲集	풍종운집	Gathering like wind and clouds (idiom for large crowds assembling quickly)
軍伍	군오	Military ranks, units
陳法	진법	Battle formation
滿天의 星象	만천의 성상	Constellations filling the sky
旗幟	기치	Banner, flag
鎗	창	Spear
鉢囊	발낭	Shoulder bag (literally 'begging bowl bag')
억게	어깨	Shoulder (older spelling)
白笠白衣	백립백의	White hat and white clothes (mourning attire)
念珠	염주	Prayer beads
聖呪	성주	Holy spell, incantation
至氣今至願爲大降 侍天主造化定永世不忘萬事知	지기금지원위대강 시천주조화정영세불망만사지	(Specific Tonghak chant)
砲士	포사	Gunner, musketeer
弓乙	궁을	Kung'ŭl (Mystical symbols in Tonghak/related prophecies)
同心義盟	동심의맹	Alliance of Shared Hearts and Righteousness
旗面	기면	Face of a banner
五萬年受運大義	오만년수운대의	Great Righteousness Receiving Fortune for 50,000 Years (Banner inscription)
空前絶後	공전절후	Unprecedented and unrepeatable
變化莫測	변화막측	Unpredictable, protean
神將奇兵	신장기병	Divine generals and wondrous troops
列郡	열군	Various counties
望風響從	망풍향종	To follow wholeheartedly upon hearing the reputation (lit. gazing at the wind and echoing)
其勢-漸張	기세점장	Its influence/momentum gradually expanded
風雲	풍운	Wind and clouds (metaphor for a turbulent situation)
迫急	박급	Urgent, critical
招討使	초토사	Pacification Commissioner
星夜南下	성야남하	Traveling south overnight (lit. by starlight)
慘敗	참패	Crushing defeat
大砲	대포	Cannon, artillery piece
逃入	도입	To flee into
乘勝長驅	승승장구	To advance victoriously after winning
突擊	돌격	Charge, assault, attack
逐出	축출	To expel, drive out
占領	점령	Occupation (military)
望間	망간	Around the 15th of the lunar month
來圍	내위	To come and besiege
和	화	Peace, harmony
結	결	To tie, conclude, form
退歸	퇴귀	To withdraw and return
徒衆	도중	Followers, disciples, group
暫還	잠환	Temporary return
官軍	관군	Government army, loyalist troops
敗北	패배	Defeat (modern: 패배)
出兵	출병	Dispatch of troops
導火	도화	Fuse, trigger (lit. leading fire)
制禦	제어	Control, suppression (modern: 제어)
守舊黨	수구당	Conservative party/faction
當局者	당국자	Person in charge, authorities
協議	협의	Consultation, discussion
電請	전청	To request by telegraph
請來	청래	To request someone's coming
抵當	저당	To confront, oppose, resist
和議	화의	Peace proposal, negotiation
拒	거	To reject, refuse
倡義檄文	창의격문	Righteous proclamation/manifesto calling for uprising
勒奪	늑탈	Extortion, forceful seizure
民財	민재	Civilian property/wealth
還給	환급	To return, refund
抑寃	억울	Unjust, wrongful grievance (modern: 억울)
罪囚	죄수	Convict, prisoner
賤民	천민	Lowborn people, outcasts
解放	해방	Liberation, emancipation
弊政	폐정	Misrule, maladministration
一例	일례	Uniformly, as a rule
歸順	귀순	Allegiance, submission
就下	취하	To go downwards (like water)
一大變革	일대변혁	Major transformation, great upheaval
背景	배경	Background, backing
擁	옹	To support, rally around
新內閣	신내각	New cabinet
庶政改革	서정개혁	Reform of general administration
斷行	단행	To carry out decisively
波動	파동	Wave, ripple, fluctuation
副産物	부산물	Byproduct
講和	강화	To make peace, conclude a treaty
討伐	토벌	Subjugation, punitive expedition
隣國	인국	Neighboring country (modern: 인국 or 이웃 나라)
慫慂	종용	Instigation, encouragement, urging
顧念	고념	To consider, bear in mind
大討伐	대토벌	Major subjugation campaign
失敗	실패	Failure, defeat
慘憺	참담	Tragic, disastrous, miserable
平定	평정	Pacification, suppression
肉迫	육박	To press close, close in on
大業	대업	Great task, great undertaking
參禮平野	삼례평야	Samnye Plain
都元帥	도원수	Commander-in-Chief
北進	북진	Advance north
徒涉	도섭	To cross a river on foot, ford
第一着	제일착	First step, first move
生擒	생금	To capture alive
留陣	유진	To halt and encamp
分軍	분군	To divide the army
進陷	진함	To advance and capture
旌旗	정기	Banners, flags
蔽天	폐천	To obscure the sky
兵甲	병갑	Soldiers and armor; military forces
耀日	요일	To shine in the sun
威風	위풍	Imposing presence, majesty
堂堂	당당	Majestic, imposing, confident
肝膽	간담	Liver and gallbladder (metaphor for courage/spirit)
麾下	휘하	Under the command of
統率	통솔	Command, leadership
諸將	제장	Various generals
並力	병력	To join forces
列陣	열진	To form lines, deploy troops
防	방	To defend, block
變更	변경	Change, alteration
潛渡	잠도	To cross secretly (usually a river)
直迫	직박	To press directly upon
肉彈血雨	육탄혈우	Human bullets and rain of blood (metaphor for fierce close combat)
血戰	혈전	Bloody battle
薄暮	박모	Dusk, twilight
血海屍山	혈해시산	Sea of blood and mountain of corpses (metaphor for terrible carnage)
慘劇	참극	Tragedy, horrific event
演出	연출	To stage, enact, produce
訓練	훈련	Training, drill
치명상	치명상	Fatal blow, mortal wound
先生	선생	Teacher, master (title of respect)
總動員	총동원	Full mobilization
同路北上	동로북상	Advancing north together on the same route
約	약	Promise, agreement; to promise/agree
援助	원조	Aid, assistance, support
來戰	내전	To come and fight
合	합	Bout, round (of fighting)
不利	불리	Disadvantageous, unfavorable
所約	소약	What was promised/agreed upon
見敗來屯	견패내둔	To arrive and camp after being defeated
巨頭	거두	Great leader, magnate
慰撫	위무	To console, comfort
留宿	유숙	To stay overnight
講	강	To lecture, expound
誦	송	To chant, recite
策	책	Strategy, plan
運	운	To devise, operate, utilize
光景	광경	Scene, sight
悲絶壯絶	비절장절	Extremely tragic and extremely heroic
憮然	무연	Lamentingly, disappointedly
嘆息	탄식	Sigh, lamentation
生民	생민	The living people, the populace
善後策	선후책	Countermeasures, follow-up plan
善講	선강	To carefully consider/devise
一心	일심	One heart, unified mind
直衝	직충	To charge directly
십분	십분	Fully, amply, very much (modern spelling)
畿湖	기호	Kyŏnggi and Hoseo regions
同心協力	동심협력	To cooperate wholeheartedly
協成	협성	To achieve together, accomplish jointly
成不成	성불성	Success or failure
犒饋	호궤	To feast troops, reward with food and drink
元氣	원기	Energy, vitality
回復	회복	Recovery, restoration
早朝	조조	Early morning
疾風迅雷	질풍신뢰	Swift wind and sudden thunder (metaphor for great speed and force)
追擊	추격	Pursuit
要塞	요새	Fortress, stronghold
包圍攻擊	포위공격	Besiege and attack
晝夜	주야	Day and night
最善最後	최선최후	The very best and final
盡	진	To exhaust, use up completely
武器	무기	Weapon, arms
不備	불비	Inadequate, insufficient
士卒	사졸	Soldiers, troops
不練	불련	Untrained, unskilled
不幸	불행	Unfortunately; misfortune
已非	이비	Already lost, no longer viable
四處	사처	All directions, everywhere
歸散	귀산	To disperse and return (home)
잡히여	잡히어/잡혀	To be caught, captured (older spelling/form)
押送	압송	To transport under guard
被捉	피착	To be captured
刑殺	형살	Execution
梟首	효수	To decapitate and display the head
戊戌	무술	Musul year (1898)
監獄	감옥	Prison
絞殺	교살	Execution by hanging/strangulation
亡命	망명	Exile, seeking asylum
頭領	두령	Leader, chief
兵士	병사	Soldier
砲殺	포살	Killed by cannon fire
埋殺	매살	Killed by being buried alive
焚殺	분살	Killed by burning
斬殺	참살	Killed by beheading
裂殺	열살	Killed by dismemberment
打殺	타살	Killed by beating
投水殺	투수살	Killed by drowning
慘狀	참상	Tragic state, horrible sight
妻孥	처노	Wife and children
田畓	전답	Farmland (paddy and dry fields)
畜類	축류	Livestock
沒刑	몰형	Confiscation (as punishment)
沒收	몰수	Confiscation, seizure
天日俱冥	천일구명	Heaven and sun are dark together (metaphor for extreme tragedy/injustice)
萬一	만일	One ten-thousandth; if by chance
補記	보기	Supplementary note, addendum
甚衆	심중	Very numerous, very many
起包聚衆	기포취중	To establish a *P'o* and gather followers
尙又	상우	Furthermore, moreover
敎人	교인	Believer, follower (of a religion)
見敗多傷	견패다상	To be defeated with many casualties
讎	수	Enemy (variant of 讐)
犧牲	희생	Sacrifice
槪算	개산	Rough estimate, calculation
政局	정국	Political situation
東洋	동양	The East, Orient (East Asia)
時局	시국	State of affairs, current situation
굉장	굉장	Immense, grand, magnificent
維新	유신	Reformation, restoration (like Meiji Ishin)
端緖	단서	Clue, beginning, starting point
日淸	일청	Japan and Qing China
崩壞	붕괴	Collapse, crumbling (modern: 붕괴)
兩班	양반	Yangban (traditional Korean aristocracy)
四民	사민	Four classes (scholars, farmers, artisans, merchants)
平等	평등	Equality
遺	유	To leave behind, bequeath
本位	본위	Standard, basis (e.g., mass-based)
教訓	교훈	Lesson, moral instruction
氣魄	기백	Spirit, vigor, mettle
意趣	의취	Meaning, purport, intention
取調	취조	Interrogation, investigation (often in police/legal context)
官人	관인	Official
高官	고관	High official position
誘	유	To tempt, lure
怨讐	원수	Enemy, foe (often implying deep grudge)
多言	다언	Many words, unnecessary talk
終命	종명	To end one's life
絕對	절대	Absolute
仇讐	구수	Enemy, foe (synonym of 怨讐)
成功	성공	Success
母	모	Mother
後昆	후곤	Descendants, posterity
感懷	감회	Feelings, reflections
黙想	묵상	Silent contemplation, meditation
以下次號	이하차호	To be continued in the next issue
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제68호
발행일	1926년 04월 01일
기사제목	甲午東學亂의 自初至終
필자	一記者
기사형태	논설

甲午東學亂의 自初至終
						一記者
甲午의 東學亂은 朝鮮 역사가 잇슨 뒤로 제일 큰 民衆運動이엿다. 조곰 멀니 말하면 高麗 말의 李太祖 起兵과 新羅 말의 甄萱, 弓裔, 王建 등의 蜂起의 갓가이 말하면 李适, 洪景來 등의 蹶起가 다-가티 그 당시의 現象에 대한 革命運動 아님이 아니엇스나 그런 운동의 대개는 그 주모자의 英雄心理와 追從者의 정권욕에 의하야 起動되고 결과 된 것으로서 거긔에는 진정한 世道를 위한 感激과 主義를 위한 투쟁이 잇지 못한 것이 보통이엿스나 甲午의 東學亂에 잇서는 재래의 革朝運動과 그 趣를 달니하야 「人乃天」이라는 東學思想을 배경으로 하고 「輔國安民」이라는 정책을 이상으로 하야 거의 혁명적 感激과 정열로써 動한 것인 바 여긔에 東學革命의 의의가 잇는 것이다. 듯건대 天道敎 靑年黨에서 금월 7일을 기하야 東學革命의 제 32회 기념을 행하리라고 한다. 그러나 朝鮮의 東學 及 東學運動은 單히 東學을 밋는 그네의 東學이 아니오 근대 朝鮮의 가진 역사적 필연으로써 産出된 것이 그 사상이오 그 운동인 즉 朝鮮사람 된 이는 다-가티 이 革命運動의 의의를 차즐 필요가 잇스리라 한다. 이에써 東學革命의 自初至終을 簡述하면

이 運動의 遠因近因
1. 遠因   前項에서 暫間 말함과 가티 李太祖의 高麗朝 革命運動은 일종의 政權獲得運動에 불과하엿고 그 밧그로 在來의 弊政을 개혁하고 다소의 신 施設을 행한 것은 그 정권을 유지키 위한 民衆懷柔策에 불과한 것이엿다. 이것은 朝鮮의 執權者가 그리하엿슬 뿐이 아니라 封建式 사회의 執權階級의 행태는 대개로 그러한 것이엿다. 그러나＜36＞ 李朝 전기 약 3백 년간은 高麗의 弊患을 거울하기 멀지 아니하고 또는 그간에 人道主義를 發揮한 仁君名相이 업지 아니하야 왕실을 중심한 德化와 仁惠가 자못 민중에게 철저함이 잇섯스나 李朝 말엽 약 2백년간은 재래의 仁政主義 그것이나마 一掃되고 오즉 당시의 지배자인 特權階級(왕실을 중심으로 한 官吏, 儒生, 土豪)의 專制, 殘虐, 誅求가 疊出하는 중 그들의 暴虐 정도는 최근 5, 60년 이래 閔家 一族이 세도를 잡으면서 그 극에 달하엿다. 그래서 각지에는 탐관오리를 膺懲키 위한 民擾가 봉기하며 일반의 民情은 극도로 恟恟하야 東學革命이 닐기 전 약 2, 30년간은 실로 山雨欲來風滿樓의 感이 잇섯나니 이와 가튼 李朝 말기의 말할 수 업는 弊政 이것이 東學革命의 遠因이 되고 近因도 된 것이다.
2. 近因   東學亂의 近因은 물론 「東學」이 생겨난 거긔에 잇는 것이다. 東學이란 것은 距今 66년 전 慶尙道 慶州 崔水雲(名은 濟愚)으로브터 創道된 일종의 사상단체요 主義結社로서 그의 信條는
「사람은 이 天地 간의 최고 存在者인 동시에 사람을 떠나서 또 다른 天地의 主宰者가 업다. 다시 말하면 사람이 곳 한울인 동시에 이 가튼 한울 사람 새에는 엇더한 차별이나 侵侮나 剝奪을 인정할 수 업고 오즉 四海一家萬族一人의 새 세상을 세움이 잇슬 뿐이다」
하야 그들은 몬저 국내문제로 「輔國, 安民」을 提唱하고 세계문제로 「布德天下, 廣濟蒼生」을 주장하야 三南 일대에서 盛히 同志者를 糾合하엿는데 그것이 곳 당시 執權者의 忌諱에 걸려서 東學首領 崔水雲은 唱道한 지 제5년 되는 甲子 3월 10일에 「左道亂政」의 죄목으로써 大邱에서 處斬되엿스나 그의 여세는 燎原의 火와 가티 熾盛하야 崔海月이라는 새로운 中心人物을 어더 가지고 甲午革命이 니러날 그 前期쯤 해서는 全羅, 忠淸, 慶常, 京畿, 江原, 黃海 등지에 분포된 道人이 약 1백만을 算하게 되엿다. 이와 가티 東學의 형세가 日張하는 반면에는 그를 壓迫하고 指彈하는 官憲의 取締와 土豪의 指目이 日甚하는 중 특히 당시의 貪官汚吏와 地方土豪는 東學取締를 구실하야 그의 생명과 재산을 임의 剝奪하는 바 그들의 反抗熱은 일로써 尤甚하게 되엿다.
이에 그들은 크게 擧事할 준비를 행하되 처음은 왕년 大邱에서 斬殺된 水雲先師의 寃을 伸하고 당면의 관리압박을 禁해 달나는 말하면 그 때의 當局을 상대로 하는 訴願運動을 시작하엿스니 그 事端은 일즉히 辛未年＜37＞(西曆 1871) 李弼濟의 盈海, 盈德 등지의 道人을 揮動한 事로브터 始하야 後壬辰 7월에는 徐仁周, 徐丙鶴 등이 忠淸觀察使 趙秉式과 全羅觀察使 李耕稙 등에게 동일한 伸寃의 訴를 드렷스며 翌年 癸巳 정월에는 一躍 중앙정부에 呈䟽伸寃하기로 되야 淸州郡 松山里에 奉䟽都所를 정하고 만반의 준비를 整하야 2월 初吉에 徐丙鶴, 孫天民, 金演局 등이 道衆 수만을 다리고 光化門 외에 陳疏하엿는데 道衆 중에는 이때브터 兵服을 換着하고 兵隊와 협동하야 정부를 顚伏식히자는 의론이 盛하얏스나 時機未熟으로 不果하고 但히 「歸家安業則依願施之」한다는 傳批를 듯고 散歸하엿스나 관리의 橫暴와 土豪의 跋扈는 去去益深한 바 是歲 3월에는 再次의 시위운동을 하기로 하야 8道 道衆에게 一齊來會 할 事들 通諭하엿스니 其略에 曰
降自叔季, 內而修攘之政未擧, 外而侵軼之勢益張. 官吏焉暴戾恣睚, 任行威福, 强豪焉凌轢徵索, 罔有紀極 學問焉鹵莽滅裂 各立門戶, 民情焉退嬰萎縮, 莫可牴牾. 其剝床之災覆隍之禍, 迫在朝夕而恬不覺悟, 此誠有志者之所懷憂長嘆者也, 吾儕俱以師門禍釁之餘生, 祖宗培養之遺民, 未伸師寃, 辜負國恩-(中略) 思不獲己 將復大聲疾呼, 陳章控寃事 如是布喩, 各包敎徒, 屈期齊集, 一以爲衛道尊師之大, 一以爲輔國安民之策, 寔切厚望」云云
3월 11일이라 右記의 通喩文을 접한 八路의 道衆이 所定地點인 報恩帳내로 齊會하엿는데 其數 십수만을 算한 중 그들은 각각 棒을 드러 旗를 삼고 돌을 모아 성을 싸코 行號受令에 威儀가 整齊하고 歌詠誦呪에 欣感이 交集하야 장차 天을 衝하고 地를 震할 기세를 보엿다. 이 소식을 들은 중앙당국은 驚懼莫措하야 忠淸兵使 洪啓薰으로 兵을 率하고 報恩에 駐屯케 하는 일면으로 魚允中을 宣諭使로 派送하야 其 動靜을 探知하엿다. 이에 東學首領 崔海月은 친히 道衆의 行列 前에 나저서 일일히 道衆을 慰閱하고 別로 각 包(包라 함은 그 때 그 結社의 小團軆名)의 大接主와 包名을 差定하고 忠慶大接主에 林奎鎬, 淸義大接主에 孫天民, 忠義大接主에 孫秉熙, 文淸大接主에 任貞宰, 沃義大接主에 朴錫奎, 關東大接主에 李元八, 湖南大接主에 南啓天, 尙公大接主에 李觀永 등을 任命하야 廟堂을 直衡하기로 하고 旬餘를 示威하다가 魚允中의 奉勅挽留로 또 한 번 後期를 두엇다.
이와 가티 道衆의 示威가 頻頻하고 기세가 당당함을 본 각지의 인민이 陸續入道 하매 이에 各 包의 接主들은 제각기＜38＞ 包所를 정하고 일체의 사무를 진행한 바 마치 각 郡 혁명위원회가 急施된 감이 잇섯스며 其中에도 沃川 朴錫奎, 報恩 任奎鎬, 禮山 朴熙寅, 文義 任貞宰, 靑山 朴元七, 扶安 金洛喆, 茂長 孫華仲, 南原 金開南, 淸風 成斗煥, 洪川 車基錫, 麟蹄 金致雲 등은 각히 該郡으로서 本包를 조직하고 都所를 別置하엿스며 全琫準은 자기 부하의 道衆을 다리고 金溝郡院坪에 駐在하얏다. 이와 가티 道人이 或聚 或散하야 今日일가 明日일가 하면서 시기를 고대한 것이 壬辰 7월로브터 癸巳 말년까지에 니르럿스며 그것이 翌年 甲午로 폭발된 것이 즉 曠古未有의 東學亂이엿다.

東學實戰의 自初至終
갑오 정월 5일이다. 全北 古阜道人 全琫準이 自郡 境內에 布告文을 發하야 道人 非道人 5천을 本部 馬項市에 召集하고 후 16일에 同郡 白山(在古阜東 十里)에 移屯하는 一方으로 翌 17일에는 茂長의 孫華仲이 역시 道衆 수천을 다리고 泰仁 扶安 등지를 巡回하며 全과 동일의 擧에 出하엿다. 이에 全羅監司 金文鉉이 砲軍 2천과 負商 1천을 거느리고 4월 7일에 古阜西 20리 되는 黃土峴에서 全琫準軍과 接戰하야 死傷 천여를 남기고 여지업시 敗退하니 이것이 동학혁명운동의 첫 烽火이엿다. 생각컨대 東學은 甲午의 그때로브터도 30여년 전에 創道되야 人乃天의 主義와 輔國安民의 목적으로써 그때까지 동지를 규합하고 시위를 續行한 바 물론 어느 시기로씨 일제 蹶起하야 당시의 特權階級을 一切撲滅하고 事人如天의 주의에 의한 無差別 無階級의 新朝鮮을 건설할 순서이엿스나 그 動하는 시기의 결정에 잇서는 스스로 의견의 不同이 잇섯다. 즉 그때 東學의 唯一 領首인 崔海月은 일이 큰일이니 좀 더 시기를 靜觀할 것이라 하엿슴에 반하야 全琫準, 孫華仲 가튼 이는 그럴 수가 업다 하야 이와 가티 急直히 擧事한 것이다. 말하면 한편은 打算的임에 반하야 한편은 충동 그대로인 셈이엿다. 아모 때에나 하려고 한 일이라 결국 道衆 전부가 動하기는 動하엿스나 일의 不利는 만히 여긔에 잇섯다.
黃土峴 接戰에서 제1차의 승리를 어든 혁명군은 井邑, 咸平 등 郡을 歷巡하야 長城郡에 니르니 도처 민중이 風從雲集하야 어언 수만을 算하는지라. 이에 軍伍를 成하되 삼삼오오의 陳法을 취하야 滿天의 星象을 짓고 旗幟는 靑黑白黃紅의＜39＞ 5 색을 썻스며 대를 깍가 鎗을 맨들고 또 鉢囊을 지어 각기 억게에 메엿스며 全琫準은 白笠白衣(古阜에서 民擾를 니르키다가 희생된 자기 부친의 喪中에 잇섯든 고)로 손에 105 염주를 들고 입으로 37 聖呪(至氣今至願爲大降 侍天主造化定永世不忘萬事知)를 외이며 각 砲士로 하여금 억개에 「弓乙」 2자를 부치고 몸에 「同心義盟」 4자를 품고 旗面에는 「五萬年受運大義」의 7자를 날리니 실로 空前絶後 變化莫測한 神將奇兵이엿다. 일로브터 列郡人心이 望風響從하는데 全琫準은 一邊으로 道를 講하며 一邊으로 兵을 練하야 其勢-漸張하며 전국이 동요하니 東亞의 風雲이 일로써 迫急하엿다. 이에 정부에서는 招討使 洪啓薰으로 하여금 江華兵 6백을 率하고 星夜南下하야 長城의 南 黃龍市街에서 交戰하다가 역시 참패하야 대포 3문까지를 빼앗기고 靈光郡으로 逃入하니 이에 혁명군은 乘勝長驅로 全州營을 突擊하야 監司 金文鉉을 逐出하고 仍히 全州를 占領하니 때는 甲午 4월 望間이엿다. 후 3일에 洪啓薰이 다시 全州城을 來圍하야 凡 7일을 交戰하엿스나 결국 如何히 할 수 업슴으로 仍히 혁명군과 和를 結하고 退歸하매 全琫準이 역시 徒衆을 仍率하고 長城으로 暫還하엿다.

官軍의 敗北과 日淸兩國의 出兵
古阜의 起動을 導火로 하야 각처의 東學黨이 다-각기 輔國安民을 聲言하고 니러나매 但히 정부의 力으로써 制禦할 수 업슴을 알은 당시의 守舊黨 當局者는 駐京淸國總理 袁世凱와 협의하고 直隷總督 李鴻章에게 電請하야 淸兵을 請來하매 日本에서는 天津條約을 압세우고 역시 朝鮮에 兵을 出하야 결국 3국 兵丁이 합세하야 東學軍을 抵當하게 되엿다.
5월 19일에 全琫準은 潭陽군에 니르러 淸將 劉永慶의 和議를 拒하고 다시금 倡義檄文을 發하야 輔國安民의 義를 傳하니 이에 金開南은 南原에서, 李裕馨은 湖西에서, 孫華仲은 茂長에서, 金德明은 金溝에서, 車致九(普天敎 車京錫父)는 井邑에서, 鄭進九는 高敝에서 니러나 全琫準軍과 연합하야 全州로 중심지를 삼고 임시의 軍政을 布하되 관으로브터 勒奪한 民財를 모다 환급케 하고 모든 抑寃히 가친 죄수와 천민을 일체 해방하며 기타 幾百年 간의 弊政을 一例로 개혁하니 민심의 歸順이 水의 就下함과 가탯다.＜40＞
이 때(6월 22일 至 7월 20일의 間) 京城의 중앙정부에는 一大變革이 생겨서 淸國 세력을 배경으로 한 守舊의 閔黨이 물너나고 日本 세력을 배경으로 한 趙義淵, 金嘉鎭, 兪吉濬 등 開化黨이 大院君을 擁하고 新內閣을 조직하야 니른바 甲午의 庶政改革을 斷行하니 이것은 전혀 東學革命의 波動에 의한 副産物이다. 그래서 이 新政府에서는 東學黨과 講和를 하느니 討伐을 하느니 하다가 外로 隣國의 慫慂과 內로 자기의 이해를 顧念한 결과 역시 討伐키로 되야 李斗璜으로 하야금 京兵 천여 인을 거느려 삼남 大討伐을 행하얏다.

公州戰의 失敗와 慘憺한 그 後
全州 일대를 平定한 동학군은 다시 대군을 모라 북으로 湖西를 점령하고 니여서 京城을 肉迫하야 중앙정부를 顚伏하는 동시에 革新의 대업을 완성하기로 하고 동년 9월에 10만의 대군을 전주 叅禮平野에 집합하야 일체의 준비를 整하고 全琫準이 스스로 都元帥가 되야 北進할 세 西湖의 경계선인 錦江을 徒涉하면서 第一着으로 礪山營將 金甲東軍과 公州儒將 李有尙軍을 擊하야 그를 生擒하고 江景平野를 통과하야 大軍營을 論山에 留陣하고 三路로 分軍하야 湖西의 首府인 公州를 進陷코저 할 새 旌旗-蔽天하고 兵甲이 耀日하야 그 威風의 堂堂이 실로 사람의 肝膽을 서늘케 함이 잇섯다.
혁명군이 이와 가티 公州城을 향하고 直進할 새 忠淸觀察使 朴齊純의 麾下에서 官軍을 통솔한 李圭泰, 成夏泳, 洪運燮 등 諸將이 日本軍과 並力하야 利仁, 孝浦, 鳳凰山 등지에 列陣하고 혁명군의 전진을 防함으로 혁명군은 이에 방향을 변경하야 10월 25일에 鳳凰山의 後面으로 態津을 潛渡하야 公州城을 直迫하매 이에 비로소 관군과의 접전이 생겨서 南月村, 翠屛, 智翠, 金盤山 등지에서 肉彈血雨-凡 7차의 혈전을 결행하야 당일 薄暮에 孝浦를 점령하고 니여서 大橋, 牛金峙, 熊峙, 錦津 등지에서 凡 7일 간의 혈전을 계속하야 양군의 死傷이 累萬에 달하는 중 그야말로 血海屍山의 一大 慘劇을 연출하고 결국 鈴木, 森尾 등의 훈련 잇는 日兵을 합한 관군에게 패하야 論山으로 退陣하니 혁명군의 치명상은 실로 여긔에 잇섯다.
이에 선하야 東學先生 崔海月은 각 包의 道人을 총동원하야 孫秉熙로 하야금 대군을 통솔케 하고 全琫準으로＜41＞ 더부러 論山에 會하야 同路北上을 約할 새 대군이 報恩帳內로보터 출발하야 公州의 利仁驛을 지나다가 京城의 관군과 더보러 접전하야 일시 得勝하엿스나 그 후 관군은 日軍의 援助를 어더 다시 來戰하매 10여 合의 血戰을 행하다가 결국 불리하야 처음 所約과 가티 論山으로 來會하니 全琫準군이 역시 見敗來屯한지라. 두 巨頭와 두 대군이 서로 울고 서로 慰撫하며 仍히 수일을 留宿할 새 한편으로는 道를 講하고 呪를 誦하며 또 한편으로는 兵을 練하고 策을 運하는 등 당시의 광경은 실로 悲絶壯絶 하엿다. 이때에 全琫準이 孫秉熙를 도라보며 憮然히 탄식을 지여 가로되
「내 한갓 일이 중하고 급함만을 생각하고 急遽히 일을 니르켜 수업는 民財와 생명을 업시하고 형세-이에 니르럿스니 내 한 몸은 이제 죽어도 압플 것이 업스나 塗炭 중에 들은 저 만흔 生民을 엇지 할가. 이제라도 善後策을 善講하야 최후의 一心으로 公州를 直衝하면 십분 희망이 잇스나 도라보건대 湖南道人은 여러 번 싸운 나마에 피곤하기 저러하니 원건대 畿湖의 道衆이 同心協力하야 大事를 協成함이 잇기를 바란다」
이에 두 사람은 서로 손목을 잡고 「일의 成不成은 天에 잇고 運에 잇는지라. 우리의 무를 바가 아니며 우리는 다못 하고 십흔 일을 할 수 잇는 대까지 할 뿐이라」하고 크게 三軍을 犒饋하야 원기를 회복하고 11월 3일 早朝에 다시 진군하야 成夏泳의 통솔한 관군을 利仁驛에서 大破하고 疾風迅雷와 가티 관군을 추격하야 牛金峙, 犬蹲峯, 周峯, 熊峙 등 要塞을 포위공격하기 凡 6 晝夜 간에 最善最後의 血戰을 盡하얏스나 결국 무기의 不備와 士卒의 不練으로 不幸 敗退하니 이에 殘餘의 대군은 대업의 已非함을 알고 四處로 歸散하야 후 12월에 全琫準은 淳昌 龜老里에서 관군한테 잡히여 京城으로 押送되고 金開南은 泰仁에서, 孫華仲은 茂長에서 被捉되야 金琫準, 孫華仲은 京城에서 刑殺되고, 金開南은 全州에서 梟首되엿스며, 崔海月은 江原道 방면으로 피신하엿다가 후 戊戌에 역시 京城 감옥에서 絞殺되고, 孫秉熙는 그 후 중국 방면으로 亡命하엿스며 그 餘의 운동에 관계된 頭領이나 병사는 모다 砲殺, 絞殺, 埋殺, 焚殺, 斬殺, 裂殺, 打殺, 投水殺한 등 그 참상을 이기여 말할 수가 업섯스며 더욱 그에 관계되는 부모, 처자, 형제, 田畓, 畜類까지를 沒刑 또는 沒收하야 三南 일대의 당시 참극은 실로 天日이 俱冥할 지경이엿다.
東學亂의 실전을 대략 이와 가티 記述하엿스나 이것은 물론 그 실전의 萬一이 못된다. 그 때의 그 운동은 東學을 밋는 道人이 잇는 곳에서는 어대서나 다-가티 蜂起한 바 도저히 그것을 次序잇게 적을 수가 업고 내 죵으로 한 말을 補記할＜42＞ 것은 黃海道 康翎, 文化, 載寧 등지에 잇는 道人 林鍾玄, 金裕泳, 元容馹, 韓華錫, 吳膺善, 方粲斗 등이 역시 수만의 도중을 모아 官軍과 日軍으로 더보러 수십次의 접전을 하야 死傷이 甚衆하엿스며 平安道 江西, 龍岡 등지의 道人 金士永과 咸興의 金學水와 江界의 李白草 등이 역시 起包聚衆한 일이 잇섯스며 尙又 慶南 晋州 등지에서 敎人 수만이 本郡 孤僧 堂山 상에서 관군과 싸우다가 見敗多傷한 것도 니즐 수 업는 일이다.

「너는 나의 讎요 나는 너의 讎」
東學革命運動은 이와 가티 니러나서 이와 가티 慘敗하엿다. 이 운동에 희생된 大衆이 槪算을 할지라도 10만 이상이 된다고 한다. 이와 가티 실패하엿슴에 不拘하고 東學革命이 당시의 朝鮮 政局 또는 東洋 時局에 밋츤 영향은 실로 굉장하엿스며 더욱 朝鮮의 일반 민심에 밋츤 영향은 오히려 큼이 잇섯다. 즉 東學亂이 니러낫슴으로 해서 守舊黨의 중앙정부는 곳 개혁이 되야 朝鮮維新의 端緖가 그로 열렷스며 니여 日淸의 전쟁을 니르켜 東洋의 風雲은 일로써 急轉하엿스며 朝鮮 5백년 동안을 뿌리 박은 兩班과 土豪의 城壘가 이로써 崩壞되고 四民 평등이 일로써 실현되엿스며 더욱이 무엇보다도 이 혁명이 우리에게 남겨 준 큰 의의는 민중의 힘이란 것은 이러한 것이며 민중의 요구는 이러한 것이다. 비록 一時의 실패를 당하엿슬지라도 우리 민중은 어느 때 일지라도 이와 가튼 민중 本位의 새 세상을 세우고야 말지며 그래서 세우기까지는 언제던지 이와 가티 싸울 것이다 하는 가장 중요한 교훈을 우리 남아 잇는 민중에게 피와 불로써 전해준 그것이다. 최후로 목이 끈킬 때의 全琫準의 남긴 말은 실로 이 氣魄 이 意趣를 전하기에 족하니 이는 다른 말이 아니라 全을 取調할 당시의 官人이 그를 高官으로써 誘한 즉 그는 소리를 놉혀 꾸지져 가로되
『너는 나의 원수요 나는 너의 怨讐니 너는 다못 나를 죽일 것 뿐이라. 무슨 多言이 잇슬 것이냐』
하고 최후까지 반항으로써 終命하엿다. 그러타. 민중과 특권계급 이것은 절대의 仇讐로서 서로 대립치는 못하는 것이다.
슬프다. 실패는 성공의 母라고 당시 민중운동의 실패는 금후 민중운동을 성공식히는 어머니가 될 터이겟지. 東學의 後昆들아 이후의 민중들아 32回의 東學革命을 黙想하는 그 오늘의 感懷가 엇더한고.(以下次號)＜43＞
＜36-43＞