Magazine Title: 삼천리 제14권 제1호
Publication Date: 1942년 01월 01일
Article Title: 東洋의 侵略者 英ㆍ米 打倒의 大獅子吼! (The Great Lion's Roar to Overthrow the Oriental Aggressors, Britain and America!)
Author: 조선임전보국단 주최 (Hosted by the Chosŏn Wartime National Service Association)
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/Opinion Piece)

The Great Lion's Roar to Overthrow the Oriental Aggressors, Britain and America!
Hosted by the Chosŏn Wartime National Service Association
On December 8th last, Our Empire drew the sword of justice to overthrow the obstructors of the East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere and the enemies of Oriental aggression, the two nations of America and Britain. Herein, we feature the great lion's roar of patriots for the overthrow of America and Britain, offered to the populace of the Peninsula.

The Holy War for the Construction of the East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere
Yŏ Unhong

Looking back at the history of humanity over several thousand years, people have fought for various purposes. Expansion of power, seizure of territory, differences in ideology, and various conflicts of interest have been causes of war, but this is the first time a war has truly been fought for justice and humanity, with the Empire of Japan's declaration of war against Britain and America. Although Wilson said during the last World War that America's participation was for justice and humanity, that was merely deceiving the public. Japan's current war against Britain and America is not a fight solely for the survival and development of the Empire of Japan. It is being fought for two greater purposes. One is to rescue the one billion people of Asia from the power of the Anglo-Saxons. <44>
Over the past 300 years, since Britain invaded India and established the East India Company, almost all of Asia, except for Japan, became colonies or semi-colonies. Even in China, until now, almost everything – politics, education, commerce – has been under the guidance and domination of Britain and America. Britain and America have committed all sorts of evils in their attempt to place all of Asia under their control. If Japan does not win this war, Asia will once again languish as slaves to the Anglo-Saxons for several hundred more years. Therefore, our fight this time is truly a Holy War (聖戰). It is the first Holy War since the dawn of history. The abuses we Orientals have received from America and Britain, the Anglo-Saxons, over the past several hundred years are too numerous to count. Just recounting what I have witnessed and experienced would take all night tonight. To mention just one or two examples, when I first went to Chicago in June 1914, a fight broke out between Black people and Americans due to the abuse of Black people. The Americans shot the Black people with guns, piling up corpses like mountains on the roadside (積屍如山), and the Black people trembled, daring not to go out for several days; the scene was unbearable to witness (目不忍見). We are well aware of the so-called lynching in the American South. I myself have experienced numerous instances of being refused food in restaurants, being kicked out of boarding houses, and being refused service in barbershops. This war is a Holy War to punish these atrocious and lawless Americans, these Americans who advocate for the equality and freedom of mankind yet commit inhumane acts. I wish my voice were louder so I could shout to all the peoples of the Orient – to the entire populace of China, the Philippines, Malaya, India, and the Dutch East Indies – "Gather under the banner of the Rising Sun to build an Orient for Orientals, and further, to build the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere!" The Empire's declaration of war against Britain and America this time is for the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. <45> Therefore, it is a Holy War to build an Orient for Orientals who have groaned under the aggression and exploitation of Britain and America. It is the first Holy War since the dawn of history. It is a Holy War fought for the freedom of all mankind, for world peace. The day is not far off when the bright sun will shine upon the lands of the Orient, and the two nations of America and Britain will fly the white flag beneath us. Youths of the Peninsula, the 25 million people of the Peninsula! The one hundred million masses living under the flag of the sun! The one billion Orientals throughout the East! All arise! Go forth! Fight! Fight until the victory of this Holy War is completely ours! Fight! Fight! (Applause) <47>

Let Us Annihilate Britain and America Along with Their Ideology
Kōyama Mitsurō (Yi Kwangsu)

Without annihilating Britain and America, a new order will not come to East Asia or the world. Only when Britain and America are annihilated and East Asia is newly established under the spirit of *Hakkō Ichiu* (八紘一宇 - Eight Corners of the World under One Roof) will peace and prosperity come to the various peoples of East Asia.
However, most people are aware of Britain and America's political aggression and economic exploitation in the Orient, but they are ignorant of its ideological poison. We must expel this ideological influence along with the political and economic power of Britain and America.

1. Individualism
Japanese thought considers the self as a subject of His Majesty, as a child of parents, as a younger sibling to an older sibling, as a husband to a wife, as a parent to a child. That is, one thinks of oneself as responsible within the Five Relations (五倫), not as an individual. Individualism is truly an Anglo-Saxon product. The foundation of Oriental thought is the principle of loyalty and filial piety (忠孝主義).

2. Commercialism - Konma-shyallisŭm (Commercialism)
Making monetary profit the standard for human life in all things is also Anglo-Saxon thought. It could be called economic thought-ism (經濟思想主義). It could also be called utilitarianism (唯利主義). They believe the state exists for the benefit of the individual, and if it goes against individual benefit, it is acceptable to revolt against the state; they do not know righteousness (義). Relationships of interest are primary. The idea that the parliament is an assembly for the benefit of taxpayers is Anglo-Saxon thought, and such a concept goes against the Japanese spirit.

3. Rights-ism (權利主義)
Although the concept of rights is said to come from Roman law, it also aligns with Jewish thought. The idea that relationships between father and son, husband and wife, state and citizen are all based on rights has infiltrated us from Britain and America.
In the Oriental spirit, there is no assertion of rights. Relationships like ruler-subject, father-son, husband-wife, elder brother-younger brother are bound by affection (情) and righteousness (義), <46> not transactional relationships of exchange based on rights and duties. There is only service (奉仕), only public duty (奉公). Erroneous individualism arises from this rights-based thinking.

4. Utilitarianism/Happiness-ism (幸福主義)
The greatest happiness for the greatest number is the national and social ideal of the British and Americans. There are two errors here. One is locating happiness in the material and sensual satisfaction of each individual; the other is the political view of ruling the minority by the majority. The Japanese spirit and Oriental thought are not like this. In the Orient, the purpose of life lies in doing righteous deeds, and ruling the people involves His Majesty alone ensuring that each person finds their proper place.

5. Liberalism/Egalitarianism, So-called Democracy (自由平等主義 소위 데모크라시-)
Freedom is the most favored slogan of the Anglo-Saxons, but this is merely self-justification and flattery regarding the human weakness of living arbitrarily. For Japanese people, the freedom spoken of by the British and Americans likely does not exist. There is only the way of living gratefully under His Majesty's great benevolence (大御心), and freedom might be called the absence of anyone hindering this life. Regarding equality, it is even more so. Ruler and subject, father and son, husband and wife, elder and younger brothers are by no means equal. Human society can be said to be established based on hierarchical, master-servant relationships.
What has been described above are the main reprehensible Anglo-American ideas that must be rejected. Even if we completely annihilate Britain and America, as long as we do not annihilate these ideas, *Hakkō Ichiu* cannot come. The new order based on harmony (和) cannot come. Harmony (和) means the harmony of great and small, high and low.
At this time, the nation must carry out the war against America and Britain with one heart and one mind (一億一心). Simultaneously, we must also annihilate the Anglo-Saxon thought that has long defiled our minds and promote the Imperial Way (皇道). (Applause) <47>

Roosevelt, Answer!
Chu Yohan (Matsumura Kōichi)

Wearing the mask of justice and humanity, you perpetrator of exploitation and conspiracy, the world's arsonist, the world's foremost hypocritical gentleman, President Roosevelt of the United States of America.
You gentleman in a tailcoat, in reality, the ringleader of bandits engaged in plunder and robbery, Prime Minister Churchill of the British Empire.
Before you two great clowns, I ask in the name of the one billion masses of Asia.
Roosevelt, whenever you open your mouth, you insist on justice and humanity, but which country opposed and deleted the proposal to insert a clause abolishing racial discrimination in the preamble of the Treaty of Paris? Which country's people discriminate against Black people and Orientals within their own borders, not even allowing them to sit together, and hunted slaves on the African continent as if hunting wild beasts? Was this your humanity, your justice?
While advocating the Monroe Doctrine for the Western Hemisphere, forbidding even a finger of interference from other nations, you advocate the so-called Open Door Policy for East Asia, engaging in interference and obstruction. What kind of contradiction and fixation is this?

Churchill, your country Britain calls itself a nation of gentlemen and prides itself that the progress of civilization is the white man's burden. But forcibly selling opium to the 300 million people of India and the 400 million people of China, causing their ruin, is this what you call the progress of civilization? Establishing the East India Company, traveling through the Indian region committing plunder and robbery, eventually enslaving 300 million Indians; imposing unequal treaties on 400 million Chinese people through the power of warships and cannons, damaging their national sovereignty, obstructing industrial development, making them groan forever under a colonial destiny, conspiring to partition and occupy their country whenever opportunity arose, exploiting coolie labor to live luxuriously in villas, and shooting students, peasants, and workers – is this your civilization? <48>
Freedom of the seas ultimately means freedom of the seas for Britain. Towards other nations besides Britain, you suppress the construction of shipping, envy the development of commerce, tried to restrict our country's navy to a 5:3 ratio at the disarmament conference, occupied all key points of the sea routes across the five oceans, intending to blockade other countries' trade in times of contingency. How can this be called freedom of the seas?
However, your evil fortune has run out. Your conspiracies – obstructing the Manchurian Incident, obstructing the China Incident, not hesitating even to collude with the communist Soviet Union to harass Germany, encircling our country from north and south to achieve your ambition of conquering East Asia – have all been shattered today where our country's evil-destroying sword (破邪劍) flashes.
The Imperial Army has endured hardships (臥薪嘗膽) and forged its strength for 30 years, tolerated the intolerable for four and a half years, repeated final negotiations for eight months. Now, rising up at once, yesterday sinking 4 pairs and severely damaging 4 pairs of warships in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, today sinking 2 pairs of British warships in the waters off Malaya – were your warships made of glass?
The American people, startled by the air force, are shelling their own aircraft and ships, causing numerous casualties, while Britain laments the "greatest misfortune since the Great War."

Discouraged Britain, how about quickly raising the white flag?
Though the small nations of Central and South America, instigated by America, are declaring war one after another, what pain does it cause us? Instead, on our side, have not the great nations of Germany and Italy joined, and has not Thailand, long under Britain's demonic grasp, resolutely concluded an offensive and defensive alliance with us?
In the First World War, Britain, France, Russia, America, Italy, and eventually even our Japan joined forces to attack Germany and Austria. But today, Japan, Germany, and Italy are one bloc, and France and Russia have already lost their fighting power. Is not Britain's isolation stark, and its defeat not already decided?
Britain and America seem to hope for a lucky outcome by dragging our country into a long war, but this war is a so-called resource acquisition war, where national strength grows while fighting. With French Indochina and Thailand on our side, there is no worry about rice. If Malaya falls into our hands, rubber is secured. If the Dutch East Indies are occupied, oil is assured. Is it not America, rather, that will face difficulties due to shortages of rubber and tin?
If Singapore falls, India is in peril. On the day the Indian people rise up and expel the British, Britain's lifeline will be endangered.
The bombing and sinking of American and British warships is by no means solely the power of gunpowder. It is the spirit of the Imperial Nation (皇國精神) of selfless service to the country (滅身報國); <49> it is the human-bullet power of the loyal and brave Japanese soldiers. The one billion people of the Orient have become one bloc to punish the ambitions of the Anglo-Saxons. We, the 24 million of the Peninsula, have pledged to become warriors of the Greater East Asia Holy War as one united body (渾然一體). The glorious new era is coming. The men and women, old and young of Chosŏn will unstintingly offer their money, strength, brains, and lives to become protagonists of Greater East Asia. (Applause) <51>

One Stroke of Anger to Pacify the World (一怒而安天下)
Yi Tonhwa

The great sage Mencius once highly praised the wars in which King T'ang and King Wu subjugated Jie and Zhou as Holy Wars that "pacified the world with one stroke of anger" (一怒而安天下). If Mencius's spirit were to witness Our Imperial Nation's Holy War today, he would surely be unable to contain his dancing for joy (手舞足踏). If the China Incident five years ago was the budding of the Holy War, today's war against America and Britain can be called the Holy War among Holy Wars, and simultaneously the war for the completion of the Holy War. That is, with the war against America and Britain, the true nature of the Holy War has become even clearer, and the meaning of the Holy War has become even more evident to the world.
The Imperial Nation's concept of justice based on *Hakkō Ichiu* (八紘一宇) and the corrupt history of sin of America and Britain were originally irreconcilable (勢不兩立). Therefore, the Imperial Nation's war against America and Britain has a distinct separation from ordinary wars. This is truly an epoch-making expression of justice arising from the divine revelation of Heaven's mandate (天命) and the turning point of great destiny (大運); it was the radiance of the sacred movement to pacify the world with one stroke of anger. Not only do all people under heaven welcome this war of justice, but also the spirits underground (地下之鬼) will mutually offer unseen aid (互相冥助) to jointly punish the sins of Britain and America, I declare with certainty. As long as the old powers of Britain and America, where the night is deep (夜色沈沈) and the ghostly aura is gloomy (鬼氣陰陰), exist on this earth, the world cannot have peace even for a day, and humanity can never attain happiness. The heavenly mandate of justice has descended upon the Imperial Nation. The heavenly punishment for sin has fallen upon them. Let us arise, the one hundred million subjects! Let us receive the great Imperial Rescript (御大詔) of His Majesty the Emperor, the Manifest God (現人神), and pledge for the certain victory of this Holy War.
For the completion of the Holy War, the three essential conditions of Heaven's timing (天時), Earth's advantage (地利), and Man's harmony (人和) must be met. Now, our Imperial Army has gained Heaven's timing, obtained Earth's advantage, and possesses Man's harmony. These are the three great fortunes bestowed upon our Imperial Nation by the gods. Firstly, according to the principle of the cyclical return of Heaven's fortune (天運循環, 無往不複), we have reached the time for the revival of the Great East. The construction of a New East Asia, the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, is truly a mystical calculation obtained through the workings of Heaven's fortune (天運之所致). Light arises from the East. The time has come when the ill fortune under which the Orient groaned due to the tyrannical power of Britain and America for several hundred years disappears, and the Orient becomes the Orient of Orientals (東洋은 東洋人의 東洋이 되는 天時). Justice and injustice, sin and merit, have become self-evident when reflected in the mirror of heavenly principle (天理). The time has come when the enormous dark shadow of Britain and America's sins will disappear into the waves of the Pacific Ocean.
Secondly, let's look at Earth's advantage (地利). Geographically, the Pacific Ocean is our sea. The gods entrusted the eternal peace of the Pacific <50> to us. The corrupt expeditionary forces of Britain and America are inherently no match for the Imperial Army due to geographical conditions. Behold the reality that in just a few days since the start of the war, the entire Western Pacific has been subdued into the hands of the Imperial Army... There is no need to ask whether the Pacific war will be long or short. Whether long or short, the Pacific will ultimately become the territorial waters of the Imperial Nation. Geography itself explains this.
Thirdly, Man's harmony (人和). Among all nations of the world, there is no country with such good Man's harmony as our Imperial Nation. This is because we possess a national polity incomparable in all nations (萬邦無比의 國體). The Imperial Nation is both a state and one large family. Every one of the one hundred million subjects must offer their lives for His Majesty the Emperor. Loyal and brave beyond compare (忠勇無比), these words literally describe the Man's harmony of the Imperial Nation.
Heaven's timing, Earth's advantage, Man's harmony – viewed from any angle, victory in the war is already decided. We people of the Peninsula must seize this opportunity to achieve the reality of Japan and Korea as one body (內鮮一體). The era of home front service (銃後奉公) begins now. Let each of us pledge to become a member contributing to the victory. (Applause) <51>

Overthrow British and American Aggressionism
Yi Sŏnghwan

Looking back, humanity has long had its innate capabilities suppressed and its natural demands shackled under extremely unfair balances of power and extremely unnatural international constraints.
The Anglo-Saxons, who once built great empires through aggression and colonization, reigned over indigenous peoples through oppression, trampling, exploitation, hardship, and enslavement, using threats, appeasement, intimidation (哃喝), and deceit (欺瞞) as the most effective policies, as means for humans to command other humans. Originally, such vicious methods and means were used when taming and working animals, but the Anglo-Saxon peoples, in the process of invading, conquering, ruling, and exploiting primitive foreign peoples, applied these methods meant for animals to humans. Meanwhile, this habit grew and grew, and they recklessly, without recognizing their opponents, extended these standard methods' poisonous fangs and demonic hands even towards the East Asian world – the birthplace of world humanity and the source that contributed to the culture and happiness of world humanity – sometimes baring their fangs, sometimes wagging their tails, sometimes revealing their teeth and growling. Is there no limit to such impudent behavior? How much more so towards our Japan? It is utterly ridiculous and gut-wrenching.
Wearing the mask of international cooperationism (國際的 協調主義), backed by the Jewish monopolistic financial conglomerates (유다야 獨占金融財閥), the development of US-UK imperialism, using ideological plots, economic manipulation, and military threats, invaded Europe and then began to invade Asia. Most of the Eastern peoples became dependencies of Britain, France, America, etc., and those that did not, with the sole exception of Japan, were somehow, tangibly or intangibly, suppressed under the dominant power of Anglo-American imperialism. During that time, East Asia was invaded materially and spiritually by Anglo-American imperialism, so that the old character of "East Asia for East Asians" became unrecognizable.
Today, as those aggressors enjoy a high standard of living and hedonistic lifestyles, <52> wearing smiles of satisfaction from their sense of superiority, are not the one billion masses of East Asia falling into ignorance, poverty, and decline?
If we allow their endless greed, exploitation, and suppression to continue unchecked any longer, letting ourselves be crushed under the wheels of Anglo-American imperialistic aggression, will there be any hope or light in the future for East Asians? Will there be anything other than castration, weakening, and extinction? Will the future of the dark tunnel not just connect to hell?
However, Heaven certainly did not bring superior peoples onto this earth merely to freeze or starve them to death. We absolutely have the right to demand the path of survival and development based on the justice of the world. We have the right to reclaim East Asia from Anglo-American imperialistic aggression. In other words, we have the great right and duty to take back stolen goods with force, through justice and righteous indignation. If we do not overthrow and annihilate the old system of democratic, liberalistic, aggressionistic capitalism centered on Britain and America, and build a world based on a truly moral new order, what will become of our descendants?
This was the Japan-China Incident five years ago, and this is the Greater East Asia Holy War that finally erupted this time. What is this if not the sacred task of world renewal (回天之聖業)? Roosevelt and Churchill, when they speak, classify nations into peace-loving countries and aggressive, war-loving countries, saying the former are good, namely Britain and America, and the latter are evil, namely Japan and the Axis powers. They act as if the responsibility and power for promoting good and punishing evil (勸善懲惡) lie with Britain and America. Furthermore, they insist that Britain and America should hold the world's police power, that only Japan, Germany, and Italy should reduce armaments, and that tariffs, commerce, and resource allocation should obey British and American commands. They harbor the audacious dream of perpetuating world domination according to the Anglo-American style. With this dream, the two Anglo-American leaders boarded the warship HMS Prince of Wales in mid-August last year, evaded the nets of German submarines, held the so-called Atlantic Charter meeting off the coast of northern Canada, secretly agreed on the eight-point principles, and were acting high and mighty, weren't they? In the recent Japan-US negotiations as well, they insisted on the so-called Pacific Principles. Their "principles" are based on the old order centered on Britain and America established by the Treaty of Versailles after the previous European Great War, which most unreasonably and unfairly divided the world's territories and resources, with Britain, France, and America occupying the vast majority of Heaven's blessings, providing only the small remainder to the Axis group of nations. Their so-called principle is to further enrich and strengthen their own territories and resources.
Even a lion, after eating a large ox, rests leisurely for 4-5 days, but even a gentle sheep in a pasture will chew on thick pine bark if hungry. <53> In such a case, can a principle be established that calls the lion a peace-lover and labels the sheep an aggressive war-lover? Where could there be greater arrogance and presumption (傍若無人 傲慢無雙)? Like a day-old puppy unaware of the tiger's fearsomeness, America, a nation founded merely 150 years ago, dared to encircle and challenge the Empire with an arrogant and insolent attitude. Behold the sight of its Pacific Fleet being scattered like clouds and mist at a single touch (鎧袖一觸). I truly feel pity for the blunder of the naive magician.
In this Greater East Asia War, and indeed in the World War, it goes without saying that the Empire of Japan will be the final victor; this decisive trend is already clear from the reports of great victories arriving moment by moment. Fundamentally, this signifies the success of building a new world order by overthrowing British and American aggressionism, while simultaneously achieving the establishment of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, the complete resolution of the China Incident, and also the consummation of Japan-Korea unification (內鮮一體). In other words, *naesŏn ilch'e* (內鮮一體), one hundred million hearts as one (一億一心) – this core entity is what enables the reconstruction of East Asia and the establishment of the new world order. Therefore, knowing the extremely grave duty of the 24 million people of the Peninsula in unifying the national spirit for this war, I hope they will silently march forward in the direction indicated by history. (Applause) <54>

Until the Enemy Surrenders
Paek San Ch'ŏngsu (Former name Kim Tonghwan)

1. There are three most pitiful men in the world. First is China's Chiang Kai-shek, second is America's Roosevelt, and third is Britain's Churchill.
It is said that the tragic hero of the 19th century was Napoleon, who went to Saint Helena. Now, entering the 20th century, these three men are about to become the most pitiful tragic heroes. Until today, we thought Chiang Kai-shek was the most incompetent among them, but looking at the situation over the past 4-5 days since the outbreak of the great war in the Pacific, Churchill and Roosevelt are several times more incompetent than him. Compared to them, the Anglo-American Pacific navies, their usual boastful talk vanished, were truly annihilated overnight, as if they were toy fleets made of paper. Can they withstand even one-third of Chiang? Or one-fifth? Although they are the enemy, it's pathetic.
Now, let us try to divine, though I am no shaman or fortune-teller, on what day these three pitiful men and the three countries guided by their hands – namely the Chungking regime, America, Britain – will perish and vanish from the face of this earth.

2. Chiang Kai-shek definitely had one chance to die. Looking at the traces of heroes and great men in history, most are people who died well when it was time to die. Since Chiang Kai-shek was a man of such stature, heaven once gave him a chance to die splendidly. That was when Nanking was about to fall, when the Nanking castle was surrounded doubly and triply, and he was urged, "Chiang Kai-shek, open the gates and surrender quickly." At that time, realizing the misery of having driven the 400 million masses onto the path of death through his own mistakes, Chiang should have run to Sun Yat-sen's Mausoleum (中山陵) before Mr. Sun Wen (孫文先生),
"Sir! Sir! I have done wrong. I have ruined the homeland, Chung Hwa (中華), that you created."
Weeping thus, he should have drawn his sword and rightly committed suicide by cutting his own throat (自刎). <56> In ancient times, Xiang Yu (項羽), after gaining the world and then being pursued, lost all his eight thousand disciples from Jiangdong (江東). Ashamed to face the elders of Jiangdong (江東父老), he came to the Wu River (烏江), killed his beloved consort, Beauty Yu (虞美人), and then committed suicide (自刎), did he not? A true man's death must surely be like this, but Chiang, like a cornered rat (窮鼠), fled Nanking, ran to Hankow (漢口), and from Hankow went further to Chungking (重慶).
He caused the deaths of several thousand student cadets from the Whampoa Military Academy (黃浦軍官學敎), where only the country's brightest talents gathered, and caused the deaths of 3.2 million young Chinese men due to the misguided anti-Japanese war. During the Great Kantō Earthquake (關東震災), I saw over 1,300 skeletons gathered in Tokyo's Asakusa Park (淺草公園), piled two or three times our height. If 3.2 million skeletons were piled up, they would encircle Chungking ten or twenty times over; they would build a new Great Wall along the Yangtze River (楊子江).
Buried amidst these ghosts and skeletons, perhaps, like Yan Xishan (閻錫山), at the end of his wits, he will enter some temple far away in Tibet (西藏), wear prayer beads and a conical hat, and live as a monk of Lamaism (라마敎). Or else, he will climb Mount Emei (峨嵋山), where Li Bai (李太白) used to roam, gaze at the moon with Song Meiling (宋美齡), and end up committing suicide by throwing himself off.
It is said that if all else fails, he plans to live in America, has deposited money in a Washington bank (華盛頓銀行), and keeps an American airplane from the Flying Tigers (구랍파의 미국비행기) waiting in his courtyard, ready to escape at any time. But now, with Japan holding air supremacy over the Pacific Ocean and Germany over the Atlantic Ocean, where can he possibly go? The miserable end of the anti-Japanese hero is truly extreme.
However, it is still not too late. Heaven has given Chiang another chance, one last chance to die a hero's death.
He should settle the accounts of the past five years of resistance, gather his troops again, make comprehensive peace, then join hands with the Japanese army and cross the snow-capped Himalayas (히말나야山). Beyond lies India, weeping under 340 years of oppression, Burma (*甸), Egypt (埃及); it is time to advance for the construction of Greater East Asia. Like Napoleon crossing the Alps, he should dismantle cannons, carry them, and cross those mountain ranges buffeted by the north wind (朔風). Even if he falls under British gunfire while doing so, Oriental history will provide him a page of record.

3. Next, when will Roosevelt die? America has deep connections with Chosŏn. It was an American who deceived the old Chosŏn government and bought the Seoul (京城) electric tram installation rights for 200 or 300 *ryang* (兩). It was also an American who maneuvered to buy the excavation rights for the royal tombs in Kyŏngju (慶州) for 400 won. Had they succeeded then, the treasures like the gold crowns (金冠) from the Silla Dynasty (新羅朝) would now be displayed in a Washington museum's (와싱톤博物舘) showcase.
Is that all? They also got their hands on the Unsan Gold Mine (雲山金鑛) in North P'yŏngan Province (平北). <57> If left unchecked, they would have leased every mine in all of Chosŏn, and figures like the mining kings Mr. Ch'oe and Mr. Pak would not have emerged later, nor would newspaper companies, professional schools, etc., have come into being.
What deeds did this person, who did such ungrateful things to our Chosŏn, perform in the Orient? Claiming to save the Philippines (比律賓) from 300 years of Spanish tyranny, they took it for themselves. Hawaii (布哇) was the same. In their 170 years since founding, they fought 134 wars of aggression, thoroughly conquering, exploiting, and oppressing people of color.
Overwhelmed by the guilt of losing the Pacific fleet and the censure for starting the war, he will now be chased by the clubs of the American public, abandon the presidential chair, flee northwards, and finally jump into Niagara Falls (나이야가라 폭포) and die.

4. Britain's Churchill causes all 320 million people of India to die at the young age of 26. The average life expectancy of Indians is 26 years (Chosŏn people: 40+ years; people in civilized countries like Germany, Italy: average 40-50). They are born on earth, allowed to live only 26 years, and then killed off. Their industrial policy is wicked. They do not allow Indians to grow rice well for their own consumption. Every year, due to lack of rice, famine occurs, and millions, tens of millions of people perish. They also don't provide medicine, hospitals, or doctors, so 6-7 million die each year from cholera (虎列剌), malaria.
They don't provide education either. They fear that if educated, Indians might become more outstanding than the British people back home. Furthermore, Britain forces opium cultivation in India. They prevent the planting of rice or beans and make them grow only opium, which is then sent to British colonies like the Malay Peninsula (*甸) to weaken the iron-like forearms of the native populace. Not only that, they even bring it to China, where it's unwanted, instigate conflicts like the Opium War, seize Hong Kong (香港), and collect indemnities of 200 million *ryang* (兩).
Still, Churchill might think that since they've dealt with India face-to-face for 340 years, India would, in case of emergency, defend British interests on Britain's behalf. However, the poet Tagore already came to Tokyo years ago and urged that India should become culturally closer to Japan. Would they ask us to serve such atrocious and lawless masters as Britain? Ultimately, Churchill's destination is the island of Saint Helena in the Mediterranean Sea. No, wait, these days the Mediterranean is covered with Italian warships, so he can't go there either. In the end, he will likely drown himself in the nearby Thames River in London (倫敦 뎀스강).

5. Ignoring his own faults, Roosevelt probably thinks that the Philippines, having lived side-by-side [with America] for 40 years, <58> will stand against Japan and defend the Pacific. However, regarding the Philippines (比島), the current president, Mr. Quezon (커즌氏), came to Tokyo 3-4 years ago, observed Japan's politics, military, and culture, returned to Manila, gathered 40,000 government officials and university students in the National Park plaza, and declared that in building the new Philippines, they must look to Japan as a leader. He specifically mentioned emulating three things: military organization, fisheries, and national education centered on Bushido (武士道). Mr. Quezon originally led independence forces as an Army Major during the Spanish-American War (米西戰爭), fought bravely, was captured by the American army, and spent 6 months in prison. Thus, he harbors resentment towards America, not gratitude. Leading the 250,000-strong Philippine regular army, he will now turn his guns towards Washington rather than Tokyo.
In short, Guam and Wake Island have already fallen in the Pacific. The next news will likely be the fall of Manila, Singapore, Honolulu. After that, the trio of Roosevelt, Churchill, and Chiang will come before our Imperial Palace's Nijūbashi Bridge (二重橋), kneel, prostrate themselves, and surrender.
Until that day, let us pledge to advance into a long-term war of resistance (長期抗戰). (Applause) <59>
<38-59>

**Summary**

This collection of editorials from the January 1942 issue of *Samch'ŏlli* magazine presents a unified, vehemently pro-Japanese and anti-Allied perspective on the Pacific War, which had just begun. Penned by prominent Korean intellectuals, some using Japanese names, the articles frame Japan's war against the US and Britain as a "Holy War" (聖戰) aimed at liberating Asia from centuries of oppressive Anglo-Saxon imperialism and establishing the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere (大東亞共榮圈) under Japan's righteous leadership. The authors denounce Western democracy, individualism, and capitalism as morally bankrupt ideologies responsible for exploiting Asian nations, citing examples like British actions in India and China, and American racism and economic aggression. They celebrate initial Japanese military victories as proof of Japan's spiritual and material superiority, predicting the inevitable downfall of Roosevelt, Churchill, and Chiang Kai-shek. A recurring theme is the call for Koreans to fully embrace *naesŏn ilch'e* (內鮮一體 - Japan and Korea as One Body), reject Western influence, and wholeheartedly contribute manpower, resources, and loyalty to the Japanese war effort, thereby fulfilling their duty as subjects of the Japanese Empire and participants in building a new East Asian order.

From a historical perspective, these articles are significant examples of collaborationist rhetoric during the late Japanese colonial period. They reveal how certain Korean elites actively participated in disseminating Japanese wartime propaganda, adopting and promoting ideologies like *Hakkō Ichiu* and *naesŏn ilch'e* to justify Japanese expansionism and mobilize Korean support for the war. Historians might find the specific arguments used to demonize the West (drawing on experiences of racism, critiques of imperialism), the portrayal of Japan as Asia's liberator, and the explicit calls for Korean assimilation and sacrifice particularly interesting for understanding the dynamics of collaboration, coercion, and ideology under Japanese rule during World War II.

**Named Entities**

東洋	동양	Orient/East Asia
英		영	Britain (England)
米		미	America (USA)
朝鮮臨戰報國團	조선임전보국단	Chosŏn Wartime National Service Association
日本帝國	일본제국	Empire of Japan
東亞共榮圈	동아공영권	East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere (Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere)
呂運弘	여운홍	Yŏ Unhong
亞細亞	아세아	Asia
英國	영국	Britain (United Kingdom)
印度	인도	India
東印度會社	동인도회사	East India Company
日本	일본	Japan
中國	중국	China
支那	지나	China (derogatory term used by Japan)
比律賓	비율빈	Philippines
馬來	마래	Malaya
蘭印	난인	Dutch East Indies
치카코	치카코	Chicago
米國	미국	America (USA)
米人	미인	American(s)
香山光郞	향산광랑	Kōyama Mitsurō (Japanese name for Yi Kwangsu)
李光洙	이광수	Yi Kwangsu
八紘一宇	팔굉일우	Hakkō Ichiu
앵글로색손	앵글로색손	Anglo-Saxon
로-마	로마	Rome
猶太	유태	Jewish
陛下	폐하	His Majesty (the Japanese Emperor)
朱耀翰	주요한	Chu Yohan
松村紘一	송촌굉일	Matsumura Kōichi (Japanese name for Chu Yohan)
루스벨트	루스벨트	Roosevelt
아메리카 合衆國	아메리카 합중국	United States of America
처칠	처칠	Churchill
大英帝國	대영제국	British Empire
巴里	파리	Paris
亞弗利加	아불리가	Africa
西半球	서반구	Western Hemisphere
東亞	동아	East Asia
東印度會社	동인도회사	East India Company
滿洲	만주	Manchuria
獨逸	독일	Germany
蘇聯	소련	Soviet Union
皇軍	황군	Imperial Army (Japanese)
하와이	하와이	Hawaii
眞珠灣	진주만	Pearl Harbor
泰國	태국	Thailand
伊		이	Italy (often paired with 獨 as 獨伊 for Germany-Italy)
佛		불	France (often paired with 英 as 英佛 for Britain-France)
露		로	Russia (often paired with 佛 as 佛露 for France-Russia)
佛印	불인	French Indochina
싱카폴	싱카폴	Singapore
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
李敦化	이돈화	Yi Tonhwa
孟子	맹자	Mencius
湯武	탕무	King T'ang and King Wu
桀紂	걸주	Jie and Zhou (tyrannical rulers)
太平洋	태평양	Pacific Ocean
天皇陛下	천황폐하	His Majesty the Emperor (of Japan)
半島	반도	Peninsula (Korean Peninsula)
李晟煥	이성환	Yi Sŏnghwan
유다야	유다야	Judea/Jewish
歐羅巴	구라파	Europe
樞軸國	추축국	Axis Powers
웰스號	웰스호	HMS Prince of Wales
加奈多	가나다	Canada
白山靑樹	백산청수	Paek San Ch'ŏngsu (pen name for Kim Tonghwan)
金東煥	김동환	Kim Tonghwan
蔣介石	장개석	Chiang Kai-shek
奈巴倫	나파륜	Napoleon
重慶	중경	Chungking
南京	남경	Nanking
中山陵	중산릉	Sun Yat-sen's Mausoleum
孫文先生	손문선생	Mr. Sun Wen (Sun Yat-sen)
中華	중화	Chung Hwa (China)
項羽	항우	Xiang Yu
江東	강동	Jiangdong
烏江	오강	Wu River
虞美人	우미인	Beauty Yu (Consort Yu)
漢口	한구	Hankow
黃浦軍官學敎	황포군관학교	Whampoa Military Academy
關東	관동	Kantō (Region in Japan)
東京	동경	Tokyo
淺草公園	천초공원	Asakusa Park
楊子江	양자강	Yangtze River
閻錫山	염석산	Yan Xishan
西藏	서장	Tibet
라마敎	라마교	Lamaism (Tibetan Buddhism)
峨嵋山	아미산	Mount Emei
李太白	이태백	Li Bai (Li Po)
宋美齡	송미령	Song Meiling (Soong Mei-ling)
華盛頓銀行	화성돈은행	Washington Bank
구랍파	구랍파	Kunming Group (likely referring to the Flying Tigers based in Kunming)
히말나야山	히말나야산	Himalaya Mountains
*甸		전	Burma (often appears with 馬來 as 馬來半島와 *甸) - The Hanja seems corrupted or non-standard. Context suggests Burma.
埃及	애급	Egypt
알푸스山	알푸스산	Alps Mountains
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Colonial name for Seoul)
慶州	경주	Kyŏngju
新羅朝	신라조	Silla Dynasty
와싱톤博物舘	와싱톤박물관	Washington Museum
平北	평북	North P'yŏngan Province
雲山金鑛	운산금광	Unsan Gold Mine
崔某	최모	Mr. Ch'oe (Certain Mr. Ch'oe)
朴某	박모	Mr. Pak (Certain Mr. Pak)
西班牙	서반아	Spain
布哇	포와	Hawaii (older transliteration)
나이야가라 폭포	나이야가라 폭포	Niagara Falls
英吉利	영길리	England/Britain
타골-	타골	Tagore (Rabindranath Tagore)
倫敦	윤돈	London
뎀스강	뎀스강	Thames River
比島	비도	Philippines (Abbreviation)
커즌氏	커즌씨	Mr. Quezon (Manuel L. Quezon)
마닐라	마닐라	Manila
米西戰爭	미서전쟁	Spanish-American War
괌		괌	Guam
웨-크島	웨이크도	Wake Island
싱가볼	싱가볼	Singapore (variant spelling)
호노루루	호노루루	Honolulu
皇城	황성	Imperial Castle/Palace (Tokyo Imperial Palace)
二重橋	이중교	Nijūbashi Bridge

**Glossary**

打倒	타도	Overthrow; strike down
獅子吼	사자후	Lion's roar (metaphor for a powerful speech or declaration)
臨戰報國團	임전보국단	Wartime National Service Association (a pro-Japanese organization in colonial Korea)
共榮圈	공영권	Co-Prosperity Sphere
聖戰	성전	Holy War
幾千年	기천년	Several thousand years
幾百年	기백년	Several hundred years
際하고는	제하고는	Except for; excluding (older form/usage)
뻐치여	뻗치어	To stretch out; extend (older spelling of 뻗치어)
虐待	학대	Abuse; mistreatment
目睹	목도	Witness firsthand
積屍如山	적시여산	Corpses piled up like mountains (idiomatic expression)
目不忍見	목불인견	Cannot bear to see; unbearable sight
逐出	축출	Expel; kick out
暴惡無道	포악무도	Atrocious and lawless
應懲	응징	Punish; retaliate
웨치고	외치고	To shout; cry out (older spelling of 외치고)
日章旗	일장기	Flag of the Rising Sun (Japanese flag)
擊滅	격멸	Annihilate; destroy completely
八紘一宇	팔굉일우	Hakkō Ichiu (Japanese slogan: "Eight corners of the world under one roof," meaning Japanese global domination)
害毒	해독	Poisonous harm; evil influence
驅逐	구축	Expel; drive out
臣民	신민	Subjects (of a monarch)
五倫	오륜	The Five Confucian Relationships (ruler-subject, father-son, husband-wife, elder-younger brother, friend-friend)
忠孝	충효	Loyalty and filial piety
商業主義	상업주의	Commercialism
唯利主義	유리주의	Utilitarianism; profit-oriented principle
遠返하면	원반하면	If it goes against; if contrary to (older form/usage)
義		의	Righteousness; justice
利害關係	이해관계	Relationship of interests; stakes
奉仕	봉사	Service
奉公	봉공	Public service; service to one's lord/country
權利主義	권리주의	Rights-ism; principle based on rights
浸*	침	Infiltrate; permeate (Hanja might be 浸透, but only 浸 appears)
매저지는	맺어지는	To be formed; tied; bound (older spelling of 맺어지는)
交換條件的	교환조건적	Based on exchange conditions; transactional
最大多數	최대다수	Greatest number; majority
官能的	관능적	Sensual; pertaining to the senses
大御心	대어심	His Majesty's great heart/will (honorific for the Emperor's intention)
階級的	계급적	Hierarchical; class-based
主從的	주종적	Master-servant; hierarchical
宣揚	선양	Promote; proclaim; propagate
皇道	황도	The Imperial Way (Japanese imperial ideology)
僞善君子	위선군자	Hypocritical gentleman
賊魁首	적괴수	Ringleader of bandits
銃理大臣	총리대신	Prime Minister
緖文	서문	Preamble; preface
撤廢	철폐	Abolish; repeal
門戶開放	문호개방	Open Door (Policy)
憧着	동착	Fixation; attachment (less common term)
紳士國	신사국	Nation of gentlemen
負荷	부하	Burden; load
阿片	아편	Opium
패가망신케	패가망신케	Cause ruin upon one's family and self
不平等條約	불평등조약	Unequal treaty
分割占據	분할점거	Partition and occupy
苦力	고력	Coolie (laborer)
軍縮會議	군축회의	Disarmament conference
押縮	압축	Compress; restrict
封鎖	봉쇄	Blockade
臥薪嘗膽	와신상담	Enduring hardship to achieve revenge/goal (lit. sleeping on firewood and tasting gall)
破邪劍	파사검	Evil-destroying sword (metaphorical)
蹶起	궐기	Rise up; take action
意氣沮止	의기저지	Discouraged; disheartened
使嗾	사주	Instigate; incite
攻守同盟	공수동맹	Offensive and defensive alliance
蒐然	추연	Starkly; clearly (less common adverb)
僥幸	요행	Stroke of luck; fluke
資源	자원	Resources
錫		석	Tin
爆沈	폭침	Bomb and sink
滅身報國	멸신보국	Sacrifice oneself for the country
揮然一體	휘연일체	Completely united as one body (likely typo for 渾然一體)
盟誓	맹서	Pledge; vow
一怒而安天下	일노이안천하	Pacify the world with one stroke of anger (quote from Mencius)
完遂	완수	Complete accomplishment
昭然	소연	Clear; evident
勢不兩立	세불양립	Cannot stand together; mutually exclusive
天命	천명	Mandate of Heaven; destiny
神啓	신계	Divine revelation
大運	대운	Great destiny; fortune
劃世紀的	획세기적	Epoch-making
冥助	명조	Unseen help; divine aid (from spirits)
共誅	공주	Jointly punish/execute
夜色沈沈	야색침침	The color of night is deep and dark
鬼氣陰陰	귀기음음	The ghostly aura is gloomy and dark
御大詔	어대조	Great Imperial Rescript
現人神	현인신	Manifest God (referring to the Japanese Emperor)
天時	천시	Heaven's timing; opportune moment
地利	지리	Earth's advantage; geographical advantage
人和	인화	Man's harmony; unity among people
天運循環	천운순환	Cyclical circulation of Heaven's fortune
無往不複	무왕불복	Nothing goes without returning (principle of cyclical return)
萬邦無比	만방무비	Incomparable in all nations
國體	국체	National polity; national essence (especially referring to Japan's emperor system)
內鮮一體	내선일체	Japan and Korea as One Body (assimilation policy slogan)
銃後奉公	총후봉공	Home front service; supporting the war effort from behind the lines
勢力權衡	세력권형	Balance of power
桎梧	질오	Shackles; fetters
蹂躪	유린	Trample; oppress
懷柔	회유	Appeasement; conciliation
哃喝	동갈	Intimidation; bluffing
欺瞞	기만	Deceit; deception
常套手段	상투수단	Standard methods; cliché tactics
毒牙	독아	Poisonous fang
魔手	마수	Demonic hand; evil influence
協調主義	협조주의	Cooperationism; policy of cooperation
奸策	간책	Cunning plot; scheme
弄絡	농락	Manipulation; trickery
脅威	협위	Threat; intimidation (variant of 위협)
輪轍	윤철	Wheel tracks
去勢	거세	Castration; weakening
回天之聖業	회천지성업	Sacred task of world renewal/restoration
勸善懲惡	권선징악	Promoting good and punishing evil
傍若無人	방약무인	Arrogant; presumptuous; acting as if no one else is present
傲慢無雙	오만무쌍	Unparalleled arrogance
鎧袖一觸	개수일촉	Defeat easily (lit. touch with an armored sleeve) - Japanese idiom
自刎	자문	Suicide by cutting one's throat
窮鼠	궁서	Cornered rat
虎列剌	호열랄	Cholera (older transliteration)
租借	조차	Lease (territory, rights)
長期抗戰	장기항전	Long-term war of resistance


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제14권 제1호
발행일	1942년 01월 01일
기사제목	東洋의 侵略者 英ㆍ米 打倒의 大獅子吼!
기사형태	논설

東洋의 侵略者 英ㆍ米 打倒의 大獅子吼!
朝鮮臨戰報國團 主催
지난 12월8일 我帝國은 東亞共榮圈의 방해자요, 동양침략의 적인 米英양국을 타도하기 위하야 정의의 검을 빼여들게 되였다. 이에 憂國之士의 米英打倒 大獅子吼를 특집하여 半島민중에게 供한다.

東亞 共榮圈建設의 聖戰
呂運弘

과거 幾千年 인류의 역사를 보면 여러 가지 목적을 위하야 싸와왔다. 세력확장, 영지의 쟁탈. 主義의 相異, 여러 가지 이해관계가 원인이 되어 전쟁하였지만 정말 正義人道를 위한 전쟁은 이번 日本帝國이 英米에 대한 선전포고가 처음이다. 전번 세계대전시 월손의 말이 米國의 참전은 正義人道를 위한 것이라 하였지 그것은 다만 민중을 소긴 것뿐이다. 日本이 이번 對英米戰은 日本帝國의 생존발전을 위하야서만 하는 싸움이 아니다. 더 큰 두 가지 목적을 위하야 싸우게 되었다. 그 하나는 亞細亞 10억 민중을 앵글로색손의 세력에서 구출하자는 것이다.＜44＞
과거 300연간 英國이 印度에 침입하야 東印度社會社 創立 이래 亞細亞전체가 日本을 際하고는 거의 다 植民地 半植民地로 되였다. 中國도 지금까지 모든 것이 정치ㆍ교육ㆍ상업 거의 다 英米의 지도와 지배 밑에 있게 되였다. 英米는 亞細亞전체를 저이들의 지배하에 두랴고 諸般惡症을 다하고 있었다. 만일 이 전쟁에서 日本이 이기지 못하면 亞細亞는 다시 몇 백년을 뻐치여 앵글로색손의 노예노릇을 하게될 것이다. 그러므로 이번 우리의 싸움은 참으로 聖戰이다. 유사이래 처음으로 있는 聖戰이다. 과거 幾百年을 두고 우리 동양인이 米ㆍ英 즉 앵글로색손에게서 받은 虐待는 이로 세여서 말할 수도 없다. 다만 내가 目睹하고 체험한 것만도 오늘저녁 밤을 새여도 못하겠다. 그 중 한 두 가지만 말할지라도 1914년6월에 내가 처음 치카코를 갔을 때 흑인학대에 흑인과 米人의 사이에 싸움이 났는데 米人들이 흑인들을 총으로 쏘아 길가에 積屍如山하였으며 흑인들이 며칠 두고 감히 출입을 떨고 있는 현상이 目不忍見이였다. 米國남방에 소위 린칭이라는 것을 우리가 잘 아는 것이다. 내가 몸소 당한 것만 해도 음식집에서 음식을 아니 주고 하숙집에서 逐出하고 이발소에서 거절을 당해본 것 1,2차가 아니였다. 이 暴惡無道한 米國人, 인류의 평등자유를 주창하는 米國人의 비인도적인 행사를 응징하려는 싸움이 이번 聖戰이다. 내가 바리기는 내 목소리가 좀 더 커서 支那의 전 민중과 比律賓ㆍ馬來ㆍ印度ㆍ蘭印의 전 동양인은 동양인의 동양을 건설하기 위하여, 한 걸음 더 나아가서는 大東亞共榮圈을 건설하기 위해서 日章旗발 밑으로 모여라 하고 동양의 각 민족에게 웨치고 싶다. 이번 帝國이 英米에 대한 선전포고는 大東亞共榮圈을 위 한 것이다.(47頁하단에 계속)＜45＞ 따라서 英米의 침략과 착취 밑에서 신음하던 동양인의 동양을 건설하는 聖戰이다. 유사이래 처음으로 있는 聖戰이다. 전 인류의 자유를 위하야 세계평화를 위하여 싸우는 聖戰이다. 동양의 천지에 明朗한 태양이 빛이고 米英양국이 우리아래 백기를 날릴 날이 멀지 아니하다. 半島의 청년아, 半島의 2천5백만 민중아. 태양 기발밑에 사는 一億대중아. 전 동양에 있는 10억의 동양인아. 다 이러나거라. 나가거라. 싸워라. 이 聖戰의 승리 완전히 우리에게 올 때까지 싸워라. 싸워라.(박수)＜47＞

思想과 함께 米英을 擊滅하자
香山光郞(李光洙)

米英을 擊滅하지 않고는 東亞에도 세계에도 신질서는 오지 않는다. 米英을 擊滅하여 八紘一宇의 정신 하에 東亞가 새로 세워지고야만, 東亞 諸민족에게 평화와 번영이 올 것이다.
그런데 世人은 대개 英米의 동양에 대한 정치적 침략과 경제적 착취는 알지만, 그 사상적 害毒은 모른다. 우리들은 英米의 정치적, 경제적 세력과 함께 이 사상적 세력도 驅逐하지 않으면 안된다.

1. 個人主義
日本思想은 나라님의 臣民으로서, 어버이의 아들로서, 형의 아우로서, 안해의 남편으로서, 아들의 아들로서의 자기를 생각한다. 즉 五倫의 책임자로서 자기를 생각하는 것이지 개인이라는 생각은 하지 않었다. 個人主義는 실로 앵글로産이다. 동양사상의 근본은 忠孝主義다.

2. 商業主義-콘마-샤ㄹ리즘
무엇이나 金錢的으로 이윤을 인생 생활의 표준으로 하는 것도 앵그로思想이다. 經濟思想主義라고도 할 것이다. 唯利主義라고도 할 것이다. 그들은 국가도 개인의 이익을 위해서 있고 개인의 이익에 遠返하면 국가는 혁명을 이르켜도 좋다하여, 그들은 義라는 것은 모른다. 利害關係가 주가 되어있다. 議會가 납세자의 이익을 위한 집합이라는 것이 앵그로思想인데, 이런 관념은, 日本정신에 거슬린다.

3. 權利主義
권리는 로-마법에서 온 관념이라지만, 또 猶太思想도 된다. 父子, 夫婦, 국가와 국민, 어느 것이나 권리주의 관계에 있다고 하는데, 이 사상도 英米로부터 우리들에게 浸*한 것이다.
동양정신에는 권리의 주장이라는 것이 없다.  君臣, 父子, 夫婦, 兄弟 어느 것이든 情과 義에 의해서 매저지는＜46＞ 것이지, 權利 義務등의 交換條件的, 取引的 관계는 아니다. 오직 奉仕가 있을 뿐이고, 奉公이 있을 뿐이다. 이 권리사상으로부터 그릇된 개인주의가 이러나는 것이다.

4. 幸福主義
최대다수의 행복이라는 것이 英米人의 국가이상이요, 사회이상이다. 여기에는 두 개의 오류가 있다. 하나는 행복을 각개인의 物質的, 官能的 만족에 두는 것이요, 하나는 다수로서 소수를 다스린다는 정치관에 있다. 日本정신 내지 동양사상은 그렇지 않다. 동양에선 인생의 목적은 의로운 일을 하는데 있는 것이고 인민을 다스리는 것은 나라님 한 분이 게시여, 各人으로 하여금, 그 설 바를 얻게 하는데 있다.

5. 自由平等主義 소위 데모크라시-
자유는 앵그로人의 가장 즐기는 표어인데, 이것은 인류의 제멋대로 사는 약점에 대한 自己辨解의 내지 阿謟에 지나지 않는다. 日本人에게는 英米人의 말하는 자유는 없을 것이다. 오직 陛下의 大御心을 감사하며 사는 道가 있을 뿐이고, 이 생활을 방해하는 자 없는 것을 자유라 할 것이다. 평등에 이르러서는 더군다나 그러하다. 君臣, 父子, 夫婦, 兄弟는 결코 평등이 아니다. 인간사회는 階級的, 主從的 관계를 기초로 해서 성립되어 있다고 할 수 있다.
이상 述한 것은 배척할 만한 英米思想의 주요한 것을 든 것인데, 우리들이 米英을 완전히 擊滅하드래도 이 사상을 擊滅하지 않는 이상, 八紘一宇는 오지 못한다. 和로서 責하려는 신질서는 오지 못한다. 和라 함은 大小高下의 조화이다.
이때, 국민은 一億一心 對米英戰을 수행할 것인데, 동시, 오랫동안 우리들의 마음을 더럽인 앵그로思想도 함께 擊滅하여 皇道를 宣揚하지 않으면 안된다.(박수) ＜47＞

루스벨트여 答하라
朱耀翰(松村紘一)

正義人道의 가면을 쓰고 搾取와 陰謀를 일삼은 세계의 放火犯, 세계 제일의 僞善君子 아메리카 합중국 대통령 루즈벨트君.
燕尾服을 입은 신사, 기실은 掠奪强盜를 일삼는 賊魁首 大英帝國 銃理大臣 처칠君.
위대한 어리꽝대 두 君을 앞에 놓코 十億 亞細亞 대중의 이름 하에서 질문하노라.
루스벨트여, 그대는 입을 열면 반드시 정의와 인도를 주장하지마는 巴里講和約 緖文에 인종차별 撤廢文案을 삽입하려 할 때에 이것을 반대하야 削除한 것은 어느 나라며 흑인과 동양인을 국내에서 차별대우하야 한 좌석에 앉지도 아니하게 하며 亞弗利加 大陸에서 노예사냥을 하기를 마치 野獸사냥 하듯 한 것은 어느 나라 사람인가. 이것이 그대의 인도며 그대의 정의였드냐.
西半球에 대하야는 몬로주의를 主唱하야 他國의 一指도 다치는 것을 금하면서 동아에 대해서는 소위 門戶開放主義를 主唱하여 干涉과 防害를 일삼으니 이 어떠한 모순과 憧着의 일인가.

처칠君이여, 그대의 나라 英國은 紳士國이라 자칭하고 문명의 진보는 백인의 負荷라 自肯하고 있거니와 三億의 印度人과 四億의 支那人에게 阿片을 강제로 판매하여 그들로 하여금 패가망신케 하는 것은 그대의 말하는 문명의 진보란 것인가. 東印度會社를 설립하여 印度지방에서 掠奪强盜를 旅行하고 나종에는 三億의 印度人을 노예화하였으며 四億의 支那人에 대하야서는 군함과 대포의 힘으로 不平等條約을 체결하야 국가의 주권을 손상하고 산업의 발전을 障害하야 영원히 식민지적 途命下에 신음하게 하며 기회만 있으면 그 나라를 分割占據하랴는 음모를 하야 苦力을 착취하여서 별장의 호화생활을 하며 청년학생과 農民工民을 사살하니 이것이 그대들의 문명인가.＜48＞
해양의 자유란 결국에 있서서 英國을 위한 해양의 자유요 英國 이외의 他國에 대하여서는 해운건설을 압박하고 通商의 발전을 猜忌하야 軍縮會議에서 我國의 해군을 5對3의 比로 押縮코저 하면 五大洋의 海路의 요점은 죄다 이를 점거하야 유사시에는 타국의 무역을 封鎖하려하니 엇지 이것을 해양의 자유라 부를 수 있느냐.
그러나 그대들의 惡運이 다 되엇다. 滿洲事變을 방해하고 支那事變을 방해하고 獨逸을 괴롭히기 위해서는 공산주의의 蘇聯과 野合하기도 부끄러워하지 아니하고 我國을 남북으로 포위하야 東亞征服의 야망을 達하려든 그대들의 음모도 오늘날 우리나라의 破邪劍이 一閃하는 곳에 散散히 부서지고 말았다.
皇軍은 臥薪嘗膽 실력을 鍛續하기 이에 30年, 참을 수 없는 것을 참기를 4년 반 여, 최후의 교섭을 거듭하기 8개월, 이제 한번 蹶起하며 어제는 하와이 眞珠灣에서 光艦을 격침하기 4雙, 大破하기 4雙, 오늘은 馬來 해상에서 英艦을 격침하기 2雙, 그대들의 군함은 유리로 만들었든가.
공군에 가슴 놀랜 米國民은 자국의 항공기와 自軍의 乘船을 포격하야 多數한 사상자를 내고 있스며, 英國은 「대전이래 최대의 불행」이라고.

意氣阻止한 英國이여, 하로 바삐 백기를 들면 如何리요.
米의 使族을 바든 中南米의 소국이 나도 나도 선전포고를 하고 있으나 於我에 무슨 痛痒을 感하리요. 그 대신 我方에 있어서는 獨伊南大國이 참가를 하고 多年 英國의 마수 하에 있든 泰國이 단연코 我와 攻守同盟을 체결치 아니하였는가.
第1次 大戰에 있어서는 獨墺양국에 대하야 英, 佛, 露, 米, 伊 그리고 나종에는 我日本까지 가담하야 공격하였으나 今日에 있어서는 日獨伊 삼국이 한 덩어리가 되고 佛露는 이미 전력을 상실하였으니 英國의 고립은 蒐然하고 그 敗北은 결정적이 아닌가.
英米는 我國을 장기전으로 몰아넣어 僥幸의 수를 바라는 모양이나 이번 전쟁은 소위 資源獲得戰爭으로서 一方 싸우며 一方 국력이 增長되는 것이다. 佛印, 泰가 我便이 됨으로 미곡이 염려 없게 되고 馬來가 我手에 들면 고무가 확보되고 蘭印을 점령하면 석유가 안심이다. 도리어 고무와 錫의 부족으로 곤란 바들 자는 米國이 아닌가.
싱카폴이 함락되면 印度가 危殆하다. 印度人이 일어나서 英을 驅逐하는 날에 英國의 생명선이 위태하게 될 것이다.
米艦과 英艦을 爆沈한 것은 결코 화약의 힘만이 안이다. 그것은 滅身報國의＜49＞ 皇國精神이요, 忠勇한 日本軍의 육탄의 힘이다. 十億의 동양인은 한 덩어리가 되여 앙글로색손의 야망을 膺懲코저 하는 것이다. 우리 반도의 2千4百萬은 揮然一體가 되여 大東亞 聖戰의 용사 되기를 盟誓하고 있다. 光榮의 新時는 오려한다. 朝鮮의 남녀노소는 大東亞의 주인공이 되기 위하야 돈과 힘과 뇌와 생명을 아낌없이 바칠 것이다.(拍手)＜51＞

一怒而安天下
李敦化

大賢 孟子는 일즉 湯武가 桀紂를 정벌한 전쟁을 「一怒而安天下」한 聖戰이라 하야 極讚하였다. 만일 孟子의 혼령이 금일 我 皇國의 聖戰을 본다면 가히 手舞足踏을 금치 못할 것이다. 5년 전 支那事變을 聖戰의 萌芽라 하면 금일 對米英戰은 聖戰중 聖戰인 동시에 聖戰의 完遂戰이라 할 수 있다. 즉 對米英戰 이야말로 聖戰의 정체가 一層 명백하야젔고 聖戰의 의미가 加一層 천하에 昭然하야졌다.
皇國의 八紘一宇의 正義觀念과 米英의 부패한 罪惡史는 원래가 勢不兩立이었다. 그럼으로 皇國 對米英戰은 보통의 전쟁과 絶桀한 구별이 있다. 이는 실로 天命의 神啓와 大運의 轉換으로부터 生하는 劃世紀的 正義의 표현이며 一怒而安天下하는 神聖運動의 광명이었다. 천하의 人이 다같이 이 정의의 戰을 환영할 뿐 안이라, 抑亦地下의 鬼도 互相冥助하야 英米 저들의 죄악을 共誅하리라 단언한다. 夜色이 沈沈하고 鬼氣가 陰陰한 저들 英米 구세력이 지구상에 존재한 이상 세계는 1일도 평화 할 수 없고 인류는 영원히 행복을 享得할 수 없다. 정의의 天命은 皇國에 降臨하였다. 죄악의 천벌은 저들의게 내렸다. 이러나자, 一億의 臣民. 現人神이신 天皇陛下의 御大詔를 받들어 이 聖戰의 필승을 期하자.
聖戰의 完遂에는 天時, 地利, 人和의 삼대요건이 구비하여야 한다. 이제 우리 皇軍은 天時를 탓고 地利를 얻었고 人和를 가졌다. 이는 神이 우리 皇國에 내려 준 삼대 행운이었다. 첫재로 말하면 天運循環, 無往不複의 理에 의하야 大東方의 復活時期에 도달하였다. 新東亞建設, 大東亞共榮圈은 실로 天運의 所致로 얻어진 신비적 靈算이었다. 광명은 동방으로부터 이러난다. 屢百年동안 英米의 포악한 세력에 신음하든 악운이 살아지고 동양은 동양인의 동양이 되는 天時가 돌아왔다. 正義와 不正義 罪惡과 功德, 天理에 거울에 비치워 스스로 명백하야졌다. 英米의 저 거대한 죄악의 暗影은 太平洋 물결 속에 살아질 天時는 왔다.
둘재, 地利로 보자. 太平洋은 지리상 우리의 바다다. 神은 太平洋의 永遠太平을＜50＞ 우리에게 막겼다. 英米의 부패한 永遠征軍은 지리적 조건에서 원래가 皇軍의 對手가 못된다. 보라, 개전 不數日에 西太平洋 전반이 皇軍의 手에 정복된 현실을... 太平洋의 전쟁이 持久이랴 短期이랴 이것은 물을 필요가 없다. 持久이든 短期이든 太平洋은 결국, 皇國의 領海가 되고 말 것이다. 이는 지리 자체가 설명하고 있다.
셋재는 人和다. 세계 만방에 우리 皇國과 같이 人和가 조흔 나라는 없다. 이는 萬邦無比의 國體를 가진 까닭이다. 皇國은 국가인 동시에 一大家族이다. 一億의 臣民은 누구나 天皇陛下를 위하야 생명을 받처야 한다. 忠勇無比 문자 그대로가 皇國의 人和다.
天時, 地利, 人和, 어대로 보든지 勝戰은 임이 결정되였다. 우리 半島人 된 자는 이 기회에 있어 內鮮一體의 실적을 거두어야 한다. 銃後奉公의 시대는 이제부터다. 우리는 각자가 승전의 일원이 되기를 盟誓하자.(拍手) ＜51＞

打倒 英米 侵略主義
李晟煥

도라보건대 인류는 오랫동안 지극히 불공평한 勢力權衡과 지극히 부자연한 國際制約 밑에서 天賦의 性能을 억압당하여 왔고, 자연의 요구가 桎梧되여 왔습니다.
일즉이 침략과 식민으로써 대제국을 건설한 앙그로삭슨은 壓迫과, 蹂躪과, 搾取와, 苦勞과, 노예화로써 토착 민족에게 군림하야 인간이 인간을 驅使하는 수단으로서 威脅과 懷柔와, 哃喝과, 欺瞞과를 가장 유효한 정책으로 쓰고 있섰든 것입니다. 원래 이러한 악독한 수단 방법은 인간이 동물을 질드려서 부려먹는 때에 쓰는 수단이엿엿건만 앙그로삭손 민족은 원시적 이민족을 침략하야 정복하고, 통치하야 혹사하는 그 과정에 있어서 이 동물에 대한 수단을 인간에게 둘너대고 적용하였든 것입니다. 這間 그들은 이 버릇이 자라고 자라서 함부로 상대도 몰나보고 세계인류의 발상지오, 또 세계인류의 文化와 幸福과를 공헌한 源泉地인 東亞天地와 東亞民族에 대하야도 이 常套手段의 毒牙와 魔手를 내밀어 때로는 헤를 날늠거리고, 때로는 꼬리도 흔들고, 때로는 니발을 드러내고 으르릉대기도 하고 있섰든 것이니 건방진 수작도 분수가 있지 안는가. 하물며 우리 일본에게 대하야서 그 笑止千萬 배창자 앞은 일이다.
그들은 국제적 協調主義라는 가면을 쓰고 유다야 獨占金融財閥을 배경으로 한 米英 제국주의의 발달은 사상적 奸策과, 경제적 弄絡과, 군사적 脅威를 가지고, 歐羅巴를 침략하고 이여서 亞細亞를 침략하기 시작하야 동방 諸民族의 대부분은 英佛米등의 屬領이 되였고, 그러치 않은 것으로 오직 日本 하나을 除한 외에는 유형 무형으로 어느 새이에 英米人 제국주의의 지배세력 하에 제압되였든 것입니다. 東亞는 그 동안 물질로 정신으로 英米人 제국주의에게 침략된 바 되여서 東亞人의 東亞라는 옛 면목은 찾어볼 수 없이 되였습니다.
今日 저들 침략자가 고도의 생활수준과 享樂的 생활을 질겨워하고＜52＞ 우월감의 만족한 미소를 띠울 때에 東亞 十億의 민중은 無智와 貧困과 衰亡에 빠저 있지 안는가.
우리가 만일 이 이상 더 그들의 끝없는 貪慾과 搾取와 制壓을 맘대로 하도록 하야 英米人 제국주의적 침략의 輪轍下에 바스러지게 된다면 東亞人의 前途에는 희망도 광명도 없이 오직 去勢와, 衰弱과, 滅亡이외에는 아모 것도 없고 암흑한 돈네루의 前途는 지옥을 接續하는 것뿐이 아니겠습니까.
그러나 天은 결코 우량 민족을 어러죽고, 굴머죽이기 위하야 이 지상에 출현시킨 것은 결코 안입니다. 우리는 단연코 생존과 발전의 길을 천하의 정의에 의하야 요구할 권리를 가지고 있읍니다. 우리는 英米人의 제국주의적 침략에서 東亞를 돌여와야 할 권리가 있는 것입니다. 다시 말하면 도적마젔든 물건을 實力을 가지고 正義와 義憤으로써 도로 빼아서 와야 할 큰 권리와 책무가 있읍니다. 그리하야 英米를 중심하였든 民主主義的, 自由主義的, 侵略主義的 資本主義의 舊體制를 打倒 擊滅하고, 진정한 道義的 신질서에 의한 세계를 건설하지 아니하면 今後 우리의 자손들이 어떻게 될 것인가.
이것이 5년 전 日支事變이오 今次 터지고야 만 大東亞 聖戰입니다. 이것이 回天의 聖業이 아니고 무엇이겠습니까. 루-스벨트나, 처-칠은 입을 열면 平和愛好國家와 侵略好戰國를 분류하야 말하되 前者는 善이라 하야 英米가 그것이오, 後者는 惡이라 하야 日本과 밑 樞軸國이 그것이라고 하면서 그 勸善懲惡의 책임과 實力이 英米에 있는 듯이 작정하고 또, 세계의 警察權을 英米가 가지여야 되고 軍備縮少는 日獨伊만 하고, 關稅 通商 資源分割 등은 英米의 명령을 순종하라는 그야말로 英米樣式에 의한 세계지배를 항구화하여 보랴는 배씸 좋은 꿈을 실고, 지난 8月 중순에 英米 兩巨頭는 군함 웰스호를 타고 獨逸 잠수함의 그물눈코을 피하여서 加奈多 北方沿岸 바다 우에서 소위 洋上會談 8個條의 원칙을 密約하고 바로 웃줄대고 있섰지 않었는가. 今般 日米交涉에 있어서도 소위 太平洋原則論을 고집하였으니, 그들의 원칙이라는 것이라는 것은 前番 歐洲大戰 이후 벨사이유조약이라는 英米 중심의 구질서에 의하야 세계의 영토와 자원을 가장 불합리 불공평하게 분할하야 天惠의 대부분을 英佛米가 점령하고 그 잔여의 소부분을 樞軸國家群에 제공하였든 것인데 그들은 그들의 영토자원을 一層 富益富하게 강화하자는 것이 소위 원칙 원칙 하는 그들의 원칙입니다.
사자도 큰 소 한 마리를 먹고 나면 4,5일간은 閑暇安眠하지만 온순한 목장 속의 양이라도 배가 곺으면 두터운 松皮를 씹는 것이니,＜53＞ 그러면 이 때에 사자를 平和愛好者라고 하고, 양을 가르처 侵略好戰者라고 하는 원칙론이 성립될 수 있겠는가. 傍若無人 傲漫無雙함이 이에서 더할 이 어데 있으랴. 하루강아지 범 무서운 줄 모른다고 건국 불과 150년밖에 못되는 米國이 감히 傲慢不遜한 태도로 帝國을 包圍挑戰 하다가 과연 鎧袖一觸에 동양함대가 雲散霧消된 꼴을 보라. 도리혀 철없는 요술쟁의 실수를 가이없이 생각합니다.
이번의 大東亞戰爭에 있어서는 물론, 세계대전에 있어서 日本帝國이 최후 승리자가 될 것은 두말할 것도 없이 벌서 결정적 대세인 것은 現下 刻刻으로 보도되는 大捷에 의하야도 알 일입니다. 이것은 근본적으로 打倒 英米侵略主義의 세계 신질서 건설의 성공임과 동시에 大東亞共榮圈의 확립, 支那事變의 완전 처리, 또 內鮮一體의 完遂도 되는 것이니 박구어 말하면 內鮮一體 一億一心, 이것이 핵심체가 되여서 비로소 東亞의 재건이 되고, 세계 신질서의 확립이 되는 것이니 今次 전쟁에 있어서 국가 정신 통일상 半島 2천4백만의 임무가 지극히 중대한 것을 알고 묵묵히 역사의 示現하는 방향으로 邁進하기를 바라는 바입니다.(拍手)＜54＞

敵이 降服하는 날까지
白山靑樹(舊名 金東煥)

1. 세상에 가장 불상한 사내 셋이 있읍니다. 그것은 支那의 蔣介石과 第二는 아메리카의 「루-즈벨트」, 第三은 英吉利의 「쳐-칠」이올시다.
19世紀의 비극의 주인공을 센트ㆍ헤레나로 간 奈巴倫이라더니, 오늘의 20世紀에 들어 가장 불상한 비극의 주인공은 바야흐로 이 세 사람이 될 것이외다. 그런데 우리는 오늘까지 생각하기를 蔣介石을 그 중에서도 가장 못난 사람인 줄 알었더니 太平洋에 대전이 터진 이래 4,5일의 모양을 보니 쳐-칠과 루-즈벨트는 그의 몇 갑절 더 가게 못났음니다. 거기 대하면 英米의 太平洋해군은 평일의 豪言壯談도 어디 갔는지 진실로 조히로 만든 장난감 함대라 하리 만치 一朝에 擊滅을 당했으니 蔣의 三分의 一이나 버틸가요, 五分의 一이나 버틸까요. 적의 일이었만 딱하외다 그려.
이제 우리는 이 딱한 세 사내와 그 사내 손에 지도되는 세 개의 나라-즉 重慶政權, 米國, 英國-은 어느 날 멸망하여 이 지구 우에서 자최를 감출 것인가, 나는 무당판수는 아니올시다만은 점이나 처보기로 합시다.

2. 蔣介石은 꼭- 한번 죽을 기회가 있었어요. 역사상 英雄傑士의 자최를 보면 대개가 죽을 시절에 잘 죽은 사람들입니다. 蔣介石에게도 그만한 인물이니 만치 이 전날 하늘은 훌융히 죽을 기회을 한번 준 적이 있어요, 그것은 南京陷落이 될 때, 즉 南京城을 두겹 세겹 에워싸고 蔣介石이여 어서 성문을 여러 항복하라고 권고를 바들 적에 蔣은 자기의 잘못으로 四億萬 대중을 죽엄의 길로 모라넛는 비참을 깨닫고 그 길로 中山陵 孫文先生 앞에 달려가
「先生이여 先生이여 내가 잘못하였나이다. 당신이 만들어 내 논 조국 中華를 내가 그릇처 놓았나이다」
하며 눈물 뿌리면서 칼을 들어 제목을＜56＞ 잘나 自刎하여야 옳았을 것입니다. 녯날 項羽는 천하를 얻었다가 쪼겨 쪼겨 江東 八千弟子를 다 노친 뒤 江東父老를 무슨 낯으로 보랴고 烏江에 와 사랑하는 處 美人을 죽이고, 저마저 自刎하지 않었습니까. 장부의 죽엄이 반드시 이래야 할 것을 蔣은 窮鼠와 가치 南京을 도망하여 漢口로 달리고 漢江서 마저 重慶으로 갔습니다.
그는 전국의 秀才들만 모힌 黃浦軍官學敎 學生隊 수천명을 죽었고 중국 청년 320만 명을 그릇된 抗日戰 때문에 죽었습니다. 나는 關東震災 때 東京 淺草公園에서 1,300여 명의 백골을 모아 논 것을 보았는데 우리 키 두어 길 되여요, 320만 개의 백골을 쌓아 놋는다면 重慶을 열벌 스무벌 감울 것이요 楊子江 근방에 새로운 萬里長城을 쌓을 것이외다.
이 幽靈과 백골 속에 쌓인 그는 閻錫山 모양으로 惱腦의 끝에 저-멀니 西藏, 어느 절에나 드러가 염주 걸고 곳갈 쓴 「라마敎」의 중이나 되여 지내겠지오, 그러찬으면 李太白이 놀든 峨嵋山에나 올너가 宋美齡이와 더부러 달구경하다가 투신자살하고 말 것입니다.
그는 모든 것이 다 안되면 米國 드러가 살려고 돈도 華盛頓銀行에 저금하고, 뜰 앞에는 언제든지 도망할 수 있게 구랍파의 미국비행기를 等待시키고 있다 하는데, 이제는 太平洋 바다의 制空權은 日本이, 大西洋 바다의 制空權은 獨逸이 갖었으니 어단들 갈 수 있으랴. 抗日英雄의 말로의 悲慘, 참으로 지극 하올시다.
그러나, 아직도 늦지 않었어요, 蔣에게 하늘은 다시 한 번 기회를 주었어요, 영웅의 죽엄을 하라고 다시 한 번 마즈막 기회를 주었어요.
그는 5년 항전의 과거를 청산하고 군대를 걷어 다시 몰고서, 全面和平을 한 뒤 日本軍과 손을 맛잡고서 저리 白雪을 인 「히말나야」산을 넘으란 말입니다. 거기에는 340년의 압제에 우는 印度가 있으니, *甸이 있고, 埃及이 있으니, 대동아건설을 위하여 진군할 때입니다. 나파륜이 알푸스山을 넘듯 대포를 뜯어 메고 朔風 부는 저 산맥을 넘으란 말이야요. 그리다가 英軍의 총에 마저 넘어진들, 동양 역사는 一頁의 기록을 남기기에 그에게 조히를 제공할 것입니다.

3. 그 다음 루-즈벨트는 언제나 죽을가? 米國이라 하면 朝鮮과는 緣故가 깊어서 옛 朝鮮 정부를 속이고 京城電車 부설권을 200兩인가 300兩에 산 자도 米國人이요, 慶州의 王陵祭堀權을 400원에 살려고 운동한 자도 米國人입니다. 그 때 속이였든들 저 新羅朝의 金冠 등 보물은 지금쯤 와싱톤博物舘의 陳列棚에 놓였을 것입니다.
그 뿐인가요, 平北 雲山金鑛도 손에＜57＞ 넣었는데 그양 두엇녀면 全鮮 鑛山이란 鑛山을 모다 租借하여, 뒷날 崔某, 朴某라 하는 鑛山王도 안나왔을 것이요, 신문사, 전문학교 등도 생기지 않었을 노릇입니다.
이렇게 우리 朝鮮에 고맙지 못한 일을 한 그가 동양에서는 대체 었든 일을 하였든고, 比律賓을 西班牙의 300년 폭정에서 구해 준다고, 그대로 제가 생겼고, 布哇도 마찬가지였지요, 건국 170년에 134회의 침략전쟁을 하여 유색인종을 到底에서 征服하고 搾取하고 壓迫하여 왔지요.
그는 太平洋함대를 마저 먹은 죄와 전쟁을 이르킨 問責에 못이겨 이제 米國민중의 몽둥이에 쫓겨서 대통령의 의자를 버리고 북으로 북으로 쪼겨서 나종엔 「나이야가라」폭포에 뛰여들어 죽고 말 것입니다.

4. 英吉利의 쳐-칠은 印度人 3억2천만 명을 모도 다 26세의 청년 시대에 죽게 함니다. 印度人의 평균수명은 26세요, (朝鮮人은 40餘歲, 獨逸 伊太利등 文明國人의 평균수명은 40 내지 50) 지구상에 났다가 스물 여섯 살만 살게 하고는 죽여버려요. 그네의 산업정책은 고약하여요. 印度人이 먹을 쌀은 잘 짓게 하지 안어요. 해마다 쌀이 없어 饑饉에 들어 수백만, 수천만 인구가 몰사합니다. 또 약과 병원과 의사도 주지 안어 虎列剌, 마라리아에 6,7백만씩 죽어집니다.
교육도 식히잔어요. 교육을 시켜 놓으면 본토의 英國人보다 더 훌융하게 될가 보아서 그리지요. 또 영국은 阿片栽培는 印度에 시키지요. 쌀이나 콩은 심으게 못하고 阿片만 작고 심어 그것을 英領식민지인 馬來半島와 *甸 등지에 보내어 토착민중의 무쇠같은 팔뚝을 녹이는데 쓰지요. 그뿐더러 남이 싫다는 支那에 까지 가지고 가서 阿片戰爭같은 싸움을 걸어서 香港도 빼앗고, 2億萬兩의 상금도 받아먹지요.
그래도 쳐-칠은 340년 동안이나 머리를 맛대고 지내 온 印度니까, 만일의 경우는 印度가 英國에 대신해서 英國의 이권을 옹호해 주리라고 할 것이나, 벌서 시인 타골- 같은 사람은 年前 東京에 와서 印度는 日本과 문화적으로 가까워야 한다고 부르지젔음니다. 우리들 英國 같은 暴惡無道한 상전을 상전으로 섬기라 하리까. 결국 쳐-칠의 갈 곳은 지중해의 센트-헤레나 섬입니다. 아니 지중해에도 요지음은 伊太利 군함으로 덮였다니 거기도 못 가고 결국 가까운 倫敦 뎀스강에 빠저 죽을 것입니다.

5. 제 잘못은 덮어놓고 아마 루-즈벨트도 40년 동안 어깨를 가지러니 사라오든 比律賓이니 日本에＜58＞ 대항하여 太平洋을 지켜 주리니 생각할는지 모르나 그러나 比島로 말하면 現 대통령 커즌氏가 3,4년 전 東京에 와서 日本의 정치, 군사, 문화를 視察하고 마닐라에 도라가 國立公園廣場에다가 정부관리와 대학생들 4만 명을 모아 놓고 새로운 比律賓 건설에는 日本을 지도자로 알고 해 나가지 않어서는 안되겠다고 말하고, 그 중에도 군사조직, 어업, 武士道를 主宗으로 한 국민교육의 세 가지를 본받겠다고 말하였음니다. 커즌氏는 원래 米西戰爭 때, 독립군을 끄을고 陸軍少佐로써 奮戰하다가 米國군대에 捕虜되여 6개월 監獄에 있든 사람이니 米國에 怨은 있을지언정 恩은 없을 사람입니다. 25萬의 比島 常備軍을 이끌고 있는 그는 東京보다 華盛頓에 이제 총뿌리를 돌일 것입니다.
요컨대 벌서 太平洋에서는 괌, 웨-크島가 함락되고, 요다음 뉴-쓰는 마닐라, 싱가볼, 호노루루가 떠러진단 소리가 들일 것이오 그런 뒤 루-즈벨트, 쳐-칠, 蔣의 3人 男은 이제 우리 皇城 二重橋 앞에 와서 무릅을 꿀고 업대여 항복할 것입니다.
그 날까지 우리는 盟誓코 長期抗戰에 나아갑시다.(拍手) ＜59＞
＜38-59＞