잡지명	別乾坤 第62號
발행일	1933년 04월 01일
기사제목	돈 업시 사는 세상, 모던룸펜 天國案內 (The World Without Money, A Modern Lumpen's Guide to Paradise)
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellany)

The World Without Money, A Modern Lumpen's Guide to Paradise
What is money? It's something you know, yet don't know. In this bright world, it's more frightening than a ghost and displays more mysterious talents than even our wide-eyed selves.
Money! Money! Money!
It is a fact that people made money, but people can't move an inch because of this money, and people should be tied to money, but people are tied to money. People live and die because of money, and whether you have money or not determines a person's high or low status, and creates who is good or bad in the world. Isn't this pathetic?
Money! People live and move only for the sake of money. It wouldn't be wrong to judge today's world and people like this.
Then, "A world without money"? Leaving aside the countries of primitive barbarians, it's unimaginable in our world. If there were such a world! I wonder how many people would wish for it among those blinded by money, but if there were, what would it be like? I've used overly polite language. Knowing that such a thing is impossible, please read the following article. In short, the story below is all nonsense and exaggeration!

How to Eat Hoddeok Without Money
A student day memory-
It was a time when even if you ate five meals a day, you couldn't stand the hunger, and if you swallowed even a stone, it would digest, such was the power of young people's stomachs.
After gulping down dinner in the evening,
"Give me some scorched rice,"
and filling up his stomach, only a few hours later, they couldn't stand not having something to eat. They had no money, so they went on a hoddeok (호떡) house raid. They all rushed in.
"Hey!"
"You bastard!"
The noise was loud and chaotic. And the sounds of ordering hoddeok were:
"Honey filling and fried-"
"Honey filling and steamed-"
"Red bean filling and steamed-"
"Red bean filling and fried-"
"Hey, nothing filling and steamed."
Everyone shouted differently, and of course, the Chinese hoddeok seller was excited.
"Eh-"
"Yes,"
he bowed and gave them hoddeok, and they ate about three or four each. Then one person still wasn't full, so this time,
"Hey, bring me a dumpling-"
At this point, the Chinese man had experienced this many times and suspected their behavior.
"Bring more?"
he said in a trembling voice, staring at us blankly.
After eating as much hoddeok as they could, they slipped out one by one. The Chinese man
"Where are you going?"
he asked.
"Oh, we're going to pee-"
"We're going to poop-"
"We're going to buy cigarettes-"
Everyone came out, and it seemed the hoddeok seller felt relieved if there was at least one person left who was good at fighting and not infected with contagious diseases.
After waiting quietly for a while, he made a note of it.
"Janggwae (掌櫃)-"
"... ..."
"Sang gwae (上櫃)-" <22>
When they were eating hoddeok, they shouted "Hey-," but now they were using a very friendly voice, "Janggwae-."
"Janggwae-"
"What is it?"
The remaining person jumped up and went to the Chinese man, saying
"Janggwae, we lost our wallet!"
and pretended to look for it in his lower and upper pockets.
"Money in the wallet, a stamp, a receipt, a pawn ticket, 10 won, 1 won, and 50 jeon (전) were lost. What should we do?"
The Chinese man was speechless at this absurd lie, but without changing his expression,
"We don't know anything, who knows-"
He shook his head.
Seeing this opportunity,
"You bastard-"
he had to shout. He put the books he had prepared in advance in front of him,
"Hey, do you think I won't pay for the hoddeok? Keep these books as collateral, you bastard. Don't you dare touch the books, you scoundrel-"
Then he would usually say
"We won't touch the books- uh."
They knew that books were the most precious things to students, so they said they wouldn't touch the books first.
"Okay, leave them here. I'll be right back-"
and ran away. Of course, there were about a dozen old, useless notebooks in those books. Later, when I went back, the hoddeok seller was tearing up those notebooks to wrap the hoddeok he was selling.

How to Drink Alcohol Without Money
Things to do at a crowded dive bar-
It's fortunate if you eat at a standing bar or restaurant and can run away through the back door, but even if you get caught by a policeman, you've still drunk alcohol for free.
Looking up at the sky, it looked like it would snow any minute, and for some reason, my heart felt gloomy and I couldn't overcome the loneliness. I wished I could drink a few glasses of alcohol and wander around, but that booze friend who always forced me to buy and drink alcohol I didn't want to drink hasn't been around lately.
If you ever feel this way and desperately miss that rotten trio of drinks, put on your overcoat, hat, and head to Jongno (종로). I'm not saying you should stand on the streets of Jongno, where many people pass by, and wait for a friend to buy you alcohol, but there are many lonely dive bars in Jongno. When you feel like it, step right in! Of course, you know very well that you don't have a penny for alcohol in your pocket.
If you want to drink as much as you want and run away without paying, it's best to have a few friends who are crowded and drunk, acting crazy (취햇다는 말). In fact, it's rare for a bar to be empty. Still, it doesn't matter, so first step in and say
"A bowl of soup, please-"
and in these days, get a bowl of clam soup with shepherd's purse (냉이) and first fill your stomach by asking the barmaid for salted seafood.
"A glass of liquor, please-"
"Yes-"
The barmaid answers and pours the liquor,
"Bring the kimchi for this customer-"
she shouts. Then, first drink a glass of lukewarm liquor and eat kimchi, and for appetizers, grill some thinly sliced beef or skewered green onions.
"A glass, please-"
"Yes-"
"A glass, please-"
"Yes-"
Drink like this for a while. However, the absolute thing to keep in mind during this time is
"I don't have a penny in my pocket-"
If you forget this important thing to keep in mind just because you've had a few drinks, you're done for. You really have to keep it in mind. This is the biggest point that determines the success or failure of this endeavor. When you're fully alert, if someone you know happens to come in, go and grab them and talk to them. Carefully guess what the barmaid's gaze is like compared to pouring the liquor! What are they looking at? What are they paying attention to? Proceed in a way that's advantageous to you. And then grab that person and go right in front of the barmaid and say,
"Two glasses of liquor, please-"
If you drink with these two people, the plan is a success. Since you're already tipsy, even if you're paying attention, the two people will naturally start bickering and making noise. After drinking like this for two or three glasses, now is the time!
"You have to make a really firm decision."
Pretend to give them an appetizer or go to light their cigarette, and bring that person close to the barmaid, and then linger around and say,
"Hey, wait a minute!"
and nod your head and close your eyes. If you happen to get out of the gate, use your best strength to run away like the thirty-six strategies.
Of course, that friend won't know <23> how many drinks you had, or whether you're running away now, or whether you paid or not, so they'll just nod their head without knowing anything and say
"Uh-"
"What if no one I know comes in?"
"Well!"
"And what if the barmaid calls out 'Hey' when I'm trying to sneak out?"
"That's a big problem! It's the same as going back in and making up another story, so you have to be prepared to be beaten and eat red bean rice in prison!"

How to Have Sex Without Money
It's as easy as pie to deceive a gisaeng (기생) and have sex without money. But you can't do it with absolutely no money. You have to have a few pennies for the restaurant bill. But this is money for eating, not for having sex, so you only pay for the food and have sex for free.
"How?"
"Humph!"
As the newspapers are saying these days, if you look around the Jangsadong (장사동) and Gwanhundong (관훈동) areas of Seoul, there are plenty of matchmaker houses that introduce prostitutes. If a friend who goes to have sex with gisaengs or prostitutes without paying doesn't have a few regular places like this, they're not qualified.
Three or four friends get together and pretend to be modern boys if they were corpses, but if they don't have the money to do that, they dress up as loafers who play around without money and act like that, but one person pretends to be a clumsy country bumpkin, the only son of a rich family from the countryside. Gisaeng houses call this clueless and countrified young master a "phoenix" (봉) and do everything they can to catch this phoenix. That's why they really make one person look like a phoenix and say,
"There's a phoenix, catch it, catch it!"
Even gisaengs, gisaeng madams, or even prostitutes lick their lips when they hear "phoenix?" The reason is that if they treat that country rich kid well, servants will come and go, land deeds will go up and down, and they'll end up playing with hundreds, thousands, or even ten thousand nyang (냥).
Anyway, dressed up like this, they start to deceive third-rate (三流), fourth-rate (四流) gisaengs, who they had gone to and paid a "bijon" (비죤) fee to before. They go to an evil and cunning matchmaker's house, pretend not to know anything, and make the old matchmaker, who becomes paralyzed in front of money, prepare a meal for a few won.
They set up the food and liquor table and send a rickshaw to the gisaeng house. A third-rate or fourth-rate gisaeng, who only casts spells in her room, would be unlikely to be invited to a restaurant in these harsh economic times. It's been a long time since they've had their gisaeng business licenses taken away because they've been unable to pay the taxes to the Gyeongseong (경성) City Hall.
When the gisaeng arrives in the rickshaw, the seat looks decent, so she thinks,
"This is it. I'm going to have a love affair-"
The gisaeng only knows this is an ordinary house, but doesn't know it's a dirty and miserable matchmaker's house.
Of course, you shouldn't tell the cunning old woman about this plan at all. If you do, you might end up spending a lot of money, and there's a risk of getting caught. Keeping quiet, they say to the old matchmaker, just like they do to the gisaeng,
"Look, we're bringing all the gisaengs here, aren't we? He's a rich phoenix!"
They make it look like this. And even if they call that old woman
"Mother-"
"Auntie-"
she doesn't know what secrets or plans are hidden inside, and just answers, and the gisaeng on this side believes that the woman who is diligently doing errands outside is this house's mother or auntie.
They drink and revel, and the plan goes into full swing.
"Hey- it's been a long time since you came up to Seoul and ate dinner at our house for the first time..."
One of the loafers says to the country rich kid, saying things that make the gisaeng more and more excited, treating him with the utmost respect, and also
"Let's get some money out of this guy, do you want in?"
They show the gisaeng that kind of hint.
In this way, it's as easy as pie to steal the one-night virginity of a gisaeng who is blinded by catching a phoenix.
Only the next morning does the gisaeng realize that this house is not an ordinary house, but a more miserable matchmaker's house than her own room. But it's no use then. The country bumpkin she thought was a phoenix is nowhere to be found, and even if he were, there's nothing she can do. With her own strength...
The old matchmaker has already received the liquor and food bill, so she just laughs with her strange mouth.

How to Ride the Streetcar Without Money
To ride the streetcar without money, like when you drink alcohol for free at a bar, it has to be crowded with people. Not only crowded, but the more pushed and shoved, the better. <24>
There's no need to worry about getting on. The streetcar runs with electric power and takes you to your destination. But the real thing is when you get off. You have to be sure that many people are getting off behind you to use this method with confidence.
If you know that several people are definitely getting off behind you, then get off where you want to. When the conductor reaches out his hand for the ticket, don't answer and just turn your head away.
Turning your head is a substitute for saying,
"Several people came, so I'll pay the ticket in the back. Take my ticket with it-"
Of course, the conductor believes it and stands there. People get off and pay their tickets in the back. But before the conductor realizes that one ticket is missing after everyone gets off, he steps on the gas and runs away as fast as his legs can carry him.
Or you can just walk away slowly and boldly. If the conductor chases after you and
"Hey, pay the ticket-"
and aggressively comes at you,
"Hey, didn't I give it to you earlier?"
That's it. There's no definite proof that he didn't receive it, and it's not easy to establish proof that he did...
If he still says something, then get angry.
"Hey, are you crazy? What kind of rudeness is this to grab a decent person? How nasty!"
But I'm telling you in advance that you have to have such a bold heart that you'd rather see the inside of a police station jail to do these things.
Besides this, there are many ways to transport things by train without money, and to send letters without money.
The following story is said to be the work of a prankster who lived somewhere in Sajikdong (사직동) who died last spring... ...
How did he send things by train without money? First, he wrote a letter to the person who would receive the goods, promising that he would depart on such and such a day at such and such a time and send it on the train that would arrive there at such and such a time that day, and instead of sending the goods in the freight car, he wrapped them well, attached the promised name, bought a admission ticket (入場券), went inside, and left them in the passenger car (客車). Then the train would depart and arrive at the station where the person was at exactly the promised time.
Then, on this side, he would look at the train schedule, buy another admission ticket, go inside pretending to see someone off, look through the passenger car, and just pick up the things that had been brought from the other side and go down. They said they played pranks skillfully just by doing this-.
Also, how did they send letters without money? When a letter came from the other side, they would open it, write a reply, put it in the same envelope, and write on the envelope
"Refused to Receive (受取拒絶)"
or
"Addressee Unknown (受信人不在)"
and send it back. Then the other side would receive the returned letter, open the envelope again, and see the reply inside...
Haha! But the person who did this also died of cholera last spring. I should have learned from him when he was alive...
But you should know that you don't need to be sad that you didn't learn it! <25>

**Named Entities**

Kyŏngsŏng (경성)	Keijo/Seoul
Changsadong (장사동)	Jangsadong
Gwanhundong (관훈동)	Gwanhundong
Sajikdong (사직동)	Sajikdong


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제62호
발행일	1933년 04월 01일
기사제목	돈 업시 사는 세상, 모던룸펜 天國案內
기사형태	잡저

돈 업시 사는 세상, 모던룸펜 天國案內
돈이라는 것이 무엇이냐? 알다가도 모를 놈은 이것이요 지금가티 밝은 세상 두 눈깔이 샛파란 우리 압헤서 귀신보다도 무섭고 오묘한 재조를 피는 놈이 이것이다.
돈! 돈! 돈!
사람이 돈을 맨들어 논 것만은 사실인대 이놈의 돈 때문에 사람은 꼼짝달삭을 못하고 돈이 사람에게 매여잇서야 할 것이어늘 사람이 돈에게 매여 지낸다. 돈 때문에 사람이 죽고 사는 것은 고만두더래도 돈이 잇고 업고가 사람의 놉고 나진 것을 결정하며 잘나고 못난 것을 맨들어 주는 세상이니 이 어이 딱하지 안흐냐?
돈! 오직 돈 때문에 그것을 위하야 사람은 살고 움직이고 잇다 오날의 세상과 사람을 이러케 판단해도 조곰도 틀린 말은 아닐 것이다.
그러면 「돈 업시 사는 세상」? 원시적(原始的) 야만인의 나라를 제처노코는 우리 세상에서야 생각만도 못할 노릇이다. 그러한 세상이 잇섯스면! 하고 바라는 사람이 돈에 눈먼 그들 속에서 몇치나 차저 낼 수 잇는지 그것부터도 의문이지만 잇스면 과연 그것은 어떠한 것이인가? 앗다 너머 점잔은 말씨를 느러노앗다. 그런 것은 잇슬 수 업다는 것을 알고 다음 글을 읽기 바란다. 한 말로 빼면 아래에 나오는 이야기는 모다 종잡을 수 업는 엉터리요 허풍이니까!

돈 업시 호떡 먹는 법
학생시대의 일-
하로에 다섯기를 먹는다고 해도 시장해서 못 견듸여 하는 시절이엿고 돌맹이라도 집어 삼키면 소화를 식힐만치 그들 젊은이의 위장(胃腸)의 힘은 참으로 위대한 때엿다.
저녁나절 저녁밥을 게눈감치듯하고
「누렁지 잇건 좀 줍쇼」
해서 든든히 뱃속을 차린지가 불과 몃 시간이엇마는 밤중쯤 되면 그들은 아무 것이라도 입질이 하고 십허 못 견듸인다. 돈은 업고 그 때 그들은 떼를 지어 호떡 집 토벌을 가는 것이다. 그들은 우- 몰려 들어갓다.
「늬야!」
「이 자식아!」
하고 떠드는 소리가 왁자짓걸하며 야단법석이 난다. 또 호떡을 찻는 소리도
「꿀 느코 군 것-」
「꿀 느코 찐 것-」
「팟 느코 찐 것-」
「팟 느코 군 것-」
「늬야 아무 것도 안느코 찐 것」
이러케 제각각 외치면 물론 호떡장사 중국사람은 신이나서
「에-」
「예」
하며 굽신거리며 호떡을 갓다주고 그들은 한 사람 압헤 한 서너개식을 먹어버리는 것이다. 그러자 한 사람이 그래도 부족해서 이번에는
「늬야- 만두 하나 가저와-」
하면 이때서는 중국사람도 만히 속아본 경험이 잇고 그들의 거동이 암만해도 수상한지라.
「또 카지고와?」
하고 떨리는 목소를 하며 눈을 멍하게 뜨고 우리를 바라본다.
호떡을 먹을대로 먹고 나서는 그들은 하나식 둘식 빠저나간다. 중국사람이
「이거 어디카?」
하고 물으면
「응 우리 오줌누러카-」
「우리 똥누러카-」
「우리 담배사러카-」
다 나오고 싸홈 잘하고 전염병에 한 사람만 나마 잇스면 그래도 호떡장사는 안심이 되는 모양-
한참동안 가만히 잇스면 작고 주목을 한다.
「장괘-」
「... ...」
「상괘-」＜22＞
호떡 먹을 때는 「늬야-」라고 소리를 치드니 이번에는 아조 친절한 목소리로 「장괘-」다.
「장괘-」
「왜 클래?」
남어잇는 한 사람은 벌컥 이러나서 중국인의 압흐로 가며
「장괘 우리 지갑 이저버렷서!」
하고 고야니 아랫주머니 윗주머니로 찻는 신융을 한다.
「지갑 속에 돈 드럿서, 도장 드럿서, 소절수 드럿서, 전당표 드럿서, 돈 10원하고 1원하고 또 50전 드럿서 이젓버렷서 이거 어떠케 해?」
이 엉터리 업는 거짓말에 중국인은 긔막힌 모양이면서도 얼골 표정 깟닥 안코
「우리 사람 몰라 그거 뉘킈 아러-」
고개를 홰홰두른다.
이 긔회를 보아
「이 자식아-」
하고 호통을 처야하는 모양-미리 준비하야 가지고 온 책보를 압흐로 내 노흐며
「인마 호떡갑 안줄가봐 그래? 이 책보 맛터가지고 잇서 갓다 줄테야. 이 자식아 고야니 책보 근듸리면 경처-」
그라면 으레히
「우리 책보 가만둬- 응」
하고 학생에게는 책보가 제일 귀중한 것이라고는 알엇는지 책보 가만 두겟다는 말부터 한다.
「그래 가만두고 잇서 여긔 둔다. 얼른 댄겨오마-」
하고 다러난다. 물론 그 책보 속에는 못쓰는 옛날 공책이 한 열댓권 싸서 잇는 것이다. 그 후에 가보면 그 호떡 장사는 그 공책을 뜨더서 호떡 팔 때 싸게를 하고 잇더라고-.

돈 업시 술 먹는 법
사람 북적북적한 선술집에서 할 일-
그야 안진술집이나 요리점에서 먹고라도 다행하게 뒷문이라도 잇서 뺑손이를 치다가 순사에게 붓들려 가드래도 돈 업시 거저 술 먹은데는 틀림업지마는 그것은 꾀 업는 짓이다.
한울을 치어다보니 금방 눈이 퍼부을 듯하고 마음은 웬일인지 음울하야 적적한 맛을 못 이기겟스며 술이라도 몃잔 먹고 도라다녓스면 조겟는대 날마다 와서 먹기 실타는 술을 억지로 사서 퍼 먹이든 그 모주 친구도 소식이 감감하다.
만일 여러분께서 이러한 때 이러한 회포를 갓게 되고 그놈의 세가지 썩은 물이 간절히 그리웁거든 두루마기 입고, 모자 쓰고 종로로 나스라. 사람 만히 다니는 종로에 서서 술 사줄 친구를 맛나 장을 대라는 말이 아니라 종로바닥에만 해도 어듸어듸 쓸쓸한 목노술집이 만흐니 생각내키는 대로 성큼 들어스거든! 물론 분명히 주머니에 술갑은 커녕 노린전 한 푼 업는 것을 잘 안다.
술을 먹고 십흔대로 먹고 돈 안내고 뺑손이를 칠려며는 될 수 잇는대로는 사람이 북적북적하고 잔득 얼어가지고(취햇다는 말) 염병을 부리고 잇는 갸륵한 친구가 몃 잇스면 더 조타. 사실 술 집 처노코 텅비여 잇슬 때는 별로 업는 일이다. 그래도 상관이 업스니 턱 먼저 들어스면서
「국 한 그릇 뜨슈-」
해서 요새가트면 냉이 느코 끄린 조개국 한 그릇을 바더 들고는 주모에게 젓갈을 달래 우선 뱃긔운을 차린다.
「약주를 한 잔 부슈-」
「네-」
대답하며 주모는 술을 부어 노코
「이번 손님 김치 내오너라-」
소리를 지른다. 그러면 우선 딱근딱근하게 듸인 술 한 잔 먹고 김치 들고 안주로는 너바니나 파산적을 굿는 것이다.
「한 잔 부슈-」
「네-」
「한 잔 부슈-」
「네-」
이러케 몃 잔을 먹는다. 그러나 이러는 동안에도 절대 주의 할 것은
「내 주머니에 돈이 한 푼도 업거니-」
하는 것이다. 고야니 술 몃 잔 드러갓다고 이 명심해두어야 할 중대한 것을 이저버리고 제 마음대로 날뛴다든지 하면 볼일 다 보는 날이다. 참으로 마음에 색여두고 잇서야 한다 이것이 이 일의 성공하고 실패하는대에 가장 큰 분긔점이 되는 것이다. 정신을 잔뜩 차리고 잇슬 때 공교히 면목이라도 잇는 사람이 들어오면 가서 서로 붓들고 이야기를 해야 한다. 주모의 술 붓는 모양보다도 그 시선! 무엇을 보고 잇나? 무엇을 주의하고 잇나? 하는 것을 잘 짐작해서 유리하도록 일을 진행해 나가는 것이다. 그리하야 그 사람을 붓들고 척 주모 압흐로 가서는
「술 두 쟌 부슈-」
이러케 가지고 두 사람이 먹으면 일은 성공인 것이다. 술도 얼근한김이고 하니까 이 편에서 주의를 하고 잇서도 두 사람은 자연히 서로 짓고 까불고 떠들게 된다. 이러케 한 두 서너잔 먹다가 이때다!
「정말 단연한 결심을 가지고 해야 한다」
안주를 집어 준다든지 혹은 담배불을 붓치러 가는 척하고 그 사람을 주모 압흐로 가까웁께 끌고 가서는 서성대다가
「이거보슈 나 장깜!」
하고 고개를 껏떡하고는 눈을 딱 감어야 한다. 다행이 대문 밧게 나왓거든 취선(最善)의 힘을 다하야 삼십륙게 줄행랑을 부르는 것이다.
물론 그 친구는
「이거보슈 나 장감-」
하고 가는 그 친구가 술을 몃 잔이나 먹엇는지 지금 내빼고 잇는 것인지 돈을 치럿는지 안치럿는지 그것을 모를＜23＞ 것이기 때문에 그냥 그대로 멋도 모르고 고개를 껏떡하며
「응-」
하고 대답을 하게 되는 것이다.
「아는 사람이 안드러오면 어떠케 하는야고요?」
「글새!」
「또 슬적 나갈적에도 주모가 여보세요 하고 불으면 어떠케 하는야고요?」
「큰일낫죠! 드러가서 다시 연극을 꿈여도 맛천가지일테고 하니까 경을 치고 주리때 팟밥 안을 각오해야죠!」

돈 업시 오입하는 법
기생년쯤 속여가지고 돈 업시 오입하기야 여반장이다. 그러나 아조 돈 업시는 안된다. 요리갑 몃 푼은 가저야 한다. 그러나 이것은 음식 먹는 돈이지 오입하는 돈은 아니니까 음식만 돈내고 먹엇지 오입은 거저하는 것이다.
「어떠케?」
「흥!」
요새 신문에도 떠드는 판이지마는 서울 장안 말이면 장사동, 관훈동 근처에는 잘만 차저 본다면 매음굴- 게집애 소개하여주는 뚜쟁이 집이 쌔고 쌧다. 돈 안내고 기생이나 갈보 오입하러 드는 친구가 이것쯤 몃 군대 단골을 못 두엇다면 자격불급이다.
동무 한 서너 사람이 짜고서 모다 시체로 치면 모-던 뽀이식으로 그러케 할 돈이 업다면 돈 업시 노라난 건달패 모양으로 꿈이고 말이나 행동을 다 그러케 가즐거며 한 사람만은 헙수록한 시골떼기 시골서 온 부자 집의 외아들 격으로 꿈이는 것이다. 이 어수룩하고 시골냄새가 풀풀 나는 되련님을 기생 집에서는 봉(鳳)이라고 부르며 재간을 잇는대로 부려가지고 이놈의 봉 잡기에 골돌하는 것이다. 그러키 때문에 한 사람을 정말 그야말로 봉 가티 꿈여가지고
「봉 잇스니 잡어가거라 잡어가거라!」
하는 것이다. 기생이나 기생어멈 혹은 하다 못해 갈보만이래도 「봉?」하면 벌서 군침을 생키는 것이다. 왜 그러냐 하면 그 시골부자집 아들 녀석을 잘만 살머 노면은 집간이 왓다갓다 하고 땅 문서가 오르나리며 왈 몃백원 왈 몃천원식 천냥만냥으로만 놀게되기 때문이다.
각설 이러케 꿈여 가지고 일전 몃 번 드러가서 「비죤」갑이나 노코 나오든 제삼류(三流), 사류(四流)의 기생을 속여먹기 시작하는대 전긔 뚜쟁이 집엘 가서 음흉하고 고약하고 눈치 잘 알고 잘 모르는 척하고 돈 압헤는 반신불수가 되는 뚜쟁이 노파를 식혀 돈 몃 원 내노코 음식을 차리게 하는 것이다.
음식상과 술상을 버려노코 인력거 하나를 보내 기생집으로 보낸다. 이까짓 방안에서 요술만 피우고 잇는 제삼류, 제사류의 기생쯤이 지금 가튼 이 심한 불경긔에 제법 요리집엘 불려 갓슬리도 만무다. 경성부청에 내는 세금도 태산 가티 밀리여 기생영업장도 빼앗기고 잇는지가 옛날-.
인력거를 타고 기생이 오면 좌석이 그럴 듯한게 보아하니 여염집이고
「이거 땡이다. 사랑노름을 다오고-」
하고 생각을 한다. 기생이 기생이라 이 집이 여염집으로만 알지 드럽고 기막히는 매음굴 뚜쟁이 집으로는 알지 못하는 것이다.
물론 음흉한 노파에게는 이 게홱을 조금도 알리지 마러야 한다. 알리면 돈이 물들듯 드는 수가 잇고 탄노가 될 염려도 잇다. 싯침 뚝 띠고 이 늙은 뚜쟁이에게도 기생에게 하는 것과 가티
「봐라 우리가 기생을 다 불러 가지고 오지 안느냐? 돈 만흔 봉이다 봉!」
이러케 뵈이는 것이다. 그리고 그 늙은 여인보고
「여보 어머니-」
「아주머니-」
하고 불르드래도 그 속에 무슨 비밀과 계획이 잇는 줄은 몰으고 대답만 할 뿐이요 이편 기생은 밧게서 열심으로 심부름만 하는 그 여인이 이 집 어머니 아주머니로만 밋게 되는 것이다.
술을 먹고 흥청거리며 게획은 가경으로 드러슨다.
「여보게- 자네가 오래간만에 서울을 올라오고 우리 집에 와서 처음 저녁을 먹게되엿는대...」
엇자면 건달 한 놈이 시골부자집 아들보고 말을 건늬며 기생이 드르면 드를수록 회가 동하는 소리를 하며 한편 대우를 극진히 하며 또
「이놈의 돈 좀 빼서 먹자 너도 낄련?」
하는 눈치를 기생에게 뵈이는 것이다.
이리하야 삼류기생의 봉잡기에 눈이 먼 기생의 하롯밤 정조를 빼앗기는 여반장이다.
이튼날 아츰에서야 기생은 이 집이 여염집이 아니라 자긔 집안 방보다도 더한 매음굴이라는 것을 발견하게 이르르는 것이다. 그러나 그 때는 소용 업는 노릇이다. 봉이라고 미덧던 시골놈은 오대간대 업고 또 잇서도 할 수 업는 노릇이다. 제 힘으로는...
뚜쟁이 노파야 술갑 음식갑은 밧고 난지라 고 해괴한 입으로 깔깔대고 웃기만 하는 것이다.

돈 업시 차 타는 법
돈 업시 전차를 탈려면은 술집에서 술 거저 먹든 때와 가티 사람이 만하야 한다. 만흘 뿐만 아니라 듸리 밀리고 북적북적하면 할 수록 조타.＜24＞
타고 가기까지는 별 걱정 업다. 전긔 긔운으로 뜨르르 전차가 다러나고 목적지까지 태워다 주는 것이다. 그러나 내릴 때가 정작인대 뒤에 사람이 만히 내리는 것을 꼭 보고 알아야 안심을 하고 이 방법을 쓸 수가 잇는 것이다.
사람이 여러시 뒤에서 분명히 내리는 것을 알면 내리고 십흔 곳에 턱 내린다. 차장이 표를 달라고 손을 내밀거든 대답도 말고 고개만 둬로 돌린다.
「여러시 왓는대 표는 뒤에서 낼게요. 내 표까지 함께 바드슈-」
하는 말로 대신 고개를 돌리는 것이다. 물론 차장은 그대로 밋고 섯다. 뒤에서는 연성 사람이 내리며 표를 낸다. 그러나 사람이 다 내리고 표 한 장이 모자라는 것을 차장이 알기 전에 운전대에서 땅을 밟으며 그대로 닷자곳자 걸음아 날 살려라 하고 도망을 처야 하는 것이다.
또 아조 대담스럽게 천천히 걸어가도 상관은 업다. 차장이 쪼차 와서
「여보 표 내요 표-」
하고 억세게 덤벼들거든
「여보 아까 주지 안헛소?」
하면 고만이다. 안 바덧다는 확실한 증거는 업는 것이요 바든 증거를 세울려면은 쉬운 일이니까...
만일 그래도 뭐라고 하거든 닥거세우는 것이다.
「여보 미친사람이로구료. 점잔흔 사람을 붓들고 이게 무슨 실례요? 고약하군!」
그러나 이런 것은 이보다도 더 경찰서 유치구경을 해도 조타하는 그만치 대담한 마음을 가저야 실행할 것이라는 것을 부처 말해 둔다.
이 외에도 돈 업시 긔차로 물건 운반하기, 돈 업시 편지 부치기, 만흔 방법이 잇다.
아래 이야기는 작년 봄에 죽은 「사직동」 어듸 살던 작난군의 짓이엿다고 전하는대... ...
돈 업시 긔차로 물건을 어떠케 보냇느냐 하면 우선 물건 바들 사람에게 편지로다가 아무 날 아무 시에 출발하야 그날 몃 시에 그곳에 도착할 긔차에다 보낸다고 약속을 해노코 물건을 화물차에 부치는 것이 아니라 잘 싸고 약속해 논 일홈을 부처서 입장권(入場券)을 사 가지고 들어가 긔차 객차(客車)에다 그것을 노아둔다. 그러면 긔차가 출발하고 그것이 꼭 제시간에 물건 바들 사람 잇는 땅 정거장에 도착한다.
그러면 이 편에서는 긔차 시간을 보아 가지고 역시 입장권을 사 가지고 들어가서 사람 배웅하는 척하고 객차를 살펴 저쪽에서 갓다 논 물건을 그냥 들고 내려가는 것이다. 그냥 이러케만 해 가지고 그들은 교묘하게 장난을 햇섯다고-.
또 돈 업시 어떠케 편지를 부첫느냐하면 저편에서 편지가 오면 그것을 뜨더보고는 답장을 써서 그 봉투에다 그대로 너허 가지고 것봉에다
「수취거절(受取拒絶)」
이라 하든지 혹은
「수신인부재(受信人不在)」
라고 써서 돌려 보냇다고 한다. 그러면 저편에서는 도로 도라온 편지를 바더 가지고 봉투를 다시 뜻고 속에 잇는 답장을 본다고...
하하! 그러나 이것을 해 본 사람도 작년 봄에 고만 염병으로 죽엇다고 한다. 안 죽엇드라면 좀 배울걸...
그러나 여러분 못 배웟다고 배는 알흘 일이 아니라는 것을 잘 알아두시요!＜25＞
＜22-25＞