잡지명	삼천리 제12권 제6호
발행일	1940년 06월 01일
기사제목	海印寺 紀行 (A Trip to Haeinsa Temple)
필자	李箕永
기사형태	기행문 (Travelogue)

A Trip to Haeinsa Temple
						Yi Kiyŏng
[1] Kayasan (伽倻山) is a renowned mountain, counted among the ten scenic spots of Chosŏn (朝鮮). Haeinsa Temple (海印寺) is located right below Udubong Peak (牛頭峯) of this Kayasan and is also the head temple (大本山) of the Dharma lineage (法刹), the foremost famous temple in the southern provinces (南道).
Currently, Haeinsa is in Ch'i'in-ri (緇仁里), Kaya-myŏn (伽倻面), Hapch'ŏn-gun (陜川郡), Kyŏngsang-namdo (慶尙南道), but it is said that the ancient Kayasan was the core part of the Kara (伽羅) confederation. That is, Kaya (伽倻) is a phonetic change from Kara, later altered with Buddhist connotations. Besides this, it has been called Udusan (牛頭山), Sangwangsan (象王山), Sanghyangsan (象向山), Chidalsan (只怛山), and Sŏlsan (雪山). A branch of Taedŏksan (大德山), located at the border of the three provinces of Ch'ungch'ŏng (忠淸), Kyŏngsang (慶尙), and Chŏlla (全羅), runs east, dividing Kyŏngsang Province into north and south. To the north are Sŏngju (星州) and Koryŏng (高靈), and to the south are Kŏch'ang (居昌) and Hapch'ŏn (陜川). It lies across these four counties (郡), with a height of 4,719 ch'ŏk (척, feet) above sea level.<84> The area is 3,328 chŏngbo (町步, unit of area). In the natural five valleys (五間) of this peak (此葉?), pine (松), red pine (赤松), maple (단풍), and deciduous trees (활엽수) are dense (査密). So, when did temples begin to appear in these mountains?
The founding date (開山 緣日) of Haeinsa is said to be the 16th day of the 10th month of Imo (壬午), the 3rd year of the reign of King Aejang (哀莊王), the 40th king of Silla (新羅) (802 AD), which is 1,139 years ago from now.
According to old records (古記), the two great virtuous monks (兩大德) Sunŭng (順應) and Ijŏng (利貞) gained the devotion (귀의) of King Aejang and founded this temple. It is said that the two masters had previously gone to Tang China and obtained the "Tongguk Tapsan'gi" (東國踏山記, Record of Traveling the Mountains of the Eastern Country) from a descendant of Master Poji Kong (寶誌公和尙) before returning to their country. Arriving at Kayasan, they built a thatched hermitage (草庵) (the ruins are said to be beyond the current T'wesŏltang, 堆雪堂 越便에 遺墟가 있다 한다) and entered meditation (禪定). At that time, King Aejang's queen consort suffered from a carbuncle (등창) on her back, and divine monks (神僧) were sought everywhere. An envoy (使從) received the royal order and reached about 10 ri (里) outside Kayasan when suddenly, he saw purple energy and bright light filling the sky above the mountain. Guided by a white fox (白狐) (the present-day Yŏhodari bridge in front of Hwangsan-ri (黃山里) is said to be where the envoy first met the white fox), he found his way into the mountain. Near the chach'ubawi (跡岩, footprint rock?) located several chŏng (町) outside the current temple gate (寺門), the fox disappeared, and he met the two masters. The envoy explained his purpose and requested they accompany him, but the two masters refused. Instead, they offered several chang (丈) of five-colored thread (五色絲) and said, "Attach one end of this thread to the queen's sore and tie the other end to a tree branch in the palace courtyard, and the carbuncle will soon heal." - The envoy returned and followed the instructions (奉命), and indeed, the tree withered and died, while the queen's carbuncle was immediately cured (善?). Upon this, the king and queen were greatly pleased (大喜) and founded Haeinsa for the masters. The king personally visited (親幸), donated 2,500 kyŏl (結) of land (田) to the temple, held a congratulatory Dharma assembly (慶讚法會) to transfer merits (回向), and then returned to the capital. (There is currently an御水井 (Royal Well) beside the Kŭngnakchŏn Hall (極樂殿)).
The temple name (寺額) Haeinsa has been commonly used since its founding. It is said that names like Kayagapsa (伽倻岬寺), Kayasansa (伽倻山寺), and Kayasa (伽倻寺) were abbreviations combining the mountain name and the temple name. However, "Haein" (海印) is originally the name of a great meditative state (大定) called "Haein sammae" (海印三昧, Ocean Seal Samādhi) found in the Buddhist scripture, the Avatamsaka Sutra (佛說 華嚴經). It is said that within this great meditative state, the three kinds of worlds (三種 世間) - namely, the world of receptacles (器世間), the world of sentient beings (衆生 世間), and the world of wisdom and enlightenment (智正覺世間) - appear sequentially, just like the myriad phenomena (森羅萬象) of the universe are reflected (印顯) in the sea. Therefore, the name of the samādhi upon which the Avatamsaka Sutra relies is called Haein. The patriarch of the Hwaŏm school (華嚴宗祖), Ŭisang (義湘), while studying the Avatamsaka Sutra<85> under Chiŏm Kong (智儼公) after entering Tang China, created the "Haeindo" (海印圖, Ocean Seal Diagram) based on the meaning of Haein sammae. When he presented this to Chiŏm Kong, Chiŏm Kong saw it and praised it greatly (大讚). Later, when Ŭisang returned to his home country, he made the Haeindo the treasure (寶) for transmitting the Dharma. He transmitted it to his head disciple (上首 弟子) Sangwŏn Taedŏk (相源 大德), who then transmitted it to Im Taedŏk (琳大德), and Im, in turn, transmitted it to Sunŭng Taedŏk (順應 大德). Thus, Sunŭng Taedŏk received this, founded a temple on Kayasan, and named it Haein. Consequently, Haeinsa became the fundamental practice center (根本 道場) of the Hwaŏm school (華嚴宗).
However, the currently existing halls (堂宇) of Haeinsa, except for the two buildings of the P'anjŏn (板殿, Scripture Hall) above and below, are all attributed to the reconstruction (重建) by Sŏn Master Chewol Sŏngan (霽月聖岸禪師), as the temple suffered six fires in the interim. Later, in the first year of King Kyŏngsun (敬順王) of Silla (927 AD), Chŏnghae (丁亥), Master Hŭirang (希朗祖師), with the patronage (귀의) of King Taejo (太祖) of Koryŏ (高麗), renovated and rebuilt Haeinsa completely. The king is said to have donated 500 kyŏl of land to the temple.
Master Hŭirang's original surname was Chu (朱). He was born in Sŏnggi-ch'on (聖基村), Chusang-myŏn (主上面), present-day Kŏch'ang-gun (居昌郡), in the 3rd year of Queen Chinsŏng (眞聖女王) of Silla, Kiyu (己酉). In the 7th year of King Hyogong (孝恭王), Kyehae (癸亥), he entered Kayasan and shaved his head (落髮). Later, he became the head of the monks (僧統) and resided at this temple, attaining the Hwaŏm Samādhi (華嚴三昧). At that time, King Taejo of Koryŏ fought against King Kyŏn Hwŏn (甄萱) of Later Paekche and was defeated at Misungsan Mountain (美崇山, present-day Toryŏng-gun, 度靈郡?). He entered Haeinsa and studied under Master Hŭirang (師事). The master dispatched Yongjŏk Taegun Choch'a Wang (?) (勇敵大軍 祖叉王) to lead divine troops (神兵) to help Koryŏ's Taejo defeat Kyŏn Hwŏn. Thus, Taejo deeply respected (敬重) Master Hŭirang and treated him as his teacher (師).
Below is an introduction to the buildings:

1. Taejŏkkwnagjŏn (大寂光殿, Hall of Great Tranquility and Light)

This main hall (本殿) originally had the plaque (扁額) "Pirojŏn" (毘盧殿) since the temple's founding and enshrined the Vairocana Buddha statue (毘盧遮那 佛像), the main deity (本尊) of the Hwaŏm school, serving as the main worship hall (大德堂). During the reign of King Sŏngjong (成宗), when Great Master Yŏngjo (榮祖大師) reconstructed it (重創), it was renamed Taejŏkkwnagjŏn. As it was rebuilt several times due to fires, its scale is said to be smaller than the original (舊制). However, the current main hall was built 123 years ago in Muin (戊寅) by the fundraising master (化主) Sŏn Master Chewol Sŏngan (霽月聖岸禪師) and the master carpenter (都片手) Sŏk Tŏksŏng (釋德聖). It is a large building of 20 kan (間) with 7 brackets (包) inside and 5 outside.

2. P'anjŏn (板殿, Scripture Hall)

The building of this hall (本殿) was originally small in scale but was renovated (改構) during the reign of King Sejo (世祖大王). However, it soon fell into disrepair (傾頹). In Musin (戊申) during the reign of King Sŏngjong (成宗), Queen Dowager Insu (仁粹) and Queen Dowager Inhye (仁惠) ordered Great Master Yŏngjo (榮祖大師) to have master artisan (都料匠) Pak Chung-sŏk (朴仲石) rebuild it. It was named Poandang (普眼堂) and the Poanmun Gate (普眼門) was erected. Later, the Poanmun Gate was completely destroyed by fire,<86> but only the P'anjŏn miraculously escaped the disaster (災) and survives to this day, making it the oldest building (最古) in the temple. The upper and lower two buildings, totaling 60 kan, house the state-published Tripitaka woodblocks (國刊 藏經板本). The two side buildings (左右 兩棟), totaling 4 kan, store the temple-published Tripitaka woodblocks (寺刊藏經板本).

3. T'wesŏltang (堆雪堂, Hall of Piled Snow)

This hall (本堂) was built at the same time as the Taejŏkkwnagjŏn. In the 3rd year of Kwangmu (光武), Master Pŏmun Ch'wigyŏn Kong (梵雲 就堅公) expanded (增刱) the meditation center (修禪社). The following year, this hall was also repaired. However, in the 7th year of Taejŏng (大定, Taishō era), the meditation center was abolished and converted into the Chosajŏn (祖師殿, Patriarchs' Hall), enshrining the portraits (影幀) of the founding patriarchs (開山祖) and successive Sŏn masters (禪社). Together with Sohyanggak (小香閣) and Ŭnghyanggak (凝香閣), it is used as a Sŏn center (禪院).

4. Myŏngbujŏn (冥府殿, Hall of the Underworld)

This hall (本殿) was founded (刱建) 68 years ago, in the 10th year of King Kojong (高宗), by Master Unhwa Pot'aek Kong (雲華普澤公) on the old site of Kŭmt'apjŏn (金塔殿). Five years later, in Muin (戊寅), it was painted with traditional colors (丹青) by various artists (諸畵員) including Suryong (繡龍). The statues of the Ten Kings (十王像) were moved (移安) from Sŏnghŭngsa Temple (聖興寺) in T'aech'ŏn (態川?).

5. Ŭngjinjŏn (應眞殿, Hall of Arhats)

This hall (本殿) was originally Haehaengdang (解行堂), a building personally constructed (親建) in the 19th year of King Sŏngjong. It enshrined the portraits of successive Sŏn masters. In the 7th year of Taejŏng (Taishō era), the 16 Arhat statues (羅漢像), which had been enshrined in the west wing (西齊) of the P'anjŏn, were moved here.

6. Toksŏnggak (獨聖閣, Shrine of the Solitary Saint)

This shrine (本閣) originally enshrined the statue of Master Hŭirang (希朗祖師像). In the 7th year of Taejŏng (Taishō era), it was moved to the current Chosajŏn (祖師殿), and the statue of the Solitary Saint (獨聖像) was placed here.

7. Kugwangnu (九光樓, Nine Lights Pavilion)

This pavilion (本樓) was built six years after the Taejŏkkwnagjŏn. At that time, the provincial governor (本道巡相) Kim Ijae (金履載) visited and saw the pavilion was unfinished. He obtained donations (施金) of 10 kwan (貫) each from 40 monks (僧) within the province and 300 nyang (냥) from Kim Yongsul (金龍述) of Kŏch'ang (居昌) to newly construct it. He is said to have personally written (手書) the pavilion's name plaque (樓題) and hung it.

8. Kwanŭmjŏn (觀音殿, Hall of Avalokiteśvara)

This hall (本殿) is a monks' hall (僧堂) rebuilt at the same time as the Taejŏkkwnagjŏn. Initially, it bore the plaque (扁) "Simkŏmdang" (尋劒堂). About 100 years ago, the Kwanŭmjŏn located north of the temple was destroyed by fire (被燒), and its associated assets (財産) were moved here, hence it received the name Kwanŭmjŏn. In Muin (戊申), the 2nd year of Yunghŭi (隆熙), Master Hoegwangsa Chun Kong (晦光師濬公) obtained a donation (金施) from Court Lady (尙宮) Ch'ŏn Ilch'ŏng (千一淸) and rebuilt it. Including the monks' quarters (寮舍), it is a large structure of 3 buildings and 86 kan.

9. Kunghyŏndang (窮玄堂, Hall for Investigating the Profound)

This hall (本堂) is also a meditation hall (禪堂) rebuilt at the same time as the Taejŏkkwnagjŏn. In Keyu (癸酉), the 7th year of Kwangmu (光武), Sŏn Master Haebung (海鵬禪師) rebuilt it. In Musin (戊申), the 2nd year of Yunghŭi (隆熙), Master Hoegwangsa Chun Kong rebuilt it at the same time as the Kwanŭmjŏn. It consists of 3 buildings and 80 kan.<87>

10. Kyŏnghongjŏn (景洪殿)

This hall (本殿) was newly built (新建) 49 years ago, in Imjin (壬辰), the 29th year of King Kojong (高宗), by Master Pŏmun Ch'wihyŏn Kong (梵雲就賢公?) as a place for prayers for the three palaces (三殿爲祝所?). Including the left and right wing corridors (翼廊), it comprises 3 buildings and 33 kan.

11. Sa'undang (四雲堂)

This hall (本堂) was also built at the same time as the Taejŏkkwnagjŏn, by the carpenter Sŏk Ujŏng (片手釋宇定). It is said to have been the administrative office (令所) where monastic administration (僧政) was traditionally conducted.

12. Myŏngwŏltang (明月堂, Bright Moon Hall)

This hall (本堂) was also constructed at the same time as the Taejŏkkwnagjŏn, by the hand of carpenter Sŏk Tŏksŏng (片手釋德性).

13. Ponghwangmun (鳳凰門, Phoenix Gate)

This gate (本門) was rebuilt along with the Taejŏkkwnagjŏn. 103 years ago, in Musul (戊戌), Elder Yŏnwŏl (淵月 長老) became the fundraising master (化主) and enshrined paintings (幀) of the four deities Kaya (伽倻), Naje (那提), Munsu (文殊), and Pohyŏn (普賢). In Keyu (癸酉), the 8th year of Syowa (昭和, Shōwa era), Great Master Kogyŏng (古鏡大師) became the fundraising master, and paintings of the Four Heavenly Kings (四天王幀) were newly created (新成) by the hand of Songp'a Sun Kong (松坡順公) and enshrined (奉安).

14. Haet'almun (解脫門, Gate of Liberation)

15. Inhamun (仁霞門?)

These two gates (此 2門) were both rebuilt along with the Taejŏkkwnagjŏn. In Kihae (己亥), the 3rd year of Kwangmu (光武), the fundraising master Sŏn Master Pŏmun Ch'wigyŏn (化主 梵雲 就堅 禪師) repaired them (重修).

16. Kuksatang (局司壇, Shrine for the Local Guardian Deity)

This shrine (本壇) is a small building of 1 building and 3 kan, enshrining the Kuksa Taesin (局師大神, Great Guardian Deity of the Temple?). Its founding date (創建 年代) is unknown (未詳), but it fortunately escaped (僥倖히 免하고) the Chŏngch'uk (丁丑) fire during the reign of King Sunjo (純祖). It was repaired (重修) by Pŏmun Kong in Kihae (己亥), the 3rd year of Kwangmu, and survives to this day.
Haeinsa is said to have many treasures (寶物), but among them, the priceless treasure (無價의 寶) that everyone must single out (特設) is undoubtedly the Tripitaka Koreana (팔만대장경, Eighty Thousand Tripitaka).
Regarding the Tripitaka (大藏經), there have been dozens of woodblock carvings (板刻) altogether in China (支那), Chosŏn (朝鮮), and the mainland (內地, i.e., Japan), starting from the Ch'okpon (蜀本, Shu edition) first published in the 4th year of Kaebo (開寶), reign of Emperor Taizu of Song (宋 太祖) (971 AD). However, the Koryŏ (高麗) carving is particularly called a world-class masterpiece (世界 無比의 걸작품) because its format's excellence (體制의 훌륭함), the meticulousness of its proofreading (校正의 엄밀함), and the completeness of its volumes and fascicles (部秩이 완비함) rank first among the world's extant woodblocks (藏板). Distinguishing by content, there are temple publications (寺刊) and state publications (國刊), and among the state publications, there are also old editions (舊本) and supplementary editions (續本). The supplementary editions were made after the Yi Dynasty (李朝), while the old editions were published before the transfer of the state-published woodblocks (國刊 藏板 移安) (the state publications were moved here in Muin (戊寅), the 7th year of King T'aewang I (李太王, i.e., King Kojong)). Although their date is much earlier than the state publications, they are said to be in no way inferior (조금도 손색이 없다 한다).<88>
The state-published blocks (國刊板) were carved over a period of roughly 16 years, from Pyŏngsin (丙申), the 23rd year of King Kojong of Koryŏ (1236 AD), with the main office (本司) established in Kanghwa (江華) and a branch office (分司) in Chinju (晋州), until Sinhae (辛亥), the 38th year (1251 AD). There are various theories (諸說) about how these scripture blocks (經板) came to be stored at Haeinsa. However, based on an inscription (陰刻) found in the margin (欄外) of the 10th fascicle of the 10th volume of the Hwaŏmgyo Pun'gi (華嚴敎 分記), discovered by Master P'ogwang (包光師) in the 7th year of Taishō (大正, 1918), which reads "丁丑出陸時 此閣失與知識道元同願開板入上 乙酉十月日首座冲玄" (During the Chŏngch'uk year [1397?] when brought out to land, this pavilion was lost. Together with the knowledgeable Towŏn (道元), vowed to carve blocks and enter the capital. October, Ŭryu year [1345 or 1405?]. Head Monk Ch'unghyŏn (冲玄)), etc., they were moved (移置) to Haeinsa in Muin (戊寅), the 7th year of King T'aewang I (1908?). The scripture blocks are stored (收藏) in two P'anjŏn buildings, each with a frontage (間口) of 33 kan and a depth (奧行) of 5.5 kan, arranged (設架 配列) on shelves. Generally, they measure 8 ch'on (寸, inch) inside vertically (縱), 2 ch'ŏk (尺, feet) 2-3 ch'on outside horizontally (外橫), and 1 ch'on 2-3 pun (分) thick (厚). End pieces (마구리) are attached at both ends, and copper decorations (銅製裝飾) are fitted at the four corners (네구통). A thin coat of lacquer (漆) is applied to the entire surface (前面). The wood used (用材) is birch (白樺). (In Korean, chajangnamu (자작나무), also called Kŏjemok (巨濟木)). The weight (重量) of one block is 700 monme (匁) to 1 kwan (貫) (approx. 2.6-3.75 kg). The printing surface (板面) is usually 7 ch'on 4-5 pun vertically and 1 ch'ŏk 5 ch'on 6 pun horizontally. There are only upper and lower border lines (界線); column lines (罫線) are absent. There are 23 lines (行) with 16 characters (字) per line, each character being about 5-6 pun square. Both sides (兩面) are carved. On one end (其 一端), the sutra title (經名), volume number (卷次), leaf number (丁數), and box number (函號) based on the Thousand Character Classic (千字文) are indicated. The outer side (外側) also has brief identifying marks carved. However, among them, there are variations in the dimensions of the printing surface, the number of lines and characters, and the size of characters. Some have outlines (輪廓) and column lines, some are carved only on one side (一面), and some have two leaves (二葉) carved on one side. This is because, although most are original blocks (原板), some were damaged over time and carved later (後에 刻한 것). These scripture blocks are arranged in two rows vertically on each level of the five-tiered shelves (五層 板架) in the two Tripitaka storage halls (藏經閣). Along the walls beside the central shelves (中央의 板架 壁際), they are arranged again in front and back rows. The number of state-published woodblocks (國刊 板本 數) is 81,258 plates (枚), comprising 1,512 titles (部秩數) and 6,568 volumes (經卷數 is likely a mistake in the original, should refer to volumes, not 355). One cannot but marvel (實로 敬歎을 不己할 뿐이겠다) at this great undertaking spanning both the Koryŏ (麗朝) and Yi (李朝) dynasties.
Regarding the origins of the first temple-published Tripitaka blocks (寺刊 藏版), the Buddhist legend (佛敎的 傳說) of the fundraiser Yi Kŏin (李居仁) is also interesting, but due to space limitations (紙面 關係), I will omit it (割愛).
The above is merely a brief account (略述) of the history (沿革) of Haeinsa (mainly based on the "Haeinsa Yakkchi" 「海印寺 略誌」, Brief Record of Haeinsa). Changing the chapter (章), I will now write about Kayasan as I saw it.

Kayasan is said to have been famous for its autumn foliage (단풍) since ancient times. However, generally, famous mountains and scenic spots (名山勝地) possess unique scenery<89> whenever viewed, just as a beautiful person is beautiful anytime. When gorgeously dressed (盛裝), the splendid beauty (華麗한 美) is pleasing; when simply attired (수수하게 차렸을 때), the simple beauty (素朴한 美) is also pleasing, is it not?
Thinking this way, my visit to Kayasan in late autumn (晩秋) should not be regrettable at all. However, had I gone just a few days earlier, I could have appreciated (玩賞) Kayasan adorned in full splendor (盛裝) with mountains full of red waves (滿山 紅濤). To have visited when the trees were bare in the empty mountain (落木 空山) and a chilly wind (陰風) blew coldly is indeed a matter of regret for being one step too late (一步遲의 恨).
Leaving the train at Taegu (大邱) and transferring to a bus bound for Koryŏng (高靈行) at the station front, one arrives at Koryŏng-ŭp (高靈邑) in about two hours. From there, until crossing the border between Kyŏngsang North and South Provinces (慶尙南北道), the utterly ordinary (平平凡凡) mountains and rivers give no hint of any famous mountain nearby. However, upon crossing the pass (嶺上), looking down (구버 보며) at the Yaroch'ŏn stream (冶爐川) along the cliff edge (낭떠러지기), and gazing (眺望) at the purple mountain silhouette (紫色 山容) rising far above the clouds (雲表), the thought "Ah, there it is!" will surely occur to anyone.
However, after passing Yaroch'ŏn, the next 30 ri (里) to Kiryudong (紀流洞) is also a newly built road (新作路) cutting through an ordinary mountain valley (平凡한 山谷). Therefore, the scenic beauty (勝景) of Kayasan begins to unfold from Hongnyudong (紅流洞).
Although it's true that before entering the Hongnyudong Gate (紅流洞門), there are famous spots like Murŭnggyo Bridge (武陵橋), only the poem by Sŏsan Taesa (西山大師) remains: "花飛暮春日, 尋入武陵天 何處神仙會, 遠林生翠煙" (Flowers fly on a late spring day, seeking entry into the Murŭng realm. Where do the immortals gather? Green mist rises from the distant forest). The old scenery of Murŭng seems to have changed, let alone the traces of immortals (神仙). Speaking of which, because a new road was built right up to the front of Haeinsa, Hongnyudong has also become secularized (俗化) and is now utterly chaotic (亂雜). Due to the bustle of road construction crews (治道軍) and timber transport workers (木材 運搬 人夫), taverns (酒幕) and shops (店鋪) are increasing. At night, heavily made-up barmaids (油頭紛面의 酒女) appear, and the sounds of hourglass drums (장구) and singing (노래 가락) drift out.
Getting off the car at Hongnyudong, the valley (溪谷) suddenly narrows, and blue mountains (靑山) on both sides enclose the turquoise stream (碧溪水). Thus, the green water (綠水) winds around the blue mountains, and the blue mountains embrace the green water, creating the superb scenery (絕勝) of the so-called Nine Bends of Hongnyu (紅流 九曲). If Kayasan were compared to Little Kŭmgang (小金剛), the Hongnyudongcheon area (紅流洞天) would be like Inner Kŭmgang (內金剛), and the Udubong Peak region (牛頭峯 一境) like Outer Kŭmgang (外金剛). Therefore, in the high mountain areas, there are forests of deciduous trees with only branches remaining (가지만 버러진 雜木林) and peaks and rocks weathered sharp (풍화작용에 무서린 峯岩) soaring high, while in the basin-like valleys (盆地인 溪谷間), there are cliffs covered in white moss (白苔낀 絕壁) and jade-like stones (玉石) and strange rocks (奇岩) polished by the rushing streams (激流), lined up (羅列).<90>
Upstream from Hongnyudong, Nongsanjŏng Pavilion (籠山亭), a relic associated with Ch'oe Ko'un (崔孤雲, Ch'oe Ch'iwŏn), also forms a scenic spot (一景). Kayasan is said to have many relics of Ko'un everywhere. The current location of Haeinsa, Ch'i'in-ri (緇仁里), is said to be a corruption of Ch'iwŏn-ri (致遠里), which was supposedly Ko'un's address when he entered Kaya leading his wife and children (妻子).
Thus, behind Nongsanjŏng Pavilion (籠山亭 後麓), there is a shrine (影堂) to Ko'un, and beside the main road beyond it (越便 大路傍), is Ko'un's famous inscribed poem (題石詩):
狂奔疊石吼重巒 (Wildly rushing, layered rocks roar through layered peaks)
人語難分咫尺間. (Human voices are hard to distinguish even close by.)
常恐是非聲到耳 (Always fearing the sounds of right and wrong reach my ears,)
故敎流水盡籠山. (Thus I bid the flowing water to envelop the mountain.)
Let me introduce one or two famous poems about Ko'un in Hongnyudong.
開道孤雲入此巒 (Opening the path, Ko'un entered these peaks,)
不知靈跡依何間. (Not knowing where his spiritual traces remain.)
謾將間眼看尋處 (Carelessly searching with idle eyes,)
動者流川靜者山. (What moves is the flowing stream, what's still is the mountain.)
This poem by Hoegyŏn Taesa (晦堅大師) is the first.
逝者流溪立者巒 (What passes is the flowing stream, what stands are the peaks,)
一區仙境落人間. (A realm of immortals descended to the human world.)
古岩不語當時事 (The ancient rocks don't speak of those times,)
何日孤雲入此山. (On what day did Ko'un enter this mountain?)
This poem by Inp'a Taesa (仁波大師) is the second. Walking the mountain path (山路) at sunset (夕陽) and going around Nongsanjŏng, the sunny and shady sides of the mountains (山南 山北) are distinct (分明), and the shining sunlight (照耀하는 日光) making the blue mountains exhale mist and haze (霧霞) is also a grand sight (壯觀). Below Ch'wijŏkpong Peak (吹笛峯), famous spots are well-known: P'iram Rock (沘筆岩), Ch'wip'ungnoe Rapids (吹風瀨), Kwangp'ungnoe Rapids (光風瀨), Wanjae'am Rock (完在岩), Pun'okp'ok Falls (噴玉瀑), Cheiltam Pool (霽日潭), Ch'ŏpsŏktae Terrace (疊石臺), Hoesŏn'am Rock (會仙岩), etc. First, looking at the poem by Ch'oe Tongsik (崔東植) about Ch'wijŏkpong:
春山春雨梁靑螺 (Spring mountain, spring rain, like a bridge of green spiral shells,)
石氣濛涳樹影多. (Stone energy misty and vast, tree shadows abundant.)
玉笛數聲雲不倦 (Several notes from a jade flute, the clouds tireless,)
也知峯月浴銀河. (Also knowing the peak's moon bathes in the Milky Way.)
This still seems fitting (髣髴), but the poem by Kang Maenghŭi (姜孟希) about P'iram Rock:
鐵削千尋壯 (Iron-pared, a thousand fathoms high, magnificent,)
雲生萬竇凉. (Clouds born from myriad caverns, cool.)
頑冥終不語 (Stubbornly silent, ultimately wordless,)
屹屹但蒼蒼. (Towering tall, just vast blue-green.)
cannot be found. Why? Because P'iram Rock was buried (무처서) under the road due to the new road construction (新作路) and is now invisible (뵈이지 않고), merely<91> the carving of the rock's name (岩名) remains as a trace (자최) on a roadside rock (路傍岩).
In this sense, perhaps Nakhwat'am Pool (落花潭, Falling Flowers Pool) preserves its natural scenery (天然의 景致) the most intact. Nakhwat'am is the final scenic wonder (絕景) before reaching the temple. Although its scale (規模) is not as grand (雄大) as Kuryongyŏn Pool (九龍淵) in Outer Kŭmgang, it forms a deep pool (深淵) below a thousand-fathom cliff (千仞 絕壁), and the single stream of falling water (一條 飛瀑) cascading over the jade-white flat rock (白玉같은 盤石), along with the reflection (除影?) of the green peak (翠巒) above, possesses a terrifying beauty that inspires awe (무시무시한 戰慓美). Its former name was Yegit'am (藝妓潭, Gisaeng Pool), but it was supposedly changed (고첬다던가) to Nakhwat'am because it was too vulgar (野). It is said to be the place where a gisaeng (기생) drowned (빠저 죽은) long ago. On the mountain top above it is Nogu Sŭngch'ŏn'am Rock (老龜 昇天岩, Old Turtle Ascending to Heaven Rock). A rock shaped like a turtle (龜形) that looks exactly as if it's about to leap up (뛰어 올을 것 같은) can be seen.
However, the famous waterfall near Haeinsa is Yongmunp'ok Falls (龍門瀑) on the roadside (路傍) towards Maljjangi (?). It is not in a long mountain valley like Pagyŏn Falls (朴淵), so the waterfall's length (瀑長) is not very long. Due to a flood several years ago, the plunge pool (瀑臼) is also filled with buried sand (伏沙로 미어저서), making the pool (웅덩이) not wide, but the site (터전) is spacious. If the base of the waterfall were excavated by human effort (人力으로 파내기만 한다면), it seems a grand waterfall (雄大한 瀑布) could be created. I entertained such fantasies (空想) and wondered if among the numerous visitors (遊客) who have prominently inscribed (大書特書) their names (姓名) in these mountains, there might be such a donor (施主), and felt a longing (念願).
Haksadae Terrace (學士臺) near Haeinsa is also said to be a place where Master Ko'un rested (置踐地?). An old juniper tree (老檜木) supposedly planted by the master's hand (手植) has grown to several arm spans wide (두어 아름되게 컸다). Legend (傳說) says it grew from a staff (지팽이) he stuck into the ground (꼬진 것이 살었다는).
Besides this, Pongch'ŏndae Terrace (奉天臺) is below the first peak (第一峯) of Udusan (牛頭山). Climbing here, the outline (輪廓) of the Chirisan mountain range (智異山 連峯) encircled by clouds (구름 밖에 둘러섰는) can be faintly seen (희미하게 내다보인다) beyond Namsan mountain (南山넘어로).
Ubijŏng Well (牛鼻井, Ox Nose Well) is on the summit (山頂) of Udubong Peak (牛頭上峯). It is a small spring (옹달샘) of naturally collected rainwater (天水바지) covered in green moss (푸른 이끼가 끼었는). Therefore, as a well, it is unremarkable (아무 보잘 것이 없으나), but it is rather strange (이상하다) that even during last year's great drought (大旱), the water in this spring remained pooled as usual (여전하게 고여 있었다니). However, it's not just this spring; water flows everywhere in the valleys of Kayasan (伽倻山 溪谷), and the nearby residents (附近 住民) who farm (農事) with this water avoided crop failure (免凶). It seems Kayasan is indeed a famous scenic spot (勝地) known as a refuge (避難處).
Putting aside such utilitarian thoughts (公利的 생각), if one climbs to the summit of Udusan and looks around, the east, west, south, and north are wide open (豁然히 툭 터진), an unobstructed sky (一望無險한 天空) that is refreshing (爽快). Closer by, the numerous small and large overlapping mountains (群少重巒) of the Kyŏngbuk region (慶北 一帶) lie submissively below (眼下에 屈服). Among them, the Naktonggang River (洛東江) stretches out long like unfurled white cloth (白布를<92> 펼친듯이). On the steep northern side (急角度가 진 北便), below this mountain, deciduous trees (雜木) grow thickly (茂盛) in the crevices of the cliffs (絕壁틈). The hermitages (庵子) attached to Haeinsa are all located near the main temple (큰 절 附近). Samsŏn'am (三仙庵) and Yaksu'am (藥水庵) are famous as nunneries (尼院). Hŭirangdae (希朗臺) is said to be where Master Hŭirang practiced (修道地), taking its name from the master (師名을 取하이라). Paengnyŏn'am Hermitage (白蓮庵) is located higher than the main temple (本寺). Amidst old pines and strange rocks (老松奇岩間), the scenery (景槪) is quite superb (絕勝), and it is the quietest (靜寂) among the temples. Thus, it is praised as the foremost scenic spot in Kayasan (伽倻山中 第一 勝地), a spiritual place and field of merit (福田靈倫). Many eminent monks (高僧) who practiced austerities (修道) have resided (住錫) here since ancient times, such as Masters Hwanjŏk (幻寂), P'unggye (楓溪), Sŏngbong (性峯), Inp'a (仁坡), Hwarhae (濶海), and Sinhae (信海).
Hongjeam Hermitage (弘濟庵) is where Samyŏng Taesa (四溟大師) resided. The room where the great master passed away (臨終) still remains today. To one side is a shrine with his portrait (影堂). I stayed right here at Hongjeam. It is a propitious site (明堂地) with a view (一望), where a wing of Pibongsan Mountain (飛鳳山) blocks the front stream (前溪), and green bamboo (靑竹) surrounds the area below the rear peak (後峯下). In the back garden (後園) is the stupa (浮屠) of Samyŏngdang (四溟堂, Samyŏng Taesa). On the mountain opposite (앞산), azaleas (철죽) bloom beautifully in spring, and it is famous for autumn foliage (단풍) in autumn. Since I went in late autumn (晩秋), I also found the deciduous forest (雜木林), where dodder (?) (저으사리) clung verdantly (시퍼렇게 붙은) to the dry branches (마른나무 가지), strangely fascinating (奇異). (End)<93>

**Summary**

This travelogue by Yi Kiyŏng describes a visit to Haeinsa Temple on Kayasan Mountain in late autumn 1940. It begins by recounting the temple's legendary founding by monks Sunŭng and Ijŏng under Silla's King Aejang, explaining the origin of the name "Haein" from the Avatamsaka Sutra, and noting subsequent reconstructions, particularly under Koryŏ's King Taejo with Master Hŭirang. The author details the history and features of various temple buildings like the Taejŏkkwnagjŏn, the P'anjŏn housing the Tripitaka Koreana woodblocks (emphasizing their historical and artistic value), meditation halls, and gates. The second part shifts to the author's personal journey, starting from Taegu, lamenting the missed peak autumn colors but appreciating the late autumn scenery. He describes the Hongnyudong valley, noting both its natural beauty (comparing it to Kŭmgangsan) and the unwelcome changes brought by new road construction, including increased commercial activity. He mentions sites associated with the Silla scholar Ch'oe Ch'iwŏn (Ko'un), various natural landmarks like waterfalls and rock formations (some impacted by development), and finally describes the view from Udubong Peak and notable hermitages like Paengnyŏn'am and Hongjeam, where Samyŏng Taesa resided.

From a historical perspective, the article is interesting for its documentation of Haeinsa's state in 1940, including detailed descriptions of its buildings and the Tripitaka Koreana, blending historical accounts with contemporary observation. It notably captures the tension between preserving cultural heritage and natural beauty versus the impacts of modernization (specifically, road construction facilitating resource extraction and tourism, leading to "secularization") during the Japanese colonial period, reflecting broader societal changes. The use of Japanese era names (Taishō, Shōwa) and terms like "Naeji" (mainland Japan) situates it firmly within its colonial context.

**Named Entities**

海印寺	해인사	Haeinsa
李箕永	이기영	Yi Kiyŏng
伽倻山	가야산	Kayasan
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
牛頭峯	우두봉	Udubong Peak
慶尙南道	경상남도	Kyŏngsang-namdo
陜川郡	합천군	Hapch'ŏn-gun
伽倻面	가야면	Kaya-myŏn
緇仁里	치인리	Ch'i'in-ri
伽羅	가라	Kara
牛頭山	우두산	Udusan
象王山	상왕산	Sangwangsan
象向山	상향산	Sanghyangsan
只怛山	지달산	Chidalsan
雪山	설산	Sŏlsan
忠淸	충청	Ch'ungch'ŏng
慶尙	경상	Kyŏngsang
全羅	전라	Chŏlla
大德山	대덕산	Taedŏksan
星州	성주	Sŏngju
高靈	고령	Koryŏng
居昌	거창	Kŏch'ang
陜川	합천	Hapch'ŏn
新羅	신라	Silla
哀莊王	애장왕	Aejang Wang
順應	순응	Sunŭng
利貞	이정	Ijŏng
唐	당	Tang (China)
寶誌公和尙	보지공화상	Poji Kong Hwasang
東國踏山記	동국답산기	Tongguk Tapsan'gi
堆雪堂	퇴설당	T'wesŏltang
黃山里	황산리	Hwangsan-ri
跡岩	적암	Chŏgam (Chach'ubawi)
極樂殿	극락전	Kŭngnakchŏn
伽倻岬寺	가야갑사	Kayagapsa
伽倻山寺	가야산사	Kayasansa
伽倻寺	가야사	Kayasa
華嚴經	화엄경	Hwaŏmgyŏng (Avatamsaka Sutra)
海印三昧	해인삼매	Haein sammae (Ocean Seal Samādhi)
義湘	의상	Ŭisang
智儼公	지엄공	Chiŏm Kong
海印圖	해인도	Haeindo (Ocean Seal Diagram)
相源 大德	상원 대덕	Sangwŏn Taedŏk
琳 大德	임 대덕	Im Taedŏk
順應 大德	순응 대덕	Sunŭng Taedŏk
霽月聖岸禪師	제월성안선사	Chewol Sŏngan Sŏnsa
板殿	판전	P'anjŏn
敬順王	경순왕	Kyŏngsun Wang
希朗祖師	희랑조사	Hŭirang Chosa
高麗 太祖	고려 태조	Koryŏ Taejo
朱	주	Chu (surname)
眞聖女王	진성여왕	Chinsŏng Yŏwang
居昌郡 主上面 聖基村	거창군 주상면 성기촌	Kŏch'ang-gun Chusang-myŏn Sŏnggi-ch'on
孝恭王	효공왕	Hyogong Wang
甄萱	견훤	Kyŏn Hwŏn
美崇山	미숭산	Misungsan
度靈郡	도령군	Toryŏng-gun
勇敵大軍 祖叉王	용적대군 조차왕	Yongjŏk Taegun Choch'a Wang (?)
大寂光殿	대적광전	Taejŏkkwnagjŏn
毘盧殿	비로전	Pirojŏn
毘盧遮那 佛像	비로자나 불상	Piroch'ana Bulsang (Vairocana Buddha Statue)
成宗	성종	Sŏngjong (King of Chosŏn)
榮祖大師	영조대사	Yŏngjo Taesa
釋德聖	석덕성	Sŏk Tŏksŏng
世祖大王	세조대왕	Sejo Taewang
仁粹 大妃	인수 대비	Insu Taebi (Queen Dowager Insu)
仁惠 大妃	인혜 대비	Inhye Taebi (Queen Dowager Inhye)
朴仲石	박중석	Pak Chung-sŏk
普眼堂	보안당	Poandang
普眼門	보안문	Poanmun
光武	광무	Kwangmu (era name)
梵雲 就堅公	범운 취견공	Pŏmun Ch'wigyŏn Kong
大定	대정	Taejŏng (Taishō era name)
冥府殿	명부전	Myŏngbujŏn
高宗	고종	Kojong (King/Emperor of Chosŏn/Korea)
雲華普澤公	운화보택공	Unhwa Pot'aek Kong
金塔殿	금탑전	Kŭmt'apjŏn
繡龍	수룡	Suryong
態川 聖興寺	태천 성흥사	T'aech'ŏn Sŏnghŭngsa
應眞殿	응진전	Ŭngjinjŏn
解行堂	해행당	Haehaengdang
獨聖閣	독성각	Toksŏnggak
希朗祖師像	희랑조사상	Hŭirang Chosa-sang (Statue of Master Hŭirang)
九光樓	구광루	Kugwangnu
金履載	김이재	Kim Ijae
金龍述	김용술	Kim Yongsul
觀音殿	관음전	Kwanŭmjŏn
尋劒堂	심검당	Simkŏmdang
隆熙	융희	Yunghŭi (era name)
晦光師濬公	회광사준공	Hoegwangsa Chun Kong
尙宮 千一淸	상궁 천일청	Sanggung Ch'ŏn Ilch'ŏng
窮玄堂	궁현당	Kunghyŏndang
海鵬禪師	해붕선사	Haebung Sŏnsa
景洪殿	경홍전	Kyŏnghongjŏn
梵雲就賢公	범운취현공	Pŏmun Ch'wihyŏn Kong (?)
四雲堂	사운당	Sa'undang
釋宇定	석우정	Sŏk Ujŏng
明月堂	명월당	Myŏngwŏltang
鳳凰門	봉황문	Ponghwangmun
淵月 長老	연월 장로	Yŏnwŏl Changno
伽倻	가야	Kaya (deity?)
那提	나제	Naje (deity?)
文殊	문수	Munsu (Mañjuśrī)
普賢	보현	Pohyŏn (Samantabhadra)
昭和	소화	Syowa (Shōwa era name)
古鏡大師	고경대사	Kogyŏng Taesa
松坡順公	송파순공	Songp'a Sun Kong
解脫門	해탈문	Haet'almun
仁霞門	인하문	Inhamun
梵雲 就堅 禪師	범운 취견 선사	Pŏmun Ch'wigyŏn Sŏnsa
局司壇	국사단	Kuksatang
局師大神	국사대신	Kuksa Taesin
純祖	순조	Sunjo (King of Chosŏn)
八萬大藏經	팔만대장경	P'alman Taejanggyŏng (Tripitaka Koreana)
宋 太祖 開寶	송 태조 개보	Song T'aejo Kaebo (Emperor Taizu of Song, Kaibao era)
蜀本	촉본	Ch'okpon (Shu edition)
支那	지나	China (Note: Older, potentially derogatory term used in the period)
內地	내지	Naeji (Mainland Japan)
李朝	이조	Ijo (Yi Dynasty / Chosŏn Dynasty)
李太王	이태왕	I T'aewang (King Kojong after abdication)
江華	강화	Kanghwa
晋州	진주	Chinju
包光師	포광사	P'ogwangsa
華嚴敎 分記	화엄교 분기	Hwaŏmgyo Pun'gi
道元	도원	Towŏn
冲玄	충현	Ch'unghyŏn
李居仁	이거인	Yi Kŏin
海印寺 略誌	해인사 약지	Haeinsa Yakkchi
大邱	대구	Taegu
高靈邑	고령읍	Koryŏng-ŭp
慶尙南北道	경상남북도	Kyŏngsang-bukto / Kyŏngsang-namdo
冶爐川	야로천	Yaroch'ŏn
紀流洞	기류동	Kiryudong
紅流洞	홍류동	Hongnyudong
武陵橋	무릉교	Murŭnggyo
西山大師	서산대사	Sŏsan Taesa
崔孤雲	최고운	Ch'oe Ko'un (Ch'oe Ch'iwŏn)
籠山亭	농산정	Nongsanjŏng
致遠里	치원리	Ch'iwŏn-ri
晦堅大師	회견대사	Hoegyŏn Taesa
仁波大師	인파대사	Inp'a Taesa
崔東植	최동식	Ch'oe Tongsik
姜孟希	강맹희	Kang Maenghŭi
吹笛峯	취적봉	Ch'wijŏkpong
沘筆岩	필암	P'iram
吹風瀨	취풍뢰	Ch'wip'ungnoe
光風瀨	광풍뢰	Kwangp'ungnoe
完在岩	완재암	Wanjae'am
噴玉瀑	분옥폭	Pun'okp'ok
霽日潭	제일담	Cheiltam
疊石臺	첩석대	Ch'ŏpsŏktae
會仙岩	회선암	Hoesŏn'am
落花潭	낙화담	Nakhwat'am
九龍淵	구룡연	Kuryongyŏn
藝妓潭	예기담	Yegit'am
老龜 昇天岩	노구 승천암	Nogu Sŭngch'ŏn'am
龍門瀑	용문폭	Yongmunp'ok
朴淵	박연	Pagyŏn (Falls)
學士臺	학사대	Haksadae
奉天臺	봉천대	Pongch'ŏndae
智異山	지리산	Chirisan
南山	남산	Namsan
牛鼻井	우비정	Ubijŏng
洛東江	낙동강	Naktonggang
三仙庵	삼선암	Samsŏn'am
藥水庵	약수암	Yaksu'am
希朗臺	희랑대	Hŭirangdae
白蓮庵	백련암	Paengnyŏn'am
幻寂	환적	Hwanjŏk
楓溪	풍계	P'unggye
性峯	성봉	Sŏngbong
仁坡	인파	Inp'a
濶海	활해	Hwarhae
信海	신해	Sinhae
弘濟庵	홍제암	Hongjeam
四溟大師	사명대사	Samyŏng Taesa
飛鳳山	비봉산	Pibongsan
四溟堂	사명당	Samyŏngdang (refers to Samyŏng Taesa)

**Glossary**

紀行	기행	Travelogue
法刹	법찰	Dharma temple; a significant Buddhist temple
大本山	대본산	Head temple of a Buddhist school or region
轉音	전음	Phonetic change
交界	교계	Border, boundary
盤居	반거	To be situated across, spread out over
町步	정보	Chŏngbo (unit of land area, approx. 9917 sq meters)
査密	사밀	Dense, thick (likely older usage or Hanja combination)
開山 緣日	개산 연일	Founding anniversary/date of a temple
古記	고기	Old records
按컨대	안컨대	According to; based on (older conjunctive form)
大德	대덕	Great Virtue; title for an eminent monk
귀의	귀의	Taking refuge (in Buddhism); devotion
草庵	초암	Thatched hermitage
遺墟	유허	Remains, ruins
禪定	선정	Dhyāna; Buddhist meditation
등창	등창	Carbuncle on the back
神僧	신승	Divine monk; monk with supernatural abilities
使從	사종	Envoy and retinue
里許	이허	Approximately X ri (distance unit, approx. 0.393 km)
紫氣	자기	Purple energy/aura
白狐	백호	White fox
數町許	수정허	Approximately several chŏng (distance unit, approx. 109m)
來意	내의	Purpose of visit
五色絲	오색사	Five-colored thread
奉命	봉명	To follow orders/commands
善하다	선하다	To be cured, healed (older usage in this context)
親幸	친행	(Of a king) to visit in person
結	결	Kyŏl (unit of land area, varied historically)
慶讚法會	경찬법회	Congratulatory Dharma assembly
回向	회향	Transferring merits (in Buddhism)
寺額	사액	Temple name plaque bestowed by the king or state
三昧	삼매	Samādhi; state of deep meditative concentration
世間	세간	World, realm (in Buddhist cosmology)
印顯	인현	To appear clearly, be reflected (like a seal imprint)
宗祖	종조	Founder/Patriarch of a school or sect
道場	도량	Place of spiritual practice; monastery
堂宇	당우	Temple buildings
重建	중건	Reconstruction (of a building)
一新	일신	Complete renovation/renewal
落髮	낙발	Shaving one's head (to become a monk)
僧統	승통	Head monk; supervisor of the monastic community
師事	사사	To study under a master; treat as one's teacher
扁額	편액	Framed inscription; plaque hung over a door or hall
本尊	본존	Main object of worship in a temple hall
重創	중창	Reconstruction; re-establishment
化主	화주	Head fundraiser/organizer for temple construction/repair
都片手	도편수	Master carpenter
包	포	Bracket system in traditional East Asian architecture
間	간	Kan; unit of space between pillars in a building
改構	개구	To renovate, restructure
傾頹	경퇴	To fall into ruin, dilapidate
都料匠	도료장	Master artisan (specializing in painting/finishing?)
影幀	영정	Portrait (especially of a revered figure)
修禪社	수선사	Meditation center
丹靑	단청	Traditional multicolored paintwork on wooden buildings
移安	이안	To move and enshrine (an image, relic, etc.)
羅漢	나한	Arhat; enlightened disciple of Buddha
獨聖	독성	Solitary Saint (Naban Jonja in Korean Buddhism)
巡相	순상	Provincial governor/inspector (likely older title)
施金	시금	Donated money
僧堂	승당	Monks' hall
寮舍	요사	Monks' living quarters
禪堂	선당	Meditation hall
爲祝所	위축소	Place dedicated to prayers (often for royalty)
翼廊	익랑	Wing corridors/cloisters
僧政	승정	Monastic administration
令所	영소	Administrative office (within a temple complex)
長老	장로	Elder monk
幀	탱	Buddhist painting, thangka (usually on silk or paper)
奉安	봉안	To enshrine respectfully
國師大神	국사대신	Guardian deity of the state/temple (local tutelary deity)
未詳	미상	Unknown, unidentified
僥倖히	요행히	Fortunately, luckily
無價	무가	Priceless
特設	특설	To single out, specially mention
大藏經	대장경	Tripitaka; the Buddhist canon
板刻	판각	Woodblock carving/printing
校正	교정	Proofreading; correction
部秩	부질	Volumes and fascicles; organization of a text
國刊	국간	State-published
寺刊	사간	Temple-published
舊本	구본	Old edition/version
續本	속본	Supplementary edition/version
移安	이안	Transfer and enshrinement
손색	손색	Inferiority, blemish, shortcoming
分司	분사	Branch office
諸說	제설	Various theories/accounts
陰刻	음각	Incised carving; intaglio
欄外	난외	Margin (of a page)
知識	지식	Knowledgeable person; acquaintance (Buddhist context)
首座	수좌	Head monk; chief seat (in a monastery)
移置	이치	To move, transfer location
間口	간구	Frontage width (of a building)
奧行	오행	Depth (of a building)
設架	설가	Setting up shelves
配列	배열	Arrangement, layout
寸	촌	Ch'on (unit of length, approx. 3.03 cm)
尺	척	Ch'ŏk (unit of length, approx. 30.3 cm)
分	분	Pun (unit of length, 1/10 ch'on)
마구리	마구리	End piece (of a woodblock, to prevent warping)
銅製	동제	Made of copper/bronze
漆	칠	Lacquer
塗	도	To coat, apply
白樺	백화	Birch tree (Betula platyphylla)
匁	문	Monme (Japanese unit of weight, approx. 3.75g)
貫	관	Kwan (unit of weight, 1000 monme, approx. 3.75kg)
界線	계선	Border lines (on a printing block/page)
罫線	괘선	Column lines (on a printing block/page)
行	행	Line (of text)
字	자	Character, letter
函號	함호	Box number (for storing woodblocks/texts)
千字文	천자문	Thousand Character Classic (used for numbering/ordering)
輪廓	윤곽	Outline, contour
葉	엽	Leaf, page (of a book or block)
略述	약술	Brief account, summary statement
沿革	연혁	History, development (of an institution)
章	장	Chapter, section
名山勝地	명산승지	Famous mountain and scenic spot
盛裝	성장	Splendid attire, full dress
素朴	소박	Simple, plain, artless
晩秋	만추	Late autumn
滿山 紅濤	만산 홍도	Mountains full of red waves (metaphor for autumn leaves)
落木 空山	낙목 공산	Bare trees on an empty mountain (late autumn/winter scene)
陰風	음풍	Chilly wind
一步遲	일보지	One step late
新作路	신작로	Newly built road (often implying modern, potentially disruptive construction)
俗化	속화	Secularization; becoming vulgar or worldly
治道軍	치도군	Road construction crew/workers (?)
人夫	인부	Laborer, workman
油頭紛面	유두분면	(Of women) Oiled hair and powdered face; heavily made-up
酒女	주녀	Barmaid; prostitute
九曲	구곡	Nine bends (of a river or valley)
洞天	동천	Scenic place (often associated with Taoist immortals); grotto-heaven
風化作用	풍화작용	Weathering
무서리다	무서리다	(Possibly) To be frost-covered; to be sharp/jagged (from 무서리, frost + suffix?)
白苔	백태	White moss or lichen
玉石	옥석	Jade-like stones
奇岩	기암	Strange or unusually shaped rocks
遺蹟	유적	Relic, historical site
致遠	치원	Ch'iwŏn (courtesy name of Ch'oe Ch'iwŏn)
影堂	영당	Shrine holding a portrait
題石詩	제석시	Poem inscribed on a rock
是非	시비	Right and wrong; gossip, disputes
籠山	농산	To envelop the mountain (name of the pavilion Nongsanjŏng)
靈跡	영적	Spiritual traces; sacred site
謾	만	Carelessly, idly
區	구	Area, district, realm
仙境	선경	Immortal realm; fairyland
夕陽	석양	Setting sun
照耀	조요	To shine brightly
霧霞	무하	Mist and haze
靑螺	청라	Green spiral shell (metaphor for a pointed mountain peak)
石氣	석기	Stone energy/aura
濛涳	몽공	Misty and vast
頑冥	완명	Stubborn and silent; obtuse
屹屹	흘흘	Towering, lofty
蒼蒼	창창	Vast and blue/green
天然	천연	Natural, untouched
規模	규모	Scale, size
雄大	웅대	Grand, magnificent
千仞	천인	Thousand fathoms (measure of great height/depth)
絕壁	절벽	Cliff, precipice
深淵	심연	Deep pool, abyss
盤石	반석	Large flat rock
飛瀑	비폭	Flying waterfall; cascade
翠巒	취만	Green peak/mountain range
除影	제영	Reflection (?) (uncertain meaning/typo?)
戰慄美	전율미	Beauty that inspires awe or trembling
老龜	노구	Old turtle
瀑	폭	Waterfall
瀑臼	폭구	Plunge pool (at the base of a waterfall)
伏沙	복사	Buried sand/silt
터전	터전	Site, grounds, base
遊客	유객	Traveler, tourist, visitor
施主	시주	Donor, benefactor (especially to a temple)
檜木	회목	Juniper or cypress tree
置踐地	치천지	Resting place; place one has trod (?)
手植	수식	Planted by hand
浮屠	부도	Stupa (containing relics of a monk)
저으사리	저으사리	Dodder or mistletoe (a type of parasitic plant)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제12권 제6호
발행일	1940년 06월 01일
기사제목	海印寺 紀行
필자	李箕永
기사형태	기행문

海印寺 紀行
						李箕永
〔1〕伽倻山은 朝鮮 10勝地 중의 하나로 치는 명산이다. 海印寺는 바로 이 伽倻山 牛頭峯 下에 있는데, 역시 法刹이 大本山인 南道 제일의 名刹이다.
현재 海印寺는 慶尙南道 陜川郡 伽倻面 緇仁里에 있으나, 옛날의 伽倻山은 伽羅연방의 要部였다 한다. 즉 伽倻는 伽羅의 轉音인데 후에 불교적으로 變稱된 것이라 한다. 이 밖에도 牛頭山, 象王山, 象向山, 只怛山, 雪山이라 칭한 바, 忠淸, 慶尙, 全羅 3도의 交界에 있는 大德山의 일맥이 東走하여, 慶尙道를 남북으르 分한 北은 星州, 高靈, 南은 居昌, 陜川 4郡간에 盤居하니, 높이는 해발 4,719척이다.<84> 면적은 3,328町步다. 此葉의 天然 五間에 松, 赤松, 단풍, 활엽수 등이 査密하다. 그러면 이 산 속에 절은 언제부터 생겼든가.
海印寺의 開山 緣日은 新羅 제40대 哀莊王 3년(서기 802년) 壬午 10월 16일이라 하니 距今 1,139년 전이다.
古記에 按컨대 順應, 利貞 兩大德이 哀莊王의 귀의를 得하여 此寺를 開創하였다는 바 兩師는 이보다 먼저 唐나라에 들어가서 寶誌公和尙의 후예에게 誌公의 「東國踏山記」를 얻어 가지고 귀국하였다 한다. 伽倻山에 到하여 草庵을 세우고 (지금의 堆雪堂 越便에 遺墟가 있다 한다) 禪定에 入하였는데, 그 때 哀莊王后가 등창이 나서 神僧을 사방으로 구하던 차, 使從이 왕명을 받들고 伽倻山 외 10里許에 至하였을 때 홀연 山上 공중에 紫氣 광명이 충천함을 보고 白狐의 인도로 (현재 黃山里 前 여호다리는 그 때 사신이 白狐를 처음 만나던 곳이라 한다) 길을 찾어서 산 안에 들어오니 지금 寺門외 數町許에 있는 자추바위(跡岩) 부근에서 여호는 온데 간데 없어지고, 兩師를 만나 보게 되었다. 사신은 來意를 말하고 동행키를 청한 즉, 2師는 불응하며 五色絲 數丈을 援하여 曰, 此線의 한 끗은 왕후의 瘡口에 粘付하고 다른 한 끗은 궁정에 있는 樹枝에 결처 두면, 등창이 곧 낳으리라고. -사신이 돌아가서 그대로 奉命한 즉 과연 그 나무는 말너 죽고, 왕후의 등창은 즉 善하신 지라, 이에 왕과 后가 모다 大喜하사 師를 위하여 海印寺를 창건하시고 왕이 親幸하여 田 2,500結을 寺에 納하는 동시에 慶讚法會를 設하여 回向한 후에 귀국하였다 한다. (지금 極樂殿측에 御水井이 있다)
寺額을 海印寺라함은 開山이래로 便稱한 寺名이다. 혹은 伽倻岬寺, 伽倻山寺, 伽倻寺라고도 칭한 것은 山名과 寺名을 합한 약칭이었다 한다. 그런데 「海印」이라 함은 본시 佛說 華嚴經 중에 있는 『海印三昧』라는 大定의 名이라 한다. 이 大定중에는 3종 世間 - 즉 器世間, 중생 世間, 智正覺世間이 順現하는 것은 마치 비유컨대 천지의 森羅萬象이 海中에 印顯하는 것과 동일하다 하여, 華嚴經의 所依 三昧의 名을 海印이라 칭하였다는 것인데, 華嚴宗祖 義湘은 唐에 入하여 智儼公의 講下에 住하면서 華嚴經을 연구할<85> 때에 海印三昧의 의미를 따서 『海印圖』를 만들어냈다. 이것을 儼公에게 進呈하였더니 儼公이 보고 大讚하였다 한다. 후에 義湘이 본국에 歸하여 海印圖로써 傳法의 寶를 삼으애, 上首 제자인 相源 大德에게 此를 전한 바, 源은 琳大德에게 전하고, 琳이 다시 順應 大德에게 전하였다. 이리하여 順應大德은 此를 受하고 伽倻山에 寺를 刱하여 寺名을 海印이라 칭하였다 하며, 따라서 海印寺는 華嚴宗의 근본 道場이 되는 까닭이라 한다.
그러나 海印寺의 현존 堂宇는 板殿 상하 2棟을 제하고는 擧皆霽月聖岸禪師의 重建에 속한다는 바 其間에 6회의 화재를 입었기 때문이다. 그 후 新羅 敬順王 원년(서기 927년) 丁亥에 希朗祖師가 高麗 太祖의 귀의로 海印寺를 一新 중건한 바 왕은 田 500結를 納寺하였다 한다.
希朗祖師의 始는 朱씨다. 新羅 眞聖女王 3년 己酉에 지금 居昌郡 主上面 聖基村에서 生하고, 孝恭王 7년 癸亥에 伽倻山에 入하여 落髮하였다. 후에 僧統이 되어 此寺에 주지라고 華嚴三昧를 得하였다 한다. 그 때 高麗 太祖가 後百濟王 甄萱과 싸워 美崇山(今 度靈郡)에서 패전하고 海印寺에 入하여 希朗祖師를 師事하였다. 師가 勇敵大軍 祖叉王을 遣하여 神兵을 率하고 麗太祖를 도아서 萱을 破하매 太祖가 朗公을 敬重하여 師로 섬기었던 것이다.
이하 건물을 소개하면

1. 大寂光殿

本殿은 開山 당시부터 毘盧殿이란 扁額을 揭하고 華嚴宗의 本尊인 毘盧 遮那 佛像을 本尊으로 모시던 大德堂인 바 成宗時에 榮祖大師가 重創할 때, 大寂光殿으로 개편하였으며 누차 화재에 중건한 터임므로 舊制보다 규모가 적어젓다 한다. 그러나 現今 本殿은 距今 123년 전 戊寅에 化主 霽月聖岸禪師, 都片手 釋德聖의 건축한 바인데 內7包 外5包 20間의 대건물이다.

2. 板殿

本殿의 건물은 원래 소규모이던 것을 世祖大王 당시에 改構하였으나 未久에 傾頹되어 成宗 戊申에 仁粹, 仁惠 兩大妃께서 榮祖大師를 명하여 都料匠 朴仲石의 手로 재건할 새 普眼堂이라 扁하고 普眼門을 세웠었다. 其後 화재로 普眼門은 全燒되었으나<86> 오직 板殿만은 무사히 災을 면하여 금일에 至하였으니 當寺의 最古 건물이다. 상하 2棟 60間에는 國刊 藏經板本을 수장하였고 좌우 兩棟 4間에는 寺刊藏經板本을 쌓두었다.

3. 堆雪堂

本堂은 大寂光殿과 同建한 것인데, 光武 3년에 梵雲 就堅公이 修禪社를 增刱하고 翌年에 本堂도 수선하였으나 大定 7년에 修禪社를 폐하여 祖師殿으로 개편하고 開山祖이하 역대 禪社의 영정을 봉안하였다. 小香閣, 凝香閣을 幷하여 禪院으로 사용한다.

4. 冥府殿

本殿은 高宗 10년, 距今 68년 전에 雲華普澤公이 金塔殿 舊基에다 刱建하고 越 5년 戊寅에 繡龍等 諸畵員의 手로 丹*하고 十王像을 態川 聖興寺로부터 移安하다.

5. 應眞殿

本殿은 본래 解行堂으로서 成宗 19년에 親建한 건물이다. 역대 禪師의 영정을 봉안하였더니 大定 7년에 板殿 西齊에 안치하였던 16羅漢像을 옴겨 왔다.

6. 獨聖閣

本閣은 본래 希朗祖師像을 봉안하였다가 大定 7년에 現今 祖師殿으로 옴겨 오고 獨聖像을 置하였다.

7. 九光樓

本樓는 大寂光殿보다 6년 후에 건축한 것인데 그 때 本道巡相 金履載가 樓未成함을 와서 보고 도내 僧 40인의 각 10貫義 金과 居昌人 金龍述의 施金 300냥을 得하여 新建한 것이다. 그가 樓題를 手書하여 걸었다 한다.

8. 觀音殿

本殿은 大寂光殿과 동시 중건한 僧堂이다. 初에는 尋劒堂의 扁을 揭하였더니 근 100년 전에 寺北에 있던 觀音殿이 被燒된 후에 소속 재산을 此處에 옴긴 고로, 觀音殿의 칭호를 받게 되었다. 隆熙 2년 戊申에 晦光師濬公이 尙宮 千一淸의 金施을 得하여 개축하니 寮舍와 아울러 3棟 86間의 대건물이다.

9. 窮玄堂

本堂 역시 大寂光殿과 동시 중건한 禪堂이다. 光武 7년 癸酉에 海鵬禪師가 중건하고 隆熙 2년 戊申에 晦光師濬公이 觀音殿과 동시 증건한 것인데 3棟 80間이다.<87>

10. 景洪殿

本殿은 高宗 29년 距今 49년 壬辰에 梵雲就賢公이 三殿爲祝所로 新建한 것인 바 좌우 翼廊을 합하여 3棟 33間이다.

11. 四雲堂

本堂은 역시 大寂光殿과 동시, 片手釋宇定의 所建인데, 舊來로 僧政을 행하던 令所라 한다.

12. 明月堂

本堂도 大寂光殿과 동시에, 片手釋德性의 손으로 건축된 것이다.

13. 鳳凰門

本門은 大寂光殿과 가치 중건되고, 距今 103년 전 戊戌에 淵月 長老가 化主가 되어 伽倻, 那提, 文殊, 普賢 4位幀을 봉안하였더니 昭和 8년 癸酉에 古鏡大師가 化主가 되어 松坡順公의 手로 四天王幀을 新成 봉안하였다.

14. 解脫門

15. 仁霞門

此 2門은 모다 大寂光殿과 가치 중건된 것으로 光武 3년 己亥에 化主 梵雲 就堅 禪師가 重修하였다.

16. 局司壇

本壇은 1棟 3間의 소건물로 局師大神을 봉안하였다. 창건 연대는 미상하나 去 純祖時에 丁丑 화재를 요행히 면하고, 光武 3년 己亥에 梵雲公의 重修로 금일에 至한 것이다.
海印寺에는 보물이 많다 하나 그 중에도 無價의 寶로는 누구나 팔만대장경을 特設하지 않을 수 없을 것이다.
大藏經은 宋 太祖 開寶 4년(서기 971년)에 始刊한 蜀本으로부터 支那, 朝鮮, 내지를 합하여 전후 수십회의 板刻이 있다 하지만 특히 高麗 板刻을 세계 無比의 걸작품이라 함은 그 체제의 훌륭함과 校正의 엄밀함과 部秩이 완비함이 세계 藏板중에 제1위이기 때문이다. 내용을 구별해 보면 寺刊과 國刊이 있고 國刊중에도 또한 舊本 續本이 있다. 續本은 李朝이후에 만든 것이고, 舊本은 國刊 藏板 移安(國刊은 李太王 7년 戊寅에 옴겨 왔다) 이전에 개간된 것으로써, 國刊보다도 연대가 훨신 이전 것이라 하나, 그러나 國刊에 비하여 조금도 손색이 없다 한다.<88>
國刊板은 高麗 高宗 23년 丙申(서기 1236년)에 本司를 江華에 分司를 晋州에 置하고, 38년 辛亥까지 大凡 16년간 조각한 것이라 한다. 이 經板을 海印寺에 두게된 데 대해서는 諸說이 있으나 大正 7년에 包光師의 발견에 의한 華嚴敎 分記 제10권 10장의 欄外에 「丁丑出陸時 此閣失與知識道元同願開板入上 乙酉十月日首座冲玄」 운운이라 음각한 것으로 보아 李太祖 7년 戊寅에 海印寺로 移置한 것이다. 經板을 間口 33間 奧行 5間半의 板殿 2棟에 收藏하여 設架 배열한 바 대저 縱 8寸內, 外橫 2尺 2,3寸, 厚 1寸 2,3分이요, 兩端에 마구리를 부치고 네구통에 銅製장식을 한데다가, 전면에 칠을 薄塗하였는데, 用材는 白樺이다. (朝鮮名으로 자작나무 일명은 巨濟木이라 한다) 한 개의 중량은 700匁 내지 1貫되는 것도 있다. 板面은 보통 縱으로 7寸 4,5分 橫으로 1尺 5寸 6分이요, 상하에 界線이 있을 뿐, 罫線는 없다. 1행 16자 23행인데 1자 方 5, 6分. 양면에 각하고 其 一端에는 經名卷次丁數並千字文에 의하여 函函號를 示하고 그 外側도 간략히 표시를 刻하였다. 그러나 其 中에 板面의 寸法, 行數, 字數, 字의 大少등이 상이한 것도 있으며 輸廓 及 괘선이 있는 것과 一面만 刻한 것과 혹은 一面에 二葉을 刻한 것 등이 있으니, 자못 전부가 原板이었지만 중간의 손상으로 후에 刻한 것이 다소 있기 때문이다. 이러한 經板을 二座 藏經閣 五層 板架에 층마다 縱으로 2열 배치하고 중앙의 板架 壁際에는 다시 전후 양변으로 배열하였으니 國刊 판본 수는 81,258枚에 經部秩數가 1,512部요 經卷數는 355권이라 하니 麗朝, 李朝 兩代에 결친 이 위대한 사업에는 실로 경탄을 不己할 뿐이겠다.
寺刊 藏版의 최초 개간된 유래에 대하여는 化主 李居仁의 불교적 전설이 또한 흥미 있으나 지면 관계로 그것은 割愛하겠다.
이상은 海印寺의 연혁을 약술함에 불과한 바 (주로 「海印寺 略誌」에 의하여) 章을 달리하여 이제부터는 내가 본 伽倻山을 적어 보기로 한다.



伽倻山은 자고로 단풍이 유명하다 한다. 그러나 大凡 명산승지는 어느 때 보아도 독특한 풍경을 가지고<89> 있나니, 마치 미인은 아무 때 보아도 미인인 것과 같다. 盛裝을 했을 때는 화려한 美가 좋을 것이오, 수수하게 차렸을 때는 또한 소박한 美가 좋을 것 아닌가.
이렇게 생각한다면 내가 晩秋에 伽倻山을 가본 것이 조금도 섭섭할 게 없겠다. 그러나 몇일 전에만 갔더라도 滿山 紅濤의 盛裝한 伽倻山을 玩賞할 수 있는 것을 落木 空山에 陰風이 냉냉한 때 찾어간 것은 자못 一步遲의 恨이 없지 않다.
大邱에서 기차를 버리고 역전에서 高麗行의 뻐쓰를 乘換하면, 2시간여에 高靈邑에 도착한다. 거기서 다시 慶尙南北道의 道界를 넘기까지 平平凡凡한 산천은 어디 하나 명산이 있을 것 같지 않다. 그러나 嶺上을 넘어서 冶爐川을 낭떠러지기를 구버 보며, 멀리 雲表에 솟은 紫色 山容을 眺望할 때는 문득 저기로구나 하는 생각이 누구나 생길 것이다.
그러나 冶爐川을 지나서 紀流洞까지 또 30리는 역시 평범한 山谷간을 뚫고 나간 신작로다. 따라서 伽倻山의 승경은 紅流洞에서부터 전개되기 시작한다.
하긴 紅流洞門을 들어서기 전에 武陵橋등의 명소가 없지 않다 하나, 지금은 「花飛暮春日, 尋入武陵天 何處神仙會, 遠林生翠煙」이라한 西山大師 시가 남어 있을 뿐, 武陵의 옛날 경치도 변모된 모양이니 더구나 신선의 자최는 말할 것도 없겠다. 그렇다니 말인데, 海印寺 앞까지 신작로를 내는 바람에 紅流洞도 俗化해서, 지금은 난잡하기 짝이 없다. 治道軍과 목재 운반 인부 등의 등쌀로 주막과 점포가 느러간다. 밤이면 油頭紛面의 酒女가 출몰하고, 장구 소리와 노래 가락이 흘려 나온다.
紅流洞에서 자동차를 내리면, 계곡은 갑자기 좁아지고, 좌우의 靑山이 碧溪水를 둘러쌌다. 그리하여 綠水는 靑山을 끼고 돌고, 靑山은 綠水를 안고 돌아, 소위 紅流 九曲의 절승을 이루었는데, 만일 伽倻山을 小金剛에 비한다면, 紅流洞天의 일대는 마치 內金剛과 같고, 牛頭峯 一境은 外金剛과 같다 할까. 그래서 고산 지대에는 가지만 버러진 잡목림과 풍화작용에 무서린 峯岩이 솟아있고 분지인 계곡간에는 白苔낀 절벽과 격류에 때를 베낀 옥석과 기암이 나열하였다.<90>
紅流洞 상류에는 崔孤雲의 유적인 籠山亭이 또한 一景을 이루었거니와, 伽倻山은 도처에 孤雲의 유적이 많다 한다. 현재 海印寺의 위치인 緇仁里는 致遠里의 變稱이라는 바, 거기는 孤雲선생이 처자를 인솔하고 伽倻에 入來했던 당시의 주소였다 한다.
그래서 籠山亭 後麓에는 孤雲의 影堂이 있고 越便 大路傍에는 저 孤雲의 유명한
狂奔疊石吼重巒
人語難分咫尺間.
常恐是非聲到耳
故敎流水盡籠山.
이라 한 題石詩가 있다. 紅流洞의 孤雲에 대한 1, 2 名詩를 소개해 보자.
開道孤雲入此巒
不知靈跡依何間.
謾將間眼看尋處
動者流川靜者山.
의 晦堅大師 詩가 其 1이오,
逝者流溪立者巒
一區仙境落人間.
古岩不語當時事
何日孤雲入此山.
의 仁波大師 詩가 其2이다. 석양 山路를 결어 籠山亭을 돌아가면 산남 산북은 除陽이 분명한데 照耀하는 日光은 靑山에 霧霞를 토함이 또한 장관이다. 吹笛峯 下엔 명소가 유명하니 沘筆岩, 吹風瀨, 光風瀨, 完在岩, 噴玉瀑, 霽日潭, 疊石臺, 會仙岩 등이다. 먼저 吹笛峯을 을푼 崔東植의 시을 보면
春山春雨梁靑螺
石氣濛涳樹影多.
玉笛數聲雲不倦
也知峯月浴銀河.
가 지금도 그럴 뜻 髣髴하나, 沘筆岩을 두고 지은 姜孟希 시의
鐵削千尋壯
雲生萬竇凉.
頑冥終不語
屹屹但蒼蒼.
은 찾어 볼 수 없다. 웨 그러냐 하면, 沘筆岩은 신작로를 내는 바람에 지금은 길 밑에 무처서 뵈이지 않고 겨우<91> 岩名을 刻字한 것이 路傍岩에 자최를 남겼기 때문이다.
이런 의미에서 천연의 경치를 그내로 가지기는 아마도 落花潭이리라. 落花潭은 寺에 至하는 최후의 절경이니 그 규모의 웅대함이 外金剛의 九龍淵만은 못 하나, 千仞 절벽下에 심연을 일우고, 백옥같은 반석위에서 떠러지는 一條 飛瀑은 그 위의 翠巒의 除影과 더부러 무시무시한 戰慓美를 갖게 한다. 前名을 藝妓潭이라 하였으나 너무 野하기 때문에 落花潭으로 고첬다던가. 옛날에 기생이 빠저 죽은 곳이라 한다. 그 위 山頂에는 老龜 昇天岩이 있다. 흡사히 금방 뛰어 올을 것 같은 龜形으로 된 바위가 보인다.
그러나 海印寺 부근의 유명한 폭포로는 말짱이로 가는, 路傍에 있는 龍門瀑이다. 그것은 朴淵 같은 長山속이 아니라, 瀑長이 그리 길진 못하다. 수년전의 홍수로 瀑臼도 伏沙로 미어저서 웅덩이가 넓지 못하다 하나, 터전은 넓기 때문에, 만일 폭포밑을 인력으로 파내기만 한다면, 웅대한 폭포를 만들 수가 있을 것 같다. 나는 그런 공상을 해 보고, 이 산속에 다수한 자기 성명을 대서특서한 遊客중에 혹시 그런 施主는 없는가 염원해 보았다.
海印寺측에 있는 學士臺도 孤雲선생의 置踐地라 한다. 선생의 手植인 老檜木이 두어 아름되게 컸다. 전설에는 지팽이를 꼬진 것이 살었다는 것이다.
이 밖에 奉天臺는 牛頭山 제일봉 하에 있으니, 여기에 올르면, 멀리 智異山 連峯이 구름 밖에 둘러섰는 輪廓이 南山넘어로 희미하게 내다보인다.
牛鼻井은 牛頭上峯 山頂에 있다. 푸른 이끼가 끼었는 天水바지의 옹달샘이다. 따라서 우물로서는 아무 보잘 것이 없으나, 작년같은 大旱에도 이 샘물이 여전하게 고여 있었다니 따는 이상하다. 그러나 물은 이 샘뿐 아니라 伽倻山 계곡은 어디나 물이 흘러서 이 물로 농사를 짓는 부근 주민들은 免凶을 하였다니, 未嘗不 伽倻山이 피난처로 유명한 승지인가 부다.
그런 공리적 생각은 그만 두더라도 牛頭山頂에 올라서 바라보면 동서남북이 豁然히 툭 터진 一望無險한 天空이 상쾌하다. 가깝게는 慶北 일대의 群少重巒이 眼下에 굴복하였는데, 그 가운데 洛東江이 白布를<92> 펼친듯이 길게 둘러있다. 急角度가 진 북편, 이 산 밑은 절벽틈에 잡목이 무성하다. 海印寺에 부속된 암자는 擧皆 큰 절 부근에 있으니 三仙庵과 藥水庵은 尼院으로 유명하고, 希朗臺는 希朗公의 修道地라 師名을 취하이라. 白蓮庵은 本寺보다도 高處에 在하여 老松奇岩간에 景槪 자못 絶勝하고, 정적하기 寺 중에 제일이니, 그래서 伽倻山중 제일 승지라는 稱譽를 듣는 福田靈倫이라 한다. 고래로 수도 고승의 住錫한 자가 많었으니, 幻寂, 楓溪, 性峯, 仁坡, 濶海, 信海 등 諸師었다.
弘濟庵은 四溟大師가 거주하던 곳이다. 지금도 대사의 임종하던 방이 그대로 한 편으로 影堂이 있다. 내가 바로 이 弘濟庵에 있었는데, 거기는 飛鳳山의 一翼이 前溪를 막어 서고, 後峯下에 靑竹이 둘러있는 一望 명당지다. 후원에 四溟堂의 浮屠가 있다. 이 앞산에 봄에는 철죽이 곱게 피고, 가을에는 단풍으로 유명하다는데, 나는 만추에 갔기 때문에 마른나무 가지에 「저으사리」가 시퍼렇게 붙은 잡목림을 또한 기이하게 보았다.(끝)<93>
<84-93>