잡지명 別건곤 제44호
발행일 1931년 10월 01일
기사제목 나의 抗議 (My Protest)
기사형태 논설 (Opinion Piece)

My Protest
Is this the right thing to do, from a parent to the school authorities?
Kim Hak-sun

Although I raised my child in my own home, I should be expressing gratitude to the school authorities who are teaching my child, who can't even tell the difference between water and fire. Instead, I'm lodging a protest. Does that make sense? However, on the other hand, I feel deeply disappointed with today's school authorities, who have driven me to utter the word "protest" even though I should be extremely grateful. Perhaps this protest is just a complaint stemming from our own circumstances, but at least for school officials to sit there and teach students without knowing their family situations or living conditions, simply imitating what others do in a coercive manner, is not the proper attitude for educators to take. Of course, the school authorities can't possibly attend to each student's family situation, provide them with support, change educational policies, or reform school rules. However, failing to understand the family circumstances of students or their living conditions ultimately leads to the conclusion that you are ignorant of the actual state of society.
(The following six lines are omitted)

To get back to the point, I have one daughter attending a girls' high school, and I support five or six family members with my salary from a factory. To support a household with factory work and also send a daughter to secondary school is a reckless endeavor, and it is truly a burden beyond my means. However, even though I am uneducated, my goal is to educate my daughter so that she can support herself, which others may see as presumptuous. But, school authorities, teachers, is it right to say to a student, just because they are behind on tuition, something like "Why are you trying to educate your child if you are poor? Why did you even enroll if you don't have money?" I would rather have you slap me or scold me for not paying my child's tuition on time, but I cannot bear to see my young and naive child come home crying after hearing such words from a teacher. If you are going to say, "Don't even try to educate the children of the poor," then, of course, I have nothing more to say. However, in today's society, striving for a comfortable life is out of the question, and even if you put your heart and soul into your children's education, many cannot even afford tuition on time, let alone other expenses like travel, gifts for teachers, or school support fees. Do you know how many families in your school are in this unfortunate situation? There may be other complaints and protests, larger ones, but I would like to use this space to ask you to stop making abusive remarks in front of students.

To the Bus Girls, Don't Look Down on Us
Gu X Ho In (九X號人)

Whether it's a conductor on a train, a bus, or a car, it's all the same, but because we bus girls are women, it seems like passengers look down on us. Especially some young male students who behave in ways they wouldn't dare to with train or tram conductors. It's not just men feeling superior, but a common prejudice against women in general. If they treated us like younger sisters because we're young, that would be kind. But they glare at us with lewd eyes and constantly heckle us—why do they do that?
"Punch your ticket, please. Punch your ticket, please," I say, but they pretend not to hear and sit still until it's time to get off, then they hand over a one-won bill as if it's no big deal. And some people hand over a ten-won bill and demand change. I don't know if they're rich gentlemen who have never seen small change in their lives, but shouldn't they know that you need to have small change ready when you ride a bus or tram? Sometimes, middle school students with bad attitudes swear and talk back to us. It's really something when their group gets on board. <10>
"Give me a round-trip ticket for the morning."
"What a stingy guy."
"The gas is good."
"Give it to me at Samcheong-dong Norikkae."
They say all sorts of things and giggle. I have no idea what makes them so excited.

Lately, it's been a lot less than before. They know that heckling us doesn't do any good, and we've gotten used to the job and aren't as shy as we used to be, so we just laugh it off. But when I think about them looking down on us and treating us like we're "just bus girls," I feel very unpleasant. What good do they think it will do for them and their sisters to act like that? I hope you'll ask them that.

From a Patient to a Doctor
Ko Yŏng-ch'an

You ask me to speak my complaints? There are so many things I could complain about in this world, but since I've been bedridden with illness for three months, I should address the most urgent complaints first.
Doctors! Why do you charge so much for treatment and medicine? It's bad enough that I'm sick, but your excessive exploitation is driving me to the point of death. Is it okay for poor people to just die?
No matter how special your skills are, what is the basis for charging one won for a consultation and two won or more for a house call?
What is the basis for charging ten or twenty times the cost of medicine?
What is the basis for charging two, three, five, or six won for hospitalization, as if it were a hotel?
No matter how I look at it, I don't think doctors have any right to make such exorbitant profits from their skills. I suppose it's hard work. But if you can spend ten minutes dabbling around and make several won in pure profit from injections and medicine, what about those who work ten hours a day for about one won? Putting that aside for now, how can someone who earns about one won and supports a family with food and clothing afford to get medical treatment when they get sick? Even if the whole family goes without water, the income is not enough to meet your fees. So, in the end, doesn't it mean that people without money have to die when they get sick? The problem boils down to this.
"Doctors, please lower the fees you charge current patients, taking into account the situation of Koreans." To that end, I would like to make the following requests:
One, don't just think about making a living, but don't think about making a fortune.
Two, even a shack is fine, don't build overly extravagant facilities like two- or three-story Western-style houses and then exploit patients to pay for them.
And as a special rule:
One, further refine your skills to avoid killing people.
Two, be kind to patients and nurses and maintain good conduct.
Three, don't be arrogant just because people call you "teacher."
Four, don't call shamans or fortune tellers when you yourself are sick.
Regardless of who you are, my complaints against doctors will end only when you follow the above rules. <11>

From a Customer to a Store
O Cham-sun

One, don't just put "Kindness, Sincerity, Small Profits, Quick Sales" on your sign, but actually practice it.
Two, don't clutter your signs with nonsensical phrases.
Three, provide drinks, seating, and restrooms in every store.
Four, put fair price tags on every item and absolutely don't offer different prices to different people.
Five, don't watch customers too closely, making them feel uncomfortably like you think they're going to steal something.
Six, abolish night markets.
Seven, hold customer appreciation events from time to time.
Eight, abolish prize giveaways.
Nine, don't just seek profit, but carefully select the items you import.
Ten, hold "Buy Korean Products" days and "Cost Price Sale" days from time to time.
Eleven, don't use dishonest advertising techniques.

From a Female Student to Male Students
Kim Yang-sun

I just received a request from a reporter from Kaebyŏk-sa to write a statement of protest. A statement of protest (?) When you are asked to write, it is not a request to write as a laborer to a capitalist or as someone who is subject to special discrimination based on class, but a request to write a protest to male students as a female student, so I cannot help but feel vague.
Why? Because male students are also students, and female students are also in the same position, no, in the same era, receiving the same cultivation. (The following eight lines are omitted) If I were to diagnose the reporter's mind like a doctor, perhaps the focus of the current issue is the stereotypical concept of male and female. Because they are men, they know the state of the world (?), and because they are women (?), they know nothing, so-called ignorant people (無知者)(?). Whether this is a word used in the 15th or 16th century, when dealing with students, it cannot be denied that we are all standing on the path of researching new science. So, I don't think we have anything to protest to male students in terms of knowledge itself.
Then, what point worthy of protest did this reporter discover and ask me, a female student, to address...?
I hesitated for a moment. I think it is a protest against some delinquent male students who harass female students with pranks and insults based on their outdated ideas. Here, as a female student, I feel that rather than a few words of protest, I would like to point out a few things to my fellow students as advice.
First, don't put the label of "man" on your forehead and act recklessly with anachronistic delusions.
Second, don't make a spectacle of yourselves by making heckling your full-time job, which is contrary to your student status.
Third, don't be so impulsive and be more cautious, considering that there are statistics showing that some students heckle a single student more than twenty times a day.
Fourth, be careful about going out at night and avoid disturbing the peace with popular songs around midnight, as it may interfere with people's sleep.
Fifth, don't follow female students walking at night like a puppy begging for food... it's despicable.
Sixth, don't treat cafes or bars like taverns, and don't spray alcohol breath on passersby while burying your head in a round hat... it's against student etiquette.
Seventh, don't walk around with geisha and cafe waitresses, as if you were carrying textbooks, while claiming to be learning specialized knowledge... it's pitiful for academics.
Eighth, don't throw letters to unknown female students and pretend to be in love... it exposes your incompetence without exception.
There are many more, but I will end here due to space limitations. I hope that all the male students who need sufficient consideration and reflection will read this when they are bored.

From a Reader to Newspaper and Magazine Publishers
K Mountain Reader

It would be quite brave of you to ask us for complaints while being magazine publishers yourselves.
Shall I try to wield my clumsy pen and write a few sharp words?

1. To Newspaper Publishers
1. Reduce the space and only publish useful articles. And then reduce the price to about half of what it is now.
2. Maintain a consistent position and opinion and do not be swayed unnecessarily.
3. If you are already going out as a commodity, act like a commodity and don't be pretentious.
4. Do not stir up the nerves of the readers by wielding a sensational pen over meaningless matters. <12>
5. Even if you have space left over, don't just translate foreign content.
6. Do not fight. (Internally)
7. Merge all the private Korean newspapers into one.

2. To Magazine Publishers
1. Do not publish both a founding and closing issue at the same time. (If you have that money, help those in need.)
2. Do not attract readers with advertisements listing empty titles.
3. Express a principle or claim.
4. Publish regularly.
5. Publish many "grateful" articles.
6. Make all reviews courteous, fair, and honest. (Especially character reviews.)

From an Outsider to the Postal Authorities
Samsu Sŏkch'onsaeng

I live in the most remote mountain village in Korea. Everyone knows that Samsu and Kapsan are incredibly remote mountain villages from ancient times. Perhaps it's because it's such a remote mountain village, or perhaps it's because they look down on people who live in such places, but the postal authorities in our area handle mail very carelessly, and I can't understand why.
When I went to Seoul before and stayed at a friend's house, I saw that the post office there brought letters to the house and asked for the recipient by name before delivering them. But here, they don't even try to find the house. Instead, they leave it at the house of the district head (區長), which is about ten *ri* away from where the recipient lives, so even urgent letters cannot be received quickly. The letter is left at the district head's house for days until someone living near my house happens to go there and bring it to me. And if the person who brought it is busy, they may not deliver it that day, or they may forget about it and lose it after several days. This kind of thing might be an exception, but generally speaking, they rarely deliver it directly. They only bring registered mail reluctantly.
Not only letters, but all ordinary mail is like that. I have been a reader of *Kaebyŏk* from the first issue of Kaebyŏk-sa, and it has been very difficult to read it every month.
Because the book is so good, the people at the post office tear it open, read it all, and then wrap it back up and deliver it. When it is left at the district head's house, they open it and read it there. After all this, someone from the village brings it to me. When I receive it, it is all tattered. So, I assume that the company sent me a used book and wrap it up and send it back to the company, so the company scolds me for sending back a used book after reading it. I get angry and write a letter to the company complaining that they are ignoring me because I am a mountain villager and sending me such a used book. How much money do you think I spent doing this? It would be nice if I could receive even a used book on time every month, but sometimes it is announced in the newspaper that it has been published, but I wait for more than ten days and it does not arrive. So, I write a letter to the company. Then the company sends me a letter saying that it was sent on X day and that if I have not received it, I should investigate. So, I put aside my work and wait for the postman to come and ask him. When I ask, he says it has not arrived. So, I write to the company again, and the company, thinking that it is truly unfair, writes "Re-sent" and sends it again. It is only after almost the entire month has passed that I receive that month's issue. I want to read the book, but I don't have money, so I sell the grain I have at home in the market and place an order.
These days, I read four things that come out of Kaebyŏk-sa and one or two other things, which costs more than one won.
It would be a great loss for me if I missed just one month of this. I always thought that the company was not sending it and was eating it up, but after investigating in various ways, I have come to realize that this is happening because the postal authorities are handling things carelessly. I am sure that I am not the only person in Korea who is experiencing this.
Therefore, I am daring to protest to the postal authorities about this matter, and I sincerely hope that they will realize this and take steps to prevent such accidents from happening again. -End- <9>
(This continues on page nine, fourth paragraph) <13>
If I miss this for just one month, it is no small loss to me. Until now, I only thought that the head office was not sending it and was taking the money, but after investigating in various ways recently, I have come to know for sure that these things are happening because the postal authorities are handling things carelessly. I am sure that I am not the only person in Korea who is experiencing this.
Therefore, I dare to protest to the postal authorities about the above facts, and I sincerely hope that they will be greatly enlightened and take care to prevent such accidents from happening again in the future. - End - <9>

**Named Entities**

金學淳	Kim Hak-sun
九X號人	Gu X Ho In
高永燦	Ko Yŏng-ch'an
吳占順	O Cham-sun
金良順	Kim Yang-sun
K山	K Mountain
三水	Samsu
甲山	Kapsan
石村生	Sŏkch'onsaeng



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제44호
발행일	1931년 10월 01일
기사제목	나의 抗議
기사형태	논설

나의 抗議
이래야 올습니까, 학부형으로부터 학교 당국에
金學淳

나서 키우기는 저의 가정에서 햇슬망정 물인지 불인지 분간도 못하는 저의 자식을 가르처 주시는 학교 당국에 대하야 감사한 표의는 그만두고 항의라 하니 말이 됩니까. 그러나 한편으로 극히 감사하여야 할 학교 당국에 항의라는 말이라도 나오게 되는 오늘의 학교 당국자를 위하야 그윽히 섭섭함을 마지아니하나이다. 하기야 항의라는 그것이 물론 우리 자신의 처지만을 생각하고 나오는 불평일는지 모르겟습니다마는 적어도 학교 당국자로 안저서 학생의 가정상항이나 생활형편을 모르고 맹육적으로 남의 하는 흉내만 내여가며 남의 자질을 가르친다는 것은 너무도 교육자로서의 취할 바 태도가 아닌가 합니다. 물론 학교 당국으로서도 일일히 학생의 가정상항을 돌보아 주고 페보아 주어가며 교육방침을 변경한다거나 학교규측을 개혁한다거나 하기까지는 못할 일일 줄 압니다. 그러나 학생의 가정상황이나 학생 가정의 생활상태를 리해치 못한다는 것은 결국 현하 사회의 실제 사정을 모르고 잇다는 결론에 박게 이를 수 업는 것이니(以下 六行略)
딴말이 너무 길어젓습니다마는 저는 저의 딸자식 하나가 방금 어느 녀자고보에 다니는 중이요 오육 명의 식구를 제가 어느 공장에 다니는 월급푼으로 떠바처 나갑니다. 공장생활로 한 집안의 살님을 떠바처 가고 게다가 딸자식을 중등학교에 통학시킨다는 것은 너무도 꾀 업는 짓인 동시에 저로서는 참말 힘에 넘치는 짐입니다. 그러나 나는 이왕 무식햇슬망정 딸자식이나마 가르처서 제 압을 제가 끄려나가게나 만드러 주랴는 것이 남으로 본다면 주제 넘친 짓입니다. 그러나 학교 당국자 선생님 여러분! 가난한 놈이 무슨 자식을 가르처, 돈 업스면 무엇하러 입학은 햇서 하는 그런 따위의 말을 월사금 체납만 해도 용서업시 소위 자긔가 가르치고 잇는 학생들 아페 대담 폭언하는 것은 차라리 제가 자식의 월사금을 철철이 내여주지 못한 죄로 제가 직접 선생님들 아페 가서 뺨을 맛는다든지 꾸중을 듯기로 하면 달게 밧겟사오나 어리고 철모르는 자식이 선생님 아페 그런 말을 듯고 도라와서 어미아비 아페서 우는 꼴은 정말 볼 수가 업습니다. 그러니 가난한 놈의 자식은 가르치지도 말어라 그러케 말슴하면 물론 더 할 말슴은 업습니다. 그러나 오늘 이 사회의 모든 형편이 애쓰며 부즈런하고도 여유 잇는 생활은 말도 말려니와 자질의 교육에 마음과 정성을 다한다고 다 해도 다른 여행비니 교원 긔렴품이니 학교 후원회비 가튼 것은 고사하고 월사금 그것까지 정한 긔한에 일일히 납부 못하는 이 안타까운 사정이 우리의 현상이요 그리고 그런 안타까운 사정을 가진 집 자질들이 당신의 가르치고 게신 학교 안에 얼마나 되는 지를 아십니까 모르십니까. 다른 불평 다른 항의, 커다란 불평과 항의가 얼마이고 잇슬 것이지만 가장 적은 이 핊�의 즉 학생 아페서 폭언을 토하는 긔염만을 그처달라는 거기에 이 난을 빌어서 한 마듸 올니나이다.

뻐스껄로 乘客에게, 만만히 보지 마라
九X號人

차장이면 전차 자동차 긔차나 다 매한가진데 우리 뻐스껄은 녀자가＜10＞ 되여서 그런지 손님들이 퍽 만만히 보는 것 가태요. 특히 남자 손님들 중에도 청년 학생들이 긔차나 전차 차장에게 안 하는 버릇을 더러 합니다. 비단 남자라고 해서 우월감을 가진 것만이 아니라 엇더한 일에고 녀자에게 대한 상투인가 합니다. 나이가 어리니까 누이동생 대접으로 그런다면 오히려 따뜻한 점이 잇지요. 음충마진 눈을 흡뜨고 번번 히야까시로 대하니 무슨 필요로 그럼니까.
「표 찍으서요. 표 찍으서요.」 하고 압흐로 갈 때는 시침을 뚝 따고 안젓다가 자긔 내릴 때 가서 턱 내리면서 일원짜리 내여노키가 일수고 또 뭘한 사람은 십원짜리 내여노흐면서 거실러 내라니 평생에 잔돈 구경은 못해본 부자집 서방님인지는 몰나도 뻐스나 전차를 타자면 잔돈 준비가 잇서야 하는 것쯤은 상식적으로 생각다더라도 모를 리야 업겟지요. 도 수 틀리는 때 반말지거리를 하며 불량성 만흔 중학생은 욕설까지 합니다. 딴 손님이 별로 업고 자긔네 패가 타게 되면 참 가관이지요.
「오전에 왕복표 한 장 주.」
「시찌떵일세.」
「게쓰가 이이네.」
「삼청동 노리까에 주시요.」
이런 별별 소리를 다 하면서 낄낄대지요. 하여간 그런 분네는 무엇에 신빠람이 나서 그러는지 도모지 모를 일이얘요.
요 근래는 전에 비하야 퍽 덜한 셈입니다. 아모리 히야까시를 햇쟈 별 수가 업는 줄 알고 우리도 처음과 달라서 일에 익숙해지니까 수좁은 기도 업서지고 해서 그까짓 것은 우숩게 아라버립니다. 그러나 「저것은 뻐스껄이다.」 하고 내려다보고 만만히 구는 것을 생각하면 대단히 불쾌를 늣깁니다. 조선 사람으로서 그네들과 그네들의 누이동생들에게는 장차 무슨 뾰족한 수가 잇겟다고 그러는 것입니까! 그것을 좀 단단히 무러보아 주십시요.

患者로서 醫師에게
高永燦

나의 항의를 말하라구요. 이 세상에 마음 노코 항의하라면 할데야 만켓지요. 그러나 아시다십히 나는 병으로 누은 지가 3개월이나 되니 우선에 급한 항의부터 해야 되겟소.
의사 제군! 치료비 약갑을 웨 그리 비싸게 밧소. 수가 사나워서 병은 나지만은 제군의 지나친 착취에 병을 못 고치고 죽을 지경이니 가난한 사람은 죽어도 맛당하오?
아모리 특수한 기술이라 하지만은 진찰료 1원 왕진료 2원 이상을 요구하는 근거가 어데 잇소?
약갑슬 원가의 10배 20배씩 밧는 폭리의 근거가 또 어데 잇소.
호텔이 아닌 다음에 입원료를 이삼 원 오육 원씩 밧는 근거는 또 어데 잇소?
아모리 따지고 보아도 의사가 기술을 파라 그처럼 폭리를 남길 하등의 근거가 업슬 줄 아오. 수고라고도 하겟지요. 한 십분 동안 흐지부지 하면 주사, 약갑 해서 여러 원의 순리익을 보게 되니 1일 10시간 고역에 1원 내외의 보수를 밧는 사람에 비한다면 엇지 되겟소. 그것은 잠시 별 문제로 하고라도 1원 내외의 수입을 가지고 상봉하솔 하고 먹고 사는 사람이 병이 나면 어느 해가에 고처 보겟소. 온 가족이 물 한 목음 안 먹는다고 치고 드러온 수입을 다 바처도 제군의 요구하는 료금에 부족이 되니 엇지 하오. 그러니 결국 돈 업는 사람은 병나면 죽어야 된다는 것이 되고 말지 안소. 그러니 문제는 여기에 귀착되고 마오.
「의사는 현재의 환자에게 요구하는 금액을 조선 사람의 처지를 참작하야 훨신 나추어라.」 하는 것이요. 그러기 위하야는 이러한 주문을 하고 십소.
一, 먹고 살 생각만 하지 돈 잡을 생각을 말 것.
一, 바라크도 조흐니 이삼칭 양옥과 가튼 과대한 설비를 하야 그 미천을 환자에게 착취하지 말 것.
그러고 별칙으로
一, 기술을 더욱 연마하야 생사람 죽임이 업도록 할 것.
一, 환자와 간호부에게 친절히 하고 품행을 단정히 할 것.
一, 「선생님」이라고 부른다고 뽐내지 말 것.
一, 의사 자신이 아플 때 무당 판수를 부르지 말 것. 이상.
엇더한 의사를 물론하고 우의 제칙을 준수하여야 의사에 대한 나의 항의가 끗나겟소.＜11＞

손님으로 商店에
吳占順

一, 간판에만 친절 정녕이니 박리다매니 하지 말고 사실로 실행할 것.
一, 간판에 되지 안은 문꾸로 너즐하니 써 부치지 말 것.
一, 상점마다 음료수와 안즐 자리와 변소를 작만할 것.
一, 물건마다 정당한 갑스로 정까표를 부치고 외누리를 절대하지 말 것.
一, 손님을 넘우 감시하야 무엇 흠치려나 온 듯이 불쾌감을 가지지 말도록 할 것.
一, 야시를 페지하도록 할 것.
一, 때로 고객 위안회를 개최할 것.
一, 경품을 페지할 것.
一, 리익만 구하지 말고 물건을 가려서 수입할 것.
一, 때때로 물산장려데-와 원가판매데-를 열 것.
一, 부정한 광고술을 쓰지 말 것.

女學生으로 男學生에게
金良順

지금 나는 개벽사 긔자로부터 항의문을 쓰라고 하는 부탁을 바덧다. 항의문(?) 하고 쓰라고 할 제는 로동자로 자본가에게나 혹 게급적으로 특별한 차별을 밧는 사람으로써 쓰라는 부탁이 아니고 한 여학생으로 남학생에게 항의를 쓰라는 부탁이니 막연한 감을 금치 못한다.
웨 그러냐 하면 남학생도 학생이요 여학생도 가튼 닙장에서 아니 가튼 시대에서 가튼 수양을 하고 잇는 까닭이다. (以下 八行略) 여긔에서 점점 긔자의 머리를 의사 격으로 진찰한다면 인습적 관렴적의 남자 여자 이것이 아마도 지금 문제의 초점일까 생각한다. 남자이니까 세상 도라가는 형편(?) 그것을 알고 여자이니까(?) 아모것도 몰으는 소위 일홈 붓처서 무지자(?) 그것일 것입니다. 이 말이 십오세기나 십륙세기에 쓰든 말이든 하여간에 학생으로 대할 때는 서로 새로운 과학을 연구하는 도정에 립각한 것만은 여기에 부인치 못할 사실이겟다. 그러면 지식 그 것으로서도 남학생들과 여학생 우리는 서로 항의할 아무것도 업는 것이라고 생각한다.
그러면 이 긔자는 엇던 대 항의할 만한 점을 발견하고 여학생 나에게 부탁을 할 것인가...?
필자는 잠깐 주저하엿다. 일부 부랑남학생들이 인습적 두뢰. 그것으로 웬만한 여학생이 지나가도 작난 욕설로 여학생을 희롱하고 잡담을 거는 것에 항의하라는 그것인가 생각한다. 여긔에서 여학생 나로써 늣긴 바가 과연 만음에 나는 멧 마듸의 항의 그것 보담 학생으로 가튼 학생에게 충고 겸하야 멧 마듸 지적하여 수수하게 나렬하려고 한다.
제일 남자란 표어를 이마에 부치고 시대착오의 망동을 함부로 취하지 말라.
둘재, 히야까시―그것을 전업으로―학생 신분에 어그러지게 추태를 연출치 말라.
셋재 히야까시를 밥먹듯 하야 엄벙덤벙 실수가 한 학생에게 매일 이십여 번이 적다는 통게를 보아 좀 침착하야 긔분에 날뜨지 말며 신중할 것.
넷재 밤에 출입을 작으맛치 하며 자정을 긔회하여 유행 창가로 풍긔를 물란케 하는 점과 안면 방해가 될 염려가 잇스니 주의에 주의를 가하여 고려가 필요.
다섯재 강아지가 밥 달나고 쫏처단이듯이 밤길 가는 여학생의 뒤를 따르지 말 것... 비열함을 말함이니―.
여섯재 카페-나 선술집을 주막집으로 알고 둥그런 모자에 머리를 파무든 채 지나가는 사람에게 술냄새 뿌리지 말 것... 학생 풍기에 대적이니―.
일곱재 전문 지식을 배운다고 기생과 카페- 여급을 엽헤 끼고 단이기를 책보 끼고 단이는 듯 하지 말라... 학사박사가 가엽쓰니―.
여덜제―알지 못하는 여학생에게 편지를 던저노코는 연애하는 척 하지 말라... 열능 인물임을 여지업시 폭로하니―.
이 외에도 만흐나 지면 관게로 이만 끗치니 충분한 고려와 사색이 필요할 때로 필요한 남학생 제씨께서 심심한 때로 보아주서요.

讀者로서 新聞雜誌業者에게
K山 讀者

당신네가 스스로 雜誌業者이면서 우리에게 불평을 무러주는 것만큼 꽤 勇斷이라 하겟소.
어데 멧 마듸 뽀족한 붓이나 놀니어 볼까요?

1. 新聞業者에게
1. 지면을 주리고 따러서 기사를 쓸모 잇는 것으로만 뽑아서 실을 것. 그래서 갑도 지금의 반 가량만 바더주엇스면.
2. 주의와 주장이 일정하게 서서 잇스면 그대로 나아가지 공연히 동요되지 말 것.
3. 이미 상품으로 나아가는 바이면 상품다웁게 나아가지 쓰잘데업시 「체」를 하지 말 것.
4. 무의미한 일을 가지고 선동적 붓끗을 휘둘너 讀者의 神經을 불안케＜12＞ 하지 말 것.
5. 아모리 지면이 남는 대도 너무 외국 것을 번역만 해넛치 말 것.
6. 싸홈질을 하지 말 것.(對內的으로)
7. 朝鮮의 민간신문을 한데 뚜드려 뭉처 한 개를 만들 것.

2. 雜誌業者에게
1. 창간 겸 종간호를 내이지 말 것.(그런 돈이 잇스면 업는 사람 구제나 할 것.)
2. 內容 업는 題目을 늘어노코 廣告로써 讀者를 끌지 말 것.
3. 主義主張을 表明할 것.
4. 定期 發行을 할 것.
5. 「고마운」 기사를 만히 실니어 줄 것.
6. 모-든 評을 점잔코 公正하면서도 끄림 업시 할 것.(특히 人物評 가튼 것.)

奧地人으로서 郵便當局에
三水 石村生

나의 사는 곳은 조선서 제일 가는 산골입니다. 누구나 三水, 甲山이라면 말할 수 업시 험한 산골인 줄로 아는 것은 녯날부터이다. 이러케 험한 살골이라서 그런지 또는 이런 곳에서 사니까 사람을 업수이 녁여서 그런지 우리 곳 우편 당국자는 우편물을 매우 무성의하게 취급하고 잇스니 그 심사를 알 수가 업습니다.
내가 전에 서울을 가서 어떤 친구의 집에 묵고 잇슬 때에 그곳 체신부가 편지를 가지고 그 집에 와가지고도 사람을 불너가지고 XXX氏가 잇느냐고 물어서 잇다고 하여야 비로소 전하고 가는 것을 보앗는데 이곳서는 그 집을 차저가기 커녕 실상 편지 바들 사람 잇는 곳에서 한 십리 밧 쯤 되는 곳인 구장(區長) 집에다 두고 가니 아모리 급한 편지라도 급히 바다볼 수가 업게 됩니다. 구장 집에서 묵히다 묵히다가 우리 집 근처에 잇는 사람이 혹시 그곳에 들니게 되여야 그것을 그 편에 보내고 또 그것을 가지고 온 사람이 자긔 일이 밧부면 그날로 전하지 못할 뿐만 아니라 그만 이저버리여 여러 날 되면 제면적어서 전하지 안코 흐지부지 업새버립니다. 이런 일은 혹간 가다가 잇는 레외의 일이라고 하겟지만 대체로 보아 직접 차저 전하는 것이 별로 업습니다. 서류(書留)이라야 마지못하야 가지고 옴니다.
편지뿐 아니라 일반 보통우편물은 죄다 그럿습니다. 나는 개벽사(開闢社)의 개벽(開闢) 창간호부터 보는 독자인데 매달 이것 보느라고 여간 힘드리지 안엇습니다.
책이 하도 조흐니까 우편소에 잇는 사람이 뜨더보다가 다 보고 나서 도로 싸서 전하지요. 이것을 또 구장 집에 갓다 두면 그곳에서들 펴처보지요. 이러케 한 것을 나종에는 동리 사람이 갓다 줍니다. 바다본즉 죄 헌책입니다. 그럼으로 본사에서 헌책 보낸 줄만 알고 그것을 도로 싸서 본사로 보낸즉 본사에서는 다 보고 나서 헌책을 도로 보낸다고 책망을 합니다. 그래 노발대발하야 본사로 편지하기를 나에게는 산골 사람이라고 무시하고 그런 헌책을 보내주엇느냐고 나물합니다. 이러케 하느라니 비용인들 얼마나 만히 들엇겟습니까. 이러케 헌책이라도 매달 제때에 꼭꼭 바더보게 되면 조켓지만 그것도 간혹 발행은 되얏다고 신문에 발표되는데 발표되야 십여 일을 기다려도 오지 안습니다. 그래 본사로 편지하지요. 그러면 본사에서는 X날 보내엿스니 만일 밧지 못하얏스면 조사하야 보라고 하는 편지가 옴으로 볼일을 못 보고 체부 오는 날을 기댜려 쪼차가서 무러봅니다. 무러보면 아니왓다고 합니다. 그래 본사로 다시 편지하면 본사에서도 참말 억울하게 된 것을 생각하시고 재송(再送)이라고 써서 또 보내줍니다. 이러케 해서 그 달이 거의 다 간 다음에야 그 달치를 바다보게 됩니다. 책은 보고 십고 돈은 업고할 수 업시 집에 잇는 곡식을 장에 갓다가 팔아서 주문을 합니다.
이즈음에는 개벽사에서 나오는 것 네 가지 그 외의 것도 한두 가지를 보는데 돈(이 끗츤 九頁 第四段에 繼續)＜13＞으로 말하면 1원이 즘 넘습니다.
이것을 한 달만 떼우게 되면 나의게는 여간 손해가 아닙니다. 나는 여지것 본사에서 보내지 안코 떼여먹군 하는 줄만 알엇더니 이즈음 여러 방면으로 조사해 본 결과 우편당국에서 취급을 무성의하게 하야 이런 일이 생기는 줄을 확실히 알앗습니다. 우리 조선 안에 이런 일 당하는 사람이 한둘에 끗치지 안을 것입니다.
그럼으로 나는 이와 가튼 사실을 드러 우편당국자의게 외람히 황의하노니 크게 깨다러 이후에는 이런 사고가 다시 생기지 안토록 주의해주기를 크게 바라고 잇는 바이다. -끗- ＜9＞
＜10-13, 9＞