잡지명	別乾坤 第44號
발행일	1931년 10월 01일
기사제목	學界漫話 (Anecdotes from the Academic World)
기사형태	소식 (News)

Anecdotes from the Academic World

Mr. Kim Sŏng-su, who has just returned from inspecting Europe, has become the principal of Chungang High School (中央高普), and former principal Mr. Ch'oe Tu-sŏn has been elected as a standing director of the same school. It is said that a new decision has been made to make Mr. Ch'oe a paid director, while Mr. Kim remains an unpaid honorary position. In any case, it is very pleasing that Mr. Kim, who has inspected Europe, is coming to the principalship of a Korean middle school (中學校) with so many problems. It seems that the general public has high expectations and is watching closely to see what new facilities will be introduced.

The young educator, Mr. Ch'oe Chin-sun, has left Chungdong School (中東學校) and taken over Kyŏngsŏng Nursery School (京城保育學校). At the same time, he has brought together almost all of the members of the Saektonghoe (색동會) to teach, and as his first project, he has dispatched Ms. Ch'oe Yŏng-ju, who was in the New Woman's Department (新女性部) of the former headquarters, to Japan to inspect various childcare facilities. It is a very pleasing and reliable thing that a childcare facility is being established with the members of Saektonghoe, who have been researching children's issues for ten years, as the center.

It is said that Messrs. Ch'oe Kyu-dong, An Il-yŏng, and Sim Chae-dŏk, who were famous in the Korean private school world and had made a firm promise like the oath of brotherhood in the peach garden (桃園結諠) of Yu, Kwan, and Chang in the founding era of Chungdong School, have seen Sim retire four or five years ago. An Il-yŏng is also returning to Kimch'ŏn High School (金泉高普) this year. When you reminisce about the past and look at the campus of Chungdong, there is a somewhat lonely atmosphere, which is a common saying among the old alumni.

Mr. Paek Nam-gyu, a mathematics teacher at Chungang High School who suddenly took the position of Dean of Academic Affairs at Tongdŏk Girls' High School (同德女高) but lost it after about a year, has recently been enthusiastically studying and promoting Esperanto. He was enthusiastically promoting it to even old men with topknots on the streets, writing an Esperanto lecture column in the Dong-A Ilbo (東亞日報). The word was that he was going to join the Kyemyŏng Club (啓明俱樂部). I don't know what happened to the Korean dictionary compilation project (朝鮮語辭典編纂事業) that was talked about at the club years ago, but since Mr. Paek, who likes to cause trouble, has joined, it is likely that an Esperanto dictionary will come out if a Korean dictionary does not. <19>

**Named Entities**

金性洙	Kim Sŏng-su
中央高普	Chungang High School
崔斗善	Ch'oe Tu-sŏn
崔瑨淳	Ch'oe Chin-sun
中東學校	Chungdong School
京城保育學校	Kyŏngsŏng Nursery School
색동會	Saektonghoe
崔泳柱	Ch'oe Yŏng-ju
新女性部	New Woman's Department
崔奎東	Ch'oe Kyu-dong
安一英	An Il-yŏng
沈在德	Sim Chae-dŏk
金泉高普	Kimch'ŏn High School
白南奎	Paek Nam-gyu
同德女高	Tongdŏk Girls' High School
東亞日報	Dong-A Ilbo
啓明俱樂部	Kyemyŏng Club



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제44호
발행일	1931년 10월 01일
기사제목	學界漫話
기사형태	소식

學界漫話
歐洲 시찰을 맛치시고 갓 도라오신 金性洙 氏가 中央高普의 교장으로 나오시고 前 교장 崔斗善 氏는 同校의 常任理事로 被選되시어 재래의 無給 理事를 崔氏에 한하야 有給으로 새 결정을 하고 김씨만은 無給의 名譽職으로 게시게 되엿다고 한다. 아모려나 일 만코 問題 만흔 조선의 中學校에서 歐洲 시찰을 하시고 온 김씨가 교장으로 나오심은 매우 깃분 일이다. 무슨 새로운 施設이 나올는지 一般으로는 기대와 주시도 적지 안흘 듯.

少壯敎育家 崔瑨淳 氏가 中東學校에서 나와 가지고 京城保育學校를 引繼해 맛는 동시에 색동會 一派의 會員을 거의 망라하야 敎鞭을 잡게 하는 한편 第一着의 사업으로 前 本社 新女性部에 게시든 崔泳柱 氏를 일본에 派遣하야 각지의 保育機關을 시찰케 하엿다니 兒童 問題에 10년간 연구를 거듭하야 온 색동會員을 중심으로 하야 保育機關 하나가 서 나가게 된다는 것은 매우 깃보고도 미덤성 잇는 일이다.

朝鮮私學界에 이름 노픈 中東學校 창립시대에 일즉이 劉關張 3인의 桃源結諠 격으로 손을 마조 잡고 굿게 약속을 하엿다든 崔奎東·安一英·沈在德 三氏도 어인 일인지 심씨가 퇴직한 지 이미 사오 년이요 安一英氏가 금년에 또 다시 金泉高普로 낙향을 하시게 되야 옛날을 회상하고 中東의 교내를 드러다 보면 엇전지 좀 쓸쓸한 기색이 돈다는 것은 옛날 校友들의 입에서 흔이 나오는 소리라고.

中央高普의 수학 선생님으로 一朝에 同德女高의 敎務主任 의자를 차지하섯다가 거기에서 실각한 지 일년여가 되는 白南奎氏는 近間에 에쓰페란토 연구와 선전에 極力熱中하시여 東亞日報 紙上에 에쓰페란토 講座欄을 擔任하시고 길까에서 상투 짠 노인에게까지 熱心宣傳하시드만 말슴이 잇섯는데 요점에는 啓明俱樂部에 드러가시게 되엿다고 한다. 年前에 同俱樂部에서 떠들든 朝鮮語辭典編纂事業은 엇지나 되엿는지 일 조와하시는 백씨가 드러가섯스니 朝鮮語辭典이 못 나오면 에쓰페란토 辭典이라도 나옴직한 일이다.＜19＞