잡지명 別건곤 제16·17호
발행일 1928년 12월 01일
기사제목 名士淑女結婚初夜의 첫 付託, 첫날밤에 무엇을 말햇나 (What was said on the wedding night about the first request of a noted scholar and virtuous lady? )
기사형태 설문 (Questionnaire)

What was said on the wedding night about the first request of a noted scholar and virtuous lady?
The most sincere and reverent thing would be a discussion of life experiences on the first day when two people, who did not even know each other, start their married life. And there will be no words as meaningful as that.

My One Request
Pak Ch'an-hŭi

Since the name of the magazine is Pyŏl Kŏn'gon (別乾坤), I guess the articles will cover all sorts of things. You're asking me to talk about the first request I made to my wife after our marriage?
Speaking for myself, I didn't make any particular requests, but the only thing I've always told my wife since our marriage is, "Don't rely on your husband, but be prepared to be independent and self-reliant!" Of course, it is natural for couples to rely on each other and support each other in life, but in the family system of us Koreans, the husband becomes the monarch of the family and assumes full responsibility for the family's livelihood, while the wife and other family members live a parasitic life. Therefore, if something unfortunate happens to the head of the household and he is unable to be at home, the family will fall apart and will not be able to maintain their livelihood. Moreover, in the current circumstances, how can we expect a man to just stay at home, given the situation we Koreans are in? Who knows, he might go abroad or have an accident that leaves him disabled. Therefore, even when living together, couples should be prepared for such possibilities and encourage the wife to develop the spirit and ability to live independently in terms of finances and other aspects of life. That was my biggest request. <60>

Child Rearing and Job Loyalty
Kuk Ki-yŏl

As you all know, I remarried after losing my first wife. Since I have three children from my previous marriage and our livelihood is not very comfortable, I realized that the responsibility of my second wife would be greater and more difficult than others. Therefore, when looking for a spouse, I sought someone who was prepared for that, and fortunately, I met my current wife. She was originally a teacher at a school, and we discussed and understood various things before we got married. So, I didn't make any special requests after the marriage. But if you ask me about the first request, other than telling her to remain loyal to her job as we discussed and for both of us to work together and raise our children well, there was nothing else.

Really, On the Wedding Night
Cho Chae-ho

My marriage wasn't a love marriage or a free marriage; I just followed what my parents arranged. My parents had been proposing to a family that was rich, while my family was poor and insignificant, so we were rejected. Whether they proposed or were rejected, I didn't care and was studying in Kyŏngsŏng (京城, today's Seoul), when I received a telegram saying, "There's an emergency at home, come down immediately." Surprised, I rushed home, only to find that the emergency was that the rich family that had rejected our proposal two years ago wanted to marry us, and they had even set the wedding date and called me down as the groom.
They had rejected the marriage proposal two years ago, and after that, they had been looking for a good groom, but for some reason, the bride absolutely refused to go anywhere else, so they had no choice but to come back to our house. The telegram and travel expenses were also sent by the bride's family. With things being like this, I couldn't help but feel resentful, but outwardly, I acted as if I was better than them and went to the bride's house.
My hometown is Sach'ŏn (泗川) in Kyŏngnam (慶南). According to the customs of that place, we spend the first night at the bride's house. When I entered the bridal chamber, people outside were making a fuss, saying that they were eavesdropping with their ears to the door. At that time, I opened the door wide and said three things to the bride in front of the whole family:
1. Even though your parents' house is rich, your in-laws' house is poor, so when you come to our house, you will definitely have to grab a hoe and go out to the fields. 2. Even a poor house has its own family traditions and circumstances. <61> You need to understand that well and adapt to it. 3. I'm not going to be someone who stays at home my whole life; I'll be leaving my house and wife to wander outside often, so you have to be prepared for that.
For this reason, she thought of me as a very difficult person, someone hard to look in the eye, and she said that only after giving birth to our first child did that difficulty lessen a little.

Two Simple Things
Ch'oe Chin-sun

First, we are poor people, so don't even think about living like rich people from the beginning. To do that, let's live an extremely simple life above all else.
Second, even after we get married, I don't know when or where I might go, so let's anticipate that possibility from the beginning and live accordingly.

Four Requests
Yi Sŏng-hwan

When a "working" person marries a wife, they will all worry, "What if she is a woman who enjoys idleness and extravagance?" I was also very worried about that, so I paid attention to that point from the beginning when choosing a wife.
When two people get along well out of goodwill, and that becomes ripe enough for marriage talks, and that passes and they get the approval of both sets of parents, the feelings of the two people from the first time they sit down together are completely different from before, and that's when discussions about married life begin. I also talked about it at that time.
First, since we are people who have to work our way out of adversity, we should give up on living an idle life from the beginning, and let's just work together as husband and wife towards "our common ideal" and build a home that doesn't interfere with our work. That was the entirety of my request.
The next thing is a subsidiary condition that comes with that, but my wife doesn't need to go out separately. I asked her to provide internal support (內助). The first is to help me organize the manuscripts I handle. The second is to manage communications (處理便紙 in public and private matters). The third is to take charge of socializing at home.
And within the limits of being able to barely maintain our lower-class life of eating, dressing, and using things, I asked her to always be prepared to go out on the streets at any time as one way to participate in our overall movement (even housewives should not be excluded from this). <62>
This request has not been in vain, and since then, she has helped me with almost half of the manuscript organization not only for the magazines I handle but also for other things, and she takes care of all the communications. And she also participates in the work that comes with the overall movement, occasionally going on local tours, giving lectures on women's issues, or visiting women's organizations.
However, there is one thing among the promises I made as a request at the beginning that I have not been able to fulfill: "We don't need to imitate the extravagant lives of the bourgeoisie, but let's travel together two or three times a year."

If I Have to Say Something
Hwang Sin-dŏk

Since marriage is the biggest promise in life, from this, two people will combine their efforts to demand a better life. From the day we get married, haven't we talked about fixing this and fixing that? But there's nothing that I would consider a request or promise, but if I have to say something, it would be that we pay attention to and discuss improving our health every day. Both of us had a kind of wandering life in the past, so our health was unknowingly destroyed. What good is it to gain the whole world if I lose my life? Therefore, we try to regulate and implement the time we eat, sleep, and work as much as we can.
Next, what we pay attention to in the home is to avoid waste. Having a lot of waste is an expression of not having a budget for the household, so we make a budget for the household and implement it exactly as it is. Furthermore, we try hard to avoid waste when it comes to food.
If I were to summarize the request I made after marriage, it would be to be healthy and manage the household well.

Let's Not Cool Off!
Pak Sŏng-hwan

There are two types of marriage: free love marriage and supervised marriage by a supervisor. Even if there are dissatisfactions at first in a supervised marriage, it is easier for them to be respectful to each other, so they live without any conflict, respecting each other as guests, and as the years go by, their affection deepens and their intentions are communicated. However, in so-called love marriages, the couple knows each other too well and has nothing to hide, and they only live with too much affection, so there is no restraint or respect, and they easily fall into vulgarity, and just as anger arises between close friends and a quickly heated room quickly cools, even their affection disappears, <63> leading to the unfortunate event of singing a song of heartbreak. And until marriage, men and women don't know each other's faults and are swept away by a burning passion, not knowing whether they will live or die, but after marriage, they realize that there's no other way, and they gradually begin to see each other's faults. Then, the face that they once saw as beautiful as a flower now looks ugly like a yaksha, and every word and action is seen as a flaw. Therefore, I think the early stages of a love marriage are the most dangerous. I don't know if my marriage is a love marriage or what kind of marriage, but because I was prepared for that point in advance, at the beginning of our marriage, we asked each other to respect each other's personalities until the end and to not just love each other as a temporary use of men and women, but to maintain a family with eternal human love.

Believe and Wait
Yun Cha-nam

When I got married, I couldn't wear a suit or ride in a car like now, and I had a joyous experience that wouldn't happen twice in a lifetime. I was so young that I didn't even know what was going on, and I just had my hair tied up in a topknot and had a wedding ceremony. So, what sense did I have to have a "first request after marriage"?
After I shaved my head to go to study in Japan without my family knowing, I always had this fantasy of taking a train to Inch'ŏn (인천), then taking a ship from Inch'ŏn to study in Japan. So, on the night of the third day after the wedding, I quietly got up, lit a cigarette, and said, "If my family finds out that I shaved my head and am going to study in Japan, they will scold me, of course. And if other people find out, they will think of me as a bad guy, so please don't let anyone know, and think of shaving my topknot as a good thing. And don't forget that you have to study to live better than others, and believe and wait for me to come back successful." I think that's my first request.

The Problem of Young People
Yu Yŏng-jun

If an old person gets remarried, they are embarrassed to tell others for fear of being ridiculed, let alone be asked about their first request after marriage. But the fact that I got married is a fact, so how can I keep it a secret forever? Since the topic has come up, I'll just tell you what I requested.
More than anything, for our future, we need to raise young people well, so I asked her to pay special attention to early childhood education, to support and sponsor existing early childhood education institutions as much as possible, and to establish future institutions. This was my biggest request.

Let's Be Economically Independent
Yu To-sun

"Let's live economically independently. Let's not rely on our parents' material support." <64>
The reason why we made this request to each other is that getting married means coming out of the care of our parents and living as an individual with our own strength, which is a big meaning. Another reason is that when there is material support from parents, there is often unexpected interference in the couple's relationship, which can cause family strife and even break the love between the couple.
For example, these days, when young men and women in our society get married through love and try to live with their parents-in-law, the wife, who has been studying at school, has not learned household chores or sewing well, so her housekeeping is not seen as appropriate by her parents-in-law.
If she can't cook rice well, they have to cook rice for her, and if she doesn't know how to make clothes, they have to make clothes for her. Having a student daughter-in-law is said to be a sign that the family will be ruined, and the family becomes unhappy overnight. Conflicts often start between the mother-in-law and the daughter-in-law, eventually leading to fights between the son and his parents, or they break up with the wife, or they see some kind of breakdown.
This is not only the fault of the parents-in-law, nor is it only the fault of the daughter-in-law. In the end, it can be seen as a phenomenon of a society moving forward from underdevelopment. It is true that parents do not understand their children, and it is also true that children do not serve their parents well.
I asked her to leave our parents' care and live independently in order to avoid seeing such misfortune.

Improve the Lifestyle First
Yi Wŏn-sik

As my first request after marriage, I asked my wife and declared to my family to abandon the traditional Korean large family system and adopt a small family system. In other words, the family form of 3 or 4 generations living together in one house, from grandparents to grandchildren or great-grandchildren, is transformed into a family form based on the husband and wife. And I asked that I would not interfere with the household affairs. That is, I give all the grain that comes up from the countryside to my wife during the first harvest season in the fall, and I am not responsible for any economic matters. Of course, I also have income from working at school, but that is used for my clothes, books, social expenses, and other miscellaneous expenses.
In most families, the mother does a lot of work in raising children in their early years, but I actively entrusted all the parenting issues of that period to my wife and did not interfere. If you hear this, you may wonder what is wrong with the husband and wife in the family, and you may think it is funny, and you may think that this is a wrong theory, but in any case, I entrusted it to the knowledge and experience that my wife gained at school or in society. In addition to this, there are also hopes for improving the quality and quantity of food and clothing, but it is a pity that I do not have the materials to publish them specifically in the paper. <65>

**Named Entities**

朴瓚熙	Pak Ch'an-hŭi
鞠琦烈	Kuk Ki-yŏl
曹在浩	Cho Chae-ho
慶南	Kyŏngnam
泗川	Sach'ŏn
崔瑨淳	Ch'oe Chin-sun
李晟煥	Yi Sŏng-hwan
黃信德	Hwang Sin-dŏk
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
朴聖煥	Pak Sŏng-hwan
尹自南	Yun Cha-nam
劉英俊	Yu Yŏng-jun
劉道順	Yu To-sun
李元植	Yi Wŏn-sik
仁川	Inch'ŏn



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제16·17호
발행일	1928년 12월 01일
기사제목	名士淑女結婚初夜의 첫 付託, 첫날밤에 무엇을 말햇나
기사형태	설문

名士淑女結婚初夜의 첫 付託, 첫날밤에 무엇을 말햇나
아지도 못하던 딴사람과 딴사람이 부부생활을 시작하는 첫날에 밧고는 생활경륜에 대한 의론처럼 진실스럽고 敬虔한 것은 업슬 것이요. 또 그처럼 의미 깁흔 말이 다시 업슬 것이다.

나의 한마듸 付托
朴瓚熙

잡지의 이름이 別乾坤이닛가 기사도 별의별 것을 다 취급하시럄니다그려- 나다려 결혼후 부부간에 첫 부탁한 말슴을 하라구요?
나로 말슴하면 특별이 무슨 부탁이라고 한 말은 업슴니다만은 다만 결혼후부터 지금까지 항상 안해에게 하는 말은 「남편을 依賴치 말고 독립자활하는 각오를 가지라!」는 그것 임니다. 물론 부부간에는 서로 依賴하고 서로 버터서 생활하는 것이 당연한 일이지만은 우리 朝鮮사람의 가족제도는 夫가 일가의 군주가 되는 동시에 일가족의 생활 전책임을 가장되는 한 사람이 질머지고 처나 기타 가족은 寄生生活을 함니다. 그럼으로 그 가장이 불행히 무슨 사고가 잇서서 집에 잇지 못하게 되면 그 가정이 그만 破綻이 되야 생활까지 유지치 못하게 됨니다. 더구나 現下에 환경이 우리 朝鮮사람과 가튼 처지에 잇서서는 남자가 엇지 집만 직히고 잇스리라고 期必할 수가 잇슴닛가. 혹은 외지에를 갈지 혹은 불행이 따른 사고가 생겨서 부자유의 몸이 될지 엇지 암닛가. 그러닛가 평소부터 부부간에도 그러한 각오를 가지고 남편과 동거를 하더라도 경제상이나 기타 일반생활상에도 여자자신이 독립생활하는 정신과 능률을 발휘케 하여야 될 것임니다. 나는 무엇보다도 그것이 큰 부탁이엿슴니다.＜60＞

子女養育과 職業忠實
鞠琦烈

나는 여러분이 알으시는 바와 가티 喪配를 하고 다시 續絃한 사람이올시다. 전처의 소생인 자녀가 셋이나 잇고 생활도 또한 그다지 넉넉지 못한 까닭에 후처되는 이의 책임이 남보다 중대하고 또 곤란할 것을 짐작하얏슴니다. 그리하야 배우자를 구할 때에도 미리 그러한 각오가 잇는 이를 구하게 되엿섯는데 다행이 지금의 妻君을 맛게 되엿슴니다. 그는 원래 엇던 학교에 교원생활을 하는 이로 나와 여러 가지 일을 다 討議하고 諒解한 후 결혼을 하엿슴니다. 그러닛가 결혼 후라고 다시 특별한 부탁이라고는 한 것이 업섯슴니다. 그러나 긋이 첫 부탁을 물으신다면 나는 결혼 후에 서로 토의한 그대로 직업도 依前히 충실하게 종사하야 부부가 다 가티 벌어드리고 자녀를 잘 양육하야 달나는 그 말 밧게는 업슴니다.

참말로 첫날밤에
曹在浩

나는 연애결혼도 자유결혼도 안이고 집에서 부모가 정해준 대로 일되는 대로 그냥 따라 갓슴니다. 집에서 부모가 전부터 청혼을 한 데가 잇섯는대 그집은 부자이고 우리 집은 하잘 것 업는 가난방이여서 거절을 당하엿슴니다. 청혼을 어대로 하거나 거절을 당하거나 나는 아는톄 할 것 업시 京城에서 공부하고 잇는대 한번은 『집안에 급한 일이 생겻스니 즉시 나려오라.』는 전보가 온고로 놀나서 뛰여 나려 간즉 급한 일이란 별일이 안이고 2년 전에 청혼을 拒退 한 그 부자집에서 혼인을 하자하야 택일까지 해놋코 신랑을 불러 나린 것이엿슴니다.
2년 전에 拒婚을 하고 그 후로 조흔 신랑집을 구해보앗 것만은 신부가 읏전 일인지 다른데로는 가지 안케다고 절대로 뻣대인 까닭으로 하는 수 업시 다시 우리집을 차저 오게 된 것이요. 속히 나려 오라는 전보와 路費도 그 신부 집에서 보낸 것이 엿슴니다. 일이 이러케 되고보니 속에는 분푸리를 할 생각이 업지안 코 것흐로는 억개가 읏슥해 가지고 신부집에 드러스게 되엿슴니다.
내 고향은 慶南 泗川이요. 그 곳 풍속에 의하야 신부집에서 첫날밤을 지내는데 신방에 들어가니 밧게서는 창 엽헤 와서 귀를 기우리고 엿듯노라고 야단들인대 그때 나는 문을 여러젓치고 왼집안 식구가 모다 듯는 압헤에 신부에게 세 가지 말을 하엿슴니다.
1. 친가는 부유햇드래도 시가는 빈한하닛가 우리 집에 가먼 반듯이 호미자루를 잡고 밧고랑에 나가야 할 것이요. 2. 가난한 집에라도 가난한 그대로의 가풍과 사정이 따로＜61＞ 잇는 것이닛가. 그것을 잘 알어서 맞추어 나가야 할 것. 3. 셋재는 나는 한평생을 집구석 방속에 가만히 부터잇슬 사람이 안이요 집과 처자를 던저두고 밧그로 도라단일 때가 만흘 것이니 그것을 각오하여야 한다하고 다짐을 밧엇슴니다.
이 까닭으로 그는 나를 퍽 어려운 사람 눈도 바로 뜨고 처다보기 어려운 딱딱한 사람으로 알엇다 하고 첫 아해를 나은 후에야 비로소 그 어려움이 조곰 적어 젓다 함니다.

간단한 두 가지
崔瑨淳

첫재에 우리는 돈 업는 사람이니 돈 만흔 사람 따위의 살림을 근본으로부터 생각도 하지 말 것. 그리하기 위하야 위선 생활은 극단의 간편생활을 하기로 하자.
둘재에 결혼 후에라도 나는 어느때 어대로 튀여 갈는지도 모르는 것이니 미리부터 그럴 경우 잇슬 것을 예긔하고 지낼 것.

네 가지 부탁
李晟煥

『일』하는 사람이 안해를 마지 할 때에 누구던지 『안일하고 華奢한 생활를 즐기는 여자면 읏저나.』하는 걱정을 가즐 것임니다. 나 역시 그런 걱정이 만헛든 고로 미리부터 그 점에 주의하여서 선택을 한 것임니다.
두 사람이 서로 호의로 교제하다가 그것이 닉어서 혼담까지 생기고 그것이 또 지나서 양편 부모의 승낙을 엇고나서 처음 만나 안는 자리 그때부터 두 사람의 심기는 전날과 전혀 달너지는 것이니 부부생활의 의논도 그때 시작되는 것임니다. 나도 그때에 이약이 하엿슴니다.
첫재로 우리는 역경에서 일해나가야 할 사람이닛가 안일한 생활을 하기는 아저녁부터 단념하고 그저 夫婦一意 우선 『우리들의 공통한 이상』을 향하야 苦戴헤 나가야 할 것이니 일에 방해 업는 가정을 지여 나가자 한 것이 부탁의 전부엿슴니다.
그 다음 것은 거긔 따르는 부수조건임니다만은 안해가 따로히 밧갓헤 나슬 필요는 업다. 안에 잇서서 내조를 하여 달라 하엿슴니다. 첫재는 내가 취급하는 원고정리를 하여 달라는 것이요. 둘재는 通信整理(公私間의 便紙處理)요. 셋재는 안에 잇서서의 교제 이것을 마터달라고 하엿슴니다.
그리고 우리가 하층생활 먹고 입고 수이고 하는 것만 간신히 하는 생활을 직혀 갈 수 잇는 범위 내에서 우리들의 전체운동(가정부녀라도 여긔에는 빠저서 안됨니다.)에 參例하는 한 가지 일로 隨時하야 거리에 나슬 각오와 준비를 가지고 잇서 달아 하엿슴니다.＜62＞
이 부탁은 과히 헛되지 안이하야 그 후로 내가 취급하는 잡지 뿐 안이라 기타에 쓰는 원고정리의 거의 반 이상의 도음을 밧고 잇고 통신은 전혀 다 맛다십이 하여 줌니다. 그리고 전체운동에 따르는 일도 각금 각금 지방순회를 하면서 혹은 여성문제 강연도 하고 혹은 여성단체 방문도 하고 함니다.
다만 한 가지 처음에 부탁삼아 약속한 일중에 『결코 뿔조아 샐활의 흉내를 낼 필요는 업스되 1년 2, 3차쯤 同伴旅行을 하도록 하자.』한 일이 잇는대 이 일 뿐만은 실행을 못하고 잇슴니다.

억지로 말하면
黃信德

결혼이라는 것이 인생의 가쟝 큰 약속이니까 이에 비롯하야 두 사람은 힘을 한데 어울러 보다 더-나은 생활을 요구하게 됨니다. 이 곳도 곳처보고 저것도 곳처 보자고 결혼하는 날부터 이약이야 업섯겟슴니까만은 이러타고 할 만한 부탁이나 약속으로 간주할 것은 업스나 억지로라도 잇다고 하면 우리는 건강증진에 대하야 날마다 새로히 주의하며 의론하는 것이겟슴니다. 우리 두 사람은 모다 과거생활에 잇서서 일종 방랑을 하엿기 때문에 부지부식간에 건강이 파괴되고 말엇슴니다. 세상을 다-엇고라도 내 목숨을 일흐면 무슨 소용이 잇겟슴니까. 그럼으로 우리는 힘자라는 대로 먹고자는 시간이나 일하는 시간을 규측뎍으로 하야 실행함니다.
다음은 가뎡안에서 류의하는 것은 폐물이 업도록 하는 것임니다. 폐물이 만히 되는 것은 그 살림에 예산이 업는 것을 표명하는 일이니 우리는 살림에 예산표를 맨들어 꼭- 그대로 실시함니다. 더구나 음식물에 대하야 폐물이 업도록 힘써함니다.
결혼 후에 한 부탁이라면 통트러 노코 몸 튼튼하고 살림 잘하자고 한 것 이엿슴니다.

식지말자!
朴聖煥

혼인에는 자유연애의 결혼과 감독자의 干涉結婚인 두 가지의 종류가 잇슴니다. 감독자의 간섭혼인은 비록 츠음에는 피차간 不滿한 일이 잇슬지라도 서로 스스러운 편이 만흐닛가 아모 충돌이 업시 그저 경애하야 그야말로 相待 如賓으로 지냄으로 해가가고 날이 깁흘수록 정이 붓고 의사가 통하지만은 소위 연애결혼이라는 것은 쌍방이 다 잘 아고 숨길 것이 업슬 뿐 안이라 너무 애정으로만 지내는 까닭에 忌憚과 존경이란 아주 업서저서 잘못하면 賤野卑簿한데 빠지기 쉽고 또 眞 所謂 친한 새에 노염이 생기고 쉽게 덥는 방이 쉽게 식는다고 피차간 애정까지 업서저서＜63＞ 破綠의 斷腸曲을 부르게 되는 불행한 일이 만슴니다. 그리고 혼인을 하기 전까지에는 남녀가 다 결점을 모르고 불가티 타올으는 정열에 쌔워서 죽늘지 살지를 모르다가 혼인을 하고본즉 결국 별 수가 업서서 피차에 점점 결점이 뵈기 시작하면 그야말로 전일에 꼿과 가티 곱게 보던 얼골도 夜叉 가티 밉게 뵈여 그외 一言一動이 다 결점만 나게 됨니다. 그럼으로 연애결혼에는 결혼초기가 제일 위험기로 생각함니다. 나는 연애결혼이라 할지 무슨 혼인이라할지 自家自評으로 말슴하기는 어렵슴니다만은 그러한 점을 미리 각오한 까닭에 결혼 벽두에 피차 부탁하기를 언제까지던지 서로 인격을 존중하야 다만 남녀의 一時用例로 사랑을 하지 말고 영구한 인간애로 한 가정을 유지하자고 하엿슴니다.

밋고 기대리시요
尹自南

제가 결혼할 때는 지금처럼 양복에다가 자동차도 못타고 일평생에 두 번도 업는 질거운 기렴을 철도 나지 안코 겨우 열다섯쌀 밧게 되지안은 어린놈을 상투를 틀려서 결혼이라고 례식을 지냇스니 무슨 철이 나서 『결혼한 후 첫 부탁』이 잇써겟슴니가?
내가 집안 어른들도 모르시게 일본유학을 가랴고 머리를 깍근후엔 인천으로 긔차를 타고 인천서 배를 탄 후엔 일본으로 유학을 간다는 이런 공상을 늘 갓고 잇게 되어슴니다. 그리자 결혼한지 사흘되는 날 밤에 다자 이러나 담배 한대를 피우면서 내가 상투를 깍고 일본 유학을 갈테야 이런 일을 집안 어른들이 아신다면 물론 야단들을 하실테요. 또 다른 사람들이라도 알면 좃치 못한 놈으로 알터이니 당신만은 조곰도 엇지 알지 마시고 상투 깍는 것을 도리여 조흔 일로 아시오. 그리고 남보담 잘 살랴면 배워야 한다는 것을 잇지말고 내가 성공만 해 가지고 도라오기를 밋고 기대리시오.』 이것이 첫 부탁이 될 줄 암니다.

어린 사람 問題
劉英俊

늙은 사람이 새로 시집을 갓다면 남이 조롱을 할가바 븟그러워서 남에게 잘 알리지도 안는데 더구나 결혼 후 첫부탁을 맛슴하라구요. 그러나 결혼한 것이 사실은 사실이닛가 엇지 장구히 비밀을 직힐 수 잇슴닛가. 이왕 말슴이 낫스니 나의 부탁한대로나 말슴하겟슴니다.
나는 무엇보다도 우리 장래를 위하야는 어린 사람을 잘 키워야 될터인즉 특히 유년교육에 만히 着眼하야 힘잇는 데까지 旣成한 유년교육기관을 찬조후원하고 또 장래에 未成한 기관을 성립하라고 하얏슴니다. 이것이 제일 큰 부탁이엿슴니다.

經濟的으로 獨立하자
劉道順

『우리는 경제뎍으로 독립해 살자. 부모의 물질뎍 보조를＜64＞ 힘닙지 말자.』
왜 이와가튼 부탁을 피차에 하엿느냐하면 결혼을 한다는 것은 부모의 길니움안에서 나아와 한 사람으로 제힘을 가지고 산다는 것이 큰 뜻이 되어잇는 까닭이고 또 한 가지 리유는 부모로부터 물질의 보조가 잇는 때에는 자녀의 부부간에 대하야 뜻하지 안은 간섭이 만케 되여 이로 말미암아 가뎡의 풍파가 이러나고 부부사이에 사랑이 깨여지는 일까지 잇게 된다.
실레를 들어보면 요새 우리 사회에서 청년남녀가 런애결혼을 하야가지고 싀부모를 모시고 살어가려고 할 때에 안해 되는 사람이 일즉 학교에서 공부를 하기 위하야 가사나 침봉을 닉숙히 배우지 못하야 살림살이 하는 것이 싀부모의 눈에 합당하게 보이지 안는다.
밥을 잘-짓지 못하니 밥을 지여주어야 하겟고 옷을 지을 줄 모르니 옷을 지여 입혀야 한다. 학생메느리 엇는 것은 집안이 망할 증조라고 까지하야 집안이 하로 아츰에 불평하게 된다. 싀어머니와 메느리 사이에 자조 충돌이 되기 시작하야 나종에는 아들과 부모사이에 싸옴을 이르키던지 그러치 안으면 안해와 갈나지게 하든지 무슨 파탄을 보게 되는 것이다.
이것은 싀보모만 그릇된 것도 안이요 메느리 되는 사람만 잘못하는 것도 안이다. 결국 말하자면 한 사회가 미개한데서부터 압흐로 나아가는 한과뎡의 현상이라고 볼 수 잇다. 부모가 자녀를 리해 못하는 것도 사실이요. 자녀된 사람이 부모를 잘-섬기지 못하는 것도 사실이다.
나는 이러한 불행을 보지 안키 위하야 부모의 슬하를 떠나 독립해 살자고 부탁하얏다.

生活方式부터 改良
李元植

저는 결혼 후 첫 부탁으로 朝鮮在來의 대가족주의를 버서나서 소가족주의를 안해에게 부탁햇스며 집안에도 선언한 것임니다. 다시 말하면 한 집안에 조부로부터 손자나 증손까지 3대나 4대가 모여 사는 것은 夫妻본위의 일가족 형식으로 변형한 것임니다. 그리고 집안에 대한 살림 문제는 제가 간섭하지 안켓다는 것을 부탁한 것임니다. 그것은 1년의 한번 가을 첫 수확기에 시골 본가에서 올라오는 양식을 전부 안해에게 맥겨서 일체의 경제문제를 저는 책임을 안이 지는 것임니다. 물론 제가 학교에 종사해서 수입되는 것도 잇지만 그것은 저의 의복이라든가 서적, 사교비 등 잡비를 쓰게 됨니다.
엇더한 집에서나 대개로 자녀양육을 幼少期에는 어머니 되는니가 만히 힘을 쓰지만 저는 적극적으로 그 시기의 양육문제를 전부 안해에게 맥겨서 절대 책임을 맷기고 관계하지 안슴니다. 혹시 이 말슴을 들으시면 한집안에서 더욱 夫妻사이에 무엇을 그러노 하시고 퍽 우습게 생가하실지도 몰으겟고 이러케 하는 것이 잘못된 이론인지도 몰으겟스나 여하간 안해가 학교에서나 사회에서 어든바 지식과 경험에 맥기고 만 것임니다. 이 외에도 음식문제나 의복문제에 대해서도 질과 양으로 개량해야 할 희망점을 부탁한 것이 잇스나 구체적으로 지면에 발표할 재료를 갓지 못한 것이 유감임니다.＜65＞
＜60-65＞