잡지명	別乾坤 제16·17호
발행일	1928년 12월 01일
기사제목	誌上討論 現下 朝鮮에서의 主婦로는 女校出身이 나흔가 舊女子가 나흔가?! (Discussion: In Present-Day Korea, Which Makes a Better Housewife, a Woman from a Girls' School or a Traditional Woman?!)
기사형태	소식 (News)

The New Woman is Equipped with the Seven Virtues
Yi Seong-hwan

You ask whether a traditional woman or a modern woman is better as a homemaker? It’s like a debate topic for middle school students, but it is a very interesting issue. However, this issue will ultimately differ depending on one's perspective and position. Ask a feudalistic man, and without hesitation, he will say that a traditional woman is better. This is because she obediently follows her husband's commands like a gentle lamb, perfectly fitting into the feudal system, isn't it? Yet, even among young people who have received some modern education and are somewhat influenced by new trends, there may be those who praise traditional women. This would likely be the work of someone who has been bitten by the venom of a frivolous new woman who does nothing but indulge in luxury.

On the other hand, there will be various reasons why some people prefer the new woman. Like this, opinions will differ depending on one's perspective and position. I am also one of those who prefer the new woman. Rather, saying that the new woman is good feels like discussing a toy. I would rather correct myself and say that only a new woman can manage a household.

Since the topic of household management has come up, let me briefly say that to grasp the essence (正鵠) of this issue, one must first correctly interpret what household management entails. If one views the home merely as a place for sewing and cooking, then one might praise the so-called feudal virtues (封建婦德) of traditional women, saying that all that is needed is to sew well, cook well, and run errands well. However, the home is by no means such a simple thing. The cultivation of a perfect individual character lies in the home, and the healthy growth and development of society also come from the home. It is a place that manages the present and produces the future. I believe it is impossible to speak of domestic peace (家庭平和) with only outdated feudal virtues (封建婦德). Even that sentiment stems from the sense of superiority that men have, wanting to turn women into their playthings (玩弄物).

<90>I cannot elaborate at length here, but I assert this: "Only a modern woman is qualified to be a homemaker." Here, when I say "modern" or "traditional," I am not simply referring to outward appearances. I am not talking about whether she wears rubber shoes or leather shoes, whether her hair is in a bun or braided, whether her skirt is long or short. I am only referring to a woman who has at least a middle school level of knowledge and understands new ideas and trends, whom I call a modern woman, and a woman who is ignorant, narrow-minded, and completely unchanged, whom I call a traditional woman.

So, why is it that only a modern woman is qualified to be a homemaker? I will explain a few reasons below.

First, modern women have knowledge and therefore have understanding (they are not frustratingly dense).

Second, modern women have knowledge and therefore have a sense of hygiene (they are not untidy and are clean).

Third, modern women handle household affairs scientifically (for example, if a family member is sick, a traditional woman might resort to superstition, but a modern woman will go to the hospital).

Fourth, modern women are good at calculations (traditional women do not even have a concept of income and expenditure, but modern women are good at calculations; they even keep a household diary).

Fifth, modern women raise children properly (for example, an uneducated traditional woman does not even know that the Earth revolves and tells stories about the sun and moon, but a modern woman does not tell such lies. Also, traditional women dislike vaccinations (種痘), but modern women are the opposite. There are many important issues like this).

Sixth, modern women can read and send letters and telegrams (traditional women have to beg men from other households to read or send letters when their husbands are away).

Seventh, modern women become companions in work (traditional women cannot even organize a newspaper, but <91> modern women write manuscripts, organize ledgers, and read books on behalf of their husbands).

There is no limit to the number of such conditions that could be listed. It is often said that modern women do not know how to cook or sew, but that is only true of foolish bourgeois (뿌르조아) daughters. How could that be? Modern women will know how to make nutritious food even with limited money and will understand the rapidly changing modern lifestyle (not just high fashion). They can do things like dyeing, sewing, and knitting at home. They can even make clothes for their young children at home instead of buying expensive, ready-made clothes. Furthermore, in terms of domestic hobbies, how much more will a modern woman, who can enjoy suitable entertainment while standing shoulder to shoulder with her husband, contribute to marital harmony compared to a traditional woman with a rigid, unyielding personality? To put it bluntly, asking whether a traditional woman or a modern woman is better for domestic life is like asking whether a machine or a person is better for domestic life. Surely, one believes that the modern woman is a person while the old woman is a machine, so what more is there to say?

Everyone values people, not machines.

Korean women must learn and learn again to become complete homemakers. Times are changing, and ideas are transforming. Therefore, domestic life cannot remain static and unchanging. Korean women must learn to create a home that progresses and improves towards a new era and a new society, rather than a home that regresses to primitive living. By doing so, they must become modern women and modern homemakers.

Two Major Shortcomings of the New Woman
Choe Gyu-dong

As someone involved in education, it seems somewhat contradictory to point out the flaws of women who have received modern education. However, the issue at hand and the standards of present-day Korean families make it impossible not to speak up. I don't know what others think, but in my experience, while modern women are superior to traditional women in terms of knowledge and understanding, they are in no way comparable to traditional women in terms of willpower.

To put it more concretely:

First, modern women seem to disregard traditional Korean family values too much. <92> Of course, the traditional family system does not perfectly fit the current era, and even if it is to be reformed, the circumstances of Korea should be considered to some extent. However, modern women disregard this and, upon marriage, immediately try to separate from their parents-in-law and siblings to lead an independent life. Moreover, while traditional women may have complaints about their husbands, they simply endure and persevere. Once they have chosen a husband, they sacrifice themselves entirely for him until the day they die. Modern women, however, generally have a weak sense of such devotion. If their husbands give them any cause for complaint or dissatisfaction, they immediately create a storm, even going so far as to advocate for divorce, thereby destroying the family.

Second, modern women seem to have too much vanity compared to traditional women. Of course, desires and living standards naturally increase with education and knowledge, but what can be done if one is only fixated on vanity and tries to live only according to one's desires without considering the actual circumstances? It is difficult enough to afford a rented room, yet they only talk about wanting a Western-style house. It is hard enough to afford a pot and utensils, yet they only clamor to buy a piano. They worry about what to eat for the next meal, yet they ask about the taste of Western or Chinese cuisine. They don't even have side dishes, yet they only buy cosmetics. Wouldn't that be a cause for concern? Traditional women do not do such things, but modern women tend to have such tendencies.

Besides the two points mentioned above, there are many other flaws, but I will stop here, as it is said that even the truest words can cause offense if taken too far. I hope that such shortcomings will disappear in the future.

The Old Woman is merely a Faithful Slave
Kim Hak-bo

This issue shouldn't even be a debate. In our homes – especially in the present 20th century, what use is there for outdated couples who sit around with 18th-century brains and institutions unchanged? If the duty of the housewife is confined to being subservient to her parents-in-law, then the old-fashioned wife might be better in that respect to some extent (but that is not necessarily the case). But in this era when stale old morals are being destroyed, the housewife's duty is not only to care for her parents-in-law. From now on, the most important duty of the housewife is to raise and educate the second generation of citizens well.

Raising children is of course important, but the method of raising children lies with the housewife, so what is her responsibility? <93> Whether a strong and vigorous worker is sent out to the nation or society depends entirely on the housewife of that home, so how can we treat this issue lightly? How can a purely old-fashioned wife, who does not know the trends of the times or the directions of the compass, nurture and guide the second generation of citizens who absorb the winds and tides of the times and rush forward? It might sound harsh, but it is like dragging funeral tools into a wedding hall. Moreover, in our Korean society, we have to take two steps forward for every step taken by others, and we have to learn two or three characters for every character learned by others. Where can we use such stale antiques (forgive me) in the Korean family? Not only that, but there are many times when it is truly frustrating to manage the household, entertain guests, attend social gatherings, or even travel far away with an old-fashioned wife. Whether it is because of all these inconveniences and limitations, or because of the vast difference in ideals and knowledge with the husband, having an old-fashioned housewife in our homes results in discord, misunderstanding, and destruction. Therefore, I assert that this issue is not even a debate.

The Educated Woman is a Mere Luxury
Yi Dong-won

It is said that this is a new era where we cannot but admire the new lifestyle. Therefore, the power of the new era is to mercilessly execute the elimination order if one cannot adapt to this new era. Jesus Christ said, "Do not put new wine into old wineskins." He said that if you put new wine into old wineskins, the wineskins will burst and the new wine will be spilled, and there is no doubt that it is absolutely right. Today's Korean society is in the midst of putting new wine into old wineskins, and there are many people who are trying to do so. Some wine has already been poured in, and the old wineskins are bursting. Therefore, although it is not a pity that the old wineskins are bursting, it is a pity that the new wine is being spilled, but I would like the new wine that is being spilled to be good, even if it is only a little bit that remains under the wineskin to be used well. The topic assigned to me is to compare and research the strengths and weaknesses of new and old women in Korea in the new era. Because the topic is good, I, who am sighing at the end of the line as a Korean in the new era, volunteered for it for free because I wanted to argue about it. However, I am confident that there is one purpose for bringing up Jesus Christ's old wineskin and new wine theory at the beginning of the writing in a way that is like answering a different question from the question asked. I hope that this will give some hint.

<94> To get straight to the point, I will consider whether new women and old women are useful in the living class of present-day Koreans, based on their superiority and inferiority.

Of course, since this is a new era like white that cannot be denied even if we ask for the world's great denials, a new lifestyle that adapts to it is necessary, and the new woman, who is an essential assistant in starting a new lifestyle, is that. However, although a lengthy study may be necessary to discuss new and old women in detail, here, I will hastily put out a great acute diagnosis that old women are those who wear their hair in a bun, wear long skirts, and wear rubber shoes, and new women are those who wear trendy hairstyles, short and patchy skirts, and wear boots. I don't know if this is a good thing, but this alone may be a dividing line between new and old sexes that appears externally. And one more thing to add is that old Korean women can be placed on the same horizontal line, but there may be distinctions between women from noble families and women from commoner families, but their lifestyles and hopes are almost the same, so even if they are treated as the same type, there will not be a big error. However, although the number of new women may not be a large group of millions, their content is quite complex, even though they are in the minority. If we vertically divide this into two equal parts, we will first discuss the appearance of women's schools in modern Korean history in order to pay our respects, but as Korean women belonging to the missionary school (mission school) system who have received English and American style (more than 90% are American) education, or in contemporary government jargon, native education, that is, women who have received Japanese education, may have originally been Korean women, but now there is an insurmountable gap between them.

So, which of the old women who make a living with needlework, meals, laundry, and all other family events, and the new women who make a heavenly living with makeup, walks, gossip, and all other non-family events, are necessary for the lives of present-day Koreans? I do not say what is superior or inferior, but ask for each person's consideration.

Let's take a look at the public life of Koreans. How poor and fragmented it is. Of course, the lifestyles of a small number of privileged classes are enjoying extreme pleasure day and night, not knowing the bottom, and improving, but what can we compare the poverty of the masses, who are the raw materials for exploitation, to?

I am only thinking about this. The new women who have received American-style education or Japanese-style education are women like excess (여엀•) to the propertyless masses. To be able to accommodate new women, there must be a Western-style reception room, a cool Japanese tatami room in the summer, and even a clean Korean ondol room to live in during the cold winter. They also run advertisements in newspapers to find housekeepers, seamstresses, servants, and sometimes even nannies. In addition to that, they put Western musical instruments at home and loaf around, and enjoy walks, theater, and concerts with their wives. At least this much must be provided for new women to be satisfied. So, how many Koreans can provide this much satisfaction to new women today? That is why there is a fierce battle among them.

It may be very embarrassing or even rude, but Weiniger of Germany divided women into two types: housewives and prostitutes. I have also divided Korean new and old women into two categories: old women are practical women and new women are luxury women. I do not guarantee whether this is appropriate or not, but in any case, my observation is that new women often act as luxury accessories based on my observations and small-scale experiences over the years.

<96>Having said this, I may be called one of the stubborn people who praise old women and attack new women, but I know this clearly. Old women will not be able to fulfill the responsibility of bringing today's life into tomorrow's life. If old women have the ability, it is only to maintain the past life. But we cannot continue to live in the past from today onwards. So, where are the new women who will contribute to tomorrow's life with their inner help?

The Old Woman Should Not Even Be Kept in the Family
Cho Gi-an

You can't graft new wood onto a rotten tree, and you can't put new grain in old bags. In the same way, old things are not needed in the new era. This is true not only in politics and society, but also in individual families. Especially in Korea today, when we are trying to renovate everything from the root up, if an old woman becomes a housewife in the family as before, putting aside everything else, how can we improve our lives first, and how can we educate our children? People often criticize new women, saying that they don't know how to manage their homes, are vain, and have no sense of chastity, but whether it's new women or old women, it depends on the person. Are all old women loyal and chaste, and are all new women promiscuous? Speaking of housekeeping, because they have a preconceived notion that Korean families and Korean lifestyles should remain the same and that things should be done as they were in the past, they say that, but if we look at it from the perspective of new families and new lifestyles, how can an ignorant old woman follow in the footsteps of a new woman? As for vanity, what is vanity and what is not? What standard is there? Old-fashioned women also want to wear nice clothes, have a good time, and even want a good house and a good husband. In general, it is said that because crucian carps are jumping, mudfish are trying to jump hundreds of feet higher, and these days, old-fashioned women have no knowledge like new women, but they try to live extravagantly more than new women, so what can we do? And I have heard that people often criticize new women for getting divorced easily. However, I think that is an unwarranted criticism. Originally, a couple is not a blood relationship, but a sentimental relationship between strangers, so it is natural to get divorced if it does not suit one's feelings, principles, or other intentions. If they lead an unnatural life because they are attached to past customs and morals, the harm will be greater than anything else. Recently, I saw a "Husband Poisoning" incident being reported in the newspapers almost every day. Such an incident is something that cannot be seen anywhere but in Korea, and when we look into the cause, it is mostly because there is no freedom of divorce and they are forced to live an unnatural life, which causes such a tragedy. You who say that old women are good as housewives, please don't just be dragged into the issue and speak from that perspective, but speak with your conscience. If new women are not needed in domestic life, as you say, why do you send your daughters to girls' schools, and why do you advocate for the necessity of women's education? If they cannot be used in the family, do you educate them to be used in open-air stalls or on the road? If there are shortcomings, it is natural to express the opinion that it would be good to improve only those shortcomings, but even in a discussion, how can you say such contradictory things that violate your conscience on a surface where everyone can read?

<97>To put it extremely, if we are to renovate and improve Korean families and society, we should gather all the old women and make them work in some factory, and each should marry a new woman. Old women originally have nothing, so it is even awkward to talk about them. I have much more to say than this, but I will stop here because it seems like I am attacking only one side too much.

I prefer Old Women
Pak Chun-p'a

A. Hey, Mr. B. I hear you’re looking for a woman these days? What kind of woman are you looking for?
B. Well, I haven’t decided what kind of woman I should look for yet. I was thinking of getting a woman from a traditional family who is good-looking, has a gentle and kind heart, and is physically healthy – but who knows what will happen!
A. A woman from a traditional family? Why? I thought you would be looking for a new woman, that is, a woman from school.
B. Well, at first I thought so too, but when I looked into this and that, I realized it wouldn’t work. Especially for us who have no property, we can’t afford a new woman.
A. Why? You seem very composed these days.
B. When wasn’t I composed? I’m always the same.
A. No, sometime ago, didn’t you swear that even if you only lived for a day, you would only marry a new woman?
B. That’s right. That’s what I’m saying. If I were only going to live for a day, that would be fine, but I’m not going to live for just a day.
A. What are you saying? Are you saying that a new woman is only good for a day? Isn’t that too insulting? Are you saying that every women’s school these days is a school for raising women who are only good for a day?
B. I’m not saying that all new women are like that. There may be some who live better than old women. But for those of us who have no property, 7 or 8 out of 10 end up being good for just a day. Mr. K, Mr. R, Mr. C, and others have seen examples of this, haven't they? And why are you trying to embarrass me by dragging out rude remarks and teasing your friend? Let's talk politely and properly. Actually, as you know, I, until just a few months ago, used the words that young people these days use to praise new women quite a bit. <98> As a result, I secretly followed new women and suffered quite a bit, but after looking at this and that, I realized that it would not work for me. The direct reason for this is the following two examples. The first is what happened to Mr. C next door, and the second is what happened to Mr. K of the OO Daily News. Shall I tell you about it? As you can imagine, Mr. C spent a year and a half carefully choosing Miss K, going over it again and again until he finally concluded that she was perfect in every way. She was good-looking, studied well (?), was a Christian, and had even studied in Tokyo, so she was a very stylish woman with a Western flair. She perfectly met Mr. C’s requirements. Haven’t you seen her? If she was that good, she would be ready to fight anyone who claimed to be second best in Jongno or in the back alleys. Of course, Mr. C was satisfied, and the woman was also very satisfied to have found a handsome man with some money like Mr. C, so both sides were very happy and satisfied. On the day of the wedding, they didn’t even feel embarrassed in front of everyone at the chapel and hugged each other and kissed. And the way the general public envied them! “Mr. C is happy! Miss K is happy!” Who wouldn’t have swallowed their saliva! Not only that, I mumbled to myself at that spot that day, “That’s how a man should live.” But Mr. A, it was three weeks after they got married? No, it was exactly on the 20th day. I was sitting in my room around 9 pm reading a book when I heard a loud noise from next door. “Maybe the servants are fighting. If not, it must be the laborers!” I thought at first, but then I heard Mr. C’s mother’s voice, which sounded like it was being torn apart. “Oh! The fight is big. Let’s go see!” I got curious and ran out the door. What a ridiculous sight! I’m too embarrassed to say it….
A. So, what happened? Tell me briefly, I’m curious.
B. Haha! It was really embarrassing. The neighbors and children were gathered in front of the gate, and when I quietly went behind them and peeked, Mr. C had his hair down and was only wearing his underwear. He was squatting on the edge of the veranda with his head in his hands, looking like an angry toad. His mother was banging on the veranda with a broken tobacco pipe and yelling towards the room (Mr. C’s room), “You little bitch. Are you trying to ruin this house? You fox-like thing, have you ever lifted a finger since you came into this house twenty days ago? Have you ever even touched a broom? You sly thing. And what else do you want that you’re complaining about me! Oh! This world. I wish it would all fall apart!” Then, from the room, a sharp voice said, “I’m leaving. Don’t worry!” Then, the mother shouted, “Go! You wicked thing, go, but pay for all the damages you’ve caused to this house. You sly thing!” Then, Mr. C, who was squatting and sulking, couldn’t stand it any longer and turned to his mother and said in a trembling voice, “Oh, it’s embarrassing for the neighbors. Please go inside. What kind of embarrassment is this?” Then, the mother became even angrier and stood in front of her son, shouting as if she were going to eat him alive, “You son of a bitch, are you embarrassed? Do you know what embarrassment is? If you knew what embarrassment was, why did you bring in a Korean fox-like woman? You son of a bitch who will ruin this family. Even if the family is ruined and we become beggars… You son of a bitch, eat me alive. And you two can live well together. I don’t know what’s going on. Does that girl have gold plating on her feet? What are those Western shoes that you buy her every day for? You son of a bitch, how is this family supposed to make a living? Oh, I’m so frustrated. You little bitch. Take off all those rings. Take off all the gold and jewel rings.” Then, the door across the room opened with a thud, and she shouted, “Here. I don’t want to take this dirty thing. Take it all.” And she threw out rings, shoes, and all sorts of things. How embarrassing. I felt sorry for Mr. C and couldn’t bear to watch. And Mr. C couldn’t stand to watch it either, so he ran into the room, grabbed a suit and put it on, grabbed a hat in his hand, and ran out into the yard. At this time, I felt too sorry to see Mr. C, so I ran home. Later, I heard from the kids that Miss K had also left that night to her parents’ house or somewhere. I still don’t know what happened to Mr. C and Miss K. At this time, I immediately concluded that “Anyone who marries a new woman is a son of a bitch.”
A. That’s too much of a simplistic conclusion, isn’t it? To talk about the entirety of new women after seeing one family fight is too harsh of a view. How many women live happily ever after?
B. Women who live happily ever after. Of course, there are. There are many. But that’s because there are various conditions that satisfy the woman’s needs. Of course, they have a lot of money, or both sides have good affection, or both sides have jobs, or they have no parents, or even if they have parents, they are virtuous. But those of us who have no property, let alone those who don’t have stable jobs, can’t even dream of it. Anyway, if you’re going to marry a new woman, first of all, you need money. Second, you have to be prepared to be her servant. You have to let her do whatever she wants, whether she gets up at sunrise or comes in the middle of the night, and you have to be willing to do all the chores, even fetching water and taking off her shoes, and promise to take her for a walk in the park once a day, go to the theater once every two days, take a trip to the countryside once a week, go to the beach for summer vacation, go to Sogeumgang for autumn trip. In winter, go to a hot spring, and in spring, go to Hanami (flower viewing). You have to carefully plan your affection and <100> expenses and follow her around diligently, and on top of that, you have to unconditionally agree to a divorce at any time. I don’t know if it’s because I’m too sensitive about new women, but that’s how it seems to me. And Mr. A, haven’t you seen what happened to Mr. K? Weren’t they so close that they even went to the bathroom together? But despite that, what do you mean by saying that she found another man in less than three months after her husband went to jail? Old women never do that, unless they get a death sentence… Anyway, they’re wicked people. Even if it’s freedom of love or freedom of divorce, how can they be so immoral? What must Mr. K have felt when he heard this news? Even if he had committed robbery and gone to jail, he wouldn’t dare to do that in the light of his usual justice. Ugh, wicked things.
A. You seem to have some kind of karmic connection with new women from birth. Why do you only pick up those bad ogre-like types and make such a fuss? I’ll give you a few examples of good women.
B. Don’t say it. I know your good examples too. Women who respect their parents, respect their husbands, take good care of their homes, have sons and daughters, and live like old women while being new women.
A. That’s right. There are so many women like that, aren’t there? Mr. R’s wife is like that. Mr. P’s wife is like that.
B. Haha! You only see the surface and don’t see the inside. Do you know how much of a servant Mr. R and Mr. P are to their wives? Do you know how much anguish and pain they have in their hearts? If you dissect them, you’ll find a lump of regret the size of a wooden pillow. Actually, Mr. R and Mr. P were the ones who told me about old women. They earnestly told me from their own experience and repeatedly asked me to do so. What is your experience?
A. That’s right. You thought well. I’m only 10% satisfied and 90% dissatisfied. Living with a new woman is like a constant "minus" number. On the first day of marriage, I was more than 10% or 12% satisfied, but it gradually decreased by 1% or even 2% or 4% in some cases, and in the end, I smelled fishy in my nose. This is not improvement, but decline. Can I live like this? Whether it’s financial loss or cooling of love, everything collapses. It’s amazing. Actually, I was going to advise you to do the same. Like what you said earlier, a woman who is good-looking, gentle and kind, physically healthy, and knows some Korean and Chinese characters to read letters and newspapers would be most suitable for our situation today. More than that, a woman who is sure to have a job, is diligent and frugal (continued on page 177) <101>
A woman who saves time and money to the maximum. Such a woman would be suitable for us.
It’s even more so for the sake of life than for the sake of love or living. I used to talk nonsense about new women and modernity a few years ago when I was ignorant, but now that I have tasted the bitterness and sweetness of the world and investigated the details of our lives and looked at our society that is being destroyed day by day, I feel this way very strongly. The woman of vanity, the woman of waste, the woman who hates to work, the woman of freedom of love – there are many of these in the new woman category, so you should be careful and not change your mind and do what you intend to do now.
B. I’ve had a good talk today. Please introduce me to a woman who is good-looking and gentle.
A. Well, let’s ask around for now to have noodles. Haha. (The End) <177>
<90-101, 177>

**Named Entities**

李晟煥	Yi Seong-hwan
崔奎東	Choe Gyu-dong
金鶴步	Kim Hak-bo
李東園	Yi Dong-won
趙基栞	Cho Gi-an
朴春坡	Pak Chun-p'a
滿洲栗밥	Manju chestnut rice
K군	K kun
R군	R kun
C군	C kun
P군	P kun
東京	Tōkyō
英米	Yŏngmi
日本	Ilbon
獨逸	Togil
와이닝게아	waininggea
小範圍	so-pŏmpi
多多味방	Tatamibang
소요금강	Soyogŭmgang
하나미	Hanami



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제16·17호
발행일	1928년 12월 01일
기사제목	誌上討論 現下 朝鮮에서의 主婦로는 女校出身이 나흔가 舊女子가 나흔가?!
기사형태	소식

誌上討論 現下 朝鮮에서의 主婦로는 女校出身이 나흔가 舊女子가 나흔가?!
新女性은 七德이 具備
李晟煥

가정주부로서 구식여성이 조흐냐? 신식여성이 조흐냐? 하는 말슴이지요. 마치 중학생들 토론문제 가트면서 매우 흥미잇는 문제임니다. 그러나 이 문제는 결국 그 觀法과 입장을 따라 서로 다르겟지요. 봉건식 남성더러 말하라고 하여 보시오. 더듬을 것 업시, 구식여성이 조타고 할 것임니다. 그것은 얼마든지 순한 羊과 가티 사내들 명령에 잘 순종하여 봉건제에 꼭 드러마즈니까 그럴 것이 안임니까. 또 그러치 안흔 현대교육을 밧고 다소 신풍조에 물드른 청년들 중에도 구여성을 謳歌하는 사람도 잇겟지요. 그것은 일 아니하고 사치만 부리는 얼치기 신여성이라는 毒蛇에게 물리여본 사람의 수작이겟지요.
또 신여성이 조타는 사람도 가지각색일 것 임니다. 이러케 그 관법과 입장에 따라서 주장이 다를 것임니다. 나도 신여성이 조타는 사람의 하나임니다. 아니 신여성이 조타는 말부터 맛치 완구를 노코 말하는 느낌이 잇슴니다. 나는 차라리 신여성이래야 가정살림을 할 수 잇다고 말슴을 고치고 십슴니다.
잠간 가정살림 이약이가 낫스니 한마듸하고 넘어갈 것은 가정살림에 대한 해석부터 바르게 하여야 이 문제의 正鵠을 어들 수 잇슴니다. 말하자면 가정이라는 것을 다만 바누질 잘하고밥짓는 役場만으로 본다면 그야 그저 바느질하고 밥 잘 짓고 심부름 잘 들으면 그만이라고 하여 구식 여성의 소위 封建婦德으로 讚揚할 수도 잇겟지요. 그러나 가정이란 결코 그러케 단순한 것이 안임니다. 개인의 完美한 인격의 淘冶도 가정에 잇고 사회의 건전한 성장발전도 가정으로부터 되는 것 임니다. 현대를 요리하고 장래를 산출하는 곳임니다. 도저히 케케묵은 封建婦德만으로＜90＞ 가정평화 운운하지 못할 것이라고 생각함니다. 그부터도 벌서 남자들이 여자를 자기네의 玩弄物을 만들겟다는 우월감에서 나오는 말임니다.
여긔서 길게 말슴 드릴 수는 업슴니다만는 나는 이러케 주장함니다.
「가정주부는 신식여성이라야 될 자격이 잇다.」고 그런데 내가 여긔서 신식이니 구식이니 하는 것은 다만 외형에 낫하나는 몸차림을 가지고 하는 말은 안임니다.즉 그가 고무신을 신엇거나 구두를 신엇거나 머리를 트럿거나 머리를 짯거나 치마가 길거나 쩌르거나 하는 것을 말하는 것이 아니라 오직 중등정도의 지식이 잇서서 신사상 신풍조를 이해함으로 해서 신식여성이라 하고 무식하여 코트러막고 답답한 그야말로 구식 그대로 아모 변천이 업는 여성을 구식 여성이라 함니다.
그러면 엇재서 신여성이래야 가정주부될 자격이 잇느냐 하면 그 이유 몃 가지를 아래에 말슴 드리겟슴니다.
첫재, 신여성은 지식이 잇슴으로 이해력이 잇는 것(긔 막히게 답답하지 안타.)
둘재, 신여성은 지식이 잇슴으로 위생관념이 잇는 것(구저즈분하지 안코 청결한 것)
셋재, 신여성은 가사처리를 과학적으로 하는 것(예를 드러 말하면 가족 중에 병자가 잇서도 구여자는 미신으로 다라 나지만 신여자는 병원으로 가는 것과 가튼 것)
넷재, 신여성은 계산에 밝은 것(구여자는 수입지출의 개념도 못 가진다. 그러나 신여성은 계산이 밝다 하다못해 가정일기 하나이라도 한다.)
다섯재, 신여성은 자녀양육을 바로 하는 것(예컨대 무식한 구여자는 지구가 도는 줄도 모르고 해와 달 이약이를 한다. 그러나 신여성은 그런 거짓말을 아니한다. 또 구여자는 種痘넛키를 실혀한다. 그러나 신여성은 그와 반대다. 이런 중요한 문제가 얼마든지 잇슬 것이다.)
여섯재, 신여성은 편지나 뎐보를 볼 줄도 알고 할 줄도 아는 것(구여자는 남편이 출타하엿슬 때 오는 편지 가는 편지를 전부 남의 집 사내들 압헤서 구걸한다.)
일곱재, 신여성은 일의 동무가 되는 것(구여자는 신문 한 장도 정리할 줄 모른다. 그러나＜91＞ 신여성은 원고도 써주고 장부도 정리하고 書物도 代讀한다.)
이와 가튼 조건을 들랴면 제한이 업지요. 흔히 세상에서 말하기를 신여성은 밥 지을 줄 모르고 옷 지을줄 모른다고 합듸다 마는 그것은 어데서 멍텅구리 뿌르조아 딴임들만 두고 하는 말임니다. 그럴 리가 잇슴니까. 신여성일사록 가튼 엄는 돈으로도 도리혀 滋養分잇는 음식을 만들 줄 알고 급격히 변해가는 현대생활(결코 고등한 유행을 말하는 것이 아니다.)의 방식을 아라할 것임니다. 가량 염색이라든지 재봉이라든지 編物이라든지를 다- 집에서 할 수 잇는 것임니다. 심지어 어린 아희들 양복 가튼 것도 남이 만든 것을 비싼 갑에 사입을 것 업시 다-집에서 할 수 이는 것임니다. 그 뿐아니라 가정취미로 말하여도 꾸어온 보리짝 모양으로 뚝-한 성격의 구여자보다 彼此 억개를 나란히 하고 정도에 맛는 오락가튼 것을 취할 줄 하는 신여성편 얼마나 兩性의 평화를 돕게 되겟슴니까. 덥허노코 한말로 끈허 말한다면 가정생활에 구여자가 나흐냐 신여자가 나흐냐 하는 말은 가정생활에 기계가 나흐냐 사람이 나흐냐와 맛찬가지라고 밋겟슴니다. 구여자는 기계이고 신여자는 사람인데야 더 말해 무엇함니까.
누구든지 사람을 貴타고 하지 기계를 귀타고 아니할 것임니다.
朝鮮의 여성은 완전한 주부가 되기 위하야 배우고 또 배워야 되겟슴니다. 시대는 박귀우고 사상은 변함니다. 따라서 가정생활도 판에 박은 듯이 만고불변의 것이 못됨니다. 원시생활로 뒷거름을 치는 살림이 아니고 조곰이라도 새 시대 새 사회로 향상진보하는 살림을 하기 위하야 朝鮮의 여성은 배워야 되겟고 그리하야 신여성이 되며 신가정주부가 되어야 하겟슴니다.

新女子의 二大缺點
崔奎東

소위 교육계에 잇다는 사람으로서 신교육바든 여자의 결점을 말하는 것은 조금 모순된일 갓슴니다. 그러나 문제가 문제이요 표준이 現下朝鮮사람 가정의 표준이닛가 不可不 말슴치 안을 수 업슴니다. 다른 이들은 엇지 생각하는지 알 수 업슴니다만은 나의 경험상으로 신여자와 구여자를 비료하야 보면 신여자는 물론 지식방면이라던지 무엇을 이해하는 방면으로는 구여자보다 낫지만은 意志방면으로는 도저히 구여자를 따를 수 업는 것 갓슴니다.
이것을 다시 구체적으로 말슴한다면
第一. 신여자는 朝鮮재래의 가족제도를 너무 무시하는＜92＞ 것 갓슴니다. 재래의 가족제도가 지금 시대에 물론 꼭 맛는다는 것은 아니아 그것을 개량하랴 하야도 다소 朝鮮의 사정을 짐작하여야 하겟는데 신여자들은 그것을 불구하고 결혼하는 즉시에 대개는 舅姑兄弟와 따로 떠러저서 독립한 생활을 하랴고 하며 또 구식여자는 아모리 자기 남편에 대하야 불평불만이 잇슬지라도 그저 참고 참어서 한번 엇던 남편을 엇는다면 자기의 생명이 끈어지는 날까지 그 남편을 위하야 전신을 희생까지 하지만은 신식여자는 대개 그러한 관념이 簿弱하야 그 남편이 자기에게 무슨 불평이나 불만을 준다먼 곳 풍파를 이르켜서 극단으로 가면 이혼문제까지 주창하야 일가정을 破케 하는 일까지 잇슴니다.
第二. 신여자는 구여자보다 허영심이 너무 만흔 것 갓슴니다. 물론 교육과 지식의 정도를 따러서 욕망과 생활정도오 느러가는 것이 사실이지만은 실제사정을 생각지 안코 허영에만 띄워서 작고 자기의 욕망대로만 살어가랴면 그 엇지 될 수가 잇슴닛가. 셋방도 어더살기가 어려운 판에 양옥집 타령만 하며 솟 釜鼎器 살 돈도 곤란한데 피아노만 사자고 졸으고 滿洲栗밥도 3시 걱정을 하는데 양요리 맛이 엇더니 청요리 맛이 엇더니 하고 반찬거리가 업는데 화장품만 사드린다면 그 안이 걱정이겟슴닛가. 구여자는 그러한 일은 업지만은 신여자는 대개가 그러한 경향이 잇는 것 갓슴니다.
이 우에 말슴한 두 가지 이외에도 여러 가지의 결점이 만치만은 眞 소위 올흔 말이라도 너무하면 반감이 난다고 그저 이만큼만 하야두고 이 압흐로 그러한 결점이 업기를 바람니다.

舊女子는 오즉 忠實한 奴隷
金鶴步

이 문제는 애초에 문제가 되지 안슴니다. 우리네 가정에서- 더구나 現下 20세기에 안저서 케케묵고 곰팽이 씨른 18세기의 두뇌와 그때 그 제도를 고대로 가만이 가지고 잇는 국식부부야 당초에 어데다가 소용이 닷겟슴닛가. 주부의 임무가 媤父母의 예속물에만 긋친다 할 것 가트면 이 점만에 한해서는 어느 정도까지 구식부인이 나흘는지 모르겟스나(이것도 반듯이 그러타는 것은 안이라) 陳腐한 舊道德은 모조리 파멸되는 이 때에 媤父母 봉양 잘 하라는 것만이 주부의 의무가 안이라 이제로부터는 적어도 제 2세 국민을 잘 길으고 잘 가르치는 것이 무엇보담도 주부의 중대한 임무라고 하겟슴니다.
아희를 기르는 것은 물론이고 아희를 잘가르치는 데도 主人보담 주부의 방법여하에 달린 것 인즉 그 책임이 어떠 합닛가.＜93＞ 그 국가에 그 사회에 튼튼하고 씩씩한 일ㅅ군을 내보내고 못 내보내는 것이 그 집 주부에게 전책임이 잇다고 볼 때에 엇지 이 문제를 輕忽하게 취급할 수 잇겟습닛가. 시대의 趨移가 어떠케 되는지 방위의 동서남북이 어대인지도 잘 알지 못하는 純구식부인으로서 시대의 바람과 조수를 드려마시고 뛰어나아와서 무엇을 알겟다고 또 무엇을 해보겟다고 날뛰는 第二世 국민을 敎養하고 지도한다는 것은 조곰 심한 말가트나 마치 결혼식장에 葬具를 끄집어내는 것과 가튼 일이라고 하고 십슴니다. 더구나 우리 朝鮮사회에서 어느 방면으로 보아도 남이 한 발작 가면 나는 두 발작 거러가야 할 것이며 남이 이 한字를 배흘 적에 나는 두字나 세字는 배와야할 우리 朝鮮가정에 이런 케케묵은 골동품(용서하시요.)을 어대다 갓다 쓰겟슴닛가? 그 뿐만 안이라 살림을 하는데나 손님을 대접하는데나 또는 어떠한 사교석상에 서나 혹은 遠方旅行을 하는데나 구식부인으로는 정말 가슴이 답답한 때가 만슴니다. 이 모든 여러 가지 不便不自由한 점으로 주인과 이상과 지식정도의 넘우 멀은 점으로나 무엇으로 보던지 우리네 가정에 잇서서 구식주부로는 不自由 不理解 不和 破壞의 결과를 불러오는 것인 즉 이 문제는 애초에 문제가 되지 안는다고 단언한 것이올시다.

배운女子는 一個 奢侈品
李東園

지금은 신생활을 이상치 안을 수 업는 신시대라 한다. 그럼으로 이 신시대에 순응치 못하면 容赦업시 陶汰令을 실행하는 것이 신시대의 위력이다. 예수 그리스도가 말하기를 헌 가죽부대에 새 술을 늣치 마르라고 하얏다. 헌 가죽부대에 새술을 느으면 그 가죽부대가 찌저저서 새술을 내여 버리게 된다고 의심업시 꼭 올은 말이다. 금일의 朝鮮의 사회는 헌 가죽부대에 새술을 늣넌 중이고 늣노라고 애쓰는 사람도 만이 잇스며 벌서 얼마를 늣키도 하얏고 헌 가죽부대가 찌저지기도 한다. 그럼으로 헌 가죽부대가 찌저지는＜94＞ 것은 앗갑지 안이하지만 새 술을 버리게 되는 것이 앗갑다고 하겟는대 朝鮮은 임의 헌 가죽부대 된지가 오래 되얏지만 거긔에 드러가는 새 술은 기어히 다 조흔 것은 안이다. 헌 가죽부대와 가티 버려저도 앗갑지 안은 새술도 간혹 만흔 것 갓다. 그런 즉 아모라도 내여 버리는 새술이닛가 其質의 好否를 云爲할 필요가 업스리라고 간단하게 말하는 사람도 만이 잇슬 것 갓지만 내의 욕망으로는 내여버리게 되는 새 술일망정 조흔 술이엿스면 한다. 웨 그런고하니 내여버리다가 조금이라도 가죽부대 밋헤 남으면 좀 잘 써볼가 하고 내게 부과된 論題는 신시대의 朝鮮에 처하야 신구여성의 長短 비교연구라고 한다. 제목이 좃코 신시대의 朝鮮人의 末席에서 長呻하는 나로서는 한번 論難하고 십흘 만하기에 무료로 청부하얏다. 그런대 과제와는 동문서답격으로 집필 劈頭에 예수 그리스도의 舊革袋新酒論을 들고 나온 것이 내달은 한 가지 목적이 잇섯스리라고 자신한다. 곳 이것으로 무슨 힌트나 되얏스면 하는 것인대.
短力直入的으로 現下朝鮮人의 생활층에서 신여성과 구여성이 소용됨을 그 優劣性으로 한번 고찰하야볼가 한다.
물론 세계의 거대한 否論을 청하야 오더라도 부정할 수 업는 白과 가튼 신시대이닛가 그것에 순응하는 신생활이 필요하고 신생활을 개업하는대는 필연한 助手인 신여성이 그것이다 그러나 신구여성을 詳論하기는 장구한 연구가 필요할넌지 모르거니와 여긔에서는 극히 피상적으로 머리는 쪽지고 치마는 길고 고무신 신은 것은 구여성 뒤통수에 트레머리 븟치고 치마는 짤고 빼뚜룩 찟두룩하고 구쓰 신은 것은 신여성이라고 大急性 診書를 내여놋차 이것이 잘되얏다고 못＜95＞ 하겟지만 요만만하야도 외형에 現出하는 新舊兩性의 區劃線은 되엿슬가한다. 그리고 한 가지만 더 첨부할 것은 朝鮮의 구여성은 동일한 수평선에 세울수가 잇지만 양반집 여성 상민집 여성의 구별이야 잇스리라 만은 그들이 생활방시과 희망이 거진 가트닛가 同類로 치더라도 과한 誤謬는 안일 것이다. 그러나 신여성이라는 것은 그 수로 보아서는 아즉 수백만이 될 만한 大群을 못당하겟스나 소수일 망정 그 내용은 꾀 복잡하다 이것을 縱斷하야 2등분을 하고보면 근세 朝鮮에 역사적으로 보아서 여학교의 출현이 오래 엿기에  경의를 표하기 위하야 먼저 奉論하거니와 선교학교(밋션스쿨) 계통에 속한 朝鮮여성으로써 英米식(9분 이상은 米國이지만) 교육밧은 여성들과 또는 當代官制 유행어로 말하면 內地人的 교육 즉 日本교육밧은 여성들은 본래는 朝鮮여자 이엿겟지만 지금은 건네기 어려운 갭푸가 생겻다.
그런 즉 針繕, 식사, 세탁, 기타 전부 가정의 행사로써 생명을 삼는 구여성과 화장, 산보, 잡담, 기타 전부 非家의 행사로써 天職을 사는 신여성과 어늬 것이 現下 朝鮮사람이 생활에 필요할가. 나는 何優何劣을 말하지 안코 각기의 一考를 바란다.
朝鮮사람의 대중생활을 한번 도라보자. 그 얼마나 빈약하고 零星한가. 물론 소수의 특권계급의 생활상이야 朝夕으로 極樂에 極樂에 하고 天井을 모르며 향상하거니와 그 이하에서 착취 원료인 대중이야 그 빈약을 무엇으로 비하야 말할가.
나는 이것만은 생각하고 잇다. 지금 米國식 교육이나 日本식 교육을 밧은 신여성들은 無産대중에게는 여엀•과 갓흔 여성들이라고 洋式應接이나 하나잇고 夏節이면 선선하리만한 日本多多味방이나 하나 잇고 冬節에 치운때에 거처하실 朝鮮식 온돌방이나마 깨끗한 것이 하나 잇서야 신여성들을 모실 수 잇고 식모, 針母, 하인 두고 혹시는 유모 구하는 광고도 신문에 내이며 그 외에 서양악기 집에노코 밥쌕임이나 하고 同夫人 散策, 극장 음악회 구경 적어도 이만이나 하여야 신여성들이 만족할 것이다. 그러면 이만한 만족을 신여성에게 제공할 朝鮮사람이 오늘 그 멧치나 될가. 그런 까닭이려니와 그들 중에 쟁탈전이 여간 白熱化하지 안엇다.
대단히 惶悚하고 혹은 不遜하다고 하면 그도 事勢不得이려니와 獨逸의 와이닝게아는 여성을 2등분하야 家婦型 여자 娼婦型 여자라 하얏다. 나는 朝鮮식 신구여성을 역시 총괄적으로 2등분하야 구여성은 실용품적 여자 신여성은 사치품적 여사라고 하야 보앗다. 이것이 當不當은 내가 보증치 안커니와 여하간 나의 관찰이 그러하얏고 또는 年來로 小範圍의 견문으로 보아도 신여성은 사치품적 부속품 行使가 만흠을 보아 하야본 말이다.
論至於此則 내가 구여성을 찬미하고 신여성을 공격하얏다고＜96＞ 頑固之徒의 1인이라고 할넌지 모르겟지만 나도 이것은 분명히 안다. 구여성은 금일의 생활을 明日의 생활에 끌고 나아가는 책임을 다하지 못할 줄을. 구여성에게 능력이 잇다 하면 과거의 생활을 유지할 것 밧게. 그러나 우리는 과거의 생활을 금일 이후로는 계속 식여서 안이 되겟다. 그러면 明日의 생활에 내조의 공으로 싸을 신여성은 과연 어대 잇는가.

舊女子는 家庭에 두지도 말자
趙基栞

썩은 나무에는 새 나무를 接할 수 업고 흔 부대에는 새 곡식을 담을 수가 업슴니다. 그와 맛찬가지로 새 시대에는 구인물이 필요치 안슴니다. 정치상이나 사회상은 물론이고 개인의 가정도 그러함니다. 특히 우리 朝鮮과 가티 무엇이라던지 근본부터 改新을 하려는 오늘에 잇서서 前日과 맛찬가지로 가정에 구여자가 주부가 된다면 다른 것은 그만두고라도 爲先 생활은 엇지 개선할 수가 잇스며 자녀의 교육은 엇지할 수가 엇슴닛가. 세상사람들이 言必稱新女子는 살님사리를 모르너니 허영심이 만흐니 정조관념이 업너니 하고 비평을 하지만은 신여자나 구여자나 그것은 사람되기에 달니엿지 구여자라고 다 烈女貞婦이고 신여자라고 다 浮浪女이겟슴닛가. 살님으로 말하더라도 朝鮮의 가정과 朝鮮의 생활방식을 그대로 두고 녯날대로만 하자는 선입견을 가지고 보닛가 그럿치 신가정 신생활편으로 보자면 무식한 구여자가 엇지 신여자의 뒤나 따러 보겟슴닛가. 허영심이란 그것도 그럿치 엇던 것이 과연 허영이고 엇던 것이 허영이 안이인지 무슨 표준이 잇슴닛가. 구식여자도 조흔 옷을 입고 십허하고 조흔 시간을 가지고 십허하고 내지 조흔집 조흔 남편을 요구하는 것은 일반 일것임니다. 眞 소위 숭어가 뛰닛가 망둥이는 몃 백尺을 더 뛰랴고 한다고 요새이 구여자들은 신여자와 가튼 지식은 업스면서도 호사는 신여자 이상으로 하랴고 하니 그것은 엇지 하겟슴닛가. 그리고 세상에서는 신여자들이 이혼을 잘 한다고 흔이 비평하는 것을 들엇슴니다. 그러나 그것은 공연한 비평으로 생각됨니다. 원래 부부라는 것은 무슨 혈족적 관계가 안이라 남과 남끼리의 情적 관계인 즉 자기의 情과 主義 기타 의사에 맛지 안으면 얼마라도 이혼을  하는 것이 당연한 일이니 공연히 과거인습, 도덕에 끌리워서 부자연한 생활을 한다면 그 폐해가 무엇보다도 더 만흘 것 갓슴니다. 근일에도 신문상에 매일 발표되다십히 『本夫毒殺』사건이 잇는 것을 보왓슴니다. 그런 사건은 우리 朝鮮이 안이고는 도저히 볼 수가 업는 사실인대 그 원인을 캐서보면 대개가 이혼의 자유가 업고 억지로 부자연한 생활을 하기 때문에 그러한 비극이 생기는 것임니다. 주부로는 구여자가 좃타고 말슴하시는 여러분 다만 문제에만 끌니어서 그 편으로 말슴하지 마르시고 양심잇는 그대로 말슴하십시오. 당신네 말슴과 가티 만일에 신여자는 주부생활에＜97＞ 필요치 안타면 당신네의 따님은 엇지하야 여학교에 다니게 하며 여자교육의 필요는 무슨 까닭으로 주창을 함닛가. 가정에서 쓸수 업다면 露店 또는 행로에서 쓰랴고 교육을 식힘닛가. 만일에 결점이 잇다면 그 결점만을 개량하얏스면 조켓다는 의견을 진술하는 것은 당연하지만은 아모리 誌上討論이라도 萬人이 公讀하는 지면에 그런 양심에 위반되는 모순의 말슴을 엇지 하심닛가.
나는 극단으로 말하자면 朝鮮의 가정이나 사회를 일신하게 개선하자면 구여자는 모다 모와다가 엇던 공장에서 노동이나 식히고 제 각히 신여자롸 결혼을 하야만 될 줄 암니다. 구여자는 원래에 아모것도 업스닛가 대해서 말하기까지 실습듸다. 이외에도 할 말슴은 만치만은 한편만 너무 공격하는 것 가터서 이만 그침니다.

나는 舊女性을
朴春坡

A. 여보게 B군. 자네 이즈음 녀자를 물색중이라지? 대체 엇던 녀자를 구하는 중인가?
B. 글세 엇던 녀자를 구해야 됴흘지 아직 확뎡을 못하얏네. 생각갓태서는 얼굴이나 똑똑하고 심덕이나 얌전하고 신톄나 건전한 구가뎡 녀자를 취해ㅅ스면-하는데 엇지될넌지!
A. 구가뎡 녀자? 그러유는. 나는 생각하기를 자네쯤은 신녀자 즉 학교출신을 물색하고 잇는 줄 아럿는데.
B. 글세 처음은 그럿케도 생각하얏네만은 가만히 이것저것을 따저보닛가 도저히 안이 되겟데. 더구나 우리가티 무산자는 신녀자 가지고는 어림도 업겟데.
A. 엇재서? 자네 이즘은 퍽 점잔어젓네 그려.
B. 언젠 점잔치 안엇나? 내야 언으때나 한모양이지.
A. 안이 그 언젠가 자네 하로를 살고만다해도 장가를 들내면 반듯이 신녀자에게 든다고 떳다고지 안엇나?
B. 올네. 그러게 말일세. 하로 살고만다하면 그리해도 조켓는데 하로 살고 말수는 업스닛가.
A. 이 사람 그게 무슨 소리인가? 그럼 신녀자란 하로ㅅ거리밧게 안된단 말인가? 그는 너무나 모욕이 안인가? 그럿케 말하면 지금의 녀학교란 녀학교는 모다 하로사리 양성소란 말인지?
B. 신녀자라고 다야 그럿켓나. 그중에도 구녀자 이상으로 잘 살어주는 녀자도 잇겟지. 그러나 우리 가티 무산자에 잇서서는 10이면 7, 8번 하로사리가 되고 마는 것일세. K군. R군. C군. 그밧게도 여러 가지로 실례를 보지 안엇나? 그런데 자네 왜 점잔치 못하게 억설을 끄집어 가지고 친구를 놀녀내랴고 하나. 점잔 정당하게 말하세. 실상 말이지. 자네도 아다십히 나도 요뎃달 전까지는 시속 청년들이 행용하는 말로 신녀자를 꽤 측켜세웟네.＜98＞ 그리하야 신녀자의 뒤도 남로르게 만히 따라단녓고 스사로 속태워 본일도 여간이 안이 엿네만은 두고두고 요럿케 조럿케 두루 따려보닛가 내 처지로는 도조히 안될 것을 발견하얏네. 그 직접동귀로는 이와 가튼 두어가지 실례가 잇네. 첫재는 우리 압집 C군의 일이고 둘재는 00일보사의 K군의 일일세. 니약이 할게 드러보겟나? 자네도 짐작하리만은 C군이야말로 K그라는 녀자를 취하기에 1년반이란 긴 세월을 두고 골느고 골느고 다시 골나서 百無一欠이란 판뎡하에서 결국 모서드린 것일세. 얼굴 입부고 공부 잘하고(?) 그리스찬에다가 겸 동경류학인지라 양풍일풍에 아조 멋드러진 녀자이것다. C군의 요구에는 아조 만점이여섯네. 자네도 보지 안엇나? 그만하면 현대녀자로는 종로에 나서나 골목에 드러서나 둘재가라면 당장 주먹쥐고 달녀들판일세.C군의 만족은 물론 그 녀자 역시 C군 가튼 미남자에 겸 돈푼 잇는 자를 엇은지라 양편이 만족 대만족하야 결혼식 당일 례배당에서부터 만인의 압헤 북그러운 줄 모르고 팔을 얼사안고 키쓰하다 십히 하얏다네. 그보다도 일반 남녀의 부러워하는 꼴이야! 「C군은 행복이다! K양은 행복이다.」하고 누가 침을 안이 생켯겟나! 안인게 안이라 나도 그날 그 자리엊�서 이럿케 혼자 웅절거렷네. 「사람이 낫다가 맛당히 저럴 것이라」고. 그런데 A군. 그들이 결혼한지 3주일인가? 안이 꼭 20일째되든 날일세. 저녁 9시쯤하야 방안에 안저 책을 보노라닛가 압집으로부터 왁자자-하고 떠드는 소리가 들니겟지. 「아마 행랑 것들이 싸우나 보다. 그럿치 안으면 뢰동자들이겟지!」하고 처음은 심상히 듯고마럿네그려. 그런데 웬걸 천만의외에도 C군 어머니의 찌저지는 듯한 목소리가 들니겟지. 「올타! 싸홈은 크다. 구경낫다!」하고 호긔심이 대발하야 문밧그로 뛰여나갓네그려. 원 이런 망측한 꼴도 잇겟나. 내 낫치 뜨거워 참아 말을 못하겟네....
A. 그래. 엇덧트란 말인가? 궁금하이 얼핏 니약이하게.
B. 하하! 참말 창피도 하데. 이웃행랑년들 아색기들이 대문이 메다십히 모혀드러 구경을 하는데 나도 그 등뒤에 가만히 가서 엿보닛가 C군은 하이카라머리를 푸러헷친 채 내복만 걸치고 마룩끗테 머리를 집고 쭈그리고 안저 성난 둑껍이 모양으로 씩은벌덕거리고 잇겟지. 그 어머니는 부런진 담배대로 마루를 땅땅 두들기며 건넌방(C군내의 방)을 향하야 이년아. 누집을 망처먹을냐고 그래 요- 여호 가튼 년아 내 집에 온 지 스므날에 걸네 한번을 드러보앗늬? 비ㅅ자루 한 번을 드러보앗늬? 요-앙큼한 년아. 그리고도 무엇이 부족하야 나를 원망해! 아구! 이 놈의 세상아. 얼핏 망해라!하고 야단발광을 하데 그려. 그리자 건넌방으로부터 「갈테야. 갈테니 걱정마러!」하고 칼날가튼 소리가 나오데 그려.＜99＞ 그리자 그 어머니는 「가! 가길낭은 가거라만은 내 집 손해 다 무러놋코 가거라. 요-앙큼한 년아.」하고 발악을 하데그려. 그리자 불눅거리고 안젓든 C군이 참다못하야 자긔 어머니를 향하야 떨니는 말소리로 「아구 이웃사람 북그럽소. 드러가 즈므시우. 사람이 이게 무슨 창피람.」하고 한마듸 건네데 그려. 그리자 그 어머니는 더욱 악이 대발하야 아들편으로 닥어안즈며 당장 잡아먹을 듯이 「이 자식아 창피해? 너는 창피를 아늬? 창피를 알면 웨 조선여호가튼 년을 어더 드렷늬? 이 집안 망할 자식아. 집안이 망하고 거지가 되어나가도... 이 자식아 나를 잡아먹어라. 그리고 너의 년놈끼리 잘사러라. 이놈 글세 웬즛이냐? 조-년의 발에는 금도금을 하얏듸? 구든가 개대가린가 그것은 왜 세커레식 사드리나 말이다. 이 자식아 이 집 살림이 엇더케 모일 살님이냐? 아구 속터저 죽겟다. 이년아. 그 반지 다 내노아라. 금반지 보석반지 다 내녊�아라-」하고 밋친 듯 발악을 하는 판인데 건너방문이 덜컥 열니며 「엿소. 이 더러운 것을 가질 내가 안이요. 다 집어 생키시우.」하고 반지며 구두며 온갓 것을 내던지데 그려. 엇지되 창피한지. C군이 가엽서 참아 못보겟데. 그리고 C군은 아무리 해도 그 꼴을 못보겟는지 방안으로 왈칵 띄여드러가더니 양복을 되는대로 주서입고 모자를 손에 든채 마당으로 뛰여나오데. 이때 나는 C군 보기가 미안하야 곳 집으로 도망해 오고 마럿네. 그 뒤에 아해들깨 드르닛가 K녀자도 그 밤중으로 본가엔가 어듼가 나가 버렷다네. 아직것 C도 K도 엇지된 셈인지 소식을 모르고 잇는 판일세. 이때에 나는 그 사실뎐말은 엇디 되얏든 직각뎍으로 「신녀자 취하는 놈은 개자식이라.」고 단안을 내리고 마럿네.
A. 이 사람 그것은 너무 심한 단편뎍 속단이 안인가? 남의 가사 싸홈 한번 보고 신녀자의 전톄를 말하는 것은 너무 심한 견해일세. 깨가 쏘다지게 잘 사는 녀자는 또 얼마나 만흔가.
B. 깨가 쏘다지게 잘사는 녀자. 무론 잇겟지. 얼마든지 잇겟지. 그러나 그것은 녀자의 요구에 만족한 여거가지 조건이 잇겟지. 돈이 만흔 것은 물론 쌍방의 애정이 좃타든지 쌍방이 다 직업이 잇다든지 부모가 업다든지 부모가 잇다해도 부덕이 좃타든지 여하간 그만한 조건이 잇는 것일세. 그러나 우리가튼 무산자 더구나 직업의 안정이 업는 자로는 애여 꿈도 못 꿀것일세. 엇잿든 신녀자에게 장가를 들내면 첫재 돈이요. 둘재 그에게 종노릇할 각오를 가지고 해야되네. 해낫에 니러나거나 밤중에 드러오거나 맘대로 하라고 내놋코 물시중 신발시중까지 실렁시행을 해주기로 하고 하로 한번 공원산보 잇틀에 한번 극장왕래, 일주일에 한번 야외산책, 녀름이면 삼장석왕에 피서, 가을이며 소요금강에 려행. 겨을이면 온천, 봄이면 「하나미」이러케 두루 에뎡과＜100＞ 에산을 세워놋코 겻틀 따라단이며 시중을 각근히 하기로 결심하고 그 우에 또 어느날 어느때라도 무조건 리혼을 시인하고서해야 되는 것일세. 신녀자에 대한 신경과민인지는 모르나 하연간 나는 그럿케 보이데. 그리고 여보게 A군. K군의 일을 보지 안나. 그와가티 찰떡가티 부터가지고 죽자사자 바로 뒤깐까지 가티 단이든 그들이 안인가? 그런데 불구하고 남편이 한번 감옥에 드러가자 석달이 못되야 딴서방이란 말이 무슨 말인가? 구가뎡녀자는 결코 그럿치 안네 바로 사형선고나 밧엇다면 모르지만... 엇잿든 괘ㅅ심한 넌들이야. 연애자유니 리혼자유니해도 그러케 무의무신할데가 어대 잇겟나. 이 소식을 드른 K군의 심정이 엇덧켓나? 그가 강도질을 하고 드러갓다해도 평소의 정의를 보아 감히 못하는 것일세. 엑기 괘ㅅ심한 것들.
A. 이 사람 자네는 신녀자와 선텬뎍 무슨 업원이 잇나보이 그려. 하필 고런 못된 아귀가튼 종류만 주서가지고 이러니저러니 떠드려쌋나? 내 조흔 녀자의 실레를 멧 가지 들께 드러보겟나!
B. 이 사람. 말말게. 자내의 조흔 실례란 것도 내가 아네. 부모공경 잘하고 남편 공대 잘하고 살님 잘하고 아들딸 낫코 바로 신녀자면서 구녀자 답게 지내는 녀자들 말이지.
A. 그럿치 그런 녀자가 얼마든지 잇지 안나? 위선 R군의 부인이 그럿치. P군의 부인이 그럿치.
B. 하하! 이 사람 자네는 것만 보아지 속은 못 보앗네. R군 P군이 그 안해에게 얼마나한 종질을 하고 잇는지 자네 아나? 그들의 가슴 가운데 얼마나한 번민 고통이 잇는지 나네 아나? 그들을 해부해보면 회한(悔恨)의 뭉치가 적어도 목침만이나 할 것 일세. 실상 말하면 나에게 구가정녀자를 말해준 이가 R군 P군일세. 자긔들의 경험에서 간곡히 말해주는 것이니 부대 그리하랴고 재삼 부탁을 하데. 위선 자네의 테험은 엇던가?
A. 올네. 잘 생가하얏네. 나도 만족이 1분이면 불만이 9분이나 되에. 신녀자와의 살님은 엇지 된 셈인지 작구 「마이너쓰」로 다라나데 그려. 결혼 첫날에는 10분 이상 12분 만족하더니 하로에 1분식 혹 경우네는 곱집어 2분 4분식 작구떠러지는데 마즈막에는 실로 코에서 비린내가 나고 말데그려. 이건 향상이 안이라 락하이니 살아먹겟나. 금전소모든지 사랑의 랭각으로든지 모든 것이 몰락이 되고마니 긔 막킨 일이지. 실상 말이지 나도 자네에게 이런 말을 권하려고 하는 판일세. 악가 자네말과 가티 얼굴이나 똑똑하고 심덕이나 얌전하고 신톄나 건강하고 거긔다가 국한문이나 다소 아러서 편지나 신문 한장이나 뜻어보는 녀자면 오늘날 우리의 처지에 잇서서 가장 뎍당할 줄 아네. 그보다도 무슨 직업이든지 반듯이 직업을 가지겟다는 여자 근실하고 검소하야. (177항에 계속)＜101＞
어대까지 시간을 액기고 금전을 액기겟다는 녀자 그런 녀자라야 우리에게 뎍당하네.
사랑보다도 살님보다도 생명을 위하야 더욱히 그런 것일세. 나도 멧 해전 철업서서는 신녀자니 모던껄이니 하고 멋업시 떠드럿더니 이제 졍말 세상의 쓰고 단 것을 맛보고 또한 우리의 살님내막을 조사해보고 날로 날로 파멸되는 우리의 사횔를 드려다 보닛가 절실히도 이런 생각이 나데 그려. 허영의 녀자 량비의 녀자 일하기 실혀하는 녀자 련애자유의 녀자 이것이 신녀자축에 만흔 것은 숨길 수 업는 것이니 자네도 부대 주의하야 변심말고 지금 뜻대로 하게.
B. 오늘 조흔 이약이 만히 하얏네. 한 곳 소개하게나 그려 얼굴이나 얌전한 녀자로.
A. 글세. 탐문해 보세 위선 국수를 먹기 위하야. 하하.(끗)＜177＞
＜90-101, 177＞