잡지명	別乾坤 제16·17호
발행일	1928년 12월 01일
기사제목	八道女子 살님사리評判記
기사형태	문예기타

Magazine Title: 別乾坤 제16·17호
Publication Date: 1928년 12월 01일
Article Title: 八道女子 살님사리評判記 (A Critical Account of Women's Housekeeping in the Eight Provinces)
Article Type: 문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

A Critical Account of Women's Housekeeping in the Eight Provinces

Gyeonggi Women Skilled in Needlework

In any country, city dwellers are more extravagant in their clothing than those in rural areas, and naturally, women in cities are more skilled in needlework than women in the countryside. Among them, Joseon has traditionally valued formal culture, so its clothing system is more advanced than other countries, and its needlework has also developed. In particular, Gyeongseong (京城), as the capital of Joseon, has a prevailing trend of extravagance in clothing for both men and women. In the past, as well as now, they feel they cannot live without having nice clothes to wear when going out, even if they have to skip meals. Accordingly, women have to be good at needlework to be respected, even if they cannot do anything else. The needlework of Seoul women is truly developed. The fact that people say Seoul women have a good back view and Seoul people have a refined appearance is also because these women are good at needlework and wear well-made clothes. This is praised by not only Koreans but also foreigners. Women in Seoul are also good at cooking and managing household affairs, in addition to their needlework. This is a matter of course for women in the city. However, if we were to name the most representative woman in Gyeonggi Province who is good at housekeeping, everyone would mention a woman from Gaeseong (開城). The housekeeping of Gaeseong women is truly thrifty and meticulous. Whether the family is wealthy or not, everything is clean, and even the worn-out tools are neatly organized. No matter whose house it is, it looks like oil is flowing on the surface, and even if a grain of rice falls, it wouldn't get a speck of dirt on it. The general atmosphere is one of diligence, frugality, and thrift, and there is little extravagance or waste. Among them, the housekeeping of widows in Gaeseong is truly tearful and admirable. Gaeseong, as everyone knows, has traditionally had a problem with early marriage, and consequently, there are many widows. However, they have a strong sense of chastity and have no intention of remarrying, sacrificing their entire lives to housekeeping.

They find pleasure in saving money, forgetting their loneliness and sorrow. Among the widows, there are so-called "paired widows" who live together like couples (this might be called same-sex companionship), making money by lending money or selling side dishes <132> and oil. Some even chop their own firewood and don't heat their rooms in winter, trying to receive the sun's heat by leaving the door open. This is a bit of an extreme analogy, like saying that cod merchants in Hamgyeong Province put shrimp jeot (새우젓) in their anus because they believe it helps digest rice quickly, but it is true that Gaeseong widows are terrifyingly good at housekeeping. The saying "a widow's purse has three beads" seems to be about these Gaeseong widows. The reason why Koreans are going bankrupt these days, but Gaeseong people are maintaining their wealth, is of course partly due to the men's skill in commerce, but I think it is also greatly due to the women's good housekeeping. Oh, right! Since Anseong (安城) is also in Gyeonggi Province, it is worth mentioning that Anseong women are good at selling brassware (鍮器). Anseong has traditionally been a famous producer of brassware, so there are even sayings like "Anseong brassware bends even in the water for ancestors' rites (제물)," and "Anseong 맞춤 (made-to-order)." The women there usually carry brassware on their heads with male peddlers and travel around to sell it. Among these peddlers, there are often beauties, adding fragrant stories to the world.

Chungcheong Women Without Distinct Characteristics

How could Chungcheong women have no distinct characteristics? In the past, there were many yangban (양반), so it was a distinct characteristic to do nothing and just eat and dress well. Generally speaking, a lack of beauty is also a distinct characteristic. The women of Hwanggan (黃澗) and Yeongdong (永同) eat a lot of soft persimmons (軟柿), so their cheeks are plump. The women of Cheongsan (靑山) and Boeun (報恩) eat a lot of jujubes (대초), so their mouths are pointed. The women of Chungju (忠州) and Jecheon (堤川) have yellow noses from smoking yellow tobacco (황색연초). The women of Yesan (禮山) eat a lot of rice, so their bellies are swollen. The women of Onyang (溫陽) take a lot of hot spring baths (溫泉浴), so their skin is soft. The women of Seosan (瑞山) eat a lot of salted hairtail roe (어리굴젓), so their lips are red. The women of Cheonan (天安) eat a lot of walnuts (호도), so they have many pockmarks. The women of Seonghwan (成歡) eat a lot of gaegosa fruit (개고사과), so their skin is dark. But that is just a funny story and has nothing to do with housekeeping. Generally speaking, Chungcheong Province has similar customs to Gyeonggi Province, so women's housekeeping is not much different from Gyeonggi, except for a few unique things due to the region. That is, Hansan (韓山), Seocheon (舒川), and Cheongyang (靑陽) have traditionally been special production areas for ramie fabric (苧布), so women are good at weaving ramie. Gongju (公州) women are good at weaving Seonra (仙羅) (Seonra is woven with ramie and silk, and it is a specialty of Gongju.) Cheongju (淸州) women are good at making yakju (약주) and wheat noodles. Tangjin (唐津) and Deoksan (德山) women are good at making azalea wine (杜鵑酒). This might be considered a unique characteristic among those without distinct characteristics.

Gangwon Women Good at Gathering Wild Greens

"Climbing the mountain to dig up doraji (도라지), its name is so good, is it wild ginseng? Going to the field to dig up bulguji (불구지), its shape is so pretty, is it a maiden? E-hey-ya, de-hey-ya - how nice, wild greens!" This was a folk song popular in the mountainous areas of Gangwon Province. Gangwon Province is a mountainous region, so there are many wild greens, and accordingly, the women are good at picking them. In March of Yangchun (陽春), when the haze rises on the distant mountains and the spring grass begins to sprout, the women of the villages go to the mountains and fields in groups of 20 or 30 <133> to gather wild greens. They pick various wild greens such as fiddleheads (고비), bracken (고사리), fragrant bear's garlic (신곰취미나), angelica sprouts (자싹모시대), Aralia continentalis shoots (삽취싹), showy Jacob's ladder (광대싸리), milk vetch (밀나물), bear's garlic (곰취), as well as deureup (두릅), deodeok (더덕), and doraji (도라지). Women in Gangwon Province consider gathering wild greens in the spring to be like farming. Poor families eat wild greens like staple foods, and they sell them in the market for food or medicinal purposes. The balloon flower roots (桔梗), Adenophora stricta (沙蔘), angelica (當歸) fiddleheads (고비), bracken (고사리), and bear's garlic (곰취) that are in pharmacies or markets in Seoul mostly come from the hands of Gangwon women.

Although there are also many that come from other regions, none are as fragrant and delicious as those produced in Gangwon Province. However, this is about the housekeeping of women in the mountain valleys of Gangwon. Other regions are somewhat different depending on the area. Yeongdong (嶺東) south of Gangneung (江陵) is similar to Gyeongsang Province, and Tongcheon (通川) north of it is similar to Hamgyeong Province, and Yeongseo (嶺西), except for Icheon (伊川) bordering Hwanghae Province, is mostly similar to Giho (畿湖). However, they are relatively more diligent and thrifty than Giho, and they are also good at weaving. This can be seen from the fact that Myeongju (明紬) of Cheorwon (鐵原) and Chuncheon (春川) and hemp cloth (麻布) of Yeomnyang (廉陽) and Gangneung (江陵) have been famous in the world since ancient times.

Hwanghae Women Good at Trading

In the spring or summer, in the alleys of Seoul, there are women with baskets on their heads, going around shouting, "Buy salted clams! Watery salted clams! We have sweet ones too. We also have soju..." They walk in groups of two or three, one after another. They are, without a doubt, women from Hwanghae Province. Hwanghae women are good at farming and weaving, but their specialty is doing well in this basket trade. Just as people associate Jeju women with haenyeo (해녀) who are good at collecting sea cucumbers and abalone, people automatically associate Hwanghae women with baskets.

Among them, there may be poor people, but most of them are from respectable families who do not consider it shameful and think of it as a kind of business. Just as swallows stay in deep caves or tree hollows in the winter and, when Yangchun Gajol (陽春佳節) comes, do not consider the distant Gangnam (江南) far and chirp to find their old owners, following the warm spring breeze, they weave and do other housekeeping at home in the fall and winter, and then, in the spring, they come south to Seoul with some capital. Their only luggage is a basket. Their business base is either Gongdeok-ri (孔德里) or Ahyeon (阿峴). In the morning, they wake up early and go to the docks of Seogang (西江) and Mapo (麻浦) to buy "salted clams, salted croaker, octopus" or, if not, they buy "soju bottles, vinegar bottles" in Gongdeok-ri (孔德里) and Ahyeon (阿峴), go into the city, and go around selling them from house to house. Unlike other merchants, they don't buy food or pay for lodging. They eat meals and sleep at the houses of people they know, so although they may be earning like a young master's easy earnings, there is nowhere to spend it. Therefore, if they earn well for two seasons from spring to summer, they don't have to worry about their livelihood for that year. Some even use it to pay for their children's tuition. Don't look down on the basket trade. <134> Among them, there are many who have children attending respectable vocational schools and universities. Because it is still small in scale and their commercial knowledge is limited, but if the scale becomes larger and their commercial knowledge increases in the future, who knows if the Hwanghae women who are doing the basket trade today will be able to operate in the international market like the Jewish people or the Chinese people? Whatever happens, it is a fact that Hwanghae children are good at basket trading. Not only in Seoul, but also if you actually go to the region, there are many women doing the basket trade everywhere. The women of Singye (新溪) and Goksan (谷山), which are famous for producing wild grapes (머루) and kiwifruit (다래), sell wild grapes and kiwifruit in baskets. The women of Hwangju (黃州) and Bongsan (鳳山), which are special production areas for pears and apples, sell pears and apples in baskets. The women of Ongjin (瓮津) and Masan (馬山) go out to sell oysters, and the women of Yeonan (延安) and Baekcheon (白川) go out to sell injeolmi (인절미). The women of Jangyeon (長淵) are good at selling wild greens and bean sprouts, and when they catch croaker in Yeonpyeong Islands (延平列島) and Daechong (大靑) and Socheong Island (小靑島), or when they catch flounder, oysters, and goats in Baengnyeong Island (白翎島), who would not say that the sight of dozens or hundreds of basket troops gathering is spectacular? Even when young women from Eunyul (殷栗) and Anak (安岳) go to dig up doraji (도라지), they bring baskets with them. There is even a folk song there that says, "Doraji! Doraji! Doraji from Eunyul Gumsanpo! Even if you dig up only one root, the bamboo basket is overflowing..." Oh, I almost forgot. The women of Haeju (海州) are good at selling alcohol (especially Bangmun wine (方文酒)) and naengmyeon (냉면), and the women of Swheung (瑞興) are good at selling millet cakes. Finally, I would also like to introduce the women of Sincheon (信川) and Jaeryeong (載寧) who sing "menari (메나리)" plaintively when weeding, the beautiful skin of the women of Haeju (海州), and the good shamanic rituals of the mudang (巫堂) of Pungcheon (豐川) and Songhwa (松禾).

Gyeongsang Women Good at Weaving

If the women of Gyeonggi are masters of needlework, the women of Gyeongsang Province are masters of weaving. Gyeongsang Province has encouraged weaving since the Silla era, so the tradition still remains today, and there are few women of any class who cannot weave. Being good at sewing or cooking is not even an issue in Gyeongsang Province. Originally, the general customs value simplicity and frugality, so extravagance in food and clothing is absolutely forbidden. They only know how to do self-farming and self-sericulture at home and weave their own clothes. Therefore, there is no place where they do not weave. Among them, hemp cloth (麻布) of Andong (安東) and Geochang (居昌), Myeongju (明紬) of Seoncheon (善川) and Sangju (尙州), and white cotton cloth (白木) of Jinju (晉州) and Sancheong (山淸) (especially old Danseong (丹城)) have been famous specialty products in Joseon since ancient times, and in recent years, they have been exported internationally, and the annual income is also not small. Because Gyeongsang Province does so much weaving, the general livelihood of everyone depends on this weaving. There are many folk songs that follow this. Samnorae (績麻歌) of Andong (安東) and Bettelga (베틀歌) of Sangju (尙州) and Mungyeong (聞慶) are songs that cannot be heard anywhere else. There is also a superstition in Gyeongsang Province that young women eat byeojjaengi (벼쨍이) (Liorhyssus hyalinus) because they say it helps to weave well, and worshipping the Weaving Girl Star (織女星) on the 7th day of the 7th month to weave well is an event that cannot be seen anywhere else besides <135> Gyeongsang Province. Whatever the reason, to speak of the housekeeping of Gyeongsang women, in a word, it is being good at weaving.

Jeolla Women Good at Cooking

If you go to Jeju Island and see haenyeo (해녀) eating live snake eel, or if you go to Gangjin (康津) and Haenam (海南) and see young men with unkempt hair wearing dirty clothes that they wore in the era when the Three Gods of Hallasan (漢拏山 三神人) descended, dripping snot and mucus, and giving bibimbap (비빔밥) with fishy cold fish soup, it would be too unfair to say, "The saying that Jeolla women are good at cooking is all dog droppings." Although there are places where they do wrong and even mold grows on rice cakes, generally speaking, Jeolla women are better at cooking than women from other provinces. Among them, the way Jeonju (全州) women cook is truly commendable. Not only is the taste good, but the way they set the table and the order in which they make things are all so elaborate that women in Seoul would shed tears and run away on the Chonam Line (潮南線) express train. Sinseollo (神仙爐) of Seoul is a famous product, but Sinseollo (神仙爐) of Jeonju (全州) is even more famous. In addition, Jeonju (全州)'s yakju (약주), bibimbap (비빔밥), Sunchang (淳昌) gochujang (고초장), Gwangju (光州) and Damyang (潭陽)'s bamboo shoots, Gurye (求禮) and Gokseong (谷城)'s takju (濁酒), silverfish hoe (銀魚膾), Gosan (高山)'s sikhye (식혜), Namwon (南原)'s yakju (藥酒), and Gunsan (群山)'s braised saengseon (生魚) are all famous products among foods. And Jeolla women are good at handicrafts. In particular, the women of Jeju (濟州) are good at making gat-yangtae-manggeon (갓양테망건), fishing nets, etc., the women of Damyang (潭陽) and Naju (羅州) are good at bamboo crafts, and the women of Gurye (求禮) and Namwon (南原) are good at woodworking (wood lacquerware). Oh, there's one more thing. Jeolla women like to decorate the jangdokdae (장독간), so every house looks like a large pottery store. This is similar to the women of Seoul decorating the maru (마루) and the women of Hamgyeong Province decorating the kitchen (e.g., water jars, earthenware jars), and the women of Hwanghae and Pyeongan Province decorating bedding.

Pyeongan Women Good at Farming

When people think of Pyeongan women, they often think of them like this: beautiful women in plain clothes and light makeup, wearing white towels on their heads, wearing gold rings on their hands, doing nothing, and sitting and singing Songsim Jangtanga (愁心長歎歌) when they are bored. But that is a misunderstanding.

It is true that Pyeongan women are more lively and cheerful than women from other places, and they like plain clothes and light makeup, and they have pretty faces, but the only women who do nothing and live only by singing Songsim Jangtanga (愁心長歎歌) are the women in the red-light districts of Pyeongyang (平壤) or Ganggye (江界). In reality, the wives of farming families are very pure, diligent, and good at housekeeping.

They work hard at weaving, and the ramie fabric (杭羅) of Anju (安州), Seongcheon (成川), and Deokcheon (德川), the Myeongju (明紬) of Nyeongbyeon (寧邊) and Bakcheon (博川), the hemp cloth (麻布) of Yangdeok (陽德) and Maengsan (孟山), the Sumok (水木) of Pyeongyang (平壤) and Gangseo (江西), and the embroidery (繡工) of Anju (安州) are all famous domestically and internationally. In particular, they are active in agriculture, and from spring to autumn, women work just as hard as men. They weed the fields, of course, and they also plant rice seedlings and weed the paddies. They also feed the cows and raise chickens. From old grandmothers to young maidens, they all go out to the fields instead of staying at home. Recently, there has been a lot of talk about returning to farming! Returning to farming! But it seems that Pyeongan women have already realized the need for returning to farming. <136> In May and June, when it is steaming hot, beautiful 28-year-old young women wearing white towels neatly, looking like a flock of white cranes, form groups of dozens and weed this field and that field, singing in a low voice like the sound of bumblebees, "How good is your family's tradition that you cut your hair and wear a soknak (속낙)..." Even if you were riding a Uiju Bapalma (義州擺撥馬), you would have to stop and listen. Just as people in Seoul choose a daughter-in-law who is good at sewing above all else, farming families in Pyeongan Province choose a daughter-in-law who is good at farming. Because Joseon is an agricultural country, women in every province work hard at farming, but Pyeongan Province puts even more effort into it than other provinces. This is what I have seen of Pyeongan women's housekeeping.

Hamgyeong Women Good at Markets

Although some women on the coast of Jeolla and Gyeongsang Provinces go to the market, in Hamgyeong Province, women in every region go to the market. There are many female spectators at the night market in Seoul, so there is even a saying that the night market is not a night market but a female market, but the market in Hamgyeong Province is truly a women's market. Women sell grains and seafood, as well as vegetables, fruits, pottery, and even wood. They are diligent in farming and weaving, but they seem to have special privileges in going to the market. On market days, everyone, old and young, goes to the market. It is a spectacle to see them wearing flower-patterned towels on their heads, fluttering long, colorful clothes, and walking back and forth barefoot. When they shout, "Buy salted seaweed! Buy salted clams! It tastes good! The other day, that father of mine sold a parrot..." people from our southern region who are not familiar with the dialect there would not even know what they are saying.

Because they are naturally physically strong, men do not carry their goods to the market for them. The women do it all themselves. They don't carry it on their backs or shoulders, they carry it all on their heads. The women of Hwanghae Province are characterized by being good at carrying baskets, but the women of Hamgyeong Province are characterized by being good at carrying hamjibak (함지박). The hamjibak is filled with all sorts of things. Grains such as beans, red beans, buckwheat, corn, and millet, as well as eggs, live chickens, flatfish, *fish, octopus, and clams, and various vegetables in the spring and various fruits in the summer and fall. Some women even carry and sell baby pigs. Even while carrying such a mountain of luggage, they also carry and hold a child, crossing big mountains and rivers barefoot for 30, 40, 50, or 60 li (리) without difficulty. Anyone who sees this cannot help but be amazed and impressed. Because women go to the market like this, they have a strong sense of saving money, and women have a lot of real power in the family's economy. The term "women's liberation" in Joseon should be used in the central and southern regions, but in Hamgyeong Province, men should rather advocate for liberation. In summary, women in Hamgyeong Province are better at outside housekeeping than inside housekeeping. <137>

**Named Entities**

京城	Gyeongseong
開城	Gaeseong
安城	Anseong
黃澗	Hwanggan
永同	Yŏngdong
靑山	Ch'ŏngsan
報恩	Poeun
忠州	Ch'ungju
堤川	Chech'ŏn
禮山	Yesan
溫陽	Onyang
瑞山	Sŏsan
天安	Ch'ŏnan
成歡	Sŏnghwan
韓山	Hansan
舒川	Sŏch'ŏn
靑陽	Ch'ŏngyang
公州	Kongju
淸州	Ch'ŏngju
唐津	Tangjin
德山	Tŏksan
陽春	Yangch'un
江原道	Kangwŏndo
江陵	Kangnŭng
通川	T'ongch'ŏn
咸鏡都	Hamgyŏngdo
嶺西	Yŏngsŏ
黃海道	Hwanghaedo
伊川	Ich'ŏn
畿湖	Kihodo
鐵原	Ch'ŏrwŏn
春川	Ch'unch'ŏn
廉陽	Yŏmnyang
海州	Haeju
孔德里	Kongdŏngni
阿峴	Ahyŏn
西江	Sŏgang
麻浦	Map'o
新溪	Sin'gye
谷山	Koksan
黃州	Hwangju
鳳山	Pongsan
瓮津	Ongjin
馬山	Masan
延安	Yŏnan
白川	Paekch'ŏn
長淵	Changyŏn
延平列島	Yŏnpyŏngnyŏldo
大靑	Taech'ŏng
小靑島	Soch'ŏngdo
白翎島	Paengnyŏngdo
殷栗	Ŭnyul
安岳	Anak
金山浦	Kŭmsanp'o
瑞興	Sŏhŭng
信川	Sinch'ŏn
載寧	Chaeryŏng
豊川	P'ungch'ŏn
松禾	Songhwa
巫堂	Mudang
京畿	Kyŏnggi
慶尙道	Kyŏngsangdo
新羅	Silla
安東	Andong
居昌	Kŏch'ang
善川	Sŏnch'ŏn
尙州	Sangju
晉州	Chinju
山淸	Sanch'ŏng
丹城	Tansŏng
聞慶	Mungyŏng
全羅道	Chŏllado
濟州島	Chejudo
康津	Kangjin
海南	Haenam
漢拏山	Hallasan
三神人	Samsinin
全州	Chŏnju
潮南線	Chonamsŏn
淳昌	Sunch'ang
光州	Kwangju
潭陽	Tamyang
求禮	Kurye
谷城	Koksŏng
高山	Kosan
南原	Namwŏn
群山	Kunsan
平安道	P'yŏngando
平壤	P'yŏngyang
江界	Kanggye
安州	Anju
成川	Sŏngch'ŏn
德川	Tŏkch'ŏn
寧邊	Nyŏngbyŏn
博川	Pakch'ŏn
陽德	Yangdŏk
孟山	Maengsan
江西	Kangso
義州	Ŭiju
咸鏡道	Hamgyŏngdo
江南	Kangnam



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제16·17호
발행일	1928년 12월 01일
기사제목	八道女子 살님사리評判記
기사형태	문예기타

八道女子 살님사리評判記
針工잘하는 京畿女子
어느 나라던지 도회의 사람들이 향촌의 사람보다 의복사치를 더하고 따러서 針工도 도회의 여자들이 향촌의 여자보다 잘하는 것은 물론이다. 그 중에도 우리 朝鮮은 自來로 형식적 문화를 숭상한 까닭에 의복제도도 다른 나라보다 비교덕 진보되고 그 針工이 또한 발달되엿다. 특히 京城은 朝鮮의 수도이니만치 남녀의 의복을 사치하는 풍이 성행하야 과거시대는 물론이고 지금까지도 찰아리 조석은 굶을지언정 출입하는 의복 한벌이 조흔 것이 업스면 못살줄로 안다. 거긔에 따러서 여자들도 아모 것도 못하야도 針工 한 가지는 잘하여햐 행세를 하게 되엿다. 서울 녀자의 針工이야말로 참으로 발달되엿다. 自來로 서울녀자의 뒷맵시가 조흐니 서울 사람의 몸노양이 묘하니 하는 것도 역시 이 여자들이 針工을 잘하야 의복을 맵시잇게 지여입는 까닭이다. 그것은 우리 朝鮮사람뿐안이라 외국사람들도 누구나 稱讚하는 바이다. 서울의 여자들은 이 바누질 이외에 음식도 잘 맹길거니와 방안살림도 잘한다. 그것은 도회의 여자들의 당연한 일이다. 그러나 京畿道에서 가장 대표적으로 살림 잘하는 여자를 말하자면 아마 누구나 開城여자를 말치 안을 수 업슬 것이다.  開城여자의 살림살이야 참으로 알들하고도 살들하다. 돈이 잇는 집이던지 업는 집이던지 모도 청결하고 器具의 느터놋는 것까지도 규모잇게 정리되여잇다. 누구의 집이던지 외면으로만 보와도 기름이 잘잘 흐르는 것 갓고 밥알이 떠러저도 흙한 점 믓지 안을 것 갓다. 일반이 근검저축하는 풍이 만코 浮虛浪費하는 일이 적다. 그 중에도 開城의 과부살림사리는 참으로 눈물겨운 일도 만코 歎服할 일도 만타. 開城은 세상사람이 다 아는 바와 가티 自來로 조혼하는 弊風이 만흔  까닭에 따러서 과부가 또한 만타. 그러나 그들은 정조관념이 강하야 개가할 생각은 조금도 업고 일생을 살림살이에 희생한다.
돈을 모흐는데 자미를 븟치는 까닭에 孤寂도 悲哀도 다 이저버린다. 과부들 간에는 소위 짝과부가 잇서서 부부와 가티 모혀(이것이 소위 동성해라할지) 돈 取利도 하고 밧침＜132＞ 술장사 기름장사를 한다. 엇던 이는 자기의 손으로 나무까지 해다때며 겨울에 방에 불을 때지 안코 태양의 열을 바드랴고 문까지 여러논는다고 한다. 이것은 마치 함경도의 명태장사가 새우장사젓을 먹으면 밥이 속히 소화된다고 새우젓을 肛門에 붓치고 단인다는 말과 가티 조곰 심한 말이지만은 하여간 開城의 과부가 살림을 무섭게 하는 것은 사릴이다. 과부주머니속에는 구슬이 셋이란 말은 이 開城과부를 두고 한말갓다. 오늘에 우리 朝鮮사람들이 모다 파산을 당하되 유독 開城사람이 그대로 유지하야나는 것은 물론 남자들이 상업을 잘하는데도 관게가 만치만은 이 여자들이 살림을 잘 하는 데 큰 관게가 만타고 생각한다. 올치! 安城도 京畿道이닛가 安城여자의 鍮器장사 잘하는 것도 한 가지 소개할 일이다. 安城은 自來로 鍮器의 명산지인 고로 俗語에도 安城유귀실굽다리는 제물에 실적 마럿느니 安城맛츰이니 하는 말까지 잇다. 그 곳 여자들은 대개 유긔를 남자負商과 가티 칠머지고 각지로 도라단이며 판다. 그 행상인 중에는 종종 미인도 잇서서 이 세상에 향그러운 이약이 거리를 각금 끼치는 일도 만타.

特色업는 忠淸道女子
忠淸道여자인들 엇지 특색이 업스랴. 과거시대에는 량반이 만헛스니 아모일도 안이하고 안저서 잘 먹고 잘 입는 것도 한 특색이요. 대뎨로 보와서 미색이 업는 것도 한 특색이다. 黃澗 永同의 여자들은 연감(軟柿)을 만히 먹어서 두 볼이 퉁퉁하고 靑山 報恩여자는 대초만히 먹어서 입이 뾰족하고 忠州 堤川여자는 황색연초 바람에 코끗이 노랏코 禮山여자는 쌀밥을 만히 먹어 배가 불으고 溫陽여자는 溫泉浴을 만히 하야 살결이 보드랍고 瑞山여자는 어리굴젓을 만히 먹어 입살이 붉고 天安여자는 호도를 만히 먹어 곰보 만코 成歡여자는 개고사과(참외이름)를 만히 먹어 살빗이 검은 것도 한 특색이다. 그러나 그것은 여긔에 말하고자 하는 살림사리와는 아모관게도 업는 한 우슴의 이약이다. 대체로 말하면 忠淸道는 일반의 풍속이 京畿道와 비슷한 까닭에 여자의 살림사리도 京畿와 별로 다를 것이 업고 다만 지방이 지방인 까닭에 몃 가지의 특수한 것이 잇다. 즉 韓山, 舒川, 靑陽 등지는 自來 苧布의 특산지로서 여자들이 苧布길삼을 잘하고 公州여자는 仙羅를 잘 짜고(仙羅는 苧絲와 蠶絲로 함하야 짠 것이니 公州의 특산이다.) 淸州여자는 약주와 밀국수를 잘하고 唐津 德山의 여자는 杜鵑酒를 잘한다. 이것이 특색업는 중 한 특색이라 할지.

나물 잘하는 江原道女子
『산에 올나 도라지를 캐니 이름이 조와서 산삼인가. 들에가서 불구지를 캐니 모양이 입버서 각시인가. 에이 헤야 데헤야-좃쿠나 나물이로구나...』 이것은 江原道산간에서 유행하는 민요엿다. 江原道는 山國이니만치 산나물이 만코 따라서 여자들이 그 나물을 잘들 뜻는다. 陽春 3월이 되야 먼 산에 애지랑이 끼고 봄풀이 파릇파릇하게 싹이 돗치기 시작하면 촌가의 여자들은 20명 혹 30명식 떼를 지여＜133＞ 산으로 들로 나물을 캐러간다. 허리 꼽으라진 고비 고살이며 향그러운 신곰취미나 자싹모시대 삽취싹이며 탐스러운 광대싸리 밀나물, 곰취등은 물론이고 두릅, 더덕, 도라지 가튼 여러 가지의 나물을 다 캔다. 江原道의 여자들은 봄철에나물캐는 것을 한 농사와 가티 생각한다. 貧寒한 집에서는 산나물을 양식가티 먹기도 하려니와 그것을 식용 또는 약용으로 시장에 매출한다. 서울의 약국이나 시장에 잇는 桔梗, 沙蔘當歸고비, 고사리, 곰취등은 대개가 江原道여자의 손을 것처서 나오는 것이다.
다른 지방에서 오는 것도 만치만은 江原道 所産처럼 향그럽고 맛잇는 것은 업다.
그러나 이것은 江原 中에도 山峽여자의 살림살이를 말하는 것이요 그 외에는 지방을 따러서 각각 조금식 다르니 즉 嶺東에도 江陵以南은 慶尙道와 비슷하고 通川 以北은 咸鏡都와 비슷하고 嶺西도 黃海道境의 伊川을 제하고는 대개가 畿湖와 비슷하다. 그러나 畿湖보다는 비교적 근검저축하는 風이 만코 또 길삼을 잘들하니 自來로 鐵原 春川의 明紬와 廉陽 江陵의 麻布가 세상에 유명한 것을 보아도 알 수 잇다.

장사 잘하는 黃海道女子
봄이나 녀름철이 되면 서울의 골목골목에는 언진머리에 광주리를 니고 『조개젓 사오. 물조개젓이요. 단 것도 잇고. 소주도 잇슴니다....』하고 둘식 세식 앞뒤를 연니여서 도라단니는 여자들이 잇다. 그들은 不問可知 黃海道의 여자들이다. 黃海道여자들은 물론 농사도 잘하고 길삼도 잘하지만은 그 중에도 특색은 이 광주리 장사를 잘하는 것이디. 濟州의 여자라하면 세상사람들이 의례히 해삼 전복 잘 따는 해녀를 연상하는 것과 가티 黃海道 여자라 하면 의례히 광주리를 연상하게 된다.
그들 중에도 물론 빈한한 사람도 잇겟지만은 대개는 상당한 집 가정에서도 그것을 븟그럽게 생각지 안코 일종의 업무로 생각한다. 제비가 결울이면 깁흔 굴속이나 나무궁게에 잇다가 陽春佳節이 되면 천리 江南을 멀다하지안코 땃듯한 봄바람을 좃차서 녯 주인을 찻너라고 喃喃히 지저귀듯이 그들은 가을과 겨울에는 집에서 길삼도 하고 다른 살림사리를 하다가 봄철이 되면 약간의 자본금을 가지고 남으로 서울을 향하야 온다. 행구라고는 광주리 한개뿐이다. 영업의 근거지는 孔德里가 안이면 阿峴이다. 아츰이면 일즉이 이러나서 西江麻浦의 배터에 가서 『조개젓, 자반조긔, 낙지』가튼 것을 사오거나 그럿치 안으면 孔德里 阿峴에서 『소주병, 초병』들을 사가지고 문안에 드러와서 이집 저집으로 도라단이며 그것을 판다. 다른 장사처럼 밥을 사먹거나 숙박료도 주지안코 아는 집과 친소를 따러서 밥도 어더먹고 잠도 붓처자니 그 장사야 말로 도련님의 천량모양으로 모흐기는 할지언뎡 소비될 곳은 업다. 그럼으로 봅으로 녀름까지 두 철만 잘벌면 그해의 생활은 걱정이 업다. 엇던 이는 그것으로 자녀의 학비까지 대여준다. 광주리 장사라고 천시하지 말어라.＜134＞ 그들 중에는 당당한 전문학교와 대학교 단이는 자녀를 둔 이가 만타. 그것이 아즉까지에 규모자 적고 상업의 지식이 국한되엿기에 그럿치 만일에 이 압흐로 규모가 더 커지고 상업의 지식이 느러간다면 오눌에 광주리 장사를 하는 黃海道의 여자들이 저 猶太의 민족이나 中國사람들과 가티 장차 국제적 商場에까지 활동을 할지 엇지 알 수 잇스랴. 그것이야 엇지되던지 하여간 黃海道의 자녀들이 광주리 장사를 잘하는 것은 사실이다. 서울에서 뿐 안이라 실지로 그 지방 에 가 다녀 보와도 어느 곳이라던지 광주리 장사하는 여자들이 만타. 머루(山葡萄) 다래(獮猴桃)만히 나기로 유명한 新溪, 谷山여자들은 머루 다래를 팔너가도 광주리요 참배와 사과의 특산지인 黃州, 鳳山의 여자는 참배, 사과를 팔너가도 광주리다. 瓮津 馬山의 여자들은 굴장사로 나아가고 延安, 白川의 여자들은 인절미 장사로 나아간다. 長淵여자들은 산나물 콩나물을 잘 파는 것은 물론이어니와 延平列島와 大靑, 小靑島에서 조긔잡이할 때라던지 白翎島에서 넙치, 굴, 산양을 할 때에 수십수백의 광주리떼 娘子軍들이 모혀드는 것을 보면 그 누가 장관이 안이라 하랴. 殷栗, 安岳에서 처녀들이 도라지를 캐러가도 광주리를 가지고 간다. 그 곳 민요에도 『도라지! 도라지! 殷栗金山浦도라지! 한뿔만 캐여도 대(竹)광주리 촬촬 넘는다....』하는 것이 잇지 안이하냐 올치 또 이젓구나 海州여자들은 술장사(특히 方文酒) 냉면장사를 잘하고 瑞興여자들은 좁쌀떡장사를 잘한다. 끗흐로 또 소개할 것은 信川 載寧여자들이 김을 맬 때에 『메나리』를 청승스럽게 잘하는 것과 海州여자의 살빗 고흔 것과 豊川 松禾巫堂의 굿 잘하는 것이다.

길삼 잘하는 慶尙道女子
京畿의 여자를 針工의 명수라 할 것 가트면 慶尙道의 여자는 織工의 명수다. 慶尙道는 녯적 新羅시대로부터 길삼을 장려한 까닭에 지금까지도 그 遺風이 남어잇서서 엇던 계급의 여자를 물론하고 길삼을 못하는 여자가 별로 업다. 바누질을 잘하거나 음식을 잘 요리하는 것은 慶尙道에서는 문제도 삼지 안는다. 원래에 일반 풍습이 質朴儉素한 것을 숭상하는 까닭에 음식과 의복에 사치는 절대의 금물이 되엿다. 그저 자기집에서 自農自桑하야 自織自衣하는 것만 안다. 그리하야 어느 지방이던지 길삼을 안이하는 곳이 업다. 그 중에도 安東 居昌의 麻布, 善川 尙州의 明紬, 晉州 山淸(특히 구 丹城)의 白木은 自來朝鮮에 유명한 특산품으로서 근래에는 국제적으로 수출되야 연수입액이 또한 적지안타. 慶尙道는 이와 가티 길삼을 만히 하는 까닭에 일반의 생활이 모도 이 길삼으로 좌우된다. 민속가요도 이로 좃차 나온 것이 만타. 安東의 삼노래(績麻歌)라던지 尙州 聞慶의 베틀歌 가튼 것은 다른 곳에서는 드러볼 수도 업는 노래다. 처자들이 벼쨍이(侶織蟲)를 잡아 먹으면 벼를 잘 짠다고 해서 그것을 잡아먹는 미신도 慶尙道에 만히 잇고 7월7석에 織女星에 祭를 지내면 벼를 잘 짠다는 미신으로 星祭 지내는 것도＜135＞ 慶尙道 외에는 볼 수 업는 일이다. 엊지 하얏던 慶尙道여자의 살림사리를 말하자면 一言而蔽之하고 길삼 잘 하는 것이엿다.

飮食 잘 하는 全羅道女子
濟州島에 가서 해녀들의 생뱀장아 먹는 것을 보거나 康津 海南에서 더벙머리 총각들이 漢拏山 三神人下降시대에 입던 때무든 옷을 입고 눈곱과 코ㅅ물을 질질 흘니며 비린내 나는 식은 생선국에 비빔밥 주는 것을 보고 『全羅여자의 음식 잘한다는 말은 다 개똥쇠가튼 거짓말』이라 하면 너무도 억울한 일이다. 약떡에도 곰이 핀다고 잘못하는 곳은 잘못하지만은 대체로 말하면 全羅道의 여자들이 다른 도의 여자보다는 요리를 잘 한다. 그 중에는 全州여자의 요리하는 법은 참으로 칭찬할 만하다. 맛도 맛이어니와 床배 보는 것이라던지 만드는 번때라던지 모도가 서울의 여자는 갓다가 눈물을 흘리고 潮南線 급행선를 타고 도망질 할 것이다. 서울의 神仙爐가 명물은 명물이지만은 全州 神仙爐는 그보다도 명물이다. 그외 全州의 약주 비빔밥이며 淳昌 고초장, 光州, 潭陽의 竹荀菜, 求禮, 谷城의 濁酒, 銀魚膾, 高山의 식혜, 南原의 藥酒 群山의 生魚찜 등이 다 음식 중 명물이다. 그리고 全羅道여자들은 手工을 잘한다. 특히 濟州의 여자들은 갓양테망건, 어망 등의 수공을 잘하고 潭陽, 羅州의 여자는 竹細工을 잘하고 求禮, 南原의 목세공(木漆器)을 잘한다. 올치 또 한 가지 잇다. 全羅道여자들은 장독간 치레를 조와하야 어느 집이던지 장독간이 큰 陶器廛가티 뵈인다. 그것은 서울의 여자의 마루시간 치레나 함경도 여자의 부억시간(例如동의, 항아리두멍) 치레나 黃平兩西여자의 침구치레와 비슷한 일이다.

農事 잘하는 平安道여자
平安道여자라 하면 세상사람들은 흔이 이럿케 생각한다. 素服淡粧한 미인으로서 머리에는 흰수건 쓰고 손에는 금가락지 끼고 아모일도 안이하고 안저서 심심하면 愁心長歎歌나 부르는 횟떠운 여자라고 그러나 그것은 오해다.
平安道여자가 다른 곳 여자보다는 물론 횟덥고 활발하고 또 素服淡粧을 조와하며 얼골이 고흔 것은 사실이지만은 아모일도 안이하고 愁心長歎歌로만 버러먹는 여자는 平壤이나 江界가튼 色鄕의 화류계 여자들 뿐이요 실제에 농가의 부인들은 아주 순결하고 근검하야 살림을 잘한다.
길삼을 힘써서 自來로 安州, 成川, 德川의 杭羅 寧邊博川의 明紬 陽德孟山의 麻布, 平壤, 江西의 水木, 安州의 繡工이 다 국내 국외에 이름 놉거니와 특히 농업에 動勞하야 春期로부터 秋期까지는 여자들이 남자들과 조금도 다름이 업시 노동을 한다. 밧김을 맴은 물론이고 모도 심으고 논도 맨다. 소도 먹이고 닭도 친다. 늙은 할머니로부터 어린 처녀들까지 집에 잇지안코 들로 나아간다. 근래에 귀농운동! 귀농운동! 하고 만이 떠들지 만은 平安道여자들은 벌서부터 귀농의＜136＞ 필요한 것을 깨다른 것 갓다. 5, 6월 찌는 듯이 더운때에 28청춘의 어엽분 처녀들이 흰 수건을 맵시잇게 눌너쓰고 백학의 무리모양으로 수십식 떼를 지여 이밧고랑을 매고 저 밧고랑을 매며 참벌의 소리 가튼 묵소리로 『네 집의 가풍이 얼마나 조와서 머리를 깍고 속낙을 쓰나요...』하고 노래를 서로 밧고 치기로 하면 제아무리 義州擺撥馬를 한 사람이라도 발낄을 멈치고 듯지를 안이치 못할 것이다. 서울에서 며누리를 어들 때에 무엇보다도 바누질 잘하는 여자를 선택하는 것 가티 平安道 농가에서는 며누리를 어들 때에 농사 잘하는 여자를 선택한다고 한다. 朝鮮이 농업국인 까닭으로 어느 道에던지 여자까지 농사에 힘을 쓰지만은 유독 平安道는 다른 道보다 一層全力력을 한다. 이 나의 본 平安道여자 살림사리라 하겟다.

場市 잘 보는 咸鏡道女子
全羅道나 慶尙道에도 해변의 일부분 여자들은 場市를 보는 일이 잇지만은 咸鏡道에는 어느 지방을 물론하고 여자들이 전부 장시를 본다. 서울의 夜市에 여자의 구경꾼이 만흔 까닭에 야시가 안이라 女市라는 말가지 잇지만은 咸鏡道의 시장은 참으로 女市場이다. 곡물 어물은 물론이고 채소, 과물, 도기, 심지어 나무장사까지도 여자들이 한다. 그들은 농사와 길삼에도 열심이지만은 특히 장시 보는대는 특권을 가진 것 갓다. 시장날이면 늙은이 젊은이 할 것 업시 모도 시장에 간다. 트레머리에 함박수건을 눌너쓰고 울긋붉긋한 긴 옷 꾸름을 흔날이며 맨발로 왓다갓다하는 것도 奇觀이어니와 『감잡젓 삽세. 물조개젓 삼세. 맛이 조외다. 엇그제 그 아바이 그럼메 나는 앵이 팜메...』하고 떠들때에는 그곳 사토리에 익지못한 우리 남방의 사람으로서는 엇진 소리인지 잘 알지도 못할 것이다.
그들은 선천적으로 체질이 모도 튼튼한 까닭에 시장에 가는데도 남자들이 그 상품을 운반하야 주는 일이 업고 전부 여자 자신이 한다. 등에 지거나 억개에다 메이는 일도 업고 모도 머리우에 닌다. 黃海道의 여자는 광주리를 잘 니는 것이 특색이지만은 咸鏡道의 여자는 함지박을 잘 니는 것이 특색이다. 그 함지속에는 별의별 것이 다 드럿다. 콩, 팟, 귀밀, 강랭이, 좁살 등 곡물은 물론이고 계란, 生鷄, 가잠이, *魚, 낙지, 조개 등 어물 봄에는 각종 채소 녀름 가을에는 각종 果物 등이다. 엇던 여자는 도야지 색기까지 니고 단니며 판다. 그런님을 산덤이 가티 닌 중에도 아희를 또 업고 안고서 맨발로 큰 산과 물을 건너 3, 40리 혹은 5,60리를 어렵지 안케 단이는 것을 보면 누구나 놀나고 감복지 안을 수 업다. 여자들이 이와 가티 시장에를 단이는 고로 금전저축에 대한 관념이 강하고 가정에서 경제의 실권도 여자들이 만히 가지게 된다. 朝鮮에서 여자해방이란 말은 중남부에서 할 것이지 이 咸鏡道에서는 도로혀 남자가 해방을 주창할 만하게 되엿다. 총괄하야 말하면 咸鏡道의 여자는 안의 살림보다도 밧게 살림을 더 잘 한다.＜137＞
＜132-137＞