잡지명	別건곤 제16·17호
발행일	1928년 12월 01일
기사제목	編輯室落書 (Editor's Notes)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Notice/Post-Editing Review)

Editor's Notes

We edited this in early autumn, and now (when the snow falls) we are finally passing it to the printers, and we have no way to apologize to the readers whose eyes have hurt from waiting so long, but all the articles we intended to have you enjoy in the beautiful autumn foliage and receive praise for, we ended up removing ourselves, and since the word "disappointing" was created, nothing has been more disappointing than this. Anyway, the long-awaited book is out now, so I hope you will welcome it, but please understand that many manuscripts were delayed and postponed to next year, so we couldn't include everything. By the way, in the previous issue, "Secret Exposure Issue" (秘密爆開號), on page 145, in the article "Secrets of Drug Salesmen" (賣藥行商秘密), 10 lines in the middle were deleted, making the meaning confusing, and it appeared as if the wrongdoings of a few individuals were the actions of the whole, and we discovered this now and express our apologies here. (Ch'a)

Let me introduce a new colleague. Yes! This person, 5 shaku 4 sun tall, wearing glasses and the only modern Western-style suit in Kaeppyŏl Company (開闢社), is Mr. Pak Sŭng-jin. He has a lot of interest in and research on stage arts, is good at making people laugh, and mediates marital fights as a hobby. He's a friend who drinks well. He has brought together all the previous "Modern" articles and has an extraordinary ambition to give a lecture to the readers of Pyŏlgŏn’gon. Also, here's another person. This person is a woman. A maiden? No, no, she is a married woman. A certain musician praised her, saying that she has a good style to succeed if she dances. On her first day at the company, she went to support a female actress and took an exam, and it seems she even heard the sound of passing, so she has become very confident. Although she speaks with a Chŏlla Province dialect, everyone who hears her says her voice is savory, and she handles Mr. Ch'a's famous jokes from the first day, so it seems she is a considerable woman in this field as well. She brings her picture and shows it to the employees, but she quickly takes it back, so I can't introduce the picture here, but her name is Miss Paek. (Ch'oe)

The number of employees has increased and decreased, and even a stove has taken its place, so the editorial office and the sales department are very cramped, and even if we turn on the stove for a short time, sweat pours out. Just then, such a coincidence happened. While Mr. Shin Yŏng-ch'ŏl was away, a package came for Mr. Shin, and when we received it on his behalf, there were about two doe of powder like flour. "Maybe it's misugaru (米수가루) [powdered multigrain drink mix]," Miss Paek announced her discovery, and Mr. Pak proposed, "Let's eat it secretly and refreshingly," and Miss Paek took out 10 chŏn from her precious wallet and even bought sugar, so the whole group stood up and gathered together, and it was good until they swallowed two or three bowls refreshingly, but after hearing the sound of "Oh, my, this powder is raw flour," everyone who ate it felt their throats getting rough and they just stared at each other's faces. It's a rare scene of "leisure in the midst of busyness" for people who are so busy they're dizzy because of editing.... (Son)

The number of staff has increased significantly, and we will be publishing regularly without fail from the New Year's issue, so the morale is really high!! Mr. Pang is now contemplating new plans for the New Year. The Chinese novel collection is highly acclaimed, the "Korean Pride" issue is becoming more and more popular, and the publication of the "Boy's Diary" has begun, so the publishing department is also starting to be active. The New Year's issue will be published at the end of this year at the latest. The New Year's issue will perform even better than the "Pride" issue, so everyone is very active!! We will definitely take the lead among the New Year's issues of newspapers and magazines, so please look forward to it... (Yi) <178>

**Named Entities**

朴勝進	Pak Sŭng-jin
白	Paek
申瑩澈	Shin Yŏng-ch'ŏl
全羅道	Chŏlla-do
方	Pang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제16·17호
발행일	1928년 12월 01일
기사제목	編輯室落書
기사형태	사고·편집후기

編輯室落書
첫가을에 편집한 것을 이제야(눈 오실 때에) 인쇄소로 넘기게되니 苦待하시느라고 눈이 압흐섯슬 독자께는 무어라고 사죄할 길조차 업지만은 첫가을 단풍철에 닑혀 드리고 칭찬 밧으러든 기사는 전부 우리손으로 빼여버리게 되니 세상에 섭섭하다는 말이 생긴후 이일처럼 더 섭섭한 일은 업슬 것임니다. 하여튼 이제라도 고대튼 책이 나왓스니 반겨하여 주시려니와 그간에 빠진 원고 철이 느저서 내년으로 밀닌 원고가 만어서 고루지 못하게 된것만은 알고 보아주서야 겟슴니다. 그런대 지난호 秘密爆開號中 145頁 『賣藥行商秘密』 記事中間의 10行이 삭제되야 文意가 어지러워저서 몃 개인의 악행이 전체의 소행처럼 보이게 된 잘못을 지금 발견하고 여기에 미안한 말슴을 드러둠니다.(車)

새로 입사한 동무를 소개하겟슴니다. 에! 또 키가 5척 4촌 각테 안경에 開闢社 유일의 모던 양복을 닙은 이가 朴勝進씨 극예술에 취미와 연구가 만흔이로 웃키기 잘하고 부부싸홈 중재는 都 마다  취급하는 술 잘 먹는 친구임니다. 전후 『모던』기사를 모라가지고 와서 別乾坤독자압헤 괘사를 떨겟다는 남다른 포부임니다. 또 한 분 이 분은 여자임니다. 처녀입니 아니아니 기혼부인이심니다. 어느 음악가가 한번 보고 무용을 하면 성공할 조흔 스타일이라고 찬사를 악기지 안엇담니다. 入社 第一 出初로 여배우 지원에 쪼차가서 시험을 보고 온다더니 눈치가 합격소리까지 드른 모양이라 자신이 대단해지신 것 갓슴니다. 全羅道사투리건만은 듯는 사람마다 말소리가 구수하다구요 유명한 車선생의 재담을 첫날부터 탁- 탁- 밧아내는 것을 보니 이 방면으로도 상당한 여장부인 것 갓슴니다. 사진을 가지고 와서 사원들에게 보여는 주지만 금방 도로 빼서 가는 통에 여긔에 사진은 소개못하나마 성명만은 白시라.(崔)

사원이 작고 느는데 난로까지 자리를 잡게 되어서 편집실이나 영업국이나 좁기가 대단하야서 난로를 잠간만 파워도 땀이 뺄뺄 흐르는대 마츰 이런 공교한 일이 생겻슴니다. 申瑩澈씨가 업는대 申씨 압흐로 소포뭉치가 왓는대 대리로 밧아보닛가 밀가루 가튼 가루가 두어되 임니다. 『아마 미수가루인가 봄니다.』하고 白씨가 發見을 발표하닛가 『조곰 넌즛이 내여 먹어보지 싀원하게』하고 朴선생이 動議 『설당은 내가 사 오지요』하고 白씨가 그 어엽분 지갑에서 일금 10전을 내여 설당까지 사오닛가 일동이 총기립 총집합 두 그릇 세 그릇씩을 싀원하게 삼킨 것까지는 조앗지만은 『아이가가 가루가 날가루야요.』아흔 소리를 듯고보니 먹은 사람마다 목이 깔금깔금해서 어골들만 서로 처다봄니다. 편집 때문에 핑핑 돌게 밧분 사람들께 『忙中小閑』의 희귀한 一景임니다....(孫)

사원이 붓적 느러서 신년호부터는 어귐업시 정기발행을 한다고 그야말로 士氣大振!! 方선생은 지금부터 신년 새 계획을 궁리하고 게심니다. 中國소설집 대호평 朝鮮자랑호는 갈스록 더 환영 少年日記 발간이러케 하야 출판부도 활약을 시작한 것임니다. 신년호는 느저도 금년 연말에 발행할 것이요. 신년호야말로 자랑호 이상의 성적을 내인다고 전원대활동!! 신문 잡지 신년호 중의 패를 차지하고야 말 것이니 긔대하시기 바람니다...(李)＜178＞