잡지명	別乾坤 第61號
발행일	1933년 03월 01일
기사제목	探偵小說 嫉妬하는 惡魔
필자	崔流帆
기사형태	소설

Magazine Title: Byeolgeon-gon No. 61
Publication Date: March 1, 1933
Article Title: 探偵小說 嫉妬하는 惡魔 (Detective Novel: The Jealous Devil)
Author: Choe Ryu-beom
Article Type: 소설 (Novel)

Detective Novel: The Jealous Devil
						Choe Ryu-beom

"Sister! In my opinion, it would be best to break it off immediately." The young man, about twenty years old, wearing the uniform of XX Vocational School, said this while looking at the woman sitting across the table.

"I also think it would be good to break it off, but..." The woman's voice was very weak. Suddenly, the lights in the dining room turned on. The lights in the empty chandelier also came on, and the room was suddenly enveloped in a nighttime atmosphere.

"I've already made up my mind. But..." The woman, who looked about twenty-two years old, with her high nose, double-lidded eyes, and dimples that appeared whenever she spoke, looked very beautiful.

"Made up your mind, you say?" The young man looked straight at the woman's face with a worried expression.

"I'm thinking of killing him and then killing myself." The woman said this and quickly wiped away the flowing tears with a handkerchief.

"What comfort can you find in such a reckless act? I also feel resentful and furious when I think about it, but..." The young man paused, took a breath, and continued, "Sister! Please be patient a little longer. And love Mr. Park more. Then, even if he's made of stone, there will be a day when he turns back to you." The young man said this and drank his tea in one gulp.

"Sister! I will move out of the dormitory tomorrow. And I've decided to live with you."

Hearing this, the woman smiled and said, "What's so great about living together? Don't worry about me and just stay in the dormitory."

As she said this, showing her ivory-white and beautiful teeth, a very lonely look appeared on the woman's face.

The next day, Chang-ho (昌鎬) woke up early. A thick morning mist covered the windows of the dormitory. He had been worried about his sister's situation and couldn't sleep all night, finally falling asleep around one in the morning, only to wake up already.

Park Sun-geol (朴淳傑) had abandoned his sister. Chang-ho didn't find it strange. From the beginning, Chang-ho had not really approved of the romance between Park Sun-geol and his sister. And he didn't believe that Park had any sincerity. Chang-ho had explained Park's personality in detail several times and warned her not to have deep relationships, but his sister, blinded by love, had listened to his words with one ear and let them out the other.

Chang-ho had been worried about when his sister would be abandoned by Park, and he had been confident that he could comfort his sister and calm her down when that happened! Ah! Yesterday, his sister's words and actions seemed decidedly half-crazed (半狂的). Chang-ho had finally come to understand the psychology of a woman who had been jilted.

Chang-ho skipped class that day and, at 8:30, left the dormitory and called his sister's friend's house where she was temporarily staying.

"Please put me through to Kim Suk-jeong (金淑貞). I am her younger brother, Kim Chang-ho."

"Ms. Suk-jeong left yesterday and hasn't returned yet," a woman's hoarse voice replied.

"Yes!" Chang-ho shouted loudly, trying to ask more, but the person on the other end hung up.

"I don't know what's going on!"

An ominous premonition flashed through Chang-ho's mind like lightning.

"That's it"<55>

Chang-ho realized something and hailed a taxi to go to his sister's friend's house in Yeongeon-dong (蓮建洞). There, he found out that his sister had left at 3:00 PM the previous day and had not returned, which worried the household very much.

This was strange. At 3:00 PM, he and his sister had eaten at the Hwasin Restaurant (화신식당), walked around Bonjeong-tong (본정통), and taken the streetcar together at Bonjeong Ojeongmok (본정 오정목), and Chang-ho had definitely seen his sister enter the gate of that house.

But if she hadn't gone into that house last night, where could she have gone? Chang-ho's mind was increasingly gripped by anxiety and unease.

"Oh, that's right. Let's go to Park Sun-geol's house anyway. If I go there, I'll know." Chang-ho took the Cheongnyangni (淸凉里) streetcar and rushed to Park's house, built in a Western style near Yeongdo Temple (永導寺). On the way, Chang-ho shuddered at the thought of suicide! Last night, after 8:00 PM, Chang-ho had seen his sister off to her friend's house in Yeongeon-dong, but his sister, wanting to reassure her brother, had gone as far as the gate of the house, then came out again and disappeared somewhere.

Suicide! Gripped by a second premonition, Chang-ho arrived at Park Sun-geol's house. Who would have imagined that Park Sun-geol's house, who appeared like a comet in the local music scene, would be hidden in such a secluded place outside the city?

Chang-ho looked at his watch. It was 9:20. Park Sun-geol's gate was tightly closed. Perhaps his sister had committed suicide inside this house. Chang-ho knocked on the door. But there was no response. So, he had no choice but to jump over the fence, break a window, and go inside.

"Is Mr. Park there?" But there was no answer. Chang-ho went through the kitchen and looked into the rooms, but no one was there. He figured that the two bodies must be in the study on the second floor and ran upstairs. Entering the study, he saw a portrait of Beethoven hanging above the south-facing window, and below it was a large grand piano.

Chang-ho, feeling uneasy about breaking into an empty house, stepped into the study. To the east was a bed, and the window had green curtains. Chang-ho entered the room and looked around. But it was an empty room with no one there. Just as Chang-ho was about to go downstairs and grabbed the handle, he spotted Park Sun-geol's body on the other side of the bed.

Unconsciously, Chang-ho rushed over there. He ran, hoping to find his sister's body there as well. But there was only Park Sun-geol's body, who seemed to have fallen from the bed due to being intoxicated with strong alcohol. When Chang-ho got closer to the body, he shouted "Ah!" once more and took two or three steps back.

Park Sun-geol's face, hands, and feet - his entire body, which had turned pale, were covered in horrifying, dark red spots! And from his lips, which seemed to have been fighting through intense agony, dark red blood flowed down and pooled on the floor.

Poisoning!

Chang-ho stood there blankly for a while, then thought that he couldn't stay here any longer and immediately went downstairs and looked for his sister's body here and there, but couldn't find it. He looked everywhere, even under the toilet floor and in the closet. But his sister's body, which he expected to find, was not there. It was a stroke of good luck. At the same time, he realized that a faint hope was bubbling up in his chest.

"My sister is still alive somewhere!"

Thinking this, he quickly ran out the door. That's right. He had to find his sister before she died.

Less than five minutes after Kim Chang-ho left the house of pianist Park Sun-geol, the housemaid entered with groceries. Park Sun-geol was a bachelor. So, he had a housemaid for meals and laundry. The housemaid lived nearby and came and went every day, but she didn't want to wake the owner, so she came after nine o'clock.

The housemaid finished her work downstairs and went upstairs. She also found the owner's body under the bed and, terrified, ran downstairs and told the neighbors. At the same time, she reported it to the local police station (駐在所). It was after ten o'clock.

The police station dispatched the chief with several police officers to the scene without delay. The prosecutor (判檢事) and clerk (書記) also arrived at the scene in succession. After the inspection, the group determined that it was a simple case of poisoning. There was a wound on the little finger of the right hand, as if pricked by a thorn, and it was presumed that a deadly poison, similar to "curare" (크라노레) used by African natives on arrows, had entered the body. It was also estimated that death had occurred ten hours prior, around twelve o'clock last night. It was also possible that the poison entered the body one or two hours before that. (It was not possible to know exactly without an autopsy.) <56>

After Kim Chang-ho left Park Sun-geol's house, he immediately borrowed a phone and called the house in Yeongeon-dong. Chang-ho didn't even consider reporting this incident to the police station. Chang-ho was consumed with worry about his sister's safety more than Park's death. The answer on the phone was almost the same as before. He had gone around to every place she might go, every person she might know, but it was all in vain.

Chang-ho was exhausted and didn't know what to do. Where on earth was his sister? Was she dead? Was she alive? Or was his sister involved in the Park Sun-geol poisoning case? Probably so. His sister had poisoned Park Sun-geol as she had decided. If so, his sister might have committed suicide somewhere as well. But if his sister had killed Park, wouldn't it have been right for her to commit suicide next to Park? His sister was not a cowardly woman. She wouldn't run away after killing her lover. If she were to commit suicide, she would of course choose to be next to her lover. If so, his sister might have nothing to do with Park's case at all. Walking blankly, Chang-ho considered it from various angles. In any case, he couldn't rest assured unless he found her alive or dead.

Suddenly, pianist Yun Gil-ho (尹吉浩), a friend of Park Sun-geol and active in the music scene with him, came to Chang-ho's mind. Yun would know Park and his sister's relationship well. In fact, he might have been the one Park consulted when he broke up with his sister.

That's right. He might get some clues if he met that man. Fortunately, Chang-ho had met Yun several times with his sister at Park's house. But strangely, he couldn't remember Yun's address. So, he had no choice but to return to the dormitory and waste two precious hours attending an urgent meeting about the Tokyo Football Expedition (東京蹴球遠征) in early next month. By the time he got Yun's address from a friend and went to Yun's house in XX-dong (XX洞), it was already 3:00 PM. At that time, Yun Gil-ho was just returning home from somewhere.

"Kim! Park Sun-geol has been murdered." As soon as they sat down together in his study, Yun said this without hesitation. Chang-ho felt a sudden flutter in his chest. Barely managing to calm himself, he asked, "What are you saying?"

"Don't you know? It seems your sister poisoned him. Truly, you never know what can happen in life..."

"......"

"I was sleeping until 10:00 AM when I got a summons from the police station. So, I was shocked and went to the station, and they said that Park Sun-geol had been murdered last night. Yesterday was Sunday, so I was at Park Sun-geol's house until 10:00 PM."

"Has the culprit been arrested?"

"No, not yet. But the police are taking an optimistic attitude (락관적 태도), saying that the case is simple." <57>

Yun looked at Chang-ho as if he were thinking about something.

"By the way, where is your sister?"

"Actually, I came to tell you about my sister in detail."

"So, what happened to your sister?"

"Well, she didn't return to her house in Yeongeon-dong last night."

"Hmm. I see." Yun finished this one word and closed his mouth.

"If you know anything about my sister, please tell me."

"No, that's what I should be asking you. The police asked me all sorts of questions about your sister's whereabouts."

This time, Chang-ho closed his mouth.

Yun calmly lit a cigarette, as if trying to gauge Chang-ho's reaction.

"Does my sister have anything to do with Mr. Park's case?" Chang-ho asked Yun with a determined look on his face.

"Well, I don't know the details, but it seems the police consider her the prime suspect (제일 혐의자)," Yun replied, exhaling smoke.

Chang-ho gave up everything and didn't leave the dormitory all day. And Chang-ho's sister, who had been missing, was caught by a detective who had been watching the house in Yeongeon-dong and taken away that evening. And the next day, Chang-ho was also summoned to the XX Police Station.

Chang-ho tried to see his sister at the police station, but it was difficult. He only heard that his sister was adamantly denying the crime.

That's right. His sister was definitely not the perpetrator. She might have killed Park Sun-geol in some way. But once she had killed him, she would never have run away. She would either have surrendered or committed suicide. If his sister denied the crime, it was clear that she was not the perpetrator. Chang-ho couldn't help but think this way.

But his sister was being held at the police station as the prime suspect (제일의 혐의자). It was a pitiful situation. He had to save her somehow. He definitely had to save her. Chang-ho made a firm decision. Chang-ho came out immediately and visited the prosecutor (검사) in charge of the case that afternoon. Fortunately, the prosecutor allowed him to meet. Chang-ho told him that he was Kim Suk-jeong's younger brother and explained the events before and after the incident in detail, and discussed the best way to clear his sister's suspicion.

"I understand your feelings as her brother. But there are many inconsistencies in Ms. Kim's actions that night. Ms. Kim says she spent the whole night looking for a place to die with the intention of committing suicide, but no one can prove it."

"That's right. My sister's words are true. My sister must have really been looking for a place to commit suicide."

"Is that so? But wouldn't a person who intends to commit suicide already be someone with a calm mind?" the prosecutor said, still suspicious of his sister.

Seeing this, there was nothing he could do. The prosecutor was a terrible enemy trying to ensnare his sister in a web of crime. Chang-ho was disappointed and left the prosecutor's house. But Chang-ho firmly vowed to save his sister with his own strength for the second time.

Next, Chang-ho visited the police doctor (警察醫) who had performed the autopsy (檢屍). Fortunately, this person also allowed him to meet. The police doctor was a kind man, not far from forty years old. So, he answered Chang-ho's questions in detail.

"The victim's cause of death, as announced in the newspapers, was poisoning. It was caused by an extremely potent poison that entered through a small wound on the tip of the little finger of the right hand. We had the poison analyzed at the Department of Pharmaceutical Science at the Imperial University (帝大藥物學校室), but we couldn't identify it exactly. There are some poisons that take one or two hours to take effect after entering the body, and they are not that rare."

"The prosecutor said that a pianist named Yun Gil-ho was at Park Sun-geol's house from 8:00 PM to 10:30 PM, and three female students from XX Girls' High School (XX녀고보) who were Park Sun-geol's students were there, but my sister was not..."

"That is because the important reason why the authorities suspect your sister is that no one knows who visited after 10:30 PM, after Yun Gil-ho left, and I judged that Park Sun-geol died around 12:00 AM based on the time that passed after death. So, the person who was at Park's house from 10:30 PM to 12:00 AM naturally becomes a suspect (살인혐의를 밧게 되는 것이요). And your sister is receiving attention from the authorities due to her romantic relationship with Mr. Park, and at the same time, her actions from 10:30 PM to 12:00 AM that night are completely unclear. So, if you want to clear your sister's suspicion, you must clarify where she was from 10:30 PM to 12:00 AM that night, or if not..."

"If not..." Chang-ho pressed the police doctor.

"If not, you must prove that the poison entered Park's body before 10:30 PM. If you succeed in either of these two things, there will be no worries." Saying this, the police doctor looked at Chang-ho with a very sympathetic expression. <58>

"Sister- she spent the night after saying goodbye to me looking for a place to die, and I want to believe that is true. But sadly, I can't prove it. But I will never give up hope. I am sure of my sister's innocence. Therefore, I will try to prove that Park Sun-geol was injected with poison by my sister before 10:30 PM and find the real culprit. Thank you for telling me so many details."

Chang-ho, filled with new courage, left the house.

Chang-ho decided to visit the female students who had gone to study piano on the day Park Sun-geol was murdered and find out the details of what happened that day.

So, the story he heard from the three female students was this:

Yun Gil-ho was at Park Sun-geol's house from 8:00 PM that night, and while the three students took turns studying piano in 30-minute intervals, Yun Gil-ho sat next to Park Sun-geol, reading foreign magazines and chatting. And Park and Yun took turns playing Liszt's "Hungarian Rhapsody" (항가리야광상곡) No. 6 and discussed the piece in various ways. But it seemed that the two men's opinions differed on the interpretation of the piece, and later they were playing the piano and arguing fiercely.

That was all the students had to say. But Chang-ho didn't listen to it meaninglessly. It was also conceivable that two talented pianists, while continuing to maintain a close relationship on the surface, were actually jealous of each other's talent (天質) and skill (技倆) at heart, and harbored such hatred that they even had murderous intentions towards each other.

Suddenly, Chang-ho remembered whose novel had dealt with such a subject. And Chang-ho began to thoroughly investigate the relationship between Park and Yun from the past to the present.

As a result, he learned that Yun and Park were classmates in the piano department at Ueno Music School (上野音樂學校) and had returned to Korea together, making many contributions to the desolate Korean music scene. The two had been promising students since their school days, so their secret rivalry (暗鬪) had never ceased. About a year after returning to Korea, Yun left for Germany and Park left for the United States to study abroad.

After returning to Korea, the competition between the two became even more intense. But on the surface, they continued to maintain a close relationship.

When Chang-ho visited a certain musician, <59> the musician said, "It's possible that Yun did it. Yun would be the happiest person about Park's misfortune. Also, Yun was invited to be a music teacher at XX Girls' High School (XX녀고보), but Park was invited instead because Yun drank too much and had an unpleasant personality. Judging from this, suspicion will go there," he said, boldly telling him important information.

Chang-ho then further expanded the scope of his investigation and, having gained sufficient confidence, wrote a letter to the head of the XX Police Station without hesitation.

To the Chief of the XX Police Station

Please forgive me for writing this letter. In order to clear the suspicion of Kim Suk-jeong, who is being investigated as a suspect in the Park Sun-geol poisoning, and to find the real culprit, I have made efforts to investigate and am reporting the results. I hope that you will consider the following matters and take strict action.

I claim that the real culprit who poisoned Park Sun-geol is his friend, the pianist Yun Gil-ho.

Reason:

The fact that Yun stayed at Park's house from 8:00 PM to 10:30 PM on the night Park was murdered is a clear fact based on the testimony of Park's students. Of course, I think Yun planned to prove his innocence by saying that he was with Park's students that night. It is simply impossible to judge from common sense that Yun poisoned Park in front of them. However, you must also have heard from the witnesses that Yun and Park were playing and discussing Liszt's "Hungarian Rhapsody" (항가리아광상곡) No. 6 that night. There is a place to pay attention to here.

"Hungarian Rhapsody" (항가리아광상곡) No. 6! All the riddles are hidden here. First, if you look closely at the sheet music (樂譜) of the piece, you will immediately notice that there are many D notes (띄음) (do, re, mi, pa, sol, la, si, do's mi note). There are many mi notes there, and they are mi notes in the octave range. And the mi notes continue for a very long time. What does this fact imply? When playing the piano, the mi note is usually pressed with the little finger of the right hand. In simple terms, "Hungarian Rhapsody" (항가리아광삭곡) No. 6 is a piece that you have to tap the keys (鍵盤) of the piano with the little finger of your right hand.

Now, if Yun knew about the wound on Park's little finger in advance and put poison on the piano mi note and told Park to play the piece, what would the result be? And if Yun knew that enough poison had entered and wiped the piano keys with a neutral (中性) drug-soaked handkerchief, what evidence would be left later? Of course, the students that night would have been studying only the basic exercises (校則本), so there would have been no need to reach for the mi notes above.

Is my guess wrong? The enclosed chemical laboratory (化學試驗所) report (毒藥査定表) is the answer I received after asking for an appraisal after I took a piece of the piano key in question. If you compare this report with the Imperial University (帝大藥物學校室) survey report, you will be able to prove that the poison remaining in Park's body and the poison remaining on the piano key are the same. Based on the above reasons, I desperately hope that you will quickly arrest and interrogate Yun Gil-ho.

Kim Chang-ho, younger brother of Suk-jeong

Chang-ho's efforts were brilliantly successful.

Yun Gil-ho was immediately arrested. And when his house was searched, the remainder of the poison used to poison Park Sun-geol was found in the bottom of a trunk he had brought from abroad. Due to this irrefutable evidence, Yun Gil-ho, the murderer who had stubbornly denied the crime and tried to shift all the blame onto the innocent Kim Suk-jeong, finally confessed to the entire crime.

Of course, Kim Suk-jeong was released that day, and the loving siblings returned home, enveloped in tears and laughter. <60>

**Named Entities**

昌鎬	Chang-ho
朴淳傑	Pak Sun-geol
金淑貞	Kim Suk-jeong
蓮建洞	Yeongeon-dong
화신식당	Hwasin sikdang
본정통	Bonjeong-tong
본정 오정목	Bonjeong Ojeongmok
清凉里	Cheongnyangni
永導寺	Yeongdo-sa
尹吉浩	Yun Gil-ho
上野音樂學校	Ueno Ŭmak Hakkyo
XX Girls' High School (XX녀고보) XX Nyeogo-bo
帝大藥物學校室	Jedaeyakmulhakkyosil



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제61호
발행일	1933년 03월 01일
기사제목	探偵小說 嫉妬하는 惡魔
필자	崔流帆
기사형태	소설

探偵小說 嫉妬하는 惡魔
						崔流帆


『누님! 저의 생각에는 일즉어니 단렴하시는 것이 조켓소』 XX전문학교교복을 입은 이십세쯤 된 청년은 식탁마즌 편에 안진 녀자를 바라보면서 이갓치 말하엿다.
『나 역시 단렴하는 것이 조흐리라고 생각은 하지만...』 녀자의 소리는 몹시 힘이 업섯다. 식당은 별안간 전등불이 켜젓다. 젓빈 샨데리아에도 전등불이 들어와서 실내는 갑작이 밤분위기에 싸이게 되엿다.
『나는 벌서 결심하고 있다. 그러나...』 이러케 말하는 그 녀자는 스물두살쯤 되여 보이며 웃득한 코라든지 쌍카풀진 두 눈이라든지 말할때마다 드러가는 볼우물이든지 그 생김생김이 몹시 아름다워 보엿다.
『결심이라니요』 청년은 근심하느 빗흐로 녀자의 얼골을 똑바로 치여다 보고 잇다.
『나는 그놈을 죽이고 나도 죽을내고 생각하고 잇다』 녀자는 이러케 말하고 흘너나리는 눈물을 얼는 손수건으로 씨서 바리엿다.
『그러한 무모한 짓을 하면 무삼 위안을 어드실 수 잇겟소. 나 역시 생각하면 분하고 치가 떨니지만...』 청년은 말이 잠간 막히는 것을 숨을 돌려 가지고 『누님! 좀 더 참으시요. 그리고 박선생을 더 사랑하십시요. 그러면 목석이 아닌 다음에야 엇재든지 누님에게로 도라슬 날이 잇슬터이니.』 청년은 이러케 말하고 차를 죽-마시엿다.
『누님! 저는 내일 기숙사를 나오겟소. 그리고 누님과 갓치 자취하기로 결정하엿소.』
이 말을 드른 녀자는 얼골에 미소를 띄우고
『자취생활이 다 뭐냐? 내 걱정은 말고 어서 기숙사에 그대로 잇거라』
이러케 말하면서 상아갓치 희고 고흔 니를 내밀면서 말끗을 맛치는 그 녀자의 열골에는 몹시 쓸쓸한 빗이 떠올낫다.



잇흔날 창호(昌鎬)는 일즉 잠이 깨엿다. 기숙사 유리창박게는 아츰안개가 자욱이 끼여 잇섯다. 그는 누님의 일이 염려되여서 밤새도록 이생각 저생각하닛가 새로 한시에나 잠이 드럿다가 벌서 깨엿다.
박순걸(朴淳傑)이가 누님을 버리엿다. 창호는 그것을 이상스럽게 역이지 안엇다. 처음부터 박순걸이와 누님과의 연애를 창호는 그닥지 찬성치 안엇든 것이엿다. 그리고 박이라는 남자에게 성의가 잇스리라고 밋어지지 안엇다. 창호는 몃번이나 박의 인격을 자세히 설명하고 깁흔 교제를 하지 말나고 주의를 식혓스나 연애에 맹목적인 누님은 동생의 말을 한 귀로 듯고 한 귀로 흘려버리엿다.
창호는 벌서 이전부터 누님은 언제 박에게 내버림을 당할가 하고 만일 그러한 때에는-그는 누님을 위로하고 누님의 마음을 안정식힐 수 잇다는 자신을 가지고 잇섯는대! 아! 어적게 누님의 언어행동은 확실히 반광적(半狂的)갓치 보엿다. 창호는 실연당한 녀자의 심리를 비로소 알게 되여섯다.
창호는 그날 결석하고 여덜시 삼십분 기숙사를 나와서 누님이 임시로 묵고 잇는 동무에 집으로 전화르 거럿다.
『김숙정(金淑貞)씨를 좀 대여 주십시오. 저는 그의 동생인 김창호라는 사람입니다.』
『숙정씨는 어적게 출입하신채 아즉 안도라오시엿습니다.』하는 녀자의 목쉰 소리가 들려왓다』
『네!』 창호는 큰소리로 부르지즈면서 더 물어볼랴고 하는대 저편에서 전화를 끈엇다.
『무삼 일이 이러낫는지 몰느겟다!』
불길한 예감이 전광과 가치 창호의 머리를 따리엿다.
『그럿타』<55>
창호는 무엇을 깨다럿는지 탁시를 불너타고 련건동(蓮建洞) 누님동무집을 차저갓드니 역시 누님은 어적게 오후 세시에 출입하신채로 도라오시지 안엇다고 그 집에서도 몹시 염려하고 잇섯다.
이것은 이상스럽다. 오후 세시면 누님라 화신식당에서 음식을 먹고 번정통을 일주하고 번정 오정목에서 전차를 타고 갓치 갓섯는데 그리고 창호는 누님이 그 집 대문 안으로 드러가는 것 까지도 확실히 목도하엿다.
그런데 어적게 밤에 그 집에를 안드러 갓스면 대체 어듸를 갓슬까? 창호의 마음은 점점 불안과 초조에 붓들니고 마럿다.
『응 그럿타. 하여간 박순걸씨 집으로 가보자. 그곳으로 가면 알 수가 잇겟지』 창호는 청량리행(淸凉里行)전차를 탁 영도사(永導寺)어구에 반양제로 지은 그의 집으로 달려갓다. 창호는 가는 도중에
자살!을 생각하고 몸을 떠럿다. 어제밤 여덜시가 지나서 창호는 누님을 연건동 집까지 바라다 드렷는데 누님은 동생보는데는 안심식힐냐고 그 집 대문까지 드러갓다가 다시 나와서 어듸로인지 종적을 감추고 만 것이다.
자살! 창호는 두 번재 이러나는 예감에 붓틀 닌채로 박순걸씨 집문전에 다다럿다. 이러한 시외 한적한 곳에 악단에 헤성과 갓치 나타난 박순걸이 집이 숨어잇는 것을 누가 추측이나 할 것이냐?
창호는 시게를 보앗다. 아홉시이십분이엿다. 박순걸이 집문은 곡 닷처 잇섯다.  잣치하면 누님은 이 집안에서 자살을 하엿는지도 모른다. 창호는 문을 두들겨 보앗다. 그러나 아모러한 기척도 업섯다. 그래서 할 수 업시 담을 뛰여너머 드러가서 유리창을 개트리고 안으로 드러갓다.
『박선생님 계심닉가?』 그러나 아모 회답이 업섯다. 창호는 부엌을 지나서 방을 드려다 보앗스나 아모도 업섯다. 필경 두사람의 시체는 이층 서재에 잇스리라 하고 이층을 뛰여올나갓다. 서재에 드러스니 남편유리창우에는 베도벤의 초상화가 걸려잇고 그 아래로는 크다란 그랜드피아노가 노엿다.
창호는 주인 업는 집에 무단침입한 것을 한편으로 불안이 생각하면서 서재로 발을 드려노앗다. 동편으로는 침대가 노여잇고 유리창에는 록색커텐이 쳐잇섯다. 창호는 그 방에 드러서서 사면을 휘둘너 보앗다. 그러나 아모도 업는 텅 비인 방이엿다. 할 수 업시 아래층으로 내려갈려고 또어와 핸들을 잡은 창호의 눈에는 침대 저쪽으로 박순걸의 시체가 띄웟다.
창호는 무의식중에 그곳을 급히 뛰여갓다. 그것은 또 한편에 자긔의 누님의 시체가 잇스려니 하고 뛰여간 것이다. 그러나 구곳에는 독한 술에 취하야 침대에서 떠러진 듯한 박순걸의 시체뿐이엿다. 창호가 시체 갓가히 갓슬 때 창호는 한번더 악! 소리를 질느고 두세거름 물너나섯다.
박순걸의 얼골 손 발-서색빠자마 속으로 나온 전신에는 암홍색(暗紅色)의 끔직끔직한 반점(斑點)이 소사잇지 안은가! 그릭 격렬한 고민과 싸홈한 입살에서는 검붉은 피가 흘너내려서 마루바닥에 고여 잇섯다.
독살(毒殺)!
창호는 한동안 그곳에 우두머니 서 잇다가 이곳은 한시 잠깐이라도 더 유예할 곳이 안이라고 생각하고 즉시 아래층으로 내려와서 이곳저곳 누님의 시체를 차저보앗스나 찻지 못하엿다. 변소 마루밋 장속 그곳까지도 빼놋치 안코 깡그리 다 보앗다. 그러나 꼭 잇슬듯한 누님의 시체는 잇지 안엇다. 불행중 다행이라 할지. 동시에 희미한 희망이 가삼속에 용소슴치는 것을 깨다럿다.
『누님은 어듸인지 사라계시다』!
이럿케 생각하면서 급히 문박을 뛰여나갓다. 그러타. 누님이 죽기전에 차저야 한다.



김창호가 피아니스트 박순걸의 집을 나온지 오분도 못되여서 그집 식모가 반찬거리를 사가지고 드러갓다. 박순걸이는 독신자다. 그래서 식사 세탁 때문에 식모를 두엇다. 그 식모는 그 근처자긔집에서 매일 왕내하는데 주인의 아츰잠을 깨개하지 안을 냥으로 아홉시가 지나서야 오는 것이엿다.
식모는 아래층에서 일을 다 보고 이층으로 올나갓다. 그 식모 역시 침대밋헤 시체로 변한 주인을 발견하고 질겁을 하야 뛰여내려와서 근처사람에게 알니엿다. 동시에 관할주재소(駐在所)에도 보고를 하엿다. 그것은 열시 후의 일이엿다.
경찰서에서는 때를 지체치 안코 서장이 수명의 경찰관을 대동하고 현장에 출장하엿다. 그리고 판검사(判檢事)와 서기(書記)도 뒤를 니어 현장에 나타낫다. 그리고 일동이 검사한 결과 간단한 독살노 결정이 되엿다. 그런데 오른손 샛기손구락 긋헤 가시에 찔닌듯한 상처가 잇고 그곳으로 아프리카토인(亞弗利加土人)이 화살에 칠하는 「크라노레」와 갓흔 맹독(猛毒)이 체내로 드러간 것으로 추정되엿다. 그리고 사후 십시간이 경과한 것으로 어제밤 열두시경에 사망한 듯 하다. 그리고 독이 신체에 드러간 것은 그때로부터 한시간이나 두시간전인지도 알 수가 업다.(그것은 해부해 보지 안흐면 정확하게 알 수가 업다)고 감정이 되엿다.



김창호가 박순걸이 집을 나온 후로 즉시 전화를 비러서 련건동집으로 전화를 거럿다. 창호는 이 사건을 경찰서에 계출할 것을 조곰도 생각지 안엇다. 창호는 박보다도 누님신상의 일노 번민초려중에 잇서스닛간. 전화의 대답은 악가와 대동소이하엿다. 갈만한 곳 알만한 곳은 한군데도 빼노<56>치안코 모조리 도라단여 보앗스나 헛수고엿다.
창호는 기진맥진하야 엇지할 바를 몰낫다. 대체 누님은 어느곳에 가 계신가? 죽엇는가? 살엇는가? 아니 박순걸 독살사건에 누님도 관련이 되어 잇지나 안흔가? 필경 그럿타. 누님이 결심한 대로 박순걸이를 독살한 것이다. 그럿타면 누님도 역시 어느 곳에서 자살하엿는지도 모르겟다. 그러나 만일 누님이 박을 죽이엿다고 하면 누님은 박의 엽헤서 자살을 하는 것이 정당한 일이 안인가? 누님은 비겁한 녀성이 안이다. 애인을 죽익 도망할 사람은 안이다. 자살한다면 물논 애인엽흘 선택할 것이다. 그럿타면 누님은 박의 사건과는 전혀 무관게인지도 알 수가 업다. 초연히 거러가면서 창호는 여러갈내로 이리저리 생각을 하여 보앗다. 하여간 생사간에 얼는 차저놋치 안으면 안심할 수가 업섯다.
불연 듯 창호머리속에는 박순걸이의 친우이고 갓치 악단에서 활약하고 잇는 윤길호(尹吉浩)라는 피아니스트가 떠올낫다. 윤이면은 박과 누님의 관계를 잘 알 것이다. 아니 잘 알뿐만 안이라 이번 박이 누님과 절연할 때도 여러 가지로 외론의 상대역이 되엿섯는짇 몰느겟스닉간.
그럿타. 그 남자를 맛나면 무슨 단서를 어들는지도 몰느겟다. 다행히 창호는 박에 집에서 수삼차 누님과 함께 윤을 만낫섯다. 그러나 얄굿게 윤의 주소를 긔억지 못하엿다. 그래 할 수 업서 기숙사로 도라와서 내월 초순 동경축구원정(東京蹴球遠征)에 대한 긴급한 회의에 참석하야 귀중한 두시간을 허비하엿다. 동무에게서 윤의 주소를 아러가지고 XX동 윤의 집으로 갓섯든 때는 오후 세시나 되엿섯다. 그때 맛츰 윤길호씨는 어듸 갓다가 집에 도라오는 길이엿다.
『김군! 박순걸씨가 살해를 당하엿다네』 그의 서재에 드러가서 둘이대좌하는 즉시로 윤은 아모 기탄 업시 이 말을 끄내엿다. 창호는 불연 듯 가슴이 울넝거리엿다. 겨우 진정하야 가지고
『그래 무슨 말이심닛가?』
『자네 입대 몰느고 잇나. 누님에게 독살을 당한 듯 하다는데. 참 사람의 일이란 알 수 업지...』
『......』
『오늘 열시까지 자고 잇는대 경찰서에 호출장이 나왓네그려. 그래 깜작 놀내서 출두해 보닛간 어적게 밤에 박순걸씨가 살해를 당하엿다고 하네그려. 어적게는 일요일이라 나는 밤 열시까지 박순걸씨댁에서 놀다왓는대』
『범인은 체포되엿습니까?』
『아니 아즉것. 그러나 사건은 간단하다고 경찰에서는 락관적 태도<57>를 취하고 잇데그려』
윤은 무엇을 생각하는 듯이 창호를 바라보고 잇섯다.
『그런데 매씨께서는 어듸 계신가?』
『네 사실은 제가 누님에 대한 것을 자세히 엿주어 볼냐고 온 것입니다.』
『그래 매씨가 엇더케 되엿단 말인가?』
『네 어적게 밤 연건동댁으로 도라가시지 안엇다고 그래요』
『응. 딴은』 윤은 이 말 한마듸를 끗내고 입을 다물엇다.
『누님의 대한 것을 아시면 말삼하여 주십시오』
『아니 그것은 내가 자네에게 무러 볼 말일세. 경찰에서는 매씨의 행방을 여러 가지로 나의게 무러보든데』
이번에는 창호가 입을 다무럿다.
윤은 침착한 태도로 창호의 눈치를 살피랴는 듯이 담배를 피여 물엇다.
『저의 누님이 박선생 사건에 무삼 관계되는 일이 잇습닛가?』 창호는 얼골에 결심한 빗을 띄우고 윤에게 질문하엿다.
『자, 그것은 자세히 몰느겟스나 경찰에서는 제일 혐의자로 인정하나 보데』 이러케 대답하면서 윤은 연긔를 후-내뿜엇다.



창호는 만사 휴의하야 할 왼종일 기숙사에서 밧글 안나왓다. 그리고 행방불명이 되엿든 창호누님은 그날 저녁때 연건동집으로 도라온 것을 미리 직히고 잇든 형사에게 붓들니어 갓다. 그리고 그 잇흔날 창호도 XX경찰서에 호출되여갓다.
창호는 경찰서에서 누님을 면회려고 노력하여 보앗스나 어려웟다. 다만 누님이 완강히 범행을 부인한다는 소리만 드러슬 뿐이엿다.
그러타. 누님은 결코 하수인(下手人)은 안이다. 누님은 어떠케 생각하면 박순걸이를 살해하얏슬는지도 모른다. 그러나 한번 살해한 이상에는 결코 도망은 하지 안엇슬 것이다. 정녕 자수하든지 자살하든지 두 길중에 하나를 취하엿슬 것이다. 누님이 범죄사실을 거부하엿다 하면 누님이 하수인이 안인 것이 명백한 일이다. 창호는 이러케 생각하지 안을수 업섯다.
그런데 누님이 제일의 혐의자로 경찰서에 류치되여잇다. 가엽슨 노릇이엿다. 엇더케 하든지 구하야 내여야 하겟다. 아니 꼭 구하지 안흐면 안된다. 창호는 굿게 결심하엿다. 창호는 곳 노여나와서 그날오후 그 사건에 관계하는 검사를 방문하엿다. 검사는 다행히 면회를 허락하엿다. 창호는 자기가 김숙정이의 동생이라는 것을 말하고 그리고 사건전후의 누님과 자기의 일을 자세히 말하고 누님의 혐의를 벗게 하기 위하야 최선의 방법을 의론하엿다.
『동생으로서의 당신의 심중은 잘 알겟습니다. 그러나 매씨의 그날밤 행동이 몹시 모순된 점이 만슴니다. 매씨는 자살할 목적으로 왼밤 죽을 장소를 차저단엿다고 하나 그것을 증명하야 주는 사람이 업습니다.』
『그럿습니다. 누님의 한 말이 진정입니다. 누님은 정말 자살장소를 차저 단엿슬 것임니다.』
『네-그러습닛가. 그러나 자살을 할냐는 사람은 그 자신이 벌서 평정한 심리를 가진 사람의 하는 일이 안이닛가요』하고 검사는 어듸까지든지 누님에게 혐의를 두고 잇다.
이러케디고 보니 할 수가 업섯다. 검사는 누님을 범망안으로 얼거 너흐랴는 무서운 원수이다. 창호는 실망을 하고 검사의 자택을 떠나 나왓다. 그러나 창호는 두 번재 자기의 힘으로 누님을 구해낼 것을 굿게 맹서하엿다.
다음을 창ㅎ는 검시(檢屍)를 행한 경찰의(警察醫)를 방문하엿다. 다행히 이분도 면회를 허락하엿다. 경찰의는 나히가 사십이 불원한 사람이며 호인이엿다. 그리하야 창호의 뭇는 말에 세세히 대답을 하야 주엇다.
『피해자의 사인은 신문에도 발표한 바와 갓치 독사요. 그것은 오른편손 색기손구랏 끗에 적은 상처로 잠입한 극도의 독한 것으로 그 독의 성질은 제대약물학교실(帝大藥物學校室)에서 감정하야 보앗지만 확실히 알 수 업는 것이요. 이러한 독약중에는 독이 체내에 드러가서 한시간이나 두시간을 경과하여야 비로소 효험을 낫타 내는 것으로써 그닥지 희귀한 것은 아니요』
『검사의 말삼에는 박순걸이 집에는 피아니스트 윤길호란 사람이 여덜시붓터 열시반까지 잇섯는데 그동안 박순걸씨의 제자인 XX녀고보학생이 세사람이 와 잇섯고 저의 누님은 업섯다고 하시는데...』
『그것은 즉 당국이 당신 매시에게 혐의를 둔 중요한 원인은 제일 열시반이후 즉 윤길호가 다녀간 후에 방문한 사람을 알 수 업는 것이고 박순걸이가 사망한 것은 사후경과에 의해서 대체로 열두시 전후라고 나는 판단하엿소. 그러닛간 열시반부터 열두시까지 박씨집에 잇든 사람이 자연히 살인혐의를 밧게 되는 것이요. 그런대 당신의 매씨는 박씨와의 연애문제로 당국의 주의를 밧는 동시에 그날밤 열시반에서 열두씨까지의 행동이 전여 불분명한데 잇는 것이요. 그러닛간 만일 당신이 매씨의 혐의를 벗게 하랴면 그날 열시반에서 열두시까지의 잇섯든 곳을 명백하게 하든지 그럿치 안흐면...』
『그럿치 안흐면...』 창호는 경찰의 말에 밧싹 대드럿다.
『그럿치 안흐면 독이 열시반 이전에 박씨 체내에 침입하엿다는 것을 증명하지 안으면 안되오. 이 두가지 중에 한가지만 성공한다면 아모 염려가 업소』 이러케 말하고 경찰의는 몹시 동정하는 표정으로 창호를 한참<58>바라보앗다.
『누님-그날밤 저와 작별한 뒤 밤을 새고 죽을 장소를 차저단녀다는데 그것이 저는 사실노 인정하고 십슴니다. 그러나 애달게도 그것을 증명할 수가 업습니다그려. 그러치만 저는 절대로 락망하지 안습니다. 저는 누님의 무죄를 확신합니다. 그럼으로 박순걸씨가 열시반 이전에 누님에게로 독을 주사바덧다는 것을 증명하야 꼭 진범인을 발견하기에 노력하겟습니다. 여러 가지 자세한 말을 일너 주서서 감사합니다.』
창호는 새로운 용기를 붓도다가지고 그 집을 나왓다.



창호는 박순걸이가 살해되는 날 피아노를 공부하러 갓든 녀제자들을 방문하고 그날 형편을 자세히 드러보기로 하엿다.
그래서 그 녀제자 세사람에게서 드른 이약이는-
윤길호가 그날밤 여덜시부터 박순걸의 집에 잇섯고 제자 세사람이 삼십분식 교대하야 순차로 피아노를 공부하는 동안 윤길호는 박순걸 엽헤서 외국잡지를 보면서 잡담을 하고 잇섯다. 그리고 박과 윤은 그날밤 『항가리야광상곡』 제육번을 번가라 타면서 그 곡에 대하야 여러 가지로 론의하엿다. 그런데 그 곡의 해석에 잇서서 두사람의 의견은 합치가 안되엿는지 나중에는 피아노를 두들기면서 격렬히 론전하고 잇섯다.
제자의 이약이는 이것뿐이엿다. 그러나 창호는 그것을 무의하게 듯지는 안엇다. 두사람의 뛰여난 피아니스트가 표면으로는 친밀히 교제를 계속하고 오지만 기실 내심으로는 설 상대자의 천질(天質)과 기량(技倆)에 대하야 몹시 질투를 깨닷고 서로서로 상대자에 대하야 살의를 품게 될 만치 증오감을 갓게 되는 것도 용혹무괴의 일이라고도 할 것이다.
창호는 불연 듯 누구의 소설이 이러한 제재(題材)를 취급한 것을 생각하여 내엿다. 그리고 창호는 박과 윤의 과거로부터 현재에 이르기까지 관계를 면밀히 조사하기에 착수하엿다.
그 결과 알게 된 것은 윤과 박은 상야음악학교(上野音樂學校) 피아노과 동긔졸업생으로 갓치 귀국하야 적막한 조선악단을 위하야 만흔 공현을 하여 왓섯다. 두사람은 재학시대부터 장내를 촉망바더온것만치 두사람의 암투(暗鬪)도 끗치지 안엇다고 한다. 귀국하야 약 일년동안 잇다가 윤은 독일노 박은 미국으로 유학의 길을 떠낫섯다.
귀국후의 두사람의 경쟁은 더욱더욱 도수를 놉혀 갈뿐이엿다. 그러나 표면으로는 어듸까지든지 친밀한 교제를 계속하야왓다.
창호가 어느 음악가를 차저가닛간<59> 그 음악가는
『그것은 윤의 소행인지도 알 수가 업다. 박의 불행을 제일 조와할 사람은 윤이닛까. 또 그리고 XX녀고보에서 음악선생으로 윤을 초빙하여다가 윤이 음주가 심하고 성정이 아름답지 못하다고 하야 박을 초빙하기로 한 것. 이것으로 보아 혐의는 그리로 갈 것이다』하고 유력한 말을 담대하게 들녀주엇다.



창호는 그리고 더욱 열심히 조사의 범위를 확대식혀서 충분한 확신을 어덧슴으로 주저치안코 XX경찰서장에게 편지를 하엿다.
XX警察署長 殿
먼저 편지로서 알욈을 용서하야 주십시오. 박순걸 독살혐의자로 취조중에 잇는 김숙정의 혐의를 벗게 하고 진범인을 발견할냐고 저는 노력하야 탐사한 결과를 알외오니 하기사항을 참작하신 후에 엄정한 처사가 계시기를 바람니다.
박순걸을 독살한 진범인은 그의 친구인 피아니스트 윤길호라고 주장합니다.
理由
윤이 박이 살해 당하든 날밤 여덜시로터 열시 반까지 박의 집에 머물너 잇섯다는 것은 박의 제자들의 증언으로 명료한 사실입니다. 물논 윤은 그날밤 박의 제자들과 함께 잇섯다고 하야 자긔 몸의 결백으로 증명하리라고 계획하여스리라 생각합니다. 오로지 그들 압헤서 윤이 박을 독살하엿다는 것은 도저히 상식으로 판단할 수 업는 까닭입니다. 그러나 그날밤 윤과 박이 리스트이 「항가리아광상곡」제육번을 열심히 타고 또 론의 하엿다는 사실도 증인으로부터 듯고 아시엿슬 것입니다. 그런대 여기에 주의할 곳이 잇슴니다.
「항가리아광상곡」제육번! 모든 수수격기는 이곳에 숨어잇는 것입니다. 우선 그 곡의 악보(樂譜)를 자세히 살펴보면 즉시로 띄음(D音)이 만이 잇다는 것을 알 수가 잇습니다, (도·레·미·파·소·라·시·도의 미음입니다) 그곳에는 미음이 퍽 만히 잇고 그리고 그것은 옥타부상의 미음입니다. 그리고 그 미음이 퍽 오래ㅅ동안 연속하야 잇습니다. 이 사실이 무엇을 암시하지 안켓습니까? 피아노 탈때에 잇서서 그 미음은 맛치 오른속 색기손가락으로 눌느게 되엿습니다. 간단히 말하면 「항가리아광삭곡」제6번은 오른손 색기손구락으로 피아노의 키(鍵盤)를 두들기지 안흐면 안되는 곡입니다.
그런대 윤이 박의 색기손구락의 상처를 미리알고 피아노미음에다가 독을 발너놋코 박에게 그 곡을 타보라고 하엿스면 그 결과는 어떠케 되겟습니까? 그리고 독이 충분이 드러간 것을 알고 윤이 얼든 중성(中性)의 약물을 적신 손수건으로 피아노의 키를 닥것다고 하면 나종에 무삼 증거가 남어잇겟습니까? 물론 그날밤의 제자들은 얏튼 정도의 교측본(校則本)을 공부하엿슬 것이니 우의 미음까지는 손이 올나갈 염녀는 업슬 것입니다.
이상의 저의 추측은 틀녓겟습니까? 동봉하야 보내드리는 화학시험소(化學試驗所)의 독약사정표(毒藥査定表)는 제가 그후 문제의 피아노 근판끗을 족곰 떠여다가 사정을 부탁한 것의 대답입니다. 그런데 이 사정표를 제대약물학교실의 조사표와 비교하야 보시면 박의 신체에 남어잇는 독과 피아노근판끗에 남어 잇는 독이 동일한 것이라는 것을 증명하실 수 잇겟습니다. 저는 이상 리유에 의지하야 속히 윤길호를 체포하야 심문하시기를 절망하야 마지 안습니다.
淑貞의 弟 金昌鎬拜



창호의 노력은 훌륭히 성공하엿다.
즉시 윤길호는 체포되엿다. 그라고 그의 집을 가택수색을 하엿드니 외국에서 가지고 온 트랭크밋바닥에서 박순걸이를 독살할 때 사용하든 독약의 남어지가 발견되엿다. 이 움치고 뛸 수 업는 증거로 말미암아 완강히 범행을 부정하고 모-든 죄를 섬약한 김숙정에게로 넘겨 씨울냐든 살인범 윤길호는 드듸여 범행 전부를 자백하엿다.
물론 김숙정이는 그날로 석방이 되어 그리든 남매는 서로 우름과 우슴에 싸혀 도라갓다.<60>
<55-60>