잡지명	別乾坤 제61호
발행일	1933년 03월 01일
기사제목	懸賞問題 (Prize Question)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Notice·Postscript)

Prize Question
In this issue's special readings, how many main characters are there in the mystery real story "Blood-Stained Notebook (피무든 手帖)" and the detective novel "Jealous Devil (嫉妬하는 惡魔)"? Please specify the number of people for each story. (Write down how many people in "Blood-Stained Notebook" and how many people in "Jealous Devil.")

Regulations for Sending in Entries
★ Must arrive at the headquarters by the 18th of next month (March).
★ Write your answer concisely on a postcard-sized paper, and be sure to clearly write your address and name.
★ You must attach the reader's certificate from the corner of this page to your answer sheet. It is invalid if not attached.
★ On the envelope, be sure to write "Kyŏngsŏng Kaebyŏksa Pyŏlgŏn’gŏn Prize Section (京城開闢社別乾坤懸賞係)" and also write "Manuscript Enclosed (原稿在中)" in blue ink next to it, and seal one corner with a two-sen stamp. If you do not write "Manuscript Enclosed," you will be fined (for insufficient postage).

Prizes
First Prize (One Person): Specially Made Art Desk Clock
Other Prizes (Ninety-Nine People): A selection of books

Correct Answer from the Previous Month's Issue
[Question] "A young man named Yi Tong-sik (李東植) and a young man named Pak Sun-dŏk (朴淳德) both loved a woman named Kim Ŭn-hŭi (金銀姬). The two young men were very close friends, so close that they would share a single cigarette. However, only in this love affair did they refuse to yield to each other, continuing a secret rivalry to win. The woman Kim Ŭn-hŭi also liked both of them, but as a pure-hearted virgin, how could she love two people at once? One day, she received letters from both young men, strangely asking her to meet them at the same time and place. However, the woman was not at all distressed and met them both at that time and place, putting them at ease. How could this woman meet them at the same time and place? The answer is simple. Write it in ten characters or less."

[Correct Answer] "It's absolutely impossible (절대로 될수업습니다)."
This is the correct answer. This time was the first time we held a Pyŏlgŏn’gŏn-style prize contest, and we received over 60,000 entries, but not a single person got it right. Perhaps it's because people thought the question was too difficult. It is impossible for one woman to meet two men at the same place and time. Although not exactly correct, the answers from the few people listed below are close to the correct answer and also somewhat novel, so they will be selected as winners without ranking, and the same prizes will be sent to them. (Answers ending with "the answer is in a dream" were excluded.) (Entries received by the 20th)
Yu Pyŏng-sŏn (劉秉璇) from Taedong (大同)
Son ■-ho (孫■浩) from Kyŏngsŏng (京城)
Hwang Ryang-sŏn (黃良善) from Ŭiju (義州)
Kim Chin-dong (金鎭東) from Sinhŭng (新興)
Yi Ch’ang-sun (李昌珣) from Musan (茂山)
Kim Yŏng-ch’ang (金永昌) from Ŭiju (義州)
Sin Yŏng-sŏk (申榮錫) from Yŏngam (靈岩)
Yi Chong-su (李宗洙) from Sŏnch’ŏn (宣川) <64>

Named Entities

李東植	Yi Tong-sik
朴淳德	Pak Sun-dŏk
金銀姬	Kim Ŭn-hŭi
劉秉璇	Yu Pyŏng-sŏn
大同	Taedong
孫■浩	Son ■-ho
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
黃良善	Hwang Ryang-sŏn
義州	Ŭiju
金鎭東	Kim Chin-dong
新興	Sinhŭng
李昌珣	Yi Ch’ang-sun
茂山	Musan
金永昌	Kim Yŏng-ch’ang
靈岩	Yŏngam
申榮錫	Sin Yŏng-sŏk
宣川	Sŏnch’ŏn
李宗洙	Yi Chong-su



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제61호
발행일	1933년 03월 01일
기사제목	懸賞問題
기사형태	사고·편집후기

懸賞問題
이번호책증 怪奇實話『피무든 手帖』探偵小說『嫉妬하는 惡魔』두가지 特選讀物중 主要人物이몃사람워잇습니? 한가지한가지마다 몃사람 몃사람이라는 것만 明記하셔서 보내주십시오(피무든 手帖에 몃사람 嫉妬하는 惡魔의 몃사람이라고만 써보내주십시오)

懸賞보내는 規定
★내달(三月)十八日지 본사에 와닷도록되여야합니다.
★엽서만한 조회에다 대답을 간단히 적어보내되 반듯이자긔주소와 성명을 이써야합니니다.
★이페지(頁)한해잇는 독자증을 답안용지에다 반듯이 붓처야합니다. 안붓치면 무효입니다.
★피봉에는 반듯이 『京城開闢社別乾坤懸賞係』라쓰고 엽헤다 『原稿在中』이라고 안잉크로쓰고 한주둥이를 고 二錢우표붓처보내주십시오. 原稿在中이라고 안쓰면 벌금(不足)을 물게됩니다.

賞品
一等一人 特製 美術卓上時計
等外九十九人 書籍一部式
進呈

前月號正解
〔問題〕『李東植이란 靑年과 朴淳德이란 靑年은 金銀姬란 女子하나를 가치 사람하엿습니다. 그런데 두 靑年은 매우 情다운 親友로 담배가 한個생겨도 둘이 가치 논아태울만치 親切한 사이엿습니다. 그러나 이 戀愛에 잇서서만을 限死코 서로 양보를 하지안코 긔어히 自己가 勝利를 하려 暗鬪가 게속되엿습니다. 그런데 金銀姬란 女子역시 두사람은 죄다 마음에 조케 생각은하나 純情을 가진 處女로서 두사람을 어케 一時에 사랑할수야잇겟습닛가? 그러자 하로는 두사람의 靑年에게서 가티 便紙가왓는데 이상하게도 가튼 時間에 가튼 場所에서 맛나자는 것이엿습니다. 그러나 女子는 조곰도낙망치안코 그 時間 그 場所에서 가치맛나주어 安心하게 하엿습니다. 그러면 이 女子가 어케그들을 가튼 時間 가튼 場所에서 맛날수잇섯슬요 대답은 간단합니다. 열字 이내로 적어보내야합니다.

〔正答〕『절대로 될수업습니다』
이것은 正答입니다. 이번호에 처음으로 別乾坤식현상을 내여보앗더니 모다들어온 것이 六萬여 枚나 되는중에 정말맞추신분은 한분도 업섯습니다. 아마 문제를 너무 어렵게만 생각하신닭인가 합니다. 한女子로서 두 男子를 가튼 場所에서 가튼 時間에 가티맛나는 것은 도저히 될수엄는문제입니다. 비록 正解는아니나 이아래 發表한몃분의 答은 正答에갓갑고  중에 긔발한 것이기에 等級은엄시 當選者로하고 賞品은 가튼 것을 보내드리겟습니다. (대답은 이연되오)하는 것을 앗습니다.(二十日지들어온 것)
大同 劉秉璇
京城 孫■浩
義州 黃良善
新興 金鎭東
茂山 李昌珣
義州 金永昌
靈岩 申榮錫
宣川 李宗洙＜64＞
＜64＞