별건곤 제30호
1930년 07월 01일
코-바듸스?, 行方不明氏 探査錄 (Who Goes Where?, Records of Inquiry into Missing Persons)
探報軍
소식 (News)

尹孝定 (Yun Hyo-jong) When the Taehan Hyophoe (大韓協會) was dissolved, Yun Hyo-jong resigned from his position as secretary-general and went to Ch'ŏrwŏn to engage in land reclamation. He even grew out the topknot (sangt'u) that he had cut off earlier, intending to spend his remaining years in leisure. However, recently he cut his hair again and came to Kyŏngsŏng, and his tall, gray-haired figure can sometimes be seen on the streets. "The mountains and rivers are different, but where is the ambition of those years?"

朴重華 (Pak Chung-hwa) - Decades ago, as the principal of Posŏng Middle School (普成中等學校) and later Hwimun Academy (徽文義塾, now Hwimun High School), Pak Chung-hwa was greatly admired by many students. However, he also earned the nickname "Japanese Patrol" (Il巡査) because he was very strict with the students at that time. He also authored works such as "Selected Japanese Dictionary," "Great Ocean of Middle School Zoology" (精選日語大海 中等動物學) and more. At the time, his name was so well-known that almost every bookstore in Kyŏngsŏng and the provinces advertised him. In recent years, he initiated the Labor Mutual Aid Society (勞動共濟會), sparking the first labor movement in Korea. Now, his news has completely faded away. Some wonder if he has fled overseas, or if he has returned to his hometown to put his specialized field of agronomy into practice. Young people or acquaintances who studied under him must have a lot of questions. However, it turns out that last year, he even went to Vladivostok (靈領 海蔘威) for negotiations regarding international trade matters and then returned. It is said that he obtained considerable understanding there, but he has not yet started due to capital issues. He has been living alone like a sleeping lion in his home in Ch'ŏngjindong, but recently he moved his home to Such'angdong.

秦學文 (Chin Hak-mun) - Since returning from Brazil, Chin Hak-mun has had no other news, so his friends in the provinces are very curious whether he has gone to the West again or completely changed direction and gone to North Manchuria. However, he has been working at the Kyemyŏng Club (啓明俱樂部) since recently, and it is said that he even lives within the club premises.

吳相淳 (O Sang-sun) - O Sang-sun, who made a considerable name for himself in the Korean New Poetry scene (朝鮮 新詩壇) a few years ago, disappeared completely after leaving Kyŏngsŏng, his fate unknown. According to someone from Kyŏngnam, as a Buddhist, he has been wandering (漂浪) among various temples in Kyŏngnam, staying for several months at Pŏmŏsa Temple (梵魚寺) in Tongnae, T'ongdosa Temple (通度寺) in Yangsan, or Haeinsa Temple (海印寺) in Hapch'ŏn. Otherwise, he would come to Taegu and stay at a friend's house for a while before leaving. Recently, he even came to Kyŏngsŏng for the first time in 7 or 8 years before leaving again.

李相和 (Yi Sang-hwa) - As the story of the poet (詩人) Yi Sang-hwa is told and as the tenth-anniversary commemorative issue of Kaebyŏk (開闢社) is being edited, Yi Sang-hwa, who wrote many poems and poetry reviews in the old Kaebyŏk magazine, receiving a warm welcome from many readers and causing trouble for the authorities several times, has not published any works in any magazines or newspapers lately. Moreover, his face has not been seen in Kyŏngsŏng for several years, so there are occasionally people who write letters wanting to know his news. However, since returning to his hometown, he has been at his main house on Ponch'ŏngt'ong in Taegu, spending his days leisurely playing Go. <76>

韓偉健 (Han Wi-gŏn) - As the news of Han Wi-gŏn, who was a reporter for the Tonga Ilbo (東亞報) and disappeared after being involved in a certain incident, is also a matter of curiosity, his wife Yi Tŏgyo (李德耀) also has an unstable address, sometimes in Inch'ŏn or Kyŏngsŏng, making it difficult for the mailman to deliver letters and making it regrettable for friends to not have the opportunity to meet. It is said that he recently established the Tongyang Women's Hospital (東洋婦人病院) in Nakwŏndong.

李貞喜孃 (Yi Chŏng-hŭi-nyang) - When she takes to the skies, she's the second-class female aviator; when she takes the stage, she's the future dancing beauty Yi Chŏng-hŭi-nyang! Those who do not know her circumstances still think that she is in Tokyo, learning dance from Ishii Baku, and occasionally showing her vibrant figure at Tachikawa Airfield. However, she broke off her relationship with Ishii Baku this spring due to unavoidable circumstances and immediately returned home, spending her days at her home in Nusangdong. Perhaps because her lively nature makes her feel too stifled, the white spot between her eyebrows has grown larger.

崔恩喜孃 (Ch'oe Ŭn-hŭi-nyang) - There are also many people who are curious about the whereabouts of Ch'oe Ŭn-hŭi-nyang, a former female reporter for the Chosŏn Ilbo (朝鮮日報). According to her close friend, she lived a secret life in Songwŏltong until last year, raising her cute daughter and spending her days singing lullabies. Recently, she moved to Hongp'adong and then moved again to X-dong. It is said that she is very uncomfortable in this heat because her belly is swollen, as if she is about to give birth to an jade girl (玉女) or jade boy (玉童子) soon. Everyone! Please don't ask again where she has moved to now. It's a secret.

姜貞熙 (Kang Chŏng-hŭi) - (Kang Arŭgnia) had been in Tokyo for a while, but recently returned to Kyŏngsŏng and is bustling about looking for a house to start a new life in Seoul. As soon as her address is confirmed, I intend to introduce her address and life situation again, so I will stop here.

露雀 洪思容 (Nojak Hong Sa-yong) - After severing ties with the T'owŏlhoe (土月會), there was no news of him at all. Recently, he briefly came to Kyŏngsŏng and then took the night train to Honam. What is he going to do there?

白基萬 (Paek Ki-man) - After going to Tokyo, it was impossible to even see his works. According to recent news, he is still playing at his main house in Taegu.

朴敬植 (Pak Kyŏng-sik) - Pak Kyŏng-sik, who was a female reporter for this company, got married and went to P'yŏngyang following her husband. Since then, there has been no news. In the meantime, she even gave birth to a cute jade boy and is currently staying at her parents' house in Kyŏngsŏng. Soon, she will go to her in-laws' house in Kanggye again.

劉英俊 (Yu Yŏng-jun) - Yu Yŏng-jun, who was once a prominent figure in the women's community as the chairman of Kŭn'uhoe (槿友會), a teacher at Ihwa Women's School (梨花女校), and a female doctor, has had no news since getting married, as if she had completely severed ties with society. Fortunately, she gave birth to her first daughter last year and recently held her first birthday party with great success. The house she was planning to move to is still not suitable, so she is still living in her old house in Susongdong.

尹益善 (Yun Ik-sŏn) - Yun Ik-sŏn, who was formerly the principal of Posŏng College (普成專門) and later founded the Kyŏngsŏng Library (京城圖書館) after the Kimi Year (己未年), and at one time went to work as the principal of Taesŏng Middle School (大成中學) in Kando, has recently been managing a farm near Tŏkjŏng Station (德亭驛) on the Kyŏngwŏn Line. According to news from his wife, Yun Yŏng-ja, who came to Seoul recently, he has been suffering from a serious illness for about a year despite his usual good health, but is now gradually recovering.

Postscript - Everyone! I hope you don't misunderstand because I said "missing." The so-called missing persons here are those who were quite active in society but have become less active for some reason, so I wanted to convey news of those whom the world is always curious about to many people. Of course, it does not mean that they have committed a crime and fled or are living in seclusion, as is common in the world. (筆者) <77>

**Named Entities**

尹孝定	Yun Hyo-jong
鐵原	Ch'ŏrwŏn
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
朴重華	Pak Chung-hwa
普成中等學校	Posŏng Chungdŭng Hakkyo
徽文義塾	Hwimun Ŭisuk
日巡査	Il sunsa
靈領 海蔘威	Yŏngnyŏng Haesămwi
淸津洞	Ch'ŏngjindong
需昌洞	Such'angdong
秦學文	Chin Hak-mun
啓明俱樂部	Kyemyŏng Kŭrakpu
吳相淳	O Sang-sun
朝鮮 新詩壇	Chosŏn Sinsidan
慶南	Kyŏngnam
東萊 梵魚寺	Tongnae Pŏmŏsa
梁山 通度寺	Yangsan T'ongdosa
陜川 海印寺	Hapch'ŏn Haeinsa
大邱	Taegu
李相和	Yi Sang-hwa
開闢社	Kaebyŏksa
韓偉健	Han Wi-gŏn
東亞報	Tonga Ilbo
李德耀	Yi Tŏgyo
仁川	Inch'ŏn
樂園洞	Nagwŏndong
東洋婦人病院	Tongyang Buin Pyŏngwŏn
李貞喜孃	Yi Chŏng-hŭi-nyang
東京	Tokyo
石井漠	Ishii Baku
立川	Tachikawa
樓上洞	Nusangdong
崔恩喜孃	Ch'oe Ŭn-hŭi-nyang
朝鮮日報	Chosŏn Ilbo
松月洞	Songwŏltong
紅把洞	Hongp'adong
姜貞熙	Kang Chŏng-hŭi
露雀 洪思容	Nojak Hong Sa-yong
土月會	T'owŏlhoe
白基萬	Paek Ki-man
朴敬植	Pak Kyŏng-sik
平壤	P'yŏngyang
江界	Kanggye
劉英俊	Yu Yŏng-jun
槿友會	Kŭn'uhoe
梨花女校	Ihwa Yŏgyo
壽松洞	Susongdong
尹益善	Yun Ik-sŏn
普成專門	Posŏng Chŏnmun
己未年	Kiminyŏn
京城圖書館	Kyŏngsŏng Tosŏgwan
間島 大成中學	Kando Taesŏng Chunghak
京元線	Kyŏngwŏnsŏn
德亭驛	Tŏkjŏngyŏk
尹英子	Yun Yŏng-ja
서울	Sŏul



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제30호
발행일	1930년 07월 01일
기사제목	코-바듸스?, 行方不明氏 探査錄
필자	探報軍
기사형태	소식

코-바듸스?, 行方不明氏 探査錄
						探報軍
尹孝定 當年 大韓協會가 해산을 당한 際에 총무의 직을 辭하고 鐵原에 가서 土地 開墾에 종사하며 남보다 먼저 깍것던 상투조차 다시 길우고 白首 餘年을 閒送한다더니 요사이 다시 머리를 깍고 京城에 와서 잇는데 그의 白髮長身를 갓금 路上에서 볼 수가 잇다. 擧目山河異한데 當年志氣今安在.

朴重華氏- 수십 년 전에 普成中等學 校長으로 徽文義塾(今 徽高)校長으로 여러 학생에게 만흔 景慕를 밧는 동시에 日巡査(그때에 그가 학생들에게 넘우 엄하게 군 까닭에 학생들이 日巡査라고 별명을 지엇다)의 別號까지 엇고 또 精選日語大海 中等動物學 等을 저술하야 한참 當年 京城과 지방 각 서점에서 그의 이름을 모를 사람이 업슬만치 선전되며 近年에는 勞動共濟會를 發起하야 朝鮮 최초의 勞動運動을 이르키던 朴重華氏는 지금에 아주 소식이 잠잠하야 그가 혹은 해외로 망명을 하엿는지 그럿치 안흐면 그의 전문 연구인 農學을 실제화식히기 위하야 鄕村으로 돌아갓는지 그에게 受學하던 청년이나 知舊 간에는 궁금증이 퍽 만을 것이다. 그러나 알고 보면 그는 昨年에 國際貿易에 관한 交涉 事項으로 靈領 海蔘威까지 갓다가 돌라왓는데 드른 바에 의하면 그곳에서는 상당한 양해까지 어덧스나 자본 관계로 아즉 착수치 못하고 淸津洞 자택에서 睡獅 모양으로 혼자 칩거하다가 근일에는 그의 자택을 需昌洞으로 새로 이전하얏다 한다.

秦學文氏-瞬星 秦學文氏는 뿌라질에서 돌아온 후 다른 소식이 업서서 지방에 잇는 그의 친구들은 그가 다시 서양으로 갓는지 또는 아주 방향을 박구어서 北滿洲로 갓는지 매우 궁금해한다. 그런데 그는 요전부터 啓明俱樂部에서 일을 보게 되엿는데 살님사리까지도 그 俱樂部 구내에서 한다고.

吳相淳氏-몃 해 전에 朝鮮 新詩壇에 相當한 이름을 나타내던 吳相淳氏는 한번 京城을 떠난 후 生歟死歟 종적이 도모지 묘연하더니 慶南에서 온 엇던 이에게 들은즉 그는 불교 신자이니만치 慶南 여러 사찰로 漂浪 생활을 하야 혹은 東萊 梵魚寺 혹은 梁山 通度寺 혹은 陜川 海印寺에서 몃달식을 지내고 그럿치 안흐면 大邱에 와서 아는 친구의 집에서 얼마 동안 놀다가 가는데 近日에는 7, 8年來 첨으로 京城까지 왓다가 갓다고 한다.

李相和氏-詩人 이약이가 나고 開闢社 創立 十週年 記念號를 편집하게 되니 옛날 開闢誌에 만흔 詩와 詩評을 써서 여러 독자에게 환영을 밧고 당국에 문제도 몃번 일으키게 하던 李相和氏는 근래에 엇던 잡지나 신문에 작품을 도모지 발표치 안코 더구나 얼골은 몃해 동안 京城에서 볼 수도 업시 된 까닭에 그의 소식을 알고 십허하야 편지하는 이가 갓금 잇다. 그런데 그는 귀향한 후 이때것 大邱 本町通 자기 本宅에 잇서서 날마다 바둑으로 閒中 세월을 보낸다고 한다. ＜76＞

韓偉健氏-東亞報 기자로 잇다가 某 사건에 干與되야 종적을 감춘 후 여러 가지의 풍문을 전하던 氏의 소식도 궁금하지만은 그의 夫人 李德耀氏도 仁川으로 또는 京城으로 주소가 일정치 못하야 배달부가 편지 전하기에도 곤란을 늣기게 되고 知友 간에 맛나 볼 기회를 엇지 못하야 섭섭히 역이더니 그는 近日에 樂園洞에다 東洋婦人病院을 새로 설립하엿다고 한다.

李貞喜孃-공중으로 올나가면 소녀 2등 비행사, 단상에 올라서면 장래 무용 미인 李貞喜孃! 그의 사정을 몰으는 이는 아즉까지도 東京에 잇서서 石井漠에게 무용을 배우고 잇다금씩 立川 비행장에서 그의 활발한 자태를 나타낼 줄로 알 것이다. 그러나 그는 벌서 금년 봄에 石井漠과 사정상 엇지할 수 업사 師弟의 緣을 끈코 즉시 귀국하야 樓上洞 자택에서 그냥 세월을 보내는데 활발한 성질에 넘우 각갑한 까닭인지 양미간에 잇는 白點이 좀더 커젓다고 한다.

崔恩喜孃-전날 朝鮮日報 여기자 崔恩喜孃의 종적을 알지 못하야 궁금한 사람도 또한 만흘 것이다. 그의 親知의 말을 들으면 그는 작년까지 松月洞에서 남모르게 비밀 생활을 하며 귀여운 따님까지 나아가지고 자장가로 세월을 보내더니 요점에는 또 紅把洞으로 움기엿다가 다시 X洞으로 이사를 하엿다는데 얼마 안이하야 玉女 혹은 玉童子를 나시려는지 배가 불너서 이 더위 중에 매우 거북히 지내더라 한다. 여러분! 지금 새로 이사한 곳은 어듸냐고 다시 뭇지는 마라 주십시오. 그것은 꼭 비밀임니다.

姜貞熙氏-(姜아근니아)는 그동안 東京에 가서 잇더니 요새에 京城에 도라와서 다시 서울 살님을 할랴고 집을 구하러 단이너라고 奔走 중이다. 그의 주소가 확정 되는 대로 그의 주소와 生活相을 다시 소개할 심치고 이만 中止.

露雀 洪思容氏-가 土月會와 관계를 끈은 후 아주 소식을 알 수 업더니 요전에 경성에 잠간 왓다가 다시 호남행 밤차를 타고 호남 방면으로 갓다고 한다. 그곳에 가서 하는 일은 또 무엇일가?

白基萬氏-氏는 東京으로 간 다음에는 작품좃차 볼 수가 업더니 근래 소식을 드른 즉 그는 大邱 本宅에서 아즉 놀고 잇다고 한다.

朴敬植氏-本社 여기자로 잇는 朴敬植氏는 결혼하고 그의 남편을 딸아 平壤에 간 다음 역시 소식이 杳然하더니 그동안 귀여운 옥동자까지 나아가지고 요지금 京城의 親家에 와서 留하고 잇는데 未久에 다시 자기 媤家인 江界로 간다고 한다.

劉英俊氏-槿友會 委員長으로 梨花女校 敎員으로 또는 여의사로 한참 동안 여성계 원로격이 되여 紙上과 壇上에서 명성이 쟁쟁하던 劉英俊氏도 결혼한 뒤에는 아주 사회와 연을 끈은 것가티 무슨 소문이 업다. 다행히 작년에 첫 따님을 나아가지고 요전에 첫돌마지까지 성황으로 하엿다는데 이사하려던 집은 아즉도 적당한 곳이 업서서 壽松洞 그전 집에 그대로 잇다고 한다.

尹益善氏-전날 普成專門 校長으로 己未年 후에 또 京城圖書館을 창설하고 일시에는 間島 大成中學 校長으로 가서 잇던 尹益善氏는 근래 京元線 德亭驛 부근에서 농장 경영을 하고 잇다더니 요전에 그의 夫人 尹英子氏가 서울에 와서 전하는 소식을 들은 즉 그는 평소에 신체가 건강함에도 불구하고 중병에 걸니어 약1년 간을 신음 중에 잇다가 지금은 漸快 중이라고요.

附言-여러분! 行方不明이라고 하엿다고 오해 말기를 바라노니 여긔에 소위 행방불명이란 것은 이 사회에서 상당한 활동을 하던 여러분으로써 무슨 관계로 인하엿던지 사회 활동이 전보다 적어저서 세상 사람이 항상 궁금하게 녁이는 이의 소식을 여러 사람에게 전하고자 하는 것이요, 결코 세상에서 보통으로 범죄 도주를 하엿다거나 은둔 생활하는 것을 의미한 것은 안임은 물론이다. (筆者) ＜77＞
＜76-77＞