잡지명	별건곤 제30호
발행일	1930년 07월 01일
기사제목	MODERN COLLEGE 開講, 聽講大歡迎 (Modern College Opens, All Are Welcome to Attend)
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

MODERN COLLEGE Opening, All Are Welcome to Attend
Lecture on Modern Optimism
Lecturer: Ŏ Rubin (魚魯辨)

Before I knew it, the weather became very hot. Of course, it's not yet the intense heat of Sambok (三伏, the hottest days of summer), but people like Mr. Pig and Mr. Pottato are already working hard to produce sweat instead of shaved ice, so I feel sorry for them and will declare a short vacation. However, before you all leave our Modern College auditorium and scatter to the beaches or picturesque resorts to spend the summer as coolly as cicadas, I hope you will attend this lecture at least. In particular, I will shorten the time and only lecture on "Modern Optimism" and end this semester.

When the sun, like a fiery ball in May and June, beats down relentlessly, and sweat flows down your spine, and you feel suffocated, everyone's cells are the same, so there is no one who doesn't feel hot. But don't loosen your chest and, if you don't have a fan, spread your palm and use it as a fan, or breathe like an ox that has plowed a field, panting, "Oh, it's hot! Oh, it's hot!" Besides the ugly sight (it would certainly be a spectacle), the heat won't go away, and the heat ghost, finding the sight repulsive, will bite your balls like an old rat. In doing so, you invite the heat and become a captive of the heat. Can there be anything more pathetic than this! At such a time, if there is such a person among you, what if they silently endure the heat and completely eliminate the awareness of heat from their mind, thinking of the seagulls in the distant blue waves of the Pacific Ocean <118> or imagining the waterfall of coldness crashing down, or, if a proletarian consciousness arises, thinking of the labor army toiling under the scorching sun or the young people in prison whose energy is drained by the heat and whose bodies are steaming and covered with heat, forgetting their own existence in the heat, or if they have the mental余裕 to sneer at those who say they are dying of heat as shallow and frivolous, they are already fully qualified to be optimists.
However, I do not want to offend your feelings with the old-fashioned optimism of Plato, Kant, or Hegel in this Modern College auditorium, saying that everything in the so-called real world is a development of universal reason, so all are rational beings, and there is nothing to be called misfortune, and that everything in the world exists with the necessary meaning. Therefore, my optimism has the sacred and inviolable mark of our Modern College. First, swallow the following depreciation with the tip of your tongue and rest assured that it is good. The world is becoming more and more extreme, running only towards sharp points like the tip of a pine needle, and people's lives are gradually reaching a dead end with no way out, so it is absolutely dangerous to express one's feelings or temperament as they are. It's more dangerous than showing your purse in front of a thief. If you meet a thin friend on the street wearing a "mismatched" suit and ask, "How are you doing these days?" they will shake their head and wave their hand like a turtle's foot going into the water, saying, "Oh, don't even talk about it. I'm dying. What…" Then, if you grab a friend with double gold watch chains in their pocket and dressed in a "matching" silk polo suit, their face dripping with oil, and ask, "How is your life these days?" this friend will also gesture in the same way, saying, "Oh, don't even talk about it. Life is worse than death. What…" That's all. I just asked as a passing greeting, but if I had a subconscious intention to get some money from this friend, I would have been greatly disappointed!
Everyone says they're dying, whether they have something or not, so who is going to live? As the saying goes, the one who farts often shits first, so since they have said they are dying so much, I wouldn't be surprised to hear news of my friends' suicides a dozen times by now, but people seem to be such thick-skinned, so it seems that they are still maintaining the status quo.
If someone comes to me and asks about suicide methods, I have even thought of a brilliant plan to teach them for free... What is it? There are two ways, and if I get a patent for the pro-suicide method, I would become rich immediately. That is, lock the door from the inside, sit quietly facing the wall, and stop breathing. Hahaha, but never think of this as Ŏ Rubin's (魚魯辨) meditation method. Stopping breathing means cutting off your breath, and if you cut off your breath, you will naturally die. Eating rat poison is treating your own body like an animal, so it's not something a gentleman should do. There is no more elegant and philosophical suicide method that doesn't cost money and leaves no mess behind. After that, there is the suicide method of giving ten jeon and going to the Han River. Giving ten jeon is especially important so that when you hesitate whether to die while holding onto the railing of the In'do Bridge (人道橋), the river breeze blowing over the dark river will sweep away the suicidal heat, and you won't have to trudge back with your noble body that couldn't die. Also, when you feel so depressed that you are longing for suicide, it would be okay to go to the riverbank to cool off and come back.
The reason I am talking about suicide in particular is that suicide is the result of pessimism, which is the opposite of optimism, and is a dark philosophy to be kept at a distance. Moreover, I am concerned that so many of our young people are choosing this easy but difficult path because they cannot overcome the various pressing realities, and the original purpose of explaining optimism is really here. Furthermore, you are now endlessly tempted by the sea due to the recent cause of heat. The sea has the capacity to swallow people more easily than a whale swallows shrimp. All the more so if it is a life thrown away as unnecessary! Someone worried about the tendency of some Korean youths with weak will (which economic conditions created) and said this:
"These days, if Korean youths make one wrong step, they become fatalists or nihilists..."
I thought there was some truth in that statement. Korean youths have only one path to take. But when they cannot find that path, or when they lack the courage and sincerity to find it, they become fatalists (even if they don't say it out loud, their minds naturally lean towards that path) and spend their days helplessly in yellow lamentation, or they think that everything in the world is futile, that life is a dewdrop returning to the soil, and they become dangerously susceptible to letting their mood control their very lives. However, if you ask if the only remedy is to have optimism (even if it is modern), my situation becomes very difficult, and I can only give an insincere answer because you really don't know my true intention and heart. Why? Because I started this lecture out of a piece of goodwill, hoping to relieve your harmful and useless worries and depression as a temporary expedient in life. It came from the kindness and concern of a neighbor girl pouring a bucket of water on a burning roof... Hehehe... Well, if someone asks how much optimistic potential you have, I have a biographical fact that I can answer without hesitation.
When I was a student in elementary school, still wet behind the ears, I saw a kid next door with a bicycle and was so envious, and my father, with no money, just thought about his dear son and said, "Son! If you study hard, I'll buy you a bicycle." Well, what luck! The young Ŏ Rubin (魚魯辨) jumped up and down like a rabbit. But his grades for that semester were failing. Holding the report card, my father, his face red with anger, said, "You rascal! I said I'd buy you a bicycle if you studied hard, but this is all you've done, you rascal!" I dodged to avoid being hit and told him the truth. "I was practicing because you said you'd buy me a bicycle. I'm good at riding a bicycle, though... Heung!" In this way, it seems that it is no coincidence that I, who was once a famous young bicycle racer, am now talking about optimism with you all. Then, what is modern optimism like? Let's listen to the key points.

First, optimism does not mean accepting everything in a contradictory society and saying "Yes" to everything in the style of Minister Hwang Hŭi (黃喜). There is no reason to dull your sensitive nerves even as much as the tip of a needle.
If you can maintain a leisurely and dignified attitude without being anxious or petty about the immediate problems at hand, you are already an excellent modern optimist. To do so, you must first have a critical eye for good and evil, right and wrong regarding the immediate problem, and you need to cultivate this ability. And if you are too pressed for time and do not have the leisure to discern it, you can hum and laugh once to quietly make time. Even generals like Kwan Yu (關羽) and Chang Fei (張飛) knelt before Kong Ming (孔明), who understood their inner thoughts and stroked his beard with a knowing smile. Therefore, if you face worldly affairs with such a strategic and detached attitude, your life will always be as smooth as water flowing around a rock. Never be impatient about trivial matters and never let your emotions be taken away. Otherwise, in a world that is already complicated and full of trouble, who knows whose cheek will be swollen by whose fist, and you will have to fight with the police every day, so what energy will you have to deal with it? However, that does not mean you should compromise. That is a foolish tactic like a hedgehog. Every problem eventually has a solution. Therefore, no matter how much you argue and foam at the mouth like a dog, if the solution is separate, it is useless. So, take this opportunity to find the solution while others are fighting with a leisurely attitude and laughing, and at first, they will punch you, saying, "What are you laughing at when we're in trouble?" but eventually, they will say, "Oh, you're right, we didn't know," and surrender to you, the optimist. To summarize, for the trivial matters of everyday life, first have a swift and critical eye to discern the essence before others, then maintain an attitude of complete indifference in the eyes of others, and look down on others' pettiness with pity. If you cannot do that, shift the problem to another direction and remove yourself from the situation - but in a very natural and leisurely attitude - if you breathe in only this key point, instead of the world becoming unpleasant, this world becomes a training ground with many opportunities to cultivate the skills of an optimist.
Now, let's take a few practical examples as practice, using the essence of this modern optimism.
First, let's take unrequited love (失戀), one of the most pressing problems for you... For example, if you are unfortunately betrayed by a lover whom you believed to be the only one in this world, that is, when you receive the bitter blow of unrequited love, what attitude should you take? What is the smooth solution? At that time, since you are the direct party to the problem, there is no choice but to "shift the problem." First, you will discover that there is no need to waste more passion than the woman (from reckless infatuation), and when the woman's passion cools, you will realize that you should naturally cool your own passion to the same extent from a modern point of view, and therefore you will study the woman's shortcomings and flaws. How many moles are on her face, her mouth is big, her upper lip curls when she laughs, her teeth are not white, her legs are bent so she can't wear Western clothes, her temper is quick, and she drinks alcohol. After discovering her flaws by changing the standard of beauty (it's easy to do), you come to a conclusion.
"There are plenty of women like you. I feel better than getting rid of a wart! Now I'm free to choose the most beautiful woman in the world... Heung."
If you cannot do this and are still attached to her, your appetite will disappear, your face will become gaunt, and you will crawl in front of the woman's skirt, shedding tears and saying in a trembling voice, "Honey, how can you be like this! Don't you remember when we held hands and walked through the cool forest together? What did you say then? You said your body was completely mine. You gave your body to me, so please don't abandon me forever." <121> If you have such a love tragedy, you will only receive the woman's cold ridicule or contempt. Moreover, tearing your hair and fighting is a non-modern atrocity. Therefore, it is best to declare separation before the woman does when you discover the subtle changes in her attitude.
What about when you are betrayed by a friend? Should you cut ties immediately? No, you can't. That may feel good at the time, but you will lose the opportunity to take revenge forever. At that time, you laugh it off and don't talk about it anymore. Then they will feel relieved and become friendly again. Then you take the opportunity to inflict the same harm on them and pretend not to know. In short, nothing is surprising to a modern optimist. There is no one who is great. There is no urgent matter. There is always a way to avoid it, a way to solve it, and everything is trivial and ordinary. "How can a sparrow know the ambition of a swan?" (燕雀安知鴻鵠之志乎)
In this way, even if you see a nude woman with a voluptuous figure at the beach, turn your head away, treating it as ordinary as a painter would treat a model, and do not try to approach her shamelessly. Fully demonstrate the magnanimity of an optimist and return!

Secrets to Becoming a Model Employee
Lecturer: Bald, Professor Core-Glasses

Let's say that you graduated from school last spring, threw away your student uniform, and fortunately became one of the unemployed, living on cold water for a whole year, and then barely became a 44-won-a-month employee this spring! How much is the debt for the stationery you used to write resumes during that year of unemployment, and how much did you spend on Marco cigarettes while waiting in front of other companies' gates for the executives to come to work? Let's put aside such noble stories and first talk about the 8-hour workday, from 8:00 AM to 4:00 PM, so there should be no complaints between labor and management. But how can you diligently perform your duties during those 8 hours to get into the eyes of the executives, and how can you be faithful to become a model employee? That's the question. If you don't, you will get a scar on your neck like someone suffering from scrofula, and you can't expect to last long. So, you need to listen to my lecture even if you don't want to, and that's why my lecture is valuable.
1. First, even if you bring your personal matters to the company and do them there, you must come to work at least 30 minutes earlier than the prescribed time. If an executive who comes to work late does not know about your special diligence in coming to work early every day, you should talk about what you saw on the way to work in the morning at lunchtime or during a temporary departure time, in a place where the executive can hear.
"I have a habit of coming to work 40 minutes earlier than the scheduled time, so it was only about 7:30 AM. At that time, at Anguk-dong (安國洞) intersection..." If you do this, even if you are doing your personal work at the company, the executive will be happy. However, you must never say, "I had some things to do at home today, so I brought them in to do them..." I will not be responsible if you say such things and end up losing out.
2. Second, do not imitate the executive who rests their chin on their hand and rows a boat with their face, or does not sit still. He is an executive, isn't he? Do not imitate the old employee who clips their nails during work hours. Even if you have finished all the company's work and have nothing to do, even if you are writing a love letter, you should open the ledger and put the abacus (珠盤) on it and write. When you can't think of a sweet phrase, pretend to flip through the ledger or pretend to put numbers on the abacus while thinking of a romantic phrase.
3. No matter how faithful, diligent, and virtuous an employee is, if they sit in their seat for a long time, their back will become stiff and their buttocks will be nailed down. When such a time comes for you, go to the bathroom or go to a neighboring room to chat, but do not forget to always take a slip or a bill or invoice in your hand. Even if you are in a hurry to run to the bathroom, if you hold such a thing in your hand, even if the executive sees you in the hallway (roca), they will think that there is an unclear point in the office work and that you are going to consult with the neighboring room. It is certain that they will give you another point as a commendable employee.
4. This may be a bit uncomfortable for you, but when the errand boy is out and not there, if the executive is looking for an errand boy, instead say, "The errand boy is out on an errand, but what do you need?" and then perk up your ears. It's unlikely that they will ask you to do the errand boy's job, and you'll only be earning more bonuses.
5. Even if there is a female employee and you have a liking for her, do not talk to her intimately in front of the executive. This may be very difficult for you to do, but if you don't know that the executive has a liking for her and you approach her, you will not be able to avoid scrofula disease even if you have excellent grades in other areas. Even if you approach a female employee that the executive hates with peace of mind, they will think that you are an incompetent man who is bewitched by a woman who is not even worth it, and you will get scrofula again.
6. In the meantime, it's 4:00 PM! You can't just wait for the end of work, pick up your hat, and run out. People who leave before the executive leaves, regardless of whether it is after the end of work, are not destined to be model employees or to be promoted. All executives have a strange disease called executive disease, which makes them consider their own thoughts more standard than the employee's circumstances, and they believe that only what meets that standard is for the good of the company. The habit of executives sitting and looking for employees even after the end of work is also a symptom of that disease. They never think that it is already after the end of work, and if you are not there when they look for you for company work, they will think that you are not very diligent. However, until you fundamentally eliminate the executive, you will have to put up with the symptoms of that disease in any executive. Do not leave before the executive leaves. Even when you go out on company business during work hours, go to the executive's office for a moment and say, "I'm going to negotiate with such and such a company. Is there anything you would like me to ask them to do?" If you throw out a word like this and leave, you will also get a point. What point? Bonus point! What point? Can't your brain turn that fast and how are you going to work as a company employee?
In addition to this, you should try to set up your address near the executive's house and get along with their children, buy their wife an umbrella, and don't forget to bring them a gift when they travel. If you keep these three things in mind and you don't get a raise or an increase, you should bring your bedding and pay your respects to the executive's office. If you gain some trust in this way, you can then relax a little and have the leisure to take a walk with a modern girl after work, which is Chapter 2. Next time! Chapter 2! <123>

**Named Entities**

黃喜	Hwang Hŭi
安國洞	Anguk-tong
關羽	Kwan U
張飛	Chang P'i
孔明	Kong Myŏng
人道橋	In'do Kyo



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제30호
발행일	1930년 07월 01일
기사제목	MODERN COLLEGE 開講, 聽講大歡迎
기사형태	잡저

MODERN COLLEGE 開講, 聽講大歡迎
모-던樂天主義講義
講師 어루빈=魚魯辨

어느새 일기가 매우 더워젓다. 물론 아즉 삼복의 蒸炎까지는 못 가서도 저 Pig군과 Pottato군 가튼 사람은 발서부터 빙수 대신 汗水 제조에 熱이 낫스니 내가 보기에 민망해서라도 쉬 하기방학을 선언하겟다. 그러나 제군이 우리 모-던 대학의 강당을 떠나 해수욕장으로 또는 山紫水明한 피서지로 제각각 흣터저서 여름 한철을 매암이 가티 서늘하게 지우기 전에 이번 강의에만은 반다시 참석하고 가기를 바래는 바이다. 특히 시간 단축을 하야 이 「모-던낙천주의」만을 강술하고 이번 학기는 끗흘 막을 것이다.

오뉴월 불덩이 가튼 볏치 짱짱 내리쪼이고 등골에서는 진땀이 구비처 흐르고 숨은 탁탁 막힐 적에 사람의 세포 조직은 다 마찬가진 바에야 더웁지 안을 사람이 업슬 것이다. 그럿타고 압가삼을 풀어헷치고 당장 부채가 업스면 손바닥을 펴들고 부채 삼아 뿌리고 젓고 서마지기 밧흘 가라낸 황소처름 숨을 헐내벌덕이며 『아이 더워! 아이 더워!』를 連呼해 보아라. 그 醜態도 醜態려니와(확실히 구경꺼리는 되렷다만은) 그런다고 더위가 물너가기는 거녕 그 꼴이 밉살스럽다고 暑鬼는 늙은 쥐와 가티 부랄을 물고 느러질 것이다. 그리하야 스사로 더위를 불너 더위에게 사로잡힌 바가 되고 만다. 이런 딱한 노릇이 잇슬 리가 잇나! 그런 때에 말이다. 만일 諸君 가운데 이런 사람이 잇섯다면 엇덜고! 더운 것을 묵묵히 참고 마음 가운데서 더위란 의식을 아주 뽑아 업세 바리고 멀니 푸른 물결이 구비치는 태평양의 갈매기를 생각한다든가＜118＞ 쾅쾅 내리쏘다지는 冷味萬斛의 폭포수를 그려본다든가 또 그럿치 안코 푸로의식이 동해서 찌는 듯한 焦熱太陽의 直射를 바드면서 苦役하는 勞働軍이라든가 監房에서 뜨거운 물에 듸처낸 배차처럼 후주꾼하게 진액이 빠지고 더위에 떠서 부숭 부숭해가지고 몸에서 김이 무럭무럭 나고 잇는 청년들의 身上을 생각하야 더위 가운데 잇는 자기의 존재를 이저바린다든지 『이까짓 더위쯤이야』하고 더워서 죽겟다는 사람을 생각이 야튼 輕妄한 인간이라고 흘겨볼 만한 마음의 여유를 가젓다면 발서 樂天家될 資格은 충분하다.
그러나 나는 이 모던칼레-지 강당에서 푸라톤이나 칸트, 헤-겔流의 소위 현실계의 一切은 宇宙理性에 발전임으로 모다 합리적 존재이고 참말 禍厄이라고 부를 것이란 하낫도 업스며 세간의 일체 사물은 오즉 필연적으로 존재할 의의를 가지고 존재하고 잇다」 하야 세계와 인생을 全然 善으로 본는 케케묵은 樂天觀을 가지고 諸君의 감정을 상해 주고 십지는 안타. 그럼으로 내가 말하고자 하는 낙천관에는 우에 모-던이란 신성 불가침한 우리 대학 마-크가 부튼 것이다. 爲先 나오는 하폄을 혀 끗흐로 씹어 넘기고 안심하여도 좃타고 생각하는 바이다. 세상이 첨단 첨단하야 송꼿끗 가티 뾰족한 곳으로만 다라나고 사람의 생활도 차차 막다른 골목에 다달너 몸 빠저 나올 길이 업서지고 보니 도저히 자기의 감정이나 性情을 그대로 발로하기가 위험하다. 도독 놈 압헤서 돈주머니 내여놋키보다 더 위험하다. 길가에서 「三ツ不揃ヒ」 양복 입은 밧삭 말은 친구를 만나
『자네 요새 살기가 엇던가』하고 물으면 고개를 쩔래쩔래 흔들고 손을 물 속에 들어가는 자라발처름 저으며
「여보게 말도 말게. 죽을 지경일세. 뭘-」
다시 족기 주머니에 쌍 금시계줄 늘이고 「三ツ揃ヒ」 실크포-라로 양장한 얼골에 기름끼 졸- 흐르는 친구를 붓들고
「자네 요새 지내는 滋味가 如何오?」하면 이 친구 亦 水中鱉式 손짓을 하면서
「여보게 자미 말 말게. 生不如死라면 고만이지 뭘-」 따는 고만이다. 내가 그저 지나가는 인사격으로 물엇기에 그럿치 제법 이 친구한테 돈이나 좀 취할 잠재의식이 잇섯든들 큰 실망을 하고 돌아설 번햇지!
이럿케 잇는 놈도 죽겟다 업는 놈도 죽겟다 모다들 죽겟다니 도대체 살 사람은 누군고. 속담에 방귀 자조 뀌는 놈이 똥 먼저 싼다고 그만치 죽겟다 죽겟다 햇스니 이맘때쯤은 친구들의 자살 소식을 10여차 들어도 상관이 업겟는데 사람들이 오낙 철면피들로만 되어서 그런지 아즉은 현상유지에 머물너 잇는 모양이다.
누가 달여와서 자살 방법이나 물으면 무보수로 아르켜 줄 묘안까지 생각해 두엇건만... ... 뭐냐고? 두 가지가 잇는데 그야말로 푸로자살법으로 전매특허를 내면 당장에 부자가 될 묘법이다. 즉 방문을 안으로 걸어 잠그고 벽을 향해 靜坐한 다음 호흡을 정지하란 말이다. 하하하 그러나 결코 이것을 어루빈式 靜坐法으로 알어서는 안된다. 호흡을 정지한다는 것은 즉 숨을 끈는 것이고 숨이 끈키면 맛당히 죽는 법이 안인가. 쥐잡는 약을 먹는 것은 자기 몸에다 스사로 동물적 대우를 하는 것이니 신사의 취할 바 길이 안이요. 돈 안들이고 점잔코 철학적이고 뒤 깨끗한 자살법이란 이 밧게 더 업슬 것이다. 그 다음에는 돈 십전 주어서 한강으로 보내는 자살법이다. 특히 십전을 주는 것은 人道橋 란간을 붓들고 서서 죽을가 말가 자제할 때 검풀은 강물에 배를 깔고 지나가는 江上風이 自殺熱을 휩쓰러 가고 보면 죽지 못한 숭거운 몸을 터벅터벅 걸어오게 할 수 업스니 말이다. 또 기분이＜119＞ 자살을 동경하리만치 울적해질 때는 강가에 나가서 消風을 하고 들어오는 것도 무방할 것이다.
그런데 내가 특히 자살에 대해서 말하는 것은 자살이란 낙천주의와는 정반대 되는 인생관인 염세주의의 귀결임으로 敬而遠之할 암흑 철학일 뿐더러 우리 청년들이 각가지 절박한 現實苦에 못이기여 드듸여는 쉽고도 어려운 이 길을 택하는 사람이 만흠으로서 나는 노파심이요 낙천관을 해설하게 된 본래의 목적도 실로 여긔 잇는 것이다. 더구나 제군은 시방 더위라는 近因으로 하야 바다의 유혹을 한업시 밧고 잇는 터이요. 바다란 고래가 새우마시기보다 더
쉽게 사람을 들어삼킬 食量을 가졋스니 말이다. 더더구나 필요업다고 내던진 생명이랴! 누구는 의지가 박약한(그것도 경제 조건이 그럿케 만들엇지만) 일부 조선 청년들의 경향을 우려하야 이런 말을 하엿다.
「시방 조선 청년들은 한발만 잘 못 밋그러지면 운명론자가 되든지 그럿치 안으면 허무주의자가 되고 만다」고... ... .
나는 그 말에 一理가 잇다고 생각하엿다. 조선 청년들의 밟을 길은 오즉 한길 밧게 업다. 그러나 그 길을 찻지 못할 때는 또는 차즐 용기와 誠力이 업슬 때 운명론자가 되야(입 밧게는 내지 안어도 마음이 자연 그 길로 기우러저서) 노-란 自嘆에 무기력한 세월을 보내든지 세상 모-든 것이 都是 허무요, 인생은 흙으로 돌아가는 한 방울 草露라 하야 氣分如何로 생명까지도 좌우해바리는 위험성을 띄게 되는 것이다. 그럿타고 그 구제책이 오즉 낙천관(비록 모-던이라 하드래도)을 가지는데 잇느냐고 힐문한다면 내 처지가 대단히 궁하게 된다는 것보다도 제군이 정말 내 본의와 心衷을 몰으는 데서 나는 무성의한 질문이 될 수 밧게 업다. 웨 그러냐 하면 나는 한갓 處世上 姑息策으로 혹 제군의 유해무익한 心煩과 우울을 덜어줄가 하는 일편의 호의로서 이 강의를 시작한 까닭이다. 꼿불이 타오르는 집웅에다 퍼부어주는 이웃집 처녀의 한 동이 물과 가튼 친절과 우려에서 나왓다 할넌지... ... 허허허... ... 자- 그럼 너는 얼마만한 낙천가적 소질이 잇느냐고 누가 뭇는다면 나는 서슴지 안코 응답할 傳記的 사실이 하나 잇다.
내가 소학생 재학시대닛가 아즉 젓내 나는 시절인데 이웃집 아희가 자행거 사 가진 것을 보고 작고만 부러워하닛가 아부지가 돈도 업스면서 자식 귀여운 생각만 하고 「애야! 너 공부만 잘하면 자행거 사주마」하여 노앗다. 자- 이게 왼 떡이냐고 소년 어루빈은 양톡기처럼 그 자리에서 깡충 뛰엿섯다. 그러나 그 학긔 성적은 락제가 되고 말엇다. 성적표를 들고 노긔 등등한 아버지가 『네 이놈! 공부 잘하면 자행거 사주렷더니 겨우 요 꼴이냐 이 자식아!」 하길래 어더마즐까 봐 비슬 비슬 피하면서 바른대로 아뢰엿든 것이다. 「자행거 사주신다게 그거 연습하노라고 그랫지요. 자행거는 잘 타요 그래두... ... 흐응!」 이리하야 당시 소년 自轉車 선수로 일홈을 날니든 내가 오늘날 제군와 더부러 낙천주의를 云謂하는 것도 결코 우연이 안인 듯 십다. 그러면 모-던낙천주의란 엇더한 것인가. 그 要訣을 들어보기로 하자.

첫째 낙천주의라고 모순 덩어리 사회의 일체를 시인하고 黃喜 정승 式으로 이래도 應  저래도 應 하라는 것은 안이다. 결코 예민한 제군의 신경을 바늘 끗만치라도 죽일 까닭은 업다.
오즉 目前에 다다른 당면 문제에 대하야 營營苟苟하지 안코 齷齪하지 안코 悠悠凜凜한 태도를 가지게 된다면 발서 훌륭한 모-던 낙천가다. 그러함에는 그 당면 문제에 대하야＜120＞ 남 먼저 善惡正邪의 비평을 가저야 할 것이니 여긔 대한 수양이 필요하다. 그러고 만일 일이 촉박하야 그것을 看取識別할 여유가 업슬 경우에는 흐흥! 하고 한번 코우슴을 쳐서 가만히 그 시간을 만드는 것이다. 關羽張飛 가튼 장사라도 속을 다 아라채이고 한거름 압서서 수염을 스담고 莞爾하는 孔明의 압헤는 무릅을 꿀엇다. 그러니 이러한 謀略的 超脫한 태도를 가지고 세간사에 당면하고 보면 언제든지 바위를 돌아 넘는 물결과 가티 인생이 순탄해질 것이다. 사소한 일에 결코 조급해서는 못쓰고 감정을 빼앗겨서는 안 된다. 그러다가는 갓득이나 까다랍고 말성 만흔 세상에 뉘 주먹에 뺨이 부어올을는지도 몰으고 파출소 순사들하고는 매일토록 싸워야 할 모양이니 그것 무슨 정력으로 감당해 내느냐 말이다. 그럿다고 결코 타협하라는 말은 아니다. 그것은 고슴도치 가튼 미련한 戰術이다. 일이란 결국 해결책이 한가지식은 다 잇는 법이다. 그러고 보니 아모리 개처름 입에 거품을 내고 論爭을 해봐야 주먹질을 쳐봐야 해결책이 따로 잇는 바에야 소용이 업다. 그러니 이 기회를 유유한 태도로 남들이 싸우는 동안에 차저내여 허허허 웃고 잇스면 된다는 말이다. 처음에는 「이 자식 남 골나는 판에 허허허는 뭐냐」고 주먹이 들어오다가도 나종에는 「참 그래 우리가 몰낫서 허허허」하고 낙천가 제군압헤 降書를 올일 터이다. 그것을 요약해 말하면 당면한 일상생활의 사소한 일에는 迅雷的 批判眼을 가지고 남 먼저 그 본질을 看取한 다음에 남 보기에 전 혀 무관심한 태도를 가지고 남들의 齷齪하는 꼴을 가엽다는 듯이 우에서 나려다볼 것. 혹 그러치 못할 경우에는 그 문제를 다른 방향으로 전환식혀 바리고 그 경우에서 몸을 뺄 것 - 그러나 퍽 천연스럽고 유유한 태도로 - 이 要訣만 호흡하고 보면 세상이 실허지기는 커텽 이 세상이 전혀 낙천가의 수완을 수련할 기회를 만히 가진 연습장가치 되고 만다.
그러면 이 모-던낙천주의의 要領을 가지고 연습삼아 한두 가지 실증을 들어보기로 하자.
위선 제군에게 제일 급한 문제의 한아인 失戀을 들어본다면... ... 가령 제군이 불행히도 이 세상에 유일한 존재라고 미덧든 연인에게 배반을 당하엿슬 때 즉 실연의 쓰라린 타격을 바덧슬 때는 엇더한 태도를 취할 것인가. 그 원만한 해결책은 무엇인가? 그때는 문제의 직접 당사자가 제군이니 만치 「문제를 전환하는 수밧게 업다. 첫재 여자보다 과분한 정열을 허비할 필요가 업다는 것을 발견할 것(열중한 무분별에서), 그리하야 여자의 정열이 식엇슬 때는 모던 見地에 잇서서도 당연히 맛찬가지 정도로 이편 정열도 식혀야 할 것을 알게 되며 따라서 그 여성의 短處와 결점을 연구해내는 것이다. 얼골에 사마구가 멧개며 입이 크고 우슬 때 웃입술이 말니고 니ㅅ발이 희지 못하고 다리가 굽어서 양장하기는 틀엿고 성질이 팩 하고 술을 먹을 줄 알고 이럿케 미의 표준을 밧구어서 그의 결점을 적발한 다음에 (용이한 일이다) 결론을 내리는 것이다.
『네까진 여자가 어데 업슬나구. 옴띤 것보다 더 시원하다! 인제 천하 미인을 선택할 자유 남아로다... ... 흥」
이러지 못하고 戀戀不忘하야 입맛이 떠러지고 얼골은 피골이 상접하야 여자의 치마 압헤 슬어저서 눈물을 흘니고 떨니는 목소래로 「여보세요, 사람이 엇지 그럿단 말이요! 그 어느 때인가 우리가 단둘이 손에 손을 잡고 淸凉理 숩속으로 거닐면서 이약이 한 것이 생각나지 안는단 말이요. 그때 당신은 무애라 하섯소. 이 몸은 온전히 당신의 것임니다. 당신에 바친 몸이오니 영영 버리지만 말어주세요＜121＞하고 내 가슴에 안기엿지요. 네? 그때 일을 발서 니젓단 말이요 네? 네!」하고 失戀悲劇을 해보아야 여자의 어름가치 찬 조소나 삿지 별수가 업다. 더구나 머리를 쥐여뜻고 따리고 차고 하는 것은 비현대적 만행이다. 그러니 여자의 태도가 변해가는 機微를 발견하거던 여자보다 먼저 절연을 선고하고 나서는 게 得策이다.
그러고 친구에게 배신을 당햇슬 때는? 곳 절교를 해바려? 못쓴다. 그러면 그 당장은 통쾌할넌지 모르나 복수할 기회는 영영 일허 바리고 만다. 그때는 허허허 웃고 다시 그 점에 대해서는 더 말을 하지 안는다. 그러면 저편에서 안심을 하고 다시 친해져온다. 그때는 기회를 타서 꼭 가튼 낭패를 식히고 몰은 척 해바리는 것이다. 요컨데 모-던 낙천가에게는 세상에 아모 신기할 게 업다. 잘난 놈이 업다. 절박한 일이 업다. 모도가 피할 길이 잇고 해결할 방도가 잇고 시시하고 평범한 것뿐이다. 「*雀安知鴻鵠之志乎」이다.
이리하야 부대 해수욕장에서 곡선미 풍부한 나체 여성을 보드래도 화가가 모델 대하듯 평범하게 「그것쯤이야」하고 고개를 돌닐지언정 체신업시 접근하랴 애쓰지 말고 낙천가의 襟度를 충분히 발휘하고 돌아오라!.

模範社員되는 秘訣
講師 대머리, 코-안경博士

그대들이 작년 봄에 학교를 졸업하야 학생복을 버서버리고 다행히 무직자의 한목이 되어서 왼 일년 동안 냉수만 먹고살다가 금년 봄에 간신히 44원짜리 월급 사원이 되엿다고 하자! 그 무직 1년 동안에 이력서 쓰노라고 업시한 印札紙 외상갑이 얼마며 重役의 出社를 기다리노라고 남의 회사 문전에서만 피운 마코-갑시 얼마인지. 그런 고상한 이약이는 그만두기로 하고 우선 여덜 시 출근 오후 네 시 퇴사, 만 8시간 근무이니 勞資間에 별 불평은 업슬 것이다. 그러나 그 8시간 동안을 엇더케 부즈런히 視務를 하여야 중역의 眼鏡에 들까 엇더케 충실하여야 모범 사원이 될까 그것이 문제다. 그것이 못되면 연주창 알는 사람처럼 모가지에 험집이 생겨서 오래가기를 바랠 수 업게 되닛가. 그래서 諸君은 실혀도 내 강의를 드러야 할 필요가 생기고 그래서 나의 강의가 가치가 생기는 것이다.
1. 첫재 제군은 집안 私事을 회사에 가지고 와서 하드래도 규정 시간보다 적어도 30분씩 더 일즉 출근하여야 된다. 혹 늣게 출근하는 중역이 그대가 그러틋 매일 일즉 출근하는 特勤特誠을 알지 못하거던 점심시간이나 혹은 퇴사 시간 臨時해서 중역이 듯는 데에서 아츰 출근도중에서 본 일을 이약이 할 것이다.
『저는 매일 출근시간 보다 40분 더 일즉 오는 버릇이 되어서 그때가 일곱시 반쯤밧게 안 되엿는데요. 그때에 安國洞 네거리에서... ...』 이러케 하여 두면 社에 와서 자긔 집일을 하고 잇드래도 중역이란 사람은 깃버하는 것이다. 그러타고 『오늘은 집에서 이러 저런 일이 생겨서 그것을 좀 가지고＜122＞ 드러와서 하느라고... ...』 해서는 절대로 안 되는 것이니 제군이 간혹 그런 말을 하야, 도리혀 손해를 보더래도 나는 책임지지 안을 것을 미리 聲明해둔다.
2. 둘째는 社의 중역이 손으로 턱을 고이고 얼골로 배(船)를 젓고 안젓다고 그 본을 떠서는 안 된다. 그는 중역이 안인가. 사원 중의 古老가 집무시간 중에 손톱을 깍고 안젓다고 그 본을 떠서도 안 된다. 社의 일을 다 마치고 손에 잡을 일이 업거던 연애 편지를 쓰더래도 장부를 펴노코 그 우애 珠盤까지 내노코 쓸 것이요. 쓰다가 달적지근한 문구가 생각이 안 나는 때쯤은 장부 책장을 들척어리는 체하거나 珠盤에 數를 놋는 체하면서 연애 문구를 생각할 것이다.
3. 암만 충실 근면 품성 방정한 사원이라도 자리에 오래 안젓스면 허리가 꼿꼿하고 궁둥이에 못이 박힐 것이니 제군에게 그런 때가 오거던 변소에를 가거나 니웃 방에 한담을 하러가되 반듯이 손에 아모 전표나 혹은 청구서 계산서를 한 장 손에 들고 가기를 잇지 말 것이니 설사가 급해서 변소로 뛰여가는 때도 그런 것을 한 장 쥐고 나스면 복도(로-까)에서 중역이 보드래도 사무상 未審한 점이 생겨서 니웃 방에 打合하러 가는 줄로 알아 줄 것이니 기특한 사원이라고 한 점 더 찍어 둘 것을 틀님업는 일이다.
4. 제군으로서는 조곰 거북한 일일넌지 모르나 급사가 밧게 나가고 업는 때 중역이 급사들 찻거던 대신 『급사는 잠깐 심브림하고 업슴니다만은 무얼 식이려고 그러심닛가』하면서 턱 드러서 보아라. 그런다고 급사 심브림을 식일 니는 만무한 것이요. 상여금만 듬뿍이 버는 노름이 되는 것이다.
5. 녀사무원이 잇드래도 또 그에게 호감이 잇더래도 중역이 보는데서 친하게 이약이하지 말
것이니 이것이야말로 제군에게는 참아 실행하기 여려운 일일넌지 모르나 중역이 스스로 호감을 가지고 잇는 것도 모르고 이편에서 또 호감을 가지고 덤비면 다른 점으로 아모리 우량한 성적을 가젓드래도 연주창病을 피하지 못할 것이요. 중역이 미워하는 여사원에게라고 안심하고 갓갑게 덤벼도 변변치 못한 남자라고 갓지도 안흔 여자에게도 醉惑되는 자라고 또 연주창이 생길 것이다.
6. 그렁 저렁하는 동안에 오후 네시! 終業시간이 되엿다고 미리 기다리고 안젓다가 모자를 집어들고 튀여나가서는 못쓴다. 퇴사 시간은 지낫건 말엇건 중역이 퇴사하기 전에 나가 버리는 사람은 모범하고나 승급하고는 인연 업는 사람이다. 중역이란 자는 어느 곳 중역이던지 중역병이란 이상한 병이 잇서서 사원의 사정보다는 자기 생각을 더 표준으로 삼고 그 표준에 맛는 것만이 회사를 위하는 것이라고 밋고 잇다. 퇴사 시간 후에도 중역이 안저서 사원을 찻는 버릇도 그 병의 한 증세다. 벌서 퇴사 시간이 지난 후이거니 하는 생각은 꿈에도 업고 자기가 社일로 찻는 때 그곳에 업스면 그다지 誠勤한 편이 못되는 사람이라고 생각해버리는 것도 그 한 증세다. 그러나 중역이란 것을 근본으로 업세 버리기 전에는 어느 중역이든지 그 병증이 잇는 것이거니 하고 달겨들어야 할 것이다. 중역이 나가기 전에 퇴사하지 말 것. 집무시간 중에 社務로 외출을 하게 될 때도 잠간 중역실에 드러가서 『이런 관계도 아모 회사에 교섭을 잠간 갓다오겟슴니다. 혹 그쪽 방면에 부탁하실 일이 업스심닛가』 이러케 한마디 내던저 두고 나가면 또한 점 찍히는 것이다. 무슨 점? 賞與金點말이지 무슨 점이야 頭腦가 그러케 속히 돌지를 못하고 어태 회사원 노릇을 하겟나?
이외에 될 수 잇스면 주소를 중역집 근처에 정하고 그 집 어린애와 사괼 것, 부인의 洋傘을 사갈 것, 여행 가거던 선물을 닛지 말 것, 이 세 가지를 명심할 것이니 이러고 昇給이 안되면, 증액이 안되면 퇴침을 들고 중역실에 문안을 드릴 것이다. 이리해서 다소 신용을 어더 노으면 그 다음에는 조곰 안심하고 퇴사 후에 모던껄과 산보할 만한 여유가 생기는 순서인데 그것은 제2과다. 요 다음 시간!! 2과야 2과!!. ＜123＞
＜118-123＞