잡지명	別乾坤 제47호
발행일	1932년 01월 01일
기사제목	狂人의 나라 西八號室 探訪記, 이 세상에 누가 精神病者냐? (A Visit to Room 8, the Land of Madmen: Who is the Lunatic in this World?)
필자	一記者
기사형태	소식 (News Article)

A Visit to Room 8, the Land of Madmen: Who is the Lunatic in this World?
						One Reporter

Lunatics (精神病者)! Though the degree may vary, the world calls them "crazy people" or "mad people."
They unconsciously disregard all the rules of human society, staging bizarre tragedies and comedies in fits, and exhibiting genius, or rather, something like genius, that ordinary people cannot. The only collective dwelling (集團地) for these mad people in Joseon is Room 8 (西八號室) of the affiliated hospital of Keijō Imperial University (京城帝大附屬醫院), [more precisely] the west wing of the hospital. Fortunately, this reporter had the opportunity to visit this place and has gained some insights, which I would like to share with the readers for their interest and reference.

Room 8 (西八號室)! A secluded brick building standing far north of the outpatient clinic (外來診療所), with a dense pine forest behind it.
Pushing past the gate with a sign saying "Do Not Enter" (開放ヲ禁ズ), I entered and found Mr. A, who was to guide me, waiting. There was a smell of Western cuisine (洋料理) somewhere. After a brief bow, I asked,
"Why does it smell so much like Western cuisine?" Mr. A replied,
"It's lunchtime." It seemed unlikely that mental patients would be fed Western cuisine, so I said,
"The dining hall is over there, isn't it?"
"This place is independent."
"Oh, I thought mental patients only ate Western food."
"No," Mr. A said with a smile. I left my hat and coat in the reception room and followed Mr. A. As we walked down the dimly lit hallway, I felt a chill, thinking I was about to meet mental patients for the first time.
"How many patients are there currently?"
"About fifty. It used to be about seventy, but it's decreased a lot."
While Mr. A and I were having this conversation, we had already arrived in front of the ward door.
The heavy door, firmly closed, had only a small hole like a mailbox slot for looking in and out, reminiscent of a prison cell door. As Mr. A pressed the doorbell (招人鐘) on the wall, I cautiously (without getting too close) peered through the hole. Suddenly, two eyes appeared in the hole! I was startled. "It must be a madman," I muttered to myself, my heart pounding.
With the sound of a key, the door opened. I followed Mr. A inside. Ah, how foolish I was! The owner of those frightening eyes was the ward's guard (看守人). The terrifying thoughts vanished.
"They are doing the major cleaning now," Mr. A explained. The people holding brooms were patients, but they were calm enough that you could tell. Unfamiliar faces, bloodless faces, lifeless movements; they seemed somehow desolate. They looked more like people recovering from a serious illness than mental patients, but the way they looked at the unfamiliar reporter and smiled sheepishly made it clear that they were indeed insane, even to my untrained eye. There were about ten patients, half Korean and half Japanese. There was a wooden floor in the center of the ward, with rooms lined up on both sides. There was a couple lying under a blanket, and people getting up and folding blankets, and mopping the floor. When we reached a large tatami room after looking around the ward, Mr. A said,
"This is the recreation room. They play Go and chess here." Sure enough, there was a Go board and a chess set in one corner.
Mr. A then approached a patient and said in a friendly voice,
"How are you, Mr. X?"
"Yes, I'm going home today," he said in a weak and unclear voice.
"Stay a few more days. Get better."
Mr. A left these words and left the ward with me. The ward door closed firmly again with the sound of a lock. Mr. A explained to me as he moved to the second floor.
"Most of the patients in this ward are diagnosed with dementia praecox (早發性痴呆) [schizophrenia]."
"It's also a form of madness, but even though they are docile like that, when they have an attack, it's chaos. But there aren't any patients here now who are completely out of control. Sometimes they suddenly come up behind you and hug you tightly, or suddenly slap you at the end of a conversation. And they're strong. Once, a guard even broke his leg."
"I bet you've been through a lot, Mr. A."
"But doctors don't experience that very often."
"So they can still recognize people."
"There was this incident last year. A patient desperately wanted to see his son, so his wife brought their child to meet him. He hugged him, kissed him, and stroked his head, and then suddenly bit off his testicles. They chased after him, took the child away, and opened the patient's mouth, but he had already swallowed them."
"The child must have died."
"They managed to save him with emergency surgery, but he lost one testicle forever."
"He didn't lose everything then."
"No, no, one is enough."
We laughed, not too loudly.
We arrived at the second-floor ward. The door and interior structure were the same as the first ward.
There were more Japanese patients than Korean patients. One Japanese man was lying on a bed covered with a blanket, looking up at the ceiling and giggling constantly.
"That is 'megalomania' (誇大忘想狂). He is constantly imagining something and laughing." Mr. A turned to the megalomaniac and said,
"X-san, 何がそんなに可笑いんだ (Nani ga sonna ni okashīnda)?" (What's so funny?) The patient looked up and said,
"え? (E?) (Huh?)," and continued to laugh as before. How long would he laugh?
If that patient's world was so funny and pleasant, I, a sane reporter, would want to become a megalomaniac and laugh so heartily. Another Japanese patient was lying on a bed and singing. Mr. A explained to me,
"Look. He sings like that all day long. I can't understand a word he's saying. He just makes it up."
In another spot, an old man who looked like a politician (政治家) was smoking a pipe and sitting naturally on a cushion, deeply contemplating something. He looked at us and glared as if he were about to attack. Mr. A explained,
"That patient always acts like a patriot (志士) or politician, calling out the names of high-ranking officials (高官大官) and talking nonsense. He has a very fiery temper."
"His eyes are as bright as stars."
The other patients were just cowering and looking at something. We left this ward.
Mr. A and I had another conversation.
"These patients seem more serious than the first ones."
"Yes. Most of them have 'paralytic dementia' (痲痺性痴呆). As for the 'dementia praecox' you saw earlier, there are many different causes. It's hard to say exactly, but it's said to be caused by extreme mental shock, but that's a vague explanation. But all of this 'paralytic dementia' comes from syphilis. The syphilis bacteria doesn't just appear on the surface of the skin, but when it invades the brain (腦), it makes people go crazy like that. So, the usual treatments for syphilis, like Salvarsan (606호) or potassium iodide (沃度加里) therapy, don't work."
"I see... Can I see the women's ward?"
"Why not? I'll show you. We're going there now."
We went down the stairs and returned to the hallway we had passed earlier and went up to another second floor. Mr. A arrived in front of the ward door and said,
"Here it is," and took out the key and turned it. The door opened. Here, two nurses (看護婦) were sitting at a table in the middle of the hallway. The south side was a special room, and the north side was an isolation room (隔離室).
We decided to see the ward first and arrived in front of a door. Unlike the men's ward, where there were no doors in each cell, here each room had a thick door with a small glass window to look inside. The room was about six tatami mats in size. In one room, a Japanese woman with disheveled hair was dragging and covering herself with cotton batting and burying her head in the window.
In the next room, and the next room, a Japanese woman was curled up in a futon, taking a nap.
In the next room, an elderly Japanese woman was sitting cross-legged on a cushion, humming and playing a hand game with stones.
"ばあさん 何してるんだい (Bāsan nani shiteru ndai)?" (Grandma, what are you doing?), Mr. A said. The woman glanced back once and continued doing the same thing.
"Look. She lines up the stones in a row like that all day long, and then takes them apart."
Next was the isolation room. When Mr. A suddenly opened the door, a strong smell of urine and feces hit my nose. The room was about the size of a ward, and the walls and floor were made of cement. It was just like an animal cage in a zoo, and although I haven't seen it, it reminded me of a prison in some European country in a novel. There was a bucket-sized hole in one corner of the room, and next to it was a dirty old pot. The patient was squatting and curled up like a bundle, covered with a yellow blanket.
Mr. A explained,
"That hole is, so to speak, the toilet, and that pot is the rice bowl. The patients placed in this isolation room are extremely dirty and troublesome. They tear the blankets to shreds, defecate and smear it on the walls, and even eat it. It's extremely filthy."
Next was another isolation room. The stench was beyond description. The patient was buried in a blanket with his head stuck in the toilet hole. When he saw us, he grinned, revealing his yellow teeth. Mr. A added one more remark to his previous explanation,
"Look. Unlike normal people, they have a tendency to put their heads in such places. Now, let's go over there."
There was a large ward on the east side.
It was a large tatami room with four or five sections in the Joseon style. There were three Korean women and four or five Japanese women. Most of the Japanese women were lying down. One old Korean woman was eating something, one woman was dozing off with a baby carrier, and the last woman, who looked to be over 40, was sitting wearing a pink silk jacket and a Buddhist nun's hat. Many books were piled up, and she seemed to have just been writing something in a notebook. When she heard us whispering in Japanese, she suddenly shouted loudly.
"What are you saying? How untidy! That won't do, that won't do... A man should do what he sets his mind to!" She gave an incomprehensible command and then smiled. Again,
"Can't you see the sun in the sky? The god (神) who lights the fire in the sun is me. That's why there is a solar cult on earth." She shouted for a while, making sounds that seemed to make sense and then didn't.
The old woman who was eating something looked at us and asked,
"What is your family name?" She was calm and collected enough that you couldn't see her as a mad person.
"Kim (金)," I replied.
"Which Kim are you?"
"Kwangsan Kim (光山 金)."
"What is your mother's family name?"
"Kim (金)."
"Hey, you rascal."
"What is your grandmother's family name?"
"Kwangsan Kim (光山 金)." After exchanging words at random for a while, I began to wonder who was really crazy and who was sane.
"Stop it," I said and turned away, leaving the women's ward and asking Mr. A about the 40-year-old woman.
"What kind of woman was she?"
"She seems to have been a geisha (妓生) before. It seems she went crazy because of a fight with her husband. When she feels like it, she writes something day and night. She uses up a notebook every day."
"Is what she writes usually coherent?"
"Sometimes it is, and sometimes it isn't. But she seems to be very good at Chinese characters (漢文). There are obscure characters we don't even know. She seems to be able to speak Japanese quite well, too."
"Then could I get some of what she wrote?"
"I have a few pages. I'll give them to you."
Mr. A gave the reporter the manuscript paper written by the patient in his office and continued,
"Even though they are all mental illnesses, there are many different types. Patients like the ones in the isolation room who eat feces have coprophagia (食糞症). What you saw earlier, where she suddenly gets excited and then depressed, is called bipolar disorder (躁鬱病). Epilepsy (癲癎), which is also called seizures, and other perversions (變質性) like 'hysteria' are also considered mental illnesses. What are perversions? They are people with very eccentric personalities. For example, without calmly considering the pros and cons or the consequences, they might spend tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands of won of their own fortune to go to court if even a single jeon is detrimental to them or affects their reputation. People with this kind of personality are called perverts. There must be quite a few people with this kind of personality in the world, but from our perspective, this is also a mental illness. Therefore, when we look at mental illness, we can consider healthy, ordinary people (普通) as the 'level,' and people who have gone above the level as geniuses (天才), and people who have fallen below the level as mental patients. But in some ways, mental patients sometimes do bizarre things that transcend ordinary people. Looking at this, it doesn't seem that mental patients are necessarily inferior to ordinary people. And there's this story, isn't there? A poet said, 'Thunder is God's fart, rain is God's diarrhea...' People with high sensibilities call him a famous poet, even though he said something bizarre that ordinary people can't even think or imagine."
"That's right. A mental patient who thinks of bizarre things and giggles to himself, or a person who writes bizarre things and pretends to be a poet, is exactly the same."
"And the characteristic of mental illness is that, unlike other illnesses, the patients themselves don't know whether they have a mental illness or not. They become dimly aware of the illness when it first occurs and almost when they are recovering. This is called insight (病識)."
"Is there a fundamental treatment for mental illness?"
"There isn't. There is only symptomatic treatment (對症療法) that treats the symptoms medically (內科) based on the symptoms."
"What kind of food do the patients eat?"
"It's ordinary. But there is this kind of thing among the patients. They don't eat rice for several days. This is called anorexia (拒食症), but when they do eat, they take other people's food and eat three or four servings at once."
"How are they sexually (性的)?"
"Bipolar patients are very erotic. Sometimes, female patients secretly grab the doctor's wrist. And sometimes, both men and women masturbate countless times a day. It doesn't matter if someone is next to them or not."
"Can't you stop them?"
"How can you? It's no use."
Our leisurely stroll had somehow reached the reception room. The reporter picked up his hat and coat and said,
"You're busy, thank you for your hard work."
"Not at all. You'd have to watch them for a month to get more material."
The reporter said goodbye to Mr. A and left Room 8. Looking up at the clear sky, my heart felt refreshed. But when I thought about whether I was a mental patient or not, it became an unsolvable riddle.

**Named Entities**

京城帝大附屬醫院	Keijō Imperial University Hospital
Kwangsan Kim	광산 김
Salvarsan	살바르산



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제47호
발행일	1932년 01월 01일
기사제목	狂人의 나라 西八號室 探訪記, 이 세상에 누가 精神病者냐?
필자	一記者
기사형태	소식

狂人의 나라 西八號室 探訪記, 이 세상에 누가 精神病者냐?
						一記者
정신병자 (精神病者)! 정도의 차이는 잇슬지라도 세상에서는 부르되 「실성한 사람」, 「미친사람」이라고 한다.
의식적(意識的)은 아니나마 인간사회의 모든 규약을 무시하고 발작적(發作的)으로 엉뚱한 비극과 희극을 연출하며 보통사람으로서 하지 못할 천재(天才)아니 천재를 발휘하는 그들 미친 사람의 집단지(集團地)가 잇스니 조선에서 오즉 하나 뿐인 경성제대 부속의원서팔호병실(京城帝大附屬醫院西八號室)이 그 곳이다. 다행이 긔자는 이곳을 탐방할 기희을 엇게 되여  듯고 어든 바가 잇서서 독자와 더부러 흥미와 참고를 나누고저 한다.

서팔호병실(西八號室)! 외래진요소(外來診療所)의 북쪽 뚝 떠러저서 울울한 송림을 등지고 서 잇는 호젓한 벽돌 집이다.
「開放ヲ禁ズ」하고 씨위 잇는 또어를 밀치고 드러가니 마침 긔자를 안내할 A씨가 기다리고서 잇섯다. 어데서인지 양료리 냄새가 난다. 긔자는 인사 한 번을 꿉뻑하고
『웬 양료리 냄새가 이러케 남니까』하고 무르니 A씨는
『지금이 점심때니까요.』한다. 정신병 환자에게 양료리 먹일리는 만무한 것 가태서,
『식당은 저-쪽에 잇지안어요.』
『여기만은 독립임니다.』
『네-정신 병자에겐 양료리만 먹이는 줄 알엇지요.』
『아니요』하며 A씨는 빙그레 웃는다. 응접실에다 모자와 외투를 버서 노코 A씨에 뒤를 따럿다. 어둠 침침한 복도 마루를 지나는데 정신병자와 초대면 할 것을 생각하니 엇전지 으시시해진다.
『현재에 환자가 멧명이나 됨니까』
『약 오십명 가량 됨니다. 전에는 칠십명 가량 되엿는대 만니 주럿지요.』
A씨와 더부러 이러한 문답을 하는 동안에 벌서 병실 문 압헤 이르럿다.
굿게 다친 육중한 문 드려다 보고 내다 볼 수만 잇게 된 우체통의 편지넌는 구녁 가틀 조고마한 구녁 마치 감옥에 감방문을 연상케 한다. A씨가 벽에 달린 초인종(招人鐘)을 누르는 동안에 나는 넌즈시 그 구녁으로 (밧삭 각가이는 못 가고) 드려다 보앗다. 그 때 돌연히 그 구녁에 나타나는 두 눈초리! 나는 깜짝 놀라고 마럿다.『미친사람 인가 보다』하고 속으로 우물쭈물하는데  가슴은 두방망이질을 하엿다.
열쇠 소리와 함께 문이 열이엿다. A의 뒤를 따러 드러섯다. 아-나의 어리석음이여 그 무서운 눈초리의 소유자는 그 병실의 간수인(看守人)이엿다. 무시무시한 생각은 조곰치도 업서젓다.
『지금 대소제를 하는 판임니다. 』하고 A씨의 설명을 듯고 보니 빗자루 들고 잇는 사람이 환자인 줄을 아리 만큼 점잔은 환자들이다.햇숙한 얼골 핏ㅅ기 업는 얼골 *기 업는 동작 어데인지 쓸쓸한 구석이 보인다. 정신병자라느니 보다 중병 알른 사람처럼 보이나 낫서른 기자의 얼골을 바라보는 눈초리 공연이 햇죽햇죽 웃는 품이 전문가 아닌 내 눈으로 보기에도 실성한 사람들인 것은 분명하다. 십여명에 환자에 조선사람 일본사람이 반바는 된다. 병실 중앙에 마루를 두고 양쪽으로 칸칸이 병실이 되어잇다. 담요를 뒤집어 쓰고 누은 한 쌍의 부부도 잇고, 때 마침 이러나서 담요를 개고있는 사람, 걸레질 하는 사람들도 잇섯다. 실내를 한 박희 도라 넓다란 다다미 방 압헤 이르럿슬 때 A씨는
『여기는 오락실임니다. 여기서들 바둑도 두고 장기도 둡니다. 』한다. 보니 아닌게 아니라 바둑판 장기판이 한 구석에 노여 잇다.
A씨는 다시 한 환자 압헤 이르러 다정한 목소리로
『X상 좀 엇덧소』
『네- 오늘 집에 가게슴니다. 』퍽 힘 업고 불분명한 목소리다.
『멧 칠만 더 게시요. 좀 더 낫거던』
A씨는 이 한마듸 말을 남기고 기자와 함께 이 병실을 나왓다.  병실의 문은 또다시 자물쇠 소리를 내며 굿게 다치엇다. A씨는 긔자에 대하야 설명하며 이층으로 발을 옴긴다.
『이 병실 환자는 대개가 조발성치보(早發性痴呆)라는 병명을 부치게 됨니다.＜28＞ 역시 미친병인데 저러케 온순하다가도 발작이 이러나는 때는 야-단 이지요. 그러나 것 잡을 수 업슬 만큼야료를 부리는 환자는 지금 업습니다. 엇저다가 별안간 뒤에 와서 꽉 껴안끼도하고 이야기 끗테 별안간 따귀를 부치기도 하는데 힘이 장사지요. 전ㅅ번에는 간수하는 사람이 다리가 부러진 일 까지 잇섯스니까요.』
『A선생도 더러 혼나 섯겟습니다.그려』
『그런데 의사들 한테는 별로 그런 일이 업서요.』
『그래도 사람을 아라 보는게로군.』
『작년에는 이런 일이 잇섯서요. 환자 하나가 아들을 몹시 보고 십허해서 안해되는 사람이 어린애를 다리고 맛나러 오지 안엇겟서요. 그런대 껴안ㅅ고 입을 맞추고 머리를 쓰다듬ㅅ고  하더니 벼란간 부랄을 뜨더 먹엇지요. 쪼처가서 어린 애를 뺏들고 환자의 입을 버리고 보니 벌서 꿀떡 생켜버렷단 말이에요.』
『어린 애는 죽엇겟군요.』
『응굽 수술해서 간신히 살기느 햇는데 부랄 한 쪽만은 영영 업서 젓지요.』
『미천을 다 빼앗기지는 안엇군요.』
『네네 한 쪽으로도 넉넉 하니까요.』
우리는 서로 과히 크지 안은 목소리로 우섯다.
2층 병실에 이러럿다. 문 압히며 실내의 구죠가 먼저 병실과 가치 되어잇다.
환자는 조선사람 보다 일본사람이 더 만타. 한 침대 우에는 일본사람 하나이 담요를 덥고 누엇는데 공연히 천장을 치여다 보고 쉴새 업시 낄낄거리고 잇다.
『저것이 「과대망상광(誇大忘想狂)이라는 것입니다. 무엇을 작고 망상하고는 웃는 것입니다. 』 A씨는 다시 과대망상광을 향하야
『Xさん何がそんなに可笑いんだ』하니 환자는 고개를 드러
『え?』(네?) 한 마듸를 하고 여전이 웃고 잇다. 언제까지나 우슬 것인가.
그 환자의 세상이 그러케까지 우습고 유쾌한 것이라면 성한 긔자도 한 번 망상광이 되여보고 십흐리만큼 통쾌하게 웃는 것이다. 다른 한 침대에는 역시 일본인 환자 하나이 드러 누어서 노래를 부르고 잇다. A씨는 나에게 설명한다.
『보십시요. 왼 종일을 저러케 노래를 부름니다. 무슨 소린지 하나 못 아라드를 소리지요. 되는 대로 짓거리니까요.』
또 한 군데는 정치가(政治家) 타입으로 생긴 늙은 로인이 곰방대에 담배를 피여 물고 방석 우에 천연스럽게 안저 무엇을 깁히 생각하고 잇다가 우리를 도라다 보고는 금방 대여들 듯이 노리고 본다. A씨는 또 설명하되
『저 환자는 언제든지 지사(志士)나 정치가 풍이 잇서서 고관대관(高官大官)의 일홈을 부르고 희떠운 소리만 함니다. 성미가 대단히 팔팔하지요.』
『아조 그 눈이 새ㅅ별 갓흔데요.』
다른 환자들은 그저 웅크리고 무엇슬 보고 잇다. 우리는 이 병실을 나왓다.
긔자와 A씨 간에는 또 문답이 버러젓다.
『먼저 환자들 보다 중하게 보임니다.』
『네. 대개가 「마비성 치보」(痲痺性痴呆)입니다. 먼저 보신 「조발성 치보」로 말 하면 여러 가지 원인이 만켓지요. 정신상 비상한 타격을 입어서 생긴다고만 말 하면 말이 막연함니다만 그러케 부칠 수 박게 업지요. 그러나 이 「마비성 치보」는 전부가 매독에서 온 것임니다. 매독균이 피부 외면에 나타난 것이 아니고 뇌(腦)를 침범하면 저러케 미치게 되는 것임니다. 그러니 치료법에 잇서서 보통 매독에 쓰는 606호나 옥도가리(沃度加里)료법으로는 치료가 안 되는 것임니다.』
『네-.... 녀자 병실은 구경 할 수 업슬가요.』
『웨요. 보여 드리지요. 지금 가는 길 임니다.』
우리는 칭게를 나려서 먼저 지나 간 복도 마루를 다시 되돌아 엇던 2층으로 올나 갓다. A씨는 병실 문 압헤 이르더니
『여김니다.』하며 열쇠를 끄내여 비튼다. 문은 열리엿다. 여기만은 랑하 복판에 간호부 두 분이 테불 압헤 안저 잇다.＜29＞ 남쪽이 별실 북쪽은 격리실(隔離室)이다.
우리는 먼저 병실부터 보기로 하고 한 방문 압헤 이르럿다. 남자 병실에는 칸칸마다 문이 업더니 여기는 방마다 두터운 문이 달려 잇고 그 문에는 조고만한 유리가 달려 그 속을 드려다 볼 수 잇다. 방은 다다미 석장 폭은 된다. 한 방에는 일본 녀자가 머리를 푸러 헤친채 이불 솜을 끄러 덥고 들창문에 머리를 처박고 잇다.
그 다음 방 또 그 다음 방에는 일본 녀자가 이불 속에 파무친채 새우잠을 자고 잇다.
또 그 다음 방에는 일본 중로인 마나님이 방석 우에 꾸러 안저서 코노래를 하여 가며 석냥갭이로 손 장난을 하고 잇다.
『ばあさん 何してるんだい』 (할머니 뭘 하시유)하는 A씨의 말에 그 녀자는 힐끗 한 번 도라 보고는 여전히 그 짓이다.
『저것 보십시요. 왼 종일 저러케 석냥갭이를 일렬로 조-ㄱ 느러 노앗다. 뜨덧다 함니다.』
다음은 격리실이다. A씨가 방문을 홱 여는데 별안간 구린내 지린내가 코를 콱 찌른다. 병실만한 방인데 벽과 방바닥이 쎄멘트로 되여 잇다. 완연히 동물원 즘생잇는 방과 갓고 보지는 못 하엿스나 소설에 나오는 구라파 어느 나라의 감옥을 연상케 한다. 방 바닥 한 구동이에는 빠케쓰 아구리만한 구녁이 뚤려 잇고 그 엽헤는 헌 남비 쪽에 지저분한 것이 붓터 잇다. 환자는 누런 담료를 뒤집어 쓴채 봇다리만하게 쪼그리고 누어 잇다.
A씨는 설명한다.
『저 구녕이 말 하자면 변소요 저 남비가 밥 그릇입니다. 이 격리실에 두는 한자는 여간 지저분 하고 야료를 부리는게 아입니다. 이불을 갈기갈기 찟고 똥 누어서는 벽에다 터턱 바르기가 일수요. 또 먹기까지 하니까요. 여간 더러운게 아입니다.』
그 다음 격리실이다. 역시 구린내란 말할 수 업다. 환자는 똥 누는 구녕에다 머리를 처박은채 이불에 똘똘 말려 잇다. 우리를 보더니 누-런 니빠리를 드러 내며 씽긋 웃는다. A씨는 먼저 셜명에다 한 마듸를 더 첨가한다.
『보십시요. 보통 사람과 달러서 머리를 저런 곳으로 두는 톡성이 잇지 안어요. 자-인제는 저쪽으로 갑시다.』
동편으로 크다란 병실이 잇다.
조선칸 사리로 너더 다섯간 되는 넓은 다다미 방이다. 조선 녀자가 셋 일본 녀자가 너덧 된다. 일본 녀자들은 대개 누어 잇다. 조선 녀자로 늙은이 한아는 무엇을 먹고 잇고 한 녀자는 보통이를 낀채 어푸렷고 마지막 한 녀자 40넘어 보이는 한 녀자는 분홍 비단 저고리에 중의 꼭갈을 쓰고 안젓다. 이름 모를 책이 만히 싸여 잇는데 방금 잡기장에다 무엇을 쓰다 둔 모양이다. 우리가 일본 말로 수군수군하는 소리를 듯더니 별안간 고성대갈이다.
『무어라는 게야. 어집잔케! 그러면 못 쓴다 못 써...남자라는게 한 번 마음먹은 것은 그대로 해야지!』 요령부득에 호령을 하더니 한 번 씽긋 웃는다. 또 다시
『하늘에 태양을 못 보느냐? 태양에 불을 켜는 신(神)이 곳 나다. 그러기에 지상에는 태양교라는 것이 잇지.』 요령이 잇는 듯도하고 업는 듯도 한 소리를 한참 지른다.
무엇을 먹고 잇는 늙은이는 우리를 도라다 보고
『성이 무어야.』하고 뭇는다. 미친 사람으로 볼 수 업스리 만큼 침착하고 여전하다.
『김가』하고 대답을 하니
『어대 김가야.』
『광산 김가.』
『어머니 성은.』
『김가』
『엑기 이녀석』
『할머니 성은 뭐시우.』
『광산 김가다.』 한참 되는대로 주고 밧고 하다가 생각하니 누가 정말 미첫는지 성한 지를 모르게 되엿다.
그만 두어라 하고 도라 서서 녀자 병실을 나오며 A씨에게 40먹은 녀자에 대한 것을 무럿다.
『무엇하든 여자ㄴ가요.』
『전에 기생인 모양임니다. 내외간에 싸홈질한 것이 원인이 되어 미친 모양입니다. 저러다가 마음이 내키면 밤낫 할 것 업시 무엇을 작고 씀니다. 매일 잡기장 한 권씩 업서지지요.』
『쓰는 것이 대개 요령이 잇슴니까.』
『요령이 잇기도 하고 업기도 하지요. 그런데 여간 한문을 잘 하는게 아닌 듯 십허요. 우리도 모를 궁벽한 문자가 다 나오니까요. 일본말도 제법하는 모양입니다.』
『그러면 그 쓴 것을 어들 수 업슬까요.』
『내게 멧 장이 잇슴니다. 드리지요.』
A씨는 씨의 연구실에서 그 환자가 쓴 원고지를 긔자에게 전하며 다시 말을 닛는다.
『가튼 정신병이지만 여러 가지 종류가 잇슴니다. 격리실에 잇는 환자 모양으로 똥을 먹는 환자를 식분ㅅ징(食糞症) 지금 그 녀자와 가치 갑작이 흥분햇다 또 침울해지는 것을 조울병(躁鬱病)이라고 하고 소위 지랄병이라고 하는 전간(癲癎)과 그 외에 변질자(變質性)「히스테리」가튼 것도 정신 병에 속한 것임니다. 변질자란 무엇인고 하니 성질이 몹시 괴팍한 사람인데 례를 드러 말 하자면 냉정히 리해타산과 압 뒤 분별을 생각함이 업시 단돈 일전이라도 자기에게손해가 되고 명예에 관게 되는 일이면 멧 만원 멧 10만원 자기 재산을 다 터러 바처 가면서라도 재판을 하는 성미 이런 성질을 가진 사람을 변질자라고 함니다. 이러한 성질을 가진 사람이 세상에 적지안이 잇슬 것입니다 만은 우리의 눈으로 보아서는 이것도 정신병입니다. 그럼으로 도대체 우리가 정신병이라는 것을 볼 때 건강한 보통＜30＞ 사람을 「레벨」로 하고 레벨 우으로 올라 간 사람을 천재(天才)라 하고 레벨 이하에 떠러진 사람을 정신병자라고 볼 수 잇슴니다. 그러나 엇던 점에 서서는 정신병자가 보통사람 이상 초월한 엉뚱한 짓을 하는 수가 잇슴니다. 이것을 보면 정신병자가 반드시 보통사람보다 저열한 것도 아닌 것 갓습니다. 그러고 이런 일이 잇지 안습니까. 엇더한 시인이 「천동은 하나님에 방귀다.비는 하나님에 설사다...」하는 보통사람이 도저히 생각도 상상도 할 수 업는 엉뚱한 소리를 하엿스되 감상안이 놉흔 세상사람은 유명한 시인이라고 부르닛까요.』
『그래요. 엉뚱한 것을 생각하고 혼자 낄낄대는 정신병자나 엉뚱 것을 써노코 시인인체 하는 사람이나 똑 갓지요.』
『그리고 정신병의 특징은 다른 병과 달라서 환자 자신이 정신병에 걸렷는지 안 걸렷는지 모름니다. 최초에 병이 발생 할 때와 거의 나아 갈 때에 희미하나마 병을 의식하게 됨니다. 이것을 병식(病識)이라고 합니다.』
『정신병에 대한 근본요법이 잇슴니까.』
『엄슴니다. 증세에 따라 내과(內科)적으로 치료하는 대증요법(對症療法)뿐입니다.』
『환자들의 식료품은 엇더한 것입니까.』
『보통이지요. 그런데 환자 중에는 이런 일이 잇슴니다. 멧 칠 이고 도모지 밥을 안 먹슴니다. 이것을 거식징(拒食症)이라고 하는데 그러다가도 먹게 되면 남의 것까지 뺏드러 3인분 4인분을 한꺼번에 먹어 엄샘니다.』
『성적(性的)으로 엇덧슴니까.』
『조울병 환자가 에로틱한 점이 만치요. 엇던 때는 녀자 환자가 슬며시 의사의 손목을 움켜 쥐는 수가 잇지요. 그리고 무엇한 때는 남자고 녀자고 하로에도 수업시 수음을 함니다. 엽헤 누가 잇건 업건 상관 업지요.』
『못하게 하는 수가 업슴니까.』
『어데 듯슴니까. 소용 업서요.』
어슬렁 어슬렁 것는 거름이 어느 틈에 응접실까지 이르럿슴니다. 긔자는 모자와 외투를 집어 들고
『밥부신데 수고 만히 허서서』
『천만에. 한 달쯤 늘 두고 보서야 더러 재료꺼리가 잇슬 것입니다만 』
긔자는 A씨와 작별하고 서8호실을 나섯다. 맑은 하늘을 치여다 보니 마음이 갓든하다. 그러나 내가 정신병자일까 아닐까를 생각하여 보니 알 수 업는 수수꺽기가 되고 만다.＜31＞
＜28-31＞