잡지명	別乾坤 第47號
발행일	1932년 01월 01일
기사제목	京城七名士 新年運數判斷記 (Predictions of the New Year's Fortunes of Seven Notables of Gyeongseong)
필자	李萬台
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

京城七名士 新年運數判斷記
						李萬台
What will the new year's fortune be? There is no one to predict it. Moreover, as for fortune-telling (占), it is impossible to discover anything reliable. Although I am well aware of this, I have selected a few notables and had their fortunes for this year told by Mr. Ri Mant'ae (李萬台), who calls himself seventeen and claims to have studied for ten years on Mount Kyeryong, and is "fifty-seven years old this year."

Whether it is accurate or not remains to be seen. In any case, I believe that by revealing their fortunes for this year, it will be an interesting article for the readers! I hope those mentioned here will send me a bottle of Toso-ju (度소주) as a fee...

宋鎭禹

Born in the year of Kyŏngin (庚寅), the eighth day of the fifth month, at the hour of the dragon. The divination is omitted.
A fleeting spring dream on the pillow, why worry? No taste in the first two or three months. The gate divination is not good.
Elder brother Kyŏng, be careful. The sound of the shepherd's flute is silent. Action brings much good. Seek wealth abroad. Your body is strong, and your wealth is strong.
In the season of the golden wind, wealth will flow. Wealth will be bestowed upon you. Also, be careful of the south. The south wind is strong with fire.
Good and bad are half and half. On a moonlit night on Lake Tongting, embrace the jade plum blossom. To the east and west, seeking profit is most auspicious.
In the months of the Rat and Ox (Tzu and Ch'ou), add mouths and gain wealth. East and west are very auspicious. The north is unfavorable. Business matters:
Gold and water are most auspicious. The mourner enters the gate. Accumulate good deeds to be auspicious. This year's fortune is very auspicious in autumn and winter.

安在鴻

Born in the year of Sinmyo (辛卯), the thirtieth day of the twelfth month, at the hour of the monkey. The divination is omitted.
The sun rises over Yo-dae (瑤坮), heaven and earth are bright. Northwest mountains and rivers, the path to wealth is clear. Be careful of water and fire.
Good fortune is mixed with bad. Wood is strong, and the south wind will injure you in the autumn season. In the fourth, fifth, and sixth months, you will handle a thousand gold.
Add mouths within the household and gain unexpected wealth outside. The winter of the golden wind is half good and half bad. Action brings good fortune.
You will feel stifled at home, like a winter day in broad daylight. Your body fortune is clear and smooth. Your fortune will flow for three years. How can this not be beautiful?

金性洙

Born in the year of Sinmyo (辛卯), the ninth day of the ninth month, at the hour of the ox. The divination is omitted.
Generally, this year, do not aim too high. Although your body is strong, old misfortunes have not yet ended. Wood is strong, and the east wind blows.
Saintly achievements are without virtue. The house is moving. Your heart is troubled. Peach blossoms bloom and smile. Do not go to the apricot village.
Gold and wood clash, causing arguments over wealth. Business matters: Just wait for the gold to be strong in the seventh, eighth, and ninth months.
A benefactor will come to help. If you move to the east, there will be losses. In the three winter months, you will handle a thousand gold.
Do not approach ominous events. A ruler shines upon you. Your wealth fortune will be adverse at first and then smooth. Lament the past.
Every time there is smoothness. <32>

李光洙

Born in the year of Imjin (壬辰), the first day of the second month, at the hour of the dragon. The divination is omitted.
This year's fortune is half good and half bad. There may be bodily misfortune. Ask for medicine in the south. Business matters:
Earthen goods are suitable. In the first two or three months, wealth will be as you wish. If not, there will be losses among relatives.
Ask what their surnames are: Kim (金) and Pak (朴). In the fourth, fifth, and sixth months, there will be glory everywhere. It is useless to stay at home.
Going out will bring good fortune. Although it is so, the tiger in the deep forest, in the eighth and ninth months, wealth will flow.
However, there is trouble with gossip. In the three winter months, your body is strong, and your wealth is strong. This year's fortune:
Peace and light.

李仁

Born in the year of Pyŏngsin (丙申), the twentieth day of the ninth month, at the hour of the dog. The divination is omitted.
This year's fortune: two real boats. One is wealth, and the other is the joy of children. Wood is strong, and the east wind blows.
Going brings benefits, but someone with the surname Kim (金) will harm me. The west is unfavorable. In the fourth, fifth, and sixth months, your body is strong, and your wealth is strong.
Large trees meet rain, which is prosperity. In the seventh, eighth, and ninth months, a benefactor will visit. What is the good fortune?
Not marriage, but wealth. Six-flower rivers and mountains (六花江山), peace and light. Business matters: water and earth goods.
Seeking a house, you will see a wall. Your body fortune is free from harm. There may be a desire to move. The northeast is very auspicious. This year's fortune:
More good than bad.

朴熙道

Born in the year of Kich'uk (己丑), the eleventh day of the eighth month, at the hour of the rooster. The divination is omitted.
Auspicious clouds descend from the heavens, and fortunate events are everywhere. Going in one direction is auspicious, but staying at home is not. If not adding mouths,
it will instead cause a loss of mouths. The fortune of the three spring months is the fortune of wearing a seal. The south wind is strong with fire, and wealth flows.
In the seventh, eighth, and ninth months, your body is strong, and your wealth is strong. A blind man gains a staff. How can this not be beautiful? In the season when water is strong,
you will hold documents in your hand. East and west are very auspicious, but north and south are not. Business matters: water and wood goods.
An owl enters the gate, causing repeated gossip. Be careful of Mr. Pak's (朴) words. This misfortune can be avoided.

金美理士

Born in the year of Kimyo (己卯), the twenty-first day of the eighth month, at the hour of the snake. The divination is omitted.
This year's fortune: a kitchen bird pecks at a plate. In the season when fire is strong, a fish leaps in the sea. If you associate with someone with the surname T'o (土),
there will be good fortune amidst the bad. Be careful of building. The divination enters four corners. There may be a desire to move. The south is suitable.
When the golden wind enters, wealth will follow naturally. A winter day in broad daylight, you will gain a guest from the earth. The world passes and responds.
Your body fortune is very auspicious. In all matters, center yourself. Public matters: retreat and cultivate virtue.
A white tiger embraces a brother, and a swallow dream can be obtained. This year's fortune is a very auspicious year. <33>

Named Entities

宋鎭禹	Song Chin-u
安在鴻	An Chae-hong
金性洙	Kim Sŏng-su
李光洙	I Kwang-su
李仁	I In
朴熙道	Pak Hŭi-do
金美理士	Kim Mi-risa
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
李萬台	I Mant'ae
Mount Kyeryong	Kyeryongsan
Lake Tongting	Tongting
金	Kim
朴	Pak
土	T'o



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제47호
발행일	1932년 01월 01일
기사제목	京城七名士 新年運數判斷記
필자	李萬台
기사형태	잡저

京城七名士 新年運數判斷記
						李萬台
신년새해에 신수 재수는 엇덜? 그것을 예언할장사는업다 더구나 점(占)으로 말하면 미들만한 그거를 발견할수업다 그런줄을 히알면서 이제 명사중의 몃분을 택하야 금년신수를 점치되 자칭 十七새로브터 게룡산에서 十년간공부한 「당년五十七세」의 리만태(李萬台)군에게 맛기엿다
맛고 안맛는 것은 두고볼일이요? 좌우간 그분들의 금년신수 재수겸을 공개함으로인하야 독자제씨에게는 한 흥미잇는 긔사가되리라고 밋느다! 여기에 힌 분들은 복채로 도소주나 한병식 보내주엇스면…….


宋鎭禹

庚寅生 五月初八日辰時 괘는략함
枕上片時 春夢何煩 正二三月 別無滋眛 門卦不好
庚兄愼之 牧笛無聲 動則多吉 求財外方 身旺財旺
金風之令 財運通泰 財上與受 又愼南方 南風火旺
吉凶相半 洞庭月夜 抱得玉梅 之東之西 求利最吉
子丑兩月 添口進財 東西大吉 北方不利 營業之事
金水最吉 吊客入門 積善則吉 此年之數 秋冬大吉


安在鴻

辛卯生 十二月三十日申時 괘는략함
日出瑤坮 天地明朗 西北江山 財路亨通 愼之水火
吉中有凶 木旺南風 時秋自傷 四五六月 手弄千金
內添人口 外得橫財 金風之冬 吉凶相半 動則有吉
在家心悶 白日冬天 身數通泰 運通三年 豈不美哉


金性洙

辛卯生 九月九日丑時 괘는략함
大抵此年 愼勿志遠 雖在身旺 舊厄未盡 木旺東風
聖功無德 家屋發動 心事煩亂 桃花衍笑 莫向杏村
金木相克 財上口舌 經營之事 只待金旺 七八九月
恩人來助 東方移去 自有損害 三冬之數 手弄千金
凶事莫近 尺月照身 君之財運 先逆後順 英嘆往事
次次有順＜32＞


李光洙

壬辰生 二月初壹日辰時 괘는략함
此年之數 吉凶相半 或有身厄 問藥南方 營業之事
土物可宜 正二三月 財數如意 若不如此 親中有損
問其何姓 金朴兩姓 四五六月 到處有榮 在家無益
出他則吉 雖曰然也 深林之虎 八月九月財運通泰
然中之事 口舌奈何 三冬之數 身旺財旺 此年之運
安道光明


李仁

丙申生 九月二十日戌時 괘는략함
此年之數 兩實載艇 一實財物 一實兒慶 木旺東風
行中有益 金姓害我 西方不吉 四五六月 身旺財旺
大木逢雨 正是發達 七八九月 恩人來訪 吉運其何
非婚是財 六花江山 安道光明 營業之事 水土兩物
求屋見墻 身運無妨 或有移意 東北大吉 此年之運
吉多凶少


朴熙道

己丑生 八月十一日酉時 괘는략함
天降祥雲 到處幸事 行方有吉 在家不吉 若非添口
返爲損口 三春之數 偑印之數 火旺南風 財運通泰
七八九月 身旺財旺 盲人得杖 豈不美哉 水旺之令
手執文書 東西大吉 南北不吉 營業之事 水木兩物
梟鳥入門 口舌重重 愼之朴言 此厄可免


金美理士

己卯生 八月二十一日己時 괘는략함
此年之數 厨鳥啄盤 火旺之令 魚躍大海 如交土姓
凶中有吉 愼之成造 卦入四角 或有移意 南方可隨
金風入應 財物自隨 白日冬天 土中得賓 世去克應
身運大吉 凡百之事 在於中心 公門之事 退而修德
白虎抱兄 燕夢可得 今年之數 大吉之年＜33＞
＜32-33＞