별건곤 제31호
1930년 08월 01일
海女歌 (Song of the Ama/Diving Woman, Poem)
石北 申光洙

Song of the Ama
						Seokbuk Shin Gwang-su

The daughter of Tamna is good at swimming, having learned to swim in the stream in front of the village since she was ten.
Local customs value marriage with diving women, and parents boast that they have no worries about food and clothing.

I, a northerner, didn't believe it when I heard it, but this year I am traveling south on a mission.
In the second month of the lunar calendar in the east of the city, the wind and sun are clamorous, and every household's children come out of the water.

Wearing only a hoe, a carrying basket, and a gourd, they are not ashamed of their naked bodies and small underpants.
They dive straight down into the deep blue water without hesitation, and falling leaves flutter in the air.

The northerners are startled, the southerners laugh, and they hold hands and play, riding the currents.
Suddenly, they disappear like baby birds diving, and only their gourds float lightly on the water.

After a while, they emerge from the blue waves, quickly pulling the gourd rope and holding it against their stomachs.
They let out a long whistle, exhaling their breath, the sound sadly moving the spirits of the water palace.

Why must people make a living like this? You alone greedily seek profit and completely disregard death.
Haven't you heard that the land can be farmed, silkworms raised, and the mountains can be mined? There is nothing more dangerous than water in this world.

Those who are skilled can dive nearly a hundred feet, but they often fall prey to hungry sharks.
Since the abolition of the tribute system, officials, though they say they give money, demand daily contributions.

Tributes from the eight provinces are sent to the capital, carrying dried abalone almost every day.
Gold and jade fill the tables of high officials, and fine silk adorns the seats of young masters.

How can they know the hardships they come from?
They barely chew it once before pushing it away.

Although you women may find pleasure in this, I feel sorry for you.
How can human lives be burdened by my appetite? Alas, I am a scholar from Haeju, and even eating bluefish is difficult, but I only hope for enough to eat morning and evening. <31>

Named Entities

耽羅	Tamna
海州	Haeju



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제31호
발행일	1930년 08월 01일
기사제목	海女歌
필자	石北 申光洙
기사형태	시

海女歌
						石北 申光洙
耽羅女兒能善泅, 十歲己學前溪遊.
土俗婚姻重潛女, 父母誇無衣食憂.
我是北人聞不信, 奉使今年南海遊.
城東二月風日喧, 家家兒女出水頭.
一鍬一答一瓢子, 赤身小袴何曾羞.
直下不疑深靑水, 紛紛風葉空中投.
北人駭然南人笑, 挈手相戱橫乘流.
忽學*雛沒無處, 但見瓢子輕輕水上浮.
斯須湧出碧波中, 急引匏繩以腹留.
一時長嘯吐氣息, 其聲悲動水宮幽.
人生爲業何須此, 爾獨貪利絶輕死.
豈不聞陸可農蠶山可採世間極險無如水.
能者深入近百尺, 往往又遭飢蛟食.
自從均役罷日供, 官吏雖云與錢*.
八道進奉走京師, 日幾䭾生乾鰒.
金玉達官庖, 綺羅公子席.
豈知辛苦所從事.
纔經一嚼案已推.
女爾雖樂, 吾自哀.
奈何處人生命累吾口腹, 嗟吾書生海州靑魚, 亦難喫但得朝夕一*足.＜31＞