**Header Section:**
Magazine Title: 삼천리 제10권 제1호
Publication Date: 1938년 01월 01일
Article Title: 半島醫藥界大觀 (A Grand View of the Peninsula's Medical and Pharmaceutical World)
Author: Unspecified
Article Type: 소식 (News/Information)

**Body Text Translation:**

A Grand View of the Peninsula's Medical and Pharmaceutical World

As the world progresses, human activities become complex and diverse, and consequently, people seek doctors as essential elements for these activities. Thus, for everyone living in modern times, a packet of medicine and an hour of medical examination become the source of all vitality. Is this not an age where medicine saves the world? Looking back, our peninsula is not the world's number one healthy region. Therefore, we must obtain even better medicine to aid our health. Here, we seek to introduce the famous doctors and medicines renowned in the world.

Cho Koyak (趙膏藥), with Over 100 Years of History - Ch'ŏnil Yakpang (天一藥房) = Sales Network of Over 10,000 Locations
If you go a little way from the Chongno 4-ch'ŏm crossroads looking towards Namch'on, before quite crossing the bridge, on the left side of the main road, there stands a modern building, grand and splendid enough to overwhelm a person at first glance. This is the Ch'ŏnil Yakpang, which produces Cho Koyak.
If one mentions Cho Koyak, it is a famous medicine advertised so widely that even a three-foot child in a remote mountain village would know it. However, for Ch'ŏnil Yakpang, the original manufacturer of this Cho Koyak, to occupy the throne of the peninsula's current pharmaceutical industry with such a splendid, colossal presence, there lies hidden truly unknown painstaking effort and struggle, and the significant accumulated merit over a long period of 150 years. That is, Mr. Cho Kŭn-ch'ang (趙根昶), the father of the current owner Mr. Cho In-sŏp (趙寅燮), was originally a traditional Korean medicine practitioner (漢方醫員) during the old Korean Empire era. Starting from about 150 years ago, using a unique elixir for tumors (腫氣仙藥) passed down in his family, he is said to have treated the afflicted areas of crowds of patients who flocked day and night. Thus, it is said that the front of his house was always bustling like a sea of people with surgical patients. Mr. Cho In-sŏp, the current owner, who learned modern studies and became enlightened to the new era, foresaw the promising future of the pharmaceutical business. At the age of 22, upon inheriting the pharmacy (藥局) from his father, he hung up the sign "Ch'ŏnil Yakpang." He named the family secret remedy (家傳秘方藥), which received enthusiastic welcome from countless people, "Cho Koyak," manufactured it as a patent medicine (賣藥), advertised it widely throughout Chosŏn (朝鮮), and provided great help even to people living in deep mountains and poor villages who could not receive the benefits of medicine. Furthermore, Mr. Cho has traded with merchants in over 40 locations in the Japanese mainland (日本內地), Shanghai (上海), Hong Kong (香港), and the China region, exporting Chosŏn-produced medicinal materials to China and importing other foreign medicinal materials into Chosŏn, wholesaling them to various colleagues scattered throughout Chosŏn.
Mr. Cho In-sŏp is originally a generous, wise, and multi-talented person. Currently, Ch'ŏnil Yakpang has a Trade Department, Crude Herbal Medicine Department, Patent Medicine Department, and Western Medicine Wholesale Department. The Western Medicine Wholesale Department steadily supplies orders not only within Kyŏngsŏng city but also from hospitals scattered in various regions. Each department has a head (都長) responsible for their respective division, and everyone is engaged in vigorous activity. The total capital is about 1 million Won. Besides the main store, there are large branches in Hwang'gŭmjŏng (黃金町), Taegu (大邱), P'yŏngyang (平壤), and Kwangju (光州), along with about 50 agencies and over 1,400 special contract stores. The places retailing Cho Koyak number around 10,000. How enormous must the annual sales figures be? Can this be called an achievement accomplished overnight? It is said there are about 180 employees working busily day and night throughout the main store and branches. Just as the store name is Ch'ŏnil (天一 - Number One Under Heaven), it can be said to be number one in the pharmaceutical business in the realm of Chosŏn.
Furthermore, to expand the business even more and further enrich its substance, in August of Shōwa 12 (1937), the Ch'ŏnil Pharmaceutical Joint-Stock Company (天一製藥株式會社) was founded with a nominal capital of 500,000 Won. After specially establishing a Manufacturing and Patent Medicine Department and a New Medicine Department, they are undertaking large-scale activities. Mr. Cho Kŭn-ch'ang is the president of the joint-stock company, Mr. Cho In-sŏp is the executive director, Mr. Kim T'ae-ryŏn (金泰鍊) is the managing director, and the auditor is Mr. Pak Yŏng-dŏk (朴永德), who is the chief of the Ch'ŏnil Yakpang Patent Medicine Department and holds full authority regarding all advertising. Mr. Pak is an extraordinarily clever and resourceful multi-faceted activist with uncommon intelligence and skill. Although he handles various complex tasks alone, he manages everything smoothly and effortlessly, making him seem like an indispensable great wing for Ch'ŏnil Yakpang.

Paekpoban (百補丸) Advancing Overseas - P'yŏnghwadang (平和堂) = Gaining Power Within Years of Founding
Paekpoban! It monopolizes full pages in various newspapers and magazines these days, startling the public eye. Paekpoban is sweeping through the peninsula's pharmaceutical industry with stormy force. It is said that orders flood in daily, and parcels are continuously carried out loaded on carts. The number of pharmaceutical products from P'yŏnghwadang Yakpang (평화당약방), the manufacturing headquarters of this Paekpoban, is an astonishing 110-odd types. Among them, the most representative medicine is Paekpoban, along with Sangsŏn Imyak (常選淋藥), which made a big noise a few years ago, Nankung-hwan (煖宮丸), and others. Currently, about 130 employees are working busily day and night, unable to catch their breath, so one can well imagine their achievements.
Mr. Yi Kŭn-t'aek (李根澤), the owner of P'yŏnghwadang, is a very virtuous and wise person with a characteristic love for silence above all else. There was a time when he did business together with Mr. Pak Hŭng-sik (朴興植), the commercial king of the peninsula, and looking at his current achievements, one might say he possesses intelligence and skill comparable to Mr. Pak's.
Currently, P'yŏnghwadang not only has the latest scientific large-scale pharmaceutical machinery but has also newly installed a high-speed electric rotary press. At the same time as celebrating the construction of the company building 1**** *, they are said to be doubling their business operations compared to before. Within this, there is the Yi Kŭn-t'aek Social Work Department. With a passionate heart desiring to raise the youth, who will be the protagonists of tomorrow's Chosŏn, to be the most robust and energetic, they first initiated a campaign to eradicate parasites among youth. A few months ago, they sent parasite eradication medicine free of charge to 10,000 children in 338 villages across Chosŏn. They are starting the second phase, aiming to completely eliminate parasites from boys and girls to bring light to the peninsula of tomorrow. They are said to be undertaking various other good works continuously. Furthermore, to make the world recognize the true value of P'yŏnghwadang's representative medicine, Paekpoban, they have even completed shipments to 21 Western countries including the United Kingdom (英國), the United States (米國), Germany (獨逸), France (佛蘭西), and Italy (伊太利). Isn't this truly tremendous?
As various tasks within P'yŏnghwadang continually increase and grow larger, one can certainly glimpse the extraordinary intelligence and skill of President Yi Kŭn-t'aek. However, one can also clearly see the outstanding activities, beyond the reach of ordinary people, of the wise and multi-talented Mr. Pyŏn Kwi-hyŏn (邊貴鉉), who strives day and night in the advertising department. <37>

A Unique Presence in Chosŏn Medicine, Hormone Medical Chemistry Research Institute (ホルモン醫化學硏究所)
It hasn't been that long since Haech'ojŏng (海草精) appeared in the world, but now it has become so famous that there's hardly anyone who doesn't know it. It's said that those who take it even once invariably express admiration, so the daily flood of letters of appreciation and order forms is likely not an empty rumor. Since this is the most representative medicine among the 20-odd new drugs manufactured by this research institute, its efficacy can well be imagined. Judging by the general favorable reception, there is a distinct feeling that the era of Haech'ojŏng is dawning.
Mr. Kim Sam-chin (金三辰), the owner of this institute, graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Pharmaceutical College (京城藥學專門學校) with excellent results in Shōwa 5 (1930). He worked diligently at the Kaesŏng Provincial Hospital (開城道立病院) for a full two years, continuously conducting research. After coming up to Kyŏngsŏng, he also spent a full two years researching and experimenting at a certain large pharmacy. Having gained absolute confidence, he independently started his own business about three years ago. He is a very meticulous person, sincere in his work.
Also, recently, he developed Korumon (コルモン), a blood-enriching and strengthening agent, and Obesumon (オベスモン), a fundamental treatment for women's diseases, once again throwing a bombshell into the medical world of Chosŏn. Korumon is a combined "hormone" (ホルモン), a medicine made from the *Yin-Yang* (*淫羊*) extract of traditional Korean/Chinese herbs (和漢藥), ginseng, and other ingredients, said to be effective for reproductive system disorders, nervous exhaustion, senility, loss of stamina, anemia, and various symptoms. According to people who have taken it, its effect is incredibly rapid. And the women's medicine called Obesumon is based on the most advanced hormone theory. It is an ovarian hormone preparation containing an optimal amount of extremely pure hormone extracted from female animal ovaries using a unique method, completely removing impurities (狹雜物). To this are added extracts from traditional Korean/Chinese motherwort (和漢益母草) and other effective ingredients, as well as calcium, important for bone composition. It is a state-of-the-art therapeutic agent, a women's disease medicine whose therapeutic effect is recommended based on experiments by clinical practitioners. As there is no place in Chosŏn specializing in hormone preparations (ホルモン製劑), this research institute displays a most unique characteristic. In any case, looking towards the coming future, they are steadily proceeding with their work with utmost practicality, making their future prospects highly noteworthy.

Manbyŏngsujŏng (萬病水錠) Headquarters - Ŏ Ŭl-bin Pharmaceutical Joint-Stock Company (魚乙彬製藥株式會社)
Ŏ Ŭl-bin Manbyŏngsu (魚乙彬萬病水 - Ŏ Ŭl-bin's Ten Thousand Disease Water) was a famous medicine on the lips of everyone, men and women, young and old, throughout the length and breadth of the three thousand *ri* peninsula. This medicine was originally the result of many years of research and experimentation by Dr. Ŏ Ŭl-bin (魚乙彬), an American M.D. It came into being before the Japan-Korea Annexation (日韓合倂). After the doctor had played a role in treating illness and saving the world (治病濟世) with this medicine for several decades, he unfortunately passed away. In the year the doctor died, Shōwa 8 (1933), the company was organized, and the doctor's son, Mr. Ŏ Ŭl-bin, became president. Keenly feeling the disadvantages for the user—related to shipping costs, sedimentation, efficacy, breakage, and other various issues—if the liquid medicine was sold in bottles, he improved it into tablets (錠) made for the user's benefit. This is Ŏ Ŭl-bin Manbyŏngsujŏng. As the efficacy of this medicine became widely known to the general public, it is said that there are even those in Manchukuo (滿洲國) and within Chosŏn who, seeking to make a fortune overnight, create similar products and confuse people.
The manager of this company, Mr. Yang Sŏng-bong (梁聖奉), is a very wise, generous, and warm-hearted person of integrity, currently the principal of Pusan Samil Kindergarten and an elder of the Presbyterian church, a faithful man. Finally, the five great principles of Ŏ Ŭl-bin pharmaceuticals are recorded:
Supreme Experience: A precious medicine researched by Dr. Ŏ Ŭl-bin over his 40 years in Chosŏn, using valuable experience to suit the climate and constitution of Chosŏn.
Most Precious Ingredients: A valuable disease-treating agent rationally manufactured by compounding only precious raw materials and meticulously selected medicinal ingredients.
Latest Manufacturing Method: Changed to tablets, ideal for drug manufacturing, employing the latest advancements in manufacturing secrets and mechanical facilities.
Greatest Efficacy: Since the essence (精), i.e., the core, of the raw materials is made into tablets, one obtains valuable effects even with a small amount, exhibiting maximum potency.
Lowest Drug Price: This quality of ingredients and effect! Such medicine cannot be bought at this price, so we can assert the highest quality product at the lowest price. <38>

Ginseng Old Establishment - Koryŏ Samŏpsa (高麗蔘業社)
This company, an old establishment in Koryŏ ginseng, has focused on expanding sales channels and improving quality steadily for over 20 years since its founding, greatly enhancing the reputation of Kaesŏng, the capital of ginseng (蔘都), as an industrial institution to the world.
The company not only directly imports Tang materials (唐材 - Chinese medicinal ingredients) produced in various parts of China (支那) but also sets a model for the peninsula's traditional Korean/Chinese medicine (漢藥界) world by making the selection and precision of Tang herbal materials (唐草材) its commercial principle.
When trade with China was cut off due to the Sino-Japanese Incident (日支事變), the market price of Tang materials suddenly soared two to three times or more. At this time, the company took the initiative to monopolize the purchase of Tang materials when Chinese merchants residing in Kyŏngsŏng were returning to their country, and is said to provide satisfaction to general customers at appropriate market prices. Furthermore, they specially manufacture about 40 types of medicinal plasters (膏藥), advancing not only within Chosŏn but also into the Japanese mainland and overseas. In particular, they research, manufacture, and sell divinely effective agents (神効劑) blended with ginseng, such as Ginseng Yŏngsin-hwan (人蔘靈神丸), Ginseng Hwal*t'ang (人蔘活*湯), and Samyong Erik (蔘茸エリク - Ginseng-Antler Elixir?). Indeed, people who have taken them once all give high praise.
The president of this company, Mr. Son Hong-jun (孫洪駿), is a very meticulous and generous person. He previously graduated from Kōbe Higher Commercial School (神戶高等商業學校) and is active as a major figure in the Kaesŏng business community. Since the time of his late father, the ginseng king Mr. Son Pong-sang (孫鳳祥翁), he has been a great contributor to making the reputation of Koryŏ ginseng known worldwide today.
Mr. Son currently holds important positions such as the head of the Kaesŏng Ginseng Cooperatives Association (開城人蔘同業組合長), head of the Kaesŏng Ginseng Sales Association (開城人蔘販賣組合長), director of the Kaesŏng Samŏp Joint-Stock Company (開城蔘業株式會社取締役), and member of the Kaesŏng Chamber of Commerce and Industry (開城商工會議所).

Authority in the P'yŏngyang Pharmaceutical World - Yŏngsaengdang Cheyaksa (永生堂製藥社)
This is the most prominent pharmacy in P'yŏngyang. Although established in Taishō 15 (1926), it already has agencies and special contract stores spread across about 3,000 locations. They manufacture about 30 types of patent medicines. Among them, the representative medicines, known as the five great famous drugs, are the Ch'oe family's secret plaster (崔氏네 秘傳膏), the emergency * medicine (救急*藥) Ch'ŏnbo-su (天寶水), the women's elixir (婦人仙藥) T'aeyang Chogyŏng-t'ang (胎養調經湯), the skin medicine (皮膚藥) Myŏl*su (滅*水), and the antipyretic (解熱藥) Netsupirin (ネツピリン). If choosing again from these, it would be Ch'oe's Secret Plaster and Ch'ŏnbo-su. The owner of this pharmacy, Mr. Ch'oe Yŏng-wŏn (崔永源), is a very meticulous, detailed, cheerful, and kind person. Annual sales are said to be 40,000 to 50,000 Won. Since the two current factories are too small, a third factory is under construction along the Taedong River (大同江邊), attracting significant attention.

Pioneer of Ginseng Industry Development - Kaesŏng Samŏp Joint-Stock Company (開城蔘業株式會社)
Ginseng, which has monopolized the throne of traditional Korean/Chinese medicine (漢藥) as an unparalleled * medicine (*藥) with a history of over a thousand years, displays its true value as a famous product of the peninsula.
To the left of Manwŏl-tae (滿月台), the site of the Koryŏ Dynasty (*高麗王朝*趾) at the foot* of Mt. Songak (*松岳山*), a vast manufacturing plant covering over 20,000 *p'yŏng* can be seen. This is the Kaesŏng Samŏp Joint-Stock Company, established in November of last year with the motto of making a great leap forward for ginseng industry development, overcoming various difficulties.

Despite the company's recent establishment, its performance is exceptionally good. The manufacturing quantity last year (Shōwa 11 - 1936) showed the truly astonishing figure of 240,000 *kŭn* (斤 - catty). Although this was an increase of tens of thousands of *kŭn* compared to previous years, the company's well-established sales network managed to absorb this overwhelming production entirely, a truly surprising fact for the industry (斯界). This indeed clearly reflects the alignment of the company's hidden efforts and the sellers' struggles, a very gratifying matter for the peninsula's industrial world.
Regarding Sales Channels:
Currently, the sales channels for ginseng were about 70% within Chosŏn, and 30% combined for the Japanese mainland, China, the South Seas (南洋) countries, and others. Deeming this insufficient, the company has focused greatly on expanding and pioneering new sales channels since its establishment, regardless of significant sacrifices. As a result, the sales network has now expanded globally. The sales channels are as follows:
Chosŏn, Hawai'i (布哇), Japanese mainland, India (印度), Karafuto (樺太 - Sakhalin), Siam (*羅 - Thailand), Taiwan (台灣), Europe (歐洲), Kwantung Leased Territory (關東州), Manchukuo (滿洲國), North America (北米), China, Malay Peninsula (馬來半島), South Seas Islands (南洋群島), etc.
Representative Director President   Kong Sŏng-hak (孔聖學)
Executive Director   Cho Yong-hwan (曺龍煥)
Director Manager Yamashina Kenryū (山階賢隆)

Seal Penis (海狗腎) from Pusan's Taeyang Muyŏksa (大洋貿易社)
This company, joined by prominent figures from the Kyŏngbuk (慶北) financial world, holds exclusive rights for the sale throughout Chosŏn and Manchuria (鮮滿一手販賣) of genuine Seal Penis (眞品 海狗腎) harvested directly by the * Karafuto Agency (*太廳直營捕獲). This North Pacific Seal Penis is said to be a heaven-sent elixir for health. Although fakes abound in the world, this one is said to be genuine.

Kaesŏng Hanyaksa (開城漢藥社) - Chang Kan-hyŏng (張干炯)
Mr. Chang graduated from Songdo High Common School (松都高普) 10 years ago and, in Shōwa 9 (1934), passed the examination system—impossible for old-style people—to obtain the qualification of Medicinal Materials Merchant (藥種商). He is a very cheerful person. He runs a well-scaled, prominent* (유*한) pharmacy, directly importing various medicinal materials from China and the Japanese mainland for both wholesale and retail.

Kaesŏng's Mr. Yi Mun-sun (李文淳)
Mr. Yi is a very magnanimous person. Starting the pharmacy business 20 years ago with 10 Won, he has walked this single path with perseverance until now. Currently, he operates respectably with funds of over 10,000 Won. Among the 15 types of manufactured plasters, the representative medicine is Ginseng Extract (人蔘エキス), called the King of All Medicines (百藥之王). He also handles dried traditional Korean/Chinese medicinal materials (漢藥乾材).

Pusan Area
Doyen of the Dental World - Kim Ch'ang Dental Clinic (金昌齒科醫院)
When one speaks of dentistry, Kim Ch'ang Dental Clinic is renowned enough to be pointed out, receiving public recognition and trust. The director, Mr. Kim Ch'ang-gyu (金昌圭), is an exceptionally talented man, magnanimous and deeply sensitive. He passed the medical licensing exam at age 23. Since opening his practice, he has strived with a spirit of great sacrifice not only regarding hygiene but also for education and the cultural advancement of Chosŏn.

His younger brother, Mr. Kim Ch'an-gyu (金讚圭), is also a gentle and multi-talented person. After graduating from Kyŏngsŏng Dental College (京城齒科醫專) in Shōwa 10 (1935), he studied at the Oral Surgery department of Tōkyō Higher Dental School (東京高等齒醫學校) before returning. He works alongside his elder brother, busy day and night for the patients.

Pillar of the Surgical World (刀圭界) - Mr. Yi Kŭn-yong (李瑾鎔)
Mr. Yi is an extremely straightforward and meticulous person, a multi-faceted activist. <39> He graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Medical College (京城醫專) in Taishō 7 (1918), worked at Severance Hospital for two years, and at the Surgery Department of Kyŏngsŏng Imperial University (京城帝大) for three months. Since opening his practice in Pusan about 12 years ago, he has gained increasing public trust daily.
Mr. Yi is currently a Pusan city council member (府議員), also runs a boxing club (拳鬪俱樂部), and strives for children's education. With about 50 patients daily, he must be busy day and night, unable to catch his breath, attending to patients and engaging in social work.

Pusan's Mr. Kim Yong-sŏk (金龍錫) (Tonggwang Hospital - 東光醫院)
Mr. Kim is renowned as an ophthalmologist and ENT doctor in Pusan. He graduated from Severance Medical College (セ專 - likely abbreviation for 세브란스 전문학교) in Shōwa 2 (1927), worked at its affiliated hospital for one and a half years, and at Taegu Tongsan Hospital (大邱東山病院) for 10 months (星霜 - lit. stars and frost, poetic for months/years, context suggests months). He opened his practice in Pusan in Shōwa 11 (1936), seeing about 30 patients daily.

Pusan's Mr. Yi Kwi-hŭng (李貴興) (Yŏngje Hospital - 永濟醫院)
Mr. Yi is a very energetic and robust person. He graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Medical College in Taishō 14 (1925), worked at Taegu Provincial Hospital (大邱道立醫院) for 4 years, and at Kyŏngbuk Andong Provincial Hospital (慶北 安東道立醫院) for 2 years. He opened his practice in Pusan 6 years ago. Having built a large, modern-style building, he provides convenience to the general patient population with facilities like Roentgen (レントヶン - X-ray), sunlamps (太陽燈), X-rays (X光線), ultraviolet rays (紫外線), and infrared rays (赤外線), installed at a cost of about 3,000 Won.

Giant of Pediatrics - Tongsan Hospital's (東山醫院) Mr. Kim Hyŏng-gi (金炯璣)
Mr. Kim is a person of integrity with a naturally gentle character, knowledgeable not only as a doctor but in various fields. After graduating from Kyŏngsŏng Medical College in Taishō 10 (1921), he spent a year conducting further research at the Chōsen Government-General Hospital (朝鮮總督府醫院). He practiced specializing in pediatrics and internal medicine in Tongnae County (東萊郡) before moving to Pusan in Shōwa 3 (1928) at the recommendation of local prominent figures.
In the spring of Shōwa 5 (1930), he newly constructed a two-story Western-style hospital building (院舍) and inpatient rooms. Since then, he has become a giant in both name and reality in pediatrics and internal medicine, increasingly earning the trust of general patients.

Star of Obstetrics and Gynecology - Women's Hospital (婦人病院) Ms. Chŏng Pong-gŭm (鄭鳳今女史)
The lady doctor is a very sharp and multi-talented person. After graduating from a Japanese Higher Girls' School with excellent results, she worked in the education section of the South Kyŏngsang Provincial Office (慶南道廳) for two years. Then she went to Tōkyō, graduated from Tōkyō Medical College (東京醫專) in Shōwa 8 (1933), and worked in the Obstetrics and Gynecology department of Pusan Railway Hospital (釜山鐵道病院) for two years. She opened her practice two full years ago and receives much trust from general patients.

Taegu Area
Great Star of the Taegu Surgical World - Namsan Hospital (南山醫院) Mr. Kim Chae-myŏng (金在明)
Mr. Kim graduated from Severance Medical College (世專) and worked at Taegu Tongsan Hospital for 11 years before opening his practice in Shōwa 6 (1931). Rich in charitable spirit, for the past three years, he has been supporting two students, enabling their admission and studies at Kyōto Technical College (京都工科大學).

Inch'ŏn Area
Inch'ŏn's Kim T'ae-gŭn (金兌根) (Tongyang Hospital - 東洋醫院)
One cannot describe how amiable Mr. Kim is. He graduated from Severance Medical College (世專) in Shōwa 3 (1928), worked at its affiliated hospital for two years, then opened a practice in Chŏnbuk (全北). He moved to his current location two years ago. He shared the following words with this reporter: "It is wrong for people to think that doctors only know about money."

Inch'ŏn's An Tu-ho (安斗護) (An Tu-ho Dental Clinic - 安斗護齒科醫院)
Mr. An is a very cheerful and organized person. After graduating from Kyŏngsŏng Dental College in Shōwa 8 (1933), he immediately opened his practice in Inch'ŏn, and his results are said to be very good. <40>

Inch'ŏn's Mr. Kim Sŏk-yŏng (金錫永)
Mr. Kim graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Dental College in Shōwa 9 (1934). After working at several hospitals, he opened his practice in this location in August of the same year. He is a very composed and talented person. It is said that he sees a large number of patients.

Inch'ŏn's Pak Sun-jŏng (朴順婷) (Women's Hospital - 婦人病院)
Ms. Pak is now 26 years old. As a first-generation graduate of Kyŏngsŏng Women's Medical Training Institute (京城女子醫學講習所), she passed the qualifying examination (檢定試驗) and honorably became a doctor at once. She worked at the Wakai Internal Medicine Department of Kyŏngsŏng Imperial University Hospital (城大若井內科) for one year and has been working at Inch'ŏn Women's Hospital (仁川婦人病院) for three years. Her cheerful expression and her clear eyes, full of spirit (精彩), sufficiently prove her multi-talented nature.

P'yŏngyang Area
Pillar of the Striving World - P'yŏngyang's Pyŏn In-gi (邊麟奇) (Hŭisaeng Hospital - 喜生醫院)
Mr. Pyŏn is a generous, steady, and energetic person. He graduated from the former Taehan Medical School (舊大韓醫學校), the predecessor of Kyŏngsŏng Medical College, with excellent results in Meiji 43 (1910). He worked at the Chŏnnam Government-General Chahye Hospital (全南朝鮮總督府 慈惠醫院) for two years, then opened his practice 25 or 26 years ago. During this time, he has saved the lives of countless patients. Mr. Pyŏn is currently the school doctor (校*) for Sang* Public Common School (上*公普校) and ** Common School (**普通學校), a provincial council member for the automotive [association?], and director of the Midwifery Training Institute (産姿講習所). Feeling that the role of midwives (産姿役) is most crucial within hygiene, rather than aiming to train professional women, Mr. Pyŏn founded this training institute in Taishō 12 (1923). Graduates number over 400, and about 130 have received midwife licenses (産姿免許狀) and are active in various places. The hospital Mr. Pyŏn runs has 15 inpatient rooms, all equipped with steam heating (스팀) except for four *ondol* (온돌) rooms. As 80 to 90 patients come and go daily, he is so busy that he often cannot eat or sleep at the proper times.

P'yŏngyang's Mr. Yi Sang-bin (李尙斌) (Yaun-dang Hospital - 野雲堂醫院)
Mr. Yi is a very gentle and warm-hearted person. He graduated from medical school in Taishō 3 (1914), worked at Ch'ungbuk Ch'ungju Chahye Hospital (忠北 忠州 慈惠醫院) for a full two years, practiced in Chŏnnam Mokp'o (全南木浦) for 8 years, practiced in P'yŏngnam P'yŏngwŏn (平南 平原) for 7 years, studied at the Ophthalmology and ENT Department of Kyŏngsŏng Imperial University Medical Faculty (城大醫學部 眼科耳鼻咽喉科) for 2 years, and has been practicing in P'yŏngyang for over 7 months (星霜 - likely months here). The research experience accumulated over a long time surely brings joy to the patients who seek him out.

P'yŏngyang's Mr. Kim Chŏng-hwa (金正和) (Suok Dental Clinic - 水玉齒科醫院)
Mr. Kim graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Dental College in Shōwa 7 (1932), worked at the P'yŏngnam Provincial Hospital (平南道立病院) for two years, passed through the affiliated hospital of Tōkyō Dental College (東京齒科醫專) and the affiliated hospital of a certain university, and opened his practice in P'yŏngyang about one year ago. He is a cheerful doctor who receives favorable reviews from the patients who visit daily.

P'yŏngyang's Mr. Kim Un-byŏng (金雲炳) (Kŭmsŏng Hospital - 錦城醫院)
Mr. Kim graduated from Osan High Common School (五山高普) and passed the qualifying examination to become a doctor instantly. Afterwards, he worked as a public physician (公醫) in Chang* (*長), Hwanghae Province (黃海道) for two years. Now, while practicing in P'yŏngyang, he is also a teacher at Osŏng Medical Training Institute (O城醫學講習所 - likely Osan misspelled or another institute).

Kaesŏng Area
Kaesŏng's Endō Yoshimi (遠藤義見) (Endō Dental Clinic - 遠藤齒科醫院)
Mr. Endō gained practical experience over many years at a dental clinic in Ōsaka (大阪). He passed the qualifying examination in Shōwa 5 (1930), honorably obtaining his medical license. He now practices in Kaesŏng and receives great praise from patients.

Kaesŏng's Watanabe Michio (渡邊道夫) (Watanabe Dental Clinic - 渡邊齒科醫院)
Mr. Watanabe graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Dental College in Shōwa 2 (1927). He worked at a university hospital for 2 years and a provincial hospital for 3 years before opening his practice in Kaesŏng... working day and night for patients. Currently, Mr. Watanabe is the President of the Kaesŏng Dental Association (開城齒科醫師會長) and also a Kaesŏng City Council Member (開城府會議員). He is a very cheerful, warm-hearted, and multi-talented person.

Kaesŏng's Mr. O Chŏng-yong (吳廷龍) (Koryŏ Dental Clinic - 고려치과의원)
Mr. O worked at a dental clinic in Japan (日本) for four years, passed the qualifying examination in Shōwa 6 (1931), practiced in Hwanghae Province, and has now moved to Kaesŏng. He is a very understanding, compassionate, and warm-hearted young man.

Kaesŏng's Mr. Ch'oe Ch'ang-sun (崔昌順) (Sipcha Hospital - 十字醫院)
Mr. Ch'oe graduated from Severance Medical College (世專) 8 years ago and worked at Namsŏng Hospital (南星病院) for 7 years before opening his practice in December the year before last. He is a very meticulous, proper, and kind person. Seeing patients coming and going without pause, one can tell his reputation is high.

Kaesŏng's Mr. Pang Kyu-hwan (方奎煥) (Pang Kye-hwan Dental Clinic - 方啓煥치과의원)
Mr. Pang graduated from Urawa Dental College in Tōkyō (東京浦和齒科醫專) in Shōwa 3 (1928) and also finished Kyŏngsŏng Pharmaceutical School (京城藥學校). Afterwards, he studied and experimented for some time at his uncle's dental clinic and practiced in Kyŏngsŏng for two years. Later, he worked together with his younger brother, Pang Kye-hwan (方啓煥), at the current location. After his brother passed away, Mr. Pang now manages it alone. He is a very agile and multi-talented person.

Kaesŏng's Mr. Im Hŏn-jang (林憲章) (Taedong Hospital - 大同醫院)
Mr. Im graduated from Chiba Medical College (千葉醫專) in Taishō 8 (1919) and worked at various hospitals for many years before opening his practice in Kaesŏng 13 years ago. Being long-established, he receives much trust from general patients. He is a very robust and sensitive person.

Sinp'o's Public Physician Mr. Yi Kang (李橿) (Hansan Hospital Director - 漢山醫院長)
Mr. Yi graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Medical College in Taishō 12 (1923). He worked at the Government-General Hospital for 1 year and a half, as Samsu Public Physician (三水公醫) for 2 and a half years, practiced in Pukch'ŏng (北靑) for 3 years, and has been working as Sinp'o Public Physician (新浦公醫) for 10 years.
The words Mr. Yi shared with this reporter had unique points; the gist is as follows:
The current medical practice organization is irrational. It would be good to manage it at the *myŏn* (면 - township) level, setting the bonus for doctors' total income at one-hundredth or perhaps one-thousandth.

Sinp'o's Mr. Chŏn Chu-ung (全柱雄) (Sinsŏng Dental Clinic - 新星齒科醫院)
Mr. Chŏn graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Dental College in Shōwa 11 (1936) and worked at Hamhŭng Provincial Hospital (咸興道立醫阮). He opened his practice in Sinp'o in May of this year. He is a very kind person.

Sinp'o's Mr. Yi Chŏng-baek (李楨伯) (Samsŏng Hospital - 三省醫院)
Mr. Yi graduated from Severance Medical College (世專) in Shōwa 10 (1935). After passing through P'yŏngyang Christian Hospital (平壤基督病院) and Hamhŭng Chehye Hospital (咸興濟惠病院), he opened his practice in Sinp'o two years ago. He is quite an interesting person.

Pukch'ŏng's Mr. Ch'oe Yong-mu (崔溶武) (Samsŏng Hospital - 三星醫院)
Mr. Ch'oe graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Medical College in Taishō 12 (1923). He worked in the internal medicine department of the Government-General Hospital for 2 years, at the Imperial University Internal Medicine Department for 1 and a half years, then came to Pukch'ŏng and opened his practice. Since Shōwa 8 (1933), he has become a public physician. He is a person of high virtue.

Hongwŏn's Mr. Kang P'il-mo (姜弼模) (Tongsŏ Hospital - 東西醫院)
Mr. Kang graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Medical College in Shōwa 9 (1934). After passing through its affiliated hospital, he worked at Chŏnnam Provincial Hospital (全南道立醫院) for 2 years, then came to Hongwŏn town (洪原邑) and opened his practice. A very gentle scholar-type gentleman, he is currently researching and experimenting with traditional Korean medicine day and night, receiving very favorable reviews from general patients.

Hongwŏn Town's Mr. Yi Chong-sul (李鍾述) (Hongwŏn Hospital - 洪原醫院)
Mr. Yi graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Medical College in Shōwa 4 (1929). After passing through Hyesan Provincial Hospital (惠山道立醫院) and working diligently for patients in various other places for many years, he became the public physician here. He is a very kind and resilient person. With 40 to 50 patients daily, one can well imagine his skill (挍衛 - likely 技倆 skill/ability).

Tanch'ŏn's Mr. Kwŏn Tu-gyŏng (權斗經) (Taedong Hospital - 大東醫院)
Mr. Kwŏn, who finished Kyŏngsŏng Medical College in Taishō 13 (1924), practiced in Hamhŭng for 4 years, served as Huch'ang Public Physician (厚昌公醫) in North P'yŏngan Province (平北) for 4 years, and has been practicing in Tanch'ŏn town (端川邑) for 5 years already. He is an extremely gentle and reliable person.

Ch'aho's Mr. Kim Sang-t'ae (金相兌) (Kim Sang-t'ae Hospital - 金相兌醫院)
Mr. Kim graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Medical College in Taishō 15 (1926). He served as a commissioned doctor for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (外務省觸託醫) for 3 years, as a public physician in South Hamgyŏng Province (咸南道公醫) for 6 years, as a common school principal for 2 years, and has been practicing at the current location since June last year. He is a warm and cheerful person who gives a favorable impression to those he meets. During this time, he has not only exerted great effort for education and patients but also currently treats about 50 patients daily.

Sŏngjin's Mr. Yun Ch'i-ro (尹致魯) (Chejung Hospital - 濟衆醫院)
Mr. Yun graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Medical College in Taishō 12 (1923). He worked at Kangwŏn Province Ch'unch'ŏn Provincial Hospital (江原道 春川道立醫院) for 2 and a half years, studied at *Hŏn University (*憲大學) Ophthalmology Department for 1 year, worked at Sŏngjin Provincial Hospital (城津道立醫院) for 1 year, served as an ophthalmology instructor at Kyŏngsŏng Medical College for 1 year, and worked at Inch'ŏn Municipal Hospital (仁川府立醫院) for about 3 years. He opened his practice at the current location 6 years ago. He is a very generous person. Patients number about 30 daily.

Sŏngjin's Mr. Kim Kyŏng-un (金敬運) (Kim Dental Clinic - 金齒科醫院)
Graduating from Kyūshū Dental College (九洲齒科醫專) in Shōwa 8 (1933), he came out and has been practicing in his hometown Sŏngjin until now. Mr. Kim is quite a humble person.

Sinch'ang Public Physician Mr. Yi Hyŏng-gwan (李亨垣) (Sangch'un Hospital - 常春醫院)
Mr. Yi graduated from Kyŏngsŏng Medical College in Taishō 13 (1924) and became a public physician, coming to the current location. This year, as a provincial council member, he has even entered the political arena, aiming for fishing village revitalization, campaigning for the primary harbor construction in Sinch'ang (新昌에 제일 築港), and also campaigning for a higher common school in Pukch'ŏng (北靑). He is a multi-faceted activist.

Hŭngnam's Mr. Pang Hyŏng-nyŏn (方亨鍊) (Hongje Hospital - 弘濟醫院)
Mr. Pang graduated from P'yŏngyang Medical College (平壤醫專) in Shōwa 10 (1935). After passing through P'yŏngyang Hospital (平壤醫院) and working in the pediatrics department of a certain hospital in Hŭngnam for about 10 months, he opened his practice about two years ago. He is a very agile and multi-talented person.

Hamhŭng's Mr. An Sang-ch'ŏl (安尙哲) (Chehye Hospital - 濟惠病院)
Mr. An is a very affectionate and devout person. His purpose in *treating patients* (*院하는 - likely 治院하는) is not limited to the physical aspect but is also to spread the gospel from a religious standpoint. Mr. An graduated from Severance Medical College (世專) in Taishō 4 (1915). <41>
<37-41>

**Summary**

This 1938 article from "Samch'ŏlli" magazine provides a comprehensive overview of the Korean pharmaceutical industry and prominent medical practitioners across various cities in colonial Korea. It highlights major pharmaceutical companies like Ch'ŏnil Yakpang (famous for Cho Koyak plaster), P'yŏnghwadang (maker of Paekpoban pills), the Hormone Medical Chemistry Research Institute, Ŏ Ŭl-bin Pharmaceutical Co., and several ginseng companies in Kaesŏng. It details their history, products, key personnel, scale of operations (capital, employees, distribution networks), and marketing efforts, including international exports. The article then shifts to profiling individual doctors and dentists in major cities (Pusan, Taegu, Inch'ŏn, P'yŏngyang, Kaesŏng) and smaller towns (Sinp'o, Pukch'ŏng, Hongwŏn, Tanch'ŏn, Ch'aho, Sŏngjin, Sinch'ang, Hŭngnam, Hamhŭng), noting their education (often Kyŏngsŏng Medical College or Severance), specialties, hospital names, years of experience, perceived character traits, and sometimes their involvement in social or political activities. The piece functions as both reporting and promotion, showcasing the modernization and reach of Western and traditional medicine under Japanese rule.

For historians, the article is valuable for several reasons. It documents the significant presence and commercial success of Korean-owned pharmaceutical companies operating on a large scale, competing with Japanese firms and even exporting globally, challenging a narrative of complete economic suppression. It also reveals the educational backgrounds and career paths of Korean medical professionals trained in modern (often Japanese-established or influenced) institutions, their geographic distribution across the peninsula, and their integration into colonial society, including roles in public health (public physicians), education, and local politics (city/provincial council members). The mention of Japanese doctors (Endō, Watanabe) and institutions (Kyŏngsŏng Imperial University, Japanese medical colleges) alongside Korean ones illustrates the intertwined nature of the colonial medical field. The blend of traditional (Hanja-based medicine, ginseng) and Western practices (hormones, X-rays, modern surgery, dentistry) provides insight into the medical landscape of the time.

**Named Entities**

三千里	삼천리	Samch'ŏlli
趙膏藥	조고약	Cho Koyak
天一藥房	천일약방	Ch'ŏnil Yakpang
鍾路	종로	Chongno
南村	남촌	Namch'on (Southern Village)
趙寅燮	조인섭	Cho In-sŏp
趙根昶	조근창	Cho Kŭn-ch'ang
舊韓國	구한국	Old Korean Empire
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
日本內地	일본내지	Nippon Naichi (Japan Mainland)
上海	상해	Shanghai
香港	홍콩	Hong Kong
中國	중국	China
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul)
黃金町	황금정	Hwang'gŭmjŏng (Ōgonchō)
大邱	대구	Taegu
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
光州	광주	Kwangju
昭和	쇼와	Shōwa
天一製藥株式會社	천일제약주식회사	Ch'ŏnil Pharmaceutical Joint-Stock Company
金泰鍊	김태련	Kim T'ae-ryŏn
朴永德	박영덕	Pak Yŏng-dŏk
百補丸	백보환	Paekpoban
平和堂	평화당	P'yŏnghwadang
常選淋藥	상선임약	Sangsŏn Imyak
煖宮丸	난궁환	Nankung-hwan
李根澤	이근택	Yi Kŭn-t'aek
朴興植	박흥식	Pak Hŭng-sik
英國	영국	United Kingdom
米國	미국	United States
獨逸	독일	Germany
佛蘭西	불란서	France
伊太利	이태리	Italy
李根澤社會事業部	이근택사회사업부	Yi Kŭn-t'aek Social Work Department
邊貴鉉	변귀현	Pyŏn Kwi-hyŏn
ホルモン醫化學硏究所	호르몬의화학연구소	Hormone Medical Chemistry Research Institute
海草精	해초정	Haech'ojŏng
金三辰	김삼진	Kim Sam-chin
京城藥學專門學校	경성약학전문학교	Kyŏngsŏng Pharmaceutical College
開城道立病院	개성도립병원	Kaesŏng Provincial Hospital
コルモン	코르몬	Korumon
オベスモン	오베스몬	Obesumon
和漢藥	화한약	Wakan'yaku / Hwahanyak (Sino-Japanese/Korean Medicine)
萬病水錠	만병수정	Manbyŏngsujŏng
魚乙彬製藥株式會社	어을빈제약주식회사	Ŏ Ŭl-bin Pharmaceutical Joint-Stock Company
魚乙彬	어을빈	Ŏ Ŭl-bin
日韓合倂	일한합병	Japan-Korea Annexation
滿洲國	만주국	Manchukuo
梁聖奉	양성봉	Yang Sŏng-bong
釜山	부산	Pusan
釜山三一幼稚園	부산삼일유치원	Pusan Samil Kindergarten
高麗蔘業社	고려삼업사	Koryŏ Samŏpsa
支那	지나	Shina (China)
日支事變	일지사변	Sino-Japanese Incident
人蔘靈神丸	인삼영신환	Insam Yŏngsin-hwan
人蔘活*湯	인삼활*탕	Insam Hwal*t'ang
蔘茸エリク	삼용에리크	Samyong Erik (Ginseng-Antler Elixir)
孫洪駿	손홍준	Son Hong-jun
神戶高等商業學校	고베고등상업학교	Kōbe Higher Commercial School
開城	개성	Kaesŏng
孫鳳祥	손봉상	Son Pong-sang
開城人蔘同業組合	개성인삼동업조합	Kaesŏng Ginseng Cooperatives Association
開城人蔘販賣組合	개성인삼판매조합	Kaesŏng Ginseng Sales Association
開城蔘業株式會社	개성삼업주식회사	Kaesŏng Samŏp Joint-Stock Company
開城商工會議所	개성상공회의소	Kaesŏng Chamber of Commerce and Industry
永生堂製藥社	영생당제약사	Yŏngsaengdang Cheyaksa
大正	다이쇼	Taishō
崔氏네 秘傳膏	최씨네 비전고	Ch'oe Family Secret Plaster
天寶水	천보수	Ch'ŏnbo-su
胎養調經湯	태양조경탕	T'aeyang Chogyŏng-t'ang
滅*水	멸*수	Myŏl*su
ネツピリン	네츠피린	Netsupirin
崔永源	최영원	Ch'oe Yŏng-wŏn
大同江邊	대동강변	Taedong Riverbank
松岳山	송악산	Songak-san
滿月台	만월대	Manwŏl-tae
布哇	포와	Hawai'i
印度	인도	India
樺太	화태	Karafuto (Sakhalin)
暹羅	섬라	Siam (Thailand)
台灣	대만	Taiwan
歐洲	구주	Europe
關東州	관동주	Kwantung Leased Territory
北米	북미	North America
馬來半島	말래반도	Malay Peninsula
南洋群島	남양군도	South Seas Islands (Micronesia)
孔聖學	공성학	Kong Sŏng-hak
曺龍煥	조용환	Cho Yong-hwan
山階賢隆	야마시나 켄류	Yamashina Kenryū
大洋貿易社	대양무역사	Taeyang Muyŏksa
慶北	경북	Kyŏngbuk (North Kyŏngsang Province)
*太廳	*태청	* Karafuto Agency (Sakhalin Agency)
開城漢藥社	개성한약사	Kaesŏng Hanyaksa
張干炯	장간형	Chang Kan-hyŏng
松都高普	송도고보	Songdo High Common School
李文淳	이문순	Yi Mun-sun
金昌齒科醫院	김창치과의원	Kim Ch'ang Dental Clinic
金昌圭	김창규	Kim Ch'ang-gyu
金讚圭	김찬규	Kim Ch'an-gyu
京城齒科醫專	경성치과의전	Kyŏngsŏng Dental College
東京高等齒醫學校	동경고등치의학교	Tōkyō Higher Dental School
李瑾鎔	이근용	Yi Kŭn-yong
京城醫專	경성의전	Kyŏngsŏng Medical College
세부란스병원	세브란스병원	Severance Hospital
京城帝大	경성제대	Kyŏngsŏng Imperial University
金龍錫	김용석	Kim Yong-sŏk
東光醫院	동광의원	Tonggwang Hospital
セ專	세전	Sejŏn (Abbr. for Severance Medical College)
大邱東山病院	대구동산병원	Taegu Tongsan Hospital
李貴興	이귀흥	Yi Kwi-hŭng
永濟醫院	영제의원	Yŏngje Hospital
大邱道立醫院	대구도립병원	Taegu Provincial Hospital
慶北 安東道立醫院	경북 안동도립병원	Kyŏngbuk Andong Provincial Hospital
レントヶン	렌트겐	Rentogen (Roentgen/X-ray)
金炯璣	김형기	Kim Hyŏng-gi
東山醫院	동산의원	Tongsan Hospital
朝鮮總督府醫院	조선총독부의원	Chōsen Government-General Hospital
東萊郡	동래군	Tongnae County
鄭鳳今	정봉금	Chŏng Pong-gŭm
婦人病院	부인병원	Puin Pyŏngwŏn (Women's Hospital)
慶南道廳	경남도청	South Kyŏngsang Provincial Office
東京醫專	동경의전	Tōkyō Medical College
釜山鐵道病院	부산철도병원	Pusan Railway Hospital
金在明	김재명	Kim Chae-myŏng
南山醫院	남산의원	Namsan Hospital
世專	세전	Sejŏn (Abbr. for Severance Medical College)
京都工科大學	교토공과대학	Kyōto Technical College
仁川	인천	Inch'ŏn
金兌根	김태근	Kim T'ae-gŭn
東洋醫院	동양의원	Tongyang Hospital
全北	전북	Chŏnbuk (North Chŏlla Province)
安斗護	안두호	An Tu-ho
安斗護齒科醫院	안두호치과의원	An Tu-ho Dental Clinic
金錫永	김석영	Kim Sŏk-yŏng
朴順婷	박순정	Pak Sun-jŏng
京城女子醫學講習所	경성여자의학강습소	Kyŏngsŏng Women's Medical Training Institute
城大若井內科	성대 와카이 내과	Kyŏngsŏng Imperial University Wakai Internal Medicine
仁川婦人病院	인천부인병원	Inch'ŏn Women's Hospital
邊麟奇	변인기	Pyŏn In-gi
喜生醫院	희생의원	Hŭisaeng Hospital
明治	메이지	Meiji
舊大韓醫學校	구대한의학교	Old Taehan Medical School
全南朝鮮總督府 慈惠醫院	전남조선총독부 자혜의원	Chŏnnam Chōsen Government-General Chahye Hospital
上*公普校	상*공보교	Sang* Public Common School
**普通學校	**보통학교	** Common School
産姿講習所	산자강습소	Midwifery Training Institute
李尙斌	이상빈	Yi Sang-bin
野雲堂醫院	야운당의원	Yaun-dang Hospital
忠北 忠州 慈惠醫院	충북 충주 자혜의원	Ch'ungbuk Ch'ungju Chahye Hospital
全南木浦	전남목포	Chŏnnam Mokp'o
平南 平原	평남 평원	P'yŏngnam P'yŏngwŏn
城大醫學部	성대의학부	Kyŏngsŏng Imperial University Medical Faculty
金正和	김정화	Kim Chŏng-hwa
水玉齒科醫院	수옥치과의원	Suok Dental Clinic
平南道立病院	평남도립병원	P'yŏngnam Provincial Hospital
東京齒科醫專	동경치과의전	Tōkyō Dental College
金雲炳	김운병	Kim Un-byŏng
錦城醫院	금성의원	Kŭmsŏng Hospital
五山高普	오산고보	Osan High Common School
黃海道	황해도	Hwanghae-do
O城醫學講習所	O성의학강습소	Osŏng Medical Training Institute
遠藤義見	엔도 요시미	Endō Yoshimi
遠藤齒科醫院	엔도치과의원	Endō Dental Clinic
大阪	오사카	Ōsaka
渡邊道夫	와타나베 미치오	Watanabe Michio
渡邊齒科醫院	와타나베치과의원	Watanabe Dental Clinic
開城齒科醫師會長	개성치과의사회장	Kaesŏng Dental Association President
開城府會議員	개성부회의원	Kaesŏng City Council Member
吳廷龍	오정용	O Chŏng-yong
고려치과의원	고려치과의원	Koryŏ Dental Clinic
崔昌順	최창순	Ch'oe Ch'ang-sun
十字醫院	십자의원	Sipcha Hospital
南星병원	남성병원	Namsŏng Hospital
方奎煥	방규환	Pang Kyu-hwan
方啓煥치과의원	방계환치과의원	Pang Kye-hwan Dental Clinic
東京浦和齒科醫專	동경 우라와 치과의전	Tōkyō Urawa Dental College
京城藥學校	경성약학교	Kyŏngsŏng Pharmaceutical School
方啓煥	방계환	Pang Kye-hwan
林憲章	임헌장	Im Hŏn-jang
大同醫院	대동의원	Taedong Hospital
千葉醫專	치바의전	Chiba Medical College
新浦	신포	Sinp'o
李橿	이강	Yi Kang
漢山醫院長	한산의원장	Hansan Hospital Director
三水公醫	삼수공의	Samsu Public Physician
北靑	북청	Pukch'ŏng
新浦公醫	신포공의	Sinp'o Public Physician
全柱雄	전주웅	Chŏn Chu-ung
新星齒科醫院	신성치과의원	Sinsŏng Dental Clinic
咸興道立醫阮	함흥도립의원	Hamhŭng Provincial Hospital
李楨伯	이정백	Yi Chŏng-baek
三省醫院	삼성의원	Samsŏng Hospital
平壤基督病院	평양기독병원	P'yŏngyang Christian Hospital
咸興濟惠病院	함흥제혜병원	Hamhŭng Chehye Hospital
崔溶武	최용무	Ch'oe Yong-mu
三星醫院	삼성의원	Samsŏng Hospital (Used again)
洪原	홍원	Hongwŏn
姜弼模	강필모	Kang P'il-mo
東西醫院	동서의원	Tongsŏ Hospital
全南道立醫院	전남도립병원	Chŏnnam Provincial Hospital
洪原邑	홍원읍	Hongwŏn Town
李鍾述	이종술	Yi Chong-sul
洪原醫院	홍원의원	Hongwŏn Hospital
惠山道立醫院	혜산도립병원	Hyesan Provincial Hospital
端川	단천	Tanch'ŏn
權斗經	권두경	Kwŏn Tu-gyŏng
大東醫院	대동의원	Taedong Hospital (Used again)
平北 厚昌公醫	평북 후창공의	North P'yŏngan Huch'ang Public Physician
端川邑	단천읍	Tanch'ŏn Town
遮湖	차호	Ch'aho
金相兌	김상태	Kim Sang-t'ae
金相兌醫院	김상태의원	Kim Sang-t'ae Hospital
外務省	외무성	Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan)
咸南道公醫	함남도공의	South Hamgyŏng Province Public Physician
城津	성진	Sŏngjin
尹致魯	윤치로	Yun Ch'i-ro
濟衆醫院	제중의원	Chejung Hospital
江原道 春川道立醫院	강원도 춘천도립병원	Kangwŏn Province Ch'unch'ŏn Provincial Hospital
*憲大學	*헌대학	*Hŏn University
城津道立醫院	성진도립병원	Sŏngjin Provincial Hospital
仁川府立醫院	인천부립병원	Inch'ŏn Municipal Hospital
金敬運	김경운	Kim Kyŏng-un
金齒科醫院	김치과의원	Kim Dental Clinic
九洲齒科醫專	구주치과의전	Kyūshū Dental College
新昌	신창	Sinch'ang
李亨垣	이형원	Yi Hyŏng-gwan
常春醫院	상춘의원	Sangch'un Hospital
興南	흥남	Hŭngnam
方亨鍊	방형련	Pang Hyŏng-nyŏn
弘濟醫院	홍제의원	Hongje Hospital
平壤醫專	평양의전	P'yŏngyang Medical College
平壤醫院	평양의원	P'yŏngyang Hospital
咸興	함흥	Hamhŭng
安尙哲	안상철	An Sang-ch'ŏl
濟惠病院	제혜병원	Chehye Hospital

**Glossary**

半島	반도	Peninsula (referring to Korea)
醫藥界	의약계	Medical and pharmaceutical world
大觀	대관	Grand view, overview
소식	소식	News, information (article type)
진보할사록	진보할수록	As (it) progresses (older connective form)
繁雜多岐	번잡다기	Complex and diverse
엇지써	어찌	Why, how (older form)
의약제세시대	의약제세시대	Age where medicine saves the world
회고컨대	회고컨대	Looking back
안이다	아니다	Is not (older negative copula form)
조흔	좋은	Good (older spelling)
어더서	얻어서	Obtaining (older spelling)
놉흔	높은	High, renowned (older spelling)
차저	찾아	Seeking, looking for (older spelling)
소개코저	소개하고자	Intending to introduce
만드러내는	만들어내는	Produces, makes (older spelling)
잇나니	있으니	There is, because there is (older spelling)
威壓	위압	Overwhelm, intimidate
굉대화려	굉대화려	Grand and splendid
곳	곧	Namely, that is (used like modern 곧)
遠山僻地	원산벽지	Remote mountains and secluded places
三尺童子	삼척동자	Three-foot child (idiom: everyone, even a small child)
알만지	알만치	Enough to know (older form of 알만치)
본포	본포	Original manufacturer/shop
巨容	거용	Colossal form/presence
王座	왕좌	Throne
苦心奮鬪	고심분투	Painstaking effort and struggle
장구한	장구한	Long (period of time)
積功	적공	Accumulated merit/achievements
漢方醫員	한방의원	Traditional Korean/Chinese medicine practitioner
전래하는	전래하는	Passed down through generations
腫氣仙藥	종기선약	Elixir/miracle drug for tumors/boils
晝夜殺到	주야쇄도	Flooding in day and night
人山人海	인산인해	Sea of people, huge crowd
신학문	신학문	New learning, modern studies
유망할	유망할	Promising (future)
先見	선견	Foresight
인계하게	인계하게	To inherit, take over
간판	간판	Signboard
열광적	열광적	Enthusiastic, fervent
밧든	받던	Received (older past participle form)
家傳秘方藥	가전비방약	Family secret remedy/medicine
賣藥	매약	Patent medicine, commercially sold drug
全鮮各處	전선각처	All parts of Chosŏn (Korea)
혜택	혜택	Benefit
업는	없는	Without, lacking (older spelling)
深山窮村	심산궁촌	Deep mountains and poor villages
도음	도움	Help, aid (older spelling)
한편	한편	Meanwhile, on the other hand
內地	내지	Mainland (referring to Japan proper)
방면	방면	Direction, region, field
藥材	약재	Medicinal materials/ingredients
수출	수출	Export
수입	수입	Import
산재한	산재한	Scattered
동업자	동업자	Colleagues (in the same business)
도매	도매	Wholesale
仁厚	인후	Generous and kind
慧敏多才	혜민다재	Wise, clever, and multi-talented
漢藥乾材部	한약건재부	Crude Herbal Medicine Department
賣藥部	매약부	Patent Medicine Department
洋藥都賣部	양약도매부	Western Medicine Wholesale Department
주문	주문	Order (for goods)
응하여	응하여	In response to
배급	배급	Distribution, supply
부서	부서	Department, division
담임하고	담임하고	To be in charge of
맹렬한	맹렬한	Fierce, vigorous
자본금	자본금	Capital fund
본점	본점	Main store/office
지점	지점	Branch store/office
대리점	대리점	Agency, agent store
특약점	특약점	Special contract store
소매	소매	Retail
돌파할	돌파할	To break through (a number/limit)
一朝一夕	일조일석	Overnight (lit. one morning, one evening)
업적	업적	Achievement, accomplishment
晝夜不拘	주야불구	Regardless of day or night, around the clock
밧부게	바쁘게	Busily (older spelling)
종업원	종업원	Employee
상호	상호	Store name, trade name
天一	천일	Number One Under Heaven (store name)
藥業	약업	Pharmaceutical business
朝鮮天下	조선천하	The realm of Chosŏn
충실케	충실케	To make substantial/enrich
公稱	공칭	Nominal (value)
資金	자금	Funds, capital
주식회사	주식회사	Joint-stock company, corporation
창립	창립	Foundation, establishment
新藥部	신약부	New Medicine Department
특설	특설	Special establishment
사장	사장	President (of a company)
전무	전무	Executive Director
상무	상무	Managing Director
감사	감사	Auditor
주임	주임	Chief, head
一切	일절	All, entire
전권	전권	Full authority
頭腦	두뇌	Brain, intellect
수완	수완	Skill, resourcefulness
비범하고	비범하고	Extraordinary, uncommon
명민한	명민한	Clever, bright
다각적	다각적	Multi-faceted
활동가	활동가	Activist, person of action
맛하보지마는	맡아보지마는	Although (one) takes charge of (older spelling)
시원스럽게	시원스럽게	Smoothly, without difficulty
안케	않게	Not (adverbial negation, older form)
나래	날개	Wing (older spelling/dialect?)
독차지하고	독차지하고	Monopolizing
이목	이목	Attention (lit. ears and eyes)
놀내이는	놀래는	Startling, surprising (older spelling)
폭풍적	폭풍적	Storm-like
휩쓰러내는	휩쓸어내는	Sweeping through
쇄도하고	쇄도하고	Flooding in
소포꾸러미	소포꾸러미	Parcel package
구루마	구루마	Cart (loanword from Japanese 車 kuruma)
연다라	연달아	Continuously, one after another
제조본포	제조본포	Manufacturing headquarters
제약수	제약수	Number of pharmaceutical products
엄청나게	엄청나게	Astonishingly, tremendously
대표약	대표약	Representative medicine
한바탕	한바탕	For a while, vigorously
큰소리치든	큰소리치던	Made a big noise, was famous (older spelling)
눈코를 못뜨고	눈코를 못 뜨고	Unable to open eyes and nose (idiom: extremely busy)
분망하게	분망하게	Busily
유덕하고	유덕하고	Virtuous
침묵	침묵	Silence
상업대왕	상업대왕	Commercial king
지지안을	지지 않을	Not inferior to, comparable to (older spelling)
최신	최신	The latest, state-of-the-art
과학적	과학적	Scientific
大製藥機械	대제약기계	Large-scale pharmaceutical machinery
高速電氣輪轉機	고속전기윤전기	High-speed electric rotary press
신설하고	신설하고	Newly establishing
사옥	사옥	Company building
배전확장	배전확장	Doubling expansion
명일	명일	Tomorrow, the future
주인공	주인공	Protagonist, main figure
유소년	유소년	Youth, young children
씩씩하고	씩씩하고	Robust, vigorous
원기있게	원기있게	Energetically
寄生虫撲滅運動	기생충박멸운동	Parasite eradication campaign
착수하고	착수하고	Initiating, starting
부락	부락	Village (often used during colonial period, sometimes with negative nuance later)
무료발송	무료발송	Free shipping/dispatch
소년소녀	소년소녀	Boys and girls
제거식혀가지고	제거시켜가지고	By eliminating/removing (causative + connective)
광명	광명	Light, brightness
가저오고저	가져오고자	Intending to bring (older spelling)
진가	진가	True value
인식식히고저	인식시키고자	Intending to make recognized (causative + older spelling)
수송	수송	Transport, shipment
완료	완료	Completion
느러가고	늘어가고	Increasing, growing (older spelling)
선전부	선전부	Advertising department
노력하는	노력하는	Striving, making efforts
엿볼 수 있거니와	엿볼 수 있거니와	While one can glimpse
보통사람	보통사람	Ordinary person
탁월한	탁월한	Excellent, outstanding
활동상	활동상	Aspect/state of activity
력력히	역력히	Clearly, vividly
아러 볼 수가 있다	알아볼 수가 있다	Can recognize/see (older spelling)
異彩	이채	Unique presence, distinctiveness
海草精	해초정	Seaweed essence (product name)
나온지가	나온 지가	Since it came out
오라지 아니하나	오래지 아니하나	Although it is not long (older spelling)
누구나	누구나	Anyone, everyone
모를 사람	모르는 사람	Person who doesn't know (older spelling)
너머나	너무나	So, extremely (older spelling)
유명하여진	유명해진	Became famous
복용한	복용한	Taken (medicine)
탄복을 마지안는다	탄복을 마지않는다	Does not cease to admire
감사장	감사장	Letter of appreciation
주문서	주문서	Order form
虛傳	허전	Empty rumor, falsehood
안일	아닐	Will not be (older future negative)
제조신약	제조신약	Newly manufactured drug
효력	효력	Efficacy, effect
여하	여하	How it is, the state of
미루어 보아	미루어 보아	Judging by, considering
바야흐로	바야흐로	Just now, finally, indeed
도래하는	도래하는	Arriving, dawning
감이 不無하다	감이 없지 않다	There is some feeling, it seems likely
연구소	연구소	Research institute
졸업하고	졸업하고	Graduating
근무하면서	근무하면서	While working
올나와서도	올라와서도	Even after coming up (to Seoul) (older spelling)
엇던	어떤	A certain (older spelling)
연구실험하다가	연구실험하다가	While researching and experimenting
절대자신	절대자신	Absolute confidence
독자적으로	독자적으로	Independently
개업한	개업한	Opened a business/practice
자상하고	자상하고	Meticulous, detailed
성실한	성실한	Sincere, faithful
補血强壯劑	보혈강장제	Blood-enriching and strengthening agent
부인병	부인병	Women's diseases
근본적	근본적	Fundamental
치료제	치료제	Therapeutic agent, remedy
거탄을 던젓는데	거탄을 던졌는데	Threw a bombshell (older spelling)
연합	연합	Combined
和漢藥	화한약	Sino-Japanese/Korean Medicine
淫羊*엑기쓰	음양*엑기스	Yin-Yang * extract (*淫羊藿 Epimedium likely intended)
인삼	인삼	Ginseng
기타	기타	Others, etc.
성분	성분	Ingredient, component
생식기	생식기	Reproductive organs
장애	장애	Disorder, obstacle
신경쇠약	신경쇠약	Nervous exhaustion, neurasthenia
노쇠	노쇠	Senility, decrepitude
근기상실	근기상실	Loss of stamina/energy
빈혈	빈혈	Anemia
諸症	제증	Various symptoms
유효하다고	유효하다고	Is said to be effective
드러보니	들어보니	Hearing (about it) (older spelling)
엇더케도	어떻게도	How (emphasized, older spelling)
速効	속효	Rapid effect
진보된	진보된	Advanced
학설	학설	Theory
입각하여	입각하여	Based on
雌性動物	자성동물	Female animal
卵巢	난소	Ovary
독특한	독특한	Unique, peculiar
방법	방법	Method
추출하여	추출하여	Extracting
狹雜物	협잡물	Impurities (archaic term)
제거한	제거한	Removed
극히	극히	Extremely
순수한	순수한	Pure
최적량	최적량	Optimal amount
포함식힌	포함시킨	Made to contain (causative)
製劑	제제	Preparation (pharmaceutical)
益母草	익모초	Motherwort (Leonurus japonicus)
취한	취한	Obtained from
骨質組成	골질조성	Bone composition
중요한	중요한	Important
配劑한	배제한	Compounded, formulated
최신치료제	최신치료제	State-of-the-art therapeutic agent
임의	임의	Voluntary, arbitrary (here likely means 'various' or 'certain')
임상가	임상가	Clinician
實驗推獎	실험추장	Experimental recommendation
압날	앞날	Future (older spelling)
전망하고	전망하고	Looking ahead, forecasting
실질주의	실질주의	Practicalism, realism
진행하느니만치	진행하는 만큼	As (it) is progressing
장래	장래	Future
주목되는 바	주목되는 바	Aspect that is drawing attention
萬病水	만병수	Ten Thousand Disease Water (product name)
錠	정	Tablet (pill form)
본포	본포	Headquarters, main shop
삼천리 방방곡곡	삼천리 방방곡곡	Every nook and cranny of the 3000-ri peninsula (Korea)
남녀노소	남녀노소	Men and women, young and old
물론하고	물론하고	Not to mention, regardless of
皆皆人	개개인	Each and every person
입끗테	입 끝에	On the tip of the tongue (older spelling)
오르나리든	오르내리던	Was spoken of, circulated (older spelling)
의학박사	의학박사	Doctor of Medicine (M.D.)
다년간	다년간	For many years
결정	결정	Result, culmination, crystallization
정제하여	정제하여	Refining, preparing (medicine)
治病濟世	치병제세	Treating illness and saving the world
역할	역할	Role
별세하게 되자	별세하게 되자	Upon passing away
조직하고	조직하고	Organizing (into a company)
送料關係	송료관계	Shipping cost relation
沈澱關係	침전관계	Sedimentation relation
약효관계	약효관계	Efficacy relation
파손관계	파손관계	Breakage relation
복용가	복용가	User (of medicine), patient
불리한	불리한	Disadvantageous
절실히	절실히	Keenly, acutely
늣기고	느끼고	Feeling (older spelling)
개량하여	개량하여	Improving, modifying
본위로	본위로	For the benefit of, prioritizing
만드럿나니	만들었나니	Made it, so (older spelling)
탁월하여	탁월하여	Excellent, outstanding
일반대중	일반대중	General public
알이워지자	알려지자	As it became known (older passive form)
일확천금	일확천금	Making a fortune overnight
유사품	유사품	Similar product, imitation
방황하게	방황하게	To make wander, confuse
지배인	지배인	Manager
다정한	다정한	Affectionate, warm-hearted
인격자	인격자	Person of integrity/character
유치원장	유치원장	Kindergarten principal
장로교회	장로교회	Presbyterian Church
장로	장로	Elder (church)
신실한	신실한	Faithful, sincere
끗흐로	끝으로	Finally, lastly (older spelling)
강령	강령	Guiding principle, creed
최고	최고	Highest, supreme
경험	경험	Experience
在鮮	재선	Residing in Chosŏn (Korea)
귀한	귀한	Precious, valuable
풍토	풍토	Natural features, climate
체질	체질	Physical constitution
고귀약	고귀약	Precious medicine
원료	원료	Raw material
정선된	정선된	Carefully selected
배제하여	배제하여	Compounding (medicine)
합리적으로	합리적으로	Rationally
제법	제법	Manufacturing method
이상적인	이상적인	Ideal
정제	정제	Tablet (pill form)
변경하고	변경하고	Changing, altering
비방	비방	Secret method/formula
기계설비	기계설비	Mechanical facilities
정예	정예	Elite, best
능력	능력	Ability, potency
약가	약가	Drug price
단언할 수 있다	단언할 수 있다	Can assert, declare confidently
人蔘	인삼	Ginseng
老舖	노포	Old establishment, long-established store
蔘業社	삼업사	Ginseng business company
창업이래	창업 이래	Since its founding
판로확장	판로확장	Sales channel expansion
품질향상	품질향상	Quality improvement
주력해	주력해	Focusing efforts on
산업기관	산업기관	Industrial institution
蔘都	삼도	Capital of Ginseng (referring to Kaesŏng)
면목	면목	Face, honor, reputation
선양한 바 크다	선양한 바 크다	Has greatly enhanced/promoted
唐材	당재	Chinese medicinal ingredients
직수입할	직수입할	To directly import
唐草材	당초재	Chinese herbal materials
물품선택	물품선택	Product selection
정밀	정밀	Precision, meticulousness
商道	상도	Commercial principles, business ethics
漢藥界	한약계	Traditional Korean/Chinese medicine world
모범	모범	Model, example
보히고	보이고	Showing (older spelling)
두절되자	두절되자	As (it) was cut off
시가	시가	Market price
일약	일약	Suddenly, at a leap
고등한	고등한	Soaring, rising high
在京	재경	Residing in Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul)
귀국당시	귀국 당시	At the time of returning to their country
솔선하여	솔선하여	Taking the initiative
독점매입	독점매입	Monopolizing purchase
적당한	적당한	Appropriate, suitable
고객	고객	Customer
만족	만족	Satisfaction
膏藥	고약	Medicinal plaster
특제하여	특제하여	Specially manufacturing
해외	해외	Overseas
진출하고	진출하고	Advancing into
배합	배합	Blending, compounding
神効劑	신효제	Divinely effective agent
발매하는	발매하는	Selling, releasing for sale
과연	과연	Indeed, truly
皆皆히	개개히	Each and every one
호평	호평	Favorable review, high praise
상세하고도	상세하고도	Meticulous and
선친	선친	Late father
聲價	성가	Reputation, fame
알리우기까지	알리기까지	Until making known
위대한	위대한	Great
공로자	공로자	Person of distinguished service, contributor
동업조합장	동업조합장	Head of the cooperative association
판매조합장	판매조합장	Head of the sales association
取締役	취체역	Director (Japanese term: Torishimariyaku)
의원	의원	Member (of an assembly/council)
의자	의자	Position, seat (of authority)
점령하고	점령하고	Occupying
권위	권위	Authority
손꼽는	손꼽는	Counted on fingers (leading, prominent)
널녀있다	널려있다	Are spread out (older spelling)
秘傳膏	비전고	Secretly transmitted plaster
구급*약	구급*약	Emergency * medicine
婦人仙藥	부인선약	Women's elixir/miracle drug
調經湯	조경탕	Menstruation regulating decoction
皮膚藥	피부약	Skin medicine
解熱藥	해열약	Antipyretic, fever reducer
골는다면	고른다면	If one were to choose (older spelling)
급밀상세	급밀상세	Meticulous and detailed (perhaps 꼼꼼상세?)
경쾌	경쾌	Cheerful, light
친절한	친절한	Kind
판매고	판매고	Sales volume
공장	공장	Factory
좁아서	좁아서	Because it is small/narrow
건축 중이니	건축 중이니	As it is under construction
주목된다	주목된다	Attracts attention
개발	개발	Development
선구	선구	Pioneer
無比	무비	Unparalleled, incomparable
*약	*약	* medicine
왕좌	왕좌	Throne
독점한	독점한	Monopolized
명산	명산	Famous product (of a region)
가치	가치	Value
발휘하고	발휘하고	Displaying, exhibiting
*趾	*지	Site, ruins
광활한	광활한	Vast, extensive
평	평	Pyeong (unit of area)
굉대한	굉대한	Huge, immense
난관	난관	Difficulty, obstacle
돌파하고	돌파하고	Breaking through
비약	비약	Leap, jump
못토-로	모토로	As a motto (loanword + particle)
설립된	설립된	Established
日淺함에도	일천함에도	Despite being recent/shallow (in history)
불구하고	불구하고	Despite, nevertheless
비상히	비상히	Exceptionally, extraordinarily
양호하여	양호하여	Being good/favorable
수량	수량	Quantity
실로	실로	Indeed, truly
경이적	경이적	Astonishing, wondrous
수자	숫자	Figure, number
보히는데	보이는데	Showing (older spelling)
예년	예년	Previous years, average year
비하여	비하여	Compared to
증산임에도	증산임에도	Despite being an increase in production
완비한	완비한	Fully equipped, well-established
판매망	판매망	Sales network
압도적	압도적	Overwhelming
생산	생산	Production
소화식힌	소화시킨	Digested, absorbed (metaphorically, sold)
斯界	사계	This field/industry
놀낼만한	놀랄만한	Surprising, astonishing (older spelling)
비장한	비장한	Hidden, cherished, determined
노력	노력	Effort
분투	분투	Struggle, strenuous effort
일치한	일치한	Aligned, coincided
자태	자태	Figure, appearance
여실히	여실히	Clearly, vividly
반영된	반영된	Reflected
산업계	산업계	Industrial world
깃버할 바	기뻐할 바	Thing to be happy about (older spelling)
불과하다	불과하다	Insufficient, merely
희생	희생	Sacrifice
도라보지 안코	돌아보지 않고	Without looking back, regardless of (older spelling)
개척	개척	Pioneering, developing
주력한	주력한	Focused efforts on
결과	결과	Result
세계적으로	세계적으로	Globally
확장되엇나니	확장되었나니	Has been expanded (older spelling)
다음과 갓다	다음과 같다	Is as follows (older spelling)
取締役社長	취체역 사장	Representative Director President
專務取締役	전무 취체역	Executive Director
取締役支配人	취체역 지배인	Director Manager
유수한	유수한	Prominent, leading
인사	인사	Figure, personage
참가한	참가한	Participated in
*太廳直營捕獲	*태청 직영 포획	Directly managed capture by the * Karafuto Agency
眞品	진품	Genuine product
海狗腎	해구신	Seal penis (traditional medicine ingredient)
특약하여	특약하여	Making a special contract for
鮮滿一手販賣	선만일수판매	Exclusive sales rights throughout Korea and Manchuria
北洋産	북양산	North Pacific origin
보건상	보건상	For health
천혜적	천혜적	Heaven-sent, naturally blessed
영약	영약	Miraculous medicine, elixir
세간에는	세간에는	In the world, among people
가짜가	가짜가	Fakes, imitations
만흐나	많으나	Although there are many (older spelling)
구식사람	구식 사람	Old-style person
불가능한	불가능한	Impossible
시험제도	시험제도	Examination system
藥種商	약종상	Medicinal Materials Merchant
자격	자격	Qualification
어덧는데	얻었는데	Obtained (older spelling)
쾌활한	쾌활한	Cheerful, lively
각종	각종	Various kinds
직수입하여다가	직수입하여다가	Directly importing and then...
소매도 하는	소매도 하는	Also doing retail
규모있는	규모있는	Having scale, sizable
유*한	유*한	Prominent* (likely 有望한 promising or 有力한 influential)
경영하는	경영하는	Managing, running (a business)
관후한	관후한	Magnanimous, generous
버젓하게	버젓하게	Respectably, properly
百藥之王	백약지왕	King of All Medicines
漢藥乾材	한약건재	Dried traditional Korean/Chinese medicinal materials
취급한다고	취급한다고	Is said to handle/deal in
치과계	치과계	Dental world
泰斗	태두	Doyen, leading figure (lit. Mount Tai and the Big Dipper)
지칭할만치	지칭할만치	Enough to be pointed out/referred to (older spelling)
인식	인식	Recognition, awareness
신뢰	신뢰	Trust
밧고 있다	받고 있다	Is receiving (older spelling)
원장	원장	Director (of a hospital/clinic)
너그럽고	너그럽고	Magnanimous, generous
다정다감한	다정다감한	Warm-hearted and sensitive
비상한	비상한	Exceptional, extraordinary
才士	재사	Talented person, man of ability
합격되어서	합격되어서	Having passed (an exam)
위생	위생	Hygiene, sanitation
기타	기타	Other, etc.
교육	교육	Education
문화조선	문화조선	Cultural Chosŏn
향상	향상	Improvement, advancement
희생적	희생적	Sacrificial
정신	정신	Spirit, mentality
애쓰는	애쓰는	Striving, making efforts
令弟	영제	Your younger brother (honorific)
상냥하고	상냥하고	Gentle, amiable
다재한	다재한	Multi-talented
구강외과	구강외과	Oral surgery
연구하다가	연구하다가	While researching/studying
도라와서	돌아와서	Returning (older spelling)
한곳에서	한곳에서	In one place, together
주야분망한	주야분망한	Busy day and night
刀圭界	도규계	Surgical world (lit. knife and jade tablet - symbols of medicine)
중진	중진	Pillar, central figure
시원하고	시원하고	Straightforward, cool
근무하다가	근무하다가	While working
날노	날로	Daily, day by day (older spelling)
府議員	부의원	City/Prefectural council member
권투俱樂部	권투구락부	Boxing club (俱樂部 - kurabu - club)
아동교육	아동교육	Children's education
눈코 뜰새없이	눈코 뜰 새 없이	No time to open eyes and nose (idiom: extremely busy)
안과	안과	Ophthalmology
이비인후과	이비인후과	Otolaryngology (ENT)
일홈이 놉다	이름이 높다	Is famous (older spelling)
畢하고	필하고	Finishing, completing (studies)
仝	동	Same as above (archaic character used for 同)
부속의원	부속의원	Affiliated hospital/clinic
성상	성상	Months/years (poetic, lit. stars and frost)
탄력있고	탄력있고	Resilient, energetic
씩씩한	씩씩한	Robust, vigorous
굉장히	굉장히	Tremendously, greatly
근대식	근대식	Modern style
지여노코	지어놓고	Having built (older spelling)
태양등	태양등	Sunlamp
X광선	X광선	X-rays
자외선	자외선	Ultraviolet rays
적외선	적외선	Infrared rays
설립해노코	설립해놓고	Having established/installed (older spelling)
편리	편리	Convenience
소아과	소아과	Pediatrics
거두	거두	Giant, great master
천성	천성	Natural disposition, innate character
온후한	온후한	Gentle and sincere
인격자	인격자	Person of integrity
의사로뿐	의사로뿐	Not only as a doctor
제방면	제방면	Various fields
지식	지식	Knowledge
풍부하다	풍부하다	Is abundant, rich
거듭하엿고	거듭하였고	Repeatedly did (older spelling)
전문으로	전문으로	Specializing in
일반유지	일반유지	General prominent figures/local leaders
권유	권유	Recommendation, suggestion
이전진출	이전진출	Moving and advancing
신춘	신춘	New spring
양옥	양옥	Western-style house
원사	원사	Hospital building
입원실	입원실	Inpatient room
신축하고	신축하고	Newly constructing
명실공히	명실공히	In both name and reality
산부인과	산부인과	Obstetrics and Gynecology
명성	명성	Star (metaphorical), reputation
여사	여사	Madam, Ms. (referring to a woman)
냉민하고	냉민하고	Sharp and clever (perhaps 冷敏?)
일즉	일찍	Early on
고등여학	고등여학	Higher Girls' School
우수한	우수한	Excellent
성적	성적	Results, grades
교육계	교육계	Education section/field
철도병원	철도병원	Railway hospital
만 2개년전	만 2개년 전	Full two years ago
만흔	많은	Many (older spelling)
거성	거성	Great star, giant figure
자선심	자선심	Charitable spirit
사근사근한	사근사근한	Amiable, gentle
잘못이라고	잘못이라고	Is a mistake, is wrong
조직적인	조직적인	Organized, systematic
성적	성적	Results, performance
양호하다고	양호하다고	Is said to be good/favorable
몃몃	몇몇	Several (older spelling)
무게가 잇고	무게가 있고	Has weight, is composed (older spelling)
재조잇는	재주있는	Talented (older spelling)
다수	다수	Large number
달한다고	달한다고	Is said to reach
명에스럽게도	명예스럽게도	Honorably (older spelling)
일약	일약	At once, in one leap
精彩잇는	정채있는	Full of spirit, lively (older spelling)
넉넉히	넉넉히	Sufficiently, amply
증명하고 잇다	증명하고 있다	Is proving (older spelling)
역주계	역주계	Striving world (perhaps 力走?)
온건한	온건한	Moderate, steady
정력가	정력가	Energetic person
전신인	전신인	Predecessor
慈惠醫院	자혜의원	Chahye Hospital (Charity Hospital)
그동안	그동안	During that time
생명	생명	Life
구출하엿다	구출하였다	Rescued (older spelling)
校*	교의	School doctor (likely 校醫)
자동사	자동차	Automobile [association?] (context unclear)
産姿講習所	산자강습소	Midwifery Training Institute
소장	소장	Director
직업여성	직업여성	Professional woman
양성목적	양성목적	Purpose of training/nurturing
産姿役	산자역	Role of midwife
중대한	중대한	Crucial, important
늣기고	느끼고	Feeling (older spelling)
졸업생	졸업생	Graduate
면허장	면허장	License certificate
맛하가지고	맡아가지고	Receiving and then... (older spelling)
흐터저	흩어져	Scattering (older spelling)
온돌방	온돌방	Ondol room (Korean floor heating)
제하고는	제하고는	Except for
스팀	스팀	Steam (heating)
노혀잇다	놓여있다	Is placed, is installed (older spelling)
출입하느니만치	출입하는 만큼	As (they) come and go
침식	침식	Eating and sleeping
제때	제때	At the proper time
못할 정도로	못할 정도로	To the extent that one cannot
多忙하다	다망하다	Is very busy
온후다정한	온후다정한	Gentle and warm-hearted
오래ㅅ동안	오랫동안	For a long time (older spelling)
싸흔	쌓은	Accumulated (older spelling)
차저오는	찾아오는	Who come seeking (older spelling)
깃븜을	기쁨을	Joy (older spelling)
호평을 밧는	호평을 받는	Receiving favorable reviews (older spelling)
활달한	활달한	Cheerful, broad-minded
검정시험	검정시험	Qualifying examination
파쓰되어	패스되어	Having passed (loanword + verb)
등장하게	등장하게	To emerge, appear
공의	공의	Public physician
일방	일방	Meanwhile, on the one hand
교사	교사	Teacher
경험을 싸어가지고	경험을 쌓아가지고	Accumulating experience (older spelling)
의사자격	의사자격	Medical license/qualification
획득하여	획득하여	Acquiring
다대한	다대한	Great, considerable
개앀…하고	개업하고	Opening a practice (likely 개업하고 with typo/damage)
쾌활하고	쾌활하고	Cheerful, lively
다정다재한	다정다재한	Warm-hearted and multi-talented
이해	이해	Understanding
동정심	동정심	Compassion, sympathy
청년	청년	Young man
맛추고	마치고	Finishing (studies) (older spelling)
재작년	재작년	Year before last
꼭게인	깍듯이	Respectfully, politely (older spelling)
쉴새없이	쉴 새 없이	Without pause, incessantly
명성	명성	Reputation
놉흔	높은	High (older spelling)
숙부	숙부	Uncle (father's younger brother)
얼마동안	얼마 동안	For some time
독영하는	독영하는	Managing alone
민첩다재한	민첩다재한	Agile and multi-talented
년조가	연조가	Years of service/experience (older spelling)
신임	신임	Trust, confidence
씩씩하고	씩씩하고	Robust, vigorous
다감한	다감한	Sensitive, emotional
들녀준 말	들려준 말	Words shared (older spelling)
특점	특점	Special point, unique feature
요점	요점	Gist, main point
불합리하다	불합리하다	Is irrational, unreasonable
면경영	면경영	Township-level management
총수입	총수입	Total income
상여금	상여금	Bonus
백분지일	백분지일	One-hundredth
천분지일	천분지일	One-thousandth
정하면	정하면	If decided/set
조흘	좋을	Good (future form, older spelling)
의원	의원	Hospital/clinic (older term)
자미인는	재미있는	Interesting, amusing (older spelling)
덕망	덕망	Virtue and reputation, high repute
놉흔	높은	High (older spelling)
상양한	상냥한	Gentle, amiable (older spelling)
학자양반	학자양반	Scholar-gentleman type
한방의학	한방의학	Traditional Korean medicine
탄력	탄력	Resilience, springiness
잇는	있는	Having (older spelling)
교위	교위	Skill, ability (likely 技倆)
如何	여하	How it is, state of affairs
짐작할	짐작할	To guess, infer
부드럽고	부드럽고	Soft, gentle
미덤직한	믿음직한	Reliable, trustworthy (older spelling)
외무성	외무성	Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan)
촉탁의	촉탁의	Commissioned doctor
보통학교장	보통학교장	Common school principal
호감	호감	Favorable impression
정다웁고도	정답고도	Affectionate and (older spelling)
쾌활미	쾌활미	Cheerfulness, liveliness
넘치는	넘치는	Overflowing
진력하였을	진력하였을	Would have exerted effort
취급하는	취급하는	Handling, treating (patients)
겸손한	겸손한	Humble
도의원	도의원	Provincial council member
정치무대	정치무대	Political stage
출마하여	출마하여	Running for office
어촌부흥	어촌부흥	Fishing village revitalization
목적하고	목적하고	Aiming for
제일	제일	Primary, number one
축항	축항	Harbor construction
운동중이며	운동 중이며	While campaigning/lobbying
고등보통학교	고등보통학교	Higher Common School
다정스럽고	다정스럽고	Affectionate (older spelling)
경건한	경건한	Devout, pious
*院하는	*원하는	Treating* (likely 治院)
육적	육적	Physical
방면	방면	Aspect, side
한한	한한	Limited to
종교적	종교적	Religious
입장	입장	Standpoint, position
복음	복음	Gospel
선전하기	선전하기	Propagating, preaching


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제10권 제1호
발행일	1938년 01월 01일
기사제목	半島醫藥界大觀
기사형태	소식

半島醫藥界大觀
세상이 진보할사록 인류의 활동은 繁雜多岐하며, 그러니만치 또한 활동의 요소로써 의사을 구하게 되야 현대 생활하는 모든 사람에게는 한 봉지의 약과, 한 시간의 진찰이 모든 활력의 원천이 된다. 엇지써 의약제세시대가 아니랴 회고컨대
우리 반도가 세계 제일가는 건강지대는 안이다. 그러기에 우리들은 더 일층 조흔 의약을 어더서 우리의 건강을 도와드러야 하겟다. 이에 세상에 일홈이 놉흔 名醫名藥을 차저 소개코저 하는 바이다.

100여년 역사 가진 趙膏藥-天一藥房=萬餘個所의 販賣網
鍾路 4丁目네거에서 남촌을 바라보고 조곰 가노라면 다리를 채 건너지안코 좌편 큰길가에 일견 댓바람으로 사람을 威壓할만큼 굉대화려한 근대식 건물이 잇나니 이것이 곳 趙膏藥을 만드러내는 天一藥房이다.
趙膏藥이라고 하면 遠山僻地 三尺童子라도 다 알만지 광범위로 선전된 유명한 약이거니와 이 趙膏藥제조본포인 天一藥房이 아주 화려한 巨容으로 現下半島藥業界의 王座를 점령하기까지에는 그야말로 남모를 苦心奮鬪와 장구한 150여년동안의 다대한 積功이 숨어있나니 즉 현재의 주인 趙寅燮씨의 부친인 趙根昶씨는 본래 舊韓國時代의 漢方醫員으로서 약 150여년전부터 그의 집에 전래하는 독특한 腫氣仙藥을 가지고 晝夜殺到하는 환자군의 腫處를 일일이 치료하여 주엇다고 한다. 그리하여 그 집 문전에는 어느 때던지 外科환자로 人山人海를 이루웟섯다고 한다. 이와 같이 유일한 외과의료품으로 써오든 약을 신학문을 배우고 신시대에 눈이 뜬 현주인 趙寅燮씨가 장래 藥業이 유망할 것을 先見하고 그의 22세때 그 부친에게서 藥局을 인계하게 되자 天一藥房이라는 간판을 내여걸고 수만흔 사람에게서 열광적 환영을 밧든 家傳秘方藥을 趙膏藥이라 하고 이것을 賣藥으로 제조하여서 全鮮各處로 널리 선전하여 의약의 혜택을 입을 수 업는 深山窮村에 사는 사람들에게도 다대한 도음을 주어왓다. 그리고 氏는 一方 日本內地와 上海 香港, 中國방면 40여처의 상인들과 거래하여 朝鮮産藥材는 中國방면으로 수출하고 기타 외국약재는 朝鮮으로 수입하여서 朝鮮내에 산재한 여러 동업자에게 도매를 하여왓다.
趙寅燮씨는 원래 仁厚하고도 慧敏多才한 분이다. 현재 天一藥房에는 貿易部, 漢藥乾材部, 賣藥部, 洋藥都賣部까지 있는데 洋藥都賣部에서는 京城시내는 물론이요 각 지방에 산재한 병원의 주문에 응하여 꾸준하게 배급하는 상태이다. 그리고 각부에는 都長이 있어 각기 부서를 담임하고 각자 共히 맹렬한 활동을 하는 중인데 총자본금은 100만원가량이요, 본점외에 黃金町, 大邱, 平壤, 光州에는 큰 지점이 있고 50여개소의 대리점과 1,400여개소의 특약점이 있으며 趙膏藥을 소매하는 곳은 약 1만여 곳이나 된다고 하니 매년 판매고가 얼마나 굉장한 수자를 돌파할 것인가? 이것이 엇지 一朝一夕에 완성된 업적이라 할 것이냐. 본지점을 통하여 晝夜不拘하고 밧부게 일하는 180여명의 종업원이 있다고 하니 상호도 天一이지만 藥業으로도 朝鮮천하에 하나이라고 하겟다.
또 한가지는 업무를 더욱 확장하고 내용을 更一層 충실케 하기 위하여 昭和 12년 8월에 公稱 資金 50만원의 天一제약주식회사를 창립하고 製造賣藥部와 新藥部를 특설한 후 대대적으로 활동을 하는 중인데 주식회사 사장에 趙根昶氏, 전무에 趙寅燮氏, 상무에 金泰鍊氏, 감사에는 天一藥房 賣藥部 주임이며 一切 선전에 관한 전권을 가지고 잇는 朴永德氏다. 朴氏는 원래 頭腦와 수완이 남달리 비범하고 명민한 다각적 활동가이다. 여러 가지 복잡한 사무를 혼자 맛하보지마는 무엇이나 시원스럽게 어렵지 안케 잘하여 나가는 분이니마치 天一藥房에는 없지 못할 큰 나래라 하겟다.

해외진출의 百補丸-平和堂=창업수년에 득세
요새 각 신문잡지의 全頁를 독차지하고 일반세인의 이목을 놀내이는 百補丸! 폭풍적 세력으로 반도약업계를 휩쓰러내는 百補丸이다. 매일같히 주문장이 쇄도하고 소포꾸러미가 구루마에 실녀서 연다라 나간다고 한다. 이 百補丸의 製造本舖인 평화당약방의 제약수는 엄청나게 110여종이나 된다는데 중에서도 가장 대표약이 百補丸과 그리고 몃 해전에 한바탕 큰소리치든 常選淋藥과 煖宮丸 등등이다. 현재 130여명의 종업원이 晝夜눈코를 못뜨고 분망하게 일들을 하고 잇다하니 그 업적을 가히 짐작할 것이 아닌가.
평화당 주인 李根澤氏는 매우 유덕하고 慧敏한 분으로서 무엇보다 침묵을 사랑하는 특성이 있다. 반도의 상업대왕 朴興植氏와도 사업을 같히 한 시절이 있엇거니와 현재의 업적으로 보아 朴氏에 지지안을 만한 두뇌와 수완을 가젓다 하겟다.
지금 평화당에는 최신 과학적 大製藥機械가 있을 뿐 아니라 高速電氣輪轉機를 신설하고 사옥도 1**** *축하자 동시 업무를 倍前擴張중이라 한다. 이안에는 李根澤 사회사업부가 있는데 명일 朝鮮의 주인공이 될 유소년을 가장 씩씩하고 원기있게 키워야겟다는 뜨거운 마음으로 먼저 유소년의 寄生虫撲滅運動을 착수하고 몃 달 전에는 全鮮 338부락에 1만명 어린이에게 기생충박멸약을 무료발송하였거니와 제2차로 다시 착수하여 소년소녀로부터 기생충을 완전히 제거식혀가지고 명일 반도의 광명을 가저오고저 한다고 한다. 기타에도 여러 가지 조흔 일을 작구작구 착수하는 중이라고. 또 평화당 대표약인 百補丸을 세계적으로 그 진가를 인식식히고저 英國, 米國, 獨逸, 佛蘭西, 伊太利 등 서양 각국 21國所에 수송을 완료까지 하였다니 참으로 굉장한 일이 아니냐.
평화당안에 여러 가지 일이 작구 느러가고 크게 됨에 있어 물론 사장 李根澤氏의 비범한 두뇌와 수완을 엿볼 수 있거니와 선전부에서 晝夜 노력하는 明敏多才한 邊貴鉉氏의 보통사람으로 *지 못할만한 탁월한 활동상을 력력히 아러 볼 수가 있다.＜37＞

醫藥 朝鮮의 異彩, ホルモン醫化學硏究所
海草精은 세상에 나온지가 그러케 오라지 아니하나 지금와서는 누구나 모를 사람없을 만치 너머나 유명하여진 약이다. 1차 복용한 사람으로는 반드시 탄복을 마지안는다 하니 매일 갓치 감사장과 주문서가 쇄도한다는 것도 虛傳은 안일 것이다. 이약을 제조하는 右연구소의 제조신약 20여종 가운데 가장 대표되는 약이니만치 그 효력 여하도 가히 짐작하겟다. 일반의 호평으로 미루어 보아 바야흐로 海草精시대가 도래하는 감이 不無하다.
이 연구소의 주인되는 金三辰氏는 昭和 5년도에 京城藥學專門學校를 우수한 성적으로 졸업하고 開城道立病院에서 만 2개년간이나 근무하면서 꾸준히 연구를 거듭하였으며 京城으로 올나와서도 엇던 큰 약방에서 만 2개년간 연구실험하다가 절대자신하는 바가 있어 약 3년전에 독자적으로 개업한 매우 자상하고 업무에 성실한 분이다.
또 최근에는 補血强劑인 コルモン이라는 약과 부인병 근본적 치료제인 オベスモン이라는 약을 또 제조해내여 醫藥朝鮮에 다시 한번 巨彈을 던젓는데 コルモン은 연합「ホルモン」 즉 和渶藥의 淫羊*엑기쓰와 인삼 기타의 성분으로 된 약인데 생식기 장애, 신경쇠약, 노쇠 근기상실, 빈혈 諸症에 유효하다고 한다. 복용한 사람의 말을 드러보니 엇더케도 速効가 있은지 모른다. 그리고 オベスモン이라는 부인약은 가장 진보된 ホルモン학설에 입각하여 雌性動物卵巢로부터 독특한 방법으로 ホルモン을 추출하여 狹雜物을 완전히 제거한 극히 순수한 것의 최적량을 포함식힌 卵巢 ホルモン제에다 和渶益母草에서 취한 엑기쓰 기타의 유효성분을 포함한 和渶藥 등을 가하엿고 骨質組成上 중요한 칼슘을 配劑한 최신치료제로서 치료상의 효과는 임의 임상가의 實驗推獎하는 부인병약이라고 한다. 朝鮮내에서는 ホルモン製劑을 전문으로 하는 곳이 없느니만치 이 연구소는 가장 남다른 특색을 발휘하는 곳이라 하겟다. 하여간 도라올 압날을 전망하고 가장 실질주의로 업무를 착착 진행하느니만치 장래가 여간 주목되는 바 아니다.

萬病水錠本舖-魚乙彬製藥株式會社
魚乙彬만병수라면 삼천리 방방곡곡, 남녀노소를 물론하고 皆皆인의 입끗테 오르나리든 유명한 약이엿다. 이 약은 본래 美國 의학박사 魚乙彬氏의 다년간 연구실험한 결정으로 日韓合倂 이전에 생긴 약이다. 同氏가 이 약을 정제하여 治病濟世的 역할을 해나려 오기 수십년간, 불행하게도 별세하게 되자, 박사가 죽든 해 즉 昭和 8년부터 회사로 조직하고 박사의 아들 魚乙彬씨가 사장이 되어 물약을 병에 너허 팔면 送料關係, 沈澱關係, 약효관계, 파손관계, 기타 여러 가지로 보아서 복용가에게 불리한 것을 절실히 늣기고 錠으로 개량하여 복용가 본위로 만드럿나니 이것이 곳 魚乙彬萬病水錠이다. 이 약의 효력이 탁월하여 일반대중에게 널리 알이워지자 滿洲國 또는 朝鮮내에서까지 일획천금을 하고저 유사품을 만드러 가지고 세상사람을 방황하게 하는 자까지 있다고 한다.
이 회사의 지배인 梁聖奉씨는 매우 慧敏하고 인후다정한 인격자로서 현재 釜山삼일유치원장이오 장노교회 장로인 신실한 분이다. 끗흐로 魚乙彬약품 5대강령을 기록한다.
최고의 경험
魚乙彬박사가 在鮮 40년간 귀한 경험으로 朝鮮의 풍토와 체질에 적합하도록 연구한 高貴藥이다.
최귀의 원료
多貴한 원료와 일일히 정선된 약재만을 配劑하여 합리적으로 제조한 高貴의 치병제이다.
최신의 제법
약품제조에 이상적인 정제로 변경하고 제조비방과 기계설비에 최신의 精銳를 다하였다.
최대의 약효
원료의 ｘ 즉 그 精을 錠으로 제조한 고로 소량으로도 귀한 효과를 엇고 최대의 능력을 발휘한다.
최저의 藥價
이 원료 이 효과! 이런 약을 이런 가격으로는 살 수 없으니 최고제에 최저가를 단언할 수 있다.＜38＞

人蔘老舖-高麗蔘業社
고려인삼의 老舖인 同社는 창업이래 20여년동안 꾸준히 판로확장과 품질향상에 주력해 왔으며 산업기관으로서 蔘都開城의 면목을 세상에 宜揚한 바 크다.
同社에서는 支那 각처에서 출산되는 唐材를 직수입할 뿐 아니라 唐草材의 물품선택과 정밀을 商道로 하여 반도 渶藥界에 모범을 보히고 있다.
日支事變으로 인하여 支那貿易이 두절되자 唐材의 시가는 일약 2, 3배이상으로 高騰한 이때에, 同社는 在京 支那人 무역상이 귀국당시에 솔선하여 唐材를 독점매입하여 가지고 적당한 시가로 일반고객에게 만족을 준다고 한다. 그리고 또 40여종의 膏藥을 특제하여 朝鮮은 물론 日本내지와 해외에까지 진출하고 있으며 특히 인삼靈神丸, 인삼활*탕, 蔘茸エリク 등 인삼배합의 神効劑를 연구제조하여 발매하는 바 과연 1차 복용한 사람은 皆皆히 호평이라 한다.
이 회사의 사장 孫洪駿씨는 매우 상세하고도 인후한 분으로서 일즉이 神戶高等商業學校를 맛초고 開城실업계에서 가장 重鎭으로 활동하는 중이다. 氏의 선친인 인삼왕 孫鳳祥翁시대로부터 금일의 고려인삼의 聲價를 세계적으로 알리우기까지 위대한 공로자이다.
氏는 현재 開城인삼동업조합장, 開城인삼판매조합장, 開城蔘業株式會社取締役, 開城商工會議所 의원 등의 중요한 의자를 점령하고 잇는 분이다.

平壤藥業界의 權威-永生堂制藥社
平壤서 가장 손꼽는 약방이다. 大正 15년에 창립하였으나 벌서 대리점 특약점이 3천여 곳에나 널녀있다. 製造賣藥은 30여종인데, 그중에 대표약으로 말하면 5대명약이라는 崔氏네 秘傳膏와 구급*약인 天寶水요 婦人仙藥인 胎養調經湯과 皮膚藥인 滅*水와 解熱藥 ネツピリン이다. 이가운데서 또 다시 골는다면 崔氏秘傳膏와 天寶水일 것이다. 이 약방의 주인 崔永源氏는 퍽으나 級密상세하고 경쾌 친절한 분이다. 매년 판매고는 4, 5만원이 된다고 하며 현재에 있는 두 개의 공장이 좁아서 大同江邊에 제3공장을 또다시 건축 중이니 크게 주목된다.

蔘業開發의 先驅-開城蔘業株式會社
천 몃 백년의 역사와 세계 無比의 *약으로 渶藥의 왕좌를 독점한 인삼은 반도명산으로 참다운 가치를 발휘하고 있다.
松岳山*의 高麗王朝*趾 滿月台의 좌측에 광활한 2만여평의 굉대한 제조공장이 보이나니 이것이 작년 11월 여러 가지 난관을 돌파하고 삼업개발을 위한 일대비약을 못토-로 하여 설립된 開城蔘業株式會社이다.

同社의 창립이 日淺함에도 불구하고 업적은 비상히 양호하여 작년도(昭和 11년도)의 제조수량은 24만斤이라는 실로 경이적 수자를 보히는데 예년에 비하여 수만근의 증산임에도 불구하고 완비한 同社의 판매망은 이 압도적 생산을 전부 소화식힌 것은 실노 斯界의 놀낼만한 사실이라 하겟다. 이것이야말노 회사측의 비장한 노력과 판매자측의 분투와가 일치한 同社의 자태가 여실히 반영된 것이니 반도산업계를 위하여 비상히 깃버할 바 아니하겟다.
판로에 대하여
인삼판로에 있어는 현재에 朝鮮내 7할, 日本內地 支那, 南洋 諸國 기타 합하여 3할가량이였는데 이것만으로는 불과하다 하여 동회사에서는 창립이래 다대한 희생도 도라보지 안코 신판로의 확장개척에 크게 주력한 결과 지금은 세계적으로 판매망이 확장되엇나니 판로는 다음과 갓다.
朝鮮, 布哇, 日本內地, 印度, 樺太, *羅, 台灣, 歐洲, 關東州, 滿洲國, 北米 支那, 馬來半島, 南洋群島등지이다.
取締役社長   孔聖學
專務取締役   曺龍煥
取締役支配人 山階賢隆

釜山大洋貿易社의 海狗腎
이 회사는 경북재계의 유수한 인사가 참가한 회사로서 *太廳直營捕獲 眞品 海狗腎을 특약하여 鮮滿一手판매를 하는데 此北洋産 海狗腎은 보건상 천혜적 영약이라 한다. 세간에는 가짜가 만흐나 이것만은 진품이라고 한다.

開城漢藥社-張干炯
氏는 10년전에 松都高普를 졸업하고 昭和 9년에 구식사람으로는 불가능한 시험제도를 돌파하여 藥種商자격을 어덧는데 매우 쾌활한 분이다. 각종 약재를 支那 及 日本내지에서 직수입하여다가 도매도 하고 소매도 하는 규모있는 유*한 약방을 경영하는 분이다.

開城 李文淳氏
氏는 매우 寬厚한 분이다. 20년전에 10원돈으로 약업을 시작하여 꾸준한 마음으로 지금까지 오직 한길만 걸어나온 결과 현재는 만여원의 자금으로 버젓하게 하는 중이다. 製造膏藥 15종중에 대표약으로는 百藥之王이라 하는 인삼エキス이다. 渶藥乾材도 취급한다고.

釜山方面
치과계의 泰斗 金昌齒科醫院
치과하면 金昌치과를 지칭할만치 일반의 인식과 신뢰를 밧고 있다. 원장 金昌圭씨는 마음이 너그럽고 다정다감한 비상한 才士로서 23세때 의사시험에 합격되어서 개업이래 위생에 대한 것은 물론이요 기타 교육을 위하여 文化朝鮮의 향상을 위하여 다대한 희생적 정신으로 애쓰는 분이다.

令弟 金讚圭씨도 상냥하고 다재한 분으로서 昭和 10년에 京城齒科醫專을 졸업한 후 東京高等齒醫學校 口腔外科에서 연구하다가 도라와서 형님과 한곳에서 환자들을 위하여 주야분망한 가운데 있다.

刀圭界의 重鎭 李瑾鎔氏
氏는 극히 시원하고 상세한 분으로서 다각적 활동가이다.＜39＞ 大正 7년에 京城醫專을 졸업하고 세부란스병원에서 2개년 京城帝大 外科에서 3개월간 근무하다가 약 12년전에 釜山서 개업한 이래 날노 일반의 신뢰를 밧고 있다.
氏는 현재 府의원으로서 권투俱樂部도 경영하고 또 아동교육을 위하여 애쓰는 분이다. 매일 환자가 50명가량이라 하니 환자들도 보살필내 사회사업할내 晝夜 눈코 뜰새없이 분망할 것이다.

釜山 金龍錫氏(東光醫院)
氏는 釜山에서 眼耳鼻咽喉科 의사로 일홈이 놉다. 昭和 2년 セ專을 畢하고 仝부속의원에서 1개년 반, 大邱東山病院에서 10개星霜이나 근무하다가 昭和 11년부터 釜山서 개업하였는데 매일 환자는 30여명이라 한다.

釜山 李貴興氏(永濟醫院)
氏는 매우 탄력있고 씩씩한 분으로서 大正 14년에 京城醫專을 畢하고 大邱道立醫院서 4년 경북 안동도립의원서 2년간 근무하다가 6년전부터 釜山서 개업하였는데 굉장히 크게 근대식으로 집을 지여노코 3,000여원으로 レントヶン 太陽燈, X光線, 자외선, 적외선을 설립해노코 환자대중에게 편리를 준다고 한다.

小兒科의 巨頭-東山醫院 金炯璣氏
氏는 천성이 온후한 인격자로서 의사로뿐 아니라 제방면에 대한 지식이 풍부하다. 大年 10년에 京城醫專을 畢한 후 朝鮮總督府醫院에서 1년간 연구를 거듭하엿고 東萊郡에서 소아과 내과 전문으로 개업하고 있다가 昭和 3년에 일반유지의 권유로 인하여 釜山으로 이전진출하게 되었다.
昭和 5년 신춘에 2층 양옥의 院舍와 입원실을 新築하고 이래 명실공히 小兒科 內科의 巨頭로서 일반환자의 신뢰를 날로 두터히 하고 있다.

産婦人科의 明星-婦人病院 鄭鳳今女史
여사는 매우 冷敏하고 다재한 분으로서 일즉 日本高等女學을 우수한 성적으로 졸업한 후 慶南道廳 교육계에서 2개년간 근무하다가 東京으로 건너가 東京醫專을 昭和 8년도에 畢하고 釜山鐵道病院 産婦人科에서 2개년간 근무하다가 만 2개년전부터 개업하였는데 일반환자로부터 만흔 신뢰를 밧고 있다.

大邱方面
大邱刀圭界의 巨星-南山醫院 金在明氏
氏는  世專을 畢하고 大邱東山病院에서 11년간 근무하다가 昭和 6년부터 개업하였는데 慈善心이 풍부하여 3년전부터 학생 두 사람이나 京都工科大學에 입학식혀 공부식히는 중이다.

仁川方面
仁川 金兌根(東洋醫院)
氏는 엇더케나 사근사근한 분인지 모른다. 昭和 3년에 世專을 졸업하고 동부속의원에서 2개년간, 그 후 전북에서 개업하고 잇다가 2년전부터 당지에서 개업하엿는데 금번 기자에게 다음과 갓흔 말을 하여 주엇다. 의사가 반듯이 금전만 안다고 생각하는 사람은 잘못이라고.

仁川 安斗護(安斗護齒科醫院)
氏는 아주 쾌활하고 조직적인 분이다. 昭和 8년에 京城齒科醫專을 졸업한 후 곳 仁川에서 개업하엿는데 성적이 매우 양호하다고 한다.＜40＞

仁川 金錫永氏
氏는 昭和 9년에 京城齒科醫專을 졸업하고 몃몃 병원에서 근무하다가 동년 8월부터 당지에서 개업하엿는데 매우 무게가 잇고 재조잇는 분이다. 환자도 다수에 달한다고 한다.

仁川 朴順婷(婦人病院)
氏는 지금 26세. 京城女子醫學講習所 제1회 졸업생으로서 검정시험에 파쓰되어 명에스럽게도 일약 의사가 되어 城大若井內科에서 1개년, 仁川婦人病院에서 3개년간 근무중이다. 경쾌한 표정과 精彩잇는 그의 맑은 눈은 다재한 것을 넉넉히 증명하고 잇다.

平壤方面
力走界의 重鎭-平壤邊麟奇(喜生醫院)
氏는 仁厚穩健한 정력가이다. 明治 43년에 京城醫專 전신인 舊大韓醫學校를 우수한 성적으로 졸업하고 全南朝鮮總督府 慈惠醫院에서 2개년간 근무하다가 25, 6년 전부터 개업하고 그동안 수만흔 환자대중의 생명을 구출하엿다. 氏는 현재 上*公普校와 **普通學校 校* 자동사에 부의원이요 産姿講習所 소장이다. 氏는 직업여성양성목적보다 위생중에 가장 産姿役이 중대한 것을 늣기고 大正 12년에 이 강습소를 창립하엿. 그동안 졸업생이 400여명에 달하고 130여인은 産姿면허장을 맛하가지고 여러곳에 흐터저 활동한다고 한다. 氏가 경영하는 병원에는 입원실이 15개소나 잇는데 네 개의 온돌방을 제하고는 전부에 스팀이 노혀잇다. 매일 환자가 8, 90명식 출입하느니만치 침식을 제때 하지 못할 정도로 多忙하다.

平壤 李尙斌氏(野雲堂醫院)
氏는 매우 온후다정한 분으로서 大正 3년에 의과를 畢하고 忠北 忠州 慈惠醫院에서 만 2개년간 全南木浦에서 8개년간 개업 平南 平原에서 7개년간 개업 城大醫學部 眼科耳鼻咽喉科에서 2개년간 연구하엿고 平壤서 개업한지도 벌서 7개 星霜이 넘는다. 오래ㅅ동안 싸흔 연구경험은 차저오는 환자들에게 반듯이 깃븜을 줄 것이다.

平壤 金正和氏(水玉齒科醫院)
氏는 昭和 7년에 京城齒科醫專을 畢하고 平南道立病院에서 2개년간 근무하다가 東京齒科醫專부속병원과 모대학부속병원을 거처가지고 약 1개년 전부터 平壤에서 개업하엿는데 매일 차저오는 환자들에게 호평을 밧는 활달한 의사이다.

平壤 金雲炳氏(錦城醫院)
氏는 五山高普를 졸업하고 검정시험에 파쓰되어 단번에 의사로 등장하게 되엇다. 그후 黃海道 長*公醫로 2개년간 근무하다가 지금은 平壤서 개업하고 잇는 일방 O城醫學講習所 교사로 잇는 중이다.

開城方面
開城 遠藤義見氏(遠藤齒科醫院)
氏는 大阪 모치과의원에서 실지로 다년간 경험을 싸어가지고 昭和 5년에 검정시험에 パ-ス되어 명예롭게도 의사자격을 획득하여 지금 開城에서 개업하고 환자들에게서 다대한 호평을 밧는 분이다.

開城 渡邊道夫氏(渡邊齒科醫院)
氏는 昭和 2년에 京城齒科醫專을 졸업하고 대학병원에서 2년 도립의원에서 3년간 근무하다가 開城에서 개앀…하고 환자들을 위하여 晝夜 노력하는 가운데 잇다. 현재에 氏는 開城齒科醫師會長이요 또 開城府會議員인데 매우 쾌활하고 다정다재한 분이다.

開城 吳廷龍氏(고려치과의원)
氏는 일즉이 日本 모치과의원에서 4개년간 근무하다가 昭和 6년도에 검정시험에 파쓰되어 黃海道에서 개업하고 잇다가 지금 開城으로 이전하엿는데 아주 이해가 넓고 동정심이 풍부한 다정한 청년이다.

開城 崔昌順氏(十字醫院)
氏는 8년전에 世專을 맛추고 南星병원에서 7개년간 근무하다가 재작년 12월부터 개업하엿는데 매우 자상하고 꼭게인 친절한 분이다. 환자가 쉴새없이 출입하는 것으로 보아 명성이 놉흔 것을 가히 알겟다.

開城 方奎煥氏(方啓煥치과의원)
氏는 東京浦和齒科醫專을 昭和 3년에 畢하고 또 京城藥學校를 맛춘 후에 숙부의 치과에서 얼마동안 연구실험하다가 京城서 2개년간 개업한 일이 잇다. 그후 弟氏 方啓煥과 現地에서 갓치 일을 보다가 弟氏는 별세하고 現今 氏가 독영하는 중인데 매우 敏捷多才한 분이다.

開城 林憲章氏(大同醫院)
氏는 大正 8년에 千葉醫專을 졸업하고 여러 병원에서 다년 굀¼무하다가 13년 전부터 開城서 개업하고 잇는데 년조가 오래니 만치 일반환자에게 만흔 신임을 밧는 매우 씩씩하고 다감한 분이다.

新浦의 公醫 李橿氏(漢山醫院長)
氏는 大正 12년도에 경성의전을 졸업하고 총독부 병원에서 1년 반, 三水公醫로 2년 반, 北靑서 3년간 개업, 新浦公醫로 10년간 근무중이다.
氏가 기자에게 들녀준 말은 남달리 特點이 있엇스니 요점은 다음과 갓다.
현대 의업조직은 불합리하다. 이것을 面경영으로 하되 의사의 총수입에 대한 상여금을 百分之一이나 혹은 天分之一노 정하면 조흘 것이다.

新浦 全柱雄氏(新星齒科醫院)
氏는 昭和 11년에 경성치과의전을 졸업하고 咸興道立醫阮에서 근무하다가 금년 5월에 新浦에서 개업하엿는데 매우 친절한 분이다.

新浦 李楨伯氏(三省醫院)
氏는 昭和 10년에 世專을 졸업한 후 平壤기독병원과 咸興濟惠病院을 거처 新浦에서 2개년 전에 개업하엿다. 아주 썩 자미인는 분이다.

北靑 崔溶武氏(三星醫院)
氏는 大正 12년에 京城醫專 졸업후 총독부병원 내과에서 2년, 帝大내과에 1년 반, 그 후 北靑와서 개업하고 잇다가 昭和 8년부터는 公醫가 되엇는데 매우 덕망이 놉흔 분이다.

洪原 姜弼模氏(東西醫院)
氏는 昭和 9년에 京城醫專을 졸업한 후 동부속의원을 거처 全南道立醫院에서 2년간 근무하다가 洪原邑으로 와 개업하엿는데 아주 상양한 학자양반으로 현재 한방의학을 晝夜로 연구실험하는 중인데 일반환자로부터 매우 호평을 밧는다고 한다.

洪原邑 李鍾述氏(洪原醫院)
氏는 昭和 4년에 京城醫專을 졸업하고 惠山道立醫院을 거처 기타 여러 곳에서 다년 환자를 위하여 노력하다가 이곳 公醫로 되엿는데 매우 친절하고 탄력이 잇는 분이다. 매일 환자가 4, 50명이나 된다고 하니 그의 挍衛如何를 가히 짐작할 것이 아닌가.

端川 權斗經氏(大東醫院)
大正 13년에 京城醫專을 맛춘 氏는 咸興서 4년간 개업, 平北 厚昌公醫로 4년간, 端川邑에서 개업한지도 벌서 5개년인데 극히 부드럽고 미덤직한 분이다.

遮湖 金相兌氏(金相兌醫院)
氏는 大正 15년에 京城醫專을 졸업하고 외무성 촉탁의로 3년간, 咸南道公醫로 6년간, 보통학교장으로 2개년, 작년 6월부터는 현지에서 개업하엿는데 대하는 사람에게 호감을 주는 정다웁고도 快活味가 넘치는 분이다. 그동안 교육을 위하여 환자를 위하여 多大히 진력하였을 뿐 아니라 지금도 매일 50여명 환자를 취급하는 중이다.

城津 尹致魯氏(濟衆醫院)
氏는 大正 12년에 京城醫專을 졸업하고 江原道 春川道立醫院에서 2개년 반, *憲大學 眼科에서 1년간 연구, 城津道立醫院에서 1년간, 京城醫專 안과강사로 1년간, 仁川府立醫院에서 약 3년간 근무하다가 6년 전부터 현 장소에서 개업하엿는데 매우 인후한 분이다. 환자는 매일 30명가량이라고 한다.

城津 金敬運氏(金齒科醫院)
昭和 8년도에 九洲齒科醫專을 졸업하고 나와 고향 城津에서 지금까지 개업하고 잇는데 氏는 괴 謙遜한 분이다.

新昌. 醫李亨垣氏(常春醫院)
氏는 大正 13년에 京城醫專을 졸업하고 公醫가 되어 현지에 와 잇는데 금년에는 도의원으로서 정치무대에까지 출마하여 어촌부흥을 목적하고 新昌에 제일 築港을 운동중이며 또 北靑에 고등보통학교를 운동하는 가운데 잇는 다각적 활동가이다.

興南 方亨鍊氏(弘濟醫院)
氏는 昭和 10년에 平壤醫專을 졸업하고 平壤醫院을 거처 興南 모병원 소아과에서도 10여개월 근무하다가 약 2개년 전에 개업하엿는데 매우 敏捷多才한 분이다.

咸興 安尙哲氏(濟惠病院)
氏는 매우 다정스럽고 경건한 분이다. 氏가 *院하는 목적은 肉的 방면에만 限한 것이 아니라 종교적 입장에서 복음을 선전하기 위함이라 한다. 氏는 大正 4년에 世專을 졸업하엿다. ＜41＞
＜37-41＞