別건곤 제47호
1932년 01월 01일
別有天地·不具者의 人世觀, 女狂人의 隨筆 (The Worldview of the Different and Disabled, A Female Madman's Essay)
西八號室人
회고·수기 (Reminiscence/Essay)

This is an essay by a mad person. It is a record of thoughts and feelings as they came, written directly on the manuscript paper. There is no particular skill involved.

However, there are some points that are not entirely without merit. Readers, please read this article to the end, paying attention to how confused and deranged the author's mental state is, as it will be a valuable reference. The author is a female patient in the psychiatric ward of a university hospital, wearing a pink vest and a *kokkal* (꼭갈, traditional Korean hat), writing essays and poems all day long. (See the *Visit to Room 7* (西七號探訪記).)

- (Editor) -

A lifetime of purity, cleanliness, and measure
A second life in the south, obtaining the Blue Dragon
A third life in the west, seeking the Pure Land. The shaman sings.
Explanation of Cheseok (제석풀이)

Wife, wife, ancestral wife, descended, descended. Recitation wife, descended. Is it because I wear a *kokkal* that I am seen as a monk? Is it because I shaved my head that I am seen as a monk? Is it because I don't eat beef that I am seen as a monk? Let's dance and play, swaggering about. Sending off the Day Before Yesterday.

Staying for several days, the words are extraordinary, the conversation is fluent and not like an ordinary guest. A hundred bows to my father's shrine. My parents' marriage in the detached house. My father's pen name is Bak *cheosa* (朴處士). The official bid farewell, suddenly disappearing from the stairs. At the time of *byeongja* (丙子, year in the sexagenary cycle). Mr. Bak's innate talent is extraordinary. On his hands and chest are blue cranes, white cranes, yellow cranes, embroidered on his hungry neck, tilted nine *shao* (筲, ancient measuring tool), weeping. Now there is a pair, the ticket leaked from the day before yesterday.

My parents were extraordinary, intelligent, and fond of learning, but disliked standing and didn't study. They were brave, swift, fond of drinking, and spoke common language. When I couldn't hear, I went to find ginseng in Duyuak (杜岳). When I was seven years old, I had natural smallpox. My parents returned, hugging me, tears like before. A stranger clearly hugged my parents, I couldn't help but shed tears. My Buddhist energy condensed on Mt. Kumgang (金剛山). Not condensation. My parents descended twice, my heart returned like an arrow to Mt. Kumgang.

Jade Emperor Buddha guest, Dipamkara Buddha, Sakyamuni Buddha, later descended, meeting Dipamkara Sakyamuni Buddha again. Dipamkara dormant for thirty-seven years, descending for the first time at forty-five. Two people came to earth. I don't know the two people in this world. In the Land of Bliss, I rejoice in meeting the Tathagata. Stubbornly ignorant, I look like a wooden general. My divine parents were worried and urgent. At the time, I asked the fortune teller. The fortune teller said,

"What is my strange surname?" I said to the old woman, "The bamboo district is my father, I lie down and can use wood as my mother, I lie down." From beginning to end, I provide for my parents, bamboo and wood are what I lie on. My parents are always with me, I have been sick for more than thirty years. I am not a basket emperor, but only pray to the Lord of Heaven. I pray to the angel, I save all living beings. The blessings of Cheongwi (天貴) and Hwa (和) are with me. Heaven God."

Please open the gates of Heaven. I repay the grace of Heaven above, and accomplish nine benefits in human life below. May my wishes be fulfilled frequently. Now I think the gates of Heaven were formerly the bamboo pieces that I lay upon. <23>

When my father descended to become emperor, he fathered eight daughters. My parents didn't know there would be a first son. I earnestly desired a son, but nine were also daughters. I abandoned the crows and magpies deep in my jade box, seeking protection. I was born on earth as a celestial hibiscus, first Han-born I am Wang So-gun (王昭君). (The following is omitted.) <24>

**Named Entities**

金剛山	Kŭmgangsan
朴處士	Pak Ch'ŏsa
杜岳	Tuyuak
王昭君	Wang So-gun



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제47호
발행일	1932년 01월 01일
기사제목	別有天地·不具者의 人世觀, 女狂人의 隨筆
필자	西八號室人
기사형태	회고·수기

別有天地·不具者의 人世觀, 女狂人의 隨筆
						西八號室人
이 글은 미친사람의 수필(隨筆)입니다. 생각 닷는대로 늣긴대로 그대로 원고지에 적어 노은 것입니다. 무슨 요령이 잇는 것은 아닙니다.
그러나 가담가담 그럴 듯한 점이 아주 업지도 안습니다. 독자제씨는 끗까지 이 글을 읽어 주시되 필자의 정신 상태가 얼마나 혼란하고 착란한가를 유의하야 보신다면 훌륭한 참고가 될 줄로 압니다. 필자는 대학병원 정신병실에 잇는 녀환자인데 분홍 서고리에 꼭갈을 쓰고 허구한날 이런 수필과 시를 짓고 잇습니다. (西七號探訪記를 참조 하십시요.)
-(編輯記者)-
一世淸淨潔度量
二世南方得靑龍
三世西方求淨土皆巫女唱
제석풀이 云
마누라 마누라 祖上마누라 나려 왓소 나려와 念佛마누라 내려 왓소. 꼭갈을 써서 중상이냐 削髮을 하여 중상이냐 牛肉을 안 먹어 중상이냐 얼시고 조타 조흘시고 거드럭 거려서 놀아보자 日前환송
數日留宿語非凡接語潤闊非俗客世百拜以父親殿 兩親婚約舍廊中 父親別號朴處士 大官作別歸忽然階下不見士 丙子之時 朴氏生手才奇異手胸皆 靑鶴, 白鶴, 黃鶴, 繡饑項狀傾九筲泣 今在壹雙昔時票日前漏落章
我親非凡聰容學文厭立不學耳驍勇差走飮酒嗜普通語時不能聞買蔘杜岳行次內我七歲天然痘尊親還駕抱我淚同前形客分明抱親思落淚不禁我佛氣凝集金剛山非凝尊親兩次降歸心如矢金剛山
玉皇佛客燃燈佛釋佛後降逢燃燈釋佛再來三十七燃燈潛伏四十五始降兩人地上來不知兩人人間中在極樂相晩我心喜悅逢如來頑慢切不知耳望如木將軍神親患爲急時在簿問卜卜者者夫夫言曰
我奇氏姓何爲也我謂嫗曰親區沒之竹爲父我伏可以木爲母我伏可 自始至父母設者竹木爲伏父母代不離身病＜23＞三十餘年我爲不筐皇帝但只上存天主己禱天使我濟蒼生伯祝無所不能하신 天貴至可和하신 天하나님
天통을 開여러주십시와 上으로 天恩을 報答하옵고 下로 人生에 九益을 成이루기를 所願成就切頻頻今思天통昔伏竹篇也로다.
父親下降爲帝時生八女尊親不知第一男爲也시더라. 切企生子九亦女盛我玉函深處棄烏鵲求護我不死今生降地天芙蓉初漢生我王昭君.(以下 略)＜24＞
＜23-24＞