별건곤 제42호
August 01, 1931
大京城 에로·그로·테로·추(醜)로 總出 (Erotic, Grotesque, Terror, Ugly in the Great Gyeongseong)
세태비평 (Social Critique)

Erotic, Grotesque, Terror, Ugly in the Great Gyeongseong
"Terror" Gives Birth to Twin Children
Double S Birth

Terror, terror, that fearsome and astonishing terror sometimes kills innocent people, but sometimes brings forth lovely people. The terror that occurred this time between Koreans and Chinese was an unprecedented misfortune, where nearly a hundred souls were sacrificed throughout the capital. However, amidst the chaos and the sea of tears, there were also joyous events that made people laugh and celebrate. This was the birth of twins by women who had fled to the Chinese consulate (中國領事館) in Seoul and the Chinese refugee camp in Pyeongyang, as if they had consulted with each other. It was precisely around 9 PM on July 5th. Inside the Chinese consulate in Seoul, with over 4,000 Chinese refugees gathered from all over the capital, a woman's scream suddenly arose from one corner amidst the extreme chaos. With everyone's nerves on edge, ready to react as if a cannon had exploded at the slightest sound, everyone was shocked and wide-eyed. "What's going on? What woman is suddenly screaming in pain? Did someone hit her? Or has some villain committed some lewd act against a woman amidst this chaos?" The Chinese, already prone to making a fuss, were in uproar for a long time. Eventually, it was found that the wife of a Chinese man named Ju Su-haeng (周樹行), residing in Sioesindang-ri (市外新堂里) outside Seoul, was giving birth to male and female twins (男女雙胎). And on the night of the 8th of the same month, a Chinese woman named Jin (陳氏) in Pyeongyang also gave birth to male twins, and besides that, women named Ryu (劉氏) and Jin (陳氏) also gave birth, causing more joy to erupt. Although the sacrifice of many innocent people in that chaos is regrettable, the birth of two sets of twins is a rare and celebratory event.

Ugly! The Incarnation of Ugliness, the Mahjong Club (麻雀俱樂部)
Y·N·N

The word "ugly!" (추로!) is not derived from the Japanese word "dirty" (도로) these days. It's simply a newly coined word intended to rhyme with "erotic" and "grotesque."

This year in Seoul, there's been a great abundance of mahjong clubs (麻雀俱樂部 大豐年). Countless mahjong clubs (麻雀俱樂部), numbering around a hundred, with names like Green Hair (綠發), River Middle (江中), Three Naks (三兀), Four Joys (四喜), Peace (平和), Clear (淸平), Middle Sprout (中發), Origin Joy (元喜), have sprung up like mushrooms after the rain.

However, I am not qualified to criticize them, as I myself am one of the club crawlers (俱樂部 巡禮者). That's why.

What I want to write here is that the quality of today's clubs has deteriorated too much. And they are extremely filthy and ugly. I want to talk about that, which is why I've picked up this pen.

One night, after finishing a commissioned manuscript, it was half-past nine. Feeling restless, I coaxed S, who was next door, and we went out to Anguk-dong (安國洞) and found a nearby two-story club. Initially, we just wanted to have a beer after a long time, but we ended up there.

Recently, after being tied down to a certain place, I hadn't been able to visit clubs. So, today was the first time in a long time that I visited one.

There were a few familiar faces (people I had met before in such places) playing Seetak or Netak. We went up the stairs, and when we stood in front of the door, no one said anything to invite us in. That was understandable, since the owner was in the middle of a game. It was also a *jo-geun sseukki* (조-겐쓰끼) game. <10>

These days, this *jo-geun sseukki* (조-겐 쓰끼) thing is rampant and has lowered the quality of the clubs.

After a while, the owner's game ended, and we started a game. We shuffled the tiles, distributed them, chose seats, and decided on the bank (기짱). The other person was the bank (긔짱). They seemed to be regulars and had some tricks up their sleeves, judging by their attitude.

Before the banker (기짱되는 자) rolled the dice, he hesitated and looked at me and asked,

"Shall we just play?" I asked, "Huh?" I already had a hunch. This was *jo-geun sseukki* (조-겐 쓰끼). He said,

"Let's bet a little."

"Bet?"

"It's too boring to just play, so let's do 1,000 *jeon* and two packs of cigarettes (千에 피죵 두갑)."

"I don't know how to play well."

"Does it matter? It's just for fun." He seemed like he wouldn't be able to stand it otherwise.

"Alright, let's do that." 1,000 *jeon* and two packs of cigarettes is 5,000 *hu* and one *won*.

The game started. For some reason, my hand was good that day. I got about 7,000 on East, South, and West Winds (東風 南風 西初). And S, who came with me, only lost 1,000 *won*.

Then their attitude changed. It seemed like they were trying to cheat (인찍기를 하려는 모양이다). I saw them exchanging tiles about twice. I just pretended not to notice.

At that time, my partner, who had the worst luck, turned around, asked to see the tiles, and then replaced the person. The guy who came in said,

"How much?"

"Two."

"Eek! Why don't you just lie down and jerk off instead of sitting here doing this?"

"What can I do if they want me to?"

Ah-ah-ah! I wanted to just throw everything down and leave. Their voices, their arrogant and dirty tricks.

The game ended.

I was in first place, and S was in third place. After deducting S's losses, I had about 4,000 *hu* left. They hesitated and just looked at each other. I knew what they were thinking. So, I said, "Please pay the game fees (껨갑시나 내주시요)," and S and I got up.

As soon as we turned around, we heard them fighting.

"Eek, I don't have any money. You pay the game fees."

"I don't have any either. How did you lose so much, you bastard?"

"I'm so angry that I missed the XXX."

We could still hear them arguing until we put on our shoes and left through the gate.

"Ugh, dirty bastards. I'm never coming again!"

S chimed in, "Everyone's like that these days. They all seem fine at first." With unpleasant feelings, we went up to the second floor of the ice shop in Andong (安洞 어름집).

The dirtiest place in Seoul! What should we call it? A den of gamblers openly soliciting bets! Why doesn't the authorities (當局者) crack down on it (取締)?

The mahjong clubs (麻雀俱樂部) of Seoul! Let's say that this is a representative scene of ugliness (추로) born of the modern era and put down this pen.

The Ultra-Special Grotesque of Cafes
Bukgeung (北熊)

Erotic... Grotesque... Terror... Ugly... Of the four, I happened to be assigned "Grotesque."

Grotesque, grotesque. Is there any grotesque in Korea? There's no way there can be anything truly "grotesque" in Korea, where everything is turned upside down like the back of a hand. Moreover, aren't our lives too consumed with the urgent need to eat and survive to demand such tastes?

But, as they say, let's skip the talk that won't recoup the investment...

Anyway, whatever anyone does, if I just write about one "grotesque" thing that happened in Seoul, my responsibility will be over.

In Seoul's Namchon (南村), there are two Japanese friends named XXXX and XXXX who run barber shops (리발 영업). They both seem to be considerable "grotesque" enthusiasts.

Everyone knows that Japanese people handle snakes, which make us shudder just to look at, as if they were playing with *tteok* (떡 - rice cake), and eat them deliciously like honey.

So, whether these two friends intended to eat them or play with them, they each had a three-foot-long snake, with a body like the leg bones of modern young women, wriggling in their sleeves.

Originally, snakes themselves are grotesque (그로데스크한), but when someone handles them like a fine silk handkerchief, the "grotesque" level rises from 99% to 120%, and that's where the story we want to hear lies.

The place is Cafe XX (XX라는 카페), a Western-style bar in Jin-gogae (진고개의) – blue lamps, pale faces, red lips, the song of wine from the electric gramophone, cigarette smoke, round hips, drunken eyes... all these things create a cocktail of debauchery. Into this scene, the two friends mentioned above swagger in.

The waitresses (웨-트레스) greet them with jokes, as if they were regular customers.

The two friends take a seat, grab a bottle of alcohol and each take a waitress (웨트레스) on their laps, and take a drink. Then they look at each other and smile slyly.

While the waitress (웨트레스), unaware of what was going on, was pouring more alcohol and trying to be charming <11>, the two friends quietly pulled out the snake (the problem in question - the fat snake) from their sleeves and put it on the table.

"Eek, what is that?"

Along with the waitress's scream of extreme shock, there was the sound of bottles falling, glasses rolling, drunken laughter, and the sound of people running and rushing around... Amidst this chaos, the two snakes sat calmly on the marble table, just flicking their tongues.

The cafe turned into utter chaos.

Seeing this, the two friends smiled contentedly, put the snakes back in their sleeves, and walked out leisurely.

They went around to several places doing this. And eventually, they were caught by the police and spent a week offering their blood to the fleas, bedbugs, and mosquitoes of the detention center at the Honjeong Police Station (本정 Police 유치장).

Erotic, Seventh Garrison Army, Gyeongseong (京城) Beauty Theater (美人座)
XXX

Erotic! Whether it's recent or long ago that "erotic" has become a buzzword and a new term, I, who doesn't even know the true taste of eroticism and just vaguely say "erotic" after hearing it, have entered the strict camp of the erotic Beauty Theater (美人座), which has given a great piece of good news and a great sensation to the erotic world of Gyeongseong (京城). I have become a prisoner, and I feel like I'm becoming an almost erotic person, if not an erotic person myself.

The headquarters of this Beauty Theater (美人座) is in bustling Osaka, Japan. With a capital of 2 million *won* (I can't guarantee the exact amount), they gather and select glamorous beauties as standing forces, and with the boast of being the best in the Orient, they are clearly aiming to conquer the erotic world, and in fact, they can be said to be conquering it. The main branch of this Beauty Theater (美人座) is of course in Osaka, and there are three other branches in Osaka, making a total of four in Osaka alone. There is one each in Kyoto (京都) and Fukuoka (福岡), and the one in the middle of Jin-gogae (진고개), Seoul, is the Seventh Garrison Army of this Beauty Theater's erotic army. (It would be a big problem if this wasn't accurate.)

When this Beauty Theater (美人座) came to Gyeongseong (京城), they didn't just bring the name itself. They brought twenty beauties (二+美人) who are currently providing services at the modern campsite (one of them is said to be a beauty residing in Gyeongseong), as well as cooks (料埋人) and boys (뽀이) who greet customers at the entrance, all the way from Osaka by train and boat. Moreover, this has stirred up the curiosity and enthusiasm of the erotic people of Seoul. And another interesting thing is that all of the beauties have taken the names of Japanese film stars (花形여배우), each taking one of the actresses' names, which is also very interesting. How about it? With just this much, you can imagine the lineup, and since the name is Beauty Theater (美人座), of course, it will only gather beauties... How dazzling and erotic this must be! However, when they came to Gyeongseong (京城), they didn't just rely on the erotic people here. If you're not an erotic person with the righteousness and courage to readily pawn a decent chrome watch to find eroticism, would you even be able to be an erotic person? Even I, who am almost an erotic person, have entered that camp!

However, I, being a lazy erotic person, only managed to poke my head in and take a hesitant step almost a month after all the fuss. It was true that a floral wreath was blocking the door, and the sound of the gramophone and loudspeakers was causing the wind to swirl. This is something you can see anywhere, but if you go inside, a flower-like beauty will greet you, and the sound of a nightingale's song and the beautiful sound of rolling beads and the sound of my jar breaking will harmonize... The thought of this made my heart flutter and my mind race, like when going to meet a lover at a promised place. However, these thoughts came together and I stepped in without a moment's delay. At this time, what was my state of mind when I stepped through the door? I acted with as much dignity and arrogance as a high-ranking official entering the palace, and on the other hand, feeling as glorious as if I was having a first time in my life, I stepped in without even acknowledging the "Irasshai" of the boy (뽀이) calling out at the entrance.

As I stepped through the narrow doorway, oh my, it was like a bustling marketplace at dawn. The time was around 9 p.m. – in the narrow but long hall, there were partitioned chairs on the left and right walls, and tables in between – the sound of the gramophone, voices, laughter, the sound of shoes scraping, the smell of powder, perfume, sweat, breath, flesh, stench – in this hot summer, it's unbearable outside, but to sit trapped in this cocktail of smells and sounds for an hour or two! It was suffocating. However, the green leaves, lush trees, and grass placed everywhere under the blue lights looked refreshing, but they also greatly contributed to making it feel stuffy and cramped, but what made me forget all of this were the erotic female soldiers (女軍). The erotic soldiers (에로 兵士) in the hall, dressed in thin and revealing Western clothes, short hair (?), Japanese clothes (日本服), and clothes of various shapes and patterns, were walking back and forth and sitting in the gaps. Here is the eroticism! Full house, full occupancy. Barely getting a seat assigned and guided to, I proudly and confidently took my seat. It was as cramped and chaotic as a third-class train, but once I had a seat, I was happy to be with the erotic women (에로) but also upset about being cramped and stuffy. What should I do!
The chair was covered in red cloth that looked like it was meant for a high-ranking executive of a large bank to sit on, but it was a bit clunky for summer. Now that I'm here, I should have a bottle of beer – not that I didn't plan to, I had saved up enough money to buy two bottles of beer after several days of saving – looking left and right, it was plausible enough, but it was a pity that the hall was narrow, and the other decorations were still lacking since it hadn't been open for long, but considering the recent opening, it could be said to be very well decorated.

Ok, let's talk well...

Daegu Michiko (大江美智子)! This beauty (미인) was in charge of serving me. For the duration of one bottle of beer, this beauty (미인) was mine. I was so happy that I wanted to spend the whole night with her.

This beauty (美人) is also the name of a recent new movie star (영화스타). I don't know if the name was given because her face resembled the star's, but it's true that everyone has taken the name of a star.

Their voices! They are cute, of course, and their Osaka (大阪) dialect is plausible. Among their words, they say that many Korean customers (조선 손님) come and that Korean customers are kind and praise their good nature, and the fact that they want to learn Korean is even more welcome and sounds amusing at the same time.

Looking at the way the waitresses (女給) of this Beauty Theater (美人座) serve customers, I see a hint of arrogance somewhere. They seem to be flaunting their status as waitresses (女급) of the erotic world. There is eroticism (에로틕한) in their charm, tone, dress, and everything else, but it was difficult to find the beauties (미인) that the name Beauty Theater (美人座) suggests. I don't know if my standards are too high, but rather than the Osaka Theater (大阪座), their accent would have been more interesting to listen to and there would have been more beauties, but the name Beauty Theater (美人座) seems to have a bit of wind mixed in.

While I was pondering, I had already finished two bottles of beer, and that was the end of my budget, so I had no choice but to get up, but I wanted to sit longer, but it was stuffy and hot, and it was difficult to sit cramped any longer. But still, people were flocking in. I don't know what will happen when the name Beauty Theater (美人座) becomes more established, but for now, I can't just say "Beauty Theater (美人座) forever." A devoted erotic person (에로뽀이) who had made up his mind and come all the way here couldn't even find a seat and turned around saying "Sumimasen" (스미마셍) with a disappointed look on his face.

Whew – when I came out, it was so refreshing. What was the gift I received at the Beauty Theater (美人座)? Stuffiness! Chaos! The waitresses (女給) being more proud than helpful. A lack of subtle charm. More lively eroticism than a calm erotic atmosphere.

This is not bad publicity, but I wouldn't sit cramped in that corner paying my own money. What if someone pulls me in again? But it would be cozy in the winter. Still, there were often potential erotic people (요보상 에로뽀이)! If you're really curious, go and see for yourself. A bottle of beer costs 45 *jeon*. <15>

**Named Entities**

周樹行	Ju Su-haeng
市外新堂里	Sioesindang-ri
陳氏	Jin
劉氏	Ryu
安國洞	Anguk-dong
京都	Kyoto
福岡	Fukuoka
大江美智子	Daegu Michiko
大阪	Osaka



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제42호
발행일	1931년 08월 01일
기사제목	大京城 에로·그로·테로·추(醜)로 總出
기사형태	세태비평

大京城 에로·그로·테로·추
『테로』가 나흔 두 雙童
雙S生

테로 테로 그 무섭고도 놀라운 테로 흔이는 무고한 사람을 죽이기도 한지만 또 어떤 땐 귀여운 사람을 낫케도 한다. 이번에 조선사람과 중국사람 새에 생긴 테로는 근래에 보지 못하던 불상사로서 경향을 통하야 근 백명의 생령이 희생이 되엿다. 그러나 그 란리 중 우름의 바다 속에서도 또 여러 사람이 우슴뽀를 터치고 치하하는 경사기 잇섯스니 그것은 곳 서울의 중국인이 피란하고 잇는 중국 령사관(中國領事館)과 평양의 중국인 피란소에서 피란온 부인이 서로 의론한 듯시 쌍둥이 어린애를 나흔 그것이다. 바로 7월 5일 오후 9시경 이엿다. 서울의 중국 령사관 안에는 경향에서 피란온 중국사람이 4천여 명이나 한곳에 모혀서 극도로 혼란한 판에 별안간 한 구석에서 부인의 비명하는 소리가 낫섯다. 신경이 한참 예민하야 누구 방귀만 꾸여도 대포가 터진다고 소동을 한게 된 판에 모도 눈이 휘둥구럿케 놀나서 이것이 웬일이냐 어떤 부인이 별안간 압푸다 소리를 지르니 누구에게 마젓느냐 또 어떤 흉측한 놈이 이 소랑한 통에 부인에게 무슨 무레한 짓을 하얏느냐 하고 갓뚝이나 떠들기 잘하는 중국 사람들이 한참동안 소동하엿다. 야종에 알고 보니 시외신당리(市外新堂里)사는 중국인 주수행(周樹行)이란 사람의 부인이 남녀쌍태(男女雙胎)를 낫느라고 그리하엿다. 그리고 동월 8일 밤에 평양에서도 진씨(陳氏)란 중국 부인이 또 사나히 쌍똥이를 낫코 그 외에 류씨(劉氏)와 진씨(陳氏)란 부인도 또한 생산을 하다가 또 우슴뽀들이 터젓다. 그 통에 무고한 사람이 만히 희생된 것도 가엽지만은 쌍둥이가 둘식 생긴 것은 희귀하고도 축하할 일이다.

추로! 추로의 권화 麻雀俱樂部
Y·N·N

추로! 라는 말은 이즘 일본의 도로라는 말을 본떠 지은 것이 아니다. 다만 에로니 구로니 하는 말에 잇대여려고 새로 지은 말이다.
서울엔 금년에 들어서 麻雀俱樂部 大豐年이 들엇다. 綠發 江中 三兀 四喜 平和 淸平 中發 元喜 등등 無慮百으로 헤일 麻雀俱樂部가 장마 뒤 국수버섯처럼 낫다.
그러나 나는 그것을 어떠타 어떠타 말할 자격을 못 가젓다. 그것은 나 자신이 俱樂部 巡禮者의 하나이니 만큼 그러타.
그런데 여기다 무엇이라고 말을 쓰려는 것은 오늘의 俱樂部는 너무 그 질이 저하되엿다는 것이다. 그리고 여간 지저분치가 안타. 추잡치 안타. 그것을 하나 이야기 하려고 이 붓을 잡옵이다.
어느날 밤 부탁바든 원고를 쓰고나니 시간이 아홉시 반이다. 그저 자기도 무엇하고 그래서 엽방에 잇는 S을 꼬여 가지고 安國洞으로 나와 갓가운 이층집 俱樂部 하나로 차저갓다. 처음엔 오래간만에 삐-루나 한잔 먹자고 나온 것이엿는데 너무 일다고 발이 그리로 갓다.
이즘 나는 몸을 어느 곳에 붓잡어 매게 된 이후 俱樂部에 못 단엿섯다. 그러니까 오늘 그곳을 차저간 것은 참으로 오래간만이엿다.
안면 잇는 이가(그런 곳에서 전에 맛난 이들 몃분 석기어 세탁인가 네탁이 놀고 잇다. 수리둘은 층게를 올나가서 방문 압헤 서니 아모도 드러 온라는 말도 딴 말도 업다. 그도 그럴것이 주인되는 이가 지금 한짱을 하는 터니 접대할 새가 잇스랴. 그것도 조-겐쓰끼라고 하니.＜10＞
요새 이 조-겐 쓰끼라는 것이 맹낭한 것이고 俱樂部의 질을 저하식힌 것이라고 한다.
한참만에 주인의 탁이 끗나서 우리들은 께임을 시작하게 되엿다. 패를 석고 후를 난흐고 자리를 보고 기짱을 정햇다. 그쪽 사람이 긔짱이엿다. 그들은 늘 이곳에 와 노는 사람인 것 갓고 축도 잇서 보인다. 그들의 하는 태도가.
기짱되는 자가 사이고로를 둘느기 전에 주춤주춤하고 나의 얼골을 치어다 보더니
「그냥 할가요?」한다. 나는 「네?」하고 물엇다. 벌서 눈치를 알기는 햇다. 조-겐 쓰끼가 이것이다. 그는
「조-곰 걸고 하지요.」
「걸닥게요.」
「그냥 하기는 너무 심심하니 千에 피죵 두갑만 하시지요.」
「잘 할줄 몰느는데요.」
「그거 관게 잇습니까. 작난인데.」 꼴이 꼭 그리해야 견딀 모양 가태
「그럼 그립시다.」하엿다. 千에 피종 둘이면 五千후에 一圓이다.
께임은 시작되엿다. 그날은 웬일인지 손이 조화 東風 南風 西初에 약 七千이 들어 왓다. 그리고 가티 온 S는 一千圓밧게 안 일엇다.
그러자 그들의 태도가 달너진다. 인찍기를 하려는 모양이다. 두 번 가량 투패를 밧구어 가는 것을 보앗다. 모른 척 해둘 밧게.
그때 가장 긔색이 낫븐 나의 월편 사람이 뒤를 도라다보며 대패 좀 보라고 하고는 사람을 가라댄다. 그 자는 들어오며
「얼마냐.」
「둘.」
「옉기! 일즉 드러누어서 XX어나 치지 이걸하고 안젓단 말이냐.」
「그러자는 걸 어쩌니.」
아-아-아! 당장 팽겨치고 나오고 십헛다. 그들의 말소리 그 傍若無人한 드러운 수작들.
께임은 끗낫다.
내가 1등 S가 3등이다. S의 진 것을 제하고 한 四千후 남는다. 그자들은 머뭇머뭇하고 서로 얼골들만 치어다 본다. 나는 그 눈치를 안다. 그래서 「껨갑시나 내주시요.」하고 S와 일어섯다.
도라스기가 무섭게 그들의 싸호는 소리가 낫다.
「옉기 난 돈 업다. 껨갑시나 네가 내라.」
「나도 업다. 이 자식아 어떠케 해서 그러케 진단 말이냐?」
「XXX을 노치닷게 분한 걸.」
우리들이 신발을 신고 대문을 나슬 때까지 그들의 떠드는 소리가 들닌다.
「에-드러운 자식들. 또 올 놈 다시 업다!」
S는「요새는 모다 그래. 모다 멀쩡한 걸 무어.」하고 겻달어 준다. 불쾌한 감정을 안코 安洞 어름집 이층에를 올너갓다.
서울서 제일 드러운 놈 모히는 곳! 그것을 어듸라고 할가. 공공연하게 돈내기 하자고 덤비는 그 노름꾼의 소굴! 웨 지 當局者는 그것을 取締안는가?
서울의 麻雀俱樂部! 이것은 현대가 나은 추로 풍경의 대표라고 하여두고 이 붓을 떼이자.

카페의 超特그로
北熊

에로....그로....테로......추로의 四로 중에 공교로히도 내가 맛든 것이 「그로」다.
그로 그로 조선에 그로가 잇나? 손바닥 가티 발ㅅ닥 되집힌 조선에 「그로」다운 그로가 잇슬택이 업다. 더구나 우리의 생활이 그러한 취미를 요구하기에는 넘우도 먹고 입기에 절박하여 잇지 아니한가!
그러나 이런 말햇다. 본전 못 차질 수작은 각설해 바리고......
엇잿거나 누가 한 짓이건 서울 안에서 생겨난 「그로」만 하나 써 노흐면 내 책임은 그만이겟다.

서울 남촌에서 리발 영업하는 XXXX과 XXXX이라는 두 일본친구가 잇다. 둘이 다 적쟌한 「그로」이스트이든 모양이다.
그런데 일본사람이 우리는 보기만 해도 몸ㅅ서리가 나는 뱀을 떡 주무르듯 하고 또 그놈을 꿀가티 맛잇게 먹는 것은 누가나 잘 알겟다.
그래 이 두 친구도 먹을랴고 그랫든지 가지고 놀랴고 그랫든지 기리가 석자나 되고 몸이 요지음 모던 색씨의 다리뼈 가튼 뱀 한 마리씩이 그들의 소매 속에서 굼툴거리게 되엿다.
월래 뱀 그것이 그로데스크한 것인데 이것을 조흔 비단수건 주몰으듯 하는 사람은 임이 「그로」99%가 120%에까지 올나가는데 정말 우리의 듯고 십흔 이야기가 잇는 것이다.
장소는 진고개의 XX라는 카페-양술집 푸른 등ㅅ불 불은 슬 흰 얼골 불근 입술 전긔 축음긔에서 울녀 나오는 술의 노래 담배 연긔 둥그스룸한 응둥어 취한 눈....이러한 것들이 형락의 칵톅을 이루고 잇는 판에 우에 말한 두 친구가 으실렁 으실렁 드러온다.
전부터 다니든 손님인지 웨-트레스들이 롱을 던지며 마지한다.
자리를 잡고 안즌 두 친구는 술병과 각긔 웨트레스 하나씩을 끼고 안저 한잔씩 마신다. 그리고는 서로 바라보고 싱긋 웃는다.
그런 줄을 모르고 련해 술을 부으며 아양을 피우는 웨트레스가 아지 못하는 사이에＜11＞ 두 친구는 소매 속에서는 문제의 그놈 굴다란 뱀-을 적 끄내여 식탁우에 올녀 노앗다.
「이이고 머니-ㅅ」
이 웨트레스의 극도에 놀낸 비명과 아울너 술병 내리지는 소리 술잔 구르는 소리 넛터리 우슴소리 우당퉁탕 달녀가고 달녀오는 소리....이러한 혼삽 중에서 두 마리의 뱀은 대리석 식탁 우에 천연스럽게 사리고 안저 혀만 늘넘거린다.
니어 카페는 대혼삽이 이러낫다.
이 꼴을 본 두 친구는 만즉한 듯이 싱긋이 웃고는 뱀을 집어 도루너코 유유히 거러 밧그로 나아갓다.

이리하기를 멧군데 도라다니엇다. 그리고 필경은 딱금나리에게 붓들니어 본정 경찰 유치장의 벼룩 빈대모기의 일족들에게 단피를 제공하는 신세를 일주일 동안이나 젓다.

에로 第七 駐屯軍 京城 美人座
XXX

에로! 에로하고 근자에 매우 떠들고 新述語의 하나가 되어 잇는지 임의 오래되엿스나 에로의 진정한 그 맛이 엇떠한 것인지 알지도 못하고 그저 들어서 에로! 말노만 에로 이러케 흐리멍텅한 내가 京城에로界에 큰 희소식인 동시에 또한 큰 센세이슌을 지어준 에로軍美人座의 엄연한 陣營에 들어가 스사로 포로가 된이 만치 나도 에로뽀이는 되지 못할지언정 에로뽀이에 각갑다는 자신이 들녀고 한다.
이 美人座의 本營은 일본 大阪벅적어리는 그곳에 두고 자본금 2백만원(확실한 책임은 못 지겟소)을 압헤 노코 艶妖한 미인들은 추리고 뽀바서 상비군으로 압잡이를 세우고 동양에서 제일이라는 코 큰소리와 한가지 확연히 에로界를 정복하랴 하며 事實로 정복하고 잇다고 할 수 잇다. 이 美人座의 本店은 물론 大阪 안에 잇고 그 외에도 支店이 세 군데나 大阪 안에 잇서 합하야 大阪 한곳에만 네군데가 잇고 京都 福岡에 한 곳식 잇고 서울 진고개 한복판에 잇는 것이 이 美人座의 에로軍 第七 駐屯軍이다. (확실치 아니한들 큰일 잇겟소.)
이 美人座가 京城까지 올 때 그대로 일홈만 가지고 온 것이 아니라 현대 營地에서 써-비스를 하고 잇는 二十美人(中하나는 京城에 在留하든 美人이라 한다)을 비롯하야 料埋人과 문 압에서 接客하는 뽀이까지 멀니 大阪서 차타고 배타고 왓다는데 더구나 서울의 에로뽀이들의 호기심과 궁둥이를들까 불넛다. 그러고 또 한가지 듯기에도 색다른 것은 그들 美人 全部가 일본 영화의 花形여배우의 일홈을 번따서 제각기 그 女優들의 일홈 중에서 하나식 지엇다는 것이 또한 대단 자미스러운 것의 하나이다. 엇더냐 말이요 이만하면 듯기만 해도 그 陣容을 짐작할 수가 잇고 또한 일홈이 美人座이니 만치 물론 미인들만 모앗슬 것이고......이 얼마나 끔쯕끔쯕하고 에로틱할 것이냐! 그러나 그들이 京城까지 올 때에 요보상 에로뽀이만을 밋고 온 것은 아닐 것이나 에로를 찻기에는 찻든 크롬 시계쯤은 넉넉히 典當舖에 떼여줄 만한 義氣와 勇敢이 잇는 요보상 에로뽀이가 아니가고 백일노릇인가 될번댁 에로뽀이 나도 그 營地에 들어 갓거늘!

그러나 나라는 에로뽀이는 게으르기 작업서 그러게 굉장히 떠든지 한 달이나 거의 지난 오늘이야 겨우 고개를 끼웃하고 황송한 거름을 거럿다. 아닌 것이 아니라 문 압헤는 花環이 문을 막고 잇고 유성긔 확성긔 소리에 엉덩 바람이 난다. 이것쯤이야 어듸서나 구경할 수 잇는 노름이나 이 안으로 드러가면 꼿가튼 미인이 반가히 마저주고 꾀꼬리 가튼 노래 소리와 구슬을 굴니는 듯한 어엽분 날소리와 질뚝백이 깨여지는 듯한 나의 말소리가 어우러저 지겟구나 이런 생각이 맛치 戀人을 약속한 장소로 맛나러 가는 때와 가티 가슴이 울렁거리고 마음이 조급하얏다. 그러나 이러한 생각이 어우러저 나며 잠시의 틈도 업시 드러섯다. 이때말이야 문 안에 발을 드딀때에 나의 심경이 엇더햇느냐고? 마치 노픈 벼슬이나 가즌 사람이 궁궐에 들어가는 듯 가진 점잔과 거만을 부리고 또 한편으로는 평생 처음 가지는 영광스러운 것 가티 문간에서 「이랏샤이」를 외치는 뽀이의 소리는 들은체도 아니하고 들어섯다.
좁다란 문간을 드러스니 어이구-와글와글하는 것이 마치 새벽녘 장터와 갓다. 시간은 저녁 아홉시 쯤-폭은 좁은데 길기만 한 홀에 좌우 벽에 간막이 椅子를 노코 그 틈에 테불을 노코-유성긔소리 말소리 우슴소리 짝짝 끄으는 신발소리 분내 향수내 땀내 입김내 살내 냄내 - 이 더운 여름에 밧게서 못 견듸일 판인데 이 냄새와 소리의 콕텔속에서 끼워 안저서 한시간 두시간식이나 안저서 버틔노! 기가 탁 막히엿다. 그러나 푸른 등불미테 곳곳이 노여 잇는 푸른 닙 욱어진 나무와 풀이 시원히 보히엿스나 역시 답답하고 좁게 하는데 큰 조력을 하얏다만은 이 모든 것을 생각도 안케하는 것은 역시 에로의 女軍들이엿다. 홀홀하고 열븐 감으로 지어 입은 洋裝 斷髮(?)日本服 形形色色의 옷모양과 옷문이에 싸인 에로 兵士들이 이 틈을 왕래하며 그 틈에 끼여 안저 잇는 것이엿다. 여기야말로 에로 萬歲다. 滿員大滿員. 겨우 한자리를 指示해 안내를 따라＜12＞ 엄연히 아주 바로 제가 젠 척하고 뽑내며 안젓다. 마치 삼등기차 속 가치 좁고 뒤숭숭스러운데 한자리에 座定을 해노코 보니 에로도 조커니와 아 답답스러운데 끼여 안젓스니 엇잿단 말이야!
椅子는 마치 큰 은행의 重役이나 안즐 만한 불근 전으로 싼 것이나 여름벌노는 좀 텀텀하든 걸. 긔왕 드러왓스니 맥주나 한병 기우려보지- 이왕이 아니라 몃칠을 별너서 맥주 두병 갑을 마련해 가지고 왓것다- 좌우를 돌나보니 아닌게 아니라 채림채림이 그럴듯하나 홀이 좁은 것이 섭섭하며 다른 裝置는 開店이 오래쟌흐니 만치 미비하얏스나, 날이 엿튼 점으로 보아서는 매우 잘 차려노앗다고 할 수 잇다- 조케 말을 하랴니....
大江美智子! 이 미인이 나의 써비스를 마탓다. 맥주 한병 먹을 동안에는 이 미인은 내차지라 할 수 잇다. 얼마나 다행스러운지 마음가태서는 하로밤 새우고도 십헛다.
이 美人 亦 최근 새로운 영화스타-의 일홈이다. 얼골이 비슷해서 지은 일홈인지 그는 채 못 무럿스나 전부가 스타의 일홈을 번딴 것은 사실이다.
그들의 말소리! 아양스러운 것은 물론이고 大阪사투리가 그럴 듯 하다. 그의 이말 저말 중에 조선 손님도 만히 오며 더구나 조선 손님은 친절하다 하며 마음성이 조타고 층찬을 마지 안는 뜨테 조선말을 배우고저 한다는 말이 한층 반갑게 녁여지며 동시에 코우슴 치게 들닌다.
이 美人座의 女給들의 接客하는 꼴을 바라보니 어느 구석인지 교만한 꼴이 보힌다. 마치 에로界의 女급들이라는 듯키 뽑내는 듯 하다. 아양과 말투와 차림차림과 모든 것이 아닌게 아니라 에로틕한 맛은 잇스나 그러한 美人座라는 일홈으로 보면 미인은 찻기가 어려웟다. 내 눈이 너모 놉흔 지는 모르겟스나 도리혀 大阪座라면 그들의 말투가 오히려 더 한층 들을 멋이 잇섯고 오히려 미인이 만타고 하겟스나 美人座라기에는 일홈에 좀 風이 석겻다 할 수 잇다.
그렁저랑하는 동안에 맥주가 벌서 두 병 예산이 고만이라 하는 수 업시 일어섯스나 더 안젓스랴 하여도 답답하고 더워서 더 끼여 안기가 어려웟섯다. 그러나 여전히 사람은 끌는다. 좀 더 잇서서 美人座라는 일홈이 석어지면 엇덜지 모르겟스나 아즉 가태서는 美人座 萬歲라 아니 할 수가 업다. 헤위 단심하야 마음을 먹고 먹어 차자 왓든 에로뽀이도 안즐 자리가 업서서「스미마셍」한마듸로 뒤통수 치고 도라스는 꼴이 딱하엿다.
휙-야고 밧그로 나오니 시원하기가 짝이 업다. 그러케 외우든 美人座에서의 선물은? 갑갑한 것! 뒤숭숭한 것! 손보다 女給이 뽑내는 것. 은근한 맛 업는 것. 가라안즌 에로보다도 들석한 에롵틕.
惡宣傳이 아니나 내돈 내고 그 구석에 안끼여 안겟소. 가다가 남이 정끄을면 엇절지! 그러나 겨울에는 안윽하겟습듸다. 그래도 틈틈이 요보상 에로뽀이도 흔하든걸! 정 굼굼하면 한번 가보시구려. 맥주 한병에 四十五錢 밧습듸다.＜15＞
＜10-12, 15＞