별건곤 제32호
1930년 09월 01일
女人(六), 追憶의 더듬길 (Woman (6), Fumbling Path of Memory)
金東仁
소설 (Novel)

Woman
Kim Tong-in

5 Kim Ok-yeop and Hwang Gyeong-ok (Continued)

Hwang Gyeong-ok was a young gisaeng (妓生) of sixteen at that time. She had a place where a couple of braids were tied on her nose, and wherever you looked at her eyes and figure, she was still a young gisaeng full of innocent fragrance.

That night, we all stayed at the Family Hotel. And the next day, we went out to Cheongnyangni and took the train there to go to Soyosan to pick maple leaves.

While staying at Soyosan for two days, I discovered in Hwang Gyeong-ok a new type of gisaeng entirely different from the kind of woman I had defined in my mind as a "gisaeng type." Of course, it was probably because she was still young, but Gyeong-ok was very embarrassed to see me <144>. At night, we shared a bed, but as soon as it was daylight, she would run away from me. If I sat next to her, her face would turn red, and she would subtly avoid me. The education she had received as a gisaeng had allowed her to play without any hesitation with my friends, but she avoided me a lot when others were watching. She couldn't even answer any questions I asked.

Gyeong-ok's attitude reminded me of Ok-yeop. Ok-yeop was rather reserved when we were alone, but when my friends were around, she would cling to me and bother me to the point where I couldn't stand it.

"This is my man."

She was the type of person who wanted to show this to others very much. She would rush in shamelessly and hug me, and if my friends even touched her body, she would shake it off vehemently and make a fuss.

But Gyeong-ok was not like that. She would hold hands and play with my friends, but as soon as I came near, her face would turn red and she would subtly avoid me.

This was dissatisfying to me. And that dissatisfaction even led to unpleasantness. I resentfully watched them playing happily at cards and went out alone to the back of the Buddhist temple (佛堂) or to a secluded rock, where I sat and pondered. Even then, I wondered if Gyeong-ok would come out to find me? Even if she was too shy to come out, wouldn't the quick-witted Sam-ju or someone else understand my feelings and send Gyeong-ok to find me?

Ah, Ok-yeop, Ok-yeop, where are you now? If only you were here, I wouldn't be so lonely. Thus, the thought of Ok-yeop became even more intense in my mind because of Gyeong-ok's attitude.

Two days later, we returned from Soyosan. And as before, we opened a nori (놀이, entertainment/party) every night at Sikdowon. But it was not easy to call Hwang Gyeong-ok. When Chan-yeong and Sam-ju, or perhaps Namgung-byeok and Gyeong-pae, showed the kind of intimate love that I and Ok-yeop had exchanged in the past, I did not have the courage to call the cold Gyeong-ok. I always sat alone, watching them have fun. And in my heart, I wished only for Ok-yeop.

Even in this loneliness, I still had one consolation. It was Hwang Gyeong-ok. When I returned to the Family Hotel late at night from Sikdowon and threw my tired body on the bed, I would definitely get a phone call around one or two in the morning <145>. After about 20 or 30 minutes, Gyeong-ok would come to the hotel secretly. And when she came, she would bring some kind of present. Sometimes it was grapes or cookies, sometimes a handkerchief - she would always bring something.

A month passed like this.

One night, as I was waiting for Gyeong-ok to come, rolling around on the bed, I heard a knock on the door. I immediately went and opened the door. But unexpectedly, Kim Ok-yeop was standing outside the door.

Shock, joy, and anger - I don't know exactly how to describe my feelings at that time. I stared at him with a blank look, wondering if this was a dream.

"Honey."

He threw the handbag and scarf he had brought onto the bed and stood firm. I also closed the door and stood facing him with my back to it.

A little later, he rushed towards me and clung to me.

"What is this?"

He clung to my arm and started to cry. I quietly left him to do as he pleased. I didn't shake him off. I didn't pull him. Thus, the second relationship with Ok-yeop was tied.

Gyeong-ok always returned to her house early in the morning while it was still dark. But Ok-yeop was not like that. He barely got out of bed until the sun was high in the sky the next day. And after ordering breakfast for two people from the boy, he went across to meet Chan-yeong and Sam-ju in the other room. He didn't return to his house until evening.

From then on, a strange life gradually unfolded. Ok-yeop and Gyeong-ok had somehow come to stand in the position of competitors.

Gyeong-ok, who had still been shy, gradually made her attitude clear. Gyeong-ok, who had never come during the day, often came to the hotel during the day. It often happened that Gyeong-ok and Ok-yeop faced each other at the hotel at night.

In the midst of this competition between these two people, I didn't know what to do and just left everything as it was. Of course, Ok-yeop's dense love, like a sand flower, was my favorite. But Gyeong-ok's pure love, like a forsythia flower, also had an charm that I couldn't give up. In a painful situation where I couldn't decide which to abandon and which to take, I met Ok-yeop and was good to him - when I met Gyeong-ok, I was also good to him - I used the so-called <146> Eight-Faced Beauty (八方美人) principle.

"You are not qualified to treat two gisaengs as concubines."

Ok-yeop often ridiculed me. I couldn't answer that. And I still took an ambiguous attitude on both sides.

Gyeong-ok was still a naive child. Ok-yeop was an old general (老將). Ok-yeop, who could not get satisfactory results from me, directed the root of her means towards Gyeong-ok. And, as the first step, Ok-yeop always praised me whenever she met Gyeong-ok. However, she did not forget to pour poison into that praise that would make Gyeong-ok leave on her own. After that, she declared that she was my wife who had even received permission from my mother.

Faced with this, the young Gyeong-ok didn't seem to know how to make up her mind. Ok-yeop always praised Gyeong-ok in front of me, while Gyeong-ok did not hesitate to openly show her jealousy towards Ok-yeop to me. And she begged me to leave Ok-yeop.

But this only annoyed me and did not do more than stir up my emotions. My heart gradually began to lean towards Ok-yeop.

At this time, at Ok-yeop's suggestion, Ok-yeop and I went on a trip to Andong County (安東縣) for a while.

It was the day before the sixtieth birthday party of Go Gyeong-sang's stern father, which I will never forget. We played all night at Sikdowon. That day, Namgung-byeok said that he felt very unwell, but he ate a lot of food because he was hungry.

The next day, Namgung was unable to attend Go Gyeong-sang's stern father's sixtieth birthday celebration at a certain restaurant because he was unwell. I and Ok-yeop, who had secretly slipped out of the banquet, stopped by the hotel for a moment and left for Andong County that night by train.

The day after arriving in Andong County, we received a telegram and a letter at the same time from Yu Ji-yeong that Namgung had died of peritonitis.

It was a bolt from the blue. I could only stare at Ok-yeop's face. Ok-yeop could only stare at my face. After that, they both sighed.

"Uh heuk."

Namgung's cough, which he made with a strangely bizarre sound, was sometimes unexpectedly heard in my ear. Namgung's habit of speaking, mostly in Japanese, and pronouncing "Sorede" as "Eu-m, ssorede-" in a particularly reserved manner was sometimes unexpectedly heard in my ear. His knife-like nose bridge and his dreamlike eyes always disturbed my mind. <147>

"Namgung is dead. I've lost a friend."

However, in the midst of this, Ok-yeop and I were firmly reunited for the second time. Gyeong-ok, whose shadow had been faint from the beginning, gradually disappeared from my mind. When I returned to Seoul, I bought several presents for my friends, but I didn't even buy a pack of cheap cigarettes for Gyeong-ok (though he couldn't smoke). It wasn't that I didn't think of it at all, but I stopped because I was worried about Ok-yeop.

After spending about 10 days in Andong County, on the way back to Seoul, I made Ok-yeop go straight to Seoul, and I got off at Pyongyang to see my son Il-hwan growing up safely, and the next day I went up to Seoul. And that night, a nori (party) was held in Room 7 of Sikdowon.

This was the day that marked the final end between Gyeong-ok and me. Of course, I didn't even think of calling Gyeong-ok. Since Ok-yeop appeared in front of me for the second time, I had never seen Gyeong-ok at the restaurant. However, after consulting with Yu Ji-yeong, Ok-yeop wrote a letter on my business card asking him to come, and he was only called after 11 o'clock. It seemed that Ok-yeop wanted to see my actions towards Gyeong-ok with ample confidence at this time.

The result was the same as Ok-yeop had imagined. I was very cold to Gyeong-ok, who had appeared unexpectedly, and did not even offer a single welcome greeting. The ten-day trip to Andong County had completely turned my heart towards Ok-yeop.

Meanwhile, Gyeong-ok, who was sitting in a corner forcing herself to smile and sing, secretly went out and went to her house at some point. Thus, with this day as an opportunity, the relationship between me and Gyeong-ok was completely severed.

I never had the opportunity to meet him again after that, and two years later, one summer day, I went to the Han River with Yu Ji-yeong to swim and met him on the streetcar on the way back. But he pretended not to know me. And he only exchanged a few words with Yu Ji-yeong.

But I saw it - that his complexion was unusual. And that his voice was trembling.

He never turned his head towards me until the end. And when he reached Jongno, he got off the streetcar. Even after getting off the streetcar, he didn't turn his head towards the streetcar and went into the courthouse. But at that time, if you look at him forgetting to open his parasol and walking with his head buried in his chest, you can see that there was a great agitation in his mind as well. <148>

Some time later, I heard through the grapevine that he had died tragically from difficult labor. Even before I knew of his death, for some reason, I was feeling a kind of faint longing for Gyeong-ok, whom I had so carelessly abandoned at that time, and my heart sank when I heard of his death.

Since then, I have sometimes thought of him. The way he would turn red in the face and avoid me whenever I went near him at Soyosan, the way he would secretly come every night and return before dawn, the way he would whisper Ok-yeop's faults in my ear, the way he was forcing a smile while only looking away on the night I met him after visiting Andong County with Ok-yeop, and finally, the way he was walking towards his house with his head down, forgetting to open his parasol one summer day - these various aspects of him sometimes come back to my memory and make me sigh.

He was also an unfortunate life.

After returning from Andong County, Ok-yeop almost lived at the Family Hotel. He would only go home for a while in the evening to do his makeup, but he would live at the hotel from night until the next day.

At that time, I was truly wasting my life. Waking up was mostly after twelve o'clock. And as soon as the sun was setting in the west, I went to Sikdowon. I usually returned from Sikdowon around three or four o'clock. At Sikdowon, only Room 7 (at that time) was never rented to anyone else for us. The friends I went out to drink with were mostly literary friends (文友), but I had never talked about writing with them.

Sometimes I would take the opportunity to quietly turn on the Victrola. And in that elaborate machine, the magnificent sound of Caruso, the beautiful sound of Kelly-Kulchi, or the soul-stirring piano of Peter Lewschutsky, and the heart-wrenching violin of Heifetz, would play my artistic conscience and artistic soul. Let's abandon this life. And let's step back onto the path of art. Isn't it the order I received from heaven to save my talent and my conscience from this mind-tiring drinking and playing? How much is the barren field of Joseon waiting for the beautiful seeds of art? There are as many things for me to do as there are mountains. This is not the time to play like this all the time. To my calling! To my calling! I would bow my head in such tearful thoughts, not knowing the time.

But that was all. By evening, I would find myself back at Sikdowon, waiting for Ok-yeop to come.

At that time, No Chun-seong (盧春城) (who was a pure literary youth at the time) also sent me a letter saying, "I am planning to publish a collection of love letters from writers, and I would be grateful if you could send me one." But I didn't even think about grabbing a manuscript paper. And I only replied, "If you find me a lover, I will write a letter to that person, so get it and write it."

I couldn't even write Namgung-byeok's eulogy, which I kept saying I would write - that was me. And I was going from party to party, further exhausting my tired mind and body.

My feelings and attitude towards Ok-yeop were also different from the first time. The first time, I had a household in mind and always associated Ok-yeop, who would become my wife in the future, but the second time, I only loved Ok-yeop as a plaything. Household? Who would have a household with such a gisaeng? I was only going to use him as a comfort to my heart until my heart left Ok-yeop.

Ok-yeop seemed to gradually realize this in my heart. At first, he subtly urged me to start a household with hints, but he gradually began to urge me to start a household openly.

"Honey, when are we going to start a household?"

He would sometimes ask like this.

"Household? Soon. But let's play a little more..."

I always answered like this. But my heart was rather answering like this -

"What is a household? I already have a master (主君) in Pyongyang, and it's annoying to have that, so am I going to bring in a gisaeng and make her my master too? That's nonsense."

Ok-yeop was a clever gisaeng. He somehow knew even this psychology of mine. And he urged me even more -

"Honey. You don't seem to want to start a household. If you don't want to, just tell me. Then I'll have some ideas too... If you don't want to have a household with me, I'll leave you."

He even tried this threat. But I didn't react there either and just laughed it off.

"If you want to leave, you can leave, why even declare it? If you leave, I'll bring another gisaeng to my heart's content."

And I just looked at the ceiling and laughed.

It seemed that this attitude of mine had disappointed Ok-yeop. He had been constantly urging me to start a household as soon as possible, but after the twelfth month of that year, when January of the following year came, he gradually began to leave me. The number of times he came to the hotel also gradually decreased. And even at the restaurant, he was tired of other rooms and was being given a tip. In the past, even if he had been called to another restaurant first, he would come running within 30 minutes if I told him to come to Sikdowon, but it often happened that he didn't come because of cooking excuses or other excuses.

Even if he had given up the idea of starting a household, it wasn't that Ok-yeop's shadow had disappeared from my heart. Ok-yeop's gradually cooling attitude was making my heart ache. It was an undeniable fact that there was a lot of pride as a man mixed in it. While I outwardly pretended to leave it alone, I was gradually becoming more and more anxious inside.

While we were passing by each other with such awkward and bizarre feelings, the final rupture between Ok-yeop and me finally came. It was one night. I greeted Ok-yeop, who had come after a long time, with joy mixed with anger, and as I was talking about this and that, I found a suspicious letter on Ok-yeop's body. It was a letter from a certain man to Ok-yeop.

I read it. Ok-yeop was just staring at what I was doing with wide eyes.

After finishing reading it, I slowly raised my head.

"Whose letter is this?"

"A customer's letter."

"An ordinary customer?"

"Of course."

I suddenly raised my hand and slapped Ok-yeop's cheek. This was the first time in my 20 years that I had used my hands.

He didn't cry. And after glaring at me for a while with venomous eyes, he picked up his coat and left.

Thus, the relationship between him and me was severed.

I couldn't sleep that night because of anger.

"That bitch! That bitch!"

I clenched my fists several times while rolling around on the bed alone. Even then, how much I wished that Ok-yeop would regret his mistake and come before me to apologize...

But the next day, my attitude was natural. Even when Ji-yeong suggested calling Ok-yeop when I went to Sikdowon in the evening, I only refused with a smile. My proud personality never allowed me to bow my head, even in the face of love.

But in my heart, I was incomparably lonely. His voluptuous gestures were always flashing before my eyes. <151> At Sikdowon, I would look at the empty seat next to me and often cry inwardly, thinking of that hateful Ok-yeop. Once, I got drunk and even cried, feeling ashamed.

After about ten days, I came down to Pyongyang. I was tired of the parties in Seoul without Ok-yeop.

In Pyongyang, I was spending my days lonely with drinking and playing, and after a while, I left for Tokyo to see the Taisho Exposition (大正博覽會) that was being held in Tokyo to relieve my lonely feelings. And when I briefly stepped into Seoul, Ok-yeop came to find me, somehow knowing that I had come to Seoul. But after talking intimately for a couple of hours as close friends, we parted ways.

After returning from Tokyo, I heard through the grapevine that Ok-yeop had gone to live somewhere in North Pyongan Province (平北). Not long after that, I heard that he had gone to Gyeryongsan (鷄龍山).

After that, I had no news of whether he was dead or alive, and two years later, one late spring day, I received a letter from him. The letter said that he had forgotten all the things in the world and was only focusing on his studies, and that he was now attending Baehwa Girls' High School (培花學堂) under his childhood name Kim Geum-ji (金金枝), and that if I had a chance to come to Seoul someday, I should visit him as an old friend.

At that time, I was about to go to Seoul to see the art exhibition, so I went to Seoul a few days before the exhibition and looked for him at a lodging house in Chebu-dong.

He greeted me happily. And we went for a walk together. At that time, whether he had any intention of protecting himself, he forced one of his friends to come with him.

After finishing the walk and saying goodbye to him, the impression of him that remained in my mind was very beautiful. Leaving that beautiful impression behind, I did not meet him again and returned to Pyongyang.

Not long after that, his traces suddenly disappeared from this wide world.

That's when my dream started. Is he dead? Is he alive? If he's alive, where did he go? What is he doing?

He's in Tokyo. He went into Gyeryongsan. He's in a village in Gangwon Province (江原道). He became a monk. He became someone's concubine. He's doing some research. Various rumors about his life kept coming into my ears. But none of them were reliable. Strangely, in the face of these various rumors, my impression of him became more and more beautiful day by day. And I would sometimes think about his work and look at the sky as if dreaming. <152>

Even as I continued to walk the path of the courtesan world, I don't know why, but after that, I saw many gisaengs and had many parties, but I never wanted to have a physical relationship with a gisaeng who wasn't Ok-yeop. Kim Ok-yeop, the very first person in the courtesan world, seemed different from all other gisaengs to me. Moreover, when I thought of him bravely trying to pioneer his path outside of the courtesan world, a kind of respect even arose.

"Kim Dong-in is a cripple."

"Kim Dong-in is an antique."

Such rumors even began to circulate in the Pyongyang courtesan world. Therefore, when No San-hong and I became close about 5 or 6 years later, the many gisaengs of Pyongyang almost cast eyes of astonishment.

Kim Ok-yeop, whom I always thought of with a great deal of sentimental recollection and shed tears for, Kim Ok-yeop, the mysterious woman whose whereabouts no one knew exactly, Kim Ok-yeop, who was so beautiful and so adorably deeply imprinted in my mind - he suddenly appeared in Pyongyang one winter.

"Kim Ok-yeop is back in Pyongyang."

I heard this news from a certain gisaeng.

I went to find Ok-yeop that evening. Suppressing my trembling heart and strangely tense feelings, my voice trembled with excitement when I looked for him at the door of his house.

But what did I find there when I finally went in?

I found a "shell of life" that had been buffeted and buffeted by the great waves of life, all rough and dirty. There was a model of the typical "end of a gisaeng's life." I found a scarecrow who had lost any "feeling" that a life should have. I found a "living corpse" that only had a mouth alive and had forgotten all other conscience, beauty, and excitement.

When I came out of that house, I let out a long sigh. And I regretted going into that house. I had never felt the sorrow of disillusionment so acutely in my life.

After that, I avoided opportunities to meet him as much as possible. But the more I met him, the more the unpleasant impression increased. Thus, during the few times I saw him at unavoidable banquets, none of his impressions, which had been so beautifully imprinted, remained, and now only an unpleasant impression of him remained.

Now, he is said to be living an interesting life as the legal wife of a former government official (前 官吏). No matter how unpleasant the impression may remain now, I sincerely bless his future, which decorated a significant page of my life. (This item is complete) <153>

**Named Entities**

金玉葉	Kim Ok-yeop
黃瓊玉	Hwang Gyeong-ok
淸凉里	Ch'ŏngnyangni
逍遙山	Soyosan
金東仁	Kim Tong-in
三珠	Sam-ju
瓚永	Ch'an-yŏng
南宮璧	Namgung-pyŏk
慶派	Kyŏng-p'ae
食道園	Sikdowŏn
安東縣	Andong-hyŏn
高敬相	Ko Kyŏng-sang
柳志永	Yu Chi-yŏng
平壤	P'yŏngyang
東京	Tōkyō
大正博覽會	Taishō Hakurankai
培花學堂	Paehwa Haktang
盧春城	No Ch'un-sŏng
盧山紅	No San-hong
金金枝	Kim Kŭm-ji
體府洞	Ch'ebu-dong
鷄龍山	Kyeryongsan
江原道	Kangwŏndo



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제32호
발행일	1930년 09월 01일
기사제목	女人(六), 追憶의 더듬길
필자	金東仁
기사형태	소설

女人
						金東仁
5 金玉葉과 黃瓊玉(續)
黃瓊玉은 그 때 열여섯살 난 아직 어린 기생이엇섯다. 코 우에 두어 곤대 얽은 자리가 잇스며 눈초리며 몸 맵시며 어듸로 뜨더 보아도 아직 순진한 내음새가 풍부한 어린 기생이엇섯다.
그날 밤 우리는 다 패밀리 호텔에서 묵엇다. 그러고 이튼날 청량리까지 나가서 거기서 긔차를 타고 소요산으로 단풍을 따러갓다.
소요산에서 잇틀을 묵어 잇는 동안 나는 아직것 마음 속에 「기생의 타입」이라고 정의(定義)하여 두엇든 그런 종류의 녀자와는 온전히 다른 새 타입의 기생을 황경옥에게서 발견하엿다. 그것은 무론 아직 나히가 어렷든 까닭이엇겟지만 경옥이는 나를 보기를 몹시 부그러워＜144＞하엿다. 밤에는 자리를 가티 하지만 날만 밝으면 그는 후덕후덕 뛰여 나가서 나를 피하엿다. 내가 자긔의 겨테라도 가 안즈면 그는 얼굴이 버-ㄹ거케 되며 슬몃이 자리를 피하고 하엿다. 아직것 배운 기생의 교육은 그로 하여금 나의 친구들과는 아모 거리낌이 업시 놀게 하엿지만 남이 보는 곳에서는 나를 몹시 피하엿다. 무슨 말을 하여도 말 대답조차 못하엿다.
경옥이의 이런 태도는 나로 하여금 곳 옥엽이를 생각나게 하엿다. 단 둘이서 잇슬때는 오히려 점잔엇지만 옥엽이는 겨테 나의 친구들이라도 잇스면 견듸지 못하도록 나에게 매달려서 시달리는 종류의 사람이엇섯다.
「이것은 내 사람」
그는 몹시도 이런 것을 남에게 보이려는 종류의 사람 이엇섯다. 체모업시 달려 들어서 쓸어 안으며 엇더케하여 나의 친구들이 그의 몸을 건드르기라도 하면 시언시언히 그곳을 털어 버리며 야단하군 하엿섯다.
그러나 경옥이는 그러치 안엇다. 그는 나의 친구들과는 손목을 잡고 놀앗지만 내가 겨테 가기만 하여도 얼굴이 버-ㄹ거케 되며 몸을 슬쩍 피하는 것이엇섯다.
이것이 나에게는 불만하엿다. 그러고 그 불만은 불쾌조차 나앗다. 유쾌히 트람프를 하며 노는 그들을 원망스러히 바라보며 나는 홀로 나와서 佛堂 뒤 혹은 외따름 바위에 가서 쓸쓸히 걸터 안저서 생각에 잠기는 것이엇섯다. 그러면서도 혹은 경옥이 나를 차즈려 나오지나 안나? 설혹 그가 붓그러워서 못 나온다 할지라도 눈치 빠른 三珠나 누구가 내 심사를 헤아리고 경옥이를 나를 차즈려 보내 주지나 안나?
아아 옥엽아 옥엽아 너는 지금 어듸 잇니? 너만 잇섯드면 나는 이러케 쓸쓸치는 안켓구나.-이리하여 옥엽이게 대한 생각은 경옥이의 태도 때문에, 더욱 나의 마음에 강렬히 이러낫다.
이틀 뒤에 우리는 소요산에서 도라왓다. 그러고 전과 가티 우리는 매일밤 식도원에서  노리를 열엇다. 그러나 황경옥은 부르는 일이 쉽지 안엇다. 瓚永과, 三珠가 혹은 남궁벽과 경패가 마치 이전의 나와, 옥엽이가티 농밀하게 서로 주고 밧는 사랑을 볼 때에 나는 차듸찬 경옥이를 부를 용긔가 업섯든 것이엇섯다. 나는 언제던 외로히 혼자서 안저서 그들의 재미잇게 노는 모양만 바라보고 잇섯다. 그러고 마음으로는 옥엽이만 잇섯드면 하엿다.
이러한 쓸쓸한 가운데서도 내게는 역시 한 가지의 위안이 잇섯다. 그것은 역시 황경옥이엇섯다. 식도원에서 밤 늣게 패밀리 호텔로 도라 가서 곤한 몸을 침대 우에 내여 던지고 잇노라면 새벽 한 시나 두 시쯤 하여서는＜145＞ 꼭 내게 전화가 오고 하엿다. 그런 뒤 2,30분만 지나면 경옥이가 남모르게 호텔로 차저 오는 것이엇섯다. 그러고 올 때에는 무슨 프레젠트를 가지고 오는 것이엇섯다. 혹은 포도 혹은 과자 엇던 때는 손수건-무엇이던 한 가지는 가지고 오는 것이엇섯다.
이러한 한 달이 지낫다.
엇던날 밤 그 밤도 경옥이가 이제나 올가 저제나 올가 기다리고 침대 우에 딍굴고 잇슬 때에 문을 두다리는 소리가 들렷다. 나는 곳 나가서 문을 열어 주엇다. 그러나 그 문 밧게는 뜻밧게 金玉葉이가 서 잇슨 것이엇섯다.
경악과 희열과 분노-그 때의 나의 마음을 엇더케 형용하면 조흘지 나는 똑똑이 모르겟다. 나는 눈이 멀건이 이게 꿈이 안인가 하는 표정으로서 그를 바라보고 잇섯다.
「여보」
그는 가지고 온 핸드빽과 목도리를 침대 우에 휙 내여 던지고 딱 버틔고 섯다. 나도 문을 다든 뒤에 그 문을 등지고 마조 버틔고 섯다.
조금 뒤에 그는 와락 내게 달려와서 매달렷다.
「이게 무슨 짓이오?」
그는 내 팔에 매달려서 울기 시작하엿다. 나는 잠자코 그의 하는 대로 내버려 두엇다. 뿌리치지도 안엇다. 끄을어 당기지도 안엇다. 이리하여 옥엽이와의 두 번째 인연은 매저젓다.
경옥이는 새벽 아직 어두워서 늘 제 집으로 도라갓다. 그러나 옥엽이는 그러치 안엇다. 그는 이튼날 해가 중천에 오른 뒤에야 겨우 침대에서 나왓다. 그러고 뽀이를 불러서 두 사람의 조반을 명한 뒤에 저편ㅅ방에 잇는 瓚永과 三珠를 만나려 건너갓다. 저녁때가 되어서야 제 집으로 도라갓다.
그 뒤부터는 이상한 살림이 차차 전개 되엿다. 옥엽과 경옥이는 어느덧 서로 경쟁자의 지위에 섯다.
아직것 수저워하든 경옥이도 차차로 제 태도를 선명히 하엿다. 나제는 일절 오는 일이 업든 경옥이가, 나제도 흔히 호텔로 차저 오게가 되엿다. 밤에 호텔에서 경옥이와 옥엽이가 마조칠 때도 흔히 잇게 되엿다.
이 두 사람의 경쟁의 틈에서 나는 엇지 할 바를 모르고 모든 일을 가만 되는대로 버려둘 뿐이엇섯다. 모래꼿과 가튼 농후한 옥엽이의 사랑은 무론 나의 조아하는 배엇섯다. 그러나 개나리꼿과 가튼 청초한 경옥이의 사랑도 또한 버리지 못 할 정취가 잇섯다. 어느 것을 버리고 어느 것을 취하여얄지 판단을 나릴 수 업는 괴로운 자리에서 나는 옥엽을 만나면 그에게 조케-경옥을 만나면 또한 그에게 조케-소위＜146＞八方美人주의를 썻다.
「당신은 기생 둘을 올케 취급할 자격이 업세요.」
옥엽이는 흔히 나를 비우섯다. 나도 거기는 대답을 못하엿다. 그러고 역시 좌우편에 다 명료치 못한 태도를 취하고 윀‡섯다.
경옥이는 아직 순진한 어린애엇섯다. 옥엽이는 老將이엇섯다. 나에게서 만족한 결과를 엇지못한 옥엽이는 수단의 뿌리를 경옥이에게 향하엿다. 그러고, 그 첫 착수로써 옥엽이는 경옥를 만나면 언제던 내 칭찬을 하엿다. 그러나 그 칭찬ㅅ속에는 경옥이로 하여금 저절로 떠러저 나갈 독을 부읏기를 닛지 안엇다. 그런 뒤에는 자긔는 나의 어머니에게까지 허락을 바든 나의 안해라 선언하엿다.
이러한 아페서 어린 경옥이는 엇지 하여야 할지 자긔의 마음을 작정할 줄을 모르는 모양이엇섯다. 옥엽이는 내 아페서 늘 경옥이의 칭찬을 하는데 반하여 경옥이는 내게 옥엽이에게게 대한 시기를 노골적으로 나타내이기를 주저치 안엇다. 그러고 내가 옥엽이와 떠나기를 간청하엿다.
그러나 이것은 오히려 나의 비위를 거슬리고 나의 감정을 더 사는데 지나지 못하엿다. 나의 마음은 차차 옥엽에게로 기울너지기 시작하엿다.
이 때에 옥엽의 發議로서 나와 옥엽이가 잠시 安東縣을 려행을 가게 되엿다.
그것은 니치지도 안는 高敬相의 嚴親의 회갑연의 전날 이엇섯다. 우리들은 역시 식도원에서 밤이 새도록 놀앗다. 그 날 南宮璧은 몹시 몸이 불쾌하다 하며 그러면서도 배가 주렷든지 음식을 만히 먹엇다.
이튼날 엇던 料亭에서 高敬相의 嚴親의 회갑 축연에 南宮은 몸이 불편하다고 참석치 못하엿다. 그 연석에서 몰래 빠저나온 나와 옥엽은 잠깐 호텔에 들렷다가 그 밤차로 安東縣으로 떠낫다.
안동현에 도착한 이튼날 우리는 柳志永에게서 南宮이 복막염으로 세상을 떠낫다는 전보와 편지를 동시에 바덧다.
그것은 청천에 벽력이엇섯다. 나는 옥엽의 얼굴을 바라볼 다름이엇섯다. 옥엽은 나의 얼굴을 바라볼 다름이엇섯다. 그런 뒤에 둘은 한숨을 쉬엇다.
「어 훍」
남달리 괴상한 소리로 짓든 남궁의 기침ㅅ리가 때때로 뜻하지 안코 귀에 들렷다. 이야기를 대게 일본말로 하며 ソレデ라는 것을 「으-ㅁ, 쏘레데-」라고 유난히 점잔케 발음하든 남궁의 이야기ㅅ버릇까지 때때로 뜻하지 안코 귀에 들렷다. 칼날가튼 코ㅅ마루며 무슨 꿈을 꾸는듯한 눈은 언제던 나의 정신을 산난케 하엿다.＜147＞
「남궁이 죽엇다. 친구 하나 일헛구나」
그러나 이러한 가운데서도 옥엽과 나는 두 번째 다시 단단히 결합되엿다. 본시부터 그림자가 엷든 경옥이는 나의 머리에서 차차 업서지고 말엇다. 서울로 도라올 때에 친구들을 위하여는 몃가지의 프레센트를 사가지고 왓지만은 경옥에게는 너절한 담배(그는 담배는 못 먹엇스나) 한 갑조차 사오지 안엇다. 조금 생각 안 난 바는 안이엇섯지만 옥엽이에게 어려워서 중지한 것이엇섯다.
한 10여일을 안동현서 지나고 서울로 오는 길에 옥엽이만 서울까지 직행을 시키고 나는 평양서 나려서 나의 아들 日煥이의 무사히 자라나는 것을 본 뒤에 이튼날 서울로 올라갓다. 그러고 그날 밤 식도원 7호실에서는 또한 노리가 열렷다.
이날이 경옥이와 나와의 마즈막 결말을 지은 날이엇섯다. 나는 무론 경옥이를 부르려고는 생각도 안하엿다. 옥엽이가 내 아페 두 번째 나타난 뒤로부터는 경옥이는 요릿집에서는 본 일이 업섯든 것이엇섯다. 그런데 옥엽이가 柳志永과 의논을 한 뒤에 내 명함에다가 오라는 편지를 써서 열한시가 지나서야 불른 것이엇섯다. 미상불 이 때에는 옥엽이는 넉넉한 자신으로 경옥이에게 대하여 취하는 나의 행동을 보려든 모양이엇섯다.
결과는 옥엽의 상상하엿든 바와 가텃다. 나는 뜻밧게 나타난 경옥이에게 아조 쌀쌀한 태도를 취한뿐 한마듸의 반가운 인사조차 안이 하엿다. 열흘 동안의 안동현 려행은 나의 마음으로 하여금 완전히 옥엽이에게로 향하게 한 것이엇섯다.
한편 모퉁이에 안저서 억지로 우스며 노래하며 하든 경옥이는 어느 틈에 몰래 나가서 제 집으로 가 버렷다. 이리하여 이 날을 긔회로 나와 경옥이의 인연은 완전히 끈어진 것이엇섯다.
그 뒤에 다시 그를 만날 긔회가 엄든 나는 그로부터 2년이 지나서 엇던 녀름날 柳志永과 함께 멱을 감으려 漢江에 나갓다가 도라오는 길에 전차에서 그를 만낫다. 그러나 그는 나를 모른체 하엿다. 그러고 柳志永과만 몃마듸의 말을 사괴엇다.
그러나 나는 보앗다.-그의 얼굴빗이 심상치 안은 것을. 그러고 그의 목소리가 떨리는 것을.
그는 끗끗내 내게로는 머리를 돌리지 안엇다. 그러고 종로까지 니르러서 그는 전차를 버리고 나렷다. 전차를 버린 뒤에도 전차 쪽으로는 머리를 돌리지도 안코 재판소 쪽으로 드러가 버렷다. 그러나 그 때에 그가 양산을 펼 것도 이저바리고 머리를 압가슴에 무든 뒤에 총총 거름으로 간 것을 보면 그의 마음에도 커다란 격동이 잇섯슴을 알 수가 잇다.＜148＞
그로부터 얼마 뒤에 그가 애처려히도 難産으로 죽엇다는 것을 나는 풍편으로 드럿다. 그의 죽음을 알기 전부터 웬 까닭인지 그 때에 그러케도 무심히 내버린 경옥이에게 대하여 일종의 엷은 그리움을 늣기고 잇든 나는 그의 죽음을 드를 때에 가슴이 선뜩하엿다.
그 뒤부터 나는 때때로 그를 생각하엿다. 소요산에서 내가 겨테 가기만 해도 얼굴이 버-ㄹ거케 되며 자리를 피하든 그 밤마다 남 모르게 차저 왓다는 새벽 밝기도 전에 도라가든 그 내 귀에 옥엽의 험구를 불어너튼 그 내가 옥엽과 함께 안동현을 다녀 온 뒤에 맛난 날 밤 딴데만 보면서 억지의 우슴을 웃고 잇든 그 그러고 마즈막으로 어느해 여름 양산을 녀페 낀 채로 펴기도 닛고 머리를 숙으리고 총총 거름으로 제 집으로 도라가든 그-이러한 여러 가지의 그의 모양이 때때로 나의 긔억에 사라나서 나로 하여금 한숨짓게 한다.
그도 한 박명한 인생이엇섯다.

안동현서 도라온 뒤부터 옥엽이는 거이 패밀리호텔에서 살엇다. 저녁 때 화장하려 잠시 집에 도라갈뿐 밤에서 이튼날까지는 호텔에서 살엇다.
그 때의 나는 살림을 진실로 허탕하엿다. 아츰(?) 깨인다는 것은 대개가 열두시를 지나서엇섯다. 그러고 해가 서편으로 기울어지기만 하면 식도원으로 갓다. 식도원에서 도라오는 것은 대개 세시나 네시쯤이엇섯다. 식도원에서는 우리를 위하여 (그 때의)7호실 한 방뿐은 결코 다른 사람에게 빌려주지 안엇다. 가티 술을 먹으려 다니는 벗들은 대개가 文友엇섯지만, 글에 대하여는 한 마듸의 이야기를 하여 본 적이 업섯다.
때때로 나는 죠용한 긔회를 타서 삑터-를 틀어 노앗다. 그러고 그 정교한 긔게ㅅ속에서 울어 나오는 카루조-의 웅장한 소리며 켈리-쿨치의 아름다운 소리에 혹은 패테류스키의 령혼을 움직이는 피아노며 하이팻츠의 마음을 떨리게 하는 빠을롱에 나이 예술적 양심과 예술적 혼을 뛰놀리는 것이엇섯다. 이런 생활을 버리자. 그러고 다시 예술의 길에 발을 드려 노차. 나의 재조, 나의 량심을 이 心神을 피곤케 하는 술과 노리에서 구원하자. 황막한 조선의 벌에 예술의 아름다운 씨를 뿌리는 것이 내가 하늘에서 바든 명령이 안이냐. 조선의 거츨은 벌은 얼마나 이 예술의 씨를 기다리는가. 나의 할 일은 태산과 가티 만타. 이러케 번번히 놀고 잇슬 때가 아니다. 나의 천직으로! 나의 천직으로! 눈물겨운 이런 생각에 머리를 숙으리고 시간가는 줄을 모르는 것이엇섯다.
그러나 그 뿐이엇섯다. 저녁때만 되면 어느덧 다시＜149＞식도원에 나타나서 옥엽이가 얼넌 오기를 기다리고 잇는 자긔를 발견하는 것이엇섯다.
그 때에 盧春城(당시에는 한 순진한 문학청년)이, 「문인들의 연애 서간집을 발행하려는데 선생도 한 편 써 보내 주시면 고맙겟다.」는 편지를 내게도 하엿다. 그러나 원고지를 잡을 생각조차 안하엿다. 그러고 「연인을 하나 구하여 주면 그 사람에게 편지를 할테니 그것을 어더쓰라.」는 회답을 한 뿐이 엇섯다.
南宮璧의 추도문을 쓴다 쓴다 하면서도 그것조차 못한 나-엇섯다. 그러고 노리에서 노리로 갓다가나 피곤한 심신을 더욱 피곤케 하는 것이엇섯다.
옥엽에게 대한 나의 마음과 태도도 첫 번엣겟과는 달럿다. 첫 번에는 살림이라는 것을 아페 그려노코 장내에 나의 마누라가 될 옥엽이를 늘 련상한데 반하여, 두 번째는 한 노리개로서 옥엽이를 사랑한데 지나지 못하엿다. 살림? 누가 그런 기생과 살림을 하야. 나의 마음이 옥엽에게서 떠날 때까지 그를 한 마음의 위안픔으로 리용할 다름이엇섯다.
이 나의 마음은 차차 옥엽이도 깨다른 모양이엇섯다. 처음에는 암시로서 은근히 살림을 채근하든 그가 차차 노골적으로 살림을 채근하기 시작하엿다.
「여보 언제 살림을 할테요」
그는 때때로 이러케 무럿다.
「살림? 곳 하지. 그러나 좀 더 놀고...」
나는 언제던이러케 대답하엿다. 그러나 나의 마음은 오히려 이러케 대답하엿다.-
「살림이 다 뭐냐. 평양에 한 主君을 두고 그것을 둔 것조차 구찬은데 둔 것조차 구찬은데 기생을 또한 모셔다가 主君을 삼어? 당찬은 소리다.」
옥엽은 령리한 기생이엇다. 그는 어느덧 나의 이런 심리조차 아럿다. 그러고 나를 더 성화 시켯다.-
「여보. 당신은 살림을 하기가 실흔 모양이외다 그려. 실흐면 실타고 그래줘요. 그러면 내게도 생각이 잇스니깐...당신이 나하고 살림하기가 실타면 나는 당신을 떠나겟서요.」
그는 이런 협박조차 해 보앗다. 그러나 거기도 나는 대적지 안코 우서 버렷다.
「떠나고 시프면 떠날게지 선언까지 할께 뭐야. 네가 떠나면 나는 마음노코 다른 기생을 모서 오겟다.」
하고는 천정을 처다 보고는 우슬 다름이엇섯다.
나의 이 태도는 옥엽이로 하여금 락망케 한 모양이엇섯다. 야-ㅇ양 만날 살림을 어서 차리기만 조르든 그는 그 해 섯달을 지나서 이듬해 정월이 되엿슬 때는 차차 내게서 떠나기 시작하엿다. 호텔로 차저오는 수효도 차차 줄엇다. 그러고 요릿집에서조차 다른 방에 질려서 개평을 떼이고 하엿다. 이전에는, 설혹 자긔가＜150＞먼저 다른 요릿집에 불렷슬지라도 식도원에서 내가 오라기만 하면 엇더케 하여서던 30분 이내로 달려오든 그가 차차 요리 핑게 조리 핑게 안 오는 일이 흔히 잇게가 되엿다.
설혹 살림하랴는 생각은 포긔하엿슬 망정 내 마음에서 옥엽의 그림자가 사라진 배는 안이엇섯다. 옥엽의 차차 차게 되여가는 태도는 나의 마음을 괴롭게 하엿다. 그 가운데는 다분의 사내로서의 자존심이 석기여 잇섯슴도 감초지 못할 사실이엇섯다. 거츠로는 나도 심상히 내버려두는 체 하면서도 속은 차차 안탁가워 함이 심하여 갓다.
이러케 서로 어석버석 긔괴한 감정으로 지나는 동안에 옥엽과 나의 마즈막 破綻이 마츰내 니르럿다. 그것은 엇던날 밤이엇섯다. 오래간만에 차저온 옥엽이를 분노가 석긴 희열로서 마저서 이런 이야기 저런 이야기 하다가 나는 옥엽의 몸에서 수상한 편지를 한 장 발견 하엿다. 그것은 엇던 사내에게서 옥엽에게로 한 편지엇섯다.
나는 그것을 읽엇다. 옥엽은 눈이 말둥말둥 나의 하는 양만 바라보고 잇섯다/
읽기를 끗내인 뒤에 나는 천천이 머리를 들엇다.
「이게 뉘 편지야.」
「손님의 편지지」
「보통ㅅ손님」
「그럼」
나는 문득 손을 들어서 옥엽이의 따귀를 따렷다. 이것은 20평생에 처음으로 하여본 나의 손질이엇섯다.
그는 울지도 안엇다. 그러고 독을 품은 눈초리로 한참 나를 흘겨보다가 훠 제 외투를 들고 나가 버렷다.
이리하여 그와 나와의 인연은 끈어진 것이엇섯다.
그날밤 분노로서 잠을 못 이루엇다.
「이년을! 이년을!」
나는 침대 우에서 혼자 딍굴면서 몃 번을 주벅을 부러 쥐엇다. 그러면서도 나는 속으로 얼마나 바랫슬가 이제라도 옥엽이가 자긔의 잘못을 뉘우치고 내 아페 와서 사죄하기를...
그러나 이튼날 나의 태도는 천연하엿다. 저녁 때 식도원에 가서 志永이가 옥엽이를 부르자 할 때에도, 나는 우스면서 거절할 뿐이엇섯다. 나의 프라우드한 성격은 비록 사랑의 아페서도 머리를 숙으림을 결코 허락지 안엇다.
그러나 마음으로는 쓸쓸키가 짝이 업섯다. 그의 그 요염히 굴든 온갓 자태는 늘 눈 아페어릿거렷다.＜151＞ 식도원에서도 내 겨테 자리가 뷔여잇는 것을 바라보고는 늘 속으로 눈물을 흘니며 그 뮈운 옥엽이를 생각하엿다. 한 번은 술에 취하여 붓그럼도 잇고, 울기까지 한 일도 잇섯다.
열흘쯤 지나서 나는 평양을 나려왓다. 옥엽이가 업는 서울의 노리에 염쯩이 생긴 것이엇섯다.
평양서는 쓸쓸히 술과 노리로서 날을 보내든 나는 얼마뒤에 大正博覽會가 東京에 열린 것을 보기 위하여 쓸쓸한 심사도 풀기 위하여 東京으로 려행을 떠낫다. 그러고 서울에 잠깐 발을 드려 노앗슬 때에 내가 서울 온 것을 엇더케 아럿는지 옥엽이가 차저왓다. 그러나 갓가운 친구로서 두어시간 친밀히 이야기를 한 뒤에 헤어진 것이엇섯다.
동경서 도라와서 나는 옥엽이가 平北 어듸로 살림을 갓다는 소식을 바람결에 드럿다. 그 뒤 얼마 안하여 그가 鷄龍山을 갓단 말을 드럿다.
그 뒤에는 죽엇는지 살앗는지 일절 소식이 업든, 그에게서 그로부터 잇해 뒤 엇던 느즌 봄날 편지 한 장이 이르럿다. 그 편지에는 자긔는 인전 세상의 온갓 일을 닛고 오로지 학업에 힘쓰며 지금 자긔의 아명 金金枝로서 培花學堂에 다닌다는 이야기며 언제 서울에 올 긔회가 잇스면 한 번 옛날의 친구로서 차저 달란 말이 잇섯다.
그 때 마츰 美術展覽會를 보려 서울로 가려든 나는 그 전람회를 며츨 압하여 상경하여 체부동 엇던 하숙에 잇는 그를 차젓다.
그는 반갑게 마젓다. 그러고 가티 산보를 나섯다. 그 때에 그는 자긔의 몸을 보호하려는 뜻이 엇는지, 엇던 자긔의 친구 하나를 억지로 가티 데리고 나섯다.
산보를 끗내이고 그와 작별을 한 뒤에 나의 머리에 남은 그의 인상은 몹시도 아름다운 것이엇섯다. 그 아름다운 인상을 남긴 채로 나는 다시 그를 만나지 안코 평양으로 도라왓다.
그 뒤 얼마하지 안어서 홀연히 그의 자최는 이 너른 천하에서 업서젓다.
그 때부터 나의 꿈은 시작된 것이엇섯다. 죽엇나. 살엇나. 살엇스면 어듸로 갓나. 무얼하나.
東京 잇다. 鷄龍山에 들어 갓다. 江原道 엇던 촌에 잇다. 중이 되엿다. 남의 첩이 되엿다. 무슨 연구를 한다. 그의 살림에 대한 여러 가지의 풍설이 끈임업시 내 귀에 드러왓다. 그러나 한가지도 신뢰할 만한 것은 업섯다. 이 여러 가지의 풍설의 아페 이상히도 그에게 대한 나의 인상은 나날이 더 아름다워 갓다. 그러고 때때로 그의 일을 생각하며 꿈꾸듯 하늘을 바라보고 잇섯다.＜152＞
여전히 화류계의 길을 밟아 나아가면서도 나는 웨 그런지 그 뒤에는 만흔 기생을 보고 만흔 노리를 하엿지만 한번도 옥엽이가 안인 기생과 육체적의 관게를 맷고 시픈 생각이 업섯다. 화류게에서의 제일 첫 번ㅅ 사람인 김옥엽은 내게는 다른 모든 기생들과는 다르게만 보여다. 더구나 자긔의 길을 화류게 이외에서 개척하려든 용감스러운 그를 생각할 때에는 일종의 존경의 념조차 니러나는 것이엇섯다.
「김동인이는 병신」
「김동인이는 고제」
이러한 소문조차 평양 화류게에서 떠돌기 시작하엿다. 그런지라 그로부터 5,6년 뒤에 盧山紅과 내가, 갓갑게 되엿슬 때에는 평양의 뭇 기생들은 거이 경이의 눈을 던진 것이엇섯다.
대단한 애상의 念이 석긴 회고로서 늘 생각하며 눈물지든 김옥엽이 그 종적을 정확히 아는 사람은 하나도 업든 수수꺽기가튼 녀인인 김옥엽, 그러케도 아름답고 그러케도 귀엽게 내 머리에 기피 인상 백여 잇는 김옥엽-그가 엇던 해 겨울 갑작이 평양에 나타낫다.
「김옥엽이가 평양에 왓대요」
나는 엇던 기생에게서 이 소식을 들은 것이엇섯다.
나는 그 날 저녁으로 옥엽이를 차저갓다. 떨리는 마음과 괴상히도 긴장된 심사를 억누르고 그의 집 문깐에서 그를 차즐 때는 나의 목소리는 흥분으로 떨렷다.
그러나 급기 드러가서 거기서 나는 무엇을 발견하엿나.
인생이라 하는 커다란 물껼에 닥기우고 또닥기워서 다 거츨고 더럽게 된 한 「인생의 껍질」을 발견하엿다. 거기는 전형적 「기생의 末路」의 표본이 잇섯다. 인생이 맛당히 가저야할 아모러한 「감정」도 일허버린 한 허수아비를 발견하엿다. 입 하나만 사라잇고, 다른 온갓 양심이며 아름다움이며 흥분을 이저버린 한 「사-ㄴ송장」을 발견하엿다.
그 집에서 나올 때에 나는 기-다라케 한숨을 쉬엇다. 그러고 그 집에 드러 갓든 것을 후회하엿다. 환멸의 비애를 그러틋 통절히 늣겨 본 적이 나의 일생에 아직것 업섯다.
나는 그 뒤에 그와 만날 긔회를 할 수 잇는 대로 피하엿다. 그러나 엇더케 만나게만 되면 만날스록 그 불쾌한 인상은 더 늘어갓다. 이리하여 피할 수 업는 연회에서 몃 번 그를 볼 동안 아직것 그럿틋 아름답게 백여 잇든 그의 인상은 하나도 남지 안코 다 사러저 업서지고 지금은 그에게 대한 불쾌한 인상만 남어잇다.
지금 그는 엇던 前 官吏의 正室이 되여 가지고 자미 잇는 생활을 한다한다. 아모리 지금은 불쾌한 인상이 남어 잇다. 하나, 그래도 내 생애의 중대한 한 페이지를 장식한 그의 장래를 나는 진심으로 축복하여마지 안는다. (此項完)＜153＞
＜144-153＞