잡지명	別乾坤 第71號
발행일	1934년 03월 01일
기사제목	約婚女의 惡魔性 (The Devilish Nature of the Betrothed Woman)
필자	崔流帆 (Ch'oe Yuhwan)
기사형태	소설 (Fiction)

The Devilish Nature of the Betrothed Woman
						Ch'oe Yuhwan

The Real Culprit is an Unexpected Person

Ri Manse stood blankly, staring out the window like a man possessed by a goblin. In his mind, an effigy stabbed with a dagger, and the face of Yun Yŏng'ae, as white as the white wall, vaguely revealed and then disappeared the face of Pak Kyŏngsuk.

And his mind was as dark as tonight, and in that darkness, a strange shadow grew and rose. What could it be? The ambiguous light of the two corpses tormented Ri Manse. Ri Manse struggled to figure out the mysterious light. But suddenly, another light flashed and his mind seemed to brighten like daytime. The puzzle was solved. As if by some miracle, all the puzzles were solved.

"Women's Sanatorium (婦人遼陽院). Ah, I know," he muttered to himself, and said to the officer,
"Tell the inspector to wait until I get there. And tell him I'll lead them to the murderer." Hearing this unexpected statement, the officer was bewildered and said,
"What? The murderer? Isn't it Kim Yŏngho? Are you talking in your sleep?" and scoffed.

"No. I've only just realized that the culprit is someone else. An unimaginable and terrifying act. I'll explain later when I get there." As Ri Manse raved like a madman, the officer, unsure of what was happening, simply went to the police station.

Ri Manse went to the station and asked the station employee a peculiar question.
"Did the freight train bound for Kaesŏng at 9 a.m. today carry timber?" The station employee looked at Ri Manse in surprise, then, as if thinking about something, answered.
"Yes, it did."
"Will that freight train stop at D Station, the next station?"
D Station is in the opposite direction of S Village.
"Yes, it stops. There will be some loading at D Station as well."

As this simple question ended, Ri Manse used the automatic telephone inside the station to call a famous women's sanatorium in D and diligently asked about the hospital patients, and then, with a smile on his face as if he had received a satisfactory answer, ran to the police station.

Inspector M was alone in the chief's office when he was startled by Ri Manse, who came running in frantically.
"I know the real culprit. Kim Yŏngho is innocent!"
he shouted. Inspector M was so dumbfounded that he stood up and asked,
"Who is the real culprit, then?"
"You'll have to go and see for yourself. We'll have to go all the way to D Village. The culprit is a patient at the women's sanatorium." Ri Manse's words were becoming increasingly strange.
"A patient, you say?" he asked.
"Yes, a patient. The culprit is pretending to be ill, but in fact, they are mentally ill and difficult to treat. They are insane. Otherwise, how could they commit such a terrifying and audacious murder? Even I, a detective novelist, am surprised by this."
"I can't understand what's going on..."

The inspector worried that Ri Manse might be going crazy.
"You won't understand. There's no precedent for this case in any country's police records. If you continue the investigation as it is, you will be guilty of negligence. Come with me to the sanatorium. If you can't trust me as an inspector, then come as an individual. Even if my guess is <58> wrong, it'll only be a waste of two hours."

Inspector M couldn't refuse Ri Manse's offer and agreed to go to the women's sanatorium.

Victim and Perpetrator Reversed

The women's sanatorium was not far from D Village station. The white buildings were scattered like a picture in a quiet and beautiful forest. Director P, Dr. P, had talent in literature in addition to his medical specialty, had published several works, and knew Ri Manse well.
"The woman you inquired about by phone is admitted under the name Kim Yŏngja (金英子). As you said, we are keeping a close watch on her," Director P said.
"What time did that woman come here?" Ri Manse asked.
"Yes, it was around 9:30 this morning."
"What is she being treated for?"
"It seems to be nervous exhaustion. She seemed very agitated by something. It's not a condition that requires hospitalization, but as you know, this place is more of a sanatorium than a hospital, so patients can be admitted as they wish. … Did that woman do something wrong?"

Director P, who asked this, still knew nothing.
"She is the murderer." Ri Manse replied in a low voice.
"What? The murderer?"
"That's right. She is the real culprit in the murder case in S Village."

The director was very surprised and hurriedly called a doctor and guided them to Kim Yŏngja's room.

As Inspector M and Ri Manse opened the door to the room, their hearts pounded violently. As they opened the door and entered, Yun Yŏng'ae stood there with wide, startled eyes. The woman could not have forgotten the face of Ri Manse, whom she had met briefly that morning. Although she didn't know Inspector M standing behind him, she realized at that moment that these intruders were not friendly visitors.
"Ah, what is this?" Suddenly, Ri Manse ran to Yun Yŏng'ae and snatched a small glass bottle with a bluish tint from her hand. She had a poison on hand in case of an emergency, somehow she had managed to get it. Having lost the poison, the woman collapsed to the floor with her last strength and cried like a madwoman.
"Inspector, do you know Yun Yŏng'ae, who went missing from her room this morning? She was hiding as a patient in this sanatorium," Ri Manse explained. Inspector M, somewhat suspicious, looked down at the crying woman and said,
"Yun Yŏng'ae didn't go out at all on the day the crime occurred. And the victim, Pak Kyŏngsuk, was not a rival in love to Yun Yŏng'ae at all. Kim Yŏngho loved Yun Yŏng'ae completely, so why would Yun Yŏng'ae risk her life to commit murder? Isn't that ridiculous?"
"Perhaps this woman is having strange hallucinations due to nervous exhaustion," he said with a puzzled look.
"Yes, that's exactly it. There's an unexpected misunderstanding there. There is a clever trick by the culprit. You concluded that the culprit was Kim Yŏngho, but that was a mistake. And you assumed that the victim was Pak Kyŏngsuk, but there's a critical misunderstanding there. You don't know anything about the victim or the culprit," Ri Manse said confidently with an extraordinary statement.
"What? What do you mean?" Inspector M shouted in a very surprised voice.
"You're saying the victim wasn't Pak Kyŏngsuk? Then who was murdered?"
"The dogs tore the entire face beyond recognition before the body could be identified. So they dressed the body in Pak Kyŏngsuk's clothes, put her belongings in it, and left it there."
"Well, how do you explain Pak Kyŏngsuk's disappearance? It's not logical for an unmarried woman to stay away from home for three or four days without her parents' permission."
"Pak Kyŏngsuk will never be able to return home. I heard from Kim Yŏngho that Kyŏngsuk is an avid reader of detective novels, staying up all night to read them, and that she has read almost all of my novels. You must first realize that the woman is not as simple as you think." Ri Manse said louder than necessary.

Extremely Wicked Murderer
<59>
"Are you criticizing Pak Kyŏngsuk?"
"Is it just criticism? That woman killed someone. She is an extremely wicked murderer."
"Huh? What?"
"That's right. Pak Kyŏngsuk is not the victim, as you suspect, but the perpetrator. She didn't die, she killed someone else."
"Who? Whom?" Inspector M asked Ri Manse in great bewilderment.
"She killed Yun Yŏng'ae."
"What are you talking about? Yun Yŏng'ae is crying in front of us right now, isn't she? Or… perhaps you are…"
"Hahaha… still don't understand? The woman here is Pak Kyŏngsuk in Yun Yŏng'ae's mask, that's who she is. Pak Kyŏngsuk was deeply in love with Kim Yŏngho. It was also Kyŏngsuk who forced the marriage by badgering her parents. You can't even imagine how much this woman resented Yun Yŏng'ae's existence, who monopolized Kim Yŏngho's love, and how much she resented Kim Yŏngho for betraying her completely. So she planned a terrible revenge against the two of them. She murdered her rival, Yŏng'ae, dressed the body in her own clothes, and made it look like Kim Yŏngho committed the murder. She killed one person and made the other a murderer, condemning them to a terrible punishment. Wouldn't that be a perfect revenge, killing two birds with one stone? And the complexity and ingenuity of the methods are no exaggeration to say that they are the ideal of detective novels and criminology."
Ri Manse said this, then went close to Pak Kyŏngsuk, who was lying down and crying, and said,
"Ms. Kyŏngsuk! You heard everything I just said, didn't you? And what I said is true, isn't it? You are a detective novelist. I understand Ms. Kyŏngsuk's admirable trick. When I met you at Yun Yŏng'ae's house this morning, I was completely fooled by your clever disguise, but after saying goodbye to you, I suddenly realized it. I could clearly make out the face of Pak Kyŏngsuk, whom I had met once in S Village, under that awkward western-style hair and made-up powder."
Pak Kyŏngsuk, already prepared, was listening to Ri Manse's words while sobbing. Her expression seemed to prove that Ri Manse's guesses were not wrong.
"So Pak Kyŏngsuk killed Yun Yŏng'ae and is disguised as the murdered woman," Inspector M said, suppressing his surprise as much as possible.
"That's right. She needed to do that. Even if she disfigured Yun Yŏng'ae's face to look like Pak Kyŏngsuk, it would cause suspicion if Yun Yŏng'ae herself went missing. Moreover, in order to make sure that Kyŏngsuk was murdered, Kyŏngsuk herself had to hide her whereabouts. So, if Kyŏngsuk pretended to be Yŏng'ae for a while, these two problems would be solved, wouldn't they? On top of that, she needed to pretend to be Yŏng'ae and deny Kim Yŏngho's alibi, making Kim Yŏngho the murderer. She is truly a woman with brilliant wisdom."
"So that's why Yun Yŏng'ae denied Kim Yŏngho's alibi."

Ri Manse's story continued.
"And Yun Yŏng'ae's rented house was a suitable place for Pak Kyŏngsuk's plan to succeed. There was only one old woman who was blind and deaf in the main house, and her daughter went out early in the morning and came back at night, so there was no reason to be exposed unless she went out. And even if she were discovered, who would recognize her as the murdered Pak Kyŏngsuk? Relatively few people in the wide and populous Kyŏngsŏng (京城) city knew Pak Kyŏngsuk.
In other words, this woman was willing to cut ties with her parents in order to avenge her love rival. What a terrible resentment! Love is truly a terrifying force. It has driven this young woman insane. No, it has created a jealousy-fueled demon. This crime is by no means the work of human hands. It is the work of a demon crawling out of hell."
Although he was relentlessly insulting and rebuking her, poor Pak Kyŏngsuk remained lying down like a stone statue, not moving.

Clear Explanation of Doubts

Inspector M listened to the novelist's fantasies coming true one by one with admiration and interest, but there were still a few points he couldn't believe.
"Mr. Ri! I still have some doubts. I understand that Pak Kyŏngsuk hid herself on the freight train and escaped, but how did you know that her whereabouts were the women's sanatorium?"
"That's because the freight train departing at 9 a.m. stops behind the women's sanatorium to connect the freight cars, and because hiding in the freight car would risk being discovered by the station staff by the time she got to D Station, she felt the need to jump off the train before arriving at D Station. When she jumped off, she found the women's sanatorium there. A hospital is the perfect refuge for a criminal, so I thought Pak Kyŏngsuk would be hiding there."
"I see! It turns out it was nothing. But neither I nor the police station knew that. And I have another question. The letter with K's signature that Pak Kyŏngsuk left in her desk drawer was obviously forged by Kyŏngsuk herself, but another piece of evidence, the blood-stained trousers found under Kim Yŏngho's house floor, is a bit difficult to explain."
"There's another reason for that. Kim Yŏngho's servant must have stolen them when he came out to do laundry. Of course, he did it while talking to the servant, taking advantage of the opportunity."
"I see, I see! She made the evidence beforehand, not after the crime. But the blood on those trousers, as a result of the analysis, is definitely human blood."
"I don't know that exactly, but it's not that difficult to get that much blood. If you have a syringe, you can draw about a vial from the vein in your arm. Even now, if you examine Pak Kyŏngsuk's arm, you might still see the needle marks. Since she couldn't steal someone else's blood, this method is often used in detective novels."
Inspector M nodded his head several times, deeply impressed.
"I have to apologize to you. It was my mistake to despise it as a novelist's fantasy. In such a fictional crime as this, we realists couldn't have imagined it at all. From now on, I will respect your opinion even on practical matters."
Ri Manse and Inspector M laughed cheerfully and without reservation. (End) <11>

Betrothed Woman's Fictional Crime

In the car heading to Kyŏngsŏng, Inspector M asked Ri Manse this question.
"There's still something I'm suspicious about. I understand that Pak Kyŏngsuk hid on the freight train and ran away, but how did you know that her whereabouts were the women's sanatorium?"
"That's because I knew that the 9 a.m. freight train stopped behind the women's sanatorium to connect freight cars, and because hiding among the freight cars would risk being discovered by the station staff by the time she got to D Station, she felt the need to jump off the train before arriving at D Station. When she jumped off, she found the women's sanatorium there. Since a hospital is the best refuge for a criminal, I thought Pak Kyŏngsuk would be hiding there."
"I see! It turns out it was nothing. But neither I nor the police station knew that. And I have another question. The letter with K's signature that Pak Kyŏngsuk left in her desk drawer was obviously forged by Kyŏngsuk herself, but another piece of evidence, the blood-stained trousers found under Kim Yŏngho's house floor, is a bit difficult to explain."
"There's another reason for that. Kim Yŏngho's servant must have stolen them when he came out to do laundry. Of course, he did it while talking to the servant, taking advantage of the opportunity."
"I see, I see! She made the evidence beforehand, not after the crime. But the blood on those trousers, as a result of the analysis, is definitely human blood."
"I don't know that exactly, but it's not that difficult to get that much blood. If you have a syringe, you can draw about a vial from the vein in your arm. Even now, if you examine Pak Kyŏngsuk's arm, you might still see the needle marks. Since she couldn't steal someone else's blood, this method is often used in detective novels."
Inspector M nodded his head several times, deeply impressed.
"I have to apologize to you. It was my mistake to despise it as a novelist's fantasy. In such a fictional crime as this, we realists couldn't have imagined it at all. From now on, I will respect your opinion even on practical matters."
Ri Manse and Inspector M laughed cheerfully and without reservation. (End) <11>

**Named Entities**

崔流帆	Ch'oe Yuhwan
리만세	Ri Manse
윤영애	Yun Yŏng'ae
박경숙	Pak Kyŏngsuk
김영호	Kim Yŏngho
婦人遼陽院	Women's Sanatorium
개성	Kaesŏng
S촌	S Ch'on
M검사	Inspector M
D리	D-ri
金英子	Kim Yŏngja
P박사	Dr. P
京城	Kyŏngsŏng



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제71호
발행일	1934년 03월 01일
기사제목	約婚女의 惡魔性
필자	崔流帆
기사형태	소설

約婚女의 惡魔性
						崔流帆
眞犯人은 意外의 人物
리만세는 독개비에게 홀린 사람처럼 멍-하니 서서 창박을 내다 보앗다. 그의 머리 속에는 단도로 가삼을 찔린 집인형(藁人形)과 흰벽과 가티 흰 윤영애의 얼골에서 어렴푸시 박경숙의 얼골이 나타낫다가는 사라지고 사라지고 하엿다.
그리고 머리 속이 금음밤과 가티 암흑하야 젓스며 그 암흑 가운대에서 무럭무럭 이상한 거림자가 떠 올낫다. 무엇일가? 희미한 빗발을 하고 잇는 두 주검의 의문의 빗치 리만세를 몹시 괴롭게 하고 잇섯다. 리만세는 그 의문의 빗츨 아러내랴고 고민하엿다. 그러나 돌연 훠! 하고 다른 빗치 빗치드니 머리속은 대낫과 갓티 밝어지는 듯 하얏다. 수수격기는 풀리엿다. 무슨 긔적과도 가티 모-든 수수격기는 풀린 것이다.
『부인료양원(婦人遼陽院)이다. 아-아랏다』하고 혼자 직거리드니 리만세는 경관을 보고
『검사를 보고 내가 갈때까지 기다려 주십시사고 말삼하야 두서요. 그리고 살인범인을 인도하야 드린다고 전하야 주서요』 천만 뜻박게 이 말을 듯고 잇든 경관은 어리둥절 하야가지고
『네, 범인이라니요. 범인은 김영호가 안임닛가? 당신은 잠고대를 하고 게시는거요』하고 조소를 하고 잇섯다.
『아니요. 범인은 따로 잇는 것을 이제 겨우 알게 되엿소. 상상도 할 수 업는 두려운 행동이요. 내가 나종에 가서 설명하겟소』 리만세가 광인가티 떠들고 잇슴으로 확실한 것을 알지 못하고 경관은 그냥 경찰서로 가버리엿다.
리만세는 정거장으로 가서 역원을 붓잡고 긔묘한 것을 질문하엿다.
『오날 오전 9시 개성행 화물렬차에는 재목을 실엇습닉가?』 역원은 깜작 놀라면서 리만세를 바라보더니 무엇을 생각하엿는지 대답하여 주엇다.
『실은일이 잇습니다』
『그 화물렬차는 다음 정거장인 D역에서 정거하게 됨닉가?』
D역은 S촌과는 반대방향에 잇는 정거장이다.
『네. 정거합니다. D역에서도 약간 실닐 것이 잇스닉간요』
이 간단한 질문이 끗나자 리만세는 역 안에 잇는 자동전화로 D에 잇는 유명한 부인료양소원을 불너내여서 무엇인지 입원환자의 일을 열심히 뭇고 잇더니 무슨 만족한 회답을 드럿는지 얼골에 미소를 띄우면서 경찰서로 달녀갓다.
M검사는 서장실에서 혼자 잇섯는데 허둥지둥 뛰여온 리만세를 보고 깜작 놀나 이러낫다.
『진범인을 아랏습니다. 김영호군은 무죄입니다』
하고 부르지젓다. M검사는 하도 어이가 업서서
『진범인은 대체 누구란 말인가?』하고 무럿다.
『그것은 검사께서 가보서야 함니다. D리까지 가서야 하겟습니다. 범인은 부인료양소의 입원환자 입니다』 리만세에 하는 말은 점점 기괴함으로
『병자란 말인가?』 하고 무럿다.
『네. 병자라면 병자입니다. 범인은 병을 층탁하고 잇지만 사실은 곳치기 어려운 정신병자입니다. 광인입니다. 그럿치 안코는 이러케 무섭고 대담한 살인행동을 감행할 수가 이겟습닉가? 탐정소설가인 제가 이러케 놀나고 잇는 것만 하야도 추측하시겟지요』
『나는 도모지 엇더케 된 영문을 알 수가 업네... ...』
검사는 리만세가 미치지나 안엇나 하고 염여을 하엿다.
『몰느실 것입니다. 어느 나라의 경찰기록에도 전례가 업는 사건입니다. 당신네들께서는 사실상 이대로 심리를 계속하야 가신다면 즉무상 과실을 면할 수 업스실 것입니다. 저하고 함께 료양소로 가시지요. 신용하실 수가 업스시면 검사로써가 아니고 일개인으로써 가시면 좃치 안습닉가? 가령 저의 추측이＜58＞ 틀렷다고 한댓자 겨우 두 시간의 랑비에 불과하닉간요』
M검사는 리만세의 말을 거절할 수가 업서서 부인료양원에 가기를 승락하엿다.

顚倒된 被害者와 加害者
부인료양원은 D리 정거장에서 그리 머지 안은 곳에 잇섯다. 한적하고 아름다운 삼림 속에 백아건물(白堊建物)이 그림과 가티 퍼저 잇섯다. 소장인 P박사는 전문하는 의학 외에 문학에도 재능을 가저서 작품도 여러편 발표되엿고 따라서 리만세를 잘 알고 잇섯다.
『악가 전화로 무러보신 인상의 부인은 김영자(金英子)란 일홈으로 입원을 하고 잇습니다. 말삼하신대로 잘 간수하고 잇습니다』하고 P원장이 말하얏다.
『그 녀자가 이곳에 온 때가 몃시엿습닉가?』하고 리만세가 무럿다.
『네. 오날 아츰 9시 반경 이엿습니다』
『무삼병으로 입원하엿습닉가?』
『신경쇠약인가봅니다. 무엇에 자극을 바더서 몹시 흥분이 된 모양이엿습니다. 별로 입원하지 안으면 안될 병은 아니지만 잘-아시는 바와 가티 이곳은 병원이라는 곳 보다는 일종의 휴양소(休養所)이닉간 병인의 희망하는대로 입원할 수가 잇습니다. ‥‥그 부인이 무슨 납분 일을 하엿습닉가?』
이렇케 뭇는 P원장은 아즉 아모것도 몰느는 것이엿다.
『살인범인입니다』 리만세는 나즉한 목소래로 대답하엿다.
『네 살인범인얘요?』
『그럿습니다. S촌의 살인사건의 진범인입니다』
원장은 몹시 놀나서 황겁히 의사를 불너서 김영자의 병실로 안내하야 주엇다.
M검사와 리만세가 그 병실의 또어를 열 때에는 엇전지 심장의 고동이 격렬하야 젓섯다. 또 이를 열고 드러스닉간 윤영애가 놀난 눈을 크게 뜨고 서 잇섯다. 그 녀자는 오날 아츰 잠간 만나본 리만세의 얼골을 이저버릴리가 없섯다. 그 뒤에 서 잇는 M검사는 몰느겟지만 이 침입자가 호의의 방문객이 안이란 것을 그 순간에 그 녀자는 모든 것을 눈치채인 것이다.
『아- 이게 무슨 짓이야』 돌연 리만세가 윤영애에게로 달녀가서 그 손에서 푸른 빗이 도는 작은 유리병을 빼앗섯다. 그 녀자는 어더케 손에 너엇는지 만일의 경우에 준비할 독약을 가지고 잇섯든 것이다. 독약을 빼악긴 그 녀자는 최후의 힘이 다해서 마루바닥에가 쓰러지면서 밋친 사람가티 울고 잇섯다.
『검사 여봅소. 오날 아츰 방안에서 행방불명이 된 윤영애를 아시지요. 그 녀자는 어느 틈에 이 료양원의 입원환자로 몸을 감추고 잇섯습니다』하고 리만세가 설명하야 주엇다. M검사는 좀 의심이 나섯는지 울고 잇는 녀자를 내려다 보면서
『윤영애는 범죄가 발생하든 날은 한 번도 외출하지 안엇다고 하는데. 그리고 피해자 박경숙이는 윤영애에게 사랑의 적도 아모것도 안인데. 김영호는 완전히 윤영애를 사랑하엿는데 무엇이 부족하야 윤영애가 생명을 걸고 살인죄를 범할리가 잇느냐 말일세. 우수운 일이 아닌가?』
『이 녀자는 신경쇠약으로 하야 긔괴한 환상을 이르키고 잇는 것이 아닐는지』하고 이상스러게 얼골을 하엿다.
『네 바로 그것입니다. 그곳에 뜻박게 착오가 잇습니다. 범인의 기민한 트릭크가 잇는 것입니다. 검사께서는 범인을 김영호라고 단정하시엿는데 그것은 실책이엿슴니다. 그리고 피해자를 박경숙이라고 인정하시엿다는데 그 곳에 중대한 착오가 잇는 것입니다. 피해자나 범인이나 당신네들께서는 족음도 몰느시엿습니다』하고 리만세가 긔괴천만한 말을 자신잇게 말하고 잇섯다.
『무엇 그게 무삼말인가?』 M검사는 몹시 놀난 목소리로 부르지젓다.
『피해자가 박경숙이가 아니라고. 그러면 대체 누가 살해를 당하얏단 말인가』
『그 시체는 개들이 무러뜻기 전에 안면 전부를 무참히 진익여 젓습니다. 그래서 용모를 알 수 업게 만든 사체에다가 박경숙이의 의복을 입히고 소지품을 집어 넛코 그 곳에 내바린 것입니다』
『자- 그러타면 박경숙의 행방불명을 엇더케 해석 하엿스면 좃탄 말인가. 미혼처녀가 부모의 승락도 업시 삼사일을 집에 안도라온다니 상식적으로 판단할 수 업는 노릇일세』
『박경숙이는 절대로 집에 도라올 수는 업습니다. 저는 김영호에게 드럿지만 경숙이는 탐정소설 애독자로 탐정소설이라면 밤을 새고 읽는다고 하며 나의 소설도 거지반 다 읽엇다고 합니다. 그 녀자는 검사께서 생각하는 것과 갓치 단순한 시골처녀가 아니란 것을 먼저 아서야 합니다』하고 리만세는 필요 이상의 큰 소래로 떠들엇다.

極惡無道한 殺人鬼
『자네는 박경숙이를 비란하는 것이 안인가?』＜59＞
『비란 뿐이겟습닉가? 그 녀자는 사람을 죽이엿습니다. 극악무도한 살인귀 입니다』
『응- 무엇』
『그럿습니다. 박경숙이는 검사께서 추측하시는 거와 가티 피해자가 안이고 가해자 입니다. 제가 죽은 것이 안이라 남을 죽인 것입니다』
『누구를 누구를』하고 M검사는 몹시 황당하야 리만세에게 무럿다.
『윤영애를 죽이엇습니다』
『여보게 자네는 무슨 말을 하고 잇나? 윤영애는 현재 우리들 압헤서 울고 잇지 안은가? 아- 그럿치 안으면 혹시 자네는‥‥』
『하하하‥‥ 그래도 몰느십닉가? 여기 잇는 녀자는 윤영애의 가면을 쓴 박경숙 바로 그 녀자입니다. 박경숙이는 김영호를 몹시 연모하엿섯습니다. 량친을 졸나서 결혼을 강제로 성립식힌 것도 경숙이엇습니다. 이 녀자가 김영호의 사랑을 독점하고 잇는 윤영애의 존재를 얼마나 저주하엿는지 전혀 자기를 배반한 김영호를 얼마나 원망하엿는지. 상상도 할 수 업는 일입니다. 그래서 두 사람에게 대하야 무서운 복수를 계획한 것입니다. 연적(戀敵)인 영애를 살해하고 그 사체에다가 자기 의복을 입혀서 김영호군에게 살인의 혐의가 오게 만든 것입니다. 한 사람은 죽이고 한 사람은 살인범으로 맨드러서 두려운 형벌을 밧게 하엿습니다. 실로 일거량득의 완전한 복수가 안이겟습닉가? 그리고 수단 방법의 복잡교묘한 것이란 탐정소설과 범죄학(犯罪學)의 연구가 이상이라고 하여도 과언이 아니겟습니다』
리만세는 여기까지 말하드니 업드려서 울고 잇는 박경숙에게 갓가히 가서
『경숙씨! 지금 한 말을 다- 드르섯지요? 그리고 제 말이 사실과 틀니지 안치요. 귀하는 탐정소설가입니다. 경숙씨의 경탄할만한 트릭크를 잘 알앗슴니다. 오날 아츰 윤영애의 집에서 만나 뵈올때는 당신의 교묘한 변장에 깜박 속아 너머갓스나 당신과 작별한 후에 나는 불연듯 생각해 냇습니다. S촌에서 그 언제인가 한 번 맛나본 박경숙이의 얼골을 그 어색한 양발(洋髮)과 화장한 박분미테서 분명히 차차낼 수가 잇섯습니다』
박경숙이는 벌서 각오하엿는지 흑흑 늑겨 울면서도 리만세의 말을 듯고 잇섯다. 그 표정이 리만세의 추측이 조곰도 틀니지 안엇다는 것을 증명하야 주는 듯 하엿다.
『그러닉간 박경숙이는 윤영애를 살해하야노코 그 죽인 녀자로 변장을 하고 잇섯네 그려』 M검사는 놀나는 빗을 억지로 죽여가면서 이러케 말하얏다.
『그럿습니다. 그러케 할 필요가 잇섯습니다. 윤영애의 얼골을 진익여서 박경숙이와 가티 보이게 한댓자 본인인 윤영애가 행방불명이 되여서는 의심을 바들 원인이 됨니다. 그 뿐 안이라 경숙이가 살해 당하얏다는 것을 확실히 하기 위하야서는 경숙이야말로 행방을 숨기지 안으면 안될 것입니다. 그래서 경숙이가 한동안 영애로 변하면 이 두가지는 문제는 해결될 것이 아니겟습닉가? 그 우에 영애로 가장을 하고 김영호의 아리바이를 부정하야 김영호로 하야금 살인범인이 되게 할 필요도 잇스닉간요. 참말 영리한 지혜를 가진 녀자입니다』
『참말 윤영애가 김영호의 아리바이를 부정한 리유도 여기 잇섯네 그려』
리만세의 이약이는 계속 되엿다.
『그리고요. 윤영애가 세든 집이 박경숙이의 게획을 성공하기에 적당한 집이 되여 잇섯습니다. 안집에는 눈어둡고 귀어둔 로파 한 사람 뿐이니 그 딸은 새벽에 나가서 밤에 도라오닉간 외출만 아니하면 탈로될 까닭이 업습니다. 또 가령 발각이 된다 하드라도 살해당한 박경숙이로 누가 아라보겟습닉가? 넓고 사람만은 경성시내에서 박경숙이를 아는 사람이 비교적 소수이닛간.
즉 이 녀자는 부모와는 인연을 끈어서라도 사랑의 원수를 갑흘냐고 하엿든 것입니다. 얼마나 두려운 원한입닛가? 연애는 참 무서운 힘을 가진 것이지요. 이 젋은 처녀를 광인을 만드러 놋앗습니다. 아니 질투에 타오르는 한 마리 귀신을 만들어 노앗습니다. 이 범죄는 결코 인간의 힘이 안입니다. 지옥 속에서 기여나온 악귀의 소행입니다』
자기를 여지업시 모욕하고 질책을 하엿지만 가엽슨 박경숙이는 업드린채 돌사람가티 꼼작도 하지 안엇다.

疑問點의 明快한 解說
M검사는 소설가의 망상이 하나 둘 적중하야 가는 것을 경탄과 흥미로써 듯고 잇다가 그러나 아즉 밋지 못할 점이 몃가지 잇섯다.
『리군! 그러면 김영호는 별로 거짓말을 할 필요도＜60＞ 업지 안은가? 김영호는 범죄당야에 늣도록 윤영애의 집에 잇섯다고 주장하고 잇섯네. 즉 영애는 그날 밤 느저도 11시 전후에는 경성에 잇서야 할 것일세. 그런데 그 윤영애가 그날 밤 멀리 떠러진 곳에서 살해를 당하얏다는 것은 좀 모순이 되지 안나? 가령 자동차를 리용하얏다고 하드라도 젊은 녀자가 무서운 밤에 촌길을 거러갓다는 것은 고지 미들 수가 업지 안은가? 그리고 암만 늙어빠진 로파라고 하드라도 윤영애가 그러케 늣게 외출하게 되면 한 마듸 말을 하고 나올 것이고 그런데 그 로파는 윤영애가 결코 외출하지 안엇다고 증언하지 안엇든가』 M검사는 날카로운 리론을 가지고 반문을 하엿다.
『네. 바로 그것입니다. 제가 어느 나라 경찰긔록에도 전례가 업다고 말하는 것은 그 점입니다』 리만세는 이 질문을 기다렷다는 듯이 주저하지 안코 대답하엿다.
『사실 긔상천외의 트리크 입니다. 살인광이 아니면 생각하야낼 수 업는 놀나운 방법입니다. 요전에 김첨지가 주어온 제웅에 관하야 검사에 주의를 드리엿지요. 단도로 찔닌 집푸레기인형 말입니다. 그것은 긔괴한 계획을 시험하기 위하야 사용한 것입니다. 즉 제웅을 화물열차에 실어노면 차에서 어느 방면으로 떠러지는가를 시혐하야 본 것입니다.』
『응 무엇. 화물렬차라니』
『알기 쉬웁게 말삼하면 이럿습니다. 탐정소설 애독자인 범인은 범죄라는 것은 엇더케 주의를 하야도 현장에 무엇인지 증거물이 남어잇을 것을 잘 알고 잇습니다. 그래서 자기는 조곰도 현정에 갓가히 가지 안코 오즉 피해자의 시체만 그 곳에 딍구러 잇게 하는 일견 불가능한 일을 성공식히고자 계획한 것입니다. 경숙이가 엇재서 이러한 일을 생각하야 내엿느냐 하면 이 녀자는 어느 틈에 윤영애의 주소를 탐지하고 윤영애가 업는 동안에 그 방에 드러가 잇섯습니다. 네 그러치요. 경숙씨! 그리고 놀나운 발견을 한 것입니다. 그것은 아시는 바와 가티 윤영애의 방은 바로 정거장 구내에 면하야 잇고 창 밋트로 하물렬차 전용의 선로가 가로질녀 잇섯습니다. 그리고 그 곳을 렬차가 지나가면 설로에 지반이 놉하지니간 화물짐짝이 창 갓가히 스칠듯이 지나갑니다. 저는 오늘 아츰 그것을 확실히 보앗습니다. 그리고 구내임으로 화물렬차가 왕래하다가 어느 때는 윤영애의 방 창박 근처에서 정거하는 일이 잇습니다. 경숙씨! 당신은 그것을 보시엿지요. 그래서 이번에 무서운 범죄를 결행하게 되엿지요』 리만세는 때때 업드려 잇는 박경숙이를 보면서 복잡한 설명을 게속하얏섯다.
『그래서 박경숙이는 역시 윤영애가 엄는 틈을 타서 그 제웅을 가저다가 재목을 실은 화물렬차에 언저 노앗습니다. 끝으로 매여놋치 안엇슴으로 긔차의 동요로 해서 제웅은 어쨋든지 떠러질 것이 정한 리치입니다. 그것이 어느 지점이 될지 대체 짐작을 하고자 한 것입니다.
긴 화물열차이고 그리고 S촌의 턴넬까지는 길이 언덕이저서 올나가게 됨으로 속력이 느려짐으로 제웅은 떠러질리가 업습니다. 턴넬이 다 지나서는 속력을 내게 되며 카푸를 돌게 됨으로 렬차는 비교적 동요하게 되는 까닭으로 제웅은 그 곳에서 떠러질 것입니다. 제웅이 떠러지는 곳이 S촌에서 조곰 떠러진 쓸쓸한 곳이란 것을 알자 범인은 번격적으로 살인을 결심하엿습니다. 그리고 김영호가 윤영애를 차저가는 날을 기다려서 뒤로 따라가서 김영호가 작별하고 떠나간 뒤에 윤영애의 집으로 드러가서 틈을 엿보고 잇다가 어렵지안케 목을 매여 죽이엿습니다. 그리고 얼골을 함부로 짓익여 노코 옷을 박구어 입히고 기차시간을 미리 아라둔 밤 화물렬차가 창박게 정거하는 것을 기다려서 창으로 그 화물차에 실어논 것입니다. 경숙씨! 내 말과 갓지요. 사체는 예정한대로 턴넬 근처에 떠러젓습니다. 개들이 와서 피부를 뜨더 먹엇습니다. 범인 경숙이는 그대로 윤영애의 방에 남어서 머리형상을 곳치고 분을 발느고 볼에는 고약을 발느고 윤영애의＜61＞ 옷을 입고 이러케 하야 윤영애로 변하야 잇섯습니다. 실제가인 검사께서는 전혀 생각도 할 수 업는 공상입니다. 그러나 그 녀자는 남자도 하기 어려운 일을 착착 실행하엿습니다. 그리고 오날 박경숙이가 집에서 행방불명이 된 비밀도 다시 설명하지 안트라도 잘 아시겟지요. 역시 가튼 방법을 취한데 불과 합니다』
『자! 경숙씨! 만일 나의 설명에 틀닌 점이 잇스면 정정하야 주시요. 별로 정정할 필요도 업겟지요』 리만세는 말을 맛치고 득의만면하야 박경숙이를 바라보앗다.
이려하야 S촌의 살인사건은 해결이 되얏다.

約婚女이 空想的 犯罪
경성으로 향하는 자동차 안에서 M검사는 리만세에게 이러한 말을 질문하얏다.
『나에게는 그래도 의심되는 점이 잇는데. 박경숙이가 화물렬차에 몸을 숨겨서 도망한 것은 알겟지만 그 행방이 부인료양원이란 것을 자네는 엇더케 아랏나?』
『그것은 오전 9시발 화물렬차가 부인료양원 뒤에서 화물차를 연락하기 위하야 정거하는 것을 안 까닭이고 화물 틈에 숨어서 D역까지 가서는 역부에게 발견될 염려가 잇슴으로 D역에 도착하기 전에 화차에서 뛰여나릴 필요를 늣긴 까닭입니다. 뛰여나려 보니 그 곳에는 부인료양원이 잇섯습니다. 병원이라는 곳은 범죄자에게 잇서서는 이우에 업슬 피란처이므로 박경숙이도 그 곳에 숨어 잇스리라고 생각한 것입니다.』
『따는 알고보니간 사실 아모것도 안일세 그려. 그것을 나나 경찰서에서는 몰낫섯네 그려. 그리고 또 한가지 의문이 잇는데 박경숙이가 자기 책상설합에 둔 K의 서명이 잇는 편지는 물론 경숙이 자신이 위조한 것이 틀림업겟지만 또 한가지 증거품이 된 즉 김영호 집 마루미테서 발견한 피무든 쓰봉은 좀 해석하기가 어려울 듯 한데』
『그것은 또 이러한 리유가 잇지요. 김영호 집 하인이 빨래를 하러 나왓을 때 그 때 훔처간 것이겟지요. 물론 하인을 아닉간 이약이를 하다가 틈을 타서 말입니다』
『따는 따는 범죄후가 안이고 그 전에 미리 증거품을 멘드러 두엇네그려. 그러나 그 쓰봉에 무든 피는 분석한 결과 확실히 사람의 피가 분명하다는데』
『그것은 저도 정학히 알 수가 업습니다만은 그러나 그만한 피를 엇기는 그닥지 어렵지 안습니다. 가령 주사기만 잇스면 자기 팔의 정맥에 서라도 한종주쯤은＜62＞ 쁨을 수도 잇스닉간. 지금이라도 박경숙이의 팔의 검사하야보면 그 주사침 자축이 아즉 남어잇슬는지도 몰느겟습니다. 다른 사람의 피를 도적할 수는 업슴으로. 이 방법은 탐정소설에서 만히 취재되는 것입니다』
M검사는 깁히 감동이 되여 몃번이나 머리를 끗덕어리엿다.
『나는 자네에게 용서를 빌지 안으면 안되겟네. 소설가의 망상이라고 경멸한 것은 나의 잘못일세. 이번과 가튼 공상적 범죄에는 우리들 실제가는 도모지 생각도 못하야 본 것일세. 나는 이제부터 실제문제에 대하야서도 그대 의견을 존중히 하기로 하엿네』
리만세와 M검사는 유쾌하고 무사기한 우슴을 우섯다.(끗)＜11＞
＜58-62, 11＞