잡지명: 別件坤 제71호
발행일: 1934년 03월 01일
기사제목: 懸賞問題 (Prize Problem)
기사형태: 사고·편집후기 (Notice/Post-editing)

Prize Problem

Note:
Kim □□□□ 4 won 67 jeon.
However, one □ is 10 □ jeon each.
Receipt for 1,□17 pieces代金
Received as above.
Eulchook July 14th
Park Tae-gil Seal
To Lee Seong-jun

A few days ago, while cleaning, I found this certificate. However, because it is old, it has been eaten by worms here and there, so I do not know the amount. However, it is an important document, so I need to know the amount. Figure out how much it is and send it in.

Things to note when sending in the prize:
★ Must arrive at the headquarters by April 20th.
★ Write the answer simply on a postcard-sized paper, and be sure to write your address and name clearly.
★ You must attach the reader's certificate at the end of this page to the answer sheet. If you don't attach it, it is invalid.
★ Write 『京城開闢社別乾坤懸賞係』 (Gyeongseong Gaebyeoksa Byeolgeon-gon Prize Department) on the envelope, and also write 『原稿在中』 (Manuscript Enclosed) in red ink next to it, seal the envelope shut, and attach a 2 jeon stamp. If you don't write 原稿在中, you will be fined (shortage).

Prizes:
First Prize One Person: One Special Made Fountain Pen
Other 99 People: One Book Each
Will be Presented.

★ Announcement of Last Month's Winners
The announcement of last month's prize will be made in next month's issue due to time constraints. We respectfully inform you of this and ask for your understanding and to wait for the next issue.
Byeolgeon-gon Prize Department White <64>

Named Entities

金□□□□	Kim □□□□
朴泰吉	Pak T’ae-gil
李成俊	I Sŏng-jun
京城開闢社	Kyŏngsŏng Gaebyŏksa



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제71호
발행일	1934년 03월 01일
기사제목	懸賞問題
기사형태	사고·편집후기

懸賞問題
記
金□□□□四圓六十七錢也
但一個□拾□錢式
壹千□百拾七個代金으로
右受取함
乙丑 七月十四日
朴泰吉 印
李成俊殿

몃칠전에 청결을하다가 이와가튼 證書하나가 나왓습니다. 그런데 오래되여서 여기저기 좀이 먹엇기 문에 金額을 모르겟습니다. 그러나 重要한 文書이여서 金額을 알어야하겟습니다. 얼마인지 아르켜내서 보내십시오.
懸賞보낼의 注意할일
★오는 四月二十日지 본사에 와닷도록되여야합니다.
★엽서만한 조회에다 대답을 간단히 적어보내되 반듯이자긔주소와 성명을 이써야합니니다.
★이페지(頁)한해잇는 독자증을 답안용지에다 반듯이 부처야합니다. 안붓치면 무효입니다.
★피봉에는 반듯이 『京城開闢社別乾坤懸賞係』라쓰고 엽헤다 『原稿在中』이라고 간잉크로쓰고 한주둥이를 고 二錢우표붓처보내주십시오. 原稿在中이라고 안쓰면 벌금(不足)을 물게됩니다.
賞品
一等一人 特製 萬年筆壹個
等外九十九人 書籍一部式
進呈합니다
★前月號當選發表
이번에 발표할 지난호의 현상은 긔한관게로 내월호에나 발표를 하게되엿습니다 삼가 이을 알려드리는바이오니 조량하시고 다음호를 기다려주십시오.
別乾坤懸賞係白＜64＞
＜64＞