별건곤 제50호
1932년 04월 01일
卷頭-春來不似春 (Editorial - Spring Has Come, But It Doesn't Feel Like Spring)
문예기타 (Literature and Other)

Spring Has Come, But It Doesn't Feel Like Spring
How to Get Through the Barley Pass

They say that March is the best time of year. Flowers bloom, butterflies fly, birds sing, and all things take on a new hue, so spring is a good time for humans as well. However, even though this good spring has returned, there are people who not only do not know it is good, but rather spend their sad years in tears. Who could they be? I would like to introduce a line from a poem called "Silkworm Woman's Lament" (蠶婦吟) that appeared in a poem by an ancient Chinese person:

"Yesterday I went to the castle, and came back with tears in my eyes. Those who are covered in silk are not the ones who raise silkworms."

昨日到城郭, 歸來涙滿中. 遍身綺羅者, 不是養蠶人.

This is a masterpiece representing the spring poverty (春窮) of farmers (農民). To put it simply, those who raise silkworms should be the ones wearing silk clothes, but the world is not like that. Those who raise silkworms cannot wear silk clothes. Rather, idle people (遊民階級) in the city who do not even know what a mulberry tree is or what a silkworm looks like are wearing silk clothes. How sad is this situation? This is the sad story of spring poverty. This is the agonizing situation of farmers. The saying "Spring has come, but it doesn't feel like spring" (春來不似春) is not just a phrase for Wang Zhaojun (王昭君), but a phrase that is most appropriate for farmers. Is it that spring doesn't feel like spring because there are no flowers? Is it that spring doesn't feel like spring because there are no butterflies? The state where there are flowers and butterflies, but spring still doesn't feel like spring, is only the sorrow seen in farmers. This is what is called spring poverty (春窮). Half of the year's harvest goes to the landlord (地主), and half goes to the lender (債主). What remains is taken away by taxes (稅金). When one thinks about lighting the stove in the morning with an old wife (老妻) with a runny nose and young children crying because they are hungry, how can one not feel one's insides melting and six organs disappearing? Is this a person's fate? I remember a line from a certain poet's poem "Abandoning a Child" (棄兒行): "Should I abandon or not abandon this child? If I don't abandon this child, I will starve." (捨是耶不捨是耶斯兒不棄斯身飢) This phrase was written at the beginning, and at the end (橋畔驚行人語殘月一聲柱陽啼) it said, "By the bridge, startled passersby speak, and in the light of the waning moon, a nightjar cries." It was a poem about abandoning a beloved young child because there was nothing to eat. After expressing the desperate question, "Should I abandon this child or not? If I don't abandon this child, I will starve," when the child is abandoned by the bridge and one turns away, the nightjar cries in the light of the waning moon (殘月一聲), which depicts an even more tragic state. The sound of the nightjar is said to be heard as "(rice is scarce)" in proverbs. Like the poem saying "(Regretting the lack of a cauldron, the azalea bird sings)" (不食杜鵑恨少鼎), the sound of the nightjar means regretting that the cauldron is small. Saying that the cauldron is small means that there is no rice. Saying that there is no rice means that there is no money. Because there is no money, there is no rice, and because there is no rice, one is hungry, so one abandons one's beloved child (子息). Is this a person's fate?

This year, too, spring has come, and the nightjar will cry. How many poor farmers (窮農) will not cry when they hear the sound of this nightjar? Everyone knows the sad state of farmers, but the question is how to save these sad farmers.

Speaking of greed and hope, if landlords and creditors would [illegible], and if the lazy children of the rich would use the money they waste on prostitutes, alcohol, and all kinds of dissipation and extravagance to save them, it would be a refreshing and wonderful thing, but that is something that cannot be hoped for even in dreams, so let's stop there. The next thing that is practically possible is for the nation to undertake a large project for the poor, which is the usual method, but it cannot fundamentally solve the problem. In the end, the only thing left is for the farmers to save themselves. While digging up tree roots, peeling pine bark, and digging up grass roots to eat in order to survive, the most important thing is for the entire farming population to have a total awakening (總自覺) with a firm heart and terrible patience for the sake of next year, the year after, and the future, and to decide everything for themselves. <3>

**Named Entities**

王昭君	Wang So-gun



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제50호
발행일	1932년 04월 01일
기사제목	卷頭-春來不似春
기사형태	문예기타

卷頭-春來不似春
보리고개를 어케 넘어갈
춘삼월호시절이라하면 一년중 제일 조흔어다 피고나븨날고 새-울고 만물이다-새빗을 내는이니만치 봄이라하면 인간에게도 해롭지아니한 조혼시절이다 그러나 그러나 이 조흔봄이 돌아왓서도 조흔줄을 알지못할아니라 도리혀 눈물로 설흔세월을 보내는사람이잇다. 그것이 누구일 예전중국사람의 시(詩)에 나타난잠부음(蠶婦吟)이라는 시한귀를 소개하면
어젓게 장보고오더니 눈물지워울기만하네 남들은 누에아니처도 원몸에 비단만감엇데
昨日到城郭, 歸來涙滿中. 遍身綺羅者, 不是養蠶人.
이라한 것이다 이것은 농민(農民)들의 춘궁(春窮)을 대표한 원고의 명작이라 천리로 말한다하면 「누에」친사람이 명주입성을 입어야 오를일인데 세상은 그러치못하야 「누에」친사람은 명주입성을 입지못하고 도리혀 나무가무엇인지 「누에」가 어케 생겻는지 형용도 알지못하는도시(都市)의 놀고먹는백성(遊民階級)이 비단의복을 몸에 감게된 것은 얼마나 설은일이냐 읷이 춘궁의 설은 사정이다 농민의 안타운일이다 「춘래불사춘」(春來不似春) 이란 말은 왕소군(王昭君)에게만잇는 문자가아니라 농민에게 가장 적절한 그귀엇다 이업서 불사춘이냐 나븨가업서 불사춘이냐 과 나븨는 잇지만은 봄이와도 봄갓지안은 상태는 오즉 농민에게서 보는 설음이다 이것이 춘궁(春窮)이라는 것이다 一년지은농사가 반은지주(地主)에게로 반은 빗임자(債主)에게로 남저지는 세금(稅金)으로 이럭저럭 다-다라나버리고 다방머리에 행주치마를선 늙은안해(老妻)와 코흘리고 배고푸다고부르짓는 어린자식들을 압헤노코 내일아츰 굴둑에 연긔를 피울생각을하고보면 오장이녹고 륙부가살아질일이아니냐 이것이 사람의 사주팔자이더냐? 어시인의 기아행(棄兒行)이라는 애기버리는시구가운데 이런 글이잇든 것이 생각이난다(捨是耶不捨是耶斯兒不棄斯身飢)라는 글귀를 벽두에써노코 내종구에(橋畔驚行人語殘月一聲柱陽啼)라하엿다. 먹을것이업서 사랑하는 어린자식을 버리랴 나아가는시엇다. 「이하해를 버려야 올으냐 버리지 안어야올으냐 이아해를 버리지아니하면 이 몸이주려죽는다」하는 비절한 허두를 내여노코 헤가서 아해를 다리에 버리고 도라설에 잔월일성(殘月一聲)에 두견이운다하는데 이르러는 더욱이 참절한새태를 글인것이엇다 두견의 소리는 속담에(솟적다)라고듯게된다(不食杜鵑恨少鼎)이라하는 시와가티 두견의 소리는 솟이 적은 것을 한한다는 이 엇다 솟이적다는 말은 쌀이업다는 말이오 쌀이업다는 말은 돈이업다는 말이다 돈이업슴으로 쌀이업고 쌀이업슴으로 배가주린 닭에 사랑하는 子息을 버리게된 것이다 이것이 사람의 운명이더냐
그년도 봄은왓다 두견은 울 것이다 이두견의소리를 듯고 울지안는궁농(窮農)이 얼마나 될것이냐 농민의 설은 사정을 모르는사람이 어대잇슬가만은 문제는 이설은 농민들을 어케구제할하는 것이 주점(主點)이다.
욕심과희망을 말하면 지주가 ×××들 ××하고 채권자가 ××을 ×××××고 부자의 부랑한 자식들이 케집과 술과 모든방탕과 사치에 업새는 돈을가지고 그드를 구원하ㅑ주엇스면 시원하고도 긔특한일이지만은 그것은 에도 바라지 못할일이라 고만두고다음 사실상으로 가능할만한일은 국가로서 궁민을 위하야 큰사업을 니르키는것도 통상방법이지만은 그여근본구제는못되는 것이다. 그리고보면 최후로 남은일은 농민들이자긔 손으로 자긔를 구제할수박게 업슬것이다 시재살기위하야 측리를 파고솔갑치를벳기고 풀리를 파서 먹어가면서라도 일변으로는 내년내명년는 장래를 위하야 구든마음과 무서운 인내를 가지고 농민전체가 총자각(總自覺)을하야 만사를 자럭자결하는 것이 최상책일 것이다.＜3＞
＜3＞