잡지명	別乾坤 第15號
발행일	1928년 08월 01일
기사제목	民衆運動으로 이러난 甲午東學亂 秘錄 (Secret Records of the Kabo Donghak Rebellion, which arose from a People's Movement)
필자	靑吾
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

The Secret Records of the Kabo Donghak Rebellion, which arose from a People's Movement
						Ch'ŏng-o

The Bizarre Popularity of Children's Songs

Regardless of the country or era, whenever a major rebellion is about to occur, whether it's by the command of heaven or the doing of ghosts, strange children's songs of unknown origin always become popular first. Leaving aside foreign countries, even in our Joseon, just before the Imjin War, the so-called "Tongdong Song (動動曲)" became very popular, and during the Pyŏngja Horan, the "Hobalga Song (호발가타령)" was popular. At the time of this Donghak Rebellion as well, a type of children's song... that is, the song "The bird below, the bird below, the Noktu bird of Chŏnju and Kobu, don't sit in the green bean field, the Noktu vines will all rot..." was popular, and another song "Kabo year, Kabo year, Ŭlmi year, Ŭlmi year, if it becomes Pyŏngsin, you can't go..." was popular. Of course, no one knew the meaning of these songs until the Donghak Rebellion broke out. However, after experiencing the rebellion, it turned out that the first song meant that Chŏn Noktu (全綠荳 - Chŏn Pong-jun's (全琫準) alias) would cause the Donghak Rebellion in Chŏnju and Kobu (全州 古阜) in the lower provinces (下道의 意), but would be defeated after requesting foreign troops (外國請兵). The latter song meant that Donghak would not succeed quickly in the Kabo year (甲午年) and if it was delayed until the Ŭlmi year (乙未年), they wouldn't even be able to stir in the Pyŏngsin year (丙申年). And that's what happened. If foreign troops hadn't been requested and the Donghak army had quickly attacked and occupied the capital during the Kabo year, the Donghak party would have easily achieved great success at that time.

Strange and Unusual Calamities

It's not good to speak of strange calamities superstitiously, but it's true that bizarre calamities occur when a major rebellion is about to happen. At the time of this Donghak Rebellion, there were many strange calamities. The Kŭmgang River (錦江) in Kongju (公州) changed color like blood for three days, and all the fish died and floated up. One well at Hwangnyongjang (黃龍場) in Changsŏng (長城) had never changed color in past experiences except when a big rebellion was about to happen, but at that time, it suddenly became yellow and turbid, making it undrinkable, which greatly agitated people, who thought a rebellion was about to break out. <33> Hundreds of sparrows suddenly died on the roof of Chŏnju Gaeksa (全州客舍) one morning, and dozens of pheasants flew at once from Mount Gyeryong (鷄龍山) to the Ganggyŏng (江景) market. People who ate them died instantly. In Sŏsŏk-ri (瑞石里), Hongch'ŏn (洪川), Gangwŏn Province (江原道), all the livestock suddenly ran away to the mountains and never returned. If they had studied this scientifically at the time, they might have known what caused it, but at the time, it caused quite a stir among the people. Coincidentally, the places where such calamities occurred all became battlefields during the Donghak Rebellion, resulting in many casualties of people and livestock. Because of this, the elders of those places still say that it was no ordinary event.

The Donghak Party and the Taewŏn'gun (大院君)

The Donghak Party appeared to be moved only by the people on the surface, but in reality, there was a secret agreement with the Taewŏn'gun (大院君), who was a major authority in the political world at the time. That is, Chŏn Pong-jun (全琫準), as a key figure in the Donghak Party, thought that to start a great cause, it was necessary to carefully examine the political situation and obtain internal support above all else, so he went to Seoul (京城) and began to frequent the house of the Taewŏn'gun (大院君), who had a prominent reputation at the time.

If it were someone else, they would ordinarily seek a government position or, if not, at least engage in son-in-law seeking (舍音) through the palace or postal service, but because he originally had great ambitions, he diligently visited for several years without any demands. The Taewŏn'gun (大院君) initially thought of him as a poor scholar (窮措大) from a rural village, but he noticed that his personality (爲人也) and actions were different from ordinary people and that he made no demands for his own sake, so he found it particularly strange. One day, he quietly called him in and asked, "Most people who come to my house seek government positions or try to make a living, but you have no requests. Why is that?" Chŏn (全氏) smiled and said, "The reason why I don't make small requests is because I have a big request." The perceptive Taewŏn'gun (大院君) already understood and invited him to a secret room to ask in detail. Chŏn (全氏) then explained in detail the power of the Donghak Party, the need for national reform, and the state of the world. Having been deprived of power by the Minbi (閔妃) party, which had newly emerged after 10 years of Sedo politics (勢道之餘), and with a burning ambition to recover his power (捲土重來), he saw this as a golden opportunity (千載의 好機) and they made a firm oath to each other. Chŏn (全) would go to the provinces to start a rebellion for reform, and he would provide internal support. When Chŏn (全) left, he personally invited him to Sŏkp'a Villa (石坡山莊), poured him wine, and wrote the Chinese character "River (江)" in his own handwriting, saying, "If the Donghak army only flies its flag as far as the Tongjak River (銅雀江), I will immediately collude with the government troops and seize the palace and personally greet you at Tongjakjin (銅雀津)." However, changing like clouds and rain (翻雲覆雨) is common for politicians (政治家의 常事). Although the Taewŏn'gun (大院君) initially made such a secret agreement with him, due to the foreign troops, the Donghak army could not easily advance north (北進). Amidst the power struggle between Japan and Qing, he also returned to politics under the guidance of Japanese Minister Keisuke Ōtori (大島圭介), took office for the third time, and organized a cabinet of the Enlightenment Party (開化黨) led by Kim Hong-jip (金宏集), deposing his lifelong enemy, Minbi (閔妃), and making her a commoner. As the political situation was once again under his control, the victory of the Donghak army seemed to be disadvantageous to him. Also, fearing that his secret communication with the Donghak Party <34> would be known to the world and that he would be held responsible, as in the previous Im-o Military Riot (壬午軍亂), he completely coldly suppressed the Donghak army with the power of the Japanese army. This was unavoidable due to the political situation at the time or the state of affairs in East Asia.

The Heaven-Sent Red-Clad Youth

The term "heaven-sent red-clad general" easily reminds one of General Kwak Chae-u (郭再祐) during the Imjin War. However, during this Donghak Rebellion, there was a youth general who was even more courageous and miraculous than Kwak Chae-u (郭再祐). It was during the battle at Sinnye-wŏn (新禮院) in Yesan County (禮山郡), South Ch'ungch'ŏng Province (忠南). That battle was the largest battle between government troops and the Donghak army after the Donghak Rebellion broke out, with thousands of casualties on both sides. At that time, the government troops were in high spirits as the Japanese soldiers had newly joined them, and the militia was at a slight disadvantage after 23 days of battle. But on the third day, unexpectedly, a red-clad brave general (紅衣少年勇將) from the Donghak army suddenly emerged and charged into the government troops with a single horse and spear. It was just like Zhao Zilong (趙子龍) at the Battle of Changbanpo (長板橋) in the Three Kingdoms era of ancient China, slashing east and west, cutting down generals. Wherever that youth went, the government troops scattered like waves, and the Donghak army finally won a great victory (大勝捷).

However, strangely, after the battle ended, the red-clad youth disappeared without a trace. It was impossible to know whether he was a ghost or a person, or whether he was dead or alive. Not only did the people of the world not know, but even the Donghak army who fought in the battle did not know who he was, and until now, they only call him the Red-Clad Youth. In ancient China, during the Qin Dynasty (秦始皇), the 13-year-old youth Qin Wuyang (秦舞陽) followed Jing Ke (荊軻) and boldly tried to assassinate the Emperor Qin Shi Huang (秦始皇), carrying the map of Dukang (督亢) of Yan (燕나라), where the white blades shone, and his face changed in the Xianyang Palace (咸陽殿上) in broad daylight. That's all that's written in the Records of the Grand Historian (史記), and there's no mention of what happened after that. Just as people who read the Records of the Grand Historian (史記) lament the unknown fate of Qin Wuyang (秦舞陽), whenever I talk about the Donghak Rebellion, I want to know who this Red-Clad Youth was and what happened to him afterward, and I feel very frustrated.

Water Coming Out of the Cannon Hole

The story that during the Imjin War, rats carried water and put it in the gun holes of the enemy is still told by the elders. But during this Donghak Rebellion, real water came out of the cannon hole. Not just a little, but pouring out like a broken dam during the rainy season. Because of this, the Donghak army was said to have miraculous powers (神出鬼沒의 조화가 잇다), and the general public all responded, and the government army fled everywhere. That fact happened right during the battle at Sinnye-wŏn (新禮院), where the Red-Clad General (紅衣將軍) appeared. At that time, the government troops occupied Muhan Fortress (無限城) (located outside the current Yesan Station (禮山驛外) and set up cannons there to defend against the Donghak army. But how could I ever tell about the corruption and evil deeds of the government troops at that time? Defending against the Donghak army was secondary; they were only concerned with looting civilian property and holding feasts. However, the Donghak army not only did not harm the good people but also took wealth from the rich and government offices <35> and gave it all to the poor, and generally proclaimed the protection of the country and the peace of the people (保國安民) and the salvation of all living beings (廣濟蒼生), so everyone responded and welcomed them. Among them, the women near Muhan Fortress (無限城) especially hated the government troops and welcomed the Donghak army, so they took advantage of the government troops sleeping and carried water at night and poured it into the government troops' cannon emplacements. Instead of the cannons firing, frogs laid eggs in the cannon holes. The government troops, who didn't even know this, were about to fire the cannons when the Donghak army approached Muhan Fortress (無限城), but water was full in every cannon hole, and they were truly astonished and fled. Since the Donghak army had miraculous powers and could make water come out of the cannon holes, from then on, the government troops couldn't even breathe properly and fled at the sight of the Donghak army's flag. Until now, some people in the world say that the Donghak army spread superstitious lies that water came out of the cannon holes to incite the people, but in reality, that story came from the mouths of the government troops, not from the mouths of the Donghak army. (3 lines deleted here - original text)

Castration of Yangban's Testicles

There have been cases of castrating pigs or horses since ancient times, but there would have been no such bizarre thing as castrating people's testicles. No, there was 腐刑 (torture to rot the testicles by tying them tight) among the cruel tortures in the past, and there have been cases of castrating testicles to create artificial eunuchs due to the evil custom of vanity (虛榮의 惡習). However, there was no incident of castrating the Yangban's (兩班) seeds to exterminate them as happened during this Donghak Rebellion. Such incidents occurred in many places at that time, but among them, the incident that occurred at the Kim family's house in Galsan-ri (葛山里), Hongju (洪州) is the most prominent and known to everyone. The Kim family was a faction of the Andong Kim clan (安東 金氏), who were relatives of the royal family, and had considerable power, and as a result, they committed many acts of violence in the area. When the Donghak Rebellion broke out, all the slaves of that house, fathers, sons, and brothers, joined the Donghak Party (東黨). When the Donghak army attacked Hongju Fortress (洪州城), threatening to kill all the corrupt officials and Yangban (兩班) who had been committing misdeeds in various places, the slaves of the Kim family decided to destroy their so-called master's house first and ran to the Sarang (舍廊 - guest room) and caught the master, Kim (金氏), tied him to a persimmon tree, and said, "We must castrate this Yangban's testicles to eliminate his seed (種子)," and cut off his testicles with a sickle. Whether that incident went well or not is a separate matter, but seeing this one incident alone, one can imagine how much abuse the commoner class had suffered from the Yangban (양반) and how much resentment they had towards the Yangban (양반).

The Elusive Detectives of the Orient

At that time, the activities of the Donghak army were so great that the Ahyŏn (衙前) officials in each district were all trusted subordinates of the Donghak army, and they reported the government army's strengths and weaknesses. Chŏn Pong-jun's (全琫準) ability to communicate with aliens was also due to his mastery of espionage. When he, as the commander of the Donghak army, occupied Kobu (古阜), Kimje (金堤), and other places and defeated the government troops coming from Chŏnju (全州), if the government troops sent a detective to find out the government army's strengths and weaknesses, the officials in the government army would know about it and notify him that a government detective dressed in such-and-such clothes would be going to such-and-such place on such-and-such date. <36> Chŏn (全氏) would order his troops accordingly, and they would capture the government detective, interrogate him, and learn the details of the government army. The troops all thought it was amazing and admired him, and the government army did not dare to send detectives carelessly.

Later, when the Donghak army occupied Hwangnyong Market (黃龍市場) in Changsŏng (長城), the government troops filled bamboo baskets with weapons and disguised themselves as merchants to attack the Donghak army from behind, planning to coordinate internally and externally. But the Donghak army knew about this in advance and captured all the merchants at once and killed them. Using the stratagem against the stratagem, the Donghak army disguised themselves in those clothes and entered the market, launching a surprise attack. The government troops all fled in defeat, and the market returned to the hands of the Donghak army. Due to space limitations, I will omit the detailed account here, but the battle at that time was a considerable battle, and the victory with the baskets was a source of pride for the Donghak army in South Cholla Province (全南).

The Occupation of Chŏnju Fortress (全州城): A Detailed Account

At this time, there was a military camp called Nammuyŏng (南武營) in Chŏnju (全州), and it was a place rich in military equipment and provisions, so the Donghak army was determined to occupy it. Whether the government army or the Donghak army possessed this Chŏnju Fortress (全州城) would determine the fate of the Honam (湖南) region. So, the government army defended it with all their might. However, in the first battle, Commander (name unknown) and Secretary Yi Tun-sŭng (李敦昇) were killed in battle, and in the second battle, Minbyŏng (民兵 - local civilian army) and government troops jointly went into battle, but Chief Song Pong-ho (宋奉昊) (a local of Chŏnju), head of the pack peddlers (負商都班首) was defeated and killed. After that, General Hong Gye-hun (洪啓薰) (i.e., Hong Chae-hŭi) came with the capital troops (京兵). Hong (洪) was originally from the military examination (武監) and was promoted rapidly for his contribution to rescuing Minbi (閔妃) during the Im-o Military Riot (壬午軍亂). He had held important military posts such as the commander of Ch'ŏngju (淸州), but now as General (招討使) he first killed Kim Si-p'ung (金始豐) (former Samnam Toposa (三南討捕使) who had a conflict with Taewŏn'gun (大院君) upon arriving in Chŏnju. After leaving only the remaining soldiers and civilian archers in Chŏnju (全州) to defend (the Minbyŏng (民兵) were only given money for refreshments), he moved the entire army to pursue Changsŏng (長城) and Kobu (古阜). When he reached Kŭmgu (金溝), 30 li away from Chŏnju (全州), he killed another officer, Chŏng Sŏk-hŭi (鄭錫禧), causing fear in the army. Many defected to the Donghak army. Taking advantage of this opportunity, the Donghak army followed a detour and occupied Wansan Chilbong (完山七峯), a strategic location in Chŏnju (全州), on the morning of April 27 - Chŏnju Market Day - and fired cannons towards the fortress. Governor Kim Mun-hyŏn (金文鉉) fled first, and Tongp'an (通判) Min Yŏng-sŭng (閔泳昇) fled to Wip'ung Mountain Fortress (威鳳山城) with the spirit tablet of the Kyŏnggi Hall (慶基殿位牌). The remaining government troops and Minbyŏng (民兵) all opened the gates and welcomed the Donghak army. At that time, the power of the Donghak army was truly impressive, with flags waving all over the mountains and fields and the sound of drums shaking the heavens and the earth. Only the next day did Hong Gye-hun (洪啓薰) learn of the news and return, attacking the fortress from Wansan (完山), turning from guest to host. On May 3, a major battle began, resulting in hundreds of casualties on both sides. However, since the Donghak army was originally defending firmly, it was difficult to determine the outcome. Hong (洪), realizing his disadvantage, sent the County Magistrate as an envoy to Chŏn Pong-jun (全琫準) at the Donghak army's headquarters in Chamnye Station (參禮驛) to propose a truce and discuss terms. Just then, Border Inspector Yi OO (李OO) arrived with troops from P'yŏng-yang (平壤) and conveyed the royal decree for appeasement. The Donghak army also conceded, and under the condition that they would not fight or plunder each other, the Donghak army generously ceded Chŏnju Fortress (全州城) to the government army and retreated through the West Gate on May 6, heading towards Kyŏnggi Province. Of course, Chŏn Pong-jun's (全琫準) plan was that rather than holding Chŏnju Fortress (全州一城) <37> and prolonging the standoff with the government army, it would be more advantageous to directly strike the capital. However, that was Chŏn's (全) great mistake. If he had firmly occupied Chŏnju (州) at that time and made it his base, and then marched directly on the capital, even if he had failed midway, it would not have been such a total defeat without any room for contact.

General Gae-nam (開南將軍) and General One-Eyed (一目將軍)

Corresponding with Chŏnju (全州), Kim Gae-nam (金開南) also rose up in Namwŏn (南原). On March 20, Kabo year (甲午), he and Yi Ch'un-gyŏng (李春景) mobilized troops in Sŏhwa-ri (西花里), Namwŏn (南原), killed Magistrate Sin Sa-hŭi (申佐熙), occupied the government office, and established five camps (五營). Kim (金) became the Central Camp Yellow Flag General (中營黃旗大將), commanding the troops, and Nam Ŭng-sam (南應三) from Tamyang (潭陽) became the Front Camp Red Flag General (前營紅旗大將), Yi Sa-ŭi (李士儀) became the Rear Camp Black Flag General (後營黑旗大將), and the other two became the Left and Right Camp Generals with white and blue flags. Chŏn Hwa-sam (全化三) and Yi Sa-myŏng (李士明) were the scribes, and Kim U-ch'ŭk (金禹則) was the strategist. They commanded the Yŏngnam (嶺南) region for a time and occupied Namwŏn Fortress (南原城) for 49 days. They then attacked Park Bong-yang (朴鳳陽), the civilian cannon general (民砲大將) of Unbong (雲峯), also known as General One-Eye (一目將軍) (Park's (朴) given name was Mun-dal (文達) - he had lost one eye and passed the civil service examination (文科) and became a lecturer (注書)), but suffered a crushing defeat to Park's (朴) army at Yŏwŏn-hyŏn (女院峴), and Namwŏn Fortress (南原城) was taken away. This was because Kim Gae-nam (金開南) had been too careless and suffered a defeat. At that time, regardless of whether there were Minbyŏng (民兵) in Unbong (雲峯), he should have gone straight to Chŏnju (全州) to join forces with the Kim army and head towards the capital, or if not, he should have made Namwŏn (南原) his center and occupied Chŏnju (全州) to strengthen his base and then ambushed the government troops or Minbyŏng (民兵) who attacked from within. Otherwise, he would not have failed so badly. However, he lingered in Namwŏn (南原) for 49 days and headed towards Unbong (雲峯), not even knowing the roads, and lost a large army to a blind man. It was truly ridiculous and regrettable.

Most Feared: Gyŏngt'yŏn (敬天)

Chŏn Pong-jun (全琫準) occupied the areas of Chŏlla Province (全羅), Ch'ungch'ŏng Province (忠淸), and was about to attack Kongju Fortress (公州城) with the momentum of a triumphant march. At the lowest level, there was originally someone skilled in divination (占術), and it was customary to perform divination before marching. On the day of the march to Kongju (公州), the divination result was "Most Feared: Gyŏngt'yŏn (最忌敬天)," so Chŏn (全氏) thought that Gyŏngt'yŏn Station (敬天驛) in Kongju (公州) was ominous and took a different route. In the end, he was defeated in Kongju (公州), and after disbanding the troops in Nonsan (論山), he headed to Sunch'ang (淳昌) in North Cholla Province (全北) in mourning clothes to temporarily hide in order to have a chance to regroup (捲土重來). On the way, he met Kim Gyŏng-ch'ŏn (金敬天) from Chŏnju (全州), who was his subordinate, and told him that he would go to hide in a village called P'ino-ri (피노里) in Sunch'ang (淳昌). It is always the case that when one fails, one is harmed by one's subordinates rather than the enemy. Kim Gyŏng-ch'ŏn (金敬天), who did not even know gratitude, reported the fact to the government army, causing Chŏn (全氏) to be captured by the government army and become a lonely spirit on the execution platform of the Seoul prison (京城監獄 斷頭臺). The words of the diviner are not to be trusted so much, but it happened that "Most Feared: Gyŏngt'yŏn (最忌敬天)" unexpectedly struck Kim Gyŏng-ch'ŏn (金敬天). At that time, Chŏn (全氏) was hiding in a private house in P'ino-ri (피노리) when the government troops suddenly surrounded him. He quickly jumped up onto the roof, but he was severely wounded in the left leg by the government troops' swords and could not go and was caught. When the government troops were about to beat him indiscriminately on the spot, he rebuked them sternly, saying, "A scholar can be killed, but not humiliated (士는 可殺이언정 不可辱). If I have violated the national law (國法을 犯), then you should punish me fairly according to the national law (國法), but it is wrong to inflict private punishment (私刑)." Even the cruel government troops were impressed by his spirit and did not dare to strike him. It is said that Kim Gyŏng-ch'ŏn (金敬天) became a County Magistrate (郡守) for his contribution. <38>

**Named Entities**

別乾坤	Pyŏl Kŏn'gon
靑吾	Ch'ŏng-o
壬辰亂	Imjin ran
丙子胡亂	Pyŏngja Horan
全琫準	Chŏn Pong-jun
全綠荳	Chŏn Noktu
乙未年	Ŭlmi nyŏn
丙申年	Pyŏngsin nyŏn
下道	Hado
全州	Chŏnju
古阜	Kobu
外國請兵	Oeguk ch'ŏngbyŏng
甲午年	Kabo nyŏn
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
公州	Kongju
錦江	Kŭmgang
長城	Changsŏng
黃龍場	Hwangnyongjang
鷄龍山	Kyeryongsan
江景	Ganggyŏng
江原道	Kangwŏndo
洪川	Hongch'ŏn
瑞石里	Sŏsŏk-ri
大院君	Taewŏn'gun
石坡山莊	Sŏkp'a Sanjang
大島圭介	Ōshima Keisuke
金宏集	Kim Hong-jip
閔妃	Minbi
壬午軍亂	Im-o kunran
郭再祐	Kwak Chae-u
禮山郡	Yesan gun
新禮院	Sinnye-wŏn
趙子龍	Cho Cha-ryong
秦始皇	Qin Shi Huang
秦舞陽	Qin Wuyang
咸陽殿	Hamyangjŏn
燕	Yen
無限城	Muhan Sŏng
葛山里	Kalsan-ri
洪州	Hongju
安東金氏	Andong Kimssi
全羅	Chŏlla
忠淸	Ch'ungch'ŏng
湖南	Honam
南武營	Nammuyŏng
李敦昇	Yi Tun-sŭng
宋奉昊	Song Pong-ho
洪啓薰	Hong Gye-hun
洪在羲	Hong Chae-hŭi
金始豐	Kim Si-p'ung
金文鉉	Kim Mun-hyŏn
閔泳昇	Min Yŏng-sŭng
參禮驛	Chamnye-yŏk
李OO	Yi OO
金開南	Kim Gae-nam
李春景	Yi Ch'un-gyŏng
申佐熙	Sin Sa-hŭi
南原邑	Namwŏn ŭp
南應三	Nam Ŭng-sam
李士儀	Yi Sa-ŭi
全化三	Chŏn Hwa-sam
李士明	Yi Sa-myŏng
金禹則	Kim U-ch'ŭk
朴鳳陽	Pak Pong-yang
雲峯	Unbong
女院峴	Yŏwŏn-hyŏn
敬天驛	Kyŏngt'yŏn-yŏk
金敬天	Kim Gyŏng-ch'ŏn
淳昌	Sunch'ang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제15호
발행일	1928년 08월 01일
기사제목	民衆運動으로 이러난 甲午東學亂 秘錄
필자	靑吾
기사형태	문예기타

民衆運動으로 이러난 甲午東學亂 秘錄
						靑吾
異常한 童謠의 流行

어느 나라 어느 시대를 물론하고 큰 변란이 이러나랴면 하눌의 명령이라 할가 귀신의 所使라 할가 반듯이 출처 모를 이상한 동요가 먼저 유행된다. 외국은 그만두고 우리 조선으로만 말하야도 壬辰亂이 이러날 臨時에는 소위 『동동曲』이 크게 유행하고 丙子胡亂 때에는 『호발가타령』이 유행하얏다. 이 東學亂 때에도 일종의 동요......즉 『아래 녁 새야 웃 녁 새야 전주 고부 록두 새야 청포밧헤 안지 마라 록도 덩굴 다 썩는다......』라는 노래가 유행하고 또 『갑오세-갑오세-을미적-을미적-병신되면 못간다......』라는 노래가 유행하얏다. 東學亂이 이러나기 전까지는 물론 누구나 그 뜻을 알지 못하얏슬 것이다. 그러나 그 뒤에 亂을 지내고 보니 卽前의 노래는 아래 녁(下道의 意)인 全州 古阜에서 全綠荳(全琫準별명)가 東學亂을 이르켯다가 外國請兵아래 패한다는 의미오. 후의 노래는 東學이 甲午年에 속히 성공을 하지 못하고 乙未年까지 遲遲하게 끌다가는 丙申年에는 곰작도 못한다는 것을 의미함이엿다. 과연 그랫섯다. 甲午年에 만일 외국의 請兵이 업고 東軍이 京城을 急擊 점령하야 시기만 일치 안엇스면 東學黨이 그 당시에 용이하게 벌서 대성공을 하얏슬 것이다.

奇奇怪怪한 災變

기괴한 災變을 그리 미신적으로 말할 것은 안이지만은 큰 변란이 잇슬 때에는 또 이상스러운 災變이 잇는 것은 사실이다. 이 東學亂 臨時에도 이상한 災變이 만헛스니 公州의 錦江은 3일간을 피빗가티 變色이 되고 고기들이 모도 죽어나오며, 長城 黃龍場터에 잇는 우물 한아는 過去 경홈상에 큰 란이 날 때가 안이면 變色되는 법이 업섯는데 그때에 별안간에 黃濁하야 먹지를 못하게 됨으로 란리가 난다고 人心이 크게 소동 되얏스며 <33> 全州客舍 집웅 우에는 참새가 하루 아츰에 수백 마리가 저절로 죽고 鷄龍山에서는 꿩이 수십 마리가 일시에 날어서 江景 시장으로 왓섯는대 그것을 잡아먹은 사람은 個個가 다 卽死를 하고 江原道 洪川 瑞石里에서는 가축이 일시에 모도 산으로 도망을 가고 오지 안엇다. 이것을 그때에 科學으로 연구하야 보앗스면 엇더한 원인으로 그리되엿다고 알엇슬는지 알 수 업스나 그 당시에는 그로 인하야 인심이 꽤 소동이 되고 또 공교하게도 그러한 災變이 잇던 곳은 東學 때에 다 交戰場이 되야 人畜의 慘傷이 만헛섯다. 그리하야 지금까지도 그곳의 故老들은 심상한 일이 안이라고 서로 전한다.

東學黨과 大院君

東學黨은 표면으로는 민중 자체로만 動한 것 갓지만은 실상 내면에는 당시 정계에 一大 權威인 大院君과 暗約이 잇섯다. 즉 全琫準은 본래 東學黨의 주요 인물로 큰 일을 이르키자면 무엇보다도 그 정계의 형편을 잘 살피고 內應을 엇는 것이 필요하다 생각하고 飄然이 京城에 올나와서 당시 명성이 쟁쟁한 大院君 門下에 출입하게 되엿섯다.
다른 사람 가트면 의례히 벼슬자리를 구하던지 그럿치 안으면 하다 못하야 宮土나 驛土의 舍音 운동이라도 할 터이나 그는 원래에 큰 뜻이 잇는 까닭에 아모 요구도 업시 몃 해 동안을 열심으로 다니엿다. 大院君도 츠음에는 그를 일개 향촌의 窮措大로 알엇스나 그 爲人也와 행동이 凡人과 다른 점이 만코 또 자기 개인을 위하야 아모 요구가 업슴으로 특히 이상히 생각하고 하루는 종용히 불너 뭇되 내의 門下에 출입하는 사람이 대개는 獵官糊口의 운동을 하는데 그대는 아모 所請이 업스니 엇진 까닭이냐 한즉 全氏는 우스면서 하는 말이 작은 請을 안이 하는 사람은 큰 請이 잇는 까닭이라 하니 機敏한 대원군은 벌서 눈치를 차리고 밀실로 불너드려 자서이 물으니 全氏 그제야 東學黨의 세력이 엇더한 것과 국정 개혁의 필요한 것과 세계 대세의 엇더한 것을 자서히 말하니 10년 勢道之餘에 새로 일어나는 閔妃의 政黨에게 정권을 빼앗기고 捲土重來의 야심이 발발한 그는 이것이 千載의 好機라 하고 서로 굿은 맹서를 하되 全은 지방에 가서 개혁의 亂을 이르키고 자기는 內應이 되기로 하며 또 全이 떠날 때에는 石坡山莊으로 친히 招待하야 술까지 부어 주고 또 親筆로 『江』字 한 字를 써 주며 말하되 東學軍이 만일에 銅雀江까지만 긧발을 날린다면 나는 당장에 官兵과 內應하야 宮中府中을 점령하고 친히 銅雀津까지 영접하마고까지 하얏다. 그러나 翻雲覆雨는 政治家의 常事이란 츠음에는 대원군이 그와가티 內約을 하얏스나 東軍이 外兵의 관계로 容易히 北進치 못하고 日淸 양국의 세력 쟁탈 틈에 자기가 또한 日本公使 大島圭介의 지도 하에 다시 政局에 臨하야 제3차로 執政을 하고 金宏集 일파의 開化黨 內閣을 조직하며 자기의 평생 强敵인 閔妃를 폐하야 庶人을 삼으니 당시 정국은 다시 자기가 주인이 된지라 東學軍의 승리는 도로혀 자기의 不利가 될 것 갓고 또 자기가 東學黨과 暗通한 것이<34> 世人에게 알게 되면 前日 壬午軍亂 때의 前鑑이 昭昭한 고로 자기에게 책임 문제가 잇슬가 하야 全然 냉정한 태도로 日軍의 세력에 의하야 東學軍을 토벌하얏다. 그것은 당시 정국 또는 東洋 대세가 엇지 할 수 업슴이니 時運에 부칠 수 밧게 업는 일이다.

天降紅衣少年

天降紅衣將軍이라 하면 누구나 壬辰亂 때의 郭再祐 장군을 연상하기 쉬울 것이다. 그러나 이 東學亂 때에는 郭再祐보다도 더 용맹스럽고 神奇한 少年將軍이 잇섯다. 忠南 禮山郡 新禮院 接戰 때엿다. 그 接戰은 東學亂이 이러난 후 官兵과 최대 격전으로서 彼此에 死傷이 수천 여 명에 달한 큰 접전이엿다. 그때 官兵은 새로 日兵이 가세하야 기세가 당당한바 23일 격전에 民兵이 다소 불리한 경우에 이르럿다. 그런대 제3일되든 날에 뜻밧게 東軍 측으로 一個 紅衣少年勇將이 돌출하야 匹馬單鎗으로 官兵을 처뭇지르는대 그야말로 녯날 支那 三國時代 長板橋 싸홈에 趙子龍이 모양으로 東으로 번적 西將을 베히고 南으로 번적 北將을 베혀 그 소년이 가는 곳에는 官兵이 물결훗터지덧하야 東軍이 遂히 大勝捷을 하얏다.
그러나 이상하게도 그 싸홈이 끗치자 그 紅衣少年은 踪跡을 알 수 업게 되엿다. 혹은 귀신인지 사람인지 또는 죽엇는지 살앗는지 아주 알 수 업섯다. 당시 세상 사람들만 잘 모를 뿐 안이라 臨戰하얏던 東軍까지도 누구인 줄을 알지 못하고 지금까지 그저 紅衣少年이라고만 말할 뿐이다. 녯날 支那의 秦始皇 때에 13세의 少年 秦舞陽이 荊軻를 따러서 대담하게도 萬乘天子 秦始皇을 죽이랴고 白刃이 閃閃한 七首를 느흔 燕나라의 督亢地圖를 질머지고 白晝 咸陽殿上에 가서 變色이 되엿다는 말만 史記에 올으고 그 뒤에는 엇지되엿다는 말이 업슴으로 후일 史記를 읽는 사람으로 하야곰 秦舞陽의 不知何落한 것을 탄식하는 것과 가티 나는 언제나 東學亂을 이약이할 때이면 이 紅衣少年이 누구인지 알고 십고 또 그 뒤에 엇지 되엿는지 알고 십허서 퍽은 안탑갑다.

大砲 구멍에서 물이 나고

녯날 壬辰亂 때에 쥐가 물을 물어다가 敵軍의 銃穴에 느엇다는 말은 지금까지도 故老의 입에서 전하야 나러오는 이약이다. 그런대 이 東學亂 때에는 대포 구멍에서 진짬 물이 나왓다. 조곰도 안이고 아주 장마통에 개샘 터지덧이 쏘다저 나왓다. 그로 인하야 東學軍은 神出鬼沒의 조화가 잇다 하야 一般 人民이 모다 嚮應하고 官軍은 도처에 望風逃走를 하얏다. 그 사실이 잇기는 바로 紅衣將軍이 낫타나던 新禮院 接戰 때엿다. 그때에 官軍은 禮山의 無限城(在今禮山驛外)을 점거하고 그곳에다 대포을 걸어놋코 東軍을 방어하얏는대 그때에 官軍의 腐敗와 行惡이야 다시 말할 수 잇스랴. 東軍의 방어는 제2로 치고 民財 약탈과 酒食으로 판을 짤 뿐이엿다. 그러나 東軍은 추호도 良民은 害치 안을 뿐 아니라 부자와 관청의 재물을<35> 빼서서 貧民을 모다 주고 또 一般으로 保國安民과 廣濟蒼生을 聲言하니 누구나 다 상응하고 환영하얏다. 그 중에도 無限城 근처에 잇는 婦女들은 더욱히 官軍을 밉게 보고 東軍을 환영하야 官軍의 잠자는 틈을 타서 밤중에 물을 질어다가 官軍의 砲臺에 다 부으니 대포가 터지기커영 대포 구멍에서 개구리가 색기를 치게 되엿섯다. 그것도 알지 못하고 잇던 官軍은 東軍이 無限城을 肉迫하야 드러올 때에 대포를 노흐랴고 하니 대포 구멍마다 물이 갓득 갓득 참으로 大驚失色하야 도망을 하며 익크 東學軍은 造化가 잇서서 능히 대포 구멍에 물을 나게 한다 하니 그 뒤부터는 官軍이 東學軍의 긧발만 보고도 숨을 잘 쉬지 못하고 도망하엿섯다. 지금까지도 세상 사람들은 그때에 東學軍이 人心을 煽亂식히너라고 미신적으로 대포 구멍에 물이 난다고 그짓말을 하얏다고 하는 이가 간혹 잇지만은 실상은 그 말이 官軍의 입에서 나온 것이요 東軍의 입에서 나온 말은 안이다. (此間3행삭제-원문)

兩班의 불알까기

녜로부터 도야지나 말의 불알을 까는 일은 잇섯지만은 사람의 불알을 까는 괴상한 일은 업섯슬 것이다. 안이 녯날에도 惡刑 중에 腐刑(睪丸을 잡아매서 썩키는 刑名)이 잇고 또 虛榮의 惡習으로 인공적 內侍를 맹길기 위하야 불알을 까는 것이 업는 것은 안이다. 그러나 이 東學亂 때처럼 兩班의 種子를 撲滅하기 위하야 불알을 깐 일은 업섯다. 그때에 여러 곳에서 그러한 일이 잇섯지만은 其 중에도 한 예를 들어 말하자면 洪州 葛山里 金氏家에서 생긴 일이 가장 현저한 것으로 세상 사람이 누구나 다 아는 것이다. 그 金氏로 말하면 外戚 安東 金氏 일파로 세력이 상당하고 따러서 그 지방에서 橫暴한 일도 만헛섯다. 東學亂이 이러나자 그 집의 奴隷들은 父子兄弟 할 것 업시 다 東黨에 叅入하얏다. 東軍이 洪州城을 처드러오며 각처에서 行惡하던 官吏, 兩班을 모주리 죽일 판에 金氏 집 노예들은 무엇보다도 소위 자기 上典의 집부터 업새버리자고 公論을 하고 舍廊으로 달녀가서 上典 金氏를 잡아다가 댓초나무에다 달아매고 따리며 이놈의 양반은 불알을 까야 種子가 업서진다 하고 사긔깜팽어로 불알을 깟섯다. 그 일이 잘되고 못된 것은 別 문제어니와 이일 한가지를 보와도 당시 상민 계급에서 양반에게 얼마나한 虐待를 바덧스며 또 양반에 대하야 얼마나 원한을 가젓던지 짐작할 수 잇다.

神出鬼沒한 東洋의 探偵

그때에 東軍의 활동은 엇지나 컷던지 각 지방에 衙前官屬은 無非東軍의 심복이 되어서 官軍의 虛實을 探報하얏다. 全琫準이 異人의 통천을 하게 된 것도 이 偵探에 밝은 탓이엿다. 그가 東軍의 지휘자로 古阜, 金堤 등지를 점령하고 全州에서 오는 官兵을 破할때에 官軍 측에서 虛實을 알기위하야 탐정을 보내면 官軍 측에 잇는 吏屬들은 그것을 알고 某月某日某處로 엇더한 服色을 한 官偵이 갈 터이니 <36> 먼저 주의하라고 통지하면 全氏는 그 말대로 軍中에 號令하야 如合符節하매 그 官偵을 다 잡아다가 問哨하야 도로혀 官軍의 내막을 잘 알게 되니 軍中이 다 신기하게 생각하고 感服하며 官軍도 감히 探偵을 함부로 보내지 못하얏다.
그 뒤에 東軍이 長城의 黃龍市場을 점령할 때에는 官軍이 竹籠채독에다 무기를 가득히 늣코 商人의 行色을 차린 다음에 東軍의 뒤를 습격하야 內外 상응하기로 하얏섯는대 東軍은 그것을 먼저 알고 일시에 商人을 모다 잡어서 죽이고 將計取計로 東軍이 그 服色을 하고 市中으로 드러가서 不意에 습격을 하니 官軍이 다 敗走하고 그 시장이 東軍의 손으로 도라왓다. 지면의 관계로 여긔에는 자서한 말을 略하나 그때의 接戰도 상당한 접전이어니와 채독으로 勝戰한 것은 당시 全南 東軍의 한 자랑거리가 되엿다.

全州城의 占領顚末

이때 全州에는 南武營이라는 兵營이 잇고 軍器軍糧이 풍부한 곳인 고로 東軍은 그곳을 점령하랴고 전력하엿섯다. 官軍이나 東軍이나 이 全州城을 가지고 못 가지는 것으로 湖南 일대의 운명을 점하게 되엿다. 그리하야 官軍도 死力을 다하야 직히엿다. 그러나 第1戰에 營將(성명 미상)과 書記 李敦昇이 敗死하고 제2차에는 民兵과 官兵이 합동 출전하다가 負商都班首 宋奉昊(全州人)가 敗死하고 그 다음에는 招討使 洪啓薰(즉 洪在羲)이 京兵을 다리고오니 洪은 본시 武監 출신으로 壬午軍亂 때에 閔妃를 구출한 공으로 超遷하야 淸州兵使 등 중요 武職에 잇다가 이제 招討使가 되엿스나 殘虐凶暴한 사람이라 到任 즉시에 먼저 金始豐(前三南討捕使인대 大院君과 有隙함)을 죽이고 全州에는 다만 殘兵과 民間의 弓手로만 직히게 한 후(民兵은 다만 點心費만 주엇다) 全軍을 動하야 長城, 古阜 등지를 추격할 새 全州를 떠나서 30리 되는 金溝에 이르러서는 또 將校 鄭錫禧를 죽이니 軍中이 다 恐惶하야 안심치 못하고 東軍에 투입하는 자가 만헛섯다. 이 틈을 타서 東軍은 間路를 쫏차서 4월 27일- 바로 全州市場날 새벽에 全州의 要塞地인 完山七峯을 점령하고 城中을 향하야 放砲하니 觀察 金文鉉은 먼저 도망하고 通判 閔泳昇은 慶基殿位牌를 가지고 威鳳山城으로 도망함으로 殘餘의 官軍과 民兵이 다 문을 열고 東軍을 迎入하니 當時 東軍의 勢는 실로 당당하야 滿山遍野에 旗㫌이 흔들리고 북소리가 천지를 진동하얏섯다. 洪啓黨은 그 翌日에야 겨우 消息을 알고 다시 回軍하야 主反爲客으로 完山에 據하야 城內를 攻擊하얏는대 5월 3일에는 一大 激戰이 시작되야 彼此 수백의 死傷이 낫섯다. 그러나 東軍이 원래 굿게 직히여서 勝負를 決하기 어러움으로 洪은 그 불리한 것을 알고 郡守를 請和使로 삼아 參禮驛에 잇는 東軍의 大本營에 가서 全琫準과 休戰의 議를 提出하고 彼此 條約을 논의하던 중 때마츰 巡邊使 李OO가 平壤兵을 率來하고 按撫의 詔를 전하니 東軍도 또한 讓步하야 서로 交戰, 侵掠치 안을 조건 하에 東軍은 好意的으로 官軍에게 全州城을 讓與하고 5월 6일에 西門으로 退하야 京畿를 향하얏다. 이것은 勿論 全琫準의 心算에 全州一城을 <37> 가지고 官軍과 時日을 相持하는 것보다 먼저 京城을 直衝하는 것이 得策으로 생각한 것이다. 그러나 그것은 全의 큰 실책이엿다. 그때 州를 굿게 점령하야 근거지를 삼은 뒤에 京城을 직향하엿더면 設或 중도에서 실패를 하야도 그다지 접촉할 여지가 업시 一敗塗地는 안이 되엿슬 것이다.

開南將軍과 一目將軍

全州와 相應하야 南原에서는 金開南이가 또 이러낫스니 그는 甲午 3월 20일 李春景과 가티 南原邑 西花里에서 動兵하야 府使 申佐熙를 斬殺한 후 府衙를 점령하고 五營을 置하야 金은 中營黃旗大將이 되야 諸軍을 지휘하고 潭陽人 南應三은 前營紅旗大將, 李士儀는 後營黑旗大將, 그 他 兩人는 白, 靑, 旗로 좌우 營將이 되고 書記는 全化三, 李士明, 謀士는 金禹則이엿는대 일시 嶺南 일대를 호령하며 凡 49일을 南原城에 점거하얏다가 雲峯에 잇는 民砲大將 朴鳳陽 속칭 一目將軍 (朴의 字는 文達이니 一目을 失하고 文科로 注書까지 한 者)을 습격하던 次 女院峴에서 朴軍에게 참패하고 南原城까지 被奪하얏는대 이것은 당시 金開南이 너무도 輕敵하다가 見敗한 것이엿다. 그때 雲峯에야 民兵이 잇던지 업던지 상관할 것 업시 全州로 직향하야 金軍과 勢를 합하야 京城오로 향하던가 그럿치 안으면 자기가 南原을 중심으로 하고 全州까지 점거하야 근거지를 튼튼케 한 뒤에 官兵이나 民兵의 內襲을 遊擊하얏스면 그다지 실패는 안이하얏슬 것이다. 그러나 苟苟하게 南原에서 49일이나 지체하다가 道路도 不知하는 雲峯으로 향하야 一個 盲目兒에게 막대한 軍馬를 상실하얏스니 참으로 우습고 可惜한 일이엿다.

最忌者敬天

全琫準은 全羅, 忠淸, 일대를 점령하고 乘勝長驅의 勢로 公州城을 進擊하게 되엿는대 그 最下에는 원래 占術에 능한 사람이 잇서서 행진할 때이면 반드시 占을 처 보는 것이 상례이엿다. 公州로 행진하는 날에는 占을 처서 본즉 「最忌敬天」이라는 占辭가 잇슴으로 全氏는 公州의 敬天驛이 불길하다는 것으로 알고 다른 길로 갓다. 결국 公州에서 大敗하고 論山에서 散兵을 한 후 자기는 捲土重來할 後期를 두고 몸을 잠시 피하기 위하야 喪服으로 全北 淳昌을 향하엿는데 도중에서 자기의 부하이던 全州人 金敬天을 만나 자기가 淳昌 「피노」里라는 촌에 가서 隱伏할 것을 말하엿더니 언제이나 실패할 때에는 敵보다도 부하에게 害를 보는 것이 常例이라. 恩德도 알지 못하는 金敬天은 그 사실을 官軍에게 告變하야 遂히 全氏로 하야금 官軍에게 捕捉이 되야 京城監獄 斷頭臺의 孤魂이 되게 하얏다. 占者의 말을 그그리 미들 것은 안이나 공교하게도 最忌敬天이라는 것이 뜻밧게 이 金敬天에게 마젓섯다. 그때에 全氏는 피노리 민가에 潛伏하얏는대 별안간에 官兵이 포위하닛가 그는 날새게 뛰여서 집웅 우으로 올나가다가 官軍의 亂刀에 왼다리를 重傷하야 가지도 못하고 잡히엿는대 현장에서 官軍이 亂打를 하닛가 그는 正色으로 꾸지저 갈오대 士는 可殺이언정 不可辱이라고 내가 國法을 犯하얏다면 당당하게 國法으로 다스릴 것이지 私刑을 하는 것은 틀린 일이라 하니 아모리 殘虐한 官軍이라도 그의 氣魄에 感服하야 감히 下手치 못하얏스며 그 뒤 金敬天은 그 功으로 郡守까지 되얏다 한다. <38>
<33-38>