별건곤 제15호	
1928년 08월 01일
단돈 二十錢 避暑秘法, 記者總出競爭記事 (Twenty Jeon Escape from the Heat: Reporters' Competitive Articles) (Miscellaneous Article)

Twenty Jeon Escape from the Heat: Reporters' Competitive Articles
As soon as lunchtime ended under the blazing sun, the editor-in-chief commanded, "Each person takes 20 jeon and no other money, and without using streetcar passes, libraries, or theaters, use only those 20 jeon to find a unique way to escape the heat until sunset today." Before the command finished, the business bureau's finance officer distributed two 10-jeon coins to each person.

Reporter A

"A Hongdukgae in the dark night" is what this kind of hot day and this kind of order signify. From one o'clock until sunset, which is eight o'clock, how can one uniquely escape the heat with only 20 jeon...? I shook a useless fan and pondered.
Because an idea didn't come, I grumbled and walked, and my steps naturally led me to the road I take every day. So, naturally, I arrived in front of my house. "Oh well, there's no other way." I went inside, took off my suit, hung it up, put a towel on the pillow, wore rubber shoes barefoot, and picked up a folding fan (尾扇). I chose two cucumbers from a stall at the entrance of the alley, and the vendor asked for 7 jeon. To save even a penny, I begged and bargained, something I never did before, and got them for 5 jeon. I borrowed a pocket whiskey-wine bottle and went to a dive bar. I asked for 10 jeon worth of soju without any side dishes, and the owner laughed, "What's going on with you today?" I put the soju in my back pocket, held the cucumbers, and went to Ch'wiunjong (翠雲亭), where I drank a ladle of mineral water. It felt cool to the bones, and I felt like I had chased away the heat. Feeling refreshed, I sat under a pine tree and watched a family shoot arrows. While they shot arrows, I had all of Pukaksan’s (北岳山) breeze to myself. The cool breeze seeping through the hemp pillow and tickling the skin felt like my body would fly away, and when I took off my rubber shoes and put my bare feet on the grass, I felt like a hermit. After lying down and sitting for a while, I got bored, so I slowly strolled—no one else would walk so leisurely in this cool pine forest. Hiding in the grass, I crossed the hill and found the Samch'ŏng-dong (三清洞) valley. The breeze was good, and the sound of women washing clothes was as refreshing as splashing in spring water. Following the stream full of cool air, as I went up each valley, the sight of young women washing clothes and soaking their white bare feet in the water was so refreshing that no one could say it was hot. If you feel hot, come to Samch'ŏng-dong and look at the feet of the women washing clothes. Just seeing it once will make your sweat disappear. But that's not all. Every time I turned a corner, there was a different beautiful woman, making me forget not only the heat but also the passing of time.
Going deep into the valley, I could no longer see any washerwomen. There, I took off all my clothes and started bathing, and the wind, the spring water, and the mountain were all mine. After washing, I sat on a rock, ate cucumbers as snacks, and poured myself a glass of soju. Now, I was completely a hermit. Listening to the secluded sounds and the cool breeze, I drank four glasses of alcohol, lay down on a rock, and took a nap. I didn't know what time it was, or if it was just the shade of the trees. It seemed like evening, so I went into the water again, took a bath, and slowly walked down. The beautiful women who had been washing clothes were now dressing up to go home. On the way down, I stopped by Ch'wiunjong (翠雲亭) again, and at the archery range, they were preparing to go home and collecting their arrows. The entire day of escaping the heat cost only 15 jeon! Since there was no need to save the remaining 5 jeon, I called over an ice cream vendor and bought a full portion, which made my spine tingle.

Reporter B

The cheapest and most refreshing escape from the heat is to pay 5 jeon and stand right behind the driver of a streetcar, taking off your hat. Even on a windless day, the streetcar creates its own wind as it speeds along like an arrow... With a total fortune of only 20 jeon, I thought that was the best way to spend it. I entered the streetcar on Ŭiju (義州) street behind T'apkol Park (塔골 公園) and the conductor urged, "Move forward, move closer!" If I stood in the back, they might ask for the 5 jeon back, so I took it as good advice and squeezed forward, standing near the front exit with my hat off. The cool feeling of riding into the wind was more refreshing than being in the depths of Kŭmgangsan (金剛山). It was bothersome to make way for people getting on and off at each stop, but there were also trendy women wearing perms who let their fragrant scent brush against my nose. Filling up with that feeling made up for the inconvenience, and the "Ding-ding—the streetcar is leaving!" signal was the best escape from the heat. If I were the streetcar manager, I would create a route that went from Tongdaemun (東大門) to Ŭiju street, in front of Kyŏngsŏng Station (京城驛), to Namdaemun (南大門), to Hwanggŭmdong (黃金町), and then back to Tongdaemun (東大門), marking it as a "Cooling Streetcar" (納涼電車) and running special operations. Then many 20-jeon heat escapees like me would ride it, and I would just keep riding around and around. But I can't become the streetcar manager, and there's no one who would let me, so I had to get off in front of the government building (監營) near Sŏdaemun (西大門).
Getting off and looking for a cool place that didn't cost money, I went to Kŭmhwawŏn (金華園) at the foot of Kŭmhwasan Mountain (金華山) on the newly paved road in Nojeomgol (路店골). Just a 5-minute walk from the streetcar, the flower shop Kŭmhwawŏn (金華園) was a cool flower garden. Being almost at the top of Kŭmhwawŏn (金華山), there was a gentle breeze in the larch and pine forest. Sitting among the flower vines and potted plants, taking off my jacket and looking down at the city, a cool air arose from somewhere, making my sweat disappear.
The deaf old owner was a nice person who welcomed conversation as if he had met a Go companion, so it was good because there was no reason to feel uncomfortable no matter how long I stayed. I learned interesting knowledge for a while, like how to grow chrysanthemums, how to protect them in winter, which flowers have the best fragrance, and which flowers are used for medicine. The sun had already set quite a bit, and I saw a neatly dressed young man and a trendy woman coming up in front of each other. I thought it was a couple secretly dating, but as they got closer, I realized it was the writer Mr. P and his wife, who said their newlywed life was fun. I sat with them again in the shade of the flowers and lectured them on the flower knowledge I had just learned. During that time, I smoked four Pigeon brand cigarettes. Now it was getting late, so I said goodbye to them and climbed up the mountain alone, heading towards the prison (監獄所) only along the ridge. The cool breeze on the mountain felt like it would blow me off and make me roll down.
I went along the ridge to Akpakkol (惡薄골) and drank a bowl of spring water, which felt like it washed away all the food I had eaten during the summer. I watched the young women and courtesans chatting and bought a cucumber for 4 jeon and four pieces of taffy for 4 jeon. I couldn't buy any more because I needed to save 7 jeon to take the bus home. Eating taffy and drinking water until I was full in hopes of staying cool until tomorrow, I got on the bus as the sun was setting. There were many people coming out but few going in, so there were only six people including me in the bus. "This is Sŏdaemun (西大門) intersection. Anyone getting off?" "This is Kwanghwamun (光化門) Stele. Passengers getting off..." The voice of the conductor was also quite cool.

Reporter C

I couldn't just sit back while everyone else was doing something, so I firmly grasped my 20 jeon and went out onto Chongno (鍾路) main street. I turned towards Namdaemun (南大門) and entered the second house on the right, just short of Kwangch'unggyo Bridge (廣충교), a shaved ice shop called Marudai (丸大) Sanjōm (三뎜). "Shall I bring you a beer?" Absolutely not, that would be a disaster. "One shaved ice with lots of strawberry syrup, please."
This shop is famous throughout Kyŏngsŏng (京城), from the north to the south villages, for grinding ice the finest. Indeed, they grind the ice as finely as snow that has fallen and piled up in winter, and they add a particularly large amount of strawberry syrup. Even if you search the corners of Chinkogae (진고개), there is no other place that grinds ice so finely except for ice cream shops. I remembered what Hyŏng (형) from the July issue of *P'ayŏng* (波影) wrote in "Shaved Ice Story." I carefully scooped up a spoonful and put it on my tongue, and oh, how cool it was. My eyes closed. That sweetly hateful taste, that refreshing coolness, went from the tip of my tongue to my entire mouth, throat, chest, back, and even my stomach. I could clearly feel a cool current flowing through me. Ah, in no time, all that sweat on my nose, forehead, and back had disappeared. Even though the ice was well ground, I still had to give away half of my 10-jeon fortune and came out. I walked a few more steps and went to the special room of the Government-General Library (總督府圖書館), leaving the pass behind, which cost 7 jeon since it was summer, there were only two customers. I went near the electric fan and took a seat. This wasn't studying, it was escaping the heat, so I had to choose easy and interesting, cool books. But it would be foolish to sweat again while choosing, so I just picked two books that caught my eye: "Forty Years of a Newspaper Reporter's Memoirs" and "Arctic Exploration." I chose only the cool and interesting parts and read as I pleased. It was already six o'clock, so I thought the hateful sun must have gone down and came out. I sat leisurely under the wisteria vines in T'apkol Park (塔골 公園), listening to the old men wearing hats telling silly stories and buying ice cream that children were eating for one jeon each three times. The vendor smiled and said, "Why are you doing that, you respectable elder?"
Whether they asked or not, as long as I was cool until sunset, that was all that mattered...

Reporter D

No matter how much I thought about it, wandering around with 20 jeon would only make me sweat more, so on the way home, I went to the Andong (安東) fruit store and bought a watermelon for 15 jeon, wrapping it up like a package. I bought 2 jeon worth of ice and 3 jeon worth of sugar (totaling 20 jeon), put them inside the watermelon, and floated it in the well. I took off all my clothes, took a cold water bath, and lay down in the backyard wearing only a loincloth. I had no other thoughts. A girl (少女) in the second grade of elementary school sat at my head, and a boy (道令) in the fourth grade sat at my feet. They read aloud from the recently published *Ŏrini* (어린이) magazine in turn, and I listened. Since there was the pleasure of eating watermelon after reading, they read with more enjoyment than usual. <86> As they read each story, they laughed out loud, and even my wife came to the back porch with her sewing basket and listened. Even listening to the story of the iceberg in the book made my head cool, and the jokes and funny stories in the appendix made people laugh. After reading for a while, I brought the watermelon and put a spoonful of that cool watermelon into my mouth, and it felt like my body was ascending to the sky. "This is so good that you wouldn't know if one of you died while eating it," I said, and the girl clapped her hands and laughed.
"Okay, let's put it back in the well, read another chapter, and then eat it again." The children were just so happy and excited. I realized that reading *Ŏrini* (어린이) magazine with the family sitting together and enjoying it was more profound than reading it alone.
It was cool, beneficial, and there was peace in the house... Thanks to that, the dinner table that day was even more enjoyable.

Reporter E

20 jeon is only enough for liquor, so I sneaked into the next room (another office) and gave a passionate speech about going to the Han River (한강), which some people were tempted by. When I asked for 20 jeon per person, they protested that at least 1 won per person was needed. I couldn't let my plan be ruined, so I waved the "proletarian" flag and insisted that no more than 20 jeon was absolutely allowed. I managed to force them and collected 20 jeon each, totaling 1 won for five people, and we took the streetcar. After deducting the round-trip streetcar fare, there were 50 jeon left. This 50 jeon had to be used wisely. Anyway, I immediately took the first-class seat as soon as I got on the streetcar. Did streetcars have first-class seats? It was the seat with the open window facing the driver's seat. It was advantageous because you didn't smell sweat from the left or right, got a good breeze, and were less bothered by people getting on and off—it was worth paying an extra two or three jeon to sit there. I forgot about the boredom by watching the beautiful women getting on and off at the Chinkogae (진고개) entrance. We got off at the Han River (한강) terminal and crossed the Han River (한강) railroad bridge. The wind was like a storm, and the hem of my trousers was about to tear. I took off my hat, stretched out my chest, and stretched my body as if yawning. If I could feel this coolness every day, I would grow taller. Across the bridge, I bought a cheap bottle of soju for 35 jeon, twelve cucumbers for 3 jeon, and borrowed some gochujang (고초장) and a soju cup for 2 jeon. I walked to the back of Salch'imok Rock (살치목 바위), took off all my clothes except for my loincloth, dipped my feet in the river, and sat down for a drink. It was indeed a special taste. I went into the water again, swam, bathed, joked with the male and female sunbathers, swam to a boat where blind men were playing games, splashed water on them, and after playing for a while, I dressed and came to the bridge entrance. It was 10 minutes before seven o'clock. With the remaining 10 jeon, I asked for five small cucumbers for four jeon each, peeled one, and got back on the first-class streetcar. If I could do that every day, it would be good exercise and I wouldn't even know it was summer.

In addition, the articles by Reporter F were similar to those of Reporter C, such as buying watermelons and reading *Ŏrini* (어린이) magazine with family at home, so they are not included (Editor). <87><84-87>

**Named Entities**

北岳山	Pukaksan
翠雲亭	Ch'wiunjong
三清洞	Samch'ŏng-dong
義州	Ŭiju
塔골 公園	T'apkol Park
金剛山	Kŭmgangsan
東大門	Tongdaemun
京城驛	Kyŏngsŏng Station
南大門	Namdaemun
黃金町	Hwanggŭmdong
西大門	Sŏdaemun
監營	kamyŏng
路店골	Nojeomgol
金華山	Kŭmhwasan
金華園	Kŭmhwawŏn
波影	P'ayŏng
鍾路	Chongno
廣충교	Kwangch'unggyo
진고개	Chinkogae
安東	Andong
살치목 바위	Salch'imok Bawi
한강	Han River



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제15호
발행일	1928년 08월 01일
기사제목	단돈 二十錢 避暑秘法, 記者總出競爭記事
기사형태	잡저

단돈 二十錢 避暑秘法, 記者總出競爭記事
불볏 쪼이는 날 점심시간이 끗나자 『한사람이 20전씩 가지고 다른 돈 쓰지 말고 뎐차파쓰나 도서관파쓰 극장파쓰 일톄로 쓰지 말고 20전만 가지고 오늘 해질 때까지 피서를 묘하게 하여 보시오』 편즙국장의 명령이 끗나기도 전에 영업국 재무 주임이 10전 짜리 두 푼식을 분배해 준다.

A記者

어둔 밤에 홍둑개란 이러케 뜨거운 날 이 따위 명령을 가르키는 말이다. 새로 한시부터 해질 때까지면 여덜 시까지 닐곱 시간 동안을 단돈 20전 가지고 엇더케 묘하게 피서를 하는가...... 애매한 부채만 잡어 흔들면서 궁리궁리 나섯다.
궁리가 나지 안으니 꿍꿍거리면서 것는 거름이 저절로 날마다 가는 길로 갈 수 밧게 그러니 저절로 우리 집 대문 압헤 이르럿다. 『에래 별수가 업다』 집에 드러가서 양복 버서 걸고 베고의 등거리에 수건 하나 억개에 걸고 맨발에 구무신 신고 미선(尾扇)하나 손에 들고 골목 밧갓 가가에서 참외 두 개 골라 드니 7전 달라 하는지라. 한푼이라도 앗기느라고 전에 아니 하든 짓을 애걸애걸 깍거서 5전 주고 포켓트 위스키-뷔인 병 하나를 빌려 가지고 선술집에 드러 가서 안주 업시 10전 어치 소주를 너어 달나 하니 『이건 또 왼 일이 심닛가』하고 주인이 웃는다. 소주는 등거리 주머니에 넛고 참외는 손에 들고 취운정에 드러가 약물 한 바가지 마시니 가슴 속 뼈 속까지 서늘한 법이 제법 더위를 물니친 것갓다. 서늘한 김에 소나무 밋에 안저서 一가뎡 활 쏘는 구경을 하고 안젓스니 활은 저의가 쏘려니와 북악산 나리는 바람은 왼통 내 차지다. 베 고의로 새여드는 바람이 사추리까지 긔여들 때의 싀원한 맛은 몸이 날러 갈 것갓고 고무신 버서 노코 맨발을 풀밧에 뺏을 때는 나 혼자 신선인 것 갓다. 누엇다 안젓다 한동안을 보내니 싀원은 하지만 심심하여저서 천천히 완보하야-이러캐 싀원한 송림 속을 밧본 거름을 것는 사람은 업슬 것이다. -풀밧으로 숨여서 등송이를 넘어 삼청동 골작이를 차저드니 바람도 조커니와 빨내질 소리가 샘물을 뒤집어쓰는 것처럼 싀원하게 들닌다. 서늘한 긔운을 갓득이 실코 구비구비 흘러 나리는 물줄기를 따라 올러가면 골작이마다 빨내질하고 안젓는 나 젊은 부인의 물에 당그고 안젓는 하연 맨발이 엇더케 서늘해 보이는지 누가 더웁다고 하느냐. 더웁거던 삼청동에 와서 빨내하는 부인의 발을 보라. 한번만 보아 두면 생각만 하여도 땀이 긔여 들 것이다. 그러나 그것뿐이 아니다. 한 구비 도라 돌 적마다 모냥 다른 미인이 잇고 잇고 하야 더위는 커냥 해가 가는 것을 니저버리게 한다.
깁숙한 골작에 까지 가면 벌서 빨내꾼도 보이지 아니하니 거긔서 훌훌 벗고 목욕을 시작하면 그 바람 그 샘물 그 산이 왼통 내차지가 된다. 한 벌 씻고 나서 바위에 안저 참외 안주하야 소주 한잔 기우리는 자미 이제는 <84> 완전히 신선이 되엿다. 그윽한 소리 서늘한 바람소리 드르면서 넉잔 술을 마시고 바위에 걸쳐 누어서 한잠 자고 나니 시간은 몃 시가 되엿는지 원래 나무 그늘이랴. 저녁 때가튼대 다시 한번 물에 긔여들어 목욕하고 천천히 거러 나려 오니 앗가 빨내 하던 미인들이 집에 도라가느라고 옷맵시를 내느라고 한 멋을 더 내인다. 나려오는 길이라 취운뎡에 다시 들르면 활터에서도 도라 갈 준비로 화살을 거둔다. 왼 종일 피서하기에 비용이 전부 15전! 5전 남겨 갈 필요가 업서서 아이수크림 장사 불러 세우고 한글읏 듬뿍 사서 마시니 등뼈가 저린다.

B記者

갑싸고 산듯한 피서는 돈 5전 내고 뎐차 맨압 운뎐수의 바로 등뒤에 모자를 벗고 섯는 것이 뎨일이다. 바람 한 점 업는 날이라도 뎐차만 속히 다러나면 바람을 스스로 내면서 화살가티 다라 나는 것이닛가..... 총 재산이 단돈 20전이니 그 법을 쓰는 것이 뎨일이라 생각하고 탑골 공원 뒤문에서 압문으로 빠저서 의주통행 뎐차에 올라타닛가 『압흐로 나스십시오 압흐로 닥어스시오』 차장이 안탑갑게 조른다. 뒤로 스라면 5전을 도로 내라 할 판인데 그저 고마운 말이라 생각하고 압흐로 압흐로 삐집고 나가서 압흐로 나리는 문 어구에 모자를 버서들고 섯스니 그 바람을 차고 나가는 싀원한 맛이란 금강산 속도 요럿캐  맛잇게 싀원하지는 못할 것갓다. 정류장에서 정거하는 동안 오르고 나리는 사람에 길 틔어 주노라고 성가시기는 하지만 그러나 그 중에는 향긋한 조흔 냄새를 코에 맞춰 주고 나가는 트래머리 녀자도 업지 안흐닛가 그 맛으로 멕구어 채우면 손해 될 것까지는 업는 일이고, 『땡땡- 차 떠남니다아』소리에 우웅하고 내닷는 싀원한 맛은 참말 일등 피서다. 내가 뎐차 과장 가트면 동대문에서 의주통으로 경성역 압흐로 남대문으로 황금뎡으로 다시 동대문으로 빙빙 비빙 도라다니게 길을 꾸며 노코 납양(納凉) 뎐차라 써 부치고 특별 운전을 하엿스면 나가튼 20전짜리 피서객이 만히 탈 것 갓고 또 나도 지금 이걸로 그냥 핑핑 돌겟는데.... 내가 뎐차 과장 될 수 도 업는 일이요 되래도 되어 줄 이가 업는 노릇이니 서대문 밧 감영 압헤서 나릴밧게.
나려서 돈 안 들고 서늘한 곳을 차지니 얼는 생각 키우는 곳이 업서서 노ㅅ점골 신작로로 드러 금화산(金華山) 기슭의 금화원을 차저 갓다. 뎐차에서 나려서 5분을 못 가서 화초ㅅ집 금화원의 서늘 꼿밧이다. 금화산 거의 꼭닥이이니, 락엽송(落葉松) 솔밧에 잔잔한 바람도 잇지 만은 꼿덩굴 밋에 화초분 틈에 안자서 웃옷 버서부치고 시가를 나려다 보는 때 어대서 나는지 모르게 싀원한 긔운이 땀이 스러지게 니러 난다.
귀먹어리 주인 령감 사람이 조와서 수작을 걸면 바둑 친구나 맛난 것처럼 반겨 하니 아모리 오래 잇서도 실탈 까닭이 업서서 더욱 죠타. 국화 기르는 묘방은 엇더코 겨울에 보장해 두는 비방(秘方)은 엇더코 향내 제일 조흔 꼿은 무엇이고 약에 쓰는 꼿은 무엇 무엇이고 한동안 취미 잇는 지식을 배호고 나니 해가 제법 기우럿는데 산밋에서 말숙한 양복 청년 한 분 트래 머리 한 분이 전후 하야 올러 오기에 어느 남의 눈가리는 련애패인가 하얏더니 갓갑게 올러 온 것을 본즉 신혼살림 자미잇다는 문사 P씨 부부이다. 그들과 다시 꼿그늘 안저서 금방 배운 꼿 지식을 한참 강의 해주고 나니 그 동안 혼자서 피운 권련  비둙이표 네 개. 이제는 저녁 긔운이 도는 때라 그들과 작별하고 나 혼자 산등으로 올라서서 산등으로만 감옥소를 향하고 가니 산상의 서늘한 바람 깟닥하면 바람에<85> 불려서 떠러저 굴늘 것 갓다.
산등으로만 악박골 차저드러 샘물 한 박아지 먹으니 녀름 내 먹은 음식이 다 내려가는 것 갓다. 젊은 부인 기생아씨 잭갈 거리는 구경하고 참외 한 개 4전 엿 네 가락 4전 더 못 사 먹는 것은 뻐-스 타고 드러갈 7전 남길 필요 때문이다. 내일까지 싀원할 욕심으로 엿먹어 가면서 물을 배부르게 먹고 해가 넘을 때 빼-스에 올나타니 나오는 사람만 만코 드러가는 손님이 적어서 차 속에는 나까지 여섯 사람인데 『서대문턱임니다. 나리실 분 계심닛가』 『광화문 비각 압히올시다. 나리실 손님.....』 꾀꼬리 차장의 목소리도 자못 서늘하다.

C記者

남 다하는 노릇에 나 혼자 빠저 그냥 잇슬 수  업서서 20전 단단히 쥐고 종로 큰길로 나아가 남대문 통으로 꺽겨서 몃 거름 광충교 못 밋처 바른 편으로 끗흐로 둘째집 환대(丸大) 삼뎜이라는 빙수집으로 긔여 드러갓다. 『맥주를 가저 올까요!』 천-만에 큰일 날 소리지. 빙수 한 그릇 딸긔물 만히 처 주시오.
이 집이 어름 곱게 갈기로 남북촌을 통하야 경성에서 제일이라고 일홈 놉흔 집이다. 참말로 겨울에 눈이 와서 곱게 싸힌 것처럼 곱게 갈고 딸긔 물을 특별히 만히 처 준다. 진고개 구석까지 들추어도 아이스크림 외에는 이러케 곱게 가러주는 집이 업다. 7월호 파영(波影)형이 쓴 『빙수 이약이』에서 배흔 것이 잇는지라. 한 숫갈 식 삿붓 떠다가 혀우에 언즈닛가 어이그 싀원하여라. 두 눈이 스르르 감겨진다. 그 얄밉게까지 달콤한 맛. 그 삿듯한 싀원한 맛이 혀끗에서 왼 입안으로 목구녕으로 가슴으로 등덜미까지 배속까지 싀원한 뎐긔가 찌르르르 도라가는 것을 분명히 알겟다. 아아 어느 틈에 코에 이마에 등덜미에 그 만흔 땀이 다 도망가고 말엇다. 어름은 잘 가럿서도 맛찬가지로 10전 재산의 반분을 탁 터러 주고 나와서 몃 거름 더 거러 총독부 도서관 파쓰는 너어 두고 7전 내고 특별실로 드러가닛가 녀름이라 손님이 두 사람뿐이다. 뎐긔부채 갓갑게 가서 자리잡고 안젓다. 이것이 공부가 아니고 피서이니 될 수 잇는 대로 쉬웁고 자미 잇는 것 서늘한 책을 골라야겠는데 그러나 골르다가 다시 땀을 흘니게 되는 것도 어리석은 짓이겟써서 대강 눈에 뜨이는 대로 고른 책이 『신문긔자 사십년 회고』하고 『북극탐험긔』 두 책이다. 서늘하고 자미 잇는 곳만 추려서 자미 나는 대로 닑고 나니 발서 여섯시 그만 하면 원수의 해가 물러 갓겟지 하고 나와서 탑골 공원 등덩굴 밋해 한가히 안저서 갓쓴 로인들의 허튼 이약이를 드르면서 아해들 사 먹는 아이스크림을 일전어치식 세 번에 사 먹으닛가 장사가 빙글빙글 우스면서 『졈잔흔 어른께서 웨 그러심닛가』한다.
뭇거나 말거나 해질 때까지 나만 싀원 하엿스면 그만이지......

D記者

아모리 생각해 보아도 20전 가지고 도라 다니다는 땀밧게 흘릴 것 업겟는지라 집으로 가는 길에 안동 과실뎐에 가서 수박 한 개 쌈싸호듯하야 15전에 하나 사서 가지고 와서 어름 2전 설당 3전(총합 20전) 사다가 수박 속에 집어 느어서 움물에 띄여 노코 옷 훌훌 벗고 랭수 목욕 한 차레 하고서 등거리 고의만 걸치고 뒷겻 마당에 드러 누으니 아모 딴 생각 업서 진다. 보통학교 2연급 다니는 少女 머리 맛에 안저 4연급 다니는 도령 세숙식여 안치고 어적게 발행된 『어린이』잡지를 차레차레 닑히면서 듯고 잇스니, 닑고 나면 수박 먹을 자미에 다른 때보다 자미 붓처 닑는다. <86> 한 가지 한가지 닑으면서 자미 잇서서 소리처 웃는 통에 안해까지 반짓고리 들고 마루 뒤턱에 와서 귀를 긔우린다. 책 속에 잇는 빙산 이약이는 엽헤서 듯고 잇서도 머리 속까지 서늘해지고 부록 세상에 잇는 우슨 이약이 재담 모아 논 것을 구절구절 사람을 웃긴다. 한 동안 닑고 난 후에 수박을 가저다 놋코 그 *안 그 서늘한 수박을 한 숫갈 입에 떠 너으니 그야말로 몸이 비상텬 한다. 『이거야말로 둘이 먹다가 하나가 죽어도 모르겟네』 하닛가 소녀가 손벽을 치고 웃는다.
『자아 또 움물에 갓다 두엇다가 한 차레 닑고 나서 또 갓다 먹세.』 어린 사람들은 그저그저 조와서 날뛴다. 『어린이』잡지도 혼자서 닑는 때보다 이러케 집안이 모혀 안저서 한 사람이 자미 잇게 탐독을 하는 때 그 맛이 더 깁흔 것을 알엇다.
서늘하고 유익하고 집안에 평화가 도탑고.... 덕택으로 이 날 저녁 밥상이 더욱 자미 잇섯다.

E기자

20전이라니 술갑이나 되어야지 슬그머니 엽헤방(딴 사무소)에 드러가 안저서 한강에 나가자고 선동 연설을 한참 하닛가 더러 솔깃해 한다. 1인분 20전씩 발긔를 하닛가 적어도 한 사람 1원씩은 내야 한다고 반대가 니러나는 지라 허허 이래서는 내가 게획 틀려지닛가 안 되겟서서 금방 『푸로레타리아』를 내 흔들면서 20전 이상은 절대로 안 된다고 력설 력설하야 간신히 욱여서 20전씩 거두어 가지고 다섯 사람이 합 1원을 가지고 뎐차를 탓다. 왕복 뎐차비를 제하면 남는 것이 50전 이 50전을 잘 리용하야 할 것이다. 웃잿던지 뎐차에 오르면서 상등석을 맨 먼저 차지 하엿다. 뎐차에도 상등석이 잇느냐고! 맨 압 자리 운전대로 향한 유리창을 여러 놋코 한편 팔 걸쳐 노코 안는 자리 거긔가 상등석이니. 좌우엽흐로 땀 냄새 맛지 안코 바람 잘 쏘이고 오르내리는 사람에게 개개기 덜하고- 한 二三전 더 내라면 더 내고라도 그 자리에 안는 것이 리익이다. 진고개 어구에서 오르나리는 미인 구경에 지리한 것을 니저버리고 한강 종졈에서 나려서 한강 텰교를 건너니 바람도가(都家)에 온 폭이나 되야 바람에 불려서 둘맥이 자락이 찌저질 지경이다. 모자를 버서 들고 가슴을 펴고 기지개 켜듯 몸을 기리로 펴니, 이러케 싀원한 맛을 날마다 본다면 키가 커질 것 갓다. 다리 건너에서 소주 한 병 35전 짜리 갑싼 걸로 골라 사고 오이 3전에 열두 개 2전 더 주고 고초장 조곰과 소주 잔 잠깐 빌너 가지고 가가로 거러 살치목 바위 뒤에 가서 고의 하나만 남기고 발거숭이가 되야 강물에 발을 잠그고 안저서 한잔 또 한잔 아닌게 아니라 특별한 맛이 잇다. 물 속에 다시 긔여 들어 헤염도 하고 목욕도 하고 남녀 선유객 놀녀도 주고 장님 노름하는 배에 헤염처가서 물도 튕겨 주고 한 동안 놀고 나서 거두어 닙고 다리목으로 오니 시간이 닐곱시 10분전이다. 남는 돈 10전으로 네 개짜리 참외를 작은 것으로 다섯 개 달래서 한 개 씩 볏기고 다시 뎐차 상등석에 오르니 날마다 고만큼씩이면 운동도 조코 녀름도 모르고 지낼 것 갓다.

이외에 또 한 가지 F긔자에 것은 수박 산 것이나 집에 가서 어린 사람 다리고 가족뎍으로 『어린이』 잡지 읽은 것이나 모다 C긔자와 근사하여서 계재하지 안는다(編者) <87><84-87>