Magazine Title: 別件坤 第15號
Publication Date: 1928년 08월 01일 (August 1, 1928)
Article Title: 世界大誘惑 밤에 피는 꼿, 各國女子生活의 秘密 (The Great Temptation of the World: Flowers That Bloom at Night, Secrets of Women's Lives in Various Countries)
Author: 海港 金니콜나이, 柳不秋, 倫敦散人, 漫遊生, KH生 (Haehang Kim Nikolai, Yu Bulchu, London Sanin, Manyuseong, KH Saeng)
Article Type: 소식 (News)

The women of Russia enjoy life. They sing love songs, yearn for a world of passion, and idealize color, food, silk clothes, songs, and dance. Love is their delicacy and fine wine. They speak of love freely, without even a hint of pretense. Moreover, their breasts, lips, and eyes reveal the trembling and brilliance of a heart burning with love. When they express their love, it becomes a fiery passion, burning intensely; when cold, their love becomes as pale as the moon or as frigid as ice. They know the pain of love's failure, and at the same time, they know the love that will unfold anew. To them, only love, dance, song, wine, and food are absolute; they consider those who disrupt color and food as enemies of life.

They have lived a life of absolute freedom in the world of color. Thoroughly embracing extremes is a characteristic of Russian women. They do not doubt that contradiction and collision are also true realities of life. This is true not only of Russian women but also of Russian men. Hypocrisy, falsehood, contradiction, and collision are all equally indifferent.

In the past, Russia had two worlds of women's lives: those of the nobility and those of the commoners. The noblewomen freely toyed with men as they pleased, indulging in comfortable living, food, wine, fine clothing, jewels, flattering words, bathhouses, and lewdness. Catherine the Great was possessed by a demon that devoured men, toying with and loving dozens, even hundreds, of men. <164>

And the common women, chased by nobles, landowners, and monks, lived miserable lives, yet they embraced their burning hearts in the wilderness, villages, taverns, or basements, singing and dancing, shifting love from man to man, leading wandering lives here and there. Thus, the common Russian women, imbued with a wandering spirit, gained freedom through Lenin's political changes. They attained equality. However, even when looking back at their past lives, they were free and unrestrained. Awakened to the consciousness of being human by a great stimulus, they take joy and pride in self-discovery. Their impoverished love lives are not much different now than before. The only change is the end of the aristocratic lifestyle.

In Russia, dance halls are strictly forbidden because they are considered the most hideous remnants of bourgeois civilization, a miniature of aristocratic comfort, and a target of licentious living. Instead, freedom of love and marriage was granted. However, prostitutes still roam the streets, making a living through that trade. In large cities like Moscow and Leningrad, there are quite a few women with considerable education and respectable professions who engage in such base acts because they cannot forget the lavish lifestyle of the pre-revolutionary era and turn to prostitution to fund it. They have no concept of chastity; they only dream of beautiful clothes, wine, and unrestrained love.

Russian women enjoy life with extreme courage or thoroughly. They do not know if they will die tomorrow, so they indulge in present pleasures, eating, dancing, and singing today. There is a strange charm in their indifferent and unrestrained hearts.

Yet, they also have strong jealousy and calculating greed. In general, Russian women regard the satisfaction of sexual instincts as the highest ideal, living a life as carefree as a galloping horse in the sky.

According to a recent survey, embezzlement of public funds has increased significantly in Russia, with 58% of the crimes being attributed to spending on women and alcohol. This phenomenon is the reality of Russia, born from their inherent national character and traditional inertia. Russian women do not deceive themselves. They participate in political movements and stride freely in the real world, according to their God-given abilities. The increasing phenomenon of embezzlement to satisfy their desires and taste fleeting pleasures speaks volumes.

Liberated Russian women have discovered, however dimly, what they call themselves. Old mothers cling to the cross, while young daughters hang portraits of Lenin on the wall and write that religion is the opium of the people. This is their newfound faith. Yet, both are still Russian.

To this day, over 60% of Russians are uneducated, especially women. Their ideals and yearnings have nothing more pure and grand than sexual pleasure, and their love is simple, and their desires are uncomplicated; their lives are only about color and food. They have no concept of life other than enjoying it, which is undoubtedly the sin of the former imperial regime.

Entering a communal restroom in Russia, one finds that the women's restroom has no door and is always open. Yet, women enter and exit without hesitation. It is completely wild. This restroom well illustrates their habits of freedom, openness, and their views on sex.

Russia is a country of poetry, a country of love, a country of women, a country of passion, and a country of revolution. It is an eternal revolutionary nation. They enjoy open human life <165>, freezing into ice when congealed and bursting into flame when ignited. That is the Russian woman. People from all over the world have many aspirations for Russian women. In addition to admiring Russia's freedom, they also yearn for the freedom of Russian women; Russian women will surely captivate the world.

The Human Hell, The Beauty Den of China

Having traveled to various parts of China for four or five years, I have not had much contact or interaction with Chinese women, so I do not have enough material to introduce.

However, I will write down a few things I saw.

I have personally seen girls' schools in Fengtian (奉天), Beijing (北京), Shanghai (上海), Hangzhou (杭州), and Nanjing (南京) several times, but I do not know the details because I have not had close interactions with the female students. However, even from the outside, they appear lively yet composed. In terms of their energy, they seem to be the best among women in the world.

Sometimes, when watching Western young women in newsreels, they are excessively lively, but they do not have the composed attitude of Chinese female students.

Even though they are so lively, their warm and gentle expressions are so endearing that onlookers cannot help but find them lovely.

One cannot find the arrogant attitude of Korean female students even if one tries to look for it. This is probably the characteristic of Chinese female students that the world can boast about.

Generally, Chinese female students, once they reach middle school, have a fierce desire for knowledge and are so engrossed in studying that few awaken to their sexuality.

They are also human, so how could they not have love in their youthful hearts? However, there are fewer instances of being love-starved like young Korean men and women and indulging in sexuality, and there are fewer tragic incidents of failed romances.

The way Chinese female students date is very different from that of Korean female students. Korean female students can easily start a romance with just a meeting at a concert or lecture, followed by a letter. However, Chinese female students do not do that. To date a man, they carefully observe his character, personality, and other aspects for several years to ensure that he meets their ideals before starting a truly complete romance. Perhaps that is why new Chinese families have fewer troubles and more harmony.

Korean women, when they first meet a man, act as if they would die for him, but they quickly discard him like an old shoe if he does not meet their expectations. However, Chinese women, once they start loving a man, do not abandon him even if he makes a big mistake and continue to love him forever.

It is truly a sacrifice and a love of life. From this perspective, their love is continental, just like the race born on the continent.

Chinese female students, when evaluating Korean female students, say, "Korean female students' romances are like public restrooms." What that means is that when someone is urgently in need of a restroom while passing by, a public restroom is the most urgently needed thing, but after using it, they leave graffiti on the walls and run away without looking back, as if it is dirty. In the same way, Korean female students pretend to love very well when they are in need and desperate, but once they are no longer in need, they treat their partners like public restrooms and abandon them.

It is said that there are many professional delinquent female students in China. There are also groups of women who lure wealthy foreign students, gathering in one place in groups of dozens.

In Korea, the young people of OO Hall are always good at introducing female students. Among them, the executives of the OO Youth Association are especially skilled at it. However, in China, hawthorn candy sellers (山査) often act as female student touts (selling hawthorn candy on a stick).

Let's stop talking about female students and write about some stories of courtesans (花柳) and men and women in the pleasure quarters.

The first place I went to in China was Fengtian. Since many of our compatriots and a large number of Japanese lived there, I did not feel much of a foreign atmosphere. Not only me, but most people who come to Fengtian for the first time probably feel the same way. However, once you go to a Chinese brothel, you will truly get a taste of being in China.

When reading ancient Chinese novels, whenever I saw passages about the Green House (靑樓), I imagined that Chinese Green Houses were magnificent and that the courtesans had a special charm, and I eagerly wanted to see them. However, when I actually came, it was different from what I had imagined. Of course, it would be different from Korean Green Houses, but it was just ordinary.

In Korea, there is a distinction between entertainers (藝妓) and prostitutes (娼妓). In China, there are distinctions such as First Class (Special Class), 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th class. And all have the freedom to engage in prostitution. A First Class woman costs about ten yuan a night. Even a Third or Fourth Class woman is cheap, allowing you to enjoy a night for one yuan.

In Fengtian, there is a place called Yichunli (宜春里), which is a 4th class brothel. There are forty to fifty elaborately made-up beauties in each house. Entering the main gate, there are rooms lined up on the left and right. Each beauty occupies one room. Curtains are always drawn at the door, and the beauty's name is written above the door. And it also says "Triangle" (三角) or "Square" (四角) in small letters. Triangle means thirty cents in our language. In other words, it means thirty cents per hour.

Even among them, the ones with pretty faces cost forty cents. However, forty cents per hour is the highest in the 4th class. It costs one yuan per night. In Yichunli alone, there are thousands of prostitutes. (The currency standard is Fengtian currency. It has depreciated terribly now, but it is always more than half the value of Japanese currency.) <167>

From this, it can be seen that the brothel system has existed in China since ancient times, and it seems that Korea and Japan also imported it from China.

In China, the pleasure district is called Pingkangli (平康里). In Fengtian, there is Pingkangli in both the New City and the Old City.

Entering the alleys of Pingkangli, every house has a gold-lettered sign that says "Academy" (書舘). Anyone who visits for the first time might doubt that it is an academy because it says "Academy." However, a "Academy" is a courtesan house. This is what is called a First Class Green House. Pingkangli is similar to Yichunli in terms of the design of the houses, but it is larger and more luxurious. Comparing it to Korea, it is similar to the difference between a two-story house in Sinmachi (新町) and a thatched house in Namilmachi (並木町).

In a First Class Green House in Pingkangli, there are usually thirty to forty women in each house.

Entering a Academy, the guide leads the guests to any empty room at the time. No matter how many guests there are, they are all seated in one room, the curtains are drawn, and the guide stands next to the door and calls out the names of the courtesans in order. Like the scene of checking the names of the courtesans in Chunhyangga (春香歌), all the courtesans in the Academy are called out without leaving anyone out. When calling out the names, you must remember the names well and choose the beauty that suits your taste to have fun with. If you forget the name, it is a mess.

You call any courtesan you want, and when that beauty comes in, you drink tea, eat guajeol (瓜節, dried melon slices), crack watermelon seeds, and chat. This is what is called "kaepan." It costs one yuan and twenty cents in Fengtian currency to only "kaepan" with one courtesan for several hours. If you like her, you spend the night with her. This place is not hourly; it is per night. In Korea, they play the janggo (長鼓, Korean drum) when singing, but in China, they play the haegeum (嵆琴, Chinese fiddle). If you want to listen to singing at a Chinese courtesan house, you have to pay separately for the haegeum. There is a man who specializes in playing the haegeum. Chinese prostitutes have a different sense of integrity than Korean prostitutes. They never have relationships with the friends of the men they are involved with. If rumors spread among their peers, they cannot maintain their position and are kicked out. It is said that this is a tradition passed down from ancient times. It is said that high-ranking officials who come to the Academy often come to smoke opium. In Pingkangli under the jurisdiction of the Japanese Consulate, the Japanese authorities do not crack down on opium and tacitly allow it, so people come to Pingkangli in the New City to smoke opium.

Because they do not conduct health checks on the prostitutes, Japanese and Koreans are not allowed to go. If they are caught receiving Japanese guests, they are punished. However, many go secretly.

There are also prostitutes of this kind in Beijing and Shanghai, but the real courtesans are not like that. They are said to have integrity and knowledge. They are said to be even more proficient in Chinese literature. They are generally good at poetry, writing, calligraphy, and painting. If a man does not please them, they will not sell their chastity even for tens of thousands of gold.

It is said that they receive thousands of yuan in compensation for attending a banquet once. It is said that decent courtesans have considerable wealth and generously donate to revolutionary causes or women's causes without being stingy.

In Shanghai, there are beauties who forcibly kidnap passersby. Their faces are exquisitely beautiful, and they are fluent in any foreign language. They wear neat Western clothing, so you cannot tell at first glance whether they are Japanese, Korean, or Chinese. However, they are all Chinese women. They target men who are well-dressed and appear to have money in their pockets or wallets. If they see a Japanese person, they lure him in Japanese; if they see another foreigner, they greet him warmly in his language and drag him away by any means. It is said that no one can escape their terrible magic. They drag him to a basement and take all his money, as well as things like watches, glasses, and fountain pens, and then send him away. These beauties are said to be scattered in various places in Shanghai, numbering over a thousand. If they are taken and do not obey and resist, they may lose their lives. However, after taking all the money and goods, they always have relations with the women they have captured before sending them away. The women call this Shui Hu Zhi (水滸誌, Water Margin) style loyalty. Many of these women have graduated from vocational schools or higher.

If you unknowingly wander around in a quiet place in Shanghai for the first time, you often encounter these beauties and suffer misfortune. The hell of beauties, the den of beauties, when will it be swept away? <168>

One Secret of Paris, Which Is a Global Problem

As Paris is the flower of the world, a city like Seoul, it is natural that moral corruption and ethical flaws reflect the dark side of modern material civilization more seriously than elsewhere, as the Northern European poet Ibsen once painfully criticized. Under the argument that the progress of art and academics degrades the innocent conscience and simple virtue of humanity, the cry of "Return to nature!" was accidentally initiated by Rousseau, the founder of modern civilization criticism, who witnessed the moral decay of 18th-century French society in Paris.

Indeed! "Paris is a city of songs and a street of tears!" Like the alleys and folk songs of Paris, Paris is a cultural center of light and a pleasure paradise of darkness. The secrets of this pleasure paradise, Paris, are truly diverse. However, as a layman in the life of pleasure, I deeply regret not being able to accurately describe the truth of the secrets and appeal to your fair criticism. I will only tell you a strange fact recorded in one of the short stories in the collection "Contemporary History" (Histoire Contem Poraine) by Anatole France, a great writer who most realistically depicted and satirized modern French society.

It is the hidden house (隱家) incident of politicians, the wealthy, and literary artists, etc., who have considerable social reputation and status. This hidden house, in French, is called Garconniere, which usually refers to a small (apparteweut) place where an unmarried person or widower lives simply. This Garconniere is often hidden in the middle of the 1st and 2nd floors (Entresol) of a large store, so it is a place that is not well known except by the gatekeeper of the rental house. Therefore, it is the most suitable and convenient place for gatherings of those who shun public attention. France's sharp satirical pen vividly depicts the backstage drama of the family life of high French society that takes place in these countless hidden houses, pointing out the moral corruption of modern life.

To elaborate on the contents of the play, for example, during a certain cabinet, a certain foreign minister had a secret love affair with the president's beautiful wife and was caught during a regular meeting at the hidden house.

Of course, it is not so remarkable that ministers who run the affairs of a country stage such hidden house dramas because they fear public opinion and eyes, but the hidden house dramas of the wealthy, who cannot dare to divorce due to trivial economic reasons despite the public knowledge of domestic discord, are truly ridiculous and tragic. Under the iron rule of the monogamy system, which is strictly guaranteed by the traditional Christian faith and current laws, concubinage (蓄妾) and polygamy, which are ancient evils of the East, are not allowed. If they expel a wife who does not suit their taste as a means of divorce, they are afraid of the division of property and the provision of alimony that the law also strongly demands. <169> Therefore, the wealthy, like Harpagon (L'avare), the protagonist of Moliere, the Shakespeare of France, stages this socially deformed hidden house comedy!

However, this hidden house drama is often staged doubly by both husband and wife, and this nominal family life, full of falsehood and pretense, is truly something that makes a third observer laugh out loud.

Wise readers! This is only a very small part of the secrets of Paris. There must be many black curtains that are a great insult to humanity, making the faces of those who write and read turn red. Readers who have read the disclosure of the world's secrets will know that the day when this world reaches the hill of perfect light is still far away. We will strive to beautify, purify, and sanctify this world stained with sin through agitation and reflection.

Secret Women's Caves in England, Especially Tempting to Orientals

London Sanin

When Orientals go to England, it is difficult to know the beauty or ugliness of women because their clothes are different and their customs are different. There are many working women in England, and among working women, there is an occupation of selling charm to men, and there is an occupation of dancing and singing in places like bars. However, to some extent, the laws of England limit working women, and the law does not allow them except for certain things and imposes fines.

Since these rules are scary, parents' supervision of female students is strict, and female students do not even think about sex while studying. They have a sense of responsibility as women, so there are few problems with women in England. After the European War, there were many changes, and there were also changes in the women's world, and it is common for men and women to hug and lie down in places like parks. However, no one thinks anything of it at all. If we talk about women in this country as a whole, they are not like the women of Paris, France. However, since women have become open, there are also secrets hidden among women. Women's secrets are mostly among working women, but Orientals are the ones who do not know the secrets of women in that country. When Orientals go to England, it is difficult to know which woman is doing such a job because their clothes are different and their customs are different. So, among those women, there are secrets that only deceive Orientals, and if Orientals go to London to study, they will be deceived by these women.

As a result, they are robbed of all their possessions and end up working as busboys in large restaurants.

Those English women are the most charming to Orientals and try to seduce them the most. People who go there for the first time without knowing that they are being pulled into such a den think that those women are giving them all their love and start associating with them. Since countries are different and races are different, but love has no borders and no country, how can the hot passion of young men and women not cool down? However, this love does not always last. That is because the love of those young men and women is not true love from the beginning. There is a black hand behind them, and it is true that there is a limit to how far love will go when it is controlled by the black hand. In the end, the curtain of such a drama closes with the man turning his steps to the East, shedding tears, and the woman standing in the West, laughing ha ha ha and kicking him away.

Among them, there are few English people, and more than half are Jewish. A few years ago, a young man from Japan went to London to study and had such a bad experience. The content was even stranger. He started exchanging love with a woman and always went to her house, whether it was her house or someone else's. One day, he followed the woman to a certain house again. As he was taking off his suit and playing, a black hand came out without him knowing and took his suit away. After searching for a while, he finally realized what was going on and ran outside to borrow a policeman's coat and escape to his hotel.

Secrets of Tibetan Beauties, a Secret Country

Manyuseong

Tibet is a plateau located between India and China. Because transportation is inconvenient, it has very little contact with foreign countries, so the circumstances of that country are still a secret country that people in the world do not know in detail.

Because the women of that country do not know the so-called modern women's makeup methods, it is no exaggeration to say that there is no artificial decorative beauty at all. However, in terms of natural physical beauty, both men and women have excellent physiques, so anyone who sees them cannot help but count them as beauties. According to a book called Tibetan Rhetoric, Tibetan women with bluish faces are said to be beauties, but in reality, the so-called bluish beauties can only be seen in the northern region called "Amdo" - that is, near Qinghai Province in China - and in general, the beauties of Tibet are said to be the beauties of the Eastern region, called "Kamu," and the beauties of the Central region. The beauties of the Eastern region have fair skin and high, pretty noses, and are no different from Western beauties. However, it is a pity that they do not seem to have much charm. The beauties of the Central region do not have very fair skin and are somewhat yellowish, but their eyes are full of charm, and it seems that a single smile could bewitch all the men in the world. These two types of beauties are completely distinct, but they generally use a unique Tibetan cosmetic called "do-cha." This "do-cha" is a reddish-black powder made by boiling the bark of the "cha-ran" tree, which grows in the Himalayan mountains, like taffy. At first, the makeup looks somewhat ugly with reddish-black spots, but as you gradually get closer, you can discover a subtle beauty in the darkness. And Tibetan women generally have smooth and soft skin. That is because they apply butter to their bodies from a young age. In Korea, when a baby is born, it is usually washed in warm water, but in Tibet, from the time they are born, they wash their bodies with butter, and even after they grow up, they wash their bodies with butter in the same way, so their bodies are always soft.

In short, the characteristics of Tibetan beauties are their good physique and smooth skin rather than clothing and makeup.

The Secret Lives of German Women, Where Even the Children Born by One's Wife Cannot Be Trusted

KH Saeng

The poet Goethe wrote in his book "The Apprentice" that "even the young children born by one's own wife cannot be trusted."

Promiscuous women, regardless of whether they have a husband or not, cannot stand not enjoying themselves as much as they want.

Goethe's words are by no means ambiguous words that insult his own people in present-day Germany. Of course, there are exceptions. But exceptions are always referring to a small number of special cases.

A woman who has become a man's wife cannot swing her hips as she pleases, no matter how promiscuous she becomes, as long as she has a husband. <172> From there, they create a seemingly decent "hausfreund" (Hausfreund). "Hausfreund" literally translates to "friend of the house" in our language.

The husband goes to his office early in the morning to work. So once the husband leaves, he does not return within a certain fixed time. The maid (女子下人) also senses the mistress's mood and deliberately leaves the house and goes out to play somewhere. Then the play begins. The woman cleans the house. But it is not for the husband who will return in the evening.

When all the preparations are finished, she makes a phone call. Then, not long after the phone call, a seemingly decent "Hausfreund" arrives at this house.

So the two of them drink tea, smoke cigarettes, and drink alcohol, and in this way, the joyful play of these two men and women unfolds for a while.

Seeing the time, when the curtain closes, the woman gives the "Hausfreund" his hat and cane and pretends to chase him out of the house, and sends him back.

A little while later, the maid returns. Dinner is prepared. The husband returns. And so, dinner begins in this seemingly infinitely harmonious home. When dinner is over, the woman plays the piano. The song "Sweet Home," "Sweet Home" ... The family is generally peaceful, but in reality, there are quite a few families that are impure like this.

In German, a man's close friend is called "freund" and a woman's close friend is called "freundin." However, you must be careful not to misunderstand this word, as it varies depending on the usage.

The words "Freund" or "Freundin" mean an extremely close relationship, but when a man calls his friend (同志) "Freund," it means that they are more intimate than brothers, but if it is a relationship between a man and a woman, it means affection or a closeness close to it.

Therefore, in the ordinary sense, the word "comrade" is not called "Freund" or "Freundin," but the word "Bekannte" is used.

This is to provide preliminary knowledge for the following conversation.

A young student is walking with a young woman, and a friend of the young student discovers them and whispers in the young student's ear, "Hey, is the woman you're walking with a 'Freundin' or a 'Bekannte'!" If he asks, "Oh, this woman? This woman is a future 'Freundin.' She's definitely promising."

It is common for German male and female students to say such things.

If this kind of immoral (不良性) student makes up about two-thirds of the entire student body, it is not such a big deal.

The concept of chastity for German men and women can be summed up in one phrase: "If you wash, it's clean." This is their strong belief. Whether they move from man A to man B, or from woman A to woman B, if they wash their bodies clean, they are definitely not dirty.

The saying that "a person who truly loves a man or a woman must stay by that one person and protect them" is an old-fashioned morality for them.

It is only valid if the condition of "during the time that one truly loves that one person" or "as long as they are together" is attached.

The saying "a loyal woman does not serve two husbands" in order to keep faith with her dead husband <173> will probably be an exception once in ten thousand years for them.

You cannot even find the word chastity in textbooks on ethics or other subjects. Instead, there are many words like "loyalty." It means that they have completely fulfilled their duty. There is no contradiction in moving on to another man or another woman after fulfilling one's duty.

In Germany, there is a special phenomenon in modern life: the number of old maids is gradually increasing. There are also more men who advocate and prefer singleness. This is partly due to the difficulties of life, but the greatest cause is the freedom of sexual life between men and women. They experience the pleasures of sexual life under the seemingly decent name of "Freund." In places like Japan, you can live together even if you are only engaged, but in Germany, cohabitation with a "Freund" who is only engaged is strictly prohibited, so they only create opportunities to meet each other from time to time.

In principle, it is customary for the man to pay for the meal if a man and woman go out together, but if they are understanding enough with each other, and if their incomes are almost the same, the man and woman will divide the bill equally and continue to enjoy their luxurious life that much longer.

And German men and women generally start to open their eyes in this direction when they are only fourteen or fifteen years old, and with the exception of those who truly love each other and will eventually get married, both men and women usually have one man or one woman attached to them.

This point is particularly free if it is free, and immoral if it is immoral.

However, one interesting thing is that if they get married after living such a life, there are many cases where a third party who knows their usual behavior in detail points out the inappropriate reasons for their marriage and raises objections. Therefore, men and women who are about to enter married life try to be much more reliable in everything than at other times.

Of course, this is by no means speaking on the basis of the whole.

Whether the husband has been dead for a long time or not, widows are eager to find a partner as soon as the ghost of their husband disappears from their eyes. These women are usually wealthy and can choose their partners as they please because they trust in money. But if they are poor women with no money, they go out to cafes and look for a potential lover who seems to have money in a semi-prostitution manner.

If not, there are not a few who maintain their lives by playing the role of "Hausfreund" to their female friend's husband.

Saying this, it may seem as if German women are all living licentious and dissolute lives from beginning to end, but that is definitely not the case.

They generally have more common sense than women in any other country and have a good habit of judging and managing their own affairs themselves.

In addition to the women who openly lead impure lives, most of them are very cautious about their actions and make a great deal of effort to maintain social appearances.

Therefore, they are also loyal to their "Freund" and have a sincere relationship with them through kindness and obedience.

Even if men and women dislike each other and have to break up, they never break up unreasonably. They express the reasons why they have to break up most honestly and clearly, and break up in a good way after reaching a mutual understanding.

Germany is the most underdeveloped country in Europe, so there are still many immature aspects to its culture, and since women are still forced to be loyal by being oppressed by men, they are ideal as someone's wife or as the head of a household.

Even women who have a "Hausfreund" do not show signs of weariness in their household finances or do extravagant things, which shows the solidity of German women. <174><164-174>

**Named Entities**

奉天	Pongch'ŏn
北京	Peking
上海	Sanghae
杭州	Hangchou
南京	Nanjing
宜春里	Ŭich'un-ni
新町	Sinmach'i
並木町	Pyŏngmokch'i
平康里	P'yŏnggang-ni
水滸誌	Suhoji
Catherine the Great	K'at'arina Yŏwang
레닌	Lenin
께-테	Kkete



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제15호
발행일	1928년 08월 01일
기사제목	世界大誘惑 밤에 피는 꼿, 各國女子生活의 秘密
기사형태	소식

世界大誘惑 밤에 피는 꼿, 各國女子生活의 秘密
自由로운 情熱의 女子, 러시아의 女子 生活 內面

海港 金니콜나이

러시아의 여자는 인생을 亨樂한다. 그들은 戀歌를 노래하고 情熱이 세계를 憧憬하며 色 食 비단옷 노래 무용을 理想할 뿐이다. 연애는 그들의 美食이며 美酒이다. 그들은 一毫도 수집어하는 빗이 업시 태연이 연애를 말한다. 뿐만 안이라 그들의 가삼과 입술과 눈에는 戰慄과 光輝가 사랑의 타는 맘으로 나타나 보인다. 發하면 灼熱한 情火가 되여 불가티 타고 冷하면 蒼白한 달이나 어름가티 쌀쌀해 지는 것이 그들의 사랑이다. 그들은 연애의 破綻의 고통을 아는 동시에 곳 니어서 전개될 사랑을 알고 잇다. 그들에게는 연애 무용 노래 술 食만이 절대적이고 色과 食을 문란케 하는 者를 인생의 적이라 한다.
그들은 色의 세계에서 절대 자유의 생활을 하여왓다. 極端으로 極端에 徹底하는 것은 러시아 여자의 특성이다. 그들에게 잇서서 모순과 撞着도 역시 인생의 참된 一現實임을 의심치 안는다. 이것은 러시아의 여자뿐 안이라 남자도 그와 갓다. 위선이나 허위나 모순 당착도 一切 無差別이다.
과거 러시아에는 귀족과 평민이 두 세계의 여성 생활이 잇섯다. 귀족의 부인들은 忌憚업시 남자를 맘대로 농락하며 안락과 酒食과 衣裳寶玉 阿謏巧言 목욕탕 음란의 생활을 하엿다. 카다리나 女王은 남자를 보면<164> 잡아먹는 마귀가 부텃든지 數十數百의 남자를 농락하며 사랑하엿다.
그리고 평민의 여성들은 귀족과 地主와 승려에게 쫏겨서 참담한 생활을 하면서도 광야와 촌락의 酒場이나 工場 또는 지하실에서 끌는 가삼을 끄러안고 노래도 하며 춤도 추며 남자에게서 남자에게로 사랑을 옴겨가며 이리저리 방랑 생활을 하얏다. 그리하야 방랑의 혼을 품은 러시아의 평민 여자들은 레닌의 정치 변동으로 말미암아 자유를 엇게 되엿다. 평등을 갓게 되엿다. 그러나 그들도 오히려 과거 생활을 도라보면 자유 분방 하엿섯다. OO이란 크다란 刺戟으로 말미암아 인간이라는 의식을 깨닷게 된 그들은 자기 발견을 깃븜과 자랑으로 삼는다. 그들의 가난한 연애 생활은 이전이나 오늘에나 大差가 업다. 다만 변한 것은 귀족 생활의 終焉일 뿐이다.
러시아에서는 舞踊場은 뿔조아 문명의 가장 추악한 유물이다. 귀족의 안락 생활의 縮圖이다. 음탕 생활의 對象이다 하는 이유로 엄금하엿다. 그 대신 연애와 결혼의 자유를 주엇다. 그러나 街頭에는 오히려 賣淫婦가 헤매이며 그것으로 稼業을 삼아 생활하는 여자가 아직도 만타. 모스크바나 레닌그라드 가튼 大都會에는 상당한 교양과 훌륭한 正業이 잇는 여자로서 이런 비천한 즛을 하는 여자가 不少하니 그것은 과거 제정 시대에 中流 이상의 華奢한 생활을 못니저 그 자금을 어드량으로 賣淫을 하는 것이다. 그들에게는 貞操 관념 가튼 것은 업고 다만 아름다운 의복과 술과 분방한 연애를 꿈꿀 따름이다.
러시아의 여자는 극한 용감으로 또는 徹底的으로 인생을 亨樂한다. 내일 죽어도 모른다. 오늘만 먹고 춤추고 노래하자는 현재 쾌락을 亨樂하는 무관심하고 분방한 맘속에 이상한 묘미가 잇다.
그러면서도 질투심과 利慾의 打算은 강하다. 통트러 말하자면 러시아의 여자는 성적 본능의 만족을 至高最上의 理想으로 하고 虛心坦懷로 奔馬가 공중으로 가는 것 가튼 생활을 하고 잇다.
얼마 전 조사에 의하면 러시아에서는 公金私消罪가 非常히 늘엇는대 그 범죄의 五割八分이 여자와 술에 소비한 것이라고 한다. 이 현상은 그들의 타고난 국민성과 전통적 惰氣가 나은 러시아의 現實相이다. 러시아의 여자는 자기를 속히지 안이한다. 그들은 정치 운동에 참가하야 어든 자유의 道를 자기 天賦의 性能에 따라 현실 세계에 활보하고 잇다. 情慾을 만족식히며 瞬間의 亨樂을 맛보기 위하야 公金私消의 범죄가 증가하는 현상은 모든 것을 말해 준다.
해방이 된 러시아의 여자는 희미하나마 자기라고 하는 것을 발견하얏다. 年老한 母親은 십자가를 끈코 잇고 젊은 딸은 레닌의 초상을 벽에 걸고 종교는 국민의 아편이라고 써 부첫다. 이것이 새로 눈뜬 그들의 新信仰인 것이다. 그러나 이 두 사람은 다 가튼 러시아인이다.
오늘까지의 러시아인의 六割强은 모다 무식하다. 특히 여자의 수가 더 만타. 그들의 이상과 憧憬은 性的 亨樂 이상의 至純最大한 것이 업고 그들의 연애는 순박하며 욕망은 단순하야 그들의 인생은 色과 食뿐의 인생이다. 인생을 亨樂하는 것 밧게 그들은 인생에 대하야 아모런 오소리치-도 가지지 못하얏스니 그는 물론 과거 帝政의 罪業이다.
러시아의 공동 변소에 드러가 보면 여자 변소가 잇는데 문이 업시 언제나 열린 채로 잇다. 그래도 여자는 태연이 출입한다. 아조 野性氣分이다. 이 변소가 자유 개방의 습관과 性의 대한 그들의 관념을 잘 말한다.
러시아는 詩의 나라며 연애의 나라며 여자의 나라 정열의 나라 혁명의 나라다. 영원의 革命國이다. 개방한 人情生活을 亨樂하며<165> 凝結하면 氷이 되고 發하면 火가 되는 것이 러시아의 여자다. 세계 各國人이 러시아 여자에 대한 동경도 만흔 것이다. 러시아의 자유를 찬미하는 외에 러시아 여자의 자유를 동경하는 마음도 업지 안이하니 러시아의 여자는 세계를 惱殺케 하고야 말 것이다.

人間大地獄 中國의 美人魔窟

柳不秋

내가 중국에는 四五年 동안이나 여러 지방으로 다녀 보왓스나 중국 여자와는 별로 접촉과 교제가 업섯슴으로 소개할 만한 재료가 넉넉지 못하다.
그러나 본대로 멧 가지 적으려 한다.
奉天, 北京, 上海, 杭州, 南京 등지의 여학교도 몃번식은 친히 보앗스나 여학생들과 직접 친밀한 교제가 업섯슴으로 자세한 내막은 알 수가 업지만은 그러나 외관으로만 보더래도 활발하면서도 침착하다. 그 활기 잇는 편으로 보아서는 세계 여성에 제일 될 것 갓다.
혹 활동사진에 보이는 서양의 젊은 여성들을 보면 활발하기는 매우 정도에 넘치지만 중국의 여학생들 가티 沈着한 태도는 볼 수가 업다.
그러케 활발하여도 여자다운 溫靜한 표정은 보는 사람이 못 견듸리 만큼 귀엽고 어엽버 보인다.
조선의 여학생들 가티 건방스러운 태도는 차저 보려고 애를 써도 볼 수가 업다. 세계의 자랑할 만한 중국 여학생의 특색일 것이다.
대개 중국 여학생들은 중등학교 정도만 되면 知識慾이 猛烈하야 공부하기에 넘어 着味하야 性의 눈뜨는 사람이 드물다.
그들도 亦 사람인데야 더군다나 청춘의 가슴속에 사랑이 업쓰랴 만은 조선의 청년 남녀와 가치 愛의 飢渴이 되어 性의 방종하는 무리가 적고도 또 연애에 실패하는 비참한 사건이 드물다.
중국 여학생의 연애하는 방식은 조선 여학생과는 아조 다르다. 조선의 여학생들은 음악회나 강연회에서 한번 맛나기만 하면 편지<166> 한 장이면 어렵지 안케 연애가 되지만은 중국 여학생은 그럿치 안타. 적어도 한 남성과 연애를 하려면 몃 해를 두고 그 남성의 性行 品格 등 여러 가지를 차근차근하게 보아서 자긔 理想에 부합이 되어야 아조 완전한 연애를 시작한다. 그런 까닭인지 중국 여자의 新가정에는 풍파가 업고 團樂이 만타 한다.
조선의 여자들은 남성과 처음 맛나섯슬 적에는 죽을 뚱 살 둥하다가도 조끔만 제 비위에 틀니면 헌신짝 버서 버리듯이 내버리기를 잘한다. 그러나 중국 여자들은 한 남성과 사랑하기만 시작하면 아모리 그 남자가 큰 過失이 잇더래도 버리지를 안이하고 영원히 사랑을 계속한다.
實노 희생이오 생명의 사랑이다. 일노부터 보면 대륙에 태여난 인종인 만큼 그 사랑도 대륙적이다.
중국 여학생이 조선 여학생을 평하며 曰 『조선 여학생의 연애는 공동 변소』라고 한다. 그게 무슨 의미냐 하면 누구나 거리를 지나다가 대변이 급할 때에는 공동 변소 가티 緊한 것이 업스나 대변을 다 보고 나면 변소 벽에 낙서하기와 나와서는 더럽다고 뒤도 안 도라보고 다러나는 그 格으로 조선 여학생들은 제가 아숩고 궁할 때는 제법 사랑을 곳 잘하는 체하다가 조금 解窮이 되면 공동 변소 가티 박대하여 버린단 말이다.
중국에도 직업적 불량 여학생들이 만히 잇다 한다. 돈 만흔 지방 유학생을 유인하는 여자들이 단체를 모여서 한곳에 수십명식 집합하여 잇는 곳도 잇다 한다.
조선에서는 恒茶飯 여학생 소개 잘하기는 OO堂의 젊은이들이다. 그 중에도 OO청년회 간부들이 솜씨 잇게 잘들하지만은 중국의 여학생 뚜장이는 山査 깡장사가 만히 한다. (아가위를 사탕에 지어서 댓가지에 꼬여서 팔너 다니는 장사)
여학생 이약이는 고만 두고 花柳 男女子 이약이나 몃 가지 적어 보려 한다.
내가 처음으로 중국에 가본 지방이 奉天이다. 우리 동포가 만히 살고 일본인이 多大數 거주하고 잇는 곳이라 그런지 별로 異國의 情操를 늣기지 못하얏다. 나뿐만 안이라 누구나 처음으로 奉天에 오는 이는 대개 그럴 것 갓다. 그러나 한번 중국 遊廓을 가보면 과연 중국에 온 것 가튼 맛을 보게 된다.
혹 중국의 고대 소설을 읽을 제 靑樓 이약이가 잇는 구절을 볼 때는 생각에 중국 靑樓는 굉장하고 妓女들도 별다른 風이 잇스리라고 하여 한번 보앗스면 하는 욕망이 간절하얏섯다. 그러나 실지로 와서 보니 상상하든 것과는 다르다. 물론 조선의 靑樓보다는 다르겟지만 그저 평범할 뿐이다.
조선에는 藝妓와 娼妓의 구별이 잇슬 뿐이다. 중국에는 頭等(特等) 1, 2, 3, 4등의 구별이 잇다. 그리고 모다 賣淫의 자유가 잇다. 頭等은 一夜十圓 쯤이면 넉넉하다. 乃至 三四등은 一圓이면 一夜行樂을 잘할 수 잇게 저렴하다.
奉天에도 宜春里란 곳이 잇스니 그곳이 4등 靑樓이다. 한집에 四五十명식 化粧盛飾한 미인들이 잇다. 정문을 드러서면 좌우로 방이 졸우록 이여서 잇다. 방 한 間에 미인 하나식 차지하고 잇다. 방문에는 항상 꺼튼을 처두고 문 우에는 미인의 芳名이 써 잇다. 그리고 또 조그만케 三角 혹 四角이라고 써 잇다. 三角이란 것은 우리말노 하자면 三十錢이란 말이다. 다시 말하면 한 시간에 三十錢이란 말이다.
조금 그 중에도 얼골이 고으면 四十錢이다. 그러나 4등에는 一時間 四十錢이 최고이다. 一夜에는 一圓이다. 宜春里만 하여도 수천 명의 창녀가 잇다. (돈의 표준은 奉天票이다. 지금은 말 못되게 폭락 되엿지만 늘 日本貨의 半 이상 저하된다.) <167>
일로 보면 遊廓 제도가 고대부터 중국에 잇섯든 것이나 조선이나 일본도 중국에서 수입된 것 갓다.
중국에서는 花柳村을 平康里라고 한다. 奉天에도 平康里가 新市街에도 잇고 舊市街에도 잇다.
平康里 골목을 드러스면 집집마다 무슨 『書舘』이란 金字 간판이 부터 잇다. 누구나 처음 지내는 사람은 書舘이라고 하엿스니까 『글방』인가 하고 의심하기들을 만히 한다. 그러나 기생집을 書舘이라고 한다. 여기가 소위 頭等靑樓란 데다. 平康里란 데도 宜春里와 집 지은 제도는 彷彿하나 더 크고 화려하다. 조선으로 비하면 新町 2층집과 並木町 초가집 비슷한 차이가 잇다.
平康里 頭等靑樓에도 한집에 三四十명식은 모다 잇다.
書舘에 드러스면 안내자가 아모 방이나 그때 비여 잇는 방으로 안내를 한다. 일행의 客이 몃치든지 다 한방으로 듸려 안치고 귀틀을 거더 부치고 문 엽헤 서서 기녀를 차례 차례로 이름을 부른다. 춘향가의 妓生點考하는 격으로 그 書舘에 잇는 기녀를 한아 남기지 안코 모조리 點名을 한다. 點名을 할 때에 꼭 이름을 잘 기억하야 두엇다가 마음에 合한 미인을 불너서 데리고 유흥을 한다. 만일 이름을 이젓다가는 랑패이다.
아모 기녀를 부르라 하여 그 미인이 드러오면 차 마시고 『과절』수박씨 까먹고 이약이 하고 논다. 이것을 소위 『캐판』이라고 한다. 기녀 一人에 몃 시간이던지 캐판만 하는데는 奉票一圓二十錢이다. 혹 마음에 들면 가티 그 밤을 지낸다. 이곳은 시간은 안이요 一夜이다. 조선서는 소리하는데 長鼓를 치지만 중국서는 해금(嵆琴)을 한다. 중국 기생집에 가서 소리를 듯자면 해금갑슬 따로 내여야 한다. 전문으로 영업하는 남자가 잇다. 중국 창녀들은 조선의 창녀들과 다른 지조가 잇다. 자기와 관계한 남자의 친구와는 결코 관계를 안이한다. 만일 同類간에 소문만 나도 처신을 못하고 내쪼긴다 한다. 이것이 고대로부터 전래하는 遺風이라 한다. 만히 書舘에 오는 客은 아편 먹으로 오는 高官들이라 한다. 일본 領事館 管下에 잇는 平康里에는 일본 官憲이 아편 取締를 안이하고 黙許함으로 아편 먹으로면 반드시 新市街 平康里로 온다.
妓女의 健康檢査를 안이함으로 일본인이나 조선인은 가지 못하게 한다. 만일 日人 손님을 밧엇다가 들키면 처벌을 당한다. 그러나 몰내는 만히 간다.
北京이나 上海에도 이런 종류의 기생들도 잇지만은 정말 기생은 안이 그럿타. 지조가 잇고 지식이 잇다 한다. 漢文의 수양이 더욱 풍부하다 한다. 詩文書畵를 대개는 다 잘한다 한다. 만일 제 마음에 업는 남자는 몃 萬金을 주어도 정조를 팔지 안이한다.
한번 어느 宴席에를 나가면 몃 千圓의 報酬를 밧는다고 한다. 웬만한 기생은 재산도 상당하며 혁명 사업이나 여자 사업에 만흔 기부를 앳기지 안코 한다고 한다.
上海에는 행인을 강제로 잡어가는 미인이 잇다. 얼골은 絶妙한 미인이오 외국어는 어느 나라말이던지 다- 충분이 通話한다. 말숙한 洋裝을 하야 일본 여자인지 조선 여자인지 중국 여자인 줄을 처음 보고는 모른다. 그러나 다- 중국 여자이다. 양복이라도 제법 차리고 보기에 돈푼이나 주머니에 드러잇슬 만한 남자를 잡어간다. 처음 보와서 日本人이면 日本語로 유혹을 하고 다른 외국 사람이면 그 나라말노 다정하게 인사를 하고 무슨 수단으로던지 끌고 간다. 그 무서운 魔手에 안이 떠러지는 사람은 업다고 한다. 끌고 가서는 지하실 속에 가두고 가진 돈은 물론이요 시계 안경 만년필 가튼 것까지라도 뺏고 보낸다. 이런 미인들이 上海에도 천여 명 이상이 各處에 산재하여 잇다 한다. 잡혀가서 만일 순종치 안코 不應을 하면 잘못하다가는 생명까지도 뺏기고 마는 위험한 곳이다. 그런데 금전이나 물품을 뺏기는 다- 빼서도 반다시 잡어온 여자와 관계는 식혀 보낸다. 저의 따는 이것을 水滸誌式 의리라고 한다. 그 여자들은 전문학교 이상 정도의 인물들이 만타.
멋모르고 처음 上海 호젓한 데를 다니다가는 흔이 이런 미인들을 맛나 봉변하는 수가 만타. 미인의 地獄 미인의 魔窟 언제 掃蕩될지 모를 것이다. <168>

世界的으로 問題되는 巴里의 一秘密

巴里가튼 세계의 꼿 서울인 만콤 자연 風紀上 문란과 도덕적 결함이 현대 물질적 문명의 暗黑面을 다른데 보다 더욱 심각하게 반영한다 함은 北歐의 시인 「입센」이 일즉 痛評한 것이다. 예술과 학술의 진보가 인류의 천진한 양심과 순박한 덕성을 惡化野卑케 한다는 論斷下에서 「자연에 도라가라!」는 絶呌가 18세기의 불란서 사회의 도덕적 타락을 파리에서 目睹한 근세 문명 비평의 開祖 「루-소」의 입으로부터 창시되얏슴이 우연한 것이 안인가 한다.
과연! 「파리는 노래의 市요 눈물의 거리라!」는 파리의 巷曲과 가티 파리는 광명의 문화원인 동시 암흑의 亨樂鄕이다. 이 亨樂鄕인 파리의 비밀이야말노 참 多種多樣인 것이다. 그러나 亨樂생활엔 문외한인 필자는 비밀의 진상을 정확히 서술하야 독자 여러분의 公明한 비판에 訴치 못함을 매우 유감으로 녁이는 바이다. 다못 현대 불란서의 사회상을 가장 여실히 묘사 풍자한 大文豪 「프랑스 (A. France)의 著 『現代歷史』(Histoire Contem Poraine)라는 소설집 중 一篇에 기재된 一怪 사실을 이약이 하여 드리려 한다.
政客, 富豪 내지 문예가 등 상당한 사회적 명망과 지위를 가진 자들의 隱家事件이다. 이 隱家란 것은 佛語로 Garconniere란 것인데 보통 미혼자인 호라비가 간단한 살님을 하는 狹少한 (apparteweut) 를 지칭하는 것이다. 이 Garconniere는 흔히 큰 貨家의 第1階와 第2階의 中同 (Entresol)에 숨어잇는 지라 貸家의 門직이 외에는 잘 알지 못하는 곳이다. 그럼으로 사람의 눈을 꺼리는 무리들의 회합에 가장 적당하고 便宜한 곳이다. 『프랑스』의 예리한 諷筆은 이 무수한 隱家 속에서 진행되는 불란서 고급 사회의 가정 생활의 裏面 연극을 實寫하야 현대 생활의 도덕적 부패를 지적하얏다.
연극 내용을 詳言하건대 가령 엇더한 內閣 당시 모 외무대신이 대통령의 美夫人과 情的 비밀 관계가 잇서 저 隱家에서 정기 회합을 하다가 들켯다는 예이다.
물론 一國政事를 요리하는 大臣輩가 衆論과 公眼이 두려워서 이러한 隱家劇을 연출하게 되는 것이야말노 그다지 기특한 것이라 할 수 업겟스나 가정의 불화를 세상이 公知함에도 불구하고 區區한 경제적 관계로 이혼을 감행치 못하는 富豪輩의 隱家劇은 참 可笑可慘한 것이라 할 것이다. 기독교의 전통적 신앙과 현행 법률이 엄중히 보장하는 一夫一婦制의 철칙 하에서 동양 古來의 악습인 蓄妾과 多妻는 할 수 업는 바이오. 이혼의 수단으로써 뜻 맛지 안는 안해를 放逐한다면 법률이 또한 强請하는 재산의 분리와 위자료의 提拱이 두려운 지라<169> 불란서의 『쉑스피어』인<169> 『몰늬에르』(Moliere)의 戱曲 『貧慾者』(L'avare)의 주인공 Harpagon 流의 貧富輩가 이 사회적 畸形現象인 隱家喜劇을 연출하게 되는 것이다!
그런데 이 隱家劇은 흔히 부부 쌍방에서 이중적으로 연출되나니 허위와 가식이 찬 이러한 名義만의 가정 생활이야말로 제3 視察者로 하야곰 抱腹絶倒케 하는 것이라 할 것이다.
현명한 독자여! 이것은 파리 비밀의 極微小的 부분이외다. 쓰는 내나 닑는 당신네가 닑고 쓰기에 얼골이 확근거릴만한 인류의 一大侮辱이라 할 만한 黑幕이 만이 잇스리라. 아즉 이 세계는 원만한 광명의 언덕에 이를 날이 먼 것을 세계의 비밀 공개를 닑은 독자는 잘 아시리라. 奮激과 반성으로써 罪惡에 싸인 이 천지를 美化, 淨化, 聖化하기에 우리는 노력할 것이외다.

特히 東洋人을 誘惑 식히는 英國의 秘密女子窟

倫敦散人

우리 동양 사람이 영국에를 가면 의복이 다르고 풍속이 다르니 만콤 엇더한 여자를 보든지 여자에 美醜를 알기가 어렵습니다. 영국에는 직업 부인이 만코 직업 부인 중에는 남자에게 애교를 파는 직업이 잇고 술집 갓흔 곳에서 춤과 노래를 하는 직업이 잇슴니다. 그러나 영국 그 나라 법률에 직업 부인도 어느 정도까지 제한이 잇서서 이- 정한 외에는 법률이 용서를 하지 안코 벌금이란 것을 밧게 됨니다.
이럭케 규칙이 무서우니 만콤 그 중에 여학생에게도 부모의 감독이 심하고 여학생도 배우는 중엔 性에 관한 생각은 하지도 안케 됨니다. 여자가 된 책임상 관념이 잇써서 그 영국에선 여자에 대한 문제가 적슴니다. 구주 전쟁이 잇슨 후 여러 가지가 변동잇스니 만콤 女子界에도 변동이 생겨 혹 공원 가튼 곳에도 남자 여자가 서로 끼고 누어 잇는 일이 만슴니다. 그러나 그것을 조곰도 보는 사람은 엇더케도 생각을 하지 안슴니다. 이 나라는 전체로 여자의 이약이를 한다면 불란서의 파리 여자- 그런 여자엔 대할 것은 안님니다. 그러나 여자가 개방이 된이 만콤 그 속에도 여자에 비밀이 숨어 잇슴니다. 여자의 비밀은 대개 직업 부인 중에 만히 잇는대 그 나라 여자에 비밀을 아지 못하는 사람은 동양인임니다. 우리 동양 사람이 영국에를 가면 의복이 다르고 풍속이 다르니 만콤 엇더한 여자가 <170>그러한 직업을 하는 여자인지 알기가 어렵슴니다. 그래 그 여자 중에도 동양인을 상대로만 속이는 비밀이 잇는대 동양인이 런던으로 유학을 간다면 이런 여자에게 속게 됨니다.
그리하야 전 재산을 다 빽기고 나종엔 도리여 큰 요리점 가튼 곳에서 뽀이 노릇도 하는 일이 잇슴니다.
영국의 그런 여자들은 동양인에게 제일 애교를 만히 부리고 제일 만히 덤비여 보랴고 함니다. 이런 마굴에서 끄는 것을 모르고 츠음으로 가는 사람은 그 여자들이 자기에게 사랑이 잇는데까지 다 쏘다 주는 줄만 알고 그 여자하고 교제를 하게 됨니다. 이러케 나라는 다르고 인종이 다르다 하드라도 사랑에는 국경이 업고 나라가 업다는 것을 아는 이상 엇지 청춘 남녀의 뜨거운 열이 시글 리가 잇겟슴니까. 그러나 이 사랑이 늘 게속이 되느냐 하면 절대로 그럿치 안슴니다. 그것은 본래부터 그 청춘 남녀들의 사랑이 진실한 사랑이 안인 까닭임니다. 등뒤에서 거문 손이 잇서서 거문 손에 지배를 바다가는 사랑이 어느 정도까지가 한이 잇슬 것은 사실임니다. 이럭케 된 연극이 나종에는 남자가 東으로 발길을 두며 눈물을 흘리며 가면 여자는 西쪽에 서서 하하하 우스며 발길로 차 쫏차 보내는 이러한 비극의 幕이 닷치고 맘니다.
그 중에도 영국 인종은 소수이나 유태인이 반 이상임니다. 몃해 전에도 일본에 잇던 청년이 런던으로 유학을 가서 그런 좃치 못한 일이 생겻섯슴니다. 그 내용은 더 이상한 사건이엿슴니다. 엇던 여자하고 사랑을 교환을 하게 되여 그 여자의 집인지 누구의 집인지는 모르나 늘 그 여자의 집이라고 차저가게 되엿슴니다. 하로는 여자를 따라 엇더한 집인지 또 가게 되엿슴니다. 그리자 그곳에서 양복을 버서 걸고 노는 중 아지 못하게 검은 손이 나와 양복을 지버드려가서 한참 찻다가 그때야 비로소 그 남자가 그런 눈치를 채고 곳 밧그로 나가 警官의 외투를 어더 입고 자기 호텔로 도망을 갓다는 이약이를 드른 일이 잇슴니다.

秘密國西藏美人

漫遊生

西藏은 인도와 支那 새이에 잇는 高原地로 교통이 불편하야 아주 외국과는 서로 교섭이 업슴으로 그 나라의 사정은 아즉까지도 세상 사람들이 자서이 알지 못하는 한 비밀의 나라이다.
그 나라의 부인들은 소위 현대 여자의 화장법을 잘 알지 못하는 까닭에 人工의 장식미(裝飾美)는 전연이 업다고 하야도 과언이 안이다. 그러나 자연의 육체미로 말하면 男女가 共히 체격이 훌륭하야 누가 보던지 미인이라고 한 손을 꼽지 안이치 못하겟다. 西藏의 修辭學이라는 책을 보면 서장의 녀자는 靑色을 띄인 얼골이 미인인 것가치 말하얏스나 실제로 보면 그 靑色을 띄인 미인이라는 것은<171> 北方 『아무도』라 하는 지방- 즉 支那의 靑海 지방 근처 이외에는 별로 볼 수가 업고 보통으로 西藏의 미인이라 하면 『가무』라 칭하는 東方의 미인계와 중앙의 미인계 兩系를 말한다. 동방의 미인은 색깔이 힌데다가 코가 웃둑하고도 어엽버서 서양 미인과 조곰도 다름이 업다. 그러나 유감되는 것은 그리 애교가 업서 뵈이는 것이다. 중앙의 미인계는 얼굴 빗이 그리 히지가 안코 다소 황색을 띄엿스나 두 눈에 애교가 橫溢하야 그야말로 한번 우스면 천하의 남자를 다 魔殺식힐 듯 하다. 이 兩 계통의 미인은 전연이 구분 되어잇스나 소위 『도-차』라 칭하는 西藏의 독특한 화장품을 사용하기는 일반이다. 이 『도-차』라 하는 것은 『히마리아』산에서 산출하는 『챠-란』이라 하는 樹木의 껍질을 살머서 엿가티 고은 赤黑色의 塊粉이다. 츠음에 그 화장한 것을 보면 赤黑色의 斑點이 담읏담읏하야 다소 추악한 듯하나 차차 접근하야 보면 수수도 하고 또 暗中에 美를 발견할 수 잇다. 그리고 西藏의 여자들은 대개 피부가 곱고도 보드러웁다. 그것은 어려서부터 몸에다 빠다를 바르는 까닭이다. 우리 조선에서는 어린 아희를 나면 대개가 溫湯에다 아희를 씻기지 만은 西藏에서는 갓날 때부터 빠다에다 몸을 싯고 또 장성하야서도 그와가치 빠다로 몸을 씨침으로 몸이 항상 보드랍다.
요컨대 西藏의 미인은 服飾과 화장보다 그 체격이 조흔 것이라던지 피부의 고흔 것이 특색이라고 하겟다.

안해가 나은 子息도 밋기 어려운 獨逸女子의 秘密生活

KH生

詩聖 『께-테』는 그의 저서 『徒弟』라는 책 속에 『자기 안해의 나은 어린 아해라도 신용할 수 업다』고 喝破하엿다.
바람둥이 여자는 일정한 남편이 잇거나 업거나 不關하고 자기의 하고 십흔 대로 마음껏 享樂하지 안코는 견댈 수 업다.
『께-테』의 이 말은 現今 독일에 잇서서 결단코 자기 민족을 모욕하는 애매한 말이 안이다. 물론 예외도 잇스리라. 그러나 예외라는 것은 항상 소수의 특수한 경우를 가르켜 하는 말이다.
한 남자의 안해가 된 여자는 아모리 바림이 나서 궁뎅이가 들먹어리여도 일정한 남편이 잇는 이상 자기의 마음대로 들먹어리는 궁뎅이를 휘두를 수는 업다.<172> 거긔서 이들은 허울좃케 『하우쓰-풀로인트』를 만든다. 『하우쓰-풀로인트』란 우리말로 직역하면 『가정의 동모』라는 말이다.
남편은 아츰 일즉이 자기의 사무소로 일을 보러 간다. 그래서 한번 나간 남편은 일정하게 정해 논 시간 이내에 도라오지 안는다. 안잠자기(女子下人)도 여자 주인의 눈치를 모아 일부러 집을 비여 주고 어대로던지 놀너 나간다. 그러면 연극은 비로소 시작된다. 여자는 집안을 말쟁이 掃除한다. 그러나 그것은 저녁에 도라 올 남편을 위해서가 안이다.
그는 그럿케하야 모-든 준비가 끗나면 전화를 건다. 그러면 전화건 지 얼마 되지 안아서 이 집에는 허울 조흔 『하우쓰-폴로인트』가 차저온다.
그래서 둘이는 차를 마시고 담배를 피우고 술을 마시고 이리하야 이 두 남녀의 즐거운 연극이 잠간 동안 전개된다.
시간을 보아 幕을 다드면 여자는 모자와 短杖을 주어서 『하우쓰-폴로인트』를 집에서 내여 쫏다 십히하야 돌려보낸다.
조곰 잇스면 안잠자기가 도라 온다. 저녁 晩餐이 준비된다. 남편이 도라 온다. 그리하야 無限히 親睦스러워보이는 이 집에 저녁 식사가 시작된다. 식사가 끗나면 여자는 피아노를 탄다. 『스윗트-홈』 『스윗트-홈』의 노래를......가정은 대개 평화한 편이나 실상은 이럿케 불순한 가정도 적지 안타.

독일어로 남자의 親友를 「폴로인트」라 하고 여자의 親友를 「폴로인텐」이라 한다. 그럿치만 이 말은 사용하는 경우에 따라 다르다는 것을 주의하지 안으면 안 된다.
이 「폴로인트」나 「폴로인텐」이라는 말은 극히 친밀한 사이라는 것을 의미하는 것인데 남자의 親友 다시 말하면 同志를 「폴로인트」라 하는 것은 형제 이상으로 친밀하다는 것이지만 이것이 남자 남자 사이가 안이고 만일 남녀의 사이면 情交 또는 거기에 갓가운 친밀성을 의미하는 말이 되는 것이다.
그런고로 보통 의미에 잇서서 동모라는 말은 「풀로인트」나 「풀로인텐」이라 하지 안코 다시 「삐간트」라는 말을 사용한다.
이것은 다음에 나올 談片의 예비 지식으로 여기에 말해 두는 것이다.

젊은 학생이 젊은 여자와 갓치 거러가는 것을 젊은 학생의 親友가 발견하고 그 젊은 학생의 귀에다 입을 대고 가만히 『여보게 갓치 가는 여자가 「풀로인텐」인가 「삐칸트」인가!』하고 무르면 『응 이 여자 말인가. 이 여자는 미래의 「풀로인텐」일세. 확실히 유망한 걸』
이러한 말을 예사로 하는 것이 독일의 남녀 학생이다.
이것케 不良性을 띄운 학생이 학생 전체의 약 3분의 2라면 이것도 그럿케 **을 일은 안이다.

독일 남녀의 정조관념이라는 것은 한마대로 끈어 말하면 『씻츠면 깨끗하다』는 것이 이들의 굿센 신조이다. 甲이라는 남자로부터 乙이라는 남자에게 욈겨가거나 甲이라는 여자로부터 乙이라는 여자로 욈겨가거나 깨끗하게 씻츤 몸이면 결단코 더럽지 안타는 것이다.
진정으로 남자나 한 여자를 사랑하는 사람은 반듯이 그 『한사람의 身邊을 떠나지 안코 직혀야 한다』는 말은 그들에게 잇서서는 발서 케케묵은 녯날의 도덕이다.
단지 그것은 잠간이나마 그 한사람을 『진정으로 사랑하는 동안』 또는 『길게 엽혜 잇는 동안』이라는 조건이 附帶하는 것이다.
죽은 남편에게 의리를 직히기 위하야 『烈女不更二夫』라는 말은<173> 이들에게 잇서서는 천년 만년에 一例가 듬을 것이다.
修身이나 기타 윤리 책에서도 정조라는 말은 차저 볼래야 차저 볼 수가 업다. 그 대신 忠實이라는 말이 만타. 완전히 의무를 다햇다는 말이다. 자기의 직힐 바 의무를 다한 이상 다시 다른 남자에게 다른 여자에게 옴겨가기로 하등의 모순될 문제가 무엇이랴 하는 결론이다.
독일에는 근대 생활에 특수한 현상으로 노처녀가 점점 만어지는 경향이다. 남자도 독신을 主唱하고 조와하는 사람이 만허진다. 그것은 생활의 곤란도 한 원인이 되는 것이지만 남녀간의 성적 생활의 자유성이 최대 원인이 되는 것이다. 그들은 소위 『풀로인트』라는 허울 조흔 일홈으로 성적 생활의 향락을 늣긴다. 일본 가튼 데서는 약혼만 하여도 갓치 동거를 할 수가 잇지만 독일에서는 약혼만 한 『풀로인트』와의 동거를 엄중히 금하는 까닭에 그들은 그 반면에 기회를 자조 지여 서로 맛나보는 것뿐이다.
원칙상 남녀가 갓치 갓스면 음식의  代價를 남자가 지불하는 것이 보통 상례이나 그들은 서로 왼만큼만 양해하는 사이면 수입이 거진 비슷하면 남녀가 등분해서 지불하고 그 대신 향락 생활을 그만큼 오래 게속한다.
그리고 독일의 남녀는 대개 十四五歲만 되면 발서 이러한 방면으로 눈을 뜨기 시작하는데 정말 진정으로 사랑하는 사람이 잇서서 장차 결혼까지 할 사람 이외에는 대개 남녀를 물론하고 남자에게는 여자 여자에게는 남자가 하나씩은 보통으로 달녀 잇다.
이 점은 특히 자유스럽다면 자유스럽고 불순하다면 불순하다고 할 것이다.
그런데 한가지 자미잇는 일은 이상과 가튼 생활을 하다가 만약 결혼을 하게 되는 경우에 제3자로서 그들의 평소의 행동을 자서히 아는 사람이 그들의 결혼에 부당한 이유를 지적하야 항의를 제출하는 일이 만타. 그런고로 결혼 생활에 드러가려는 고 때의 남녀는 비교적 다른 때보다 훨신 모-든 것에 착실해 지려는 노력을 한다.
이것도 물론 전체를 표준해서 말하는 것은 결코 안이다.
남편이 죽은 지가 오래든지 안이든지 미망인들은 남편의 거림자가 눈에서 사라지기만 하면 발서 그 짝을 구하기에 열중하는데 이러한 여자들은 대개 돈 잇는 부자로서 돈 그것을 밋기로 자기네 마음대로 그 짝을 낙구어 드릴 수가 잇지만 만일 돈 업는 가난한 여자면 카페 가튼 곳으로 出張해서 半賣淫的으로 돈푼이나 잇서 보이는 情夫를 찻기에 골몰하는 여자가 만타.
또 그럿치 안으면 자기 동모의 남편에게 소위 『하우쓰-풀로인트』노릇을 하고 생활을 유지하는 이도 적지 안타.
이럿케 말하면 독일 여자는 전체로 하나에서 열까지 모도가 음탕한 방종 생활로서 일관한 것가티 보일른지 모르나 그러나 결단코 그럿치는 안타.
그들은 비교적 아모 나라 여자보다도 상식이 풍부하야 자기 자신의 일은 자기 스사로 판단 내지 收拾하야 나가는 조흔 습관을 가지고 잇다.
노골적으로 드러내 놋코 불순한 생활을 하는 여자 이외에는 대개가 자기 행동에 대해서 몹시 자중하고 또 다 가티 사회적 체면을 위하야 적지 안은 주의와 노력을 한다.
그래서 자기의 풀로인트에 대해서도 忠實을 다하고 親切從順에 참다운 교제를 하는 것이다.
남녀가 다 가티 자기의 상대되는 남녀가 실혀저서 서로 혜질 경우가 되드라도 결단코 무리하게 혜지는 법이 업다. 서로 서로 혜지지 안으면 안될 이유를 가장 솔직하게 분명하게 吐破하야 다가티 양해가 잇슨 후 조흔 낫츠로 혜진다.
독일은 歐羅巴에 잇서서 제일 뒤저서 발달된 나라인 만치 아즉도 그 문화에 잇서서 幼稚한 점이 적지 안으며 아즉도 여자가 남자의 밋혜 눌녀서 忠實을 강제해 생활하는 만치 남의 妻로서 또는 한 가정의 주부로서 이상적이다.
『하우쓰-풀로인트』를 가지고 잇는 여자라도 결단코 자기 가정의 家計上 실증을 내거나 허황한 짓을 하지 안는 것으로 보아 독일 부인의 堅實性을 알 수 잇는 것이다. <174><164-174>