잡지명	동광 제27호
발행일	1931년 11월 10일
기사제목	監獄의 鄕土色, 釜山·大邱·西大門·海洲·平壤 (Local Color of Prisons: Pusan, Taegu, Sŏdaemun, Haeju, P'yŏngyang)
기사형태	회고·수기 (Recollection/Memoir)

**Local Color of Prisons: Pusan, Taegu, Sŏdaemun, Haeju, P'yŏngyang**

**Pusan Prison, the Frightening Mother-in-Law**
By Pak Ilhyŏng (朴日馨)

Tongkwangsa requested that I write about the distinctive characteristics of Pusan Prison.
Comparing Korean prisons to those in Japan or other foreign countries, or comparing prisons in capitalist nations to those in the Soviet Union to find their relative merits and characteristics, would perhaps be easier. This is because each might have different standards of penal administration (行刑上) or different fundamental spirits of legislation (立法), thus possessing clear characteristics stemming from the very basics of the issue.
However, comparing the various prisons within Korea – all under the same legislative spirit, same penal administration standards, and same governing body (統率機關) – to find their unique characteristics would be as difficult as visiting every public toilet (公衆便所) on the streets of Seoul to investigate the distinctive features amidst their foul stench. Of course, minor variations might arise depending on the personality (爲人如何) of the direct supervisors, but it is questionable whether these differences reach the level of distinct characteristics. And even if such distinct characteristics exist, they would likely be constantly eliminated (especially the progressive aspects) by a strong leveling force, as long as the ruling policy of the political division known as Korea maintains its monolithic principle. Can we not see a recent example of this in the sharp decline in the standards for book censorship (圖書檢閱) (for books sent to inmates) at Sŏdaemun Prison?
Furthermore, entering and leaving a public toilet is generally free, barring unforeseen circumstances, but the situation with prisons is entirely different, making this task even more markedly difficult.
Until recently, I have been in and out of Pusan Prison several times. Thus, although incomplete, I have some knowledge of its facilities and customs. However, I lack the grounds to state precisely how characteristic it is compared to other places. Besides Pusan Prison, I only spent a short time in Taegu, so I will primarily compare Taegu and Pusan and note a few differences.

One usually associates police lockups (留置場) with lice (蝨) and prisons with bedbugs (빈대). This might even be an iron rule (鐵則). Bedbugs are truly a famous feature of prisons. However, Pusan Prison, though not perfectly, <46> seems to be a small exception to this iron rule. When I visited the old Pusan Prison (which no longer exists) back in the Kimi year (1919), it certainly harbored a supply of bedbugs second to none. But the current Pusan Prison, perhaps because it was newly built not long ago, made finding bedbugs in the cracks of doors and walls as difficult as finding coins in a poor man's pocket. However, that too is now an old story from a year ago.

Next, let's talk about meals. The rice in Pusan is a blend of five parts foxtail millet (粟), three parts soybeans (大豆), and two parts proso millet (黍). Comparing this to Taegu's rice – five parts foxtail millet, three parts soybeans, and two parts rice (쌀) – one might feel disappointed just by the name, as rice is missing. However, in terms of taste (哧), the rice-less Pusan rice is much more palatable. Especially since May of last year, after switching the previously less sticky proso millet to glutinous proso millet, the taste of the rice has truly become excellent. That taste, sweetening the more you chew, like a spring bubbling up! However, Pusan serves significantly smaller portions of rice than Taegu. That is, the minimum portion in Taegu is grade 7, while in Pusan it is grade 9. Of course, Taegu's grade 7 rice is not the same quantity as Pusan's grade 9 rice. But there is a considerable difference in quantity between Taegu's basic grade 7 and Pusan's basic grade 9. And if you think that since Pusan is by the sea, you might at least get to eat well, perhaps some broth from boiled fish bones, you will be disappointed. Overall, the food in Pusan is rather unappetizing.

If the food isn't good, are the hygiene facilities decent? Not really. Being naturally healthy, I haven't been to the infirmary (病監), but I have had minor check-ups. Compared to Taegu, where a medical officer (醫務係員) always wanders around with a stethoscope, the medical care in Pusan, where they at most glance at your tongue from afar, is hardly worth mentioning. Also, for unconvicted prisoners (未決囚) or inmates doing cell work (監房作業), the time for exercise, the greatest source of vitality (活力素), once a day, is absurdly short (短促). The only slightly better thing (than Taegu) might be that there are two night soil buckets (똥통) per cell, and clean, sun-dried ones are brought in daily.

What about the censorship standards for books sent to unconvicted or convicted prisoners? Naturally, they are extremely conservative (固陋) and ignorant. Among philosophy books, Hamajiri Ichirō's (帆足理一郞) *Introduction to Philosophy* (哲學槪論) is disallowed, and for economics books, Fukuda Tokuzō's (福田德三) *National Economics* (國民經濟學) is rejected. Yet, it's quite a spectacle (壯觀) that Hegel's (헤-겔) *Logic* was permitted here. And works like Hatano Seiichi's (波多野精一) *History of Western Philosophy* (西洋哲學史) are only allowed for Japanese people – how biased (집질이다). Moreover, any so-called original language books (原書) in foreign languages seem destined for rejection (却下) right from the reception desk (受付係).

I've already reached the allotted page count... This is something I once heard in the large pigeon coop of a courthouse (裁判所) from a Japanese swindler (詐欺쟁い) who claimed to have been through every prison in all of Korea (全朝鮮): Pusan is likely no less severe in discipline than Sŏdaemun. Indeed, factors like being in a solitary cell (獨房) versus a shared cell (雜居房) might have played a role, but in my experience, Pusan felt like being under the watchful eye (眼前) of a frightening mother-in-law, while Taegu felt like the men's quarters (사랑) of my own home.
And despite the prison law stating, "Criminal defendants (刑事被告人) are not subject to this limit (此限에 不在하다)," in Pusan, one can usually only write one letter (通) per week. What's the point of comparing this to Taegu, where one could write three letters daily!

Ah! There is one noteworthy characteristic (特色) of Pusan Prison. I didn't know this while actually incarcerated, but learned the details while sending things in (差入) and visiting (面會) other comrades who entered later. The Japanese woman at the reception desk (受付係) there is kind to an extent that makes one think it strange. There are more than one or two instances where tasks that were clearly difficult were accomplished without trouble thanks to her kindness. And this kindness of hers is not limited to specific times or specific people; it is always the same towards everyone. Recently, I had some business (所幹) at a certain prison near Seoul and went there. Seeing the unbecoming behavior of a Korean friend at the reception desk there, I was suddenly reminded of this famous figure (名物) of Pusan.
-(1931. 10. 18) <47>

**No. 0141 of Taegu Women's Prison**
By Hwang Aedŏk (黃愛德)

Due to the AeO(?) Women's Association Incident (愛O婦人會事件) in 1919, I lived in Taegu Prison for three years, including the time awaiting trial, along with nine comrades. Ten years have passed since then, so there must have been some changes, but what major changes could there be in the prison, that separate world for humans?
At that time, the small world I was dragged into, after abruptly severing ties with the beloved world outside, was enclosed by black wooden planks (널판장). If only I could have leaped over that single plank wall, I could have returned to the free world. But after the verdict, my name was "0141." With my name on a red collar tag, and even a mark for being good at work, I was a loyal citizen of the prison nation.
The building was brick. If the men's prison (男監) was the outer quarters (사랑채), the women's prison (女監) was the inner quarters (안채). However, a wall that no one could trespass separated these two buildings. The only person who smilingly opened and passed through the tightly shut gate in that wall was the life-term prisoner (無期刑囚) who carried the meals. When these people brought the food and left it in front of the women's prison gate, women in red clothes would bring it inside.
There were seven cells (監房) in the women's prison. At the end of the corridor (廊下) stretching east and west was the unconvicted prisoners' cell (未決房). To its right was the theft cell (절盜房). Following the corridor eastward, five cells – the arson cell (放火房), murder cell (殺人房), rape cell (강간房), etc. – were lined up. The first cell I entered was the theft cell. It was a rectangular room (矩形房) no larger than three *kan* (칸 - traditional unit of space), housing 24 people at its most crowded, and usually 20. Imagine the cell door being unlatched (빗짱), opened with a smile, and then slammed shut with a clang (덜컹). I cannot describe how gloomy, miserable, and frightening that slamming sound was. Looking at the closed door, there was a food slot (밥구멍), and slightly above it, a peephole (감시구멍) through which the guards watched every 10 minutes. Outside, a Japanese female guard would lift a piece of metal and peer through, her two eyes barely twinkling through the wires. On the wall opposite the door, there were only two high-up holes covered with glass (유리). There were no air holes (공긔구멍) or anything else. Imagine about twenty people in red clothes lying packed tightly (꼭꼭백이는) on the wooden floor, heads and feet alternating in opposite directions. In the cracks of the wooden plank walls (널판 담벽 틈사리), bedbugs were lined up in horizontal formation (橫隊) as if preparing for an all-out attack – don't even mention it. And the lice! How numerous they were. And scabies (옴)! In one corner, a night soil bucket (똥통) – this was placed outside the women's prison gate once daily, and emptied by someone from the men's prison without us knowing. This was our entire property (全財産), besides the one or two sheets of toilet paper (수지) given daily. This paper was more precious than currency within the cell.
Our work lasted a grueling 13 hours! Yet, the meal was bean-millet (?) rice (콩쉬수밥) with salt (소금). Fortunately, a few of us received the special privilege of outside food delivery (差入) for one meal each day, so we didn't feel lacking in food for that meal. But eating bean rice and salt soup (소금국) damaged my teeth, and they are still not healthy. That rice was truly a garbage can for dirty things; all the impure things of the world were in it. It's amazing that people survived eating it. Since then, I've considered hygiene (위생) useless.
Another thing I brought back from prison is a condition (증세) in my lower legs. Sitting cross-legged like the Japanese for thirteen hours a day working, it was killing me (죽어 백이지오). The house where we worked, made of wooden planks, had only dirt floors covered with scraps of straw mats (거적뙈기) used for weaving straw bags. Besides the dampness (습한), the cushions (방석) we sat on were woven from rice straw (벳집) and were so stiff and packed (꼭꼭백여서) it was agony. To forget the pain, we sewed (바누질) frantically. Among us who entered for the same incident, some managed to sew eight garments while others made two or three.
Bathing was once a week. All 120-130 inmates of the women's prison bathed in the same bathhouse, so by the end, it was muddy water – bathing was the most unpleasant thing in the world. Though it lasted only 3 minutes, I wished it hadn't even been 1 minute. <48>
The cell I was in, the theft cell, was the worst. The people were so dirty and mean-spirited. Lying alternatingly next to each other, they would kick each other sharply enough to pierce intestines – the scene was quite intense. Fights (싸홈) and curses. They wouldn't listen to the guards either. No matter the punishment – being exposed to the sun for 2-3 minutes daily as exercise/outing, beatings, reduced food rations – they wouldn't listen. People were so wicked. Once, when I was still awaiting trial, wearing clothes sent from outside, they thought I was asleep and rubbed my nose and kicked me hard. No amount of reasoning worked. So, one time I shouted that they were wicked, and only then did they calm down a bit. After that, every Sunday afternoon (we worked Sunday mornings too, even though the female guards were all Christians), I taught them literacy and told them Bible stories. From then on, they followed me, calling me "Teacher, Teacher." And each boasted that their own cell's teacher (one of us nine) was the best.
A few of us had special joint meetings (공통면회) where a Western woman (西洋婦人) came to pray with us. Ordinary individual meetings (個人면회) seemed to involve speaking to each other through a hole in the wall (담구멍) in the meeting room, until a guard closed the shutter before the time was up.
Regarding reading (독서), when awaiting trial, we could exchange two books for another two anytime after finishing them, but once convicted, there was no time to read due to work. Communication within the cells (監房 內 통신) involved writing on paper scraps (수지) by making impressions with some hard skewer (꼬치), which the life-term prisoner (無期囚) doing cleaning rounds would cleverly deliver, avoiding the guards' eyes. Their agility in passing secret letters (밀서) while hiding from the guards was astonishing. There were six female guards (간수), all Japanese. Among them was the harsh "Tiger" (호랭이). Ordinary prisoners trembled whenever she opened her eyes. "Yoho" (요호) was another guard; peering through the peephole, if she saw us huddled together because of the cold, lying with heads and feet alternating in the usual way, she would tease, "Big shrimp and little shrimp (생우) are playing well," and walk around with sharp eyes.
When seasons changed and people outside wore lined clothes, we were still in unlined clothes without even a single blanket; it was truly cold. We went directly from unlined clothes to cotton-padded ones. The cold at this time, the dirty baths, and one more thing, making dirty clothes – we made the clothes ourselves, but the clothes returned after being washed by male prisoners (男監罪囚), supposedly laundered but looking worse than unwashed, covered in dust – doing this work on those clothes sticky with all sorts of germs from scabies, venereal disease (림질) – these three were the three greatest sufferings (三大苦痛) most difficult for me to endure. For those suffering from bedbugs and lice, perhaps those were the worst. Anyway, among the guards, there were nicknames like "Old Woman" (할멈), "Snot-Nose" (코홀색이), and another I've forgotten. The chief guard (남자), a man, was nicknamed "Konbap" (콘밥) because he pronounced *kongbap* (콩밥, bean rice) as *konbap*.
One day, as over a hundred female prisoners in red and blue clothes were crouched down, busily moving their needles, the warden (전옥) came in, called the names of a few of us, and ordered our parole (假出獄). At that moment, all the prisoners, ignoring the guards' attempts to stop them, cried aloud, sad to see us go. As the entire women's prison wept, they cried, saying the three years we were there felt as enjoyable as three days. Thinking back on how we kindly taught them literacy, a feeling of wanting to stay longer with them welled up in my tear-filled eyes. I wonder if anyone who was there then is still alive, but I would like to visit Taegu Prison once.

**Scabies Prison! Sŏdaemun Prison**
By Song Pongu (宋奉瑀)

If one were to tour all the prisons across the land (全土監獄) and point out their characteristics one by one: Sinŭiju Prison is the Red Water Prison (赤水 監獄 - red water because the water there is so red that white things dipped in it immediately turn red). Kyŏngsŏng Prison is the Work Prison (일 감옥). Taejŏn Prison is the Baton Prison (몽동이 監獄). Taegu Prison is the Fight Prison (싸홈 監獄). Hamhŭng Prison is the Bastard Prison (쌍간나색기 監獄). Ch'ŏngjin Prison is the Fish Prison (生鮮監獄). Haeju Prison is the Appearance Prison (外樣監獄). And Sŏdaemun Prison is the Scabies Prison (옴감옥). <49>
Let me write about the Scabies Prison! Sŏdaemun Prison.

Sŏdaemun Prison is situated in the place called Kŭmgye-dong (金鷄洞), with Mt. Pukak (北岳山) soaring in front and Kilma Pass (길마재) looking down from behind.
She embraces numerous revolutionaries and patriots (志士), as well as convicts (受刑者) dragged in for robbery, theft (强窃盜), fraud (詐欺), and so on. Entering inside, one finds it forms a small society, completely different from what one saw glancing from the outside. There live tall guys, short guys, handsome guys, ugly guys, children, old people, young people, women, and so on. Regardless of whether they had money and status in society or not, whether they had knowledge or not, and whether they were political prisoners or common criminals, everyone, absolutely everyone, wears red clothes. The food, needless to say, is bean rice (콩밥). Side dishes are mostly soybean paste soup (된장국), dried radish strips (무말냉이), fish pieces once a week, seaweed soup (미역국), bean oil (콩긔름), etc. In autumn, they also give green onion soup (파국), pumpkin soup (호박국), and cabbage soup (배채국). Among these side dishes, the potatoes served in summer are delicious. Their taste truly puts dishes from Myŏngwŏlgwan (明月舘) or the Chosŏn Hotel (朝鮮호텔) to shame. It's not that they are well-cooked, but that they taste so good to the mouths of those inside. Speaking of food, it's not too bad. However, before the current warden came – that is, before the First Party (第一次 黨) members put on prison uniforms (受刑服) – the food was truly unspeakable.
The rice wasn't bean rice, but stone rice (石飯). Thus, some troublemaker (作亂軍) wrote this poem:
Three meals of stone rice, eating it all,
Sleeping soundly behind moonlit iron bars (月明鐵窓),
The resentful bird (恨鳥) (cuckoo) cries 'ppikuk' on the prison mountain,
Tears stream down the white-clothed holy figure (白衣聖容).
That "Stone Rice" was the rice of Sŏdaemun Prison I speak of now. But things improved – food, hygiene, exercise – after Warden Yokoyama (橫山所長), who arrived when the comrades from the First Party began their sentences, was confronted. So, after that, there weren't as many stones, and the side dishes and such (屬) also got a bit better.
Bedbugs are also a famous feature. But since these exist even in the outside world (裟婆), it's not that remarkable. However, scabies (옴) is undoubtedly a famous feature. When convicts undergo a physical examination (身體檢査), they all strip naked. You can see bluish spots dotted on their bodies; this is the scabies rash (옴독). I had never seen such a hideous scabies rash before. Among 10 convicts' bodies, 6 or 7 are all scabies-ridden (옴쟁이). Some call this a bean rash (콩독). But it's not a bean rash. It's scabies.
Among all prisons in Korea (全鮮), Sŏdaemun Prison is likely number one for scabies.
Scabies Prison! There's much more to tell about Sŏdaemun Prison. But the time I have does not allow my pen to follow freely. I shall postpone it for another day.

**Characteristics of Haeju Prison**
By Wŏn Ch'ŏl (元鐵)

It was around eight in the evening when I first set foot inside the prison (刑務所). I was dragged through the night air into the gloomy interior, enclosed by imposing iron-like walls built high with Haeju's famous granite (花崗石). All creation seemed dead and desolate (孤寥). The陰酸한 air (chilly and somber?) and melancholic mood, which I had never tasted before, seemed to ruthlessly trample (蹂躪) my highly sensitive mind. Haeju Prison is impressive not only in its construction but also in its location, nestled in Sakat Pass (사갓재) on a spur descending from the famously scenic Mt. Nam (南山) range (笠嶺 - Ipryŏng Pass?). I believe it ranks among the most sturdy and imposing prisons in all of Korea (全朝鮮). Being in Haeju, rich in granite, the entire structure, from the outer walls (外壁) to the small garden (庭物) inside the walls, is made of white granite. Considering the relatively few prison breaks (破獄) or escapes (脫走囚) since its establishment several years (星霜) ago, one can imagine how sturdy and organized it must be. I don't know the exact total area, but it's about 30,000 *pyeong* (approx. 99,000 sq meters). The main gate (正門) faces north, with Mt. Nam as a backdrop to the rear. Of course, a small guardhouse is built on the mountainside (山腹), manned by a guard throughout the day. Facing the main gate, the women's prison (女監) is on the left side (外人便 쪽), and on the right side, positioned furthest north, is the detention center (拘置監). I learned this about a month after entering the prison. First, I entered a room called the investigation room (調室), changed into blue clothes (靑衣), and was taken to the so-called superior's office (上官室). After routinely asking for my address, name, occupation, and prior convictions, the chief guard (간수부장) immediately led me towards the detention center. Upon entering the detention center gate, the first thing that caught my eye was the cement (세멘트) floor, with something resembling a straw mat (멍석) laid along the front of the cells. This was probably to muffle the footsteps of the guards (看守) on duty (守衛). Before entering the cell (監房), my clothes were checked again, down to my handkerchief. Then, the clanking sound (젯걱) of the cell door opening was extremely grating to my ears, hearing it for the first time. The first cell I entered was cell 12 (a shared cell - 雜房). There was an indicator sign (표시기) on the front wall and the door (門) on the left. The door had a hole just large enough for the guard's eye (看守의 눈) to see through, and below it, a slot for food (밥들이는 구멍). On the left side, there was another hole large enough to see the upper half of a face. Both holes were covered with steel bars (철강). At the rear, there were two windows (窓), but they were placed very high, making it impossible to see the outside view (외경), of course. These too were heavily barred with iron rods (鐵棒). I assume the basic layout is similar in any prison. Besides these, there was a washbasin (세수분), a drinking water container (음료수통), and a wooden toilet (변기). At nine at night, sleep (취침) was announced. The bedding (침구) was one blanket for every three people. We slept on a thin mat (자리) spread on the cold wooden floor (마루바닥). The bell sound (종소래) at seven in the morning signaled waking up (기상), I learned. For me, lacking any knowledge or experience of prison, everything felt novel and difficult (신산하엿다?). Roll call (점검) began 2-3 minutes after waking up. The chief guard came to count the number (數爻) of defendants (被告). We were told to bow (禮) to the superior officer. If one didn't bow or something similar, they would face real trouble (난경). As there were few political prisoners (思想犯), I couldn't avoid the same violent treatment (橫暴한 대우) as the common criminals. After roll call, a guard gave us a tooth stick (이닥그?) and salt (소곰). After washing up, bean rice (콩밥) was served. It was foxtail millet (?) (胡米좁쌀) mixed with beans, served in portions labeled 1 or 2 (1, 2字栢?). We had to survive eating one lump (뎅이) of this. And if someone receiving outside food (私食) was discovered giving even a little to another person, both the giver and receiver would be dragged out of the cell, beaten thoroughly, reported, and have their outside food and private clothes (私服) privileges suspended for 15 days. If such violations (犯則) were discovered 3 or 4 times repeatedly, the outside food privilege would be permanently revoked. After the meal came cell inspection (檢房). Exercise was also conducted concurrently with inspection. Exercise consisted merely of walking around the trees (樓木?) in the detention center's front garden (庭園) 3 or 4 times before going back inside. Korean guards (朝鮮人 간수) absolutely did not guard the detention center. For some reason, a Japanese chief guard (日本人 看守監?) was in charge. Baths were once a week but lasted only 5 minutes. Visitations (面會) were generally similar, but anyone other than family (家族) was refused. Trying to meet the warden to complain about a guard's violent behavior (難暴한 행동) or the lack of hygiene (衛生上 불철저) in the cell was always ignored – this is a characteristic of Haeju Prison. Regarding letters (書信), the prison rules allowed one letter every 10 days for unconvicted inmates, but in reality, only two per month were permitted. Writing in English (英語) in letters was forbidden. Whether this was Haeju Prison's policy (政策) or because the guards' level of knowledge (知識水準) was low (賤薄) and censorship (檢閱) was difficult, I cannot tell.
Regarding book deliveries (書籍差入), only school textbooks (學校敎科書) or dictionaries (字典) were allowed. Any social science books (社會科學書籍), even legal publications (合法出版物), were not permitted – another unique characteristic of Haeju Prison.
Although my time in preliminary examination (豫審) was a short period of about 6 months, I never once appeared in court (出廷). There are many other things I'd like to write about, such as those held in preliminary examination for 3 or 4 years (one line omitted), but as I am not a free person (自由스러운 사람), I will end my poor writing (拙筆) here.
-(1931. 10. 7)- <51>

**Factory 11 of P'yŏngyang Prison**
By Yi Kang (李剛)

Recollections of No. 1607, who served 2 years and 6 months (including pre-trial detention) for violating the Decree (制令) and Peace Preservation Law (治安維持法), the reason being his position as Chairman of the Shanghai Provisional XX Legislative Assembly (上海臨時XX議政院 議長)!
The place is P'yŏngyang, Amamachi (岩町) district in P'yŏngyang, P'yŏngyang Prison. Separated from the world by a single layer of wooden planks, this place has five cell blocks (監房). Though wooden (木製) outside, the inside is cold cement (세멘트). A toilet (변기) sits in one corner of the floor. Although there's an iron grating window (쇠구물창) at the back, once you enter through the heavy door with its air window (공기창) and food slot (밥구멍), day or night, the prison... (Four lines omitted) Depending on the severity of the crime, there are various punishments within the prison, such as being confined in a dark place (暗處). However, to maintain order, reward marks/badges (賞標) are given to those with good conduct who follow the prison rules (獄則) well. If one earns many badges, progressing from 'poor' (不良) to 'excellent' (優), they might even be granted parole (假出獄). The privilege (特點) of having a badge doesn't involve differences in food, but allows one to walk alone (獨步) instead of being chained (쇠사슬줄) and led by a guard. Badge or not, a prisoner is a prisoner. The rice is foxtail millet (호미) and bean rice; you never see rice (쌀). The side dish is salt (소금). Besides that, we got salt soup in the morning and soybean paste soup in the evening. If you didn't drink a lot of water during meals, you'd suffer from thirst, as water was given only sparingly, even in summer.
Eating bean rice, the work included making tobacco pipe stems (담배빨죽?), furniture (家具), shoes (구두), Western clothes (洋服), net making (구물뜨기?), straw sandals (와라지), rope twisting (삼끼?). Besides these, there was brick work (벽돌일) and construction/repairs (營繕). But the most common work, occupying about 60%, was weaving Japanese cloth (옷감). The place where about 50 of us worked was Factory 11 (11공장). Here, we could push back (배쎔을 뻐처도) quite freely, and guards would tacitly approve (黙認) minor things. Normally, in P'yŏngyang Prison factories, defecation (大便) was forbidden, leading to tragicomic (喜悲劇) incidents of people relieving themselves on the spot, but not in Factory 11. Anyone could just walk up to the guard, give a nod (禮), and take a toilet pass (大便票) as they pleased. However, because internal prison struggles (刑務所內鬪爭) intensified, political prisoners (政治犯), who were initially kept separate supposedly for propaganda (宣傳) reasons, were apparently integrated shortly after I left. Internal prison communication (獄內의 通信) was done by avoiding the guards' eyes, using toothpicks (?) (이 껌피) to write on paper scraps (수지), or hiding pencil fragments (연필조각). External communication (獄外에 通信) involved sending letters (發信) once every two months, while incoming mail (來信) could be received anytime. However, sending letters could also be done specially in particular cases; with enough knack (이력), one could send more. Visitations were also once every two months. Taken to a small room separate from the cell block, the curtain (휘장) would open, revealing the visitor standing there stiffly. Words would stop, and as we just stared at each other, the 30-minute visitation time would feel like less than 3 minutes before the curtain closed. If you complained to the guard (看守) that you had more to say, sometimes a blockhead (소대가리) guard might tell them to open the curtain again to let you speak more.
The most common illness (病) in the prison is scabies (옴), which they call "tamusi" (다무시 - likely ringworm?) for some reason. There were also many who suffered from pleurisy (늑막염) or what was thought to be a cold (감기). As for hygiene, there was only a bath once a week in dirty water for just 10 minutes, and not even a washbasin (세수대아) was provided in the room. So, even if there were Five Blessings (五福) in the red-clothed life inside the cell, what could possibly be refreshing (씨원한)? Other prisons are likely the same, but what we called the Five Blessings in prison were: small amount (量少 - of food?), small body (體少?), few words (言少), few worries (心少?), and short sentence (刑期少) – these five 'lessers' were the great blessings. I possessed three blessings: small body, small amount, and few words. <52>

**Summary**

This collection of memoirs from five former inmates offers a grim portrayal of conditions in major Korean prisons (Pusan, Taegu, Sŏdaemun, Haeju, P'yŏngyang) under Japanese rule in 1931. Authors describe pervasive issues like poor sanitation (lice, bedbugs, scabies – Sŏdaemun being notorious as "Scabies Prison"), inadequate and often unpalatable food (bean/millet rice, meager side dishes), harsh discipline, arbitrary rules, strict censorship of reading materials and mail, limited exercise, and insufficient medical care. Despite slight variations attributed to location or specific wardens (like a surprisingly kind receptionist in Pusan or relative leniency in P'yŏngyang's Factory 11), the overall picture is one of deliberate neglect and dehumanization, particularly harsh for political prisoners often grouped with common criminals.

**Historical Significance:**

Historians would find these first-hand accounts valuable for understanding the lived experience of incarceration during the Japanese colonial period, corroborating official records with personal narratives of suffering and resilience. The texts highlight the systematic nature of control within the prison system, including censorship aimed at suppressing dissent, the racial dynamics (Japanese guards often perceived as harsher, though one exception is noted), the specific hardships faced by female prisoners (detailed by Hwang Aedŏk), and the subtle forms of resistance and communication among inmates. The mention of specific incidents (like the AeO Women's Association case) and political groups (the "First Party" at Sŏdaemun, Yi Kang's connection to the Shanghai Provisional Government) provides context for the imprisonment of activists. The stark comparisons between prisons offer insights into perceived differences in severity and local "specialties" of misery.

**Named Entities**

東光社	동광사	Tongkwangsa
釜山刑務所	부산형무소	Pusan Prison
朴日馨	박일형	Pak Ilhyŏng
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
諸外國	제외국	Various foreign countries
資本主義諸國	자본주의제국	Capitalist nations
쏘베트 同盟	소베트 동맹	Soviet Union
統率機關	통솔기관	Governing Body (Implied: Ministry of Justice/Penal System Command)
서울	서울	Seoul
西大門刑務所	서대문형무소	Sŏdaemun Prison
大邱	대구	Taegu
釜山	부산	Pusan
己未年	기미년	Kimi Year (1919)
帆足理一郞	(일본 이름)	Hamajiri Ichirō
福田德三	(일본 이름)	Fukuda Tokuzō
헤-겔	헤겔	Hegel
波多野精一	(일본 이름)	Hatano Seiichi
裁判所	재판소	Courthouse
西大門	서대문	Sŏdaemun
黃愛德	황애덕	Hwang Aedŏk
愛O婦人會事件	애O부인회 사건	AeO(?) Women's Association Incident
男監	남감	Men's Prison
女監	여감	Women's Prison
西洋婦人	서양부인	Western woman
宋奉瑀	송봉우	Song Pongu
新義州 監獄	신의주 감옥	Sinŭiju Prison
京城監獄	경성감옥	Kyŏngsŏng Prison
太田監獄	대전 감옥	Taejŏn Prison (Note: 太田 usually read Ota in Japanese, but here context suggests Taejŏn)
大邱監獄	대구 감옥	Taegu Prison
咸興監獄	함흥 감옥	Hamhŭng Prison
淸津監獄	청진 감옥	Ch'ŏngjin Prison
海洲監獄	해주 감옥	Haeju Prison
北岳山	북악산	Mt. Pukak
길마재	길마재	Kilma Pass (Kilmajae)
金鷄洞	금계동	Kŭmgye-dong
明月舘	명월관	Myŏngwŏlgwan
朝鮮호텔	조선호텔	Chosŏn Hotel
第一次 黨	제1차 당	First Party
橫山所長	(일본 이름)	Warden Yokoyama
全鮮	전선	All of Korea (Chŏnsŏn)
海洲	해주	Haeju
元鐵	원철	Wŏn Ch'ŏl
南山	남산	Mt. Nam
笠嶺	입령	Ipryŏng Pass
사갓재	사갓재	Sakat Pass (Sagaschae)
日本人	일본인	Japanese person
朝鮮人	조선인	Korean person
李剛	이강	Yi Kang
上海臨時XX議政院	상해임시XX의정원	Shanghai Provisional XX Legislative Assembly
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
岩町	암정/이와마치	Amamachi / Iwama-ch'i (District in P'yŏngyang)
平壤刑務所	평양형무소	P'yŏngyang Prison

**Glossary**

監獄	감옥	Prison
鄕土色	향토색	Local color; distinctive regional characteristics
刑務所	형무소	Prison (Modern term, used alongside 監獄)
회고·수기	회고·수기	Recollection/Memoir
行刑	행형	Execution of sentence; penal administration
立法	입법	Legislation
爲人	위인	Personality; character (of a person)
配備된	배비된	Deployed; assigned (Older spelling of 배치된)
醜汚	추오	Filthy; squalid
臭氣	취기	Foul odor; stench
査探	사탐	Investigate; probe
差度	차도	Degree of difference
除斥	제척	Exclusion; removal
圖書	도서	Books
檢閱	검열	Censorship
未備하나마	미비하나마	Although incomplete/inadequate
留置場	유치장	Police lockup; holding cell
蝨	슬	Lice (Hanja character rarely used now, 이 is common)
빈대	빈대	Bedbug
鐵則	철칙	Iron rule
配合된다	배합된다	Is blended; is mixed
哧	치	(Exclamation/sound, likely indicating taste/palatability - rare usage)
훨신	훨씬	Much more (Older spelling)
분량	분량	Quantity; amount
맛득지 못한	맛´지 못한	Unappetizing; not tasty (Older form of 맛없다/맛들지 못하다)
빤빤한가	빤빤한가	Decent; presentable (Colloquial)
病監	병감	Prison infirmary
醫務係員	의무계원	Medical staff member
긔곳해야	기껏해야	At most (Older spelling)
먼빛에서	먼발치에서	From a distance (Older spelling/dialect)
未決囚	미결수	Unconvicted prisoner; defendant awaiting trial
監房作業	감방 작업	Cell work (work done inside the cell)
活力素	활력소	Source of vitality; energizer (Figurative, here referring to exercise)
短促하다	단촉하다	To be very short (time)
똥통	똥통	Night soil bucket; chamber pot
固陋하다	고루하다	To be conservative; narrow-minded; obstinate
툇자	툇자	Rejection; refusal (Colloquial)
壯觀	장관	Spectacle; magnificent sight
집질이다	집질이다	Biased; unfair (Dialect/Archaic?)
原書	원서	Original language book
受付係	수부계	Reception desk (Japanese term 受付係 used directly)
却下	각하	Rejection; dismissal
裁判所	재판소	Courthouse
詐欺쟁이	사기쟁이	Swindler; con artist (쟁이 is a suffix for person)
嚴酷하다	엄혹하다	To be severe; harsh; rigorous
獨房	독방	Solitary confinement cell
雜居房	잡거방	Shared cell; communal cell
眼前	안전	In front of one's eyes; presence
사랑	사랑	Men's quarters in a traditional house; guest room (Used metaphorically for comfort)
刑事被告人	형사 피고인	Criminal defendant
此限에 不在하다	차한에 부재하다	Not subject to this limit (Formal/Legalistic phrasing)
通	통	Counter for letters, documents
差入	차입	Sending goods (food, clothes, books) to prisoners from outside
面會	면회	Meeting; visitation (in prison)
所幹	소간	Business; errand; matter to attend to
널판장	널판장	Wooden plank wall/enclosure
뻘간	빨간	Red (Older spelling)
廊下	낭하	Corridor; hallway
절盜房	절도방	Theft cell (cell for thieves)
放火房	방화방	Arson cell
殺人房	살인방	Murder cell
강간房	강간방	Rape cell
矩形房	구형방	Rectangular room
빗짱	빗장	Wooden door latch/bolt
감시구멍	감시 구멍	Peephole; observation hole
공긔구멍	공기 구멍	Air hole; vent (Older spelling of 공기)
어그맥겨	엇멕여/엇갈려	Alternating; interspersing (Older form/dialect)
橫隊	횡대	Horizontal line/formation
옴	옴	Scabies
수지	수지	Paper scrap; toilet paper (Archaic usage)
無期刑囚	무기형수	Prisoner serving a life sentence
콩쉬수밥	콩수수밥?	Rice mixed with beans and possibly sorghum/millet (Unclear exact grain, older term)
소금국	소금국	Salt soup
증세	증세	Symptom; condition
거적뙈기	거적때기	Scrap of straw mat
벳집	볏집	Rice straw
바누질	바느질	Sewing (Older spelling)
싸홈	싸움	Fight; quarrel (Older spelling)
호령	호령	Command; roar; yell
공통면회	공통면회	Joint meeting/visitation
담구멍	담구멍	Hole in the wall (for speaking through during visits)
독서	독서	Reading
꼬치	꼬챙이?	Skewer; pointed stick (used for writing?)
밀서	밀서	Secret letter
간수	간수	Prison guard
호랭이	호랑이	Tiger (Nickname for a guard)
생우	새우	Shrimp (Used metaphorically)
할멈	할멈	Old woman (Nickname for a guard)
코홀색이	코흘리개	Snot-nosed kid (Nickname for a guard)
콘밥	콩밥	Bean rice (Nickname for warden based on mispronunciation)
전옥	전옥	Warden (Older term)
假出獄	가출옥	Parole; temporary release
赤水	적수	Red water
몽동이	몽둥이	Club; baton
쌍간나색기	쌍간나새끼	Son of a bitch; bastard (Strong profanity)
生鮮	생선	Fish
外樣	외양	Appearance; outward look
옴감옥	옴감옥	Scabies prison
强窃盜	강절도	Robbery and theft
詐欺	사기	Fraud
受刑者	수형자	Convict; person serving a sentence
콩밥	콩밥	Bean rice (Staple prison food)
된장국	된장국	Soybean paste soup
무말냉이	무말랭이	Dried radish strips
콩긔름	콩기름	Bean oil; soybean oil (Older spelling)
石飯	석반	Stone rice (Rice containing stones)
作亂軍	작란군	Troublemaker; rebellious soldier/person
月明鐵窓	월명철창	Moonlit iron bars
恨鳥	한조	Resentful bird (Often refers to the cuckoo)
白衣聖容	백의성용	White-clothed holy figure (Symbolic reference, possibly to suffering prisoners)
第一次 黨	제1차 당	First Party (Referring to a specific political group arrest)
屬	속	Type; kind; category
옴독	옴독	Scabies rash/poison
全鮮	전선	All of Korea
花崗石	화강석	Granite
破獄	파옥	Prison break
脫走囚	탈주수	Escaped prisoner
拘置監	구치감	Detention center (within a prison, often for those awaiting trial)
調室	조실	Investigation room
靑衣	청의	Blue clothes (Possibly a type of prison uniform)
上官室	상관실	Superior's office
간수부장	간수부장	Chief guard
세멘트	시멘트	Cement
멍석	멍석	Large straw mat
守衛	수위	Guarding; security
젯걱	절걱/철컥	Clank; clang (Sound of metal)
雜房	잡방	Shared cell; miscellaneous room
표시기	표시기	Indicator; sign
철강	철강	Steel bars
세수분	세수분	Washbasin
음료수통	음료수통	Drinking water container
변기	변기	Toilet; bedpan
목재	목재	Wood; lumber
취침	취침	Sleeping; bedtime
침구	침구	Bedding
기상	기상	Waking up
점검	점검	Roll call; inspection
被告	피고	Defendant
數爻	수효	Number; count
禮	례	Bow; courtesy; etiquette (Older spelling of 예)
난경	난경	Difficult situation; predicament; trouble
思想犯	사상범	Thought criminal; political prisoner
橫暴한 대우	횡포한 대우	Violent/tyrannical treatment
이닥그	이쑤시개? 칫솔?	Toothpick or rudimentary toothbrush? (Unclear, archaic term)
소곰	소금	Salt (Older spelling)
胡米좁쌀	호미좁쌀	Foxtail millet? (Specific grain combination)
字栢	자백?	Label/mark on food portion? (Unclear unit/term)
뎅이	덩이	Lump; chunk (Portion of rice)
私食	사식	Food sent in from outside
犯則	범칙	Violation; infraction
檢房	검방	Cell inspection
庭園	정원	Garden
樓木	누목?	Tree? Pavilion? (Unclear, possibly typo for 수목 樹木?)
書信	서신	Letter; correspondence
賤薄	천박	Lowly; vulgar; superficial
書籍差入	서적 차입	Delivery of books from outside
學校敎科書	학교 교과서	School textbook
字典	자전	Dictionary (Character dictionary)
社會科學書籍	사회과학 서적	Social science book
合法出版物	합법 출판물	Legal publication
豫審	예심	Preliminary examination/hearing (Pre-trial process)
出廷	출정	Court appearance
拙筆	졸필	Poor writing; humble expression for one's own writing
制令	제령	Decree; ordinance (Colonial era law)
治安維持法	치안유지법	Peace Preservation Law (Used to suppress dissent)
述懷	술회	Reminiscence; reflection
木製	목제	Wooden
쇠구물창	쇠그물창	Iron grating window
暗處	암처	Dark place
獄則	옥칙	Prison rules
賞標	상표	Reward mark; badge
優	우	Excellent (Grade/rating)
不良	불량	Poor; bad (Grade/rating)
特點	특점	Special privilege; characteristic
쇠사슬줄	쇠사슬줄	Iron chain
獨步	독보	Walking alone (Privilege of not being chained)
호미	조	Foxtail millet (Type of grain)
담배빨죽	담배 빨대?	Tobacco pipe stem? (Unclear term)
 家具	가구	Furniture
구물뜨기	그물뜨기	Net making
와라지	짚신	Straw sandals (Japanese term わらじ used)
삼끼	새끼 꼬기	Rope twisting (Making rope from straw)
營繕	영선	Construction and repairs
배쎔	배짱/고집	Stubbornness; defiance; nerve (Dialect/Colloquial?)
黙認	묵인	Tacit approval; connivance
大便	대변	Defecation; bowel movement
喜悲劇	희비극	Tragicomedy
宣傳	선전	Propaganda
獄內의 通信	옥내 통신	Internal prison communication
이 껌피	이쑤시개?	Toothpick? (Unclear term, 껌피 might mean skin/peel)
연필조각	연필 조각	Pencil fragment
獄外에 通信	옥외 통신	External communication (mail)
發信	발신	Sending mail
來信	내신	Receiving mail
이력	이력	Skill; knack; experience
휘장	휘장	Curtain
소대가리	소대가리	Cow's head (Insult: blockhead, stupid person)
다무시	백선/버짐	Ringworm; skin fungus (Japanese タムシ?)
늑막염	늑막염	Pleurisy
세수대아	세숫대야	Washbasin (Older spelling)
五福	오복	Five Blessings (Used ironically)
量少	양소	Small amount (Implied: of food)
體少	체소	Small body? Less physical burden? (Unclear meaning in context)
言少	언소	Few words; speaking little
心少	심소	Few worries? Peace of mind? (Unclear meaning in context)
刑期少	형기소	Short sentence


---------------------------


잡지명	동광 제27호
발행일	1931년 11월 10일
기사제목	監獄의 鄕土色, 釜山·大邱·西大門·海洲·平壤
기사형태	회고·수기

監獄의 鄕土色, 釜山·大邱·西大門·海洲·平壤
무서운 시어미 釜山刑務所
朴日馨

東光社로부터 釜山刑務所의 특색을 써 달라는 부탁이 왓다.
朝鮮의 刑務所를 일본이나 기타의 諸外國刑務所와 비교한다거나 資本主義諸國의 刑務所를 쏘베트 同盟의 그것과 비교하야 그 우열의 특색을 찾아보라는 것쯤은 오히려 용이할 것이니 그것은 각자가 혹은 行刑上의 수준이 不一하며 혹은 立法의 근본정신을 달리하야 문제의 기본으로부터 이미 顯然한 특색을 가지고 잇는 까닭이다.
그러나 동일한 입법정신, 동일한 行刑水準, 동일한 統率機關하에 配備된 朝鮮內의 諸 감옥을 互相比較하야 그 특색을 찾아본다는 것은 서울의 거리거리에 配備된 公衆便所를 일일히 巡訪하야 그 醜汚한 臭氣中의 특색을 査探하는 것과 비슷하게 힘드는 일일 것이다. 물론 그 직접적 관리자의 爲人如何에 따라 多少의 變異가 생기지 안는 것도 아니겟으나 그 差度가 대체 특색의 정도에까지 이를것인가는 의문이다. 그리고 설혹 이러타 할 특색이 잇다고 할지라도 그 특색은 조선이란 政治分區의 통치방침이 그 일원적 원리를 변치안는 한에서는 항상 강력한 수평운동에 의하야 不斷히 除斥(특히 그 進步인 부분이) 됨을 입을 것이다. 우리는 그 실례를 최근 西大門刑務所의 圖書(在監人에게 差入하는) 檢閱水準의 급격한 저하에서도 볼 수 잇지 않은가.
더구나 공중변소에의 출입은 특별한 事變을 예상하지 안는 한에서는 자유일 것이오 刑務所에의 출입은 事情이 이것과도 판이하니 이 점에서 이 일의 어려움은 더욱 현저할 것이다.
나는 최근까지에 서나차례 釜山刑務所를 드나든 일이 잇다. 그래서 未備하나마 그 곳의 시설과 習俗에 대해서는 약간의 지식을 가지고 잇다.. 그러나 그것이 다른 곳에 비하야 얼마나 한 특색이 되는가는 똑똑히 말할 근거를 가지지 못하엿다. 釜山 이외의 刑務所로는 대구에 잠간동안 잇서본 일이 잇슬 뿐이니 나는 주로 대구와 부산을 비교하야 그 상이한 者 멫 가지를 적어볼까 한다.

留置場이라면 이(蝨)를 연상하고 감옥이라면 『빈대』를 생각하게 되는 것이 보통이다. 아니 오히려 鐵則일 것이다. 이러케도 빈대는 감옥의 명물인 것이다. 그런데 釜山 刑務所만은 불철저하나마＜46＞ 이 鐵則으로부터 조그만은 예외를 짓고잇는 셈이다. 己未年에 내가 지금은 없어진 옛날의 釜山刑務所에를 가 보앗슬때쯤은 거기도 확실히 남부럽지 않을만한 빈대가 저장되어 잇섯엇다. 그런데 지금의 釜山刑務所는 새로 짓은지가 얼마 안되는 까닭인지 벌어진 문틈, 壁틈에서 빈대를 잡아내기가 가난뱅이의 주머니속에서 동전을 뒤저내기 만큼이나 하엿다. 그러나 그것도 지금은 발서 일년이나 지난 묵은일이 되어버리엇다.

다음으로 식사이야기를 하자. 釜山의 밥은 조(粟) 다섯, 콩(大豆) 셋, 기장(黍) 둘 - 이러케 配合된다. 이것을 조 다섯, 콩 셋, 쌀 둘인 大邱의 밥과 비하면 일홈만이라도 쌀이 빠저서 섭섭하게 생각될는지 모르겟다. 그러나 그 맛(哧)에 잇서서는 쌀없는 釜山밥이 훨신 먹음직하다. 더구나 작년 5월 이래 종래에 적든 메기장을 차기장으로 고친 뒤로는 밥맛이 실로 훌늉해 젓다. 씹을스록 단 맛이 샘솟듯하는 그 밥맛! 그러치만 釜山은 大邱보담 밥의 분량이 무척 적다. 즉 大邱서는 최소 분량이 7等인데 釜山은 9等이다. 물론 大邱의 7등밥이 釜山의 9등밥과 동량인 것은 아니다. 그러나 大邱의 基本等級인 7등과 釜山의 基本等級인 9등 간에는 상당한 분량상의 거리가 잇는 것이다. 그리고 부산은 해변이니 생선 뼉다귀 삶은 물이라도 좀 잘 먹으려니하고 생각하다가는 실망이다. 대체로 釜山의 음식은 맛득지 못한 편이다.

음식이 맛득지 못하면 위생시설이나 빤빤한가? 하면 그러치도 못하다. 원래 병 없는 몸이라 病監에까지는 가보지 못하엿으나 조그만은 진찰은 받아보앗는데 醫務係員이 반듯이 청진기를 들고 어설렁거리기라도 하는 大邱에 비하면 긔곳해야 혓바닥이나 먼빛에서 물꺼름이 보고가는 부산의 의료는 문제가 안될 지경이다. 그리고 未決囚나 監房作業을 하는 囚人에게는 하로 한 번 최대의 活力素인 운동도 그 시간이 터무니없이 短促하다. 단지 좀 나은 것이 (大邱보담) 잇다면 똥통이 한 감방에 두 個 폭으로 잇어서 매일매일 깨끗이 볕에 말린 새것을 들여놓는 것이 그것일 것이다.

未決 혹은 旣決囚에게 差入되는 圖書의 檢閱水準은 어떠한가? 물론 지극히 固陋하고도 無知하다. 철학서적으로는 帆足理一郞의 哲學槪論이 不許되고 經濟學書籍이면 福田德三의 國民經濟學이 툇자다. 그런데 이런 곳에서 『헤-겔 論理學』이 허가되엇으니 壯觀이고 波多野精一의 西洋哲學史따위도 日本사람에게라야 許可되니 집질이다. 그리고 외국어의 소위 原書면은 受付係에서부터 『却下』로 작정인 모양이다.

발서 所定의 紙數가 다 되엇는데... 이것은 언젠지 내가 裁判所의 넓은 비둘기통에서 全朝鮮의 감옥을 잇는대로 돌아다녓다는 詐欺쟁이 日人에게서 들은 이야긴데 규율이 嚴酷하기로는 釜山이 西大門보담도 못하지 안으리라는 것이다. 하기는 獨房이오 雜居房인 關係도 잇엇겟지만 나의 경험으로 보면 釜山은 무서운 시어미의 眼前과 같엇고 大邱는 내 집 사랑과 같은 感이 잇엇다.
그리고 『刑事被告人은 此限에 不在하다』는 監獄法의 所定이 잇슴에도 불구하고 釜山서는 普通 一週 一通밖에 편지를 쓸 수가 없다. 이것을 一日三通씩을 매일 쓸 수 잇는 大邱와 비교는 해서 무엇하랴!

참! 특기할 釜山刑務所의 特色 한가지가 잇다. 이것은 정작 在監中에는 몰랏다가 다른 동지가 들어갓슬때에 差入도하고 面會도 하러다니노라고 속속들이 안 일이거니와 그 곳의 受付係에 잇는 日本婦人은 이상하다는 생각이 날만큼 친절하다. 분명히 하기 힘들 일도 그의 친절로써 어렵잔케 한 전례가 한 둘이 아니다. 그리고 이러한 그 부인의 친절은 특정한 시간, 특정한 사람에게만 그런 것이 아니라 언제나, 누구에게나 한결같이 그러하다. 내가 近著에 멫 번 서울 근처에 잇는 모 刑務所에 所幹이 잇서서 갓다가 그 곳 受付係에 잇는 조선친구의 사람못될 꼴을 보고는 문득문득 이 釜山의 名物이 생각낫다.
-(1931. 10. 18) ＜47＞

大邱女監의 0141號
黃愛德

1919년 愛O婦人會事件으로 9명의 동지와 같이 未決까지 합하야 3년 동안을 大邱 감옥에서 살앗습니다. 歲月은 흘러서 10여년이나 지낫으니 其間 多少 變化가 없지도 않을 것입니다마는 인간의 別天地 監獄에 무슨 큰 變化가 잇겟습니까.
그때에 정든 세상 인연을 뚝 끊고 끌리워간 조고만 세상은 껌언 널판장으로 들러쌔와 잇엇습니다. 그까지 널판장하나 넝큼 뛰어 넘엇으면 다시 자유로운 세상에 돌아올 것을 그러나 판결이 난 후의 나의 이름은 「0141號」 뻘간 옷깃에 이름을 달고 일 잘한다고 상표까지 단 충실한 감옥나라 사람이엇습니다.
집은 벽돌집 男監이 사랑채라 하면 女監은 안채, 그러나 이 두 집 사이에는 누구나 범접하지 못할 담장이 가루막혀 잇습니다. 그 담장의 꽉 닫힌 문을 벙싯열고 드나드는 사람은 오직 밥 나르는 無期刑囚가 잇엇을 따름입니다. 이 사람들이 밥을 날라다 女監문 앞에 놓아 주면 빨간 옷 입은 여자들이 들어 옵니다.
女監의 監房은 일곱인데 東西로 늘어진 廊下가 다흔 四便 끝에 未決房, 그 옳은편에 절盜房이 잇고, 廊下를 딸아 東쪽으로 꺽이면서 放火房, 殺人房, 강간房 등 다섯 방이 쭈르니 나라니 해 잇습니다. 내가 처음에 들어갓든 방은 절도방인데 三間에서 더 되지 못하는 矩形房에 제일 많이 잇을때에는 24명, 보통 20명이 잇엇습니다. 빗짱을 열고 벙싯 감방문을 열엇다가 덜컹하고 다시 문이 닫히엇다고 상상하지오. 그 덜컹하는 소리가 어떠캐 음산하고 처량하고 무서웟든지 모르겟습니다. 그 닫힌 문을 바라보면 밥구멍이 잇고 그 조금 우에 간수들이 10분만에 한 번씩 감시하는 감시구멍이 잇습니다. 밖에서 쇠조각을 달삭들고 철사를 통하야 겨우 두 눈이 반작어리고 보는 일본 여 간수가 잇습니다. 문과 마주 대한 담벽에는 놉다라케 유리로 막은 두 구멍이 잇을 뿐. 공긔구멍도 아무것도 없습니다. 꼭꼭백이는 나무판장에 수무명이나 되는 빨간 옷입은 사람들이 머리와 다리를 어그맥겨 반대방면으로 두고 누엇을때에 널판 담벽 틈사리에는 빈대가 일제공격을 시작할랴는 듯이 橫隊로 정열하고 잇는데 말도 마십시오. 이가 어떠케 많은지. 그러고 옴! 한편 구석에는 똥통-이것은 매일 한번씩 女監 문밖에 메어다 두면 男監에서 우리는 아지 못하는 새에 내다 버려 줍니다. 우리의 全財産은 이것이고 이 밖에 하루에 한 두장씩 주는 수지가 잇습니다 .이 수지야 말로 감방내의 紙幣보다 더 귀한 물건입니다.
우리의 일은 무려 13시간! 그런데 밥은 콩쉬수밥에 소금-그때의 우리 멫 사람은 매일 한끼씩 差入이라는 특별한 특점을 받아서 요행이 한 끼도 식사에 부족은 느끼지 않앗습니다마는 나는 콩밥에 소금국을 먹다가 이를 다처서 지금도 성하지 못한채로 잇습니다. 그 밥이야말로 더러운 물건의 쓰럭이통 세상의 부정한 물건은 다 들어 잇으니 그것을 먹고도 사는 사람이 용하지오. 나는 그때부터 위생이란 소용없는 것으로 압니다.
내가 또 한가지 감옥에서 남겨가지고 온 것은 다리 앞은 증센데 하루에 열 세 시간이나 일본사람같이 꼭 쪼꾸려 앉어서 일을하니 죽어 백이지오. 우리의 일하는 널판장으로 만든 집에는 그냥 흙에다가 가마니 뜨든 거적뙈기를 펴놓은 것이 방바닥인데 그 습한 것은 둘째로 하고 깔고 앉는 방석이라는 것이 벳집으로 엮엇는데 꼭꼭백여서 죽을 지경입니다. 그 고통을 이저버리누라고 불이나케 바누질을 하는데 같은 사건으로 들어갓든 우리 멫 사람은 다른 사람이 두 서너벌 하는 새에 여듧벌까지 해보앗습니다.
목욕은 한 주일에 한 번. 한 목욕탕에 女監囚 全部 백 이삼십명이 다 하고 나니 맨 마즈막에는 흙탕물-세상 싫은 것이 목욕이엇습니다. 겨우 3분간동안 이지마는 도리어 1분간도＜48＞ 아니햇으면 하엿습니다.
내가 잇는 방은 절도방이엇는데 제일 고약하엿습니다. 사람들이 어떠케 더럽고 마음성이 나뿐지 서로 엇바꿔 누어잇으면서 창자가 꿰지게 쿡쿡차고 야단이니 그 광경이야 굉장하지오. 싸홈과 욕설. 간수의 말도 듣지 않고 하루에 2 3분式 운동 겸 소풍을 쏘이는 것 때리는 것 밥 조꼼 주는 것 등 암만 형벌을 가하여도 듣지 않고 사람들이 어떠케 고약한지 한 번은 내가 未決로 잇을 때 差入들인 옷을 입고 잇엇는데 내가 잠을 들은줄 알고 막 코를 부비고 춤을 콱콱 받앗습니다. 암만 타일러도 듣지 않기에 한 번은 고약한 것이라고 호령을 햇더니 그제야 즘 나지고 그 후에는 일요 오후 (午前은 일요에도 불구하고 일. 그때에 여간수는 다 기독교인이엇습니다.) 마다 글도 가르치고 성경 말슴도 하여 주엇더니 그 후부터는 선생님 선생님하면서 따랏습니다. 그러고 제각기 자기방 선생님(우리 아홉사람)이 좋다고 자랑들을 하엿습니다.
우리 멫 사람에게는 특별히 공통면회가 잇어서 西洋婦人이 와서 기도도 하고 하엿습니다. 普通 個人 면회는 면회실에서 담구멍을 대하야 서로 말하다가 시간이 얼마되기전에 간수가 그 구멍문을 닫아버리는 것 같앗습니다.
독서는 다 未決때에는 아무때나 두 책을 보고나면 다른 두 책을 들여 주엇는데 旣決에서는 일하기에 책 볼 여가가 없엇습니다. 監房 內 통신은 수지에 무슨 구둔 꼬치로 꼭꼭 자리를 내서 쓰면 掃除하러 다니든 無期囚가 눈치빠르게 전하여 주는데 간수의 눈을 숨겨 가면서 밀서를 전하는 민첩한 수완은 놀랠만합니다. 간수는 전부 일본녀자 여섯명 그 중에 그 혹독한 「호랭이」 눈만뜨면 보통 죄수들은 부들부들 떨엇습니다. 「요호」 이것은 감시 구멍으로 디려다보고는 우리가 추워서 例의 머리와 다리를 서로 반대방향으로 놓고 꼬부라치고 누어잇으면 큰생우 작은생우 잘논다 하면서 놀려대고 눈을 빤작이며 다녓습니다.
철이 갈리워 세상에서는 겹껏을 입을 때에 홋것을 그냥 입고 이불 하나 없이 잇을때에는 사실 여간 춥지 않습니다. 홋것을 벗고는 곳 솜옷을 입으니까요. 이 때에 추운것과 더러운 목욕, 또 한가지 더러운 옷 짓는 것- 옷은 우리가 짓지마는 그 더럽고 옴, 림질 가진 각색 병균의 진득진득하는 옷 전부를 男監罪囚가 빨래하여오면 그 빨래 햇다는 것이 안한것만 같지 못하게 몬지가 펄석펄석 나는 그 옷하는 것-이 세가지는 나에게 가장 겪이 어려운 三大苦痛이엇습니다. 빈대, 이, 타는 사람은 그것이 제일 괴로웟을 것이지마는. 그것은 그러코 간수중에는 「할멈」, 「코홀색이」 또 하나는 이저 버렷습니다마는 간수부장이라는 사람(남자)는 콩밥을 콘밥콘밥하는 까닭에 「콘밥」이라는 별명을 지어주엇습니다.
하루는 백여명이 되는 빨간 옷 퍼런 옷 입은 여 죄수가 쪼꾸리고 앉어서 분주히 바늘을 온기고 잇을때에 전옥이 들어와서 우리 멫 사람의 이름을 부르고 假出獄을 命하엿습니다. 그때 모든 罪囚들은 간수의 말리는 소리도 듣지않고 우리가 나가는 것을 아껴서 목을 놓아 울엇습니다. 女監이 다 울도록 그들은 우리가 잇을동안 3년 지난 것이 사흘 지난 것 같이 재미잇엇다고 하면서 울때에 서로 정답게 글도 배워주든 생각을 하고 그들과 같이 더 잇엇으면 하는 마음까지 뜨거운 눈에 떠올라 왓습니다. 그때 잇는 사람중에 아직도 나마잇는 사람은 없겟지마는 大邱 刑務所를 한 번 찾아보고 싶습니다.

옴 監獄! 西大門監獄
宋奉瑀

全土監獄을 한 번 쭉 들너보면서 그것들의 특색을 하나式 집어낸다면 新義州 監獄은 赤水 監獄 (赤水란 것은 이 監獄의 물은 빩애서 힌 물건을 물에 담그면 곳 赤色으로 변한다.) 京城監獄은 일 감옥, 太田監獄은 몽동이 監獄, 大邱監獄은 싸홈 監獄, 咸興監獄은 쌍간나색기 監獄, 淸津監獄은 生鮮監獄, 海洲監獄은 外樣監獄, 그리고 西大門監獄은 옴감옥이다.＜49＞
나는 옴감옥! 西大門監獄이야기를 써보자.

앞으로 北岳山이 우뚝솟아잇고 뒤로는 길마재가 구버보고 잇는 소위 金鷄洞이란 곳에 西大門監獄이 座定을 하고잇다.
彼女는 수많은 혁명가와 志士를 비롯하야 强窃盜 그리고 詐欺 등등으로 끄집어 드리어 온 受刑者를 품고 잇는데 이 속에 들어가보면 밖앝에서 곁눈질하야 보든것과는 아조 딴판으로 조고만한 사회를 이루고 잇다. 키 큰 놈 키 적은 놈, 잘난 놈, 못난 놈, 어린이, 나 많은 이 젊은이, 女人등등이 살고잇다. 의복은 이 사람 저사람 할 것없이 사회에서야 돈이 잇고 지위가 잇엇던지 없엇던지 또는 지식이 잇던지 없던지 그리고 또는 정치범이던지 잡범이던지 모조리 깡그리 붉은 옷을 입고 잇다. 밥은 두말 할 것 없이 콩밥이요 반찬은 대개가 된장국 무말냉이 일주일에 한 번 式 생선토막 미역국, 콩긔름 등등이요 가을이 되면 파국, 호박국 배채국도 준다. 이 반찬들 가운데 여름철에 주는 감자가 맛이 잇다. 그 맛이야말로 明月舘料理나 朝鮮호텔 料理따위는 名啣도 못드릴만치 되어잇다. 그러케 맛난 것이 요리를 잘하여서가 아니라 그 안에 잇는 사람들의 입에는 그러케 맛이 잇다는 말이다. 음식으로 말하면 과히 나쁘지 안은 택이다. 그러나 지금 소장이 오기 전 -즉 第一次 黨 사람들이 受刑服을 가리입기 前에는 참으로 음식이란 말 못되엇더니라.
밥은 콩밥이 아니라 돌(石) 밥이엇섯다. 그리하야 어떤 作亂軍은
三食石飯모두食
月明鐵窓쿨쿨宿
恨鳥(삑국새)獄山삑국哭
白衣聖容줄줄淚
이란 詩를 지엇다. 『石飯』 이란 것이 내가 지금 말하는 西大門監獄의 밥이엇섯다. 그러던 것이 第一次黨 동지들이 受刑日부터 새로 갈려 온 橫山所長에게 따저서 음식, 위생, 운동 등이 고첫다. 그래서 그 후 부터는 돌도 그리 많지 않앗고 또는 반찬등 屬도 좀 나아젓섯다.
빈대도 명물이다. 그러나 이것쯤은 裟婆에도 잇는곳은 잇는 것이니 그다지 신통치는 아니하다마는 옴만은 명물임에 틀림이 없다. 受刑人들이 身體檢査를 받을 때, 모조리 옷을 벗는다. 그들의 몸에서 푸릿푸릿한 곳이 點點한 것을 볼 수 잇나니 이것이 옴독이다. 옴독이라도 그리 흉한 것은 첨 보앗다. 10人의 受刑人의 몹동아리에는 6, 7인은 모두가 옴쟁이다. 이것을 혹자는 말키를 콩독이라고 한다. 그러나 이것은 콩독은 아니다. 옴이다.
全鮮 어느 감옥을 물론하고 옴으로는 西大門監獄이 第一일 것이다.
옴감옥! 西大門監獄에 대한 이야기가 많다. 아직도 그러나 내가 가진바 시간은 붓끝가는 대로 두지를 않는다. 後日로 밀기로 하자.

海洲刑務所의 特色
海洲 元鐵

내가 처음으로 刑務所안에 발을 디려 놓을때는 오후 여덜시경이엇다. 海洲에서도 유명한 花崗石으로 높다라케 鐵壁울 쌓놓은 우중충한 속으로 밤 공기를 헤치고 끌려들어가게 되엇다. 萬象은 죽은 듯이 孤寥하엿다. 일즉히 맛보지 못하든 陰酸한 공기와 우울한 기분은 몹시도 銳敏하엿든 나의 머리를 餘地없이도 蹂躪하는 것 같하엿다. 海洲의 刑務所는 건물로도 굉장하지만 위치에 잇어서도 경치좋키로 유명한 남산줄를타고 나려가(笠嶺) 사갓재라는 곳에 들러앉아잇다. 견고하고 굉장하기로는 全朝鮮에서 멫재 안가리라고 믿는다. 花崗石이 많은 海洲이니 만큼 刑務所에 外壁으로 담안에 조고마한 庭物까지 全部가 힌 花崗石으로 되어잇다. 설립 이래 멫 개 星霜이 되기까지 한번도 破獄이나 脫走囚같은 것이 比較的 적은 것을 볼적에 이만하면 얼마나 견고하고 조직적인 것은 인간의 두뇌로 상상할 수 잇는 일이다. 총 평수는 자세히 알 수 없으나 약 3만평쯤 된다. 그리고 正門은 北便을 향하고 後方으로는 南山을 배경으로 하고잇다. 물론 山腹에는 조고마케 집을 짓고 종일토록 간수가 직히고 잇다. 그리고 正門으로 향하야 외인便 쪽으로＜50＞ 女監이 잇고 오른편 쪽으로 제일 北側에 놓여잇는 것이 拘置監이다. 이것은 내가 監獄안에서 약 1個月 후에 안 것이다. 처음에 調室이라는 곳으로 들어가서 靑衣로 갈아입고 所謂 上官室이라는 곳으로 끌려 들어가 住所 姓名 職業 前科의 유무를 一律的으로 믓고 바로 간수부장이 끌고 拘置監으로 향한다. 拘置監門안을 들어서자 第一 첫재 눈에 띠이는 것은 밑바닥은 세멘트로 하고 감방 압줄로 멍석 비슷한 것을 까럿다. 아마 이것은 守衛하는 看守들에 발자최소래를 안들리게 한 것 같다. 監戊�에 들어가기 전에 다시 한 번 의복전부를 베껴보고 심지어 수건까지도 흘터본다. 그리고는 젯걱하고 여는 감방문 소래는 처음 듣는 나에게 잇어서는 몹시도 듣기에 거북하엿다. 내가 처음 들어간 감방은 12방(雜房)움´엿다. 정면으로는 표시기가 잇고 左側에는 門이 잇다. 문에는 看守의 눈이 겨우 보일만하게 구멍이 뚤려저잇고 아래로 밥들이는 구멍이 잇다. 그리고 左側으로는 얼골 上半面이 보일만하게 또 하나 구멍이 잇다. 그리고 이 두 구멍은 전부 철강으로 막어잇다. 후방에는 窓이 두 개 잇으나 몹시 높히 붙어 외경은 물론 아니보인다 이것도 모다 鐵棒으로 무겁게 박어놓앗다. 이상은 어떠한 감옥이나 大綱 같을줄 안다. 그 이외에는 세수분과 음료수통과 그리고 변기도 목재로 되어잇다. 밤 아훕시가 되면 취침을 선언한다. 침구는 一枚에 3명식 덮도록 되어잇다. 차디찬 마루바닥에다 열분 자리 한 장을 깔고 자도록 되어잇다. 아츰 일곱시에 종소래는 기상하라는 소래인 것으로 알앗다. 형무소에 대한 지식이라든지 경험이 없는 나에게 잇어서는 모든 것이 신산하엿다. 起床한지 2,3분후에 점검이 시작된다. 간수부장이 와서 被告들의 數爻를 맛추어 보는 것이다. 上官에게 禮를 해야 된다고 한다. 만약 禮같은 것을 아니한다든지 하면 그야말로 난경을 치게 되는 것이다. 思想犯이 적으니만치 나도 雜犯들과 같이 橫暴한 대우를 아니 받을 수 없엇다. 點檢이 지난 뒤에 간수가 이닥그라고 소곰을 준다. 세면이 끈난 뒤에는 콩밥을 들여준다. 胡米좁쌀에 콩을 석거서 1, 2字栢을 박어준다. 이것을 한 뎅이식 먹고 살아가겐 된다. 그리고 만약 私食을 먹는 사람으로서 다른 사람에게 조금이라도 주는 것이 발견되면 그야말로 준사람이나 먹은 사람이나 감방문 밖으로 끌어내어서 실컨 때린 후에 보고를 하고 私食과 私服을 15일씩이나 정지시키고 이러한 犯則을 3, 4회 거듬 발견당하면 아주 私食을 끊어버리고 만다. 식사가 끝난뒤에는 檢房이다. 檢房과 동시에 운동도 시킨다. 운동이라야 拘置監앞 庭園에 樓木을 싸고 3, 4회 돌고 들어갈 뿐이다. 朝鮮人 간수 같은 것은 절대로 拘置監은 지키지 안는다. 웨 그런지 日本人 看守監이 담당을 한다. 그리고 목욕은 일주일에 한 번식 잇스나 5분 동안밖에 아니시킨다. 면회같은 것은 대강. 같으나 가족이외에는 누구에게나 거절이다. 혹시 간수의 난폭한 행동이나 監房內의 위생상 불철저한 것을 가지고 소장을 면회하려하나 그들은 종시 듣지 안는 것이 海洲刑務所의 특색이다. 書信은 未決監에 잇어서는 10일간에 1회식 형무소 규칙에 잇으나 실은 1개월에 두 번식밖에 더 許하지 안는다. 편지에는 英語같은 것을 쓰지 못하게 하니 이것이 海洲刑務所의 政策인지 그러치 않으면 간수들의 지식수준이 賤薄하여 검열하기에 곤란하니까 쓰지말라는지 알 수 없다.
書籍差入같은데 잇어서도 學校敎科書나 그러치 않으면 字典 같은것에 한하엿슬 뿐이지 社會科學書籍 같은 合法出版物이든 어떠한 것이든지 아니들여 주는 것도 海洲刑務所에 고유한 특징의 하나이다.
내가 豫審으로 잇기는 약 6개월의 짤분 기간이엇으나 그 동안에 한 번도 出廷한 적이 없섯다. 豫審으로 3, 4년식이나(一行略)하고 싶은 일이 이외에도 얼마든지 잇으나 自由스러운 사람이 되지 못하는나만큼 이만 拙筆 하려한다.
-(1931. 10. 7)- ＜51＞

平壤刑務所의 11工場
李剛

上海臨時XX議政院 議長되엇든 것이 원인이 되어 制令 及 治安維持法 違反으로 未決을 合하야 2년 6月의 형을 마추고 나온 1607號의 述懷!
곳은 平壤, 平壤은 岩町 平壤刑務所 널판장 한 겹으로 세상과 인연을 끊은 이 곳에는 監房 다섯이 잇으니 외부는 木製나 內面은 차지찬 세멘트. 마루방바닥 한 편 구석에는 변기가 놓여잇고 뒤에는 비록 쇠구물창이 잇으나 공기창과 밥구멍이 잇는 묵어운 문을 떨컹 열고 한 번 들어 가는 날이면 낮이나 밤이나 감옥은 (四行畧) 그 罪狀의 정도를 따라서 캄캄한 暗處에 가두우는 等 刑務所 내의 刑罰이 여러 가지 잇지마는 한 편에는 그 질서를 유지해 나가기 위하야 品行端正하고 獄則을 잘 직히는 사람에게 賞標를 부처주고 不良에서 優가 되도록 賞標를 많이 달게되면 假出獄까지 시켜주는 일이 잇습니다. 賞標 부친 사람의 特點은 飮食上 差別은 없지마는 쇠사슬줄에 매와서 간수에게 끌리워 단니지 아니하고 「獨步」의 特點을 가질수 잇습니다. 賞標고 무엇이고 罪囚야 罪囚지오. 밥은 호미와 콩밥, 쌀 구경이라고는 하지 못합니다. 반찬이라고는 소금, 그 밖에 아츰에는 소금국을 주고 저녁에는 된장국을 얻어 먹엇습니다. 만일 밥 먹을 때에 물을 많이 먹어두지 않으면 갈증이 나서 야단이지오. 여름에나 물을 조금 줄 따름이니.
콩밥을 얻어먹고, 하는 일은 담배빨죽, 家具 구두, 洋服 만드는 것 구물뜨기 「와라지」 삼끼, 이 밖에 벽돌일, 營繕 등이 잇지마는 제일 많은 것은 일본 옷감 짜는 것인데 이것이 6할 가량이나 점녕합니다. 우리의 50여 명이 일하든 곳은 11공장 여기서는 마음대로 배쎔을 뻐처도 웬만한 일이면 간수들도 할 수 없이 黙認하엿습니다. 普通이면 平壤刑務所工場에서는 大便을 못보게 하여서 그 자리에서 뒤를 보는 喜悲劇도 연출하는 일도 잇지마는 11공장에서는 그러치 않앗습니다. 누구나 간수앞에 뚜벅뚜벅 나가서 한 번 껀득 禮를 하고는 제 마음대로 大便票를 집어가지고 하엿습니다. 그러다가 刑務所內鬪爭이 심하여진 까닭에 처음에는 宣傳한다고 몰아두엇든 政治犯도 내가 나온지 얼마 후에는 갈라 잇게 되엇다고 합니다. 獄內의 通信은 간수의 눈을 피해가면서 수지에 이 껌피를 내서하고 연필조각을 감추엇다. 하는 일도 잇습니다. 獄外에 通信은 發信이 2個月에 한 번 來信은 얼마던지 받습니다. 그러나 發信도 특별한 경우에는 특별히 할 수 잇스니 이력만 나면 더 할 수 잇습니다. 면회도 두 달에 한 번 監房과 떠러저잇는 조고만 한 방에 끌리워 나가면 휘장이 열리고 거기는 나를 찾아보러 온 사람이 억막히 서 잇는데 하든 말이 뚝 끊어지고 서로 처다만 보는때는 30분이라는 면회시간이 3분도 못되어서 휘장이 다처집니다. 더 할 말이 잇다고 看守에게 야단을 하면 혹시 소대가리가 잇다가 더 말하게 하라고 휘장을 열어주기도 합니다.
監房에 제일 많은 病은 옴인데 그것을 왜 그러는지 「다무시」라고들 합디다. 늑막염, 감기로 알튼 사람도 많은데 衛生이라고는 한 주일에 한 번식 더러운 물에 불과 10분 동안을 목욕하는 뿐이고 방안에 세수대아 하나도 주지 않으니 監房내에 뻘건 옷 입은 生活에 五福이 잇다한들 씨원한 것이 무엇잇겟습니까. 다른 刑務所도 그러켓지마는 우리가 刑務所 내 五福이라고 하는 것은 量少, 體少, 言少, 心少, 刑期少의 다섯가지 다 적은 것만이 큰 福인데 나는 體少 量少의 言少 3福을 가젓엇습니다.＜52＞
＜46-52＞