잡지명	별건곤 제25호
발행일	1930년 01월 01일
기사제목	各界各人 十年回顧, (A Retrospective of the Past Decade by People from Various Fields)
기사형태	회고·수기 (Reminiscences and Essays)

各界各人 十年回顧,
作家로서 본 文壇의 十年
李光洙

A Retrospective of the Past Decade by People from Various Fields,
Ten Years of the Literary World as Seen by a Writer
I Gwang-su

To be called a writer, I should have acted like a writer. Anyway, it has been exactly twenty-two years since I wrote and published my first novel.

Ten years ago, there was even doubt as to whether one could write literature in Korean, so it wouldn't be an exaggeration to say there was no such thing as a literary world to call by name.
If there was anything, it would have been the Sijo (時調) and songs, filled with decadent sentiments, from the years after the Gyeongseul Year (庚戌年, 1910) to the Gimmi Year (己未年, 1919) (I see these often these days in the "Today in the Past" column of the Dong-A Ilbo). Back then, if you wrote something, you had to recite it.

It was also before Gimmi Year that "Youth (靑春)" held a contest for serialized novels. About twenty were selected, with Jo Yo-han coming in second and Kim Myeong-sun coming in third. I also saw Bang Jeong-hwan submit something at that time.
After the Gimmi Year, newspapers and magazines were established and the literary world gradually took shape. In terms of trends, there was the nationalist literature that inherited the decadent thought of before the Gimmi Year, the Decadentism literature that swept the literary world for a time after Kim Eok's "Dance of Anguish (懊惱의 舞蹈)", and the Idealism of Park Wol-tan. What followed Idealism was today's New Emerging Literature.

My very first work? It was the novel "Gyuwon (閨怨)" published twenty-two years ago in the magazine "Daehan Heunghakbo (大韓興學報)" published by Korean students in Japan.
In terms of style, most of the works at that time were in classical Chinese, and I think I started writing in colloquial style from "Mujeong (無情)".<52>
"Mujeong" was serialized in the Maeil Shinbo, and the manuscript fee was five won per month (ha ha). Now, if you write a newspaper novel, you get two won per day, which is twelve times as much.

The New Emerging Literature? Of course, I believe it will develop well in the future.
But here, take an apple (there's a piece of apple on the desk). Probably no one eats this apple as medicine. Some people with constipation might eat an apple every day to help with bowel movements, but they certainly aren't eating it thinking of it as bitter medicine.
Literature is the same.
If literature is to be literature, if it is to have a literary quality, it must be like an apple. No one wants to eat bitter pills thinking they taste good.
But these days, New Emerging Literature seems to be nothing more than bitter medicine. It is so-called infantile literature, wandering only with a sense of purpose.
If that is only used as a tool, then that literature may be established, but historically, such literature does not have a long lifespan.
Looking at Japan's New Emerging Literary World, the propaganda literature of Aono Suekichi's faction, centered on the Literary Arts Front (文藝戰線), which only contains a sense of purpose, is declining, and the proletarianism of the Battle Flag (戰旗) faction is making new progress. Just looking at the fact that Jack London's works are read less these days, you can see whether the general public demands apples or only wants to eat bitter medicine.
So, I think that even works by people who don't proclaim themselves as "pro writers" can be called proletarian literature if they express the emotions of the people well. Tolstoy is not a pro writer, but his works contain many outstanding proletarian works.
Everything in the world is multi-faceted. Our general attitude toward literature and art is also the same. The multi-faceted nature seems to be full of contradictions, but if you observe the contradictions again, there is harmony in them. We cannot truly say that we have observed or truly made a claim unless we go as far as discovering that harmony.
To do that, you need time to gain life experience. That is why there are so few writers who have written great works before the age of forty or fifty.

My literary principle? As you all know, it is Nationalist Literature.
However, before reading anyone else's works, I read Kinosita Shōshō's "Fire Pillar (火の柱)" and Tolstoy's works before the Bible, and was deeply influenced.
I will continue to read Tolstoy a lot in the future and follow him.<53>

新聞記者로 본 十年 朝鮮
高永翰

Ten Years of Joseon as Seen by a Newspaper Reporter
Go Yeong-han

Write about the Joseon of ten years ago and the Joseon of ten years later, as seen through ten years of newspaper reporting—I received this request and could not help but feel suffocated. Ten years is not a very long time, but it is also not a very short time. As the saying goes, "Sharpen a sword for ten years," ten years is truly an important period for the success or failure of something. So, what was Joseon like ten years ago, and what is Joseon like today, ten years later? This is a world where I cannot say everything I want to say and cannot write everything I want to write. No matter how much I have seen, heard, and felt during that time, I cannot write it all, but even if I were to write it, I am saddened that I have nothing more than tragic materials and heart-wrenching complaints. We have heard and know well about the changes in the world's trends over the past ten years. But when we turn the eyes that have seen the world's trends to look at our disappearing state, who can refrain from sighing? The Joseon I saw ten years ago with my so-called newspaper reporter's eye was still not as bad as today. The Joseon of that time, like someone who had just woken up from a long sleep, had a pulse of vitality in every social class. The thought of living like others, the spirit of doing something! All of that was quite vigorous and swept through the entire society.
From that time, the rise of the enthusiasm for learning (向學熱) began, and various movements such as the youth movement, social movement, women's movement, and promotion of domestic products arose like bamboo shoots after the rain. The sound of "knife-galbi mandu (칼톱만주)" in the dead of winter, symbolizing the enthusiasm for learning of the children of the proletariat, still seems to linger in my ears, and the sight of people wearing cotton cloth overcoats, symbolizing the promotion of domestic products, bustling on every street, still lingers in my eyes. Was that all? In addition, the enthusiasm for various businesses was very vigorous, and I saw many business organizations such as companies and organizations being established everywhere. The atmosphere of Joseon at that time was truly lively, filled with a new atmosphere, and was both emotional and dynamic.
I, who was handling all of the above events as newspaper articles, also felt satisfied and happy because the object of my profession was only lively things like that, and at the same time, I often felt my shoulders rise on their own in my newspaper reporter life.<54> Also, in the crime articles, which are a section of the social pages of newspapers, there were not many articles like those of today, where hundreds of people in the countryside are swindled out of their money with bundles of newspapers, or where several robberies occur in one night. Instead, there was a situation where the entire page could be filled with crime articles related to the times, such as groups and parties. It is not necessarily good that such newspaper articles existed, but the social landscape at that time was generally like that.
Looking back, what is Joseon like today, ten years later? I want to say that it is like someone suffering from cerebrospinal meningitis or a young man with anemia. It is as if it has fallen asleep again after waking up for a moment, and the vigor that was so vigorous at that time has become anemic due to malnutrition and other causes, and is groaning. Some of the things that happened in the past have disappeared without a trace today, and others have declined year after year, leaving only a few traces. Everyone feels weary and tired and only seeks the path of comfortable ease, and they seem to be degenerating into extreme egoism, where they think it is enough to live well alone due to the development of abnormal intellect.
Compared to ten years ago, the level of culture and everything else has developed significantly. I do not deny this. But it is strange. Is it because the development of culture has been too rapid? Or is it because it has become irregular? Ten years ago, there were still people with money in their pockets, but today, ten years later, there is only dust left in the corners of their pockets. And those who lived without much worry about making a living at that time are now in a miserable state where it is difficult to even have three meals every nine days. Mr. So-and-so, a wealthy man, has gone bankrupt these days, and Mr. So-and-so's store has gone out of business these days... ... I hear these kinds of news so often that my ears are numb, but I can hardly hear anything like someone has made money or succeeded in business. Therefore, those who have some property, whether large or small, are wary of losing it and are desperately clinging to it, except for extravagant people, and only the poor are in an even more dire situation. Accordingly, our lives do not have any moisture, and like people with anemia, we are only becoming dry and withered, and the exhaustion and misery are truly beyond words. At the same time, the way of life has become extremely chaotic, and it is impossible to find a way to live without dying.
We currently have a better culture than ten years ago. However, our actual lives are completely opposite to culture and are much more exhausted than they were ten years ago. I am not here to discuss the cause of this, but if that is indeed the case, then the culture we have is a culture that does not accompany our actual lives, and a culture that has no relationship with our actual lives. Just as all problems do not exist apart from actual life, a culture that does not benefit our lives will only be a shadow.<55> I feel that this is especially true in urban culture.
The number of intellectuals has increased significantly compared to ten years ago. The majority of them are unemployed or propertyless. Therefore, they are looking for jobs. But our society today is not at all prepared to provide them with jobs. Job shortage! Job shortage! This has become even more serious for the intellectual class than for the working class, so it is not a minor matter for young people of the intellectual class to get a job. If they fail to achieve their goal of finding a job, they often fall into self-abandonment after suffering from anguish and pain. This is also a major social problem in Joseon today, as everyone knows.
Therefore, all problems in Joseon today have become profound. We are no longer prosperous like in the old days, but are all in a state of depletion, and therefore, we are only left with the task of exerting extraordinary activity and constant effort. What will Joseon be like in another ten years... ... (End)

醫師로 본 十年 朝鮮
金溶埉

Ten Years of Joseon as Seen by a Doctor
Kim Yong-seop

This year marks exactly ten years.
But as an ordinary doctor who has been living my life, I don't have much to say.
Everything is probably like this, but in terms of Joseon's economic state as seen through the eyes of a doctor, it can be said that it is even worse now than it was ten years ago.
In terms of the types of patients, there is not much difference, but there is one special change.
There was no disease called beriberi (脚氣) in traditional Joseon. Of course, there was a disease called "sudungdari," where the legs swell, but that is different from beriberi.
Also, people from Joseon who went to or came from Japan knew about beriberi.
However, Joseon people in Joseon never knew about beriberi.
Now, beriberi has spread widely in Joseon. I am thinking about it a lot, but I still don't know the exact cause.
Has venereal disease increased? No, sir. Usually, you would think that it has increased a lot, but in reality, there is not much difference between ten years ago and now.
Of course, I am saying that in terms of the rate of population increase.
Also, there is one thing that is unique to Joseon people.<56> Japanese people get the disease spinal syphilis (脊髓癆) a lot, but Joseon people don't get it at all. If it is an exaggeration to say that they don't get it at all, then I haven't met a single person with it in ten years.
That disease is a nerve disorder that comes after syphilis, and the first symptom is that they can't use their lower body and their eyes become dark. It is similar to a stroke, but it is not a stroke.
Perhaps that is because venereal disease is relatively rare among Joseon people (it is very common among Japanese people). But I don't know what will happen in the future.
Hygiene concepts? Of course, hygiene concepts have developed a lot as many new intellectuals have been created.
Only ten years ago, when a patient with an infectious disease was born, they would never hide it, and no one would ask for the patient to be isolated and treated.
The difficult thing is that the patient's illness does not get better, and the good thing is that the patient who receives treatment from my hands becomes completely healthy and gets better.

通譯으로 본 十年 朝鮮
李鐘燁

Ten Years of Joseon as Seen by an Interpreter
I Jong-yeop

If I start talking, there's no end to it. But since we are in a position where we can't say all that we want to say, what can we do? (Ha ha)
The people I deal with are mostly French, and other than that, people from countries that have newly become independent after the European War and have not yet established consulates in Joseon—for example, people from Poland or Yugoslavia—we usually provide them with convenience.
After the European War, not many foreigners came, but this year, for the first time, many have visited. Most of them are scholars or correspondents, and there are not many industrialists.
Even if there are industrialists, they just come to Japan and stop by briefly on their way to China to ask about the situation, but there are still no conditions in Joseon for French industrialists to invest.
Of course, these days, I often receive requests from large French stores asking me to introduce them to sales channels in Joseon, but there has to be a place to introduce them to.
About ten years ago, there was a general merchandise store called Hanyang Foreign Firm (漢陽洋行) in Gyeongseong, and with our introduction, they traded very reliably with a store in Paris. But the result was not very pleasant.
What foreigners observe in Joseon? Where do foreigners honestly say what they have seen and thought in Joseon?
They just flatter us to our liking<57> and only give useless praise that it is good and has developed.
How long have I been here? Twenty-one years. It's been a long time, right? (Ha ha)
Of course, I have many impressions during that time. But I can't tell you in detail, so I'm frustrated.

料理業者로 본 十年 朝鮮
安淳煥

Ten Years of Joseon as Seen by a Restaurant Owner
An Sun-hwan

I am now retired, having handed over my business to others, but I have been involved in that field for several decades.
Of course, many things have changed during that time. Not only has the taste of the food changed to suit the tastes of today's people, but above all, the way the food is prepared has changed.
In the past, whether it was fruit or sliced meat, anything that was placed on the table, even in ordinary homes, was usually piled up several layers high, and in the palace, it was piled up two "ja (자)" high (a traditional Korean unit of length, approximately 30cm). At the same time, only good items were placed on the top, and things like peels for fruit and bones for meat were placed inside, so it was just for show.
Was that all? Because they piled up food like that in places like the palace, it would all spoil in the summer and couldn't be eaten. Furthermore, they would send things like that to foreigners (in the Old Korean Era). Some even had maggots, so what would foreigners say when they saw that?
I reformed that when I was the Director of the Culinary Department (典膳課長) in the Royal Palace. I even heard that I was a traitor because of it.
So, I started reforming it from the Royal Palace, making the piles thinner and not putting bad things inside, and ordinary people started to follow suit.
So, you can say that restaurants are much more developed now compared to before.
There have been many changes in the customers who frequent restaurants, but among them, the number of people who are purely vagrants has decreased, while the number of people who come for social purposes and the number of Japanese customers has increased.
However, overall, the times are not as good as before.
Geisha girls? The way geisha girls are called is also very different from before.
Everything is new these days, so even geisha girls can sing new-style songs and part their hair to one side. It doesn't matter how good they are at singing or dancing, as long as they are good at chattering, they are considered skilled.
Moreover, these days, only geisha girls who can speak Japanese and sing Japanese songs are hired by the Japanese customers who have increased in number these days.<58>

電車監督으로 본 十年 朝鮮
徐桂源

Ten Years of Joseon as Seen by a Tram Supervisor
Seo Gye-won

Ten years? I've been doing this for twenty years. I first became a conductor when the Seoul Electric Company (京城電氣株式會社) was run by Westerners, the American-Korean Electric Company (米韓電氣會社).
After that, it became the Japanese-Korean Gas Electric Company (日韓瓦斯電氣會社), and then the Seoul Electric Company again.
The trams at that time were really funny. The lines were single tracks. Also, because the cars didn't have roofs like they do now, passengers had to put up their umbrellas inside the tram when it rained (ha ha). Also, there were only twenty-three cars.
Then, around the Gimmi Year, there were sixty cars, and now there are one hundred and thirty cars.
When the tram fare was based on zones, it was two jeon five rin (錢 五厘) or three jeon (錢) per zone, but when the ticket system was introduced, it became five jeon (錢) each. Of course, the zones were also abolished.
But the trams at that time were as popular as cars are now, and it was a great source of pride to take the tram somewhere. The conductors and drivers were also very proud.
The conductor's salary is still paid by the hour, but in the past it was five jeon (錢) per hour, but now even beginners get nine jeon five rin (錢 五厘) per hour.
The income from tram fares was less than two thousand won per day about ten years ago, but now it is well over four thousand won even in the autumn season, which is said to be the worst time of the year.
Passengers on the tram? Of course, there are more. Among them, the number of students and people going to work has increased dramatically.
I was a conductor for a while, but now I am a supervisor, so I earn more and it is a little easier.
It's been a long time, so I'm thinking of quitting now, but the company is persuading me to stay, so I'm just staying there.

新聞配達夫로 본 十年 朝鮮
徐丙郁

Ten Years of Joseon as Seen by a Newspaper Deliveryman
Seo Byeong-uk

I have been delivering newspapers since the Maeil Shinbo (每日申報) days. I did it there for quite a long time, and then I came here when this Dong-A Ilbo (東亞日報) was founded.<59>
In the Maeil Shinbo days, only eight people were in charge of delivering newspapers in the city of Gyeongseong, so I ran around in an area that is now as wide as ten districts.
The number of people who read newspapers has increased much more than in the past, and even people who I didn't expect now receive newspapers.
When delivering newspapers, of course, there are many difficulties. Not all newspaper readers have the same mind, and there are many people who have strange personalities and pick unnecessary fights.
When they were confiscated? Of course, a lot. At such times, I tried to deliver even one more newspaper while avoiding the police station.
The collection of money is done by the deliverymen, both ten years ago and now.
The salary was paid at six jeon (錢) per newspaper, and now it is fifteen jeon (錢). So, you have to deliver three hundred newspapers to earn forty-five won a month. In addition, there is an allowance of fifteen won.
When people didn't pay or the reader ran away? That's right. In the past, there were a lot of people who read the newspaper a lot and then ran away without paying the newspaper fee, looking at us with their eyes wide open, and in such cases, we had no choice but to deduct it from our salary. But these days, that has decreased a lot.
I am now a deputy supervisor because I have been doing it for a long time, but a deliveryman is still a deliveryman. I have also filled this age as a deliveryman. Anyway, when you compare the newspapers of the past and the newspapers of today, there are many big differences.

妓生으로 본 十年 朝鮮
金花中仙

Ten Years of Joseon as Seen by a Geisha
Kim Hwa-jungseon

I became a geisha at the age of thirteen, and I am twenty-five now, so I guess it has been about twelve or thirteen years.
I got married in the middle and lived as a wife for about three years, so it has been about seven years since I came back.

Why did I come back to be a geisha? There are circumstances for that, and it is certainly better to stay at home in terms of the fun of living.
Speaking of the trends of geisha girls, ten years ago, did they sing pansori or anything like that, or carry around a janggu (장구, a traditional Korean drum) and run around? Because of that, there was even a conflict with the Dadong Association (茶洞組合) for a while. There were many Pyeongyang geisha girls in the Dadong Association, so from that time on, geisha girls from the Seodo region saw the role of entertainers.<60>
Now, there are not many people who know how to make geisha girls sing less, and there are many geisha girls who sing new-style songs, so there is no room for old-fashioned and old geisha girls like us.
The hourly rate used to be one won (圓) for the first hour and ninety jeon (錢) for the following hours, but these days it has risen to one won ninety-five jeon (圓 九十五錢) for the first hour and one won thirty jeon (圓 三十錢) for the following hours. But whether it goes up or down, we lose twenty-five percent to others, so the geisha girl doesn't get much to eat.

車夫로 본 十年 朝鮮
金俊三

Ten Years of Joseon as Seen by a Rickshaw Driver
Kim Jun-sam

I've been doing this job for about ten years, but why else would I do this? People are doing what cows and horses do.
Since ten years or so have passed, I've forgotten everything.
Making a living? Don't even talk about it. It was really good before. Anyway, when the former emperor (Yi Tae-wang, 李太王) passed away, the fare was high, and unlike now, it wasn't a company (employment system), but my own business, so I could eat everything. But now, it's a company, and on top of that, because of the car - that damned thing - there are fewer passengers... the fare is cheap... for adults, we lowered the fare from seventy jeon (錢) to sixty jeon (錢), and because of the car, passengers don't go to Yongsan (龍山) or outside the gate anymore. About ten years ago, I could lie down and roll around and earn fifty or sixty won a month, but now it's barely thirty won.
And these days, do customers give you a drink fee when you take them somewhere? In the past, there were many adults who would give a generous drink fee in addition to the fare when I took them somewhere. Sometimes, if it was a nice restaurant, I would even eat and drink with them.
Why am I working for a company instead of running my own business? Ha ha, that's a frustrating question. I know it's harmful to work for a company because I eat the fare myself when I run my own business, and I share it with the owner when I work for a company, but I have to have a car. Even if someone is pulling a new car or running their own business with their own car, if the car gets old and damaged and can't be used, they have to have money to buy a car. So, I have no choice but to come to the company.
Ten years ago, there was only one company in Seoul, Hanseong Group (漢城組). How many people are running their own business with their own car now? All - companies.
The roads are better, of course. That's a little easier, but because I lost the customers outside the gate to the damned cars, there's no big benefit even if the roads are better.<61>
Have I experienced difficult things? Don't even talk about it. Everything I experience is difficult.
Among them, there are customers who are very drunk.
It's hard to get them in the car... It's even harder if they fall out on the way... Moreover, let's say they vomit on your back while you're in the car... There are many times when passengers who are out of their minds ask you for their home... In such cases, I take them back to Byeongmun and send them home... Also, after taking them somewhere, they don't pay the fare and swear at you... They hit you and kick you... When I think about it, there are many unbelievable things. I've been doing that for over ten years, and now I'm over forty and sitting in my fifties, so is this something I can do?
Huh? Fun times? Really.
Think about it. What's fun? Maybe when I take a customer somewhere and they give me a generous tip for drinks? Ha ha ha ha.

店員으로 본 十年 朝鮮
金溶鎭

Ten Years of Joseon as Seen by a Store Clerk
Kim Yong-jin

I started my career as a store clerk when I was seventeen, so that was fifteen years ago.
At that time (it doesn't exist now), I went to the Obok Store Second Branch (五福商店 第二支店), a general store in Jongno (鐘路), and they gave me food and paid me four won (圓) per month. After a few days, I quit because my salary was too low, but the owner said he would raise it to seven won (圓), so I went back to that store. Seven won (圓) may not seem like much, but at that time, a bag of rice was only seven won fifty jeon (圓 五十錢), so it was better than getting forty or fifty won now.
So, I was there for about four years, and then I went to the general merchandise department of the Daedong Trading Company (大東貿易會社), which was in Namdaemun-ro (南門通), but it doesn't exist now either.
Because it was a company, they gave me lunch and dinner and paid me forty won (圓), and the hours were only from 9:30 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. In the place I was in before, it was from 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m.
I was there for about four years, but unfortunately the company went bankrupt. But the owner was a very kind person, and he gave me several hundred won (圓) to start a business when I left.
I gave that money to my brother-in-law and had him start a business. I was thinking of running my own business when I saw the situation. But my brother-in-law ended up failing. That was fate, too.
So, I raised some capital again and started an antique business in Gurigae (구리개).
But it's different from the past, and now you can't run a business with just a small amount of capital. It was really good in the past. You could just leave a sign with a few hundred won (圓) and it would be okay.
But Mr. Choi, the owner of this store, persuaded me, so I came here and started working as a store clerk again.
Ten years ago and now? It's completely different. Only ten years ago, the goods sold in general merchandise stores were very simple. But now, if the quality of the goods is the same, but one is more luxurious, people buy that one even if it costs a little more.
The stores used to be like small hole-in-the-wall shops, but now they are as grand as you can see, so that would be one of the changes.
Also, there was only one Japanese store in Jongno (鐘路) in the past, the Nagano Kinbodo (長尾金寶堂) next to the Youth Hall (靑年會館). But now, aren't they all just Japanese stores?
You ask if there were any interesting incidents, but store clerks are originally like machines, sitting all day selling things, so there's no way anything can happen.
I've been working as a store clerk in someone else's house for over ten years, and I still don't have anything set aside for tomorrow, so it's depressing to think about.<63>

**Named Entities**

李光洙	I Gwang-su
庚戌年	Gyeongseul nyeon
己未年	Gimmi nyeon
東亞日報	Dong-A Ilbo
朱요한	Jo Yo-han
金明淳	Kim Myeong-sun
方定煥	Bang Jeong-hwan
金億	Kim Eok
懊惱의 舞蹈	Ono-ui Mudo
朴月灘	Park Wol-tan
大韓興學報	Daehan Heunghakbo
閨怨	Gyuwon
無情	Mujeong
每日申報	Maeil Shinbo
靑野季吉	Aono Suekichi
文藝戰線	Munye Jeonseon
戰旗	Jeonqi
톨스토이	Tolt'ŭstoi
木下尙江	Kinosita Shōshō
火の柱	Hi no Hasira
高永翰	Ko Yŏng-han
金溶埉	Kim Yong-seop
李鐘燁	I Jong-yeop
漢陽洋行	Hanyang yanghaeng
安淳煥	An Sun-hwan
典膳課長	Jeonseon Kwajang
徐桂源	Sŏ Kye-wŏn
京城電氣株式會社	Kyŏngsŏng Chŏn'gi Chusik Hoesa
米韓電氣會社	Mihan Chŏn'gi Hoesa
日韓瓦斯電氣會社	Ilhan Wasŭ Chŏn'gi Hoesa
徐丙郁	Sŏ Pyŏng-uk
金花中仙	Kim Hwa-jungseon
茶洞組合	Tadong Cho'hap
平壤妓生	P'yŏngyang Kisang
金俊三	Kim Jun-sam
李太王	I T'aewang
金溶鎭	Kim Yong-jin
五福商店 第二支店	Obok Sangjŏm Che-i Chi-jŏm
鐘路	Chongno
大東貿易會社	Taedong Muyŏk Hoesa
南門通	Nammuntong
崔	Ch'oe
長尾金寶堂	Nagao Kinpōdō
青年會館	Ch'ŏngnyŏn Hoegwan



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제25호
발행일	1930년 01월 01일
기사제목	各界各人 十年回顧,
기사형태	회고·수기

各界各人 十年回顧,
作家로서 본 文壇의 十年
李光洙

작가라니 작가 行勢를 햇서야 말이지요. 좌우간 내가 첫 번 소설을 써 발표한 것은 꼭 스물 두 해째 되엿슴니다.

십 년 이전에는 조선 글로 문예를 쓸 수가 잇느냐 하는 의문까지도 가지게 되엿섯스니까 문단이라고 일홈 지을 존재도 업섯다고 하여도 과언이 아니겟슴니다.
만일 잇섯다고 하면 庚戌年 이후 己未年까지에 00적 情調가 아주 농후한 時調(이것은 요지음 東亞日報에 『過去의 今日』이라는 欄에 만히 보이드군요) 唱歌 가튼 것이겟지요. 그 때에는 글로 썻스면 반드시 목으로 읍게 되엿섯스니까요.

역시 己未 이전의 일인데 『靑春』에서 懸賞小說을 모집한 일이 잇섯슴니다. 한 이십 편이나 당선이 되엿는데 朱요한 君이 그 때에 2등으로 金明淳 氏가 3등으로 뽑혓슴니다. 方定煥 君도 그 때에 투고를 한 것을 보앗슴니다.
그리하다가 己未 이후로 신문 잡지가 만히 생기고 문단도 점점 형태를 갓추게 되엿는데 경향으로 말하면 己未 이전의 00思想을 정통으로 바더 내려온 민족주의 문학과 金億君의 『懊惱의 舞蹈』 이후에 一時 문단을 風靡한 떼카다니즘의 문학과 또 한 가지 朴月灘의 理想主義의 세가지라고 보겟슴니다. 理想主義를 뒤이어 바든 것이 오늘의 新興文學이겟지요.

맨 처음 작품이요? 그것은 우에 말한 스물 두 해 전인데 그 때에 일본 유학생들이 발행하든 大韓興學報라는 잡지에 발표한 『閨怨』이라는 소설임니다.
문체로 말하면 그 때의 것이 대개 古文體엿고 내가 口文體로 쓰기는 『無情』부터-ㄴ＜52＞ 것 갓슴니다.
『無情』은 每日申報에 연재하엿는데 원고료가 한 달에 오 원이엇슴니다(허허). 그러든 것이 지금은 신문 소설을 쓰면 一日分 이 원을 주니까 열두 배나 올은 세음이지요.

新興文學이요? 물론 이 압흐로 잘 발전이 되여 나갈 줄 암니다.
그러나 여긔에 사과(맛침 책상 우에 사과 한 쪽이 잇다)  이 사과를 아마 약으로 먹는 사람은 別로히 업슬 것임니다. 혹 便秘症이 잇는 사람이 매일 사과 한 개식을 먹으면 排便이 잘 되니까 그래서 먹는 사람도 잇겟지만 그 사람 역시 달은 약을 먹는 생각으로는 결코 먹는 것이 아닐 것임니다.
문학도 그럿슴니다.
문학이 문학인 이상 문학다운 곳이 잇자면 사과와 가터야 아니하겟슴니까. 쓰듸 쓴 금게랍을 맛으로 녁여 먹을 사람은 업스니까요.
그런데 요지음의 新興文學이 단지 금게랍에 긋치지 아니하나 십슴니다. 目的意識만에 彷徨하는 소위 小兒病的 문학이 그것임니다.
그것도 단지 한 개의 도구와 가티 쓴다면 그 문학이 성립치 못할 것은 아니나 在來로 보건데 그러한 문학은 결코 수명이 길지 못함니다.
일본의 新興文壇을 보더래도 文藝戰線을 중심으로 한 靑野季吉 一派의 목적의식만을 내용으로 한 宣傳文學은 몰락이 되고 戰旗 一派의 푸로레타리아리아리슴이 새로운 발전을 하지 아니함니까? 영국의 째크·론돈의 작품이 요지음 와서 덜 일키는 것만 보아도 일반 대중이 사과를 요구하느냐 금게랍만을 먹으려 하느냐는 것을 알 수가 잇슴니다.
그러니까 나는 자기가 『내가 푸로作家라』고 표방하고 나서지 아니한 사람 이외의 작품이라도 민중의 감정을 잘 표현하얏스면 푸로文學이라고 할 수가 잇다고 생각함니다. 톨스토이가 푸로作家는 아니지만 그의 작품 중에는 당당한 푸로作品이 만히 잇지 안슴니까.
세상의 모든 것은 多角的임니다. 문예에 대한 一般 우리의 태도도 그럿슴니다. 그 多角的인 것이 첩경 矛盾이 되는 것 가트나 그 矛盾을 다시 관찰하면 그 중에 調和가 잇슴니다. 우리는 그 調和를 발견하기에까지 일으지 아니하면 정말로 관찰하엿다고 할 수가 업스며 정말로 주장을 할 수가 업슴니다.
그리하자면 인생의 경험을 어들 시간이 필요함니다. 그리하기 때문에 사오십 세 이전에 大作을 쓴 작가는 만흔 작가들 중에 별로히 업슴니다.

나의 文學上 主義요? 잘들 아시는 바와 가티 民族主義 文學이겟지요.
그러나 나는 누구의 무엇을 읽기 전보담도 木下尙江의 『블기둥(火の柱)』을 읽것고 성경을 일기 전에 톨스토이의 작품을 읽거 깁흔 感化를 바덧슴니다.
압흐로도 톨스토이를 만히 읽글 터이며 그를 따를 터임니다.＜53＞

新聞記者로 본 十年 朝鮮
高永翰

십 년 동안 신문기자 생활을 통하여 본 십 년 전의 조선과 십 년 후의 조선을 써라 ― 나는 이 가튼 부탁을 밧고 가슴이 스스로 답답하여짐을 참을 수가 업섯다. 십 년이라는 세월이 그리 길다고도 할 수 업지마는 또한 그리 쩌르다고도 할 수 업는 것이니 십 년에 磨一劒이라는 말과 가치 事의 成不成에 잇서 십 년이라는 세월이야말로, 실로 중요한 一期로 되여 잇는 것이다. 그러면 십 년 전의 조선은 엇더하여스며 십 년 후 금일의 조선은 또한 엇더한가. 하고 십픈 말을 다 하지 못하고 쓰고 십픈 것을 다 쓰지 못하고 사는 세상이니, 그 동안 보고 듯고 늣긴 바가 아모리 만타 하여도 다 쓸 수는 업다마는 구태여 쓴다 하여도 나로서는 오즉 悲觀材料 기맥히는 하소연밧게 아모 것도 더 가지지 못하얏슴을 슬퍼한다. 최근 십 년간 세계 대세의 변천이라는 것을 우리는 귀에 익히 드럿고 또 잘 안다. 그러나 세계 대세를 보던 그 眼目을 도리키여 우리의 사라가는 꼴을 한 번 드려다 볼 때에 누가 또한 太息을 禁할 자 잇스랴. 내가 소위 新聞記者眼을 가지고 보던 십 년 전의 조선은 그래도 오늘 갓지는 안헛섯다. 그 때의 조선은 오래 잠자다가 새로히 이러난 사람 모양으로 어느 사회층을 물론하고 모다 一脈의 생기가 약동하고 잇서섯다. 우리도 남과 가치 사라보겟다는 생각, 무엇을 하여 보겟다는 意氣! 그 모든 것은 자못 왕성한 바 잇서 사회의 전반을 風靡하고 잇지 안헛서든가.
그리하야 向學熱의 勃興도 그 때부터이엇섯고 또 靑年運動 社會運動 女性運動 物産獎勵運動 등 各樣各種의 운동이 雨後에 竹筍처럼 이러나고 잇서섯다. 無産階級 子弟들의 向學熱을 『씸볼』하던 嚴冬의 夜 『칼톱만주』 소래가 아즉도 나의 귀에 남하 잇는 듯하고 또 物産獎勵運動을 表徵하는 수목두루맥이 입은 사람들이 거리거리마다 욱실거리든 그 常時의 광경이 爾今에도 나의 눈에 어리어 잇다. 그 뿐이엇든가. 또 그 외에 각종의 事業熱도 매우 왕성하야 무슨 회사이니 무슨 단체이니 하는 여러 가지의 事業機關이 각처에 만히 勃興되고 잇던 것을 나는 잘 보왓섯다. 그 때 조선의 氣象은 과연 潑剌한 바 잇서 新興氣分이 瀰滿하엿섯고 또 어대까지 情意的이요 動的이엿섯다.
그 당시 이상의 모든 事象을 신문기사로 취급하고 잇든 나 역시 나의 직업의 대상이 그와 가치 생기 잇는 것들 뿐이엇느니만큼 스스로 만족하고 유쾌함을＜54＞ 늣겨왓서스며 또 그와 동시에 신문기자 생활에 잇서 저절로 두 억개가 읏슥읏슥 올라갈 적이 만엇섯든 것이다. 또 신문 社會面 기사의 一部門인 犯罪記事에 잇서서도 요새와 가치 新聞紙 뭉텡이로 시골 숫백이를 속히고 돈을 빼아섯느니 一夜에 강도가 몃 件식 발생하엿느니 하는 기사는 別로히 업서섯고 무슨 團이니 무슨 黨이니 하는 時局에 관한 犯罪記事로 전 지면을 채우고도 남을 만한 형편이 잇서다. 그 가튼 신문기사가 반드시 조타는 것은 아니지마는 그 때의 社會相은 대체로 그러하엿다는 말이다.
도리켜 십 년 후 今日의 조선은 엇더한가. 마치 腦脊髓膜炎에 걸닌 사람이 아니면 貧血症 든 청년과 彷佛하다고 나는 말하고 십다. 모처럼 깨엇든 잠을 또다시 들엇는 듯하고 그 때도록도 왕성하든 혈기가 營養不良 其他의 원인으로 貧血症이 생기어 呻吟하고 잇는 사람 갓다. 녯날에 이러낫든 모든 事象은 爾今에 자최도 업시 사라진 것도 잇고 또는 年復年 衰殘하야 약간 그 形跡만 남기고 잇는 것도 잇다. 사람마다 困憊와 倦怠를 感하야 구차한 晏宴의 길만 차즈랴 하고 變態的 理智의 발달로 나 혼자만 잘 살면 그만이라는 극단의 이기주의로 타락되어가는 듯십다.
십 년 전에 비하야 文化 程度 또는 기타의 모든 것이 懸隔히 발달되엿다고 한다. 이것은 나도 인정하지 안는 배는 아니다. 그러나 異常타. 문화의 발달이 너머 급격하게 된 관계인가. 또는 變則的으로 되엿기 까닭인가. 십 년 전 그 때에는 그래도 주머니 속에 돈푼이나 드러 잇든 사람들이 십 년 후 今日에는 주머니 귀통이에 몬지만 남게 되얏고 또 그 당시에는 생활하여 가기에는 별 걱정 업시 지낸다든 사람들이 오늘날에 이르러는 一家離散 三旬九食도 어렵게 된 慘狀이 아닌가. 財産家 아모개는 요새 敗家를 하엿다더라 아모개 상점은 요새 거판을 하엿다더라... ... 이 가튼 소식은 귀가 저리도록 들려오되 누구는 돈을 모왓다던가 사업에 성공을 하엿다는 것 가튼 말은 좀처럼 어더 들을 수도 업는 형편이다. 그러하야 만커나 적거나 자기 재산을 가진 사람들은 虛浪한 사람들 除한 외에는 그것을 업새히지 안흐랴고 스스로 경계하고 死守하야 업는 사람들만 더한층 죽을 지경이오 또 이에 따라 우리의 생활은 조곰도 潤澤한 맛을 가지지 못하고 貧血症 들닌 사람 모양으로 춀춀 말나만 드러가 그 疲弊 慘狀은 과연 口不可形言이다. 그 와 동시에 生活樣態는 극도로, 亂脈化하야 장차 엇더케 해야 죽지 안코 살어갈지 갈피를 차릴 수 업는 형편이다.
우리는 현재 십 년 전보다 훌륭한 문화를 가지고 잇다. 그러나 우리의 실제생활은 문화와 정반대로 십 년 전 그 때보다 만히 疲弊되어 잇다. 내가 여긔에 잇서 그 원인을 論하고저 하는 배는 아니어니와 과연 그러타 하면 우리의 가진 바 문화는 우리의 실제생활과 相伴하지 안는 문화이요 또 우리의 실생활에 아모 관계를 갓지 안흔 문화이니 모든 문제가 실제생활을 떠나서는 업는 것과 가치＜55＞ 우리의 생활에 혜택을 주지 못하는 문화는 오즉 그림자밧게 될 것이 업슬 것이다. 都市文化에 잇서 더욱 그러하다고 나는 感한다.
십 년 전보다 知識群은 만히 증가하엿다. 그들 중에는 無職者와 또는 無産者들이 대다수이다. 그러하야 그들은 직업을 찻는다. 그러나 지금 우리의 사회는 그들에게 일일히 직업을 줄 만한 아모 준비가 업다. 就職難! 就職難! 이것은 노동계급보다 지식계급에 잇서 더한층 深刻化하엿스니, 지식계급의 청년으로서 직업을 엇는다는 것은 若干 難事가 아니다. 직업을 구하다 못해 終始 목적을 일우지 못하면 번민 고통 끗헤 그만 自抛自棄에 떠러지는 일도 종종 잇스니 이것 역시 今日의 조선에 잇서 중대한 사회문제의 하나임은 누구나 다 알고 잇는 사실이다.
그러하야 今日의 조선은 모든 문제가 전부 深刻化하엿다. 녯날과 가치 풍성풍성하지를 못하고 모두가 枯渴 狀態이며 따라서 非常한 활동과 不斷의 노력을 拂하여야만 될 일만 남앗다. 압흐로 또 십 년 후의 조선은 과연 如何히 되랴는고... ...(끗)

醫師로 본 十年 朝鮮
金溶埉

금년에 꼭 십 년이 되엿슴니다.
그러나 평범한 한 個의 의사로써 생활을 해 나려온 것이니까 뭐 별로 感想이랄 것도 업슴니다.
여러 가지가 모도 다 그러하겟지만 의사의 눈으로 통해 보는 조선의 경제상태라는 것은 말하자면 지금이 도리어 십 년 전만도 못하다고 할 수가 잇슴니다.
환자의 종류로 말하면 역시 별 차이는 업는데 한 가지 특수한 변화가 잇슴니다.
在來 조선에는 脚氣라는 병이 업섯슴니다. 물론 수둥다리라고 다리가 붓는 병이 잇기는 햇지만은 그것은 脚氣와는 달음니다.
또 전에라도 조선 사람으로 일본에 가서 잇다거나 다녀왓다거나 한 사람은 脚氣를 알엇슴니다.
그러나 조선에 잇는 조선 사람으로는 결코 脚氣를 알치 아니하엿슴니다.
그러든 것이 지금은 조선도 脚氣가 만히 퍼지게 되엿슴니다. 만히 생각을 하여보는 중인데 아직 그 원인은 자세히 알 수가 업슴니다.
花柳病이 늘엇느냐고요? 아니올시다. 보통 생각하면 퍽 만히 늘엇슬 뜻하지만 실상은 십 년 전이나 지금이나 별로 달을 것이 업슴니다.
그것도 물론 인구 증가에 대한 率로 보아서 그러한 말슴임니다.
또 조선 사람에게 특이한 것 한 가지가＜56＞ 잇슴니다. 일본 사람들은 脊髓癆라는 병을 만히 알는데 조선 사람은 하나도 업슴니다. 하나도 업다는 것이 과언이라면 십 년 동안에 나로서는 하나도 맛나보지 못햇슴니다.
그 병은 梅毒 후에 오는 신경의 故障인데 第一 아랫두리를 쓰지 못하고 눈이 어두어지고 함니다. 중풍 비슷하나 중풍도 아님니다.
그것은 아마 조선 사람에게 花柳病이 比較的 적은 까닭이라고 할가요(일본 사람에게는 퍽 만슴니다). 그러나 압흐로 엇지 될지 몰으겟슴니다.
衛生觀念이요? 물론 新知識階級이 만히 생긴 만큼 衛生觀念도 발달이 만이 되엿슴니다.
십 년 전만 해도 전염병 환자가 생겨나면 절대로 숨길 뿐이지이 환자를 隔離 치료해 주시요 하는 사람은 한 사람도 업섯슴니다.
곤란한 것이래야 환자의 병이 잘 낫지 아니하는 것이고 깃분 것이래야 그 반대로 내손에서 치료를 밧든 환자가 完人이 되여서 나아가는 것임니다.

通譯으로 본 十年 朝鮮
李鐘燁

말을 하자면야 끗치 업슴니다. 그러나 끗치 업슬 그 말을 하고 십허도 못할 처지에 잇는 우리니까(허허) 엇지하겟슴니까.
내가 接하는 사람은 대개가 法國 사람이고 그밧게는 歐洲大戰 후 새로히 독립되여 가지고 아직 조선에 領事館을 두지 못한 ― 가령 폴랜드라든가 유-고슬라비아 가튼 나라 사람들은 대개 우리가 편의를 보아줌니다.
歐洲大戰 이후로 외국 사람이 별로 오지 아니하더니 금년에 들어서 비로소 만히 다녀간 셈입니다. 대개는 학자나 通信員 가튼 사람들이 만코 實業家는 별로 업슴니다.
實業家는 잇대야 그저 일본에 왓다가 중국으로 가는 길에 잠시 들녀서 상황을 뭇기는 허지만 그러나 法國 實業家로써 조선에 투자할 만한 조건이 조선에는 아직 발생이 되지 아니하엿스니까요.
물론 요지음도 法國의 큰 상점 가튼 데서 조선에 販路를 소개하여 달나는 의뢰는 자주 오지만 그런 것을 소개할 만한 곳이 잇서야지요.
한 십 년 전에 京城에 잇는 漢陽洋行이라는 雜貨商이 잇섯는데 우리의 소개로 아주 信用 잇게 巴里의 어느 상점과 거래를 한 일이 잇섯지요. 그러나 결과는 그닥지 향긔롭지 못햇슴니다.
외국인의 조선 觀察談이요? 외국 사람들이 조선에 와서 보고 생각헌 바를 어데 솔ㅅ직하게 말을 함니까?
그저 우리의 비위에 맛도록 허느라고＜57＞ 조타고 발전이 되엿다고 쓸데업는 칭찬만 할 따름이지요.
내가 여긔 잇슨지요? 스물 한 해됨니다. 꽤 오랏지요?(허허)
그동안의 감상이 물론 만슴니다. 그러나 제제히 말슴해 드릴 수가 업스니 답답함니다.

料理業者로 본 十年 朝鮮
安淳煥

지금은 나도 이것저것을 남에게 내여주고 들어안저 잇는 세음임니다만은 그 방면으로 幾十 년 종사해 보앗슴니다.
그 동안에 변한 것이 물론 만치요. 요리의 맛도 이지음 사람의 입에 맛도록 변햇슬 뿐 아니라 무엇보담도 요리를 차리는 법이 변햇슴니다.
전에는 과실이라든지 편육이라든지 하여간 상에 노히는 것이면 보통 집에서라도 멧치씩 고여올니고 宮 안에서는 두자를 고엿슴니다. 그러면서 것만 조흔 놈으로 고이고 속에다는 과실이면 껍질 가튼 것으로 고기면 뼉다귀 가튼 것을 너어 노앗스니까 말하자면 것치례만 한 세음이지요.
그게 그 뿐임니까. 宮 안 가튼 데서는 음식을 그러케  고이자니까 녀름이면 모다 상해서 먹지를 못하게 됨니다. 더구나 그런 것을 외국 사람(舊韓國時代)에게 보내줌니다. 심하면 구덱이가 난 것도 잇는데 그것을 외국 사람이 보고 무어라고 하겟슴니까.
그러든 것을 내가 宮內府에 典膳課長으로 잇슬 때 개량을 햇지요. 그것 때문에 역적이란 말까지도 들엇슴니다만은.
그래 宮內府에서부터 개량을 해가지고 고임도 얏게 하고 속에 낫분 것을 넛치 안코 하니까 일반 민간에서도 딸어가든군요.
그러니까 지금 요리집이라는 것은 전에 비하면 아주 썩 발달이 된 셈이지요.
요리집에 다니는 손님으로는 여러 가지 변한 점이 만흔데 그 중에도 순전히 浮浪者로 노는 사람이 적어진 대신 交際上 필요로 다니는 사람이 만허진 것과 일본 손님이 만허진 것임니다.
그러나 全般으로 보면 세월이 전만 못한 편이지요.
기생이요? 기생을 불으는 것도 전과는 만히 달너젓슴니다.
지금은 모든 것이 新式時代라 그러한지 기생도 唱歌ㅅ개나 하고 가르마를 한편으로 갈은 기생 歌舞는 엇지 되엿든지 재왈거리기나 잘하면 名技 축에 드는 형편이니까요.
더구나 요지음 왓작 늘은 일본 손님한테는 일본말ㅅ깨나 하고 일본 노래ㅅ장이나 하는 기생이래야만 버리를 하게 되니까요.＜58＞

電車監督으로 본 十年 朝鮮
徐桂源

십 년이라니 나는 이십 년이나 되엿슴니다. 내가 맨 처음 車掌이 되기는 지금 京城電氣株式會社를 서양 사람이 경영하든 米韓電氣會社 땜니다.
그 뒤에 다시 日韓瓦斯電氣會社가 되엿고 또다시 京城電氣會社가 되엿지요.
그 때의 電車는 참 우수웟슴니다. 線이 單線이지요. 그러고 차에도 지금 가튼 집웅이 업기 때문에 비가 오면 손님들이 電車 안에서도 우산을 펴들어야 되얏슴니다. (허허) 또 車數도 스물세 臺밧게는 업섯슴니다.
그러다가 己未年 전후에 육십 臺가 되엿고 지금은 일백이삼십 臺나 되엿슴니다.
電車삭은 區域制로 잇슬 때는 한 구역에 二錢 五厘, 三錢 하다가 車票制로 되면서 五錢씩 되엿지요. 구역도 물론 철폐되고요.
그러치만 그 때의 電車라면 지금의 自動車만큼이나 인기가 잇서서 電車를 타고 어데를 다녀오면 큰 자랑ㅅ거리가 되엿슴니다. 그만큼 車掌이나 運轉手도 코가 웃둑햇지요.
車掌의 給料는 전이나 지금이나 모다 時給인데 전에는 한 시간에 오 전씩이든 것이 지금은 初給이라도 九錢 五厘씩임니다.
電車싹으로 수입되는 것은 한 십 년 전에는 매일 이천 원도 못 되든 것이 지금 와서는 가장 세월이 낫부다는 가을철에도 사천 원이 훨신 넘어감니다.
전차를 타는 손님이요? 물론 만하젓지요. 그 중에도 학생과 회사 출근하는 사람은 아주 겁나게 불엇슴니다.
나는 얼마 동안 車掌으로 잇다가 지금은 監督이 되여 잇스니까 전보담은 수입 만코 좀은 편하기도 함니다.
오래도 되고 햇스니까 인제는 그만두고 물너안즈랴고 하는데 회사에서 말뉴하기 때문에 그저 그대로 잇서 보는 중입니다.

新聞配達夫로 본 十年 朝鮮
徐丙郁

내가 신문 배달을 하기는 每日申報 때부터임니다. 거기서 꽤 오래하다가 이 東亞日報가 창간되면서부터 이 곳으로 왓지요.＜59＞
每日申報 때는 京城 시내를 겨우 여덜 사람이 맛터서 배달을 하엿스니까 지금의 십 구역이나 되게 넓게 뛰여다닌 셈이지요.
신문을 보는 사람도 前日보담 훨신 만이 불엇고 또 생각밧게의 사람들도 신문을 지금은 바더보게 되엿슴니다.
배달을 하느라면 물론 어려운 일이 만히 잇슴니다. 신문 독자가 전부 모다 한 마음이 아니고 그 중에는 성질이 이상하여서 공연한 까탈을 피우는 사람도 만흐니까요.
押收된 때요. 물론 만치요. 그러한 때는 몰내 파출소를 피해 다니면서 한 장이라도 더 배달을 하랴고 애를 쓴 적도 만슴니다.
收金은 십 년 전이나 지금이나 모다 배달부의 손으로 합니다.
월급은 한 장에 육 전씩 처서 割이로 먹엇는데 지금은 십오 전씩임니다. 그러니까 삼백 장을 배달해야만 한 달에 사십오 원이 수입이 되지요. 그밧게 수당으로 십오 원씩 밧는 것이 잇슴니다.
못 밧거나 독자가 몰내 달어난 때요. 그럿슴니다. 좀 드릿겨서는 실것 신문을 보다가 슬그머니 달어나는 사람 눈을 멀끔멀끔 뜨고 신문갑슬 아니 내는 사람 그러한 사람이 만핫는데 그런 때는 우리 월급에서 떼여드려 놋는 수밧게는 업스니까요. 그러나 요지음 와서는 그러한 일이 만히 減해젓슴니다.
나는 지금은 오래ㅅ동안 햇다는 것으로 副監督이 되여서 들어안저 잇는 세음이지만 배달부는 역시 배달부지요. 배달부로 또한 이 나히를 채웟슴니다. 하여간 옛날 신문과 지금 신문을 比해 보면 크게 달넌진 것이 만히 잇슴니다.


妓生으로 본 十年 朝鮮
金花中仙

열세 살에 기생이 되여 가지고 지금 스물다섯 살이니까 아마 열두세 해째 되나 봄니다.
中間에 살님을 들어가서 한 삼 년 살님을 하다가 다시 나온 제는 한 칠 년 되고요.

웨 다시 기생을 나왓느냐고요? 그것은 사정이 잇서 그러한 것이고 살어가는 재미 便으로야 들어안젓든 때가 물론 낫지요.
기생의 風道를 말하더래도 십 년 전이면 어데 판소리니 무엇니 하고 장구를 들메고 날뛰고 함니까. 그것 때문에 茶洞組合하고는 한 동안 갈등까지 생겻섯더람니다. 茶洞組合에는 平壤妓生이 만코 따러서 그 때부터도 西道妓生들은 광대의 한 목슬 보앗스니까요.＜60＞
그러든 것이 지금은 차차 기생을 소리를 식히실 줄 아는 니이가 별로 업고 기생들도 洋式 妓生이라든가 하는 唱歌 불으는 기생이 만허서 우리 가튼 구식이요 늙은 것은 세월이 도모지 업슴니다.
時間代는 전에 첫 시간에 일 원씩하고 다음 시간부터 구십 전씩 하든 것이 요새 와서 첫 시간 일원구십오전 다음 시간보터 일원삼십전씩으로 올낫슴니다. 그러나 오르건 내리건 二割 五分씩이나 남에게 뺏기니까 기생이 먹는 것은 멧 푼이 되지 아니함니다.


車夫로 본 十年 朝鮮

金俊三

한 십 년 이 노릇을 해먹기는 하지만 오즉해야 이 짓을 하겟슴니까. 소나 말이 하는 짓을 사람이 하다니요.
그러구저러구 십 년이나 지낫스니까 모다 이저바렷지요.
버리요? 말도 맙시요. 전에야 참 조앗지요. 엇잿든 舊皇帝(李太王) 도라가섯슬 림시해서는 싹시 厚한 데다가 지금처럼 會社(雇用制)가 아니고 내 영업이니까 통 다 내가 먹지 안슴니까. 그런데 지금은 회사가 된 데다가 우완 중에 자동차-ㄴ지 그 제-길할 놈의 것 때문에 타시는 손님이 적지요... 삭시 헐치요... 장정은 전에 칠십 전 하는 것을 육십 전으로 내리고 또 자동차 때문여 龍山이나 문밧게 가시는 손님은 타시질 안슴니다 그려. 한 십 년 전이면 누어서 굴너도 한 달에 오륙십 원은 벌더니 지금은 웬걸이요 삼십 원이 빠득함니다 그려.
그러고 지금 손님들은 모서다 드려야 술갑시나 주시나요 웬. 전에는 손님을 모시고 가면 차삭 주시는 외에 술갑슬 厚히 주시는 어른이 만허섯담니다. 혹 조웅한 요리집 가튼 데면 가치 모시고 술도 먹엇는 걸요.
웨 내 영업을 안코 회사로 와서 잇느냐고요? 허허 갑갑한 말슴임니다. 내 영업을 하면 삭슬통 내가 먹고 회사에 와서 잇스면 주인과 반씩 노나 먹으니까 害 되는 줄이야 알지요만 차가 잇서야지요. 새로 차를 끄는 사람이나 제 차를 가지고 제 영업을 하는 사람이라도 차가 낡고 상해서 못 쓰게 되면 차를 살 돈이 잇서야 말이지요. 그러니까 할 수 업시 회사로 오는 게지요.
십 년 전에야 서울 안에 회사가 漢城組라는 것 하나 밧게 업섯슴니다. 그러든 것이 지금은 제 차를 가지고 제 영업을 하는 사람이 멧치나 되나요. 죄- 회사지요.
길은 조아지고 말고요. 그것이 좀 편하지요만 원수놈의 자동차한테 문밧 손님을 뺏겻스니까 길이 조아젓슨들＜61＞ 무슨 큰 利가 될 것도 업지요.
어려운 일을 당해 보앗느냐고요? 말도 맙시요. 당하는 것이 죄- 어려운 일이지요.
그 중에도 술이 몹시 취하신 손님이 게심니다.
차에 모서 올니느라고 경이지요... 가다가 굴너내리면 더 경이지요... 더구나 차 우에서 등뒤에다 대고 게여 봅시요... 정신이 업서서 타신 손님이 자기 宅을 물을 때도 만치요... 그런 때는 도루 병문으로 모시고 와서 즈무서 보내기도 한 걸요... 또 실컷 모서다 드리면 삭슬 안 주고 욕지거리를 하지요... 때리고 차고 하지요... 생각하면 별별 기막힌 일이 만슴니다. 그 짓을 십 년을 넘겨 해먹고 지금 사십이 넘어 오십줄에 안젓스니 이게 해먹을 노릇임니까.
네? 질거운 때요? 원참.
생각해 봅시요. 무에 질거울 께 잇겟슴니까. 그저 손님을 모서다 드리고 나면 술갑시나 좀 후하게 주시면 그 때나 질거울가요? 허허허허.


店員으로 본 十年 朝鮮
金溶鎭

내가 점원 생활의 처걸음을 나서기는 열일곱 살쩍 그러니까 지금으로부터 십오 년 전임니다.
그 때에(지금은 업서젓지만) 鐘路에 잇는 五福商店 第二支店이라는 雜貨店에 먹여주고 四 圓씩 밧기로 하고 들어갓슴니다. 멧칠 잇다가 나는 월급이 적다고 일단 나왓는데 주인이 七 圓씩으로 올녀주마고 하여서 다시 그 상점에 가 잇섯슴니다. 칠 원이라면 멧 푼 아니 되는 것 갓지만 그 때는 쌀 한 섬에 七圓五十錢 밧게 아니할 때니까 지금 사오십 원 밧는 것보담 도리여 나은 셈이지요.
그래 그 곳에서 한 사 년 잇다가 역시 지금은 업서젓지만 南門通에 잇든 大東貿易會社의 雜貨部로 가서 잇섯슴니다.
그 곳은 회사인 만큼 겸심과 저녁을 먹여주고도 사십 원씩이나 주엇고 또 시간도 아츰 아홉 시 반부터 저녁 아홉 시까지 밧게 더 아니 되엿슴니다. 먼점 잇든 곳에서는 아츰 일곱 시부터 밤 열두 시까지엿스닛가요.
그 곳에서도 한 사 년쯤 잇섯는데 불행하게도 그 회사가 破産이 되엿슴니다. 그런데 그 주인 되는 이가 퍽 마음이 조흔 이여서 내가 나올 때에 장사 밋천을 하라고 돈을 멧백 원 줍듸다.
그 돈을 내 妹夫 되는 사람을 주어서 장사를 식혓지요. 나도 형편을 보아 내 영업을 해보겟다는 생각이엇지요. 그런데 내 妹夫 되는 사람이 그만 실패를 해버렷겟나요. 그것도 운수겟지요.
그래 나는 다지 자본을 조곰 만들여 가지고 구리개에서 古物商을 시작하여 보앗슴니다.
그러나 그것이 전과 달너서 지금은 조고만 자본으로는 장사를 해먹을 수가 업서요. 前 가트면야 참 조앗지요. 멧백 원 가지고 名色 뎐ㅅ방만 버려 노면 되엿스니까요.
그런데 마침 이 상점의 주인 되는 최씨가 勸誘하기에 이 곳으로 와서 다시 또 점원 생활을 시작하엿슴니다.
십 년 전과 지금이요? 어림업시 달으지요. 십 년 전만 해도 雜貨商에서 팔니는 물건이 퍽 질소하엿슴니다. 그러든 것이 지금은 품질이 가튼 물건이라도 한 편이 사치로워 보이면 갑시 좀 더하더래도 그 놈을 사 감니다 그려.
상점들도 전에는 구멍가가쇰 직하든 것이 지금 보시는 것처럼 굉장하게 조와젓스니까 그것도 변한 축에 들겟지요.
그러고 전에는 鐘路에 일본 사람 상점이라고는 靑年會館 엽헤 長尾金寶堂이라는 것 하나 밧것 업섯슴니다. 그러든 것이 지금은 맨 그저 일본 사람 빗치 아님니까.
뭣 자미잇는 사건이 업섯느냐고 물으시지만 원래 점원이라는 것이 기계처럼 왼종일 안저서 물건을 파는 것 밧게 업스닛가 무슨 일이 생길 리이 잇나요.
그저 남의 집 점원사리로 십 년을 넘겨지나고 보니까 ― 그러고도 역시 내일이라고는 해노흔 것이 업스니 생각하면 한심할 따름이지요.＜63＞
＜52-63＞