잡지명	別건곤 제25호
발행일	1930년 01월 01일
기사제목	開闢社創社十周年紀念計畫 (The 10th Anniversary Project of Kaebyuk Publishing Company)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Notice/Post-Editing)

The 10th Anniversary Project of Kaebyuk Publishing Company

1. Establishment of New Sister Projects
We will take the lead in starting new projects that are most urgently needed but have been neglected until now.

2. Dispatch of Readers Abroad
We will select one or two people through a thesis contest in the three magazines and have them inspect emerging cities abroad.

3. Increase of One Type of Three Magazines
In addition to the three magazines currently published, we plan to publish a new magazine and advance as four major magazines.

4. Holding a Commemorative Exhibition
In addition to holding a 10th-anniversary rally every month for a year, we will hold a large exhibition that will be especially beneficial to the public.

5. Organization of National Reader Associations
We intend to organize reader associations for "Student" (學生) and "Children" (어린이) nationwide to build even closer relationships.

6. Organization of a Touring Lecture Team
We will organize a touring lecture team from our employees and consultants and dispatch them to local areas from time to time, focusing on reader associations, to contribute to the improvement of local culture.

7. Establishment of a Headquarters Agency Department
We plan to establish a large agency department in the style of a consumer cooperative with over 200,000 readers to improve the convenience of real life.

8. Commemorative Publication: Popular Tales of Korean History
The first of the 10th-anniversary publications is a book written by Cha Sang-ch’an (車相瓚氏), describing modern Korean history in a way that anyone can easily understand.

9. Commemorative Publication: "The Origin of Civilization" (文明의 淵源)
A 10th-anniversary gift for students and young people, translated and written by Ko Yŏng-hwan (高永煥氏), detailing the path of human culture.

10. Commemorative Publication: Popular Lectures on Childcare
Pang Chŏng-hwan's (方定煥氏) childcare lectures, which have been eagerly awaited by every home in every region!! We assert that this book is essential for every household.

A Single Rider's Valiant Fight, Further Fight, a New Path for the Eleventh Year
Kaebyuk Publishing Company, which is celebrating its 10th anniversary this New Year, has not only created a grand special edition for the New Year's issue of the three magazines, along with a magnificent appendix, but is also steadily preparing for the aforementioned ten major projects. <108>

We earnestly request the support of all our fellow employees and readers!!
We are endlessly grateful that we have been able to fight hard every day for the past ten years with our insignificant power, entirely thanks to the support of our readers. At the same time, we earnestly request your even stronger support for a new advance in the eleventh year. <109>

**Named Entities**

學生	Haksaeng
어린이	Ŏrini
車相瓚氏	Ch’a Sang-ch’an
高永煥氏	Ko Yŏng-hwan
方定煥氏	Pang Chŏng-hwan



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제25호
발행일	1930년 01월 01일
기사제목	開闢社創社十周年紀念計畫
기사형태	사고·편집후기

開闢社創社十周年紀念計畫
1 新姉妹事業創設
目下最新緊急을 要하는 일이면서 아즉지니저버려지고잇는 新事業에 率先着手함니다
2 讀者外國派遣
三雜誌를 通하야 論文募集의 方式으로 一人或二人을 選出하야 外國新興都市를 視察케함
3 三雜誌一種增判
現在發行하는 三雜誌外에 한가지 새 雜誌를 刊行하야 四大雜誌로 奮進하려함니다
4 紀念展覽會開催
十週年紀念集會를 今年中一年두고 每月開催하는 外에 特히 民衆에게 有益할 大展覽會開催
5 全國讀者會組織
『學生』과『어린이』의 讀者會를 全朝鮮的으로 組織하야 一層緊密한 關係를 지여나아가려는것임니다
6 巡廻講演班組織
本社社員及囑托中으로서 巡廻講演班을 組織하야 隨時地方에 出張하야 讀者會中心으로 地方文化向上에 努力
7 本社代理部新設
二十餘萬讀者와 더부러 消費組合式의 一大代理部를 設置하야 實生活의 便宜를 圖하기로함
8 紀念出版 通俗朝鮮史話
十週年紀念出版其一, 아모나 가장 쉽게 알수잇게 著述한 近代朝鮮史車相瓚氏著
9 紀念出版 「文明의 淵源」
學生級靑年級을 向해보내는 十週年紀念선물노 人類文化의 길을 細術한 高永煥氏譯著
10 紀念出版 通俗育兒講話
地方마다 집집마다에서 苦待한지 오래인 方定煥氏의 育兒講話!! 萬家必備할 著書임을 斷言한다

一騎當千 奮戰奮戰 十一年의 새길
이번 新年으로 十週年을 마지하는 開闢社는 우선 三雜誌新年號를 大大特輯한 外에 宏壯한 附錄지 添附하엿거니와 다시  上記十大計劃을 세워 그 準備가 着着進行되고 잇슴니다.＜108＞

社友諸氐 讀者諸位의 後援을 切願!!
하잘것업는 微力으로 十年一日가치 苦戰해올수 잇는 것은 全혀 讀者諸氏의 後援힘인 것을 感謝하야마지아니하는 同時에 更히 十一年의 새로운 進出을 위하야 一層의 힘잇는 聲援을 주시기 切願함니다＜109＞
＜108-109＞