잡지명	別乾坤 제25호
발행일	1930년 01월 01일
기사제목	大大諷刺 社會成功 秘術
기사형태	잡저

Magazine Title: 別乾坤 제25호
Publication Date: 1930-01-01
Article Title: 大大諷刺 社會成功 秘術 (Great Satire: Secrets of Social Success)
Article Type: 雜著 (Miscellany)

Great Satire: Secrets of Social Success

Secrets to Becoming a Literary Man

Literary man! Just the word sounds romantic and evokes a harmony of longing that rings musically in the ears. Literary man! Man of literature! The object of adoration for literary youths, an authority in the realm of love... the secret to becoming a literary man with such a rich meaning of life...

After listing all this, it seems very difficult, but in reality, it's as easy as swimming with your arms propped up.

Gentlemen! Or rather, Ladies! If you want to become a literary man or woman, faithfully follow the path below.

First, buy about ten thousand sheets of manuscript paper and about five thousand 2-jeon stamps, then just write and send them to newspapers and magazines indiscriminately.

When writing poetry, it's enough to say, "Ah! It's raining." "Oh! Flowers are blooming." "Oh! Leaves are falling." "Ah! My heart aches." "Oh! Life is desolate." "Oh! My Love!" For novels, just give a concept without anything else.

Second, don't specialize in just one thing.

Poetry, novels, dramas, screenplays, reviews, translations of foreign works in triple or quadruple layers...

If you continue the above two things with an indomitable spirit for a month or two, you will already be 50% a literary man.

At that time, make friends with people from magazine companies and put your name in the "Literary Figures Contributing to This Magazine" section of the magazine's preview column. If not, treat a fellow writer to tangsuyuk and a hundred white porcelain cups of alcohol and beg them to write a "Literary Impression" in the newspaper. Then you will already be 100% a literary man.

However, the above is an artificial silk-style literary man. It means you can do that if you just want the name.

If you truly want to be a literary man, you must observe with the eyes of a scientist, think with the mind of a philosopher, and express with the techniques of an artist, as the ancients taught. <144>

To do that, you need 100% study and 100% talent.

Secrets to Becoming Beautiful

All the unattractive women in the world who harbor resentment for broken mirrors and spend day and night in distress! In modern times, your worries are nothing more than杞憂(giyu, groundless fears).

Go to the Han River and stage a suicide scene to the point where you don't catch a cold. The next day, it will be boldly reported as the suicide of a beautiful woman. In an era when a box of Pakga Powder costs 10 jeon, doesn't a 5 jeon streetcar fare turn you into a social beauty overnight!

Also, if you cut your hair, you become a 단발미인(danbalmiin, short-haired beauty); if you wear Western clothes, you become a 양장미인(yangjangmiin, Western-dressed beauty); if you run away, you become a 도망질미인(domangjilmiin, runaway beauty)... It's very modern.

If you want to become beautiful in a slightly more difficult way: 1. Sleep well, eat well, and defecate well (drink a glass of cold water three times a day). 2. Eat vegetables for breakfast. 3. Don't bathe too often. 4. Massage yourself once a day. 5. Wash your eyes well with water. 6. Wash off your makeup before going to bed. 7. Whiten your teeth. 8. Comb your hair to make your face look pretty. 9. Sit still in front of a mirror for 5 minutes. 10. Apply makeup thinly, about 70-80%. 11. Express your emotions. 12. Make your voice beautiful. 13. Pay attention to color rather than quality of fabric. 14. Have clothes made to fit your body. 15. Be mindful of your rear view. 16. Pay attention to your gait. 17. Make your hands beautiful.

Secrets to Becoming a Famous Reporter

Famous reporter, famous reporter, famous reporter for a major newspaper, star reporter. Just hearing it makes my legs tingle and makes me feel energized. Moreover, in Joseon, the authority of a reporter is truly tremendous, so who wouldn't want to become one with youthful energy?

Getting news so miraculously that ghosts cry and goblins wet themselves and run away, being treated with the utmost hospitality wherever you go... How about it? Don't you want to become one? Then I'll reveal the secret.

First, go to a newspaper that can't pay you a salary and beg them to give you a reporter title since you don't need the money. Take that and go around socializing with everyone, eating expensive foreign food and showing off. Give some money to reporters from 電通(Dentsu) or 帝通(Teikoku Tsushin) and get articles from them. Follow factions and move from one newspaper to another. When the president or executive goes to Japan or somewhere, send them telegrams saying "Have a safe trip" from inside the car. Always wear a badge on your Western-style collar. Go to the theater fourteen times a week. Insult people you hate in articles. Work as a writer as well... and so on.

However, if that doesn't work, there's also the following method.

Be diligent (try to write articles with your mouth, not your hands), be quick, study the experiences of pioneers, and handle articles fairly... and so on. <145>

Secrets to Love Success

Oscar Wilde said in the opening of his work "The Model Millionaire," "Romance is the privilege of the rich, not the profession of the unemployed."

But that's a blatant lie. You can't love if you don't have money?

Even if your stomach rumbles, even if the landlady nags you about the rent, even if you have spring and autumn clothes tailored and wear hand-me-down winter clothes, even if your wife runs an in-house tailoring shop and you've been suspended from school for not paying tuition, even if you sleep with your 라팔 (raphal) pants under your pillow at night, even if the end of a towel flutters from your upper pocket, attend girls' school concerts diligently, prepare peach-colored letter paper, light blue Western envelopes, a collection of modern love letters, and a few 3-jeon stamps, and diligently engage in 秋波(chupa, flirtatious glances) broadcasting at Andong Intersection every morning and evening, diligently tail people, and fiercely dump your previous lover... and so on, eating up a few of those promiscuous girls is as easy as turning your hand.

However, if you want to do it sincerely as a truly sincere person, it requires a few conditions, though it may be a bit dull.

1. A mutual feeling between each other (one-sided love won't work). 2. Touch hands only after your temperature rises to twelve points. 3. Love that sprouts in hardship. 4. Love without competitors. 5. Love with a noble spirit. 6. Love that proceeds secretly. 7. Love with few words exchanged. 8. Love that doesn't allow the body. 9. Love that doesn't love the feeling of love. 10. Love that can lead to marriage. 11. Love that isn't infatuated with beauty... Only such love can truly succeed.

Secrets to Making Money

Money! Money! Money! If you can't make money, if you're short on money, listen carefully if you want to make money.

The world has changed, so you can't exploit the people's wealth as a 수령(suryeong, magistrate), but instead, there are still many bribes in modern times. If you have some rice paddies inherited from your ancestors, it's good to mortgage them and go to Incheon to trade in soybeans. It's also good to walk around the streets and pay attention to whether bundles of paper money have fallen. It's also good to go into the deep mountains with a hammer on your waist and hammer rocks until you become a multi-millionaire. Or, if a relative dies without an heir, it's very good to become an adopted son and inherit tens of millions of won and become a director of a newspaper company.

If you don't have such heavenly blessings, let your total income be 70% of your total expenditure. (However, income deficits in certain areas are a separate matter.)

Secrets to Being Affectionate Between Husband and Wife

Who is the closest person in a person's life? It's the spouse. Husband and wife are one body. Since you're going to live together for a lifetime, it's a principle that your affection should be deep and your relationship close, and <146> therefore, it should be so in reality.

But sometimes there are exceptions, which is truly lamentable.

Here, I introduce the secrets to harmony and affection between husband and wife to revive sweet homes for all the unfortunate couples in the world.

It's good for the husband to meet his wife in an alley on the way back from a restaurant, and for the wife to meet him on the way back from music.

It's good to act coquettish and beg for a cape even if you don't have the money, and it's good to praise other women within earshot of your wife.

It's good to dig up each other's past and talk about love or criticize each other. It's good for divorce, that is.

If you want to live like a proper couple, the following techniques are absolutely necessary.

For the husband: 1. Don't love your wife too much. 2. Don't peep at her putting on makeup. 3. When your wife wears new clothes and is happy, tell her she looks good. 4. Fight once a month, but reconcile 5 minutes after fighting. 5. Praise her 된장찌개(doenjang jjigae, soybean paste stew) for being delicious. 7. Don't be too kind to your mother or mother-in-law. 8. Don't treat your wife's family coldly. 9. When your wife is not in a good mood, take her for a walk. 10. When she is sick, be more affectionate than usual. 11. Don't ignore your wife's cleanliness. 12. Never lose your dignity as a husband. 13. Love her sincerely.

For the wife: 1. Understand 유머(yumeo, humor). 2. Take care of your husband meticulously, treating him like a child to some extent. 3. Don't be a wise wife; be a loving wife. 4. Don't love your children more than your husband. 5. 10% jealousy. 6. Don't talk back to your husband. 7. Don't leave your angry husband and go out. 8. Don't praise other men in front of your husband. 9. Don't directly correct or demand your husband's bad habits or difficult requests. 10. Don't reveal your husband's secrets carelessly. 11. Share a hobby. 12. Don't be more extravagant than your husband. 13. Love your husband sincerely.

Secrets to Becoming a Youth Leader

Once upon a time—there was a beautiful prince... there was a strange frog... If you steal a few of Andersen or Grimm's fairy tales and publish them in the corner of a newspaper where there's space left, and write a few children's songs that even adults don't understand, saying that the moon is smiling and the stars aren't sleeping... you're already a youth leader. (And of course, a children's book writer.)

Going a little further, if you have some spare change, you run a children's magazine, spreading out love novels and picking out the money from the noses of children, you'll be in the top class.

Gentlemen! Don't you have any intention of trying it? If you really want to try it, I'll really coach you.

Dealing with young people is more responsible than anything else. If you make a mistake, it's easy to instill very bad habits in the minds of young people.

Therefore, you must act as a very mature nanny while having the same innocent heart as a young person. <147>

Secrets to Becoming a New Woman

New Woman! Good. After living in prison for thousands of years, you've come out into the bright world, so everything is joy and everything is freedom. Who do you fear, and what do you care about?

Chastity? Pshaw! Where is that old-fashioned sound? Where is the law that says you can't live the life you want while being single?

Well! Tonight, I'm going to give a passionate speech on the "Social Consideration of Women's Issues."

Be refined and modern... That's what a New Woman is...

Like this, a fake New Woman who shouts for absolute liberation and absolute freedom becomes an object of infinite admiration for young girls who still have young ears and eyes.

She thinks she's walking on the cutting edge of women's liberation, but it's rather a deformity.

She's wandering around in heroism that others have already overcome long ago. They are mannequins of the transitional period.

Because of them, even true New Women and true feminist activists are misunderstood by some people.

You must have a firm belief and a scalpel-like understanding. If there is no absolute in all truth, how can there be an absolute in the women's movement and women's liberation? Absolute freedom and absolute liberation? Then are women going to go to the moon and build an independent country among themselves?

The short skirt that she's been wanting to wear is imitating Western street girls, and the high heels, while shouting for liberation, are restricting the freedom of the body.

Secrets to Becoming a Doctor of Philosophy

How to become a Doctor of Philosophy—the secret—is amazing when you find out.

You graduated from elementary school, graduated from six middle schools in three years, and somehow did 식료품전문(siklyopum jeonmun, grocery specialty) and love affairs, and then went to Japan, or since Japan is too close, crossed the Pacific or Atlantic, and the only thing you did there was write "Received a total of X ten thousand yen," and had an affair with 洋密賣淫(yangmilmaeeum, Western secret prostitution), and pretended to have read only two books written by Japanese people, and otherwise everything was marked with an "X." When you came back, you bought several thousand won worth of 洋書(yangseo, Western books) that you didn't know the names of, had many Western-style suits made, and as soon as there was an article in the Joseon newspaper like "Dr. XXX of X Country Returns Home in Glory," that person becomes an unshakeable doctor.

It's a fun gamble for a friend who has some money and is crazy about getting a name.

However, you must not forget that the truly current doctors of philosophy have earned their honorable degrees, which are the result of their efforts, after fighting with microscopes and ancient books and racking their brains for at least several years or several decades.

Secrets to Becoming a Company Director

Becoming a director is as easy as lying down and eating rice cake.

You put out ten thousand won and buy a rickshaw for personal use—although most people take 圓택시(won taeksi, won taxis)—make a few subordinates and keep them as employees of the company, go to a restaurant twenty-nine times a month, buy only two houses and have only three concubines, take only those subordinates who flatter you among the lower-level employees and give them drinks, and behead those who don't, attach a dog fur muffler to your neck, and always smoke a 여송연(yeosongyeon, cigar)... With just this, your position and qualifications are more than sufficient. However, if there is a commendable friend among you who is deeply interested and dedicated to the business itself and should be in a director position, you should think deeply about it.

If you follow the above as it is, you are a 천치(cheonchi, fool). You will become a puppet director and an object to be exploited.

Secrets to Becoming a Famous Person

To become a famous person! There's a very easy way. You have to have traveled overseas—especially to the West or China. Even if you're secretly cracking 호박씨(hobakssi, pumpkin seeds), you have to loudly proclaim that you're working for society.

You have to frequently attend gatherings like restaurants, be sure to be close to the newspaper company, and have your travel announced in the news section when you travel, and become the initiator of send-off or welcome parties for people going to the West or Japan.

If possible, it's even better to get a director or executive position. That way, no matter how sinful you are, they can't directly curse you.

This is the only secret to manufacturing fake famous people. However, you should know that a famous person should never be made like this.

If you want to become a famous person, become someone who sincerely works for society. Then the world will naturally look up to you as a famous person.

Secrets to Preventing Your Husband from Having a Concubine

If your husband gets a concubine, either make a false accusation of robbery like someone else did, or go to the place where the two are sitting together and tear their heads apart, or stage a suicide scene, or run away to your parents' house... All are good.

But that's too vulgar, so a refined lady can't do that, no matter how angry she is.

If the thread of affection has completely broken and there is no hope of restoring the relationship between husband and wife, you should break up cleanly. If your husband is doing it out of a temporary whim, then careful consideration and quiet action are very necessary.

Excluding special exceptions, if a husband is promiscuous or takes a concubine, it's because he feels a lack in the home with his wife.

You should carefully examine where that lack comes from and make your husband find fun at home, send affection and use techniques so that his heart doesn't lean towards women other than his wife. For concrete plans, you can use the Secrets to Marital Harmony written above. <149>

Secrets to Becoming a Socialist

To become a socialist! You need quite a bit of means to a considerable extent...?

First, when dealing with people, you must be good at saying "our proletarians" or "comrade." You must always carry about two pamphlets in your pocket for advertising purposes, and you must always put up pictures of Marx, Engels, or Lenin on the wall. And comrades must OO their wives.

But if you want to become a true 主義者(juuija, an adherent of a particular ideology or doctrine), you can't do that. You must have thorough theory, the courage to fight, and class consciousness according to the order.

Secrets to Magazine Management

Academic background, ideology, and experience are all unnecessary. It's good if you only have some money, need to get a name, and have the three conditions to relieve boredom. Even if you seize land or deceive others, it's good to get about 3,000 won and get a rented room in a three-room house. Put up a sign as big as Namdaemun there, and as a first priority, urgently engrave your name card, but write on the job application that you are a director or president of a certain company. Before collecting manuscripts, send large-font promotional flyers saying that it is Joseon's first academic magazine or popular magazine to the provinces, then present the province's influential figures with magazine subscriptions or advertising fees first. In the first issue, you must include your own picture or inaugural address. And the business expenses should be about 1,000 won, and the entertainment expenses and restaurant fees should be more than 2,000 won. Also, you must have the determination to end the curtain with the inaugural issue or the second or third issue. But that is not the secret of a true manager. The true secret is not just money, but constant effort and knowledge about it.

Secrets to Overcoming Lovesickness

Heartbreak! Heartbreak! Ah! The bitterness of heartbreak! To all the young men and women in the world who are crying from this bitterness! Listen carefully to these words.

It's good to drink alcohol and become a 酒太白(jutaebaek, heavy drinker) to forget everything. It's good to hold a picture of your gone lover in your arms and meet them in your dreams. It's good to go to a quiet place and cry while reading the letters he/she sent before.

If you still can't stand it, it's good to take a fatal dose of Neuyiraz and spend some time in the hospital.

But that's a century late, so how can you, who are walking on the cutting edge of modernism, be like that...?

Thirty minutes after heartbreak, walk arm in arm with a new lover past the door of your old lover.

How exhilarating and refreshing is that?

Because you know love as the total value of life, all comedies (even if you're crying sadly, it's actually a comedy) occur.

Sentimentalism has been liquidated long ago. Young people who cry in sentimentalism are 121 years old.

Sentimental love is too theatrical and too technical.

Simply hang up, proceed, and liquidate—this is the only way to have adaptability to love in modern times. Never imitate Werther. <150>

**Named Entities**

安東	Andong
朴家粉	Pakka Powder
한 강	Han River
李白	Li Paek
電通	Dentsu
帝通	Teikoku Tsushin



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제25호
발행일	1930년 01월 01일
기사제목	大大諷刺 社會成功 秘術
기사형태	잡저

大大諷刺 社會成功 秘術
文人 되는 秘訣
문사! 말만 들어도 그 리씀이 로맨틕한 게 憧憬의 하-모니 가치 음악적으로 귀에 울니다. 문사! 문학자! 문학소년의 추모의 대상, 戀愛界의 오소리티-... ... 이럿틋이 生의 意義가 풍만한 문사 되는 비결... ...
이러케 늘어노코 보니까 아주 썩 어려울 줄 알어도 실상 알고 보면 팔 집고 헤염치기다.
제군! 혹 諸裙! 제군 등이 만일 文士나 혹은 文女가 되고 십거든 다음의 經路를 충실하게 밟어라.
第一로 원고용지를 한 만장 사다노코 2錢 우표를 한 오천 장 사다노코 그저 마구 써서 그저 마구 신문사로 잡지사로 보내라.
쓰는 데는 詩에 잇서서는 아! 비가 온다. 어! 꼬치 픤다. 오! 낙엽이 진다. 아! 가슴이 압흐다. 어! 인생이 적막하다. 오! 나의 戀愛 氏여!―이러한 것이면 충분하고 소설에 잇서서는 아모 것도 다- 그만두고 개념만 주-ㄱ 설명을 하면 그만이다.
第二로는 한 가지 것만 전문으로 파서는 안 된다.
시∙소설∙드라마∙시나리오∙評∙三重四重의 외국작품 번역... ...
이상의 두 가지를 한 두어 달 불굴의 정신으로 계속하면 이미 諸君 등은 50%의 文士가 된다.
그때에는 제군 등은 곳 잡지사 사람과 親交를 매저 가지고 그 잡지의 豫告欄에 『本誌에 執筆하는 文人 諸氏』라는 곳에 제군 등의 성명 3字를 집어 너어라. 그러치 아니하면 달은 문사 하나를 탕수육에 백알ㅅ잔이나 대접하고는 신문에 『文人 印象記』를 써 달나고 간청을 하여라. 그러면 그때에는 발서 제군은 100%의 문사로 완성이 된다.
단, 以上은 人造絹式 문사란 말이다. 일홈만 엇자면 그러케 해도 된다 그 말이다.
제군이 만일 진정하게 문사가 되려면 이미 옛사람이 갈으킨 바와 가치 과학자의 눈으로 관찰하고 철학자의 머리로 생각하고 예술가의 수법으로 표현을 해야 한다.＜144＞
그리하자면 百分의 공부와 百分의 재능이 필요한 것이다.

美人 되는 秘訣
세상에 破鏡의 원한을 먹음고 날로 밤으로 悶悶히 지내는 만 천하의 不美人들이여! 현대에 잇서는 그대들의 근심이 한 개의 杞憂에 지나지 못한다.
한강에 나아가서 감기가 돌지 아니할 정도로 自殺劇 一幕을 實演하여라. 이튼날에는 미인의 투신자살이라고 버젓하게 나지 안나. 朴家粉 한 갑에도 10錢하는 시절에 電車삭 5錢이면 一躍 사회적 미인이 되지를 안는가!
또 斷髮을 하면 斷髮美人 洋裝을 하면 洋裝美人 도망질을 하면 도망질美人... ... 아주 모던式이다.
그러치 안코 좀 어려운 방법으로 미인이 되자면 一, 잘 자고 잘 먹고 잘 排便(三時로 냉수를 한 잔씩 먹는다.)을 식힐 것 二, 아츰밥에는 야채를 먹을 것 三, 목욕을 자조 말 것 四, 하로에 한번 맛사-지를 할 것 五, 물로 눈을 잘 씨슬 것 六, 잘 때에 분을 시처버리고 잘 것 七, 니ㅅ발을 희게 할 것 八, 얼골 모습을 딸어 머리를 비슬 것 九, 거울 압헤 5분간 靜坐할 것 十, 화장은 七八 分으로 엷히 할 것 十一, 마음을 표정에 나타낼 것 十二, 말소리를 알음답게 할 것 十三, 옷감은 質보담도 색채에 주의할 것 十四, 몸에 맛도록 옷을 해 입을 것 十五, 뒤ㅅ맵씨에 유념할 것 十六, 걸음거리를 주의할 것 十七, 손을 곱게 할 것.

名記者 되는 秘訣
명기자, 명기자, 大新聞의 명기자, 花形記者. 듯기만 해도 다리가 웃줄거려지고 긔운이 나는 듯하다. 더구나 조선에 엇서서는 기자의 권위란 참 굉장한 지라 누가 젊은 긔운으로 한번 되여보기를 바라지 아니하랴.
귀신이 哭을 하고 독개비가 오좀을 싸고 달어날 만큼 신통하게 기사 어더내는 것, 오나가나 대접을 극진히 밧는 것... ... 엇대? 제군도 한번 되여보고 십지 안소? 그러면 秘方을 공개하지.
一 曰, 월급 못 주는 신문사에 가서 돈은 일 업스니 名義나 두어 달나고 사정 사정으로 간청을 해서 爲先 記者名函을 박어 둘 일, 그 놈을 가지고 걸이나개나 막 돌아다니며 교제를 할 일, 外上 료리를 먹고 ヰノゴリ를 잽힐 것, 電通이나 帝通 기자에게 돈푼이나 먹여두고 記事를 어더낼 일, 黨派를 딸아 이 신문사 저 신문사로 옴겨다닐 일, 사장이나 중역이 일본이나 어데를 가거든 차 속에 대고 『선생님 안녕히 다녀오십시요.』라고 電報를 댓 장씩 칠 일, 洋服エリ에는 반듯이 빼지를 부치고 다닐 일, 일주일에 열네 번씩 극장에를 다닐 일, 미운 놈을 기사로 욕할 일, 文士業을 겸할 일... ... 등등이다.
그러나 혹 성가지지 아니하면 다음의 法도 잇다.
부지런할 일(손으로 기사를 쓰려고 말고 말로 쓰려고 할 것), 민첩할 일, 先進의 경험을 연구할 일, 기사를 공평하게 취급할 일... ... 등등이다.＜145＞

戀愛 成功秘訣
오스카-∙외일드는 그의 作 『千萬者의 모델』이라는 소설의 冒頭에 Romance is the privilege of the rich, not the profession of the unemployer―(연애도 돈 잇는 사람의 特權이지 失業者의 할 일이 못 된다.)―라고 말하엿다.
그러나 그것은 새빨간 거짓말이다. 돈이 업다고 연애를 못해?
배ㅅ속에서 꼬르륵 소리는 나도 하숙집 노파는 밥갑슬 졸나도 春秋服을 잽혀 冬服은 차저입엇서도 집에서는 안해가 內裁縫所를 내이고 안젓서도 月謝金을 못 내어서 停學處分은 당햇서도 라팔바지는 저녁에 요미테 깔고 자고 윗 포켓에서는 수건 끄치 폴폴 날니고 여학교 음악회는 精勤을 하고 桃花色 레터-페-퍼-와 엷푸른 洋봉투와 現代戀愛片紙集과 3錢 우표 멧 장은 內衣을 잽혀서 작만하여두고 아침과 저녁때로 安洞 六거리에 서서 秋波放送業을 게울니하지 아니하고 尾行을 부즈런히 하고 前의 애인을 떼이기를 매섭게 해야 하고... ... 등등으로 하면 그까짓 난봉 게집애 멧 개쯤 먹기야 如反掌이다.
그러나 좀 진실한 사람으로써 진실하게 해보겟다면 약간 묵업기는 하나 다음의 멧 가지 필요조건이 잇서야 한다.
一, 서로 마음이 잇는 사이(외짝사랑은 못 쓴다.) 二, 熱이 十二分 올은 뒤에 손을 대일 三, 艱難 속에서 싹이 도든 사랑 三, 경쟁자가 업는 사이사랑 四, 氣魂이 고결한 사랑 五, 비밀히 진행되는 사랑 六, 피차에 말이 적은 사랑 七, 몸을 許하지 아니한 사랑 八, 哀顧과 脅迫으로 엇지 아니한 사랑 九, 연애의 氣分을 연애하지 아니하는 사랑 十, 결혼할 수 잇는 사랑 十一, 美色에 홀니우지 아니한 사랑... ... 이러한 사랑이라야만 성공을 정말로 할 수가 잇는 것이다.

돈 모는 秘訣
돈! 돈! 돈을 못 모아서 돈이 모자라서 돈을 모으고 십흔 사람은 귀를 기우리고 들어라,
세상이 달너서 守令사리로 民財 토색질은 못할 것이고 그 대신 뇌물쯤은 현대에도 만히 잇고 先祖에서 물너내린 논 석직이나 잇거든 抵當을 해 가지고 인천으로 가서 米豆를 한번 하는 것도 조코 길거리로 다니면서 지전뭉치가 흘넛나 주의를 하는 것도 조코 함머-를 허리에 차고 深山으로 들어가서 바우ㅅ뎅이를 두들겨보다가 千萬長者가 되는 것도 조코 혹 친척이 죽으면서 嗣子가 업서 急造 養子가 되여가서는 멧천만圓 相續을 바더 신문사의 理事가 되는 것도 썩 조타.
만일 이상과 가튼 天運의 惠澤이 업는 사람은 총수입의 七割을 총지출로 하여라.(단, 某 方面의 의미의 수입부족에 관한 것은 別論으로 함.)

夫婦間 親愛하는 秘訣
사람의 일생에 가장 각가운 사이가 누구냐 하면 그것은 부부간이다. 부부는 一身이다. 평생을 가치 살어갈 사람이니 정이 깁고 사이가 각가워야 할 것이 원칙이며＜146＞ 따라서 實地도 그러하여야 할 것이다.
그런데 간혹 예외의 사람이 잇스니 얼마나 통탄할 일이냐.
이에 부부간의 和解多情한 秘方을 소개하야 만 천하의 不遇한 부부에게 스위트호-ㅁ을 甦生식혀 주려 한다.
남편은 요리집에서 안해는 음악에서 돌아오는 길에 골목쟁이에서 만나는 것도 조타.
업는 돈에 케이프만 사달나고 아양을 부리는 것도 조코 안해 듯는데 달은 여자를 칭찬하는 것도 조타.
피차에 과거를 들추어 가지고 사랑 혹은 꼬집어 말하는 것도 조타. 이혼하기에 조타는 말이다.
만일 그러치 안코 좀 부부답게 지내랴거든 다음의 技巧가 절대 필요하다.
남편은 一, 안해를 넘우 사랑하지 말 것 二, 화장하는 것을 엿보지 말 것 三, 안해가 새 옷을 입고 조와하거든 조타고 하여줄 것 四, 싸홈은 한 달에 한번씩 하되 하고 나서 5분만에 화해할 것 五, 된장찌개가 맛이 잇다고 칭찬해 줄 것 七, 어멈이나 침모에게 넘우 친절히 하지 말 것 八, 妻家 사람을 냉대하지 말 것 九, 안해의 기분이 조치 못할 때는 데리고 산보를 나갈 것 十, 병이 난 때에는 平素日보담 더 정답게 해줄 것 十一, 안해의 潔癖을 무시하지 말 것 十二, 남편으로써의 위엄을 일치 말 것 十三, 진심으로 사랑할 것.
안해는 一, 유-모어를 이해해야 할 것 二, 어느 정도까지는 남편을 어린애 보아주듯이 세심히 해줄 것 三, 賢妻가 되지 말고 愛妻가 될 것 四, 자식을 남편보담 더 사랑하지 말 것 五, 10%쯤의 嫉妬 六, 나물애는 말에 말대답을 하지 말 것 七, 성난 남편을 남겨두고 외출하지 말 것 八, 남편 압헤서 달은 남자를 칭찬하지 말 것 九, 남편의 낫분 버룻이나 또 어려운 請을 직접으로 곳치기 혹은 요구하지 말 것 十, 남편의 비밀을 함부루 말하지 말 것 十一, 취미를 한 가지로 할 것 十二, 남편 이상으로 호사하지 말 것 十三, 남편을 진심으로 사랑할 것.

少年 指導者 되는 秘訣
옛날옛적에―어여분 왕자님이 잇는데... ... 이상한 개고리가 잇는데... ... 하고 안델센이나 끄림의 동화 멧 개를 훔처다가 紙面이 남어 찔찔매는 신문 구석에 내이고 달님이 우스시고 별님이 잠을 아니 자시고... ...라고 어룬도 모를 童謠 멧 개만 쓰면 발서 少年 指導者다.(童話作家가 되는 것은 물론이고)
좀더 나아가서 잔돈푼이나 잇스면 소년잡지를 경영하느라고 연애소설 가튼 것을 너줄하게 늘어노쿠는 어린애들의 코 무든 돈을 발겨내면 아주 一流班에 올으게 된다.
제군! 한번 해볼 생각이 업소? 정말로 해보고 십다면 이편에서도 정말로 코-치를 해주지.
어린 사람을 상대로 하는 데는 달은 무엇보담도 책임이 묵업다. 깟댁 잘못하면 어린 사람들의 머리에 아조 고약한 버릇을 너어주기가 쉽다.
그럼으로 아주 썩 老熟한 褓母役을 하는 한편으로 어린 사람과 꼭 가튼 순진한 마음을 가저야 한다.＜147＞

新女性 되는 秘訣
新女性! 조-치. 수천 년 동안을 獄中生活을 하다가 光明한 天地에 나왓스니 모든 것이 깃븜이요 모도가 자유다. 누구를 두려워하며 무엇을 거릿기랴.
貞操? 피- 그런 케케묵은 소리가 어데 잇노? 독신으로 지내면서는 허구 십흔 생활을 못하라는 법이 대관절 어데 잇노?
자! 오늘밤에는 내가 여성문제의 『社會的 考察』이란 제목으로 열변을 吐할 판이야.
점잔찬케 모던껄이 무어야... ... 新女性이지... ... .
이처럼 절대의 해방 절대의 자유를 부르짓는 假ㅅ者 新女性이 아직 귀와 눈이 어린 소녀들에게는 무한한 欽仰의 표적이 된다.
자기 스사로는 여성 해방의 첨단을 걸어가기나 하는 것 가치 생각을 하고 잇스나 그것은 도리어 畸形의 것이다.
남은 이미 극복한 지 오란 히로이씀에서 방황하고 잇다. 그들은 과도기의 마네킹껄이다.
그들 때문에 진실한 新女性 진실한 女性運動家까지도 일부 사람의 오해를 입는다.
구든 신념과 메스 가튼 이해력이 잇서야 한다. 모든 진리에 절대가 업거든 하물며 여성운동 여성해방에 하필 절대가 잇스랴? 절대자유 절대해방이라니 그러면 여자끼리만 月世界에 가서 독립국을 건설한단 말인가.
짤븐 스커트는 실컷 뽄땃다는 것이 서양의 스트릿∙껄을 숭내 낸 것이요 굽 놉흔 구두는 해방 해방하면서도 신체의 자유부터 拘束하는 것이다.

學博士 되는 秘訣
學博士 되는 법―그 비결―알고 보면 굉장하다.
보통학교는 졸업을 햇고 중학교 3년 동안에 여섯 군데를 졸업햇스며 그렁저렁 食料品 專門과 戀愛業을 하다가 일본이나 일본은 넘우 각가우니까 太平洋 혹은 太西洋쯤 건너가서 그 곳에서 한 일은 일금 X萬圓也라를 쓴 것과 洋密賣淫과 다정하여진 것과 일본 사람이 저술 한 책을 두 권만 보는 체한 것 외에는 전부가 X자요 돌아올 때에는 일홈 모를 洋書를 멧천 원 어치 산 것과 西洋式 양복을 만히 작만한 것과 조선의 신문에 『X國 X學博士 XXX 氏 錦衣還鄕』 等屬의 기사가 나기만 하면 그 양반은 움직일 수 업는 박사가 된다.
돈푼이나 잇고 일홈을 못 어더 헛천ㅅ병이 난 친구는 허염직헌 노름이다.
그러나 현재에 某某하는 정말 學博士들은 적어도 멧 해 혹은 멧십 년씩 현미경과 싸우고 古書籍과 싸우고 머리를 알코 나서 어든 노력의 결정인 영예로운 학위라는 것을 제군은 이저서는 아니 된다.

會社 重役 되는 秘訣
중역쯤이야 누어 떡먹기다.
돈 萬圓이나 내어노코 자가용 인력거나 한 채 사노코―圓 탁씨를 대부분 타지만―부하를 멧 사람 만들어 가지고 그 회사의 사원으로＜148＞ 두고 한 달에 스물아홉 번씩 요리집에를 가고 집은 둘만 사 가지고 妾은 셋만 엇고 下級社員 중에 아첨을 부리는 놈만 데리고 다니면서 술잔이나 멕이고 그러찬은 놈은 목을 뎅겅뎅겅 베여바리고 목에다 개털목도리라도 부치고 여송연은 반듯이 피어 물어야 하고... ... 이만하면 지위와 자격이 十二分으로 충분하다. 그러나 제군 중에 뜻이 깁고 마음이 잇서 사업 그 자체를 위하야 중역 지위에 잇서야 할 가상한 친구가 잇다면 깁히 한번 생각을 해야 한다.
만일 우에 말한 대로 그대로 본밧는다면 제군은 天痴다. 제군은 허수아비 중역이 되고 被利用物이 된다.

名士 되는 秘訣
명사가 되자면! 아주 썩 쉬운 길이 잇다. 해외―특히 서양이나 중국에를 한번 다녀와야 한다. 속으로는 호박씨를 까도 거트로만 사회를 爲합노라고 소리를 빠락빠락 질너야 한다.
集會에는 요리집과 한가지로 자조 출입을 하고 新聞社측은 반듯이 친해두어서 여행을 할 때에 消息欄에 드러야 하고 洋行이나 혹 日行하는 사람의 餞送 또는 歡迎會의 發起人이 되여야 한다.
웬만하면 理事나 重役쯤 한 개 따두면 더구나 조타. 그래 노면 아모리 罪惡이 잇서도 바로 대고 욕을 하지 못한다.
이것이 假名士 製造의 유일한 비결이다. 그러나 명사라는 것은 결코 이러케 만들어저서도 안 된다는 것을 제군을 알어야 한다.
제군이 만일 명사가 되고 십다면 사회를 위하여 진심으로 일을 하는 사람이 되여라. 그러면 세상은 스사로 제군을 명사로 울어러 주리라.

男便이 妾 안 두게 하는 秘訣
남편이 첩 어드면 누구처럼 强盜 헛告發이나 허지. 그러찬으면 년놈이 마주 안진 데 쪼차가서 대가리를 아득아득 뜨더주어도 조코 自殺劇을 한 幕 演出해도 조코 親家로 픽 다러나도 조코 다- 조타.
그러나 그것은 넘우 쌍스러워서 점잔으신 부인네께서야 아모리 화증이 나시더래도 그리하실 수야 잇나.
영영 피차에 애정의 실마리가 끈치고 다시 부부의 사이가 회복될 희망이 업스면 싼뜻하게 갈녀설 것이고 그러치 안코 남편이 일시의 뜬 긔운으로 한 것이면 거긔 대해서 신중한 고려와 조용한 조처가 매우 필요하다.
특수한 예외를 제하고는 남편이 난봉을 부린다든가 첩을 엇는 것은 가정에 안해에 부족을 늣기는 탓이다.
그 부족이 어데 온 것인가를 잘 살펴서 남편으로 하여곰 가정에 재미를 갓게하고 안해인 자기 이외의 여자에 마음이 쏠니지 아니하도록 정도 보내며 기교도 부려야 한다. 具體案은 우에 쓴 夫婦和合秘訣을 이용하면 된다.＜149＞

社會主義者되는 秘訣
사회주의자! 되자면 상당 이상으로 상당한 수단이 필요한 걸... ...?
첫재에는 사람을 대할 때에 『우리 無産者』 또는 『동무』 소리를 잘해야 하고 懷中에 廣告的으로 팜플렛을 그저 두 권쯤만 늣코 다니고 벽에는 맑쓰 엔겔스나 레-닌의 사진을 반듯이 부처두어야 한다. 그리고 동무끼리 안해를 OO하여야 한다.
그러나 진정한 主義者가 되랴면 그럴 수야 잇스랴. 아순 대로 철저한 이론과 투쟁의 용기, 계급의식이라도 가저야 할 것이다.

雜誌 經營의 秘訣
學歷∙主義∙經驗도 다 心要치 안타. 다만 돈이 좀 잇고 일홈을 어들 필요가 잇고 심심푸리를 할 세 조건만 구비하면 좃타. 토지를 잡히거나 남을 꾀여서라도 약 3천원 돈만 가지고 엇던 세집 한 간만 엇고 거긔에는 남대문만한 간판을 부치며 爲先 急先務로 名啣을 백히되 雇書에는 某社 理事나 또는 某 社長이라 백히고 원고도 모기 전에 조선 初有의 學術雜誌 또는 大衆雜誌라 하는 大書 特書의 삐라를 지방에 發送한 다음에 地方 有志에게 誌代 又는 廣告料를 先捧하고 창간호에는 자기의 사진 또는 創刊辭를 내여야 한다. 그리고 사업비는 약 천 원이면 交際費 料理代가 이천 원 이상은 되여야 한다. 또 기한은 創刊號 乃至 이삼 號로 終幕의 각오를 가져야 한다. 그러나 그것이 엇지 진정한 經營者의 비결이랴. 진정한 비결은 다른 것이 아니라 돈도 돈이지만은 그저 부단한 노력과 거긔에 대한 지식이 잇서야 한다.

失戀病 나수는 秘訣
실연! 실연! 아! 실연의 쓰라림! 이 쓰라림에 우는 만 천하의 젊은 제군 諸女여! 이 말을 깁히 들으라.
알콜을 먹고 모든 것을 이즈려고 酒太白이가 되는 것도 조타. 가고 업는 애인의 사진을 품에 품고 꿈에 맛나는 것도 조타. 고요한 곳에 가서 그가 전에 보낸 편지를 읽으며 우는 것도 조타.
그래도 못 참겟거든 죽잔흘 分量의 ネユイラズ를 먹고 얼맛동안 病院 身勢을 입는 것도 조타.
그러나 그것은 1世紀쯤 느진 것이니 적어도 모던이즘의 첨단을 걸어가는 제군이 그래서야 되나... ... .
실연 30분 후에 새로운 연인과 팔을 끼고 舊愛人의 문 압흘 걸어가거라.
얼마나 통쾌하고 시원스러운 일이냐.
연애를 인생생활의 全的 가치로 알으니까 모든 喜劇(제군은 설어서 울어도 실상은 喜劇이다.)이 발생되는 것이다.
感傷主義는 청산한 지가 오래다. 感傷主義에 우는 젊은이는 일백스물한 살 먹은 늙은이다.
感傷主義의 연애는 넘우나 演劇的이요 넘우나 技巧的이다.
간단명확하게 걸고 진행하고 청산하고―이래야만 현대에서 연애를 할 適應性이 잇는 것이다. 결코 벨텔을 본밧지 말어라.＜150＞
＜144-150＞