Magazine Title	개벽 제23호
Publication Date	1922년 05월 01일
Article Title	民衆的呌號의 第一聲인 甲午의 革新運動(續) (The Gabo Reform Movement, the First Popular Cry (Continued))
Author	黃義敦
Article Type	논설 (Editorial/Essay)

The Gabo Reform Movement, the First Popular Cry
						Hwang Ŭi-don

IV. The Emergence of Chŏn Pong-jun

People often critique figures based on the standard of their contemporary success or failure. However, I cannot nod in agreement with this. If one were to evaluate the value of figures solely in direct proportion to their contemporary success or failure, then Christ would be worth less than the Pharisees, Confucius (孔仲尼) would lack the success of Guan Zhong (管夷吾), Wycliffe would not have been Luther's predecessor, and Scott would not have been Hungary's benefactor.

Behold! The histories of old and new! While success and failure are not entirely unrelated to the protagonist's personal superiority or inferiority, in the vast majority of cases, the outcome of success or failure is determined more by differences in timing and environment than by the protagonist's personal qualities. That is, even with the same personality and the same skill, one might happen to gain the glory of success, or happen to fall into the hardship of failure; this has often been the case. How could this not be the dominion of fate? The saying, "When the time comes, heaven and earth unite their strength; when fortune departs, the hero cannot plot for himself," however much it may be a cry of lament from failure, cannot be said to lack a measure of truth.

How could it be only that? Taking a step further, it is often the case that great figures, as the foremost enlightened ones of their time and society, holding ideas and principles transcendent of their era and society, who publicly disclose their beliefs without reservation while boldly advancing to destroy obstinate old ideas and decaying old structures, become sacrifices in present failure for the sake of future success. Jesus was such a case, Bruno was such a case, Rousseau was such a case, Louis Blanc was such a case. They were precisely the vanguards of reform and pioneers of exploration for truth and freedom, becoming sacrifices for future successes. Therefore, the secret counsel of Laozi (太上老人), who said, "Do not be the first in the world," cannot be said to lack a measure of truth either.

It is in this sense that I wish to recognize the greatness of Mr. Chŏn Pong-jun, the pioneer and center of the Gabo Reform Movement.<73> However tumultuous the petty criticisms of the narrow-minded may be, they are all merely critiques based on the standard of his contemporary failure. Truly, one cannot but lament the scarcity of those who sing the praises of his great value, who boldly cried out and courageously rose up for our popular freedom and social equality.

No matter how much discontent over aristocratic tyranny was pervasive, in that era when the theory of "divinely bestowed sacred" monarchical power and the "heaven is high, earth is low" ideology of class dominated the general societal mindset, it was inevitable that those responding to the call for freedom and the banner of equality were few, and the assembled forces were weak, ultimately preventing the harvest of tangible success. Nevertheless, the spirit of freedom he cried out for remains eternally, and the ideology of reform he propagated overflows even to this day. Thus, while his failure may be the outward appearance, his success is spiritual; while his stumble was temporary, his harvest is eternal. As a flower cluster in the desert, a lighthouse in the dark night, how could I not sing the praises and laud him, this great historical figure of our peninsula, even if he suffered temporary failure?

*Bluebird, bluebird, oh bluebird,*
*Why did you come out?*
*Because the pine and bamboo leaves were green, green,*
*Thinking it was spring, I came out, but*
*White snow flutters and scatters.*
*That green pine and bamboo across the way*
*Deceived me!*

This is a song of poignant lament, mourning the sacrifice of aspiring individuals in Mr. Chŏn Pong-jun's untimely activities. Reciting his lament, while mourning Mr. Chŏn's temporary failure, I simultaneously sing the praises of the eternal spiritual victory on the other side, and take up my worn brush to describe his brief history.

Chŏn Pong-jun let out his first cry sixty-nine years ago from today (1854 AD, Gapin year) in a rural village in Kobu County (古阜郡), Honam Province (湖南). The time was the 5th year of King Ch'ŏlchong (哲宗) of the Yi Dynasty (李朝), 43 years after the failure of the revolutionary movement of the Kwansŏ (關西) hero Hong Kyŏng-nae (洪景來), 7 years after Marx's Communist Manifesto, 6 years after the outbreak of the Third Revolution in France (랭쓰), the same year as the declaration of the Crimean War (크림 戰爭), 4 years after the outbreak of Hong Xiuquan's (洪秀全) revolutionary turmoil, 3 years before the Anglo-French joint forces' invasion of Beijing (北京), and 4 years before Britain's (뿌리텐) annexation of India (印度). In Chosŏn (朝鮮), the flames of aristocratic oppression (虐焰) were blazing to their extreme; in the West, the cries for freedom and equality were most fierce; in India and China (支那), European invasion was extremely severe, while at the same time, it was a period when the dawn of civilization was gradually about to break. Thus, the world became a very eventful world, and the era became a most chaotic era. The Hibiscus Peninsula (槿花半島), which had been silent like a crouching lion in a corner, also reached a time<74> when it could not help but dance to that wind and respond to that sound. Therefore, Heaven, having intent, brought forth the giant Mr. Chŏn Pong-jun, fit to be the performer of the first act.

His family originally belonged to the humble commoner class. In the inherited bloodline from his grandfather and father, there originally flowed the precious blood yearning for freedom, and the fervor praising equality boiled within. That is, they viewed the aristocratic class—the center of all evils like injustice and tyranny—as snakes and scorpions (蛇蝎視), simultaneously hating and cursing them the most. They viewed the commoner class, groaning under all kinds of suffering from encroachment (侵漁) and plunder (掠奪), as brothers, simultaneously shedding tears of deepest sympathy for them. Thus, both his grandfather and father successively rang the bell of freedom and raised the flag of equality, attacking the corrupt officials (貪官汚吏), but ultimately became sacrifices to them.

Chŏn Pong-jun, born and raised in such a family, under such a bloodline, possessed not only the innate characteristics of a strong-willed, heroic, intelligent (剛毅英敏), grievously indignant (悲憤慷慨) destructive figure, but also, though his stature was short (矮小) earning him the nickname "General Mung Bean" (菉豆將軍), his imposing bearing (軒昂한 氣宇) exuded a vibrant heroic spirit. His piercing gaze (炯然한 眼光) overflowed with sharp observational power. With courage surpassing thunder (霹靂), versatile resourcefulness (縱橫의 機智) capable of stirring up winds and clouds, outstanding writing, fluent eloquence (辨舌)—in every aspect, he was an extraordinary figure in whom the characteristics and talents fit for a great destructive figure were fully developed without exception.

However, no matter how extraordinary a great person may be, without an extraordinary stimulus (感觸), there is no extraordinary motive; without an extraordinary motive, there is no extraordinary resolve; and simultaneously, one cannot achieve an extraordinary undertaking.

However heroic Hannibal might have been, had it not been for his father's instruction, making him swear before the war god to punish Rome, the sworn enemy with whom he could not live under the same sky (不共戴天), he might not have accomplished the great feat of flying over the Alps and cornering (跼蹙) the Roman Republic under siege for twelve long years. However much Mr. Ch'oe Yŏng might have been the "Tiger Head General," had it not been for the parental teaching to "love the country like home and view gold like dung," he might not have left behind the loyal record of standing tall like a pillar against the crumbling waves (頹波之砥柱) and fighting hard for the dying Koryŏ for thirty long years. However much of a dashing man Napoleon might have been, had it not been for the inherited impulse from his father, who was sacrificed for Corsica's independence, he might not have worn the glorious crown of the French Emperor commanding the world. Even Lenin, however great a figure he is today, had it not been for the stimulus of the tragic sacrifice (慘劇) of his elder brother who fought for the Soviet cause, might not have achieved the success of ruling the great Russian Republic today.

Ah, thus it is. The accomplishment of an extraordinary undertaking by an extraordinary person requires an extraordinary stimulus, just like this. For the extraordinary hero Mr. Chŏn Pong-jun, whom I praise, to arouse the extraordinary undertaking, the Gabo Revolutionary Movement, it also must have originated from such an extraordinary stimulus, becoming the motive and the resolve.<75>

The greatest stimulus for him was witnessing his father's sacrifice in the pro-commoner movement during his youth. His father, in order to expel (攘逐) the most rapacious, tyrannical, and cruel governor of Kobu County, raised the banner of justice, led the populace, fought bravely, but was finally captured by government forces and became a guest of no return under brutal torture and harsh interrogation. Chŏn Pong-jun, having personally witnessed this tragic situation, felt the fiery resentment of ten thousand leagues pierce the nine heavens in his heart (胷中), and an iron-clad resolve hardened in an instant. His cheeks flushed (兩顂에 피ㅅ발이서고), his eyes (雙眼) overflowed with killing intent (殺氣), his "hair stood on end pushing up his hat" (頭髮衝冠), and his "iron fist clenched tightly" (鐵拳緊握). He resolved to attack the aristocratic class, his mortal enemy (不共戴天의 㒧敵) both publicly and privately, inheriting his father's dying wish, intending to cry out for freedom and declare war for reconstruction.

However, realizing the difficulty of achieving his ideals in a scattered (渙散) society lacking unity and connection, he must have naturally sought a cooperative, unified society. Thus, the Tonghak Party (東學黨)—a secret commoner organization based on the spirit of freedom and the principle of equality, then under the greatest scorn (■視) of the aristocratic class—came into Mr. Chŏn's sharp vision (炯面), and he realized it was the supreme place for him to belong (依歸所) and a field to exercise his prowess (用武地). So he immediately joined the party, becoming a bedrock-like (磐石) disciple under the second spiritual leader Ch'oe Hae-wŏl (崔海月), and further propagated his principles among his party comrades. This was thirty-three years ago from today (Gyeongin year, 1890).

Like a fish getting water, or a tiger growing wings, like a hidden dragon (潜龍) encountering wind and clouds, or the Stone Monkey obtaining the Ruyi Jingu Bang (如意棒), the extraordinary great man Chŏn Pong-jun now met the extraordinary organization, the Tonghak Party. As he was about to spread his wings (羽翼) and realize his convictions, the world of the Peninsula began to stir with winds and clouds.

However, Chŏn Pong-jun, intending to bide his time (跂待) and prepare everything meticulously (周密히), disguised himself as an ordinary traveler and secretly entered the capital, Kyŏngsŏng (京城), staying (覊留) at the residence of the Hung-sŏn Taewŏn'gun (興宣大院君), the representative figure of the aristocratic class at the time, for several years. There, he thoroughly spied out (偵探) the organizational content of the aristocratic class—his sole opposing force and future target of attack—while intending to use the disgruntled Taewŏn'gun, who was out of power, to achieve his own objective. But since his goal was not in the petty world of officialdom (苟苟한 仕宦界) like ordinary people, even while staying idly (閑㪚) at the residence of the Taewŏn'gun, the center of contemporary authority, he made no request whatsoever regarding official positions. Therefore, the Taewŏn'gun found him unusual and asked about his reasons, but Chŏn coolly replied that "his aspirations were distinct from ordinary people, with his sole yearning focused on the four characters 'For Country, For People' (爲國爲民), so it was not something achievable through ordinary requests."<76>

How could a phoenix soaring a thousand fathoms sing in unison with common birds? How could the great ambition of the Roc be known to the wren? No matter how much the Taewŏn'gun might have been the sole ruthless schemer (梟雄) of the late Yi Dynasty, his perspective (眼孔), having daily contacted only vulgar types scheming for petty gains (繩營狗苟), naturally failed to recognize such a great man.

After lingering in the capital for several years, having completed the reconnaissance of the enemy situation and the connection (締結) with an inside collaborator (the Taewŏn'gun), he suddenly returned (飄然히 還歸) to his hometown in the spring thirty years ago from today (Gyesa year, 1893). He gathered brave and resourceful warriors, contacted Tonghak Party members in various regions to make thorough preparations on all fronts, denounced the tyranny of corrupt officials, propagated the principles of freedom and equality to arouse the public sentiment across the land, and awaited the opportunity for an explosion. From this point, the winds and clouds over the peninsula grew more pressing day by day. Finally, the popular disturbance (民擾) that arose, unable to bear the oppressive rule of Kobu governor Cho Pyŏng-gap (趙秉甲), became the fuse, and the great turmoil of the Gabo Revolution erupted. The time was the second month of spring, twenty-nine years ago from today (Gapo year, 1894).

V. The Outbreak of the Reform Movement and its Progress

Looking at historical examples, no matter how instantaneously a calamity erupts, the underlying causes that made its eruption inevitable accumulate for at least several hundred years, or even if momentous, its outbreak often stems from a minor clash. That is, however instantaneously the French Revolution erupted, its underlying causes had accumulated over many periods. However complex the causes of the World War might have been, its outbreak resulted from the sound of a single pistol (빗스돌). Similarly, the underlying causes of the Gabo Reform Movement, as mentioned before—the corruption of state affairs, aristocratic tyranny, the cries of suffering commoners, the formation of the Tonghak Party, the activities of Chŏn Pong-jun—various complex facts had piled up and accumulated, awaiting the right moment with the force of a massive explosion. Then, leading several thousand people crying under the rapacious tyranny of one Cho Pyŏng-gap, they attacked Kobu Castle and immediately occupied it. Thereupon, all the people of Kobu County responded in concert. Chŏn encamped his entire army at Paeksan (白山) in the same county and distributed a manifesto (檄文) throughout the country. The various counties (列邑) of Honam responded greatly. Ch'oe Kyŏng-sŏn (崔景善) in T'aein (泰仁), Son Hwa-jung (孫和中) in Mujang (茂長), Kim Kae-nam (金介男) in Namwŏn (南原) each rose up, leading tens of thousands of popular militia, expelling corrupt officials and declaring freedom and equality. Throughout the Three Southern Provinces (三南), hundreds of thousands of people, rising like wind and surging like water (風起水湧), all submitted under Chŏn Pong-jun's banner.

Chŏn Pong-jun then gathered troops and horses, trained (操練) the ranks (隊伍), and first, at the Battle of Paeksan,<77> utterly defeated several thousand government troops dispatched (浱遣) from the Chŏnju provincial garrison. Leading the victorious soldiers, jubilant and advancing bravely, towards Chŏnju (全州), the capital of Honam, Governor Kim Mun-hyŏn (金文鉉) was greatly alarmed and frightened (驚懼) and fled. The entire country was greatly shaken. Thereupon, the Suppressing Commander (招討使) for both Honam provinces, Hong Kye-hun (洪啓薰), leading (領率) several thousand government troops, came to defend. The forces of Chŏn and Hong met at Ch'ilbongsan (七峰山) near Chŏnju, continuing a heroic and tragic (悲壯慘憺) bloody battle for several days, finally routing the government forces. Consequently, morale soared further, and popular sentiment grew even more excited. Chŏn Pong-jun then ordered his entire army to advance and surround Chŏnju Castle. Wansan Castle (完山城), famous as an impregnable fortress, finally fell around the middle of the fourth lunar month of Gap'o (1894), and the popular army entered the city.

Chŏn Pong-jun's army occupied Chŏnju Castle, commanded the entire Honam province, punished and expelled (誅逐) corrupt officials, disciplined (懲罰) local tyrants and Confucian scholars, promulgated civil administration, and carried out reformist politics. Thereupon, the popular classes, who had been groaning in suffering under encroachment and plunder, experienced a new world of leaping joy, while the aristocratic class, accustomed to arbitrary tyranny through rapacity and cruelty, scattered in panic like startled fish and fleeing birds (魚駭鳥竄), not knowing where to turn. The entire country was greatly shaken, and the royal court, flustered (遑遑), sought countermeasures. They dispatched Royal Emissary Ŏm Se-yŏng (嚴世永) to dismiss and promote (黜陟) corrupt officials and placate (撫摩) the discontented populace. They sent reinforcements to Suppressing Commander Hong Kye-hun to attack Chŏnju, and requested relief troops from Qing China (淸國). Japan (日本) also dispatched troops, ultimately leading to the outbreak (戰端) of the Sino-Japanese War. The clashes between government and popular forces intensified, and a great, heroic and tragic bloody battle continued around Chŏnju Castle for several months.

Thus, although Chŏnju Castle was temporarily occupied by government forces, ultimately, popular army reinforcements rose from all sides, and Mr. Chŏn's command was agile, defeating the government forces again and reoccupying Chŏnju Castle. Kim Kae-nam, the brave general of the Namwŏn popular army, also came to aid with tens of thousands of elite troops. Morale doubled, and the army's reputation surged. As the people of both Yŏngnam (嶺南) and Hosŏ (湖西) provinces also rose up in response, Chŏn Pong-jun then led a large army north to occupy Hosŏ and press towards Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul), planning to overthrow the central government and fundamentally implement the great work of reform.

VI. The Battle of Kongju and its Failure

However, when intending to advance into enemy territory, prioritizing the consolidation of one's own position, one's fundamental base (巢穴), is a common principle of warfare throughout history. Therefore, Emperor Gaozu of Han (漢高祖) first focused his efforts on securing the Guanzhong (關中) region, and Cao Mengde (曹孟德) took meticulous precautions for the defense of Xudu (許都) whenever he went on campaign. Thus, in the mind of Chŏn Pong-jun, who intended to strike directly at Kyŏngsŏng, the defense of Chŏnju, his foundational base, was a matter of great concern. Therefore, he selected (擢拔) the brave general Kim Kae-nam, who possessed both supreme courage and versatile strategic ingenuity, to defend (守禦) Chŏnju Castle.

However, the government forces, about whom it could be said "defeated troops still value strength," no matter how weakened and corrupt <78> they were, were still battle-hardened elite soldiers. On the other hand, although the popular army was numerous, it was a disorderly mob (烏合之亂衆). Realizing the difficulty of ensuring success (期必) without meticulous strategic planning, Chŏn Pong-jun adopted a strategy of advancing from eight directions. He directed the leaders of the Tonghak Party who had risen up in the Three Southern Provinces (三南) to occupy strategic points in various areas and raid (抄擊) the government forces. Kim Chŏng-hyŏn (金鼎鉉), An Sŭng-gwan (安承寬), and others occupied Suwŏn (水原); Ko Sŏk-chu (高錫柱) occupied Yugu (維鳩) near Kongju (公州); Chŏng Wŏn-jun (鄭元俊) occupied Okch'ŏn (沃川). Each commanded tens of thousands of popular militia to confront the government forces, aiming to divide and weaken their strength.

In the ninth lunar month of the same year, he gathered a large army of 100,000 at the Samnye (參禮) plain near Chŏnju, collected provisions, organized the ranks (隊伍), and Chŏn Pong-jun himself became the Commander-in-Chief (都元帥). Commanding the entire army, he advanced north towards Kyŏngsŏng. While wading across (徒涉) the Kŭmgang River (錦江), the boundary between the two Hosŏ provinces, he first routed the forces of Yŏsan (礪山) Garrison Commander Kim Kab-dong (金甲東) and Kongju Confucian Commander Yi Yu-sang (李有尙), capturing them alive (生擒). Passing through the Kanggyŏng (江景) plain, he encamped the main army at Nonsan (論山), divided the forces into three routes, and aimed to advance and capture Kongju, the capital of Hosŏ. Banners and flags covered the sky (旌旗가 蔽天), armor and weapons glittered in the sun (兵甲이 耀日). The imposing majesty was enough to strike terror into the hearts (肝膽을 驚塞) of the government forces.

Although there are no documents recording the situation of the popular army directly, making it difficult to know the details of the time, even from the cursing and reviling records on the government side, fragmentary accounts state: "The rebels' momentum gradually intensified, advancing on three routes." "Flags like a forest, rebel soldiers filling the space." "The rebels knew Hyop'o (孝浦) was undefended, entering as if into an unmanned territory." "The lights from the rebel campfires reflected each other for tens of li; mountains and seas of people, almost like the sands of the Ganges." "The rebel chief, under a raised red canopy, riding in a large palanquin, advanced straight up the south road, momentum like a rising tide." "Setting fires all at once created a fire-castle." "Rebel soldiers surrounded three sides, stretching maybe thirty li from head to tail, responding like the snake of Mount Changshan when struck." "Sŏng Ha-yŏng (夏泳) alone bore the brunt, the situation untenable." "The rebels in formation still stood firm, unmoving." From these snippets, one can gauge how fierce the popular army's momentum was and how solemn their bearing was at that time.

Chŏn Pong-jun then commanded the entire popular army, targeted Kongju Castle, and advanced like a surging tide. Under the command of Ch'ungch'ŏng Governor Pak Che-sun (朴齊純), government generals Yi Kyu-t'ae (李圭泰), Sŏng Ha-yŏng (成夏泳), Hong Un-sŏp (洪運燮), Ku Sang-jo (具相祖), and others, joining forces (幷力) with Japanese troops, took positions at Iin (利仁), Hyop'o (孝浦), Pongwisan (鳳圍山), Ugŭmch'i (牛金峙), and other locations, attempting to block the popular army's advance. Consequently, the popular army changed its direction of advance, detoured (迂回) behind Pongwisan on the 25th of the tenth lunar month, secretly crossed (潜渡) the T'aejin (態津) ford, and pressed directly (直薄) upon Kongju Castle. Thereupon, the government and popular forces clashed, and a great decisive battle of human bullets and blood rain (肉彈血雨) continued all day long at Namwŏlch'on (南月村), Ch'wibyŏng (翠屛), and other places. Thus, by dusk that day, they finally routed the government forces and occupied Hyop'o the next morning without resistance. From this point, the popular army's situation greatly improved, and mountain-collapsing<79> tide-sweeping great bloody battles continued day and night for five or six days at Hyop'o, Taegyo (大橋), Ugŭmch'i, T'aech'i (態峙), Kŭmjin (錦津), and other locations. The dead and wounded on both sides numbered in the tens of thousands. However, the government forces, though fewer, were battle-hardened elite soldiers, and furthermore, they had the support of incomparably elite Japanese troops led by Suzuki (鈴木) and Morio (森尾). The terrain around Kongju Castle was very rugged, making the government's defensive position a hundred times more advantageous than the popular army's offensive, rendering it difficult to advance and capture easily. Amidst this, the momentum of the popular army, having fought bloody battles for several days, was greatly exhausted (疲罷). Thus, they were forced to retreat to Nonsan to plan another attempt.

Therefore, Chŏn Pong-jun treated (犒饋) his army to restore their energy and requested tens of thousands of reinforcements from the Wŏnsan garrison commander, Mr. Kim Kae-nam. On the morning of the third day of the eleventh lunar month, they advanced again, routing the government forces led by Sŏng Ha-yŏng at Iin Station (利仁驛). Pursuing the government forces like a swift wind and sudden thunder (疾風迅雷), they surrounded and attacked the strongholds of Ugŭmch'i, Kyŏndonbong (犬蹲峰), Chubong (周峰), Ungch'i (熊峙), etc., for six days and nights. Cannonballs rained down, and piled corpses covered the mountains (積屍가 萬山), resulting in an extremely tragic (慘天極地) great bloody battle. However, ultimately due to heaven's lack of aid and the disadvantageous terrain, the popular army suffered a major defeat and retreated.

Thus, the popular army was forced to retreat to Nonsan, and then, unable to withstand the sharp point (銳鋒) of the pursuing government forces, scattered back to Honam. However, Chŏn Pong-jun, a hero who "grew stronger in adversity" (到窮愈壯), again planned a comeback (捲土重來). But generals like Kim Chŏng-hyŏn, Chŏng Wŏn-jun, Kim Pok-yong (金福用), Ch'oe Han-gyu (崔漢圭), Kim Kae-nam, Yi Hŭi-in (李熙人), etc., were successively defeated and eliminated (剪除) in various places, cutting off his wings (羽翼). The government forces' onslaught was fierce and enraged, causing the popular sentiment to shrink back in great fear (恐縮). Those responding to his call and rallying to his banner were few. Ultimately, he could not continue his great ambition and was captured by government forces in the twelfth lunar month of the same year, bidding farewell to this world amidst endless regrets.

Ah, thus are the affairs of the world. Thus is the final fate (未老) of heroes. King Xiang Yu of Chu (楚羈王), the great warrior of world-covering strength (拔山蓋世), also ended his life amidst the bitter resentment (寃恨) of "The times are against me; Zhui will not run" (時不利兮騅不逝). The great strategist Zhuge Liang (諸葛亮), resourceful and versatile, also cried out, "Planning is with man; success is with Heaven." How could it be only them? The final road of the great Carthaginian Hannibal also ended thus. The military fate of the Corsican (골시카) hero Napoleon also ended thus. The waters of the Kŭmgang River flow silently; the Samnye Plain lies spread out flowerless. Only the evening mist, tinged with resentment, and the autumn rain, soaked in tears, cause travelers and passersby to recall the General's deeds of those years and cry out the lament, "Forever causing heroes' tears to fill their collars" (長使英雄淚滿襟).

*The river flows, the stones turn not,*
*Lingering regret, the failure to swallow Wu.*
*Setting sun, no one met,*
*Long song by the white stone stream.*

VII. Influence and Conclusion

It ended in failure—the Gabo Reform Movement, which cried out<80> and rose up for freedom, for equality, ended in failure. It came to nothing—Chŏn Pong-jun's plan, which fought bravely and acted vigorously to rescue the weak and suffering commoner class, to punish (膺懲) the unjust and tyrannical aristocratic class, also came to nothing. But his profuse bloodstains (淋漓한 血痕) are still imprinted on the mountains and rivers of the Peninsula, and his sacred spirit eternally overflows the lands of the East (東洋). Look! From where did the beginnings of the winds and clouds in the East over the past thirty years arise? From whom was the spirit of freedom on the Korean Peninsula inspired? Although the unjust, tyrannical, cruel, and rapacious aristocratic class could not be fundamentally destroyed, those punished (膺懲) under Chŏn Pong-jun's thunderous iron whip saw their fierce oppression diminish and their cruel poisonous fangs weaken. The pitiable popular class, cowering (跼蹐) amidst encroachment, plunder, suffering, and groaning, although they could not obtain thorough guarantees of freedom, awakened under the Gabo Reform Movement and gradually began to demand their natural rights and equal status. From this point on, the dark curtain of despotism over the Peninsula's mountains and rivers gradually lifted, and the freedom bell of equality began to ring. Thus, clan-based factions were smashed (劈破), class distinctions were lowered, plunder ceased, and human rights began to be respected. Its result was that the path was opened for our populace, wandering in delusion, to gradually receive the dawn of civilization.

How could its influence have been only that? Its great wave (波動), in one turn, aroused the Sino-Japanese War; in a second turn, endangered the life of China (中國), the master of the East and a great old nation of four thousand years; and in a third turn, awakened the obstinate, deluded stupor (頑迷한 昏夢) of its four hundred million people, allowing the dawn of new culture to shine (照耀) upon the lands of the East.

Ah, great is the Gabo Reform Movement! Although in its temporary, superficial aspect, it ended in failure like flowing water and drifting clouds, in its spiritual and ideal aspect, its harvest is thus great. It is not only a beautiful flower (美華) in the history of the Peninsula, but also a beautiful flower in the history of the East. It is not only the freedom bell of the Chosŏn people, but can be called the freedom bell of the entire Chosŏn nation.

How could I not revere (崇拜) its achievements? How could I not praise its benefits (惠澤)? "End"

Due to the busyness of making a living (契活) and the pressure of time, there are many points of rough investigation (踈畧), brief (簡率), and possibly confused (莣雜) description. Readers, please forgive (恕諒) me!
The Author bows <81>

**Summary**

Hwang Ŭi-don argues that Chŏn Pong-jun, leader of the 1894 Gabo Reform Movement (Donghak Peasant Revolution), should be revered as a great historical figure despite his military failure. The author contends that judging figures solely by immediate success is flawed, citing historical examples like Jesus, Confucius, and various revolutionaries. Chŏn is portrayed as a pioneer who, inspired by his father's sacrifice and embodying the commoners' yearning for freedom and equality, bravely challenged the corrupt aristocracy and outdated social order. Though the movement was suppressed, Hwang asserts its "spiritual success" was profound and eternal. The uprising awakened popular consciousness in Korea, weakened aristocratic power, and initiated demands for rights and equality. Furthermore, its ripple effect triggered the Sino-Japanese War, shook China, and ultimately helped spread the "dawn of new culture" throughout East Asia.

From the perspective of Korean colonial history, this 1922 article is highly significant. Its overt celebration of a failed anti-establishment rebellion, framing it as a foundational moment for Korean popular ("Minjung") consciousness and freedom under the banner of "Reform Movement" (革新運動), can be read as a form of nationalist expression and subtle resistance against Japanese rule. Historians would find value in its emphasis on the ideological legacy over military outcome, the connection drawn between the domestic uprising and broader East Asian geopolitical shifts (positioning Korea as a catalyst), and the specific terminology used to legitimize the movement within a modernizing, nationalistic framework during a period of suppressed political expression.

**Named Entities**

全琫準	전봉준	Chŏn Pong-jun
黃義敦	황의돈	Hwang Ŭi-don
그리스도	그리스도	Kŭrisŭdo (Jesus Christ)
孔仲尼	공중니	Kong Chung-ni (Confucius)
管夷吾	관이오	Kwan I-o (Guan Zhong)
웨클니푸	웨클리프	Wek'ŭlnip'u (Wycliffe)
루터	루터	Rut'ŏ (Luther)
스코트	스코트	Sŭk'ot'ŭ (Scott)
匈牙利	헝가리	Hyungari (Hungary)
푸루노	브루노	P'uruno (Bruno)
루소	루소	Ruso (Rousseau)
루이푸랑	루이블랑	Ruip'urang (Louis Blanc)
太上老人	태상노인	T'aesang Noin (Laozi)
湖南	호남	Honam
古阜郡	고부군	Kobugun
李朝	이조	Ijo (Joseon Dynasty)
哲宗	철종	Ch'ŏlchong
關西	관서	Kwansŏ
洪景來	홍경래	Hong Kyŏng-nae
맑스	마르크스	Mak'ŭsŭ (Marx)
랭쓰	프랑스	P'ŭrangssŭ (France)
크림 戰爭	크림 전쟁	K'ŭrim Chŏnjaeng (Crimean War)
洪秀全	홍수전	Hong Su-jŏn
印度	인도	Indo (India)
支那	지나	China
北京	북경	Pukkyŏng (Beijing)
뿌리텐	브리튼	Pŭrit'en (Britain)
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
槿花半島	근화반도	Kŭnhwa Pando (Korean Peninsula)
崔海月	최해월	Ch'oe Hae-wŏl (Ch'oe Si-hyŏng)
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul)
興宣大院君	흥선대원군	Hŭngsŏn Taewŏn'gun
趙秉甲	조병갑	Cho Pyŏng-gap
白山	백산	Paeksan
崔景善	최경선	Ch'oe Kyŏng-sŏn
泰仁	태인	T'aein
孫和中	손화중	Son Hwa-jung
茂長	무장	Mujang
金介男	김개남	Kim Kae-nam
南原	남원	Namwŏn
三南	삼남	Samnam
全州	전주	Chŏnju
金文鉉	김문현	Kim Mun-hyŏn
洪啓薰	홍계훈	Hong Kye-hun
七峰山	칠봉산	Ch'ilbongsan
完山城	완산성	Wansansŏng
嚴世永	엄세영	Ŏm Se-yŏng
淸國	청국	Ch'ŏngguk (Qing China)
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
嶺南	영남	Yŏngnam
湖西	호서	Hosŏ
漢高祖	한고조	Han Kojo (Emperor Gaozu of Han)
關中	관중	Kwanchung
曹孟德	조맹덕	Cho Meng-dŏk (Cao Cao)
許都	허도	Hŏdo (Xuchang)
金鼎鉉	김정현	Kim Chŏng-hyŏn
安承寬	안승관	An Sŭng-gwan
水原	수원	Suwŏn
高錫柱	고석주	Ko Sŏk-chu
公州	공주	Kongju
維鳩	유구	Yugu
鄭元俊	정원준	Chŏng Wŏn-jun
沃川	옥천	Okch'ŏn
參禮	삼례	Samnye
錦江	금강	Kŭmgang
礪山	여산	Yŏsan
金甲東	김갑동	Kim Kab-dong
李有尙	이유상	Yi Yu-sang
江景	강경	Kanggyŏng
論山	논산	Nonsan
孝浦	효포	Hyop'o
朴齊純	박제순	Pak Che-sun
李圭泰	이규태	Yi Kyu-t'ae
成夏泳	성하영	Sŏng Ha-yŏng
洪運燮	홍운섭	Hong Un-sŏp
具相祖	구상조	Ku Sang-jo
鈴木	스즈키	Suzuki
森尾	모리오	Morio
利仁	이인	Iin
鳳圍山	봉위산	Pongwisan
牛金峙	우금치	Ugŭmch'i
態津	태진	T'aejin
南月村	남월촌	Namwŏlch'on
翠屛	취병	Ch'wibyŏng
大橋	대교	Taegyo
態峙	태치	T'aech'i
錦津	금진	Kŭmjin
利仁驛	이인역	Iin Yŏk
犬蹲峰	견돈봉	Kyŏndonbong
周峰	주봉	Chubong
熊峙	웅치	Ungch'i
金福用	김복용	Kim Pok-yong
崔漢圭	최한규	Ch'oe Han-gyu
李熙人	이희인	Yi Hŭi-in
楚羈王	초패왕	Ch'o Kwi-wang (King Xiang Yu of Chu - Note: 羈 is used, likely for 项羽霸王)
諸葛亮	제갈량	Chegal Lyang (Zhuge Liang)
한니발	한니발	Hannibal
골시카	코르시카	Kolsika (Corsica)
나포테온	나폴레옹	Napot'eon (Napoleon)
東洋	동양	Tongyang (The East/Orient)
中國	중국	Chungguk (China)

**Glossary**

往往이	왕왕이	Often, frequently (adverbial form using '이')
首肯치	수긍치	Not agree/approve (Archaic negative verb ending '치')
업섯스며	없었으며	Was not (Archaic spelling of '없었으며')
하얏슬	하였을	Would have done/been (Archaic spelling of '하였을')
만핫도다	많았도다	Were many (Archaic exclamatory ending '도다')
딸하	따라	According to, following (Archaic spelling)
매치고	맺히고	Is formed/tied (Archaic spelling of '맺히고')
忌憚업시	기탄없이	Without reservation/hesitation (Archaic spelling of '없이')
頑冥한	완명한	Obstinate and ignorant
陳腐한	진부한	Stale, trite, outdated
稀少함을	희소함을	Being rare (Object form)
瀰滿할지라도	미만할지라도	Even though it fills/permeates (Archaic spelling of '-ㄹ지라도')
呌號	규호	Cry, slogan, call (Older Hanja 呌 for 叫/규)
吊傷한	조상한	Mourning, lamenting
慷慨淋漓	강개임리	Overflowing with indignation and lament (Sino-Korean idiom)
吟咏하야	음영하여	Reciting/chanting (Archaic spelling of verb ending '-하여')
禿筆	독필	Worn-out writing brush (Humble term for one's own writing)
槪歷	개력	Outline, brief history
呱呱의 聲	고고의 성	The cry of a newborn baby (Sino-Korean term)
虐焰	학염	Flames of tyranny/oppression
熾上되고	치상되고	Blazing upwards, becoming extreme
殆甚한	태심한	Extremely severe
啓發되랴는	계발되려는	About to be enlightened/developed (Archaic future intent form '-려는')
啞然無聲	아연무성	Dumbstruck and silent (Sino-Korean idiom)
蛇蝎視	사갈시	Viewing like snakes and scorpions (with hatred)
憎惡呪咀	증오주저	Hatred and curse
侵漁	침어	Encroachment and plunder
掠奪	약탈	Pillage, plunder
呻吟	신음	Groaning, moaning
鱗次로	인차로	One after another, successively
貪官汚吏	탐관오리	Corrupt officials (Sino-Korean term)
剛毅英敏	강의영민	Strong-willed, heroic, and intelligent (Sino-Korean descriptor)
悲憤慷慨	비분강개	Grievous and indignant (Sino-Korean descriptor)
矮小하야	왜소하여	Being small/short in stature (Archaic spelling of '-하여')
菉豆將軍	녹두장군	General Mung Bean (Nickname)
綽號	작호	Nickname
軒昂한 氣宇	헌앙한 기우	Imposing and dignified bearing/spirit
炯然한 眼光	형연한 안광	Piercing gaze, sharp eyes
膽勇	담용	Courage, bravery
縱橫의 機智	종횡의 기지	Versatile resourcefulness/wit
辨舌	변설	Eloquence, power of speech
感觸	감촉	Touch, feeling, stimulus
膺懲함을	응징함을	Punishing (Object form)
飛越하야	비월하여	Flying over, leaping across (Archaic spelling of '-하여')
跼蹙케하던	국축케 하던	Causing to cower/be cornered (Archaic causative form)
砥柱와 가티	지주와 같이	Like a mainstay/pillar (Archaic spelling of '같이')
屹然奮鬪한	흘연분투한	Standing tall and fighting hard
慘劇	참극	Tragedy, terrible event
攘逐키	양축키	To expel/drive out (Archaic infinitive form '-키')
胷中	흉중	In one's heart/mind (Archaic Hanja 胸)
忿恨	분한	Resentment, indignation
사모치고	사무치고	Piercing deeply (Archaic spelling of '사무치고')
피ㅅ발이서고	핏발이 서고	Being bloodshot (Archaic spelling/spacing with ㅅ)
頭髮衝冠	두발충관	Hair pushing up the hat (Idiom for extreme anger)
鐵拳緊握	철권긴악	Iron fist tightly clenched (Idiom)
不共戴天	불공대천	Cannot live under the same sky (Idiom for mortal enemy)
㒧敵	원적	Enemy (Archaic Hanja 㒧 for 怨)
渙散한	환산한	Scattered, dispersed
依歸所	의귀소	Place to belong/return to
用武地	용무지	Place to use one's skills/force
磐石	반석	Bedrock, foundation stone
潜龍	잠룡	Hidden dragon (Person of great potential)
羽翼	우익	Wings, assistants, support
跂待하고	기대하고	Waiting expectantly (Archaic Hanja 跂 for 企)
周密히	주밀히	Meticulously, carefully
假粧하고	가장하고	Disguising oneself as
覊留하기	기류하기	Staying temporarily (Archaic Hanja 覊 for 羈)
有漏업시	유루없이	Without leakage, thoroughly (Archaic spelling of '없이')
偵探하는	정탐하는	Spying, reconnoitering
締結	체결	Concluding (a pact), connecting
苟苟한	구구한	Petty, trivial
仕宦界	사환계	World of officialdom/government service
梟雄	효웅	Ruthless hero, ambitious schemer
繩營狗苟	승영구구	Schemingly pursuing petty gains (Sino-Korean idiom)
眼孔	안공	Pupil; insight, perspective
飄然히	표연히	Driftingly, suddenly appearing/disappearing
檄文	격문	Manifesto, proclamation
列邑	열읍	Various towns/counties
響應하야	향응하여	Responding to a call (Archaic spelling of '-하여')
風起水湧	풍기수용	Wind rises and water surges (Idiom for uprising)
隊伍	대오	Ranks, formation (of troops)
操練하야	조련하여	Training, drilling (Archaic spelling of '-하여')
驚懼하야	경구하여	Alarmed and frightened (Archaic spelling of '-하여')
招討使	초토사	Commander sent to suppress rebellion
領率하고	영솔하고	Leading, commanding (troops)
悲壯慘憺	비장참담	Heroic and tragic; ghastly and tragic
陷落이	함락이	Fall (of a city) (Subject form)
誅逐하고	주축하고	Punishing and expelling
懲罰하며	징벌하며	Punishing
魚駭鳥竄	어해조찬	Fish startled and birds scattering (Idiom for panic)
遑遑하야	황황하여	Flustered, agitated (Archaic spelling of '-하여')
黜陟하고	출척하고	Dismissing and promoting (officials)
撫摩하며	무마하며	Pacifying, placating
戰端	전단	Outbreak of war, casus belli
巢穴	소혈	Nest, den, base of operations
鞏固케	공고케	To make solid/firm (Archaic form)
擢拔하야	탁발하여	Selecting, promoting (outstanding person) (Archaic spelling of '-하여')
烏合의 亂衆	오합의 난중	Disorderly mob, rabble
期必키어려움을	기필키 어려움을	Difficulty of ensuring success (Archaic verb form)
抄擊케할ㅅ새	초격케 할새	While having [them] attack/raid (Archaic causative + temporal ending)
徒涉하면서	도섭하면서	While wading across
生擒하고	생금하고	Capturing alive
旌旗가 蔽天하고	정기가 폐천하고	Banners and flags covering the sky
兵甲이 耀日하야	병갑이 요일하여	Armor and weapons glittering in the sun (Archaic spelling of '-하여')
肝膽을 驚塞케할만하얏섯다	간담을 경색케 할만하였었다	Was enough to terrify (lit. startle the liver and gallbladder) (Archaic form)
幷力하야	병력하여	Joining forces (Archaic spelling of '-하여')
迂回하야	우회하여	Detouring, bypassing (Archaic spelling of '-하여')
潜渡하면서	잠도하면서	While crossing secretly
直薄하매	직박하매	Upon directly approaching/pressing close
肉彈血雨	육탄혈우	Human bullets and rain of blood (Fierce battle)
疲罷하얏슴으로	피패하였으므로	Because [they] were exhausted/worn out (Archaic spelling)
犒饋하야	호궤하여	Feasting/treating [troops] (Archaic spelling of '-하여')
疾風迅雷와 가티	질풍신뢰와 같이	Like a swift wind and sudden thunder (Very fast) (Archaic spelling of '같이')
積屍가 萬山하야	적시가 만산하여	Piled corpses covering the mountains (Archaic spelling of '-하여')
慘天極地	참천극지	Extremely tragic/horrible (lit. reaching heaven and earth)
敗退되고	패퇴되고	Being defeated and retreating
捲土重來	권토중래	Staging a comeback (lit. rolling up earth and coming again) (Idiom)
剪除되고	전제되고	Being cut off / eliminated
銳鋒	예봉	Sharp point (of an attack), vanguard
恐縮하매	공축하매	Upon shrinking back in fear
未老	말로	End of the road, final fate (Archaic Hanja 未 for 末)
拔山蓋世	발산개세	Uprooting mountains and covering the world (Idiom for immense strength)
寃恨	원한	Grudge, resentment
騅不逝	추불서	Zhui [horse] does not go (Quote from Xiang Yu)
淋漓한 血痕	임리한 혈흔	Dripping/profuse bloodstains
膺懲이 된	응징이 된	Which were punished
跼蹐하던	국축하던	Cowering, stooping in fear (Archaic spelling)
劈破되고	벽파되고	Being smashed/broken
波動	파동	Wave, ripple effect
頑迷한 昏夢	완미한 혼몽	Obstinate and deluded stupor/dream
照耀케	조요케	To shine upon (Archaic form)
美華	미화	Beautiful flower, glory
崇拜치	숭배치	Not worship/revere (Archaic negative ending '치')
惠澤	혜택	Benefit, grace
契活	계활	Making a living, livelihood (Likely 計活)
踈畧함과	소략함과	Being rough/cursory (Archaic Hanja 踈 for 疎)
簡率	간솔	Simple and hasty, brief
莣雜한	착잡한	Confused, mixed (Likely typo for 錯雜)
恕諒하시옵소서	서량하시오소서	Please forgive/understand (Archaic honorific ending)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제23호
발행일	1922년 05월 01일
기사제목	民衆的呌號의 第一聲인 甲午의 革新運動(續)
필자	黃義敦
기사형태	논설

民衆的呌號의 第一聲인 甲午의 革新運動
						黃義敦
四, 全琫準의 出世
世人은 往往이 人物을 評論함이 그의 價値를 現在的 成敗의 比例로 標準하도다. 마는 나는 그를 首肯치 못하겟다. 만일 單純한 現在的 成敗의 正比例뿐으로 人物의 價値를 評定한다 하면 그리스도가 바리색 敎人의 價値만 못할 것이오 孔仲尼가 管夷吾의 成功이 업섯스며 웨클니푸가 루터의 先進이 되지 못하얏슬 것이오 스코트가 匈牙利의 恩人이 되지 못하얏슬 것이다.
보라! 古今의 歷史를! 成功과 失敗 그가 主人翁의 人格的 優劣의 關係가 全혀 업지는 안터래도 多大數는 主人翁의 人格的 優劣의 關係보다도 時期와 環境의 差異를 딸하 成敗의 結果가 매치고 마는 것이다. 곳 同一한 人格, 同一한 手腕으로도 偶然이 成功의 光榮을 어듬도 잇고 偶然이 失敗의 苦境에 빠짐도 만핫도다. 이 어찌 運命의 支配가 아니랴? 「時來天地皆同力, 運去英雄不自謀」라 함이 아무리 失敗의 哀呼聲일지라도 半面의 眞理가 업지 안타 할 만하도다.
어찌 그뿐이랴? 一步를 前進하야 말하면 往往이 그 時代 그 社會에서 最高의 先覺者로서 時代와 社會에 超越한 思想과 主義를 가진 先進的 偉人으로 自家의 所信을 忌憚업시 公開하는 同時에 大膽이 勇進하야 頑冥한 舊思想 陳腐한 舊建設을 破壞코자 하는 偉人은 未來的 成功을 爲하야 現在的 失敗에 犧牲이 되고 마는 것이다. 곳 예수가 그요, 푸루노가 그요, 루소가 그요, 루이푸랑이 그일다. 그네는 곳 眞理와 自由를 위하야 革新의 前驅며 開拓의 先鋒으로서 未來의 成功者를 爲하야 犧牲이 되고 말엇섯다. 그럼으로 「勿爲天下先」하라 하던 太上老人의 秘訣도 反面의 眞理가 업지 안타 할만하도다.
나는 이러한 意味에서 甲午革新運動의 先驅요 中心인＜73＞全琫準君의 偉大함을 認定코자 한다. 狹眼者流의 苟苟한  批評이 아무리 紛紜할지라도 그는 다 그의 現在的 失敗에 對한 標準的 批評뿐. 참으로 우리 民衆的 自由와 社會的 平等을 爲하야 大膽히 呌號하고 勇敢히 奮起한 그의 偉大한 價値를 謳歌하는 者가 稀少함을 痛歎치 아니할 수 업도다.
아무리 貴族的 專橫에 대한 不平이 瀰滿할지라도 「天授神聖的」君權主義와 「天尊地卑的」階級 思想이 一般 社會的 頭腦를 支配케 된 그 時代에 自由의 呌號와 平等의 旗幟에 和應者가 적고 集合者가 弱함으로 마츰내 顯在的 成功의 收穫을 엇지 못하얏슬지라도 그의 呌號한 自由의 精神은 永遠이 남아 잇고 그의 宣傳한 革新의 思想은 至今껏 橫溢하도다. 그래서 그의 失敗는 表像일지라도 그의 成功은 精神이오 그의 蹉跌은 一時일지라도 그의 收穫은 永遠하리로다. 沙漠의 花叢이오 暗夜의 燈臺로서 우리 半島의 歷史的 偉人인 그에 對하야 아무리 一時的 失敗가 잇더래도 내 어찌 그를 謳歌치 아니하며 讚歎치 아니하랴.
새야새야 파랑새야
너-어이 나왓나냐
솔닙대ㅅ닙 푸릇푸릇키로
봄철인가 나왓더니
白雪이 풀풀 헛날린다
저 건너 저-靑松綠竹이
날 속이엇네!
함은 當時에 有志者流가 全琫準君의 때아닌 活動에 犧牲됨을 吊傷한 慷慨淋漓의 悲歌일다. 나는 그의 悲歌를 吟咏하야 全君의 一時的 失敗를 吊傷하는 同時에 그의 反面에는 精神的 勝利가 永遠함을 謳歌하면서 禿筆을 들어 그의 槪歷을 敍述코자 하노라.
全琫準은 距今 六十九年(西紀 一八五四年 甲寅) 前에 湖南 古阜郡 鄕村에서 呱呱의 聲을 들엇다. 때는 마츰 李朝 哲宗 五年, 關西 豪傑 洪景來의 革命運動 失敗 後 四十三年, 맑스의 共産主義 宣言 後 七年,  랭쓰 第三革命 爆發 後 六年, 크림 戰爭 宣戰의 同年, 洪秀全의 革命亂發生 後 四年, 英佛聯合軍의 北京侵略 前 三年, 뿌리텐의 印度倂合 前 四年으로서 朝鮮에서는 貴族의 虐焰이 極端에 熾上되고 西洋에서는 自由와 平等의 呌號聲이 가장 猛烈하얏고 印度와 支那에는 歐州人의 侵略이 殆甚한 同時에 文明의 曙光이 次次 啓發되랴는 時期엇섯다. 그래서 天下는 매우 多事의 天下가 되고 時代는 가장 混亂의 時代가 되엇섯다. 一隅에 수獅와 가티 啞然無聲하든 槿花半島도 또한 그 바람에 춤추고 그 소리에 和應치 아니할 수 업는＜74＞ 時期가 왓다. 그럼으로 蒼天이 그 有意하사 第一幕의 演奏者가 될 만한 巨人 全琫準君을 誕生케 하얏도다.
그의 家庭은 本來- 微賤한 平民階級으로서 乃祖乃父의 由來的 血統에는 原來-自由를 憧憬하는 寶血이 흘러잇고 平等을 謳歌하는 熱度가 沸騰하얏섯다. 곳 不義, 橫暴, 온갓 罪惡의 中心인 貴族 階級을 蛇蝎視하는 同時에 그를 가장 憎惡呪咀하얏고 侵漁, 掠奪 가진 苦痛 中에 呻吟하는 良民 階級을 兄弟視하는 同時에 그에 가장 同情의 悲淚를 뿌렷섯다. 그래서 乃祖도 乃父도 다 鱗次로 自由의 鐘을 울리고 平等의 기를 들어 貪官汚吏輩를 突擊하다가 마츰내 그에 犧牲이 되고 말앗섯다.
이러한 家庭, 이러한 血統下에서 産育된 全琫準君은 生來의 天性이 剛毅英敏, 悲憤慷慨의 破壞的 人物의 特點이 具備하엿슬 뿐만 아니라. 아무리 身長이 矮小하야 菉豆將軍의 綽號를 들엇더래도 그의 軒昂한 氣宇에는 勃勃한 英氣가 流露하고 그의 炯然한 眼光에는 銳利한 觀察力이 橫溢하며 霹靂을 陵侮할 듯한 過人의 膽勇, 風雲을 喚起할 만한 縱橫의 機智, 卓越한 文章, 流暢한 辨舌, 어느 方面으로던지? 破壞的 偉人이 될 만한 特性과 才能이 完全히 發育되지 안함이 업는 超凡의 人物이엇섯다.
그러나 아무리 非常한 偉人일지라도 非常한 感觸이업스면 非常한 動機가 업고 非常한 動機가 업스면 非常한 決心이 업는 同時에 非常한 事業을 이루지못하는 것이다.
한니발이 아무리 英雄일ㅅ지라도 不共戴天의 警敵인로-마의 膺懲함을 軍神前에 誓約케하던 父訓이 아니엇더면 알푸쓰를 飛越하야로-마 共和國을 十二年의 長歲月間-孤城下에 跼蹙케하던 大事業을 이루지 못하얏슬것이오 崔瑩氏가 아무리 虎頭將軍이라 할지라도 「愛國如家視金如糞」하라하던 親敎가 아니엇더면 垂死의 高麗를 爲하야 三十年의 長歲月間-頹波의 砥柱와 가티 屹然奮鬪한 忠義的記錄을 치지 못하얏슬 것이며 나포테온이 아무리 快男兒일라도 골시카의 獨立을 爲하야 犧牲이 된 及父의 遺傳的衝動이 아니엇더면 天下를 號令하는 르랭쓰 大皇帝의 榮冠을 쓰지 못하얏슬것이 오레닌이 아무리 現實的偉人이라 할ㅅ지라도 「소피에트」主義를 爲하야 奮鬪하던 乃兄의 犧牲的慘劇의 感觸이 아니엇더면 오늘날로시아 大共和國을 支配하는 成功을 엇지 못하얏슬는지도 알수 업슬 것이다.
아-이러하다. 非常人의 非常的事業을 成就함에는 非常的感觸을 要求함이 이러하다. 나의 謳歌하는 非常의 豪傑全琫準君의 非常한 事業곳 甲午革命運動을 喚起함에도 한 그러한 非常的感觸으로부터 動機가 되고 決＜75＞心이 되지 아니할수 없섯슬 것이다.
그는 곳 그의 幼少時에 乃父의 平民主義的運動에 犧牲됨이 가장 큰 感觸이엇섯다. 乃父는 가장 貪暴殘虐한 古阜郡守를 攘逐키 爲하야 正義의 旗幟를 들고 民衆을 指揮하야 奮戰勇鬪하다가 마츰내 官運에게 捕虜가 되어 慘刑酷訊下에서 不歸의 客이 되고 말앗다. 그의 悲境을 親當케된 全琫準의 胷中에는 萬丈火焰의 忿恨이 九天에 사모치고 一片鐵石의 決心이 刹那에 구덧섯다. 兩顂에 피ㅅ발이서고 雙眼에 殺氣가 넘치며 「頭髮衝冠」하고 「鐵拳緊握」되면서 公私兩方面으로 「不共戴天」의 㒧敵인 貴族階級을 向하야 突擊하랴는 決心을 세우고 乃父의 遺志를 繼承하야 自由를 부르지즈며 改造를 宣戰하랴 하얏섯다.
마는 統一이 업고 聯絡이 업시 渙散한 社會에서는 到底히 自家의 理想을 貫徹키 어려움을 覺悟한 그는 勿論協同團結的社會를 要求하얏슬 것이다. 그래서 當時에 가장 貴族階級의 ■視下에서 自由의 精神, 平等의 主義로 秘密結社가 된 平民團體-곳 東學黨이 銳利한 全君의 炯面에 비치는 同時에 그가 無上한 自家의 依歸所요 用武地임을 覺悟하얏다. 그래서 그는 곳 그의 黨에 參加하야 第二世敎主崔海月의 門下에 한 磐石가튼 徒弟가 되면서 그의 黨友에 對하야 自家의 主義를 더욱 宣傳하얏나니 는 距今三十三年(庚寅)前이엇섯다.
고기(魚)가 물을 것고 범(虎)이 날개가 남과 가티 潜龍이 風雲을 맛나고 石猿이 如意棒을 어둠과 가티 非常의 偉人全琫準도 인제는 非常의 團體인 東學黨을 맛나 羽翼을 펴고 所信을 貫徹케 되랴하는 同時에 半島의 天地는 이로부터 風雲이 捲起하랴한다.
그러나 時期를 跂待하고 萬事를 周密히 準備하랴는 全琫準은 다시 尋常旅客의 貌樣을 假粧하고 京城에 潛入하야 當時에 貴族階級의 代表的人物인 興宣大院君邸에 覊留하기 數年이엇섯다. 그래서 唯一無二의 敵對方으로서 將來突擊의 目標인 貴族階級의 組織的內容을 有漏업시 偵探하는 同時에 朱勢不平의 大院君을 利用하야 自家의 目的을 貫徹하랴하얏섯다. 그러나 目的이 普通人과 가티 苟苟한 仕宦界에 잇지 안한 그는 아모리 閑㪚의 地位에 잇슬ㅅ지라도 當代權威의 中心인 大院君邸에 羈留하면서도 仕宦에 對하야서는 一言의 要求가 업섯다. 그럼으로 大院君은 그를 異常히 여겨 그의 緣由를 물엇스나 全은 「自己이 志願이 普通人과 特殊하야 憧憬一念이「爲國爲民」四字에 잇슴으로 尋常要求의 成就할 바 아니라」하야 그를 冷然히 對答하얏섯다.＜76＞
이 어 千仞의 飛鳳이 凡鳥와 同鳴하며 大鵬의 壯志를 鷦■의 알바이랴? 大院君이 그 아무리 李朝末葉에 唯一無二한 梟雄이라 할지라도 繩營狗苟의 俗輩 나날이 接觸하던 眼孔임으로 이러한 偉人도 바로 비추지 못하얏슴은 當然한 바이라 할만하도다.
屢年間京城에 留連하야 敵情의 偵察과 內應者(大院君)의 締結이 完成되매 이에 距今三十年(癸巳)前春에 飄然히 故鄕에 還歸하야 智勇의 壯士를 締結하고 各地에 東學黨을 聯絡하야 八面의 準備를 周到케하며 貪官汚吏의 暴行을 聲討하고 自由平等의 主義를 宣傳하야 天下의 民心을 興奮케하야 爆發의 期會를 趾待하니 이로부터 半島의 風雲이 나날이 切追하야 가는 中에 마츰 古阜郡守趙秉甲의 虐政을 못내이겨 蜂起한 民擾가導火線이 되어 甲午革命의 大亂이 爆發되니 는 距今二十九年甲午春二月이엇섯다.
五, 革新運動의 爆發과 그의 進行
歷史上의 實例를 보건대 禍亂의 爆發이 아무리 一刹那에 되더래도 그의 爆發되지 아니할ㅅ수업슬만한 遠因은 적어도 數百年 는 重大할ㅅ지라도 그의 爆發은 微少한 一衝突에부터 되는 것이다. 곳 佛蘭西의 革命이 아무리 一刹那에 爆發이 되엇더래도 그의 遠因은 幾多의 時日間-集積이 된바이며 世界大戰亂의 原因이 아무리 縱錯할ㅅ지라도 그의 爆發은「빗스돌」의 一聲으로부터 되고 말엇섯다. 甲午革新運動의 遠因도 한 前述함과 가티 幾多의 時日間-國政의 腐敗, 貴族의 專橫, 平民의 呌苦, 東學黨의 結社, 全琫準의 活動, 各方面의 縱錯한 事實이 쌔히고 새혀 萬丈爆發의 氣勢로 時機를 歧待하던 次에 一個趙秉甲의 貪虐下에서 呼泣하는 數千의 民衆을 指揮하야 古阜城을 突擊하야 그를 곳 占領하매 이에 古阜郡民이 全部-和應함으로 全軍을 同郡白山下에 留陣하고 檄文을 全國에 配布하니 湖南列邑이 크게 響應하야 崔景善은 泰仁에서, 孫和中은 茂長에서, 金介男은 南原에서, 各히 奮起하야 數萬의 民兵을 指揮하야 貪官汚吏를 驅逐하고 自由平等을 宣言하매 三南一帶에 風起水湧하는 數十萬의 民衆이 다 全琫準의 旗幟下에 歸附하얏섯다.
全琫準은 이에 兵馬를 收集하고 隊伍를 操練하야 第一若으로 全州兵營에서 浱遣한 幾千의 官軍을 白山戰에서 ＜77＞一戰大破하고 勇躍歡喜하는 得勝兵을 몰아 湖南의 首府인 全州를 向하매 監司金文鉉이 크게 驚懼하야 逃走하고 全國이 大震하니 이에 両湖招討使洪啓薰이 數千의 官軍을 領率하고 來防함으로 全洪両軍이 全州七峰山上에서 會合하야 悲壯慘憺의 血戰을 繼續하기 數日에 마츰내 官軍을 大破하얏섯다. 그럼으로 士氣가 더욱 鼓舞되고 民心이 더욱 興奮되엇섯다. 全琫準은 이에 三軍을 號令하야 全州城을 進圍하매 金城湯池로 有名한 完山城도 마츰내 甲午四月望間으로 陷落이 되어 民軍이 入城케 되엇섯다.
全琫準軍이 全州城을 占領하고 湖南一道를 號令하야 貪官汚吏를 誅逐하고 土豪儒生을 懲罰하며 民政을 宣布하야 維新의 政治를 擧行하니 이에 侵漁攘奪中에서 呻吟苦痛하던 民衆階級은 踴躍歡喜의 新天地를 맛낫고 貪暴殘虐의 任意專橫하던 貴族階級은 魚駭鳥竄의 所向을 莫知할 아니라. 全國이 大震하고 滿潮가 遑遑하야 對抗의 討策을 請求할새 宣諭使嚴世永을 派遣하야 貪官汚吏를 黜陟하고 不平民心을 撫摩하며 招討使洪啓薰에게 援助의 官兵을 增派하야 全州를 進攻하며 淸國에 援兵을 請求하매 日本도 한 派兵하야 마츰내 日淸의 戰端을 啓發케 하얏고 官民兩軍의 衝突이 더욱 甚하야 悲壯慘憺의 大血戰이 全州城下에서 繼續하기 屢月間이엇섯다.
그래서 一時에는 全州城이 官軍의 占領한 바도 되엇섯스나 마츰내 民軍의 援兵이 四起하고 全君의 指揮가 機敏하야 官軍을 再破하고 全州城을 再占하며 南原民軍의 勇將金介男이 한 幾萬의 精兵으로 來援하니 士氣가 倍勇하고 軍聲이 大振하야 嶺南湖西兩道民이 한 蜂起呼應함으로 全琫準이 이에 大軍을 몰아 北으로 湖西를 占領하고 京城을 進迫하야 中央政府를 顚覆하고 革新의 大事業을 根本的으로 實行코자 計劃하얏다.
六, 公州戰과 그의 失敗
그러나 敵境에 進攻하랴면 自家의 立場곳 自家의 根本的巢穴을 鞏固케 함에 먼저 主義함은 古今을 勿論하고 兵家의 通例일다. 그럼으로 漢高祖는 먼저 關中을 保守키에 專力하얏고 曹孟德은 出征時마다 許都守護의 用意를 가장 周密히 하얏섯다. 그럼으로 京城을 直擣코자하는 全琫準의 胸中에는 自家의 基礎的根據地인 全州의 守備가 가장 用慮된 바이엇섯다. 그래서 冠軍의 絶勇과 縱橫의 智謀가 兼備한 勇將金介男을 擢拔하야 全州城을 守禦케하얏섯다.
그러나 「泰兵尙强」이라 할만한 官軍은 아무리 殘弱腐＜78＞敗하다하야도 아즉도 百鍊의 精卒인 同時에 民軍의 數字는 아무리 多數일ㅅ지라도 烏合의 亂衆임으로 百船의 作戰計劃이 周密치 못하야서는 到底히 成功을 期必키어려움을 覺悟한 全琫準은 八面交進의 策으로 三南各地에 蜂起한 東學黨의 首領을 指揮하야 各方面의 要害地를 占領하고 官軍을 抄擊케할ㅅ새 金鼎鉉, 安承寬等은 水原을 占領하고 高錫柱는 公州維鳩를, 鄭元俊은 沃川을 占領하야 各其-數萬의 民兵으로 官軍을 對抗하야 官軍의 勢力을 分殺케하고
同年九月에 十萬의 大軍을 全州參禮平野에 集合하야 軍糧을 收拾하며 隊伍를 整理하고 全琫準이 스스로 都元帥가 되야 全軍을 號令하야 北으로 京城을 向하고 前進할새 兩湖의 境界線인 錦江을 徒涉하면서 第一着으로 礪山營將金甲東軍과 公州儒將李有尙軍을 大破하야 그를 生擒하고 江景平野를 通過하야 大軍營을 論山에 留陣하고 三路에 分軍하야 湖西의 首府인 公州를 進陷코자하매 旌旗가 蔽天하고 兵甲이 耀日하야 堂堂한 威風이 官軍의 肝膽을 驚塞케할만하얏섯다.
아무리 民軍의 狀況을 正面으로 記錄한 文籍이 업슴으로 當時의 事情을 詳悉키는 어려울ㅅ지라도 그의 反面에 官軍側의 呪咀辱罵的記錄으로 「賊勢漸熾三路幷進」이라. 「揰旗如林賊兵充塞」이라. 「賊知孝浦無備如入無人之境」이라. 「賊壘火光相映數十里人山人海幾比恒河沙數」라. 「賊酋揚紅盖乘大轎由南路直上勢如潮漲」이라하며 「一時擧火便作火城」이라. 「賊兵環繞三面首尾可三十里如常山蛇擊之則應」이라. 「夏泳獨當其衝勢不可支」라. 「結陣之賊尙屹然不動」이라한 斷片的記錄을 보면 그 當時에 民軍의 氣勢가 얼마 猛烈하고 民軍의 威風이 얼마나 莊嚴하얏슴을 알만하도다.
全琫準은 이에 全民軍을 號令하야 公州城을 指的하고 急潮와 가티 前進하매 忠淸監司 朴齊純의 指揮下에서 官軍을 統率한 李圭泰, 成夏泳, 洪運燮, 具相祖等諸將이 日本軍과 幷力하야 利仁, 孝浦, 鳳圍山, 牛金峙等地에 列陣하고 民軍의 前進을 防止코저함으로 民軍이 이에 前進의 方向을 變更하야 十月二十五日에 鳳圍山의 後面으로 迂回하야 態津을 潜渡하면서 公州城을 直薄하매 이에 官軍兩軍의 衝突하야 南月村, 翠屛等地에서 肉彈血雨의 大決戰을 繼續하기 盡日이엇섯다. 그래서 마츰내 當日薄暮에 官軍을 大破하고 翌朝에 孝浦를 抵抗업시 占領하얏섯다. 이로부터 民軍의 形勢가 大振하면서 孝浦, 大橋, 牛金峙, 態峙, 錦津等地에서 山崩＜79＞㬘的大血戰이 晝夜로 繼續하기 五六日間에 兩軍의 死傷이 屢萬이엇섯다.그러나 官軍은 아무리 少數일ㅅ지라도 百鍊의 精卒이 오더구나 鈴木, 森尾等의 統率한 精利無比의 日軍의 援助가 잇고 公州城四圍의 地勢가 매우 險峻하야 民軍의 攻勢보다 官軍의 守勢가 百倍나 便利하야 容易히 進占키어려운 中에 屢日血戰한 民軍의 氣勢가 크게 疲罷하얏슴으로 不得已論山에 退陣하야 再擧를 經營케 되엇섯다.
그래서 全琫準은 三軍을 犒饋하야 元氣를 回復케하고 元山留守將金介男君에게 數萬의 援兵을 請하야 十一月三日早朝에 다시 進軍하야 成夏泳의 統率한 官軍을 利仁驛에서 大破하고 疾風迅雷와 가티 官軍을 追擊하야 牛金峙, 犬蹲峰, 周峰, 熊峙等要塞를 包圍攻擊하기 六晝夜間에 砲丸이 如雨하고 積屍가 萬山하야 慘天極地의 大血戰이 되엇스나 마츰내 天運의 不助와 地勢의 不利로 民軍이 크게 敗退되고 말엇섯다.
그래서 民軍은 不得已論山에 退陣하얏다가 한 官軍의 追擊的銳鋒을 못내 이겨 湖南에 散歸하얏섯다. 그러나 「到窮愈壯」의 豪傑인 全琫準은 다시 捲土重來의 計劃을 經營하얏섯다. 마는 金鼎鉉, 鄭元俊, 金福用, 崔漢圭, 金介男, 李熙人等諸將이 各地에서 次第敗沒하야 羽翼이 剪除되고 官軍이 猛暴가 忿甚하야 民心이 크게 恐縮하매 부름에 應하고 붊에 和答하는 者가 적음으로 마츰내 壯志를 再續치 못하고 同年十二月로 官軍에게 捕虜가 되어 無盡의 遺恨中에서 現世를 告別하얏섯다.
아-天下事가이러하다. 英雄의 未老가 이러하다. 拔山蓋世의 大勇士楚羈王도 「時不利兮騅不逝의 寃恨中에서 一生을 마첫고 智機縱橫의 大哲人諸葛亮도 「謀事在人成事在天임을 부르지젓다. 어 그네이랴? 가태디의 偉人한니발의 未路」도 이러하고 말엇다. 골씨카의 老雄나 포테온의 軍命도 이러하고 말엇다. 錦江江水-말이업시 흘러잇고 參禮平野-업시 펼쳐잇스 寃恨에 빗긴 저녁 烟氣, 눈물에 저진 가을비, 行人過客으로 하야금 將軍의 當年事를 追憶하고 「長使英雄淚滿襟」의 悲歌를 부르짓게 하도다.
江流石不轉
遺恨失呑吳
落日不逢人
長歌白石㵎
七, 影響과 結論
失敗가 되엇다-自由를 爲하야-平等을 爲하야-呌＜80＞號하고 奮起하던 甲午革新運動은 그만 失敗가 디고 말엇다 虛事가 되엇다-殘弱苦痛의 良民階級을 救濟키 爲하야 不義橫暴의 貴族階級을 膺懲키 爲하야! 勇戰하고 活躍하던 全琫準의 計劃도 그만 虛事가 되고 말엇다. 마는 그의 淋漓한 血痕은 至今 半島江山에 박혀 잇고 그의 神聖한 精神은 永久히 東洋天地에 橫溢하도다. 보아라! 三十年來東洋天地에 風雲의 端緖가 어대로부터 啓發되엇스며 朝鮮半島에 自由의 精神이 뉘로부터 鼓吹되엇는가 不義, 橫暴, 殘忍, 貪虐의 貴族階級을 아무리 根本的으로 破壞치는 못하얏슬ㅅ지라도 雷霆가튼 全琫準의 鐵鞭下에 膺懲이 된 그네는 그 壯烈하던 虐陷이 줄어들고 그 慘酷한 毒牙가 弱하야 젓스며 侵漁, 攘奪, 苦痛, 呻吟中에 跼蹐하던 可哀의 民衆階級은 아무리 徹底한 自由의 保障을 엇지 못하얏더래도 甲午革新運動下에 覺醒이 된 그네는 天賦의 權利와 平等의 地位를 次第로 要求케 되엇도다. 이로부터서는 半島山河에 나날이 專制의 暗黑幕이 거쳐가고 平等의 自由鍾이 울어오게 되엇다. 그래서 門閥이 劈破되고 階級이 降殺되고 略奪이 停止되고 人權이 尊重되기 始作하얏섯다. 그의 結果는 迷夢中에서 彷徨하던 우리 民衆도 次次文明의 曙光을 바들만한 端緖가 啓發케 되엇섯다.
그의 影響이 어 그이엇스랴? 그의 偉大한 波動은 一轉하야 日淸의 戰爭이 喚起되고 再轉하야 東洋의 主人公으로서 四千年老大國인 中國의 生命이 危險케 되고 三轉하야 그네 四億萬人의 頑迷한 昏夢이 覺醒되면서 新文化의 曙光이 東洋天地에 照耀케 되엇도다.
아-偉大하다. 甲午革新의 運動이어! 그가 아무리 一時的表象的方面으로는 水流雲空的失敗에 돌아가고 말앗더래도 그의 精神的理想的方面으로는 収穫이 偉大함이 이러하도다. 그는 곳 半島史上에 美華일아니라 東洋史上에의 美華이며 朝鮮民族의 自由鍾일아니라. 全朝鮮民族의 自由鍾이라할만하도다.
내-어 그의 功績을 崇拜치 아니하며 내-어 그의 惠澤을 讚嘆치 아니하랴? 「」
契活의 奔忙함과 時日의 促迫함으로 因하와 調査의 踈畧함과
敍述의 簡率 는 莣雜한 點이 만흐오니 讀者諸氏는 恕諒하시옵소서!
筆者는 白＜81＞
＜73-81＞