別乾坤 第24號
1929년 12월 01일
工場監督과 大擊鬪, 夢夢夢 (A Great Fight with the Factory Supervisor, A Dream)
黃信德
잡저 (Miscellany)

It was a very warm early autumn day, and I set off on a school excursion with my students. I was surprised how many students there were; it seemed like there were about 2,000 of them. As we walked along the road, the line stretched for 10 li (里), and the people passing by all stopped and exclaimed, "Wow, that's a lot!" Hearing those words made me so happy. I thought our school was the best girls' school in Seoul. So, we went to visit a very large factory that stood in the middle of the city, a place one would expect to see. All the students went in together to look around. There, countless female workers were busily working at the weaving machines. When I looked closely, weren't they all our students? I was so surprised. When I looked to see if the students who had been lined up behind me were there, they had disappeared into the ground as if they were all gone. My heart pounded, and I was so surprised that I ran to each machine and looked at the faces of the female workers. What should I do? They were definitely our students.

And those sly girls didn't say a word and just smiled at me. I didn't know what was going on and was so frustrated that I couldn't stand it. Then, from a corner, a supervisor with a nasty face came rushing towards me like a kite swooping down on a chick. He grabbed the arm of a female worker, a second-year student from our school, who was working right in front of me, and shouted in a voice like rolling pebbles, "Why are you just yawning! If you don't want to work, get out! That's fine!!" And he slapped her cheek, pulled her hair, and kicked her. It looked like he was going to beat her to death.

"You little rascal, try and endure this." I shouted fiercely like a blade and stepped in front of him. I don't know where I got the strength, but I just grabbed him by the scruff of his neck and lifted him up like a rat with one arm, then slammed him down on the ground in the yard.

I felt so refreshed, as if 30 years of pent-up frustration had been relieved in one morning. Then, I thought, "Oh no, I forgot. What happened to that female worker who was beaten so badly?" When I turned around, there was no factory, no female workers, no students, nothing to be seen. The place was empty. As I thrashed around and turned over, I opened my eyes wide. It was a dream. How could I have such strength? <57>

**Named Entities**

서울	Sŏul



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	工場監督과 大擊鬪, 夢夢夢
필자	黃信德
기사형태	잡저

工場監督과 大擊鬪, 夢夢夢
						黃信德
초가을 日氣가 몹시 따뜻한 날인데 나는 우리학교 生徒들을 다리고 修學旅行을 떠낫슴니다. 생도 수가 어느새 그럿케 만히 불엇는지 2천여명이나 될 것갓슴니다. 행길에 나서니 列이 10里나 뻐처서 길 가는 사람들이 죄다 발을 멈추고 「야-만키도 하다」하고 감탄을 마지 안슴니다. 그런 말을 들으니 엇지나 깃부든지요. 우리학교가 서울 여학교 중에 제일가는 것가티 생각이 들엇지오. 그래 어데서 꼭 한번 볼 듯한 도시의 한복판에 서잇는 굉장이 큰 공장에 들어가서 見學을 하는데 그 만흔 생도들이 한꺼번에 다 들어서서 구경을 함니다. 거긔는 수 만흔 女工들이 분주히 직조기계 압헤 매달여서 일을 하고 잇는데 자세히 보닛가 전부가 우리학교생도들이 안이겟슴닛가. 하도 이상하야 들여다보니 내 뒤에 列을 짓고 서잇슬 생도들이 감쭉가티 땅속으로 들어갓는지 한사람도 업슴니다. 그만 가슴이 두군거리고 엇지나 놀나운지 기계마다 달여가서 女工의 얼골들을 똑바로 처다보니 이일을 엇지함닛가. 우리학교생도들이 틀님업슴니다.
그 애들이 또 앙큼스럽게 아모 말도 하지안코 나를 보고 빙그레 웃기만 하겟지요. 그래서 엇떤 영문을 몰으고 속만 갑갑해 못견듸는데 저편 구석에 서잇든 심술사납게 생겨먹은 감독인지 한 자가 병아리 차러오는 솔개미 모양으로 우닥 대달여오드니 바로 내압헤 일을 하고잇든 우리학교 2년급인 女工의 팔을 움켜쥐고 왕방울가튼 목소래로 「웨 하품만하고 잇서! 일이 하기실우면 나갓소 조와!!」하고 그만 뺨을 치고 머리를 끄들고 차고 하는데 금방 때려죽일 것갓슴니다.
「이년석 어데 견듸여 보아라」 칼날가티 무섭게 외치고 그놈압헤 나선 나는 엇덧케 힘이 세든지 그냥 그자의 목덜미를 잡아쥐고는 쥐색기처럼 외팔로 깡중 처들엇다가 그대로 마당에다 태기지를 처바렷슴니다.
엇지나 마음이 상쾌하든지 30년 久滯가 하로 아츰에 나린 것갓슴니다. 그러다가 「앗차 이젓고나 앗가 몹시＜56＞ 어더맛든 그 女工은 엇지되엿노」하고 돌아다보니 발서 그 곳에는 공장도 女工도 생도도 아무것도 볼 수 업고 자리가 횡-하드니 몸부림을 치고 돌아눕는새 눈을 번쩍 떳슴니다. 꿈이지요. 나의게 무슨 그런 힘이 잇슬나구요.＜57＞
＜56-57＞