잡지명	別乾坤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	요새이 생각나는 사람 (People I've Been Thinking About Lately)
필자	多情生
기사형태	소식 (News)

People I've Been Thinking About Lately
						多情生

Hyon Sang-yun: After the famed physician (名醫) Mr. Hyon Sang-yun was declared hopeless, and just as we were about to burst into tears of sorrow, he miraculously recovered, and is now twice as healthy as he was before he fell ill.
He is currently in his hometown of Chŏngju, reading and studying classical Chinese literature in his fields.

Kim Wŏn-ju: Though it is a bit late, I must congratulate Ms. Kim Wŏn-ju on her happy marriage (華婚). (The groom is Mr. Ha Yun-sil of Posŏng Higher Common School).
I further congratulate them as they have built a small palace of love in Sŏngbuk-tong, where the air is fresh and close to Mr. Ha's workplace, and are living in harmony and joy.
I hope that she will write some beautiful poems again.

Yi Kwang-su: Seeing that his "Sad History of King Tanjong" (端宗哀史) is being serialized again in the Tonga Ilbo, it seems that we can rest assured that his illness, which caused concern for some time, is improving.
I often see him holding the hand of a 4 or 5-year-old child under the acacia trees of Paksŏk Pass, absentmindedly watching the passersby. However, he looks different from before, with his head closely shaved and his cheeks unexpectedly plump, making him almost unrecognizable.
I hear that he has recently had a son, so I hope that his wife is healthy after childbirth. What will he do for the celebration of his son's birth?

Kim Myŏng-sik: He felt stifled being confined in Cheju and unable to find books he liked, so he has gone to Osaka, Japan.
Sadly, his legs are still not free. Why is fate so cruel to those with aspirations?
I am very happy to hear that he has had two auspicious events involving children (弄障의 慶事).
He seems to be putting his heart into raising the second Kim Myŏng-sik.

No Chayŏng: Human misfortune is immeasurable. Who would have imagined that No Chayŏng, the writer whose works were so popular that almost every student's desk had one of his books, would now be spending quiet days in an isolated house at the foot of Sŏngbuk-tong mountain, suffering from severe tuberculosis?
When a close friend finally visited him, he took his hand, tears welling up in his eyes, and said, "No one has visited me in three years... I am so grateful. I will never forget it."
If there is anyone who still has some affection from the old days when they admired him, wouldn't it be good to visit him and offer some comfort?

Chang Tŏk-su: After crossing over to America, there has been no news of him at all. At first, there were brief reports in newspapers and magazines, but even those have stopped recently.
I privately heard that he has already completed his studies and is now in London, England. And it seems that he intends to return home next year.

Yi Sŏng-tae: He is hospitalized at the medical college hospital. His illness, of course, is one that he contracted while in prison (在監時).
His former self is gone, and the sight of him barely clinging to life, with only skin and bones remaining, is heartbreaking.
He is receiving sincere care from his family, but given his current condition, it seems difficult. There are many things he and Pak Il-byŏng want to say, but they do not have the freedom to express them, so I will stop here.

Yu Yŏng-jun: Some of you may know this because you received an invitation last year, but if you don't, I would like to introduce Ms. Yu's marriage to K, a wealthy man (財産家) from Sunch'ŏn, South Chŏlla Province (全南順天).
She is still living in Seoul and is always complaining that her house is too small... But since her patron (大主) has a lot of money, that's nothing.
Finally, I hear that the young lady (令孃) born last May is growing up well.

Pak Il-byŏng: He was released from Sŏdaemun Prison last summer. However, he has been hospitalized at the medical college hospital for almost three months due to illness.
His illness is a disorder of the brain nerves, and he cannot see well and cannot hear well either.
If his condition continues to worsen, his life may be in danger.
He is thinking of changing his treatment to moxibustion (뜸질), but even that is not easy due to various circumstances.

Ch'oe Ŭn-hŭi:

Since retiring from the Chosŏn Ilbo, I have not been able to meet her at all. The clear nameplate at her house in Kahoe-dong has been removed, and there has been no news of her at all. I hear that she has retired to Songwŏl-tong.
She had a daughter as beautiful as jade (玉), and both mother and daughter are very healthy after childbirth. Her child's father visits every two or three days. We are all eagerly waiting for her to recover quickly and show us her beautiful figure in a warm fur coat.

Kwŏn Ae-ra: Ms. Kwŏn Ae-ra, who was once famous as a contemporary female orator (女流雄辯家), female [illegible] (女流XX家), and female Kaesŏng flirt (女流開城난봉家), went to Chungju to live a sweet life in the countryside with her patron, Yi Pyŏng-ch'ŏl. Recently, I saw her briefly in Seoul, and now I hear that she has become a kindergarten teacher (娛母) at a certain kindergarten in Chŏngŭp, the metropolis of chariots (車天子의 都邑地). Perhaps because she is raising two children, a son and a daughter, and focusing on her life, signs of aging are clearly visible on her face.
However, her spirit from the old days remains, and she was supposed to give a lecture at a lecture meeting hosted by the Kyŏngsŏng branch of the Kwŏn Friendship Association (權友會 京城支會) some time ago, but it was unfortunately canceled.
People who had been looking forward to hearing the Kaesŏng flirt song (開城난봉가) after a long time were greatly disappointed.
I hear that she plans to support an economically independent life as a professional woman in the future.

Sŏ Chae-p'il: I only hear news that he has gone from Philadelphia to Washington D.C. and is working at a hospital. Having stayed in America for so long, he has become completely Americanized.

Sin Il-sŏn: Ms. Sin Il-sŏn, the queen of the Korean film industry (朝鮮映畵界), who once set the hearts of young fans (and old men) ablaze. After marrying Mr. Yang, the precious son of a wealthy widow (百萬金 寡婦宅 貴童子) from Hwasun, South Chŏlla Province (全南和順), her news has been completely lost. Is the baby growing well?
I hear that she and Mr. Yang are going to appear together in a certain movie again, so the general fans are raising both hands and shouting, "Hooray!"
Surely, she hasn't lost her former appearance in the meantime.

Yi Pyŏng-jo:

After the Sŏgwang (曙光) was discontinued (廢刊), he returned to his hometown of Anak (安岳) and devoted himself to educating rural children at Myŏngnyun School (明倫學校), but he was imprisoned for a "tongue-lashing" incident (舌禍事件) and suffered greatly.
After that, there was no news of him for a while, but recently he came to Seoul again and is engaged in some kind of enterprise (經綸).＜71＞

**Named Entities**

玄相允	Hyon Sang-yun
定州	Chŏngju
金元周	Kim Wŏn-ju
普成高等普通學校	Posŏng Kodŭng Pot'ong Hakkyo
河允實	Ha Yun-sil
李光洙	Yi Kwang-su
東亞日報	Tonga Ilbo
端宗哀史	Tanjong Aesa
박석고개	Paksŏk Kogae
金明植	Kim Myŏng-sik
濟州	Cheju
大阪	Ōsaka
盧子泳	No Chayŏng
張德秀	Chang Tŏk-su
李星泰	Yi Sŏng-tae
朴一秉	Pak Il-byŏng
劉英俊	Yu Yŏng-jun
全南順天	Chŏllam Sunch'ŏn
崔恩喜	Ch'oe Ŭn-hŭi
朝鮮日報	Chosŏn Ilbo
嘉會洞	Kahoedong
松月洞	Songwŏldong
權愛羅	Kwŏn Ae-ra
李秉喆	Yi Pyŏng-ch'ŏl
忠州	Ch'ungju
井邑	Chŏngŭp
權友會 京城支會	Kwŏn Uhoe Kyŏngsŏng Chihoe
徐載弼	Sŏ Chae-p'il
申一仙	Sin Il-sŏn
全南和順	Chŏllam Hwasun
李秉祚	Yi Pyŏng-jo
曙光	Sŏgwang
安岳	Anak
明倫學校	Myŏngnyun Hakkyo



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	요새이 생각나는 사람
필자	多情生
기사형태	소식

요새이 생각나는 사람
						多情生
玄相允氏 名醫가 절망을 宣告하고 우리의 입에서 탄식이 울어나올만큼 한동안 危境에 일으럿든 玄相允氏, 氏는 그 후에 거의 기적으로 병세가 회복되여 지금은 알키 전보담도 배나 건강한 몸이 되엿다.
지금은 아직 그의 本鄕 定州 田園에서 독서-漢學古典을 연구하고 잇는 중이다.

金元周女史 祝華婚... ... 좀 늣기는 하엿지만 慶事로운 金女史의 華婚을 축하하지 아니할 수가 업다.(新郞은 普成高等普通學校의 河允實君)
河氏의 출근하기에 각갑고 또 공기가 조흔 城北洞에 조고마한 사랑의 殿堂을 일우고 오손도손 자미가 옥실북실하게 지난다니 더욱히 祝賀又祝賀다.
이제는 다시 고흔 詩나 좀 써주섯스면?

李光洙氏 東亞日報에 端宗哀史가 다시 실니는 것을 보아 한동안 위급을 전하든 氏의 병도 안심할 수가 잇슴을 알 수가 잇게된 듯하다.
박석고개 악가시아 나무 밋헤 4,5세된 어린애의 손을 잡고 서서 오고가는 행인을 무심히 보고 잇는 氏를 종종 볼 수가 잇다. 그러나 전의 모습과는 달너 머리를 홀낭 깍고 두볼에 난데업는 살이 듬신 저서 첩경 알어 볼 수가 업다.
요지음 得男을 하엿다니 부인은 産後 건강하시며 得男禮로는 氏여 무엇으로?

金明植氏 濟州에 들어벡혀 잇자니 제일 답답하고 또 마음에 마즌 冊을 어더 볼 수가 업서 日本 大阪으로 가서 잇다고 한다.
야속스럽게 다리는 永永 自由롭지 못한 모양이다. 世態는 엇지하여 뜻잇는 사람에게 그다지 악착한지.
들으니 두번이나 弄障의 慶事를 보앗다니 매우 반가웁다.
第二世의 金明植氏을 養成하기에 勞心하고 잇는 듯.

盧子泳氏 사람의 불행이란 유로 헤아리기가 어려운 것이다. 한동안 남녀학생의 冊床 우에 그의 작품이 업는 곳이 거의 업슬만큼 인기를 끌고 잇든 作家 盧子泳氏가 거의 重態에 빠진 肺病으로 城北洞山下 孤屋에서 고요한 세월을 보내고 잇게 될 줄이야 누가 전에 짐작인들 하엿스랴.
어느 친고가 모처럼 차저가 보앗더니 손을 잡고 눈물이 핑돌며
『3년동안에 누구 하나 차저오는 사람이 업더니... ... 참 고맙슴니다. 평생 두고 잇지 아니하겟슴니다』고 하더란다.
옛날에 崇拜(?)하든 정이 혹 남은 이가 잇거든 한번 차저 暫時 위로하여 줌이 엇더할는지.

張德秀氏 한번 米洲를 건너간 뒤에는 도모지 니러타는 소식이 업다. 그것도 처음 얼마동안에는 신문잡지가튼데 간단한 통신도 잇고 하더니 요지음은 그것조차 근치고 업다.
私私로 전하는 말을 들으면 학업은 발서 맛추엇고 지금은 英國 론돈에 가서 잇다고도 한다. 그러고 明年쯤은 歸國할 의사가 보이더라고.

李星泰氏 醫專病院에서 입원 치료 중이다. 병은 물론 在監時에 어흔 병이다.
녯날의 모습은 간곳업고 그야말로 뼈와 가죽만 남어 寒心한 一命을 잇글고 나가는 정상은 참아 볼 수가 업다.
가족들의 至誠한 看護를 밧기는 하나 지금의 상태 가태서는 좀 어려운 편에 각가웁다. 朴一秉氏와 아울너 여러가지 하고 십흔 말은 만코 만흐나 그것을 발표할 자유는 업스니 이만둔다.

劉英俊女史 昨年末에 招待狀을 바더 알은 사람도 잇겟지만 혹 몰으는 이가 잇다면 劉女史  *全南順天財産家 K氏와의 結婚을 紹介한다.
지금 살임사리는 서울서 그대로 하고 언제던지 집이 좁아서 안되겟다고 불평을 불으짓고 다니더니... ... 그러나 뭣 大主께서 돈이 만흐시니까 그만 것쯤이야.
끄트로 지난 5월에 나은 令孃도 잘 자라는 모양이다.

朴一秉氏 지난 녀름에 西大門 刑務所에서 出獄하엿다. 그러나 그 뒤에 병으로 醫專病院에 입원하여 치료를 밧는지가 석달이 각가워 온다.
병은 뇌신경의 고장인데 눈이 잘 보이지 아니하고 또 귀도 잘 들니지 아니한다고 한다.
만일 병세가 그대로 나아가다가는 생명까지도 워태롭게 되리라고 한다.
치료법을 곳처 뜸질을 좀하여 볼 생각이 잇기는 하나 그것 역시 여러가지 형편으로 任意롭지 못하다 하다.

崔恩喜孃

朝鮮日報 퇴직 후로는 도모지 맛나 볼 수가 업다. 嘉會洞댁의 뚜렷한 門牌도 띄여바리고 감감히 소식이 업더니 松月洞으로 隱居를 하엿다고.
玉가튼 따님을 나엇는데 産後에 母女분이 매우 건강하고 애아버지되는 이도 이틀에 한번 사흘에 한번 차저온다고 한다. 어서 밧비 기운을 회복하여 가지고 털外套의 뜻뜻한 곰 미인의 자태를 보여주기 천만 기다린다.

權愛羅氏 한참 當年 女流雄辯家 여류XX家 女流開城난봉家(歌)로 유명한 權愛羅女史, 大主인 李秉喆氏와 忠州農村에 가서 달큼한 살음사리를 하다가 요지음 잠간 서울서 얼골을 뵙게 되더니 다시 車天子의 都邑地 井邑의 某幼稚園 娛母가 되시엿다고 아들과 따님을 두분이나 길으며 살음사리에 골몰함인지 얼골에는 老틔가 완연히 나타나 보인다.
그러나 전날의 기개만은 그대로 남어 얼마전에 權友會 京城支會 主催의 講演會에 등단하랴다가 섭섭히도 중지되엿다.
오란간만에 開城난봉가를 드르랴던 사람들도 대실망.
들으니 압흐로는 직업부인으로써 경제적 독립 생활을 支持할 의기라고.

徐載弼氏 필나델피아에서 와싱통市로 가서 한편으로 어느 병원 일을 보고 잇다는 소식만이 들닌다. 米洲에 오래 머물은 이만큼 어데까지든지 양키式이다.

申一仙마마 한동안 젊문 팬(늙은이도) 가삼을 태워주는 朝鮮映畵界의 女王 申一仙마마. 全南和順의 百萬金 寡婦宅 貴童子 梁서방님과 結婚을 한뒤에 도모지 소식이 묘연하다. 아기는 잘 자라는지?
들으니 또 요지음 다시 大主 梁君과가티 某映畵에 출연을 한다하니 일반 팬들은 쌍수를 놉히 들고 우-라-.
설마 그 동안에 발서 녯날의 모슴이 살어지지는 안니하엿겟지.

李秉祚氏

曙光廢刊이후 本第인 安岳으로 돌아가 明倫學校에서 農村子弟敎育을 盡力하든 중 舌禍事件으로 入獄하여 모진 고생까지 하엿다.
그 뒤로 暫間 소식이 업더니 요지음 上京하여 다시 무엇인지 經綸하고 잇는 중이다.＜71＞
＜70-71＞