잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	海外事情 米國資本主義의 南北아메리카 征服 (Overseas Affairs: The Conquest of North and South America by American Capitalism)
필자	米國에서 韓昇貞 (Han Seung-jeong, from the United States)
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

Overseas Affairs: The Conquest of North and South America by American Capitalism
						By Han Seung-jeong, from the United States

I. Introduction

There may be various reasons behind the modern imperialistic nations' attempts to seize colonies and protectorates by all means, but the most important ones can be summarized as follows:

(1) To migrate surplus population.

(2) To acquire abundant raw material sources.

(3) To obtain priority in foreign investment.

(4) To occupy advantageous markets for commodity exports.

It is a principle for manufacturers to import cheap and good raw materials and seek the most profitable sales market for goods manufactured from these raw materials. It is also customary for capitalists to seek safe investment destinations with high interest rates. The recent European Great War was caused by the fermentation of the above four major causes intertwined. Before the war, in 1913, the foreign investment amount of European countries was 20 billion dollars for England (whose total wealth at the time was 85 billion dollars), 6 billion dollars for Germany, and 9 billion dollars for France. In addition, the foreign trade amount was 5 billion dollars for England, 4 billion dollars for Germany, and 3.5 billion dollars for France. The total global investment amount in the same year was 35 billion dollars, and the total amount of foreign trade was 40 billion dollars. Like this, wherever capital and goods go, the citizens and flags of that country follow. Wherever capital and goods from various countries gather, competition arises due to economic principles, and eventually, jealousy, friction, and strife are induced.

However, despite only ten years having passed since the tragic performance that resulted in the loss of millions of lives and enormous amounts of property, an event unprecedented in history, the international powers are simply repeating their past actions, giving the impression that they are promoting a future great war. We can roughly predict the present and the future by reflecting on the past. Among the economic developments of various countries after the war, what attracts our attention the most is the global conquest of American capital. It is unknown what kind of incidents this will bring about in the future, along with the settlement of the German reparations issue, international war debts, and the economic development of various countries.

Now, I would like to briefly study the capitalistic power of the United States over Latin America, which can be seen as one aspect of the economic expansion of the United States.

II. Monroe Doctrine

On December 22, 1823, then-U.S. President James Monroe issued a statement regarding Latin America. Although I will not review the entirety of the famous Monroe Doctrine in modern political history here, it can be summarized into the following three major points:

1.  No country shall establish colonies on the American continent.

2.  No country shall expand monarchical systems on the American continent.

3.  The United States will not interfere in European affairs, and European countries shall not interfere in American affairs.

According to Americans' explanation of the Monroe Doctrine, it aims to maintain the political and economic development of Latin American countries and the peace of the entire Western Hemisphere. However, in reality, if one delves into the inside, it becomes clear that it was revealed from the cunning ambition of the United States. I believe that the true purpose of this Monroe Doctrine is (1) to prevent European countries from invading Latin America, (2) to establish the political, economic, and social customs of the United States, and (3) to thereby carry out political and economic domination. In other words, while the pretext is peace and development, the actual content is to satisfy one's own ambitions. Without further theorizing about this, if we examine the current political and economic power of the United States over Latin America, we will be able to understand the true meaning of the Monroe Doctrine more clearly. However, I will leave the political situation to the research of other experts and only briefly describe the economic aspect, so I hope that the readers will understand this.

III. American Capital in Latin America

As mentioned above, the history of American exploration of Latin America began a century ago, but its development is a fact of the 20th century. Until the end of the previous century, the United States was still preoccupied with resolving domestic problems, and its commerce and industry were not so developed. Therefore, its power spread overseas was much more immature compared to England, Germany, and France. In 1900, the U.S. investment in Latin America was 185,000,000 dollars in Mexico, 50,000,000 dollars in Cuba, and 55,000,000 dollars in other countries, totaling 290,000,000 dollars. This figure is by no means small, but it is very small compared to the current total of 5,100,000,000 dollars in 1927. That is, it has increased about 18 times in 27 years. Let's examine the outline in more detail on the left.

Cuba: Cuba is nominally an independent country, but in fact, it is a territory of the United States and ranks first in the world in sugar production. Almost all industries in this country, including railroads, telecommunications, telephones, and mining, are managed by American capital and technology. In particular, it seems that the United States is showing even more ambition in sugar production, and there are many semi-official sugar companies. As a result, almost all the sugar that Americans consume on a daily basis is brought in from Cuba. The amount of U.S. investment in the country and by industry is as follows. (As of 1927)

Sugar 750,000,000 dollars
Railroad 110,000,000 dollars
Public Utilities 110,000,000 dollars
Hotels and other buildings 80,000,000 dollars
Tobacco 50,000,000 dollars
Various Factories 40,000,000 dollars
Mining 35,000,000 dollars
Stores 30,000,000 dollars
Agriculture 25,000,000 dollars
Banks 20,000,000 dollars
Warehouses and Docks 10,000,000 dollars
Others 258,000,000 dollars
Total 1,508,700,000 dollars

According to the above total, the capital of Americans circulating in Cuba is more than 1.5 billion dollars. If this is divided by the total population of Cuba, 3.36 million, the average per person is about 500 dollars. That is, every person in Cuba owes about 500 dollars to Americans. How frightening and amazing is this phenomenon? I wonder how much money Koreans are using from others.

Mexico: Mexico, famous for silver and oil, is also the second largest debtor to the United States (among Latin America). The country's abundant oil fields and mining districts are all in the hands of Americans. In addition, many commercial and industrial rights are under the control of Americans, and therefore, hundreds of American companies are exploiting in Mexico. The statistics are listed on the left. (As of 1927)

Rural Property 166,047,000 dollars
Urban Property 35,771,000 dollars
Oil Fields 318,638,000 dollars <90>
Oil Refining Industry 50,070,000 dollars
Mining 342,427,000 dollars
Timber 10,935,000 dollars
Railroad 248,158,000 dollars
Various Factories 27,716,000 dollars
Stores 26,140,000 dollars
Public Utilities 30,799,000 dollars
Others 132,180,000 dollars
Total 1,389,061,000 dollars

Chile: Chile, which ranks first in the world in silver production and has abundant natural resources, has about 400,000,000 dollars of American capital invested. The most famous among American companies are the Guggenheim Brothers, Anaconda Copper, Braden Copper, and Bethlehem Steel. These companies, with huge capital and strong political backing, are absorbing the blood of the poor Chilean people.

Brazil: When one says Brazil, everyone knows that it is famous for coffee, rubber, and canned meat industries. There is also about 300,000,000 dollars of American capital invested in this country, of which 100,000,000 dollars is the debt of the U.S. government. The powerful American companies in Brazil are United States Steel, Wilson & Co., Swift & Company, and Armour & Company. Much of the coffee and canned meat that Americans eat daily comes from this country. It is said that Henry Ford (the automobile king) recently purchased tens of thousands of acres of land in Brazil and is building the world's largest rubber factory.

Argentina: Argentina is a rising country in Latin America with the second largest national wealth in the world and a promising future industrial country with leather, zinc, cement, and textile industries. The economic competition between England and the United States is very fierce in this country. In 1900, the economic power of England was in a superior position, but now it has yielded to the United States. To give an example, in 1900, the ratio of meat canning industries operated by British companies was 38%, and those operated by American companies was 35%. By 1920, the British had decreased to 32%, and the Americans had increased to 68%. Currently, the United States has about 235,000,000 dollars in capital invested.

Peru: American capitalism is rampant in Peru. Standard Oil owns about a million acres of oil fields, and Cerro de Pasco Copper Corporation is buying and excavating about 6,000 acres of mining land. About 100,000,000 dollars of American money is dominating the country's finances.

In addition to this, there is no country where American capital has not spread, and there is no place without an American commercial company. Listing them all together is as follows:

Colombia 88,000,000 dollars <91>
Bolivia 80,000,000 dollars
Honduras 24,232,275 dollars
Costa Rica 8,585,268 dollars
Panama 8,253,226 dollars
Guantanamo 3,944,762 dollars
Nicaragua 500,000 dollars

IV. Conclusion

The statistics listed above can be seen as proving the capitalistic power of the United States over Latin America. We also assume that this situation is likely to become even more intense in the future. Immediately after Mr. Hoover was elected president, he toured Latin America, made his unique commercial observations, and returned to emphasize measures to increase trade between the United States and Latin America. Charles Lindbergh, the darling who first crossed the Atlantic Ocean, flew around Latin America for a week, illuminating the possibility of air transportation connections in the American continent. Mr. Young, the chairman of the German reparations committee held in Paris this summer, said at a meeting of a manufacturers' association, "Latin America is fertile with natural resources and close by, making it the most suitable place for American economic development." Modern American youths favor business, are skilled in the art of wealth accumulation, and are suitable for overseas development due to their abundant adventurous spirit. There are many in the U.S. government and private sector who are studying optimal policies for foreign trade and foreign investment. Behind these various conditions are hundreds of warships and tens of thousands of cannons, protecting them. In one corner of the world, people talk about peace and justice, but that is still just a dream. This world is still a world for the strong and a stage for the rich. The following four lines omitted (The End) <92>

**Named Entities**

쩨임쓰몬로	James Monroe
라틴 아메리카	Latin America
墨書哥	Mexico
큐바	Cuba
智利	Ch'illi
브라질	Pŭrajil
알젠틔나	Aljent'ina
페루	P'eru
헨리포드	Henry Ford
콜롬비아	K'ollombia
볼비아	Bolivia
혼두라쓰	Hondurasŭ
코스타리카	K'osŭt'arik'a
파나마	P'anama
간타나모	Kant'anamo
니카라그아	Nikaragŭa
후버	Hoover
린드뻐크	Lindbŏkkŭ
영	Yŏng



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	海外事情 米國資本主義의 南北아메리카 征服
필자	米國에서 韓昇貞
기사형태	논설

海外事情 米國資本主義의 南北아메리카 征服
						米國에서 韓昇貞
一, 序言
近代帝國主義的國家들이 植民地와 保護地를 攝張하려고온갓 手段을다부리는 裡面에는여러가지 理由가잇슬지나그 中에 가장 重要한 者를 討究하면 大槪左와如할것이다.
(一)過剩한 人口를 移民하는것.
(二)豊富한 原料地를 獲得하는것.
(三)外國投資의 優先權을엇는것.
(四)商品輸出의 有利한 市場을 占有하는것.
製造家는 低廉하고 良好한 原料를 輸入하야 原料로써 製造한 商品을가장 有利하게 販賣市場을 探求하는것이 原則이며 資本家는 利息이 高騰하고도 安全한 投資地를찻는것이 常例이다 아직도우리 記憶에새로운 歐洲大戰亂은 上記한 四大原因이둥치고 얼켜서 醱酵된 者이니 戰前卽一九一三年現在歐洲諸國의 外國投資額을보면 英國二百億弗(當時에 英國의 總富가 八百五十億弗이엿슴) 獨逸이 六十億弗蘭西九十億弗이엿스며한 外國貿易額을보면 英國이 五十億弗 獨逸이 四十億弗蘭西가 三十五億弗이엿다 그리고 同年의 全世界投資額이 三百五十億弗이엿스며 外國貿易의 總額이 四百億弗이엿다. 이와가티 資本이가고 商品이가는데는그나라 市民과 國旗가르게되며여러나라 資本과 商品이모히는곳에는 經濟上原理에 依하야 彼此間競爭이생기게되며 乃＜88＞終에는 嫉妬軋輕爭鬪等을 誘致하게되는것이다.
그런데 有史以來의처음인 數百萬의 生靈과 累巨萬의 財産을 損失한 慘劇을 演出한지가 겨우 十年을지냇슴에 不拘하고 國際列國은그 前行動을그냥 反覆하고잇스며 未來의 大戰을 促成하고잇는 感이업지안이하다. 우리는 過去를 鑑照하야 現在와 未來를 大槪推測할수가잇는닭이다 戰後各國의 經濟的發展中에 吾人의 注目을 第一만히게하는것은 무엇보다도 米國資本의 世界的征服이라고할수잇스며 이것이 將次獨逸賠償金問題와 國際間戰債問題의 整理及列國의 經濟的發展과 아울너 如何한 事變을 招來할는지알수업는것이다.
이제여긔서 米國의 經濟的擴張의 一面이라고볼수잇는라틴 亞米利加에 對한 米國의 資本主義的勢力을 簡單하게 硏究하여보고저한다.
二, 몬로主義
一八二三年十二月二十二日에 當時米國大統領이든쩨임쓰몬로氏가 라틘亞米利加에 對한 聲明書를 發布하엿스니 이것이 近代政治史에 有名한몬로主義의 全文을여긔서 論評하려고하지안커니와 그것을 總合하면 左의 三大條目으로 分할수가잇다.
一, 어느나라든지 亞米利加大陸에 植民地를 만들지못할것
二, 어느나라든지 亞米利加大陸에 君主主義的制度를 擴張하지못할것.
三, 米國이 歐洲諸國의 事件에 不干涉할터이니 歐洲諸國은 亞米利加大陸의 事件을 干涉하지말것.
米國인들의 몬로主義에 對한 說明을드르면 라틘亞米利加諸國의 政治的經濟的發展及西半球全體의 平和를 保持하고저함에잇다고하지만은 實上 그 裡面을 詳細히들추어보면 米國의 狡滑한 野心에서 發露된것임을 明確히알수가잇스니 이몬로主義의 眞正한 目的은(一)歐洲諸國들의 라틘亞米利加侵略을 防備하고(二)米國의 政治的經濟的制度及社會的風習을 樹立하며(三)그리하야 政治的經濟的支配를 遂行하고저하는데잇다고생각한다 卽그와가티 口實上으로는 平和이니 發展이니하지만은 事實上內容은 自國의 野心을 滿足케하고저하는데잇다는말이다 여긔에 對하야 더 理論을거듭할것이업시 現在의 라틘亞米利加에 對한 米國의 政治的經濟的勢力을 硏究해보면 몬로主義의 眞義를더욱 明白히알수가잇슬것이다 그런데나는 政治的情勢에 對하여서는 다른 專門家의 硏究에맛기고다만 그 經濟的一面을 略述하고저하는바이니 讀者諸氏가그러케 諒解하여주기를바란다.
三, 라틘亞米利加의 米國資本
以上에말한바와가티 米國의 라틘亞米利加開拓史는 一世紀前부터 始作한것이지만온 그 發展史는 二十世紀以來의 事實이라고안이할수업다 前世紀末葉지도 米國은아즉 內＜89＞國問題整理에 汲汲하여왓스며 商工業이그러케 發達하지를못하엿다 그럼으로 海外에퍼진 勢力이 英獨佛에 比하야 훨신 幼穉하엿다 一九◯◯年에 라틘亞米利加에 對한 米國의 投資額은 墨書哥에 一八五, ◯◯◯, ◯◯◯弗큐바에 五◯,  ◯◯◯, ◯◯◯弗其他諸國에 五五, ◯◯◯, ◯◯◯弗總合二九◯, ◯◯◯ ◯◯◯弗이엿다. 이 數爻가 決코 少額이안이로되그것을 一九二七年現在總額五, 一◯◯, ◯◯◯ ◯◯◯弗에 比하면 大端히적다고안이할수업다. 卽二十七年동안에 約十八倍가 增加된세음이다. 左에 그 大要를좀더 詳細히 討究하여보기로하자.
큐바 큐바는 名目獨立國이면서도 事實은 米國의 屬領이며 砂糖産出로써 世界의 第一位를 占 하는나라이니이나라의 鐵道電信電話鑛業其他모든 工業이거의다 米國人의 資本과 技術로써 經營한다고하며 特別히 砂糖製造에 對해서는 米國더욱 野心을부리고잇는모양인데 半官半民의 砂糖會社가만히잇다고한다 그리하야 米國人이 一常食用하는 砂糖은거의다 큐바에서가저오는것이다 이제 同國에 對한 米國의 投資額과 産業別을보면 左와 如하다. (一九二七年現在)
砂糖 七五◯,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗
鐵道 一一◯,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗
公共利用事業 一一◯,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗
旅館其他삘딍 八◯,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗
煙草 五◯,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗
各種工場 四◯,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗
鑛業 三五◯,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗
商店 三◯,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗
農業 二五,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗
銀行 二◯,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗
倉庫와 船渠 一◯,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗
其他 二五八,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗
合計 一,五◯八,七◯◯,◯◯◯弗
以上의 總計에 依하면큐바에서 循環하는 米國人의 資本이 十五億弗以上인데 그것을큐바의 全人口三百三十六萬에 分割하면 每人平均이 約五百弗式되는세음이다 卽큐바國의 每人이 米國人의게 約五百弗式지고잇는 計算이된다이얼마나무섭고놀나운 現像이냐 뭇노니 朝鮮人은 남의돈을얼마나쓰고잇느냐.
墨西哥 銀과 石油로써 有名한 墨西哥가한 米國에 對한 第二의 負債國이니(라틘亞米利加中에서) 이나라의 豊富한 油田과 鑛區는모다 米人의 掌中에드러가잇다고한다 그밧게여러가지 商工業權이만히 米人의 支配下에잇스며 라서 數百의 米國會社가 墨西哥에서 搾取作用을하고잇다고한다 左에 그 統計를 列擧한다. (一九二七年現在)
農村財産 一六六,◯四七,◯◯◯弗
都會財産 三五,七七一,◯◯◯弗
油田 三一八,六三八,◯◯◯弗＜90＞
石油精製業 五◯,◯七◯,◯◯◯弗
鑛業 三四二,四二七,◯◯◯弗
材木 一◯,九三五,◯◯◯弗
鐵道 二四八,一五八,◯◯◯弗
各種工場 二七,七一六,◯◯◯弗
商店 二六,一四◯,◯◯◯弗
公共利用事業 三◯,七九九,◯◯◯弗
其他 一三二,一八◯,◯◯◯弗
合計 一,三八九,◯六一,◯◯◯弗
칠리 (智利) 銀의 産出로써 世界의 第一位를 占하며  豊富한 自然富源을가진칠리에 米國의 資本이 約四◯◯, ◯◯◯, ◯◯◯弗이가서잇는데 米國人의 會社中에 가장 有名 者는 그리근해임銅鐵會社 아나콘다銅鐵會社 로든銅鐵會社及 베들네햄銅鐵會社들이라고한다 巨額의 資本을가지고든든한 政治的背景을가진이 會社들이 可憐한칠리 百姓의 피를 吸收하고잇다.
라질 라질이라하면 누구든지 珈琲, 고무, 肉類罐詰工業으로 有名한나라인줄일고잇다 이나라에한 約三◯◯, ◯◯◯, ◯◯◯弗의 米國資本이가서잇는데그 中의 一◯◯, ◯◯◯, ◯◯◯弗은 米國政府의 債權이라고한다. 라질에서 有力한 米人의 會社는 合衆國銅鐵會社, 윌손罐詰會社, 스위프트罐詰會社及알몰罐詰會社이라고하며 米國人의 每日食卓에오른는 珈琲와 罐詰肉類는만히이나라에서만 드러오는것이라고한다 얼마前에헨리포드氏(自動車王)가 라질에 數萬坪의 土地를 買入하고 世界最大의 고무工場을 設置中이라고한다.
알젠틔나 알쩬틔나는 라틘亞米利加의 新進國으로써 世界의 第二位를 占하는 國富을가젓스며 皮革, 亞鉛, 쎄멘트 紡績業等으로매우 有望한 將來의 工業國이니 이나라에서 英米의 經濟的競爭이 大端히 激烈하다고한다 一九◯◯年에는 英國의 經濟的勢力이 優勝한 地位에잇섯더니 只今에는 米國의게 讓步하엿다고한다 이제그 一例를들면 一九◯◯年에이나라 肉類罐詰製造業에 英國人의 會社로 經營된것이 三割八分 米國人의 會社로 經營된것이 三割五分의 比例이엿는데 一九二◯年에니르러서는 英國은 三割二分으로 減少되고 米國은 六割八分으로 增加되엿다고한다 그리고 現在米國이 資本的二三五, ◯◯◯, ◯◯◯弗이가서잇다.
페루 페루에도 米國의 資本主義가 縱橫하고잇는데스탠다드 石油가 約百萬에커의 油田을 所持하고잇스며 세로패스코銅鐵會社가 한 約六千에커의 鑛産地를 買收採掘中이라고한다 그리고 米國人의돈 約一◯◯, ◯◯◯, ◯◯◯弗이이나라 金融을 支配하고잇는中이다.
以外에도어어느나라를 勿論하고 米國의 資本이 蔓延하지안흔곳이업스며 米國의 商業會社가업는데가업는데 그것을통트러 列記하면 左와 如하다.
콜롬비아 八八,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗＜91＞
볼비아 八◯,◯◯◯,◯◯◯弗
혼두라쓰 二四,二三二,二七五弗
코스타리카 八,五八五,二六八弗
파나마 八,二五三,二二六弗
간타나모 三,九四四,七六二弗
니카라그아 五◯◯,◯◯◯弗
四, 結論
以上에 列記한 統計는 라틘亞米利加에 對하야 米國의 資本主義的勢力을스라로 證明한다고볼수가잇스며 이 形勢가압흐로더욱더욱 濃厚하여갈 可能性이 만흔것을 우리는 한 推想한다 후버氏가 大統領으로 被選된 卽時로 라틘亞米利加를 巡行하야 氏獨特의 商業家的觀察을하고도라와서 米國과 라틘亞米利加의 貿易增進策을 力說하며 大西洋을처음으로 橫斷한 寵恩兒린드뻐크는 라틘亞米利加를 飛行機로 一週하야 亞米利加大陸의 空中交通聯絡의 可能性을 燈明하엿스며 今夏에 巴里에서 開催한 獨逸賠償金問題委員會의 會長인영氏가그 前에어느 製造業者協會席上에서「라틘亞米利加는 自然富源이 豊肥하고 兼하야갓가운 故로 米國經濟的發展上의 最適地이라」고 演說한일이잇다 現代의 米國靑年들은 實業을조화하야 致富術에 能 하며 冒險心이 富하야 海外發展에 適合하여잇다 米國의 官民間에는 外國貿易과 外國投資에 對한 最適政策을 硏究하는이가만히잇다이러한여러가지 條件의 背後에는 數百의 軍艦과 數萬의 大砲가잇셔서 이들을 擁護하고잇다 世上一隅에서는 平和이니 正義이니 들지만은 그것은 아즉에서지내지못한다 아즉도이 世上은 强한 者의 天地이며 富한 者의 舞臺이다. 以下四行略()＜92＞
＜88-92＞