別건곤 第24號

1929년 12월 01일

朝鮮語辭典과 朝鮮人 (Korean Dictionary and Koreans)

李克魯 (I Keuk-ro)

논설 (Essay)

In our Korea, all aspects can be said to be barren lands. However, even within that, the Korean language is an even more unexplored wasteland. We use our language a lot, but who has ever investigated it? Listen to the fishermen by the sea; they have names for all the fish and shellfish. Listen to the children living in remote villages; you will learn the names of plants, flowers and trees that we don't usually know. All these words only circulate in their mouths, and they have not become academic terms. <156>

It is not so shameful that other natural sciences or crafts are behind others. However, for a great nation that has lived a cultural life in one place for tens of thousands of years without recorded history, and four to five thousand years with recorded history, it is truly shameful to not have organized even one language that communicates its meaning and is the basis of general culture, to the point that we cannot lift our faces in front of others. Someone once said that they were insulted by a certain foreigner at a drinking party, saying, "You people don't even have a dictionary, what are you making such a fuss about!" and decided to devote themselves to the dictionary project. When the writer was in charge of the Korean language course at the University of Berlin four years ago, how many people suffered unbearable pain and shame because there was no standard Korean dictionary? I don't know if the face is thick and there is no shame, but I think everyone has pain when writing. Look, even the Mongolian people who live as nomads in the Mongolian desert, and the Manchurian people who hunt in the forests of Mount Paektu, have standard dictionaries that they have been using for hundreds of years.

In Silla, the common people wrote or used Korean words with Idu script (吏讀文), and in the Joseon Dynasty, King Sejong created the Korean alphabet (朝鮮文字) to record Korean words, so scriptures and other translations were made, and some creative works were also produced, but even then, a dictionary could not be made. After that, for thousands of years, ignorant people who were suppressed by the power of Chinese characters could not even dream of pioneering the Korean language. At first, French missionaries came to Korea to spread Catholicism and learned Korean, and as a byproduct, the Korean-French dictionary (韓佛字典) was published in Paris in 1880. After that, in 1890, the Korean-English dictionary (韓英字典) by the Englishman Underwood was published in Yokohama, and in 1920, the Government-General of Korea published the Korean dictionary (朝鮮語辭典). The latter books were all written by foreigners to learn Korean. So, a dictionary written by Koreans to learn Korean has not yet been published. However, we are not without effort. Seventeen or eighteen years ago, Kim Tu-bong, Lee Kyu-yeong, and Kwon Deok-kyu from the Kwangmun Society began compiling a Korean dictionary and worked hard for many years, and three years ago, Choi Nam-seon, Lee Yun-jae, Jeong In-bo, Lim Gyu, Byeon Yeong-ro, and Han Cheong from the Gyeongmyeong Club worked on the same project. Kim Tu-bong in Shanghai has collected tens of thousands of vocabularies for six or seven years, and Lee Sang-chun in Gaeseong is also said to have collected many vocabularies. However, it has not yet been published, so there is no need to say anything, and even those made by foreigners only publish a small number of vocabularies, and it is difficult to call them true standard dictionaries.

Our dictionary compilation has a different point from that of other countries. In other countries, standard language and orthography have already been established, so the dictionary content is only expanded or contracted according to the use, but in our language, everything has not yet been established, so a authoritative standard dictionary must be created when unification is achieved. To do so, at least a unified organization should be specially established. Therefore, we have organized the Korean Dictionary Compilation Society (朝鮮語辭典編纂會) this time. Our project is not to take the first step decisively, but to make a total settlement of the accumulated achievements that many seniors have been working on for twenty years, and to establish a great authority from many authorities. <157>

**Named Entities**

朝鮮 I Korea
李克魯 I I Keuk-ro
海邊漁民 I Haebyŏn Ŏmin
椎童牧竪 I Chwidong Moksŏ
某國人 I Mouk Kuk-in
伯林大學 I Pŏllin Taehak
蒙古沙漠 I Monggo Sămak
蒙古族 I Monggojok
白頭山 I Paektusan
滿洲族 I Manjujok
新羅 I Silla
吏讀文 I Idu-mun
李朝 I Ijo
世宗大王 I Sejong Taewang
佛蘭西 I Pŭransŭ
巴里 I Pari
언더우뜨 I Ŏndŏudŭ
橫濱 I Yŏnghŭng
朝鮮總督府 I Chosŏn Ch'ongdokbu
光文會 I Kwangmunhoe
金枓奉 I Kim Tu-bong
李奎榮 I I Kyuyŏng
權悳奎 I Kwŏn Tŏk-kyu
啓明俱樂部 I Kyemyŏng Kurakbu
崔南善 I Ch'oe Namsŏn
李允宰 I I Yunjjae
鄭寅普 I Chŏng Inbo
林圭 I Im Kyu
卞榮魯 I Pyŏn Yŏngno
韓澄 I Han Ch'ŏng
上海 I Sanghae
李常春 I I Sangch'un
開城 I Kaesŏng
朝鮮語辭典編纂會 I Chosŏnŏ Sajŏn P'yŏnjiphoe



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮語辭典과 朝鮮人
필자	李克魯
기사형태	논설

朝鮮語辭典과 朝鮮人
						李克魯
우리 朝鮮에는 모든 方面이 다 荒蕪地라할수잇다 그러나그가온대에도 朝鮮語方面에는 더욱 開拓 못된 荒蕪地다 우리가 쓰는 우리의말이퍽만컷마는 누가 그것을 한번 調査하야보앗는가 海邊漁民에게서 들어보라 모든 물고기와 모든 조개들의 이름이다잇으며 窮鄕■村에 사는 椎童牧竪에게서들오보라 우리가 普通모르는물, , 나무이름을 얼마나 알게되는가 이모든 말은 다그들의 헉끄테만 돌아다니고 이죽감이것는 學術的말이 되지못하얏다.＜156＞
다른 自然科學이나 工藝가남보다 뒤떨어진것을 그러케부끄러운것은 아니다 그러나 無史幾萬年과 有史四五千年에 한곳에서 文化生活을하야오는 一大民族으로 自己의 뜻을 通하고 一般文化의 基礎가되는 말하나를 整理못하고 살아오는것은 참아 남의압헤 얼골을 들지못할부끄럼이 아니라 할수업다 어느사람은 한번 酒席에서 某國人에게서『너이는 字典도 한권 업는것들이 무슨 큰소리냐!』하는 侮辱을 當하고 字典事業에 奮鬪하기로 決心하얏다한다 執筆者도 年前에 伯林大學에서 四年間 朝鮮語講座를 맛타볼때에 朝鮮語標準字典이 업서서 참아 못當할 苦痛과 羞恥를 어찌 한두사람만 當하얏으리오 얼골 가죽이 두텁어서 부끄럼은 업슬는지 모르지만는 누구나 글슬때에 苦痛은 다잇스리라고 생각한다 보라 저 蒙古沙漠에서 遊牧하는 蒙古族에게도 白頭山森林속에서 狩獵하는 滿洲族에게도 여러 百年동안 써오는 標準字典이 잇다.
新羅에 群聽이 吏讀文으로써 或朝鮮말을 썻스며 李朝에 世宗大王이 朝鮮文字를 만들어 朝鮮말을 記錄케하시매 經傳과 其他多少의 諺解가낫스며 或創作도 잇엇스나 그때에도 辭典은 만들지못하얏다 그뒤에는 더욱 數千年동안에 漢文威力에 壓伏된 無知한 무리는 朝鮮語開拓에는도 지 못하얏다 처음에 佛蘭西 宣敎師들이 天主敎를 傳하려 朝鮮에와서 朝鮮말을 배호게되매 그 副産物로 그들의손에서 韓佛字典이 一八八〇年에 巴里에서 出版되엿고 其後一八九〇年에 英人 언더우뜨 의 韓英字典이 橫濱에서 出版되엇고 大正九年에 朝鮮總督府에서 朝鮮語辭典을 出版하얏다 이우에 말한것은 다 外人이 朝鮮語를 배호랴고 만든 冊이다 그러니 朝鮮사람이 朝鮮말을 배호고저 쓴 字典은 아즉 하나도 出版되지 못하얏다 그러나 우리도 勞力을 아니하는것은 아니다 十七八年前에 光文會에서 金枓奉, 李奎榮, 權悳奎諸氏가 朝鮮語辭典編纂에 着手하야 多年勞力하얏스며 三年前에 啓明俱樂部에서 崔南善, 李允宰, 鄭寅普, 林圭, 卞榮魯, 韓澄諸氏가 同一한 事業에 勞力하얏고 上海의 金枓奉氏가 六七年來에 數萬語彙를 蒐集하얏스며 開城의 李常春氏가 亦是 數多의 語彙를 蒐集하얏다한다 그러나 아즉 出版되지 못하얏스니 말할것도 업소 外人이 만든 그것들도 多少의 語彙를 刊行함에 不過하고 참 標準字典이라고 말하기는 어렵다.
우리의 辭典編纂은 다른나라에서 그것과 다른 點이잇다 다른나라 에서는 이미 標準語와 綴字法이 定하야젓슴으로 所用에딸하서 字典內容만 伸縮하야 編纂할뿐이지만은 우리말은 아즉 모든 것이 定하야지지 못하야슴으로 어느때에나 統一이되어서 權威잇는 標準字典이 나야될것이다 그러자면 적어도 統一機關을 特設하여야 되겟다 그러므로 우리는 이번에 朝鮮語辭典編纂會를 組織하게된것이다 우리의 事業은 決斷코 첫거름부터 걸어가는것이아니오 여러 先輩들의 二十年來에 努力하야 오는 積功을 總決算하자함이며 數多의 權威로부터 一大權威를새우자하는것이다.＜157＞
＜156-157＞