별건곤 제24호
December 01, 1929
한글의 起源 (The Origin of Hangeul) (Essay)
金允經 (Kim Yun-gyŏng)

Regarding the origin of Hangeul

Kim Yun-gyŏng

When Chŏng In-ji himself, who added detailed explanations and examples to the Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音) when it was promulgated, said, "The form of the Chŏngŭm was not based on anything, but was created naturally," it means that Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音) did not imitate any other script at all. Comparing it with any script, ancient or modern, Eastern or Western, it is clear that there is nothing identical to Hunmin Chŏngŭm. Of course, as we all know well, it is clear from documents and the scientific organization of Hunmin Chŏngŭm itself that various countries' scripts and existing scripts were consulted when painstakingly researching Hunmin Chŏngŭm. Mr. Chŏng In-ji's saying "The shape of the letters imitates ancient seal script (古蒃)" is ultimately just referring to one aspect of the reference. No matter how much it is said that "the letters imitate ancient seal script," it is not the same as ancient seal script. Rather, it has similarities to Sanskrit, but if one thinks it was made in imitation of Sanskrit, it is also similar to hyangchal (鄕札), that is, ancient script, which is described as "resembling continuous Sanskrit writing (似梵書連布)." The fact that it has similarities to various scripts in this way is evidence that various scripts were consulted, and at the same time, the fact that it is not identical to any of them is evidence that it was not imitated from just one script. However, in the past, many scholars, both internal and external, have advocated their own origin theories according to their own views. I will introduce some of the important ones below.

1. Ancient Seal Script (古蒃) Origin Theory. This is based on Chŏng In-ji's preface, "The letters imitate ancient seal script (字倣古蒃)," and it has been the most commonly circulated theory. The authors of "Tongguk Munhŏn Pigo (東國文獻備考)" (which Hŏng Pong-han and others compiled under the order of King Yŏngjo in 1770, consisting of thirteen sections; later, Yi Man-un supplemented it with seven more sections under the order of King Chŏngjo, making it twenty sections, but it was not published; still later, Pak Yong-dae and others corrected and deleted it under the order of Emperor Kojong, resulting in sixteen sections), Ungt’ing Yi Tŏk-mu (雄亭 李德懋) (author of Angyŏpki (盎葉記), died in 1793), and Dr. Gale (who discussed it in the English magazine "The Korea") are all supporters of this theory. However, Ch’oe Nam-sŏn said about this, "It is not that it imitated ancient seal script, but that it resembles ancient seal script" (in his article "Facts of World History in Korean History" in the Tonga Ilbo (東亞日報)), and An Kwak said about this, "It is merely an implication that it should be revered in the same way as Chinese characters (漢文) because it was made in relation to Chinese characters, and it does not truly mean that it imitated Chinese characters" (in his article "The Origin of Ŏnmun (諺文)" in Tonggwang (東光)), and Chŏng In-ji himself, who said "The letters imitate ancient seal script," also said "The form of the Chŏngŭm was not based on anything (正音之體無所祖述)" (in his preface), and Ch’oe Malli and others, who submitted a memorial opposing the promulgation of Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音), said "The vulgar script (諺文) all derives from ancient letters (古字), with no real basis (黨日諺文皆本古字, 實無所據)" (in the Sejong Sillok (世宗實錄)). From various points of view, I think this theory has weak foundations. Only if we view this "ancient letter (古字)" or "ancient seal script (古蒃)" as the ancient script of Korea can it be interpreted without any contradictions.

2. Sanskrit Origin Theory. However, doubts about the aforementioned ancient seal script origin theory arose in later generations, and based on the structure of Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音), the Sanskrit origin theory was advocated. Sŏng Hyŏn (成俔) (a poet during King Sŏngjong’s reign, died in the literati purges of Yŏnsan), the author of Yongjae Ch’onghwa (慵齋叢話), said, "Its letterforms are based on Sanskrit, and it is universally and without hindrance able to record the sounds and letters of our country and various other countries that could not be recorded," and Yi Su-gwang (李晬光) (a person from the reigns of King Sŏnjo and Kwanghaegun), the author of Jibong Yuseol (芝峯類說), said, "The shapes of our country's vulgar script (諺書) entirely imitate Sanskrit, beginning in the reign of King Sejong, when a bureau was established to create it, and the skill of creating the letters truly comes from calculation. The vulgar script (諺書) having emerged, there is no language of any country that cannot be communicated; this is something that only a sage could accomplish." However, Mr. Sŏng Hyŏn did not state any reasons, and Mr. Yi Su-gwang not only did not state any reasons, but also made contradictory statements, saying "entirely imitate Sanskrit (全倣梵字)" while also saying "the skill of creating the letters truly comes from calculation (制字之巧, 實自容算云)." Furthermore, Ban Nobutomo (伴信友), the author of Kajihonmatsu (假字本末), wrote, "In a private record, it is seen that its letterforms are quite similar to Sanskrit, but the meaning of the letters is not clear as to what they are based on," but regarding the statement in Yongjae Ch’onghwa (慵齋叢話) that "Ŏnmun (諺文) is based on Sanskrit (依梵字爲之)," if idu (吏讀) were originally made in imitation of Sanskrit, then the new letters made by the group of Sŏksŏk would naturally resemble Sanskrit as well. However, this is confusing idu (吏讀), which had been used since the early Three Kingdoms period, with "Ŏnmun (諺文)" (Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音)), which was promulgated in the 28th year of King Sejong's reign. The "based on Sanskrit (依梵字爲之)" in Yongjae Ch’onghwa (慵齋叢話) refers to Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音), not idu (吏讀). The "new letters (新字)" that were supposedly created in the 11th year of Emperor Tenmu's reign (683 AD), as stated in the Nihon Shoki (日本書紀), "ordered Kyōgube no Muraji Iwashiro and others to gather and create a new set of letters, consisting of one section of forty-four volumes," cannot have imitated Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音), which was created in 1446 (whether they actually exist is a separate question), which is fundamentally contradictory. However, in a general sense, Ban Nobutomo can be considered one of the people who agreed with the Sanskrit origin theory of Korean letters, as he stated that the Japanese letters, which were made in imitation of Korean letters, must also have imitated Sanskrit. Furthermore, Mokushō Chitoku (墨井治德) also said, "Even if the design of the letter shapes is unique to Korea, the system of arrangement imitates the system of arrangement of Sanskrit" (in "About the Origin of the Arrangement System of Ŏnmun (諺文)" in Chosen (朝鮮) No. 135, August 1926), so he can also be considered someone who sees that there is a basis in Sanskrit. Furthermore, T’oegong (Kwŏn Sang-no) also advocated the Sanskrit origin theory ("The Relationship between World Scripts and Buddhism (世界文字와 佛敎의 關係)" in Buddhism (佛敎) No. 49). However, because he asserted that all scripts, including Chinese characters, Mongolian script, Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音), kana, as well as Bohai script, Pali, Burmese, ■Luo script, Sinhalese, Roman script, and Arabic script, that is, all world scripts, are directly or indirectly based on Sanskrit, I think it is too exaggerated. Furthermore, Hwang Yun-sŏk (黃胤錫) (from the reign of King Yŏngjo) also advocated the Sanskrit origin theory, saying, "The origin of the national Hunmin Chŏngŭm (邦訓民正音淵源) is mostly based on this, and ultimately does not go outside the scope of Sanskrit (大抵本此, 而終不出於梵字範圍矣)" (as mentioned in Ŭnhak Ponwŏn (韻學本源)). In any case, these various Sanskrit origin theories are mostly based on superficial comparisons of letter shapes or comparisons of the order of arrangement, and there seems to be weak historical evidence of a direct relationship.

3. Mongolian Script Origin Theory. Yi Ik (李瀷) (a person from the reign of King Sukjong), the author of Sŏngho Sŏlsŏl (星湖傳說), insisted that it was derived from the Mongolian script. He said, "Our Eastern vulgar script (諺字) was created in the reign of King Sejong in the year Pyŏngin, and there is no sound that does not have a letter. This has never happened since the creation of man. During the reign of Emperor Shizu of the Yuan Dynasty, a man named Pasiba created Mongolian letters, which had four tones: rising, level, departing, and entering; and seven initial consonants for the sounds of the lips, tongue, throat, teeth, incisors, and half-incisors. If there was a sound, nothing was left out. Chinese letters are based on shape, so people transmit them with their hands and see them with their eyes. Mongolian letters are based on sound, so people transmit them with their mouths and hear them with their ears. However, if there is no shape at all, how can they be transmitted and not disappear? Now there is no way to see its details. If there is an example of letters that can be used throughout the world, later generations will be of the same type as our vulgar script (諺文). I suspect that there must have been such a method in the early Ming Dynasty. When our country first created it, a bureau was established in the palace, and Chŏng In-ji, Sŏng Sammun, Shin Suk-chu, and others were ordered to compile it. At that time, the scholar of the imperial court, Hwang Ch’an, was exiled to Liaodong for his crimes, and Sammun and others were sent to question him, going back and forth thirteen times. I guess that the fact that the current vulgar script (諺文) is completely different from Chinese letters means that Hwang Ch’an had nothing to do with it. At that time, it had been seventy-nine years since the fall of the Yuan Dynasty, and the matter must not have completely disappeared. What Ch’an transmitted to us is something else. According to the history of King Chungnyŏl, Princess Noguk (公主妬龍) wrote to the Yuan Dynasty in 'Uighur' script, so that people would not understand it. The history says that Shin Hŭng wrote it. In the third year of An Kajŏng, the Uighur country surrendered to Mongolia; it was Tang Gaochang. They lived in Ganzhou, which is the name of a Western Region country, and worshiped Buddhism. Pasiba said that what he transmitted was Buddhism, but if he said that it was commonly used in the world, what other script could the princess have written? In that case, could it be that the current vulgar script (諺字) is different in shape but the same in meaning? Chinese books have more than half of the sounds without letters. Why are there or are there not letters for the various sounds of the lips, tongue, throat, and teeth? The vulgar script (諺文) has fourteen initials, and there are also four cases where there is an initial but no final. These are the so-called entering tones. There is also a tongue sound, and our country also has no letter for it. The four rhymes of chim, t’am, yŏm, and ham are cut in the same way as chin and mun. What we call entering tones do not exist in Chinese; there are only the two letters ŏl and i. The three rhymes of so, hyo, and yu have one letter for two sounds, which is incomprehensible. I suspect that the sounds of Huayin changed completely after the Five Barbarians (五胡) and the Northern Wei Dynasty. There is a sound of Northern Bow (北弓). The customs of our country have many turbid sounds in the west, and this is also true in P’anch’on in the capital. Northern people migrated to Cheju, so their sounds are similar to those of the north. The letters of the Western Regions do not lack any sounds, so in addition to the eight tones and seventeen rhymes below ok (屋沃), there may be no other sounds, and this is what they got from Ch’an. In that case, Pasiba's afterthoughts can be imagined. It can be said that the later generation excelled at it, but its letter shapes have completely disappeared, and only I have distinguished them with one dot or two dots. Letters with one dot all come from the tip of the tongue and are correct sounds, and letters with two dots all come from the tongue and are deflected sounds. The initial examples are now nowhere to be found." He also states that what Sŏng Sammun and others learned from Hwang Ch’an during their thirteen trips to and from Liaodong was not related to Chinese characters but to the Mongolian script. Furthermore, Dr. Shiratori Kurakichi also advocated the Pasiba script origin theory of Mongolia, but I have heard that recently he has come to advocate that its origin lies within Korea. Furthermore, Yu Hŭi (柳僖) (Kungp’yŏnja (弓便子)) also acknowledged the basis in the Mongolian script, saying, "Ŏnmun (諺文), though created in Mongolia, was completed in our East (諺文, 雖剏於蒙古, 而成於我東)" (Ŏnmunji (諺文志)). Furthermore, Yi Nŭng-hwa also said, "The method of pronunciation of Ŏnmun (諺文) all imitates the Mongolian Rhyme Dictionary (蒙古韻會), and questioning Hwang Ch’an was about this. Shin Suk-chu’s preface to Hongmu Chŏng’un (洪武正韻) shows its beginnings. Also, the so-called letterforms of Ŏnmun (諺文) are made in imitation of Sanskrit (字體倣梵字爲之), that is, also the Mongolian script (卽亦蒙古字也). (omitted) Shin Suk-chu was good at the Mongolian language, which allows us to imagine that at that time, Mongolian was still studied, and it is not difficult to think that Ŏnmun (諺文) was a derivative of the Mongolian script (諺文爲蒙字之脫體)" (Buddhist History (佛敎通史), article on the 28th year of King Sejong), thus also agreeing with the Mongolian script origin theory.

4. Sanskrit and Mongolian Script Origin Theory. Dr. Kanazawa Shozaburo is the main proponent of this theory. He said, "Drawing on the examples of Yuan's Pasiba script, they must have sensed the relationship between national independence and national letters. According to recent research, it seems that they based it on the structure of Indian 'Devanagari' and added unique efforts to it to complete it academically... It will be obvious at a glance if you compare the Ŏnmun (諺文) ᅩ(o)ᅮ(u)ᅡ(a)ᆷ(m)ᆼ(v)ᅩ and the Sanskrit ᅩ(o)ᅮ(u)ᅮ(a)ᆷ(m)ᅮ(v)..." (Nihon Hyakka Daijiten (日本百科大辭典)), and later again said, "In my opinion, Ŏnmun (諺文) is based on Sanskrit and Mongolian scripts, with special efforts added, and the author was probably a Buddhist monk. There is a book in Korea called Jin’onjip, which is a collection of dharanis, written in three lines: Sanskrit (楚語, probably a mistake for 梵語), its Chinese transliteration, and the Ŏnmun (諺文) transliteration. Ŏnmun (諺文) was probably newly created by monks as a way to easily show the sounds when teaching the mantras of dharanis. Religion and letters are closely related in many cases, and Mongolian letters were also made by monks. Moreover, the fact that Ŏnmun (諺文) was made using Sanskrit and Mongolian letters as materials further guarantees that opinion. Among the twenty-eight letters of Ŏnmun (諺文), the letters representing vowels were mostly made based on Sanskrit.

Among the letters representing consonants, the numbers are based on either Sanskrit or Mongolian letters."

Since Mongolian letters were also made based on Sanskrit, it is good to see Ŏnmun (諺文) as belonging to the Indian language family in general. However, Ŏnmun (諺文) is not just imitating other people's letters in this way, but has a special structure that has no parallel in world letters. It scientifically classifies sounds, and the letters representing the same type of sound are developed sequentially from the same basic letter..." (Kogogaku Tsūron (國語學通論)). This means that the origin of Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音) is recognized in both Sanskrit and Mongolian scripts. Generally, the Mongolian script was created by Pasiba at the behest of Emperor Shizu of Yuan (1260-1294) because he was worried that his country did not have its own letters. Therefore, the Yuan Dynasty also tried to use this newly created script in documents going back and forth with Goryeo. However, as seen in "In the spring month... on the day of Imsul, the Yuan envoy came, and the king welcomed the decree at Sŏnŭimun, and the text used the newly created Mongolian script, which no one could understand" (refer to the 14th year of King Wonjong's reign in the Goryeosa (高麗史)), its power was weak, so Uighur script was commonly used.

Also, "One day, the princess was jealous of Lady Cho's exclusive favor, and wrote in Uighur script, sending it to Runrun Buqa, a follower. Runrun Buqa betrayed the two people and went to Yuan, reaching the Empress Dowager. Uighur is ancient Huihu. Yuan originally had no letters, and Pasiba first created Mongolian letters, but many letters used back and forth were in Uighur script" (refer to the 89th volume of Goryeosa (高麗史), the article on Princess Suko Daejang of King Chungsŏn's reign), it can be seen that Uighur script was commonly used and the relationship between Uighur script and Mongolian script. The princess in the previous text is a Yuan princess who married King Chungsŏn in the 22nd year of King Chungnyŏl when he was a crown prince in Yuan. In the 24th year, the princess returned to Goryeo from Yuan and, seeing that Lady Cho was monopolizing the king's favor, could not suppress the flames of jealousy and wrote a letter in Uighur script to the Empress Dowager of Yuan to complain. Uighur script is also called Wēi-kāi-zhēn, and Mongolian script is also called T’ie-erh-yüeh-zhēn. In the memorial of Sŏl Chang-su (提調偰長壽) (a descendant of a Uighur naturalized person whose father brought his family to Korea during the Zhizheng era of Emperor Shun of Yuan) in November of the 3rd year of King T’aejo, it is stated, "Those who are proficient in the Mongolian language, can translate texts, and can write calligraphy, and can also write Wēi-kāi script, will be the first class; those who can only write Wēi-kāi script and are also proficient in the Mongolian language, will be of the second class, with the same rank as the former." Also, in the spring article of the 5th year of King Sejong, it is stated, "The Ministry of Rites reports that there are two types of Mongolian script, one is Wēi-kāi-zhēn, and the other is T’ie-erh-yüeh-zhēn. In previous royal decrees and printed books, T’ie-erh-yüeh-zhēn was used, and Wēi-kāi-zhēn was used for regular writing, and neither should be abandoned. Currently, students all study Wēi-kāi-zhēn, and few study T’ie-erh-yüeh-zhēn. From now on, take students in the Mongolian language in the fourth month of each season and test their proficiency in T’ie-erh-yüeh-zhēn, following the example of Wēi-kāi-zhēn."

However, since that is also based on Sanskrit (as the Ming Dynasty person Zhao Bi states in Shimo Cuoben (石墨錯本), the Mongolian script is also a variation of the Brahma Karu script), even if Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音) was made based on the Mongolian script, it ultimately comes down to the Indian language family. For this reason, the main point of this theory is to claim that it is an Indian language family.

The above are the important systematic origin theories. Besides these, there are various claims such as the script origin theory and the Syriac script origin theory and the Japanese kana origin theory, but they are not worth considering. However, in addition to the systematic origin theory, there are also various symbolic origin theories. They are not really worthy of being called origin theories, but since I have already started talking about it, I will introduce them briefly.

1. Pictographic Origin Theory. This is generally based on the idea that Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音) was made by pictographically representing the organs of articulation, such as the teeth, tongue, lips, teeth, and throat. Also, the idea that the letter shapes are images of the gyubyeok circles and curves, and that the dots and strokes are in the style of small seal script and split clerical script, can also be included here. Shin Kyŏng-jun (申景濬) (1692-1781), the author of Hunmin Chŏngŭm Togae (訓民正音圖解), and Kang Wi (姜瑋) (who wrote Kyŏngse Chŏngŭm Tosŏl (經世正音圖說) in the 6th year of King Kojong) are all proponents of this idea. Chi Sŏk-yŏng (池錫永) proposed the original plan of the newly revised Korean language promulgated by the Ministry of Education in July of the 9th year of Emperor Kwangmu, and in his "Explanation of the Pictographic Representation of the Five Sounds (五音象形辨)," he said that "ㄱ (kieok) represents the shape of the teeth (牙音象牙形)" and "ㄴ (nieun) represents the shape of the tongue (舌音象舌形)," thus also advocating this idea. Yi Yun-jae cited the "Pictographic Diagram of the Initial Consonants of Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音初聲象形圖)" ("ㄱ represents the shape of the teeth, ㄴ represents the shape of the tongue, ㄷ represents the shape of the tongue being flicked..."), saying, "From this, we can see that our Chŏngŭm (正音) was not made by following other letters or any shapes, but simply by imitating the shapes of the organs of articulation, such as the teeth, tongue, lips, teeth, and throat" (Tonga Ilbo (東亞日報), October 25, 1927).

2. Musical Theory Origin Theory. This can be viewed as essentially the same as the pictographic tongue theory mentioned above, with only the names being different. The pictographic theory allocates the names of the seven sounds to the organs of articulation, such as the teeth, tongue, lips, teeth, throat, half-tongue, and half-teeth, and says that the letter shapes are made accordingly. However, the musical theory allocates the names of the seven sounds to the names of the musical scales, such as kung, sang, kak, chi, u, pyŏn-chi, and pyŏn-kung, and says that the letter shapes are symbolically made accordingly. However, just as ㄱ (kieok) of the tooth sound is said to resemble the shape of the teeth but is actually not at all similar, even if ㄴ (nieun) is said to be the chi sound, if you ask why it is the chi sound, you cannot get an answer. In that case, it might be better to say that it was made in response to do, re, mi, fa, sol, la, si of today's most popular Western music. This is thought to be our Eastern dynamic fantasy. Just like the names of the Five Elements, Five Sounds, Five Constants, and Five Directions, if only the numbers happen to be the same, they are forcibly linked and corresponded as if there were some causal relationship, which is nothing more than a product of such a thought. Pak Sŏng-wŏn (朴性源) (1697-1767), the author of Hwadong Chŏngŭm T’ongsŏk Un’go (華東正音通釋韻考) (or Chŏngŭm T’ongsŏk (正音通釋)), published in 1787, explained the Five Sounds and Initial Consonants as "Kak (tooth sound) ㄱ(k) ᄏ(k’) ᆼ(ng), Chi (tongue sound) ᆮ(t) ᇀ(t’) ᆫ(n), Pyŏn-chi (half-tongue sound) ᄅ(l) (Hongmu Hall made it half-chi half-tongue), Sang (teeth sound) ᆨ(s) ᆾ(s’) ᆺ(s), U (lip sound) ᄇ(p) ᄑ(p’) ᄆ(m) ᅀ, (ho throat sound) ᄋ(ng) ᄒ(h) Pyŏn-gung (half-throat sound) △ (Hongmu Hall made it half-chi half-chi)." Also, in the explanation of "Seven Sounds of Voice (from Wŏn’yŭm T’ongsŏk (元音通釋))," it is said, "Kak is a tooth sound, the sound comes out to the teeth, the tongue shrinks and leaps, the teeth spread and the lips bravely kiss, passing through the round, solid mold, coming out smoothly in front. Chi is a tongue sound, the sound comes out to the tongue, the teeth close and the lips open, slowly and leisurely returning, rising with alternating vibrations, coming out from below. Sang is a teeth sound, the sound comes out to the teeth, the mouth opens widely, rising and returning to the center, firmly and strongly, though it comes out, it remains. U is a lip sound, the sound comes out to the lips, the teeth open and the lips and throat, closing the mouth and passing through, large and heavy, the tongue is in the center, going straight up from the inside. Pyŏn-chi is a half-tongue sound, opening the mouth and exhaling, half resounding on the tongue, and the tongue sticks, rising backward to the throat, and the throat dances. Pyŏn-hu is a half-throat sound, aligning the teeth and exhaling, the sound starts in the throat, and the throat is still, lightly coming out of the throat, and the tongue shakes." The Tongguk Munhŏn Pigo (東國文獻備考), as mentioned earlier, seems to advocate the ancient seal script theory (古篆說) by saying "imitating ancient seal script (倣古篆)," but in its music section, it says, "I humbly think that the Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音) of King Sejong's reign exhausted the sounds of the lips, teeth, throat, and tongue, fulfilled the melodies of kung, sang, kak, chi, and u, and exhausted the changes of clear and turbid, high and low, all of which were promoted as the beginnings of music, to truly adorn the dialect, so it is both not music and music, therefore, it is attached after the music section," so it can also be considered to belong to the musical theory origin theory. Furthermore, An Kwak also repeatedly contributed articles under the titles "The Origin of Ŏnmun (諺文)" or "The Source of Ŏnmun (諺文)" (Sidae Ilbo (時代日報), May 13, 1925, Chosŏn Sahak (朝鮮史學) No. 1, Tonggwang (東光) No. 6, etc.), saying, "Regarding what the foundation of the self-organization lies in, I say that it abstracts and draws music, which is a beautification of natural truth, so that it matches the adjustment points in pronunciation. In other words, the origin of Ŏnmun (諺文) is musical abstraction," which can be said to be joining this idea.

3. Twenty-Eight Mansions Origin Theory. This is not really worthy of being called a separate view, but Hong Ryang-ho (洪良浩) boldly concluded in the preface to his book Kyŏngse Chŏngŭm Tosŏl (經世正音圖說) that "Our Great King Sejong created the twenty-eight letters of Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音) to correspond to the number of the constellations (以應列宿之數)," meaning that the twenty-eight letters were made in response to the twenty-eight mansions. However, he then says, "And the letter shapes are images of the gyubyeok circles and curves, and the dots exhaust the style of small seal script and split clerical script (而字形則奎璧圓曲之象, 點盡則小篆分隷之體)," which seems to be saying either the pictographic theory or the Chinese character theory, so it is very ambiguous as an origin theory.

I have roughly examined the various origin theories above. Finally, what I want to say is that the origin of Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音) lies in ancient letters. These ancient letters are the ancient letters that are expressed in various names in the literature, such as the Samhwang Naemun, Shinji Bisa Mun, Wangmun Munjja, Kakmok Mun, P’yonmok Sŏmun, Paekche Mun, Hyangchal, Bohai Mun, and Goryeo Mun, but the exact actual content of what they were like has not been transmitted. Of course, even if clear verification is insufficient to draw a conclusion yet, it can be said to have more clarity compared to all the aforementioned origin theories. That is because

1. As examined earlier, even if it is difficult to see the actual content of ancient letters clearly, the fact that letters existed in ancient times is an undeniable fact.
2. As Shin Kyŏng-jun states in the preface to Hunmin Chŏngŭm Togae (訓民正音圖解), "The East had old commonly used letters, but their numbers were incomplete, and their shapes had no rules, so they were not enough to express one dialect, but they were enough to serve one region (東方舊有俗用文字, 而其數不備, 其形無法, 不族以形一方言, 而備一方之用也)," so a part of the incomplete ancient letters was transmitted to that era (he was a person from the reign of King Yŏngjo).
3. Regarding the P’yŏngyang Pŏpsu Bridge inscription excavated in February 1583, it is said, "There is an ancient stele at the P’yŏngyang Pŏpsu Bridge, which is neither Ŏnmun (諺文), nor Sanskrit, nor seal script, and no one can understand it," and also "In February 1583, a stone stele buried at the Pŏpsu Bridge was excavated and examined, and it was broken into three pieces. The stele inscription was not clerical script, but looked like Sanskrit, and some say that it was written by Shinji during the time of Tangun, but it was lost due to the passage of time (歲久遺失)" (P’yŏngyangji (平壤誌)), thus proving that the ancient letters were neither Ŏnmun (諺文), nor seal script, nor Sanskrit, nor clerical script, and also "Hyangchal (鄕札) resembles continuous Sanskrit writing (似梵書連布)" (Transmission of the Great Master Gyunyŏ of the reign of King Shindŏk of Goryeo), thus proving that hyangchal (鄕札) (that is, ancient letters) is similar to Sanskrit, and now Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音) also has similarities to Sanskrit enough to advocate the Sanskrit origin theory, so the fact that ancient letters and Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音) are similar to each other is proven.
4. Haengji (行智) (a monk of Mt. Hiei, the second son of Fujiwara Takanobu) states in his Hunsŏk Ŏnmunhae (訓釋諺文解) (which is cited in T’oegong’s article in Buddhism No. 49, but since there is only Kajimeiyō Koei (假名遣古意) in July 1893 as Haengji's writing, there hasn’t been opportunity to view it, so it is left with a question), "This script has two forms, ancient and modern. The ancient form has been transmitted since the initial creation of the Three Han Kingdoms. The modern form is the ancient script that was revised during the reign of King Sejong of the Joseon Dynasty. Now, the ancient script of that country has lost its transmission, and only the modern script is used. The ancient script also has two forms, one is ■■■■■■■, and the other is ■■■■■■■. Goryeo molded the Yuan Dynasty T’ongbo coins with the character ■ on the back, which is like the modern character 오 (o), and the relics of the previous generation can be seen for real," thus proving that the modern script is a revision of the ancient script since the Three Han Kingdoms.
5. The "If the vulgar script (諺文) all derives from ancient letters (古字), and is not a new script, then, although the letter shapes imitate ancient seal script, the meaning of combining the letters is completely contrary to the ancient script" in the memorial against Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音) by Ch’oe Malli and others and the "The letters imitate ancient seal script (字倣古篆)" in Chŏng In-ji’s preface should be interpreted as our ancient letters, not as ancient Chinese characters or ancient seal script, and only then will there be no contradictions with the aforementioned items, and the meaning of imitating the ancient seal script that is difficult to reconcile becomes reasonable.

Due to these reasons, I have come to agree that Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音) was made based on ancient letters, with further in-depth academic research and reference to the letters of various countries added to it. Kwŏn Tŏk-kyu also concluded, giving similar reasons, "The creation period of Joseon letters was during the Silla Dynasty or the early Goryeo Dynasty, and the creation was clearly before Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音), so King Sejong and various scholars only had the merit of correcting the sounds and promulgating them to the people with national power. However, the revival of Joseon letters is entirely due to King Sejong, and if it were not for King Sejong's reign, the so-called Chŏngŭm (正音) would not have been possible, so King Sejong's reign is a great light in our cultural history as a saint who completed Joseon letters." However, no matter what Hunmin Chŏngŭm (訓民正音) was made based on, there will be no change in the glory of Sejong's creation and invention, which goes without saying. If the honor of creation and invention is taken away by saying that it was made based on something, then today's creators, inventors, and discoverers of many arts and sciences would all have to abandon their honors. The reason for


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	한글의 起源
필자	金允經
기사형태	논설

한글의 起源
						金允經
訓民正音을 發布할때에 그것에 對한 仔細한 解釋과 凡例를 더한 鄭麟趾自身이『正音之體, 無所祖述而成於自然』이라고함과가티 訓民正音이 다른 文字를 模倣한것은 도무지안임니다. 이것은 古今東西의 어느 文字와 比較하여보던지 訓民正音과 同一한것은 업는것을 보아도 明白한일이외다. 無論 우이의잘알고잇는대로 訓民正音을 苦心硏究함에 當하여 各國의 文字라던지 在來의文字를 參考하엿다는것은 文獻에 依하던지 訓民正音自體의 科學的組織으로 보던지 明白한일이외다. 鄭麟趾氏『魚形而字倣古蒃』이라한것도 結局慘苦의 一端을 말함에 不過한것임니다. 아무리『字倣古蒃』이라하엿서도 古蒃과는 갓지안이하고 돌이어 梵字와 비슷함이잇스며 그럿타고 梵字에 模倣하여 만들은것인가 생각하면 한『似梵書連布』라고한 鄕札 卽古代文字와 비슷함이잇슴니다. 이와갓치 여러 文字와 비슷한 點이 잇는것은 여러文字를 참고하엿다는것을 證據하는 同時에 한 그어느것과도 同一함이 업다는 點은 어느 한文字만에 模倣함이 안인것을 證據하는것이외다. 그러하나 古來로 內外의 多數學者들은 自己의 보는바에딸아 各各自家의 起源說을 主唱하엿슴니다. 다음에 그 重要한 것을 몃만 紹介하겟슴니다.
一, 古蒃起源說. 이것은 鄭麟趾氏의 序文中의『字倣古蒃』에 根據한것으로서 從來 가장 普通으로 돌아댕기던것임니다.『東國文獻備考』의 著者들(英祖四十六年＜158＞卽西曆一七七○年에 洪鳳漢들이 命令을밧들어 編撰한 것인데 十三考로되엿섯고 正祖時李萬運이 命令을밧들어 增補하되 七考를더하여 二十考로하엿스나 刊行되지못하엿섯고 高宗皇帝때 朴容大들이 命令을 밧들어 校正刪削한 結果 十六考로되엿슴)과 雄亭 李德懋(盎葉記著者, 正祖十七年癸丑歿)와 께일 博士(Dr. J. S. Gale. 英文誌 “The Korea”에 論하엿다고함) 들은 다 이學說에 左租한이들이외다. 그러하나 崔南善氏는 이에 對하여『古蒃에 倣하엿다는것이 아니고 古蒃에 비슷하다는 말이라』(丙寅元朝號 東亞日報『朝鮮史上世界的事實』第二回) 하고 安廓氏는 이에 對하여『漢文과 關係잇게 만들은것인 故로 漢文과 同樣으로 尊崇하여라하는 暗示에 不過하는 文句요 참말로 漢字를 模倣하엿다는것은 아니라』(丙寅十月 東光第六號 『諺文의 出處』)하고 『字倣古蒃』이란말을한 鄭麟趾自身도『正音之體無所祖述』(序文中)이라하고 訓民正音發布를 反對하여 上疏한 崔萬理들도『黨日諺文皆本古字, 實無所據』(世宗實錄)라하엿슴니다. 여러 가지 點으로 보아서 이 學說은 根據가 薄弱하다고 생각함니다. 이『古字』或은『古蒃』을 朝鮮古代의 文字라고 보고야 비로소 前後矛盾이업시 解釋될ㅅ것이라고 생각함니다.
二, 梵字起源說. 그러한데 前記古蒃起源說에 對하여는 後世에 疑問을 품ㅅ게되고  訓民正音의 構造로보아서 梵字起源說을 主唱하게되엿슴니다. 慵齋叢話의 著者成俔(成宗詩人, 燕山朝士禍歿)은『其字體依梵字爲之本國及諸國語音文字所不能記者, 悉通無礙』라하고 芝峯類說의 著者 李晬光(宣祖及光海時人)은『我國諺書字樣全倣梵字, 始於世宗朝, 設局撰出, 而制字之巧, 實自容算云, 夫諺書出而萬邦語音無不可通者, 所謂非聖人不能之』라함이 이것이외다. 그러하나 成俔氏의말에는 理由를 말하지안이하엿고  李晬光氏의말에는 理由를 말하지안이할뿐안이라『全倣梵字』라고 하면서『制字之巧, 實自容算云』이라한 前後矛盾의말을하엿슴니다.  假字本末의 著者 伴信友는『私記에 其字頗似梵字, 未詳字義所准據라고 보이지만은 저 叢話에 諺文을 依梵字爲之라고함에 對하여 우에말함가티 吏讀은 原來梵字에 模倣하여 만들은것인즉 石積의무리가 만들은 新字도 吏讀에 본밧앗다하면 이것도 自然梵字와가틀터라』고하엿스나 이것은 三國初期以來로 使用하여온 吏讀과 李朝世宗二十八年에 發布된「諺文」(訓民正音)과를 混同한것임니다. 慵齋叢話의『依梵字爲之』는 訓民正音에 對하여 이른것이요 吏讀에 對하여 이른것은 안이외다. 日本書紀 天武天皇十一年條에『命境部連石積等, 更聚俾造新字一部四十四卷』이라한 武天十一年(西曆六八三年)에 만들엇다는 新字(그 有無는 別問題로하고)가 世宗二十八＜159＞年(西曆一四四六年)에 만들은 訓民正音에 模倣하엿다는것은 根本으로 矛盾임니다. 그러하나 大體의 意味에서 朝鮮文字는 梵字에 模倣하여 만들엇다는말에 贊成하여서 朝鮮文字에 模倣하여만들은 日本文字도 한 梵字에 模倣하엿슬것이라고 한말인 故로 伴信友도 訓民正音의 梵字起源說을 贊成한 한사람이라할만한것이외다  墨井治德氏도『字形考案은 朝鮮固有의것이라할지라도 組立法은 梵字組立法을 模倣한것이라』(大正十五年八月『朝鮮』百三十五號『諺文組立法の起源に就いて』)한 故로 亦是 梵字에 根據함이 잇다고 보는 한사람이라하겟슴니다.  退耕(權相老)氏도 梵字起源說을 主張하엿슴니다(『佛敎』第四十九號『世界文字와 佛敎의 關係』). 그러하나 氏눈 漢字, 蒙古字, 訓民正音, 假名은 勿論이고 渤海字, 巴利文, 緬甸字, ■羅字, 錫蘭字, 羅馬字, 아라비아字들의 모도가, 卽世界文字가다 直接間接으로 梵字에 根據한것이라고 斷言한이만치 넘우 誘張的이라고 생각됨니다.  黃胤錫(英祖朝人)도『邦訓民正音淵源, 大抵本此, 而終不出於梵字範圍矣』라고하여 역시 梵字起源說을 主張하엿슴니다(韻學本源에말한바). 엇지하엿던지 이여러 梵字起源說은 대개 外觀上字形의 比較 或은 排列順序의 比較에 根據를 둔것이고 直接關係잇다는 史蹟의 根據는 薄弱한것갓슴니다.
三, 蒙古字起源說. 星湖傳說의 著者 李瀷(肅宗時人)은 蒙古字에서 脫靴하여된것이라고 力說하엿슴니다.『我東諺字 創於世宗朝丙寅, 凡有音者莫불有字, 人■蒼■以來未始有也, 元世祖時 巴思八者得佛氏道敎制蒙古字, 上平去入四聲之韻兮, 唇舌喉齒牙半齒之七音之母字, 苟有其音者, 一無所遺, 凡中國之字以形爲主, 故人以手傳而目視也, 蒙字以聲爲主, 故人以口傳而而聽也, 然全無其形又何能傳而不泯, 今無以得見其祥, 若者例爲文字, 可以通行於天下, 後世與我之諺文同科, 意者明初必有其法也, 我國之始制也, 設局禁中, 命鄭麟趾成三問申叔舟等撰定, 時皇朝學士 黃瓚罪謪遼東, 使三問等往質, 凡往返十三度云, 以意臆之, 今諺文與中國字絶異, 瓚何與焉, 是時元亡綴七十九年, 其事必有未泯者, 瓚之所傳於我育, 外此更無其物也, 按高鹿忠烈王時, 公主妬龍作畏吾兒子達于元, 欲人之不曉也, 史云回體書于愼行云, 安嘉定三年畏吾兒國降於蒙古, 唐高昌也, 居甘州卽西域國名而奉佛敎者也, 巴思八所傳旣云佛敎, 而云世之通行則公主之所作字非此而何, 然則與今諺字不過形別而意同者歟, 凡中國書有音而無字者過半凡唇舌喉齒開口淸濁隨口異聲, 何故或有或無, 今諺反切凡十四母, 其有母而無切亦四條, 所謂入聲也, 其舌帖上■一條我國亦無字, 侵覃鹽咸四韻與眞文同切, 我所謂入聲中國無有, 只有兒二兩字, 其蕭爻尤三韻一字二音, 此不可曉也, 意者五胡以後歷元魏, 華音盡變, 北弓之音有然者耶, 邦俗西邊多濁聲, 都中泮村亦然, 北民移濟州, 故其音與北＜160＞相類, 可以爲驗, 西域之字無音不備, 則屋沃以下八聲十七韻外恐更別無其音, 而其得於瓚者如此, 然則巴思八之餘意又可想, 可謂後出瀷工, 但其字形全沒意我惟以一點二點爲別, 一點者皆出於舌端爲正音, 二點者皆出於舌, 右傍偏音也, 其初凡例今無可考』라고 하여 그는 成三問들이 遼東에 十三次나 往復하면서 黃瓚에게 배운것이 漢字에 關한것이안이고 蒙古字에關한것이엿다고함이외다.  白鳥庫吉博士도 蒙古의 巴思八字起源說을 主唱하엿섯스나 近境에는 그 起源이 朝鮮안에잇다고 主唱하게되엿다고함을 側聞하엿슴니다.  柳僖(弓便子)氏도『諺文, 雖剏於蒙古, 而成於我東』(諺文志)이라고 하여 蒙古字에 基因함을 是認하엿슴니다.  李能和氏도『諺文發音之法, 皆倣蒙古韻會, 質問黃瓚者卽此也, 申叔舟洪武正韻序見其端緖矣, 又所謂諺文文字體倣梵字爲之者, 卽亦蒙古字也,(中略) 申叔舟善蒙古語, 卽此可以想見當時, 尙修蒙語而諺文爲蒙字之脫體, 不難思也』(佛敎通史世宗二十八年條)라하여 亦是蒙古字起源說을 贊成하엿슴니다.
四, 梵字及蒙古字起源說. 金澤庄三郞博士도 이 學說의 主人公임니다. 氏는『元의巴思(Pagsna) 文字들의 例에 徵하여 國家의 獨立과 國字와의 關係도늣기엇을것이며 最近硏究에 依하면 印度『데나아기리』(Devanagarl)의 組織에 본밧아 數箇의 梵字를 基礎로하고 여긔에 獨特한 工夫를 더하여 學術的으로 完成한것갓다.……諺文中의 數箇의 梵字를 模倣하엿다는것은 諺文 ᅩ(o)ᅮ(u)ᅡ(a)ᆷ(m)ᆼ(v)ᅩ와 梵字 ᅩ(o)ᅮ(u)ᅮ(a)ᆷ(m)ᅮ(v)들을 對照하여보면 一目瞭然할ㅅ것이라.……』(日本百科大辭典)고하고 그뒤 다시『나의생각에는 諺文은 梵字와 蒙古字들에 基礎하여 다시 特別한 工夫를더한것으로서 作者는아마 佛徒엿스리라고 생각한다 朝鮮에 眞言集이라는 陀羅尼를 모은 冊이잇는데 楚(梵의잘못일ㅅ것임)語와 그 漢字의 音譯과 諺文의 音譯의 세줄로 나란이쓴것이다. 諺文은 이가티 僧侶가 陀羅尼들의 呪文을 가르칠 境遇에 그 音을 容易히 보이어줄 方便으로서 새로 만들어낸것이리라고 생각된다. 宗敎와 文字는 만흔 境遇에 밀접한 關係가잇서서 蒙古文字들도 僧侶의 손으로된것이다. 그뿐안이라 諺文이 梵字며 蒙古字를 材料로하여 만들엇다는것은저 一層그 意見을 保證한다. 諺文二十八字중 母音을 表하는 文字는 대개 梵字에 본밧아 만들은것이고.

子音을 表하는 文字中 數字는 或은 梵字 或은 蒙＜161＞古文字에 본뜬 것이다.

蒙古文字도 梵字를 본밧아만들은 文字인 故로 諺文은 大體에잇서서 印度系의 文字屬한다보아도 좃타. 그러하나 諺文은 다만 이가티 남의 文字를 模倣만한것이안이고 世界文字中에 類例가 업는 特種의 構造를가지고잇다. 그것은 聲音을 科學的으로 分類하여서 同種類의 聲音을 表하는 文字는 同一의 基礎文字에서  順次로 發達하게한것이다.……』(國語學通論)라고 하엿다. 이것은 卽訓民正音의 基源을 梵字와 蒙古字의 兩方에 認定한것이외다. 大槪蒙古字는 元의 世祖(西曆一二六〇-一二九四)가 自國에 固有한 文字 업슴을 걱정하여 巴思八이란 者로하여금 回鶻文字를 基礎로하여 만들게한것이외다. 그리하여 元나라는 高麗와 往復하는 文書들에도 이 新制文字를 使用하려고한것임니다. 그러하나(春正月……壬戌, 元使래來, 王迎詔于, 宣義門, 其文用新制蒙古字, 人無識者』(高麗史元宗十四年條參照)라고 보임과가티 그 勢力이 微弱하엿던 때문에 普通으로는 回鶻文字가 使用된것임니다.
一公主妬趙妃專寵, 作畏吾兒字, 書付隨從潤潤不花, 潤潤反二人, 如元, 達于皇太后, 畏吾兒古回鶻也, 元古無字, 八思巴 始制蒙古字, 然往來書多用畏吾兒字』(高麗史卷八十九 忠宣王蘇國大長公主條參照)라고 함을 보아도 回鶻文字가 普通으로 使用된일과 回鶻文字와 蒙古文字의 關係를 엿볼ㅅ수잇는것임니다. 前文의 公主란것은 元나라 公主ㄴ데 忠烈王二十二年에 忠宣王이 世子로서 元에 잇슬때 그公主에게 장가들엇든바 同二十四年에 公主가元에서 高麗에 돌아오아 趙妃의 寵愛獨占함을보고 猜忌의 불ㅅ길이일믈 抑制하지못하여 곳 畏吾兒(回鶻)字로 片紙를 쓰어서 元의 皇太后에게 보내어 呼訴한것이업슴니다. 回鶻文字는 偉丌眞, 蒙古字는 帖兒月眞이라고도 이르는것임니다. 李太祖三年十一月司譯院提調偰長壽(回鶻歸化人의 後孫인데 長壽의 父親이 元의 順帝至正年間에 家族을 데리고 朝鮮에 避亂하여옴)의 上書中에(習蒙古語者, 能譯文者, 能寫字樣, 兼寫偉丌字者, 爲第一科, 只能書寫偉丌文字, 幷通蒙古語者, 第二科出身品級同前』이라함이나 世宗五年春條에『禮曹啓, 蒙古字學有二樣, 一日偉丌眞, 二日帖兒月眞, 在前詔書及印書, 用帖兒月眞, 常行文字用偉丌眞, 可不偏廢, 今生徒皆習偉丌眞, 習帖兒月眞者少, 自今四孟朔, 蒙學取才, 竝試帖兒月眞通不通分數, 依偉丌眞例, 從之』라함＜162＞에 因하여삷힐ㅅ수잇는것이외다. 그러하나 그것도 梵字를 依支한것인 故로(明人趙■의 石墨錯本에는 蒙古字法도 다 梵天伽盧書의 變態라고 말하엿슴) 訓民正音이 蒙古字에 根據하여 만들엇다하여도 結局은 印度系의 文字에 歸結된ㅅ것임니다. 이 때문에 이 學說의 要點은 印度系의 文字라 主張하는것이외다.
以上에 들어본것은 系統的起源說의 重要한것임니다 이박게도 書欌文字說이라던가 시리아文字說이라던가 日本假名起源說이라던가 여러 가지 主唱이잇스나 取할만한것은 못되는것임니다. 그러하나 系統的起源說外에 象徵的起源說도 여러 가지잇슴니다. 別로 起源說이라고지 불만한것은 못되나 이미 말하던치니 兼하여조곰 紹介하여두려고함니다.
一, 象形起源說. 이것은 大體로 發音機關인 牙舌唇齒喉들의 象形에 根據하여 訓民正音을 만들엇다고 하는것임니다.  字形은 奎璧圓曲의 象이요 點劃은 小篆分隷의 體라고하는것도 여긔에 屬할만하다하겟슴니다. 訓民正音圖解著者 申景濬(西曆一六九二-一七八一), 經世正音圖說著者 姜瑋(高宗六年著)가튼이들은 다이말의 主張者들이올시다. 池錫永씨은 光武九年七月 學部發布의 新訂國文의 本案을 提議한인데 그 五音象形辨을보면『ㄱ牙音象牙形』이라던가『ㄴ舌音象舌形』이라고하여 이것을 主張한것이며 李允宰氏는 訓民正音初聲象形圖『象牙形, ㄴ象舌形, ㄷ象掉舌形……들의)를 引用하고서「이로써보면 우리 正音은 다른 文字라던가 或은어한 物形에 쫏차만들은 것이 안니고 單純히 사람의 發聲機關인 牙舌唇齒喉의 模樣을 본뜬것임을 알ㅅ것이라」(丁卯十月二十五日東亞日報)고하엿슴니다.
二, 樂理起源說. 이것은 압헤말한 象形舌과 實際는갓고서 名稱만 다름에 不過하다고 보아조흔것임니다 象形說은 七音의 名稱을 發音의 機關인 牙舌唇齒喉半舌半齒에 案配하여 그 字形이 各各된것이라고 하는것이나 樂理說은 七音의 名稱을 音樂의 音階名稱인 宮商角徵羽變徵變宮에 案配하여 그 字形이 象徵的으로 各各된것이라고 함이외다. 그러하나 牙音의ㄱ이 牙形과갓다고는 하엿스되 實際에는 조곰도갓지안이한것과 마찬가지로 ㄴ이 徵音이라하여도 웨徵音이냐고물으면 그 對答은 들을ㅅ수업슴니다. 그럿타하면 오늘가장 盛行되는 西洋音樂의 도, 레, 미, 파, 쏠, 라, 씨, 에 應하여 만들엇다하는 便이 더욱조치안을찌모를것이의다. 이것은 우리 東洋의 力學的空想이라고생각됨니다. 맛치 五行이라던가 五音이라던가 五常이라던가 五方이라던가 이름과가티 다만 數만 偶然히 共通되엿스면 無理히 그것을 連結對應시키어 무슨 因果關係라도 잇는듯이 생각하든것과가튼 思想의 産物에 不過하는것임니다. 正祖十一年(西曆一九八七)에 刊行된 華東正音通釋韻考(或은 正音通釋이라고도함) 著者 朴性源(西曆一六九七-一七六七)＜163＞은 五音, 初聲을 說明하되 角(牙音)ᆨᄏᆼ, 徵(舌音)ᆮᇀᆫ, 變徵(半舌音)ᄅ (洪武館作半徵半), 商(齒音)ᆨᆾᆺ, 羽(唇音)ᄇᄑᄆᅀ, (富喉音)ᄋᄒ 變宮(半喉音)△洪武館作半徵半徵』이라하엿슴니다. 『七音出聲(出元音通釋)』의 說明에 角爲牙音, 聲出至牙, 縮舌而躍, 張齒勇吻, 通圓實模, 平出於前, 徵爲舌音, 聲出至舌, 齒合唇啓, 回漫舒遲, 迭振以起 ,自邪降出. 商爲齒音, 聲出至齒, 口開■張, 騰上歸中, 胡達堅剛, 雖出若留. 羽爲唇音, 聲出至唇, 齒開吻喉, 合口而通, ■大沈雄, 舌則居中, 自內直上. 變徵爲半舌音, 開口發氣, 半響於舌, 而舌帖, 逆升於喉, 而喉舞. 變后爲半喉音, 齊齒發氣, 起聲於喉, 而喉靜, 輕出於喉, 而舌搖.』라하엿슴니다. 東國文獻備考에는 먼저도말한대로『倣古篆』이라고하여 古篆說 을 一邊主張함가티보이나 그 樂考에는『臣謹按世宗朝訓民正音, 極唇齒喉舌之聲, 盡宮商角徵之調, 窮淸濁高下之變, 是皆推作樂之緖餘, 以實飭乎方言, 則蓋非樂而樂也, 故, 附之樂考之後云』이라함을보면한 樂理起說에 屬할만도 한것이외다.  安廓氏도『諺文의 淵源』或은『諺文의 出處』란 題目으로 屢屢히 投稿하여(乙丑五月十三日時代日報, 朝鮮史學第一號, 東光第六號, 其他)『自體組織의 基礎가무엇에잇는가 論者는이에 對하여 自然的至理의 美化物인 音樂을 抽象的으로 그리어내어 發音上 調節點에 相合하도록 한것이라이르노라. 다시말하면 諺文의 起源은 樂理的抽象이라하노라.』라고함도이말에 加擔한것이라불ㅅ것임니다.
三, 二十八宿起源說. 이것은 別로 한 主見을세운것이라고지 불만한것은못되나 洪良浩氏가 그 著書 經世正音圖說의 序에『我世宗大王, 創制訓民正音二十八字, 以應列宿之數』라한것은 二十八字란 二十八이 二十八宿이란 二十八에 應하여 만들은것을 膽大히도 斷案을 나린것임니다. 그러하나 그는 그다음에 『而字形則奎璧圓曲之象, 點盡則小篆分隷之體』라함을보면 或은 象形說 或은 漢字說을 말함과도 가타보이기 때문에 起源說로서는 매우 暖昧한것임니다.
以上으로 여러起源說을 大綱삶히어보왓슴니다. 마주막으로 筆者이밋는바를말하려하는것은 訓民正音起源이 古代文字에잇다함이외다 이古代文字란것은 三皇內文이니 神誌秘詞文이니 王文文字니 刻木文이니 片木書文이니 百濟文이니 鄕札이니 渤海文이니 高麗文이니 하는여러가지 名稱으로 文獻에는 만히 表現되여 文字가 잇섯슴만은 傳하되 그어떤한것이엇던가에 對한 明確한 實際內容은 傳하여주지안이한 그 古代文字를 이름이외다. 이것은 勿論 아직 斷案을 나릴만치 明確한 考證은 不充分하다할지라도 前記 모든起源說에 比한다면 오히려 明確性을 가진것이라고 하겟슴니다. 그것은
一, 前에 考察함과 가티 古代文字가 假令實際內容에잇서서 明確히 보기어렵다하더라도 文字가 古代에 잇섯다는 것만은움측이지못할 事實임과.
二, 申景濬氏가 訓民正音圖解의 序에『東方舊有俗用文字, 而其數不備, 其形無法, 不族以形一方言, 而備一方之用也』라함과가티 不完全은 하지만은 古代＜164＞文字의 一部分이 그 時代(英祖朝人임)지 傳한일과
三, 宣祖十六年癸未(西曆一五八三)二月에 發掘된 平壤法首橋碑文에 對하여『平壤法首橋有古碑, 非諺, 非梵, 非篆, 人莫能曉라』하고 『癸未二月 掘覔石碑之埋于法首橋者, 出而視之則, 折爲三段 碑文, 非隷字, 如梵書樣, 或謂此是壇君時神誌所書云, 歲久遺失』(平壤誌)이라고 하여서 古代文字가 諺文도안이고 篆文도안이고 梵文도안이고 隷字도안임을 證據하여주고 『鄕札, 似梵書連布』(高麗神德王時人大師均如傳)라고하여 鄕札(卽古代文字)이 梵書와비슷함을 證據하여주엇는데 이제 訓民正音도 梵字起源說을 主唱할만치 梵字에 비슷함이잇는 故로 古代文字와 訓民正音은 서로 비슷함이 證明되는일과
四, 行智(叡山僧, 藤原隆能의 二男)가 訓釋諺文解(이것은『佛敎』第四十九號 退耕氏의 論文에서 引用한것인데 行智의 著書로서는 文化六年七月에된『假名遣古意』박게 업슨즉 아즉 參考할겨을이업서 疑問으로둠)에『此文古今二體, 古體則自三韓國初制傳, 今體則李朝世宗時 改削古文 卽今其國古文失其傳, 但行今文, 古文卽今所傳肥人書是也, 古文亦有二體, 一則■■■■■■■等, 一則■■■■■■■等,高麗模鑄元祐通寶背文■字, 如今文오字, 前代遺文, 可以實見』이라고 하여 今文은 三韓以來의 古文을 改削한것임을 證據하는일과
五, 崔萬理들의 訓民正音反對上疏中의『儻日諺文皆本古字, 非新字也則, 字形雖倣古之篆文, 用意合字盡反於古』와 鄭麟趾序文中의『字倣古篆』도 漢字의 古文,
古篆으로 解釋할ㅅ것이안이라 우리의 古文으로 解釋하고서야 前記各項과 矛盾도되지안이하고 갈지안이한 古篆을 模倣하엿다고 한 意味도 合當하게되는일.
들로 因하여 訓民正音은 古代文字를 根據삼아서 거긔다가 더욱깁흔 學術的硏究와 各國文字의 參考를 더하여 만들엇다는것을 首肯하게됨니다. 權悳奎氏도 大同小異한 理由를들어서『朝鮮文의 創造期가 羅朝엿든가 複調엿던가 明白히 그創造는 訓民正音以前에닛는것이니 世宗王은 여러 學者와 함께 그 音을 바르게하여서 國力으로 國民에게 頒布한 功이 잇슬뿐이다. 그러하나 朝鮮文字의 復興은 全혀 世宗王의 功勞니 世宗朝가 업섯더면 所謂正音은되지못하엿을것인즉 世宗朝 朝鮮文을 集大成한 聖人으로서 우리 文化史上에 큰 光彩다』라고 結論하엿슴니다. 그러하나 訓民正音을 무엇에 根據하여만들엇다 할찌라도 世宗의 創作發明의 光榮에는 조곰도 變化가업슬것은 말할ㅅ것도 업슴니다. 만일 무엇에 根據하여만들엇다고하여 創作發明의 名譽를 빼앗긴다하면 오늘날 許多한 藝術이나 科學에 對한 創作家, 發明家, 發見家는 다 그 名譽를 버리지안이하면 안이될터올시다. 웨그러하냐하면 發明이나 發見은 다 先輩의 業蹟을 힘닙지안이하고는 됨이 업는닭이외다.
(參考에 未備한 點 이만으나 時間의 餘裕가업슴으로아직그냥둠을 惠諒하심바라며 敎示를 顧함니다. 十月二十六日＜165＞
＜158-165＞