별건곤 第24號
1929년 12월 01일
民族의 甦生과 體育
徐相天
논설 (Essay)

In 1806, Napoleon's Grand Army defeated the Prussian army at Jena and, passing through Berlin, concluded an alliance with King Friedrich at Tilsit. Napoleon's policy of global ambition was gradually succeeding. On the other hand, Prussia was devastated by France, and the state of affairs in military, economic, industrial, and other aspects was truly dire. Consequently, the courage of the people was disheartened, and the spirit of cooperative unity and patriotic service was diminished, placing the nation at a moment of critical survival. At that time, the patriot Fichte delivered speeches throughout the country under the title "Address to the German Nation," desperately calling for new education to prepare for the recovery war. Among the many patriotic martyrs at the time, figures like Stein emphasized the need to complete military preparations and, in particular, to improve physical education through speeches or written proposals. Facing such a critical moment of survival for Prussia, a man named Friedrich Ludwig Jahn, the founder of German gymnastics, emerged, achieving great success in promoting patriotism through physical education and uniting the German people, leaving a name that would be forever immortalized along with German history. Let us examine the simple biography of this great man, Jahn, who inspired patriotism through physical education and unfolded a new life for his homeland in the face of Prussia's imminent crisis. He was born on August 11, 1778, in a small farming village near Lanz. Until the age of fourteen, he received education from his own father, who was a pastor at the time, instilling in him a beautiful sense of right and wrong and a fervent patriotism towards his homeland. From a young age, he disliked socializing with his peers and enjoyed traveling throughout the country alone, studying the national condition and history. Later, he dropped out of the Köllnische Gymnasium in Berlin and transferred to the Halle Theological Seminary to study theology, which was against his personal preference. He was greatly inspired by reading the chapter "The Necessity of Education Concerning the Struggle of Youth" in the book written by Mr. Mair, and in 1797, he also published and promoted a book titled "Promoting Patriotism for the Prussian People." In 1806, when Napoleon led a large army and invaded Prussia, he abandoned his studies for the sake of his country and headed to Jena to join the army, but it was too late to participate. Witnessing the tragic state of the Prussian army's defeat near Jena, the extreme outrage and sorrow turned the hair of the twenty-nine-year-old youth white overnight. Afterwards, in 1810, he published a book called "German Nationality." This book was the key to his political and athletic activities and, at the same time, a noble song of German unification with Prussia as its leader. General Blücher even praised this book as a defense book. He sought to invigorate physical education, substantially strengthen national defense, and achieve the goal of Prussian independence. At that time, he organized the German League with a large number of comrades and built a large gymnasium. Lamenting that the spirit of the compatriots was stagnant, the nation was gradually entering a miserable situation, and they were being dominated by French influence in various aspects, not only politically but also militarily and ideologically. He resolved to awaken the patriotism of the people by any means and to restore the freedom of the homeland. He gathered young people at the gymnasium, formed teams, and marched, holding national flags and singing the national anthem, or engaged in competitive gymnastics, striving to gain a major force for national restoration. At that time, Jahn's contribution to injecting a sound German spirit into German sports and youth was significant. The fact that Germany defeated France in the Franco-Prussian War and achieved restoration, becoming a global Germany, was largely due to the power of physical education. The fact that the national power has already recovered in just a few years since the disastrous defeat in the Great European War is because the sports associations are scattered throughout the country's provinces, counties, townships, and villages with the headquarters in the center and they are using physical education as the only method of recovery. If any nation wants to live well, it must promote this great recovery agent of physical education, and at the same time, the physical education must be one that contributes to the revival of the nation.

<170>

<171>

**Named Entities**

나폴레온	Napoleon
예나	Jena
普軍	Prussian army
伯林	Berlin
지루짓도	Tilsit
普王	King of Prussia
후이히데	Fichte
獨逸國民에게 告함	Address to the German Nation
시유타인	Stein
후리-드ㆍ루도우이리ㆍ양	Friedrich Ludwig Jahn
랜쓰	Lanz
伯林구라우엔구로스테	Köllnische Gymnasium in Berlin
하루레	Halle
마이에루	Mair
靑年의 戰鬪에 關한 敎育의 必要	The Necessity of Education Concerning the Struggle of Youth
普國國民에 對하여 愛國心을 促進	Promoting Patriotism for the Prussian People
獨逸國體	German Nationality
부루유해루	Blücher
普佛戰爭	Franco-Prussian War



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제24호
발행일	1929년 12월 01일
기사제목	民族의 甦生과 體育
필자	徐相天
기사형태	논설

民族의 甦生과 體育
						徐相天
西紀一八○六年佛國「나폴레온」의 大軍이「예나」에서 普軍을 擊破하고 長縣伯林을 過하여 普王다「지루짓도」에서 盟約을 締結하니「나폴레온」의 世界的野心의 政策은 漸漸成功하게되엿다 그 反面으로 普國은 佛國에게 ■■되여 軍事는 物論經濟産業各方面에 잇서서 當時의 狀態가 實로 慘憺하여젓다 딸아 國民의 勇氣가 沮喪되며 協同團結의 精神과 愛國奉仕의 氣魂이 項廢하여 國家는 正히 危急存亡의 秋에서게되얏다 當時의 愛國者「후이히데」는「獨逸國民에게 告함」이란는 題로서 全國을 巡廻演說하며 復■戰에 備할 新敎育의 必要을 絶叫하엿섯고 當時幾多의 憂國烈士中에「시유타인」과 如한 者는 或은 演說로 或은 建白書로서 軍備를 完備하며 特＜170＞히 體育을 向上식힐것을 力說하엿섯다 如此한 普國危急存亡의 秋를 當하여 體育으로서 愛國心을 鼓吹하여 獨逸國民의 團結에 至大한 成功을싸어 獨逸歷史와 함게 永遠不滅할일홈을남긴 獨逸體育의 始祖「후리-드ㆍ루도우이리ㆍ양」이라는 사람이 頭角을 露出하게되얏다 이와가티 普國의 危機一髮의 를 當하여 體育으로서 愛國心을 鼓舞하고 이로서 祖國의 新生命을 展開한 偉人「양」의 簡單한 復歷을보자 氏는 西歷一七七八年八月十一日「랜쓰」附近一小農村에 誕生하며 十四歲에 至하기지 當時牧師이 職으로잇든 自己父親으로부터엇기어려운 正, 不正에 對한 아름다운 感情과 祖國에 對한 烈烈한 愛國心을 喚酲하는 敎育을바더섯다 幼時로부터 同輩와 交際하기를조와하지안코 호울노 國內를 通歷하며 國情과 歷史의 硏究를조와하엿다 後에「伯林구라우엔구로스테」高等學校를 中途에 退學하고 自己嗜好에는 反하는 神學을 硏究하기 爲하여「하루레」神學校로 轉學하엿다.「마이에루」氏著書中에「靑年의 戰鬪에 關한 敎育의 必要」라는 章을 熟讀하고 크게 發憤하여 一九七九年에「普國國民에 對하여 愛國心을 促進」이라는 冊을 著述하여 出版하여 宣傳한 事도 有하엿다 一八○六年「나폴레온」이 大軍을 率하고 普國을 侵入하엿슬쩍에 氏는 祖國을 爲하여 學業을 廢하고 從軍하기 爲하여「예나」向하엿스나 때가임이느저 參加치못하고「예나」附近에서 普軍敗戰의 慘狀을 目擊하자 極度의 憤慨와 悲痛은 二十九歲의 靑年의 頭髮의 一夜에 白雪로 化케하여섯다 그後 一八一○年獨逸國體라는 冊을 出版하여섯다 此書는 氏의 政治的體育的行爲의 鍵인 同時에 普國을 盟主로한 獨逸統一의 尊貴한 歌이엿다「부루유해루」將軍은 此書을 國防書라고지 讚揚하여섯다 氏는 體育을 旺盛커하여 國防을 實充實케하고 普國獨立의 目的을 達하기 爲하여 當時多數한 同志와 獨逸同盟을 組織하며 同時에 一大體操場을 建設하엿다 同胞의 情神이 沈滯하여 國家가 漸次悲慘한 境遇에 入하며 政治上은 勿論壯交上思想上格方面에 佛人의 支配를 受하는것을 歎慨하여 如何히하든지 國民의 愛國心을 喚起起하여 祖國의 自由를 回復하기로 決心하고 體操場에 靑年을 糾合하여 團隊를 作하고 或은 國旗를들고 國歌를 高唱하여 行列을하고 或은 競技體操를 行하여 國力復興上一大勢力을 得하기에 努力하엿든것이다. 當時獨逸의 體育과 靑年에게 健全한 獨逸魂魄을 注入함에는「양」의 貢獻이 至大하엿다 獨逸이 그 後普佛戰爭에 佛國을 擊破하여 復興을하고 世界的獨逸이된것은 全혀 體育에힘입은바가 多하여섯다. 現今大歐洲戰에 慘敗한지 不過年歲에벌서 國力이 回復이됨은 中央에 本部를두고 全國道郡面村에 體育組合이 散在하여 體育으로 唯一의 回生濟로쓴닭이나 어느 民族이던지 그 民族이잘살랴하면 이 偉大한 回生濟의 體育을 獎勵하지아니치못할것이며 圓時에 그 體育은 그 民族의 甦生에 貢獻할 體育이아니되면안될 것이다.＜171＞
＜170-171＞