잡지명	별건곤 제33호
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	樞密院의 政治的 機能 (The Political Function of the Privy Council)
필자	忙中閑人
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

The Political Function of the Privy Council
						忙中閑人

Centered around the London Naval Treaty, a white-knuckle fight is currently (September 10th) unfolding between the government and the Privy Council. It has been over a month since the treaty review began, and the committee has convened eight times (as of September 9th), but far from being settled, it remains in a truly unstable state of dark clouds and low visibility. Though public opinion supports it, and it is an international treaty desired by the people, it probably won't go as far as rejecting the treaty itself due to international trust. However, it is clear from the current situation that it will directly or indirectly inflict a fatal wound on the government. Even just causing the fall of the Navy Minister (海相), who has been at the center of the issue since the signing, could lead the government to collapse. In fact, the previous Wakatsuki Cabinet resigned en masse due to a conflict with the Privy Council. Hence, even discussions about abolishing the Privy Council have arisen recently. What is the structure and authority of this Privy Council, which sometimes interferes in important state affairs, and at other times influences the fate of the cabinet, seemingly possessing power greater than that of the cabinet? As requested, I will try to write a simple, popular explanation of this, but it is a daunting task for someone who is not an expert.

One of the Three Major Reefs

Great Britain also has a Privy Council. However, there is currently no Privy Council with a similar system elsewhere. The British "Privy Council (PrivigCouncil)" is usually translated as "樞密院 (Privy Council)," but its nature is vastly different. The British "Privy Council (PrivigCouncil)" is almost exclusively an organ for ceremonial rites, and it does not involve itself in general administration. For that reason, it never conflicts with the government, nor does talk of abolishing it ever arise. But here, it's always a problem. Although parliamentary politics here has a history of 40 years, which is not short, it has not seen healthy development due to the power of the clan cliques (藩閥) and bureaucrats (官僚) for a long time, and the spheres of the political world and the location of power have always been chaotic. (It should not be confused with the Emperor's Great Authority.) The party politics (政黨政治), which is the natural conclusion of parliamentary politics, has only recently taken its first steps. People seem to be pleased that "constitutional government has now returned to the right path." However, even the Minseong Party Cabinet (民政黨內閣), which currently holds the vast majority of seats in the House of Representatives, cannot proceed according to its own beliefs. It is in a difficult situation where it sometimes has to court the military government (軍府) (the Army and Navy authorities) and the House of Peers (貴院), and sometimes has to bow to the Privy Council (樞府). Therefore, it can only be seen that its party politics are still in a state of paralysis. That is why the system of ministers from the Army and Navy being military officers, the system of the House of Peers, and the system of the Privy Council are called the three major reefs (3大暗礁) of the political world. What I am about to write about now is one of these reefs.

The Emperor's Advisory Body

This Privy Council was established in Meiji 21 (明治21年) for the purpose of deliberating on the draft constitution. It was not acceptable to decide on the enactment of the basic law for the 100-year plan of the nation solely by the government authorities, nor was it possible to convene a national assembly at that time when there was no parliament, as it would be contrary to the original intent of the bestowed constitution (欽定憲法) (a constitution that a monarch establishes based on their will is called a bestowed constitution). Therefore, it was decided to have the meritorious subjects of the nation deliberate on it. However, even after deliberating on the constitution as originally intended, it has continued to exist as a constitutional organ until now.

The clause that "the Privy Councilors deliberate on important state affairs in response to the Emperor's consultation as stipulated in the Privy Council Ordinance" (Constitution Article 52) makes it clear that they are, along with the State Ministers who "administer all affairs (萬機를 攝行)," organs assisting the Emperor, who supports the Great Authority. However, the scope and form of assistance are distinctly different.

The State Ministers (國務大臣) – commonly known as the government – fulfill their duty of assistance in the full range of the Great Authority, whether it be legal or factual matters, through words or documents, or by offering suggestions, in a free form. On the other hand, the Privy Councilors (樞密顧問) – commonly known as the Privy Council (樞府) – first and foremost wait for consultation on important state affairs (although there are no constitutional restrictions) and deliberate on them (there are a few exceptions). It is purely a consultative body, and it does not enforce laws or orders to the outside world, interfere in general administration, or directly influence state affairs with its resolutions. Therefore, it bears no responsibility to the parliament. Although there are interpretations that, in formal terms, the State Ministers do not bear responsibility to the parliament either, they ultimately become responsible through the parliament's authority. In this way, the irresponsible Privy Council (無責任한 樞府) confronts the responsible cabinet (責任內閣) and often inflicts fatal wounds, so it will truly be incompatible for the development of party politics.

Organization and Scope of Authority

Now, I will write about the organization and authority based on the Privy Council Ordinance.

The Privy Council is organized with 1 chairman (議長), 1 vice-chairman (副議長), and 24 councilors (顧問官). (Ordinance Article 2) Of course, there will also be a secretary-general (書記官長) and secretaries (書記官). In addition, by special imperial decree (Meiji 21 Imperial Edict), princes (親王) of age residing in the capital are granted seats, and the State Ministers also hold seats as councilors due to their official duties and can participate in voting. (Ordinance Article 11) There is no fixed standard for the position of chairman. Instead, it is appointed by the Emperor (親任) from among the meritorious subjects of the nation (of course, the government selects and recommends them), but those who have not reached the age of 40 have no qualifications at all. (Ordinance Article 4) So they are all old men. Because they are old, they may have a lot of experience in state affairs, but on the other hand, it is natural that they will be close to conservative and stubborn, and of course, they will be good at nagging. The Privy Council, organized in this way, is a constitutional organ that responds to the Emperor's consultation on important state affairs, as mentioned above. At the same time, as an organ of the Imperial Household, it has the authority to deliberate on major events of the Imperial Household without waiting for consultation (Imperial Household Law Articles 9, 27, 29, 55, 62) or when it becomes necessary to appoint a regent (攝政) (Law Article 19) or when it becomes necessary to change the order of succession of the regency (典範) (Law Article 25). In addition, it has the authority to adjudicate disputes over authority that may arise between the Administrative Court and the Ordinary Court, but this is still nominal. In this way, although there are restrictions on the matters to be consulted regarding major events of the Imperial Household, there are no particular restrictions on general international affairs, except that the Constitution states that they are important state affairs. However, the matters for consultation listed in the Privy Council Ordinance are as follows. (Ordinance Article 3)
1. Matters pertaining to the Imperial Household Law
2. Drafts and questions regarding the clauses of the Constitution or laws and ordinances attached to the Constitution
3. Declaration of martial law (戒嚴宣告) (Constitution Article 14), emergency ordinances that substitute for laws (緊急勅令) (Constitution Article 8), emergency measures regarding finances (財政上 緊急處分) (Constitution Article 70), and other ordinances that regulate penalties
4. Treaties and agreements negotiated with foreign countries
(The treaty revision review that the government is currently arguing over falls under this item.)
5. Matters regarding the revision of the Privy Council Ordinance and its administrative regulations
(Because there are such clauses, it is difficult for the government to reform the Privy Council at will.)
6. Other matters that are consulted on temporarily

Harmful Effects of Abuse of Authority

In this way, although it has the authority to respond to consultations on important state affairs, it is only supposed to respond to consultations and submit opinions, and it is not supposed to interfere in administration.

Ordinance Article 8 also clearly states that "Even though the Privy Council is the Supreme Advisor to the Emperor regarding administrative and legislative matters, it shall not interfere in administration." However, because everyone has self-esteem, a sense of superiority, and a desire for power, it goes without saying that these old men, who are recognized by themselves and others as meritorious subjects of the nation, will have these traits.

Moreover, because they are outside the realm of actual administration, it would not be very pleasing for them if their existence were to fade from the minds of the people. Therefore, it would not be unreasonable for them to try to flaunt their existence and authority whenever they have the opportunity. It is only natural that they would want to restrain the government's tyranny out of meddlesomeness, and it is a fortunate thing for the nation that they carefully deliberate on state affairs. However, whenever problems arise, the Privy Council's attitude has the suspicion of abusing its supreme privileges. "Although there is a clear statement that it cannot interfere in administration," if it tries to find fault under the guise of examining the matters for consultation before responding, it can find as much fault as it wants, and it can make things difficult for the government as much as it wants. There is a precedent of forcing the government to resign with its initial rejection, and injuries that are politically related to the government's honor are commonplace.

Arguments for and against Continuation

Of course, the government is the most responsible party for assisting in governance (大政輔弼), not the Privy Council. Furthermore, whether or not to adopt the Privy Council's resolution on matters of consultation belongs entirely to the Emperor. Therefore, if the government believes that the Privy Council's resolution is incorrect, the State Ministers can request the non-adoption of the resolution in accordance with their official duties. However, while this is possible in theory, since the State Ministers also participate in the meeting as councilors and have been defeated in the voting (because the number of State Ministers is smaller than the number of councilors), they will always be defeated in the voting if the government and the Privy Council have absolutely different opinions. Politically, it is impossible to listen to the minority opinion again (i.e., the government's opinion) and request a re-approval. Therefore, if the Privy Council and the government have different opinions and the Privy Council's attitude becomes stubborn, the government has no other choice but to either surrender and withdraw the proposal or revise it, or face rejection and resign according to the principle of dying for a just cause (玉碎主義). Then, what is the reason for continuing to maintain the Privy Council, which has such a significant impact on administration? The only vague answer is "in order to carefully decide on state affairs." For that reason, recently, discussions have arisen to "transfer the duties related to major events of the Imperial Household to another organ and abolish it altogether." First, the existence of two important organs for assisting in the Great Authority makes it impossible to expect the unification of state affairs, and therefore the responsible cabinet cannot fulfill its responsibility. Even if the Privy Council's attitude or resolution is improper, there is no way to impeach it (even if the parliament passes a resolution to impeach the Privy Council, it would be ineffective). In any case, in order to fully exercise the advantages of parliamentary politics - in order to reflect the people's strong will in administration without hindrance - there should be no other organ to restrain the government other than the parliament. Now that universal suffrage has been implemented, there will be progress year by year.
(In this article, the two characters for Japan (日本) have been omitted for reasons of circumstance, for which the author apologizes.)

<34-37>

**Named Entities**

倫敦海軍條約	London Naval Treaty
若槻內閣	Wakatsuki Cabinet
明治	Meiji
天皇	Emperor
民政黨內閣	Minseong Party Cabinet



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제33호
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	樞密院의 政治的 機能
필자	忙中閑人
기사형태	논설

樞密院의 政治的 機能
						忙中閑人
倫敦海軍條約을 中心으로 政府와 樞密院사이에는 方今(9月10日) 白兵戰이 演出되여 잇슴니다. 條約審査를 始作한 지가 한 달이 넘엇스며 委員會를 거듭하기 여듧 번(9月9日까지)이나 되엿스나 落着되기는 姑捨하고 그야말로 暗雲低迷의 不安狀態에 잇슴니다. 輿論이 支持하고 國民이 要望하는 國際條約이라 國際信義만으로도 條約 그것을 否認하는 態度에까지야 이르지 안켓지 만은 直接間接으로 政府에 致命傷을 줄 것쯤은 지금까지의 形勢로 보아 分明함니다. 調印以來로 問題의 中心에 들던 海相하나만 너머지게 만들더라도 政府는 瓦解의 運命을 밟게 될는지도 모를 것임니다. 요 前前番若槻內閣은 實로이 樞密院과의 衝突로 因하야 마츰내 總辭職을 하엿든 것임니다. 그래서 近者에는 樞密院 廢止論까지도 생기게 됨니다. 이가티 때로는 重要한 國務에 干與하며 때로는 內閣의 運命을 左右하야 內閣以上의 權能을 가진 듯한 이 樞密院은 그 組織과 權限이 어떠한가? 所托대로 이에 대한 通俗的 解說을 簡單케 쓰려고는 함니다만은 專門家안인 나에게는 神通치 못한 노릇임니다.

3大暗礁의 하나

樞密院은 英國에도 잇슴니다. 그러나 이 樞密院과 가튼 그런制度의 樞密院은 지금 다른 데는 업슴니다. 英國의 『푸리빅·카운쓸(PrivigCouncil)』을 普通 『樞密院』이라고 飜譯하지만은 이 樞密院하고는 그 性質이 엄청나게 다름니다. 英國의 『푸리빅·카운쓸』은 거의 儀式典禮의 專門機關으로 一般施政에는 關係하지 안는 까닭에 政府와 衝突되는 일도 업거니와 따라서 廢止論가튼 것도 생기지 안이함니다. 여기는 그러치 못하야 恒常 말성임니다. 여기의 議會政治도 벌서 40年이란 짜르지 안은 歷史를 가젓지만은 오랫동안 藩閥과 官僚의 勢力으로 因하야   健全한 發達을 보지 못하고 政界의 分野와 權力의 所在가 항상 混屯하엿슴니다. (天皇의 大權과는 混同치 말어야 함니다.) 議會政治의 當然한 結論인 政黨政治란 것이 近年에 와서야 비로서 그 第1步를 보게 된 것임니다. 「인제야 憲政이 常道에<34> 돌아갓다.」國民은 깃버하는 모양이나 現在 衆議院議席의 絶大多數를 차지한 民政黨內閣으로도 自家의 所信에 의하야 邁進치 못하고 때로 軍府(陸海軍當局)와 貴院에 秋波를 보내며 때로 樞府에 叩頭치 안이치 못할 苦境을 當하고 잇스니 지금 그의 政黨政治란 아직도 半身不隨의 身勢라고 볼 수 밧게 업시 되엿슴니다. 그러기에 陸海軍大臣武官制, 貴族院官制와 아울러 樞密院官制라는 것을 그의 政界의 3大暗礁라고들 함니다. 지금 쓰려는 것이 이 暗礁의 하나임니다.

천황의 諮詢機關

이 樞密院은 明治 21年 憲法草案을 審議할 目的으로 設置되엿든 것임니다. 國家의 100年大計를 마련할 基礎法의 制定을 政府當局者만으로써 決定한다는 것도 안되엿고 그럿타고 議會도 업는 當時에 國民會議가튼 것을 召集한다는 것도 欽定憲法(君主가 그 意思를 基礎로 制定하는 憲法을 欽定憲法이라고 함니다.)
本旨에 어그러진다 하야 國家의 元勳으로써 이를 審議케 하엿든 것임니다. 그러나 當初의 目的대로 憲法을 議決한 뒤에도 憲法上機關으로 지금까지 依然히 存續된 것임니다.
「樞密顧問은 樞密院官制의 所定대로 天皇의 諮詢에 應하야 重要한 國務를 審議」(憲法52條) 한다는 條文을 보더라도 『萬機를 攝行』하는 國務大臣과 한 가지로 大權을 輔翼하는 天皇輔翼機關인 것은 勿論임니다. 그러나 輔翼하는 範圍와 形式은 現著하게 다름니다.
國務大臣-通稱政府은 法律上事項이던지 事實上事項이던지 大權一切의 範圍에서 言辭로던지 文書로던지 또는 獻策하던지 自由로운 形式으로써 輔弼의 責을 다하지만은 樞密顧問-通稱樞府는 于先 무엇보다도 重要한 國務에 대하야 (憲法上制限은 업지만은) 諮詢을 기다려 審議하는 (二三 例外가 잇슴니다.) 純全한 諮詢機關으로 外部에 대하야 法律命令을 施行하거나 一般施政에 干與하거나 또는 議決한 結果가 直接으로 國務를 左右케 하는 것도 안임니다. 따라서 議會에 대하야 何等의 責任을 지지 안이함니다. 國務大臣도 形式論으로는 議會에 대하야 責任지는 것이 안이라는 解釋도 잇지만은 엇째든 議會의 權能으로 責任을 지게되는 結果에 이르게 함니다. 이가티 말하자면 無責任한 樞府가 責任內閣과 버틔여서 흔히 致命傷을 주게되니 政黨政治의 發達을 위하여서는 실로 勢不兩立일 것임니다.

組織과 權限範圍

인제 樞密院官制에 의하야 組織과 權限에 대한 이약이를 씁시다.
樞密院은 議長 1人 副議長 1人 顧問官 24人으로<35> 組織되엿슴니다. (官制第2條) 이밧게 書記官長 書記官들이 잇슬 것은 勿論임니다만은 특별히 詔書에 의해서 (明治21年勅旨) 在京한 成年以上의 親王은 議席을 가지게 되엿스며 國務大臣도 그 職責上 顧問官의 資格으로 議席을 가지며 또한 表決에 參與할 수 잇슴니다. (官制11條) 議長이나 地位에 一定한 標準이 업시 그저 國家의 元勳中에서 親任하는 것임니다.(勿論 政府에서 銓衡上奏)만은 40歲 以上에 達하지 안은 사람은 全然 資格이 업슴니다. (官制第4條) 그러니까 모다 늙은이들임니다. 늙은이닛가 國政에 대하야 經驗도 만흐려니와 一方으로 保守와 頑固에 가까울 것도 事勢에 當然하며 잔소리 잘 할것도 勿論임니다. 이가티 組織된 樞密院은 우에도 말한바와 가티 重要한 國務에 대하야 天皇의 諮詢에 應하는 憲法上 機關인 동시에 一面 皇室機關으로
皇室의 大事에 대하야 天皇의 諮詢에 座하는 일(皇室典範 제9, 27, 29, 55, 62條出)
攝政을 둘 必要가 생긴 때(典範 19條)나 攝政의 順位를 變更할 必要가 생긴 때(典範 25條)에 諮詢을 기다리지 안코 議決하는 權限이 잇슴니다. 이밧게 行政裁判所와 通常裁判所사이에 일이 날수 잇는 權限爭議를 裁定할 權限이 잇슴니다만은 이는 아직 有名無實임니다. 이가티 皇室大事에 대하야서는 그 諮問事項이 制限이 잇스나 一般國際에 대하야서는 다만 憲法에 重要한 國務라 하얏슬 뿐이고 특별한 制限이 업슴니다만은 樞密院官制에 例擧한 諮詢事項은 다음과 갓슴니다.(官制 第3條)
1, 皇室典範에 屬한 事項
2, 憲法의 條項 또는 憲法에 附屬한 法律勅令에 관한 草案 及 疑議
3, 戒嚴宣告(憲14條) 法律을 代身할 緊急勅令(憲8) 財政上 緊急處分(憲70) 及 其他 罰則을 規程한 勅令
4, 列國과 交涉한 條政 及 約束
(方今 政府와 말성부리는 條改審査가 이 事頂에 該當한 것임니다.)
5, 樞密院官制 及 事務規程의 改正에 관한 事項
(이런 條項이 잇스니까 政府의 맘대로 樞府를 改革하기도 어렵슴니다.)
6, 이밧게도 臨時로 諮詢하는 事項
權限濫用의 弊害
이가티 重要한 國務에 대하야 諮詢에 應하는 權限은 잇지만은 그는 어듸까지 諮詢에 應하야 意見을 上奏할 뿐이요 施政에 干與하라는 것이 안임니다.
官制 第8條에도
樞密院은 行政 及 立法事項에 관하야 天皇의 至高顧問이라 하더라도 施政에 干與함이 업다 라고 明記하엿슴니다. 그러나 사람이란<36> 누구든지 自負心도 잇고 優越感 權力慾도 잇는 탓에 國家의 元勳이라고 自他가 認定하는 이 늙은이들이야, 말할 것도 업슬 것임니다.
더구나 實際 施政의 圈外에 잇는 터이라 國民의 頭腦속에서 自家의 存在가 멀어지는 것도 그다지 탐탐할 것이 못될 것임니다. 그러니까 機會만 잇스면 自家의 존재와 權威를 뽑내여 보랴는 것도 無理가 안일 것임니다. 政府의 專橫을 牽制하려는 것도 婆心의 當然이며 國務를 신중히 審議한다는 것도 名正言順이라 國家를 위하야 多幸한 일일 것임니다만은 問題가 생길 때마다 樞府의 가진 態度는 無上한 特權을 濫用하는 嫌疑가 업지 안이함니다. 「施政에 干與치 못한다 는 明文이 잇지만은 諮詢事項에 대하야 奉答하기 前 審査한다는 名目下에서 트집을 잡으려면 얼마던지 잡을 수 잇고 정부를 골니라면 얼마던지 골릴 수잇슬 것임니다. 最初의 否決로 政府를 辭職케 한 前例도 잇섯거니와 政治的으로 政府의 體面에 關係될만한 상처쯤은 恒茶飯임니다.

存續論과 廢止論

勿論 大政輔弼의 最責任者는 政府요 樞府가 안일뿐만 안이라 諮詢事項에 대한 樞府의 議決結果를 採用하고 안하는 것은 天皇에 全屬한 것임으로 政府에서 만일 樞府의 議決이 올치 안타고 生覺할 때에는 國務大臣은 職責上 그 議決의 不採擇을 奏請할 수가 잇슴니다. 그러나 理論上으로는 이것이 가능하지만은 國務大臣도 顧問官의 地位로 會議에 參加하야 表決에 敗한 以上 (國務大臣의 數는 顧問官보다 적은 까닭에) 만일 政府와 樞府와 意見이 絶對로 다를 경우에는 언제든지 表決에 敗하게 됨니다. 다시 小數의 意見(卽 政府의 意見)을 들어서 다시 裁可를 奏請한다는 것은 政治的으로 不能임니다. 그러니까 樞府와 政府가 意見을 달리하야 樞府의 態度가 頑强하게 되면 政府로는 屈服하야 案을 撤回하던지 修正을 하던지 그러치 안으면 玉碎主義로 否決을 當하고 辭職을 하던지 하는 수 밧게는 별다른 道理가 업게 됨니다. 그러면 이와가티 施政에 重大한 關係가 잇는 樞密院을 무슨 까닭으로 存續식히느냐? 하는 理由는 「國務를 愼重히 處斷키 위하야」라는 漠然한 對答밧게는 업슴니다. 그런까닭으로 最近에 이르러서는 「皇室大事에 관한 職務는 다른 機關에 옴기고 아주 廢止해 버리자는 議論이 臺頭하게 됨니다. 첫재 大權의 輔翼에 2種의 重要機關이 存在함으로써 政務의 統一을 바랄 수 업고 따라서 責任內閣이 責任을 다 할수업스며 樞府의 態度나 議決이 不當하더래도 이를 彈効하야 (가령 議會에서 樞府彈効決議가튼 것을 하더래도) 實効를 이를 道理가 업는 까닭임니다. 엇잿던 議會政治의 完全한 長處를 發揮식히려면- 國民의 强意를 支障업시 施政에 反暎식히려면 議會이외에는 政府를 牽制하는 다른 機關이 업서야 할 것임니다. 임이 普選을 實施한 나라이란 해를 따라서 進步야 잇겟지요.
(이 記事中 日本 2字는 事情上 全部 略하얏삽기 筆者에게 未安을 사합니다.)
<34-37>