별건곤 제33호
1930년 10월 01일
大邱 會社團體 槪觀 (An Overview of Companies and Organizations in Daegu)
大邱二六四
소식 (News)

An Overview of Companies and Organizations in Daegu
Daegu 264

As the suppression, like a storm, sweeps across the nation and its scope widens daily, and its intensity increases, the social movement of Korea, which is experiencing an unprecedented period of suffering, is universally afflicted with a chronic disease of stagnation. As everyone is concerned, unless this difficult and arduous situation is resolved in a new direction on a grand scale, it will be difficult to see any energetic progress, although there may be some differences depending on the region.

Therefore, in attempting to introduce the social organizations in Daegu as outlined in the title, my interest is significantly diminished because the current state of decline is so severe that there is hardly anything to enumerate. Even the leading figures, who desperately try to defend their positions, eventually become exhausted and scattered. The meeting places of some organizations feel like desolate wastelands after a war. In general, the cause of this stagnation can be attributed to two factors: external oppression and internal weakness, which is an undeniable fact. However, trying to determine which of these two is the proximate cause and which is the remote cause, considering that the stagnation is caused by both internal weakness and external oppression, is like trying to determine whether the chicken or the egg came first. When we hear that the general social movement in Northwestern Korea is making more energetic progress than that in Southern Korea, it is undeniable that the fighting elements in the Southern Korean region bear the responsibility for their own lack of courage, even under the same oppression. When the brave warriors at the forefront are sacrificed, there must be those who immediately defend the ranks and continue the succession. New brave warriors, please come forth quickly. Here are a few social organizations in Daegu. <73>

1. Daegu Youth League (大邱靑年同盟)

Founded on July 24, 1927, during a time when the nationwide united movement was strong, the Daegu Youth Association (大邱靑年會), Agu Youth Alliance (我求靑年同盟), Seoul Shinyu Group (서울新友團), Youth League (靑年同盟), and Proletarian Youth Association (無産靑年會) merged to form the Daegu Youth League. Jang Jeok-u (張赤宇), currently imprisoned for the 4th Communist Youth League Incident (共靑年事件), was appointed as the first Executive Chairman. With approximately 130 members, the league was quite active for some time. However, due to the incident and the gradual loss of freedom of speech and assembly, it became difficult to hold any gatherings, even committee meetings, resulting in a near closure. Currently, Park Myeong-gi (朴明基) serves as the Executive Chairman, but the league is unable to produce any social effectiveness and remains in a state of silence. However, the future cannot be determined solely by a temporary ebb and flow. We cannot pessimistically anticipate eternal extinction due to today's temporary stagnation, nor can we simply rely on historical inevitability and wait for Gang Tae-gong (姜太公) to reach 80 years old. We must make desperate efforts to revitalize this idle formation and break through the difficult situation. <74>

2. Daegu Boys League (大邱少年同盟)

Founded on July 27, 1924, through the merger of four groups: the Boys' Revolutionary Association (少年革英會), the Reform Group (改造團), the Labor Boys' Association (勞働少年會), and the Innovation Group (革造團). The Daegu Boys' Association (大邱少年會), led by Kim Yeong-bo (金英波), disagreed with the purpose of the merger and withdrew midway. The Daegu Boys' League, with 150 members and Son Gi-chae (孫基埰) as the first Chairman, focused on mass training and self-education. Currently, Park Byeong-cheol (朴柄喆) serves as the Executive Chairman and is somewhat active, but the league is in a very stagnant state compared to before and has not played a significant role.

3. Singanhoe Daegu Branch (新幹會 大邱支會)

Founded on September 3, 1927, when the fierce momentum of the Singan Movement (新幹運動), which aimed to concentrate the total power of the national united party, spread nationwide. At the time of its founding, it had 200 members, led by the first Chairman, Lee Gyeong-hui (李慶熙), and was quite active in mass training. However, it gradually declined, and now the number of members feels like a mere hundred. At large gatherings, the number of attending police officers is almost equal to the number of assembled members, a truly sparse state. Once, at a temporary general meeting, Secretary-General Ryu Yeon-sul (柳淵述) shed tears and lamented the idle formation in a sorrowful tone. However, there was no further progress, and Chairman Song Du-hwan (宋斗煥) continues to push forward with steady efforts. We hope that the members themselves will be encouraged to have a clear consciousness and firm courage, and that the number of qualitatively enriched members who consciously support the Singan Movement, which accommodates the masses at the current stage, will increase. <75>

4. Geunwoohoe Daegu Branch (槿友會 大邱支會)

Founded on February 27, 1928, with approximately 150 members. Under the patient and self-respecting efforts of Chairman Lee Chun-su (李春壽), it continues to lead its members even in the current difficult situation. It has not achieved any socially significant results, but it focuses on self-education, such as monthly discussion meetings within the membership. During the recent flood damage in the Palgongsan (八公山) area, it took the lead over other organizations, collecting over 70 items of clothing among its members and having 4 or 5 committee members travel over 40 li (里) on mountain roads to distribute them to the general disaster victims. In any case, its tireless activities are not very stagnant. Perhaps it would be a good strategy to further permeate the Geunwoo Movement (槿友運動) among general housewives in its current state and build a solid base there. <76>

5. Gyeongbuk Hyeongpyeongsa Daegu Branch (慶北 衡平社 大邱支會)

Founded in 1912, with only about 50 members. However, it is said to have the best record of unity among all organizations. With the wholehearted enthusiasm of Branch Manager Kim Chun-sam (金春三), he has been managing the organization's affairs since its founding. The number of butcher shops in the district alone exceeds 300, indicating that unity and solidarity are very strong. We hope that they will use that strength to achieve more social effectiveness.

6. Gyeongbuk Youth League (慶北靑年聯盟)

On January 7, 1928, the Gyeongbuk Journalists' League (記者同盟) was founded in Gimcheon (金泉), Gyeongbuk (慶北), and soon after, the Gyeongbuk Youth League (慶北靑年聯盟) was formed. It was the total consolidation of various youth leagues in Gyeongbuk and avant-garde figures who had been included in cells. With the most combative spirit, Hong Bo-yong (洪甫容) was appointed as the first Chairman and was quite active for some time. However, he was imprisoned due to the ML Party Incident (ML黨 事件), and Jeong Si-myeong (鄭時鳴) succeeded him. Although the signboard was hung at the Choyang Hall (朝陽會館), Jeong was also imprisoned due to the ML Party Incident, and all the executives were scattered. The signboard itself was removed by an unknown hand without anyone noticing. This is a deceased organization that has faded from the memory of the people of Daegu without ever being formally dissolved. (End) <77>

**Named Entities**

大邱	Taegu
張赤宇	Chang Chŏg-u
朴明基	Pak Myŏng-gi
金英波	Kim Yŏng-bo
孫基埰	Son Ki-ch’ae
朴柄喆	Pak Pyŏng-ch’ŏl
李慶熙	Lee Kyŏng-hŭi
柳淵述	Ryu Yŏn-sul
宋斗煥	Song Tu-hwan
李春壽	Lee Ch’un-su
金春三	Kim Ch’un-sam
金泉	Kimch’ŏn
洪甫容	Hong Po-yong
鄭時鳴	Chŏng Si-myŏng
朝陽會館	Choyang Hoegwan
八公山	P’algongsan



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제33호
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	大邱 會社團體 槪觀
필자	大邱二六四
기사형태	소식

大邱 會社團體 槪觀
						大邱二六四
全國的으로 暴風雨가티 밀녀오는 彈壓이 나날이 그 範圍가 넓어지고 그 度數가 昻揚됨을 따라 曾前에 보지 못하든 受難期에 잇는 朝鮮의 社會運動이란 것이 一律的으로 沉滯라는 不治의 病에 걸녀 잇스니 다가티 關心하는 바와 가티 이 艱難苦極한 국면을 大局的으로 어느 新방면에 打開하기 전에는 혹 地方을 따라 多少의 差異는 잇슬지언정 到底히 活氣잇는 進出을 보기가 어려울 것이다.
그럼으로 이 大邱에 잇는 社會團體를 題와 가티 槪觀的으로 남아 紹介하려 함에 무엇보담도 먼저 筆者의 興味가 十分이나 減殺되는 것은 넘우나 銷沈된 現狀이 可히 이럿타고 할 만한 무엇을 枚擧할 수 업스리만치 閑散해서 그 指導人物들도 或 必死의 努力으로 陣營을 직히다가도<72> 맛침내 勢窮力盡해서 七零八落이 되여 멧 箇 團體의 會館이란 맛치 戰後의 荒原과 가티 蕭條落寞한 感이 업지 안으니 大體로 이 沉滯라는 것은 그 原因을 두 곳에서 가려 볼 수가 잇는 것이니. 그 하나를 外來의 抑壓이라면 다른 하나는 自體의 不振이란 것도 避할 수 업는 儼然한 한 事實이다. 그러나 自體의 不振과 外來의 抑壓이 兩面的으로 한 沉滯의 現狀을 이루운 것을 가지고 이 두 가지 中에서 어느 것이 近因이 되며 어느 것이 遠因되는 것을 갈이려는 것은 맛치 닭과 닭알의 先後를 갈이려는 것과 가티 甚히 어려운 일이나 西北鮮의 一般社會運動이 南鮮의 그것보다 얼마나 더 活氣잇는 進出을 하고 잇다는 것을 드를 때 다 가튼 抑壓의 밋헤서도 南北의 이만한 差異가 잇다는 것은 南朝鮮地方의 戰鬪分子가 아직도 그 步武가 勇敢치 못한 自體의 不振이란 責任을 안질수가 업는 것이다. 恒常前衛에 나선 勇者가 犧牲을 當하면 連헤 곳 陣營을 직히고 後任을 繼承할 만한 鬪士가 끈허지지 안어야 할 것이니 새로운 勇者여, 어서 만이 나오라. 이에 大邱에<73> 잇는 社會團鬪의 맷 낫흘 紹介한다면 알에와 갓다.

1, 大邱靑年同盟

1927년 7月24日에 創立하엿스니 當時에 全鮮的 合同運動이 濃厚한 機運에 따라 大邱靑年會, 我求靑年同盟, 서울新友團, 靑年同盟, 無産靑年會 等이 合同헤서 大邱靑年同盟이 創設되고 第一世 執行委員長으로는 現下 第4次 共靑年事件으로 在監中인 張赤宇君이 就任해서 會員이 約130名 假量으로 幾多의 活躍을 하다가 맛침내 그 事件으로 囹圄의 몸이 되고 또한 言論集會의 自由를 漸漸 喪失함을 따라 一切의 集會와 甚至於 委員會까지 잘 열지 못하게 되여 거의 閉門狀態로 現下는 朴明基氏가 執行委員長으로 잇스나 아모 社會的 能率을 낼 수가 업시 그냥 沉黙狀態로 잇다. 그러나 大勢의 消長하는 한 토막만으로서 將久한 未來를 決定할 수는 업는 것이니 오늘날의 一時的 沉滯로서 永遠한 消滅를 悲觀할 수 업는 것이며 또한 歷史的 必然性만을 밋고 姜太公의 達80을 그대로 기달일 수는 더구나 업는 것이니 모름직이 必死的 努力으로 이 閑散한 陣容을 活氣잇게 整頓헤서 艱難한 局面을 打開해<74> 나가기를 바래서 마지 안이하는 것이다.

2, 大邱少年同盟

1924年 7月27日에 少年革英會, 改造團, 勞働少年會, 革造團의 4箇團體가 合同해서 大邱少年同盟이 創立되는데 그中에 大邱少年會는 金英波君의 合同의 主旨를 不肯이 녁여 中道에서 脫한 일도 잇섯스나 大邱少年同盟은 會員150名으로서 第一世 委員長을 孫基埰君으로 하야 大衆的 訓練과 自體敎養가튼 데만은 努力을 해오다가 지금은 朴柄喆君이 執行委員長으로서 多少의 活躍을 하나 이 亦是 比前해서는 매우 沉滯한 狀態로 別로 枚擧할 役割을 하지 못하는 중이다.

3, 新幹會 大邱支會

1927년 9月3日에 創立되엿스니 民族的 單一黨의 總力量을 集中하는 新幹運動의 猛烈한 氣勢가 全國的으로 波及될 때 創立當時 會員이 200名으로서 第一世 會長 李慶熙氏가 統率하고 大衆的 訓練에 자못 活氣를 뻣치다가 이 또한 漸漸 萎微不振한 狀態에 이르러서 지금은 會員 數가 號日百萬의 感이 업지 안으며 大會席上가튼 데는 臨席警官과 集合會員의 數爻가 거의 比等할 만한 零星한 狀態로서 일직이 이 어느<75> 臨時大會때 書記長 柳淵述氏가 눈물을 흘니며 悲壯한 語調로 閑散한 陣營을 痛歎한 일도 잇섯스나 맛침내 더 進展됨이 업시 委員長 宋斗煥氏의 꾸준한 努力으로 그냥 推過해 나가나 亦是 會員 自體의 明確한 意識과 堅忍한 勇氣를 鼓舞해서 엇지튼 現段階의 大衆을 收容하는 新幹運動을 意識的으로 支持하는 質的으로 充實한 會員이 늘어가기를 바라는 것이다.

4, 槿友會 大邱支會

1928年 2월27日에 創立되여서 會員 數가 約150名假量으로 委員長 李春壽氏의 隱忍自重하는 努力으로 現下의 難局面을 當해서도 그냥 會員을 統率해 나가며 社會的으로 大書特書할 만한 功果를 낫하내지는 못하엿스나 會員 自體 內에 잇서서 月例討論會가튼 自體敎養에 매우 注力하며 이번 八公山一帶의 水害에는 다른 團體보다 먼저 率先해서 會員들끼리의 게 모은 衣服類만 70餘點을 가지고 委員4,5人이 山路40餘里의 災害地를 跋涉해서 一般罹災民의게 分配해준 일도 잇섯스며 어이튼 不煩不撓한 活動이 그다지 沉滯하지는 안으니 이 現狀으로 남아 훨신 더 一般 家庭婦人의게 槿友運動을 浸透식혀서 거긔에 鞏固한 陣勢를 벼푸는 것이 一策이<76> 안일가 한다.

5, 慶北 衡平社 大邱支會

1912年에 創立되엿는데 會員은 約50名 假量에 不過하나 自體의 統一에 잇서서는 어느 團體보다 第一 成績이 좃타고 하며 支社長 金春三氏의 渾身的 熱誠으로 創立以來로 지금까지 社務를 掌理하며 府內에만 잇는 獸肉販賣店의 數가 300을 超過하니 모다 團結과 統一이 매우 鞏固히 되여 잇다니 그만한 力量으로 좀더 社會的 能率을 내기를 바란다.

6, 慶北靑年聯盟

1928年 1月7日에 慶北 金泉에서 記者同盟이 創立된 卽後 곳 因해서 慶北靑年聯盟이 되니 慶北에 잇는 各 靑年同盟과  또 細胞에 包容되엿든 前衛分子들의 總結束인지라 가장 戰鬪的 氣勢로 第一世 委員長 洪甫容氏가 就任하야 幾多의 活躍을 하다가 ML黨 事件으로 投獄되고 連해 鄭時鳴氏가 繼任하야 看板은 朝陽會館에 걸어두엇든 바 鄭氏 또한 ML黨 事件으로 投獄됨에 幹部들은 모다 零落되고 看板좃차 不知不識中에 뉘손으로 띄여지고 말엇스니 이것은 正式으로 解體한 일도 업시 인제는 大邱人의 記憶에 좃차 살어진 夭死團體가 잇다.-(完)-<77>
<72-77>