별건곤 제33호
1930년 10월 01일
大邱商工界一瞥 (A Glimpse of the Daegu Commercial and Industrial World)
徐相日
논설 (Essay)

A Glimpse of the Daegu Commercial and Industrial World
						Seo Sang-il

(Omitted preceding text)

From a historical perspective, one might imagine that Daegu, in terms of the general economy and especially the commercial and industrial sectors, has followed a similar path to Gyeongseong. However, unlike Gyeongseong, which for 500 years of the Joseon Dynasty was the political center, its commercial and industrial sectors were not merely neglected but were inevitably shaped by the exploitative diplomatic practices that drained the provinces. As a result, most Seoul people today have developed feminine qualities in men, which is no coincidence. The so-called commercial and industrial sectors, centered around the middle and lower classes in central Gyeongseong, had their economic lives develop from rudimentary forms of quasi-feudal capital and feudal commercial capital during the agricultural servitude era. During the 20 years following the great earthquake of the Japanese annexation of Korea, the parasitic economic life dependent on political power collapsed. Modern commercial, industrial, and financial capital flooded in. Only a few factories and trading companies under the management of chaebols (財閥) such as Min Yeong-hwi and Kim Seong-su barely maintained modern industrial forms. Can we even call the rest the general commercial and industrial sector of Koreans? The Daegu commercial and industrial world is following a similar path to Gyeongseong, which is in a state of ruin and decline to the point of being insignificant.

Daegu, in terms of its political life, was also under the rule of one person south of Joryeong Pass (鳥嶺), exploiting the region and sustaining its economic life through parasitic means. Fortunately, Daegu's geographical relationship with the agricultural area has allowed it to maintain feudal landlord power in a conservative atmosphere, even after the collapse of political power. This is a unique economic characteristic of Daegu. However, apart from that, the general economic conditions and the commercial and industrial sectors were originally more immature and empty than those of Gyeongseong. Moreover, its own growth and development were hindered by the shadow of the entrenched landlord power. Suddenly, it encountered the high-speed hurricane of modern imperialism, and the resulting suffering is beyond description. It is impossible to describe the state of the Daegu commercial and industrial world.

Compared to others who keep up with the London gold and silver prices and New York stock market trends through the radio and compete in the development of the modern economy through air transport, we lack even the most basic national protection, not to mention mutual self-reliance. For us Koreans as a whole, whose economic future is overshadowed by darkness, the inner workings of the Daegu economy are simply following the path of Gyeongseong's decline. Gyeongseong, as the political center, has undergone rapid changes, while Daegu, as a landlord-centered area, is progressing more slowly in a conservative atmosphere. However, the inevitable outcome appears to be nothing but ruin and destruction.

The conservative nature of Daegu people can be seen as a strength in some ways, but on the other hand, it completely lacks decisiveness and a spirit of enterprise. It is a fact that it cannot perform a major operation to reverse its course and revive itself with its own strength from this chronic state of weakness. However, can even that conservative life withstand the rapid force of the hurricane and preserve its remnants? That is only the opinion of the foolish Daegu people. The future of Daegu people, who possess human vices, holds nothing for human society but a progression from clinging to death to extinction.

Despite possessing considerable wealth, enough to maintain its position as the leading local area in all of Korea, their economic activities are limited to exploiting tenant farmers and usury. If not that, then the only shortcut to wealth through more sophisticated management is to pay annual installments to the Oriental Development Company (東拓) or the Colonial Bank (殖銀) to buy land. Who would not laugh at their contentment with this self-ignorance and self-satisfaction? Of the 274,000 tons of cargo shipped annually from Daegu Station, only a few merchants use carload service (車扱), including Kang Chi-un, who handles approximately 5,000 tons of salt, and Choi Sang-geun, who handles approximately 2,000 tons of North Sea fish. Who else can be said to exist? Considering that Daegu, a large market that consumes 2 million seok (石) of rice production, imports 100,000 seok of miscellaneous grains, and consumes nearly 10,000 tons of fertilizer, does not have a single direct trader, what can be more eloquently proven? In a market where 800,000 won of fish products are gathered and distributed, there isn't even a single broker with a net capital of 5,000 won. What more is there to say? Even though 3 million won worth of silk and cotton fabrics are imported, there is no way there is even a single importer. The so-called Daegu Yakryeong Market (大邱藥令市), a historical specialty, has a trade volume of 1 million won, but the protagonist is Gaeseong person Kim Hong-jo, and his 100,000 won success story is something to be proud of.

What about the industrial sector? The Dongyang Textile Mill (東洋染織所), managed by Lee Sang-ak, produces 100,000 bolts of ramie fabric (東洋苧), with a total value of approximately 200,000 won. That textile factory is like an only son. Besides that, what else is there besides Baek Nam-chae's Choyang Refined Pill Factory (朝陽煉丸工場), which produces 2 million pills worth 45,000 won? If we consider the financial institutions such as Gyeongil Bank (慶一銀行) of the Jang Gil-sang lineage, the Hapdong Bank (合同銀行) of the Jeong Jae-hak lineage, and the Choyang Mutual Savings Company (朝陽無盡) of the Seo Byeong-won lineage, which are historical products of the developed lending industry, there isn't a single other joint-stock company. From this, the general economic sector of the Daegu commercial and industrial world can be inferred. It is said that Gyeongeun and Hapeun, managed by the so-called chaebols, will become the Second Hanseong Bank (漢城銀行) with Japanese executives. Is it fortunate if even relying on it for a few people's livelihoods becomes possible?

To recover from the daily decline of our commercial and industrial sector, it was thought that forming some kind of cohesive, united organization for mutual support among merchants and industrialists who sympathize with the same plight would be a way to survive. The Daegu Commercial and Industrial Association (大邱商工協會) was the first of its kind in all of Korea and was founded 4-5 years ago, but only an empty signboard hangs on the pillar of the Choyang Hall (朝陽會館) in front of Dalseong Park (達城公園).

People who wander in ignorance and apathy, enjoying it as their only pleasure, and colleagues who spend their days making noise in conceptual games, what is the secret to our true revival? How can the atmosphere of a modern industrial city in Pyongyang be considered a coincidence? Isn't it the result of the step-by-step economic development accumulated during the 500 years of the Joseon Dynasty when political freedom was lost? If the worldwide commercial strategy of the Chinese is the product of 300 years of labor during the Qing Dynasty, then the worldwide leap of the Jewish people must also be the result of perseverance and effort from a long history of hardship over 2,000 years. Furthermore, in aspiring to the future society, can it be obtained apart from practice and effort, and can one be abandoned and two be sought? Whether we are left or right, should we strive, or perhaps fight, from ignorance to awareness, from concept to reality, from the smallest possible step? Isn't that constant accumulation our final harvest?

(Omitted subsequent text)

**Named Entities**

李朝	Joseon Dynasty
京城	Gyeongseong
閔泳徽	Min Yeong-hwi
金性洙	Kim Seong-su
鳥嶺	Joryeong
姜致雲	Kang Chi-un
崔相根	Ch'oe Sang-gŭn
李相岳	Li Sang-ak
白南埰	Paek Nam-ch'ae
張吉相	Chang Kil-sang
慶一銀行	Kyŏngil Ŭnhaeng
鄭在學	Chŏng Chae-hak
合同銀行	Haptong Ŭnhaeng
徐丙元	Sŏ Pyŏng-wŏn
朝陽無盡	Choyang Mujin
漢城銀行	Hansŏng Ŭnhaeng
達城公園	Talsŏng Kongwŏn
金弘祖	Kim Hong-jo
平壤	P'yŏngyang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제33호
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	大邱商工界一瞥
필자	徐相日
기사형태	논설

大邱商工界一瞥
						徐相日
前略(-원문)
歷史的 見地에서의 大邱는 一般經濟界로서나 商工界로서에 잇서서는 京城과 比等한 過程을 踏來하여 잇지 안이하엿나 하는 想像을 가질 수 잇다는 것은 京城은 李朝 500年 동안 何如間 政治中心인 것만큼 그 商工界에 等閒하여 왓다는 것보담도 필연적 趨勢에서 지방만을 搾取하여 사라온 外交的 術習이 發達한 結果 至今 서울사람은 大槪가 男子로서의 女性 的 性能을 馴致한 所以가 決코 偶然이 안이여섯고 所謂 商工界는 中下階級이 京城中部地帶를 中心삼아 거의 農奴時代的 貸弊資本과 封建時代的 商業資本의 幼稚한 形殼만에서 그들의 所謂 經濟生活이 生長하여 오다가 韓日倂合이란 一大地震을 逢着한 20年동안에 政治的 勢力에서의 寄生的 經濟生活의 崩壞는 勿論이오 現代的 商業資本, 産業資本, 金融資本이 洪水가티 미러오는 急潮에 閔泳徽, 金性洙 等 財閥의 經營下에 隷屬한 幾箇의 工場과 商會等이 現代的 産業形態를 僅保할 뿐이오 其外 朝鮮人의 一般的 商工界라 할가. 經濟界는 보잘 것이 업실 만큼 破滅과 沒落의 過程에 잇는 오날의 京城과 거의 同轍의 過程을 밟고 잇는 것이 大邱商工界라 보지 안이할 수가 업슬가 하는 것은 大邱 亦然 그 政治的 生命에 잇서서는 鳥嶺 以南을 分界삼아 一人之下요 萬人之上으로서 地方搾取의 寄生的 生活에서 土人의 經濟生活이 營爲되여왓는 바 多幸히 大邱는 地理的 關係에 잇서서 農業地帶인 것만큼 비록 政治勢力은 崩壞하얏슬지라도 保守的 분위기에서 依然히 封建的 地主勢力을 保有하여온 것만은 大邱의 經濟的 한 特色이라 안이할 수 업스나마도 其外의 一般的 經濟狀態라든지 商工界에 잇서서는 오히려 京城의 比가 안일만큼 元來가 幼稚하얏고 空虛한 狀態를 갓고 왓슴은 勿論이겟고 더욱이 地主勢力이 盤居한 陰翳에서 그 自身의 生長發達까지도 阻害를 밧아오든 바 突然이 高速度로 부러치는 現代 帝國主義 颶風을 맛나스니 그 아래에서 呻吟하는 慘狀이야말로 言語道斷한 大邱商工界의 內容이라 안이 할 수 업슬 것이다. 라듸오로서 倫敦金銀時價와 紐育株式時勢를 맛추워 가면서 飛行運輸로서에 現代經濟의 發展이나마도 競爭하고 잇는 남들의게 比하야 何等의 國家的 保護가 업슴은 姑舍하고도 相互自活의 自觀까지도 업는 너나할 것 업시 朝鮮사람 全體의 經濟的 將來에는 一株의 暗影밧게 보이지 안이하는 우리들이라면 더욱 大邱經濟界의 裏面消息이야 第一 京城의 沒落過程을 行進하고 잇슬 뿐이다. 京城은 政治的 中心인 것만큼<82> 急激한 變化를 가저온대 比하야 大邱는 地主中心인 까닭으로 多少 保守的 氣分에서 그 行進이 漸鈍的이나마도 必然의 歸趨는 沒落과 破滅 그것밧게는 아모 것도 업슬 것 갓해 보인다. 大邱人의 保守的 特性이엇든 意味에서는 特長이라 할 수도 잇지마는  그 反面에는 勇斷力과 進取性이 全然 缺如하여 잇고 보니 이 慢性的 衰弱症을 到底히 自身의 힘으로서는 一大手術를 加하여 起死回生的 方向轉換을 하지 못할 것은 事實이다. 그럿타고 하야서 保守的 生命 그것이나마도 颶風의 急勢를 能히 抵抗하여 그 殘喘을 保有할 수 잇슬가. 그는 오즉 愚鈍한 大邱人의 所見밧게는 업슬 것이다. 人間으로서에 가진 惡徵을 具備한 大邱人의 將來에는 무엇이든지 死守에서 死滅로 行進하는 것밧게 人間社會를 爲하야서는 아모것도 차자볼 것이 업다. 全鮮에 잇서서 地方的으로서에는 그 首位를 不讓하랴는 相當한 富力을 死藏하고도 그들의 經濟的 營爲라면 小作人搾取와 高利貸金뿐일 것이요 그것이 안인 高級的 經營이라면 東拓이나 殖銀에 年賦金내여서 土地買入의 唯一한 致富의 捷逕이란 自己無知에서 自慢의  至安을 깃버하고 잇슴을 뉘가 웃지 안이하랴? 大邱驛에서 一年發着하는 貨物 總噸數 27만4천噸中에서 이것을 車扱으로 利用하는 商人으로서는 鹽類에 略5,000噸을 取扱하는 姜致雲과 北魚等에 略 2천톤을 取扱하는 崔相根外 數人을 除하고는 또 뉘가 잇다고 할 수가 업스며 穀肥類에 잇서서는 米穀生産高 2백만石을 呑吐하며 雜穀輸入高 10만石을 消費하며 肥料輸入量이 거의 1만噸을 消化하는 大邱의 大市場에 한 사람의 直貿易이 업다는 것만 보아도 무엇을 雄辯으로 證明할 수 잇슬 것이다. 80만圓의 魚物이 集散하는 市場에 正味5,000圓의 資金을 가진 客主1人이 업다는 대에야 더 말할 것이 어대 잇스며 300만圓의 綢緞布木이 輸入되야도 한 사람의 輸入商이 잇슬 理가 萬無하고 所謂 大邱藥令市라 하면 歷史的 名物로서 100만圓의 貿易高를 가젓지마는 主人公은 開城人 金弘祖 한 사람의 10만金 成功談이 자랑꺼리가 된다. 工業界는 엇더하냐? 李相岳의 經營인 東洋染織所에서 東洋苧生産量이 10만疋 總價額이 略20여만圓의 織組工場 하나이 오즉 외동아달 格이오 그外에는 生産量 200만枚 價額 4,5만圓의 白南埰 朝陽煉丸工場밧게야 무엇이 다시 잇슬 것이랴? 張吉相系의 慶一銀行과 鄭在學系의 合同銀行과 徐丙元系의 朝陽無盡가튼 金融機關이 貸金業의 發達한 歷史的 産物의 特徵이라 할 만한 株式會社를 떠나서는 한 箇도 더 볼 수가 업는 大邱商工界라 하면 그 一般的 經濟界는 可窺할 수 잇슬 것이다. 所謂 財閥이 經營한다는 慶銀 合銀도 將次 日人專務入銀으로서에 第二漢城銀行의 運命을 가지게 된다니 몃 사람의 糊口를 依託할 만한 就職이나마 可能하다면 不幸中多幸이라 할가? 나날이 凋落하여가는 우리 商工界를 爲하야 九死에 一生을 挽回함에는 오즉 同病을 相憐하는 商工業者의 相互保障이 될 만한 무슨 連帶的 鞏固한 團結體를 이름이 한 自活의 方途가 될가 하여 大邱商工協會가 全鮮에 그<83> 嚆矢的 創立된지 임이 4,5箇年이엿스나 오즉 빈 看板만 達城公園 압 朝陽會館 기동에 걸여 잇슬뿐이다. 모든 無知와 沒覺에서 死藏에 해매이면서도 그것을 唯一의 享樂地帶로 깃뻐하는 人士들이나 觀念遊戱에서만 自朝至暮토록 喧騷만으로서에 消日를 삼는 동모들이여 우리의 참된 復活의 要訣은 무엇일가? 平壤에 隆隆한 現代産業都市의 氣分이 엇지 偶然이라 하랴. 政治的 自由를 喪失한 李朝 500年 동안에 오즉 經濟的으로만 一步一步의 發展이 積蓄한 今日의 收穫이 안일가? 支那人의 世界的 商略이 淸朝300年동안 勤勞의 産物이 안일 수 업다면 猶太族의 世界的 飛躍이 또한 2,000년동안 오랜 설엄에서 力行의 所得일 것이다. 뿐만이 안이라 未來의 社會를 憧憬함에 잇서서도 實踐과 力行을 떠나 어들수 잇스며 하나를 바리고 둘를 求할 수 잇슬가? 우리는 左이나 右이나 오즉 無知에서 自覺으로 觀念에서 現實로 可能한 最小限度의 一步에서 努力이라할가? 鬪爭이라할가. 不斷한 集積 그것이라야 우리의 最後收穫이 안일가 한다.(下略-원문)
<82-84>