별건곤 제33호
October 01, 1930
新興하는 大邱商業界 (The Emerging Daegu Commercial World)
K·M·L
논설 (Article)

The Emerging Daegu Commercial World
K·M·L

Daegu, one of the three major cities in Joseon and the southern capital, is not only a notable city in terms of produce and local transportation but also has a surprisingly increasing population every year, now embracing 100,000 residents. Furthermore, it possesses a vast and boundless plain, offering ample room for future development, and thus, the construction of a Greater Daegu is possible.

However, how has the commercial world of Daegu, with such a blessed stage, fared? Everywhere, of course, the so-called major cities have their own issues. However, Daegu's commercial world was even more in their hands (저네들의 手中에 드러 잇섯다). Therefore, whether it was a large or small item, people invariably went to their stores first. The main reason why commercial power was more alarmingly in their hands than in other cities was that, since ancient times, Southern Joseon (南鮮) had only revered literature and art, treating commerce and industry with contempt and ultimately neglecting them.

Moreover, the faults of the merchants were not insignificant. For the most part, they misunderstood being unkind, charging high prices, and favoring outsiders as mere commercial tactics.

To some extent, the character of the people of Gyeongsangnam-do, who generally appear gentle and peculiar, is not without reason, but largely due to the small number of merchants and their seemingly arrogant treatment of customers, which was a major failing of the Daegu Korean commercial world.

Furthermore, Daegu, a wealthy region with the most millionaires and large asset holders, has not received any support from capitalists as merchants <84> and has only been weakly struggling in isolation, eventually declining.

In the meantime, their daily development and occasional expansion are beyond any need for exaggeration.

However, such things are now mostly old stories, and in the last few years, a truly welcome phenomenon has emerged in our commercial world. What is it?

They are clearing the ground and setting up pillars to build a new palace on the site of ruins. It is the result of young merchants' great awakening, overcoming all difficulties, and fighting with all their might. Now, a sense of emerging vigor is not only thickening, but also certain prominent stores such as "Mooyoungdang Bookstore (茂英堂書店), Seongcho Publishing Company (星潮社書店), Sangmundang (尙文堂) in the book and stationery sector, Dong-A Women's Trading Company Branch (東亞婦人商會支店), Mooyoungdang Western Goods Department (茂英堂洋品部), Daegu Socks Store (大邱洋襪所), Bokundong Main Store (復運堂本店), Western Goods Store (西部雜貨店), Anchang Socks Store (安昌洋襪所) in the Western goods and general merchandise sector, Ji Ihong Store (池二洪商店), Kim Changrok Store (金昌錄商店), Kim Seongjae Store (金聖在商店), Taechang Store (泰昌商店) in the silk and cotton goods sector, and other companies such as Sangshin Company (商信社), Dalseo Western Shoe Store (達西洋靴店), Dongyang Dyeing and Weaving Factory (東洋染織所), Daegu Leather Traders Association (大邱皮革商會)" are not at all affected by the major panic periods of recession, austerity, and drought but are developing with the momentum of the rising sun.

Moreover, it is particularly noteworthy that our merchants have bought and newly built or renovated many of their prominent store sites in Honmachi (本町) 1 and 2-chome Street, the most central area of Daegu.

Also, in the Jeunggogae (진고개)-like in Seoul, and the Motomachi (元町) street area in front of the train station, many stores have closed down due to the recession in recent years, and even those that are open seem to be in a state of decline and exhaustion. However, in contrast, our commercial district is showing signs of prosperity. (Although some minor stores in our commercial world with insufficient content and insensitive management policies have also closed down.)

Previously, they only competed with each other like a family feud, but now they have united and become one, living in harmony, cultivating modern commercial knowledge, and now they have even begun to confront and compete with them (저네들).

Thus, those who had been boasting with an air of arrogance are now feeling fear. And since most of them are young merchants, their anxiety is said to be considerable, as their future seems uncertain.

Moreover, the Chamber of Commerce, which had been their exclusive property, saw the emergence of young councilors such as Bae Yeongdeok (裴永悳) this year, and Lee Eungbok (李膺福) even occupied the unprecedented position of Deputy Secretary-General. As a result, they are making many efforts for our commercial world, and our merchants are also now trying to utilize the Chamber of Commerce.

Furthermore, Baek Giman (白基萬), who had made a name for himself as a star in the Daegu poetry scene, left the poetry scene and stepped into the business world. After several years, with the enthusiastic support of the Daegu commercial world, he launched the "Daegu Commerce and Industry Monthly Report" (大邱商工月報) (Office: Choyang Hall (朝陽會館)), which is now being edited and will soon be released to the world, marking a unique spectacle and compass for the Daegu commercial world. How much is this to be celebrated for the emerging commercial world! <85>

**Named Entities**

全鮮		Jeonseon
大邱		Taegu
慶南道		Kyŏngnamdo
茂英堂書店		Muyŏngdang Sŏjŏm
星潮社書店		Sŏngch'o Sŏjŏm
尙文堂		Sangmundang
東亞婦人商會		Tong-A Puin Sanghwe
茂英堂洋品部		Muyŏngdang Yangp'umbu
大邱洋襪所		Taegu Yangmalsso
復運堂本店		Pongundong Ponjŏm
西部雜貨店		Sŏbu Chaphwajŏm
安昌洋襪所		Anch'ang Yangmalsso
池二洪商店		Chi Ihong Sangjŏm
金昌錄商店		Kim Ch'angnok Sangjŏm
金聖在商店		Kim Sŏngjae Sangjŏm
泰昌商店		T'aech'ang Sangjŏm
商信社		Sangshinsa
達西洋靴店		Talsŏ Yanghwajŏm
東洋染織所		Tongyang Yŏmjiksŏ
大邱皮革商會		Taegu P'igyŏk Sanghwe
서울		Sŏul
裴永悳		Pae Yŏngdŏk
李膺福		Lee Ŭngbok
白基萬		Paek Kiman
大邱商工月報		Taegu Sanggong Wŏlbo
朝陽會館		Choyang Hoegwan



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제33호
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	新興하는 大邱商業界
필자	K·M·L
기사형태	논설

新興하는 大邱商業界
						K·M·L
全鮮 3大 都市의 하나이요 南方의 首府인 大邱는 産物노 보아서나 地方交通으로 보아서나 屈指할 만한 都市일 뿐 안이라 해마다 人口도 놀나운 數字로 느러가 現在 10만 府民을 包容하고 잇다. 그러고 넓고도 가업는 平原地帶를 가지고 잇서 압흐로도 얼마든지 發展할 餘地가 잇스며 따라서 大大邱를 建設할 수 잇슬 것이다.
그러나 이와 가튼 天惠의 舞臺를 가진 大邱의 商業界는 果然 엇더하엿나? 어듸나 勿論하고 所謂 大都市란 名目을 가진 곳이다. 그러하엿지만 大邱의 商業界란 보담 더 저네들의 手中에 드러 잇섯다. 따라서 만코 적고간에 물건을 사려면 依例히 저네들의 商店으로 먼저 차처가게 되엿섯다. 다른 都市보다도 더 寒心하게 저네들의 手中으로 商權이 드러가게 된 大體의 原因인 즉 南鮮에는 예로부터 文藝만을 崇拜하야 商工業이란 賤待視하여 왓고 드듸여 等閑視하고 마럿기 때문이다.
그러고 商業者로서의 過失도 적지 안헛스니 大體로 不親切하고 갑빗싸고 외누리 만히 하는 習慣을 오로지 商業術策으로 誤解하엿기 때문이다.
어느 點까지는 慶南道사람의 性格이 大略 점잔하고도 특명스러워 보이는데 原因이 업는 바도 안이나 大槪는 商業者數가 적엇스며 그야말로 배부른 흥정을 하다 십히 顧客을 對偶하엿슴이 大邱朝鮮人商業界의 一大失因이엇다.
그러고 千萬長者 大資産家를 가장 만히 가지고 잇는 富鄕인 大邱이면서도 商業家로서는 何等 資本家의 後援을 밧지<84> 못하고 오즉 외로히 貧弱한 가운데서 氣息奄奄하게 나아가다가 畢竟 衰殘하여젓슬 뿐이엿다.
그러는 동안에 저네들은 나날히 發展되고 때때로 擴張될 것이야 長廣舌을 기대릴 것도 업슬 것이다.
그러나 이런 것도 거운 半 남어 녯 이약이가 되고 이즘 몃 해동안의 우리네 商業界에는 참으로 반가운 現狀이 낫하낫스니 엇더한 것이냐?
廢墟의 宮터에 새로운 宮殿을 세우려고 터전을 닥고 기둥을 세우려 한다. 그는 少壯商業家들이 만흔 自覺下에서 萬難을 무릅쓰고 全力을 다하야 奪鬪해 나온 結果- 이제는 新興氣分이 濃厚하여 갈 뿐안이라 某某有數한 商店들은 『書籍文具界로는 茂英堂書店 星潮社書店 尙文堂 等 洋品雜貨界로는 東亞婦人商會支店 茂英堂洋品部 大邱洋襪所 復運堂本店 西部雜貨店 安昌洋襪所 等 綢緞布木界로는 池二洪商店 金昌錄商店 金聖在商店 泰昌商店 等 其他 商信社 達西洋靴店 東洋染織所 大邱皮革商會 等』不景氣니 緊縮이니 旱災니 하는 큰 恐慌時期 가운데서 조금도 그 影響을 밧지안코 旭日昇天의 勢로 發展되여 나가는 現狀이다.
더욱이 特書할 만한 것은 大邱로서는 가장 中心地帶인 本町1,2丁目通에는 저네들의 有數하든 商店터를 우리네 商業家로서 買收하야 新築 或은 改築한 곳도 적지 안타.
그러고 서울의 진고개와 가튼 驛前 元町通의 저네들 商店街에는 數年以來 不景氣로 因하야 閉店한 곳도 만코 現在 門을 열고 잇스나 內容이 衰殘해서 疲困한 狀態에 잇는 곳도 적지 안흔 模樣이다. 그러나 그와 反對로 우리네 商店街에는 오히려 旺氣를 띄고 나아가는 現狀에 잇다,(우리네 商業界에도 內容이 充實치 못하고 經營方針이 不敏하든 微微한 店鋪들이야 閉店한 곳도 往往히 잇지만)
그러고 前에는 한집안 싸홈 모양으로 서로히 競爭만 해오든 것을 이제는 團結이 되여 한등어리가 되고 서로 和睦히 지내며 現代의 商業智識을 서로 戒養하며 이제는 오히려 저네들을 對抗하야 競爭을 하기 始作하엿다.
그리하야 眼下無人의 勢로 뽐내며 나아가든 그들이 이제 와서는 오히려 恐怖를 눗긴다 한다. 그러고 大槪가 少壯商業家들인 만큼 將來가 萬里가틈에 希望이 遼遠하다 하야 그들의 鳩首心焦가 참으로 적지 안은 모양이다.
그러고 商業會議所란 오즉 저네들 專有物가티 되여 오든 것이 今年에 니르러 裴永悳氏 外 少壯 評議員들이 出馬하게 되자 前例업든 副書記長까지도 李膺福氏가 그 椅子를 占領하게 되엿스며 따라서 우리네 商業界를 爲하야 만흔 盡力을 하는 中이며 우리네 商業界들도 또한 이제야 商業會議所를 利用하려고 한다.
그러고 大邱詩壇의 名星으로 일홈을 날니든 白基萬氏가 詩壇을 떠나 實業界로 발을 듸려논 지 數年만에 大邱商業界의 熱熱한 聲援下에 『大邱商工月報』(事務所朝陽會館)를 發行하게 되여 이제 編輯中임으로 不遠하야 世上에 나타나게 되엿스니 大邱商業界의 한 異彩이요 또한 羅盤針이다. 이것이 新興商業界을 爲하야 얼마나 慶賀할 바이냐.<85>
<84-85>