雜誌名: 別乾坤 第33號

발행일: 1930년 10월 01일
기사제목: 葉書通信 (Postal Card Correspondence)
기사형태: 雜著 (Miscellany)

Postal Card Correspondence
Dangerous Curved Bridge

The curved bridge (the first bridge on the east side of Gwanggyo = curved bridge (曲橋)) that crosses from our neighborhood to Gwancheol-dong was repaired once several decades ago and has been left as is. Now, the supporting wood and planks are all rotten and broken, so if a person passing by is even slightly careless, they will undoubtedly be injured. Does the Civil Engineering Section of the Gyeongseong City Hall only nap in this autumn breeze, or do they have no intention of repairing it? If the residents didn't pay their taxes, they would enforce it, wouldn't they? If what I say isn't true, the Mayor of Gyeongseong or the head of the Civil Engineering Section should take a trip and try playing a trick riding act on the curved bridge as a test. (Kim Saeng, Samgak-cho, Seoul)

What is Cutting Edge?

Recently, newspapers and magazines are full of the word "cutting edge (尖端)" which I haven't seen before. What is "cutting edge" anyway? Is it the tip of an awl? The tip of a high collar female student's shoes? The tip of a Westerner's nose? The followers of the Bocheon religion (普天敎) say they must have a sharp trick (뾰죽한 수) to live, so they don't cut their topknots. Do writers these days also believe in Bocheon religion? They say that you have to wear wide-legged Oxford bags to be modern, but why do they use the word "cutting edge" so readily everywhere? I think it would be better if they used it sparingly as a seasoning from now on. (A Reader from Pyeongyang)

Outrageous Men

At the Suyeonjeong mineral spring (翠雲亭) or the Gacheon-dong mineral spring (可潛洞), men gather every morning and make a fuss, claiming to be doing something called cold-water bathing (冷水浴), completely naked. How can women like us go there to drink the mineral water, feeling so ashamed? Even if they are all men, if they had even a little modesty and public-mindedness, would they be able to strip naked and be so dirty next to a well where others are drinking? Those men should be laid face down and their buttocks beaten 300 times, and then they should be deported to a naked country like the South Sea Islands or an island across the sea. (A Woman from Gahoe-dong, Seoul)

Don't Be Fooled

Recently, there are advertisements everywhere for recruiting male and female employees for such-and-such company (무슨社), claiming a monthly income of 50 won or more, or even 100 won or more. I, who was suffering the agony of death due to unemployment, thought this was a godsend and went there as if I were looking for my father or older brother who had come back to life. But as it turned out, they asked for a personal guarantee deposit (身元保證金) of 200 won.

But what could I do? With the promise that the deposit would be returned later and that I would earn a monthly salary of 50 won or more, I sold some household belongings at home and pawned them to give them the money. But what a surprise! The monthly salary (月給) wasn't really a monthly salary; it meant that if you were good at recruiting advertisements yourself, you would get that much of a discount. And the so-called company (名色社) is just an empty shell that cleverly steals other people's deposits. In the end, I suffered a loss and sued them, but was it of any use? The only thing anyone can do is to be careful from the beginning. Please don't be fooled like me and pay attention. (Kim Saeng, Jongno 2-ga, Seoul) <91>

Named Entities

翠雲亭	Ch'uiunjŏng
可潛洞	Kagamdong
京城府	Kyŏngsŏng-bu
貫鐵洞	Kwan’ch’ŏl-tong
廣橋	Kwanggyo
金生	Kim Saeng
三角町	Samgak-chŏng
平壤	P'yŏngyang
嘉會洞	Kahoedong
鍾路通	Chongno-t'ong



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제33호
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	葉書通信
기사형태	잡저

葉書通信
危險한 曲橋

우리 洞里에서 貫鐵洞을 건너가는 곱은 다리(廣橋東便 첫다리=曲橋)는 몃 10年前에 한번 修繕을 하고는 그대로 두어 只今에는 架木과 板木이 모도 썩어 문어진 까닭에 通行하는 사람이 조곰만 不注意하면 落傷하기는 念慮업시 되엿다. 京城府 土木課에는 이 가을바람에도 낮잠만 자는지 엇재 修繕할 생각이 업는가. 府民이 稅金안낸다고 强制執行하듯하면 그러케는 안이두겟지 내말이 正말이 안이거든 京城府尹이나 土木課長이 한번 出張을 하야 試驗으로 曲橋에서 曲馬團노름이나 하야보시요.(市內三角町 金生)

尖端은 다 무엇이요

요새 新聞이나 雜誌에는 前에 못보든 尖端이란 文字가 만흐니 대체 尖端이란 것이 무엇인가요. 송곳끗인가요 하이카라 女學生의 구두끗인가요. 西洋놈의 코끗인가요 普天敎徒들이 뾰죽한 수가 잇서야 산다고 상투를 안 깍는다더니 요새 글 쓰는 이들도 普天敎를 信仰함니까. 바지는 아래통이 넓다란 라팔바지를 입어야 모던式이라면서 아모데나 尖端소리는 웨 잘 쓰나요. 이 압흐로는 그것도 양렴으로 조곰식 썻스면 조흘 듯하외다.(平壤 一讀者)

망측한 男子들

翠雲亭 약수터에나 可潛洞약수터에는 所謂 冷水浴인지 무엇인지 한다압시고 아츰이면 男子들이 모도 벌개벗고 야단을 치니 우리가튼 女子들이야 어듸 창피하여서 약수물이나 먹으려 갈 수 잇나요. 女子도 女子이지만은 自己네 男子끼리라도 적으나 염지가 잇고 公德心이 잇스면 남이 먹는 우물엽헤서 벌개벗고 지저분하게는 할 수 잇글가요. 그런 男子는 그대로 업허 놋코서 볼기를 한 300度 따린 다음에 南洋群島나 물 건너 섬나라가튼 裸體國으로 定配를 보냇스면 조겟소이다.(市內嘉會洞 一女性)

속지마시요

요새에 거리마다 무슨社 무슨社라고 男女社員 大募集廣告를 붓첫스되 月收50圓以上 或은 100圓以上이라 하엿기에 職業이 업서 죽을 苦痛을 밧던 나는 이것이 웬 떡이냐하고 마치 죽엇다가 다시 사라온 父兄을 차자 가듯이 가보앗드니 及其也 身元保證金 200圓을 내라겟지요.
그러나 할슈잇슴니까. 保證金은 追後에 도로주고 月給50圓以上이 생긴다는 바람에 집에 잇는 如干 세간 나부랭이를 팔고 典當을 잡혀 갓다 주엇더니 웬걸요 月給이란 것은 月給이 안이라 自己가 廣告募集가튼 것을 잘 하면 그 割引이 그럿탄 말이고 또 名色社란 것은 아모 것도 업는 빈털털이로 남의 保證金만 살작 잘너 먹슴듸다. 也終에 損害를 보고 告訴를 하니 所用이 잇슴니까. 그저 누구나 츰부터 잘 注意하는 수 밧게는 업겟습듸다. 나처럼 꼭 속지말고 注意를 하십시요.(市內鍾路通 2丁目 金生)<91>
<91>