Magazine Title:	삼천리 제9호
Publication Date:	1930년 10월 01일
Article Title:	二百萬 在外同胞 安危將來 (The Safety and Future of Two Million Overseas Compatriots)
Author:	金世鎔 (Kim Seyong); 羅景錫 (Na Kyŏngsŏk); 申興雨 (Sin Hŭng'u)
Article Type:	논설 (Editorial/Commentary)

The Activities of Koreans in Siberia
Kim Seyong

That Siberia, especially the Maritime Province (沿海州), has become the cornerstone of Soviet Russia's Far East policy is no different from the Tsarist era before the change in national polity. However, the fundamental difference lies in the fact that the former is based on the standpoint of ethnic protection and autonomous equality, whereas the latter adhered to a subservient, discriminatory, imperialistic ethnic policy. Consequently, the relationship of Koreans, who have deep historical ties to this land in economic, political, and various other aspects, has also significantly changed with the revolution as a turning point.
When studying the situation of overseas Koreans, the condition and problems of Koreans within the Soviet territory cannot be excluded. However, literature on this subject has been lacking, or if it exists, this writer, due to limited knowledge, has not heard of it. Therefore, despite being unqualified to describe it, at the earnest request (懇託) of Samch'ŏlli, I will limit myself to briefly introducing this issue in an extremely rough and general manner, intending this as a preface to a more concrete and numerical introduction promised to the readers later.

I
History of Migration to Siberia = The first time Koreans set foot in Russian territory (露領) was in 1863. At that time, the northern region of Korea suffered a great famine, and several families among the famine refugees crossed the Tuman River (豆滿江) seeking a path to survival in the wilderness of the Posyet (쁘셋도) region. This initiated further migration. Later, political exiles (流配人) or those fleeing the great famines of 1868 and 1869 migrated collectively, defying the national law (國法) that stipulated the death penalty for emigration. In 1869, there was a time when the number surged by 6,500 in half a year. These people mostly settled in the Ussuri region (鳥蘇里地方), <2> making a living through their innate skill of land cultivation. In 1871, 102 families, totaling over 500 people, migrated to Hŭngnyongju (黑龍州) and received 100 desyatina (떼샤진... 1 desyatina... 2,400 p'yŏng [approx. 7,934 sq meters]) of allotted land (配與地) per family from the Russian government. As the economy of the previously settled migrants improved and their influence gradually solidified (鞏固), and with the sharp increase of those continuously migrating from the Korean interior due to oppression (强力拿去), the Russians began to feel the fear (危懼) of being overwhelmed. Thus, in 1888, the Russo-Korean Special Agreement (露鮮特別協定) was established to restrict immigration. According to this agreement, Koreans who migrated to Russian territory before 1884 were recognized as Russian subjects, while subsequent immigrants were considered temporary foreign residents. However, in 1893, Governor-General Dukhovskoy (도호브스키) confirmed the land use rights for Korean farmers (鮮農) and permitted naturalization (入籍) for those who had resided for over five years, even temporary residents, and also encouraged migration to the interior.
Later, in 1901, land allocation to non-naturalized persons was again halted, and settlement on state land was prohibited. However, at the Special Deliberative Council on the Korean Problem held in Vladivostok (海參威) in 1908, naturalization of Koreans was permitted without land allocation being a necessary condition. Since then, the Russian government's attitude was not aimed at preventing immigration but rather varied in leniency depending on the circumstances. Consequently, Koreans continuously entering Russia seeking a livelihood reached over 13,000 in the southern Ussuri region alone by 1896. Elsewhere, they established dozens of villages such as Sinel'nikovo (시내리니꼬-보), Korsakovka (고로사고-푸카), Krounovka (구로노-푸카), Ol'gino-Romanovka (욀후네로마노프까) along the basins of the Suifun (슈환川), Lefu (레후川), and Daubihe (다라뷔에川) rivers. By 1910, the number of immigrants reached nearly 80,000. After the Japan-Korea Annexation (日韓合倂), the number increased further, and by 1915, there were over 40 Korean villages throughout the Maritime Province. Most had reclaimed desolate wilderness (曠原) and swamps (沼澤) into fertile land (沃土潤地), stabilizing their livelihood foundation. Naturalized citizens enjoyed all civil rights as Russian citizens. Particularly, the lives of migrants forcibly relocated by Russian authorities to places like Samalli (사만리) and Tobiho (도비허) in Hŭngnyongju were most affluent (裕足).
Most of these individuals received education in Russian schools and assimilated into the Russian lifestyle. Depending on the region, their economic power rivaled that of Russians. Kim Pyŏnghak (金炳學), who contracted for the Siberian Railway construction after 1894, and Ch'oe Pongjun (崔鳳俊), who succeeded as a military supplier (軍事用達) during the Russo-Japanese War, accumulated assets worth hundreds of thousands of won. Ch'oe Pongjun purchased steamships of over a thousand tons and was actively involved in trade between Wŏnsan and Vladivostok. Besides them, many others amassed wealth through commerce. On the other hand, non-naturalized vagrants (流戶人) and temporary residents mostly lived as employees (雇傭人) of Russians and original settlers or as tenant farmers (小作人) on rented land (借地), paying 40% to 60% of their harvest as rent (貢納) to landlords, similar to tenant farmers in the Korean interior. <3> However, due to the rich soil fertility (地味肥厚) and lack of land scarcity (土地饑饉), they still managed a relatively comfortable life.
Besides agriculture and commerce, quite a few engaged in speculative businesses (投機事業) and opium smuggling (鴉片密賣) (which persists even today, becoming a cancer of the Korean problem in Russia). Nearly 20,000 worked as miners (抗夫) in mines such as Lena (레나), Yenisei (나세이), and Amur (아물). Many also succeeded in livestock farming and fishing. Some gained fame as officials, soldiers, and teachers.

II
Koreans under the Soviet Regime after 1917
The November 1917 revolution, which established Soviet power, started with the dictatorship of the proletariat (푸로레타리아) and simultaneously declared the rights (abbreviated in original) of weak/small ethnic groups (弱小民族) and oppressed ethnic groups (被壓迫民族). The Constitution of the Russian Republic states:
"The Russian Republic, based on the fundamental spirit that the power of the people is equal regardless of racial or ethnic differences, declares that any kind of oppression against minority ethnic groups or restriction on equality... moreover, establishing or permitting any kind of privilege (direct or indirect) among individual ethnic groups - conflicts with (牴觸) the fundamental laws of the Republic. Also, individual ethnic groups have the right to separate into autonomous republics or autonomous oblasts through resolutions of the Soviet Congress, subject to the approval of the highest organs of the Russian Republic."
"The people of the Russian Republic have the right to freely use their respective ethnic languages in various congresses, courts, government offices, and social life."
"In regions with mixed populations of various ethnic groups, villages composed of the same ethnic group may separate to form independent rural soviets when the residential area expands."
Implementing this, Poland and Ukraine became independent, and over ten ethnic groups such as the Yakuts (야구-즈), Kirghiz (길기), Tatars (따달), Uzbeks (우즈벳크), etc., established autonomous territories, promoting and protecting their ethnic interests. This revolution brought significant changes to the lives of Koreans in Russia.

A. Political Aspects
As stipulated in the Constitution, Koreans, excluding those restricted from voting such as Tsarist-era police, spies, monks, and non-laboring earners, who are laborers regardless of gender and have registered residency for a certain period, possess the right to vote and be elected if they are 18 years or older on election day. They hold all political rights in daily life, just like Soviet Russians. Currently, the number of Koreans in the Maritime Province and other parts of Russia was approximately 220,000-240,000 in 1929, with over 60% holding voting rights. Among those eligible for election, some hold important positions as village, county, and district council members. Among them, there are three Korean members in the Vladivostok and Khabarovsk (하바롭스크) Soviet committees. Besides these administrative organs, quite a few (regrettably unable to provide numerical figures) are active in judicial bodies like the police and courts, and in Communist Party organs. It is a fact that the political rights and duties of Koreans in Russia are in no way different from those of Russian citizens. Furthermore, within the Maritime Province Regional Committee, an organ called the 'Korean Department' (高麗部) was established, overseeing administration related to Koreans with divisions for sanitation, industry, society, administrative investigation, etc., liaising with and receiving guidance from the Provincial Committee.
Although there was some sympathy and preferential treatment during the initial migration period, as the quantity and quality of the migrating force expanded, the sinister Russian authorities expelled laborers from mines (鑛山), abused farmers on farms, and closed all schools teaching in Korean. The political oppression and forced assimilation policies of Tsarist officials reached their peak. The Kwŏnŏphoe (勸業會), established in 1911 with official Russian permission as a Korean political organization managing general administration, judiciary, police, as well as education, industrial promotion, pioneering, officer training, etc., was forcibly shut down by the central Tsarist government when the European Great War (歐洲大戰) broke out in 1914 to welcome Japan's participation, simultaneously suppressing Korean political activities. Even towards the 200 Korean officers and several thousand soldiers who served as Russian soldiers during the Great War and achieved numerous distinguished merits (殊勳) on the Eastern Front, there was severe discrimination in treatment. Compared to that time, the political power and legal equality enjoyed by Koreans under Soviet rule today, based on the principle of ethnic non-discrimination, represent a world of difference.
Regarding the nationality issue, those naturalized during the Tsarist era are naturally recognized as Russian citizens. For Koreans who entered the country after the Japanese military intervention in Siberia and were missed in the registration, they were instructed to report to the relevant authorities. Currently, most are naturalized, except for those who do not comply with the Soviet Constitution, mobile smugglers of prohibited goods, etc. <4>
Political life as citizens of Soviet Russia is the same as the general political life of citizens of the Russian Republic, so there is no need to elaborate. While inserting a narrative about the Maritime Province being the historical source of the overseas Korean movement and its diverse past activities would be interesting, it is omitted here as a brief sketch will be provided in the later section on 'Active Figures'.

B. Economic Aspects
After the revolution, the Soviet economic policy, based on socialism, liberated Koreans from the economic shackles (桎梏) of the Tsarist era. It equally distributed the economic privileges and protection under the proletarian dictatorship system to poor peasants, who were exploited (搾取) like serfs by a small number of Korean and Russian landlords, and factory workers, who were wage slaves (賃銀奴隷). However, in the Far East Maritime Province, due to foreign military intervention (干涉) during the revolution, its status as the final base for counter-revolutionary forces, and other geographical and cultural factors, the central government's various measures were not implemented swiftly. Until the withdrawal of Japanese troops (撤兵) in 1922, Koreans lived under a system similar to the Tsarist era. They passed through the transitional period of so-called War Communism (戰時共産黨時代), characterized by land nationalization and forced grain requisition (穀物强制徵發), and even until the New Economic Policy period in 1924, industrial and economic life remained somewhat chaotic (混頓). However, after the distribution of land use rights and the promulgation of the Agricultural Laborer Protection Law in August 1925,

(Note, Labor Protection Law)
1. Prohibition of child labor under 14 years old
2. One public holiday per week
3. Wages not to fall below the minimum guarantee set by the state
4. Absolute guarantee of livelihood, etc.
In addition, facilities like Soviet state farms (sovkhoz/솝골호즈), agricultural laborer communes (kommuna/꼼뮨) (collective farms), cooperative organizations (協同組合) for acquiring tractors and machinery to help peasants learn new production methods, etc. ...
After the establishment of the new industrial policy, the economic activities of Koreans in various fields also became organized and regulated.
Looking at the occupational population distribution (1927):
1. Farmers...... Over 130,000. The number engaged solely in agriculture, including livestock farming, constitutes 45% of the total Korean population in the Maritime Province.
2. Fishing...... Farmers who also engage in fishing, plus fishermen solely engaged in fishing, constitute 25%.
3. Industrial laborers... 15%. After the implementation of the Five-Year Plan, this industrial population increased and now reaches 20%.
4. Freelance occupations... Retail merchants, smugglers, freelance laborers, 10%. Besides these, officials, others.
Within each of these industrial systems, there are respective cooperatives (組合). For example, the Kamchatka (감챠스카) Korean Fishermen's Cooperative, the Vladivostok Fisheries Cooperative, or in other industries, cooperatives are organized together with Russians based on occupation. In agriculture, they are organized into communes (곰뮨), artels (알째리), or kolkhozes (골호즈), sovkhozes (솝골호즈), etc.
Laborers, regardless of being skilled (熟練) or unskilled (不孰練 - older spelling), become cooperative members and receive opportunities for labor distribution. There is usually a preparatory period of 3 months for joining. Those entering Russian territory undergo investigation at the border authorities, declare their destination based on skills and preferences, and after arriving at the said location and completing the aforementioned 3-month labor preparatory period, they become regular members of the relevant cooperative.
Regarding the land issue... the government allocates vast tracts of land to Korean kolkhozes. The kolkhoz committee distributes land based on cultivation capacity. Here, 'self-reliance' means individual or family units that do not include the capacity to hire others. Taxes are <5> paid from the autumn harvest allocated to each individual, as reimbursement for government subsidies at actual cost... or even below actual cost, with a minimum amount set, reportedly.
Below is a recent example from 1930, not specifically for Koreans, but similar instances likely exist among Korean farmers:
The average daily income of an individual farmer not joining a kolkhoz is 1.93 rubles.
A farmer joining a kolkhoz has an average daily income of 4.75 rubles (this approaches the wages of industrial workers), showing a significant difference.
Comparing the income of Koreans and Russians in certain regions of the Maritime Province, there are places where Koreans earn more. This might be due to engaging in supplementary businesses like fishing and livestock farming besides agriculture, and lower living expenses. In any case, it can be numerically proven that the economic life of Koreans after the revolution has gradually become more affluent as its foundation stabilized.
Of course, there is freedom of saving, and savings institutions even exist with government encouragement. However, laborers who do not exploit the labor of others cannot become rich no matter how much they save; this is due to the cleverness of Soviet policy and also the practical impossibility.
To digress slightly, let's look at the benefits for farmers joining a kolkhoz. If a farmer joins the kolkhoz of their village with five or six hectares (헥타) of land and some farming tools, the governing body allocates land area and tools according to their cultivation capacity. Then, instead of an hourly wage system, a piece-rate system based on labor efficiency is applied. Besides the allocated area, they can cultivate as much additional land as their surplus capacity (剩餘能力) allows. At harvest time, the number of labor days and the value of the income are calculated and distributed among the members (in cash or grain). After deducting taxes and reimbursing government subsidies, part of the remainder is distributed as profit dividends, and another part is accumulated as the kolkhoz's fund to strengthen its financial foundation.
Besides the Korean economy centered on agriculture, fishing, forestry, livestock farming, and other industries are also important. However, since agriculture is the backbone of the Korean economy, and lacking figures and investigation for the others, they will be omitted. Within agriculture, rice cultivation (米作), which has been developing and improving year by year as a major product of the Maritime Province recently, will be briefly introduced.
The origin of rice cultivation in the Maritime Province dates back to 1910. In that year, Korean farmers residing in Nikolsk-Ussuriysk (니골스크, 우스리프키) experimented with cultivation, and the results were favorable. Subsequently, it rapidly spread to Korean farming areas like Khabarovsk (로하바롭스크), Posyet (보셋도), Grodekovo (구로데고!), Spasskoye (스빠스고트). In 1919, there was a great harvest of paddy rice (水稻), with the planted area reaching 200 desyatina; 1920... 2,500; 1921... 7,000; 1922... 12,000. By 1928, it had reached 4.5 times the area before 1922. The government did not neglect various experiments and encouragements, and in 1923, the annual production reportedly reached 300,000 to 400,000 sŏk [1 sŏk ≈ 180 liters].
Furthermore, as this paddy field business is a unique (獨古的) skill of Koreans, there is potential for considerable development in the future. Before paddy rice cultivation, it was entirely dry-field farming (田作) of wheat. Although opium cultivation (阿片栽培) was prohibited after the Soviet administration began (始政), it was actively cultivated before the revolution, and a considerable number made money through smuggling it abroad.
Although not precise figures, it is said that in 1924, Korean agricultural products in the Maritime Province alone amounted to a huge sum of 4 million won. Currently, combining the output from various sectors like timber, fisheries, sericulture, mining, etc., it is estimated to reach tens of millions of won. The economic strength of Koreans in the Maritime Province is indeed greatly increasing.

C. Education, Society, and Other Cultural Aspects
Before the revolution, the cultural and educational levels of Koreans residing in Russian territory showed a marked difference between naturalized and non-naturalized residents. Children of naturalized citizens mostly entered Russian schools, received Russian education, and assimilated into its culture. However, non-naturalized individuals, especially those living in rural areas, rejected not only the livelihood system and customs but also their education. After 1905, exiled patriots and intellectuals scattered in various overseas locations flowed into Russian territory and became active in educational endeavors while eagerly importing Russian education and culture. At that time, the Korean National Association (國民會) from America established branches in various places, founding schools and publishing newspapers. The Haejo Sinmun (海潮新聞), edited by Chang To* (張道* - name incomplete), and the Taedong Sinmun (大東新聞), edited by Sin Ch'aeho (申采浩), might still be remembered by people. As mentioned earlier, the Kwŏnŏphoe (勸業會) also strived in educational and cultural work during its existence. <6> Before the Great War, there were 40 schools teaching in Russian (for naturalized citizens) and over 100 elementary schools teaching in Korean (some similar to traditional sŏdang). There was also one middle school and one normal school each. At that time, education was subservient to religion, and the government forcibly mandated belief in the Greek Orthodox Church (希臘敎), teaching the Bible in schools as well.
After the Revolution = Education was completely separated from the shackles/prison (宇獄 - likely error for 굴레 or similar) of religion. In place of the slavish capitalist education system, a creative transformation of education and culture was undertaken based on the fundamental concepts of the communist spirit, grounded on the freest scientific foundation. Its basic policies are as follows:
1. To make unceasing efforts to further raise the cultural level of culturally backward peoples.
2. To carry out literacy education (文**敎* - likely 文盲敎育) and educational matters in the spirit of collectivism and international solidarity (소리다리티-) of the working class.
3. To strive for activities creating a new matrix (母體) of laboring and peasant intellectuals among the various peoples within the Soviet Union = the production of collaborators with the highest necessary qualifications (**이 - likely 學位/qualifications) for scientific and research activities.
Thus, the slavish cultural policy of the Tsarist era was fundamentally revolutionized. Like other ethnic groups, the prohibition on mother-tongue education for Koreans was lifted. As much as possible, based on the aforementioned spirit, schools and other cultural institutions were established, while encouraging the use of their own ethnic language and fostering knowledge about Korean history, geography, and culture. Simultaneously, Korean-language newspapers were allowed to be published, receiving unsparing (不借) material and spiritual assistance. Korean newspapers include the Avangard (아방갈드* 先烽* - Sŏnbong) published in Vladivostok, with tens of thousands of readers and expanding year by year. There are also many Korean-language magazines and Korean-language wall newspapers (벽신문) from various labor cooperatives. As early as 1923, over 200 purely Korean elementary schools were established in the southern counties of the Maritime Province. Based on resolutions of the county soviet congresses, they were recognized as regular elementary schools. From that year, the position of Plenipotentiary for Korean Elementary School Affairs was established within the county education departments (縣學務課), actively involved in field surveys of schools, establishing school networks, implementing regular education, and ensuring regular supply (補紿 - archaic) of necessities. Several years ago, 9-year schools were established in Vladivostok and Khabarovsk, implementing a continuous system from elementary to middle school. The number of normal schools and peasant schools is also increasing. Although not exclusively Korean, institutions like the Far Eastern Communist University, Party schools, Labor University, and Administrative Officer Training Centers (養成所), where many Koreans are enrolled, provide adult education (成人敎育) for Koreans.
Additionally, there is the Communist University of the Toilers of the East in Moscow (莫斯科), a higher education institution where many Korean youths (over 50 enrolling each year) study. Koreans also enroll in the Polytechnic University and various other political education universities, receiving specialized education. Particularly noteworthy is the International Military Academy (國際士官學校) in Leningrad (레-닌그라드). This academy has contingents from various small nations, teaching the latest knowledge and techniques in military science. After 6 years of graduation, they serve as officers in the Red Army (赤軍). Each year, over 200 Korean youths study at this military academy, and the number of graduates exceeds 500-600. Among them, there are *50 air force officers (* number obscured), many of whom have gained resounding fame (勇名 轟轟) for their outstanding (拔群) performance in All-Russian Army aviation competitions. A considerable number of officers also serve as military instructors in Mongolia (蒙古) and other countries.
For political and cultural enlightenment activities (啓蒙活動), there are Korean libraries (existed until 1926, surely still exist now), public assembly halls, theaters, various clubs (俱樂部), and workers' night schools in Vladivostok and Khabarovsk, where various meetings are continuously held. On commemorative days, the Korean XX Youth Theater Troupe performs plays. On Tan-o festival (which is designated as the Communist Youth League memorial day), people from various regions gather in places like Vladivostok for prize wrestling (懸賞씨름) tournaments and other athletic meets.
Thus, the education and culture of Koreans, like their political and economic aspects, are growing steadily year by year under the policies and assistance of Soviet Russia, which is making leaping progress based on Communism.

III
Pioneers and Gathering of Figures among Koreans in Siberia......
Representative figures among the pioneers of the early settlement era are Ch'oe Chaehyang (崔在享) and Ch'oe Pongjun (崔鳳俊). Mr. Ch'oe Chaehyang, born the son of a low-born slave (賤奴子), entered Russia at the age of 8 or 9. Through self-study under hardship, he received a Russian education and briefly served in the navy. Later, he held the public office of village head (而長 - likely 里長) for about 20 years, encouraging education and industry, thereby laying the groundwork (素地) for Korean political activity. Korean youth fighters (靑年鬪士) born in Russian territory, <7> now aged 30-40 or older, received Ch'oe's education back then. After the Kabo Reforms (1894), he was active as an interpreter for Korean-Russian diplomacy and served as the central figure for overseas contact for the pro-Russian faction in the late Yi Dynasty (李朝). He also had a close friendship with An Chunggŭn (安重根). His nickname at the time was 'Ch'oe Ppetjja' (최, 뻬-짜 - Choi Pechka), and he reportedly enjoyed much trust among Russian officials. Mr. Ch'oe Pongjun was the Korean industrial king within Russian territory. He made his fortune during the Russo-Japanese War by importing Korean cattle and horses for the Russian army. He also left significant achievements in education and politics and died of illness in Nikolsk (니골스크) 8 or 9 years ago.
Besides them, Chŏng Chaegwan (鄭在寬) and Yi Kang (李剛) who came from America as exiles, established branches of the Korean National Association (國民會) in various places, engaging in educational, cultural, and political activities. From the Korean interior, figures like Sin Ch'aeho (申采浩), Yi Tonghwi (李東輝), Yi Kap (李甲), Yi Sangsŏl (李相卨), Yi Chongho (李鍾浩), Yu Tongyŏl (柳東悅) entered Russia and engaged in political activities centered around newspapers and magazines. Among them, Yi Tonghwi and Yi Sangsŏl are well-remembered by the general public.
After the Revolution... among those who grew up in Russia and received Russian education, currently active in the Communist Party and various Korean organizations, are well-known figures like Han Myŏngse (韓明世), Kim Ap'anasŭ (金아파나스), Ch'oe Koryŏ (崔高麗), Pak Ae (朴愛), Nam Manch'un (南晩春), Nam Syura (南슈라), Kim Mihai (金미하이), besides the late Ch'ae Kŭrigori (蔡그리고리) who passed away in Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul) this spring. Also, there are veterans like the aforementioned Yi Tonghwi, Kim Hasŏk (金夏錫), Kim Ch'ŏrhun (金哲勳), Chang Tojŏng (張道程), Pak Ŭngch'il (朴應七), Yun Hae (尹海), Kim Chin (金震), who, although not born in Russia, have rushed about (馳驅) and been active in various parts of Siberia for over a decade.
Among these, Mr. Pak Chinsun (朴鎭淳) organized and led the Korean Socialist Party (X人社會黨 - likely 韓人社會黨, Hanin Sahoedang) in 1918. He attended the Second Congress of the Communist International (國際共産黨大會), where his fluent Russian oratory amazed the leaders of various national Communist parties. Brimming with talent and proficient (堪能) in Korean writing, he still contributes articles under pseudonyms to magazines and newspapers in Korea. For the past 5-6 years, he has been a professor at Moscow University and the Peasant University, with many writings on dialectics (辨證法) and other socialist philosophy. Mr. Kim Hasŏk, a tall man of 6 ch'ŏk [approx. 180cm], like Yi Tonghwi and Kim Ch'ŏrhun, initially worked as a nationalist activist but threw himself into the proletarian movement around the time of the revolution. All the aforementioned individuals were involved, directly or indirectly, in many significant events during the Russian Revolution. Some even participated in bloody battles with Trotsky's (토로츠키) 5th Army during the Siberian Expedition (遠征) and as partisans (빨치산).
Among military figures, Mr. O Umuk (吳憂黙), who gained fame for his bravery in the European War, is also well-known. After the revolution, he became a member of the committee at the Leningrad International Military Academy, striving to train Korean military personnel.
Besides these, there are many promising individuals currently active as members of the Young Communist League or Pioneers (삐오넬), but they will be omitted here.
As the allotted space has already been greatly exceeded,
1. The issue of 'Korean Autonomy' (高麗族自治) in the Maritime Province, and
2. The issue of Korean farmer expulsion, will be briefly described regarding their progression only.

IV
Expulsion of Korean Farmers... ... From December last year to April-May this year, foreign newspapers reported that 30,000 to 50,000 farmers, unable to bear the oppression by Russian authorities, fled from Russian territory to the North Manchuria region. However, according to reliable investigations, the number who returned was only 4,000-5,000. Furthermore, the cause was attributed to those belonging to the wealthy farmer (kulak) class who opposed the kolkhoz policy, some farmers who, instigated (煽動) by them, did not understand the current laws and system, and others involved in smuggling prohibited goods and opium who could not withstand the strict crackdown (取締) by the authorities and thus crossed the border to return (越境撤歸). Smugglers violating national laws are an issue abroad, but for those farmers who, due to their own ignorance, abandoned a zone of guaranteed livelihood rarely found anywhere else, it might be their freedom. However, upon arriving in North Manchuria, they realized their rashness, and several thousand have since re-entered Russia. Therefore, the flight of some reactionary farmers and smugglers abroad has no impact on Soviet agricultural policy and should not be treated as a general problem.

Korean Autonomy Issue
In 1922, when Soviet power was fully established in the Maritime Province, Han Myŏngse and others from the Koryŏbu (高麗部 - Korean Department) committee proposed the issue of Maritime Province autonomy (沿海州自治問題) to the central government. This initiated the process. In 1924, the Communist International (國際共産黨) acknowledged the issue and recommended (勸論) it to the central government. Simultaneously, the leaders of the Koryŏbu began detailed investigations (線密 - likely 細密) into the government's economy, culture, land, etc. <8> At that time, the International Party and the Central Government, while naturally recognizing it based on the principles of Soviet ethnic policy, also saw that Korean autonomy in the Maritime Province would have a significant impact on Far East XX policy (likely 'revolutionary' or 'communist'). They handled the issue with sincerity. However, around the time the Russo-Japanese Treaty (露日條約) was concluded, disagreements arose among Russian party cadres in the Maritime Province: A. Korean autonomy lacked a established economic foundation. B. It would actually benefit XX's (likely Japan's) colonial policy. C. There were concerns (憂慮) it might provoke dissatisfaction among Russians, especially peasants, who held strong Great Russian chauvinism, lacked understanding of ethnic solidarity (소리다리티) and Soviet ethnic policy. D. It would inevitably cause obstacles (支障) in diplomatic relations with XX (Japan). Thus, it was decided to postpone it until an appropriate time. This year, the issue was again raised at the All-Russian Congress of Soviets by representatives of the Maritime Province Koreans, but again, besides the aforementioned reasons, it was concluded that Koreans still lacked political control and unity internally. Even if autonomy were granted, various internal problems would arise, so a resolution was not reached. Minority ethnic groups within the Soviet territory like the Yakuts, Buryats, Kirghiz, Tatars, Caucasians, Uzbeks, etc., have already achieved autonomy and are showing remarkable progress and development. If Koreans in Russian territory are not XX (Japanese) nationals but Russian citizens with Soviet Russian nationality, then once their political training and economic and cultural development reach a certain level, and if X-Russian (Japan-Russian) international relations take a sharp turn in the future, this issue will likely reignite (再燃) concretely.
The autonomy of Koreans in the Maritime Province will ultimately not be decided by the central government's diplomatic relations with X (Japan), but rather by the degree of political cohesiveness, cultural advancement, and unceasing efforts of the Koreans in Russia towards this issue. If so, the Maritime Province autonomy issue, which has profound relevance (關聯) not only for Koreans in Russia but for all Koreans, is by no means an impossibility. <9>

The Recent State of Compatriots in Manchuria
Na Kongmin (羅公民)

I. Population Distribution
Primarily, the area centered around Wangch'ŏng (汪淸) and Yŏngil (廷吉), commonly known as North Kando (北間道), has the highest density (密度) of settled compatriots. Areas near Kirin (吉林) provincial capital and places like Hŭnggyŏng (興京) and T'onghwa (通化) (belonging to Pongch'ŏn Province/奉天省) have the next highest density. Manchuria (滿洲) refers to the three northeastern provinces (東北 3省), namely Pongch'ŏn, Kirin, and Hŭngnyonggang (黑龍江). There is no place in any nook and cranny (坊坊曲曲) of these three provinces where Koreans are absent. Some may wonder exactly how many Koreans live in all of Manchuria. However, an accurate survey would require effort from Chinese authorities, but since the Chinese do not even count their own population, why would they have the time (奚暇) to survey the number of Koreans? Therefore, although it is commonly said to be one million or two million, there is no basis (根據) for this. Reluctantly, I will list (例擧) incomplete surveys from various sources for reference (參考).

Chŏngŭibu (正義府) Survey: 737,892 people
Tongyang Hyŏphoe (東洋協會): 736,266 people
Mantetsu (滿鐵 - South Manchuria Railway): 783,187 people
Mansŏn Sinbo (滿鮮申報): 811,187 people
Chung-Il Munhwa Hyŏphoe (中日文化協會 - Sino-Japanese Cultural Association): 893,000 people

Not only do these numbers vary greatly, but the extent to which even the largest count, by the Chung-Il Munhwa Hyŏphoe, was conducted comprehensively is questionable. <9> Therefore, the actual number can be estimated (推測) to certainly exceed one million.
Now let's compare the population densities of Korea and Manchuria to see how many more migrants can be accommodated (容許) in the future.
(Note: The population and area of Eastern Mongolia (東蒙古) are included in the table above - table not shown in provided text)
According to these figures (not provided), it seems that for land that could support about 3 people in Korea, only 1 person lives in Manchuria. However, since these figures are averages for the 3 provinces and Eastern Mongolia, excluding places like Hŭngnyonggang Province and Mongolia where the climate is unfavorable and production is difficult, the population density is likely similar to the average density of Korea. For example, the population density of Liaoning Province (遼寧省) (formerly Pongch'ŏn Province) (1,300) is comparable (伯仲) to Hwanghae Province (黃海道) (1,226) and North Ch'ungch'ŏng Province (忠北) (1,628). Kirin Province (吉林省) (450) corresponds to the population of North Hamgyŏng Province (咸北) (452). The only places with room (餘裕) for migration are Hŭngnyonggang or the Mongolian regions. Consequently, about one million poor people arrive (來到) annually from Shantung (山東) and Chihli (直隷) provinces. They cannot reside in the densely populated Pongch'ŏn Province and are transferred (轉送) to Kirin and Hŭngnyonggang provinces. Thus, the issue of Korean expulsion (被逐) in 1927 was not solely due to political rejection (排斥) based on strategy (政略上). From the perspective of Chinese sovereignty (主權), there was an important economic reason for not welcoming them, which we should not treat lightly (等閑視). Within the next 10 years (不出), migrants from other provinces will likely number 100,000, and the existing Chinese population will increase (增殖) by over 500,000. It is clear that the Korean problem will face various severe oppressive complications (惡迫한 層折) more from an economic standpoint than a political one, so life in Manchuria does not permit optimism (樂觀).

II. Living Conditions
Living conditions depend on production income, so I will first discuss the occupations of compatriots in Manchuria. Generally, paddy field cultivation (水畓耕作) is their sole specialty (長技) and primary goal, so naturally, agriculture accounts for over nine-tenths of occupations.
In years when farming goes well, they can settle the year's debts (淸帳) and barely have enough food left to sustain life (廷命). But if a bad harvest occurs, their impoverished life becomes indescribably miserable (慘酷). Lacking land ownership, most rent land on a yearly basis (當年치기), paying the land rent (借地料) in advance in the spring. Those who farm for 4-5 days as independent farmers have some leeway, but their number is small. Most work as sharecroppers for Chinese landlords, either giving half the crop or bearing the costs of land preparation, seeds, and cultivation, then giving 20-30% of the autumn harvest (秋收) to the landlord. In essence, they are tenant farmers belonging to the Chinese. They take out high-interest loans in the spring, repay double (倍償) in the autumn, and the following year (翌年), they must repay (報償) an amount doubled again over several years. Therefore, unless the land is exceptionally good, they cannot escape (헤여나지) from debt (빗에서), effectively living as agricultural serfs. How much is the total value produced through such toil? Across North and South Manchuria, last year's production amounted to 1.52 million sŏk. Excluding about 200,000 sŏk directly cultivated by Chinese, over 1.3 million sŏk were produced through Korean cultivation. <10> However, half of that belongs to the landlords, and the other half is the income of the Koreans. Considering 90% of the one million people, i.e., 900,000, as farmers, the average income per person is about 7 tu [1 tu = 1/10 sŏk ≈ 18 liters]. They must manage their entire livelihood with this. They only get a taste of white rice by plucking a little from the standing stalks in the field. As soon as (무섭게) it's threshed (打作), they sell (팔아서) it to buy millet (小米) as a substitute food (代食). One million people farming rice but surviving on millet – that is the standard life of compatriots in Manchuria.
In North Kando, settlement dates back 80 years. Since the villages and towns were entirely pioneered by Koreans, there are few established entrepreneurs. However, in urban areas (市街地), there are rice mills (精米所), straw rope (草繩) makers, general stores (雜貨商), Korean street millet vendors, etc., everywhere. Among those who have achieved some success as specialty merchants are Samsŏng-ho (三省號) and Pando Sanghoe (半島商會) in Ssup'ingjie (四平街). Their businesses are solid, have operated without major issues for several years, and have considerable credibility even within Korea. In manufacturing, several rubber (膠皮) factories (工廠) have recently emerged: Aeryun Rubber Factory (愛輪膠皮工廠) in Dairen (大連), Yungmin Factory (育民工廠) in Andong County (安東縣), and Samsŏng Rubber Factory (三省膠皮工廠) in Pongch'ŏn (奉天). All are still struggling to establish themselves. As demand (需用) from the Chinese is gradually (漸次) increasing, there seems to be great promise (囑望) for the future.

III. Educational Situation
The education of children of migrant Koreans is handled by seven types of operators (經營者), inevitably presenting a complex (複雜) situation regarding educational policies (方針) and guidance strategies (方策).

a. Private Schools
These are schools in various villages where the guardians (父兄) of the children provide (自辨) the expenses and educate freely. The quality of education depends on the competence of the educators (敎務者 - archaic?) and financial circumstances, operating without any uniform system (均制) or unification, continuing as long as they can manage.

b. Organization Schools
Established by political activists or ideological groups among Koreans in the hinterland (奧地), these schools aim to instill the Korean spirit. Expenses are borne by the organization or local guardians. In the past (己往), many were run by the Chŏngŭibu (正義府), but after its dissolution and replacement (代立) by the Kungminbu (國民府), its influence has diminished (縮少 - modern 축소) due to confrontation (對峙) with communists.

c. Commissioned Schools
Elementary schools along the railway lines (沿線) were previously run by the Government-General of Korea (朝鮮總督府). For some reason, three years ago, they were entirely entrusted (委任) to the South Manchuria Railway Company (滿鐵), with expenses paid by the Government-General but management handled by Mantetsu. According to the agreement, Mantetsu promised active management, but currently (只今 - older spelling), it seems primarily focused on passively getting rid of responsibility (발너맛치는 것).

d. Japanese Schools
Excluding large cities along the Mantetsu lines where regular elementary schools exist, children residing near small stations study together (共學) with Japanese children in Japanese elementary schools. This also refers to graduating from regular or elementary schools and enrolling in Japanese middle schools or specialized schools.

e. Chinese Education
This involves enrolling in Chinese primary schools from the beginning and receiving purely Chinese-style education. There are two types: one where Koreans willingly (自進) choose Chinese education, and another, like in North Kando where 80% of the residents are Korean, where Chinese national policy (國策) mandates (實施) Chinese education for Korean children, encouraging (勸獎) it while suppressing Korean-style education.

f. Religious Schools
There are 89 schools with a religious character (色彩). 59 belong to Protestantism (耶蘇敎), 21 to Catholicism (天主敎), 8 to Ch'ŏndogyo (天道敎), 8 to Sich'ŏngyo (侍天敎), 6 to Wŏnjonggyo (元宗敎), 4 to Taejonggyo (大倧敎), and 2 to Ch'ŏngnimgyo (靑林敎).

g. Foreign-Managed Schools
These are also mostly similar to religious schools, but the above schools have Koreans named as operators, whereas 'foreign-managed' means the school owner and principal are foreigners. <11> It is particularly noteworthy that 17 out of 19 such schools are managed by Germans (德國人). Below is a brief outline of education for reference. Almost all these schools focus on elementary education subjects.

Besides these, there are important topics like the problem of renouncing Korean registration (脫籍問題), naturalization (歸化問題), and the influence of Communism. However, discussing (論述) these naturally touches upon (論及) political issues. Critiquing them with a constrained writing style (筆法) could easily invite (招致) misunderstanding on both sides, so I deliberately avoid it. Nevertheless, it is remarkable (顯著) that most young people in Manchuria lean left (左傾). If this progresses without fully examining the benefits and drawbacks (得失) for the farmers, the vast majority of innocent (無고한) farmers might face a major threat (威肀… - likely 威脅) greater than the 1927 expulsion. It is truly time for serious "self-criticism." Also, there is a problematic tendency (幣端) to equate the current issues of Koreans renouncing registration and naturalization, leading to constant confusion (混同). These must be clearly (確然히) distinguished. Demanding the freedom for any Korean to naturalize (into China?) at will is a necessary principle. Naturalizing into China is something that might happen by free will after obtaining (圖得) the right to renounce Korean registration; some may naturalize, others may live without doing so. As this issue is quite important, I ask for your forgiveness (容恕) as I plan to discuss it later (追後). <12>

The Recent Situation of 8,000 Compatriots in America
Sin Hŭng'u

It has been reported many times that our Korean compatriots reside historically in large numbers on the small island of Hawaii (布哇) in the Pacific Ocean and various parts of the North American continent (北美大陸), showing remarkable activity politically, economically, and culturally. Now, I will report on the recent safety and circumstances (形便 - older spelling) of compatriots in America.
Having recently traveled to America and arrived in Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul) just a few days ago, I am relatively well-informed about recent conditions. According to my investigation, the places in North America where Koreans live in the largest concentrations were Los Angeles (로샌젤스), Chicago (시카코), and New York (紐育). There were about 100 in Los Angeles city proper and about 400 in the vicinity. In Chicago city, there were over 5,000 [Translator's Note: This seems incredibly high, likely a typo in the original text. 500 seems more plausible based on context and other sources, but the text clearly says 5千/5,000], and about 60 compatriots lived in New York. Within the total of about 1,000 Koreans living in and around these three cities, approximately 300 <12> were students attending various universities and schools. The rest were farmers, people running large shops comparable to those of Westerners on main streets, and others working for organizations, banks, and companies. Speaking of business, it was truly moving to see a large company run by our people called Kim-Pae Company (金裵會社) in Chicago, actively engaged in management. Besides that, many were active in introducing and selling Oriental products (東洋物産).
Furthermore, the living standard of compatriots on the North American continent is, of course, better than here in Korea. Even an agricultural laborer earns wages (勞銀) of over 5 Won, up to 3-4 Won [Translator's Note: 5 Won and 3-4 Won seems contradictory, likely a typo, maybe 3-5 Won?] per day. And although people talk about recession, it doesn't seem severe (甚하지) enough to prevent finding work. Notably, in the aforementioned cities of Chicago, San Francisco (桑港), New York, and Los Angeles, where many Koreans are concentrated, there are distinct churches for our people. Inside them are X-language schools [likely Korean language schools] teaching schoolchildren Korean speech and Hangul. Occasionally, when visitors from the home country (本國) arrive, they are invited to teach about Korean affairs.
The schoolchildren (學童) there are mostly children born in America, all holding full citizenship rights (市民權). Therefore, they own land and houses (家屋) in their own names.
Just a word for readers who might be curious: Dr. Sŏ Chaep'il (徐載弼 - Philip Jaisohn) is working day and night as the head of the Pathology Department (病理學部) at a large hospital in Pennsylvania (벤실페니아). Also, the Korean Commission to America and Europe (歐美委員部) is... (abbreviated in original). Regarding newspapers and magazines there, there is the Sinhan Minbo (新韓民報 - name was partially obscured as 新X民報) managed (主宰) by Mr. Paek Ilgyu (白日奎) and others. There is a student magazine called the Korean Student Review (코레앤 스튜-덴트 레뷰), and magazines like 'Uraki' (우라키 - Our?) and 'Silŏp' (實業 - Industry/Business), which sometimes reach Korea, are steadily developing.
So, how about Hawaii (布哇)? While North America had only about a thousand, Hawaii, partly due to connections from the Development Company (開發會社) era 30 years ago, is home to a large number (多數한) of compatriots, about 6,000. Their living conditions and educational level show no significant difference from the North American continent. Since the climate is excellent, products are abundant, and its location is crucial between East and West, our Korean people have long been enlightened (깨다름) in many ways and active. Among them, Mr. Min Ch'anho (閔贊鎬) is someone who succeeded economically, and he has poured much effort (심혈) into establishing and managing churches and schools there for the resident compatriots. However, Hawaii is currently facing a serious problem. Eight or nine out of ten compatriots residing there crossed over as young adults in their twenties or thirties during the Development Company era 30 years ago. But after decades of spring winds and autumn rains, they have now become gray-haired and unable to work. Also, because many Korean women crossed over from Korea before the immigration ban was implemented, many schoolchildren around the age of 10 have been born. Thus, being composed mostly of either the elderly or the young, they inevitably face significant challenges in their livelihood. This is not just today's problem but the shared fate of the resident compatriots until at least those children reach adulthood. Dr. Yi Sŭngman (李承晩 - Syngman Rhee) was greatly concerned about this. After visiting the small island named "Hawaii" (하와이) near Honolulu (호놀루루), he arranged to receive a grant (拂下) for it from the US government. He plans to reclaim the uncultivated land (未懇地 - modern 미간지) on the island and is raising capital through a joint-stock company to start (開如 - archaic?) agricultural and forestry-based immigration there. Of course, they only accept Korean immigrants. It seems Dr. Yi's plan is to properly reclaim that vast land to provide economic assistance to the struggling Hawaii compatriots, while also establishing unique collective training, education, and religious projects. The future deserves great attention. Compatriots on the US mainland are also cooperating (요同하여 - likely 協同하여) significantly in this project, with many becoming shareholders (주주) in the aforementioned company.
Currently in Hawaii, there is a magazine called 'T'aep'yŏngyang' (太平洋 - Pacific) and another called 'American Korean'. As for newspapers, <13> there is the Kungminbo (國民報 - name was partially obscured as XX민보). I will refrain from discussing political activities here.
Besides this, there are about 1,000 compatriots in Mexico (멕시코). In South America, it's no exaggeration (과언) to say there are practically none in Brazil (뿌라질). Therefore, approximately 8,000 to 9,000 of our compatriots live in Hawaii and the US mainland. Their living conditions are indeed better than those of you in the homeland. Also, unless troublesome international political issues arise in the future, it seems their peaceful lives will continue. I regret being unable to provide numerical descriptions, but I convey the news that the roughly 8,000-9,000 compatriots in America are currently living peacefully (평안하게). <36>
<2-18, 36>

**Summary**

This collection of articles from the October 1930 issue of *Samch'ŏlli* magazine details the situations of Korean diaspora communities in Soviet Siberia, Chinese Manchuria, and the United States (including Hawaii). Kim Seyong describes the history of Korean migration to Siberia, contrasting the Tsarist era's discriminatory policies with the Soviet regime's promise of ethnic equality, political rights (voting, holding office, mother-tongue education), and economic restructuring through collectivization (kolkhozes), while also noting challenges like the Korean Autonomy issue remaining unresolved. Na Kongmin (Na Kyŏngsŏk) portrays the precarious life of the roughly one million Koreans in Manchuria, mostly impoverished tenant farmers exploited by Chinese landlords and high-interest debt, facing increasing economic pressure from Chinese migration, and navigating a complex educational landscape fragmented by private, organizational, Japanese, Chinese, and religious influences, alongside rising left-wing sentiment among youth. Sin Hŭng'u reports on the smaller but relatively more stable communities in the US mainland (Los Angeles, Chicago, New York) and Hawaii, highlighting better economic conditions, established community institutions (churches, schools), and notable figures like Sŏ Chaep'il and Yi Sŭngman, but also notes the emerging demographic challenge in Hawaii with an aging first generation and a large young second generation, prompting Yi Sŭngman's initiative for a new agricultural settlement.

From a historical perspective, these articles offer valuable first-hand (or near contemporary) accounts of the diverse experiences of the Korean diaspora during a critical period. Historians would find interest in the detailed description of Soviet policies towards Koreans in the Far East, including the implementation of collectivization and the complexities surrounding the Korean Autonomy question; the stark portrayal of the economic hardships and land tenure issues faced by Koreans in Manchuria, which fueled social and political movements; the comparison of different educational systems shaping identity among overseas Koreans; and the early organizational efforts and emerging socio-economic challenges within the Korean-American community, including the activities of prominent independence figures like Yi Sŭngman. The articles reflect the varied political, economic, and cultural realities encountered by Koreans forced or choosing to live outside the colonized homeland.

**Named Entities**

金世鎔	김세용	Kim Seyong
羅景錫	나경석	Na Kyŏngsŏk
申興雨	신흥우	Sin Hŭng'u
西伯利亞	시베리아	Siberia
沿海州	연해주	Yŏnhaeju (Maritime Province)
소뷔엣드, 로서아	소비에트 러시아	Soviet Russia
帝政時代	제정시대	Tsarist Era
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
豆滿江	두만강	Tuman River
쁘셋도	프세트	Posyet
鳥蘇里地方	오소리지방	Ussuri region
黑龍州	흑룡주	Hŭngnyongju (Heilongjiang Province)
露國	노국	Russia
露鮮特別協定	노선특별협정	Russo-Korean Special Agreement
도호브스키	도호브스키	Dukhovskoy
海參威	해삼위	Vladivostok
슈환川	슈환천	Suifun River (Razdolnaya River)
레후川	레후천	Lefu River (Ilistaya River)
다라뷔에川	다라뷔에천	Daubihe River (Arsenyevka River)
시내리니꼬-보	시넬니코보	Sinel'nikovo
고로사고-푸카	고로사코푸카	Korsakovka
구로노-푸카	구로노푸카	Krounovka
욀후네로마노프까	올후네로마노프카	Ol'gino-Romanovka
日韓合倂	일한합병	Japan-Korea Annexation
사만리	사만리	Samalli (?)
도비허	도비허	Tobiho (?)
金炳學	김병학	Kim Pyŏnghak
崔鳳俊	최봉준	Ch'oe Pongjun
元山	원산	Wŏnsan
레나	레나	Lena
나세이	나세이	Yenisei (?)
아물	아물	Amur
波蘭	파란	Poland
우크라이나	우크라이나	Ukraine
야구-즈	야쿠츠	Yakuts
길기	길기	Kirghiz
따달	따달	Tatars
우즈벳크	우즈베크	Uzbeks
하바롭스크	하바롭스크	Khabarovsk
高麗部	고려부	Koryŏbu (Korean Department/Section)
勸業會	권업회	Kwŏnŏphoe (Association for the Encouragement of Industry)
歐洲大戰	구주대전	European Great War (WWI)
日本	일본	Japan
希臘敎	희랍교	Greek Orthodox Church
아방갈드	아방가르드	Avangard (Newspaper)
先烽	선봉	Sŏnbong (Newspaper)
감챠스카	감차츠카	Kamchatka
莫斯科	모스크바	Moscow
東方勞力者共産大學	동방노력자공산대학	Communist University of the Toilers of the East
레-닌그라드	레닌그라드	Leningrad
國際士官學校	국제사관학교	International Military Academy
赤軍	적군	Red Army
蒙古	몽고	Mongolia
崔在享	최재향	Ch'oe Chaehyang
최, 뻬-짜	최 뻬짜	Ch'oe Ppetjja (Choi Pechka)
李朝	이조	Yi Dynasty
安重根	안중근	An Chunggŭn
니골스크	니콜스크	Nikolsk (Nikolsk-Ussuriysky/Ussuriysk)
鄭在寬	정재관	Chŏng Chaegwan
李剛	이강	Yi Kang
國民會	국민회	Kungminhoe (Korean National Association)
張道*	장도*	Chang To*
海潮新聞	해조신문	Haejo Sinmun (Newspaper)
申采浩	신채호	Sin Ch'aeho
大東新聞	대동신문	Taedong Sinmun (Newspaper)
李東輝	이동휘	Yi Tonghwi
李甲	이갑	Yi Kap
李相卨	이상설	Yi Sangsŏl
李鍾浩	이종호	Yi Chongho
柳東悅	유동열	Yu Tongyŏl
蔡그리골리	채그리고리	Ch'ae Kŭrigori (Gregory Tsoi/Choi?)
韓明世	한명세	Han Myŏngse
金아파나스	김아파나스	Kim Ap'anasŭ (Afanasy Kim?)
崔高麗	최고려	Ch'oe Koryŏ
朴愛	박애	Pak Ae
南晩春	남만춘	Nam Manch'un
南슈라	남슈라	Nam Syura (Shura Nam?)
金미하이	김미하이	Kim Mihai (Mikhail Kim?)
金夏錫	김하석	Kim Hasŏk
金哲勳	김철훈	Kim Ch'ŏrhun
張道程	장도정	Chang Tojŏng
朴應七	박응칠	Pak Ŭngch'il
尹海	윤해	Yun Hae
金震	김진	Kim Chin
朴鎭淳	박진순	Pak Chinsun
國際共産黨	국제공산당	Communist International (Comintern)
토로츠키	트로츠키	Trotsky
빨치산	빨치산	Partisan
吳憂黙	오우묵	O Umuk
高麗族自治	고려족자치	Korean Autonomy
露日條約	노일조약	Russo-Japanese Treaty
羅公民	나공민	Na Kongmin
汪淸	왕청	Wangch'ŏng (Wangqing)
廷吉	연길	Yŏngil (Yanji)
北間道	북간도	Pukkan-do (North Jiandao)
吉林省	길림성	Kirin Province (Jilin)
興京	흥경	Hŭnggyŏng (Xingjing)
通化	통화	T'onghwa (Tonghua)
奉天省	봉천성	Pongch'ŏn Province (Fengtian)
滿洲	만주	Manchuria
東北 3省	동북 3성	Three Northeastern Provinces
黑龍江	흑룡강	Hŭngnyonggang (Heilongjiang River/Province)
中國	중국	China
正義府	정의부	Chŏngŭibu (Righteous Government)
東洋協會	동양협회	Tongyang Hyŏphoe (Oriental Association/Society)
滿鐵	만철	Manch'ŏl (South Manchuria Railway Company - Mantetsu)
滿鮮申報	만선신보	Mansŏn Sinbo (Manchuria-Korea Daily News)
中日文化協會	중일문화협회	Chung-Il Munhwa Hyŏphoe (Sino-Japanese Cultural Association)
東蒙古	동몽골	Eastern Mongolia
遼寧省	요녕성	Liaoning Province
黃海道	황해도	Hwanghae Province
忠北	충북	North Ch'ungch'ŏng Province
咸北	함북	North Hamgyŏng Province
山東	산동	Shantung (Shandong)
直隷	직례	Chihli (Hebei)
四平街	사평가	Sup'ingjie (Siping Street)
三省號	삼성호	Samsŏng-ho (Company name)
半島商會	반도상회	Pando Sanghoe (Peninsula Trading Company)
大連	대련	Dairen (Dalian)
愛輪膠皮工廠	애륜교피공장	Aeryun Kyop'i Kongchang (Aeryun Rubber Factory)
安東縣	안동현	Andong County (Antung/Dandong)
育民工廠	육민공장	Yungmin Kongchang (Yungmin Factory)
奉天	봉천	Pongch'ŏn (Fengtian/Mukden/Shenyang)
三省膠皮工廠	삼성교피공장	Samsŏng Kyop'i Kongchang (Samsŏng Rubber Factory)
朝鮮總督府	조선총독부	Chosŏn Ch'ongdokpu (Government-General of Korea)
國民府	국민부	Kungminbu (National People's Prefecture)
耶蘇敎	야소교	Protestantism
天主敎	천주교	Catholicism
天道敎	천도교	Ch'ŏndogyo
侍天敎	시천교	Sich'ŏngyo
元宗敎	원종교	Wŏnjonggyo
大倧敎	대종교	Taejonggyo
靑林敎	청림교	Ch'ŏngnimgyo
德國人	독일인	Germans
太平洋	태평양	Pacific Ocean
布哇	포와	Hawaii
北美大陸	북미대륙	North American Continent
로샌젤스	로스앤젤레스	Los Angeles
시카코	시카고	Chicago
紐育	뉴욕	New York
金裵會社	김배회사	Kim-Pae Hoesa (Kim-Pae Company)
東洋物産	동양물산	Tongyang Mulsan (Oriental Products)
桑港	상항	San Francisco
徐載弼	서재필	Sŏ Chaep'il (Philip Jaisohn)
벤실페니아	펜실베이니아	Pennsylvania
歐美委員部	구미위원부	Kumi Wiwŏnbu (Korean Commission to America and Europe)
白日奎	백일규	Paek Ilgyu
新韓民報	신한민보	Sinhan Minbo (Newspaper)
코레앤 스튜-덴트 레뷰	코리안 스튜던트 리뷰	Korean Student Review
우라키	우라키	Uraki (?) (Magazine name)
實業	실업	Silŏp (Industry/Business - Magazine name)
閔贊鎬	민찬호	Min Ch'anho
호놀루루	호놀룰루	Honolulu
하와이	하와이	Hawaii
美國	미국	United States (America)
李承晩	이승만	Yi Sŭngman (Syngman Rhee)
國民報	국민보	Kungminbo (Newspaper)
멕시코	멕시코	Mexico
뿌라질	브라질	Brazil

**Glossary**

在外同胞	재외동포	Overseas compatriots
安危將來	안위장래	Safety and future
沿海州	연해주	Maritime Province (Primorsky Krai)
소뷔엣드	소비에트	Soviet (older transliteration)
로서아	러시아	Russia (older transliteration)
國體	국체	National political system/structure
隷屬的	예속적	Subordinate, dependent
除却	제각	Exclude, remove
寡聞	과문	Limited knowledge (humble expression)
懇託	간탁	Earnest request
露領	노령	Russian territory (older term)
饑饉民	기근민	Famine refugees
流配人	유배인	Political exile
國法	국법	National law
定着	정착	Settle down
떼샤진	데샤티나	Desyatina (Russian land unit; spelling reflects older transliteration)
配與地	배여지	Allotted land
鞏固	공고	Solidify, strengthen
强力拿去	강력탈취(?)	Forceful taking, oppression (interpretation of archaic/unclear term)
危懼	위구	Fear, apprehension
入籍	입적	Naturalization, registering as a citizen
鮮農	선농	Korean farmer (older term using 鮮 for Korea)
鮮人	선인	Korean person (older term)
曠原	광원	Wilderness, vast plain
沼澤	소택	Marsh, swamp
沃土潤地	옥토윤지	Fertile land
亨受	형수	Enjoy (rights, benefits) (modern 향수 享受)
裕足	유족	Affluent, well-off
軍事用達	군사용달	Military supplier
流戶人	유호인	Vagrant, wanderer
雇傭人	고용인	Employee, hired worker
借地	차지	Rented land
小作人	소작인	Tenant farmer
貢納	공납	Pay tribute/rent
地味肥厚	지미비후	Soil fertility is rich
土地饑饉	토지기근	Land famine (scarcity)
投機事業	투기사업	Speculative business
鴉片密賣	아편밀매	Opium smuggling
抗夫	항부	Miner (older term)
푸로레타리아	프롤레타리아	Proletariat (older transliteration)
弱小民族	약소민족	Weak/small ethnic groups
被壓迫民族	피압박민족	Oppressed ethnic groups
牴觸	저촉	Conflict with, contradict
高麗部	고려부	Korean Department/Section (using 高麗 for Korea)
勸業會	권업회	Association for the Encouragement of Industry
殊勳	수훈	Distinguished service/merit
桎梏	질곡	Shackles, fetters
搾取	착취	Exploitation
賃銀奴隷	임금노예	Wage slave
干涉	간섭	Interference, intervention
撤兵	철병	Withdrawal of troops
穀物强制徵發	곡물강제징발	Forced grain requisition
戰時共産黨時代	전시공산당시대	War Communism period
混頓	혼돈	Chaos, confusion
꼼뮨	코뮌	Commune (transliteration)
골호즈	콜호스	Kolkhoz (Collective farm) (transliteration)
알째리	아르텔	Artel (Cooperative association) (transliteration)
솝골호즈	소프호스	Sovkhoz (State farm) (transliteration)
組合	조합	Union, association, cooperative
熟練	숙련	Skilled (labor)
不孰練	불숙련	Unskilled (labor) (older spelling)
헥타	헥타르	Hectare (transliteration)
剩餘能力	잉여능력	Surplus capacity/ability
米作	미작	Rice cultivation
水稻	수도	Paddy rice
獨古的	독특한(?)	Unique, peculiar (archaic term, likely meaning 독특한/獨特的)
田作	전작	Dry-field farming
始政	시정	Start of administration/rule
阿片栽培	아편재배	Opium cultivation
宇獄	굴레(?)	Shackles/prison (likely typo/archaic term for 굴레 or 감옥)
소리다리티-	솔리다리티	Solidarity (transliteration)
母體	모체	Matrix, parent body
不借	아끼지 않음	Not sparing (aid, effort) (lit. 'not borrowing')
벽신문	벽신문	Wall newspaper
學務課	학무과	Academic Affairs Section
補紿	보급	Supply, provision (archaic term for 보급/補給)
成人敎育	성인교육	Adult education
養成所	양성소	Training center
拔群	발군	Outstanding, preeminent
勇名 轟轟	용명 굉굉	Famous for bravery, renowned
啓蒙活動	계몽활동	Enlightenment activities
俱樂部	구락부	Club (older transliteration)
懸賞	현상	Prize money, reward
集散	집산	Gathering and dispersal
賤奴子	천노자	Child of a low-born slave (cheonmin)
而長	이장	Village head (likely 里長)
素地	소지	Foundation, groundwork
鬪士	투사	Fighter, warrior
馳驅	치구	Rush about, be busy
堪能	감능	Proficient, skilled
辨證法	변증법	Dialectics
駕嘆	가탄	Exclaim in admiration
遠征	원정	Expedition
囑望	촉망	Hopeful expectation, promise
煽動	선동	Instigation, agitation
取締	취체	Crackdown, regulation (modern form 취체)
越境撤歸	월경철귀	Cross border and return/withdraw
提議	제의	Propose, suggest
發端	발단	Beginning, origin
勸論	권론	Recommend, advise
線密	세밀(?)	Detailed, meticulous (likely 細密/세밀)
憂慮	우려	Concern, worry
支障	지장	Obstacle, hindrance
再燃	재연	Rekindle, reignite
關聯	관련	Connection, relation
分布	분포	Distribution
密度	밀도	Density
著大	저대	Remarkable, significant (archaic)
坊坊曲曲	방방곡곡	Every nook and cranny
數爻	수효	Number, count (rare term)
奚暇	해가	What leisure/time (Classical Chinese loan)
根據	근거	Basis, grounds
例擧	열거	List examples (modern form 열거)
參考	참고	Reference
推測	추측	Guess, estimate
容許	용허	Permit, allow
伯仲	백중	Be evenly matched, be close
餘裕	여유	Room, leeway, surplus
來到	내도	Arrive
轉送	전송	Transfer, forward
被逐	피축	Be expelled/driven out
政略上	정략상	From a political strategy perspective
排斥	배척	Exclusion, rejection
主權	주권	Sovereignty
等閑視	등한시	Neglect, treat lightly
不出	불과	Within, not exceeding (lit. 'not exit')
增殖	증식	Increase, multiply
惡迫	압박(?)	Pressure, oppression (likely 압박/壓迫)
層折	층절	Complication, twists and turns (rare/archaic term)
樂觀	낙관	Optimism
달여잇슴으로	달려있으므로	Depends on (older spelling/form)
水畓耕作	수답경작	Paddy field cultivation
長技	장기	Specialty, strong point
淸帳	청장	Settle accounts
廷命	연명	Sustain life, barely survive
慘酷	참혹	Cruel, harsh, miserable
當年치기	당년치기	Yearly contract/arrangement
借地料	차지료	Land rent
秋收	추수	Autumn harvest
倍償	배상	Repay double
翌年	익년	Following year
報償	보상	Repay, compensate
헤여나지	헤어나지	Escape from, get out of (older spelling)
빗에서	빚에서	From debt (older spelling)
打作	타작	Threshing
무섭게	무섭게	As soon as (lit. frighteningly fast)
팔아서	팔아서	Sell (older spelling)
小米	소미	Millet
代食	대식	Substitute food
市街地	시가지	Urban area
精米所	정미소	Rice mill
草繩	초승	Straw rope
雜貨商	잡화상	General store merchant
膠皮	고무	Rubber (lit. glue skin)
工廠	공장	Factory, plant
需用	수용	Demand, need
漸次	점차	Gradually
經營者	경영자	Manager, operator
方針	방침	Policy, course
方策	방책	Plan, measure
複雜	복잡	Complex
呈하지	제시하지	Present, show (formal) (modern 제시하다)
父兄	부형	Parents and older brothers; guardians
自辨	자변	Provide oneself
敎務者	교사/교육자(?)	Educator, teacher (archaic term)
均制	균제	Uniform system/regulation
奧地	오지	Hinterland, remote area
乃至	내지	Or, and even
己往	기왕	The past, formerly
代立	대립	Replace, stand in place of
對峙	대치	Confrontation, opposition
縮少	축소	Reduction, decrease (modern form 축소/縮小)
沿線	연선	Along the line (railway)
委任	위임	Entrust, commission
只今	지금	Now (older spelling)
발너맛치는	내팽개치는(?)	Getting rid of, shirking responsibility (colloquial/older term)
共學	공학	Co-education, studying together
自進	자진	Volunteer, willingly
國策	국책	National policy
實施	실시	Implement, enforce
勸獎	권장	Encourage, promote
色彩	색채	Color, tinge, characteristic
脫籍	탈적	Renouncing one's family register/nationality
歸化	귀화	Naturalization (into another country)
論述	논술	Discuss, expound
論及	논급	Mention, touch upon
筆法	필법	Writing style
招致	초치	Invite, cause, incur
左傾	좌경	Left-leaning
顯著	현저	Remarkable, prominent
得失	득실	Advantages and disadvantages
無고한	무고한	Innocent, blameless (고 likely 辜)
威肀…	위협…	Threat (肀 likely 脅)
幣端	폐단	Evil practice, vice, abuse
恒常	항상	Always, constantly
混同	혼동	Confusion, mix-up
確然히	확연히	Clearly, distinctly
圖得	도모함(?)	Gain, obtain (likely 도모/圖謀 meaning plan/seek)
追後	추후	Later, subsequently
容恕	용서	Forgiveness, pardon
布哇	하와이	Hawaii (older transliteration)
形便	형편	Situation, circumstances (modern form 형편)
可量	가량	Approximately (modern form 가량/假量)
勞銀	노임/임금	Wages (older term)
甚하지	심하지	Be severe/extreme
本國	본국	Home country
學童	학동	Schoolchildren
市民權	시민권	Citizenship rights
家屋	가옥	House, building
博士	박사	Doctor (Ph.D.), scholar
病理學部	병리학부	Pathology Department
主宰	주재	Preside over, manage
開發會社	개발회사	Development company
因緣	인연	Connection, tie, fate
多數한	다수한	Numerous
원악	워낙	Originally, inherently (older form)
깨다름	깨달음	Enlightenment, awakening (older spelling)
심혈	심혈	Heart and blood; utmost effort
拂下	불하	Grant, sell government property
未懇地	미간지	Uncultivated land (modern 미간지/未墾地)
開如	시작함(?)	Begin, start (archaic term, likely 시작/始作 or 개시/開始)
압날	앞날	Future (dialectal/older form)
요同하여	협동하여(?)	Cooperating (同 likely related to 協同/협동)
주주	주주	Shareholder
뿌라질	브라질	Brazil (older transliteration)
과언	과언	Exaggeration
평안하게	평안하게	Peacefully, safely


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제9호
발행일	1930년 10월 01일
기사제목	二百萬 在外同胞 安危將來
기사형태	논설

二百萬 在外同胞 安危將來
西伯利亞의 朝鮮人 活動...金世鎔
在滿 百萬同胞의 最近...羅景錫
米洲兄弟의 現狀과 將來...申興雨

西伯利亞의 朝鮮人 活動
金世鎔

西伯利亞 特히 沿海州가 『소뷔엣드, 로서아』 極東政策의 定石이 되어 잇는 것은 國體가 變革되기 前 帝政時代와 다를 바 업스나 前者는 어대까지던지 民族擁護와 自主的 平等의 見地를 基綢로 하여 잇슴에 反하야 後者는 隷屬的 差別的 帝國主義의 民族政策을 가젓던 것에 根本的 差違가 잇스며 따라서 經濟와 政治 밋 여러 가지 方面으로 歷史的 因緣이 深甚한 朝鮮人의 이 땅에 對한 關係도 革命을 轉機로 하야 크게 달나젓다.
海外 朝鮮人 狀況을 硏究함에 소뷔엣드 領域 內의 朝鮮人 狀態와 問題를 除却할 수 업스나 從來 이 方面의 文獻이 업고 또 잇다 하더라도 筆者의 寡聞으로 듯지 못하엿스니 이에 叙述의 資格이 업슴에 不顧하고 이제 三千里의 懇託으로 極히 粗雜하고 槪括的이나마 同問題를 簡單하게 紹介함에 끗치고 이것으로써 讀者와 約束하는 다음의 具體的 數字的 紹介의 序言으로 하고저 한다.

一
西伯利亞 移住歷史〓조선사람이 露領에서 처음 足跡을 들이게 된 것은 1863年이다. 當時 北鮮地方은 큰 凶年으로 饑饉民 中 數個 家族이 豆滿江을 건너 『쁘셋도』地方의 荒原으로 生活의 血路를 求하야 移住하게 된 것을 動機로 하야 其後 政治的 流配人 或은 己巳 庚午의 大凶年 때 國外移住者는 死刑에 處한다는 國法를 突破하여 가면서 集團的으로 移住하엿고 1869年에는 半個年동안에 6천5백 名의 激增을 본 때도 잇스니 이들은 大槪 鳥蘇里地方에 定着하야＜2＞ 生來의 技術인 土地耕作으로 生活하엿스며 1871年에는 102家族 500餘名이 黑龍州로 移住하야 露國政府로부터 一家族의게 百떼샤진(1떼샤진...2,400坪)의 配與地를 밧엇는데 임이 移住한 사람의 經濟가 向上되어 이들 勢力이 漸次 鞏固하여짐과 또 强力拿去로 朝鮮內地에서 繼續하야 移住하는 者 激增으로 露人은 비로소 壓倒의 危懼를 늣기개 되어 1888年 露鮮特別協定으로써 移民制限을 하게 되엇다. 同協約에 依하면 1884年 以前에 露領에 移住한 朝鮮人은 이를 露國臣民으로 認定하고 其後 移民은 一時的 居住의 外國人으로 看做하엿스나 1893年 『도호브스키』總督은 鮮農土地使用權을 確定하야 一時居住者라도 5年以上 在留한 者의게는 入籍을 許하엿스며 또 奧地移民을 獎勵하엿다.
其後 1901年에는 다시 入籍者 以外의 土地配與를 停止하고 官有地 定住를 禁止하엿다가 同8年 海參威에서 開催된 朝鮮人問題特別審議會에서 土地配與를 必要條件으로 하지 안코 鮮人入籍을 許하얏스니 以來 露政府 態度가 移民防止가 아니고 形便에 따라 政策의 硬緩에 不過하엿슴으로 生路를 求하여 陸續入露하는 朝鮮人은 1896年 鳥蘇里 南部地方만에 1萬 3千餘名에 達하엿스며 其外에는 『슈환川』 『레후川』 『다라뷔에川』의 流域에서 『시내리니꼬-보』 『고로사고-푸카』 『구로노-푸카』 『욀후네로마노프까』 等 數十村落을 建設하고 1910年까지 近 8萬名의 移住者를 보게 된 바 日韓合倂後로는 더욱 增加하야 1915年 沿海州 各地에 朝鮮人 村落만 40餘處나 되어 大槪는 荒凉한 曠原과 沼澤을 開拓하야 沃土潤地로 말들어서 生活根據는 安定하게 되고 入籍者는 露國人民으로서 모든 公民權을 亨受하엿스며 特히 露官廳에서 强制移住를 시킨 黑龍州 『사만리』 『도비허』 等地의 移住民의 生活은 가장 裕足하엿섯다.
이들은 大槪 露國人學校에서 敎育을 밧고 生活樣式도 露人에 同化되엇스며 地方에 따라 經濟力에 잇서 露人과 比肩하야 甲午以後 西伯利亞鐵道敷設을 請負한 金炳學과 甲辰當時 軍事用達로 成功한 崔鳳俊 等은 數十萬圓의 資産을 모이게 되엇는데 崔鳳俊은 千頓以上의 汽船을 購入하야 元山 海蔘威間 貿易에도 크게 活動을 하엿스며 이외에도 商業으로 致富한 者 頗多하엿다. 그 反面에 非入籍者을 流戶人과 一時 居住者들의 大槪는 露國人과 元戶人의 雇傭人 或은 借地 小作人으로 約 4割 乃至 6割의 耕作料를 地主의게 貢納하면서 朝鮮內地의 小作人과 다를 바 업는 生活을＜3＞ 하엿스나 地味肥厚와 土地饑饉이 업섯슴으로 그레도 裕足한 生活을 하엿다.
農業과 商業 以外에는 投機事業과 鴉片密賣(今日까지도 存在하야 在露朝鮮人問題의 癌種이 되어 잇다)를 한 者 不少하며 『레나』 『나세이』 『아물』 等 鑛山에서 抗夫로 從事한 者 近 2萬餘名에 達하고 牧畜業 漁業 等 經營으로 成功한 사람도 만엇스며 官吏, 軍人 敎師로 得名한 者도 잇다.

二
1917年 以後 소뷔엣드 政權下의 朝鮮人
소뷔엣드 權力을 樹立한 1917年 11月 革命은 푸로레타리아 獨裁로 出發한 同時 弱小民族과 被壓迫民族의(略-원문)宣言確保하엿스니 로서아共和國 憲法에
『로서아共和國은 人種과 民族의 異同을 가리지 안코 人民의 權力은 平等하다는 基本精神에서 少數民族에 對한 如何한 種類의 壓迫 或은 平等에 對한 制限...况 個個民族間에 或 種의 特權(直接 間接)을 設定 或은 許容-한다는 것은 共和國의 基本法規에 牴觸됨을 聲明하며 또 個個民族은 소뷔엣드 大會決議로서 로서아共和國 最高機關이 承認을 經하야 自治共和國, 自治州로 分離할 權利가 有함』
『로서아共和國 人民은 各種 大會 裁判所, 官廳 社會生活에 잇서 自由로 各自 民族語를 使用할 權利가 有함』
『各種 民族의 混在하는 住民을 가진 地方에서는 居住區域이 擴大할 時 同一民族으로 構成된 村落은 獨立한 農村 소뷔엣드를 組織하기 爲하야 分離함을 得함』
라고 한 後 이를 實行하야 波蘭 우크라이나가 獨立하고 『야구-즈』 『길기』 『따달』 『우즈벳크』 等 十數民族이 自治領을 建設하야 民族單位의 權益伸長과 保護을 하고 잇스니 이 革命은 在露朝鮮人 生活에도 多大한 變動을 제來하엿다.

A 政治的方面
憲法에 制定된 바와 가치 朝鮮人도 帝政時代의 警官, 스파이 僧侶 不勞所得者 等 選擧資格制限 以外의 勤勞人으로 性別을 가래지 안코 一定한 居住期限의 登錄이 잇는 者로 選擧當日18歲 以上의 男女는 選擧 被選擧의 權利가 確保되어 잇스며 日常生活에 잇서 소뷔엣드 露國人과 가치 모-든 政治的 權利를 占有하고 잇다. 現在 沿海州 其他 在露朝鮮人 數가 1929年에 大略 22萬-24萬人으로 以上의 選擧權을 가진 數는 60%以上에 達하며 被選擧權者 中에는 村郡縣議員의 要職에 잇는 者가 잇고 그 中 海參威 『하바롭스크』 소뷔엣드 委員 中에는 朝鮮人 委員이 세 사람이나 잇다. 以上 行政機關 外 警察 裁判所 等 司法機關과 共産黨機關에 在職活動하는 者 不少(數字的으로 表示못함이 遺恨)하니 在露朝鮮人의 政治上 權利와 義務는 露國 國民과 조곰도 差別이 업는 것이 事實이다. 그리고 沿海州地方委員會 會內에는 『高麗部라는 機關을 設置하야 衛生 産業社會 行政調査 等의 各部를 두고 朝鮮人에 關한 行政을 統轄하고 州委員會와 連絡하야 그의 指導를 밧는다.
일즉 朝鮮人의 移住 當時 多少 同情과 優待는 이섯스나 移住勢力의 量과 質이 擴大되어짐에 따라 陰凶한 露當局은 鑛山에서 勞動者를 驅逐하고 農莊에서 農民을 虐待하엿스며 朝鮮文으로 敎育하는 學校를 一切 閉鎖하는 等 帝政官僚들의 政治的 强壓策과 强制同化策이 極에 達하엿고 1911年에 露當局의 公許에 依하야 朝鮮人 政治機關으로 成立되어 一般의 行政 司法 警察은 勿論 敎育 勸業 開拓 士官養成 等을 管理 經營하든 『勸業會』도 1914年 歐洲大戰이 이러나자 帝政 中央政府는......의 參加를 歡迎하기 爲하야 强制封鎖을 하는 同時 朝鮮人의 政治活動을 强壓하엿스며 大戰時 露國 軍人으로 東部戰線에서 幾多 殊勳을 남긴 朝鮮人 2百의 將校와 數千의 兵士에 對하여도 待遇 差別이 甚하엿스니 今日 소뷔엣드 治下 朝鮮人이 民族無差別의 原則에서 享有하고 잇는 政治權力과 平等法을 當時에 比하면 天壤의 差가 잇다할 것이다.
國籍問題에 對하여도 帝政時代 入籍한 者는 勿論 露國民으로 認定하고 日本 軍隊의 西伯利亞出兵 以後 入國한 朝鮮人 中 登錄에 漏落된 者를 當該機關에 申告케 하야 現在소배엣드 憲法에 導守치 아는 者 移動的 禁物密輸入者 以外 大槪는 入籍되어잇다.＜4＞
소비엣드로서아 公民으로서 政治生活은 로서아 共和國民의 一般的 政治生活과 同一함으로 歎歎할 必要가 업는바로 沿海州가 海外朝鮮人運動의 歷史策源地로 되어 잇는 것과 그 多樣的인 過去運動을 挿叙함은 興味잇는 것이나 後項의 『活動人物』에 素描라도 하겟기에 이에는 略하엿다.

B 經濟方面
革命以後 社會主義에 立脚한 소뷔엣드 經濟政策은 朝鮮人을 帝政時代의 經濟的 桎梏에서 解放하야 小數 朝鮮人 地主와 露國人 地主에게 農奴와 가치 搾取를 밧은 貧農과 賃銀奴隷인 工場勞動者의게 無産階級獨制政治制度 下의 經濟的 特權과 保護를 均一하게 分配하엿다. 그러나 極東沿海州는 革命 當時 外國의 軍事的 干涉과 反革命軍의 最後 根據地帶 其他 地理的文化的 關係로 中央政府의 諸般施設이 迅速하게 實行되지 못하야 1922年 日本軍 撤兵까지 朝鮮人은 그이짜-時代의 制度와 가치 生活하고 土地國有와 穀物强制徵發 等 所謂 戰時共産黨時代의 過渡期를 지나 1924年 新經濟政策時期까지도 産業 經濟生活이 多少 混頓하엿스나 土地使用權分配와 1925年 8月 農業勞動者保護法發布와

(註, 勞動保護法)
一. 14歲 以下 少年勞動禁止
二. 一週間一日公休日
三. 賃金은 國家에서 制定한 最低保證 以下로 不下할 것
四. 生活의 絶對保障 等
以外 農民이 새로운 生産方法을 習得하는 農業學校로서 소비엣드 國營農場 農業勞動者꼼뮨(共同農場)의 設施와 트락타 使用 機械購入을 爲한 協同組合의 組織 等......
新産業政策이 樹立된 後로는 朝鮮人의 諸 方面 經濟活動도 組織化되고 整理되엇다.
現在 職業人口別를 보면(1927年)
一. 農民......13萬 餘로 畜産과 함께 專門的으로 農業만 經營하는 數가 朝鮮人 沿海州 總人口의 45%
二. 漁業......農民으로써 漁業을 兼한 數와 專門的으로 漁業만 經營하는 漁民이 25%
三. 工業勞動者...15%
5個年計劃實施 以後 同工業人口數 增加하야 現在는 20%에 達함
四. 自由職業...小賣商人, 密輸業者 自由勞動者 10%로 이 外에 官吏 其他
以上 各種 産業系統에는 各其 組合이 잇서 例하면 『감챠스카』朝鮮人漁民組合 海參威水産組合 或은 그 業에도 職業別로 露西人과 함께 組合을 組織하고 農業가트면 『곰뮨』 『알째리』 或은 『골호즈』 『솝골호즈』 等으로 組織되어 잇다.
勞動者는 熟練 不孰練을 가리지 안코 組合員이 되어서 勞動이 分配機會를 밧게 되며 加入함에는 普通 3個月이 準備期限이 잇스니 露領에 드러가는 者는 國境官廳에서 調査를 바든 後 技術과 希望에 따라 行先地를 申告한 後 該地方에 가서 前記 3個月의 勞動準備期를 經過한 後 當該組合의 正會員이 된다.
土地問題...에 對하여는 政府에서 廣大한 土地를 朝鮮人 골호즈에 配與하고 골호즈 委員會에서는 耕作能力을 標準하야 分配하니 이에 自力이라는 것은 個人 或은 家族單位로 他人의 雇傭能力을 包含치 안는 것이면 稅金은＜5＞, 가을의 收穫 中에서 各自로 配當되는 政府補助의 實費...或은 實費 以下의 換償金으로서 最低額이 制定된다고 한다.
以下 1930年의 最近實例가 朝鮮人의 것은 아니지만 그러나 朝鮮人 農民에도 이런 實例가 이슬 것이니
卽 골호즈에 加入치 안은 個人 農民의 一日平均收入이
1,93圓이고
골호즈에 加入한 農民은 一日平均 4,75圓의 收入이 잇서(이는 工業勞動者의 賃金에 接近하나)그 差가 甚하며
沿海州 엇던 地方의 朝鮮人과 로서아人의 收入을 比較하여보면 朝鮮人이 더 만은 곳이 잇스니 이는 農業 以外 漁業 畜産 等을 兼業함과 生活費用이 低廉한 理由도잇겟지만 엇젯든 革命 以後 朝鮮人 經濟生活은 其基礎가 安定됨을 따라 漸次 富裕하여짐을 數字로 證明할 수 잇다.
勿論 貯畜의 自由가 잇고 또 政府의 獎勵로 貯蓄機關까지 잇스나 他人의 勞力을 搾取치 안는 勤勞人은 아무리 貯蓄하더라도 富者가 되지 못하니 이는 소비엣드 政策의 巧妙함과 또 實際的 可能性이 업는 까닭이다.
말이 岐路에 들지마는 골호즈에 加入하는 農民의 利益을 보자. 一農民이 五六『헥타』의 土地와 若干의 農具를 가지고 當該部落의 골호즈에 加入하면 管轄機關에서는 耕作能力에 따라 面積과 農具를 分與한 後 一日의 時間的 賃金制가 아니고 勞動의 能率賃金制로 分與된 一定한 面積 以外 그 剩餘能力대로 얼마던지 耕作할 수 잇스며 收穫期에는 그 동안 勞動의 日數와 收入의 價格을 計算하야 加入員에 分配하고(金錢 又는 穀物노) 差引額 中 稅金과 政府補助를 償還하며 그 남어지 中 一部는 利益配當金으로 分配하고 다른 一部는 當該골호즈의 基金으로 積立하야 골호즈 財政的 基礎를 充實이 한다.
農業을 中心한 朝鮮인 經濟 以外 漁業 林業 畜産 其他産業에 關한 것도 重要하지마는 朝鮮人 經濟의 中樞가 되는 것은 農業임으로 以外의 것은 數字와 調査도 업건니와 略하고 農業中에도 最近 沿海州 主要産物로 年年이 發展 改良되어가는 米作을 簡單이 紹介하겟다.
沿海州의 米作 起源은 1910年으로 同年 니골스크, 우스리프키에 居住하는 朝鮮 農氏이 試作하야 그 成績이 良好하엿슴으로 以後 로하바롭스크, 보셋도, 구로데고! 스빠스고트 等 鮮農居住地方에 急激이 傳播되어 1919年은 水稻大豊作으로 播種面積이 2百『대사진』 1920年...2, 500 1921年 7,000 1922年―1 2,000 1928年에는 1922年前의 4,5倍에 達하엿고 政府에서는 各種試驗과 獎勵를 게을니 하지 안니하야 23年度에 年産額이 삼사십萬石에 達하엿다고 한다.
그리고 이 水田事業은 朝鮮人의 獨古的 技能인 만큼 今後도 얼마던지 發達할 可能性이 잇다. 水稻耕作 以前에는 全部가 小麥의 田作이고 소비엣드 始政 以來 阿片栽培를 禁止하엿스나 革命 前에는 盛히 耕作하야 國外密賣로 돈푼 모은 者가 相當이 잇다.
正確한 數字라고 할 수 업스나 1924年度 沿海州에서만 朝鮮人 農産物이 4百萬圓 巨額이라 하니 現在 木材 漁場 養蠶 鑛山 等 各種産額을 合하면 數千萬圓에 達할 것으로 沿海州 朝鮮人의 經濟的 實力은 말노 增大하여가고 잇다.

C, 敎育, 社會,其他文化的方面
革命 前 露領에 在住한 朝鮮人의 文化와 敎育 程度는 入籍民과 非入籍民間에 顯著한 差異가 잇서 入籍民의 子女는 大槪 露國學校에 入學하야 로서아 敎育을 밧고 그의 文化에 同化되엇스나 非入籍者 中 特히 農村 居住者는 生存制度와 風俗은 勿論 그들 敎育까지 拒否하여 오다가 1905年 以後 海外 各地에 散在한 亡命客과 志士가 露領方面에 流入하야 敎育事業에 活動하는 同時 로서아 敎育과 文化 輸入에 汲汲하엿다. 當時 米州로부터 온 國民會는 各地에 支會를 두고 學校設立과 新聞發行을 하엿스니 張道* 主筆의 海潮新聞과 申采浩 主筆의 大東新聞은 아직 世人의 記憶에 잇슬 것이다. 前記한 바 『勸業會』에서도 存績期間內 敎育文化事業에＜6＞, 盡力하야 大戰 前에 入籍한 學校(露語敎授) 40所 朝鮮語敎授小學校 書堂에 類似한 것도 이섯다.)...100餘所 中學校와 師範學校 各各 一個所가 이섯다. 當時는 敎育이 宗敎의 支配에 *侍된 때라 政府에서는 强制로 希臘敎를 信仰케 하고 學校에서도 聖書를 가리켯다.
革命 以後=敎育을 宗敎의 宇獄으로부터 完全히 分離시키어 奴隷的 資本主義 敎育制의 代로 共産主義 精神에 根本 觀念을 두고 가장 自由한 科學的 土臺에서 敎育文化의 創造的 變革을 하엿스니 이의 基本政策은 다음과 갓다.
一. 文化的으로 後進한 諸 民族의 文化水準을 一層 向上시키기 爲하야 不斷한 努力을 할 것.
二. 文**敎* 及 敎育의 問題를 勤勞階級의 集團主義 及 國際的 소리다리티-의 精神에 續行할 것.
三. 소비엣드 國內에 잇는 諸 民族의 勞動 及 農民 知識階級의 새로운 母體를 創造하는 活動=科學的 硏究的 活動에 必要한 最高 **이 잇는 協力者의 産出=을 爲하야 努力* 것.
이리하야 帝政時代의 奴隷的 文化政策을 根本的으로 革命하야 다른 民族과 가치 朝鮮人의게도 母國語 敎育의 禁止를 解除하고 될 수 잇는데로 前記 精神에 立脚하야 學校 其他 文化機關을 設立하는데 同時 自民族語 使用獎勵와 朝鮮의 歷史 地理 文化에 關한 智識을 通養시키는 同時 朝鮮文 新聞紙를 發刊케 하야 物質的 精神的 援助를 不借하엿스니 朝鮮文 新聞으로는 海參威에서 發刊되는 아방갈드* 先烽*가 잇서 讀者가 數萬에 達하고 年年이 擴大되어가며 朝鮮文 雜誌 其他 各 勤勞組合의 朝鮮文 壁新聞도 만타. 學校는 1923年에 벌서 沿海州 南部 各郡에 總數 2百 以上의 純朝鮮人 小學校가 設立되어 縣소비엣드大會 決議에 依하야 普通小學校로 認可되고 이해부터 縣學務課內에 朝鮮* 小學校事務全權의 職制가 設定되어서 各地 學校의 實地調査의 學校網 樹立 正則敎育實施 及 必需品의 規則的 補紿 等에 活動하고 잇스며 數年 前 海參威와 하바롭스크에는 9年制 學校가 設立되어 小學校와 中學의 連續學制를 實施하고 잇스며 師範學校 農民學校도 數가 增加되고 朝鮮人 獨立의 것이 아니지마는 朝鮮人이 多數 入學하여잇는 極東共産大學 黨學校 勞動大學 行政官養成所 等은 朝鮮人成人敎育을 식히고 잇다.
이 外에 最高學府로 朝鮮 靑年이 多數(每年 50名 以上式 入學) 在學하는 莫斯科의 東方勞力者共産大學이 잇고 工科大學 其他 各種 政治敎育의 大學에도 朝鮮人이 入學하야 專門的 敎育을 밧고 잇스며 特히 注目할 것은 『레-닌그라드』에 잇는 國際士官學校이다. 이 學校에는 弱小民族의 各隊가 잇서 軍事에 關한 最近 智識과 技術을 養하고 6年의 卒業 後는 赤軍으 士官으로 實務에 **하니 每年 이 士官學校에 在學하는 朝鮮 靑年이 2百餘名에 達하고 卒業한 者는 5,6百名 以上이나 된다. 그 중 飛行將校가 *50名으로 全露陸軍飛行大會에 拔群으 成績을 가지지 勇名 轟轟한 者도 만흐며 士官 中에는 蒙古 其他國 陸軍敎官으로 잇는 數도 不少하다.
政治的 文化的 啓蒙活動으로는 海參威와 하바롭스크에 高麗圖書舘(1926年까지 이섯는데 現在도 勿論 이슬 것이다) 民衆集會所 劇場 各種 俱樂部 勞動者夜間講習所 等이 잇서 平常 各種 集會가 繼續되며 紀念日가튼 때는 朝鮮XX靑年劇團에서 演劇을 하고 端午에는 이날을 共産少年軍紀念데-로 하야 各地方民이 海參威 等地에 모여서 懸賞씨름大會 其他 運動會를 開催한다.
以上 朝鮮人의 敎育과 文化는 政治 經濟方面과 가치 共産主義를 基準으로하고 飛躍的 進展을 하는 소비엣드 로서아의 政策과 援助 下에 年年 健實하게 成長하여가고 잇다.

三
西伯利亞의 朝鮮人 先驅者와 人物集散......
初期 開拓時代의 先驅者 中 代表的 人物은 崔在享과 崔鳳俊으로 崔在享氏은 賤奴子로서 8,9歲時 入露하야 苦學으로 露國 敎育을 밧고 一時는 海軍人되엇다가 其後 20年동안이나 而長의 公職에 잇서 敎育과 實業을 獎勵하는 동안 朝鮮人의 政治的 活動의 素地를 닥거노앗스며 露領 出生으로＜7＞ 今日 3,40歲 以上의 朝鮮人 靑年鬪士는 當年의 崔의 敎育을 바덧다. 甲申年 以後는 鮮露間 外交의 通譯과 李朝末年 親露派의 海外連絡의 中心人物노서 活動하고 安重根과의 親交도 두터웟섯다. 當時 別名은 『최, 뻬-짜』로 露人官邊에도 信用이 만엇다고 한다. 崔鳳俊氏 露領 內에서 朝鮮人 實業王으로서 日露戰爭 當時 朝鮮의 牛馬를 輸入하여다가 露國軍隊에 用達하야 致富한 사람인데 亦是 敎育과 政治方面에 非常한 業蹟을 남기고 8,9年前 니골스크에서 病死하엿다.
以外에 米州로부터 亡命하여온 鄭在寬
李剛氏 等은 各地에 國民會 支會를 設置하야 敎育 文化 政治 方面에 活動하엿고 朝鮮 內地로부터는 申采浩
李東輝
李甲
李相卨
李鍾浩
柳東悅等 諸氏가 入露하야 新聞 雜誌를 中心으로 政治的 活動을 하엿스며 其中 李東輝
李相卨 兩氏는 一般 記憶에 잘 남어잇는 이다.
革命 後...로서아에서 生長하야 로서아 敎育을 바든 者로 現在 共産黨과 朝鮮人 各種 機關에서 活動하고 잇는 人物 中 今春 京城서 別世한 蔡그리고리를 비롯하야 일홈잇는 韓明世
金아파나스
崔高麗
朴愛
南晩春
南슈라
金미하이 等外 前記 李東輝
金夏錫
金哲勳
張道程
朴應七
尹海
金震等 露西亞 出生은 아니지만 10數星霜 西伯利亞 各地에 馳驅하야 活動한 老將들엇다.
이 中 朴鎭淳氏는 1918年 X人社會黨을 組織하야 活動하다가 第二次 國際共産黨大會 때 參席하야 그의 流暢한 露語의 熱辯은 各國 共産黨 巨頭를 駕嘆케 하엿스며 才氣橫溢하야 朝鮮文에도 堪能하야 現在에도 朝鮮 內의 雜誌新聞에 變名으로 投稿를 하며 5,6年前부터 莫斯科大學과 農民大學의 敎授로 잇서 辨證法 其他 社會主義哲學에 關한 著書도 만타. 金夏錫氏는 6尺 長身으로 李東輝
金哲勳 諸氏와 가치 初期에는 民族運動者로 活動하다가 革命 前後하야 無産階級運動에 投身한 老鬪士인대 以上 諸氏는 모다 러서아 革命 當時 直接 間接으로 만흔 일을 하고 잇고 其中에는 토로츠기의 西伯利亞遠征 第5軍團과 『빨치산』에 參加하야 血戰한 사람도 잇다.
軍人 中에는 歐羅巴戰爭에 勇名을 떨친 吳憂黙氏도 有名하야 革命 後는 레-닌그라-드 國際士官學校委員 中 一人이 되어 朝鮮人 軍人의 養成에 努力하엿다.
以外 現在 靑年共産黨員 或은 『삐오넬』노서 將來에 囑望이 만흔 사람도 잇지만은 略하고저 한다.
임이 所定한 紙面이 만이 超過하엿기로
一. 沿海州 『高麗族自治』 問題와
二. 朝鮮農民 驅逐問題에 對하여는 簡單하게 經過만을 쓰겟다.

四
朝鮮農民驅逐... ...昨年12月부터 今年4 5月까지 露當局의 壓迫에 不堪하야 3萬 乃至 5萬의 農民이 露領으로부터 北滿洲 地方으로 避亂하여 왓다고 外地新聞은 報導하엿다. 그러나 確實한 調査에 依하면 撤歸한 數는 4千-5千에 不過하고 또 其 原因은 골호즈 政策에 反對하는 富農階級에 屬한 者와 이를 煽動으로 現 法領과 制度를 理解하지 못한 一部 農民 其外 禁品密輸入者와 阿片密買者들이 官憲 當局의 嚴峻한 取締에 박이지 못하여서 越境撤歸한 것이다. 國法을 犯하는 密輸入者는 海外에 두고 그러치 못한 農民이 自己의 無知로 어대가도 만나기 어려운생활의 保障地帶를 버리는 것도 그들 自由이겟지마는 北滿洲로 와서야 비로소 輕率하엿슴을 깨닷고 다시 入露한 者도 數千 名에 達하얏다. 故로 一部 反動農民과 密輸入者의 國外逃去가 소비엣드 農業政策에 何等 影響이 업슴과 또 一般의 問題 삼을 꺼리도 못될 것이다.

高麗族自治問題
1922年 沿海州에 소비엣드 政權이 完全이 樹立되자 꼴뷔로(高麗部)委員 韓明世 等으로서 沿海州自治問題를 中央政府에 提議되엿슴을 發端으로하야 1924年에는 國際共産黨이 同問題를 承認하고 中央政府에 勸論하는 同時 高麗部 責任者들은 政府 經濟 文化 土地 等에＜8＞, 對하야 線密한 調査에 着手하엿는데 當時 國際黨가 中央政府는 소비엣드 民族政策의 原則上 認定은 勿論 沿海州의 朝鮮人 自治가 東洋XX政策上 重大한 影響이 잇섯슴으로 誠意로서 同問題를 取扱하엿스나 露日條約이 締結되기 前後하야 沿海州 露國黨幹部間에 A, 高麗族 自治는 經濟的 基礎가 確立되지 못한 것과  B, XX의 植民政策을 도리어 유리하게 하는 것. C, 大露西亞주의가 강하고 민족적 소리다리티의 관념과 소비엣트 民族政策의 理解가 薄弱한 로서아人 特히 農民들의 不平을 誘發할 憂慮가 이슴과 D, XX과의 外交關係에는 支障을 不免하리라 하야 適當한 時期까지는 保留하게 되엇든 바 今年度 全露소비에드 大會에 다시 問題가 沿海州 朝鮮人 代表가 提出하얏스나 亦是 前記 理由 外 朝鮮人 內에 아직 政治的 統制力과 團結이 不足하야 비록 自治를 許與한다 하더라도 種種 內部問題가 發生되리라 하야 亦是 解決을 엇지 못하엿다. 소비에드 領內에 잇는 少數民族인 야꾸-드 무랴-드 길기스 따달 까프까-TM 우지벡크族 等이 임이 自治를 하야 非常한 向上과 發達의 實跡을 보이고 잇스니 露領에 잇는 朝鮮人이 XX國民이 아니고 소비에드 로서아에 國籍을 둔 로서아 國民이라면 이들의 政治的 訓練과 經濟的 文化的 發達이 어너 程度에 達하면 또 X露의 國際關係가 今後라도 急轉한다면 同問題는 具體的으로 再燃될 것이다.
沿海州의 朝鮮人 自治가 決코 中央政府의 對X外交上 關係로 決定됨이 아니고 在露 朝鮮人의 政治的 統制性과 文化的 向上 밋 同問題를 爲한 不斷한 努力中如何에 決定될 것이라면 露領在朝鮮人 以外에 朝鮮人 全體에 深大한 關聯이 잇는 沿海州自治問題는 決코 可能性이 업는 것이 아닐 것이다.＜9＞

在滿同胞의 最近狀態
羅公民

一. 人口分布
생각건대 汪淸 廷吉을 中心으로 한 俗稱 北間道 一帶가 第一 移住同胞의 密度가 著大하고 吉林省城附近과 興京 通化(奉天省에 屬함) 等地의 密度가 그 다음이 됨니다. 滿洲라 指稱함은 東北 3省 卽 奉天 吉林 黑龍江을 이르는 것인데 3省의 坊坊曲曲에 어느 곳이든지 朝鮮 사람 업는 곳은 업슴니다. 그러면 을마나 朝鮮 사람이 全 滿洲에 사너냐고 궁금히 녀기는 이가 게실 줄은 암이다. 그러나 的確히 調査함에는 中國官廳에서 힘써야겟는데 中國人이 自國民의 數爻도 알아보지 아니하는 판에 奚暇에 朝鮮 사람 數를 調査할 까닭이 잇겟슴니까. 그럼으로 通稱 百萬 또는 2百萬이라고 하나 아모 根據도 업는 일이외다. 不得已 各方面의 不完全한 調査를 例擧하야 參考에 供할까함니다.

正義府調査    737,892名

東洋協會      736,266

滿鐵          783,187

滿鮮申報      811,187

中日文化協會  893,000

이와갓치 그 數가 大相不同할 뿐 아니다. 最大數되는 中日文化協會의 調査도 어느 程度까지 秘密히 하얏는지 疑問임니다.＜9＞, 그 반즉 實際의 數는 반다시 百萬 以上될 것 으로 推測할 수 잇슴니다.
이제 다시 朝鮮과 滿洲의 人口密度를 比較하야 今後로 얼마나 移住民을 容許할 수 잇는가를 살펴봅시다.
備考(上表中東蒙古의 人口와 面積을 包含함)
이 數字에 依하야 보면 朝鮮안에서 3人쯤 살 만한 땅에 一人이 사는 세음이 된다. 그러나 以上 數字는 3省과 東蒙古의 平均數임으로 黑龍江省과 蒙古갓치 氣候不調하고 生産이 如意치 못한 곳을 除한 즉 人口의 密度는 朝鮮의 平均數와 비슷할 것임니다. 例컨대 遼寧省(奉天省의 改名)의 人口密度(1,300)은 黃海道(1,226)와 忠北(1,628)에 伯仲되고 吉林省(450)은 咸北(452) 住民數에 該當하고 移住의 餘裕가 잇는 곳은 黑龍江이나 蒙古地方뿐 이외다. 그리하야 每年 山東 直隷 兩省에서 百萬 內外의 貧民이 來到하는데 密度强大한 奉天省에는 居住하지 못하고 吉林省과 黑龍省으로 轉送하게 되니 1927年 在滿同胞 被逐問題가 다만 政略上으로 排斥한 것이 아니라 中國의 主權으로 볼 때는 經濟上으로 歡迎하지 못할 重要한 理由* 搆成되여 잇는 것을 우리는 等閑視하지 못할 바이외다. 今後 10年을 不出하야 他省 移民 10萬人과 在來中國人이 增殖으로 50萬 以上이 될 것이니 朝鮮사람 問題는 政治 上으로보다 더욱 經濟的으로 여러 가지 惡迫한 層折이 發生할 것이 分明하니 滿洲生活은 樂觀을 不許합니다.

二. 生活狀態
生活狀態는 生産收入에 달여잇슴으로 먼저 在滿同胞의 職業을 말삼하겟슴니다. 大體로 水畓耕作이 唯一 長技요 또 그것이 唯一 目的임으로 自然 農業이 十中九 以上됨니다.
農事가 順調로 되는 해는 當年의 負債를 淸帳하고 겨우 廷命할 農糧이 남게 되는 것이나 萬苦 凶年이 들게 되면 그 窮乏한 살임은 形言할 수 업시 慘酷함이다. 土地의 所有權이 업는 故로 大槪 當年치기로 借地料를 春期에 先給하고 自農으로 4,5日耕 耕作하는 이는 多少 餘裕가 잇는 사람으로 그 數가 얼마 되지 못하고 大槪는 中國 地主의 땅을 半作하거나 土地整理 種子 耕作費를 自擔하고 秋收 後 10의 3이나 2을 地主에 주는 例가 잇스니 大體로는 中國人에게 屬한 小作農임니다. 春期에 高利로 내먹은 것을 秋期에 倍償하고 翌年 當하며 그 數三年에 再倍加한 金額을 報償하게 함으로 如干 조흔 땅이 아니면 빗에서 헤여나지 못하야 實際上 農奴 生活을 하게 됨니다. 이러케 苦勞하야 가면서 農作한 總額數가 얼마나 되너냐하면 南北滿洲를 通하야 昨年度의 生産額이 152萬石이 되얏스니 그 中 中國人의 直接 耕作한 바 約 20萬石을 除하면 130餘萬石이 朝鮮 사람의 耕作으로＜10＞, 産出되는 것이외다. 그러나 그 折半은 地主의 所得이요 그 折半이 朝鮮사람의 所得이니 百萬名의 九割 卽 90萬을 農民으로 看做하고 一人의 平均所得이 7斗 可量이 됨니다. 이것으로 全 살임을 當하야 가게되니 白米맛은 베를 논에 세워 놋코 조곰 흘터 먹어 볼 뿐이요 打作하기 무섭게 팔아서 小米로 代食하니 百萬사람이 베農事지어 小米 먹고 廷命하는 것이 在滿同胞의 標準生活이외다.
北間島에는 元來 80年 以來 移住한 곳이고 또 그 땅은 農村이나 市街을 專혀 朝鮮 사람 손으로 開拓하얏슴으로 基礎를 잡은 事業家가 別로 업고 다만 市街地에 잇서 精米所 草繩 雜貨商朝鮮街小米商 等 各地에 다 잇스니 그 즁에 特産商으로 多少 成功한 이는 4平街의 三省號 半島商會가 될 것임니다. 그네들은 內容이 充實하고 數年來 別故障이 업시 朝鮮안에도 相當한 信用이 잇슴니다. 製造工業 方面으로는 고무工業이 近來 數三個所 생겨나 大連의 愛輪膠皮工廠 安東縣의 育民工廠 奉天의 三省膠皮工廠이 잇스나 아즉 다 자리가 잡피지 아니하야 奮鬪하는 中. 中國人의 需用이 漸次 느러가는 故로 將來로는 多大한 囑望을 할 것 갓슴니다.

三. 敎育狀況
移住朝鮮人 子弟의 敎育은 7種類의 經營者의 손으로 하여 잇는 故로 그 敎育方針으로든지 指導方策으로든지 複雜한 狀態를 呈하지 안일 수 업슴니다.

가, 私立學校
鄕村 各地에 잇는 子弟의 父兄이 經費를 自辨하야 自由狀態로 敎育하는 것이니 그 敎務者의 能率과 財政事情에 依하야 應分의 敎養을 與하게 됨으로 아모 均制도 統一도 업시 經營하야 가는 날 까지 繼續하게 된 것이외다.

나. 團體學校
奧地朝鮮사람 政治運動者 乃至 思想團體의 施設에 依하야 設立됨으로 朝鮮精神을 注入하는 主義 下에 經費는 團體 又는 地方父兄이 負擔하는 것이외다. 己往에는 正義府에서 經營하야 온 것이 만히 잇섯스나 正義府가 解體되 國民府가 代立한 後 共産主義者와 對峙하게 되야 그 勢力이 縮少한 影響이 잇슴니다.

다. 委任學校
鐵道沿線에 잇는 普通學校를 己往에는 朝鮮總督府에서 經營하다가 무슨 생각으로 그랫는지 滿鐵에 全部 委任하야 經營하야 달나고 費用만 總督府에서 支出하고 管理는 滿鐵에서 하게 된지가 3年前붓터 이외다. 그 約定書에 依하면 滿鐵은 積極的 經營을 하겟노라 하얏스니 只今으로 보면 專혀 消極的으로 발너맛치는 것이 爲主인 것갓슴니다.

라. 日本學校
滿鐵沿線 各地에 普通學校잇는 大都會를 빼놋코 小驛附近에 居住하는 이의 子弟는 日本 小學校에서 日本 兒童과 共學하게 되고 普通學校 又는 小學校를 卒業하고 日本 中學校이나 專門學校에 入學하는 것을 말하는 것이외다.

마. 中國敎育
最初붓터 中國 初級小學에 入學하야 純中國式으로 敎育함이니 그것도 두 가지가 잇서서 한가지는 朝鮮 사람이 自進하야 中國 敎育를 밧게 하는 것 또 하나는 北間島갓치 全 住民의 8割이나 朝鮮 사람되는 곳에는 中國 國策 上 朝鮮 兒童에게 中國 敎育을 實施하기 爲하야 朝鮮的 敎育을 壓迫하야 가면서 勸獎하는 것이외다.

바. 宗敎學校
宗敎 色彩를 띈 學校數가 全體로 89校인데 耶蘇敎 所屬한 것이 59校
天主敎所屬       21校

天道敎           8校

侍天敎           8校

元宗敎           6校

大倧敎           4校

靑林敎           2校


사. 外人經營
이것도 大槪 宗敎學校와 다름업스나 上記 校는 經營者의 名義가 朝鮮 사람이 된 것이요. 外人經營이라는 것은 校主 校長의 名義까지 다 外國人이외다.＜11＞, 19校 中 17校는 德國人 經營인 것은 特히 注意할 바이외다. 以下 敎育의 槪要를 略擧하야 參考에 供함니다. 此等 學校는 거이 다 初等敎育을 科目삼슴니다.

其外에도 脫籍問題 歸化問題 共産主義의 影響 等 重要한 題目이 잇스나 此를 論述함에는 自然 政治問題에 論及하야 不自由한 筆法으로 此를 論評함은 雙方面에 오히려 誤解를 招致하기 쉬은 故니 此를 짐짓 避하려 하나 在滿 靑年이 거의 左傾된 것이 顯著한데 此로 因하야 農民에게 미치는 利益得失을 充分히 論究하야 進行치 아니하면 無고한 農民의 大多數가 1927年 被逐 以上의 一大 威肀…을 受할는지 알 수 업슴니다. 그야말로 鄭重한 「自己批判」을 할 때가 된 줄 암니다. 또 當面問題나 朝鮮人의 脫籍과 歸化를 同一視하는 幣端의 잇서 恒常 混同하는 模樣인 바 此를 確然히 區分하야 朝鮮사람이면 何時에든지 任意入籍할 만한 自由가 잇기를 要求하는 것은 原則上 必然한 일이요 中國에 歸化하는 것은 脫籍權을 圖得한 後 自由意思로 中國에 歸化하는 사람도 잇슬 것이요. 아니하고 사는 사람도 잇슬 것이외다. 此 問題는 자못 重要한 題目인 즉 追後 論述하기로 容恕하심을 바람니다.＜12＞

米洲의 8千同胞의 近況
申興雨

太平洋속의 적은 섬 布哇와 北美大陸의 各處에는 우리 朝鮮同胞들이 歷史的으로 만히 가 잇서서 政治的 經濟的 文化的으로 놀나운 活躍을 보이고 잇다함은 여러 번 世上에 紹介된 일이어니와 이제 最近의 在美同胞의 安危와 그 形便들을 報導하겟슴니다.
나는 最近에도 美國을 단녀 바로 數日前에 着京한 터임으로 比較的 近日의 形便을 알 만한데 내가 調査한 바에 依하건대 北美洲에는 朝鮮 사람이 가ž¥ 만히 集團되어 살고 잇는 곳은 「로샌젤스」와 「시카코」와 紐育이엇는데 로샌젤스 市內에만 約 百名 그 附近에 約 4百名이 잇스며 市俄古市 內에도 5千 餘名이 잇고 紐育에도 約 60名의 同胞가 살고 잇습데다. 前記세 都市와 그 附近에 사는 朝鮮人 總數가 約 1千名되는 속에 3百名 可量이＜12＞, 各 大中學校에 다니는 學生들이고 그 남어지는 農事짓는 사람 歐美人과 比肩하게 큰 商舖를 大路邊에 내어노코 장사하는 사람 그 外 團體 銀行 會社에 勤務하는 이들이엇슴니다. 장사말이 낫스니 말이지만 市俄古에는 金裵會社라 하는 우리 사람들이 經營하는 큰 商會가 잇서서 經營方面으로 만히 活躍하고 잇는 것은 實로 感激할 일이엇고 그 밧게 東洋物産의 紹介販賣 等에 活動하는 분도 만엇슴니다.
그리고 北美大陸에 잇는 同胞의 生活 程度는 勿論 우리 朝鮮안 보다 낫슴니다. 農業勞動者라도 하로 나가 일을 하면 5圓 以上 34圓 可量의 勞銀이 생기는 터이며 또 不景氣 不景氣하지만은 일자리 업서 勞動을 못하게 까지는 甚하지 안은 모양입데다. 特記할 것은 朝鮮 사람이 만히 集團되어 잇는 前記 市俄古 桑港 紐育 「로스샌젤스」都市에는 우리 사람 獨特의 敎會堂이 잇고 그 속에 X語學校가 잇서 學童들에게 朝鮮말과 朝鮮한글을 가르처주며 때때로 本國에서 드러 온 손님이 잇스면 請하여다가 朝鮮 事情을 가르치게 하더이다.
그 곳 學童들은 大槪 美洲에서 出生한 아이가 大部分이 되어 모다 堂堂한 市民權을 가지고 잇습데다. 그래서 土地 家屋가튼 것도 다 自己의 名義로 所有權을 가지고 잇서요.
이 글을 보시는 여서분이 궁금하실 듯 십혀 한마듸 적거니와 徐載弼 博士는 「벤실페니아」에서 큰 病院의 病理學部 主任으로 日夜活動하고 계심니다. 그러고 歐美委員部도(略-원문)...그곳에 잇는 新聞 雜誌를 말하면 白日奎氏 等이 主宰하는 新X民報가 잇고 學生雜誌로 「코레앤 스튜-덴트 레뷰」라는 것이 잇고 朝鮮에도 각금 나오는 『우라키』 『實業』 等의 雜誌가 잇서서 꾸준히 發展하더이다.
그러면 布哇 方面은 엇더하가? 北美州에는 千名 內外에 不過하엿지만은 布哇에는 三十年 前 開發會社 때의 因緣도 잇서서 約 6千名이라느 多數한 同胞가 거주하고 잇습데다. 그분들의 生活狀態나 敎育 程度는 北美大陸과 큰 差異업슴니다. 원악 氣候가 조코 産物이 만히나고 位置가 東西洋의 要地에 잇슴으로 우리 朝鮮 사람들도 일즉부터 여러 가지 点으로 만히 깨다름을 밧고 活動하고 잇습데다. 그 중에도 閔贊鎬가튼 분은 경제적으로 성공한 분이어니와 그곳 교회와 학교를 설립 경영하는 등 在留동포를 위하야 만히 심혈을 붓고 잇습데다. 그런데 布哇에는 지금 중대 문제에 당면하고 잇습데다. 그것은 거기 在留하는 동포의 십중팔구는 30년 전 開發會社 때 이삼십 먹은 장년으로 건너간 터이나 春風秋雨 수십 년을 격는 동안에 그만 이제는 백발이 성성하여 노동을 할 수 업는 이가 되어 버리엇고 또한 移民禁止法이 실행되기 전 조선에서 조선여자들이 만히 건너간 관계로 10세 左右되는 학동들이 만히 생기엇는데 이와가치 노인이 아니면 소년들뿐임으로 생활상에 큰 지장을 밧지 아니치 못하게 되엇습데다. 이것은 오늘의 문제만 아니고 적어도 그 소년들이 성년 될 때까지 在留同胞의 共同한 운명이기 까닭에 李承晩박사가 크게 우려하고 박사 자신이 그 「호놀루루」부근에 잇는 「하와이」라는 적은 섬을 尋訪한 결과 그것을 미국정부로부터 拂下를 밧게 되어 그 섬 속 未懇地를 개척할 작정으로 이에 주식회사를 모아가지고 그곳에다가 農林業的 移民을 開如하고 잇더이다. 그야 물론 조선 사람의 移民만을 밧어드리는 것이지요. 아마 李 博士의 계획으로는 그 너른 땅안을 잘 개간하야 곤경에 잇는 布哇同胞 를 經濟的으로 협조하는 한편 독특한 단체적 훈련과 교육 종교사업 등을 이르킬 모양이엇스니 압날을 크게 주목할 만하다 할 것이엇슴니다. 이 사업에는 美本州에 잇는 동포들도 만히 요同하여 前記 주식회사의 주주로도 만히 되어잇서요.
현재 布哇에는 잡지로는 「太平洋」이란 것이 잇고 또 「아메리캔 코레안」이란 것이 잇스며 신문으로는＜13＞ XX민보가 잇습데다. 정치적 활동 방면은 여거에는 피하기로 하지요.
이밧게 「멕시코」(墨西哥)에 약 1,000명의 동포가 잇스며 남미 뿌라질에는 전혀 업다 하여도 과언이 아니라고 합데다. 그러니 布哇와 美 본토에 대략 8,000 내지 9,000에 달하는 우리 동포가 살고 잇는데 생활 상태는 본토의 여러분보다 나슨 것은 사실이엇고 또 압흐로 까다로운 국제적 정치문제만이 이러나지 안는다면 그 평온한 생활은 압르로 더 계속될 것가치 생각되더이다. 수자적으로 記述못한 것이 미안하기 짝이 업스나 대체로 八九千의 美洲동포는 현재 평안하게 잇더라는 소식을 전하나이다.＜36＞
＜2-18, 36＞