잡지명	삼천리 제7권 제5호
발행일	1935년 06월 01일
기사제목	歌姬의 藝術·戀愛生活 (The Art and Love Lives of Songstresses)
필자	本社特派員 金如山
기사형태	소식 (News/Report)

The Art and Love Lives of Songstresses
						By Our Special Correspondent Kim Yŏ-san

Wang Su-bok, Dreaming of Being a Writer's Wife

It's March 7th, and spring has barely touched P'yŏngyang Fortress. However, the frozen Taedong River has already thawed, and its oily, glossy blue waves cradle the reflection of Pubyŏk Pavilion, dancing merrily as they flow carefree below Yŏn'gwang Pavilion and Taedong Gate. (Photo is Wang Su-bok)

It seems spring in the Western Province (西道) arrives first at this Taedong River. Soon, the weeping willows, soaked in green, will let down their hair like silk strands, floating beautifully on the water, fluttering lightly in the spring breeze. When that time comes, skylarks will surely chirp and sing over the barley fields beyond Sŏn'gyo-ri, and swallows will skim effortlessly over the waters of the Taedong River.<139>

It's spring. Spring! March, it's spring.

I felt an impulse to shout something aloud. I wished for wings to sprout on my body so I could fly about the blue sky like a bird.

From my lips flowed a whistle, matching the quietly flowing rhythm of the "Katyusha" song. And I realized my legs were stepping lightly, as if about to dance to the melody of "Bolero."

Amidst this,

*A thousand li, orioles cry, green reflected in red,*
*Water village, mountain fortress, wine flags in the wind.*
*The Southern Dynasties' four hundred eighty temples,*
*How many towers and terraces are veiled in misty rain?*

Feeling the sentiment of the Tang-Song writer Du Mu (杜枚之) in this ancient capital, the place I arrived at was before a cleanly built, large single-gate entrance. Could the old feeling of a Jiangnan scholar searching for Xinghua Village (杏花村) be warmer and more stylish than this? I stood before the imposing gate and lifted my head to look at the gate plaque.

Wang Su-bok (王壽福)

Wasn't that beautiful name clearly written in semi-cursive script on the ceramic gate plaque? Thinking back, my steps had initially passed the P'yŏngan Department Store, then left the Kwangmyŏng Bookstore behind, gone back up the main street of Chongno, turned into the side alley by the Ilsin Printing Shop, and somehow, without knowing the way (不知到君家格), arrived here.

Miss Wang, Deep in Sleep, Wakes at Noon

The time was twelve o'clock noon. In Seoul, the midday whistle would be sounding loudly from the peak of Namsan. I knocked cautiously on the door. Perhaps she had attended some banquet last night, danced late, sung drinking songs, and returned? The housemaid came out and respectfully informed me that she was still asleep (就寢中).

However, wasn't I someone who had deliberately come down from Seoul? In the popular songstress poll currently being conducted nationwide by our Samch'ŏlli Company, hadn't Miss Wang Su-bok surprisingly received the highest number of votes, monopolizing the popularity in the capital right now? Is there any gathering of young men where talk of popular singers doesn't arise? Is there any gathering of two or three modern, high-collar intellectuals where Wang Su-bok isn't discussed? Don't the record companies say that because of this, the records Wang Su-bok recorded are selling like hotcakes, as if they'd sprouted wings? Hadn't I, bearing a grave mission, come all the way from distant Seoul, six or seven hundred ri away, specifically to visit such a queen of popularity? Couldn't sleep wait? In truth, I too had come down on the "Hikari" (光) express <140> from Seoul's Namdaemun Station at three last night, so I was quite tired from lack of sleep, but seeking Miss Wang Su-bok, I had come straight here upon arriving at the inn.

I muttered inwardly, "Miss Wang Su-bok, please sleep a little less. Please endure this intrusion as part of the 'popularity tax' (人氣稅)."

Just as I was murmuring this to myself, upon the second message that someone from Seoul's Samch'ŏlli Company had arrived, she indeed woke from her sweet sleep, quickly got up, hastily dressed behind a folding screen (屏風), and invited me to enter.

The room was dazzlingly decorated. Like the bedroom of Cleopatra, who floated a pleasure boat on the Nile in India (印度나일) and sat playing a four-stringed lute (四絃琴), there was a large full-length mirror occupying one wall, several small winter landscape paintings, and on one side of the room, a three-tiered mother-of-pearl inlaid wardrobe (三層花草衣襪), a Western-style wardrobe painted glossy black, a fine landscape painting (山水畵), and an indescribably beautiful fragrance (香氣)...

If I were Yi Mong-nyong (李夢龍), I could perhaps compose poetry about all this, but how could I, a simpleton in such subtle sentiments, express it? I could only discover a life of splendor and a beautiful queen here.

Childhood at Myŏngnyun School, Maidenhood at Kisaeng School

As if intoxicated by sweet wine, I was bewildered for a moment, then, remembering that tens of thousands of readers would be awaiting my travelogue, I gathered my wits.

"Where were you born?"

I tossed out the first question without hesitation, as if I were no novice (햇내기) at this.

Wang: Me? I'm from P'yŏngyang. Ch'angjŏn-ri (she pronounces it T'angdŏng-ri, in the P'yŏngyang dialect), near the main street (장거리 까외다 - near the market street edge?).
Me: So, born in P'yŏngyang, raised in P'yŏngyang, die in P'yŏngyang! Ah, but surely you shouldn't pass away already? Anyway, you must have been close to the Taedong River since childhood. And your current age (芳紀)?
Wang: (Smiling lightly) Is there much to say about age? I was born on April 24th, Taishō 6 [1917].
Me: Then you're nineteen. Nineteen years of life! This is truly a wonderful time. The prime of your youth.
Wang: Still, although others may see my life as luxurious and lived amidst laughter, I too have much sadness, loneliness, and sighs. I am truly an orphan of fate (運命의 孤兒). I lost my father when I was three. It was so long ago that I can't even remember his face well, but as the proverb says, 'Losing parents early (早失父母) halves the joys of the world,' and that saying is true.
What were we four siblings to do then? We cried a lot under our mother's care, and missed our father greatly as we <141> grew up. Somehow, I entered the school here, Myŏngnyun Common School. There I learned arithmetic, classical Chinese, talked about the distant future with many friends, and spent my childhood happily.
Then, when I was ten and entered the third grade of common school, a big problem arose in our family. It wasn't anything else but... oh! Let's stop the sad stories. It will only trouble you to hear them, sir.
Me: Please go on. Is there anyone who hasn't experienced hardship in their early years?
Wang: Is that so? Well... so I dropped out of school. Because I couldn't afford the tuition fees to continue. If I had had the money for tuition then and finished school smoothly, maybe I would have studied in America, become a professor at Ewha Women's College by now, and perhaps even earned some doctorate.
After that, at my mother's suggestion, I entered the Kisaeng School. Yes, of course, the P'yŏngyang Kisaeng School that exists here now. My grades were good. I graduated with honors at thirteen. Then, having come this far, I became a kisaeng (긔생).
Me: Didn't you dislike becoming a kisaeng?
Wang: There was a reason I became a kisaeng. My older sister (언이) had become a kisaeng before me. Seeing her always wearing splendid clothes and smiling as she went about made me somewhat envious. Then, once, the West Korea Famous Singers Competition (西鮮名唱大會) was held in P'yŏngyang Fortress. I performed, but somehow I grew tired of ancient folk songs (古代俗謠), and from then on, I wanted to learn folk songs (民謠) or modern popular songs (時體流行歌) and strove in that direction. I practiced popular songs repeatedly, secretly.

The Record She's Most Confident In is "Solitary Island's Sorrow"

Me: And then?
Wang: That was in May of the year before last [1933]. I joined the Columbia Company in Seoul and recorded five records, ten sides, for the first time. Due to circumstances later, I signed a contract with the Polydor Company and joined them.
Me: How many records did you release with Polydor?
Wang: Let's see. All told, it should be over thirty.
Me: They must all have been good, but which one do you personally feel most satisfied with, thinking it turned out best?
Wang: "Solitary Island's Sorrow" (孤兒의 情恨). It was a song I thought highly of, as if it depicted my feelings with a brush.
Me: Any others?
Wang: And then, "Seeking Youth" (靑春을 차저).
Me: So, how do you spend your days, day by day?
Wang: I always wake up around eleven or twelve. I'm a late sleeper, but I've never passed noon. Don't worry. Then <142> I practice the piano a bit, prepare to go to the Kisaeng Association (券番), and follow the requesting clients to 'labor' (로동) at various restaurants (料亭) here and there until midnight or one in the morning.
Me: Labor?
Wang: Of course. It's not entertainment (娛樂), it's labor (勞働).

Future Professions: A Large Instrument Store, A Large Bookstore

Me: You sell songs and dances at night, and record for records during the day. So, what's your monthly income? It's quite rude to ask a young lady her age and income, but many readers really want to hear about such things.
Wang: Income varies. There are times when it's high, and times when it's low. Government officials or salarymen working at banks or companies might have a fixed salary, but our income is like a floating cloud.
In months with high earnings, it can be 700 or 800 Won, and in months with low earnings, 300 or 400 Won.
Me: What do you do with all that money? How much are your monthly living expenses?
Wang: Since my income isn't fixed, my expenditures aren't fixed either, but the average might be around 100 Won.
Me: So, how much money would satisfy you?
Wang: (Smiling) One million Won!
Me: What would you do with one million Won?
Wang: I'd set up a large musical instrument store and a large bookstore.
Me: Why are you so drawn to that?
Wang: Since it's a large instrument store, I could play a fine piano, and since it's a large bookstore, I could read good books as I please. Isn't that wonderful?
Me: That's too big an issue, so let's put it aside for later. Generally, when are you happiest?
Wang: I'd be happy if I could leave this shameful kisaeng profession, which is like being someone's plaything. Then, I want to study more freely and sing better songs for people. That is my lifelong wish.
Me: Are there unpleasant times when recording songs too?
Wang: Of course, there are. For example, when a recorded master disc turns out badly and they have to stomp on it, destroy it, and make a new master disc, I really feel like crying. It's sad.

No Experience in Love, Longs to be a Writer's Wife in the Future

Me: Now, please tell me about your experiences with 'love' (연애).
The season is spring, the body is youthful, the time is when the swallows of Jiangnan arrive... At such times, the topics young people discuss are music or dance, and if not dance, then stories of 'love' are savory and pleasant to hear.<143>
Wang: Savory? (Smiling) Saying savory sounds a bit problematic (語弊). I've never been in love in my life. There might be someone among the adults I've met whom I've felt a light longing to see just once more, but that level isn't love, is it?
Me: Then that's just perfect.
Wang: What is?
Me: If word spread that Miss Wang Su-bok had a lover, how sad, anxious, and disappointed all the eligible bachelors (天下의 好男子) in the world would be!
Wang: Why is that?
Me: A man's psychology is such that he hopes the woman he admires remains a virgin (處女), untouched by any fellow.
Anyway, setting that aside, what kind of man will you choose as a husband in the future? To what kind of profession, what kind of personality will you entrust your life?
Wang: How can I decide based only on personality or profession? As long as he suits my heart, that's enough. Well... someone who communicates through writing because they can't express themselves well verbally is fine too. A salaried worker is also fine. I prefer someone nervous rather than dull-witted. I like a writer (文士).
Me: So, when you get married, become someone's wife, and take charge of managing a household, how much do you think you'll need for monthly living expenses?
Wang: I think a monthly income of around 200 Won would be necessary. If 200 Won is too much, then around 170 or 180 Won seems necessary.
Me: Then, the age of the prospective male partner?
Wang: Six or seven years older is good.
Me: You mentioned earlier that you like writers (文士) who write poetry and novels? But given the situation in Korea, how many writers can make 170 or 180 Won, let alone 200 Won, in living expenses every month? If you wait for such a person to appear, you might have to wait until your black hair turns white as scallion roots (팟뿌리). Will that work? Wouldn't it be better to go abroad (洋行) and choose a spouse?
Wang: If I could find a writer husband, I'd make do with around 100 Won. Hohoho.
Me: One last question. When do you plan to start a life revolution? When will you kick away the shabby (눅거리) kisaeng life and emerge as an artist?
Wang: This spring! Watch for this spring.
After talking like this, Miss Wang Su-bok again played a piece on the piano for me. Then, with her beautiful voice, she sang the song recorded on the "Solitary Island's Sorrow" record.
The exquisite melody (音律) of ding-dong flowed out over the wall, carried by the spring breeze, and spread quietly through P'yŏngyang Fortress.<144>

Sŏnu Il-sŏn, Longing for Rural Life

Like the sound of a jade flute (玉통소) on an autumn night, long, thin, lingering, sorrowful, mournful, flowing, flowing down upon the vast fields of the three thousand ri, heartbreakingly plucking at the chests of the young – the genius vocalist Miss Sŏnu Il-sŏn (鮮于一扇)!

Since Miss Yun Sim-dŏk (尹心悳), born in the same P'yŏngyang Fortress, put the single song "Hymn of Death" (死의 讚美) into the world and departed for the eternal kingdom, Korean history has counted this Miss Sŏnu Il-sŏn as the foremost singer of sorrow. How many literary figures wept copious tears listening to her songs? This songstress expresses mournful feelings so well. P'yŏngyang Fortress's name has risen higher because of this one songstress. The mountains and rivers of the Peninsula have gained the honor of being called the "Land of Art" because of this one Miss Sŏnu Il-sŏn.

In the future, many reverent people will surely emerge wanting to place a splendid flower crown (꼿관) upon the head of this young girl songstress, but first, how high the fervor of love for her art is can be sufficiently seen by the many people who readily cast votes for her in the Popular Singer Poll hosted by the Samch'ŏlli Company this time.

Holding Flowers (꼿을 잡고)

*When flowers bloom in the gentle spring breeze,*
*That unforgettable past of bygone days.*

*Though I try to forget past times like clouds,*
*This sad heart of mine has no way to forget.*

*Playing with flowers seems like only yesterday,*
*But that person is gone, and I am alone.*

*The more I think, the sadder my heart, how can I not cry?*
*Unable not to cry, I hold the flowers.*<145>

Few have likely not heard this song already. This is a tune for which a certain famous poet (詩人) specifically wrote lyrics for Miss Sŏnu Il-sŏn, a certain famous composer (作曲家) who returned from Tokyo composed the score, and on top of that, Miss Sŏnu sang mournfully, drawing out the notes like the drooping weeping willows (실버들) of Nŭngna Island (能羅島), seemingly cutting off yet connecting, connecting yet cutting off. When this song, starting from the capital Seoul, opened the West Gate and flowed through P'yŏngyang, Sŏnch'ŏn, and Ŭiju, opened the East Gate and flowed through Wŏnsan and Ch'ŏngjin, and opened the South Gate and flowed through Taegu, Kyŏngju, and Pusan, immersing the entire three thousand ri, even the sunset traveler on the road stopped their steps and looked back upon their own life, and even the housewife in a common home put down her laundry bat (빨내방마이) and thought once about 'Life'.
Miss Sŏn's voice so languidly thawed people's frozen blood vessels and cast stones into the forgotten sea of their hearts.
Since then, this songstress has continued to sing various songs that received public acclaim, causing flowers of laughter to bloom in the desolate land.

Her Modest Home and Various Early Hardships

Originally, P'yŏngyang, situated by the Taedong River, and Yŏngnam Chinju, by the Nam River, are famous as centers of beauty (色鄕), and now Miss Sŏnu Il-sŏn also resides in P'yŏngyang. One day, I sat facing Miss Sŏnu Il-sŏn at her home in Chŏnjae-ri, below Moran Hill.

She appeared quite elegant (雅淡) and pure (淸雅) like a crane (학두룸), as she sometimes appears in photographs. However, she seemed extremely frugal. On the day I visited, she was simply dressed like a schoolgirl in a navy blue skirt (감정치마) and white jeogori (힌저고리). The room was also completely different from Miss Wang Su-bok's; in the upper room (웃방) with cloth curtains (布帳), there was only a two-tiered wardrobe chest (두님層의 衣籠), three small mirrors, a phonograph, and a dressing table (鏡臺). There were no flowerpots, fishbowls, or Western paintings. If I were to describe Miss Wang Su-bok's life, which I saw earlier, as lavish and beautiful (浮華美麗), should I say Miss Il-sŏn's life is solely modest and elegant (質素雅淡)?

Me: Where were you born? Are you from P'yŏngyang?
Il-sŏn: No. I'm not from P'yŏngyang. My original hometown is Susang-ri, Pusan-myŏn, Taedong-gun.
Me: Still, it's P'yŏngan Province, indeed. I hear that Miss Il-sŏn is a descendant of the famous Confucian scholar of the Yi Dynasty, Master Sŏnu Ton-am (鮮于遯庵先生). How did a descendant of such a famous noble family (名門) become a kisaeng like this?
Il-sŏn: Would I have become a kisaeng because I wanted to? It must be because the world is heartless. When I was in my hometown in Pusan-myŏn, I too lived like others in a warm family, cherished like gold or jade, receiving my parents' love. Then, things took a bad turn, and my only older brother (옵바) suddenly <146> passed away at the age of eighteen. Losing his son, my father lost his grip, lost heart, spent his days drinking, and when he came home, everything bothered him, so he destroyed household goods (살님을 부쉬고). When sober, he passed the time with tears and sighs, causing the family fortune to collapse (破産). And after that, my father simply disappeared without a trace (定處업시).
Me: Oh dear (저런번)! Has he not returned at all since then?
Il-sŏn: There's still no news. I don't know where he is. So, what could be done? I went to my maternal relatives' house (外家집) in Kangdong and was raised there, and when they moved to P'yŏngyang, I followed them.
Me: How old were you, Miss Il-sŏn, when your father left?
Il-sŏn: I was seven years old.

Half a Life Spent in Tears as a Sock Factory Girl

Me: So, what happened then? Life must have been very painful then.
Il-sŏn: It was. Thinking about it now, how I endured those hardships seems like a dream. Weren't the family members few? There were four of us: mother, older sister, younger sibling, and myself. But my older sister got married and went to Kangsŏ, and for the remaining three, our livelihood was uncertain (生道가 漠然하여). My mother worked from morning till evening doing laundry (빨내) and needlework (針工) for others, and I worked at a sock factory (양말 공장).
Me: A sock factory?
Il-sŏn: That's right. While unraveling sock yarn and making gloves, living in poverty, even my young heart knew I couldn't support my mother with this income (이 벌이로는), and I felt truly frustrated. Then, it was when I turned twelve. I went to see the sixtieth birthday celebration (回甲) of the grandmother of a kisaeng I knew named Yi Hwa-sŏn (李花仙), and seeing the many kisaengs dancing and singing was so beautiful and captivating. So, feeling admiration, I decided I too would become a kisaeng, earn good money, and support my mother. I pleaded with my mother, saying I would become a kisaeng.
My mother angrily told me not to even utter such words, but I asked and pleaded and insisted many, many times. Moreover, due to the extreme hardship of our lives, what could be done? In the end, my mother, shedding tears, must have said,
"Go ahead and do as you wish (네 생각대로 하렴으나)."
However, talk of becoming a kisaeng is easy, but where is it truly that easy? How could it be easy for me, who hadn't even graduated from elementary school (小學校)? So, after coming to P'yŏngyang, I worked during the day and attended night school (夜學) at night, and thanks to that, I barely managed to enroll in the kisaeng school.<147>
Me: At what age?
Il-sŏn: I entered at thirteen. Then I graduated at sixteen and became a kisaeng.
Me: When did you first gain renown as a singer, known for singing well?
Il-sŏn: The year after I became a kisaeng, that is, when I was seventeen.
Me: Did you join Polydor right from the start?
Il-sŏn: Yes.
Me: How many records did you put out initially?
Il-sŏn: All told, I probably recorded about twenty. Among those, only seven are currently being sold.
Me: With just seven records, have you already become so popular? How old are you now?
Il-sŏn: (Slightly embarrassed) Nineteen.

If Only I Had 70-80 Won Living Expenses, I Would Quit Being a Kisaeng

Me: Sometimes a kisaeng, sometimes a recording singer. How is that life?
Il-sŏn: Well... If I could have just been a recording singer without becoming a kisaeng, that would have been good. Kisaeng life is utterly tiresome. But even so, it's not that I particularly enjoy the singer's life either. If I could just abandon all these professions and live quietly supporting my mother... As a kisaeng dealing with clients, I don't resent the clients, but since one side is the client and this side is like a commodity (商品), selling songs and dances, those people seem to think they possess even my freedom, while this side, conversely, feels completely powerless.
Sometimes, when they curse, act drunk (酒酊), and dirty my clothes, truly, more sweat than the dripping sweat from sitting in a millet field holding a hoe (호미) during the hottest days of summer (三伏) pours out profusely.
Me: Then you must be planning to quit being a kisaeng and marry into a good place.
Il-sŏn: (Smiling faintly, lowering her head, then lifting it after a moment) Wouldn't I want to marry? But where is there a gentleman who would also take care of my mother?
Me: Why wouldn't there be? There are ten million men in Korea. If you were to choose from among them? Please tell me straight out – what kind of personality, what kind of job, what age?
Il-sŏn: - Hohoho. Someone with a gentle personality is good.
Me: A gentle person is good.
Il-sŏn: A salaried worker is good.
Me: The profession is a salaried worker.
Il-sŏn: Age twenty-seven or twenty-eight, no younger brothers-in-law, and a single man (獨身者) is good.<148>
Me: Those aren't such difficult conditions. So, where do you intend to live in the future?
Il-sŏn: The countryside is better than the city (都會). I want to go to a quiet rural village (農村) and live peacefully.
Me: How much would be good for monthly living expenses now? Moreover, after marriage, how much per month do you think you could get by on?
Il-sŏn: Well, I'll have to see. How much I'll eat and spend. But I think I'd be satisfied with about 70 or 80 Won. My mother says I must marry a rich husband, but among rich people, I've met many, and truly kind adults seem extremely rare. So, in my opinion, I believe I would be satisfied with someone who can provide that much living expense.
Me: Where is the father you mentioned earlier?
Il-sŏn: I don't know. He must still be alive, but perhaps because he considers his daughter being a kisaeng lowly (賤이 녁겨), there's no news. My desire to see my father is earnest, but what can I do? I want to see him at least once while he is alive (사라게신 때).
Me: Well, even Sim Ch'ŏng was able to meet her father, so please be patient. So, how long do you intend to continue this life?
Il-sŏn: I'm thinking of finishing recording this spring and quitting being a kisaeng. I'll either just record songs or else live a domestic life (家庭生活).
As we talked at length like this, her expression remained solely pure and innocent (純眞). I came out praying that glory would grace the future of this young, clean girl.<149>

**Summary**

This 1935 article from *Samch'ŏlli* magazine profiles two popular P'yŏngyang-based kisaeng singers, Wang Su-bok and Sŏnu Il-sŏn, exploring their backgrounds, artistic careers, daily lives, and aspirations for the future, particularly regarding marriage and escaping the kisaeng profession. Both women achieved fame through recording popular songs (yuhaengga) but express deep dissatisfaction with the kisaeng life, citing its hardships and lack of freedom. Wang Su-bok dreams of marrying a writer and opening a bookstore/instrument shop, while Sŏnu Il-sŏn, who endured extreme poverty and factory work before becoming a kisaeng to support her family, longs for a quiet rural life with a gentle, salaried husband who can accept her mother.

From a historical perspective, the article offers valuable insights into the lives of female entertainers in colonial Korea, particularly the intersection of traditional kisaeng culture with modern recording technology and popular music. It highlights the social constraints and economic pressures that led women into the kisaeng profession, their complex relationship with fame and artistry versus the perceived degradation of their work, and their modern aspirations for education, financial independence (albeit often through marriage), and escape from societal judgment. The details about income levels, living expenses, desired spousal characteristics, and the specific recording companies (Columbia, Polydor) provide concrete socio-economic context for the era.

**Named Entities**

王壽福	왕수복	Wang Su-bok
本社特派員	본사특파원	Our Special Correspondent
金如山	김여산	Kim Yŏ-san
평양성	평양성	P'yŏngyang Fortress
대동강	대동강	Taedong River
부벽루	부벽루	Pubyŏk Pavilion
연광정	연광정	Yŏn'gwang Pavilion
대동문	대동문	Taedong Gate
선교리	선교리	Sŏn'gyo-ri
唐宋	당송	Tang-Song (Dynasties)
杜枚之	두목지	Du Mu
杏花村	행화촌	Xinghua Village (lit. Apricot Blossom Village)
江南	강남	Jiangnan (South of the Yangtze River)
平安百貨店	평안백화점	P'yŏngan Department Store
光明書觀	광명서관	Kwangmyŏng Bookstore
鍾路	종로	Chongno
一信印刷所	일신인쇄소	Ilsin Printing Shop
서울	서울	Seoul
南山	남산	Namsan (Mountain)
本社	본사	Our Company (Samch'ŏlli Company)
三千里社	삼천리사	Samch'ŏlli Company
印度	인도	India
나일강	나일강	Nile River
쿠레오파도라	클레오파트라	Cleopatra
李夢龍	이몽룡	Yi Mong-nyong
평양	평양	P'yŏngyang
倉田里	창전리	Ch'angjŏn-ri
大正	대정	Taishō (Japanese era, 1912-1926)
明倫普通學校	명륜보통학교	Myŏngnyun Common School
美國	미국	America
梨花專門學校	이화전문학교	Ewha Women's College (then Ewha Professional School)
妓生學校	기생학교	Kisaeng School
平壤妓生學校	평양기생학교	P'yŏngyang Kisaeng School
西鮮	서선	Sŏsŏn (West Korea)
콜롬비아 회사	콜롬비아 회사	Columbia Company
포리도-루회사	폴리도르 회사	Polydor Company
券番	권번	Kwŏnbŏn (Kisaeng Association/Union)
朝鮮	조선	Korea (Chosŏn)
鮮于一扇	선우일선	Sŏnu Il-sŏn
尹心悳	윤심덕	Yun Sim-dŏk
半島江山	반도강산	Peninsula's Mountains and Rivers (Korea)
東京	동경	Tokyo
能羅島	능라도	Nŭngna Island
宣川	선천	Sŏnch'ŏn
義州	의주	Ŭiju
元山	원산	Wŏnsan
淸津	청진	Ch'ŏngjin
大邱	대구	Taegu
慶州	경주	Kyŏngju
釜山	부산	Pusan
嶺南	영남	Yŏngnam (Region)
晉州	진주	Chinju
南江	남강	Nam River
모란봉	모란봉	Moran Hill
錢齋里	전재리	Chŏnjae-ri
大同郡	대동군	Taedong County
釜山面	부산면	Pusan Township (Myeon)
水上里	수상리	Susang Village (Ri)
李朝	이조	Yi Dynasty
鮮于遯庵先生	선우돈암 선생	Master Sŏnu Ton-am
江西	강서	Kangsŏ
江東	강동	Kangdong
李花仙	이화선	Yi Hwa-sŏn
小學校	소학교	Elementary School (Common School)
夜學	야학	Night School
沈淸	심청	Sim Ch'ŏng (Character from a classic Korean tale)

**Glossary**

歌姬	가희	Songstress (often implying kisaeng)
일홈	이름	Name (older spelling)
어럿더	얼었던	Frozen (older form/spelling)
풀니어	풀리어	Thawed, loosened (older form/spelling)
윤긔	윤기	Gloss, sheen (older spelling)
흘너	흘러	To flow (older spelling)
잇스면	있으면	If there is (older spelling)
저진	젖은	Wet, soaked (older spelling)
가튼	같은	Like, same as (older spelling)
날닐	날릴	Will fly/flutter (older spelling)
놉히	높이	Highly, aloud (older spelling)
십흔	싶은	Wanting to (older spelling)
늣기엿다	느꼈다	Felt (older spelling)
도처	돋아	To sprout (older spelling/form)
달니고	다니고	Going around (older spelling)
마처	맞춰	To match (older spelling)
흘너 나왓다	흘러 나왔다	Flowed out (older spelling)
두다리	두 다리	Two legs (older spelling)
가치	같이	Like, together (older spelling)
깨달엇다	깨달았다	Realized (older spelling)
하든	하던	Used to do (older form/spelling)
녯	옛	Old, ancient (older spelling)
압헤	앞에	In front of (older spelling)
처다 보앗다	쳐다 보았다	Looked up at (older spelling)
안는가	않은가	Isn't it? (older spelling)
올너가	올라가	Going up (older spelling)
엽골목	옆골목	Side alley (older spelling)
도라	돌아	Turning (older spelling)
기침	기침	Waking up (here, not 'cough') (older usage/context)
늣도록	늦도록	Until late (older spelling)
엿주어라	여쭈어라	To ask respectfully (older form)
아인가	아닌가	Am I not? Isn't it? (older spelling)
인긔	인기	Popularity (older spelling)
푸토	부터? 이야기?	From? Story? (likely a typo in original, context suggests 이야기 'story/talk')
이약이	이야기	Story, talk (older spelling)
너흔	넣은	Put in, recorded (older spelling)
팔려간다고	팔려간다고	Are selling (passive, older spelling)
엇스나	없으나	Although there isn't (older spelling)
찻고저	찾고자	Intending to find (older spelling)
려관	여관	Inn, hotel (older spelling)
거름	걸음	Step, pace (older spelling)
자시소	자시소/주무시소	Please sleep (honorific, archaic/dialectal)
이러케	이렇게	Like this (older spelling)
인긔세	인기세	Popularity tax (coined term?)
참어주시구려	참아주시구려	Please endure it (polite, archaic/literary ending)
이러나	일어나	Getting up (older spelling)
평풍	병풍	Folding screen (older spelling)
드러옵시사고	들어옵시사고	Please come in (highly polite, archaic)
차렷다	차렸다	Is decorated, set up (older spelling)
안젓든	앉았던	Was sitting (older spelling)
물닌	물린	Inlaid (older spelling)
조흔	좋은	Good, fine (older spelling)
업는	없는	Without, lacking (older spelling)
잇스련만	있으련만	Would be able to, but (older spelling/form)
햇내기	햇내기	Novice, newcomer (colloquial)
안코	않고	Without doing (older spelling)
던젓다	던졌다	Threw, tossed off (asked) (older spelling)
나섯서요	나셨어요	Were you born? (honorific, older spelling)
까외다	가외다/가까이다	Outside edge, vicinity / Is near (dialectal/older spelling)
돌아가서야 쓰겟서요	돌아가셔야 쓰겠어요	Should you pass away already? (polite, older spelling)
엇제든	어쨌든	Anyway (older spelling)
친하엿든게구려	친하였던게구려	You must have been close (older spelling/form)
잇서요	있어요	Is there? (older spelling)
낫담니다	났답니다	Was born (older spelling/form)
조흐실	좋으실	Will be good (older spelling)
잇담니다	있답니다	There is (older spelling/form)
슬품	슬픔	Sadness (older spelling)
외롬	외로움	Loneliness (older spelling)
만히	많이	Many, much (older spelling)
원악	워낙	By nature, originally (older spelling)
여이엇서요	여의었어요	Lost (a relative) (older spelling)
얼골	얼굴	Face (older spelling)
못함니만은	못합니다만은	Cannot, but (older spelling/form)
자라낫담니다	자라났답니다	Grew up (older spelling/form)
드러섯지요	들어섰지요	Entered (older spelling)
동무	동무	Friend (common term then, now mainly North Korean or archaic)
이약이도	이야기도	Stories too (older spelling)
지내섯지요	지내셨지요	Spent time (honorific, older spelling)
올너가자	올라가자	Upon going up to (older spelling)
생기엇서요	생겼어요	Arose, occurred (older spelling)
저어	저	Uhm, well (hesitation sound)
드르서	들어서	By hearing (older spelling)
업는 이	없는 이	Person without (older spelling)
잇슬나구	있을라구	Would there be? (older spelling/form)
퇴학하엿서요	퇴학하였어요	Dropped out of school (older spelling)
마즈	마저	Even, finishing (older spelling)
업스니깐요	없으니까요	Because there isn't (older spelling)
염여업시	염려없이	Without worry (older spelling)
마추엇든들	마쳤던들	If (I) had finished (older spelling/form)
되엇슬넌지	되었을는지	Might have become (older spelling/form)
몰낫지요	몰랐지요	Didn't know -> perhaps (older spelling)
말슴	말씀	Words, speech (older spelling)
잇서	있어	There being (older spelling)
드러 갓지요	들어 갔지요	Entered (older spelling)
조왓담니다	좋았답니다	Was good (older spelling/form)
햇서요	했어요	Did (older spelling)
되엇지요	되었지요	Became (older spelling)
실치 안엇서요	싫지 않았어요	Didn't you dislike it? (older spelling)
언이	언니	Older sister (older spelling)
몬저	먼저	First (older spelling)
잇섯담니다	있었답니다	Was (older spelling/form)
우스며	웃으며	Smiling (older spelling)
하엿슴니다	하였습니다	Did (older formal ending)
열니엇지요	열렸지요	Was held (older spelling)
엇전지	어쩐지	Somehow (older spelling)
실혀저	싫어져	Came to dislike (older spelling/form)
배호고 십혀	배우고 싶어	Wanted to learn (older spelling/form)
노력하엿담니다	노력하였답니다	Tried hard (older spelling/form)
작고	자꾸	Repeatedly, often (older spelling)
취입	취입	Recording (sound onto a medium)
맷고	맺고	Formed, signed (a contract) (older spelling)
몃장	몇 장	How many sheets/records (older spelling)
너섯서요	넣으셨어요	Did you put in/record? (honorific, older spelling)
조왓겟지만	좋았겠지만	Must have been good, but (older spelling)
조케	좋게	Well, favorably (older spelling)
엇더케	어떻게	How (older spelling)
보내세요	보내세요	How do you spend (time)? (older spelling)
늣잠꾸레기	늦잠꾸러기	Late sleeper (older spelling)
업담니다	없답니다	There isn't (older spelling/form)
하야	하여	And then (older connective form)
따러	따라	Following (older spelling)
로동	노동	Labor (older spelling, used here distinct from entertainment)
뭇는	묻는	Asking (older spelling)
아니겟지만	아니겠지만	It may not be, but (older spelling)
듯고 십혀해요	듣고 싶어해요	Want(s) to hear (older spelling/form)
업지요	없지요	There isn't (colloquial ending)
만흘	많을	Many/much (adjective form, older spelling)
살래리맨	샐러리맨	Salaryman (loanword, older spelling)
저이들	저희들	Our, we (humble, older spelling)
갓담니다	같답니다	Is like (older spelling/form)
못생기는	못 생기는	When not much is earned (lit. 'when cannot arise')
만흔	많은	Many, much (older spelling)
무얼	무엇을	What (older contraction)
들관데	들까인데? / 드는가인데?	How much does it cost? (older/dialectal form)
못하니	못하니	Is not / Cannot be (older spelling)
백만원	백만 원	One million Won
악긔점	악기점	Musical instrument store (older spelling)
차리지요	차리지요	Will set up (colloquial ending)
엇재서	어째서	Why (older spelling)
깃분	기쁜	Happy, joyful (older spelling)
됏스면	됐으면	If it becomes / If I could (older spelling)
깁부겟서요	기쁘겠어요	I would be happy (older spelling)
불려드리고	불러드리고	Sing for (someone) (older spelling)
십혀요	싶어요	Want to (older spelling)
원이람니다	원이랍니다	Is my wish (older spelling/form)
잇고 말고요	있고 말고요	Of course there is (idiomatic)
잘못되엇다고	잘못되었다고	That it went wrong (older spelling)
즛밟어	짓밟아	To trample upon (older spelling)
업새	없애	To get rid of (older spelling)
너흘	넣을	To put in / record (older spelling)
울고 십허요	울고 싶어요	Want to cry (older spelling)
연애	연애	Love affair, dating (term used then)
하시구려	하시구려	Please tell/do (polite, archaic/literary ending)
듯기	듣기	Listening (older spelling)
조와요	좋아요	Is good (older spelling)
어룬	어른	Adult (older spelling)
보앗스면	보았으면	If (I) could see (older spelling)
가비엽게	가볍게	Lightly (older spelling)
아니겟지요	아니겠지요	It wouldn't be (older spelling)
마츰	마침	Just, luckily,正好 (older spelling)
잇섯단	있었단	That there was (older spelling)
실망할가요	실망할까요	Will (they) be disappointed? (older spelling)
웨요	왜요	Why? (older spelling)
붓지안코	붙지 않고	Without being attached (older spelling)
잇섯스면	있었으면	If (she) were (older spelling)
골나잡겟서요	골라잡겠어요	Will you choose? (older spelling)
맛기겟서요	맡기겠어요	Will you entrust? (older spelling)
보구야	보고야	Just by looking at (older spelling)
마즈면	맞으면	If it fits/suits (older spelling)
못해서	못해서	Cannot do / Because (I) cannot do (older spelling)
조코요	좋고요	Is good, and (older spelling)
조쿠요	좋고요	Is good, and (older spelling)
둔중한	둔중한	Dull-witted, heavy
신경질한	신경질한	Nervous, high-strung (used positively here)
문사	문사	Writer, man of letters
안해	아내	Wife (older spelling)
마터하게	맡아하게	To take charge of (older spelling)
갓해요	같아요	Seems like (older spelling)
만흐면	많으면	If it's much/many (older spelling)
나히	나이	Age (older spelling)
팟뿌리	팥 뿌리	Red bean root (idiom for white/gray hair)
되겟슴니까	되겠습니까	Will it work? Will it do? (older formal ending)
배필	배필	Spouse
골누는	고르는	Choosing (older spelling)
조흘걸요	좋을걸요	Would be better (older spelling/form)
어더진다면	얻어진다면	If obtained (older spelling)
끗흐로	끝으로	Lastly (older spelling)
뭇겟서요	묻겠어요	I will ask (older spelling)
생활혁명	생활혁명	Life revolution (idiomatic phrase for a major life change)
이르키겟서요	일으키겠어요	Will you cause/start? (older spelling)
눅거리	눅거리	Shabby, worn-out item/state (used pejoratively for kisaeng life)
나서겟서요	나서겠어요	Will you step forward as? (older spelling)
위하야	위하여	For the sake of (older spelling)
불너	불러	Calling, singing (older spelling)
음률	음률	Melody, rhythm
밧그로	밖으로	Outside (older spelling)
펴진다	퍼진다	Spreads (older spelling)
옥통소	옥퉁소	Jade flute (traditional instrument)
애닯게	애달프게	Sorrowfully, pitifully (older spelling)
구슬푸게	구슬프게	Sadly, mournfully (older spelling)
널분	넓은	Wide, broad (older spelling)
나리어	내리어	Coming down (older spelling)
안탁갑게도	안타깝게도	Regrettably, pitifully (older spelling)
뜻어 내리는	뜯어 내리는	Plucking, tearing out (evokes strong emotion)
집어너코	집어넣고	Putting in (older spelling)
놉하젓다	높아졌다	Became higher (older spelling)
어덧다	얻었다	Gained, obtained (older spelling)
압흐로	앞으로	In the future (older spelling)
꼿관	꽃관	Flower crown (older spelling)
언치려	얹히려	To place upon (older spelling)
다수히	다수히	Many (adverb, older form)
나오려니와	나오려니와	Will emerge, and (literary connective)
위선	우선	First of all (older spelling)
놉흔지	높은지	How high is (older spelling)
넉넉히	넉넉히	Sufficiently, enough
못니즐	못 잊을	Unforgettable (older spelling)
닛자	잊자	Let's forget (older spelling)
니즐	잊을	To forget (older spelling)
설은	설운	Sad, sorrowful (older form/spelling)
어제련만	어제련만	Seems like only yesterday, but (literary)
외로이	외로이	Lonely (adverb, older spelling)
생각사룩	생각수록	The more (I) think (older spelling/form)
설어	설워	Being sad (older spelling/form)
잡노라	잡노라	I hold (declarative literary ending)
모씨	모씨	A certain Mr./Ms. (used when name is unknown or withheld)
작곡가	작곡가	Composer
부친	부친	Attached, composed (here, music)
느러지는	늘어지는	Drooping, drawn-out (older spelling)
실버들	실버들	Weeping willow
끈는 듯	끊는 듯	As if cutting off (older spelling)
잇고	잇고	Connecting (older spelling)
잇는 듯	잇는 듯	As if connecting (older spelling)
끈으면서	끊으면서	While cutting off (older spelling)
까락	가락	Melody, tune (older spelling)
비록하야	비롯하여	Starting with (older spelling)
왼-	온-	Whole, entire (older spelling)
길가든	길 가던	Walking on the road (older form/spelling)
돌처 보앗고	돌쳐 보았고 / 돌이켜 보았고	Looked back upon / Reflected upon (older spelling)
빨내방마이	빨래 방망이	Laundry bat (older spelling)
노코	놓고	Putting down (older spelling)
어럿든	얼었던	Frozen (older spelling)
노곤하게	노곤하게	Wearily, languidly
이젓든	잊었던	Forgotten (older spelling)
밧든	받던	Received (older spelling)
밋	밑	Below, under (older spelling)
안젓다	앉았다	Sat (older spelling)
각금	가끔	Sometimes (older spelling)
사신	사진	Photograph (older spelling)
녀학생	여학생	Female student (older spelling)
감정치마	감정 치마	Navy blue skirt (traditional clothing item)
힌저고리	흰 저고리	White jeogori (upper garment) (older spelling)
바처 입엇슬	받쳐 입었을	Was wearing (layered) (older spelling)
딴판	딴판	Completely different
웃방	웃방	Upper room (in a traditional house)
의롱	의롱	Wardrobe chest
노엿슬	놓였을	Was placed (older spelling)
아담하다	아담하다	Elegant, neat, cozy
청아하다	청아하다	Pure, elegant, clear
학두룸	학두루미	Crane (bird) (older spelling)
보엿스니	보였으니	Appeared to be, since it appeared (older spelling)
차저 간	찾아 간	Visited (older spelling)
내 할가	내 할까	Should I say? (older spelling)
아녜요	아니에요	No (polite informal, older spelling)
아니람니다	아니랍니다	It is not (polite deferential, older spelling/form)
들니는	들리는	Heard, audible (older spelling)
후손	후손	Descendant
명문	명문	Noble family
엇재서	어째서	Why (older spelling)
십허	싶어	Wanting to (older spelling)
땃뜻한	따뜻한	Warm (older spelling)
밧어	받아	Receiving (older spelling)
살어 갓담니다	살아 갔답니다	Lived (older spelling/form)
한나이든	하나이던	The only one (older spelling/form)
옵바	오빠	Older brother (older spelling)
도라가섯서요	돌아가셨어요	Passed away (honorific, older spelling)
일흔	잃은	Lost (older spelling)
풀니고	풀리고	Loosened, unraveled (older spelling)
귀치안어	귀찮아	Bothersome, annoying (older spelling)
살님	살림	Household goods, living (older spelling)
부쉬고	부수고	Breaking, destroying (older spelling)
마럿서요	말았어요	Ended up doing (negative connotation) (older spelling)
정처업시	정처없이	Without a fixed place, aimlessly (older spelling)
저런번	저런	Oh dear! Alas! (older spelling/form)
안도라오섯나뇨	안 돌아오셨나요	Didn't he return? (honorific, older spelling/form)
여직것	여태껏	Until now (older spelling)
업서요	없어요	There isn't (older spelling)
게신지요	계신지요	Where he is (honorific, older ending)
엇절	어쩔	What to do (older contraction)
잇서야지요	있어야지요	Could there be? / Of course (context dependent) (older form)
외가집	외갓집	Maternal relatives' house (older spelling)
길너나다가	길러나다가	Was being raised (older spelling/form)
몃살	몇 살	How many years old (older spelling)
엇잿서요	어쨌어요	What happened then? (older spelling)
괴로웟겟구만요	괴로웠겠구만요	Must have been painful (older spelling/form)
격겨	겪어	Experiencing, enduring (older spelling)
꿈가튼	꿈같은	Like a dream (older spelling)
식구	식구	Family member
네식구엇지요	네 식구였지요	Were four family members (older spelling)
생도	생도	Livelihood, way of living (older spelling, 生道)
막연하다	막연하다	Vague, uncertain
빨내	빨래	Laundry (older spelling)
침공	침공	Needlework
일하섯고	일하셨고	Worked (honorific, older spelling)
다녓서요	다녔어요	Attended, went to (older spelling)
그랫담니다	그랬답니다	That's right (older spelling/form)
이 벌이로는	이 벌이로는	With this income
안타가워	안타까워	Feeling sorry/frustrated (older spelling)
하엿담니다	하였답니다	Did (older spelling/form)
되든	되던	When it became (older spelling/form)
이엇지요	이었지요	It was (older spelling)
귀생	기생	Kisaeng (older spelling)
회갑	회갑	60th birthday celebration
끌니든지요	끌리는지요	Was attractive/captivating (older spelling/form)
공양하다	공양하다	To support, provide for (parents/elders)
되겟노라고	되겠노라고	That I would become (older declarative form)
애원하엿담니다	애원하였답니다	Pleaded (older spelling/form)
노하시면서	노하시면서	While being angry (honorific, older spelling)
입밧게	입 밖에	Outside the mouth (i.e., utter)
내지말라고	내지 말라고	Not to utter/say
하시엿스나	하시었으나	Said, but (honorific, older spelling)
떼쓰고	떼쓰고	To pester, whine
나종에는	나중에는	In the end (older spelling)
흘니며	흘리며	Shedding (tears) (older spelling)
하렴으나	하려무나	Go ahead and do it (archaic/familiar command)
하시겟지	하시겠지	(She) must have said (older spelling)
용이하다	용이하다	To be easy
낫에는	낮에는	In the daytime (older spelling)
다니어	다니어	Attended (older spelling/form)
긔생학교	기생학교	Kisaeng School (older spelling)
입학하엿담니다	입학하였답니다	Entered school (older spelling/form)
듯던	듣던	Heard (older spelling)
포리돌	폴리도르	Polydor (record company name, older phonetization)
너흐섯든지오	넣으셨던지요	Did you put in/record? (honorific, older spelling/form)
너키는	넣기는	As for recording/putting in (older spelling)
되엇슬	되었을	Would be (older spelling)
놉헛든가요	높았던가요	Was it high? (older spelling)
붓그러워하며	부끄러워하며	Being shy/embarrassed (older spelling)
엇더함니까	어떠합니까	How is it? (older spelling/form)
되엇더라면	되었더라면	If (I) had become (older spelling)
조왓슬	좋았을	Would have been good (older spelling)
그러타고	그렇다고	Even so (older spelling)
지긋지긋하다	지긋지긋하다	Tiresome, fed up
긔생	기생	Kisaeng (entertainer) (older spelling)
주정	주정	Drunken behavior
호미	호미	Korean hand plow/hoe
삼복	삼복	Hottest days of summer
밧작밧작	바짝바짝	Profusely (sweating), sizzlingly
출가	출가	Marriage (for a woman, lit. 'leaving the house')
배포	배포	Plan, intention
방그레	방그레	Faintly (smiling)
우스며	웃으며	Smiling (older spelling)
모서 줄	모셔 줄	Who will take care of/serve (honorific)
어듸	어디	Where (older spelling)
엇더코	어떻고	How is... (older spelling)
엇더타	어떻다	Is how... (older spelling)
쭉-	쭉	Straight, directly
보구려	보구려	Please try/look (polite, archaic/literary ending)
유순하다	유순하다	Gentle, meek
시동생	시동생	Husband's younger brother
독신자	독신자	Single person (unmarried)
농촌	농촌	Rural village, countryside
한적하다	한적하다	Quiet, secluded
조흐서요	좋으세요	Would be good for you (polite, older spelling)
쓸넌지	쓸는지	Will use (older spelling/form)
아러요	알아요	I know (older spelling)
만흔	많은	Many, much (older spelling)
밋습니다	믿습니다	I believe (older formal ending)
아지 못함니다	알지 못합니다	I do not know (older spelling/formal ending)
게시련만	계시련만	He must be alive, but (honorific, older form)
천이 녁겨	천히 여겨	Considering (someone) lowly/base (older spelling/form)
뵈옵고 십흔	뵈옵고 싶은	Wanting to see (humble, older spelling/form)
사라게신 때	살아계신 때	While (he is) alive (honorific, older spelling)
뵙고 십허요	뵙고 싶어요	Want to see (humble, older spelling)
누구려하게	누그러하게	Gently, patiently (older form?) -> 누그러지게 (softened, calmed)
가지서요	가지세요	Please have (older spelling)
하시렴니까	하시렵니까	Do you intend to do? (older spelling/form)
둘랴고	두려고	Intending to quit/leave (older spelling)
아느면	않으면	If not (older spelling)
함니다	합니다	Will do (older formal ending)
이엇다	이었다	Was (older spelling)
잇서지이라고	있으지라고 / 있으라고	That there will be (praying) (older spelling/form)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제7권 제5호
발행일	1935년 06월 01일
기사제목	歌姬의 藝術·戀愛生活
필자	本社特派員 金如山
기사형태	소식

歌姬의 藝術·戀愛生活
						本社特派員 金如山
文士夫人을 꿈꾸는 王壽福
삼월이라 초칠일, 평양성에는 아직 봄비치 일느다. 그러나 어럿더 대동강물이 어느덧 풀니어 기름가튼 윤긔잇는 푸른 물결이 부벽루 그림자를 안고 웃줄웃줄 춤을 추면서 鍊光亭이라 大同門아래로 시름업시 흘너 나린다.(사진은 王壽福)
서도(西道)의 봄은 이 대동강에 가장 몬저 차저 오는 듯 이제 조곰만 더 잇스면 초록 빗갈에 저진 수양버들이 삼단가튼 머리를 훨-훨- 풀어 곱다라케 물 우에 띄우고 봄바람에 가비여히 날닐 것이다. 그때가 되면 멀니 선교리 너머 보리빗 우으로는 종달새가 재질거리고 우름 울겟고 대동강＜139＞ 물가에는 물찬제비가 시름업시 날닐 것이다.
봄이다. 봄! 춘삼월이라 봄이다.
나는 무엇인가 소리 놉히 부르짓고 십흔 충동을 늣기엿다. 몸에 날개가 도처 마치 새모양으로 푸른 하늘에 이리저리 달니고 십다.
내 입으로는 「갓쥬샤」노래의 고요히 흐르는 리듬에 마처 휘파람이 입설로 흘너 나왓다. 그리고는 두다리는 『보레로』의 멜로듸에 마처 딴스라도 할 것 가치 경쾌스럽게 스텝이 날님을 깨달엇다.
이러는 사이에
千里鶯啼 絲映紅
水村山郭 酒旗風
南朝四百 八十寺
多少樓台 煙雨中
하든 唐宋文章 杜枚之의 情調를 이 古都속에서 늣기면서 다다른 곳이 깨긋하게 소슨 一閣大門 압히라. 杏花村을 찻는 江南才士의 녯 기분인들 이에서 더 훈훈하고 멋지랴. 나는 소슬 대문 압헤서 고개를 드러 門碑을 처다 보앗다.

王壽福
이라고 砂器門牌 우에다가 분명히 半草書로 흘너 쓴 아릿다운 일홈이 잇지 안는가. 생각건대 내 발길은 처음에 平安百貨店압 지나 光明書觀을 또 뒤로 두고 鍾路 큰 거리를 도로 올너가 一信印刷所 엽골목을 도라 不知到君家格으로 어느 새에 다다른 것이엇다.

열두점에 起寢하는 단잠에 든 王孃
때는 열두점 서울이라면 南山 마루턱에서 점심 고동소리가 소리 크게 영각할 때다. 조심스럽게 문을 두다리니, 아마 어제밤 어느 연회자리에 나아가 밥 늣도록 춤추고 勸酒歌하고 도라오섯슴인가. 아직 就寢중이라고 어멈이 나와 엿주어라 한다.
그러나 나는 일부러 서울서 내려 온 몸이 아인가. 지금 本社에서 천하에 공모하는 人氣歌姬投票에 王福壽孃은 놀납게도 최고점의 得票를 어더 지금 장안안의 인긔를 독점하여 잇지 안는가. 젊은 청년이 모힌 자리에 지금 인긔가수 푸토 이약이 나지 안는 곳이 잇든가. 둘이고 셋이고 시체 하이칼나 재사가 모힌 자리에 「왕수복」의 이약이 나지 안튼 곳이 잇든가. 레코-드회사에서는 이때문에 왕수복이 불어 너흔 레코-드판이 날개가 도처 팔려간다고 하지 안는가. 그러한 인긔의 녀왕을 륙칠백리되는 먼 서울에서 일부러 방문하려 나는 중대한 사명을 띄고 오지 안엇는가. 잠이야 아모 때인들 못자랴. 실상은 나도 어제밤 세시에 서울 남대문에서 「히까리」(光) 급행을＜140＞ 타고 내려 온 지라 한잠 못자서 곤하기 여간이 아니 엇스나 왕수복씨를 찻고저 려관에 들자 곳 이리로 온 거름이 아닌가.
속으로 『왕수복씨여 잠을 조곰 덜 자시소. 이러케 와서 성가시게 함도 인긔세(人氣稅)거니 하고 참어주시구려』
혼자 중얼거릴 때에 양은 서울 삼천리사에서 왓다는 두번재 전갈에 과연 단잠을 깨고 얼는 이러나 평풍 뒤에 숨어 옷을 분주히 주서 입고 문을 열고 드러옵시사고 한다.
방안은 눈부시게 차렷다. 「印度나일」강가에 遊客船을 띄어 노코 四絃琴타고 안젓든 「쿠레오파도라」의 침실가치 왼벽을 차지한 큰 體鏡잇는 데다가 조고마한 겨울 사오개가 잇고 방한쪽으로 자개를 물닌 三層花草衣襪 까막케 윤이 흐르게 칠한 洋服장 그리고 조흔 山水畵 무에라 말할 수 업는 아름다운 香氣...
『李夢龍』이라면 여기에 모다 韻부칠수 잇스련만 이러한 미묘한 정서에는 뚱딴지인 내가 무에라고 표현하랴. 오직 화려한 생활과 아름다운 여왕을 여기에서 발견하엿슬뿐.

少年時節엔 明倫學校로 處女時節엔 妓生學校로
나는 달큼한 술에 취한 듯 함참 어리둥절하다가 수만명 독자가 내의 방문긔를 기대리고 잇스리란 생각에 정신을 내어
어듸서 나섯서요?
하고 이런 일에는 「햇내기」 아니란듯 서슴지 안코 인제 한마듸 던젓다.
王. 저요, 저는 평양이야요. 倉田里(덩거당 式으로 탕덩리하고 평양사투리 그대로 나온다)장거리 까외다.
나. 그러면 나기를 평양 자라기를 평양 죽기를 평양! 앗불사 벌서 도라가서야 쓰겟서요. 엇제든 대동강허고는 어릴 때부텀 친하엿든게구려. 그런데 지금 芳紀는?
王. (가비여히 웃스며)芳紀랄것 잇서요. 大正6년 4월 스무사흔날 낫담니다.
나. 그럼 열아홉이시구만 人生 열아홉! 이건 너무 조흔 때구만요. 지금 창 덩 조흐실 철
王. 그래도 남들이 보기에는 저의 생활은 호화롭고 우슴속에 사는 듯하지만 저에게도 슬품과 외롬과 탄식이 만히 잇담니다. 저는 원악 운명의 고아(運命의 孤兒)여요. 세살적 아버지를 여이엇서요. 너무 오래전 일이 되어 아버지 얼골조차 잘 긔억하지 못함니만은 속담에도 『早失父母』한 이상 세상에 樂이 半減이라고 그 말이 오래요.
그러케 되니 우리 4男妹는 엇더케 해요. 어머‹ˆ 슬하에서 울기도 만히 하고 아버지 그리운 생각도 만히 하면서＜141＞ 자라낫담니다. 이럭저럭 학교라고 이곳 明倫普通學校에 드러섯지요. 그래서 산술도 배우고 한문도 배우고 여러 동무들과 먼-장래 이약이도 하고 즐겁게 少年時節을 지내섯지요.
그러다가 내가 열살나든 해 보통학교 삼학년에 올너가자 우리 집안에 큰 문제가 생기엇서요. 그것은 다른 것이 아니고 저어! 에이 슬푼 이약이는 그만 두지요. 선생님도 드르서 오직 성가실뿐 일걸요.
나. 어서 말슴하서요. 누구나 초년고생 업는 이가 잇슬나구.
王. 그럴가요. 글세... 그래서 학교를 퇴학하엿서요. 저는-학비때문에 마즈 단닐 수 업스니깐요. 그때 학비도 염여업시 잇서서 학교를 순조롭게 마추엇든들 미국공부하고 지금쯤은 이화전문학교 녀교수쯤 되고 그리고 무슨 박사쯤 되엇슬넌지 몰낫지요.
그러고 난 뒤는 어머님 말슴이 잇서 妓生學校라고 드러 갓지요. 네 물론 지금 잇는 이곳 平壤妓生學校지요. 그래서 성적은 조왓담니다. 열 세살 때에 우등으로 졸업햇서요. 그런 뒤는 내친 거름에 긔생이 되엇지요.
나. 긔생되기 실치 안엇서요?
王. 긔생된데 동기가 잇지요. 언이가 나보다 몬저 긔생이 되어 잇섯담니다. 그래서 화려한 옷을 입고, 언이가 늘 우스며 다니는 것이 한편 부럽기도 하엿슴니다. 그런 뒤 한번은 평양성에 西鮮名唱大會가 열니엇지요. 나는 出演하엿다가 엇전지 古代俗謠는 실혀저 그제부터는 民謠나 時體流行歌를 배호고 십혀 그편으로 노력하엿담니다. 류행가 연습을 작고 햇지요. 남모르게.

레코-드로 自信잇는 것 孤島의 情恨이래요
나. 그리고는?
王. 그것이 再昨年 5월이엇지요. 서울 콜롬비아 회사에 入社하여 처음으로 다섯장 열面을 吹込하엿지요. 그 뒤 사정으로 다시 포리도-루회사와 게약을 맷고 거기 入社하엿서요.
나. 포리돌에 가서는 몃장이나 너섯서요.
王. 글세요. 이럭저럭 서른장을 넘을 걸요.
나. 다 조왓겟지만 그중에도 가장 잘 되엇다고 스사로 만족하는 것은.
王. 『孤兒의 情恨』이여요. 내 心情을 붓으로 그려 노은 듯 퍽으나 조케 생각하는 노래엇지요.
나. 또?
王. 그리고는 『靑春을 차저.』
나. 그런데 대체 하로 하로를 엇더케 보내세요.
王. 아츰 열한시나 열두시면 꼭 일어나요. 늣잠꾸레기지만 오정을 지내본 적은 업담니다. 안심하세요. 그러군＜142＞ 「피아노」연습을 좀 하고 券番에 갈 준비를 하고 그리하야 청하는 손님을 따러 밤 열두시 새로 한시까지 이곳저곳 料亭에서 『로동』하지요.
나. 勞働?
王. 그럼요. 娛樂이 아니고 勞働이지요.

장차 職業으로는 큰 樂器店, 큰 書店
나. 밤에는 노래와 춤을 팔고 낫에는 레코-드에 취입을 하고 그래서 한달 수입이 얼마나 되서요. 젊은 아가씨에게 년령과 수입을 뭇는 것은 여간 실례가 아니겟지만 여러 독자는 그런 것을 꼭 듯고 십혀해요.
王. 수입이야 대중 업지요. 만흘 때도 잇고 적을 때도 잇지요. 나라에 다니는 관리나 은행 회사에 다니는 살래리맨이면 월급이 일정하겟지만-저이들 수입은 뜬구름갓담니다.
만히 생기는 달은 7, 800圓도 되고 못생기는 달이면 3, 400圓도 되구요.
나. 그 만흔 돈 다 무얼 하세요. 한달 생활비는 얼마나 들관데?
王. 수입이 일정치 못하니 支出도 일정치 못하지만 평균 잡으면 100圓쯤 될는지요.
나. 그래 얼마나 돈이 잇스면 마음에 만족하겟서요.
王. (우스며) 백만원!
나. 백만원 가지고 무얼하게
王. 큰 악긔점과 書店을 차리지요.
나. 엇재서 거기에 그러케 마음이 끌려요.
王. 큰 樂器店이니까 조흔 피아노를 칠수 잇겟고 큰 書店이나까 조흔 책도 맘대로 볼 수 잇고 그것 안조와요.
나. 그건 너무 큰 문제니까 뒤로 미루고-대체 지금 제일 깃분 때가 엇던 때여요.
王. 어서 이 추하고 남의 노리개가음가튼 긔생 직업을 떠나게 됏스면 깁부겟서요. 그리고서 자유롭게 좀더 공부하여 조흔 노래를 불려드리고 십혀요. 그것이 저의 일생의 원이람니다.
나. 노래 취입에도 불쾌한 때가 잇서요?
王. 잇고 말고요. 가령 취입한 소리판이 잘못되엇다고 그것을 즛밟어 업새 버리고 새로 소리판 너흘 때는 꼭 울고 십허요. 슬퍼요.

戀愛해 본 적은 업고 장차는 文士夫人을 憧憬
나. 자-인제 『연애』하든 말슴이나 하시구려.
때는 봄, 몸은 청춘 시절은 강남제비 올 때... 이러할 때 젊은 사람들의 화제는 음악이 아니면 춤, 춤이 아니면 「연애」이약이가 구수하여 듯기 조와요.＜143＞
王. 구수? (우스며) 구수하다면 語弊잇구만요. 연애는 생전에 한 일 업서요. 혹 한번 맛난 어룬가운데 다시 한번 더 보앗스면 하고 가비엽게 그리워지는 분은 잇지만 어듸 그 정도가 연애는 아니겟지요.
나. 그럼 마츰 잘 되엇소이다.
王. 무에가.
나. 王.壽福氏에게 愛人이 잇섯단 말이 펴지면 天下의 好男子들이 얼마나 슬퍼하고 애타하고 失望할가요.
王. 그건 또 웨요.
나. 사내들 心理란 아모조록 處女대로 아모조록 어느 놈팽이 붓지안코 잇섯스면 해요. 제가 憧憬하는 女性에게는.
그래 그는 그러타하고 장차 엇던 사내를 남편으로 골나잡겟서요. 엇던 職業 엇던 性格가진 이에게 一生을 맛기겟서요?
王. 性格이나 직업만 보구야 엇더케 정하겟서요. 제 마음에 마즈면 그만이지요. 글세요. 말로는 참아 못해서 글로 통정하는 이도 조코요. 월급쟁이도 조쿠요. 둔중한 이보다 신경질한 분이 조와요. 文士가 조와요.
나. 그래서 이제 시집가서 남의 안해가 되어 가정 살님을 마터하게 되면 얼마나 가지면 生活費가 될 것 갓해요.
王. 아모래도 200圓 정도는 한달 收入이 잇서야 할 것 갓해요. 200圓이 만흐면 백칠팔십圓 정도는 잇서야 할 것 갓해요.
나. 그러면 相對男性의 나히는.
王. 6,7年이상이 조와요.
나. 앗가 말에 詩 쓰고 小說 쓰는 文士를 조와하신다구요? 그런데 조선형편에 어듸 문사치고 200圓이나 백칠팔십圓 生活費를 다달이 만들 사람이 몃치나 된다구요? 그런 분이 출현하기를 기다리자면 거문머리 팟뿌리 될 때까지 기다려야 할 터이니 일이 되겟슴니까. 차라리 洋行이나해서 配匹 골누는 것이 조흘걸요.
王. 文士男便이 어더진다면 100圓 정도로 참지요. 호호호.
나. 끗흐로 한마듸 더 뭇겟서요. 언제쯤 生活革命을 이르키겟서요. 눅거리 긔생살림을 발로 부수어 버리고 藝術家로 나서겟서요.
王. 올봄! 올봄을 두고 보세요.
이러케 이약이하고 王.壽福孃은 다시 나를 위하야 피아노 한 곡조 타 준다. 그리고는 아름다운 목소리로 「孤島의 情恨」이란 레코-드에 너흔 그 노래를 불너 준다.
둥-당-하는 묘한 音律이 담장밧그로 흘너 나가 봄바람을 타고 고요히 평양성중에 펴진다.＜144＞

農村生活을 憧憬하는 鮮于一扇
가을밤 玉통소 소리가치, 길게, 가늘게, 연연하게, 애닯게, 구술푸게 흘너흘너 삼천리 널분 들에 흘너 나리어 젊은 이의 가슴을 안탁갑게도 뜻어 내리는 천재 성악가 선우일선(鮮于一扇)양!
가튼 평양성중에 태어나 「死의 讚美」의 一曲을 집어너코 영원한 나라로 가버린 尹心悳孃이래 조선사화에서는 슬픔의 歌手로 이 선우일선양을 첫손가락에 곱앗다. 그의 노래를 듯고 허굽흔 우름을 운 제자가인이 얼마나 만튼고 애닯은 심정을 이러케도 잘 표현하여 주는 이 歌姬 평양성은 이 歌姬 한 분 때문에 그 일홈이 더 놉하젓다. 半島江山은 이 선우일선양 한 분 때문에 「藝術의 나라」라는 名譽을 어덧다.
압흐로 화려한 꼿관을 젊은 이 小女歌姬의 머리우에 언치려 하는 경견한 人民이 多數히 나오려니와 위선 그의 예술을 사랑하는 熱度가 얼마나 놉흔지는 이번 三千里社主催의 人氣歌手投票에 그에게로 즐겨 표를 던지는 人士가 만흔 것으로 보아도 넉넉히 알 수 잇다.

꼿을 잡고

하늘하늘 봄바람에 꼿이 피면
다시 못니즐 지낸 그 옛날.

지낸 세월 구름이라 닛자해도
니즐 길 업는 설은 이내 맘.

꼿을 들고 놀든것이 어제련만
그 님은 가고 나만 외로이.

생각사룩 맘이 설어 아니우랴
안 울 수 업서 꼿을 잡노라.＜145＞

이미 이 노래를 들어보지 못한 이는 드물것이다. 이것은 유명한 시인(詩人) 모씨가 특히 선우일선양을 위하여 짓고 동경 다녀온 유명한 작곡가(作曲家) 모씨가 곡보를  부친 그 우에 선우양이 느러지는 능라도 실버드들 모양으로 끈는 듯 잇고 잇는 듯 끈으면서 애닯게도 부른 노래까락이라. 이 노래가 서울장안을 비록하야 서대문을 열고 평양이라 宣川이라 이주라 흐르고 동대문을 열고 元山이라 淸津이라 흐르고 南大門을 열고 大邱와 慶州라 釜山이라 흘너 왼-三千里가 이 노래가락에 잠길 때 길가든 夕陽過客도 발길을 멈추고 제 신세를 한번 돌처 보앗고 어염집 부녀자도 빨내방마이를 노코 『人生』을 한번 생각하여 보앗다.
선양의 목소리는 그러케도 남의 어럿든 血脈을 노곤하게 풀어 노앗고 남의 이젓든 가슴의 바다에 돌을 던젓다.
이 歌姬은 그 뒤로도 게속하며 세상에 호평을 밧든 여러 노래를 불너 적막강산에 우슴의 꼿을 피게 하고 잇다.

質素한 그의 집과 初年苦生의 가지가지
원래 대동강을 끼고 잇는 평양과 南江을 끼고 잇는 嶺南晉州의 두군데는 色鄕으로 유명하거니와 이제 鮮于一扇孃도 그 사는 곳이 또한 평양이다. 나는 어느날 모란봉밋 錢齋里 그의 집에서 鮮于一扇孃과 마조 안젓다.
그는 각금 사신에 나오는 모양으로 퍽으나 아담하게(雅淡)하게 학두룸가치 청아(淸雅)하게 자태를 타고 낫다. 그러나 몹시 검소한 드시 보엿스니 내가 차저 간 그날은 마치 어느 녀학생모양으로 감정치마 힌저고리를 바처 입엇슬 뿐 방안도 왕수복씨와는 딴판으로 布悵친 웃방에 두님層의 衣籠과 조고마한 거울 세개가 잇고 축음긔가 잇고 化粧하는 鏡臺가 노엿슬 뿐 花奔이나 어항이나 서양그림 가튼 것도 업다. 앗가 보고 온 王.壽福氏의 生活을 浮華美麗하다 하면 一扇孃의 生活은 오직 質素雅淡하다고내 할가.
나. 어데서 나섯서요. 평양이신가요.
一扇. 아녜요. 저는 평양이 아니-람니다. 원래 고향은 大同郡 釜山面 水上里여요.
나. 그래도 평안도는 평안도구만 들니는 말에 一扇氏는 李朝의 유명한 名儒 鮮于遯庵先生의 后孫이라는데 엇재서 그러케 유명한 名門의 后孫으로 이러케 妓生되엇서요.
一扇. 되고 십허 긔생되엇겟서요. 다 세상의 무정하니까 그런가 보지요. 저도 그 釜山面의 고향에 잇슬 때는 남과 가치 땃뜻한 가정에서 금이야 옥이야 하며 부모님의 사랑을 밧어 가며 살어 갓담니다. 그러다가 일이 안되느라고 오직 한나이든 나의 옵바가 그만 열여덜살에＜146＞ 덜컥 도라가섯서요. 그러니 아들을 일흔 아버지가 손에 맥이 풀니고 마음이 떠서 술로 세월을 보내고 집에 드러오시면 모든 것이 귀치안어 살님을 부쉬고 술이 깨면 눈물과 한숨으로 지내신 까닭에 집안 家産은 그만 破産이 되고 또 그런 뒤는 아버님은 그만 定處업시 종적을 감추고 마럿서요.
나. 저런번! 그뒤 아조 안도라오섯나뇨.
一扇. 여직것 소식업서요. 어데 게신지요. 그러니 엇절 수 잇서야지요. 저는 江東잇는 外家집 에 가서 길너나다가 外家에서 평양으로 이사하여 오게 되니까 저도 따라 왓지요.
나. 아버지 떠나든 때가 一扇氏 몃살되든 해인가요.
一扇. 일곱살 나든 해여요.

양말공장 女職工으로 눈물속에 보낸 半生
나. 그래 엇잿서요. 그때는 생활이 퍽으나 괴로웟겟구만요.
一扇. 그랫지요. 지금 생각하면 그 고상을 엇더케 격겨 왓는지 꿈가튼 일이람니다. 집안식구나 적은가요. 어머니와 언니와 동생까지 네식구엇지요. 그런데 언니는 江西로 시집을 가고 남은 세식구는 생도가 막연하여 어머님은 남의 집 빨내와 針工으로 아츰부터 저녁까지 일하섯고 저는 양말 공장에 다녓서요.
나. 양말공장?
一扇. 그랫담니다. 양말목실도 풀고, 장갑도 만들면서 곤궁하게 지날 때 어린 제 마음에도 이로 동으로는 어머니를 모실 수 업는 줄 알고 정말 안타가워 하엿담니다. 그러다가 바로 열두살 되든 해이엇지요. 내가 아는 李花仙이란 귀생의 조모 回甲날이 와서 그 잔체를 구경하엿는데 만흔 긔생들이 춤추고 노래 부르는 것이 엇더케도 아름답고 마음이 끌니든지요. 그래서 흠모하는 생각이 나서 나도 긔생이나 되어 돈 잘 벌어 어머님을 공양하겟다 작정하고 어머니께 긔생되겟노라고 애원하엿담니다.
어머니는 노하시면서 그런 말은 입밧게도 내지말라고 하시엿스나 제가 여러번 여러번 청하고 떼쓰고 하엿고 더구나 극도에 이른 생활난 때문에 엇절 수 잇서야지요. 어머님는 나종에는 눈물 흘니며
「네 생각대로 하렴으나」
하시겟지,
그러나 말이 긔생되기 쉽기 어듸 그것이 그리 쉬운 일인가요. 小學校도 졸업을 못한 제가 엇더케 용이하겟서요. 그래서 평양와서 낫에는 일하고 밤에는 夜學을 다니어 그 덕으로 긔생학교에 겨우 입학하엿담니다.＜147＞
나. 몃살에?
一扇. 열세살에 입학햇지요. 그래서 열여섯 나든 해에 졸업하고 긔생이 되엇담니다.
나. 노래 잘 부른다고 歌手의 일홈을 듯던 때는 언제던가요.
一扇. 妓生나온 그 이듬해, 즉 열일곱살 나든 해엇지요.
나. 바로 처음부터 「포리돌」에 入社하섯든가요.
一扇. 네.
나. 처음에 몃장이나 너흐섯든지오.
一扇. 너키는 이럭저럭 스무장쯤 되엇슬 걸요. 그 중에서 일곱장만 지금 팔고 잇지요.
나. 겨우 일곱장의 레코-드를 가지고 그동안 벌서 그러케 인긔가 놉헛든가요. 지금은 몃 살인데요.
一扇. (조곰 붓그러워하미) 열아홉.

七八十圓生活費만 잇스면 妓生을 그만 두겟노라
나. 한때는 긔생, 한때는 레코-드 歌手 그 生活이 엇더함니까.
一扇. 글세요. 긔생이 아니되고 레코-드 歌手만 되엇더라면 조왓슬 터인데. 妓生生活이란 지긋지긋함니다. 그러타고 가수생활도 그러케 조와 하는 것도 아니지요. 이런 직업을 다 버리고 그저 어머니 모시고 조용히 살 수 잇다면... 막상 긔생의 몸으로 손님을 대하고 보니 손님을 원망하는 것은 아니나 한편을 손님이고 이쪽은 商品모양으로 노래와 춤을 파는 팔닌  몸이 되다보니까 저편 분들은 제의 자유까지 합하여 가진 듯 십고 이편은 그 반대로 아조 無能者가 된 듯한 늣김이 잇슴니다.
엇던 때는 욕하고 酒酊부리며 옷을 더럽혀 노흘 때는 참말 三伏철에 「호미」쥐고 조밧골에 안저 흘니는 비지땀보다 더한 진땀이 밧작밧작 나옵데다.
나. 그러면 긔생을 그만두고 조흔 곳에 출가할 配布로구만.
一扇. (방그레 우스며 고개를 숙이고 잇다가 한참만에 들며) 가고 십흔 생각이야 업겟서요. 그러치만 어머님을 모서 줄 양반이 어듸 잇서야지요.
나. 웨 업서요. 조선에 남자가 일천만명이나 잇는데 그 중에서 골나 잡는다면? 어듸 엇던 성질에 직업은 엇더코 나히는 엇더타 하는 것을 쭉-말슴하여 보구려.
一扇. -호호호 성질은 유순한 이가 조코
나. 유순한 이가 조코
一扇. 월급쟁이가 조코
나. 직업은 월급쟁이
一扇. 나히는 스물칠팔세나 되고 시동생이 업고 독신자가 조와요.＜148＞
나. 그러케 어려운 조건이 아니구만요. 그러면 장차 어듸서 생활하려 해요.
一扇. 都會보다 農村이 조와요. 한적한 농촌에 가서 고요히 생활하고 십허요.
나. 지금 한달 生活費는 얼마나 가지면 조흐서요. 더구나 結婚뒤에 한달에 얼마나 가지면 지낼듯 십허요.
一扇. 그야 보아야 알지요. 얼마나 먹고 쓸넌지 그러치만 아마 7,80圓이면 만족할 줄 아러요. 저의 어머니는 돈만흔 남편만 엇어야 된다 하지만 돈만흔 사람치고 마음착한 어룬이 제가 만흔 사람을 대해 보앗스나 대단히 드문듯 십습데다. 그래 제 생각만은 그만한 生活費를 낼 수 잇는 분이면 만족하다고 밋습니다.
나. 앗가 말슴하든 아버지는 지금 어듸 게신가요.
一扇. 아지 못함니다. 아직 生存하여 게시련만 딸년이 긔생이라 천이 녁겨 소식조차 업스니 아버지 뵈옵고 십흔 생각 간절하나 엇지 함니까. 사라게신 때 단 한번이라도 뵙고 십허요.
나. 글세요 沈淸이도 아버지를 맛날 수 잇섯는데 마음을 누구려하게 가지서요. 그래 언제까지 이 생활을 하시렴니까.
一扇. 올 봄에 취입을 맛추고 긔생은 그만 둘랴고 생각중임니다. 노래만 취입하든지 그러치 아느면 家庭生活을 하면 함니다. 이러케 길게 이약이하는 사이 그의 표정은 오직 순진(純眞) 그대로이엇다. 나 어린 깨긋한 소녀의 장래에 영광이 잇서지이라고 빌며 나왓다.＜149＞
＜139-149＞