Magazine Title: 三千理 제7권 제5호
Publication Date: 1935년 06월 01일
Article Title: 詩客과 風流 (Poets and Elegance)
Author: 金治元 (Kim Ch'i-wŏn)
Article Type: 문예평론 (Literary Criticism)

Poets and Elegance
						Kim Ch'i-wŏn

絳葩春艶艶 (Deep red blossoms in spring are gorgeous, gorgeous)
朱實夏團團 (Crimson fruits in summer are round, round)
This poem, by Yi Kyu-bo (李奎報), who reached the pinnacle of nature poetry, is his *Cherry Poem*. It describes how reddish flowers bloom beautifully in spring, and in summer, the fruits ripen roundly, giving it value to be cherished and recited by later generations. There is a poem by the Master, recited impromptu on the road, which is called the finest song under heaven. That poem says:

蹇驢影裏碧山暮 (In the shadow of a limping donkey, the green mountains grow dark)
斷鴈聲中江樹秋 (Amidst the cries of scattered wild geese, the river trees show autumn)
獨鶴何歸天杳杳 (Where does the lone crane return? The sky is vast and remote)
行人不盡路愁愁 (Travelers are endless, the road is sorrowful, sorrowful)

In Koryŏ (高麗), there was another poet with exquisitely sharp eyes: Master Kim Hwang-wŏn (金黃元). The Master's *Yŏngwangjŏng Poem* (鍊光亭詩) is a subtle and beautiful masterpiece, widely recited and known by people. What does that poem say?

故國三千餘里後 (Behind the old country, over three thousand *ri*)
名區四十二州間 (Among the famous districts of forty-two provinces)
長城一面溶溶水 (Along one face of the Great Wall, water flows gently, gently)
大野東頭点点山 (At the eastern end of the great plain, mountains rise peak by peak)
萬戶樓臺天畔起 (Pavilions of ten thousand households rise as if touching heaven)
四時歌曲月中還 (Songs of the four seasons return under the moon)
向日留心黃鶴樓 (Formerly, my heart lingered at Yellow Crane Tower)
夕陽回首白雲樓 (At sunset, I turn my head back toward White Cloud Pavilion)

Let's translate this poem: Behind the old country of over three thousand *ri* and among the renowned 42 provinces, the water hugs the long wall, flowing gently, gently, and the mountains dominate the great plain, rising sharply. The pavilions of ten thousand households seem to reach the sky, and the songs of the four seasons return beneath the moon. Previously, I set my heart on the Yellow Crane Tower, but until sunset, I lingered, turning my head towards Paegun Bay (白雲灣).

徘徊樓上月徘徊 (Pacing on the tower, the moon paces)
客子徘徊亦快哉 (The traveler pacing is also joyful)
玉兎幾年仙藥搗 (For how many years has the Jade Rabbit pounded the elixir?)
素娥何處鏡奩間 (Where is Chang'e between the mirror and cosmetic box?)
搖波散百東坡水 (Shaking waves scatter a hundred Su Dongpo waters)
對影成三太白杯 (Facing shadows become three Li Bai cups)
直到夜深天似洗 (Until late night when the sky seems washed)
好風吹送桂香來 (A good wind blows, sending the scent of cassia)

This poem is the *Tohwaeru Poem* (桃徊樓詩) by An Ch'im (安琛), a Minister (判書) during the reign of King Kwangjong (光廟). Its fresh poetic thought is enough to overwhelm one's sensibilities.
A scholar named Ŏ Suk-kwŏn (魚叔權) said in his *P'aegwan Chapki* (稗官雜記) that while this poem is undoubtedly fine, the phrases "Tongp'a paek" (東坡百 - a hundred [cups like] Su Dongpo) and "T'aebaek sam" (太白三 - three [cups like] Li Bai) were plagiarized (剽窃) from Yi Mun-sun's (李文順) poetry. He also mocked An-ssi (安氏) for having previously composed verses at Ch'angnyŏng's (昌寧) Ch'uwŏrhŏn (秋月軒) – "Shaking waves scatter, becoming Dongpo's hundred" (搖波散作東坡百) and "Facing shadows truly become Taebaek's cups" (對影眞成太白杯) <231> – noting that repeated self-quotation in the above poem is not what a poet should do. However, since the poem is perfectly rounded and fervent, I believe we should just appreciate its poetic flavor rather than judging the poet's character. It has occasionally happened since ancient times that poets thoroughly read the famous poems of their predecessors, find a hint there, and skillfully craft poems with similar meanings. Let me give one example. Pae Ch'a-san (裴此山), a clerk (吏屬 아전) in Kimhae (金海), wrote in his *Yŏnjallu Poem* (鷰子樓詩):

鷰子樓前楊柳花 (In front of Swallow Tower, willow blossoms)
楊柳鷰子夕陽斜 (Willows, swallows, the setting sun slants)
鷰蹴飛花花蹴鷰 (Swallows kick flying blossoms, blossoms kick swallows)
散入東風萬人家 (Scattering into the east wind, into ten thousand homes)

The spring season when cottonwood fluff (絮花) flies has arrived. It not only vividly expresses the life of swallows returning from Jiangnan (江南) to fly under the eaves of the common people (百姓) but also adheres to poetic rules and rhymes (押韻). Liu Yuxi (劉禹錫) wrote in his *Wuyi Xiang* (烏衣巷) composition: 朱雀橋頭野草花 (By Zhuque Bridge, wildflowers bloom) 烏衣巷口夕陽斜 (At the entrance to Wuyi Lane, the setting sun slants) 舊時王榭堂前鷰 (Swallows from Wang and Xie's halls of old) 飛入尋常百姓家 (Fly into the homes of ordinary people). Dear readers, please compare this with the preceding poem. Pae Ch'a-san was a poet of the late Yi Dynasty (李朝), and Liu Yuxi was a poet of the Tang (唐) Dynasty. Isn't it clear that the *Yŏnjallu Poem* indeed received its hint from the poem above?

鞦韆 (Swing)
鷰子雙雙飛去態 (Like swallows flying away in pairs)
挑花點點落來形 (Like peach blossoms falling dot by dot)

Are they swallows flying away in pairs?
Are they peach blossoms falling dot by dot?
This poem expresses the sight of young ladies from respectable families (閨秀處女), wearing pink *chŏgori* and crimson skirts, or black *chŏgori* and white skirts, on a swing (鞦韆), swaying between heaven and earth (非天非地半空中), advancing and retreating amid green waters and blue mountains (綠水靑山自進退). How beautiful is that?

扶笻登眺渺茫問 (Leaning on a staff, I climb and gaze into the vast distance)
萬頃蒼波萬點山 (Ten thousand hectares of blue waves, ten thousand mountain peaks)
口腹於口其一崇 (Mouth and belly, upon mouth, one is lofty)
不將身世老江于 (I will not let my life grow old by the river)

This poem was composed by the scholar Ŏ Suk-kwŏn when he climbed Mokmyŏksan (木覓山). As a mountain-climbing poem, it is worthy of being cherished and recited. Anyone who recites this poem while climbing Mount Tai (登泰山) will feel their mind refreshed (心神을 爽快케), and worldly cares (塵世의 雜慮) will disappear. It is indeed a fresh poetic work. I will introduce another landscape poem (江山詩) that I cherish: it is Hŭi An's (希顔) *Yangjulluwŏn Poem* (楊州樓院詩). The poem says: 有山何處不爲廬 (Where there are mountains, is there any place not a hut?) 坐對靑山試一噓 (Sitting facing the blue mountains, I try a sigh) 簪笏十年成老大 (Ten years with hairpin and tablet, I've grown old) 莫敎霜髴賦歸歟 (Don't let frosty hair make me compose "Shall I return?") This is a supreme song under heaven, which feels new even if we recite it a hundred times. Didn't the famous historian Sŏ Kun-jŏng (徐君正) comment, "This poem has the elegant charm of rivers and mountains (江山雅趣) and not a speck of dust (一点塵埃)"?

石上投石石石石 (Throwing a stone onto a stone, stone stone stone)
僧堂坐僧僧僧僧 (Monks sitting in the monks' hall, monk monk monk)

Stones rolling when a stone is thrown onto stones, sound: *tol tol tol* (돌돌돌). Monks sitting in the temple hall, all talking: *chung chung chung* (중중중).

八鵲步泥八鵲鵲 (Eight magpies walking in mud, eight magpies *p'aljjak-jjak*)
五犢喫草五犢犢 (Five calves eating grass, five calves *odok-dok*)

Eight magpies walking in the mud, sound: *p'aljjak jjak* (팔작작).
Five calves eating grass, sound: *odok dok* (오독독).

世事態態思 (Pondering worldly affairs carefully, carefully)
此時虎虎時 (This is not a careless, careless time)
人皆弓弓去 (Everyone goes swiftly, swiftly)
我獨矢矢來 (I alone come straightly, straightly)
心可花花守 (The heart must be guarded firmly, firmly)
言何草草爲 (Why speak carelessly, carelessly?)
吾詩竹竹驗 (If you test my poems generation after generation)
前路松松開 <232> (The road ahead will open smoothly, smoothly)

Let's translate this poem:
Pondering worldly affairs meticulously (꼼꼼히),
This is not a time for carelessness (범범한).
Though others all go swiftly (활활히),
I alone intend to come straight (솔솔히).
The heart must be guarded firmly (꼭 꼭꼭),
Why should words be spoken carelessly (풀풀이)?
If my poems are tested generation after generation (대대로),
The path ahead will open smoothly (솔솔 열니리라).

The poems above are humorous poems (滑稽詩) by the unfortunate poet, Master Kim Rip (金笠). The Master has numerous famous poems expressed in simple characters.
For instance, the universally popular lines:
月白雪白天地白 (Moon white, snow white, heaven and earth white)
山深夜深客愁深 (Mountains deep, night deep, traveler's sorrow deep)

And in his Kŭmgangsan (金剛山) Spring Scenery poem:
岩岩石石間間水 (Among cliffs and rocks, water here and there)
栢栢松松處處花 (Cypresses and pines, flowers everywhere)

There is a poem about clouds covering the mountain peaks, making the mountain and clouds appear white together, making it hard to distinguish cloud from mountain. Then, strangely, the clouds drift away, revealing the majestic forms of the Twelve Thousand Peaks (一萬二千峯).
山與雲俱白 (Mountain and cloud are both white)
雲山不辨容 (Cloud and mountain, form indistinguishable)
雲歸山獨立 (Clouds return, the mountain stands alone)
一萬二千峯 (Twelve Thousand Peaks)

There is a legend that Kŭmgangsan wept when Master Kim Rip composed this poem, but some say it was the work of Master Hŏ Mi-su (許眉首), so it is uncertain (未詳).

可憐行色可憐身 (Pitiful travel appearance, pitiful body)
可憐門前訪可憐 (At Karyŏn's gate, visiting Karyŏn)
可憐此意傳可憐 (Pitiful I convey this feeling to Karyŏn)
可憐能如可憐心 (Will pitiful Karyŏn understand my pitiful heart?)

This is the *Karyŏn Kisaeng Poem* (可憐妓詩). It means: My pitiful self in pitiful travel attire went to the gate of the *kisaeng* (妓生) named Karyŏn (可憐) and sought Karyŏn. If pitiful I tell my feelings to the *kisaeng* Karyŏn, will the *kisaeng* Karyŏn understand my pitiful heart?

身是吾身口是吾 (Body is my body, mouth is my mouth)
行身開口總由吾 (Moving the body, opening the mouth, all depends on me)
如何將此吾身口 (How could I take this my body and mouth)
輕動妄言反害吾 (And by rash actions and reckless words, turn around and harm myself?)

This poem is *O Sin O Ku* (吾身吾口 - My Body, My Mouth) by Master Song U-am (宋尤庵), the leader of the Noron (老論) faction. Not only is it a famous piece for all ages, but it also offers much warning to us today. Translating this poem: It is my body, my mouth; my actions and my words originate from me. How could I, through my own actions and words, create shortcomings and flaws, and end up harming myself with words?

During the reign of King Sŏngjong (成宗朝), there was a man named Son Sun-hyo (孫舜孝), who served up to Ch'ansŏng P'anjungch'u (贊成判中樞). He was known as a heavy drinker (好酒客) and once composed a poem while drunk (醉中):
明月明未明 (Bright moon, bright yet not bright)
淸風淸未淸 (Clear wind, clear yet not clear)
我心正未正 (My mind, upright yet not upright)
待得明月明 (Waiting for the bright moon to become bright)
This describes the state of a drunkard (醉客). He drank three or four times (三休四休) and took the sobriquet Ch'ilhyu (七休 - Seven Rests). But following a friend's (友) advice, he changed it to Ch'ilbulhyu (七不休 - Seven Non-Rests), and because of this, he lost his government post (벼살). A scholar named Sŏ Tal-sŏng (徐達成) wrote a teasing (戱弄) poem:
可休休日休方好 (Resting when one can rest is truly good)
休不休時休亦羞 (Resting when one shouldn't rest is also shameful)
三四休並七休客 (Three-four rests combined, the Seven Rests guest)
休休今腹更休休 (Rest, rest, now the belly rests again, rest, rest)

During the reign of King Tanjong (端宗朝), there was Sŏng Sam-mun (成三問), whose courtesy name (字) was Kŭnbo (謹甫) and sobriquet (號) was <233> Maejukhŏn (梅竹軒), from Ch'angnyŏng (昌寧). He was one of the Six Martyred Ministers (死六臣). When he was going to his death, he composed a poem while riding in the cart (車). What was it like? 擊鼓催人命 (Drumbeats hasten a person's life) 回顧日欲斜 (Looking back, the sun is about to set) 黃天無一店 (In the yellow sky, not a single inn) 今夜宿誰家 (Tonight, at whose house shall I lodge?) In other words: The drumbeat signals the hastening of life, and the sun sets in the western mountains. In the yellow sky (黃天) without inns—ah, my fading shadow, where will it stay tonight? How pitiful is this poem? Anyone who sees this poem cannot help but shed tears. As the Master was being transported (載車時), a servant (奴) happened to be standing nearby and offered him wine (술). After drinking (飮하신후에), the Master composed another poem:
食人之食衣人衣 (Eating another's food, wearing another's clothes)
所一平生莫有遠 (Throughout my life, nothing was distant [from the king's favor])
一死固知忠義在 (By dying once, I firmly know loyalty and righteousness remain)
顯陵松栢夢依依 (Pines and cypresses of Hyŏllŭng tomb linger in dreams)
His loyalty (忠義) in thinking of the former king (先王) is truly moving for all ages (千古).

Among the Six Martyred Ministers (死六臣), another person comes to mind: Master Pak P'eng-nyŏn (朴彭年). It is said that during King Yŏngjo's reign (英廟朝), scholars (文士) like Sŏng Sam-mun, Yu T'ae-ch'o (柳太初), Ha Chung-chang (河仲章), and Yi Paek-ko (李伯高) were contemporaries of King Tanjong (檀君一時), but all were greatly influenced (感化) by Master P'eng-nyŏn, showing his excellence in Confucian studies (經學) and literature (文章). When Kim Chong-sŏ (金宗瑞) was executed (被誅) during the Kye-yu year (癸酉) of King Nosan (魯山 - Tanj

---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제7권 제5호
발행일	1935년 06월 01일
기사제목	詩客과 風流
필자	金治元
기사형태	문예평론

詩客과 風流
						金治元
絳葩春艶艶
朱實夏團團
이 詩는 自然詩로 그 절정에 달한 李奎報先生이 櫻桃詩로써 봄에는 붉으스레한 꽃이 곱게곱게 피여나고 여름이면 열매가 매저 동굴동굴 닉어간다는 것으로 後人의게 愛誦의 價値를 주엇던 것이다. 先生의 路上口吟으로 천하에 絶唱이라 일컷는 詩가 잇으니 그 詩에 曰
蹇驢影裏碧山暮
斷鴈聲中江樹秋
獨鶴何歸天杳杳
行人不盡路愁愁
高麗외 絶妙한 烱眼을 가진 詩人이 또 잇으니 그는 金黃元先生이다. 先生의 鍊光亭詩는 奸美한 大傑作으로 汎히 人口에 膾炙하나니 그 詩는 과연 어딀 한가.
故國三千餘里後
名區四十二州間
長城一面溶溶水
大野東頭点点山
萬戶樓臺天畔起
四時歌曲月中還
向日留心黃鶴樓
夕陽回首白雲樓
라. 이 詩를 意譯하면 녯날아 三千餘里의 뒤와 勝地 42州의 사이에 물은 긴 城을 안고 고이고이 흘너가고 山은 큰 뜰을 눌으고 불끈불끈 솟앗는데 만호의 다락은 하날에 달뜻 일어나고 四時의 노래는 달 미트로 돌아듬니다. 前日엔 맘을 黃鶴樓에 두엇더니 夕陽까지 머리를 白雲灣에 들녓다 함이외다.
徘徊樓上月徘徊
客子徘徊亦快哉
玉兎幾年仙藥搗
素娥何處鏡奩間
搖波散百東坡水
對影成三太白杯
直到夜深天似洗
好風吹送桂香來
이 詩는 光廟朝에 判書 安琛의 桃徊樓詩이니 淸新한 詩想으로 人의 口氣를 逼할 만하다.
魚叔權이란 文士가 稗官雜記에 말하기를 此詩는 佳作은 틀님없으나 東坡百 太白三이란 文句는 李文順의 詩篇에서 剽窃하엿다 하고 又安氏가 일즉이 昌寧秋月軒에서 搖波散作東坡百이요. 對影眞成太白杯란＜231＞ 作詩가 잇는바 上詩에 屢次引用은 詩人의 할 바가 아니라 하여 또한 비웃엇다. 그러나 詩가 圓滿히 酣熱되엿으니 吾人은 그 詩味를 吟咏할 따름이지 그 人格조차 論할 배 아니라 생각한다. 자고로 先輩名詩를 通讀하야 그곳에서 한트를 바다 意味近似한 詩篇을 技巧잇게 料理하는 겄은 간혹잇는 일이니 그 一例를 들면 金海吏屬 아전)裴此山이 鷰子樓詩에 曰
鷰子樓前楊柳花
楊柳鷰子夕陽斜
鷰蹴飛花花蹴鷰
散入東風萬人家
絮花가 날니는 봄철은 왓다. 江南갓던 제비는 뭇 百姓의 첨下에 날아드는 그 一生을 여실히 표현할 뿐아니라 律에 들어맛고 押抽이라들 한다. 劉禹錫이 鳥衣巷作에 曰 朱雀橋頭野草花 鳥衣巷口夕陽斜 舊時王榭堂前鷰 飛入尋常百姓家라 하엿스니 讀者 여러분 先詩와 대조하여 보십시다. 裴此山은 李朝 末의 詩人이오 劉禹錫은 唐에 詩人이고 보니 果是鷰子樓詩는 上詩에서 힌트를 받은 것이 確然하지 안슴니가?
鞦韆
鷰子雙雙飛去態
挑花點點落來形
쌍쌍히 날아가는 제비런가?
점점이 떨어지는 도화런가?
분홍저고리 다홍치마 혹은 黑色저고리에 힌치마를 입은 閨수 처녀들이 鞦韆에 當하여 非天非地半空中에 綠水靑山自進退의 態를 詩로써 표현한 것이외다. 얼마나 아름담슴닛가?
扶笻登眺渺茫問
萬頃蒼波萬點山
口腹於口其一崇
不將身世老江于
이 詩는 魚叔權이란 文士가 木覓山에 登하야 지은 것으로 登山詩로써 愛誦할 價値가 잇다. 누구를 물론하고 登泰山하야 此詩를 吟咏할 진대 心神을 爽快케 하야 塵世의 雜慮가 업서지리니 과연 淸新한 詩篇이엿다. 내가 愛誦하는 江山詩又一篇을 소개하리니 그는 希顔의 楊州樓院詩이다. 其詩에 曰 有山何處不爲廬요 坐對靑山試一噓라 簪笏十年成老大하니 莫敎霜髴賦歸歟라 하니 天下의 絶唱으로 吾人이 一百番외와도 새롭게 한다. 史家로 유명한 徐君正先生이 評曰 此詩有江山雅趣하고 無一点塵埃라 하지 안엇슴닛가?
石上投石石石石
僧堂坐僧僧僧僧
돌우에 돌을 던지니 돌이 굴너가는 소리 돌돌돌 절당에 중에 앉어서 말하는 겄이 모두다 중중중
八鵲步泥八鵲鵲
五犢喫草五犢犢
여듧까치 진흙을 거러가는 소리 팔작작
다섯의 송아지 풀을 먹는 소리가 오독독
世事態態思
此時虎虎時
人皆弓弓去
我獨矢矢來
心可花花守
言何草草爲
吾詩竹竹驗
前路松松開라. 이 詩를＜232＞ 意譯하면
세상일을 꼼꼼히 생각하니
이 범범한 때가 안이야요.
남은 모다 활활히 가도
나는 혼자 솔솔히 오렴니다.
마음은 꼭 꼭꼭 질어야하고
말은 어이 풀풀이 하릿가?
내시를 대대로 시험하랴면
앞길이 솔솔 열니리라.
이상의 詩는 不遇의 詩人인 金笠先生의 滑稽詩이외다. 先生은 單純한 文字로 表現한 名詩가 허다하니
月白雪白天地白
山深夜深客愁深이란
普遍的으로 유행되여 잇는 詩句等이며 金剛山春景詩에 曰
岩岩石石間間水
栢栢松松處處花라든지
구름이 山峯을 덥허 山이 구름으로 더부러 한가지로 히니 구름인가? 山인가? 分辨하기 어렵더니 구름이 기괴하게도 날아가니 一萬二千峯의 雄姿가 날아닛다는 詩가 잇으니
山與雲俱白
雲山不辨容
雲歸山獨立
一萬二千峯
金笠先生이 此詩를 지으니 金剛山이 울엇다는 傳說이 잇는 바 許眉首先生의 作이라고도 하니 未詳하외다.
可憐行色可憐身
可憐門前訪可憐
可憐此意傳可憐
可憐能如可憐心
이 詩는 可憐한 行色의 가련한 몸이 可憐이란 妓生의 문전에 가서 可憐이란 妓生을 찾엇다. 가련한 내가 가련한 妓生에게 내 뜻을 말하면 可憐이란 妓生은 나의 가련한 마음을 알어보리라는 可憐妓詩이외다.
身是吾身口是吾
行身開口總由吾
如何將此吾身口
輕動妄言反害吾
이 詩는 老論의 巨頭인 宋尤庵先生의 吾身吾口란 詩로써 萬古에 名文이 될뿐더러 오날날 우리의게 警戒함이 많아 이 詩를 意譯하면 나의 몸 나의 입으로 내하는 行動이고 내하는 말이거니 나의 행동 나의 말에서 내가 短点을 만들고 내가 缺点을 만들어서 내가 도로 말로 害를 넙을 줄이 잇으럿까?
成宗朝에 孫舜孝란 사람은 贊成判中樞까지 지낸 분이다. 公은 好酒客으로써 일즉이 醉中에 읊은 詩가 잇으니
明月明未明
淸風淸未淸
我心正未正
待得明月明이라 하야 醉客의 形容을 말하엿다. 公이 三休四休에 말을 취하야 號를 七休라 하엿더니 벗(友)에 말에 의하야 七不休로 고첫더니 일로하야 벼살을 갈너가게 되엿다. 徐達成이란 文士가 戱弄한 詩에 曰
可休休日休方好
休不休時休亦羞
三四休並七休客
休休今腹更休休
端宗朝에 成三問의 字는 謹甫요 號는＜233＞ 梅竹軒이니 昌寧人이다. 死六臣에 一人이 그로써 죽으려 갈 적에 車에 올라 지은 詩가 잇으니 그는 어떠하엿던가? 擊鼓催人命인데 回顧日欲斜라 黃天無一店하니 今夜宿誰家가? 다시 말하면 人命을 잡촉하는 信號에 북소래에 西山에 해는 지누나. 客店도 업는 黃天으로 아-영영 사라저가는 나의 그림자는 오날밤 어는 곳에서 머물넌가? 이 얼마나 애처러운 詩인가? 누구를 물론하고 이 詩를 볼 때에 눈물을 흘니지 안코는 견디지 못하라리. 先生이 載車時에 맛츰 奴가 곁에 서서 술을 올니거늘 先生은 飮하신후에 또 詩를 지엿으니 그 詩에 曰
食人之食衣人衣
所一平生莫有遠
一死固知忠義在
顯陵松栢夢依依라 하니
先王을 생각하는 그 忠義야말로 과연 千古에 不感할 것이다.
死六臣中 또 생각나는 분이 잇으니 그는 朴彭年先生이시다. 英廟朝에 成三問
柳太初
河仲章
李伯高等 文士가 檀君一時로되 皆 彭年先生의 感化가 많으섯다고 하니 經學文章이 뛰여난 것을 가히 알지라. 魯山 癸酉에 金宗瑞가 被誅하고 府中에서 잘 채할새 先生맛음 참예하여 읊은 詩가 잇으니
廟堂深處動哀絲
萬事如今總不知
柳綠東風吹細細
花明春日正遲遲
先王大業抽金櫃
聖主鴻恩倒玉巵
不樂胡爲長不樂
賡歌醉飽太平時란 詩는 府中에 색이여 붓첫다는 名詩이외다.
三敎宗風本不差
較非爭是亂如蛙
一般是性俱無礙
何釋何儒何道耶
이 詩는 高麗末年에 隱士 元天錫先生의 詩이니 高麗末의 三敎相爭을 일삼던 그 社會를 誹謗한 名詩이다. 安司直貴孫의 부인 催氏는 參判 雲致의 딸이니 自幼로 聰明하야 詩書를 無不通知하엿다. 그 남편이 早死하매 글을 지여 스스로 슯어하엿으니 그 詩에 曰
鳳凰于飛
債鳴樂止
鳳飛不下
鳳獨哭止
搔首間天
天黙止止
天長海濶
限無極止
봉황이 날미여 화하게 울고요
봉이 가고 안오니 황혼자 우노메라
머리들어 하날에 무러보니
하날 또한 잠잠하고나
하날이 길고 바다 넓으나
나의 한은 궁진함이 없고나
이 얼마나 무한한 哀愁를 그려낸건가?
眞實로 그 文辭의 凄惋한 것은 吾人의 눈물을 흘니게 할 뿐이다.
輓家人(作者未詳)
兒啼號母母何之
誤道靑山採採遲
日暮靑山人不至＜234＞
更蔣何說慰啼兒
엄마가 어듸어듸 갓나하고
애기가 울며 엄마를 불너요
늣도록 나물켄다 속엿더니
청산에 해가 저도 님안오니
다시는 무슨 말노 달랠건가?
去無情(妓生初月作)
鳥鳥花花各有名
山山水水自分明
花鳥水山長若此
煙光何事去無情
새가 울고
꽃은 피고
산 푸르고
물을 흘너
해마다
오건만은
그대가 간
이후에는
소식조차
돈무하니
무정할손
그대로다
別人
大同江上送情人
楊柳千絲不係人
含淚眼看含淚眼
斷膓人送斷膓人
이 詩는 關西의 名妓 桂月이가 海伯 李光德이 昵愛한 바 되엿다가 相別할 때에 進呈한 詩이다.
芙蓉은 成川名妓니 號는 雲楚라 姿色言語行動 그 모든 것이 俱備하고 詩文에도 長하엿다. 情郞 金有聲의게 보낸 想思詩같은 千古에 絶調로 思慕의 情이 極하엿다. 芙蓉이 芙蓉꽃을 읊은 詩는 自己의 自色을 自稱한 것으로
芙蓉花發滿池紅
人道芙蓉勝妻容
朝日妻從堤上過
如何人不看芙蓉
련꼿이 피엿든가
못까에 가득하니
사람들 말하기를
나보다 곱다건만
못까에 내 지날 때
그까진 것 하고요
본체만체 하노라＜235＞
＜231-235＞