Magazine Title: 개벽 제18호
Publication Date: 1921년 12월 01일
Article Title: 東方私學의王-崔冲先生, 十大偉人紹介의 其五 (King of Eastern Private Education - Master Ch'oe Ch'ung, Introduction to Ten Great Figures Part 5)
Author: 개벽사
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/Article)

King of Eastern Private Education - Master Ch'oe Ch'ung, Introduction to Ten Great Figures Part 5
						Kae Pyŏk Sa

The Resplendent Life of the Master
The Master's courtesy name was Hoyŏn (浩然), and his pen name was Hwangjae (惶齋). He was born 937 years ago, in the 3rd year of Koryŏ King Sŏngjong, Kapshin year (which was the 1st year of Song Yongxi and the year 984 in the Western calendar), as a native of Haeju Taenyŏng County (海州大寧郡). His appearance was imposing and grand (風姿 - 魁偉), his character upright and firm (性操 - 貞堅), and it is said that from a young age, he loved learning and excelled at composing texts (屬文). In the 8th year of King Mokchong (穆宗, the king after Sŏngjong) (when the Master was 22), he was selected first in the Kapkwa (甲科, highest level civil service examination). During the reign of King Hyŏnjong (顯宗, after Mokchong), he served successively in official posts such as Sŭbŭi Pokwŏl (拾遺補闕), Hallim Haksa (翰林學士), Yebu Sirang (禮部侍郞), and Kanŭi Taebu (諫議大夫). At the beginning of King Tŏkchong's reign (德宗, after Hyŏnjong), he was transferred to the posts of U Sangi Sangsi (右散騎常侍) and Tongji Chungch'uwŏnsa (同知中樞院事). At this time, the Master submitted a memorial stating, "Previously, during King Sŏngjong's time, the texts of 'Six Rights and Six Wrongs' from the Shuoyuan (說苑六正六邪) and the 'Six Articles Edict' of the Han Inspector-Generals (漢刺史六條) were written on the walls of various inner and outer government offices. Now, as much time has passed, they have become dilapidated. It is fitting to rewrite and post these to inform the vassals of the way they should be admonished." The King followed this advice. During the reign of King Chŏngjong (靖宗, after Tŏkchong), he again became Sangsŏ Chwapoksya (尙書佐僕射) and Ch'amjijŏngsa (叅知政事), then was appointed Pyŏngmasa (兵馬使) of the Northwest Circuit. By royal command, he toured the border regions and determined the sites for fortifications, establishing forts such as Yŏngwŏn (寧遠) and P'yŏngno (平虜) and over 10 garrisons (堡). Upon returning, he became Munha Sirang (門下侍郞) and P'yŏngjangsa (平章事). When King Munjong (文宗, after Chŏngjong) ascended the throne, the Master was promoted at a leap to Munha Sijung (門下侍中), then made T'aebu (太傅), and granted the honorific title of Meritorious Subject Pushing Loyalty and Assisting the Way (推忠贊道功臣號). At that time, while serving as Sijung and concurrently as To Pyŏngmasa (都兵馬使), the Master submitted a memorial stating, "Last year, the grain harvest failed in the northwestern provinces and forts. The people are impoverished; men suffer from corvée labor, and women suffer from grain levies. I request that all construction work be prohibited except for the repair of local ponds and dikes." The King complied. He also proposed releasing with goodwill the 86 Eastern Jurchen chiefs, including Yŏmhan (鹽漢), who were detained at the capital's guesthouses (京舘) at the time, intending to make them sincerely submit to the court's grace and righteousness, which was carried out as planned. In the 8th year of the same reign, the Master reached the age of 70 and requested retirement to his hometown citing old age and exhaustion. However, the King replied, "Ch'ung is a Confucian master of successive generations <102> and an elder statesman of the Three Han (三韓). Although he requests retirement now, I cannot bear to grant it," and bestowed upon him a stool and staff (几杖) to allow him to continue overseeing affairs. Later, he was granted high positions such as T'aesa (太師), concurrently Munha Sijung, and Naesaryŏng (內史令) to allow him to retire with honor. King Munjong specially dispatched Naesa Sirang P'yŏngjangsa Kim Wŏnjŏng (金元鼎) and Tongji Chungch'uwŏnsa Wang Mu-sung (王懋崇) as envoys to the Master's residence, bestowing upon him a sincere imperial edict along with clothing, belts, silver vessels, colored silks, cloth currency, saddled horses, and other items. Even after the Master resided at home, the court consulted him on all significant military and state affairs, and repeatedly added to his honorific titles, such as Meritorious Subject Pushing Loyalty, Assisting the Way, Aiding Governance, Uniting in Virtue, Broadening Culture, Esteeming Confucianism, Securing Stability, and Succoring the Realm (推忠贊道佐理同德弘文懿儒保定康濟功臣號). Unfortunately, in the 22nd year of King Munjong, the Musin year (戊申), the Master passed away at the advanced age of 85. The King dispatched the Director of the Grand Medical Office (大醫監), Yi Yŏm (李鹽), to offer condolences with an imperial edict, and posthumously honored him with the title Munhŏn (文憲).
Although the Master's official career and the achievements established during that time are not detailed here, in summary, the Master was highly esteemed by his contemporaries for his character and literary skill. While serving through the five reigns of Mokchong, Hyŏnjong, Tŏkchong, Chŏngjong, and Munjong, he was always a pillar of the state and nation. Among them, King Munjong particularly admired and trusted the Master, often comparing him in imperial edicts and official documents (詔書와 官誥) to the Eight Primes (八元) of Emperor Yao and the Four Sages (四子) of the House of Ji (姬室, Zhou dynasty).

The Master Establishes Schools and Raises Teachers
Before discussing the Master's establishment of schools and raising of teachers, let me first say a word about the trends in Koryŏ culture at that time.
According to historical records (史), Silla culture after the unification of the Three Kingdoms was entirely interwoven with the two forces of Confucianism (儒道) and Buddhism (佛敎). Among these, Confucianism, primarily concerned with the practicalities of rites and music (禮樂), punishments and administration (刑政), and self-cultivation, family regulation, state governance, and bringing peace to the world (修齊治平), served as a reference and guarantee for the establishment and maintenance of general cultural institutions and supported the external rituals of people at the time. Buddhism, primarily concerned with refuge (歸依), vows (發願), abstinence (禁欲), liberation (解脫), and shrines (神社), supported the internal faith of all classes, high and low. When Silla fell and Koryŏ took its place, this situation did not change. Furthermore, at that time, there was no perceived need to change either the rituals of Confucianism or the beliefs of Buddhism. Not only that, but the general populace accepted this situation as natural, believing that the way to govern the state and family or, upon withdrawal, to live out one's personal life virtuously, lay entirely in the proper guidance of this situation. The attitude and policies of King T'aejo Wang Kŏn (麗太祖 王氏), a preeminent figure of his time, fully illustrate this. Although he himself deeply believed in Buddhism, trusted the entire geomantic prognostication (圖懺) of the monk Tosŏn (道詵), took the monk Ch'ungdam (忠湛) as his teacher, consulting him on all military and state affairs, <103> established the P'algwanhoe (八關會, Festival of the Eight Vows), held the Yŏndŭnghoe (燃燈會, Lantern Festival), supported monks, and recognized "Our dynasty's great enterprise necessarily relies on the protective power of the Buddhas; the seizure and exchange of Sŏn and Kyo school temples should be forbidden" as the first article of his Ten Injunctions for Governing the State (治國要訓), he nevertheless also revered the culture, rites, and music of the Tang style. He particularly displayed the "Wu Yi" (無逸, Against Luxurious Ease) chapter from the Book of Documents by the Duke of Zhou (周公) on his left and right to reflect upon when entering and exiting. Not long after ascending the throne, he specifically traveled to P'yŏngyang to establish a school. In his 13th year, he appointed the scholar Chŏng Ong (廷鶚) as Doctor of Calligraphy (書學博士), separately founded an academy (學院), gathered students from the six departments (六部), and had them discourse on Confucian learning, specially providing colored silks and granary grain to encourage this, leading to a temporary flourishing of the academic atmosphere (學風). In this way, King T'aejo freely opened both Confucianism and Buddhism, seeking their balanced development, intending to use Confucianism to aid in the initial establishment of the dynasty's cultural institutions and Buddhism to help gather the hearts of the people from the late Silla period. This national policy (國是) became a model for successive kings and ministers, generally pervading the governance of the nation for 340 years from the beginning of King T'aejo's reign until the 46th year of King Kojong, when the Yuan dynasty era name began to be used.
However, things do not always proceed smoothly according to ideals. The royal family's national policy of regulating general conduct through the civilized governance (文治) of Confucianism and controlling general sentiment through Confucian beliefs did not unfold as planned. The common folk in the alleys (閭巷) increasingly drifted into superstition (迷信), avoiding labor by becoming monks (僧) and abandoning their families to become nuns (尼), resulting in a continuous stream of people ruining their homes and fortunes (毁家破産). Even among those ranked as scholar-officials (士大夫), except for a few, most esteemed Buddhist practices under a Confucian name (儒名에 佛行), making it difficult to expect the establishment of a sound popular ethos (民風). Thus, the 4th king, Kwangjong (光宗), and the 6th king, Sŏngjong (成宗), mainly focused on civilizing education (文敎), establishing the state examination system (科擧), and greatly promoting the National Academy (國學). The 8th king, Hyŏnjong (顯宗), forbade women from becoming nuns. The 11th king, Munjong (文宗), with his brilliant insight and far-reaching ambition, particularly focused on promulgating civilized rule (文治). He dismissed petty men, promoted talented individuals, had the Nine Classics (九經) and other works stored in the Royal Library (秘閣) printed, placed one set each in various academies (諸學院), personally visited the National Academy (國子監), and paid respects twice at the Confucian shrine (文廟), exhausting all his sincerity and effort to reverse the trend. However, the students of the time remained indolent in their studies, lacking diligence. The general populace became even more deluded by the Three Jewels (三寶, Buddha, Dharma, Sangha), not knowing where to stop. Thus, individuals concerned about the sound development of the nation and society faced a moment ripe for a sudden uprising.
At this time, the Master [Ch'oe Ch'ung] determined that the great way to turn back the raging tide of the era lay in the propagation of Confucian culture (儒道文化). He believed that its spread could not be achieved solely through governmental power but required awaiting the flourishing of private academies (私學). Resolving upon this, he dedicated himself to teaching later generations. Students gathered in droves (坌集), filling the streets and alleys (巷街에 塡溢). Consequently, he divided them among nine academies (九齋) - Laksŏng (樂聖), Taejung (大中), Sŏngmyŏng (誠明), Kyŏngŏp (敬業), Chodo (造道), Solsŏng (率性), Chindŏk (進德), <104> Taehwa (大和), Sip'yŏng (侍聘) - to meet the demand for instruction. Contemporaries referred to the students of these nine academies as the "Disciples of Sijung Ch'oe Kong" (侍中崔公의 徒) and generally treated them with special courtesy. Every year during the summer months (暑月), he borrowed rooms from Buddhist temples (法寺) to conduct summer classes (夏課). He selected those among his disciples who had passed the state examinations or those with excellent learning yet to hold office to take charge of teaching, instructing them in the Five Classics (五經) and Three Histories (三史). Occasionally, when senior scholars passed by, the custom of composing poems by candlelight (刻燭賦詩) was practiced. Their precedence and quality were assessed, and names were called out according to the ranking on a list (榜). Small banquets were held where, amidst young students lined up left and right, rites of bowing and yielding, advancing and retreating (揖讓進退) were performed, enjoying the whole day before returning to the capital (洛) at dusk. Onlookers were invariably filled with admiration (莫不感嘆). After the Master passed away, the scholars registered in these nine academies were called the Munhŏn Kongdo (文憲公徒, Disciples of Lord Munhŏn).
In this way, the Master dedicated his efforts to establishing private schools and nurturing talent, working tirelessly (孜孜不倦). This became an object of admiration at the time, and other Confucian officials largely followed his example, each establishing schools and fostering scholars. Notable examples include the Hongmun Kongdo (弘文公徒) of Sijung Chŏng Pae-kŏl (鄭倍傑), the Kwanghŏn Kongdo (匡憲公徒) of Ch'amjŏng No Cho (盧朝), the Namsan To (南山徒) of Chesu Kim Sang-bin (金尙賓), the Sŏwŏn To (西園徒) of Poksya Kim Mu-chae (金無滯), the Munch'ung Kongdo (文忠公徒) of Sijung Kim Ŭn-jŏng (金殷鼎), the Yangsin Kongdo (良愼公徒) of P'yŏngjang Kim Ŭi-jin (金義珍), the Chŏnggyŏng Kongdo (貞敬公徒) of P'yŏngjang Hwang Hyŏng (黃瑩), the Ch'ungp'yŏng Kongdo (忠平公徒) of Yu Kam (柳監), the Chŏnghŏn Kongdo (貞憲公徒) of Sijung Mun Chŏng (文正), the Sŏ Sirang To (徐侍郞徒) of Sŏ Sŏk (徐碩), and the Kusan To (龜山徒) whose founder's name is unknown. Together with the Munhŏn Kongdo, these were called the Twelve To (12徒), among which the Munhŏn Kongdo was said to be the most prosperous.

Appendix
Regarding the "Chiguk Yŏhun" (治國要訓) mentioned in this section: In the 26th year of Koryŏ T'aejo Wang, the King personally wrote the Ten Injunctions for Governing the State (治國訓要十條) to pass down to his successors. They are: (1) Our dynasty's great enterprise necessarily relies on the protective power of the Buddhas; the seizure and exchange of Sŏn and Kyo school temples should be forbidden. (2) Temples other than those designated by Tosŏn should not be recklessly built. (3) Passing the state to the eldest son is the usual propriety, but if the crown prince is unworthy, give it to his next son. (4) We have long admired Tang ways; culture, rites, and music should all follow their system. The Khitan are a nation of beasts; be careful not to imitate them. (5) Sŏgyŏng (西京, Pyongyang) is the root of our country's geomantic energy (地脉); you should tour and reside there for over 100 days during the four middle months of the seasons. (6) The Lantern Festival (燃燈) is for serving the Buddha; the P'algwanhoe (八關) is for worshipping the spirits of Heaven, famous mountains, great rivers, and dragon gods. Additions or reductions [to these festivals] should be forbidden. (7) To win the hearts of subjects and people, listen to counsel and distance yourself from slander. Also, employ the people according to the seasons, lighten corvée and taxes; then you will naturally gain the people's hearts, the country will be rich, and the people peaceful. (8) South of Ch'ahyŏn (車峴), the terrain is inauspicious (地勢背逆); people from those southern prefectures and counties should not hold positions of authority. (9) In safety, do not forget danger; soldiers should be cared for and protected. Reduce their corvée duties appropriately. Every autumn, train and inspect the brave and elite. (10) The "Wu Yi" chapter by the Duke of Zhou should be illustrated and displayed; reflect upon it when entering and exiting.

The Master's Writings
Now, to imagine the Master's visage more closely, <105> one piece each of his prose and poetry, composed in his own hand, are presented below.

Record of Pongson Honggyŏng Temple (奉先弘慶寺記)
Your servant humbly notes that the inner scriptures (內典, Buddhist texts) state that *chaoti* (招提) means inviting and guiding outstanding talents from the ten directions to reside and broadly expound the Buddhist law. Also, Zhuangzi set up a temporary hut (*lu*, 廬) to observe benevolence and righteousness, and the Book of Jin discusses inns (逆旅) to facilitate public and private affairs. The newly established temple north of Sŏnggwan Station (成觀驛) in Chiksan County (稷山縣), about a cow's bellow away, is of this kind. The land has no long or short pavilions, human habitation is distant, there are marshes with bananas and cattails (蕉蒲之澤), and bandits (刦賊) are quite numerous. Situated at a crucial junction of diverging roads (歧路之要衝), it is truly inconvenient for travelers. This could not ultimately be left unattended in a flourishing age. Our sovereign Lord, maintaining his position with benevolence and upholding the virtue of civility, has laid down spears and shields, halberds and axes (干戈戚揚). Rites, music, punishments, and administration are all perfected. As for meritorious deeds of joyous donation (喜捨之綠) and pursuing endeavors (遹追之業), searching past generations reveals none who surpass him. He once commanded the Supreme Monks (都僧錄) of the left and right districts, Great Master Sinhaeng Kyŏng (臣逈兢), whose titles are T'ongjin Kwanggyo Wŏnje Hongdo (通眞光敎圓濟弘道), saying: "Formerly, the Imperial Father, King Anjong Hŏn'gyŏng Hyo'ŭi Yŏngmun the Great (皇考安宗憲景孝懿英文大王), initially hid his status and devoted his life to the thousand sages (丈千歸命). Whenever he read the marvelous teachings of the Buddhist schools (法輩之妙說), he deeply appreciated the transformative citadel of the middle path (中道之化城). He wished to put this into practice but could not achieve it. I shall skillfully continue his aspiration and eternally behold its completion. Firstly, to rescue travelers so they need not worry about dangerous places; secondly, to gather monks (緇侶) to turn the Dharma wheel (法輪). Master, you should strive to supervise and assist, personally overseeing the planning (胥字), fulfilling my written command, and taking charge of managing the construction (盧事之權)." Kyŏng received the imperial words and promptly planned the layout, tireless through nine turns, needing a hundred legs yet not faltering. Valuing the command, he called upon talented individuals. There were Great Master Kwangni Chŭnghyŏn (廣利證玄), purple-robed śramaṇa (沙門) Tŭkch'ong (臣得聰); Great Master Chŏngno Suchin Ori Mundŏk (靜盧修眞悟理文德), purple-robed śramaṇa Changnim (臣藏琳), and others who competed to support the endeavor (扶顚轂), divined the best location (枚卜要途), and came with fervent enthusiasm (蒸烈來斯), truly sharing the work with me. His Majesty further dispatched Meritorious Subject Kangsŏng Ch'iri Iktae (推誠致理翊戴功臣), Grand Master of Imperial Banquets with Golden Seal and Purple Ribbon (金紫興祿大夫), Minister of War (兵部尙書), Manager of Chungch'uwon Affairs (知中樞院事) concurrently Senior Tutor to the Crown Prince (太子太傳), Supreme Pillar of State (上柱國), Founding Baron of Ch'ŏnsu County (天水縣開國男) with a fief of 200 households, Kang Min-ch'ŏm (姜民瞻); and Vice-Commissioner of the Chungch'uwon (中樞副使), Grand Master of the Court (中大夫), Director of the Palace Library (秘書監) concurrently Guest Tutor to the Crown Prince (太子賓客), Pillar of State (柱國), Founding Baron of Sŏnch'un County (宣春縣門國男) with a fief of 300 households, granted the Golden Seal and Purple Fish Pouch (賜金紫魚袋), Kim Maeng (臣金猛), etc., as special supervisors (別監使). Thus, the work proceeded harmoniously, slander ceased, and pride was appropriate. Laborers were gathered without disrupting the farming season (勿奪於農時), and expenses were managed without burdening the public treasury (勿免煩於公帑). Potters provided tiles, carpenters supplied timber. Artisans with inspired axes and wind-like adzes (靈鉅風斤) gathered like bees, and crowds of idle hands (游手之羣) rushed forth with cloud-like shovels and lightning-fast mattocks (雲鍬電鍤). Starting in the autumn of the Pyŏngjin year (丙辰) and finishing by the Sinyu year (辛酉), a total of over 200 *kan* (間, bays) of halls, gates, corridors, etc., were built. The sculpted and painted images of various meritorious deeds (功德像), bells (鍾), gongs (盤), banners (幡), and canopies (盖) are all present as seen, truly numerous. It was granted the name plaque Ponsŏn Honggyŏng Temple (奉先弘慶寺). Everyone felt its urgency, its form seemed to fly in, the image hall and scripture repository (經樓) are splendidly different, appearing like Tuṣita heaven (兜率). The duck bells (鳧鍾) and goose pagoda (雁塔) are solemn, remotely resembling Laṅka (爛陁, possibly Lanka/Ceylon). Since the Three Jewels (三寶) are flourishing, a thousand lamps can truly continue in succession. Also, west of the temple, facing it, a guest lodge (客舘) was established, occupying one section (區) with ten *kan*, named Kwangnok T'onghwa Wŏn (廣綠通化院). This provides warm lodging in winter and cool rooms in summer (溫廬冬凉屋夏), generously stocked with provisions (糇粮), stored with autumn chrysanthemums (菊秋), offering relief to the poor and needy (施賙窮急) like Yongbo's comforting gruel (雍伯之戚漿), guarding against thieves and villains (防備盜奸) like the watchtowers of Chenliu (陳留之摟戴). Thus, not only will tonsured monks (方袍之象) find real refuge instead of empty travel, but also travelers with bound feet (裏足之徒) can rest day and night (宵盤晝憩), ultimately seeing the realm of true realization (證眞之境) without hearing of the peril of burning stops (焚次之虞). If we had not drawn from antiquity and followed the present, fulfilling the great vow of the former king and teaching the profound gate of that Buddha's teachings according to circumstances, would this benevolence of benefiting both [monks and travelers] not have ceased? Alas! The beginning was small, but the continuation is endless. The merit of building upon the foundation (肯構之功) already exists, and the way of carrying it out (奉行之道) is also broad. Utterly good and beautiful, reflecting on this now, I command a Confucian student (儒生) to record these great deeds. I, with my slow and dull mouth (遲燥吻) and shallow learning like chewing dregs (學淺嚼筯), am incapable of composing refined descriptive prose (形似之文). Yet, this humble work of mine dares to emulate. I briefly record the essentials to be enshrined in the precious records (裸寶錄). At this time, the eighteenth year of His Majesty's reign, the sixth year of the T'aep'yŏng era (太平紀曆). Recorded respectfully on a day in the fourth month of summer.

Shown to Guests at My Seat (示座客)
The waterside pavilion's wind-blown lattice bitterly invites me, (水閣風欞苦見招)
Years pass amidst piles of documents. (簿書叢裏度流年)
The season of red cherries and purple bamboo shoots is about to pass, <106> (朱櫻紫笋時將過)
Red hibiscus and crimson pomegranate blossoms are also lovely. (紅槿丹榴態亦姸)
Long ill, I dislike inviting guests for drinks, (病久却嫌邀客飮)
Lazy by nature, I especially love sleeping while listening to orioles. (性慵偏喜聽鶯眠)
Fine seasons and fair days can never be repeated, (良辰佳日終難再)
Quickly chase the blooming flowers and become a drunken immortal. (急趂花開作醉仙)

Conclusion
As recorded above, with his firm and upright character (堅貞한 性操), imposing appearance (魁偉한 風姿), and outstanding literary talent (優秀한 文學), he stood solemnly in the halls of government (廟堂). Before, he devoted significant effort to the promulgation of civil governance (文政), and later, he exerted his utmost sincerity for the spread of civilizing education (文敎). Although, due to Koryŏ's national policy (國是) and the popular customs (民習) of the time, the civil governance and education he aimed for may not have thoroughly permeated the general populace, that was due to circumstances (勢) and fate (命). It cannot be debated; he simply did all that he could do. The effects were indeed not in vain. During his time, a flourishing of the academic atmosphere (學風의 蔚興) was seen. The great seeds sown then did not perish over the many subsequent generations but remained unbroken (綿綿不滅), implicitly creating the cause for the burgeoning of Neo-Confucianism (理學) in late Koryŏ. He demonstrated with the clearest facts that the great power of private academies (私學) outside the National Academy (國學) could not be underestimated. The fact that he showed through his own actions that the enterprise of education (敎育의 事業) is far more suitable than any other endeavor for rescuing the ways of the world and the hearts of the people is something particularly moving for us today (今日의 우리에게 잇서 特히 感激不措할 바이라). Is it merely coincidental that the world calls him the Confucius of the East Sea (海東孔子) and the King of Private Education (私學의 王)? <107>

**Summary**

This 1921 article from the magazine *Kae Pyŏk* celebrates Ch'oe Ch'ung (984-1068), a highly influential scholar-official of the Koryŏ Dynasty. It details his long and distinguished career serving five kings, highlighting his integrity, scholarship, and administrative achievements. The core focus is on Ch'oe Ch'ung's response to what the author perceives as the negative influence of Buddhism's prevalence and the inadequacy of state-sponsored Confucian education. Ch'oe Ch'ung established nine renowned private academies (the Kujae or 九齋), fostering Confucian learning and producing many capable individuals, earning him the title "King of Eastern Private Education" and comparisons to Confucius. The article includes a transcription of a temple record and a poem attributed to Ch'oe Ch'ung and concludes by emphasizing the lasting impact of his dedication to private education on Korean intellectual history, particularly in laying the groundwork for later Neo-Confucianism.

From the perspective of Korean colonial history, this article is significant. Published in 1921, a period of intensified Japanese assimilation policies following the 1919 March First Movement, elevating a historical Korean figure known for *private* educational initiatives carries potential subtext. It implicitly promotes Korean national pride and cultural identity by celebrating indigenous intellectual achievement and educational autonomy, potentially serving as a form of cultural resistance against colonial attempts to control education and history. Highlighting Ch'oe Ch'ung as a "Confucius of the East Sea" positions Korea as a center of civilization independent of external influence, subtly challenging Japanese narratives of Korean backwardness.

**Named Entities**

崔冲	최충	Ch'oe Ch'ung
浩然	호연	Hoyŏn
惶齋	황재	Hwangjae
高麗	고려	Koryŏ
成宗	성종	Sŏngjong
宋	송	Song (Dynasty)
海州大寧郡	해주대녕군	Haeju Taenyŏng County
穆宗	목종	Mokchong
顯宗	현종	Hyŏnjong
德宗	덕종	Tŏkchong
漢	한	Han (Dynasty)
靖宗	정종	Chŏngjong
寧遠	영원	Yŏngwŏn
平虜	평로	P'yŏngno
文宗	문종	Munjong
三韓	삼한	Samhan (Three Han)
金元鼎	김원정	Kim Wŏnjŏng
王懋崇	왕무숭	Wang Mu-sung
李鹽	이염	Yi Yŏm
文憲	문헌	Munhŏn
姚皇	요황	Emperor Yao
姬室	희실	House of Ji (Zhou Dynasty)
新羅	신라	Silla
儒道	유도	Confucianism
佛敎	불교	Buddhism
麗太祖 王氏	여태조 왕씨	King T'aejo Wang Kŏn of Koryŏ
道詵	도선	Tosŏn
忠湛	충담	Ch'ungdam
八關會	팔관회	P'algwanhoe (Festival of the Eight Vows)
燃燈會	연등회	Yŏndŭnghoe (Lantern Festival)
唐	당	Tang (Dynasty)
周公	주공	Duke of Zhou
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
廷鶚	정악	Chŏng Ong
六部	육부	Yukpu (Six Departments)
高宗	고종	Kojong
元	원	Yuan (Dynasty)
光宗	광종	Kwangjong
國學	국학	Kuk hak (National Academy)
九經	구경	Ku kyŏng (Nine Classics)
秘閣	비각	Pigak (Royal Library)
國子監	국자감	Kukchagam (National Academy)
文廟	문묘	Munmyo (Confucian Shrine)
三寶	삼보	Sambo (Three Jewels of Buddhism)
樂聖	낙성	Naksŏng (Academy Name)
大中	대중	Taejung (Academy Name)
誠明	성명	Sŏngmyŏng (Academy Name)
敬業	경업	Kyŏngŏp (Academy Name)
造道	조도	Chodo (Academy Name)
率性	솔성	Solsŏng (Academy Name)
進德	진덕	Chindŏk (Academy Name)
大和	대화	Taehwa (Academy Name)
侍聘	시빙	Sip'yŏng (Academy Name)
九齋	구재	Kujae (Nine Academies)
侍中崔公	시중최공	Sijung Ch'oe Kong (Lord Ch'oe, the Sijung)
文憲公徒	문헌공도	Munhŏn Kongdo (Disciples of Lord Munhŏn)
鄭倍傑	정배걸	Chŏng Pae-kŏl
弘文公徒	홍문공도	Hongmun Kongdo
盧朝	노조	No Cho
匡憲公徒	광헌공도	Kwanghŏn Kongdo
金尙賓	김상빈	Kim Sang-bin
南山徒	남산도	Namsan To
金無滯	김무체	Kim Mu-chae
西園徒	서원도	Sŏwŏn To
金殷鼎	김은정	Kim Ŭn-jŏng
文忠公徒	문충공도	Munch'ung Kongdo
金義珍	김의진	Kim Ŭi-jin
良愼公徒	양신공도	Yangsin Kongdo
黃瑩	황형	Hwang Hyŏng
貞敬公徒	정경공도	Chŏnggyŏng Kongdo
柳監	유감	Yu Kam
忠平公徒	충평공도	Ch'ungp'yŏng Kongdo
文正	문정	Mun Chŏng
貞憲公徒	정헌공도	Chŏnghŏn Kongdo
徐碩	서석	Sŏ Sŏk
徐侍郞徒	서시랑도	Sŏ Sirang To
龜山徒	구산도	Kusan To
12徒	12도	Sibido (Twelve Schools/Discipleships)
治國要訓	치국요훈	Chiguk Yŏhun (Ten Injunctions)
西京	서경	Sŏgyŏng (Pyongyang)
車峴	차현	Ch'ahyŏn
奉先弘慶寺	봉선홍경사	Pongsŏn Honggyŏng Temple
稷山縣	직산현	Chiksan County
成觀驛	성관역	Sŏnggwan Station
莊子	장자	Zhuangzi
晋書	진서	Book of Jin
逈兢	형긍	Hyŏnggŭng
安宗憲景孝懿英文大王	안종헌경효의영문대왕	King Anjong Hŏn'gyŏng Hyo'ŭi Yŏngmun the Great
得聰	득총	Tŭkch'ong
藏琳	장림	Changnim
姜民瞻	강민첨	Kang Min-ch'ŏm
天水縣	천수현	Ch'ŏnsu County
金猛	김맹	Kim Maeng
宣春縣	선춘현	Sŏnch'un County
廣綠通化院	광록통화원	Kwangnok T'onghwa Wŏn
海東孔子	해동공자	Haedong Kongja (Confucius of the East Sea)

**Glossary**

先生	선생	Master, Teacher (honorific)
字	자	Courtesy name
號	호	Pen name, sobriquet
距今	거금	Ago from the present
卽	즉	Namely, that is
風姿	풍자	Appearance, bearing
魁偉	괴외	Imposing, grand
性操	성조	Character, disposition
貞堅	정견	Upright and firm
少時	소시	Youth, young days (older term)
學	학	Learning, study
好하다	좋아하다	To like, to be fond of (older conjugation '好하야')
屬文	속문	Composing texts, writing
善하다	잘하다	To be good at (older conjugation '善하얏다')
選擢되엇스며	선발되었으며	Was selected (older spelling/passive form)
歷任하다	역임하다	To serve successively in posts
轉職하얏다	전직하였다	Was transferred (older spelling)
奏하다	주하다	To report to the throne, memorialize
일즉	일찍	Early, previously (older form)
時	시	Time, era
壁	벽	Wall
文	문	Text, writing
令	령	Order, command, edict
書하다	쓰다	To write (older form '書하얏던')
年代	연대	Years, era
久遠하다	구원하다	To be long past, ancient
荒廢하다	황폐하다	To fall into ruin, become dilapidated (older form '荒廢하얏슨')
맛당히	마땅히	Fittingly, properly (older spelling)
更書	갱서	To rewrite
揭示하다	게시하다	To post, display
臣下	신하	Vassal, subject
飭勵하다	칙려하다	To admonish, encourage
道	도	Way, path, principle
知하게 하지	알게 하지	Let (them) know (older construction)
從하다	좇다, 따르다	To follow, comply with (older form '從하얏스며')
朝	조	Reign, dynasty, court
拓定하다	척정하다	To delimit, establish boundaries (for construction)
鎭	진	Military fort, garrison town
堡	보	Smaller fort, garrison
되엇스며	되었으며	Became (older spelling)
卽位하다	즉위하다	To ascend the throne
一躍	일약	At one leap, suddenly
太傅	태부	Grand Tutor (high official title)
賜하다	사하다	To bestow, grant (by a superior)
功臣號	공신호	Meritorious Subject Title
當時	당시	At that time
奏하다	주하다	To report to the throne, memorialize
去歲	거세	Last year (older term)
禾穀	화곡	Grain crops
不登하다	부등하다	To fail (of crops), not ripen
百姓	백성	The common people
貧乏하다	빈핍하다	To be poor, destitute
男	남	Man
徭役	요역	Corvée labor
困하다	곤하다	To suffer, be distressed
女	녀	Woman
徵糶	징조	Grain levy, tax in kind
請컨대	청컨대	I request that... (older form)
地池	지지	Ponds and dikes (local irrigation)
修繕하다	수선하다	To repair, mend
以外	이외	Except for, other than
一切	일절	All, entirely
工役	공역	Construction work
禁斷케 하자	금단케 하자	Let's prohibit (older imperative)
京舘	경관	Capital guesthouses (for foreign envoys, etc.)
抑留하다	억류하다	To detain
東女眞	동여진	Eastern Jurchens
酋長	추장	Chieftain
放還하다	방환하다	To release and send back
恩義	은의	Grace and righteousness
誠服하다	성복하다	To sincerely submit
意	의	Intention, meaning
如意하다	여의하다	As intended, according to one's wishes (older form '如意하얏스며')
年滿	연만	Full of years, old age
老耗	노모	Old age and exhaustion (older term '老耗를')
理由	이유	Reason
退鄕	퇴향	Retirement to one's hometown
乞하다	걸하다	To beg, request (older form '乞하얏스나')
儒宗	유종	Great Confucian scholar, master
老德	노덕	Venerable elder, elder statesman
참아	차마	Cannot bear to
允從하다	윤종하다	To permit, grant
几杖	궤장	Stool and staff (granted to aged high officials)
視事케 하얏스며	시사케 하였으며	Made (him) oversee affairs (older causative)
太師	태사	Grand Preceptor (highest official title)
兼	겸	Concurrently
內史令	내사령	Director of the Chancellery (high official title)
顯位	현위	Prominent position
加하다	가하다	To add, bestow additionally
致仕케 하되	치사케 하되	Allowing retirement with honor, but... (older form)
特히	특히	Especially, specially (older spelling)
使者	사자	Envoy, messenger
第	제	Residence (of a high official)
就케 하야	나아가게 하여	Making (them) go to (older causative)
懇篤하다	간독하다	Sincere and earnest
詔書	조서	Imperial edict
衣帶	의대	Clothing and belt
銀器	은기	Silverware
綵段	채단	Colored silk fabrics
布貨	포화	Cloth currency
鞍馬	안마	Saddled horse
幷賜하다	병사하다	To bestow together/additionally
居家하다	거가하다	To reside at home
以後	이후	Afterwards
朝廷	조정	Royal court
軍國大事	군국대사	Important military and state affairs
悉皆	실개	Entirely, all
就咨하다	취자하다	To go and consult
累加하다	누가하다	To add repeatedly
日月이 不興하야	세월이 불행하여	Unfortunately, as time passed (idiomatic, lit. 'sun and moon did not prosper')
高齡	고령	Advanced age
世를 辭하다	세상을 떠나다	To leave the world, pass away (euphemism)
差遣하다	차견하다	To dispatch (an official)
吊를 致하다	조의를 표하다	To offer condolences
謚하다	시호하다	To bestow a posthumous name
曰	왈	Said, called (classical particle)
官歷	관력	Official career
樹立하다	수립하다	To establish, set up
事功	사공	Achievements, meritorious deeds
詳述하다	상술하다	To describe in detail
約하다	요약하다	To summarize
言하면	말하면	Speaking of, if one says
人格	인격	Character, personality
文章	문장	Writing, literary skill
當世	당세	That time, contemporary period
推重하다	추중하다	To esteem highly
歷事하다	역사하다	To serve through (reigns)
間	간	During, interval
恒是	항시	Always, constantly (older form)
家國	가국	Family and state, the nation
棟樑	동량	Ridgepole and beam; pillar (of the state)
慕仰하다	모앙하다	To admire, look up to
信任하다	신임하다	To trust
官誥	관고	Official patent of appointment
文句	문구	Wording, phrase
每樣	매양	Always, often (older form)
擬하다	의하다	To compare to, liken to
斯文	사문	This writing; Confucianism, Confucian scholars
建學立師	건학입사	Establishing schools and raising teachers
推移	추이	Transition, change, trend
徵하다	징하다	To seek evidence from, consult
統一	통일	Unification
以後	이후	After
全혀	전혀	Entirely, completely (older spelling)
勢力	세력	Force, power, influence
經緯되엇스며	경위되었으며	Was interwoven, structured (older spelling)
禮樂	예악	Rites and music
刑政	형정	Punishments and administration
修齊治平	수제치평	Self-cultivation, family regulation, state governance, world peace (Confucian stages)
實際	실제	Reality, practice
大部	대부	Large part, majority
內容	내용	Content(s)
一般	일반	General, common
文物制度	문물제도	Cultural institutions and systems
建立	건립	Establishment, founding
及	급	And (classical connective)
保持	보지	Maintenance, preservation
對한	대한	Regarding, concerning
叅考	참고	Reference (older Hanja)
保障	보장	Guarantee, security
當時	당시	At that time
人間	인간	Human, person; society
外的	외적	External
儀式	의식	Ritual, ceremony
支持하다	지지하다	To support
歸依	귀의	Taking refuge (in Buddhism)
發願	발원	Making a vow (in Buddhism)
禁欲	금욕	Abstinence, asceticism
解脫	해탈	Liberation (in Buddhism)
神社	신사	Shrine (here likely referring to Buddhist sacred places/concepts rather than Shinto)
信仰	신앙	Faith, belief
上下一般	상하일반	High and low alike, all classes
內的	내적	Internal
亡하다	망하다	To fall, perish (of a dynasty)
代하다	대하다	To replace, take the place of
形便	형편	Situation, circumstances (older usage)
變하다	변하다	To change
必要	필요	Need, necessity
感치 아니하엿섯스며	느끼지 아니하였으며	Did not feel (older negative past form)
뿐아니라	뿐 아니라	Not only that
當然하다	당연하다	Natural, a matter of course
是認하다	시인하다	To acknowledge, approve
나아가	나아가	Advancing, going forward
治하다	다스리다	To govern
물러와	물러와	Retreating, stepping back
個身	개신	Individual self, one's own person
始終	시종	Beginning and end; one's life course
善히 하다	잘 하다	To do well, make good
全혀	전혀	Entirely (older spelling)
善導	선도	Good guidance
態度	태도	Attitude
政策	정책	Policy
全容	전용	Full picture, entirety
認하다	인하다	To recognize, perceive
個身	개신	Oneself, individual
深信하다	심신하다	To believe deeply
圖懺	도참	Geomantic prognostication texts
師事하다	사사하다	To serve as a teacher
諮詢하다	자순하다	To consult
行하다	행하다	To do, perform, carry out
設하다	설하다	To establish, set up
供養하다	공양하다	To make offerings, support (monks)
我國	아국	Our country
大業	대업	Great enterprise, undertaking
必資	필자	Necessarily rely on
諸佛	제불	All Buddhas
保護	보호	Protection
之力	지력	Power of
禪敎寺院	선교사원	Sŏn (Zen) and Kyo (Doctrinal) school temples
宜禁	의금	Should be forbidden
換奪	환탈	Exchange and seizure
治國要訓	치국요훈	Injunctions for Governing the State
第1條	제1조	Article 1
認하다	인하다	To recognize, consider
不拘하고	불구하고	Despite, nevertheless
更히	다시	Again, furthermore (older form)
是崇하다	시숭하다	To revere, esteem
特히	특히	Especially (older spelling)
無逸一篇	무일일편	The "Wu Yi" chapter (from Book of Documents)
左右	좌우	Left and right
圖揭하다	도게하다	To illustrate and display
出入	출입	Entering and exiting
觀省하다	관성하다	To observe and reflect
未幾	미기	Not long after
委혀	굳이, 특별히	Specifically, particularly (older form, possibly dialectal or archaic)
幸行하다	행행하다	To make an imperial visit
創置하다	창치하다	To establish, found
秀才	수재	Talented scholar (examination degree)
拜하다	배하다	To appoint (to office)
別로	별로	Separately
學院	학원	Academy, school
招集하다	초집하다	To gather, summon
講論케 하되	강론케 하되	Having (them) discourse on (older causative)
與하다	주다	To give, provide
獎勵하다	장려하다	To encourage
學風	학풍	Academic atmosphere, scholarly trend
蔚興하다	울흥하다	To flourish, prosper
兩敎	양교	Two teachings (Confucianism and Buddhism)
自由開放하다	자유개방하다	To freely open
均等	균등	Equality, balance
發達	발달	Development
圖하다	도모하다	To plan, seek
國初	국초	Beginning of the dynasty
草創	초창	Initial establishment
資하다	자하다	To utilize, rely on
羅末	나말	End of the Silla dynasty
人心	인심	People's hearts, popular sentiment
收攬	수람	Gathering, winning over
國是	국시	National policy
後	후	After
歷代	역대	Successive generations/reigns
王相	왕상	Kings and ministers
龜鑑	귀감	Model, exemplar
大盖	대개	Generally, mostly (older form)
精神	정신	Spirit, ethos
一貫하다	일관하다	To pervade, be consistent throughout
凡事	범사	All matters, everything
理想	이상	Ideal
고이고이	곱게곱게	Smoothly, neatly (reduplicative adverb)
儀容	의용	Demeanor, conduct
整齊히	정제히	Orderly, neatly (older spelling)
心情	심정	Feeling, sentiment
支配코저	지배하고자	Intending to control (older desiderative form)
王家	왕가	Royal family
閭巷	여항	Alleys and streets; common people
羣庶	군서	The masses, common folk (older term)
日로	날로	Day by day
迷信	미신	Superstition
流하다	흐르다	To flow, drift into
役	역	Labor service, corvée
避하다	피하다	To avoid
僧	승	Buddhist monk
家庭	가정	Family, household
叛하다	반하다	To rebel against, abandon
尼	니	Buddhist nun
等	등	Etc., and so on
毁家破産	훼가파산	Ruining one's family and fortune
者	자	Person, one who
續出하다	속출하다	To appear continuously
士大夫	사대부	Scholar-official class
列	렬	Rank, row
立한 者	선 자	One who stands (in the ranks)
少數	소수	Small number, minority
除한 以外	제한 이외	Except for, excluding
儒名에 佛行	유명에 불행	Buddhist practice under a Confucian name
是尙하다	시상하다	To esteem, advocate
健全하다	건전하다	Sound, healthy
民風	민풍	Popular customs, ethos
樹立	수립	Establishment
期하기 難하매	기하기 난하매	As it was difficult to expect (older form)
主로	주로	Mainly, primarily
文敎	문교	Civilizing education, literary culture
力을 致하다	힘을 다하다	To exert effort
科擧	과거	State examination system
制	제	System
大起하다	대기하다	To greatly promote, raise up
婦女	부녀	Women
尼僧	니승	Buddhist nun
禁斷하다	금단하다	To prohibit, forbid
英明	영명	Brilliant insight
宏遠	굉원	Far-reaching, grand
志	지	Ambition, will
布施	보시	Promulgation; almsgiving (Buddhist term used broadly here)
注力하다	주력하다	To focus effort on
小人	소인	Petty person, unworthy man
黜하다	출하다	To dismiss, expel
賢才	현재	Talented and virtuous person
擧하다	거하다	To raise, promote
所藏	소장	Collection, stored items
印刊하다	인간하다	To print and publish
各一秩式	각일질씩	One set each
置케 하고	두게 하고	Having (them) placed (older causative)
親幸하다	친행하다	To visit personally (by the emperor)
再拜하다	재배하다	To bow twice
誠力	성력	Sincerity and effort
盡傾하다	진경하다	To exhaust, pour out completely
大勢	대세	General trend, situation
挽回	만회	Recovery, reversal
努力하다	노력하다	To make an effort
諸生	제생	Various students
依然히	여전히	Still, as before
業	업	Studies, vocation
惰怠하다	타태하다	To be idle, negligent
勉强치 아니하며	면강치 아니하며	Not studying diligently (older negative form)
民衆	민중	The masses, populace
더욱이	더욱이	Furthermore, moreover
惑溺하다	혹닉하다	To be deluded and engrossed in
止할 바를 不知	그칠 바를 알지 못함	Not knowing where to stop
國家社會	국가사회	Nation and society
健全	건전	Soundness, health
發達	발달	Development
思하다	생각하다	To think, consider
人士	인사	Man of letters, intellectual, personage
幡然히	번연히	Suddenly, abruptly
起하다	일어나다	To rise, arise
機運	기운	Opportunity, favorable moment
際하다	제하다	To be at the time of, encounter
狂瀾을 挽回하다	광란을 만회하다	To turn back the raging tide
大道	대도	Great way, correct path
儒道文化	유도문화	Confucian culture
普及	보급	Spread, propagation
一便	일편	One side, one aspect; solely
官力	관력	Government power
期할 바가 아니오	기할 바가 아니오	Is not something to be expected
반듯이	반드시	Necessarily, surely (older spelling)
私學	사학	Private school(s), private learning
興旺	흥왕	Flourishing, prosperity
待하다	기다리다	To wait for
庶幾하다	서기하다	To hope for, be probable
決하다	결정하다	To decide, resolve
後進	후진	Later generations, younger scholars
敎誨	교회	Teaching, instruction
專從하다	전종하다	To devote oneself to
學徒	학도	Students, disciples
坌集하다	분집하다	To gather in crowds
巷街	항가	Streets and alleys
塡溢하다	진일하다	To fill up, overflow
分하다	나누다	To divide
敎導	교도	Teaching, guidance
應케하니	응하게 하니	Making (them) respond (older causative)
當世	당세	That time, contemporary period
指稱하다	지칭하다	To refer to, call
徒	도	Disciple(s), follower(s)
무릇	무릇	Generally, in all cases
境遇	경우	Circumstance, occasion
特히	특히	Especially (older spelling)
禮遇하다	예우하다	To treat with courtesy
每歲	매세	Every year
暑月	서월	Summer months
法寺	법사	Buddhist temple (Dharma temple)
僧房	승방	Monk's quarters
借得하다	차득하다	To borrow and obtain
夏課	하과	Summer classes/study session
及第	급제	Passing the state examination
學優未官者	학우미관자	One whose learning is excellent but not yet an official
擇하다	택하다	To choose, select
任	임	Duty, responsibility
當케 하고	맡게 하고	Making (them) take charge of (older causative)
五經三史	오경삼사	Five Classics and Three Histories
敎授하다	교수하다	To teach, instruct
때로	때로	Sometimes, occasionally
先進	선진	Senior, elder scholar
通過하다	통과하다	To pass by
刻燭賦詩	각촉부시	Composing poems by candlelight (timed competition)
例	례	Custom, practice
行하다	행하다	To perform, carry out
先後	선후	Order, precedence
優劣	우열	Superiority and inferiority
試擇하다	시택하다	To test and select
榜	방	List (of successful exam candidates, rankings)
次第	차제	Order, sequence
唱名하다	창명하다	To call out names
드리며	들리며	Entering (older passive/causative sense?) - context suggests 'presenting/announcing'
小宴	소연	Small banquet
設하다	설하다	To set up, hold
冠童	관동	Youth who has had capping ceremony; young student
羅列하다	나열하다	To line up, be arrayed
間	간	Among, between
揖讓進退	읍양진퇴	Rites of bowing, yielding, advancing, and retreating
終日	종일	All day long
즐기다	즐기다	To enjoy
日暮	일모	Dusk, sunset
歸洛하다	귀락하다	To return to the capital (Luoyang/Gaegyeong)
觀者	관자	Onlooker, spectator
莫不	막불	None who did not (double negative = all)
感嘆하다	감탄하다	To admire, marvel
棄世後	기세후	After passing away
籍中	적중	Within the register/rolls
置한 士子	둔 사자	Scholars placed/registered
稱하다	칭하다	To call, name
孜孜不倦	자자불권	Tirelessly, assiduously
人材	인재	Talented person, personnel
敎養	교양	Education, cultivation, nurturing
致하다	치하다	To exert, devote
推仰	추앙	Admiration, reverence
的	적	Target, object (of admiration)
其他	기타	Other
儒臣	유신	Confucian official
大槪로	대개로	Generally, mostly (older form)
倣하다	모방하다	To imitate, follow the example of
各各	각각	Each, respectively
建하다	세우다	To establish, build
士子	사자	Scholar, student
養하다	양성하다	To nurture, foster
祭酒	제주	Libationer (an academic title)
僕射	복야	Vice Director (official title)
侍中	시중	Grand Councilor (high official title)
平章	평장	Manager of Affairs (high official title)
未詳	미상	Unknown
著然하다	저연하다	Conspicuous, notable
倂稱하다	병칭하다	To call collectively
最盛하다	최성하다	Most flourishing, prosperous
本項中	본항중	Within this item/section
後嗣	후사	Successor, heir
傳케한 것	전하게 한 것	That which was transmitted (older causative)
地脉	지맥	Earth's energy lines (geomancy)
根本	근본	Root, foundation
四仲	사중	Four middle months of the seasons
巡駐	순주	To tour and reside
留過	유과	To stay over
祀る	제사지내다	To worship, perform rites for (Japanese verb used in Korean text annotation)
天靈	천령	Spirit of Heaven
名山大川	명산대천	Famous mountains and great rivers
龍神	용신	Dragon god
加减	가감	Addition and subtraction; modification
從諫	종간	Following counsel/remonstrance
遠讒	원참	Distancing from slander
使民以時	사민이시	Employing the people according to the seasons
輕徭薄賦	경요박부	Lightening corvée and taxes
自得	자득	Naturally obtain
民心	민심	People's hearts
國富民安	국부민안	Country rich and people peaceful
地勢	지세	Terrain, topography
背逆	배역	Inauspicious, rebellious (geomantic term)
彼下	피하	That lower (region)
州郡	주군	Prefectures and counties
在位	재위	To be in position (of authority)
用事	용사	To hold power, manage affairs
安不可忘危	안불가망위	In safety, one must not forget danger
兵卒	병졸	Soldiers
護恤	호휼	To protect and care for
量除	양제	To measure and exempt/reduce
訓閱	훈열	To train and inspect
勇銳	용예	Brave and elite (troops)
面影	면영	Face, visage, image
一層	일층	More, further
가까이	가까이	Closely
想念키	상념키	To think of, imagine (older form)
爲하야	위하여	For the sake of (older spelling)
親筆	친필	Own handwriting
成한	이룬	Composed, completed
詩	시	Poem
各1篇뿐을	각 1편뿐을	Only one piece each
揭記한다	게기한다	To post and record, present here
內典	내전	Inner scriptures (Buddhist texts)
招提	초제	Monastery, place inviting worthies (Buddhist term)
招引	초인	To invite
提携	제휴	To guide, lead by the hand
十方	시방	Ten directions (Buddhist cosmology; everywhere)
英俊	영준	Outstanding talent
弘闡	홍천	To broadly expound
居止	거지	Dwelling place
之耶焉	지야언	Classical Chinese grammatical particles
逆旅	역려	Inn, lodging house
濟	제	To aid, ferry across
公私	공사	Public and private (affairs)
卽其類也	즉기류야	Is of that kind (classical phrase)
蕉蒲之澤	초포지택	Marsh with bananas and cattails
刦賊	겁적	Bandits, robbers
頗多	파다	Quite numerous
歧路之要衝	기로지요충	Crucial junction of diverging roads
往來	왕래	Coming and going, traffic
難便	난편	Inconvenient
終否	종부	Ultimately not possible, cannot be left
盛時	성시	Flourishing age
惟我主上	유아주상	Our sovereign Lord
守位	수위	To maintain the position/throne
秉文之德	병문지덕	Upholding the virtue of civility/culture
干戈戚揚	간과척양	Spears and shields, halberds and axes (military weapons)
偃之矣	언지의	Has laid them down (classical phrase)
畢修之矣	필수지의	Has perfected them all (classical phrase)
若乃	약내	As for (classical connective)
喜捨之綠	희사지연	Merit/karma from joyous donation (Buddhist context)
遹追之業	휼추지업	Endeavor of pursuit (meaning unclear, likely Buddhist context)
求諸往代	구저왕대	Seeking among past generations
無得而踰	무득이유	None can be found to surpass
左右兩街	좌우양가	Left and right districts (of the capital)
都僧錄	도승록	Supreme Monk Supervisor
大師	대사	Great Master (Buddhist title)
臣	신	Your servant (used when addressing the sovereign)
昔者	석자	Formerly, in the past
皇考	황고	Deceased Imperial Father
潛身	잠신	To hide one's status/body
丈千歸命	장천귀명	Devotion to the thousand sages(?) (meaning obscure)
覽	람	To view, read
法輩之妙說	법배지묘설	Marvelous teachings of the Buddhist schools/groups
深嘉	심가	To deeply appreciate
中道之化城	중도지화성	Transformative citadel of the Middle Path (Buddhist concept, cf. Lotus Sutra)
効行	효행	To put into practice, emulate
未能勳集	미능훈집	Could not achieve the merit/result
朕	짐	I (imperial pronoun)
善繼其志	선계기지	Skillfully continue his aspiration
永觀厥成	영관궐성	Eternally behold its completion
救濟	구제	To rescue, relieve
征人	정인	Traveler, person on a journey
莫憂於險地	막우어험지	Do not worry about dangerous places
招携	초휴	To invite and lead
緇侶	치려	Monks (lit. black-robed companions)
載轄於法輪	재할어법륜	To carry/turn the Dharma wheel
師	사	Master (referring to the monk)
宜力	의력	Should strive
視贊襄	시찬양	To supervise and assist
躬親	궁친	Personally
胥字	서자	To plan, lay out (archaic)
副我書員之命	부아서원지명	Fulfill my written command
主其盧事之權	주기노사지권	Take charge of managing the construction
受綸言	수륜언	To receive the imperial words
便圖經縱	편도경종	Promptly planned the layout (lengthwise and crosswise)
九迴而無倦	구회이무권	Tireless through nine turns
須百足以不僵	수백족이부강	Needing a hundred legs yet not faltering (hyperbole for effort)
所貴之命	소귀지명	The valued command
將籲俊	장유준	Called upon talented individuals
爰有	원유	There were (classical phrase)
賜紫沙門	사자사문	Purple-robed śramaṇa (monk granted honor)
競扶顚轂	경부전곡	Competed to support the enterprise (lit. support falling wheel hubs)
枚卜要途	매복요도	Divined the essential path/location (by casting lots)
蒸烈來斯	증렬래사	Came with fervent enthusiasm (classical phrase)
實輿我役	실여아역	Truly shared the work with me
上續差	상속차	His Majesty further dispatched
推誠致理翊戴功臣	추성치리익대공신	Meritorious Subject title (Pushing Sincerity, Achieving Order, Assisting and Upholding)
金紫興祿大夫	금자흥록대부	Grand Master of Imperial Banquets with Golden Seal and Purple Ribbon (official rank)
兵部尙書	병부상서	Minister of War
知中樞院事	지중추원사	Manager of Chungch'uwon Affairs
太子太傳	태자태전	Senior Tutor to the Crown Prince
上柱國	상주국	Supreme Pillar of State (honorific title)
開國男	개국남	Founding Baron (noble title)
食邑	식읍	Fief (lit. eating town)
中樞副使	중추부사	Vice-Commissioner of the Chungch'uwon
中大夫	중대부	Grand Master of the Court (official rank)
秘書監	비서감	Director of the Palace Library
太子賓客	태자빈객	Guest Tutor to the Crown Prince
柱國	주국	Pillar of State (honorific title)
賜金紫魚袋	사금자어대	Granted the Golden Seal and Purple Fish Pouch (sign of honor)
別監使	별감사	Special Supervisor
事諧	사해	Work proceeded harmoniously
共理	공리	Managed together
謗絶	방절	Slander ceased
宜驕	의교	Pride was appropriate
庀徒	비도	To gather laborers
勿奪於農時	물탈어농시	Without disrupting the farming season
程工	정공	To manage/calculate labor/expenses
勿煩於公帑	물번어공帑	Without burdening the public treasury
陶人	도인	Potter
施瓦	시와	To provide tiles
木客	목객	Carpenter (or possibly timber merchant)
供材	공재	To supply timber
靈鉅風斤	영거풍근	Inspired axes and wind-like adzes (skilled artisans)
蜂聚	봉취	To gather like bees
蕩心之匠	탕심지장	Artisans who move the heart(?) (meaning unclear)
雲鍬電鍤	운鍬전삽	Cloud-like shovels and lightning-fast mattocks (fast work)
駿奔	준분	To rush forth quickly
游手之羣	유수지군	Crowds of idle hands (laborers)
起自	기자	Starting from
迄于	흘우	Ending in/by
凡造得	범조득	In total, built
間	간	*kan* (bay, unit of building size)
所置	소치	That which was placed/installed
塑畫	소화	Sculpted and painted (images)
功德像	공덕상	Meritorious deed images (Buddhist iconography)
鍾盤幡盖	종반번개	Bells, gongs/trays, banners, canopies
具如見在	구여견재	All are present as seen
其數寔繁	기수식번	Their number is truly numerous
賜額	사액	To grant a name plaque
切由	절유	Urgency and reason
鳩潺	구잔	Gathering(?) (meaning obscure, perhaps related to construction)
勢若飛來	세약비래	Its form seems to fly in
像殿	상전	Image hall
經樓	경루	Scripture repository/pavilion
麗異	이이	Splendidly different
宛疑兜率	완의두솔	Appearing like Tuṣita heaven
鳧鍾雁塔	부종안탑	Duck bells and goose pagoda (poetic description)
莊嚴	장엄	Solemn, majestic
遙認爛陁	요인난타	Remotely resembling Laṅka (possibly Lanka/Ceylon)
旣當	기당	Since, as
勃興	발흥	Flourishing, rising vigorously
實可	실가	Truly possible
千燈相續	천등상속	A thousand lamps continue in succession
對立	대립	To stand opposite
客舘	객관	Guest lodge
一區	일구	One section/area
許	허	Approximately
號曰	호왈	Named, called
溫廬冬凉屋夏	온려동량옥하	Warm lodging in winter, cool rooms in summer
寬積	관적	Generously stocked
糇粮	후량	Provisions, dry rations
貯之菊秋	저지국추	Stored with autumn chrysanthemums(?) (meaning obscure)
施賙窮急	시주궁급	Offering relief to the poor and needy
雍伯之戚漿	옹백지척장	Yongbo's comforting gruel (allusion to a story of kindness)
防備盜奸	방비도간	Guarding against thieves and villains
陳留之摟戴	진류지루대	Watchtowers of Chenliu (allusion)
夫如是則	부여시즉	Thus, in this way (classical phrase)
不獨	부독	Not only
方袍之象	방포지상	Tonsured monks (lit. square-robed figures)
虛往實歸	허왕실귀	Empty travel and real return (finding refuge)
裏足之徒	이족지도	Travelers with bound feet (or perhaps common travelers)
宵盤晝憩	소반주게	Resting day and night
終見	종견	Ultimately see
證眞之境	증진지경	Realm of true realization
蔑聞焚次之虞	멸문분차지우	Without hearing of the peril of burning stops (danger on journeys)
向若	향약	If previously (classical conditional)
非	비	Not
酌古沿今	작고연금	Drawing from antiquity and following the present
賽先王弘願	새선왕홍원	Fulfilling the great vow of the former king
隨機敎宗	수기교종	Teaching the doctrine according to circumstances
彼佛之妙門	피불지묘문	Profound gate of that Buddha's teachings
兼濟之仁	겸제지인	Benevolence of benefiting both
幾乎而息	기호이식	Would have nearly ceased
於戱	오희	Alas! (classical interjection)
權輿有苗	권유유묘	The beginning was small (like a sprout)
祖述無窮	조술무궁	Continuation is endless (lit. ancestral telling is without end)
肯構之功	긍구지공	Merit of building upon the foundation
旣存矣	기존의	Already exists (classical phrase)
奉行之道	봉행지도	The way of carrying it out
亦廣矣	역광의	Is also broad (classical phrase)
盡善盡美	진선진미	Utterly good and beautiful
念玆今則	염자금즉	Reflecting on this now (classical phrase)
申命	신명	To command again/further
儒生	유생	Confucian student
俾書盛事	비서성사	To have (him) record these great deeds
遲燥吻	지조문	Slow and dull mouth (self-deprecation)
學淺嚼筯	학천작저	Learning shallow like chewing dregs (self-deprecation)
形似之文	형사지문	Refined descriptive prose
無能爲也	무능위야	Am incapable of doing (classical phrase)
小子	소자	This humble person (self-deprecation)
斐然之作	비연지작	Elegant composition (referring to the requested writing)
竊取効焉	절취효언	Humbly attempt to emulate (classical phrase)
略記	약기	Briefly record
端聊耶	단료야	Essentials (classical phrase ending)
裸寶錄	나보록	Precious records(?) (meaning obscure, possibly 'enshrine in precious records')
聖上御圖之十八載	성상어͏͏͏͏도지십팔재	The 18th year of His Majesty's reign (lit. map/reign)
太平紀曆之第六年	태평기력지제육년	The 6th year of the T'aep'yŏng era calendar
謹記	근기	Respectfully recorded
水閣	수각	Waterside pavilion
風欞	풍령	Wind-blown lattice window
苦見招	고견초	Bitterly invites me (poetic)
簿書叢裏	부서총리	Amidst piles of documents/registers
度流年	도유년	To pass the flowing years
朱櫻	주앵	Red cherry
紫笋	자순	Purple bamboo shoot
時將過	시장과	The season is about to pass
紅槿	홍근	Red hibiscus (Rose of Sharon)
丹榴	단류	Crimson pomegranate (flower)
態亦姸	태역연	Appearance also lovely
病久	병구	Long ill
却嫌	각혐	Dislike, feel averse to
邀客飮	요객음	Inviting guests for drinks
性慵	성용	Lazy by nature
偏喜	편희	Especially love/like
聽鶯眠	청앵면	Sleeping while listening to orioles
良辰	양진	Fine season/time
佳日	가일	Fair day
終難再	종난재	Ultimately difficult to repeat, cannot come again
急趂	급진	Quickly chase/pursue (older form '趂')
花開	화개	Blooming flowers
作醉仙	작취선	Become a drunken immortal
堅貞	견정	Firm and upright
廟堂	묘당	Ancestral shrine; court, halls of government
前하야는	앞서는	Before, previously (older form)
後하야는	뒤에는	Later, afterwards (older form)
彈하다	다하다	To exhaust, exert fully (here: sincerity)
然함으로 因하야	그러함으로 인하여	Because it was so (older construction)
徹底치 못함	철저치 못함	Not being thorough/complete
有하얏다 할지라도	있었다 할지라도	Even though there was (older past form)
勢	세	Circumstances, power, trend
命	명	Fate, destiny, command
異論하다	이론하다	To dispute, raise objection
오즉	오직	Only, merely (older spelling)
그로서는	그로서는	As for him
할 바를 다 하얏섯다	할 바를 다 하였었다	Did all that he could do (older past perfective)
効	효	Effect, result
果然	과연	Indeed, surely
虛치 아니하야	헛되지 아니하여	Not being in vain (older negative)
蔚興	울흥	Flourishing, prosperity
見하다	보다	To see (older form '見하얏스며')
떨어털인	떨어뜨린	Sown, dropped (older causative form)
幾多	기다	Many, numerous
世代	세대	Generation
經하는 間	경하는 동안	While passing through
綿綿不滅	면면불멸	Unbroken and unceasing
隱然中에	은연중에	Implicitly, latently
麗末	여말	End of the Koryŏ dynasty
理學	이학	Neo-Confucianism (School of Principle)
勃興	발흥	Burgeoning, sudden rise
原因	원인	Cause
作하다	짓다, 만들다	To make, create (older form '作하얏스며')
以外에	이외에	Outside of, besides
偉力	위력	Great power
一層	일층	More, further
侮示지 못할 者	업신여기지 못할 것	Something that cannot be underestimated/despised (older phrasing)
最明瞭	최명료	Clearest
事實	사실	Fact
提示하다	제시하다	To present, show
어떠한	어떠한	Whatever, any kind of
事爲	사위	Undertaking, deed
敎育	교육	Education
事業	사업	Enterprise, work, project
世道人心	세도인심	The ways of the world and the hearts of the people
救拾하기에	구습하기에	In rescuing/gathering up
一層	일층	More, further
至適한 事	지극한 일	Most suitable matter
몸으로써	몸으로써	Through his own body/actions
알켜준	알려준	Taught, made known (older causative/passive form)
일과 가튼 일	일과 같은 일	Things like the fact that
今日	금일	Today
우리에게 잇서	우리에게 있어	For us (older phrasing)
特히	특히	Especially (older spelling)
感激不措	감격불조	Moved beyond measure (lit. gratitude without placing/stopping)
바이라	바이다	Is the thing that... (older copula form)
世	세	The world, people
偶然하다	우연하다	Accidental, coincidental
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제18호
발행일	1921년 12월 01일
기사제목	東方私學의王-崔冲先生, 十大偉人紹介의 其五
필자	개벽사
기사형태	논설

東方私學의王-崔冲先生, 十大偉人紹介의 其五
						개벽사
赫赫한 先生의 一生
先生의 字는 浩然, 號는 惶齋니, 距今 937年前, 卽 高麗成宗3年甲申(宋雍熙元年이오 西曆紀元 984年)에 海州大寧郡의 人으로 生하다. 風姿 - 魁偉하고 性操- 貞堅하며 少時로부터 學을 好하야 屬文에 善하얏다한다. 穆宗(成宗의 次에 在한 王) 8年(先生의 年이 22)에는 甲科第一에 選擢되엇스며 顯宗(穆宗의 次)時에 拾遺補闕, 翰林學士, 禮部侍郞, 諫議大夫 等 官職을 歷任하고 德宗(顯宗의 次)初에는 右散騎常侍, 同知中樞院事로 轉職하얏다. 이때에 先生이 奏하되 「일즉 成宗의 時, 內外諸司廳의 壁에다- 說苑六正六邪의 文과 漢刺史六條의 令을 書하얏던 바 이제 年代가 久遠하야 荒廢하얏슨 즉 맛당히 此를 更書揭示하야 臣下로의 飭勵할 바 道를 知하게 하지」하매 王이 此를 從하얏스며 靖宗(德宗의 次)朝에는 다시 尙書, 佐僕射, 叅知政事로부터 西北路兵馬事가 되어 王命으로 邊境을 巡行하며 城池를 拓定할세 寧遠, 平虜等의 鎭과 10餘의 堡를 置하고 다시 돌아와 門下侍郞,  平章事가 되엇스며 文宗(靖宗의 次)이 卽位하야는 一躍, 先生으로 門下侍中, 다시 太傳를 삼고 推忠贊道의 功臣號를 賜하얏다. 當時 先生이 侍中으로써 都兵馬使가 되어 奏하되 「去歲 西北州鎭에 禾穀이 不登하야 百姓이 貧乏하야 男은 徭役에 困하며 女는 徵糶에 困하니 請컨대 地池를 修繕하는 以外의 一切工役을 禁斷케 하자」하매 王이 從하얏스며 다시 當時 京舘에 抑留한 東女眞酋長鹽漢等 86人을 好意로 放還하야 朝廷의 恩義에 誠服케 할 意를 奏하야 如意하얏스며 同8年에는 先生이 年滿7旬, 老耗를 理由하야써 退鄕을 乞하얏스나 王은 써하되 冲은 累代儒宗이며＜102＞ 三韓老德인 바 이제 비록 退鄕을 請하나 참아 允從할 수 업다 하고 几杖을 賜하야써 視事케 하얏스며 그 後 太師, 兼 門下侍中, 內史令 等의 顯位를 加하야써 致仕케 하되 文宗은 特히 內史侍郞平章事金元鼎과 同知中樞院事王懋崇의 兩人을 使者로서 先生第에 就케 하야 懇篤한 詔書와 衣帶, 銀器, 綵段, 布貨, 鞍馬等 物을 幷賜하얏스며 이와가티 先生의 居家한 以後이라도 朝廷에서는 軍國大事를 悉皆就咨하되 다시 推忠贊道佐理同德弘文懿儒保定康濟의 功臣號를 累加하얏스며 日月이 不興하야 文宗22年 戊申에 先生이 85歲의 高齡으로써 世를 辭하얏는데 王은 大醫監李鹽을 差遣하야 詔書로써 吊를 致하얏스디 謚하야 曰文憲이라 하다.
先生의 官歷과 其間에 樹立한 事功을 여긔에 詳述치 아니하나 約하야 言하면 先生은 일즉이 人格과 文章으로 當世의 推重한 바 되어 穆, 顯, 德, 靖, 文의 五朝를 歷事하는 間에 恒是 家國의 棟樑이 되엇스며 그 中에도 文宗은 特히 先生을 慕仰하며 信任하야 詔書와 官誥等의 文句에는 每樣 先生으로써 姚皇의 八元과 姬室의 四子에 擬하얏다.

先生이 斯惻, 建學立師
先生의 建學立師를 말하기 前에 먼저 當時 高麗文化의 推移를 一言하리라.
史에 徵하면 일즉 三國統一이 成한 以後의 新羅文化는 全혀 儒道와 佛敎의 두 勢力으로써 經緯되엇스며 그 中에도 禮樂, 刑政, 修齊治平의 實際로써 그 大部의 內容을 삼은 儒敎는 一般文物制度의 建立 及 保持에 對한 叅考가 되며 保障이 되어 當時 人間의 外的 儀式을 支持하얏스며 歸依, 發願, 禁欲, 解脫 等의 神社로써 그 大部의 內容으로 삼은 佛敎는 上下一般의 內的 信仰을 支持하얏다. 新羅가 亡하고 高麗가 代하야도 이 形便은 變하지 아니하얏스며 또 當時에 잇서서는 儒敎의 儀式에서나 佛敎의 信仰에서나 반듯이 變하여야 될 何等의 必要를 感치 아니하엿섯스며 뿐아니라 當時 一般은 모다 그 形便의 當然한 것은 是認하얏스며 나아가 家國을 治하거나 물러와 個身의 始終을 善히 하는 道가 全혀 그 形便의 善導에 잇다하얏다. 이는 當世의 一人이던 麗太祖 王氏의 態度와 政策에 나아가 그 全容을 認할 수가 잇스니 그는 自己個身이 佛을 深信하야 僧道詵의 圖懺全部를 信하며 또 僧忠湛을 師事하야 軍國大小事를 그에 諮詢하야＜103＞ 行하고 다시 八關會를 設하고 燃燈會를 行하고 僧侶를 供養하며 「我國大業必資諸佛保護之力, 禪敎寺院宜禁換奪」이란 것을 治國要訓의 第1條로 認하얏슴에 不拘하고 更히 唐風의 文物禮樂을 是崇하며 特히 周公의 無逸一篇을 左右에 圖揭하야 出入에 觀省하얏스며 卽位後 未幾에 委혀 平壤에 幸行하야 學校를 創置하고 13年에 秀才廷鶚으로써 書學博士를 拜하고 別로 學院을 創置하고 六部의 生徒를 招集하야 儒學을 講論케 하되 特히 綵帛과 倉穀을 與하야 此를 獎勵한 바 學風이 一時에 蔚興하얏다. 麗太祖는 이와가티 儒와 佛의 兩敎를 自由開放하야 그 均等의 發達을 圖하되 儒로써 國初文物制度의 草創에 資하고 佛로써 羅末 人心의 收攬에 資하고저 한 바 이러한 國是는 그 後 歷代王相의 龜鑑이 되어 太祖王의 卽位初로부터 高宗46年 卽元의 年號를 쓰기까지 340年間의 國治를 大盖 그 精神으로써 一貫하얏다.
그러나 凡事는 반듯이 理想대로 고이고이 되어 나아가는 것은 아니라 儒敎의 文治로써 一般의 儀容을 整齊히 하고 儒敎의 信念으로써 一般의 心情을 支配코저 하는 王家의 國是도 생각대로 되지 아니하야 閭巷의 羣庶는 日로 迷信에 流하야 役을 避하야 僧이 되고 家庭을 叛하야 尼가 되는 等 毁家破産의 者가 續出하며 비록 士大夫의 列에 立한 者일지라도 少數의 人을 除한 以外의 一般은 儒名에 佛行을 是尙하야 健全한 民風의 樹立을 期하기 難하매 4代祖 光宗과 6代祖 成宗은 主로 文敎에 力을 致하야 科擧의 制를 立하고 國學을 大起하고 8代祖 顯宗은 婦女의 尼僧됨을 禁斷하고 11代祖 文宗은 英明의 姿와 宏遠의 志로써 特히 文治의 布施에 注力하야 小人을 黜하고 賢才를 擧하여 秘閣所藏의 九經 其他를 印刊하야 各一秩式을 諸學院에 置케 하고 國子監에 親幸하야 文廟에 再拜하는 等의 잇는 誠力을 盡傾하야 大勢의 挽回에 努力하얏스나 當時의 諸生은 依然히 業에 惰怠하야 勉强치 아니하며 一般民衆은 더욱이 三寶에 惑溺하야 그 止할 바를 不知하는 等 國家社會의 健全한 發達을 思하는 人士는 한번 幡然히 起할 機運에 際하얏다.
이 때에 先生은 써하되 當時의 狂瀾을 挽回하는 大道는 儒道文化의 普及에 잇스며 이것의 普及은 一便의 官力으로써 期할 바가 아니오 반듯이 私學의 興旺을 待하야써 庶幾할 것이라하고 이에 志를 決하야 後進의 敎誨에 專從하니 學徒- 坌集하야 巷街에 塡溢하는지라 이에 樂聖, 大中, 誠明, 敬業, 造道, 率性, 進德,＜104＞ 大和, 侍聘의 九齋에 分하야써 敎導에 應케하니 當世- 이 九齋의 生徒를 指稱하야 侍中崔公의 徒라 하야 무릇 境遇에 特히 그들을 禮遇하얏스며 每歲暑月에는 法寺의 僧房을 借得하야 夏課를 行하게 하고 그 徒中에 及第한 者와 또는 學優未官者를 擇하야써 敎導의 任에 當케 하고 五經三史를 敎授하얏스며 때로 先進되는 人士가 通過하면 刻燭賦詩의 例를 行하되 그 先後와 優劣을 試擇하야 榜의 次第로써 唱名하야써 드리며 小宴을 設하야 冠童이 左右에 羅列한 間에서 揖讓進退의 禮를 行하야써 終日을 즐기다 日暮에 歸洛한 바 觀者一 莫不感嘆하얏다. 先生이 棄世後는 이 九齋籍中에 置한 士子를 稱하야써 文憲公徒라 하얏다.
이와가티 先生은 私學의 建立과 人材의 敎養에 力을 致하야 孜孜不倦한 바 이는 곳 當時에 在한 推仰의 的이 되어 其他儒臣도 大槪로 此를 倣하야 各各 學을 建하고 士子를 養하얏스니 侍中 鄭倍傑의 弘文公徒와 叅政盧朝의 匡憲公徒와 祭酒 金尙賓의 南山徒와 僕射 金無滯의 西園徒와 侍中 金殷鼎의 文忠公徒와 平章 金義珍의 良愼公徒와 平章 黃瑩의 貞敬公徒와 柳監의 忠平公徒와 侍中文正의 貞憲公徒와 徐碩의 徐侍郞徒와 氏名未詳의 龜山徒는 그 著然한 者이며 여긔에 文憲公徒를 倂稱하야 12徒라 하얏는데 12徒中에도 文憲公徒가 最盛하얏다한다.

附記
本項中에 「治國要訓」이라 함은 高麗太祖王 26年에 王이 親히 治國訓要十條를 書하야 後嗣에 傳케한 것이니 (1)我國大業必資諸佛保護之力 禪敎寺院宜禁換奪 (2)諸寺院道詵所占定外不可妄創造 (3)傳國以長雖曰常禮然 元子不肖與其次子 (4)久慕唐風文物禮樂悉遵其制 契丹禽獸之國愼勿効焉 (5)西京我國地脉之根本宜以四仲巡駐留過百日 (6)燃燈所以事佛 八關所以祀天靈及名山大川龍神宜禁加减 (7)欲得臣民之心要在從諫遠讒 又使民以時輕徭蓮賦自得民心國富民安 (8)車峴以南地勢背逆 彼下州郡人 不宜在位用事 (9)安不可忘危, 兵卒宜加護恤 量除徭役, 每年秋, 訓閱勇銳 (10)周公無逸一篇 宜當圖揭 出入觀省이 是라.

先生의 文과
이제 先生의 面影을 더 一層 가까이 想念키 爲하야＜105＞ 그 親筆에 成한 文과 詩의 各1篇뿐을 揭記한다.

奉先弘慶寺記
臣謹按內典云招提者謂招引提携十方英俊弘闡佛法居止之耶焉又莊子設*廬而視仁義晋書論逆旅以濟公私今之於稷山縣成觀驛北路一牛鳴地新置寺舍者卽其類也地無長短之亭人煙隔絶有蕉蒲之澤刦賊頗多觀歧路之要衝實往來之難便不可終否屬於盛時惟我主上守位以仁秉文之德干戈戚揚皆偃之矣禮樂刑政畢修之矣若乃喜捨之綠遹追之業求諸往代無得而踰嘗命左右兩街都僧錄通眞光敎圓濟弘道大師臣逈兢曰昔者皇考安宗憲景孝懿英文大王初九潛身丈千歸命每覽法輩之妙說深嘉中道之化城方欲効行未能勳集朕則善繼其志永觀厥成一則救濟征人莫憂於險地一則招携緇侶載轄於法輪師宜力視贊襄躬親胥字副我書員之命主其盧事之權兢受綸言便圖經縱九迴而無倦須百足以不僵所貴之命將籲俊爰有廣利證玄大師賜紫沙門臣得聰靜盧修眞悟理文德賜紫沙門臣藏琳等競扶顚轂枚卜要途蒸烈來斯實輿我役上續差推誠致理翊戴功臣金紫興祿大夫兵部尙書知中樞院事兼太子太傳上柱國天水縣開國男食邑二百戶姜民瞻中樞副使中大夫秘書監兼太子賓客柱國宣春縣門國男食邑三百戶賜金紫魚袋臣金猛等爲別監使於是事諧共理謗絶宜驕庀徒勿奪於農時程勿免煩於公帑陶人施瓦木客供材靈鉅風斤蜂聚蕩 心之匠雲鍬電鍤駿奔游手之羣起自丙辰秋迄于辛酉歲凡造得堂殿門廊等共二百餘間所置塑畫諸功德像及鍾盤幡盖具如見在其數寔繁乃賜額爲先弘慶寺莫不切由鳩潺勢若飛來像殿經樓麗異而宛疑兜率鳧鍾雁塔莊嚴而遙認爛陁旣當三寶勃興實可千燈相續又於寺西對立客舘得一區許入十間號曰廣綠通化院斯亦溫廬冬凉屋夏寬積以糇粮貯之菊秋施賙窮急設雍伯之戚漿防備盜奸列陳留之摟戴夫如是則不獨方袍之象虛往實歸亦令裏足之徒宵盤晝憩終見證眞之境蔑聞焚次之虞向若 非酌古沿今賽先王弘願隨機敎宗彼佛之妙門則兼濟之仁幾乎而息於戱權輿有苗祖述無窮肯構之功旣存矣奉行之道亦廣矣盡善盡美念玆今則申命儒生俾書盛事臣思遲燥吻學淺嚼筯雖長 鄕形似之文無能爲也而小子斐然之作竊取効焉略記端聊耶裸寶錄時聖上御圖之十八載太平紀曆之第六年夏四月日謹記.

示座客
水閣風欞苦見招, 簿書叢裏度流年. 朱櫻紫笋時將過,＜106＞ 紅槿丹榴態亦姸. 病久却嫌邀客飮, 性慵偏喜聽鶯眠. 良辰佳日終難再, 急趂花開作醉仙.

結論
右에 記함과 가티 그 堅貞한 性操와 魁偉한 風姿와 優秀한 文學으로써 儼然히 廟堂우에 立하야 前하야는 文政의 布施에 一段의 力을 盡하얏스며 後하야는 文敎의 普及에 最後의 誠을 彈하얏다. 高麗의 國是 -然하고 當時의 民習이 然함으로 因하야 비록 그의 期한 文政과 文敎가 一般에 徹底치 못함이 有하얏다 할지라도 그는 勢이며 命이라. 異論할 것이 못되고 오즉 그로서는 할 바를 다 하얏섯다. 그 効는 果然 虛치 아니하야 일즉이 當世에 잇서 學風의 蔚興을 見하얏스며 그때에 떨어털인 큰 씨는 그 後의 幾多世代를 經하는 間에도 綿綿不滅하야 隱然中에 麗末理學勃興의 原因을 作하얏스며 國學以外에 私學의 偉力이 一層 侮示지 못할 者- 有함을 最明瞭한 事實로써 提示하고 어떠한 事爲보다도 敎育의 事業이 그 世道人心을 救拾하기에 一層 至適한 事를 그의 몸으로써 알켜준 일과 가튼 일은 今日의 우리에게 잇서 特히 感激不措할 바이라. 世- 그를 稱하야 海東孔子라 하며 私學의 王이라 함이 어찌 偶然하리요.＜107＞
＜102-107＞