잡지명	別乾坤 第23號
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	京城이 가진 名所와 古蹟 (Famous Places and Historic Sites of Gyeongseong)
필자	考古生
기사형태	문예기타 (Literature and Other)

The Famous Places and Historic Sites of Gyeongseong

						Gohyeonseong (考古生)

Gyeongbok Palace - Changdeok Palace - Deoksu Palace - Eoui Palace - Gyeonghui Palace - Jasu Palace - Ingyeong Palace - Yuksang Palace - Yeonghui Hall - Seonwon Hall - Jangsaeng Hall - Great Shrine - Independence Gate - Independence Hall Memorial Stone - Wongudan Altar - Jangchungdan Altar - Pagoda Park - Sajik Altar - Samgaksan Mountain - Bukhansanseong Fortress - Segeomjeong Pavilion - Seokpajeong Pavilion - Namsan Mountain - Bugaksan Mountain - Han River Railway Bridge - Six Martyred Retainers' Tomb - Four Loyalists Shrine - Guan Yu Shrine - Munmyo Shrine

Twelve Palaces and Jongmyo Shrine

Gyeongbok Palace: Gyeongbok Palace was originally started in February of the 4th year of King Taejo, Eulhae (乙亥), and completed in September of the same year. The name Gyeongbok (景福) was taken from the Shijing (詩經) Zhouya (周雅), which said, “May the prince live for ten thousand years, receiving great blessings (君子萬年에 介以景福).” Jeong Do-jeon (鄭道傳) selected the name by King Taejo’s command. Afterward, in the first year of the second King Jeongjong, the capital was temporarily moved to Gaeseong, but in the 5th year of the third King Taejong, the royal court returned to this palace. It remained the royal palace for 200 years until the 25th year of King Seonjo, Imjin (壬辰), when a foreign invasion occurred. King Seonjo fled to Uiju, and the capital became empty. Riotous people set fire to the palace, and all the buildings were destroyed. For the next 274 years, it remained a desolate site. 66 years ago, in the year Gapja (甲子), King Taejong ascended the throne, and the Daewongun (大院君) took over as regent. He renovated general politics and planned the reconstruction of this palace. The cornerstone ceremony was held on June 20th, Eulchuk (乙丑), and it was completed in July of the following year, Jeongmyo (丁卯). Furthermore, in the following year, Muja (戊辰), the king moved here from Changdeok Palace. Currently, the remaining Geunjeongjeon Hall (勤政殿), Sajeongjeon Hall (思政殿), Sujeongjeon Hall (修政殿), Jagyeongjeon Hall (慈慶殿), Gyeonghoeru Pavilion (慶會樓), Gwanghwamun Gate (光化門) (originally Nam Gate), Geonchunmun Gate (建春門) (East Gate), Yeongchumun Gate (迎秋門) (West Gate), Sinmumun Gate (神武門) (North Gate), and other important buildings were all built at that time. (The names, of course, are inherited from the previous ones.) Among them, Geunjeongjeon Hall and Gyeonghoeru Pavilion are grand in scale, and the architecture is also ingenious. Gyeonghoeru Pavilion has 108 rooms (287 pyeong below the stairs) and 48 stone pillars, each 145 cheok long. Around it, there is a lotus pond with two islands in the middle, which was once a place for banquets for the king and his officials. Geunjeongjeon Hall is the main hall of Gyeongbok Palace, where the king's enthronement and other official ceremonies were held. (This hall also had four gates: the south gate was called Geunjeong (勤政), the south of it was called Hongrye (弘禮), the east was called Ilhwa (日華), and the west was called Wolhwa (月華).) Originally, when entering through Gwanghwamun Gate, there was Heungnyemun Gate (興禮) in front, and inside Heungnyemun Gate was Geunjeongmun Gate. Between these two gates, there was a canal flowing east to west (that is, Geumcheon), and on the canal, there was a stone bridge called Geumcheon Bridge. However, now all the various facilities in the main gate and Geunjeongmun Gate have been removed, and the new building of the Government-General has been built on the site. In the east corridor of the hall, there are two stories of Yungmun (隆文), and in the west corridor, there are two stories of Yungmu (隆武). In the front courtyard of the hall, granite stone slabs are laid, and on the left and right sides of the central sidewalk, there are stone pillars indicating the seating order of civil and military officials from the first rank to the ninth rank. At both ends of the base of the hall, there is a large bronze cauldron, and on the outer two-story stone staircase around it, a grand stone railing is installed. This hall is not only the largest of Korean architectural structures but also a masterpiece that combines the palace system of the Tang Dynasty in China with unique Korean craftsmanship, worthy of being proud of to the world. Sajeongjeon Hall (north of Geunjeongjeon Hall) was the king’s private hall, where he reviewed state affairs every morning. Sujeongjeon Hall was the king’s audience hall, used by the cabinet for a time during the Korean Empire and is now a part of the museum's exhibition hall. (Gwanghwamun Gate and other palace gates are listed in other sections.) For 24 years after the transfer, state affairs were managed in this palace, but 34 years ago, on February 11th, Eulmi (乙未) (January 2nd in the lunar calendar), the Emperor suddenly moved to the Russian legation, and the following year, Dingyu (丁酉) (Geonyang year 2), on February 20th, he moved to Gyeongungung Palace (that is, Deoksu Palace) and never returned. The palace eventually became an abandoned palace, with only crows and magpies crying amidst the cold rain. During the Gyeongseong Exposition (共進會) era in the 4th year of Taisho, all buildings except for important ones like Geunjeongjeon Hall and Gyeonghoeru Pavilion were demolished, and the art museum at the time remained as a museum until today. The Gangnyeong Hall (康寧殿) and Gyotae Hall (交泰殿), which were once the main sleeping quarters of the king and queen, were relocated to Changdeok Palace in the 6th year of Taisho, and now only the Eosan (蛾眉山) in the rear garden remains as a vestige of the past. The stone wall around the palace is 1,813 steps, 21 cheok and 1 chon high, and the area south of Sinmumun Gate alone is about 130,000 pyeong. Most of the stone walls have now been demolished.

Changdeok Palace: This is a separate palace built by King Taejo of the Joseon Dynasty at the same time as Gyeongbok Palace (slightly later than Gyeongbok Palace). It was also destroyed by fire during the Imjin War and rebuilt in the first year of Gwanghaegun (started in the 39th year of King Seonjo). Later, Injeongjeon Hall was also damaged and was rebuilt in the 4th year of King Sunjo, Gapja (126 years ago), and the inner palace was also built. Emperor Sunjong moved from Deoksu Palace to this palace in December of the first year of Emperor Yunghee, Dingmi (丁未). Until then, it had been an abandoned palace like Gyeongbok Palace, but at that time, it underwent major repairs, and new annexes were also built, renewing the face of the royal palace. The main gate is Donhwamun Gate (敦化門) (South Gate), the east is Seoninmun Gate (宣仁門), the west is Gimho (金虎), and the north is Gwangji (廣智) (the history of the gates is listed in the articles on the Eight Gates and Palace Gates). Inside the main gate, on the right, is the Yi Royal Household Office (李王職), and on the left, there are various halls centered around the famous two-story Injeongjeon Hall. The two-story Seunghwaru Pavilion (承華樓) and Juhapru Pavilion (宙合樓) (with more than 80 steps up and down, used for royal banquets) were both magnificent and splendid in structure and decoration. Unfortunately, a fire broke out on November 10th of the 6th year of Taisho from one room in the west of Daejojeon Hall (大造殿), and Daejojeon Hall, Heuijeongdang Hall (熙政堂), Gyeonggungak Pavilion (景薰閣), Cheonggwangru Pavilion (澄光樓), and other buildings were destroyed at once. Construction began again in December of the same year, and the Gyotae Hall and Gangnyeong Hall located behind Geunjeongjeon Hall in Gyeongbok Palace were relocated. The construction lasted for three years and was completed on December 25th of the 9th year of Taisho.

Changgyeong Palace: Changgyeongwon (昌慶苑) is located within Changgyeong Palace. Changgyeong Palace was originally the old site of Suganggung Palace (壽康宮) during the Goryeo Dynasty. After King Taejo moved the capital to Hanyang, he built a separate palace called Suganggung Palace (still using the old name) together with Changdeok Palace. After more than a hundred years, in the 14th year of King Seongjong, Gemyo (癸卯), the king comforted the three widowed queens: Queen Jeonghui, Lady Yun (the queen of King Sejo, King Seongjong's grandmother); Queen Insu, Lady Han (the queen of King Deokjong, King Seongjong's birth mother); and Queen Ansun, Lady Han (King Yejong's consort, King Seongjong's adoptive mother). It was also used as a place to hold ceremonies of audience (King Seongjong led his officials to congratulate the three palaces on the New Year and then took his seat in Myeongjeongjeon Hall (明政殿) in the palace to receive congratulations). The old palace was demolished, and a new palace was built, which is Changgyeong Palace. Later, during the Imjin War, it was also destroyed by fire, leaving only Honghwamun Gate (弘化門), Myeongjeongmun Gate (明政門), and Myeongjeongjeon Hall. In the 8th year of Gwanghae, it was extensively repaired again. Myeongjeongjeon Hall, Myeongjeongmun Gate, and Honghwamun Gate, along with Namdaemun Gate and Donhwamun Gate, are the five major wooden buildings in Gyeongseong with the longest history.

<19> Later, after Emperor Yunghee moved here in the year Dingmi (丁未) of Yunghee, on the suggestion of a certain high official, a botanical garden and museum were established for the amusement of the royal family. The animals were all purchased from Yu Han-seong, who was running a private zoo (small scale) at the time, and he was appointed as the director of the zoo due to his expertise in animal husbandry and other related matters. The plants were purchased through negotiations with the Inner Garden of the Imperial Household Ministry of Japan, and the artifacts were widely collected by a high-ranking official of the Imperial Household Ministry. At the time, it was merely a place of entertainment for the royal family, but as it gradually expanded, it was opened to the public from October of the 3rd year of Yunghee, Giyu (己酉). Now, not only is the scale quite large, but the general facilities are also complete. In spring, the cherry blossoms at night are particularly spectacular, attracting tens of thousands of visitors every night. To the north of the botanical garden, there are dense old trees and undulating hills, which is the Secret Garden (秘苑). The scenery in the four gardens is secluded, and the rocks and water are beautiful. Among them, Okryucheon (玉流泉) and Taegeukjeong (太極亭) are scenic spots in the country. In spring, hundreds of flowers bloom, and in autumn, the autumn leaves are like brocade. The Secret Garden's treasures, such as matsutake mushrooms, give the sensation of entering a fairyland once seen. However, it is regrettable that general viewing is still not allowed except for special people.

Deoksu Palace: This palace was originally the private residence of Prince Wolsan (長子), the elder brother of King Seongjong, the birthplace of King Seongjong. After the Imjin War, when King Seonjo returned to the capital (October 4th, Gyosa (癸巳)), all the palaces had been destroyed by fire, so he had to designate this place as a temporary palace, calling it Gyeongungung Palace (慶運宮) (the so-called temporary royal residence). The house of Sim Ui-gyeom (沈義謙) was incorporated into the East Palace, the house of Sim Yeon-won (沈連源) was incorporated into the Middle Palace, and nearby large and small houses were temporarily designated as various government offices within the palace. After Changdeok Palace was rebuilt in the first year of Gwanghaegun, Giyu, the king moved there, leaving this place only as a temporary palace. In the 3rd year of Gwanghae, the king confined Queen Inmok (宣祖繼妃 金氏) in this palace and renamed it Seogung Palace (西宮). After King Injo's coup, it was renamed Myeongnyegung Palace (明禮宮). Later, after King Taehwang moved to the Russian legation, it was renamed Gyeongungung Palace again. On the night of April 14th of the 8th year of Gwangmu, a fire broke out in the palace, and Hamnyeongjeon Hall (咸寧殿) (sleeping quarters) and Junghwajeon Hall (中和殿) (audience hall) were burned down and rebuilt. Within the palace, there are Gwanmyeongjeon Hall (觀明殿), Jeukjodang Hall (卽祚殿), Seogeodang Hall (昔御殿), Suindang Hall (壽仁堂), Jeonggwanheon Pavilion (靜觀軒), and Gyeonghyojeon Hall (景孝殿). To the west of Hamnyeongjeon Hall is the Stone Building, designed by the Englishman Tebisson, in the so-called Renaissance style. To the northwest of it, there are Guseongheon (九成軒) and Dundeokjeon Hall (敦德殿), which are also in Western style. The main gate was originally Dunnyemun Gate (敦禮門), but as the outer area expanded, Daeanmun Gate (大安門) was built, which is now Daehanmun Gate (大漢門). It was only recently in the year Dingmi (丁未) that it was called Deoksu Palace, after King Taehwang abdicated and King Sunjong ascended the throne and moved to Changdeok Palace. This was to celebrate the longevity of the retired King Taehwang.

Gyeonghui, Jasu, Ingyeong Three Palaces: Gyeonghui Palace was originally the old residence of King Taejo, and it was built together with Jasu and Ingyeong Palaces in the 8th year of Gwanghae, Byeongjin (丙辰), according to the words of a fortuneteller. The original name was Gyeongdeok Palace, and it was renamed Gyeonghui in the 36th year of King Yeongjo. The audience hall is Sungjeongjeon Hall (崇政殿), and the main gate is Heunghwamun Gate. The current Gyeongseong Middle School and Government-General's residence in Seodaemun-dong are located on its site. The two palaces of Ingyeong and Jasu were built at the foot of Inwangsan Mountain, but they were demolished after King Injo's coup. Even now, the stone bridge on the passageway of Sunhwa Hospital is called Jasu Palace Bridge because of this.

Eoui Palace: This palace was a separate residence where King Hyojong (son of King Injo) resided when he was a Grand Prince. Because King Hyojong suffered many hardships as the crown prince during the Byeongja Horan, he cherished this place in memory of it. Afterward, it was used as a wedding venue for the crown prince and other royal family members, similar to a separate palace. Most of it has now been demolished, and the new building of the Police Affairs Section occupies the old site. Only some old buildings and a white pine tree with five branches remain, telling the old story. This white pine is described in a separate section and is the largest white pine in Gyeongseong, a rare tree that is about 400 years old. (Now Naejadong)

<21> In addition, Yuksang Palace is located in Gungjeong-dong, and this is the palace of Royal Consort Suk-bin Choe, the birth mother of King Yeongjo.

Yeonghui Hall: Originally, this hall was located in the area from the intersection of the current Yeongnakjeong and Honmachi to the Honmachi Police Station (old Jukdong). Because its surface was painted red, it was called Red Gate, and the "Yeong (永)" character in the current Yeongnakjeong also comes from the "Yeong (永)" character in this Yeonghui Hall. This site was originally the residence of Princess Uisuk (懿淑公主), a daughter of King Sejo (married to Prince Haseongbuwon Jeong Hyeon-jo (鄭顯祖)). After Queen Dangyeong, Lady Shin (Queen Jungjong’s first queen), was deposed, she lived here in seclusion and called it Nambyeoljeon (南別殿). During the reign of King Gwanghae, portraits of King Taejo and King Sejo were enshrined here, and it was first called Yeonghui Hall. Thereafter, portraits of successive monarchs were also enshrined, preserving it for hundreds of years. In the 4th year of Gwangmu, it was moved to the rear garden of the Government-General Hospital, that is, to the current location behind the Government-General Hospital. (In Yeonghui Hall, the portraits of monarchs who had gone through military conflicts or coups were enshrined, so the king wore military attire during previous processions.) The building that is now Yeonghui Hall was originally Sado Temple (思悼廟) (also known as Gyeongmugung Palace (景慕宮)), built by King Jeongjo to mourn the unfortunate death of his father, Prince Sado (思悼世子).

Seonwon Hall: Seonwon Hall was originally located within Yeongseongmun Gate, but recently it was demolished and moved to its current location at the end of Wondong (the former site of the Army Military Academy). Within this hall, the portraits of the successive monarchs of the Joseon Dynasty are enshrined, divided into 11 rooms. The first room is for King Taejo, the second room is for King Sejo, the third room is for King Wonjong (posthumously honored as the father of King Injo), the fourth room is for King Sukjong, the fifth room is for King Yeongjo, the sixth room is for King Jeongjo, the seventh room is for King Sunjo, the eighth room is for King Ikjong (posthumously honored as the father of King Heonjong), the tenth room is for King Cheoljong, and the eleventh room is for Emperor Gojong (this is not based on those with meritorious deeds, but only enshrines those monarchs whose portraits exist). This area is also the site of the former Daebodan Altar (大報壇). The Daebodan Altar was built during the reign of King Sukjong to commemorate Emperor Shenzong of the Ming Dynasty.

Great Shrine and Jangsaeng Hall: The Great Shrine (大廟) (Jongmyo) has two palaces, the Main Hall (本殿) and Yeongnyeongjeon Hall (永寧殿). The Main Hall is the place to enshrine those monarchs who have great achievements, and Yeongnyeongjeon Hall is the place to enshrine those who were omitted from this or who were crown princes and died before succeeding to the throne but were posthumously honored with a royal title. This Jongmyo Shrine was founded in September of the 4th year of King Taejo. Later, during the Imjin War, the enemy general Ukita Hideie occupied this place and set up his camp. Every night, strange spirits appeared, either scaring soldiers to death or strangling them. The enemy army was greatly frightened and said that this was the fault of the Great Shrine, so they set fire to it and retreated to Sogong-dong (now the site of the Chosun Hotel). The current building was rebuilt during the reign of King Gwanghae after the war. There is an old building called Jangsaeng Hall (長生殿) (also Jangseon Hall (長宣殿)) near the current Higher Industrial School in Yeonji-dong. This is the place where royal coffins, etc. are manufactured and stored.

<22> Four Great Memorials and Three Great Parks

Independence Gate and Independence Hall: No Korean who is not from Seoul will remember Independence Gate (獨立門) or Independence Hall (獨立館) more than any other historic site in Seoul. This Independence Gate was originally Hongjeonmun Gate (紅箭門), which was rebuilt as a double-pillar gate in the 30th year of King Jungjong (1535 AD) and named Yeonjomu (延詔門) (meaning to extend the edict of the Ming emperor). In the 34th year, the Ming envoy Xue Yanchong (薛延寵) renamed it Eungeunmun Gate (迎恩門), and in the 39th year of King Seonjo, Zhu Zhiban (朱之蕃), another Ming envoy, inscribed the name. After the Sino-Japanese War of Gapo (甲午) (1894) and the Treaty of Shimonoseki, Joseon became completely independent. On February 12th of the 31st year of King Gojong, Gap-o (甲午) (January 10th, 1895 AD), the king personally visited the Great Shrine and swore independence. In January of the following year (February in the solar calendar), Eungeunmun Gate was demolished (the plaque of Eungeunmun Gate written by Zhu Zhiban is now preserved in the Government-General's School Affairs Section). Later, Seo Jae-pil (徐載弼) returned from the United States and formed the Independence Association (獨立協會) with Yi Sang-jae (李商在), Yun Chi-ho (尹致昊), and others. With the initiation of the association, donations were collected from the general public, and on November 21st of the first year of Geonyang (建陽), Byeongsin (丙申) (1896 AD), this gate was erected south of the old Eungeunmun Gate. At the cornerstone ceremony, more than 5,000 officials and commoners gathered, and students from the government-run English School and the private Paichai School (培材學校) participated in the celebration, creating an unprecedented scene. Independence Hall was originally Mohwaru (慕華樓), which was renamed Mohwagwan (慕華館) in the 12th year of King Sejong. For hundreds of years, it was the welcoming place for Chinese envoys. During the era of the Independence Association, it was renamed Independence Hall and became a speech hall for the people. Later, the Iljinhoe (一進會) also used it as a speech hall for the people. It became the property of Song Byeong-jun (宋秉畯) and became the founding office of Donggwang Company (東光社). Now, it is owned by Heungup Agricultural Co., Ltd. (興業農業株式會社), which is a successor to the company, and is used as its office. Moreover, after the double-pillar gate was demolished, only two stone pillars remain, standing north of Independence Gate to this day.

<23> Memorial Stele Pavilion and Wongudan Altar: In the eastern corner of Gwanghwamun Intersection, there is an old pavilion, which is the Memorial Stele Pavilion erected in September of the 6th year of Gwangmu, Imin (壬寅), to celebrate the 40th anniversary of King Taejo's reign. On the surface of the stele, it is written "The Great Korean Emperor's Sixtieth Birthday and Fortieth Anniversary of Accession to the Throne Commemorative Stele and Preface." The text was written by the then Minister Yoon Yong-sun (尹容善), the writing was by Min Byeong-seok (閔丙奭) (then Vice Minister of the Army), and the seal script was by the Lee Royal Highness. (Commonly known as the Hwangtomaru Stele Pavilion) And in one corner of the current Chosun Hotel, there is an octagonal high pavilion, which is the Hwanggunwoo (皇穹宇) that was previously in the Wongudan Altar. The old site of this Wongudan Altar was the residence of Princess Gyeongjeong (慶貞公主), the second daughter of King Taejong, the third king of the Joseon Dynasty (married to Zhao Da-rim (趙大臨), Prince of Pyeongyang), which is why the area was previously called Gong-dong (large and small). Later, Zhao Da-rim was accused of a crime, and his house was confiscated. It became the residence of Prince Uian (義安君) Seong, the third son of King Seonjo. During the Imjin War, the Japanese general Ukita Hideie moved here from the Great Shrine and then withdrew. Later, the Ming general Li Rusong (李如松) stayed here. After the Ming Dynasty fell and the Qing Dynasty rose, this place became the lodging for Qing envoys again, which was the former Nambyeolgong. Later, Joseon became independent and built the Wongudan Altar on this site. On October 20th of the first year of Gwangmu, the Emperor ascended to this altar to worship Heaven and ascended to the throne. The altar was originally composed of three tiers, and each tier had a granite railing, which was carefully preserved. After the annexation, it became the site of the Chosun Hotel, and the altar was also demolished. The central area of the altar is now the site of the central lobby of the hotel. The octagonal hall that exists today is the Hwanggunwoo (皇穹宇), built three years after the altar, to enshrine the ancestral tablets of the gods of heaven, the gods of earth, and the Great Emperor.

Jangchungdan Altar: "Building Jangchungdan Altar under Namsan Mountain, honoring it with the music of the military band... Arirang" is still popular among the common people even now. This Jangchungdan Altar was formerly the site of the Nambyeong camp. On August 20th of the 32nd year of King Taejo, Eulmi (乙未), it was established to commemorate the court officials Yi Gyeong-jik (李耕稙) and Hong Gye-hun (洪啓薰), the leader of the allied forces, who died honorably during the assassination of Queen Min. The completion was in November of the 4th year of Gwangmu, Gyeongja, and the epitaph was written by Min Young-hwan (閔泳煥), the honorable loyalty. Recently, a park has been established, and the sports field and other facilities are relatively complete among the parks in Gyeongseong. The surrounding pine forest is dense, and in spring, forsythias and cherry blossoms are in full bloom, and the weeping willows are famous. In the inner area, there is mineral water, and the electric bus goes directly into the park, so there are many visitors for strolls in all seasons.

Thirteen-Story Pagoda and Six Masterpiece Stele = Pagoda Park: Pagoda Park is located in the center of Gyeongseong, and it is always full of dust. Besides the narrow base and lack of facilities, it is insignificant compared to Namsan and Jangchung two parks. However, because it is located in the central area of Koreans, it has become the only promenade for people near Jongno, and because there are many historical relics, there are many visitors from home and abroad. This was originally the old site of Heungboksa Temple (興福寺) of Goryeo. After King Taejo established the capital in Hanyang, it was designated as the headquarters of the Jogye Order (曹溪宗). In the 3rd year of King Taejo, it was abolished, and the Music Academy (樂學都監) was established. In the 10th year of King Sejo, Eul-yu (乙酉), King Sejo built Wongaksa Temple (圓覺寺) for his elder brother, Grand Prince Hyoryeong (孝寧大君) (whose name was Bo). (Grand Prince Hyoryeong preached the Wongak Dharma Assembly at Hwiam Temple (檜巖寺) in Yangju, and it was reported that Tathagata appeared and sarira split into hundreds of bodies, so King Sejo ordered Grand Prince Imyeong (臨瀛大君) Gyu (璆) (fourth son of King Sejong) and Chief State Councilor Shin Suk-ju (申叔舟) to demolish more than 200 houses with more than 2,100 soldiers, manufacture 80,000 blue tiles, and build the Great Wongaksa Temple. The perimeter of the temple was 2,000 steps, the main hall of the temple was the Great Gwangmyeong Hall (大光明殿), the left was the meditation room (禪室), the right was Unjip (雲集), the gate was called Jeokgwang (寂光), the next gate was called Banya (般若), the outer gate was called Haetal (解脫), the bell tower was called Beoproe (法雷), the kitchen was called Hyangjeokryo (香寂寮), and the sutra repository was called Haejang (海藏). Wongak means Buddhist scriptures, the construction of the temple began in June of the 10th year and was completed in October of the same year, and the completion ceremony was on April 8th of the following year.) Later, in the 10th year of Yeonsan, the temple was abolished, houses were confiscated, and a pleasure house called Yeollimbangwon (聯芳院) was widely established. After King Jungjong's coup, in the 7th year, Im-sin (壬申), all of these were abolished, and the blue tiles were distributed to each temple, and other timber was returned to the people who had their houses destroyed during the Yeonsan period. Since then, the base has been desolate, becoming the gardens of private houses, and the turtle-shaped stele and stone pagoda have been buried in the remnants of smoke and yellow dust for hundreds of years. From the 2nd year of Gwangmu, the customs office managed this pagoda to preserve the Wongaksa Pagoda (圓覺塔), and the Seoul City Hall purchased houses and established a park under the supervision of the internal civil engineering bureau, following the opinion of the Englishman Brown. (The octagonal pavilion was also newly built at that time.) At that time, it was not open every day, but only twice a week, and the base was smaller than it is now. After that, it was expanded somewhat and opened every day, but after the Manse (萬歲) incident in the year Gimi, the back door was closed, but recently it has been reopened. The Wongaksa Stele (圓覺寺碑) and the Thirteen-Story Stone Pagoda in this park are the great sights of Gyeongseong. The Wongaksa Stele is 4.5 cheok wide and 11.5 cheok high (including the螭首), and the six-character seal script "Stele of the Great Wongaksa Temple (大圓覺寺之碑)" on the stele's inscription is the calligraphy of Kang Hee-maeng (姜希孟), a famous calligrapher of the time of King Seongjong. The inscription on the front of the stele is the work of Kim Su-on (金守溫) (Goea), a civil official of the time of King Sejo, written by the famous calligrapher Seong Im at that time. The writing on the back is by Seo Geo-jeong (徐居正) (Saga) and written by Jeong Ran-jong (鄭蘭宗). In addition to having the works of the three major calligraphers and two major writers, the carvings are also masterpieces, so it is called the Six Masterpiece Stele of Joseon. According to the inscription, it was erected in April of the 7th year of Seonghwa, so Seonghwa is the reign title of Emperor Xianzong of Ming, corresponding to the 2nd year of King Seongjong of Joseon (1471 AD, 459 years ago). Originally, this stele was planned to be erected at the same time as the construction of Wongaksa Temple, and King Sejo had Kim Su-on write the text, but King Sejo passed away, so the stele could not be erected. In the time of King Seongjong, Seo Geo-jeong, Kang Hee-maeng, Seong Im, and Jeong Ran-jong, etc., were commissioned to write it and erect it. Also, the stone pagoda is often mistakenly said in popular lore to be the pagoda of the Yuan Dynasty by Yuan Prime Minister Tokhto Bukha, but this is an ignorant statement.

<25> According to the above inscription and the Veritable Records of King Sejo, it is clear that it was completed on April 6th of the 12th year of King Sejo (1467 AD = 463 years ago) and the completion ceremony was held on April 8th of the following year. (The Wongaksa Stele inscription says, "Also, on April 8th of next year (that is, April 8th of the 12th year), at the completion of the stupa (called stupa in Sanskrit), the Dharma Assembly will be held," and the entry on April 8th of the 13th year of the Veritable Records of King Sejo says, "The Wongaksa Pagoda was completed and a lantern festival was held to celebrate.") The height of the stele is about 40 cheok, and the base of the pagoda is made of three layers of granite. Including the upper 7 stories and the lower 3 stories, it is also called a 10-story pagoda. In addition, adding the 3 tiers of the base, it is called a 13-story pagoda. On the upper 7 stories, Buddha statues are carved on all four sides. On the lower 3 stories, 12 assemblies (靈山, 三世佛, 彌陀, 龍華, 圓覺, 華嚴, 多寶, 法華, 旃檀, 消災, 藥師, 楞嚴) are carved on all four sides. The three tiers of the base are all carved with dragons and lions, peonies, people, birds and animals, lotus leaves, and arhats. However, the 3 stories of this pagoda that were removed are said in popular lore to have been left as they were because Japanese soldiers during the Imjin War tried to remove them, but there was an unusual disaster. In fact, when the temple was abolished during the time of King Jungjong, the upper 3 stories were taken down to be moved to Hwiam Temple (檜巖寺), but suddenly a dense fog arose and laborers were injured, so it was stopped. Also, the stones of Wongaksa Temple were used for the stones of Gwangtong Bridge (廣通橋), Cheonggyecheon (淸溪川) channels, and stone columns and stone walls on both banks, so you can imagine how large and beautiful the stones were at that time.

Sajik Park: This park was originally the main site of the Sajik Altar, and it was liberated in recent years to become a park. It is a good park in the western part of Gyeongseong with dense pine forests and excellent rocks and water. The Sajik Altar was built in the 3rd year of King Taejo. Sa (社) is the one who worships Hooto (后土), located in the east, and Jik (稷) is the one who worships Hojik (后稷), that is, the god of grain, located in the west. The shrines of the two altars face north, with a square-bottomed, round-topped stone in the center (the deity). The outer side of the altar is surrounded by a three-tiered stone altar with a perimeter of 26 cheok in Zhou scale (1 Zhou cheok is usually 6 cheok 7 bun 5 mao in


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	京城이 가진 名所와 古蹟
필자	考古生
기사형태	문예기타

京城이 가진 名所와 古蹟
						考古生
景福宮-昌德宮-德壽宮-於義宮-慶熙宮-慈壽宮-仁慶宮-毓祥宮-永禧殿-璿源殿-長生殿-大廟-獨立門-獨立館紀念碑-園丘壇-獎忠壇-塔洞公園-社稷-三角山-北漢山城-洗劍亭-石坡亭-南山-北岳山-漢江鐵橋-六臣墓-四忠祠-關羽廟-文廟

十二宮殿과 宗廟

景福宮 景福宮은 원래 李太祖4년 乙亥 2월에 기공하야 同년 9월에 준공하얏스니 이름을 景福이라 함은 詩傳周雅에 君子萬年에 介以景福이란 것을 取함이니 鄭道傳이 太祖의 命을 承하야 선정한 것이다. 其後 제2世 定宗大王 원년 일시 開城에 移都하얏다가 제3世 太宗5년에 다시 此宮에 還御한 후 이래 200년간의 왕궁이 되엿더니 제14世왕 宣祖25년 壬辰4월에 外亂이 起하야 宣祖가 義州로 파천하고 都城이 공허하매 亂民이 燒火하야 궁전이 전부 소실되고 其後 274년간을 황폐한 故基로 잇다가 踞今 66년전 甲子에 李太王이 즉위하고 大院君이 섭정하매 그는 일반의 정치를 쇄신하는 동시에 此 궁전의 중건을 계획하야 乙丑 6월20일에 定礎式을 행하야 그 翌年 丁卯7월에 준공하고 又其<18> 翌年 戊辰에 昌德宮으로부터 此에 移御하얏다. 現에 잔존한 勤政殿, 思政殿, 修政殿, 慈慶殿, 慶會樓, 光化門(元南門), 建春門(東門), 迎秋門(西門), 神武門(北門) 등 중요 건물은 다 당시의 건축한 것으로(명칭은 물론 이전 것을 仍用한 것이다) 其中 勤政殿과 慶會樓는 규모가 宏大하고 건축이 또한 교묘하니 慶會樓는 間數108(階下287평)로 145척 되는 石柱 48本이 有하고 其 주위에는 蓮池가 有하며 池中에 2島가 잇스니 전일에 君臣이 연회하던 곳이오 勤政殿은 景福宮의 正殿이니 왕의 즉위 及 기타 公式大禮를 행하던 곳이다. (此殿도 四門이 잇섯스니 南曰勤政, 又其 南曰弘禮, 東曰日華, 西曰月華) 원래에는 光化門으로 入하면 전면에 興禮門(弘禮)이 잇고 興禮門 내에는 勤政門間이 잇스며 이 양문의 중간에는 동서로 貫流하는 溝渠(즉 錦川)가 잇고 川上에는 錦川橋란 石橋가 잇섯스나 지금은 정문과 勤政門에 잇는 여러가지의 시설한 것을 다 철거하고 其基址에 總督府 新청사를 건축하얏다. 殿의 東行閣에는 隆文, 西行閣에는 隆武의 2樓가 잇고 殿의 前庭에는 화강석의 石疊을 敷하고 중앙 보도의 좌우에는 문무 양반의 席次를 示한 정일품으로 종9품까지의 石柱가 立하얏스며 殿의 기단 좌우 양단에는 大銅鼎이 1개식 잇고 其 외측의 주위 2층 석계에는 웅대한 石欄을 設하얏스니 此殿은 朝鮮건축물 중 최대한 者일 뿐 안이라 支那唐代 이래의 궁전의 制에다 朝鮮 독특한 技工을 가한 者로 족히 세계에 자랑할 만한 것이다. 思政殿은(在勤政殿北) 왕의 便殿으로 매 朝政事를 視하던 곳이오 修正殿은 왕의 聽政의 궁전으로 韓國시대에 일시 내각에서 이용하다가 지금은 박물관의 일부 진열실이 되엿다. (光化門 외 他 宮門은 他項에 載함) 移御 후 24년간 국정은 此 궁궐에서 요리되엿더니 距今 34년전 乙未 2월11일(陰 정월2일)에 太皇帝가 俄館으로 播遷하얏다가 其 翌年 丁酉(建陽2년) 2월20일에 慶運宮(즉 德壽宮)으로 移御하고 다시 도라오지 안이하니 其 궁전은 遂히 廢宮이 되야 凄烟冷雨에 烏雀이 亂鳴할 뿐이러니 大正4년 共進會시대에 勤政殿, 慶會樓 등 중요 건물을 除한 외 기타 건물은 또 撤毁하고 당시 미술관은 박물관으로 仍存하야 今日까지 至햐앗스며 前日에 왕 及 왕후의 正寢이 되엿던 康寧, 交泰 兩殿은 大正6년에 昌德宮 내로 移建하고 지금은 其後庭의 蛾眉山만 녯자취를 직히고 잇슬 뿐이엿다. 궁의 주위 石墻은 1,813보, 高는 21척1촌이오 廣은 神武門 以南만이 약 13만평이니 石墻은 지금 대부분 撤毁되엿다.

昌德宮 此는 李朝太祖가 景福宮과 동시에 창건한 별궁으로(景福宮보다 少後함) 壬辰亂 때에 또한 兵火에 소실되엿다가 光海君 원년(宣祖39년 始役) 己酉에 중건하엿더니 其後 仁政殿이 또 파손되야 제23世 純祖大王4년 甲子(距今 126년 전)에 다시 修築하고 또 내전을 건축하얏다. 純宗이 德壽宮에서 此궁으로 移御하기는 隆熙원년 丁未 12월이엿슴으로 그때까지는 景福宮과 가티 한 廢宮으로 잇섯다가 其時에 대수리를 하고 부속청사도 새로 건축하야 왕궁의<19> 면목을 인신케 하엿다. 其 정문은 敦化門(南門), 동은 宣仁門, 서는 金虎, 북은 廣智오(문의 내력은 八門 及 宮門기사에 載함) 정문내 右方에는 李王職이 잇고 又 左方에 유명한 2층누각의 仁政殿을 중심으로 한 각 전각이 有하니 2층의 承華樓, 宙合樓(階 上下 합80餘疊을 敷하는데 궁중 연회소다)는 其中 結構장식이 공히 華麗壯大하더니 불행이 大正6년 11월10일에 大造殿 西方 1실에서 失火되야 大造殿, 熙政堂, 景薰閣, 澄光樓, 기타 건물이 일시 烏有에 歸하고 同年 12월에 다시 기공하야 景福宮 勤政殿 후방에 잇는 交泰 康寧 兩殿을 移建한 바 공사가 凡3년을 亘하야 大正9년 12월25일에 落成하얏다.

昌慶宮 昌慶苑은 元 昌慶宮내에 잇스니 昌慶宮은 往昔麗朝 때의 壽康宮 舊址로 李太祖가 漢都에 移御한 후 昌德宮과 공히 壽康宮(舊名울 仍用)이란 별궁을 건축하엿더니 其後 백여년을 經하야 제9世 成宗大王14년 癸卯에 왕이 貞熹王后 尹씨(世祖王妃, 成宗의 祖母妃), 仁粹王后 韓씨(德宗王妃니 成宗生母妃), 安順王后 韓씨(睿宗繼妃니 成宗養母妃) 3인의 과부왕후를 위안하고 且朝見의 식을 擧하는 장소로 사용하기 위하야 (成宗이 正朔에 君臣을 率하고 上記 三宮에 賀한 후 궁내 明政殿에 御하야 朝賀를 受함) 고궁을 毁撤하고 다시 新宮을 建하얏스니 此가 즉 昌慶宮이다. 그후 壬辰亂 때에 이것도 또한 兵火에 燒失되고 다만 弘化門, 明政門, 明政殿만 남앗더니 光海朝8년에 다시 대수축을 하얏스니 此 明政殿, 明政門, 弘化門은 彼 南大門, 敦化門과 공히 京城 5대 목조건물로 최고의 역사를 가진 것이다.

其後 융희 원년 丁未에 隆熙帝가 移御한 후 당 某某大官의 發議로 왕가의 遊樂을 위하야 동식물원 及 박물관을 설치하고 동물은 其時 私營 동물원(소규모)업을 하는 劉漢性 소유의 동물을 전부 구입하고 飼養 기타 관계로 그를 동물원장으로 삼엇고 식물은 日本 宮內省 內苑에 교섭하야 구입하얏스며 博物은 宮內府 某某高官이 其任에 당하야 넒이 蒐集하얏다. 당시에는 但히 왕가의 한 오락장에 불과하더니 其後 점차 확장함을 따러 隆熙3년 己酉10월부터 일반에 공개하게 되엿는데 지금은 규모도 자못 宏大하고 기타 일반 설비가 완전할 뿐 안이라 봄이면 夜櫻이 특히 불만하고 관람자 每夜 수만에 달한다. 식물원의 북에는 老樹가 울창하고 구릉이 逶迤하니 此 즉 秘苑이다. 四園에 풍광이 幽邃하고 水石이 奇麗하니 其中 玉流泉, 太極亭은 國中의 勝景地로 봄에는 백화가 만발하고 가을에는 단풍이 錦繡와 가튼 中 秘苑의 珍物인 松茸가 산출하야 한번 보면 仙境에 入함과 如한 感이<20> 잇다. 다만 유감은 특별한 사람 이외에는 아즉 일반 관람을 식히지 안는 것이다.

德壽宮 此宮은 원래 成宗大王의 生家 형 月山大君婷(德宗의 長子)의 사저로 壬亂 후 宣祖가 환도하매(癸巳 10월4일 還都) 여러 궁궐이 모다 燒失되엿슴으로 부득이 此를 行宮으로 정하야 慶運宮이라 칭하고(소위 時御所) 沈義謙의 家는 東宮으로 沈連源家는 中宮으로 편입하고 부근 大小家로 임시 궐내 各司를 정하엿더니 光海君원년 己酉에 昌德宮이 중건되고 왕이 移御한 후에는 但히 行宮으로 잇던 바 光海3년에 主가 仁穆大妃(宣祖繼妃 金씨)를 此궁에 幽閉하고 西宮이라 개칭하엿더니 仁祖가 반정한 후 다시 明禮宮이라 명명하얏다. 其後 李太皇이 俄館에 播遷한 후 다시 慶運宮이라 개칭하더니 光武8년 4월14일 밤에 궁중이 失火하야 咸寧殿(寢殿), 中和殿(受朝正殿)이 沒燒되야 此를 중건하얏다. 궁내에는 觀明殿, 卽祚殿, 昔御殿, 壽仁堂, 靜觀軒, 景孝殿이 잇고 咸寧殿 서에 石造殿이 잇스니 此는 英人 『떼비슨』의 설계로 소위 『루네상쓰』식이다. 其 서북에는 九成軒과 敦德殿이 잇스니 또한 洋式이오 정문은 건설 초에는 敦禮門이러니 후에 외곽을 확장함에 따러 大安門을 建하니 卽今의 大漢門이오 德壽宮이라 칭하기는 최근 丁未年에 李太皇이 禪位하고 純宗이 즉위한 후 昌德宮으로 移御하며 始한 것이니 此는 은퇴한 李太皇의 壽德을 祝하는 의미엿다.

慶熙·慈壽·仁慶 三宮 慶熙宮은 元是 李太祖의 舊邸로 光海8년 丙辰에 術者의 言에 의하야 慈壽, 仁慶 양궁과 공히 창건하얏스니 원명은 慶德宮으로 英祖36년에 慶熙라 개칭하고 受朝正殿은 崇政殿, 정문은 興化門이니 지금 西大門町에 잇는 京城中學 及 總督府관사가 그 基址다. 그리고 仁慶, 慈壽 양궁은 仁王山 下에 建하얏더니 仁祖反正 후 此를 毁撤하얏스니 지금에도 順化病院 통로의 石橋를 慈壽宮 다리라 칭함은 此로 인함이다.

於義宮 이 궁은 孝宗大王(仁祖의 子)이 大君 때에 주거하던 別邸이엿는데 孝宗은 세자로서 丙子胡亂 때에 고난을 만히 격근 까닭으로 此를 기념하기 위하야 정중이 보관하고 其後 별궁과 同樣으로 왕세자 기타 왕족의 結婚式所로 充用하얏다. 지금은 대부분이 훼철되고 警務課 分室의 신건물이 녯터를 차지하고 잇고 다만 고색창연한 잔존의 일부 구건물과 一枝五本의 白松이 잇서서 녯 역사를 말할 뿐이다. 此 白松은 別項에 기재하얏거니와 京城에 잇는 白松 중 최대한 者로 樹齡이 약 400년 되는 珍木이다. (今 內資洞)<21>
此外에 宮井洞에는 毓祥宮이 잇스니 此는 英祖생모 崔씨의 궁이다.

永禧殿 원래에 此殿은 지금 永樂町과 本町의 교차점으로부터 本町경찰서에 至하는 일대의 지역에 잇섯스니(舊 竹洞) 그 표면을 赤塗하엿기 때문에 赤門이라 칭하얏고 지금 소위 永樂町의 永자도 此 永禧殿의 永자에서 出한 것이다. 此址는 본시 世祖의 一女 懿淑公主(下嫁 河城府院君 鄭顯祖)의 邸로서 中宗왕비 端敬王后 愼씨(中宗 제1왕비)가 遜位한 후 此에 은거하야 南別殿이라 칭하더니 光海<pers>朝 때에 <pers>太祖, 世祖 양 대왕의 초상을 봉안하고 비로소 永禧殿이라 칭하고 其後 역대 군주의 초상도 또한 안치하야 爾來 누100년을 보존하더니 光武4년에 總督府병원의 後庭 즉 現今의 위치 總督府의원 後로 이전하얏다. (永禧殿에는 대개 兵亂 反正亂 지난 군주의 御眞을 봉안한 고로 前日 거동 때에 군왕이 특히 戎服을 함) 지금에 永禧殿이 되여 잇는 건물은 원래 正祖가 그의 부왕인 莊祖大王(즉 思悼世子)의 非命에 죽은 것을 애도하기 위하야 建한 思悼廟(일명 景慕宮)이엿다.

璿源殿 璿源殿은 원래 永成門 대궐 내에 잇다가 근래에 그것이 毁撤되며 苑洞 막바지 지금의 위치(전 陸軍武官學校舍)로 이전하얏스니 此殿내에는 李朝 역대 군주의 睟容을 봉안한 바 凡11실로 分하얏다. 제1실은 太祖大王, 제2실은 世祖大王, 제3실은 元宗大王(仁祖의 부왕으로 追崇), 제4실은 肅宗大王, 제5실은 英祖大王, 제6실은 正祖大王, 제7실은 純祖大王, 제8실은 翼宗大王(憲宗 부왕으로 追崇), 제10실은 哲宗大王, 제11실은 高宗大皇帝(이것은 공덕이 잇는 이를 표준한 것이 안이오 君主 중 御眞이 잇는 이만 봉안한데 불과한 것이다) 그리고 此 부근은 元 大報壇 자리니 大報壇은 肅宗 때에 明의 神宗을 祀하기 위하야 建한 것이다.

大廟와 長生殿 大廟(宗廟)는 本殿 及 永寧殿 2궁이 잇스니 本殿은 군주 중 大功이 有한 이를 祀하는 所오 永寧殿은 此에 누락된 이 또는 왕세자로 薨去 후 王號를 追崇한 이를 祀하는 곳이다. 이 宗廟는 太祖4년 9월에 창건하얏던 바 其後 壬辰亂 때에 敵將 浮田秀家가 此를 占하고 진영을 設하얏더니 每夜에 怪神이 출현하야 혹은 병졸을 驚死케 하고 또는 縊殺하니 적군이 大驚하야 이것은 大廟의 탓이라 하고 燒火한 후 小公洞(今 朝鮮호텔지)으로 利屯하얏다. 지금의 건물은 平亂 후 光海朝에 다시 중건한 것이다. 그리고 지금의 蓮池洞 高等工業學校 부근 長生殿(又는 長宣殿)이란 고건물이 잇스니 이는 왕실의 棺槨 등을<22> 제작 보관하는 곳이다.

四大紀念物과 三大公園

獨立門과 獨立館 서을 사람 안이 朝鮮 사람치고는 서울의 무슨 고적보다도 獨立門이나 獨立館은 누구나 잘 기억할 것이다. 이 獨立門은 본래 紅箭門으로 中宗30년(서기 1535)에 雙柱門으로 改立하고 延詔門이라 扁하얏다가(明帝의 詔를 延하는 의미) 同34년에 明使 薛延寵이 迎恩門이라 개편하고 宣祖39년에 明使 朱之蕃의 筆로 揭額하엿더니 甲午 日淸戰役 후 馬關條約에 의하야 朝鮮이 완전 독립됨으로 太上王31년 甲午 2월12일(서기1895년 1월10일)에 왕은 친히 太廟에 臨하야 독립 誓告를 하고 翌年 정월에(陽2월) 迎恩門을 毁撤하엿더니(朱之蕃의 迎恩門 額字는 지금 總督府 學務課 分室에 보존함) 其後 徐載弼이 米國으로부터 귀국하며 李商在, 尹致昊 외 某某人과 獨立協會를 이르키며 그 會의 發起로 일반 국민의 義捐金을 모집하야 建陽원년 丙申(서기1896) 11월21일에 구 迎恩門 南에 此門을 立하얏다. 其 立礎式에는 官民 상하 5천여인이 會集하고 특히 官立 英語學校와 私立 培材學校 학생은 축하로 참가를 하야 공전의 성황을 이르럿섯고 獨立館은 元 慕華樓로 世宗12년에 慕華館으로 개칭하야 이래 수백년간 中國使行의 迎賓所가 되엿다가 그 亦 獨立協會 시대에 獨立館으로 개칭하야 국민의 연설집회소가 되엿더니 其後 一進會가 또한 국민의 연설대로 사용하다가 宋秉畯의 소유가 되야 東光社創立事務所가 되엿더니 지금은 그 계통인 興業農業株式會社의 소유가 되는 동시에 그 사무소로 充用한다. 尙又 雙柱門은 撤廢한 후 兩箇 石柱만 잔존하야 지금까지 獨立門 북측에 立하얏다.<23>

紀念碑閣과 圜丘壇 光化門通 네거리 東隅에 고색창연한 한 전각이 잇스니 이것은 光武6년 壬寅9월에 李太王의 御在位40년을 축하하기 위하야 立한 紀念碑閣이다. 碑의 표면에는 『大韓國大皇帝寶齡六旬御極四十年稱慶紀念碑並序』라 書하얏스니 撰文은 당시 議政 尹容善, 書는 閔丙奭(其時 陸軍副長) 篆은 李王殿下의 筆이다.(속칭 黃土마루碑閣) 그리고 現今 朝鮮호텔의 一隅에 八角의 高閣이 잇스니 이것은 전일 圜丘壇 구내에 잇던 皇穹宇다. 이 圜丘壇의 故址는 李朝 제3世왕 太宗의 제2왕녀 慶貞公主의 邸(平壤府院君 趙大臨에게 下嫁하얏는대 此로 인하야 전일에 그 부근을 公洞(大,小)이라 함)로 其後에 趙大臨이 得罪하야 집을 籍沒한 후 宣祖 제3子 義安君 珹의 邸가 되엿더니 壬辰亂 때에 日將 浮田秀家가 太廟로부터 此에 이둔하얏다가 퇴거하고 其後 明將 李如松이 此에 체류하엿섯다. 明이 망하고 淸이 흥한 후 此所는 다시 淸의 사절 숙박소가 되엿스니 전일 南別宮이 즉 이것이다. 其後 朝鮮이 독립되며 此地에 圜丘壇을 築하고 光武원년 10월20일에 皇帝은 此에 登하야 天에 祭하고 帝位에 卽하얏다. 壇은 원래 3단으로 成하고 각 단은 화강암의 난간을 設하고 존중이 보관하더니 합병 후 朝鮮호텔의 基地가 되며 壇도 훼철되엿스니 壇의 中央地는 지금 호텔의 중앙부 대합실 터이다. 現今에 잇는 八角堂은 壇을 築한지 3년 후에 天神, 地祗 及 太皇帝의 위패를 祠하던 皇穹宇다.

獎忠壇 南山 밋헤 獎忠壇을 짓고 軍樂隊 장단에 밧드려 총만 한다라는 아리랑타령... ...은 지금도 아즉까지 俗間에 유행한다. 이 獎忠壇은 녯날 南別營 자리로 李太王32년 乙未 8월20일 閔妃被弑事變 때에 節死한 궁내 大臣 李耕稙과 聯隊長 洪啓薰을 祀하기 위하야 設한 것이니 준공하기는 光武4년 庚子11월이오 비문은 忠正公 閔泳煥이 書하얏다. 근래에는 공원을 설치하야 운동장 기타 설비가 京城 여러 공원 중 비교적 완비하고 四圍의 송림이 울밀할 뿐 안이라 봄에는 莘荑花(개나리), 櫻花가 盛開하고 또 버들이 조키로 유명하며 그 奧地에는 약수가 잇고 電車 「뻐스」가 공원 내까지 직통하는 까닭에 四時 산보의 객이 만타.

十三層塔과 六絶碑=塔洞公園 塔洞公園은 京城 시가 중앙에 잇서서 항상 塵埃가 가득하고 基地가 狹少한 외에 아모 설비가 업서서 彼南山, 獎忠兩公園에 비하면 아주 보잘것이 업스나 朝鮮人 중심지대에 잇기 때문에 鍾路 부근 사람의 유일한 산보지가 되고 또 역사적 유물이 만흔 까닭에 내외인의<24> 관람객이 만타. 此는 원래 高麗의 興福寺 舊基로 太祖가 漢陽에 定都한 후에 曺溪宗 本社로 삼엇더니 太祖3년에 此를  廢止하고 樂學都監을 두엇다가 世祖10년 乙酉에 世祖가 其兄 孝寧大君(名은 補니 제2兄) 위하야 此에 圓覺寺를 창건하엿더니(孝寧大君이 楊州 檜巖寺에서 圓覺法會를 설하는데 如來가 現相하고 사리가 百餘로 分身하얏다고 啓함으로 世祖가 此를 기념하기 위하야 臨瀛大君 璆(世宗 제4남)와 領相 申叔舟 등을 명하야 2천백여의 役軍으로 민가 200여호를 毁하고 靑瓦 8만장을 製하야 大圓覺寺를 창건하고 又 大鍾을 鑄하니 寺의 주위가 2천步오 寺의 正殿은 大光明殿, 좌는 禪室, 우는 雲集, 門曰 寂光, 次門曰 般若, 其外門曰 解脫, 鍾閣曰 法雷, 供辨廠曰 香寂寮, 藏經殿曰 海藏이라 칭하고 圓覺은 불경을 意함이오 寺의 起工은 10년6월 畢工은 同년10월, 落成式은 그 翌年 4월8일) 其後 燕山10년에 寺를 廢하고 민가를 沒毁하야 聯芳院이란 妓樂所를 廣設하엿다가 中宗이 反正 후 7년 壬申에 此를 전부 철폐하야 靑瓦는 각 사찰에 分給하고 기타 재목은 燕山時 毁家당한 諸민가에 환급하얏다. 이래 그 基地는 遂히 황폐하야 민가의 정원이 되고 龜碑와 석탑은 但히 殘烟黃埃 중에 매몰하야 수백년을 나려 오다가 光武2년부터 此 圓覺塔을 보관하기 위하야 稅關에서 관리하고 又 漢城府에서는 인가를 매입하야 내부 토목국 감독으로 英國人 『뿌라운』의 의견을 從하야 공원을 設하얏다.(八角亭도 其時 신축) 그때에는 매일 공개치 안코 다만 일주일에 2차식 공개하고 基地도 지금보다도 협소하엿더니 其後 다소 확장하고 매일 공개하얏던 바 己未年 만세사건이 그 곳에서 이러난  뒤로 그 후문을 봉쇄하얏다가 최근에 다시 洞開하얏다. 이 공원 내에 잇는 圓覺寺碑와 十三層石塔은 京城의 대명물이니 圓覺寺碑는 폭이 4척5촌, 高가 11척5촌(螭首이지)이오 碑額에 『大圓覺寺之碑』 6자 篆書는 成宗 때 명필 姜希孟의 유묵이오 비의 前面 비문은 世祖 때 文臣 金守溫(乖厓)의 文으로 그때 명필 成任이 쓰고 후면의 文은 徐居正(四佳)이 짓고 鄭蘭宗이 썻스니 上記 3대 명필, 2대 문장의 手蹟이 구비한 외에 조각이 또한 천하 걸작인 고로 朝鮮六絶碑라 칭한다. 비문에 의하면 成化7년 4월 立이라 하얏슨즉 成化는 明의 憲宗 연호로 朝鮮 成宗2년에 해당하다.(서기1471 距今459년 전) 원래 이 비도 圓覺寺 창건 즉시에 立하기로 계획하야 世祖가 金守溫으로 文을 撰케 하얏스나 世祖가 승하함으로 비를 立치 못하얏다가 成宗 때에 이르러 徐居正, 姜希孟, 成任, 鄭蘭宗 등으로 筆之書之케하야 此를 立한 것이다. 又 석탑은 속간에서 흔히 誤傳하기를 高麗 때 元承相 脫脫不花의 願塔으로 元人인 所作이라 하나 此는 沒識한 말이다.<25>
上記한 비문이라던지 世祖實錄에 의하면 世祖12년(서기1467=距今463년 전) 4월6일에 준공하야 翌年 4월8일에 낙성식을 한 것이 분명하다.(圓覺寺碑文에 云하되 又 明年 4월8일에(즉 12년4월8일)以窣覩婆(梵書에 稱塔曰窣覩婆)成에 轉法會라 하고 世祖實錄13년 4월8일 기사에 (圓覺寺塔成設燃燈會以落成云云)비의 高는 약40척, 탑의 기단은 3층의 화강석으로 造하얏는데 상부7층, 하부3층을 합하야 10층탑이라고도 하고 又 此에 3기단까지 加하야 13층탑이라고 한다. 상부7층에는 4면에 불상를 刻하고 하부3층에는 4면에 12會(靈山,三世佛,彌陀,龍華,圓覺,華嚴,多寶,法華,旃檀,消災,藥師,楞嚴)의 圖를 刻하고 기단은 3층이 공히 龍獅, 牧丹, 人物, 鳥獸, 蓮葉, 羅漢 등을 刻하얏다. 然而 此탑의 撤下된 3층은 俗傳에 壬亂시 日兵이 移去하랴다가 異災가 잇스서서 그대로 두엇다하나 사실은 中宗 때에 寺를 撤廢할 시에 此를 檜岩寺로 移하랴고 상부3층을 取下하는데 홀연 濃霧가 急起하고 인부가 부상하야 중지한 것이다. 又 圓覺寺의 석재는 지금 廣通橋, 淸溪川溝 石柱와 兩岸 石垣에 사용하얏스니 당시 석재가 如何히 宏大하고 美麗하엿던 것을 짐작할 수 잇다.

社稷公園 此 공원은 원래 社稷壇의 重地로 근년에 해방하야 공원이 된 것이니 송림이 울창하고 수석이 絶佳한 京城 서부의 好箇公園이다. 元 社稷壇은 太祖3년에 築하얏스니 社는 后土를 祀하는 者로 東에 在하고 稷은 后稷 즉 穀神을 祀하는 者로 西에 在하얏다. 兩壇神座는 皆 南坐北向으로 중앙에 方底圓頂의 石이 잇고(神體) 壇의 外方에는 3段의 石壇으로 圍가 周尺(1周尺은 보통尺의 6尺7分5毛)26척이오 사방 高는 3척4촌이 된다.

三大名山과 兩大鐵橋

三角山=北漢山城 三角山은 其 高2,634英尺으로, 일명은 華山 又는 北漢山이니 녯날에 百濟시조 溫祚王이 其 형 沸流와 가티 南行하다가 漢山負兒岳(新羅시에 負兒岳이라 칭함)에 놀나 可居之地를 相하얏다 함이 즉 此山이다. 江原道 분수령으로부터 來한 連峯疊岳이 逶迤屈曲하야 楊州 서남에서 道峯이 되고 其 餘脉이 돌기하야 此산이 되엿스니 白雲, 國望, 仁壽 三峯이 雲중에 돌출하야 3朶의 부용과 如한 고로 三角이라 명하얏다. 白雲이라 함은 太祖가 이에 올나서 『引手攀蘿上碧峯, 一庵高臥白雲中』이라는 御製詩를 지엿슴으로 仍名함이오 白雲臺로 從하야 남하하면 萬景臺니 太祖가 無學을 명하야<26> 此臺에서 國都를 相한 고로 國望峯이라 하고 人壽峯은 白雲臺 東方에 잇스니 仁者樂山-仁者壽-의 意를 取함이다. 山腹에는 北漢山城의 古址가 잇스니 此는 李朝 肅宗37년 辛卯에 築한 것으로 성의 주위 7,620보(1보는 營造尺 6尺이니 全 주위는 里程으로 약3里10町여) 城 高는 평지13척-14척, 山上10척, 女墻(銃穴塀)3척 내지 4척, 기타 半築處 6척 내지 7척이오 성문은 大南, 大城, 大西, 大東 4문이 잇고 성내에는 離宮 及 각 청사가 잇섯스나 지금은 모도 頹廢하고 且 사찰도 其 수가 甚多하얏스나 현존한 者는 성내에 太古, 元曉, 奉聖, 相雲, 扶旺 등 諸寺가 有하고 성외에는 僧伽, 津寬, 文殊(有 오백나한) 등이 잇스니 其中 太古寺는 李牧隱穡의 撰文한 普愚大師의 비가 잇다.(白雲臺 登路에는 근래에 京城 모모가 鐵鎖를 架하고 계단을 맨기러서 등산에 편리케 되엿다)

北岳山 京城의 북방 鎭山으로 일명은 白岳山이니(三角山 남면에 在함으로 高麗시에 面岳이라고도 함) 三角山 萬景臺의 南支로서 其形이 未開牧丹과 如하고 高가 1,296英尺이다. 其西는 仁旺山이니 산하에 淸風溪, 白雲洞, 紫霞洞, 弼雲臺, 松石園 등의 水石絶佳한 명소가 잇고 北岳의 下의 三淸洞은 水石이 京城에 제일이오 其東 白鹿洞은 송림이 울밀한 중, 翠雲亭 藥泉이 有하야 산책 放射의 객이 만타.

南山과 倭城臺

南山은 일명 終南(或曰引慶)이오 또는 木覓이니 木은 (南), 覓은 (山岳)의 음을 取함이니 역시 南山이란 뜻이다. 其高가 853英尺이니 최고봉은 蠶頭(속칭 加乙頭 又名 龍頭)오 南에 在한 者는 大雪馬峴(큰설마재), 西에 在한 者는 小雪馬峴(적은설마재 즉 설마는=橇-峻急하다는 뜻이니 咸鏡道에서 嶺의 峻急한 곳을 도트머리(직조기의 실 감는 것)라 함과 갓다)이다. 頂에는 國師堂(巫祠)이 잇고 또 그 부근에는 봉수대의 舊跡이 잇다. 이 산은 京城의 案山으로 송림이 울창하고 泉石이 絶佳하야 自來 勝地로 칭하던 중 근래에는 南山, 漢陽, 양 공원을 設하고 자동차가 통행함으로 登覽에 편리하고 또 漢陽公園 내에는 朝鮮神社가 宏大이 건설되고 山麓에는 노인정, 綠泉亭 등 水石의 명소가 잇고 又 其東에는 獎忠壇公園이 잇다. 구總督府가 잇던 倭城臺는 往昔 壬辰亂시에 적장 增田長盛의 주둔처인 고로 倭將臺라 칭한 것이 인하야 倭城臺가 되엿다 한다. 그러나 실은 倭將臺가 안이라 倭장터(倭市場基)이니 壬亂시 왜인이 그 곳에 시장을 設한 고로 生한 것이다.<27>

漢江=鐵橋 京城의명소를 말하는 중에 漢江을 또한 말하지 안을 수 업다. 漢江은 古稱 冽水 又 일명은 漢山河이니 朝鮮 제4의 大江이다. 기원이 三이 잇스니 一은 江原道 江陵 五臺山, 一은 忠淸道 報恩 俗離山, 一은 江原道 淮陽 金剛山 萬瀑洞에서 出하야 諸流가 相合汚流하다가 京城의 南에 至하야 비로소 漢江이 되고 西流하야 鷺梁, 龍山, 麻浦, 西江, 楊花渡가 된 후 西에서 祖江이 되야 海에 入한다. 其 연안은 풍경이 絶佳하고 且 鷺梁津에는 京釜, 京仁線의 철교와 인도교가 가설되야 교통이 편리할 뿐 안이라 結構가 심히 장대하고 풍치가 극히 佳好하야 京城의 일대 유람지가 되엿다. 尙又 龍山은 전일 萬里倉을 설치하고 各道 貢稅米를 貯置하던 곳이니 풍경이 絶佳하고 舟楫이 輻湊하야 시가가 자못 번영하고 江上에는 自來 名樓 *亭이 만헛다.(鐵橋기사 99頁餘白 참조)
此外에 彰義門의 洗劍亭은 往昔 仁祖反正시 여러 反正공신과 密議하던 處, 또는 肅宗 때 總戎廳 諸 武臣의 會遊處로 水石이 絶佳하고 石坡亭은 大院君의 遺亭으로 화훼, 수석 조키로 京都 부근에 저명한다.

六臣墓·四忠祠와 兩素王廟

六臣墓와 四忠祠 漢江鐵橋의 구경을 가는 사람은 누구나 그 철교 도는 철교 거너편에 잇는 水道局(仁川水道源地), 鳳山遊園, 그러치 안으면 象頭山에까지나 올나갓다 오면 대만족으로 생각할 것이다. 그러나 그보다도 아즉 세상 사람이 널니 잘 아지 못하는 눈물겨운 古蹟=漢江부근으로는 유일한 고적이 잇는 것을 알지 안어서는 안이 된다. 그것은 근래 모 신문지상에 續載되는 端宗哀話에도 낫타나는 端宗朝의 死六臣 成三問, 河緯地, 柳誠源, 朴彭年, 李塏, 兪應孚, 成三問의 부친 成勝諸賢의 묘다. 그들의 내력과 그 죽던 때의 사실은 여긔에 장황히 말하지 안커니와 그 時 그들은 端宗의 복위를 하랴다가 발각되야 世祖에게 가진 惡刑을 당하고서 최후 이 鷺梁津에서 斬戮 하얏는데 시체까지도 매장치 안코 그냥 노변에 放棄하엿더니 엇던 노승이 와서 매장을 하고 목패로 다만 成氏墓니 朴氏墓니 하는 표를 세우고 갓던 바(俗傳에 그 노승은 生六臣 중 1인인 東峯 金時習이라 한다) 其後 英祖34년 戊寅에 伸寃하야 그 관직을 복하고 그 묘패를 다시 석패로 立하며(그 亦 전과 가티 成氏之墓니 朴氏之墓라 함) 그 묘의 부근에 비각과 愍節書院을 立하얏더니 大院君 서원 철폐시에 그 亦 철폐되고 지금은 다만 荒墳과 묘비만 草莽中에 뭇처 잇슬 뿐이다. 그리고 鷺梁津 정거장 동남측에는 한 小丘가 잇스니 이는 전일 肅宗시대  老少黨爭의 경과로 희생된 소위 老論 4大臣 李頣命, 李健命, 金昌集, 趙泰釆 4인의 四忠書院(一云 鷺江書院)이니 此는 英宗시대에 건설한 者로 大院君 毁院時代에도 특전으로 면하얏더니 시대變運의 결과 지금은 始興郡 北面事務所가 되고 四忠書院이란 門額과 비석만 아즉까지 그 面所內에 잔존하야 잇다.

文廟 文廟=즉 成均館은 太祖7년 戊寅7월에 창건하얏더니 定宗2년에 失火燒盡됨으로 太宗7년에 다시 중건하고 同9년에 廟庭碑를 세웟던 바(春亭 卞季良이 비문을 撰함) 宣祖壬亂 때에 또 兵火로 인하야 일반 건물이 소실되고 비까지 燒破되엿슴으로 宣祖34년에 大成殿을 중건하고 同39년에 또 明倫堂을 낙성하얏다. 其後 仁祖4년 丙寅4월에 上이<28> 이 文廟의 전후 역사가 泯滅될가 염려하야 廟庭碑를 다시 立하게 命하되 전일 卞季良의 비문을 그대로 刻하게 하얏스니 당시 그 비문을 改書한 이는 李弘冑요 篆額은 金尙容, 碑陰은 月沙 李廷龜가 記하얏다.(사실의 梗槪만) 이래 春風秋雨 수백년간 유생의 尊崇地가 되엿다가 근래에는 다시 經學院이 되엿다.

關羽廟

서울에 關羽廟는 凡5개소가 잇스니 1은 南大門外 南廟(소위 生關王廟), 2는 東大門外 東廟(소위 死關王廟), 3은 西大門外 西廟, 4은 惠化門內(舊宋洞) 北廟, 5는 鍾路 普信閣 附屬廟다. 北廟는 京城 諸關廟 중 가장 역사가 日淺하니 李太王20년 癸未9월에 낙성한 것이다. 이 北廟 건설에는 우서운 이약이가 잇스니 즉 李太王은 壬午년 春間에 우연이 한 꿈을 뀐즉 엇던 壯漢이 長劍을 가지고 그를 해하랴 하는데 關羽가 구하야 주고 또 수일후 閔妃의 꿈에도 또한 그와 가튼 일이 잇슴으로 원래 미신 조와하는 그들은 이 關羽를 위할 필요가 잇다 생각하고 內帤金을 지출하야 이 廟를 짓고 그 낙성식에는 왕이 친히 奠酌禮를 행하고 왕세자까지 수행하며 또 비를 立하되 文은 御製하고 閔泳煥(忠正)으로 書케 하얏다. 그런데 공교하게도 그 翌年 甲申之變에 李太王은 이 北廟에서 亂을 피하얏슴으로 그와 일반 세상 사람들은 關王의 顯靈이 부합한다고 하고 더욱 關廟를 신앙하얏섯다. 甲午革新 후 此廟는 空閉하얏다가 약10여년 전에 三十本山에 대여하야 佛敎中央學校을 此에 設하얏더니 지금은 普成高普校의 교실이 되엿다.(지금은 新건물)
西廟는 지금 西大門박 濟生院 盲啞部의 前身이엿스니 이 廟는 특히 蜀漢 昭烈王 劉玄德을 主神으로 하고 關羽 張飛를 侍神으로 하엿스니 다른 關廟보다 이색이 잇는 바 關廟라는 이보다 昭烈廟라는 것이 適宜하겟다. 그리고 南廟는 諸廟 중 가장 먼저 짓고 건축과 기타 神像의 설비도 가장 웅대하니 宣祖31년 戊戌에 明將 陳寅이 蔚山에서 敗歸하야 此地에서 치료하는 중 關王의 顯靈이 잇섯다 하고 寅이 항상 關羽를 祀하더니 寅의 귀국할 際에 정부에서 기념 겸 此를 건축하고(32년 己亥4월) 其後3년만에 또 東廟를 건축하엿는데 此건축에는 明의 神宗帝가 內帤銀 4천냥을 기부하고 또 친필로 『顯靈昭德關王之廟』라 書한 위패까지 送하얏스니(지금 南東兩廟에 顯靈昭德關王廟의 6자 揭額은 英祖22년 7월에 御筆로 揭한 것이다) 諸廟 중 南北兩廟는 건물 기타 시설이 宏大할 뿐만 안이라 甲午전까지도 정부에서 亨祀를 하며 소중하게 보관하고 일반 인민의 拜參하는 者가 만헛스며 且 鍾路의 廟는 市廛의 사람들이 소규모로 위하던 것으로 일반은 잘 알지도 못하는 것이다. 然而 이 關王廟에 대하야는 俗間에서 말하기를 壬亂시 關羽가 顯靈하야 적을 격퇴한 고로 그 공으로 廟를 設하얏다 하나 실은 그 時 明人이 關羽를 크게 숭배하는 풍이 잇서서 朝鮮 체재 중에 關羽를 항상 祭亨함으로 정부에서 그 환심을 사고 또는 영웅 숭배심에 감염이 되여 이것을 지은 것이오 결코 다른 의미가 잇는 것은 안이다. 그것은 其時 明軍이 잇던 南原, 平壤, 京城가튼 곳에는 擧皆 關羽廟가 잇스되 다른 곳은 업은 것을 보와도 잘 짐작할 것이다. 이럼에 불구하고 사대사상에 중독이 되고 미신에 마취된 사람들은 關羽라는 羽자도 잘 불으지 못하고 關某 또는 關公 任關聖帝君하고 신앙하며 심지어 妖巫狂女까지 關帝가 집혓느니 奠乃가 집혓느니(奠乃도 關羽를 위하는 것)하고 惑世誣民을 한다. 엇지 가엽고 개탄할 일이 안이냐.<29>
<18-29>