잡지명	別乾坤 第23號
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	京城五大鍾辨正錄 (A Critical Record of the Five Great Bells of Kyŏngsŏng)
필자	靑吾
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

A Critical Record of the Five Great Bells of Kyŏngsŏng
						Ch'ŏng-o

There were originally five large bells in Seoul. The first was cast in the summer of Ŭlhae year (1395) of Taejo's 4th year and placed in the Chonggak (鐘閣) on Chongno (鐘路), where it was struck at dawn and dusk. This is the bell called the Original Ingyŏng (元인경), for which Yangch'on (陽村) Kwŏn Kŭn (權近) wrote the inscription. The second was cast on the 7th day of the 10th month of Taejong's 12th year (1412), and Pyŏn Ch'un-jŏng Kyeryang (卞春亭季良) wrote the inscription; it was cast to be hung in the Kwanghwamun (光化門) tower (Taejong's Commemorative Bell). The third was cast in the first month of Sejo's 3rd year (1457), and Sin Suk-chu (申叔舟) wrote the inscription; it was placed in the front eaves of the Sajŏng Hall (思政殿) inside Kyŏngbok Palace (景福內) to command the royal guards. The fourth was cast in the 10th month of Sejo's 7th year, Im-o year (1461, according to the bell inscription, the 10th month of Ch'ŏnsun 6th year, Im-o year); Yi Ch'am (吏叅) Han Kye-hŭi (韓繼禧) composed the bell inscription, and Yi Rang (吏郞) Chŏng Nan-jong (鄭蘭宗) wrote it; it was hung in Hŭngch'ŏn Temple (興天寺) in Chŏng-dong (貞洞) (the old temple guarding Chŏngnŭng (貞陵)). The fifth was cast in the second month of Sejo's 13th year (1467, Sŏnghwa 4th year, second month); the supervisor was Kwangsan-gun (光山君) Kim Kuk-kwang (金國光).

The first bell, the Original Ingyŏng (元인경), was burned and melted away when the Chonggak (鐘閣) was burned down during the Imjin War (壬辰亂). The second bell, the Kwanghwamun (光化門) tower bell, was also burned and lost when the palace was burned down during the Imjin War. The third bell was originally in the palace, but a pavilion was built outside Kwanghwamun (光化門) on the west side and it was moved there. In the first year of Yejong (睿宗), it was moved back into the palace. During the Imjin War, only the pavilion was burned down, and the bell remained. In the 24th year of Yŏngjo (英宗), the pavilion was rebuilt, but later the bell broke and did not make sound, so people called it the "mute bell." In the 3rd year of Yi T'aewang (李太王), Pyŏng-in year (1926), it was melted down and used to manufacture coins worth a hundred yang each. The saying "A guy who would take down the Ingyŏng (인경) and put it in his pocket" became a prophecy at this time.

The fourth bell, the Chŏngnŭng bell, was moved to Wŏngak Temple (圓覺寺) (now the site of T'apkol Park (塔洞公園址)) after Hŭngch'ŏn Temple (興天寺) was abandoned. When Wŏngak Temple (圓覺寺) was abandoned again in the 7th year of Chungjong (中宗) (1512), the powerful official Kim An-ro (金安老) tried to move it to the Tondaemun (東大門) and ring it at dawn and dusk, but An-ro (安老) failed shortly after and could not do so. For over 350 years since then, it remained on the side of Tondaemun (東大門). In the 5th month of the 24th year of Yŏngjo (英宗) (1748), the King said to the ministers of the Ministry of Land, "There is a bell inside Hŭnginmun (興仁門) and another outside Kwanghwamun (光化門). The bell surface has the insignia of King Sejo (光廟) and the Inner Court, and there are also royal inscriptions, so build pavilions and store them." He ordered them to build the pavilions and place them there. Recently, in the 3rd year of Yi T'aewang (李太王), Pyŏng-in year (1926), when Kwanghwamun (光化門) was rebuilt, he ordered monks from various temples to transport the Tondaemun (東大門) bell and hang it in the gate tower, holding a Buddhist ceremony and celebrating the completion of the gate. On April 28th of the 4th year of Yunghŭi (隆熙) (1910), it was moved and stored in the Yi Wangjik Museum (李王職博物館). The fifth bell is the one currently in Posinkak (普信閣). Like the aforementioned museum bell, it is famous as an antique and brother bell of Kyŏngsŏng.

However, regarding the origin of this bell, the 世祖紀 of 朝野會通 only states, "In the 13th year of Mu-o (戊午) [1468], a large bell was cast and placed on Unjong Street (雲從街) to herald the dawn and dusk." There is no mention of how it came to Posinkak (普信閣) now, nor is there any bell inscription or other record. In fact, the surface of this bell has been mostly melted, and only the names of the supervisors at the time of casting are recorded in 54 lines after Sŏnghwa 4th year, 2nd month (Sejo 13th year), so its history is difficult to know. (Many of the names have also been eroded.) However, it is certain that it was cast in Sŏnghwa 4th year, that is, Sejo 13th year, so it cannot be confused with the aforementioned bells. However, in various records published recently by people both inside and outside the country, most mistakenly identify this bell as the Chŏngnŭng bell, so readers should pay particular attention.

However, the current Posinkak (普信閣) was burned down in a large fire on October 28th of the 6th year of Yi T'aewang (李太王), Ki-sa year (1909), and rebuilt on October 28th of the same year. The sangnyangmun (上樑文, ridgepole inscription) was composed by Chŏng Ki-se (鄭基世), and the calligraphy was by Yep'an (禮判) Kim Tae-jin (金大振). The three characters "Posinkak (普信閣)" were recently unveiled on March 15th of the 32nd year of Yi T'aewang (李太王) (1935), with calligraphy by Haegang (海崗) Kim Kyu-jin (金圭鎭). <75>

**Named Entities**

京城	Kyŏngsŏng
鐘路	Chongno
陽村	Yangch'on
權近	Kwŏn Kŭn
卞春亭季良	Pyŏn Ch'un-jŏng Kyeryang
光化門	Kwanghwamun
思政殿	Sajŏngjŏn
申叔舟	Sin Suk-chu
景福內	Kyŏngbok nae
韓繼禧	Han Kye-hŭi
鄭蘭宗	Chŏng Nan-jong
貞洞	Chŏng-dong
興天寺	Hŭngch'ŏnsa
貞陵	Chŏngnŭng
光山君	Kwangsan-gun
金國光	Kim Kuk-kwang
睿宗	Yejong
英宗	Yŏngjo
李太王	Yi T'aewang
圓覺寺	Wŏngaksa
塔洞公園址	T'apkol Kongwŏnjji
中宗	Chungjong
金安老	Kim An-ro
東大門	Tondaemun
興仁門	Hŭnginmun
李王職博物館	Yi Wangjik Pangmulgwan
普信閣	Posinkak
朝野會通	Choyohoet'ong
雲從街	Unjonggae
鄭基世	Chŏng Ki-se
禮判	Yep'an
金大振	Kim Tae-jin
海崗	Haegang
金圭鎭	Kim Kyu-jin



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	京城五大鍾辨正錄
필자	靑吾
기사형태	잡저

京城五大鍾辨正錄
						靑吾
서울에는 원래에 큰 鐘이 5개가 잇섯스니 第一은 최초 太祖4년 乙亥 녀름에 鑄造하야 鍾路 鐘閣에 置하고 晨昏에 치던 것이니 이것이 元 인경이라 하는 鐘으로써 陽村 權近이 銘을 지엿고 第二는 太宗12년 10월初7일에 鑄造하야 卞春亭季良이 銘을 지은 것이니, 光化門樓에 달기 위하야 鑄造한 것이오(太宗의 功德頌鐘) 第三은 世祖3년 정월에 鑄造하야 申叔舟가 銘을 作한 것이니 景福內 思政殿前 廡에 置하고 禁軍을 호령하던 것이오 第四는 世祖7년 壬午10월(天順6년 壬午10월(鐘銘云)-)에 鑄造하야 吏叅 韓繼禧가 鐘銘을 撰하고 吏郞 鄭蘭宗이 書하얏스니 貞洞 興天寺(舊 貞陵守護寺)에 懸하엿던 것이오 第五는 世祖13년 2월(成化4년 2월)에 鑄造하얏스니 都提造는 光山君 金國光이다. 그런데 第一鐘 즉 元인경은 壬辰亂 때에 鐘閣이 燒火되며 타서 록아 업서젓고 第二鐘은 즉 光化門樓鐘도 壬亂時 궁궐이 燒火될 때에 역시 타서 업서젓스며 第三鐘은 원래 宮中에 잇다가 光化門外 西便에 閣을 짓고 移懸하얏더니 睿宗원년에 宮城內로 다시 移懸하얏다가 壬亂에 閣만 燒火되고 鐘은 殘存하엿더니 英宗24년에 更히 閣을 建하얏더니 後에 鐘이 破하야 소리가 나지 안음으로 민간에서 謂之 벙어리종이라 하더니 李太王3년 丙寅에 當百錢 제조할 때에 녹여 썻스니 속담에 『인경을 떼여 주머니에 늘 놈』이란 말이 이 때에 한 讖言이 된 것이다. 그리고 第四鐘 즉 貞陵鐘은 興天寺가 廢한 뒤에 圓覺寺(今 塔洞公園址)에 移懸하얏다가 中宗7년에 圓覺寺가 又廢하니 당시 權臣 金安老가 東大門에 移置하야 晨昏에 鳴코자 하다가 未幾에 安老가 失敗하야 여의치 못하고 爾來 350여 년을 東大門側에 잇다가 英宗24년 5월에 上이 『地部의 臣에게 謂하야 曰 興仁門內와 光化門外에 各히 一鐘이 잇는데 鐘面에 光廟(世祖)와 內殿의 徽號가 잇고 또 御製가 잇스니 다 閣을 設하고 貯하라.』 命함으로 그 閣을 設하고 置하엿다가 최근 李太王3년 丙寅 光化門 重建時에 各寺 승려를 命하야 東大門鐘을 運搬하야 門樓에 달고 法會를 設하며 門의 落成을 祝하엿더니 隆熙4년 4월28일에 李王職博物館에 移藏하얏다. 그리고 第五鐘은 現今 普信閣에 잇는 것이니 上記 博物館鐘과 가티 京城의 古物로 兄弟鐘으로 著名한 것이다. 그런데 此鐘의 出處는 다만 『朝野會通』 世祖紀에 戊午13년에 大鐘을 鑄하야 雲從街에 置하고 晨昏을 驚하얏다 云하고 엇던 경로로 지금 普信閣으로 왓다는 말이나 그 鐘銘 또는 다른 기록이 업스며 실제에 이 鐘도 표면이 모도 消融되고 다만 成化4년 2월(世祖13년) 이하 54行에 당시 監鑄者의 氏名만 記하얏슴으로 그 내력을 잘 알수 업다.(氏名도 消落이 만타) 그러나 成化4년 즉 世祖13년에 鑄造란 것만은 확실한 즉 上記 諸鐘과는 혼동할 수 업는 것이다. 그런데 근래 內外人의 발표한 여러 기록을 보면 대개는 本鐘을 貞陵鐘으로 誤認하니 독자는 특히 留意할 것이다.

然而 현재 普信閣은 李太王6년 己巳에 10월28일에 큰 화재가 잇서 燒火된 후 그해 10월28일에 重建한 것이니 그 上樑文은 鄭基世가 撰하고 書는 禮判 金大振의 筆이오 普信閣 3字는 최근 李太王32년 3월15일에 揭하얏스니 海崗 金圭鎭의 筆이다.<75>
<75>