잡지명: 別乾坤 제23호
발행일: 1929년 09월 27일
기사제목: 碧海桑田가티 激變한 서울의 녯날집과 只今집 (The Drastic Changes of Old and Present Houses in Seoul like the Blue Sea Changing into Mulberry Fields)
기사형태: 세태비평 (Critique of Social Trends)

The Drastic Changes of Old and Present Houses in Seoul like the Blue Sea Changing into Mulberry Fields

徽文高普 and 觀象監

The location of Hwimun High School (徽文高普) is now called Wondong, but it used to be Gwansangam Hill (觀象監峴). Even now, many people still call it Gwansangam Hill. This is because there was an office called Gwansanggam (觀象監) during the Korean Dynasty. Gwansanggam was in charge of astronomy, geography, calendar calculation, meteorology, and timekeeping, which is equivalent to a meteorological observatory today. It was established at the beginning of the dynasty and renamed Saryeokseo during the reign of Yeonsan (燕山) in the Byeongin year, but later it was restored to Gwansanggam during the reign of Jungjong. For a time (before Yeonsan), it was called Seoungwan, and the surrounding area was called Unhyeon, which is the origin of calling Daewongun's palace Unhyeongung. Even now, on the west side of the main gate of Hwimun High School, there remains a stone platform where celestial phenomena were observed in the old days, resembling the Cheomseongdae in Gyeongju, telling the old history. It is a great historical site of Gyeongseong. It seems that there is a terrestrial connection, even if the celestial connection is unknown, that the site of Gwansanggam (觀象監), whose name contains the character "gam (監)", became the site of a school run by Minister Min. And the school playground on the Gyedong side is the former site of Gyeongugung (景祐宮). (The palace of Consort Suk (綏妃朴氏), the birth mother of Sunjo)

李王職雅樂部 and 禁衛營

If you pass Hwimun High School and head towards Changdeok Palace, you will find the Yi Wangjik Aakbu (李王職雅樂部) (formerly Eunsa Sueopjang). The building used to be a military camp, one of the Five Military Commands (五營門), called Geumwiyeong (禁衛營). Geumwiyeong was established in the Imsul year of the 8th year of King Sukjong's reign. It served as the main camp for the defense soldiers of the six provinces of Gyeonggi, Hwanghae, Gangwon, Gyeongsang, Chungcheong, and Jeolla, and had the same military duties as the Royal Guard Command (御營廳). Now, there are more musicians than soldiers, so we might as well call it the Aakdae Barracks (雅樂隊 營門).

團成社 and 左捕廳

If you pass the Aakbu (雅樂部) and head towards Pajo Bridge (罷朝橋) on the wide road in front of Donhwamun, you will see a fire station branch office (消防隊 出張所) towering on the east side of the road. This is the former site of the Left Police Bureau (左捕盜廳址). Originally, the base of the Left Police Bureau was quite large, encompassing even the current Dansungsa (團成社). Nowadays, it seems most glamorous when men and women go together to watch action films or plays in the first-class seats of Dansungsa, but in reality, they are sitting inside a podaocheong (捕盜廳 - the popular slang pronunciation). Haha.

光化門郵便局 and 右捕廳

Speaking of podaocheong (捕盜廳), the east bridge of the Gwanghwamun Post Office is the former podaocheong Bridge. Recently, after the road was renovated, its name was changed to Bokcheong Bridge (福淸橋), and the bridge pillars were even inscribed with the new name. Bokcheong Bridge is a slightly more pleasant name than Podaocheong Bridge. However, it seems to disregard history too much. The reason it was called Podaocheong Bridge is that the current Gwanghwamun Post Office used to be the Right Police Bureau (右捕廳). The fact that the post office became a podaocheong is very different from the fact that the Geumbu (禁府 - Royal Investigation Bureau) became a court. However, the post office collects money from many people and delivers letters, and then sends them out again, so it is also a podaocheong for money and letters.

英國總領事館 and 興天寺

The current British Consulate General in Jeongdong is the site of the former Heungcheonsa Temple (興天寺). Originally, Jeongdong became Jeongneungdong because King Taejo buried his second queen, Queen Sindeok of the Gang clan (康氏), in Bukwon of Hwanghwabang in the first month of the D丁丑 year of his sixth year, and named it Jeongneung. Later, it was abbreviated to Jeongdong. Heungcheonsa Temple (禪敎宗總本山) was built to protect the tomb. After the rebellion of Bangnyeong and Bangbeon (born to Consort Gang), King Taejong (born to his first queen, the Han clan) felt that it was unacceptable to have the tomb in the capital and moved it to Sahari, Yangju. Only Heungcheonsa Temple remained, and King Sejo even cast a large bell and hung it in the seventh year of his reign (now the museum bell). In the fifth month of the Jungjong reign, Confucian students burned it out of anti-Buddhist sentiment (the large wooden five-story pagoda was also burned down at the time). For hundreds of years thereafter, it remained state-owned land until it became the British Consulate in the Gapshin year, the 21st year of King Taejong's reign, on April 28th.

太平館 and 西小門 總督府官舍

The area near the Governor-General's residence in Taepyeongjeong is the site of the former Taepyeonggwan (太平館) (originally named Taepyeonggwan), where envoys from the Ming Dynasty were accommodated. The reason why the bridge at Namdaemun Tong was called Daepyeong Bridge (大平다리) was due to this, and the fact that the area became Taepyeongbang and today's Taepyeong Tong (太平通) is also due to this. In the southwest corner of the backyard of the Director-General's residence of the School Affairs Bureau, there is a stele commemorating the tears of the Ming general Yang Ho (楊鎬), and next to the stele was the Seonmu Shrine (宣武祠). (Yang Ho's stele was originally located in Muhakjae, but after being damaged, it was rebuilt in this location during the reign of King Yeongjo).

普成高普 and 北廟·三仙坪

Samseonpyeong (三仙坪) outside Dongsomun was formerly a training ground, and the small hill on its south side was a place of execution for soldiers, like Ichon-dong (乙丑 - Eulchuk - after the flood, abandoned village) under the Yongsan Iron Bridge. And Poseong High School (普成高普校) inside Dongsomun was formerly the site of Bukgwanwangmyo (北關王廟). Details about this are recorded in Famous Historical Sites, so I will omit them here.

順化病院 and 濟生院

The area of Sunhwa Hospital (順化病院) was the site of Bukhak (北學), one of the Five Schools (五學) in the early Joseon Dynasty. During the reign of Gwanghae, Jaseugung Palace (慈壽宮) was built, but after the Injo Restoration, the palace was destroyed and became a Buddhist nunnery. During the reign of Sukjong, it became Bukhak again, and after it was abolished, it became Sunhwagung Palace (順化宮), and now it has become a hospital. The blind and deaf department of the Jesaengwon (濟生院) Nursing Department outside Seodaemun is the site of the old Seogwanwangmyo, and the headquarters of the Jesaengwon in Singyo-dong is the former Seonhuigung Palace (宣禧宮). Seonhuigung Palace is the palace of Yeongbin Yi (暎嬪李氏), the birth mother of Crown Prince Jangheon (正祖父王 - King Jeongjo's grandfather).

五營門 and 그 他 營門

As mentioned briefly above, the old Eunsa Sueopjang was Geumwiyeong (禁衛營), one of the Five Military Commands. The former Training Command (訓練都監) was the area of the current Dongdaemun Police Station and the Dongdaemun Branch of Hanseong Bank, and the current Tobacco Monopoly Bureau Factory was the site of the Royal Guard Command (御營廳). The Howiyeong (扈衛營) was located near Dongshibjagae Dongcheonbyeon, and there is still a sign attached. The Chongyungcheong (總戎廳) was located near Segeomjeong. The Training Command was the Royal Guard, the Royal Guard Command, like the Geumwiyeong, was the main camp of the Gyeong, Hwang, Gang, Gyeong, Jeon six provinces' defense soldiers, and the Chongyungcheong was the Gyeongseong and Gyeonggi defense soldiers, and later became the Bukhan defense soldiers. In addition, the Sugeumcheong was the Gyeongseong eastern defense soldiers, defending Namhan, and there was also Hadogam in the Training Institute.<97>

感古堂 and 그 附近

The large old house across from Poseong College (普成專門校) is called Gamgodang (感古堂), which was the private residence of Queen Inhyeon (仁顯王后), King Sukjong's queen. After Queen Min was deposed to the rank of Royal Consort Jang and expelled from the palace, she was confined to that house. After being reinstated, the house was named Gamgodang in commemoration. The firewood yard in front of that house is the site of Seo Gwang-beom's house, who was a member of the new cabinet during the Gapsin Coup. And Andong Byeolgung (安洞別宮) at the entrance of that neighborhood is the place where the ceremony was held when Princess Sunmyeong (純明妃 - King Sunjong's first queen) entered the palace, and it was preserved to be used for palace ceremonies thereafter. Currently, some court ladies reside there and are in charge of sewing and laundering the clothes of the royal family of Yi Wangga (李王家).

訓練院 and 東大門小學校

The site of Dongdaemun Elementary School (東大門小學校) (Japanese school) and the plaza in front of it was the former Training Institute (訓練院) where the old Japanese army was trained. The current Gyeongseong Sports Complex (京城運動場) is the former Hadogam Barracks (下都監營). During the Imo Incident (壬午軍亂), Japanese instructor Hori Moto Reisuke was killed by rebel soldiers at this place, and Qing generals Wu Changqing (吳長慶) and Ma Jianzhong (馬建忠) also stationed their troops there. During the Gapsin Coup, King Yi temporarily avoided the revolt under the protection of Yuan Shikai. (There was a stele commemorating Wu Changqing's departure at this place). The Training Institute's office building was dismantled and moved, and is now the dormitory of the nursing school of the Governor-General's Hospital, and the sign is kept by the School Affairs Bureau.

東大門女學校 and 東學·北平館

Dongdaemun Girls' School (東大門女學校), run by Christians, is the former site of Donghak (東學), one of the Four Schools (四學), and initially was Bukpyeonggwan (北平館), where envoys offering tribute from the Jurchens were accommodated. And Seohak (西學) is the site of the Governor-General's residence and the residence of the head of the Gyeongseong Provincial Police Department located in Seohakjae, and Namhak (南學) is now the Jinryo Branch Office of the Gyeonggi Imperial University Pre-College (大和町一丁目), and Junghak (中學) is the land at numbers 88, 91, 83, 53 near Junghak Bridge.

塔洞公園 and 圓覺寺·禁府

Taptong Park (塔洞公園) is the site of the former Wongaksa Temple (圓覺寺), which is described in detail in Famous Historical Sites, so I will omit it here. The old court building that rises up there is the former site of the Geumbu (禁府). The back alley is still called Geumbudwi-gol.

朝鮮호텔 and 小公主宮·圜丘壇

The Chosun Hotel (朝鮮호텔) (site 6,700 pyeong, building area 583 pyeong, total 69 rooms, construction cost 843,000 won, designed by German Gedera Rande) is originally the site of Hwangu-dan (圜丘壇 - Altar of Heaven). The details about Hwangu-dan are described in detail in Famous Historical Sites, so I will omit them here. The original site of Hwangu-dan was the residence of Princess Gyeongjeong (慶貞公主), the second daughter of King Taejong (the so-called Little Princess), who married Jo Dae-rim (趙大臨) (the so-called Evil Son-in-Law), the Pyeongyang Gun. Because Jo was violent and arrogant, Grand Censor Meng Sa-seong (孟思誠) and Jipyeong Park An-sin (朴安身) interrogated him without reporting to the King, and after that, the palace was abandoned. Later, it became the palace of Prince Uian (義安君) Seong (晟) (the third son of King Seonjo born to Royal Consort In (仁嬪) of the Kim clan, who died early). During the Imjin War, Uta Hideka stationed his troops there (from Jongmyo). After Hideka retreated from the capital, Li Rusong also stationed his troops there. After the Ming Dynasty fell and the Qing Dynasty made peace, it was used as a reception place for the envoys, the so-called Nambyeolgung. Until the city area was reorganized, the area around it was called Sogong-dong (小公洞), meaning Little Princess Neighborhood. Even now, the east gate, Gwangseonmun (光宣門), still exists, and the Governor-General's Library is inside.

曹溪寺 and 李東岳詩壇

A bell tower is visible to the south from the Gyeongjeon Honmachi Terminal on the branch of Namsan. This is the Japanese Jogyesa Temple (曹溪寺). The main gate was originally the Hwangyemun Gate of the Pyongyang Palace, and it was relocated in 1925. On the left side inside the gate, the six characters "Dongak Seonsaeng Sidan (東岳先生詩壇)" are carved on a large rock, which is the site of the famous writer Li Dong-ak (李同岳), An Neul (安訥) during the reign of King Seonjo. And the Korean-style building that is the main hall of the temple is the Sungjeongjeon (崇政殿) (a place where official ceremonies were held, like Geunjeongjeon), the main hall of Gyeonghuigung Palace (興化門大闕), built by King Gwanghae, and it was relocated in 1926. It can be said that the temple is a collection of Korean historical sites.

日出小學校-均役倉<98>

Nisshutsushōgakkō (日出小學校) is the site of the former Gyunyeokchang (均役倉). Gyunyeokchang was established in the Sinmi year of the 27th year of King Yeongjo's reign. It was a place where taxes were collected from those who wanted to be exempted from compulsory conscription of the people, and slave sales taxes were collected from the yangban who were selling people (slaves).

倭館 and 韓銀庭球場

The alley south of the Cheondogyo Church in Gyeungun-dong was called Wakan Alley (倭館골) until a few years ago. This is because when the Japanese legation at Cheonyeonjeong outside Seomun was burned down during the Imo Incident, and the envoy came again in December of the Gyemi year, Park Yeong-hyo's house in that location (at the time, Gyodong) was purchased and the legation was established, so the name Wakan Alley was created. Currently, the site is the southern part of the Cheondogyo Church and the Korea First Bank tennis court, and other nearby houses. At the time, the site of the Japanese legation was said to be 277 pyeong.

第一高普 and 金玉均家·博文局

The current Jeil High School (第一高普) is the site of Kim Ok-gyun's house, and Yoon Chi-ho's (尹致昭) house in Anguk-dong is the former house of Park Yeong-hyo. The Gapsin Coup was only a few years ago, but how much change has occurred like the mulberry fields turning into a blue sea. And the practice classroom for women's training courses at the Gyeungun-dong Normal School, the attached ordinary school, and the dormitory for the normal school faculty were formerly the Bakmunguk (博文局), where the first Korean newspaper, the Hanseong Sunbo (漢城旬報), was founded.

靑鶴洞-櫻谷, 紅葉亭-經板閣

Cheonghak-dong (靑鶴洞) is the current so-called Sakuradani (櫻谷) under the old Governor-General's residence at the foot of Namsan. It is the former site of Yongjae Yi Hang (容齋李荇)先生, who was the Grand Scholar of the Jungjong Dynasty and contributed to the Supplement to the Yeojiseungram. Hongyeopjeong (紅葉亭) in Nammicheongjeong is the former villa of Yi Yu-won (李裕元), the Yeonguijeong who wrote the Gwanghwamun Sangnyangmun. He was a descendant of Oseong Seonsaeng (鰲城先生), and he built this villa in Chang-dong, the old base of Seonsaeng, in commemoration. Now it is owned by a certain Japanese millionaire. And the old Gyeongbanggak (經板閣) house in Gwonneung-dong is Hong Guk-yeong's (洪國榮) sarangchae, who ruled the world during the reign of Jeongjo.

壽松洞公普-太僕司-鄭道傳

Susongdong Public School (壽松洞公普) is the site of the former Taeboksi (太僕司). Taeboksi was in charge of the politics of horses and pastures, and the site was originally the house of Jeong Do-jeon (鄭道傳) at the beginning of the dynasty. After Jeong was executed as the mastermind of the Bangseok-Bangbeon rebellion, his house was confiscated and Taeboksi was established. According to legend, Jeong Do-jeon argued with Muhak about the orientation of Gyeongbokgung Palace. Later, Do-jeon asked Muhak for a house site, wishing for a land of a hundred sons and a thousand grandsons. Muhak hated his greed and gave him the site of this Taeboksi. Jeong saw that it was also a land of a hundred sons and a thousand grandsons, so he made it his home. But soon he was executed and it became Taeboksi, so it is said that the so-called land of a hundred sons and a thousand grandsons became the residence of Kim Saeng, who was good at producing offspring, and it fit perfectly. And the reason why that place was called Sujinbang (壽進坊) was also created by Do-jeon. Initially, it was called Sujin (壽盡), but when Do-jeon died, he said, "I am in Sujin-dong, so it is difficult to be reborn." He lamented and died, so later Sujin was changed to Sujin or Sujung.

郵政局과 日本

The old-fashioned Korean-style house owned by a Japanese man, Takuura, at 39 Gyeonji-dong, was originally the site of Jeonuigam (典醫監), and it became the Post Office during the Gapsin era of King Yi. On the day of its completion ceremony, Kim Ok-gyun's group set fire to the vicinity and attacked Minister Min Yeong-ik, causing the Gapsin Coup.

京畿監營과 赤十字病院

西大門警察署

The Red Cross Hospital and the Seodaemun Police Station outside Seodaemun are the former site of the Gyeonggi Gamyeong (京畿監營). Even now, people often call the area in front of it Gamyeong ap.

漢江人道鐵橋

The Hangang Pedestrian Bridge was originally constructed in October 1917 at a cost of 810,000 won in the so-called "Sydra" type, with a length of 346 kan and a width of 5 kan. After being partially damaged in the Eultchuk flood, it was reconstructed over 1 year and 6 months at a cost of 1.3 million won in the so-called modern cantilever type, with a length of 460 meters and a width of 18 meters. The opening ceremony was held on the 18th of this month, and even streetcars pass through it, so it is said to be the best iron bridge in the Orient.<99>

**Named Entities**

徽文高普	Hwimun Gopo
苑洞	Wŏndong
觀象監峴	Kwansanggam Hyŏn
觀象監	Kwansanggam
燕山	Yŏnsan
丙寅	Pyŏngin
司曆署	Saryŏksŏ
中宗	Chungjong
書雲觀	Sŏungwan
雲峴	Unhyŏn
雲峴宮	Unhyŏngung
慶州	Kyŏngju
瞻星臺	Ch'ŏmsŏngdae
閔大監	Min Taegam
桂洞	Kyedong
景祐宮	Kyŏngugung
純祖	Sunjo
綏妃朴氏	Swip'i Paks'si
李王職雅樂部	Yi Wangjik Aakpu
昌德宮	Ch'angdŏk Kung
恩賜授産場	Ŭnsa Suŏpchang
五營門	O Yŏngmun
禁衛營	Kŭmwiŏng
肅宗	Sukjong
壬戌	Imsul
京畿	Kyŏnggi
黃海	Hwanghae
江原	Kangwŏn
慶尙	Kyŏngsang
忠淸	Ch'ungch'ŏng
全羅	Chŏlla
御營廳	Ŏyŏngch'ŏng
敦化門	Tonhwamun
罷朝橋	P'ajo Kyo
左捕盜廳	Chwap'odoch'ŏng
團成社	Tansŏngsa
光化門郵便局	Kwanghwamun Up'yŏnguk
福淸橋	Pokch'ŏng Kyo
右捕廳	Up'och'ŏng
禁府	Kŭmbu
貞洞	Chŏngdong
英國 總領事館	Yŏngguk Ch'ongnyŏngsawan
興天寺	Hŭngch'ŏnsa
太祖	T'aejo
神德王后康氏	Sindeok Wanghu Kangssi
皇華坊	Hwanghwabang
北原	Pugwŏn
貞陵	Chŏngnŭng
貞陵洞	Chŏngnŭngdong
芳領	Pangnyŏng
芳蕃	Pangbŏn
太宗	T'aejong
韓氏	Hanssi
楊州	Yangju
沙河里	Sahari
世祖	Sejo
大鐘	Taejong
博物館	Pangmulgwan
中宗	Chungjong
李太王	Yi T'ae Wang
太平町	T'aep'yŏngch'ŏng
總督府	Ch'ongdokbu
太平館	T'aep'yŏnggwan
南大門通	Namdaemun T'ong
大平다리	Taep'yŏngtari
大平坊	Taep'yŏngbang
太平通	T'aep'yŏngt'ong
學務局長官	Hakmubu Changgwan
楊鎬	Yang Ho
墮淚碑	T'alloebi
宣武祠	Sŏnmusa
英祖	Yŏngjo
普成高普	Posŏng Kopo
北廟	Pungmyo
三仙坪	Samsŏnp'yŏng
東小門	Tongsomun
龍山鐵橋	Yongsanch'ŏlgyo
二村洞	Ich'ondong
普成高普校	Posŏng Kopokyo
北關王廟	Pukkwanwangmyo
順化病院	Sunhwa Pyŏngwŏn
濟生院	Cheasaengwŏn
五學	O Hak
光海朝	Kwanghaejo
慈壽宮	Chasugung
仁祖	Injo
肅宗	Sukjong
北學	Pukhak
順化宮	Sunhwagung
西大門外	Sŏdaemun oe
盲啞部	Maengabu
舊西關王廟	Ku Sŏgwanwangmyo
新橋洞	Sin-gyo-dong
宣禧宮	Sŏnhŭigung
莊憲世子	Changhŏn Seja
正祖	Chŏngjo
暎嬪李氏	Yŏngbin Yissi
五營門	O Yŏngmun
舊恩賜授産場	Ku Ŭnsa Suŏpchang
訓練都監	訓鍊都監
東大門警察署	Tongdaemun Kyŏngch'alsŏ
漢城銀行東大門支店	Hansŏng Ŭnhaeng Tongdaemun Chijŏm
煙草專賣局工場	Yŏnb'o Chŏnmaeguk Kongjang
御營廳	Ŏyŏngch'ŏng
扈衛營	Howiyŏng
東十字街	Tongshibjaga
東川邊	Tongch'ŏnbyŏn
總戎廳	Ch'ongyungch'ŏng
洗劍亭	Segeomjŏng
訓練都監	訓鍊都監
輦下親兵	Ryŏnha Ch'inbyŏng
京畿	Kyŏnggi
總戎廳	Ch'ongyungch'ŏng
北漢守備兵	Pukhan Subipyŏng
守禁廳	Sugeumch'ŏng
南漢	Namhan
訓練院	Hunlyŏnwŏn
下都監	Hadogam
感古堂	Kamgodang
普成專門校	Posŏng Chŏnmunkyo
肅宗王妃	Sukjong Wangbi
仁顯王后閔氏	Inhyŏn Wanghu Minssi
張嬪	Changbin
甲申政變	Kapsin Chŏngbyŏn
徐光範	Sŏ Kwangbŏm
安洞別宮	Andong Pyŏlgung
純明妃	Sunmyŏngbi
純宗	Sunjong
李王家	Yi Wangga
訓練院	Hunlyŏnwŏn
東大門小學校	Tongdaemun Sohakkyo
京城運動場	Kyŏngsŏng Undongchang
舊 下都監營	Ku Hadogam Yŏng
堀本禮造	Hori Moto Reisuke
壬午軍亂	Imogunnan
吳長慶	Wu Changqing
馬建忠	Ma Jianzhong
李太王	Yi T'ae Wang
袁世凱	Yuan Shikai
吳長慶	Wu Changqing
基督敎	Kidokkyo
東大門女學校	Tongdaemun Yŏhakkyo
四學	Sahak
女眞	Yŏjin
貢物獻上	Kongmulhŏnsang
北平館	Pukp'yŏnggwan
西學	Sŏhak
京畿帝國大學豫科	Kyŏnggi Jeguk Taehak Yegwa
進寮分寮室	Chinryo Pullyosil
中學	Chunghak
塔洞公園	Taptong Kongwŏn
圓覺寺	Wŏngaksa
禁府	Kŭmbu
禁府뒤골	Kŭmbudwi-gol
朝鮮호텔	Chosŏn Hotel
小公主宮	So Kongju Gung
圜丘壇	Hwangu-dan
慶貞公主	Kyŏngjŏng Kongju
趙大臨	Cho Taerim
孟思誠	Maeng Saseong
朴安身	Pak Ansin
義安君	Ŭian Gun
珹	Sŏng
宣祖	Sŏnjo
仁嬪金氏	Inbin Kimssi
浮田秀家	Uta Hideka
李如松	Li Rusong
南別宮	Nambyŏlgung
小公洞	Sogong-dong
光宣門	Kwangseonmun
總督府圖書館	Ch'ongdokbu Tosŏgwan
曺溪寺	Chogyŏsa
京電本町	Kyŏngjŏn Honmachi
李東岳	Li Tong-ak
安訥	An Nŭl
李同岳詩壇	Li Tong-ak Sidan
慶熙宮	Kyŏnghuigung
興化門大闕	Hŭnghwamun Taegwŏl
崇政殿	Sungjŏngjŏn
勤政殿	Kŭnjŏngjŏn
日出小學校	Nisshutsushōgakkō
均役倉	Kyunyŏkchang
英宗	Yŏngjo
倭館	Waegwan
慶雲洞	Kyŏngundong
天道敎堂	Ch'ŏndogyo T'ang
天然亭	Ch'ŏnyŏnjŏng
李鍾承	Yi Chong-sŭng
朴泳孝	Pak Yŏng-hyo
韓一銀行庭球場	Hanil Ŭnhaeng T'inggu Chang
第一高普	Cheil Kopo
金玉均	Kim Ok-kyun
安國洞	Angukdong
尹致昭氏	Yun Ch'ijossi
朴泳孝	Pak Yŏng-hyo
慶雲洞	Kyŏngundong
師範學校	Sŏbŏm Hakkyo
女子演習科	Yŏja Yŏnsŭpkwa
附屬普通學校	Pusŏk Pot'ong Hakkyo
師範科	Sŏbŏmkwa
寄宿舍	Kisuks'a
博文局	Pagmunguk
漢城旬報	Hansŏng Sunbo
靑鶴洞	Ch'ŏnghakdong
櫻谷	Sakuradani
舊總督府	Kyujongdokbu
李荇	Li Hang
容齋李荇	Yongjae Li Hang
輿地勝覽增補	Yŏjiseungram Chŭngbo
南米倉町	Nammich'angch'ŏng
紅葉亭	Hongyŏpting
李裕元	Li Yu-wŏn
鰲城先生	Osŏng Sŏnsaeng
洪國榮	Hong Kuk-yŏng
壽松洞公普	Susongdong Kongpo
太僕司	T'aebŏksa
鄭道傳	Chŏng Do-jŏn
芳碩芳蕃亂	Pangsŏk Bangbŏnnan
景福宮	Kyŏngbokkung
無學	Muhak
壽進坊	Sujinbang
堅志洞	Kyŏnji-dong
澤浦	Takuura
典醫監	Chŏnŭigam
李太王	Yi T'ae Wang
郵政局	Uchŏnguk
金玉均一派	Kim Ok-kyun Ilp'a
閔泳翊	Min Yŏng-ik
京畿監營	Kyŏnggi Kamŏng
赤十字病院	Chŏksipsaja Pyŏngwŏn
西大門警察署	Sŏdaemun Kyŏngch'alsŏ
西大門 外	Sŏdaemun oe
監營 압	Kamŏng ap
漢江人道鐵橋	Hangang Indoch'ŏlgyo



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	碧海桑田가티 激變한 서울의 녯날집과 只今집
기사형태	세태비평

碧海桑田가티 激變한 서울의 녯날집과 只今집
徽文高普와 觀象監

徽文高普의 소재지를 지금은 苑洞이라 하지만은 전에는 관상감재(觀象監峴)다. 안이 지금에도 흔이는 관상감재라고 부른다. 그것은 과저 韓國時代에 觀象監이란 官署가 잇섯든 까닭이다. 觀象監이란 곳은 天文, 地理, 曆數, 測候, 刻漏 등을 맛튼 곳이니 지금으로 말하면 測候所다. 이것은 國初에 설립되야 燕山 丙寅에 司曆署로 곳치엿더니 其後 中宗 때에 다시 觀象監으로 復舊하얏다. 또 일시(燕山以前)에는 書雲觀이라 칭하고 그 부근을 雲峴이라 하엿스니 大院君宮을 雲峴宮이라 함도 여긔에서 기인한 것이다. 지금에도 徽文高普校 正門 西側에 녯날의 天象을 보던 石臺가 남어 잇서서 慶州의 瞻星臺 모양으로 녯 역사를 말하고 잇스니 그것도 京城의 古蹟이라면 큰 고적이다. 大監이란 監字 잇는 觀象監 집터가 閔大監의 經營하는 學校터가 된 것도 天上 緣分은 몰나도 地上 緣分은 잇는 모양이다. 그리고 桂洞편의 同校運動場은 前 景祐宮址다.(純祖生母 綏妃朴氏宮)

李王職雅樂部와 禁衛營

徽文高普를 조금 지내서 昌德宮 압흐로 가랴면 李王職雅樂部(前 恩賜授産場)가 잇다. 그 집은 전날에 五營門 중에 한아인 禁衛營이란 兵營이다. 禁衛營은 肅宗8년 壬戌에 設始된 것이니 京畿, 黃海, 江原, 慶尙, 忠淸, 全羅, 六道의 守備兵의 本營으로 御營廳과 동일한 軍務를 가진 것이다. 지금은 軍兵 대신에 樂工들이 만흐니 억지로 雅樂隊 營門이라구나 붓처 볼가.

團成社와 左捕廳

이 雅樂部를 지내서 敦化門압 널분 길로 罷朝橋를 향하야 가면 도로 東側에 空中에 웃득이 솟슨 消防隊 出張所가 잇다. 이것은 전날 左捕盜廳址다. 원래 左捕廳 基地로 말하면 퍽 廣*을 하야 지금 團成社까지도 그 構內에 드럿다. 요새이 모던 男女가 同行을 하야 團成社 一等席에서 活動寫眞이나 演劇 구경을 하면 가장 호광스러운 듯하지만은 실상 알고 보면 보두청(捕盜廳의 俗訛音)에 드러가 안진 심이다. 呵呵.

光化門郵便局과 右捕廳

捕盜廳 이약이가 낫스니 말이지 光化門郵便局 東邊다리는 전날의 捕廳다리다. 근래 道路改正 후에 福淸橋라고 이름을 곳치여서 아주 비위좃케 石橋柱에까지 삭여 붓치엿다. 捕廳다리보다는 福淸다리라는 것이 조금 향그러운 이름이다. 그러나 그것은 너무도 역사를 무시한 것 갓다. 그 다리를 捕廳다리라 한 것은 지금 光化門郵便局이 녯날 右捕廳이 되엿던 까닭이다. 捕廳이 郵便局이 된 것은 禁府가 裁判所된 것과는 아주 緣이 먼 셈이다. 그러나 우편국은 여러 사람의 돈을 모도 잡아드리고 또 편지를 잡아 드려 갓다가 또 發送을 하니 그것도 돈과 편지의 보두청은 보두청이다.

英國總領事館과 興天寺

지금 貞洞에 잇는 英國 總領事館은 녯날 興天寺란 절터이다. 원래에 貞洞은 太祖6년 丁丑 정월에 그의 繼妃 神德王后 康氏를 皇華坊 北原에<96> 葬하고 貞陵이라 한 故로 遂히 貞陵洞이 되고 그 뒤에 또 略하야 貞洞이 되엿스며 그 陵의 守護次로 興天寺(禪敎宗總本山)를 建하얏섯는데 芳領 芳蕃(康氏 所生)의 亂 후에 太宗(初妃 韓氏生)이 感情上 陵을 國都內에 두는 것이 不可하다 하고 楊州 沙河里로 移葬하고 興天寺만 遺存하야 世祖7년에 또 大鐘까지 鑄하야 懸하얏더니(今 博物館鐘) 中宗5년 5월에 中學儒生들이 斥佛의 感情으로 此를 燒火하고 (당시 大建物인 木造五重塔도 燒失함) 爾來 屢100년간 國有地로 잇다가 李太王21년 甲申 4월28일에 英領館이 되엿다.

太平館과 西小門 總督府官舍

太平町에 잇는 總督府官舍 부근 일대는 전날 明의 사신을 宿泊식히던 太平館(元名太平館)자리다. 전날 南大門通다리를 大平다리라 한 것도 이로 인하야 샌긴 것이요 그 곳을 大平坊 금일에 太平通이 된 것도 이로 인함이다. 同所 學務局長官舍 後庭 西南隅에는 明將 楊鎬의 墮淚碑가 잇고 그 碑側에는 宣武祠가 잇섯다.(楊鎬碑는 원래 無學재에 잇섯다가 파손된 후 英祖 때에 此地에 重建함)

普成高普와 北廟·三仙坪

東小門박 三仙坪은 전날 練兵場이오 其 南側 小丘는 龍山鐵橋下 二村洞(乙丑홍수 후 廢洞)과 가티 군인의 死刑場이엿다. 그리고 東小門內 普成高普校는 전날 北關王廟터다 여긔에 관한 일은 名勝古跡에 詳載되엿기 玆에 略한다.

順化病院과 濟生院

順化病院 일대는 國初 때 五學 중의 一인 北學의 地로 光海朝에 慈壽宮을 築하얏더니 仁祖反正 후 宮을 毁하고 尼寺가 되엿다가 肅宗 때 다시 北學이 되고 此를 廢한 후 順化宮이 되엿다가 今에 病院이 되엿다. 西大門外 濟生院 養育部의 盲啞部는 舊西關王廟 자리요 新橋洞에 잇는 濟生院本部는 元 宣禧宮이니 宣禧宮은 莊憲世子(正祖父王)의 生母 暎嬪李氏의 宮이다.

五營門과 그他營門

舊恩賜授産場이 전날 五營門의 한아인 禁衛營이엿단 말은 우에 잠간 말하엿거니와 전날 訓練都監은 지금 東大門警察署 及 漢城銀行東大門支店 일대의 地요 지금 煙草專賣局工場은 御營廳 자리오 扈衛營은 東十字街 東川邊에 잇섯스니 지금도 아즉 간판이 부터 잇고 總戎廳은 洗劍亭 부근에 잇섯다. 訓練都監은 輦下親兵 즉 近衛兵營이오 御營廳은 禁衛營과 가티 京, 黃, 江, 慶, 全 六道 守備兵의 本營이오 總戎廳은 京城 及 京畿 수비병으로 후에 北漢守備兵이 되고 此外에 守禁廳은 京城東部 守備兵으로 南漢을 수비하고 訓練院에는 또 下都監이 잇섯다.<97>

感古堂과 그 附近

普成專門校 越便의 큰 古家를 感古堂이라 하니 이것은 전날 肅宗王妃 仁顯王后 閔氏의 私邸로 閔氏가 張嬪으로 임하야 出宮되야 그 집에 幽閉되얏다가 다시 復宮한 후 그 紀念으로 感古堂이라 命名한 것이다. 그 집 압헤 잇는 柴場은 甲申政變 때에 新內閣에 한사람이던 徐光範의 집자리오 그리고 그 洞口에 잇는 安洞別宮은 純明妃(純宗初妃) 閔氏의 入內時 式을 擧하던 장소로 其後 宮中嘉禮에 쓰기로 보존한 것인데 지금은 일부 女官이 住居하며 李王家 宮中衣服의 裁縫 세탁 등을 맛터하는 곳이다.

訓練院과 東大門小學校

東大門小學校(日本人校)의 基地와 其前 廣場은 舊 日軍隊를 훈련하던 訓練院이오 지금 京城運動場은 舊 下都監營이니 壬午軍亂 때에 日敎官 堀本禮造가 이 곳에서 亂兵에게 죽엇고 또 淸將 吳長慶 馬建忠 등의 留陣하엿던 곳이오 甲申政變 때에 李太王이 袁世凱의 擁護로 일시 亂을 避하던 곳이다.(此處 吳長慶의 去思碑가 잇섯다) 訓練院 廳舍는 毁移하야 지금 總督府醫院의 看護婦養成所校舍가 되고 그 간판은 學務局에서 보관한다.

東大門女學校와 東學·北平館

基督敎에서 경영하는 東大門女學校는 전일 四學의 一인 東學의 所在地요 最初에는 女眞의 貢物獻上하는 使者를 숙박식히던 北平館이다. 그리고 西學은 즉 西學재에 잇는 總督府官舍 及 京城道警察部 長官舍地가 되고 南學은 지금 京畿帝國大學豫科進寮分寮室이 되고(大和町一丁目) 中學은 지금 中學다리 부근 88, 91, 83, 53번지의 地이다.

塔洞公園과 圓覺寺·禁府

塔洞公園은 舊圓覺寺址인 것은 名勝古跡에 詳記하엿기 玆에 略하거니와 그리 올너와서 舊裁判所자리는 元禁府자리다. 그 後洞을 지금도 禁府뒤골이라 한다.

朝鮮호텔과 小公主宮·圜丘壇

朝鮮호텔(基地6,700坪, 建坪583坪, 總室數69, 工費84만3천圓, 獨人게데라란데 설계)은 원래 圜丘壇址다. 圜丘壇에 관한 事는 名勝古跡에 詳載하엿기 略하거니와 圜丘壇의 元基址는 太宗 第二女 慶貞公主(소위 小公主)의 邸니 平壤君 趙大臨(소위 惡亡尉)에게 下嫁하엿다가 趙가 橫暴驕奢함으로 大司憲 孟思誠, 持平 朴安身이 上啓치 안코 拷訊한 후로 그 宮은 遂히 廢하얏더니 그 후 義安君 珹(宣祖 三男 仁嬪金氏所生 早死)의 宮이 되엿다가 壬辰亂 때에 浮田秀家가 此에 留陣하얏고 (自宗廟로)秀家가 退京 후 李如松이 또 留陣하엿섯다. 그뒤 明이 亡하고 淸과 和約 후 그 使節의 迎賓所를 삼엇스니 소위 南別宮이 이것이다. 市區改正 전까지는 그 부근 일대를 小公洞이라 하엿스니 즉 小公主洞이란 의미다. 지금도 그 東門 光宣門은 아즉까지 잇고 其內는 總督府圖書館이 되엿다.

曺溪寺와 李東岳詩壇

京電本町 終點에서 正南으로 뵈이는 南山 支脉에 한 鍾樓가 잇스니 此는 日本人의 曺溪寺다. 그 정문은 원래 平壤離宮의 皇禮門으로 大正14년에 移建하얏고 그 門內 左側에는 큰 巖石上에 『東岳先生詩壇』 六字를 刻하얏스니 前日 宣祖 때 유명한 文章 李同岳 安訥先生의 遺址다. 그리고 그 寺의 本堂인 朝鮮式 건물은 元 光海朝가 건축한 慶熙宮(興化門大闕)의 正殿인 崇政殿(勤正殿과 가티 公式 大禮를 行하는 곳)으로 大正15년에 移築한 것이다. 그 寺는 朝鮮 古蹟의 集合所라 하얏도 可하다.

日出小學校-均役倉<98>

日出小學校는 元 均役倉 자리다. 均役倉은 英宗27년 辛未에 設한 것이니 즉 人民의 强制徵兵에 免코자 하는 者에게 其代로 稅金을 밧고 또 人身賣買(奴隷)하는 兩班에게는 奴隷賣買稅를 徵收하든 곳이다.

倭館과 韓銀庭球場

慶雲洞 天道敎堂 南便 골목을 몃해 전까지도 倭館골이라 하엿다. 그것은 壬午軍亂 때에 西門外 天然亭의 日公館이 被燒되고 그 후 癸未12월에 公使가 再來할 때에 倭城臺下 禁衛大將 李鍾承家를 임시 사용하다가 이 곳(其時 校洞)에 잇는 朴泳孝家를 買入하야 公使館을 設하얏슴으로 倭館골이란 이름이 생겻다. 지금 그 基地는 天道敎堂 前의 南部 及 韓一銀行庭球場 기타 부근 家屋이니 당시 日公館基地는 277평이라 한다.

第一高普와 金玉均家·博文局

지금 第一高普는 元 金玉均 집터요 安國洞 尹致昭氏家는 元 朴泳孝집이다. 甲申政變 때가 불과 몃해 안이언만은 桑田碧海 그 얼마나 變遷이 되엿는가. 그리고 慶雲洞 師範學校 女子演習科 敎室 附屬普通學校 師範科 寄宿舍는 元 博文局이니 朝鮮의 新聞 元祖 漢城旬報를 創刊한 곳이다.

靑鶴洞-櫻谷, 紅葉亭-經板閣

靑鶴洞은 南山麓 舊總督府官邸下 지금 소위 櫻谷이라 하는 곳이니 中宗朝 大提學으로 輿地勝覽增補에 有功한 容齋李荇先生의 遺址요 南米倉町에 잇는 紅葉亭은 元 光化門上樑文撰者 領相 李裕元의 別墅니 그는 鰲城先生 後孫으로 선생의 舊基인 倉洞에 紀念으로 此別墅를 지엿던 것이다. 지금은 某日本富豪의 소유가 되엿다. 그리고 勸農洞에 잇는 舊經板閣집은 正祖時 世道하던 洪國榮의 사랑채다.

壽松洞公普-太僕司-鄭道傳

壽松洞公普는 元 太僕司址다. 太僕司는 輿馬廐牧의 政을 만튼 곳이니 그 터는 원래 國初에 鄭道傳의 집터로 鄭이 芳碩芳蕃亂의 主謀者로 被誅하고 그 집을 적몰하야 遂히 太僕司를 삼은 것이다. 俗傳에 鄭道傳이 無學과 景福宮 坐向問題로 爭詰하다가 其後 道傳이 無學에게 家基를 求하되 百子千孫의 地를 願하엿더니 無學이 그 慾心 만흔 것을 미워하야 이 太僕司 자리를 잡어 주엇더니 鄭이 보와도 또한 百子千孫의 地인 故로 家基를 삼엇던바 未久에 被誅하고 太僕이 되니 소위 百子千孫之地가 색기 잘 낫는 김생의 所居가 되야 맛기는 꼭 마젓다 한다. 그리고 그 곳을 壽進坊이라 한 것도 道傳이가 지은 것으로 最初는 壽盡이라 하엿더니 道傳이 死時에 말하기를 내가 壽盡洞에 잇스니 更生키 難하다. 歎하고 죽엇슴으로 그 후에 壽盡을 곳치여 壽進 또는 壽重이라 하얏다 한다.

郵政局과 日本

堅志洞 39번지에 잇는 日本人 澤浦의 所有인 古色蒼然한 朝鮮式 家屋은 원래 典醫監 故址로 李太王 甲申時代에 郵政局이 되엿는데 그 落成式日에 金玉均一派가 그 부근에 火를 放하고 閔泳翊 大官을 狙擊한 後因하야 甲申政變을 이르킨 곳이다.

京畿監營과 赤十字病院

西大門警察署

西大門 外에 잇는 赤十字病院과 西大門警察署는 前日 京畿監營 터이다. 지금도 민간에서는 흔이 그 압을 監營 압이라고 한다.

漢江人道鐵橋

漢江人道橋는 원래 大正6년 10월에 工費81만圓으로 소위 쉬드라型으로 架設하야 長346間 幅5間이엿더니 乙丑년 水災에 일부 파손이 된바 其後 1년6개월을 費하야 130만圓으로 長460米 幅18米 소위 近世式 凸桁型으로 架設하야 今月18일에 開通式을 行하고 電車까지 通行하니 東洋第一의 鐵橋라 한다.<99>
<96-99>