잡지명	別乾坤 第23號
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	大京城의 特殊村 (Special Villages of Great Gyeongseong)
기사형태	소식 (News)

Special Villages of Great Gyeongseong

Culture Village

A "culture village" means a place where people who lead a so-called cultured life reside. A cultured life implies that even if one's roots are in Songpan, their house is built in a modern Western style, the sound of solo singing flows along with the piano, or at least the sound of a jazz band from a record player is heard. Of course, a radio antenna must be perched on the roof. It is said that breaking a cheap Western dish once a day is a "cultured life." However, who among Koreans who struggle to afford a small rented room or a bowl of bean sprout soup, especially the weary and impoverished people of Seoul, can lead a (narrowly defined) cultured life? Even if the capital is vast and the population is large, the number of people who lead such leisurely cultured lives can be counted on one hand. Therefore, it is difficult to find a so-called culture village where only those people live. Even looking at the poor lives of Westerners, one might consider it a cultured life, and it's not uncommon to see that even the lives of Japanese salaried workers are cultured.

Then, where is the so-called culture village where only Koreans live and lead a cultured life? Should we point to the area inside Dongsomun (東小門)? However, we cannot say that building a Western-style house and living as described above is the only definition of a cultured life. Even if one lives in a thatched-roof house, breaking away from the traditional Korean family system and enjoying a pleasant and harmonious life while eating red bean rice and dipping it in soybean paste is enough to be called a cultured life. To call the area inside Dongsomun a culture village is too desolate at first glance. <106> However, their lives are mostly simple and clean. Many are company employees or salaried workers in other places, and educated people (識者級) seek quiet places and newly build houses in that area, leading simple and neat lives. It is not yet fully developed, but in the future, as transportation becomes more convenient, this area will be the only culture village for Koreans, as other good locations have all been taken.

Poor Village

Having lost their fertile rice paddies and fields, with no rice to eat and no house to sleep in, they turn their backs on their beloved mountains and rivers, moving in groups of men and women, old and young, to eat corn and millet somewhere, a miserable and wretched state for Koreans.

Unable to sustain a life in the capital, without a house or a foundation, they are pushed out beyond Dongmun (東門) and Seomun (西門), a mere escape for the poor people of Seoul.

If you were to search for the poor villages of Seoul, setting aside the special classes, who among the Koreans isn't poor? But among these poor people of Seoul, those who cannot endure are all driven out beyond the gates. However, although not everyone living outside the gates is poor, the most representative poor village in Seoul would undoubtedly be Sindang-ri (新堂里) outside Sugumun (光熙門).

In this Sindang-ri, along the main road to Wangsimni (往十里), most of the more than half of the 2,700 households, excluding a few thatched-roof houses, live in what one could hardly call proper dwellings (土幕). In this Sindang-ri, there are also wealthy people who harvest over 300 seok (石), even up to 1,000 seok, but the rest are factory workers and company employees, mostly earning a few tens of jeon (錢) per day to feed an average of five family members. However, those who do not have a fixed job and work on a daily basis cannot always find work every day, so many families, both adults and children, hug their empty stomachs.

Initially, Sindang-ri had few houses and the mountain slopes were a public cemetery, but recently, as the public cemetery gradually disappeared, people with nowhere to go gathered, using Western scrap metal for roofs and torn mats for walls to block the rain and wind, leading lives that were hardly human. The poor in Sindang-ri can be classified as poor and destitute (窮民), with those living in makeshift huts (士幕) being the destitute. Looking into the lives of these destitute people, it is truly unbearable to witness. Of course, they build a house overnight without building permits and are not concerned with any taxes or responsibilities. Of course, they cannot pay. When the wind blows, they stand holding onto the pillars with one hand and pressing down on the roof with the other. At dawn, they are the first to wake up in the world, and if they have something to eat, they eat, and if not, they starve, searching for work without a fixed destination. Spending the whole day searching here and there, if they don't earn anything, they inevitably starve. If they are lucky enough to earn a few tens of jeon (錢), <107> they buy a bag of millet (粟) and a lump of bean curd residue (비지) and return to their makeshift hut. The innocent children and pitiful wives watch and anxiously wait for the shadow of their husband and father returning with a bag of millet.

Most of them were farmers in the countryside, but their farmland was lost, and due to famine, there was nothing to eat. Hearing that Seoul was good, they came alone or with their families to this unfamiliar land, hoping for a good place to live, easy money, and a comfortable life. However, Seoul did not provide them with jobs and food. They had nowhere to go and no place to sleep, so they built makeshift huts here and lived lives that were difficult to bear. The remaining thatched-roof houses near the road are also inhabited by the poor, mostly factory workers or day laborers. Among them, about 30 households of Chinese people (支那人) live, and as diligent as they are wherever they go, except for a few stonemasons (石工), they all cultivate land near the area. About a hundred households of Japanese people (日本人) have a fixed monthly income, so their lives, although living in a poor village, are more stable and comfortable compared to the lives of Koreans. Most of the land in that area is owned by the Oriental Development Company (東拓), and the land owned by Koreans is said to be worth only 40,000 to 50,000 won (圓) at market price. Shouldn't we sigh again? Isn't it heartbreaking?

Westerner Village

There are few Westerners living in Seoul, and they do not live together in one particular place. Each lives near the place they are related to, such as those related to schools living near the schools, and those related to churches or consulates living near them. Once they build a house, they exchange them with each other, and new arrivals move into the houses that people who have returned to their home countries used to live in. As a result, even with new people coming and going, things remain the same.

However, the area around Jeong-dong (貞洞) is where the most are gathered. Because it was initially designated as a foreign settlement (外國人의 居留地), most of the consulates of various countries were located there, and gradually, one or two houses were added, and now it resembles a quiet back alley in some Western country.

The Russian (露國), American (美國), and British (英國) consulates are located there, and the French (佛蘭西) consulate was also located there until it moved to Seodaemun (西大門) a few years ago.

Due to the presence of consulates in this area, people associated with those institutions built houses, and now, although there are not many houses, it has become a Westerner village (西洋人村).

It is a bit difficult to peek into their lives. Whenever I pass by, unlike us who eat breakfast early and go to factories or companies with lunch boxes, I only see their sons and daughters with bright blue eyes, carrying a few books and going to study. <108> In the afternoon, the children return from school—their schools are nearby—and play lively in the grass, and men and women pair up and exercise on the tennis courts.

The sound of the piano that echoes as dusk falls tells us everything about their lives. They have enough money and enough freedom to move around. If we want to argue with them, we have to argue with their country. Laughter is on their lips, and vitality fills their faces. We shouldn't be envious of their lives, but I wish we could be like that wherever we go.

In addition, there are White Russian (白系露人) people living in Seoul, but they are living in difficult circumstances. They barely make a living by carrying so-called Russian bread or ready-made Western clothes or Western-style trousers on their shoulders and wandering around. They have fled not only to Korea but also to various places, and I don't know what opportunities they are looking for, but many of them were aristocrats in the past. Anyway, whether it's the beginning or the end, whenever I see them, even though they are fellow foreigners, they seem very pitiful.

Chinese Village

It goes without saying that Chinese people (지나인) are the most numerous foreigners in Korea. They are known for being diligent and thrifty in every country they go to. The amount of money they take out of this narrow, poor Korea is truly unimaginable. They sell everything from candied peanuts, hotteok (호떡), vegetable dishes, and fabrics to samdongju (삼동주) merchants, fly swatters, grill vendors, and stonemasons, and they also do other things. They go into the mountains to cultivate fields, and if they earn ten jeon (錢), they spend no more than two jeon (錢) on daily living expenses and hide the rest in their pockets. They are one of the ethnic groups that take money from the pockets of Koreans. Moreover, there is a lack of jobs and an increasing number of people who cannot make a living. Because these Chinese (지나인) laborers work diligently all day even for half the wages, more than half, if not all, of the workers on major construction sites are Chinese (지나인). For this reason, it is becoming increasingly difficult for Korean laborers to survive.

These nearly 5,000 Chinese (지나인) residing in Seoul live in every corner of the city. There is no place where they do not live, and there is no one who does not leave their hotteok (호떡) carts lying around. However, the most populous Chinese village (지나인촌) in Seoul is Seosomun-jeong (西小門町), followed by Gwansu-dong (觀水洞), or the back alleys near Nagatani-cho (長谷川町).

Entering their streets, everything from the buildings to the air smells Chinese (지나 냄새), and the smell of green onions and garlic stabs our noses. Everything truly evokes a Chinese (지나) atmosphere.

Looking inside the houses while passing by the streets, it seems as if something that cannot be openly revealed to the world is hidden in the gloomy atmosphere, and the incomprehensible, sinister voices sound like something is being plotted. Having heard that Chinese (지나) people smoke opium like tobacco, their faces all look yellowish, as if they are all opium addicts. Especially when passing through the streets of Seosomun-jeong (西小門町), it feels like walking through the lower strata of their home country. Entering their houses, one might think they will not be able to find their way out. Seosomun-jeong (西小門町) is a unique place in Seoul for having many opium dens, so when seeing beggars in tattered clothes or people neatly wrapped in blankets, especially those with yellow faces and hunched backs, sneaking into the gloomy side alleys at sunset, late at night, or early in the morning, it is certain that they are all opium addicts. There also seem to be Chinese (지나인) prostitutes. Even if one doesn't know the customs of the Chinese (지나인), their faces are bloodless, and they have a lascivious posture no matter where you look. Seeing their gloomy expressions and seductive poses in the dim lamplight, they are undoubtedly prostitutes. It's like they are out on the streets fishing for foreign clients. From beginning to end, their streets feel shady, heavy, and like a den of iniquity, and their words and sinister voices make them seem like a scheming ethnic group no matter where you look. Their lives cannot be fully described on paper based solely on these observations, but in some corner of their houses, there must be a tightly packed wad of paper money hidden away. In this respect, there is a difference between the outward appearance and the reality of Koreans, who decorate only the outside and have nothing but pawn tickets in the iron safe they bought when they had some money.

Still, they are a nation with a flag (國긔), so on holidays, they hang the Blue Sky with a White Sun flag (靑天白日긔), and during the Lunar New Year, stubborn people like them close their front doors for several days and make noise and gather to play. When they drink, they only drink at home and do not wander the streets drunk. No matter how much of a holiday it is, I have never seen them act indecently in the streets like Koreans. Since they are originally thrifty people, they do something to make a living and it is difficult to find beggars among them.

Industrial Village

When counting countries without industry, Korea cannot but be considered the foremost. Recently, many factories have been built here and there, and chimneys have sprung up quite tall, but it is all owned by others, and what we own is only a small cottage industry. With abundant raw materials and plentiful resources at our fingertips, we could not figure out how to make them and put them to good use, and eventually, others noticed them first and took them away. How can a country without industry not be poor? Now that we have realized this, factories and manufacturing companies are springing up here and there, but the important industries have already been taken away by the enemies, and Koreans who lack economic power cannot compete against their large capital, and they will collapse in a few days. Korean industry cannot be revived now, <110> but we can only wait for the future.

However, instead of being pessimistic, we should study how to develop on a small scale with small capital. Currently, there are several factories being run with large capital, but that's all there is. We cannot boast that Koreans have industry just because of those few places. Moreover, when trying to find an industrial village in Seoul, we are only likely to see a terrible sight, but if we had to point one out, it would be a part of Byeongmok-jeong (並木町) and the area around Seosaheon-jeong (西四軒町). However, it is too dreadful to present this as a Korean industrial village, a Korean industrial village in the capital (首都) of Seoul.

A few slender chimneys stand tall, and there is a rattling sound even in the small huts. They are mostly dyeing yarn and weaving fabrics used only by Koreans. There is also a glass (硝子) factory and an iron factory that makes tobacco cases. However, they don't particularly build separate buildings, and the rattling sound can be heard from ordinary living houses from dawn till dusk. Along the streets, they sell side dishes or tobacco, and inside the houses, they are mostly engaged in dyeing or weaving, whether it is their main or side job. Passing through the alleys of that neighborhood, there are many people engaged in some kind of business, such as selling side dishes or rice, so there are few people who are idle, and therefore, there seem to be few people who are struggling and starving for their daily meals. If they are rattling at home as a side job, one or two members of the family are working at some other store, company, or factory to earn money. There are few people who live wealthy lives, but there seem to be few people who are extremely threatened by life. Anyway, such small-scale industries can be sustained.

I believe that when the time comes when we build chimneys that seem to pierce the sky in the land of Korea with our own hands, the lives of Koreans will be comfortable.

Labor Village

A labor village is simply a place where many laborers live. However, if we exclude the people of a certain class who do not lift a finger and only sit and eat, there is no one who earns money with their own hands and puts food in their mouth who is not a laborer. However, if we distinguish this labor into physical labor and mental labor, the explanation is well known. Now, the labor village we want to talk about is, among these, a village of extremely extreme physical laborers who can only make a living and survive by doing difficult and arduous physical labor.

In Korea, there is a lot of work to do, even if it is someone else's work, and there are many people to do it. Everywhere you go, there are companies, everywhere you go, there are construction sites, and everywhere you go, there are markets. However, Korea is also famous for having many unemployed people (失職者) and many jobless people. Even if they have lost their jobs, they have to eat to live. Those who have not learned anything lack nutrition and have no blood, but they have strong bones. Inevitably, they carry loads on their backs or pull carts, waiting for their daily meals. However, there is not always work for the many thousands of them.

The area near Bongnae Bridge (蓬萊橋) next to Gyeongseong Station (京城驛) to the area over Yakhyun (藥峴) can be called a labor village. They sit in the scorching sun all day, waiting for someone to bring a difficult load, and if they are lucky, they earn a few tens of jeon (錢) and get something to eat that day. Most of them rent a room in someone else's house and cook their own meals, or the wife does work for the landlord and receives three bowls of rice a day and a monthly salary of around 3 won (圓), while the husband earns money by pulling a cart or doing odd jobs, barely making a living. However, many people go to a factory and receive a daily wage (日給). Since they have no leisure other than eating, the issue of their children's education is a long-term problem.

Also, an ideal (?) labor village would be Hyeonjeo-dong (峴底洞) outside Dongnimmun (獨立門). This neighborhood consists of newly built, simple Korean-style houses. Of the 1,300 households with a population of over 5,000, more than half are factory workers and day laborers, and the remaining 60 households of Japanese (日本人) are mostly government officials. There are no wealthy people, and there are also no people who starve every day. People eat breakfast early in the morning, pack their lunch, and return at dusk. Even though they do difficult and arduous labor, they don't worry about their daily meals. Even if they buy rice in a paper bag and cook a pot of bean curd residue (비지), laughter can be heard from the small huts. It is a poor and noisy neighborhood, but they feel abundance in their lives.

Prostitute Village

When you hear Dabang-gol (茶房町), you think of gisaeng (妓生). Sleeping late in the morning is called Dabang-gol sleep. Gisaeng (妓生) who sell laughter and songs until late at night cannot wake up early in the morning, so they naturally sleep late. Originally, there were many affluent people living in Dabang-gol (茶房町), so those who played and ate did not need to wake up early in the morning. However, it is only recently that many gisaeng (妓生) have lived in Dabang-gol (茶房町), but it is true that there are many gisaeng (妓生). Until recently, Ogung-gol (五宮골) was famous as a gisaeng (妓生) village, but now they are mostly gathered in the vicinity of Seorin-dong (瑞麟洞), Cheongjin-dong (淸進洞), and Gwancheol-dong (貫鐵洞).

They mostly live in that area, centering around restaurants, and it is possible that they choose to live as close as possible to those places. In Seoul, that area is famous for having many gisaeng (妓生).

What are their lives like? It is a gisaeng's (妓生) life that anyone can know and imagine. Almost all of them live in rented houses, and their families must be small. They spend several hours a day, not getting enough sleep, acting as entertainers (놀님감), giving a portion to the gwonbeon (權番) and the restaurant, and returning with only a small amount left in their hands. If they don't save, they have to eat with that money, they have to dress with that money, and they have to pay rent and miscellaneous expenses. They have to support their families with their frail bodies. However, with their simple income, there must be some other way to support their families who are only looking at them.

The job of looking at the dim sunset and starting to groom their eyebrows in front of a powder case is a beautiful job. But it is a cruel job in the world. Their hearts shrink as they wait for the rickshaw puller (인력거꾼) who shouts at the gate. Even if there is unease in the house and on their bodies, and their brows are furrowed, they have to put on a fake smile and control their emotions in front of the time-serving masters as part of their business strategy. Even if they barely ate soybean stew (된장찌개) at home, they have to say that the sinseollo (神仙爐) is not tasty for the sake of appearances.

The neighborhood where gisaeng (妓生) live is sometimes noisy and sometimes quiet. The sound of janggu (장구) and gayageum (가야금) along with the sound of singing can be heard even during the day, and the atmosphere of the gisaeng (妓生) village is immediately felt. However, even though the songs are the same, the sound that flows out into the street during the day sounds very cruel. However, since this is a job created by society, we should not ridicule or criticize these women.

**Named Entities**

Songpan	松板
Dongsomun	東小門
Wangsimni	往十里
Sindang-ri	新堂里
Sugumun	光熙門
Seodaemun	西大門
Jeong-dong	貞洞
露國	Roguk
美國	Miguk
英國	Yŏngguk
佛蘭西	Pŭransa
東拓	Dongt'ak
Byeongmok-jeong	並木町
Seosaheon-jeong	西四軒町
京城驛	Kyŏngsŏng-yŏk
蓬萊橋	Pongnae-gyo
藥峴	Yagyŏn
獨立門	Tongnimmun
峴底洞	Hyŏnjŏ-dong
茶房町	Tabang-gol
五宮골	Ogunggŏl
瑞麟洞	Sŏrindong
淸進洞	Ch'ŏngjindong
貫鐵洞	Kwant'ŏrdong
西小門町	Sŏsomun-jŏng
觀水洞	Kwansudong
長谷川町	Nagatani-cho
權番	kwŏnbŏn


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	大京城의 特殊村
기사형태	소식

大京城의 特殊村
文化村

文化村이라면 소위 문화생활을 하는 사람들, 문화생활이라면 松板쪽을 부처 노앗드래도 집은 신식 양옥으로 지어 놋코 피아노에 마처 흐르는 독창 소래가 안이면 류성긔판의 짜쓰빤드 소리쯤은 들녀 나와야 하고 집웅 우에는 라듸오 안테나가 가루 걸처 잇서야 할 것은 물론이어니와 하로에 한번식은 갑싼 것일망정 양요리 접시나 부서야 왈 문화생활이라고들 한다. 그러나 한간 세방이 어렵고 한그릇 콩나물죽이 어려운 형편에 잇는 조선 사람이 더구나 찌들니고 쪼들니는 서울 사람이(편벽된 의미의) 문화생활을 하고 잇는 사람이 누구일 것이냐. 장안이 넓고 인간이 만타해도 이러한 여유락락한 문화생활을 하고 잇는 사람은 안저서라도 손곱을 수가 잇다. 따라서 그들만이 모혀서 사는 소위 문화촌이란 문화촌을 차저 내이기도 어렵다. 얼는 서양 사람의 가난한 살님을 보아도 그것이 문화생활이고 일본 사람의 월급쟁이 살님을 보아도 그것이 문화생활이 안인게 드물다고는 할 수가 잇는지는 모른다.
그러면 조선 사람 만히 모혀서 문화생활을 하고 잇는 소위 문화촌은 어듸냐. 東小門 안 근방을 칠가. 그러나 문화생활이라고 반듯이 양옥을 짓고 우에 말한 것가튼 그러한 생활이 문화생활이라고만 할 수는 업다. 한간 초옥에 드러 안젓드라도 조선 재래의 가족제도에서 버서나 팟밥에 된장을 쩌서 먹드라도 자미잇고 화락한 생활을 하는 것을 문화생활이라고 하기에 넉넉하다. 東小門 안 근방을 문화촌이라기에는 얼는 보아서<106> 너무 쓸쓸하다. 그러나 그들의 살님은 대개가 간단하고도 정결하다. 대개가 회사원이거나 그외 타 여러 곳에서 월급쟁이로 단이는 사람이 만코 식자급(識者級)의 사람들이 閑寂한 곳을 차저 그 근방에 새로히 주택을 짓고 간편하고 개끗한 살님을 하고 잇다. 아즉은 전부랄 수가 업스나 압흐로는 그 근방은 교통도 더 편리해지면 조선 사람의 문화촌으로 이곳 밧게는 업고 다른 조흔 곳들은 다 빼앗겻다.

貧民村

기름진 논밧 전지를 다 뺏기고 먹으랴니 밥이 업고 잠잘냐니 집이 업서 그리운 산천을 등지고 남부녀대하야 강냉이 조밥이나마 어더 먹으려고 수천만리 먼먼 길을 산넘고 물건너 몰녀 가는 것이 쪼들니고 구차한 조선 사람의 현상이다.
그러고 장안 살님을 지탕해 갈 수가 업고 집업고 터전 업서 동문밧 서문밧 문밧그로 쪼기여나가는 것이 가난한 서울사람의 한낫 피해갈 곳이다.
서울의 빈민촌을 차자 내라니 서울 사람 안이 조선 사람이 특수한 게급을 제해 놋코서 누가 빈민 안인 사람이 잇겟는가만은 이러케 가난한 서울 사람 중에도 할수 업는 사람은 모조리 문밧그로 몰녀 나가는 것이다. 그러나 문밧게 사는 사람이 전부가 빈민이라는 것은 안이지만은 그 중에도 서울의 빈민촌으로 대표가 될만한 곳은 수구문(光熙門)밧 新堂里를 손곱아도 과히 험의 적은 말은 안일 것이다.
이 신당리는 往十里로 가는 큰길 연변의 불과 얼마 못되는 草屋을 除한 전 호수 2,700여 호의 반수 이상이 사람이 거처하는가 십흔 土幕들이다. 이러한 신당리에도 300石 이상으로 千石의 추수를 밧는 부자도 잇스나 그 외에는 공장의 직공과 회사의 고용인들이고 대개는 그날 그날에 몃십전식의 품삭을 바더 평균 다섯 사람이나 되는 식구를 길너 간다. 그러나 일뎡한 직업이 업시 日雇用을 하는 사람들에게 날마다 돈버리가 잇스란 법 업서 그날의 먹을 것을 엇지 못하고 어른 아이가 주린 배를 부등켜 안고 잇는 식구들이 또한 만타.
이 신당리는 처음에는 인가라고는 얼마 업고 산등성이는 공동묘지엿든 것이 최근에 와서 점점 공동묘지는 업서지게 되자 갈곳 업는 사람들이 모혀 드러 서양 철조각으로 집웅을 잇고 거적 조각으로 벽을 삼아 비와 바람을 막고 사람의 살님이 안인 사람의 살님을 하고 잇다. 신당리의 빈민을 난호면 빈민과 궁민(窮民)이며 士幕사리를 하는 사람들이 궁민들이다. 이 궁민들의 사는 모양을 들여다 보면 과연 눈으로 볼 수가 업다. 물논 이들은 건축 허가업시 밤동안에 집 한채를 지어 놋코 세금이란 무슨 세금이고 아모 상관이 업고 책임이 업다. 물논 내일 수가 업는 것이다. 바람이 불면 한 손으론 기동을 붓들고 한손으론 집웅을 누르고 섯다. 새벽이면 세상에서는 뎨일 먼저 니러나서 잇스면 먹고 업스면 굶어서 정한 곳 업시 일터를 차저 간다. 그날 하로를 온종일 이리저리 차저 단이다가 벌지 못한 날은 별수 업시 굼는 것이 그들의 일상이다. 요행히 몃십전<107> 생긴 날은 조(粟) 한봉지에 비지 한덩이를 사 들고 土幕을 차저 간다. 철모르는 아이와 불상한 안해는 조쌀 한봉지 사들고 드러 오는 남편과 아버지의 그림자를 바라보고 애조리며 기다리고 잇다.
이들은 대개가 시골서 농사를 짓다가 농터가 떠러지고 흉년이 들고 해서 먹을 것은 업고 서울이 조타는 말을 듯고 홋몸으로 혹은 처자를 거느리고 버리 조코 돈 흔하고 살기 편한 서울을 차저 미들 사람 업는 백사지 땅에 드러섯다. 그러나 그들에세 업을 주고 먹을 것을 주는 서울은 안이엿다. 그들은 갈 곳이 업고 잠 잘곳이 업서 이곳에다 토막을 짓고 참아 눈으로 보기 어려운 살님을 하고 잇다. 그 남아지 길가 근처에 잇는 초가들은 역시 빈민들이랄 수 밧게 업스며 그들은 대개가 공장 직공이나 日雇 노동자가 만타. 그중에는 支那人이 30戶 가령 살고 잇는데 어데를 가든지 勤儉한 그들은 역시 몃 사람 石工을 제한 외에는 전부가 그 근처의 땅을 어더서 농사를 짓고 잇다. 또 백여戶나 되는 日本人은 거의 다 일뎡한 월수입이 잇서 그들의 생활은 貧村에 잇스면서도 조선 사람의 생활 내용에 비하면 토대가 잡히고 구차하나마 여유가 잇다. 그 근방의 토지는 대개가 東拓의 소유가 되고 조선 사람의 소유로는 시가 時價로 불과 4,5만圓이라 한다. 이러하니 이제 다시 한숨 쉴배 안이련만 한심치 안은가.

西洋人村

서울 잇는 서양 사람들은 수도 적거니와 특별히 한 곳에만 모혀 살지를 안이하고 각기 자긔네의 관게되는 곳을 따라 學校에 관게되는 사람은 그 학교 근처에 집을 짓고 살고 교회나 령사관에 관게 잇는 사람은 역시 그 근처에 집을 짓고 살며 집을 한번 지어 노으면 서로 밧구어 들며 새로 오는 사람은 번국으로 도라간 사람이 잇든 집으로 이가티 함으로 결국 새로히 오고 가고 한대도 늘 그 모양으로 잇게 된다.
그러나 그 중에서 뎨일  만히 모혀 살기는 암만해도 貞洞 일대가 될 것이다. 그 곳은 처음에 外國人의 居留地로 지정을 해주엇든 까닭에 대개 각국 령사관은 그 곳으로 몰니엿슴으로 차차로 한채 두채 집이 느러서 지금은 얼는 서양 어느 한적한 뒤골목도 갓다.
그 곳에는 露國 米國 英國의 領事舘이 잇스며 佛蘭西 領事舘 역시 그 곳에 잇다가 년전에 西大門 밧그로 옴기게 되엿다.
이 근처는 영사관이 잇는 관게로 그 게통 사람들이 살기 위하야 집들을 지은 것이 지금과 가티 몃집 안되나마 터전을 차지하고 사는 서양인촌이 되고 마럿다.
그들의 생활 내면을 엿보기에는 좀 어려운 감이 잇스며 늘 그곳을 지낼 때 보면 아츰이라야 우리네들처럼 새벽밥을 먹고 공장으로 회사로 점심밥을 싸 질머지고 나스는 사람을 구경할 수가 업고 다만 새ㅅ파란 눈둥자를 되록어리고 책 두어권을 녑헤 끼고 공부하러 가는 그들의 아들 딸을 보기 외에는 별노히 다른 곳으로 출근하는 사람을 못 보겟다. 낫이 되면 아이들은<108> 학교-그들이 학교가 그 근처에 잇다- 에서 도라와서 풀밧에서 생긔잇게 뛰고 놀며 다저 노은 테니스 코-트에서는 남녀가 한짝식 지어 오후의 운동을 한다.
어슴푸레하게 해 점을제 울녀 나오는 피아노의 소리는 그들의 생활 전부를 귀로 들녀 준다. 그들에게는 쓸 만콤 돈이 잇고 움즉일 만콤 자유가 잇다. 그들과 시비를 하랴면 그 나라와 시비를 해야 한다. 그들의 말마듸에는 우슴이 떠러지고 그들의 얼골에는 생기가 념친다. 그들의 살님을 부러워 할 배도 안이지만 우리네도 어느 곳을 가든지 그래젓스면 십다.
이 외에도 서울에 와 잇는 白系露人이 잇스나 그들은 처지가 처지이니 만치 어려운 살님을 하고 잇다. 소위 로시아빵이나 긔성양복 혹은 양복 가음을 억개에 둘처메고 돌아단이며 근근히 여명을 니어 간다. 그들이 비단 조선뿐이 안이라 각처에 망명하여 잇스며 무슨 긔희를 엿보고 잇는지는 모르거니와 그들 중에는 녯날에 귀족들이 만타. 하여간 처음이야 끗이야 엇쨋든 그들을 볼제는 가튼 외국 사람이어늘 그 인간만이 퍽 딱해 보이기도 한다.

中國人村

조선에 와 잇는 외국인으로는 지나인이 뎨일 만흔 것은 더 말할 것 업는 사실이다. 어느 나라를 가든지 근검하고 저축 만히 하는 민족으로 그야말노 세평이 놉흔 지나인이다. 이들이 요 좁은 조선구차한 조선 돈을 얼마나 가저가느냐 하는 것은 참으로 상상밧게 큰 액수이다. 아가워 콩사탕 호떡 야채 요리점 포목점 다시 떠러저서 삼동주행상 파리채 석쇠장사 돌쟁이(石工) 댐쟁이 이외에도 여러가지 그들은 안이 하는 것이 업시 山골로 드러가서 밧고랑을 갈고 십전을 벌면 이전을 넘기지 안코 하로에 생활비로 쓰고 그 남어지는 주머니에 감추어 두는 것이다. 이들은 조선 사람의 주머니를 글거가는 민족 중에 하나이다. 더구나 일은 업고 노동자는 만허 먹고 살수 업는 사람이 만허지는 것도 이 지나인 노동자가 남의 반갑에라도 종일 근실하게 일을 하는 까닭에 왼만한 공사나 일터에는 반이상 그러치 안으면 전부가 지나인 노동자인 것을 볼 수 잇다. 이런 까닭에 조선 사람 노동자가 점점 사러갈 수가 업게 되는 것이다.
서울에 현주하는 근 오천명이나 되는 그들은 구석구석이 안 끼여 사는 곳이 업고 의레히 호떡가가라도 버려 놋코 잇지 그대로 잇는 사람이 업다. 그러나 서울의 지나인촌이라면 그중 만키로는 西小門町이요 다음에는 觀水洞이 될 것이다. 또는 長谷川町 근처의 뒤ㅅ골목일 것이다.
그들의 거리를 드러스면 건물부터, 근처의 공기부터가 지나 냄새가 나고 첫대파와 마눌 냄새가 우리네의 코를 쿡 찌르는 것이나 모든 것이 과연 지나 냄새가 떠돈다.
거리를 지나다 집안을 드려다 보면 우중충한 그 속에 엇전지 세상에 공공연하게 내여 노치 못할 무엇이 감추어 잇는듯도 하고 아러드를 수 업는 음흉한 말소리는 무엇이고 음모가 잇는<109> 것도 갓다. 지나 사람들은 아편을 담배 먹듯 한다는 말을 드러서 그러한지 그들의 얼골을 볼제 누릇누릇한 것이 모도 다 아편쟁이 갓기도 하다. 그 중에도 서소문뎡 거리를 지내면 허릴업시 그들의 번국 어느 하층 사회를 거러가는 감이 잇다. 그들의 집에를 드러가면 나올 길을 못 차저 나올 것도 가티 생각이 든다. 서소문뎡은 아편굴이 만키로 서울서 독특한 곳이니만치 석양때나 밤늣게 혹은 새벽녁에 헌털뱅이 입은 걸인이나 아래 우를 말ㅅ숙하게 휘감은 사람 툭별히 얼골이 누르고 목허리 굽은 사람들이 왕래를 흘끔흘끔 살살펴보며 우중충한 녑골목으로 드러스는 것을 보면 그것이 모도 아편쟁이에 틀님이 업다. 지나인의 밀매음녀도 잇는 듯하다. 아모리 지나인의 원풍속을 모른다 해도 피ㅅ기운업는 얼골에 어듸로 보든지 음탕한 포-스를 하고 희미한 뎐등빗에 우울한 표정, 유혹뎍 표정을 하고 잇는 것을 보면 별수 업는 매음녀다. 거리에 나서서 외입쟁이 낙시질을 하는 것도 갓다. 무엇에서 무엇까지 그들의 거리는 음침하고 충중하고 마굴과도 가튼 기분이 돌고 그들의 말소리나 음흉한 음성은 어듸로 보든지 음모뎍 민족이다. 그들의 생활을 지면으로 이와 가튼 것만을 보고서는 말을 할 수가 업스나 그들의 집안 어느 구석이고 눈에 띄이지 안는 곳에는 꽁꽁 뭉친 지전이 박혀 잇슬 것이다. 이것을 보면 것만은 화려하게 꿈여놋코 돈푼 생겻슬 적에 사노앗든 철궤속에는 뎐당표만 수두룩하게 담긴 조선 사람의 그것만은 안과 밧게 차이라 할 수 잇다.
그래도 그들은 국긔가 잇는 민족들이라 명절 때면은 청천백일(靑天白日)긔를 내다러 노코 정월에 설노리가튼 것은 그가티 구든 사람들이 몃칠식 전방문을 다더 걸고 떠들고 모혀 논다. 그들은 술을 먹게 되면 집안에서만 먹고 취해서 거리를 단이지 안는 고로 아모리 명절이라고 조선 사람가티 거리에서 추태를 연출하는 것을 못 보앗고 원래가 근검한 사라들이라 무슨 짓이고 해서 먹고 살지 그들에게서 걸인을 차저 보기가 어렵다.

工業村

공업업는 나라를 손곱을 제 조선을 읏듬으로 치지 안을 수가 업다. 근래에 와서 여기저기 공장이 만히 생겻고 연돌도 제법 웃둑웃둑 소사 잇스나 그러나 그것은 보기 조케도 모도 다 남의 것이요 우리네 것이라고는 미미한 소공업에 지내지 못한다. 풍부한 원료와 가득한 재료를 압뒤에 싸어 두고서 그것을 엇더케 맨드러서 엇더한데 소용이 되게 쓰겟다는 생각을 못하고 잇다가 결국 남의 눈에 먼저 띄우게 되여 결국 남의 손에 집어 너어 주고 말엇다. 공업 업는 나라가 엇지 빈한하지 안을 수 잇스랴. 인제 와서 깨달은 것이 잇는지 여기저기서 무슨 공장 무슨 제조회사가 벌 니러나듯 하지만 원래 적들에게 중요한 공업은 다 빼앗기엿고 경제력이 부족한 조선 사람이 적들 대자본 미톄서 그들에 대항은커녕 몃날이 못 가서 쓰러지고 말게 된다. 인제 와서는 이러날냐야 이러날수 업는 조선의 공업이지만<110> 압날을 기다릴 수 밧게는 업다.
그러나 비관을 할 것이 안이라 소자본을 가지고라도 규모잇게 발전을 해갈 연구를 할 것이다. 현재에 몃개 공장이 대자본으로 경영하는 것이 잇스나 그러나 그것은 몃군데에 끄치는 것이다. 고것을 가지고 조선 사람이 공업을 가젓다고 내세울 수는 업는 것이다. 더구나 서울에 잇서서 공업촌을 차져보려 할 때에는 도리혀 참혹한 꼴만 보려는 것이나 구태여 차자 내이라면 병목뎡(並木町) 일부와 서사헌뎡(西四軒町) 일대를 볼수 밧게 업다. 그러나 조선 사람의 공업촌, 조선의 수도(首都) 서울의 공업촌이 이러하다고 내세우기에는 너무나 참혹한 감이 잇다.
가느다란 연돌이나마 몃개가 웃둑 소사 잇고 오막사리 집엣도 떨거덕 소리는 난다. 대개는 실에 염색을 하는 것과 조선 사람에게만 소용되는 직조물을 짯는 것이다. 유리(硝子) 공장도 잇고 담배통 맨드는 철공장도 잇다. 그러나 별노히 딴 건축물을 지어 노치는 안코 보통 살님하는 집에서 새벽부터 밤까지 떨거덕어리는 소리가 난다. 길개로 난데는 반찬가가나 담배가가를 벌녀 놋코 집안에서는 원업이 될지 부업이 될는지 대개가 떨거덕어리는 염색이나 직조업이다. 그 동리 골목을 지내며 보면 반찬가가나 쌀가가나 그러치 안으면 무엇이든 반듯이 무슨 영업이고 하고 잇는이 만치 그 근처 사람들은 노는 사람이 별노 업고 따라서 그 날의 먹을 것을 넘려하며 굼주리고 잇는 사람은 별노히 업는 듯하다. 자긔 집에서 부업으로 떨거덕어리면 그 식구 중에 한사람이나 두사람은 다른 무슨 장사나 어느 회사나 공장에 가서 돈버리를 하고 잇다. 부유한 살님을 하는 사람은 적으나 극도로 생활의 위협을 당하는 사람 역시 드믄 것 갓다. 하여간 이러한 소공업일 망정 보장해 갈수 잇는 것이다.
압흐로도 조선 텬디에 하눌을 찌를 듯한 연돌을 우리네 손으로 세워질 때가 오면 조선 사람의 살님도 넉넉할 것을 밋는다.

勞働村

노동촌이라면 더 註를 다를 것이 업시 노동자가 만히 사는 곳을 노동촌이라 하겟다. 그러나 손끗하나 안이 꼼작이고 파먹고만 안저 잇는 특종게급의 사람을 제해 놋코는 적어도 제손으로 버러서 제입에 밥을 넛는 사람치고 노동자가 안인 이 업다. 그러나 이 노동을 구별하야서 육톄노동이니 정신노동이니 하는 너머도 잘 아는 설명은 약하나 이제 말하고자 하는 노동촌은 그 중에도 육톄노동 육톄노동 중에도 힘들고 어려운 노동을 해야만 그날 입에 풀칠을 하고 사러 갈 수가 잇는 극도의 극도의 육톄노동자촌을 차자 보기로 하자.
조선에도 결국 그것이 남의 일일망정 할 일도 만코 일할 사람도 만타. 어듸를 가든지 회사요 어듸를 가든지 공사장(工事場)이요 버리판이다. 그러나 실직자(失職者) 만코 무직업자 만키로도 유명한 조선이다. 직업을 일헛스나 먹어야<111> 산다. 그러타고 배흔 것이 업는 그네는 영양부족으로 피ㅅ빗은 업스나 타고난 골격은 튼튼하다. 할 수 업시 그들은 지개를 등에 언고 구루마를 끌고 그날 그날의 밥을 기다린다. 그러나 수만흔 그들을 위해서 늘 버리가 잇서 주지는 안는다.
경성역(京城驛) 녑헤 봉래교(蓬萊橋) 근방으로부터 약현(藥峴)으로 넘어가는 근방까지를 노동촌이라 할 수 잇다. 하로 온종일을 또악볏에 안저서 들고 가기 어려운 짐이 잇기를 종일 기다리다가 요행한 행보나 잇스면 불과 몃십전을 바더서 그날에 멕이를 어든 것이다. 대개 그들의 주택은 남의 집 겻방 행랑방을 빌녀서 끄려먹고 살거나 안해는 주인집의 일을 보아주고 하로에 밥 세 그릇과 한달에 3圓 내외의 월급을 밧고 남편은 구루마나 기게버리를 하여서 겨우겨우 먹고만 산다. 그러나 대개는 어느 공장에 가서 일공(日給)을 밧고 단이는 사람이 만타. 원래가 그들은 먹는 이외에는 아모 여유가 업슴으로 자녀의 교육 문뎨는 저-몃재의 문뎨이다.
또 리상뎍(?) 노동촌은 獨立門 밧 峴底洞이 될 것이다. 이 동리는 최근에 새로히 건축한 조선식으로 간단하게 지은 집들이다. 전 호수는 1,300여 戶에 人口가 오천여나 되는 중에 반수 이상은 공작 직공과 日給 노동자들이고 그 남어지는 회사의 사원으로 60여 戶되는 日本人들은 대개가 官公吏라 한다. 부유한 사람이 업고 그날 그날 굶는 사람이 역시 별노 업다. 아츰에는 새벽밥을 먹고 점심을 싸들고 나서서는 저녁 어둑할 때 도라오는 사람들은 비록 힘들고 어려운 노동을 할망정 그날의 멕이는 걱정하지 안는다. 비록 조희 봉지에 쌀을 사들고 비지 한 뭉치를 끄려 놋트라도 오막사리 집에서는 우슴 소래가 들녀 나온다. 빈한한 동리요 싯그러운 동리이나 그들의 생활에는 오히려 넉넉을 늣긴다.

妓生村

다방골(茶屋町)하면 기생을 련상한다. 아츰 늣게까지 자는 잠을 다방골잠이라 한다. 밤 늣게까지 우슴을 팔고 노래를 팔고 도라온 기생네가 아츰에 일즉이 이러날 수는 업스니 자연 늣도록 잘 것이요 원래 다방골에는 대개 유여한 사람이 만히 살엇든 까닭에 놀고 먹는 그네들이 아츰에 일즉이 이러날 필요가 업는 것이다. 그러나 다방골에 긔생이 만히 산다는 것은 최근에 와서의 일이나 하여간 기생 만흔 것은 사실이다. 얼마 전까지도 오궁골이라면 기생촌으로 유명하엿스나 지금에는 瑞麟洞과 淸進洞과 貫鐵洞 근방에 대개 모혀 잇게 되엿다.

그들이 대개 그 근방으로 모혀 사는 것은 요리점을 중심으로 하야 될 수 잇는대로 그 근방을 택해서 사는지는 모르나 서울에서는 그 근방이 기생 만히 살기로 져명하다.
그들의 살님은 엇더한가. 누구나 알수 잇고 상상할 수 잇는 기생의 살님이다. 거의 다 월세집에 들어 잇고 그들의 식구는 단촐해야 한다. 하로에 몃시간을 밤잠도 못 자 가며 놀님감<112> 노릇을 해서 권번과 요리집에 몃활을 뜻기고 불과 얼마 안이 남는 것을 손에 쥐고 도라오니 번시 적축이 업스면 그 돈으로 그날 그날을 먹어야 하며 그 돈으로 입어야 하며 집세와 잡비를 써야 한다. 연약한 한몸으로 버러서 식구를 길러야 한다. 그러나 단순한 수입으로는 자긔 한몸만 처다보고 잇는 식구를 길르기에는 다른 무슨 수입의 방법이 잇서야 한다.

어슴푸레한 석양을 바라보고 분첩을 대해 안적 아미를 다스리기 시작하는 직업 중에는 고흔 즉업이다. 그러나 세상에 악착한 직업이다. 문ㅅ간에서 소리처 부르는 인력거꾼을 기다리기에 그들의 애는 날로 조라든다. 집안에 불안이 잇서 일신에, 불안이 잇서 찝흐렷든 눈쌀도 시간 상전 압헤서는 영업정책상 거즛 우슴일망정 우슴을 띄우고 그들의 감정을 조종해 주어야 한다. 집에서는 된장찌개를 겨우 먹엇슬망정 체면상으로 신선로(神仙爐)가 맛이 업다고 해야 한다.

기생이 사는 동리는 거리가 싯그럽기도 하고 조용하기도 하다. 낫에도 장구와 가야금 소리가 노래 소리와 함께 들녀 나오는 것으로 얼는 기생촌의 기운이 돈다. 그러나 노래야 마찬가지의 노래것만은 대낫에 거리로 흘너 나오는 그 소리는 퍽이나 악착하게도 들닌다. 그러나 이것도 사회가 지어 준 한 직업인 이상 이 직업 녀자들을 구태여 비우슬 배 안이오 시비할 배도 안이다.<113>
<106-113>