잡지명	別乾坤 第23號
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	京城 八大門과 五大宮門의 由來 (The Origin of the Eight Great Gates and Five Palace Gates of Gyeongseong)
필자	門內漢
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

The Origin of the Eight Great Gates and Five Palace Gates of Gyeongseong
						Mun Naehan

1. The Eight Great City Gates

In present-day Gyeongseong, only the two great gates, Namdaemun and Dongdaemun, and the three minor gates, Gwanghui, Hyehwa, and Chang'ui, remain. Originally, there were eight gates: Jeongnam was Heunginjimun, Jeongseo was Donuimun, Jeongnam was Sungnyemun, Jeongbuk was Sukjeongmun, Dongbuk was Hyehwamun, Seobuk was Chang'uimun, Dongnam was Gwanghuimun, and Seonam was Souimun. Additionally, there was another small gate between Dongdaemun and Gwanghuimun, namely Sugu mun (水口門). Now, let me briefly explain their origins.

Souimun (昭義門), commonly known as Seosomun (西小門), was originally called Sodeokmun (昭德門), but its name was changed to Soui in the 3rd year of King Seongjong's reign. This was because the posthumous title of Queen Han (the daughter of Han Myeong-hwe), the consort of King Yejong, was raised to Hwihuin Sodeok (徽仁昭德), and this was avoided. The gate tower (譙樓) was first built in August of the 28th year of King Yeongjo's reign by the Geumyeongcheong (禁營廳) under the King's order, and the signboard of Souimun was hung. Souimun does not have any particular history of note, but in the past, the execution ground for capital criminals was located outside the gate, so people facing execution were called "Seosomun斩." Recently, on August 1, 1907, during the disbandment of the Korean army in the 10th year of Emperor Gwangmu, a clash occurred between the Siwidae (侍衛隊) (now the site of the Seosomun government office) and the Japanese army inside this gate, resulting in numerous casualties on both sides. Captain Kajiwara of the Japanese garrison also died, which is what civilians and officials still refer to as the Seosomun Battle (西小門接戰). At that time, this gate was showered with numerous bullets, and the surrounding area witnessed a scene of bloody carnage. This gate was demolished in December 1914.

Hyehwamun (惠化門), commonly known as Dongsomun (東小門), was originally named Honghwamun (弘化門). In the 14th year of King Seongjong's reign, the east gate of Changgyeonggung Palace was also named Honghwa, so to avoid confusion between the two gates, the name was changed to Hyehwamun in the 6th year of King Jungjong's reign. The gate tower was also first built in August of the 20th year of King Yeongjo's reign by the Eoyeongcheong (御營廳) under the King's order, and the signboard of Hyehwamun was hung.

Chang'uimun (彰義門) is commonly called Jahamun (紫霞門), because the gate is located at the end of Jahadong (紫霞洞). The name Chang'ui comes from the old temple called Jang'uisa (藏義寺) (also known as Chang'uisa (彰義寺)) that was located outside the gate. During the Injo Restoration, when meritorious subjects such as Yi Gwi, Yi Seo, Choe Myeong-gil, Kim Ryu, Yi Gi-chuk, and Won Du-pyo invaded Gyeongseong, the so-called Dokgi Jeongseung (독기政丞) Won Du-pyo and the strongman Yi Gi-chuk broke and entered through this gate. In light of this, King Injo reinforced the fortress walls near this gate and greatly repaired the gate. It is said in folk tales that the name Chang'ui was given to commemorate the Restoration at that time, but there are clear records (in documents such as Yeojiseungnam (輿地勝覽) and Jibong Yuseol (芝峯類說)) that it was called Chang'ui even before King Injo, from the beginning of the dynasty, so this is a complete misunderstanding. Furthermore, Jang'uisa was a temple built by King Taejong Muryeol for Jangchunrang (長春郞) and Paraang (罷郞), who died heroically when Silla fought against Baekje at Hwangsan. Since the Goryeo Dynasty, it has been a famous temple, and during the reign of King Sejong of the Joseon Dynasty, it was used as a reading place for the scholars of Jiphyeonjeon. After King Seongjong, the temple was abolished, and a guard post was established here, and the Tangchuntae (蕩春臺) was built. (Now the front of Segeomjeong (洗劍亭))

Gwanghuimun (光熙門): Although Gwanghuimun and Sugumun (水口門) are now referred to as the same gate with different names, originally Gwanghuimun and Sugumun were completely separate gates. Sugumun was a separate gate from the eight gates, specifically used for carrying out corpses, an impure gate. There is a saying, "Bad winds blow through Sugumun," or referring to a dying old person or patient, "It's Sugumun's turn." Gwanghuimun, commonly known as Namsomun (南小門), was originally located in the upper reaches of the Jangchungdan (獎忠壇) stream, deep within the fortress walls of the Han River passage. In terms of feng shui, it was said that having the gate there was unfavorable to Gyeongseong, so it was closed and abandoned, and the name Gwanghuimun was taken and moved to the original Sugumun. As a result, the original Gwanghuimun, or Namsomun, disappeared between existence and non-existence, and Sugumun eventually became Gwanghuimun. Near this Sugumun, from the early Joseon Dynasty to modern times, there was the Donghwalinseo (東活人署) (now the east side of the entrance to Jangchungdan) and a sweat lodge, which was a type of isolation hospital for contagious diseases, managed entirely by monks.

Namdaemun (南大門), also known as Sungnyemun (崇禮門) (禮 belongs to fire, meaning south), is the largest building among the Eight Great Gates of Gyeongseong. Not only is its magnificence unparalleled, but its history is also long. It was completed on February 8th of the 7th year of King Taejo's reign (two years after the construction of Gyeongseong), and general decorations and repairs were done in the 3rd year of King Sejong's reign (when the fortress walls were built with stone). It was also repaired during the major renovation of the Gyeongseong fortress walls in the 30th year of King Sukjong's reign. Most of the buildings in Gyeongseong were burned down during the Imjin War, but this gate especially escaped the disaster and has survived to this day. The three large characters "崇禮門" on the current signboard of the gate tower are commonly believed by the public to be the writing of Grand Prince Anpyeong (安平大君) Yi Yong (brother of King Munjong), but this is a misunderstanding. In fact, it is the writing of Jukdang (竹堂) Yu Jin-dong, who was famous as a master calligrapher during the reign of King Jungjong. This was discovered by Yu Hyeok-ran, a descendant of the Yu clan, during the Sukjong era when he was repairing the gate. According to Jeong Dong-yu's Juyeongpyeon (晝永篇), several scrolls of Yu Jin-dong's writing of Sungnyemun had been passed down in the Yu clan's household. At first, the descendants thought it was just a scroll for practice, but later, when Yu Hyeok-ran repaired the gate, he saw the inscription "嘉靖某年竹堂書" on the back of the signboard and realized that it was written by his ancestor Jukdang. He compared it with the scrolls in his house and found that the calligraphy was exactly the same. And while the gate plaques of all the other gates are written horizontally, Namdaemun is uniquely written vertically to suppress the fire mountain of Gwanak (冠岳).

Dongdaemun (東大門), also known as Heunginjimun (興仁之門) (仁 belongs to wood, meaning east), was built at the beginning of the Joseon Dynasty like the Four Great Gates. It was burned down during the Imjin War, and then rebuilt during the reign of King Sukjong. It was later destroyed again and rebuilt by King Tae in the year of Eulchu when Gyeongbokgung Palace was being reconstructed. All the gates of Gyeongseong have three characters, but Dongdaemun is uniquely called Heunginjimun, adding the character 之, because the east side of Gyeongseong was weak, so the character 之 was added to compensate for this, and a curved wall was also built. (The name of the calligrapher of the gate plaque is unknown.)

The North Gate, or Sukjeongmun (肅靖門), is located in the mountainous area northeast of Samcheong-dong. It is the most remote of the Four Great Gates, and there are few pedestrians besides those passing through Seongbuk-dong, so it is always closed (now the gate is destroyed and naturally open). The building is also very unremarkable compared to the other gates, so even people living in Gyeongseong often do not know of its existence and often mistake Chang'uimun (彰義門), the Northwest Gate, for the North Gate. Among the women in the neighborhood, there is a superstition that going to this gate three times before Sangwon (上元) will ward off bad luck, which seems to have originated from the dangerous terrain.

2. The Five Palace Gates

Donhwamun (敦化門): This is the main gate of Changdeokgung Palace. It was built in the year of Gapsul (1394 AD – 536 years ago) in the 3rd year of King Taejo along with the construction of Changdeokgung Palace. During the Imjin War, all the palaces were burned down, but this gate uniquely escaped the disaster along with Honghwamun, Myeongjeongmun, Myeongjeongjeon, and Namdaemun of Changgyeonggung Palace. Together with the aforementioned Honghwamun, Myeongjeongmun, Myeongjeongjeon, and Namdaemun, it is famous as one of the Five Great Ancient Buildings of Gyeongseong. According to Yongjae Chonghwa (慵齋叢話), Jeong Guk-hyeong (Jeong Nan-jong's pseudonym, Heobaektang (虛白堂), was Guk-hyeong) wrote the plaques for the various halls and gates of Changdeokgung Palace. As mentioned above, this gate was unharmed during the Imjin War, so the writing on this gate plaque is clearly by Jeong.

Honghwamun (弘化門): This is the main gate of Changgyeonggung Palace - now Changgyeongwon. It was built in the year of Gyemyo (1483 AD – 447 years ago) in the 14th year of King Seongjong when Changgyeonggung Palace was built. The three characters 弘化門 on the plaque are the writing of Yi Ji-han, a scribe during the reign of King Injo. (Yi Ji-han's pseudonym was Ja-beon (子藩), his pen name was Sugok (壽谷), he was from Gang'eum (江陰), born in the year of Gapjin (甲辰) in the 37th year of King Seonjo, passed the civil service examination in the year of Eulhae (乙亥) in the 13th year of King Injo, and rose to the rank of Sanghogun (上護軍). He was skilled in calligraphy.) <116>

Heunghwamun (興化門): This gate is the main gate of Gyeonghuigung Palace (originally Gyeongdeokgung Palace, commonly known as Saemunan Daegwol). It was erected in the year of Byeongjin (1616 AD – 314 years ago) in the 8th year of Gwanghaegun when Gyeongdeokgung Palace was built, and the three characters 興化門 on the gate plaque are the writing of Yi Sin. (Yi Sin was from Yeoju, the son of County Magistrate Yi Bok-jang. He passed the military examination and rose to the rank of County Magistrate. He was a famous calligrapher and wrote the plaques for this gate, Taeboksi (太僕寺), and Sangdaeamun (霜臺衙門)). It is popularly said that the writing on the gate plaque is by the famous calligrapher Grand Prince Anpyeong Yi Yong, and that the light from the writing shone as far as Yajo-hyeon (夜照峴) even at night, so it was called Yajo-hyeon. However, after the letters were hit by enemy bullets during the Imjin War, they lost their light. This is a misrepresentation, as Grand Prince Anpyeong Yi Yong, as everyone knows, was the third son of King Sejong the Great, and this Gyeongdeokgung Palace was built much later (about 160 years later) during the reign of Gwanghaegun, so no matter how ignorant one may be, it is completely inappropriate to say that it is the writing of Grand Prince Anpyeong. The location of this gate was originally facing east, but when the Seodaemun passage was renovated in August 1915, it was moved to its current location.

Gwanghwamun (光化門): The East Gate of Gyeongbokgung Palace is Geonchunmun (建春文), which in the past was a gate used only by members of the royal family, in-laws, sons-in-law of the king, and female court officials. The West Gate is Yeongchumun (迎秋門), which in the past was a gate used by general officials. The North Gate is Sinmumun (神武門), which was not usually used for passage but was only permitted for use by the King when he visited the Gyeongmudae (景武臺) training ground or in other special cases. These three gates were, of course, built when Gyeongbokgung Palace was built, but their construction was not very grand. Only Gwanghwamun, the South Gate and main gate, was grand and magnificent, and its architecture was so skillful that it became one of the two great spectacles of Gyeongseong along with Namdaemun. It was built in October of the year of Eulchu (1865 AD – 60 years ago) in the 2nd year of King Tae. The architect was Kim Won-sik, and the plaque with the three characters 光化門 was written by Jeong Hak-gyo, whose pen name was Hyangsu (香壽) (also known as Mongin (夢人) or Mongjungmongin (夢中夢人)). The sangnyangmun (上樑文) was written by Yi Yu-won and calligraphed by Shin Seok-hee (see sangnyangmun below). The pair of haechi (獬豸) (獬豸 is a divine sheep, also called haechi, and commonly known as haetae) in front of the gate were created by the great modern artist Yi Se-uk (or Tae-uk). (In the past, the four stone Cheonrok (天祿) on the east and west sides of the Geumcheon Bridge (錦川橋) inside the gate were artifacts from the early days of the dynasty.) These haechi were moved to the backyard of the Government-General when the road in front of the Government-General was expanded, and Gwanghwamun was also relocated to the north side of Geonchunmun at the same time as the completion of the Government-General.

Gwanghwamun Sangnyangmun (光化門上樑文)

(Omitted text - a classical Chinese text celebrating the rebuilding of Gwanghwamun)

(The above sangnyangmun was discovered in the ceiling of the multi-story building when Gwanghwamun was relocated. It was written on red satin, about 3 feet wide and 30 feet long.)

Daehanmun (大漢門): This is the main gate of Deoksugung Palace. Originally, it was Dae'anmun (大安門). During the time of Emperor Tae, Hyeon Yeong-un gained favor, and his concubine Bae (裴) went in and out of the palace dressed in Western clothes. Among the courtiers, those who disliked this reported to Emperor Tae that it was written in some secret record that the 安 character in Dae'anmun was the 女 character with a crown, and that if a crowned woman went in and out of that gate, the country would perish. Emperor Tae believed this and immediately strictly prohibited Bae from entering the palace and changed Dae'anmun to Daehanmun. The plaque on that gate was written by the recent master calligrapher Yu Han-ik.

**Named Entities**

南大門	Namdaemun
東大門	Dongdaemun
光熙門	Gwanghuimun
惠化門	Hyehwamun
彰義門	Chang'uimun
水口門	Sugumun
昭義門	Souimun
西小門	Seosomun
昭德門	Sodeokmun
成宗	Seongjong
睿宗妃 韓氏	Yejongbi Han-ssi
韓明澮	Han Myeong-hwe
徽仁昭德	Hwihuin Sodeok
英祖	Yeongjo
禁營廳	Geumyeongcheong
光武	Gwangmu
侍衛隊	Siwidae
梶原 大尉	Kajiwara Taii
西小門接戰	Seosomun Jeopjeon
惠化門	Hyehwamun
東小門	Dongsomun
弘化門	Honghwamun
昌慶宮	Changgyeonggung
中宗	Jungjong
御營廳	Eoyeongcheong
紫霞門	Jahamun
紫霞洞	Jahadong
藏義寺 (彰義寺)	Jang'uisa (Chang'uisa)
仁祖	Injo
李貴	Yi Gwi
李曙	Yi Seo
崔鳴吉	Choe Myeong-gil
金瑬	Kim Ryu
李起築	Yi Gi-chuk
元斗杓	Won Du-pyo
獨기政丞 元斗杓	Dokgi Jeongseung Won Du-pyo
輿地勝覽	Yeojiseungnam
芝峯類說	Jibong Yuseol
新羅	Silla
百濟	Baekje
黃山	Hwangsan
長春郞	Jangchunrang
罷郞	Paraang
太宗武烈王	Taejong Muryeolwang
麗朝	Yeocho
李朝	Ijo
世宗	Sejong
集賢殿	Jiphyeonjeon
蕩春臺	Tangchuntae
洗劍亭	Segeomjeong
南小門	Namsomun
獎忠壇	Jangchungdan
漢江	Han Gang
東活人署	Donghwalinseo
崇禮門	Sungnyemun
李太祖	Yi Taejo
世宗	Sejong
肅宗	Sukjong
壬亂	Imnan
安平大君 李瑢	Anpyeong Daegun Yi Yong
文宗	Munjong
竹堂 柳辰同	Jukdang Yu Jin-dong
柳大將 赫然	Yu Daejang Hyeokran
鄭東愈	Jeong Dong-yu
晝永篇	Juyeongpyeon
嘉靖某年竹堂書	Gajeong Moyeon Jukdangseo
冠岳	Gwanak
興仁之門	Heunginjimun
李太王	Yi Taehwang
景福宮	Gyeongbokgung
北門	Bungmun
肅靖門	Sukjeongmun
三淸洞	Samcheong-dong
城北洞	Seongbuk-dong
西北門	Seobungmun
上元	Sangwon
敦化門	Donhwamun
昌德宮	Changdeokgung
鄭國馨	Jeong Guk-hyeong
虛白堂 鄭蘭宗	Heobaektang Jeong Nan-jong
慵齋叢話	Yongjae Chonghwa
Myeongjeongmun	Myeongjeongmun
Myeongjeongjeon	Myeongjeongjeon
弘化門	Honghwamun
李之翰	Yi Ji-han
子藩	Ja-beon
壽谷	Sugok
江陰	Gang'eum
宣祖	Seonjo
乙亥	Eulhae
上護軍	Sanghogun
興化門	Heunghwamun
慶熙宮 (慶德宮)	Gyeonghuigung (Gyeongdeokgung)
새문안大闕	Saemunan Daegwol
光海	Gwanghae
丙辰	Byeongjin
李伸	Yi Sin
驪州	Yeoju
李福長	Yi Bok-jang
太僕寺	Taeboksi
霜臺衙門	Sangdaeamun
夜照峴	Yajo-hyeon
安平大君 李瑢	Anpyeong Daegun Yi Yong
光化門	Gwanghwamun
景福宮	Gyeongbokgung
建春文	Geonchunmun
迎秋門	Yeongchumun
神武門	Sinmumun
景武臺	Gyeongmudae
金元植	Kim Won-sik
香壽 (夢人, 夢中夢人) 丁學敎	Hyangsu (Mongin, Mongjungmongin) Jeong Hak-gyo
李裕元	Yi Yu-won
申錫禧	Shin Seok-hee
李世旭 (李泰旭)	Yi Se-uk (Yi Tae-uk)
錦川橋	Geumcheon Gyo
大漢門	Daehanmun
德壽宮	Deoksugung
大安門	Dae'anmun
太皇帝	Taehwangje
玄暎運	Hyeon Yeong-un
裵0子	Bae 0-ja
劉漢翼	Yu Han-ik



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제23호
발행일	1929년 09월 27일
기사제목	京城 八大門과 五大宮門의 由來
필자	門內漢
기사형태	논설

京城 八大門과 五大宮門의 由來
						門內漢
一, 八大城門

지금의 京城에는 南大門과 東大門 二大門 外에 光熙, 惠化, 彰義 三小門이 有할 뿐이나 원래에는 八門이 잇섯스니 즉 正南은 興仁之門, 正西는 敦義門, 正南은 崇禮門, 正北은 肅靖門, 東北은 惠化門, 西北은 彰義門, 東南은 光熙門, 西南은 昭義門이오 此外에 東大門과 光熙門 間에 小門이 또 잇섯스니 즉 水口門이다. 이제 그 유래를 잠간 말하자면

昭義門 昭義門(속칭 西小門)은 원래 昭德門이라 칭하다가 成宗3년에 昭義라 改稱하얏스니 그것은 睿宗妃 韓氏(韓明澮女)의 謚號를 徽仁昭德이라 追上한 까닭에 此를 避하야 改함이엿다. 그 譙樓는 英祖28년 8월에 御名으로 禁營廳에서 始建하고 昭義門의 扁을 揭하얏다. 昭義門은 무슨 특별한 역사는 별로 업스나 往昔 重罪人의 斬刑場이 그 門박게 잇섯슴으로 死刑에 臨한 사람을 謂之 『西小門斬』이라 하얏고 近來 光武10년 丁未 8월1일 韓國軍隊解散할 때에는 此 門內에 잇뎐 侍衛隊(現今 西小門 官舍터)와 日本軍隊間에 충돌이 생겨서 兩方의 多數 死傷이 생기고 日本守備隊의 梶原 大尉가 또한 죽엇스니 지금까지 民官에서 西小門接戰이라 하는 것이 그것이다. 그때에 이 門도 多數한 탄환의 세례를 바덧든 것은 물론이어니와 그 부근 일대도 腥血의 慘狀을 보게 되엿다. 이 문은 其後 大正3년 12월에 撤毁하얏다.

惠化門 此門은 속칭 東小門이니 元名은 弘化門으로서 成宗14년에 昌慶宮 東門을 弘化라 칭한 후 兩門의 名이 서로 混同됨으로 中宗6년에 惠化門이라 改稱하엿다. 그 譙樓도 英祖20년 8월에 御命으로 御營廳에서 始建하고 惠化門이란 扁額을 揭하얏다.

彰義門 俗稱 紫霞門이라 하니 이는 그 門의 위치가 紫霞洞 막바지에 잇는 까닭이오 彰義라 함은 전날 그 門박에 藏義寺(一名 彰義寺)란 古刹이 잇섯기 때문에 그 古蹟을 取하야 지은 것이니 仁祖反正時 李貴, 李曙, 崔鳴吉, 金瑬, 李起築, 元斗杓 등 諸功臣이 京城을 襲入할 때에 소위 독기政丞 元斗杓와 力士 李起築이 斫破하고 드러 오던 門이다. 此에<114> 鑑하야 仁祖는 此門 부근의 성벽을 견고히 修築하고 門도 크게 修繕하얏섯는데 俗間에서는 門名을 彰義라 한 것도 그때 反正한 것을 紀念하기 위하야 지은 것이라 하나 仁祖 이전 즉 國初부터 彰義라 칭한 것은 기록(輿地勝覽, 芝峯類說 등 諸記錄)이 明白히 잇슨즉 이것은 全然 誤解다. 且藏義寺는 往昔 新羅가 百濟와 黃山에서 싸울 때에 長春郞, 罷郞이 節死하얏슴으로 太宗武烈王이 此 2人을 위하야 建한 절이니 麗朝이래 名刹로서 李朝 世宗 때에 此를 集賢殿 諸臣의 讀書所로 삼엇다가 成宗 이후에 寺를 廢하고 此에 關防을 設하며 蕩春臺를 築하얏다.(今 洗劍亭 前面)

光熙門 지금은 光熙門과 水口門이 同門異稱이 되엿지만은 원래는 光熙門과 水口門이 아주 딴 門이엿다. 水口門은 上述함과 가티 八門 외에 특히 따로 잇서서 死尸만 나아가게 한 不淨門이니 속담에 『못된 바람은 水口門으로 분다』하던지 또는 濱死한 老人이나 病者를 指하야 『水口門 차례』라 하는 것이 그것이오 光熙門은 속칭 南小門으로 원래 獎忠壇 溪流의 上流, 즉 漢江通路의 奧地 城壁에 잇섯섯는데 風水學上에 그 門이 거긔에 잇는 것은 京城에 不利하다 하야 廢鎖하고 光熙門이란 명칭만 띠여다가 元水口門에 移冠하얏다. 그리하야 元光熙門 즉 南小門은 有耶無耶間에 업서지고 水口門이 遂히 光熙門이 되엿다. 이 水口門 부근에는 往昔 李朝初로부터 近代까지 東活人署(現今 獎忠壇 입구 東便)와 汗蒸幕이 잇섯스니 이것은 一種 傳染病의 避病院으로 그 관리는 全혀 승려가 하엿섯다.

南大門 일명은 崇禮門(禮는 火에 속하얏스니 즉 南方의 意다.)이니 京城 八大門 중 最大 건물로 雄麗壯大함이 그 此가 업슬 뿐 안이라 역사가 또한 오라다. 落成하기는 李太祖7년 2월8일이오(京城 築城 後2년) 一般의 粧飾과 修繕은 世宗3년(城壁石築時)에 하엿고 其後 肅宗30년에 京城城壁을 크게 修築할 때에도 또한 修繕하얏스니 京城의 諸建物이 대개 壬亂 때에 燒火되엿스나 특히 此門은 그 禍를 免하야 今日까지 나려왓다. 현재 門樓 懸板額面의 崇禮門이란 3大字는 俗間에서 흔이 安平大君
李瑢(文宗의 弟)의 筆이라 하나 이것은 誤解이오 實은 中宗時代 名筆로 유명한 竹堂 柳辰同의 筆이다. 이것은 肅宗시대에 柳氏의 후손인 柳大將 赫然이 그 문을 수선할 때에 발견한 것이다. 鄭東愈의 晝永篇에 의하면 柳氏家에는 원래 崇禮門이라 쓴 柳辰同의 書軸이 여러장이 傳하야 왓섯는데 그 후손도 츰에는 그냥 練習하던 書軸으로 알엇더니 그<115> 뒤에 柳大將이 門을 修繕할 때에 그 懸板의 後面에 嘉靖某年竹堂書라 記한 것이 잇는 것을 보고 비로소 자긔의 祖先 竹堂이 쓴 것을 알고 그 집에 잇는 書軸과 對照하야 본즉 書法이 조금도 틀님이 업섯다고 云云하얏다. 그리고 諸門의 門額은 다 橫書하얏스되 惟獨 南大門을 縱書한 것은 冠岳의 火山을 壓하기 위함이라 한다.

東大門 일명 興仁之門(仁은 木에 屬하니 東方의 意다.)이니 四大門과 가티 李朝 初에 창건하얏다가 壬亂兵火에 燒火되고 그 후 肅宗 때에 修築하얏다가 또 崩壞되야 李太王 乙丑에 景福宮 重建時 다시 重建하얏다. 京城의 諸門은 다 三字이되 惟獨 東大門을 興仁之門이라 하야 之字를 加한 것은 京城의 東方이 虛한 故로 此를 補하기 위하야 之字를 加하고 또 曲城을 設하얏다 한다.(그 門 額書는 筆者의 氏名이 未詳하다.)

北門 즉 肅靖門은 三淸洞 東北方 山地에 잇스니 四大門 중 제일 地僻하고 城北洞을 通行하는 이외에는 別로 行人이 업슴으로 항상 폐쇄(지금은 문이 파괴되야 자연 開通되엿다.)하야 두고 건물도 諸門 중에 아주 보잘것이 업슴으로 비록 京城에 잇는 사람들도 흔이 그 존재조차 알지를 못하고 대개는 西北門인 彰義門을 北門으로 오인한다. 閭巷의 婦女들 間에는 上元 전에 이 門에 三次만 가면 度厄를 한다는 미신이 잇스니 이것은 필경 그 지대가 험난한 까닭에 생긴 말인 듯하다.

二, 五大宮門

敦化門 此는 昌德宮의 正門이니 李太祖3년 甲戌(서기1394-距今536년 전)에 昌德宮을 창건할 동시에 건설한 것이다. 壬辰亂 때에 諸宮殿 이어 모도 燒火되엿스되 유독 此門은 昌慶宮의 弘化門, 明政門, 明政殿 南大門과 가티 免禍하얏스니 下記한 弘化門, 明政門, 明政殿, 南大門을 幷하야 京城五大古建築物로 유명한 것이다. 門 額字는 慵齋叢話에 의하면 鄭國馨(虛白堂 鄭蘭宗의 字曰 國馨)이 昌德宮 諸殿 及 門額을 書하얏다 하엿는데 上記한 바와 가티 此門은 壬亂時도 無事하얏슨즉 이 門 額字는 鄭氏의 筆이 분명하다.

弘化門 昌慶宮-今 昌慶苑의 정문이니 成宗14년 癸卯(서기1483-距今 447년 전)에 昌慶宮을 창건할 時에 건설한 것이다. 그 額에 弘化門 三字는 仁祖 때의 寫字官 李之翰의 筆이다.(之翰의 字는 子藩, 號는 壽谷, 江陰人이니<116>宣祖37년 甲辰生, 仁祖13년 乙亥 進士, 官至上護軍, 善書)

興化門 此門은 慶熙宮(元名 慶德宮, 속칭 새문안大闕) 정문이니 光海8년 丙辰(서기1616-距今314년 전)에 慶德宮 창건할 때에 立한 것이오 그 門額의 興化門 三字는 李伸의 筆이다.(李伸은 驪州人이니 縣監 李福長의 子다. 武科로 官이 縣監에 至한 바 그는 名筆로서 此門과 太僕寺, 霜臺衙門 扁額을 書하얏다. 俗間에서 그 門 額字는 名筆 安平大君 李瑢의 筆로 夜間에도 그 筆光이 夜照峴까지 빗치웟기 때문에 夜照峴이라 칭하다가 壬辰亂 때에 글자가 敵彈에 마진 후 其光을 失하얏다. 誤傳하나 安平大君 李瑢은 누구나 잘 아는 바와 가티 世宗大王의 第三子오 此慶德宮은 其後(略160여년 후)光海朝에 建築한 것인즉 아모리 巷祝이라도 安平大君의 글시란 말은 千萬不當한 것이다. 此門의 위치는 원래 東向이엿다가 大正4년 8월에 西大門 通路를 改修할 때에 現在地로 移하얏다.

光化門 景福宮의 東門은 建春文이니 前日에 宗室, 外戚, 駙馬, 女官 등만 限하야 出入하던 門이오 迎秋門은 西門이니 前日에 일반 관리가 출입하던 문이오 北門은 神武門이니 보통으로 통행치 안이하고 오즉 主上이 景武臺 科場에 臨御하거나 기타 특별한 경우에만 한하야 출입을 許한 것이다. 此 三門은 물론 景福宮 건축할 때에 건립한 것이나 건축이 그리 雄大할 것은 업스되 오즉 南門인 光化門은 정문이니 만치 雄大宏傑할 뿐 안이라 건축이 또한 교묘하야 南大門가티 京城의 二大偉觀이 되다. 건축하기는 李太王2년 乙丑10월(서기1865-距今60년 전)이니 建築師는 金元植이오 光化門이란 三字의 門額은 香壽(又號는 夢人 一云夢中夢人) 丁學敎의 筆이오 上樑文은 李裕元이 撰하고 申錫禧가 書하얏스며(下記 上樑文 참조) 門前의 雙獬豸(豸는 神羊이오 音은 해치니 속칭 海駝)는 近世 美術大家 李世旭(一云泰旭)의 作이다.(前日 門內 錦川橋上 東과 西에 南北 兩側에 四個 石天祿은 國初 遺物이다.) 此 獬豸는 總督府前 道路 확장할 때에 總督府 後院으로 옹기고 光化門도 總督府 落成 동시 建春門 北便으로 移轉식혓다.

光化門上樑文
伏以若作室肯堂, 拊丕基而圖永迺立門有伉, 旋化樞而嚮明, 于時也天閭上開, 其方則帝車南指, 顧玆法宮聽政之所, 奧自神京定都之初, 背嵩面河, 王業奠中央之宅, 體國經野, 宸居近上紫之垣, 猗 殿宇正位辨方面眉扁顧各思義禹勤堯思,<117> 敷盛德於春生秋成, 羲泰箕康, 迓景祿於日升月恒, 寶扆御當陽之位, 金門闢正南之維, 瑤躔候極宿之祥. 昇平有象, 璿籙兆亭午之運, 文明出治, 比若前代之承光宜光, 四方之所共仰, 有如兩闕之敦化興化百僚之所必趨, 自中古未遑重修, 在聖朝思述先志恭惟.
主上殿下升聞 潛邸. 泰運興邦. 承 文考之顯謨. 在厥初呼哲命吉. 奉 太母之懿訓, 率由章不憩不忘. 仁孝英明之夙彰令聞, 八城咸頌. 政敎施措之動合盛典. 百度鼎新. 爰攷玉帶之舊圖. 載營華蓋之重構. 肆 宸衷之先定. 又延議之僉同. 家國共休願乎上者願乎下者. 朝野相慶, 咸曰一哉咸曰大哉. 縱軫母奪民時. 擧皆如趨父事. 非謂公儲私蓄, 有裕於昔年. 抑以地利人和, 若待乎今日. 司徒按考工之記. 太史占定中之星. *鼓弗勝, 梓材惟丹臒垣墉惟塗墍. 棟宇協吉, 體象乎天地 經緯乎陰陽. 一礎一砌之無改前規, 寓精義於法祖中侈不陋之皆合中道, 垂遠圖於裕昆. 迨輪奐之奏新工, 迺棖闑之仿古制. 漢建章之千門萬戶, 豈取觀美而壯居. 周明堂之右个左扉, 亶爲縣瀍而布令. 碧瓦鱗動, 負神武而將將. 畵檐翼齊, 對冠嶽而屹屹揭舊號於寶額, 銀鉤重新. 護佳氣於丹闈金鑰增固. 週市如彩虹飮月之狀. 盤紆若赤螭捧日之形. 玉凧朝儀, 排雙扇面蹌濟靑繩御路, 方二軌而坦平. 烏臺風生, 宛是城上所舊址. 黃閣地近, 依然門下省遺撫. 軒豁之政如我心. 閌閬乎無遠天室. 閽人含口, 沈沈高閣漏聲. 閤吏引班, 蒼蒼禁城曉色. 臨朱鳥而正晷景. 聳金爵而凌雲霄. 被四著明峻之功, 一家氣像. 成萬推存神之玅, 八荒庭衢. 敢頌川至之休庸助霞擧之役. 兒郞偉抛樑東. 駱峰初日照新宮. 林葱匝域含生類, 自在吾王大化中. 兒郞偉抛樑西, 煌煌奎壁耀金題. 喜聽門卒平安報, 鞍峴烽光夜夜低. 兒郞偉抛樑南, 漢水環之碧於藍. 郡國舟車都會地, 恩波洋溢頌遐覃, 兒郞偉抛樑北, 母嶽參天瞻峻極. 授斗爲巵躋彼堂, 聖人請祝於千億. 兒郞偉抛樑上, 對越天心迓景貺. 筵臣退食每遲遲, 日昃猶勤治道訪. 兒郞偉抛樑下, 大庇群生居廣厦. 臨殿時聞擊壤聲, 黃雲處處滿田野. 伏願上樑之後. 日月光華之無私照. 雨露化育之所均霑. 闢之乾闔之坤, 宣*澤於家家戶戶. 仁爲關義爲鍵, 納景祥於子子孫孫, 建不拔洪基, 措諸泰山磐石, 開太平萬世, 躋之壽域春臺.
大匡輔國崇祿大夫行判中樞府事臣李裕元奉敎謹撰
資憲大夫行龍驤衛大護軍兼經筵事臣申錫禧奉敎謹書
同治四年乙丑十月十一日戌時.
(上上樑文은 光化門 移轉時 其層樓 天井에서 發見하얏는데 赤色緞子에 書한 것으로 幅이 약 3尺 長이 약 3丈 云)

大漢門 德壽宮의 정문이니 원래는 大安門이엿다. 太皇帝 당시에 玄暎運이 承寵을 하며 其妾 裵0子가 洋裝을 하고 闕內에 無常出入을 하얏더니 侍臣 중 此를 忌惡하는 者가 太皇帝에게 奏하되 엇던 秘記에 잇스되 大安門의 安字는 女字가 冠을 한 것인데 冠쓴 女子가 그 門으로 出入을 하면 나라가 亡한다고 하얏더니 太皇帝가 그 말을 信聽하고 즉시 裵氏의 宮中出入을 嚴禁하고 大安門도 大漢門으로 變更하얏스니  그 門額은 近來 名筆 劉漢翼의 所書다.<118>
<114-118>