잡지명	別乾坤 第34號
발행일	1930년 11월 01일
기사제목	增收로 因한 米價暴落과 朝鮮農村經濟의 凋落 (The Fall of Korean Rural Economy Due to Rice Price Plunge Caused by Increased Harvest)
필자	申泰翊
기사형태	논설 (Article)

Due to Increased Harvest, Rice Price Plunge and the Decline of the Joseon Rural Economy
						Shin Tae-ik

This year's rice crop in Joseon is said to reap a bumper harvest beyond compare. Our three meals a day come from this rice. Also, by selling this rice, we can get some money in our hands. Seeing this blessed bumper crop, we cannot help but sing a song of joy (擊壤歌) and feel the pleasure of loosening our belts and patting our bellies. However, the world has become quite the opposite of what it used to be. Although it is a year of abundance, there is an uproar that things are terrible because the market price has fallen. So, people are very anxious, saying that a year of abundance is only good in name, but in reality, it threatens our livelihood more than a year of famine. There are times when people cannot live because they are hungry, but even though there is an unprecedented bumper crop of food to fill our bellies, instead of hearing good news, only cries of "We cannot live!" come from everyone's mouths. Isn't this pathetic? It is truly a hateful and physical phenomenon.

Today's Treatment of Joseon Rice

Before talking about why the rice price is falling, I would like to briefly explain the current situation of Joseon rice. At this time when the Joseon economy is within the Japanese economic sphere, it goes without saying that Joseon rice is also within the Japanese economic sphere. Furthermore, it is an inevitable trend that Joseon rice has come to occupy an important position in solving Japan's food problem. Therefore, just by the fact that the amount of Joseon rice exported to Japan increases every year, we can see that Joseon rice makes a great contribution to Japan's food problem. As the export of Joseon rice to Japan increases every year, it alleviates the food shortage in Japan, but on the other hand, the great difficulty that Japanese farmers are being pressured by Joseon rice is blocking the way forward. In other words, as the export of Joseon rice increases every year, the rice stocks in Japan become sufficient, and because Joseon rice is significantly cheaper than Japanese rice, the demand for Joseon rice naturally increases, which puts pressure on Japanese rice. In particular, for about two to three months from the harvest season, the export of Joseon rice intensifies, making it inevitable that the price of Japanese rice will fall, resulting in lower income for Japanese farmers. Therefore, in Japan, there is a growing movement to restrict the import of Joseon rice as a measure to save farmers and prevent the fall in rice prices. In short, although Joseon rice has made a great contribution to solving Japan's food problem, today, instead of appreciating that contribution, they are almost rejecting Joseon rice, which is the treatment Joseon rice receives from Japan today.

How Much of a Bumper Crop Is It?

Like a ship raising its sails high and floating downstream in warm and gentle weather, this year's farming conditions have been truly smooth. From the time the seeds were sown in spring, it rained when it needed to rain and the sun shone brightly when it needed to shine, and there were no problems in the so-called unlucky days (厄日) of 210 and 220 days that are considered dangerous in the rice industry. This blessed opportune weather (適順適雨) did not only happen in Joseon, but also miraculously in Japan and Taiwan. As a result, the trend of anticipating a bumper crop in all three places became prevalent, and people eagerly awaited the official announcement of the first rice crop forecast for each place. Indeed, the content of the announcement confirmed that it was a bumper crop. However, what was shockingly overwhelming was that the numbers indicated a bumper crop that was significantly different from general expectations. First, looking at Joseon's harvest forecast, it is 19,296,461 seok (석), a sharp increase of 5,594,715 seok (석), or 48 percent, compared to the actual harvest of the previous year. The harvest forecast for Japan is also 66,867,530 seok (석), a sharp increase of 7,314,258 seok (석), or 12.3 percent, compared to the actual harvest of the previous year. Comparing this forecast to the highest record, which was the actual harvest of four years ago, Joseon's increase is 1,997,000 seok (석), and Japan's increase is 4,766,000 seok (석). Furthermore, compared to the average actual harvest volume of the recent five years, Joseon's increase is 4,379,000 seok (석), and Japan's increase is 7,381,000 seok (석). In conclusion, the sum of the harvest forecasts for Joseon and Japan, compared to the actual harvest of the previous year, yields a huge increase of 11,760,000 seok (석). Since this number is based on forecasts as of September 24 for Joseon and September 20 for Japan, it is impossible to guarantee that the actual harvest will be exactly the same. However, unless there is a significant deterioration after the first forecast survey, the general consensus is that there will not be a big difference between the actual harvest and this forecast.

Rice Prices Falling Senselessly

How great would this bumper crop be in an era of self-sufficiency? It would be a cause for concern if things didn't go well, but there's no reason to worry about having too much rice. However, today is the era of the monetary economy. We cannot make a living with just a large amount of rice. It's not enough to just have food. Even when cooking rice, we need money to buy firewood (薪炭). So, it's a time when we need to sell rice to get money. However, if the purchasing power of buyers is small compared to the increase in rice production, then naturally there will be a lot of rice left over, which leads to the saying that there is an overproduction of rice. When estimating the rice supply and demand for next year, even if we don't import foreign rice and only consider Japanese, Joseon, and Taiwanese rice, we expect a surplus of 7 to 8 million seok (석). In this situation, the continued plunge in rice prices is seen as an inevitable consequence. The December futures contract for Incheon rice (仁川期米) has broken the 13 won range and even reached a low of 12 won, and is showing some rebound due to measures to prevent the price drop. However, it is difficult to see this as the bottom of the rice price. The fall in rice prices is motivated by the bumper harvest of new rice, and it is also combined with the rice price stabilization movement after the lifting of the gold ban (金解禁). Therefore, I don't think it's time to say that the price cannot fall any further even with a bumper harvest. In other words, today's rice price fluctuations are driven by (1) the revision of rice price stabilization and (2) oversupply due to the anticipation of a bumper harvest. Therefore, I wonder if the price will fall further than the point of equilibrium in the price index, corresponding to the oversupply of rice itself.

What Countermeasures Are There?

There are two methods for controlling rice prices: quantity adjustment and price adjustment. First, what is quantity control? As the name suggests, it means adjusting to an appropriate quantity. In other words, the government is using artificial measures to ensure that the quantity does not exceed the amount that Japan can absorb or fall below an appropriate quantity. Price adjustment is because if the rice price is too high, it will cause great hardship to general consumers, and conversely, if the price is too low, it will be disadvantageous to the producing farmers. Therefore, the government is always using measures such as selling and buying to prevent the price from being too high or too low, and these two adjustment methods are usually combined. However, looking at the fall in rice prices, the measures that the authorities are taking to prevent the drop, as announced so far, or the news we hear, are as follows:
△ The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (農林省) was taken aback by the unexpectedly large numbers in the first harvest forecast for Japanese and Joseon rice, and by the great disaster of rice prices (米價의 大慘落), and decided to take special measures.
(1) Effectively utilize the remaining 70 million yen in rice funds to purchase 3 million seok (석) of new rice first.
(2) Expand the borrowing limit for operating funds to strengthen the purchasing funds.
(3) Provide a considerable amount of low-interest funds as emergency funds for non-rice producers, and allow them to use rice storage capacity of 4 million seok (석) to sell on a monthly average.
(4) Encourage the storage of land tax in kind (正租).
(5) Adjust the import of Joseon and Taiwanese rice while blocking the import of foreign grains (外粟).
(6) Extend the Foreign Rice Import Restriction Ordinance (外米輸入制限令) for one year and raise the national tax by imperial decree.
However, as the disastrous fall in rice prices (米價의 慘落) was getting worse, the government became even more impatient. Also, the Japan Agricultural Association (日本農會) could not help but have the following intentions:
(1) As an emergency measure, sell the 2.4 million seok (석) of government-owned rice (持越殘米 five million seok (석) of carryover rice) on the overseas market, with the willingness to take some losses.
(2) Add the income from the above overseas investment and purchase 3 million seok (석) of new rice.
(3) Have producers consolidate about 2 million seok (석) and store them in various warehouses until next year's rice year, and the government will provide special low-interest funds for this purpose.
(4) Import Joseon rice on a monthly average, and also sell Japanese rice on a monthly average.
The whole of Japan is in a very tense mood due to measures to prevent the fall in rice prices. Looking at the measures centered on Japanese rice and the measures of the Joseon Government-General (朝鮮總督府) centered on Joseon rice:
(1) Mobilize all existing and unbuilt rice warehouses in Joseon to store rice by utilizing a warehouse area of 200 pyeong (평).
(2) Have financial associations (金融組合) provide funds for the amount of land tax in kind (野積正租).
(3) Have water utilization associations (水利組合), industrial associations (産業組合), and landlord groups provide low-interest funds.
It is said that they have set a goal of adjusting 3.1 million seok (석) with these plans.
Looking at the above measures, it is difficult to see them all as thorough rice price controls. Just listing the measures in a showy manner raises doubts about their effectiveness. Prices are determined most fairly by the relationship between supply and demand and the surrounding economic conditions, and even if artificial measures are added to this to make unnatural adjustments, it is impossible to think that the actual results will be good. I cannot go into detail about the reasons why the rice price measures to date have been insufficient due to space constraints, but I will give one example. In Japan, purchasing 3 million seok (석), and in Joseon, aiming to adjust 3 million seok (석), is too small compared to the rate of increase in rice production in both places, that is, the surplus rice. Therefore, I cannot help but pay attention to how much these unnatural measures will be able to change the direction of the oncoming natural trend. Even if these rice price measures are effective, they are not measures for the majority of small and medium-sized farmers in Joseon, so it is certain that only a small number of people will truly benefit from the measures. The reason why the measures are departing from small and medium-sized farmers is that the above measures are all designed to benefit large landowners and merchants. Anyway, Joseon rice has increased further under the Rice Production Increase Plan (産米增殖計劃), but now that it is impossible to dispose of the increased production, we cannot be grateful for the Rice Production Increase Plan (産米增殖計劃). In fact, it is also true that this increase plan has become a fundamental cause of the rice price plunge (米價慘落).

How Do Farmers Get Affected and What Is the General Relationship?

The oversupply of agricultural products is a globally common phenomenon. It is not only seen in Joseon and Japan. Looking at today's economic recession, producers of agriculture, commerce, and industry are having a harder time than consumers. Originally, a decrease in consumption means a decline in production, and since consumption and production are interdependent, the recession of production can be said to be the inactivity of consumption, but in reality, producers are in more difficulty than consumers. In other words, it can be said to be a phenomenon of producer suffering. With rice under these circumstances seeing a record bumper crop this year, it is inevitable that the impact on farmers, who are producers, will be truly significant. Therefore, I will mainly focus on the impact of the rice price drop on Joseon farmers. Farmers account for 80 percent of Joseon, and there are very few sources of income that can be considered significant other than rice, so the fact is that the Joseon economy depends on the abundance or failure of crops and the rise and fall of their prices. Therefore, when the rice price falls by about 10 won, the impact is, of course, more severe in Joseon than in Japan. Moreover, since Joseon people do not go directly to the Japanese market to sell, but go through several hands, the impact on Joseon people is unknowingly enormous. I am going to look at the extent of the impact of this rice price reduction on Joseon farm households with this relationship.
(1) Increase in Farmers' Debt (農民의 負債增加) Almost all farmers in Joseon are in debt, and they can only pay off their debts by selling new grain. Not only tenant farmers but also large, medium, and small landowners are almost all in debt. Most of them have securities entered as collateral with the Colonial Industrial Bank (殖銀), the Oriental Development Company (東拓), and financial associations (金融組合), and interest or repayment on these is made after the harvest. However, with the rice price plummeting, if a person who could settle their accounts by selling 10 seok (석) last year, this year they would be in a situation where they would not have much left even if they sold 20 or 30 seok (석). So, if these people have no surplus, they will either pay less interest or not be able to repay it, and their debt will remain as it is. It is impossible to predict what state they will eventually be in as a result.
(2) Expectation of Land Price Decline (土地價低落의 豫想) Because they are unable to settle their debts, they will inevitably be unable to maintain ownership of their farmland, and it is expected that there will be many people selling off their land as a result.
(3) Wandering and Bankruptcy (流浪과 破産) Due to the situation as described above, not only will tenants be unable to pay off the debts they incurred this spring, making it impossible for them to buy millet or barley, but it is also doubtful whether they will have any funds to farm next spring. Of course, they will try to get a loan, but no one will give them a loan, so they will naturally move on the road of wandering. Also, it cannot be said that there will not be a considerable number of bankruptcies among large, medium, and small farmers due to debt settlement and other reasons.
Although brief, it is natural that Joseon farm households are filled with anxiety, facing the difficulties mentioned in the above three items. It is reasonable to think that the impact of this rice price drop will not only end with farm households but will also extend to the general economy. Therefore, I will not say much more and will conclude with the following simple conclusion, saying that our outlook is bleak.
Even with the market prices that have already appeared, they have fallen below the cost of production for owner-cultivators and tenant farmers, and for landowners, it has become difficult to even pay taxes, let alone interest on capital. This upheaval will eventually greatly reduce general purchasing power (一般의 購買力을 大減退케 할 것이다). Moreover, the fall in prices, along with the government's passive policies, will severely depress commerce and industry (商工業을 몹시 沈衰케 할 것이며), and the impact on the financial world due to the inability to recover claims on large and small landowners will undoubtedly be considerable. (October 13, 1930)

**Named Entities**

申泰翊	Shin Tae-ik
仁川	Inch'ŏn
農林省	Nongnim-sŏng
日本農會	Ilbon Nonghoe
朝鮮總督府	Chosŏn Ch'ongdokpu
水利組合	Suri Chohap
産業組合	Sanŏp Chohap
殖銀	Sigŭn
東拓	Tongt'ak
金融組合	Kŭmyung Chohap



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제34호
발행일	1930년 11월 01일
기사제목	增收로 因한 米價暴落과 朝鮮農村經濟의 凋落
필자	申泰翊
기사형태	논설

增收로 因한 米價暴落과 朝鮮農村經濟의 凋落
						申泰翊
조선의 금년 미작은 무전대풍의 수확을 거두리라한다. 우리의 三食이 이 쌀로 된다. 또 이 쌀을 팔어서 우리의 수중에 돈푼이라도 떨어지게 된다. 이러한 천혜의 대풍작을 보게 되얏슴에 우리는 擊壤歌를 놉히 부르며 허리띄를 끌너 배를 두드리는 깃붐을 안가질 수가 업다. 그러나 세상은 옛과는 아주 정반대가 되고 말엇다. 풍년이라 하지만 시세가 떨어저 큰일 낫다고 소동들을 하고 잇다. 그래서 풍년이라 하는 것은 일흠만 조흘 뿐이고 실상인즉 흉년 이상으로 우리들의 살림을 위협하는 것이라 하야 인심이 몹시도 불안에 싸여 잇다. 배곱하 못사는 일은 잇지만 배부르게 해줄 식량이 未曾見의 대풍년이라고 하는대 조흔 낫으로 듯지 안코 돌이혀 누구의 입에서나 못살겟다는 비명만 나온다. 이-안이 한심치 안흔가. 참으로 얄미운 피육적 현상이다.

今日 朝鮮米의 밧는 待遇
米價가 왜 떨어지나 하는 것을 말하기 전에 나는 먼저 조선쌀이 오늘에 어떠한 처지에 서 잇는가를 간단히 말하랴 한다. 조선경제가 일본의 경제권내에 잇는 이 때에 잇서 조선미도 일본의 경제권내에 잇슬 것은 다시말할 것 업다. 더구나 일본의 식량문제를 해결함에 잇서 조선미가 중요한 지위를 점케 된 것은 필연한 理勢이다. 그럼으로 조선미가 일본으로 이출되는 수량이 매년 늘어가는 것만 가지고서도 조선미가 일본의 식량문제에 큰 공적을 가지고 잇는 것을 알 수 잇다. 이와 가티 조선미의 일본이출이 매년 늘어가는 점에 잇서서 일본의 식량부족을 완화케 한다고 하지만, 일면으로 일본농민이 조선미의 압박을 밧는다는 큰 난관이 압길을 막고 잇다. 즉 조선미의＜36＞ 이출이 매년 증가함으로 일본내의 在米가 충족케 되고 또 조선미가 일본미보다 갑이 현저히 싼 까닭에 자연히 조선미의 수용이 늘어가는 만큼 일본미가 압박을 밧고 잇다. 특히 추수기로부터 2, 3개월가량 조선미의 이출이 일층 殺到하야 일본미가가 안떨어질 수 업게 되고 딸허서 일본농민의 소득이 적게 되는 결과를 맨든다. 그럼으로 일본에서는 농민을 구제하는 동시에 미가저락의 방지책으로 조선미의 이입을 제한하자는 말이 왕성케 되는 것이다. 요컨대 조선미가 일본의 식량문제를 해결함에 큰 공적이 잇섯지만 오늘에 잇서는 그 공적을 고맙게 생각해주지 안코 돌이혀 조선미를 거의 배척을 하고 잇는 것이 오늘에 조선미가 일본으로부터 밧는 대우이란 것이다.

얼만한 數量의 豊作인가
日暖風和한 때에 돗을 놉히 달고 順流에 뜬 배와가티 금년의 農形이야말로 참 순조로 되야왓다. 봄에 씨를 뿌려논 뒤로부터 비와야 될 때에 비오고 暴陽으로 내리 쪼일 때에 내리 쪼이며 米界에서 소위 厄日이라고 하야 위험시하는 210일 220일도 아모 고장이 업섯다. 이와가튼 천혜의 適順適雨가 조선전체에만 끗치지 안코 일본과 대만에도 기적적 순조로 경과가 되얏다. 그래서 三處가 일제히 풍작을 예상하는 경향이 만허지면서 각각 그 米作豫想의 제일회 정식발표가 잇기를 고대하얏든바 과연 그 발표의 내용은 풍작인 것이 틀님업섯다. 그러나 경악 不己한 것은 그 수자가 一般豫想보다 현저한 차가 잇는 대풍작이엿든 까닭이다. 먼저 조선의 수확예상을 보면 19,296,461석 전년 實收에 비교하야 5,594,715석 즉 4할 8리의 격증이다. 또 일본의 수확예상도 66,867,530석으로 전년의 實收에 비교하야 7,314,258석 즉 1할 2분 3리의 격증이 발표되얏다. 이 예상을 다시 최고기록인 4년전의 實收에 비하야 조선은 백구십구만칠천석, 일본은 사백칠십육만육천석이다. 또 최근 5개년간의 평균 實收量에 비교하면 조선은 사백삼십칠만구천석, 일본은 칠백삼십팔만일천석의 증가이다. 결국 조선과 일본의 수확예상을 합산하야 전년 실수에 비교하여 보면 천백칠십육만석의 大增收이란 숫자를 엇게 되얏다. 이 숫자가 조선은 9월 24일 현재, 일본은 9월 20일의 현재로 한 예상인 만큼 꼭-그대로 實收가 되리라고 장담을 못할 일이지만 하여간 제1회 예상조사 후 다소의 변화가 업지 안켓스나 현저한 악화를 보지 안흐면 실제의 수확과 이 예상이 그대지 큰 차가 안생길 것이라는 것이 일반에 유력한 관측이다.

情神업시 떠러진 米價
자급자족 시대이라하면 이 대풍작이 얼마나 조흘가. 잘 안된 것은 걱정이 될 일이지만 쌀이 너무 만허서 두통거리가 될 리없다. 그러나 오늘에는 貨幣經濟의 시대이다. 쌀이 만히 산출된다고 이것만으로써 살림사리가 모다 되지 못한다. 식량만 잇서도 안된다. 밥을 질야도 돈가지고 나아가 薪炭을＜37＞ 사야된다. 그런즉 쌀 팔어 돈사야 되는 때이다. 그러나 米增收에 비하야 사는 사람 즉 구매력이 적은즉 자연히 米는 만히 남께 되니 즉 米의 생산과잉이라는 말이 나온다. 내년도의 米 수급관계를 추산하면 外米를 수입치안코 일본미, 조선미, 대만미만 가지고도 7, 8백만석의 과잉를 예상케 되는 이 때에 잇서 쌀갑의 폭락이 계속한 것은 필연의 귀결이라고 본다. 仁川期米의 12월限이 13원대가 깨여저 12원대의 저가까지 잇섯다가 저락방지의 대책으로 얼만큼 反撥을 보히고 잇다. 그러나 이것으로써 쌀갑의 바닥이 나왓다고 보기 어려운 형세 알에 잇다. 쌀갑의 저락은 新米의 대풍작의 동기가 되는 동시에 金解禁後의 미가평준 운동이 가미한 것임으로 오즉 大豊作이라도 이 이상 떨어질 수 업다고 할 때가 안일 줄로 생각한다. 다시 말하면 오늘의 쌀갑변동은 (一) 미가평준의 개정 (二) 대풍작 예상으로 인한 공급과잉이라는 것이 원동력으로 되야 잇는 까닭에 물가의 지수평준점에서 米자체의 공급과잉만큼 더 떠러질 것이 안인가 한다.

엇더한 對策이 잇나
미가의 통제에는 수량의 조절과 가격조절의 두가지 방법이 잇다. 먼저 수량통제가 어떠한것인가. 字意와 가티 적당한 수량으로 조절한다는 말이니 즉 일본에서 수용할 만한 수량을 넘치거나 혹은 적당한 수량이 못되거나 하지 안토록 정부에서 인위책을 쓰고 잇다는 것이다. 또 가격조절이라는 것은 쌀갑이 너무 빗싸면 일반소비자에게 큰 고통을 주는 결과가 되며 이와 반대로 너무 갑이 싸면 생산자인 농민에게 불리케 되는 까닭으로 이것도 너무 빗싸지 안토록 너무 싸지안토록 하랴고 정부에서는 불하와 매상 등의 대책을 항상 쓰고 잇는대 이 두 조절의 방법이 보통은 합치되야 잇다. 그런대 미가가 폭락함을 보고 위정자가 어떠한 대책으로써 그 저락을 막으랴는지 오늘까지 대책이라고 발표된 것과 또는 전하는 소식을 들으면 알에와 가튼 것이다.
△ 농림성에서는 일본미와 조선미 수확의 一回豫想이 너무 의외의 대숫자이며 또 米價의 大慘落임을 보고 당황낭패하야 특급책을 취케 되얏다.
(一) 미곡자금 운용자금 잔액 칠천만원을 유효히 이용하야 먼저 新米 삼백만석을 매상할 일.
(二) 운용자금 차입한도를 확장하야 매상자금의 충실을 圖할 일.
(三) 미생산자의 응급자금으로 상당한 거액의 저리자금을 융통하고 미곡창고수용력 사백만석을 이용케 하야 月別平均賣를 하게 할 일.
(四) 正租의 저장방법을 勵行케 할 일.
(五) 조선 대만미의 이입을 조절하는 동시에 外粟輸入을 막을 일.
(六) 外米輸入制限令을 일년연장하야 칙령으로써 국세을 올니게 할 일.
등이엿다. 그러나 미가의 慘落이 어떠한 지경까지 몰으도록 멀어저감으로 정부는 더욱 초초케 되얏다. 그러고 日本農會로서도＜38＞ 알에와 가튼 의향을 갓지 안흘 수가 업게 되얏다.
(一) 응급의 대책으로 政府所有米인 이백사십만석(持越殘米 오백만석)을 다소의 손실을 볼 각오 알에 해외시장에 팔 것.
(二) 上 해외투자의 수입금을 가하야 新米 三百萬石을 매상.
(三) 약 이백만석은 생산자가 결속하야 내년 미곡년도까지 각종창고에 저장하고 此에 정부는 특별저리자금을 대부할 것.
(四) 조선미를 月別平均으로 移入하며 또 일본미도 月別平均賣를 하게 할 것.
등으로 일본전국에는 미가저락에 대한 방지책으로 매우 긴장된 기분을 띄여 잇다. 이상은 일본미의 중심으로 한 대책에나 조선미를 중심으로 한 朝鮮總督府의 대책이라는 것을 보면
(一) 조선내에 旣設未設의미곡창고를 총동원하야 이백평의 창고면적의 활용으로 미곡을 저장케 할 일.
(二) 金融組合으로 하야금 野積正租에 대한 금액을 융통케 할 일.
(三) 水利組合, 産業組合 지주의 단체로 하여금 저리자금을 융통케 할 일.
등의 계획을 가지고 삼백십만석을 조절하랴는 목표를 세운 것이라 한다.
이상의 대책을 보면 모다 철저한 미가의 조절이라고 보기가 어렵다. 다만 진열식으로 대책을 말하야서는 그 효과에 대하야 의문을 안가질 수가 업다. 물가는 수급관계와 四圍의 경제사정이 가장 공평히 결정해 주는 것으로 此에 인위책을 가하야 부자연의 조절을 가할지라도 실제의 결과가 조흘이라고 생각할 수 업다. 오늘까지의 미가대책이라는 것이 불철저하다는 이유를 지면관계로 자세히 들지를 못하지만 그 중의 일례를 들어보랴 한다. 일본에 잇서 삼백만석 買上 조선에 잇서 삼백만석 목표의 조절이라는 것은 兩處의 미작증가율 즉 과잉미에 비하야 너무 적은 것이다. 그럼으로 의런한 부자연의 대책으로써 몰여 오는 자연의 대세를 얼만큼이나 방향을 몰니게 할는지 주목하기를 마지 안는 바이다. 이 미가대책이 奏效케 된다고 할지라도 조선에 잇서서 다수한 중소농을 위하는 대책이 안인 만큼 참으로그 대책의 혜택을 입을 사람은 소수에 불과할 것이 틀님업슬 것이다. 무슨 까닭에 중소농을 떠난 대책인가 하면 이상의 대책이라는 것은 모다가 대지주와 상인들의 편리를 드음에 족케 된것인 때문이다. 엇더튼지 産米增殖計劃알에 조선미가 더욱 증수가 되얏지만 오늘에 와서는 그 생산양대로 처치할 길이 막힌 만큼 産米增殖計劃에 대하야 고맙게 생각할 수 업슬 뿐안이라 돌이혀 이 증식계획은 米價慘落의 근본적 一原因이 되여진 감이 잇는 것도 사실이다.

農家가 밧는 影響과 一般의 關係는 어떨가
농산물 과잉이라는 것은 세계적으로 공통된 현상이다. 오즉 조선과 일본에서만 보는 것이 안이다. 그러고 오늘의 불경기를 보면 농상공 모든 것이 소비자측보다도 생산자측이 더욱 껄치지를 못하고 잇다. 원래 소비가 감퇴하여진다는 것은＜39＞ 생산의 부진을 의미하는 말이며 소비와 생산이 상관적 관계를 매저잇슴으로 생산의 불황은 곳 소비의 不活潑이라고 하겟스나 실상인즉 소비자측보다도 생산자측이 그 이상의 곤경에 빠져 잇는 것이 사실이다. 즉 생산자수난의 일현상이라고 말할 수 잇다. 이러한 환경 밋헤 잇는 쌀이 금년에 잇서 신기록의 대풍작을 보게 되얏다함에는 생산자인 농가의 바들 영향이 참으로 심대할 것은 피치 못할 일이다. 그래서 나는 조선농가가 미가저락으로 인하야 밧는 영향여하를 주로 삼고 말하랴 한다. 조선은 농민이 8할을 점하고 잇스며 미곡을 빼여놋코는 이러타고 볼만한 수입의 원천이 매우 적은 만큼 더욱 조선사람의 경제라는 것은 농작풍흉과 그 갑의 고저에 명맥을 달고 잇다는 것이 사실이다. 그럼으로 쌀갑이 10원가량 떨어젓다고 한 때에 그 영향밧는 것이 일본보다도 조선이 더 심케 되는 것은 물론이다. 그런데다가 조선사람으로서 일본시장에갓다가 직접 파는 것이 안이라 몃손을 넘어가는 만큼 조선사람이 밧는 영향이야말로 남모르게 막심한 터이다. 이러한 관계를 가진 조선농가에서 이번의 미가저렴으로 해서 밧는 영향정도가 어떠할가를 나는 보랴고 한다.
(一) 農民의 負債增加 조선의 농민은 거의 모다가 빗진 이들로 그 淸帳은 新穀이 나서 이것을 팔어 가지고야 된다. 빗진 것은 소작의 농가뿐만 안이라 대중소의 지주들도 거의 모다 빗진 이들이라. 대개가 殖銀 東拓과 金融組合에 문권이 저당권설정이란 형식으로 들어가 잇고 此에 대한 이자 혹은 변상은 추수해가지고 하는 터이다. 그런대 미가가 폭락하야 가량 작년에 10석을 팔어가지고 셈이 되든 사람이면 금년에는 2, 30석을 팔어서도 별로 남음이 업게 될 형세에 잇다. 그런즉 이러한 餘在가 업는 사람은 이자를 덜냇거나 혹은 못갑흐게 되면 그들의 빗은 그대로 떠러저 잇게 되야 결국 이로써 어떠한 지경에 갈지를 헤알일수가 잇다.
(二) 土地價低落의 豫想 채무를 淸帳못하게 되는 까닭에 할 수 업시 농토의 소유권을 保持치 못하게 되야 결국에는 방매하는 사람이 만허질 것이 예상되는 바이다.
(三) 流浪과 破産 이상과 가튼 형세임으로 소작인은 금년 봄에 진 빗을 갑지 못하는 때문에 당장 좁쌀이나 양쌀이나 사먹을 수 업슬 뿐 안이라 明春에 무슨 자금을 가지고 농사를 질 수 잇슬는지 의문이다. 물론 빗을 어드랴 하나 빗주는 사람이 업슬 것인즉 자연히 유랑의 길로 발을 옴길 것이다. 또 대중소농으로도 債務淸帳 등 관계로 파산자가 상당히 생기지 안흐리라고 말할 수 업다.
간단하지만 이상의 3항목에서 말한 난관을 압둡 조선농가의 불안이 가득한 것은 당연한 일이다. 이와 가튼 미가저락의 영향을 바들 것은 농가에만 끗치지 안코 한걸음 더 나아가 일반경제계에서 바들 영향이 상당할 것도 사리에 당연한 귀착이라고 생각한다. 그럼으로 나는 긴-말을 안하랴하고 알에와 가튼 간단한 결론으로써 우리의 眼前이 眼澹한것을 말하랴 한다.
이미 출현한 시세만으로도 자작소작농에게는 생산비 이하로 떨어젓스며 또 지주에 잇서서는 자본에 대한 이자는 고사하고 세금납부까지 어렵웁게 되얏다. 이 파동은 결국에 일반의 구매력을 大減退케 할 것이다. 그러고 물가의 저락은 정부의 소극정책과 한가지로 상공업을 몹시 沈衰케 할 것이며 대소지주계급에 대한 채권의 회수불능으로 인하야 금융계에서 밧는 영향이 상당할 것이 틀림업슬 줄로 생각한다.(1930, 10, 13일에)＜40＞
＜36-40＞