잡지명	別乾坤 第34號
발행일	1930년 11월 01일
기사제목	바다로 나아가는 사람들 (People Going Out to Sea)
필자	씽그
기사형태	희곡·시나리오 (Play/Scenario)

People Going Out to Sea
						Singeu
Mo-ria (Old Woman)
Pa-teure (Son)
Kaseurin (Daughter)
No-ra (Younger Daughter)
Several Men and Women
An island isolated on the west coast of Ireland

Interior of a small fisherman's house. Fire pit, loom, and other household items common in a fisherman's house. Several planks lean against the wall. Kaseurin, around twenty years old, kneads flour, puts it in a pot hanging over the fire pit, and wipes her hands on her apron. Then, she starts turning the loom. The innocent No-ra cautiously opens the door and peeks in.
No-ra (in a low voice) Where did Mother go?
Kaseurin (calmly) She must be sleeping. I feel sorry for her. She must be trying to get some sleep after all her suffering.
(No-ra quietly enters and takes out a bundle from her skirt.)
Kaseurin (turning the loom quickly) What is that?
No-ra A shroud and socks from a corpse found in Donegal. The young pastor brought it. (Kaseurin perks up at the story and stops turning the loom, turning around quickly.)
No-ra He said to check carefully if it's Maikel oppa's. But to open it after Mother goes to the sea.
Kaseurin But it's unlikely to be Maikel's. Even if he drifted, it's unlikely he went that far north.
No-ra Why, the young pastor said so. That sometimes such a thing happens. And if this is Maikel oppa's, tell Mother. Say that with God's grace, Maikel had a proper funeral. But if it's not Maikel oppa's, don't tell anyone but Mother. If Mother knows, she'll cry more and writhe in pain. The old woman will only weaken. Don't say anything.
The door that No-ra half-closed slams shut loudly in the wind.
Kaseurin (looking outside anxiously) Did you tell that pastor not to let Pa-teure oppa go to Kilwae Market with the horse today?
No-ra So, the pastor said this. That I shouldn't stop Pa-teure from going. But there's nothing to worry about because Mother is praying until late at night, so God won't let her lose Pa-teure, the only son she has left.
Kaseurin Is the wave strong at that white rock corner?
No-ra Yes, the sound of the waves is scary in the west. If the tide comes in against the wind, it will probably be worse. (No-ra takes the bundle and goes to the table.)
No-ra Shall we open it?
Kaseurin What if Mother comes out before we open it? (Goes to the table.) Also, it will take a long time to look while we're crying.
No-ra (goes to the door leading to the next room and listens) She's walking back and forth on the floor, so she might come out soon.
Kaseurin Hey, bring the ladder and put it on top of that cotton yarn. Then Mother won't know. And soon the tide will come in, and Mother will go to the seaside to see if Maikel is coming from the east, so let's look and cry as much as we want during that time. (They place the ladder towards the ceiling of the fire pit, and Kaseurin climbs up two or three steps and hides the bundle in a secluded place. Mo-ria comes out from the next room.)
Mo-ria (looking up at Kaseurin, almost nagging) I thought there would be enough firewood to last until tonight.
Kaseurin I'm just making some snacks for a bit. (Throws peat.) When the tide goes out, Pa-teure will say he's going to Connemara soon. I'm trying to feed him before he goes. (No-ra picks up the falling peat and puts it next to the fire pit.)
Mo-ria (sitting down on a chair next to the fire pit) If the southwest wind starts blowing, Pa-teure won't be able to go. He definitely won't go today. And the pastor will hold him back firmly.
No-ra Mother, the pastor won't stop him. And Akka Aemon, Simon, Stephen Petty or Keuram Shon say Pa-teure oppa will definitely leave.
Mo-ria Where did that fellow go anyway?
No-ra He said he's going to ask if there's another boat going out this week or not, so he'll be back soon. Already the tide is coming in at that blue corner <161> and the fishing boats from the east are returning with their sails fully unfurled...
Kaseurin Someone's climbing the stone steps.
No-ra (looking outside) Pa-teure is coming up very quickly.
Pa-teure (comes in and looks around the room. With a sad expression and weakly) Where's the rope I bought in Connemara?
Kaseurin (coming down) No-ra, get the rope hanging next to that plank. This morning, that black-legged pig almost bit it off, so I hung it up.
No-ra (handing the rope to Pa-teure) Is this it?
Mo-ria Pa-teure, it would be nice if you could just hang that rope next to that plank. (Pa-teure receives the rope.) If Maikel's body washes up tomorrow morning or the morning after, we'll have to dig a deep grave for our poor son with God's help. Then we'll need the rope.
Pa-teure (fumbling with the rope) I'm going to ride that horse. I need a rein so I can hurry up and leave. If I'm indecisive and miss this boat again, there won't be another one leaving for a week or two, or even longer. I heard that horse prices will be quite high at this market. I can't miss it.
Mo-ria But if Maikel's body washes up, there won't be a man in the house to make a coffin. Then the villagers will scold us. I bought the best and most expensive planks in Connemara for Maikel. (Mo-ria turns her head and looks at the planks leaning against the wall.)
Pa-teure What does it matter if he washes up? Have you found him at all? We've been searching day and night for nine days and haven't found him. And with this strong southwest wind blowing, he'll probably be blown back out to sea.
Mo-ria Even if we can't find Maikel, the sea is rough because the southwest wind is blowing so strongly. Moreover, something strange was seen next to the moon last night, so it will be even rougher tonight. No matter how many horses you have, a hundred or a thousand, a thousand horses aren't worth one son. Especially you, the only one left.
Pa-teure (making a rein, to Kaseurin) Check outside every day to make sure the lambs don't go into the barley field. And if the innkeeper comes and offers a good price for the black-legged pig, sell it right away without hesitation.
Mo-ria How would that child know the price of pigs? Why are you asking her that?
Pa-teure (to Kaseurin) And if the wind doesn't die down by the time the moon sets, you and No-ra should go out and collect seaweed to make ash. From now on, I'm the only man in the house, so I need to take care of everything. <162>
Mo-ria This is a disaster. If you go out to sea too, how will this old woman live with those girls? I long for my grave... (Pa-teure puts the rein on the ground, takes off the jacket he was wearing, and puts on a similar flannel jacket.)
Pa-teure (to No-ra) See if the boat has arrived.
No-ra (looking outside) It's just passing that blue corner and lowering its sails.
Pa-teure (taking his purse and tobacco pouch) It'll take 30 minutes to get there, so I need to hurry. Then I'll be back in two or three days. If the wind is strong, it'll be four days.
Mo-ria (going to the fire pit and putting a cloth on her head) What's the use of giving advice to someone who doesn't listen to his old mother? Don't leave because the storm is strong.
Kaseurin Going to the sea is a young man's job. No matter how much you try to stop him, he won't listen.
Pa-teure (picking up the rein) Then I need to go quickly. I'll ride the red horse and lead the gray foal... Then I'll be back. (Leaves)
Mo-ria (before he leaves the door) He's gone. I'll never see him again... He's gone and before it gets dark, I've lost my only remaining child.
Kaseurin Oh dear. Mother looked back at you as she was leaving. Why didn't you say something nice to her? That's too much. Even if she didn't, the person leaving wouldn't feel good. What kind of thing is that to say? (Mo-ria is silently gathering ashes with the fire tongs. She doesn't even look back.)
No-ra (to Mo-ria) Mother, why are you heating the fire to bake snacks?
Kaseurin (startled) Oh my, what should I do? No-ra, we didn't even feed oppa any snacks before he left. (Kaseurin comes to the fire.)
No-ra He ate some in the morning and it's still there, but if he's on the boat until midnight, he'll starve to death.
Kaseurin (taking out the snacks from the pot) Starve to death, my foot. All Mother does is say things like that all day and night, and it drives everyone else crazy. (Mo-ria is sitting on the chair, just nodding her body back and forth.)
Kaseurin (wrapping the bread in a cloth and to Mo-ria) Quickly, take this and go to the stone well and give it to Pa-teure as he passes by. And take back what you said earlier and just say, "Pa-teure, be careful and have a good trip." Wouldn't that make the person leaving feel a little better?
Mo-ria (taking the bread) Won't it be too late?
Kaseurin If you go quickly, you'll be fine.
Mo-ria (getting up as if she's about to fall) I can't even walk as I please.
Kaseurin (looking anxiously) No-ra, bring her the cane. It'll be a disaster if she falls.
No-ra Which cane? <163>
Kaseurin Why, the one Maikel bought in Connemara.
Mo-ria (taking the cane No-ra gives her) The world is full of strange things. They say an old person leaves wealth to their children when they die, but this is a child who left it to them when he died...
Mo-ria (walks out slowly.)
No-ra (goes to the ladder.)
Kaseurin Hey, wait. What if Mother comes back? She's so weak. I don't know what might happen.
No-ra Can't you see her?
Kaseurin (looking outside) I can't see her, but she might come back, so take it down quickly.
No-ra (takes down the bundle) The pastor said he'd be passing by tomorrow. If this is Maikel oppa's, I should tell the pastor.
Kaseurin (receiving the bundle) How did the pastor find this? Tell me the details.
No-ra (coming down from the ladder) Yeah! Two men were secretly loading moonshine onto a boat before dawn and passed that dark rock corner in the north sea. But one of them got this caught in the oar he was rowing with.
Kaseurin (trying to untie the bundle) Bring a knife. I can't untie it even if I stay up all night, it's so soaked in salt water.
No-ra (giving the knife) Is Donegal very far away?
Kaseurin (cutting the string) Of course it's far. Someone who came to our house once – the one who bought this knife – said that if you walk from that big rock over there, you have to walk for a whole week to get to Donegal.
No-ra How many days would it take by boat?
Kaseurin (opening the bundle and taking out one sock. They both look at it intently.)
Kaseurin (in a low voice) No-ra, I can't believe it's definitely Maikel's. Right.
No-ra Where's the flannel shirt that was caught on the nail? Should I take that and see if it's the same flannel? (Searches for the shirt hanging on the wall) It was here, where did it go?
Kaseurin Pa-teure oppa might have changed into it earlier. Because the clothes he was wearing were soaked in water. (Pointing to the corner of the room) The sleeves of that one hanging over there are the same fabric, so we can tell with that. Take that off and bring it here.
No-ra (takes off the shirt. The two compare them.)
Kaseurin The fabric is the same! But the same fabric as this can be found in every store in Galway, so anyone can buy it. So how can we say it's definitely Maikel's?
No-ra (picks up the sock, looks at the stitches and cries out loud) <164> It's Maikel, sister! It's definitely Maikel. God, even though Maikel is dead, please have mercy on his poor soul. How much more will Mother cry if she finds out? And Pa-teure oppa is gone too.
Kaseurin So, you knitted this?
No-ra Out of the three pairs I knitted, he wore two pairs. This one has sixty stitches and the neck is slightly torn.
Kaseurin (counting the stitches) It's true, No-ra. Maikel drifted so far north, but the only thing that cried for Maikel was a lost seagull. How pitiful.
No-ra (half-turning her body, placing both hands on the clothes) He was so strong, rowed so well, was so good at fishing, and was a king in the sea. How sad that he ended up as just an old shirt like this!
Kaseurin (after a moment) No-ra. Isn't Mother coming? I hear tired footsteps on the stone steps.
No-ra (looking outside) Oh dear, she's almost at the doorstep.
Kaseurin Hide this quickly before Mother comes in. Maybe she'll be a little calmer now that she's blessed Pa-teure. Let's not say anything until that only remaining oppa comes back safely from the sea.
No-ra (packing the bundle with Kaseurin) Let's hide it in that corner. (The two quickly hide it in the corner of the fire pit. Kaseurin goes to the loom.)
No-ra Will she know I was crying by looking at my eyes?
Kaseurin Turn around and sit down with your back to the door.
No-ra (turns her back to the door and sits in the corner of the fire pit.)
Mo-ria (comes in very slowly. Doesn't even look at the daughters and goes to sit in the chair over there. She's holding the bundle of bread. Kaseurin and No-ra look at each other and No-ra glances at what Mo-ria is holding.)
Kaseurin (turns the loom for a while) Did you give him the bread?
Mo-ria (without looking back, sobs.)
Kaseurin Did you meet Pa-teure riding the horse?
Mo-ria (remains seated without answering.)
Kaseurin It's so frustrating. What's the point of only feeling sorry for the past? Did you meet Pa-teure? Yes?
Mo-ria (weakly) What should I do with my heart that's been broken into a thousand pieces?
Kaseurin (as before) Did you meet Pa-teure?
Mo-ria I saw something scary.
Kaseurin (leaving the loom and looking outside) That's too much. He's passing that blue corner over there. Leading the gray foal.
Mo-ria (startled. In the process, the cloth slips and her disheveled white hair is revealed. In a slightly trembling voice) Leading the foal... <165>
Kaseurin (coming to the fire pit) But why are you doing this?
Mo-ria (very slowly) I saw something scary that no one else has seen. Did Preed, Da-ra see a dead person holding a child?
Kaseurin No-ra What? (Both kneel on either side of Mo-ria.)
No-ra Tell us something. What did you see?
Mo-ria I went to the stone well and prayed quietly. Then Pa-teure came. Riding the red horse and leading the gray foal. (Raises both arms as if holding something in front of her) It was so scary. No-ra.
Kaseurin But what was scary?
Mo-ria (like a person out of their mind) I saw Maikel.
Kaseurin (comforting her) You're talking nonsense. What Mother saw must have been something else. Maikel's body had a proper funeral with God's help in that far northern sea.
Mo-ria (somewhat defiantly) What are you talking about? I definitely saw him. Pa-teure was riding the red horse. So I wanted to say, "Have a good trip," but something stuck in my throat and I couldn't say anything. Pa-teure passed by on his horse and said, "Goodbye," but I still couldn't say anything because my throat wouldn't open. I wanted to look at Pa-teure's back as he left with my tearful face—at that time. Maikel was sitting on the back of that gray foal. Wearing fine clothes and shiny new shoes.
Kaseurin (cries) We have nothing more to hope for.
No-ra The pastor said that God wouldn't take Mother's only remaining son.
Mo-ria (in a weak voice, but clearly) How can that pastor know what the sea does? Pa-teure is definitely dead. Go quickly and tell Aemon to come and make a coffin out of the new planks I bought. I'll die soon too. There was a husband in this house, and the husband's father. And there were six sons. Six strong sons—I suffered the same pain every time I gave birth to each of those sons—some of them were found, and some weren't—they all died. Stephen and Sean died when that big storm arose, and a few days later, Gregory was found at the harbor. They laid the two sons side by side on the white planks and brought them into this room. Through that door (Mo-ria stops talking. Kaseurin and No-ra listen with horrified expressions, then look at the half-open door behind them and a fearful look appears.)
No-ra (quietly, listening intently) Listen to that sound. <166> The sound of people murmuring—
Kaseurin (quietly) It's coming from the seaside.
Mo-ria (pretending not to hear and continues to speak) And Se-mas and your father and your grandfather disappeared into the dark room without a trace. But by the time it was bright, there wasn't even a piece of plank left. After that, the boat Batji was riding on capsized. I was sitting in this spot holding Pa-teure. He was just a nursing baby then. At that time—two, three, four women from the village came in one after another and made the sign of the cross without saying a word. Men followed them in. They were holding something wrapped in a half-torn red sail, carrying it together. Water dripped from the bundle, even though it was a clear day, so much so that the threshold got wet.
Mo-ria (points to the door and stops talking. The door opens quietly and old women silently bow their heads, make the sign of the cross at the threshold, come to the front of the stage, and kneel down. They're wearing red bonnets on their heads.)
Mo-ria (half-dreaming, to Kaseurin) Is it Batji? Is it Maikel? Or has something scary else happened?
Kaseurin Maikel had a funeral in that northern sea, how could he come from so far away?
Mo-ria There must be more than one or two young men who have drowned in the sea. Even if they found one, how would they know if it was Maikel or someone like Maikel? After being in the water for nine days in that scary wind, would the mothers who gave birth to them be able to recognize them?
Kaseurin It's definitely Maikel. They sent a bundle with what the dead man was wearing from that far north.
Kaseurin (extends her arm and gives Mo-ria what Maikel was wearing. Mo-ria slowly gets up and receives it with both hands. No-ra looks outside.)
No-ra What are those people carrying? And water is dripping and even the stone floor is wet.
Kaseurin (quietly asks the women who have come in) Is it Pa-teure?
One of the women Yes, it is. Lord, receive his soul.
(Younger women than the women who came in earlier come in, pull a table, put Pa-teure's body covered with a sail on the plank, carry it in, and place it on the table.)
Kaseurin (asks the women while everyone is silently doing something) How did he fall in?
One of the women The gray foal that was following behind pushed Pa-teure off. They found him near that place where the white waves rise.
Mo-ria (goes to the table and kneels in front of the head of the body. The women mourn silently with gestures. Kaseurin and No-ra go to one side of the table and kneel. The men kneel at the threshold.)
Mo-ria (as if forgetting there are people around) They're all dead. No matter how scary the sea is, it can't do anything to me now—now I won't have to worry whether the south wind blows or the west wind blows, whether the big waves collide from the east and west and rise to the sky, I won't have to sleep or cry or pray. From now on, I won't have to worry about going to get holy water on a dark night during the November festival. I won't have to worry even if the waves are strong and all the women in the village cry and shout. (To No-ra) No-ra, give me the holy water. There must still be some left.
No-ra (brings the holy water)
Mo-ria (puts Maikel's clothes at Pa-teure's feet and sprinkles holy water) Pa-teure, it's not that I didn't pray for you. I prayed so loudly in the dark night that I couldn't hear my own voice. But from today onwards, you will be at peace. It's time to be at peace. From today on, I can sleep soundly—even on the long nights of the November festival. Even if I live on rotten fish and moldy rice cakes.
Mo-ria (makes the sign of the cross and prays silently.)
Kaseurin (to an old man) Please make a coffin early tomorrow with Aemon. There are new planks that Mother bought. Mother knew she would find Maikel's body—there's also freshly baked rice cakes, so please eat those and do the work.
Old man (looking at the planks) There must be nails too.
Kaseurin There aren't—I didn't even think about the nails.
Another man How could you forget the nails this time? You've done this so many times.
Kaseurin She's too old now and must be out of her mind.
Mo-ria (very slowly gets up, spreads the clothes Maikel was wearing next to the body, and sprinkles the remaining holy water.)
No-ra (quietly to Kaseurin) Why is it that Mother's heart seems so calm today? When Maikel oppa died, Mother's crying could be heard all over the village. Maybe Maikel oppa was more important.
Kaseurin (slowly and clearly) Old people get tired of everything quickly. She cried and thrashed around for nine days, how much strength would she have left?
Mo-ria (overturns the cup with no holy water left on the table and places both hands on Pa-teure's feet.) This is the last time we'll all be together. Everything is over now. Lord. Please let the souls of Pa-teure and Maikel rest in peace. Please gather the souls of Se-mas, Batji, Stephen, Sean, and all my sons. (Bows her head) After I die, please gather the souls of everyone who is left alive in this world after I'm gone.
Mo-ria (stops talking. The sound of sobbing is heard among the women. It fades again.)
Mo-ria (continues again) With God's grace, Maikel had a funeral in the far northern sea, and Pa-teure will have a coffin made of those clean planks and be buried in a deep grave. What more could there be to worry about? No one can live forever. We are satisfied with this. What more could we want?
Mo-ria kneels. The curtain slowly falls. <168>

**Named Entities**

Donegal	Donegal
Kaseurin	Kaseurin
Kilwaejang	Kilwaejang
Kon-nemara	Kon-nemara
Kŭram Shon	Kŭram Shon
Maikel	Maikel
Mo-ria	Mo-ria
No-ra	No-ra
Pa-teure	Pa-teure
Pattji	Pattji
Preed	Preed
Se-mas	Se-mas
Shōn	Shōn
Simōn	Simōn
Sŭt'ep'an	Sŭt'ep'an
Ta-ra	Ta-ra


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제34호
발행일	1930년 11월 01일
기사제목	바다로 나아가는 사람들
필자	씽그
기사형태	희곡·시나리오

바다로 나아가는 사람들
						씽그
모-리아 老人
파-트레 아들
카스린 딸
노-라 자근 딸
男女數人
아일랜드 西海岸으로 외떠러진 섬

조고만 어민의 집 내부 火窯 레믈 물레, 그 외 어민집에의 잇슴즉한 살님 遺器, 벽에는 새널판이 세넷 똑 기대여 잇다. 스므살쯤 된 카스린 밀가루를 반죽하야 火窯에 걸닌 가마에 넛코 행주치마로 손을 닥는다. 그러고 물레를 돌니기 시작한다. 천진스러운 노-라 문을 깨웃이 열고 고개를 드리민다.
노-라 (나즌 목소리로) 어머닌 어데 가섯수?
카스린 (끗까지 침착해서) 주무시나 보다. 어머니도 가여우시지. 아마 고생고생하시다가 잠이나 드러 보실냐는게지-
(노-라 살그머니 드러와서 치마 속에서 보통이 하나를 내놋는다)
카스린 (빨니 물레를 두르며) 그건 무어냐.
노-라 도네갈에서 건진 송장의 삿스하고 양말이라고. 그 젊은 목사님이 갓다 주엇다우(카스린은 이야기에 귀가 번적 띄여 물레손을 떼이고 밧작 대여 돈다)
노-라 이것이 마이켈 옵바의 것인지 안인지 잘 살편보라고 그럼듸다. 그런데 어머니가 바다가에 나가신 뒤에 펴보라구.
카스린 그러치만 마이켈의 것일 리치가 잇늬. 아모리 떠갓기로 그러케 먼 북쪽까지 갓슬 듯 십흐냐.
노-라 왜 그래도 절믄 목사님은 그러든데. 각금 그런 일이 잇다구. 그러고 이것이 만약에 마이켈 옵바의 것이거든＜160＞ 어머니께 말을 하라구. 하누님의 은혜로 마이켈은 깨끗한 葬事를 지내게 되엿다구. 그러치만 만약에 마이켈 옵바의 것이 아니거든 어머닌말구 누구에게든지 말하지 말나구. 어머니가 아시면 더 울고 몸부림을 치실터이닛가. 노인이 몸만 축가실테니. 아모 말 말나구.
노-라가 반만 닷고 드러온 문이 바람에 몹시 닷처진다.
카스린 (념려스럽게 밧글 보며) 너 오늘 파-트레 옵바가 말을 가지고 낄웨이장으로 간다고 하는 것을 못가게 말녀 달나고 그 목사님에게 말햇늬.
노-라 그러니까 목사님은 그러든데. 내가 파-트레가 가는 것을 말니지 안켓다. 그러나 조곰도 념려할 것이 업는 게 어머니께서 밤이면 밤ㅅ중까지 기도를 올니고 게시닛가 하누님께서는 어머니의 아들 중의 하나만 남은 파-트레를 마저 일허 버리게는 아니하시리라고.
카스린 저 흰바위 모퉁이에 파도가 심하데?
노-라 그럼 서쪽에서는 파도소리가 무섭게 들니는데. 바람에 거슬려서 潮水가 밀녀오면 아마 더 할 걸.(노-라 보퉁이를 들고 테-블잇는 곳으로 간다)
노-라 펴 볼가.
카스린 다 펴보기 전에 어머니가 나오시면 엇저게.(테블쪽으로 간다) 또 우리가 우느라면 보는 동안은 오래 걸닐걸.
노-라 (엽방으로 통한 문압헤 가서 듯는다) 마루로 왓다갓다 하시는데 곳 나오시기도 하겟수.
카스린 얘 사다리를 가저 오느라 저 꼭댁이 숫섬잇는데다 두자. 그럼 어머니가 모르시겟지. 그러고 곳 潮水가 밀려오면  또 어머니는 바다ㅅ가로 나가서 동쪽에서 마이켈이 떠오나 하고 보시러 가실터이니 그럼 그동안에 실컷 보고 실컷 울자구나. (그들은 火窯우 天井을 향하여 사다리를 놋코 카스린 二三步거러 올너가서 섭둔 곳에다 보퉁이를 감춘다. 모-리아 엽방에서 나온다)
모-리아 (카스린을 치여다보며 잔소리 비슷이) 내논숫만 해도 오늘밤까지 넉넉할 줄 알엇구나.
카스린 지금 잠간 과자를 맨드느라고 그래요. (泥炭을 집어던진다) 조수가 나가면 파-트레가 곳 콘네마라로 간다고 할텐데. 좀 멕여 보낼나고 그래요.(노-라 泥炭 떠러지는 것을 주서서 火窯엽헤 놋는다)
모-리아 (火窯엽 걸상에 걸어 안즈며) 서남풍이 불기 시작하면 파-트레는 갈니가 업겟지. 오늘은 꼭 안갈 터이지. 그러고 그것은 목사님이 단단이 붓잡아 주실 터이니까.
노-라 어머니 목사님은 안말녀 주실걸요. 그러고 악가 에-몬·사이몬, 스티-븐·페틔든지 끄람·숀들이 파-트레 옵바는 꼭 떠날 것이라고 그럽듸다.
모-리아 그 녀석은 대체 어듸로 간누?
노-라 이번 주일안에 배가 한번 더 나가는지 엇전지 무러보고 온댓스닛가 곳 오겟지요. 저-기 푸른 모통이에는＜161＞ 벌서 조수가 밀니기 시작해서 동쪽에서는 고기배가 돗을 활짝 펴고 도라오니까...
카스린 누가 돌 층층대를 올나 오나보다.
노-라 (박글 보고) 파-트레-바야 아조 급히 올나 오는데.
파-트레 (드러 와서 실내를 도라 본다. 슯흔 빗을 띄우고 힘업시) 저 콘네마라에서 사온 색기 엇잿늬.
카스린 (나려와서) 노-라야 저 널반지 녑헤 걸닌 색기떼여 주어라. 오늘 아츰에 그 놈의 다리거믄 도야지가 다 물어 끈을 것가태서 갓다 걸어 두엇다.
노-라 (색기를 파-트레에게 내여 밀며) 이거 말이우.
모-리아 파-트레 그 색기는 그 널반지 녑헤 그대로 좀 걸어 두엇스면 조켓다. (파-트레 색기를 밧는다) 이러다가도 내일 아츰이고 모래 아츰이고 어느 아침이고 마이켈의 시체가 떠와 주면 하누님이 도와주신 은혜로 불상한 아들을 위해서 무덤을 깁히 파주지 안으며 안될 것이 아니냐. 그러면 그 때는 색기가 들테지.
파-트레 (색기를 뭉등거리며) 그놈의 말을 타고 갈텐데. 곱비가 잇서야지 얼는 서두러서 떠나지 안코 어름어름하다가 이 배도 또 노치면 일주일이고 이주일이고 혹은 더 오래도록 다시는 떠나는 배가 업거든요. 이번 장은 말시세가 상당하리라고들 하든데 노처서 되겟수.
모-리아 그러치만 마이켈의 몸이 밀녀와 다으면 집에서 관을 짜을 사나히의 손이 업겟구나.그러면 동리 사람들이 욕인들 좀 하리. 콘네마라에서 그 중 조코 빗싼 널을 마이켈 때문에 사왓는데. (모-리아 고개를 돌녀 벽에 기대인 널을 바라본다)
파-트레 밀녀 와 닷는게 다 뭐요. 찻긴들 좀 차젓소. 날마다 날마다 밤낫으로 아흐레를 차저도 못 찾지 안엇수. 그런데다 서남풍이 이러케 시게 부니 오다가도 도로 갓게소 원.
모-리아 만일 마이켈은 못 찻는다 하드라도 지금 서남풍이 몹시 무러서 바다가 거치러 젓는데 더구나 어제밤에 달엽헤 이상한 것이 하나 보엿스닛가 오늘밤은 더 거치러질걸. 네가 아모리 백마리 천마리의 말을 가젓다 하기로 천마리 말이 아들 하나와 갓겟늬. 더구나 하나밧게 안남은 네가.
파-트레 (곱비를 만들며 카스린에게) 날마다 밧갓으로 돌아 단이며 잘 살펴보아 羊의 색기가 보리밧으로 드러 가지 못하게 그러고 객주집 사람이 와서 다리검은 도야지를 상당한 갑에 팔나거든 두말말고 얼는 파러버려요.
모-리아 그애가 도야지 시세를 엇더케 안다고 그런 부탁을 하늬.
파-트레 (카스린에게) 그러고 만일 달이 질 때까지 바람이 자지 안커든 노-라하고 나가서 해초나 주서다가 재도 좀 만들어 노아야지. 인제부터는 집안에 사나히라고는 나하나 뿐이니 미처 여기저기 손이 다야지.＜162＞
모-리아 참 큰일 낫다. 너마저가 바다로 나가 바리면 이 늘근 것이 저 게집애들만 다리고엇더케 살어간단 말이냐. 무덤자리가 그리운데...(파-트레는 곱비를 땅에 놋코 입엇든 저고리를 벗고 가튼 감후란빌 저고리를 밧구어 입는다)
파-트레 (노-라에게) 배가 와다엇나 보아라.
노-라 (밧글 본다) 지금 저 퍼런 모통이를 지내서 돗을 감는데.
파-트레 (돈주머니와 담배갑을 들고) 거기까지 가랴면 30분은 걸닐테니가 얼는 가야지.그럼 이틀이나 사흘만에 오리다. 만약에 바람이 시면 한 나흘만에나 오구.
모-리아 (火窯엽에 가서 포대기를 머리에 쓴다) 늘근 어미의 말을 아니 듯는 녁석을 머 세 다 쓰누. 풍랑이 시니 떠나지를 말내두.
카스린 바다로 가는 것은 젊은 사람의 할 일인데, 아모리 말니면 드를 리가 잇나요.
파-트레 (곱비를 집어 들고) 그럼 얼는 가야지. 불근 말은 타고 회색 망아지는 끌고 가지... 그럼 갓다 오리다. (나간다)
모-리아 (아즉 그가 문을 나스기 전에) 마저 가버렷구나. 다시는 또 못 맛나지...아조 가버렷서 밤이 어둡기 전에 내게는 하나 남은 자식마저 업서지는구나.
카스린 아이구 참. 어머니두 나가면서 어머니를 도라다 보는데 왜 한마듸라도 조흔 말을 아니해 주시구. 딱두하시우. 그러지 안어두 떠나는 사람맘이 조치 안을텐데. 그게 무슨 말슴이란 말이우. (모-리아는 아모 생도 업시 火箸로 재를 쓰러 모으고 잇다. 도라다 보는 척도 안이한다)
노-라 (모-리아에게 향하야) 어머니 과자구을 불인데 왜 덥푸시우.
카스린 (깜작 놀내며) 아이 이를 엇저니. 노-라야 옵바를 과자도 안멕여 보냇구나. (카스린 불넙흐로 온다)
노-라 아츰에 좀 먹고 이 때ㅅ것 그대로 잇는데 밤 중까지 배를 타고가면 허기저 죽겟수.
카스린 (가마에서 과자를 꺼내며) 허기지고 말구. 온 어머니는 밤낫 그런 소리만 하시는 바람에 다른 사람까지 정신이 다 빠지는구려. (모-리아 걸상에 안즌 채로 몸만 전후로 끄덕끄덕이고 잇다)
카스린 (팡쪽을 보에다 싸며 모-리아에게) 얼는 이걸 가지고 저 차돌백이 우물압까지 가서 파-트레가 지내가거든 주어 보내서요. 그러고 맛나서 앗가 한 말은 물너버리고 『파-트레 조심해서 잘 갓다오느라』라고 한마듸만 해 주시우. 그러면 가는 사람도 얼마콤 마음에 조흘 것이 아니겟서요.
모-리아 (팡을 바더 들고) 늣지안을가.
카스린 빨니 가시면 돼요.
모-리아 (쓰러질 듯이 이러스며) 거름인들 맘대로 걸녀야지.
카스린 (넘려스럽게 보며) 노-라야 집행이 갓다 드려라. 가시다 너머지시면 큰일 난다.
노-라 어는 집행이?＜163＞
카스린 왜 그 마이켈이 콘네마라에서 사온 것 말이야.
모-리아 (노-라가 주는 집행이를 바다 들고) 세상에 별 신세도 다 잇지. 늘근 거시 자식들에게 재물을 남겨 주고 죽는다드구면 이건 자식이 남겨 주고 죽엇스니...
모-리아 (천천히 거러 나간다)
노-라 (사다리 압흐로 간다)
카스린 얘 가만잇서. 어머니가 가시다가 도로 오시면 엇저니. 가엽시도 저러케 筋力이 업서지섯스니 무슨 일이 잇슬지 알겟니.
노-라 거진 안뵈우?
카스린 (밧글 내여다 보고) 안뵈긴 안뵈지만 다시 돌처 오실지 모르니 얼는 내려라.
노-라 (보통이를 집어 나린다) 내일쯤 목사님이이리 지내 가신댓스닛가. 이게 만일 마이켈 옵바 것이면 목사님께 말을 해야지.
카스린 (보통이를 바드며) 목사님이 엇더케 이걸 차젓다구. 자세 이약이하데.
노-라 (사다리에서 나려 오며) 응! 누군지 남자 둘이서 달기 울기 전에 密造술을 배에다 실코 저 북쪽 바다 시ㅅ커먼 바위모통이를 지내 갓섯드라나. 그런데 한사람이 젓는 노에 가서 이게 걸녓대.
카스린 (보통이를 푸르려 하며) 칼을 갓다 다우. 엇더케 소곰물에 저젓는지 밤을 새도 못풀겟다.
노-라 (칼을 주며) 도네갈이란데는 퍽 먼덴가 보지.
카스린 (실을 끈는다) 멀구말구. 언젠가 집에 왓든 사람이 그러는데-이 칼을 사온 이-그이 말이야. 저쪽 큰 바위잇는 데서부터 거러가면 일헤동안이나 줄곳 거러가야 도네갈이란데를 간다드라.
노-라 배를 타면 몃칠이나 걸닐가?
카스린 (보통이를 펴고 양말 한쪽을 꺼낸다. 둘이느 열심히 드려다 본다.)
카스린 (나즌 목소리로) 노-라야 엇재 꼭 마이켈의 것이라고는 미들 수가 업다. 그러치.
노-라 어듸 저 못에 걸닌 삿스를 떼다가 이것하고 똑가튼 후란넬감인가 대여 볼가. (벽에 걸닌 사쓰를 뒤저본다) 여긔 잇섯는데 어듸갓서.
카스린 앗가 파-트레 옵바가 밧구어 입엇는지도 모른다. 입은 옷이 물에 저젓섯스니까. (방구석을 가르키며) 저기 걸닌 저것도 소매는 가튼 감이니가 그걸 가지고도 알 수가 잇스니 이리 떼여 오느라.
노-라 (사쓰를 떼여 온다. 두리는 대여 본다)
카스린 감은 똑갓지! 그러나 이거와 똑가튼 감은 갈웨이만 가면 가개마다 잇스닛가 누구든지 사입을 수 잇는 것이 아니냐. 그러니 엇더케 마이켈의 것이라고만 할 수가 잇나.
노-라 (양말을 집어 따온 실의 눈을 시여 보드니 큰소리 츠며)＜164＞ 마이켈이야 언늬! 틀님업는 마이켈이야. 하누님 마이켈은 죽엇드라도 그 불상한 령혼에게 은혜를 베푸러 주십시요. 어머니가 이걸 아시면 또 얼마나 우실나구 파-트레 옵바도 업고.
카스린 그럼이게 네가 짜준 것이냐.
노-라 세 켤레 짜 준 중에서 두켜레채 신은 것이우. 이건 눈을 예순으로 짜어서 네코만 떠려트린 것이라우.
카스린 (눈을 세여보며) 참 그럿쿠나 노-라. 마이켈이 그러케 먼 북쪽 바다까지 흘너 갓스나 마이켈을 위해서 을어 준 것은 길일흔 갈맥이 밧게 업섯겟지. 불상도 하지.
노-라 (몸을 반이나 도리기고 두손은 그 옷 우에 올녀 놋코) 그러케 튼튼하고 배 잘젓고 그물질 잘하고 바다에서는 왕이라든 이가 겨오 이러케 헌 샤스 한 벌이 되고 말다니. 얼마나 슬픈 일인지!
카스린 (잠간 잇다가) 노-라. 어머니가 오시지나안늬. 돌층층대에 피곤한 발소리가 난다.
노-라 (밧글 본다) 아이구 거진문턱에 다 오섯서.
카스린 어머니가 드러 오시기 전에 이걸 얼는 감추어라. 아마 파-트레에게 축복을 해 주엇스면 마음이 좀 가러 안즈섯느지도 모르니. 그 하나밧게 안남은 옵바가 바다에서 무사히 도라 올 때까지 우리는 아모 말도 하지 말자.
노-라 (카스린과 가티 보퉁이를 꾸리며) 저구석에다 감추어 둡시다. (둘이서 급히 火窯넙구석에다 감춘다. 카스린은 물레 압흐로 간다.)
노-라 내 눈을 보고 운 줄 알가.
카스린 문잇는 쪽에다 등을 두고 도라 안젓거라.
노-라 (문을 등지고 火窯넙 방구석에 가 도라 안는다)
모-리아 (아조 천천히 드러 온다. 딸들이 잇는 쪽은 보지도 안코 저편 걸상에 가 안는다. 손에는 팡싼 보통이를 쥔 채로 잇다. 카스린 노-라 서로 치여다 보며 노-라 모-리아의 손에 쥔 것을 가로 친다)
카스린 (한참동안 물레를 돌이다가) 팡은 갓다 주섯수?
모-리아 (돌아다 보지도 안코 咽泣을 한다)
카스린 말타고 가는 파-트레를 맛나섯서요?
모-리아 (그대로 대답 업시 안젓다)
카스린 참 답답해 못살겟군. 맛나 보고 한 이야기나 하면 엇대서 지난 일을 설어만 하면 무얼 하누. 파-트레를 맛낫서요! 네?
모-리아 (힘업시) 천조각 만조각이나 께여진 내맘을 엇저면 조흘지!
카스린 (앗가가티) 파-트레를 맛낫서요!
모-리아 나는 무서운 것을 보고 왓다.
카스린 (물레에서 떠러저 밧글 본다) 딱도 하시우. 저-기 퍼런 모통이를 돌아 가는구료. 회색 망아지를 뒤세우고.
모-리아 (깜작 놀낸다. 그 바람에 보재기가 흘너나리며 헛트러진 백발이 보힌다. 좀 떨니는 소리로) 망이지를 뒤세우고...＜165＞
카스린 (火窯넙으로 오며) 그런데 왜 그러시우.
모-리아 (극히 천천히) 나는 다른 아모도 보지 못한 무서운 것을 보고 왓다. 푸리드, 다-라는 죽은 사람이 아이를 안고 슨 것을 보앗다드라만?
카스린·노-라 뭐요? (둘, 모-리아의 좌우에 무롭 꿀코 안는다)
노-라 얙이 좀 하시우. 멀 보섯는지.
모-리아 차둘백이 우물 압까지 가서 뀀˜는 입 속으로 긔도를 드렷섯다. 그 때 파-트레가 오드라. 불근 말을 타고 회색 망아지를 뒤세우고. (두팔을 들어 압헤 보히는 무엇을 가지는 듯이) 참 무서웟다. 노-라.
카스린 그런데 무엇이 무서워요?
모-리아 (혼이 나간 사람가치) 마이켈을 보앗다.
카스린 (위안한다) 벌소리를 다 하시는구려. 어머니가 보섯다는 것은 다른 것이겟지요. 마이켈의 시체는 저-북쪽 바다 먼 곳에서 하누님의 도으심으로 정결한 장사를 지냇다우.
모-리아 (좀 반항적으로) 그건 다 무슨 소리냐, 내가 꼭 보앗는데. 파-트레가 불근 말을 타고 오드라. 그래서 나는 「잘 단여 오느라」하고 말을 하고 십헛스나 무엇인지 목에가 꽉 맥혀서 아모 말도 못하고 말엇다. 파-트레는 말을 탄 채로 지나가며 「안녕히 게십시요」하고 인사를 하드라만은 나는 그래도 목이 터지지가 안어서 역시 말을 못하고 말엇다. 나는 그 때 눈물 흐르는 얼골을 드러 파-트레가 가는 뒤ㅅ모양이라도 보랴고 햇섯다-그 때말이다. 그 회색 망아지 등에는 마이켈이 안저 가드라. 훌늉한 옷을 입고 번적어리는 새신을 신고.
카스린 (운다) 우리들에게는 더 다시 바랄 것이 업서젓구려.
노-라 목사님 말이 하누님은 어머니의 하나 남은 아들을 마저 뺏지는 아느시리라구 하든데.
모-리아 (여튼 목소리로 그러나 똑똑하게) 그까진 목사가 바다가 하는 일을 엇지 알 수 잇겟늬. 파-트레는 꼭 죽엇다. 밧비가서 에-몬을 좀 오라고 해서 저-기 사다노은 새널노 내 관도 하나 짜 달나고 그래라. 나도 곳 죽을 걸. 이 집에는 남편도 잇섯고 남편의 아버지도 잇섯다. 그러고 아들이 여섯이나 잇섯다. 여섯이 다 튼튼하든 아들이엿섯다-그 아들을 하나하나 나을 적마다 다가튼 고통을 바덧섯다-그 중에는 시체를 차즌 것도 잇고 못차즌 것도 잇다-다 죽어 바렷다. 스테판과 숀은 그 큰 풍랑이 이러낫슬 때 죽엇고 그런지 몃칠 후에 그레고리만 어구에서 차젓다. 허-연 널쪽에다 두아들을 나란히 눕혀서 이 방안으로 들어다 주엇다. 저-기 저 문으로 (모-리아 말을 중지한다. 카스린, 노-라는 무시무시하게 넉이며 듯다가 그들의 뒤에 반쯤 열닌 문을 도라 보고 무서운 긔색이 보힌다)
노-라 (귀를 기우리면 가만히) 저 소리 드러 좀 보아요.＜166＞ 사람들의 웅성거리는 소리-
카스린 (가만히) 바다ㅅ가에서 들녀오지.
모-리아 (드른체 만체 하고 말을 게속한다) 그러고 세-마스와 너의 아버지와 너의 할아버지는 캄캄한 방에 간 곳도 모르게 업서 젓섯다. 그러나 날이 발글 녁에는 널조각 하나 남어잇지 아니하엿다. 그 다음에는 밧지가 탓든 배가 뒤집혓스니 안죽고 백엿슬고. 나는 파-트레를 안ㅅ고 지금 이 자리에 안저 잇섯다. 그건 아즉 젓먹이 어린 것이엿지. 그 때말이다. 그 때-동리녀편네가 두사람 세사람 네사람 니어서 드러오며 아모 말도 업시 十字를 긋드라. 그 뒤를 따러서 사나히들이 따러 드러왓다. 半에 쯔즌 불근 돗(帆)에 무엇인지 싸서 마조 잡고 드러 오드라. 그 뭉치에서는 물이 뚝뚝 청명한 날이것만 저 문턱이 젓도록 물이 떠러젓다.
모-리아 (문을 가르키며 말을 하다 끗친다.그 문이 고요이 열니며 나이 늙은 여인들이 말업시 고개를 숙이고 문턱에서 十字를 그으며 드러와 무대압헤 나아가서 무릅을 꿀고 안는다. 불근 보돌을 머리에 썻다)
모-리아 (반은 꿈꾸는 듯 카스린에게) 밧지냐? 마이켈이냐? 그러치 아느면 무슨 무서운 일이 또 생겻느냐.
카스린 마이켈은 저 북쪽 바다에서 장사를 지냇는데 그 먼데서 올니가 잇서요.
모-리아 바다에 빠저 죽은 절믄 사람이 하나둘이 아닐텐데. 만일 건저냇다기로 그게 마이켈인지 마이켈과 가튼 사람인지 엇지 알겟늬. 아흐레 동안이나 물 속에서 그 무서운 바람에 불녀 단엿스니 저를 나흔 어민들 아터볼 수 잇슬가.
카스린 틀님업는 마이켈이야요. 그 먼 북쪽에서 죽은 사람이 입어든 것을 한 보통이 보내 왓서요.
카스린 (팔을 뻐더서 마이켈이 입엇든 것을 모-리아에게 준다. 모-리아 천천히 이러나서 두손으로 밧는다. 노-라 밧글 내여다 본다)
노-라 저 사람들이 무얼 메고 오네. 그러고 물이 떠러저서 돌바닥가지 저젓는데.
카스린 (들아와 잇는 여인들에게 가만히 뭇는다) 파-트레일까요?
여인들의 하나 그럿슴니다. 주여 그의 영혼을 바더드리소서.
(압헤 드러 온 여인들보다 좀 절문 여인들이 드러와 床을 끄을어다 그 남자를 돗(帆)으로덥흔 파-트레의 시체를 널 우에 담어 가지고 드러와서 床 우에 놋는다)
카스린 (여러 사람들이 말업시하는 동안에 여인들에게 뭇는다) 엇더케 하다가 빠젓슬가요.
여인들의 하나 뒤쪼차 가든 회색 망아지가 파-트레를 떠여 밀엇담니다. 저-기 흰 파도가 이러나는 곳에 건저 노앗섯지요.
모-리아 (테-블 잇는 곳으로 가서 시체의 머리잇는 압헤 무릅을 꿀는다. 여인들 말업시 소리업시 몸짓을 하며 슬퍼한다. 카스린 노-라 테-블 한쪽에 가서 무릅을 꿀는다. 남자들은 문턱에서 무릅을 꿀는다)
모-리아 (주위에 사람잇는 것을 니저 버린 듯) 다 죽어 버렷다. 아모리＜167＞ 무서운 바다기로 인제는 내게 아모런 짓도 못할 테지-인제야 남풍이 불건 서풍이 불건 큰 파도가 동쪽에서 서쪽에서 마조 부다처서 하눌까지 올나 간들 나는 인제는 잠도 안자고 울거나 긔도를 드리거나 하지안해도 아모 걱정이 업겟지. 이제부터는 11月祭날 캄캄한 밤중에 聖水를 길너 가지 안어도 걱정이 업겟지. 파도가 심하고 온동리 여인들이 울고 부르지저도 나는 아모 걱정이 업겟지.(노-라에게) 노-라 聖水를 이리 다오. 아즉도 남어 잇슬 것이다.
노-라 (聖水를 갓다 준다)
모-리아 (마이켈의 옷을 파-트레의 발치에 놋코 聖水를 뿌린다) 파-트레 내가 너를 위하야 긔도를 드리지 아니한 것이 아니다. 캄캄한 밤에 내가 내 소리를 드를 수 업게 긔도를 하기는 하엿섯다. 그러나 오늘부터는 편안히 지내게 되엿다. 편히 지내도 조흘 때도 되엿지. 오늘부터는 안심하고-11月祭날 긴긴 밤도 한숨에 잘 수가 잇겟지. 썩은 생선에 곰팽이 쓰른 떡을 먹고 지내드라도.
모-리아 (十字를 것고 입 속으로 긔도를 한다)
카스린 (늘근 남자에게) 내일 일즉이 에-몬하고 둘이서 관을 지어 주십시요. 어머니가 사오신 새널이 잇스니 어머니는 꼭 마이켈의 시체를 차즐 줄 알엇담니다-맛침 새로 구은 떡도 잇스니 그거나 잡수어 가면 일을 좀 해주시오.
노인 (널을 바라보며) 못도 잇겟지.
카스린 업는데-못까지는 미처 생각을 못햇는걸.
다른 한사람 엇재 이번에는 못을 이즈섯슬가. 그러케 몃번이나 치르면서.
카스린 인제는 너무 늘거서 정신이 업서 지신 게지오.
모-리아(아조 천천히 이러서서 마이켈이 입엇든 옷을 시체녑헤 펴노코 남은 聖水를 뿌린다)
노-라 (카스린에게 가만히) 오늘은 웬일로 어머니 마음이 퍽 가라 안즈신 것 갓소. 마이켈 옵바가 죽엇다든 때에 어머니의 울음소리는 온동리에 다 들니드니 아마 마이켈 옵바가 더 중햇든가보.
카스린 (천천히 그러고 똑똑히) 늘근이란 무슨 일에든지 곳 실증이 나는 것이란다. 아후레 동안이나 울고 몸부림을 첫스니 근력인들 남으섯겟늬.
모-리아 (聖水업서진 컵을 床 우에 업허 노코 두손을 파-트레의 발 우에 올녀 놋는다) 이번이야말노 한데 모여 보는구나. 모든 일은 인제 끗이 낫다. 주여. 파-트레와 마이켈의 영혼을 편히 쉬게 해 주십시요. 세-마스도 밧지도 스테판도 숀도 모든 저의 아들의 혼을 잘 거더 주십시요.(머리를 숙이고) 제가 죽은 뒤로 이 세상에 사라 남어잇는 모든 사람의 죽은 뒤도 잘 거두어 주십시요.
모-리아 (말을 끄친다. 여인들 중에서 咽泣하는 소리들닌다. 다시 엿터진다).
모-리아 (다시 게속한다) 하누님의 은혜로 마이켈은 먼 북쪽 바다에서 장사를 지냇고 파-트레는 저 깨끗한 널노 관을 지어서 그 속에 넛고 깁흔 무덤에 장사를 지내게 되엿다. 이 이상에 무슨 거리낄 것 이스리-누구나 사람은 언제까지든지 살 수가 업는 것이다. 우리는 이것에 만족한다. 더 무슨 소망이 잇스리.
모-리아 무릅을 꿀는다. 막이 천천히 나려 온다.＜168＞
＜160-168＞