別乾坤 第18號
1929년 01월 01일
別의 別乾坤 (Various Oddities)
잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

Various Oddities

A Woman Who Eats Hair

In Kōen City, Miss Yokoyama is an odd woman who, strangely enough, has a habit of consuming various types of hair, having eaten more than half of her own. A couple of months ago, she ate cotton diapers (月子) and merino wool wrappers, which led to a surgical procedure at her home. To everyone's surprise, the mass of hair removed weighed 130 grams! One should be careful about having such a daughter-in-law, or else the hair of the entire family might be devoured!

A Horse with Neurasthenia

A man living outside Tokyo tied his horse to a telephone pole while he went to a tofu shop to load up on soybean pulp. Suddenly, the horse began hitting its head against the pole and died on the spot. The police investigation revealed that the horse was male and the cause of death was neurasthenia! Perhaps the horse was also overworked from too much research.

Who Will Report?

Have you ever seen such a madman? A wealthy man's son, lodging at the Hangzhou Railway Hotel in China, suddenly committed suicide by poison. In his suicide note, he wrote, "To my friends and acquaintances! I am embarking on this endeavor to explore the Land of Ultimate Bliss (極樂) and Heaven (天國), the abodes of the human soul, to ascertain their truth! I implore you not to hastily judge me as insane!" But who will report back his findings?

Dying of Laughter

To speak only of Japan is unpleasant, but there was a patient admitted to the Tohoku Imperial University Hospital with a peculiar and amusing ailment unlike any other in the world. Day and night, all he did was laugh in an odd illness. He didn't just laugh a little, but burst into uncontrollable laughter. He grew thinner every day, eventually losing his tongue (舌). No medicine or treatment was effective, and he died laughing, saying it was good. He had been laughing like this for eight years and died at the age of twenty-six. It seems that laughing is better than crying when you are about to die.

Husband Repulsion League Club

Recently, in Illinois, USA, a "Wives' Club" has been newly organized. "The existence of the husband, a strange animal, is the number one source of irritation for us in the world. Our club members must thoroughly repel this monster." This is the motto of this club. Membership is open to married women and women who will soon be married. As soon as the inaugural meeting was held, they created a "Wives' Holiday," leaving the husbands and children at home to watch the house, while the members held hands and enjoyed sightseeing and theatrical performances to their hearts' content. The husbands had to fetch water, cook, and take care of the crying children, and if they complained or nagged, it would be a big problem. The members would storm the house in a large group and make a fuss. So, the husbands are currently discussing countermeasures.

<53>

**Named Entities**

橫山某	Yokoyama
橫演市	Kōen City
東京市外	Tokyo
杭州鐵道호텔	Hangzhou Railway Hotel
中國	China
東北帝大附屬病院	Tohoku Imperial University Hospital
美國	America
이리노이洲	Illinois



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제18호
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	別의 別乾坤
기사형태	잡저

別의 別乾坤
머리털먹는색씨
橫演市橫山某라는어엽분색씨는이상하게도털(毛類)죵류를조화하야 自己의 머리털의 半以上을트더먹엇다는 괴상망측한 病者인데 두어달 前에는 다리지(月子)와메린스(毛織類)褓子를먹은 닭에 그집에서는 할수 업시 切開手術을하고 털뭉치를 어내서보니 놀나지마시요! 그털의무게가 一百三十 그람이나듸드람니다. 그런 며누리를어덧다가는 웬집안식구의 머리가 모도 묵사발이 될터이니 特히 注意!
馬도 神經衰弱
東京市外에 사는 某가 馬車를 을고어는 豆腐집에가서 비지를 실으랴고 電信柱에 말을 매여노앗드니 별안간 말이 電柱에다대가리를 부딋고 그 자리에서 絶命하엿다. 警察이 出張檢視한즉 말은수놈이고 原因은 神經衰弱이드라고! 그러면 그말도 무슨 硏究를 너무한 닭일가.
報告는 누가?
세상에 밋친놈밋친놈하야도 이런밋친놈도 보앗슬아? 中國杭州鐵道호텔에 投宿하야잇든 어는 裕富한 집 아들놈이 하로낫에 별안간 飮毒自殺을하얏다. 그 遺書에 曰『日常에 親交가 잇는벗들이여! 나는사람의 靈魂의 安住地라는 極樂과 天國을 實地에 探訪하야 그 眞否를 알기위하야 이에 此擧에 나아가노라! 君들은 망녕되히나를 發狂者라 速斷하지 말기를 바란다』햇다니 그 報告는누가하노!
죽으면 이런 病으로
日本이약이만하야 未安합니다만은 東北帝大附屬病院에 한 患者가 入院을 햇는데 이세상에 업는 참하고도 우수운 病 그저밤이나 낫이나 웃기만하는 珍奇한 病이래요 웃는데도 이만저만하게 웃는 것이 아니라 대고 웃는데 날마다 살이 말러서 나종에는 혀(舌)마지업서저 藥石의 效가업시그저좃타고 대면서죽엇담니다. 이러케 웃기를 八年이 나두고 우섯는데 二十六歲에 죽엇대요 이왕죽을터이면 우는것보다는 웃는 것이 좀 나흘 듯.
夫君排擊 同盟俱樂部
最近에 米國이리노이洲에서는 「마누라 俱樂部」가새로 組織이되엿는데――.『세상에서 우리들에게 第一성화를 밧치는 것은 남편이라는 奇怪한 動物의 存在이다. 우리 俱樂部員은 徹底하게 이 怪物을 排擊하지안으면 안된다』이것이 이 俱樂部의멋토-라나요 會員資格은 令監잇는마누라와 곳마누라가 될 女子라하고 發會式을 하자마자 『마누라 休暇日』을 맨드러가지고 영감과 어린아재는 집을 직히라고 남겨두고 會員一同이 손에 손을 잡고 遊山과 劇場求景을 실컷단인담니다. 령감패는 물깃고밥짓고 우는애를 보아주어야하는데 가다 혹 칭얼거리든지 잔소리를 하든지 하면은 큰일이나지요 會員들은 大擧하야 그집을 습격을하야 야단법석을 하고온 다나요 그래서 目下경을 치는 령감패에서는 이 對策을 協議中이라고.
＜53＞