잡지명: 別乾坤 第18號
발행일: 1929년 01월 01일
기사제목: 流行! 新年 새流行! 希望하는 流行·豫想하는 流行 (Fashion! New Year, New Fashion! Desired and Predicted Fashions)
기사형태: 설문 (Questionnaire)

Fashion! New Year, New Fashion! Desired and Predicted Fashions
Fashion Heading Towards Ursa Major

Li Ryang

Europe, America, Asia - the whole world is shaking. What's more, Korea is mixed in with the clouds, living a rootless life, "shake, shake."
I am writing this manuscript on the Kaesong-bound train. Shaking train, shaking body, and shaking thoughts - everything is shaking, without any backbone.
Someone spoke a great deal about the Korean spirit (朝鮮心), but now that Korean spirit has become a trendy product, another shaking thing, so their lives and minds are shaking somewhere else. The words "shaking" and "becoming fashionable" don't have the same meaning, but -
By the way, Mr. Ch'ŏngo!
You want me to write about fashion?
That's really inappropriate. You should ask the owner of a big department store, or a modern advertising agent singing a Chongno marching song will come up with an interesting and charming new idea. That is their personality and their successful life. But I am not a merchant, an advertising agent, a department store employee, or a news reporter or some street boy, so it is hard for me to speak the truth about fashion.
However, the state of fashion, whether it starts with some person or is followed by others, its motive is the eruption of a new desire from the dissatisfaction of the reality they hold. This is a great creation and a new impulse.
By the way, Mr. Ch'ŏngo! What has become fashionable in Korea, what is becoming fashionable now, and what do you want to become fashionable in the future? <100>
Anything is fine. It is fine for love symposiums to be fashionable, it is fine to organize gender-starved civilian groups, it is fine to just put up a big sign even if there are no products, and it is fine for so-called modern beauties (現代美) - bobbed-hair girls (斷髮娘) or bobbed-hair women (斷髮婦人) - to wander the streets day and night. It is fine for simple restaurants to be created instead of big restaurants, for brick buildings to be built because lumber is expensive, and for rubber shoes to become so popular that they are in every trash can. It is fine for anything to become fashionable. We do not have thoughts like wanting this fashion or not wanting that fashion. It is because we know the economic relations that are the basis of modern life, the disordered means of production, and the life styles and forms that follow the trends of thought. The life of the time is the thing of the time, so it shakes, becomes fashionable, and flutters - in this endless dance and nebula-like swirling, we will see a new fashion of the spirit, which will shout the greatness of labor to the left and head towards Ursa Major.

Again in a Middle Style

Li Sŭngman

=What I wish would happen=
These days, the new women (新女子) just cover themselves up with modern (모더-ㄴ) things, regardless of shape or color, and paste on and wear whatever is strange. They look like dough painted with colors. I cannot bear to see them wield and parade around things that are neither stylish nor tasteful. I wish they would dress plainly, with simple makeup, clothing, and hairstyles, so that we could see them as Korean new women (朝鮮의 新女子).
=What seems likely to happen=
Korean women have been wearing shoes because the season is right, but since shoes are originally Western, they should follow the Western style. However, they are making heels so high that they are almost a span (뼘) long, and it looks awkward to walk around in them, like going down a steep hill. But now they are used to it and even run, so I think the heels will gradually get shorter, and next year they will probably be very short. And the skirts of the new women (新女子) who lift one leg when getting on the streetcar, showing their behinds and knees, will get longer.
=What I wish would happen again=
It's cold, so they wear overcoats and mufflers, but it seems like it's hard to get by without a muffler, so almost all the women wear them. What's even worse is the muffler of the new women (新女子). The skirts are short, and the mufflers come down to their shins <101>, which is not only unpleasant to look at, but if they are not dirtier because they are long, why do they only make them small and long even if it costs more? Will they only stop when they are long enough to drag on the ground? I wish they would shrink back to this length.
Also, I wish they would change the way the so-called new literature youths (新文學靑年) wear their hats, with the tops folded round, back to the middle style (中折式).

Tea Drinking and Handshakes

Li T'aejun

=Fashion that seems likely to happen=
Though thatched-roof houses may still be hidden behind signs, Seoul is still in the times, and is trying to have a fin-de-siècle urban landscape. However, even the highest people, those so-called modern girls (모껄) or modern boys (모뽀이), dragging their beads and eating soup with opera boxes in shabby clothes, feel as awkward as watching a hastily translated play.
Seeing this, I think that even in Chongno, where only insensitive merchants live, tea room alleys will soon appear, and that tea-drinking will become fashionable not only among blatant moderns (모더-ㄴ) but also generally.
=Fashion I wish would happen=
Of course, there are some new women (新女性) who readily offer a handshake without waiting for it to become fashionable, showing as much courtesy as their affection is deep, but it is still not generalized, and it is a fact that such women are especially regarded as tomboys (말괄냥이視).
When meeting sisters or female friends after a long time, it is too much to say "Are you well? So-and-so, are you well?" It is stuffy and too blunt, and in cases where you cannot take off your hat and bow, a handshake would be good. I think I am not the only one who feels awkward when unable to greet a female friend after a long time with as much affection as I feel. I wish a handshake greeting between men and women would become very popular, generalized, and commonplace.

Strange Male Students and Good Children's Songs

Li Sŏgu

-Fashion I wish would happen-
There is not enough friendly spirit among our young people (靑年間). It is a pity that there is no opportunity to become close, no matter how much they want to be friends. Therefore, I wish there was a social institution where they could meet in a friendly spirit (親友的 氣分), without setting any rules or getting rid of any formalities. <102>
=Fashion that seems likely to happen=
These days, middle school students are imitating the so-called modern boys (모더-ㄴ뽀이) and modern girls (모더-ㄴ껄) who dress strangely and oddly, and it seems that in the new year, the middle school students' dressing up will become even more severe. For example, besides the way they cut their hair, wear their hats, or have pants that are wide enough for three or four people's necks, they seem likely to dress even more strangely.
=What I wish would happen again=
These days, there are so many children going to school that they only learn kissing at school, and the sounds of children's songs (童謠) that they used to hear without knowing the meaning have disappeared. When I heard the sound of a flute on the streets, like "Eouwara tteouwara...", I felt a lonely feeling and an unknown piercing in my heart even without knowing the meaning, but now that I can't hear that sound, people are even more lonely. Someone recently published a book of Korean traditional children's songs (됴선 고유의 動搖), but I wish they would write melodies for it again and have the children sing it.

Tent Life and Military-Style Gymnastics

Hyŏn Tongwan

=What I wish would happen=
More than other fashions, if I were to talk about exercise, I would want baseball to disappear because of the economic situation of our Koreans. It is good for middle schools with difficult finances to have students do baseball, but it costs too much economically, so I wish they would choose something that costs less and allows for sufficient exercise for the whole group, such as soccer, volleyball, or basketball.
=What seems likely to happen=
Tent life has already become a reality in foreign countries, but in Korea, it is still only thought of as a hobby. Of course, you can't do it in the winter because of the weather, but I think it would be very good in the summer. Whether you look at it economically, for health, hygiene, or as a hobby, I am sure it will be good. And it would be great news for people being chased by the housing shortage. In many ways, I believe that tent life will become a reality rather than a trend in Korea.
-What I wish would happen again-
Because of cultural education and whatnot, even gymnastics that used to be taught in a military style are now done in a cultural style(?). But I wish gymnastics would be taught in a military style as before. When we were in school, the students' physiques were really great, but if you look at the physiques of today's students, they look just like the sons of Saengwon (生員) (a civil service licentiate in the Chosŏn Dynasty). These days, gymnastics is like a time for play! I wish they would make strong and upright physiques again through the strict, military-style gymnastics of the past. <103>

Even Holidays Should Be Korean Holidays

Kim Tongjin

=What I wish would happen=
We do not have a social institution or any general entertainment institution - like a music club - so when young people have something to discuss or consult, they have no other place to go but a restaurant. I think it is a big problem for our weak economy because there is no other place to go than a restaurant in situations where you have to maintain a certain amount of respect. There are sometimes clubs, but they are only gatherings of special groups of people and are not general, so they are useless. I wish there was a high-minded institution where anyone could play and talk and cultivate gentlemanly character.
-What seems likely to happen-
In the past, even if a person of status had an affair with a lowly woman, they could not announce it to the world and marry her formally. If such a thing happened, it was considered a strange event. Of course, times have changed, so people might say that's how it is, but perhaps because they are following the example of Westerners, they are formally marrying women such as kisaeng (妓生) or actresses - not that they are lowly - and even making vows to heaven under the auspices of a church pastor. I have seen an example of this with a friend of mine recently. In the future, such marriages will become more popular, and the Jesus church will become a wedding hall.
=What I wish would happen again=
These days, the Korean kisaeng (妓生) sing 'ddan-ddi ddan-ddara' (딴띄 딴따라) and wriggle around doing Western dances (西洋춤) like orok kobushi in order to put on a show and make a good living. Of course, that is what the so-called new youth (新靑年) (modern boy (모더-ㄴ 뽀이)) demand, so they are doing that, but Korean kisaeng (긔생) these days also enjoy modern style (모던式) on their own accord. If it's a Korean kisaeng (긔생), it should have a Korean taste. It's neither a Japanese kisaeng (긔생) nor a Western kisaeng (긔생). I don't know what the identity is, and it's ridiculous to see them dancing Western dance (?) with cotton socks on, shaking their hairpin-pinned heads, and singing "Gurai Yomichi" (구라이 요미찌) (a popular Japanese song at the time). If they did it properly, it would be worth watching for a moment, but it immediately spoils the mood. We have songs and dances that we can be proud of in the world, so why do they have to like foreign things - and not even new foreign things? From the new year, I wish Korean kisaeng (긔생) with pure Korean taste would return. Also - I wish traditional games (競技) that have been around for holidays - ssirŭm (씨름), tug-of-war, swing, etc. - would properly represent Korean holidays. <104>

Everything Should Be Korean

Ryu Hyŏngi

=What I wish would happen=
In both spirit and matter, we should study Korean things and love Korean things, so that the daily life in all aspects would be of the unique Korean spirit. First of all, when you see people who go to England, France, or other foreign countries to study literature, philosophy, or other fields of knowledge, they must read books in that country's language or they will lose face. When you see people who have been to Japan, they reject Korean writing or Korean things as being childish and insignificant, and they even worship foreigners like ghosts. Of course, if you are studying the culture of that country professionally, you need to read in that country's language, but recently, it is not like that. They indiscriminately like foreign things and do not even look back at Korea's unique literature or history. I see many addicts of foreign culture. But we must not lose our Korean spirit and study our writings and history so that we can show off and be proud to foreigners as much as we have studied ourselves. And in terms of material things, there is no spirit of loving Korean things. It is a bit embarrassing for me to wear Western clothes (洋服) and say this, but there is a tendency to like Western clothes (洋服) indiscriminately and to think that they will do whatever it takes to fit their situation, and as for women, even though they can wear good Korean clothes (됴선 것), they think that they can only look good and act well with expensive foreign fabrics. This tendency seems to have increased a lot recently. Like this, in both spiritual life and material life, I hope that we will study Korean things and love Korean things so that we can work hard to save ourselves from the increasingly dire situation.
=What seems likely=
Because they have a lot of money and their stomachs are full, women in America, where they want to do something different from what others are doing, have passed the era of bobbing their hair (斷髮), and in China, the government does not say that bobbing hair (斷髮) is such a good thing. It may be necessary in some ways, but in any case, it is not only boring in many ways, but if you argue for gender equality and make your hairstyle the same as a man's, that does not make you equal! I am not saying this from the thought of male supremacy, but aren't men and women different and shouldn't they be different? And if more than half of a woman's life is beauty, and the hair will be the mainstay of that beauty <105>, I feel like I am not seeing something feminine when I see a woman with her hair cut. It has become an anti-bobbed hair (斷髮) argument, but this bobbed hair (斷髮), which cannot be praised, will become popular in Korea in the new year, especially on the long hair of Korean women that droops and does not suit them! I wish it wouldn't happen... ...
=What I wish would happen again=
At the time, the enthusiasm and sincerity were so great that female students threw away their pointy shoes and wore hemp shoes (집신), threw away their Western-style skirts (양속치마) and wore cotton skirts (수목치마). The Korean Products Promotion Society (됴선물산장려) was sincere and strong, but these days, you can't even hear about it, and they have not only abandoned hemp shoes (집신) again but are worried that they can't wear silk shoes. Like I said in various ways, it seems that the idea of loving Korea and loving our things has completely disappeared. I hope that in the new year, we will implement the Korean Products Promotion again so that we can love Korea as much as possible and not forget the Korean spirit. <126>

**Named Entities**

李亮	Li Ryang
靑吾	Ch'ŏngo
李承萬	Li Sŭngman
李泰俊	Li T'aejun
李瑞求	Li Sŏgu
玄東完	Hyŏn Tongwan
金東進	Kim Tongjin
柳瀅基	Ryu Hyŏngi
開城	Kaesŏng
朝鮮	Chosŏn
鐘路	Chongno



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제18호
발행일	1929년 01월 01일
기사제목	流行! 新年 새流行! 希望하는 流行·豫想하는 流行
기사형태	설문

流行! 新年 새流行! 希望하는 流行·豫想하는 流行
大熊星으로 가는 流行

李亮

유롭, 亞美利加, 亞細亞-全世界는 흔들리고 잇소. 더욱 朝鮮은 그름에 끼워서 『흔들흔들』뿌리가 업는 生活이요.
나는 只今 이 原稿를 開城行 列車에서 쓰오. 흔들리는 汽車, 흔들리는 몸, 또 흔들거리는 생각-모든 것이 흔들흔들 뼈가 업구려.
누구 한분은 퍽도 朝鮮心을 말슴하더니 지금은 그 朝鮮心도 한 流行인 商品이 되고 또 흔들거리는 물건이 되야 그 生活과 그 마음이 딴거리에서 흔들거리고 잇다하오. 흔들거린다는 말고, 流行된다는 말이 한가지 의유가 아니지마는-
그런데 靑吾兄!
流行에 대한 이약이를 쓰라고요?
원 當치 안으신 말슴이요. 이것은 오히려 큰 떼파-트 主人의게 무르시던지 그렂치 안으시면 종로행진곡을 부르고 잇는 모더-ㄴ -廣告業者가 滋味잇고도 魅力잇는 新案을 提起할 것임니다. 그것은 그사람들의게 한 個性이요. 또 得意한 生活임니다. 그런데 나는 商人도 아니요. 廣告業者도 아니요. 百貨店店員도 아니요. 또 新聞記者나 무슨 스트리트 뽀이가 안인이상, 참말 流行性의 眞實을 말슴하기에 거북합니다.
그러나 流行이라는 그 世態가 엇던 사람의 시작으로 또 엇던 사람들의 追隨를 바더오던지 其 動機와 動機만은 다 자기가 가지고 잇는 現實不滿에서 새로운 慾求의 發作이니, 이것은 훌융한 創作이요. 또 新生의 衝動이외다.
그런데 靑吾兄! 무엇이 朝鮮에서 流行되엿느냐고 只今 流行되느냐고<100> 또 將來 엇던 것이 流行되엿스면 좃켓느냐고요-.
무엇이던지 좃슴니다. 戀愛座談會가 流行되여도 좃코 性에 주린 男女便衣隊를 組織하여도 좃코, 商品은 업서도 看板만 크게 달어노아도 좃코, 또 소위 現代美라는 斷髮娘이나 斷髮婦人이 밤낫 길거리에서 헤고 단이엳 좃슴니다. 큰 料理집 代身에 簡易食堂이 생기고 材木이 高價가 되야 煉瓦建物이 생기고 고무신은 유행되다 못해 쓰레기통마다,  업는 곳이 업슴니다. 무엇이던지 流行됨대로 流行되는 것이 좃슴니다. 우리는 이 流行이 납부고 저 流行이 좃코 또 엇던 流行을 바라고 -이러한 생각을 아니 가지게 됨니다. 그것은 現代生活의 基礎인 經濟關係와 또 無秩序한 生産手段과 其 思潮와 傾向에 따르는 其 生活形態와 形式을 잘 아는 까닭이외다. 其 時代의 生活은 其 時代의 사물이니까 흔들리우고 유행되고, 까불고-이러케 끗업는 탈춤속과 星雲갓치 도라가는 過卷 가운데서 새로운 精神의 流行을 볼것이니 그것은 좌편으로 左便으로 勞動力의 偉大를 부르며 大熊星을 갈 것임니다.

다시 中折式으로

李承萬

=되엿스면=
모더-ㄴ式이면 모양도 色彩도 相關업시 덥허놋코 이상하기만 하면 주서바르고 주서입는 것이 요사이 新女子이다. 밀가루반죽에다 色彩칠한 것 갓쳐 그게 무슨 모양인지 어울이지도 안코 맛지도 안은 것을 모더-ㄴ이라고 휘두르고 단이는 꼴은 볼 수가 없다. 化粧이나 衣服빗이나 모양이나 수수하게 차려서 어되까지 됴선의 新女子라고 볼 수 잇게 하엿스면 좃켓다.
=될 듯 한 것=
됴선 마른 신만 신고 지낼 색시들이 時절이 조와서 구두를 신게 되엿는대, 구두는 원래가 西洋사람의 것이니ㅅ가 그 번을 따라야 하겟스나 짝없이 굽을 놉히 맨드러 뼘가옷이나 되는 것을 신고 단이여 보기에도 퍽 거북해 보이고 똑 언덕빗탈길을 나려가는 것 갓드니 요새는 퍽 익숙해서 다름질도 하게 되니ㅅ가 인제는 굽이 차차 야터저서 새해에는 아마 퍽 얏허질 것 갓고 電車에 탈때한다리를 들면 엉덩이까지 보이고 무릅까지 내여 놋튼 新女子의 스카-트가 좀 기러질 것 갓슴니다.
=다시 되엿스면=
치우니ㅅ가 外套입고 목도리를 두루고 단이는 것이지만 목도리를 걸지 안코는 행세하기 어려웁다는 듯이 일제하게도 요새 女子들은 안이걸고 단이는 이가 업는 중 좀 심한 것은 新女子의 목도리이다. 치마는 짧고 목도리는 신등까지 나려오니<101> 보기도 실치만 길다고 더 더러운 것이 아닌 바에야 실갑 더 드리고 보기실케 작고 기러만 가니 질질 땅에다 끄을리도록 길어저야만 고만 둘야른지 이만콤 길엇슬 때 다시 오구라젓스면.
또 新文學靑年이라고 휘젓고 단이는 이의 帽子꼭지를 동굴게 접어쓰고 다니는 것을 다시 中折式으로 햇스면-.

喫茶와 握手

李泰俊

=될 듯한 流行=
아즉도 초가집웅은 看板뒤에 숨어잇슬지언정 서울에도 時代는 時代라 제법 世紀末의 都市風景을 갓초려하는 것 갓다. 그러나 至尊이 소위 모껄이니 모뽀이니 하는 분들로 구쓰를 끄르고 湯飯에 오폐라빡쓰를 시루꼬 집테불갓흔데 버서 놋는 것은 암만하여도 初忌飜譯劇을 구경하는 것과 갓치 어색한 감이 업지 안은 것이다.
이를 보아 아모리 無神經한 商人들만 사는 鐘路라 하드라도 不遠하야 喫茶店 골목이 생길 것과 판백이 모더-ㄴ들은 勿論이려니와 一般的으로도 喫茶道樂이 流行되리라고 생각한다.
=되엿스면 하는 流行=
勿論 유행을 기다리지 안코도 선선히 손을 내여 밀어 情分이 깁흔 그만큼 滿足한 예를 보히는 新女性이 아조 업슬 것은 아니나 아직도 一般化되지 안을분더러 이러한 女性을 特히 말괄냥이視하는 것이 事實이다.
오래간만에 맛난 누이들에게 혹은 그러한 女子친구들에게 너 잘잇섯니 아무개 잘잇섯소 하기에는 情에 막히며 너무나 무뚝뚝한 일이고, 그렂타고 帽子를 벗고 허리를 굽힐 수도 업는 경우에는 말인사와 함끠 握手가 조흘 것 갓다. 더욱 오래간만에 맛난 女子親구에게 情分대로 인사하지 못하는 딱한 경우는 나뿐이 아니리라 생각한다. 어서 男女間에 握手禮가 大流行을 지어 一般化하고 平凡視되엿스면 한다.

괴상한 남학생과 조흔 동요

李瑞求

-되엿스면 하는 流行-
우리 靑年間에는 너모도 우의적 기분이 업다. 아모리 서로 친하고 십허도 친해질 機會가 업는 것이 유감이다. 그럼으로 무슨 規則을 定한다든지 무슨 形式을 버서나서 그저 서로서로 親友的 氣分으로<102> 會合할 만한 社交機關이 잇섯스면 한다.
=될 듯한 流行=
所謂 모더-ㄴ뽀이니 모더-ㄴ껄이니 하야 괴상야릇하게 맵시를 타리고 단이는 것을 요새 中學生들이 이번을 뜨나 새해에는 中學生들의 모양내는 것이 더욱 심아여 질 듯하다. 가령 머리를 깍는 식이라든지 모자를 쓰는 식이라든지 바지통이 서너사람 목이나 넓다든지 하는 것 이외에 더욱 이상야릇하게 모양을 낼 듯하다.
=다시 되엿스면=
요새 어린이들은 學校단이는 이가 만허저서 學校에 가서 하도 뽑뽀만 배워서 그러한지 예전에 듯든 意味도 모를 童謠소리가 업서젓다. 거리거리에서 피리소리에 맛추어 가령「어우워라 떠우워라...」하는 소리를 들을때에 意味도 모를 童謠소리가 업서젓다. 거리거리에서 피리소리에 맛추어 가령 「어우워라 떠우워라...」하는 소리를 들을때에 意味모르는 中에 쓸쓸한 긔분이 생기고 알수업는 마음에 찌름을 感하드니 그 소리를 들을 수 업스니 人가 더욱 쓸쓸하다. 요전에 누가 됴선 고유의 動搖를 冊매여 내엇스나 다시 거긔다 곡됴를 지어서 어린이 들이 부르게 햇스면 한다.

天幕 生活과 軍隊式 體操

玄東完

=되엿스면=
나야 다른 流行보다도 운동에 대해서 말하면 우리 됴선 사람의 경제로 보아서 野球를 업새엿스면 한다. 經費도 困難한 中學校에서 野球를 學生에게 식히는 것은 운동이야 좃타고 하지만 경제상 너모도 비용이 만히드니 蹴球나, 排球나 籠球가치 비용을 적게 드리고 넉넉히 全體의 운동을 할 수 잇는 것을 택하얏스면 한다.
=될 듯한 것=
外國에서는 발서부터 天幕生活이 實際化하엿지만 됴선에는 아즉 趣味의 하나로 밧게 생각하지 안는다 겨울에야 氣후 관게로 물론 할 수 업지만 녀름 한철이야 대단히 좃타고 생각한다. 경제상으로 보든지 건강으로 보든지 위생으로 보든지 또 취미로 보든지 꼭 조훌 줄로 안다. 그러고 住宅難으로 쫏기는 사람에게 큰 福音이겟다. 여러 가지 의미로 보아서 됴선에는 天幕 生活이 流行이라느니 보다도 實際化될 것을 밋는다.
-다시 되엿스면-
文化敎育이니 무어니하여서 軍隊式으로 가르키든 體操까지 文化式(?)으로 되엿다. 그러나 體操만은 예전대로 軍隊式으로 가르키여 주엇스면 한다. 우리가 學校단일때의 學生의 體格은 참 훌융하엿든것이나 요새 학생의 體格을 보면, 꼭 生員님의 子弟갓다. 요새 體操가 톄조인가 한작난 時間갓지! 體操만은 예전대로 軍隊式으로 嚴하고 튼튼하고 고든 體格을 만드러주엇스면 한다.<103>

名節도 朝鮮 名節

金東進

=되엿스면=
우리에게는 社交機關이라든가 무슨 一般的으로 娛樂機關-?악부 갓흔것-이엄승으로 靑年끼리 交際나 相談할 일이 잇다고 하면 다른 데 갈곳이 업슴으로 반듯이 料理집으로 가게 된다. 웬만큼 體面을 차려야 할 境遇에는 꼭 料理집 밧게는 갈 곳이 업스니 貧弱한 우리의 경제상에 큰 문뎨이라고 생각한다. 혹죵의 俱樂部가 잇스나 그것은 特殊한 部分의 사람들만 모히는 것이고 一般的이 못되니 아모 소용도 업는 것이고 누구든지 놀 수 잇고 이 약이 할 수 잇고 紳士的 氣品을 길을 만한 最善意의 그러한 機關이 잇섯스면 한다.
-될 듯한 것-
예전에야 地位잇는 사람이 踐한 女子와 情을 通하고 지내기는 하여도 正正堂堂하게 世上에 公布하고 正式으로 結婚을 할 수가 업섯스며 만약 그러한 일이 잇스면 怪變으로 생각을 하엿스마 요새와서는 물론 時代가 밧귀엿스니 人가 그러하다고 하겟지만 西洋사람의 본을 떠서 그러한지 妓生이나 女俳優-그러케 踐하다는 것은 안니나-와 갓흔 女子와 正式으로 더구나 敎會牧師의 主體밋헤서 하늘에 맹서를 하게 되엿다. 近日 나의 친구의 例를 보아도 그러하다. 압흐로는 더욱 이러한 結婚이 流行되며 예수 敎會堂이 한 結婚式場이 되고 말 듯하다.
=다시 되엿스면=
딴띄 딴따라을 불으고 오록 고부시 西洋춤이니 하며 벌쭉어리고 단여야만 행세를 하고 잘 불려 먹는다는 것이 요새 됴선 妓生네들이다. 그야 물론 요새 됴선 妓生네 들이다. 그야 물론 요새 일으는 바 新靑年(모더-ㄴ 뽀이)들이 要求하는 것이 그것이닛가 그럿케쇼지만 스스로나아가서 모던式을 즐기는 것이 또한 요새의 됴선 기생이다. 됴선 긔생이면  됴선 맛이 잇서야지 日本 기생도 아니고 西洋기생도 아니고 엇든 것이 正體인지 알 수가 업스며 솜보선을 신은 꼴에 西洋춤(?)을 춘다고 푹적대이고 비녀꼬진 대가리를 휘저흐며 「구라이 요미찌」를 부르고 안젓는 꼴이야-그나마 제대로나 되엿스면 잠간 즛고 볼맛이 잇지만-당장에 氣分이 상하고 만다. 우리에게도 世界에 자랑할 만한 歌舞가 잇는데 왜 하필 외국것이 조탄-외국것이라도 새것이 아니다-새해부터는 純全한 됴선 맛이 잇는 됴선 기생이 다시 되엿스면 한다. 또 하나-名節노리에도 在來로 잇서오든 競技-씨름, 줄다리기, 鞦韆 等-갓흔 것으로 됴선의 名節을 잘 말하게 되엿스면 한다.<104>

모도가 朝鮮것

柳瀅基

=되엿스면=
우리는 精神에 잇서서나 物質에 잇서서 됴선 것을 硏究하고 됴선것을 사랑하여 各方面의 日常生活이 됴선의 固有한 精神 그것이 되엿스면 좃켓슴니다. 첫재로 영국이나 佛國이나 外國에 가서 文學 혹은 哲學 其他 各方面의 智識을 硏究하고 또 공부하고 온 사람을 보면 반드시 그나라 말로 된 冊을 닑지 안으면 면목이 아니슨다. 日本이나 갓다 온 사람을 보면 日本文冊이라야지 됴선글이나 됴선 것은 幼稚하고 하잘 것이 업다고 덥허놋코 排斥을 하며 심지어 그 外國사람을 귀신과 갓치 슝상하게 되는 것을 볼 수가 잇슴니다. 물론 그 나라의 문물을 전문으로 硏究하게 되면 그나라의 글이 안이면 안되겟스나 近來에 와서보면은 그런것도 아니고 外國것은 덥허 놋코 좃타고 하야 됴선의 고유한 文學이나 歷史는 돌아다 보지도 아는 一種 외국문물의 中毒者들을 만히 보겟슴니다. 그러나 우리는 어듸까지 됴선사람이라는 그 精神을 일치말고 우리의 글과 우리의 歷史가튼 것도 좀 硏究하야 自己가 硏究하니만침 外國사람에게 내보히고 자랑을 하게 되엿스면 좃켓슴니다. 그리고 物質에 잇서서도 됴선 것을 사랑하는 정신이 업슴니다. 나브터 洋服을 닙고 이런 말을 하는 것은 좀 未安한 말이지만은 洋服이 좃타고 덥허놋코 자긔형세에 붓처도 하겟다는 생각과 女子로 말하드라도, 됴선 것으로 넉넉히 조흔 것을 입을 수가 잇는데 갑빗싼 外國옷감이라야 모양을 내일 수가 잇고 행세하기에도 좃타고 하는 傾向이 요새와서 뿍적 느른 것 갓슴니다. 이와갓치 精神生活에 잇서서나 物質生活에 잇서서나 됴선 것을 좀 연구하고 됴선 것을 사랑하여서 더욱 더욱 위경에 빠지는 구차한 우리를 우리가 힘써 다시 구할 수 잇게되기를 바람니다.
=될 듯 한=
돈이 만흐닛가 배가 불러서 남이 안이하는 것을 좀 별나게 해 보겟다는 米國에서는 여자가 斷髮하는 것이 流行時代는 지낫스며 中國에서는 政府에서 斷髮이 그러케 조흔 것이라고는 안이합니다. 或 어느 點으로 보아서 必要할른지도 모르나 하여간 여러 가지로 보아서 자미업슬뿐아니라 男女平等을 主張하야 머리모양브터 男子와 갓치한다고 그것으로 평등이 되는 것은 아니겟지요! 내가 하는 말이 男尊女卑라는 생각으로브터 하는 말이 아니라 男子와 女子는 區別이 잇스며 달러야 할 것이 아님닛가 그러고 女子의 半以上의 生命이라면 美가 될 것이고 그美에는<105> 머리가 주장될 것인데 그 머리를 깍근 여자를 볼때에는 엇던지 女性에 대한 것 갓지 안이한 생각이 듭니다. 斷髮反對論이 되고 말엇스나 층찬할 수 없ㄴㄴ 이 斷髮이 더군다나 축축 느러지는 됴선 女子의 머리에는 어울리지도 안는 이 斷髮이 새해에는 우리 됴선에도 流行할 것임니다! 되지 안엇으면 좃켓지만... ...
=다시 되엿스면=
한참 당년에는 엇전 열성과 성심이 그리 잇섯든지 女學生들도 코뽀쪽한 구두를 버서 버리고 집신을 신고, 양속치마를 버서 던지고 수목치마들 입고 단이든 됴선물산장려가 정성스럽고 힘잇게 되드니, 요지막에는 말도 들어 볼 수가 업시 될뿐더러 집신을 다시 버서 바리고 비단구두를 못신어서 걱정을 하게 되엿스니 우에 여러 가지 말한 것과가티 됴선을 사랑하고 우리의 것을 사랑한다는 사상이 아조 업서진 것 갓슴니다. 새해에는 다시 물산장려을 실행하야서야 어대까지든지 됴선을 사랑하고 됴선의 혼을 닛지 말게 되엿스면 좃켓슴니다.<126>
<100-105, 126>