잡지명	別乾坤 第9號
발행일	1927년 10월 01일
기사제목	變裝出動 臨時OO되여본記, 새벽에도 妓生 모시고 自動車運轉助手가 되야 (A Disguised Outing: A Record of Temporarily Being OO, Even Taking Gisaengs in the Early Morning as an Automobile Driver's Assistant)
필자	C 기자
기사형태	소식 (News)

"Onegaishimasu! (オ願ヒシマス)"
"Ha-ha, doko made desu ka? (ハ-ハ-何處マデデスカ?)"
"Hōrai-chō made... ... (蓬萊町マデ)"
"Ha-ha, yoroshū gozaimasu! (ハ-ハ-好ロシゥ御座イマス)"

The time was 10:52 PM on September 23rd.
The place was K-dong K Automobile Department.
The car was an American-made Bikk style No. 233.
The passengers were a drunken Japanese man who looked like a company employee, around 40 years old, and a woman who seemed to be his wife, around 35 years old, totaling two people.
The driver was Mr. An, one of the two drivers from the K Automobile Department.
The assistant was young and good-looking (although I call myself) a reporter.

The car is now speeding towards Hōrai-chō (蓬萊町). The drunken Japanese couple in the car are babbling incoherently, but they seem to be saying that they were invited to a friend's house and received very kind hospitality.
The car unknowingly rounded Namdaemun (南大門) to the left, then turned right, passed over Hōrai Bridge (蓬萊橋), and went left again for a while before stopping near the Chosŏn Printing House (朝鮮印刷所). As an assistant should, I quickly jumped out of the driver's seat, took off my hat, and politely opened the door for the passengers to get out. The drunken man and woman staggered out of the car.
"Ikura... (幾何)"
"E, san-en itadakimasu! (エ 三圓戴キマス)"
I took the three yen they readily handed over and turned the car around to return to K-dong. On the way, the driver, Mr. An, and I started talking.
"How can you be such a good assistant? You're better than someone who's been doing it for years!"
"Oh, come on! How can a sudden, clueless, lightning-strike assistant do well? You're just teasing me..."
"No, really, you're doing better than someone who's been an assistant for years." <24>
(A moment of silence...)
"By the way, do you usually charge three yen no matter where you go in the city?"
"Yes, that's right. Even now, it's a cheap price. Until last year, we charged four yen."
"It seems that taxis (one-yen uniform fare cars) charge one yen no matter where you go in the city. Do passengers readily pay three yen without saying anything?"
"Why wouldn't they say anything? As you saw just now, this time the passengers were Japanese, so they readily gave three yen without saying a word, but if it were a Korean customer (it's a bit harsh to say, but it's the truth), they would often (it's an extreme statement) want to pay less for this high-class chartered car than the taxi fare. That's why we lowered the four yen to three yen." (The following 50 lines have been deleted - original text)
The car unknowingly arrived at the K Automobile Department. The round trip took exactly 15 minutes - three yen in 15 minutes - anyway, it's a great business.

This was only two days after receiving mobilization orders from the editor and coming to the K-dong K Automobile Department to start working as a driver's assistant every evening (the first day, from 8:30 PM to 12 AM, I was just aimlessly playing the role of a non-urgent customer of the Automobile Department). Finally, for the first time, I got a customer and borrowed assistant K's jacket and went all the way to Hōrai-chō (蓬萊町). The clock read exactly 11:13!
Before the driver and I could even get out of the car, the owner, Mr. Lee, and assistant K rushed out.
"We have to go again. This time it's to Hwagaesa (華溪寺) outside Tongsomun (東小門). Park the car in front of the main street in that upper alley and wait." Apparently, they had been asked in advance while we were gone to Hōrai-chō (蓬萊町).
I thought to myself, "Great, now we've caught a big one." Gladly, I went with the driver, Mr. An, to the main street in the upper alley that the owner had pointed out and parked the car.
Sure enough, after a while, a man who looked to be about 40 years old, wearing a ramie durumagi (두루마기) and a fedora, came staggering out of the Chinese restaurant Changsŏwŏn (暢叙園) in that alley, completely drunk. He sat down in the car and said in a slurred voice, "Hey driver, how much to Hwagaesa (華溪寺)?"
"Yes, please give me eight yen."
"What! Eight yen? Why so expensive... I always went for six yen... Why are you like this..."
"No, sir. It's eight yen."
"No. I know everything... I'm a regular who always goes for six yen... You can't charge more... Hey... hey driver!"
Then, three men in their 30s, also wearing fedoras and ramie durumagi (두루마기) and completely drunk, and two gisaeng (妓生) ladies who looked to be well over 20, whose neatly combed hair was a bit disheveled and whose clothes were wrinkled from being harassed by the men, came out. One of the gisaeng (妓生) ladies, wearing a gray autumn coat, stubbornly refused to go, but one of the young men forcibly grabbed her wrist and dragged her into the car.
For a while, the fare was argued over, but eventually, it seems the automobile department compromised on seven yen.
For a short time, I was taking on a slightly different job, whether I was forced to do it or wanted to do it, so I should have just been faithful to that role. But because my main job is a reporter, I was already greatly excited in my mind about getting good story material as soon as I followed them. I quickly put water in the radiator (放熱器) with assistant K and even added gasoline. Unexpectedly, there were so many passengers that a passenger had taken assistant's seat, so I couldn't follow them. The car carrying them drove off towards Hwagaesa (華溪寺) outside Tongsomun (東小門), driven by Mr. An.

Late-night Hwagaesa (華溪寺)!
In the dense pine forest, with the serene Buddhist temple to the side, a scene of exclusive pleasure would have unfolded for those intoxicated with gisaeng (妓生) and alcohol (酒).

On the third day, the 24th! Again, there were no customers, so I just chatted aimlessly with drivers An and Lee and returned home bored. The day after that was Sunday, so I thought there would be more customers and it would be busier than usual. At the earnest request of the two drivers, who wanted to get some fresh air, I decided to go to the K Automobile Department earlier than usual (the 4th day), around 2 PM, even though I usually went to work around 8 PM.

2:27 PM!
The phone rings! Ring! Ring!
The owner, Mr. Lee, picks up the receiver.
"Yes, yes, that's right... Hwagaesa (華溪寺)... Yes, we can go... Where should we park the car... Yes, in front of Yumeigwan (優美館)... By the way, how about the fare... Yes, they'll give it to the driver... Yes, I understand... Then I'll send it right away."
Driver An, who was already prepared!
"Where to?"
"To lawyer Kim OO's house in Kwanchŏl-tong (貫鐵洞). To Hwagaesa (華溪寺)... Go quickly."
"Yes, I'll be back. Is there enough gas (揮發油) and water?"
"Yes, there's plenty. I filled it all up this morning..."
"Mr. Lee, why don't you go too? Even if you get chased back again..."
"Yes, of course, I'll go."
I hurriedly borrowed K's jacket again and drove with Mr. An to lawyer Kim 00's house in Kwanchŏl-tong (貫鐵洞).
I parked the car near Yumeigwan (優美館) beyond Tŏkhŭng Bookstore (德興書林), and I rushed out to send a message of arrival (來車) to Kim's house <26> when I ran into the lawyer and his party.
There were a total of six people in the group!
Among them was a beautiful gisaeng (妓生) lady, and there were also others who seemed to be lawyers and five friends of Mr. Kim. Some wore gray serge suits and gold-rimmed glasses, and one even had a hunting rifle slung over his shoulder. It is said that these people often go for walks in the suburbs with gisaeng (妓生) and hunting rifles on leisurely Sundays.
I thought, "Surely this time..." and followed them, but in the end, after all the passengers were seated, there was no room. I couldn't go again! Driver An looked very sorry, but I said goodbye to him with a smile and walked back to the K Automobile Department alone, feeling helpless.
"Hwagaesa (華溪寺) and I have no fate. It was like that on the second day, and it's like that today... If you're going to Hwagaesa (華溪寺), there must always be six people! There's no law that says there must be exactly six people to go! Maybe it's because they've been riding as regulars for a long time and have experience, or maybe it's because I was born with a fate to never go to Hwagaesa (華溪寺), but anyway, it's a strange thing."

2:35 PM!
The entire family of Mr. Pang 00, a member of the Kyŏngsŏng Municipal Council (京城府協議員), are taking a car to the Yongsan (龍山) racetrack. Mr. Pang had already gone out in the morning, and now his wife, a woman who seemed to be his daughter, an old woman, and someone who seemed to be his secretary, a total of four people, were going out again.
Driver Lee and I immediately put them in the American-made Habu-style No. 228 and were about to leave. I thought that since I had no connection with Hwagaesa (華溪寺) and had gone out twice only to be turned away, I would surely be able to go to the Yongsan (龍山) racetrack because there were fewer passengers and there would be room! But the gentleman who seemed to be the secretary, perhaps because he was very experienced, said that the back seat was uncomfortable and took my seat next to the driver in the front.
So, I couldn't chase him out and tell him to ride in the back, and I also couldn't sit in the passenger seat since I was supposed to be an assistant. So, I couldn't go with them and just sadly saw them off.

3:59 PM!
The Bikk No. 233, which had taken lawyer Kim and his party to Hwagaesa (華溪寺), and the Habu No. 228, which had taken Mr. Pang's family, had all returned. As usual, assistant K and I picked up brooms and cleaned the inside and outside of the cars.

4:50 PM!
Driver An and I were in the Bikk No. 233, and Driver Lee and assistant K were in the Habu No. 228. We all started out together and headed towards the Yongsan (龍山) racetrack.
We weren't called by anyone, and no one told us to go. We just went out on a temporary basis (散會) because we expected that there would be more people wanting to take a car where there were many people gathered.
The wide sandy field next to the Yongsan (龍山) Second Overpass! The final race was just unfolding around the racetrack set up there.
It was worth seeing the five or six riders in their crimson racing uniforms with numbers on their backs, fighting with all their might, but it was even more disgusting to see the thousands of gamblers who had bet hundreds or thousands of won dreaming of making a fortune, and the girls with oily hair and powdered faces who had set up indoor and outdoor taverns in tents, expecting to make a lot of money because so many people were gathered there, raising their voices and singing.
Finally, the races were over. The general audience, who had been tense for a long time, began to disperse in all directions, pushing and shoving each other.
Driver An and I immediately ran to the front of the car and waited for customers. However, because of the cheap taxis, no one came to ride in this high-class chartered car. Fortunately, we met a wealthy Japanese family and took them, but the big problem was that there were so many people that my seat was taken again. Driver An was very sorry and hesitated for a while. Then, he saw a Bikk-style No. 266 car from MH Automobile Department passing by with few passengers, so he asked that driver to take me. Fortunately, I was able to catch that car and come back.
Dodging the crowds of people who packed the road and raising a cloud of dust, the Bikk car carrying me sped towards the city.
After a while, as we rounded Namdaemun (南大門) and turned onto Taep'yŏng Street (太平通), the driver sitting next to me asked, "Doesn't Mr. Lee (K Automobile Department owner) drive these days?"
He seemed to think that I was a real driver's assistant from the K Automobile Department. I was a bit flustered to answer right away.
I had only greeted Mr. Lee, the owner of the K Automobile Department, and only knew that he was the owner. I had never seen him drive or heard about him driving, so I didn't even know if he could drive. I didn't know what to say when he suddenly asked me this, so I just guessed.
"Well, sometimes he drives instead if the drivers, Mr. An or Mr. Lee, are too tired."
"Then he really acts like the owner!"
"You could say that."
While I was giving these flustered answers, the car unknowingly arrived at the entrance of Yŏngnak-chŏng (永樂町). One of the passengers said he would get off there, so, as usual, I quickly jumped out, opened the door of the passenger seat, and politely helped him get off.
After thinking about it, I realized that it would be very difficult to answer if the driver asked me about the K Automobile Department in detail, and I was also very worried that my true identity would be revealed. So, I said that I would get off there too, said goodbye to the driver, stopped by the K Automobile Department for a moment, and returned home.
The four-day income and impressions of a different job! That is all about being an automobile driver’s assistant.
Finally, one word of addition is that being an automobile driver’s assistant is generally a very difficult job until one becomes a driver.
It varies depending on the automobile department, but one can get meals there until one becomes a driver, but there doesn't seem to be much pay. And the worst thing is that this business doesn't have fixed hours, so in the summer, you can't even get a wink of sleep, let alone at night, even during the day. And every time you arrive and depart, you have to adjust the amount of water (水) and gasoline and add it, and you have to clean it from time to time. Even in the cold winter, there is no work day or night like in the summer, but sometimes you have to go far away in the middle of the night with the driver to pick up passengers, and if there are many passengers, no matter how late at night or how far away, only the assistant is left behind, which is very painful. It would be less so if there were streetcars, but if there are no streetcars or even if there are streetcars, but it's too late at night and the streetcars have stopped, it's very painful.
Even if you don't follow the driver, if the car goes far away and the tire bursts or the car breaks down and you receive a notice, you have to ride a bicycle to that place, even on a very cold day, and repair the car in the snow-filled ditch. Worse, in some cases (if it overturns), one's bones may be crushed, or one may accidentally injure people or animals and be imprisoned. In any case, it is a terrible job. (The entire responsibility lies with the driver.) Even though being an assistant is such a bitter and painful job, on the other hand, one feels somewhat pleasant or happy when one gradually learns how to drive a car, and when one learns about the inside of the machine one by one and sometimes completely repairs a broken car, and when one goes far away with the driver and gets to drive oneself for a short time on the way back. <29>

**Named Entities**

南大門	Namdaemun
蓬萊町	Hōrai-chō
蓬萊橋	Hōrai-gyo
朝鮮印刷所	Chosŏn Inswaeso
安氏	An ssi
華溪寺	Hwagaesa
東小門	Tongsomun
暢叙園	Changsŏwŏn
李氏	Ri ssi
京城府協議員	Kyŏngsŏng-bu Hyŏbŭiwŏn
方00氏	Pang ssi
龍山	Yongsan
永樂町	Eiraku-cho



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제9호
발행일	1927년 10월 01일
기사제목	變裝出動 臨時OO되여본記, 새벽에도 妓生 모시고 自動車運轉助手가 되야
필자	C記者
기사형태	소식

變裝出動 臨時OO되여본記, 새벽에도 妓生 모시고 自動車運轉助手가 되야
						C記者
『오네가이시마스! (オ願ヒシマス )』
『하-하- 도꼬마데데스까? (ハ-ハ-何處マデデスカ?)』
『호-라이쬬ㅡ마데... ... (蓬萊町マデ)』
『하-하- 요로슈- 고자이마스! (ハ-ハ-好ロシゥ御座イマス)』

때 (日時) 는 9월 23일 오후 10시 52분.
곳 (場所) 은 K洞 K自働車部.
자동자는 미국제 삑구식 233호.
승객은 회사사원가튼 40세쯤 된 술 (酒) 취한 일본인 남자 하나와 그의 부인인듯 십은 35세쯤 된 여자 하나 합해서 두 사람.
운전수는 K自働車部의 두사람 운전수 중의 하나이니 安씨.
조수는 나희(齡)가 어리(幼)고 모양이 그럴듯한.
기자 (自稱이지만)

자동차는 지금 蓬萊町을 향하야 살가티 달려간다. 차안에 타고 안즌 日人 두 부부는 술이 잔득 취하야 횡설수설 짓거리는 것이 요령 부득이나 엇잿든지 자기 친구집에 불려(招待)가서 너무 고마운 대접을 밧엇다는 것이다.
차는 언으듯 남대문을 왼쪽으로 끼고 돌아나가다가 오른쪽으로 꼽으라저서 蓬萊橋를 지나 다시 왼쪽으로 한참 가다가 朝鮮印刷所 엽헤까지 와서 정차하엿다. 나는 조수가 으레히 하는 격으로 운전대에서 얼른 먼저 뛰여나려 모자를 벗고 아조 공손하게 객석의 문을 열어 손님을 나리게 하얏다. 술 취한 남녀는 빗틀거리며 차에서 나렷다.
『이꾸라...... (幾何)』
『에 산엔 이다다끼마스! (エ 三圓戴キマス)』
아모말 업시 선듯 내주는 三圓을 밧어 가지고 차를 돌려 다시 K洞으로 돌아 오는 차중에서 운전수 安氏와 주거니 밧거니 이약이가 시작되엿다.
『엇저면 그러케 조수 노릇을 잘 하심니까? 몇 해동안 정말 조수 노릇한 사람보다도 낫슴니다그려!』
『온 천만에 말슴이지! 아모 것도 모르고 별안간 내다른 벼락 조수가 잘하긴 무얼 잘해요. 공연히 놀리시느라고 그러시지......』
『아니요. 정말 여러 해동안 조수 노릇하든 사람보다 못지 안케 잘 하시는걸요.』＜24＞
(잠간 침묵...... )
『그런데 시내이면 어대를 가던지 으레 三圓식 밧슴닛가?』
『네 그럿슴니다. 그래도 지금은 싸게 밧는게 그럿탐니다. 작년까지 四圓식이나 밧엇는데요.』
『탁시차(一圓均一車)는 시내이면 어대를 가던지 一圓을 밧는 모양인데 그럿케 三圓식이나 밧어도 타는 손님이 아모말 업시 잘 주나요.』
『웨 아모 말 업슬리가 잇나요. 지금도 보셧지만 이번에는 日本사람이 되여서 아모 말업시 선듯 三圓을 주엇지만 조선 손님 가트면 (너무 심한 말슴갓지만) 사실이지 각금 그 탁시車 표준만해서 이 고급대절차의 갑도 덜 주겟다는 손님이 만치요. 그래서 四圓 밧든 것을 一圓 주려서 三圓을 밧지요. 』(이하 50행 삭제 - 원문)
차는 언으듯 K自働車部까지 와 다엇다. 시간은 왕복에 꼭 15분 - 15분 동안에 三圓 - 하여간 영업은 큰 영업이다.

이것이 편집장에게 동원령을 밧고 K洞 K自働車部에 와서 저녁마다 운전조수 노릇을 하기 시작한지 잇흘 만에야 (첫날은 오후 8시 30분브터 同12시까지 공연히 自働車部의 緊치안은 손님 노릇만 하고) 비로소 처음으로 손님이라고 어더 걸려서 정말 조수 K君의 웃옷을 빌려입고 蓬萊町까지 단여 오는 길인대 시계는 꼭 11시 13분!
운전수와 나는 차에서 나리기도 전에 주인 李氏와 K조수가 급히 내닷더니
『또 가야겟소. 이번에는 東小門 밧 華溪寺요. 차를 요 웃골목 큰 행길 앞헤다 대고 긔다리사요.』한다. 아마 蓬萊町을 간 사이에 미리 부탁이 잇섯든게다.
나는 『익크 인제 멀즉이 하나 걸렷구나.』하고 속으로 반가워하면서 운전수 安氏와 가티 주인이 가르키는 대로 고 웃골목 큰 행길 앞헤다 차를 대엿다.
과연 조곰 잇더니 모시 두루마기에 중절모자를 쓴 한 40여 세 되여 보히는 사람하나가 그 골목 안에 잇는 중국요리점 暢叙園에서 술이 대취하야 빗틀거리며 나오더니 덥허놋코 차안으로 들어가 안즈며 혀 꼬부라진 소리로 『여보 운전수 華溪寺까지 얼마요.』한다.
『녜 八圓만 줍쇼.』
『뭐어! 八圓 웨 그리빗싸...... 六圓씩에 다 단엿는대 웨이래......』
『아니올시다. 八圓이 올시다.』
『안이야. 내가 다 알어...... 六圓식에 늘 단골로 타고 단이든 사람인대 더 밧으려면 되나...... 하...... 그럿치 안소...... 여보 운전수!』
그러자 뒤미처 역시 술이 잔뜩 취한 중절모자에 모시 두루마기 입은 30세 이내의 남자 셋하고 술은 취하지 안엇스나 그 사나희들에게 얼마나 시달렷는지 곰게 비슨 머리가 좀 헝클어지고＜25＞ 옷이 꾸기꾸기해진 20이 훨신 넘어 보히는 기생아씨 두분이 나오더니 그 중에 회색빗 가을 외투 입은 기생하나는 가기 실타고 구지 앙탈을 하것만 젊은 사나희 하나가 억지로 손목을 잡아 끌어다 차 속에 태운다.
임금은 한참동안 좀 깍자거니 못 한다거니하고 닷투더니 결국 자동차부에서 조곰 양보하야 七圓에 작정한 모양이다.
나는 잠깐동안이나마 억지로 하는 일이던지 하고 십허 하는 일이던지 좀 색다른 직업을 해보는 신분이니 거긔에 충실햇스면 그만이겟는대 내 본직이 기자이라 그런지 마음 속으로 발서 그들을 따라가기만 하면 조흔 기사재료브터 엇게 될 것을 크게 깃버하면서 부리낫케 K조수와 가티 라지엣타(放熱器)에다 물을 붓고 또 휘발유까지 넛코 나닛가 뜻밧게 손님이 만하서 조수의 자리까지 손님이 빼서 안즌고로 할 수 업시 따라가지 못하고 그들을 실은 자동차만 安 운전수에게 잇끌리여 東小門 밧 華溪寺를 향하야 달려갓다.

심야의 華溪寺!
욱어진 송림속에 그윽한 佛堂을 엽흐로 끼고 기생과 술(酒)에 마음껏 도취된 그들에게는 그들의 獨存的 歡樂境이 버러젓스리라.

제 3일째 되는 24일! 역시 손님이 엄서서 운전수 安, 李 두분과 쓸데엄는 한담만 •˜다가 무료히 도라오고, 그 잇흔날은 일요일인고로 보통날 보다는 다소 손님이 만코 분주하리니 바람도 쏘일 겸해서 일즉이 오라는 두분 운전수의 간곡한 情請으로 이날은(제4일) 특별히 시간을 좀 일으게 잡아 오후 8시나 되어야 출근하는 것을 오후 2시경에 K自働車部로 달려갓다.

오후 2시 27분!
전화가 짜르릉! 짜르릉!
주인 李氏가 수화기를 떼여든다.
『녜 녜 그럿슴니다...... 華溪寺요...... 녜 갈 수 잇슴니다...... 차는 엇다가 대라고요...... 녜 優美館압흐로요...... 그런대 임금은 엇더케하랍쇼...... 녜 운전수에게 주실터예요...... 녜 알앗슴니다...... 그럼 곳 보내겟슴니다.』
미리 준비하고 잇던 安 운전수!
『어대래요.』
『저 貫鐵洞 金OO변호사집이요. 華溪寺라고...... 빨리 가보시오.』
『네 갓다오지요. 기하쓰(揮發油)하고 물은 충분하겟지요.』
『네 넉넉합니다. 악가 아츰에 새로 다 부어 노앗스닛가......』
『李선생 또 가보시지요. 가셔사 또 쫏겨 오시드라도...... 』
『네 가고말고요.』
나는 분주히 K군의 웃옷을 또 빌려입고 安운전수와 가티 동승한 후 貫鐵洞 金00변호사 집으로 달려갓다.
優美館 越便 德興書林압헤 차를 대이고 나는 급히 뛰여나려 金변호사 집으로＜26＞ 來車의 通寄를 하러 가는 길에 나오는 변호사일행과 딱 마주첫다.
일행은 모도가 여섯사람!
그 중에는 꼿가티  어엽븐 기생아씨도 한분 석겻스며 그 외에는 다른 변호사 갓흔이도 잇고 또 金氏의 친우인 듯 십은대 다섯분이 죄다. 회색세비로 양복에 金테 안경을 쓴 이도 잇고 또 그 중에는 엽총을 둘너멘 이도 잇다. 이들은 이럿케 각금각금 한가한 일요일이면 기생과 엽총을 엽헤 끼고 교외로 산보를 가는 것이 例套라 한다.
나는 『이번에야 설마......』하고 따라왓더니 급기야 손님을 다  태우고 보니 역시 자리가 엄다. 또 못가게 되엿다! 安 운전수는 몹시 미안해하는 모양이나 나는 조흔 낫으로 그를 작별하고 할 일 업시 혼자 걸어서 K自働車部로 도라왓다.
『華溪寺하고 나하고는 인록이 엄다. 둘재날이 그럿코 오늘이 그럿코......  華溪寺를 가는 이면 으레히 여섯 사람! 꼭 여섯 사람이 되어야 간다고 정해논 법이야 업스련만! 단골로 오래 타 보아서 경험이 잇서 그런지 또는 내가 華溪寺를 못 가볼 팔자를 선천적으로 타고난 까닭인지 하여간 이상한 일이다.』

오후 2시 35분!
京城府協議員 方00氏의 가족 일동이 龍山경마장을 갑시느라고 자동차를 타신다. 方氏는 먼저 아츰에 출동합시고 그 부인과 따님인 듯 십은 이와 또 늙은 부인 한 분과 비서인 듯 십은 이와 도합 네 분이 이제 또 출동을 합시는 것이다.
李 운전수와 나는 즉시 미국제 합뿌式 228호에 그들을 실코 발동하야 떠나려닛가 華溪寺와는＜27＞ 원래 인연이 업서서 두 번 식이나 따라 나섯다가 헛빵만 첫지만 龍山경마장 까지야 물론 손님이 적으닛가 자리도 남아서 꼭 갈 수가 잇겟지! 하고 밋엇더니 비서인 듯 십은 냥반이 원래 경험이 만흐신 까닭인지 뒷자리는 불편합시다고 압헤 운전대 엽헤 내 자리를 점령합신다.
그러니 뒤로 타라고 쫏차 내는 수도 엄고 또 그럿타고 조수 행세를 하는 내가 뒷자리가 남는다고 객석에 안저 갈 수도 업고 해서 이亦 따라 나스지 못하고 그냥 섭섭히 보내고 말엇다.

오후 3시 59분!
김변호사 일행을 태워가지고 華溪寺에 나갓던 삑구 233호와 方氏의 가족을 태워 가지고 간 합뿌 228호가 죄다 還來하엿다. 조수의 K군과 나는 으레히 하는 격으로 총채를 들고 차의 내외를 죄다 소제하엿다.

오후 4시 50분!
삑구 233호에는 安 운전수와 내가 타고 합뿌 228호에는 李 운전수와 조수의 K군이 타고 일제히 출발하야 龍山競馬場으로 달려 나갓다.
누가 불러서 간 것도 아니고 누가 나가보라고 해서 나간 것도 아니고 오즉 사람이 만히 모힌 곳이닛가 자동차를 탈 사람이 만흐리라는 豫期로 散會될 臨時하야 나간 것이다.
龍山 第二인도교 엽흐로 넓다란 砂場! 그곳에 시설된 경마장 주위에는 그때에 비로소 최후에 결승전이 전개되엿다.
욹읏 붉읏한 경마복에 號數를 등에 붓친 五六명의 선수가 走馬加鞭으로 필사의 勇力을 다하야 싸호는 것도 볼만하지만 돈을 수백 수십원식 걸어놋코 일확천금을 꿈꾸는 千兩萬兩軍이들의 애쓰는 꼴이며 사람 만히 모힐 것을 豫期하고 무슨 큰 수나 생길 듯이 천막 속에다 내외주점을 벌리고 油頭粉面의 아가씨들이 제각긔 목소리를 놉히여 노래를 부르는 그 꼴이야말로 침을 배앗틀 만치 더럽게 볼 만 하얏다.
이흑고 경마도 끝낫다. 끗업시 긴장되여잇던 일반 관중은 제각기 압흘 닷토아 뿔뿔이 제지기 시작한다.
운전수 安氏와 나는 즉시 차 압흐로 달려가서 손님을 기다리고 잇섯다. 그러나 갑싼 탁시차때믄에 이 고급 대절차는 도모지 타러 오는 손님이 업더니 다행히 돈만흔 어느 日本人의 가족을 맛나 그들을 태우기는 하엿스나 큰일난 것은 사람이 만하서 내 자리를 또 빼앗긴 것이다. 安 운전수는 너무도 미안해하며 한참 머뭇머뭇 하더니 맛츰 그 압흐로 지나가는 MH 自働車部의 삑구式 266호 차가 손님을 적게 태우고 들어가는 것을 보고 그 운전수에게 나를 부탁하여 준 까닭에 다행이 그 차를 잡아타고 들어오게 되엿다.
길이 미도록 꽉 드리 찬 사람들을 헷치고 뿌연 먼지를 날리면서 나를 태운 삑구車는 시내를 향하야 질주한다.
얼마만에 南大門을 끼고 太平通길로 빠저서 한참 가다가 다시 黃金町 길로＜28＞ 나슬 때인대 엽헤 안즌 운전수가 『요새 李氏(K自働車部主人)는 운전하지 안슴닛가』하고 뭇는다.
그는 나를 K自働車部의 정말 운전조수로 알고 뭇는 모양인대 나는 얼는 대답하기가 좀 뻥뻥하엿다.
K自働車部에 주인 李氏와는 겨우 인사만 하엿슬 뿐이고 또 그가 주인이라는 것만 알엇지 그가 운전하는 것은 내 눈으로 직접 보지도 못하고 또 듯지도 못한 까닭에 그가 운전을 할 줄 아는 것조차 나로서는 도모지 모르는 터인데 이럿케 갑자기 물어노니 무엇이라도 대답을 하여야 조흘지 몰라서 좀 머뭇거리다가 그냥 추측적으로
『웨요 각극 운전수의 安氏나 李氏가 너무 피곤하시든지 하면 대신 운전을 하심니다.』하엿다.
『그럼 아조 주인행새를 함니다 그려!』
『말하자면 그렇케 말 할 수도 잇겟지요.』
이럿케 얼떨떨한 대답을 하는 동안에 차는 언으듯 永樂町入口에 와 다엇다. 손님 중에 한 사람이 나리겟다는 고로 나는 역시 하는 例套로 얼는 뛰여나려서 객석의 문을 열고 그를 공손히 마저 나렷다.
그리고나서 아모리 생각하여도 그 운전수가 K自働車部의 내용을 작고 뭇든지 하면 아지 못하고 대답하기가 몹시 괴로울 것도 갓고 또 제일 내 본색이 들어날까하는 것도 큰 걱정이 되야서 나도 그 곳에서 나리겟다고 하야 그 운전수와 작별하고 K自働車部를 잠간 들너 집으로 도라왓다.
색다른 직업! 자동차 운전조수의 4일간 소득과 소감은 이상이다.
끗흐로 한마의 부언할 것은 자동차 운전조수란 대체로 운전수가 되기까지는 몹시 괴로운 직업이다.
자동차부에 따라서 각각 다르겟지만 운전수가 되기까지 밥은 그 곳에서 어더 먹을 수 잇스나 보수는 별로히 업는 모양이다. 그리고 제일 이 영업이란 일정하게 시간을 정해놋코 하는 영업이 아닌 관계로 녀름 가튼 때는 밤은 고사하고 낫에도 잠 한잠 못자고 꼴칵 밝히게 된다. 그리고 發着할 때마다 물(水)과 휘발유의 분량을 맛초아 너어야 하고 또 時時로 소제를 하여야 하며 치운 겨울 갓흔 때는 녀름 가티 주야로 일은 업서도 간혹 심야에 먼 곳으로 운전수와 가티 손님을 태우러 갓다가 만일 손님이 만튼지하면  아모리 깁흔 밤중이거나 아모리 먼 곳이거나 조수만은 따로 떠러저서 크게 고통 될 젹이 만타. 그나마 전차라도 잇는 곳이면 들 하겟지만 전차도 업는 곳이던지 또 전차가 잇하다 하드라도 밤이 너무 깁허서 전차가 끈어 젓슬 때는 여간 큰 고통이 아니다.
엇저다가 운전수를 따라가지 안엇드라도 그 차가 먼곳에 나갓다가 박휘가 터진다던지 또는 기체가 파손되던지 하야 통지를 밧으면 아모리 치운 날이라도 자전거를 타고 그 곳을 쫏처가 차듸찬 눈구덩이 속에서 차를 수선해야 하는 것이다. 그보다도 혹 경우에 (불행히 전복된 때) 분골쇄신이 되는 때도 잇고 혹은 실수가 되야 인축을 傷害하고 懲役하는 때도 잇스니 엇쨋든 끔즉한 직업이다.(전 책임은 운전수에게 잇지만) 조수가 이럿케 쓰리고 괴로운 직업이면서도 그 반면에 다소 유쾌하다던지 깃븜을 늣기는 것은 자동차 운전하는 법을 차차 배호게 되고 또 기계 속을 한 가지 한 가지식 알어서 병난 차를 각금 완전하게 곳치기도 하고 또 운전수와 가티 먼곳에 나갓다가가 드러오는 길에 잠간이라도 내 손으로 직접 운전을 해 보는 때이다.＜29＞
＜24-29＞