별건곤 제9호
1927년 10월 01일
放送劇, 엇던 舞臺監督의 이약이 全一幕, 劇硏究會第7回放送臺本 (Radio Play, A Certain Stage Director's Story, One Act, Drama Research Group 7th Radio Script)
金永八(作) (Kim Yeong-pal (Author))
희곡·시나리오 (Play/Scenario)

Characters              Roles

Director Lee           Shim Hun

Mother             Lee Gyeong-son

Park Yeong-suk           Yu Il-chun

Choe Byeong-hwan           Choe Seung-il

Innkeeper Old Woman     Kim Yeong-pal

The time is late spring. The stage is behind a certain inn. Sound effect: wind.

Mother   Who is that student?
Yeong-suk   (Blushes.)
Director Lee      Uh, that?! (Hesitates.)
Mother   Is that student also a theater person?
Director Lee      No—
Mother   No? (Looks Yeong-suk up and down.)
Director Lee      Yes, she is my friend.
Mother   (Glances sideways, averting her eyes) Oh—a friend.
Director Lee      Ah, Yeong-suk, this is my mother. Please greet her.
Yeong-suk   Yes—(Her voice barely audible, she bows her head, embarrassed.)
Mother   Yes, hello—oh my, how bright her face is. And how old are you this year?
Yeong-suk   Nineteen years old.
Mother   Nineteen years old? Oh my, how lovely her voice is.
Yeong-suk   (Keeps her head down, saying nothing.)
- Silence -
Director Lee      Mother.
Mother   Yes. <123>
Director Lee      By the way, what brings you all the way to Seoul so suddenly?
Mother   I wanted to see you, whom I haven't seen in ages, and also, I'm planning to go to Wonsan by train tonight.
Director Lee      Wonsan?
Mother   Yes.
Director Lee      Why Wonsan?
Mother   (As if dumbfounded) You wander around day and night, so how would you know anything? But to be so ignorant, is that how an unfilial son behaves?
Director Lee      What are you talking about?
Mother   Don't you ever think of your father?
Director Lee      Are you talking about my deceased father?
Mother   Yes.
Director Lee      Since it's a time when even living people struggle to make a living, is it so strange that I don't think about my deceased father?
Mother   (Cannot speak.)
Director Lee      So, you're saying you're going to visit Father's gravesite?
Mother   That's right. You are you, and I am me, so you may have forgotten, but I can never forget your father before I die.
Director Lee      (Thinks for a while) I suppose so.
Mother   By the way, child, as you know, this seems like my last time. After this visit, I don't think I'll be able to go again— (Sheds tears silently.) —So, as a last time, I had to go, but I have no funds. I thought, what would happen if I came to my son, but now that I'm here, it's even worse, so I can't even bring myself to speak.
Director Lee      (Shows sympathy to his mother.)
Mother   (Sighs.)
Director Lee      These days I'm so broke that the inn is telling me to leave. It's been four months since I paid them—well, why don't you go to Gye-dong (桂洞) and talk to Aunt. Surely they have money there.
Mother   How can I go there and say such a thing?
Director Lee      Then what are you going to do?
Mother   Well, should I go?
(The three sit in silence. Then, Mother stands up, looks around the room, thinks for a moment, and seems to make up her mind.)
Mother   Then, I'll be back.
Director Lee      Where are you going? To Gye-dong?
Mother   Well. Student, stay here and play. Okay.
Yeong-suk   (Stands up and bows silently.)
Mother exits. <124>
Director Lee      Yeong-suk, the most disgusting thing is humanity. To think of not cherishing you, who think of the dead and love people like me who are dying—and to think of betraying Choe, such a wonderful person, even though he loves you—even though opium addicts sell their houses, land, wives, and children before selling themselves, the humanity that cannot swallow the sun and smash the earth with its fist seems cowardly and disgusting. That they cannot shake this universe.
Yeong-suk   Why are you so excited by yourself?
Director Lee      No. Society has given me stimulants.
Yeong-suk   Then the new society we desire won't be like that, right? The society that is coming—
Director Lee      Which day? What day of the week? No, no. The hopes that women have are useless. If we don't create it ourselves, it's useless. (Suddenly shouting) Heh heh, I seem very excited right now; I've been rude, haven't I?
Yeong-suk   No. It doesn't matter much.
Director Lee      My mother thinks of her husband, her beloved from the old days, and always visits his gravesite.
Yeong-suk   Aren't you going to the gravesite, Director Lee?
Director Lee      Visit the gravesite? No, not at all. Look at this body. Look at this physique. I should be resenting the father who made such an unfortunate [being]! What am I grateful for that I should visit his gravesite? My father gave me this ungrateful world. A hideous society. That's why I became an actor, to show myself to people. I’m sending the world up. That's why I only see you as a friend. Also, I will live alone for the rest of my life, fearing that I might give birth to another disabled person with a small physique like me.
Yeong-suk   Why do you say such difficult and incomprehensible things sometimes?
Director Lee      No. Isn't that a natural thing to say? Even if a war breaks out and the enemy invades, I don't have the physique to hold a rifle to defend against it.
Yeong-suk   Even so—when the time comes—
Director Lee      Will it? Even for this disabled person—anyway, human life is dramatic, so maybe.
Yeong-suk   That's right. But it also differs from person to person, doesn't it?
Director Lee      That's a valid point. Of course, it will be. But I unhesitatingly see this society as a stage, and all the people moving within it as actors. Therefore, our lives can be seen as dramatic. How do you feel about that, Yeong-suk?
Yeong-suk   Me? But I want to leave this stage. Because on this stage called society, I can never escape the name of woman.
Director Lee      Why is that?
Yeong-suk   Because there is class. Because there is contempt. Because there is abuse.
Director Lee      So, you're saying you're denying reality? Right, right.
Yeong-suk   But is that useful?
Director Lee      Suddenly the level has dropped sharply, why is that? Heh heh heh. But the time to become strong has come.
Yeong-suk   Do you think so?
Director Lee      Yes, it has. Do you know the trends in world theater right now?
Yeong-suk   I'm completely ignorant in that area.
Director Lee      If you don't know the moving, great stage of the world, isn't that something to be ashamed of?
Yeong-suk   I'm not ashamed. It's because society has made me so.
Director Lee      But—
Yeong-suk   Then I'll learn from you. Teach me. How are the activities of the world's famous actors?
Director Lee      Haha, it's very difficult to answer if you ask so directly. But doesn't the newspaper tell you well? Lately, Chinese theater, for example, is shaking the whole world more than anything else, and isn't it being shaken? When I think about this, I desperately want to gather actors and go out and do theater.
Yeong-suk   I want to do it too. I want to become a great actress.
Director Lee      Really?
Yeong-suk   Yes. Why? Don't I have the qualifications to stand on stage?
Director Lee      No, not at all. What qualifications are needed? Anyone can do it if they have a strong will and firm ideology to stand on stage. Lenin, the great man of Russia, said: theory is method, and unity is weapon. But the time for theory has passed, hasn't it? No, rather than passed, I only have petty thoughts like love affairs. So, I have no choice but to gather actors and go to the stage. If you, Yeong-suk, also step on the stage, that would be good too. If you step on the stage with your true heart.
Yeong-suk   Yes—I understand what you're saying now. I'll step on it. I'll become a shining, great actress on the stage, like Zara Leander (Zarah Leander).
Director Lee      Is that so? Then I'll become Karl Liebknecht. <126> Then, Yeong-suk, hurry up and put on makeup. Get dressed, and I'm already doing my makeup. The actors will come too. We don't need tools. Because it's in our hearts?
(At this moment, friend Choe Byeong-hwan appears.)
Choe      Hey—Director.
Director Lee      It's been a long time. Choe, is that you?
Choe      (Bows his head awkwardly.) Is it okay to come in?
Director Lee      Come on in.
Choe      So, how have you been? Sleeping well these days?
Director Lee      So so, how about you?
Choe      Me? Me too, what can I do. By the way, what are you researching these days?
Director Lee      I need to eat.
Yeong-suk   Does food necessarily come with research?
Director Lee      Yes, for me, and not just me, everyone's research material is food. But when I don't have to worry about food, society will already have changed. Therefore, rather than researching, we must first do the work to not have to worry about food.
Choe      (Jokingly) Everyone recognizes you, Lee, what's going on? Not that, but listening to your story right now, it seems like you are a *ddadda* (따따)?
Director Lee      (Laughing) People call me a *ddadda* (따따)? I don't know if the people who recognize me are *ddadda* (따따), but I'm not a *ddadda* (따따). It's not that I don't have the feelings of a *ddadda* (따따). But I'm not a *ddadda* (따따). I can see myself as a *ddadda* (따따) who hates *ddadda* (따따), but I'm not a *ddadda* (따따) of the *ddadda* (따따) group. - Yeong-suk, what do you think of me? Do you see me as a *ddadda* (따따)?
Yeong-suk   I can't understand the nature of *ddadda* (따따) well. But if you're not a *ddadda* (따따), then you're not.
Director Lee      Your answer is like a *ddadda* (따따).
Yeong-suk   (Laughs at the same time.)
Choe
Choe      So, if you have to eat to do research?
Director Lee      Then I have to move my limbs without rest.
Choe      Until now, have you been sitting still and eating?
Director Lee      Not really. I've been moving my arms and legs without rest since I was young, but the movements from then until yesterday were only bowing down without raising my head, but from today's labor, if we raise our heads and move our arms and legs, we will rightfully earn food from it and, if we don't pay it back rightfully, we'll only be able to earn food. People who don't know me might laugh when they hear me, but they can't help but laugh. <127>
Hehe, nonsense.
Innkeeper (Entering, dragging her shoes and tapping her tobacco pouch against a stone) Hey, is Director Lee here?
Director Lee      (Ignoring her) I have to eat.
Innkeeper   Hey, Director Lee.
Director Lee      So I'll either find food or work.
Innkeeper   Hey, Director Lee. (Louder.)
Director Lee      There's no way such happiness will come to me—Hey—I'll have to go out and get lunch from someone. The inn won't even give me a room, let alone food, that crazy wife of the innkeeper. But they have to eat to live too.
Choe      (Putting his hand to his mouth and pointing to the innkeeper) Shh—
Innkeeper   Director Lee—
Director Lee      Yes—
Innkeeper   Yes, what is it? If you're a decent person, shouldn't you have some shame?
Director Lee      I don't know.
Innkeeper   What do you mean, you don't know? Do you think I'm living off free money? You should have some sense. You keep saying you'll leave, but when? Huh?
Director Lee      I'll leave.
Innkeeper   When will you leave?
Director Lee      I'll leave now. (Stands up.)
Innkeeper   What do you mean? Oh, how can I deal with this wretch—
Director Lee      Just sit down for a moment. There—stay there. I'll be right back. I need to avoid this. (Leaves.)
Innkeeper   Ugh, it's infuriating. They treat him like a master, but where is there such a master, really— (Follows him out.)
(The two sit in silence.)
Choe      Are you Ms. Yeong-suk?
Yeong-suk   (Blushes.)
Choe      You're from Gaeseong, right?
Yeong-suk   Yes.
Choe      Are you free today?
Yeong-suk   ......
Choe      Ah, today is Sunday.
Yeong-suk   Yes—
Choe      Don't you know me?
Yeong-suk   I don't know you very well.
Choe      I am Choe Byeong-hwan of the Gaeseong Youth Association. Do you know me now? <128>
Yeong-suk   Yes?
Choe      Do you know me now? Is your mother well? I've been in Seoul for a long time, so it's been a while since I saw her.
Yeong-suk   Yes, is that so. I've heard a lot about you from my mother.
Choe      Nonsense. My mother loves me very much. Yeong-suk, you know that she loves me like her own son or son-in-law.
Yeong-suk   (Her face turns red and she says nothing.)
Choe      (Noticing that she is embarrassed) Have you known Director Lee for a long time?
Yeong-suk   No—
Choe      Then, did you meet him recently?
Yeong-suk   Yes.
Choe      Does your mother know Director Lee?
Yeong-suk   ......
Choe      Doesn't she know him?
Yeong-suk   No.
Choe      Then she doesn't know you came to Seoul either?
Yeong-suk   Yes—But I didn't come to Seoul for this purpose. I came to meet my friend.
Choe      Even so, you should have told your mother. Otherwise, she will be waiting for you at home, won't she? I wouldn't say these things to a complete stranger, but I don't think it's a problem for me to say these things. Actually, I saw you on the street and saw you coming here, so I came here.
Yeong-suk   Yes, is that so. Thank you.
Choe      Are you going home today?
Yeong-suk   Yes.
Choe      Then let's go together. I'm planning to go back today anyway, so what do you think of doing that? Yes, Yeong-suk?
Yeong-suk   ......
Choe      Are you uncomfortable?
Yeong-suk   No.
Choe      Then let's go together?
Yeong-suk   ......
Choe      Why aren't you answering?
Yeong-suk   Let's go together.
Choe      It's okay to go together, isn't it? You may know when you get home, but I have the responsibility to protect Yeong-suk.
Yeong-suk   Please stop saying such things. <129>
Choe      Then I'll cancel it. But it doesn't mean there's no problem, does it?
Yeong-suk   There's no problem, so please don't say it.
Director Lee      (Coming in at some point) You two are as affectionate as lovely birds.
Yeong-suk   (Her face turns red.)
Choe      Where did you go, Director Lee?
Director Lee      I went up to the mountain—.
Choe      What for?
Director Lee      To look down at Gyeongseong and to look up at the sky.
Choe      So, what are you going to do?
Director Lee      My heart was stuffy, so I went up and looked around, but the sky is not even, and sometimes dark clouds float by and it rains, so how can the city be even? There are shallow houses and tall houses and straight houses, but there are more collapsing houses. (As if realizing something) I'm sorry. The interesting story between you two was cut short, heh heh.
Yeong-suk   It's okay. Director Lee.
Choe      That person.
Director Lee      What's there to excuse? It's okay for me no matter what, I'm a person who has nothing. Do I have a house? Do I have the society I demand? So, I have neither individuality nor love.
Choe      You're using Dadaist terms again.
Director Lee      Heh heh. (Laughing) Dada? Interpret it as you like. But I'm hungry. I have to go to the stage to get food.
Choe      Well, Yeong-suk, let's go home. So we're not late for the train.
Yeong-suk   (Ignoring him) Director Lee—are you that hungry?
Director Lee      Yes. If I don't eat, I can't move my body. To build a house, you need cornerstones and beams, and just as fish die without water, people need food. Isn't love food too?
Yeong-suk   Do you think so?
Director Lee      That's right. Definitely right. If anyone says otherwise, it's fake. It's a lie. My words may seem funny, but they are probably true.
Yeong-suk   Even so—.
Director Lee      Deceiving people with falsehoods is worse than the devil. There's nothing I hate more than that. But people can do it. Especially women do it casually. Heh heh. <130>
Yeong-suk   Is that so? (Cries.)
Director Lee      But you, Yeong-suk, won't do that, right?
(At this time, the innkeeper appears.)
Innkeeper   Director Lee, you're here again?
Director Lee      Yes, I'm here.
Innkeeper   Hey, please think a little. What am I supposed to do if you don't give up the room every day? What am I supposed to do? Huh?
Director Lee      Madam, I'm sorry. I'm leaving soon, so don't worry.
Innkeeper   Where are you going? You just keep saying you'll leave. At this rate, what crazy woman will do this business? Really.
(Director Lee runs into the room and comes out with his luggage.)
Yeong-suk   (Wiping away tears, stands up.)
Choe      (Standing up) Where are you going?
Director Lee      I'm going wherever my feet take me.
Yeong-suk   Where is that?
Director Lee      I don't know—(To the innkeeper) I've troubled you too much for a long time.
Innkeeper   (Softening) Oh my, what are you talking about? I have to eat to live, so I end up saying this and that. Don't take it to heart. Huh. I'm not that bad of a woman. You'll know that because you've been through it.
Director Lee      Yes, I know. I know everything well. And Yeong-suk, you came all the way here—I'm sorry. Please forgive me.
Yeong-suk   Not at all, don't say that.
Choe      I'm very sorry too. But I don't have the power to save you.
Director Lee      Thank you. I'm grateful. And I don't even think about your salvation. Still, I have two arms and legs. Not only that, but the stage is waiting for me now. My role is from now on. Well—then—.
Innkeeper   Still, human affection is a dirty thing. (Cries.) A cold wind is blowing... Good bye.
Yeong-suk   Director Lee, I understand the stage well too.
Choe      Well, let's go! In a tone of sighing.
- (End) - <131>

**Named Entities**

沈勳	Shim Hun
李慶孫	Lee Gyeong-son
劉一淳	Yu Il-chun
崔承一	Choe Seung-il
金永八	Kim Yeong-pal
원산	Wonsan
桂洞	Gye-dong
레닌	Lenin
칼 리브크네히트	Karl Liebknecht
자룩센불크	Zara Leander
개성	Gaeseong
최병환	Choe Byeong-hwan



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제9호
발행일	1927년 10월 01일
기사제목	放送劇, 엇던 舞臺監督의 이약이 全一幕, 劇硏究會第7回放送臺本
필자	金永八(作)
기사형태	희곡·시나리오

放送劇, 엇던 舞臺監督의 이약이 全一幕, 劇硏究會第7回放送臺本
						金永八(作)
人物              役割

李監督           沈勳

母親             李慶孫

朴永淑           劉一淳

崔丙煥           崔承一

旅館主人老婆     金永八

때는 느진 봄. 무대는 어느 여관 뒤. 체 擬音은 바람.

어머니   저 학생은 왼 학생이냐?
永淑   (얼골을 붉힌다.)
李       네 저?! (어물거린다.)
어머니   저 학생도 연극하는 사람이냐?
李       안이요 -
어머니   안이야? (永淑을 내리 훌터본다.)
李       네 저의 친구이여요.
어머니   (흘긋 곁눈으로 보다가 눈을 피하면서) 응 --  친구야.
李       참 영숙시 이 어른은 저의 어머니심니다. 인사 엿주우시지요.
永淑   네 - (겨우 목소래가 나올낙말낙 하고 머리를 숙이며 붓끄러워한다.)
어머니   네 평안하오 - 아이그 얼골도 똑똑하지. 그래 올래 몃 살이나 되엿소?
永淑   열아홉쌀이예요.
어머니   열아홉쌀? 아이그 말소리도 엇저면 저러케 입부우.
永淑   (머리를 숙이고 아모 말이 업다.)
- 사  이 -
李       어머니.
어머니   그래.＜123＞
李       그런대 오늘 별안간 서울까지 오섯스니 왼일이서요.
어머니   올애동안 보지 못한 너두 볼겸 또 그리고 오늘밤 차로 원산을 갈냐고 그런다.
李       원산이요?
어머니   그래.
李       원산은 왜요.
어머니   (기막히는 듯이) 너야 밤낫 떠돌아 단이니까 무얼 알겟니만 그럿타고 그럿케 모른  단 말이냐. 그래서야 엇더케 아들이라고 밋겟니.
李       무얼 말슴이예요?
어머니   너는 아버지 생각이 도모지 업늬?
李       돌아가신 아버님 말슴이심니까?
어머니   그래.
李       산 사람이 살기를 위하야 싸와도 잘 살아지지 안는 이때이니까 도라가신 아버님을  생각지 못하는 것이야 그다지 이상할 것이 잇슴니까.
어머니  (말을 못한다.)
李       그래 어머님께서는 아버님의 산수에를 가시는 길이시란 말슴이심니까.
어머니   그럿타. 너는 너고 나는 나니까 너는 이젓기로  나야 죽기 전에는 너의 아버지를  이즐 수 잇늬.
李       (한참 무슨 생각을 하고 잇다가) 그러시겟죠.
어머니   그런대 이애 너도 아다십히 나도 이번이 마즈막인듯십다. 이번에 단여오면 또다시  갈 것 갓지도 안코 - (소래업시 눈물을 흘닌다.) - 그래서 마즈막 겸 겸두겸두하여         서 가기는 가야할 터인대 차삭이 또 업구나. 그래서 설마 아들 안태 오면 엇지되겟         지 하엿드니 여기오니 또 너역 그러니 말이 나오지를 안는구나.
李       (어머니의게 동정하는 빗을 보인다.)
어머니   (한숨의 쉰다.)
李       저역 요사이는 궁해서 여관에서는 작고 나가라고 함니다. 넉달치를 안이 주엇드니  - 그럼 어머니 게동 아주머니 댁이나 가서서 말슴이나 하여 보십쇼. 설마 거기는 돈        잇는 집이니까.
어머니   어데 그런대 가면 말이 나오드냐.
李       그럼 엇더케 하심니까.
어머니   글세 좀 가보까?
(三人 묵묵히 안젓다가 어머니가 일어서서 방안을 휘둘어 보고 무엇을 생각하다가     결심한 듯이)
어머니   그럼 좀 단여오마.
李       어대를 가서요? 게동집 가서요?
어머니   글세. 어보학생 - 안저 놀다가오. 응.
永淑   (일어나 黙禮한다.)
어머니 퇴장 ＜124＞
李       영숙씨 퍽 더러운 것은 인간성이지요. 죽은 사람을 생각하는 것과 죽어가는 나와  가튼 사람을 사랑하신다는 영숙씨를 질기지 안는 것을 생각하면 - 또 최군과 가튼         훌륭한 인격자가 영숙씨를 사랑한다 하여도 그것을 배반하는 것을 생각하면 - 아편        에 중독이 되야 집을 팔고 땅을 팔고 계집을 팔고 자식을 팔은 다음에 자긔를 파는         인간성도 드럽지마는 태양을 생키고 지구를 주먹으로 따리여서 깨트리지 못하는 인         간성도 비겁하고 더러운 것 갓해요. 그리하야 이 우주를 흔드러 놋치 못하는 것이.
永淑   왜 이리 혼자 흥분을 하서요.
李       안이요. 사회가 나를 흥분제를 주엇서요.
永淑   그럼 우리가 바라는 새로운 사회는 그럿치 안켓지요. 장차 올 사회는 -
李       어느 날? 무슨 요일에요? 안이요 안이요. 녀자가 생각하는 그러한 바램은 소용업서요. 우리들이 만들지 안으면 입으로만은 틀녓서요. (별안간 쿵치면서) 허허 나는 지금 퍽  흥분된 듯 한대 실례를 하엿지요?
永淑   안이요. 별노 관계업지요.
李       어머님은 녯날의 꿈꾸든 사랑하는 자긔의 남편을 생각하고 늘 그러케 산수에를 가  신담니다.
永淑   리선생님은 안이 가서요?
李       산수에를 가요 아니요 천만에 이 몸을 보십쇼. 이 체격을 보십쇼 이러케 불행한   안이 이러한 ??를 만드러 논 아버지를 원망할 처지임니다. 무엇이 고마워서 산수에         를 가요. 나의 아버지는 고맙지도 안은 이러한 세상을 나에게 주엇슴니다. 추악한 사        회를. 그래서 나는 나를 여러 사람에게 보이기 위하야 배우가 된 것이올시다. 세상을        보내는 것임니다. 그럿키 때문에 나는 영숙씨를 한 친구로만 아는 것이올시다. 또 나        와 가튼 체격이 적은 불구자를 나을가 두려워서 나는 일생을 홀노 보낸다는 것이지         요.
永淑   왜 그러케 엇더한 때에는 어렵고 못 알아들을 말슴을 하서요.
李       안이요. 그것이 당연한 말슴이 안이여요. 나는 전쟁이 나서 적군이 처드러와도 그  것을 방비할 총대 한아를 들만한 체격이 되지 못하엿서요.
永淑   그래두 - 때가 오면은
李       그럴까요. 이 불구자에게도 - 하엿든 인간 생활이란 극적이니까 그럴는지도 모르  지요.
永淑  그것을 그래요. 그러나 또 사람 사람에 따라서 다 다르지 안어요.-
李     그것도 일리 잇는 말슴이예요. 물론 그럴 것이지요. 그러나 저는 서슴지 안코 이     사회를 무대로 알고 그 속에 옴지기는 무리는 모다 배우로 암니다. 그럼으로 우리들        의 생활은 곳 극적이라고 볼 수가 잇는＜125＞ 것이예요. 영숙씨는 엇더케 생각을           하심니까?
永淑  저요? 그러나 저는 이 무대에서 떠나고 십허요. 이 사회라는 무대에서는 어느떄든    지 녀자라는 일홈을 버서 날 수는 업스니까요.
李      그것은 왜요?
永淑   게급이 잇는 까닭이예요. 경멸이 잇는 까닭이예요. 학대가 잇는 까닭이지요.
李      그러니까 영숙씨의 말슴은 현실을 부뎡하신단 말슴이심니다그려? 그럿치요. 그럿   치요.
永淑   그러나 그것이 소용잇서요?
李    별안간 레벨이 얏하지니 왼 까닭임니까 네? 하하하 그러나 강하여 질때는 왓슴니  다.
永淑   그럴까요?
李       네 그럿슴니다. 영숙씨는 지금 세계의 연극의 추세를 아심니까?
永淑   저는 그러한 방면은 아주 맹목이예요.
李       움지기는 세계의 대무대를 모른신다면 너무나 붓끄러운 말슴 가튼대요?
永淑   저는 붓끄럽지 안어요. 그것은 사회가 식히인 것이니까요.
李       그러나
永淑   그러면 선생님께 배우지요. 아르켜 주서요. 세계의 명배우들의 활약이 엇대요?
李       하하 그러케 단도즉입적으로 무른시면 대답하기가 대단이 곤난함니다. 그러나 신  문이 잘 말하지 안이 함니까. 요사이에 중국의 연극가튼 것은 우리가 무엇보다도 전        세계를 흔들고 잇고 또 흔들니여 잇지 안이함니까. 이것을 내가 생각할 때에는 어서        밧비 나도 배우들을 거나리고 나아가서 연극이 하고 십허요.
永淑   저도 하고십허요. 훌륭한 녀배우가 되고 십허요.
李       그래요?
永淑   네. 왜요? 저는 무대에 설만한 자격이 업서요?
李      아니 천만에 자격여부가 잇겟슴니까. 무대에 스겟다는 강한 의지와 굿은 사상만 가  지면 누구나 되는 것이올시다. 로서아의 위인 레 - 닌은 말하엿슴니다. 리론은 방법        이요 단결은 무긔라구. 그러나 리론의 시기는 지낫겟지요. 안이 지난다는 것보다도          나는 사랑쌈가튼 고리탐탐한 생각만 나요. 그러니까 나는 배우들을 모아가지고 무대        로 나갈 수 밧게는 업서요. 만약 영숙씨도 무대를 발브신다면 발버도 좃치요. 영숙씨        의 참마음으로 무대를 밟으신다면.
永淑   네 - 말슴을 인제야 잘 알어듯겟서요. 밟어보지요. 무대에서 희성된 훌륭한 녀배    우로 자룩센불크와 가티 되지요.
李       그럿슴니까? 그러면 저는 칼 리브크네히트가＜126＞ 되지요. 그러면 영숙씨도 어서  화장을 하서요. 의상을 채리시고 저는 벌서부터 메 - 크업을 하고 잇슴니다. 배우들        도 오겟지요. 도구들은 렴려 업슴니다. 우리들의 마음 가운대 잇스니까?
(이때 친구 丙煥이 등장)
崔       여 - 감독.
李       올해간만일세 그려. 최군인가.
崔       (거북한 듯이 머리를 숙이고) 드러가도 조흔가?
李       드러오게 그려.
崔       그래 엇더한가 요사히 자미가 조흔가?
李       그저 그러하이 자네는?
崔       나? 나도 그럿차 별 수 잇나. 그런대 요사이 무슨 연구하나?
李       밥이 잇서야지.
永淑   연구하시는대 밥이 꼭 듬니까?
李       네 나에게는 안이 나뿐이 아니라 누구나 연구의 재료가 밥이겟지요. 그러나 나에  게 밥 걱정이 업슬때에는 임이 사회는 밧귀인 때 겟지요. 그럼으로 연구하는 것보다        도 먼저 밥 걱정하지 안이 할 운동을 하여야 하겟지요.
崔       (농담비슷하게) 리군을 따따로 모두 인증하니 왼일인가? 안인게 아니라 지금 이약  이를 들어면 따따 갓기도 한대?
李       (코우슴을 치며) 사람들이 나더러 따따라구? 나를 따로 인중하는 사람들이 따따   일는지는 모르나 나는 따따는 안일세. 따따의 기분이 업섯든 것은 안일세. 그러나 따        따는 안일세. 나는 따따를 미워하는 따따로는 볼 수 잇스나 따따의 무리의 따따는          안 일세. - 영숙씨는 저를 엇더케 생각하심니까. 따따로 보심니까?
永淑   저는 따따의 성질을 잘 리해 할 수가 업서요. 그러나 따따가 안이시라면 따따가     안이신 것이지요.
李       엇제 대답이 대답이 따따가튼대요.
永淑   (동시에 웃는다.)
崔
崔       그레 밥을 먹어야만 연구가 된다면?
李       그러니까 수족을 쉬일새 업시 놀니여야지.
崔       잇때까지는 가만이 안저서 먹고 지냇든가?
李       그럿치도 안엇지. 나는 어려서부터 지금까지 팔과 다리를 쉬일 사이가 업시 움지  기 엿지만은 그떄부터 어제까지의 움지기 엿든 것은 머리를 들지 못하고 숙으리고만        잇기 때문이엿스나 오늘부터의 로동은 머리를 들고 팔다리를 움지기면 우리는 밥을         그 속으로부터 정당하게 엇고 또 정당하게 내지 안으면 안이 될 것을 말하여서 밥을        엇어먹는 수 밧게는 업네. 나를 모르는 사람은 혹 내말을 듯고 우슬 사람도 잇슬는         지 모르나 그러나 우서도 할 수 업지.＜127＞
헤헤 천만의 말이지.
旅館主人 (신을 끄을고 드러오면서 담배통을 돌에다 따리면서) 여보 리선생 잇소?
李       (들은 체도 안이하고) 밥은 먹어야 할 터이니까.
主人   여보 리선생.
李       그럼으로 나는 밥을 찻거나 로동을 하나.
主人   여보 리선생. (소래가 크다.)
李       나에게는 그러한 행목이 오지 안는대야 엇저는 수가 업거든 - 야 - 나가서 점심  이나 누구에게든지 또 어더 먹어야겟다. 려관에서는 밥은 커냥 방을 작고 내노라고         하니까 귀신가튼 마누라쟁이가 그러나 그들도 먹고 살자니까.
崔       (입에다 손을 대이고 주인 잇는 것을 아르킨다.) 쉬 -
主人   리선생 -
李       네 -
主人   네란 다 무엇이요. 당신두 원 사람이면은 렴체가 엇서야 안하우?
李       글세요.
主人   그 외그려우. 그리기를 외양은 그럿치 안은 량반이 나는 이건 깜팡돈으로 지내는    줄 알우? 생각이 좀 잇서야 하지안소. 나간다 나간다 말만하면 엇저잔 말이요. 응.
李       나가죠.
主人   안이 언제 말이요.
李       지금 나가죠. (일어슨다.)
主人   짐은 엇더케 할 세음이요.
李       잇다가 또와서 잘테니 거기 두어야지요.
主人   안이 무엇이 엇제요? 원 저 원수를 엇더케 해 하기를 -
李       잠간만 안저 게십쇼. 자 - 거기 좀 잇게. 내곳 들어 옷게 응 좀 피하여야겟네. (나  간다.)
主人   흥 긔가 막히여 상전상전하니 이런 상전이 어대 잇서 글세 잇기를 엥 - (쫏치여     나간다.)
(두 사람 묵묵히 안저 잇다가)
崔       당산은 영숙씨가 안이심니까.
永淑   (얼골을 붉힌다.)
崔       개성이 댁이시지요?
永淑   네.
崔       오늘은 한가하심니까?
永淑   ......
崔       참 오늘이 일요일이니까요.
永淑   네 -
崔       저를 모르심니까?
永淑   네 자서이 모르겟서요.
崔       저는 개성 청년회의 최병환이올시다. 그러면 아시겟지요.＜128＞
永淑   네?
崔       아시겟지요? 어머님도 안령하심니까 그간 서울와서 올해 잇게 되여서 어머님 뵈   온지도 퍽 올애되엿슴니다.
永淑   네 그러서요. 저는 어머님꼐 선생님의 말심은 만이 들엇슴니다요.
崔       천만에요. 어머님께서 퍽 저를 사랑하서서요. 맛치 당신의 친아들이나 사위가티 사  랑하여 잇는 것은 영숙씨도 잘 아시겟지요.
永淑   (얼골이 붉어지고 말이업다.)
崔       (상대가 붓그러워하는 것을 눈치채고) 참 리군과는 올해전부터 아시든가요?
永淑   안이요 -
崔       그럼 근래에 아섯든가요.
永淑   네.
崔       어머님도 리군을 아시나요?
永淑   ......
崔       모르시나요?
永淑   네.
崔       그럼 서울 오신 것도 모르시겟슴니다. 그려?
永淑   네 - 그러나 저는 이곳을 목적으로 서울 온 것은 안이예요. 저의 동무를 맛나러     왓든 길이예요.
崔       그럿트라도 어머님께 말슴을 하고 오세예죠. 그럿치 안이하면 댁에서 기다리시지  안이함니까? 아조 모르는 사람가트면 이러한 말은 안이하여도 좃치만은 저는 이러한        말을 하여서 별로 관게 업슬 것 가트니까 하는 말이올시다. 사실 내가 여기 온 것은        영숙씨를 길에서 보앗다가 이 곳으로 들어오시는 것을 보고 왓슴니다.
永淑   네 그러서요. 고맙슴니다.
崔       오늘 안으로 가시겟슴니까?
永淑   네.
崔       그럼 저하고 함께 가시지요. 저도 오늘쯤 단여 오랴고 하는 차이니까 그리하시는 것이 엇더함니까. 네 영숙씨?
永淑  ......
崔       좀 거북하심니까.
永淑   안이요.
崔       그럼 가티 가시지요?
永淑   ......
崔       왜 대답이 업슴심니가?
永淑  가티가시지요.
崔       가티가시여도 관게업슬만 함니다. 댁에 가서서 아시면 아시겟지만 저는 영숙씨를  보호할만한 책임이 잇스니까요.
永淑   그러한 말슴은 그만두서요.＜129＞
崔       그러면 취소하겟슴니다. 그러나 별로 관게 업다는 말슴이 안이심니까?
永淑   관게 업스니까 말슴마서요.
李       (어느결인지 들어와서 잇다가) 두분은 어엽분 새들과가티 정다웁슴니다. 그려.
永淑   (얼골이 불어진다.)
崔       리군 어대 단여왓나.
李       산에 좀 올나갓섯네 - .
崔       산에 무엇하러.
李       경성안을 내려다 보기 위하야 그리고 하눌을 치여다 보기 위하야서.
崔       그래서 엇더케한단 말인가.
李       가슴이 답답하여서 올나가서 이곳저곳을 바라보기는 하엿스나 하눌과 가티 고르지  못하고 안이 잇다금 하눌도 거문 구름이 둥둥 떠단이며 비가 오는대, 시가가 고를          수가 잇나. 얏흔 집도 잇고 놉흔 집도 잇고 반듯한 집도 잇지만 다 쓰러지는 집이          더 만테. (하다가 무엇을 깨다른 듯이) 참 미안함니다. 두분께 자미잇는 이야기가 중        간에 끗치여서 허허.
永淑   안이예요. 리선생님.
崔       원 그사람.
李       이 사람 변명할 것이 무엇잇나. 나야 아모러케하여도 조흐니 나는 아모 것도 업는  사람일세. 집이 잇나 내가 요구하는 사회가 잇나 그러니까 나에게는 개성도 업고 연        애도 업는 것일세.
崔       또 자네는 따따식 용어를 쓰네 그려.
李      허허. (우스며) 따따? 마음대로 해석하게. 그러나 나는 배가 곱흐다. 밥을 엇으러    무대로 가야겟다.
崔       자 영숙씨 우리도 집으로 가시지요. 차시간에 늣지안케.
永淑   (들은채도 안이하고) 리선생님 - 그러케 시장하서요.
李       네. 밥을 안이 먹으면 몸을 움지길 수가 업서요. 집을 세울녀면 주춧돌과 들보가   필요하고 물고기에는 물이 업스면 죽는 것과 가티 사람들에게는 밥이 필요함니다.          연애도 밥이 잇고 연애가 안이임니까.
永淑   그럴까요?
李       그럿치요. 반듯이 그럿치요. 만약 누구던지 그럿치 안타는 사람이 잇스면 그것은   허위임니다. 그것은 그짓말임니다. 나의 말은 우수은 것 갓겟지만은 아마 진리일 것         이올시다.
永淑   그래두 - .
李       허위를 가지고 사람을 기만하는 것은 나는 악마 이상이라고 함니다. 그것가티 미  운 것은 업슴니다. 그러나 사람은 할 수가 잇는 것임니다. 더욱이 녀자들은 그것을          례사로 하고 잇슴니다. 허허.＜130＞
永淑   그래요? (운다.)
李       그러나 영숙씨만은 그럿치 안이하겟지요.
(이떄 주인등장)
主人   리선생 또 왓소?
李       네 왓슴니다.
主人   여보 글세 좀 생각을 해요. 어쩌라고 이러케 날마다 방을 안이내노우 글세. 응?
李       마나님 미안함니다. 나는 지금 곳 나가겟스니 렴려마십쇼.
主人   어대 나갑듸가? 말노만 나간다 나간다 하기만 하니 이래서야 어느 밋처갈 년이 이   영업을 한단 말이요. 말이.
(李 방으럀œ 뛰여들어 가서 짐을 싸가지고 나온다.)
永淑   (눈물을 씨스면서 이러슨다.)
崔       (일어스면서) 어대로 갈터인가?
李       발가는대로 가지.
永淑   발가는 대가 어대여요.
李       글세요 - (주인에게) 올애동안 너무나 만이 신세를 낏치엿슴니다.
主人   (눅으러저서) 아이그 무얼 신세라고 그리시우. 나도 할수 헐 수 업시 먹고 살냐니    까 이런 소리 저런 소리를 하게 되는 것이요. 엇지 생각마시오. 응. 나도 그다지 낫         분 년은 안이라우 지내보앗스니까 알터이시지만.
李       네 암니다. 다 잘 암니다. 그리고 영숙씨 못처럼 차저 오섯다가 - 미안합니다. 용  서하십쇼.
永淑   천만에 그런 말슴은 마서요.
崔       나도 퍽 미안하이. 그러나 나의 힘이 자네를 구할만한 힘이 업스니.
李       고마우이. 감사하이. 그리고 자네의 구원가튼 것은 생각지도 안이하네. 그래두 나  의 팔이 둘이나 잇고 다리가 달니엿스니까. 그 뿐만안이라 지금 무대에서는 나를 기        다리고 잇네. 나의 역할은 지금부터 일세. 자 - 그러면 - .
主人   그래두 사람의 정이란 더러운 것이야. (운다.) 찬바람은 불어오는데...... 여보 잘      가우.
永淑   리선생님 저도 무대를 잘 알겟세요.
崔       자 우리는 가시지요! 永歎의 調로.
- (끗) -＜131＞
＜123-131＞