별건곤 제9호
1927년 10월 01일
高級蕩女呂太后, 東西毒婦列傳(其二) (The High-Class Immoral Empress Lü, Biographies of Poisonous Women of the East and West (Part 2))
茄予峰人
문예기타 (Miscellaneous Literature)

In the land of Tanp'u (單父), there lived a strange man named Lyo Mun (呂文) who did not care much about his household but always wandered around the world, making a living by reading people's faces. The world called him a "face reader."

This man was not an ordinary person. He did not even glance at those who were sloppy, and he would never read the faces of those who did not please him, even if they offered him a fortune. However, if he saw something strange in someone's face, he would follow them, even if they were beggars or lowly guests, and read their faces without pay. Sometimes, he would insist on reading their faces while counting cups of wine or small sums of money. What he saw always came true and was always verified. Therefore, people at that time called him the "Sage of Face Reading" and an "Extraordinary Person."

In this way, this person traveled the world, making a living by reading faces, but he did not covet money, he was selective about who he associated with, he liked writing, and he was happy to see swords. He pretended to be a man of purpose and a hero.

While traveling around the world, reading people's faces, discussing writing when he had time, and drinking when he had the chance, this wandering man had somehow managed to have daughters. After giving birth to his eldest daughter, he stared at her face and suddenly slapped his knee, looking at his wife and lamenting and laughing, "She has the aura of an emperor, but she is just a girl! But she is more than qualified to be an empress! But there is poison in her eyes and a blue aura on her face, so she will become a bit immoral... Oops! Never mind!" He was happy and decided to find her a spouse in his heart.

After giving birth to his second daughter, he stared at her face again and slapped his knee, "She seems to have a slightly less grand aura than the eldest, but this child is also good. She is qualified to be a queen. Anyway, it is a blessing for our family. What if she were a son? Grow up well. I will find you a good spouse. Your father is good at reading faces, so don't worry-" and he was happy a second time.

In this way, this man entrusted his wife with raising his daughters beautifully and kindly and left home to wander the world. After roaming for several years, he returned home and saw that his daughters were growing up beautifully and kindly like twin peony flowers in front of the yard. He was so fond of his daughters that he held them on his knees and said, "Uh-huh, my daughters, you will become empress in the future, and you will become queen when you grow up. Uh-huh..." and danced and showed affection.

He hated to leave his beloved daughters, but to find them spouses (talents of kings, lords, and generals), he left home again, asking his wife to raise his daughters beautifully and kindly while he was away, and to teach them poetry, literature, etiquette, music, needlework, and housekeeping. Crossing mountains and rivers, traveling to Shandong (山東) and Jiangxi (江西) for several years, he followed and read the faces of all the heroes in the world, but although there were some good people among them, there was no one so outstanding that he liked. He was very disappointed in his heart, but he waited patiently and continued to wander.

After roaming for several years, he missed his daughters who were growing up beautifully and returned home. Time was like flowing water, and the eldest daughter was already 18 years old, and the second daughter was already 16 years old. He was pleased to see the graceful appearance of his younger daughter, who was tidying up silk fabrics in front of the wardrobe with her mother in the inner room. The eldest daughter, who had been reciting poetry in the backyard cottage, heard that her father, who had been traveling far away, had returned and lifted her skirt as if flying, descending to the porch with bare feet like lotus roots! What kind of wife she would become, even her father, the famous face reader, was dazed.

He put his two daughters in front of him and compared their faces from when they were young to when they were grown up, and there was not much difference, but they looked a little more splendid. After drinking four or five cups of welcome wine poured by his wife, he lay down, resting his head on a mandarin duck pillow made by his younger daughter, and looked at his twin daughters again. He had never seen such faces while traveling the world, and he was overjoyed. "You, the eldest, will become an empress, and you, the younger, will become a queen. Ah - my precious daughters!" and smiled. Then, noticing something strange again, he gently touched his eldest daughter's eyes, "This child's eyes are a bit - strange? And her complexion is a bit - blue..." <142> and hesitated a couple of times.

He left again. To obtain the talent of kings, lords, and generals, to find spouses for his daughters, he left again and wandered around. When he arrived in P'ae County (沛縣), people said that there was a man named Yu Kye (劉季) [Yu Pang (劉邦)], who had a prominent nose and a dragon-like face, with thick whiskers and 72 black spots under his left leg. He had an aura of becoming noble in the future, but since becoming the head of the Sasu (泗上) district, he had been indulging in drinking and women and was said to be living a dissolute life every day, so they all looked down on him, saying that he seemed to have no future. When the face reader heard this, he went to Sasu (泗上) to find Yu Kye (劉季). He was sitting in a brothel with beautiful women, drinking and singing, living a dissolute life. Looking closely, he indeed had a prominent nose and a dragon-like face, with extremely thick whiskers, and his arms were long enough to reach below his knees. He was truly a hero unlike any he had ever seen, and the aura of an emperor was clearly visible. He was overjoyed in his heart, thinking that he had achieved his lifelong wish. He invited Yu Kye (劉季) to a quiet place, introduced himself, and immediately begged him to accept his daughter (Lyo Yŏn (呂顔)) as his wife. Yu Kye (劉季) was originally fond of women, or perhaps it was fate, but he accepted without hesitation. Lyo Mun (呂文) was overjoyed and took Yu Pang (劉邦) to his house and told his wife the story. His wife did not yet know Yu Pang's (劉邦) personality, so she insisted that it was not right to give their precious daughter to a district head of Sasu (泗上) and that she should be given to a member of the P'ae County (沛縣) family. (There was a marriage proposal before.) Lyo Mun (呂文) scolded her, saying that a woman could not recognize people. He had found the spouse he had wanted all his life today. This man would become a king if small, and an emperor if large. He decided on the marriage, and this eventually became Empress Lyo (呂后), the wife of Han Kao-tsu (漢高祖) [Yu Pang (劉邦)]. (Lyo Mun's (呂文) second daughter married P'an K'wai (樊噲), and they also married on the same day.)

After Yu Pang (劉邦) fought with the world's greatest general, Hsiang Yü (項羽), for eight years, Lyo Hu (呂后) in her youth had few peaceful days. She would have slept in the army barracks and her heart would have been strained by the sword light. Moreover, how would she have felt when crossing the Šu (蜀) Road, and how would she have felt when Yu Pang's (劉邦) soul fled at the Chü (雎) River? At this time, she would not have been able to sleep comfortably, let alone live in luxury. Moreover, how could she have even thought of immoral acts, or dreamed of making a living through violence? However, as the wife of Yu Pang (劉邦), the Han P'ae-gong (漢沛公), there would have been times of luxury. As her father had predicted, there would have been times of internal and external affairs, and she would have tried to act cute when the time was right, and her poisonous nature would have occasionally shown. However, there seem to have been no sins that the world knew about during those eight years of hardship. She must have put up a great fuss when Ch'i-fu-jen (戚夫人) was brought in?

It is said that Lyo Hu (呂后) was branded as the most immoral, licentious, seductive, and poisonous woman of all time after Yu Pang (劉邦) ascended the throne as the so-called Han T'ai-tsu (漢太祖). After wandering through hardship for nearly 10 years without a peaceful day, she was fortunate enough to become the wife of the so-called emperor and command the world, so how could she not have enjoyed supreme luxury?

Lying high in grand and spacious rooms, taking all the treasures of the world and placing them on her left and right, what could she not do as she pleased, eating what she wanted to eat, wearing what she wanted to wear, and doing what she wanted to do? <143> Lying in grand and spacious rooms without eating well or dressing well, what was there to do? Her true nature was aroused. Immoral winds began to blow. No matter how precious her position as empress was, how could she endure the dissatisfaction of her sexual desires? Why should she endure what she wanted to do? Yu Pang (劉邦) was there, but how could that be enough? Moreover, Yu Pang (劉邦) had Ch'i-mi-jen (戚夫人) and palace women attending to him on his left and right. Despite her face and position, Lyo Hu (呂后) opened the front and back doors, deceiving Yu Pang's (劉邦) eyes, and began to summon handsome and strong soldiers in turn. Siao Ho (蕭何), one of the three founding heroes who only knew about state affairs and not private affairs, and who held the high position of prime minister, is said to have entered Lyo Hu's (呂后) bedroom a hundred times. Chang Liang (張良), who was admired by the world as a man of integrity and high morals, the so-called I Yin (伊尹) of the time, is said to have succumbed to Lyo Hu's (呂后) enticement and violated his chastity. How could one enumerate the handsome men and youths besides them? It is said that Empress Lyo (0后) of modern times wore a fox amulet (여호00) around her waist to seduce people, but this product would be the representative of immorality for all time.

Who could stop her from doing what she wanted with her own things, and what would be the use of saying anything? If state affairs were not harmed and there was no harm to the people, then it would be left to the unknown. But how could state affairs be perfect and the people be at peace if things went this way?

In addition to immoral winds, murderous winds began to blow in Lyo Hu (呂后). After obtaining the world and enjoying peace, she had no worries about anything, but it was questionable whether this could be guaranteed forever. After Yu Pang (劉邦) died, or even before he died, the revolt of dissatisfied kings, lords, and generals would be a big problem. She wanted to enjoy unlimited pleasure forever, but she was deeply worried about the rebellion of the feudal lords. Unable to think of anything else, she plotted to kill the founding meritorious subjects. She decided to arrest and kill all the kings, lords, and generals who had strength, cunning, and soldiers.

First of all, even Sun Wu (孫吳) would not have been able to believe it at the time of the founding. Huaiyin-hu (淮陰侯) Han Sin (韓信), who had earned the title of Military God, was falsely enticed and captured and killed by strongmen, and his entire family was exterminated. How heinous!

Liang-wang (梁王) P'yŏng Wŏl (彭越) (also a founding meritorious subject) was also falsely accused (the only excuse was to eliminate future troubles), executed, and his entire family was exterminated. Besides this, countless kings and lords were either killed, their families were exterminated, they ran away, they were exiled, they almost died, or they died and came back to life. There was no one who was not caught by Lyo Hu (呂后). It is said that Siao Ho (蕭何) was fortunate to have preserved his life due to his close relationship with Lyo Hu (呂后), and that Chang Liang (張良) was fortunate to have avoided death because he had run away in advance.

It is said that this poisonous woman killed people so brutally and cruelly that all the plants and creatures shuddered and turned away. The method of killing was extremely violent and inhumane.

Once, Yu Pang (劉邦) suffered a great defeat in the Chü (雎) River battle but was fortunate enough to meet a benefactor and save his life, and at that time, he brought back Ch'ŏk-puin (척부인). There was a son born to this Ch'ŏk-puin (척부인), Chao-wang (趙王) Yoi (如意). Because he was smarter than Lyo Hu's (呂后) son, the crown prince, and also resembled Yu Pang (劉邦) in appearance, it was decided to appoint Yoi (如意), the son of Ch'ŏk-puin (척부인), as the crown prince, saying that the emperor, Lyo Hu's (呂后) son, was weak. Lyo Hu (呂后), who had detected this, was furious <144> and plotted to poison Ch'ŏk-puin (척부인) and Chao-wang (趙王) Yoi (如意). She conspired with many trusted aides and first made a complete decision to establish her own son as the crown prince. (She forced Chang Liang (張良) to use his strategy to recruit the eminent Sangsan Sahao (常山四皓) of the time, and obtained the emperor's consent.)

Then, Emperor Yu Pang (劉邦) fell ill after being hit by a stray arrow while fighting against Huainan-wang (淮南王) Kyŏng-po (鯨布) and died. From now on, there would be no more excessive autocracy than Lyo Hu (呂后). As the Grand Empress Dowager, she committed atrocities and chaos in every way. First, she poisoned Chao-wang (趙王) Yoi (如意), who was in her eyes, and then extended her poisonous hands to Ch'ŏk-puin (척부인), her enemy during Lyo Hu's (呂后) time. First, she cut off Ch'ŏk-puin's (척부인) limbs so that she could not go, come, sit, or stand, and made her a round lump. Then, she gouged out her eyes so that she could not see, poured boiling oil into her ears so that she could not hear, and poured poison into her mouth so that she could not bite, speak, or eat, and put her in a pigsty. Then, she called the Second Emperor (so-called Emperor Hyo-hye (孝惠皇帝)) to see this. The Emperor was so shocked that he wept and fell ill on the spot, suffering for a year before barely recovering. How cruel and violent a female ghost!

Emperor Hyo-hye (孝惠皇帝) at this time became chronically ill from the shock and died after only seven years on the throne. Because he had no son, Lyo T'aehu (呂太后) took another person's son and placed him on the throne. However, she was dissatisfied with that and plotted to replace him with her own relatives, the Lyo (呂) clan. When Ch'in P'yong (陳平) and Chu Po (周勃) argued that this was impossible, she did not listen and secretly killed the young emperor and established Hŏngsan-wang (恒山王) Ŭi (義) as the son of the false Emperor Hyo-hye (惠帝).

Even Lyo T'aehu (呂太后), the representative high-class poisonous woman of all time, had a day when her luck ran out. One day, in the eighth year of the Third Emperor Hyo-hye (惠帝), she suddenly fell down and died. Then, Lyo Nok (呂祿) and Lyo San (呂産), powerful figures in the Lyo (呂) clan, plotted to seize power and started a rebellion. However, as a result of Ch'in P'yong (陳平) and Chu Po's (周勃) fierce battle for the Yu (劉) clan, they defeated and killed Lyo Nok (呂祿) and Lyo San (呂産) and exterminated the Lyo (呂) clan, regardless of gender or age. The sins that Lyo Hu (呂后) had accumulated were finally avenged here.

In the beginning, why could Lyo Mun (呂文), Lyo Hu's (呂后) father, see the success of the Yu (劉) clan in his face reading, but not see the destruction of the Lyo (呂) clan? Is this not a question for all time? The destruction later was not as good as being an empress for a time, haha. <145>

**Named Entities**

呂文	Lyo Mun
單父	Tanp'u
劉季	Yu Kye
劉邦	Yu Pang
呂顔	Lyo Yŏn
沛縣	P'ae-hyŏn
泗上	Sasu
漢高祖	Han Kao-tsu
樊噲	P'an K'wai
項羽	Hsiang Yü
蜀道	Šukto
雎水	Chyŭsu
漢太祖	Han T'aejo
戚夫人	Ch'i-puin
蕭何	Siao Ho
伊尹	I Yin
張良	Chang Liang
趙王如意	Cho-wang Yoi
常山四皓	Sangsansa-ho
淮南王鯨布	Hwainam-wang Kyŏng-po
孝惠皇帝	Hyo-hye Hwangje
恒山王義	Hŏngsan-wang Ŭi
呂祿	Lyo Nok
呂産	Lyo San
陳平	Ch'in P'yŏng
周勃	Chu Po
呂后	Lyo Hu
山東	Shantung
江西	Kanghsi



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제9호
발행일	1927년 10월 01일
기사제목	高級蕩女呂太后, 東西毒婦列傳(其二)
필자	茄予峰人
기사형태	문예기타

高級蕩女呂太后, 東西毒婦列傳
						茄予峰人
單父(보)란 땅에 呂文이란 한 이상한 위인이 잇서 가사는 별로 도라보지 안코 항상 세상을 두루 도라다니며 남의 相을 보아주는 것으로 일을 삼고 잇스니 세상이 그를 가리켜 「관상쟁이」이라 하더라.
이 위인은 엇재든 보통 위인이 안이엿다. 상을 보되 여간 草草한 자는 눈거러 보지도 안고 또 자기 마음에 들지 안는 자는 비록 만금을 준다해도 절대 보아주지를 안엇다. 그러나 자기 눈에 좀 이상한 점만 보이는 듯하면 비록 乞人賤客이라도 따라가 붓들고 무보수로 보아주며 혹 경우에는 술잔이나 돈푼이나 톡톡히 세 가면서 기어히 보아 주군 하얏다. 보면 반듯이 맛고 또한 꼭꼭 증험이 되것다. 그래서 이 때 사람들이 이를 가르켜 「觀相의 聖者」라 하고 「異人」이라고 하얏다.
이리하야 이 者는 천하를 도라단니며 상 보아주기를 일삼으되 돈을 탐하지 안으며 사람을 가리여 사괴며 또한 글을 조와하며 劒을 보면 또한 반겨하며 제법 무슨 지사가티 안이 제법 英雄好漢인 척하고 단이엿다.
이럿케 천하를 주유하며 사람의 상이나 보아주고 여가 잇스면 글 토론이나 하고 기회 잇스면 술이나 마시는 이러한 방랑의 위인이 그래도 어느 틈에 제조하얏든지 딸 형제는 제조해 두엇다. 맛딸을 나어놋코 상을 물그럼이 드려다 보다가 갑작이 무릅을 툭치며 자긔 안해를 보고＜141＞ 탄식겸 빙슥 우스며 「천자의 기상을 가지긴 가젓스나 그만 게집애로구나! 그러나 황후의 격은 넉넉하다! 그러나 눈초리에 毒이 잇고 얼굴에 퍼런 기ㅡ 잇서 좀 淫蕩스럽게 되얏는걸...... 앗차! 이건 딴소리!」하고 스사로 깃버하고 또 스사로 그 배필을 구해보기로 내심에 정하얏다 한다.
둘재 딸을 나어놋코 또 물그럼히 상을 드려다 보드니 또 무릅을 툭 치며 「맛애 보다는 기상이 좀 못한 듯 하나 이 애도 괜찬타. 왕후의 처는 넉넉하겟다. 엇잿든 吾家의 복이다. 아들이면 별수 잇드냐. 잘 자라거라. 내 조흔 배필을 구해 주마. 네 아비 상을 잘 보나니 념려 잇겟느나-」하고 두 번재 깃버하얏다 한다.
이리하야 이 위인은 딸 형제를 곱게 착하게 양육할 것을 자기 안해에게 부탁하고 집을 떠나 널니 천하를 주유하얏다. 멧해를 도라다니다가 집에를 드러가보니 딸 형제가 뜰 압헤 두폭 牧丹花가티 어글어글하게 곱게 착하게 잘 자라는데 자기 딸이지만 엇지도 탐스럽고 입분지 두 딸을 무릅우에 안치고 「어허둥둥 내 딸아 너는 장래 황후되고 너는 자라 왕비되라. 어허둥둥......」하고 억개 춤을 추며 재롱을 보앗다 한다.
사랑스런 딸을 두고 다시 외출하기가 실흐나 그의 배필(王侯將相의 才)을 구해보기 위하야 또 집을 떠나면서 자기 안해에게 자기 업는동안 딸 형제를 곱게 착하게 기를 것을 부탁하고 또한 詩書禮樂이며 針工食事를 잘 가르키여 줄 것을 부탁하얏다. 산을 넘고 물을 건너 山東으로 江西로 멧해를 도라다니며 천하의 好漢이란 好漢은 따라가며 상을 보앗스나 개중에 好人物이 업지는 안치만 그럿케 마음에 맛는 탁월한 인물은 업는지라 心中에 퍽 섭섭하되 오직 시기만 기다리며 꾸준히 도라 단이엇다.
멧해를 도라다니다가 집 생각 안이 곱게 자라는 딸 형제가 생각나서 집에 도라와보니 세월이 若流波라 맛 딸의 나희가 발서 18세, 둘재 딸이 발서 16세엿다. 內室 장롱 압헤서 모친과 마조 안저 섬섬옥수로 吳綾蜀帛을 뒷첫다 재첫다 하는 적은 딸의 단아한 容姿도 보기 좃커니와 후원초당에서 詩書를 외오다가 遠遊의 부친이 도라오신다는 말을 듯고 날 듯 뛸 듯 치마를 거더들고 외씨 갓튼 맨발로 삽작 堂下로 내려서는 맛딸의 月態花容! 장차 누구의 처가 되겟는지 그야말로 이 명관상쟁이 부친도 恍忽하얏다.
두 딸을 압헤놋코 다시 어렷슬 때 상과 지금 자랏슬 때 상을 비교해보니 별로 틀님은 업스나 좀더 화려해 보엿다. 안해가 부어주는 위로주를 사오배 마시고 적은 딸의 손으로 된 鴛鴦枕을 도두 베고 누어 다시금 兄弟花容을 살펴보니 천하를 주유하나 일즉 보지 못한 얼굴이라 喜不自勝하야 「큰애 너는 황후가 되고 적은 애 너는 왕비가 된다. 아 - 내 딸 형제 귀하지!」하고 빙그레 우섯다. 그리다가 또 무슨 이상한 점을 반견하얏는지 맛딸의 눈초리를 가만히 살작 만지며 「이애는 눈이 좀 - 이상해? 그리고 얼굴빗이 좀 - 퍼 - 런 것이...」＜142＞ 하고 헤를 두어번 채엿다.

또 떠낫다. 왕후장상의 才를 엇기위하야 딸 형제 배필을 구하기 위하야 또 떠나 두루 도라단이다가 沛縣에 이르니 사람들이 말하기를 劉季(邦) 란 자 잇서 隆準龍顔에 수염이 고흐며 또한 좌편다리 아래 72개의 흑점이 잇서 장래 귀히 될 기상이 잇스나 泗上亭長이 된 후부터 주색을 조와하야 날마다 방탕하기를 조와하니 장래가 업슬 듯하다고 모다 업수히 녁여 말하는지라 이 관상쟁이가 이 말을 듯고 곳 泗上으로 劉季를 차저가보니 靑樓에 안저 미색을 벗하야 술을 마시며 노래를 하며 방탕하기 짝이 업서 보엿다. 가만히 보니 과연 隆準龍顔에 鬚髥이 극히 고흐며 팔이 무릅 아레까지 기러진 실로 일즉 보지 못하든 천하 好漢이라 제왕의 氣宇가 역역키 보이는 지라 이여 심중에 大喜하야 평생 소원을 성취하얏다 하고 곳 劉季를 從容한 곳으로 청하야 성명을 통하고 당장에 자기의 딸(呂顔)로써 箕箒의 節을 밧들게 한다고 간청하얏다. 劉季 본래 - 호색하야 그랫던지 연분이 되야 그랫든지 첫 마듸 사양치 안코 곳 허낙하얏다. 呂文이 이에 大喜하야 劉邦을 더리고 자기의 집으로 가 안해에게그 사연을 말하니 안해는 아직 劉邦의 爲人如何를 모르는 지라 귀한 여식을 일개 泗上亭長에게 줌을 불가하다 하야 期於 沛縣원에게 줄 것을 역설하는 지라(전에 婚說이 잇섯다 한다.) 呂文이 責하야 일개 아녀자 엇지 사람을 아러보리오. 내 평생에 원하든 배 오늘에 일넛도다. 이 사람은 장래 적으면 왕이요 크면 천자 되리라 하고 아조 혼약을 결정하니 이것이 맛츰내 漢高祖(劉邦)의 안해 呂后이엿다.(呂文의 第二女는 樊噲에게 출가 亦 當日同婚)

劉邦이 천하 장사 項羽로 더부러 8년이나 風鹿을 격고나니 청춘시절의 呂后는 그닥 寧日이업섯섯다. 진중에서 새우잠 잣술 것이요. 劒光에 가슴도 죄여슬 것이다. 하물며 蜀道를 넘을 때 심사 엇더 하엿스며 雎水에 劉邦이 魂飛魄散할 때 엇더 하엿스랴. 이 때는 물론 발 편 잠도 못 갓슬 젓이요. 호화는 더구나 못 하얏슬 것이다. 하물며 음행이야 감히 생각이나 하얏스며 살벌로 爲事할 것이야 꿈이나 꾸엇스랴. 그러나 劉邦 즉 漢沛公의 안해이 만치 間間히 호화도 잇섯슬 것이요. 其父의 예언과 가티 間間히 內通外通도 하얏슬 것이고 또한 아양도 부릴때로 부려보고 독살스런 풍이 간간히 보엿슬 것이다. 그러나 8년 풍록 그 중간에는 별 세상이 알만한 죄악은 업슨 듯 하다. 戚夫人을 어더 들일 때 강짜는 뭇척 부렷섯겟지?
呂后를가리켜 만고의 음부요 탕부요 요부요 독부라 지명하기는 劉邦이 소위 漢太祖로 등극한 그 이후부터라 한다. 寧日업시 근 10년이나 풍록 중에 헤매다가 다행히 소위 천자의 안해가 되야 천하를 호령하게 되니 엇지 無上의 호화가 안이랴.
高臺廣室에 놉히 누어 천하의 寶란 다 취하야 좌우에 두고 먹고 십흔 것 입고 십흔 것 하고 십흔 것 그 무엇이 마음대로 안이되랴.＜143＞ 잘 먹고 잘 입고 하는 것 업시 고대광실에 누엇스니 할 것이 무엇이랴 이에 본 성은 충동되얏다. 淫風은 닐기 시작하얏다. 아무리 황후란 귀한 위치에 잇스나 性慾의 불만을 엇지 참으리오. 하고 십흔 것을 무엇 때문에 참으리오. 劉邦이 잇스나 그것이 엇지 만족 하리오. 함울며 劉邦은 척미인이 잇고 궁녀가 좌우를 侍側함이리오. 이를 呂后는 체면도 위치도 불구하고 압뒵문을 여러놋코 劉邦의 눈을 속여가며 얼굴이나 반반하고 힘깨나 쓰는 장졸은 번을 차저 불너드리기 시작하얏다. 국사만 알고 사사는 모른다 하는 건국삼걸의 一로 승상의 고직을 가진 蕭何도 呂后寢室에는 一百番 출입하얏다하며 淸廉高潔로 천하의 人이 앙모하든 당시 伊尹이라든 張良이도 呂后의 유인에는 그만 정조를 굴하얏다 한다. 그 외의 俊男俊兒야 엿지 枚擧할 수 잇스랴. 00近代의 여걸 0后가 사람을호리기 위하야 여호00을 허리에 차고 잇섯다 하지만 이때 이 품질이야 말로 음행에는 만고에 대표가 될 듯하다.
자기 것 가지고 자기 마음대로 하는 것을 누가 막으랴 말하면 또한 소용이 무엇이랴. 국사가 그릇되지 안코 민간에 해나 업스면 그 亦不知에 付해 두고 말 것이다. 그러나 이리하고서 엇지 국사가 완전하며 인민이 평안하리오.
呂后 음풍이외에 다시 살풍이 닐기 시작하얏다. 천하를 엇고 태평을 누리게 되니 만사에 다시 걱정이 업스나 그러나 이것을 영원히 보장하기는 의문이엿다. 劉邦이 죽으면 안이 죽기 전이라도 불평잇는 王侯將卒이 반란을 기하는 것이 큰 일이다. 영원히 獨享樂을 누렷스면 조켓는데 제후의 반란이 그윽키 걱정되얏다. 이에 생각다 생각다 못하야 건국공신 죽이기를 꾀하얏다. 왕후장상 중에 힘깨나 쓰고 모략 개나잇고 卒兵 깨나 잇는 놈은 모조리 잡아 죽이기로 하얏다.
위선 건국당시 孫吳도 밋지 못하리라. 軍神의 호를 엇은 淮陰侯 韓信이를 무고히 유인해다가 力士로 하야금 捕殺을하고 그의 삼족까지 盡滅하얏다. 얼마나 악독한 일이냐.
梁王 彭越(亦建國功臣)을 또한 무고히(다만 구실은 후환을 업시 한다는 것) 꼬여다가 참살하고 그 亦 삼족을 멸하얏다. 이 밧게 무수한 왕후가 혹은 죽고 혹은 삼족이 멸하고 혹은 다러나고 혹은 定配 가고 혹은 죽을 번하고 혹은 죽엇다 사러나고하야 呂后의 손에 안 걸닌 자가 업섯다. 蕭何는 요행 呂后와 친밀한 관계로 생을 保하얏다 하며 張良은 미리 다라난 까닭에 요행 死를 면하얏다한다.
이 독부는 사람을 죽이되 草木群生이 다 즌저리를 떨고 도라설만하게 박살 안이면 烽殺이요 烹殺 안이면 독살이엿다 한다. 그 죽이는 방법이 극단의 포악잔인이었다 한다.
劉邦이 일즉 雎水戰에서 大困을 당하다가 요행 은인을 만내여 생명을 保하고 그 때 척부인을 더 어더왓든 일이잇다. 이 척부인에게서 나은 아들이 잇스니 趙王如意이엇다. 呂后가 나은 태자보다 위인이 똑똑하고 또한 용모가 劉邦과 흡사한지라 황제 呂后의 소생 태자는 병약하다하야 척부인 소생 如意로 하야금 태자를 정하기로 내정하얏다. 이것을 탐지한 呂后는 노발대발하야＜144＞ 곳 척부인 及 趙王如意는 독살을 計하고 諸多心腹과 謀하야 위선 자기소생자로 태자세울 것을 完定하얏다. (張良을 강요하야 良의 戱策으로 當時人 탈이 놉흔 常山四皓를 영입하야 황제의 양해를 어덧섯다.)
그리자 맛츰 황제 劉邦이가 淮南王鯨布와 싸우다가 流失에 마저 병나 죽엇다. 呂后 이제부터는 이상 더한 專權專橫은 업게 되얏다. 太后가 되야가지고 백방으로 暴行亂行을 專恣하니 위선 안중에 든 趙王如意를 鴆殺하고 니어 그의 어미 즉 呂后 당대시긔의 적이든 척부인께 독수를 내미럿다. 위선 척부인의 수족을 단절하야 가지도 오지도 안지도 서지도 못하게 두루뭉세리를 만들고 그리고 눈을 빼여 보지도 못하게 하고 그리고 귀에 끌는 기름을 부어녀어 듯지도 못하게 하고 그리고 입에 독약을 부어 녀어 물지도 못하게 말도 못하고 먹지도 못하게 해 가지고 도야지 우리에 너어 주엇섯다. 그리고 二世帝 (所謂孝惠皇帝)를 불너 이것을 보게 하얏다. 帝 놀내여 대곡하고 업퍼저 곳 발병하야 일년이나 고통하다가 겨우 니러낫섯다. 얼마나 잔인폭악한 여귀이냐.
孝惠帝 이때에 놀난 병이 고질이 되야 재위 7년만에 그만 죽어버렷다. 아들이 업스매 呂太后 타인의 자를 취하야 帝位에 卽케 하얏다. 그러나 그것이 불만하야 미기에 자기의 친족인 呂氏를 代立하기로 하얏다. 이에 陳平과 周勃이 불가함을 역설하매 미수하고 곳 그 幼帝를 幽殺하고 恒山王義를 立하야 거즛 惠帝의 子라 하얏다.

만고의 대표적 고급 독부인 呂太后도 그만 운이 盡할 날이 잇섯다. 三世惠帝 8년 어느 날에 그만 헤를 빼물고 죽어 잣바젓다. 그리자 呂氏 중의 세력자 呂祿과 呂産이 大權逆取를 謀하고 반란을 니르켯섯다. 그러나 陳平과 周勃이 劉氏를 위하야 力戰한 결과 미기에 呂祿呂産을 격파하야 참살하고 呂氏란 氏種도 업시 남녀노소 盡滅해 버리고 마럿다. 呂后의 쌋고 싸은 죄악은 여기서 시원히 보복되고 마럿다.
初에  呂后의 아비 呂文이란 자, 상을 보되 劉氏의 잘 될 것은 보고 呂氏의 멸망할 것은 웨 못 보앗는지? 이것이 천고의 의문안이냐? 후일 멸망이 一時皇后만 不如하든 모양 呵呵.＜145＞
＜141-145＞