Magazine Title: 개벽 제21호
Publication Date: 1922년 03월 01일
Article Title: 京城兄弟에게 嘆願합니다!!, -大京城을 建設키 爲하야- (I Plead with the Brethren of Kyŏngsŏng!! - To Construct a Great Kyŏngsŏng -)
Author: 朴達成
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/Argumentative Essay)

I Plead with the Brethren of Kyŏngsŏng!!, - To Construct a Great Kyŏngsŏng -
						Pak Tal-sŏng
Whether to call it public opinion or an appeal, I leave that aside, but under the name of being a Chosŏn person, I cannot help but ask, and though it is not some concrete, organized proposal, I now take up this pen.
Everyone, whether living in Kyŏngsŏng or in the countryside, all of you who are the Chosŏn people.
Let us gather our eyes, gather our ears, gather our mouths, and gather our strength to resolve the issue of our Kyŏngsŏng, which is among our problems. Before resolving it, I earnestly plead with you all:

Let us know what kind of place Kyŏngsŏng is.
Everyone, what kind of place is Kyŏngsŏng?
Kyŏngsŏng is our "Seoul" that our people have called it for ages.
Kyŏngsŏng is the central city of our people's culture, situated right in the center of South and North Chosŏn.
Kyŏngsŏng is a pivotal city in the East, connecting China to the north and Japan to the east.
Kyŏngsŏng is a city where all eyes converge, a place where people from the East and West must inevitably pass through.
Kyŏngsŏng is the city that bears the entire responsibility for and represents the total spiritual and material strength of our people.
Therefore <43>
Kyŏngsŏng can also be a place that brings shame upon our people.
Kyŏngsŏng can also be a place that displays the glory of our people.
Simply put, it is said that one can know Chosŏn by seeing Kyŏngsŏng.
Such a Kyŏngsŏng. A Kyŏngsŏng that has such a gravely important and great relationship to us. How could we dare to treat it with negligence, even for a moment?
The English boast of London, the French boast of Paris, the Germans boast of Berlin, the Americans boast of Washington, the Japanese boast of Tokyo, the Swiss (西瑞人), even smaller than Chosŏn, boast of Genoa ("쩨노바"), and even the Dutch, situated by the North Sea, boast of The Hague.
To boast of them to all the people under heaven, they gathered many people over many years, shed much blood, and shed much sweat. That is—to build a great metropolis, to demonstrate the strength of their country and their people to the world—they clearly did so. Setting aside other examples, consider present-day Tokyo in Japan, which until 50 years ago bore the small name Edo and was situated in a corner of the Musashino plain on the Pacific coast. How is it? In merely 50 years, it has formed a great Eastern metropolis with a population of 3 million, proclaiming its pride to the world. How much of their blood and sweat must have been shed!
Let's stop talking about others; we must boast of Kyŏngsŏng. However,
Everyone, is Kyŏngsŏng something to be proud of or not? If we present Kyŏngsŏng, will we not face shame? It is not right to despise what is one's own, but no matter how I look at it, Kyŏngsŏng is not yet something to be proud of.

Let's look at the inner reality of Kyŏngsŏng.
Since it was the responsibility of the political figures of that time, namely our ancestors, there is no need to say more about the location, but it is increasingly infuriating to think that Kyŏngsŏng is too deep in the mountains. When guests coming from the south pass Yŏngdŭngp'o and cross the Han River, they inevitably harbor the doubt, "Is the saying that there is a city in those mountains true or false?" And when guests coming from the north pass Susaek and cross over Sinch'on, they inevitably harbor the doubt, "Are there houses in these mountains or not?" This is a fact. Thus, upon entering Namdaemun Gate and looking around in all four directions, they will smack their lips in utter bewilderment, thinking, "Ah—mountains to the north, mountains to the south, mountains to the east, mountains to the west. Ah—it's truly deep in the mountains. Is the distance between the mountains perhaps 10 li? Not even 10 li? Ah—what reason could there be for placing a capital in such a place?" <44>
Here, our people have already suffered shame. (Regardless of whether it's the ancestors or descendants, the responsibility lies with the Chosŏn people.) Whether it's mountains or plains, let's set aside the location and look at its inner reality.
What is the population? Merely around 160,000-170,000 (including both residents and outsiders).
What is the number of households? Merely around 60,000 households (including both residents and outsiders).
Ah—indeed a small city. But then,
What are the city streets like? The streets of Namch'on (South Village) are somewhat orderly, while the streets of Pukch'on (North Village) are quite squalid. What about the roads? Namdaemun Street and Chongno Street are passable. But beyond that, there is nothing worth seeing. What about the buildings? Except for a few government offices, banks, companies, churches, schools, hospitals, etc., they are all small, single-story tiled-roof houses or thatched-roof houses. What about the shops? It seems there are no shops worth over a million Won. It appears they cannot manage beyond brokerage businesses or small retail stores. The signboards are large, but the content is insignificant.
What about education? There are no universities, only 6 or 7 professional schools (including public and private), and 13 or 14 high schools (including boys', girls', public, and private). However, there are 13 public elementary schools and 4 or 5 private elementary schools. There are 2 kindergartens, albeit incomplete, and only one orphanage. And then, in this alley and that alley, there are small signboards reading "Such-and-such Sŏdang (書堂, traditional school)," where some things chant "Heaven and Earth are dark and yellow, the sun and moon illuminate brightly (天地玄黃, 日月爲明燭)."
What about literature, and what about art? Ah—it's empty. Is there a library? There is only the Kyŏngsŏng Library, established the other day. Are there theaters? There is barely one managed by Chosŏn people. It seems there is another theater under planning. What about parks? There is only the palm-sized T'aptong Park and the incomplete Namsan Park (and even those were not made with our sweat). What about hospitals? Although there are few modern, complete hospitals, one can see many pharmacy signboards here and there. What about public bathhouses? It seems the Chosŏn people live their lives without ever bathing. There isn't a single bathhouse managed by Chosŏn people. There are only a few Japanese bathhouses throughout Namch'on and Pukch'on. What about barbershops? This is unexpected. It seems they have developed somewhat more than anything else. Among them, the most astonishing and strange is the development of Western clothing stores and Western shoe stores. Ah ah, it seems the Chosŏn people also quite like Western clothes and shoes. Another strange thing is the development of liquor stores. No, not development, just that there are many. Restaurants, domestic and foreign liquor stores, standing bars, serving bars—truly, their number is quite large. Seeing this, it seems the Chosŏn people live only on alcohol. Therefore, there are many drunkards among the people. There are many who are dazed, as if afflicted with mental illness. However, <45>
What about bookstores (書冊肆)? Ah—how shameful. Only various kinds of Chinese classics are laid out. Only several hundred kinds of "new novels" (新小說) are lined up. And then, only a few collections of popular songs (俗歌集) and a few magazines that mimic others are laid out. Books such as religious texts, literary works, political books, economic books, etc., which could serve as treasures for real human life, cannot be seen. Ah—it is truly strange that for these people, called the cultured people of ancient East Asia, books are so purely empty.
Because of this, "new novels" and popular song collections are found in abundance in every house and every room. Because of this, the mouths of men and women, old and young, only utter the sounds of reciting novels. Ah—what a pitiful people.
But why is it that among the citizens of Kyŏngsŏng Prefecture (京城府民) in general, there are few independent livers? Most are servants (奴僕 生活者) or live in servants' quarters (行廊사리). The house belongs to the master, the food belongs to the master, and even the work is the master's work. In return, the master lives in idle leisure (優遊徒食).
It is crystal clear that this is the cause of poverty and weakness. Since each person does not do their own work, there is no choice but gradual decline, and even in decline, life must be sustained, so they dare to commit all sorts of unconscionable perversions of human life, such as fraud, gambling, falsehood, flattery, etc.

I Plead with the Brethren of Kyŏngsŏng
Everyone, this is the inner reality of Kyŏngsŏng. Whether seen by foreigners or by us, whether seen for the first time or the tenth time, it is an inescapable inner truth.
Fellow countrymen living in Kyŏngsŏng, 200,000 of you! Since Kyŏngsŏng is a city with such a relationship to us, and its inner reality is so squalid and unremarkable in our eyes, how should we resolve this going forward? Should we just stand by and watch, whether it perishes or prospers? Should we just pretend not to know, whether others laugh or not? What should we do?
Brethren! If we were not the Chosŏn people, it wouldn't matter, but since we are the Chosŏn people, we absolutely cannot leave Kyŏngsŏng, the central city of Chosŏn, neglected. Furthermore, as people of Kyŏngsŏng, we certainly cannot pretend not to know.
Ah—Brethren! The reporter—truly, with all sincerity and sorrow, pleads: everyone in Kyŏngsŏng, to ensure Kyŏngsŏng maintains the dignity of a great metropolis, to make Kyŏngsŏng a source of pride to the world, to uphold the honor of Kyŏngsŏng or Chosŏn, to attain the true value of our lives, let us, under a great awakening, make a great resolute decision and focus on the construction of a Great Kyŏngsŏng. The reporter, disregarding his humble views, wishes to express a few words of heartfelt sentiment. Everyone, brethren!
First, know what kind of place Kyŏngsŏng is. <46>
Second, know what kind of relationship exists between Kyŏngsŏng and us.
Third, know what kind of work the citizens of Kyŏngsŏng Prefecture must do.
Fourth, know what the current situation of Kyŏngsŏng is.
Fifth, know how Kyŏngsŏng should be well developed.
I say. Brethren! You probably have a general idea of what kind of place Kyŏngsŏng is, what relationship it has with us, and what its current situation is. But what is the work we must do for the development of Kyŏngsŏng?
Brethren! Is it the work to wake up early, call the servant (下人) saying, "Bring washing water (洗手물)," call the servant living in the outer quarters (行廊) saying, "Cook rice," "Go run an errand for side dishes," then lean back against the warmest part of the heated floor (알엣목) and just tap-tap the long bamboo pipe (長竹)?
Brethren, I ask you! Is it the work to enter another's corridor, eat cold rice and wear worn-out clothes, obey the master's orders saying "Yes, yes," and barely pass through life?
Brethren! I earnestly wish: stop being masters and stop being servants in the outer quarters, and let each person pursue an independent livelihood (獨立生計), appealing to one's own sweat and blood for one's own food, clothing, and shelter. That is what saves you, saves Kyŏngsŏng, and saves Chosŏn.
Brethren! I plead again: abolish the master system, the servant system, the outer-quarters servant system. Thus, cook your own rice with your own hands, make your own clothes with your own hands, fetch your own water with your own hands, gather your own firewood with your own hands, and do all daily activities by yourselves. People in civilized countries all do this; prosperous people all do this.
Brethren! Is it the work to eat dinner and then wander aimlessly on the main street of Chongno, frequenting liquor stores, meeting friends for frivolous chatter, lying down in a corner of the room singing vulgar songs (雜歌), or reciting Ch'unhyangjŏn (春香傳), Simch'ŏngjŏn (深淸傳), and new or old novels?
Brethren! Since the topic came up, let me say this: there is likely no one in the world who likes miscellaneous novels (雜小說) as much as you do. Isn't it true that in every house, even in the servants' quarters (行廊方), there is at least one novel like Ch'unhyangjŏn or some other tale? After eating dinner, if you just step out into the alley, the sound of "beggar gangs" (각설이때) coming from every house is truly unpleasant to hear.
Everyone! Isn't it true that what you recite every evening is clearly because you have nothing better to do, just trying to pass the time somehow? It's likely neither a demand of emotion nor a demand of knowledge. Without rhyme or reason, it must clearly be so. Ah—everyone! Why can't you read even one volume of a magazine or one sheet of a newspaper, instead indulging in those filthy <47> and filthy, rotten and rotten, vulgar and dissolute tales (雜蕩俗說)? Brethren! Setting aside other books, why can't you read even one magazine or one newspaper? Brethren! Is this the common practice of city dwellers? Have you considered it a necessary task for yourselves, for Kyŏngsŏng, for Chosŏn?
Brethren! If you are truly the brethren of Kyŏngsŏng, first gather at each bookstore (書館), sweep away those messy old and new novels or collections of vulgar songs, tie them up and put them away, and also pull out the ones in your homes one by one and throw them into the stove (火爐). Then, in their place, prepare books, newspapers, or magazines necessary for knowledge and life. And
Brethren! Please take off the hat of superstition (迷信). How to guide those called shamans (巫黨) or blind fortune-tellers (판수) towards a positive way of life is also an issue, but those who are deceived by them, wasting life, property, and time, and furthermore damaging the dignity of the nation—how pitiful and detestable they are! Setting aside their own pitiableness, for the sake of the city's dignity, the nation's dignity, we cannot leave them unattended even for a moment. Performing rituals for household peace (安宅), chanting scriptures (經), or having fortunes told (身數풀이) within one's own home may be set aside, but the ugly act (醜行) of unhesitatingly scattering precious rice—rice gathered from blood and sweat—on the main streets (三路街 上). That barbaric act (蠻行), unbearable for humans. We cannot tolerate it even for a moment.
Brethren! Is that all? Others call it:
Kyŏngsŏng with many idle people, Kyŏngsŏng that reads novels well, Kyŏngsŏng that drinks well, Kyŏngsŏng with much superstition, and at the same time add:
Kyŏngsŏng that fights well (private disputes, 私事爭鬪), Kyŏngsŏng that curses well. This statement is also true. (Although not all people of Kyŏngsŏng are like that) Among world cities, there is no city that fights as well as Kyŏngsŏng, and no city with as much cursing (辱說). Regardless of gender or age, regardless of high or low status, fights break out at the slightest provocation, and curses follow every word. You all know the examples without needing them listed one by one.
Brethren! All these things damage our dignity (軆面) and expose our national character (民族性) to others in a negative light. The people of other countries, other cities, are definitely not like this. Not looking far, even in Tokyo, Japan, this doesn't exist.
Those who have seen Tokyo probably know. There, there are no idle people, no people who only recite vulgar tales, there is superstition but no outwardly ugly behavior, there is alcohol but no rowdy drunks (酒酲軍), there are few disputes, and little cursing. Since they are short-tempered, there might be knife fights, but messy cursing and fighting are rare. This is generally their individual <48> inner determination and also their behavior to preserve the dignity of the nation and the city. I hear that
People in Beijing are also like that, and people in London, Paris, and Berlin are also said to be like that. Indeed, it must be so.
Brethren! Brethren of Kyŏngsŏng! Are our deeds, our actions, our words as described by the reporter above factual? Ah—Brethren! Rather than pleading with the brethren, unable to think further, I say

The Deplorable and Infuriating Literary and Political Evils of the 500 Years of the Yi Dynasty (李朝)!
I say that the fact that such habits, such evil practices, have been passed down to the citizens of Kyŏngsŏng Prefecture and become chronic diseases is due to absolutely nothing other than the literary and political evils (文弊政弊) of the 500 years of the Yi Dynasty.
How to read some Chinese characters, get a government post, and try to live a leisurely life of idle consumption (優遊徒食)? How to gain power, seize others' property, and try to live one's whole life without labor? How to appear pleasing to others? How to seek reliance on others? How to become another's subordinate (手下)? How to become another's dependent retainer (食客)? How to become a high official's (大監) concubine (妾)? How to become even a seamstress (針母) in a magistrate's (令監) house? It is a fact that 500 years were spent under all sorts of messy, power-hungry, dependent, deceitful, fraudulent, self-deprecating atmospheres (氣風). That's why they liked only playing, only drinking, only superstition, only fighting, only cursing, and ultimately, they liked the stories of novels whose main ingredients were idleness (閑逸), debauchery (淫蕩), superstition (迷信), luck-seeking (僥倖), and vanity (虛榮). The high officials in the halls (廳上令監) had nothing else to do, the wives and concubines in the inner chambers (深房妻妾) had nothing else to do, and the servants in the outer quarters (行廊奴僕) had nothing else to do. Among them, the only ambiguous ones were the villagers in the countryside (鄕村의 鄕民들).
Someone might rush in wielding a knife, but among the people of Kyŏngsŏng in the past, there were many thieves (盜賊놈). There were many truly vicious thieves who sucked the blood and sweat of others.
Brethren! The households of the so-called "Master So-and-so's house" (무슨 大監宅) or "Magistrate So-and-so's house" (무슨 令監宅) in Kyŏngsŏng—should they rightly be called Magistrate's house or Master's house (though of course not all Masters and Magistrates)? Ah—the deplorable and infuriating literary and political evils of the 500 years of the Yi Dynasty! The more I think, the more chills run down my spine.
Brethren! These are facts known to all. There is no need for lengthy explanation (張遑). Only, from now on, let us seek the plan for construction (建設策) to build a Great Kyŏngsŏng. As the first part of that construction plan, it goes without saying that all the aforementioned evils must be swept away (一掃), and as an urgent measure (時急한 一策) here, I propose <49>

A Preparatory Committee for the Construction of Great Kyŏngsŏng (大京城建設期成會).
It is said that Kyŏngsŏng has the Kyŏngsŏng Prefectural Office (京城府廳) that undertakes all facilities related to city streets, roads, industry, economy, education, sanitation, etc., and also a City Planning Research Association (都市計畫硏究會) that studies its development plan. However, this is purely the authorities' (當局) plan, not the citizens' (民間) plan. Although the authorities undoubtedly aim for Kyŏngsŏng's development, isn't it more crucial for us citizens, due to our responsibility and for our livelihood, to take the lead even more vigorously and attend urgently to all facilities? Are we a people with senses or without? Brethren, among 200,000 of you, that there has been no discussion yet for Kyŏngsŏng—what a shameless thing this is!
Brethren! While the facilities in Namch'on are like that, why are the facilities in Pukch'on in this state? Like the old saying, "One puts out the fire on one's own foot first," it is definitely not their fault. It is solely the fault of us citizens ourselves. Here, in order to live like others, to make our place like others' places, to make it better than others' places, ultimately to construct a Great Kyŏngsŏng, as the first step, let's organize a Preparatory Committee for the Construction of Great Kyŏngsŏng. The general method of organization would be:
Form a committee with 2 or 3 influential people (persons fully equipped with spiritual and material strength (精神上 物質上 實力)) from each dong (洞, neighborhood), set the goal as the construction of a world-class Great Kyŏngsŏng, and for its projects, continuously engage in activities in the aspects of religion, morality, economy, academics, sanitation, etc., to improve the people's livelihood and promote happiness. Also, establish branches or several executive committee members in each dong to continuously work for that dong.
For example, if the reporter were the committee member for Kyŏngun-dong (慶雲洞), whether that section of Kyŏngun-dong has 100 or 200 households, regardless, they would visit each household (家家이 巡回), persuade (說諭) people regarding all the unseemly matters arising daily in that neighborhood to improve them, and commend (表彰) all virtuous deeds to set an example (模範). Thus, promoting through newspapers or magazines, and seeking ways for improvement through lectures and discussions, would also be quite good.
In any case, whatever the method (方式), in order to construct a Great Kyŏngsŏng, to improve our lives, there must definitely be some kind of activity from us citizens.
Looking at the resolution of the general meeting of the City Planning Research Association at the end of last year for reference, it was stated that they plan to accommodate a population of one million in Kyŏngsŏng within the next 50 years. And the area of the city <50> was set at 54,250,000 p'yŏng, with 21,800,000 p'yŏng deducted for 4 major parks or the Han River area, making the actual urban area 32,450,000 p'yŏng. Calculating this in ri, it is said to be a little over 4 ri 13 chō east to west, and about 3 ri 10 chō north to south. This means Namsan will become the central park, and with the Han River basin as the outer line, Yongsan, Map'o, Wangsimni, and Ch'ŏngnyangni will all fall within the city limits.
Brethren! They have planned like this and set a standard of one million people within 50 years. Whether this will proceed exactly according to their plan is questionable, but anyway, shouldn't we citizens have some plan? Shouldn't we have some decision, whether we aim for a standard of 100 square li or 10 square li, or to accommodate one million in 10 years or five million in 30 years? If we cannot even do this, shouldn't we at least provide promotional support (促進的 後援) and cooperative effort (協助的 出力) for their plan? Since Kyŏngsŏng is the Kyŏngsŏng of us citizens, how can we treat it as someone else's affair and disregard it (度外에 致하고)? However,
Brethren! One thing to think deeply about is, whoever plans it, if Kyŏngsŏng comes to embrace such a large population, whether one million or two million, which people will be embraced? Of course, since it is Chosŏn's Kyŏngsŏng, the Chosŏn people would be embraced. But everyone, it is very doubtful whether it will be embraced by the Chosŏn people. It seems likely to be foreigners.
Look. 50 years ago, there were no foreigners residing in our Kyŏngsŏng. (Even if there were, it was no more than 10 households.) Never mind 50 years ago, even 20 years ago, there weren't that many. But how is it now? Doesn't it seem like one-third, no, half are foreigners? Looking at it this way, won't it become entirely a city of foreigners after 10 or 50 years? Since the situation (事勢) is likely to be like this, our people must clench their teeth, rush in tightly, and not leave the embrace of Kyŏngsŏng, and even fellow countrymen from the countryside (鄕村의 同胞) should be constantly called up to become the backbone (骨子) of Kyŏngsŏng. However, like a person drowning who has consciousness but inevitably dies unable to do anything, it is indeed a difficult situation. It's a difficult situation that people from the countryside coming to Kyŏngsŏng is set aside, and people from Kyŏngsŏng cannot help but return to the countryside.
Not knowing as much as others, not having as much money as others, not knowing how to work as much as others—how can one manage city life? Unavoidably (不得已), there is no choice but to return to the deep mountains. Even then, if there were perhaps factories or companies, allowing the general public to engage in labor life (勞働生活), <51> they could somehow manage to struggle through, but even that doesn't exist.
Therefore, the Kyŏngsŏng of the future will end up being the Kyŏngsŏng of the knowledgeable (知者), the wealthy (金力者), and the powerful (權力者). Therefore, it will naturally end up being the Kyŏngsŏng of foreigners.
Brethren! Whether it becomes a Kyŏngsŏng of foreigners or not, we cannot just leave it be. No matter how much our blood dries up, our vitality dissipates (毒이 풀리고), and our stamina weakens (根氣가 殘弱), how could we lack courage even once at the moment life is about to end?
Currently, the number of our brethren living in Kyŏngsŏng is 188,640 (according to the 1921 [Taishō 10] count), Japanese are 69,273, and other foreigners are 3,785. Looking at this, Chosŏn people number at least three times more. With this majority of over three times, no matter how poor and weak we are, doesn't failing to stand up to them display too much powerlessness (無氣力)?
Brethren! Whatever means or methods we use, let's press closely into the embrace of Kyŏngsŏng and create our Great Kyŏngsŏng. Let's thereby make Kyŏngsŏng a world-class metropolis and boast of our people's strength to the world.
I wish that you would come out from rural life (鄕村生活) to city life (都會生活). Ten years of city life are better than a hundred years of village life. As for the reasons, I will end here for now, setting aside the issue of "City Life and Village Life."
Brethren! In any case, let's focus on the construction of Great Kyŏngsŏng. (This is just public opinion) <52>

**Summary**

The author, Pak Tal-sŏng, passionately appeals to the Korean residents ("brethren") of Kyŏngsŏng (colonial Seoul) to awaken to the city's degraded state and take collective action to build a "Great Kyŏngsŏng." He contrasts Kyŏngsŏng's potential importance as the national center with its current reality: poor infrastructure, lack of cultural institutions, perceived laziness and vice among its inhabitants (drinking, superstition, reading frivolous novels, reliance on servants), and the legacy of the "literary and political evils" of the Joseon Dynasty. He urges self-reliance, modernization of habits, and the formation of a citizen-led "Preparatory Committee for the Construction of Great Kyŏngsŏng" to improve the city, fearing that otherwise, Kyŏngsŏng will increasingly become dominated by foreigners (specifically Japanese) due to Koreans' lack of competitiveness.

This article is significant for historians as it vividly reflects early colonial Korean nationalist sentiment focused on urban modernity and self-improvement as a path to national strength and dignity. It reveals anxieties about Japanese encroachment not just politically but demographically and culturally within the capital itself. The sharp critique of Joseon's legacy ("文弊政弊") as a source of current problems, alongside the call for practical action (forming committees, changing lifestyles, promoting education over superstition), highlights the complex attitudes of intellectuals grappling with tradition and modernity under colonial rule. The detailed description of Kyŏngsŏng's perceived shortcomings offers valuable social history insights into the city in the early 1920s.

**Named Entities**

京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
朴達成	박달성	Pak Tal-sŏng
中華	중화	Chunghwa (China)
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
東洋	동양	Tong'yang (The East/Orient)
英國	영국	Yŏngguk (England/Britain)
倫敦	런던	Rŏndŏn (London)
佛國	불국	Pulguk (France)
巴里	파리	P'ari (Paris)
獨逸	독일	Togil (Germany)
伯林	베를린	Perŭllin (Berlin)
米國	미국	Miguk (USA)
華盛頓	워싱턴	Hwasŏngt'on (Washington)
西瑞	서서	Sŏsŏ (Switzerland - archaic term)
쩨노바	제노바	Chenoba (Genoa)
北海	북해	Pukhae (North Sea)
和蘭	화란	Hwaran (Holland/Netherlands - archaic term)
海牙	해아	Hae'a (The Hague)
江戶	강호	Kangho (Edo)
太平洋	태평양	T'aep'yŏngyang (Pacific Ocean)
武藏野	무사시노	Musasino (Musashino)
永登浦	영등포	Yŏngdŭngp'o
漢江	한강	Han'gang
水色	수색	Susaek
新村	신촌	Sinch'on
南大門	남대문	Namdaemun
南村	남촌	Namch'on
北村	북촌	Pukch'on
鍾路	종로	Chongno
京城圖書館	경성도서관	Kyŏngsŏng Tosŏgwan (Kyŏngsŏng Library)
塔洞公園	탑동공원	T'aptong Kongwŏn (T'aptong Park/Pagoda Park)
南山	남산	Namsan
京城府民	경성부민	Kyŏngsŏng Pumin (Citizens of Kyŏngsŏng Prefecture)
李朝	이조	Ijo (Yi Dynasty/Joseon)
慶雲洞	경운동	Kyŏngun-dong
京城府廳	경성부청	Kyŏngsŏng Puch'ŏng (Kyŏngsŏng Prefectural Office)
都市計畫硏究會	도시계획연구회	Tosi Kyehoek Yŏn'guhoe (City Planning Research Association)
龍山	용산	Yongsan
麻浦	마포	Map'o
往十里	왕십리	Wangsimni
淸凉里	청량리	Ch'ŏngnyangni
北京	북경	Pukkyŏng (Beijing)
大正10年度	대정10년도	Taejŏng 10nyŏndo (Taishō Year 10 / 1921)

**Glossary**

輿論	여론	Public opinion
哀訴	애소	Appeal, plea
姑捨	고사	To leave aside, disregard
하얏던지	하였던지	Whatever one did (older spelling/form of 했던지)
엿줄 수 업서서	여쭐 수 없어서	Being unable to ask/inquire (older spelling/form)
具軆的	구체적	Concrete, specific
議案	의안	Proposal, bill, agenda item
先하야	선하여	Before doing (older form of 선행하여 or ~하기에 앞서)
懇願	간원	Earnest plea, supplication
民族	민족	People, nation, ethnic group
都會	도회	City, metropolis
要樞	요추	Pivot, key point, hub
萬目總集	만목총집	Where all eyes gather, focal point
總實力	총실력	Total strength, full capacity
總代表	총대표	Overall representative
羞恥	수치	Shame, disgrace
榮光	영광	Glory, honor
至重且大	지중차대	Extremely important and great
關係	관계	Relationship, connection
敢히	감히	Daringly, presumptuously
疎忽	소홀	Negligence, carelessness
付하고	부하고	To attach to, entrust to (older form, modern: 부치고)
자랑	자랑	Boast, pride
猶少	유소	Even smaller/lesser
介在	개재	To be situated between, intervene
人民	인민	People, populace
即	즉	Namely, that is
表明	표명	To express, declare, manifest
分明히	분명히	Clearly, distinctly
蔑視	멸시	Contempt, disdain
當치 안흔	당치 않은	Unfitting, improper (older spelling/form of 당치 않은)
뜨더보아도	뜯어보아도	No matter how closely one examines (older spelling/form of 뜯어보아도)
裏面	이면	Inner side, hidden reality, inside story
政局者	정국자	Politician, statesman (of the time)
先祖	선조	Ancestors
位置	위치	Location, position
對하야서	대하여서	Regarding, concerning (older spelling/form of 대해서)
넘우나	너무나	Too much, very (older spelling/form of 너무나)
深深山골	심심산골	Deep mountains, remote mountain valley
痛忿	통분	Indignation, resentment
疑心	의심	Doubt, suspicion
事實	사실	Fact, truth
四面	사면	Four sides, all directions
疑訝千萬	의아천만	Utterly bewildered, full of doubt
當하얏습니다	당하였습니다	Suffered, encountered (older spelling/form of 당했습니다)
井然	정연	Orderly, neat
醜雜	추잡	Squalid, dirty, sordid
建物	건물	Building
官廳	관청	Government office
倭小	왜소	Small, diminutive
平瓦家	평와가	Single-story tiled-roof house
草家	초가	Thatched-roof house
商店	상점	Shop, store
居間사리	거간사리	Brokerage business (older term)
小賣店	소매점	Retail store
看板	간판	Signboard
內容	내용	Content(s)
官私立竝	관사립병	Including public and private
普通學校	보통학교	Elementary school (colonial era term)
幼穉院	유치원	Kindergarten
不完全	불완전	Incomplete, imperfect
孤兒院	고아원	Orphanage
書堂	서당	Traditional village school teaching Chinese classics
空	공	Empty, void
圖書館	도서관	Library
設立	설립	Establishment, foundation
劇場	극장	Theater
經營	경영	Management, operation
設計	설계	Design, plan
公園	공원	Park
藥局	약국	Pharmacy
沐浴湯	목욕탕	Public bathhouse
當代	당대	Lifetime, generation (used here to mean 'ever')
理髮所	이발소	Barbershop
意外	의외	Unexpected
發達	발달	Development, progress
可驚可怪	가경가괴	Astonishing and strange
洋服店	양복점	Western clothing store (tailor)
洋靴店	양화점	Western shoe store
酒店	주점	Liquor store, pub, bar
料理집	요릿집	Restaurant (often high-end or serving specific cuisine like Japanese)
선술집	선술집	Standing bar (cheap place to drink standing up)
바침술집	바침술집	Serving bar (place where drinks are served, possibly with food)
實로	실로	Truly, indeed
罹한 者	이한 자	One who is afflicted with (a disease)
어릿어릿한 者	어릿어릿한 자	One who is dazed, bewildered
書冊肆	서책사	Bookstore (older term)
창피하도다	창피하도다	How shameful! (older exclamation)
漢學	한학	Chinese classics/studies
新小說	신소설	"New novel" (transitional genre popular in early 20th c. Korea)
羅列	나열	To list, line up
俗歌集	속가집	Collection of popular/folk songs
雜誌	잡지	Magazine, journal
寶鑑	보감	Treasured mirror (figurative: valuable guide/reference book)
純-空	순-공	Purely empty
可怪한	가괴한	Strange, bizarre, odd
男女老少	남녀노소	Men and women, old and young; everyone
외우는 소리	외우는 소리	Sound of reciting/memorizing
可憐한	가련한	Pitiful, pathetic
大體	대체	Generally, on the whole
府民	부민	Prefectural citizens
獨立 生活者	독립 생활자	One who lives independently
奴僕 生活者	노복 생활자	One who lives as a servant
行廊사리	행랑살이	Living in the outer servants' quarters (haengnangchae)
主人	주인	Master, owner
優遊徒食	유유자적	Living in idle leisure, eating without working
貧弱	빈약	Poor and weak, meager
原因	원인	Cause, reason
歷歷히	역력히	Clearly, vividly, plainly
各自	각자	Each person, individually
漸漸	점점	Gradually, little by little
衰殘	쇠잔	Decline, decay, weakening
別數 업스며	별수 없으며	Having no other choice (older form of 별수 없으며)
生命	생명	Life
維持	유지	Maintenance, preservation
詐欺賭博	사기 도박	Fraud and gambling
虛僞	허위	Falsehood, deceit
阿謟	아첨	Flattery, sycophancy
逆道	역도	Perversion, unnatural way, treason
敢行	감행	To dare to do, carry out resolutely
同胞	동포	Compatriots, fellow countrymen
將次	장차	In the future, henceforth
解決	해결	Solution, resolution
亡하거나 興하거나	망하거나 흥하거나	Whether it perishes or prospers
傍觀	방관	Watching from the sidelines, looking on indifferently
모른 체	모른 체	Pretending not to know
어찌하렴니까	어찌하렵니까	What are you going to do? (older interrogative form)
放任	방임	Neglect, leaving unattended
眞實로	진실로	Truly, sincerely
哀情	애정	Sorrowful feeling, pathos
面目	면목	Face, dignity, honor
保障	보장	Guarantee, security
軆面	체면	Face, honor, dignity (same as 면목)
眞價	진가	True value, real worth
엇기 爲하야	얻기 위하여	In order to obtain/attain (older spelling/form)
覺醒	각성	Awakening, realization
勇斷	용단	Resolute decision, bold action
着目	착목	To pay attention to, focus on
拙見	졸견	My humble opinion/view
衷情	충정	Sincere feeling, heartfelt sentiment
陳하려	진하려	To state, express (older form of 진술하려)
現況	현황	Current situation, present status
아적에	아적에	Early in the morning (dialectal/older form of 아침에)
下人	하인	Servant (male)
洗手물	세숫물	Washing water (for face and hands, older form)
行廊	행랑	Outer house/building often used for servants' quarters
分付	분부	Order, command (from a superior)
알엣목	아랫목	The warmest part of a heated floor (ondol)
長竹	장죽	Long bamboo tobacco pipe
懇曲히	간곡히	Earnestly, cordially
獨立生計	독립 생계	Independent livelihood
衣食住	의식주	Food, clothing, and shelter; basic necessities
訴하라	소하라	To appeal to, rely on (here used figuratively)
即	즉	Namely, that is (also used like 'the very thing that...')
저녁	저녁	Evening, dinner
희둥지둥	희둥지둥	Aimlessly, wandering idly (onomatopoeic/mimetic)
巨里	거리	Main street (older form of 거리)
彷徨	방황	Wandering, roaming
들락날락	들락날락	Going in and out frequently
親舊	친구	Friend (older Hanja spelling)
시시펑펑한	시시펑펑한	Trivial, frivolous, idle
雜談	잡담	Idle chat, gossip
방구석	방구석	Corner of the room
업드려	엎드려	Lying face down, prostrate (older spelling/form)
雜歌	잡가	Miscellaneous/vulgar songs
春香傳	춘향전	Tale of Chunhyang (famous Korean classic story)
深淸傳	심청전	Tale of Sim Cheong (famous Korean classic story)
낫스니 말이지	나서니 말이지	Since it came up... (older expression form)
甚之於	심지어	Even, going so far as to
行廊方	행랑방	Room in the servants' quarters
각설이때	각설이패	Group of wandering entertainers/beggars (often reciting stories/songs)
거북하더이다	거북하더이다	It was uncomfortable/unpleasant to hear (older polite ending)
時間	시간	Time
感情	감정	Emotion, feeling
知識	지식	Knowledge
要求	요구	Demand, requirement
갈대 올대업시	갈데 올데없이	Having nowhere to go (idiomatic for 'without direction or purpose')
卷	권	Volume (counter for books)
新聞	신문	Newspaper
더럽고	더럽고	Dirty, filthy (repeated for emphasis)
썩어진	썩어진	Rotten, decayed
雜蕩俗說	잡탕 속설	Mixed-up vulgar talk/stories
醉하고	취하고	To get drunk on, indulge in
常事	상사	Common practice, usual affair
各 書館	각 서관	Each bookstore (older term '서관')
너저분한	너저분한	Messy, untidy, sordid
一掃	일소	To sweep away, eradicate
묵거 치우고	묶어 치우고	To tie up and put away/dispose of (older spelling/form)
一一이	일일이	One by one, individually
뽑아내어	뽑아내어	To pull out, extract
火爐	화로	Brazier, stove
너흐십시오	넣으십시오	Please put in (older spelling/form of 넣으십시오)
代身	대신	Instead of, in place of
準備	준비	Preparation
迷信	미신	Superstition
감투	감투	Official's hat (here figurative for 'mantle' or 'label')
巫黨	무당	Shaman (usually female)
판수	판수	Blind fortune-teller/diviner (usually male)
善한	선한	Good, virtuous
方面	방면	Direction, aspect, field
引導	인도	Guidance, leading
問題	문제	Problem, issue, question
속아서	속아서	Being deceived/tricked
徒費	도비	Waste (of time, money, effort)
損喪	손상	Damage, harm, loss
可憎	가증	Detestable, abominable
自家內	자가내	Within one's own home
安宅	안택	Ritual for peace and safety of the household
經	경	Scriptures, sutras (often Buddhist)
身數풀이	신수풀이	Fortune-telling for the year ahead
且置	차치	To set aside for the time being
貴重한	귀중한	Precious, valuable
쌀	쌀	Rice (uncooked)
三路街 上	삼로가 상	On the main street/crossroads (lit. 'on the three-way street')
忌憚업시	기탄없이	Without hesitation or reserve
내어 리는	내어리는	To throw out, scatter (older form/spelling)
醜行	추행	Ugly act, disgraceful conduct
蠻行	만행	Barbaric act, brutality
容恕치	용서치	To not forgive/tolerate (older negative form)
노는 사람	노는 사람	Idle person, person who doesn't work
싸움	싸움	Fight, quarrel, dispute
私事爭鬪	사사쟁투	Private dispute/fight
욕	욕	Curse, insult, abusive language
亦是	역시	Also, likewise, indeed
毋論	무론	Regardless of, irrespective of (same as 물론)
上下貴賤	상하귀천	High and low, noble and base; all social classes
걸핏하면	걸핏하면	Easily, at the slightest provocation
말끗마다	말끝마다	At the end of every word/sentence
辱說	욕설	Abusive language, cursing
낫나치	낱낱이	One by one, in detail
民族性	민족성	National character/trait
惡方面	악방면	Negative aspect/direction
暴露	폭로	Exposure, revealing
멀리 말고	멀리 말고	Not looking far, close by
酒酲軍	주정꾼	Rowdy drunkard
爭鬪	쟁투	Strife, conflict, fight
短氣	단기	Short temper
칼 놀음	칼 놀음	Knife fight, swordplay
保存	보존	Preservation, conservation
內定	내정	Inner decision, private resolution (here likely 'mindset')
行動	행동	Action, behavior
들으니까	들으니까	As I hear it, according to what I've heard
言辭	언사	Words, speech, statement
以上	이상	The aforementioned, above
論한 바	논한 바	What has been discussed/argued
可痛可忿	가통가분	Deplorable and infuriating
文弊政弊	문폐정폐	Evils stemming from literary culture and maladministration
遺傳	유전	Heredity, transmission (here 'passed down')
痼疾	고질	Chronic disease, deep-rooted evil
斷斷無他	단단무타	Absolutely nothing else but...
漢文字	한문자	Chinese characters
벼슬나치	벼슬아치	Government official (slightly archaic/colloquial)
權勢	권세	Power, authority, influence
빼앗어	빼앗아	To snatch, seize, steal
勞苦치	노고치	To not labor/toil (older negative form)
平生	평생	Whole life, lifetime
곱게 보일가	곱게 보일까	How to look pleasing? (older interrogative)
依賴方	의뢰방	Someone/something to rely on
求할가	구할까	How to seek/find? (older interrogative)
手下	수하	Subordinate, underling
食客	식객	Dependent retainer, hanger-on who lives off a patron
大監	대감	High-ranking official (Joseon title, 'Your Excellency')
妾	첩	Concubine
令監宅	영감댁	Magistrate's/Lower official's house (Joseon title)
針母	침모	Seamstress (often in a noble household)
權勢的	권세적	Related to power/authority
依賴的	의뢰적	Dependent
虛僞的	허위적	Deceitful, false
詐欺的	사기적	Fraudulent
自卑的	자비적	Self-deprecating, servile
氣風	기풍	Atmosphere, spirit, ethos
結局	결국	Ultimately, in the end
閑逸	한일	Leisurely idleness
淫蕩	음탕	Debauchery, lewdness
僥倖	요행	Good luck, fluke, seeking unearned fortune
虛榮	허영	Vanity, empty honor
總材料	총재료	Main ingredients, total material
이악이	이야기	Story, talk (older spelling)
廳上令監	청상영감	High officials in the government halls
深房妻妾	심방처첩	Wives and concubines in the inner chambers
奴僕	노복	Servants (male and female)
曖昧한	애매한	Ambiguous, vague (here 'innocent' or 'unrelated')
鄕村	향촌	Countryside village
鄕民	향민	Villager
或者	혹자	Someone, some people
盜賊놈	도적놈	Thief (derogatory suffix '놈')
凶惡한	흉악한	Vicious, atrocious, wicked
所謂	소위	So-called
家戶	가호	Household, family status (here 'lineage' or 'standing')
相當할가요	상당할까요	Would it be appropriate/fitting? (older interrogative)
勿論	물론	Of course, needless to say
全部	전부	All, entire part
寒氣	한기	Chill, cold air
張遑	장황	Lengthy and tedious, verbose
오즉	오직	Only, solely (older spelling)
建設策	건설책	Construction plan/policy
講求	강구	To seek, devise, work out (a plan)
弊害	폐해	Evil, harm, vice, abuse
玆에	자에	Here, at this point (literary/archaic)
時急	시급	Urgent
期成會	기성회	Preparatory committee (for founding something)
府廳	부청	Prefectural office
産業	산업	Industry
經濟	경제	Economy
敎育	교육	Education
衛生	위생	Hygiene, sanitation
施設	시설	Facility, institution, establishment
硏究會	연구회	Research association/society
發展策	발전책	Development plan
講究	강구	To study, investigate, research
純	순	Purely, solely
當局	당국	The authorities, the administration concerned
計策	계책	Plan, scheme, strategy
民間	민간	Civilian, private sector, the people
一層	일층	Even more, further
先率	선솔	To take the lead
汲汲	급급	Eagerly, absorbed in, busily
責任上	책임상	In terms of responsibility
生活上	생활상	In terms of livelihood/life
緊要치	긴요치	To not be crucial/vital (older negative form)
感覺	감각	Sense, feeling, sensation
廉恥적은	염치적은	Shameless (lit. lacking shame)
古語	고어	Old saying, proverb
罪	죄	Sin, crime, fault
有志者	유지자	Person of influence, volunteer, interested party
精神上	정신상	Spiritually, mentally
物質上	물질상	Materially
實力	실력	Real ability, capability, strength
具全	구전	Fully equipped/possessing
目的	목적	Goal, purpose, objective
世界的	세계적	World-class, global
事業	사업	Project, enterprise, work
生活改善	생활개선	Improvement of livelihood
幸福增進	행복증진	Promotion of happiness
宗敎	종교	Religion
道德	도덕	Morality, ethics
學術	학술	Academics, learning, science
不斷히	부단히	Constantly, unceasingly
活動	활동	Activity, action
支會	지회	Branch (of an organization)
執行委員	집행위원	Executive committee member
幾人 式	기인 식	Several persons each
置하야	치하여	To establish, place (older form of 설치하여)
該洞	해당 동	The said/concerned neighborhood (dong)
假令	가령	For example, supposing
一幅	일폭	One section/area
百戶	백호	Hundred households
家家이	가가이	House by house, door to door (older form)
巡回	순회	To patrol, make rounds, tour
洞里	동리	Neighborhood (same as 동네)
日日로	일일로	Daily, day by day
起하는	기하는	Arising, occurring (older form of 일어나는)
不美의 事	불미의 사	Unseemly matter, unpleasant affair
說諭	설유	To persuade, explain and admonish
改良	개량	Improvement, reform
美德의 事	미덕의 사	Virtuous deed/matter
表彰	표창	To commend publicly, award recognition
模範	모범	Model, example
宣傳	선전	Propaganda, publicity, promotion
講演	강연	Lecture, speech
討論	토론	Discussion, debate
改善의 道	개선의 도	Way/path of improvement
퍽	퍽	Very, quite, considerably
如何間	여하간	Anyway, in any case
方式	방식	Method, way, style
向上	향상	Improvement, advancement, progress
昨年末	작년말	End of last year
總會	총회	General meeting
決議	결의	Resolution, decision
參考	참고	Reference
百萬人口	백만인구	Population of one million
收容	수용	Accommodation, capacity
面積	면적	Area (measurement)
坪	평	Pyeong (unit of area, approx 3.3 sq m)
漢江地帶	한강지대	Han River area/zone
控除	공제	Deduction, subtraction
實際	실제	Actual, real
市街地	시가지	Urban area, built-up area
里數	이수	Distance in ri (unit of distance, approx 393m)
計하면	계하면	If calculated (older form of 계산하면)
東西	동서	East-West
町	정	Chō (Japanese unit of distance, approx 109m)
남즛하고	남짓하고	A little over, slightly more than
南北	남북	North-South
中央公園	중앙공원	Central park
流域	유역	River basin
外線	외선	Outer line
範圍	범위	Scope, range, limits
標準	표준	Standard, criterion
作定	작정	Decision, determination, plan
促進的	촉진적	Promotional, accelerating
後援	후원	Support, backing, patronage
協助的	협조적	Cooperative
出力	출력	Effort, contribution (lit. 'output power')
度外에 致하고	도외에 치하고	To disregard, ignore, leave out of consideration
깁히	깊이	Deeply (older spelling)
包容	포용	Embrace, contain, accommodate
多數	다수	Large number, majority
疑心스럽습니다	의심스럽습니다	It is doubtful/suspicious
外國人	외국인	Foreigner
居住	거주	Residence, dwelling
現在	현재	Present time, currently
半數	반수	Half the number
事勢	사세	Situation, state of affairs
이러하겟는지라	이러하겠는지라	Since it is likely to be like this (older connective form)
이빨을 악물고	이빨을 악물고	Clenching one's teeth
밧삭 달려들어	바싹 달려들어	To rush in closely/tightly
품	품	Bosom, embrace
떠나지	떠나지	To not leave
同胞	동포	Compatriot (also used for brethren/siblings figuratively)
骨子	골자	Backbone, core, nucleus
물에 빠진 者	물에 빠진 자	One who has fallen into water, drowning person
精神	정신	Mind, spirit, consciousness
딱한 일	딱한 일	Pitiful/difficult situation
돌아가지 안흘 수 업게	돌아가지 않을 수 없게	Becoming unable not to return (i.e., forced to return)
돈	돈	Money
不得已	부득이	Unavoidably, inevitably
深山	심산	Deep mountains
工場	공장	Factory
會社	회사	Company
一般	일반	General public, ordinary people
勞働生活	노동 생활	Labor life, working life
부댁겨 살겟지만	부대껴 살겠지만	Although one might live struggling/jostling (older spelling/form)
今後	금후	Henceforth, from now on, in the future
知者	지자	Knowledgeable person, intellectual
金力者	금력자	Wealthy person (lit. 'money-power person')
權力者	권력자	Powerful person
自然	자연	Naturally, spontaneously
피가 마르고	피가 마르고	Blood drying up (figurative for exhaustion/desperation)
毒이 풀리고	독이 풀리고	Vitality dissipating (idiomatic, lit. 'poison being released/weakened')
根氣	근기	Stamina, perseverance, energy
殘弱	잔약	Weakened, feeble, deteriorated
生命	생명	Life
끈허질	끊어질	To be cut off, severed (older spelling)
勇氣	용기	Courage, bravery
至今	지금	Now, currently (older Hanja form of 지금)
計	계	Total, count
多數	다수	Majority, large number
對敵치	대적치	To not oppose/rival (older negative form)
無氣力	무기력	Lethargy, powerlessness, lack of vitality
表示	표시	Indication, expression, display
手段方法	수단방법	Means and methods
밧삭밧삭 닥아 들어서	바싹바싹 닦아 들어서	Pressing in very closely/tightly (repeated for emphasis)
村落生活	촌락생활	Village life
理由	이유	Reason
別로	별로	Separately, specially (here context implies 'as a separate topic')
끈침니다	끊습니다	To end, conclude (older polite ending)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제21호
발행일	1922년 03월 01일
기사제목	京城兄弟에게 嘆願합니다!!, -大京城을 建設키 爲하야-
필자	朴達成
기사형태	논설

京城兄弟에게 嘆願합니다!!, -大京城을 建設키 爲하야-
						朴達成
輿論이라 할는지 哀訴라 할는지 그는 姑捨하고 어찌 하얏던지 朝鮮人이라는 下에서 아니 엿줄 수 업서서 무슨 具軆的 組織的 議案은 아니나마 이제 이 붓을 들게 되엇습니다.
여러분 京城에 살거나 鄕里에 살거나 朝鮮民族이라는 여러분.
가-가티 눈을 모으고 귀를 모으고 입을 모으고 힘을 모아서 問題 中에 在한 우리京城을 解決하자 합니다. 解決하기에 先하야 여러분께 懇願하노니

京城이 어떠한 곳인지를 아십시다
여러분 京城이란 어떠한 곳입니까.
京城은 우리民族이 두고두고 불러오던 우리 「서울」입니다.
京城은 南鮮北鮮 正中央에 處한 우리民族文化中心의 都會입니다.
京城은 北으로 中華, 東으로 日本을 聯한 東洋要樞의 都會입니다.
京城은 東人 西人 가고 오는 사람이 반듯이 들니는 萬目總集의 都會입니다.
京城은 우리民族의 精神上 物質上 總實力의 全責任을 總代表한 都會입니다.
그러니까＜43＞
京城은 우리民族의 羞恥를 招來하는 곳도 되며
京城은 우리民族의 榮光을 發揮하는 곳도 됩니다.
簡單히 말하면 京城을 보아 朝鮮을 알수잇다 합니다.
이러한 京城. 우리에게 이와가티 至重且大한 關係를 有한 京城. 우리로서 이찌 敢히 一時나 疎忽에 付하고 말수야 잇습니까.
英國人은 倫敦을 자랑하며 佛國人은 巴里를 자랑하며, 獨逸人은 伯林을 자랑하며 米國人은 華盛頓을 자랑하며 日本人은 東京을 자랑하며 朝鮮보다 猶少한 西瑞人은 「쩨노바」를 자랑하며 北海邊에 介在한 和蘭人도 海牙를 자랑합니다.
그들은 그를 天下萬人에게 자랑하기 爲하야 만흔 해를 두고 만흔 人民이 모여서 피도 만히 흘리고 땀도 만히 흘렷습니다. 即 大都會를 만들기 爲하야 그 나라 그 民族의 實力을 世上에 表明하기 爲하야―그들은 分明히 그리하얏습니다. 다른 例는 그만두고라도 50年前까지 江戶라는 小名을 가지고 太平洋岸 武藏野 一隅에 介在하얏던 現 日本의 東京. 그-어떠합니까. 不過 50年에 3百萬 人口를 두고 東洋的 大都會를 形成하야 世界에 소리처 자랑하니 그들의 피와 땀 얼마나 흘렷스리이까!
남의 말은 그만두고 우리로서는 京城을 자랑하여야겟습니다. 그런데
여러분 京城이 자랑거리가 됩니까 못됩니까? 京城을 내여 노하 羞恥나 아니 當하리이까? 自己것을 自己가 蔑視함은 分에 當치 안흔 짓입니다마는 아무리 뜨더보아도 京城은 자랑거리가 아즉 못된다 합니다.

京城의 裏面을 봅시다
當時의 政局者 即 우리 先祖의 責任이니까 位置에 對하야서는 더-말할 必要가 업습니다마는 京城이 넘우나 深深山골인 것은 생각사록 痛忿합니다. 南으로 오는 손이 永登浦를 지나 漢江을 건너설 때 「아-저 山골에 都會가 잇다는 말이 正말인가 거짓말인가?」의 疑心을 반듯이 가지게 되며 北으로 오는 손이 水色을 지나 新村을 넘어설 때 「아-이 山골에도 人家가 잇는가 업는가?」의 疑心을 반듯이 가지게 됨은 事實입니다. 그리하야 南大門을 쓱 들어서서 四面을 핑 둘러보고 「아-北에도 山南에도 山東에도 山西에도 山 아-深深山골이로구나. 山과 山 사이가 10里나 될가? 10里도 못되어? 아-이런 곳에 都會를 두게 된 것이 왼 까닭일가」하고 疑訝千萬에 입맛을 쩝쩝 다실 것입니다.＜44＞
여긔서 발서 우리民族은 羞恥를 當하얏습니다. (先人이거나 後人이거나 不問하고 그-責任은 朝鮮民族) 山골이거나 들판이거나 그 位置는 그만해두고 이제 그-裏面을 본다 합시다.
人口는 얼마? 不過  16,7萬 內外.(그도 內外人 合하야)
戶數는 얼마? 不過 6萬戶 內外.(그도 內外人 合하야)
아-果然 少都會로다. 그런데
市街는 어떤가? 南村의 市街는 좀 井然하고 北村의 市街는 퍽 醜雜하다. 道路는 어떤가? 南大門通 鍾路通은 그럴 듯하다. 그러나 其外는 도대체 볼 것 업다. 建物은 어떤가? 官廳, 銀行, 會社, 敎堂, 學校, 病院 等 몃몃 個所를 制限 外에는 모다 倭小한 平瓦家 草家이다. 商店은 어떠한가? 百萬圓 以上의 商店이 업는 듯하다. 居間사리 아니면 小賣店에서 지내지 못하는 듯하다. 看板은 크지만 內容은 보잘 것 업다.
敎育은 어떤가? 大學은 업고 專門學校 6,7個所가(官私立竝)잇고 高等學校 13,4個所가(男女官私立竝)잇다. 그런데 普通學校가 13個所이며 私立小學校가 4,5個所이다. 幼穉院은 不完全하나마 2個所가 잇고 孤兒院은 겨우 하나이다. 그리고는 이 골목 저 골목에 무슨 書堂 무슨 書堂 적은 看板을 부티고 「天地玄黃, 日月爲明燭」을 찻는 무엇들이 잇다.
文學은 어떠며 藝術은 어떤가? 아-空이다. 圖書館이 잇는가? 엇그제 設立된 京城圖書館 하나가 잇다. 劇場이 잇는가? 朝鮮人 經營이란 겨우 1個所밧게 업다. 設計 中에 在한 무슨 劇場이 또 하나 잇는 듯하다. 公園은 어떤가? 손바닥만한 塔洞公園 不完全하나마 南山公園이 잇슬 뿐이다.(그것도 우리의 땀으로 만든 것은 아님) 病院은 어떤가? 時代的으로 된 完全한 病院은 적으나 이곳저곳 藥局看板은 만히 보겟다. 沐浴湯은 어떤가? 朝鮮民族은 當代 가도 沐浴은 아니하고 사는 듯하다. 朝鮮人 經營의 沐浴場은 하나도 업다. 南北村을 通하야 日本人 浴湯 幾個所가 잇슬 뿐이다. 理髮所는 어떤가? 이것은 意外이다. 무엇보다 가장 좀 發達이 된 듯하다. 그 중에도 可驚可怪한 것은 洋服店 洋靴店이 第一 發達된 것이다. 아아 朝鮮民族도 洋服洋靴는 매우 조와하는 듯하다. 또 可怪한 것은 酒店의 發達이라. 아니 發達이 아니라 그저 만흔 것이다. 料理집 內外酒店 선술집 바침술집 實로 그-數가 퍽 만타. 이것을 보면 朝鮮民族은 술만 먹고 사는 듯하다. 그러한지라 民族 中에 술 취한 者가 만타. 精神病에 罹한 者처럼 어릿어릿한 者가 만타. 그런데＜45＞
書冊肆는 어떠한가? 아-창피하도다. 機種의 漢學이 노혓슬 뿐이오. 幾百種의 新小說이 羅列하얏슬 뿐이다. 그리고는 俗歌集 몃 冊과 남의 입내 내듯한 雜誌 몃 冊이 노혓슬 뿐이다. 宗敎書, 文學書, 政治書, 經濟書 等 人間 實生活의 寶鑑이 될만한 무슨 書籍은 볼 수 업다. 아-東洋古代의 文化民族이라는 이들에게 書籍이 이러케 純-空인 것은 實로 可怪한 일이다.
이러한지라 집집 방방에 新小說, 俗歌集은 만히 노혀잇다. 이러한지라 男女老少의 입과 입에는 小說 외우는 소리뿐이다. 아-可憐한 民族이로다.
그런데 大體 京城府民에게는 獨立 生活者가 적음은 이 웬 까닭일가. 大槪는 奴僕 生活者이며 行廊사리이다. 집도 主人의 집 밥도 主人의 밥 일까지도 主人의 일을 하도다. 代身에 主人은 優遊徒食하도다.
이것이 貧弱의 原因임을 歷歷히 알겟다. 사람 各自가 自己의 일을 아니 하는지라 漸漸 衰殘할 밧게 別數 업스며 衰殘하나마 生命은 維持하여야 겟는지라 詐欺賭博, 虛僞, 阿謟 等 모든 人生으로의 참아못할 逆道를 敢行하도다.

京城兄弟에게 歎願합니다
여러분이어 이것이 京城의 裏面입니다. 外國人이 보거나 우리로서 보거나 처음으로 보거나 幾十次로 보거나 避치 못할 裏面眞相입니다.
京城에 사시는 同胞 20萬이여. 京城이 우리와 그러한 關係가 잇는 都會요 京城의 裏面이 우리보기에 그와 가티 醜雜하야 아모 보잘 것이 업스니 이를 將次 어떠케 解決하여야 되겟습니까. 亡하거나 興하거나 그대로 傍觀해 둘 뿐입니까. 남이 웃거나 말거나 그져 모른 체 하겟습니까. 어찌하렴니까.
兄弟여. 우리가 朝鮮民族이 아니면 모르거니와 朝鮮民族이 된 以上은 朝鮮의 中心 都會 京城을 決코 放任해 두지 못합니다. 더군다나 京城人民으로서는 더욱이 모른 체 하지 못할 것이외다.
아-兄弟여 記者-眞實로 哀情을 다하야 哀願하노니 京城에 계신 여러분이어 京城으로써 大都會의 面目을 保障키 爲하야 京城으로써 世界에 자랑하기 爲하야 京城 又는 朝鮮의 軆面을 維持키 爲하야 우리들의 生活의 眞價를 엇기 爲하야 大한 覺醒下에서 大한 勇斷을 下하야써 大京城 建設에 着目합시다. 記者는 拙見을 不顧하고 몃마디 衷情을 陳하려 합니다. 여러분 兄弟여.
첫재 京城이 어떠한 곳임을 알으소서.＜46＞
둘재 京城과 우리의 關係가 어떠한가를 알으소서.
셋재 京城府民으로는 어떠한 일을 하여야겟는 것을 알으소서.
넷재 京城의 現況이 어떠한가를 알으소서.
다섯재 京城을 어떠케 써 잘 發展시킬가를 알으소서.
합니다. 兄弟여. 京城이 어떤 곳인지 우리와 關係가 어떤지 그 現況이 어떤지는 大槪 알아슬 것입니다. 그런데 우리로서의 할 일 京城의 發展을 爲하야서는 할 일이 무엇입니까.
兄弟여. 아적에 일어나서 下人 불러 「洗手물 떠오너라」 行廊 불러「밥 지어라」「반찬가가에 단여 오너라」分付하고 알엣목에 재치고 안저 長竹만 툭툭 떠는 것이 그것이 하는 일일가요?
兄弟여 뭇노니 남의 廊下에 들어서 식은 밥 해진 옷이나 집어먹고 입고 主人의 令下에 「에이에이」하며 苟苟히 一生을 지내는 것이 그것이 하는 일이라 할가요?
兄弟여. 내 懇曲히 願하노니 主人노릇도 그만두고 行廊노릇도 그만두고 各各 獨立生計를 하되 各自의 衣食住는 各自 스스로의 땀과 피에 訴하라 합니다. 그것이 即 여러분을 살리는 것이오 京城을 살리는 것이오 朝鮮을 살리는 것입니다.
兄弟여. 다시 哀願하노니 主人制 下人制 行廊制를 廢하라 합니다. 그리하야 밥도 제 손으로 옷도 제 손으로 물도 제 손으로 나무도 제 손으로 日用行事 모든 것을 各自 自己로써 하라 합니다. 文明國人은 다-그러하며 잘 사는 사람들은 다-그러합니다.
兄弟여. 저녁이나 먹으면 희둥지둥 鍾路巨里에나 彷徨하고 酒店에나 들락날락하고 親舊맛나 시시펑펑한 雜談이나 하고 방구석에 업드려 雜歌나 불으고 春香傳 深淸傳 新舊小說이나 외이는 것이 그것이 할 일이겟습니까.
兄弟여. 말이 낫스니 말이지 여러분처럼 雜小說 조와하는 이는 世界에 업스리라 합니다. 집집마다 甚之於 行廊方에도 春香傳 무슨傳하는 小說 한 冊 식은 다-잇지 아니합니까. 저녁을 먹고 나서 골목에 발만 내여 노흐면 집집으로 나오는 「각설이때」의 소리 참말 듯기에 거북하더이다.
여러분. 여러분의 저녁마다 외이는 그것이 分明히 할 일이 업서서 그렁저렁 時間이나 보내자고 그리하는 것이 아닙니까. 感情의 要求도 아니오 知識의 要求도 아니겟지오. 갈대 올대업시 分明히 그러하겟지오. 아-여러분. 雜誌 한 卷 新聞 한 장은 왜 못 보면서 그-더럽고＜47＞ 더럽고 썩어지고 썩어진 雜蕩俗說에 醉하고 말읍니까. 兄弟여. 다른 書籍은 그만두고 雜誌하나 新聞 한 장을 왜 못 봄니까. 兄弟여 이것이 都會人의 常事입니까. 自己를 爲하야 京城을 爲하야 朝鮮을 爲하야의 반듯이 할 일이라고 생각하얏습니까.
兄弟여. 兄弟들이 分明히 京城兄弟이거든 先히 各 書館에 모여들어 그-너저분한 新舊小說 또는 雜歌類를 一掃하야 묵거 치우고 또는 兄弟들 집에 잇는 그것들을 一一이 뽑아내어 火爐에 집어 너흐십시오. 그리하야 그-代身 知識上 生活上에 必要한 書籍 또는 新聞雜誌를 準備하십시오. 그리고
兄弟여. 제발 迷信의 감투를 벗으소서. 巫黨이니 판수이니 하는 그들을 어떠케 善한 生의 方面으로 引導할가함도 問題이거니와 그들에게 속아서 生命, 財産, 時間을 徒費하고 또는 民族의 軆面을 損喪시키는 그 者들 그-얼마나 불상하며 可憎합니까. 自己네의 불상함은 姑舍하고 都會의 軆面, 民族의 軆面을 爲하야는 一時라도 放任해 두지는 못하겟습니다. 自家內에서 安宅을 하거나 經을 읽거나 身數풀이를 하거나 그는 且置하고라도 貴重한 쌀 피와 땀이 모인 밥을 三路街 上에 忌憚업시 내어 리는 그-醜行. 사람으로의 참아못할 그-蠻行. 우리로서는 一時라도 容恕치 못할 것이라 합니다.
兄弟여. 그 뿐입니까. 남이 불으기를
노는 사람 만흔 京城 小說 잘 읽는 京城 술 잘먹는 京城 迷信 만흔 京城이라 하는 同時 加하야
싸움(私事爭鬪)잘하는 京城 욕 잘하는 京城이라 합니다. 이 말도 亦是 事實입니다. (京城人民이라고 다-그런 것은 아니지만) 世界都市 치고 京城과 가티 싸움 잘하는 都市는 업스며 욕說 만흔 都市는 업습니다. 男女老少 毋論하고 上下貴賤 毋論하고 걸핏하면 싸움이오 말끗마다 辱說입니다. 그 例는 낫나치 들지 안하도 다-아시리이다.
兄弟여. 이런 것이 다-우리의 軆面을 損喪시키며 우리의 民族性을 남에게 惡方面으로 暴露시키는 것입니다. 다른 나라 다른 都市의 人民은 決코 그런 것이 업습니다. 멀리 말고 日本東京만해도 업습니다.
東京을 본 이는 大槪 알리이다. 그곳은 노는 사람이 업고 俗說만 외이는 사람이 업고 迷信은 잇스나 外面的 醜行은 업고 술은 잇스나 酒酲軍은 업스며 爭鬪가 적으며 辱說이 적습니다. 그들이 短氣인지라 或 칼 놀음은 잇지만 너저분한 辱說과 싸움은 적습니다. 이것이 大槪 民族의 軆面 都會의 軆面을 保存하는 그들 各自의＜48＞ 內定이며 또 行動입니다. 들으니까
北京사람도 그러하며 倫敦 巴里 伯林사람들도 그러타 합니다. 事實 그럴 것이외다.
兄弟여. 京城의 兄弟여. 우리의 하는 일, 하는 行動, 하는 言辭가 以上 記者의 論한 바가 事實입니까. 아-兄弟여. 兄弟들에게 嘆願함보다 나는 생각다 못하야

可痛可忿한 李朝 5百年의 文弊政弊
라 합니다. 京城府民에게 이러한 習性 이러한 惡行이 遺傳되어 痼疾이 된 것은 斷斷無他 李朝 5百年의 文弊政弊라 합니다.
어떠케 하야 漢文字나 읽어 벼슬나치나 하야가지고 優遊徒食의 閒逸한 生活을 하야 볼가. 어떠케 하면 權勢를 어더 남의 것을 빼앗어 勞苦치 안코 平生을 먹어 볼가. 어떠케 하면 남에게 곱게 보일가. 어떠케 하면 남에게 依賴方을 求할가. 어떠케 하면 남의 手下가 될가. 어떠케 하면 남의 食客이 될가. 어떠케 하면 大監의 妾이 될가. 어떠케 하면 令監宅 針母라도 되어보나 等 모든 너저분한 權勢的 依賴的 虛僞的 詐欺的 自卑的 氣風 下에 五百年을 지내온 것이 事實입니다. 그래서 놀기만 조와하고 술만 조와하고 迷信만 조와하고 싸움만 조와하고 辱說만 조와하고 結局 閑逸 淫蕩 迷信 僥倖 虛榮을 總材料로 한 小說의 이악이를 조와하얏습니다. 廳上令監도 그밧게 일이 업고 深房妻妾도 그밧게 일이 업고 行廊奴僕도 그밧게 일이 업섯습니다. 그 中에 오즉 曖昧한 것은 鄕村의 鄕民들이엇습니다.
或者-칼을 들고 달려들는지는 모르나 以前의 京城人 中에는 盜賊놈이 만핫습니다. 남의 피와 땀을 빨아먹든 아조 凶惡한 盜賊놈이 만핫습니다.
兄弟여. 京城에 所謂 무슨 大監宅 무슨 令監宅하는 그 집의 家戶가 分明 令監宅 大監宅이어야 相當할가요.(勿論 大監令監의 全部는 아니나)? 아-可痛可憤한 李朝 5百年의 文弊政弊 생각사록 寒氣가 돌도다.
兄弟여. 다-아시는 事實이라. 張遑할 必要가 업습니다. 오즉 이로부터 大京城을 建設키 爲하야 그-建設策을 講求합시다. 그-建設策의 첫재로서는 以上의 모든 弊害를 一掃할 것은 毋論이며 玆에 時急한 一策으로는＜49＞

大京城建設期成會
이라 합니다. 京城은 京城府廳이 잇서서 市街니 道路니 産業이니 經濟이니 敎育이니 衛生이니 모든 施設을 하노라 하며 또는 都市計畫硏究會가 잇서서 그-發展策을 講究하노라 합니다. 그러나 이것은 純 當局으로의 計策이며 民間으로의 計策은 아닙니다. 當局도 毋論 京城의 發展을 爲하는 것이지만 우리民間으로서 더-一層 先率하야 모든 施設에 汲汲할 것은 우리의 責任上 우리의 生活上 더-緊要치 아니합니까. 그런데 感覺이 잇는 民族입니까 업는 民族입니까. 兄弟 20萬에 京城을 爲하야 무슨 議論이 아즉 것 업슴이 이 무슨 廉恥적은 일입니까?
兄弟여. 南村의 施設은 저러하거늘 北村의 施設은 왜 이 모양입니까. 「내 발등엣 불을 먼첨 끈다」는 古語와 가티 그들의 잘못은 決코 아니라 합니다. 다만 우리 民間 스스로의 罪라합니다. 玆에 우리도 남과 가티 살기 爲하야 남의 곳과 가티 하기 爲하야 남의 곳보다 더-낫기 爲하야 結局 大京城을 建設키 爲하야 그-第一策으로 大京城建設期成會를 組織하자 합니다. 그-組織方法 大槪로는
各洞의 有志者(精神上 物質上 實力이 具全한 人)2人 或 3人으로써 會를 組織하고 그 目的으로는 世界的 大京城 建設이라 하고 그-事業으로는 人民의 生活改善 幸福增進을 爲하야 宗敎 道德 經濟 學術 衛生 等 方面으로 不斷히 活動할 것이라 합니다. 그리고 各洞에는 支會 又는 執行委員 幾人 式을 置하야 該洞을 爲하야 不斷히 活動케 할 것이라 합니다.
假令 記者가 慶雲洞委員이라 하면 慶雲洞 一幅이 百戶거나 2百戶거나 毋論하고 家家이 巡回하며 그 洞里의 日日로 起하는 모든 不美의 事는 說諭하야 改良하도록 하며 모든 美德의 事는 表彰하야 模範이 되도록 할 것입니다. 그리하야 新聞이나 雜誌로 宣傳도 하며 講演과 討論으로 改善의 道를 講究함도 퍽 조흔 일이라 합니다.
如何間 그-方式은 어떠케 하든지 大京城을 建設하기 爲하야 우리의 生活을 向上시키기 爲하야 우리 民間으로서 어떠한 活動이 반듯이 잇슬 것이라 합니다.
昨年末에 都市計畫硏究會 總會의 決議를 參考로 본다 하면 이로부터 50年內에 京城에 百萬人口를 收容하도록 하겟다 하얏습니다. 그리고 都市의 面積으로는＜50＞ 5,425萬坪으로 하야 2,180萬坪은 4大公園 又는 漢江地帶로 控除하고 實際 市街地로는 3,245萬坪으로 하얏다 합니다. 此를 里數로 計하면 東西가 4里13町 남즛하고 南北이 3里10町쯤 된다 합니다. 그러니까 南山이 中央公園이 되고 漢江流域을 外線으로 하야 龍山 麻浦 往十里 淸凉里가 다-都市의 範圍에 들것입니다.
兄弟여. 그들은 이러케 計畫하고 五10年內에 百萬人을 標準잡앗다 합니다. 이것이 그들의 計畫대로 그대로 될는지는 疑問이나 어찌하얏든 우리民間으로의 무슨 計畫이 업슬가요. 우리는 4方 百里나 10里를 標準한다거나 10年에 百萬 30年에 五百萬을 收容케 한다거나 무슨 作定이 잇서야 될 것 아닙니까. 이것도 못한다하면 그들의 計畫에 促進的 後援이라도 하고 協助的 出力이라도 하여야 하지 아니합니까. 京城이 우리民間의 京城인 바에야 어찌 他人의 事와 가티 度外에 致하고 말리이까. 그런데
兄弟여. 깁히 한가지 생각할 것은 누가 計畫히던지 京城에 百萬이거나 2百萬이거나 그러한 多數의 人口를 包容케 된다하면 어느 民族이 包容되리이까. 毋論 朝鮮의 京城이니까 朝鮮民族이 包容되겟지오. 그러나 여러분 朝鮮民族으로 包容이 되리라하기 매우 疑心스럽습니다. 아마 外國人일 듯 십소이다.
보십시오. 50年前은 우리 京城에 外國人의 居住가 업섯습니다. (잇다 하드래도 不過 10戶 內外) 50年은 그만두고 20年 前만해도 그리 만치 안핫습니다. 그런데 지금은 어떳습니까. 3分의 1 아니 半數가 外國人인듯 십지 아니합니까. 이로써 보면 이제 10年 뒤이나 50年 뒤이면 全혀 外國人의 京城이 될 것이 아닙니까. 事勢가 이러하겟는지라 우리 民族은 이에 이빨을 악물고 밧삭 달려들어 京城의 품을 떠나지 못할 것이며 鄕村의 同胞라도 자꾸 불러 올려 京城의 骨子가 되게 하여야 되겟습니다. 그런데 물에 빠진 者가 精神은 잇고도 어쩔 수 업시 죽는 것 가티 果然 딱한 일입니다. 鄕村의 人民이 京城으로 오기는 姑舍하고 京城사람으로서 鄕村으로 돌아가지 안흘 수 업게 되엇스니 이것이 딱한 일이외다.
남만콤 아지 못하고 남만곰 돈이 업고 남만콤 일할 줄 모르니 都會의 生活을 하련들 어찌합니까. 不得已 深山으로 돌아갈 밧게 업습니다. 그도 혹-工場이 잇거나 會社가 잇거나 하야 一般이 勞働生活이라도 할 수 잇스면＜51＞ 그런대로 부댁겨 살겟지만 그도 업습니다.
그러니까 今後의 京城은 知者 金力者 權力者의 京城이 되고 말 것이외다. 그러니까 自然 外國人의 京城이 되고 말 것이외다.
兄弟여. 外國人의 京城이 되거나 말거나 그대로 둘 수는 업습니다. 아무리 피가 마르고 毒이 풀리고 根氣가 殘弱하다한들 生命이 끈허질 그때에야 어찌 한번의 勇氣가 업겟습니까.
至今 京城에 사는 우리 兄弟는 188,640人 (大正10年度 計)이며 日本人은 69,273人이며 其他 外國人은 3,785이라 합니다. 이로써 보면 朝鮮人은 적어도 3倍 以上이 됩니다. 이 3倍 以上의 多數로써 아무리 貧弱하단들 그들을 對敵치 못한다고야 넘우나 無氣力을 表示하지 안습니까.
兄弟여. 어떠한 手段方法을 쓰던지 京城의 품안에 밧삭밧삭 닥아 들어서 우리의 大京城을 만들어 봅시다. 그리하야 京城으로써 世界的 大都會를 만들어 노코 우리民族의 實力을 世界에 자랑해 봅시다.
願하노니 鄕村生活로부터 都會生活에 나와 주소서. 都會生活의 10年은 村落生活의 百年보다 낫습니다. 그-理由로는 別로 「都會生活과 村落生活」이란 問題를 두고 아즉 이만 끈침니다.
兄弟여. 어찌하얏든 大京城 建設에 着目합시다. (다만 與論뿐입니다)＜52＞
＜43-52＞