**Header Section:**
Magazine Title: 개벽 第21號 (Kaebyŏk, Issue 21)
Publication Date: 1922년 03월 01일 (March 1, 1922)
Article Title: 民衆의 親友=兪吉濬先生, 10大偉人紹介의 其八 (Friend of the People = Mr. Yu Kil-chun, Eighth in the Introduction of 10 Great Men)
Author: 一記者 (Il Kija - One Reporter)
Article Type: 논설 (Nonsŏl - Editorial/Article)

**Body Text Translation:**
Friend of the People = Mr. Yu Kil-chun, Eighth in the Introduction of 10 Great Men
						One Reporter

It was Pyŏngja (丙子), 45 years ago from now. The Chosŏn court abandoned its traditional isolationist policy (鎖國主義), which had made the rejection of the West and Japan (斥洋斥倭) its primary national principle (國是), and adopted an open-door policy (開國主義), making it the primary national principle to establish relations with all nations and achieve the great work of restoration (維新). As previously discussed in issue number three of this magazine when introducing Mr. Kim Ok-kyun (金玉均先生), Chosŏn, through this treaty, used an era name signifying the opening of the country for the first time (previously, the Qing Dynasty's (淸國) era name was used) and referred to itself as the Great Monarch of Great Chosŏn (大朝鮮國 大君主), thus becoming, even in appearance, a dignified, independent, and autonomous nation.

However, this was not achieved because all hundred officials at the time possessed such self-awareness. It was accomplished only through the forceful arguments of a few farsighted individuals, such as the interpreter O Kyŏng-sŏk (吳慶錫, father of the current O Se-ch'ang 吳世昌氏) and the Right State Councilor Pak Kyu-su (朴珪壽). From this point, two major political factions naturally emerged in Chosŏn's political sea: the pro-enlightenment faction (開化便) and the conservative faction (守舊便). These two factions, due to their differing political views and principles, mutually excluded each other and sometimes clashed, causing numerous disturbances such as the Kapsin (甲申), Kabo (甲午), and Ŭlmi (乙未) political upheavals (政變).

Although it is generally well known, one point must be mentioned here. While the two aforementioned factions were alike in their practice of mutual exclusion, there was a world of difference (天壤之差) in the spirit behind their actions. Specifically, <57> the pro-enlightenment faction, observing Chosŏn's situation at the time and considering the trend of the world situation, held the most fervent self-awareness that without implementing a major restoration (維新) in both politics and morality, Chosŏn's future could not be secured. They fought against the stubborn, unenlightened, and shameless (頑冥無廉) power holders of the time primarily to realize this politically. Conversely, the conservative faction lacked any foresight regarding the prevailing trends and acted mainly to protect their existing interests or acquire new ones, merely massacring (屠戮) or exiling (逐放) members of the enlightenment faction. What, indeed, was the result when such shameless, cunning, and wicked (無廉狡惡) individuals, who knew nothing beyond their own interests, ultimately achieved victory?

We previously introduced Mr. Kim Ok-kyun (金玉均先生), the mastermind of the Kapsin Coup (甲申政變), in issue number three of this magazine, depicting the political situation centered around the Kapsin reforms. Now, with the same pen, we introduce Mr. Yu Kil-chun (兪吉濬先生), a protagonist of the Kabo Upheaval (甲午政變) and an influential figure in the Ŭlmi Reforms (乙未更張). While drafting this manuscript, the reporter himself feels indescribable emotion, and I am confident that readers, by comparing this with the article in issue number three, will gain something from it.

Kyudang (矩堂) Mr. Yu was born 66 years ago from now, on the 25th day of the 9th month of Pyŏngjin (丙辰), in Kye-dong, Kyŏngsŏng Prefecture (京城府 桂洞). From childhood, he enjoyed giving things to others. During holidays (名節), he would always take out his own food and drinks to share (共分) with his friends, finding joy in doing so. Later, during the Pyŏngin Disturbance (丙寅의 亂 - 1866 French Campaign), when his family evacuated to Kwangju (廣州), the family circumstances (家勢) became extremely poor (赤貧). They barely maintained their livelihood (家道) with a monthly donation of 50 nyang from his maternal grandfather (外祖). On one occasion (at age 19), Mr. Yu took the entire 50 nyang and used it to arrange housing for a poor relative (貧族). He was profound in character and outstanding in talent. He mastered Chinese classics (漢學) early on. In the spring of Sinmi (辛巳), at the age of 26, he went to study abroad in Tokyo, Japan (日本東京), where he studied under Fukuzawa Yukichi (福澤諭吉) and was greatly influenced (薰陶) by him. He later transferred (轉學) to the United States (米國) and graduated from Boston (포스톤) University. After observing the political customs (政治風俗) and cultural institutions (文物制度) of various European and American countries, he departed via the Mediterranean Sea and returned to his homeland in the winter of Ŭlyu (乙酉). This was right after the Kapsin Coup (甲申政變). Anyone suspected (嫌疑) of being part of the enlightenment party was being rounded up (一網打盡), and the conservative Min clan faction (閔族一黨) held key positions in the government. Mr. Yu, considered to have the same intentions as the enlightenment party, was immediately imprisoned (拘囚) in the Police Bureau (捕盜廳). At this time, the political situation was extremely perilous (甚히 怪惡); any progressive and ambitious young person returning from abroad was immediately captured and killed (捕殺) regardless of right or wrong (曲直). Mr. Yu's <58> fate was also highly precarious at this time, but fortunately, he received the protection (顧護) of the Police Chief Han Kyu-sŏl (韓圭卨氏) at the time, barely escaping great misfortune. He was subsequently confined (幽閉) at Mr. Han's house. Later, placed under house arrest in Paengnoktong (白鹿洞, now Ch'wiun-jŏng 翠雲亭), he drafted "Sŏyu Kyŏnmun" (西遊見聞 - Observations on Travels in the West), spending eight years in melancholy and indignation (憂鬱慷慨).

An awl in a bag inevitably reveals its point (囊中之錐); a righteous man (正義之士) generally rises up. The fortune of liberation (解放) suddenly arrived for Mr. Yu as well.

It was the autumn of Imjin (壬辰). A certain Westerner requested the government of the time to purchase the rights for the application of electricity (電氣應用) throughout Chosŏn for a mere 140,000 wŏn (圓). However, none of the cabinet ministers (閣僚) at the time could fully interpret this Westerner's negotiation document (交涉文書). Inevitably, they requested Mr. Yu, who was under house arrest, to translate (飜譯) this text and also handle the negotiation (交涉). From the outset (自初), the government, struggling with immediate financial distress (眼前의 窘窮) and lacking solutions (方途), was inclined to concede (讓與) the rights upon seeing a source for over 100,000 wŏn. Mr. Yu, indignant (忿하야) that such significant rights (權利) would be transferred to a foreigner, strongly remonstrated against it (極力으로 이를 諫止하야), and finally, the matter was settled without incident. For this achievement, the government lifted Mr. Yu's confinement (禁) in November of the same year, allowing him to return to his family home. On the night his confinement was lifted, Mr. Yu composed (親吟) a poem, which reads:
風雪山中夜 (Wind and snow in the mountain night)
蕭然一榻書 (Desolate, a single couch, books)
主人梅共笑 (The host and plum blossoms smile together)
春色在茅盧 (Spring colors are in the thatched hut)

The political situation (時局) turned, bringing about the turmoil (風雲) of Kabo (甲午). Mr. Yu then undertook the major Kabo Reforms (甲午改革), establishing the Deliberative Council (軍國機務處) and becoming one of its committee members (委員), fully dedicating himself to the reform of various government affairs (庶政). Subsequently, when the new government was organized, he became Inspector General of the State Council (議政府都憲), later Vice Minister of Home Affairs (內部 協判), and then Minister of Home Affairs (內部大臣). In the winter of Ŭlmi (乙未), when the King (高宗) secretly fled (潛幸) to the Russian Legation (露國公館) and the Kim Hong-jip (金宏集) cabinet collapsed (瓦解), he avoided the disaster (難을 避하야) by staying in Japan. Later, he communicated with cadets from the military academy (士官學徒) in Kyŏngsŏng (在京) and secretly plotted (暗圖) to reform the pro-Russian (親露派) government, but the plot leaked (謀洩) midway and did not succeed (不果). He returned to Korea (歸國) in Chŏngmi (丁未 - 1907), organized the Hŭngsadan (興士團) to greatly promote (大起) national education (國民敎育), became President of the Hansŏng Citizens' Association (漢城府民會長) to plan improvements to the municipal system (市制의 政善), and started the National Economic Association (國民經濟會), working zealously for industrial development (産業의 開發). When the Japan-Korea Annexation (日韓合倂) was decided in Kyŏngsul (庚戍 - 1910), he was offered the title of Baron (男爵) by the Korean Peerage Association (朝鮮貴族會), but he returned it (返上) and lived in seclusion (隱居) in Noryangjin (鷺梁津), focusing his intention on national education until he departed this world (世を辭하니) on the 25th day of the 9th month of Pyŏngjin (丙辰 - 1916), at the age (時年) of 61. <59>

The Kabo Reforms and Mr. Yu's Prime (得意)

The Kapsin Reforms, accomplished by the faction of the late Kim Ok-kyun, collapsed after only three days. Kim Ok-kyun, Pak Yŏng-hyo (朴泳孝), Sŏ Kwang-bŏm (徐光範), and Sŏ Chae-p’il (徐載弼) went into exile (亡命) in Japan, while the remaining members of the enlightenment party were massacred (屠戮) or banished/dismissed (竄黜), and Chosŏn once again became the domain (天下) of the conservative party. Although we will not detail it here, it is no exaggeration to say that the 10 years in Chosŏn after Kapsin were truly a period of corruption and chaos unprecedented since the beginning of its history (朝鮮有史以後 初有의 濁亂). Internally, the atmosphere in the palace (宮中) was undeniably corrupt, centered around Chillyŏnggun (眞靈君, a shamaness who claimed to be the daughter of Guan Yu (關帝), presiding over the Northern Shrine (北廟) and becoming a hidden source (潛源) of power in the palace). Externally, the corruption (腐敗) of local officials, centered around Min Yŏng-jun (閔泳駿, later renamed Min Yŏng-hwi 閔泳徽) and Min Hyŏng-sik (閔炯植), reached its peak, filling the sky (漲天) with the resentful cries (怨聲) of the four classes of people (四民), and the nation's administrative discipline (政綱) was ruined (掃地). Although there were renowned officials like Kim Hong-jip (金弘集), Ŏ Ch'ung-jung (魚充中), and Kim Yun-sik (金允植) among the high officials (顯官) at the time, they could do nothing about the power of the Min clan faction (閔族一派), which had Queen Min (閔后) as its background support (背景), and could only watch with folded arms (袖手傍觀).

Entering the year Kabo (甲午), at the very beginning of the new spring (新春劈頭), Kim Ok-kyun, the mastermind of the Kapsin Reforms, was assassinated (暗殺) in Shanghai, and his head was displayed on a pole (梟하야) in Kyŏngsŏng, once again provoking (剌戟) the sentiments (心情) of the progressive and ambitious individuals of the enlightenment movement. The Donghak Uprising (東學의 亂), which had revealed its force (其鋒을 露한) in previous years, saw its momentum (其勢) grow daily (日隆). The government at the time requested aid (援) from Qing China (淸國). In the 4th month of the summer of Kabo, Qing troops landed (上陸) at Asan (牙山). Upon receiving this news, Japan also hastily dispatched troops (急遽히 兵을 出하야), entering Kyŏngsŏng (京城) in the 6th month of the same year. The land of Kyŏngsŏng truly fell into a situation where turmoil reigned (風雲이 晦暝), and both sky and sun grew dark (天日이 俱暗).

At this time, the inner intention (內意) behind Qing China dispatching troops to Chosŏn was to take advantage (此機를 乘하야) of the friction (軋轢) between the government and the assembly in Japan at the time, recover its traditional authority (從來의 權威) over Chosŏn, and eventually bring all of Chosŏn into its grasp (掌中). Aware of this, the Japanese government immediately dissolved (解散) its assembly and, with resolute (斷乎) determination (決心), proceeded to dispatch troops. Qing General Yuan Shikai (袁世凱), observing that the situation was unusual (尋常치 안음을 觀察하고), negotiated (交涉) with Japanese Minister Ōtori Keisuke (大鳥圭介) and proposed (議하얏스나) the simultaneous withdrawal of troops (同時 撤兵) by both countries (兩國). However, the discussion failed (其議-不調), and Minister Ōtori hastened preparations (準備を 急行하매) to reform Chosŏn's internal affairs (內政) single-handedly (獨力). Yuan Shikai fled under cover of night (乘夜逃走), and at dawn (拂曉) on the 21st day of the 6th month, two battalions (2大隊) of Japanese soldiers (日兵) finally marched towards Kyŏngbok Palace (景福宮). The stage (舞臺) for the Kabo Reforms thus began to open (始開).

Now, turning back (却說), Mr. Yu was confined (鮮禁되어 - likely meaning politically confined or under house arrest) in Paengnoktong, becoming a free man (自由의 몸이 되는) in November of Imjin (壬辰), two years before the Kabo year. Since his pardon (赦免以後), <60> Mr. Yu had not stood at the forefront (正面) of the political world at the time. Besides maintaining close friendly relations morning and evening (朝暮相善하는) with Kim Hak-u (金鶴羽) and Kwŏn Yŏng-jin (權濚鎭), who were patriots (志士) and experts on foreign affairs (外國通) at the time, he also maintained connections (氣脈을 相通하야) with Cho Hŭi-yŏn (趙羲淵), an influential figure (有力者) in the contemporary political scene, quietly observing (觀望하던 中) the unfolding situation (風雲의 推移). Entering the year Kabo, as Japan and Qing clashed (相衝) and Chosŏn's political world reached a turning point (其局面을 一轉할 運), Mr. Yu resolutely rose up (翻然히 起하야) and dedicated his entire effort (全心力) to pioneering the new situation (新局面의 開拓). He coordinated his plans (其謀를 共定하고) with Messrs. Kim and Kwŏn, as well as various like-minded individuals (諸有志) in the government, including Cho Hŭi-yŏn, An Kyŏng-su (安駉壽), and Kim Ka-jin (金嘉鎭). On the dawn of the 21st day of the 6th month, coinciding with the mobilization (出動) of Japanese troops, they escorted (擁하고) the Taewŏn'gun (大院君) from Unhyŏn Palace (雲峴宮), entered Kyŏngbok Palace (景福宮), and decisively carried out (斷行하니) internal reforms with irresistible force (破竹의 勢로써). This was the Kabo Reform.

Thereupon, Min Yŏng-jun (later renamed Yŏng-hwi 泳徽) and the rest of the Min clan faction (閔族一派) were either placed under house arrest (安置) or exiled (竄謫). Kim Hong-jip (金宏集) was appointed (拜하야) temporary Chief State Councilor (臨時의 領議政) to carry out the reform of various government affairs (庶政). The King issued an edict (詔) proclaiming (布明) his intention for timely political restoration (政治의 因時維新). On the 23rd, the Deliberative Council (軍國機務處) was established (設하야) to decide on all matters (萬事를 刱定할 새), with Kim Hong-jip as its Director-General (總裁). Mr. Yu became one of its committee members (委員) and was tasked with drafting (起草) and deciding (決定) on all sorts of systems (百般의 制度). The main outline (大軆) of the reforms at that time involved the abolition (廢止) of factions (朋黨) and the Yangban-commoner class distinction (班常), the abolition of the system discriminating between civil and military officials (文武尊卑制), and the complete renewal (一新) of other misgovernance (弊政). A few days later, by royal command (勅命), a new cabinet (新內閣) was organized. Kim Hong-jip became Chief State Councilor (領議政), and Mr. Yu became Inspector General of the State Council (議政府都憲), managing (主張) almost all affairs. Later, on the 20th day of the 7th month, a new government organization system (新官制) was promulgated (發布), establishing and initially using (始用) a 10-ministry system: Imperial Household (宮內府), Home Affairs (內部), Education (學部), Foreign Affairs (外部), Finance (度支部), Agriculture and Commerce (農商部), Military Affairs (軍部), Justice (法部), and Public Works (工部 - likely). These were all primarily based on Mr. Yu's plans (考案).

One thing to consider here is that the elimination (淘汰) of the conservative party in the Kabo Reforms meant the frustration (挫折) of Queen Min's (閔后) power, and the success (成功) of the reform party meant the success of the Taewŏn'gun. Of course, the reform party's real intention (本意) was not to respect (尊重) the Taewŏn'gun's political views, but due to the connection (關係) of having accomplished things through (因하야) the Taewŏn'gun, it naturally turned out that way. However, the actions of the reform faction often disagreed (不合) with the intentions of the Taewŏn'gun's faction, and at the same time, that faction came to see through (看破하게 되엇다) the decline (不振) of its own power. As a result of their anxiety (焦慮) and plotting something different (異謀를 圖하기까지에 至한 結果), Yi Chun-yong (李埈鎔) was eventually banished (配함) to Kyodong Island (喬桐), and the Taewŏn'gun's power fell to the ground (勢力墜地). Thereafter, it became Queen Min's prime (得意) again.

Prior to this, in the 7th month of the same year, Mr. Pak Yŏng-hyo (朴泳孝氏) returned to the country (歸國). The King granted him a special pardon (特宥) for his crime (罪, the Kapsin affair), and by the 12th month, appointed him Minister of Home Affairs (內部大臣). Consequently, a clash (衝突) between two major powers (2大 勢力) emerged in the political world at that time. That is, while previously Mr. Yu Kil-chun (兪吉濬氏), supporting Kim Hong-jip <61> as leader (首戴한), had managed (主張) the larger part (大部) of state affairs (政務), now, besides Mr. Yu, there was also Mr. Pak. Mr. Pak further advanced his steps (其步を 更進하야), and in the 4th month of Ŭlmi (乙未), strongly revised (改正) the existing government organization system (官制). According to the new system (新官制), he remained Minister of Home Affairs while appointing Mr. Yu as Vice Minister of Home Affairs (內部協判), making him his subordinate (部下). The public (世間) referred to this as the division (分立) between Kim Hong-jip and Pak Yŏng-hyo, but in reality (其實), it was a secret strife (暗鬪) between Yu and Pak.

It was midsummer (中夏) of Ŭlmi. The Sino-Japanese War (日淸戰爭) ended with Japan's victory (勝利), but due to the Triple Intervention (三國의 干涉), the Liaodong Peninsula (遼東半島) had to be returned (返還). The atmosphere (空氣) in Hansŏng (漢城) changed completely (一變), and Japan's power became unreliable (可恃치 못하게 되매). Russian Minister Weber's (露國公使 韋貝) activity seized the opportunity (其機を 乘하게 되어), and the secret maneuvering (暗中飛躍) of the pro-Russian faction (親露派) flourished (盛하게 되며). Queen Min (閔后), although initially secretly supporting (後援) Pak Yŏng-hyo to remove (除去) the opposition party (反對黨) to the Min clan, once the general situation (大勢) reached this point, secretly came to dislike (忌) Pak and conspired (結托) with the remnants of the conservative party (守舊의 餘黨). Furthermore, seeing that many cabinet ministers (閣僚) at the time were not of his party, Mr. Pak attempted a final plan (最後の一計 圖하야) to change (轉換코저) the situation, but the plot leaked midway (其謀-中途に 漏洩되어). In the intercalary 5th month of Ŭlmi, Mr. Pak unavoidably (不得已) went into exile (亡命) in Japan, and the power (勢力) of the Progressive Party (開進黨) somehow disappeared (消失되기에 至하얏다).

Thereupon, the Taewŏn'gun retired (退隱) to Kongdŏk-ri (孔德里), Queen Min wielded power (用事), dismissed (黜하고) the Progressive faction (開進派), and appointed conservatives (守舊派) and pro-Russians (親露派) to important positions (重用). Pak Chŏng-yang (朴定陽) was made Prime Minister (總理), Mr. Yu (兪氏) was dismissed (斥하야) and appointed Governor of Ŭiju (義州觀察使), with a plan (計策) to assassinate (暗殺) him on the way to his post (赴任 途中). However, the plot leaked (謀-洩하야) and did not succeed (不果), and the situation (局面) changed completely (一轉하야), reaching a point where the very existence (有無) of the Kabo Reforms was questionable.

The Ŭlmi Renewal (乙未更張) and Mr. Yu's Exile (亡命)

As the Kabo Reforms collapsed (瓦解) less than a year (一年を 不出하야) after their inception, progressive and ambitious individuals (新進有志) could only weep bitterly (淚を 飮하고) and think about pioneering a new situation. At this time, the concentration (集中) of Japanese rōnin (日本浪士) in Kyŏngsŏng provided many conveniences (幾多の 便宜) for carrying out such an undertaking.

August 21st, Ŭlmi (乙未 8月21日) - This is an extraordinary day (異常な日) that Chosŏn people cannot forget. As generally recognized, early that morning (是日早朝), the Taewŏn'gun entered Kyŏngbok Palace from Kongdŏk-ri, Queen Min was brutally murdered (慘殺), influential members of the current cabinet (閣僚) like the Yi Yun-yong (李允用) brothers and Yi Pŏm-jin (李範晋) were dismissed (罷免), and Messrs. Kim Hong-jip, Sŏ Kwang-bŏm (徐光範), Cho Hŭi-yŏn (趙羲淵), Kwŏn Yŏng-jin (權濚鎭), and Chŏng Pyŏng-ha (鄭秉夏) were again appointed to important positions (重用). It was the day the Kabo Reforms were renewed (更張하던 날).

At this time, Mr. Yu became Acting Minister of Home Affairs (內部大臣 署理) and soon after (不久に) Minister of Home Affairs (內部大臣). Together with Kim Hong-jip, he dedicated himself (專務할 새) to the renewal of various government affairs (庶政の 更張). In the 10th month, <62> a state funeral (發喪) was held for Queen Min. In the 11th month, the Chosŏn era name (朝鮮年號) was initiated (始政), called Kŏnyang (建陽), and the Short Hair Decree (斷髮令) was issued (下하야), forcing (强制하엿스며) people to cut their hair. They intended to completely renew (一新하려 하엿다) all aspects of government administration (庶政の 萬般). However, the difficult obstacle (難關) for the government at the time was the incident of Queen Min's assassination (閔后暗殺の 事件).

The Ŭlmi Renewal was not initially aimed (目的한) at assassinating Queen Min, nor were there perpetrators (下手者) among its partisans (黨與). However, there was no way (方途) to avoid (回避) responsibility (責). As an unavoidable measure (不得已 策), they dismissed (罷免) Minister of Military Affairs Cho Hŭi-yŏn (軍部大臣 趙羲淵) and Police Commissioner Kwŏn Yŏng-jin (警務使 權濚鎭), who had controlled (掌하얏던) the palace guard (警衛), police (警察), and military affairs (兵事) at the time, as well as Training Unit Commanders Yi Tu-hwang (訓練隊長 李斗璜) and U Pŏm-sŏn (禹範善), and held Queen Min's funeral (閔后の 發喪) to try to absolve themselves of responsibility (其責を 免코저 하엿다). However, this had no effect (何等の 効が 無하고) and only served to remove (除하야) the most powerful figures (最 有權者) of the new government, causing a reduction (減損を 致한) in its power (其勢). Furthermore (加之 而), the promulgation (降下) of the Short Hair Decree (斷髮令) incurred (買하야) the anger (怒) of the stubborn populace (頑民), causing popular disturbances (民擾) to rise up like swarms (蜂起). Yi Yun-yong and his brother, who had infiltrated (潛入) the American Legation (米國公館), and Yi Pŏm-jin, who had infiltrated the Russian Legation (露國公館), were watching (窺하던 中) for the arrival (到來) of their opportunity (其機). Yi Pŏm-jin, through introductions (紹介) via Court Lady Yang (宮女の 楊尙宮) and the eunuch Kang Sŏk-ho (內侍 姜錫鎬), arranged for the King to flee (播遷케 하고) to the Russian Legation on the night of the 26th day of the 12th lunar month (陰12月 26日夜) of Ŭlmi. A provisional cabinet (臨時の 內閣) was organized to destroy (撲滅) the Kim Hong-jip cabinet. On the morning of the next day (翌27日朝), Kim Hong-jip and Yu Kil-chun were arrested (逮捕) inside the palace (宮內), and Chŏng Pyŏng-ha was arrested on his way to attend court (仕進途中). Kim and Chŏng were executed by beheading (斬殺) in front of the Police Agency gate (警務廳の 門前), Ŏ Yun-jung (魚允中) was struck down and killed (擊殺) in Yong'in (龍仁), Kim Yun-sik (金允植) was banished (流配) to Cheju Island (濟州), and other cabinet members (閣員) fled (逃走) or were retained in office (仍用되엇는데). The Prime Minister (總理) of the new government (新政府) at this time was Pak Chŏng-yang (朴定陽), and the Police Commissioner (警務使) was Yi Yun-yong (李允用). However, at this time, Mr. Yu, arrested together (가티 逮捕되어) with Mr. Kim, was passing in front of the stone Haechi statues on the west side (西便 石海駝前) after exiting Kwanghwamun Gate (光化門), when he was rescued (救한 바 되어) by Japan-affiliated guard soldiers (日本派 守兵) garrisoned (守備하던) at the Three Army Headquarters (三軍部, now Infantry Barracks) on the west side, and went into exile (亡命) in Japan.

Regarding Mr. Yu's actions during this changing situation (變局), there is one thing particularly remembered (記憶되는 것이 잇스니). On the morning of the 27th when the disturbance (變亂) occurred, Messrs. Kim and Yu attended court (仕進한 即), but the King was already absent (不在한지라). Realizing (看破하고) the gravity and wrongness (大事의 卽非함을) of the situation, they discussed measures for the aftermath (善後策を 議할 새). Mr. Yu suggested, saying: "The state's ancestral shrines and altars (國家의 宗廟社稷) are not the private possession (私有) of the King (郡王) alone. Furthermore, since the King has already escaped (脫出) the palace and privately gone (私行) to a foreigner's legation (外人의 公館), he has already lost the status (格) of a King. How about issuing an edict (詔勅) from Queen Dowager Hong (洪大妣) and planning (策함) the great hundred-year plan (百年의 大計) for the nation?" Chief Councilor Kim shed tears (淚を 下하며) and said (曰): "This plan (此計) is certainly right (固當然하다) for the nation and the people, but as for me (余로), I cannot have any other thought (他念) than to die by the King's command (國王의 命令). May you (君) alone plan well (善圖) and support (扶) the nation of tomorrow (明日의 國家)." Mr. Yu also shed tears (亦淚を 下하며) and said (曰): "As you, Teacher (先生), face death (死に 就하매), I cannot think alone (獨히) of the future (後日)." And both submitted to arrest (就縛) at the same time – that is the story.
Ah! (아아) How magnificent (壯) was Mr. Yu's spirit (意氣), willing to refuse nothing (辭讓치 못하리라) for the future (將來) of his home and country (家國)! And also, what fidelity and righteousness (節義) did Mr. Kim show, facing death (死に 就した) <63> for his King! Although the two differed in the newness or oldness of their thinking (思想の 新舊), they were one (일이다) in the source (所發) of their loyalty (忠誠).

The Teacher's Style (先生之風): Mountains High, Rivers Long (山高水長)

1. When the country is weak, deeply worry about the sovereign/people (國弱深憂主)
When the house is poor, doubly think of parents (家貧倍思親)

This is a poem from one of Mr. Yu's casual compositions (偶吟). Though the text is short (文이 雖短하나), it is sufficient (足히) to infer (推量) what was in the Teacher's mind (意中). However, the "sovereign" (主) mentioned in this poem does not refer simply (單히) to the monarch (君主) alone, like the traditional "sovereign" (從來の主), but refers collectively (通하야 써 말한) to the entire 20 million nation/people (2千萬の 民族全軆) as the "master" (主). This is precisely (이가 곳) the point (點) where, in their desire to offer loyalty (忠を 効こ저 한) to the home and country (家國) at that time (當時に 잇서), Mr. Kim Hong-jip and Mr. Yu Kil-chun were similar in capacity (其量が 同하되), but naturally differed (스스로 갓지 아니한 바이라) in their ultimate aim (歸趣). That is, Mr. Kim sought to serve the nation (民族を 爲하고저) through (通하야) the monarch (君主), whereas in contrast (反하야), Mr. Yu had no intention (엇섯다) of serving the monarch (君主を 爲코저 함이) through the nation (民族を 通하야).

Quietly considering (가만히 생각컨대), he had nothing else (다시 아모 것이 업섯다) in mind other than (以外に) the nation and the people (國家와 民族). It goes without saying (勿論이오) that he never troubled his mind (心を 勞け 한 것이 업슴), even for a moment (一時이나마), for money (金錢) or power (權勢). If possible, it seemed (如하얏다) he wanted to leave the political world (政界を 떠나서) and pour his heart and soul (心力を 傾注코저 함과) completely (온전히) into the social sphere (社會的 方面으로). The only reason (故) he could not do so (다못 그러치 못한 것은) was that, given the circumstances of the time (當時の 形便に 잇서), it was impossible to serve the nation and society (國家社會を 爲할 수 업는) apart from politics (政治を 떠나).

"To give civilization (文明) to the people (民衆) of Chosŏn (朝鮮)" – this was the Teacher's first determination (第1 決心). What is the way (方道) to give civilization? "To organize (組織하리라) a civilized-style government (文明式の 政府) capable of handling (如何きに 可한) civilization" – this was the Teacher's second determination (第2 決心).

The reporter saw how enthusiastic (如何히 熱中하엿는 가) he was about giving our nation (民族) civilization, first in his written work (著한) "Sŏyu Kyŏnmun" (西遊見聞). As the book title indicates (書名이 示함과 與히), "Sŏyu Kyŏnmun" was compiled (編述) to transmit (傳하기 爲하야) everything seen and heard (見聞한 全部) in Western countries (西國) to his Korean brothers (朝鮮兄弟). <64> It is a great work (大著) comprising 20 chapters (篇) and 555 pages (頁) of main text (本文). It describes the general systems (一般制度) of politics (政治), industry (産業), and education (敎育) in modern civilized nations (現代文明國), as well as the essence of their spirit (精神の 所在). It covers general matters concerning Westerners' religion (宗敎), rituals (儀式), and customs (風俗), especially the state of enlightenment work (敎化事業の 如何) and describes machines (機械), the beneficial tools (利器) of civilization (文明). Its arrangement (排置) is highly systematic (組織的), and its wording and meaning (辭意) are clear and pertinent (愷切). Upon a single reading (一讀に), it could capably (能히) arouse (喚起) the self-awareness (自覺) of the populace (民衆). Although the writing (그 글) was compiled 35 years ago from now (距今 35年前), in the year Chŏnghae (丁亥 - 1887), it used a mixed script of Korean and Hanja (國漢文を 交用) so that even those who only roughly understood characters (文字を 略解する 人) could read it (能讀). Furthermore, at the time of compilation (編述한 當時), lacking funds for publishing (出版할 資金이 無하야), he left it as is (그대로 仍置). Then, 8 years later (8年後), upon reaching the year Ŭlmi (乙未 - 1895), he printed (印刷) one thousand copies (一千部) and distributed them (配付) entirely free of charge (全部 無料) to prominent people (人士) in various places (各地). He was the first (其始) in modern Chosŏn (朝鮮の 近世) to begin (始) the style (文套) of using mixed Korean script and Hanja (國漢文交用), and also the first (其始) to publish (出版) a modern-style book (現代式の 著書).

2. In contrast (反하야) to Mr. Kim Hong-jip (金弘集先生), a great figure (一大偉人) in the political world (政界) at that time, who was a member of the Soron faction (少論の 人), he was a member of the Noron faction (老論の 人). Although one cannot say his family lineage (家系) was illustrious (赫赫), it is a fact (事實) that it belonged (屬) to the Yangban class (兩班). Yet, from the very beginning (自初), he hated (미워하고) this distinction (別) between Yangban and commoners (班常) and advocated (主唱) the equality (平等) of the four classes (四民). No, rather than advocating (主唱한 것보다), he himself took the lead (率先) in practicing (實行) it. He did not wear (不嬰) clothes (衣服) made of items other than domestic products (國産以外の 品). He did not use (不用) carts or horses (車馬) for coming and going (出入). He did not recognize (不認) discrimination (差別) in language (言語). It was as if he practiced (實踐) exactly the slogan (標語) of a certain teacher: "No person above a person, no person below a person" (人上無人、人下無人).

Moreover, the Teacher had an extremely (極端) inviolable (可히 犯치 못할) personality (性格). While extremely favoring (極端으로 爲한) those he favored, at the same time (同時), he extremely hated (極端으로 미워하엿다) those he hated (미워할 者). Although he didn't say it aloud (비록 입으로 말은 하지 아니하나), he tended (便) to always keep it engraved on his bones (每樣 뼈에 새겨 가지고 잇는). Therefore (그래서), he was always (恒常) slow in speech (言に 訥하고) and quick in action (行に 敏하엿스며). Also, when managing (經營) somewhat important matters (重大な 仕事), he would not stand in the front (正面に 立たず) himself, but would always hide behind (每樣 背後に 隱하야) and manipulate (操縱) every matter (每事). Third parties (第3者) might (或) call the Teacher excessive (甚하다) or insidious (陰險하다). However, this was because it was unavoidable (그리하지 아니 할 수 업슴이엿슴에 因함이요) in order to accomplish (成就) the matter (事), and there was no other intention (他意가 無하엿다). Furthermore, <65> unless one is among the ordinary folk (平凡者流) trying to muddle through (이럭저럭 하다가) life (한세상을 마추려하는), who could it be (그 누구이리요), one wonders (아지 못게라), who does not possess (가지지 아니 한 者) a somewhat extreme personality (多少 極端の 性格)?
Some 26 or 7 years ago from now (距今 26,7年前), promulgating (下하고) the Short Hair Decree (斷髮令) and forcing (强制) the cutting of hair upon the four classes (四民の 斷髮) was truly something that could not be done (能치 못할 바인) with ordinary courage (凡勇). At the same time, many of the Teacher's failures (失敗) at that time stemmed from (잇섯다) this. However, the evaluation (評) of a person should not be discussed merely based on the success or failure (成敗) of the matter (事), but rather based on the state of mind (心情の 如何) at the time (當). Thus, we would rather (寧히) simply love (愛する 뿐이다) his sincerity (心誠) in disregarding nothing (무엇이라도 不計한) for the sake of the civilization (文明) of his home and country (家國).

Another unforgettable aspect of the Teacher is his extensive knowledge (博識). It goes without saying (勿論) that he was more knowledgeable (博識) than any other figure (諸人物) of his time, and even in today's society (今日の 社會), people possessing such systematic knowledge (組織的の 學識) are likely rare (罕少). This extensive knowledge was fully utilized (活用) in the Kabo (甲午) and Ŭlmi (乙未) reforms (改革). It is obvious (勿論) that the Teacher's activities (活動) owed much (多) to his extensive knowledge (博識).

Furthermore, we offer a measure of gratitude (一段の 感謝を 呈한다) for the fact that the Teacher employed his intention (其意を用) directly and indirectly (直接間接) until the very end (最終) for the promotion (振興) of social culture (社會文運) and the development (開發) of industry (産業). Generally (大盖), it is the norm (通常) for those active (活躍) in the political world (政界) to become desolate and inactive (寂寥無爲) if they lose their path (一朝 其路を 失). However, the Teacher did not seek (求) political power (政權) for its own sake (爲하야); rather, he sought to seize (取) political power only as a means (手段) for the development (發展) of the national society (民族社會). Whether in office (朝に 在할 時) or out of office (野に 在할 時), he endeavored (努力) exactly the same (꼭가티) for social development (社會の 發展). It is generally recognized (一般이 共認する 바이라) that even while lying low (蟄臥) in Noryangjin (鷺梁津), he nurtured (誘成) many industrialists (實業家) for the development of industry (産業の 開發) and exerted considerable effort (얼마나한 努力) for the work of education (敎育の 事業). There is no need to await (待) our lengthy explanation (絮說).

Postscript (附記): As the Teacher is an elder (어룬) who departed this world (世を 辭) years ago (年前), and at the same time (同時), the general public (一般) already knows well (다-잘 아는 터임으로) what kind of person (如何한 人) he was, we will not go into full detail (가추 말하지 아니하며) but only fulfill the responsibility (責) of introduction (紹介) by outlining the main points (大槪を 말하야써). <66>
<57-66>

**Summary**

This 1922 article from the magazine *Kaebyŏk* profiles Yu Kil-chun (1856-1916), positioning him as a key figure in Korea's modernization efforts during the late Chosŏn period. It contrasts the reformist ("enlightenment") faction, to which Yu belonged, driven by a desire to save the nation through modernization, with the conservative faction, motivated by self-interest. The article details Yu's education abroad (Japan and US), his imprisonment upon return, his influential role in the Kabo (1894) and Ŭlmi (1895) reforms including drafting new laws and government structures, his subsequent exile after the collapse of the reformist government following Queen Min's assassination and King Gojong's flight to the Russian legation, and his later life dedicated to national education and industrial development despite being barred from politics. It highlights his authorship of "Sŏyu Kyŏnmun," a foundational work introducing Western civilization to Korea, and portrays him as a principled, knowledgeable, though somewhat uncompromising, leader devoted to the nation rather than just the monarch.

From a historical perspective, the article is significant for its contemporary (1922) evaluation of Yu Kil-chun and the turbulent reform period shortly after the annexation. It provides insight into how intellectuals during the colonial era viewed the figures and events leading up to annexation, framing the reformists like Yu and Kim Ok-kyun as patriots striving against conservative obstruction and foreign interference. The detailed accounts of political maneuvering, factional struggles (including the Soron/Noron mention), the specific reforms attempted (abolition of class system, new ministries), and dramatic events like the King's flight offer valuable contemporary perspectives, even if filtered through the author's clear pro-reformist bias. The emphasis on Yu's focus on the "people" (Minjung 民衆) and "nation" (Minjok 民族) over the monarch reflects early nationalist sentiments.

**Named Entities**

兪吉濬先生	유길준선생	Yu Kil-chun Sŏnsaeng (Mr. Yu Kil-chun)
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
淸國	청국	Ch'ŏngguk (Qing China)
金玉均先生	김옥균선생	Kim Ok-kyun Sŏnsaeng (Mr. Kim Ok-kyun)
吳慶錫	오경석	O Kyŏng-sŏk
吳世昌氏	오세창씨	O Se-ch'ang Ssi (Mr. O Se-ch'ang)
朴珪壽	박규수	Pak Kyu-su
甲申	갑신	Kapsin (1884)
甲午	갑오	Kabo (1894)
乙未	을미	Ŭlmi (1895)
京城府 桂洞	경성부 계동	Kyŏngsŏng-bu Kye-dong (Kye-dong, Seoul Prefecture)
廣州	광주	Kwangju
東京	동경	Tonggyŏng (Tokyo)
福澤諭吉	복자와 유키치	Fukuzawa Yukichi
米國	미국	Miguk (United States)
포스톤大學	포스톤대학	Posŭt'on Taehak (Boston University)
捕盜廳	포도청	P'odo-ch'ŏng (Police Bureau)
閔族一黨	민족일당	Minjok Ilttang (Min Clan Faction)
韓圭卨氏	한규설씨	Han Kyu-sŏl Ssi (Mr. Han Kyu-sŏl)
白鹿洞	백록동	Paengnoktong
翠雲亭	취운정	Ch'wiun-jŏng
西遊見聞	서유견문	Sŏyu Kyŏnmun (Observations on Travels in the West)
金鶴羽	김학우	Kim Hak-u
權濚鎭	권영진	Kwŏn Yŏng-jin
趙羲淵	조희연	Cho Hŭi-yŏn
安駉壽	안경수	An Kyŏng-su
金嘉鎭	김가진	Kim Ka-jin
雲峴宮	운현궁	Unhyŏn'gung (Unhyeon Palace)
大院君	대원군	Taewŏn'gun (Grand Prince Regent Heungseon)
景福宮	경복궁	Kyŏngbokkung (Gyeongbok Palace)
閔泳駿	민영준	Min Yŏng-jun
泳徽	영휘	Yŏng-hwi (Min Yŏng-hwi)
金宏集	김홍집	Kim Hong-jip
軍國機務處	군국기무처	Kun'guk Kimuch'ŏ (Deliberative Council)
議政府	의정부	Ŭijŏngbu (State Council)
高宗	고종	Kojong (King/Emperor Gojong)
露國公館	노국공관	Noguk Konggwan (Russian Legation)
興士團	흥사단	Hŭngsadan (Society for Fostering Activists)
漢城府民會	한성부민회	Hansŏng Puminhoe (Seoul Citizens' Association)
國民經濟會	국민경제회	Kungmin Kyŏngjehoe (National Economic Association)
庚戍	경술	Kyŏngsul (1910)
朝鮮貴族會	조선귀족회	Chosŏn Kwijokhoe (Korean Peerage Association)
鷺梁津	노량진	Noryangjin
朴泳孝	박영효	Pak Yŏng-hyo
徐光範	서광범	Sŏ Kwang-bŏm
徐載弼	서재필	Sŏ Chae-p’il
眞靈君	진령군	Chillyŏnggun (Shamaness influential with Queen Min)
北廟	북묘	Pukmyo (Northern Shrine)
關帝	관제	Kwanje (Guan Yu)
閔炯植	민형식	Min Hyŏng-sik
魚充中	어충중	Ŏ Ch'ung-jung
金允植	김윤식	Kim Yun-sik
閔后	민후	Minhu (Queen Min)
上海	상해	Sanghae (Shanghai)
東學	동학	Tonghak
牙山	아산	Asan
大鳥圭介	오오토리 케이스케	Ōtori Keisuke
袁世凱	원세개	Wŏn Se-gae (Yuan Shikai)
李埈鎔	이준용	Yi Chun-yong
喬桐	교동	Kyodong (Island)
韋貝	위패	Wip'ae (Karl Ivanovich Weber - usually transliterated 위베르 or 웨베르)
朴定陽	박정양	Pak Chŏng-yang
義州	의주	Ŭiju
李允用	이윤용	Yi Yun-yong
李範晋	이범진	Yi Pŏm-jin
鄭秉夏	정병하	Chŏng Pyŏng-ha
李斗璜	이두황	Yi Tu-hwang
禹範善	우범선	U Pŏm-sŏn
楊尙宮	양상궁	Yang Sanggung (Court Lady Yang)
姜錫鎬	강석호	Kang Sŏk-ho
警務廳	경무청	Kyŏngmuch'ŏng (Police Agency)
龍仁	용인	Yong'in
濟州	제주	Cheju
光化門	광화문	Kwanghwamun (Gate)
三軍部	삼군부	Samgunbu (Three Army Headquarters)
洪大妣	홍대비	Hong Taebi (Queen Dowager Hong - likely referring to Queen Sinjeong, mother of Heonjong, of the Pungyang Jo clan, acting as regent for Gojong. Hong is likely a mistake or refers to a different figure).

**Glossary**

斥洋斥倭	척양척왜	Reject the West, reject Japan
國是	국시	National policy/principle
鎖國主義	쇄국주의	Isolationism
開國主義	개국주의	Open-door policy
修好條規	수호조규	Treaty of Amity (specifically refers to the 1876 Korea-Japan Treaty)
年號	연호	Era name
大君主	대군주	Great Monarch
開化便	개화편	Pro-enlightenment faction (lit. 'enlightenment side')
守舊便	수구편	Conservative faction (lit. 'old custom side')
排擠	배제	Exclusion, ostracism
政變	정변	Political upheaval, coup d'état
維新	유신	Restoration, reform (term borrowed from Meiji Restoration)
自覺	자각	Self-awareness, realization
輩流	배류	Group, faction, crowd (often negative)
頑冥無廉	완명무렴	Stubborn, unenlightened, and shameless
屠戮	도륙	Massacre, slaughter
逐放	축방	Exile, banishment
鉅堂	거당	Kyudang (Yu Kil-chun's pen name)
施如하기를	시여하기를	To enjoy giving/bestowing (older form of 베풀기를)
赤貧	적빈	Extreme poverty
薰陶	훈도	Influence, tutelage, nurturing
嫌疑	혐의	Suspicion
一網打盡	일망타진	Rounding up in one sweep, catching in one net
怪惡	괴악	Strange and evil, perilous, terrible
捕殺	포살	Capture and kill
幽閉	유폐	Confined, imprisoned (often house arrest)
慷慨	강개	Indignation, lamentation
囊中之錐	낭중지추	An awl in a sack (idiom: talent will reveal itself)
讓與	양여	Concede, transfer, yield
諫止	간지	Remonstrate and stop
親吟	친음	Personally composed (poem)
時局	시국	State of affairs, current situation
風雲	풍운	Winds and clouds (metaphor for turmoil, upheaval)
庶政	서정	Various government affairs
協判	협판	Vice Minister (Chosŏn Dynasty title)
大臣	대신	Minister
潛幸	잠행	Secretly move/flee (usually refers to royalty)
瓦解	와해	Collapse, disintegrate (like tiles breaking)
暗圖	암도	Secretly plot/plan
謀洩	모설	Plot leaked
不果	불과	Did not succeed, fruitless
有史以後	유사이후	Since the beginning of history
濁亂	탁란	Corruption and chaos
宮中	궁중	Royal court, inside the palace
腐敗	부패	Corruption, decay
怨聲	원성	Resentful voices/cries
政綱	정강	Administrative discipline/principles
掃地	소지	Swept clean (metaphor for utterly ruined)
背景	배경	Background, support
袖手傍觀	수수방관	Watch with folded arms, stand idly by
梟	효	To display a severed head on a pole
剌戟	척극	Stimulate, provoke (older form of 자극)
内意	내의	Inner intention, real purpose
軋轢	알력	Friction, discord
乘機	승기	Seize the opportunity
掌中	장중	In the palm of one's hand
解散	해산	Dissolve (an assembly, etc.)
斷乎	단호	Resolute, decisive
交涉	교섭	Negotiation, dealings
撤兵	철병	Withdrawal of troops
不調	부조	Failed, unsuccessful (negotiations)
拂曉	불효	Dawn, daybreak
却說	각설	Now, turning to... (narrative transition phrase)
觀望	관망	Observe, wait and see
翻然히	번연히	Resolutely, suddenly changing one's mind
擁	옹	Support, escort, hold (often royalty)
破竹之勢	파죽지세	Force of splitting bamboo (idiom: irresistible force)
斷行	단행	Decisively carry out
安置	안치	Place under house arrest
竄謫	찬적	Exile, banishment
詔	조	Royal edict
刱定	창정	Establish, decide, create
總裁	총재	President, director-general
弊政	폐정	Misrule, maladministration
一新	일신	Complete renewal, reform
勅命	칙명	Royal command
考案	고안	Plan, device, design
淘汰	도태	Elimination, purge, selection
挫折	좌절	Setback, frustration
本意	본의	Real intention, true motive
焦慮	초려	Anxiety, impatience, fret
異謀	이모	Different plot, conspiracy
配	배	Banishment (to a place)
墜地	추지	Fall to the ground (loss of power/status)
特宥	특유	Special pardon
衝突	충돌	Clash, conflict
更進	갱진	Further advance, progress further
暗鬪	암투	Secret strife, infighting
干涉	간섭	Intervention, interference
返還	반환	Return, retrocession
可恃	가시	Reliable, dependable (often used in negative: 可恃치 못하다)
暗中飛躍	암중비약	Secret maneuvering, rapid advance in the dark
結托	결탁	Conspire, collude
漏洩	누설	Leak (of information), divulge
不得已	부득이	Unavoidably, inevitably
消失	소실	Disappear, vanish
退隱	퇴은	Retire from public life, live in seclusion
用事	용사	Wield power, be in charge
黜	출	Dismiss from office
赴任	부임	Proceed to one's new post
更張	경장	Renewal, reform, reorganization
浪士	낭사	Rōnin (Japanese masterless samurai, often political thugs/activists in this context)
慘殺	참살	Brutal murder, massacre
罷免	파면	Dismissal from office
署理	서리	Acting (in a position)
專務	전무	Dedicate oneself to, specialize in
發喪	발상	Hold a state funeral
斷髮令	단발령	Short hair decree (ordering men to cut off topknots)
强制	강제	Compulsion, force
難關	난관	Difficulty, obstacle, bottleneck
黨與	당여	Partisans, accomplices
下手者	하수자	Perpetrator, person who carried out the act
回避	회피	Avoid, evade
警衛	경위	Guard, security
警務使	경무사	Police Commissioner
訓練隊	훈련대	Training Unit (modernized military unit)
蜂起	봉기	Rise up like bees, swarm (uprising)
窺	규	Spy, watch for an opportunity
播遷	파천	Flee the capital (usually by royalty)
撲滅	박멸	Eradicate, destroy
翌	익	Next (day)
斬殺	참살	Execute by beheading
擊殺	격살	Strike down, kill
流配	유배	Banishment, exile
仍用	잉용	Retain in office
宗廟社稷	종묘사직	Ancestral shrine and altars of land and grain (metonym for the state/dynasty)
私有	사유	Private possession
格	격	Status, rank, standard
詔勅	조칙	Royal edict/decree
大計	대계	Great plan, grand strategy
節義	절의	Fidelity, integrity, righteousness
歸趣	귀취	Ultimate destination, aim, final resting place
傾注	경주	Pour into, concentrate on
博識	박식	Extensive knowledge, erudition
罕少	한소	Rare, scarce
蟄臥	칩와	Lie low, stay inactive/hidden
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제21호
발행일	1922년 03월 01일
기사제목	民衆의 親友=兪吉濬先生, 10大偉人紹介의 其八
필자	一記者
기사형태	논설

民衆의 親友=兪吉濬先生, 10大偉人紹介의 其八
						一記者
距今 45年前 丙子이라. 朝鮮의 朝廷에서는 單히 斥洋斥倭로써 國是의 第一義를 삼던 從來의 鎖國主義를 排하고 널리 萬邦과 그 關을 通하야 維新의 鴻業을 成就하기로써 國是의 第一義를 삼는 開國主義를 取하야 비롯오 日本과 더부러 修好條規를 締結하얏다. 이에 對하야는 일즉이 本誌 三號에서 金玉均先生을 紹介할 때에 그 大軆를 말한 바이 잇거니와 朝鮮은 이 條約에 잇서 처음으로 開國의 年號를 썻스며 (그前에는 淸國의 年號를 썻섯다) 大朝鮮國 大君主를 稱하야 於是乎 朝鮮은 그 軆面에서까지 儼然한 獨立自主國이 되엇섯다.

그러나 이것은 當時의 當局者가 百人이라하면 百人 全部가 다 各기 그와 가튼 自覺으로써 그리한 것이 아니오 겨우 當時의 譯官 吳慶錫(現 吳世昌氏의 先親)과 右議政 朴珪壽 等 몃사람 先見者의 力爭에 依하야 그리 된 것인 바 이로부터 朝鮮의 政海에는 스스로 開化便과 守舊便의 2大政黨을 現出케 되엇스며 이 2大政黨은 그 政見과 主義가 相違한 그만큼 서로 排擠하며 때로 衝突하야 甲申, 甲午, 乙未의 政變 等 事와 가튼 幾多의 波瀾을 惹起하얏다.
우리가 一般으로 잘 아는 일이나 여긔에서 한가지 말하야 두지 아니치 못할 것은 右에 말한 2大의 黨流가 서로서로 排除를 일삼은 點에 잇서서는 한가지나 그리한 精神에 잇서서는 그 두 黨流의 사이에 天壤의 差가 잇스니 即＜57＞ 開化의 便에서는 當時 朝鮮의 現狀으로써 보고 世界大勢의 趨向으로써 살펴 그 政治로서나 道德으로나 一大 維新을 斷行치 아니하면 實로 明日의 朝鮮을 어더 볼 수 업스리라는 가장 熱烈한 自覺을 가지고 먼저 이를 政治에서 實現키 爲하야 當時의 執權者인 頑冥無廉의 輩流와 싸운 것이오 守舊의 便에서는 當時의 大勢에 對한 一步의 先見이 無하고 主로 自己들이 所有한 利權을 擁護하며 또는 새로이 獲得키 爲하야 開化便의 사람을 屠戮 或은 逐放한 것 뿐이라. 이와 가티 自己의 利權을 아는 以外에 다시 아모 것도 모르는 無廉狡惡의 輩가 結局의 勝利를 어든 結果는 果然 어떠하엿는가.
우리는 일즉이 本誌 第3號에서 甲申政變의 主腦人인 金玉均先生을 紹介하야 甲申의 改革을 中心으로 한 當時의 政刑을 寫出하얏다. 이제 다시 그 붓으로써 甲午政變의 主人公이오 乙未更張의 有力者인 兪吉濬先生을 紹介하게 되도다. 이 稿를 草하매 記者 自身이 말할 수 업는 感慨를 가지는 것은 勿論이오 讀者 諸氏一般도 本誌 第三號의 記事와 相考하야써 읽으면 그 엇는 바가 업지 아니하리라고 自信한다.

矩堂 兪先生은 距今 66年前 丙辰 9月25日로써 京城府 桂洞에 나다. 幼時로부터 무엇이나 남에게 施如하기를 즐기어 名節가튼 때이면 每樣自家의 飮食品을 索出하야 그 동무를 과 共分함으로써 스스로 깃브다 하엿스며 其後 丙寅의 亂에 그 집이 廣州로 避難함에 미처는 家勢-赤貧하야 그 外祖 某氏의 주는 月50兩의 寄贈을 바다 家道를 僅保할 새 先生은 어느 때 그 50兩의 全金을 들어써 어떤 貧族의 住宅을 장만하야준 일도 잇섯다.(19歲時의 事) 性이 深刻하며 才-出衆하야 일즉이 漢學을 修하야 大成하고 26歲되는 辛已 春에 日本東京에 遊學할 새 福澤諭吉을 師事하야 그에게 薰陶된 바-만핫스며 그 後 米國으로 轉學하야 「포스톤」大學을 卒業하고 歐米諸國의 政治風俗과 文物制度를 視察하며 地中海를 出하야 乙酉 冬에 故國에 돌아왓는데 때는 正히 甲申의 政變을 지내인 後이라 開化黨의 嫌疑가 잇는 사람은 一網에 打盡되고 守舊便인 閔族一黨이 政局의 要路에 當하엿는 바 先生으로써 開化黨과 同一한 意思를 가진 사람이라 하야 곳 捕盜廳에 拘囚하얏다. 이때는 政界의 形便이 甚히 怪惡하야 무릇 外國으로부터 돌아오는 新進有志에 對하야는 그 曲直을 뭇지안코 곳 捕殺하는 바 先生도＜58＞ 이때의 運命이 甚히 危殆하얏스나 幸히 當時의 捕將 韓圭卨氏의 顧護를 입어 겨우 大禍를 免하고 仍히 韓氏家에 幽閉되엇스며 其後 白鹿洞『(今 翠雲亭)에 安置한 몸이 되어 「西遊見聞」을 草하며 凡 8年間의 歲月을 憂鬱慷慨 中에서 지내엿다.
囊中의 錐는 그 끗이 반듯이 나타나는 것이요 正義의 士는 大槪로 일어나는 것이라 先生의 身上에도 문득 解放의 運이 이르럿다.
때는 壬辰의 秋, 洋人 某가 當時의 政府를 向하야 全朝鮮에 대한 電氣應用의 權利를 僅14萬圓의 金으로써 買收하기를 請하얏다. 그런데 當時의 閣僚 中에는 이 洋人의 交涉文書를 完全히 解釋할 者가 업섯는 바 不得已 安置 中에 잇는 先生을 請하야 이 글을 飜譯케 하며 또 그 交涉의 任에 當케 하얏다. 政府에서는 自初로 眼前의 窘窮에 方途가 업서 苦心하던 中 10餘萬圓의 出處를 보고 곳 그 權利를 讓與할 意向이엿다. 先生은 그와가튼 큰 權利를 一外人에게 讓與함을 忿하야 極力으로 이를 諫止하야 듸디어 無事케 된 바 政府에서는 그 功으로써 同年 11月에 그만 先生의 禁을 解하야 故家로 歸하게 되엇다. 解禁되든 當夜에 先生이 親吟한 詩가 잇쓰니 가로되
風雪山中夜 蕭然一榻書 主人梅共笑 春色在茅盧
時局은 一轉하야 甲午의 風雲을 現出하엿다. 先生은 이에 甲午의 改革을 大行할 새 軍國機務處를 設하고 그 委員의 一人이 되어 庶政의 改革에 全當하엿스며 仍히 新政府가 組織됨에 미처 議政府都憲이 되고 그 後에 內部 協判으로 다시 內部大臣이 되엇스며 乙未 冬에 國王(高宗)이 露國公館으로 潛幸하야 金宏集內閣이 瓦解되매 難을 避하야 日本에 留하얏스며 그 후에 다시 在京의 士官學徒와 通하야 親露派 政府의 改革을 暗圖하얏스나 中途에 謀洩하야 不果하고 丁未에 歸國하야 興士團을 組織하야 國民敎育을 大起코저 하얏스며 다시 漢城府民會長이 되어 市制의 政善을 策하고 國民經濟會를 起하야 産業의 開發에 熱力하얏스며 庚戍에 日韓合倂이 決行됨에 미처 朝鮮貴族會에 依하야 男爵을 주엇스나 이를 返上하고 鷺梁津에 隱居하야 國民敎育에 其意를 注하다가 丙辰 9月25日에 世를 辭하니 時年이 61이엇다.＜59＞

甲午의 改革과 先生의 得意
故 金玉均 一派의 手에 成한 甲申의 改革이 겨우 3日로써 瓦解되며 金玉均, 朴泳孝, 徐光範, 徐載弼은 日本으로 亡命하고 其餘의 開化黨은 屠戮 或은 竄黜되어 朝鮮은 다시 守舊黨의 天下가 되엇다. 여긔에 그 詳細를 말치 아니 할지나 甲申 以後 10年間의 朝鮮은 實로 朝鮮有史以後 初有의 濁亂을 致한 時라 하야도 過言이 아니다. 內로 眞靈君(北廟의 主로서 關帝의 女로 自處하야 宮中勢力의 潛源이 되던 妖女)를 中心한 宮中의 空氣의 濁亂을 말할 것도 업섯고 外로 閔泳駿
閔炯植을 中心한 地方官吏의 腐敗가 其極에 達하야 四民의 怨聲이 漲天하고 國家의 政綱도 掃地하얏다. 當時의 顯官 中에 金弘集, 魚充中, 金允植과 가튼 名臣이 업지 아니 하엿스나 閔后를 背景으로한 閔族一派의 勢力을 如何히 할 수 업섯스며 다못 袖手傍觀할 따름이엇다.
歲-甲午에 入하여 新春劈頭에 甲申改革의 主腦者 金玉均을 上海에서 暗殺하고 其首를 京城에 梟하야 開化新進有志의 心情을 다시 한번 剌戟하엿스며 先年에 其鋒을 露한 東學의 亂은 其勢-日隆하는 바 當時 政府에서는 淸國에 其援을 請하야 甲午 夏 4月에 淸軍이 牙山에 上陸하엿스며 此報를 接한 日本이 또한 急遽히 兵을 出하야 同年 6月에 京城에 入하니 京城의 天地는 實로 風雲이 晦暝, 天日이 俱暗한 形便에 陷하얏다.
이때에 淸國이 朝鮮에 兵을 出한 內意는 當時의 日本에는 政府와 議會間의 軋轢이 有한 바 此機를 乘하야 朝鮮에 對한 從來의 權威를 回復하고 進하야 全 朝鮮을 自己의 掌中에 入케 하라함에 在하엿다. 此를 知한 日本의 政府는 卽時에 議會를 解散하고 斷乎한 決心으로써 兵을 出하기에 至함인 바 淸將 袁世凱는 事態의 尋常치 안음을 觀察하고 日本公使 大鳥圭介와 交涉하야 兩國이 同時 撤兵을 議하얏스나 其議-不調하고 大鳥公使는 獨力으로써 朝鮮의 內政을 改革할 準備를 急行하매 袁世凱는 乘夜逃走하고 6月21日 拂曉에 日兵 2大隊는 듸디어 景福宮을 向하얏스니 甲午改革의 舞臺는 이에 始開하엿다.

却說 先生이 白鹿洞으로 鮮禁되어 自由의 몸이 되는 甲午年을 距하기 2年前 壬辰 11月의 事이라. 一自 赦免以後의＜60＞ 先生은 當時政界의 正面에 立하지 아니하고 當時의 志士이며 또 外國通인 金鶴羽, 權濚鎭 兩人과 朝暮相善하는 以外에 別로 當時 政局의 有力者 趙羲淵과 氣脈을 相通하야 그윽히 風雲의 推移를 觀望하던 中 歲-甲午에 入하며 日, 淸이 相衝하야 朝鮮의 政界는 其局面을 一轉할 運에 至한지라. 先生은 이에 翻然히 起하야 全心力으로써 新局面의 開拓에 當할 새 金, 權 兩人을 始하야 在朝의 趙羲淵, 安駉壽, 金嘉鎭 等의 諸有志와 其謀를 共定하고 6月21日 拂曉를 期하야 日兵의 出動과 共히 雲峴宮의 大院君을 擁하고 景福宮에 入하야 破竹의 勢로써 內政의 改革을 斷行하니 是가 즉 甲午의 改革이라.
이에 閔泳駿 (後 改名 泳徽)以下 閔族一派를 或은 安置 或은 竄謫하고 金宏集으로써 臨時의 領議政을 拜하야 庶政의 改革을 行할 새 王은 詔를 下하야 政治의 因時維新의 意를 布明하고 同23日에 軍國機務處를 設하야 萬事를 刱定할 새 金宏集이 그 總裁가 되엇스며 先生이 其 委員의 一人이 되어 百般의 制度를 起草 決定케 하얏스니 當時 改政의 大軆는 朋黨 及 班常의 廢止, 文武尊卑制의 廢止와 其他 弊政의 一新을 行함에 在하얏스며 數日後 勅命으로 新內閣을 組織케 할 새 金宏集이 領議政이 되고 先生이 議政府都憲이 되어 거의 萬事를 主張하얏스며 그後 7月20日에 新官制를 發布하야 宮內府, 內部, 學部, 外部, 度支部, 農商部, 軍部, 法部, 工部의 10部制를 始用하니 是皆 主로 先生의 考案에 出한 것이엇다.
여긔에서 한 가지 생각하여 둘 것은 甲午의 改革에 잇서 守舊黨의 淘汰는 即 閔后의 勢力의 挫折을 意味함이오 改革黨의 成功은 即 大院君의 成功을 意味함이 된 그것이다. 勿論 改革黨의 本意가 大院君의 政見을 尊重함은 아니나 大院君을 因하야 事를 成한 關係上 스스로 그리 된 것이 잇다. 그러나 改革派의 行事는 만히 大院君 一派의 意思와 不合하엿스며 同時에 그 一派는 自己勢力의 不振을 看破하게 되엇다. 이에 焦慮하야 異謀를 圖하기까지에 至한 結果는 結局 李埈鎔을 喬桐에 配함이 되고 大院君의 勢力墜地가 되얏스며 그 以後는 更히 閔后의 得意가 되엇다.
그리고 是에 先하야 同年 7月에 朴泳孝氏가 歸國하매 王은 그 罪(甲午의 事)를 特宥하고 同 12月에 至하야는 그로써 內部大臣을 삼앗다. 於是乎 當時의 政界에는 2大 勢力의 衝突을 見하게 되엇다. 즉 從來에는 金宏集을＜61＞ 首戴한 兪吉濬氏가 政務의 大部를 主張하얏스나 이제부터는 兪氏 外에 更히 朴氏가 有한 바 朴氏는 其步를 更進하야 乙未 4月에는 强히 從來의 官制를 改正하고 新官制에 依하야 自己가 仍히 內部大臣이 되는 同時에 兪氏로 內部協判을 任하야 自己의 部下를 삼앗다. 이를 稱하야 世間에서는 或 金宏集과 朴泳孝과의 分立이라 하나 其實은 兪와 朴과의 暗鬪이엿다.
때는 乙未의 中夏, 日淸戰爭은 日本의 勝利로써 其局을 終하얏스나 三國의 干涉으로 遼東半島를 反還하게되매 漢城의 空氣는 一變하야 日本의 勢力을 可恃치 못하게 되매 露國公使 韋貝의 活動이 其機를 乘하게 되어 親露派의 暗中飛躍이 盛하게 되며 閔后도 其始는 閔族의 反對黨을 除去키 爲하야 朴泳孝氏를 그윽히 後援하엿스나 大勢-此에 至한 即 그윽히 朴을 忌하고 守舊의 餘黨과 結托하며 且 當時의 閣僚가 만히 其黨이 아닌 것을 본 朴氏는 最後의 一計를 圖하야 局面을 轉換코저 하엿스나 其謀-中途에 漏洩되어 乙未 閏5月 中에 朴氏는 日本으로 亡命하는 不得已에 至하야 開進黨의 勢力은 이럭뎌럭 消失되기에 至하얏다.
이에 大院君은 孔德里로 退隱하고 閔后가 用事하며 開進派를 黜하고 守舊派와 親露派를 重用할 새 朴定陽으로 總理를 삼고 先生(兪氏)을 斥하야 義州觀察使에 任하고 赴任 途中에서 暗殺할 計策이엇스나 謀-洩하야 不果하고 局面은 一轉하야 甲午改革의 有無조차 무를 곳이 업시되엇다.

乙未의 更張과 先生의 亡命
甲午의 改革이 一年을 不出하야 瓦解되매 新進有志는 다 못 淚를 飮하고 新局面의 開拓을 兼할 뿐이엿는데 이때 日本浪士의 京城集中은 이러한 일을 實行하기에 幾多의 便宜를 如하게 되엇다.
乙未 8月21日- 이날은 朝鮮人으로서 이즐수 업는 異常한 날이다. 一般이 認함과 與히 是日早朝에 大院君이 孔德里로부터 景福宮에 入하며 閔后가 慘殺되고 當時 閣僚의 有力者 李允用 兄弟와 李範晋 等이 罷免되고 金宏集, 徐光範, 趙羲淵, 權濚鎭, 鄭秉夏 諸人이 更히 重用되어 甲午의 改革을 更張하던 날이다.
先生은 이때에 內部大臣 署理가 되고 不久에 內部大臣이 되어 金宏集과 共히 庶政의 更張에 專務할 새 10月에＜62＞ 閔后를 爲하야 發喪하고 11月에 朝鮮年號를 始政하야 建陽이라 하고 斷髮令을 下하야 人民의 斷髮을 强制하엿스며 庶政의 萬般을 一新하려 하엿다. 그러나 當時 政府의 難關은 閔后暗殺의 事件이엿다.
乙未更張이 自初로 閔后暗殺을 目的한 것도 아니오 또 그 黨與에 下手者가 有한 것도 아니나 그러나 그 責을 回避할 方途가 업섯다. 不得已 策으로 當時의 宮中의 警衛와 警察 及 兵事를 掌하얏던 軍部大臣 趙羲淵, 警務使 權濚鎭 兩人과 訓練隊長 李斗璜, 禹範善 兩人을 罷免하고 閔后의 發喪을 行하야써 其責을 免코저 하엿다. 그러나 그것은 何等의 効가 無하고 다못 新政府의 最有權者를 除하야 其勢의 減損을 致한 것이엿다. 加之 而斷髮令의 降下는 頑民의 怒를 買하야 民擾가 蜂起하며 米國公使館에 潛入한 李允用 兄弟와 露國公使館에 潛入한 李範晉은 其機의 到來를 窺하던 中 李範晉은 當時 宮女의 楊尙宮과 內侍 姜錫鎬를 紹介하야 乙未의 陰12月 26日夜에 國王을 露公使館에 播遷케 하고 臨時의 內閣을 組織하야 金宏集內閣을 撲滅할 새 翌27日朝에, 金宏集, 兪吉濬을 宮內에서, 鄭秉夏를 仕進途中에서 逮捕하야, 金, 鄭 兩人을 警務廳의 門前에서 斬殺하고, 魚允中을 龍仁에서 擊殺하고 金允植을 濟州에 流配하고 其他의 閣員은 逃走 或 仍用되엇는데 當時 新政府의 總理는 朴定陽, 警務使는 李允用이엿다. 그런데 이때의 兪先生은 金氏과 가티 逮捕되어 光化門을 나와 西便 石海駝前을 지내일제 그 西便 三軍部(現 步兵隊)에 守備하던 日本派 守兵에게 救한 바 되어 日本에 亡命하얏다.
이 變局에 잇서 우리가 先生의 일에 對하야 特히 한가지 記憶되는 것이 잇스니 即 그 變亂이 起하는 27日朝에 金. 兪 兩人이 宮中에 仕進한 即 國王은 이미 不在한지라. 兩人은 이에 大事의 卽非함을 看破하고 善後策을 議할 새 先生은 써 하되 國家의 宗廟社稷은 郡王一人의 私有가 아니며 且 國王이 이미 宮中을 脫出하야 外人의 公館에 私行한 以上에는 벌서 君王의 格을 失하얏슨 即 洪大妣의 詔勅을 發하야 國家 百年의 大計를 策함이 如何할가 한 即 金總理-淚를 下하며 曰「此計-國家와 人民을 爲하야 固當然하다 할지나 余로는 國王의 命令에 死할 以外에 다시 他念을 有하지 못하노니 君이 혼자 善圖하야써 明日의 國家을 扶함이 有하라」하매 先生이 亦淚를 下하며 曰「先生이 死에 就하매 余-獨히 後日을 思할 수 업다」하고 兩人이 一時에 就縛한 그 일이다.
아아 家國의 將來를 爲하야는 아모 것도 辭讓치 못하리라한 先生의 意氣- 얼마나 壯하며 또한 君王을 爲하야＜63＞ 스스로 死에 就한 金氏의 節義가 또한 如何한가. 兩人이 그 思想의 新舊에 在하야는 不同하나 그 忠誠의 所發에 在하야는 일이다.

先生之風이어 山高水長
1 國弱深憂主
家貧倍思親
이는 어느 때에 先生의 偶吟에서 나온 詩이니 그 文이 雖短하나 足히 先生의 意中을 推量할 수 잇도다. 그러나 이 詩에 나타난 「主」라 함은 單히 君主 그 一人을 指稱함과 如한 從來의 主가 아니오 2千萬의 民族全軆를 通하야 써 말한 「主」이니 이가 곳 當時에 잇서 家國을 爲하야 忠을 効코저 한 點에서는 金宏集先生과 兪吉濬先生이 其量이 同하되 그 歸趣에 잇서는 스스로 갓지 아니한 바이라. 即 金氏는 君主를 通하야 民族을 爲하고저 한 것임에 反하야 兪氏는 民族을 通하야 君主를 爲코저 함이 엇섯다.
가만히 생각컨대 그는 國家와 民族을 생각하는 以外에 다시 아모 것이 업섯다. 金錢이나 權勢를 爲하야 一時이나마 그 心을 勞케 한 것이 업슴은 勿論이오 그는 할 수만 잇스면 政界를 떠나서 온전히 社會的 方面으로 그 心力을 傾注코저 함과 如하얏다. 다못 그러치 못한 것은 當時의 形便에 잇서 政治를 떠나 國家社會를 爲할 수 업는 故에서 나옴 뿐이엇다.
「朝鮮의 民衆에게 文明을 如하리라」이것은 先生의 第1 決心이엇스며 文明을 與할 方道가 무엇이냐? 文明을 如何기에 可한 文明式의 政府를 組織하리라. 이것은 先生의 第2 決心이엇다.
記者는 그가 우리民族에게 文明을 주기 爲하야 如何히 熱中하엿는 가를 먼저 그의 著한 「西遊見聞」에서 보앗노니 「西遊見聞」은 그 書名이 示함과 與히 그 西國에서 見聞한 全部를 朝鮮兄弟에게 傳하기 爲하야 編述한 것으로＜64＞ 全文 20篇에 本文 555頁로써 成한 大著이니 거긔에는 現代文明國의 政治, 産業, 敎育의 一般制度와 밋 그 精神의 所在를 말하고 西人의 宗敎, 儀式, 風俗에 關한 一般이며 特히 敎化事業의 如何와 文明의 利器인 機械의 如何를 叙述하야 그 排置가 甚히 組織的이며 그 辭意-愷切하야 一讀에 能히 民衆의 自覺을 喚起케 하얏스며 그 글은 距今 35年前 丁亥에 編述한 것임에 不拘하고 國漢文을 交用하야 文字를 略解하는 人이라도 能讀케 하얏스며 또 이를 編述한 當時에 出版할 資金이 無하야 그대로 仍置하엿다가 8年後 乙未에 及하야 一千部를 印刷하야 全部 무료로써 各地의 人士에게 配付하얏나니 朝鮮의 近世에 잇서 國漢文交用의 文套를 始한 者도 그이며 現代式의 著書를 出版한 者도 그가 其始이엿다.

2 當時 政界의 一大偉人이던 金弘集先生이 少論의 人임에 反하야 그는 老論의 人이엿다. 그러케 赫赫하엿다고 할 수 업스나 그의 家系가 兩班에 屬한 것은 事實이다. 그런데 그는 이와가튼 班常의 別을 自初로 미워하고 四民의 平等을 主唱하엿다. 아니 主唱한 것보다 자기가 率先하야 實行하엿다. 그는 몸에 國産以外의 品으로 成한 衣服을 不嬰하엿스며 出入에 車馬를 不用하엿스며 言語에 差別을 不認하엿섯다. 「그는 人上無人, 人下無人」이라는 某先生의 標語를 그대로 實踐한 셈이엿다.

그리고 先生은 可히 犯치 못할 極端의 性格을 가젓섯다. 그는 爲할 者를 極端으로 爲한 同時에 미워할 者를 極端으로 미워하엿다. 비록 입으로 말은 하지 아니하나 每樣 뼈에 새겨 가지고 잇는 便이엿다. 그래서 그는 恒常 言에 訥하고 行에 敏하엿스며 또 얼마큼 重大한 일을 經營할 때에는 自己가 그 正面에 서지 아니하고 每樣 背後에 隱하야 每事를 操縱하는 바 第3者는 或 先生을 指하야 甚하다 하엿스며 또는 陰險하다 하엿다. 그러나 이것은 或 事를 成就하기 爲하야 그리하지 아니 할 수 업슴이엿슴에 因함이요 他意가 無하엿다. 그리고 이럭저럭 하다가＜65＞ 한세상을 마추려하는 平凡者流가 아닌 以上 多少 極端의 性格을 가지지 아니 한 者- 아지 못게라. 그 누구이리요.
距今 26,7年前에 在하야 斷髮令을 下하고 四民의 斷髮을 强制함과 如함은 實로 凡勇으로 能치 못할 바인 同時에 先生의 當時 失敗도 만히 그에 잇섯다. 그러나 사람에 對한 評은 한갓 事의 成敗로써 論할 것이 아니오 그에 當한 心情의 如何로써 論한 것인 即 우리는 寧히 先生이 家國의 文明을 爲하야는 무엇이라도 不計한 그 心誠을 愛할 뿐이다.

先生에게서 또한 忘却치 못할 것은 그 博識이다. 그가 當時의 諸人物에 比하야 누구보다도 博識이엿던 것은 勿論이오 今日의 社會에 在하야도 그만큼 組織的의 學識을 가진 이가 罕少할 것이다. 그 博識은 甲午, 乙未의 改革에 잇서 그대로 活用하엿섯다. 先生의 活動이 그 博識에 負한 바 多함은 勿論일 것이다.

그리고 先生이 最終까지 社會文運의 振興과 産業의 開發을 爲하야 直接間接으로 其意를 用한 點에서 우리는 一段의 感謝를 呈한다. 大盖 政界에서 活躍하던 者가 一朝 其路를 失하면 寂寥無爲함이 그 通常이라. 그러나 先生은 政權을 爲하야 政權을 求한 것이 아니오 民族社會의 發展을 爲하야 그 手段으로써 政權을 取코져 한 것 뿐이엿는지라. 그는 朝에 在할 時나 野에 在할 時나 꼭가티 社會의 發展을 爲하야 努力하얏다. 그가 鷺梁津에 蟄臥하는 中에도 産業의 開發을 爲하야 幾多의 實業家를 誘成하얏스며 또는 敎育의 事業을 爲하야 얼마나한 努力을 行한 것은 一般이 共認하는 바이라. 우리의 絮說을 待할 것도 업도다.

附記 先生은 年前에 世를 辭한 어룬인 同時에 一般이 그의 如何한 人임을 다-잘 아는 터임으로 가추 말하지 아니하며 그 大槪를 말하야써 紹介의 責을 막을 뿐이다.＜66＞
＜57-66＞