Magazine Title: 개벽 제21호
Publication Date: 1922년 03월 01일
Article Title: 文學에 뜻을 두는 이에게 (To Those Who Aspire to Literature)
Author: 京西學人 (Kyŏngsŏ Hagin)
Article Type: 문예평론 (Literary Criticism)

文學에 뜻을 두는 이에게
						京西學人

It seems there are many younger brothers and sisters [fellow youths] lately. Among young men and women, the words ‘literature’ or ‘man of letters’ seem to hold much charm. Looking at this phenomenon in light of our society's current situation, there are points to be happy about and points to be sad about. It is joyful to see literature, the most important sustenance and expression of spiritual life, beginning to rise in Chosŏn (朝鮮), where spiritual life was almost non-existent. However, it is also sad to see that young people have extremely little interest in the fields of natural science and applied science (medicine, engineering, agriculture, etc.) within the category of science (理科部類), which are most necessary for today's Chosŏn trying to learn and adopt new ways of life, and that there is a strong tendency to enter the humanities (文科部類). Generally, literature and art are the flowers of civilization, but if literature and art alone flourish in a society lacking a foundation of morality, knowledge, and wealth, it would be like a 'dead willow producing blossoms' (枯楊生華), only accelerating the aging of its roots. Therefore, to speak frankly, I do not wish for many men of letters to emerge in our Chosŏn currently, but rather hope for many scientists, especially natural scientists. However, this cannot be dictated by any force; those who want to become men of letters will inevitably become men of letters, and I also cannot approve of someone whose natural disposition (天稟) or preference (嗜好) lies in literature forcing themselves to choose a profession other than literature. Thus, I intend to offer a few points of caution, based on my own experience which might be a day longer than yours, to you, my younger brothers and sisters, who intend to set your sights on literature and become men of letters in the future.

What is Literature? <1>

What literature is is a big question; it is a problem that can only be solved after studying literary theory horizontally and literary history vertically. Moreover, unlike other disciplines, it is extremely difficult to give a simple definition for literature, whose scope is extremely vast and whose content is extremely indefinite. As mentioned above, one can only say, "If you want to know what literature is, read literary theory and literary history." There might be an opportunity to talk about this in a later section of this article, but since the topic of literary theory and literary history has come up, let's address it here.
Literary theory (文學論), much like General Theory of Law (法學通論) for law or Introduction to Philosophy (哲學槪論) for philosophy, provides a general overview of the nature, types, forms, and methods of expression of literature in general. Literary history (文學史) describes the emergence and development of literature expressed in a certain national language. Therefore, while there could be a single, universal literary theory or introduction to literature for the world, there will be a literary history for each country. Thus, there are English Literary History, French Literary History, Japanese Literary History, etc.
Then, which literary introduction and which literary history should we read to understand what literature is? Naturally, one should first read an introduction to literature and a history of Chosŏn literature written by a Chosŏn person. Why? Because even if it's the same introduction to literature, one written by a Chosŏn person is based on Chosŏn literature, and Chosŏn literary history describes the emergence and development of Chosŏn literature. Chosŏn people need knowledge of Chosŏn literature to understand or create Chosŏn literature. Not only in literature, but recently, almost every type of science has an introduction and a history, and studying these has become the quickest way to grasp the outline of that science. For example, as mentioned above, the quickest way to understand what philosophy is is to first look at an introduction to philosophy and a history of philosophy; similarly, the quickest way to understand what economics is is to look at principles of economics and the history of economics. However, even in philosophy, law, economics, and even psychology, physiology, and other pure sciences, which seem unlikely to have national differences, there are some differences depending on the nation. Therefore, people of any country need to first read the introductions and histories written by their own countrymen. How much more necessary must this be for literature, where national color forms the keynote?
Unfortunately, however, there is still no literary history or literary theory in Chosŏn. I have often broken into a sweat when asked by Westerners to introduce the history of Chosŏn literature. Thus, I have often thought that I must, by all means, try to write a history of Chosŏn literature. <2>
So, which literary history and literary theory should we read? I will introduce a few books written in Japanese that I have seen.
Winchester (윈체스터), Original Author: *Principles of Literary Criticism* (文藝批評論)
Natsume Sōseki (夏目潄石), Author: *Theory of Literature* (文學論)
Honma Hisao (本間久雄), Author: *Introduction to Literature* (文學槪論)
Tsubouchi Shōyō (坪內逍遙), Author: *History of English Literature* (英文學史)
Igarashi Chikara (五十嵐力), Author: *History of Japanese Literature* (日本文學史)
Among these, the cheapest and easiest to understand is Mr. Honma Hisao's *Introduction to Literature*. Winchester's *Principles of Literary Criticism*, though not a very difficult book in the original English, is said to be somewhat difficult in the Japanese translation. Mr. Natsume's *Theory of Literature* is the most famous work by a Japanese author, having almost classical authority, but it is somewhat advanced and has many quotations from English literature, making it rather difficult without a background in English literature. As for literary history, Dr. Tsubouchi's *History of English Literature* and Mr. Igarashi Chikara's *History of Japanese Literature* are both masterpieces. Reading either one will give you a general idea of what literary history is and provide many benefits. However, we must strive together so that an Introduction to Literature and a History of Chosŏn Literature written by Chosŏn people can emerge quickly.
Leaving that aside, what then is literature? Let's explain literature within the scope of common sense.
Looking at the semantic meaning of the compound word 'literature' (文學), in the broadest sense, almost all books recorded in writing can be called literature. This holds true whether viewed from the perspective of Chinese characters (漢文) or European languages (歐文). However, this is too broad to be useful. Analyzing what is taught in what is currently called the Faculty of Arts (文科) in universities can help understand the commonly used meaning of literature today; explaining what literature is from this perspective could be one method.
According to the university systems in Europe and America (歐米), academic disciplines are usually divided into two categories: Arts (文科) and Sciences (理科). (Sometimes Theology (神學科) is added <3> making it three categories). Sciences belonging to the Arts category are those whose graduates obtain a Bachelor of Arts degree; these include not only Literature and Philosophy, but also Psychology, Sociology, History, Law, Political Science, Economics, and the like. Those belonging to the Science category obtain a Bachelor of Science degree; these include pure sciences like Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, Natural History, as well as disciplines applying these sciences, such as Medicine, Engineering, Agriculture, etc.
Furthermore, according to the Japanese (日本) university system, the Faculty of Arts (文科) includes Literature, Philosophy, Psychology, Sociology, History, Geography, etc., which are disciplines whose graduates receive the title of Bachelor of Arts (文學士).
Looking at this, the Faculty of Arts, or Department of Literature (文學科), includes various disciplines besides literature in the narrow, or proper, sense. Therefore, just because someone graduated from the Faculty of Arts at a university and obtained the degree or title of Bachelor of Arts does not necessarily mean they are a literary scholar (文學家) or a man of letters (文士). Only those who have studied 'literature' within the Faculty of Arts are the ones who will become literary scholars or men of letters. One often hears the lament, "Chosŏn people only study literature!" However, setting aside those who study independently, among those who have studied literature at university, as far as I know, there are only a couple from the Literature Department of Waseda (早稻田). Others have studied either Philosophy, History, or Sociology; I have yet to hear of anyone else who studied pure literature. Moreover, a Bachelor of Arts (A.B.) graduate from an American (米國) university is not yet any kind of specialist. Only after studying for two or more additional years to obtain an M.A. degree, or studying for three or more additional years to obtain a Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.), does one gain the qualifications of a specialist based on academic credentials.
So, what is the 'literature' that makes one a literary scholar or a man of letters? It is the specific discipline called 'literature' among the aforementioned academic disciplines of the Faculty of Arts. Although the nature and content of literature have not yet been clearly explained, this much should already clarify the formal distinction between literature and non-literature.
Then, what subjects are taught in this restricted sense of the Department of Literature (文學科), that is, the department for those who intend to become literary scholars or men of letters? Investigating this will naturally reveal the nature, content, and types of literature we are discussing in this article. In European and American universities, this corresponds to the program requiring an M.A. degree in pure literature; in Japanese universities, <4> it corresponds to programs indicated as Department of National Literature (國文學科), Department of Chinese Literature (漢文學科), Department of English Literature (英文學科), Department of French Literature (佛文學科), Department of German Literature (獨文學科), Department of Sanskrit Literature (梵文學科) (based on Tokyo Imperial University), etc.
For those intending to study pure literature, Introduction to Literature, Principles of Literary Criticism, and Literary History are undoubtedly essential foundational knowledge. Furthermore, for someone specializing in English literature, English Literary History becomes foundational knowledge, followed by research on novels, poetry, drama, short prose, essays, etc., written in English, either historically or by selecting specific authors. Thus, an English literary scholar, besides knowing English, of course, must (1) know the historical development path and facts of English literature, (2) be well-versed in the history and important authors and works of at least one genre within English literature—such as novels, poetry, drama, short prose, or essays—and (3) also be thoroughly knowledgeable about the form and content of the works of certain authors within the genres of novels, poetry, drama, short prose, or essays. To give a real example, Dr. Tsubouchi Yūzō (坪內雄藏博士) [pen name Shōyō] in Japan is an English literary scholar. He is an English literary scholar as a historian of English literature, as someone knowledgeable about drama within English literature, and as someone expert in Shakespearean drama within drama. In terms of his creation of dramatic poetry in Japanese, he is a playwright (作劇家), a man of letters (文士).
Besides national or ethnic distinctions like English literature or National Literature, if there is something simply called a 'literary scholar' (文學家), it would be a scholar of general literary theory (文學槪論學者). That is, a scholar who studies the origins, types, and especially the rules that all literature since the beginning of history should follow. Particularly, scholars of poetics (詩學者), who study the rules of the most artistic forms of literature like poetry and drama, would be the type of literary scholars least tinged with national color.
From the above explanation, I believe you have gained a general concept of what a "literary scholar" is. Consequently, you should also understand what the academic discipline of 'literature' is, which one studies to become a literary scholar.
Then, what is a man of letters (文士)? A man of letters is a person whose profession is to create the literary works that are the object of study for literary scholars. Broadly dividing them, there are authors (作家) and critics (批評家). Further dividing these according to the various forms of literature, it would be as follows: <5>
1. Authors (作者): Poet (詩人), Playwright (劇作家), Novelist (小說家), Essayist (論文家)
2. Critics (批評家): Poetry Critic (詩評家), Drama Critic (劇評家), Novel Critic (小說批評家)
In the world, all those engaged in these professions are commonly referred to collectively as 'literary scholars' or 'men of letters'. However, as mentioned above, a 'literary scholar' is a profession primarily focused on research, like all other scholars, while a 'man of letters' is a profession primarily focused on creation or criticism. To represent those whose profession is literature more clearly:
1. Literary Scholar (文學家)
    Literary Historian (文學史家)
    Literary scholar specializing in specific forms like poetry, drama, etc.
    Literary scholar specializing in specific authors and works
    Literary scholar specializing in the literature of a specific nation
2. Man of Letters (文士)
    Author (作者) - Poet, Playwright, Novelist, Essayist
    Critic (批評家) - Poetry Critic, Drama Critic, Novel Critic

Qualities of Literary Scholars and Men of Letters

Are there literary scholars in Chosŏn currently? No. Why? The mark of a literary scholar is their publications or university lectures, and seeing that these are absent, we must say there are no literary scholars in Chosŏn yet. If there have been any writings of a literary scholarly nature published in newspapers or magazines during this time, they would be Hwang Sŏgu's (黃錫禹君) treatise on poetry, Hyŏn Ch'ŏl's (玄哲君) treatise on drama, Kim Ŏk's (金億君) research on literature and art, and, though clumsy, the few short essays I myself have written. However, even so, one cannot yet grant them the title of literary scholars. If they wish to become literary scholars, they must henceforth demonstrate deeper and higher literary knowledge through publications or lectures. <6>
Then, are there men of letters? There are those who write novels, those who write poetry, those who write impressionistic essays (感想文), so as long as they pursue this as a profession, large or small, they can be called novelists, poets, and essayists. There are also one or two playwrights. However, there seems to be no one particularly noteworthy as a literary critic (文藝批評家) yet.
So, what considerations are necessary when you, my younger brothers and sisters, are about to enter the gate of literature? First, each of you must examine your own qualities (素質).
Not only in literature but in any profession, choosing one that suits one's own qualities is extremely important, especially so in literature and other arts. Then, what kind of person can be said to have the qualities to become a literary scholar or a man of letters?
This issue is extremely crucial in education. To know whether a person is suited for a certain profession depends on (1) the observation of parents or teachers, (2) the individual's introspection (內省), and (3) the demands of society. As children grow up, individuals exhibit certain characteristics to varying degrees. For example, one child might enjoy drawing while playing, another might enjoy singing songs and handling musical instruments. As they grow older, some children might enjoy listening to and telling stories, some might enjoy asking about various things to understand their principles, and others might enjoy making things out of sorghum stalks. From here, the outline of that child's lifelong profession can already be roughly determined. Intelligent and sincere parents or teachers should quickly perceive this and provide various stimuli and guidance to further develop the child's strengths, so that by the time the child finishes elementary school, the path for their life should already be determined. Therefore, those who have such parents and teachers can choose their profession without useless wandering and wasting energy, receiving training related to that profession from the time they are weaned. Thus, even if such a person receives, say, 5 years of specialized education, it is actually not just five years, but amounts to receiving specialized education for 20 years, starting even before entering elementary school. Consequently, they are not just people who know specialized knowledge or skills; their <7> fundamental character and thus their entire life become assimilated into that specialty, that skill. That is how great specialists are made. To give a real example, it is said that Goethe's (꿰테) mother used to tell him myths and legends from when he was 7 or 8 years old, stop midway, and have Goethe imagine and fill in the rest the next day. In this way, he received the education of a poet from that time. How different is this compared to the education in our Chosŏn, where students graduate from middle school still not knowing what specialty they will pursue? Anyone, myself included, who wanders without knowing their profession (often called purpose), is truly pitiful. Even if late, by the time one becomes a middle school student, when asked, "What do you want to become in the future?" one should be able to answer without hesitation, "I am an industrialist!", "I am a physicist!", "I am a man of letters!"
However, as mentioned above, we unfortunately do not have such wise parents or educators. Thus, the only criteria remaining for us to choose our profession are the other two methods: introspection (內省) and the demands of society.
What is introspection? Avoiding detailed explanation, let me state my conclusion: to know if one is suited for a certain profession, it is necessary to answer the following five questions:
(a) What do I like the most?
(b) What am I best at?
(c) What do I most wish to become?
(d) What are my physiological, economic, and other circumstances?
(e) What does society demand of me?
This is something I devised when I needed to inquire about the intentions of many young people, and I believe it is reasonably valid based on experience and has a considerable psychological basis. For instance, here is an example of answers judged suitable for becoming a man of letters: <8>
(a) What do you like the most?
    When I was young, I liked listening to stories and reading storybooks. In school, I most enjoy language studies, history, and reading other literary works.
(b) What are you best at?
    I am best at composition and language studies.
(c) What do you wish to become?
    I wish to become a novelist.
(d) What are your personal circumstances?
    My family has enough to eat, and my health is average.
(e) What does society demand of you?
    I am confident that by becoming a novelist, I can contribute to the Chosŏn nation.
If such answers are obtained, one could say without the slightest hesitation, "You should become a novelist!" However, in reality, when asking various young people, many cannot clearly answer even what they like most or what they are best at. Regarding the question of what they most wish to become, they initially have no plan at all, and some individuals might say they want to become one among a soldier, a pastor, a man of letters, or a thinker. Such people probably want to become all of those things, which is a confession of complete ignorance about their own qualities and also proves how incomplete the current education in Chosŏn is.
Furthermore, I have hardly seen anyone who takes physiological and economic conditions into consideration. Physiological conditions include age, health, talent, etc., yet they don't consider these. Nor do they consider whether they have the funds for studying, or whether they have the financial capacity to sustain the life of a man of letters in a society like Chosŏn where one cannot live solely on manuscript fees. Instead, relying on some thought like the good, yet not-so-good, maxim "If you try, you can do it," I have seen many who intend to make useless efforts. <9> Thus, I have also experienced having to explain the concept of human qualities and details about various professions to those who lack clear self-awareness regarding these five questions, before they could finally determine their own qualities and lifelong profession.
In any case, if through such methods one gains the self-awareness that one's qualities—to be precise, one's qualities, circumstances, and the demands of society—are suited for literature, only then should one make literature one's life goal. Otherwise, carelessly deciding on literature as a goal based on a temporary impulse or stimulation, and then stubbornly persisting because changing goals is difficult, will only waste energy and time, ending in failure. A person's life seems long but is short, and changing a goal one has decided upon and prepared for is no small matter. It's quite difficult even for a cigarette vendor to switch businesses to become a side-dish vendor; how much more difficult must it be to change a profession prepared for with ten years of effort? It might be only slightly better than suicide. Therefore, in deciding on a profession, the sooner it is decided, the better, and the more carefully it is considered and decided, the better. For this purpose, specialists who investigate individual qualities psychologically have emerged in America (美國).
Having thus decided on literature as a life goal, as mentioned before, the question arises whether to become a literary scholar or a man of letters. Even within being a literary scholar, there are various types, and within being a man of letters, there are also various types, so one must choose among them. However, here too, one can only rely on the method of introspection described above. For example, if one loves literature but prefers studying others' creations and criticisms rather than creating or criticizing oneself, one should become a literary scholar. If, however, one is best at and desires most to create or criticize oneself, one should become a creative writer or critic. Among creative writers, those who are extremely sensitive and have a talent for rhythm should become poets. Those who possess a sharp eye for observing and analyzing human life and also have extremely rich imagination, and who like, are good at, and wish to write plays, should become playwrights. Those who are similarly inclined towards novels should become novelists. And those who are equally sharp in observing and analyzing human life, equally sensitive to nature and human life, but prefer not to express this rhythmically or appeal to imagination, but rather to write somewhat critically with more intellectual elements, should become essay writers (論文作家). (The word 'nonmun' (論文) [essay/treatise] is not entirely appropriate, but I am referring to what is called 'Essay' in English.) Figures like Carlyle (칼라일) and Emerson (에머슨) are famous essayists <10> in English literature. In Chinese literature (漢文), works like *Lisao* (離騷經), *Ode on the Red Cliff* (赤壁賦), or *Preface to the Pavilion of Prince Teng* (滕王閣序) would all belong here. Calling this 'short prose' (小品文) is inappropriate as there are long pieces too. Calling it 'fu' (賦) [rhapsody] requires some rhythm, so that's also not fitting. Calling it 'nonmun' (論文) is also problematic because political articles in newspapers and magazines are 'nonmun,' and all scientific papers are also 'nonmun.' However, taking Emerson's essays as an example, many titles translate into East Asian languages with the character 'ron' (論) [treatise/discourse], such as *History*, *Love*, *Friendship*. It is in this sense that I use 'nonmun.' Perhaps 'literary essay' (文學的 論文) would be slightly more appropriate.
However, this 'essay' is a literary form not yet widely introduced in Chosŏn. But it occupies a very important position among literary forms. Especially since works traditionally considered pure literary works in Chinese literature often took the form of poetry and fu (詩賦), I believe this form of literature will flourish greatly in future Chosŏn literature. Traditionally speaking, travelogues (紀行文), prefaces (序), records (記), epitaphs (墓誌銘), and the like all belong to this category. Such works are literary creations standing on equal footing with poetry, drama, and novels. In the past East (東洋), such forms of writing were respected even more than novels, drama, or poetry. Since this notion still exists among the general populace, perhaps this is not something to be necessarily broken down but rather developed as a characteristic feature of our literature.

Studies for Literary Scholars and Men of Letters

Having reached the self-awareness, "Right, I have the qualities to be a literary scholar or a man of letters!" among you younger brothers and sisters, and having decided, to some extent, on the ultimate goal—like "I will become a novelist," "I will become a poet," or "I will become a literary historian"—what should be done next? Simply deciding doesn't make it happen. Once decided, one must strive to achieve the set goal. Deciding and talking about becoming a literary scholar or man of letters without doing the necessary work is like deciding and talking about going into business without preparing capital or knowledge. Being a literary scholar or man of letters is also a kind of business, a profession. To pursue this business, this profession, <11> requires preparation of capital. Buying manuscript paper and a fountain pen is not the preparation for becoming a man of letters. The profession of a literary scholar or man of letters, like all other professions, provides the means for livelihood and earns immortal honor (not to mention the satisfaction of one's inner demands). To gain such things, shouldn't one realize how much capital in terms of money and effort must be invested in that profession? In our current society, it seems manuscript paper and a fountain pen are often considered the capital of a man of letters. Because no capital is invested, valuable products cannot emerge.
Then, what is necessary to become a literary scholar or man of letters? Study (工夫), of course! Just as engineers or technicians cannot succeed without study, just as judges, prosecutors, or lawyers cannot succeed without study, just as interpreters cannot succeed without language study, literary scholars and men of letters also cannot succeed without study. I once wrote an essay titled "Men of Letters and Cultivation" (文士와 修養), in which I said that men of letters must study well, and that our men of letters are inadequate because they do not study. Someone then refuted this, writing in a very mocking tone, "Stop saying such old-fashioned things! Haven't you even seen Expressionism?" Indeed, my words are old-fashioned, in the sense that the saying "nothing can be achieved without study" has existed since ancient times and is not my new invention. However, just as the sun rising in the East in the morning is a truth that never becomes outdated, this too is a truth that never becomes outdated. Furthermore, regarding Expressionism, I am poorly informed and have never heard that Expressionism is a literature that can be achieved without study.
Of course, systematic education received at school is central to study. To put it bluntly, the most proper and quickest path for those among us who will become literary scholars or men of letters is to enter the Faculty of Arts at Yŏnhŭi Chŏnmun Hakkyo (廷禧專門學校) [later Yonsei University], or the English Literature Department (or German, French, Russian) in the Faculty of Arts at various universities in Japan, study the prescribed subjects well, and graduate. Graduating from a university's literature department does not automatically mean one becomes a literary scholar or man of letters, but to become one, one must at least learn what is taught in a university's literature department; one must receive that much foundational knowledge, training, and guidance. If this foundational knowledge is necessary, it must be acquired even through self-study, but how difficult would that be? That is why learning at school is said to be the quickest path. How much more so when there is no way to receive training and guidance through self-study! <12>
However, this does not mean that one absolutely cannot become a literary scholar or man of letters through self-study. To do so would require expending twice the effort compared to learning at school. The principles of self-study are (1) reading books (讀書), (2) self-practice (自習), and (3) choosing a guide/mentor (指導者). Reading books here does not mean aimless reading, but reading for self-study—reading to learn almost all the subjects taught at university on one's own. It is different from the reading one should not abandon throughout life; it is reading done with painstaking effort (刻苦勉勵). Often, those who claim to aspire to literature consider reading novels, poems, or literary magazines aimlessly as 'reading.' But those who intend to self-study literature must first engage in the kind of reading mentioned above—reading to complete the university literature curriculum—and only in their leisure time, or after doing so, should they indulge in reading literary works or magazines of their preference. Therefore, those who wish to cultivate themselves as men of letters need to receive guidance from a reliable mentor even in their reading. (I will stop elaborating on foundational knowledge here, as it should be discussed in "Men of Letters and Cultivation.")
Second, self-practice (自習) must be done by both those receiving school education and those studying independently. It means practicing writing, little by little, ceaselessly every day—those aiming to be novelists practice writing novels, those aiming to be poets practice writing poetry, and so on. Writing is a kind of skill (技術). Just as any skill cannot be mastered without learning, it also cannot be mastered without practice. Once you have decided, "My profession is Man of Letters!", you must live your daily life as a man of letters, just as a religious person prays, reads scriptures, and preaches throughout their life without rest. Similarly, those aspiring to be men of letters should regard the profession as their lifelong calling (天職) to which they dedicate their lives, never abandoning the thought "I am a man of letters" even for a moment. Whether observing nature and human life or contemplating based on those materials, they should always do so as a man of letters, and especially practice "writing," the sole method of expression for a man of letters, ceaselessly throughout their lives. Just as a painter discards hundreds of canvases as practice works, a man of letters must discard thousands of sheets of manuscript paper as practice works. For artists, the divine spirit (神韻) comes only through constant thought and work in their art. If they neglect it for several months or years, even if they try to regain their former state, the god of art, having abandoned them in eight or nine cases out of ten, will never return to the insincere artist. <13>
The artistic lifespan of artists is often short. There may be various reasons, but among the important ones are (1) lack of talent (素質) and (2) complacency due to small success, or moral corruption and laziness. If one has sufficient cultivation (素養) and unceasing effort (努力), their artistic life will almost parallel their physical life. "It is nature where only the strong survive!" The final victory will only go to the strong, to those who strive.
However, a guide/mentor is also necessary for this practice (習作). Especially for beginners, guidance on how to select materials, how to express, how to describe, how to use rhetoric, etc., from a mentor is almost absolutely necessary.
The above discusses the study methods required to become a man of letters. To become a literary scholar requires even more study. Since a literary scholar is a scholar like a legal scholar or a scientist, their life's work can be said to be study. The study for an artist, the man of letters, merely requires digesting knowledge related to literature—such as language, grammar, logic, rhetoric—and knowledge about literature—such as literary history, literary theory, aesthetics, art theory—and knowledge about human life—such as philosophy, history, sociology, religion, economics, psychology, ethics—and knowledge about nature—such as biology, astronomy, etc.—to use as material and reference for creation. However, the literary scholar scientifically studies the changes and laws of various literary works as objects of study, so their study must be more precise and scientific.
Then, in what situation should the word 'genius' (天才) be used? How should the common saying that literature comes from genius and cannot be learned be interpreted?
Of course, genius exists. However, just because the character 'heaven' (天) is attached to the word 'genius' does not mean that such a person is 'born knowing' (生以知之), understands knowledge without learning academics, and can naturally compose masterpieces without studying writing. It means someone who particularly excels among those who have studied equally. Among the five questions mentioned earlier, being 'best at' something signifies that person's genius in that field. Everyone has strengths in certain areas, and someone who excels above a thousand or ten thousand people in that strength is called a genius; genius is not someone possessing <14> some peculiar ability different from ordinary people.
Undoubtedly, genius is a national treasure. Since geniuses do not appear in large numbers in one generation, the nation needs to cherish and protect them. However, a genius is not a monster who becomes a literary scholar or man of letters without studying; rather, they are people who manifest their genius through study, and the more they study, the better they manifest it. Therefore, those without genius must study because they lack genius, and those with genius must study because they have genius.
Finally, there is one thing most important and necessary for becoming a literary scholar or man of letters, especially a man of letters with the power to dominate the spirit of the populace. It is something truly more necessary than study, than genius, than skillful writing. That is none other than a sound character (健全한 人格). Any knowledge or ability, when possessed by a person of sound character, benefits the nation or all humanity. But if a person of unsound character possesses knowledge or ability, they instead inflict harm, and the greater the knowledge or ability they possess, the greater the harm they inflict. This is especially true for men of letters who create literary works that hold a kind of charm capable of dominating the public spirit. Therefore, in the aforementioned "Men of Letters and Cultivation," I stated that for society, having a man of letters with an unsound character is more dangerous than having an unsound physician. Unfortunately, in our Chosŏn, it seems that 'man of letters' is customarily associated with indulgence in wine and women, and considered someone privileged not to observe the morals that humans ought to uphold (不拘小節). This is a phenomenon greatly worrying for the future of Chosŏn's literary world and the nation. Therefore, you, younger brothers and sisters, who newly aspire to become men of letters, must absolutely not be tainted by the decadent evil customs of the present day, but strive to cultivate a sound character truly worthy of being the spiritual teachers and friends of the populace.
A sound character is not particularly unusual. It refers to the owner of truthful and reverent conduct, who always keeps their clothing and dwelling clean and tidy, whose speech and actions are strictly regulated by propriety, who absolutely shuns wine, women, and other moral vices, and is thus worthy of anyone's respect and trust.
If the discussion above has conveyed to the readers the concept of what literature is and the requirements needed to become a man of letters, there would be no greater happiness. <15>

**Summary**

The author, Kyŏngsŏ Hagin, addresses young Koreans aspiring to literature in 1922. While acknowledging the growing interest in literature as positive for Chosŏn's spiritual life, he argues strongly that the nation currently needs scientists and technicians more urgently for practical development and wealth creation. He defines literature, distinguishes literary scholars (researchers) from men of letters (writers/critics), and emphasizes the necessity of self-reflection to determine one's suitability (qualities, circumstances, societal needs) for a literary career. The author stresses rigorous study (akin to university education, even via self-study), continuous practice, and mentorship, dismissing the notion that genius alone suffices. Crucially, he concludes by highlighting the paramount importance of a sound moral character for writers, warning against the perceived bohemianism and moral laxity in literary circles, arguing that writers hold significant influence over the public spirit.

From a historical perspective, this article is significant as it reflects the intense debates among Korean intellectuals under Japanese rule about the path to modernization and national strengthening. The author's prioritization of science and technology over literature, while still valuing literature, aligns with pragmatic nationalist currents of the time. His lament about the lack of Korean literary theory and history underscores the challenges faced in establishing a modern national literary tradition under colonial constraints. The references to Japanese academic structures and scholars also reveal the inescapable influence of the colonizer's institutions on Korean intellectual life. Finally, the strong emphasis on moral character suggests anxieties about the social role and conduct of the emerging modern intelligentsia in Korea.

**Named Entities**

京西學人	경서학인	Kyŏngsŏ Hagin
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
西洋	서양	The West / Westerners
歐米	구미	Europe and America
日本	일본	Japan
윈체스터	윈체스터	Winchester
夏目潄石	나쓰메 소세키	Natsume Sōseki
本間久雄	혼마 히사오	Honma Hisao
坪內逍遙	쓰보우치 쇼요	Tsubouchi Shōyō
五十嵐力	이가라시 치카라	Igarashi Chikara
早稻田	와세다	Waseda
米國	미국	America / United States
黃錫禹	황석우	Hwang Sŏgu
玄哲	현철	Hyŏn Ch'ŏl
金億	김억	Kim Ŏk
꿰테	괴테	Goethe
美國	미국	America / United States
칼라일	칼라일	Carlyle
에머슨	에머슨	Emerson
東洋	동양	The East / Orient
廷禧專門學校	연희전문학교	Yŏnhŭi Chŏnmun Hakkyo

**Glossary**

弟妹	제매	Younger brothers and sisters (here used metaphorically for young people/students)
만흔	많은	Many (older spelling of 많은)
깃버할	기뻐할	To be happy about (older spelling/form of 기뻐할)
슬퍼할	슬퍼할	To be sad about (older spelling/form of 슬퍼할)
업스나	없으나	Although there is not (older spelling of 없으나)
닐어나려	일어나려	Trying to rise/emerge (older spelling/form of 일어나려)
富力	부력	Wealth, economic power
爲先	우선	First of all, primarily (uses Hanja)
部類	부류	Category, class, type (uses Hanja)
가티	같이	Like, as (older spelling of 같이)
잇슬	있을	Will be, might be (older spelling of 있을)
닑을가	읽을까	Should one read? (older spelling/form of 읽을까)
웨	왜	Why (older spelling of 왜)
아모리	아무리	No matter how (older spelling of 아무리)
日文	일문	Japanese writing/language (uses Hanja)
가운대	가운데	Among, amidst (older spelling of 가운데)
밧게	밖에	Outside of, besides, only (older spelling of 밖에)
업습니다	없습니다	There is not / does not exist (older spelling of 없습니다)
어더야	얻어야	Must obtain/get (older spelling of 얻어야)
뭇거니와	묻거니와	Aside from asking (older grammatical form/spelling)
어떠케	어떻게	How (older spelling of 어떻게)
밧는	받는	Receiving (older spelling of 받는)
工夫	공부	Study, learning (uses Hanja, common term)
몃가지	몇 가지	Several kinds/types (older spelling of 몇 가지)
조하하다	좋아하다	To like, to prefer (older spelling of 좋아하다)
밧게	받게	To come to receive (older spelling/form of 받게)
부터	부터	From (particle indicating starting point)
깁고	깊고	Deep and... (older spelling of 깊고)
놉흔	높은	High, lofty (older spelling of 높은)
맛당히	마땅히	Properly, rightly, ought to (older spelling of 마땅히)
조흐니	좋으니	As it is good (older spelling/form of 좋으니)
밋	및	And, as well as (older spelling of 및)
아즉	아직	Still, yet (older spelling of 아직)
잇겟지마는	있겠지만은	Although there might be (older form/spelling)
이악이	이야기	Story, talk (older spelling of 이야기)
잇슴을	있음을	The fact that there is (older spelling/form of 있음을)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제21호
발행일	1922년 03월 01일
기사제목	文學에 뜻을 두는 이에게
필자	京西學人
기사형태	문예평론

文學에 뜻을 두는 이에게
						京西學人
近來에 弟妹가 만흔 듯 합니다. 靑年男女間에 文學이라든지 文士란 말이 만흔 魅力을 가진 듯 합니다. 이 現像 우리社會의 現狀에 비추어보면 깃버할 點도 잇고 슬퍼할 點도 잇습니다. 精神生活이란 것이 거의 업스나 다름업던 朝鮮에 精神生活의 가장 重要한 糧食이오 表現인 文學이 닐어나려 하는 點으로 보아 깃버할만 하고, 또 方今 新方式의 生活을 배워 들이려하는 오늘의 朝鮮에서 가장 必要한 것이 爲先 富力獲得의 源泉이 되는 理科部類의 自然科學, 應用科學(醫, 工, 農 等)의 知識인데 靑年이 이런 方面으로 興味를 가지는 것이 極히 薄하고 文科部類로 들어가랴는 傾向이 만흔 點으로 보면 슬퍼할만한 일이외다. 대저 文學이나 藝術은 文明의 꼿인데 道德과 知識과 富力의 基礎가 업는 社會에 文學, 藝術만 繁昌한다 하면 이는 所謂 枯楊生華로 그 根幹의 老衰를 促進하게 될 뿐일 것이외다. 그럼으로 眞情을 말하면 나는 現在 우리 朝鮮에 文士가 만히 나기를 願치 아니하고 科學者, 그 中에도 自然科學者가 만히 나기를 願하는 바외다. 그러나 이것은 무슨 힘으로 規定할 것이 되지 못하니 文士가 되려하는 이는 亦是 文士가 되고야 말 것이오 또 天稟이나 嗜好가 文學에 잇는 者가 억지로 文學 이외의 다른 職業을 擇하는 것도 贊成하지 못할 일이외다. 이에 나는 將次 文學에 뜻을 두어 文士가 되랴는 弟妹諸位께 나의 一日의 長이나 될 經驗으로 몃가지 注意를 들이려 함이외다.

文學이란 무엇인가＜1＞

文學이란 무엇인가 하는 것은 큰 問題니 이는 橫으로는 文學論, 縱으로 文學史를 硏究한 뒤에야 解決될 問題외다. 더구나 다른 學問과 달라 範圍가 몹시 曠漠하고 內容이 몹시 一定치 못한 文學에 對하야는 簡單한 定義를 말하기는 甚히 困難한 일이외다. 우에도 말한 바와 가티 文學이 무엇인지를 알랴거든 文學論과 文學史를 닑어라 할 수 밧게 업습니다. 여긔 對해서는 이 글의 後節에 말할 機會도 잇겟지마는 이미 文學論, 文學史 이악이가 낫스니 여긔서 말해두고 맙시다.
文學論이라면 마치 法學에 對한 法學通論, 哲學에 對한 哲學槪論 貌樣으로 一般文學의 性質, 種類, 表現의 形式과 方法 等을 槪論한 것이오, 文學史라 하면 어떤 國語로 表現되는 文學의 發生, 發達을 叙하는 것이니 그럼으로 文學論 또는 文學槪論이라 하면 世界를 通하야 한가지가 잇슬 수도 잇지마는 文學史라 하면 나라마다 하나씩은 잇슬 것이외다. 그래서 英文學史, 佛文學史, 日本文學史 等이 잇습니다.
그러면 우리가 文學이 무엇인지를 알랴면 어느 文學槪論과 어느 文學史를 닑을가. 毌論 朝鮮사람이 쓴 文學槪論과 朝鮮文學史를 맨 처음 닑어야 할 것이외다. 웨 그러냐하면 가튼 文學槪論이라도 朝鮮人이 쓴 것은 朝鮮文學을 基礎로 한 것이오 朝鮮文學史는 朝鮮文學의 發生과 發達을 叙한 것인데 朝鮮人은 朝鮮文學을 알기에나 朝鮮文學을 짓기에나 朝鮮文學의 知識이 必要하기 때문이외다. 文學뿐 아니라 近來에는 무슨 種類의 科學에나 槪論과 史가 잇서 그 科學의 大綱을 알기에는 이를 硏究함이 가장 捷徑이 되게 되엇습니다. 假令 우에 말한 바와 가티 哲學이 무엇인지를 알랴거든 爲先 哲學槪論과 哲學史로 보는 것이 捷徑이오 經濟學이 무엇인지를 알랴거든 經濟原論과 經濟學史를 보는 것이 捷徑임과 가틉니다. 그런데 이러케 民族的 差別이 업슬듯한 哲學이나 法學, 經濟學, 甚至에 心理學, 生理學, 其他 純粹한 科學에도 民族을 딸아 多少間 差別이 잇기 때문에 어떤 나라 사람은 먼저 그 나라 사람이 지은 槪論과 史를 닑을 必要가 잇거든 하물며 民族的 色彩가 基調를 成한 文學이야 말할 必要도 업슬 것이외다.
그러치마는 不幸히 아즉 朝鮮에는 文學史도 업고 文學論도 업습니다. 나는 西洋人에게 朝鮮文學史를 紹介해 달라는 請을 듯고 땀을 흘린 적이 여러번입니다. 그래서 아모리 하더라도 내가 朝鮮文學史를＜2＞ 써 보리라 한 적도 만흡니다.
그러면 우리는 어는 文學史와 文學論을 닑을가. 내가 본 가운대 日文으로 된 몃가지 冊을 紹介하리다.
윈체스터 原著   文藝批評論
夏目潄石 著     文學論
本間久雄 著     文學槪論
坪內逍遙 著     英文學史
五十嵐力 著     日本文學史
이中에 가장 갑시 싸고 알아보기 쉬운 것은 本間久雄氏의 文學槪論이오, 윈체스터著 文藝批評論은 原文인 英文으로는 그리 어려운 冊이 아니나 日本譯은 좀 어렵게 되엇더라 합니다. 夏目氏의 文學論은 日本人의 著로는 가장 有名하야 거의 古典的 權威가 잇는 것이나 좀 高尙하고 英文의 引例가 만하 英文學의 素養이 업시는 좀 어려운 책이오, 文學史로는 坪內博士의 英文學史와 五十嵐力氏의 日本文學史가 다 名著인데 어느 것이나 하나를 보면 大體 文學史를 어떤 것인지를 알만할 뿐더러 만흔 利益을 어들 것이외다. 그러나 彼此에 힘써서 速히 朝鮮人이 쓴 文學槪論과 朝鮮文學史가 생겨야 하겟습니다.
그는 그만하고 그러면 文學이란 무엇인가. 常識的으로 할 範圍에서 文學이란 것을 說明해 봅시다.
文學이란 熟語의 語義를 보건대 가장 넓은 意味로 보면 무릇 文字로 記錄된 書籍은 거의 全部 文學이라 할 수도 잇습니다. 이는 漢文뜻으로 보든지 歐文뜻으로 보든지 그러합니다. 그러나 이것은 넘우 廣汎한 것이니 말할 것 업고 現今 大學에 文科라 稱하는 데서 배우는 것을 分析하면 오늘날에 通用되는 文學의 語義를 알 수가 잇스니 이 方面으로 文學이란 무엇인가를 說明하는 것도 한 方法일 것이외다.
歐米의 大學制度로 보면 普通 學科를 文科, 理科의 兩部類로 分합니다.(或 거긔 神學科를 加하야＜3＞ 三部類로 分하는 수도 잇습니다) 文科部類에 屬한 科學는 베첼러 옵 아츠(文學士)의 學位를 엇는 者니 文學, 哲學은 勿論이오, 心理學, 社會學, 史學, 法學, 政治學, 經濟學, 가튼 것이며 理科部類에 屬한 것은 배쳴러 옵 싸이엔쓰(理學士)의 學位를 엇는 者니 數學, 物理學, 化學, 博物學 等 純正科學과 이러한 科學을 應用하야 되는 醫學, 工學, 農學 等이외다.
또 日本의 大學制度로 말하면 文科라 하면 文學, 哲學, 心理學, 社會學, 史學, 地理學 等이니 文學士의 稱號를 엇는 學科외다.
이에 보건대 文科, 또는 文學科라는 데는 狹義의, 또는 正當한 意味의 文學外에 여러가지 學科가 包含되는 것이니 그럼으로 大學의 文科를 卒業하야 文學士의 學位나 稱號를 어덧다고 그가 반듯이 文學者나 文士는 아니외다. 文科中에도 文學이란 것을 배운 者가 비롯오 文學者나 文士가 될 者외다. 「朝鮮사람은 文學만 배워!」하는 嘆息을 흔히 듯거니와 獨學으로 배우는 者는 且置하고 大學에서 文學을 배운 者는 내가 알기에 早稻田文學科에서 두어 사람밧게 업습니다. 그 外에는 或은 哲學科, 或은 史學, 社會學을 배운 者이지 純正文學을 배운 이는 아즉 그 한 사람밧게 못 들엇습니다. 더구나 米國大學出身의 文學士(A.B.)는 아즉 아모 專門家도 아니니 다시 二個年 以上 工夫하야 (M.A.)의 學位를 엇재 된 때나, 또 三個年 以上 工夫하야 哲學博士(Ph.D.)를 어든 때에 비롯오 學歷으로 專門家의 資格을 엇게 되는 것이외다.
그런즉 文學者나 文士가 되는 文學이란 무엇인가. 그것은 上述한 文學의 學科中에 特히 文學이라 한 學科외다. 아즉 文學의 性質과 內容은 分明히 說明되지 아니 하엿스나 이만하면 벌서 文學과 非文學과의 形式的 差別은 判明되엇스리라 합니다.
그러면 이러케 制限된 意味의 文學科, 卽 文學者나 文士가 되랴는 文學科에는 배우는 學科가 무엇인가. 이것을 調査해보면 自然히 우리가 이 글에서 말하는 文學의 性質과 內容과 種類가 判明되어 올 것이외다. 이는 歐米의 大學으로 말하면 純正文學으로 M.A.의 學位를 要求하는 科程이오 日本의 大學으로＜4＞ 말하면 國文學科, 漢文學科, 英文學科, 佛文學科, 獨文學科, 梵文學科 (東京帝國大學에 據함)等으로 表示되는 科程이외다.
純正文學을 배울랴는 者에게 文學槪論, 文藝批評論, 文學史가 絶對的 基礎知識이 될 것은 勿論이어니와 英文學을 專攻하는 者에게는 다시 英文學史가 基礎知識이 되고 그담에 英文으로 된 小說, 詩歌, 劇, 短文, 論文 等을 硏究하되 或은 史的으로, 或은 特殊한 作家를 擇하야 할 것이외다. 그래서 英文學者라 하면 그가 英文을 아는 것은 勿論이어니와 (一)英文學의 歷史的 發達의 經路와 事實을 알고, (二)특히 英文學中에도 小說이나 詩나 劇이나 短文이나 論文, 이中에 하나의 歷史와 重要한 作家와 作品에 精通하고, (三)그리고도 小說이나 詩나 劇이나 短文이나 論文의 作家中에 어떤 作家의 作品의 形式과 內容에 精通하여야 할 것이외다. 實例를 들면 日本의 坪內雄藏博士는 英文學者외다. 그는 英文學史家로 英文學者요 英文學中의 劇을 알기로 英文學者요, 劇中에 沙翁劇에 精通하기로 英文學者외다. 그가 日文으로 劇詩를 創作하는 方面으로 보면 그는 作劇家로 文士외다.
그밧게 英文學이니 國文學이니 하는 國家的 또는 民族的 區別을 떠나서 그냥 文學者라고 名稱할 것이 잇다하면 그는 文學槪論學者일 것이니 곳 有史以來로 모든 文學의 發生한 綠由와 種類와 特히 모든 文學의 조차야 할 法則을 硏究하는 學者일 것이외다. 특히 詩歌, 劇가튼 文學中에도 가장 藝術的인 것의 法則을 硏究하는 詩學者가튼 것은 가장 民族的 色彩를 띄지 아니하는 文學者일 것이외다.
以上에 말한 바로 「文學者」란 大軆 어떠한 것인가의 槪念을 어덧스리라 합니다. 딸아서 文學者가 되기에 배울 文學이란 學問이 무엇인 것도 알아졋스리라 합니다.
그러면 文士란 무엇인가. 文士라 하면 文學者의 硏究의 對象이 되는 文學的 作品을 創作하는 職業을 가진 사람이니 이를 大別하면 作家와 批評家가 되고 다시 이를 文學의 모든 形式에 갈르면 如左할 것이외다.＜5＞
1 作者 : 詩人, 劇作家, 小說家, 論文家
2 批評家 : 詩評家, 劇評家, 小說批評家
世上에서는 恒用 이러한 모든 職業을 하는 者를 總稱하야 文學者라고도 일컷고 文士라고도 일컷거니와 우에도 말한 바와 가티 文學者라 하면 다른 모든 學者와 가티 硏究를 爲主하는 職業이오 文士라 하면 創作이나 批評을 爲主하는 職業이외다. 文學이란 것을 職業으로 하는 者를 다시 알기 쉽게 表示하면
1. 文學者
文學史家
詩, 劇 等 特殊한 形式의 文學을 硏究하는 文學者
특수한 作家와 作品을 硏究하는 文學者
特殊한 民族의 文學을 硏究하는 文學者
2. 文士
作者 - 詩人, 劇作者, 小說家, 論文家
批評家 - 詩評家, 劇評家, 小說批評家

文學者, 文士의 素質
現在 朝鮮에 文學者가 잇느냐 하면 업습니다. 웨? 文學者의 文學者된 標는 著述이나 大學의 講義인데 이것이 업는 것을 보니 아즉 朝鮮에는 文學者가 업다고 하겟습니다. 그 동안 新聞雜誌 等에 文學者的 글이 난 것이 잇다하면 黃錫禹君의 詩論, 玄哲君의 劇論, 金億君의 文藝硏究 等과 拙劣하나마 내가 쓴 몃 篇의 小論文이겟습니다. 그러나 그러타고 아즉 그네를 文學者라고 허할 수는 업스니 그네가 文學者가 되랴면 이제부터 더욱 깁고 놉흔 文學的 知識이 잇슴을 著述로나 講義로나 發表하여야 할 것이외다.＜6＞
그러면 文士는 잇느냐. 小說 짓는 이, 詩 짓는 이, 感想文 짓는 이가 잇스니 그네는 크던지 적던지 이를 職業으로 하는 以上 小說家요 詩人이요, 論文家라 하겟고, 또 一, 二의 劇作家도 잇습니다. 그러나 아즉 文藝批評家로는 아즉 特筆할 이가 업는 듯 합니다.
그러면 只今 여러분 弟妹께서 文學의 門에 들어가려 할 때에 어떠한 考慮가 必要할가. 첫재는 各各 自己의 素質을 調査해 보아야 할 것이외다.
文學뿐 아니라 무슨 職業이던지 各各 自己의 素質에 適合하는 것을 擇하는 것이 甚히 重要한 일인데 特別히 文學이나 其他 藝術에서 그러합니다. 그런즉 어떠한 사람이 文學者나 文士가 될 素質이 잇다할가.
이런 問題는 敎育上에 甚히 重大한 問題인데 어떤 사람이 어떤 職業에 대한 適否를 아는데는 (1)父兄이나 敎師의 觀察과 (2)當者의 內省과 (3)社會의 要求의 依할 것이외다. 兒童이 長成할 때에는 個人을 딸아 多少間 特質이 잇습니다. 假令 어떤 아이는 작난을 하되 그림 그리기를 조하한다던지, 어떤 이는 노래 부르기와 악기 다르기를 조하한다던지, 또 차차 자라갈스록 어떤 아이는 이악이 듯기와 하기를 조하하며, 어떤 이는 여러가지를 물어 그 理致를 알기를 조하하며, 또 어떤 이는 수수깽이 나무로 무엇을 맨들기를 조하할 것이외다. 여긔서 벌서 그 아이의 一生의 職業의 輪廓이 대강 決定될 것이니 聰明하고 誠意잇는 父兄이나 敎師는 얼는 이를 看取하야 더욱 여러가지 剌激과 指導를 주어 더욱더욱 그 아이의 特長을 發揮하도록 하야 小學校를 마츤 때에는 벌서 그 아이의 一生의 進路가 確定될 것이외다. 이럼으로 그러한 父兄과 敎師를 가진 이는 쓸데업시 彷徨하야 精力을 消耗함이 업시 自己의 가질 職業을 擇하야 젓떨어질 때부터 그 職業에 關한 素養을 밧게 되는 것이니 그럼으로 그런 사람은 비록 5年이면 5年의 무슨 專門敎育을 바닷다 하더라도 其實은 五年이 아니오 小學校에 入學하기 前부터 20年동안이나 專門敎育을 바든 심이 됩니다. 그래서 그는 다만 專門知識이나 技術을 아는 사람일 뿐더러 그의＜7＞ 性格 根柢와 딸아서 그의 生活全軆가 그 專門, 그 技術에 化하야 버리고 맙니다. 그래서 偉大한 專門家가 되는 것이외다. 實例를 들면 꿰테는 7, 8歲쩍부터 그 母親이 神話나 傳說가튼 이악이를 하다가 中間쯤에 그치고 그 남아지는 그 이튿날 꿰테더러 想像하야 체워노케 하엿다합니다. 이리하야 그는 그때부터 詩人의 敎育을 바든 것이외다. 이것을 우리 朝鮮學生들의 中學을 卒業하고도 아즉도 무슨 專門을 할는지 모르는 敎育에 비겨 어떠케 差異가 만흡니까. 누구나, 나부터도, 제 職業(흔히 目的이라 하는)이 무엇인지를 몰라 彷徨하는 者는 眞實로 불상한 者니 늣더라도 中學生만 되면 「너는 將次 무엇이 되랴느냐」할 때에, 「나는 工業家요!」, 「나는 物理學者요!」, 「나는 文士요!」하고 서슴지 안코 대답하게 되어야 할 것이외다.
그러나 우에도 말한 바와 가티 우리는 不幸히 그러케 聰明한 父兄도 敎育者도 못 가졋스니 우리가 우리의 職業을 擇하기에 唯一한 準據가 되는 것은 남아지 두 方法 卽 內省과 社會의 要求뿐 일 것이외다.
內省이란 무엇인가, 나는 仔細한 說明을 避하고 나의 어든 結論을 말하건대, 自己의 어떤 職業에 對한 適否를 알랴거든 左記의 5問題에 대답함이 必要합니다.
(ㄱ) 나는 무엇을 가장 조하하나?
(ㄴ) 나는 무엇을 가장 잘하나.
(ㄷ) 나는 무엇이 되기를 가장 願하나.
(ㄹ) 내 生理的, 經濟的 其他의 事情이 어떠한가.
(ㅁ) 社會는 내게 무엇을 求하나.
이는 내가 마츰 多數靑年에게 그네의 意思를 무를 必要가 생긴 境遇에 考案하야 經驗上 妥當하다고 認定한 것이니 相當히 心理學的 根據가 잇다고 미듭니다. 假令 文士되기에 適當한 素質이라고 判斷한 答案의 實例를 들건댄＜8＞
(ㄱ) 무엇을 가장 조하하시오?
어려서는 이악이 듯기와 이악이冊 보기를 조하하엿고 學校에서는 語學과 歷史와, 其他 文學書類 보기를 가장 조하합니다.
(ㄴ) 무엇을 가장 잘 하시오?
作文과 語學을 가장 잘 합니다.
(ㄷ) 무엇이 되기를 願하시오?
小說家되기를 願합니다.
(ㄹ) 一身上의 事情이 어떠시오?
집에는 먹을 것이나 잇고 健康은 中이나 됩니다.
(ㅁ) 社會는 당신에게 무엇을 要求하시오?
나는 小說家가 됨으로 朝鮮民族에게 貢獻함이 잇스리라고 自信합니다.
이러한 答案을 어드면 족음도 躊躇할 것 업시 「당신은 小說家 되시오!」할 것이외다. 그러나 事實上 여러 靑年다려 물어보면 自己가 무엇을 가장 조하하는지, 무엇을 가장 잘하는지조차 分明히 대답지 못하는 이가 만코 무엇이 되기를 가장 願하느냐 하는 問題에 對하야는 當初에 아모 作定이 업서서 或 同一한 사람으로 軍人이나 牧師나 文士나 思想家中에 하나이 되고 십다는 이도 잇습니다. 이런 사람은 아마 그 모든 것이 다 되고 십흔 모양인데 이것이 自己의 素質에 對하야 全혀 暗昧하다는 自白이오 또 朝鮮의 現在敎育이 어떠케 不完全한 것을 實證할 것이외다.
또 生理的 條件, 經濟的 條件을 考慮에 넛는 이는 거의 하나도 보지 못하엿습니다. 生理的 條件이라 하면 年齡, 健康, 才能 等인데 이것도 考慮하지 안코 또 自己에게 工夫할 學費가 잇는지, 또 朝鮮과 가티 原稿料만으로 生活할 수 업는 社會에서 文士生活을 하여갈만한 資力이 잇는지도 考慮치 아니하고 그저 무슨 생각으론지 「하면 된다」는 조코도 조치 못한 格言을 미더 쓸데업는 애를 쓰랴는 이를 본 일이 만흡니다.＜9＞ 그래서 이 다섯가지 問題에 對하야 分明한 自覺이 업는 이에게는 사람이 素質이란 것과, 모든 職業에 關한 解說을 하여서 비롯오 自己의 素質과 一生의 職業을 定하는 것도 經驗하엿습니다.
아모러나 이러한 方法으로 自己의 素質이, 仔細히 말하자면 素質과 事情과 社會의 要求가 文學에 適當하다는 自覺을 엇거든 비롯오 文學으로 一生의 目的을 삼을 것이외다. 그러치 아니하고 함부르, 一時의 衝動이나 剌激으로 文學으로 目的을 定하고 그리고는 目的을 變하는 것이 어려워서 그냥 固執하다가는 精力과 歲月만 虛費하고 失敗하고 말 것이외다. 사람의 一生이란 긴 듯하고도 짤아서 한번 定하고 準備하여 오던 目的을 고치기는 여간 큰 일이 아니외다. 卷煙가가 하다가 반찬가가로 業을 고치기도 꽤 어려운 일인데, 하물며 十年精力을 들여 準備한 職業을 고치는 것은 自殺보다 족음 나흘가 한 일이외다. 그럼으로 職業을 定하는 데는 速히 定할스록 조코 愼重히 考慮해 定할스록 조흐니 이를 爲하야 美國서는 心理學的으로 個人의 素質을 調査한 專門家가 생겻습니다.
이러케 하야 文學을 一生의 目的으로 定하엿다 하고라도 前에 말한 바와 가티 文學者가 되랴, 文士가 되랴, 文學者가 되기에도 여러가지 種類가 잇고 文士가 되기에도 여러가지 種類가 잇스니 그 中에서 또 어떤 것을 擇할가 하는 問題가 생깁니다. 그러나 여긔서도 以上에 말한 內省法으로 할 수 밧게 업스니 假令 文學을 愛好하되 自己가 創作이나, 批評하기보다 남의 創作과 批評을 硏究하고 십흔 사람은 文學者가 될 것이오, 그보다도 自己가 創作이나, 批評을 가장 잘하고 願하거든 創作家나 批評家가 될 것이요, 다 가튼 創作家에도 極히 敏感하며 韻律의 才能이 잇는 이는 詩人이 될 것이오, 人生의 觀察과 分析에 銳利한 눈을 가지고 또 想像力이 極히 豐富한 者로 劇을 조하하고 잘하고 願하는 者는 劇作家가 되고, 小說을 그러하는 者는 小說作家가 될 것이외다. 그러고 다가티 人生의 觀察과 分析에 銳利하고 다가티 自然이나 人生에 對하야 敏感하더라도 이를 韻律맛게 表現하거나, 想像力에 訴하지 아니하고 다소 理智的 要素를 만히 너허 評論 비슷이 쓰기를 조하하는 이는 論文作家될 것이외다. (論文이라면 말이 適當치 아니합니다마는 나는 英語로 Essay라는 것을 指稱합니다.) 칼라일, 에머슨 가튼 이는 英文學에 有名한＜10＞ 論文作者 Essayist외다. 漢文에도 離騷經이나 赤壁賦나 滕王閣序가튼 것은 다 여긔 屬할 것이니 이것을 小品文이라 하면 긴 글도 잇스니 適當치 아니하고 賦라 하면 多少의 韻律이 必要하니 그도 適當치 아니하고 論文이라 하면 新聞雜誌의 政治的 論文도 論文, 모든 科學的 論文도 論文인즉 論文이라함도 適當치 아니하나 假令 에머슨의 엣세를 例로 들면 歷史論, 戀愛論, 交友論, 이 모양으로 東洋말로 飜譊할 때에 論字달릴 것이 만흐니 이 意味로 論文이라 할 것이외다. 아마 文學的 論文이라 하면 좀더 適當할는지 모르겟습니다.
그런데 이 論文은 아즉 朝鮮에는 만히 紹介되지 아니한 文學的 形式이외다. 그러나 이는 文學的 形式中에 매우 重要한 位置를 占한 것이며 特히 漢文學中에 純正文學的 作品이라고 하여 온 것은 흔히 詩賦의 形式이기 때문에 今後의 朝鮮文學에는 이 形式의 文學이 만히 盛하리라 합니다. 在來로 말하면 紀行文, 序, 記, 墓誌銘, 이런 것들이 모두 이 部類에 屬할 것이외다. 이런 作品들은 詩나 劇이나 小說과 平等의 地位에 설 文學的 作品이외다. 過去 東洋에서는 돌이어 小說이나 劇이나 詩歌보다도 이런 形式의 글을 尊敬하엿기 때문에 지금도 一般 同胞中에는 그러한 觀念이 잇슨 즉 이는 반듯이 打破할 것이 아니오 우리 文學의 特色으로 그냥 發達시킬 것인가 합니다.

文學者, 文士의 修學
이 모양으로 하야 여러 弟妹中에서 「올치 나는 文學者나, 文士될 素質이 잇다!」하는 自覺을 어든 後에 어떤 程度까지는 나는 小說家가 되리라, 詩人이 되리라, 또는 文學史家가 되리라, 하는 모양으로 局極의 目的까지 定하거든 그 後에 어떠케 할가. 定하기만 한다고 되는 것이 아니니 定하거든 定한 目的이 達해지도록 힘을 써야 할 것이외다. 文學者나 文士가 되리라고 作定만 하고, 말만 하고 文學者 되기에, 文士 되기에 必要한 일을 하지 아니하면 이는 마치 나는 장사를 하리라고 作定하고 말도 하면서 資本도, 知識도 準備 아니하는 것과 가틉니다. 文學者나 文士도 一種의 장사요 職業이니 이 장사 이 職業을 하기에도＜11＞ 資本의 準備가 必要할 것이외다. 原稿紙와 萬年筆을 사오는 것이 文士되는 準備가 아니외다. 文學者나 文士라는 職業도 다른 모든 職業가 가티 그 職業을 가진 者에게 衣食의 資를 벌어주고 不朽의 名譽를 벌어주는 것이니 (自己의 內的 要求의 滿足은 말말고라도) 이만한 것을 어드랴면 그 職業에 얼마나 만흔 金錢과 精力의 資本이 들는지 알 것이 아닙니까. 現今 우리 社會에서는 흔히 原稿紙와 萬年筆이 文士의 資本으로 아는 모양이니 資本을 아니 들인지라, 갑가는 商品이 나오지를 못하는 것이외다.
그러면 文學者, 文士가 되랴면 어떠한 일이 必要하냐, 가론 工夫외다! 技師나 技手가 工夫업시는 안 되는 것과 가티 判檢事나 辯護士가 工夫업시는 안 되는 것과 가티, 通譯者가 語學工夫업시는 안 되는 것과 가티, 文學者나 文士도 工夫업시는 안됩니다. 내가 일즉 「文士와 修養」이란 論文을 써 그 中에 文士들도 工夫를 잘해야한다, 우리 文士들은 工夫를 아니 해서 못쓰겟다 하는 말을 썻더니 어떤 이가 그것을 反駁하야 「그런 낡은 소리를 하지 말어라, 表現主義란 것도 못보앗느냐」하고 매우 내 말 嘲笑하는 態度로 글을 쓰셧습니다. 果然 내 말은 낡은 말이외다. 녜로부터 工夫 아니하고는 아모 것도 안 된다는 말이 잇섯고 내가 新發明한 말이 아닌 點으로. 그러나 太陽이 아츰에 東에 뜨는 것이 決코 낡아지지 안는 眞理임과 가티 이것도 決코 낡아지지 안는 眞理외다. 또 表現主義 云云하엿스니 表現主義란 工夫안하고도 되는 文學이란 말은 나는 寡聞하야 들어 본 일이 업습니다.
工夫에도 毌論 學校에서 밧는 系統的 敎育이 中心이 된 것이외다. 單的으로 말하면 우리 中에서 文學者나 文士가 될 이는 廷禧專門學校의 文科나, 日本 各大學의 文科中에 英文學科 (獨, 佛, 露도)에 入學하야 거긔 規定한 學科를 잘 工夫하고 卒業하는 것이 가장 正當한 길이오, 또 가장 捷徑일 것이외다. 大學의 文學科를 卒業한다고 곳 반듯이 文學者나 文士가 된다는 것이 아니나 文學者나 文士가 되랴면 적더라도 大學의 文學科에서 배우는 것만 한 것은 배워야, 그만한 基礎知識과 訓練과 指導는 바다야 할 것이외다. 이 基礎知識이 必要하다하면 이는 獨學으로라도 어더야 할 것인에 그러노라니 여간 困難하리까. 그럼으로 學校에서 배우는 것이 가장 捷徑이라함이외다. 하물며 獨學으로 訓練과 指導를 바들 길이 업슴에리오!＜12＞
그러나 獨學으로 全然히 文學者나 文士가 못 된다는 것은 아니니 그리하랴면 學校에서 배우는 것보다 倍의 精力을 虛費할 것이외다. 獨學의 方針은 (1) 讀書와 (2) 自習과 (3) 指導者의 擇定인데 讀書라 하여도 漫然한 讀書가 아니오 獨學的 讀書니 大學에서 배우는 學科의 거의 全部를 혼자 배우자는 讀書외다. 一生에 讀書를 廢하지 말라는 讀書와 달라서 그야말로 刻苦勉勵하야 하는 讀書외다. 흔히 文學에 뜻을 둔다는 이들이 漫然히 小說이나 詩나 文藝雜誌나를 讀함으로써 讀書라 하거니와 文學을 獨學하랴는 者는 그보다 먼저 우에 말한 바 大學의 文學科를 讀修하는 讀書를 하여야 하고 그 餘暇에 또 그러한 後에 自己가 嗜好하는 文學的 作品이나 文藝雜誌 等屬을 耽讀할 것이외다. 그럼으로 文士의 修養을 하랴는 이는 讀書에도 어떤 信賴할만한 指導者의 指導를 바들 必要가 잇는 것이외다. (「文士와 修養」에 말할 것이기에 더 길게 基礎知識에 關한 말을 하기는 그칩니다)
둘재, 自習이라함은 學校敎育을 밧는 者나 獨學하는 者나 共通히 다 하여야 할 것이니 곳 小說家가 되랴는 이는 小說, 詩人이 되랴는 이는 詩, 이 모양으로 날마다 끈임업시 족음식 족음식 글짓기를 練習한다는 뜻이외다. 文이란 一種의 技術이니 무릇 技術이란 아니 배우고도 안 되는 것과 가티 아니 練習하고도 안 되는 것이니 이미 「나의 職業은 文士다!」하고 作定하엿거든 自己는 文士가 되어 日常生活까지도 文士다운 生活을 하여야 할 것이 마치 宗敎家가 一生을 두고 쉬움업시 祈禱하고 聖經보고 傳道함과 가틀 것이외다. 이와 가티 文士가 되랴는 이는 文士란 職業을 自己의 一生의 生命을 바칠 天職으로 알아 暫時도 나는 文士다 하는 생각을 버리지 말고 自然과 人生의 觀察에나 그것을 材料로 하는 思索에나, 늘 文士로써 하고 特히 文士의 唯一한 表現方法인 「글짓기」를 一生에 끈힘업시 하여야 할 것이외다. 畫家가 數百幅의 畫布를 習作으로 버리는 모양으로 文士도 數千張의 原稿紙를 習作으로 버려야 할 것이외다. 무릇 藝術家는 늘 그것을 생각하고 그 일을 해야 길이 두고 神韻이 오지, 만일 數月이나 數年을 내버려둔다 하면 다시 前狀을 恢復하려 하여도 十에 八,九 버리고 간 藝術의 神은 不誠實한 그에게로 永遠히 안돌아오고＜13＞ 마는 것이외다.
藝術家의 藝術的 生命이 흔히 짤븐데 그 原因은 여러가지 잇겟지마는 그 中에도 重要할 것은 (1) 素質의 不足과 (2) 小成에 安한 等閒, 또는 道德的 墮落과 懶惰외다. 그에게 充分한 素養이 잇고 不斷의 努力이 잇다하면 그의 藝術的 生命은 거의 肉軆的 生命과 平行할 것이외다. 「힘잇는 이랴야 살게된 自然이다!」 最後의 勝利는 오즉 힘잇는 者, 힘쓰는 者에게로만 돌아갈 것이외다.
그런데 이 習作에도 指導者가 必要합니다. 첫재 材料를 取하는 法, 表現하는 法, 描寫하는 法, 修辭하는 法, 等 初學者가 指導者의 指導를 바들 必要는 거의 絶對라 할 것이외다.
以上은 文士가 되기에 要한 工夫法을 말한 것이어니와 文學者가 되기에는 이 以上의 工夫가 必要하니 文學者라 하면 法學者나 理學者와 가튼 學者임으로 그의 一生事業이 工夫라 할 수 잇습니다. 藝術家인 文士의 工夫는 오즉 文에 關한 知識 卽 語學, 文法學, 論理學, 修辭學과 文學에 關한 知識 卽 文學史, 文學槪論, 美學, 藝術論과 人生에 關한 知識 卽 哲學, 史學, 社會學, 宗敎學, 經濟學, 心理學, 倫理學과 自然에 關한 知識 卽 生物學, 天文學 等의 知識을 消化하야 創作의 資料와 叅考만 삼으면 그만이지마는 文學者라 하면 여러 文學的 作品을 對象으로 하야 科學的으로 그 變遷과 法則을 硏究하는 것이니 그의 工夫는 더욱 情密하고 科學的이라 할 것이외다.
그러면 天才란 말은 어는 境遇에 使用할가. 文學이라면 흔히 天才가 잇지 배워되는 것이 아니란 말은 어떠케 解釋할 말인가.
毌論 天才가 잇습니다. 그러나 天才라는 말에 天字가 부텃다하야 그는 生以知之하야 學問을 안배우고도 知識을 알고 글짓기를 工夫하지 아니하고도 저절로 名文을 지를 줄 안다는 뜻이 아니라 다가티 工夫하엿지마는 그中에 特別히 뛰어나는 者라는 뜻이외다. 우에 말한 五問中에 「내가 무엇을 가장 잘하나」하는 잘한다는 것이 그 方面에 對한 그 사람의 天才외다. 누구에게나 各기 어떤 方面에 特長이 잇는데 그 特長 中에 或은 千人之上, 或은 萬人之上 뛰어나는 者를 天才라는 것이지, 天才란 凡人과는 다른 무슨＜14＞ 特異한 能力을 가진 者는 아니외다.
毌論 天才는 國家의 보배외다. 그는 一代에 여러사람이 나는 것이 아니매 그 國家는 天才를 愛護할 必要가 잇습니다. 그러나 天才는 工夫 아니하고도 文學者나 文士가 되는 怪物이 아니오, 工夫해야 天才를 發揮하고 工夫할스록 잘 發揮하는 사람이외다. 그럼으로 天才가 업는 이는 天才가 업스니까 工夫를 하여야 하고 天才가 잇는 이는 天才가 잇스니까 工夫를 하여야 합니다.
最後에 한가지 文學者나 文士되기에 그 中에도 民衆의 精神을 支配하는 힘이 잇는 文士되기에 가장 重要하고 가장 必要한 것이 잇스니 진실로 工夫보다도 天才보다도, 글 잘 짓는 것  보다도 必要한 것이 잇스니 그것은 곳 健全한 人格이외다. 무슨 知識이나 무슨 能力이나 健全한 人格者에게 잇고야 그것이 民族이나 全人類에게 利益을 주는 것이지 不健全한 人格者가 知識이나 能力을 가지면 돌이어 害毒을 끼치게 되고 그 가진 知識이나 能力이 클스록 그 주는 害毒이 더욱 클 것이외다. 그中에도 民衆의 精神을 支配하는 一種의 魅力을 가진 文學的 作品을 짓는 文士에서 더욱 그러합니다. 그럼으로 나는 우에 引用한 일이 잇는 「文士와 修養」에서도 社會가 不健全한 人格者인 文士를 가짐은 不健全한 醫師를 가지는 것 以上 危險한 일이라고 하엿습니다. 그런데 不幸히 우리 朝鮮에서는 文士라 하면 의례히 酒色에 沈溺하고 의례히 不拘小節이라 하야 人生으로 맛당히 지켜야 할 만한 道德을 아니지키는 特權을 가진 者로 아니 이는 朝鮮의 文壇과 밋 民族의 將來를 爲하야 크게 憂慮할 現象이외다. 그런즉 새로 文士가 되랴는 여러 弟妹께서는 決코 現代의 墮落한 惡習에 물들지 아니 하고 진실로 民衆의 精神的 師友가 될 만한 健全한 人格의 修養에 努力하여야 합니다.
健全한 人格이란 特히 異常한 것이 아니니 衣服居處를 恒常 淨潔히 하고 言語動作을 甚히 法度잇게 하며 決코 酒色 其他의 道德的 罪惡을 멀리 하야 누구던지 尊敬할 만하고 信賴할 만한 眞實하고 敬虔한 行爲의 所有者를 일커름이외다.
以上의 所論이 讀者에게 文學이란 무엇인가의 槪念과 文士되기에 所要하는 要件을 말슴하여 들인다 하면 이만 幸이 업겟습니다.＜15＞
＜1-15＞