Magazine Title:	삼천리 제11권 제1호
Publication Date:	1939년 01월 01일
Article Title:	東亞協同體와 朝鮮 (The East Asian Cooperative Body and Korea)
Author:	金明植 印貞植 車載貞 (Kim Myŏngsik, In Chŏngsik, Cha Chaejŏng)
Article Type:	논설 (Editorial/Opinion Piece)

The East Asian Cooperative Body and Korea
						Kim Myŏngsik, In Chŏngsik, Cha Chaejŏng

Construction Consciousness and Continental Advance
Kim Myŏngsik

The issue of constructing a New East Asia under the leadership of the Empire [of Japan] has already passed the stage of theory and reached the first stage of realization. Of course, it is undeniable that there are still obstructions from third countries and the opponent's resistance has not ceased, presenting many difficulties for the construction of a New East Asia. However, having already achieved military victory, politically transformed the face of China (支那), deployed foundational economic work, and culturally realized cooperation for a new life, it will inevitably be realized according to the Empire's established policy, regardless of any opponent's reluctance or any third country's hindrance, overtly or covertly. There is no need for lengthy explanation. Moreover, the Empire's established policy is not to make China proper a second Manchukuo (滿洲國), as the Imperial government has repeatedly stated. If it were to adopt a policy like Britain's towards Egypt in the previous century, the issue of constructing a New East Asian Cooperative Body could not arise, and most of China's territory would simply become the Empire's colony. That is, <48> in the previous century, Britain invaded Egypt, made Sudan (埃及領土인스탄), a territory larger than Egypt, its colony, and made Egypt a protectorate, granting formal independence only after the Great War. At that time, there was only a relationship of conqueror and conquered, and the autonomy of mutual cooperation was completely rejected. However, the Imperial Government has declared multiple times that it has no territorial ambitions towards China, and in reality, not only are there no actions like permanently occupying militarily seized regions to make them a kind of colony, but it is organizing a new political regime for China under the Empire's guidance. Therefore, the issue of the New East Asian Cooperative Body has emerged, and with the completion of this cooperative body, it will be factually proven that the Empire's policy towards China is fundamentally different from Britain's policy towards Egypt in the previous century.

Furthermore, regarding the issue of constructing a New China, the federal theory seems influential. While some might suspect this stems from a divide-and-rule policy like Britain's towards India (印), considering the vastness of the country, underdeveloped transportation infrastructure, and historical autonomous systems and thought, perhaps a federal structure is suited to reality as a transitional form. I believe that upon reaching a certain stage of development, reorganizing into a unitary state would be more efficient. Of course, Briand's ambitious plan for a European Federation ended as mere fantasy, but if the above comes to pass, the issue of a federation in New East Asia will mark a new epoch in human history. Therefore, we must now have special interest and enthusiasm for the construction of the New East Asian Cooperative Body, actively participate in it, and pioneer the first step of our new destiny.

However, in constructing the New East Asia, the most urgent task is to establish an ideology that can serve as a guide and blueprint for the new construction. It is a great regret that among the construction ideologies proposed so far by many politicians, scholars, commentators, and practitioners, none have established a persuasive ideology under a systematic worldview, merely offering divergent arguments. If such an ideology is not established, Sun Yat-sen's (孫文) Three Principles of the People cannot be sublated (揚棄), and if they are not sublated, there is a concern that the construction of New East Asia might be left half-finished. Therefore, for this new construction, the Korean populace must first contribute through a construction ideology. Firstly, it goes without saying that the Korean populace must appear as a harmonizing force (調和役) between the Japanese and Chinese peoples. However, past facts demonstrate that in fulfilling this duty, we have incurred misunderstandings from both peoples. Consequently, our activities until now have been constrained (跼踳), forcing us to constantly lead a bat-like existence (蝙蝠生活). This might be considered an unavoidable aspect <49> of the situation in a certain period, but if such reality is not resolved going forward, our lives will be no different from the past. Accordingly, we will not be able to contribute to the construction of New East Asia, and even if the issue of a New East Asian Federation arises next, our position will not improve significantly.

Here, we need to present a New East Asian construction ideology, and to do so, we must first examine the Three Principles of the People. However, this short essay cannot possibly do that, so I will only discuss its concepts. The Nation (民族) and People's Rights (民權) of the Three Principles are concepts of the modern nation-state, while People's Livelihood (民生) is a socialist concept. It goes without saying that these two consciousnesses cannot form a single unified idea. Furthermore, the national thought and concept of popular sovereignty of the modern nation-state have already been altered in every state and society (including Britain, America, and France). It is easy to understand that such past thought cannot and should not become the ideology of New East Asia. Then, could Fascism (파시즘) be the blueprint for the new construction? Anyone who understands Fascism's state ideology would not affirm this.

Of course, nobody is unaware that the state ideology of Germany (獨) and Italy (伊) recently served as the driving force in breaking the stagnation of Europe (歐洲). However, its national dictatorial thought (國家的 獨裁思想) and ethnic exclusionary concept (民族的 排他觀念) prove that it cannot become the construction ideology for a New Europe. Furthermore, if such state thought or ethnic concepts were adopted as the blueprint for new construction in the reality of East Asia, it would become an even greater obstacle than Sun Yat-sen's Three Principles. Therefore, those interested in the new construction must be particularly wary of such an ideology.

Therefore, as mentioned above, although theories about this new construction have been much debated by politicians, practitioners, and scholars since the outbreak of the China Incident (支那事變), a definite ideology has yet to be established. It seems they are proceeding using only the few policies from government declarations as construction strategies. These government declarations can only serve as expedient measures to manage the current situation; they cannot become the ideology for new construction. Among scholars' proposals, the article "On Establishing Cultural Policy" by Sugimori Kōjirō (杉森孝次郞) in the November issue of *Nippon Hyōron* (日本評論) attempted to establish a systematic worldview for the new construction, but it merely ended with rejecting the Three Principles and failed to present a concrete ideology for the new construction, which is regrettable, like a dragon's head with a snake's tail.

Now, having received an urgent request from afar, I lack the time to fully elaborate on the new construction ideology I have conceived, but <50> to outline it briefly, it is a new form of Idealism (理想主義). It organizes political Democracy (데모구라시), economic Collectivism (고렉띄브), and social Humanism (휴매니즘) into a single unified concept by bringing them together in harmony. I believe this Idealism will be a perfect ideology for constructing New East Asia. Firstly, by realizing Democracy politically, it will outwardly reject dictatorial ideology while sublating Sun Yat-sen's Nationalism and Principle of People's Rights. Economically, by realizing Collectivism (크래티브 - *sic, likely intended '고렉띄브'*), it will criticize the crude views of democracy while checking the appetite of capitalism and correcting the fantasies of communism. Then, by realizing Humanism socially, it will aim for the development of human culture and lay the foundation for harmony among all nations (萬邦이 協和). It goes without saying that this Idealism will be a good ideology for us to fulfill our duty as a harmonizing force between the Japanese and Chinese peoples. Therefore, we must first gain a deep understanding (造階 - *sic, likely 造詣*) of this Idealism and participate in the movement for constructing New East Asia. By propagating Democracy politically, advocating Collectivism (코텍리브 - *sic, likely intended '고렉띄브'*) economically, and Humanism socially to both peoples, making them adopt it as the ideology for achieving harmony among nations, our path forward will open up by itself. Simultaneously, our contribution to the construction of New East Asia, and indeed a New World, will be illustrious in history.

"We once learned from Western thought and order and have already made it our own. We certainly learned it from the basics (いろは - iroha), but even before learning from the West, we already had our own culture, thought, and tradition. We did not merely seize Western culture. We adopted it in our own style (流儀), Orientalized it, and by Orientalizing it, we intend to create something new." (Nippon Hyōron, December issue editorial) Originally, there is no need to oppose Western and Eastern cultures, and as the above statement shows, doing so does not yield an ideology for new construction. It can be asserted from the essence of new construction, which possesses universality, that the construction ideology should neither be Eastern nor Western. Therefore, it must be simultaneously Eastern and Western, and thus, global. The fact that the above statement is too abstract, regardless of how it came about, means it cannot sublate Sun Yat-sen's Three Principles, just as conceptual philosophy cannot move practical reality. Therefore, when discussing the ideology for constructing New East Asia, rather than geographically distinguishing between Eastern and Western things, we must discover a trans-regional ideology appropriate for the era. The fact that Orientalizing Western things will not sublate Western consciousness is proven, above all, <51> by the backwardness of Eastern culture. It is not that we geographically avoid Western things, but that as an ideology of the era, we deny its supra-temporal nature. In other words, it must be an effort to elucidate a trans-regional ideology of the era.

Thus, we must make it the ideology for constructing New East Asia and simultaneously stand at the forefront of world construction. As such an ideology, the aforementioned Idealism can originally become an era-defining ideology transcending the West and the East. It is an inevitable trend (理勢) that the opportunity for its realization will unfold in the construction of the New East Asian Cooperative Body.

The Reorganization of East Asia and the Korean People

In Chŏngsik

Mao Zedong (毛澤東), the supreme leader of the Chinese Communist Party, in his lengthy essay "On Protracted War" (持久戰を論한다), divided the entire outlook of the Sino-Japanese War (日支戰爭) into three stages. Thus, he stated:
"The first stage is the period when the enemy's strategy is offense and ours is defense; the second stage is the period when the enemy's strategy is defense and ours is preparation for counter-offense; and the third stage is the period when our strategy is counter-offense and the enemy's strategy is retreat." (See Kaizō (改造), October special issue)

Furthermore, Mao Zedong explained that in this first stage, "The enemy's intention is to occupy the three points of Guangdong (廣東), Wuhan (武漢), and Lanzhou (蘭州), and then link these three points."

However, any Chinese person attempting to grasp the objective situation coolly, apart from subjectivity and hope, cannot help but harbor the greatest suspicion towards this prognosis of the Sino-Japanese War prescribed by Mao Zedong. Today, with major coastal cities like Beijing (北京) and Tianjin (天津), Shanghai (上海) and Guangdong, Suzhou (蘇州) and Hangzhou (杭州) all fallen into the hands of the Imperial Army, and hegemony over the Yellow River (黃河) basin and the entire Yangtze River (長江) region completely secured under the Empire's control, the three points of Guangdong, Wuhan, and Lanzhou <52> have now been completely occupied. With this, the Empire has come to assert hegemony over the Central Plain (中原) of all China.

"He who controls the Central Plain can seize all of China (中華)" has been the consistent basic principle throughout the entire political history of China for the past half-millennium. The entire lineage of the endlessly changing Kingly Way (王道) and Hegemonic Way (覇道) could only rise and fall by adhering to this basic principle. No matter how much modern China failed to possess a unified, centralized modern structure economically and politically, one cannot deny the fact that the region already occupied by the hands of the Imperial Army indeed constitutes the heartland of modern China, the Central Plain in the modern sense.

Of course, as theorists of the Chinese Communist Party like Mao Zedong always emphasize, semi-feudal (半封建的) economic elements of self-sufficiency still remain abundantly in modern China. Like an amoeba (아미-바), the traditional persistence (執着力) of this semi-feudal economic relationship is that even if a part is cut off, that part alone can survive. However, this fact can by no means serve as a basis to deny that the loss of the Central Plain constitutes a fatal blow to the future resistance power of anti-Japanese China.

Immediately after the fall of Wuhan, Mao Zedong, while on the path of exile, endeavored to cleverly excuse the disgrace of defeat in an interview with a foreign journalist, saying, "The area occupied by the Japanese army is not yet even one-third of all China. The remaining two-thirds are under the control of the anti-Japanese government. This is the reservoir and base for future resistance... The final victory shines on the side of China."

However, the issue is not whether the area seized by the Imperial Army occupies one-third of all China or not; in other words, it is not about the extent of the occupied territory, but about the economic and political importance of this area. The fact that the anti-Japanese leaders, who intended to turn Hankou (漢口) into a 'Madrid' (마드-리드), have lost even this Wuhan cannot be seen as anything but a fatal blow to them.

Today's anti-Japanese government, which has only tread the path of escape and retreat to Chongqing (重慶) and Kunming (昆明), cannot be denied, despite their grandiloquent words, to have become nothing more than a regional regime.

Chiang Kai-shek (蔣介石), in a recent propaganda piece titled "A Letter to the Chinese People" (改造, December issue), particularly emphasized that "the main strategy for the future anti-Japanese war is internal line operations." However, no matter how ingenious a tactic so-called guerrilla warfare may be, the notion that lost territory can be recovered through the stirrings of demoralized, uncoordinated remnants of defeated soldiers is surely an excessively reckless and bold logic. <53>

Therefore, in essence, the fall of Wuhan cannot but be the final, decisive blow to their anti-Japanese regime. With this, the war is certainly transitioning into a new stage, both from the Chinese perspective and from the Empire's side.

Let's first examine the Chinese side.
Mao Zedong, again in the aforementioned interview immediately after the fall of Wuhan, declared, "The war is now transitioning from the first stage to the second stage, that is, from the period of defense to the period of preparation for counter-offense." However, it is doubtful whether even a single person in this world possesses a mind dull enough to believe this boast.

It is true that the war is entering a new stage from the Chinese perspective as well. However, it is not a stage progressing from defeat to victory, from defense to counter-offense, but rather a stage deteriorating from gradual retreat to decisive defeat, a fatal stage falling from a nationwide unified regime to a mere regional regime, and nothing else.

Let's examine this same process again from the Empire's side.
Immediately after the fall of Wuhan, while Chiang Kai-shek and Mao Zedong were repeating the aforementioned restrained noises, Finance Minister Ikeda (池田藏相), in his Meiji Day statement, said, "The capture of Wuhan marks an important stage in achieving the objectives intended by the current Incident." Indeed, what is this new stage? According to the same statement, "It is based on establishing a mutually linked relationship among the three countries of Japan, Manchukuo, and China (日滿支), spanning politics, economy, culture, etc." In other words, the transition from the protracted war of the past to the protracted construction of the future forms the characteristic of the new stage. On the same day as Finance Minister Ikeda's statement, Prime Minister Konoe (近衛首相) also spoke similarly in a radio broadcast, drawing the entire nation's attention to the protracted construction of the future. Of course, this transition to future protracted construction absolutely does not mean the cessation of warfare against the anti-Japanese regime.

The fundamental policy of "not dealing with the Chiang regime" and the national strategic goal of "aiming for the eradication of the anti-Japanese regime" will be pursued to the end, and until this is achieved, punitive warfare (*懲戰 - *sic, likely 聖戰 'holy war' or simply 'warfare' intended*) will continue as is. Therefore, the transition to protracted construction simply means that, along with the continuation of warfare, the entire national policy after the fall of Wuhan will place heavier emphasis on new construction—that is, the construction of a New Order in East Asia (東亞의 新秩序)—the formation of the East Asian Cooperative Body (東亞協同體). <54>

In essence, protracted construction refers to the reorganization of East Asia (東亞의 再編成) with the Empire of Japan as the sole and absolute leader (盟主). What does the reorganization of East Asia mean?

Firstly, the reorganization of East Asia in an economic sense involves the establishment of a Japan-Manchuria-China 'bloc' economy (『뿌럭』경제) based on the co-existence and co-prosperity (共存共榮) of the various peoples of East Asia.

Secondly, the reorganization of East Asia in a political sense refers to the formation of an East Asian Cooperative Body or East Asian Federation (東亞聯邦體) to secure these economic goals. Of course, such an East Asian Cooperative Body fundamentally excludes the invasion of East Asia by Western imperialism. However, it excludes Western imperialistic invasion, not Westerners themselves. Furthermore, the ideology of the East Asian Cooperative Body includes the impetus to overcome the 'nationalism' of anti-Japanese China, while simultaneously opposing abstract 'internationalism' (*터인*쇼날리즘 - *sic, likely 'internationalism'*). However, this does not mean enclosing all of East Asia into East Asian isolationism, an East Asian Monroe Doctrine, regional closed-doorism, or regional expediency. Forming all of East Asia into a single economic and political unit means that all of East Asia, as a single cooperative body, actively participates in and contributes to the progress of world history as a single unit.

Considering this culturally, the aim is to secure and develop a common culture for the East Asian peoples, distinct in its entire tradition and growth from European civilization. This cultural mission entrusted to the East Asian Cooperative Body is by no means intended to unconditionally exclude the introduction of European civilization. It merely seeks to select and assimilate European civilization based on the unique indigenous culture of East Asia.

Therefore, it not only excludes the uncritical imitation of European civilization but also opposes an East Asian closed-doorism that stands against European civilization.

In essence, carrying out this unprecedentedly great mission economically, politically, and culturally must be the task of future protracted construction. The reason why the current China Incident is a historic Holy War (聖戰) from the Empire's perspective also lies herein.

In the basins of the Yellow River and the Yangtze, tens of thousands of heroic spirits (英靈) lie silently asleep, shrouded in glory. They were by no means soldiers of aggression. Their blood was shed solely for the happiness and prosperity (繁榮) of East Asia, and their noble sacrifices can only be compensated <55> by the establishment of the New Order in East Asia.

"Towards the new battlefield in the East, scorched by the blazing sun, covered in yellow dust, we advance. I felt this scene was incomparably beautiful. I felt the surging, great power in this advance. I felt the pulsating, overflowing, powerful tide," wrote Sergeant Hino (火野軍曺) from the battlefield in "Wheat and Soldiers" (麥と兵隊). We cannot help but see the incomparably magnificent, solemn creative power of the Japanese people in this pulsating, overflowing, powerful tide.

This incomparably great historical creative power has presented the issue of the New Order in East Asia, as described above, as the task of future protracted construction.

Like all peoples of Asia (亞細亞), we, the populace of Korea (朝鮮), must henceforth discuss our national destiny only on the premise of the completion of this newly formed New Order in East Asia—that is, the East Asian Cooperative Body. Therefore, there is no political issue facing Koreans today as important as this theme of the East Asian Cooperative Body.

Facing the ideal of this East Asian Cooperative Body, which will be realized in the not-too-distant future, how should we define the future direction of the Korean populace, whom we love most dearly? The problem lies here.

Firstly, the ideal of the East Asian Cooperative Body thoroughly rejects future prospects for Korea based on nationalism or Marxism.

This ideal of the East Asian Cooperative Body promises existence, prosperity, and happiness to the Korean populace only when they fulfill their duties faithfully as subjects of the Empire of Japan. Herein lies the insurmountable limit regarding the issue of the Korean people's destiny.

This limit must be clearly acknowledged.

Thus, the ideal of the East Asian Cooperative Body has a profound relevance to the destiny of Koreans today. This profound relevance presents the issue of *Naesŏn Ilch'e* (內鮮一體 - Interior [Japan] and Korea as One Body) as the only political path for us Koreans to follow.

I dare to assert: the Korean problem today is nothing other than the *Naesŏn Ilch'e* problem. Why? Because it is clearly shown that all paths other than *Naesŏn Ilch'e* are mere delusion, and therefore, no path remains other than this one. <56>

Hereinafter, I wish to express my beliefs regarding this *Naesŏn Ilch'e*.

Firstly, the issue is the possibility of *Naesŏn Ilch'e*, about which many people harbor doubts. However, the question of possibility, at least concerning a historical movement, boils down to the question of social necessity. Why? Because something is possible only when it possesses social necessity, and necessity implies possibility.

Thus, in demonstrating the necessity of *Naesŏn Ilch'e*, I intend to investigate it from the following three perspectives (契機 - key moments/factors):

First, the factor derived from the special position Korea occupies as a Continental Logistics Base (大陸兵站基地) for the Empire of Japan's hegemony in East Asia. Second, the factor of the Korean populace's national awakening (國民的 自覺) and voluntary, active cooperation with the continental policy, which is accelerating with the progress of the Incident and the formation process of the East Asian Cooperative Body. Third, the factor stemming from the natural expectation of bold and innovative national policies from the domestic reformist forces (革新勢力) poised to lead tomorrow's government.

These three factors interact and permeate each other, and together with the deep desire of the populace for *Naesŏn Ilch'e*, I am convinced they will bring about a historical transformation in the lives of the Korean people.

Let's consider the first factor.
Since the Manchurian Incident, the economic mission assigned to Korea was its position as the "Link of the Japan-Manchuria Economic Bloc" (日滿경제뿔럭의 紐帶). However, with the outbreak of the China Incident demanding strong Japan-wide control over economic relations, it gradually began to be exposed that this economic guiding principle of the "Link of the Japan-Manchuria Economic Bloc" was too abstract in content. In reality, no country or region can exist solely playing a linking role or having that as its primary mission.

Thus, with the China Incident as a turning point, the slogan for Korea, "Link of the Japan-Manchuria Economic Bloc," transformed into the more concrete, controlled-economy-oriented, continental-policy-oriented new slogan of "Continental Logistics Base." The reason why Korea is a logistics base for the Empire of Japan's continental policy is, of course, explained by the special geographical relationship Korea occupies, but if we examine the content of this concept in more detail, the following points are listed: <57>
"(1) Transporting munitions across the Korea Strait or the China Sea to the front lines requires enormous shipping (*船* - *sic, likely 船舶 'shipping'*), anticipating the scale of future wars, and entails great technical difficulties. This fact has already been proven to some extent in the China Incident.
(2) Even if there is no shortage of shipping, considerable danger must be anticipated considering the future of submarines, airplanes, etc.
(3) From these points, relying solely on the mainland [Japan] for the logistical role in future wars cannot be considered an appropriate strategy. Comparing Korea, Manchuria, and North China (北支) for their suitability as logistics bases, Korea has the most developed foundational conditions for fostering modern industry. While Manchukuo (滿洲國) has not developed subcontracting industries that could form the basis of heavy industry to date, Korea already has them developed to some extent. In terms of labor supply as well, Korea's education system is several decades ahead of Manchukuo's, making it far superior..." (Suzuki Masafumi (鈴木正文), "The Current Stage of the Korean Economy" (朝鮮經濟의 現段階))

This role as a logistics base, in turn, brings about enormous influence on the general life of the Korean populace.

Firstly, with the rapid development of heavy industry, especially military industry, the internal contradictions of Korean society are alleviated. The basic characteristic of the Korean economic structure lies in the fact that semi-feudal (半封建的) economic relations in agricultural production still remain deeply rooted, while in industrial production, monopoly capital (獨占資本), which has an even higher composition compared to the mainland, is dominant. However, no matter how highly composed the industrial capital is, the trend of enormous development in heavy industry, especially military industry, is sufficient to fully absorb Korea's surplus rural population into cities and factories.
The peculiar phenomenon of labor shortages being keenly lamented in the heavy industrial zones of Hamnam (咸南) Province in recent years is a welcome sign reflecting this situation. In essence, the rapid development of heavy industry, along with large-scale advances into Manchuria and North China, opens up vast avenues for the urban unemployed masses and the rural surplus population.

Secondly, to fulfill the mission as a logistics base, the large-scale existence of an Industrial Reserve Army (産業豫備軍), organized, trained, and educated in a modern and Japanese manner, is an essential condition. In this respect, Korea is said to be about 20 years ahead of Manchukuo or North China. This relationship is the factor that led to Korea being chosen as the most important immediate logistics base, despite Manchukuo and North China being geographically closer to the continental front lines.
According to comparisons of labor efficiency in modern factories, even in Korea, workers who have received elementary education and thus understand the national language [Japanese] are said to be 20 to 30 percent more efficient than those who do not. <58> According to the Government-General's announcement, the current number of industrial reserve troops who have received elementary education in Korea reaches 700,000. During the Second Education Expansion Plan period from Shōwa 12 (1937) to Shōwa 21 (1946), the capacity of elementary schools is planned to be expanded to accommodate 1,680,000 students, and simplified schools (簡易學校) to 154,000. This trend of educational expansion must be seen as a historical cultural phenomenon accompanying the industrialization of Korea and the process of Korea's reorganization as a logistics base. Who among those who truly love Korea would not applaud this welcome phenomenon with passionate fervor?

Thirdly, the process of Korea's transformation into a logistics base, i.e., industrialization, increasingly shifts the balance from 'Agricultural Korea' towards 'Industrial Korea'. The feudal fragmentation of Korean agriculture, combined with the aftermath of the world-sweeping agricultural crisis, fostered a trend of miserable impoverishment (*참담* - *sic, likely 참담한*) in Korean agriculture and peasant life, while simultaneously leading the Government-General politics into unbearable constraints (桎梏), especially regarding financial and public order issues. To escape these constraints, Governor-General Ugaki (宇垣總督 - *error in text, should be Minami*) had already adopted the policy of parallel development of agriculture and industry (農工倂進政策) along with rural revitalization measures as the guiding principle for the Korean economy. Furthermore, the practical progression of the continental policy has further spurred this trend of parallel agricultural and industrial development, strengthening a series of policies such as vigorous planning for heavy industry, rural revitalization, commercial management of agriculture, and fostering agriculture for industrial raw materials. The previous agricultural policy, heavily biased towards rice, was swept away long ago by the global agricultural crisis. Currently, the agricultural production of industrial raw materials such as wool, cotton, flax, hops, and sweet potatoes for fuel alcohol is being strongly encouraged, showing promising long-term prospects.
Looking at areas like fisheries as well, not content with traditional primitive fishing methods, there are already signs of active advancement into processing.
In essence, this policy of parallel agricultural and industrial development, coupled with the aforementioned trend of large-scale absorption of surplus rural population, is confidently expected to revitalize and bring prosperity to Korean villages at a rapid tempo.

Fourthly, the fact that what is required for Korea as a logistics base is not light industry but heavy industry or primary industry (粗工業) not only avoids conflict with small and medium-sized commercial and industrial enterprises run by Koreans but can actually serve as a driving force to actively promote the development of the latter. Subcontracting industries, predicated on heavy industry, have prospects for further expansion in the hands of Korean entrepreneurs in the future. Furthermore, Korea's traditional small and medium industries—light bulbs (電球), enamelware (琺瑯鐵器 - hōrō tekki), matches (燐寸), and rubber shoes (고무靴)—even amidst the dominant development of such heavy or primary industries, are already competing effectively <59> with mainland products without any relation to them, even advancing into world markets.

Finally, Korea's transformation into a logistics base adds significance to the political position Korea occupies in the Empire's hegemony in East Asia and the formation of the East Asian Cooperative Body. Regarding this point, Governor-General Minami (南總督) already emphasized in his meeting with Mr. Yun Ch'iho (尹致昊氏) that "the core of East Asians' construction of the East" lies in "the perfection of *Naesŏn Ilch'e*."
Thus, the issue of public order (治安) in Korea becomes the most crucial problem. At the same time, to sweep away the political dissatisfaction or discontent of Koreans and have them cooperate with the Empire of Japan's continental policy with 100 percent sincerity and passion, it must not be forgotten to grant them political qualifications equal to those of mainlanders after they fulfill national duties equal to those of mainlanders. Indeed, the reason why the issue of Korean suffrage, alongside the issue of the East Asian Cooperative Body, is beginning to be fervently discussed in central political circles today lies here.

In summary, the demand for Korea's transformation into a logistics base, imposed by the progression of the continental policy, can promise at least this much welfare and prosperity to us Koreans—economically, politically, and culturally.
Herein lies an important factor for *Naesŏn Ilch'e*—that is, one significant factor arising from Korea's transformation into a logistics base.

While the above factor for *Naesŏn Ilch'e* originates from the demands of the Empire's continental policy, the second factor originates from the voluntary will of the Korean populace, who come to expect significant welfare and prosperity with the progression of the continental policy. While the first factor is enforced from above, i.e., from the state, with a coercive nature, the second factor arises voluntarily from below, i.e., from the populace. Thus, it is at the confluence of these two factors that we can witness the materialization of *Naesŏn Ilch'e*—*Naesŏn Ilch'e* in its true sense.

As a people, Koreans have numerous flaws. However, we Koreans also have strengths that are second to none. I believe this strength lies in being extremely intelligent and shrewd compared to other peoples. Since the outbreak of the Incident, we Koreans, as an entire nation, have faithfully cooperated with the Empire's national policy. Even during the Changkufeng Incident (長鼓峰事件), contrary to the worries of the authorities, Koreans maintained discipline to the end, demonstrating loyalty on the Empire's side and showing the organizational capacity of a modern civilized nation. If we compare the political attitude of Koreans today with that of Taishō 8 (1919), we cannot help but be astonished by the vast difference. It is not that individual ideologues have converted, but that Koreans as a <60> nation have shown a faithful transformation (轉向). They have, in fact, intuitively realized through this Incident that individual Koreans can expect happiness and prosperity only as loyal subjects who cooperate fully with the Empire's continental policy to the very end, and therefore, there is no political path for Koreans today other than this one. What spurred this intuitive awakening in them was not their precise observation or critique of the East Asian situation. They perceived directly in their own life processes that, despite various persistent propaganda and agitation by 'Communists' or 'Nationalists', their individual positions were not deteriorating step by step, but rather improving. Let's take the example of apples (苹果). The areas around Taegu (大邱), Hwangju (黃州), Wonsan (元山), and Chinnamp'o (鎭南浦) are renowned as abundant apple-producing regions. The production price of apples this year has risen three to four times compared to last year. This is, of course, primarily due to the vast North China market being newly opened by the China Incident. Not limited to apples, all other special products have similar prospects in relation to North China. Apples are just one example. In general, this connection between the Korean countryside and the development of the Incident promotes a series of processes—commercial management of agriculture, corporatization of agricultural management, processing of agricultural products, improvement of agricultural technology, increase in agricultural product prices, enrichment (富褣化 - *sic, likely 富裕化 'enrichment'*) of peasant life, etc.—bringing unprecedented prosperity to Korean peasant life.

Next, regarding the population issue as well, the general populace intuits their improving situation. In a farming village in Yonggang (龍岡) district, P'yŏngnam (平南) Province, with no more than 200 households, the number of new migrants to North China and cities reached 15 or 16 people in the last 3 years. Those who were wandering on the brink of starvation as surplus rural population are now receiving wages of over 60 chŏn to 2 wŏn per day as urban laborers, and as pioneers in Manchuria and North China, they are even sending some money home each month. Thus, even in the population problem, one of the most critical issues in Korean society since the Incident, paths to resolving past contradictions and constraints are actively opening up. At a time when the world is suffering from a flood of unemployment, a strange phenomenon is presenting itself in Korean villages where landlords cannot find farmhands ('머슴'). The Government-General is already relocating 10,000 poor peasant households annually to Manchukuo through the Korea-Manchuria Colonization Company (鮮滿拓殖會社). This relocation of 10,000 households to Manchuria alone is a significant contribution to alleviating the class contradictions in Korean rural society. Adding to this the large numbers of surplus population absorbed into North China and military industries, we can certainly hold an optimistic outlook regarding the population problem that has long plagued rural society. <61>

Thus, the Korean populace, also in terms of this population issue, intuitively perceives that their individual positions are generally stabilizing and improving along with the progression of the continental policy.

Furthermore, looking at import-export relations, urban small and medium commercial and industrial entrepreneurs, along with producers of special agricultural products in rural areas, are keenly sensing their interests aligning with the progress of the Incident and the stabilization of North China. Small and medium commercial enterprises targeting the newly opened vast market are actively emerging among Korean business owners, even under this wartime economic system. As we enter the stage of protracted construction henceforth, this trend in small and medium commerce and industry will be further accelerated.

In addition to this, another trend of prosperity drawing public attention can be seen in today's booming mining (鑛山) activity. The rich nature of 'Mining Korea', containing inexhaustible deposits of various metals like gold, silver, copper, iron, tungsten (重石), molybdenum (水鉛 - *sic, likely molybdenum*), pyrite (硫化鐵), magnesite, and aluminum, is being developed everywhere, in parallel with and greatly stimulated by the progress of the Incident, improving the economic standing of a large number of petty citizens. Consequently, here too, the general populace develops feelings of full support for the continental policy.

In summary, the fact that since the outbreak of the North China Incident, the Korean populace, truly as an entire nation, has faithfully fulfilled their duties as subjects of the Empire while expressing the utmost sincerity in their willingness to cooperate with the Empire's continental policy to the end, is indeed because they could intuitively see the path to general welfare and prosperity in relation to this Incident. With the fall of Hankou as a trigger, the protracted war has transitioned into the new stage of protracted construction. The further this great stride of protracted construction, which thoroughly reshapes the history of Asia (亞細亞), advances, the more broadly the path to happiness and prosperity promised to the Korean populace will be opened, I am convinced. Accordingly, the populace's absolute trust in Imperial rule, their spiritual awakening as citizens, the penetration of Japanism (日本主義) among the populace, the complete equalization of the mainland Japanese and Korean peoples—in short, the process of realizing *Naesŏn Ilch'e*—will proceed step by step.

Today's Korean populace already eagerly desires *Naesŏn Ilch'e*. Furthermore, they expect that in this process of realizing *Naesŏn Ilch'e*, the Empire's national policy will satisfactorily advance the essence of *Naesŏn Ilch'e*—the complete economic, political, and cultural equalization of the mainland and Korean peoples, and the process of merging the two peoples based on this equalization. <62>

Herein lies the second factor for the necessity of *Naesŏn Ilch'e*—that is, the factor of fervent desire welling up from below, from the populace.

The innovative ideology of New Japanism (新日本主義), which reveres only the Imperial Household as the center, respects only the Imperial Household, and acknowledges distinctions only between the Imperial Household and the people, has, since the 226 Incident (226事件), been forming a great historical current across economic, political, and cultural fields, poised to sway the Imperial government of tomorrow.

That we can expect the true realization of *Naesŏn Ilch'e* and the complete materialization of the great East Asian ideal is solely because we accurately grasp the necessity of the growth of reformist forces within state power.

Herein lies the third factor for the necessity of *Naesŏn Ilch'e*.

The three factors for the necessity of *Naesŏn Ilch'e* described above, each oriented towards the Korea of tomorrow, mutually penetrate and interact, creating a great historical, transformative tide (*湖潮* - *sic, likely 潮流 'tide'*) ideologically and politically.

We must ride this tide and mobilize the entire nation. Thus, we must instill in Koreans as a nation the conviction and passion for *Naesŏn Ilch'e*. Before a nation lacking conviction and passion lies only ruin (滅亡).

Thus, with conviction and passion, we must first faithfully fulfill our national duties as subjects of the Empire. The most important among national duties is the duty of national defense and military service (國防兵役). The conscription system (徵兵制) decided to be implemented in Manchukuo from next year has given us Koreans a tremendous shock (衝動). At the same time, we cannot but express our heartfelt respect for the bold, Asian, and innovative political stance of today's reformist forces.

We certainly cannot be satisfied merely with the implementation of the volunteer soldier system (志願兵制度). The volunteer soldier system must be expanded and strengthened into a compulsory military service system (義務兵制度). Our national sincerity reached Heaven, and the Imperial edict for the volunteer soldier system was issued. To achieve the implementation of the compulsory military service system, we must demonstrate our 100 percent national passion.

Furthermore, the implementation of a compulsory education system (義務敎育制) is also promised for the near future. The implementation of this compulsory education is a prerequisite for the conscription system, and at the same time, it must be a prerequisite for the policy of extending mainland systems (*内地延長主義*). <63>

Only the policy of extending mainland systems in its true sense must constitute the political content of *Naesŏn Ilch'e*. The national rights acquired by fulfilling national duties identical to those of the mainland people refer to political qualifications equal to those of the mainland people.

All political systems of the mainland—the universal suffrage system (普通選擧制), the prefecture system (府縣制), the compulsory education system, etc.—should be extended and applied to Korea to the same degree as in the mainland. Herein lies the greatest happiness we can expect. Let us advance, children of Koryŏ (高麗)!
Marchons?! Marchons! (*French: Let's march! Let's march!*)

The New Order in East Asia and Innovation

Cha Chaejŏng

The fall of the three towns of Wuhan (武漢 3鎭) and Guangdong (廣東) not only marked a new stage in the situational development of the China Incident itself but also became a new signpost for the direction of East Asian historical development. The Incident, ongoing for over a year, only fully and clearly revealed its true face and character to the entire world with this event.

The resisting enemy, the Chiang Kai-shek (蔣介石) regime, thereby lost its greatest base for resistance, had its political, economic, and international diplomatic foundations stripped away, and has already become extremely powerless as Japan's counterpart in the Incident. The weakening of the Chiang Kai-shek regime, a puppet (傀儡) of international finance capital, signifies the defeat and powerlessness in China of Western capital, such as British, American, and French (英米佛), which had dominated China. Simultaneously, it means that one of the greatest strongholds of Western capitalist imperialism's domination in the Far East has been crushed. Thus, the system of aggression in East Asia, which Western capitalist imperialism has constructed and maintained (構維待 - *sic, likely 構築維持*) for a century, is now facing its decisive catastrophe.

With this, the Incident can be seen as having entered the authentic track of its original purpose. Considering that the true object and goal of the current Incident were not the imperialistic monopoly of the Chinese populace and the Chinese market, but the obstruction and elimination of Western capital's invasion of China and its running dog, the anti-Japanese regime, and furthermore, <64> the establishment of the most rational New Order (新秩序) in East Asia, the Incident after the capture of Wuhan has indeed advanced to a new stage, as stated by government authorities.

The Konoe Cabinet, in its statement after the capture of Wuhan, spoke of establishing a New Order in East Asia.
It is an undeniable fact that some form of New Order, different from the previous one, will emerge in post-Incident East Asia. However, regarding that New Order, it remains an extremely vague concept for now. Points that can be anticipated include: Western imperialism becoming powerless in China and eventually being completely expelled (驅遂); the anti-Japanese regime disappearing and a new regime being established; the Red forces in China being expelled and simultaneously the Comintern's (콤민테룬) Red passage being shattered; and all diplomatic relations that bound (結縳) the old China and the old Orient, such as the Nine-Power Treaty (9個國條約類), which do not conform to the circumstances of the new situation, being abrogated (破棄), etc. Furthermore, it can be expected that the three nations of Japan, Manchukuo, and China in East Asia will be joined into a completely cooperative unit (協同體的 單位) across political, economic, and socio-cultural spheres. However, merely listing these common-sense points makes it difficult to discover the true form of the New East Asian Order.

The point that We (吾人) wish to know, and that the populace of all East Asia who will be encompassed by this future New Order wish to know, is its ideological and cultural-historical keynote.
The New Order in East Asia, simply put, is the new life order for the peoples of East Asia. We are under the promise of being granted our new life order through the construction of the New China.

The process of reaching this understanding must go through the internal understanding of Japan, the active agent (能動的 擔當者) and subject (主體) of establishing the New East Asian Order.
This is because the New Order of East Asia that will emerge in the future is the unified expression of the given new situation in East Asia and its active subject—that is, the objective and subjective.

The Japanese nation, seeking to bestow a New Order upon East Asia, is itself demanding its own internal new order—expressed in Japanese terms as Innovation (革新).
And this domestic innovation rests upon <65> the political, economic, cultural, and international diplomatic necessities that can only be made possible through the New Order on the continent. Its connection with the Continental New Order has interactive, simultaneous, and parallel aspects. In this respect, Japan's domestic innovation, as an internal element of the New East Asian Order, has a crucial connection with the Continental New Order. Therefore, it is almost impossible to understand the Continental New Order without understanding Japan's domestic innovation; that is, the ideological keynote of Japan's domestic innovation is precisely that of the Continental Order.

Whether it is the New Order in East Asia or Japan's Innovation, it is comprehensive and should be considered across political, economic, socio-cultural, and international diplomatic aspects. However, when summarizing it succinctly, the question is whether it is capitalist or anti-capitalist.

Of course, the focus of discussion can be placed elsewhere. It is extremely necessary to consider perspectives like nationalism vs. internationalism, Japanism vs. East Asianism, East Asian totalitarianism vs. worldism, etc. However, rather than such one-sided and abstract points, the concrete and fundamental focus of observation is thought to be its capitalist or non-capitalist nature. This is because the process of transformation in capitalist national societies requires starting, first of all, from self-negation.

However, even if anti-capitalist, various forms can be anticipated: Marxist Communism, German-Italian Totalitarianism (I recognize Fascist society as belonging to the anti-capitalist category), or an innovative Japanist society, etc. Then, on what kind of qualitative foundation will the New Order in East Asia, with Innovative Japan as its active guiding subject, be based, must it be based, and do We hope it will become?

It is from this perspective that we believe it is proper to recognize the Japanese, East Asian historical, and world-historical significance of the New East Asian Order as the settlement of the Incident.

The current Incident is part of Japan's Innovation. Capitalist Japan must be completely sublated concurrently with the conclusion of this Incident. Establishing the New Order in East Asia as an imperialistic development of capitalist Japan not only loses world-historical significance but also does not signify Japan's own happy development and, in fact, signifies impossibility. Japan's capitalist forces lack any subjective capability to lead and unfold the current Incident; in reality, the leading subject of the current Incident is not Japan's capitalist forces. Therefore, the fundamental reason why the current Incident does not conclude as such capitalist imperialist aggression lies here. <66>

Japanese capitalism, even before its economic development reached maturity, while still harboring vigorous energy within its body, became completely deadlocked ("行詰ル" - ikizumaru) and powerless in its domestic political and ideological path. This point is a peculiarity unique to Japan; this is the individuality and tradition of the Japanese national society. This peculiarity is the foundation of Japanese national society in any historical era. That is, the tradition of the special bond between the Imperial Household (皇室) and the people (國民) is the center and pivot of national life in any historical society of Japan. There is no way to understand Japan disregarding this point. In all significant transformations of state and national life, such as cultural reforms, the Meiji Restoration (明治維新), and today's Innovation, the Japanese individuality and tradition, moreover, seek the source of all driving force in the special relationship between the Imperial Household and the people.

The Japanese tradition and individuality possess an essence that repels all democratic, liberal, individualistic, and capitalist ways of life. The Imperial Way ideology (皇道思想) and Imperial Subject ideology (皇民思想) are fundamentally incompatible with the capitalist social order.

Therefore, Japanism, the Japanese spirit (日本精神), originally opposes capitalism. At today's historical stage, to truly defend Japanese individuality, tradition, cultural superiority, and the development of the Japanese nation, Japan must necessarily start its self-innovation from the negation of capitalism. Furthermore, to plan the prosperity of the Japanese nation-state that has negated capitalism, continental, East Asian development, rather than imperialism, is an indispensable condition as the necessary direction for its political, economic, and cultural development. The expanding Japanese nation must inevitably seek its economic needs and the establishment of an autarkic (아우타루키적) economy on the continent, and carrying this out requires the cooperative union of East Asian peoples politically and culturally. From these points, Japan's Innovation is placed in an inseparable relationship with the establishment of the East Asian Cooperative Body's New Order. However, the governance (經綸) of East Asia is also possible for capitalist Japan, but that requires it to be imperialistic. Being imperialistic externally requires being capitalist domestically, which, as mentioned before, is impossible due to the domestic anti-capitalist conditions.

The points above are the reason why continental management is part of the concrete process of Innovation, and why the New Order in East Asia must be placed on an anti-capitalist foundation.

Therefore, the New Order in East Asia is not an order of conquest, nor an order of domination, but a cooperative order (協同秩序) based on the co-existence and co-prosperity of peoples, a guiding order (指導秩序). Consequently, its political form, economic form, and cultural form will naturally not be capitalist, imperialistic, or conquering. That is, <67> the autonomous interests of the various national societies encompassed within the New East Asian Order should be respected, and their individuality, traditions, and cultures should likewise be respected. However, it is thought that this autonomy should be recognized only within the limit that all these elements are developmentally unified into the newly forming East Asian ideology, East Asian tradition, and East Asian culture. The East Asian ideology mentioned here is a nascent ideology currently in the process of formation. It cannot be a handicraft produced now by attempting an unfounded synthesis of concepts through forced interpretation (牽强附會的). As it is something generated, developed, and crystallized from the intertwined unification of the real lives of the East Asian peoples, it belongs to the category of the future. The only point for us to consider here is that whether it be East Asian ideology, East Asian culture, or its tradition, none of them involve retroactively gathering the old cultural remnants scattered in the past or present lives of various peoples—Chinese, Manchurian, Mongolian, Japanese, etc. At the same time, unconditional rejection of Western things should not be made the condition for creating East Asian culture and thought. The attitude towards creating the New East Asian Culture must be progressive and creative throughout; it must be the unified crystallization of the given new life culture. However, here too, a subject is necessary. In that sense, it can be anticipated that the culture of the Japanese nation will inevitably become the embryonic disc (胚盤) of the New East Asian culture. This is because within today's Japanese national culture, more abundantly, appropriately, and rationally than in that of any other Asian nation, various parts of past Asian culture are preserved, protected, and alive in a modern way with unity (albeit Japanese unity). However, even such Japanese culture itself must be released (*放牧* - *lit. 'put out to pasture', fig. 'exposed/allowed to grow'*) into the new environment and further nurtured and developed by the cultures of those (*爾* - *archaic 'you/those'*) other peoples. The case of East Asian ideology is also identical. Even if today's Japanese spirit holds the position of the guiding principle for innovating Japanese national society, it is difficult for it to be fully understood and accepted by China or other peoples. Moreover, as the guiding principle for the life of the cooperative East Asian peoples, it cannot be unconditionally applied. Today's Japanese spirit, or Japanism, must possess a more modernized, universal system. For peoples other than the Japanese, it is so traditional, emotional, and blood-based (血液的) that it is impossible to grasp and understand through intellect.

Furthermore, the world-historical significance of the New East Asian Order is that it shows a new direction regarding traditional worldism (世界主義). The abstractness of traditional worldism is that it is capitalist. Marxist worldism is the same, especially in the latter case, its abstractness has often been concealed because it has an appearance and system different from concrete reality. The East Asian Cooperative Body is a significant correction to that, bestowing a concrete system upon the New Worldism, and making a decisive contribution to rebuilding the world order.

Based on the observations above, such internal relevance and interaction are at play between the New East Asian Order and Japan's Innovation, so they cannot be observed separately using an identification method. Therefore, the culturally brilliant New Order of East Asia, the New Order of East Asia that promises happiness to the East Asian peoples, is an issue to be decided contingent upon (*相俟하야*) the success of Japan's domestic Innovation. <68>

**Summary**

This collection of editorials argues for Korea's place within Japan's vision of a "New Order in East Asia" or "East Asian Cooperative Body," written shortly after Japan's significant military victories in China in late 1938. Kim Myŏngsik critiques Western imperialism and Chinese nationalism (Sun Yat-sen's Three Principles), rejecting Fascism as well, and proposes a new "Idealism" combining democracy, collectivism, and humanism as the guiding ideology, emphasizing Korea's role as a harmonizer. In Chŏngsik counters Mao Zedong's view of the war, asserting Japan's inevitable victory and the dawn of a "protracted construction" phase. He strongly advocates for *Naesŏn Ilch'e* (Japan-Korea Unification), arguing it's necessary for both Japan's continental strategy (Korea as a logistics base) and Korean prosperity, citing economic benefits and growing popular support among Koreans. Cha Chaejŏng links the establishment of the New East Asian Order to Japan's own internal "Innovation" (革新), arguing this innovation must be anti-capitalist and rooted in the unique Japanese spirit (Emperor-centric), which will then guide the cooperative, non-imperialistic order for East Asia's co-prosperity.

For historians, these texts offer a valuable window into the collaborationist discourse among Korean intellectuals during the height of Japanese militarism. They reveal attempts to rationalize Japanese expansionism, frame it as anti-Western and progressive, and articulate a vision for Korea's survival and supposed advancement through complete assimilation (*Naesŏn Ilch'e*) and active participation in Japan's imperial project. The detailed arguments about economic benefits, the critique of alternative ideologies (Chinese nationalism, communism, fascism), and the emphasis on Japanese spirit as the foundation for the new order provide insight into the pressures, rationalizations, and aspirations within a segment of Korean society under colonial rule.

**Named Entities**

Original Form	Hangul/Kana	English Translation or Romanization
金明植	김명식	Kim Myŏngsik
印貞植	인정식	In Chŏngsik
車載貞	차재정	Cha Chaejŏng
東亞	동아	East Asia
朝鮮	조선	Korea (Chosŏn)
帝國	제국	Empire (of Japan)
第三國	제삼국	Third Country
支那	지나	China (Shina)
英國	영국	Britain
埃及	애급	Egypt
埃及領土인스탄	애급영토인스탄	Sudan (Egyptian Territory Sudan - likely refers to Anglo-Egyptian Sudan)
滿洲國	만주국	Manchukuo
歐洲	구주	Europe
印	인	India
國士	국사	Land/Country (used contextually for China's territory)
부리안	부리안	Briand (Aristide Briand)
孫文	손문	Sun Yat-sen
英米佛	영미불	Britain, America, France
獨	독	Germany
伊	이	Italy
杉森孝次郞	스기모리 고지로	Sugimori Kōjirō
日本評論	니혼효론	Nippon Hyōron (magazine)
毛澤東	모택동	Mao Zedong
廣東	광동	Guangdong (Canton)
武漢	무한	Wuhan
蘭州	난주	Lanzhou
北京	북경	Beijing
天津	천진	Tianjin
上海	상해	Shanghai
蘇州	소주	Suzhou
杭州	항주	Hangzhou
黃河	황하	Yellow River
長江	장강	Yangtze River
中華	중화	China (Chunghwa)
中國共産黨	중국공산당	Chinese Communist Party
마드-리드	마드리드	Madrid
重慶	중경	Chongqing
昆明	곤명	Kunming
蔣介石	장개석	Chiang Kai-shek
改造	가이조	Kaizō (magazine)
池田藏相	이케다	Finance Minister Ikeda (Ikeda Seihin)
近衛首相	고노에	Prime Minister Konoe (Konoe Fumimaro)
日滿支	일만지	Japan-Manchuria-China
火野軍曺	히노	Sergeant Hino (Hino Ashihei)
麥と兵隊	보리와 병대	Wheat and Soldiers (Mugi to Heitai)
亞細亞	아세아	Asia
咸南	함남	Hamnam (Province)
北支	북지	North China
鈴木正文	스즈키 마사후미	Suzuki Masafumi
朝鮮經濟의 現段階	조선경제의 현단계	The Current Stage of the Korean Economy
南總督	미나미 총독	Governor-General Minami (Minami Jirō)
尹致昊氏	윤치호씨	Mr. Yun Ch'iho
長鼓峰	장고봉	Changkufeng (Lake Khasan)
大正 8年	대정 8년	Taishō 8 (1919)
大邱	대구	Taegu
黃州	황주	Hwangju
元山	원산	Wonsan
鎭南浦	진남포	Chinnamp'o
平南	평남	P'yŏngnam (Province)
龍岡	용강	Yonggang
滿洲	만주	Manchuria
昭和 12年	소화 12년	Shōwa 12 (1937)
昭和 21年	소화 21년	Shōwa 21 (1946)
鮮滿拓殖會社	선만척식회사	Korea-Manchuria Colonization Company
重石	중석	Tungsten
水鉛	수연	Molybdenum (likely, though literally 'water lead')
硫化鐵	유화철	Pyrite (Iron Sulfide)
皇室	황실	Imperial Household (Japanese)
國民	국민	People/Nation/Subjects (esp. of the Emperor)
226事件	226사건	February 26 Incident (1936)
高麗	고려	Koryŏ (Used poetically for Korea)
武漢 3鎭	무한 3진	The Three Towns of Wuhan
九個國條約	9개국조약	Nine-Power Treaty
蒙古	몽고	Mongolia
明治維新	명치유신	Meiji Restoration
皇道思想	황도사상	Imperial Way ideology
皇民思想	황민사상	Imperial Subject ideology
日本精神	일본정신	Japanese Spirit
콤민테룬	코민테른	Comintern

**Glossary**

Original Word	Standard Hangul	English Explanation
協同體	협동체	Cooperative Body/Community
進出	진출	Advance/Expansion
建設	건설	Construction/Building
方針	방침	Policy/Course of action
植民地	식민지	Colony
聲明	성명	Statement/Declaration
聯邦	연방	Federation/Federal Union
意識	의식	Consciousness/Ideology
民族主義	민족주의	Nationalism
揚棄	양기	Sublation (Philosophical term: negate yet preserve/transcend); older usage/spelling for 지양(止揚)
調和役	조화역	Harmonizing role/Mediator
蝙蝠生活	편복생활	Bat-like existence (Figurative: opportunistic, wavering between sides)
파시즘	파시즘	Fascism
獨裁	독재	Dictatorship
排他	배타	Exclusionary/Exclusive
理想主義	이상주의	Idealism
데모구라시	데모크라시	Democracy (Older transliteration)
고렉띄브	콜렉티브	Collective (Older transliteration)
휴매니즘	휴머니즘	Humanism (Older transliteration)
支那事變	지나사변	China Incident (Japanese term for the Second Sino-Japanese War)
持久戰	지구전	Protracted war
陷落	함락	Fall/Capture (of a city)
敗北	패배	Defeat
盟主	맹주	Leader of an alliance/Hegemon
共存共榮	공존공영	Co-existence and co-prosperity
뿌럭경제	블록경제	Bloc economy (Transliteration of 'bloc')
內鮮一體	내선일체	"Interior [Japan] and Korea as One Body"; Policy of assimilation
兵站基地	병참기지	Logistics base/Supply base
國民的 自覺	국민적 자각	National consciousness/awakening (as subjects of the Empire)
革新勢力	혁신세력	Innovation forces/Reformist forces (Often referring to right-wing/militarist groups in 1930s Japan)
紐帶	뉴대	Bond/Link/Tie (Older form of 유대)
半封建的	반봉건적	Semi-feudal
過剩人口	과잉인구	Surplus population
獨占資本	독점자본	Monopoly capital
産業豫備軍	산업예비군	Industrial reserve army
農工倂進	농공병진	Parallel development of agriculture and industry
治安	치안	Public order/Security
徵兵制	징병제	Conscription system/Draft
志願兵制度	지원병제도	Volunteer soldier system
義務敎育制	의무교육제	Compulsory education system
內地延長主義	내지연장주의	Policy of extending mainland (Japan's) systems to colonies
普通選擧制	보통선거제	Universal suffrage system
府縣制	부현제	Prefecture system (Applying Japan's administrative divisions)
新秩序	신질서	New Order
傀儡	괴뢰	Puppet
驅逐	구축	Expulsion/Driving out
콤민테룬	코민테른	Comintern (Communist International)
묵은	묵은	Old/Stale (Older spelling/form)
結縳	결박	Binding/Tying up/Fetters
破棄	파기	Abrogation/Discarding/Destruction
아우타루키	아우타르키	Autarky (Economic self-sufficiency)
經綸	경륜	Governance/Administration/Grand plan/Statesmanship
되여	되어	Becoming/To be (Older spelling)
하야	하여	Doing/To do (Older spelling)
우에	위에	On/Above (Older spelling)
밧그로	밖으로	Outwardly (Older spelling)
갓거니와	같거니와	Like/As well as (Older spelling)
몃	몇	Several/Some (Older spelling)
끗까지	끝까지	To the end/Completely (Older spelling)
세음	셈	Count/Calculation (Used here idiomatically: 'it amounts to'/'means')
올나섰다	올라섰다	To rise up/Stand on (Older spelling)
노여저	놓여져	To be placed/Situated (Older spelling)
무력해젖다	무력해졌다	To become powerless/Weakened (Older spelling)
위하야는	위하여는	For the sake of (Older spelling)
하드래도	하더라도	Even if/Although (Older spelling)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제11권 제1호
발행일	1939년 01월 01일
기사제목	東亞協同體와 朝鮮
필자	金明植 印貞植 車載貞
기사형태	논설

東亞協同體와 朝鮮
						金明植 印貞植 車載貞
建設意識과 大陸進出
金明植
帝國의 주도하에 新東亞建設問題는 발서 이론의 시기를 지나서 실현의 第1段階에 이르렀다. 물론 이제 오히려 第3國의 방해가 있고 또 상대방의 抗戰이 끈치지 아니하야 新東亞 建設에 많은 난관이 있는 것은 부정할 수 없는 일이지마는 그러나 이미 군사적으로 승리하고 또 정치적으로 支那의 면목을 一變케하야 경제적 基礎工作이 전개됨과 함께 문화적으로 新生活의 협동이 실현되고 있으니 이것은 어느 상대방에서 질겨하지 아니 하야도 또는 어느 第3國에서 陰으로 陽으로 阻止하야도 帝國의 旣定方針과 같이 실현될 것은 煩言할 필요가 없다. 그리고 帝國의 旣定方針이 支那本部로 하야곰 第2滿洲國을 맨듬에 있지 아니한 것은 帝國정부의 累累聲明한 바와 갓거니와 만일 前世紀에 있어서 英國이 埃及에 對함과 같은 정책을 取한다 하면 新東亞協同體의 건설문제는 생길 수 없고 支那의 영토의 대부분이 帝國의 殖民地가 되는 것 뿐이다. 즉 <48>前世紀에 있어서 英國은 埃及에 침입하야 埃及보다 광대한 埃及領土인스탄은 저의 殖民地를 맨들고 埃及은 보호국을 맨들엇다가 大戰 後에 형식상의 독립을 許하였는데 이때에 있어서는 征服被征服關係가 있었을 뿐이오 互相協同의 자주성은 전혀 拒否되였다. 그런데 帝國政府에서는 支那에 대한 영토적 야심이 없는 것을 멫번이나 聲明하고 또 실제에 있어서 군사적으로 점령한 지역을 永久占有하야 일종의 殖民地를 맨들려 함과 같은 일이 없을 뿐만 아니라 帝國의 指導下에 支那의 新政權을 조직하고 있다. 그러므로 新東亞의 協同體問題가 나온 것이오 또 이 協同體가 완성됨으로 말미암아 帝國의 對支政策이 前世紀의 英國의 對 埃及政策과 근본적으로 다른 것이 사실로 판명될 것이다.
그리고 新支那建設問題에 있어서는 聯邦說이 유력한 모양인데 이것은 英國의 對印政策과 같이 分治方針에서 나온 것이 아니냐하는 一派의 의심도 없지 아니 하겠지마는 國士가 廣*하고 또 교통기관이 발달되지 아니한 것과 그우에 역사적의 自治制度 밋 思想을 상고할 것 같으면 혹은 과도기적 형태로 해서 聯邦組織이 현실에 合한 것이 아닌가고 생각한다. 그리하야 발전의 어느 단계에 이르러서 單一國家로 개조하는 것이 보다 더 능률적이 되리라고 밋는다. 물론 부리안의 有爲한 歐洲聯邦案은 하나의 공상에 끈치고 말았지마는 以上과 같이 되면 新東亞의 聯邦問題는 人類史에 있어서 新紀元을 지을 것다. 그러므로 이제 우리는 新東亞協同體의 건설에 대하야 특별한 관심과 열의를 가지고 그에 적극적으로 참가하에 新運命의 第一步를 開拓치 안으면 아니될 것이다.
그런데 新東亞를 건설함에 當하야 第一 緊急한 것은 新建設의 指針이 되고 圖案이 될만한 의식의 확립에 있다. 그리고 지금까지의 많은 정치가, 학자, 논객, 실제가 등의 건설의식은 물론 議論이 區區할 뿐이오 수긍할만한 세계관의 체계하에 확립한 의식을 발견할 수 없는 것은 一大遺憾이다. 그리고 그것이 확립되지 아니하면 소위 孫文의 三民主義를 揚棄할 수 없고 또 그것이 揚棄되지 안는 한에는 新東亞建設은 中途半斷이 될 염려가 없지 아니하니 이 新建設을 위하야 朝鮮民衆 먼저 건설의식으로써 공헌하지 아니하면 아니할 것이다. 첫재 朝鮮民衆은 日支兩民族間에서 調和役으로 나타나야 할 것은 물론이어니와 이 임무를 다함에 있어서 兩民族의 오해를 사는 일이 있는 것은 종래의 사실이 입증하는 바이오 또 그 까닭에 지금까지의 우리의 활동이 跼踳하야 노상 蝙蝠生活을 일삼지 아니 할 수 없었든 것은 어느 시기에 있어서 정세의 피할 수 없는 <49> 일이라 할는지 모르나 만일 그와 같은 현실이 앞으로도 解消되지 아니하면 우리의 생활은 從來와 다를 것이 없을 것이다. 따라서 우리는 新東亞建設에 기여함이 있지 못할 것이니 그리되면 다음 新東亞聯邦問題가 생긴다하야도 우리의 처지는 얼마나 好轉되지 아니할 것이다.
여기서 이제 우리는 新東亞建設意識을 제시할 필요가 있는대 그러함에는 먼저 三民主義를 검토치 아니하면 아니될 것이다. 그러나 이 小論에서 그는 가능한 일이 아니니 그의 개념만 論難하겠다. 그런데 三民主義의 民族, 民權은 近代國家意識이오 民生은 社會主義意識이니 이 兩個意識이 單一觀念을 형성할 수 없는 것은 말할 필요도 없고 또 近代國家의 民族思想과 民權觀念은 이제 어느 國家社會에 있어서도 (그것은 英米佛 등도 예외가 되지 안는다) 變改하고 말았으니 이러한 過去思想이 新東亞의 의식이 될 수 없는 것은 또 되여서는 아니될 것은 알기 쉬운 일이다. 그러면 파시즘이 新建設의 圖案이 될 것이냐 하면 그것은 파시즘의 國國家意識을 이해하는 者로서는 누구나 肯定치 아니 할 것이다.
물론 最近 獨伊兩國이 歐洲의 沈滯한 현상을 打破함에 있어서 그 國家意識이 원동력이 될 것은 누구도 모르는 바 아니지마는 그러나 그것이 新歐洲의 建設意識이 될 수 없는 것은 國家的 獨裁思想과 民族的 排他觀念이 입증하는 바이오. 더구나 東亞의 현실에 있어서 그러한 國家思想이나 民族觀念으로 新建設의 圖案을 삼는다하면 그것은 孫文의 三民主義가 新建設의 장해물이 되는 것보다 더 큰 장해물이 될 것이니 그러므로 新建設에 대한 관심을 가진 者는 특히 이러한 의식을 경계치 아니하면 아니될 것이다.
그러므로 우에서도 말하였거니와 支那事變이 發勃한 후 정치가, 實際家 學者 등의 이 新建設에 대한 이론이 만이 論難되였으나 이제 오히려 일정한 의식이 확립되지 못하야 한갓 政府宣言의 몃 가지 방침으로 建設方略을 삼고 나가는 모양이니 이 政府宣言은 현장을 수습하는 便法이 될 것 뿐이오 新建設意識이 될 수 없는 것이다. 그리고 학자의 論策 중에는 日本評論 11월호 소재 杉森孝次郞의 문화정책의 확립에」라는 논문이 新建設에 대한 세계관의 체계를 세우려고 노력하였으나 오즉 三民主義를 배격함에 끈치고 新建設의 구체적 의식을 提示치 못한 것은 龍頭蛇尾의 憾이 없지 않다.
그런데 이제 나는 遠方에서 시급한 주문을 바다 내의 생각한 바 新建設意識을 兩論할 시간의 餘裕가 없으나 그 대략을 <50>말하면 理想主義의 新形態인데 정치적으로 데모구라시와 경제적으로 고렉띄브와 사회적으로 휴매니즘을 集結調和하야 單一 觀念으로 조직한 것이니 理想主義는 新東亞를 건설함에 완전무결한 의식이 되리라고 생각한다. 첫재 정치적으로 레오구라시를 실현하야 박그로 獨裁意識을 排斥함과 함께 앞으로 孫文의 民族主義와 民權主義를 揚棄기고 또 경제적으로 크래티브를 실현하야 民主主義의 조잡한 견해를 指彈하는 동시에 資本主義의 식욕을 견제하고 共産主義의 공상을 수정할 것이다. 그리하야 사회적으로 휴매니즘을 실현함으로써 人文의 발전을 기도하야 萬邦이 協和하는 端緖를 지을 것이다. 그리고 이 理想主義가 우리로 하야곰 日支兩民族間에서 調和役의 임무을 수행케 함에 좋은 의식이 될 것은 말할 필요도 없다. 그러므로 이제 우리는 먼저 이 理想主義에 대한 깊은 造階를 가지고 新東亞의 建設運動에 참가하지 아니하면 아니될 것이다. 그러하야 정치적으로는 레모구라시를 兩民族에게 선전하고 경제적으로는 코텍리브를 사회적으로는 휴매니즘을 주장하야 저들로 하야곰 그로써 協和萬邦하는 意識윤삼게하면 우리의 진로는 스스로 열릴 것이오. 그와 동시에 우리의 新東亞 그리고 新世界建設에 대한 貢獻은 史上에 赫赫할 것이다.
「우리는 일즉 서구의 사상에 질서에 배우고 이미 그것을 우리의 것을 맨들었다. 우리는 물론 그것을 いろは로부터 배웠으나 우리는 서구에서 배우기 전에 이미 우리는 우리의 문화와 사상과 전통을 가지고 있었다. 우리는 다못 서구문화를 戰取한 것만이 아니다. 그것을 우리의 流儀로 바다드러 東方化하고 또 東方化함에 의하야 하나의 새것을 창조하려한다」 (日本評論 12월호 社說) 원래 西歐文化와 東方文化를 대립시킬 필요도 없거니와 그리함으로써 新建設의 의식이 나오지 안는 것은 以上의 言論으로 알 수 있다. 그리고 新建設意識은 東方的의 것이 되여도 아니될 것이오. 서구적의 것이 되여도 아니될 것은 세계성을 가진 新建設의 本質로 보아 단언할 수 있다. 그림으로 그것은 東方的인 동시에 西歐的이오 그리하야 世界的이 되지 아니하면 아니될 것이다. 그리고 以上의 言論이 너무도 抽象的인 것은 엇지 되였든지 그로써 孫文의 三民主義를 揚棄할 수 없는 것은 觀念哲學이 실제사실을 움직기지 못하는 것과 다르지 아니할 것이니 그러므로 新東亞建設의 의식을 論함에 當하야 지역적으로 東方的의 것과 西歐的의 것과를 분별하는 것보다 시대적으로 超地域的의 의식을 발견치 아니하면 아니될 것이다. 그리고 西歐的의 것을 東方化한다고 西歐意識이 揚棄되지 아니할 것은 무엇보다도 <51> 東方文化의 後進性이 입증하는 바이어니와 지역적으로 西歐的인 것을 기피하는 것이 아니오 時代意識으로해서 그의 超時代性을 부정하는 것이니 말하자면 그것은 超地域的의 時代意識을 闡明하기 위한 노력이 아니면 아니될 것이다.
그리하야 그로써 新東亞建設의 의식을 삼는 동시에 나가서 世界建設의 首途에 서지 아니하면 아니될 것이다. 그리고 그러한 의식으로 해서 우에서 말한 理想主義는 원래 西歐와 東方을 초월한 時代意識이 될 수 있으니 新東亞의 協同體를 건설함에 있어서 그것이 실현될 계기가 전개될 것은 필연한 理勢이다.

東亞의 再編成과 朝鮮人

印貞植
中國共産黨의 最高領袖 毛澤東은 『持久戰을 論한다』는 장편의 논문에 잇어서 日支戰爭의 全展望을 3개의 계단으로 구분하였다. 그리하야
『第一을 階段있 適의 戰略이 進攻이고 我의 戰略이 방어의 시기이며 第二의 階段으 適의 戰略이 수세이고 我의 戰略이 반공준비의 시기이며 第三의 階段은 我의 戰略이 반공이고 適의 戰略이 퇴각시기』(改造 10월 특대호 참조)라고 말하였다.
그리고 다시 毛澤東은 이 第一階段에 있어서의 『適의 企圖는 廣東, 武漢, 蘭州의 三地點을 占據한 후 이 三地點을 연계하는대 있다』라고 설명하였다.
그러나 主觀과 希望을 떠나서 객관적 정세를 냉정히 파악하려는 如何한 支那人도 毛澤東의 처방한 이 日支戰爭의 運勢判斷書에 대해서 최대의 疑訝를 품지 않을 수 없을 것이다. 北京과 天津 上海와 廣東, 蘇州와 杭州 등, 해안선에 沿한 중요도시가 皇軍의 손에 모조리 陷落되고 黃河流域과 長江一帶의 制覇가 帝國의 지배 하에 완전히 거두어진 今日廣東, 武漢, 蘭州의 三地點이 <52> 다시 완전히 占據되고 말었으니 이로서 帝國은 全支那의 中原에 覇를 부르게된 것이다.
中原에 覇를 制하는 者, 全中華를 거둘 수 있다』는 것은 과거 반만년간의 全支那 정치사를 통해서 一貫되여온 기본원칙이였다. 無常하게 轉變하여온 王道와 覇道의 全系列도 모다 이 기본원칙에 순응해서만 起伏될 수 있었다. 아무리 현대의 支那가 경제적으로 정치적으로 統一된 집권적인 근대적 기구를 가지지 못했다 할지라도 이미 皇軍의 손에 점령된 지역은 실로 現代支那의 心臟部를 구성하는 근대적인 의미에 있어서의 中原의 地帶라는 사실을 거부할 수는 없을 것이다.
물론 毛澤東 등 中國共産黨의 이론가들이 항상 강조하는 바와 같이 현대 支那에는 아직도 自作自給的일 半封建的인 경제요소가 多分히 殘存하고 있다. 『아미-바』와 한 모양으로 어느 부분을 절단하드래도 고 부분만으로서 생활할 수 있다는 것이 이 半封建的인 경제관계의 傳統的일 執着力이다. 그러나 이러한 사실은 결코 中原의 地帶를 빼았긴 것이 抗日支那의 今後의 抗戰力에 대한 치명적일 타격이 된다는 것을 부정할 수가 있는 논거는 되지 못한다.
武漢이 함락된 직후 毛澤東은 亡命途上, 外人記者와의 「일터-뷰」에 있어서 『日本軍이 점거한 지역은 아직 全支那의 3분의 1도 못된다. 남은 3분의 2는 抗日政權의 지배하에 있다. 이것은 今後의 抗戰의 築源地이며 根據地이다... 최후의 승리는 中國의 側에 빛나고 있다』라고 敗戰의 醜態를 교묘하게 辯護하기에 노력하였다.
그러나 문제는 皇軍의 손에 거두어진 지역이 全支那의 3분의 1를 점하느냐 못 하느냐 하는대 있는 것이 아니고 다시 말하면 占據된 지역의 廣狹性 如何에 있는 것이 아니고 이 지역의 경제적, 정치적 중요성 如何에 있는 것이다. 漢口를 『마드-리드』로 化하려든 그들 抗日首領들이 이 武漢조차 상실하였다는 것은 아무리 보아도 그들에 대한 치명적인 타격이 아닐 수 없다.
重慶으로 昆明으로 오직 逃避와 退却의 길을 고밥비였을 뿐일 今日의 抗日政權은 그들의 豪言大語에도 불구하고 한 개의 地方政權에 불과하게 되였다는 것을 아무도 否認할 수가 없을 것이다.
蔣介石은 최근 『中國國民에 告하는 書』(改造 12월호)라는 宣傳文에 있어서 今後의 抗日戰의 주요전략은 內線作戰이다」라는 것을 각별히 강조하였다. 그러나 소위, 유격전이란 것이 如何히 巧妙한 戰法이라 할지라도 의기를 상실한 아무 聯絡도 없는 敗殘兵의 蠢動을 가지고서 失地를 回收할 수가 있다는 것은 너무도 무모하게 大膽한 論理가 아니면 안된다. <53>
그러므로 要컨대 武漢의 함락은 그들 抗日政權에 대한 最後의 결정적인 타격이 안일 수 없다. 이로서 전쟁은 支那側으로 보아서나 帝國의 便으로 보아서나 확실히 새로운 階段에로 轉入하고 있다.
爲先 支那側으로 살펴보자.
毛澤東은 다시 武漢 陷落 直後의 前記 「인터-뷰」에 있어서 『전쟁은 지금에야 第1階段에서 第2階段에로 다시 말하면 防禦의 시기에서 反攻準備의 시기에로 전입하고 있다』라고 言明하였다. 그러나 이 豪語를 신용할만한 우둔한 두뇌의 소유자가 과연 한 사람일들 이 세계에 있을 수 있는 지가 의문이다.
전쟁이 支那側으로 보아서도 새로운 階段에로 드러가고 있는 것만은 사실이다. 그러나 그것은 敗戰에서 勝戰에로 防禦에서 反攻에로 나가는 階段이 아니고 漸次的 退却에서 決定的 敗戰에로 轉落되는 階段이며 全國的 統一政權에서 한 개의 地方政權에로 失墮되는 致命的인 階段이외에 아무 것도 아니다.
이 同一한 과정을 다시 帝國의 側에서 考察하여보자.
武漢이 함락된 직후 蔣介石과 毛澤東이 前記와 같은 抑制소리를 되푸리하고 있을 때 池田藏相은 明治節의 담화에 있어서 『武漢攻略은 今次事變所期의 目的達成上 중요한 一階段을 劃한다』라고 말하였다. 과연 新階段이란 무엇이냐. 다시 同聲明에 의하면 『日滿支3國의 相携에 정치, 경제, 문화 등 各般에 亘하야 互相連環의 관계를 수립하는 것으로 根幹을 삼는다』라고 설명되였다. 다시 말하면 從來의 長期戰爭에서 今後의 長期建設에로의 移行이 곳 新階段의 특징을 형성한다. 池田藏相의 이 聲明과 同日에 近衛首相도 또한 라듸오 방송에 있어서 同樣의 의미를 말하야 今後의 長期建設에 관해서 全國民의 留意을 족한 일이 있다. 물론 今後의 長期建設에로의 이행이란 것은 抗日政權에 대한 應戰의 終熄을 의미하는 바는 절대로 아니다.
『蔣政權을 상대로 안한다』는 근본방침과』 抗日政權의 根絶을 期한다』는 國策的 目標는 끗까지 달성되고야 말 것이며 또 이것이 달성되기까지에는 *懲戰은 그대로 계속된 것이다. 그러므로 長期建設에로의 移行이란 것은 應戰의 持續과 아울러 武漢이 함락된 今後의 全國策이 새로운 건설에로 다시 말하면 東亞의 新秩序의 建設-東亞協同體의 결성에로 보담 무거운 중점을 두게 된다는 것을 의미함에 불과하다. <54>
요컨대 長期建設이란 것은 日本帝國을 唯一絶對의 盟主로 하는 東亞의 再編成을 말하는 것이다. 東亞의 再編成이란 무엇을 의미하느냐.
첫재로 경제적 의미의 東亞再編成이란 것은 東亞 各 民族의 共存共榮을 基調로 하는 日滿支 『뿌럭』경제의 확립을 내용으로 하는 것이며.
둘재로 정치적일 의미의 東亞再編成이란 것은 이러한 경제적 목표를 확보하기 위한 東亞協同體 혹은 東亞聯邦體의 결성을 말하는 것이다. 물론 이러한 東亞協同體란 것은 白人의 帝國主義에 의한 東亞의 침략을 근본적으로 배제한다. 그러나 그것은 白人의 帝國主義的 침략을 배제하는 것이며 白人 그 자체를 배제하는 것은 절대로 아닐 것이다. 또 東亞協同體의 사상은 抗日支那의 『내쇼날리즘을 超克하는 계기를 포함하는 동시에 추상적일 『터인*쇼날리즘』과도 대립된다. 그러나 그것은 그러타고 해서 全東亞를 들어 東亞孤立主義 東亞몬로-主義 지방적 閉鎖主義 지방적 便宜主義에 封鎖해 버리러는 것도 아니다. 全東亞를 들어 한 개의 경제적, 정치적 단위로 결성하려는 것은 한 개의 협동체로의 全東亞가 한 개의 단위로서 全世界史의 前進에 향하여 적극적으로 참가하고 기여한다는 것을 의미할 뿐이다.
다시 이를 문화적으로 고찰한다면 歐羅巴의 문명에 대해서 全傳統과 全成長을 달리하는 東亞民族共通의 문화를 확보하며 또 발전성장케 하려는데 있다. 東亞協同體에 賦與된 이러한 문화적 사명은 결코 歐羅巴文明의 도입을 無條件하고 배제하려는 것은 아니다. 東亞의 고유한 문화를 基抵로 해서만 歐羅巴의 文明을 선택하고 또 攝取하려는데 있을 뿐이다.
그러므로 그것은 歐羅巴文明의 無批判的 模倣을 배제할뿐 아니라 다시 歐羅巴문명에 대립하는 東亞的 封鎖主義에도 대립된다.
要컨대 경제적으로 정치적으로 또 문화적으로 이러한 空前의 위대한 사명을 수행하려는 것이 今後의 長期建設의 과제가 아니면 안된다. 또 今日의 支那事變이 帝國의 側으로 보아서 한 개의 역사적인 聖戰이라는 이유도 여기에 있는 것이다.
黃河와 長江의 유역에는 幾萬의 英靈이 光榮에 싸히여 고요히 잠들고 있다. 그들은 결코 침략의 병사가 아니였다. 그들의 피는 오직 東亞의 행복과 繁榮을 위해서만 흘려진 것이며 그들의 고귀한 희생은 오직 東亞新秩序의 확립에 의해서만 代償될 <55>수 있을 것이다.
『동방의 새로운 戰場을 향해서 炎天에 쬐이면서 黃廑에 싸히여 진군하여 나아간다. 나는 이 풍경을 비할데 없이 아름답게 늣겼다. 나는 이 進軍에서 타올르는 위대한 힘을 느겼다. 脉脉이 흘러넘치는 힘찬 波潮를 느겼다』라고 戰場에선 火野軍曺는 『麥과兵隊』에서 말하였다. 우리는 이 脉脉이 흘러넘치는 힘찬 波潮 속에서 日本民族의 위대하기 짝이 없는 莊嚴한 創造力을 보지 않을 수가 없다.
이 위대하기 짝이 없는 역사적 창조력이 今後의 長期建設의 과제로서 前記와 같은 東亞新秩序의 문제를 제시하였다.
亞細亞의 모든 民族과 같이 우리 朝鮮의 民衆도 이처럼 새로히 결성될 東亞의 新秩序 다시 말하면 東亞協同體의 완성을 전제로 하고서만 今後의 民族적 운명을 논하지 않으면 안되게 되였다. 그러므로 今日의 朝鮮人이 당면한 정치적 문제로서 이 東亞協同體의 題처럼 중요한 문제는 없을 것이다.
머지 않은 장래에 구현될 이 東亞協同體의 理想을 앞에 두고 우리는 우리들이 가장 사랑하여 마지 안는 朝鮮民衆의 今後의 방향을 如何히 규정하여야 할 것인가 문제는 여긔에 있다.
첫재로 東亞協同體의 理想은 民族主義 또는 맑스主義에 입각한 朝鮮의 장래관을 철저히 거부한다.
이 東亞協同體의 理想은 日本帝國의 臣民으로서의 충실한 임무를 다할때에만 朝鮮民衆에게생존과 繁榮과 행복을 약속하려 한다. 여긔에 朝鮮人의 운명예 관한 문제예 있어서의 넘을 수 없는 한계가 있는 것이다.
이 한계는 명백히 是認되지 않으면 않된다.
이처럼 東亞協同體의 理想은 今日의 朝鮮人의 운명에 관해서 심각한 關聯性을 가진다. 이 심각한 관련은 우리들 朝鮮人의 나아갈 唯一의 政治的 路線으로서 內鮮一體의 문제를 제시하고 있다.
나는 감히 斷言할 수가 있다. 今日의 朝鮮人 問題는 곧 內鮮一體 問題 이외에 아무것도 아니라는 것을, 웨 그러냐하면 內鮮一體 이외의 一切의 路線이 한 것 迷妄에 불과하다는 것이 명백히 제시되여 있으며 따라서 이 노선 이외에 아무 길도 남겨진 길이 없기 때문이다. <56>
나는 以下에 있어서 이 內鮮一體에 관한 나의 所信을 披瀝하여보고저 한다.
첫재로 문제는 많은 사람들이 懷疑하는 바 內鮮一體의 가능성 如何의 문제일다. 그런데 가능성 如何의 문제란 것은 적어도 한 개의 역사적 운동에 관한한 사회적 필연성의 如否의 문제에로 歸着되고 만다. 웨 그러냐하면 가능하다는 것은 반다시 사회적 필연성을 가젓을 때에만 가능한 것이며 또 필연적이란 것은 가능적이란 것을 의미하고 있기 때문이다.
이리하야 內鮮一體의 필연성을 논증함에 있어서 나는 다음과 같은 세 가지 契機에서 究明하려 한다.
첫재는 日本帝國의 東亞制覇 上 朝鮮이 占한 바 大陸兵站基地로서의 특수적 지위에서 抽出되는 獎機이며 둘재는 事變의 進展과 東亞協同體形成過程의 進展에 따라 加速度的으로 促成되는 朝鮮民衆의 국민적 자각과 大陸政策에로의 자발적, 적극적 협동의 契機이며 셋재는 明日의 정권을 「리-드」하려는 국내의 革新勢力의 대담하고 또 革新的인 국책에 대한 당연한 기대로부터 오는 契機일다.
이 세 가지의 契機는 서로 作用하고 또 서로 浸透하야 內鮮一體에 대한 民衆의 깊은 要望과 아울려 朝鮮民衆生活의 역사적인 變形을 齎來할 것이라고 나는 確信하여 마지 않는다.
첫재의 契機부터 考察하여 보자.
滿洲事變이래, 朝鮮에 課與된 경제적 사명은 「日滿경제뿔럭의 紐帶」로서의 지위이였다. 그러나 支那事變의 發勃을 계기로 하여 경제관계에 있어서의 전日本的 통제가 강렬히 요구됨에 따라 이 『日滿經濟뿔럭의 紐帶』라는 經濟指導原理가 내용에 있어서 너무나 架空的이란 것이 점차로 폭로되기 비롯하였다. 대체 어떠한 나라 어떠한 지역을 불구하고 그의 경제적 관계가 단순히 유대적 역할에만 종시하고 또 그것만을 主要使命으로 한다는 것은 실제적으로 존재할 수가 없는 것이다.
이리하야 支那事變을 계기로 朝鮮에 대한 『日滿經濟뿔럭의 紐帶』라는 표어는 大陸兵站基地라는 보담 구체적이고 統制經濟的이고 大陸政策的인 새로운 표어에로 변형되였다. 朝鮮이 日本帝國의 大陸政策에 있어서의 兵站基地라는 이유는 물론, 朝鮮이 占한 바 특수한 지리적 관계에 의해서 설명되는 바이지만 이 개념의 내용을 보담 詳細히 究明하여 본다면 다음과 같은 諸點이 列擧된다. <57>
(1) 朝鮮海峽 혹은 支那海를 건너서 군수품을 전선에 수송한다는 것은 將來戰의 규모가 클 것을 상상하여 尨大한 船*을 要하며 技術的으로도 多大한 困難을 伴한다. 支那事變에 있어서도 이미 어느 정도까지 이 사실이 입증되였다.
(2) 設使 船*에 있어서는 부족함이 없다할지라도 溍水艦, 비행기 등의 장래를 고려할 때 상당한, 위험을 각오하지 않을 수 없다.
(3) 이러한 점에서 將來戰에 있어서의 兵站的 역할을 內地에만 기대한다는 것은 適宜의 策이라고 할 수가 없다. 朝鮮, 滿洲, 北支 등을 비교하여 兵站基地로서의 優劣을 고려하여 볼 때 近代工業을 부식함에 있어서도 朝鮮이 기초적 조건이 가장 整備하고 있다. 滿洲國에는 重工業의 기초가 될만한 下請工業이 今日까지 발전된 바가 없지만 朝鮮에는 이미 어느 정도까지 발전되였다. 勞働者供給의 點으로도 朝鮮은 이미 敎育制度가 滿洲國에 비해서 수십년을 前進하였음으로 훨신 優良하다...』(鈴木正文 著『朝鮮經濟의 現段階』)
이러한 兵站基地로서의 역할은 다시 朝鮮의 一般民衆生活에 대해서 莫大한 영향을 齎來한다.
첫재로 重工業 특히 軍需工業히 급격히 발전됨에 따라 朝鮮社會의 내부적 모순이 완화된다. 朝鮮經濟機構의 기본적인 특징은 농업생산에 있어서의 半封建的인 경제관계가 아직도 뿌리깊게 殘存하고 있음에 反하여 공업생산에 있어서는 內地에 比해서도 오히려 高度構成을 가진 獨占資本이 지배적이라는데 있다. 그러나 아무리 高度구성을 가진 工業資本이라 할지라도 重工業 특히 軍需工業의 莫大한 발전의 경향은 朝鮮의 農村過剩人口을 도시에로 공장에로 충분히 흡수하기에 足하다.
近年 咸南地方의 重工業地帶에 있어서 노동자의 부족이 절실히 哀訴되고 있는 奇現象은 這間의 사정을 반영하는 반가운 일이다. 要컨대 重工業의 급격한 발전은 滿洲, 北支에로의 대량적 진출과 아울러 도시의 失業群像과 농촌의 과잉인구에 대해서 광대한 활로를 開拓한다.
둘재로 兵站基地로서의 使命을 다하기 위해서는 近代的으로 또 日本的으로 조직되고 훈련되고 교육받은 産業豫備軍의 대량적 존재가 필수조건이 된다. 이 점에 있어서 朝鮮은 滿洲國이나 北支에 비해서 약 20년이 압섰다고 朝한다. 이러한 관계가 滿洲國이나 北支가 大陸戰線에 보담 近在함에도 불구하고 朝鮮을 當面의 가장 중요한 兵站基地로 선택케한 요인이 되는 것이다.
근대적 공장의 노동능률의 비교에 의하면 朝鮮에서도 小學敎育을 받은 따라서 국어를 해득하는 노동자가 국어를 해득치 못하는 <58> 노동자에 비해서 2할 내지 3할의 능률이 높다 한다. 그런데 總督府의 발표에 의하면 現在 朝鮮의 小學敎育을 받은 産業豫備軍의 수가 70만명에 달하는데 昭和 12년도 以降 21년도에 이르는 第2次 敎育普及計劃其間에는 小學校의 수용능력을 168만명으로 簡易學校의 수용능력을 15만4천명으로 확대증가할 작정이라 한다. 이러한 교육 보급의 경향은 朝鮮의 工業化와 兵站基地로서의 朝鮮의 再編成의 過程에 따르는 역사적인 문화현상이 아니면 않된다. 참으로 朝鮮을 사랑하는 사람으로서 이 반가운 현상에 情熱의 박수를 보내지 않을 者 그 누가 있으랴.
셋재로 다시 朝鮮의 兵站基地化 즉 工業化의 과정은 『農業朝鮮』에 대한 『工業朝鮮』의 비중을 더욱 더욱 무겁게 하여 나아간다. 朝鮮農業의 封建的 零細性은 세계를 휩쓴 農業恐慌의 여파와 합세되여 朝鮮의 농업 及 농민생활의 참담* 貧窮化의 경향을 保成하는 동시에 總督政治로 하여금 특히 재정 及 치안 상의 문제에 있어서 견딜 수 없는 桎梏에로 유도하여 왓다. 이 桎梏으로부터 해방되기 위해서 字垣總督은 이미 農村振興책과 아울러 農工倂進政策을 朝鮮經濟指導의 原理로 삼어왓다. 다시 대륙정책의 현실적 진행은 이러한 農工倂進의 경향에 一層 拍車를 가하야 重工業의 왕성한 계획과 아울러 농촌의 진흥, 農業의 商業的 經營 工業原料로서의 농업의 조성 등 一聯의 정책을 강화케하여 온 것이다. 米穀에만 編重하는 從來의 農業政策은 세계적 農業恐慌이 이미 一蹴해 버린지 오랫다. 현재에는 양모, 면화, 亞麻, 홋부, 燃料알콜用芋類 등 工業用原料의 농업생산이 極力獎勵 되여 원대한 전망을 보이고 있다.
또 水産業 등의 방면을 보드래도 從來의 原始的 漁獲에 만족하지 않고 이미 加工方面에로의 적극적 진출을 보이고 있다.
要컨대 農工倂進의 이러한 정책은 전술한 바 農村過剩人口의 大量的 消化의 경향과 아울러 朝鮮의 농촌을 急遠한 「템포」로 振興, 繁榮케 할 것이라고 확신된다.
넷재로 兵站基地로서의 朝鮮에 요구되는 것이 輕工業이 아니고 重工業 내지 粗工業이란 것은 朝鮮人의 손에서 경영되는 中小商工業과 衝突되지 않을 뿐 아니라 도리혀 後者의 발전을 적극적으로 助長하는 動機가 될 수 있다. 重工業이 전제가 되는 下請工業은 今後 朝鮮人 企業家의 손에서 一層 擴大될 전망을 가진다. 또 朝鮮 從來의 中小工業電球琺王郞鐵器燐寸과고 무靴 等은 이러한 重工業 내지 粗工業의 지배적 발전에도 불구하고 이것과 아무 관계없이 現在에 있어서 이미 內地品과 結杭하야 能히 <59> 優劣을 다투면서 世界市場에까지 진출하고 있다.
마즈막으로 朝鮮의 兵站基地化는 帝國의 東亞制覇와 또 東亞西協同體의 구성에 있어서 朝鮮의 占하는 바 정치적 지위에 중대성을 加하게 된다. 이 점에 관하야 南總督은 이미 尹致昊氏와의 회견에서 東洋人의 『동양건설의 핵심은 內鮮一體의 완벽에』 있다는 것을 특히 강조하였다.
이리하야 조선의 치안문제가 가장 중대한 문제로 되는 동시에 조선인의 정치적 불평 내지 불만을 一掃하고 朝鮮人으로 하여금 日本帝國의 大陸政策에 100퍼-센트의 성의와 정열을 가지고 협동케 하기 위해서는 內地人과 동등한 국민적 의무를 다하게 한 후 內地人과 동등한 정치적 자격을 그들에게 賦與할 것을 잊어서는 안될 것이다. 사실 현재 中央政界에서 東亞協同體의 문제와 아울어 朝鮮人參政權의 문제가 열열히 討議되기 시작한 이유도 여긔에 있는 것이다.
이상을 要컨대 大陸政策의 진행에 따라서 朝鮮에 課해진 兵站基地化의 要請은 우리 朝鮮人의 생활에 대해서 경제적으로 정치적으로 또 문화적으로 爲先 이만한 福利와 繁榮을 약속할 수 있다.
여긔에 內鮮一體化의 중요한 계기- 즉, 朝鮮의 兵站基地化로부터 오는 한 개의 중요한 계기가 존재한다.
內鮮一體化의 이상의 계기가 帝國의 大陸政策의 요구에서 출발되고 있음에 反하야 第2의 계기는 大陸政策의 진행에 따라서 多大한 복리와, 번영을 기대하게 되는 조선민중의 자발적 의사로부터 출발한다. 제1의 계기가 상부로부터 즉 국가로부터 강행적 성질을 가지고 관철되고 있음에 반하야 제2의 계기는 下部로부터 즉 民衆으로부터 자발적으로 출발된다. 이리하야 이 두 계기의 합류에 있어서 우리는 內鮮一體의 具體化-참된 의미의 內鮮一體化를 볼 수 있는 것이다.
한 개의 民族으로서의 朝鮮人은 허다한 결점을 가지고 있다. 그러나 우리 朝鮮人에게도 남에 지지안는 장점이 있다. 이 장점은 他余의 民族에 비해서 몹시 총명하고 영리한 점에 있다고 나는 본다. 事變勃發 이래 우리 朝鮮人은 全 民族을 들어서 제국의 국책에 충실하게 협조하여 왔다. 長鼓峰사건의 당시에도 위정자의 기우에 반해서 조선인은 일계불란 끗까지 제국의 측에서 충성을 다하야 근대적 문화국민으로서의 조직성을 보이였다. 금일의 조선인의 정치적 태세를 大正 8년 당시의 그것과 비해 본다면 우리는 그의 天壤과 같은 차이에 놀라지 않을 수 없을 것이다. 개개의 주의자가 전향한 것이 아니라 한 개의 民族으로서의<60> 朝鮮人이 충실한 轉向을 표시한 것이다. 오직 帝國의 大陸政策에 끗까지 협동하는 충실한 국민으로서만 개개의 朝鮮人의 행복과 繁榮을 기대할 수가 있으며 따라서 今日의 朝鮮人의 政治的 路線이란 이 길 외에 아무것도 없다는 것을 그들은 사실 이번 事變에 있어서 직관적으로 깨달은 것이다. 그들에게 있어서 이러한 직관적인 자각을 촉진한 것은 東亞의 정세에 대한 그들의 정확한 관찰 내지 비판이 원인이 아니였다. 그들은 그들 자신의 생활과정에 있어서 『꼼뮤니스트』 혹은 『나쇼날리스트』의 여러 가지 執拗한 선전 내지 煽動에도 불구하고 각자의 지위가 一步一步 악화되는 것이 아니다. 도리혀 향상되고 있다는 것을 直覺하였다. 苹果의 實例를 들어 보자. 大邱, 黃州, 元山, 鎭南浦 등의 지역 일대는 苹果의 豊産地로 일흠이 높다. 그런데 苹果의 생산가격이 작년에 비해서 금년에는 3倍 내지 4倍가 올랐다. 이것은 물론 支那事變에 의해서 광대한 北支의 시장이 새로히 개척된 것이 주요한 원인이다. 苹果에만 한한 것이 아니라 他余의 모든 특산물도 北支와의 관계에 있어서 同樣의 전망을 가진다. 苹果는 한 實例에 불과한다. 일반적으로 朝鮮農村과 事變의 발전과의 이러한 연관성은 농업의 상업적경영 농업경영의 기업화 농산물의 가공화 농업기술의 개량 농산물가격의 증진, 농민생활의 富褣化 등 일련의 과정을 촉진하야 朝鮮農民生活의 공전의 繁榮을 齎來하는 것이다.
다음으로 人口問題에 있어서도 一般民衆은 행복되고 있는 그들의 지위를 直觀하고 있다. 總戶數 200戶를 넘지 못하는 平南 龍岡地方의 一農村에서는 北支와 도시에로의 新移住者가 最延數 3, 년간에 15, 6명에 달하게 되였다. 農村過剩人口로서 飢餓線上을 헤메이고 있든 그들이 도시의 노동자로서는 日給 60錢 이상 내지 2圓의 보수를 받고 있으며 滿洲와 北支의 개척자로서는 달마다 약간의 송금까지도 하고 있는 現狀이다. 또 事變以來 朝鮮社會의 가장 중요한 문제의 하나인 過剩人口問題에 있어서도 從來의 矛盾과 桎梏을 해결해 나가는 길이 활발하게 열리고 있다. 세계를 들어서 失業洪水에 허덕이고 있는 이때 朝鮮의 농촌에서는 지주의 집에서 『머슴』 구할 수 없다는 기이한 현상이 呈示되고 있다. 總督府에서는 이미 年年 1萬戶 限度의 貧農을 鮮滿拓殖會社의 손을 거처서 滿洲國에로 이주하고 있다. 이 1만戶의 滿洲移住만으로서도 朝鮮農村社會의 계급적 모순을 완화하는데 多大한 공헌이 아닐 수 없다. 다시 이에 가해서 北支에로 軍需工業에로 흡수되는 대량적인 過剩人口를 생각할 때 우리는 從來 오래동안 農村社會를 괴롭혀온 人口問題에 있어서도 확실히 樂觀의 전망을 가질 수가 있다. <61>
이리하야 朝鮮의 民衆은 이 人口問題의 方面에서도 各自의 지위가 大陸政策의 진행에 따라 일반적으로 안정되고 향상되고 있는 것을 直覺하고 있다.
다시 輸出入關係에서 본다 할지라도 농촌의 特殊農産物 生産者와 함께 도시의 中小商工業者들도 事變의 進展과 北支의 안정에 따라 그들의 이해관계를 민첩하게 감각하고 있다. 새로히 개척되는 광대한 시장을 목표로 하는 中小商工業이 朝鮮人의 商工業者間에서도 이 戰時經濟體制下에서 오히러 활발하게 勃興되고 있다. 今後 長期建設의 단계에로 들어감에 따라 中小商工業의 이러한 경향은 더욱 促成될 것이다.
이외에도 다시 세상의 주목을 끌고있는 繁榮의 경향은 今日의 왕성한 鑛山景氣에서도 볼 수 있다. 金, 銀, 銅, 鐵, 重石, 水鉛, 硫化鐵 마그네사이트 알미니움 등 各樣의 금속을 무진장으로 포함하고 있는 鑛業朝鮮의 豊穰한 자연은 事變의 進展과 倂行하여 또 그로부터 막대한 刺戟을 받으면서 處處에서 개발되여 다대한 수의 小市民들의 경제적 지위를 향상케하고 있다. 따라서 여긔에서도 一般民衆은 大陸政策에 대한 全幅的 지지의 감정을 품게된다.
이를 요컨대 北支事變發勃이래 朝鮮民衆이 실로 全 民族을 들어서 帝國臣民으로서의 의무를 충실히 수행하는 동시에 帝國의 大陸政策에 끗까지 협동하려는 최대의 성의를 표시하여 온 것은 실로 그들이 이 事變과의 관련에 있어서 일반적 福利와 繁榮의 길을 직관할 수 있기 때문이 아니면 안된다. 漢口의 함락을 獎機로 하여 長期戰爭은 長期建設의 新階段에로 轉入하였다. 亞細의 亞 역사를 철저히 개조하는 이 長期建設의 巨步가 전진되면 될수록 朝鮮民衆에게 약속되는 행복과 繁榮의 길은 더욱 더욱 廣濶하게 개척될 것이라고 확신된다. 또 이에 따라서 帝國統治에 대한 民衆의 절대적 信望國民으로서의 精神的 自覺 日本主義의 民衆의 間에로의 침투 內鮮民族의 완전한 평등화 등 요컨대 內鮮一體의 구체화 과정이 一步一步 추진되여 나아갈 것이다.
今日의 朝鮮民衆은 벌서 內鮮一體로 熱烈히 要望하고 있다. 또 그들은 이 內鮮一體의 具體化의 과정에 있이서 帝國의 국책이 內鮮一體의 眞髓 內地民族과 朝鮮民族의 완전한 경제적 정치적 문화적 평등화와 이 평등화를 基調로 하는 內鮮兩民族의 合流의 과정을 만족됨이 있게 추진식킬 것이라고 기대하고 있다. <62>
여긔에 鮮內一體의 필연성의 第2의 계기-다시 말하면 下部로부터 民衆으로부터 솟아오르는 熱烈한 要望의 獎機가 있는 것이다.
皇室만을 중심을 推戴하고 皇室만을 존중하고 皇室과 人民의 間에서만 차별을 是認하는 新日本主義의 革新思想은 226事件 이래, 경제, 정치, 문화 등 각 분야를 통하야 위대한 역사적 潮流를 형성하면서 明日의 帝國政權을 좌우하려한다.
우리가 內鮮一體의 진실한 실현을 또 東亞大理想의 완전한 구체화를 기대할 수 있는 것도 오직 國家權力에 있어서의 革新勢力의 增長의 필연성을 정확히 간파하고 있기 때문이다.
여긔에 內鮮一體化의 필연성의 第3의 계기가 존재한다.
이상에 말한 바 鮮內一體 필연성의 3개의 계기는 各各 明日의 朝鮮을 향하야 서로 침투하고 서로 작용하면서 사상적으로 정치적으로 위대한 역사적인 變革的 湖潮을 일우고 있다.
우리는 이 潮流을 타고 全 民族을 總動員하여야 할 것이다. 이리하야 민족으로서의 朝鮮人에게 內鮮一體에 대한 信念과 情熱을 부어야 할 것이다. 信念과 情熱이 없는 민족의 앞에는 오직 滅亡이 있을 뿐이다.
이리하야 신념과 정열을 가지고 우리는 爲先 帝國臣民으로서의 국민적 의무를 충실히 수행하여야 할 것이다. 국민적 임무 중에 最重要의 것은 國防兵役의 의무이다. 明年度로부터 실시되기로 결정된 滿洲國의 徵兵制는 우리들 朝鮮人에 대헤서 막대한 衝動을 주었다. 이와 동시에 우리는 今月의 革新勢力에 대해서 그의 대담하고 亞細亞的이고 革新的인 政治的 態勢에 喪心으로서의 경의를 표하지 않을 수 없었다.
志願兵制度의 실시만으로서 우리는 물론 만족할 수 없다. 志願兵制度는 다시 義務兵制度에 까지 擴大强化되지 않으면 안될 것이다. 우리들의 국민적 성의가 天에 달하여 志願兵制度의 勅令이 나렸다. 다시 義務兵制度의 실시를 획득키 위해서 우리들의 100퍼-센트의 국민적 정열을 示表하지 않으면 안된다.
다시 義務敎育制의 실시도 머지 않은 장래로 약속되여있다. 이 義務敎育의 실시는 徵兵制의 전제인 동시에 內地延長主義 전제가 아니면 안된다. <63>
진실한 의미의 內地延長主義만이 內鮮一體化의 정치적 내용이 되지 않으면 안된다. 內地民族과 동일한 국민적 의무를 다함에 의해서 획득되는 국민적 권리란 內地民族과 동등한 정치적 자격을 말하는 것이다.
內地의 모든 정치제도-普通選擧制府縣制 의무교육제 등이 內地와 동일한 정도로 朝鮮에도 擴大延長되여야 할 것이다. 여긔에 우리가 기대한 수 있는 최대의 행복이 있다. 나아가자 高麗의 자녀들아.
MaRrhons?! Marchons!

東亞新秩序와 革新

車載貞
武漢 3鎭과 廣東의 함락은 支那事變自體의 戰局的 발전에 新段階를 劃하였을뿐더러 東亞史發展의 방향에 新標幟가 되고 말었다. 1年有餘來의 事變은 이것을 계기로 비로소 그 相貌와 個性을 전적으로 그리고 뚜렸하게 全世界의 面前에 나타내인 것이다.
抗敵 蔣介石政權은 이로써 그 抗戰의 최대 근거를 상실하고 그 정치적 경제적 國際外交的 근간을 빼았기어 발서 일본의 事變 相對者로서는 지극히 무력한 것으로 되고 말었다. 국제 금융자본의 傀儡 蔣介石政權의 무력화는 곳 支那를 지배해온 英米佛 등 歐米資本의 支那에  있어서의 敗北과 無力化를 의미하는 것이다. 동시에 그것은 歐米의 資本的 帝國主義의 極東支配의 최대 堅壘의 한아가 粉碎된 세음이니 歐米의 資本的 帝國主義가 1世紀來*構維待해온 바 東亞의 侵略體系는 이에 그 결정적 파국에 직면해 있다는 것을 의미한다.
이것으로써 事變은 그 본래의 목적의 본격적 軌道 우에 올나섰다고 볼 수 있으니 今次 事變의 참된 대상과 목표는 支那民衆과 支那市場이의 帝國主義的 독점이 아니라 歐米資本의 支那侵略과 그것의 走狗인 抗日政權의 阻止排除에 있엇으며 더 나아가서는 <64> 東亞에 가장 합리적인 新秩序를 부여수립하는데 있겠음에 鑑하야 武漢攻略 後의 事變은 정부당국의 성명과 같이 正히 신단계에 발전하였다.
近衛內閣은 武漢攻略 後의 성명에서 東亞新秩序의 수립을 말하였다.
事變 後의 東亞에는 如何한 樣相의 新秩序이건 從來의 그것과는 다른 것이 출현할 것은 어김없는 사실인 것이다. 그러나 그 新秩序에 관하는 한 지금으로서는 지극히 막연한 한 개의 개념이다. 支那에서 歐米의 帝國主義가 무력해가지고 더 나아가서는 완전히 驅遂될 수 있다는 것과 抗日政權이 소멸하고 新政權이 수립된다는 것 中國의 赤色勢力을 驅遂하고 동시에 콤민테룬의 赤色通路를 粉碎한다는 것 그리고 묵은 中國과 묵은 東洋을 結縳해논 一切의 外交關係가 예컨댄 9個國條約類의 新事態의 정세에 부합치 안는 것이 破棄되리라는 것 등등 이외 東亞의 日滿支3國은 정치적 경제적 及 사회문화적인 各部面에 亘하야 완전한 協同體的 單位에 결합되리라는 것까지도 예상될 수 있는 諸點이나 다못 이러한 상식적 諸點의 이론만으로는 東亞新秩序의 진정한 姿態를 발견하기는 어려운 일이다.
吾人이 알고저 하고 또 장래의 이 新秩序에 포괄될 全東亞의 民衆의 알고저 하는 點은 그 新秩序의 思想的 及 文化史的 基調이다.
東亞의 新秩序는 端的으로 말하면 東亞諸民族의 新生活秩序이다. 우리는 바야흐로 新支那의 건설을 통하야 우리의 新生活秩序를 부여될 約束 下에 있는 것이다.
이것에 관한 認識에 도달하는 과정은 東亞新秩序樹立의 능동적 擔當者이며 그 主體인 日本의 內部認識을 통하지 않으면 아니된다.
所與의 東亞新事態와 그 건설의 능동적 주체 즉 客觀과 主觀-의 통일된 표현이 그 과정이 장차 나타날 東亞의 新秩序이기 때문이다.
東亞에 新秩序를 부여코지 하며 있는 日本民族은 그 自身自己의 내부적 新秩序를-그것을 日本的으로 표현해서 革新을 요구하며 있다.
그리고 이 國內革新은 大陸의 新秩序를 통해서만 가능할 수 있는 政治的 經濟的 文化的, 國際外交的 諸必要우에 노여저 있서 <65> 大陸新秩序와의 관련은 交互的이며 同時的이며 倂行的인 諸面을 가지고 있다. 이런 점에서 東亞新秩序의 내면적 요소로서 日本의 國內革新은 大陸新秩序와 중요한 관련을 가지고 있다. 그러므로 日本의 國內革新을 이해치 못하고 大陸의 新秩序를 認識하기는 殆히 불가능한 것이니 즉 日本의 國內革新의 思想基調는 곧 大陸秩序의 그것이기 때문이다.
東亞의 新秩序이거나 日本의 革新이거나 그것은 全面的이어서 政治的 經濟的 社會文化的 國際外交的 諸方面에 亘하야 고찰될 것이나 문제는 그것을 단적으로 요약할때 그것이 資本主義的냐 反資本主義的이냐이다.
물론 이밖에도 논의의 중점은 여러 곳에 노여질 수 있다. 民族主義와 國際主義, 日本主義와 東亞主義 東亞全體主義와 世界主義 등등의 우에 관점이 두어지는 것도 지극히 필요한 일이나 그러한 일면적이고 추상적인 것보담 구체적이고 근본적인 관찰의 중점은 資本主義的인 與否이라고 생각한다. 資本的 諸國民社會의 變革過程은 于先 自己否定에서부터 출발하는 것을 필요로 함으로서이다.
그러나 反資本主義的 하드래도 거기에 또한 여러 가지 형태를 예상할 수 있으니 맑스적 共産主義 獨伊的 全體主義 (나는 팟시쯤사회를 反資本的 範疇에 속하는 것으로써 인식한다) 또는 革新的 日本主義社會 등등인 바 그러면 革新日本을 능동적 지도의 주체로 하는 東亞의 新秩序는 如何한 質態의 基調우에 입각할 것이며 또 하지 않으면 아니되며 되여지기를 吾人은 바랄 것인가.
우리는 이러한 의도에서 事變의 처리로서의 東亞新秩序의 日本的 東亞史的 世界史的 의의를 인식함이 정당하다고 생각한다.
今次의 事變은 日本革新의 일부이다. 資本主義 日本은 이 事變의 완결과 동시에 완전히 지양되지 않으면 아니된다. 資本主義 日本의 帝國主義的 발전으로서 東亞의 新秩序를 수립할 것은 世界史的 意義를 상실하는 것일 뿐 아니라 日本自身의 행복적 발전을 의미하지 못하고 사실에 있어서 불가능을 의미한다. 日本의 資本主義的 勢力은 今次의 事變을 領導的으로 展開할 何等의 주체적 실력을 가지 못하니 實地에 있어서 今次 事變의 領導主體는 日本의 資本的 勢力이 아니다. 그러므로 今次의 事變이 그러한 資本主義的 帝國主義의 침략으로써 귀결되지 안는 근본적 원인이 여기에 있다. <66>
日本의 資本主義는 그 경제적 발전이 정돈되기 전에 그 체내에 오히려 왕성한 精力을 포장해 있으면서, 國內的 政治的 思想的 進路에서 완전히 「行詰ル」하고 무력해젖다. 이 點은 日本만이 가지고 있는 特異性이니, 이것이 日本民族社會의 個性이며, 傳統이다. 이 特異性은 如何한 역사적 시대에서나 日本民族社會의 根柢가 되여있는 點이다. 즉 皇室과 國民과의 특수한 결합의 전통은 日本의 如何한 역사사회에서나 그 國家的 國民的 생활의 중심이며 中樞이다. 이 點을 도외시하고 日本을 인식하는 길은 없으니 문화의 改新, 明治維新, 今日의 革新 등, 모든 國家, 國民生活의 重大한 變革에 있어서 더구나 日本的 個性과 傳統은 모든 發動力의 연원을 그 중심을 皇室과 國民과의 특수한 관계에 求한다.
日本적인 傳統과 個性은 民主主義的 自由主義的, 個人的 資本主義的인 一切의 生活樣態에 反撥하는 본질을 가지고 있다. 皇道思想, 皇民思想은 근본적으로 資本主義的 社會秩序와는 相容되지 안는다.
그러므로 日本主義는, 日本精神을 원래로 資本主義를 한다. 今日의 역사단계에 있어서 참으로 日本的 個性과 傳統과 日本의 文化的 優越性을 그리고 日本民族의 發展을 擁護하기 위하야는 日本은 필연적으로 自己革新의 起點을 資本主義의-에서부터 출발하지 않으면 아니되며 또 나아서 資本主義를 부정한 日本民族의 국가의 興隆을 圖謀하기 위하야는 그 政治的 經濟的 文化的 발전의 必然的 방향으로서 帝國主義 아닌 大陸的 東亞的 발전이 不可缺의 조건이다. 膨脹하는 日本民族은 그 經濟生活의 욕구와 아우타루키적 경제의 확립을 위하야 필연적으로 대륙에 그것을 구하지 않으면 아니되며 그것을 수행하는데는 政治的으로 文化的으로 東亞諸民族의 協同結合을 필요로 한다. 이러한 諸點에서 日本의 革新은 東亞協同亞 東體 新秩序의 수립과 相關不可分의 관계에 노여있다. 그러나 東亞의 經綸은 資本主義 日本으로서도 가능한 일이나 그것에는 帝國主義的임을 요하고 對外的으로 帝國主義的임에는 국내적으로 資本主義임을 要함으로 그것은 국내의 反資本의 諸條件으로 말미암아 불가능하다는 소이는 前述함과 같다.
如上한 諸點이 大陸經營이 革新의 具體的 과정의 일부이며 東亞의 新秩序가 反資本의 基調우에 노여지지 않으면 아니된다는 所以이다.
그러므로 東亞의 新秩序는 征服秩序가 아니며 支配秩序가 아니라 諸民族共存共榮에 인한 協同秩序이며 指導秩序이다. 따라서 그 政治形態 經濟形態 文化形態도 資本的, 帝國主義的, 征服的이 안일 것은 물론이다. 즉 東亞新秩序內에 포괄되는 <67> 諸民族社會는 그 自主的 이익이 존중되고 개성 전통, 문화가 한 가지 존중되여야 할 것이다. 그러나 이것들이 어느 것이나 새로히 형성되는 東亞思想 東亞傳統 東亞文化에 발전적으로 통일된다는 한계안에서만 자주성이 인정되어야 할 줄로 생각한다. 여기에 말하는 東亞思想이란 이제야 形成道程에 있는 新興 이데올로기이다. 지금 吾人이 개념의 無定見한 종합을 試하야 牽强附會的으로 맞추어 생산하는 수예품이 될 수 없다. 東亞諸民族의 실생활의 교착통일에서 생성발달하야 結晶되는 것임으로 그것은 장래의 범주이다. 다못 여기서 오인이 고려할 것은 東亞思想이나 東亞文化나 그 傳統이나란 것은 그 모두가 과거 또는 현재의 諸民族생활에 소재에 허터저 있는 묵은 支那的 滿洲的 蒙古的 日本的인 등등의 문화적 잔해를 복고적으로 긁어 모으는 것은 아니며 동시에 서양적인 것을 무조건으로 排斥하는 것으로써 東亞的 문화, 사상의 창조의 조건을 삼어서는 안된다. 新東亞文化創造의 태도는 어데까지나 진보적이며, 창조적이여야할지니 所與의 신생활문화의 통일적 結晶이여야 한다. 그러나 여기서도 또한 그 주체가 필요하다. 그러한 의미에서 日本民族의 문화는 필연으로 新東亞문화의 胚盤이 되리라는 것을 예상할 수 있으니 今日의 日本民族文化 가운데에는 亞細亞의 如何한 민족의 그것보담도 풍부하게 정당하게 합리적으로 과거의 亞細亞文化의 각 부분이 통일성(日本的이지만)을 가지고 근대적으로 보존되여있고 守護되여 있으며 사라있다는 점이다. 그러나 그러한 일본문화자신 또한 新環境에 放牧하야 爾*諸民族의 그것에서 더 成育발달되지 않으면 아니된다. 東亞思想의 경우에 있어서도 亦 同一하니 今日의 日本精神이 日本民族社會를 革新하는 指導原理의 지위를 가지고 있다 하드래도 支那나 其他 民族에게 그것이 전면적으로 이해용납되기 어렵고 더구나 東亞協同民族生活의 指導原理로서 무조건 통용될 수 없는 점인바 그것은 今日의 日本精神, 또는 日本主義는 좀더 근대화한 보편적 체계를 具有하지 않으면 아니된다. 日本민족 이외의 民族으로서는 그것을 지성을 통하야 攝取이해하기는 불가능할만치 전통적이고 감정적이고 血液的이다
그리고 東亞新秩序의 세계사적 의의는 從來의 世界主義에 대하야 새로운 방향을 보혀주는 것이다. 從來의 世界主義가 추상적인 점은 資本主義的인 것이다. 맑스主義的인 것이나 동일하나 특히 後者에 있어서는 구체적인 것과 다른 外觀과 체계를 가지고 있서 往往히 그 추상성이 掩蔽되어 왔었는데 東亞協同體는 그것에 대한 重大訂正이며 新世界主義에 대하야 구체적 체계를 부여하는 것이며 世界秩序를 재건하는데 결정적으로 공헌하는 것이다.
이상에 본바에 의하야 東亞新秩序와 日本의 革新 兩者間에는 그러한 내면적 연관성과 交互性이 작용하고 있음으로 識認方法으서 兩者를 분리하야 관찰할 수 없는 것이다. 그러므로 文化史的으로 빛나는 東亞의 新秩序는 東亞諸民族의 행복을 약속하는 東亞의 新秩序는 日本의 國內革新의 성과와 相俟하야 결정될 문제이다. <68>
<48-68>