Magazine Title: 삼천리 제7권 제3호
Publication Date: 1935년 03월 01일
Article Title: 傷痕 (Scar)
Author: 韓仁澤
Article Type: 소설 (Novel)

傷痕
						韓仁澤
The night grew ever deeper, and a single wild goose flew across the autumn sky, crying mournfully like a wanderer lamenting this ephemeral world.
Yŏng-ho, like a man out of his mind, leaned his body against the moonlit, shaded zelkova tree and stood watching until the lone goose, autumn's wanderer who had lost its mate, disappeared far into the southern sky.
It seemed endlessly pitiful to see the lost lone goose wandering and fumbling through this night, just like his own heart. Whenever he heard the sporadic "Keong! Keong!" cry of a fox from the mountain ahead, Yŏng-ho heard it as the cry of his wife, resenting and cursing him, and it sounded like the voice of a messenger prophesying some unknown, ominous storm approaching his path ahead.
Yŏng-ho was afraid to look at anything. More than that, it felt as if all things in the universe were looking at him and laughing scornfully. For that reason, Yŏng-ho was ashamed to show his face to the world. Even though it was a night devoid of people, Yŏng-ho felt fortunate to have buried himself in the dark shade of the zelkova tree, and he lacked the courage to step even a few paces forward into the bright moonlight, where even a tiny ant crawling could be seen. The dark tree shadows and the bright moonlight before his eyes! That boundary line seemed like an incredibly vast limit to Yŏng-ho. He felt unworthy, as if he dared not tread upon such pristine ground.
Yŏng-ho couldn't help but be surprised himself at how his personality had changed like this over the recent ten-odd days. "I have lost my humanity," he cried out in his heart. Thinking this, he found looking at his own body<289> repulsive and wanted to curse it.
This was also why, even though it had been over ten days since Yŏng-ho came down to his hometown, he felt ashamed to face the villagers and found everything bothersome, so he kept the door tightly shut during the day and lay down like someone suffering from a plague. When night came and people disappeared, he would come out under this zelkova tree to try and forget his bursting heart and endless suffering. However, even coming out to a place like this and feeling the breeze did not easily make the painful feelings recede from Yŏng-ho's chest.
What he saw and heard seemed, on the contrary, to insult and mock him, making it unbearable.
"Ah! I am not human!"
"I am a man who killed someone."
Yŏng-ho, having become sentimental from extreme anguish, cried this out, turned his body, and threw his head against the zelkova tree.
Yŏng-ho's mind was in turmoil. Yŏng-ho tore at his disheveled hair. It was then. In a voice almost like a sob,
"Father!"
Ung came stumbling towards Yŏng-ho and clung to his suit trousers.
"Is that you, Ung?"
Yŏng-ho, startled, grabbed Ung's wrist. Then he hugged Ung tightly. Ung was Yŏng-ho's five-year-old son. He yawned and hunched his body. Then he shivered violently.
"Ung! Are you cold? When did you come out?"
Yŏng-ho said, holding Ung tightly.
"A while ago!"
"A while ago? Then you must have been looking for father for quite some time?"
"..."
Ung shook his head instead of answering.
"Then why didn't you come to Father sooner? Are you scared of Father?"
Yŏng-ho looked at Ung with pained eyes. Ung said nothing and hung his head low. Yŏng-ho's heart grew heavier.
"Ah! I truly deserve to be struck by lightning! Even to this child..."
Yŏng-ho cried out inwardly. Tears welled up in Yŏng-ho's eyes. His shoulders began to tremble.
The young Ung, perhaps sensing something, lifted his head, looked up<290> at Yŏng-ho with a displeased face, then shook his head and said,
"Father! I'm not crying. I don't miss Mother..."
Ung's words, close to tears, pierced Yŏng-ho's heart like nails. He couldn't say anything, only gazing at Ung with tear-filled eyes.
"Father, I won't say I miss Mother again..."
"I like Father! That Mother..."
Though saying he wouldn't cry, his words mixed with sobs, perhaps sensing his father's suffering, this pure-hearted attempt at consolation would surely draw tears from anyone. How much more so for Yŏng-ho's heart?
"It is my sin. What cruel play of fate is this?" Yŏng-ho murmured under his breath. Yŏng-ho's tears burst forth. It was weeping he could not suppress himself.
Yŏng-ho, who seemed strong-willed enough not to flinch even if beheaded on the spot and possessed the spirit of a man with youthful blood coursing through him, his anguished heart finally made him weep.
What made him weep was not so much his sense of responsibility, nor the fact that a pitiful life had been sacrificed because of him, but rather Ung's pure heart arising from this situation.
Ung's pure heart could not but make Yŏng-ho weep. Yŏng-ho wept, deeply moved.
"Mother..."
Ung's tears also burst forth. At the very beginning of his outburst, the word "Mother" came out first – the mother he had just told his father he wouldn't think about again, dismissing her as "that Mother." It didn't stop there. The sound of calling for his mother grew louder than his crying, and finally, he struggled in his father's arms as if his father didn't matter either. Yŏng-ho put Ung down. He wanted to let Ung cry until his heart felt relieved. But it was too painful a thing.
As if neither father nor anything else mattered, only Mother, Ung walked towards the house, calling for his mother. As if not even acknowledging his father's existence, he didn't look back, continuously wiping tears with one hand, calling for his mother.
But the mother Ung called for while crying and walking away would not come out to greet the lonely Ung. Ung calling for the mother who had departed from this world forever! If Ung's mother were alive as before, the moment Ung's cry reached her ears, she would drop whatever she was doing and run out,<291> saying,
"Why are you crying? Ung, don't cry."
"Did someone hit you? Where did you fall?"
Saying this, she would hold Ung and wipe his tears with the hem of her skirt. There was no way Ung's mother, who was eternally gone from this world, would come out. The god of cruel fate had mercilessly snatched away such happiness from young Ung.
Watching Ung's retreating figure as he cried and walked away, Yŏng-ho's vision blurred. Looking at the shape of Ung, who had lost his mother, Yŏng-ho felt for the first time in his young life a sensation like a sharp knife's edge scraping away at his chest. He thought that from now on, Ung's tragedy, along with his own, would begin and never cease as long as they lived.
"Ung! Ung!"
Yŏng-ho gathered his voice, choked with sobs, called Ung, and followed behind him. Yŏng-ho held the lonely, crying Ung tightly in his arms.
"Ung! Don't cry! You have Father, don't you! I'll take you to Seoul and buy you a toy car, and an airplane too..."
Yŏng-ho's heart ached as he tried to console Ung. Ung, as if the world meant nothing to him and only Mother mattered, paid no attention to his father's words and only cried, calling for his mother.
"Ung! If the neighbors hear, they'll gossip about the crying child. Father won't cry anymore either. Stop it now, Ung!"
"Ung! Don't cry. If you don't cry, I'll tell you an interesting story! A really interesting story..."
Once inside the room, Yŏng-ho sat Ung down and tried hard to soothe him. He brought out snacks, opened picture books, and finally managed to stop Ung's crying.
"Father, I won't cry again. Father, don't you cry either. I'll live with Father. It's okay even without Mother!"
Ung wiped his tears sideways, sniffled, and showed a smile.
"That's right, you'll live with Father..."
Saying this, placing Ung on his lap, he smiled back, but both Yŏng-ho's smile and Ung's smile were pained smiles.
Thinking about how Ung, who had grown up seeing him maybe once a year, said he liked his father and wanted to live with him, and especially how, since the very first evening after Yŏng-ho came down upon hearing the news of his wife's death, Ung hadn't left his side, followed him around, and slept in his arms – thinking how lonely<292> Ung must be feeling to act like that, he couldn't help but think it was all the result of the great sin he had committed.
And whenever he showed signs of depression, Ung, perhaps sensing something in his young heart, would come close under his chin and say,
"That Mother..."
"I don't miss Mother..." The effort he made to console him was truly unbearable to watch. Yŏng-ho felt he had committed a great sin even against Ung. He knew that if Ung grew up and learned the reason why and how his mother left this world, he would curse him. Yŏng-ho was lost in endless contemplation.
"Father! What are you thinking about?"
"I'm not thinking about anything."
Yŏng-ho was jolted from his thoughts by Ung's voice.
"Were you thinking of a story to tell? Father..."
Ung had seen his father often sit like this, thinking about something, when he was about to tell a story.
"Uh-huh!"
Yŏng-ho, like someone absent-minded, answered mechanically without thinking about anything.
"What story? A cat story? Father, I like the cat story..."
"Yes! It's interesting."
"Father, tell me the cat story once..."
"It's getting late, so let's sleep tonight and I'll tell you tomorrow morning..."
"No, I want to hear it now."
Ung shook his body and insisted petulantly.
"You have to listen well to Father if you want me to take you to Seoul on the train the day after tomorrow."
"I'm not going to Seoul! I'll live in this house."
"Why won't you go to Seoul? Isn't it good to go live with Father in Seoul? Ride the streetcar, see interesting sights too, Seoul is really nice."
"No! I'm not going to Seoul."
"If Father goes to Seoul, will you live alone?"
"..."
Ung sat silently. Ung thought about something for a while.
"She said people become bad if they go to Seoul."
"Haha! Become bad people? Who said that?"
"Mother!"
"That's a lie. Did Father become a bad person anywhere?"
"You are a bad person! When I asked<293> why Father doesn't come home, Mother said Father became a bad person and that's why he doesn't come! Even when I asked Mother to go to Seoul where Father is, she said she couldn't go to a place where people become bad."
"... "
Hearing these words, Yŏng-ho's head lowered involuntarily. Yŏng-ho felt ashamed even to look at young Ung's face.
"It's true. Mother always said that..."
Ung said this, looking at his silent father.
"Right! Father is a bad person."
Yŏng-ho said this and hugged Ung tightly. Yŏng-ho's conscience couldn't bear not saying these words.
"I am indeed a bad person."
He cried out inwardly again. Under normal circumstances, he would have thought it wrong for his wife to speak ill of him even to a young child, but facing this situation today, he felt the shame of a husband, wondering how desperate his wife must have been to say such things even to Ung.
Ung was nodding off. Yŏng-ho gently laid Ung down, and as if putting an infant to sleep, held his breath and patted lightly, softly on the bedding. Ung seemed to drift into a dream where all the world's suffering could be forgotten, falling asleep.
The room is endlessly quiet and desolate. A chilly autumn wind, rare for the season, seeps through the cracks in the door. The night seems to have deepened considerably.
Yŏng-ho's mind was in turmoil. Thinking about how his wife had spent desolate years in this very room, feeling all the world's agony for five or six years, finding solace only in Ung, made his heart ache even more.
Ung, who had received endless love nestled in his mother's arms in this room, now lay sleeping alone, having lost his mother, looking pitiful. Yŏng-ho had never dreamed he would see such a sight. It was an unexpected outcome.
The beginning of this tragedy must have been twelve days ago. Twelve days ago was when Kyŏng-ho received the last letter from his wife. Seeing the letter envelope thrown by the postman, Yŏng-ho's face grimaced. It wasn't just that day. It had almost become a habit for him to grimace whenever he received a letter from his wife. And although Misako couldn't read Korean, <294> she seemed to sense the content of the letters, making him always feel anxious. When Misako asked where it came from, he would evasively say it was from a friend.
Yŏng-ho had lied to Misako, telling her he wasn't married. Because of this, Misako lived on, never dreaming that Yŏng-ho had a wife and even a son.
Yŏng-ho had graduated from university in Tōkyō last spring and immediately got a job at a bank in Seoul. Getting hired so easily was because of Misako. Misako's father was a businessman. Misako, who had given her first love to Yŏng-ho, had asked her father to help arrange employment for her future husband, Yŏng-ho. Misako's father had a close relationship with an executive at a bank in Seoul and wrote a letter of introduction for Yŏng-ho. Thus, Yŏng-ho was able readily to secure a position at that bank immediately upon his return.
"Once we part, that'll be the end of it." "Misako probably won't follow me all the way to Korea." Misako, whom he had thought this about, came to Korea a few days after he sent a letter saying he had found a job. Yŏng-ho hadn't realized the strength of Misako's love, strong enough to make her follow him to Korea. Because of this, when leaving Tōkyō, Yŏng-ho had sent a letter to his wife in his hometown saying he would bring her up as soon as he found a job in Seoul. Yŏng-ho had truly intended to do so, but unexpectedly received a telegram from Misako. Upon receiving the telegram, Yŏng-ho tore up the letter he had written and set aside to send to his wife. A storm erupted in Yŏng-ho's heart. "How can I break through this difficult situation?" He agonized over this problem. For several days, he lost his appetite and suffered, wondering how best to handle the situation. In the meantime, Misako had already arrived.
Thus, Yŏng-ho's precarious first household with Misako, which even he hadn't anticipated, unfolded limitlessly in a corner of Seoul. On the other hand, Yŏng-ho's wife waited endlessly day after day for happy news from her husband.
Yŏng-ho received letters from his wife almost daily. Receiving his wife's letters asking how the job search was going, Yŏng-ho replied only that he hadn't found a job yet. However, this couldn't continue for more than four months. His wife in the hometown somehow found out <295> that her husband had actually been employed for some time and was even living with a Japanese woman, and she immediately wrote a letter to her husband. The agony that had briefly subsided for Yŏng-ho arose once again.
Receiving a letter saying she would come up to Seoul if he didn't resolve the situation quickly, Yŏng-ho didn't know what to do. After much thought, he wrote and sent a letter detailing the circumstances. He explained how he had met Misako by chance while in Tōkyō, how he had easily gotten the job through Misako's father's introduction, how he had planned to bring his wife from home as soon as he was employed, but Misako unexpectedly followed him to Korea. He then wrote that if he abandoned Misako now, he would likely lose the job he had worked hard to get. He asked his wife to understand these things, promising that when he found an opportunity to transfer elsewhere, he would reform his current life and leave Misako. Finally, he added that if she failed to understand these circumstances and came to Seoul, he would then throw everything away and set off on a path of aimless wandering towards Manchuria. In truth, Yŏng-ho was not without affection for his wife. Misako also loved him with all her might, so Yŏng-ho was truly suffering at a crossroads of love.
Saying he couldn't abandon Misako for the time being for the sake of his livelihood was, for Yŏng-ho, a statement contrary to his conscience. Yŏng-ho was not the type to cling to a woman he didn't care for just for sustenance. It was merely an excuse to gain some leeway in his heart, caught at the painful crossroads of love, from his wife. While an excuse, he thought it the best point to make his wife understand. Yŏng-ho couldn't help but be moved by Misako's devotion. The power of Misako's great love rendered Yŏng-ho's heart immobile. Only when faced with such a situation did Yŏng-ho finally realize how heavy his responsibility was for having trifled with a woman. He thought that abandoning Misako now would mean ruining her life, something unthinkable for a human being. If he had known that the foolish escapades of his carefree student days would lead to such results today, he would never have gotten involved with Misako in the first place.
His wife, trusting and loving her husband, understood from his letter the difficult situation and agony he was currently in. The wife, faithful to her husband, decided after receiving the letter not to say anything for the sake of her husband's future, entrusting all her happiness to Ung <296> in her hometown, and only quietly prayed in her heart for her husband to get transferred soon.
Yŏng-ho, upon receiving his wife's reply, was deeply moved by her. And so, he wracked his brain studying solutions for his life situation.
A year passed like this! On the surface, it seemed to pass without incident, but his wife's inner heart was never stable, and Yŏng-ho himself never had a moment without feeling pain.
About a month ago, Yŏng-ho noticed from the letters she sent that his wife's attitude, which had been sailing smoothly, had suddenly changed. She suggested it was a timeless matter, and he should rather return home and farm together. But in reality, Yŏng-ho was not clinging to Misako for sustenance. If he were holding onto Misako merely for food, Yŏng-ho would have long ago cast off the unforgettable suffering and, as his wife suggested, returned to his hometown to farm peacefully. That wasn't the issue. It was a matter of affection towards Misako that he couldn't speak of to his wife.
Ten-odd days ago, when Yŏng-ho tore open the last letter from his wife, his vision blurred, and his mind reeled. It felt as though an iron mace had fallen upon the head of Yŏng-ho, who was wandering at the crossroads of love.
Misako, knowing nothing, also looked wide-eyed at Yŏng-ho's behavior.
Yŏng-ho read the letter once more.
It was more of a suicide note than a letter. It was the final suicide note to her husband from his cursed wife.
"Waiting a month, waiting two months, brings no particular news, only increasing heartache. How must your heart feel, sir? Thinking about all this, I have decided to die. By the time you receive this letter, your wife will no longer be in this world. Your suffering will disappear. Your wife dies for your sake. Please raise pitiful Ung well."
The content of the letter, clumsily written in pencil, was brief. Yŏng-ho left Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul) on the night train that day without telling Misako whether he was coming or going. Yŏng-ho intended to go and save his wife before she died.
"If only she hasn't died..."
With this expectation and a sliver of hope, Yŏng-ho arrived in his hometown the next morning. However, Yŏng-ho's<297> expectation and hope crumbled futilely. His wife, just as she had left in her suicide note, had become a guest who would not return, having drunk lye the previous afternoon. Only young Ung clung to his dead mother's body, crying.
Yŏng-ho inwardly apologized to his dead wife's departed spirit for his wrongdoing. He held onto his wife's corpse and wept endlessly.
Ung, taken from his mother's corpse into the arms of his unfamiliar father, cried, calling for his mother.
Yŏng-ho felt ashamed to face the villagers. He thought they would curse him and ridicule him. Looking at the villagers felt hotter than holding a bonfire to his face.
"Filthy man!"
"The man who killed a person!"
It felt as though such curses reached his ears. It felt as though the villagers were spitting saliva on his face.
Because he had lost his parents when young and had no relatives in his hometown, his situation felt even more solitary. There was only Ung and himself.
Yŏng-ho had always proclaimed that people who couldn't hold their heads up for fear of outsiders' slander were weak-willed, but as his circumstances today were extraordinary, he feared outsiders' criticism, and felt his character degrading.
More than anyone, he felt unable to face his own brother-in-law, yet hearing his comforting words of consolation, Yŏng-ho could not suppress his feelings of self-reproach.
"My dear fellow! I am a sinner. I am the one who killed my wife, the one who killed your sister."
That evening, Yŏng-ho grabbed his brother-in-law's wrist, spoke thus, and wept. The tears flowing down in two streams from his large eyes testified that these were words without falsehood, a confession of a frank conscience.
"She poisoned herself due to extreme nervous exhaustion. Don't think anything else. It's all one's given fate."
The brother-in-law's voice sounded as gentle as a kind mother's.
"Extreme nervous exhaustion! That too is because of me! What can I possibly say..."
It was true that Yŏng-ho's wife had committed suicide due to extreme nervous exhaustion. She had trusted only her husband and waited solely for him to transfer to another post.
As a husband's wife, for the sake of her husband's happiness, she couldn't say what needed to be said, weeping silently inwardly and suffering, <298> eventually developing nervous exhaustion. When it manifested its most severe symptoms, she drank poison to forget everything.
Yŏng-ho knew his wife's heart well. Though he tried to forget and forget again, what remained unforgettable was his wife of days past.
He couldn't bear the thought of his wife, who met her end so helplessly and kindly.
He remembered his wife's devotion to him in days gone by. That pierced Yŏng-ho's conscience deeply.
When Yŏng-ho went to Tōkyō to study, he remembered how his wife did neighbors' chores (싹일), saved up pennies, and diligently sent them to him. Thinking of that now, faced with his wife's death resulting from his own beastly behavior, he saw himself as a demon. Though his original intentions were not so, it was useless now.
Even though more than a week had passed since Yŏng-ho buried his wife, he had no thought of leaving his hometown. He didn't want to stay in his hometown, nor did he want to go elsewhere; his nerves were almost incapacitated.
From Misako, who knew nothing, letters arrived almost daily urging him to return to the capital. Telegrams also came. But Yŏng-ho didn't reply. He sent no word to the bank either. Before Yŏng-ho now, there was no Misako, no bank, nothing. He lacked the mental space to think about such things. For him, there was only Ung (藥 - This seems like a typo, should likely be 웅/Ung). Apart from the resolve to raise Ung preciously, just as his mother had loved him, Yŏng-ho had nothing.
It felt as though he was now living solely for Ung's sake.
"Ung, even if I have to sacrifice everything, I will strive for your happiness."
Yŏng-ho gazed intently at the face of Ung sleeping alone, murmuring this inwardly. The sleeping Ung occasionally sobbed softly (흑흑 느긴다). From his small mouth, sighs occasionally escaped, seeming to lament the distant, turbulent future and the present.
Yŏng-ho also lay down. He held Ung, sleeping soundly on his chest, tightly in a strong embrace. Then he tried to sleep, hoping to forget all his agony, even for a short while. But sleep did not come. Even a moment's rest was not permitted to Yŏng-ho. Yŏng-ho could not stay lying down. It felt as if a fire was burning in his chest. He got up from his bedding again, opened the door, and sat down on the veranda edge (퇴ㅅ마루).
The chilly wind seemed to wash over his constricted chest. From inside the room, the sound of Ung's sobbing flowed out. From somewhere, the first rooster's crow drifted mournfully, shaking the cold autumn dawn air.<299>

**Summary**

Yŏng-ho, a Korean man educated in Tōkyō, returns to his rural hometown consumed by guilt after his wife's suicide. Her death was precipitated by Yŏng-ho's affair with Misako, a Japanese woman in Seoul whose connections secured his bank job. Yŏng-ho had hidden his marriage from Misako and his affair from his wife, leading his wife to despair and take her own life, leaving behind their young son, Ung. Overwhelmed by shame and grief, Yŏng-ho struggles to face his past actions, his community, and his responsibility towards the traumatized Ung, who oscillates between needing his father and mourning his mother. The story ends with Yŏng-ho finding no solace, haunted by his wife's sacrifice and the uncertain future of his son.

From a historical perspective, the story vividly portrays the personal conflicts arising during Korea's colonial period. It highlights the tensions between traditional Korean family structures and the modern, often Japanese-influenced, lives adopted by educated Koreans like Yŏng-ho, including relationships with Japanese individuals (Misako). Historians might find the depiction of Yŏng-ho's internal struggle, the wife's tragic adherence to traditional expectations juxtaposed with her ultimate despair, and the complex dynamics involving Korean, Japanese, and modern urban (Seoul/Tōkyō) versus rural Korean settings particularly revealing of the era's social and psychological landscape. The economic dependency tied to the relationship with Misako also reflects colonial power dynamics.

**Named Entities**

Original Form	Hangul or Kana	English Translation or Romanization
韓仁澤	한인택	Han In-t'aek
경호	경호	Kyŏng-ho (Appears as 영호/Yŏng-ho in the main text)
영호	영호	Yŏng-ho
웅	웅	Ung
미사꼬	미사코	Misako
동경	동경	Tōkyō
서울	서울	Seoul
만주	만주	Manchuria
은행	은행	Bank

**Glossary**

Original Word	Standard Hangul	English Explanation
하날	하늘	Sky (Older spelling)
녀	여	Prefix often used before nouns related to women (e.g., 여우 - fox, originally 녀호) or phonetic rendering. Here possibly part of 들녀오는 (들려오는 - coming heard from).
외기럭기	외기러기	Lone wild goose (Older spelling/form)
섯다	섰다	Stood (Older spelling)
들녀오는	들려오는	Being heard from (a distance) (Older spelling)
우름소리	울음소리	Sound of crying (Older spelling)
부르지즘	부르짖음	A cry, shout, outcry (Older spelling)
같햇다	같았다	Was like, seemed like (Older spelling)
끈어진	끊어진	Cut off, ceased (Older spelling)
뵈일	보일	Be seen, visible (Older spelling)
한게선	한계선	Boundary line, limit line
같아였다	같았다	Was like, seemed like (Older spelling)
놀내지	놀라지	Be surprised (Older spelling)
없섯다	없었다	Did not exist, was not (Older spelling)
자긔	자기	Oneself, self (Older spelling)
몸둥이	몸뚱이	Body (Slightly dismissive or colloquial term)
나려온지	내려온 지	Since coming down/returning (Older spelling)
되여도	되어도	Even though it became/was (Older spelling)
귀치않어서	귀찮아서	Because it's bothersome/annoying (Older spelling)
낫이면	낮이면	During the day (Older spelling)
닫어걸고	닫아걸고	To shut and lock/bolt
밋에	밑에	Underneath, below (Older spelling)
괴로움	괴로움	Suffering, agony, distress
물너가지를 않엇다	물러가지를 않았다	Did not recede/withdraw (Older spelling)
도로혀	도리어	Rather, on the contrary (Older spelling)
같아야서	같아서	Because it seemed/was like (Older spelling)
부르지즈며	부르짖으며	While crying out/shouting (Older spelling)
달녀와서	달려와서	Having run up to (Older spelling)
매달닌다	매달린다	Clings to
놀내여	놀라서	Being surprised (Older spelling)
얼사안엇다	얼싸안았다	Hugged tightly (Older spelling)
움치린다	움츠린다	To huddle, crouch, flinch
껴안으며	껴안으며	While hugging
찾어다녓겟구나	찾아다녔겠구나	Must have been looking around for (Older spelling)
웨	왜	Why (Older spelling)
않어	않아	Not do/be (contracted form, older spelling)
아모말	아무 말	Any word(s), nothing
마즐	맞을	Deserving of (being hit), likely to receive (Older spelling)
부르지젔다	부르짖었다	Cried out, shouted (Older spelling)
쌀녹거리기	살랑거리기(?)	Trembling subtly (Possible interpretation of archaic form)
치어다	쳐다	To look up at
안우러	안 울어	I'm not crying / Don't cry (Infant/child speech or older form)
보고십지	보고 싶지	Don't want to see / Don't miss (Older spelling)
가삼에	가슴에	In the heart/chest (Older spelling)
밖는	박는	Driving in (like a nail)
아폇다	아팠다	It hurt (Older spelling)
허께	할게	I will do (Future tense promise, older form)
좋와	좋아	Like, good (Older spelling)
위로하는	위로하는	Consoling, comforting
자아내고야 말 것이다	자아내고야 말 것이다	Would inevitably evoke/bring about
하물며	하물며	Moreover, let alone, not to mention
어떠하였을까	어떠하였을까	How must it have been?
부르지젓다	부르짖었다	Cried out, shouted (Older spelling)
우름	울음	Crying, weeping (Older spelling)
말엇다	말았다	Stopped (doing something), ended up (Older spelling)
울니고야	울리고야	Making someone cry (emphatic) (Older spelling)
말미아마	말미암아	Due to, because of
회생되였다는	희생되었다는	The fact that (someone) was sacrificed (Older spelling)
이러난	일어난	Occurred, happened, arose
견듸지	견디지	Endure, bear (Older spelling)
울니지	울리지	Make cry (Older spelling)
느끼여	느껴	Feeling (Older spelling)
버둥	버둥	Struggling, flailing
노았다	놓았다	Put down, released (Older spelling)
행하여	향하여	Towards
씨스며	씻으며	While wiping (Older spelling)
맞어주지	맞아주지	Greet, welcome (Older spelling)
살어	살아	Alive, living (Older spelling)
깟닥	까딱	Slightly, just, barely (Often with sound/hearing)
뛰여	뛰어	Running (Older spelling)
너머젓니	넘어졌니	Did you fall down? (Older spelling)
빼아서	빼앗아	To snatch away, take away
뒤못양	뒷모양	Appearance from behind, retreating figure (Older spelling)
부허	부터	From (time/point) (Older spelling)
자긔의	자기의	One's own (Older spelling)
따러갔다	따라갔다	Followed (Older spelling)
끼여	끼어	Holding tightly (in arms) (Older spelling)
마러라	말아라	Don't do (imperative) (Older spelling)
더리고	데리고	Taking (someone along) (Older spelling)
앉허노고	앉혀놓고	Having seated (someone) (Older spelling)
내놋고	내놓고	Bringing out, presenting (Older spelling)
끈처노았다	끊어놓았다	Made (someone) stop (crying) (Older spelling)
울지마우	울지 마오	Don't cry (Polite imperative, slightly archaic/formal)
마조	마주	Facing each other
자란	자란	Grown up
더욱이나	더욱이나	Moreover, furthermore
안해가	아내가	Wife (Subject marker usage)
눌치만	눈치만	Only the sign/hint (Older spelling)
뵈이면	보이면	If (it) is shown/seen (Older spelling)
턱미테	턱밑에	Under the chin (Older spelling)
닥아앉어	다가앉아	Sitting close to (Older spelling)
보고십지	보고 싶지	Don't want to see / Don't miss (Older spelling)
성쟝하야	성장하여	Growing up (Older spelling)
리유로	이유로	For the reason
떠낫다는	떠났다는	That (someone) left/departed (Older spelling)
알엇다	알았다	Knew (Older spelling)
해매고	헤매고	Wandering, roaming (Older spelling)
까였다	깨었다	Woke up, was broken from (Older spelling)
깊어오니	깊어가니	As it deepens
아참	아침	Morning (Older spelling/pronunciation)
싫여	싫어	Don't want to, dislike (Older spelling)
웨	왜	Why (Older spelling)
나뿐	나쁜	Bad (Older spelling)
안오시느냐고	안 오시느냐고	Asking why (someone respected) doesn't come (Older spelling)
되여서	되어서	Having become (Older spelling)
안온다던데	안 온다던데	Heard that (someone) doesn't come (Older spelling)
하여도	하여도	Even if (one) does
나분	나쁜	Bad (Older spelling)
수그러젓다	수그러졌다	Lowered, bowed (head) (Older spelling)
낫을	낯을	Face (Object marker usage) (Older spelling)
옳다	옳다	Right, correct
아희에게까지	아이에게까지	Even to a child (Older spelling)
안타까왔으면	안타까웠으면	If (she) had felt pitiful/frustrated
고요이	고요히	Quietly, calmly (Older spelling)
누이고	뉘고	Laying (someone) down (Older spelling)
간난	갓난	Newborn (infant)
재우뜻이	재우듯이	As if putting to sleep (Older spelling)
가비웁게	가볍게	Lightly (Older spelling)
두다렸다	두드렸다	Patted, tapped (Older spelling)
기여	기어	Crawling (into) (Older spelling)
살란하였다	산란하였다	Was distraught, agitated, scattered (mind)
오륙년	오륙 년	Five or six years
고뇌를	고뇌를	Agony, anguish
부치가며	붙이가며	Attaching/devoting (oneself) to (Older spelling)
안게	안겨	Being held (in arms) (Older spelling)
누어자는	누워 자는	Lying down sleeping (Older spelling)
보리라고는	보리라고는	That (I) would see (such a thing)
않엇던	않았던	Had not been (Older spelling)
열이틀	열이틀	Twelve days (Possibly older or dialectal form for 열흘+이틀)
찡그려첬다	찡그려졌다	Grimaced, frowned (Older spelling)
되던	되던	Used to become, became (habitually)
알어보는	알아보는	Recognizing, finding out (Older spelling)
조마조마하였다	조마조마하였다	Was anxious, nervous
어데서	어디서	From where (Older spelling)
어물어물하여	어물어물하여	Evasively, vaguely
넹기였던	넘기였던	Handed over, passed off (as) (Older spelling)
들지 않엇다고	들지 않았다고	Saying he hadn't married (Older spelling: 들다 for 장가들다 - to marry)
살어 왔다	살아 왔다	Has lived (Older spelling)
알지 못하고	알지 못하고	Not knowing
하였던	하였던	Had done
받힌	바친	Dedicated, devoted (Older spelling)
위하야	위하여	For the sake of (Older spelling)
알선을	알선을	Arrangement, good offices, mediation
주엇던	주었던	Had given (Older spelling)
관게로	관계로	Due to the relationship
써 주엇던	써 주었던	Had written (for someone) (Older spelling)
그리하야	그리하여	And so, thus (Older spelling)
되야	되어	Becoming (Older spelling)
되였던	되었던	Had become (Older spelling)
해여지면	헤어지면	If (we) part (Older spelling)
딸어	따라	Following (Older spelling)
차저	찾아	Looking for, visiting (Older spelling)
깨닷지	깨닫지	Realize (Older spelling)
올나오게	올라오게	To come up (to the city) (Older spelling)
부치엇던	부쳤던	Had sent (letter) (Older spelling)
작정하고	작정하고	Deciding, planning
있섯던	있었던	Had been (Older spelling)
받엇던	받았던	Had received (Older spelling)
부치려고	부치려고	Intending to send (Older spelling)
노았던	놓았던	Had placed/set aside (Older spelling)
찌어버렸다	찢어버렸다	Tore up (Older spelling)
이러났다	일어났다	Arose, occurred
란경을	난경을	Difficult situation (難境)
돌파할까	돌파할까	How to break through?
알엇다	앓았다	Suffered, agonized over (Older spelling)
하였으면	하였으면	If (I) had done
몇을	며칠	Several days (Older spelling)
식음도	식음도	Food and drink (appetite)
하였던	하였던	Had done
사이애	사이에	In the meantime (Older spelling)
간닥한	간단한(?)	Simple, precarious (?) (Context suggests precarious, but form is unusual; possibly 간략한 or 위태한 intended)
첬	첫	First (Older spelling)
살님은	살림은	Household, living situation
펄처지게	펼쳐지게	To unfold, spread out (Older spelling)
되였다	되었다	Became (Older spelling)
반면	반면	On the other hand
깃뿐	기쁜	Happy, joyful (Older spelling)
받다싶이	받다시피	Almost receiving (daily)
받엇다	받았다	Received (Older spelling)
되엇는가	되었는가	How did it become? (How is it going?) (Older spelling)
아즉	아직	Still, yet (Older spelling)
되지 않엇다고만	되지 않았다고만	Only that it hadn't happened/worked out (Older spelling)
회답을	회답을	Reply, answer
하였다	하였다	Did (Older spelling)
게속	계속	Continuation (Older spelling)
못하엿다	못하였다	Could not do (Older spelling)
되였다는	되었다는	That (he) had become (employed) (Older spelling)
어떻케	어떻게	How (Older spelling)
알엇다	알았다	Found out, knew (Older spelling)
받어던	받았던	Had received (Older spelling)
몰났다	몰랐다	Did not know (Older spelling)
못하야	못하여	Unable to do, failing to do (Older spelling)
부치엇다	부쳤다	Sent (letter) (Older spelling)
기희에	기회에	Opportunity, chance (Older spelling)
맞나게	만나게	To meet (Older spelling)
되였다는	되었다는	That (it) happened (Older spelling)
불러오리라고	불러오리라고	Saying he would call/bring (her) (Older spelling)
작정하였던	작정하였던	Had planned/decided
왔다는	왔다는	That (she) came
버린다면	버린다면	If (he) abandons
모처럼	모처럼	After much effort, kindly
취직하였던	취직하였던	Had been employed
되리라는	되리라는	That (it) would become (Older spelling)
리해하도록	이해하도록	So that (she) understands (Older spelling)
보와	보아	Seeing, looking for (an opportunity)
전직을	전직을	Job transfer
개혁하고	개혁하고	To reform, reorganize
버리겠다는	버리겠다는	That (he) would abandon
리해	이해	Understanding (Older spelling)
못하여	못하여	Unable to
상경을	상경을	Going up to the capital (Seoul)
내던지고	내던지고	Throwing away
정처없이	정처 없이	Aimlessly, without a fixed place
방랑의	방랑의	Of wandering
떠나겠다는	떠나겠다는	That (he) would leave
사실	사실	In fact, truth
아니엇다	아니었다	Was not (Older spelling)
역시	역시	Also, likewise
힘것	힘껏	With all one's strength (Older spelling)
사랑하여 주는	사랑하여 주는	Loving (him)
고민하게	고민하게	To agonize
되였던	되었던	Had become (Older spelling)
버리면	버리면	If (he) abandons
실직을	실직을	Losing one's job
되겠으니	되겠으니	Since (he) would become
위하야	위하여	For the sake of (Older spelling)
당분간	당분간	For the time being
못버리겠다는	못 버리겠다는	That (he) cannot abandon
있서서는	있어서는	For (him) (Older spelling)
붓잡고	붙잡고	Holding onto (Older spelling)
있을	있을	Would be
안해에게	아내에게	To his wife (Older spelling)
마움에	마음에	In the heart/mind (Older spelling)
얻으려는	얻으려는	Trying to obtain
핑게의	핑계의	Of an excuse (Older spelling)
되면서도	되면서도	Even while being
안해의게	아내에게	To his wife (Older spelling)
리해를	이해를	Understanding (Older spelling)
시키는데	시키는데	In making (her) understand
조목으로	조목으로	As a point/item
생각하였던	생각하였던	Had thought
정성을	정성을	Sincerity, devotion
다하는	다하는	Doing one's utmost
어찌할 수 없엇다	어찌할 수 없었다	Could not help it, couldn't do anything about it (Older spelling)
위대한	위대한	Great, mighty
힘이	힘이	Power, strength
마음을	마음을	Heart, mind
꼼짝 못하게	꼼짝 못하게	Unable to move, immobilized
하였던	하였던	Had done
희롱한	희롱한	Trifled with, toyed with
자기의	자기의	One's own
책임이	책임이	Responsibility
중하다는	중하다는	That (it) is heavy/serious
광경을	광경을	Scene, sight
당하여서야	당하여서야	Only upon encountering/facing
비로소	비로소	For the first time, finally
깨달엇던	깨달았던	Had realized (Older spelling)
와서	와서	Now that it has come to this
버린다면	버린다면	If (he) abandons
일생을	일생을	Lifetime
버리게	버리게	Cause to ruin/abandon
인간으로서는	인간으로서는	As a human being
못할	못할	Cannot do, unthinkable
작란이	장난이	Mischief, prank, escapade (Older spelling)
낳게	낳게	To give birth to, lead to
되리라는	되리라는	That (it) would become (Older spelling)
알엇더면	알았더라면	If (he) had known (Older spelling)
당초에	당초에	In the first place, initially
알지 않엇을	알지 않았을	Would not have known (Older spelling)
신임하고	신임하고	Trusting
사랑하고	사랑하고	Loving
남편이	남편이	Husband
보낸	보낸	Sent
어떠한	어떠한	What kind of
곤경에서	곤경에서	In a difficult situation
고민하고	고민하고	Agonizing
있다는	있다는	That (he) is
리해하였다	이해하였다	Understood (Older spelling)
충실한	충실한	Faithful, devoted
위하야	위하여	For the sake of (Older spelling)
소리도	소리도	Even a word/sound
아니하기로	아니하기로	Deciding not to do
작정하고	작정하고	Deciding, planning
락을	낙을	Pleasure, joy (Older spelling)
부치고	부치고	Entrusting, attaching (Older spelling)
하로	하루	One day, quickly (Older spelling)
속히	속히	Quickly
전직이	전직이	Job transfer
되기만	되기만	Only becoming
은은이	은은히	Quietly, secretly (Older spelling)
축원을	축원을	Prayer, blessing
하였던	하였던	Had done
회답을	회답을	Reply
받은	받은	Received
안해에게서	아내에게서	From his wife (Older spelling)
무한한	무한한	Infinite, boundless
감동을	감동을	Being moved/touched
받엇다	받았다	Received (Older spelling)
그리하야	그리하여	And so, thus (Older spelling)
자기	자기	His own
생활에	생활에	Regarding life
대한	대한	About
해결책을	해결책을	Solution
연구하기에	연구하기에	In researching/studying
알엇다	앓았다	Agonized over (Older spelling)
내려오기를	내려오기를	Continuing for (time)
일년	일년	One year
겉으로는	겉으로는	On the surface
아무	아무	Any
풍파없이	풍파 없이	Without trouble/incident
내려온	내려온	Passed, went on
같으나	같으나	Although it seemed
안해의	아내의	Wife's (Older spelling)
속마음은	속마음은	Inner heart, true feelings
언제던지	언제든지	Always, whenever (Older spelling)
안정이	안정이	Stability, peace
되지 않고	되지 않고	Not becoming
영호	영호	Yŏng-ho
역시	역시	Also
고통을	고통을	Pain, suffering
느끼지 않엇을	느끼지 않았을	Had not felt (Older spelling)
때가 없섯다	때가 없었다	There was no time when (Older spelling)
순풍으로	순풍으로	Smoothly (like sailing with a favorable wind)
내려가던	내려가던	Was going/proceeding
급작이	갑자기	Suddenly (Older spelling)
변하여진	변하여진	Changed
깨달엇다	깨달았다	Realized (Older spelling)
세월없는	세월 없는(?)	Timeless, unending (?) (Meaning unclear, perhaps 'futile' or 'pointless waiting')
도라와	돌아와	Returning (Older spelling)
함께	함께	Together
농사라도	농사라도	Even farming
짓자는	짓자는	Suggesting to do/build (farm)
기실	기실	In reality, actually
붓잡고	붙잡고	Holding onto (Older spelling)
있는	있는	Being
아니엇다	아니었다	Was not (Older spelling)
단순이	단순히	Simply, merely (Older spelling)
있다면	있다면	If (he) were
벌서	벌써	Already (Older spelling)
하로라도	하루라도	Even for a single day (Older spelling)
잊지 못하는	잊지 못하는	Unforgettable
괴로움을	괴로움을	Suffering
물리치고	물리치고	Pushing away, overcoming
안해의	아내의	Wife's (Older spelling)
말과 같이	말과 같이	As (she) said
도라가서	돌아가서	Returning (Older spelling)
마음 편하게	마음 편하게	With a peaceful mind
농사라도	농사라도	Even farming
지였을	지었을	Would have done/built (farmed) (Older spelling)
그것이	그것이	That thing
아니엇던	아니었던	Was not (Older spelling)
안해에게는	아내에게는	To his wife (Older spelling)
말하지 못할	말하지 못할	Unspeakable
미사꼬에 대한	미사코에 대한	Regarding Misako
인정문제인	인정 문제인	Matter of human feeling/affection (人情問題)
뜨더 볼	뜯어 볼	Tear open and look at (Older spelling)
때의	때의	At the time of
아득하여지고	아득하여지고	Becoming distant/blurred (vision)
정신이	정신이	Mind, consciousness
어지러웠던	어지러웠던	Was dizzy/reeling
방황하던	방황하던	Was wandering
영호의	영호의	Yŏng-ho's
머리 우에는	머리 위에는	Upon the head (Older spelling)
철퇴가	철퇴가	Iron mace/hammer
내린	내린	Fallen, struck
같아였다	같았다	Seemed like (Older spelling)
휘둥그래젓다	휘둥그레졌다	Eyes became wide (with surprise) (Older spelling)
내려보앗다	내려보았다	Looked down at, read through (Older spelling)
유서이였던	유서이었던	Was a suicide note (Older spelling)
올리는	올리는	Offering up (to a superior/husband)
저주받은	저주받은	Cursed
유서이였던	유서이었던	Was a suicide note (Older spelling)
기다려도	기다려도	Even waiting
두달을	두 달을	Two months
기다려도	기다려도	Even waiting
별다른	별다른	Particular, special
소식이	소식이	News
없고	없고	There is not
마음만	마음만	Only the heart/mind
괴로워질	괴로워질	Will become painful
뿐이올시다	뿐이올시다	It is only (Humble/polite ending)
당신의	당신의	Your (formal)
마음인들	마음인들	Even your heart/mind
오즉	오죽	How much (more/less) (Older spelling)
하겠읍니까	하겠습니까	Would it be? (Formal question)
나는	나는	I am
이 모든 것을	이 모든 것을	All these things
생각하고	생각하고	Thinking
죽기로	죽기로	To die (decided)
작정을	작정을	Decision
하였읍니다	하였습니다	Have made (Formal ending)
당신이	당신이	You (formal)
이 편지를	이 편지를	This letter
받어볼	받아볼	Receive and see (Older spelling)
때는	때는	At the time when
처는	처는	Your wife (humble reference)
벌서	벌써	Already (Older spelling)
이 세상에	이 세상에	In this world
있지 않을	있지 않을	Will not be
것입니다	것입니다	(It) is (Formal ending)
당신의	당신의	Your (formal)
고민은	고민은	Suffering, agony
없어져 갈	없어져 갈	Will disappear
것입니다	것입니다	(It) is (Formal ending)
처는	처는	Your wife (humble)
당신을	당신을	You (formal)
위하야	위하여	For the sake of (Older spelling)
죽읍니다	죽습니다	Dies (Formal ending)
불상한	불쌍한	Pitiful (Older spelling)
웅을	웅을	Ung (Object)
잘	잘	Well
길러주소서	길러주소서	Please raise (him) (Archaic/formal request)
서투룹게	서투르게	Clumsily (Older spelling)
쓴	쓴	Written
편지내용은	편지 내용은	Letter content
간단하였다	간단하였다	Was brief/simple
밤차로	밤차로	By the night train
미사꼬에게는	미사코에게는	To Misako
온다간다	온다 간다	Coming or going (telling one's whereabouts)
말도 하지 않고	말도 하지 않고	Without even saying a word
떠났다	떠났다	Left
죽기 전에	죽기 전에	Before dying
가서	가서	Going
안해를	아내를	Wife (Object) (Older spelling)
살이려고	살리려고	Trying to save (Older spelling)
하였다	하였다	Did
말어주엇으면	말아주었으면	If only (she) hadn't (died) (Older spelling)
이리한	이러한	This kind of (Older spelling)
기대와	기대와	Expectation and
한줄기의	한 줄기의	A ray/stream of
희망을	희망을	Hope
가지고	가지고	Having, with
그 이튼날	그 이튿날	The next day (Older spelling)
아침에	아침에	In the morning
도착하였다	도착하였다	Arrived
그러나	그러나	However, but
영호의	영호의	Yŏng-ho's
기대와	기대와	Expectation and
희망은	희망은	Hope
허무하게도	허무하게도	Futilely, vainly
문허지고	무너지고	Collapsed, crumbled (Older spelling)
말엇다	말았다	Ended up (doing) (Older spelling)
안해는	아내는	The wife (Older spelling)
그가	그가	She
유서에	유서에	In the suicide note
남계논	남겨놓은	Had left behind (Older spelling)
것과 같이	것과 같이	Just as
그 전날	그 전날	The day before
오후에	오후에	In the afternoon
양재물을	양잿물을	Lye water (caustic substance used for suicide)
마시고	마시고	Drinking
불귀의 객이	불귀의 객이	Guest who does not return (euphemism for deceased)
되였던 것이다	되었던 것이다	Had become (Older spelling)
어린	어린	Young
웅만이	웅만이	Only Ung
죽은	죽은	Dead
어미의	어미의	Mother's
시체에	시체에	On the corpse
매달려	매달려	Clinging to
우는	우는	Crying
고혼에게	고혼에게	To the departed spirit
속으로	속으로	Inwardly
자기 잘못을	자기 잘못을	His own fault/wrongdoing
사과하였다	사과하였다	Apologized
그는	그는	He
안해의	아내의	Wife's (Older spelling)
시체를	시체를	Corpse (Object)
붓잡고	붙잡고	Holding onto (Older spelling)
끝없이	끝없이	Endlessly
울엇다	울었다	Wept (Older spelling)
시체로부터	시체로부터	From the corpse
낯선	낯선	Unfamiliar
아버지의	아버지의	Father's
품에	품에	In the embrace/arms
안계서	안겨서	Being held (Older spelling)
어머니를	어머니를	Mother (Object)
부르며	부르며	While calling
우는	우는	Crying
부끄러웠다	부끄러웠다	Was ashamed
그들은	그들은	They
자기를	자기를	Himself (Object)
욕할	욕할	Would curse/insult
것이며	것이며	And would
비웃을	비웃을	Would ridicule
것이라고	것이라고	That (they) would
생각하였다	생각하였다	Thought
바라보는	바라보는	Looking at
것이	것이	The act of
낯에다	낯에다	On the face (Older spelling)
모닥불을	모닥불을	Bonfire (Object)
붓는	붓는(?)	Pouring/setting (?) (Maybe 붙이는 - applying/holding)
것보다	것보다	Than
더욱	더욱	More
홧근거렷다	화끈거렸다	Felt hot/flushed (Older spelling)
욕들이	욕들이	Curses, insults
귀에	귀에	In the ear
들리는	들리는	Being heard
같아였다	같았다	Seemed like (Older spelling)
동내사람들이	동네 사람들이	Villagers (Older spelling)
자기의	자기의	His own
낯에	낯에	On the face (Older spelling)
춤을	침을	Saliva, spit (Older spelling)
뱉는	뱉는	Spitting
같아였다	같았다	Seemed like (Older spelling)
어릴 때	어릴 때	When young
부모를	부모를	Parents (Object)
잃고	잃고	Having lost
일가친척조차	일가친척조차	Even relatives
없는	없는	Without, not having
까닭으로	까닭으로	Because of, for the reason
지기의	자기의	His own (Older spelling)
신세가	신세가	Situation, circumstances
더욱	더욱	More
고독하여진	고독하여진	Became lonely
같아였다	같았다	Seemed like (Older spelling)
자기밖에는	자기밖에는	Other than himself
없섯다	없었다	There was not (Older spelling)
외인의	외인의	Outsider's, stranger's
비방을	비방을	Slander, criticism
두러워하야	두려워하여	Fearing (Older spelling)
머리를	머리를	Head (Object)
들지 못하는	들지 못하는	Unable to lift/hold up
사람들은	사람들은	People
의지가	의지가	Willpower
약한	약한	Weak
사람이라고	사람이라고	That (they are) people
영호는	영호는	Yŏng-ho
늘	늘	Always
부르지저	부르짖어	Having cried out/proclaimed (Older spelling)
왔으나	왔으나	Had come (doing), but
오늘의	오늘의	Today's
자기의	자기의	His own
환경이	환경이	Environment, circumstances
남다른	남다른	Different from others, extraordinary
것 만큼	것만큼	As much as
외인의	외인의	Outsider's
비방이	비방이	Slander
두러웠고	두려웠고	Was fearful (Older spelling)
인격이	인격이	Character, personality
떨어져 가는	떨어져 가는	Falling, degrading
듯하였다	듯하였다	Seemed like
누구보다도	누구보다도	More than anyone
볼 면목이 없는	볼 면목이 없는	Having no face to show, ashamed to face
자기의	자기의	His own
처남되는	처남 되는	Who is his brother-in-law
사람이	사람이	Person
도로혀	도리어	Rather, on the contrary (Older spelling)
자긔를	자기를	Himself (Object) (Older spelling)
위로하여주는	위로하여주는	Consoling
부러운	부드러운 (?)	Soft, gentle (부러운 means enviable, likely typo for 부드러운)
말소리에	말소리에	In the voice
영호는	영호는	Yŏng-ho
자책의	자책의	Of self-reproach
감을	감을	Feeling (Object)
금치	금치	Suppress, control
못하였던	못하였던	Could not
여보	여보	Hey, look here (addressing someone close)
나는	나는	I am
죄인이오	죄인이오	A sinner (Archaic/formal ending)
나는	나는	I am
나의	나의	My
안해를	아내를	Wife (Object) (Older spelling)
죽인	죽인	Who killed
놈이고	놈이고	Am a bastard/fellow and
당신의	당신의	Your
누이를	누이를	Sister (Object)
죽인	죽인	Who killed
놈이 올시다	놈이올시다	Am a bastard/fellow (Humble/formal ending)
영호는	영호는	Yŏng-ho
그날 밥	그날 밤 (?)	That night (?) (밥 means rice/meal, likely typo for 밤/night)
처남의	처남의	Brother-in-law's
손목을	손목을	Wrist (Object)
잡고	잡고	Holding
그렇게	그렇게	Like that, thus
말하며	말하며	While saying
울엇다	울었다	Wept (Older spelling)
거즛이	거짓이	Lie, falsehood (Older spelling)
없는	없는	Without
말이고	말이고	Is the word and
솔직한	솔직한	Frank, honest
량심의	양심의	Of conscience (Older spelling)
고백이라고는	고백이라고는	That (it) is a confession
것을	것을	The fact that
그의	그의	His
크다란	커다란	Large, big (Older spelling)
눈에서	눈에서	From the eyes
두 줄기의	두 줄기의	Of two streams
선을	선을	Lines (Object)
그리며	그리며	Drawing
흘러내리는	흘러내리는	Flowing down
눈물이	눈물이	Tears
말하여 주엇다	말하여 주었다	Told, testified (Older spelling)
극도의	극도의	Extreme
신경쇠약으로	신경쇠약으로	Due to nervous exhaustion/neurasthenia
음독한	음독한	Took poison
것일세	것일세	It is (Familiar/slightly authoritative ending)
딴 생각은	딴 생각은	Other thoughts
하지도 말게	하지도 말게	Don't even do/think (Familiar command)
모다	모두	All (Older spelling)
타고 난	타고난	Inborn, destined
자기의	자기의	One's own
팔자지	팔자지	Is fate/destiny (Contraction with familiar ending)
처남의	처남의	Brother-in-law's
말소리는	말소리는	Voice
인자한	인자한	Benevolent, kind
어머니의	어머니의	Mother's
말소리와 같이	말소리와 같이	Like the voice
부드럽게	부드럽게	Softly, gently
들였다	들렸다	Was heard (Older spelling)
신경쇠약	신경쇠약	Nervous exhaustion, neurasthenia
그것도	그것도	That too
저 때문이지요	저 때문이지요	It is because of me (Humble polite ending)
무어라	무어라	What (to say)
하였으면 좋을는지	하였으면 좋을는지	What would be good to have said/done
영호의	영호의	Yŏng-ho's
안해는	아내는	Wife (Older spelling)
극도의	극도의	Extreme
신경쇠약으로	신경쇠약으로	Due to nervous exhaustion
자살한	자살한	Committed suicide
것이 사실이다	것이 사실이다	Is the truth
그는	그는	She
남편만	남편만	Only the husband
믿고	믿고	Trusting
다른 곳으로	다른 곳으로	To another place
전직하기만	전직하기만	Only transferring jobs
기다렸던	기다렸던	Had waited
것이다	것이다	It is
한 남편의	한 남편의	Of one husband
안해로서	아내로서	As a wife (Older spelling)
그 남편의	그 남편의	That husband's
행복을	행복을	Happiness (Object)
위하야	위하여	For the sake of (Older spelling)
그는	그는	She
할 말를	할 말을	Words to say (Object) (Typo: 말를)
못하고	못하고	Unable to do
속으로	속으로	Inwardly
쓸쓸이	쓸쓸히	Lonely, desolately (Older spelling)
울어오고	울어오고	Had been crying
고민하여	고민하여	Agonizing
오든	오던	Had come (doing), had been (Older spelling)
끝에	끝에	At the end
신경쇠약에	신경쇠약에	To nervous exhaustion
걸리였고	걸렸고	Contracted, caught (illness) (Older spelling)
그것이	그것이	That
극도외	극도의	Extreme (Typo: 극도외)
악증을	악증을	Severe symptoms
발휘하게	발휘하게	To exhibit, display
되자	되자	As soon as it became
모든 것을	모든 것을	Everything (Object)
잊어버리려고	잊어버리려고	Trying to forget
음독을	음독을	Taking poison (Object)
한 것이엇다	한 것이었다	Was what (she) did (Older spelling)
영호는	영호는	Yŏng-ho
안해의	아내의	Wife's (Older spelling)
마음을	마음을	Heart, mind (Object)
잘 알고 있섯다	잘 알고 있었다	Knew well (Older spelling)
잊고	잊고	Forgetting
또	또	Again
잊어버리려고	잊어버리려고	Trying to forget
하여도	하여도	Even though (he) tried
잊허지지	잊히지	Be forgotten (Older spelling)
않는	않는	Not
것은	것은	The thing that
지내간	지나간	Past, bygone (Older spelling)
날의	날의	Of the days
안해였다	아내였다	Was the wife (Older spelling)
너무도	너무도	Too, excessively
무능하게	무능하게	Helplessly, incompetently
선량하게	선량하게	Kindly, virtuously
최후를	최후를	The end, final moment (Object)
마친	마친	Finished, ended
안해	아내	Wife (Older spelling)
일이	일이	Matter, affair
안타까워서	안타까워서	Because it's pitiful/regrettable
견딀 수 없섯다	견딜 수 없었다	Could not bear/endure (Older spelling)
지내간	지나간	Past (Older spelling)
날	날	Day
자기에게	자기에게	To himself
충성을	충성을	Loyalty, devotion (Object)
다한	다한	Did one's utmost
안해의	아내의	Wife's (Older spelling)
일이	일이	Affair, matter
생각난다	생각난다	Comes to mind, remembers
그것은	그것은	That
영호의	영호의	Yŏng-ho's
량심을	양심을	Conscience (Object) (Older spelling)
쑥쑥	쑥쑥	Deeply, thoroughly (onomatopoeia for piercing)
쑤시는	쑤시는	Piercing, jabbing
것이다	것이다	Is the thing that
영호가	영호가	Yŏng-ho
동경에	동경에	To Tōkyō
건너가	건너가	Going across (to Japan)
공부할 때	공부할 때	When studying
그 안해는	그 아내는	That wife (Older spelling)
이웃집	이웃집	Neighbor's house
싹일을	삯일을	Paid labor, chores for wages (Older spelling)
하야	하여	Doing (Older spelling)
푼푼이	푼푼이	Penny by penny, frugally
뫃아서	모아서	Gathering, saving up (Older spelling)
자기에게	자기에게	To himself
정성것	정성껏	Sincerely, with devotion (Older spelling)
보내주던	보내주던	Used to send
그 일을	그 일을	That matter/deed (Object)
생각하고	생각하고	Thinking of
오늘의	오늘의	Today's
자기의	자기의	His own
수성에	수성(獸性)에	Beastliness, animal nature (likely 獸性)
가까운	가까운	Close to
행동에서	행동에서	From the behavior
일어난	일어난	Resulted from, arose from
안해의	아내의	Wife's (Older spelling)
주검에	주검에	Death, corpse (Object)
직면하게	직면하게	To face directly
되니	되니	As it became
자기 자신을	자기 자신을	Himself (Object)
자기로도	자기로도	Even by himself
악마와 같이	악마와 같이	Like a demon
보였다	보였다	Appeared, seemed
자기의	자기의	His own
본 뜻은	본뜻은	Original intention
그러하지도 않엇지만	그러하지도 않았지만	Although it wasn't like that (Older spelling)
지금와서는	지금 와서는	Now that it has come to this
소용없는	소용없는	Useless
것이다	것이다	Is the thing
영호는	영호는	Yŏng-ho
안해를	아내를	Wife (Object) (Older spelling)
장사한 지	장사한 지	Since burying
일주일이	일주일이	One week
넘어도	넘어도	Even though it passed
고향을	고향을	Hometown (Object)
떠날	떠날	To leave
생각을	생각을	Thought (Object)
두지 않엇다	두지 않았다	Did not have/keep (Older spelling)
그는	그는	He
고향에	고향에	In the hometown
있고 십지도 않엇고	있고 싶지도 않았고	Did not want to stay and (Older spelling)
다른 데로	다른 데로	To another place
가고싶지도	가고 싶지도	Did not want to go either
않을 만큼	않을 만큼	To the extent that
그의	그의	His
신경은	신경은	Nerves
거이	거의	Almost (Older spelling)
무능하게	무능하게	Incapacitated, powerless
되였다	되었다	Became (Older spelling)
아모 것도	아무것도	Anything (Older spelling)
알지 못하는	알지 못하는	Not knowing
미사꼬에게서는	미사코에게서는	From Misako
매일과 같이	매일과 같이	Like every day
상경하라는	상경하라는	Telling (him) to come to the capital
편지가	편지가	Letter
왔다	왔다	Came
전보도	전보도	Telegram too
왔다	왔다	Came
그러나	그러나	However
영호는	영호는	Yŏng-ho
회답도	회답도	Reply either
하지 않엇다	하지 않았다	Did not do (Older spelling)
은행에도	은행에도	To the bank either
아모	아무	Any (Older spelling)
소식을	소식을	News (Object)
하지 않엇다	하지 않았다	Did not do/send (Older spelling)
지금	지금	Now
영호의	영호의	Yŏng-ho's
앞에는	앞에는	Before him
미사꼬도	미사코도	Misako either
은행도	은행도	Bank either
아모 것도	아무것도	Anything (Older spelling)
없섯다	없었다	Was not there (Older spelling)
그는	그는	He
그만한	그만한	That much
것을	것을	Thing (Object)
생각할	생각할	To think about
여유를	여유를	Mental space, composure (Object)
가지지 못하였다	가지지 못하였다	Could not have
그에게는	그에게는	For him
오즉	오직	Only (Older spelling)
藥이	약(웅?)이	Medicine/Drug (likely typo for 웅/Ung) (Object)
있을	있을	There is only
따름이다	따름이다	Is only
웅을	웅을	Ung (Object)
어머니가	어머니가	Mother
그를	그를	Him (Object)
사랑하여 주는	사랑하여 주는	Loving
이상	이상	More than, as much as
고이고이	곱게곱게	Preciously, carefully (Older spelling/form)
길러내려는	길러내려는	Intending to raise
결심밖에	결심밖에	Only the determination
영호의게는	영호에게는	For Yŏng-ho (Older spelling)
아무 것도	아무것도	Nothing
없섯다	없었다	Was not (Older spelling)
자기가	자기가	He himself
지금	지금	Now
살어가는	살아가는	Living (Older spelling)
것이	것이	The fact that
오즉	오직	Only (Older spelling)
웅을	웅을	Ung (Object)
위하여서만	위하여서만	Only for the sake of
살어가는	살아가는	Living (Older spelling)
듯 하였다	듯하였다	Seemed like
웅아	웅아	Ung (vocative)
내가	내가	I
모든 것을	모든 것을	Everything (Object)
희생하여	희생하여	Sacrificing
가면서라도	가면서라도	Even while doing so
네	네	Your (familiar)
행복을	행복을	Happiness (Object)
위하야	위하여	For the sake of (Older spelling)
힘쓰겠다	힘쓰겠다	Will strive, make effort
영호는	영호는	Yŏng-ho
외로이	외로이	Lonely (Older spelling)
누어자는	누워 자는	Lying sleeping (Older spelling)
웅의	웅의	Ung's
낯을	낯을	Face (Object) (Older spelling)
물끄럼이	물끄러미	Vacantly, intently (Older spelling)
바라보다가	바라보다가	While gazing at
이렇게	이렇게	Like this
입 속으로	입 속으로	Inwardly, under his breath
부르지젓다	부르짖었다	Cried out (Older spelling)
잠든	잠든	Asleep
웅은	웅은	Ung
이따금	이따금	Occasionally
흑흑	흑흑	Sound of sobbing
느긴다	느낀다 (?)	Feels/sobs (?) (느끼다 usually means feel, context suggests sobbing/whimpering - 흐느낀다)
그의	그의	His
적은	작은	Small (Older spelling)
입에서는	입에서는	From the mouth
아득한	아득한	Distant, remote
장래의	장래의	Of the future
파란과	파란과	Troubles, ups and downs and
지금을	지금을	The present (Object)
원망하는	원망하는	Resenting
듯한	듯한	Seeming like
한숨이	한숨이	Sigh
갓금	가끔	Sometimes, occasionally (Older spelling)
흘러나온다	흘러나온다	Flows out, escapes
영호도	영호도	Yŏng-ho too
자리에	자리에	On the bedding/spot
누엇다	누웠다	Lay down (Older spelling)
그는	그는	He
자기의	자기의	His own
가슴에	가슴에	On his chest
곤하게	곤하게	Soundly (sleeping)
잠든	잠든	Asleep
웅을	웅을	Ung (Object)
힘있게	힘 있게	Strongly
폭	폭	Deeply, completely (embracing)
껴안였다	껴안았다	Embraced (Older spelling)
그러고	그러고	And then
그는	그는	He
잠시 동안이라도	잠시 동안이라도	Even for a short while
모든	모든	All
고민을	고민을	Agony, worries (Object)
잊을 수 있는	잊을 수 있는	Able to forget
잠이나	잠이나	Sleep at least
자려고	자려고	Trying to sleep
하였다	하였다	Did
그러나	그러나	However
잠이	잠이	Sleep
오지 않엇다	오지 않았다	Did not come (Older spelling)
영호에게는	영호에게는	To Yŏng-ho
잠시 동안의	잠시 동안의	Of a short while
안식조차	안식조차	Even rest/peace
허락지	허락지	Permit, allow (Older spelling)
않엇다	않았다	Did not (Older spelling)
영호는	영호는	Yŏng-ho
자리에	자리에	On the bedding
눕고	눕고	Lying down
있을 수가	있을 수가	Could not be
없섯다	없었다	Was not (Older spelling)
가슴에서	가슴에서	From the chest
불이	불이	Fire
붓는	붙는 (?)	Catching/burning (?) (붓다 means pour, 붙다 means catch fire)
듯 하였다	듯하였다	Seemed like
그는	그는	He
다시	다시	Again
자리에서	자리에서	From the bedding
일어나	일어나	Getting up
문을	문을	Door (Object)
열고	열고	Opening
퇴ㅅ마루에	툇마루에	On the narrow wooden porch/veranda outside a room (Older spelling)
나앉젓다	나앉았다	Sat out on (Older spelling)
쌀쌀한	쌀쌀한	Chilly, cool
바람이	바람이	Wind
답답한	답답한	Stifling, frustrating
가슴을	가슴을	Chest (Object)
씨서주는	씻어주는	Washing away/cooling (Older spelling)
듯하다	듯하다	Seems like
방안에서는	방 안에서는	From inside the room
웅의	웅의	Ung's
느끼는 소리가	흐느끼는 소리가 (?)	Sound of sobbing (?) (See 느긴다 above)
흘러나온다	흘러나온다	Flows out
어대서인지	어디서인지	From somewhere (Older spelling)
첫 닭	첫 닭	First rooster
우름소래가	울음소리가	Crowing sound (Older spelling)
가을	가을	Autumn
새벽	새벽	Dawn
찬	찬	Cold
공기를	공기를	Air (Object)
흔들며	흔들며	Shaking
애처럽게	애처롭게	Pathetically, mournfully
흘러온다	흘러온다	Flows, drifts (sound)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제7권 제3호
발행일	1935년 03월 01일
기사제목	傷痕
필자	韓仁澤
기사형태	소설

傷痕
						韓仁澤
밤은 점점 깊어가는데 기러기 한마리가 허무한 세상을 원망하는 방랑자와 같이 애닯이 울며 가을 하날을 날너 간다.
경호는 정신없는 사람모양으로 달빛에 그늘진 느티나무에 비스틈이 몸을 의지하고 가을의 방랑자인 짝 일흔 외기럭기이가 멀니 남쪽하날에 살어질 때까지 바라보고 섯다.
길 잃은 외기럭이가 자긔의 마음과도 같이 이 밤을 헤매며 더듬고 있는 것이 끝없이 안타가워 보였다. 잇다금식 앞산에서 들녀오는 『컹! 컹!』하는 여호의 외마듸 우름소리를 들을 때마다 영호는 그 우름소리가 자긔를 원망하고 저주하는 안해의 부르지즘 같이 들니였으며 장차 자긔에 압길에 그 어떤 알지 못할 불길한 가품이 도라오는라 것을 예언하는 사자의 소리와도 같이 들니였다.
영호는 모든 것을 바라보기가 무서웠다. 그보다도 세상의 삼라만상이 자긔를 보고 비웃는 것 같햇다. 그런 까닭으로 영호는 자긔의 모양을 세상에 내놓기가 부끄러웠다. 인적이 끈어진 이 밤이였지만 그래도 영호는 시컴언 느티나무 그늘 속에 자긔의 몸을 파묻은 것이 다행이라고 생각하였으며 두서너 발작만 나서면 개아미새끼가 기여가는 것까지도 뵈일 만큼 밝은 달빛이 흐르고 있는 그곧에까지 자긔의 몸을 내세을만한 용기를 가지지 못하였다. 눈앞에 보이는 시컴언 나무 그림자와 환한 달빛! 그 경게선은 영호에게 있어서는 너무나 엄청나게 큰 한게선같이 보였다. 자긔는 감이 그러한 결백한 대지를 밟지 못할 자격을 가진 것 같아였다.
영호는 최근 10여 일간 이렇게까지 자긔의 성격이 변하여진데 대하여서는 자긔 스스로도 놀내지 않을 수가 없섯다. 인간성을 잃은 자긔라고 그는 마음속으로 부르지젔다. 그렇게 생각하니 자긔로 자긔의 몸둥이를<289> 돌아보기도 보기 싫고 저주하고 싶헛다.
영호가 고향에 나려온지 10여 일이 되여도 동내사람을 대하기가 부끄럽고 모든 것이 귀치않어서 낫이면 문을 꽉 닫어걸고 염병하는 사람모양으로 누어있는 까닭도 그 까닭이엇다. 인적이 끈어진 밤이면 이 느티나무 밋에 와서 터질듯한 마음과 끝없는 괴로움을 잊으려고 나오는 것이다. 그러나 괴로운 마음은 이러한 곧에 나와 바람을 쏘인다 하여도 좀처럼 영호의 가슴에서 물너가지를 않엇다.
보는 것 듣는 것이 도로혀 자긔를 욕하고 비웃는 것 같아야서 견딜 수가 없엇다.
「아! 나는 인간이 아니다!」
「나는 사람을 죽인 놈이다」
극도의 고민으로 센치멘탈하여진 영호는 이렇게 부르지즈며 몸을 도리겨 머리를 느티나무에 내던지는 것이다.
영호의 정신은 어지러웠다. 영호는 허터진 머리를 쥐여 뜯엇다. 그때이다. 거이 우룸소리에 가까운 목소리로
「아버지!」
웅이가 타박거리며 영호의 곁에 달녀와서 양복바지에 매달닌다.
「웅이냐?」
영호는 깜짝 놀내여 웅의 손목을 잡엇 그러고 그는 웅이를 얼사안엇다. 웅이는 다섯살 나는 영호의 아들이다. 선하품을 하며 몸을 움치린다. 그러고는 와들와들 떤다.
「웅아! 추우냐 언제 나왔니?」
영호는 웅을 꼭 껴안으며 말한다.
「아까!」
「아까? 그러면 아버지를 퍽 찾어다녓겟구나?」
「...」
웅은 대답 대신에 머리를 가로 흔든다.
「그러면 웨 아버지 곁으로 진작 오지 않어? 아버지가 무서우냐?」
영호는 괴로운 눈으로 웅을 바라보았다. 웅은 아모말도 안하고 머리를 푹 숙인다. 영호의 마음은 더욱 괴로웠다.
「아! 나는 참으로 벼락을 마즐 놈이구나! 이것에게에까지...」
영호는 속으로 이렇게 부르지젔다. 영호의 눈에는 눈물이 핑핑 돌았다. 그의 어깨가 쌀녹거리기 시작한다.
어린 웅은 무엇을 생각하였는지 머리를 들어 못마땅하다는<290> 낯으로 영호를 치어다 보다가 머리를 흔들며
「아버지! 난 안우러. 난 어머니 보고십지 않어...」
울음에 가까운 웅의 말은 영호의 가삼에 못을 밖는 듯이 아폇다. 그는 아모말도 못하고 눈물어린 눈으로 웅을 바라볼 따름이엇다.
「아버지 다시는 어머니를 보구십다고 안허께...」
「난 아버지가 좋와! 그까지 어머니...」
울지 않겟다 하면서도 우름이 섞인 말로 아버지의 괴로워하는 마음을 알어차렷든지 위로하는 이 순정에는 누구던지 눈물을 자아내고야 말 것이다. 하물며 영호의 마음이야 그 어떠하였을까?
「나의 죄다. 이 무슨 운명의 악희냐?」 영호는 입 속으로 이렇게 부르지젓다. 영호의 우름은 터젓다. 그것은 자기로도 억제할 수 없는 우름이였다.
당장에 목을 딴다처도 꼼작 안할만큼 의지가 강하여 보이고 젊은 피가 뛰노는 남아다운 기개를 가진 영호이였으나 그의 괴로운 마음은 그를 울니고야 말엇다.
그를 울니게 한 것은 자긔의 책임감이라는 것보다 불상한 인생이 자긔로 말미아마 회생되였다는 그것보다 지금은 그것을 중심으로 이러난 웅의 순정이엇던 것이다.
웅의 순정은 영호를 울리지 않고는 견듸지 못하였다. 영호는 느끼여 운다.
「어머니...」
웅의 우름도 터젓다. 우름이 터저나오는 첫머리에는 그가 아버지를 보고 다시는 생각지도 않고 그까지 어머니라고 하던 어머니 소리가 먼저 나왔다. 그것으로만 끈치지 않엇다. 우름소리보다 어머니를 부르는 소리가 더 나오며 나종에는 아버지도 일없다는 듯이 아버지의 가삼에서 버둥을 치는 것이다. 영호는 웅을 내려 노았다. 웅의 마음이 시원하여질 때까지 웅을 울리고 싶헛다. 그러나 그것은 너무나 괴로운 일이엇다.
아버지도 아무 것도 상관이 없고 오즉 어머니만이라는 듯이 어머니를 부르며 웅은 집을 행하여 걸어간다. 아버지의 존재조차 인정 안한다는 듯이 뒤도 돌아보지 않고 한손으로 눌물을 연상 씨스며 어머니를 부르는 것이다.
그러나 어머니를 부르며 울며 가는 웅에게 그 어머니가 나와서 외로운 웅을 맞어주지 안는다. 이 세상에서 영원이 떠나간 어머니를 부르는 웅! 전과같이 웅의 어머니가 살어 있을 때라면 웅의 우름소리만 귀에 깟닥 들려도 하던 일을 던지고 뛰여 나와서<291>
「웨 우니? 웅아 울지마러라」
「누가 때리더냐. 어듸 너머젓니?」
이렇게 말하며 웅을 안고 치마자락으로 눈물을 씻어줄 것이다. 이 세상에서 영원이 없어진 웅의 어머니가 나올리도 없는 것이다. 악희의 신은 무상하게도 어린 웅에게서 이러한 행복을 빼아서 가고 만 것이다.
웅이 울며 걸어가는 뒤못양을 바라보는 영호의 눈앞은 아득하였다. 어미를 잃은 웅의 모양을 바라볼 때 영호는 자긔의 젊은 반생에 있어 이렇게까지 날카로운 칼끝으로 가슴을 싹싹 깎아내는 듯한 느낌을 가지여 보기는 처음이다. 인제부허 웅의 비극은 자긔의 비극과 함께 시작되야 목숨이 살어있을 때까지 영원이 꺼지지 않으리라고 생각하였다.
「웅아! 웅아!」
영호는 울음에 흡슬녀 나오는 목소리를 가다듬어 웅을 불으며 뒤를 따러갔다. 영호는 외로이 울고가는 웅을 가슴에 폭 끼여 안엇다.
「웅아! 울지 마러라! 아버지가 있지 안니! 서울에 더리고 가서 자동차도 사주고 그러고 비행기도...」
웅을 달내는 영호의 마음은 괴로웠다. 웅은 세상이 내게는 소용없고 오즉 어머니 뿐이라는 듯이 아버지 말은 들은 척도 하지 않고 어머니만 부르며 우는 것이다.
「웅아! 동내사람들이 들으면 우는 아이라고 흉을 보겟구나. 아버지도 인제는 안 운다. 딱 끈처라 웅아!」
「웅아! 울지 마러라. 울지 않으면 자미있는 이야기를 들녀주마! 참 자미있는 이야기를...」
방에 들어온 영호는 웅을 자리에 앉허노고 웅을 달내기에 애를 썼다. 과자도 내놋고 그림책도 펴보이고 하야 웅의 우름을 겨우 끈처노았다.
「아버지 난 다시는 안 울께 아버지도 울지마우. 난 아버지와 살테야. 어머니 없어도 괜찬어!」
웅은 눈물을 가로외로 씻고 코를 훌젹거리며 우슴을 우서 보인다.
「그렇치 아버지와 살지...」
이렇게 웅을 무릅에 올려 앉히고 말하며 마조 웃엇으나 영호의 우슴도 그러고 웅의 우슴도 모다 괴로운 우슴이였다.
웅이가 일년에 한번씩 보나마나하고 자란 자긔를 아버지가 좋다고 같이 살겟다고 하며 더욱이나 안해가 죽엇다는 소식을 듣고 내려온 자긔에게 첫날 저녁부터 아버지의 곁을 떠나지 않고 따라다니며 아버지의 품에서 잠을 자는 웅이가 얼마나 얼마나 고독을 느끼고 있으면 그렇게까지 할가 하는 것을 생각하면<292> 이것이 모다 자긔가 범한 크다란 죄의 결과라고 생각하지 않을 수가 없섯다.
그러고 그 어린 마음에 무슨 생각이 들엇는지 자긔가 우울하여진 눌치만 뵈이면 턱미테 닥아앉어
「그까지 어머니...」
「난 어머니 보고십지 안어...」 이렇게 말을 하니 자긔를 위로시키기에 애쓰는 정상이란 참으로 눈으로 볼 수가 없섯다. 영호는 웅에게까지 큰 죄를 지은 것 같헛다. 웅이가 만일 성쟝하야 자긔 어머니가 어떠한 리유로 어떻게 이 세상을 떠낫다는 것을 알게 된다면 자긔를 저주할 것을 알엇다. 영호는 끝없는 명상에서 해매고 있섯다.
「아버지! 무엇을 생각하고 있어?」
「아무것도 생각지 안는다」
영호는 웅의 말소리에 명상에서 까였다.
「이야기할 것을 생각했서? 아버지...」
웅은 아버지가 이야기할 때에 가끔 이렇게 앉어 무엇을 생각하는 것을 보았던 까닭이다.
「응!」
영호는 정신없는 사람모양으로 아무것도 생각지 않고 거저 기게적으로 대답을 하였다.
「무슨 이야기 고양이 이야기? 아버지 난 고양이 이야기가 자미잇어...」
「그럼! 자미잇지」
「아버지 한번 해주어 고양이 이야기...」
「밤이 깊어오니 오늘밤은 자고 내일 아참 이야기하마...」
「싫여 지금 듣고 싶어」
웅은 몸을 가루 흔들며 떼를 쓴다.
「아버지 말슴을 잘 들어야 내일 모레 기차를 타고 서울로 데리고 갈테야」
「난 서울안가? 이 집에서 살테야」
「웨 서울안가? 아버지와 같이 서울가서 살면 좋지 않어. 전차도 타고 또 자미있는 구경도 하고 서울 참 좋단다」
「싫여! 서울안가」
「아버지가 서울가면 너 혼자 살테야?」
「...」
웅은 말없이 앉엇다. 웅은 한참 무엇을 생각하다.
「서울가면 낫분 사람이 된대요」
「하하! 낫분 사람이 된대. 누가 그래」
「어머니가!」
「거즛말이다. 아버지가 어듸 나뿐 사람이 됏니」
「나뿐 사람이지 뭐! 아버지가 웨 집으로 안오시느냐고<293> 물으니 어머니가 아버지는 나뿐 사람이 되여서 안온다던데 뭐! 어머니를 보고 서울 아버지 있는 곳으로 가자고 하여도 나분 사람이 되는 곳으로 못간다고 하던데요」
「..   」
이 말을 들은 영호의 머리는 그도 알지 못하게 수그러젓다. 영호는 어린 웅의 낫을 바라보기에도 부끄러웠다.
「참말이우. 어머니가 늘 그러시던데...」
말없이 앉은 아버지를 바라보고 웅은 이렇게 말하는 것이다.
「옳다! 아버지는 나뿐 사람이다」
영호는 이렇게 말하고 웅을 힘있게 껴안엇다. 영호의 양심은 이 말을 하지 않고는 견듸지 못하였다.
「나는 과연 나뿐 사람이다」
그는 속으로 또다시 이렇게 부르지젓다. 어린 아희에게까지 자긔를 원망하는 말을 들려준 안해를 평시 같으면 그릇된 행동이라고 생각하였겟지만 오늘의 이 경우를 당하여서는 도로혀 안해가 그 얼마나 안타까왔으면 웅에게까지 그런 말을 하였을가 하는 한 남편으로서의 부끄러운 감을 느끼였다.
웅은 끄덕끄덕 졸고 있다. 영호는 웅을 자리에 고요이 누이고 간난 아희를 잠재우뜻이 숨을 죽여가며 자근자근 가비웁게 자리 위를 두다렸다. 웅은 세상의 모든 고통를 잊을 수 있는 꿈속으로 기여 들어가는 듯이 잠이 들엇다.
방안은 끝없이 고요하고 쓸쓸하다. 가을로서는 보기 드문 쌀쌀한 바람이 문틈으로 새여들어온다. 밤도 퍽 깊어진 모양같다.
영호의 마음은 살란하였다. 이 쓸쓸한 방에서 자기 안해가 오륙년 동안 세상의 모든 고뇌를 느끼면서 오즉 웅에게 마음을 부치가며 쓸쓸한 세월을 보내였다는 것을 생각하니 마음이 더욱 쓰리엿다.
이방 이곳에서 어머니의 품에 안게 끗없는 사랑을 받던 웅은 지금 어미를 잃고 외로이 누어자는 것이 불상하게 보였다. 영호는 이런한 모양을 보리라고는 꿈에도 생각지 않엇던 것이다. 뜻하지 않엇던 결과이였던 것이였다.
이 비극의 첫머리 그것은 열이틀 전이리라. 경호는 안해에게서 마지막 편지를 받던 그때가 열이틀 전이엿다. 배달부가 던지고 간 편지봉을 본 영호의 낯은 찡그려첬다. 그것은 그날뿐이 아니였다. 언제던지 안해에게서 온 편지를 받으면 낯을 찡그리는 것이 거이 습관이 되던 것이다. 그러고 조선문을 알지 못하는 「미사꼬」였지만 <294> 편지 내용을 알어보는 듯하야 언제던지 마음이 조마조마하였다. 「미사꼬」 혹시 어데서 온 것인가 물을때면 동무에게서 온 것이라고 어물어물하여 넹기였던 것이엇다.
영호는 미사꼬에게 자기는 장가를 들지 않엇다고 속였다. 그런 까닭으로 미사꼬는 영호에게 안해와 그러고 아들까지 있다는 것을 꿈에도 알지 못하고 살어 왔다.
영호는 작년 봄 동경에서 대학을 졸업하고 나오는 길로 곧 서울 어떤 은행에 취직을 하였던 것이다. 그렇게 쉽게 취직하게 된 것은 미사꼬때문이다. 미사꼬의 아버지는 실업가이였다. 영호에게 첫사랑을 받힌 미사꼬는 그 남편될 영호를 위하야 자기 아버지에게 취직 알선을 소개하여 주엇던 것이엇다. 미사꼬의 아버지는 서울 어떤 은행 중역과 친한 관게로 영호에게 소개장을 써 주엇던 것이다. 그리하야 영호는 나오는 즉시로 일이 쉽게 되야 그 은행으로 들어가게 되였던 것이였다.
「한번 해여지면 그만이겠지」 「미사꼬가 조선까지 딸어 나오지 않겠지」 이렇게 생각하였던 미사꼬가 자기가 취직되였다는 편지를 보낸 몇일 후에 조선을 나왔던 것이다. 영호는 미사꼬가 자기를 차저 조선으로 따라오게까지 그의 사랑이 강한 것을 깨닷지 못하였다. 그런 까닭으로 영호는 동경에서 나올 때 고향에 있는 안해에게 서울에서 취직이 되면 곧 올나오게 하겠다는 편지를 부치엇던 것이다. 영호도 참마음으로 그렇게 작정하고 있섯던 것이 뜻밖에 미사꼬에게서 전보를 받엇던 것이다. 영호는 그 전보를 받고 안해에게 부치려고 써 노았던 편지를 그대로 찌어버렸다. 영호의 마음에는 선풍이 이러났다. 「어떻게 하면 이 란경을 돌파할까?」 그는 이 문제로 머리를 알엇다. 어떻게 처리를 하였으면 좋을는지 몇을 동안은 식음도 잃고 고민을 하였던 것이엇다. 그러는 사이애 미사꼬는 벌서 나왔다.
이렇게야 영호 자신조차 뜻하지 않엇던 미사꼬와의 간닥한 첬 살님은 서울 한 구석에 무한히 펄처지게 되였다. 그 반면 영호의 안해는 매일 남편에게서 깃뿐 소식만 뜻없이 기다리고 있섯다.
영호는 매일 받다싶이 안해의 편지를 받엇다. 취직이 어떻게 되엇는가 하는 안해의 편지를 받는 영호는 아즉 취직이 되지 않엇다고만 회답을 하였다. 그러나 그것은 사개월 이상 더 게속 못하엿다. 고향에 있는 안해는 자기 남편이 벌서 전부터 취직이 되였다는 것과 또 일본여자와 살님을 하고 있다는 소문까지 어떻케 알고<295> 곧 그 남편에게 편지를 하였던 것이다. 영호에게는 얼마동안 머리를 숙이였던 고통이 또 다시 일어나게 되였다.
속히 처리를 하여 주지 않으면 서울로 올러오겟다는 편지를 받어던 영호는 어쩔줄을 몰났다. 그는 생각다 못하야 자세한 내용의 이야기를 써서 부치엇다. 자기가 동경있을 때 우연한 기희에 미사꼬를 맞나게 되였다는 것과 미사꼬의 아버지 소개로 쉽게 취직이 되었다는 것,  취직만 되면 곧 고향에 있는 안해를 불러오리라고 작정하였던 것이 뜻밖에 미사꼬가 조선으로 자기를 따라 왔다는 말을 하고 지금 미사꼬를 버린다면 모처럼 취직하였던 것이 실직이 되리라는 것 이런 것을 안해가 리해하도록 쉽게 쓴 다음 기회를 보와 다른 곳에 전직을 하게 되면 지금 생활을 개혁하고 미사꼬를 버리겠다는 말을 썼다. 그리고 끝으로 만일 이러한 사정을 리해 못하여 주고 상경을 한다면 그때는 모든 것을 내던지고 만주방면으로 정처없이 방랑의 길을 떠나겠다는 말을 썼다. 영호는 사실 그 안해와 정이 없는 것은 아니엇다. 미사꼬도 역시 자기를 힘것 사랑하여 주는 것이니 영호는 참으로 사랑의 십자로에서 고민하게 되였던 것이다.
미사꼬를 버리면 실직을 하게 되겠으니 먹을 것을 위하야 당분간 미사꼬를 못버리겠다는 말은 영호에게 있서서는 양심에 없는 말이다. 먹을 것을 위하야 마음에 없는 여자를 붓잡고 있을 영호가 아니였다. 그것은 다만 안해에게 사랑의 괴로운 십자로에 헤매는 자기 마움에 여유를 얻으려는 핑게의 말이엇다. 핑게가 되면서도 안해의게 리해를 시키는데 제일 더 좋은 조목으로 생각하였던 것이다. 영호는 자기에게 정성을 다하는 미사꼬의 사랑에 어찌할 수 없엇다. 미사꼬의 위대한 사랑의 힘이 영호의 마음을 꼼짝 못하게 하였던 것이엇다. 한 여성을 희롱한 자기의 책임이 얼마나 중하다는 것을 영호는 그러한 광경을 당하여서야 비로소 깨달엇던 것이엇다. 지금와서 미사꼬를 버린다면 미사꼬의 일생을 버리게 되는 것이고 인간으로서는 못할 일이라고 생각하였다. 철없는 학생시대의 헛된 작란이 오늘의 이러한 결과를 낳게 되리라는 것을 그가 알엇더면 당초에 미사꼬를 알지 않엇을 것이다.
남편을 신임하고 남편을 사랑하고 있는 그 안해는 남편이 보낸 편지를 보고 그가 지금 어떠한 곤경에서 고민하고 있다는 것을 리해하였다. 남편에게 충실한 그 안해는 그 편지를 받고 남편의 장래를 위하야 아무 소리도 아니하기로 작정하고 고향에서 모든 락을 웅에게<296> 부치고 남편이 하로 속히 전직이 되기만 마음속으로 은은이 축원을 하였던 것이다.
안해의 회답을 받은 영호는 안해에게서 무한한 감동을 받엇다. 그리하야 자기 생활에 대한 해결책을 연구하기에 머리를 알엇다.
이렇게 내려오기를 일년! 겉으로는 아무 풍파없이 내려온 것 같으나 안해의 속마음은 언제던지 안정이 되지 않고 영호 역시 고통을 느끼지 않엇을 때가 없섯다.
최근 한달 전부터 순풍으로 내려가던 안해의 태도가 급작이 변하여진 것을 영호는 그가 보낸 편지에서 깨달엇다. 세월없는 일이니 차라리 집에 도라와 함께 농사라도 짓자는 것이다. 그러나 기실 영호는 먹을 것을 위하야 미사꼬를 붓잡고 있는 것이 아니엇다. 단순이 먹을 것을 위하야 미사꼬를 붓잡고 있다면 영호는 벌서 하로라도 잊지 못하는 괴로움을 물리치고 안해의 말과 같이 고향에 도라가서 마음 편하게 농사라도 지였을 것이다. 문제는 그것이 아니엇던 것이엇다. 안해에게는 말하지 못할 미사꼬에 대한 인정문제인 것이다.
10여 일 전 안해에게서 마지막으로 온 편지를 뜨더 볼 때의 영호는 앞이 아득하여지고 정신이 어지러웠던 것이다. 사랑의 십자로에서 방황하던 영호의 머리 우에는 철퇴가 내린 것 같아였다.
아무 것도 알지 못하는 미사꼬도 영호의 태도를 보고 눈이 휘둥그래젓다.
영호는 그 편지를 다시 한번 내려보앗다.
그것은 편지라기보다 유서이였던 것이다. 마지막으로 남편에게 올리는 저주받은 안해의 유서이였던 것이다.
「한달을 기다려도 두달을 기다려도 별다른 소식이 없고 마음만 괴로워질 뿐이올시다. 당신의 마음인들 오즉 하겠읍니까? 나는 이 모든 것을 생각하고 죽기로 작정을 하였읍니다. 당신이 이 편지를 받어볼 때는 처는 벌서 이 세상에 있지 않을 것입니다. 당신의 고민은 없어저 갈 것입니다. 처는 당신을 위하야 죽읍니다. 불상한 웅을 잘 길러주소서.」
연필로 서투룹게 쓴 편지내용은 간단하였다. 영호는 그날 밤차로 미사꼬에게는 온다간다 말도 하지 않고 경성을 떠났다. 영호는 안해가 죽기 전에 가서 안해를 살이려고 하였다.
「죽지만 말어주엇으면...」
이리한 기대와 한줄기의 희망을 가지고 그 이튼날 아침에 영호는 고향에 도착하였다. 그러나 영호의<297> 기대와 희망은 허무하게도 문허지고 말엇다. 안해는 그가 유서에 남계논 것과 같이 그 전날 오후에 양재물을 마시고 불귀의 객이 되였던 것이다. 어린 웅만이 죽은 어미의 시체에 매달려 우는 것이다.
영호는 죽은 안해의 고혼에게 속으로 자기 잘못을 사과하였다. 그는 안해의 시체를 붓잡고 끝없이 울엇다.
웅은 어머니의 시체로부터 낯선 아버지의 품에 안계서 어머니를 부르며 우는 것이다.
영호는 동내사람들을 대하기가 부끄러웠다. 그들은 자기를 욕할 것이며 비웃을 것이라고 생각하였다. 동내사람들을 바라보는 것이 낯에다 모닥불을 붓는 것보다 더욱 홧근거렷다.
「더러운 놈!」
「사람을 죽인 놈!」
이러한 욕들이 귀에 들리는 것 같아였다. 동내사람들이 자기의 낯에 춤을 뱉는 것 같아였다.
고향이라고 하더라도 어릴 때 부모를 잃고 일가친척조차 없는 까닭으로 지기의 신세가 더욱 고독하여진 것 같아였다. 웅과 자기밖에는 없섯다.
외인의 비방을 두러워하야 머리를 들지 못하는 사람들은 의지가 약한 사람이라고 영호는 늘 부르지저 왔으나 오늘의 자기의 환경이 남다른 것 만큼 외인의 비방이 두러웠고 인격이 떨어저 가는 듯하였다.
누구보다도 볼 면목이 없는 자기의 처남되는 사람이 도로혀 자긔를 위로하여주는 부러운 말소리에 영호는 자책의 감을 금치 못하였던 것이다.
「여보! 나는 죄인이오. 나는 나의 안해를 죽인 놈이고 당신의 누이를 죽인 놈이 올시다.」
영호는 그날 밥 처남의 손목을 잡고 그렇게 말하며 울엇다. 거즛이 없는 말이고 솔직한 량심의 고백이라고는 것을 그의 크다란 눈에서 두 줄기의 선을 그리며 흘러내리는 눈물이 말하여 주엇다.
「극도의 신경쇠약으로 음독한 것일세. 딴 생각은 하지도 말게. 모다 타고 난 자기의 팔자지」
처남의 말소리는 인자한 어머니의 말소리와 같이 부드럽게 들였다.
「극도의 신경쇠약! 그것도 저 때문이지요! 무어라 하였으면 좋을는지...」
영호의 안해는 극도의 신경쇠약으로 자살한 것이 사실이다. 그는 남편만 믿고 다른 곳으로 전직하기만 기다렸던 것이다.
한 남편의 안해로서 그 남편의 행복을 위하야 그는 할 말를 못하고 속으로 쓸쓸이 울어오고 고민하여 오든<298> 끝에 신경쇠약에 걸리였고 그것이 극도외 악증을 발휘하게 되자 모든 것을 잊어버리려고 음독을 한 것이엇다.
영호는 안해의 마음을 잘 알고 있섯다. 잊고 또 잊어버리려고 하여도 잊허지지 않는 것은 지내간 날의 안해였다.
너무도 무능하게 선량하게 최후를 마친 안해 일이 안타까워서 견딀 수 없섯다.
지내간 날 자기에게 충성을 다한 안해의 일이 생각난다. 그것은 영호의 량심을 쑥쑥 쑤시는 것이다.
영호가 동경에 건너가 공부할 때 그 안해는 이웃집 싹일을 하야 푼푼이 뫃아서 자기에게 정성것 보내주던 그 일을 생각하고 오늘의 자기의 수성에 가까운 행동에서 일어난 안해의 주검에 직면하게 되니 자기 자신을 자기로도 악마와 같이 보였다. 자기의 본 뜻은 그러하지도 않엇지만 지금와서는 소용없는 것이다.
영호는 안해를 장사한 지 일주일이 넘어도 고향을 떠날 생각을 두지 않엇다. 그는 고향에 있고 십지도 않엇고 다른 데로 가고싶지도 않을 만큼 그의 신경은 거이 무능하게 되였다.
아모 것도 알지 못하는 「미사꼬」에게서는 매일과 같이 상경하라는 편지가 왔다. 전보도 왔다. 그러나 영호는 회답도 하지 않엇다. 은행에도 아모 소식을 하지 않엇다. 지금 영호의 앞에는 「미사꼬」도 「은행」도 아모 것도 없엇다. 그는 그만한 것을 생각할 여유를 가지지 못하였다. 그에게는 오즉 藥이 있을 따름이다. 웅을 어머니가 그를 사랑하여 주는 이상 고이고이 길러내려는 결심밖에 영호의게는 아무 것도 없엇다.
자기가 지금 살어가는 것이 오즉 웅을 위하여서만 살어가는 듯 하였다.
「웅아 내가 모든 것을 희생하여 가면서라도 네 행복을 위하야 힘쓰겠다」
영호는 외로이 누어자는 웅의 낯을 물끄럼이 바라보다가 이렇게 입 속으로 부르지젓다. 잠든 웅은 이따금 흑흑 느긴다. 그의 적은 입에서는 아득한 장래의 파란과 지금을 원망하는 듯한 한숨이 갓금 흘러나온다.
영호도 자리에 누엇다. 그는 자기의 가슴에 곤하게 잠든 웅을 힘있게 폭 껴안였다. 그러고 그는 잠시 동안이라도 모든 고민을 잊을 수 있는 잠이나 자려고 하였다. 그러나 잠이 오지 않엇다. 영호에게는 잠시 동안의 안식조차 허락지 않엇다. 영호는 자리에 눕고 있을 수가 없엇다. 가슴에서 불이 붓는 듯 하였다. 그는 다시 자리에서 일어나 문을 열고 퇴ㅅ마루에 나앉젓다.
쌀쌀한 바람이 답답한 가슴을 씨서주는 듯하다. 방안에서는 웅의 느끼는 소리가 흘러나온다. 어대서인지 첫 닭 우름소래가 가을 새벽 찬 공기를 흔들며 애처럽게 흘러온다.<299>
<289-299>