잡지명	別乾坤 第53號
발행일	1932년 07월 01일
기사제목	探偵小說, 汽車에서 맛난 사람 (Detective Novel: A Person Met on the Train)
필자	流邦
기사형태	소설 (Fiction)

A Detective Novel: A Person Met on the Train
						Yu-bang

As the Wonsan-bound train was about to depart, a shabby-looking man hurriedly boarded and, coming to my side, said,
"Excuse me, but please move aside for a moment," and placed a bundle of papers he was carrying on the overhead rack above me. He then went to the seat across from me and sat down. I paid him no attention and continued talking with Mr. Son, who was sitting opposite me.

"These days, it seems everyone will starve to death. Morality, compassion, and loyalty are considered less than worn-out shoes, and everyone is consumed with money, but how can they get it as they please? Tragic events are happening here and there, and crimes never heard of before are occurring everywhere. How can one live even a day in peace with society like this? I'm only pessimistic, anxious and depressed, and there isn't a single day I feel good. It's really pathetic. Take a look at this newspaper. These days, you can’t bear to look at the newspapers."

On the second page, an article about a missing woman was reported in large letters. The public's attention had already become desensitized to the frequent disappearances of people these days, but the announcement of the disappearance of the widow of Baron Yi (李) caused a slight stir.

According to the newspaper article, the woman disappeared from her home in Samcheong-dong three days ago and has not returned. It seems the woman went out for a walk that evening, and a search of the room revealed no signs of travel.

She was highly regarded as a very dignified woman, so there were rumors of some secret hidden within. However, the police denied that there was likely any heinous crime involved.

"Incidents like this will probably become more frequent. As the economic recession intensifies, more crimes will occur."

"Just because Baron Yi’s (李) widow hasn't returned home for two or three days, there's no need to connect it to a criminal case so arbitrarily. Is there anything so problematic about the Baroness going somewhere for a few days? While everyone is making a fuss, she might be relaxing comfortably at a seaside villa. Why worry about such unnecessary things—"

Suddenly, Mr. Son stopped speaking and exclaimed in surprise,
"Ah, get out of the way, get out of the way!" I stood up in surprise and looked above me. A large bag containing product samples placed on the rack was about to fall right on my head.

"I'm very sorry. I put the item in a tight space earlier, and I didn't realize it would fall. Please forgive me," the man who had placed the paper-wrapped item apologized for his mistake.

"It's nothing, it's alright."

With that incident, my conversation with Mr. Son came to an end, so I began to read the newspaper. After reading a few lines, I looked up and saw that Mr. Son was still staring at the rack above me with a strange look.

"Why are you looking like that? Do you think it's going to fall again?"

Knowing well that it was shameful for a gentleman to pry into other people's belongings on a train, I involuntarily looked up at my bag and the bundle of paper placed together. It was a round, slender, long object of about three or four ja (尺; approx. 3-4 feet) showing a strange curve. Noticing my gaze, the man who had placed it there looked over at me anxiously and laughed.

"Are you talking about that bundle of paper? Haha, that's my leg."

"What?! A leg?!"

Hearing his words, it did look like the shape of a person's leg. The slightly bent knee clearly resembled the shape of a human leg. Seeing how surprised I was, he chuckled and said,
"You were surprised, weren't you? That's my business." He pulled out a business card. <42>

"Jang Yeong-tae (張永泰), Manufacturer of Artificial Limbs."

He spoke politely, but for some reason, I didn't like his impression. I could see the skillful manner of a salesman, yet there was something cunning about him. When getting off at Wonsan station, I helped him lower the bundle of paper, and I was surprised once again by how heavy it was.

I was busy with various things the next day and soon forgot about the man named Jang Yeong-tae who had carried the paper-wrapped artificial leg, but I happened to meet him again by chance. A few days later, I boarded a train to Mokpo for some business, and the train car was very crowded. There were many people standing because there weren't enough seats. Moreover, many people boarded at Daejeon Station, making the train car even more crowded. Just as the train was about to depart, a couple boarded belatedly; the man was thin and small, while the woman was plump and large. I usually give up my seat for women, but this time I didn't feel like offering my seat. If I gave up the seat I had barely managed to get, it would be difficult to get another one for the long journey. Besides, the lady was so plump that there wouldn't be enough space for her to sit comfortably even if I stood up. The friend sitting next to me didn't seem to be dreaming of offering his seat either. However, an unexpected event forced me to give up my seat. It wasn't long after the train left Daejeon. Unexpectedly, the plump woman screamed and leaned her elephantine body against me. Everyone was surprised and looked at us. I endured the suffocating discomfort and forced myself to stand up. The woman's round, flat face was filled with fear, and her ample chest heaved.

"Ah, scary, please get that away from me! Oh, I was so scared!"

I didn't understand what she was talking about until I followed her gaze to the rack above, where a round, long, slender, brown bundle of paper was placed. It was an object shaped exactly like a human arm, with the end slightly open, revealing one finger. "I'm very sorry," a familiar voice said, and when I glanced back, it was none other than Jang Yeong-tae, the man I had met on the train the other day.

"Please don't worry. You seem surprised by my arm, but this is my artificial arm."

He glanced at me and seemed slightly surprised, then continued his explanation.

"As this gentleman knows well, I am Jang Yeong-tae, a manufacturer of artificial limbs. I'm very sorry for startling you. I have no words to express my apology for surprising the lady due to my carelessness."

For some reason, I didn't like this man. He also seemed uneasy about meeting me. He felt sorry that I had lost my seat because of him and offered me his seat, but I refused. I leaned against the window of the train door and began to read the newspaper. The newspaper still featured the strange case of Baron Yi’s (李) widow's disappearance. Her whereabouts were still unknown, and it was speculated that some crime had occurred. The only clue regarding the woman's movements was that a driver from Hanseong Motor Company had driven a woman resembling Baron Yi’s (李) widow from Gyeongseong Station to Guryongsan that evening. The newspaper published an article titled "Prevent the Rampage of Murderers" along with the woman's photograph.

"No matter what kind of murderer it is, they take extraordinary care to conceal the body. Even if there is an intention to hide the body, the means to do so are never easy. Thousands upon thousands of eyes shine in the streets. How can one deceive them and move the body? One could burn the body or dissolve it with chemicals, but according to past cases, it has almost always ended in failure. Indeed, there is no more difficult problem than disposing of a body after murder. If, unfortunately, Baron Yi’s (李) widow has been murdered in the disappearance case, the authorities should be able to easily find the criminal's traces and arrest the perpetrator. How can we allow the rampage of murderers to continue?"

I took my eyes off the newspaper and quietly pondered the issue of disposing of Baron Yi’s (李) widow's body. If I were the perpetrator, what would I do with the body? Burying it is too risky no matter what. I should burn it to destroy the evidence, but that is also difficult. Of course, I can't transport it out of the city. Then, the only remaining method would be to dismember the body piece by piece and discard them far away one by one. But doing so would take several days—I realized I was having strange thoughts and was startled. Jang (張) was silently looking at the newspaper. <43>

I looked at the bundle of paper on the rack again. At that moment, I had the urge to jump up and untie it, but I barely managed to calm myself and looked out the window.

The fresh air refreshed my head. I almost caused a big scene like a hysterical woman. I felt ashamed of myself for even having such thoughts. Thinking that the artificial limb manufacturer Jang Yeong-tae (張永泰) was related to the disappearance of Baron Yi’s (李) widow was like grabbing someone on the street and shouting, "You murderer!"

When I got off at Mokpo Station platform, all the unpleasant thoughts had left my head, but I couldn't help but stop when I saw the police station bulletin board in front of the station.

"500 Won Reward - A reward of the above amount will be given to anyone who notifies the police of the whereabouts of Baroness Yi (李XX), regardless of whether she is alive or dead."

And then described the woman's appearance in relatively detailed terms.

"Head is small, hair is black, eyes are relatively yellow, height is 5 cheok 1 chon (尺, 寸; approx. 5’1")—"

Reward money five hundred won—five hundred won was enough to tempt me. In these difficult times, having five hundred won is such a big fortune. This is a windfall. I have the key to this case, don't I? I can't help but think that the man I saw on the train is the perpetrator. Of course, I am not a private detective. But I am quite confident in this case. I still find the man named Jang Yeong-tae (張永泰) suspicious. I can't forget the very anxious look he had when he met me on the train the second time. He must be hiding something. He must have wrapped real human legs and arms, not artificial limbs, in that bundle. That could be the case. It is understandable that the plump woman screamed and fell on me. The finger that was briefly visible at that time looked too real to be a manufactured finger. If that was really a bundle of human legs and arms, who could say for sure that they weren't the arms and legs of Baron Yi’s (李) widow? If I investigate him thoroughly, the woman's whereabouts will surely be revealed. First, I need to find out his address. The business card he gave me on the train didn't have an address, but I can find out by investigating the printing shop that made the business card. Thinking about it now, it was foolish, but at that time, I became so enthusiastic that I searched almost every printing shop in Gyeongseong. Finally, at the twenty-eighth shop I visited, XX Printing Shop, they said they had printed about a hundred of those business cards. <44>

"This is the business card of Mr. Jang Yeong-tae (張永泰) from Wonjeong 2-jeongmok (元町二丁目) XX beonji (番地)."

Hearing the owner's words, the taxi driver's words from the newspaper came to mind, and I exclaimed without realizing it.

"Wonjeong (元町)! Guryongsan (九龍山), that's right!"

After dinner, I went to Guryongsan (九龍山) XXX beonji (番地), but the lights were not on yet. Jang (張) must have been out. After nine o'clock, I waited, smoking a pack of cigarettes, but Jang (張) did not return. Had he gone to the theater? The thought of a terrifying corpse lying in a dark corner of the room made my body shudder and my hair stand on end. Perhaps he is now at some beach, taking pieces of the body, like the head, arms, or legs, and burying them in the sand. Just then, a person came around the street corner and entered XXX beonji (番地). He was not carrying anything in his hands. Shortly after, the room lit up. I stood at the entrance for a while, thinking. Should I just barge in and directly interrogate him about his crime? But there is no way he would reveal his inner thoughts, and I can't predict what he might do to me in return. It wasn't because I was scared, but I didn't want to suddenly do such a thing out of the blue. I should seize a better opportunity and trap him without him being able to move. I should tail him when he goes out. He has a habit of taking the train in the morning, so if I secretly follow him then, I can easily discover the scene where he has hidden the body. The next morning at seven o'clock, I went to XXX beonji (番地). As I expected, Jang (張) left at 7:20, carrying a large travel bag in one hand and a bundle in the other. He hailed a taxi at the street corner and got in. I immediately grabbed a taxi and chased after him.

Jang (張), after coming all the way to the station, hurriedly bought a ticket and boarded a train bound for Incheon. I barely managed to get on as well. Once inside the train car, I slowly searched for Jang (張) and found him sitting in a window seat at the end. I decided to hide secretly in the doorway and monitor his actions without him noticing. There was only a large travel bag on the rack, and he had placed the bundle right next to him. No matter how I thought about it, it seemed like the bundle I had seen before was inside. Seeing that he had wrapped something as round as a human head in cloth and tied it with string, my heart grew cold as I imagined what was inside.

"Good morning."

Unable to hold back any longer, I stepped inside and greeted him.

"Oh!" He looked very surprised.

"We meet so often."

"Yes! It's strangely often that we meet," his voice trembled.

"Where are you going?"

"Well, I'm too tired. I'm going to Shanghai for a bit to rest and buy some things."

The train had already reached Incheon. I couldn't delay any longer.

"What is wrapped in this bundle? It would be hard to untie it if customs wanted to inspect it."

Of course, I knew that he wasn't planning on having customs inspect his bundle, but rather to throw it into the sea.

"What are you talking about?"

Jang (張) blinked as if he was very confused.

"Why are you trying to hide it? I already know everything."

"You know everything—"

There were two police officers on the platform, so I immediately called them over. I said bluntly,
"Please arrest this man." The moment I finished speaking, I saw an extra edition of the newspaper fluttering on the station bulletin board, and I couldn't help but be stunned and surprised.

"Baron Yi’s (李) Widow Returns."

But it was already too late. It was impossible to escape now, and the police arrested Jang (張).

"I don't know who you are, but thank you very much. I was waiting to arrest this man. But how did you know about this man?"

I was at a loss for words.

"No, no, it's a mistake."

But the police officer didn't seem to hear me and said sternly.

"Jang Yeong-tae (張永泰), you are under arrest for fraud and embezzlement."

Many people on the platform surrounded us, making my situation even more difficult. I slipped through the crowd and awkwardly walked away.

Later, I heard that Jang (張) was sentenced to six months in prison for fraud and embezzlement.

Even now, when I think about that incident, I break out in a cold sweat.

And I realize more acutely that first impressions matter a lot. (End) <45>

**Named Entities**

李	I
손군	Son-gun
삼청동	Samch’ŏng-dong
장영태	Chang Yŏng-t’ae
원산	Wŏnsan
목포	Mokp’o
대전	Taejŏn
한성자동차회사	Hansŏng Chadongch’ahoesa
경성역	Kyŏngsŏng-yŏk
구룡산	Kuryongsan
인천	Inch’ŏn
원정	Wŏnjŏng
상해	Sanghae



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제53호
발행일	1932년 07월 01일
기사제목	探偵小說, 汽車에서 맛난 사람
필자	流邦
기사형태	소설

探偵小說, 汽車에서 맛난 사람
						流邦
원산행 렬차가 막 떠나려고 하자 채림채리가 허줄한 사람 하나가 급히 올라타더니 겨트로 와서
「실례올시다만은 잠간만 비켜주십시요」하며 손에 들엇든 종이 뭉텅이를 내머리위 선반에다 언저노코는 건너편 자리에 가 안는다. 나는 그사람에게 아모 관심도 가지지 아니하고 여전히 마즌편에 안즌 손군과 이야기를 게속하얏다.
「요새가태서는 전부 굶어죽을 것갓데 도덕이니 인정이니 의리니 그런 것은 헌신짝만도 못하게 녁이고 모다 눈이 뻘개서 돈돈하고 덤비지만 어듸 맘대로 돈이 잽히나 여기 저기서는 기가 막히는 참극이 이러나고 전에 드러보지도 못하든 범죄가 각처에 생기니 사회가 이래서야 어듸 맘노코 하로인들 살수 잇겟나 비관만되고 불안하고 우울해서 하로도 기분이 유쾌한 날이 업스니 참 딱하지 자 이 신문 좀 보게 요새신문은 도모지 볼수가 업데그려」
제2면에는 엇던 부인이 행방불명된 기사가 커단 활자로 보도되여잇섯다. 요사이 자조 생기는 인간분실사건에 대하야 세상사람의 이목은 벌서 둔감이 된 상태엿스나 리남작 미망인의 분실사건이 발표되자 저윽이 놀라는 모양이엿다.
신문기사에 의하건대 부인은 사흘전 삼청동자택에서 자최를 감춘채 아직까지 도라오지 안엇다한다. 부인은 그날저녁때 아마 산보차로 나섯든 모양이요 방을 수색해 보아도 려행을 떠나간 행적은 업섯다.
대단히 점잔은 부인이라고 평판이 놉핫든만큼 혹시 그 리면에 무슨 비밀이나 잠재해 잇지안나 혹 소문이 뒤숭숭햇스나 경찰측에서는 무서운 범행가튼 것은 잇슬 리가 업다고 부인하얏다.
「이런 사건이 아마도 작고 이러날껄. 불경기가 심각화하야 갈수록 범죄는 더욱 더 생겨나는 것이니까」
「리남작 미망인이 이삼일동안 집에 도라오지 안는다고해서 그러케 자네 맘대로 그 사실을 갓다가 범죄사건과 관련해서 생각할 필요까지는 업지 안은가. 남작 부인이라고 해서 몃칠간 어듸 놀러나가는 것이 무에 그다지 문제될 것잇나 세상사람이 야단하고 떠드는 지금에 부인은 어느 해안 별장에 가서 편안히 정양하고 잇슬지 아나 괘니 쓸데업는 일에-」
별안간 손군은 말을 중단하고 문득 놀라면서
「앗 저 비켜나게 비켜」하고 부르짓는다. 나는 놀나 이러서서 머리위를 처다본즉 선반우에 언저논 상품견본을 너은 커단 가방이 바로 머리우에 하마트면 떠러질 판이엿다.
「대단히 미안합니다 제가 앗가 좁은 틈에 물건을 끼여노앗는데 떠러지게 될줄은 몰낫섯지요 용서하십시요」하고 앗가 종이에 싼 물건을 올려노튼 사람이 잘못되엿노라고 사과를 한다.
「천만에 괜찬습니다」
이통에 그만 손군과 이야기하든 것도 일단락을 고하엿슴으로 나는 신문을 펴서 읽기를 시작하얏다. 몃줄 내려보다가 얼굴을 든 즉 손군이 아직까지 이상스런 눈으로 내머리위 선반을 처다보고 잇다.
「이사람 무얼 그럿케보나 또 떠러질 것가튼가」
기차ㅅ간에서 남의 물건을 드려다본다는 것은 신사로서 수치스런 일이라는 것도 잘 알면서 저절로 고개를 들어 내의 가방과 가티 노인 종이 뭉텡이를 처다보앗다. 그것은 둥글면서 가늘고 길며 이상한 곡선을 나타내인 서너자가량의 물건이엿다. 눈치를 채엿는지 앗가 그 사람이 불안한 듯이 이쪽을 근너다보며
「저 종이뭉텅이 말슴입니까 하하 그것은 제의 다리올시다」하고 웃는다.
「무엇?! 다리?!」
말을 듯고보니 하기는 사람의 다리모양으로 보인다. 무릅이 조곰 굽은 것가튼 것은 분명히 사람의 다리 형상을 나타내인다. 내가 몹시 놀나는 것을 본 그는 벙글벙글 우스며
「놀나섯지요 그게 제의 장사올시다<42> 이상스런 장사이지요」하고 명함 한 장을 끄내준다.
「의수 의족 제조업 장영태」
그는 말을 점잔으나 엇전지 나보매는 인상이 불호하얏다. 장사치의 능난한 솜씨가 보이면서 어듼지 교활한데가 잇섯다. 원산 정거장에서 내릴 때 내가 그 종이 뭉텅이를 내리워주엇는데 생각보다 대단히 무거운 물건임에 다시 한번 놀낫다.
나는 내일에 여러 가지로 밧버서 의족을 싼 종이뭉텅이를 가젓든 장영태라는 사람을 이내 이저버렷다가 그후 우연이 다시 맛나게 되엿다. 몃칠후에 목포에 볼일이 잇서 기차에 오른즉 차ㅅ간이 몹시 혼란하얏다. 자리가 좁아서 서서 가는 사람도 여럿이 잇섯다. 그리다가 또 대전 정거장에서 만흔 사람이 올낫슴으로 차ㅅ간은 아조 만원이 되엿다. 렬차가 떠나려할 즈음에 뒤떠러저 올라탄 부부가 잇서스니 사내는 마르고 조고만편이요 네편네는 뚱뚱하고 몸이 큰 편이엿다. 나는 보통 부인에게 자리를 내여주는 성미나 이때만은 이러서서 자리를 사양할 생각이 잘나지 안엇다. 겨우 차지한 자리를 한번 일흐면 기나긴 려행에 또 엇기도 어려울 모양이고 그뿐아니라 원체 뚱뚱한 마나님이라 내혼자 이러난 댓자 궁둥이 내려놀 자리가 모자랄 모양이다. 겨테 안즌 친구도 자리사양할 생각은 꿈도 안꾸는 눈치다. 그러나 나는 의외의 일로 불가물 자리를 사양하지 아니치 못하게 되엿다. 렬차가 대전을 떠난 지 얼마나 안되여서다. 뜻밧게 뚱뚱한 부인이 으악! 하고 괭장이 큰소리를 지르며 그 코끼리와 가튼 몸둥이를 내에게 다갓다 언는다 모든 사람도 다 놀나서 이쪽을 바라본다. 나는 숨이 막힐 듯한 괴로움을 견듸매 억지로 몸을 빠저이러낫다. 부인의 둥글넙적한 얼굴에는 공포의 표정이 넘치고 두둑한 젓가슴이 들먹들먹한다.
「아아 무서워 저것을 저리 치워주세요 에에 혼낫다」
무슨 소린지 몰낫다가 부인의 시선을 따라 선반위를 처다보니 거기에는 둥글며 길고가는 갈색종이 뭉텅이가 노여잇섯다. 그것은 꼭 인간의 팔과 가튼 형상을 한 물것으로 끄치 조곰 뚜러저 손가락하나이 비여저나왓다. 「대단이 미안합니다」하고 귀에 익은 듯한 목소리가 나길래 힐끗 도라다본즉 그는 바로 전날 차ㅅ간에서 맛낫든 장영태라는 사람이엇다.
「안심하십시요. 제의 팔을 보고 놀나신 모양인데 이것은 제의 의수올시다」
그는 언뜻 나를 보고 저윽이 놀나는 모양이더니 다시 변명을 잇는다.
「이분께서도 잘 아십니다만은 저는 의수의족제조업을 하는 장영태란 사람입니다. 놀나게해드려서 대단히 죄송스럽습니다. 제의 부주의로 부인을 놀래드려서 무어라고 엿줄 말슴이 업습니다」
나는 엇전지 이 사람이 실헛다. 그도 나를 맛난 것이 불안해 뵈는 눈치다. 그는 자기 때문에 내가 자리를 일허버렷슴으로 미안햇든지 자기자리를 나에게 사양하는 것을 나는 거절하얏다. 나는 열차 출입구창문에 기대서서 신문읽기를 시작하얏다. 신문에는 여전히 리남작미망인의 행방불명된 괴사건을 굉장히 떠드려노앗다. 부인의 행방은 의연히 판명되지 아니하얏는데 필시 엇더한 범행이 생긴 것이라고 추단해 노앗다. 부인의 행동에 대하야 다만 한가지 증거로는 한성자동차회사의 운전수가 그날저녁때 리남작 미망인인듯한 부인을 경성역압헤서부터 구룡산까지 태워다드렷다는 사실이 잇슬뿐이엿다. 신문에는 이상과 가튼 기사제목 「살인귀의 횡행을 방지하라」하는 일문을 부인의 사진과 한가지로 발표하얏다.
「엇더한 살인귀라고 할지라도 시체를 은멸하기에는 비상한 고심을 한다 설혹 시체은밀의 의사가 잇드래도 그 수단에 잇서서는 결코 용이한 일이 아니다. 거리에는 수천수만의 눈이 빗난다 그것을 어더케 속이고 시체를 옴겨갈수 잇스랴. 시체를 불살으거나 약품으로 소해할수도 잇겟<43>지만 오늘날까지의 례에 의하면 거이 실패로 도라갓다. 실로 살인후에 시체처분처럼 곤란한 문제는 업다. 리남작미망인 분실사건에 대하야 만약 불행이 부인이 살해를 당하얏다고하면 당국은 용이히 그 범적을 차자내여 범인을 체포할수 잇서야 할 것이다. 엇지 살인귀의 횡행을 내버려둘수 잇스랴」
나는 신문에서 눈을 떼고 리남작미망인의 시체처분문제에 대하야 가만히 생각해보앗다. 만약 내가 범인이라고 가정한다면 시체를 엇더케하랴 파뭇는 것은 암만해도 위험이 만타 증거가 업서지도록 불살라버려 그러나 그도 곤란한 일 물론 시내로부터 운반해 내갈수는 업다 그럿타고 하면 한가지 남은 방법으로는 시체를 조각조각 각을 떠서 하나씩 하나씩 멀리 갓다 버리는 수밧게 업다. 그러나 그리하랴면 날자가 여러날 걸닐 것이다-나는 이상한 생각을 하고 잇섯슴을 스스로 깨닷고 흠칫 놀낫다. 장은 잠잣코 신문을 드려다본다.
나는 다시 한번 실겅위에 언진 종이 뭉텅이를 처다보앗다. 그 순간 나는 벌떡 이러나 그것을 끌러보고 십흔 충동을 바닷스나 겨우 마음을 진정하고 창밧글 내다보앗다.
신선한 바람이 머리를 상쾌하얏다. 자칫하더면 히스테리증 잇는 녀자모양으로 큰일을 저즈를 뻔하얏다. 내가 엇더케되여서 그런 생각까지 가지게 되엿든가 하고 스스로 붓그러웟다. 그 의수의족제조업자 장영태를 리남작미망인의 향방불명사건에 관게가 잇다고 생각하는가 그것은 맛치 길가다가 아모나 붓자고 「이 살인자야」하는 투나 맛찬가지가 아닐까?
목초정거장 플랫트폼-에 나렷슬 때는 지금까지의 모든 불쾌한 생각이 머리속에서 떠나갓섯스나 정거장 압헤 잇는 파출소게시판을 보고나서는 웃둑 서지 안을수가 업섯다.
「500원현상-리XX 남작부인의 생사여하를 불구하고 그 소재처를 경찰에 통고하는 자에게 우금액을 증여함」
그리고는 비교적 상세하게 부인이 풍채를 설명해노앗다.
「머리는 적은편 두발은 검고 눈은 비교적 누른 신장 오척일촌-」
현삼금 오백원-오백원은 나를 유혹하기에 넉넉하얏다. 요새가티 궁한 판에 오백원이 생긴다니 얼마나 큰 버리야 이야말로 땡이다 횡재다 아조 터무니 업는 것도 아니요 나는 이 사건의 열쇠를 가지고 잇지 안으냐 렬차중에서 본 사람 안만해도 그가 이사건의 범인으로 생각되여 견딜수 업다. 물론 나는 사립탐정을 하는 것이 아니다. 그러나 이 사건에는 상당한 자신이 잇다. 암만해도 장영태란 사람이 수상하다. 그는 두 번재 차중에서 나를 맛낫슬 때 아조 불안한 안색을 하든 것을 이즐수가 업다. 필시 무엇을 감초고 잇는 모양이다. 분명히 그는 의수의족이 아닌 정말 인간의 다리를 팔을 조히 뭉텅이 속에 쌋섯슴에 틀님업스리라 그도 그럴수 잇는 일이다. 뚱뚱한 부인의 소리를 지르며 내게로 업더지든 것도 당연한 일이다. 그때 한끄트로 내다뵈이든 손까락 그것은 만든 것치고는 너머 정말손가락가탯다. 그것이 정말인간의 다리 나팔을 싼 뭉텅이라고 하면 무엇으로 리남작미망인의 팔이나 다리가 아니라고 누가 단정할 것인가 그자를 자세히 조사하면 물론 부인의 행방은 판명될 것이다. 먼저 그의 주소를 아라내이자 그가 차중에서 준 명함에는 주소가 기입되지 안엇지만은 명함을 백인 인쇄소를 조사해보면 알게 될 것이다. 지금 생각하면 철업는 즛이엇지만 그때는 아조 열이 생겨서 경성시내 각 인쇄소를 삿삿치 뒤지다십히 하얏다. 맛츰내 수물여들번재 차저간 XX인쇄소에서 그 명함을 백엿다고 한다.<44>
「이것은 원정이정목 XX번지 장영태씨의 명합입니다」
주인의 말을 드르니 언뜻 신문에서본 운전수의 말이 생각나서 나는 모르는 동안에 외첫다.
「원정! 구룡산 올치」
저녁을 먹고 구룡산 XXX번지를 차자 간즉 등불이 아직 켜지지 안엇다. 아마 장은 외출하고 업는 모양이엿다. 아홉시가 지나 담배를 한갑이나 남아태이도록 장은 도라오지 안엇다. 극장에를 갓나 어둑컴컴한 실내 한구석에 무서운 시체가 노엿슬 생각을 하니 몸이 소스라들고 머리가 쭈벼하얏다. 혹시 지금쯤 그는 어느 해변까으로 시체의 모가지나 팔이나 다리조각을 가지고가서 모래속에 파뭇고 잇슬지도 모를 일이다. 맛츰 그럴즈음에 한사람이 거리모퉁이를 도라와 XXX번지로 드러간다. 그는 손에 아무것도 아무것도 아니드렷다. 조곰후에 방안이 환해젓다. 나는 얼마쯤 입구에서 서서 생각해보앗다. 이대로 쑥 드러가서 단도직입적으로 그의 범죄를 힐문할까 그러나 그가 그만 일에 자기속을 배아틀니도 만무하거니와 도리혀 나의게 덤벼드러 무슨 즛을 하리라고 예측할수도 업는 노릇이다. 나는 겁에 질려서가 아니라 아닌 밤중에 흥두깨 내밀기로 문득 그런 즛을 저즐르고 십지가 안엇다. 그보다도 조흔 기회를 붓들어 그를 꼼작업시 묵거노아야한다. 그가 외출할때를 타서 미행을 하자 그는 아침에 차를 타는 버릇이 잇스니 그때에 몰내 뒤를 따르면 쉽사리 시체를 은닉한 현장을 발견해낼수가 잇스리라 이튼날 아침 일곱시에 나는 XXX번지에 출장하얏다. 장은 내가 예상한대로 닐곱시 이십분에 한 손에는 커단 려행 가방을 들고 또 한손에는 무슨 보작이를 들고 나선다. 그는 거리모퉁이에서 택시를 불러 탓다. 나도 곳 뒤니어서 택시를 잡아타고 그의 뒤를 추격하얏다.
정거장 압까지 와서 자동차를 나린 장은 급히 차표를 사더니 인천행 렬차에 올라탄다. 나도 겨우 뒤미처 오를수가 잇섯다. 차ㅅ간에 올라서 나는 슬슬 장을 차자다니다가 외인쪽 맨끗자리에 자리를 잡고 안젓는 것을 발간하얏다. 나는 그가 눈치채이지 못하게 몰내 승강대에 숨어서서 그의 하는 행동을 감시하기로 하얏다. 선반 우에는 커단 려행 가방이 잇슬 뿐이고 보작이는 바로 자기 엽헤 노앗는데 그 속에는 아모리 생각하야도 전에 보든 종이뭉텅이가 드러 잇는 것만 가탓다. 사람의 머리만치 둥근 것을 보작이로 싸고 또 노끈으로 묵기까지 한 것을 보고 나는 그 속에 들어 잇는 것을 상상하며 가슴이 서늘하얏다.
「안령하십니까」
나는 더 참다 못하야 안으로 드러스며 인사를 부첫다.
「어어!」그는 몹시 놀나는 모양이다.
「자조 맛나 뵙겟습니다」
「네에! 참 이상스럽게 여러번 맛나뵙는걸요」그의 음성은 떨려나왓다.
「어듸까지 가시는 길입니까」
「네에 저 몸이 너무 고단해서요 상해에 좀 가서 쉬기도 할 겸 또 물건도 좀 사올 겸해서 갑니다」
기차는 벌서 인천에 다엇다. 인제는 더 지체를 할 수가 업섯다.
「이 보작이에 싼 것은 무엇입니까 세관에서 조사해 볼랴면 끌르노라고 힘이 들겟군요」
물론 나는 그이 보작이를 세관에서 조사하도록 가지고 다니지 아니하고 바다에 갓다 내던질 것을 잘 알엇다.
「그게 무슨 말슴입니까」
장은 아조 이상한 듯이 눈을 꺼벅꺼벅하며 뭇는다.
「무얼 숨길라고 그러십니까 벌서 다 알고 잇습니다」
「다 알고 잇다구-」
플랫트폼-에는 경관 두사람이 잇슴으로 나는 즉시 경관을 불럿다. 나는 닷자곳자로
「이 사람을 체로해 주십시요」말을 해노코 난 순간 선뜻 정거장 게시판에 신문 호외가 나부튼 것을 보고 나는 어안이벙벙해지며 놀나지 아늘수 업섯다.
「리남작 미망인 도라오다」
그러나 임의 때는 느젓다. 지금에 이르러 도망칠수도 업고 경관은 장을 체포하얏다.
「누구신지는 모르겟습니다만 대단히 수고하시엇습니다. 나는 이 자를 체포하랴고 기다리든 차입니다. 그런데 엇더케 당신은 이 자를」
나는 얼이 빠질 지경이엿다.
「아닙니다 아닙니다 잘못입니다」
그러나 경관은 내 말을 드른 척도 아니하고 엄연히 말하얏다.
「장영태를 사기 횡령죄로 체포합니다」
플랫트폼-에 잇든 여러 사람들이 우리를 둘러쌋슴으로 나는 더욱 립장이 곤란하얏다. 나는 무리 틈에 끼여 어름어름 빠저나왓다.
그후 드른즉 장은 사기횡령죄로 륙개월 증역 언도를 바닷다 한다.
지금도 나는 그때 일을 생각하면 식은땀이 날 지경이다.
그리고 사람이란 첫인상에 큰 관게잇다는 것을 더욱 절실히 늣기게 된다.(끗)<45>
<42-45>