별건곤 제37호
1931년 02월 01일
吸煙室 (Smoking Room)
세태비평 (Social Commentary)

From the new semester, vocational subjects will be greatly increased in each middle and high school, and 13 vocational schools will be newly established throughout Joseon. The saying, "son of unemployment," seems to fit perfectly now.

Whether it's because the price of woolens was too low this winter or because women's extravagance has increased, it's very fashionable for women to wear woolens. Is it a wool shawl (毛껄)? It may be understandable.

The New Stem Society (新幹會) headquarters placed the Gyeongseong branch members under suspension, and the branch expelled or suspended the executive members of the headquarters. At a time when fundamental solutions are being discussed, that's nothing. What can't they do to each other?

The New Year's editions of each Korean newspaper were filled with statements from authorities that had not been seen in previous years. In the current situation, the words of the authorities are the most influential, so it's rather late for savvy newspapers.

The Gyeongseong District Court Prosecutor's Office lost the important indictment in the so-called 900,000 won case. Instead of posting a notice saying "No Newspaper Reporters Allowed (新聞記者御斷り)," if they had posted a notice saying "No Document Thieves Allowed (書類盜賊御斷り)," such a thing would not have happened.

There are already 37 mahjong clubs (麻雀俱樂部) in Gyeongseong, and more than 100 applications for permission are currently being submitted. In this era, are we just going to play mahjong? Mahjong or hoping for a promotion (麻雀乎望雀乎)?

The Joseon Infantry (朝鮮步兵隊), which had been rumored to be disbanded for some time, will finally be disbanded at the end of February. Whether or not a useless ornamental soldier exists is of no concern to the general public, but if we remove even the charcoal brazier in May and June (五六月火爐), we will feel regret, and if we reflect on life and death, our emotions will be boundless.

It is natural to have a tuition reduction movement (月謝金 減下運動) at a time when money is scarce, but the police are even prohibiting the gatherings. If that's the case, they should announce "Regulations for the Strict Control of Students and Parents of Students Withdrawing Due to Lack of Funds (無錢退學生學父兄取締規則)" and strictly control the parents of students who are withdrawing due to unpaid tuition fees.

It hasn't been long since we celebrated the solar New Year, and now the lunar New Year is approaching again, so the double hardship for those without money is truly indescribable. Climbing to heaven is more difficult than the road to Silla (世道지난이 難於上靑天).

Even if a few individuals do newspapers and magazines, they call it the representative body of the Japanese people; even if they attend foreign gatherings, they call it the representative of the Japanese and Korean people; even if they hold playful gatherings, they call it the Japanese People's Assembly (日民衆大會), so are the Korean people that cheap (歇價)?

While there are grand unifications across the land, such as the unification of Cheondogyo (天道敎), the unification of Christianity, the unification of the Bumo Merchant Association (布木商組合), and the Gyeongin Cooperative Association (京仁取合同), the dissolution theories are emerging for the New Stem Society (新幹會), the Geunwoo Society (槿友會), Cheongchong (靑總), and the New Rising Youth Alliance (新興靑盟) in the provinces. Is this the principle of contradictory properties (相反性原理乎)?

The Chungnam Provincial Office, which had been the subject of a struggle in Gongju (公州), Taejeon (太田), Jochiwon (鳥致院), and Cheonan (天安) in a one-daughter-four-son-in-law pattern (一女四婿格), will finally be moved to Taejeon. Ah, it has to be that way; Taejeon is originally the Jin Gogaegogae (진고개) of Chungnam.

(Omitted three lines)

It has been discussed by the Japanese Revised Penal Code Committee that a man can be found guilty of adultery (姦通罪) if the wife sues. If this law is implemented, it will be a great terror for those having affairs. <19>

**Named Entities**

新幹會	Sin'ganhoe
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
朝鮮	Chosŏn
公州	Kongju
太田	Taejŏn
鳥致院	Choch'iwŏn
天安	Ch'ŏnan
忠南	Ch'ungnam
天道敎	Ch'ŏndogyo
槿友會	Kŭn'uhoe



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제37호
발행일	1931년 02월 01일
기사제목	吸煙室
기사형태	세태비평

吸煙室
新學期부터는 각 중등학교에 실업과목을 만하늣코 全조선에 13개 실업학교를 신설한다고 한다. 속담에 실업의 아들이란 말이 只今에 와서 꼭 맛는 모양인가.

今年 겨울에서 毛物갑이 너무 헐해 그런지 여자들의 사치심이 느러서 그런지 女子界에 毛物입는 風이 매우 유행한다. 모껄=毛껄이닛가 그도 容或無怪.

新幹會본부에서는 京城支會員에게 停權處分을 하고 同支會에서는 본부 집행위원에게 除名또는 停權處分을 하얏다. 근본적 解消論이 이러나는 이때에 그것쯤이야. 서로 못할 것은 무엇이잇다.

朝鮮文 各新聞의 新年號에는 예년에 못보던 당국자의 談이 滿載하얏다. 지금 형편에야 누구보다도 당국자의 말이 가장 유력한 터이닛가 怜悧한 신문사로서야 도로혀 晩時의 일이지.

京城地方法院 檢事局에서는 소위 90만원사건의 중대한 고소장을 紛失하얏다. 『新聞記者御斷り』라는 禁札을 붓치지 말고 『書類盜賊御斷り』라는 禁札을 붓첫더면 그런 일이 업섯겟지.

京城市內에는 벌서 麻雀俱樂部가 37개나 생기고 方今 허가 출원을 한 것도 1백여 건에 달한다고 한다. 이 시대에 잇서서  麻雀들만 하고 말터인가 麻雀乎望雀乎.

벌서부터 해산설을 전하던 朝鮮步兵隊는 期여히 2월말에 해산히기로 되엿다. 無用의 화초병이 잇스나 업스나 일반 민중에개는 하등 관계가 업는 것이지만은 眞所謂 五六月火爐도 업새면 섭섭하다고 생사를 회고하면 感慨無量.

돈이 귀한 이때에 月謝金 減下運動을 하는 것은 당연한 일이지만은 경찰은 그 집회까지 금지를 한다. 그럴터이면 無錢退學生學父兄取締規則을 발표하야 月謝金 못내고 퇴학 당하는 학생의 학부형들 엄중 取締하지.

陽曆설을 지낸 지가 얼마 안이 되는데 陰曆설이 또 닥쳐오니 돈업는 사람의 이중고통이야 참으로 형언 할 수 업다. 세도지난이 難於上靑天.

몃 개인이 신문잡지를 하야도 日민중의 대표기관, 외국인 집회에 참석하야도 日朝鮮民衆대표, 遊戱的집회를 하야도 日民衆大會라 하니 조선민중은 그럿케 歇價인가.

天道敎합동, 기독교합동, 布木商組合의 합동, 京仁取合同 등 天下大合同이 되는 반면에 신간회를 비롯하야 槿友會, 靑總, 지방의 新興靑盟 등 解消說이 擡頭하니 此是相反性原理乎.

一女四婿格으로 公州, 太田, 鳥致院, 天安 등지에서 쟁탈전을 하던 충남 도청은 그여히 太田으로 이전하케 되엿다. 암-그리되고 말고 太田이 원래 忠南진고개이지.

(此間三行略)

처가 고소하면 남자도 姦通罪가 성립된다는 條文이 일본개정형법위원회에서 토의하게 되엿다. 이 법이 실시된다면 외입장의 大恐惶일걸.＜19＞
＜19＞