잡지명	別乾坤 제37호
발행일	1931년 02월 01일
기사제목	風聞帖 (Rumor Mill)
기사형태	소식 (News)

Rumor Mill
Mr. Namgung Eok, who previously contributed greatly to society as the president of the Hwangseong Shinmun and the chairman of the Kwandong Hakhoe, went down to his hometown in Hongcheon (Mogok) and was diligently involved in church affairs and educational projects. Recently, he has been particularly focused on cultivating Mugunghwa (Rose of Sharon) saplings and plans to distribute about 10,000 plants to schools in Seoul and the countryside this spring.

Mr. No Jayeong of Chunseong, who had been seemingly cut off from society for a long time due to illness and was recuperating at his home in Seongbuk-dong, has almost fully recovered his health recently and is said to be returning to the literary scene soon. We sincerely wish him well.

Jeong Baek and Lee Jeongyun, who were released from prison on January 7th, stayed at the Haeseong Inn in the city for a while. Jeong went down to his hometown in Cheorwon, and Lee went down to his hometown in Sunchang. After recuperating for a few months from their unhealthy bodies, which had suffered for many years in iron bars, they are said to be coming back to Seoul.

It is said that Mr. Hwang Shindeok was very happy when he had a son last fall, but unexpectedly, he recently suffered a tragic loss and is also mourning the death of his beloved daughter, Wonbin. Worldly affairs are like this, a mixture of joy and sorrow.

Mr. Lee Seongtae, who had been receiving treatment at the Medical Specialist Hospital for more than a year after his release from prison, is said to have had a relapse recently and underwent another surgery the other day.

Mr. Yun Ikseon, the former president of Boseong Jeonmun School, had been living a rural life near Deokjeong Station on the Gyeongwon Line. He came to Seoul with the intention of staying for a long time, and it is said that even he, who was once vigorous and tall, already has a full head of white hair. <37>
<37>

Named Entities

南宮檍	Namgung Eok
皇城新聞	Hwangseong Shinmun
關東學會	Kwandong Hakhoe
洪川	Hongcheon
牟谷	Mogok
盧子泳	No Jayeong
春城	Chunseong
成북동	Seongbuk-dong
鄭柏	Jeong Baek
李廷允	Lee Jeongyun
海星旅館	Haeseong Inn
鐵原	Cheorwon
淳昌	Sunchang
黃信德	Hwang Shindeok
元彬	Wonbin
李星泰	Lee Seongtae
尹益善	Yun Ikseon
普成專門學校	Boseong Jeonmun Hakkyo
京元線	Gyeongwon Line
德亭驛	Deokjeong Station



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제37호
발행일	1931년 02월 01일
기사제목	風聞帖
기사형태	소식

風聞帖
전날 皇城新聞 사장으로 또는 關東學會 회장으로 사회에 만흔 공헌이 잇던 南宮檍 노인은 洪川鄕第(牟谷)에 나려가서 교회일과 교육사업에 열심하던 중 근래에는 또 無窮花 묘목재배에 특히 힘을 써서 今春에 약 1만株 가량을 京鄕 각 학교에 배급하랴고 계획한다고.

病魔로 인하야 오래동안 이 사회와 인연을 끈타십피하고 성북동 자택에서 요양을 하던 春城 盧子泳씨는 근래에 건강이 거의 회복이 되야 불원간 文壇에 다시 출마를 하리라고 한다. 爲之顒祝.

1월 7일에 출감한 鄭柏
李廷允 양씨는 그 간 시내 海星旅館에 체류하다가 정씨는 鐵原鄕第로 이씨는 淳昌鄕第로 나려갓는대 다년간 鐵窓에서 辛苦하던 不健한 몸을 수월간 요양한 다음에 다시 상경하리라고.

黃信德씨는 작년 가을에 옥동자를 나서 매우 깃버하더니 뜻박으로 요전에 그의 사랑하는 따임 元彬孃이 慘헉을 보고 또한 애통을 한다고 한다. 世事는 如是一喜一悲.

출옥 후 醫專病院에서 약 1년 이상 치료 중에 잇던 李星泰씨는 근간 병이 재발하야 일전에 또 수술을 하얏다 한다.

전일 普成專門學校長이던 尹益善씨는 그 간 京元線 德亭驛 부근에서 농촌생활을 하다가 장기간 체류할 예정으로 경성에 왓는대 그 씩식하고 장대하던 그도 벌서 白髮이 성성하더라고.＜37＞
＜37＞