Magazine Title	삼천리 제6권 제9호
Publication Date	1934년 09월 01일
Article Title	『運命과 死生觀』 座談會 (Symposium on "Fate and Views on Life and Death")
Author	尹白南 (Yun Paengnam), 梁白華 (Yang Paekhwa), 李晶燮 (Yi Chŏngsŏp), 李瑞求 (Yi Sŏgu), 鄭秀日 (Chŏng Suil), 柳光烈 (Yu Kwangnyŏl), 金東仁 (Kim Tongin), 金東煥 (Kim Tonghwan - from Samch'ŏlli)
Article Type	대담·좌담 (Dialogue/Symposium)

『運命과 死生觀』 座談會 (Symposium on "Fate and Views on Life and Death")
Participants (in order of age)
Mr. Yun Paengnam: Current head of Yadam Company, commissioned by the Dong-A Ilbo, formerly studied in Tokyo <128>
Mr. Yang Paekhwa: Novelist, graduate of Hansŏng High School, numerous translations of Chinese novels and poems
Mr. Yi Chŏngsŏp: Graduate of the University of Paris Faculty of Arts, former editorial writer for the Chungang Ilbo, traveled around the world, current critic
Mr. Yi Sŏgu: Former reporter for the Dong-A Ilbo, current director of the literary department at the Sieron Gramophone Company
Mr. Chŏng Suil: Current economics editor at the Chungang Ilbo, studied at Meiji University in Tokyo
Mr. Yu Kwangnyŏl: Former society editor at the Chosŏn Ilbo, deputy editor at the Chungang Ilbo, current critic
Mr. Kim Tongin: Graduate of Keio University, former arts editor at the Chosŏn Ilbo, novelist
From Samch'ŏlli: Kim Tonghwan

Evening of August 15th, upstairs at Paekhabwŏn (百合園) in Chongno, Seoul.

Samch'ŏlli: Honestly, when you think about it, the ways of the world are laughable. Just look at Ch'oe Ch'anghak (崔昌學), who until yesterday was wandering around as a money-grubber, suddenly becoming a millionaire. Pang Ŭngmo and Pak Yongun became rich overnight. And then people like Yi Kwanyong (李灌鎔), Pang Chŏnghwan (方定煥), and Yun Simdŏk (尹心悳) suddenly departed for the next world. You just never know what momentous event might drop before your eyes in this world we live in. So, should we believe that fate (運命) or destiny (八字) exists? <129> It seems to exist and yet not exist; it's utterly confusing. So, without bringing up difficult philosophy or religion, just as a passing conversation, could you please unravel this riddle for us?

Yun Paengnam: It exists. I firmly believe that fate exists. Years ago, I was taking a car from Masan (馬山) to Chinju, and there was a big pass between them, like Samgak Mountain. Just as the car was turning a curve (カ-ブ) on the mountainside, wouldn't you know it, the rear wheel popped off. So, what do you think happened? From that high cliff, the car tumbled down like an autumn paulownia leaf blowing in the wind, falling hundreds of *kil* down the precipice. Actually, it wasn't a precipice, it was hell; it felt like entering the path to the afterlife (저슬길).

Yi Sŏgu: Oh dear, oh dear...

Yun Paengnam: It was truly perilous. I can laugh and talk about it now, but at that time, the young beauty sitting next to me, a well-formed Chinju kisaeng (긔생), jumped out first to save herself as soon as she heard the car breaking down, only to be crushed to death by the car. Also, a man who looked like some kind of township chief sitting in front of me also jumped out first to save himself and died instantly. At that moment, I thought, "Ah well, if I'm meant to die, I'll die. If I'm meant to live, will sitting still kill me, and jumping out save me?" With that thought, I just resigned myself (`アキラメ`) and braced myself, sitting firmly as the car tumbled over a couple of times. After being thrown out the window and regaining consciousness sometime later, I found that I had survived, and the driver's assistant (助手), who hadn't jumped out until the very end, had also survived. Everyone else was dead. That beautiful Chinju kisaeng, of course, also died. At that time, I thought, "Well, look at this. Fate really does seem to exist."

Kim Tongin: I've also tried horse racing (競馬) occasionally in P'yŏngyang (平壤) and Seoul, and some days, you win money easily without much effort; things just go well, you have a lucky hand. But other days, even if you concentrate harder, grit your teeth, and are determined to win, you end up losing every time. There are days when things work out and days when they don't. It's the same with Hwatu (花鬪), isn't it? And Mahjong (マ-짱)? There are definitely days when you have a lucky streak. I've heard from pai gow (골패꾼) and Tujeon (투전꾼) gamblers that there are definitely days when you win and days when you lose.

Yi Sŏgu: That's right, there are definitely days when Mahjong (マ-짱) goes well. Also, when something is about to happen, a premonition (豫感) always seems to appear. Once, when I was working at the Dong-A Ilbo, some sudden incident occurred, and I went into the newspaper office late at night, worked until two in the morning making an extra edition (號外), and then took a rickshaw (인력거) home through the dawn streets. Right in front of the rickshaw, keeping pace with it, a blind man (소경 년석) walked by. At that moment, I felt goosebumps all over. A blind man walking on the main street of the capital at two in the morning <130> was completely unexpected. Feeling uneasy for some reason, I returned home to find that my young child, who had been playing fine until just before, suddenly had a high fever and was burning up. We fussed about doctors and hospitals, but before dawn even broke, the child died. It's truly strange. Ever since then, whenever I meet a blind person, I get goosebumps. It's all mysterious.

Yi Chŏngsŏp: In the West too, they say if a black cat (뿌랙캣) crosses your path, misfortune is sure to follow. It's similar to how East Asians dislike blind people. They also dislike the number thirteen...

Chŏng Suil: That is indeed strange. Historically, it's said that many great figures and geniuses died on dates involving the number thirteen.

**Is Becoming a Millionaire Also a Matter of Fate?**

Kim Tonghwan: Hold on. Let's reserve the mysteries of life and death and similar issues for the subsequent "My Views on Life and Death" section. For now, let's stick to talking about fate.

Yi Chŏngsŏp: I've had another experience like this. I commute to the library every day. From my house behind Kyŏnghagwŏn, I take a bus to Chongno 5-ga, and I always hope the first tram will be the Namdaemun-bound (南大門行) one, but invariably, the Sŏdaemun-bound one comes first. If this happened only once or twice, it might be different, but it's been exactly the same for over 10 days straight. One could see this as some bizarre mischief of the gods (神). However, I generally try not to believe in fate. Because it's unscientific (非科學的). If fate is predetermined from birth, then shouldn't people just sit back without moving their hands and feet and wait for fortune and blessings? That would be the best strategy. Even thinking with common sense, could this world be constructed so poorly? It's absurd. Anyone who strives, uses all their means, and devotes their whole mind and energy will achieve success and happiness. Often, when our ancestors talk about fate (팔자), if things go well, it's their own doing, but if things go poorly, they blame it on fate. It's contradictory.

Yun Paengnam: That's a matter of degree. There are things where, no matter how hard one tries, if it's not meant to be, it just won't happen.

Kim Tongin: There are things beyond human power.

Yu Kwangnyŏl: There's the saying, "Great wealth depends on Heaven, small wealth depends on diligence" (大富在天 小富在人), but believing that fate determines everything is absolutely wrong.

Chŏng Suil: No, we shouldn't engage in moral arguments (道德論) about whether it's bad if it exists or good if it doesn't. But it is truly strange. During the flood disaster (수재) some time ago, our newspaper's president and Mr. Yi Man'gyu went boating in Yangp'yŏng and were crossing a strong current when the boat capsized. The boatman, who was known to be an excellent swimmer, drowned, while Mr. Yŏ Unhyŏng and Mr. Yi Man'gyu, who were wearing Western suits and <131> weren't great swimmers, survived. The other passengers also died. It's utterly inexplicable, isn't it? Among the dozen or so people who fell in, the good swimmers all died, and the least skilled ones survived.

Yi Sŏgu: Hmm, they say in water, you have to stand stiff as a village guardian post (장승) to survive. Like Mr. Yŏ Unhyŏng.
(Laughter)

Yun Paengnam: There is such a thing as superhuman mystery (超人力的 神秘).

Yang Paekhwa: It's probably correct to believe it exists. There's a fellow I know outside the gate where I live, who has lived his 50 years as a charcoal seller (숫장사). He works diligently (부즈런하게) from dawn till night for decades, but due to misfortune (박복하게), he always just barely makes enough to get by. Sometimes, when the market is good, he might make a profit of a hundred won. But then, within a few days, invariably, his son dies, his wife gets sick, or he gets robbed, and some unforeseen event forces him to spend all that money. The other day, I met him sitting at his melon stall (참외 가가), sighing and lamenting, "I was born with such bad fortune my whole life, that's why things are like this."

Kim Tongin: That's right. In these times, the saying "Dust gathering to become Mt. Tai" (塵合泰山) can't happen; perhaps "Dust gathering to become a hill" (塵合成丘) might. Yet, there are those who gather their whole lives but can't even make a hill, and conversely, there are lazybones (게르름방이) who build mountains their whole lives.

Yi Sŏgu: Like the saying, "A gourd dipper (박아지) is hard to carve but easy to use," fate seems designed to be easily blamed. (Laughter)

**Even in a Shipwreck, the Lucky Survive**

Yi Chŏngsŏp: However, didn't 200 students all die when their boat capsized at Yongdamp'o (龍塘浦) years ago? Surely, all 200 of them weren't fated (宿命) to die on the same day at the same time?

Chŏng Suil: While cases like that exist, aren't there also instances where only two or three people survive when hundreds die? Once, I was going from Inch'ŏn to Yŏngjongdo (永宗島) for fun when our boat nearly capsized in a storm. Among the ten passengers, only myself and one friend survived; everyone else died. Wouldn't you call this luck?

Yi Sŏgu: If you read Remarque's war novel "All Quiet on the Western Front," when a platoon charged through exploding shells and machine-gun fire raining like bullets, the one who was at the very front, the one who arguably should have died first, survived, while others dropped dead one after another. They say there's no time like being on the battlefield to make you believe in fate. Truly, surviving a war and returning home is purely fate (팔자), superhuman power (超人力).

Yun Paengnam: Is it only in war? It's exactly the same when you travel by ship. About 5 years ago, I took a ship from Inch'ŏn heading for the Ch'ilsan Sea (七山海), and the waves were so <132> rough that even the ship's boys (뽀-이) were yelling that people were going to die, and the third-class passengers were clamoring to lower the lifeboats (뽀-도). The ship was tossing about like a leaf, so everyone was terrified and making a fuss. In the end, the ones who fled in the lifeboats reportedly died. I held firm. Whether one lives or dies is up to fate, so I braced myself, telling myself to hold on, hold on, and remained truly calm and composed (泰然自若). And so, I ate well and managed to navigate that difficult six-day sea journey safely. Believing in fate might have its downsides, but conversely, it gives a person a spirit (긔백) of mental peace and acceptance of destiny (安神立命), a kind of resignation (`アキラメ`).

Kim Tongin: That's right. It builds resilience (버팀성), indeed. Your courage grows stronger. If you think, "What's meant to be will be..."

Yi Sŏgu: Right. That's right. For example, suppose you'll be beheaded if you don't have 1,000 Won in hand by sunrise tomorrow morning. What good does it do to lie in bed, constantly thinking about the impossible, worrying and staying up all night? It only makes your own situation worse. At times like that, if you think, "Money I'm not fated (팔자) to have won't fall from the sky," and just resign yourself (`アキラメ`), then you can relax your mind and sleep soundly with your feet stretched out. That's the merit of believing in fate.

Yang Paekhwa: Believing too much is problematic. During the old Korean Empire era, a high official named Sim Sangwŏn became an envoy (修信使) to Japan and was traveling from Pusan to Tokyo on a steamship with many attendants (隨員). The sea was so rough it seemed the ship would break apart any moment. So, everyone from the captain down was trembling, fearing death, but this gentleman alone remained calm and composed (泰然自若), impressing everyone. Finally, after landing at Shimonoseki (下關), they approached him with flattery, saying, "Your Excellency is truly great. You remained composed even when the ship seemed about to sink." Only then did he jump up, trembling, and ask, "What? Do steamships sink too?" He had believed too much in "enlightenment (개명)" and thought steamships couldn't sink. (General laughter)

Yi Chŏngsŏp: In short, depending on one's self-cultivation (修養如何), that is, through individual education or level of wisdom (지예), one might be able to overcome fate to some extent.

Kim Tongin: The very ability to cultivate oneself is also a result of fate. (Laughter)

Chŏng Suil: Does self-cultivation have a religious meaning?

Yi Chŏngsŏp: Of course, that meaning is included. In any case, a person with self-cultivation is someone who can freely apply the brakes (뿌레-끼) of their mind to change course from one path to another.

**Millionaires Come and Go in an Instant**

Yun Paengnam: There's the word "courage" (度胸 - dokyō), right? But there are cases that cannot be explained by such words. Once, I was riding in a car on a smooth, level road (탄탄대로), and the woman sitting next to me was sitting upright in her seat, looking quite imposing, like the eldest daughter-in-law of a rich family. <133> However, when the car stopped at a train track (긔차 선로), the woman's chest seemed slightly injured in the sudden halt, and because of that, she died three days later. Fate definitely exists.

Kim Tongin: I heard this story when I was in middle school. A child was sleeping under a tree when two thieves came by. They were discussing their robbery plans when they finally noticed the child and were startled. They conferred, saying, "If this kid heard our conversation and reports us to the police, we're in big trouble," and raised an axe to kill him. Just then, a carriage came galloping down the road nearby. So the thieves ran off. Now, in that carriage were a very wealthy couple who had no children and were out for a stroll. Seeing the child sleeping under the tree, the wife said to her husband, "Since we have no children, let's take that child and raise him." But the husband waved his hand dismissively, objecting, "How can we adopt a child whose background we don't even know and make him our heir?" So they passed by. A while later, the child woke up rubbing his eyes, unaware that while he slept, he had narrowly escaped being killed by robbers and had also missed the chance to become the adopted son (수양 아들) of a wealthy couple and potentially the heir to a millionaire. Fate is decided in an instant like this. Really, why would a carriage happen to come by just as they were about to kill him? And why would the husband happen to object, causing the poor child to lose the chance to become rich? It's all a mystery.

Yi Chŏngsŏp: There's also a story like this. A man was sailing on a ship when the waves were so fierce that a mountain-like wave swept over the deck, grabbing a man standing there and throwing him into the sea. Then another wave surged up, tossing the man back onto the deck. Then he was thrown back into the sea again, and finally, on the fourth time, he landed back on the deck and survived. In other words, in the blink of an eye, he died and came back to life four times. (Laughter)

Yun Paengnam: In essence, if we could know things in advance, it wouldn't be called fate. Since we don't know, we call it coincidence. It's all due to the limits of human intelligence (人智不足). If human wisdom (지예) developed further to see into the future, everyone would surely acknowledge fate.

**The West Also Reveres the Book of Changes**

Yi Sŏgu: Even in the West, they believe the Book of Changes (周易) is good. They say if you tell fortunes according to the I Ching, it really comes true.

Yi Sŏgu: You can't trust those fools telling fortunes (卦) in Tapkol Park (탑공공원).

Yu Kwangnyŏl: Oh, they're just riffraff.

Yang Paekhwa: It's strange how even twins (쌍동이) born on the same day at the same time have different palm lines (손금).

Chŏng Suil: The only difference between twins is who was born first (先童) and second (後童), but over 10 or 20 <134> years, one child thrives while the other doesn't.

Kim Tongin: Their fates must have been different even though they were born on the same day.

Yang Paekhwa: Some families are ruined shortly after bringing in a daughter-in-law. Moreover, they dislike people born in the Year of the Tiger (寅生). Those born under the Tiger sign are said to have very bad fate.

Yu Kwangnyŏl: In Japan too, women born in the 'Hinoe-uma' year (丙子生 - actually 丙午, Fire Horse, not 丙子 Water Rat; likely a confusion in the text or transcription, as 丙午 is the famously unlucky year for women) find it difficult to marry.

Yun Paengnam: Speaking of twins earlier, although I was born in the Year of the Rat (戊子生), among the billions of people in this world, there must be many born at the exact same time as me. Yet, our fates are all different, so they turn out that way, and I turn out this way. Just like different flowers, the morning glory (견우화) becomes a morning glory, and the camellia (동백꼿) becomes a camellia.

Yu Kwangnyŏl: However, no matter how much I think about it, becoming rich and noble doesn't seem to be due to fate. I recently went to Chŏngŭp in Chŏllado Province and thoroughly inspected the house that Ch'a Kyŏngsŏk (車京錫) supposedly built for a million won. Ch'a, born in Koch'ang (高敞胎生), instantly became the leader of 100,000 followers (교도) and collected a million won from ignorant folks (우부우민) to build a palace-like house. At first glance, one might say it's because he was born with good fate. However, rather than that, wasn't it because, in the ignorant state of the Korean populace, especially the top-knotted commoners, he cleverly learned some XX trickery [text unclear, possibly related to his religious sect] and manipulated things here and there? Looking at the Chŏnggamnok (鄭鑑錄), not a single passage is clearly expressed; it uses ambiguous language interpretable this way and that, employing magical-sounding words, ultimately becoming a tool for cunning people. It's due to the low level of knowledge among the Korean populace; what is the Chŏnggamnok really?

Kim Tongin: Look at Pang Ŭngmo's gold mine (금광). Initially, three people started it, but when they didn't find gold, two dropped out. Later, when Pang, who had held on, started working it alone, gold poured out.

Chŏng Suil: Ch'oe Ch'anghak is the same. He took over an abandoned mine (廢鑛) that others gave up on because they found no gold, and he saw it through to the end.

Yu Kwangnyŏl: People with outstanding wisdom (지예) create their own destiny. Before the Imjin War (壬辰亂), Yulgok (栗谷) surveyed the world situation and strongly argued for raising 100,000 soldiers (養兵十萬), but Yu Sŏae (柳西崖) opposed it, asking what need there was for soldiers in such peaceful times. Consequently, Yulgok, dying first, reportedly sighed deeply, saying, "The Deputy Director (부제학 - Sŏae's position at the time) will face difficult times." Indeed, the Imjin War broke out later, and reports came in from governors of the three southern provinces that fortress after fortress was falling, causing chaos. Only then did Yu Sŏae realize the truth of Yulgok's earlier words and lament Yulgok's true greatness. Even after that, with phrases like "Within 100 li of Hanyang, no sound of chickens or dogs" (漢陽萬里 鷄犬無聲) and so on, the Chŏnggamnok made nonsensical <135> claims, poisoning (다독) the foolish common people. Cases like Master Yulgok's are because he was an elder and a visionary, so he could make predictions akin to prophecy, but others couldn't because their knowledge was lacking. Is there any reason for predestination (宿命) to exist? Even if the whole world insists it exists, the Korean nation should deny the theory of fate to avoid its poisonous influence (다독), I believe.
Regarding Pang Ŭngmo's gold mine, it must have been Mr. Pang, not the two who left earlier, who knew there was definitely gold in that mine. If we interpret all matters this way, isn't that sufficient?

Yi Chŏngsŏp: Well, as I said earlier, arguing that we should reject fatalism because believing in it weakens the people's spirit is a moral argument (道德論). Moral arguments are forbidden here. Haha.
In any case, we don't deny physiognomy (觀相術), the art of judging fortune by facial features and structure. However, didn't some physiognomist look at the Korean tycoon Min Yŏnghwi (閔泳徽) and predict he would starve to death?

Yi Sŏgu: He must have been an unreliable, fly-by-night physiognomist. How could Min Yŏnghwi starve to death? No matter how drastically things change (상전벽해).

**General Nam I Predicted to Die Young**

Yun Paengnam: There's also this story. Kwŏn Nam wanted to take General Nam I (南怡將軍) as his son-in-law, so he had a physiognomist read his face. The prediction was, "He will achieve fame in his 20s but will die young (早命)." So he gave up the idea. Still uncertain, Kwŏn Nam then had his own daughter's face read, and the prediction was that she would have a short life and die before twenty. Sensing something intuitively, he decided to make Nam I his son-in-law after all.

Yi Sŏgu: There's this story too. It was probably during King Yejong's reign, a time of political upheaval (反正). A certain person (궐자) had his fortune told, and the physiognomist said he had the face of a chief state councillor (정승). So he asked, "What if I don't become one?" The physiognomist swore, "I'll give you my head." Eventually, far from becoming chief councillor, he was implicated as a traitor, captured, and was being transported bound to Saenamt'ŏ (새남터) execution ground. While riding in the cart out through Namdaemun Gate, contemplating his miserable fate, he happened to see that physiognomist passing by. He yelled, "Hey you! I didn't become chief councillor, and now I'm going to die. Let's cut off your head!" But the physiognomist shouted back, "You fool, it's not over yet!" Hearing this, something clicked in his mind. "Okay, no need to despair. I'm not dead yet!" he thought, mustered his courage right there, and as he neared the execution site, he broke his bonds and escaped. And didn't they say he eventually did become chief state councillor?

Yi Chŏngsŏp: That's right, you have to make an effort (로력하여야). Didn't they say some fellow, just because someone told him he was fated to be chief councillor, went into the mountains, didn't lift a finger, just waited for the King's summons (召命), <136> became a beggar, and starved to death?

Yang Paekhwa: Fate is believed in the West too, but the Western view (서양류) is that good fortune comes through effort, while the Eastern view (동양류) is that it comes even if you sit still. That's what's wrong.

Yi Chŏngsŏp: Arguments like "If it weren't for the single pistol shot of a Serbian (셀비아) youth, or even if there was, if the Austrian (오지리) Archduke hadn't gone there at that exact time, the World War wouldn't have happened" seem like forced reasoning, no matter how you look at it.

Yu Kwangnyŏl: Didn't Yi Sunsin (리순신) die fighting Shimazu's (島津) 100,000-strong army at Yirakp'a (李落波)? Some argue that the name Yirakp'a, meaning 'the place where Yi falls', existed even before Yi Sunsin was born, so Admiral Ch'ungmu's death fighting there was indeed fate. On another note, they say when Admiral Ch'ungmu passed away, a long star (東方長星 - comet/meteor) appeared in the east. When his subordinate generals saw the star shining and suggested praying to the general's star, Admiral Ch'ungmu refused, saying, "My virtue and strength are less than Zhuge Wuhou's (제갈무후), how could I compare?" But due to their strong insistence, he knelt on the deck and prayed. Then, for some reason, that star trailed its tail from one corner of the sky and plunged into the sea. Consequently, even Admiral Ch'ungmu lamented, "My fortune has run out."

Samch'ŏlli: Is suicide (자실) also fate?

Yi Chŏngsŏp: It's something one chooses oneself. You can't call it fate.

Yi Sŏgu: They say some young man in our neighborhood went to the Han River to commit suicide. When night fell and the moonlight shone, he saw the water was full beneath the First Railway Bridge (제일철교). Normally, there's water under the Second Railway Bridge (제이철교), and the First Bridge area is a sandy plain (백사불). So this fellow, thinking it was deep water, jumped, but didn't die and instead became a hunchback (곱추). He crawled back home that night and has lived as a disabled person (불구자) ever since. Seeing things like that, maybe there's a separate fate for committing suicide. (Laughter)

Kim Tongin: Whether one believes in fate or not, that too is all fate. (Laughter)

Yun Paengnam: Just because some physiognomist (관상장이) says I'll die early, I don't think I'll necessarily die early. I've sort of transcended life and death.

Yi Sŏgu: This happened in Osaka (大板). A bank employee had tuberculosis (페병) and, in despair, decided to commit suicide. Thinking that if he had to die anyway, he might as well commit a love suicide (정사), he took some woman with him to die together and they ingested "Karumochin" (カるもチン - poison). But somehow, the man survived, and only the woman died.

Kim Tongin: Seeing things like that, one could say the entire movement within the world is fate.

**The Dying Sentiments of Great Men and Philosophers**

Yun Paengnam: I read Fujimura Misao's (藤村操) "Gantō no Kan" (巖頭感 - Thoughts on the Cliff Top), written when he died at Kegon Falls (華巖の瀑). I sympathize with his sentiment: "In the vast expanse of nature, who is there not subject to incomprehensible fate?" <137>

Yi Chŏngsŏp: At this rate, we'll end up going back to the age of Greek (끼리시아) mythology. The Greeks first believed in the god of fate, but finding that insufficient, they eventually started believing in the ultimate, original god of fate who governed the fate of the god of fate. (Laughter)

Kim Tongin: When I went to study in Tokyo (동경), my father wanted me to study law, but I insisted on literature. Because of that, I ended up losing a fortune of over 100,000 won. If I had studied law as my father said, perhaps I wouldn't have squandered the family assets.

Kim Tonghwan: Is being childless also fate (팔자)?

Yi Chŏngsŏp: Don't write this down, but if one has gonorrhea toxicity (림독성), having children is out of the question.

Yang Paekhwa: There are people who are healthy but childless.

Yu Kwangnyŏl: Yes, there are. Definitely.

Chŏng Suil: They say if someone has a "monk's face" (僧相), they won't have children.

Yun Paengnam: That's right, they avoid the monk's face.

Chŏng Suil: Having children but not having one present at your deathbed – that truly seems like fate. My paternal uncle (백부) had three sons. They were all by his sickbed until the illness became critical, but at the moment of death, they had gone into the next room and fallen asleep briefly when he passed away. During his life, a physiognomist told him he wouldn't have a child present at his death, and it turned out exactly like that (영낙업서요).

Yun Paengnam: Fortune tellers (점장이) are often right.

Yi Sŏgu: On my recent trip to Tokyo, I visited Sun Sŏng (瞬星秦學文 - Chin Hakmun) who is staying in Kamakura (鐮倉). He told me he had consulted two famous medical doctors. They examined him and delivered a death sentence (死刑宣告), saying one lung was completely gone, there was no hope, and he wouldn't last more than a few days. Just then, a friend from his student days came to visit. Out of friendship (友情), the friend offered to take a look. After examining him, the friend said, "This is thoracic empyema (흥농), not tuberculosis (페병). It's pus collected in the chest; maybe it can be cured." Sun Sŏng, who had already resigned himself to death, said, "Then please treat me, even if I die trying." So they rushed him by car to Tokyo, admitted him to Keio University Hospital (慶大醫院), and performed surgery. Indeed, it was empyema. He is gradually recovering now. If that friend hadn't come then, wouldn't Sun Sŏng have died? Sun Sŏng was shedding tears, calling that friend his life-saving benefactor (재생지 은인).

Kim Tongin: Years ago, during a big flood in P'yŏngyang, in the attic of an old (예해짜리?) noodle house, the people who stayed on the second floor until the last minute, playing pai gow and thinking they wouldn't die, all perished. Those who had been downstairs under the water survived. After the water receded, people were shocked when digging out the bodies; it was truly unexpected.

Yang Paekhwa: Truly, it must be Sun Sŏng's fate not to die yet.

Kim Tonghwan: Is physiognomy (觀相) accurate? <138>

Yi Chŏngsŏp: Physiognomy is accurate. It's strange.

Yang Paekhwa: Palm reading (손끔) is also unerring.

Yi Chŏngsŏp: When reading faces, some people have eyes that sparkle with vitality; they are invariably talented. There are also cheeks that look endearing; such people invariably succeed. There are probably good foreheads too. Tolstoy, Victor Hugo, Napoleon – they all had good foreheads, very good.

Yun Paengnam: Some people just have faces that look good, you know? Fortunate people. Even without looking professionally.

Yi Chŏngsŏp: Handwriting is like that too. They say you know the person from their calligraphy, speech, writing, and judgment (書判 - part of 신언서판 身言書判).

Yun Paengnam: T'aeju (胎主) is also accurate. In Chŏlla Province, they call it Kongdo (공도).

Yi Sŏgu: In Tokyo, they call it Meidōkai (明道會). Even famous scientists in Japan all believe in Meidō, they say. Governor-General Ugaki (宇垣總督) is reportedly a member of the Meidōkai too.

Kim Tonghwan: T'aeju predicts the present, right?

Yun Paengnam: That's right. It knows the present uncannily well, but the future, not at all.

Yi Sŏgu: Years ago in Kaesŏng, Mr. Kim Yŏnsu (金年洙) of Haedong Bank and Mr. Song Chinu (宋鎭禹) were observed by a Meidōkai master (道師) named Yamada (山田). Mr. Kim Yŏnsu happened to be carrying out a land reclamation project somewhere in the Chŏlla sea. He asked the master to go see how the construction was progressing and come back. Perhaps because the distance was great, after a while, the master opened his eyes and described how the mountain looked, what the foreman's (십장 년석) face looked like, and how much progress had been made in which area, matching the details perfectly (영낙업시). Mr. Song Chinu reportedly exclaimed in admiration,
"あなた 本當に 神樣ですな" (Anata hontō ni kamisama desu na - You truly are like a god!)
T'aeju really is accurate.

**Clairvoyance Also Hits the Mark**

Yun Paengnam: I had it done once too. I held tweezers (`핀셋트`) hidden in my hand and asked, "What is this?" He just grinned and said, "`핀셋토` (p'inset'o - tweezers)." His clairvoyance (透視術) seemed pretty good.

Chŏng Suil: When I lived in Yakch'ojŏng (藥草町), I went to a T'aeju practitioner and asked him to check on my house during the rainy season. After making whooshing wind sounds and various other noises, after a while, he described exactly how a wall had collapsed and how the single-post gate was damaged, hitting the mark perfectly (영낙업시).

Yun Paengnam: About ten years ago, I got angry and decided to go to Manchuria. I left my hometown in Chŏlla Province and came to Seoul. I intended to leave immediately, but ended up staying for about ten days. My family got worried and consulted a T'aeju practitioner. My wife soon sent a letter saying the practitioner described me lying down in some house in Seoul, having a mole under my armpit, and slight facial hair, detailing everything precisely. And that information was also perfectly accurate (영낙업시). Really, how could they even know about the mole under my armpit? (General laughter)

Kim Tonghwan: So, once again, should we <139> conclude that fate exists?

Chŏng Suil: Thinking about "Pŏn Pokch'ang" (번복창), who caused a stir at the Inch'ŏn Rice and Bean Exchange (仁川米豆), is strange. He started as an insignificant poor man, ran errands for a brokerage firm (영구 중매점?) for three years, and saved up 100 won. At that time, the market was volatile, and fortunes were made or lost in 10 minutes. Prices shot up 200, 300 points in about ten ticks. He hit it right three times in a row and instantly made 200,000 won. Then he went to Osaka (大板) and won again, earning another 300,000 won. But then he tried to turn it into a million won, plunged back in, and lost everything. In just a few tens of minutes, he became a multimillionaire and then lost it all... This is surely a trick beyond human power (人力).

Yun Paengnam: There's a similar story from the time of the Russian (로서아) Revolution. They needed funds to start the revolution but had none. A fortune teller came and said they would have luck gambling in Monaco (모나꼬). So, a comrade drove a car all the way to Monaco, spent three months studying the statistics of wins and losses, and then started gambling with just a few dozen won. Sure enough, he kept winning and eventually made several million won, which they used for revolutionary funds.

Kim Tonghwan: So, in the end, those who believe fate exists are Messrs. Yun Paengnam, Yang Paekhwa, Kim Tongin, and Yi Sŏgu – four people. Those who try to believe it doesn't exist are Messrs. Yi Chŏngsŏp and Yu Kwangnyŏl – two people. And in the middle group (中間派), believing it seems to exist and yet not exist, is Mr. Chŏng Suil – one person.
Anyway, how can this issue, which billions of people have wrestled with for thousands of years, be resolved quickly? Let's not draw a conclusion about whether it exists or not.
- At this point, a commemorative photo was taken, followed by dinner -

**My View on Life and Death**

Kim Tonghwan: When geniuses, heroes, or great people die or are born, are there any omens (前兆)?

Yu Kwangnyŏl: When Kim Okkyun died in Shanghai, he appeared in a dream to Tōyama Mitsuru (頭山滿) in Tokyo at the exact same time. It's written in Tōyama Mitsuru's autobiography.

Kim Tongin: Sometimes dirt rain (흙비) falls.

Yi Sŏgu: When Yi T'aewang (King Kojong) passed away, a white rainbow pierced the sun (白虹貫日).

Yun Paengnam: Was that white rainbow piercing the sun seen only in Korea?

Yi Sŏgu: No, they say it was seen only in Korea.

Chŏng Suil: At that time, many crows gathered in the Seoul and Inch'ŏn areas. It is strange.

Yi Chŏngsŏp: Crows usually caw beforehand even when an ordinary house is about to have a funeral.

Kim Tongin: They say a white rainbow pierced the sun when Queen Min (민비) died too.

Yang Paekhwa: When Min Ch'ungjŏng (민충정) passed away, I clearly saw blood bamboo (혈죽) sprout with my own eyes when I was a middle school student. Green bamboo pierced through the wooden floor and shot up.

Yi Sŏgu: General Hasegawa (長谷川) supposedly sent an adjutant (副官) <140> to investigate it because it was so strange.

Yang Paekhwa: The bamboo at Min Ch'ungjŏng's house is truly mysterious. They say when Chŏng P'oŭn (정포은) died, blood bamboo (血竹) grew at Sŏnjukkyo Bridge (善竹橋), but it died soon after.

Yu Kwangnyŏl: In China, they say stars fall.

Kim Tongin: In the West too, they say stars are newly born or fall.

Chŏng Suil: There are people who know the time of their own death.

Yun Paengnam: My own late father was like that. He passed away on the first day of the first lunar month. From the 29th day of the twelfth month, while on his sickbed, he asked for new clothes, put them on, summoned all his descendants, had last letters written to relatives and friends far away, and then passed away peacefully. He must have known his time had come.

Yang Paekhwa: In Buddhism (佛家), eminent monks (高僧) have their coffins prepared in advance, and just before dying, they even get into the coffin themselves.

Chŏng Suil: They say one becomes like that upon attaining enlightenment (道通).

**The Man from Cho Koyak Pharmacy Who Returned from the Afterlife**

Yang Paekhwa: There's also this story. About Ch'ŏnil Pharmacy (天一藥房), the one that sells Cho's plaster (조고약). An employee there fell ill, tried treatment after treatment to no avail, and finally drank urine and died. So he went to the afterlife, walked endlessly through a rugged mountain region like the area below Samgak Mountain in Seoul, and came upon a house with a gatekeeper. There, Judge Ch'oe (崔判官) was sitting, looking through documents, and declared that the wrong person, someone not yet meant to die, had been brought. He sent him back out, following a dog along the path from the afterlife. Well, he revived after three days and is still alive today. (General laughter)

Yi Sŏgu: There are many such stories in Seoul too.

Kim Tongin: Edgar Allan Poe's stories also deal frequently with suspended animation (假死狀態).

Chŏng Suil: Mr. Kim of Suwon (水原金氏) and Mr. Lee of Yangp'yŏng (揚平李氏) died on the same day at the same time and entered the afterlife together. Judge Ch'oe said that Mr. Lee of Yangp'yŏng, who wasn't supposed to die yet, had been brought by mistake. So he ordered a messenger (사자) to take him back. But this messenger from the underworld (저승사자) must have drunk some rice wine (막걸리) because, on the way out, instead of taking Mr. Lee's soul back to Yangp'yŏng and attaching it there, he mistakenly took it to Mr. Kim's house in Suwon, attached it, and left. So, when he suddenly revived, his family members were all overjoyed, crying "Father!" and "Oppa!", but he looked around and didn't recognize anyone. Three days after reviving, he went looking for his old home in Yangp'yŏng. His parents and his own children were there, but his wife and children didn't know who this fellow was and chased him away. (Laughter) <141>

Yun Paengnam: Furthermore, this strange thing happened. An American woman, whose name I forget, came to a temple in Kyoto (京都) to practice Buddhism (佛道), saying she was studying. Why specifically Buddhism? And why Kyoto? Because when she was in America, she had the same dream every year on her birthday. The dream was about her spending her entire life in some East Asian-style temple. The pillars and structure of the building were exactly the same every year. So, thinking of East Asia, she decided to visit Japan, and among places in Japan, Kyoto (京都) has the most temples, so she went there. She spent many days searching various temples until she finally found one where every single tree and stone (一木一石) was identical to the one in her dream. Amazed, she immediately entered that temple, shaved her head, put on a monk's cap, became a nun, and is still practicing Buddhism there today.

Yi Chŏngsŏp: That's material for Freud's (피-이드) psychoanalysis (精神分析).

Yang Paekhwa: It certainly happens that you dream something first, and then it manifests in reality later.

Yi Sŏgu: Yes. After experiencing something, you feel like you've definitely heard or seen it somewhere before. Then you think hard and realize you saw it in a dream. That happens often.

**Can Humans Face Death Calmly?**

Kim Tonghwan: What constitutes dying well? How do you all wish to die?

Yun Paengnam: I want to live a long life.

Yang Paekhwa: I want to live to 80 or 90, see my great-grandchildren and great-great-grandchildren, and then die.

Chŏng Suil: I want to live long enough to see how the world turns out.

Yun Paengnam: As for how to die, I'd like to be instantly killed by a cannonball – bang! – and just drop dead. In my youth, I wanted to throw myself into the vast blue waves of the boundless ocean.

Yi Sŏgu: Normally, I don't think about death, but once I went to Andonghyeon (安東縣). My friends had left, and I went alone to a bathhouse named 'Chidang' (池塘 - Pond). Lying naked alone on the third floor of the bathhouse, enjoying a feeling of perfect peace, I suddenly thought, "What if I get murdered here? What if I die alone with no one around?" A sense of fear arose, and I quickly gathered my clothes and ran out. There are moments when one trembles with the fear of death.

Yun Paengnam: I've also experienced the temptation of death. When I was sixteen, I climbed Chamsu Hill (南山蠶頭 - Silkworm Head) on Namsan. Looking down at the distant darkness below from the cliff, I thought how easily I could die just by falling. I felt tempted to take a magnificent leap and die.

Yi Chŏngsŏp: I've had a similar experience. Years ago, when I went to New York, I went up the Woolworth Building (윌스삘딩) <142> – maybe there are taller buildings now, putting it lower in rank, but at the time, it was the tallest building in the world. Standing up there, I felt an impulse to jump off and die. The thought of how exhilarating that death would be came over me. At that time, I could spend money freely and was living luxuriously, so the thought of suicide would never have occurred to me even in dreams, but when you actually encounter such magnificence, you feel the lure of death. Seeing Niagara Falls (나이아가라) also made me want to die. There's a mystery in how a person's small personality gets absorbed into the grandeur of the universe.

Kim Tongin: That's true. When you see the vast ocean or stand on a high mountaintop and feel the grandeur, you often think of death (死). I once went to Nikkō (日光) and saw Kegon Falls (게곤노다끼). At that time, any ordinary person would feel like jumping into the water like Fujimura Misao (등촌조).

Kim Tonghwan: But is death really that frightening?

Yi Sŏgu: When it happens, it just happens. There's nothing to fear, nothing pitiful, nothing to fuss about. Some time ago, I was in a car accident going from Onyang Hot Springs to P'yŏngt'aek (平澤) and was knocked unconscious. At the moment of impact, Bang!, I felt nothing at all.

Kim Tongin: In P'yŏngyang, I happened to witness a love suicide between an innkeeper's daughter and an unemployed young man from the next room. At first, I didn't know, but I heard sounds of distress, opened the window, and saw the two of them vomiting after ingesting rat poison (`猫イラズ`). Even then, the woman was wiping up the vomit with a cloth. Women are creatures who maintain their decorum even at the moment of death.

Yu Kwangnyŏl: When I was young, I fell into a well a couple of times. When water entered my mouth and I couldn't breathe, right at the moment of suffocation, I felt nothing.

**Death Row Inmates' Final Moments: Facing Death Calmly**

Yang Paekhwa: In Manchuria, I saw bandits being executed. Even with the sword about to fall on their necks, they smiled calmly.

Yi Sŏgu: Was it the smile of ignorance (無智)?

Yun Paengnam: No, it seems to be human nature to maintain composure at the time of death. Also, when I lived in Kwŏnnong-dong (勸農洞), I contracted cholera (호렬자), and a doctor named Yi Myŏnsik apparently gave me a wrong injection of cocaine (고까인). I died and then came back to life. At that moment, I let out a chuckle. Thinking, "So this is what life is," a laugh just came out automatically!

Yi Chŏngsŏp: One of the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove (竹林七賢) loved alcohol so much that he had a disciple follow him with a shovel, telling him to bury him wherever he died. Then he continued drinking as usual. Truly someone who transcended life and death. <143>

Yang Paekhwa: Still, things like that aside, the attachment to life seems quite strong. They say people beg to be spared right up until they ascend the gallows (絞首臺).

Yun Paengnam: No. Someone who used to be a prison warden (典獄) in Korea retired and wrote his memoirs. In it, he said that many Korean death row inmates face death calmly (從容就死).

Yi Sŏgu: What? They say that by the time they are dragged out, eight or nine out of ten are already dead. They lose consciousness.

Kim Tongin: I saw hangings at Mansudae (萬壽臺) in P'yŏngyang. A prisoner heading to the execution platform, wouldn't you know it, his shoe came off as he walked, and he stopped to find it and put it back on. You'd think, what difference does it make whether a man about to die wears his shoes or not, but that's not how the person involved feels. Psychology is strange. (Laughter)

Chŏng Suil: Someone who was a warden at some prison told this story. When prisoners are taken to the execution platform, their last wishes for food are granted. Thieves and murderers usually ask for rice cakes or noodles, making various requests. But among educated and cultured individuals, 9 out of 10 simply ask for three glasses of cold water.

Yi Sŏgu: They are completely abstaining. Through the power of self-cultivation.

Yu Kwangnyŏl: Drinking cold water must be out of anger (火).

Yun Paengnam: They probably would be angry. (Laughter)

Yang Paekhwa: Watching bandits being executed in Fengtian (봉천), I saw one ask for a shirt from someone nearby, borrow it, put it around his neck, and then go to his death. He must have been thinking of his appearance after death.

Yi Chŏngsŏp: In the West too, when you look at the cells of executed prisoners, they often scratched their names with their fingernails before dying.

Yun Paengnam: They say water is sprayed violently on death row inmates before execution. They're already dead by that moment. In old Korea, they used to paint the face with ashes. They say prisoners died when the ash-painting began.

Yu Kwangnyŏl: Everyone seems to dislike death. Even a great sage like Confucius, when Zigong (子貢) came, Confucius lamented, "I dreamed I was receiving offerings between two pillars; my time to die has come," and shed tears, asking Zigong what should be done. According to Yin dynasty legend, eating something between two pillars meant death. Didn't Jesus also cry out when carrying the cross at the end, "My God, why have you forsaken me?"
It's just that those figures had a single-minded focus (一念), which made their deaths solemn.
Nelson saying, "I have done my duty. I die, but Great Britain lives," and dying calmly, or Yi Sunsin's death – they could face death calmly only because they had that single-minded focus on the nation and people they thought about day and night. It seems everyone dislikes death. <144>
Song Siyŏl (宋時烈) was like that too. When faced with execution by poison (賜藥) and the bowl of poison was before him, he gathered his 100-odd disciples and gave them instructions: "Don't be anxious, don't lose your spirit, cultivate talented people." After that, he wrote letters where needed, provided calligraphy samples to those who asked, and then drank the poison bowl at dawn.

Chŏng Suil: It's the same psychology as martyrs (殉敎者) dying.

Kim Tongin: There's self-satisfaction involved.

Yi Sŏgu: They want to die grandly. Since they have to die anyway, they want to leave their name behind.

Yi Chŏngsŏp: Even someone like the Daewongun (大院君) supposedly shouted thunderously at the end, "So, I'm dying too?"

Yang Paekhwa: Reading the biographies of the Six Martyred Ministers (死六臣), it's all due to single-minded loyalty (一心).

Yi Sŏgu: That's right, nothing is fearsome before single-mindedness (一心).

Chŏng Suil: If one is filled with devotion for the state, like Sŏng Sammun (成三門), truly only single-mindedness (一心) would remain.

Yun Paengnam: When one achieves single-mindedness, one doesn't even feel pain.

Kim Tonghwan: Everyone probably has an attachment to life.

Yi Sŏgu: Someone asked a death row inmate in handcuffs and shackles, and the reply was reportedly, "I'd be fine even if they kept me in these handcuffs and shackles, just as long as they don't kill me."

Yi Chŏngsŏp: The effort plants (植物) make to live is truly tear-jerking. Like a blade of grass pushing through rock.

Samch'ŏlli: It's getting late, so let's conclude here. Thank you very much. <145>

**Summary**

This 1934 symposium transcript captures a lively debate among prominent Korean intellectuals and writers about the existence and nature of fate (운명/팔자) versus free will, and their views on life and death. Participants share personal anecdotes—near-death experiences, gambling luck, strange coincidences, premonitions—to argue for or against fate being a determining force. The discussion touches upon traditional beliefs like physiognomy (관상), palmistry (손금), spiritualism (태주/명도), omens, and the influence of texts like the *Chŏnggamnok*, contrasting them with scientific skepticism and the importance of effort and self-cultivation. The latter half delves into attitudes towards death, including the fear of dying, the desire for a long life, the possibility of facing death calmly (like historical figures or martyrs), and the ultimate attachment to life.

From a historical perspective, the article offers insights into the intellectual climate of colonial Korea. The participants grapple with modernity (cars, trains, Western science like psychoanalysis, world travel) while still engaging deeply with traditional East Asian concepts of fate, divination, and spiritual phenomena, including Japanese practices like Meidōkai. The debate reflects a society in transition, questioning old beliefs but not entirely discarding them. The references to historical figures like Yi Sunsin, Yulgok, and events like the Imjin War or the deaths of King Kojong and Queen Min, framed within discussions of fate and omens, reveal how history was interpreted through both rational and supernatural lenses. Yu Kwangnyŏl's critique of the *Chŏnggamnok* and fatalism as detrimental to the "Korean nation's spirit" (조선 민족) hints at underlying nationalist sentiments and a desire for agency during a period of subjugation. The casual mixing of Korean and Japanese terms and references also reflects the linguistic and cultural reality of the time.

**Named Entities**

삼천리	삼천리	Samch'ŏlli
최창학	최창학	Ch'oe Ch'anghak
방응모	방응모	Pang Ŭngmo
박용운	박용운	Pak Yongun
리관용	이관용	Yi Kwanyong
방정환	방정환	Pang Chŏnghwan
윤심덕	윤심덕	Yun Simdŏk
윤백남	윤백남	Yun Paengnam
야담사	야담사	Yadam Company
동아일보	동아일보	Tong-A Ilbo
동경	도쿄	Tokyo
양백화	양백화	Yang Paekhwa
한성고등학교	한성고등학교	Hansŏng High School
중국	중국	China
이정섭	이정섭	Yi Chŏngsŏp
파리대학	파리대학	University of Paris
중앙일보	중앙일보	Chungang Ilbo
이서구	이서구	Yi Sŏgu
시에론축음기회사	시에론 축음기 회사	Sieron Gramophone Company
정수일	정수일	Chŏng Suil
명치대학	메이지대학	Meiji University
유광렬	유광렬	Yu Kwangnyŏl
조선일보	조선일보	Chosŏn Ilbo
김동인	김동인	Kim Tongin
경응대학	게이오대학	Keio University
김동환	김동환	Kim Tonghwan
서울	서울	Seoul
종로	종로	Chongno
백합원	백합원	Paekhabwŏn
마산	마산	Masan
진주	진주	Chinju
삼각산	삼각산	Samgak Mountain
평양	평양	P'yŏngyang
경학원	경학원	Kyŏnghagwŏn
남대문	남대문	Namdaemun
서대문	서대문	Sŏdaemun
서양	서양	The West
이만규	이만규	Yi Man'gyu
양평	양평	Yangp'yŏng
여운형	여운형	Yŏ Unhyŏng
문밖	문밖	Munbak (Outside the Gate - likely refers to area outside Seoul's gates)
용당포	용당포	Yongdamp'o
인천	인천	Inch'ŏn
영종도	영종도	Yŏngjongdo
서부전선 별탈업다	서부전선 이상 없다	All Quiet on the Western Front
칠산바다	칠산바다	Ch'ilsan Sea
학국시대	한국시대	Korean Empire Era
심상원	심상원	Sim Sangwŏn
일본	일본	Japan
부산	부산	Pusan
하관	시모노세키	Shimonoseki
용당포	용당포	Yongdamp'o (repeated, likely error in original - maybe meant another place?)
주역	주역	I Ching (Book of Changes)
탑공공원	탑골공원	Tapkol Park
전라도	전라도	Chŏlla Province
정읍	정읍	Chŏngŭp
차경석	차경석	Ch'a Kyŏngsŏk
고창	고창	Koch'ang
정감녹	정감록	Chŏnggamnok
율곡	율곡	Yulgok (Yi I)
유서애	유서애	Yu Sŏae (Yu Sŏngnyong)
한양	한양	Hanyang (Old name for Seoul)
민영휘	민영휘	Min Yŏnghwi
권남	권남	Kwŏn Nam
남이장군	남이장군	General Nam I
예종	예종	King Yejong
새남터	새남터	Saenamt'ŏ
셀비아	세르비아	Serbia
오지리	오스트리아	Austria
리순신	이순신	Yi Sunsin
도진	시마즈	Shimazu
리낙파	이락파	Yirakp'a (Place name related to Yi Sunsin's death)
제갈무후	제갈무후	Zhuge Wuhou (Zhuge Liang)
한강	한강	Han River
제일철교	제1철교	First Railway Bridge
제이철교	제2철교	Second Railway Bridge
대판	오사카	Osaka
등촌조	후지무라 미사오	Fujimura Misao
화암폭포	게곤폭포	Kegon Falls (華巖の瀑)
끼리시아	그리스	Greece
希臘	그리스	Greece
림독성	임독성	Gonorrhea toxicity
백부	백부	Paternal Uncle
가마쿠라	가마쿠라	Kamakura
순성	순성	Sun Sŏng (Chin Hakmun 秦學文)
경응대학병원	게이오대학병원	Keio University Hospital
해동은행	해동은행	Haedong Bank
김연수	김연수	Kim Yŏnsu
송진우	송진우	Song Chinu
산전	야마다	Yamada
명도회	명도회	Meidōkai
우원총독	우가키 총독	Governor-General Ugaki
약초정	약초정	Yakch'ojŏng (Yakusōchō)
인천미두판	인천미두판	Inch'ŏn Rice and Bean Exchange
번복창	번복창	Pŏn Pokch'ang
로서아	러시아	Russia
모나꼬	모나코	Monaco
김옥균	김옥균	Kim Okkyun
상해	상하이	Shanghai
두산만	도야마 미쓰루	Tōyama Mitsuru
리태왕	이태왕	Yi T'aewang (King Kojong)
민비	민비	Queen Min
민중정	민충정	Min Ch'ungjŏng (Min Yŏnghwan)
선죽교	선죽교	Sŏnjukkyo Bridge
정포은	정포은	Chŏng P'oŭn (Chŏng Mongju)
천일약방	천일약방	Ch'ŏnil Pharmacy
조고약	조고약	Cho's Plaster
최판관	최판관	Judge Ch'oe
수원	수원	Suwon
양평	양평	Yangp'yŏng (repeated)
미국	미국	America
경도	교토	Kyoto
피-이드	프로이트	Freud
뉴-욕	뉴욕	New York
윌스삘딩	울워스 빌딩	Woolworth Building
나이아가라	나이아가라	Niagara Falls
일광	닛코	Nikkō
게곤노다끼	게곤 폭포	Kegon Falls
안동현	안동현	Andonghyeon
온양	온양	Onyang
평택	평택	P'yŏngt'aek
권농동	권농동	Kwŏnnong-dong
리면식	이면식	Yi Myŏnsik
죽림칠현	죽림칠현	Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove
만수대	만수대	Mansudae
넬손	넬슨	Nelson
송시열	송시열	Song Siyŏl
대원군	대원군	Daewongun (Regent Heungseon)
사육신	사육신	Six Martyred Ministers
성삼문	성삼문	Sŏng Sammun

**Glossary**

운명	운명	Fate, destiny
사생관	사생관	View on life and death
좌담회	좌담회	Symposium, round-table discussion
팔자	팔자	Fate, destiny (often implies inescapable fate)
수수걱기	수수께끼	Riddle, puzzle (older spelling)
고개	고개	Mountain pass
자동차	자동차	Automobile, car
박휘	바퀴	Wheel (older spelling)
낭떠러지	낭떠러지	Cliff, precipice
저슬길	저승길	Path to the afterlife (older spelling/pronunciation)
긔생	기생	Kisaeng (female entertainer)
즉살	즉살	Instant death
경마	경마	Horse racing
화투	화투	Hwatu (Korean flower cards game)
마-짱	마작	Mahjong (loanword)
골패꾼	골패꾼	Bone tile gambler
투전꾼	투전꾼	Card gambler (using Tujeon cards)
예감	예감	Premonition, foreboding
호외	호외	Newspaper extra
인력거	인력거	Rickshaw
소경	소경	Blind person (older, potentially offensive term)
뿌랙캣	블랙캣	Black cat (loanword)
력사상	역사상	Historically
뻐스	버스	Bus (loanword)
전차	전차	Tram, streetcar
기괴	기괴	Bizarre, strange
선천적	선천적	Congenital, innate, predetermined
분투	분투	Struggle, strenuous effort
수단	수단	Means, ways, methods
복녹	복록	Fortune and blessings
운운	운운	To talk about, to mention (often implies repetition or vague talk)
정도	정도	Degree, extent
수재	수재	Flood disaster
헤염	헤엄	Swimming (older spelling)
장승	장승	Village guardian post (wooden totem pole)
초인력적	초인력적	Superhuman
신비	신비	Mystery
숫장사	숯장수	Charcoal seller/dealer (older spelling)
부즈런하게	부지런하게	Diligently (older spelling)
박복하다	박복하다	To be ill-fated, unlucky
리익	이익	Profit, gain (older spelling)
진합태산	진합태산	Dust gathering to become Mt. Tai (idiom: small things accumulate)
진합성구	진합성구	Dust gathering to become a hill (idiom: small efforts yield small results)
게르름방이	게으름뱅이	Lazy person (older spelling)
박아지	바가지	Gourd dipper
숙명	숙명	Fate, destiny (often unavoidable)
풍낭	풍랑	Stormy waves
뽀-이	보이	Boy, ship's boy (loanword)
뽀-도	보트	Boat (loanword)
안신입명	안신입명	Finding peace of mind and accepting destiny
긔백	기백	Spirit, vigor, mettle (older spelling)
アキラメ	아키라메	Resignation, giving up (Japanese loanword)
버팀성	버팀성	Endurance, resilience, tenacity
수양	수양	Self-cultivation, moral training
지예	지혜	Wisdom, intelligence (older spelling)
뿌레-끼	브레이크	Brake (loanword)
度胸	도쿄	Courage, nerve, guts (Japanese loanword, dokyō)
탄탄대로	탄탄대로	Smooth, level road; easy path
긔차	기차	Train (older spelling)
수양 아들	수양아들	Adopted son
주역	주역	Book of Changes (I Ching)
卦	괘	Divination trigram/hexagram
손금	손금	Palm lines (for palmistry)
인생	인생	Person born in the Year of the Tiger (zodiac reference)
무자생	무자생	Person born in the Year of the Rat (Muja cyclical year)
병자생	병자생	Person born in the Year of the Rat (Pyŏngja cyclical year - text likely meant 丙午 Hinoe-uma/Fire Horse)
견우화	견우화	Morning glory flower
동백꼿	동백꽃	Camellia flower (older spelling)
교도	교도	Follower, believer (of a religion/sect)
우부우민	우부우민	Ignorant men and women, the unenlightened masses
금광	금광	Gold mine
폐광	폐광	Abandoned mine
양병십만	양병십만	Raising 100,000 soldiers
임진란	임진란	Imjin War (Japanese invasions, 1592-1598)
다독	다독	Poisonous influence, corruption (likely 荼毒)
관상술	관상술	Physiognomy (face reading)
상전벽해	상전벽해	Mulberry fields become blue sea (idiom: drastic change)
조명	조명	Early death, premature death
반정	반정	Coup d'état, political restoration/upheaval
정승	정승	Chief State Councillor (highest official in Joseon)
새남터	새남터	Saenamt'ŏ (historical execution ground)
로력	노력	Effort, labor (North Korean spelling or older form)
소명	소명	Summons, calling (esp. royal or divine)
동방장성	동방장성	Long star in the East (comet or meteor)
자실	자살	Suicide (older or dialectal spelling)
곱추	곱추	Hunchback
불구자	불구자	Disabled person
페병	폐병	Lung disease, tuberculosis
정사	정사	Love suicide, joint suicide of lovers
카루모친	카루모친	Karumochin (type of poison, possibly Calcium Molybdate or similar)
巖頭感	암두감	Gantō no Kan (Japanese: Thoughts on the Cliff Top)
림독성	임독성	Gonorrhea toxicity (believed cause of infertility)
승상	승상	Monk's face (physiognomy term suggesting childlessness)
백부	백부	Paternal uncle
영낙업서요	영락없어요	Without fail, exactly as predicted (older spelling)
점장이	점쟁이	Fortune teller (older spelling)
흥농	흉농	Thoracic empyema (pus in the chest cavity)
재생지 은인	재생지 은인	Benefactor who gives a second life
태주	태주	Form of spiritualism or mediumship
공도	공도	Kongdo (regional name for T'aeju, esp. Chŏlla)
명도회	명도회	Meidōkai (Japanese spiritualist group)
투시술	투시술	Clairvoyance
미두판	미두판	Rice and bean exchange/market
인력	인력	Human power/strength
증조	징조	Omen, portent (older spelling)
흙비	흙비	Dirt rain, dust rain
백홍관일	백홍관일	White rainbow pierces the sun (omen)
혈죽	혈죽	Blood bamboo (bamboo miraculously growing at a loyalist's death site)
불가	불가	Buddhism
고승	고승	Eminent monk
도통	도통	Attaining enlightenment/mastery
최판관	최판관	Judge Ch'oe (figure in the underworld bureaucracy)
저승사자	저승사자	Messenger from the underworld, grim reaper
가사상태	가사상태	Suspended animation, apparent death
불도	불도	The way of Buddha, Buddhism
정신분석	정신분석	Psychoanalysis
호렬자	호열자	Cholera (older term)
고까인	코카인	Cocaine (loanword)
죽림칠현	죽림칠현	Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove
교수대	교수대	Gallows
전옥	전옥	Prison warden
종용취사	종용취사	Meeting death calmly and composedly
순교자	순교자	Martyr
사육신	사육신	Six Martyred Ministers
일심	일심	One mind, single-mindedness, wholehearted devotion
사약	사약	Royal poison granted for execution


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제6권 제9호
발행일	1934년 09월 01일
기사제목	『運命과 死生觀』 座談會
기사형태	대담·좌담

『運命과 死生觀』 座談會
叅席諸氏(年齡順)
尹白南氏 現 野談社主幹, 東亞日報社囑託 前東京遊學＜128＞
梁白華氏 小說家, 漢城高等學校出身, 中國小說詩歌飜譯多數
李晶燮氏 巴里大學文科出身 前中央日 報論說班記者, 世界一週, 現評論家
李瑞求氏 前東亞日報記者, 現시에론蓄音器會社文藝部主任
鄭秀日氏 現中央日報經濟部長, 東京明治 大學修學
柳光烈氏 前朝鮮日 報社會 部長, 中央日報編輯局次長, 現 評論家
金東仁氏 慶應大學出, 前 朝鮮日報 學藝部長, 小說家
本社側 金東煥

八月 十五日 저녁 서울 종로 百合園 褸上에서
本社, 참말 생각하면 세상일이란 우수워요, 글세 어제까지 금전꾼으로 도라다니든 최창학(崔昌學)씨가 돌연히 백만장자되고 방응모씨 박용운씨가 하로밤 사이에 큰 부자되고 또 리관용(李灌鎔)씨 방정환(方定煥)씨 윤심덕(尹心悳)씨들이 갑작히 저 세상에 떠나가고. 도모지 눈선압헤서 무슨 큰 일이 떠러질는지 모르는 것이 우리 사는 이 세상 일임니다그려. 그러니 어듸 운명(運命)이란 혹은 팔자(八字)란 잇다고 보아야＜129＞ 올해요? 잇는듯 업고 업는듯 잇서 도모지 잘 모르겟서요. 그러니 어러운 철학이나 종교는 내세우지 말고 그저 지나가는 이약이로 어듸 이 수수걱기를 좀 푸러주세요.
尹白南, 잇서요. 운명이란 것이 나는 꼭 잇다고 보아요. 내가 년전에 마산(馬山)서 진주로 자동차 타고 가는데 삼각산 가튼 큰 고개란 놈이 그 사이에 하나 가르노엿지요. 자동차가 마츰 거시각슬적에 산비탈에서 카-부를 도는데 자동차 뒤 박휘가 덜넝빠지겟지 그러니 일은 엇더케 되엇겟서요. 그 놉흔 절벽에서 자동차가 가을 바람에 날니는 오동입 모양으로 디글디글 굴너 몃백길되는 낭떠러지로 떠러지고 말엇지요. 실상 낭떠러진 깃이 아니라 지옥이엇지 저슬길에든 세음이엇지요.
李瑞求, 저런변 저런변...
尹白南, 참말 아슬아슬햇지. 지금은 웃고 이약이도 되지만 그때 내 엽헤 안젓든 잘도 생겻더니 진주 긔생이란 젊은 미인이 자동차 고장 소리나자 저 몬저 살겟다고 선두로 뛰어 내리다가 자동차에 깔려 즉살하엿고 또 내 압헤 안젓든 무슨 면장 비슷한 사람도 몬저 살겟다고 뛰어 나리다가 즉살하엿지. 나는 그때 에라 죽으면 죽어라. 살 놈이면 안젓다고 죽고 죽을 놈이면 뛰어 나린다고 살텐가」하는 생각으로 그만 「アキラメ」하고 떡-버티고 안저 자동차와 함께 두어번 곤두박질 하고 이럭저럭 하다가 창박에 뿌리어 한참만에 눈을 깨어보니 나는 살고 마즈막 까지 뛰어나리지 안튼 운전대의 조수(助手)란 놈이 살고 그러고는 다 죽엇더구만. 그러케 잘낫든 진주 긔생도 무론 죽고 그때 얘, 이것 봐라 팔자란 놈 잇기는 잇구나보다 햇지요.
金東仁, 나도 평양(平壤)서와 서울서 각금 경마(競馬)를 하여 보앗는데 엇던 날은 힘 안들이고 돈 잘 따먹는 날 잇지, 그저 잘 드러맛지 손속이 잘나는 날 잇서요. 그러나 엇든 날은 더 정신차리고 이를 감을고 꼭 익이려드러도 백패하는날 잇서요. 되는날 잇고 안되는 날 잇서요. 화투(花鬪)도 그러치 마-짱(麻雀)도 그러치 손속이 잘나는 날 꼭 잇지 드른 즉 골패꾼 투전꾼 이약이 들어도 꼭 되는 날 잇고 안되는 날 잇다 해요.
李瑞求, 그러치 마-짱 잘되는 날잇지 분명 꼭 잇지요. 또 무슨 일날 때는 꼭 예감(豫感)이란 나타나 보이는 법이여요. 내 압서 동아일보 다닐 때 무슨 돌발 사건이든가 이러나서 밤중에 신문사에 드러가서 새벽 두시까지 호외(號外)를 만드러내고 인력거 타고 새벽길을 거러 나오는데 인력거 압헤 발착맛게도 웬 소경 년석이 지나간단 말이예요. 그 순간 몸에서 옷삭 소름이 끼처요. 새벽 두시에 소경이 장안 큰길을 지나 다니다니＜130＞ 도모지 천만 뜻밧기지요. 그래서 엇전지 자미업다 생각하면서 집에 도라와 본 즉 악가까지 잘 놀든 어린 아해가 갑작히 열이 올나 펄펄끌어요. 의사요 병원이요 하고 아모리 떠들엇지만은 동도 채 트기전에 어린 아애가 그만 죽습데다. 참 이상하여요. 그 뒤부터 소경만 맛나면 몸에 옷속옷속 소름이 끼처요. 다 신비한 일이지요.
李晶燮, 서양서도 뿌랙캣이라 하야 거문 고양이 지나가면 반드시 흥변이 잇다지요. 동양 사람이 소경을 꺼리는 이상이지요. 또 열 셋이란 수를 슬혀하고...
鄭秀日, 그참 이상하여요. 력사상으로 보아도 열 셋이란 수자드는 날에 위인과 천재가 만히 죽엇다드구만

百萬長者됨도 八字所關인가?
金東煥, 가만잇습시다. 생사에 대한 신비라거나 그런 문제는 나종에 게속할 「나의 사생관」에 밀우기로 하고 여기서는 위선 운명에 관한 말슴만 하기로 합시다.
李晶燮, 나는 또 이런 일이 잇서지요. 지간 매일 도서관으로 다니는데 경학원 뒤의 내집에서 뻐스타고 종로 오정목 오면 반드시 처음 전차가 남대문행(南大門行)이어야 조켓는데 늘 서대문행이 몬저 온단 말이애요. 이것이 하로 이틀만이라면 또 모르겟는데 전혀 10여일을두고 꼭 갓단 말이애요. 이것도 기괴(氣怪)한 무슨 신(神)의 작란이라고 보자면 볼 수 잇겟지요. 그러나 나는 대체로 운명을 밋지 안으려해요. 그것은 비과학적(非科學的)이니까 만일 선천적으로 운명이 결정되어 잇다면 그러면 사람 사람은 손발 놀니지 말고 안저서 복녹이나 기다러지 안켓서요. 그게 상책이지요. 상식으로 생각하여 보아도 이 세상이 그러케 졸열하게 꾸미어젓슬가요? 안될 말이지 누구나 분투하고 수단것 다하고 일심정력 드리면 성공과 행복이 오는 법이지요. 흔히 우리네 조상들이 팔자 운운하는것을 보아도 잘되면 제잘나 되고 못되면 팔자에 밀지요. 모순이지.
尹白南, 그것은 정도 문제지 아모리 애를 써도 안될 놈은 안되고 마는 것이 잇지.
金東仁, 사람 힘으로 할 수 업는 일이 따로잇지요.
柳光烈, 大富在天 小富在人이란 말도 잇기야 하지만, 그러나 운명은 잇다고 생각하여서는 결단이지.
鄭秀日, 아니 잇스면 납부고 업스면 조코 하는 그런 도덕론(道德論)을 하여서는 안되지. 그런데 참 이상하기는 해요. 얼마전 수재 때에 글세 우리 신문사의 사장과 리만규씨들이 양평가서 배타고 물살 센 데를 건너는데 그만 배가 전복되어 한다하는 헤염 잘치는 그 뱃사공은 빠저죽고 양복 입은 채 헤염칠 줄도＜131＞ 잘 모르는 여운형씨와 리만규씨가 사랏서요. 다른 선객들도 다 죽엇는데 도모지 모를 일 아뎌요. 십여 명 빠진 속에서 헤염 잘치는 이는 다 죽고 제일 재주업는 분이 살아나다니.
李瑞求, 응 물 가운데서는 아주-장승가치 서야 산대. 여운형씨 가치
(大笑)
尹白南, 초인력적 신비(超人力的 神秘)가 잇는 법이야.
梁白華, 아마 잇다고 보는 것이 올치. 나 사는 문박에 아는 년석 하나 잇는데 50평생을 숫장사로 사라오지. 그런데 새벽부터 밤까지 참 부즈런하게 몃 십년 동안 일하여 오는데 박복하게도 늘 겨우 입에 풀칠할 정도에 끈처요. 엇든 때는 시세가 조와 돈 백원 리익을 본대요. 그러면 몃츨 아니가서 또 반드시 아들이 죽거나 안해가 병들거나 도적 맛거나 하여 불이에 그 돈을 다터러 버리고야 말 경우가 생긴대요. 일전 참외 가가에 안즌 것을 맛낫더니 한숨쉬며 나는 평생 팔자를 박하게 타고나서 이러타고 한탄하고 안젓더구만.
金東仁, 그러치 지금 세월엔 진합태산(塵合泰山)이란, 잇슬 수 업고 진합성구(塵合成丘)나 될가, 그런데 평생 모아야 언덕도 못 이루는 이 잇고 그 반대로 평생 게르름방이가 태산만드는 일이 잇단말이지.
李瑞求, 박아지란 씨우기가 어럽지. 쓰기는 십다는 격으로 팔자란 꼭 쓰기는 쉽게 된 것이야.(大笑)

破船되여도 運조흐면 산다
李晶燮, 그러나 용당포(龍塘浦)에서 년전에 학생 200명이 배업허지면서 다 죽지 안엇서요. 그네들도 200명이나 한날 한시에 설마 다 죽으란 숙명(宿命)을 타고 낫겟서요.
鄭秀日, 그런 경우도 잇지만 또 여러 백명이 다 죽는 속에서 두 세 명만 사는 례가 잇지 안어요. 나도 언젠가 인천서 영종도(永宗島)로 놀너 가다가 풍낭에 배가 번제지면서 열이 탓든 중 나하고 또 내친구 한아하고 둘만 살고 다른 사람은 다 죽엇서요. 이거야 조와 아니랄가요.
李瑞求, 루마루케가 지은 「서부전선 별탈업다」하는 전쟁 소설을 보아도 함께 일소대가 폭발탄 터지고 긔관 총알이 비오듯하는 속을 돌격하여 나가도 가장 몬저 선두에 선 말하자면 제일 몬저 죽엇서야 올햇슬 그자가 살고 딴놈들이 덜컥덜컥 죽더래요. 전장에 나간 때 가치 운명을 밋게 되는 때가 업대요. 참말 전쟁에 사라 도라오는 것은 꼭 팔자지 초인력(超人力)이지.
尹白南, 그야 전쟁뿐이겟소. 배를 타보면 꼭갓치요. 나도 한 5년전 될가 인천서 배를 타고 칠산바다(七山海)를 가는데 파도가 엇더케＜132＞ 세든지 뽀-이들까지 사람 죽는다고 야단이고 삼등 선객들은 뽀-도를 내리라고 야단이엇지. 배가 가랍입 가치 나붓기니까 모다들 겁이나서 그질알이지. 그래서 결국 뽀-드타고 도망가든 년석들은 죽엇다더구만. 나는 버티엇지 살고 죽고가 팔자소관인데 버티어라 버티어라하고 그야말로 태연자약하엿지. 그래서 나는 밥잘먹고 엿새 동안의 그 어러운 뱃길을 무사히 항해할 수 잇섯서요. 운명을 밋는 것이 납분 점도 잇겟지만 그 반대로 사람이 안신입명(安神立命)적 태연(泰然)하는 긔백(氣舶)이 생겨요. 일종의「アキラメ」지요.
金東仁, 그러치 버팀성이 생기고 말고. 뱃장이 든든하여지지. 될 놈은 되겟거니 하면... ...
李瑞求, 올하요. 그말이 올하요. 가령 래일 아츰 해돗기와 가치 내손에 돈 千圓업스면 목이 떠러질 일이 잇지. 그 때 자리에 누어 안될 일을 작고 생각하고 근심하며 밤을 박히면 무얼해요. 제 꼴악선이만 고약해지지. 그럴 때에 「팔자에 업는 돈이 하늘에서 떠러지겟늬」하고 턱「アキラメ」하는 생각을 하면 그제부터는 마음을 활-노코 발점 편히 잘 수 잇지요. 운명 밋는 공덕이지.
梁白華, 지내처 밋으면 탈이지. 녜전 학국시대에 심상원이란 대관이 일본 수신사(修信使)가 되어 만흔 수원(隨員)들을 다리고 부산서 화륜선타고 동경으로 드러가는데 바다에 엇더케 파도가 심한지 금시에 배가 파선할 것 갓더래요. 그래서 선장 이하 모다 죽는다고 벌벌 떠는데 이 양반 혼자만 태연자약하거든 모다 감복하엿대. 그래서 결국 하관가서 육지에 내린 뒤에 「영감 참 위대하심니다. 당장 배 파선할 것 가튼데도 태연하시고」하고 아첨하니 그제야 펄적뛰며 벌벌떨면서 「아니 화륜선도 파선하나?」하더래요. 「개명」을 너무 밋어서 화륜선은 파선아니 하는 줄 알엇더래.(一同大笑)
李晶燮, 요컨대 수양여하(修養如何)로 즉 그 개인의 교육이라든지 지예 정도로 어느 정도로 운명을 극복할 수야 잇겟지.
金東仁, 그 수양할 힘이 잇게 된 것도 역시 운명의 소치지(一同笑)
鄭秀日, 수양이란 종교적 이미일가.
李晶燮, 그런 이미도 물론 포함되겟지요. 엇잿든 이리 갈길을 저리 가도록 마음의 「뿌레-끼」를 자유자재하게 틀 수 잇는 사람이 수양잇는 사람이겟지요.

瞬間 瞬間에 百萬長者왓다갓다
尹白南, 「度胸」(도교-)란 말이잇지. 그러나 그런 말로써는 설명할 수 업는 경우가 잇지요. 한번은 탄탄대로를 자동차 타고 가는데 내겻헤 안진 녀자는 그야말로 부자집 맛며누리가치 떡버티고 좌석에 안즌 품이 그럴듯＜133＞ 서요. 그런데 자동차가 긔차 선로에 와서 스톱하는 바람에 한들에 그 녀자 가슴이 조곰 다치든 듯하더니 그거로 해서 그 녀자가 사흘만에 죽엇지요. 꼭 운수가 잇서요.
金東仁, 나도 중학교 다닐 때에 드른 이약이지만 한 아해가 나무 아래서 잠자는데 도적놈이 둘이 와서 도적질할 계획 이약이 하다가 아해 잇는 것을 비로소 보고 놀나서 「이놈애가 우리 이약이 듯고 경찰서 가서 고발하면 큰일난다」고 공론하면서 독끼를 드러 죽이려 하는데 마츰 저리로 마차 한 채가 달녀 오더래요. 그래서 도적놈들은 그만 가버렷지. 그 다음 그 마차에는 원래 자식업는 큰 부자의 부처가 산보하려 나왓는데 나무 아래서 아해가 자는 것 보고 마누라가 영감더러 우리 자식이 업스니 저애를 갓다가 길늘가」하니까 영감이 손을 내두르면서 「근본도 모르는 아해를 엇더케 갓다가 후사를 삼소」하고 반대하여 그냥 지나갓대요. 한참만에 그 아해는 눈을 부시시 뜨고 깨어낫지만 제가 자는 사이에 강도 손에 죽을 번한 줄도 또 부자 부처의 수양 아들되야 하마하더면 백만장자의 상속자 될번도 몰낫다해요. 운명이란 이러케 일순간에 결정되는 것이예요. 글세 하필 마구 죽이려드는 판에 마차가 오겟서요. 또 영감이 하필 반대하여 그만 거지아이가 부자될 긔회를 노첫겟서요. 다 신비여요.
李晶燮, 또 이런 이약이도 잇지요. 한 사람이 배타고 항해를 하는데 파도가 엇더케 센지 산가튼 물결이 탁 쓸려오면서 갑판에 섯든 사람을 탁 쓸어 바다 속에 집어너터니 또다시 그 파도가 탁 소스며 그 사람이 또 간판에 와 떠러지더니 다시 한번 바다에 또 떠러지더니 결국 네번만에 도로 간판 우에 와서 떠러저 사랏대요. 말하자면 눈깜작 할사이에 네번이나 죽엇다 살앗다한 세음지.(大笑)
尹白南, 요건대 미리 알 수 잇스면 운명이랄 이 업는데 모르니까 우연이라 하지 다 인지부족(人智不足)의 소치지. 좀더 사람의 지예가 발달되어 장래 일을 꾀둘너 보게되면 운명은 누구나 다 시인하련먼.

西洋서도 周易을 숭상
李瑞燮, 서양서도 주역(周易)은 조타고 밋어요. 정말 주역대로 점치면 꼭 드러맛는대요.
李瑞求, 탑공공원서 卦을 보는 얼간망둥이들이야 밋을 걸 못되지.
柳光烈, 그야 그저 날탕패지.
梁白華, 아모리 한날 한시에 난 쌍동이라도 손금이 달느지 그도 이상해.
鄭秀日, 쌍둥이도 겨우 구별 잇다면 先童 後童 뿐인데 그것이 10년 20년＜134＞ 가는 동안에 한 아는 잘되고 한 아는 잘못되지.
金東仁, 가튼날 나도 운명이 달넛든게지.
梁白華, 엇든 집은 며누리 어더가지고 몃츨 안가서 집안이 결단나지. 더구나 인생(寅生)을 꺼리지. 인자생은 팔자 아조 고약하대.
柳光烈, 일본서도 「丙子生」라고 시집도 가기어럽지.
尹白南, 악가 쌍동이 말이 낫지만 그야 나는 무자생(戊子生)이지만 이 세상 수십억 인류중 나와 동일 동시에 난 사람도 만겟지요. 그래도 운명이 다 다르니까 그는 그러케되고 나는 이러케 되는 것이겟지. 가튼 꼿이라도 견우화는 견우화대로 되고 동백꼿은 동백꼿대로 되드시.
柳光烈, 그러나 암만 생각해도 부자되고 귀하게 되는 것이 운명때문이 아닌 듯해요. 나는 이번 전라도 정읍가서 차경석(車京錫)이가 백만원을 너허 지엇다는 집을 삿삿치 구경하엿는데 고창태생(高敞胎生)인 차가가 일약 십만 교도의 두목이되고 백만원 돈을 우부우민한태서 거두어 궁궐가튼 집짓고 사는 것 보면 얼는 보기에 제 팔자 잘타고나서 그러타고도 하겟스나 그러나 그러타기보다 조선 민중 더구나 상투쟁이들이 미개한 판에 눈치빠르게 XX수 배워가지고 이러저리 둘너마처 그러케 된 것이 아닐가요. 정감녹(鄭鑑錄)을 보아도 어느 구절하나 분명하게 표시한것이 업고 이러케도 해석하게 저러케도 해석하게 어름어름한 문자로 요술가튼 말을 써노코 결국 간악한 사람들의 리용물이 되게하고 잇지안어요. 조선 민중의 지식 정도가 나저 그러치 정감녹이 다 무엇일가.
東仁, 방응모씨 금광보면 처음엔 셋이서 하다가 금이 안나니 둘은 떠러저 나가고 나종에 기튼방이 혼자하기 시작하니 물물 나오더래요.
鄭秀日, 최창학도 그러치 남이 금이 안난다고 페광(廢鑛)한 것을 붓들고 끗을 보앗지.
柳光烈, 지예가 뛰어난 사람은 운명을 만들지요. 임진낙전에 율곡(栗谷)은 천하대세를 살피고 양병십만(養兵十萬)하여야 하겟다고 크게 주장하엿지만 유서애(柳西崖)는 이런 태평성절에 양병이 무슨 양병인고 하고 반대하지 안엇서요. 그래서 결국 율곡은 몬저 죽으면서 「부제학(그때 西涯가 부제학이 잇스니까)이 장차 곤난할 때가 올걸」하고 장태식하더래요. 그뒤 정말 임진란이 잇서 삼남 고을의 수령들에게서 장께가 올너오는데 성마다 모다 함몰을 당하고 모다 야단이 낫더라지. 그때에사 유서애는 율곡의 녯말을 깨닷고 율곡이 참 훌용하엿다고 탄탄불이 하엿다래요. 그 후에도 무슨 한양백리 계견무성(漢陽萬里 鷄犬無聲)이란 등무에 엇지고 엇지고하여 정감녹이 뚱딴지가튼＜135＞ 소리를 하여 어리석은 우민들을 다독(茶毒)하엿지요. 앗가 율곡선생의 일가튼 것은 그 어룬이 선각자니까 예언 비슷하게 하엿지만 다른 사람은 지식이 모자라니까 못안 것이지요. 숙명이라고 잇슬 까닭이 잇나뇨? 만일 세계만국이 다 잇다고 주장할지라도 조선 민족은 운명설을 부인하여 그 다독(茶毒)를 피하여야 올흘줄 알어요.
방응모 금광일도 그 광산에 금이 꼭 잇거니하고 알어낸 이가 몬저 떠러저간 둘이 아니고 방씨엇든 게지요. 이러케 만사를 해석하면 그만아녜요.
李晶燮, 글세 앗가도 말햇지만 운명론을 밋는 것이 백성의 원긔를 약하게하니까 배척하자 하는 것은 도덕론이지요. 이 자리는 도덕론은 금물이래요. 하하
좌우간 우리는 얼골 골격을 보고 길흉을 판단하는 관상술(觀相術)은 부인치 안어요. 그런데 엇든 관생쟁이가 조선갑부 민영휘(閔泳徽)를 보고 굴머 죽으리라고 하엿다든가.
李瑞求, 껄넝 껄넝 관상쟁이든게지. 민영휘가 굴머 죽을리 잇슬나구. 아모리 상전벅해 되더래도.

南怡將軍의 早死할 것 豫言
尹白南, 이런 일도 잇섯다지요. 권남이가 남이장군(南怡將軍)을 사위삼으려고 관상쟁에게 관상보이니 「20여 세에 공명은 하나 조명(早命)하리라」고 하엿대요. 그래서 단념하다가 미심하여 권남이가 다시 자긔 딸을 관상보이니 단명하여 이십전에 죽으리라고 하엿대요. 그래서 무엔가 직각되는 것이 잇서 사위를 삼앗다드군.
李瑞求, 이런 일도 잇지요. 예종 때지 아마. 반정(反正)잇든 철이니까. 궐자가 관상보이니 너는 정승할 상이라 하더라지. 그래서 그럼 못되면 엇저겟느냐 하니 관상쟁이가 내목을 버여주지 하고 맹세히더래요. 그리다가 급기야 정승은 고사하고 역적에 몰려 궐자가 잡혀 새남터 사형대로 동지워 호송되는데 그래서 수레우에서 남대문 나가면서 생각을 하니 제 신세가 긔가 막힌 판에 마츰보니 그 엽흐로 관상쟁이가 지나가더래요. 그래서 이놈아 정승 못하고 나는 죽는다. 네목아지 베이자하고 호령을 한즉 그 관생쟁이가 도로 호령하며 「이자식아 아직 모른다!」하고 한마듸 하더래요. 그 소리 듯자 벌적 무엇이 생각나서 오냐 낙망할 것 아니다. 아직 죽기 전이다!하고 거기서 용긔를 내어 형장 갓가히 가서 매논 줄바를 끈고 도망첫대요. 그래서 끗끗내 정승되엇다 하지 안어요.
李晶燮, 그러치 로력하여야 되지 엇든 년석이 당신 꼭 정승될 팔자라고 하엿다고 그 말만 밋고 산속에 드러가 손발 꼼작하지 안코 어서 임군께서 소명(召命)잇기만 기다리다가＜136＞ 거지되어 굶어죽엇다고 하지 안어요.
梁白華, 운명이야 서양서도 밋지만은 서양류는 노력하면 호운이 온다고 보고 동양류(東洋流)는 가만 안저도 된다고 보지 그것이 틀녓지.
李晶燮, 셀비아 청년의 피스톨 한방이 업섯던들 또는 잇더래도 그때 오지리 황태자가 그 시간에 거기로 가지안엇든들 세게대전은 업섯슬 것을-하는 류의 말은 아모래도 억설갓해요.
柳光烈, 리순신이 도진(島津) 등 십만대군과 리낙파(李落波)에서 싸우다가 죽지안엇서요. 그것도 원래 리락파란 리씨 떠러진다는 일홈이 리순신 나기 전부터 잇섯는데 그만 거기서 싸우다가 충무공이 죽은 것은 역시 운명이드라고 보는 이들이 잇지요. 딴말이나 충무공이 도라갈 때 하늘에 동방장성(東方長星)이 보이더라는구먼. 부하장수들이 저 별이 승하니 장군별에 빌나고 하니까 충무공말이 내 제갈무후보다 덕이 못하고 힘이 못한데 엇지 비려되랴 거절하엿스나 너무도 강권하는 바람에 선창에 업듸어 빌엇다는구만. 그랫더니 엇진 까닭인지 그 별이 천애일방으로부터 꼬리를 물고 바다로 떠러저 버리더라는군. 그래서 충무공조차 내게 운이 다햇다고 슬퍼햇다드군.
本社, 자실도 운명일가요.
李晶燮, 저절로 취하는 것이지. 운명이라 할 수 업지.
李瑞求, 우리 동리 엇든 청년이 자살하려고 한강 나갓다는구만 밤이 되어 달비체 보니 제일철교 아래에 물이 가득 갑엇더라지 원래 제이철교에 물이 잇고 제일철교에는 백사불인데 그래서 이 작자가 물속이거니 하고 떠러저서 그만 죽지는 안코 곱추가 되엇대요. 그래서 그 밤에 기어드러와 지금까지 불구자로 사는데 그런 것 보면 자살할 팔자도 따로 잇는가보이.(大笑)
金東仁, 운명을 밋는 사람과 안밋는 사람과 그도 다 운명인게지.(大笑)
尹白南, 나는 어느 관상장이가 일즉 죽을리라 한다고 일즉 죽을 것 갓지는 안어요. 생과 사는 초월한 셈이지요.
李瑞求, 대판서 이러난 일인데 은행원이 페병드럿는데 비관끗헤 자살하기로 작정하고 긔왕 죽을바에는 정사(情死)나 하리라하야 어느 녀자를 더리고 가치 죽으려 「카루모친」을 먹엇는데 엇지엇지 하다가보니 사내는 도로 살고 녀자먼 죽엇더래요.
金東仁, 그런 것 보면 세상 속 움직임의 전부를 운명이라 할 일이야.

偉人哲學者의 辭世感을
尹白南, 등존조(藤村操)의 「華巖の瀑」에서 죽을 때의 「巖頭感」이란 글을 보앗는데 「悠悠たる大自然の中に何人が 不可解なる 運命の下にあちさるものありや」라 한＜137＞ 그 감상은 동감요이어.と
李晶燮, 그러다가는 끼리시아 신화시대(希臘神話時代)로 다시 올나갈 걸요. 히랍 사람들은 처음은 운명의 신을 밋다가 그도 부족하여 나종에는 그 운명의 신의 운명을 지배하는 맨 원본의 운명의 신을 밋기 시작하엿다지.(大笑)
金東仁, 나 동경공부 갓슬 때 아버지는 법률하라는 것을 고집을 세워 문학을 하고 낫는데 그 때문에 이럭저럭 10여 만원 재산도 다 업샛지. 아버지 말대로 법률하엿더면 가산탕진하지 아니하고 말엇슬는지도 몰낫지.
金東煥, 자식업는 것도 팔자일가요.
李晶燮, 쓰지는 마오만은 림독성(淋毒性)이 잇스면 자식은 틀니지.
梁白華, 무병하고도 자식업는 이 잇서요.
柳光烈, 잇지. 잇고말고.
鄭秀日, 승상(僧相)이라고 중의상이면 자식업대요.
尹白南, 그러치 승상을 꺼리지.
鄭秀日, 자식은 잇서도 임종하는 자식이란 그건 참 팔자인 듯해요. 우리 백부가 아들 三兄弟 두엇는데 병중 시발까지 다와 안젓다가 임종시는 그만 건너방에 드러가 잠간 잠든 사이에 도라가시더래. 생전에 관상보이니 림종할 자식이 업겟다고 하더니만 영낙업서요.
尹白南, 점장이는 마저요.
李瑞求, 이번 동경갓다가 가마구라(鐮倉)에 가잇는 순성(瞬星秦學文)을 맛낫는데 그이 말이 유명한 의학박사 두분을 청하여다가 보이니 한쪽 페가 완전히 업서젓슨 즉 도리 업겟다고 몃칠 못가리라는 사형선고(死刑宣告)를 하더래요. 마츰 그때 학생 때 친하게 지내는 동무가 문병으로 와보고 좌우간 우정(友情)으로 한번 보자하여 보엿더니 그 사람 말이 이것은 흥농(胸濃)이지 페병이 아니다. 가슴에 고름 드러찬 것이니 곳칠 수 잇슬는지 모르겟다고 하더래요. 이미 다 죽엇거니하든 순성은 그러면 죽어도 조흐니 곤처달나고 맛겻대요. 그래서 불이야 불이야 자동차로 동경가서 경응대학병원(慶大醫院)에 입원하여 수술하니 과연 흥농이더래요. 그래서 점점 쾌하여 가는 중인대 그때 그 동무가 아니왓든들 순성은 죽엇슬 사람아녀요. 순성은 그사람이 재생지 은인이라고 눈물 흘니드구만.
金東仁, 년전 평양서 큰물젓는데 예해짜리 국수집 다락에서 마즈막까지 이충에서 안죽는다고 골패두고 안젓든 치들이 다 죽고 물밋헤 깔녓든 패들이 사라낫서요. 물이 다 간다음 송장파내보고 놀낫지 의외에 참 놀낫섯지.
梁白華, 참말 순성은 아직 죽지안을 팔자인게야.
金東煥, 관상(觀相)은 맛슴니까.＜138＞
李晶燮, 관상은 마저요. 그 이상하지.
梁白華, 손끔도 영낙업지.
李晶燮, 관상볼 때 눈빗이 잇서 영채를 발하는 사람잇는데 그는 반드시 재조잇지. 볼가튼 것도 귀염성스럽게 생긴 볼이 잇지. 반드시 성공하지 아마도 조흔 이마가 잇지. 톨스토이 삑-돌유고- 나파륜 다 이마가 조치 조와.
尹白南, 얼골이 어쩐지 조흔 사람잇지. 복잇는 사람이, 전문적으로 아니 보아도 말이예요.
李晶燮, 글씨도 그러치요. 신언서판(書判)이라고 글씨보고 인물안대요.
尹白南, 태주도 맛지.(胎主) 전라도서는 「공도」라고 그러치.
李瑞求, 동경서는 명도회(明道會)라고 하지. 일본잇는 유명한 과학자들도 모다 명도만은 밋는대요. 우원총독도 명도회 회원이라더구만.
金東煥, 태주는 현재를 마처 내는 것이지요.
尹白南, 그러치요. 현재는 신통하게 알고 장래는 영 모르지.
李瑞求, 년전 개성서 해동은행 김연수(金年洙)씨와 송진우(宋鎭禹)씨가 산전(山田)이란 명도회 도사(道師)에게 베엿는데 전라도 어듸 바다를 김연수씨가 마츰 메우는 공사를 하고 잇섯대요. 그래서 그 공사가 엇더게 되엇는가 가보고 와달나 하엿더니 아마 거리가 머럿든지 한참만에 도로 눈을 깨고 말하는 것이 산이 엇더케 생기고, 십장 년석 얼골이 엇더게 생겻는데 어느 방면을 얼마나 머물넛더라고 영낙업시 마추더래요. 그래서 송진우씨가
「あなた 本當に 新樣ですな」
하고 감탄하엿대요. 정말 태주먼은 잘 맛지요.

透視術도 영낙없시 마처
尹白南, 나도 한변 보인 일이 잇지 손 속에 「핀셋트」를 감아쥐고 이게 무에야 하니까 씩-웃고나더니 「핀셋토」라고 대인단 말이여요. 투시술(透視術)도 어지간 하더구만.
鄭秀日, 내가 약초정(藥草町)살 때 태주 잇는데 가서 장마에 우리 집이 엇더케 되엇겟느야고 가보랫더니 쌕-쌕-하는 바람소리 홱홱하는 별별소리 다 나더니 한참만에 벽이 엇더케 떠러지고 일각 대문이 엇더케 상하고 하고 영낙업시 마추겟지.
尹白南, 나도 십여 년 전에 화가 나서 만주갈 작정으로 고향인 전라도를 떠나 서울왓지요. 곳 들너 간다는 것이 십여 일 류하게 되니 집에서는 궁금하여 태주를 보엿더니 서울 어느 집에 드러누어 잇는데 겨드랑 밋헤 점이 잇고 수염 약간 나고 하고 세세하게 이약이 하드라고 내안해에게서 이내 편지가 왓서요. 그것이 또 영낙업시 맛는단 말이지. 글세 엇더케 겨드랑 밋헤 점이 잇는 줄까지 알까요.(一同大笑)
金東煥, 그러면 다시 한변 운명이란 잇다고＜139＞ 보아야 올흘가요.
鄭秀日, 인천미두판(仁川米豆)판에서 왕질하든 「번복창」일 생각하면 이상하지. 그가 처음 보잘 것 업는 가난한 사람으로 영구 중매점 심부름 3년동안 하는 사이에 푼푼히 돈모아 100원을 만드러 쥐엇거든. 그때는 시세가 조와서 10분이 10분에 승부가 낫지. 한 열도막에 200정 300정 씽씽 내닷는데 3번 손마저 20만원을 대번에 모앗대요. 그래서 다시 대판(大阪)드러가 또 마저 30만원 벌엇는데 그만 100만원을 만들겟다고 또 접어들다가 다 업샛지. 불과 몃십분에 수십만장자 되엿다가... 이거야 인력으로 할 수 업는 조화지요.
尹白南, 로서아혁명 당시에도 그런 이약이 잇습데다. 혁명을 이르키겟는데 자금이 업섯단말이지. 마츰 점쟁이가 와보고 「모나꼬」가서 투전하면 수 나겟다고 하더래요」 그래서 어느 동지가 자동차 타고 「모나꼬」까지 가서 석달 동안 마치고 안맛는 통게를 연구하고 난 뒤 몃십원 안되는 미천을 가지고 시작 하엿더니 과연 마저내서 나종에 수백만원 만드러 그것으로 혁명자금을 썻대요.
金東煥, 그러니 결국 운명이 잇다고 보는 이가 尹白南 梁白華 金東仁 李瑞求의 네 분이요. 업다고 보려하는 이가 李晶燮 柳光烈 두 분이요. 잇는 듯 업고 업는 듯 잇는 中間派에 鄭秀日 한 분이라고 보겟슴니다 그려.
아무튼 몃 千年來 몃 억만 인류가 싸워오든 이 문제가 속히 풀려지겟서요. 잇고 업고는 결론을 짓지말기로 하겟슴니다.
-此間 紀念撮影 저녁待接-

나의 生死觀
金東煥, 천재나 영웅이나 위인이 죽든지 나든지 할 때에 무슨 증조(前兆)가 보임니까.
柳光烈, 김옥균이 상해서 죽엇슬 때 그와 동시각에 동경잇는 두산만(頭山滿)의 꿈에 나타나 보이더라고 두산만의 자서전에 씨여 잇서요.
金東仁, 흙비(土雨)가 오는 수도 잇지.
李瑞求, 리태왕 도라 가실 때는 백홍이관일(白虹貫日)하엿지요.
尹白南, 그때 백홍관일 하는 거이 조선서만 보엿슬나구.
李瑞求, 아니 조선서만 보엿대요.
鄭秀日, 그때 서울과 인천 일대에 가마귀가 만히 떳지 이상은 해요.
李晶燮, 고마귀는 보통집 상칙날 때도 미리 와서 울지.
金東仁, 민비 때에도 백홍관일 하엿다고 하더구만.
梁白華, 민중정이 도라갓섯슬 때 혈죽난 것을 나는 중학생 때에 분명히 내눈으로 보앗서요. 푸르청청한 대가 널마루를 뚤코 올니소삿서요.
李瑞求, 장곡천 대장이 부관(副官)보내어＜140＞ 하도 신긔하여 실지로 조사 식혓다드군.
梁白華, 민충정집 참대만은 참 신긔해요. 정포은 도라갓슬 때 선죽교(善竹橋)에 참대(血竹)이 낫더라 하지만 그는 곳 죽엇다지요.
柳光烈, 중국서는 별이 떠러진다드군.
金東仁, 서양서도 별이 새로 나든지 떠러진다든지 한다지요.
鄭秀日, 제 죽을 시간을 아는 사람잇서요.
尹白南, 바로 우리 선친께서 그리섯지. 음력으로 정월초 하롯날 도라가시는데 섯달 스무나흔날부터 병석에서 새옷을 가저오래서 입고 자손들 다 불느고 먼곳 잇는 친척과 동무들에게 마즈막 편지를 씨우고 그리고는 고요히 도라가섯서요. 그때를 아시엇기 그러켓지요.
梁白華, 불가(佛家)에선 고명한 도승(高僧)들은 미리 관을 짜게 하고 죽을 림박하여 제가 관속에까지 드러가 눕는대요.
鄭秀日, 도통(道通)을 하면 그러케 된대지.

저승에 갓다온 趙고약 房人
梁白華, 또 이런 일도 잇지. 천일약방(天一藥房)말이야요. 조고약 파는 그 집 점원이 병이드러 치료하다 하다 못해서 마즈막에 오줌을 먹고 죽엇대요. 그래서 저승에 간즉 마치 서울 삼각산 밋가튼 험한 산속을 작고가다가 엇든 퉁경단집이 잇는데 거기가니 최판관(崔判官)이 안저 장께를 들처보다가 아직 안죽을 사람을 잘못 잡어왓다고 도로 내보내어 강아지따라 저승길로 도라나왓다는데 글세 그래서 사흘만에 사라난 것이 여태 살어요.(一同大笑)
李瑞求, 서울에도 그런 이약이야 만치.
金東仁, 아란포-의 소설에도 가사상태(假死狀態)를 취급한 소설이 만치요.
鄭秀日, 수원김씨(水原金氏)와 양평리씨(揚平李氏)가 한날 한시에 죽어 가치 저승에 드러갓는데 최판관 말이 그만 아직 아니 죽을 양평리씨를 데러왓거든 그래서 사자에 달아 다시 내보냇는데 이 저승사자란 작자가 막걸네를 먹엇든지 대리고 나오다가 양평리씨를 양평에 갓다가 그 혼을 부처 노을 것을 그만 잘못하야 수원리씨집에 갓다가 부처노코 가버렷다지. 그래서 떡-사라나 보니 집식구들은 아이고 아버지 아이고 옵바하고 모다 조와라 하는데 암만보아야 모르겟더래. 그래서 사라난 지 사흘만에 녯집 양평으로 차저가니 옛보는 부모와 제 자식들이 다잇는데 안해나 자식들은 저게 어느 년석이 왓느냐고 몰으고 쫏차 보내더래요.(大笑)＜141＞
尹白南, 더구나 이런 신긔한 일도 잇섯지. 미국 엇든 녀자가 일홈은 이젓는데 불도를 닥는다고 경도(京都) 어는 절깐에 와서 수도하고 잇는데 엇재서 하필 왈 불도요. 하필 왈 경도인가 하면 미국 잇슬 때 생일날마다 꿈을 꾸는데 꼭 가튼 꿈이드래요. 그 꿈이 엇던고 하면 엇든 동양식 절간에 가 일평생 지내는 자긔 일생 꿈인데 기둥과 집구조가 해마다 꼭갓더래요. 그래서 동양이라면 일본 가볼 일이요 일본 중에도 절이 만키로는 경도(京都)이니까 경도에 가본다고, 거기가서 여러날 두고 이 절깐 저 절깐을 수탐하여 보다가 나종에 꿈에 보든 집과 일목일석(一木一石)이 달느지 안는 절간이 잇더래요. 신긔하여서 그 길로 그 절깐에 드러가 머리깍고 송낙쓰고 중이 되어 지금도 불도를 닥고 잇대요.
李晶燮, 그것은 피-이드의 정신분석(精神分析) 재료구만.
梁白華, 몬저 꿈을 꾸고 나종에 사실로 나타나는 일이야 잇고 말고.
李瑞求, 그래요. 무슨 일을 격고 낫는데 그 일은 어듸서 꼭 듯고 본일갓거든. 그래서 곰곰 생각하여 보면 꿈에 본일이든 것을, 그런 일만해요.

人生은 泰然 죽을 수 잇슬가
金東煥, 엇더케 죽으면 잘 죽는 것이겟서요. 엇더케들 죽고 십흐서요.
尹白南, 나는 오래 살고십허요.
梁白華, 8, 90까지 살어 증손자 고손자까지 보고서 죽고 십허요.
鄭秀日, 오래사러서 세상이 엇지되는 꼴이나 보고 십허요.
尹白南, 죽되 대포알에 꽝-마저 폴삭 죽고 십허요. 소년 시대에는 만경청파 너른 물결에 풍덩실 몸을 던지고 십더니만.
李瑞求, 나는 평상시에는 죽엄을 생각지 안는데 한번은 안동현(安東縣)에 갓는데 동무들 떠나서 나혼자 무슨 지당(池塘)이라 써부친 목욕탕으로 갓단 말이지 그래서 3층 목욕장에서 혼자 벗고 드러누어 천하태평의 긔분을 맛보고 잇다가 갑작이 내가 여기 잇다가 살인이나 당하면 엇저나 아모도 업는 속에서 죽엄을 당하면 엇저나하는 공포심이 생기면서 그만 옷을 주서입고 뛰어나와 버렷서요. 순간 순간 죽음의 공포에 떠는 때가 잇서요.
尹白南, 나도 죽음의 유혹을 밧어본 때가 잇지. 열여섯살 적에 남산잠두(南山蠶頭)에 올나가보앗거든. 그 절벽에서 까-만케 먼 아래를 내려다 보느라니 뚝 떠러지기만 하면 금시에 죽겟거니 생각하니 어듸 장쾌하게 떠러저 죽고십흔 유혹을 밧어집데다.
李晶燮, 나도 그런 경험 잇서요. 전년에 뉴-욕 갓슬 적에 「윌스삘딩」이라고＜142＞ 지금은 더 놉흔 집도 잇서 제 몃재에 떠러진 모양이지만. 그때는 세게 최고의 집이엇지. 그 우에 올나서니 탁 떠러저 죽고십흔 충동이 납데다. 얼마나 그 죽엄이 통쾌하랴 하는 생각이 나면서 그때야 돈도 마음대로 쓸 수 잇섯고 호화롭게 보내든 때에 자살할 생각이 꿈엔들 나리까만은 정작 그런 웅대성에 접촉하면 사의 유혹을 늣겨저요. 나이아가라 폭포 볼 때도 죽어보고 십더구만. 사람의 조고만 성격이 그만 우주의 웅대성에 흡수되어 버리는 신비가 잇서요.
金東仁, 그야 그러치. 큰 바다를 본다든지 놉흔 산꼭대기에 올나서 웅대를 늣길 때면 흔히 死를 생각하게 되어요. 일광(日光)가서 「게곤노다끼」를 본 일이 잇는데 그때 웬간한 사람은 등촌조가치 물에 들어 뛰어들겟더구만.
金東煥, 그런데 죽음이란 그러케 무서운 것일가요.
李瑞求, 당하면 그뿐이지. 두러울 것도 비참할 것도 아모랄 것도 업슬 일이지. 나 얼마전에 온양 온천서 평택(平澤)까지 자동차타고 가다가 자동차 충돌이 되야 인사불성이 된 일이 잇는데 악! 하고 충돌되든 그 순간 아모러치도 안어요.
金東仁, 평양서 녀관집 딸하고 실직 청년이 정이 들어 자살하는 것을 마츰 겻방에서 본 일이 잇는데 처음은 몰낫다가 고민하는 소리에 창문을 열어보니 둘이 「猫イラズ」를 먹고 작고 토하는데 -그때도 녀자는 토한 것을 걸네로 닥는단 말이애요. 녀자란 죽는 순간까지 체면을 직히는 동물이더구만.
柳, 나는 어릴 때 움몰에 두어번 빠저 보앗는데 입으로 물이 드러가 숨이 막혀 딱 죽어질 적엔 아모러치도 안어요.

死刑囚의 최후 從容就死한다
梁白華, 만주서 마적덜 죽이는 것을 보앗는데 칼이 당장 목우에 떠러지는 데도 태연히 웃서요.
李瑞求, 무지(無智)의 우슴일가.
尹白南, 아니 죽을 때 체모 차리는 것은 인정인가봐요. 그리고 나는 권농동(勸農洞) 살 적에 호렬자에 걸녀 리면식이란 의사가 「고까인」 주사를 잘못 노은 모양으로 죽엇다가 사라난 일이 잇지. 그 순간 내가 픽 웃더래요. 인생이란 이런 것인가 함애 저절로 픽! 우슴이 나왓든게지.
李晶燮, 죽림칠현(竹林七賢) 중 한 사람은 술을 엇더케 즐기든지 제자 하나를 삽을 메어 압세고 다니면서 어듸든지 죽거든 네가 파뭇어 달나고 그러고는 여전히 술먹고 지내더라고 과연 생시를 초월한 이지.＜143＞
梁白華, 그래도 그런 것은 그러치만 생에 대한 애착이란 어지간한 모양이드군. 교수대(絞首臺)에 올나갈 때까지 살려달나고 애걸한다는데.
尹白南, 아녀요. 조선서 전옥(典獄)으로 잇든 사람이 퇴직하고 감상록을 쓴 것이 잇는데 거기 보면 조선 사람 사형수는 종용취사(從容就死)가 만타구 하더구만.
李瑞求, 무어. 벌서 끄을너 낼 때 십중팔구는 죽는다니까. 정신 일는다드구만.
金東仁, 평양 만수대(萬壽臺)서 목매 죽이는 것을 보니 사형대로 향하는 죄수가 글세 가다가 신이 뻐서지니 그를 차저 신고 가요. 당장 죽을 년석이 신을 신으면 엇더고 안 신으면 엇덜것가치 생각되지만 당자들은 안 그러커든 심리란 이상해요.(大笑)
鄭秀日, 어느 형무소 전옥으로 잇든 이가 이약이하는데 사형대에 올닐 때는 최후에 소원하는 것을 다 먹인다는데 강도나 살인가튼 사람은 대개 떡을 다고 국수를 먹여다고 하고 이것저것 청하는 것 이례지만 지식잇고 교양잇는 사람들은 10에 9까지 다만 냉수 석잔을 청해여 마신대요.
李瑞求, 아조 단렴하는 게지. 수양의 힘으로.
柳光烈, 냉수 먹는 것이야 火나서 그러는 게이지.
尹白南, 화도 날걸.(大笑)
梁白華, 봉천서 마적 죽이는 걸보니 가다가 겻헤 사람에게서 적삼을 달나고 하여 빌어서는 목에 걸치고 나가 죽더구만. 사후 체면을 생각한 것이겟지.
李晶燮, 서양서도 대개 사형죄수 잇든 방을 보면 제일홈을 손톱으로 끗고 죽는대요.
尹白南, 사형수야 죽이기 전 물을 홱 뿜는다드군. 그 순간에 벌서 다 죽는대요. 옛날 조선서는 얼골에 헤칠한대요. 헤칠 시작할 때 다 죽는다지.
柳光烈, 누구나 죽음을 실혀하나봐요. 공부자가튼 대성인도 자공(子貢)이 오니까. 공자께서 「내가 두 기둥 가운데서 무엇을 밧어먹는 꿈을 꾸엇스니 이제는 죽을 날 왓다」고 한탄하면서 자공더러 엇저면 조켓느냐고 락루하엿대요. 은나라 전설에 두 기둥 사이에 서서 무엇을 먹으면 죽는대요. 예수도 마즈막 십자가를 절머질 때에 「하늘이여 날 버리시는가」고 울지 안엇서요.
다만 그 분들은 일념(一念)이 잇스니까 죽엄이 장엄하엿슬 뿐이지요.
넬손이 「나는 나의 의무를 다하엿다. 나는 죽되 대영제국은 사랏다」하고 종용히 죽은 것이라든지 리순신이 죽은 것이라든지 다 주야로 생각하는 국가 민족에 대한 일념이 잇스니까 태연히 죽을 수 잇섯슬 뿐이지. 죽엄은 누구나 실혀한＜144＞ 모양이드군.
송시열(宋時烈)도 그러햇지. 사약(賜藥)을 당하여 약사발이 압헤오자 100여 명 제자들을 쭉-모아노코 근실말어라 혼을 일치말어라 인재를 양성하여라 하는 훈게를 한뒤 편지 쓸 곳에 편지 다쓰고 필적 달나는 사람에 다 필적 써주고 새벽에 약사발 마섯다 하지안어요.
鄭秀日, 순교자(殉敎者)들이 죽는 심리와 갓지요.
金東仁, 자긔 만족이 잇는게지.
李瑞求, 크게 죽으려고 그러지. 긔왕 죽는 바에 일홈이나 끼치고 죽으려고 그러지.
李晶燮, 대원군(大院君) 가튼 이도 나종에 그래 나도 죽는단 말이야」하고 소리를 벽역가치 첫다지.
梁白華, 사육신(死六臣) 전긔를 보면 다 일심(一心)때문이지.
李瑞求, 그러치 일심 압헤 무서운 것 업지요.
鄭秀日, 성삼문(成三門) 모양으로 국가를 위하는 지성에 끌으면 정말 일심만 남을 것이지.
尹白南, 일심만 나면 아푼 줄도 모르지요.
金東煥, 생의 집착은 누구나 가지고 잇슬걸요.
李瑞求, 수갑과 촉쇄를 채워논 사형수더러 엇든 사람이 무르니 그 대답이 「나를 이대로 수갑 촉쇄를 채워두어도 조흐니 죽이지만 말면 조켓다고 하더라지오.
李晶燮, 식물(植物)이 살려고 하는 노력도 참으로 눈물겨웁지오. 바위를 뚤고 나오는 풀싹이라든지.
本社, 밤도 늣고한데 이것으로 끗막겟슴니다. 대단히 감사하엿슴니다.＜145＞
＜128-145＞