Magazine Title: 삼천리 第六卷 第九號
Publication Date: 1934년 09월 01일
Article Title: 太平洋건너서, (-歐米遊記續-) (Across the Pacific, -Continuation of European/American Travelogue-)
Author: 晶月 (Chŏngwŏl)
Article Type: 기행문 (Travelogue)

Across the Pacific,
						Chŏngwŏl

Niagara Falls (나이가라 瀑布)

This waterfall is a grand, boundless great torrent (water surface 300 ch'ŏk) flowing from Lake Erie (이리大湖) and falling into Lake Ontario (리오湖).
The urban area, catering to literary figures and patrons, has complex facilities and transportation systems reaching in all directions. In the shops left and right, native folk crafts and curios (土人 風俗玩物) are displayed, and one's heart is drawn to these primitive art pieces (原始的 藝術品). Unable to withstand the snowy wind, it feels as if my feet will fall off. We set out by taxi to see the longed-for Niagara Falls. Entering a park dense with forests, the snow clinging to the cedar trees makes the entire tree white, creating a white forest, truly showing the magnificent beauty of nature. As already heard, the Niagara Falls plaza is vast and consists of endless hills (無故한 hill). The river that becomes Niagara Falls forms the border between the United States (合衆國) and Canada (架奈陀). That is, it's the spectacle of the US's Lake Erie water falling into Canada's Lake Ontario, with Goat Island in the center dividing the falls into two: one is the American Falls, and the other, belonging to Canada, is Horseshoe Falls (馬蹄瀧). The sight of it becoming a large ice sheet and then icicles, with water pouring down over them, is exquisite. Moreover, at night, illuminated by lights (이루미네슘 - illuminations), the scene appearing in brilliant colors creates a distinct spectacle, like the aurora seen when passing through Siberia (西白利亞). Humans make nature great, but that power comes from nature and returns to nature's creation. There, we gain and can see new beauty. It is said that the view of the falls is better from the Canadian side than the American side, so tourists invariably go there to see it. We each paid five dollars (五딸나) and crossed the iron bridge, the border, into the British territory of Canada to view it. Indeed, it reached the extreme of exquisite beauty.

Niagara Falls Exhibition Hall (라이갈瀑 陳列舘)

In European and American countries, regardless of the place, even small towns invariably have an exhibition hall or museum introducing the local situation. Here <162> there is an exhibition hall displaying the primitive state of life of the native people (本土人種) through various flora, fauna, and minerals.

Watching a Motion Picture (活動寫眞 求景)

The film was entirely about the primitive state of life of the native people (本土人種). It depicted a white man marrying the daughter of a native chief (土人酋長) and living together. They speak thus: Love is the flame of God. It beautifies and purifies all things. It gives poetry to us prosaic beings. It is the night dew that allows the grass sprouts to hear the earth. It allows one to hear the pulse in the human soul. It illuminates life and gives hope. One who has not experienced love cannot claim to have looked into the soul of true human life. That person cannot live life nobly themselves. Perhaps true love is not just spirit, nor just flesh, but exists between spirit and flesh, coming and going between God and human.
Thus, I rested comfortably in a warm room for nine days. On the 21st, at 7:50 AM, I departed this place by train.

Six Days in Chicago (市俄古)

Chicago (치카고) is the second largest metropolis in the US with a population of 2.5 million and one of the world's foremost major commercial and industrial cities. Facing Lake Michigan (미시간湖), it not only has a long shoreline but also canals and six major train stations where goods gather and disperse, making its industry said to be even greater than New York's (紐育).
The city layout is orderly, with surface and elevated trams running crisscross. Transportation is extremely convenient, and there are numerous secluded and elegant parks, such as Lincoln Park (Bineoln Park) and Jackson Park, which are among the world's renowned parks. There is the world's number one ranked Marshall Field Department Store (maskal field department stor), the Union Stock Yards (유니옹屠牛場), the Municipal Pier (뮤니시바루棧橋), the Pullman Company (부루만會社), etc., and <163> besides these, there are the Art Institute, museums, and the University of Chicago (치카고大學).
At the entrance to Washington Park (와싱톤公園), there is a large stone statue: the "Fountain of Time" (時泉) and the sculpted procession of the God of Time. There is the world's largest greenhouse, where tropical plants grow luxuriantly.

Blackstone Hotel

This hotel is not only the premier hotel in Chicago but is said to be the largest hotel in the world. It has three thousand rooms and 26 floors. Inside, starting with the stock exchange, there are various shops, a dance hall, a barbershop, and sales departments, making it just like a marketplace. The desk for assigning rooms to travelers is like a ticket counter at a train station, with dozens of windows.

Art Museum (art musime)

Wherever one goes, visiting the art museum has become like some sort of obligation. Among the paintings, there were many copies of Italian ancient paintings (伊太利 古代畵). Among modern paintings, there were works by French Impressionist painters (佛蘭西 印象派 畫家) such as Gauguin (고간), Van Gogh (고호), Cézanne (세잔), Renoir (루노알), Sisley? (시실리), Pissarro? (비사로), Degas (데갈), and among contemporary paintings, there were also works by Matisse (마치스), Utrillo (웃쓰리오), Rousseau (루소), and Derain (데한). In sculpture (彫列), there were three works by Michelangelo (미게란체로).

Two Days at the Grand Canyon (그랜드캐이용)

Departed Chicago. Unusual windmills (방아 - perhaps windpumps?) come into view, snow-capped mountains are visible in the distance, and reddish-earth mountains like earthen fortresses grandly block the fields, evoking images of native cave dwellings (土窟生活). In the wide fields, cattle with only white heads hang their heads low. Peculiar coal-like pebbles catch the eye, and primitive native huts (原始的 土人의 小屋) are scattered here and there. Intermediate stops are very long, 10 or even 20 minutes, during which time one can view and also buy handicrafts made by the native people (土人種).
Arrived at the Grand Canyon (그랜드키이용), famous for its strange scenery. Checked into the El Tovar Hotel (에루도바루 호텔).
If Swiss scenery is pretty and small, American natural scenery is large and handsome.
Canyon (캐이용) means gorge. The layered rock (層岩) and the mile-deep, mile-wide rock strata (岩石 斷層) are like the pyramids in India (印度), protruding countlessly from the thousand-fathom bottom. When illuminated by the setting sun, it looks like nature's reflection, truly magnificent at first sight. The inverted reflections in the valley bottom hit by light rays, and the beautiful view of the Colorado River (코로라도河) flowing like a silver ribbon (銀紐), are also difficult to describe in words. The rocks themselves are beautiful. Their colors change to blue, gray, yellow, and red depending on the light. Thus, one can clearly see the majesty of the sun and nature in physical form. The native people (土人) are said to call this place the path to Heaven (天國).
Stayed here one night and the next afternoon, bought expensive tickets for 12 dollars (12딸나) each per person and traveled a long distance by automobile to the central point and endpoint of the mountain range. The strange rocks and bizarre stones (奇岩怪石) of the mountains, viewed from lookout points (眺望臺) where we stopped, were a spectacular sight.
Returned, packed our luggage, and departed this place at 8 PM.

Two Days in Los Angeles (羅府)

Inside the train running through here, attention was paid to the comfort and entertainment of the passengers, with complete facilities such as sleeper cars (寢臺車), dining cars (食堂車), observation cars (展望車), etc. The observation car had a card room (骨牌室), reading room (書籍閱器室), reception room (接客室), and observation room (展望室), all decorated beautifully and excellently.
Los Angeles (羅府) is always a warm and beautiful city, <164> famous for its orange groves (密拑밧 - likely 蜜柑밭, orange field), vegetable markets (野菜市場), flower markets (花市場), etc. It is also a summer resort for people from the eastern US. Like Osaka in Japan, there are many amusement areas in the surroundings, reachable by electric tram anywhere, and numerous seaside bathing spots (海水浴場地). The iron bridges (rail lines?) are oiled on the tracks (線路에 油를 바르고), and since the fuel used is oil (石油), there is no dust or soot (塵埃 煤煙), making it convenient.
In the city streets, on both sides of the roads, there are rows of tall palm trees (파레무) with large leaves, providing shade, so the city is buried within palm trees.

Hollywood (Hole wooa)

This place is the world-famous motion picture film (活動寫眞 훨님 - film) manufacturing center. When we visited, we saw actors actually out and filming (撮影). The facilities used for backgrounds (背景) were tremendous.

Nine Days in Yosemite, Mariposa Grove (요세미데 마리보자 大森林)

During winter and summer seasons, special trains for sightseers, summer vacationers, and winter vacationers are run to the park entrance at El Portal (루보다루 - likely El Portal). We travel by motor coach (乘合自働車) along the Merced River (마셋도 溪流). Checked into The Ahwahnee Hotel (The ahwohrel호텔).
This park consists of beautiful mountains, waterfalls, streams, and strange rocks (寄岩); El Capitan (에루가 비단 - likely El Capitan), Bridalveil Fall (부라이다부엘으리봉 - likely Bridalveil Fall), Three Brothers (스리부라자 - likely Three Brothers), etc., are famous waterfalls.
The Mariposa Grove (마리보자森林) is reached by daily automobile service from Yosemite; it is a great forest of large trees with diameters from 15 feet to 30 feet and heights up to 400 feet, renowned worldwide.
This park was opened 35 years ago and ranks first among the numerous parks in the US. The special feature of this mountain is that all four seasons are good: in spring, there is little rain, and the snow melts, making the waterfall water thick; in summer, city dwellers escape the heat of the plains and live in cabins (小屋生活); in autumn, the foliage (紅葉) is beautiful; and in winter, it is not too cold, but there is much snow, making it good for skating (스켓) and skiing (스키노리).
The hotel is an Indian-style building (印度式 建物); the interior is entirely decorated in a Mexican design (멕기스코떼자인), with woven fabrics (織物) laid out, and Indian calico (印度사라사) hung on the walls, so that not a single item is not a work of art. The snow falls heavily. Distant mountains become hazy, while nearby trees reveal their shapes completely. Seeing noble deer (사슴떼) burying their mouths in the snow there was also a fine sight. Groups of women skiers (스키團體인 女子), all wearing pants (빵스 - pantsu/trousers), play energetically. Every Saturday night, there is a dance party (땐스會), which was quite a spectacle.
Here in the plaza, the 2,500-foot Yosemite Falls (요세미데瀧) cascades down like a white cloth hung from the sky. Here, there is a dance hall (딴스場), music hall (音樂堂), swimming pool (水泳場), post office (郵便局), library (圖書室), school (學校), hospital (病院), research lab (硏究室), sales department (販賣部), etc., and hundreds of wooden cabins (木造小屋), as well as buildings equipped with offices (事務所), dining halls (食堂), and rest areas (休憩所). Furthermore, there is a museum displaying local products, providing visitors with both interest and practical benefit.

Six Days in San Francisco (桑港)

San Francisco (桑港) is a major metropolis on the US Pacific coast with 700,000 people, where the weather is like spring year-round. It is the gateway to the US Pacific. Including the populations of the adjacent bay areas (灣來의 諸民), the population is 1.5 million. Trading ships from Japan (日本), China (中國), India (印度), Australia (豪洲), etc., gather day and night, making it a connection point (接續黠) between Eastern and Western civilizations. At the southern end of the city, there are the Twin Peaks (二子山), and if one spends time enjoying the panoramic view from there, looking down upon the district of tall buildings packed together embraced by the sea on three sides, one can appreciate the splendid scene of a grand panorama <165> unfolding in brilliant colors. On the Pacific coast, there is the world's number one Golden Gate Park (金門大公園), five miles long; the great swimming area, likely Playas or near Cliff House, crowded with thousands of tourists (후리이야스가 大遊泳場); the center of Western scholarship, the University of California (가주大學); the Presidio military reservation (부레시데오兵營); the Japanese Tea Garden (日本茶菓店); a music hall (音樂堂); a botanical garden (植物苑); and a zoo (動物苑). Chinatown (촤이나타운) is located between Grant Avenue (구란도街) and Pacific Street? (바식구지가 街), has collected many East Asian art objects (東洋 美術品), and is very developed.

Golden Gate Park (金門公園)

The entrance to San Francisco Bay (桑港灣) is called the Golden Gate (金門). Here is Golden Gate Park, cleverly adorned with grass, ponds, and flowerbeds (花壇). There is an art museum (美術舘), conservatory (溫室), playground (遊戱場), zoo (動物園), and also a Japanese-style garden (日本式 庭園). A short distance from here, there is a great cliff on the Pacific coast, and Seal Rocks (海豹岩), where countless seals come out and sit, is also quite a sight.
Boarded the Taiyo Maru (大洋丸) and set sail on the Pacific Ocean. On February 14th, boarded the Taiyo Maru (太洋丸) and set sail on the Pacific Ocean towards Yokohama (橫濱).
The Taiyo Maru, Japan's largest ship seized from Germany during the European War, proceeds smoothly along its course following the Black Current (黑湖 - Kuroshio Current). We travel through the middle of the Pacific, unable to distinguish water from sky or sky from water. After several days, we practice wearing life jackets (救命胴衣 - life jaeeat) around our waists and taking refuge during rough seas.
The crew's treatment of the passengers was impartial (一視 同仁). The kindness of the captain and crew left nothing to be desired.

Life Aboard the Ship (船內生活)

This describes the facilities and life in the first-class section of the Taiyo Maru. Inside the room, there are two beds facing each other. There are female attendants (女下人 - Birl) and male attendants (男下人 - Goy); 'girl' for women's use, 'boy' for men's use. Bathing is done every morning. After waking up, one drinks coffee, eats breakfast, and if playing on the deck (덱기 - 甲板), tea is brought out. At four o'clock, there are tea and sweets (茶菓). At 7:30 PM, dinner is served with a bugle call (라발 - reveille/bugle). There is a first-class dining room (一等食堂), ladies' lounge (婦人談話室), smoking room (喫煙室), promenade deck (散步甲板), library (圖書室), game room (遊戱室), swimming pool (水泳室), children's room (兒童室), reception room (應接室), barbershop (理髮所), laundry (洗濯室), and children's playroom (兒童遊戱室). Sports programs (運動 曲目) include ping pong (삥뽕), ring toss (輪投), deck golf (덱기꼴푸), deck billiards? (덱기피리야드), Go (碁), Shogi (將棋), bridge (뿌리지), Mahjong (마장), etc. After dinner, gambling (노름) routinely starts in the salon (쌀논), and even during the day on deck, one can freely engage in activities as much as desired. Thus, the 22,000-ton ship carries 2,000 passengers, running ceaselessly, while onboard, people carry out all the activities they would on land. Sometimes, sounds of the ship pitching (上下 - pitching) long, large, and slowly, or rolling (從橫 - rolling) are heard. Sometimes, passing showers come and go, and the cloud shadows, changing beautifully moment by moment, are visible. Lying on a deck chair (甲板캐빈 - 臥椅子), reading a novel or conversing with the passenger seated beside is also refreshing. Piercing through the vast waves where water and sky blend, like an arrow, the spectacle of schools of flying fish passing by, flocks of albatrosses (信天翁) ceaselessly following the ship, or pods of dolphins, and floating whales (鯨魚) was magnificent. When encountering other steamships once or twice in mid-ocean, the sight of all passengers on both ships cheering from the decks, mutually blowing their whistles (氣笛) to signal greetings, is truly an expression of human warmth (人情味). Especially on moonlit nights, the scene of gentlemen and ladies, families together, or lovers strolling in groups of threes and fives on the deck also becomes poetry. <166>
Motion pictures (活動寫眞), concerts (音樂會), and plays (演劇) are held in turn, and on the final day, there was a play performed by all the crew members.
Program (曲目):
Magic Tricks (手品) - Tōyō Benkei (東洋背辯慶 - likely a parody or themed act)
Sword Drama (劍劇) - Kunisada Chūji Sansū (國定忠治三數 - referring to the famous gambler/outlaw)
Comedy Dance (滑稽 땐스)
Spring Play (春劇) - Harukoma Nimaku (春駒二幕 - Spring Colt, Two Acts)
Comedy Manzai (滑稽 萬歲)
Acrobatics (曲藝) - Tōyō Benkei (東洋背辯慶 - same title, different act type?)

Shipboard Newspaper (船內新聞)

News from various countries received via wireless telegraph (無線 電信) becomes the shipboard newspaper, delivered one sheet per person at the dinner table each night. In this way, even while floating on the sea, one can know the daily changes in various countries around the world.

Sports Competition (運動競技)

During the long period of living together on the same ship, passengers from home and abroad become as close as old friends. An entertainment program (餘興一程) was decided, officers were elected from among the passengers, and competitors were chosen according to their skills. Everyone spent a happy day filled with laughter and excitement.

Japanese Cuisine with Sukiyaki (스기야기로 日本料理)

On the night of the 25th, the thrilling news spread that there would be sukiyaki (스기야기) for dinner. Tatami mats were laid out on the deck, knives (나이프) and forks (혹구 - fōku) were discarded, and people dressed in Japanese clothes (和服) with geta (게다), picked up chopsticks (적갈), and had a meal of sukiyaki and Masamune sake (正宗). The exquisite taste was beyond words. The Pacific waves struck the ship's bow, again and again.

Arrival in Hawaii (布哇 着), Honolulu (호노루루)

The Hawaiian Islands (布哇群島) are like an interlude appearing in the middle of a play. The pleasant feeling of docking in Hawaii (布哇), where flowers bloom and birds sing year-round, after a week's voyage from San Francisco (桑港), seems hard to forget in a lifetime. Although the city is US territory (米國領地), there are many East Asians (東洋人), and especially many of our compatriots (同胞) reside there.
The Hawaiian Islands consist of Hawaii (하와이) itself, nine other islands, and a small number of uninhabited islets. The common name Hawaii comes from the name of Hawaiʻiloa, the legendary first discoverer of Hawaii.
Hawaii is located at the crossroads of the vast Pacific Ocean (太平洋), facing the Asian continent on one side and the American continent on the other, facing Australia (濠洲) to the south, and far off, through the Panama Canal (파나마運河), it is famous as a port for supplying water and coal (給水給炭) to ships crossing the Pacific vertically and horizontally. Additionally, it is an important location as the site of undersea telegraph stations (海底電信局) and wireless telegraph stations (無線電信局).
Hawaii is also strategically vital as a US outpost (前哨), guarding fortifications on both land and sea. There is the Pearl Harbor naval base (眞洙灣軍港), Schofield Barracks (샤후다兵營 - likely Schofield), and another Schofield Barracks? (스코푸이르도兵營 - likely Schofield again or related).
Furthermore, Hawaii is a contact point for Eastern and Western cultures (東西文化), the birthplace of various Pan-Pacific conferences (汎 太平洋 諸會議), the starting point for East-West international racial issues (東西 國際的 人種問題), and at the same time, its climate is mild throughout the four seasons, making it ideal as a place for sightseeing (漫遊地) and recuperation (保養地).

Statue of Kamehameha I (가메하마 第一世 銅像)

The statue of Kamehameha I (가메하마 第一世 銅像) in front of the Judiciary Building (布哇縣 裁判所庭) on King Street was erected by King Kalākaua (가라가우아王) during the centennial celebration of Captain Cook's (캬부돈쿡크) discovery of Hawaii. The statue was cast in Florence, Italy (伊太利 후로렌스).
King Kamehameha (가메하마王) was the chief who unified the Hawaiian Islands and established the Kamehameha dynasty (가메하마王朝). From that time <167> until today, it displays the dazzling golden image of the hero.

Nuʻuanu Pali (누아누파리)

Nuʻuanu Pali, located seven miles northeast of the city, is the old battlefield (古戰場) where Kamehameha I fought the final battle for the unification of Hawaii. This place is a scenic spot of thousand-fathom cliffs (千仞絶壁), and the wind blowing here is said to rank third in the world for wind speed (世界 第三 位風速).

Punchbowl Hill (뽄지부르丘)

An extinct volcano (死火山) with an elevation of 500 feet, protruding in the mountains central to the city, the crater's traces remain at the summit. Legend has it that when the chief of this island returned victorious from an expedition to Kauai (加哇 - likely Kauai), capturing many spoils and women, and held a victory feast, the mountain suddenly rumbled and erupted. The spirits (生靈) danced to warn the cruel chief.
Standing atop this hill, one has an excellent distant view not only of Honolulu city but also of the ʻEwa Plantation (에와耕地), Pearl Harbor naval base (眞洙灣軍港), Waipahu (와이바후), and ʻAiea Plantation (아이에아 耕地).

Tour around Diamond Head (따이야몬드렛도 巡廻)

Diamond Head (따이야몬드헷도) is the trace of an ancient crater (古噴火口) and is now part of the US Army's Fort Ruger? (오아우要塞地 - Oahu fortification). From here, one can soon reach Waikiki Beach (와이기기海岸).

Waikiki Aquarium (와이기기 水族舘)

It contains all sorts of rare fish from the nearby Hawaiian seas, a place famous worldwide for its collection of fish species in five or seven brilliant colors (五彩七色).

Bishop Museum (비솟부 博物舘)

The nobleman Charles Bishop (챠레스비숏부氏) invested in various public works to commemorate his deceased wife (a princess - 王女). Among these, this museum is the most valuable place, displaying items of the Polynesian people (부루네상族 - likely Polynesian), flora and fauna, models of ancient life states (太古 生活狀態), sculptures (彫列), etc., comprehensively arranged, making it most convenient for studying the peoples of the South Seas (南洋民族).

Departure from Hawaii (하와い 出航)

As departure time arrived, it became extremely crowded with passengers who had gone ashore returning and well-wishers (餞送客). People selling flower leis (花來 - likely 花輪, flower garland/lei), paper streamers (色紙) hung from the ship, necklaces strung with plant seeds/nuts (목도리 - 植物열매를 께인 것), people buying, people buying and leaving, people putting them around others' necks - a great commotion (야단법석). A bugle (喇叭) blew, well-wishers disembarked. On land, people waved handkerchiefs (손진도리 - likely 손수건), or some Hawaiian women stood in lines, dancing (하와이춤 - Hawaiian dance) and singing, creating a grand spectacle. The ship departs. Naked native boys (裸體의 土人) dive headfirst to grab coins thrown by passengers and come back up; some climb onto the ship, collect money, and fall back into the water. Also quite a sight. Ah, the ship is once again on the ocean.

Last Night

It was the last night of life aboard the ship. On the dining tables, gifts (선물) and various hats (各色 帽子) were placed for each person. Everyone sat wearing the hats. After greetings from the captain (船長), under the leadership of the wife of the Counselor of the US Embassy (米國大使舘 參事舘夫人), there were three cheers of "Mansei" (萬歲 三唱). Seating at the table is determined by rank (官等); we were seated with the Chief Purser (主人事務長) and also Mr. Noda (野田氏), a section chief from the Korea Colonial Company (朝鮮拓殖會社), and his wife.

Arrival in Yokohama (橫濱到着)

The Taiyo Maru, with a displacement tonnage of 22,000 tons, arrived safely in Yokohama at 2 PM after covering the 5,510-mile distance from San Francisco in 17 days. <168> On the pier (阜頭), a sea of people (人山人海), the welcoming crowd, was visible. People waved hands and shouted greetings between the deck and the shore. The people who came to meet us were Mr. Yang Chae-ha (楊在河氏) and Mr. Kim T'aek-chin (金澤辰氏). I was very glad to see them. Disembarked, went to Tokyo, and checked into a hotel in Shinjuku (新宿호텔).
The houses in Tokyo all looked like barracks (바락그), the roads were dirty, and the people seemed hunched over like shrimps (새우등갓치) and lacking energy (氣運).

One Week in Tokyo (一週日間 東京)

Starting with His Highness Yi Wang (李王殿下 - Yi Un or another member of the former royal family), I visited acquaintances and friends. Some offered lunch, some offered dinner; the welcome was quite warm. On the 10th, at 9:30 PM, departed from Tokyo Station (東京驛) by train. Ah, my heart pounds ceaselessly. Raced along the Tōkaidō Line (東海道線). Compared to European and American scenery, there is a sense of high mountains and striking beauty, but the atmosphere is small, clear, elegant, and beautiful.

Arrival in Pusan, Return to Tongnae (釜山着 東萊歸來)

Arrived in Pusan (釜山) at 8 AM on the 12th. All my relatives, my elderly mother, and my three children came out. Whether dreaming or awake, tears did not come, and my feelings were strange. Returned to Tongnae (東萊) by automobile. The mushroom-like houses I saw one year and eight months ago, the dusty roads, remain primitive as they were. Only people have aged and grown. More than anything, it is fortunate that my elderly mother is energetic and my three children are healthy.
Ah, ah, the longed-for tour of Europe and America has become the past, and I have returned to my longed-for hometown. How will our path unfold from here? (The End) <169>

**Summary**

This travelogue by "Chŏngwŏl" (晶月) chronicles the latter part of an extensive journey from America back to Korea in 1934. Starting from Niagara Falls, the author travels through Chicago, the Grand Canyon, Los Angeles, Yosemite, and San Francisco, providing observations on the sights, people, infrastructure (hotels, trains, museums), and perceived cultural differences, including encounters with Native Americans and depictions of them. The journey continues across the Pacific on the Japanese liner Taiyo Maru, with detailed descriptions of shipboard life, entertainment, and a stopover in Hawaii (Honolulu), noting the significant Korean population there. Finally, the author arrives in Yokohama, spends a week in Tokyo (meeting Yi Wang), and returns home to Tongnae via Pusan, reflecting on the changes and unchanging aspects of home after nearly two years abroad.

From a historical perspective, the article offers a rare glimpse into the experiences and perspectives of an elite Korean traveler during the colonial period. The author's observations on American modernity, efficiency, and scale contrast sharply with the description of Tokyo and especially the "primitive" state of Tongnae upon return. The casual references to "natives" (土人) using the prevailing terminology of the time, the description of shipboard life reflecting international hierarchies (class distinctions, service staff), the mention of meeting the former Korean royalty (Yi Wang) in Tokyo, and the presence of the Korea Colonial Company official provide valuable social and political context of the era for historians studying colonial subjectivities, travel, and cross-cultural encounters.

**Named Entities**

나이가라 瀑布	나이아가라 폭포	Niagara Falls
이리大湖	이리대호	Lake Erie
리오湖	리오호	Lake Ontario
合衆國	합중국	United States
架奈陀	캐나다	Canada
山羊島	산양도	Goat Island
아메리카瀧	아메리카롱	American Falls
馬蹄瀧	마제롱	Horseshoe Falls
西白利亞	서백리아	Siberia (likely used metaphorically for aurora)
市俄古	시카고	Chicago
치카고	치카고	Chicago
미시간湖	미시간호	Lake Michigan
紐育	뉴욕	New York
Bineoln Park	링컨 파크	Lincoln Park (misspelled in original)
JacksonPark	잭슨 파크	Jackson Park
maskal field department stor	마샬 필드 백화점	Marshall Field Department Store (misspelled in original)
유니옹屠牛場	유니언 도축장	Union Stock Yards
뮤니시바루棧橋	뮤니시펄 잔교	Municipal Pier
부루만會社	풀먼 회사	Pullman Company
치카고大學	시카고 대학	University of Chicago
와싱톤公園	워싱턴 공원	Washington Park
時泉	시천	Fountain of Time
Blackstone Hotel	블랙스톤 호텔	Blackstone Hotel
伊太利	이태리	Italy
佛蘭西	프랑스	France
고간	고갱	Gauguin
고호	고흐	Van Gogh
세잔	세잔	Cézanne
루노알	르누아르	Renoir
시실리	시슬리	Sisley (?)
비사로	피사로	Pissarro (?)
데갈	드가	Degas
마치스	마티스	Matisse
웃쓰리오	위트릴로	Utrillo
루소	루소	Rousseau
데한	드랭	Derain (?)
미게란체로	미켈란젤로	Michelangelo
그랜드캐이용	그랜드 캐니언	Grand Canyon
印度	인도	India
코로라도河	콜로라도하	Colorado River
에루도바루 호텔	엘 토바 호텔	El Tovar Hotel
天國	천국	Heaven
로스안젤스	로스앤젤레스	Los Angeles
羅府	나성	Los Angeles (Sino-Korean name)
日本	일본	Japan
Hole wooa	할리우드	Hollywood (misspelled in original)
요세미데	요세미티	Yosemite
마리보자 大森林	마리포사 대삼림	Mariposa Grove
루보다루	엘 포탈	El Portal (?)
마셋도 溪流	머세드 계류	Merced River
The ahwohrel호텔	아와니 호텔	The Ahwahnee Hotel (misspelled in original)
에루가 비단	엘 카피탄	El Capitan (?)
부라이다부엘으리봉	브라이덜베일 폭포	Bridalveil Fall (?)
스리부라자	스리 브라더스	Three Brothers (?)
멕기스코	멕시코	Mexico
印度사라사	인도 사라사	Indian calico/chintz
요세미데瀧	요세미티롱	Yosemite Falls
샌푸란씨스코	샌프란시스코	San Francisco
桑港	상항	San Francisco (Sino-Korean name)
中國	중국	China
豪洲	호주	Australia
二子山	이자산	Twin Peaks
金門大公園	금문대공원	Golden Gate Park
후리이야스가 大遊泳場	플레이아스/클리프 하우스 수영장	Playas/Cliff House swimming area (?)
가주大學	가주대학	University of California
부레시데오兵營	프레시디오 병영	Presidio Barracks
日本茶菓店	일본차가점	Japanese Tea Garden/Shop
촤이나타운	차이나타운	Chinatown
구란도街	그랜트가	Grant Avenue
바식구지가 街	퍼시픽가	Pacific Street (?)
金門	금문	Golden Gate
桑港灣	상항만	San Francisco Bay
海豹岩	해표암	Seal Rocks
大洋丸	대양환	Taiyo Maru
太洋丸	태양환	Taiyo Maru
橫濱	횡빈	Yokohama
黑湖	흑호	Kuroshio Current (Black Current)
東洋背辯慶	동양배변경	Tōyō Benkei (Performance Title)
國定忠治三數	국정충치삼수	Kunisada Chūji Sansū (Performance Title)
春駒二幕	춘구이막	Harukoma Nimaku (Performance Title)
萬歲	만세	Manzai (Performance) / Banzai (Cheer)
朝鮮拓殖會社	조선척식회사	Korea Colonial Company
野田氏	야전씨	Mr. Noda
布哇	포와	Hawaii
호노루루	호놀룰루	Honolulu
同胞	동포	Compatriots (Fellow Koreans)
하와이	하와이	Hawaii
亞細亞大陸	아세아대륙	Asian Continent
아메리카大陸	아메리카대륙	American Continent
濠洲	호주	Australia
파나마運河	파나마운하	Panama Canal
眞洙灣軍港	진수만군항	Pearl Harbor Naval Base
샤후다兵營	샤프터 병영	Schofield Barracks (?) - possibly Fort Shafter
스코푸이르도兵營	스코필드 병영	Schofield Barracks (?)
汎 太平洋 諸會議	범태평양 제회의	Pan-Pacific Conferences
가메하마 第一世	카메하메하 제1세	Kamehameha I
캬부돈쿡크	캡틴 쿡	Captain Cook
가라가우아王	칼라카우아왕	King Kalākaua
伊太利 후로렌스	이태리 플로렌스	Florence, Italy
가메하메하王朝	카메하메하왕조	Kamehameha Dynasty
누아누파리	누우아누팔리	Nuʻuanu Pali
뽄지부르丘	펀치볼구	Punchbowl Crater
加哇	카우아이	Kauai (?)
에와耕地	에와경지	ʻEwa Plantation
와이바후	와이파후	Waipahu
아이에아 耕地	아이에아경지	ʻAiea Plantation
따이야몬드렛도	다이아몬드 헤드	Diamond Head
오아우要塞地	오아후 요새지	Oahu Fortification (Fort Ruger?)
와이기기海岸	와이키키해안	Waikiki Beach
와이기기 水族舘	와이키키 수족관	Waikiki Aquarium
비솟부 博物舘	비숍 박물관	Bishop Museum
챠레스비숏부氏	찰스 비숍씨	Charles Bishop
부루네상族	폴리네시아족	Polynesian people (?)
南洋民族	남양민족	South Seas Peoples
米國大使舘 參事舘夫人	미국대사관 참사관부인	Wife of the Counselor of the US Embassy
楊在河氏	양재하씨	Yang Chae-ha
金澤辰氏	김택진씨	Kim T'aek-chin
東京	동경	Tokyo
新宿	신숙	Shinjuku
李王殿下	이왕전하	His Highness Yi Wang (Yi Un)
東海道線	동해도선	Tōkaidō Line
釜山	부산	Pusan
東萊	동래	Tongnae
老母	노모	Elderly Mother
三兒	삼아	Three Children (used here for author's children)
三男妹	삼남매	Three Siblings/Children

**Glossary**

瀑布	폭포	Waterfall
續	속	Continuation
遊記	유기	Travelogue
大湖	대호	Great Lake
落下	낙하	Fall, drop
壯大	장대	Grand, magnificent
無邊	무변	Boundless, limitless
飛流	비류	Flying stream, torrent
市街地	시가지	Urban area, downtown
文人黑客	문인묵객	Literary figures and artists/patrons (old term)
相對	상대	Dealing with, catering to
施設	시설	Facilities
煩雜	번잡	Complex, busy, intricate (older usage)
交通機關	교통기관	Transportation facilities/system
四通八達	사통팔달	Extending in all directions
左右	좌우	Left and right
商店	상점	Shop, store
土人	토인	Native person, indigenous person (dated/potentially offensive term)
風俗	풍속	Customs, manners; folk
玩物	완물	Toy, curio, trinket
産物	산물	Product, produce
陳列	진열	Display, exhibition
原始的	원시적	Primitive
藝術品	예술품	Work of art
마암	마음	Heart, mind (older spelling)
쓸니게 된다	쏠리게 된다	To be drawn to, attracted to (older spelling/form)
雪風	설풍	Snowy wind, blizzard
견딀 수 업고	견딜 수 없고	Cannot endure/withstand (older spelling)
떠러저 나갈 듯하다	떨어져 나갈 듯하다	Feels like it will fall off (older spelling)
택시	택시	Taxi
憧憬	동경	Longing, yearning
求景	구경	Sightseeing, viewing (older spelling/usage, now 구경)
나섯다	나섰다	Set out, started out (older spelling)
森林	삼림	Forest
욱어진	우거진	Dense, thick (with trees/plants)
드러시니	들어서니	Upon entering (older spelling)
杉나무	삼나무	Cedar tree
엉키어	엉기어	Clinging to, tangled in
全體	전체	Whole, entire
壯嚴	장엄	Magnificent, sublime, solemn
임의	이미	Already (older spelling)
듯든 바와 갓치	듣던 바와 같이	As heard before (older spelling)
廣場	광장	Plaza, square
넓기도 하며	넓기도 하며	Is also wide
無故한	무고한	Endless, without reason (here likely means vast, unending)
川	천	River
便	편	Side, direction
卽	즉	Namely, that is
景	경	Scenery, view
中央	중앙	Center
屬한	속한	Belonging to
어름판	얼음판	Sheet of ice
고도름	고드름	Icicle
우으로	위으로	Over, above (older spelling)
나려쓰는	내리쏟는	Pouring down (older spelling/form)
光景	광경	Scene, sight
絶美	절미	Exquisite beauty
이루미네슘	일루미네이션	Illumination (loan word)
비초이여	비추이어	Shining upon, illuminating (older spelling)
가진	갖은	Various, all kinds of (older spelling)
燦爛	찬란	Brilliant, radiant
色彩	색채	Color
나타나는	나타나는	Appearing
通過	통과	Passing through
딴	딴	Different, other
景色	경색	Scenery, view (can also mean situation/tone)
偉大	위대	Great, grand
맨들지마는	만들지마는	Makes, but... (older spelling/form)
힘	힘	Power, strength
創造	창조	Creation
도라가고 만다	돌아가고 만다	Ends up returning (older spelling)
거긔서	거기서	There, from there (older spelling)
새	새	New
아람다온	아름다운	Beautiful (older spelling)
엇고	얻고	Gain, obtain (older spelling)
正面	정면	Front view
觀客	관객	Spectator, tourist
반드시	반드시	Invariably, surely
곳으로	곳으로	To the place
每人	매인	Each person
딸나	달러	Dollar (loan word, older transliteration)
式	식	Each, per
鐵橋	철교	Iron bridge
國境	국경	Border
건너	건너	Across
英國領地	영국령지	British territory
果然	과연	Indeed, truly
極致	극치	Pinnacle, extreme
達하엿다	달하였다	Reached (older spelling)
陳列舘	진열관	Exhibition hall
歐米	구미	Europe and America
各國	각국	Each country, various countries
勿論	물론	Of course, regardless of
조고만한	자그마한	Small, little (older form)
土地狀況	토지상황	Local situation/conditions
紹介	소개	Introduction
本土人種	본토인종	Native race/people
生活狀態	생활상태	State of life, living conditions
動植礦各種	동식광각종	Various types of animals, plants, and minerals
活動寫眞	활동사진	Motion picture, movie (older term)
酋長	추장	Chief, chieftain
婚姻	혼인	Marriage
神	신	God
불꼿	불꽃	Flame, spark (older spelling)
美化	미화	Beautification
淨化	정화	Purification
散文的	산문적	Prosaic
詩	시	Poetry
大地	대지	Earth, ground
草芽	초아	Grass sprout
듯게하는	듣게 하는	Allowing to hear (older spelling)
밤이슬	밤이슬	Night dew
魂	혼	Soul, spirit
脉溥	맥박	Pulse (older Hanja usage for 박)
人生	인생	Human life
빗	빛	Light (older spelling)
빗초이고	비추이고	Shining upon (older spelling)
希望	희망	Hope
體驗	체험	Experience
참人生	참인생	True human life
속	속	Inside
듸려다 보앗다고	들여다 보았다고	To have looked into (older spelling)
尊貴	존귀	Noble, precious
아마	아마	Perhaps, maybe
眞	진	True
靈	령	Spirit
肉	육	Flesh
사이	사이	Between
人間	인간	Human being
徒來	거래	Coming and going, transaction (used metaphorically here)
이럭저럭	이럭저럭	Somehow, one way or another
日間	일간	Days (counter)
房	방	Room
閑養	한양	Resting comfortably, recuperating
午前	오전	A.M., morning
車	차	Train, vehicle
떠나다	떠나다	To depart, leave
人口	인구	Population
萬	만	Ten thousand
 가진	가진	Having, possessing (older spelling)
弟二	제이	Second
大會	대도시	Large city, metropolis (older usage)
世界	세계	World
屈指	굴지	Leading, prominent (lit. finger-bending)
大商工業市	대상공업시	Major commercial and industrial city
面하야	면하여	Facing (older spelling)
沿岸線	연안선	Shoreline, coastline
運河	운하	Canal
停車場	정차장	Station (train station)
物資	물자	Goods, materials
集散	집산	Gathering and dispersing
工業	공업	Industry
盛大	성대	Prosperous, grand
以上	이상	More than, above
區劃	구획	Layout, division
整然	정연	Orderly, neat
地上	지상	Ground level, surface
高架電車	고가전차	Elevated tram/train
從橫	종횡	Crisscross, vertically and horizontally
疾走	질주	Running fast, speeding
至便	지편	Extremely convenient
幽邃閑雅	유수 한아	Secluded, deep, quiet, and elegant
公園	공원	Park
多數	다수	Numerous, many
有數	유수	Renowned, prominent
第一稱	제일칭	Ranked number one
其外	기외	Besides that, in addition
美術舘	미술관	Art museum
博物舘	박물관	Museum
大學	대학	University
入口	입구	Entrance
大石像	대석상	Large stone statue
彫列	조각	Sculpture, carving (used loosely for statue/group)
溫室	온실	Greenhouse
熱帶草木	열대초목	Tropical plants and trees
鬱蒼	울창	Luxuriant, dense
第一	제일	First, number one
內部	내부	Interior
取引所	거래소	Exchange (stock exchange)
爲始	위시	Starting with, including
各	각	Each, various
땐스場	댄스장	Dance hall (loan word + 場)
理髮所	이발소	Barbershop
販賣部	판매부	Sales department
마치	마치	Just like, as if
市場	시장	Marketplace
旅客	여객	Traveler, passenger
房表	방표	Room assignment slip/counter (likely context specific)
갓치	같이	Like, as (older spelling)
數十介	수십개	Dozens of (介 used as counter)
義務	의무	Obligation, duty
되엿다	되었다	Became (older spelling)
그림	그림	Painting, picture
古代畵	고대화	Ancient painting
코피	카피	Copy (loan word)
만앗다	많았다	Were many (older spelling)
近代畵	근대화	Modern painting
印象派	인상파	Impressionist school
畵家	화가	Painter, artist
現代	현대	Contemporary, modern times
잇섯다	있었다	There was/were (older spelling)
作品	작품	Work (of art)
三介	삼개	Three items/pieces (介 as counter)
떠낫다	떠났다	Departed (older spelling)
異常	이상	Unusual, strange
방아	풍차	Windmill (likely context, 방아 usually means millstone/pounder)
보이고	보이고	Are seen, come into view
雪山	설산	Snow-capped mountain
멀니	멀리	Far away, in the distance (older spelling)
土城	토성	Earthen fortress/wall
赤土山	적토산	Red earth mountain
雄大	웅대	Grand, majestic
野原	야원	Field, plain
숙숙막어 잇서	쑥쑥 막아 있어	Blocking the view here and there (?) (meaning unclear, likely describes prominent features)
土種	토종	Native species/race (can be derogatory)
土窟生活	토굴생활	Cave dwelling life
聯想	연상	Association (of ideas)
식힌다	시킨다	Causes, makes one do (older spelling)
넓은 들	넓은 들	Wide field
머리만 힌 소	머리만 흰 소	Cattle with only white heads
고개를 느리고 잇스며	고개를 느리고 있으며	Hanging their heads low (older spelling)
石炭	석탄	Coal
조악돌	자갈돌	Pebbles, gravel (조악 likely means coarse/rough)
떼우고	띄우고	Catching (the eye) (older spelling)
小屋	소옥	Hut, small house
군대군대	군데군데	Here and there, scattered
中間停車	중간정차	Intermediate stop
오래서	오래서	Being long (time) (older spelling)
分	분	Minute (unit of time)
式	식	Approximately, about
동안	동안	During (that time)
手工	수공	Handicraft
살 수 잇다	살 수 있다	Can buy (older spelling)
怪異	괴이	Strange, bizarre
景致	경치	Scenery, view
유명	유명	Famous
나럿다	내렸다	Got off, descended (older spelling)
投宿	투숙	Check in (at lodging)
瑞西	서서	Switzerland (abbreviation)
입부고	예쁘고	Pretty (older spelling/dialectal?)
적다하면	작다 하면	If (one says it) is small
크고	크고	Large
잘 생겻다	잘 생겼다	Handsome, well-formed (older spelling)
峽谷	협곡	Gorge, canyon
意味	의미	Meaning
層岩	층암	Layered rock, strata
哩	마일	Mile (older transliteration/unit)
廣	광	Width
岩石	암석	Rock
斷層	단층	Fault, stratum
갓하야	같아서	Being like (older spelling)
千仞底	천인저	Thousand-fathom bottom (deep place)
無數	무수	Countless
突立	돌립	Protruding, standing out sharply
夕陽	석양	Setting sun
비최일 때	비추일 때	When illuminated (older spelling)
影色	영색	Reflection color (?) (meaning uncertain, maybe reflected light/shadow)
一見	일견	At first sight
谷底	곡저	Valley bottom
光線	광선	Ray of light
反射	반사	Reflection
倒影	도영	Inverted image, reflection
흘너	흘러	Flowing (older spelling)
銀紐	은뉴	Silver ribbon
美觀	미관	Beautiful sight
亦是	역시	Also, likewise
自身	자신	Itself
따러	따라	According to, depending on (older spelling)
靑	청	Blue
灰	회	Gray
黃	황	Yellow
赤	적	Red
變	변	Change
그리하야	그리하여	Thus, therefore (older spelling)
太陽	태양	Sun
威嚴	위엄	Majesty, dignity
確實	확실	Certain, sure
形體上	형체상	In terms of form/shape
通할 길	통할 길	Path leading to
하엿다	하였다	Did (older spelling)
翌日	익일	The next day
午後	오후	P.M., afternoon
高價票	고가표	Expensive ticket
사가지고	사 가지고	Having bought
自働車	자동차	Automobile (older spelling)
山岳	산악	Mountain range
中央点	중앙점	Central point
終点	종점	Endpoint
長拒離	장거리	Long distance
往來	왕래	Coming and going, travel back and forth
眺望臺	조망대	Lookout point, observatory
곳마다	곳마다	Every place
내려서	내려서	Getting off/down
奇岩怪石	기암괴석	Strange rocks and bizarre stones
壯觀	장관	Spectacular view, grand sight
도라와서	돌아와서	Having returned (older spelling)
行裝	행장	Luggage, travel preparations
차려가지고	차려 가지고	Having packed/prepared
列車	열차	Train
內	내	Inside
安慰	안위	Comfort
娛樂	오락	Entertainment
注意	주의	Attention, care
寢臺車	침대차	Sleeper car
食堂車	식당차	Dining car
展望車	전망차	Observation car
設備	설비	Facilities, equipment
完全	완전	Complete, perfect
骨牌室	골패실	Card room (using traditional Korean cards term)
書籍閱器室	서적열람실	Reading room (lit. book reading device room)
接客室	접객실	Reception room
展望室	전망실	Observation room
美麗優秀	미려우수	Beautiful and excellent
장식	장식	Decoration
노앗다	놓았다	Placed, set (older spelling)
恒常	항상	Always
暖和	난화	Warm, mild
都會	도회	City, metropolis
密拑밧	밀감밭	Orange grove (蜜柑밭)
所在地	소재지	Location
野菜市場	야채시장	Vegetable market
花市場	화시장	Flower market
著名	저명	Famous, renowned
東部人	동부인	Easterner (person from the East Coast US)
避暑地	피서지	Summer resort
四園	사원	Surroundings, vicinity (likely 周圍)
遊覽地	유람지	Amusement area, tourist spot
만하서	많아서	Being many (older spelling)
어대든지	어디든지	Anywhere (older spelling)
電車	전차	Electric tram/train
갈 수 잇고	갈 수 있고	Can go (older spelling)
數多	수다	Numerous
海水浴場地	해수욕장지	Seaside bathing spot
線路	선로	Track, rail line
油	유	Oil
바르고	바르고	Applying
燃料	연료	Fuel
石油	석유	Petroleum, oil
故로	고로	Therefore, because of
塵埃	진애	Dust
煤煙	매연	Soot and smoke
等	등	Etc., and so on
업서	없어	Not having, without (older spelling)
便利	편리	Convenient
道路	도로	Road
左右	좌우	Both sides
키크고	키 크고	Tall
입사귀	잎사귀	Leaf
큰	큰	Big, large
파레무	야자수	Palm tree (loan word?)
圍並木	가로수	Row of trees along a road (並木), 圍 might imply enclosure?
그늘저 잇서	그늘져 있어	Being shaded (older spelling)
파뭇처 잇다	파묻혀 있다	Is buried within (older spelling)
훨님	필름	Film (loan word, older transliteration)
製造所	제조소	Manufacturing plant, studio
마침	마침	Just then, coincidentally
俳優	배우	Actor
나와서	나와서	Coming out
撮影	촬영	Filming, shooting (a movie)
現狀	현상	Current situation, actual state
보이고 잇섯다	보이고 있었다	Was showing (older spelling)
背景	배경	Background, setting
使用	사용	Use
굉장	굉장	Tremendous, grand
冬夏節	동하절	Winter and summer seasons
觀光客	관광객	Tourist
避暑客	피서객	Summer vacationer
避寒客	피한객	Winter vacationer (person avoiding cold)
爲하야	위하여	For the sake of (older spelling)
特別列車	특별열차	Special train
入口	입구	Entrance
오게 한다	오게 한다	Makes (it) come
乘合自働車	승합자동차	Motor coach, bus (older term)
끼고 간다	끼고 간다	Goes alongside (a river, etc.)
投宿	투숙	Check in (at lodging)
秀麗	수려	Beautiful, graceful (scenery)
山嶽	산악	Mountains
瀑布	폭포	Waterfall
溪流	계류	Mountain stream
寄岩	기암	Strange/fantastic rock
著名	저명	Famous
直經	직경	Diameter
高	고	Height
呎	피트	Foot (unit of measurement, older transliteration)
大樹	대수	Large tree
有數	유수	Renowned, prominent
곳이다	곳이다	Is the place
公開	공개	Opened to the public
第一位	제일위	First rank/place
点하고 잇다	점하고 있다	Occupies, holds (a position) (older spelling)
特長	특장	Special feature, characteristic
四季	사계	Four seasons
조와	좋아	Good (older spelling)
春	춘	Spring
비	비	Rain
적고	적고	Little, few
눈	눈	Snow
녹어	녹어	Melting
물	물	Water
굴거지고	굵어지고	Becoming thick/strong (older spelling)
夏節	하절	Summer season
平地	평지	Flatland, plains
더위	더위	Heat
避하야	피하여	Avoiding (older spelling)
都會人	도회인	City dweller
小屋生活	소옥생활	Cabin life
秋	추	Autumn
紅葉	홍엽	Autumn foliage
아람답고	아름답고	Beautiful (older spelling)
冬	동	Winter
춥지도 아니하면서	춥지도 아니하면서	While not being cold
積雪	적설	Accumulated snow
만하	많아	Much, many (older spelling)
스켓	스케이트	Skate (loan word)
스키노리	스키타기	Skiing (loan word + 놀이/타기)
조흔 곳이다	좋은 곳이다	Is a good place (older spelling)
建物	건물	Building
內部	내부	Interior
全部	전부	Entirely, all
떼자인	디자인	Design (loan word)
織物	직물	Woven fabric, textile
깔고	깔고	Laying out, spreading
壁	벽	Wall
거러노아	걸어놓아	Having hung up (older spelling)
一器一品	일기일품	Every single item/object
아닌 거시 업다	아닌 것이 없다	There is nothing that is not (i.e., everything is)
쏘다	쏟아(지다)	Pours (down) (older spelling)
저먼 산	저 먼 산	That distant mountain
흐려지고	흐려지고	Becoming hazy/blurred
갓가온	가까운	Nearby (older spelling)
樹木	수목	Trees
形狀	형상	Shape, form
完然	완연	Clearly, completely
高貴	고귀	Noble
사슴떼	사슴 떼	Herd of deer
입	입	Mouth
눈우에	눈 위에	On the snow (older spelling)
박고	박고	Burying, sticking in
그니난거슨	거니는 것은	Strolling, walking around (older spelling?)
보기 조왓다	보기 좋았다	Was good to see (older spelling)
스키團體	스키 단체	Ski group/club
女子	여자	Woman, female
모다	모두	All (older spelling)
빵스	바지	Pants, trousers (loan word from Japanese パンツ)
입고	입고	Wearing
活發	활발	Energetic, lively
논다	논다	Plays
土曜日	토요일	Saturday
夜	야	Night
마다	마다	Every
땐스會	댄스회	Dance party/gathering (loan word + 會)
구경스러웟다	구경스러웠다	Was quite a sight/spectacle (older spelling)
廣場	광장	Plaza
尺	척	Foot (East Asian unit, approx. 30.3 cm)
沖天	충천	Soaring to the sky
白布	백포	White cloth
갓치	같이	Like, as (older spelling)
내리 쏘다진다	내리 쏟아진다	Cascades/pours down
딴스場	댄스장	Dance hall
音樂堂	음악당	Music hall
水泳場	수영장	Swimming pool
郵便局	우편국	Post office
圖書室	도서실	Library room
學校	학교	School
病院	병원	Hospital
硏究室	연구실	Research lab
販賣部	판매부	Sales department
木造小屋	목조소옥	Wooden cabin
잇스며	있으며	There is/are, and (older spelling)
事務所	사무소	Office
食堂	식당	Dining hall
休憩所	휴게소	Rest area
具備	구비	Equipped with, possessing
博物	박물	Museum (abbreviation)
所産品	소산품	Local products
陳列	진열	Display
觀客	관객	Visitor, spectator
趣味	취미	Interest, taste
實益	실익	Practical benefit
四時天候	사시천후	Year-round weather
봄과 갓다	봄과 같다	Is like spring (older spelling)
關門	관문	Gateway
隣接	인접	Adjacent
灣來	만래	Bay area (?) (meaning uncertain)
諸民	제민	Various peoples/populations
倂하야	병하여	Combining, including (older spelling)
朝夕	조석	Morning and evening, day and night
散集	산집	Gathering and dispersing
東西文明	동서문명	Eastern and Western civilizations
接續黠	접속점	Connection point (黠 likely typo for 點)
南端	남단	Southern end
一望遊覽	일망유람	Panoramic view/sightseeing
때를 지내면	때를 지내면	If one spends time
三方	삼방	Three sides/directions
海	해	Sea
抱하고	포하고	Embracing, surrounding
高屋羅列	고옥나열	Tall buildings lined up
區	구	District, area
내려다 보면	내려다 보면	If one looks down
色彩	색채	Color
찬란한	찬란한	Brilliant
一大	일대	Grand, large-scale
展開	전개	Unfolding, development
佳景	가경	Fine view, beautiful scenery
觀賞	관상	Appreciation, viewing (for enjoyment)
太平洋岸	태평양안	Pacific coast
廷長	연장	Length, extension
哩	마일	Mile
덥히난	덮이는	Covered with (older spelling)
大遊泳場	대수영장	Large swimming area/pool
西部學術	서부학술	Western scholarship/learning
中心	중심	Center
兵營	병영	Barracks, military camp
茶菓店	다과점	Tea and cake shop
植物苑	식물원	Botanical garden
動物苑	동물원	Zoo
街間	가간	Between streets
東洋 美術品	동양 미술품	East Asian art objects
만히	많이	Many, much (older spelling)
蒐集	수집	Collection
發展	발전	Development, progress
入口	입구	Entrance
가라처	가리켜	Pointing to, referring to (older spelling)
金門	금문	Golden Gate
草	초	Grass
池	지	Pond
花壇	화단	Flowerbed
巧妙	교묘	Cleverly, skillfully
꿈여잇고	꾸며 있고	Is decorated (older spelling)
溫室	온실	Conservatory, greenhouse
遊戱場	유희장	Playground, amusement area
動物園	동물원	Zoo
日本式 庭園	일본식 정원	Japanese-style garden
좀가면	좀 가면	If one goes a little further
一大 絶壁	일대 절벽	Great cliff
海豹岩	해표암	Seal Rock(s)
海豹	해표	Seal (animal)
無數	무수	Countless
안진 것	앉은 것	The sight of (them) sitting (older spelling)
亦是	역시	Also, likewise
求景스럽다	구경스럽다	Is quite a sight (older spelling)
타고	타고	Boarding, riding
바다	바다	Sea, ocean
떳다	떴다	Floated, set sail (older spelling)
向하야	향하여	Towards (older spelling)
太平洋上	태평양상	On the Pacific Ocean
獨逸	독일	Germany
빼서온	빼앗아 온	Seized, captured
배	배	Ship
進航	진항	Proceeding, sailing
따라	따라	Following
船	선	Ship
順하야	순하여	Smoothly, following (older spelling?)
速力	속력	Speed
進行	진행	Proceeding, advancing
물인지 하눌인지	물인지 하늘인지	Whether water or sky (older spelling)
分別	분별	Distinction, discernment
업시	없이	Without (older spelling)
中	중	Middle
몃칠가다가	며칠 가다가	After going for several days (older spelling)
救命胴衣	구명동의	Life jacket
허리	허리	Waist
매고	매고	Tying, wearing
風浪時	풍랑시	During rough seas/stormy weather
避亂	피란	Taking refuge, evacuation
練習	연습	Practice, drill
船客	선객	Ship passenger
對한	대한	Towards, regarding
船員	선원	Crew member
待遇	대우	Treatment
一視 同仁	일시 동인	Impartiality, equal treatment for all
以下	이하	Below, and subordinates
親切	친절	Kindness
遺憾	유감	Regret, dissatisfaction (here means 'leaving nothing to be desired')
업섯다	없었다	There was not (older spelling)
室內	실내	Room interior
左右對立	좌우대립	Facing each other left and right
寢臺	침대	Bed
女下人	여하인	Female servant/attendant (older term)
男下人	남하인	Male servant/attendant (older term)
껄	걸	Girl (loan word, older transliteration)
뽀의	보이	Boy (loan word, older transliteration)
沐浴	목욕	Bathing
每朝	매조	Every morning
朝起寢後	조기침후	After waking up in the morning (lit. morning wake bed after)
카피	커피	Coffee (loan word)
朝飯	조반	Breakfast
덱기	데크	Deck (of a ship) (loan word)
놀냐면	놀자면	If one wants to play/relax (older spelling/form)
茶	차	Tea
가지고 온다	가지고 온다	Brings
四時	사시	Four o'clock
茶菓	다과	Tea and sweets/cake
七時半	칠시반	7:30
라발	나팔	Bugle, trumpet (loan word 'reveille'?)
夕飯	석반	Dinner
食한다	식한다	Eats (formal)
一等食堂	일등식당	First-class dining room
婦人談話室	부인담화실	Ladies' lounge/parlor
喫煙室	끽연실	Smoking room
散步甲板	산보갑판	Promenade deck
圖書室	도서실	Library room
遊戱室	유희실	Game room
水泳室	수영실	Swimming pool (room)
兒童室	아동실	Children's room
應接室	응접실	Reception room
理髮所	이발소	Barbershop
洗濯室	세탁실	Laundry room
兒童遊戱室	아동유희실	Children's playroom
運動	운동	Sports, exercise
曲目	곡목	Program, list of items (here, activities)
삥뽕	핑퐁	Ping pong (loan word)
輪投	윤투	Ring toss
덱기꼴푸	데크골프	Deck golf (loan word + 골프)
덱기피리야드	데크빌리어드	Deck billiards (?) (loan word + 빌리어드)
碁	기	Go (board game)
將棋	장기	Shogi (Japanese chess) / Changgi (Korean chess)
뿌리지	브리지	Bridge (card game) (loan word)
마장	마작	Mahjong (loan word)
後	후	After
쌀논	살롱	Salon (loan word)
依例	의례	Routinely, customarily
노름	놀음	Gambling, games (can have negative connotation)
시작	시작	Start, beginning
낫에도	낮에도	Even during the day (older spelling)
甲板우에서	갑판 위에서	On the deck (older spelling)
얼마라도	얼마라도	As much as one wants
自由自在	자유자재	Freely, at will
作亂	작란	Engage in activities, play around (lit. make disturbance)
하게 된다	하게 된다	Gets to do
頓	톤	Ton (unit of weight) (loan word)
실코	싣고	Carrying, loading (older spelling)
쉴새업시	쉴 새 없이	Without rest, ceaselessly (older spelling)
다라나며	달아나며	Running, speeding away (older spelling)
그 우에서는	그 위에서는	On top of it (older spelling)
平地	평지	Flat ground, on land
動作	동작	Action, movement
지낸다	지낸다	Spends time
때로난	때로는	Sometimes (older spelling)
長大緩慢	장대완만	Long, large, and slow
빗징구	피칭	Pitching (ship movement) (loan word?)
上下	상하	Up and down
로링	롤링	Rolling (ship movement) (loan word)
從橫	종횡	Side to side
동작하는 소리	동작하는 소리	Sound of movement
驟雨去來	취우거래	Sudden showers coming and going
刻刻	각각	Moment by moment
아람답게	아름답게	Beautifully (older spelling)
推移	추이	Transition, change
雲影	운영	Cloud shadows
보인다	보인다	Are visible
甲板캐빈	갑판 캐빈	Deck chair (臥椅子 - reclining chair)
누어	누워	Lying down (older spelling)
小說	소설	Novel
보거나	보거나	Reading or...
엽헤안진객과	옆에 앉은 객과	With the passenger seated beside (older spelling)
對話	대화	Conversation
상쾌	상쾌	Refreshing
水天彷彿	수천방불	Where water and sky resemble each other, horizon
渺茫	묘망	Vast and hazy, boundless
波濤	파도	Waves
속을	속을	Through the middle of
화살과 갓치	화살과 같이	Like an arrow (older spelling)
뚤코가간대	뚫고 가는데	Piercing through and going (older spelling)
지나가는	지나가는	Passing by
飛魚	비어	Flying fish
群	군	Group, school (of fish)
不絶	부절	Ceaselessly, constantly
追船從走	추선종주	Following the ship
信天翁	신천옹	Albatross
海豚	해돈	Dolphin
一隊	일대	Group, pod
浮遊	부유	Floating
鯨魚	경어	Whale
壯觀	장관	Magnificent sight
次	차	Time(s)
海洋	해양	Ocean
他汽船	타기선	Other steamship
遭遇	조우	Encounter
兩便	양편	Both sides
全員	전원	All members, everyone
歡呼	환호	Cheer, shout of joy
互相	호상	Mutually
氣笛	기적	Whistle, siren (of a ship)
부러	불어	Blowing (older spelling)
安否	안부	Safety and well-being, greetings
信號	신호	Signal
景實노	광경 실로	Scene, truly/indeed (older spelling/form?)
人情味	인정미	Human warmth, kindness
表現	표현	Expression
特히	특히	Especially (older spelling)
月夜	월야	Moonlit night
紳士	신사	Gentleman
淑女	숙녀	Lady
家族同伴	가족동반	Accompanied by family
戀人同志	연인동지	Lovers together
三三五五	삼삼오오	In small groups (of threes and fives)
逍遙	소요	Strolling, leisurely walk
詩	시	Poetry
되고 만다	되고 만다	Ends up becoming
音樂會	음악회	Concert
演劇	연극	Play, drama
낸 차레	내 차례	In turn (?) (meaning uncertain, maybe 'in sequence')
最終日	최종일	Final day
一同	일동	All members, everyone together
出演	출연	Performance, appearance
잇섯다	있었다	There was (older spelling)
手品	수품	Magic trick (Japanese origin?)
劍劇	검극	Sword drama (Japanese genre Kenkeki)
滑稽	골계	Comedy, humor
땐스	댄스	Dance (loan word)
春劇	춘극	Spring play
春駒二幕	춘구이막	Harukoma Nimaku (Play title)
萬歲	만세	Manzai (Japanese comedy) / Banzai (cheer)
曲藝	곡예	Acrobatics, circus tricks
新聞	신문	Newspaper
無線 電信	무선 전신	Wireless telegraph
通한	통한	Received through
各國	각국	Various countries
消息	소식	News
每夜	매야	Every night
食卓	식탁	Dining table
一人 前	일인 전	Per person (lit. one person front)
一枚式	일매식	One sheet each
報告	보고	Report
이와 갓치	이와 같이	Like this, in this way (older spelling)
海上	해상	On the sea
떠서	떠서	Floating
朝夕變更	조석변경	Morning and evening changes, daily changes
알 수가 잇다	알 수가 있다	Can know (older spelling)
競技	경기	Competition, match
長時日	장시일	Long period of time
기거를 갓치하는	기거를 같이하는	Living together (older spelling)
동안	동안	During
內外乘客	내외승객	Passengers from home and abroad
故舊	고구	Old friends
親密	친밀	Close, intimate
餘興	여흥	Entertainment, amusement
一程	일정	Program, schedule
정하고	정하고	Deciding
中	중	Among
任員	임원	Officer, official
選立	선립	Elect, select
長技	장기	Special skill, forte
대로	대로	According to
競技者	경기자	Competitor
擇하엿다	택하였다	Selected (older spelling)
一同	일동	Everyone
우숨과 興	웃음과 흥	Laughter and excitement/merriment (older spelling)
幸福	행복	Happiness
一日	일일	One day
보낸다	보낸다	Spends (time)
스기야기	스키야키	Sukiyaki (Japanese dish) (loan word)
日本料理	일본요리	Japanese cuisine
夜	야	Night
夕飯	석반	Dinner
飛報	비보	Exciting news, urgent report
널녓다	널렸다	Spread widely (older spelling)
다다미	다타미	Tatami mat (loan word)
甲板 우에	갑판 위에	On the deck (older spelling)
깔고	깔고	Laying out
나이프	나이프	Knife (loan word)
혹구	포크	Fork (loan word)
내버리고	내버리고	Discarding, throwing away
和服	와후쿠	Japanese clothing (Kimono)
게다	게타	Geta (Japanese wooden clogs) (loan word)
적갈	젓가락	Chopsticks (older/dialectal term?)
집어	집어	Picking up
正宗	정종	Masamune (brand of sake) / Refined sake
食事	식사	Meal
하게 된다	하게 된다	Gets to do
珍味	진미	Delicacy, exquisite taste
말할 수 업섯다	말할 수 없었다	Was beyond words, indescribable (older spelling)
물결	물결	Wave
배머리	뱃머리	Bow (of a ship)
치고 또 친다	치고 또 친다	Strikes and strikes again
着	착	Arrival
群島	군도	Archipelago, group of islands
演劇	연극	Play, drama
中	중	Middle
中幕	중막	Interlude, intermission curtain
갓다	같다	Is like (older spelling)
乘船	승선	Boarding a ship
一週日	일주일	One week
만에	만에	After (a period of time)
陸地	육지	Land
開花啼鳥	개화제조	Flowers bloom and birds sing (poetic phrase)
寄港	기항	Calling at a port, stopover
好感	호감	Good feeling, favorable impression
一生	일생	Lifetime
잇기 어려올 것 갓다	잊기 어려울 것 같다	Seems difficult to forget (older spelling)
領地	영지	Territory
東洋人	동양인	East Asian person
만코	많고	Many, and... (older spelling)
더욱	더욱	Especially, moreover
우리 同胞	우리 동포	Our compatriots (fellow Koreans)
만히	많이	Many (older spelling)
居住	거주	Residence, living
爲始하야	위시하여	Starting with (older spelling)
島	도	Island
小數	소수	Small number
無人小島	무인소도	Uninhabited small island
되어 잇다	되어 있다	Is composed of (older spelling)
通稱	통칭	Common name, alias
傳說	전설	Legend
나타나는	나타나는	Appearing in
最初發見者	최초발견자	First discoverer
일홈으로 지은 거시다	이름으로 지은 것이다	Is named after (older spelling)
洋洋	양양	Vast (ocean)
十字路	십자로	Crossroads
位하야	위하여	Located at (older spelling)
一方	일방	One side
他方	타방	The other side
南方	남방	South
面하고	면하고	Facing
멀니는	멀리는	Far off (older spelling)
縱斷	종단	Crossing vertically
橫斷	횡단	Crossing horizontally
船舶	선박	Ship, vessel
給水給炭	급수급탄	Supplying water and coal
港	항	Port, harbor
其外	기외	Besides that
海底電信局	해저전신국	Undersea telegraph station
無線電信局	무선전신국	Wireless telegraph station
所在地	소재지	Location
重要	중요	Important
軍事上	군사상	Militarily, strategically
前哨	전초	Outpost
緊要地	긴요지	Vital place, strategic point
海陸雙方	해륙쌍방	Both sea and land
要害	요해	Strategic point, stronghold
固守	고수	Firmly defending
東西文化	동서문화	Eastern and Western cultures
接觸点	접촉점	Contact point
發祥地	발상지	Birthplace, origin
國際的	국제적	International
人種問題	인종문제	Racial issues/problems
出發地	출발지	Starting point
同時	동시	At the same time
氣候	기후	Climate
溫和	온화	Mild, temperate
漫遊地	만유지	Sightseeing destination
保養地	보양지	Place for recuperation, health resort
理想的	이상적	Ideal
銅像	동상	Bronze statue
街	가	Street
縣	현	Prefecture, county (used for Hawaii)
裁判所	재판소	Courthouse, Judiciary Building
庭	정	Garden, yard
紀念百年祭	기념백년제	Centennial celebration/festival
建設	건설	Construction, erection
像	상	Statue, image
鑄造	주조	Casting (metal)
統一	통일	Unification
樹立	수립	Establishment
王朝	왕조	Dynasty
그때붓허	그때부터	Since that time (older spelling)
今日	금일	Today (formal)
金色眩徨	금색현황	Dazzling golden color
英傑	영걸	Hero, outstanding figure
나타내고 잇다	나타내고 있다	Is displaying (older spelling)
東北	동북	Northeast
哩所	마일소	Place X miles away
最終戰	최종전	Final battle
하든	하던	That was done (older spelling)
古戰場	고전장	Old battlefield
同所	동소	The same place, said place
千仞絶壁	천인절벽	Thousand-fathom cliff (very high cliff)
奇勝地	기승지	Place of outstanding natural beauty
부는 바람	부는 바람	Blowing wind
第三 位風速	제삼 위풍속	Third place wind speed
稱	칭	Be called, named
中央	중앙	Center
山中	산중	In the mountains
突出	돌출	Protruding, projecting
海拔	해발	Elevation above sea level
呎	피트	Foot (unit)
死火山	사화산	Extinct volcano
頂上	정상	Summit, peak
噴火口	분화구	Crater
흔적	흔적	Trace, mark
남아 잇다	남아 있다	Remains (older spelling)
昔日	석일	Old days, bygone times
此島	차도	This island
遠征	원정	Expedition
分捕品	분포품	Spoils of war, booty
婦女子	부녀자	Women and children
生擄	생포	Capture alive
凱旋祝宴	개선축연	Triumphant return banquet
開할 시	개할 시	At the time of opening/holding
突然	돌연	Suddenly
山이 울니고	산이 울리고	The mountain rumbled (older spelling)
噴火	분화	Eruption
生靈	생령	Living spirits, souls
춤을 추어	춤을 추어	Dancing
慘酷	참혹	Cruel, brutal
警戒	경계	Warning, caution
傳說	전설	Legend
丘上	구상	On the hill
올너서면	올라서면	If one climbs up (older spelling)
勿論	물론	Of course, not to mention
耕地	경지	Cultivated land, plantation
遠望	원망	Distant view
優秀	우수	Excellent, outstanding
巡廻	순회	Tour, circuit
古噴火口	고분화구	Ancient crater
蹟	적	Trace, ruin
只今	지금	Now (formal)
陸軍	육군	Army
要塞地	요새지	Fortified area
一	일	One, part of
近海	근해	Nearby sea, coastal waters
모-든	모든	All
珍魚	진어	Rare fish
五彩七色	오색칠색	Five or seven brilliant colors (idiomatic for very colorful)
魚族	어족	Fish species
蒐集	수집	Collection
著名	저명	Famous
豪族	호족	Powerful family, nobleman
亡妻	망처	Deceased wife
王女	왕녀	Princess
紀念	기념	Commemoration
爲하야	위하여	For the sake of (older spelling)
公共事業	공공사업	Public works/enterprise
投資	투자	Investment
其中	기중	Among them
가장	가장	Most
價値	가치	Value
內壁	내벽	Inner wall
溶岩	용암	Lava
珍材	진재	Rare materials
爲始	위시	Starting with, including
族	족	Tribe, people, race
器物	기물	Utensils, artifacts
生物	생물	Living things, organisms
太古	태고	Ancient times
生活狀態	생활상태	State of life
模型	모형	Model
彫列	조각	Sculpture, carving
綱羅	망라	Comprehensively covering, including everything
見學	견학	Study tour, field trip
出航	출항	Departure (of a ship)
時間	시간	Time
되니	되니	As it becomes
下陸햇다	하륙했다	Having gone ashore (older spelling)
모혀드는	모여드는	Gathering (older spelling)
船客	선객	Passenger
餞送客	전송객	Well-wisher, person seeing someone off
대단이	대단히	Greatly, extremely (older spelling)
複難	복잡	Crowded, complicated (likely 복잡)
花來	화환	Flower garland, lei (likely 花輪)
배에 걸친	배에 걸친	Hung on the ship
色紙	색지	Colored paper, streamer
목에 걸친	목에 걸친	Hung around the neck
목도리	목걸이	Necklace (here made of seeds/nuts)
植物열매를 께인 것	식물 열매를 꿰인 것	Thing made by stringing plant fruits/seeds (older spelling)
파는 사람	파는 사람	Person selling
사는 사람	사는 사람	Person buying
사서 가는 사람	사서 가는 사람	Person buying and leaving
사람목에 걸처주는 사람	사람 목에 걸쳐주는 사람	Person putting (it) around someone's neck (older spelling)
야단법석	야단법석	Commotion, hullabaloo
喇叭	나팔	Bugle, trumpet
불고	불고	Blowing
餞送人	전송인	Well-wisher
나리고	내리고	Getting off (older spelling)
陸地	육지	Land
손진도리	손수건	Handkerchief (?) (uncertain term)
엇던	어떤	Some (older spelling)
女人	여인	Woman
隊	대	Group, line
지어서서	지어서서	Forming a line and standing (older spelling)
춤을 추고	춤을 추고	Dancing
하와이춤	하와이춤	Hawaiian dance
노래를 하야	노래를 하여	Singing (older spelling)
一大 壯觀	일대 장관	A grand spectacle
이르고만다	이루고 만다	Ends up forming/creating (older spelling)
떠난다	떠난다	Departs
裸體	나체	Naked body
土人	토인	Native person
던지는 돈	던지는 돈	Thrown money/coins
물구나무서서	물구나무 서서	Doing a handstand (in water, diving)
집어가지고	집어 가지고	Picking up and taking
나오고	나오고	Coming out
엇던 者	어떤 자	Some person (older spelling)
배위로	배 위로	Onto the ship
올나와	올라와	Climbing up (older spelling)
거두어 가지고	거두어 가지고	Collecting
물속으로	물속으로	Into the water
떠러진다	떨어진다	Falls (older spelling)
구경거리엇다	구경거리였다	Was a sight to see (older spelling)
아	아	Ah
다시	다시	Again
海洋	해양	Ocean
떳다	떴다	Floated, set sail (older spelling)
最後夜	최후야	Last night
선물	선물	Gift, present
各色 帽子	각색 모자	Various kinds of hats
各各	각각	Each, respectively
노혀 잇다	놓여 있다	Are placed (older spelling)
안젓다	앉았다	Sat (older spelling)
船長	선장	Captain (of a ship)
人事	인사	Greetings
잇슨 後	있은 후	After there was (older spelling)
大使舘	대사관	Embassy
參事舘夫人	참사관부인	Wife of the Counselor
主禮下	주례하	Under the leadership/presidency of
萬歲 三唱	만세 삼창	Three cheers of "Mansei/Banzai"
官等	관등	Rank, official grade
定席	정석	Assigned seat
하나니	하나니	As it is... (older connective form)
主人事務長	선임사무장	Chief Purser (主人 likely refers to head of non-deck dept)
爲始하야	위시하여	Including, starting with (older spelling)
課長	과장	Section chief
夫妻	부처	Husband and wife
잇섯다	있었다	Were there (older spelling)
到着	도착	Arrival
排水噸數	배수톤수	Displacement tonnage
距離	거리	Distance
哩	마일	Mile
日만에	일 만에	In X days
無事	무사	Safely, without incident
阜頭	부두	Pier, wharf (older term)
人山人海	인산인해	Sea of people, huge crowd
迎接人	영접인	Welcoming person/crowd
보엿다	보였다	Was visible (older spelling)
손을 들고	손을 들고	Raising hands
소리를 질너	소리를 질러	Shouting (older spelling)
甲板 우와	갑판 위와	Deck and... (older spelling)
陸地	육지	Land
사이	사이	Between
인사	인사	Greeting
마지러 온 사람	맞으러 온 사람	Person who came to meet/welcome (older spelling)
매우	매우	Very
반가웟섯다	반가웠었다	Was very glad (to see) (older spelling)
下船	하선	Disembarking
新宿호텔	신주쿠 호텔	Shinjuku hotel
投宿	투숙	Check in
집	집	House
바락그	바라크	Barracks (loan word)
갓고	같고	Like, and... (older spelling)
道路	도로	Road
더럽고	더럽고	Dirty
사람들	사람들	People
허리	허리	Back, waist
새우등갓치	새우등같이	Like a shrimp's back (hunched) (older spelling)
꼬부라지고	꼬부라지고	Bent, hunched over
氣運	기운	Energy, vitality
업서 보엿다	없어 보였다	Looked like they lacked (older spelling)
一週日間	일주일간	For one week
殿下	전하	Your/His Highness
知人親友	지인친우	Acquaintances and close friends
차잣다	찾았다	Visited, looked for (older spelling)
或	혹	Some, or
午餐	오찬	Lunch (formal)
주는자	주는 자	Person giving
晩餐	만찬	Dinner (formal)
歡迎	환영	Welcome
자못	자못	Quite, very
컷다	컸다	Was large/great (older spelling)
驛	역	Station (train)
떠낫다	떠났다	Departed (older spelling)
가삼	가슴	Chest, heart (older spelling)
두군거린다	두근거린다	Pounds, throbs
線中	선중	Along the line
疾走	질주	Speeding, running fast
景色	경색	Scenery
比하면	비하면	Compared to
山高 秀麗	산고 수려	Mountains are high and beautiful
맛	맛	Taste, sense, feel
적고	작고	Small (older spelling)
淸雅	청아	Clear and elegant
隹麗	준려	Beautiful, graceful (隹 seems typo for 俊 or 秀?)
着	착	Arrival
歸來	귀래	Returning
親戚 一同	친척 일동	All relatives
三兒	삼아	Three children
나왓다	나왔다	Came out (older spelling)
꿈인지 생시인지	꿈인지 생시인지	Whether dream or reality
눈물	눈물	Tears
아니 나오고	아니 나오고	Do not come out
感想	감상	Feelings, impression
이상스럽다	이상스럽다	Is strange
自働車	자동차	Automobile
도라왓다	돌아왔다	Returned (older spelling)
一年 八個月 前	일년 팔개월 전	One year and eight months ago
보든	보던	That I saw (older spelling)
버섯과 갓흔 집	버섯과 같은 집	Mushroom-like house (older spelling)
몬지나는 길	먼지 나는 길	Dusty road (older spelling)
그대로	그대로	As it was
잇다	있다	Is, exists (older spelling)
다만	다만	Only, just
늙고	늙고	Aged
컷슬뿐이다	컸을 뿐이다	Only grown (older spelling)
무엇보다	무엇보다	More than anything
氣運	기운	Energy, health
조코	좋고	Good, and... (older spelling)
三男妹	삼남매	Three children/siblings
健康	건강	Health
多幸	다행	Fortunate
일이다	일이다	Is the thing/matter
過去	과거	Past
그리워하든	그리워하던	That I longed for (older spelling)
故鄕	고향	Hometown
붙어	부터	From (older spelling)
前道	전도	Future path, road ahead
얻어케	어떻게	How (older spelling)
展開	전개	Unfold, develop
하랴는고	하려는고	Will it...? (older interrogative ending)
끗	끝	The End (older spelling)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제6권 제9호
발행일	1934년 09월 01일
기사제목	太平洋건너서, (-歐米遊記續-)
필자	晶月
기사형태	기행문

太平洋건너서,
						晶月
나이가라 瀑布
이 爆布는 이리大湖로 붙어와서 리오湖에 落下하는 壯大 無邊의 大飛流 (水面 三百尺)이다.
市街地는 文人黑客을 相對로 하는 이만치 施設이 煩雜하고 交通機關이 四通八達케 되어 잇다. 左右商店에는 土人 風俗玩物들의 産物이 陳列되여 그 原始的 藝術品에 마암이 쓸니게 된다. 雪風에 견딀 수 업고 발이 떠러저 나갈 듯하다. 우리는 택시로 憧憬하든 라이갈瀑를 求景하러 나섯다. 森林이 욱어진 公園을 드러시니 杉나무에 엉키어 잇는 눈이 나무 全體가 되고 그거시 白森林이 되어 과연 壯嚴한 自然美를 보이고 잇다. 임의 듯든 바와 갓치 라이갈瀑布廣은 넓기도 하며 無故한 (hill)노 되어 잇다. 라이갈瀑가 된 川은 合衆國과 架奈陀便이 되여잇다. 卽 合衆國이 리湖水가 加奈咤 온다리오湖에 落流하는 景인대 中央에 山羊島가 잇서서 瀑布를 兩分하야 其一은 아메리카瀧이오 他一은 架奈陀에 屬한 馬蹄瀧이다. 그거시 크게 어름판이 되고 또 고도름이 되어 잇는 우으로 나려쓰는 光景이란 絶美하고 더욱이 밤에는 이루미네슘으로 비초이여 가진 燦爛한 色彩로 나타나는 光景 西白利亞 通過時에 보는 오로라와 같은 一種의 딴 景色을 내고 잇다. 사람은 自然을 偉大하게 맨들지마는 그 힘은 自然에서 나오고 自然 創造에게로 도라가고 만다. 거긔서 우리는 새 아람다온 거슬엇고 또 볼 수 잇다. 瀑布의 光景은 米國便보다 加奈咤便이 正面이라고 하야 觀客들은 반드시 그 곳으로 求景간다. 우리는 每人 五딸나式 내고 鐵橋 卽 國境을 건너 英國領地 加奈陀로 가서 보앗다. 果然 絶美極致에 達하엿다.

라이갈瀑 陳列舘
歐米 各國에는 어느 곳을 勿論하고 조고만한 市街地라도 반드시 陳列舘이나 博物館이 잇서 土地狀況을 紹介하고 잇다. 여긔에＜162＞ 陳列舘이 잇서 本土人種의 原始的 生活狀態를 動植礦各種으로 陳列해 노앗다.

活動寫眞 求景
寫眞은 모다 本土人種의 原始 生活狀態이엿다. 白人과 土人酋長의 딸과 婚姻하야 사는 거시엿다. 그들은 이러케 말한다. 戀愛는 神의 불꼿이다. 모든 거슬 美化하고 淨化한다. 散文的인 우리에게 詩를 준다. 大地에 草芽를 듯게하는 밤이슬이다. 사람 魂에 脉溥을 듯게 한다. 人生에게 빗을 빗초이고 希望을 준다. 戀愛를 體驗한 사람이 아니면 참人生의 魂의 속을 듸려다 보앗다고 할 수 업다. 그 사람 자신이 人生을 尊貴하게 살 수 업다. 아마 眞의 사랑은 靈뿐 아니오 肉뿐만도 아니라 靈肉사이에 잇서 神과 人間사이에 徒來하는 거시다.
이럭저럭 九日間이나 따듯한 房속에서 閑養햇다. 21日 午前 7時 50分 車로 이 곳을 떠나다.

六日間 市俄古
치카고는 人口 2百 50萬을 가진 米國 弟二의 大會요 世界에서 屈指하는 大商工業市다. 미시간湖(Michigan)에 面하야 沿岸線이 길뿐 아니라 運河가 잇고 六大 停車場이 잇서 物資가 集散하야 工業의 盛大한 거슨 紐育 以上이라고 한다.
市街는 區劃 整然하야 地上 及 高架電車는 從橫으로 疾走한다. 交通이 至便하여 幽수閑雅公園이 多數 잇서서 Bineoln Park, JacksonPark 等은 世界 有數한 公園이라 世界 第一稱 잇는 maskal field department stor 유니옹屠牛場 뮤니시바루棧橋 부루만會社 等이 잇고＜163＞ 其外 美術舘, 博物舘, 치카고大學이 잇다.
와싱톤公園 入口에 大石像이 잇스니 「時泉」과 時神의 彫列이다. 世界最大의 溫室이 잇서 熱帶草木이 鬱蒼해 잇다.

Blaekstone Hotel
이 호텔은 치카고 第一가는 호텔 뿐 아니라 世界에 第一 큰 호텔이란다. 房이 三千個요 26層이다. 內部에는 取引所를 爲始하야 各 商店이 잇고 땐스場 理髮所 販賣部가 잇서 마치 市場과 갓고 旅客에게 房表라는 거슨 마치 停車場에서 票파는 갓치 數十介가 잇다.

art musime
어느 곳을 가든지 반드시 美術舘을 보게 되는 거슨 무슨 義務갓치 되엿다. 그림 중에는 伊太利 古代畵의 코피가 만앗다. 近代畵로는 佛蘭西 印象派 畵家 中 고간 고호 세잔 루노알 시실리비 사로 데갈 거시 잇고 現代 그림으로 난 마치스 웃쓰리오 루소 데한 것도 잇섯다. 彫列에난 미게란체로 作品이 三介 잇섯다.

二日間 그랜드캐이용
치카코를 떠낫다. 異常스러온 방아가 보이고 雪山이 멀니 보이며 土城과 같은 赤土山이 雄大하게 野原을 숙숙막어 잇서 土種의 土窟生活을 聯想식힌다. 넓은 들에난 머리만 힌 소가 고개를 느리고 잇스며 石炭과 같은 조악돌 異常하게 눈에 떼우고 原始的 土人의 小屋이 군대군대잇다. 中間停車가 매우 오래서 10分 或 20分式 하여 그 동안 土人種들의 手工을 求景할 수 잇고 또 살 수도 잇다.
怪異한 景致로 유명한 그랜드키이용에 나럿다. 에루도바루 호텔에 投宿하엿다.
瑞西의 景色이 입부고 적다하면 米國 自然景色은 크고 잘 생겻다.
캐이용은 峽谷의 意味요. 層岩과 深一哩廣 一哩의 岩石 斷層은 마치 印度에 잇는 비라밋도 갓하야 千仞底에서 無數하게 突立하엿다. 그거시 夕陽에 비최일 때는 自然에 影色한 것 갓하야 一見 매우 雄大하다. 谷底에 光線에 反射되는 倒影이며 코로라도河가 흘너 銀紐를 일은 美觀 또한 形言키 難하다. 岩石自身이 아람답다. 光線에 따러 그 色이 靑, 灰, 黃, 赤으로 變한다. 그리하야 太陽의 威嚴과 自然을 確實하게 形體上으로 볼 수 잇다. 土人들은 이곳을 天國으로 通할 길이라고 한단다.
여긔서 一泊하고 翌日 午後에 每人 12딸나式 高價票를 사가지고 自働車로 山岳의 中央点과 終点까지 長拒離를 往來하엿다. 眺望臺 잇는 곳마다 내려서 보는 山岳의 奇岩怪石은 壯觀이엿다.
도라와서 行裝을 차려가지고 午後 八時에 이곳을 떠낫다.

二日間 로스안젤스(羅府)
여긔서 通한 列車 內에는 旅客의 安慰와 娛樂을 注意하야 寢臺車 食堂車 展望車 等 設備가 完全하야 展望車에는 骨牌室 書籍閱器室 接客室 展望室이 잇서 모다 美麗優秀한 장식을 하여 노앗다.
羅府는 恒常 暖和하고 아람다운 都會로＜164＞ 密拑밧 所在地 野菜市場 花市場 等이 著名하다. 또 米國 東部人들의 避暑地이다. 日本에 大阪과 같이 四園에 遊覽地가 만하서 어대든지 電車로 갈 수 잇고 數多한 海水浴場地가 잇다. 鐵橋는 線路에 油를 바르고 燃料는 石油를 쓰는 故로 塵埃 煤煙 等이 업서 便利하다.
市街地는 道路 左右에 키크고 입사귀 큰 파레무圍並木이 잇서 그늘저 잇서 市街는 파레무 나무 속에 파뭇처 잇다.

Hole wooa
이곳은 世界的 有名한 活動寫眞훨님 製造所이다. 우리가 求景할 때는 마침 俳優들이 나와서 撮影하는 現狀을 보이고 잇섯다. 背景으로 使用하는 設備는 굉장하엿다.
9日間 요세미데 마리보자 大森林 冬夏節에 觀光客 避暑客 避寒客을 爲하야 特別列車를 公園入口에 루보다루까지 오게 한다. 乘合自働車로 마셋도 溪流를 끼고 간다. The ahwohrel호텔에 投宿하엿다.
此 公園은 秀麗한 山嶽瀑布 溪流 及 寄岩으로 되엿나니 에루가 비단 부라이다부엘으리봉 스리부라자 等 瀑布는 著名하다.
마리보자森林은 요세미데에서 每日 自働車가 往來하난대 直經 15呎으로 30呎까지 高四百呎大樹로 된 大森林으로 世界에 有數한 곳이다.
이 公園은 35年 前에 公開한 곳으로 米國內 數多한 公園 中에 第一位를 点하고 잇다. 이 산의 特長은 四季가 다 조와 春에는 비가 적고 눈이 녹어 瀑布의 물이 굴거지고 夏節은 平地의 더위를 避하야 都會人들이 小屋生活을 하고 秋에는 紅葉이 아람답고 冬은 춥지도 아니하면서 積雪이 만하 스켓과 스키노리에 조흔 곳이다.
호텔은 印度式 建物노 內部는 全部 멕기스코떼자인을 하고 織物을 깔고 壁에는 印度사라사를 거러노아 一器一品 藝術品 아닌 거시 업다. 눈은 푹푹쏘다. 저먼 산은 흐려지고 갓가온 樹木은 그 形狀이 完然해진다. 거긔 高貴한 사슴떼가 입을 눈우에 박고 그니난거슨 또한 보기 조왓다. 스키團體인 女子들은 모다 빵스를 입고 活發이 논다. 土曜日 夜마다 땐스會가 잇서 구경스러웟다.
여긔 廣場에는 2千 5百尺이나 되는 요세미데瀧이 沖天에 白布를 친 것갓치 내리 쏘다진다. 여긔난 딴스場 音樂堂 水泳場 郵便局 圖書室 學校 病院 硏究室 販賣部 等이 잇고 數百木造小屋이 잇스며 事務所 食堂 休憩所를 具備한 建物이 잇다. 더욱이 博物이 잇서 所産品을 陳列해 노아 觀客에게 趣味와 實益을 준다.

六日間 샌푸란씨스코(桑港)
桑港은 70萬人을 가진 米國 太平洋岸의 大都會地로 四時天候 봄과 갓다. 米國 太平洋의 關門이오. 隣接 灣來의 諸民을 倂하야 人口 150萬이오. 日本 中國 印度 豪洲 等地의 貿易船은 朝夕 散集하야 東西文明의 接續黠이다. 市街南端에 二子山이 잇서 一望遊覽에 때를 지내면 三方海에 抱하고 高屋羅列한 區를 내려다 보면 色彩 찬란한＜165＞ 一大 파노라마의 展開한 佳景을 觀賞할 수 잇다. 大平洋岸에는 世界 第一인 廷長 五哩나 되는 金門大公園 數千遊覽客으로 덥히난 후리이야스가 大遊泳場 西部學術에 中心인 가주大學 부레시데오兵營 日本茶菓店 音樂堂 植物苑 動物苑이 잇다. 촤이나타운은 구란도街와 바식구지가 街間에 잇서 東洋 美術品을 만히 蒐集하야 매우 發展하고 잇다.

金門公園
桑港灣 入口를 가라처 金門이라고 한다. 여긔 金門公園이 잇서 草, 池, 花壇이 巧妙히 꿈여잇고 美術舘, 溫室, 遊戱場, 動物園이 잇고 日本式 庭園로 잇다. 여긔서 좀가면 大平洋岸 一大 絶壁이 잇고 海豹岩이 잇서 海豹가 無數히 나와 안진 것도 亦是 求景스럽다.
大洋丸을 타고 大平洋바다에 떳다. 2月 14日에 太洋丸을 타고 橫濱을 向하야 太平洋上에 떳다.
太平丸은 歐州戰爭 때 獨逸서 빼서온 日本 第一 큰배가 進航을 따라 船은 黑湖를 順하야 速力으로 進行한다. 물인지 하눌인지 하눌인지 물인지 分別 업시 太平洋 中을 간다. 몃칠가다가 救命胴衣를(life jaeeat)허리에 매고 風浪時 避亂하는 練習을 한다.
船客에 對한 船員들의 待遇는 一視 同仁이엿다. 船長 以下 船員들의 親切한 待遇는 遺憾이 업섯다.

船內生活
太洋丸 一等室 設備 及 그 生活이다. 室內는 左右對立 寢臺 二個가 잇고 女下人 男下人이  잇서(Birl, Goy, 女子用에는 껄 男子用에는 뽀의다. 沐浴은 每朝하게 된다. 朝起寢後 카피를 마시고 朝飯을 먹고 덱기에서(甲板) 놀냐면 茶를 가지고 온다. 四時에 茶菓가 잇고 七時半 라발에 夕飯을 食한다. 一等食堂 婦人談話室 喫煙室 散步甲板 圖書室 遊戱室 水泳室 兒童室 應接室 理髮所 洗濯室 兒童遊戱室이 잇다. 運動 曲目은 삥뽕 輪投 덱기꼴푸 덱기피리야드 碁 將棋 뿌리지 마장 等으로 夕飯 後에 쌀논에서 依例히 노름 시작이 되고 낫에도 甲板우에서 얼마라도 自由自在로 作亂하게 된다. 그리하야 2萬 2千頓되는 배는 2千名의 船客을 실코 쉴새업시 다라나며 그 우에서는 平地에서 하는 모든 動作을 하고 지낸다. 때로난 長大緩慢하게 빗징구로(上下) 또는 로링으로(從橫) 동작하는 소리가 나고 때로난 驟雨去來하며 刻刻으로 아람답게 推移하는 雲影이 보인다. 甲板캐빈에(臥椅子) 누어 小說도 보고 或 엽헤안진객과 對話함도 상쾌하다. 水天彷彿한 渺茫한 波濤 속을 화살과 갓치 뚤코가간대 지나가는 飛魚의 群 不絶히 追船從走하는 信天翁 或은 海豚一隊 浮遊하는 鯨魚 等 壯觀이엿다. 1, 2次海洋 中 他汽船과 遭遇할 때 兩便 全員이 甲板 우에서 歡呼하는 소리 互相氣笛을 부러 安否를 信號하는 景實노 人情味의 表現이며 特히 月夜에 紳士 淑女 家族同伴 或은 戀人同志 三三五五덱기에 逍遙하는 光景 또한 詩가 되고 만다.＜166＞
活動寫眞 音樂會 演劇이 낸 차레 잇스며 最終日에 船員 一同이 出演 演劇이 잇섯다.
曲目
手品 東洋背辯慶
劍劇 國定忠治三數
滑稽 땐스
春劇 春駒二幕
滑稽 萬歲
曲藝 東洋背辯慶

船內新聞
無線 電信으로 通한 各國 消息은 船內 新聞이 되여 每夜食卓에 一人 前에 一枚式 報告한다. 이와 갓치 海上에 떠서 世界 各國의 朝夕變更을 알 수가 잇다.

運動競技
長時日 한 배 안에서 기거를 갓치하는 동안 內外乘客은 故舊와 갓치 親密해진다. 餘興一程을 정하고 船客 中에서 任員을 選立하고 또 그 長技대로 競技者를 擇하엿다. 一同은 우숨과 興으로서 幸福스러운 一日을 보낸다.

스기야기로 日本料理
25日夜 夕飯은 스기야기 料理가 잇다는 飛報가 널녓다. 다다미를 甲板 우에 깔고 나이프와 혹구를 내버리고 和服으로 게다로 적갈을 집어 스기야기와 正宗으로 食事를 하게 된다. 그 珍味 말할 수 업섯다. 太平洋 물결은 배머리를 치고 또 친다.

布哇 着 호노루루(名하와이)
布哇群島는 마치 演劇 中에 나타나는 中幕과 갓다. 桑港서 乘船한지 一週日만에 陸地 卽 四時 開花啼鳥하는 布哇에 寄港하는 好感은 一生을 두고 잇기 어려올 것 갓다. 同市는 米國領地지마는 東洋人이 만코 더욱 우리 同胞가 만히 居住하는 곳이다.
하와이群島는 하와이를 爲始하야 九島와 小數의 無人小島로 되어 잇다. 通稱 하와이는 傳說에 나타나는 布哇 最初發見者 하와이로아의 일홈으로 지은 거시다.
하와이는 洋洋한 太平洋上 十字路에 位하야 一方 亞細亞大陸 他方 아메리카大陸을 보고 南方을 濠洲에 面하고 멀니는 파나마運河를 通하야 太平洋 縱斷 橫斷 船舶에게 給水給炭하는 港으로 著名하며 其外 海底電信局 無線電信局의 所在地로 重要한 곳이다.
하와이는 軍事上으로도 米國의 前哨로 緊要地요 海陸雙方의 要害를 固守하고 잇다. 眞洙灣軍港이 잇고 샤후다兵營 스코푸이르도兵營 等이 잇다.
하와이는 더욱이 東西文化의 接觸点이여서 汎 太平洋 諸會議 發祥地요 東西 國際的 人種問題 出發地인 同時에 四季氣候 溫和하야 漫遊地 保養地로 理想的이다.

가메하마 第一世 銅像
킹街 布哇縣 裁判所庭 前에 잇는 가메하마 第一世 銅像은 캬부돈쿡크 布哇 發見 紀念百年祭때 가라가우아王이 建設한 거신대 像은 伊太利 후로렌스에서 鑄造한 거시다.
가메하마王은 布哇島를 統一하야 가메하마王朝를 樹立한 酋長이다. 그때붓허＜167＞ 今日까지 金色眩徨한 英傑의 像을 나타내고 잇다.

누아누파리
市의 東北 七哩所에 잇는 누아누파리는 가메하마 第一世가 布哇 統一 最終戰을 하든 古戰場이다. 同所는 千仞絶壁의 奇勝地요 여긔서 부는 바람은 世界 第三 位風速이라고 稱한다.

뽄지부르丘
市 中央山中에 突出한 海拔 五百呎의 死火山으로 頂上에는 噴火口의 흔적이 남아 잇다. 昔日此島의 酋長의 加哇에 遠征할 시 만흔 分捕品과 婦女子를 生摀’하야 凱旋祝宴을 開할 시 突然히 山이 울니고 噴火하엿다. 그 生靈이 춤을 추어 慘酷한 酋長을 警戒하엿다는 傳說이 잇다.
이 丘上에 올너서면 하와이市는 勿論이오 에와耕地 眞洙灣軍港 와이바후 아이에아 耕地 等 遠望이 優秀하다.

따이야몬드렛도 巡廻
따이야몬드헷도는 古噴火口의 蹟으로 只今은 米國 陸軍 오아우要塞地의 一이라 한다. 여긔서 곳 와이기기海岸을 갈 수 잇다.

와이기기 水族舘
布哇 近海에 잇는 모-든 珍魚가 잇스니 五彩七色의 魚族蒐集한 곳으로 世界에 著名한 곳이다.

비솟부 博物舘
豪族 챠레스비숏부氏가 亡妻 (王女)를 紀念하기 爲하야 여러 가지 公共事業에 投資하엿다. 其中이 博物館은 가장 價値 잇는 곳으로 內壁에 溶岩 珍材를 爲始하야 부루네상族의 器物 生物 或 太古 生活狀態 模型 彫列 等 綱羅해 노아 南洋民族 見學으로 가장 便利하다.

하와이 出航
出航 時間이 되니 下陸햇다 모혀드는 船客 及 餞送客으로 대단이 複難해진다. 花來 배에 걸친 色紙 목에 걸친 목도리(植物열매를 께인 것) 파는 사람 사는 사람 사서 가는 사람 사람목에 걸처주는 사람 야단법석이다. 喇叭을 불고 餞送人이 나리고 陸地에서는 손진도리 或 엇던 하와이女人은 隊를 지어서서 춤을 추고(하와이춤) 노래를 하야 一大 壯觀을 이르고만다. 배가 떠난다. 裸體의 土人들은 船客들이 던지는 돈을 물구나무서서 집어가지고 나오고 엇던 者는 배위로 올나와 돈을 거두어 가지고 물속으로 떠러진다. 또한 구경거리엇다. 아, 배는 다시 海洋에 떳다.

last night
船內 生活에 最後夜가 되엿다. 食卓에는 선물과 各色 帽子가 各各 노혀 잇다. 모다 帽子들을 쓰고 안젓다. 船長의 人事가 잇슨 後 米國大使舘 參事舘夫人의 主禮下에 萬歲 三唱이 잇섯다. 食卓은 各各 官等대로 定席하나니 우리는 主人事務長을 爲始하야 朝鮮拓殖會社 課長 野田氏夫妻도 잇섯다.

橫濱到着
排水噸數 二萬 二千噸되는 太洋丸은 桑港서 橫濱까지 距離 5510哩를 17日만에 午後 二時에 무사히 到着하엿다.＜168＞ 阜頭에는 人山人海에 迎接人이 보엿다. 손을 들고 소리를 질너 甲板 우와 陸地사이에 인사가 잇다. 우리를 마지러 온 사람은 楊在河氏와 金澤辰氏이엿다. 매우 반가웟섯다. 下船하야 東京으로 가서 新宿호텔에 投宿하엿다.
東京 집은 모다 바락그 갓고 道路는 더럽고 사람들은 허리가 새우등갓치 꼬부라지고 氣運이 업서 보엿다.

一週日間 東京
李王殿下를 爲始로 知人親友들을 차잣다. 或 午餐을 주는자 晩餐을 주는자 歡迎이 자못컷다. 10日 午後 9時 30分車로 東京驛을 떠낫다. 아아, 내 가삼은 쉴새 업시 두군거린다. 東海道線中에 疾走하엿다. 歐米景色에 比하면 山高 秀麗한 맛이 잇스나 氣分이 적고 淸雅하고 隹麗하다.

釜山着 東萊歸來
12日 午前 八時에 釜山에 到着하엿다. 親戚 一同과 老母와 三兒가 나왓다. 나는 꿈인지 생시인지 눈물도 아니 나오고 感想이 이상스럽다. 自働車로 東萊에 도라왓다. 一年 八個月 前에 보든 버섯과 갓흔 집 몬지나는 길 原始그대로 잇다. 다만 사람이 늙고 컷슬뿐이다. 무엇보다 老母의 氣運이 조코 三男妹가 健康한 거슨 多幸한 일이다.
아, 아, 憧憬하든 歐米漫遊도 지나간 過去가 되고 그리워하든 故鄕에도 도라왓다. 일노붙어 우리의 前道는 얻어케 展開하랴는고. (끗)＜169＞
＜162-169＞