잡지명	개벽 제27호
발행일	1922년 09월 01일
기사제목	眞理의 體驗 (Experience of Truth)
필자	李敦化
기사형태	논설 (Editorial/Essay)

眞理의 體驗
						李敦化
力 (Force)

All matter possesses something called Force. Thus, physicists say that the ultimate essence of matter is Force; scholars studying gravity (mechanics) and those studying substance (physics) are entirely the same at their ultimate point, meaning Force and Substance are one at their extreme. Therefore, the ultimate point of Force and Substance cannot be called Matter, nor can it be called Force; it is said there is a kind of incomprehensible, mystical activity. That is, a kind of Mystical Force governs all things in the universe. Therefore,

Plants possess the Mystical Force that allows the plant itself to grow; Animals possess the Mystical Force that allows the animal itself to grow;

Furthermore, electricity has electric force, steam has steam force, water has hydraulic force, fire has thermal force, wind has wind force, earth has terrestrial force; ultimately, all things possess their respective forces.

Thus, the principle that governs all these forces is what we call the Universal Gravitation of the Great Universe. <34>

As such, because the Great Universe has the Gravitational Force that governs it, the great celestial bodies move without losing their orbits, and everything else, down to the smallest dust mote, does not lose its position of endless generation, evolving from infinity towards infinity in orderly sequence.

Embodying this principle, humans have a human force; human force is purely endowed with this Mystical Force of the universe. Human force can be discussed in terms of physical strength and mental strength; only when a person has robust strength in both these aspects can they be recognized as having a complete personality. Physical strength guarantees a person's direct physical life force, while mental strength guarantees a person's spiritual creative power. Thus, the proof of human greatness lies in that spiritual creative power.

Confucius established his teaching, calling it Benevolence (仁); Benevolence is precisely Force.
Śākyamuni established his teaching, calling it Compassion (慈悲); Compassion is precisely Force.
Jesus established his teaching, calling it Love (愛); Love is precisely Force.
Ch'oe Suun established his teaching, calling it Man is Heaven (人乃天); Man is Heaven is precisely Force.

Looking at it this way, the principles of Benevolence, Love, Compassion, and Man is Heaven all refer to human Force; that is, they refer to the great spiritual creative power of humans.

When this human spiritual creative power manifests in the realm of morality, it transforms into the principles of Benevolence, Love, Compassion, and Man is Heaven, displaying great religious character through the principles of Universal Brotherhood and One World Family.

When human spiritual creative power manifests in the realm of science, it grasps the principles of research, contemplation, and invention, displaying great engineering character.

When human spiritual force manifests in the realm of literature, it transforms into emotions of recitation, lamentation, and praise, displaying great aesthetic character.

Thus, when it manifests in the national aspect, it enables that nation to form a brilliant culture in contrast to other nations.

I declare: The Universe is Force. All Existence is Force. Humanity is Force. Therefore, I do not hesitate to say that a homogenous nation is a collection of Force. From this perspective, the Korean Nation (朝鮮民族) means the Korean Nation is precisely Force. The history that proves the Korean Nation <35> is precisely a history of Force. The culture that proves the Korean Nation is precisely a culture of Force. All other things that prove the Korean Nation are likewise aggregates of Force.

Brothers! A nation without Force is a dead nation; a nation whose Force has waned is a weak nation. Brothers! How can we become a nation with strong Force?

Brothers! What is the point where the Nation's Force exerts its greatest strength?

First, the Force of Compatriots binding together: If our nation, compared to other nations, concentrates its Force through relatively strong unity and powerful harmony, the weak will not remain weak, and the poor will not remain poor.

Second, the Force of Compatriots supporting each other: Just as the four limbs and hundred body parts in one body have their independent functions yet work together for the sake of the whole body, even if various groups and thinkers within one nation have their respective skills, when it comes to working for that one nation, seeking the mutual common benefit of compatriots is precisely this.

Therefore, whether looking at the economy, education, or general affairs, only after not losing the center of Force—that is, compatriots and the self-nation—can we begin to speak of National Force. A nation possessing such National Force is truly a nation worthy of the name.

戀 (Love)

Above, I briefly discussed the principle of Force, but we must not forget that at the source of the manifestation of humanity's strong Force lies the sacred binding power called Love (戀).

Recently, while strolling in the fields, I had an experience where I felt the Force of Love to be even more sacred and powerful. In the midst of a dry, tasteless wilderness, where only weeds swayed in the evening breeze of the setting sun, my mind grew increasingly troubled. Then, by chance, amidst these tasteless wild weeds, I discovered a single stem of narcissus. My entire mental energy suddenly focused on this narcissus, and my entire interest was infinitely provoked by this single narcissus stem. This wilderness, which until moments ago had been dry and tasteless, suddenly transformed into a field overflowing with sentiment, a place of love. Where this single narcissus stem merged with my sense of interest, the entire universe appeared affectionate, and all objects changed to assume loving attitudes.

Now I understand. The mind is the center of the universe, and Love <36> is the center of the human heart.

The state of a heart without Love is precisely a desert, a cold rock, a withered tree. Only when the heart finds the center of Love does it first gain vitality, gain life force, and the true spring of life begins to well up.

Recently, among young men and women, the issue of the sanctity of love (戀愛神聖問題) has become fashionable, and I have seen the rising voices crying out for love. However, I do not wish to see love merely as the concept of affection arising between the sexual desires of men and women. In a broader sense, everything that springs forth from human sentiment (人情) can be called a loving action (戀愛的 作用).

Li Po (李白) loved the wind and the moon; this can be called a loving nature towards the wind and moon. T'ao Yüan-ming (陶淵明) loved the fields and gardens; this can be called a loving nature towards fields and gardens. Proceeding in this manner, it can be said that almost everyone possesses one or more objects of love according to their individual characteristics. Loving alcohol is one kind of love; loving poetry is one kind of love; loving women is love; loving truth can also be called love.

In this broad sense of love, one thing that must be deeply considered is the method of choosing love. Love is by no means always sacred; the meaning of sanctity only manifests when love is utilized well. Even in the same love between man and woman, becoming a slave to love, ultimately committing suicide, abandoning one's work, or drifting into aimlessness—such things can truly be called misuse of love. What I call sacred love here is to transcend the love of reason (理性) and grasp the love of truth (眞理的 戀愛). The reason why many famous inventors of old did not take wives and spent their entire lives as bachelors was because they grasped this love of truth.

Plato (부라톤) once referred to the ideal realm of truth, goodness, and beauty as Love (戀), and called the object of that love the world of "Ideas" (이떼아). Plato essentially made the contemplative pleasure of truth his own love. And was it only Plato? Almost all sages and philosophers of old were no different; they dedicated their life's love sometimes to the deep pursuit of truth, sometimes relied on the invention of things, sometimes depended on the propagation of morality, and sometimes contributed to the success of endeavors.

I earnestly hope that those among our Korean youth who cry out for the sanctity of love will refrain from misusing the loving function between men and women and extend it towards the success of endeavors.

Generally, if one looks into the inner aspect of why people consider love sacred, it is because within love itself, there is a union of affection without selfishness, the mind concentrates on one thing, and thus love is accompanied by a spirit of sacrifice <37>. This is said to be the sacred point of love. However, if such a sacred point is applied only to the issue of union between men and women, how regrettable and lamentable would that be? The inner aspect of achieving success in endeavors also absolutely requires these three great spirits: first, there must be a union of love towards the endeavor; second, there must be concentration of a single mind; third, there must be a spirit of sacrifice. From this perspective, if one transfers the force of love as much as possible towards the realm of activity, and if a person, having grasped a certain endeavor of truth, takes that truth as their beloved wife, forgetting the onset of old age, then that indeed can be called having attained the sanctity of love.

Now is the time when we seek to make the development of our nation our highest ideal. We have no leisure to misuse other loves. If we set the ideal goal of love as this Korean nation, formed by the countless ancestors behind us and the countless descendants before us, and rejoice, delight, grieve, and anger with them, how eternal would that joy be, and how great would that pleasure be? Let those who merely pursue the desires of sound and color come and taste the flavor of this true love.

生 (Life)

On a certain drowsy spring day, I went out to the fields for a walk. There, in the middle of a wide field, I discovered a stone the size of a bushel measure (斗大). Simultaneously, from the edge of the stone, I saw the tender sprout of some nameless grass. With a kind of curiosity, I grasped its young shoot with my hand and tried to find its origin. The place where the tender sprout had first begun to emerge was not the edge of the stone, but its center. Reader, do not be surprised. That weak grass sprout initially began to emerge following the warmth from the central part of the stone, but upon emerging, a heavy force of several dozen *kwan* (貫) pressed down from above. The pitiful tender sprout inevitably began a desperate struggle against that heavy force. The tender sprout, white as snow, coiled and twisted like a snake, again and again, until finally its vanguard emerged at the edge of the stone. Seeing this, I realized how powerful the force of Life is. Furthermore, I realized how immensely powerful the life-generating force of the entire universe is. I realized that the force of Life cannot be resisted by anything whatsoever. Even something as weak as the tender sprout of feeble grass was able to overcome the mighty pressure and finally see the light of the sun. <38>

Scholars say that consciousness is not unique to humans but is common to plants in general, and ultimately, even within inorganic substances like metal, stone, and earth, there is also consciousness. There is merely a difference in the degree of consciousness. Following this line of thought, there is nothing in the entire universe that is not conscious, and thus, that consciousness is accompanied by the force of Life, giving the principle of endless generation with the overwhelming power of the entire universe.

I do not know what "Life" (生) is, but I know that "Life" is something that began developing from eons ago and is transmitted from infinity to infinity.

It first diligently prepared the force of the entire universe from before infinity as the force of the Ultimate Nothingness (無極).

It then began the arrangement of nebulae and the organization of the solar system as the force of the Great Ultimate (太極).

It then came to life as the Earth, as plants, and as living beings.

Thus, until it transformed into us, humankind, it reached the point of proclaiming its own success amidst eternal, infinite struggle.

Humankind is the vanguard general of the universe's life-generating force. They are brave warriors who pioneer the infinite, boundless universe. In this sense, Life is precisely Human Life, and Human Life is precisely Life.

Russell (럿셀) discussed the human force of "Life" in terms of possession and creation, stating that the creative impulse is solely the human-like activity of humans. Following this statement, the meaning of human "Life" lies entirely in creativity.

Humans desire money, honor, power, even fine clothes and good food, comfort, and convenience, but such things are merely means of life, not the purpose of life. The object of life's purpose lies solely in creating something, discovering something, inventing something.

Sages of old often spoke of eternal life (永生), of future life.
When I deeply consider this concept of eternal life, I cannot help but feel infinite interest in it. I cannot help but feel that Life is precisely eternal life. The force of "Life" in the universe transforms into the life force of our humankind, carrying infinite creative purposes, and is transmitted from infinity to infinity. Thus, this life force of humankind transforms into the life force of our Paedal (倍達) people, becoming its historical force and its cultural force. Even though we <39> may die as individuals, we will not die as humankind, nor will we die as a nation. As the ancients said, "From the perspective of change, heaven and earth cannot last even a moment; from the perspective of non-change, things and the self are both inexhaustible." Just like this, even if there comes a day when this Hansŏng (漢城) changes into a vast sea (滄海), and even if there comes a day when the vast sea changes into mulberry fields (桑田), the life of this nation does not disappear due to mulberry fields and vast seas. Knowing this is precisely knowing the meaning of "Life," and thus, one can be called a person who has experienced the Way of eternal life. We must all seek the path of eternal life. There is only one Way of eternal life. It lies in the entire nation, crystallized from the same blood, creating eternal life through the union of love. When we strive for the development of the nation, it is striving for our own eternal life; when we aim to elevate the nation's culture, this too is pioneering the path of our own eternal life. Brothers! You cannot attain eternal life as an individual brother, nor can you attain eternal life through superstitious faith. However, through the crystallization of the national spirit surrounding you brothers, you can surely open the Way of eternal life forever.

金 (Money/Economy)

During the mid-Yi Dynasty (李朝), there was a famous prime minister named Yi Munŏn (李文彦). One day, he obtained a broken *yŏp'chŏn* (葉錢, leaf coin, a type of Joseon cash coin) worth one *p'un* (푼). He immediately called the office servant (廳直) and ordered him to get the broken piece of the *yŏp'chŏn* repaired. The servant heard this and replied, "To get this one-*p'un* *yŏp'chŏn* repaired, it will cost two or three *p'un* in wages." Prime Minister Yi smiled and said, "I am not unaware of that. If I now add two or three *p'un* of my own money to repair this one *p'un* coin, though it may be a loss for me, from the perspective of the entire nation, there will be an economic gain of one *p'un*." He insisted on paying the two or three *p'un* wage and had the one-*p'un* broken *yŏp'chŏn* repaired, according to the anecdote. This shows the magnanimity of a great prime minister who understood the national economy. If today, our Korean nation had even one ten-thousandth of the economic sense like Prime Minister Yi, no matter how poor and weak our nation is, we could say there would be a day to achieve wealth and strength. Look! Whose control are all the daily necessities of our current Korean nation under? There is nothing we wear that is not a foreign product; nothing we use that is not an imported good (舶來品); even what we eat—alcohol, rice cakes, sweets, sugar, bread, and general cuisine—is either Western, Japanese, or Chinese. Thus, day by day, hour by hour, money flies high on its wings and goes abroad. We can see what our economic situation will gradually become. There are two types of economy: active and passive. Actively, it is the method of promoting industry <40> and planning exports. Passively, it is the method of limiting imports and loving the use of domestic goods. Given the current situation of our Chosŏn, although we may not be able to implement an active economy due to various circumstances, when it comes to a passive economy, we cannot say it's impossible to the extent feasible. Currently, our nation must stimulate national self-discipline (民族的 克己心), and even if we cannot be extravagant, even if things are expensive, we must love and use our own products and awaken a national economic consciousness.

自由 (Freedom)

Confucius (孔子), when once besieged in Sung (宋), "calmly played the zither (琴)." Socrates (소쿠라테쓰), when facing death, conversely gave words of comfort to his wife, children, and friends. Śākyamuni (釋迦) abandoned the honor of myriad chariots (萬乘之尊) and dared to undertake six years of ascetic practice. Ch'oe Suun (崔水雲) declined the position of "Prime Minister in White" (白衣宰相) and deliberately chose ascetic practice. All these incidents were great events where they experienced the freedom of the mind. Generally, the phrase "freedom of the mind" means that one has the potential to reform one's own mind at will to reach the best state; thus, freeing this potential from material things and establishing oneself in a state of independent self-mastery. It refers to the state of mind Mencius (孟軻) spoke of: one that cannot be corrupted by wealth and honor, whose will cannot be changed by poverty and lowliness; one that can tread on naked blades if necessary, decline titles and stipends if appropriate, and take the world if justifiable. The more such citizens a nation has, the more that nation becomes a nation worthy of its name; the more such people a nation has, the more that nation becomes a nation worthy of its name. If an individual or a nation without such cultivation could successfully advance an enterprise, it would either be hypocrisy or undoubtedly rootless behavior stemming from a temporary, frivolous mind. In other words, trying to achieve freedom in endeavors without having freedom of the self is the act of a kind of deceitful false gentleman (假紳士輩). Those unable to move their own minds when needed, unable to remain unmoved when needed, unable to endure when endurance is called for, unable to struggle when struggle is called for; entirely cut down by stubbornness, fallen into prejudice, becoming slaves to emotion, captives of circumstance; daily making jealousy, slander, and defamation their business—yet still able to swagger proudly, considering themselves alone to possess the freedom of the world and equality—if a knowledgeable person were to see such a crowd, who truly possesses the pitiable point? <41> Thus, in the end, who propagates the path of destruction if not such an unreasonable crowd?

I once heard, at a certain place, as soon as the topic of youth cultivation (靑年의 修養) came up, a young man suddenly changed color and said, "We are not people of an era of cultivation now, but people of an era of activity. The word 'cultivation' is no longer necessary for us; we must take direct action with blood, fists, and iron." Hearing these words, I realized there was a piece of truth in them, and I was inwardly pleased by the young man's imposing courage. I know that today, within our youth intellectual circles, many hold thoughts similar to this young man's, and many wish to resolve all matters with such courage. However, what I truly wish to entrust to them is that cultivation (修養) is definitely not, as those young people think, about kneeling, closing one's eyes, and shutting oneself indoors all day studying ethics (道學). Cultivation is like the regular grand maneuvers of the army and navy preparing for war with real society through self-discipline, effort, and a fighting spirit to attain a personality worthy of a human being. Therefore, cultivation is extremely necessary anytime, anywhere. Moreover, for the warriors fighting on the current active stage, it is something that cannot be forgotten even for a moment. Just like a great merchant carrying treasures of gold, silver, pearls, and jade passing through the dens of Manchurian bandits (滿洲馬賊窟), one cannot afford a moment of laziness. Preparing to bravely fight and win whenever encountering a sudden change—that is precisely the way of cultivation. Even if it is an era where all matters are resolved by blood and iron, if that blood and iron do not necessarily spring from a cultivated heart of righteous courage (義勇), it is absolutely worthless. Moreover, in today's era, which seeks to protect the rights of the weak through justice and humanity, how can the young patriots who form the backbone of our nation, lacking inner fortitude (根氣), broad perspective (達觀), patience (忍耐), self-discipline (克己), a concept of reason (道理), the manifestation of true love (眞正愛), and human-like innate nature (天性)—lacking the great cultivation that makes their own minds free—presume to chatter about great matters and save their compatriots? As I see it, the most urgent task for our nation today lies in the improvement of education, the development of industry, and the construction of general culture, as compatriots would agree. However, the true element enabling steady progress in all these things still lies in vigorously inspiring the national spirit of freedom (民族的 自由心). Only for a nation possessing such a spirit of freedom can the future be discussed, and hope be planned. Just as the actions of an innocent youth hold far more promise from the standpoint of hope than the practical ability of a seventy-year-old man clear on matters of principle, <42> the task our nation still needs to strive for is nurturing youthful vigor (少年다운 元氣) and elevating the pure, noble heart of morality characteristic of youth; this can be called today's urgent duty.

書 (Books/Reading)

The new coolness has now entered the suburbs and ruins. The time has come when one can draw close to the lamplight. Schools have started opening, and the season has arrived for students to roll and unroll scrolls and books (簡編). The time has come for all people to indulge in the pleasure of reading. Reading is a pleasure (趣味); those who do not know the pleasure of reading can, in some respects, be called unfortunate individuals. Books are truly treasure troves of pleasure, kingdoms of pleasure. Let me try to speak of the pleasure of books.

First, reading is a time-shrinking art (縮時術). One who possesses the pleasure of reading can sit today and ably have an audience with the sages and philosophers of a thousand years ago, see heroes, meet talented men, and encounter beautiful women. If I read the Analects (論語), Confucius (孔子) can immediately become my teacher. If I read the Romance of the Three Kingdoms (三國志), heroes like Zhuge Liang (諸葛亮), Zhou Yu (周瑜), Guan Yu (關羽), Liu Bei (劉備) can immediately become my advisors. If I read Biographies of Beauties (美人傳), the beautiful women of antiquity can immediately become my good companions. Therefore, one who knows the pleasure of reading will not lament the lack of a teacher, nor lament the lack of advisors.

Second, reading is a space-shrinking art (縮地術). One who knows the pleasure of reading can lie indoors and ably roam the four seas and traverse the universe. If I read a Geography of the West (西洋輿地), London (倫敦), Paris (巴里), and Berlin (伯林) can be obtained, wandering within a small space. If I read a Geography of China (中國輿地), the bell sounds of Hanshan (寒山) will clearly be at my ear, and the misty moon over the Five Lakes (五湖) can be obtained, floating between my eyebrows at any time. If I read a Geography of Korea (朝鮮地誌), Kŭmgang Mountain (金剛山) need not necessarily be in the Yŏngdong region, nor are the superb views of the South Sea (南海) fixed objects in a definite place. Thus, if I read Astronomy (天文學), it may be possible to communicate via wireless telegraphy with brothers in the Martian world (火星界), and perhaps Chang'e (姮娥) of the Moon Palace (月宮) might send the elixir of immortality (不死藥). Therefore, <43> one who knows the pleasure of reading can obtain travel without money, and can obtain rides on trains, steamships, and flying vehicles without cash.

Third, reading is a divine power art (神通術). Within books, there is the life of primordial humans before history, tales of gods, the secret arts of war gods' strategies, the mysterious realm of truth, and depictions of the absolute subtlety of principles. Try burning incense, sitting silently, and holding a volume of the Book of Changes (周易) in hand; the divine beings of antiquity will come and speak to me of the mysterious, subtle realm. Books are truly a divine power art and the secret key to spiritual communion (交靈).

Originally, life is pleasure. One lives by pleasure and dies by pleasure; pleasure has a thousand forms and myriad appearances. There are noble ones, and there are base ones. Those who do not pursue noble pleasures inevitably turn towards the base. Unfortunately, among us Koreans, many do not know the pleasure of reading. Therefore, the direction of pleasure naturally turns to the opposite, and those who change towards vices like drinking, wicked love, lust for power, etc., are everywhere. Being Korean, I earnestly hope that people will experience the pleasure of reading and move from false pleasures to true pleasures. <44>

**Summary**

This essay by Yi Tonhwa argues that "Truth" is experienced through understanding and cultivating fundamental forces: Force (力), Love (戀), Life (生), Economy (金 - lit. Gold/Money), Freedom (自由), and Books (書). He posits that Force underlies all existence, manifesting spiritually in humans and collectively in nations. Love, especially when directed towards truth or national endeavors rather than just romance, is a powerful motivator. Life is presented as an eternal, creative, and inherently conscious force culminating in humanity and embodied in the nation's continuity. Economic self-sufficiency through favoring domestic products is crucial for national strength. True Freedom is mental and spiritual self-mastery, essential for meaningful action, more important even than immediate "activity" without cultivation. Finally, Reading Books offers profound pleasures and access to wisdom across time and space, cultivating a noble mind. From a colonial history perspective, the essay is significant for its strong, albeit sometimes veiled, nationalist undertones. Written in 1922 under Japanese rule, Yi's emphasis on inherent national "Force," the eternal "Life" of the Korean nation (Paedal people), the call for national unity, economic self-reliance (passive resistance against Japanese economic dominance), and the cultivation of inner "Freedom" and moral strength can be interpreted as a call for cultural and spiritual resistance and nation-building despite political subjugation. Historians might find the blending of traditional philosophies (Confucianism, Buddhism, Ch'ŏndogyo), Western ideas (Plato, Russell), and nationalist aspirations, articulated through these six concepts, revealing of Korean intellectual responses during the colonial period.

**Named Entities**

李敦化	이돈화	Yi Tonhwa
孔子	공자	Kongja
釋迦	석가	Sŏkcha
耶穌	예수	Yesu
崔水雲	최수운	Ch'oe Suun
李白	이백	Yi Paek
陶淵明	도연명	To Yŏnmyŏng
부라톤	부라톤	P'ŭrat'on (Plato)
이떼아	이데아	Idea (Platonic)
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
럿셀	러셀	Rŏssel (Bertrand Russell)
倍達族	배달족	Paedaljok (Ancient name/term for Korean people)
漢城	한성	Hansŏng (Old name for Seoul)
李朝	이조	Yi-jo (Yi Dynasty/Joseon Dynasty)
李文彦	이문언	Yi Munŏn
西洋	서양	Sŏyang (The West/Occident)
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
中國	중국	Chungguk (China)
宋	송	Song (Ancient Chinese state)
소쿠라테쓰	소크라테스	Sok'urat'esŭ (Socrates)
孟軻	맹가	Maeng K'o (Mencius)
滿洲	만주	Manju (Manchuria)
論語	논어	Nonŏ (Analects of Confucius)
三國志	삼국지	Samgukchi (Romance of the Three Kingdoms)
諸葛亮	제갈량	Chegallyang (Zhuge Liang)
周瑜	주유	Chuyu (Zhou Yu)
關羽	관우	Kwanu (Guan Yu)
劉備	유비	Yubi (Liu Bei)
美人傳	미인전	Miinjŏn (Biographies of Beauties - likely a generic reference)
西洋輿地	서양여지	Sŏyang Yŏji (Geography of the West - generic title)
倫敦	윤돈	Yundon (London)
巴里	파리	P'ari (Paris)
伯林	벌린	Pŏllin (Berlin)
中國輿地	중국여지	Chungguk Yŏji (Geography of China - generic title)
寒山	한산	Hansan (Hanshan Temple/Mountain)
五湖	오호	Oho (Five Lakes of China)
朝鮮地誌	조선지지	Chosŏn Chiji (Geography of Korea - generic title)
金剛山	금강산	Kŭmgangsan (Diamond Mountain)
南海	남해	Namhae (South Sea of Korea)
天文學	천문학	Ch'ŏnmunhak (Astronomy)
火星界	화성계	Hwasŏnggye (Martian World)
月宮	월궁	Wŏlgung (Moon Palace)
姮娥	항아	Hang'a (Chang'e - Chinese moon goddess)
周易	주역	Chuyŏk (Book of Changes/I Ching)

**Glossary**

力	힘	Force, power, strength
物質	물질	Matter, substance
物理學者	물리학자	Physicist
重力	중력	Gravity
極致	극치	Climax, extremity, ultimate point
不可思議	불가사의	Incomprehensible, mysterious
神秘的	신비적	Mystical
宇宙萬有	우주만유	All things in the universe
支配	지배	Control, rule, govern
萬有引力	만유인력	Universal gravitation
星辰	성신	Stars, celestial bodies
軌	궤	Orbit, track
微廛纖芥	미진섬개	Minute dust particle (idiomatic for something extremely small)
生生無窮	생생무궁	Endless generation/creation/life
秩序	질서	Order, system
進化	진화	Evolution, progress
稟賦	품부	Endow, bestow upon (innately)
體力	체력	Physical strength
精神力	정신력	Mental strength, spiritual power
人格	인격	Personality, character
創造力	창조력	Creative power
仁	인	Benevolence (Confucian virtue)
慈悲	자비	Compassion (Buddhist virtue)
愛	애	Love
人乃天	인내천	Man is Heaven (Ch'ŏndogyo doctrine)
道德	도덕	Morality, ethics
四海同胞主義	사해동포주의	Principle of Universal Brotherhood
世界一家主義	세계일가주의	Principle of One World Family
宗敎性	종교성	Religious character/nature
科學	과학	Science
硏究	연구	Research
思索	사색	Contemplation, speculation
發明	발명	Invention
把持	파지	Grasp, hold firmly
工學的	공학적	Engineering-related
文學	문학	Literature
吟咏	음영	Recitation, chanting (of poetry)
嗟嘆	차탄	Sighing, lamentation
讚美	찬미	Praise, admiration
美學的	미학적	Aesthetic
民族的	민족적	National, ethnic
對照	대조	Contrast, comparison
燦然	찬연	Brilliant, radiant
文物	문물	Culture, civilization
集合	집합	Collection, assembly, aggregate
衰한	쇠한	Weakened, declined (older form of 쇠한)
强味	강미	Strong point, strength (lit. strong taste)
團結	단결	Unity, solidarity
和合	화합	Harmony, concord
集中	집중	Concentration
相扶	상부	Mutual support
譬컨데	비컨데	For example (older form of 비유컨대)
四肢百體	사지백체	Four limbs and hundred body parts (the whole body)
技能	기능	Skill, function
共同	공동	Common, joint
作業	작업	Work, operation
利益	이익	Benefit, profit, interest
圖謀	도모	Plan, seek, scheme
經濟	경제	Economy
敎育	교육	Education
中心	중심	Center
失치	잃지	Not lose (older form of 잃지)
然後에야	연후에야	Only after that
本源	본원	Origin, source
戀	연	Love, affection (often romantic or deep attachment)
神聖	신성	Sacred, holy
强大	강대	Powerful, strong
偶然히	우연히	By chance, accidentally
曠野	광야	Wilderness, vast field
雜草	잡초	Weeds
夕陽	석양	Setting sun
煩鬱	번울	Distressed, depressed, troubled
水仙花	수선화	Narcissus
一嚴	일엄	One stem/stalk (likely archaic or specific usage)
全精神力	전정신력	Entire mental energy/focus
興趣	흥취	Interest, taste, charm
挑發	도발	Provocation, stimulation
融合	융합	Fusion, merging
有情	유정	Having feelings, affectionate
物象	물상	Objects, phenomena
狀態	상태	State, condition
沙漠	사막	Desert
寒巖	한암	Cold rock
枯木	고목	Withered tree
活氣	활기	Vitality, animation
生力	생력	Life force, vitality
源泉	원천	Source, spring
流行되어	유행되어	Becoming fashionable/popular
絶叫	절규	Scream, cry out
性慾	성욕	Sexual desire
觀念	관념	Concept, idea
廣義	광의	Broad sense/meaning
人情	인정	Human sentiment/feeling
作用	작용	Action, function, effect
特性	특성	Special characteristic, trait
目的物	목적물	Object, objective
選擇	선택	Choice, selection
活用	활용	Utilize, make good use of
奴隷	노예	Slave
畢竟	필경	After all, ultimately, in the end
自殺	자살	Suicide
事業	사업	Work, undertaking, enterprise, business
廢하며	폐하며	Abandoning, abolishing (older form of 폐하며)
放浪	방랑	Wandering, vagrancy
惡用	악용	Misuse, abuse
理性	이성	Reason
解脫	해탈	Liberation, emancipation (often in a Buddhist sense)
眞理的	진리적	Related to truth
獨身生活	독신생활	Single life, celibacy
理想	이상	Ideal
境涯	경애	Boundary, realm, state
眞善美	진선미	Truth, goodness, and beauty
賢哲	현철	Sages and philosophers
深求	심구	Deep inquiry/pursuit
依하며	의하며	Relying on (older form of 의하며)
宣傳	선전	Propagation, publicity, propaganda
賴하며	뇌하며	Depending on (older form of 뇌하며)
奉貢	봉공	Contribute, dedicate
切望	절망	Earnest desire/hope
濫用	남용	Abuse, misuse
裏面	이면	Inner side, behind the scenes
私氣	사기	Selfishness, private motives
唯一	유일	Only one, sole
犧牲的	희생적	Sacrificial
伴隨	반수	Accompany
可惜	가석	Regrettable, pitiful
遺憾	유감	Regret, pity
成就	성취	Achievement, accomplishment
到底	도저	(Not) at all, absolutely (used with negative)
可望	가망	Hope, prospect, possibility
愛妻	애처	Beloved wife
老의 將至함	노의 장지함	The impending arrival of old age
最高理想	최고이상	Highest ideal
餘暇	여가	Leisure, spare time
背後	배후	Behind, in the back
無量數	무량수	Innumerable quantity
祖先	조선	Ancestors
眼前	안전	Before one's eyes
子孫	자손	Descendants
結合	결합	Union, combination
樂하고	낙하고	Being joyful (older form of 즐거워하고)
喜하고	희하고	Being happy (older form of 기뻐하고)
哀하고	애하고	Being sorrowful (older form of 슬퍼하고)
怒한다하면	노한다하면	If one gets angry (older form of 노한다면)
永遠	영원	Eternity
快	쾌	Pleasure, delight
聲色	성색	Sound and color (sensual pleasures, esp. related to women and music)
慾	욕	Desire, craving
追遂	추수	Pursuit (likely older/variant form of 추구)
吟味	음미	Savor, appreciate
斗大	두대	Size of a bushel measure (large)
石	석	Stone
頭邊	두변	Edge, side (lit. head-side)
軟芽	연아	Tender sprout/bud
好奇心	호기심	Curiosity
어린엄	어린 움	Young shoot/sprout (엄 is likely 움)
出生處	출생처	Place of birth/origin
中央	중앙	Center
當初	당초	At first, initially
發生	발생	Occurrence, emergence, generation
幾十貫	기십관	Several tens of *kwan* (a unit of weight/currency)
下壓	하압	Press down
可憐	가련	Pitiful, pathetic
不得已	부득이	Unavoidably, inevitably
惡戰苦鬪	악전고투	Desperate struggle, hard fight
蟠屈	반굴	Coil, twist
先鋒	선봉	Vanguard, forefront
發顯	발현	Manifestation, appearance
打勝	타승	Defeat, overcome
太陽	태양	Sun
意識	의식	Consciousness
植物	식물	Plant
共通	공통	Common
無機物	무기물	Inorganic substance
金石土塊	금석토괴	Metal, stone, and earth clods
差違	차위	Difference, disparity
倂隨	병수	Accompany, go along with (older form of 병수)
磅礴	방박	Vast, boundless, overwhelming
永劫	영겁	Eternity, eon
傳하야	전하여	Transmitting, passing down (older form of 전하여)
無極	무극	Ultimate Nothingness, Limitless
太極	태극	Great Ultimate (Supreme Ultimate in Chinese philosophy)
星霧	성무	Nebula
組織	조직	Organization, structure
變化	변화	Change, transformation
奮鬪	분투	Struggle, strenuous effort
先鋒將	선봉장	Vanguard general
開拓	개척	Pioneer, open up
勇猛	용맹	Brave, valiant
戰鬪士	전투사	Warrior, fighter
人生	인생	Human life
所有	소유	Possession, ownership
衝動	충동	Impulse, drive
如何	여하	How, what (state/condition)
金錢	금전	Money
名譽	명예	Honor, fame
權利	권리	Right, power
好衣好食	호의호식	Fine clothes and good food
安樂	안락	Comfort, ease
便利	편리	Convenience
方便	방편	Means, expedient
永生	영생	Eternal life
感得	감득	Realize, perceive intuitively
倍達族	배달족	Paedal people (poetic/ancient term for Koreans)
歷史	역사	History
文化	문화	Culture
個人	개인	Individual
天地	천지	Heaven and Earth, the world
一瞬	일순	An instant, a moment
桑田	상전	Mulberry fields (symbolizing land)
滄海	창해	Blue sea, vast ocean (symbolizing sea)
意義	의의	Meaning, significance
道	도	Way, path, principle
體驗	체험	Experience (personal)
結晶	결정	Crystal, crystallization
向上	향상	Improvement, advancement
開拓	개척	Pioneer, develop
迷信的	미신적	Superstitious
信仰	신앙	Faith, belief
四圍	사위	Surroundings
靈	영	Spirit, soul
可得	가득	Can obtain/achieve
中葉	중엽	Middle period
葉錢	엽전	Leaf coin (Joseon era coin)
一分	일푼	One *pun* (small unit of currency)
卽時	즉시	Immediately
廳直	청직	Office servant/attendant
破片	파편	Fragment, broken piece
때여오라	떼어오라/때워오라	Bring it detached / Patch it up (Context suggests 'repair/patch', i.e. 때워오라)
雇價	고가	Wage, labor cost
加添	가첨	Add, supplement
損害	손해	Loss, damage
國家全體	국가전체	Entire nation/state
期於히	기어히	By all means, insistently (older form of 기어이)
逸話	일화	Anecdote
國民的	국민적	National
度量	도량	Magnanimity, generosity
富强	부강	Wealth and power
現在	현재	Present time, current
日用品	일용품	Daily necessities
支配	지배	Control, domination
他國	타국	Other country, foreign country
物品	물품	Goods, articles
舶來品	박래품	Imported goods (lit. ship-arrived goods)
甚至於	심지어	Even, going so far as
餠	병	Rice cake, pastry (Tteok)
菓子	과자	Sweets, confectionary
砂糖	사탕	Sugar
빵	빵	Bread
料理	요리	Cuisine, cooking
漸漸	점점	Gradually
形便	형편	Situation, circumstances
積極的	적극적	Active, positive
消極的	소극적	Passive, negative
産業	산업	Industry
振興	진흥	Promotion, development
輸出	수출	Export
圖謀	도모	Plan, scheme
輸入	수입	Import
制限	제한	Limit, restriction
自家	자가	One's own, domestic
可能性	가능성	Possibility
克己心	극기심	Self-discipline, self-control
振發	진발	Arouse, stir up
奢侈	사치	Luxury, extravagance
高價	고가	High price
愛用	애용	Favorite use, habitual use
喚起	환기	Arousal, awakening
圍할 時에	위할 시에	When besieged (older form)
泰然히	태연히	Calmly, composedly
琴	금	Zither (stringed instrument)
死에 就할 時에	사에 취할 시에	When facing death (older form)
妻子	처자	Wife and children
朋友	붕우	Friends
慰安	위안	Comfort, consolation
詞	사	Words, speech
萬乘之尊	만승지존	Honor of ten thousand chariots (a king/emperor)
苦行	고행	Ascetic practice, penance
敢行	감행	Dare to do, carry out boldly
白衣宰相	백의재상	Prime Minister in White (unofficial advisor of great influence)
辭하고	사하고	Declining, refusing (older form of 사양하고)
取하엿다	취하였다	Took, chose (older form of 취하였다)
任意로	임의로	At will, arbitrarily
改造	개조	Remodel, reform
地境	지경	Boundary, state, level
可能性	가능성	Possibility
解脫케하야	해탈케 하여	Causing liberation (older form)
獨立自在	독립자재	Independent and self-mastering
立케 함	서게 함	Making stand
貧賤	빈천	Poverty and lowliness
志	지	Will, aspiration, ambition
變치	변치	Not change (older form of 변하지)
白刃	백인	Naked blade
蹈할	도할	Tread upon (older form of 밟을)
爵祿	작록	Title and stipend (rank and salary)
辭할	사할	Decline (older form of 사양할)
天下	천하	The world, "under heaven"
心志	심지	Mind and will, determination
國家	국가	Nation, state
國民	국민	Citizen, people of a nation
修養	수양	Cultivation (of mind/character), self-discipline
進就	진취	Advance, progress, make headway
虛僞	허위	Falsehood, hypocrisy
一時	일시	Temporary, for a time
浮虛	부허	Frivolous, vain, empty
無根氣	무근기	Without foundation/fortitude (older form of 근기 없는)
行動	행동	Action, behavior
假紳士輩	가신사배	Fake gentlemen types
自心	자심	One's own mind/heart
不動	부동	Immobile, unmoved
忍耐	인내	Patience, endurance
固執	고집	Stubbornness, obstinacy
偏見	편견	Prejudice, bias
捕虜	포로	Captive, prisoner of war
嫉妬	질투	Jealousy, envy
中傷	중상	Slander, defamation
誹謗	비방	Slander, calumny
能事	능사	One's specialty, forte (often used ironically)
意氣揚揚	의기양양	Triumphant, elated
호울로가	홀로가	Alone (older form of 홀로)
自處하며	자처하며	Considering oneself as (older form)
平等	평등	Equality
識者	식자	Knowledgeable person, intellectual
滅亡	멸망	Downfall, ruin, destruction
無理	무리	Unreasonable crowd/group, absurdity
場所	장소	Place, location
靑年	청년	Youth, young person
空然히	공연히	Vainly, uselessly, without reason (older form of 공연히)
必要	필요	Necessary
어대까지든지	어디까지든지	To whatever extent (older form of 어디까지든지)
拳	권	Fist
鐵	철	Iron
直接	직접	Direct
一片	일편	One piece, a bit
깨다랏스며	깨달았으며	Realized (older form)
堂堂	당당	Imposing, dignified, confident
勇氣	용기	Courage
慇懃히	은근히	Inwardly, secretly, kindly
깃버하엿노라	기뻐하였노라	Was pleased (older form)
思想界	사상계	Intellectual circles/world
解決코저	해결코자	Trying to resolve (older form of 해결하고자)
付托코저	부탁코자	Wanting to entrust (older form of 부탁하고자)
무릅을 꿀코	무릎을 꿇고	Kneeling down (older spelling/form)
눈을 감고	눈을 감고	Closing eyes
終日	종일	All day long
閉門黙坐	폐문묵좌	Closing the door and sitting silently
道學	도학	Ethics, moral philosophy (esp. Neo-Confucianism)
工夫	공부	Study, effort
爲하야	위하여	For the sake of (older form)
克己	극기	Self-discipline, self-denial
努力	노력	Effort, exertion
奮鬪的	분투적	Striving, struggling
實社會	실사회	Real society
戰爭	전쟁	War
準備	준비	Preparation
陸海軍	육해군	Army and Navy
平素	평소	Usual times, ordinarily
大演習	대연습	Grand maneuvers, large-scale exercises
何時何處	하시하처	Any time, any place
活舞臺	활무대	Active stage/arena
戰士	전사	Warrior, soldier
妄却	망각	Forgetfulness (older form of 망각)
恰然히	흡연히	Just like, as if (likely older/variant form of 흡사히)
金銀珠玉	금은주옥	Gold, silver, pearls, and jade (treasures)
貝物	패물	Treasures, valuables
大商	대상	Great merchant
馬賊窟	마적굴	Bandit's den
暫時	잠시	For a moment
惰氣	타기	Laziness, indolence
急變	급변	Sudden change
勇戰決勝	용전결승	Fighting bravely to decide victory
價値	가치	Value, worth
義勇	의용	Righteous courage
正義人道	정의인도	Justice and humanity
擁護코저	옹호코자	Trying to protect/defend (older form)
中堅	중견	Nucleus, backbone, mainstay
有志	유지	Volunteer, interested party, patriot
根氣	근기	Fortitude, perseverance, stamina (older form of 끈기)
達觀	달관	Broad perspective, philosophical outlook
道理	도리	Reason, principle, way
眞正	진정	True, genuine
發現	발현	Manifestation, revelation
天性	천성	Innate nature, disposition
大事	대사	Great affair, important matter
喋喋	첩첩	Chattering, babbling
拯濟	증제	Save, rescue (from distress)
急先務	급선무	Urgent priority, first task
建設	건설	Construction, establishment
同感	동감	Same feeling, agreement
根氣잇게	근기있게	With fortitude/perseverance (older form of 끈기 있게)
要素	요소	Element, factor
自由心	자유심	Spirit of freedom
鼓吹	고취	Inspire, instill, advocate
將來	장래	Future
希望	희망	Hope
事理	사리	Reason, logic, principle
明白	명백	Clear, obvious
七十老人	칠십노인	Seventy-year-old person
實行力	실행력	Ability to execute/implement
天眞爛漫	천진난만	Innocent and naive
少年	소년	Boy, youth
元氣	원기	Vigor, energy, vitality
潔白高尙	결백고상	Pure, white, noble, lofty
向上케 함	향상케 함	Causing to improve/elevate
新凉	신량	New coolness (of autumn)
郊墟	교허	Suburbs and ruins
燈火	등화	Lamplight
親할만한	친할만한	Suitable for getting close to
開學	개학	Start of school term
書生	서생	Student, scholar
簡編	간편	Bamboo slips and silk scrolls (books)
捲舒	권서	Rolling and unrolling (reading scrolls)
時節	시절	Season, time
總히	총히	All, entirely (older form of 총히)
讀書	독서	Reading books
耽할	탐할	Indulge in (older form of 탐닉할)
趣味	취미	Hobby, interest, taste, pleasure
不幸	불행	Unhappiness, misfortune
寶庫	보고	Treasure house, repository
王國	왕국	Kingdom
語케하라	어케하라	Let (me) speak (older form/contraction)
縮時術	축시술	Time-shrinking art
千古前	천고전	A thousand years ago, ancient times
聖哲	성철	Sages and philosophers
面謁	면알	Have an audience with
英雄	영웅	Hero
才子	재자	Talented man
佳人	가인	Beautiful woman
師父	사부	Teacher, master
謀士	모사	Strategist, advisor
護桀	호걸	Hero, brave/outstanding person (older form/typo for 豪傑?)
好配耦	호배우	Good spouse/companion
恨嘆	한탄	Lament, deplore
縮地術	축지술	Space-shrinking art (method of traveling great distances quickly)
臥하야	와하여	Lying down (older form)
周遊	주유	Tour, travel around
跋涉	발섭	Traverse, travel over mountains and rivers
方寸	방촌	Small space (lit. square inch, often refers to the mind)
徘徊	배회	Wander, linger
耳邊	이변	Beside the ear
眉間	미간	Between the eyebrows
浮動	부동	Floating, fluctuating
地誌	지지	Geography book, gazetteer
何必	하필	Why necessarily
嶺東	영동	Yŏngdong region (east of Taegwallyeong Pass)
絶景	절경	Superb view, picturesque scenery
固定	고정	Fixed, stationary
無線電信	무선전신	Wireless telegraphy
不死藥	불사약	Elixir of immortality
無錢	무전	Without money
無金錢	무금전	Without cash/money
汽車	기차	Train
汽船	기선	Steamship
飛行車	비행차	Flying vehicle (airplane)
乘함	승함	Riding (older form)
神通術	신통술	Divine power art, supernatural ability
歷史以前	역사이전	Before history
原人	원인	Primordial human
神	신	God, deity, spirit
軍神	군신	God of war
作戰秘術	작전비술	Secret arts of strategy
神秘境	신비경	Mysterious realm/state
事理	사리	Principle, reason
絶對妙境	절대묘경	Absolute subtle realm/state
描寫	묘사	Description, portrayal
香	향	Incense
焚하고	분하고	Burning (older form of 피우고)
黙坐	묵좌	Sit silently
執하면	집하면	If one holds (older form)
神人	신인	Divine being, person with supernatural powers
來語케 되나니	내어케 되나니	Come and speak (older form/construction)
交靈	교령	Spiritual communion
秘訣	비결	Secret key/method
元來	원래	Originally
千態萬樣	천태만양	Thousand attitudes and myriad forms (great variety)
高尙	고상	Noble, refined, lofty
卑陋	비루	Base, vulgar, mean
不就	불취	Not undertake, not engage in
反對方向	반대방향	Opposite direction
飮酒	음주	Drinking alcohol
惡戀	악련	Wicked love/affair
權勢	권세	Power, influence
惡德	악덕	Vice, immorality
比比皆然	비비개연	It is common everywhere, such cases are numerous
眞	진	True, real
僞	위	False, fake
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제27호
발행일	1922년 09월 01일
기사제목	眞理의 體驗
필자	李敦化
기사형태	논설

眞理의 體驗
						李敦化
力
一般物質은 다가티 力이라 하는 것이 잇다. 그리하야 物理學者는 말하되 物質의 極致는 곳 力이 된다 하나니 重力을 硏究하는 力學者나 質을 硏究하는 物理學者나 그 極致點에 이르러는 全혀 同一하다 하엿다 即 力과 質은 極致點에서 한 가지라 하는 말이라. 그리하야 力과 質의 極致點은 物質이라고도 稱할 수 업스며 力이라고도 稱할수업는 一種 不可思議한 神秘的 活動이 잇다하엿다. 即 一種 神秘的 力이 宇宙萬有를 支配하게 된다 함이라. 그럼으로
植物에는 植物自體를 生長케 하는 神秘力을 가젓스며 動物에는 動物 그 自體를 成長케 하는 神秘的 力을 가젓스며
乃至 電氣에 電氣力이  잇스며 蒸氣에 蒸氣力이 잇스며 水에는 水力이 잇스며 火에 火力이 잇스며 風에는 風力이 잇스며 土에는 土力이 잇스며  畢竟 一切萬有에는 一切萬有力이 잇다.
그리하야 此 一切萬有力을 摠攝하는 理法을 가르처 吾人은 이를 大宇宙의 萬有引力이라 하는 것이다.＜34＞
如斯히 大宇宙에는 大宇宙를 支配하는 引力이 잇슴으로 大天星辰은 運行하되 그 軌를 失치 아니하고 其他 一切萬有로부터 微廛纖芥에 至하기까지 生生無窮의 位置를 일치 아니하고 整然한 秩序로써 無窮에서 無窮을 向하야 進化케 되는 것이라.
이 原理를 體하야 사람에게는 사람的의 力이 잇나니 사람의 力이라 하는 것은 此 宇宙의 神秘的 力을 純然히 稟賦케 된 것이엇다. 사람의 力은 이를 體力과 精神力의 두 가지로 논하 볼수 잇나니 사람은 이 두 가지의 力이 튼튼한 然後에야 完全한 人格이 잇다 認定할 수 잇다. 體力은 사람의 直接 肉體的 生命力을 保證하는 것이오 心力은 사람의 精神的 創造力을 保證하는 것이다. 그리하야 사람의 偉大한 것을 證明할 곳은 그 精神的 創造力에 잇다 하는 것이다.
孔子는 敎를 세우되 仁이라 하엿나니 仁은 곳 力이니라.
釋迦는 敎를 세우되 慈悲라 하엿나니 慈悲는 곳 力이니라.
耶穌는 敎를 세우되 愛라 하엿나니 愛는 곳 力이니라.
崔水雲은 敎를 세우되 人乃天이라 하엿나니 人乃天은 곳 力이니라.
그리고보면 仁, 愛, 慈悲 乃至 人乃天의 主義는 다가티 사람的 力을 이름인데 即 사람의 偉大한 精神的 創造力을 이름이엇다.
이 사람의 精神的 創造力이 道德의 方面으로 나타날 時에는 이가 仁, 愛, 慈悲 乃至 人乃天의 主義로 化하야 四海同胞主義, 世界一家主義로 偉大한 宗敎性을 發揮케 되는 것이오.
사람의 精神的 創造力이 科學의 方面으로 나타날 時는 이가 硏究, 思索, 發明의 理를 把持하야 偉大한 工學的 性을 發揮케되는 것이오.
사람의 精神的 力이 文學의 方面으로 나타날 時는 이가 吟咏, 嗟嘆, 讚美의 感情으로 化하야 偉大한 美學的 性을 發揮케 되는 것이다.
그리하야 이가 民族的 方面으로 나타날 時는 그 民族으로 他民族에 對照하야 燦然한 文物을 形成케하는 것이다.
나는 斷言하노니 宇宙는 力이니라 萬有는 力이니라. 人類는 力이니라. 그리하야 同一한 民族은 力의 集合이라 함을 마지 아니하노라. 이點에서 朝鮮民族이라하면 朝鮮民族은 곳 力이니라. 朝鮮民族을 證明하는 歷史는＜35＞ 곳 力의 歷史니라. 朝鮮民族을 證明하는 文化는 곳 力의 文化니라. 其他 一切로 朝鮮民族을 證明하는 그 모든 것은 다가티 力의 集合體니라.
兄弟여 力이 업는 民族은 이 죽은 民族이며 力이 衰한 民族은 이 弱한 民族이니라 兄弟여 어찌하면 力이 强한 民族이 되어볼가?
兄弟여 民族의 力으로 가장 强味를 發揮하는 點은 무엇이뇨.
첫재 同胞-써 相結하는 力이니 自己의 民族을 他民族에 比較하야 比較的 强한 團結, 힘잇는 和合으로써 力을 이에 集中한다하면 弱者-써 弱者-아닐 것이오. 貧者-써 貧者아닐 것이며
둘재 同胞-써 相扶하는 力이니 譬컨데 一身體中에 四肢百體가  各各 獨立的 技能이 잇다할지라도 一身體를 爲하야 共同의 作業을 함과 가티 一民族中에 各各의 團體 各各의 思想家가 서로 各各의 技能이 잇다할 지라도 그 一民族을 爲하는 點에 至하야는 同胞相互共同의 利益을 圖謀함이 곳 이것이다.
그리하야 經濟로 보든지 敎育으로 보든지 其他 一般의 萬事로 보든지 한 가지로 同胞와 同胞, 自己民族이라 하는 力의 中心을 失치 아니한 然後에야 처음으로 民族的 力을 말할 수 잇스며 그러한 民族的 力을 가진 民族이야 말로 民族다운 民族이라 할지라.

戀
以上에서 暫時 力의 原理를 말하엿거니와 人類의 强한 力의 發表되는 本源에는 戀이라하는 神聖한 愛의 結合力이 잇슴을 잊지 말어야 하리라.
나는 近間 野外에서 散步하다가 偶然히 戀의 力이 一層 神聖하고 强大함을 感覺한 일이 잇섯다. 乾燥無味한 曠野의 中에  다만 雜草가 夕陽의 晩風에 흔들거릴뿐으로 나의 마음은 한層 煩鬱하야갈 이때이라 그리다가 偶然히 이 無味한 曠野雜草의 中에서 水仙花 一嚴을 發見하엿다. 나의 全精神力은 문득 이 水仙花를 向하야 集中이 되엇스며 그리하야 나의 全興趣는 이 水仙花 一嚴에 말미어 無限의 挑發을 바닷다. 어제껏 乾燥無味하든 이 曠野는 문득 情趣가 充溢한 愛의 場으로 化하야 이 水仙花 一嚴이 나의 興趣心과 融合하는 곳에 모든 宇宙는 有情히 보이며 모든 物象은 情다운 態度로 變하엿다.
이제야 나는 알괘라. 心은 곳 宇宙의 中心이며 戀은＜36＞곳 人心의 中心인 것을?
戀이 업는 心의 狀態는 이 곳 沙漠이며 寒巖이며 枯木이다. 心은 戀의 中心을 어더 처음으로 活氣가 나며 生力이 들며 眞正한 生命의 源泉이 솟아 나오는 것이다.
近來 靑年男女의 間에 흔히 戀愛神聖問題가 流行되어 戀愛를 絶叫하는 調가 놉하감을 보앗다. 그러나 나는 男女의 性慾間에 生하는 愛의 觀念으로써 뿐 이를 戀愛로 보고저 아니한다. 廣義의 意味에서 人情으로부터 솟아 나오는 모든 것은 다가티 이를 戀愛的 作用이라 한다.
李白은 風과 月을 愛하엿스니 이는 風月에 對한 戀愛性이라 할 수 잇스며 陶淵明은 田園을 愛하엿스니 이는 田園에 對한 戀愛性이라 할 수 잇다. 이가튼 方法으로 推移하면 사람은 自己의 特性에 從하야 一種  或은 二種 以上의 戀愛의 目的物을 가지지 아니한 者-거의 업다 하리라. 酒를 愛함도 一種의 戀愛이며 詩를 愛함도 一種의 戀愛이며 女를 愛함도 戀愛이며 眞理를 愛함도 또한 戀愛라 할 수 잇다.
이와가튼 廣義的 戀愛의 意味에 잇서 한 가지 深考치 아니치 못할 것은 即 戀愛의 選擇方法이라 할 수 잇다. 戀愛라 하면 決코 다-神聖한 것이 아니오 戀愛를 善히 活用하는 곳에 처음으로 神聖의 意味가 發顯하는 것이다. 同一한 男女의 戀愛라할지라도 戀愛의 奴隷가 되어 畢竟 自殺을 遂하며 事業을 廢하며 放浪에 流함과 가튼 것은이 實로 戀愛의 惡用이라 할 수잇다. 이제 나의 이른바 神聖한 戀愛라 하는 것은 理性의 戀愛를 解脫하고 眞理的 戀愛를 把持하라 하는 것이니 古來 有名한 發明家는 大部分 妻를 帶일치 아니하고 오즉 獨身生活로 一生을 終한 人이 만핫슴은 이곳 眞理的 戀愛를 把持한 故이라.
부라톤은 일즉 理想의 眞善美한 境涯를  가르처 이를 戀이라 하엿고 그리하야 그 戀의 目的物을 「이떼아」의 世界라 하엿다. 부라톤은 곳 眞理의 思索的 快感으로써 自己의 戀愛를 삼앗든 것이라 어찌 부라톤 뿐이리오. 古來의 賢哲이 거의 다 그러치 아니한 者-업나니 그들은 一生의 戀愛를 或은 眞理의 深求에 바치며 事物의 發明에 依하며 道德의 宣傳에 賴하며 事業의 成功에 奉貢하엿다.
나는 우리 朝鮮靑年의 戀愛의 神聖을 絶叫하는 者로 삼가 戀愛的 作用을 男女의 間에 濫用치 勿하고 事業의 成功方面으로 延長케 하기를 切望하는 바이라.
大槪 世人이 戀愛를 神聖타 하는 그 裏面을 보면 戀愛其物의 內面에는 私氣업는 愛의 結合이 잇슴이며 心이 唯一에 集中함이며 그리하야 戀愛는 犧牲的 精神＜37＞伴隨함으로써라하나니 그것이 곳 戀愛의 神聖한 점이라 함이엇다. 그러나 그러틋 神聖한 點을 다만 男女間의 結合問題에 뿐 應用이 된다하면 그 얼마나 可惜한 일이며 遺憾될 일이 될가. 事業의 成就하는 裏面도 또한 이 三大精神이 업고는 到底可望이 업는 것이니 爲先 事業에 對하야도 愛의 結合이 업시는 아니되는 것이오 一心의 集中이 업시는 아니되는 것이오 犧牲의 精神이 업시는 아니되는 것이다. 이點에서 나는 戀愛의 力을 될 수 잇는 대로 活動의 方面으로 옴겨 어떠한 사람이 어떠한 眞理의 事業을 把持히엿든지 그眞理로써 戀愛的 愛妻를 삼아가지고 老의 將至함을 忘한다면 그야말로 戀愛의 神聖을 어덧다 할 것이다.
只今 우리는 民族의 發展으로써 우리의 最高理想을 삼고저하는 이 때라 우리에게는 別로 다른 戀愛를 濫用할 餘暇가 업고 우리의 背後에 잇는 無量數의 祖先 우리의 眼前에 잇는 無量數의 子孫 그들로 結合된 이 朝鮮民族으로 戀의 理想的 目標를 定하고 그들로 더불어 樂하고 喜하고 哀하고 怒한다하면 그 樂이 얼마나 永遠할 것이며 그 快가 얼마나 大하겟는가. 한갓  聲色의 慾에 追遂하는 者는 來하야 이 眞正 戀愛의 味를 吟味하야 보라.

生
어떤 잠풍한 春日이라 나는 散步次로 野에 나섯다. 그리하야 廣野의 中에서 斗大의 石을 發見하엿다. 兼하야 石의 頭邊으로부터 이름도 아지못할 草의 軟芽를 보앗다. 나는 一種의 好奇心으로 그의 어린엄을 손으로 잡고 그의 出生處를 알아 보앗다. 그 軟芽가 當初 發生하기로 始作한 곳은 石의 頭邊이 아니오 石의 中央이엇다. 讀者여 놀라지 말라. 그 軟弱한 草의 芽는 當初에 石의 中央部로부터 溫氣를 딸하 發生하기를 始作하엿스나 나고보니 幾十貫의 重한 力이 上으로부터 下壓함으로 그 可憐한 軟芽는 不得已- 그 重力과 惡戰苦鬪를 始作하야 白雪과 가튼 軟芽가 蛇와 如히 蟠屈 又 蟠屈하다가 畢竟은 石의 頭邊으로 그 先鋒이 發顯하게 되엇다. 나는 이것을 보고 生의 力이 그 얼마나 强大한 것을 알앗다. 더욱이 全宇宙의 生生의 力이 그 얼마나 强大한 것을 알앗다. 生의 力이란 到底 어떠한 것으로써도 抵抗치 못할 것을 알앗다. 그 弱함이 弱草의 軟芽와 가튼 것도 能히 써 强大한 壓力을 打勝하고 畢竟 太陽의 光을 보게됨이라.＜38＞
學者는 말하되 意識이라 하는 것은 오즉 사람에게 뿐 잇는 것이 아니오 一般 植物의 共通히 잇는 것이며 畢竟 無機物과 가튼 金石土塊의 中에도 또한 意識이 잇다 하엿다. 다만 意識程度의 差違가 잇슬 뿐이라 하엿다. 이 말로써 조차보면 全宇宙의 萬有는 도모지가 意識的 아닌 것이 업스며 그리하야 그 意識에는 生의 力이 倂隨하야 全宇宙의 磅礴한 힘으로 生生無窮의 理를 주는 것이엇다.
나는 「生」이 그 무엇임은 아지못하나 그러나 「生」이라 하는 그것은 永劫以前으로부터 發展하기를 始作하야 無窮으로부터 無窮에 傳하야 가는 物을 알앗다.
그는 처음 無極의 力으로써 無窮 以前에서 全宇宙의 力을 準備함에 汲汲하엿다.
그는 또 太極의 力으로써 星霧의 排置, 太陽系의 組織을 始作하엿다.
그는 또 地球로써 生하엿스며 植物로써 生히엿스며 生物로서 生하엿다.
그리하야 그는 우리의 人類로써 變化하기까지는 永劫無限의 奮鬪中에서 畢竟 自己의 成功을 告함에 至하엿다.
人類는 宇宙生生力의 先鋒將이니라. 無限無窮의 宇宙를 開拓하야 나아가는 勇猛한 戰鬪士들이다. 이 意味에서 生은 곳 人生이며 人生은 곳 生이엇다.
럿셀은 사람의 「生」의 力을 所有와 創造 두 가지로 논하보고 創造 衝動이 오즉 사람의 사람다운 運動이라 하엿다. 이말로 조차보면 사람의 사람된 「生」의 意味는 全然히 創造性 如何에 잇다 하겟다.
사람은 金錢을 慾望하며 名譽를 慾望하며 權利를 慾望하며 乃至 好衣好食을 慾望하며 安樂과 便利를 慾望하나 그러나 그러한 것은 도모지가 生의 方便에 不過한 것이오 生의 目的은 아니다. 生의 目的物은 오로지 무엇을 創造함에 잇스며 發見함에 잇스며 發明함에 잇다.
古來의 聖者들은 만히 永生을 말하엿다. 未來의 生을 말하엿다.
나는 이 永生의 말을 감안히 생각할 때에 그間에 無限의 趣味를 感함을 마지 아니한다. 生은 곳 永生임을 感得치 아니치 못하겟다. 宇宙의 「生」의 力은 우리 人類의 生의 力으로 化하야 無限한 創造的 目的을 가지고 無窮으로부터 無窮에 傳하야 가는 것이다. 그리하야 이 人類의 「生」의 力은 우리 倍達族의 生의 力으로 化하야 그가 歷史의 力이 되며 그가 文化의 力이 되어왓다. 우리가 비록＜39＞ 個人으로써는 죽는다 할지라도 人類로써는 죽지 아니하며 民族으로써 죽지 아니할 것이다. 變하는 者로써 보면 天地도 能히 一瞬이 못될 것이오 變치 안는 者로써 보면 物과 我- 共히 다함이 업다한 古人의 말과가티 이 漢城은 變하야 滄海가 되는 날이 잇슬지라도, 滄海는 變하야 桑田이 되는 날이 잇슬지라도 이 民族의 生命이라는 것은 桑田과 滄海에 말미어 업서지지 아니하는 것이다. 이것을 알미 곳 「生」의 意義를 알미오 그리하야 永生의 道를 體驗한 者라 하리라. 우리는 누구나 다가티 永生의 길을 차저야 하겟다. 永生의 道는 오즉 하나뿐이다. 同一한 血로 結晶한 民族의 全體가 愛의 結合으로 永遠의 生命을 創造함에 잇다. 우리가 民族의 發展을 圖한다 함은 이 自己의 영생을 圖함이오 民族의 文化를 向上케 한다 함은 이또한 自己의 永生의 길을 開拓하는 것이다. 兄弟여 兄弟의 個體로는 能히 永生을 得할 수 업스나 又 兄弟의 迷信的 信仰으로는 能히 永生을 得할 수 업스나 그러나 兄弟의 四圍에 잇는 民族的 靈의 結晶으로는 能히 永生의 道를 길이 開拓함을 可得하리라.

金
李朝中葉에 李文彦이라 하는 名宰相이 잇섯다. 그는 어떤날 깨여진 葉錢 한 푼을 어더 가지고 卽時 廳直이를 불너 그 葉錢의 破片을 때여오라 하엿다. 廳直이는 이 말을 듯고 「이 葉錢 한 分을 때여 오랴면 二三分의 雇價가 들어야 합니다.」고 여쭈오니 李宰相은 웃으면서 「나도 그것을 모르는 바가 아니다. 내가 이제 내 돈 二三分을 加添하야 이 한 푼을 때여 노흐면 나는써 損害라 할지라도 國家全體로 보면 一分의 經濟가 잇슬 것이라.」고 말을 하고 期於히 二三分의 雇價를 주고 一分의 破葉錢을 때여왓다는 逸話가 잇다. 이것은 넉넉히 國民的 經濟를 아는 大宰相의 度量이 잇다 하겟다. 오눌날 우리 朝鮮民族으로 만일 李宰相과 가튼 經濟的 觀念이 萬分의 一이라도 잇다 하면 아무리 貧弱한 우리 民族이라도 可히써 富强을 致할 日이 잇다 말할 수 잇스리라. 보라 우리 現在 朝鮮民族의 日用品의 全部가 뉘의 支配를 밧는가. 입는 것이 他國 物品아님이 업스며 쓰는 것이 舶來品 아님이 업스며 甚至於 먹는 것까지 酒, 餠, 菓子砂糖, 빵, 及其 一般料理가 西洋 것이 아니면 日本 것이며 中國 것이라 그리하야 日日時時로 돈냥 돈푼이 날개를 놉히 들고 海外로 날아갈뿐이니 우리의 經濟形便이 漸漸 그 어떠할 것을 알아볼 수 잇겟다. 經濟에는 積極的과 消極的 經濟 두 가지가 잇나니 積極的으로는 産業을＜40＞ 振興케하야 輸出을 圖謀하는 方法이오 消極的으로는 輸入을 制限케 하고 自家의 物을 愛用하는 方法이라 우리 朝鮮의 現在形便으로 모든 事情上 비록 積極的 經濟를 施設할 수 업다 할지라도 消極的 經濟에 이르러는 可히써 될수 잇는 限度까지는 可能性이 업다 하지 못할지니 現在 우리 民族으로써는 民族的 克己心을 振發하야 비록 奢侈치 못할지라도 비록 高價가 된다 할지라도 自家의 物品을 愛用하야 國民的 經濟心을 喚起하여야 할지라.

自由
孔子-일즉 宋에 圍할 時에 「泰然히 琴을 彈하엿다」하며 소쿠라테쓰가 일즉 死에 就할 時에 妻子 及 朋友에게 돌이어 慰安의 詞를 주엇다 하며 釋迦는 萬乘의 尊을 버리고 6年 苦行을 敢行하엿다 하며 崔水雲은 白衣宰相을 辭하고 일부러 苦行을 取하엿다하나니 이러한 일은 다가티 心의 自由를 體驗한 大事件이엇다. 大槪 心의 自由라 하는 말은 自己의 心을 任意로 改造하야 가장 善한 地境에 이르게 할 可能性이 잇다함이오 그리하야 이 可能性을 事物로부터 解脫케하야 獨立自在의 境에 立케 함을 이름이니 孟軻의 이른바 富貴할지라도 能히 淫치 아니할 만하며 貧賤할지라도 能히 그 志를 變치 아니할 만하며 白刃이라도 可히 蹈할 것이면 蹈하며 爵祿이라도 可히 辭할 것이면 辭하며 天下라도 可히 取할 것이면 取할 만한 心志를 일러 말하는 것이라. 國家에는 그러한 國民이 만하갈스록 그 國家가 國家다운 國家가 되는 法이오 民族에는 그러한 民族이 만하갈스록 그 民族은 民族다운 民族이 되어가는 法이라. 萬一 個人으로나 民族으로써 그러한 修養이 업는 者로써 能히 事業을 進就한다 하면 그는 虛僞가 아니면 반듯이 一時의 浮虛한  마음으로 울어 나오는 無根氣한 行動이라 할 수 잇다. 다시 말하면 自己의 自由가 업시 事業의 自由를 圖謀한다 함이 곳 一種의 거짓말하는 假紳士輩라 하는 말이다. 自心을 能히 動할 곳에 動치 못하며 또한 能히 不動할 곳에 不動치 못하며 忍耐할 곳에 忍耐치 못하며 奮鬪할 곳에 奮鬪치 못하고 全혀 固執에 깍기며 偏見에 빠지며 感情의 奴隷가 되며 事物의 捕虜가 되어 날로 嫉妬와 中傷과 誹謗으로써 能事를 삼는 者로서 오히려 能히 意氣揚揚하야 自己 호울로가 天下의 自由를 어덧다 自處하며 天下의 平等을 가젓다 하나니 萬一 識者로서 이러한 무리를 보게 되면 可憐한 點이 實로 뉘에게 잇다하겟는가.＜41＞ 그리하야 結局 滅亡의 道를 宣傳하는 者는 이려한 無理가 아니면 다시 어떠한 사람이 되겟는가.
나는 일즉 어떠한 場所에서 靑年의 修養이라 하는 말이 나자마나 一人의 靑年으로부터 空然히 色을 變하야「우리는 只今 修養時代의 사람이 아니오 活動時代의 사람입니다. 修養이라하는 말은 어느덧 우리에게 必要한 말이 아니오 우리는 어대까지든지 血과 拳과 鐵로서 直接의 行動을 取치 아니하면 아니됩니다.」하는 말을 듯고 나는 그 말속에 一片의 眞理가 잇슴을 깨다랏스며 또한 그 靑年의 堂堂한 勇氣가 잇슴을 慇懃히 깃버하엿노라. 今日 우리의 靑年思想界에는 大槪가 이 靑年의 思想과 가튼 思想을 가진 이가 만흐며 또한 그러한 勇氣로써 萬事를 解決코저 하는 이가 만하짐을 아노라. 그러나 내가 眞實로 이들에게 付托코저 하는 말은 修養이라 함은 決코 그들 靑年의 생각한 바와 가티 무릅을 꿀코 눈을 감고 終日 閉門黙坐하야 道學을 工夫한다 하는 意味가 아니오. 修養이라는 것은 사람의 사람다운 人格을 엇기 爲하야 克己와 努力과 奮鬪的 精神으로 實社會와 戰爭을 準備하는 陸海軍의 平素의 大演習과 가튼 것이니 그럼으로 修養은 何時何處에든지 極히 必要한 것이오 더욱이 現在 活舞臺에 奮鬪하는 戰士로써는 一刻이라도 妄却치 못할 배라 恰然히 金銀珠玉의 貝物을 가진 大商이 滿洲의 馬賊窟을 通過할 때와 가티 暫時도 惰氣를 가저서는 아니될 것이오. 어느때에 急變을 當하든지 그와 勇戰決勝할 準備를 햐야두는 것이 그 곳 修養의 道라 하는 말이다. 비록 血과 鐵로써 萬事를 解決하는 時代라 할지라도 그 血과 鐵이 반듯이 修養잇는 義勇외 心으로부터 울어나오지 아니한 것이면 決코 價値가 업는  것이다. 하믈며 오늘날 時代는 正義人道로써 弱者의 權利를 擁護코저 하는 이때에 잇서 우리民族의 中堅되는 靑年有志가 마음에 根氣가 업스며 達觀이 업스며 忍耐가 업스며 克己가 업스며 道理의 觀念이 업스며 眞正愛의 發現이 업스며 人類다운 天性이 업시 곳 그 自心을 自由로 하는 偉大한 修養이 업시 어찌 大事를 喋喋할 수 잇스며 同胞를 拯濟할 수 잇스리오. 나로써 보건대 우리 民族의 今日의 急先務는 敎育의 向上에 잇스며 産業의 發達에 잇스며 其他 一般文化의 建設에 잇슴은 同胞와 가티 同感하는 배이나 그러나 그 모든 것을 根氣잇게  進步할 만한 眞正要素는 아즉도 民族的 自由心을 힘잇게 鼓吹함에 잇다 하나니 이러한 自由心을 가진 民族에야말로 將來를 可히 말할 수 잇스며 希望을 可히 圖謀할 수 잇는 것이라 事理에 明白한 七十老人의＜42＞ 實行力보다 天眞爛漫한 少年의 行動이 希望의 點에서 멀리 바람이 만함과 가티 우리 民族의 아즉것 힘쓸 일은 少年다운 元氣를 기름에 잇스며 少年다운 潔白高尙한 道義의 心을 向上케 함이 今日의 急務라 할 수 잇다.

書
新凉이 이제 郊墟에 入하엿도다. 加히써 燈火를 親할만한 時代가 왓다. 學校는 開學을 始作하고 書生은 簡編을 捲舒할 時節이 왓다. 萬人이 總히 讀書의 樂을 耽할 時代가 왓다. 讀書는 趣味니 讀書의 趣味를 모르는 者는 어떤 點에서 不幸의 人物이라할 수 잇나니 書는 實로 趣味의 寶庫이며 趣味의 王國이라할 수 잇다. 試하야 나더러 書의 趣味를 語케하라.
第一 讀書는 縮時術이니 讀書의 趣味를 가진者는 今日에 안저 能히 千古前의 聖哲에 面謁할수 잇스며 英雄을 볼 수 잇스며 才子를 對할 수 잇스며 佳人을 接할 수 잇는 것이라. 내가 論語를 讀한다 하면 孔子는 바루 我의 師父가 될 수 잇스며 내가 三國志를 讀한다하면 諸葛亮, 周瑜, 關羽, 劉備 等 護桀은 바루 我의 謀士가 될수잇스며 我가 美人傳을 讀한다 하면 千古의 佳人은 바루 我의 好配耦가 될 수 잇는 것이라. 그럼으로 讀書의 趣味를 知하는 者는 師父가 업슴을 恨嘆치 아니할 것이오. 謀士가 업슴을 恨嘆치 아니 할 것이오.
第二 讀書는 縮地術이니 讀書의 趣味를 아는 者는 室內에 臥하야 能히 四海를 周遊하며 宇宙를 跋涉할 수 잇나니 我가 西洋輿地를 讀한다 하면 倫敦, 巴里, 伯林이 方寸의 間에 徘徊함을 可得하며 我가 中國輿地를 讀한다 하면 寒山의 鐘聲이 떠떳이 耳邊에 잇슬 것이오. 五湖의 烟月이 어느때에든지 眉間에 浮動함을 可得할 것이며 我가 朝鮮地誌를 讀한다 하면 金剛山은 何必 嶺東에 잇슬것이 아니오 南海의 絶景이 또한 一定한 處所에 固定할 物이 아니엇다. 그리하야 我가 天文學을 讀한다 하면 火星界의 兄弟로 無線電信을 通함도 可得하며 月宮의 姮娥가 不死藥을 보냄도 可得하리라. 그럼으로＜43＞ 讀書의 趣味를 知하는 者는, 無錢의 旅行을 可得할 수 잇으며 無金錢의 汽車, 汽船, 飛行車를 乘함을 可得하리라.
第三 讀書는 神通術이니 書의 中에는 歷史以前 原人의 生活이 잇스며 神의 話가 잇스며 軍神의 作戰秘術이 잇스며 眞理의 神秘境이 잇스며 事理의 絶對妙境을 描寫한 것이라 試하야 香을 焚하고 黙坐하야 手에 周易一卷을  執하면 千古의 神人이 我에게 神秘의 妙境을 來語케 되나니 書는 實로 神通術이며 交靈의 秘訣이니라.
元來-人生은 趣味라. 趣味로써 生하고 趣味로써 死하나니 趣味는써 千態萬樣이라. 高尙한 者도 잇스며 卑陋한 者도 잇는 것이라. 高尙한 趣味에 不就하는 者는 卑陋에 就하야 나아가게 되는 것이라 不幸이 우리 朝鮮人은 讀書의 趣味를 아지 못하는 者-多한지라 그럼으로 趣味의 方面이 스스로 反對方向으로 就하야 飮酒, 惡戀, 權勢 等의 惡德으로 變하는 者-比比皆然하니 朝鮮人된 者-삼가 讀書의 趣味를 體驗하야 僞의 趣味로 眞의 趣味에 나아가기를 切望하는 바이라.＜44＞
＜34-44＞