잡지명	개벽 제39호
발행일	1923년 09월 01일
기사제목	클라르테運動의 世界化 (Globalization of the Clarté Movement)
필자	金基鎭
기사형태	문예평론 (Literary Criticism)

The Globalization of the Clarté Movement
						Kim Kijin (金基鎭)
I
I see the two currents of spiritualism and practicalism beginning to flow dimly, vaguely, yet implicitly in every aspect of our human society. As long as humans live on Earth and not outside it, as long as humans are not something other than human, like ghosts or goblins, all thoughts arising or welling up in each person's head must inevitably be for "people."
Unless literature is established for something other than humans—for example, for goblins, ghosts, or the "God" people call upon and harmonize with—a child of man who plants their feet on the ground cannot possibly create such excessive, undue thoughts. That is, as long as we do not live detached from reality, the movements initiated by people must inevitably be movements for people.
In Chosŏn (though this is likely true for any country today), it is a lamentable situation that many specialized literary figures—such professionals lacking 창자 (guts/substance?) like yourselves—are emerging. Since literature is not the private property of an individual, it goes without saying that one must not forget the social nature of literary arts. In this regard, it is fortunate that Guyau's famous work "Art from a Sociological Point of View" exists. In Chosŏn, those called specialized literary figures (though there are hardly any worth calling such, and even if there were, how many could there be?) seem to know literature only as an occupation utterly disconnected from society. Not only that, but they also seem to think of themselves as having no dealings with the people of society in general.
Literary youths (writers in Chosŏn), what are their (I don't say all of them) arguments? They say, <11> "We are literary figures, artists, therefore we do not lend an ear to noisy matters like social thought, this ideology, or that movement. We love freedom exceedingly, and we strive only to do our part, that is, to create Beauty." And then they reveal their clear faces before the eyes of the crowd. If so, what kind of freedom do they love, and what does this Beauty mean? In Chosŏn, especially for people (!) struggling day by day just for their meals, what freedom is there, and what "mental leisure and room" is there for the creation of Beauty?
If freedom, what class's freedom is it? Is it the freedom of the bourgeoisie? Or the freedom of the proletariat? Of course, it is a clear fact that both the bourgeoisie and the proletariat in Chosŏn are abused classes, but still, there is room to distinguish between freedom that defends the bourgeoisie and proletarian class freedom. Consequently, isn't it an unavoidable fact that bourgeois class aesthetic consciousness and proletarian class aesthetic consciousness are clearly divided? (I will postpone discussion on bourgeois literature and proletarian literature to the next opportunity and now hasten my pen towards the current goal.)
Not only the propertyless class are proletarians. All the oppressed populations of the entire world are proletarians like us. Therefore, the proletariat has no national borders. What boundary line could there be for the people of Gorky's "The Lower Depths"?
Under capitalist militarism, there is no literature intrinsic to life. If there is, it can only be the outcry of rebellion against that era. Moreover, in Chosŏn, is there even the leisure to look for literature? No. That is the conclusion. It is a fact that among those who wish to pursue literature, there will be none who do not feel the sorrow of reality. (If there is anyone who cannot feel the sorrow of exposing reality, or anyone who cannot carry the sorrow of exposing reality through to the revolution of reality, it would be better for them to hang themselves and die.)
For the words "literature" or "beauty" to arise from the mouths of the propertyless class, the ruled class, would be a kind of miracle and, at the same time, one of the meaningless phenomena. When thinking of the ground one stands on and the time flowing by, if the word "art" rolls off the tongue while one's neck is being twisted and face trampled, isn't that a spectacle on Earth? Comrades, if you see the world, think of Chosŏn, if the wick of your heart (心臘) is still fresh within your breast and half <12> of your head has not disappeared, you will cry out loudly for the reality XX [text obscured/missing].
If asked what kind of literature is needed in Chosŏn (as would be the case in Japan and China as well), it is the literature of Proletkult (프로렛트컬트) that is needed. Literature for the enlightenment of the great majority is needed. Accordingly, how urgent it is to teach our mother tongue (國文) to the illiterate comrades in remote farming villages is something everyone knows without needing to be told. From any perspective, the literature of Proletkult is the most urgent issue among all things. The thought of the revolution of reality, determined by the turning of the age, the misery of life, the exposure of the wickedness of the established classes, and the sorrow of reality, must engulf the world like a ball of fire and become one unified mass. Cast away the foundation of sentimentalism (俗情主義) which deliberately forgets the sorrow of exposing reality, avoids reality, and ultimately arrives at affirming reality—smash it right now with the iron hammer of reality!
The young people of Chosŏn who try to follow the history of Japanese literature exactly need to open their eyes wider once more. How many missteps has the Japanese literary world, baptized by naturalist literature, taken since the early Meiji era until today? In today's Japanese literary world, those who could be said to follow the path of the people who were pure in the early literary circles seem to have become weaker, spiritless sentimentalists compared to their predecessors, and not a few are seen seeking refuge in the Ivory Tower. This can only be attributed to having lost the social nature of literary arts.
Then, in Chosŏn—although the sprouts of Proletkult literature are not yet visible—I have nevertheless sensed that a similar sign has begun to flow implicitly. Therefore, I am saying these words in advance before such a movement is concretely born.
That is, regarding the two undercurrents of spiritualism and practicalism—of course, just as there is no idealism detached from the intimate reality like realism and idealism, spiritualism and practicalism also have the same roots, but because the nature of the tactics (탁크릭크), that is, the strategies each employs, are clearly different, I believe there is some need for discussion here.

2
The fact that spiritualism and practicalism were discussed globally pertains to the recent split in the Clarté movement, specifically the debate between Henri Barbusse and Romain Rolland. Now, writing <13> in Chosŏn, which lags behind the world in everything, about the globalization of the Clarté movement, I do not feel such a great need for it. Why? Because any ideology, any movement, has its stages (層階). Therefore, this debate between Romain Rolland and Barbusse is ultimately a debate between Rolland and Barbusse in France, and there is no need yet to make noise about it in Chosŏn.
However, it is an inevitable fact that we will tread such stages before long. Seeds that are not sown do not sprout; if it weren't going to emerge, it would be different, but preparing now for what will eventually sprout is by no means futile labor. And even if it turns out to be futile labor, what harm could there be?
Romain Rolland, through his "Jean-Christophe," "July 14th," "Danton," "Above the Battle," "The People's Theater," etc., has already become relatively popular, his name quite elevated in Chosŏn, but the name Henri Barbusse may not be known as much. The name Barbusse, author of "Clarté" (the forerunner of the Clarté movement), "Hell," "Under Fire," etc., might sound somewhat unfamiliar to the ear.
Henri Barbusse was born on May 17, 1874, in Asnières, Seine, France. Later, when he was twenty, he received an award from the poetry society L'Écho de Paris (he was originally a poet). Then, in 1898, when he was twenty-five, he married the youngest daughter of Catulle Mendès. Afterwards, he was a drama critic for "Grande Revue" and also became the chief editor of the magazine "Je sais tout" (I know it all). (Since I, the writer of this, also do not know Barbusse's career in detail, I am translating verbatim the brief profile written in "Poètes d'aujourd'hui" published by Mercure de France, so I am not sure if he is still the editor of "Je sais tout" now. After the "Clarté Group" (클라르테團) was organized in Europe the year after "Clarté" was published in 1918 [Note: "Clarté" the novel was published in 1919, the group formed afterwards], the magazine "Clarté" came into being under Barbusse's direction, so I don't know if he is still the editor of "Je sais tout". - Details like this career don't matter much; it is enough just to know that he is a "Seeker of Truth." Below, I would like to translate one of his poems.
Letter
When I write a letter to you, the lamp beside me peeps <14>
The clock waits for that duration
I close both eyes without doubt
And walk into our sleep...

The lamp is quiet, but I have a fever
And people cannot hear your voice, your voice...
Your name that smiled upon my lips
And your caress I hold within my fingers.

I have a peace I haven't had recently, but
Your boundless heart touches me, is felt, and sighs
Half-fallen into a dream, I don't know
If the one writing the letter is me or perhaps you...

3
The poem above is merely included to convey his poetic style, but it is questionable how well I have conveyed that style with the power of my poor language skills. In any case, Henri Barbusse is a courageous artist with a firm philosophy grounded in reality. The year after his novel "Clarté," meaning "Light," was published, in 1919, Henri Barbusse, Romain Rolland, Blasco Ibáñez, Georg Brandes, Anatole France, Ellen Key, Upton Sinclair, H.G. Wells, Stefan Zweig, Georges Duhamel, Israel Zangwill, and others with cosmopolitan aspirations aligned with Barbusse's "Clarté" ideals, initiated a global movement for "Light, Truth, and Love." This is the "Clarté Movement."
However, less than two full years after the Clarté Movement was concretely established, a split occurred within it. The debate between pure spiritualism and practicalism arose within the Clarté Movement.
Barbusse's principle—that is, practical reality revolution, which aims first and foremost for the fundamental destruction of the modern social structure and decadent bourgeois culture in order to liberate art onto the path of life's inherent freedom, denying all modern societies that possess social conditions restricting art—clashed with Romain Rolland's stance: "Art stands on absolute freedom, therefore it is not governed by the social environment. Thus, we have absolutely no need to support the bourgeois class or flatter the newly emerging proletarian class. We <15> revere absolute freedom and genuinely abhor the state of slavery, whereas Henri Barbusse is nothing more than a propagandist for social revolution, akin to kneeling before the proletarian class. We are artists. Therefore, we absolutely do not delight in participating in peripheral issues like political movements or social movements, let alone economic movements." This conflict between practical reality revolution and reality-avoiding, solitary, free spiritualism was the cause that triggered the split in the "Clarté Movement."
Rather than me examining and passing judgment on the two sides at length with my inadequate words here, I believe it is better to translate the debating essays of Barbusse and Rolland, append them, and leave the judgment to each individual. I repeat, this debate is by no means a personal dispute between two great French artists but something that must be taken up as an issue in various countries around the world today. The debate consists of five letters in total between the two. The very first is the article Barbusse wrote in the second issue of "Clarté" magazine in 1921 [Note: The text says 1920, but the first letter is usually dated 1921], titled "Concerning Rollandism." This article became the trigger for the debate. Although the five debating letters will likely amount to many manuscript pages, I intend to translate them in full below as they should be referential.
Concerning Rollandism. By Henri Barbusse
It is not very surprising that there is much that is essentially conservative among "intellectual workers." In the faint light of this modern intellectual life, we can perceive the rebirth of facts from a century ago. "Literature" has always been a speculative form of slavery. Especially in the "great ages" when political success reached its zenith, the function of writers, thinkers, and artists was nothing more than a kind of decorative boast. They generally became quite useful items for attracting the respectful hearts of the masses towards all established customs, ways of thinking, ruling forms, and sanctified institutions.
Of course, this entanglement [맛틈, likely '맡음' - responsibility/entanglement?] which binds them seems more apparent in the most famous writers, but the majority are caught and hang onto the professional ties of being a writer, taking responsibility upon themselves. This tendency among writers has a more primitive reason beyond this. The sculptor of turbulent life, falling from the mother's womb, respects the "Past" more, being inherently handicapped [배안의 병신 - literally 'cripple in the womb', likely meaning inherently predisposed]. Since art has an instinctive tendency to flow towards conservatism. Why? Because the scenes of the present and the past are already prepared, they appear abundant <16> for sculpting, and are therefore much easier to create than the lofty rational speculation pursuing the future.
From the natural tendency of artistic vitality, the sophistry sometimes seen in this argument arises. The various reasons that fuel this tendency seem merely superficial, not real, yet since what people see is the appearance, the will is needed to try to investigate deeper than that.
Most writers have not tried to take on this responsibility. What we intend to speak of are only writers, not scholars. Science, due to its precise inherent duty, is destined to seek other, easier paths. That is, science is essentially a corrector, so its critical spirit is the raison d'être of science. Science is a systematization built upon correction after correction, a seemingly traditional construct, showing firm norms against fantasy, just as it does against the confusion and ambiguity of the accidental emergence of idols in the natural world. It wouldn't be an exaggeration to say that the intellectual class, after ceasing to mimic monks by pretending to be scholars, gradually, little by little, cultivated their own originality—and thus endured excommunication. However, for the most part, the dangerous acrobatics were neither to the taste of the intellectual class nor within their power. And so, in the first 25 years of the 20th century, at the intellectual center of France, 39 of the most honorable literary decorators formed a group, and from here, the classical propaganda of anti-innovation gained momentum. But such common occurrences do not pose a significant obstacle. Regarding what has just been said, how severe the ignorance and slavish mentality are is not the issue. However, only one thing like this can be said: that the present powers, just as they have occupied various weapons in the world (whether unpleasant means or pleasant means), will also monopolize various spiritual weapons, and also, in the point that they have turned their methods of expression into ropes that make their solemn pronouncements serve convention and approve submission, they can be said to have generally industrialized them. Currently, significant misunderstandings often arise among the few non-reactionary intellectuals, and these misunderstandings seem to be worsening. So here lies a problem we must inevitably confront. Because it is a matter of the attitude of figures like those on the left—that is, those who, moved by honesty, sincerity, and a true heart, <17> have directed their arrows of criticism towards the various institutions that are now trying to plunge us from collapse into annihilation, but who now have the appearance of being adversaries to our thorough republicanism. Such writers, thinkers, and artists have many vague disciples, who use, or misuse—in my opinion—the model and norm of Romain Rolland.
Even saying this, we do not want to hear that my comrades in the "Clarté Group" and I myself are slandering Rolland, who is in many ways the pride of the modern era. We are not questioning Romain Rolland's moral courage or literary talent, nor are we trying to diminish in the slightest the echo of his outcry against the Great War, at a time when he alone transcended the spirituality of humanity and he alone was truly justified. We bring up such a name because otherwise, it is difficult for us to point out the social danger and the error of intellectuals that are now about to be exposed. The actions of the Rollandists, who elevate their master to participate in five or six matters [닷곱에나 서곱에나 - possibly a typo for 대여섯에나, meaning 'five or six'], are what have created such danger.
An honest, intelligent, and brave person, following their reason, transcends the ferocious war and displays the freedom of the spirit in the most admirable way. There is nothing in this world as sublime as an attack drawn from this reason and compassion against the kind of root cause that brings about all artificial suffering, all misfortune. A person of deep thought cannot approve of that dreadful madman-like behavior, even if it is generally accepted. Why? Because it is tantamount to comparing what others dare to call "ideals" with the true ideals of humanity. It takes upon itself the task of correcting all thoughts and human hearts. And then it indicates the path for all people to avoid friction and conflict and reach the unwavering goal of a great plane of humanity and co-existence.
He who stands up, "alone against all," due to various circumstances, pays no heed <18> to the kind of lamentations that those supposedly wise people habitually pretend to cry out. For him, the ancestrally transmitted poetic but thin-shadowed various prayers regarding human misfortune and madness are of no concern. He points out the common thread connecting falsehood and sin. No, he even dares to say that war, the frequently occurring and escalating slaughter, is the actual doing of an international minority who manipulate everything and use the masses to achieve their own goals. What benefit is there in planning a rebellion of the heart even against accomplished facts and shooting such arrows of blame! Yes, it is used, as Romain Rolland has already said, to rescue the "independence" of the spirit and the rights of thought.
That is, in the face of the world's ruin, it is used to preserve the legacy possessed by the great consciences of the past, and also the spiritual treasures from which those very people drew strength. Also, it is a kind of positive action because it increases this moral treasure and expands it within the hearts of the people. The reverence that attracts plausible, sturdy personalities who know well the tricks of resisting falsehood and illusion naturally multiplies its adherents through pure gratitude. But should one be satisfied with that? No, decidedly not. If things remain that way, everything will stay the same. We can no longer control the unsettling feeling that already overflows in our chests.
That is, the desire to prevent a new war, or the desire to struggle towards that goal even unto death. No matter how the curses cried out by heroes standing on justice and compassion reverberate, no matter how splendid they are, if these curses hide their traces, war will erupt a second time. Why? Because the social causes of war remain as they are. Language that expresses the spirit has no direct effect on life. There is no true point of contact between all kinds of interconnected events and the blatant defiance with which the great protesters of common sayings openly interrogate. The role of simply appearing like a moralist is negative. They come onto the stage after the problem has erupted once. And then, as disaster presses heavily and military slaughter increases ever more terrifyingly from one instance to the next, they merely follow behind forever. The world's traders dismiss this morality and etiquette with a snort and face no troublesome situation. Those who gather and hoard <19> continue to pile up the wealth of the entire world. Diplomacy and parliaments—the secret police and public gendarmes of the capitalists—try only to firmly bind the interest among themselves through treaties and laws.
This noble, terrifying "powerlessness" must be abandoned. To escape this, we must recognize that the struggle against the false laws of society requires two stages: one "destructive" and the other "constructive," and that these twins are in an inseparable relationship. "Man destroys only that which must be replaced," asserts Auguste Comte. Without borrowing positive force, no matter how powerful, no matter how imposing the criticism, it is like a floating cloud. Regarding the existing order, no matter how one employs the eloquence of Demosthenes, if it does not indicate a New Order, it is merely empty, foolish talk.
Again, herein lies the second duty of the intellectual class. That is, the duty to construct an Ideal Order—at first merely a theoretical truth, a function of the spirit—like a science—a persistent, positivist, and applied science—as long as reality opposes the order of society. Although it may be true that the suffering experienced by possessors of beautiful souls from the sight of increasing injustice towards people selects legal reformers and makes them work, they first realistically examine the conditions of individual or collective life and then build the structure of their New Conception upon it.
Socialist theorists have drawn the arbitrarily constructed concept that the world calls the "Established Order" from that strange reverence, that is to say, into their own arguments. The sole reason for the existence of this order is the fact that it is "Established," and at the same time, it imposes all constraints, materially and morally. The oligarchy and privilege system, which sanctifies the enslavement of almost all productive forces and, by turning all crucial places on Earth into quagmires of antagonism and destruction, has dared to carry out infinite slaughter, must be expelled from the reason of "man" only by the opposing elements organized solely by the system itself. This rational order is the strength of society itself, the law, born from the very foundation of the individual and their life. It hastens innovation through the entire synthetic mechanism of life. It also destroys everything despotic, conventional, superstitious <20> in all aspects and creates a perfect organism. Why? Because only a perfect organism can have the hope of life.
Thus, these servants of the spirit are far removed from their predecessors. It was both helpful and important for them that they read works which crudely argued the various consequences we now have within the present. So they have pointed out to whom or to what the people engaged in mutual slaughter should pay their sincere respect, and what loyalty they must uphold. They have discerned the framework of doctrine and action between the great goal of solidarity and peace—an announcement merely heard as a faint echo—and the chaos of the modern era. They have relentlessly filled the gap between what exists and what ought to exist. This gap, more than cannons and legends, has defended traditional privileges and sanctified ferocity. They do not permit themselves the disappointment of how difficult the task of starting anew is within the confused and noisy realm of existing laws. And thus, it is such people who deserve to be credited with providing the only solution to all avoidable public misfortunes, all avoidable collective hardships.
Providing an ideal solution and actually applying it are quite different things. In any case, it is necessary to embark on the task. A reform plan adapted to the substance of the problem has a kind of power in itself, merely propagating it introduces action. Generally, the masses, who despite possessing supreme power, have hitherto tasted the bitterness of failure due to their instability and lack of solidarity, will sufficiently accomplish what they intended to do once they make up their minds. The New Conception is not mere refutation. It is a new plan for things.
However, here we must make a declaration that is simultaneously sorrowful and astonishing. That is, we are led to declare that the "Rollandists," standing aloof from logicians and social reformers, give no consideration whatsoever to the "practical aspect of the problem." Does this arise from an antipathy towards those who must engage in politics? Or is it due to hesitation in boldly expressing straightforward affirmation, and a reluctance towards the courage required to dare assert, "This is truth"? Or is it because they fear the idea that has a deep-seated root which could be called violence? Or else, <21> is it because there is hope that humanity can be transformed by achieving curative effects through other special means? Whichever of these reasons, they are all weak and childish. Look at the word "politics" from any side of its meaning. Then, anyone cannot help but realize that the word signifies realization—that now, realization is everything, and if pure ideas remain merely single ideas, they will vanish like mist.
What guarantee does the socialist reform plan offer to the demands of the spirit and conscience? Is it not in its attempt to logically apply its common creed, the permanent truth? We are not trying to discover magical, alchemical prescriptions or mysteriously craft them and then combine them. The entire structure of ideal reconstruction is governed by liberation from anomalies. No error can arise in the calculations of the geometry of social revolution, which the principles of Clarté define and interpret. Declaring such a thing is no more presumptuous than when scholars use the great word "Truth" in declaring the authoritative certainty of the fundamental laws of applied science in its extremely limited practical aspects.
Is there any other solution besides this? There are not that many ways to generally adjust all individual efforts within a balanced economic dynamic. There might be one way to personally reform people such that organization or collective discipline becomes unnecessary for egoists to change into good people, do good deeds, and live in accordance with ideals. However, we cannot earnestly and naively halt our steps before the illusion of this miraculous solution. The crisis is pressing down, about to crush the nearly living modern person. We are floundering, dirtied by stubborn internal strife. "Humanity" has passed into the hands of moneylenders and is being forced into a pond of unknown depth. And they suggest to us that since humans can all change by modeling themselves on the small prototypes of groups who are themselves nothing but deviant exceptions, we should wait until everyone first becomes strong themselves.
Regarding "Violence," it could be said that this word has been treated with extreme contempt, treated hideously and uglily. As a result, we cannot get past the conclusions of splendid opinions and have come to embrace a disordered image of <22> something that originally should stand firmly in its place. Surely no one would praise cruel, blood-reeking actions—certainly not among those who seek, through scientific knowledge, to rescue the social structure from the disorder of violence. The norms of reason and justice—which are now the issue to be established—if demanded and maintained by people with common interests, would already preserve authority by that fact alone. That is, it means if they seize power, the only means by which they can demand everything and maintain everything. Violence, or rather Sanction—because it is the act of giving this indispensable right of management to the victims and the exploited—when considered separately from the hands of those who usurp existing violence, is itself a neutral element. As long as its use is not questioned, one cannot decide whether it is good or bad. Even the most extreme proponents of humanitarian and sentimental ideas would permit sanctions to fall upon their own heads to prevent the harm of common crimes. It is a clear fact stated by the imperialist, militarist system itself that there are various acts within this system that can be seen as crimes against common law (though the time is already late). Here, the purpose of violence is nothing other than setting aside armed-[text unclear/missing]-removal. The intervention of violence in the general concept of social revolution—we think carefully about the meaning before using words—is merely one detail (떼타이유 [détail]) concerning all objectives, and even that, only a temporary detail.
I believe that there is virtually nothing justifiable or forgivable in the spiritual tendencies of those mentioned here. It arises from evasion and is a new, repeated stylization of the traditional formula of the "Ivory Tower." The servants of the spirit content themselves with merely attempting hostile demonstrations against pervasive evils. Therefore, they sometimes spare the effort required to rush in and alleviate some disorder. Thus, the swirling current among the populace, who uniformly harbor hatred towards the barbarity spreading across the world, grows ever larger. Now is indeed the time when the issue is transforming ideals into facts and reforming the order of things, or when conservatives and reformists stand side-by-side on the same stage; therefore, what are things like passive reformism if not, in fact, preservers of the Old Order? They cling to the past, risking their lives. <23> And one arm borrows strength from the Clarté Group. They ask us, become stagnant, obstruct further, and readily intend even hostile actions. Among their kind, some fortunately enjoy the reputation of being "progressive." "Progressive" is a characteristic truth usable only concerning their opposite, but they, regardless, intend to participate in an organized, "completely regular struggle." But like anarchists, that is, disjointed, moreover, harmful forces due to the consequences of their individual actions rather than beneficial due to the heroic spirit they teach. Ultimately, in the end, they form a kind of decorative "Left Wing" between "Pacifism" and "Liberalism," but since they are originally useless, they are merely pitiful.
They think of Socialism too simply. They only, in one single path, with an intractable obstinacy, look back at yesterday's historical episodes and openly declare that the failure of Socialism is clearer than seeing fire. The reason they give is the indecisiveness and lethargy shown by a faction of minority Socialists in 1914 (who knew nothing about devising strategies to prevent the actual outbreak of events). However, such judgment is an unforgivable shortsightedness, and in this way, no one could possibly establish the system of socialist belief and tactics, by which the entire source of the spirit of rebellion across generations, all perspectives, all victories, all failures, have been encompassed and sought to advance. The youth of today must make a bold choice between these two tendencies. One must consider that now is transitioning into an era where mutual insults and denunciations not based on constructive and precise effort are merely decorative and almost shameful.
Only after the revolutionary spirit exists can one see the perfection of the spirit of rebellion. The need for human thought itself to be independent exists for the purpose of proceeding to action, by no means is it said for the sake of independence itself. The "Rollandists" have merely fulfilled the first part of the duty of a thinker. The moralist's denunciations and attacks are now extremely serious, so they will not be left alone without opening the path to action. Henceforth, their disciples will firmly tread that path.
(Published in Clarté Magazine No. 3) -Continued-<24>

**Summary**

Kim Kijin argues passionately for the necessity of "Proletkult" (proletarian culture/literature) in colonial Chosŏn, sharply criticizing contemporary Korean writers who retreat into aestheticism ("art for art's sake") and ignore the harsh social realities and class struggles faced by the masses, particularly the oppressed proletariat. He introduces the recent split within the international Clarté movement, contrasting Henri Barbusse's call for practical, revolutionary action to fundamentally destroy oppressive social structures (Practicalism) with Romain Rolland's emphasis on the independent, transcendent spirit of the artist detached from direct political/social struggle (Spiritualism). Kim clearly sides with Barbusse, urging Korean intellectuals and youth to embrace a literature committed to social revolution and the "construction" of a new socialist order, dismissing Rolland's approach as ineffective, potentially complicit with the status quo, and ultimately a form of escapism into an "Ivory Tower." This article is significant for historians as it showcases the early and direct engagement of Korean intellectuals with international leftist literary and political debates (Clarté, Socialism, Proletkult) in the 1920s. It reveals the urgency felt by figures like Kim Kijin to forge a socially committed, revolutionary art form as a tool for consciousness-raising and struggle against both colonial oppression and class exploitation in Korea.

**Named Entities**

金基鎭	김기진	Kim Kijin
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
中國	중국	Chungguk (China)
뿌르즈와	부르주아	Ppurŭjwa (Bourgeoisie - transliteration)
프로레타리아	프롤레타리아	P'ŭroret'aria (Proletariat - transliteration)
꼬르키	고리키	Kkorŭk'i (Gorky - transliteration)
안리ㆍ빠르뿌-스	앙리 바르뷔스	Anri Parŭppu-sŭ (Henri Barbusse - transliteration)
로맨ㆍ로-	로맹 롤랑	Romaen Ro-rang (Romain Rolland - transliteration)
佛蘭西	프랑스	Pŭllansŏ (France - phonetic transcription using Hanja)
L`E cho do Purin	-	L'Écho de Paris (French name)
카튜-ㄹㆍ만데스	카튈 망데스	K'at'yu-rŭ Mandesŭ (Catulle Mendès - transliteration)
그란드ㆍ르뿌-	그랑드 르뷔	Kŭrandŭ Rŭppu- (Grande Revue - transliteration)
즈 세 투	주 세 투	Chŭ Se T'u (Je sais tout - transliteration)
메르큐-르 드 프란쓰	메르퀴르 드 프랑스	Merŭk'yu-rŭ dŭ P'ŭranssŭ (Mercure de France - transliteration)
포엣트 또쥬-르드우이	포에트 도주르뒤	P'oet'ŭ Ttojyurŭdŭui (Poètes d'aujourd'hui - transliteration)
클라르테	클라르테	K'ŭllaret'e (Clarté - transliteration)
쁘라스코ㆍ이바네스	블라스코 이바녜스	Ppŭrasŭk'o Ibanesŭ (Blasco Ibáñez - transliteration)
조르즈ㆍ쁘란데쓰	게오르그 브란데스	Chorŭjŭ Ppŭrandesŭ (Georg Brandes - transliteration)
아나토-ㄹㆍ프란스	아나톨 프랑스	Anat'o-rŭ P'ŭransŭ (Anatole France - transliteration)
에렌ㆍ케이	엘렌 케이	Eren K'ei (Ellen Key - transliteration)
압론ㆍ씽클레아	업턴 싱클레어	Apton Ss'ingk'ŭllea (Upton Sinclair - transliteration)
에취ㆍ자-웰스	H. G. 웰스	Ech'wi Cha-Welsŭ (H.G. Wells - transliteration)
스테판ㆍ쓰와잉그	슈테판 츠바이크	Sŭt'ep'an Ssŭwainggŭ (Stefan Zweig - transliteration)
조르즈ㆍ뜌아메-르	조르주 뒤아멜	Chorŭjŭ Ttyuame-rŭ (Georges Duhamel - transliteration)
요세프ㆍ장그빌	이스라엘 장윌	Yosep'ŭ Changgŭbil (Israel Zangwill - transliteration)
오우규스트ㆍ콤트	오귀스트 콩트	Ougyusŭt'ŭ K'omt'ŭ (Auguste Comte - transliteration)
떼모스태비스	데모스테네스	Ttemosŭt'aebisŭ (Demosthenes - transliteration)

**Glossary**

밧갓헤	바깥에	Outside (older spelling/form of 바깥에)
흘느기	흐르기	Flowing (older spelling/form of 흐르기)
안이	아니	Not; No (older spelling/form of 아니)
귀쉀	귀신	Ghost; Spirit (older spelling/form of 귀신)
독가비	도깨비	Goblin (older spelling/form of 도깨비)
갓흔	같은	Like; Same as (older spelling/form of 같은)
붓친	붙인	Attached; Planted (older spelling/form of 붙인)
만히	많이	Many; Much (older spelling/form of 많이)
업는	없는	Non-existent; Lacking (older spelling/form of 없는)
밋는다	믿는다	Believe (older spelling/form of 믿는다)
잇서서	있어서	Being in/at; Because there is (older spelling/form of 있어서)
엇더하냐	어떠하냐	How is it? What is it like? (older spelling/form)
기우린다	기울인다	Lean; Tilt; Lend (an ear) (older spelling/form)
엇더한	어떠한	What kind of; Any (older spelling/form)
헤	의	Of (possessive particle) (dialectal or older form of 의)
잇겟느냐	있겠느냐	Will there be? Would there be? (older spelling/form)
다함끼	다 함께	All together
난호아 지는	나누어지는	Is divided (older spelling/form of 나누어지는)
업슬	없을	Will not be; Which does not exist (older spelling/form of 없을)
늣기지	느끼지	Feel (older spelling/form of 느끼지)
것겟다	겠다	Would be better (contraction, likely of 좋을 것이다/것이다) (older usage)
듸듸고	디디고	Stepping on (older spelling/form of 디디고)
우흐로부터	위로부터	From above (older spelling/form of 위로부터)
놉히	높이	Highly; Loudly (older spelling/form of 높이)
부르지질	부르짖을	Will cry out; Will shout (older spelling/form of 부르짖을)
갓흐면	같으면	If it is like (older spelling/form of 같으면)
그럿코	그렇고	Being so; And (older spelling/form of 그렇고)
가리키는	가르치는	Teaching (older spelling/form of 가르치는)
늣기엿다	느꼈다	Felt (older spelling/form of 느꼈다)
로-	롤랑	Rolland (older transcription)
빠르쀼-스	바르뷔스	Barbusse (older transcription)
일홈	이름	Name (older spelling/form)
잇섯다	있었다	Was; Existed (older spelling/form)
맨드러	만들어	Make (older spelling/form of 만들어)
조흔	좋은	Good (older spelling/form)
언저가지고	얹어서 가지고	Placing/Adding and carrying (older spelling/form)
올흐냐	옳으냐	Is it right? (older spelling/form)
놋는	놓는	Placing; Setting down (older spelling/form)
밧드러 올니는	받들어 올리는	Upholding; Lifting up respectfully (older spelling/form)
맛틀여고	맡으려고	Trying to take responsibility for (older spelling/form)
거사려서	거슬러서	Against; Opposing (older spelling/form)
질머지고	짊어지고	Shouldering; Bearing (a burden) (older spelling/form)
직히지	지키지	Keep; Protect; Defend (older spelling/form)
뵈는	보이는	Seems; Looks (older spelling/form of 보이는)
채워내려왓다	채워 내려왔다	Have been filling up (older spelling/form)
실혀하는대	싫어하는데	Dislikes; Abhors (older spelling/form)
떠러트릴여고	떨어뜨리려고	Trying to drop; Trying to cause to fall (older spelling/form)
맛보아온	맛보아 온	Have tasted; Have experienced (older spelling/form)
넉넉히	넉넉히	Sufficiently; Amply
내놋코서	내놓고서	Putting forth; Risking (older spelling/form)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제39호
발행일	1923년 09월 01일
기사제목	클라르테運動의 世界化
필자	金基鎭
기사형태	문예평론

클라르테運動의 世界化
						金基鎭
一
精神主義와 實際主義의 두 갈내의 물결이 우리 사람 사회의 각 방면에 暗然히, 朦曨하게, 흘느기 시작한 것을 나는 보게 된다. 사람이 地球 밧갓헤서 사는 것이 안이고 地球 우에 사는 이상에, 사람이 귀쉀 이나 혹는 독가비 갓흔 사람이외의 물건이 안이고 사람인 이상에, 각 사람의 머리 속에서 일어날, 울어나온 모든 생각은 「사람들」을 위한 것이 안이면 안될 것이다.
文學이 사람이외의 무슨 다른 물건, 가령 예를 들면, 독가비나 귀신이나, 혹은 사람들이 불느기 조화하는 「한우님」을 위해서 세워진다면 모르거니와, 땅우에 발을 붓친 사람의 자식으로는 이와 갓흔 度外의, 分外인 생각을 만드러내지 못할 것이다. 즉 현실을 떠나서 살지 안이하는 이상에 사람들의 이르키는 운동은 사람들을 위한 운동이 안이면 안이될 것이다.
朝鮮에 잇서서 (現今의 어느 나라를 勿論하고 그럴 터이지만) 專門文學家가- 제옹과 갓흔 창자 업는 文學家가 만히 생긴다는 것은 한심한 일이다. 文藝가 자기 개인의 소유물이 안인 이상에 文藝의 社會性을 망각하고서는 안될 것은 말할 것까지도 이르지 안을 줄로 밋는다. 이 점에 잇서서 규-요의 名著 「社會學上으로 본 藝術」이 잇는 것은 다행한 일이다. 朝鮮에 잇서서 專門文學家(라고 부를만한 것도 업지만은 또 잇서야 얼마나 그리 만흐랴 만은-)라는 사람들는 극히 사회와 沒交涉한 직업으로만 文學을 아는 모양이다. 그 뿐이 안이요 또 자기자신도 社會一般의 사람들과 交涉이 업는 거와 가티 생각하고 잇는 모양이다.
文學靑年(朝鮮에 잇서서 文士), 그들의 (全部라고는 말하지 안는다) 말솜시가 엇더하냐 하면 그네들은 『우리는＜11＞ 文學家다, 藝術家다, 그럼으로 우리는 社會思想이니, 무슨 主義니, 무슨 運動이니 하는 떠드는 소리에는 귀를 안 기우린다. 우리는 극히 자유를 사랑하며, 우리의 할 바「일」, 즉 美를 창조함에만 노력할 뿐이다』. 하고는 멀금한 얼골을 뭇사람의 눈압헤 드러내여 놋는 것이다. 그려면 그네들이 사랑한다는 자유는 엇더한 것이며 헤 美라는 것은 무엇을 말하는 것이냐. 朝鮮에 잇서 더구나 그날 그날의 「끼니」에 쫏기여 헤매이는 사람들(!)의 생활에 무슨 자유가 잇스며 무슨 美의 창조의 「心的 餘裕와 餘地」가 잇겟느냐.
자유면 엇더한 계급의 자유일 것이냐. 뿌르즈와찌-의 자유냐? 프로레타리아의 자유냐? 물론 朝鮮의 뿌르즈와나 프로레타리아는 다함끼 被虐待階級인 것은 분명한 사실이지만은 그래도 뿌르즈와를 擁護하는 자유와 프로레타리아階級的 자유는 가려볼 餘地가 잇는 터이다. 따러서 뿌르즈와階級的 美意識과 프로레타리아階級的 美意識이 명료하게 난호아 지는 것은 엇지할 수 업는 사실이 아니냐. (뿌르즈와 문학과 프로레타리아 문학에 대한 말은 다음 기회로 미루어두고 지금은 써 나가는 목표를 향해서 붓길을 빨니한다.)
無産階級者만 프로레타리아가 안이다. 왼 세계의 모든 虐待밧는 인구들은 우리와 가티 프로레타리아다. 그럼으로 프로레타리아에게는 國境이 업는 것이다. 꼬르키-의 「맨아래층」의 人民에게 무슨 경계선이 잇슬 것이냐.
資本主義 軍國主義 治下에서는 生의 本然한 문학이 업다. 잇다하면 그것은 그 시대의 反逆의 부르지짐 뿐일 것이다. 더구나 朝鮮에 잇서서 문학이라는 것을 차저볼 여유가 잇너냐. 안이다. 그것은 결론이다. 문학을 하고자 하는 사람 중에 현실의 悲哀를 늣기지 안이하는 사람이 업슬 것은 사실이다. (혹 現實曝露의 悲哀를 늣기지 못하는 사람이 잇거든 또는 그 現實曝露의 悲哀를 現實革命에까지 끌고 나가지 못하는 사람이 잇거든 목이라도 매고서 죽어버리는게 좃켓다.)
被支配階級의 無産階級者들의 입에서 문학이니 美니 하는 소리가 일어난다는 것은 일종의 奇蹟인 동시에 無意味한 현상의 하나일 것이다. 듸듸고 서잇는 땅뎅이를 생각하고 흘너지나가는 타임을 생각할 때에 목아지를 비틀니면서 얼골을 짓밟히면서 藝術이라는 말이 혀바닥 우흐로부터 궁그러 내려온다면 그것은 地上의 奇觀이 안이냐. 동모들아 너희가 세계를 보고 朝鮮을 생각하고 가슴속에 心臘이 아직것 싱싱하고 머리의＜12＞ 반쪼각이 업서지지 안이 하엿거든 현실XX을 놉히 부르지질 것이다.
朝鮮에 잇서서 엇더한 문학이 필요하냐 할 것 갓흐면 (日本도 그럿코, 中國도 그러할 터이지만) 프로렛트컬트의 문학이 필요한 것이다. 多大數의 敎化문학이 필요한 것이다. 따러서 農村僻地의 文盲의 동모들에게 國文을 가리키는 것이 얼마나 급한 일인지는 말하지 안이하여도 다 아는 일일 것이다. 엇더한 점으로 보든지 프로렛트컬트의 문학은 모든 것 중에서 그중 긴급한 문제다. 시대의 전환과 생활의 悲慘과 旣成階級의 曝惡과 현실의 悲哀에서 결정된 현실혁명의 사상이 불덩어리갓치 세계를 흡싸서 한 뭉치가 되지 안으면 안될 것이다. 현실 曝露의 悲哀를 억지로 이저버리고서 현실에서 廻避하여가며 헤 가서는 現實肯定까지 이르게 되는 俗情主義의 根據를 현실의 쇠방맹이로 이 당장에서 부셔바려라.
日本의 文學史를 고대로 밟으려고 하는 朝鮮의 졂은 사람들은 눈을 더 한번 둥그랏케 뜰 필요가 잇는 것이다. 自然主義문학의 洗禮를 밧은 日本의 文壇이 明治初年 이후로 오늘까지 몃 거름이나 헛발을 떼여노화 내려왓느냐. 오늘의 日本文壇는 엇더한 의미로 初期文壇에서 凈凈하든 사람들의 뒤ㅅ 길을 것는다고 할 만한 사람들이 그들의 先輩 보담도 약한 기운 업는 俗情主義者가 되여 가지고 象牙의 塔에 安住하고자 하는 사람이 적지 안히 보인다. 이것은 文藝의 社會性을 일허버린 까닭 이상을 지나지 안이함으로 緣由된 탓이라 할 밧게는 수 업다.
그러면 朝鮮에 잇서서- 아직 프로렛트컬트의 문학의 싹은 보이지 안이하지마는- 그래도 이와 近似한 증조가 暗然히 흘느게 된 것을 나는 늣기엿다. 그럼으로 이러한 운동이 구체적으로 誕生되기 전에 미리 이와갓흔 말을 하는 것이다.
즉 精神主義와 實際主義의 두 갈내의 暗流에 대해서- 물론 現實主義와 理想主義와 갓치 밀접한 현실을 떠난 理想主義가 업는 것과 가치 精神主義와 實際主義와도 뿌리는 갓다 할지라도 그 각각 쓰는 戰術 즉 탁크릭크의 성질이 明瞭히 달음으로 여긔에는 얼마간 論議할 필요가 잇는 것으로 나는 밋는다.

2
精神主義와 實際主義가 세계적으로 논의된 사실은 최근의 클라르테運動의 分裂에 대해서 안리ㆍ빠르뿌-스와 로맨ㆍ로-과의 論爭이엿섯다. 지금 나는 모든 것으로＜13＞ 세계에 뒤떠러진 朝鮮에서 클라르테運動의 세계화의 소개를 쓰는데 과히 그 갓흔 필요를 늣기지는 못한다. 웨 그러냐하면 엇더한 主義의 엇더한 運動이던지 그 층게(層階)라는 것이 잇는 까닭이다. 그럼으로 이것도 로맨ㆍ로-란과 빠르쀼-스의 논쟁도 결국은 佛蘭西에 잇서서 로-란과 빠르쀼-스의 논쟁이지 朝鮮에서는 아직 떠들 필요가 업는 것이다.
그러나 멀지 안이하여서 그와 갓흔 層階를 밟을 것은 必然한 사실이다. 뿌리지 안이한 씨는 나지를 안이하는 것이라 나오지 안을 것이면 모르거니와 이왕 싹 나올 것을 지곰붓허 준비하여 가지고 잇는 것은 결코 徒勞가 안일 것이다. 또 설영 徒勞가 되면 된다기로 무슨 害가 잇겟느냐.
로맨ㆍ로-란은 그의 「쟌.크리스토프」 「7月14日」 「딴톤」 「싸홈우에 서거라」 「民衆藝術論」등으로 임의 朝鮮에도 그 일흠이 비교적 포퓨-라라고 할만치 놉핫지만은 안리ㆍ빠르쀼-스의 일홈은 그러키 만히 알지는 못할 것이다. 클라르테運動의 先驅인 「클라르테」, 「地獄」 「砲煙彈雨 아래서」등의 작자 빠르쀼-스의 일홈은 얼마간 귀에 생소할 것이다.
안리ㆍ빠르쀼-스는 1874年 5月17日 佛蘭西 세-느의 아스니에르라는 곳에서 낫다. 그 후 그가 시무살 때에 L`E cho do Purin라는 詩會의 상을 밧은 일이 잇다. (그는 본래 시인 이엿섯다) 그후 1898年 그가 시물 다섯살 되던 해에 카튜-ㄹㆍ만데스씨의 망내 딸과 婚姻을 햇섯다. 그 후에 「그란드ㆍ르뿌-」의 戱曲批評家로 잇섯고 또한 「즈 세 투」(내가 다 안다)라는 雜誌의 主任記者가 되엿다. (이것을 쓰는 나 역시 빠르쀼-스의 經歷을 자세히 모르는 고로 「메르큐-르 드 프란쓰」社의 出版 「포엣트 또쥬-르드우이」에 쓰인 簡畧한 經歷을 고대로 번역하는 것인 고로 지금도 역시 「즈 세 투」의 記者로 잇는지 안 잇는지는 자세히 모르겟다. 1980年에 「클라르테」가 出版된 그 이듬해에 歐羅巴에서 조직된 「클라르테團」이 생긴 뒤로 빠르쀼-쓰 主宰하에서 「클라르테」라는 雜誌가 되엿슴으로 지금도 아직 「즈 세 투」의 記者로 잇는지 그것은 모르겟다. -이와 갓흔 經歷 갓흔 것은 아모래도 조흔 것이닛가 다만 그가 「眞理의 探索者」인 것만 알어두면 구만일 것이다. 아래에 그의 詩를 하나 번역해 보고자 한다.
편지
네게다 편지 쓸 때 람프는 엽헤서 엿보고 잇고＜14＞
時計는 고동안을 기다리고 잇다
나는 의심업시 두 눈을 감고서
우리들의 잠 속으로 거러 드러가...

람프는 고요하나 나는 熱病을 가젓다
그러구 사람들은 듯지를 못해 네 말소리를 네 말소리를...
내 입살 우에서 웃음을 짓든 너의 일홈을
또한 너의 愛撫를 손고락 쇽에 내가 가젓다.

나는 근래의 업는 平穩을 가젓다 그러나
너의 가업슨 心臟은 내게 다이고 늣기여 탄식해
반이나 꿈속에 빠젓슬 때에 나는 모르겟다
편지를 쓰고 잇는 사람이 나인지 혹은 너인지...

3
이 우에 詩는 단지 그의 時風을 전하기 위해서 써 노흔 것이나 포-브르한 나의 語學의 힘으로 얼마나 그 時風을 전하게 되엿는지는 의문이다. 하여간 안리ㆍ빠르쀼-스는 현실에 굿센 哲學을 가진 용감한 藝術家이다. 그의 소설 「클라르테」즉 「光明」이 出版되든 그 이듬해 1919年에 안리ㆍ빠르쀼-스, 로맨ㆍ로-, 쁘라스코ㆍ이바네스, 조르즈ㆍ쁘란데쓰, 아나토-ㄹㆍ프란스, 에렌ㆍ케이, 압론ㆍ씽클레아, 에취ㆍ자-웰스, 스테판ㆍ쓰와잉그, 조르즈ㆍ뜌아메-르, 요세프ㆍ장그빌 등과 갓치 世界主義의 뜻을 가진 빠르쀼-스의 「클라르테」의 뜻을 가진 「光明과 眞理와 사랑」의 世界的運動을 이르키엿섯다. 이것이 즉, 「클라르테 運動」이다.
그러나 클라르테運動이 구체적으로 일어선후 滿 2年이 못 되여서 클라르테運動의 分裂이 생기게 된 것이다. 쀼 精神主義와 實際主義의 論爭이라는 것이 클라르테運動 내부에 일어난 것이다.
빠빠빠빠르쀼-쓰의 主義 즉 藝術이 制限당하는 사회적 조건을 가지고 잇는 현대의 모든 사회를 부정하고서 藝術을 生의 本然한 자유의 길로 解放식이기 위해서 제일 첫재 먼저 현대사회組織과 떼카단익크ㆍ뿌르즈와 문화의 根本的 破壞를 하고자 하는 實際的 現實革命과 로맨ㆍ로-의 『藝術은 절대적 자유 우에 스넌 것임으로 社會的 環境에 支配되지는 안는 것이다. 그럼으로 우리는 뿌르즈와 階級에 부축이 된다든지 新興 프로레타리아 계급에 아첨한다든지 할 필요가 절대로 업다. 우리는＜15＞絶對的 자유를 尊奉하고 奴隷的 境地를 마음으로 실혀하는대 안리ㆍ빠르쀼-스는 프로레타리아 階級 압헤 무룹을 꿀는 것과 갓흔 社會革命의 宣傳者 이상을 지나지 못한다. 우리는 藝術家다. 그럼으로 枝葉의 문제인 政治運動 혹은 社會運動 더한층 떠러저서 經濟運動 갓흔 운동 속에 참예하는 것을 진심으로 절대로 질거워하지 안이한다』하는 現實廻避의 孤獨的 自由精神主義와의 衝突이 「클라르테運動」의 分裂을 이르키게 된 원인이다.
여긔서 내가 변변치 못한 말로 장황하게 兩者를 檢討하여 가지고 판단을 내리는 것 보담도, 빠르쀼-스와 로-란 두 사람의 논쟁한 論文을 번역하여 언저가지고, 각 개인의 판단에 맛기여 두는 것이 조흔줄로 안다. 두 번 거듭 말하는 것이지만은, 이 논쟁은 결코 佛蘭西의 2大 藝術家의 개인적 논쟁이 안이라 現今의 세계 각국에서 문제로 삼지 안으면 안이 될 것이다. 논쟁은 전부 兩者 합해서 五通인대, 그 중의 맨 처음은 빠르 쀼-스가 1920年에 「클라르테誌」 第 二號에 쓴 「로-란디즘에 대해서」라는 글이다. 이 글이 논쟁을 이르킨 동기가 된 것이다. 논쟁 五通이 原稿枚數로 퍽 만흘 것이나 참고가 될만하야 全譯하여서 아래에 언고자 한다.
로-란듸즘에 대해서. 안리ㆍ빠르쀼-스 「정신의 勞働者」속에는 本質的으로 保守的인 것이 만히 잇는 것은 그다지 이상한 일이라고는 말할 수 업다. 이 근대적 智識生活의 微微한 光明 속에서 우리는 1世紀나 지나간 녯날의 사실의 再生을 洞察할 수 잇다. 「文學」이라는 것이 항상, 投機적인 일종의 奴隷形式 이엿섯다. 더군다나 정치적 성공이 그 극점에 달햇던 「위대한 시대」에 잇서서는, 作家, 思想家, 藝術家의 職分은 일종의 裝飾的 자랑에 불과 하엿섯다. 그네들은 一般히 인정된 모든 습관이며, 생각하는 방법과 똑갓치, 支配하는 諸形式이며, 神聖化된 모든 제도에 대해서도 俗衆의 尊心의 마음을 끄는데 퍽 유용한 물건이 되엿다.
물론, 이구중 잡혀단이는 「맛틈」는 제일 유명한 作家일수록 더 똑똑하게 보이는 것이지마는, 그 대부분은 作家라는 직업적 因緣에 붓잡혀 매달녀서, 그네들 자신이 그 책임을 지게된 것이다. 작가들의 이 경향은 이 밧갓헤 더 原始的인 이유가 잇다. 波瀾重疊한 인생의 彫刻家는, 어머니 배ㅅ속에서 떨어지면셔 배안의 병신으로 「過去」를 더 존중하는 것이다. 藝術에는 保守主義로 흐르려고 하는 本能的 경향이 잇스닛가. 웨 그러냐 하면 現在及 過去의 光景은 준비가 다 된 것이기 때문에 塑造上 풍부하게＜16＞ 보이는 까닭으로 따러서 未來追求의 高遠한 悟性의 推測보다는 훨신 맨들기 쉬운 까닭이다.
藝術的 生活力의 自然傾向으로 붓허, 이 議論上 때때로 보이는 詭辯이 생기는 것이다. 이 傾向을 불붓채질 해주는 여러 가지 이유는, 오히려 것 데기로 보일 뿐이요, 실재적은 안이나 然이나, 사람이면 저 보는 것은 外觀인 까닭에, 그보다 더 이상 깁히 探究해 볼여고 하자면 意志라는 것이 필요한 것이다.
대개의 作家는 이 책임을 맛틀여고 하지 안헛다. 우리가 말할여고 하는 것은 다만 作家 뿐이요, 學者라는 사람은 안이다. 과학은 그 情密한 고유의 本分상, 다른 쉬운 길을 차저가도록 되는 것이다. 즉, 과학은 本質上, 一箇의 訂正者인 까닭에 그 批評的 精神이 과학의 存在理由라는 것이다. 과학은 곤친 우에 또 곤치여 노흔 一箇의 體系化이며, 假象上의 傳統이며, 幻想에 대한 것과 갓치 자연계의 偶象發現의 混亂과 曖昧한 것에 대해서도, 確平한 규범을 보이고 잇는 것이다. 知識階級은 學者인척 할여고 중(僧)의 흉내를 내는 것을 구만둔 뒤로, 점점, 조곰식 그네들 자신의 獨創性을 키워 내려왓다-그래가지고 그들은 破門당하는 것을 甘受햇다- 라고 말해도 過言은 안이겟다. 그럿치만 대체로는 知識階級에는 그 위험한 曲馬의 노름은, 거지반 趣味에도 맛지 안이하고 또는 그네들의 힘도 붓처서 될 수 업는 것이엿다. 그래가지고 20世紀 최초의 25年間, 佛蘭西의 知的 中心에는 39名의 제일 名譽잇는 문학적 裝飾家가 一團이 되여가지고 여기에서 反革新의 古典的 宣傳이 氣勢를 놉히게 된 것이다. 그럿치만 이 따위 흔히 잇는 사실은 그다지 큰 가로것침이 되지 못한다. 지금 말한 것에 관해서 無智와 奴隷根性이 얼마나 지독하냐 하는 것은 문제도 안된다. 그럿치만 다만 한가지 이와 갓흔 말은 할 수 잇다. 즉 현재 諸 權力은 맛치 세상에 잇는 여러 가지 武器 (보기 실흔 手段이든지, 보기 조흔 手段이든지,)를 점령해 온 것과 갓치, 여러 가지 精神的 武器도 獨点해 내려올 것과 그러고 그 표현법도 역시 그 壯嚴한 발표를 因襲에 奉仕식히고 服從을 是認식히는 끈아풀을 맨드러버린 점에 잇서서, 대체로는 産業化되도록 만드러 버린 것이라 고 말할 수 잇는 것이다. 현재에는 소수의 非反動的 知識階級 사이에 종종 중대한 誤解가 발생되고 그러고 이 誤解가 더욱 심하게 되여 가는 모양이다. 그래서 여기에 우리가 맛당히 당면하지 안이하면 안이될 문제가 잇다. 웨 그러냐하면 그것은 左와 갓흔 인물들의 태도의 문제인 까닭에 즉 그네들은 正直과 眞心과 眞實한 마음에 움지기여서,＜17＞ 그네들의 非難의 활살을, 저 지금이야 우리들을 崩壞에서 死滅로 떠러트릴여고 하는 여러 가지 制度에 향해서 쏘아내려 왓지만는, 지금에 와서는 우리의 徹底적 共和主義의 敵對者인 外觀을 가지고 잇는 까닭에. 그와 갓흔 作家, 思想家, 藝術家에게는, 만흔 朦朧한 弟子들이 잇는 것인데, 그 사람들은 로ㆍ맨로-란의 典形이며 규범을 이용하며, 혹은 濫用-내 의견으로는-하는 것이다.
이와가티 말한다 하더래도 우리는 「클라르테團」의 나의 동지며 내 자신이 여러 가지 점으로 현대의 자랑거리인 로-란에게 대해서 誹訪하는 것이라는 말은 듯고십지 안타. 우리는 로맨,로-란의 道德的 勇氣며 文學的 才能에 대해서 이러니, 저러니 하는 것이 안이라, 혹은 또, 그 사람 혼자가 인류의 靈性우에 超越하고 그 사람 혼자가 참으로 正當하엿든 그 때의 그가 던진 저 大戰反對의 부르지즘의 反響을 조곰 맛치래도 깍글여고 하는 것이 안이다. 우리들이 이와 가튼 일홈을 들고나서는 것은 이러케라도 하지 안으면, 우리들이, 지금 暴露될여고 하는 사회적 위험이며, 智識者의 誤謬를 指摘해 집어내기 어려운 까닭이다. 저의들의 先生을 닷곱에나 서곱에나」 참예 식힐여고 밧드러 올니는 로-란디스트의 한다는 일이, 그것이 이와 가튼 위험을 자어낸 것이다.
正直하고 聰明하고 勇敢한 사람이, 자기의 이성을 따라서, 狂猛한 전쟁 우에 超越해 가지고, 써 가장 보기좃케 정신의 자유를 발휘하는 것이다. 모든 人爲的 苦難, 모든 不幸을 이러이러하게 일으키는 것과 가튼, 일종의 禍根에 대한 이 이성과 憐悶의 情으로부터 끄러 올너온 공격과 가티 崇高한 물건은 이 세상에는 다시 업슬 것이다. 생각이 깁흔 사람이면은, 설사 그것이 일반으로 통용된다 하더래도 무서운 밋친 놈의 짓가튼 그 모양은 是認하지 못할 것이다. 웨 그러냐하면 그것은 다른 사람들이 감히 「理想」이라고 불으는 것과 인류의 참된 理想이라는 것과 키를 대여 보는 것과 맛창가지인 까닭이다. 그것은 모든 사상과 사람의 심정의 匡正이라는 일을 그 자신이 질머지고 잇는 것이다. 그라구서 그것은 萬人이 軋轢衝突을 피해서 인류의 一大平面과 共同生存이라는 不拔의 목적에 도달하는 길을 지시하는 것이다.
여러 가지 사정에 의해서 『單身으로 萬人을 거사려서』 몸을 세우고 잇는 그는 저 賢明하다는 사람들이 常套로 가장인척 하고 부르짓는 哀哭 가튼 것은 眼中에도 두지＜18＞ 안는다. 그에게 잇서서는, 사람의 불운이며, 狂症에 대한 祖上傳來의 詩的이지만은 그림자는 얄븐 여러 가지 祈禱文 가튼 것이야 아모래도 조흔 것이다. 그는 虛妄과 罪惡과의 연결되는 공통의 끈아풀이 무엇인가를 가리키여 준다. 아니, 그는, 전쟁이라는 것이 자조 생기고 또는 증가될여고 하는 殺戮은, 萬物을 뜻대로 부리고, 民衆을 저의 목적을 도달식히기 위해서 이용하는 국제적의 소수자의 사실상의 하는 일 이라는 것까지 대담하게 말해 버리고 잇다. 이믜 되여버린 사실에 대해서까지 마음의 反逆을 계획하고 이가티 비난의 활살을 쏘아준다는 데는 무슨 유익한 일이 잇너냐! 그럿타, 그것은 모맨ㆍ로-란이 이믜 말한 바와 가티 정신의 「獨立」과 사상의 권리의 急을 구하는데 쓰이는 까닭이다.
즉 이 세상의 破滅을 당해서 과거의 위대한 양심의 소유의 유산이며, 또한 그 사람 그 사람들로 부터서 힘을 바더 오든 바 精神的 財寶를 보존하는데 쓰이는 까닭이다. 또 그것은 이 道德的 財寶를 증대하고, 그것을 민중이 마음 가온대에서 擴大식혀가는 것이닛가 일종의 積極的 行爲이다. 虛僞와 錯覺에 반항하는 꾀를 잘 알고 잇는, 그럴뜻한, 튼튼한 인격을 끄으는 崇拜의 念은, 至純한 感激에 의해서 당연히 그 歸依者를 倍加하는 것이다. 그럿치만 고것으로 만족할 것이냐 안이다, 斷然히 안이다. 그 모양이면은 萬事依然일 것이다. 우리들은 벌서, 인저는 흉중에 橫溢하는, 구만 둘내야 둘 수 업는 찝부두두한 마음을 엇지할 수 업다.
즉 새로운 전쟁을 抑止할여고 하는 마음, 혹은 죽어도 그 목적에 향해서 奮鬪할여고 하는 마음이다. 正義와 憐愍 우에선 영웅들의 부르짓든 呪咀가 如何하게 反響을 잡어 일으키며 엇더한 훌융한 것이던지 이러한 呪咀가 자최를 숨기게 되면 전쟁은 두 번째 勃發할 것이다. 웨그러냐 하면 전쟁의 사회적 諸因이 依然히 그 모양이닛간. 정신을 낫하내이는 언어라는 것은 직접 생활에는 아모 효과가 업는 것이다. 서루 관련해서 일러나는 모든 종류의 사건과 흔히 하는 말의 위대한 抗議者의 공연하게 詰問하는 그 倣岸한 부정의 사이에는 참된 접촉점이 업다. 단순하게 도덕가 비슷하게 출연하는 약구와리(役割)는 부정적이다. 그네들은 문제가 一次突發하구 나서 무대에 나온다. 그러구서는 災厄이 심하게 눌너 덥고 軍隊의 殺戮이 다음에서 다음으로 더 무서웁게 증가되여갈 때에 다만 뒤만 永久히, 좃처갈 뿐이다. 세계의 貿易關系者들은 이 道德禮儀를 코웃음에 붓처버리고, 아모 煩雜한 모양을 당하지 안코 잇는 것이다. 글거모아＜19＞ 놋는 놈들은 依然히 전세계의 富를 싸어 올녀간다. 外交와 議會-資本家의 秘密警察과 공연한 憲兵隊- 는 條約과 法律에 의해서 어듸까지든지 利子를 단단히 저의들 끼리들만의 사이에다 붓잡어 매여 노흘야고만 한다.
이 고상한, 무서워할 만한 「무력한 것」을 버리지 안으면 안될 것이다. 이것을 免할여면은 우리들은 사회의 거짓인 法律에 대한 鬪爭에는 두 개의 層階, 즉 하나는「破壞的」과 또 하나는 「建設的」, 이 두 개의 階段이 필요하며, 그러구 이 쌍둥이는 不分不離의 관계에 잇다는 것을 인정하지 안으면 안이될 것이다. 「사람은 그, 다만 밧구어 노하야만 될 것만을 파괴한다」라고 오우규스트ㆍ콤트는 斷言해 말한다. 적극적 힘을 빌지 안이하면, 제아모리 힘잇는, 아모리 당당한 비판일지라도 그것은 뜬구룸과 갓흔 것이다. 현존한 질서에 대해서, 제아모리 떼모스태비스의 辯舌을 놀닌다 하더래도 만일 그것이 新秩序를 표시하는 것이 안일 것 가트면 오직 그것은 空漠한 일개의 어리석은 말에 지나지 못하는 것이다.
다시, 여기에 잇서서 知識階級의 第2의 임무가 잇다. 즉 현실이 사회의 질서에 반대하는 한 理想的 秩序, 처음에는 다만 理論的 眞理, 精神의 一作用에 지나지 못하는 理想的 秩序를 일개의 科學- 固執的인 實證的인 또한 應用的인 科學-과 가티 건설할여고 하는 임무다. 대개 아름다운 靈魂의 소유자가 사람에 대해서 不公正이 增大되여가는 광경으로부터 밧는 苦惱는, 법률의 改正者를 택해 가지고 그래가지고 일을 식힌다는 것이 사실일지라도, 그네들은 먼저 개인적 또는 집합적 생활조건을 현실적으로 검토하여 보고서, 그 우에다가 그네들의 新觀念의 구조를 건축하는 까닭이다.
社會主義的 理論家들은 그엿던 기이한 숭배로부터 世人이 「旣成秩序」라고 불으는 제 맘대로 지은 개념을 즉 말하자면 그네들 자신의 論據로 끄으러 올닌 것이다. 그네들의 이 질서의 존재의 유일한 이유는 「旣成」이라는 그 사실 뿐이며, 그것은 동시에 物質上 道德上, 한가지로 모든 束縛을 짓는 것이다. 거지반 모든 생산력의 奴隷化를 神聖視하며, 地上一切의 중대한 장소를 反目과 破壞의 진구렁으로 맨드러 버리는데 따라서 無限의 殺戮을 감히 하여오든 寡頭政治와 특권제도는, 오직 그 제도 자신으로만 조직된 對立分子에 한해서만 「사람」의 이성으로부터 放逐되여야만 할 것이다. 이 합리적 질서는 제 사회의 힘이요, 법인 개인과 그의 생활 그것의 밋구녕으로부터 생겨나오는 것이다. 그것은 생활의 全合成機關을 통해서 革新을 재촉하는 것이다. 또한 그것은 모든 방면을 專制的인 것, 因襲的인 것, 迷信的인＜20＞ 모든 것을 파괴하고서 일개의 완전한 有機體를 창조하는 것이다. 웨 그러냐하면, 다만 완전한 有機體에게만 생활의 희망을 가질 수 잇넌 것인 고로.
이러케 되여가지고 이러한 정신의 종(僕)들은 그네들의 先輩와는 멀니 떠러저버리고 잇는 것이다. 그네들이, 현재 그 안에 잇서서 지금 우리들이 가지고 잇는 色色의 결과를 粗雜하게 論證한 著書를 읽은 것은 그네들의 도움도 되고 동시에 중요한 것이엿다. 그래서 그들은 서로 殺戮을 일삼고 잇는 사람들은 「누구」에게 또는 「무엇」에게 그 진심의 敬意를 표하여야 올흐냐, 그러구 또는 如何한 忠誠을 직히지 안으면 안되느냐 하는 것을 지적해 내려왓다. 그네들은 連帶와 평화의 큰 목표- 다만 오죽잔은 反響으로만 귀틈에 끼엿든 오직 宣言- 과 현대의 混沌과외 사이에 敎理와 행동과의 계획을 骨子로 알어 내려왓다. 그네들은 잇는 물건과 잇서야만 할 물건의 間隙을 쉴틈업시 채워내려왓다. 이 間隙은 大砲며 傳說 이상으로, 종래의 特權과 神聖化된 兇猛性을 擁護해 내려왓다. 그네들은 現存된 諸 法律의 錯亂한 식그러운 領域안에 잇서서 오로지 새로히 시작할여고 하는 사업이 얼마나 곤란한 것이냐, 하는 실망하는 것을 허락하지 안는다. 그러구서, 이와 가튼 사람들이야말로, 모든 피할 수 잇는 公然한 불행이며, 모든 피할 수 잇는 集合的 難苦에서 대해 유일한 해결책을 제공하엿다고 할만하다.
이상적 해결책을 제공하는 것과, 그것을 실지로 응용하는 것은 퍽 틀니는 것이다. 엇더한 경우를 물론하고 그 일에 着手한다는 일이 필요한 일이다. 문제의 실질에 적응된 改造案에는 그 자신이 일종의 힘이 잇서가지고 다만 그것을 선전할 뿐이고 행동을 移入하는 것이다. 대개, 그 최고 권력을 가지고 잇는 데에도 불구하고서 자기의 不安定과 團結力의 缺乏 때문에 종래 실패의 쓰린 맛을 맛보아온 大衆이, 한번 결심을 해버리면, 자기가 하고자 하든 것을 넉넉히 해버릴 것이다. 新觀念은 한낫의 駁論이 안이다. 그것은 사물에 대한 새로운 一個의 계획이다.
그런데, 우리는 이곳에서 슬퍼할 동시에, 놀나울 선언을 하지 안으면 안된다. 즉 『로-란디스트』는 論理家이며 社會改造論者로부터 超然하게 떠나서 『問題의 實行的 方面』에는 何等의 考慮를 하고 잇지 안는다는 宣言을 하게 되엿다. 이것은 정치에 관계되지 안으면 안이될 사람들에게 대한 反感으로부터서 일어남이냐? 그것은 또는 卒直한 肯定을 대담히 표현하는데 躊躇해서, 그러구 『이것은 眞理다』라고 감히 斷定을 내리여고 하는 그 용감한 것에게 浚巡한 맛이 잇기 때문이냐? 혹은 또는 그것이 폭력이라고 할 만한 속깁흔 밋바닥이 잇는 관념을 두려워해서 그러는 것이냐? 혹은 그러치 안코서 다른＜21＞ 별달은 수단을 가지고서 救治의 효과를 올녀 인간성을 變革할 수 잇다는 희망이 잇기 때문에 그라는 것이냐? 이것들의 이유의 이것저것이 도모지 다 薄弱한 것이요 幼稚한 것이다. 「정치」라는 말을 그 말의 엇던 쪽으로서든지 보아라. 그러면 누구이든지 그 말은 실현을 의미하는 것 즉 지금에 와서는 실현하는 것이 萬事요 純粹觀念이라는 것은 依然히 단일한 관념에 불과한다면, 안개와 가티 消滅해 버리겟다는 사실을 깨닷지 안코서는 잇지 못할 것이다.
社會主義的 改造案은 精神과 良心의 욕구에게 엇더한 保證을 제공하는 것이냐? 그것은 그 共同信條인 恒久的 眞理를 論理的으로 適用할여고 하는데 잇지 안으냐? 우리들은 魔術的, 鍊金術的 處方을 발견해 가지고 혹은 神秘的으로 제작해 가지고서 그것들을 調合할여고 하는 것이 안이다. 理想的 再建의 全構造는 變則으로의 해방에 의해서 지배된다. 클라르테의 원리가 限定하고, 解得하는, 社會革命 幾何學의 계산에는 아모 誤謬라는 것이 발생하지 못한다. 이와 가튼 것을 선언하는 것은, 잀€ 지극히 제한을 밧은 實行的 方面에 잇는 應用的 科學의 根本的 諸 法則의 權威잇는 確實性을 宣言하는 경우에 學者들이 「眞理」라고 말하는 위대한 언어를 쓰는 거와가티 족음도 潛越한 것은 안이다.
이것말고 다른 해결책이 잇느냐? 均衡된 經濟的 力學內의 모든 개인적 노력을 一般으로 調整하는 방법은 그러케 만히는 잇지 안는 법이다. 利己主義者가 변해서 조흔 사람이 되고 착한 일을 하며, 理想에 합치되는 생활을 하기 위해서 조직이라든가 集合的 規律이라든가가 불필요하게 되는 것과 가티 사람을 個人的을 革新해 가는 데에도 한 가지의 방법이 잇슬 것이다. 그럿치만은 우리들은 이 奇蹟적인 해결책의 幻想압헤서 일심으로, 천연덕스럽게 거름을 멈추을 수는 업는 것이다. 위기는 거진거진 사러잇는 현대인을 깔고 뭉갤야고 잡어 눌느고잇다. 우리들은 頑固한 내란 때문에 다 드렵혀저서 허위덕 거리고 잇다. 「人道」는 월수쟁이의 손으로 건너가고 깁히도 모르는 연못속으로 쫏끼여 드러가지 안으면 안되게 되여왓다. 그러구서 우리에게 暗示하는 것은, 사람이라고 하는 것은, 그네들 자신이 脫線的 예외에 지나지 안는 무리들의 조고만한 雛型을 본바더서 한사람 남지 안코 변해버릴 수 잇는 것임으로 모든 사람들이 자기자신이 먼저 굿세게 될때까지 기다리라고 하는, 수작을 붓치고 잇는 것이다.
「暴力」에 대해서 말하면, 이 말은 지극히 賤待밧고, 보기 흉하게 醜하게 대우를 밧어내려왓다고 해도 좃켓다. 그 결과, 우리들은 훌융한 의견의 결론을 지나서지 못하고, 원래 자기의 서 잇슬 곳에 딱 서잇지 안으면 안이될＜22＞ 엇던 물건에 대해서 무질서한 영상을 끄러안게 되엿다. 누구던지 殘忍한 피 비린 냄새가 나는 행동을 頌揚할 사람은 업슬 터이다. -죽어도 과학적 지식에 의해서, 사회조직을 폭력의 무질서로부터 구해낼여고 하는 사람 사람들의 가온대에는 업슬 터이다. 이성과 정의의 규범은- 그것은 지금 확립될여고 하는 문제다- 만일 共通利害를 가지고 잇는 사람들로서, 그것을 요구하고 또는 유지할여고 할 것 가트면, 벌서 그것만으로도 權威를 보존해 나가게 될 터이지. 즉 그것은 만일 그네들의 모든 것을 요구하고 모든 것을 유지할 수 잇는 유일한 수단인 권력을 붓잡을 것 가트면, 하는 의미의 말이다. 폭력, 안이 차라리 制裁- 웨 그러냐 하면 犧牲者며, 被搾取者들에게 이 必要不可缺의 管理權을 주는 일이닛가- 는 現化暴力을 纂奪하고 잇는 사람의 손으로부터 떼여버려가지고 생각하면은, 그 자신이 중립적인 一要素이다. 그 사용 如何를 뭇지 안는 한도에 잇서서는 좃타든지 납브다든지 할 결정을 내릴 수 업는 것이다. 人道主義的인 그러구서 센티멘탈인 觀念의 지극히 극단적인 사람일지라도 制裁는 공동범죄의 害를 방지하기 위해서 그네들의 머리우에 떠러지지 안으면 안이될 것을 허용할 터이지. 帝國主義的, 軍國主義的 제도에는 공동법률에 반대된 범죄라고 볼만한 (때는 벌서 느젓지만은) 여러 가지 행위가 잇는 것은 이 제도 자신이 말하고 잇는 명백한 일이다. 여기에 잇서서 폭력의 목적으로 한 것은 武裝芧�除를 젯처놋코는 아모 것도 업다. 폭력의 介在는 社會革命의 一般槪念에 잇서서- 우리들은 언어를 쓸 때에는 먼저 그 의미를 잘 생각한다- 모든 목적에 대한 한 떼타이유(細目)이요 또는 그것도 일시적 細目에 불과한 것이다.
나는 밋는다. 여기에 말한거와 가튼 그들의 정신적 경향에는 사실상 거지반 協當한 점도 용서할 수 업다는 것을 그것은 逃避로부터 생겨나 가지고, 그러구서 「象牙의 塔」의 전통적 法式을 新式으로, 두 번이나 식힌 것이다. 정신의 從僕들은, 濔漫한 害惡에 대해서 敵對的 示威를 시험하고 잇는 것으로만 能事로 알고 안젓다. 그럼으로 그들은 突入해 가지고서 엇던 紛亂을 輕減할만한 수고를 잇다금 앳기게 되는 것이다. 이와가티 되여서, 한갈 가티 천하에 뻣치는 野蠻性에 대해서 憎惡의 생각을 가지고 잇는 민중 사이의 뺑뺑이 도는 물결은 점점 더 커저가는 것이다. 지금이야말로 이상을 사실로 변하고 사물의 질서를 改修할여고 하는 것이 문제이며, 또는 保守派와 改革파가 똑가튼 무대에 나란히 서잇는 경우인 까닭에, 消極的 改革主義와 가튼 그런 것들이 사실상 舊秩序의 保存者가 안이고 무엇이란 말이다. 그네들은 목숨을＜23＞ 내놋코서 과거에 붓잡어 매달여잇다. 그러고 한편짝 팔은 클라르테團에게 그 힘을 빌이고 잇다. 그네들은 우리에게 청해셔 澁滯가 되고, 방해를 더 하고, 휫닥하면은 敵對行爲까지 할여고 한다. 그들의 同類 중에는 재수좃케 「進步的」이라는 評判을 듯고 잇는 사람도 잇다. 「進步的」이라는 것은 다만 그들의 반대되는 것에 대해서만 쓸 수 잇는 特徵的 眞理인데, 그들은 엇젓든 간에 조직적인 「완전히 規則的인 鬪爭에 참가할여고 한다. 그럿치만 無政府主義者와 가티, 즉 支離滅裂한, 더구나 그것이 가리친 英雄的 精神에 의해서 有益하다고 말하는 것보다도 차라리 그 개인으로의 행동의 결과에 의해서 유해한 諸勢力과 함가지. 결국 마감에 가서는 그네들은 「平和主義」와 「自由主義」의 사이에  一種 裝飾的 「左翼」을 형성하는 것인데, 원래 그들은 無用한 것이닛가 불상할 따름이다.
그들은 社會主義라는 것을 지극히 간단하게 생각한다. 그들은 다만 한갈내 외줄길로 엇더케 손을 붓처볼 수 업는 頑迷한 것으로써, 昨日의 歷史的 揷話를 回顧하고서 社會主義의 실패는 불을 보는 것보다도 똑똑한 일이라고 公言까지 한다. 그 이유로 하는 것은, 1914年 소수 社會主義者의 一流 (그것은 實發事件에 대해서 전혀 방지할 策略을 베풀줄을 몰낫섯다)가 보이든 그 無定見하고 無氣力한 것이라 한다. 그러나 이와 가튼 判斷은 容赦할 수 업는 淺見이며, 이와 가티 하여 가지고서는 엇던 사람을 물론하고 여러 대대로 反逆精神의 전부의 本源과, 모든 槪觀, 모든 勝利, 모든 失敗가, 써 包括되여오고 써 進步할여고 하는 社會主義의 신념과 전술의 체계를 세울 수가 업슬 것이다. 현대의 청년은 이 두개의 경향 사이에서 대담하게 撰擇을 하지 안으면 안된다. 지금이야, 建設的인, 그러구 정확한 노력에 근거 두지 안이한 서로 辱하고 罵倒하는 것가튼 일은, 다만 裝飾的인 동시에, 거지반 붓그러워 할만한 시대로 變遷하여간다는 것을 생각하지 안으면 안이된다.
革命精神이 잇슨 연후에, 처음으로 反逆精神의 완전을 보는 것이다. 사람의 사상이 그 자신이 독립할 필요가 잇다는 것은 실행에 나아갈 목적이 잇기 때문이지, 결코 독립하기 위해서 하는 말은 안이다. 『로-란디스트』는 思想家로서의 의무의 第一의 부분만을 다햇다는데 불과하다. 道德家의 非難攻擊은 지금은 非常히 심각한 까닭에, 실행의 길을 열어 젯치지 안코서는 내버려두지는 안을 것이다. 이후 그들의 弟子들이 그 길을 단단하게 밟어 노흘 것이다.
(클라르테誌 第 三號所載) -續-＜24＞
＜11-24＞