Magazine Title: 개벽 제39호
Publication Date: 1923년 09월 01일
Article Title: 혼돈, 4年만에 故國에 돌아와서 (Chaos, Returning to the Homeland After 4 Years)
Author: 金星
Article Type: 문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Chaos, Returning to the Homeland After 4 Years
						Kim Sŏng (金星)
Brother Kim!
Returning to my cherished homeland after a long time, the mountains are welcoming, the waters are welcoming, the people are welcoming, and even the animals are welcoming. However, alongside this welcome, there is also a devilish, unpleasant aspect that seeks to uproot the feelings of welcome I have cherished unbearably until now.

Brother Kim, four years is not such a long time. Four years is a short period that can flow by before one even thinks about it. But thinking back on the time of four years once more, it is indeed a considerably long period. Isn't four years 1,461 days? This period of nearly 1,500 days might not be particularly precious or long for all the civilized nations that are ahead of us, but from the standpoint of our people, who lag behind others by at least a hundred years, this period of four years is certainly very valuable. Consequently, aren't we in a position where we must accomplish in this short period what others might do in 20 or 30 years? Therefore, while the period of four years may be nothing to others, for our people, it must be an intermediate period during which all aspects of social life should undergo remarkable changes. Thus, as I boarded the ship heading towards my longed-for homeland this time, my small heart pounded unreasonably with truly great expectations and curiosity.

Brother Kim, it has already been over six weeks since I returned to my home, the Samch'ŏlli Kangt'o (千里 江土 - Land of Three Thousand Ri). I haven't visited many places during this time, only briefly stopping by the cities of Pusan, Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul), and Kaesŏng. I spent most of my vacation in my hometown, P'yŏngyang. <49> Therefore, I haven't had the chance to make significant observations or travel throughout the country, and even if I had ample opportunity, it is currently very difficult to pass judgment one way or the other. Moreover, since this was my first time visiting Pusan, Seoul, or Kaesŏng, I couldn't compare the past with the present. As for my hometown P'yŏngyang, having grown up there for 18 years without going outside, I already knew its general state. Thus, I could roughly recognize what had developed and what had regressed by comparing P'yŏngyang of four years ago with P'yŏngyang today, four years later. However, observations of P'yŏngyang alone cannot be taken as representing the state of all Korea (全鮮). Therefore, based on what I saw and heard on the train during my journey, and the general knowledge I gleaned, albeit superficially, from the few cities mentioned above, I have taken up my pen to jot down, without any particular order, just as they come to mind, a few facts that I have keenly realized since my return, things I desperately wish to cry out to our people. Please just listen to them as the sincere pleas of a naive younger brother.

Brother Kim, the first thing that wounded my heart most strongly upon setting foot in our country was none other than the way our people walk. The way they drag themselves along, half-dead or like fidgety people, sluggishly and without vitality, was truly unbearable to watch, making my eyes want to bleed. Of course, there must be common ethnic reasons for this. A people not busy, a people wearing clothes that appear lazy, a people commonly weak in constitution, a people enslaved by the habit inherited from the gait of the yangban (량반) in coming and going—perhaps because of being such a people, the walk has become so unsightly. But brother, how can we afford to live such a leisurely life? The issue of clothing reform is very difficult and serious, so I cannot speak hastily. However, for the sake of making our walk more energetic, more lively, more vital, I think it is an extremely urgent matter for our people to implement even some small improvements immediately. Leaving other things as they are, how about first making the trouser legs (바디가랭이) narrower, abolishing the practice of tying the ankles, and wearing the *chŏgori* (저고리 - upper garment) slightly longer than now, so that the *turumagi* (두루막이 - overcoat), which greatly hinders walking, is used only for ceremonial occasions (례복) and not worn in daily life? Wouldn't that prevent hindrance even when walking quickly, and wouldn't we avoid the dirty sight of dragging wide trouser legs on the ground? And we must courageously break our traditional habits and walk a bit faster. <50> When going out on the street, let's walk briskly and purposefully, reach our destination, wipe our sweat, and rest. Why loiter and shuffle about on dusty streets? If there's work to be done, let's do it quickly and rest; if there's a road to travel, let's traverse it quickly and rest. Speaking among ourselves, what curses, what insults, what slander wouldn't foreigners utter upon seeing this manner of walking! We must correct our inherent nature starting from our walk.

Brother Kim, the next thing that became a thorn in my eye is our people's white clothing (白色衣服). Of course, white is beautiful. It is pure. It is an expression of a noble heart. However, because white clothing is purer and cleaner, it gets dirty more quickly and stains more easily. Since we wear white clothes, shouldn't we wash them more often than others? The sight of wearing white clothes until they are black with dirt, until mud stains them yellow, is truly unbearable. If one cannot wash frequently, I would rather they wear colored clothing.

Brother Kim, the urban areas (都會處) of our country were indescribably desolate and unpleasant to see. In Pusan, it seemed that the commercial districts (시가디) belonged almost exclusively to the Japanese (日人). In Seoul too, Chin'gogae and Namdaemun-t'ong (南大門通) were bustling and city-like, but the commercial areas of our people were far more insignificant than I had expected. In Kaesŏng, tiled-roof houses (기와집) were hard to find, and P'yŏngyang was filled with toy-like shops (商店). The streets of P'yŏngyang have changed quite a bit compared to four years ago. New electric trams (電車) have been laid, and there are some new brick buildings. However, the trams are a source of livelihood for foreigners (外國人). The gleaming new buildings are also mostly owned by Japanese or Chinese (中國人). Nothing has changed in the Korean (朝鮮人) commercial areas. The only change, if any, is that four years ago there were many vendors selling *hottŏk* (호떡 - Chinese pancake), but now they have all disappeared, and the streets are filled with calls of "Brown rice bread" (玄米빵). In every city, the commercial districts of our people seem hesitant to develop due to various reasons. Some areas seem to be withering day by day, while others seem to have already collapsed. So, what shall we eat to live now? Shall we forever be dogs under the rich man's table? Why is it that while living on our own land, we cannot act as masters of our land, and are forced day by day to have everything taken away by foreign devils (外邦놈), gradually finding ourselves on the path to ruin?! This is incomprehensible (不可思議). It is not that we lack strength. But we do not know how to use our strength properly. <51>

Brother Kim, I heard words like these from an elder in P'yŏngyang:
"Coming home after a long time, there are indeed many changes. While you were away, P'yŏngyang changed considerably. Trams have been laid, the railway bridge (鐵橋) is almost completed, there's an airfield (飛行場) so airplanes fly around every day, and a large restaurant (料理집) called Mikado has opened. Now, it wouldn't be inferior compared to any city in other countries."

Brother Kim, when I heard these words, my heart ached as if being gouged by a dull knife. They rejoice that P'yŏngyang is progressing compared to other cities. Yes! It should rightly be rejoiced. Trams running, airplanes sputtering, automobiles honking, and a railway bridge being laid should signify the development of P'yŏngyang, so of course, the people of P'yŏngyang would rejoice over this. But, brother, why don't they think one step further? Should they merely be glad, saying, "Now, seeing airplanes is no longer novel, and there's no need to walk with aching legs at the train station, isn't this truly a good world?" Isn't there someone else who should be glad about this? Brother, isn't this a time when we should be sadder and reflect more upon ourselves rather than rejoicing? Is all this development, namely the current development of P'yŏngyang, truly development based on the 60,000 Koreans (朝鮮人), or development that promises stability in the lives of Koreans? I couldn't help but harbor great doubts here. It is certainly true that this development they rejoice in will be a great fortune and a big blessing for a part of the New Town (新市街). But what impact will the interests and happiness of that segment of foreigners have on us Korean citizens? This is one of my great questions.

Brother Kim, when I am on the verge of starving to death, if my neighbor accumulates a lot of money and rides an automobile, is it right to simply rejoice, saying, "It is the glory of our village (同里)"? Or rather, shouldn't one carefully consider what impact that rich person riding an automobile has on one's own life, make a judgment, and then rejoice if it's a case for rejoicing, or grieve if it's a matter for grief? Looking at the people of our country now, automobiles honk during the day, electric lights turn night into day, sometimes airplanes fly by; roads that previously took five or six days to travel can now be traversed in 5 or 6 hours by giving a few tens of *chŏn* (拾錢 - sen/jeon, 1/100 of won/yen) to the Railway Company (鐵道會社); places where it used to take ten days to exchange news can now communicate in an instant by adding a few silver coins (銀錢) to the coffers of the Telegraph Office (電信局); where there were only thatched houses before, foreigners have come in and built splendid, luxurious houses; previously, trying to get fish caught in Wŏnsan <52> in Kyŏngsŏng was quite difficult, but now, while just sitting still, one can eat dried grapes from America (米國), jam or fruit juice from Australia (오스트랠리아), bananas from Taiwan (臺灣), tangerines from Kishū (紀州); one can wear Swiss-made (西瑞製) platinum watches, unheard of before, and wear Panama hats from England (英國). It seems there are many people who, without any further thought, swagger around saying, "What fine times these are!"

Brother, it is a dreadful thing to contemplate. It sends shivers down my spine. There are many people who, while enjoying the readily available opium, fail to realize that it is simultaneously scraping away their insides. Trains have appeared, the telegraph is utilized, foreign goods are easily accessible; but by whose hand are all these conveniences and applications operated, and consequently, what price are we paying? Ah! Why do we sit dressed in silk clothes, drinking fragrant wine, yet not feel indignation that most of our fields have fallen into the hands of foreigners (外人) to obtain those clothes, that wine? Why can we not hear the sound of the saw cutting down the pillars of the house we live in, while intoxicated in a seemingly peaceful world (太平乾坤)? Our lives are becoming more dangerous by the minute, yet how can we just laugh and chatter, saying, "It's still good"?

Brother Kim, now I will briefly write about the experiences I gained during my travels.
Traveling from Pusan to Sinŭiju, why are the villages along the railway line so dilapidated? The collapsing thatched houses resembling crab shells, the sight of people sitting inside, bare-chested and smoking tobacco—it was truly a village of hopeless, ruined people (亡國奴). Years ago, a Westerner who traveled through all of Korea (全鮮) by train and arrived in Beijing reportedly spoke thus of his impressions of Korea:
"I had heard much that Korea was an uncivilized country (未開國). However, after visiting Korea, I discovered it to be a country far more developed than I had expected. The reason is that I discerned this time that Korea is a country where the livestock industry (牧畜業) is highly developed. As I traversed all of Korea by train, I saw livestock sheds (家畜小屋) forming villages everywhere, lined up along the railway." How satirical this is towards us!

Brother Kim, what can be done when those houses that this foreigner saw as livestock sheds are not really animal pens, but the dwellings where our brothers and sisters live? <53> The words of the British newspaper magnate who died years ago, after visiting Korea and remarking in his impressions, "Korean farming villages still have a sense of primitive life," were a fresh alarm bell in our ears.

In Pusan, it was difficult to find where the Korean commercial district (朝鮮人 市街) was tucked away. The inns (여관) run by Koreans felt more like pigsties than inns. Why can't we live a bit more cleanly?

In Seoul too, in the entire area near Kwanghwamun (光化門), the low houses, dirty narrow streets, and the open sewers flowing alongside the roads evoked sighs of despair. And comparing Namdaemun-t'ong (南大門通) and Chin'gogae with Chongno (鍾路), I could not suppress a certain sense of dread.

The worst thing in Kaesŏng was that the custom of women wearing the *chang'ot* (쟝옷 - traditional overgarment covering the head and body) still remained. When I first arrived in Kaesŏng, it felt like visiting some small kingdom described in novels. Old or young, if a woman, everyone wore a *chang'ot* even if they walked barefoot on the street. What a strange custom (怪風)! I couldn't help but be alarmed that Kaesŏng was so conservative (保舊的).

Speaking of the *chang'ot*, looking at all of Korea, I was surprised to discover that even the so-called enlightened new women (新女子) (school graduates and current students) had not yet abandoned the habit of wearing the *chang'ot*. It felt as if many new women used parasols not really for sun protection, but as a substitute for the old *chang'ot*.

In P'yŏngyang, there was tremendous development for the Japanese. However, from the Korean perspective, there seemed to be no progress whatsoever. If one were to pick out something different from before, it would be the sharp increase in *kisaeng* (妓生 - female entertainers) and the proliferation of slums (貧民窟) outside Ch'ilsŏngmun (七星門外) and in the T'osŏng (土城) area.

Brother Kim, please don't be shocked. It is said that the current number of *kisaeng* in P'yŏngyang is over 3,000. Just hearing the number is astonishing. Furthermore, who knows how many hundreds more of those "flour faces" (밀가루 - prostitutes) roam the streets every night. On any summer day, go up to Ŭlmildae or Pubyŏngnu pavilion along the Ch'ŏngnyubyŏk cliff. The sound of the *changgo* (쟝고 - hourglass drum) drifting from the Taedong River (大同江) is deafening, and the sight of young women and old crones, all half-drunk (반취), dancing hip-swaying dances in pleasure boats, can be seen daily. P'yŏngyang has thus utterly tarnished its honor as a land of beautiful rivers and mountains (금수강산).

I don't know about going further south (南南鮮), but seeing a few villages in the northwest (西北鮮), I couldn't help but feel disheartened. When you 찾아 들어가 (search out and enter) what are called towns (무슨 고을), you find a few collapsing thatched-roof eateries lined up facing each other along a single road (외길). At the end of this main street (행길), <54> there is a dilapidated Public Ordinary School (公立 普通學校), a large-gated Police Station (警察署), a tile-roofed County Office (郡廳), the signboard of the Tonga Ilbo Branch Office (東亞日報 分局) in the upper room of a cold noodle (冷麵) shop, one or two Japanese general stores (雜貨商), and one or two butcher shops (獸肉 판매점). This is what they call a town. Moreover, even in these impoverished towns, it was common these days for touring performance troupes (순회흥행), calling themselves theater groups or music societies, to come and try to extract even small amounts from the difficult livelihoods of the people. Of course, music concerts and plays should be held, but upon closer inspection, it seems the truth is that many of these concerts and plays are not intended to inspire aesthetic feelings or provide any education to the villagers. Rather, under the guise of collecting donations or sympathy money, they use a few battered trumpets and unrehearsed plays to charge high admission fees, pass the night in a muddled way (어러뚱뚱하게), and then fill their own bellies with the proceeds. Truly, if they loved the nation, these concerts and plays should be free, or not happen at all. Furthermore, regarding the tyranny of officials in rural areas, I both witnessed and heard facts so appalling and infuriating that I dislike even writing about them.

Brother Kim, this time, I must confess with regret that I found no hope whatsoever among the young people belonging to the so-called intellectual class (知識階級) of our country. Instead, I have decided to find the path of boundless hope among the simple young people holding hoes (호믜잡은) in the farming villages. Brother Kim, the reason is as follows.

I considered those who have graduated from middle school level schools in our country as young people belonging to the intellectual class. However, almost all of them belong to the middle class or above, the propertied class (有産階級). Consequently, I discovered this time, and could not help but grieve, the undeniable fact that as soon as they graduate from school, they immediately join the ranks of the leisured class (遊食階級). Of course, it might be because they cannot start work in our society in a way that matches their ideals. But if they truly pitied this nation and had received a truly meaningful and complete education, they could not possibly be idling around (번둥번둥) like that even for a moment. There is so much work to be done in our society right now. Brother, as you know, I too am a young man. However, looking at the current P'yŏngyang society, rather than siding with the youth, I would praise the older generation. Look. The old man saved money and educated his children. He donated some amount, however grudgingly (구들구들하기는), to some association or school. Even now, they work tirelessly, sweating and enduring insults, to earn money. They feed, clothe, and raise their children. But what about those young people who have such parents, <55> who even studied abroad with the money their parents gave them? When they gather, they just drink alcohol. In the evening, they take *kisaeng* and float on the Taedong River. Their parents' lives and property, the future of their younger siblings—these are of no concern to them. All that matters is that they themselves eat fine food (요리) and hold the wrist of a *kisaeng*. Brother, I don't know about other places, but in P'yŏngyang, it's said that those wearing student caps frequently visit *kisaeng* houses.

Brother, let us weep. Let us cry out loud. Let us hold each other's wrists and weep our fill. Yet, our poor compatriots have trusted and looked up to them until now. They believed that when these young people graduated and returned, they would help us in some way... But they throw away thousands of won, money gathered from the blood and sweat of tens of thousands of compatriots, at Japanese boarding houses, and then return, acting as if asking, "Who the hell are you?" They don't even glance at the masses; they cultivate *kisaeng* and fatten the liquor merchants. How can one not weep when thinking of this? Yet, here is another strange phenomenon: while those who initially returned from studying abroad mostly engaged in socially beneficial work, it is truly an incomprehensible mystery (不可思議) why many of those who have returned recently are mostly dissolute (망종을 부리는).

Brother Kim, upon returning home, I saw that most of our country's emerging writers (新進文士) drink alcohol. I also heard that most gentlemen who act as leaders of society drink alcohol. When I heard this, shivers ran down my spine. Now, if on some battlefield, an officer responsible for command were carrying a liquor bottle while leading the vanguard charge, how much could we guarantee the safety of that army, and consequently, predict victory?

We are born in extraordinary times. It is a time more dangerous than a battlefield. Facing such a critical moment (危機一髮), if one leads the masses, discerning East from West (東西를 ª¨르는 - *text unclear*), while carrying a liquor bottle... I dislike saying more. The masses guided by a drunkard, an intoxicated person, are truly pitiful beyond measure.

Brother Kim, I wish the youth of our country were a bit more serious (眞劍스러웟스면). I wish they would approach life more earnestly (眞面目하게), to use the Japanese term. If you're going to go to a *kisaeng* house, then fall to the extreme depths, or if you're coming to church (敎會堂), please become a true believer. I wish they would uproot the notion of "Just live life as it comes and die." <56> I wish they would manage a true life, firm and unshakeable (確乎不動), based on their own definite principles (自己主見). Looking closely here now, there are plenty of young people who go to church on Sunday and say "Amen" to God (한우님), then sleep at the warmest spot (아래목) in a *kisaeng* house on Monday night, then on Tuesday afternoon act as an officer of some youth association, shouting slogans, and then on Wednesday afternoon float a boat on the Taedong River with a *kisaeng*.

Brother, we cannot drive out those filthy fellows who would seat God and a *kisaeng* in the same place and serve them both. Will no miracle appear to strike down the hypocrites (僞善者) all at once? If you attend church, let's be sincere believers. And if you go to *kisaeng* houses, let's withdraw from the believer's life. Let's stop living ambiguously (두루뭉수리) and manage a sincere life. We must realize that God and *kisaeng* absolutely cannot be served together.

Brother Kim! The Japanese shrines (神社) being built three in a row on Namsan Park in Seoul and the 3 or 4 churches (敎會堂) newly built in P'yŏngyang over the last two or three years form an interesting contrast. There's a saying that the Japanese are a people living in superstition (迷信). However, it feels like our people are an even more severely superstitious nation. Even now, incidents of curing illnesses through prayer (긔도) or healing through the laying on of hands (按手) are countless. God-Worshipping People's Associations (崇神人組合) are flourishing. Churches, far too luxurious compared to our living standards, are newly emerging. Even Christianity, said to be the furthest from superstition among world religions, has become a headquarters of superstition (迷信의 大本營) in Korea. Pastors (牧師) who claim to heal sickness through prayer still run rampant (橫行). Building brick churches stems from the exact same psychological impulse as the Japanese building shrines everywhere. They view the Christian God (한우님) just as they viewed the Jade Emperor (玉皇上帝) of old. And Jesus has become an invisible shaman (무당) in their minds. They have already forgotten what Jesus said to the Samaritan woman about the temple (聖殿). And with the exact same mindset as when they previously erected village shrines (성황당) or Maitreya statues (미럭), they build excessively magnificent churches. It's not just Christianity. Many Ch'ŏndogyo (天道敎) followers also wander in superstition. Buddhism (佛敎) is the same. It's said that crowds flock to Kyeryongsan (계룡산), leading their families. I personally witnessed shamanistic rituals (굿) being performed at the summit of Namsan in Seoul just a month ago. I also saw one of my relatives take a sick child somewhere near Chindong (眞洞) where there was supposedly someone who cured illness through prayer. I tried hard to dissuade them at the time, but my tongue was too weak to pull out the roots of superstition firmly planted in their heads. Even at hot spring ponds (溫井池), they offered sacrifices (祭祀) to the hot spring. The hot spring vent was blocked with money thrown in as offerings. Rumors are spreading that Jesus will <57> return in three years. It's said a great leader (장수) has been born somewhere. A strange theory (怪說) is circulating that the recent flood in P'yŏngyang was caused because a large anchor (닷) was retrieved from the Taedong River years ago. There are still people who claim to have wrestled with a one-legged goblin (외다리 독개비). A child relative of mine insists on not taking medicine now because a grandmother who cures illness through prayer told her not to. It's said there's a grandmother somewhere in P'yŏngyang who can tell a person's past and future love life by reading their pulse (맥). Even with my own mother, I end up arguing about this for quite a while. Ah! Everywhere you go, it's superstition. And it seems this fatalistic view (運命觀) arising from superstition dominates the entire spirit of our people. Everything is attributed to fate (八字). For any difficult task, fatalism (運命論) is invoked. All misfortunes are considered punishment from God or spirits (신). Ah! This superstition enveloping our entire being—it's so difficult to leap out of it. But brother, for the prosperity of our nation, we must wash away this concept. But the method? I do not know.

Brother Kim, it is easy to be civilized on the surface, but very difficult to achieve inner civilization. The labor problem (勞働問題) is like that, and the women's issue (婦人問題) is also like that. While paying lip service to women's liberation (婦人을 해방햇다구), people think it strange if a widow remarries, and look with peculiar eyes (怪異한 눈) if female students come for a walk in the park. While clamoring that women are equal to men (婦人은 男子와 同等이라구), they make a big fuss as if it's a disaster if women smoke like men. Men frequent *kisaeng* houses daily, yet consider it a huge scandal (變) if a woman commits adultery (서방질) even once. While proclaiming that labor is sacred (勞働은 신성하다), even those who go around giving speeches look down on rickshaw pullers (人力車꾼). They blush (赤面) if asked to pull a cart (구루마).

Brother, what use is mere superficial clamoring? We must first fix our insides. We must first overturn our thoughts.

Brother Kim, another thing that made a big impression on me upon my return was discovering that most of my classmates (同窓生) and friends I address informally ("얘" "재") are already playing the roles of fathers and husbands. Brother, it has been clamored countless times (몃 千萬番) that early marriage (早婚) is bad, but where is the effect? Friends who have already become fathers always say this when they meet me:
"You are fortunate. I earnestly request you not to marry before 30." Thus, they curse their married lives. <58> But their parents do not understand this. My grandmother also complains that I am not married. Ah! This too is a major problem. Mrs. Sanger (쌩키夫人) advocated birth control (産兒制限) and toured the world, but in our country, young people who are still entirely dependent parasites (寄生生活) in terms of economic power or intelligence, bear children without hesitation. Then, what will they feed and clothe them with, and who will provide their home education? But the elders in our society pay no attention to anything. Just the calculation of having a daughter-in-law to order around, the joy of seeing grandchildren—that's enough for them. Even now in our society, marriages at age 18 for males and 17 for females in cities, and 9 for males and 18 for females in the countryside, are performed every single day. Then, weak children (體質 虛弱한 아해) are born to these ignorant couples. The child cannot eat properly, cannot dress properly, cannot live in a proper place, and receives instruction in a pigsty-like life from a young girl mother who lacks knowledge, experience, and has a weak sense of responsibility. What will their future be like?

Brother Kim, the conclusion is drawing near.
Korea (朝鮮) has traditionally boasted of being the Eastern Land of Courtesy (東方禮義之國). I do not know what it was like in the past, before I was born, but looking at the current state of our society, far from being the Eastern Land of Courtesy, it is endlessly shameful. When riding the train, children gather and make vulgar gestures towards the train. Our country's children are like this, wanting to curse even people passing by for no reason. Forget courtesy (禮), even rudeness (失禮) knows no bounds. People jeer (야지함니다) at music concerts. Arriving 30-40 minutes late for any meeting (會) is considered normal. People come into lecture halls wearing only their inner jackets (동저구리 바람). A preacher (說敎者) comes to the pulpit on Sunday wearing yellow shoes. When I went to the lecture by the Hawaiian Student Delegation (하와이 學生團) in Seoul, someone drunk stood outside the door causing a drunken disturbance (쥐정) all night. Even when the tram is full, no one stands up to offer a seat to a woman who enters. There's even a story (니약이) about someone attending a wedding wearing riding clothes (乘馬服). It's truly rare to see someone say thank you after asking for directions on the street. People rarely say thank you when buying things at a store. Korean station employees (停車場 朝鮮人 驛夫) act like government officials (官吏). When people gather, all they talk about is food (먹는 니이약). If I were to write more, it would be endless. We need to be more courteous (례졀다위야). And we must strive to live clean, orderly (뎡녕하며), and civilized lives.

Brother Kim, we must learn to respect the personality (人格) of others. And we must learn to value time. <59> When waiting at places like music concerts for the scheduled time plus 30 minutes to over an hour's delay (에누리) (I once experienced a delay of 1 hour and 5 minutes) just to hear a few bars of unripe squeaking sounds (설닉은 삥삥소리), I just wanted to beat up the master of ceremonies (司會者). We need to fully observe and study every aspect of our lives. Then we must find our own weaknesses ourselves and reform them one by one. We must never forget the thought, "We are youth facing extraordinary times."

Brother Kim, Kim, Kim, having written this essay of impressions, it has become too lengthy. But this is my unreserved confession. I cannot help but add one last word.

"Chaos" (혼돈), chaos, it is chaos. The reason I titled this impression piece "Chaos" is because of this. That is, upon returning after a long time and looking into our society, I immediately uttered the exclamation "Chaos!" It reminds me of the first chapter of Genesis. Just like the words "Now the earth was formless and empty, darkness was over the surface of the deep" (Genesis 1:2 - 따이 혼돈하야 공허하고 깁흠우에 캄캄함이 잇는대), present-day Korea is in chaos. Just as the Earth, initially in chaos, had various elements bubbling, churning, and swirling in darkness (캄캄함), our society now also has the elements for building a new society mixed together, bubbling and boiling. It seems many people have not yet found the definite path forward they should take. They just get swept along with this society in bewilderment, asking, "What is happening to the world?" As it spins and swirls like this, Venus (金星) will emerge, Jupiter (木星) will emerge, the Moon will emerge, and the Earth will emerge, and eventually, chaos will transform to give birth to order (整列) and law (法規). And then prosperity and joy will fill the earth (따우에).

"In the beginning, the earth was formless and empty, darkness was over the surface of the deep, and the Spirit of God was hovering over the waters." Now, where is the Power (勢力) (God - 한우님) hovering over our chaotic society? Who will quickly step forward and shout, "I am the energy (에너기) that will organize this chaos into order!"? (End) <60>
<49-60>

**Summary**

Returning to Korea after four years abroad in 1923, the author Kim Sŏng expresses profound disappointment and shock at the state of his homeland. He observes a pervasive lethargy and lack of progress among Koreans, contrasting sharply with the superficial modernization (trains, buildings) primarily benefiting the Japanese colonizers. He criticizes Koreans' walking gait, adherence to impractical white clothing, poor hygiene, the decline of Korean businesses, and the complacency towards colonial development. He laments the moral decay and lack of direction among the educated youth, widespread superstition hindering rational thought, persistent harmful customs like early marriage, and a general lack of courtesy and discipline. The author concludes that Korea is in a state of "chaos," yearning for a force to bring order and progress. This article is historically significant as a raw, firsthand account from a returning intellectual during the colonial period. It vividly portrays the socio-economic impact of Japanese rule, the cultural clashes between tradition and modernity (often superficial), the psychological effects of colonization (fatalism, apathy, internalized inferiority), the critique of the Korean elite's failures, and the desperate search for national identity and direction in the face of overwhelming challenges. Historians can find valuable insights into urban conditions (Pusan, Seoul, Kaesŏng, P'yŏngyang), rural decline, social customs, religious practices, and the critical perspective of a concerned nationalist observing his society in flux.

**Named Entities**

金兄	김형	Brother Kim / Mr. Kim (addressee)
金星	김성	Kim Sŏng (author)
故國	고국	Homeland (Korea)
三千里 江土	삼천리 강토	Samch'ŏlli Kangt'o (Poetic name for Korea)
釜山	부산	Pusan
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul)
開城	개성	Kaesŏng
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
全鮮	전선	Chŏnsŏn (All Korea)
日人	일인	Japanese person/people
中國人	중국인	Chinese person/people
朝鮮人	조선인	Korean person/people
新市街	신시가	Sin Siga (New Town/Street area, likely Japanese sector)
鐵橋	철교	Railway Bridge
飛行場	비행장	Airfield
料理집 (미가도)	요릿집 (미카도)	Mikado Restaurant
米國	미국	Miguk (USA)
오스트랠리아	오스트레일리아	Australia
臺灣	대만	Taiwan
紀州	기주	Kishū (Region in Japan)
西瑞	서서	Sŏsŏ (Likely Switzerland)
英國	영국	Yŏngguk (UK)
鐵道會社	철도회사	Ch'ŏlto Hoesa (Railway Company)
電信局	전신국	Chŏnsin'guk (Telegraph Office)
新義州	신의주	Sinŭiju
北京	북경	Beijing
牧畜業	목축업	Livestock Industry
光化門	광화문	Kwanghwamun (Gate in Seoul)
南大門通	남대문통	Namdaemun-t'ong (Namdaemun Street, Seoul)
鍾路	종로	Chongno (Street in Seoul)
大同江	대동강	Taedong River (P'yŏngyang)
七星門外	칠성문외	Ch'ilsŏngmun-pak (Area outside Ch'ilsŏng Gate, P'yŏngyang)
土城	토성	T'osŏng (Earthen Fortress area, P'yŏngyang)
南南鮮	남남선	Namnamsŏn (Southern part of Korea)
西北鮮	서북선	Sŏbuksŏn (Northwestern part of Korea)
公立 普通學校	공립 보통학교	Kongnip Pot'ong Hakkyo (Public Ordinary School)
警察署	경찰서	Kyŏngch'alsŏ (Police Station)
郡廳	군청	Kunch'ŏng (County Office)
東亞日報 分局	동아일보 분국	Tonga Ilbo Branch Office
쌩키夫人	생키 부인	Mrs. Sanger (Likely Margaret Sanger)
東方禮義之國	동방예의지국	Tongbang Yeŭi Chiguk (Eastern Land of Courtesy)
하와이 學生團	하와이 학생단	Hawaii Student Delegation
停車場 朝鮮人 驛夫	정거장 조선인 역부	Chŏnggŏjang Chosŏnin Yŏkpu (Train Station Korean Staff/Porters)
南山公園	남산공원	Namsan Park (Seoul)
神社	신사	Shinto Shrine
敎會堂	교회당	Church building
崇神人組合	숭신인조합	Sungsin'in Chohap (God-Worshipping People's Association - interpretation)
玉皇上帝	옥황상제	Ok(h)wang Sangje (Jade Emperor)
聖殿	성전	Holy Temple
성황당	성황당	Sŏnghwangdang (Village shrine)
미럭	미륵	Mirŭk (Maitreya Buddha statue)
天道敎	천도교	Ch'ŏndogyo (Religion)
佛敎	불교	Buddhism
계룡산	계룡산	Kyeryongsan (Mountain)
眞洞	진동	Chindong (Place name)
溫井池	온정지	Onjŏngji (Hot spring pond)
金星	금성	Kŭmsŏng (Venus)
木星	목성	Moksŏng (Jupiter)
地球	지구	Chigu (Earth)
한우님	하느님	God (archaic/dialectal spelling of 하느님)

**Glossary**

혼돈	혼돈	Chaos, confusion
故國	고국	Homeland, native country
즘생	짐승	Animal (older spelling)
녑구리	옆구리	Side, flank (older spelling/dialectal)
업시	없이	Without (older spelling)
뵈히는	보이는	Appearing, looking (older spelling)
시긔	시기	Period, time (older form of 시기 時期)
갑진	값진	Valuable (older spelling)
처디	처지	Situation, circumstances (older spelling)
括目相對	괄목상대	Looking at someone with new eyes due to remarkable progress
뛰놀니엿슴니다	뛰놀렸습니다	Made (my heart) pound/leap (older conjugation)
단녀본	다녀본	Visited, went around (older spelling)
갓핫슴니다	같았습니다	Seemed like, was like (older spelling)
여디도 업시	어디에도 없이 / 여지없이	Completely, utterly / Nowhere (context suggests 'utterly insignificant') (older spelling/idiom)
개와집	기와집	Tiled-roof house (older spelling)
작란감	장난감	Toy (older spelling)
만터니	많더니	There used to be many (older spelling/conjugation)
업서지고	없어지고	Disappeared (older spelling)
엇든	어떤	Some, certain (older spelling)
밧게	밖에	Outside of, except for (older spelling)
드른바	들은 바	What was heard
짓그려볼가	지껄여볼까	Shall I chatter/ramble on (older spelling/form)
소김	속임	Deception (older spelling)
소래	소리	Sound, voice (older spelling)
엇재	어찌	How, why (older spelling)
거름 거리	걸음걸이	Gait, way of walking
즘생	짐승	Animal (older spelling)
측 느려치고	축 늘어지고	Sagging, drooping limply
로예	노예	Slave
바디가랭이	바지가랑이	Trouser legs (older form)
묵는	묶는	Tying (older spelling)
두루막이	두루마기	Traditional Korean overcoat (older spelling)
례복	예복	Ceremonial dress, formal wear
거치적거릴	거치적거릴	To be cumbersome, hindering (older spelling)
웨	왜	Why (older spelling)
피슙�는	피어오르는(?)	Rising (dust) (*unclear original*)
비방	비방	Slander, defamation
올른	옳은	Right, correct (older spelling)
곳처야	고쳐야	Must correct/fix (older spelling)
니여	이어	Following, continuing (older spelling)
얼룩	얼룩	Stain, spot
자조	자주	Frequently
빨내	빨래	Laundry
색캄앗토록	새까맣도록	Until it becomes pitch black
샛발앗케	샛노랗게	Intensely yellow (likely '샛노랗게' intended, older spelling)
뭉개는	뭉개는	Crushing, smudging, wearing carelessly
쓸쓸하고	쓸쓸하고	Desolate, lonely
시가디	시가지	Urban area, streets (older spelling)
번화도	번화도	Bustling nature
미미한	미미한	Insignificant, trivial
변햇다면	변했다면	If it has changed
주저안즌	주저앉은	Collapsed, sunk down (older spelling)
살아갈가요	살아갈까요	How shall we live?
영영히	영영히	Forever, eternally
外邦놈	외방놈	Foreign devil, foreigner (derogatory)
不可思議	불가사의	Incomprehensible, mysterious
깃버함니다	기뻐합니다	Rejoices (older spelling)
맛당히	마땅히	Rightly, properly (older spelling)
터이니까	터이니까	Because it signifies/means (older grammar)
압흐게	아프게	Painfully (older spelling)
조흔	좋은	Good (older spelling)
즐겨할	즐거워할	To rejoice, be glad (older form)
녑짐	옆집	Neighboring house (older spelling)
同里	동리	Village (older term for 동네)
밋치는가를	미치는가를	Whether it affects (older spelling)
낫에는	낮에는	During the day (older spelling)
拾錢	십전	Ten jeon/sen (unit of currency)
銀錢	은전	Silver coin/money
草家	초가	Thatched-roof house
乾葡萄	건포도	Dried grapes, raisins
나무과즙	나무과즙(?)	Tree fruit juice (?) (likely 과일즙 - fruit juice)
西瑞製	서서제	Swiss-made (西瑞 likely Switzerland)
맥고모자	밀짚모자(?)	Straw hat (Panama hat context) (*Possibly 밀짚모자*)
거드럭거리는	거드럭거리는	Swaggering, acting pompously
내쟝	내장	Internal organs
글거가는	긁어가는	Scraping away
엇기	얻기	To obtain, get
통분히	통분히	Indignantly
太平乾坤	태평건곤	Peaceful world/times
버혀	베어	Cutting down (older spelling)
듯지	듣지	Hear (older spelling)
싯뻙언	시뻘건	Bright red (bare chest context, older spelling)
웃둥	웃통	Upper body (torso)
亡國奴	망국노	People of a ruined nation
未開國	미개국	Uncivilized country
牧畜業	목축업	Livestock industry
家畜小屋	가축소옥	Livestock shed/hut
백엿는지	박혔는지	Where it was stuck/hidden (older spelling)
도야지 우리	돼지우리	Pigsty
시궁창	시궁창	Open sewer, ditch
쟝옷	장옷	Traditional women's overgarment covering head/body
怪風	괴풍	Strange custom
保舊的	보수적	Conservative (older term 保守的 is more common now)
新女子	신여자	New Woman (term for modern, educated women)
妓生	기생	Female entertainer/courtesan
激增	격증	Sharp increase
밀가루	밀가루	Flour (here slang for prostitute - white makeup)
쳥류벽	청류벽	Ch'ŏngnyubyŏk (cliff name near P'yŏngyang)
쟝고	장고	Hourglass-shaped drum
반취	반취	Half-drunk
금수강산	금수강산	Land of embroidered rivers and mountains (beautiful scenery)
고을	고을	Town, district (older term)
행길	행길	Main street (older term)
冷麵	냉면	Cold noodles
獸肉	수육	Meat (esp. boiled meat slices)
뜨더	뜯어	To tear off, extort (money)
순회흥행	순회흥행	Touring performance/show
어러뚱뚱하게	어리뚱뚱하게	In a muddled, foolish way (older spelling)
뻐린	버린	Threw away, abandoned (older spelling)
갓흐면	같으면	If it were (older spelling)
횡포	횡포	Tyranny, oppression
기막키고	기막히고	Appalling, shocking (older spelling)
知識階級	지식계급	Intellectual class
호믜잡은	호미 잡은	Holding a hoe (farming tool)
有産階級	유산계급	Propertied class
遊食階級	유식계급	Leisured class (living without working)
맛도록	맞도록	Suiting, matching (older spelling)
녁이고	여기고	Considering, regarding as (older spelling)
바닷슬	받았을	Would have received (older spelling)
번둥번둥	빈둥빈둥	Idling around, loafing (older form)
녕감	영감	Old man, elder (term of address)
모화	모아	Gathering, saving (money) (older spelling)
식혓슴니다	시켰습니다	Made (someone) do, educated (older spelling)
구들구들하기는	구질구질하기는	Reluctantly, grudgingly (associated with stinginess, older form)
싯고	싣고	Loading, carrying (passengers/kisaeng)
밋고	믿고	Believing, trusting (older spelling)
망종	망종	Dissolute person, scoundrel (here: 부리다 - acting dissolutely)
新進文士	신진문사	Emerging/new writer
危機一髮	위기일발	Hair's breadth crisis, critical moment
ª¨르는	가르는(?)	Discerning, dividing (East/West) (*unclear original*)
가이업기	가엾기	Pitifully, wretchedly (older spelling)
眞劍스러웟스면	진검스러웠으면	Wish it were more serious (using 真剣, Japanese loan?)
眞面目하게	진면목하게	Seriously, earnestly (using 真面目, Japanese loan)
敎會堂	교회당	Church building
한우님	하느님	God (older/dialectal spelling)
아래목	아랫목	Warmest part of a heated floor
僞善者	위선자	Hypocrite
두루뭉수리	두루뭉수리	Ambiguously, vaguely, noncommittally
神社	신사	Shinto shrine
迷信	미신	Superstition
긔도	기도	Prayer (older spelling)
按手	안수	Laying on of hands (religious healing)
崇神人組合	숭신인조합	God-Worshipping People's Association (interpretation)
橫行	횡행	Rampant, prevalent (negative connotation)
玉皇上帝	옥황상제	Jade Emperor (Taoist deity)
무당	무당	Shaman
聖殿	성전	Holy Temple
성황당	성황당	Village guardian shrine
미럭	미륵	Maitreya Buddha statue (older spelling)
天道敎	천도교	Ch'ŏndogyo (Korean religion)
佛敎	불교	Buddhism
굿	굿	Shamanistic ritual
溫井池	온정지	Hot spring pond
祭祀	제사	Ancestral rites, sacrifice
닷	닻	Anchor
怪說	괴설	Strange rumor, bizarre theory
외다리 독개비	외다리 도깨비	One-legged goblin (older spelling)
맥	맥	Pulse
運命觀	운명관	View of fate, fatalism
八字	팔자	Fate, destiny (lit. eight characters of birth time)
運命論	운명론	Fatalism
勞働問題	노동문제	Labor problem/issue
婦人問題	부인문제	Women's issue/problem
해방햇다구	해방했다고	Saying (women) are liberated
怪異	괴이	Strange, bizarre
同等	동등	Equal status
서방질	서방질	Adultery (by a woman)
赤面	적면	Blushing
人力車꾼	인력거꾼	Rickshaw puller
구루마	구루마	Cart (from Japanese 'kuruma')
同窓生	동창생	Alumnus, classmate
早婚	조혼	Early marriage
咀呪	저주	Curse
産兒制限	산아제한	Birth control
寄生生活	기생생활	Parasitic life
며누리	며느리	Daughter-in-law (older spelling)
體質 虛弱	체질 허약	Weak constitution
아해	아이	Child (older form)
東方禮義之國	동방예의지국	Eastern Land of Courtesy
야지함니다	야유합니다	Jeer, hoot (at) (older spelling/form of 야유하다)
동저구리	동저고리	Inner jacket (part of Hanbok)
쥐정	주정	Drunken behavior/ravings
니약이도	이야기도	Story also (older spelling)
乘馬服	승마복	Riding clothes
례졀다위야	예절다워야	Must be courteous (older spelling/grammar)
뎡녕하며	정연하며	Orderly (older spelling of 정연하다)
人格	인격	Personality, character
에누리	에누리	Discount, haggling (here context suggests 'delay' or 'padding')
설닉은	설익은	Unripe, immature (older spelling)
삥삥소리	삥삥소리	Squeaking/whining sound (onomatopoeia)
司會者	사회자	Master of Ceremonies (MC)
마즈막으로	마지막으로	Lastly, finally (older spelling)
캄캄함이	캄캄함이	Darkness
깁흠	깊음	Depth
잇는대	있는데	Where there is (older spelling)
뒤석겨	뒤섞여	Mixed up, jumbled (older spelling)
끌어	끓어	Boiling (older spelling)
도라가며	돌아가며	Turning, revolving (older spelling)
맛츰내는	마침내는	Eventually, finally (older spelling)
整列	정렬	Order, alignment
法規	법규	Laws and regulations
낫켓지오	낳겠지요	Will give birth to, produce (older spelling)
따우에	땅 위에	On the earth/ground (older spelling)
勢力	세력	Power, force
졍리식힐	정리시킬	To organize, arrange (older spelling)
에너기	에너지	Energy (loanword, older transcription)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제39호
발행일	1923년 09월 01일
기사제목	혼돈, 4年만에 故國에 돌아와서
필자	金星
기사형태	문예기타

혼돈, 4年만에 故國에 돌아와서
						金星
金兄!
오래간만에 정든 故國에 돌아오니 山도 반갑고 물도 반가우며, 사람들도 반갑고 즘생들까지도 반잡슴니다. 그러나 반가운 한편으로는 또 이때껏 참을 수 업시 반갑던 생각을 뿌리채  빼여가려는 악마가튼 보기 실흔 한 녑구리도 업지 아니함니다.
金兄, 4年이란 세월이 그리 기인 것은 아니외다. 4年 가튼 것은 생각지도 안을 동안에 어느새 흘러버릴 短期일 것이외다. 그러나 다시 한번 4年이란 시간을 되푸리해 생각해 본다면은 적지 아니하게 오랜 시긔일 것이외다. 4年이면 1461日이 아님니까? 이 1500日의 시간이 그래도 우리보다는 압섯다는 문명한 모-든 나라에 잇서서는 그리 귀즁한 것도 아니고 그리 기인 시간도 아니 될넌지 모르겟스나, 남보다 적어도 백년쯤은 뒤떠러진 우리민족의 立地로 볼 때에는 확실히 이 4年 동안이라는 세월이 매우 갑진 것도 되고 따라서 남이 20年이나 30年동안에 할 일을 우리는 요 短期 안에 실행하여야 할 처디가 아님닛가! 그러함으로 4個年이라는 세월이 다른 사람에게는 몰라도 우리 민족에게는 모-든 사회생활이 括目相對하지 안으면 아니 될 中間期일 것이외다. 그럼으로 저는 이번예 그립든 本國을 향해 떠나는 배를 타면서부터 그야말로 만흔 기대와 好奇心을 가지고 제 적은 가슴을 분수 업시도 뛰놀니엿슴니다.
金兄, 저는 제 본집인 三千里 江土 안에 돌아 온지 벌서 6週日이 남앗슴니다. 그 동안 단녀본 대라야 별로 업고 다만 都會處로는 釜山, 京城, 開城에를 잠간 잠간식 들녀 보앗고 그러고는 제 休暇의 대부분을 제 고향인 平壤에서 지나버렷슴니다.＜49＞ 그럼으로 쫏차서 전국에 관한 상당한 관찰이나 유람을 할 기회도 업섯거니와 더욱히 상당한 기회가 잇섯다구하드래도 아직 이러타 저러타 비판을 나리기가 대단히 어려운 가운데 잇슴니다. 더욱이 부산이나 서울이나 개성에는 제가이전에 가본 적이 업시 이번이 거의 첫번 구경이엿슴으로 이전과 지금을 비교하야 볼 수가 업게 되엿고 고향인 평양으로 말하면 제가 18年 동안이나 밧게 나지 안코 길려운 데가 되여서 그래도 대강한 상태는 전부터 알고 잇섯슴으로 4年前엣 평양과 4年后인 오늘엣 평양을 서로 비교하야 어느 것이 發展되엿고 어느 것이 退步되엿는지를 대강이라도 認識할 수가 잇게 되엿슴니다. 그러나 평양만의 관찰로써 全鮮의 상태로 인정할 수는 업는 것이니까 제가 오는 동안 기차에서 보고 드른바 또는 우에 말한 몃곳 都會處에서 귀결엔 망정 대강 어든 지식을 가지고 제가 귀국한 후 절실히 깨다른 바 또는 우리 민족에게 泣告하고 십흔바 몃가지 사실을 순서도 가리지 안코 그저 생각나는 대로 막 짓그려볼가 하야 붓을 드럿슴니다. 다만 소김 업슨 어린 동생의 호소하는 소래로 드러주시면 그 뿐이겟슴니다.
金兄, 우리 나라에 쳑 나려서면서 처음으로 가장 강하게 제 마음에 상처를 내여 주는 것은 다른 아모 것도 아니요 우리 나라 사람의 거름 거리 모양이 그것이올시다. 엇재 절반은 죽은 사람처럼 또는 모다 긴벙쟁이들처럼 측 느려치고 활기업시 느릿느릿 거리는 모양은 참으로 눈에서 피가 쏘다지도록 보기 실흔 것이엿슴니다. 물론 거긔에는 民族的 共通한 리유가 잇겟지오. 분주하지 아니한 민족, 게으르게 뵈히는 衣服을 닙은 민족, 공통적으로 弱質인 민족, 往來에 량반 거름거리 본을 전래해온 習慣의 로예가 된 민족, 이 민족이기 때문에 거름이 이가티도 보기 실케 되엿겟지오, 그러나 형님, 엇재서 우리가 이러케 한가한 살림을 하고잇슬 수가 잇겟슴니까? 衣服改良이라는 문뎨에 가서는 매우 어렵고 重大한 문뎨가 됨으로 얼는 말할 수가 업슴니다만은 어서 우리들의 거름 거리를 좀더 원기잇게 좀더 활발하게 좀더 생기잇게 하기 위하야 다만 얼마간읫 改良이라도, 즉시로 실행하는 것이 우리민족에게 크게 時急한 문뎨일가 함니다. 다른 것은 다 그래도 두고라도 위선 바디가랭이를 좁게 만들고 다님 묵는 것은 폐한 후 저고리를 지금보다 족음 더 길게 해닙어서 거름 거리에 몹시도 거릿거리는 두루막이는 례복으로나 쓸망정 日常生活에는 닙지 안토록 햇스면 엇덜가 함니다. 그러케 되면 빨니 거러도 거치적거릴 리 업게 되고 넓은 바디가랭이를 따에 쩔쩔 끌고 다니는 더러운 꼴도 보히지 아니할 것이 아니겟슴니가? 그러고 우리는 종래의 우리 습관을 용감하게 깨트려서 거름 거리를 좀 빨랑빨랑 거러야 하겟슴니다＜50＞ 길에 나서면 활기잇게 뚜벅뚜벅 밧비 거러서 갈 곳을 다 가서 땀도 드리고 쉬이기도 하지오. 웨 그러케 먼지 피슚�는 거리에서 어기적 버기적 하고 잇겟슴니까? 할 일이 잇거든 빨랑빨랑 해버리고 쉬이고 갈 길이 잇거든 얼는 얼는 다 가서 쉬입시다. 우리는 우리끼리기 말이지 외국사람으로써 이 거름 거리 꼴을 보고야 엇더한 咀呪, 엇더한 욕, 엇더한 비방이야 아니 하오릿가! 우리는 거름거리에서부터 우리의게 오른 性質올 곳처야 하겟슴니다.
金兄, 그 후로 니여 제 눈에 가시가 되는 것은 우리민족의 白色衣服 그것이외다. 물론 백색은 아름답슴니다. 순결함니다. 고결한 마음의 表白이외다. 그러나 白色衣服은 그것이 더 순결하고 더 깨끗하니 만치 더 날내 더러워지고 더 날내 얼룩이 집니다. 白色衣服을 닙엇스니그와 동시에 남보다 더 자조 빨내하여야 할 것이 아님니까? 흰옷에 때가 색캄앗토록, 흙물이 샛발앗케 들도록 닙고 뭉개는 꼴은 참으로 못 보겟슴니다. 빨내를 자조 못하겟거든 차라리 有色 의복을 닙기를 원함니다.
金兄, 우리 나라 都會處는 말할 수 업시 쓸쓸하고 보기 실혓슴니다. 부산에는 시가디라구는 日人의 것 밧게 업는 것 갓핫슴니다. 서울에도 진고개, 南大門通이 번화도 하고 도회갓기도 하지 우리 나라 사람의 시가디라고는 예상햇든 것보다는 여디도 업시 미미한 것이엿슴니다. 개성에서는 개와집 보기가 힘들고 평양에는 작란감 가튼 商店들로 채와 잇슴니다. 평양의 거리는 4年前 보다 퍽 달라젓슴니다. 새로 電車도 노히고 새 벽돌집도 더러 잇슴니다. 그러나 電車는 外國人의 밥버리통이외다. 번적 번적하는 새 집들도 모다 日人의 것이거나 中國人의 것이외다. 朝鮮人 시가에는 변한 것이 업슴니다. 다만 4年前에는 호떡쟝사가 만터니 지금에는 그것이 하나도 업서지고 거리거리에 「玄米빵」 소래로 가득 채와진 것이 그래도 변햇다면 변한 것입니다. 어느 都會나 우리 나라 사람의 시가디는 여러 가지 원인으로 인해서 發展되기를 주저하고 잇는 것 갓슴니다. 엇던 대는 나날이 시드러저 가는 것 갓기도 하고 엇든 대는 벌서 주저안즌 것 갓기도 하올시다. 그러면 이제 우리는 무엇을 먹고 살아갈가요? 영영히 부자집 床아레 개노릇이나 할까요? 웨 우리는 우리 땅에 살면서도 우리 땅의 주인노릇을 못하고 나날이 外邦놈에게 잇는 모-든 것을 빼앗기면서 차차차차 파멸에 길을 차자 드러가지 아니치 못하게 되엿슬가요?! 이것은 不可思議이외다. 우리들에게 힘이 업는 것은 아니외다. 그러나 우리는 우리 힘을 바로 쓸 줄을 모름니다. ＜51＞
金兄, 저는 평양에서 엇든 어른에게 이런 말을 드른 적이 잇슴니다.
『오래간만에 집에 오니까 미상불 달라진 것도 만켓네 그려. 님자 업는 동안에 평양도 무던히 변햇다네. 電車도 노히고, 鐵橋도 거의 落成되엿고 飛行場도 잇서서 飛行機도 매일 떠도라 단니고 미가도라는 큰 料理집도 생기고, 이제는 그만햇스면 다른 나라 어느 都會에 비기던지 遜色은 업슬 것이로세』
金兄, 저는 이 말을 드를 때 제 가슴은 무듼 칼로 욱여내는 것처럼 압핫슴니다. 그들은 평양이 다른 도회처보다 나아가는 것을 깃버함니다. 예! 맛당히 깃버해야할 것이겟지오. 電車도 단니고, 飛行機도 투들거리며 自動車도 뿡뿡거리고 鐵橋도 노히는 것이 평양에 발전을 의미하는 것일 터이니까 물론 평양 사람으로는 이것을 깃버할 것이겟지오. 그러나, 형님, 그들은 웨 한 거름 더 나가 생각해 보지 아니할가요? 자! 이제는 飛行機 구경도 신기한 것이 못되고, 停車場에도 다리 압흐게 거러단닐 필요도 업서지고 햇스니 이게 참 조흔 세상이 아니냐하고 즐겨할 것이겟슴니까? 이것을 즐겨할 사람은 따로 잇지 아니한가요? 형님, 우리는 이것을 즐겨하기 보다 더 한층 슬퍼하고 더 한층 自省하여야할 때가 아닐가요? 이 모-든 發展, 곳 평양의 現今發展이 과연 6만의 朝鮮人을 基本으로한, 또는 朝鮮人의 생활의 안정을 期約하는 發展일가요? 저는 여긔 큰 의심을 품지 아니치 못하엿슴니다. 그들이 즐기는 이 발전이라는 것이 新市街 일부에게는 一大 幸福이오 큰 복주머니 일거슨 확실한 사실일 것이외다. 그러나 그 外國人 일부의 이익과 행복이 과연 우리 朝鮮人 시민에게 엇더한 영향을 끼칠가? 이것이 제의 큰 의문 가운대 하나이올시다.
金兄, 나는 굶어 죽을 디경인데 내 녑짐에 사는 사람이 돈을 만히 모흐고 자동차를 타면 그것을 그저 「우리 동리에 영광일다」하야 한갓 즐겨하는 것이 올흔 일일가요? 또 혹은 그 부자가 자동차를 탐으로 자긔 자신의 생활에 엇더한 영향이 밋치는가를 잘 생각해서 판단을 나린 후에 깃버할 경우이거든 깃버하고 슬퍼할 일이거든 슬퍼하여야 할 것이 아닐가요? 지금 우리 나라 사람으로 보건댄 낫에는 자동차 뿡 하고 밤에는 전등불로 不夜城을 이루며, 때로는 飛行機도 나라 단니고, 전에는 닷새 엿새에 단니든 길을 鐵道會社에 돈 몃 拾錢 드리 미러주면 5,6時間이면 왕래할 수 잇고 전에는 열흘이 걸려야 서로 소식을 通하든 곳에도 電信局 金庫에 銀錢 몃 푼을 보태주면 삽시간에 서로 통할 수가 잇스니까, 전에는 草家만 잇든 곳에 外國人이 들어와 번듯하고 화려한 집을 짓고, 전에는 元山서 나는 생선을 京城에서 어더 먹으려도＜52＞ 여간 어려운 일이 아니엿섯는데 지금에는 가만이 안저 잇서도, 米國서 온 乾葡萄, 오스트랠리아에서 온 쨈이나 나무과즙, 臺灣서 온 빠나나, 紀州서 온 귤 가튼 것을 먹을 수 잇게 되엿스니, 전에는 말도 못 드럿든 西瑞製 白金時計를 차고, 영국서 온 맥고모자를 쓰게 되엿다고, 그저 다른 아모 생각업시 「세월 조쿠나」하고 거드럭거리는 분이 만히 잇는 것 갓슴니다.
형님, 생각하두새 두려운 일이외다. 몸에 소름이 끼칠 일이외다. 그들은 빨기 조흔 아편이, 사람이 이를 빠라가며 즐기는 그 동시에 그 사람의 내쟝을 박박 글거가는 것을 깨닷지 못하는 사람이 만슴니다. 기차가 생기고, 電信이 응용되며 외국물건을 손쉽게 쓰게 되엿스니, 그래서 이 모-든 편리나 응용이 과연 누구의 손으로부터 運轉되며 따라서 우리는 그 대가로 무엇을 支拂하고 잇슴니까? 아! 우리는 웨 비단옷을 닙고 안저서 향긔로운 술을 마시면서 그 옷, 그 술을 엇기 위하야 우리뜰의 대부분이 外人의 손에 드러간 것을 통분히 생각지 안님니까? 우리는 엇재서 유리가 太平乾坤에 독기자투 썩일 적에 우리가 드러안즌 집 기둥을 버혀 내이는 톱소리를 듯지 못할가요? 우리의 생명은 刻一刻으로 위험해 오는데 우리는 엇재서 「그래도 조타」하고 웃고 떠들기만 할 수가 잇겟슴니까?
金兄, 이제는 잠간 제가 려행하는 가운데서 어더 본 경험담을 쓰기로 하겟슴니다.
부산서부터 신의주까지 가 보아야 기차선로 연변의 촌락들은 웨 그다지도 쇠퇴하여저 잇슴니까? 게딱지 가튼 쓰러저가는 초가집들, 그 안에서 싯뻙언 웃둥 내여놋코 담배 피우며 안젓는 꼴은 갈데 업는 亡國奴의 村 그것이엿나이다. 年前에 엇든 西洋人 하나가 기차를 타고 주ㄱ 全鮮을 通過하야 北京에 와서 그 여행감상을 말할 때 朝鮮에 대해 이러케 말햇다구  함니다.
『나는 朝鮮이 未開國이란 말을 만히 드럿노라. 그러나 내가 朝鮮을 방문한 후에 내 예긔하엿든 것보다는 퍽 발달되여 잇는 나라임을 발견하엿노라. 그 이유로는 나는 이번에 朝鮮은 牧畜業이 매우 발달된 나라임을 간파하엿노라. 내가 기차를 타고 全鮮을 꿰뚤너 을 때 나는 도처에 家畜小屋이 동리를 이루워 즐비하게 기차연변에 잇는 것을 보앗노라.』 이 얼마나 우리를 風刺한 말임니까?
金兄, 이 外國人이 家畜小屋으로 본 그 집들은 정말 家畜간이 아니라 우리 형제들이 起居하는 주택임에 엇지 하겟슴니까?＜53＞ 年前에 죽은 英國新聞王이 朝鮮을 방문하고 그 感想談에 「朝鮮 농촌은 아직 原始的 생활의 感이 잇다」 하엿다는 것은 아직 우리 귀에 새롭은 警鍾이엿슴니다.
부산에는 朝鮮人 市街가 어느 구석에 백엿는지 차자 내이기가 힘들 디경이엿슴니다. 朝鮮人이 경영하는 여관이라는 것은 려관 이래기보다도 도야지 우리의 感이 잇섯슴니다. 웨 좀 더 깨끗하게 살아보지 못할가요?
서울서도 光化門 부근 一帶에 나즌 집과 더럽고 좁은 길이며 길녑헤 흐르는 시궁창들에는 절망의 嘆聲을 금할 수가 업섯슴니다. 그러고 南大門通 及 진고개와 鍾路를 비겨볼 때 엇든 恐怖가 일어남을 억제할 수가 업섯슴니다.
開城에 제일 고약한 것은 부인들 쟝옷 쓰는 풍습이 아직 남아잇는 것이엿슴니다. 처음 개성에 나리니까 마치 小說에서 보든 엇든 小王國에 가본 감이 잇섯슴니다. 늙은이고 젊은이고 부인이면 누구나 다 맨발로 길을 갈지연정 쟝옷은 쓰고야 감니다. 이 무슨 怪風일가요. 개성이 이러케까지 保舊的임에는 一警치 아니치 못하엿슴니다.
쟝옷 말이 낫스니 말이지, 全鮮을 두고 볼 적에, 소위 깻다는 新女子(학교 卒業生 及 在學生)들도 아직 쟝옷 쓰는 버릇을 업새지 못한 것을 저는 발견하고 놀낫슴니다. 그것은 만흔 新女子들이 파라쏠을 정말 해 가림을 위함보다도 녯날 쟝옷 대신으로 쓰고 단니는 것 가튼 감을 주는 것이엿슴니다.
平壤에는 日本人便으로는 非常한 발달이엿슴니다. 그러나 朝鮮人便으로 볼 때에는 아모런 발전도 업는 것 갓슴니다. 전 보다 다른 것을 골나 내이자면 妓生의 激增과 七星門外 及 土城方面에 貧民窟의 번창이외다.
金兄, 놀나지 마십시오. 평양에 현재 妓生數가 3천餘名 이라함니다. 말만 드러도 놀납슴니다. 더욱이 이밧게도 밤마다 거리에 얼는 거리는 밀가루가 또 몃백명인지 모를 것이외다. 녀름날에 아무 날이나 쳥류벽을 좃차 을밀대나 부벽루에 올나 보십시오, 大同江에서 불려오는 쟝고 소래 귀가 압흐고 젊은 여인 늙은 한멈 모두 반취는 되여 둥덩실 노릿배 안에서 엉덩춤 추며 돌아가는 꼴이 매일 보힘니다. 평양은 이러케 하야 금수강산 조흔 강산이라는 名譽를 여지 업시 더럽혀 버리고 마럿슴니다.
南南鮮으로 가면서는 모르겟슴니다, 만은 西北鮮으로 數三의 시골을 볼 때에는 한심하지 안을 수 업섯슴니다. 소위 무슨 고을이니 무슨 고을이니 해야 차자 드러가 보면 외길 좌우로 쓰러저가는 草家음식점 몃 집이 느런히 마조서 잇고 그＜54＞ 행길 끗흐로 허술한 公立 普通學校, 大門 큰 警察署, 개와집 郡廳, 冷麵집 웃방의 東亞日報 分局看板, 日本人의 雜貨商이 한 집이나 두 집, 1,2의 獸肉 판매점, 이것으로 말로는 무슨 고을이니 무슨 고을이니 함니다. 더군다나 이러케도 빈약한 고을고을에 요새이도 만날 무슨 연극단이니 무슨 음악회이니 하야 어려운 그들의 살림에서 다만 얼마식 이라도 더 뜨더 오려고 순회흥행을 하는 일이 드뭇햇슴니다. 물론 음악회도 하고 연극회도 열어야겟지오 만은 사실 가만히 살펴보면 그 음악회, 연극회가 무슨 그 村民들의 美的 感情을 고취하려거나 엇든 교육을 뜻하는 것이 아니오 대부분은 헌 나발 個나 가지고 련습도 업는 연극으로 무슨 寄附金이니 무슨 同情金이니 하는 美名下에 入場料만 만히 바다가지고 하로밤을 어러뚱뚱하게 보내 뻐린 후 그 수입으로 제 배를 채우는 간악한 무리가 만흔 것이 사실인 것 갓슴니다. 참으로 그들이 민족을 사랑한달 것 갓흐면 음악회도 무료, 연극회도 무료 아니면 아니될 것입니다. 더욱이 시고을 官吏들의 횡포에 대해서는 쓰기도 실토록 기막키고 열기가 오르는 사실을 목도하기도 하고 듯기도 햇슴니다.
金兄, 저는 이번에 소위 우리 나라 知識階級에 잇는 청년들에게서 아모런 希望도 발견치 못한 것을 유감이나마 告白치 아니치 못하게 되엿슴니다. 나는 도로혀 농촌에서 호믜잡은 단순한 청년들에게서 구만리가튼 희망의 길을 찻기로 하엿슴니다. 金兄, 그 이유는 이러하외다.
나는 우리 나라서 中等程度 學校卒業程度를 知識階級에 속한 청년으로 보앗슴니다. 그런데 그들은 거의 다 中産階級 이상 有産階級에 속한 사람들이외다. 따라서 그들이 학교를 졸업하면 졸업하는 즉시로 遊食階級에 일分子로 入格되고 마는 것이 숨길 수 업는 사실임을 저는 이번에 발견하고 슬퍼하지 안을 수 업섯슴니다. 물론 그들은 우리 사회에서 그들의 理想에 맛도록 일을 시작할 수 업슴으로써 일넌지는 모름니다 만은 만일 과연으로 그들이 이 민족을 불상히 녁이고 참의미엣 완전한 교육을 바닷슬 것 갓흐면 그들은 한시라도 그러케 번둥번둥 놀고 잇슬 수는 업슬 것입니다. 지금 우리 사회에는 할 일이 너무나 만슴니다. 형님, 형님도 아시다 십히 나도 새파란 청년이외다. 그러나 나는 現今 平壤社會로 볼 때 靑年便으로 가담하기보다도 老年便을 칭찬하겟슴니다. 보십시오. 녕감은 돈을 모화 자식 공부를 식혓슴니다. 무슨 회이니 무슨 학교이니에, 구들구들하기는 하면서도 寄附를 얼마 햇슴니다. 그들은 지금도 쉬이지 안코 땀을 흘려가며 욕을 먹어가며 돈을 범니다. 그들은 자식들도 먹여 기르고 닙혀 기름니다. 그러나 그런 부모를 가지고＜55＞ 그 부모가 준 돈으로 외국류학까지 하고 왓다는 그 젊은이들은 엇더함니까? 모혀 안즈면 술이나 마심니다. 저녁이면 妓生 싯고 大同江에 뜸니다. 그들에게는 부모의 生命 財産, 어린 동생의 살 길 등은 아모 관게도 업슴니다. 다만 그들 자신만이 요리나 먹고 妓生 손목이나 쥐엿스면 그 뿐임니다. 형님, 다른대는 모름니다만은 평양서는 학생모자를 쓰고 妓生집 출입하는 자가 수둑햇다 함니다.
형님, 웁시다. 소리처 웁시다. 우리 두리 손목을 맛잡고 슬컷 처 울어봅시다. 그래도 우리 불상한 동포들은 여지껏 그들을 밋고 바라다보고 잇섯슴니다. 그래도 그들이 졸업하고 도라오면 우리를 무엇으로라도 도와주려니... 하고 밋고 잇섯슴니다. 그리나 그들은 수만의 동포가 피와 땀을 모화 갓다준 돈을 몃 천원식 일본인 下宿屋에 내버리고 와서는 「너히들이 웬 놈이냐?」하는 듯이 민중은 도라다도 아니보고 그들은 妓生을 양성식히고 술쟝사를 살지움니다. 이것을 생각할 때 울지 안을 수 잇겟슴니까? 그런데 여기 또 한 가지 이상한 현상이 잇는 것은 最初에 外國서 유학하고 도라온 이들은 거의 사회에 유익한 사업에 着手함에 불구하고 요새 가제 도라온 이는 대부분 망종을 부리는 이가 만흔 것은 참으로 깨다를 수 업는 不可思議이외다.
金兄, 나는 本國와서 우리 나라 新進文士의 대부분이 술을 먹는 것을 보앗슴니다. 또, 사회의 指導者然 하는 신사들이 대부분 술을 먹는다는 말을 드럿슴니다. 이 말을 드를 때 저는 몸에 소름이 끼첫슴니다. 이제 만일 엇든 戰場에서 指揮官의 責任을 가진 士官이 술병을 차고 突進의 先鋒을 指揮하고 잇다구 하면 우리는 얼마나 그 軍隊의 안전을 期約할 수 잇스며 따라 승리를 豫期할 수 잇겟슴니까?
우리는 지금 非常한 때에 낫슴니다. 戰場 이상으로 위험한 때이외다. 이러한 위기일발읫 때에 처하야 東西를 ª¨르는 대중을 인도하면서 술병을 차고 나선다면... 저는 더 말하기도 실슴니다. 술주정꾼, 술 취한 자의 지도를 밧는 대중이야말로 가이업기 그지 업슴니다.
金兄, 우리 나라 청년들도 좀 더 眞劍스러웟스면 좃켓서요. 생활이라는 것을 좀 더 日本文字로 眞面目하게 하면 좃켓서요. 妓生집에를 가려거든 極端까지 타락해 버리거나 敎會堂에를 오겟거든 진정한 信者가 되여 주엇스면 조켓서요. 「한 세상 되는대로 살다가 죽엇스면 그 뿐이지」하는 관렴을 뿌리채 빼버려 주엇스면 좃켓서요. 일정한 自己主見 하에서＜56＞ 確乎不動하는 참된 생활을 경영햇스면 좃켓서요. 지금 여긔 가만히 보니까 일요일에는 敎會堂에 가서 한우님 아멘 하다가 월요일 밤에는 妓生집 아래목에서 잠자고 화요일 오후에는 무슨 청년회 임원이 웨 하고 떠들다가 수요일 오후에는 大同江에 妓生 실고 배 띄우는 청년이 수두룩 함니다.
형님, 한우님과 妓生을 한 자리에 안처놋코 둘을 다 섬기겟다는 더러운 놈들을 처물녀 버릴 수는 업슴니다. 僞善者들을 한 묵금에 때려 부실 奇蹟은 아니 나타남니까? 敎會堂에 단니거든 진실한 信者가 됩시다. 그러고 妓生집에 가거든 신자생활에서 脫退합시다. 두루뭉수리 생활을 그만두고 진정스런 생활을 경영하여야지오. 한우님과 妓生을 도저히 한꺼번에 섬길 수 업는 것을 깨달아야 하겟슴니다.
金兄! 서울 南山公園에 세 개식 련다라 세우는 日本人의 神社와 兩 3年間에 새로 지은 평양에 3,4個所의 敎會堂이 재미잇는 대조를 이루움니다. 日本人은 迷信 속에서 생활하는 민족이란 말이 잇슴이다. 그러나 우리 나라 사람은 더욱 심한 迷信的 민족인 感이 잇슴니다. 이직도 到處에 긔도로 병을 고치느니 按手로 병을 고치느니 하는 일이 헤일 수도 업시 만슴니다. 崇神人組合이 發興함니다. 우리의 생활에 비하야 넘우도 분수에 넘치는 화려한 敎會堂이 새로 생겨남니다. 세계종교 중 가쟝 迷信에서 멀다는 예수敎도 朝鮮에 잇서서는 迷信의 大本營이 되여잇슴니다. 긔도로 병을 고친다는 牧師가 아직까지도 橫行을 힘니다. 벽돌집 敎會堂을 짓는 것은 꼭 日本人이 到處에 神社를 짓는 그 심리와 동일한 心理作用의 實現임니다. 그들은 예수교의 한우님도 그젼 玉皇上帝 보는 모양으로 봄니다. 그러고 예수는 그를 마음속에 보히지 안는 무당이 되엿슴니다. 그들은 벌서 예수가 사마리아女人으로 더부러 聖殿에 대해서 엇더케 말슴하신 것을 니저부렷슴니다. 그러고 전에 성황당이나 미럭을 세우든 것과 꼭 가튼 심리로 過度히 훌륭한 敎會堂을 짓슴니다. 예수교 뿐 아니올시다. 天道敎人도 만히는 迷信에서 방황함니다. 佛敎도 그럿슴니다. 계룡산으로는 群衆이 가족들을 잇글고 모혀든다구 함니다. 서울 南山 꼭닥이에서 굿하는 구경을 바루 한 달 전에 친히 보앗슴니다. 제  친척 중에도 알는 아해 하나를 眞洞근처 어데선가 긔도로 병 고치는 사람이 잇다고 다리고 갓다오는 것을 보앗슴니다. 나는 그때 한사하고 말려 보앗슴니다만은 그들 머리에 꽉 근거를 잡은 迷信에 뿌리를 빼여 내기에는 내 혀가 넘우 약하엿슴니다. 溫井池에서도 溫泉에 祭祀를 드립듸다. 溫泉구멍은 비노라고 드리친 돈으로 맥혓습듸다. 3年后에는 예수가＜57＞ 재 강림한다는 소문이 돕니다. 어대서 장수가 낫다고 함니다. 이번 평양 水災는 年前에 大同江에서 큰 닷을 한 개 건지여 내인 까닭이란 怪說이 도라감니다. 방금까지도 외다리 독개비하고 씨름을 해 보앗노라는 사람이 잇슴니다. 제 친척 중에 알는 아해 하나도 긔도로 병 고치는 할미가 약을 먹지 말라더라고 지금 한사하고 약을 아니 먹으려 듬니다. 평양 어대서는 맥을 보고 그 사랑의 래력과 장래를 아라마치는 할머니가 잇다구 함니다. 제의 친어머니하고까지 저는 그것 때문에 한참식 변론을 하게 됨니다. 아! 어대를 가던지 迷信 그것이외다. 그러고 또 이 迷信으로부터 생기는 運命觀이 우리 민족의 全 精神을 지배하고 잇는 것 갓슴이다. 모-든 것은 八字이라 함니다. 무슨 일이든지 힘드는 일이면 運命論을 끄냄니다. 모든 不幸事는 모두 한우님 혹은 신의 벌이라 함니다. 아! 우리 전 신체를 싸고도는 이 迷信 여긔서 훌적 뛰처 나오기가 이러케도 어렵슴니다. 그러나 형님 우리는 우리 민족의 繁榮을 위하야 이 관념을 싯처버리지 아니치 못하겟슴니다. 그러나 그 방법은? 저는 모르겟슴니다.
金兄, 것흐로는 文明하기 쉬워도 속 文明을 하기는 대단히 어렵슴니다. 勞働問題도 그러코 婦人問題도 그럿슴니다. 婦人을 해방햇다구 말은 하면서도 과부가 시집갓다면 이상하게 생각하고 여학생이 공원에 산보를 왓다면 怪異이한 눈으로 바라다 봄니다. 부인은 남자와 同等이라구 말로는 떠들면서 여자도 남자처럼 담배를 먹는다면 큰일 난 것가티 떠들며 남자는 妓生집에를 매일 단이면서도 여자는 서방질을 한번만 하야도 큰 變으로 암니다. 勞働은 신성하다고 입으로는 떠들며, 도라 단니며 演說까지 한다는 그들도 人力車꾼에게는 하대를함니다. 구루마를 끌라면 赤面함나다.
형님, 것흐로 떠들기나 하는 것이 무슨 쓸 대가 잇겟슴니까? 먼저 우리의 속부터 고치지 안으면 안이되겟슴니다. 먼저 사상부터 뒤집어 밧구어 노하야 하겟슴니다.
金兄, 그러고 또 이번 제가 도라와서 한 가지 크게 印象된 것은 제의 同窓生의 대부분 또는 「얘」 「재」 하는 동무들이 거의 다 벌서 아바지와 남편 노릇 하는 것을 발견한 것입니다. 형님, 早婚은 낫부다고 벌서 몃 千萬番을 떠드럿슴니다만은 그 효과는 어대 잇슴니가? 임이 아버지된 친구들은 저를 맛나면 늘 이러케 말함니다.
『君, 자네는 행복일세, 꼭 부탁하니 30歲 전에는 장가들지 말게』함니다. 이러케 그들은 그들의 결혼생활을 咀呪함니다.＜58＞ 그러나 그들의 부모는 이것을 이해 못함니다. 제 할머니도 저를 장가 아니 든다고 원망만 하구 잇슴니다. 아! 이것이 또한 큰 일이외다. 쌩키夫人은 産兒制限을 高唱하야 세계일주를 합듸다만은 우리 나라서는 아직 經濟力으로나 智力으로나 어림도 업시 寄生生活을 하는 젊은이들이 끄림이 업시 자식을 나하놋슴니다. 그러면 그들은 무엇으로 먹이고 입히며 누구가 그 가정교육을 시행하겟슴니까? 그러나 우리사회의 늙은이들은 아모런 것도 도라보지 안슴니다. 그저 며누리 부려먹을 타산, 손자 보는 깃븜 그것이면 그만임니다. 아직까지도 우리 사회에는 都會에서는 남자 18 여자 17歲의 결혼, 시골서는 남자 9歲 여자 18歲의 결혼이 매일매일 거행됨니다. 그러면 이 쳘모르는 부부간에서는 또는 體質 虛弱한 아해가 생김니다. 아해는 먹을 것도 못 먹고 입을 것도 못 닙으며 기거할 곳에 기거하지 못하고 도야지가튼 생활 속에서 知識도 업고 경험도 업스며 責任心도 弱한 少女 어머니의 교훈을 밧슴니다. 그 장래가 엇더하겟슴니가?
金兄, 거의 終結이 갓가와 옴니다.
朝鮮은 古來로 東方禮義之國이라 자랑함니다. 나는 過去, 곳 제가 세상에 태여나기 전에는 엇더햇는지 모름니다만은 現今 우리 사회의 현상을 볼 때 東方禮義之國은커녕 부끄럽기 그지업슴니다. 긔차를 타고 오면 아해들이 몽켜서서 이차를 향해 욕하는 손짓을 함니다. 우리 나라 아해들은 이러케까지도 공연히 얼는 지나가노라 사람들까지를 욕하고 십허함니다. 禮는 커는 失禮도 분수가 업슴니다. 音樂會에 와서 야지함니다. 무슨 會 한다면 3,40分의 시간에 누리는 상당한 것으로 생각함니다. 연설회에 동저구리 바람으로 드러옴니다. 說敎者가 일요일에 노랑구두 신고 강단에 오름니다. 서울서 하와이 學生團 강연회에 갓더니 엇든 자는 술 먹고 문밧게 와서 밤새도록 쥐정하고 잇슴니다. 電車가 만원인데 여자가 들어와도 니러서서 자리 내여주는 사람도 업습듸다. 결혼식에 乘馬服 닙고 둘러갓드란 니약이도 잇슴니다. 길 가다가 길 무러보고도 고맙다는 인사하는 이 보기 참 드믑니다. 상점에 가서 물건을 사도 고맙다는 인사 별로 아니함니다. 停車場 朝鮮人 驛夫들은 官吏갓슴니다. 모혀 안즈면 먹는 니이약 뿐임니다. 쓰려면 한이 업슴니다. 우리는 좀 더 례졀다위야 하겟슴니다. 그러고 깨끗하고 뎡녕하며 文明스런 생활을 하기를 힘 써야 하겟슴니다.
金兄, 우리는 타인의 人格을 尊重할 줄 알아야 하겟슴니다. 그러고 시간을 귀히 녁일줄 알아야 하겟슴니다. 음악회＜59＞갓흔대 가서 설닉은 삥삥소리 몃마대를 듯자고 定刻에서 30分 내지는 1時間餘(한 번은 1시간 5분 동안읫 에누리를 본 적이 잇슴니다)의 시간에 누러를 기다리고 잇슬 때는 그냥 그 司會者를 실컷 두드려주고 십헛섯슴니다. 우리는 우리 생활의 각 방면을 충분히 관찰하고 연구할 필요가 잇슴니다. 그래서 우리 스스로가 우리 약점을 차자내여 하나식 하나식 개조하여야 하겟슴니다. 우리는 항상 「우리는 비상한 시대에 처한 청년일다」하는 생각을 니저버리지 아니하여야 하겟슴니다.
金金金兄, 感想文이라고 써 놋코 보니 넘우 지리하여 젓슴니다. 그러나 이것은 제의 숨김업슨 고백이외다. 마즈막으로 한마듸 더 쓰지 안을 수 업슴니다.
「혼돈」 혼돈, 혼돈이외다. 이 감상문의 뎨목을 「혼돈」이라고 한 것도 이 떄문이외다. 곳 이번 오래간만에 도라와서 우리 사회를 드려다 볼 때 단번에 「혼돈」하는 탄어를 발하엿슴니다. 창세기 첫쟝 생각이 남니다. 「따이 혼돈하야 공허하고 깁흠우에 캄캄함이 잇는대」(창세기 1장 2졀)하는 말과 가티 現今 朝鮮은 혼돈 속에 잇슴니다. 地球가 처음에 혼돈한 속에서 각가지 元素가 부글부글 뒤석겨 끌어 도라가며 캄캄하는 것가티 지금 우리 사회도 새 사회를 건설할 要素들이 한 대 뒤석겨 우글부글 뒤끌코 잇슴니다. 모든 사람이 아즉 자기가 가야할 확실한 압길을 엇지 못한 것 만슴니다. 다만 「세상이 이게 엇지된 일이인가」 하고 의아하는 속에서 이 사회와 함끠 석겨 도라감니다. 이러케 뒤석겨 핑글핑글 도라 가다가는 金星도 생기고 木星도 생기며 달도 생기고 地球도 생기여서 마츰내는 혼돈이 변하야 整列과 法規를 낫켓지오. 그러고는 繁榮과 歡喜가 따우에 가득햇지오.
「태초에는 따이 혼돈하야 공허하고 깁흠 우에 캄캄함이 잇는데 한우님의 신이 물 우에 운동하시더라 하엿슴니다. 이제 이 혼돈한 우리 사회 우에 운동하는 勢力 (한우님)은 어대 잇슴니까? 누가 얼는 나서서 『내가 그 혼돈을 질서잇게 졍리식힐 에너기 이로다』하고 소리치겟슴니까? (끗)＜60＞
＜49-60＞