雜誌名	別乾坤 第55號
발행일	1932년 09월 01일
기사제목	萬華鏡 (Kaleidoscope)
기사형태	雜著 (Miscellany)

◇ Mr. Yi Il's Appointment as County Magistrate

When they hear that Mr. Yi Il of Dongwon (東園李一) became a county magistrate, those who don't know him might wonder how a school teacher suddenly became a county magistrate. But when you find out, it's not a county magistrate in the official sense, but that he became the county magistrate of Anak (安악) in his own home. As everyone knows, he's an athlete, and every morning he would come to the mountain behind Chwiunjeong (翠雲亭) to exercise. But ever since he remarried last month, perhaps because it's the beginning of his new marriage, he hasn't been mountain climbing, and he keeps the doors locked and doesn't even go out. That's why his friends nicknamed him the County Magistrate of Anak.

◇ Mr. Kwon Deok-kyu's Eulogy for Mr. Min's Bronze Statue

This is a story from several years ago. At Hwimun High School (徽文高普), they made a statue of the founder, Mr. Min (設立者閔氏銅像), on the hill of the athletic field, and the principal and other teachers wrote commemorative texts (記念文) and eulogies (賛文) for the statue and erected them on a stele next to it. Kwon Deok-kyu (權悳奎) wrote a satirical eulogy, saying, "Your face is dark, so I can know your heart; your feet are big, so big feet are ○○○ — Your face is dark (爾面이 黑), so your heart can be known (其心可知); your feet are big (爾足이 大), so big feet are called ○ (足大曰○) —."

◇ Mr. Kim Jae-su's Secret Business

It is said that Mr. Kim Jae-su (金在洙), the younger brother of Kim Seong-su (金性洙), who was newly transferred from Boseon College (普專校長) to Yonhee College (연전), has taken over the Mokdan (牧丹) cafe in Gongpyeong-dong (공평동) in the city and is now running it. The older brother is the president of a vocational school, and the younger brother is the owner of a cafe. It is said that the Kim brothers are quite incompatible. If the president says during student moral education time at the vocational school, "Korean students must go to cafes," it would be one thing, but if he says they shouldn't go, then in this world with many sibling disputes (兄弟爭訟), Jae-su might sue his uncle for obstructing his business (營業妨害) and demand compensation. But the Dong-A Ilbo (東亞報) will never publish this, so don't worry!

◇ Mr. Yeo Un-hyeong's Double-Barreled Cannon

Mr. Yeo Un-hyeong's (呂運亨) double-barreled cannon, you say? It would be a big mistake to misunderstand that he secretly brought a double-barreled cannon when he came from Shanghai (上海). The truth is that when he was in Taejeon (太田) Prison, he suffered greatly from hemorrhoids (痔疾), and the doctor (醫師) accidentally made another hole in his anus (肛門) during surgery and left it as is. From then on, when he defecated, it came out of both holes at the same time, and when he farted, the sound came out of both sides at the same time. If we were to give this a nickname, we could call it Mr. Yeo's double-barreled cannon. <13>

**Named Entities**

李一	Yi Il
東園李一	Tongwŏn Yi Il
安악	Anak
翠雲亭	Chwiunjeong
徽文高普	Hwimun High School
設立者閔氏銅像	Statue of the founder, Mr. Min
權悳奎	Kwŏn Tŏk-kyu
金性洙	Kim Sŏng-su
普專校長	President of Boseon College
연전	Yonhee College
金在洙	Kim Chae-su
牧丹	Moktan
공평동	Gongpyeong-dong
東亞報	Tong-A Ilbo
呂運亨	Yŏ Un-hyŏng
上海	Shanghai
太田	T’aejŏn



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제55호
발행일	1932년 09월 01일
기사제목	萬華鏡
기사형태	잡저

萬華鏡

◇李一氏의 郡守借啣

동원 리일씨(東園李一)가 군수가 되엿다면 모르는사람들은 학교선생님이 별안간에 어케 군수가되엿느냐고할 것이다. 그러나 알고보면 그의 군수는 관리의 군수가아니요 자긔집 안악군수를 하엿단말이다 그는누구나 잘아는 운동가로 아츰이면 반드시 취운정뒤ㅅ산에와서 운동을 하는데 그가 월전에 재취(再娶)장가를 든뒤로는 신정지초가되야 그러한지 등산운동을 아니함은 물론이고 문을 잔득걸어닷고 일제박갓출임지아니하는 닭에 그의 친구들이 별명짓기를 안악군수라고 한것이엿다.

◇權悳奎氏의 閔氏銅像賛

이것은 벌서몃해전이야기다. 휘문고보(徽文高普)엣 그 운동장언덕에다 설립자민씨동상(設立者閔氏銅像)을 만드러노코 교장이하 여러교원들이 그동상의 긔렴문(記念文)찬문(賛文) 등을지여서 그엽헤긔렴비에다색이여세우는데 권덕규(權悳奎)씨는 그것을 레의풍자적찬문을지여왈『너의얼골빗이검으니 그마음을알수잇고 너의발이크니 발이큰 것은 ○○이다―――爾面이 黑』하니 其心可知요 爾足이 大하니 足大曰○―――』이라하얏다

◇金在洙君의 秘密業

보전교장(普專校長)으로 새로연전된 김성수(金性洙)씨의게씨 김재수군은 얼마전부터 시내공평동에잇는목단(牧丹)카-페집을 인게하야 방금 경영한다고한다. 형님은 전문학교교장 아우는 카-페집주인 군가형제는 가위불가당이어니와 만일전문학교에서 교장이 학생훈화시간에 『조선의학생은 반드시 카-페를가야된다』고하면 모르거니와 가서안된다고하면 형제쟁송(兄弟爭訟)이만흔이세상에 재순군이 그의 백씨더러 영업방해(營業妨害)하엿다고 손해배상 청구를 할지도모를 것이다 그러나 동아보(東亞報)에서는 절대발치안을 터이니 부대안심!

◇呂運亨氏의 雙穴砲

려운형(呂運亨)씨의 쌍혈포라닛가 그가 상해(上海)에서올에 비밀하 쌍혈포를 가서 온 것으로 오해해서는 큰일이다. 사실인즉 그가 태전(太田)감옥에잇슬에 치질(痔疾)로큰고생을하엿는데 의사(醫師)가 수술을하다가 잘못실수하야 항문(肛門)에 구명을 하나 러노코 그대로 두어서 그뒤부터는 뒤를보아도 두구멍으로 가치나오고 방귀를 여도 두편으로 가티 소리가나게되엿다한다. 이것을 별명 짓자면 려씨의 쌍혈포라고 할수잇는 것이다.＜13＞
＜13＞