別건곤 第55號
1932년 09월 01일
學界漫話 (Anecdotes from Academia)
소식 (News)

Recently, in the quiet Joseon academic world, three new doctors have emerged in the last couple of months, each unique and having earned their degrees abroad, which is even more honorable and 자랑스럽다 (prideful). While that is so, the loss of one doctor is very regrettable. It could be said that joy and sorrow are mixed in the academic world.

Music Doctor, Kye Chŏng-shik
Kye Chŏng-shik, as a violinist since his youth, is remembered by almost every music fan in Joseon. He went to Germany, majored in music for about ten years, graduated from the German National "Würzburg" University last year, and submitted a thesis. In June, it passed, and he honorably earned a doctorate in music. After touring Europe and America, he will return home within this year. Our musician, who left with a broken heart, will be filled with emotion upon his return. As a sensitive artist, he will have unforgettable memories, but I will ask him in advance not to think of old loves and to engage in lively activities for the sake of Joseon's art.

Philosophy Doctor, Ch'oe Yun-ho
It's been seventeen years since he left for America, so few people may remember his name. He is a former student of P'yŏngyang Taesŏng School (大成學校) who went to America at the age of twenty-two and stayed there for nearly twenty years, studying in various places. Ch'oe Yun-ho, who earned a doctorate in education from Indiana State University, will return home this month. Above all, Dr. Ch'oe is commendably determined to dedicate his life to establishing rural culture and will go to become the head of the Pongsan Farmer's Academy (鳳山農民學院長) with his wife, Yi Sŏn-haeng, hand in hand. It would be even more appreciated if he truly became a friend to the Joseon farmers with topknots, holding their hands.

Economics Doctor, Kim To-yŏn
Kim To-yŏn was a well-known figure during his days as a student in Tokyo, known for his speeches and writing skills. After a long period of silence, he was imprisoned for over a year as a representative of Tokyo students during the March 1st Movement (긔미운동). In 1922, he went to America, and after ten years, he is returning this month (August), having earned a doctorate in economics from the American University in Washington. Haha, his bald head must be getting balder.

The Unfortunate Death of Medical Doctor Yu Il-chun
Medical Doctor Yu Il-chun was a prominent Joseon bacteriologist and a promising young scholar at the age of thirty-eight. In August, he went to the Han River with his family to swim and unfortunately drowned. It seems that we will never see Dr. Yu's calm and trustworthy face again in the professor's office at the medical school, a loss of 100 percent of his charm. I don't know how much of a loss this is for the Joseon medical community.

Regretful
Daughter: "Mother, your cold is almost gone, but there's still some medicine left."
Mother: "It's almost gone? It's a pity about the remaining medicine. Then go outside and get a little more cold air and come back and finish it."

A Business Card
A servant came back drunk from running an errand. The master was furious.
Master: "Oh, what kind of evil deed is this? If you get drunk and fall into a ditch and die, what will I do?"
Servant: "Haha! It's okay. Anyone will carry me here. I always have a master's business card in my pocket."

An Inexplicable Child
"Hey, take a look at our child's picture. Isn't he cute? But he doesn't look like me or my wife, so what's going on?"
"Hey, isn't that how it should be? What good would it be if he resembled you? If he did, it would be a disaster." <26>

Named Entities

桂貞植	Kye Chŏng-shik
울쓰뿔크	Wŭlssŭppŭlk'ŭ
崔允浩	Ch'oe Yun-ho
平壤大成學校	P'yŏngyang Taesŏng Hakkyo
李善行	Yi Sŏn-haeng
鳳山農民學院	Pongsan Nongmin Hagwŏn
金度演	Kim To-yŏn
俞日濬	Yu Il-chun



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제55호
발행일	1932년 09월 01일
기사제목	學界漫話
기사형태	소식

學界漫話
적막하든 조선학게에 최근두어달을두고 박사세분이 새로생기고 박사중에도 모다 특색잇는박사 그리고 모다 외국에서 학위를 어덧다는 것이 더욱명예스럽고 자랑스럽다 그는 그러타하거니와 한박사를 일흔 것은 몹시도 가석하다 학게에도 깃븜과 스름이 석기어잇다할는지.

音樂博士 桂貞植氏
게정식(桂貞植)씨는 소년시대부터 바욜리니스트로 조선안음악팬으로는 누구나 거의 그이름을 긔억하고잇지만 씨는 독일에 건너가서 십개성상간이나 음악을 전공하고 작년에 독일국립 「울쓰뿔크」대학을 졸업하고 논문을 제출햇든바 그것이 지난 六月에 통과되야 음악박사의 영예스러운 학위를 엇고 구미를 만유한후 금년안으로 귀국하리라한다 날 사랑으로 가슴에 상처를 바든 우리 음악가는 도라오는어리에도 감개가 무량할 더욱이 감상성만흔예술가 로서는 잇지못할긔억이 잇겟지만 옛날의사랑을 생각지말고 조선의예술을 위하야 생명잇는 활동을 해보라고 미리부탁이나 해둘.

哲學博士崔允浩氏
十七년만에 미국에서 도라왓스니 그의 이름을 아는이도 별로업겟지만 옛날평양대성학교(大成學校)출신으로 스믈두살에 미국에건너가서 근 二十년간이나 체류하며 여러곳에서 수학하고 인디아나주립대학에서 교육학으로 박사의 학위를 어든 최윤호(崔允浩)씨가 금월중에 귀국하신바 최박사는 무엇보다도 농민문화수립에 일생을 희생하시겟다는 정신으로 그의 부인리선행(李善行)녀사와가티 손을 잇글고 봉산농민학원장(鳳山農民學院長)이되야 가시겟다하니 박사로는 참고마운일이다. 상투튼 조선 농민과 손을 붓들고 정말 그들의 동무가 되야준다면 더욱고마운일.

經濟學博士金度演氏
김도연(金度演)씨하면 한참당년동경유학시대에는 연설잘하고 글쓰기로 이름이쟁쟁하든분인데 한참동안 그의소식이 전연무문이든중 긔미운동당시 동경유학생대표로일년여의 철창생활을 치르고 一九二二년에 미국으로건너가서 십년만에 이달(八月)로귀국하게되엿고 선물은 미국와상통아메리칸대학에서 경제학박사의 학위를 어더가지고 도라오시는것이란다. 하하 버서진머리가 더버서지섯겟군.

醫學博士兪日濬씨의 不幸
의학박사유일준(兪日濬)씨 과연조선의 세균학자요  三十八세라는소장학자로서 이름이놉고 기대도만튼바 지난 八月중에 가족과가티 한강에가 수영을하시다가 잘못하야 익사를하섯다. 이제는 의학전문학교교수실에서 그의 아존하고 침착한 자타입이 백퍼센트나 풍부하든 유씨의 면영도 다시는 영구이보지못할 듯 조선의학게를위하야 얼마나 아운일인지 모르겟다.

앗갑다
『어머니 감기가 그러저럭 다나엇는데 약이 아직도 남어잇서요』
어머니 『다나엇서? 남은약이 앗갑구나 그럼 박게나가 찬바람을 조곰만 더쏘이고 드러와서 마자먹어버려라』

名啣 한장
심부름갓든하인이 술이잔득취해서 도라왓다 주인이 그을보고 성이 머리지치첫겟다.
주인『아아아니 저게 무슨악선이야 술이취해서 개천구뎅이 걱구루백혀죽으면! 엇더케할테야』
하인『하하하! 괜찬습니다 누구든지 여기지 메다주겟지요 호주머니속에는 언제던지 염감명함 한 장이  드러잇스니소』

알수업는자식
『여보게 좀봐주게 우리애사진인데 귀엽지…그런데 나도 담지안코 우리마누라도 담지안엇으니 웬일일?』
『이사람아 그래야될것아닌가 자네가튼아비달마 무엇하겟니 담는다면 그야말 대평판이세』＜26＞
＜26＞