**Header Section:**
Magazine Title: 동광 제12호
Publication Date: 1927-04-01
Article Title: 古朝鮮 壇君 (Old Chosŏn Tan'gun)
Author: 李能和 (Yi Nŭnghwa)
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/Argumentative Essay)

**Body Text Translation:**
Old Chosŏn Tan'gun
						Yi Nŭnghwa

I. Correcting the Title of Tan'gun

In the *Samguk Yusa*, the entry "Old Chosŏn, Wang Kŏm Chosŏn" states:
"The *Wei Shu* says: 'Two thousand years ago, there was Tan'gun Wang Kŏm. He established his capital at Asadal and founded a country called Chosŏn. This was simultaneous with Emperor Kao (Kao should be Yao).' The *Kogi* says: 'Long ago, Hwanin (meaning Chesŏk [Indra]) had a son by a concubine named Hwanung. Hwanung often turned his thoughts toward the world below and desired the human world. The father, knowing his son's intent, looked down upon Samwi T'aebaek, deeming it suitable for benefiting humankind widely. He then bestowed upon Hwanung three Heavenly Seals (天符印) and dispatched him to rule there. Hwanung led a host of three thousand and descended to the summit of T'aebaek Mountain, beneath a divine altar tree (神壇樹). This place was called Sinsi (神市, Divine City), and Hwanung was called Hwanung Ch'ŏnwang (Heavenly King). He commanded the Earl of Wind (風伯), the Master of Rain (雨師), and the Master of Clouds (雲師), and presided over grain, life, sickness, punishment, good and evil—in all, over three hundred and sixty affairs of humankind. He governed and brought civilization while in the world. At that time, there was a bear and a tiger living in the same cave. They constantly prayed to the divine Hwanung, wishing to be transformed into humans. At this time, the deity gave them a stalk of sacred mugwort and twenty cloves of garlic, saying, "If you eat these and do not see sunlight for one hundred days, you will attain human form." The bear and the tiger received and ate them. Abiding by the taboo for three weeks [original text says three hundred days, likely an error for twenty-one days, *samch'iril* 三七日], the bear attained a woman's body. The tiger could not abide by the taboo and did not attain a human body. The bear-woman had no one to marry, so she constantly prayed beneath the altar tree (壇樹), wishing to conceive. Hwanung then temporarily transformed himself and married her. She conceived and bore a son. His name was Tan'gun Wang Kŏm. In the 50th year of T'ang Kao's (Kao should be Yao's) reign, the year *kyŏngin*, he established his capital at P'yŏngyang Castle and first called the country Chosŏn. Later, he moved the capital to Paegak Mountain Asadal, also called Kunghol Mountain (or Panghol Mountain), and also Kŭmmidal. He ruled the country for one thousand five hundred years. In the *kimyo* year of King Hu of Chou's accession, Kija was enfeoffed in Chosŏn. Tan'gun then moved to Changdanggyŏng. Later, he returned to Asadal and became a mountain god. His lifespan was one thousand nine hundred and eight years.'"
Thus it is stated. Seen from this perspective, he was called Tan'gun (壇君) because he was born under the divine altar tree (神壇樹), and there is not the slightest doubt about this. However, in later generations, beginning with books like the *Tongguk Saryak* compiled by Kwŏn Kŭn, Yi Ch'em, et al., the Geography section of the *Koryŏsa* compiled by Chŏng Inji, and the *Tongguk T'onggam* compiled by Sŏ Kŏjŏng, Son Pijang, et al., it was written, "A divine man descended under a sandalwood tree (檀木) on T'aebaek Mountain. The people of the country established him as their ruler. This was Tan'gun (檀君)." As a result, people not only forgot the ritual of offering sacrifices to the gods of heaven, earth, mountains, and rivers according to the system of the altar tree (壇樹) in the ancient theocratic era but also lost its very spirit. During the reign of King Ch'ungnyŏl of Koryŏ, there was a renowned monk called National Preceptor Pogak (the Zen master Iryŏn), who broadly collected records of ancient mysteries and diligently searched for legends from folk songs in the alleys, compiling a "wild history" (野史) called *Samguk Yusa*. He supplemented the omissions in Kim Pusik's *Tongguk Sajŏn* [likely referring to *Samguk Sagi*], enabling us, his descendants, to know of the existence of Tan'gun Wang Kŏm, the founder of our nation who performed sacrifices to Heaven at a divine altar. His contribution to the history of the Korean people is immense. Nevertheless, despite the records cited by National Preceptor Pogak from the *Wei Shu* and *Kogi* clearly stating the title as Tan'gun (壇君), people have blindly followed the falsified title of Tan'gun (檀君) found in the official compilations (官撰) of the Yi Dynasty such as *Tongguk Saryak*, *Koryŏsa*, and *Tongguk T'onggam*. This is likely somewhat due to the influence of these being official compilations. However, seen from a scholarly perspective, there were indeed those who realized that the title Tan'gun (檀君) is incorrect and the title Tan'gun (壇君) <6> is correct. I shall list these records below to provide references for the esteemed scholars researching history in our academic community.

(1) Nam Yakch'ŏn's Interpretation Regarding the Title Tan'gun (壇君)
In the *Yakch'ŏn chip*, compiled by Nam Kuman, a person of the King Sukchong era of the Yi Dynasty, the entry on Tan'gun states:
"The old history's record of Tan'gun (檀君) says, 'A divine man descended under a sandalwood tree (檀木) on T'aebaek Mountain, and the people of the country established him as ruler. This was the *muchin* year of T'ang Yao...' This account comes from the *Samhan Kogi*, but now, examining the *Samguk Yusa*, it records the account from the *Kogi*, stating, 'Long ago, Hwanin, the Lord Chesŏk, had a son by a concubine named Hwanung... He descended to the summit of T'aebaek Mountain under a divine altar tree (神檀樹), which was called Sinsi. This was Hwanung Ch'ŏnwang... At that time, there was a bear... who attained a woman's body. She constantly prayed under the altar tree (壇樹), wishing to conceive. Hwanung then temporarily transformed himself and married her, and she bore a son named Tan'gun (壇君)...' Judging by this, the one who descended under the altar tree (壇樹) at T'aebaek was the father of Tan'gun (壇君), not Tan'gun (壇君) himself. He was called Tan'gun (壇君) because he was born under the altar tree (壇樹)."
Thus it is stated. Nam Yakch'ŏn's interpretation regarding the title Tan'gun (壇君) is extremely clear, and it can be called the first critical examination since the title was altered to Tan'gun (檀君).

(2) An Sunam's View on the Title Tan'gun (壇君)
In the *Tongsa Kangmok*, compiled by An Chŏngbok (style name Sunam), a person of the King Yŏngjo era of the Yi Dynasty, the entry on the differing titles of Tan'gun states:
"The *Yusa* considers that because he descended under a divine altar tree (神壇樹), he was called Tan'gun (壇君). The *T'onggam* and the *Koryŏsa* Geography section consider that because he descended under an altar tree (壇樹) [Note: An writes 壇樹 here, likely intending 檀樹 based on his conclusion], he was called Tan'gun (檀君). We now follow the *T'onggam* and the *Koryŏsa* Geography section."
Thus it is stated. An Sunam knew that he was called Tan'gun (壇君) because he descended under a divine altar tree (神壇樹), but he merely states that because the *Tongguk T'onggam* and the *Koryŏsa* Geography section called him Tan'gun (檀君), he follows them. This seems to weigh the importance of official compilations versus wild histories in his mind. However, regarding historical facts, chronological order should be essential. In that case, the *Samguk Yusa* was the very first to make known to the world that Tan'gun Wang Kŏm was the founding ancestor of Old Chosŏn. Even if it is a wild history, it is proper to follow this book. The title Tan'gun (檀君), which was suddenly altered in the *Tongguk T'onggam* and the *Koryŏsa* Geography section, should perhaps be deemed false. Furthermore, speculating on the reason for the alteration to Tan'gun (檀君), the character 壇 in Sindan-su (神壇樹, divine altar tree) and the character 檀 in Sindan-su (神檀樹, divine sandalwood tree) have similar shapes, and also because both refer to trees, it seems the change occurred this way. It follows the example of Lao Dan (老聃), the founder of Daoism, who was born under a plum tree (李樹) and thus took the surname Li (李). Similarly, being born under a sandalwood tree (檀木) led to the title Tan'gun (檀君). However, in the rituals of ancient divine affairs (神事), an altar (壇) was invariably set up on a mountain under a tree, and sacrifices were offered there to the deities of heaven, earth, and spirits (神祇). Therefore, if one speaks of ancient divine affairs without knowing the system of the altar tree (壇樹), one loses the spiritual essence of the ancient divine religion (神敎), rendering it worthless.

(3) Sin Yŏam's View on the Title Tan'gun (壇君)
In the *Kanggyeji*, compiled by Sin Kyŏngjun (style name Yŏam), a person of the King Chŏngjo era of the Yi Dynasty, the entry on Former Chosŏn states:
"Tan'gun Wang Kŏm (壇君王儉), the *Shiji* writes Kŏm (儉). Initially descended to the summit of T'aebaek Mountain under a divine sandalwood tree (神檀樹). The people of the country established him as ruler, and the country was named Chosŏn. (Yu Hyŏngwŏn [style name P'an'gye] in his *Hŭngjiji* says: 'T'aebaek Mountain is located about 120 *li* east of modern Yŏngbyŏn Prefecture in P'yŏngan Province, and is now called Myohyang Mountain.')
I note that in the *Samguk Yusa*, Sindan (神檀) is written as Sin'dan (神壇), and Tan'gun (檀君) is written as Tan'gun (壇君). The *Samguk Yusa* is likely the first history to emerge from the East, and considering the character *sin* (神, divine), the *tan* (壇) of an altar platform (壇壝) seems more correct. Even if the *tan* (壇) of Sin'dan (神壇) is written as *tan* (檀), there are two types of sandalwood (檀木): one is purple sandalwood (紫檀), which is fragrant, and the other is commonly called *paktal* wood (朴達木), which is hard, dense, and suitable for materials. T'aebaek Mountain has much purple sandalwood, hence it was named Myohyang Mountain (妙香山, Mysterious Fragrance Mountain). People below T'aebaek Mountain consider the purple sandalwood to be the *tan* (檀) of Tan'gun (檀君). The guardian mountain of Kangdong County is called Taebak Mountain (大朴山), and below it is a large tomb mound, traditionally said to be Tan'gun's tomb. *Taebak* is *paktal*. It is named thus because Tan'gun's tomb is there."
Thus it is stated. Sin Yŏam's interpretation is even more detailed and clear compared to Messrs. Nam and An. He recognizes the *Samguk Yusa* as the first history to emerge from the East and simultaneously places significant weight on the meaning of the character *tan* (壇) in Sin'dan (神壇). Furthermore, his interpretation of the meaning of *tan* (檀) <7> can also be deemed appropriate. Generally, the *tan* (檀) in the modern title Tan'gun (檀君) clearly refers not to the *tan* of *paktal* wood, but to the *tan* of purple sandalwood fragrance (紫檀香). Researching the path by which T'aebaek Mountain came to be called Myohyang Mountain, it seems that during the reign of King Injong of Koryŏ, two renowned monks named Hong Gwak and T'am Mil founded a monastery (伽藍) on T'aebaek Mountain. At the same time, seeing that the mountain produced much purple sandalwood, they likely cited the significance of *chŏndan* fragrance (栴檀香, sandalwood fragrance) found in Buddhist scriptures and renamed the mountain Myohyang.
I respect the accounts from the *Wei Shu* and *Kogi* cited in the *Samguk Yusa* and believe it is proper to correct the title of Wang Kŏm-ssi, the founding ancestor (theocratic heavenly ruler) of Old Chosŏn, to Tan'gun (壇君).

II. Wang Kŏm Means Lord God, and Chosŏn is a Translation of Hwan'guk

(1) Wang Kŏm Means Lord God
Tan'gun's name was called Wang Kŏm or Hwan Kŏm. I suspect that *Kŏm* (儉) might be an ancient Korean noun for 'god'. Indeed, the character *Sin* (神) currently used in our language was originally borrowed from Chinese characters and is not a Korean word. If so, there must have been a native proper noun for 'god' in ancient Chosŏn. I propose that the character *Kŏm* (儉), pronounced 'Kam' [], corresponds to this. Why is this so? The evidence that 'Kam' (, 儉) had the meaning of 'god' in our Korean language is as follows:
First, '*Kamtchok* ( or 쪽)' means 'spirit possession' (神接); *Kam* () is 'god', and *tchok* () means 'companion' or 'contact'.
Second, it refers to '*Kamsil*' (실, God Room or Spirit Chamber), yet contemporary custom crudely borrows the character *Kam* (龕) from Buddhist niches (佛龕) and calls it *Kamsil* (龕室), which is laughable. In the Chinese dictionary *Ciyuan*, the explanation of the character *Kam* (龕) is as follows: *Kam* (龕) (Buddhist stupa, also means the chamber beneath a stupa. [Du Fu's poem] "The meditation niche (禪龕) is just peaceful." Customarily, the small chamber housing a Buddha statue is called *Pulgam* (佛龕)). Seen from this, it is clear that the *Sinsil* (神室) where ancestral tablets are enshrined in our custom is indeed '*Kamsil*' (실) and not *Kamsil* (龕室).
Third, concerning survivals of ancient Japanese divine affairs (神事) worth referencing, they are as follows:
Due to the geographical relationship between Chosŏn and Japan, it is a clear fact that ancient culture and institutions (language, religion) were mutually exchanged and borrowed. However, regarding which came first, who was the source and who the recipient, I leave that to specialists researching ancient history. For now, I wish to explain the similarities between the divine affairs of both countries. In ancient Japanese, 'god' was called '*kamu*', which is not only similar to the ancient Korean '*Kam*' () but also involves the use of *shimenawa* (主連, sacred rope) in divine affairs. This resembles the *Kŏmjul* (儉繩, Kŏm rope, 줄) in our customs' divine affairs. I believe that the Chosŏn *Kŏmjul* and the Japanese *shimenawa* might share the same origin stemming from ancient divine customs. Here, I will discuss the survivals of ancient Japanese divine affairs as follows:

(A) Shimenawa (注連) or Shirikumenawa (端出之繩)
The *Nihon Shoki* states: "Amaterasu Ōmikami entered the Ama-no-Iwato cave... When the rock door was opened and peered into, the Tajikarao-no-kami deity took Amaterasu Ōmikami's hand and led her out. Thereupon, the Nakatomi and Imibe deities demarcated the boundary with a *shirikumenawa* (端出之繩, rope with ends sticking out). Rope is also called *hidari nawa* (left-twisted rope). *Shirikume* is pronounced *shirikumenawa* (斯梨俱米奈波)."
The *Wakan Sansai Zue* states: "*Shimenawa* (注連) (端出之繩, Shirikumenawa, Japanese name Shirikubenawa, also Shichigosan-nawa, commonly called Shimenawa). Note: The *shimenawa* rope is stretched before shrines and over gates to ward off misfortune. The rope is made of rice straw, with tufts of straw ends emerging about every eight inches, numbering seven, five, and three strands. It is twisted to the left, hence the name *shirikumenawa* (rope with ends sticking out)."
Thus it is stated. The Japanese *shimenawa* (注連) is similar to our Korean word *chul* (乼, rope), which is also evidence of mutual connection.

(B) Sakaki (榊木, Kamu-namu)
In the linguistic research on ancient words by Japanese Doctor of Letters, Miyazaki Michisaburō:
"Sakaki (榊木) 'Kamu-namu' (カムナム) are all Korean words." <8>
Thus it is stated. Therefore, '*kamu*' means 'god', corresponding to the Korean '*Kam*' (), and '*namu*' means 'tree', corresponding to the Korean '*namu*' (나무). Based on these points, it is sufficient to know the common origin of divine affairs in ancient Korea and Japan, and it also proves that Korean divine customs spread to Japan.
1. Discussing the survivals of ancient divine affairs of the Northern Barbarians (北夷), they are as follows:

(1) Black Water Divine Altar (黑水神壇)
In the *Taiyan Wenchao* written by the contemporary Chinese Zhang Binglin (章炳麟): "In the *Mu Tianzi Zhuan*, the *Ximo Xun* speaks of the *Honglu* (鴻鷺) of the desert, referring to the Black Water Divine Altar (黑水神壇). The Ximo tribes worship the *Yapulu* (亞普魯) god, meaning 'Son of High Heaven'. Generally, their divine altar is by the Black Water."
Thus it is stated. Indeed, Paektu Mountain (白山) and the Black Water (黑水) are the originating land of Chosŏn's Tan'gun (According to Mr. Sin Ch'aeho's research, Tan'gun's first capital, Asadal, is Wandal Mountain near present-day Harbin. If so, the Songhua River flowing from T'aebaek Mountain passes Harbin and merges into the Heilongjiang [Black Dragon River], which is sufficient to imagine Tan'gun's territory). Tan'gun's son, Haeburu, was the king of North Puyŏ. The *Yapulu* god worshipped at the Black Water Divine Altar (*Honglu*) might possibly be the Haeburu god or the goddess Habangnyŏ (夫餘神, Puyŏ goddess). Not only is *Yapulu* phonetically similar to Haeburu or Habangnyŏ, but also because the Black Water, Puyŏ, and the desert are geographically adjacent regions, the customs of divine affairs likely flowed in. Furthermore, in our Korean language, characters like 玄 (hyŏn, profound/dark), 黑 (hŭk, black), 紺 (kam, navy blue), 錦 (kŭm, brocade/gold) have the訓 reading '*kamul*' (물). '*Kamul*' means Black Water (黑水). Therefore, Black Water refers to Divine Water (神水), Hyŏnt'o (玄菟) refers to Divine Land (神土), Kammak Mountain (紺岳) in Yŏnch'ŏn (formerly Chŏksŏng) and Kŭmsan Mountain (錦山) in Naju (both mountains have shrines) signify Divine Mountains (神山). The *Yuan Shi Yujie* states: "In Mongolian, *Haralu* means Black Dragon." The names *Haralu* (할루), *Heilong* (헐룽, Black Dragon), *Honglu* (홍루) have similar phonetic readings; the characters differ, but the meaning is the same, so we know that the *Honglu* Divine Altar is the Black Dragon Divine Altar. Also, the names of ancient peoples like *Hunyü* (葷鬻, 훈루), *Xianyun* (玁狁, 험룬), *Xiongnu* (匈奴, 헝루) are similar to *Honglu* and *Heilong*. Perhaps the origin of the country names came from the Black Water Divine Altar in the beginning. This proves that the various ancient states of the Dongyi (東夷) and Beiyi (北夷) peoples shared the same ethnic origin, language family, religion, and customs.

(2) Chosŏn is a Translation of Hwan'guk
Tan'gun named the country Chosŏn (朝鮮). According to historians' records, Chosŏn took its meaning from 'Morning Sun Fresh and Bright' (朝日鮮明). However, since Chinese characters were likely not used during Tan'gun's time, how could the meaning 'Morning Sun Fresh and Bright' have been derived? I interpret it this way. It is said that Hwanung Ch'ŏnwang received the three Heavenly Seals, led a host of three thousand, descended under the divine altar tree on the summit of T'aebaek Mountain, governed worldly affairs, and this place was called Sinsi. This seems to be a myth from the primordial era where the ruler or chieftain exercised divine authority, using the grand phenomena of Heaven (天) and Sun (日) as means to civilize the people. It is like the Jewish prophet Moses receiving God's revelation on Mount Sinai and transmitting the gospel of the kingdom of heaven, or like the Chinese Yellow Emperor reaching the Jade Purity Primordial Palace in the First Grotto-Heaven of the Great Mountain Heavenly Altar, obtaining the *Yuanshi Tianzun Hunyuan Sanhuang Yushuo Yinfu Jing* (*Sanhuang Neiwen*) from a stone casket, using it to govern the country, achieving longevity through immortal arts, and finally ascending to heaven riding a dragon at Dinghu. Now, interpreting the meaning of Hwan'guk (桓國), the origin of Hwanung Ch'ŏnwang, it means Heavenly Kingdom (天國) or Bright Country (光明國).
Hwan'guk (桓國, Han-nal [한날]) meaning Heavenly Kingdom (天國) in ancient language OR Hwan'guk (桓國, Hwan-han nara [환한 나라] meaning Bright Country 光明國)
Tan'gun, the son of Hwanung Ch'ŏnwang, was a divinely transformed figure who inherited the heavenly mandate, founded the nation, took the meaning of 'Morning Sun Fresh and Bright' (朝日鮮明), and named it Chosŏn (朝鮮). This is essentially a semantic translation of Hwan'guk (환한 나라, Bright Country).
The systematic Heaven (天) mythology originating from Hwanung Ch'ŏnwang's Hwan'guk (天國, Han-nal) OR the systematic Sun (日) mythology originating from Tan'gun Wang Kŏm's <9> Chosŏn (光明國, 朝日鮮明's Hwan-han nara [환한 나라, Bright Country]) are listed below:

(A) Lineage of Heaven Mythology and Sun Mythology in Puyŏ
(Lineage of Heaven Mythology) Cited in the *Tongguk Yi Sang-guk chip* compiled by Yi Kyubo, a person of the King Kojong era of Koryŏ. Cited in the Old *Samguksa* and the *Samguk Yusa* compiled by the monk Iryŏn, a person of the King Ch'ungnyŏl era. Cited from the *Kogi*: "In the third year of Shenjue of Emperor Xuan of the Former Han, the year *imsul*, fourth month, eighth day, the Heavenly Emperor sent down the crown prince Haemosu to the old capital of Puyŏ. He rode in a five-dragon chariot, accompanied by over a hundred followers riding white swans, floating high above. Music stirred among the clouds. He wore a crown of bird feathers and carried a sword of dragon light. In the morning, he attended to affairs; in the evening, he ascended to heaven. The world called him Ch'ŏnwang (天王, Heavenly King). In the great assemblies of the Three Kingdoms period [likely referring to Puyŏ's own assemblies], they feasted, sang, and danced for days, calling it Yŏnggo (迎鼓, Welcoming the Drum). When there were military affairs, they also sacrificed to Heaven."
(Lineage of Sun Mythology) The country name Puyŏ (夫餘) means 'white' (白) in our language, symbolizing dawn (黎明). According to the *Wei Zhi*, "Puyŏ clothing favors white." White clothing signifies purity, clarity, and brightness. Also, the surname of the Puyŏ kings was Hae (解) (King Sŏnpuru of East Puyŏ, King Haemosu of North Puyŏ). In our language, the sun (日) is called *hae* (해). In essence, the country name, royal surname, and clothing of Puyŏ all seem to derive their meaning from the Sun (日).

(B) Lineage of Heaven Mythology and Sun Mythology in Ye (濊)
(Lineage of Heaven Mythology) *Wei Zhi*: "Ye always sacrifices to Heaven during the festival in the tenth month. They drink, sing, and dance day and night, calling it Much'ŏn (舞天, Dancing to Heaven)." Also states: "They observe the stars at dawn (曉候星宿) to predict the abundance or scarcity of the year's harvest (evidence of development in astronomy and calendrical science)."
(Lineage of Sun Mythology) According to the *Guangyun*, Ye (濊) is pronounced *huì* (呼會切, 'hoe' [회]) and also *huá* (滑各切, 'hwa' [훠]). Since 'hoe' (회) and 'hwa' (훠) are similar to our word '*hae*' (해, Sun), it seems likely that the country name Ye derived its meaning from the Sun (日).

(C) Lineage of Heaven Mythology and Sun Mythology in the Samhan (三韓)
(Lineage of Heaven Mythology) *Sanguo Zhi*: "In the various statelets of Mahan, one person is appointed in each to preside over sacrifices to the Heavenly God (天神), called Ch'ŏn'gun (天君). Also, each statelet has a separate precinct called Sodo (蘇塗). They erect large poles, hang bells and drums, and serve ghosts and spirits (鬼神)."
(Lineage of Sun Mythology) *Sanguo Zhi*: Among the statelets of Mahan, there were Ilhwa-guk (日華國, Sun Splendor Country) and Wŏlchi-guk (月支國, Moon Branch Country). Ilhwa and Wŏlchi were likely nouns derived from Sun and Moon worship. Chin (辰) in Chinhan (辰韓) signifies the East directionally, and temporally, Chin represents sunrise (日出).

(D) Heaven Mythology and Sun Mythology in Koguryŏ (高句麗)
(Lineage of Heaven Mythology) Stele of King Kwanggaet'o of Koguryŏ says: "Thinking back to when the founding ancestor King Ch'umo founded the state, he came from North Puyŏ, son of the Heavenly Emperor, his mother the daughter of Habaek (河伯, River Earl). He emerged by splitting an egg. Born a sage... he ordered his chariot and proceeded south. His route passed the Amni River (奄利之水). The king approached the ford and said, 'I am the son of the August Heaven, my mother the daughter of Habaek, King Ch'umo.'"
(Lineage of Sun Mythology) Cited in the Old *Samguksa* in the *Tongguk Yi Sang-guk chip*: "The founding ancestor of Koguryŏ, Tongmyŏng Sŏngje (東明聖帝, Sage King of Eastern Brightness [Tongmyŏng symbolizes sunrise]) , personal name Chumong (朱蒙), also called Sanghae (象解, Hae [解] is Sun [日], so symbolizing the sun). Previously, King Haeburu of Puyŏ died, and his son Kŭmwa succeeded to the throne. At that time, he found the crown prince [referring to Yuhwa] at Ubal stream south of T'aebaek Mountain. He asked her, 'I am the daughter of Habaek, named Yuhwa. I went out to play with my younger brothers when a man, calling himself Haemosu, son of the Heavenly Emperor, lured me to a room near the Yalu River below T'aesim Mountain and had relations with me, then left and never returned. My parents blamed me for following a man without a matchmaker and banished me to reside at Ubal stream.' Kŭmwa found this strange and confined her to a room. She was shone upon by the sun; she moved to avoid it, but the sun's shadow followed and shone on her. Consequently, she became pregnant and laid an egg, about five *sŭng* [升, unit of volume] in size. The king tried to split it but couldn't break it. He returned it to the mother. The mother wrapped it in cloth and placed it in a warm spot. A baby boy broke the shell and emerged."
*Samguk Sagi*, Koguryŏ Annals: "King Yurimyŏng (琉璃明王), personal name Yuri (類利), also called Yuryu (孺留), was Chumong's eldest son. While in Puyŏ, he found the sword his father had left behind, traveled to Cholbon, and met his father, the king. The king said to Yuri, 'If you are truly my son, what divine power do you possess?' Yuri lifted his body, soared into the air, and rode the sunlight streaming through the window (乘牖日光), which was also his divine feat. The king was greatly pleased and installed him as crown prince."

(E) Lineage of Heaven Mythology and Sun Mythology in Paekche (百濟) <10>

(Lineage of Heaven Mythology) *Samguk Sagi*, Paekche Annals: "The founder Onjo first established a great altar (大壇) and personally sacrificed to Heaven."
(Lineage of Sun Mythology) The country name of Paekche and the royal surname were both called Puyŏ, and sometimes the surname was Hae (解). In essence, since Paekche emerged from the lineage of Puyŏ and Koguryŏ, there is no doubt that survivals of Sun and Moon mythology existed.

(F) Lineage of Heaven Mythology and Sun Mythology in Karak/Kaya (駕洛/伽耶)
(Lineage of Heaven Mythology) *Samguk Yusa*, Karak Chronicle: "In the 18th year of Jianwu of the Later Han, the year *imin*, third month, on the day of the purification ceremony (禊洛), the Nine Chiefs (我刀干, 汝刀干, 彼刀干, 五刀干, 留水干, 留天干, 神天干, 五天干, 神鬼干 [names of chieftains at the time, remnants of the Kan barbarians (干夷), same tribe as Samhan]), at their northern residence Kuji (龜旨), there was a strange voice and aura. A purple rope descended from heaven and touched the ground (Heaven mythology ends here). Following the rope down, they found a red cloth wrapping a golden box. Opening it, they saw six golden eggs, round like the sun (日神話, Sun mythology). The six eggs transformed into boys, their appearance very imposing. They grew day by day. On the full moon day of that month, they ascended the throne. Because he first appeared, he was called Suro (首露). The country was called Great Karak (大駕洛), also Kaya Country (伽耶國). The other five men each returned to become the lords of the Five Kaya."
*Tongguk Yŏji Sŭngnam*, Hapch'ŏn County entry, quoting Ch'oe Ch'iwŏn's *Sŏk Ijŏng Chŏn*: "The mountain goddess of Kaya Mountain, Chŏnggyŏn Moju, was influenced by the heavenly god Ip'ihaji (夷毗訶之) and gave birth to King Noejiljil (惱窒朱日) of Great Kaya and King Noejilch'ŏng'ye (惱窒靑裔) of Kimgwan Country. Also, the *Sŏk Sunŭng Chŏn* says, 'Crown Prince Wŏlgwang (月光太子, Moonlight Crown Prince) of Great Kaya Country was the 17th generation descendant of Chŏnggyŏn. Thus, King Inoe (異腦王) was the 8th generation descendant of Noejiljil.'"

(G) Lineage of Heaven Mythology and Sun Mythology in Silla (新羅)
(Lineage of Heaven Mythology) *Samguk Yusa* says: "The ancestors of the six clans of Chinhan all seem to have descended from heaven. The ancestors of the six clans climbed high ground and looked south. Near the Na Well (羅井) at Yangsan, there was a strange aura, lightning descended to the ground, and a white horse was kneeling and bowing. Upon investigation, they found a large egg. When the horse saw people, it neighed loudly and ascended to heaven. They split the egg and obtained a baby boy. Heaven and earth shook, and the sun and moon became clear and bright. Thus, he was named Hyŏkkŏse (赫居世). People at the time congratulated each other, saying, 'The Son of Heaven has now descended.'"
*Samguk Sagi* says: "The Chin people called a gourd *pak* (朴). Because the first large egg was like a gourd, Pak (朴) was taken as the surname." (Pak [朴] is '*palk*' [밝], meaning bright [光明]. The auspicious signs surrounding Pak Hyŏkkŏse took the image of the sun.)
(Lineage of Sun Mythology) *Samguk Yusa*: "Hyŏkkŏse (赫居世) is likely a native term. Sometimes written as Pulgunnae Wang (弗矩內王), meaning 'ruling the world with brightness' (光明理世)." (Pulgunnae [불구례] symbolizes the rising sun in the east. The four characters 光明理世 'brightness ruling the world' sufficiently explain its meaning.) *Samguk Sagi*: "Silla, King Soji Maripkan, 19th year, spring, second month, established a divine palace (神宮) at Naeŭl (奈乙). Naeŭl was the place where the founding ancestor was first born." (Naeŭl [날] means 'day' or 'sun' [日]. Based on this, the auspicious birth signs of Pak Hyŏkkŏse took the image of sunrise.) *Sui Shu*: "Silla worships the sun and moon gods (日月神)."

III. Comparison and Corroboration of Ancient Divine Altar Ritual Systems
In high antiquity, the Way of the Gods (神道) was used to establish teachings and civilize the people. Studying the ancient histories of various countries worldwide reveals that the form of sacrificing to Heaven and worshipping gods invariably relied on an altar system (壇制), similar to the divine affairs of our Chosŏn Tan'gun. Examples are as follows:

(1) The System of the Divine Altar (神壇) <11>

Chosŏn (神壇, Divine Altar): Hwanung Ch'ŏnwang, under the divine altar tree on T'aebaek Mountain, commanding the Earl of Wind and Master of Rain, presided over grain, life, sickness, punishment, good and evil, in all over 360 affairs of humankind. This was called Sinsi (神市, Divine City).
Northeast Barbarians (祈山, Praying to Mountains): Sushen felled trees and prayed to mountains (祈必有壇, Prayer implies an altar). Chin [Jin Dynasty] sacrificed to the Changbai Mountain god, enfeoffing him as Kaitian Hongsheng Di (開天弘聖帝, Heaven-Opening Vast Sage Emperor). Manchus erected poles at their *tangse* (堂子, shamanic shrine) and sacrificed to Heaven.
(蹛林, Stopping at Groves): Xiongnu sacrificed to Heaven, Earth, ghosts, and spirits. Xianbei erected willow branches. Liao erected trees and worshipped Heaven.
Japan (神籬, Himorogi): Emperor Jimmu, on Mount Amanokagu, set up an altar, erected *sakaki* trees, and sacrificed to his ancestor Amaterasu Ōmikami. This was called *himorogi* (神籬).
Below (壇, Altar): A place for sacrifice. A flat, level area was chosen, often on a mountain, built up with earth. (*Li Ji* [禮記]): Burnt offerings (燔柴) at the Great Altar (泰壇) are sacrifices to Heaven.
Below (郊, Suburban Altar): Name for sacrificing to Heaven and Earth. At the winter solstice, Heaven was worshipped at the southern suburban altar (南郊). At the summer solstice, Earth was worshipped at the northern suburban altar (北郊).
(郊祀, Suburban Sacrifice): (*Li Ji*) The ritual of suburban sacrifice is for worshipping Shangdi (上帝, Supreme Emperor).
Middle (圜丘, Round Mound): Heavenly Altar (天壇). Place for sacrificing to Heaven at the winter solstice. (*Zhou Li Shu* [周禮䟽]): High ground is called *qiu* (丘, mound). Roundness symbolizes the roundness of Heaven. Using high ground to serve Heaven.
Kingdom (畤, Zhi Altar): Place for sacrificing to the spirits of Heaven and Earth. *Zhi* (畤) means 'to stop' (止). A place where divine spirits reside, like *Lingzhi* (靈畤, Numinous Altar). (*Shiji* [史記]): Qin and Han established *zhi* altars in Yongzhou to sacrifice to Shangdi and the gods of the sun, moon, and other spirits.
(社稷, Sheji - Altars of Soil and Grain): *She* (社) is the god of soil. *Ji* (稷) is the god of grain. When founding a state, altars and boundaries (壇壝) were established to sacrifice to them. The *She* altar must have a tree. The Xiahou clan used pine. The Yin people used cypress. The Zhou people used chestnut. These were suitable for the local soil.
(封禪, Fengshan Sacrifices): On Mount Tai, earth was piled to make an altar (壇) to sacrifice to Heaven, reporting merits to Heaven; this is called *Feng* (封). On a small mountain below Mount Tai, the ground was cleared to report merits to Earth; this is called *Shan* (禪).

(2) The System of the Altar Tree (壇樹)
Establishing a divine altar in connection with a tree (樹) was the system of the ancient theocratic era. If contemporary people studying the mythological religion of antiquity (altar system divine affairs, 壇制神事) speak of the altar while excluding the tree, one cannot adequately discuss the ancient system with them. Consider this: in the births and deaths of ancient divine figures and religious founders, there is invariably a connection to mountain altars (山壇) and trees (樹木). Examples include:
(Dijun [帝俊]): Nieyao Yindi (孼搖頵羝, mountain name). On it is a *fumu* tree (扶木). There is a valley called Wenyuan (溫源). In the valley is a divine person named Shebishi (奢比尸). He is a friend below Dijun. The Emperor has two altars below. (*Shanhaijing* [山海經])
(Laozi [老子]): Born under a plum tree (李樹), pointed to the plum tree and said, "This is my surname." (Daoist texts)
(Śākyamuni [釋迦]): Born under a Pippala tree in the Lumbinī garden of Kapilavastu. Attained enlightenment under the Bodhi tree. Entered parinirvāṇa between twin Sāla trees. (Buddhist texts)
(Moses [摩西]): The Jewish prophet Moses received God's revelation on Mount Sinai. (*Covenant*)
(Muhammad [摩哈麥特]): On a mountain in Mecca, heard the heavenly spirit chanting from the sky. (*Quran*)
These are such examples. Now, speaking of our Chosŏn, Hwanung Ch'ŏnwang descended under the divine altar tree (神壇樹) on the summit of T'aebaek Mountain and carried out the civilizing work of Sinsi. Furthermore, Wang Kŏm was born under the altar tree (壇樹), became the founding ancestor of Chosŏn, and obtained the title Tan'gun (壇君). Generally, Chosŏn's Tan'gun was the chieftain of the ancient Dong Yi Nine Tribes (東九夷族), and his altar tree system was also the most ancient, seemingly becoming the progenitor of the divine religions (神敎) of various Mongoloid nations like the Sushen, Xiongnu, Xianbei, Khitan, Balhae, Jurchen, etc.
The systems and rituals of ancient China, such as Fengshan (封禪), Sheji (社稷), Jiaosi (郊祀), etc., began with Emperor Shun (舜). Shun was a man of the Eastern Yi (東夷之人) (See *Mencius*), and Tan'gun stood alongside Yao (堯). Therefore, the sacrificial systems of Shun's type, such as *lei* (類), *yin* (禋), *wang* (望), *bian* (徧) (See below), might perhaps have adopted the system of Chosŏn's Tan'gun. Here, I create a System Diagram of Altar System Divine Affairs of the Ethnically Related Northeast Barbarians (同民族 同宗敎인 東北夷의 壇制神事系統圖) and offer it for the reference of esteemed scholars.

IV. System Diagram of Altar System Divine Affairs of the Ethnically Related Northeast Barbarians <12>

System Diagram
<13>
[Content of the diagram is not included in the provided text]

**Summary**

Yi Nŭnghwa argues that the correct title for the founder of Old Chosŏn is 壇君 (Tan'gun, related to 'altar'), based on the *Samguk Yusa* which describes his lineage descending from Hwanung under a 'divine altar tree' (神壇樹). He critiques later official histories like *Tongguk T'onggam* for changing it to 檀君 (Tan'gun, related to 'sandalwood'), suggesting this obscured the original theocratic meaning tied to altar rituals. Yi further interprets 王儉 (Wang Kŏm) as 'Lord God' based on the archaic Korean word '' (Kam/Kom) and 朝鮮 (Chosŏn) as a translation of 桓國 (Hwan'guk, 'Bright/Heavenly Country'), linking these to widespread Heaven and Sun worship myths across ancient Koreanic states and comparing Korean altar practices to those of neighboring peoples. From the perspective of colonial history, the article is significant for its assertion of a unique, ancient Korean religious and political identity rooted in shamanistic altar rituals (壇制), distinct from later Sinicized interpretations. Yi's attempt to reclaim the 'original' Tan'gun and connect him to broader Northeast Asian traditions reflects efforts to bolster national consciousness and historical legitimacy during a period of Japanese rule, making it interesting for historians studying colonial-era historiography and nationalism.

**Named Entities**

古朝鮮	고조선	Old Chosŏn
壇君	단군	Tan'gun (Altar Lord)
李能和	이능화	Yi Nŭnghwa
三國遺事	삼국유사	Samguk Yusa
王儉	왕검	Wang Kŏm
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
魏書	위서	Wei Shu (Book of Wei)
阿斯達	아사달	Asadal
高	고	Kao (Should be 堯 Yao)
堯	요	Yao
古記	고기	Kogi (Old Record)
桓國	환국	Hwan'guk
帝釋	제석	Chesŏk (Indra)
桓雄	환웅	Hwanung
三危	삼위	Samwi
大伯	대백	T'aebaek (Mountain)
天符印	천부인	Ch'ŏnbuin (Heavenly Seal)
太白山	태백산	T'aebaek Mountain
神市	신시	Sinsi (Divine City)
桓雄天王	환웅천왕	Hwanung Ch'ŏnwang (Heavenly King Hwanung)
風伯	풍백	P'ungbaek (Earl of Wind)
雨師	우사	Usa (Master of Rain)
雲師	운사	Unsa (Master of Clouds)
唐高	당고	T'ang Kao (Should be 唐堯 T'ang Yao)
平壤城	평양성	P'yŏngyang Castle
白岳山	백악산	Paegak Mountain
弓忽山	궁홀산	Kunghol Mountain
方忽山	방홀산	Panghol Mountain
今彌達	금미달	Kŭmmidal
周	주	Chou (Dynasty)
虎王	호왕	King Hu (Error for 武王 King Wu)
箕子	기자	Kija (Jizi)
藏唐京	장당경	Changdanggyŏng
權近	권근	Kwŏn Kŭn
李詹	이첨	Yi Ch'em
東國史略	동국사략	Tongguk Saryak
鄭麟趾	정인지	Chŏng Inji
高麗史	고려사	Koryŏsa (History of Koryŏ)
徐居正	서거정	Sŏ Kŏjŏng
孫比長	손비장	Son Pijang
東國通鑑	동국통감	Tongguk T'onggam
檀君	단군	Tan'gun (Sandalwood Lord)
太白山檀木下	태백산단목하	Under the Sandalwood Tree on T'aebaek Mountain
忠烈王	충렬왕	King Ch'ungnyŏl
普覺國尊	보각국존	National Preceptor Pogak
一然禪師	일연선사	Zen Master Iryŏn
金富軾	김부식	Kim Pusik
東國史乘	동국사승	Tongguk Sajŏn (likely Samguk Sagi)
李朝	이조	Yi Dynasty (Chosŏn Dynasty)
南九萬	남구만	Nam Kuman
藥泉集	약천집	Yakch'ŏn chip (Collection of Yakch'ŏn)
肅宗	숙종	King Sukchong
三韓古記	삼한고기	Samhan Kogi (Old Record of the Three Han)
神檀樹	신단수	Sindan-su (Divine Sandalwood Tree / Divine Altar Tree - ambiguity is key here)
壇樹	단수	Tan-su (Altar Tree)
安鼎福	안정복	An Chŏngbok
順菴	순암	Sunam (An Chŏngbok's style name)
東史綱目	동사강목	Tongsa Kangmok
英宗	영종	King Yŏngjo (Should be 英祖 Yŏngjo)
麗史	여사	Yŏsa (Abbreviation for Koryŏsa)
老聃	노담	Lao Dan (Laozi)
李樹	이수	Plum Tree
李氏	이씨	Li Clan/Surname
神事	신사	Sinsa (Divine Affairs/Rituals)
神祇	신기	Sin'gi (Deities of Heaven and Earth)
神敎	신교	Sin'gyo (Divine Teaching/Religion)
申景濬	신경준	Sin Kyŏngjun
旅菴	여암	Yŏam (Sin Kyŏngjun's style name)
疆界誌	강계지	Kanggyeji
史記	사기	Shiji (Records of the Grand Historian)
柳馨遠	유형원	Yu Hyŏngwŏn
磻溪	반계	P'an'gye (Yu Hyŏngwŏn's style name)
興地志	흥지지	Hŭngjiji (Likely part of 磻溪隧錄 P'an'gye Surok)
平安道	평안도	P'yŏngan Province
寧邊府	영변부	Yŏngbyŏn Prefecture
妙香山	묘향산	Myohyang Mountain
壇壝	단유	Tanyu (Altar platform and boundary)
紫檀	자단	Chadan (Purple Sandalwood)
朴達木	박달목	Paktal Wood (Birch species)
江東縣	강동현	Kangdong County
大朴山	대박산	Taebak Mountain
仁宗	인종	King Injong (Koryŏ)
宏廓	굉곽	Hong Gwak (Monk)
探密	탐밀	T'am Mil (Monk)
伽藍	가람	Karam (Buddhist Monastery, from Skt. Sangharama)
栴檀香	전단향	Chŏndanhyang (Sandalwood fragrance)
王儉氏	왕검씨	Mr./Clan Wang Kŏm
桓儉	환검	Hwan Kŏm
	감	Kam/Kom (Archaic Korean for 'God/Spirit')
	감쪽	Kamtchok (Spirit contact/possession)
실	감실	Kamsil (Spirit chamber)
佛龕	불감	Pulgam (Buddhist niche)
龕室	감실	Kamsil (Niche room)
華人	화인	Hwain (Chinese people)
辭源	사원	Ciyuan (Chinese dictionary)
杜甫	두보	Du Fu (Chinese Poet)
日本	일본	Japan
神	かむ	Kamu (Japanese for God)
主連	しめ	Shime(nawa) (Sacred rope - likely writer's interpretation of 注連)
儉繩	검승	Kŏmsŭng (Kŏm rope)
儉乼	검줄	Kŏmjul (Kŏm rope)
줄	감줄	Kamjul (Kam rope)
注連	しめなわ	Shimenawa (Japanese sacred rope)
端出之繩	しりくめなわ	Shirikumenawa (Alt. name for Shimenawa)
日本書紀	일본서기	Nihon Shoki (Chronicles of Japan)
天照大神	아마테라스 오미카미	Amaterasu Ōmikami
天石窟	아마노 이와토	Ama-no-Iwato (Cave)
手力雄神	타지카라오노카미	Tajikarao-no-kami
中臣忌部神	나카토미 이미베노카미	Nakatomi Imibe no kami
斯梨俱米奈波	しりくめなわ	Shirikumenawa (Phonetic Kanji)
和漢三才圖會	화한삼재도회	Wakan Sansai Zue (Japanese encyclopedia)
七五三繩	しちごさんなわ	Shichigosan-nawa (Alt. name for Shimenawa)
之米奈波	しめなわ	Shimenawa (Phonetic Hiragana/Katakana - likely)
榊木	さかき	Sakaki (Sacred Cleyera tree)
カムナム	かむなむ	Kamu-namu (Hypothesized Korean origin for Sakaki)
宮崎通三郞	미야자키 미치사부로	Miyazaki Michisaburō
北夷	북이	Northern Barbarians
黑水神壇	흑수신단	Black Water Divine Altar
中國人	중국인	Chinese person
章炳麟	장병린	Zhang Binglin
太炎文鈔	태염문초	Taiyan Wenchao (Writings of Zhang Binglin)
穆天子傳	목천자전	Mu Tianzi Zhuan (Tale of King Mu)
西膜訓	서막훈	Ximo Xun (Section of Mu Tianzi Zhuan)
沙漠	사막	Desert
鴻鷺	홍로	Honglu (Mythical bird/place/altar name)
亞普魯神	아보로신	Yapulu God
上天之子姓	상천지자성	Son of High Heaven Surname
黑水	흑수	Black Water (Heishui / Amur River system)
申釆浩	신채호	Sin Ch'aeho
哈爾賓	합이빈	Harbin
完達山	완달산	Wandal Mountain
松花江	송화강	Songhua River
黑龍江	흑룡강	Heilongjiang (Black Dragon River)
解夫婁	해부루	Haeburu
北夫餘	북부여	North Puyŏ
河伯女神	하백여신	Habangnyŏ Sin (River Earl's Daughter Goddess)
夫餘神	부여신	Puyŏ Sin (Puyŏ God/Goddess)
玄	현	Hyŏn (Profound/Dark)
黑	흑	Hŭk (Black)
紺	감	Kam (Navy blue)
錦	금	Kŭm (Brocade/Gold)
물	감물	Kamul (Archaic reading for Hyŏn, Hŭk, Kam, Kŭm; means 'dark/black')
玄菟	현도	Hyŏnt'o (Xuantu Commandery)
漣川	연천	Yŏnch'ŏn
積城	적성	Chŏksŏng (Former name of area)
紺岳	감악	Kammak (Mountain)
羅州	나주	Naju
錦山	금산	Kŭmsan (Mountain)
元史語解	원사어해	Yuan Shi Yujie (Explanation of Language in the History of Yuan)
蒙古語	몽고어	Mongolian Language
哈喇婁	할루	Haralu (Mongolian for Black Dragon)
黑龍	흑룡	Hŭngnyong/Heilong (Black Dragon)
葷鬻	훈육	Hunyü
玁狁	험윤	Xianyun
匈奴	흉노	Xiongnu
東夷	동이	Dongyi (Eastern Barbarians)
桓國	환국	Hwan'guk (Han-nal 한날 / Hwan-han nara 환한 나라)
天國	천국	Ch'ŏn'guk (Heavenly Kingdom)
光明國	광명국	Kwangmyŏng'guk (Bright Country)
漢捺	한날	Han-nal (Hypothesized ancient Korean for 'Heavenly Kingdom')
환한 나라	환한 나라	Hwan-han nara (Bright Country)
猶太	유태	Yudae (Judea/Jewish)
摩西	모세	Moses
蘇來山	소래산	Sorae Mountain (Mount Sinai)
上帝	상제	Sangje (Supreme Emperor/God)
中國	중국	China
黃帝	황제	Yellow Emperor
大山	대산	Great Mountain (Mount Tai)
天壇	천단	Heavenly Altar
第一洞天	제일동천	First Grotto-Heaven
玉淸元始宮	옥청원시궁	Jade Purity Primordial Palace
石匣	석갑	Stone Casket
元始天尊混元三皇玉說陰符經	원시천존혼원삼황옥설음부경	Yuanshi Tianzun Hunyuan Sanhuang Yushuo Yinfu Jing
三皇內文	삼황내문	Sanhuang Neiwen
鼎湖	정호	Dinghu
夫餘	부여	Puyŏ
李奎報	이규보	Yi Kyubo
高宗	고종	King Kojong (Koryŏ)
東國李相國集	동국이상국집	Tongguk Yi Sang-guk chip (Collected Works of Minister Yi of the Eastern State)
舊三國史	구삼국사	Old Samguksa (Old History of the Three Kingdoms)
漢	한	Han (Dynasty)
宣帝	선제	Emperor Xuan
神爵	신작	Shenjue (Era name)
壬戌	임술	Imsul (Year designation)
解慕漱	해모수	Haemosu
五龍車	오룡차	Five-Dragon Chariot
白鵠	백곡	White Swan
迎鼓	영고	Yŏnggo (Puyŏ festival)
魏志	위지	Wei Zhi (Records of Wei)
解	해	Hae (Surname; also Korean for 'Sun')
鮮夫婁	선부루	Sŏnpuru (King of East Puyŏ)
濊	예	Ye (Ancient Koreanic group)
十月節	시월절	October Festival
舞天	무천	Much'ŏn (Ye festival)
曉候星宿	효후성수	Observing stars at dawn
廣韻	광운	Guangyun (Chinese dictionary)
呼會切	호회절	Huì (Fanqie spelling)
滑各切	활각절	Huá (Fanqie spelling)
해	해	Hae (Korean word for Sun)
三韓	삼한	Samhan (Three Han confederacies)
馬韓	마한	Mahan
天神	천신	Ch'ŏnsin (Heavenly God)
天君	천군	Ch'ŏn'gun (Heavenly Prince)
蘇塗	소도	Sodo
鬼神	귀신	Kwisn (Ghosts and Spirits)
三國志	삼국지	Sanguo Zhi (Records of the Three Kingdoms)
日華國	일화국	Ilhwa-guk (Sun Splendor Country)
月支國	월지국	Wŏlchi-guk (Moon Branch Country)
辰韓	진한	Chinhan
辰	진	Chin (Direction East; Time Sunrise)
高句麗	고구려	Koguryŏ
廣開土王	광개토왕	King Kwanggaet'o
陵碑	능비	Tomb Stele
鄒牟王	추모왕	King Ch'umo (Founder of Koguryŏ)
天帝	천제	Ch'ŏnje (Heavenly Emperor)
河伯女郞	하백여랑	Habangnyŏrang (Daughter of the River Earl)
奄利之水	엄리수	Amni River
皇天	황천	Hwangch'ŏn (August Heaven)
東明聖帝	동명성제	Tongmyŏng Sŏngje (Sage King of Eastern Brightness)
朱蒙	주몽	Chumong
象解	상해	Sanghae (Symbolizing the Sun)
金蛙	금와	Kŭmwa (King of Puyŏ)
太白山南優渤手	태백산남우발수	Ubal Stream South of T'aebaek Mountain
柳花	유화	Yuhwa (Mother of Chumong)
鴨綠	압록	Amnok (Yalu River)
琉璃明王	유리명왕	King Yurimyŏng
類利	유리	Yuri
孺留	유류	Yuryu
卒本	졸본	Cholbon (Early Koguryŏ capital)
百濟	백제	Paekche
始祖	시조	Sijo (Founding Ancestor)
溫祚	온조	Onjo (Founder of Paekche)
大壇	대단	Tae'dan (Great Altar)
駕洛	가락	Karak (Kaya)
伽耶	가야	Kaya
後漢	후한	Later Han (Dynasty)
建武	건무	Jianwu (Era name)
壬寅	임인	Imin (Year designation)
九干	구간	Kugan (Nine Chiefs)
我刀干	아도간	Ado Kan
汝刀干	여도간	Yŏdo Kan
彼刀干	피도간	P'ido Kan
五刀干	오도간	Odo Kan
留水干	유수간	Yusu Kan
留天干	유천간	Yuch'ŏn Kan
神天干	신천간	Sinch'ŏn Kan
五天干	오천간	Och'ŏn Kan
神鬼干	신기간	Sin'gwi Kan
禊洛	계락	Kyerak (Purification Ceremony)
龜旨	구지	Kuji (Place name, Turtle Peak)
首露	수로	Suro (Founder of Karak/Kaya)
五伽耶	오가야	O Kaya (Five Kaya states)
東國輿地勝覽	동국여지승람	Tongguk Yŏji Sŭngnam (Geographical Survey of the Eastern Kingdom)
陜川郡	합천군	Hapch'ŏn County
崔致遠	최치원	Ch'oe Ch'iwŏn
釋利貞傳	석이정전	Sŏk Ijŏng Chŏn (Biography of the Monk Ijŏng)
伽耶山神	가야산신	Kayasan Sin (Mountain God of Kaya Mountain)
正見母主	정견모주	Chŏnggyŏn Moju (Goddess name)
天神夷毗訶之	천신이비가지	Ch'ŏnsin Ip'ihaji (Heavenly God Ip'ihaji)
大伽耶王	대가야왕	King of Great Kaya
惱窒朱日	뇌질주일	Noejiljil
金官國王	금관국왕	King of Kimgwan Country
惱窒靑裔	뇌질청예	Noejilch'ŏng'ye
釋順應傳	석순응전	Sŏk Sunŭng Chŏn (Biography of the Monk Sunŭng)
月光太子	월광태자	Wŏlgwang T'aeja (Moonlight Crown Prince)
異腦王	이뇌왕	King Inoe
新羅	신라	Silla
辰韓六部	진한육부	Six Clans of Chinhan
楊山	양산	Yangsan
羅井	나정	Na Well
赫居世	혁거세	Hyŏkkŏse (Founder of Silla)
天子	천자	Ch'ŏnja (Son of Heaven)
朴	박	Pak (Surname; Gourd)
弗矩內王	불구내왕	Pulgunnae Wang (Alt. name for Hyŏkkŏse)
光明理世	광명이세	Kwangmyŏng Ise (Ruling the World with Brightness)
炤知麻立干	소지마립간	King Soji Maripkan
神宮	신궁	Sin'gung (Divine Palace)
奈乙	나을	Naeŭl (Birthplace of Hyŏkkŏse)
날	날	Nal (Korean for 'Day'/'Sun')
隋書	수서	Sui Shu (Book of Sui)
日月神	일월신	Irwŏlsin (Sun and Moon Gods)
神道	신도	Sindo (Way of the Gods/Shinto/Shamanism)
肅愼	숙신	Sushen (Ancient Northeast Asian people)
長白山	장백산	Changbai Mountain (Paektu Mountain)
開天弘聖帝	개천홍성제	Kaitian Hongsheng Di (Title for Changbai Mountain God)
滿洲	만주	Manchuria
堂子	당자	Tangse (Manchu shamanic shrine)
匈奴	흉노	Xiongnu
鮮卑	선비	Xianbei
遼	요	Liao (Dynasty)
神籬	히모로기	Himorogi (Japanese sacred space)
神武天皇	진무천황	Emperor Jimmu
天香山	아마노카구야마	Mount Amanokagu
禮記	예기	Li Ji (Book of Rites)
泰壇	태단	T'aedan (Great Altar)
郊	교	Kyo (Suburban Altar)
南郊	남교	Namgyo (Southern Suburban Altar)
北郊	북교	Pukkyo (Northern Suburban Altar)
郊祀	교사	Kyosa (Suburban Sacrifice)
圜丘	원구	Wŏn'gu (Round Mound Altar)
周禮䟽	주례소	Zhou Li Shu (Commentary on the Rites of Zhou)
畤	치	Chi (Type of altar)
靈畤	영치	Yŏngji (Numinous Altar)
秦	진	Qin (Dynasty/State)
雍州	옹주	Yongzhou (Province)
社稷	사직	Sajik (Altars of Soil and Grain)
社	사	Sa (Altar of Soil)
稷	직	Chik (Altar of Grain)
夏后氏	하후씨	Xiahou Clan (Xia Dynasty)
殷人	은인	Yin People (Shang Dynasty)
周人	주인	Zhou People
封禪	봉선	Pong Sŏn (Fengshan Sacrifices)
泰山	태산	Mount Tai
帝俊	제준	Dijun (Chinese Deity)
孼搖頵羝	얼요군제	Nieyao Yindi (Mythical Mountain)
扶木	부목	Pumu (Mythical Tree)
溫源谷	온원곡	Wenyuan Valley
奢比尸	사비시	Shebishi (Mythical Figure)
山海經	산해경	Shanhaijing (Classic of Mountains and Seas)
迦毘羅國	가비라국	Kapilavastu
嵐毘尼園	남비니원	Lumbinī Garden
畢鉢羅樹	필발라수	Pippala Tree (Bodhi Tree)
菩提樹	보리수	Porisu (Bodhi Tree)
娑羅雙樹	사라쌍수	Sarasangsu (Twin Sāla Trees)
奮約	분약	Punyok (The Covenant - Bible)
摩哈麥特	마합맥특	Mahammaet'ŭk (Muhammad)
麥加山	맥가산	Maekka Mountain (Mountain in Mecca)
可蘭經	가란경	Karan'gyŏng (Quran)
東九夷族	동구이족	Dong Kui Jok (Nine Tribes of the Eastern Yi)
契丹	거란	Khitan
渤海	발해	Balhae
女眞	여진	Jurchen
蒙古種	몽고종	Mongoloid Race
支那	지나	China (Older term)
舜	순	Shun (Legendary Chinese Emperor)
孟子	맹자	Mencius
類	유	Lei (Type of sacrifice)
禋	인	In (Type of sacrifice)
望	망	Mang (Type of sacrifice)
徧	편	Pyŏn (Type of sacrifice)
東北夷	동북이	Northeast Barbarians

**Glossary**

稱號	칭호	Title, Appellation
證正	증정	To correct, rectify through evidence
迺往	내왕	Formerly, in the past (archaic)
阿斯達	아사달	Asadal (Capital of Old Chosŏn)
開國	개국	To found a nation
庶子	서자	Son born of a concubine
數意天下	삭의천하	Frequently turned thoughts toward the world below
貪求人世	탐구인세	To covet the human world
弘益人間	홍익인간	To broadly benefit humankind (founding principle)
天符印	천부인	Heavenly Seal (symbol of authority)
遣往理之	견왕리지	To dispatch to go and govern there
率徒	솔도	To lead followers/disciples
神壇樹	신단수	Divine Altar Tree
風伯	풍백	Earl of Wind
雨師	우사	Master of Rain
雲師	운사	Master of Clouds
主穀	주곡	To preside over grain
主命	주명	To preside over life/fate
主病	주병	To preside over sickness
主刑	주형	To preside over punishment
主善惡	주선악	To preside over good and evil
凡	범	In all, generally
理化	이화	To govern and civilize
一熊一虎	일웅일호	One bear, one tiger (older text form)
同穴而居	동혈이거	Living in the same cave
常祈	상기	Constantly prayed
願化爲人	원화위인	Wished to transform into humans
靈艾	영애	Sacred mugwort
蒜	산	Garlic
爾輩	이배	You (plural, archaic)
不見日光	불견일광	Without seeing sunlight
便得人形	편득인형	Then will attain human form
忌三七日	기삼칠일	Abstain for three weeks (21 days - based on common interpretation of the myth, though text says 300)
女身	여신	Woman's body
無與爲婚	무여위혼	Had no one to marry with
呪願有孕	주원유잉	Prayed/chanted, wishing to conceive
假化	가화	To temporarily transform
孕生子	잉생자	Conceived and bore a son
卽位	즉위	To ascend the throne
御國	어국	To rule the country
封	봉	To enfeoff
山神	산신	Mountain God
壽	수	Lifespan
疑義	의의	Doubt, question
撰	찬	To compile, write
 비롯오	비롯오	Beginning with, starting from (older spelling)
降于	강우	To descend upon/at
檀木	단목	Sandalwood tree
國人	국인	People of the country
神權時代	신권시대	Theocratic era
祭祀	제사	Sacrifice, rite
闕漏	궐루	Omissions, gaps
補足	보족	To supplement, complement
後裔	후예	Descendants
昭然明白	소연명백	Clearly evident
官撰	관찬	Officially compiled (by the government)
盲從	맹종	To follow blindly
所致	소치	That which is caused by, result
眼目	안목	Discerning eye, insight
覺知	각지	To perceive, realize
＜6＞	<6>	Page number marker
左方	좌방	Below, on the left side (in vertical text)
學界	학계	Academic world
大方家	대방가	Great masters, esteemed experts
參考	참고	Reference
提供	제공	To provide, offer
考	고	To examine, investigate
稱量	칭량	To weigh, measure
輕重	경중	Relative importance (light vs. heavy)
事實	사실	Fact, reality
次序	차서	Order, sequence
在	재	To be located at, exist in
正當	정당	Proper, right, legitimate
忽然	홀연	Suddenly, unexpectedly
變改	변개	To alter, change
虛僞	허위	Falsehood, fabrication
附	부	To attach, assign to
理由	이유	Reason
推測	추측	To speculate, guess
字形	자형	Character shape/form
相類	상류	Similar
同是	동시	Also is, likewise is
關係	관계	Relation, connection
道敎	도교	Daoism
始祖	시조	Founder
姓	성	Surname
例	예	Example
儀式	의식	Ritual, ceremony
반듯이	반듯이	Invariably, certainly (older spelling)
設	설	To establish, set up
天地神祇	천지신기	Deities of Heaven, Earth, and spirits
精神	정신	Spirit, essence
骨子	골자	Core, gist, essence
喪失	상실	To lose
何等	하등	What kind of, any sort of
價值	가치	Value, worth
更一層	갱일층	Even more, further
詳明	상명	Detailed and clear
意義	의의	Meaning, significance
置重	치중	To place emphasis/importance on
＜7＞	<7>	Page number marker
大抵	대저	Generally, mostly
今世	금세	Modern times, present age
朴達木	박달목	Paktal wood (type of birch)
紫檀香	자단향	Fragrance of purple sandalwood
經路	경로	Path, process
研究	연구	Research, study
佛書	불서	Buddhist scripture
載在	재재	To be recorded in
改稱	개칭	To rename
尊重	존중	To respect, value
思	사	To think, believe
主神	주신	Lord God, main deity
譯	역	Translation
恐	공	Perhaps, likely, fear (archaic usage for 'perhaps')
古語	고어	Ancient language
	감	Kam/Kom (Proposed ancient Korean word for 'God')
當	당	To correspond to, be equivalent to
何以然也	하이연야	Why is this so? (Classical Chinese phrase)
證據	증거	Evidence, proof
如	여	Like, as
神接	신접	Spirit possession/contact
伴接	반접	To accompany, contact
神室	신실	Spirit chamber/room
時俗	시속	Contemporary custom
구차히	구차히	Crudely, poorly (older spelling)
借用	차용	To borrow (for use)
可笑	가소	Laughable, ridiculous
釋義	석의	Explanation of meaning
浮圖塔	부도탑	Stupa, pagoda
俗因	속인	Customarily because of this...
謂	위	To call, refer to
奉安	봉안	To enshrine
明白	명백	Clear, evident
遺俗	유속	Surviving custom
地理	지리	Geography
文物	문물	Culture and institutions
相通互藉	상통호자	Mutually connected and borrowed from each other
歷然	역연	Clear, evident
孰先孰後	숙선숙후	Which came first, which later
誰源誰流	수원수류	Who was the source, who the recipient
專門	전문	Specialized
爲先	위선	For now, firstly
就	취	Regarding, concerning
說明	설명	To explain
注連	주련	Shimenawa (sacred rope) - Yi Nŭnghwa's Hanja usage
乼	줄	Chul (rope)
同一	동일	Same
源流	원류	Origin, source stream
＜8＞	<8>	Page number marker
徵	징	To verify based on, according to
足	족	Sufficient
流傳	유전	To spread, transmit
北夷	북이	Northern Barbarians (non-Han groups to the north)
今	금	Now, contemporary
撰	찬	Written by
謂	위	To refer to, call
種	종	Tribe, race
事	사	To serve, worship
義曰	의왈	The meaning is...
大抵	대저	Generally
發祥之地	발상지지	Place of origin, cradle
高證	고증	Scholarly investigation, verification
卽今	즉금	Present-day
地域	지역	Territory, region
想像	상상	To imagine
子	자	Son
河伯女	하백녀	Daughter of the River Earl (Habaek)
音呼相似	음호상사	Phonetic pronunciation is similar
地分	지분	Geographical area, region
隣接	인접	Adjacent
流入	유입	To flow in
訓	훈	Native Korean reading/meaning of a Hanja character
謂	위	To mean, refer to
故	고	Therefore
意味	의미	To mean, signify
兩山	양산	Both mountains
皆有	개유	Both have
神祠	신사	Shrine
音讀	음독	Phonetic reading
字異而義同	자이이의동	Characters differ but meaning is same
古昔	고석	Ancient times
厥初	궐초	In the very beginning
起原	기원	Origin
諸	제	Various, all
民族	민족	Ethnic group, people
語族	어족	Language family
宗敎	종교	Religion
習俗	습속	Customs
證明	증명	To prove
國號	국호	Name of a country
史氏	사씨	Historians (Mr. Historian)
記錄	기록	Record
朝日鮮明	조일선명	Morning sun fresh and bright
取義	취의	To take the meaning
當時	당시	At that time
한문	한문	Chinese writing, Hanja text
草昧時代	초매시대	Primordial era, age of ignorance
君主	군주	Monarch, ruler
酋長	추장	Chieftain
神權	신권	Divine authority
行使	행사	To exercise (authority)
人民	인민	The people
化導	화도	To civilize and guide
手段	수단	Means, method
至大	지대	Extremely large, grand
現象	현상	Phenomenon
稱托	칭탁	To use as a pretext, invoke
神話	신화	Myth, mythology
先知	선지	Prophet
黙示	묵시	Revelation
福音	복음	Gospel
得	득	To obtain
國家	국가	Country, state
治理	치리	To govern
長生仙術	장생선술	Arts of longevity and immortality
終乃	종내	Finally, in the end
出自	출자	Origin, provenance
系統的	계통적	Systematic
＜9＞	<9>	Page number marker
下方	하방	Below
天神話	천신화	Heaven mythology
日神話	일신화	Sun mythology
列擧	열거	To list, enumerate
引用	인용	To cite, quote
遺	유	To send down, leave behind
太子	태자	Crown Prince
古都	고도	Old capital
乘	승	To ride
從者	종자	Follower, attendant
騎	기	To ride (an animal)
浮於上	부어상	Floating above
音樂	음악	Music
動雲中	동운중	Stirred among the clouds
戴	대	To wear (on the head)
佩	패	To wear (at the waist), carry
聽事	청사	To attend to governmental affairs
升天	승천	To ascend to heaven
世	세	The world, people
謂之	위지	Called him...
大會	대회	Great assembly
連日	연일	For consecutive days
飮食歌舞	음식가무	Eating, drinking, singing, dancing
名曰	명왈	Named...
有軍事	유군사	When there were military affairs
亦	역	Also
祭天	제천	To sacrifice to Heaven
黎明	여명	Dawn
象	상	Symbol, image
據	거	According to
衣尙白	의상백	Clothing favors white
潔淸	결청	Pure and clean
光明	광명	Bright, luminous
圖色	도색	Color scheme (likely error for 特色 feature/characteristic)
表示	표시	To signify, indicate
要	요	In essence, fundamentally
晝夜	주야	Day and night
豫知	예지	To know in advance
年歲	연세	Year's harvest
豊約	풍약	Abundance or scarcity
天文	천문	Astronomy
曆法	역법	Calendrical science
發達	발달	Development
按	안	According to (when citing a source)
切	절	Fanqie spelling indicator
恐ㅎ건대	공하건대	Perhaps, likely (older form of 恐하건대)
諸國	제국	Various states/countries
邑	읍	Township, settlement
各立一人	각립일인	Each establishes one person
主	주	To preside over
別邑	별읍	Separate precinct
名之爲	명지위	Named it...
立大木	입대목	Erect large poles/trees
縣鈴鼓	현령고	Hang bells and drums
事鬼神	사귀신	Serve ghosts and spirits
方位	방위	Direction
時間	시간	Time
取象	취상	To take the image of, symbolize
剖卵	부란	To split an egg
降出	강출	To descend and emerge
聖	성	Sage, holy
命駕	명가	To order the chariot prepared
巡車	순거	Touring chariot
南下	남하	To go south
路由	유로	Route passed through
臨津	임진	To approach the ford
言曰	언왈	Said...
諱	휘	Personal name (taboo)
嗣位	사위	To succeed to the throne
於是時	어시시	At this time
得	득	To find, obtain
問之曰	문지왈	Asked him/her, saying...
諸弟	제제	Younger brothers/siblings
出遊	출유	To go out to play
男子	남자	Man
自言	자언	Said of himself
誘	유	To lure
私之	사지	Had illicit relations with him/her
卽往不返	즉왕불반	Left immediately and did not return
父母	부모	Parents
責	책	To blame
無媒	무매	Without a matchmaker
從人	종인	To follow a man (marry without proper procedure)
遂	수	Consequently, thereupon
謫居	적거	To live in exile/banishment
異之	이지	Found it strange
幽閉	유폐	To confine
爲日所照	위일소조	Was shone upon by the sun
引身避之	인신피지	Moved body to avoid it
日影又逐	일영우축	Sun's shadow again pursued
炤之	소지	Shone on it/her
因而	인이	Consequently
有孕	유잉	Became pregnant
生一卵	생일란	Laid an egg
大如五升許	대여오승허	About five *sŭng* in size
剖之	부지	To split it
不能破	불능파	Could not break it
遂還其母	수환기모	Then returned it to its mother
以物裹之	이물과지	Wrapped it with something
置之暖處	치지난처	Placed it in a warm place
男兒	남아	Baby boy
破殼而出	파각이출	Broke the shell and emerged
遺劒	유검	Left-behind sword
行至	행지	Traveled until arriving at
見父王	견부왕	Met his father, the king
汝實我子	여실아자	Are you truly my son?
有何神聖	유하신성	What divine power/ability do you possess?
擧身	거신	Lifted his body
聳空	용공	Soared into the air
乘牖日光	승유일광	Rode the sunlight through the window
亦其神異	역기신이	Also his divine feat
大悅	대열	Greatly pleased
立爲太子	입위태자	Installed as crown prince
＜10＞	<10>	Page number marker
始設	시설	First established
親祀	친사	Personally sacrificed
無疑	무의	Without doubt
後漢	후한	Later Han dynasty
壬寅	임인	Imin year (in sexagenary cycle)
三月	삼월	Third month
禊洛	계락	Purification ceremony (specific to Kaya myth)
所居	소거	Residence, dwelling place
殊常	수상	Unusual, extraordinary
聲氣	성기	Voice and aura/energy
紫繩	자승	Purple rope
自天垂	자천수	Descended from heaven
着地	착지	Touched the ground
尋繩之下	심승지하	Following beneath the rope
乃見	내견	Then saw
紅幅	홍폭	Red cloth wrapping
裹	과	To wrap
金盒子	금합자	Golden box
開而視之	개이시지	Opened and looked inside
黃金卵	황금란	Golden eggs
圓如日	원여일	Round like the sun
化爲童子	화위동자	Transformed into boys
容貌	용모	Appearance
甚偉	심위	Very imposing/grand
日日而大	일일이대	Grew larger day by day
於其月	어기월	In that month
望日	망일	Full moon day (15th day of lunar month)
始現	시현	First appeared
故云	고운	Therefore called
國稱	국칭	Country was named
餘	여	Remaining
各歸	각귀	Each returned
爲五伽耶主	위오가야주	Became lords of the Five Kaya
郡	군	County
撰	찬	Authored by
傳	전	Biography
山神	산신	Mountain god/goddess
母主	모주	Matriarch, female ruler/deity
乃爲	내위	Was by...
所感	소감	Influenced by, moved by
生	생	Gave birth to
乃	내	Was, is (emphatic copula)
十七世孫	십칠세손	17th generation descendant
則	즉	Then, thus
八世孫	팔세손	8th generation descendant
六部	육부	Six clans/divisions
似皆	사개	Seemingly all
從天而降	종천이강	Descended from heaven
乘高	승고	Climbed high ground
南望	남망	Looked south
傍	방	Near, beside
異氣	이기	Strange aura/energy
電光	전광	Lightning flash
垂地	수지	Descended to the ground
跪拜	궤배	Knelt and bowed
尋檢之	심검지	Investigated it
長嘶	장시	Neighed loudly
上天	상천	Ascended to heaven
剖其卵	부기란	Split its egg
得童男	득동남	Obtained a baby boy
天地振動	천지진동	Heaven and earth shook
日月淸明	일월청명	Sun and moon became clear and bright
因名	인명	Thus named
時人	시인	People of the time
爭賀曰	쟁하왈	Vied to congratulate, saying...
己降	기강	Has descended
謂	위	To call
瓠	호	Gourd
初	초	First, initial
如瓠	여호	Like a gourd
故以	고이	Therefore used...
爲姓	위성	As the surname
밝	밝	Palk (Old Korean for 'bright')
瑞相	서상	Auspicious sign/omen
取象	취상	To take the image of
蓋	개	Likely, probably
鄕言	향언	Native language, local term
或作	혹작	Sometimes written as
言	언	Meaning
理世	이세	To rule the world
東日初出	동일초출	Rising sun in the east
解釋	해석	To interpret, explain
足	족	Sufficient
麻立干	마립간	Maripkan (Silla royal title)
春二月	춘이월	Spring, second month
置	치	To establish, place
處	처	Place
날	날	Nal (Korean word for 'day' or 'sun')
據	거	Based on
拜	배	To worship
比較	비교	Comparison
旁證	방증	Corroborating evidence, supporting proof
上古時代	상고시대	High antiquity
神道設敎	신도설교	To establish teachings through the way of the gods
化理	화리	To civilize and manage
世界	세계	World
各國	각국	Various countries
形式	형식	Form, format
＜11＞	<11>	Page number marker
制度	제도	System
祈山	기산	Praying to mountains
伐石	벌석	Felling stones (or trees?) - context suggests ritual action
封	봉	To enfeoff (grant title/land)
立杆	입간	To erect poles
祀天	사천	To sacrifice to Heaven
神籬	히모로기	Himorogi (Japanese sacred space marker, often using trees)
榊	さかき	Sakaki (sacred tree in Shinto)
祭場	제장	Place of sacrifice
擇	택	To choose
平坦	평탄	Flat and level
築	축	To build, pile up (earth)
燔柴	번시	Burnt offering (of wood)
郊祀	교사	Suburban sacrifice
冬至	동지	Winter solstice
夏至	하지	Summer solstice
所以	소이	That by which, the means by which
圜丘	원구	Round Mound Altar
象	상	To symbolize
因高以事天	인고이사천	Using height to serve Heaven
止	지	To stop, reside
神靈	신령	Divine spirit
依止	의지	To rely on, reside in
所	소	Place
卽如	즉여	Is like
立畤	입치	To establish *zhi* altars
祀	사	To sacrifice to
社	사	Altar/God of the soil
稷	직	Altar/God of grain
建國	건국	To found a state
壇壝	단유	Altar platform and boundary wall
必有樹	필유수	Must have a tree
松	송	Pine
栢	백	Cypress (older form of 柏)
栗	률	Chestnut
是乃	시내	This is...
所宜	소의	That which is suitable
封	봉	Feng sacrifice (on mountain top)
報天之功	보천지공	To report merits to Heaven
禪	선	Shan sacrifice (at mountain base)
報地之功	보지지공	To report merits to Earth
關係	관계	Relationship, connection
入死	입사	Entering death (parinirvana)
入般涅槃	입반열반	To enter Parinirvāṇa
奮約	분약	Covenant (likely referring to the Bible/Torah)
廳	청	To hear (older form of 聽)
空唱	공창	Chanting from the sky
＜12＞	<12>	Page number marker
系統圖	계통도	System Diagram, Lineage Chart
＜13＞	<13>	Page number marker


---------------------------


잡지명	동광 제12호
발행일	1927년 04월 01일
기사제목	古朝鮮 壇君
필자	李能和
기사형태	논설

古朝鮮 壇君
						李能和
一. 壇君稱號의 證正
三國遺事 「古朝鮮 王儉 朝鮮」條에
「魏書云. 迺往二天載. 有壇君王儉. 立都阿斯達. 開國. 號朝鮮. 與高(高當作堯)同時. 古記云. 昔有桓國(謂帝釋也)庶子桓雄. 數意天下. 貪求人世. 父知子意. 下視三危大伯. 可以弘益人間. 乃授天符印三箇. 遣往理之. 雄. 率徒三千. 降於太白山頂. 神壇樹下. 謂之神市. 是謂桓雄天王也. 將風伯雨師雲師. 而主穀主命主病主刑主善惡. 凡主人間三百六十餘事. 在世理化. 時有一態一虎同穴而居. 常祈于神雄. 願化爲人. 時. 神遺靈艾一炷蒜二十枚. 曰爾輩食之. 不見日光. 百日. 便得人形. 態虎得而食之. 忌三百日. 態得女身. 虎不能忌而不得人身. 態女者無與爲婚. 故. 每於壇樹下. 呪願有孕. 雄乃假化而婚之. 孕生子. 號曰壇君王儉. 以唐高(高當作堯) 卽位五十年庚寅. 都平壤城. 始稱朝鮮. 又移都於白岳山阿斯達. 又名弓(一作方)忽山. 又今彌達. 御國一千五百年. 周虎王卽位己卯. 封箕子於朝鮮. 壇君乃移於藏唐京. 後. 還阿斯達爲山神. 壽一千九百八歲.」
라 云云하였다. 由是觀之하면 神壇樹下에서 탄생한 故로 壇君이라 칭한 것이니 其中에 조곰도 疑義가 없다. 그런데 후세에 至하여 權近, 李詹 등 撰 東國史略, 鄭麟趾 撰 高麗史 地理志, 徐居正, 孫比長 등 撰 東國通鑒 등 書에 비롯오 「有神人, 降于太白山檀木下, 國人立以爲君, 是爲檀君」이라 하였다. 그래서 上古 神權時代에 壇樹의 제도에 의하여 天地山川 등 神에게 제사하던 의식을 망각할 뿐만 아니라 그 정신까지도 상실하여 버리었다. 高麗 忠烈王 時에 普覺國尊(一然禪師)라 하는 名僧이 있어서 古代 신비의 기록을 博採하며 閭巷 風謠의 전설을 冥搜하여 三國遺事라 하는 野史를 纂輯하여 金富軾의 東國史乘의 闕漏를 補足하여 우리 後裔로 하여금 神壇祭天開國始祖壇君王儉이 있는 줄을 알게 하였으니 朝鮮民族史上에 공로가 多大하다. 그러하나 普覺國尊의 인용한 魏書와 古記에서 壇君이라 稱號한 기록이 昭然明白함에 불구하고 世人은 李朝의 官撰인 東國史略, 高麗史 及 東國通鑑 등 書의 위조한 檀君의 稱號를 盲從하여 왔다. 이는 다소 官撰인 세력의 所致도 있을 것이다. 그러하나 학자의 안목으로써 보아서 檀君의 칭호는 非하고 壇君의 稱號가＜6＞ 是함을 覺知한 사람도 없지 않다. 此等 기록을 左方에 열거하여 우리 학계의 역사연구 諸 大方家의 참고에 제공하건대

(一)南藥泉의 壇君 稱號에 대한 解釋
李朝 肅宗時 人 南九萬 撰 藥泉集 檀君 條에
「舊史檀君記云, 有神人, 降于太白山檀木下, 國入立爲君, 時唐堯戊辰歲也 ... 此說出於三韓古云,而今, 考三國遺事, 載古記之說, 而昔有桓因帝釋庶子桓雄... 降太白山頂神檀樹下, 謂之神市, 是謂桓雄天王也, ... 時有一態...得女身, 每於壇樹下呪願有孕, 雄乃假化而婚之, 生子曰壇君... 以此言之, 降太白壇樹下者乃, 壇君之父, 非壇君也, 以其生壇樹下, 故稱壇君也.」
云云하였다. 南藥泉의 壇君 칭호에 대한 해석은 심히 명확하여 檀君 變稱 이후 初見의 考證이라 謂하겠다.

(二)安順菴의 壇君稱號에 대한 견해
李朝 英宗時 人 安順菴 鼎福 撰 東史綱目의 檀君 異稱 條에
「遺事以爲降於神壇樹下, 故稱壇君, 通鑑及麗志, 以爲降於壇樹下, 故稱檀君, 今從通鑑及麗志.」
라 云云하였다. 安順菴은 神壇樹下에 降生한 故로 壇君이라 칭함을 知하였으나 다만 東國通鑒 及 麗史地理志에 檀君이라 칭하였음으로 此를 從한다. 云云함은 그 심중에 官撰과 野史와의 輕重을 稱量한 듯하다. 그러하나 역사상의 사실에 대하여는 先後의 次序가 필요할찌라. 然則 壇君王儉이 古朝鮮 開國始祖됨을 세상에 알게 하기는 三國遺事가 제일 선두에 在하니 비록 野史일찌라도 此書를 從함이 정당하다. 東國通鑑과 高麗史 地理志에 忽然 變改된 檀君의 칭호는 此를 虛僞에 附함이 可할 듯하다. 그리고 檀君 變稱의 이유를 추측하여 보건대 神壇樹의 壇字와 神檀樹의 檀字는 字形이 相類하고 또는 同是 樹木인 관계로 이와 같이 變稱된 것 같다. 道敎始祖 老聃이 李樹下에 生한 故로 姓을 李氏라 한 例에 의하여 檀木下에 生한 故로 檀君이라 칭한 것이다. 그러하나 古代 神事의 의식에는 반듯이 山上 樹下에 壇을 設하고 거긔서 天地神祇에 제사하였은 즉 古代 神事를 言하는 者가 壇樹의 제도를 不知하면 此는 卽 古代 神敎의 정신 골자를 상실함이니 何等의 가치도 無한 것이다.

(三)申旅菴의 壇君 칭호에 대한 견해
李朝 正宗時 人 申旅菴 景濬 撰 疆界誌의 前朝鮮 條에
檀君王儉, 史記作儉 初降太白山頂神檀樹下, 國入立爲君, 國號朝鮮(柳磻溪馨遠興地志云, 太伯山在今平安道寧邊府東一百二十餘里許而, 今名妙香山.
愚, 按三國遺事, 神檀作神壇, 檀君作壇君, 蓋三國遺事東方始出之史, 而以神字觀之, 壇壝之壇較是矣, 神壇之. 壇, 雖作檀, 而檀木有二種, 一紫檀有香, 一俗名朴達木堅緻中材用, 太伯山多紫檀, 故, 名以妙香山, 太伯山下人, 以紫檀爲檀君之檀, 江東縣之鎭山曰大朴山, 下有一大塚, 世傳檀君墓, 大朴卽朴達也, 而有檀君墓而名之也」
라 云云하였다. 申旅菴의 해석은 南, 安 二氏에 비하여 更一層 詳明하다. 三國遺事를 東方初出之史로 인정하는 동시에 神壇의 壇字에 意義를 置重하였다. 그리고 또는 檀의 意義의＜7＞ 해석도 정당하다 謂하겠다. 大抵 今世의 檀君 칭호의 檀字는 朴達木의 檀이 아니요 紫檀香의 檀字인 것이 명백하다. 太白山이 妙香山으로 變稱된 그 경로를 연구하여 보면 高麗 仁宗 時에 宏廓
探密이라 하는 名僧 兩人이 있어서 太白山에 伽藍을 創建하는 동시에 當山에 紫檀이 多産함을 見하고 佛書에 載在한 栴檀香의 의의를 인용하여 山名을 妙香이라 改稱한 듯하다.
余는 三國遺事의 인용한 魏書 及 古記의 기사를 존중하여 古朝鮮 開國始祖(神權天子) 王儉氏의 칭호는 壇君으로 證正함이 정당한 줄로 思한다.

二. 王儉은 主神의 義요 朝鮮은 桓國의 譯이라
(一)王儉은 主神의 義
壇君의 名은 王儉 혹은 桓儉이라 칭하였다. 儉은 恐하건대 古語의 神이라는 명사인 듯하다. 盖 我語의 今用 神字는 본시 漢字를 차용한 것이요 朝鮮語가 아니다. 然則 朝鮮 古代에 반듯이 神이라는 固有名詞가 있었을 것이니 余는 儉 「」字로써 此를 當하려 한다. 何以然也오 하면 우리 朝鮮語에 「」(儉)이 神의 義를 有한 증거는 左와 如하니
一. 「 혹 쪽」은 즉 神接의 義니 은 神이요 은 伴接이라.
一. 「실」(神室)을 謂함이어늘 時俗에서는 구차히 佛龕의 龕字를 借用하여 龕室이라 하니 가소로운 일이다. 華人 辭源에 龕字의 釋義는 左와 같으니 龕(浮圖塔也, 一曰塔下室也. (杜甫詩)「禪龕只晏如」 俗因謂供佛之小室曰佛龕) 由此觀之하면 我俗에 神主 奉安하는 神室은 卽 「실」이요 龕室이 아님이 명백하다.
一. 日本 古代 神事의 遺俗에 참고할만한 者는 左와 如하다.
朝鮮과 日本과는 지리상 관계로 고대 문물(言語 宗敎)이 相通互藉되었음은 사실이 歷然하다. 다만 孰先孰後 誰源誰流에 至하여는 古史 전문 연구가에 맡기어두고 爲先 兩國 神事 相類點에 就하여 설명하고저 한다. 日本古語에 神을 「かむ」라 謂하였으니 此는 朝鮮 古語의 「」과 유사할 뿐만 아니라 神事에 主連을 用하니 此는 我俗 神事에 儉繩(儉乼, 줄)과 相類하다. 余는 朝鮮의 儉乼과 日本의 注連은 古代 神俗으로 붙어 오는 同一 源流가 아닌가고 思한다. 玆에 日本 古代 神事의 遺俗을 言하면 즉 左와 如하다

(一) 注連 혹 端出之繩
日本書紀에 「天照大神, 入于天石窟, ... 開磐后窺之, 時手力雄神則奉天照大神之手, 引而奉出, 於是, 中臣忌部神則界以端出之繩. 繩亦云左繩端出, 此云斯梨俱米奈波.
和漢三才圖會에 「注連(端出之繩, 和名之利久倍奈波, 七五三繩, 俗云之米奈波) 按注連繩, 神前及門戶引張之, 以避不梁, 其繩用稻藁, 每八寸許而出本端, 數七五三莖, 左綯之, 故名端出之繩.」
云云하였다. 日本語의 注連은 我 朝鮮語의 乼과 相類하니 此亦 相通된 증거의 一이 될 것이다.

(二)榊木(カムナム)
日本人 문학박사 宮崎通三郞氏의 古語 考證에
『榊木O「カムナム」トハ皆 朝鮮語ナリ』＜8＞
라 云云하였다. 然則 「カム는 神의 義니 朝鮮語의 「」이요 「ナム」는 木의 義니 朝鮮語의 「나무」다. 此等에 徵하여 鮮日 古代에 神事의 同源임을 知하기 足하고 또는 朝鮮 神俗이 日本에 流傳되였음을 증명하겠다.
1. 北夷 古代 神事의 遺俗을 言하면 즉 左와 如하다.

(1) 黑水神壇
今 中國人 章炳麟 撰 太炎文鈔에 「穆天子傳, 西膜訓沙漠鴻鷺, 謂黑水神壇也. 西膜種, 事亞普魯神, 義曰上天之子姓, 大抵其神壇, 在黑水」라
云云하였다. 蓋白山 黑水는 朝鮮 壇君의 發祥之地(申釆浩氏 고증에 의하면 壇君 初都 阿斯達은 卽今 哈爾賓의 完達山이 是也라 하니 然則 太白山에서 流出하는 松花江이 哈爾賓을 경유하여 黑龍江에 合流하니 壇君의 地域을 想像하기 足하다.)요 壇君의 子 解夫婁는 北夫餘의 王이었으니 黑水神壇(鴻鷺)에서 祀한 亞普魯神은 恐하건대 즉 解夫婁神이나 혹은 河伯女神(夫餘神)이 그것인 듯하다. 亞普魯는 解夫婁 혹 河伯女와 昔呼相似할 뿐만 아니라 黑水와 夫餘와 沙漠과는 地分이 인접한 관계로 神事의 풍속이 流入한 것일찌로다. 그리고 또는 我 朝鮮語에 玄字, 黑字, 紺字, 錦字등은 그 訓을 「물」이라 하니 「물」은 즉 黑水라. 故로 黑水라 함은 즉 神水를 謂함이요 玄菟는 神土를 謂함이요. 漣川(古積城) 紺岳과 羅州 錦山(兩山皆有神祠)은 神山을 의미한 것이다. 元史語解에 云하되 「蒙古語, 哈喇婁者, 卽黑龍也」라 하였으니 哈喇婁(할루), 黑龍(헐룽), 鴻鷺(홍루) 등 명칭은 音讀이 相類하여 字異而義同한 것인즉 鴻鷺神壇이 즉 黑龍神壇인 것을 知하겠으며 且 古昔의 葷鬻(훈루), 玁狁(험룬), 匈奴(헝루) 등의 명칭도 鴻鷺, 異龍과 相似하니 恐하건대 厥初에 黑水神壇에서 國名의 起原된 듯하다. 此는 즉 東夷 北夷 諸 古國은 민족도 同源이요 語族도 同源이요 종교도 同源이요 習俗도 同源임을 증명하는 者다.

(二)朝鮮은 桓國의 譯
壇君이 國號를 朝鮮이라 칭하였다. 史氏의 기록에 의하면 朝鮮이란 것은 즉 朝日鮮明의 意義를 取한 것이라 하였다. 그러하나 壇君 당시에 한문을 쓰지 아니하였을 터인데 朝日鮮明을 어떻게 取義하였을까? 余는 이렇게 해석한다. 桓雄天王이 天符印 三箇를 받아가지고 三千徒衆을 領率하고 太白山頂 神壇樹下에 降하여 世事를 治理하여 是를 神市라 謂하였다 하니 是는 즉 草昧時代의 君主 酋長으로 神權을 행사하여 人民을 化導하는 수단으로 至大 현상인 天과 日에 稱托한 神話인 듯하니 猶太의 先知 摩西가 蘇來山頂에서 上帝의 黙示를 受하여 천국의 福音을 전함과 같고 中國 黃帝가 大山天壇 第一洞天의 玉淸元始宮에 至하여 石匣 中에서 元始天尊混元三皇玉說陰符經(三皇內文)을 得하여 此로써 국가를 治理하고 長生仙術을 얻어 終乃 鼎湖에서 騎龍升天함과 같다. 이제 桓雄天王의 出自인 桓國의 의의를 해석하여 보면 천국 又는 光明國을 謂함이다.
桓國(汗捺)古語의 天國義 又 桓國(桓한 나라 光明國義)
桓雄天王의 子 壇君은 즉 神化의 人格으로 繼天開國하여 朝日鮮明의 의의를 취하여 朝鮮이라 칭호하였으니 是는 즉 桓國(환한 나라)의 義譯이다.
桓雄天王의 桓國(天國漢捺)의 系統的 天 神話 又는 壇君王儉의＜9＞ 朝鮮(光明國 朝日鮮明의 환한 나라)의 系統的 日 神話 등을 下方에 열거하건대

(一) 夫餘에 天神話 及 日神話의 계통
(天 神話의 계통) 高麗 高宗時 人 李奎報 撰, 東國李相國集 引用.
舊三國史及忠烈王時人一然禪師撰, 三國遺事引用古記云, 前漢漢宣帝神爵三年壬戌四月八日, 天帝遺太子解慕漱, 降夫餘古都, 乘五龍車, 從者百餘人, 騎白鵠, 浮於上, 音樂動雲中, 戴鳥羽之冠, 佩龍光之劒, 朝則聽事, 暮則升天, 世謂之天王, 三國中大會, 連日飮食歌舞, 名曰迎鼓, 有軍事亦祭天.
(日 神話의 계통) 夫餘國號 「부여」는 我語에 白의 義니 黎明의 象이요 魏志에 據하면 「夫餘衣尙白이라」하였으나 白衣는 潔淸光明한 圖色을 표시한 것이요. 또는 夫餘王은 그 姓을 解(東夫餘王 鮮夫婁, 北夫餘王 解慕漱)라 하였으니 我語에 日을 謂하여 解(해)라 한즉 要하건대 夫餘의 國號, 王姓, 衣服은 다 日에서 取義한 것 같다.

(二) 濊에 天神話 及 日神話의 계통
(天 神話의 계통) 魏志 「濊 常用十月節祭天, 晝夜飮酒歌舞, 名之爲舞天.」 又 云 「曉侯星宿, 豫知年歲豊約(天文曆法의 발달한 증거)」
(日 神話의 계통) 廣韻을 按하건대 濊, 呼會切 「회」 又 滑各切 「훠」라 하였으니 「회」와 「훠」는 我語의 「해」(日)과 相類한즉 恐ㅎ건대 濊의 國號는 日에서 取義한 듯하다.

(三) 三韓에 天神話 及 日神話에 系統
(天 神話의 계통) 三國志 「馬韓諸國邑, 各立一人, 主祭天神, 名之天君, 又諸國各有別邑, 名之爲蘇塗, 立大木, 縣鈴鼓, 事鬼神.」
(日 神話의 계통) 三國志 馬韓 諸國 중에 日華國, 月支國이 有하니 日華 月支는 要하건대 日月宗拜에서 나온 명사일찌요. 辰韓의 辰은 方位의 辰은 東方을 의미함이요 시간의 辰은 日出을 取象한 것이다.

(四) 高句麗에 天神話 及 日神話
(天 神話의 계통) 高句麗 廣開土王 陵碑云 「惟昔始祖鄒牟王之創基也, 出自北夫餘天帝之子, 母河伯女郞, 剖卵降出, 生子, 有聖□□□□□□命駕巡車南下, 路由奄利之水, 王臨津言曰, 我是皇天之子, 母河伯女郞鄒牟王.」
(日 神話의 계통) 東國李相國集 引用 舊三國史云 「高句麗始祖東明聖帝(東明은 日出을 象한 것이다) 諱朱蒙, 一云象解(解는 日이니 즉 해를 象함), 先是夫餘王解夫婁薨, 子金蛙嗣位, 於是時, 得太子於太白山南優渤手, 問之曰, 我是河伯之女, 名柳花, 與諸弟出遊, 時有一男子, 自言天帝子解慕漱, 誘我於態心山下鴨綠邊室中私之, 卽往不返, 父母責我無媒而從人, 遂謫居優渤水, 金蛙異之, 幽閉於室中, 爲日所照引身避之日影又逐而炤之, 因而有孕, 生一卵, 大如五升許, 王欲剖之, 不能破, 遂還其母, 其母以物裹之, 置之暖處, 有一男兒, 破殼而出.」
三國史記 高句麗本記 「琉璃明王, 諱類利, 或云孺留, 朱蒙元子, 在夫餘, 得父遺劒, 行至卒本, 見父王, 王謂類利, 汝實我子, 有何神聖, 類利擧身聳空, 乘牖日光, 亦其神異, 王大悅, 立爲太子.」

(五)百濟에 天神話 及 日神話의 계통＜10＞

(天 神話의 계통) 三國史記 百濟本記 「始祖溫祚, 始設大壇, 親祀天也.」
(日 神話의 계통) 百濟 國號 及 王姓을 皆夫餘라도 稱하고 혹은 姓解라 하였다. 要ㅎ건대 百濟는 夫餘 句麗의 계통에서 出하였은 즉 日月 神話에도 그 遺俗이 존재한 것은 無疑한 事다.

(六) 駕洛伽耶에 天神話 及 日神話의 계통
(天 神話의 계통) 三國遺事 駕洛國記 「後漢建武十八年壬寅三月, 九干(我刀干汝刀干彼刀干五刀干留水干留天干神天干五天干神鬼干(當時酋長의 名稱이니 干夷 遺族이오 三韓同族이다), 禊洛之日, 所居北龜旨, 有殊常聲氣, 有紫繩自天垂而着地(己上天神話라), 尋繩之下乃見紅幅, 裹金盒子, 開而視之, 有黃金卵六, 圓如日(日神話라), 六卵化爲童子, 容貌甚偉, 日日而大, 於其月望日, 卽位, 始現故云首露, 國稱大駕洛, 又稱伽耶國, 餘五人各歸爲五伽耶主.」
東國輿地勝覽 陜川郡條 崔致遠撰 釋利貞傳云 「伽耶山神正見母主乃爲天神夷毗訶之所感, 生大伽耶王惱窒朱日, 金官國王惱窒靑裔, 又釋順應傳云, 大伽耶國月光太子, 乃正見之十七世孫, 則異腦王乃惱窒朱日之八世孫也.」

(七) 新羅에 天神話 及 日神話의 계통
(天 神話의 계통) 三國遺事云 「辰韓六部之祖, 似皆從天而降六部之祖, 乘高南望, 楊山羅井傍, 有異氣, 電光垂地, 有一白馬跪拜之伏, 尋檢之, 有一大卵, 馬見人, 長嘶上天, 剖其卵, 得童男, 天地振動, 日月淸明, 因名赫居世, 王時人爭賀曰, 今天子己降.」
三國史記 云 「辰人謂瓠爲朴, 以初大卵如瓠, 故以朴爲姓.」(朴은 「밝」이니 光明을 謂함이라. 朴赫居世의 瑞相은 日에서 取象함이다.)
(日 神話의 계통) 三國遺事 「赫居世, 蓋鄕言也, 或作弗矩內王, 言光明理世也.」(弗矩內 「불구례」는 東日初出을 象함이다. 光明理世 四字에 그 意義를 解釋키 足하다.) 三國史記 「新羅炤知麻立十九年春二月, 置神宮於奈乙, 柰乙始祖初生處也.(柰乙 「날」은 日을 謂함이니 此에 據하여 朴赫居世의 誕生 瑞相은 日出의 象을 取한 것이다.) 隋書新羅拜日月神.」

三. 古代 神壇儀制의 比較 及 旁證
上古時代에 神道로 設敎하여 인민을 化理하였나니 세계 각국의 古史를 연구하여 보면 그 祭天祀神의 형식은 반듯이 壇制에 의하지 아님이 無하여 우리 朝鮮 壇君의 神事와 유사하니 그 諸例를 擧하면 즉 左와 如하다.

(一) 神壇의 제도＜11＞

朝鮮 (神壇) 桓雄天王. 於太白山神壇樹下. 將風伯雨師. 主穀主命主病主刑主善惡. 凡主人間三百六十餘事. 是謂神市.
東北夷 (祈山) 肅愼伐石祈山. (祈必有壇)金祀長白山神. 封開天弘聖帝. 滿洲堂子立杆祀天
(蹛林) 匈奴祭天地鬼神. 鮮卑竪柳枝. 遼立樹拜天.
日本 (神籬ヒモロヤ) 神武天皇. 於天香山. 設壇立榊. 祭其祖先天照大神. 名曰神籬.
以 (壇) 祭場也. 擇平坦之地. 多在山上以土築之. (禮)燔柴于泰壇. 祭天也.
下 (郊) 祭天地之名. 冬至祀天於南郊.夏至祀地於北郊.
(郊祀) (禮)郊祀之禮. 所以祀上帝也.
中 (圜丘) 天壇也. 冬至祭天之處. (周禮䟽)土地高者曰丘. 圜者象天圓也. 因高以事天
國 (時) 祭天地神祗之處. 畤者止也. 神靈依止之所卽如靈畤. (史記)秦漢. 於雍州立畤.
祀上帝及日月諸神.
(社稷) 社土神. 稷穀神. 建國則立壇壝以祀之社必有樹. 夏后氏以松. 殷人以栢.
周人以栗. 是乃土地之所宜也.
(封禪) 泰山上. 築土爲壇. 以祭天. 報天之功曰封. 泰山下小山上. 除地以報地之功曰禪.

(二) 壇樹의 제도
神壇을 樹에 의하여함은 上古 神權時代의 제도라. 今人이 고대의 신화적 종교(壇制神事)를 연구하는 者가 만일 樹를 除하고 壇을 言하면 足히 더불어 古制를 논하지 못할지니 歷數하여보라. 上古의 神人, 敎祖의 出生入死에는 반듯이 山壇 及 樹木의 관계가 有하니 例를 擧하면
(帝俊) 孼搖頵羝(山名), 上有扶木, 有谷曰溫源, 谷有神人, 名曰奢比尸, 惟帝俊下友, 帝下兩壇, (山海經)
(老子) 生於李樹下, 指李樹曰是我姓也.(道書)
(釋迦) 誕生于迦毘羅國嵐毘尼園畢鉢羅樹下, 成道於菩提樹下, 入般涅槃於娑羅雙樹下.(佛書)
(摩西) 猶太先知摩西, 於蘇來山上, 受上帝之黙示.(奮約)
(摩哈麥特) 於麥加山上, 廳天神空唱.(可蘭經)
云云 등이 是也-라. 이제 우리 朝鮮으로써 言하면 桓雄天王이 太白山頂 神壇樹下에 降하여 神市의 行化를 하고 또는 王儉이 壇樹下에서 生하여 朝鮮 開國始祖가 되어 壇君의 칭호를 得하였다. 大抵 朝鮮壇君은 上古 東九夷族의 君長이요 그 壇樹의 제도도 亦 最古하여 肅愼, 匈奴, 鮮卑, 契丹, 渤海, 女眞 등 凡 蒙古種 諸國의 神敎의 始祖로 된 것 같다.
支那 古代의 封禪, 社稷, 郊祀 등의 제도 의식은 帝舞 붙어 爲始하였는데 舞은 東夷之人 (見孟子)이요 壇君은 與堯並立하였은즉 舞의 類, 禋, 望, 徧 (見下) 등의 祭制는 恐ㅎ건대 朝鮮壇君의 제도를 채용한 것이 아닌가 思한다. 玆에 同民族 同宗敎인 東北夷의 壇制神事系統圖를 作하여 大方의 참고에 提供함.

四. 同種族的 東北夷 壇制神事 系統圖＜12＞

계통도
＜13＞
＜6-13＞