Magazine Title:	東光 제12호
Publication Date:	1927년 04월 01일
Article Title:	朝鮮上古文化의 硏究, 朝鮮古代宗敎의 宗敎學的 土俗學的 硏究(2) (Research on Korea's Ancient Culture, A Religious Studies and Ethnological Study of Ancient Korean Religion (2))
Author:	孫晉泰 (Son Chin-t'ae)
Article Type:	논설 (Editorial/Essay)

Research on Korea's Ancient Culture, A Religious Studies and Ethnological Study of Ancient Korean Religion
						Son Chin-t'ae

Chapter 2: The Imaginary Environment and Concepts of Soul, Death, and Illness
Section 1: The Imaginary Environment

We cultured people have two kinds of environments. One is the Natural Environment, and the other is the Social Environment. The former encompasses all of nature around us—for example, the sun, moon, mountains, rivers, oceans, air, climate, land, living beings, minerals, etc., all natural phenomena that have direct or indirect relationships with our lives. The latter includes all environments produced by human life—for example, political, economic, social, and historical environments all belong here. However, primitive people had a third environment besides these two. That third environment had a close relationship with what we are now. That third environment was the world of spirits (精靈). Although it sometimes brought benefits to people, it was generally an environment that brought illness and death. Since this environment could only exist in people's imagination, Professor Keller named it the Imaginary Environment (주1).

The question of how the imaginary environment came to be established boils down to how the existence of spirits came to be established. To explain the belief of primitive people who were convinced of the existence of spirits, the quickest path begins with the so-called "Dream Theory" (夢幻說) advocated by the founding father of anthropology, Edward B. Tylor (주2). According to this Dream Theory, primitive people thought all visions seen in dreams were real existences.

For example, a cruel head of household or tribal chief from life remained deeply etched in the memory of primitive people.<23> Thus, they appeared in their dreams. Just as in life, they did not evoke favorable feelings. Their faces, clothes, voices, and attitudes were the same as when they were alive. Also, primitive people sometimes saw their enemies—now people of the otherworld—in their dreams. Enemies in life were still their enemies after death. However, upon waking from the dream, neither the chief nor the enemy could be seen. From this, primitive people reasoned thus: although the material body perished, their soul (魂) or spirit (精靈, Spirt [sic]) was still alive, existing somewhere in their surroundings. In this way, the spirits of beasts killed fighting primitive people also came to exist, and all these invisible spirits took space as their dwelling place (巢窇), constantly residing around primitive people as enemies. It would have been fine if they just resided there, but all the spatial existences living in the imaginary environment repeatedly brought fortune and misfortune to primitive people. For example, when faced with illness, death, and disasters, primitive people immediately posed the question, "Who is doing this?" Unaware of scientific causes of illness (病因), sources of disaster (災源), and natural death, they were convinced that calamities and illnesses were all the doings of those who held enmity towards them, or the dead souls (死魂) and spirits of such enemies. To explain this primitive psychology further, primitive people always interpreted spiritual existences anthropomorphically, just like themselves. Thus, if I am struck by an enemy, a wound occurs when hit by the enemy's spear or arrow in the future, and sometimes death results from that wound. Therefore, they reasoned that death or illness arises from the enemy's blow or the poison of a spear or arrow. Consequently, the invisible enemy—the spiritual existence—could inflict illness or death upon people with their invisible bows and arrows or spears—they had seen such spears and arrows many times in dreams and felt pain when struck by them. In this way, primitive people reasoned that the cause of illness (病因) was entirely the doing of a dead enemy (死敵) (or the magical act (魔斷的 所爲) of an enemy). Many examples of this among all uncivilized peoples have been cited by Professor Tylor (주3) and Dr. Maddox (주4), so I will omit the details, but to give specific examples from Eastern texts, there is the passage in the "Book of Sui" (隋書), Vol. 83, Biography of Fu Kuo in the Western Regions (西域 附國傳):

"When someone dies... the descendants do not weep, but wearing armor and dancing with swords, they shout, 'Our parents were taken by ghosts (鬼), we want to avenge this grievance and kill the ghosts!'" Or, as seen in Vol. 6 of Hsi Ch'ing's (西淸) "Outer Records of Heilongjiang" (黑龍江外記) from the Ch'ing (淸) dynasty: <24>

"When the Daur (達呼爾) fall ill, they invariably say the ancestors are causing trouble (祖宗見怪), summon a shaman (薩瑪, Salma), and perform spirit dancing (跳神) to appease them. Salma (薩瑪) means shaman (巫覡). ... If the Salma says, 'The ancestors want a horse,' they kill a horse to sacrifice; 'If they want an ox,' they slaughter an ox to sacrifice, even down to the specific color and sex (驪黃牝牡), exactly as commanded."

These are poignant examples. The spirits of ancestors also needed oxen and horses to live their lives. The Daur people thought they inflicted illness on their descendants to obtain these plants or livestock.

In this way, the imaginary environment had a very close relationship with the lives of primitive people. This will be discussed in somewhat more detail in the next chapter.

Section 2: Soul Immortality and Afterlife

The views on the soul (靈魂) commonly spoken of among the Korean populace today can be broadly divided into:
1. Qi-Soul Theory (氣魂說)
2. Soul-Mouse Theory (魂鼠說)

According to the Qi-Soul Theory, the soul of a living person is like breath (숨ㅅ氣), invisible to the eye. And this Qi-soul (氣魂) is thought to be the owner of the body. That is, we call the soul "nŏk" (넋). The meaning of the word "nŏk" in Korean is not interpretable. Perhaps it originates from the same etymon as the Japanese word "nushi" (主), meaning master or owner. The Yakut (야쿠트) people also call their soul "Ichichi" (이치치), and the word "Ichichi" means owner (주5). Therefore, it is said that when the owner, the "nŏk," leaves the body, the person dies. On the other hand, it is also said that when "breath" (숨) disappears, one also dies. In this way, "nŏk" and "sum" (숨) are thought of as different names for the same thing. If the abstract concept is "nŏk," its concrete manifestation can be called "sum"; if the static aspect is "nŏk," the dynamic aspect is thought to be "sum," so while they are considered entirely different things, on the other hand, they seem to have points of congruence. (For examples of the Qi-Soul Theory among uncivilized peoples, refer to the "Animism" chapter in Tylor's "Primitive Culture.")

According to the Qi-Soul Theory, breath and soul are living things. While they are inside the body, we are alive, but as soon as they leave, we die. Etymologically, the Korean word <25> "sum" (숨) corresponds to "moksum" (목숨, throat-breath), meaning lifespan. This word originates from the meaning that we are alive as long as there is breath in the throat. In Japanese as well, "iki" (息, breath) corresponds to "ikiru" (生, live).

Next, what happens to the Qi-soul after it leaves the body? Primitive reasoning does not extend that far, especially since the Qi-soul is a Qi-like (氣的) existence that cannot be perceived. Thus, they leap directly into the Spirit Theory (精靈說), which is entirely unrelated to the Qi-Soul Theory.

Our folk belief says that the soul after death survives separate from the body, like a "shadow" (그림자). That is, it continues to live in the imaginary environment or goes to the underworld (地下界) to continue a life similar to this one in a dim world (幽暗한 세계). Even though it is said to be like a "shadow," it is not visible to the naked eye but can only be conceived in the imagination or fantasy, thought to be an image-like existence (影的 존재) similar to objects seen in dreams.

Next, the Soul-Mouse Theory (魂鼠說) is an interpretation that views the soul of a living person concretely and materially. That is, the soul is said to be like a "shrew mouse" (새양쥐). Some say there are three such mice, others say two. Still another person mentioned a one-mouse theory.

Listening to the three-mouse theory, one mouse is black and possesses a thieving nature (盜性). A white mouse possesses a good nature (善性) and constantly suppresses the black mouse's thieving nature. Therefore, a person's character is determined by whether the final mouse is white or black. That is, a person whose final mouse is black develops a propensity for theft (盜癖), while one whose final mouse is white becomes a good person (善人). This three-mouse theory is likely a combination of the Chinese three-souls-seven-spirits theory (三魂七魄說) and the soul-mouse theory, fabricated in later times and further linked to the desire to explain the good and evil in human nature.

Those who speak of the two-mouse theory say it is because there are only two nostrils (코ㅅ구멍). This is a natural conclusion from primitive reasoning. The three-soul theory is a Chinese idea that one soul each resides in the underworld, the tomb (墓中), and the ancestral tablet (位牌) within the family shrine (家廟). Therefore, this two-mouse theory is likely the indigenous Korean belief. It is said that the two mice sometimes exit through the nostrils during sleep (睡眠中), and some even say that if you place a ruler (尺) under the nostrils, the soul-mice (魂鼠) will crawl out along it. Even more amusingly,<26> some claim to have seen the mice exiting like this. The idea of mice exiting through the nostrils is, in essence, a concretization of the saying that breath exits through the nostrils. The two-mouse theory is particularly prevalent among women, and I too was a believer in the two-mouse theory as a child. Seeing that the three-mouse theory can be found among those with a background in Chinese classics (漢學 素養) further suggests the three-mouse theory is influenced by the three-soul concept (三魂).

While the two-mouse and three-mouse theories are common among the folk, the person who mentioned the one-mouse theory was Mrs. Kang Sŏk-cha (康錫子) of Hamhŭng (咸興). Whether such sayings are common in Hamgyŏng Province (咸鏡道) is unknown, but Mrs. Kang also considered the soul-mouse like a shrew mouse and said it escapes through the nostrils during sleep. Furthermore, similar to ideas commonly found throughout Korea and among uncivilized peoples, she stated, "If you paint the face of a sleeping person with yellow lacquer (황칠) or wake them up suddenly, the soul-mouse might not recognize the face properly or might not have time to re-enter the body, causing the person to go mad (發狂) or even die on the spot." However, the two-mouse theory seems closest to the original form.

How the reasoning that the soul is like a shrew mouse was derived is unknown, but in essence, the mouse is a concretization of breath (息氣), and the body lives because its owner, the soul, resides within it. This reasoning, as I need hardly explain, was a natural theory for primitive people who well understood that a person lives while they have breath and that life ceases when breath disappears.

However, while the existence of the soul after death is clearly recognized through the existence of many other people's souls, how was the existence of the soul in a living person inferred? This too can be explained by the "Dream Theory" (夢幻說). For example, primitive people, like us, traveled in dreams. They might visit a friend far away or receive a visit from a friend. Upon waking, their own body, which should have traveled far, is still upon the sleeping mat (寢席). And the friend they were just conversing with has gone to an unknown place (不知去處). Primitive people then thought thus: what traveled in the dream was not my body—if it were the body, it could not have returned home so quickly to still be on the sleeping mat—it was my soul. And the friend who visited me was not the physical friend, but the friend's soul. In this way, primitive people held a<27> dualistic view (二元說) contrasting body and soul. And they thought the soul could freely appear and disappear anywhere. The ancient Korean belief in soul immortality (靈魂不滅設) was also like this. And they considered the soul the owner of the body and the source of life.

According to primitive theory, "Anything that can be thought of, exists."

It is not an easy problem to determine what ancient Koreans thought about life in the afterlife (後世)—in other words, life after death (死後). The Korean people, having lived for a long time amidst Confucian (儒), Buddhist (佛), and Taoist (仙) thought, have almost forgotten their indigenous ideas about the afterlife. Thus, extracting the original form from today's ethnological (土俗上) or folk belief (民間信仰上) materials is a very difficult task. However, besides the ideas of Paradise (極樂), Hell (地獄), and becoming an immortal (化仙思想), the vague idea of going to another world (他界) generally remains. The fact that this otherworld is conceived as an underworld (地下界) still remains in folk belief. Not only that, but the idea of an underworld originally arose from burial (埋葬) (주5). Since the Korean custom of burial has existed since ancient times (to be discussed later), it can be said that the idea of an underworld must also have existed since ancient times.

Also, sometimes our folk belief vaguely considers the otherworld to be somewhere at the ends of the earth. However, whichever otherworld it may be, there is no difference in the fact that it is not a world like the bright present world (光明한 現世), but always a dim world (幽暗한 세계). This much can be inferred from folklore (土俗), but whether the number of otherworlds is plural or singular, or what kind of life exists in the otherworld, is entirely unknowable. (The reason the otherworld is considered dim is that the inhabitants of the otherworld, the spirits (精靈), always appear in dim dreams and fantasies.)

In our folk tales (民間 說話上), there are instances where people who performed good deeds (善行) in this life ascend to heaven (昇天) after death and become celestial bodies (天軆) (sun, moon, stars, etc.). The sun (太陽), moon (太陰), stars (星), the Big Dipper (北斗七星), and the Three Terraces asterism (三台星) are all said to be people who died and became these things. Also, in tales, people sometimes ascend to heaven. However, considering that the belief in post-mortem ascension to heaven (死後 昇天說) is almost non-existent in actual belief (實際 信仰上), such tales likely arose from the poetic imagination (詩的 想像) of later people or developed under the influence of Chinese thought (支那思想), rather than being based on folk belief. The ascension-to-heaven theory in tales had life only within the tales. Thus, even if the idea of ascension was not influenced by China, but arose independently among various peoples from the Retribution Theory (應報思想), as Professor Tylor suggested, where the sun, moon, stars, and heavens <28> are thought of as dwellings for the souls of the dead (주7), the fact that it holds almost no life in folk belief suggests it is most likely a product born from the poetic imagination of later ages.

Since ethnological materials (土俗學的 材料) are so ambiguous, we have no choice but to take other methods, but ancient documents (古代의 文獻) do not clearly teach us about this either. However, we can glimpse one aspect through ancient records (古記錄). That is, by applying an anthropological interpretation to ancient Korean funeral customs (葬式 慣習), we can grasp the outline. The "Records of the Three Kingdoms" (三國志), Vol. 30, Biography of Ch'in Han (辰韓傳), contains the passage:

"Ch'in Han... uses large bird feathers (大鳥羽) when sending off the dead (送死), the intention being to enable the dead person to fly away (飛揚)."

It is said that large bird feathers were given to the deceased to enable their soul to fly away. However, "flying away" (飛揚) may not necessarily mean ascending to heaven. For example, consider the "Songs of Ch'u" (楚辭), Vol. 7, "Summoning the Soul" (招魂) 9, which speaks of the difficulty of the path to the otherworld: in the East, there are thousand-fathom giants seeking human souls; in the South, black-toothed people seek human flesh for sacrifices; the scorching heat (炎熱) of the West chars and decays (燋爛) human bodies, and though thirsty, one cannot find water; in the North, there are layers of ice (重冰), fierce winds (况風), and driving snow (疾雪); and "The Gates of Heaven have nine layers, guarded by tigers and leopards; if someone from below wishes to ascend, they pierce and kill them (鑿殺之也)." Or consider "Summoning the Soul" (招魂) Chapter 10 in the "Songs of Ch'u," which speaks of the perils of the afterlife path:

"To the East lies the great sea and weak water (弱水)... To the South, fiery flames stretch for a thousand li... To the West, shifting sands drift boundlessly (流沙漭洋洋)... To the North flow cold mountains and distant dragons (寒山逴龍)," urging the swift return of the dead soul (死魂). Or consider the "Records of the Three Kingdoms" (三國志), Vol. 30, Biography of the Wu Huan (烏丸傳):

"The Wu Huan... believe the spirits (神靈) of the dead return to Red Mountain (赤山). Red Mountain is several thousand li northwest of Liaotung (遼東西北)... On the day of burial... they have two people chant incantations (呪文), asking the soul (魂神) of the deceased to pass through perils and obstacles (險阻) and not be blocked by malevolent ghosts (橫鬼) so it may reach Red Mountain..."

Just as these examples and other uncivilized peoples often think of the path to the afterlife as perilous (주8), perhaps ancient Koreans also thought that wings (羽翼) were necessary for embarking on the perilous and distant journey to the otherworld, and thus sent off the dead with bird feathers (鳥羽) in that sense. Regardless, the deceased definitely had to go to the otherworld. (Spirits wandering the earth and arising in cemeteries will be detailed in Chapter 3.) <29>

What was life in the otherworld thought to be like? We can glimpse the general idea by examining the customs of human sacrifice (殉葬) and grave goods (殉物). Since the custom of human sacrifice exists worldwide, as all anthropologists state, I will omit discussion here. Also, Mr. Shigematsu Toshiaki (重松俊章) of Japan has already gathered materials from ancient Chinese books concerning the customs of human sacrifice among the Han Chinese, Mongol, Manchu, and Turkic peoples, so to avoid tedious examples, I will introduce Mr. Shigematsu's thesis (주9) to those who wish to see them. I particularly wish to discuss ancient Korean human sacrifice and, moreover, the grave goods (殉物) of all East Asian peoples. Grave goods, along with human sacrifice, are invaluable materials for considering primitive people's conceptions of the afterlife.

The "Records of the Three Kingdoms" (三國志), Vol. 3, Biography of Puyŏ (夫餘傳), relates:
"Puyŏ... for their dead, in the summer months, they all use ice. They kill people for sacrificial burial (殺人殉葬), sometimes numbering in the hundreds (多者以百穀[數]). They bury lavishly (厚葬), having coffins (棺) but no outer coffins (槨)."

The "Book of Chin" (晉書), Vol. 97, Biography of Ma Han (馬韓傳), states:
"Ma Han... do not know how to ride oxen or horses; the livestock they keep (畜者) are only used for sending off in burials (送葬)."

And the "Book of the Later Han" (後漢書), Vol. 115, Biography of Koguryŏ (高句麗傳), says:
"Koguryŏ... gold, silver, valuables, and silk (金銀財帛) are all exhausted in lavish burials (厚葬)."

The "Book of Sui" (隋書), Vol. 81, Biography of Koryŏ (高麗, i.e., Koguryŏ), contains:
"Koryŏ... at funerals (葬), they beat drums, dance, make music, and send them off. After burial (埋訖), they take all the clothing, articles, chariots, and horses the deceased used in life (死者生時服玩車馬) and place them beside the tomb (墓側). Those attending the funeral (會葬者) compete to take them away."

There is also the passage in the "Book of Sui" (隋書), Vol. 81, Biography of Paekche (百濟傳):
"Paekche... funerals (喪) are like those of Koryŏ (高麗)."

That is, the Puyŏ people practiced human sacrifice and also used many grave goods (lavish burial). The Ma Han people sacrificed oxen and horses. The Koguryŏ people sacrificed gold, silver, and valuables. By the time of the Sui dynasty (支那의 時代), due to the development of economic thought among the Koguryŏ people, grave goods were not buried with the corpse; instead, after first offering various items to the deceased—likely only the essence (精) of all items—those attending the funeral would divide and take them. It seems plausible that the Ma Han people did not know how to ride oxen and horses, but the statement that livestock were only kept for sacrificial burial (送葬) is, of course, an exaggerated expression. Oxen and horses would likely have been used for farming and transport. Also, their meat would likely have been consumed<30> for food. (For evidence that ancient Koreans ate horse meat, refer to the words of the troublesome commoner Yi Kim (伊金) of Kosŏng in the "History of Koryŏ" (高麗史), Vol. 107, Biography of Hwa, and the story of Pang Ong in Sŏng Hyŏn's "Yongje Ch'onghwa" (慵齊叢話), end of Vol. 2.) Be that as it may.

Among the Puyŏ people, who were of the same ethnicity as the Koryŏ (Koguryŏ) people, the custom of human sacrifice (殉人) existed. Human sacrifice existed not only in Puyŏ but also in ancient Silla (新羅). The "History of the Three Kingdoms" (三國史記), Vol. 4, states:
"Chi Chŭng Maripkan (智證麻立干), Third Year, Spring, Third Month. An order was issued prohibiting human sacrifice (禁殉葬). Previously, when a king died (國王薨), five males and five females each were sacrificed (殉以男女各五人). At this time, it was prohibited."

Thus, what was the meaning behind ancient Koreans sacrificing people, daily items like clothing and toys (衣服 玩), livestock like oxen and horses (牛馬), and valuables like gold, silver, and currency (金銀財幣) for the deceased? This question has already been resolved by the so-called "Continuation Theory" (繼生說)(주10) in anthropology. The Continuation Theory is the idea that views life after death as a continuation or extension of life before death. Therefore, it could also be called the "Extension Theory" (延長說). If we analyze the meaning of ancient Korean grave goods and human sacrifice using this Continuation Theory, the afterlife, although distant and somewhat dim (幽暗), required chariots, oxen, and horses for farming, transport, and food; clothing, toys, and chariots were needed for protection against cold and for entertainment. Also, many attendants (從者) and gold, silver, and currency were needed for luxury. It was no different from life in the present world (現世). However, since it was impossible for the deceased to personally carry all such possessions, the customs of human sacrifice and grave goods arose. Also, if the family kept the deceased's belongings, the deceased could not use them in the afterlife, so they thought they could send them to the deceased by burying them all with the corpse or by burning them. Burning was thought to send only the essence (精) of the items to the deceased, who was a spiritual existence (精靈的 존재). The reason for temporarily placing grave goods beside the tomb has already been explained, but the fact that funeral attendees took them away likely stemmed not only from economic meaning but also from the notion of viewing the deceased's items as sacred (神聖視). However, another reason the family did not keep them likely arose from the fear (恐怖) that the deceased, seeking their former possessions, would repeatedly inflict illness upon the family. From this fear, the taboo (禁忌, Taboo) concept that the deceased's items are impure (不精) would also have arisen. <31>

However, simply stating that the customs of human sacrifice and grave goods existed does not scientifically allow us to assert definitively that ancient Koreans were believers in the Continuation Theory. Why is that? Because customs often exist merely as customs without being accompanied by conscious belief. For example, the word "ŏmjisongarak" (엄지손가락, thumb) means "mother finger" (어미 손가락), and calling the most important and largest finger the "mother finger" (母指) can be seen as a relic of the ancient matriarchal era (母權時代). However, this does not mean that a matriarchal era existed in Korean history. In the Hamgyŏng Province dialect, mother is "ŏmani" (어마니) and grandmother is "amai" (아마이), and in general Korean, paternal aunt is "chagŭn ŏmŏni" (적은 어머니, small mother) and paternal uncle's wife is "k'ŭn ŏmŏni" (큰어머니, big mother), all meaning "mother." According to anthropologists, this is a relic of the group marriage era (群婚時代). Even so, claiming this means a group marriage era existed in Korea is the unscientific nonsense of naive linguists. Since such comical stories (笑話) have frequently appeared in Korean magazines recently, I have made a special point of mentioning this. Anthropology transcends ethnicity, seeking similarities and studying the general history of human life using those materials. Ethnology (토속학), however, values differences more than similarities, collects and analyzes materials within a single ethnic group, applies scientific criticism, and only then can compare them with other ethnic groups or adopt them into history. This is an aside. Even looking at current folk beliefs, traces of the Continuation Theory are clearly present. Among the folk, the clothing and objects (衣服 器物) owned by the deceased during their lifetime are sometimes burned (燒棄) either to erase memories or because they are considered impure (不精). However, sometimes, with clear consciousness, they are burned and sent (燒送) with the meaning of gifting them to the deceased. For example, when ancestors, seeking their possessions from life, inflict illness on the family, the family, following the shaman's (무녀) words, burns and sends what the ancestor desires (祖先의 所欲). This is because they believe the ancestors require various daily necessities, clothing, etc., for their lives in the afterlife, just as in this world. Next,
Let's look at a few examples of grave goods (殉物) among neighboring peoples—Manchus, Mongols, Turks, Miao, etc. The "Records of the Three Kingdoms" (三國志), Vol. 30, Biography of the Wu Huan (烏丸傳), states:
"Wu Huan... when someone first dies, they weep (哭). At the burial, they sing, dance, and send them off (歌舞相送). They fatten a dog (肥養犬), leash it with a colored rope (采繩嬰牽), and take the deceased's riding horse (所乘馬), clothing (衣物), and garments worn in life (生時服飾), burning them all to send them off (皆燒以送之). They specifically entrust the dog (特屬累犬) to guard the deceased's spirit (死者神靈) on its way back to Red Mountain (赤山). Red Mountain is several thousand <32> li northwest of Liaotung, similar to how Chinese people believe the souls of the dead (死之魂) return to Mount T'ai (泰山). On the night of the burial day (至葬日), relatives and friends gather and sit in a circle (夜聚親舊員坐). The dog and horse are led around the seats (牽犬馬歷位). Sometimes those weeping (*哭者) throw meat to them (擲肉與之).... Afterwards, the dog, horse, and clothing are killed and burned (殺犬馬衣物燒之)."

That is, the Wu Huan people burned and sent (燒送) the deceased's clothing, dog, and riding horse, seemingly even using the dog as a guide. The "Book of the Former Han" (前漢書), Vol. 94A, Biography of the Hsiung-nu (匈奴傳), says:
"For their sending off the dead (送死), there are inner and outer coffins (棺槨), gold, silver, clothes, and garments (金銀衣裳)," etc.

The "Book of Sui" (隋書), Vol. 83, Biography of Fu Kuo in the Western Regions (西域 附國傳), states:
"When someone dies (有死者), there are no mourning clothes (無服制). The corpse (死屍) is placed on a high bed (高牀之上), washed (沐浴), clothed (衣服), covered with armor (被以牟甲), and draped with animal skins (覆以獸皮). The deceased's family kills an ox (死家殺牛). Relatives exchange gifts of wine (親屬以賭[豚]酒相遺), and they drink and eat together before sending off (共飮噉而飛[葬]之)."
This indicates that grave goods for the Turkic peoples included clothing, armor, animal skin coats, and food like beef and pork (牛豚). The "Old Book of Tang" (舊唐書), Vol. 196A, Biography of T'u-fan (吐蕃傳), states:
"When their Tsan-p'u (贊普, ruler) dies, people are sacrificed for burial (以人殉葬). Clothing, valuables (衣服珍玩), as well as the horse he used to ride, bow, sword, and the like (嘗所乘馬弓劍之類), are all buried (皆悉埋之)."

Looking at the Manchus, the "Old Book of Tang" (舊唐書), Vol. 199B, Biography of the Mo-ho (靺鞨傳), contains:
"For the dead (死者), they dig a hole in the ground and bury them (穿地埋之), placing the body against the earth (以身襯土), without coffin or wrapping implements (無棺斂之具). They kill the horse ridden [by the deceased] (殺所乘之馬) and place it before the corpse (於屍前設之)."

Hsü Meng-hsin's (徐夢莘) "Collected Records Concerning the Alliances with the North from Three Reigns" (三朝北盟會編) from the Sung (宋) dynasty, Vol. 3, states:
"The dead are buried (死者埋之), but without inner or outer coffins (無棺槨). Nobles burn alive (生焚) their favored slaves and maids (所寵奴婢) and the saddle horses they rode (所乘鞍馬) to sacrifice them (殉之). All sacrificial food and drink items (所有祭祀飮食之物) are completely burned (盡焚之), calling it 'burning rice' (燒飯)."

And the section on "Customs of the Jurchen Barbarians" (野人女眞風俗) in Sŏng Hyŏn's (成俔) "Miscellaneous Writings of Yongje" (傭齋叢話), Vol. 10, states:
"When they bury people (其葬人也), they dig a hole and throw the corpse into it (穿穴而投尸於其中), pile stones to make a mound (累石爲墳), offer wine and food and perform rites (設酒飯行祭), then pour the wine and food into the hole (後投瀉酒飯於穴), making contact with the corpse (與尸相接). They also tie the horse loved during life (平生所愛馬) in front of the mound (係於墳前), and hang a bow, arrows, quiver, and case (弓矢筒鞬) on it (掛弓矢筒鞬於其上), waiting for them to decay (待其銷盡), and people dare not take them (人不敢收)," etc.

Hsi Ch'ing's (西淸) "Outer Records of Heilongjiang" (黑龍江外記), Vol. 6, from the Ch'ing (淸) dynasty, mentions:
"The wealthy, for the deceased (爲亡人), burn a set of fur coat and hat (焚裘帽一火), sometimes worth thousands or hundreds in gold (嘗抵千百金). Previously, they even burned palanquins and horses (猶焚輿馬), an extreme extravagance (侵僭之甚)."

Regarding the grave goods of the Miao people (苗族), Lu Tz'u-yün's (陸次雲) "Detailed Records of the Tung Stream Grottoes" (峒谿纖志), Vol. 1, states the following about the Yang Guang (佯獷):
"Yang Guang... when parents die (父母死), they burn their clothes and caps (焚其衣冠), as if gifting them to the ghosts (有如贈鬼)."

Thus, the methods of sacrificial offering (殉節, likely typo for 殉祭 or 殉物) varied—burning (燒送), burying (埋送), hanging (掛送), etc.—but the underlying thought of gifting them for the deceased's <33> afterlife (後世 生活) remains the same. Even more interesting is the Mongol practice of attaching shoes to the deceased. This is meant for them to use on the journey to the otherworld. The "History of the Yüan" (元史), Vol. 77, "Old National Customs and Rites" (國俗舊禮), states:
"When the imperial chariot is prepared for the funeral journey (凡宮車晏駕), the coffin (棺) uses fragrant sandalwood (香檀木).... For enshrouding (殮), a sable fur coat (貂皮襖), fur hat (皮帽), and boots (靴) are used; the belt for tying the waist (其[衣]滅[?]繫腰), box, and bowl (盒鉢) are all made of white powdered leather (白粉皮). Sacrificed with them (殉以) are two gold pitchers (金壺甁二), one basin (盆一), and one set of bowl, plate, spoon, and chopsticks (椀楪匙筯各一)."

Ancient Northern Europeans also attached shoes to the feet of the corpse for the difficult journey to the otherworld, and this custom remains among German villagers today. Not only that, but villagers sometimes attach a needle and thread for the deceased to mend tears in their clothing. Furthermore, among Europeans, the custom of placing a small amount of money in the deceased's hand as travel expenses (路費) is common (주11).

In this way, it can be understood that ancient Koreans were also likely believers in the Continuation Theory.

Chapter 2 Notes
(1) A. G. Keller, Societal Evolution, New York 1915, pp. 260, 133ff.
(2) E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture, "Animism", London, 1871-1920.
(3) Ibid. Vol, ii, pp. 126ff.
(4) Maddox. The Medicine Man, pp. 7ff.
(5) Czaplicka, op. cit, p. 278. [Note: Text actually cites Jevons for p.299, and Czaplicka for p. 278 - need to verify original intent/accuracy if possible, but transcribed as given.]
(6) Jevons F. B., An Introduction to the History of Religion, p. 299. [Note: Text actually cites Czaplicka for p.278, and Jevons for p. 299 - transcribed as given.]
(7) Tylor, Primitive Culture, ii, pp. 69-74.
(8) Ibid. pp. 65-68.
(9) 重松俊章 「支那古代殉送の風習に就いて」 (東洋史論叢, 481 - 540頁 所收) (Shigematsu Toshiaki, "Regarding the Ancient Chinese Custom of Sacrificial Sending Off," included in Tōyōshi Ronsō, pp. 481-540)
(10) Tylor, op. cit., pp. 69-82.
(11) E. B. Tylor, Anthropology: An Introduction to the Study of Man and Civilization New York, 1923, p. 347.
(To be continued) <34>

**Summary**

This article by Son Chin-t'ae explores ancient Korean beliefs about the supernatural and the afterlife, framed within early anthropological theories. It discusses the concept of an "imaginary environment" inhabited by spirits, derived from dreams and fear, which influence health and fortune. Son examines Korean folk beliefs about the soul ("nŏk," "sum"), including the "Qi-Soul" theory and the "Soul-Mouse" theory (two or three mice residing in the body). He argues that ancient Koreans believed in an afterlife, likely a dim underworld, based on interpretations of burial customs like including bird feathers (for travel) and grave goods (殉物) or human sacrifices (殉葬) documented in historical records for Puyŏ, Koguryŏ, Silla, and Ma Han. These practices suggest a belief in the continuation of earthly life after death (Continuation Theory), where the deceased required possessions, servants, and even animals. The article compares these Korean beliefs and practices with those of neighboring cultures (Wu Huan, Hsiung-nu, Tibetans, Manchus, Miao) and Europeans.

From a colonial history perspective, this article is interesting as it shows a Korean intellectual engaging with Western anthropological frameworks (Tylor, Keller) to analyze and validate indigenous Korean culture and history during a period of Japanese rule. Son attempts to reconstruct ancient Korean beliefs using comparative ethnology and textual analysis, asserting distinct Korean traditions while also placing them within a broader East Asian and global context. Historians might find value in Son's methodology, his sources (both Korean folklore and Chinese historical texts), and his effort to define a unique Korean spiritual heritage separate from later Confucian/Buddhist/Taoist influences, reflecting a nascent cultural nationalism or academic pursuit under colonial constraints.

**Named Entities**

孫晉泰	손진태	Son Chin-t'ae
Keller	켈러	Keller
Edward B. Tylor	타일러-	Edward B. Tylor
隋書	수서	Book of Sui
西域 附國傳	서역 부국전	Biography of Fu Kuo in the Western Regions
西淸	서청	Hsi Ch'ing
黑龍江外記	흑룡강외기	Outer Records of Heilongjiang
淸	청	Ch'ing
達呼爾	달호이	Daur
薩瑪	살마	Salma (Shaman)
朝鮮	조선	Korea/Chosŏn
Yakut	야쿠트	Yakut
咸興	함흥	Hamhŭng
康錫子	강석자	Kang Sŏk-cha
咸鏡道	함경도	Hamgyŏng Province
Maddox	마독스	Maddox
儒	유	Confucianism
佛	불	Buddhism
仙	선	Taoism (Immortals)
三國志	삼국지	Records of the Three Kingdoms
辰韓傳	진한전	Biography of Ch'in Han
楚辭	초사	Songs of Ch'u
招魂	초혼	Summoning the Soul
烏丸傳	오환전	Biography of the Wu Huan
遼東西北	요동서북	Northwest of Liaotung
赤山	적산	Red Mountain
泰山	태산	Mount T'ai
重松俊章	시게마츠 토시아키	Shigematsu Toshiaki
支那	지나	China (older term)
東洋史論叢	동양사론총	Tōyōshi Ronsō (East Asian History Treatises)
夫餘傳	부여전	Biography of Puyŏ
晉書	진서	Book of Chin
馬韓傳	마한전	Biography of Ma Han
後漢書	후한서	Book of the Later Han
高句麗傳	고구려전	Biography of Koguryŏ
隋書	수서	Book of Sui
高麗傳	고려전	Biography of Koryŏ (Koguryŏ)
百濟傳	백제전	Biography of Paekche
高麗史	고려사	History of Koryŏ
慵齊叢話	용재총화	Yongje Ch'onghwa (Miscellaneous Writings of Yongje)
成俔	성현	Sŏng Hyŏn
新羅	신라	Silla
三國史記	삼국사기	History of the Three Kingdoms
智證麻立干	지증마립간	Chi Chŭng Maripkan
前漢書	전한서	Book of the Former Han
匈奴傳	흉노전	Biography of the Hsiung-nu
舊唐書	구당서	Old Book of Tang
吐蕃傳	토번전	Biography of T'u-fan (Tibet)
靺鞨傳	말갈전	Biography of the Mo-ho
三朝北盟會編	삼조북맹회편	Collected Records Concerning the Alliances with the North from Three Reigns
徐夢莘	서몽신	Hsü Meng-hsin
宋	송	Sung (Dynasty)
野人女眞	야인여진	Jurchen Barbarians ("Wild Jurchens")
陸次雲	육차운	Lu Tz'u-yün
峒谿纖志	동계섬지	Detailed Records of the Tung Stream Grottoes
佯獷	양광	Yang Guang (Ethnic group name, possibly typo or obscure term)
苗族	묘족	Miao People
元史	원사	History of the Yüan
Jevons F. B.	제번스	Jevons F. B.
Czaplicka	차플리카	Czaplicka
獨逸	독일	Germany
歐羅巴	구라파	Europe

**Glossary**

상상상(想像上)의 환경(環境)	상상상의 환경	Imaginary environment
정령(精靈)	정령	Spirit(s)
인류학(人類學)	인류학	Anthropology
비조(鼻祖)	비조	Founding father, originator
몽환설(夢幻說)	몽환설	Dream Theory
타격(打擊)	타격	Blow, strike
창시(槍矢)	창시	Spear and arrow
소위(所爲)	소위	Act, deed, doing
마단적(魔斷的)	마단적	Magical, relating to sorcery (potentially idiosyncratic term)
조종(祖宗)	조종	Ancestors
무격(巫覡)	무격	Shaman (male or female)
영혼(靈魂)	영혼	Soul, spirit
기혼설(氣魂說)	기혼설	Qi-Soul Theory (Soul as Breath/Energy)
혼서설(魂鼠說)	혼서설	Soul-Mouse Theory
넋	넋	Soul, spirit (native Korean word)
숨	숨	Breath
이어동물(異名同物)	이명동물	Different names for the same thing
목숨	목숨	Life, lifespan (lit. throat-breath)
그림자	그림자	Shadow
지하계(地下界)	지하계	Underworld
유암(幽暗)한 세계(世界)	유암한 세계	Dim/dark world
새양쥐	새앙쥐	Shrew mouse (older spelling)
비공(鼻孔)	비공	Nostril
황칠(黃漆)	황칠	Yellow lacquer/varnish
발광(發狂)	발광	Go mad, become insane
몽환설(夢幻說)	몽환설	Dream Theory (repeated)
침석(寢席)	침석	Sleeping mat, bed
이원설(二元說)	이원설	Dualism
후세(後世)	후세	Afterlife, later ages
타계(他界)	타계	Otherworld, afterlife
매장(埋葬)	매장	Burial
승천(昇天)	승천	Ascend to heaven
응보사상(應報思想)	응보사상	Retribution theory
토속학(土俗學)	토속학	Ethnology, folklore studies
송사(送死)	송사	Sending off the dead (funeral rite)
비양(飛揚)	비양	Fly away, soar
험조(險阻)	험조	Perils and obstacles
횡귀(橫鬼)	횡귀	Malevolent ghost, obstructing spirit
순장(殉葬)	순장	Human sacrifice (at burial)
순물(殉物)	순물	Grave goods (sacrificed items)
후장(厚葬)	후장	Lavish burial
관곽(棺槨)	관곽	Inner and outer coffins
계생설(繼生說)	계생설	Continuation theory (of life after death)
금기(禁忌)	금기	Taboo
부정(不精)하다	부정하다	To be impure, unclean
소송(燒送)	소송	Send off by burning
무녀(巫女)	무녀	Female shaman, priestess
소욕(所欲)	소욕	What is desired
국속구례(國俗舊禮)	국속구례	Old National Customs and Rites
노비(奴婢)	노비	Slaves (male and female)
소반(燒飯)	소반	Burning rice (ritual burning of food offerings)
통건(筒鞬)	통건	Quiver and bow case


---------------------------


잡지명	동광 제12호
발행일	1927년 04월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮上古文化의 硏究, 朝鮮古代宗敎의 宗敎學的 土俗學的 硏究(2)
필자	孫晉泰
기사형태	논설

朝鮮上古文化의 硏究, 朝鮮古代宗敎의 宗敎學的 土俗學的 硏究
						孫晉泰
第2章 想像上의 環境과 魂, 死, 病에 대한 觀念
第1節 想像上의 環境
우리 문화인이 가진 환경에는 두 가지가 있다. 하나는 自然的 環境이요 또 하나는 社會的 環境이다. 前者에는 우리 주위에 있는 모든 자연- 例하며 日, 月, 山, 川, 海洋, 空氣, 氣候, 土地, 生物, 鑛物 등 우리 생활에 직접 간접 관계를 가진 모든 자연 현상이 포괄되고 後者에는 우리 인류 생활이 산출한 모든 환경- 例하면 政治的, 經濟的, 社會的, 歷史的 모든 환경이 종속된다. 하나 원시인에게는 이러한 2種의 환경 밖에 第3환경이 있었다. 그 第三 환경은 지금 우리로서는 밀접한 관계를 가진 것이었다. 그 第3환경은 精靈의 세계였다. 그것은 사람에게 이익을 주기도 하였지마는 대체로는 병과 죽음을 주는 환경이였다. 그 환경은 오직 사람의 想像上에만 존재할 수 있는 者임으로 Keller 교수는 그것을 想像上의 환경(Imagiamary enviroment)(주1) 이라고 命名하였다.
想像上의 환경이 어떻게 하여서 성립되느냐 하는 문제는 精靈의 존재가 어떻게 하여서 성립되느냐 하는 점으로 歸者된다. 精靈의 존재를 확신한 원시인의 신앙을 설명함에는 인류학의 鼻祖 타일러-(Edward B. Tylor) 氏는 기타가 주창한 소위 「夢幻說」(Ddward B. Tylor)(주2)를 비롯한 것이 가장 빠른 길이다. 이 夢幻說에 의하면 원시인은 꿈 가운대 보이는 모든 환상을 실재한 존재라고 생각하였다.
例하면 生前에 心思 궂은 家長 또는 族長은 原始人의 기억 가운대 깊이 남아 있었다.＜23＞ 그래서 그것이 그들의 꿈에 날아나게 되다. 역시 生前과 같이 그들에게 好感을 주지 못하였다. 얼굴과 의복이며 음성, 태도가 생전과 一般이었다. 또 원시인은 꿈 가운대 때때로 그들의 적- 지금은 他界의 사람이 된-을 보았다. 生前의 적은 死後에도 그들의 적이었다. 그러하나 꿈에서 깨어보면 족장이고 적이고 보이지 아니하였다. 여긔에서 원시인들은 이렇게  추리하엿다. 물질적인 육체는 소멸되었으나 그들의 魂 또는 精靈(Spirt)은 아직도 살아 있어서 그들의 주위의 어느 곳에 존재하여 있다고 이렇게 하여서 그들 원시인과 싸우다 죽은 야수의 精靈도 존재되고 이러한 모든 無形的 모든 精靈은 공간을 그 巢窇로 하여 원시인의 주위에 적으로 常住하게 되었다. 常住만 하였으면 좋겠지마는 想像上 환경 중에 사는 모든 공간적 존재는 누누히 원시인에게 災福을 주었다. 例하면 원시人은 病, 死와 災難에 대하여 즉시 「누구가 이러한 짓을 하노?」하는 의문을 發하였다. 과학적 病因 災源과 자연의 死를 알지 못한 그들은 災病을 모도 그들에게 적의를 가진 者 혹은 그러한 者의 死魂, 적의 精靈의 所爲라고 확신하였다. 이 원시인의 심리를 다시 설명하면 원시인은 精靈的 존재를 항상 그들 자신과 같이 인간적으로 해석하였다. 해서 내가 적에게 맞으면 앞으로 적의 창이나 활에 찔릴 때에는 상처가 생기고 그 상처로 인하여 죽는 때도 있다. 그러하면 죽음이나 병이란 敵의 타격이나 槍矢의 독으로 인하여 생기는 것이라고 추리한다. 해서 無形한 적- 精靈的 존재인- 은 그 無形한 弓矢나 槍으로 -그들은 꿈 가운대 그러한 槍矢를 많이 보았고 그 槍矢슗� 찔리었을 때에는 고통도 느끼었다. -병이나 죽음을 사람에게 줄 수가 있다고 생각하였다. 이렇게 하여서 원법인들은 病因을 모도 死敵의 所爲(혹은 적의 魔斷的 所爲)라고 추리하였다. 이에 관한 모든 未開民族의 例는 타일러 교수(주3) 마독스(Maddos) 박사(주4)에 의하여 많이 인용되어 있음으로 일절을 略하나 특히 동양의 서적에서 敎例를 들면 「隋書」 83 西域 附國傳에 있는
「有死 .... 子孫不器, 帶甲舞釰而呼云, 我父母爲鬼所取, 我欲報寃殺鬼에」란 것이던지 淸 西淸의 黑龍江外記 卷6에 보이는＜24＞
「達呼爾(Daur)病, 必曰祖宗見怪, 召薩瑪, 跳神禳之, 薩瑪巫覡也. ... 蔭瑪曰, 祖宗要馬, 則殺馬以祭, 要牛, 則椎牛以祭, 至於驪黃牝牡, 一如其命」 云云
이란 것은 그 痛切한 例다. 祖先의 死魂도 그들의 생활을 하기 위하여는 牛馬가 필요하였다. 그 식물 또는 가축을 얻기 때문에 자손에게 병을 주는 것이라고 「다우르」族들은 생각하였다.
이와 같이 想像上의 환경은 原始人의 생활과 非常히 밀접한 관계를 가지었었다. 이것은 다시 次章에 다소 詳述할 기회가 잇다.

第2節 靈魂不滅과 後世生活
今日 朝鮮民間에서 말하는 靈魂에 대한 견해는 그것을 大別하여
1. 氣魂說
2. 魂鼠說
로 난울 수 있다. 氣魂說에 의하면 살ㄴ 사람의 魂은 마치 숨ㅅ氣와 같아서 눈으로는 볼 수 없다고 한다. 그리고 이 氣魂은 육체의 所有主라고 생각한다. 즉 우리는 魂을 「넋」이라고 한다. 넋이란 말은 朝鮮말로서는 무슨 의미인지 해석되지 않는다. 아마 이것은 日本말의 主人 所有主 등을 의미하는 「主」와 같은 語源에서 나아온 말일 것이다. 「야쿠트」(Yakut) 사람들도 그들의 魂을 “Ichichi"라고 하며 「이치치」란 말은 소유주를 의미한다고 한다.(주5) 그럼으로 그 所有主인 「넋」이 몸에서 빠아지면 사람은 죽는다고 하며 한편으로는 「숨」이 없어지면 또한 죽는다고 한다. 이렇게 하여 「넋」와 「숨」은 異名同物과 같이 생각되여 있다. 추상적인 것이 「넋」이면 그 구체적인 것은 「숨」이라고 할 수 있으며 靜的인 것이 넋이면 動的인 것은 숨이라 생각하여  兩者가 전연 別物같이 생각되면서도 한편으로는 서로 일치하는 점이 있는 것 같다. (氣魂說에 관한 未開民族의 例는 Tylor 「原始文化」의 「안니미즘」章을 참조)
氣魂說에 의하면 숨과 혼은 살아있는 것이다. 그것이 體內에 있을 동안 우리는 살아 있지만 그것이 빠아지기만 하면 죽게 된다. 語源學的으로 보아도 朝鮮말의＜25＞ 숨은 壽命을 의미하는 「목숨」(喉息)과 일치한다. 목에 숨이 있는 동안 우리는 살아있는 것이란 의미에서 나아온 말이다. 日本말에도 「息」는 「生」와 일치한다.
다음에 그러면 육체에서 빠아지어 나아간 뒤의 氣魂은 어떻게 되느냐 하면 원시인의 추리는 거긔까지 및이지 아니한다. 더구나 氣魂이란 것은 어떻게 인식할 수 없는 氣的 存在인 까닭에. 해서 그들은 一躍하여 氣魂說과 전연 무관계한 精靈說로 들어가게 된다.
死後의 靈魂은 마치 「그림자」와 같이 육체를 떠나아 생존한다고 우리 민간 신앙은 말한다. 즉 想像上의 환경에서 생활을 계속하며 혹은 地下界로 가아서 幽暗한 세계에서 此生과 같은 생활을 계속한다고 한다. 「그림자」와 같다고 하더라도 肉眼에 보이는 것이 아니라 오직 想像上, 幻想上에만 생각할 수 있으며 마치 꿈 가운대 보이는 물체와 같은 影的 존재라고 생각하고 있다.
다음에 魂鼠說은 생활하는 사람의 魂을 구체적 물질적으로 보는 해석법이다. 즉 魂은 마치 「새양쥐」와 같은 것이라고 한다. 혹은 그 쥐가 세 마리라고도 하며 혹은 두 마리라고도 한다. 또 어떼한 이는 한 마리說을 말하였다.
三鼠說을 들어보면 그 중에 한 마리는 黑色이요 그것은 盜性을 가지었다. 白色의 한 마리는 善性을 가지어서 黑鼠의 盜性을 항상 억제한다. 그럼으로 최후의 한머리가 白色인지 黑色인지에 의하여 그 사람의 성질이 결정되다고 한다. 즉 최후의 한머리가 黑色인 사람은 盜癖을 가지게 되고 白色이면 善人이 된다고 한다. 이 三鼠說은 아미 支那의 三魂七魄說 因有한 魂鼠說이 결합되어 後世에 造作된 것이 다시 人性의 善惡을 설명하고저 하는 요구와 결부된 것이다.
二鼠說을 말하는 사람은 코ㅅ구멍이 둘 뿐인 까닭이라고 한다. 이것은 原始的 推理로서는 당연한 말이다. 三魂說은 地下界, 墓中, 家廟 內의 位牌에 각각 一魂이 있다는 支那思想이다. 그럼으로 이 二鼠說이 이마 朝鮮 고유한 신앙일 것이다. 두 마리 쥐는 睡眠中 鼻孔으로붙어 나아가는 일도 있다고 하며 심한 者는 자(尺)를 鼻孔下에 받히어 두면 그것을 타고 魂鼠가 나아간다고 하며 더 웃웁은 말은＜26＞ 그렇게 쥐가 나아가는 것을 보았다고 한다. 쥐가 鼻孔으로 나아간다고 하는 것은 要하건대 숨이 鼻孔으로 나아간다는 말을 具像化한 것이다. 二鼠說은 특히 부인들 사이에 많고 나도 아이 때에는 二鼠說의 信者였다. 그러고 三鼠說은 漢學 素養이 있는 사람들 사이에 발견할 수 있는 것을 보더라도 三鼠說은 三魂의 影嚮일 것이다.
二鼠說과 三鼠說은 민간에 普通的으로 있지마는 一鼠說을 말한 이는 咸興의 康錫子 부인이었다. 이러한 말이 咸鏡道에 많이 있는지는 알수 없으나 康夫人도 魂鼠를 생양쥐와 앝고 睡眠 中에는 鼻孔으로붙어 탈출한다고 하었다. 또 그는 朝鮮 각지에서와 未開民族 사이에 거의 보통적으로 있는 思想과 같이 「만일 자는 사람의 얼굴에 황칠을 하던지 자는 사람을 急히 께우면 魂鼠가 얼굴을 잘 못보던지 및어 체내에 들어오지 못함으로 그 사람이 發狂을 하던지 그대로 죽는 때도 있다」고 하였다. 그러하나 二鼠說이 가장 原型에 가깝은 것 같다.
魂으로 새양쥐와 같다고 하는 추리는 어떻게 하여서 引出하였는지는 알 수 없으나 要하건대 쥐는 息氣의 具像化한 것이요 육체는 그 所有主인 魂이 體內에 있는 까닭에 생활하게 되는 것이라고 한다. 이 推理는 내가 설명할 필요도 없이 사람은 숨이 있는 동안 생활하고 생활이 그치자 숨이 없어짐을 잘 알던 原始人의 당연한 이론이었다.
그러하나 死後의 靈魂存在는 많은 다른 사람의 靈魂의 존재에 의하여 명백히 인식된다 하더라도 생활인의 靈魂存在는 어떻게 추리되었는가? 이것도 또한 「夢幻說」로서 설명할 수 있다. 例하면 原始人은 우리와 같이 꿈에 여행을 하였다. 遠方에 있는 友人을 찾아가아 보던지 友人의 방문을 받던지 하였다. 잠을 깨어보면 遠方에 여행하였을 바 자기의 육체는 그대로 寢席 우에 있다. 그리고 지금까지 함께 談話하던 友人은 不知去處로 가고 말았다. 그러면 원시인은 이렇게 생각하였다. 꿈에 여행한 것은 내 몸둥이가 아니요- 몸둥이면 그렇게 빨리 집으로 오아서 依然히 寢席上에 있을 이가 없다.- 내 魂이었으며 나를 찾아온 友人은 육체의 友人이 아니요 友人의 魂이었었다고. 이렇게 원시인은 육체와 靈魂의＜27＞ 對立한 二元說을 가지었었다. 그러고 魂은 자유로 自在한 곳에 出沒할 수 있다고 생각하였다. 古代 朝鮮人의 靈魂不滅設도 이러하였다. 그러고 魂을 육체의 소유주며 생명의 원천이라고 생각하였다.
원시인의 이론에 의하면 「생각할 수 있는 것은 모도 존재하였다.」
後世의 생활- 다시 말하면 死後의 생활에 대하여 고대 朝鮮人이 어떻게 생각하였는지는 容易한 문제가 아니다. 儒, 佛, 仙 모든 사상 중에 오래동안 생활하여온 朝鮮民族은 後世 생활에 관한 고유 사상을 거의 잊어버리었다. 해서 今日의 土俗上 혹은 民間信仰上의 재료로 원형을 抽出하기는 매우 곤란한 일이다. 하나 極樂, 地獄, 化仙思想 외에 막연하나마 他界로 간다는 생각은 일반으로 남아 있다. 그 他界가 地下界로 생각되어 있는 것은 아직도 민간신앙 속에 남아있다. 뿐만 아니라 원래 地下界의 사상이란 埋葬에서붙어 일어난 것이다(주5). 그런데 朝鮮 埋葬 습관은 오랜 옛날붙어 존재하엿다. (次述) 그럼으로 地下界의 사상도 오랜 옛날붙어 존재하었을 것이라고 할 수 있다.
또 或時로 우리 민간신앙은 막연히 지구의 끝가는 어느 곳에 他界가 있다고도 생각한다. 하지마는 그 어느 他界던지 그것이 光明한 現世와 같은 세계가 아니요 항상 幽暗한 세계임에는 異致가 없다. 이만큼은 土俗으로 推理할 수 있으나 他界의 數가 복수인지 혹은 단수인지 他界의 생활이란 어떠한 것인지는 도모지 알 수 없다. (他界가 幽暗하다고 하는 것은 他界人인 精靈이 항상 幽暗한 꿈속과 환상속에 보이는 까닭이다.)
우리 민간 說話上에는 今世에서 善行한 사람이 死後 昇天하여 天軆(日, 月, 星 등)가 되는 일이 있다. 太陽, 太陰, 星, 北斗七星, 三台星은 모도 사람이 죽어 된 것이라고 한다. 또 說話上에는 사람이 昇天하는 일도 있다. 하지마는 실제 信仰上에 死後 昇天說이 거의 없는 것을 보면 그러한 說話는 後世人의 詩的 想像에서 나아온 것이던지 또는 支那思想의 感化上에 발달된 것이요 민간신앙을 토대로 한 것은 아닐 것이다. 說話上의 昇天說은 다만 說話上에만 생명이었을 뿐이다. 하면 昇天思想이 비록 支那의 감화가 아니요 타일러 敎授가 말한 바와 같이 日, 月, 星辰, 天堂을＜28＞ 死魂의 住居로 생가함은 應報思想(Retribution theory)으로붙어 나아온 것임으로 각 민족간에 독립적으로 발생할 가능성이 있다(주7)고 하더라도 그것이 민간 신앙상에 조곰도 생명을 가지지 못한 것을 보면 아무리 해도 長世의 詩的 想像으로 일어난 산물일 것이다.
土俗學的 材料가 이렇게 애매함으로 우리는 다른 방법을 取할 수밖에 없으나 고대의 文獻이 그것을 명백히 가르치어 주는 것도 없다. 하지마는 古記錄으로 그 一面을 窺知할 수는 있다. 즉 朝鮮 고대의 葬式 慣習에 人類學的 해석을 加하면 輪廓을 알 수 있는 것이다. 「三國志」  30 辰韓傳에는
「辰韓... 以大鳥羽送死, 其意欲使死者飛揚」
이란 구절이 있다. 死者의 靈魂을 飛揚하게 하기 위하여 大鳥羽를 死者에게 주었다고 한다. 그러하나 飛揚이란 반듯이 昇天하라는 의미가 아닐 것이다. 例하면 「楚辭」 卷7 招魂 9가 他界의 行路에 관하여 東方에는 千仞의 巨人이 있어 사람의 魂을 구하고 南方에는 黑齒人이 제사를 위하여 人肉을 찾으며 西方의 炎熱은 사람의 육체를 燋爛하게 하고 목말라 물을 구하여도 얻을 수 없으며 北方에는 重冰과 况風 疾雪이 있고 「天門九重, 虎豹守之, 下人有欲上者, 則鑿殺之也」라고 하여 後世ㅅ길의 어렵음을 말하고 「楚辭」 招魂 第十에
「東有大海弱水, ... 南有炎火千里, ... 西方流沙漭洋洋, ... 北流有寒山逴龍」이라고 後世ㅅ길의 險함을 말하여 死魂의 速히 돌아옴을 請招하는 것이라던지 「三國志」 30 烏丸傳에
「烏丸 ... 死者神靈, 歸呼赤山, 赤山在遼東西北數千里, ... 至葬日, ... 使二人, 口誦呪文, 使死者魂神, 經至歷險阻, 勿令橫鬼遮護達其赤山...」
이란 것이라던지 또 다른 未開民이 往往 後世의 길을 험난하다고 생각하는 것(주8)과 같이 昔日의 朝鮮사람도 他界의 險하고 遼遠한 길을 떠남에는 羽翼이 필요하다고 하여 그러한 의미로서 鳥羽를 送死한 것이 아닌가 한다. 그것은 如何間 死者는 반듯이 他界에 가지 않으면 안되었다.(地上에 방황하며 묘지에 발생하는 精靈에 관하여는 第3章에 詳述하려 한다.)＜29＞
他界의 생활은 어떠하다고 생각하였는가? 그것을 설명함에는 殉葬 殉物을 習俗을 보면 대강을 엿붙 수 있다. 殉葬의 習俗이 세계적으로 있는 것은 모든 인류학자가 말하는 바임으로 여긔에서는 생략하며 또 특히 支那 古書에서 漢族, 蒙古族, 滿洲族, 土耳其族 사이의 殉葬 풍속에 관한 材料를 모아준 이는 日本의 重松俊章氏임으로 역시 煩例를 피하고 그것을 보고저 하는 이에게는 重松氏의 논문(주9)을 소개하여 두며 나는 특히 고대 朝鮮의 殉葬과 더욱이 東洋 모든 민족의 殉物에 관하여 論述하고저 한다. 殉物은 殉葬과 함께 原始人의 後世 생활에 대한 관념을 생각함에는 무엇보다도 귀중한 材料다.
「三國志」 3 夫餘傳은
「夫餘... 其死, 夏月皆用氷, 殺人殉葬, 多者以百穀厚葬, 有棺無槨」
이라 전하여 「晉書」 97  馬韓傳은
「馬韓 ...不知乘牛馬, 畜者但以送葬」
이라고 하고 「後漢書」 115 高句麗傳은
「高句麗 ... 金銀財帛, 盡於厚葬」
「隋書」 81 高麗(高句麗)傳에는
「高麗 ... 葬則鼓舞作樂而送之, 埋訖, 悉取死者生時服玩車馬, 置於墓側, 會葬者, 爭取而去」
라는 모든 기록이었다. 또 「隋書」 81 百濟傳은
「百濟 ... 喪則如高麗」
란 것도 있다. 즉 夫餘人은 殉人을 하였으며 많은 殉物(厚葬)도 하였다. 馬韓人은 牛馬를 殉葬하였으며 高句麗人은 金銀財幣를 殉物하였다. 支那의 時代에 이르어서는 高句麗人의 經濟思想의 발달에 의하여 殉物을 死體와 함께 매장하지 아니하고 一次 死者에게 諸種의 물품을 제공한 뒤에- 모든 물품의 精만을- 그것을 會葬者가 分取하게 되었다. 馬韓人이 牛馬를 탈 줄 몰았던 것은 사실일 듯하나 가축을 送葬(殉葬)用으로만 하였다는 것은 물론 과장한 표현일 것이다. 牛馬는 경작과 운반에 사용하였을 것이다. 또 그 牛馬肉은 식용으로도 채용하였을＜30＞ 것이다. (옛날 朝鮮사람이 馬肉을 먹은 證跡은 「高麗史」 107 和傳內의 固城妖民伊金의 말과 成俔의 「慵齊叢話」 권2末의 放翁 이야기를 참조하라.) 그러한 것은 어찌 되었던지.
高麗人과 同種이었던 夫餘族 사이에는 殉人의 풍속이 있었다. 殉人은 夫餘에만 있었던 것이 아니요 新羅의 고대에도 있었다. 「三國史記」 권4 에
「智證麻立干 三年 春三月, 下令, 禁殉葬, 前國王薨, 則殉以男女各五人, 至是禁焉」
이라는 것이다. 이렇게 고대 朝鮮人이 死者를 위하여 사람이며 의복 완구같은 일용물, 牛馬와 같은 가축, 金銀財幣와 같은 귀중품을 殉葬한 것은 무슨 의미였었나? 이 문제는 人類學上의 소위 「繼生說」(주10)(Continnauee theory)로 발서 해결되어 있다. 繼生說이란 死後 생활을 生前 생활의 계속 혹은 연장이라고 보는 사상이다. 그럼으로 「延長說」이라고 하여도 좋을 것이다. 이 繼生說로서 고대 朝鮮人의 殉物 殉人의 의미를 해부하여 보면 後世란 머나먼 곳에 있으며 좀 幽暗한 상태에 있기는 하지마는 거긔에서는 경작 운반 식용을 위하여 車, 牛, 馬도 필요하여 防寒 오락을 위하여는 의복 완구 車 등이 필요하였다. 또 사치를 위하여는 많은 從者와 金銀 財幣도 要用되었다. 現世의 생활과 조곰도 다름이 없다. 하지마는 그러한 모든 재산을 死者가 손수 가지고 가기는 불가능함으로 여긔에서 殉人 殉物의 習俗이 일어나는 것이다. 또 死者의 것을 가족이 가지고 있어서는 死者가 그것을 後世에서 사용할 수 없음으로 그것을 모도 死體와 함께 매장하던지 혹은 소각하여 그것을 死者에게 보낼 수 있다고 생각한 것이다. 소각하면 물품의 精만이 精靈的 존재인 死者에게로 가는 것이라도 생각하였다. 墓側에 일시 殉物을 두는 이유는 이미 설명하였지마는 그것을 會葬者가 가지어 가는 것은 경제적 의미 외에는 死者의 물품을 神聖視하는 관념에서도 기인하였을 것이다. 그러하나 그것은 가족이 가지지 아니하는 한 이유는 死者가 生前의 所有物을 찾고저 하여 누누히 가족에게 병을 준다는 공포에서 일어나았을 것이다. 그 공포관념에서 다시 死者의 물품은 不精하다는 禁忌(Taboo)관념도 일어나았을 것이다. ＜31＞
한데 상술한 殉人 殉物의 습속이 있었다고 하는 것만으로서는 반듯이 朝鮮 고대인들이 繼生說의 신자였을 것이라고는 과학상 단언하지 못할 일이다. 웨 그러냐하면 습속이란 다만 습속만으로 존재하고 의식적 신앙이 수반되지 아니하는 경우가 많다. 예하면 「엄지손가락」이란 말은 「어미 손가락」이란 말이요. 제일 중요하고 큰 手指를 母指라고 함은 太古 母權時代의 유적이라고 할 수 있다. 그러하나 그것이 朝鮮史上에 母權時代가 있었다는 것을 의미함은 아니다. 咸鏡道 방언이 母를 「어마니」라고 하고 祖母를 「아마이」라고 하며 일반 朝鮮語에 叔母를 「적은 어머니」. 伯叔母를 「큰어머니」라고 하여 모도 「어머니」를 의미함은 인류학자들의 말에 의하면 이것은 群婚時代의 유물이라고 한다. 그렇다고 하더라도 그것이 朝鮮에 羣婚時代가 있었던 것을 의미함이라고 말함은 유치한 언어학자의 비과학적 망론이다. 근래 朝鮮 잡지에 흔히 이러한 종류의 笑話가 보이기에 특히 一言하여 둔 바다. 인류학은 민족을 초월함으로 유사를 구하여 그 재료로서 인류의 일반 생활사를 考究하지마는 토속학은 유사보다도 차이를 존중하고 일민족 내의 재료를 수집 분석하여 과학적 비판을 가한 뒤에 비롯오 타 민족과 그것을 비교 연구할 수도 있으며 역사상에 채용할 수도 있는 것이다. 이것은 여담이요. 現今 민간 신앙상으로 보더라도 繼生說의 흔적이 분명히 있다. 민간에서는 死者의 생전 소유하였던 의복 기물을 혹은 기억을 소제하기 위하여 또 혹은 그것을 부정하다 하여 燒棄하기도 하지만는 때때로는 명료한 의식하에 死者에 증여한다는 의미로 燒送하는 일도 있다. 예하면 祖先이 생전의 소유물을 차고저 가족에게 병을 주슗�을 때 가족들은 무녀의 말대로 선조의 所欲을 燒送한다. 이것은 祖先이 후세에서 현세와 같이 諸種의 일용기물 의복등을 생활상 요구한다고 믿는 까닭이다. 다음에
주위 민족- 滿洲族. 蒙古族. 土耳其族. 苗族등에서 殉物의 數例를 들면 「三國志」30 烏丸傳은
「烏丸...始死則哭, 葬則歌舞相送, 肥養犬, 以采繩嬰牽, 並取亡子所乘馬衣物生時服飾, 皆燒以送之, 特屬累犬使護, 死者神靈, 歸乎赤山, 赤山財遼東＜32＞西北數千里, 如中國人, 以死之魂, 歸泰山也, 至葬日, 夜聚親舊員坐, 牽犬馬歷位, 或*哭者, 擲肉與之, .... 然後, 殺犬馬衣物燒之」
라고 한다. 즉 烏丸人들은 死者의 衣服 犬乘馬를 燒送하였으며 개(犬)를 引導者로 하여서까지 燒送하였던 모양이다. 「前漢書」 94上 匈奴傳은
「其送死, 有棺槨金銀衣裳」云云
이라고 하며 「隋書」 83 西域
附國傳은
「有死者, 無服制, 死屍高牀之上, 沐浴衣服被以牟甲, 覆以獸皮, 死家殺牛, 親屬以賭酒相遺, 共飮噉而飛之.」
라고 하여 土耳其族의 弱物에는 衣服, 牟甲, 獸皮外套, 牛豚의 음식등이 있었음을 말한다. 「舊唐書」 196上 吐蕃傳은
「其贊普死, 以人殉葬, 衣服珍玩, 及嘗所乘馬弓劍之類, 皆悉埋之」
라고 하였다. 滿洲族의 것을 보면 「舊唐書」 199下 靺鞨傳에는
「死者, 穿地埋之, 以身襯土, 無棺斂之具, 殺所乘之馬, 於屍前設之」
라고 하고 宋 徐夢莘의 「三朝北盟會編」 卷3 에는
「死者埋之, 而無棺槨, 貴子生焚所寵奴婢, 所乘鞍馬而殉之, 所有祭祀飮食之物, 盡焚之, 謂之燒飯」
이라 하였으며 朝鮮 成俔의 「傭齋叢話」 卷10 野人女眞風俗의 條는
「其葬人也, 穿穴而投尸於其中, 累石爲墳, 設酒飯行祭, 後投瀉酒飯於穴, 與尸相接, 又以平生所愛馬, 係於墳前, 又掛弓矢筒鞬於其上, 待其銷盡, 而人不敢收」云云
이라 하였다. 淸 西淸의 「黑龍江外記」 卷6에는
「富者爲亡人, 焚裘帽一火, 嘗抵千百金, 從前猶焚輿馬, 侵僭之甚」
이라하여었다. 苗族의 殉物에 대하여 陸次雲雲士의 「峒谿纖志」 上卷은 다음과 같이 말한다.
「양獷.... 父母死, 焚其衣冠, 有如贈鬼」
이리하게 殉節의 방법은 燒送, 埋送, 掛送등으로 일정하지 못하나 그것이 死者의＜33＞ 後世 生活을 위하여 贈與하는 思想임에는 다름이 없다. 더욱 재미있는 것은 蒙古人이 死者에게 신발을 붙이어 주는 것이다. 他界까지의 여행에 그것을 사용하란 의미다. 「元史」 77 國俗舊禮가 말하는
「凡宮車晏駕棺, 用香檀木. ... 殮用貂皮襖皮帽靴其멸繫腰, 盒鉢俱用白粉皮爲之, 殉以金壺甁二, 盆一, 椀楪匙筯各一」
이란 것이다. 昔日의 北歐人도 死者의 艱難한 他界 여행을 위하여 死體의 脚部에 신발을 붙이어 주었으며 今日 獨逸의 村民中에도 그러한 풍습이 남아 있다. 뿐만 아니라 村民들은 死者에게 의복의 파열을 꾀매라고 바늘과 실을 붙이어 주기도 한다. 또 歐羅巴人들 사이에는 死者에게 路費로서 少許의 돈을 손에 쥐어주는 풍속이 보통으로 있다.(주11)
이러하게 朝鮮 고대인도 아마 繼生說의 신자였던 것만은 알 수 있다.

第二章 註
(1) A. G. Keller, Societal Evolution, New York 1915, pp. 260, 133ff.
(2) E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture, "Auimism", London, 1871-1920.
(3) Ibid. Vol, ii, pp. 126ff.
(4) Maddox. The Medicine Man, pp. 7ff.
(5) Jevons F. B., Au Introduction to the History of Reliion, p. 299.
(6) Czaplicka, op. cit, p. 278.
(7) Tylor, Primitive Culture, ii, pp. 69-74.
(8) Ibid. pp. 65-68.
(9) 重松俊章 「支那古代殉送の風習に就いて」 (東洋史論叢, 481 - 540頁 所收)
(10) Tylor, op. cit., pp. 69-82.
(11) E. B. Tylor, Authropology : An Introduction to the Study of Man and Civilization New York, 1923, p. 347.
(未完) ＜34＞
＜23-34＞