별건곤 제12·13호
1928년 05월 01일
묵어도 價値 높은 科文詩賦 (Valuable even when neglected: Gwageo Literary Compositions)
논설 (Essay)

Valuable even when neglected: Gwageo Literary Compositions
李光鍾

For over 4,000 years of history, at the head of what I would like to describe as a word to boast to the world, shall I write about the heroic strategies of General Ŭlchi Mundŏk of Koguryŏ and Yang Manch’un, who made the Sui and Tang dynasties unable to even return with a broken piece of armor, daring not even to glance eastward? Shall I record the extraordinary plans and divine power of Kim Yusin, who united the Three Kingdoms and expelled the surveillance of neighboring countries? The pioneering of Tae Choyŏng, the power of Kae Somun, the meritorious service of Kang Kamch’an, and the annihilation of the enemy by Ch’ungmugong—since all of these are already known to the world, not needing my embellishment, as written in stone inscriptions and painted on bamboo and silk, I will not further describe them. Moreover, I am a clumsy old scholar, born and raised in times of peace, lacking in the study of military power and martial prowess, so I must admit my inability to even dip my brush in ink here. However, in wanting to describe the arts of Silla, the pottery of Koryŏ, and the Korean alphabet of Chosŏn… the world already admires these before I can even exaggerate them, leaving no room to repaint the battle array.

Now there is one thing, a single matter worthy of being sung about, worthy of being passed down, and also worthy of contemplation. However, in my describing this one matter, those who see it will surely spit upon it, those who hear it will surely curse it, the old will laugh at it, and the young will imitate it, so that amidst a tumultuous uproar, they will cast me out to a distant, detestable place. I wonder if there will be even one person among 10 million who will sympathize with me. I am prepared that, as a matter of course, my words will be not only unaccepted or defended but rather reviled with terms like "poisonous residue." Nevertheless, I boldly do not hesitate to write. Do not be alarmed by this unhesitating pen; it is none other than the so-called gwagŏ (科擧) poetry and prose of Korean literature. This poetry and prose is a unique product of Korea, forming a distinct category of literature. Fundamentally, denying the gwagŏ system itself or denouncing its abuses is a separate matter. However, regarding the poetry and prose themselves, that is, their artistry, their subtlety, their intricacy, their tightly knit structure, their grand and heroic arrangement, is truly a unique art in the world. In an era of isolationism for several hundred years, the arts of offense and defense, of enriching the country and strengthening the military, were relegated to the sidelines, and heroes had no place to display their prowess. The teachings of Song Confucianism bound people's minds with iron wire, blocking the path of even an inch of thought towards upward progress. In the midst of this, competition for power formed factions, and killings continued incessantly.

Humans are animals, and the mind is a living thing. The innate talents of our people, which often emerge in the mountainous and riverine peninsula of the northern temperate zone, where could they express their exquisite skills? Inevitably, they devoted themselves to literature from a young age. Thus, they dedicated themselves to the poetry and prose that emerged at that time. And so, their innate talents, for their entire lives, were embodied in the emotions of poetry and prose, the ideals of poetry and prose, and the skills of poetry and prose. Therefore, the masterpieces of renowned masters, worthy of endless admiration, are artistic creations of such refinement that even when examining the distant lands of mainland China or Western Europe, there are no equals to be found. Who would agree with this statement? I cannot help but lament. This artistic creation of poetry and prose encompasses the sciences of literature, history, politics, and ethics, and furthermore, its very essence is a brilliant, grand art with the ideas of philosophy. Critics may say, "Can poetry fill the stomach? Can prose keep one warm?" lamenting that heroes waste away in useless versifying. This is a naive statement ignorant of the times, so I do not harshly criticize it. It is not my intention today to advocate for the encouragement and continuation of poetry and prose. The artistic creations of Korean predecessors, who spent their years in diligence within humble mud-walled homes, as a result of the changes of the times, no one even remembers their soul or recites their name, even if one looks back upon heaven and earth. To preserve the literature of the past and to long for our people, it is sufficient to collect and compile the so-called fragments of the Eastern people, the masterpieces of several hundred great masters, into the literature section of an encyclopedia, to reveal its historically unique brilliance to the world. <116>

**Named Entities**

乙支文德	Ŭlchi Mundŏk
高句麗	Koguryŏ
梁萬春	Yang Manch'un
金庾信	Kim Yusin
大祚榮	Tae Choyŏng
蓋蘇文	Kae Somun
姜邯贊	Kang Kamch'an
忠武公	Ch'ungmugong
新羅	Silla
高麗	Koryŏ
朝鮮	Chosŏn
宋儒	Songyu



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	묵어도 價値 높은 科文詩賦
필자	李光鍾
기사형태	논설

묵어도 價値 높은 科文詩賦
						李光鍾
有史 4,000餘載 以來로 세계에 誇張할 其一의 一言을 기술코자 하는 筆頭에 隋와 唐이 片甲이 不還하고 감히 東으로 睨視치 못하게 하든 高句麗 大將 乙支文德과 梁萬春의 雄韜大略을 書하야 볼가. 三國을 倂合하고 隣邦의 감시를 축출하든 金庾信의 奇謨神威를 大書特書할가. 大祚榮의 開拓, 蓋蘇文의 威勢, 姜邯贊의 樹功, 忠武公의 殲敵은 以上 皆 金石의 文字와 竹帛의 丹靑이 筆者의 必을 借하야 贅言을 不待하고 世人의 所共和임으로 更히 기술치 안이할 뿐 안이라 筆者는 迂踈한 老學究라 太平에 生하고 太平에 長하야 兵力과 武威는 涉獵의 攻苦가 素乏함으로 此에는 敢히 霑毫弄墨의＜115＞ 能力이 無함을 자인할 뿐이다. 然則 新羅의 文藝와 高麗의 窯品과 朝鮮의 한글…… 등의 此를 기술코자 함에는 筆者가 과장하기 전에 世人이 이왕 경탄하는 바이라 筆陣圖에 개칠할 여지가 無하다.
今에 一件事가 有하니 此可以詠嘆이오 此可以傳誦이오 亦 可以 思慮할 만한 一件事이다. 然이나 此 一件事를 筆者가 記述함에는 見者-必唾之오 聞者 -必罵之오 老的은 笑之오 小的은 擬之하야 嘩然哄然에 筆者를 遠惡地로 投棄코자 하리라. 1,000만人 中에 1個人이나 筆者와 同情하리가 有할는지 一例로 筆者의 言을 認定 又는 擁護는 고사하고 反히 中毒胎弊等語로 呶呶히 능멸함을 각오한다. 然이나 筆者는 大膽으로 筆을 주저치 안는다. 此 주저치 안는 筆은 勿驚하라. 즉 朝鮮 文藝의 所謂 科文의 詩와 賦이다. 此 詩와 賦는 文學의 一格을 別成한 朝鮮의 特有物이다. 根本的 科擧의 法을 부인하거나 폐단을 唾罵하는 것은 別問題이다. 但 詩와 賦의 자체 卽 其 文藝에 在하야 其 奧妙, 迭蕩, 緊着, 豪雄의 排置規模가 과연 世界의 유일한 文藝일다. 時代가 시대인 鎖國主義 幾 100年間에 進攻退守 富國强兵의 術은 笆籬邊에 付하야 英雄이 用武之地가 無하고 宋儒의 學說은 鐵絲로 頭顱를 縛하야 一寸의 思想이 向上 進展의 道를 墻壁가티 막엇섯다. 개중에 權利競爭은 偏黨을 成하야 殺戮이 陸續의 時代이다.
人은 動物이오. 心은 活物이라. 北溫帶 半島 山河에 往往 배출하는 吾民族의 天賦才藝는 其 精藝를 何處에 露出하얏노 不得已 自幼로 文學에 從事하얏다. 그리하야 당시에 發身하는 詩와 賦에 專力하고 마럿다. 그리하야 天賦의 才藝를 필생토록 寓情이 詩와 賦오 理想이 詩와 賦오 技能이 詩와 賦엿다. 所以로 屈指하든 巨擘의 一唱三歎의 傑作은 大陸 支那이나 遠地 西歐에 考證하야도 匹儔가 無할만한 精選의 文藝일다. 誰가 此言을 首肯하리오마는 筆者는 哀惜하기를 마지 안는다. 此 詩賦의 文藝는 科學인 文學, 史學, 政治, 道德을 包括하고도 又 以上 哲學의 思想이 전혀 其 自體가 燦爛한 一大 文藝이다.  駁論者 曰 詩可飽乎아 賦可暖乎아 하야 無用의 吟詠으로 英雄이 盡 白頭라 하리라. 此는 時代를 不知하는 幼稚의 言임으로 苛責치도 안이하다. 筆者인들 今日에 詩와 賦를 獎勵 繼續하자는 意見이 안일다. 朝鮮의 先輩가 松燈土壁에서 兀兀窮年하든 傑作의 文藝를 時代의 變遷으로 更히 其 魂을 弔하거나 其 名을 誦하느니가 天地를 回顧고하야 1인도 不可見이라. 文의 文藝를 保存하고 我民族을 憧憬함에는 幾 100人의 巨擘大匠의 傑作인 所謂 東人의 斷簡殘篇을 俱收並蓄하야 百科全書 文學篇中에 其 歷史的 唯一한 光輝를 世界에 公開하기 自足한다. ＜116＞
＜115-116＞