잡지명	별건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	世界的으로 자랑할 朝鮮의 十三大 畵家 (Thirteen Korean Painters to Be Proud of Worldwide)
필자	高義東
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

Thirteen Korean Painters to Be Proud of Worldwide
						Ko Ŭi-dong

I have picked up my clumsy brush after a long time with the title of "Pride of Our Art." However, art is too broad in scope. I only want to talk about painting.

But what is pride, and it is very difficult. If there is something to be proud of, it can be done, but if it is difficult, it is truly difficult. However, it is not that there is nothing to be proud of in art, but that the great and brilliant art of ancient times has declined so much in modern times that there is always a feeling of regret and resentment about the present. To make an analogy, it is like an ignorant and poor man who repeats the words that his ancestors lived well with literature and abundant life, without considering his own point of view, and cannot avoid the ridicule of others. Generally, 자랑하는 것(pride) in painting can be expressed in words or language, but it is better to see the work itself. We cannot know the great spirit and mysterious idea of the work only through the phrases written in history or the stories passed down. In other words, if you see the work before your eyes, you can understand everything without saying anything, so it is naturally 자랑(pride), and therefore people cannot help but praise it. Therefore, there is also a deep regret. It is inevitable that we cannot see the works of 상고(ancient times) now, but we cannot help but suppress the feeling that we cannot see even those of the 연대(era) that could have been passed down. However, the regret returns to the fact that it is useless to talk about it. I will briefly introduce that there were famous works from Silla to 근세(modern times), and the names of those who created them.

The Wall Painting of Hwangnyongsa Temple in Kyŏngju - It is said that this was truly a work that robbed 조화(nature). Birds looked at the trees in the painting and wanted to nestle, so they flew over, but slipped and fell on the wall. <129> After a while, when the colors faded and the brushstrokes became faint, others added to it, but the birds never came again. Even if we only imagine this, how can we not know the mysterious beauty that overflows from the brush tip onto the canvas? In addition, the Avalokiteśvara statue of Punhwangsa Temple in Kyŏngju and the Vimalakirti statue of Tanjusa Temple in Chinju were all masterpieces of the world. The person who created these kinds of works is Sŏlgo, a person from the Silla Dynasty who is said to be the originator of our art world.

Tamjing - This is a monk from the Paekche period. In the 11th year of King Mu of Paekche, or the 27th year of King Chinp'yŏng of Silla (the 18th year of Empress Suiko of Japan), he went to Japan and manufactured paper, ink, and colors, and painted the wall paintings of Hōryū-ji Temple. There must have been many other great works besides this, but now the wall paintings of Hōryū-ji Temple are a world-class art that Japan boasts about.

King Kongmin - His name was Chŏn, and his pen name was Ijae or Iktang. As a ruler of the late Koryŏ Dynasty, his style of painting was pure and noble, and it is said that his delicate brushstrokes could steal the work of nature when depicting objects. His famous works include the Daruma Crossing the Sea on a Reed and the Śākyamuni Emerging from the Mountain at Hŭngdŏk Temple, which were rare masterpieces.

An Kyŏn - His pen name was Kado, and his art name was Hyŏndongja. He was a person from the Sejong period of the Yi Dynasty, and he fully expressed the mystery in landscapes and figures. He is said to be the progenitor of the art world for 500 years of the Yi Dynasty. His works included the Azure Green Clouds and White Clouds Painting (Ch'ŏngsan Paegundo) and the 임강완월도(Imgangwanwŏldo) that were owned by the court at the time, and 만학쟁류도(Manhakchaengnyudo) were rare and valuable works.

Ch'oe Kyŏng - His pen name was Sadŭk, and his art name was Kŭnjae. His brushstrokes each obtained the true mystery in figures and landscapes, and his reputation was as great as Hyŏndongja An Kyŏn at the time. Ch'ae Hŭi Returning to Han Painting (Ch'ae Hŭi Kwihando) was a rare masterpiece.
Yi Sang-jwa - His pen name was Kong-u. He was a person from the Chungjong period. From a young age, he was deeply skilled in painting and writing, and his talent amazed people. In the 38th year of Chungjong, he painted the 열녀전(Yŏlnyŏjŏn).

Kim Chi - His pen name was Kyesu, and his art name was Yangsongdang. His brushstrokes were exquisite in figures, landscapes, birds and animals, and grass and insects. At that time, he was called the Three Wonders (Samjŏl) along with the writing of Ch'oe Ip and the famous calligraphy of Sŏkpong Han Ho.
Shin Ssi - Her art name was Saimdang, and she was the mother of Yi Yulgok. She was a person from the Chungjong period. She demonstrated exquisite brushstrokes in landscapes, flowers, and grass and insects, and even now, we can sometimes see fragments of her ink.

Yi Kyŏng-yun - His pen name was Kye-gil, and his art name was Nangp'a. He was a person from the Injong period. His painting style was noble and refined, and he was skilled in figures, landscapes, and birds and animals. He sketched Kŭmgangsan Mountain.

Yi Chŏng - His pen name was Kong-gan, and his art name was Naong. He was a person from the Sŏnjo period. He was skilled in painting from the age of 5, and he achieved great success at the age of 10. He visited Kŭmgangsan Mountain 11 times, and when he rebuilt Changansa Temple, he painted many landscapes and Buddha images on the temple walls. He died at the young age of 30.

Kim Myŏng-guk - His pen name was Ch'ŏnyŏ, and his art name was Yŏndam. He was well-versed in landscapes and figures, and he did not imitate the methods of the ancients, but created his own style. When he went to Japan following the 통신사(Tongsinsa) (ambassador), people regarded even a single piece of paper or a drop of ink as precious as treasure. The Old Hermit Playing Baduk Painting (Nosen Wigi Do) and 烟江曉天圖(Yŏnganghyoch'ŏndo) are all masterpieces that have been passed down through the generations. <130>

Chŏng Sŏn - His pen name was Wŏn-baek, and his art name was Kyŏmjae. He was a person from the Sukjong period. He was skilled in landscapes, and his brushwork was strong and vivid, creating his own style in sketching real scenery. He sketched many famous scenic spots throughout Korea. Therefore, Kyŏmjae was the first painter to sketch landscapes.

Kim Hong-do - His pen name was Sanŭng, and his art name was Tanwŏn. He was a person from the Chŏngjo period. His brushwork was divine in figures, landscapes, and cut branches. He depicted the customs of Korea, that is, the phenomena of society at the time. Tanwŏn was the first painter to sketch the realities of modern times. He also painted 오륜행실(Oryunhaengsil) (Five Moral Rules), but the current versions in circulation are reprints because the original woodblocks were destroyed in a fire. There are many inaccuracies.

In addition to these, there must be others who have created masterpieces, but it is too regrettable that we only introduce their names and eras and that there are no works to pass on. I will end here and look forward to the next opportunity. <131>

**Named Entities**

慶州黃龍寺	Kyŏngju Hwangnyongsa
慶州 芬黃寺	Kyŏngju Punhwangsa
晋州 斷住寺	Chinju Tanjusa
率居	Sŏlgo
曇徵	Tamjing
百濟武王	Paekche Muwang
新羅眞平王	Silla Chinp'yŏngwang
日本推古天皇	Nihon Suiko Tennō
法隆寺	Hōryū-ji
恭愍王	Kongminwang
顓	Chŏn
怡齋	Ijae
益堂	Iktang
安堅	An Kyŏn
可度	Kado
玄洞子	Hyŏndongja
崔涇	Ch'oe Kyŏng
思得	Sadŭk
謹齋	Kŭnjae
李上佐	Yi Sang-jwa
公祐	Kong-u
金禔	Kim Chi
季綏	Kyesu
養松堂	Yangsongdang
簡易	Ch'oe Ip
石峰韓濩	Sŏkpong Han Ho
申氏	Shin Ssi
思姙堂	Saimdang
李栗谷	Yi Yulgok
李慶胤	Yi Kyŏng-yun
啓吉	Kye-gil
駱坡	Nangp'a
李楨	Yi Chŏng
公幹	Kong-gan
懶翁	Naong
金明國	Kim Myŏng-guk
天汝	Ch'ŏnyŏ
蓮潭	Yŏndam
鄭敾	Chŏng Sŏn
元伯	Wŏn-baek
謙齋	Kyŏmjae
金弘道	Kim Hong-do
士能	Sanŭng
檀園	Tanwŏn



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	世界的으로 자랑할 朝鮮의 十三大 畵家
필자	高義東
기사형태	논설

世界的으로 자랑할 朝鮮의 十三大 畵家
						高義東
우리의 美術 자랑이라는 제목으로 오래간만에 서투른 봇을 잡게 되엿다. 그러나 미술이라면 범위가 너무 광범하다. 다만 그림에 대한 말만 하고자 한다.
그런데 무엇이고 자랑이라는 것이 대단히 어렵다. 어려운 중에도 자랑할 만한 것이 잇스면 오히려 할 수가 잇지마는 하기 어려운 경우에 잇서서는 참으로 곤란한 중에도 곤란하다. 그러나 미술이라는 것이 참으로 자랑할 것이 아주 업서서 곤란하다는 것이 안이라 古代에 잇서서는 그 위대하고도 또 燦然하든 그 미술이 근대에 이르러서 너무도 沈衰하여저서 항상 현재에 섭섭하고도 또 寃痛한 늣김이 잇는 까닭이다. 맛치 比喩하야 말하면 무식하고 빈궁한 놈이 자기의 녯날 先祖가 文章에다 豊饒한 생활을 겸하야 잘 지내엿섯다는 말을 옴기여 자기의 見地를 생각지 안이하고 남의 嘲笑를 면치 못하는 것 갓다는 늣김이 잇다는 말이다. 大抵 그림이라는 것을 자랑하는 것은 문자나 혹은 언어로도 표시할 수가 잇겟지만 그것보다도 그 작품을 보게 되여야 하는 것이다. 역사상에 씨여 잇는 文句이나 전래하는 이약이로만은 그 작품의 위대한 정신과 神妙한 着想을 아라내일 수 업다. 다시 말하면 작품을 眼前에 대하면 모든 것을 말하지 안이하여도 알수 잇게 된다는 말이니 重言復言할 것 업시 제절로 자랑이 되는 것이요 따라서 사람으로 하야금 讚美하지 안이치 못하게 되는 것이다. 이럼으로 또한 深切한 유감이 잇다. 上古의 작품을 이제 잇서서 대하야 볼 수 업는 것은 오히려 읏지할 수 업는 일이라 하겟지마는 可히 傳來할 수 잇슬만한 年代에 잇는 것도 또한 볼수 업다는 일에 이르러서는 참으로 넘어도 말할 수 업는 늣김을 억제할 수 업다. 그러나 그 유감은 작구 말을 하야도 별 소용 업다는데로 돌아가고 만다. 新羅 이후로 근세에 이르기까지에 유명한 작품이 잇섯다는 것과 그 작품을 창작한 이의 성명이나 약간 소개하랴 한다.

慶州黃龍寺의 壁畵  이것은 참으로 奪造化한 작품이 엿섯다 한다. 그 그림에 잇는 나무를 鳥雀이 바라보고 깃드리고자 하야 나라왓다가 다만 벽상에 밋그러지고 맛랏다.＜129＞ 을마 후에 彩色이 버서지고 筆劃이 희미하여 진 것을 타인이 補添하엿던 鳥雀이 다시 오지 안이하엿다 하니 이 말로만 들어 追想을 한들 읏지 그 神秘한 妙相이 筆端을 따라 畵面에 넘치는 氣韻을 알수 잇지 안이하랴. 이외에도 慶州 芬黃寺의 觀音像과 晋州 斷住寺의 維摩居四像等이 다 絶世의 珍品이엿섯다. 이러한 等 作品을 지여 내인 이는 즉 우리 미술계에 잇서서 元祖되는 新羅時人에 率居라 명칭하는 이이다.

曇徵  이는 百濟때의 僧이니 百濟 武王11년 즉 新羅 眞平王 27년(日本 推古天皇 18년)에 日本에 渡居하야 紙墨과 彩色을 製造하고 法隆寺 壁畵를 繪字한 이니 이외에 다른 작품도 응당 위대한 것이 만앗지마는 이제 이 法隆寺의 壁畵는 현금 日本에서 세계적으로 참 자랑하는 미술이다.

恭愍王  諱는 顓이요 號는 怡齋 또는 益堂이라 하엿고 高麗末의 임군으로 畵格이 淸高하야 物象을 描寫할제 微妙한 毫端은 능히 天工을 奪하엿다 한다. 그의 高名한 작품은 折葦渡海하는 達摩像과 興德寺의 釋迦出山像 등이 稀世의 珍作이엿섯다.

安堅  字는 可度요 號는 玄洞子요 李朝 世宗時 人이니 山水와 人物에 其 妙를 각각 다하얏고 李朝 500년간 美術界의 鼻祖라 한다. 그의 작품으로는 당시에 궁내에 所藏되엿든 靑山 白雲圖 臨江玩月圖와 萬壑爭流圖 등이 稀貴한 작품이엿다.

崔涇  字는 思得이요 號는 謹齋니 그의 筆韻이 人物 山水에 각각 그 眞妙를 得하야 당시의 玄洞子 安堅과 名聲이 幷振하엿섯스니 蔡姬歸漢圖는 稀世의 珍品이엿섯다.
李上佐  字는 公祐요 中宗時 人이니 幼時로부터 繪書에 工이 深大하야 그의 天才는 사람으로 하야곰 놀납게 하엿스며 中宗 38년에 烈女傳을 畵하엿다.

金禔  字는 季綏요 號는 養松堂이요 그의 筆致는 人物, 山水, 翎毛, 草虫에 精妙치 안이 함이 업섯고 當時에 簡易 崔岦의 文章과 石峰韓濩의 名筆과 더부러 三絶이라 칭하니라.
申氏  號는 思姙堂이오 李栗谷의 母堂이니 中宗時 人이라. 山水와 花卉와 草虫에 精妙한 筆端를 발휘하엿섯스며 지금에도 혹 殘墨短楮를 得見할 수 잇다.

李慶胤  字는 啓吉이요 號는 駱坡니 仁宗時 人으로 畵品이 孤高하야 人物 山水 翎毛에다 工히 沈切하고 金剛山을 寫生한 것이다.

李楨  字는 公幹이요 號는 懶翁이요 宣祖時 人이니 5歲時로부터 畵에 능하야 10歲時에 大成하니라. 11次를 金剛山에 遊覽하야 長安寺를 改搆할때에 寺壁에 山水와 佛影을 多畵하얏고 年이 겨우 30에 卒하니라.

金明國  字는 天汝요 號는 蓮潭이니 山水와 人物에 정통하여 古人의 法을 蹈襲하지 안이하고 자기의 胸襟을 創開하엿스며 通信使를 따라 日本에 渡居하엿슬 때에 時人이 片紙 寸黙이라도 得키만 하면 寶玉가티 역이엿고 老仙圍棋圖와 烟江曉天圖 등은 다 傳世의 絶品이 되엿섯다. ＜130＞

鄭敾  字는 元伯이요 號는 謙齋니 肅宗時 人이라. 山水에 精能하니 그 筆法이 壯健淋漓하야 眞景을 寫生하기에 一家를 自成하얏스니 朝鮮 各處 名勝을 만히 寫生하니라. 그름으로 風景을 寫生한 畵家로는 謙齋가 비롯이니라.

金弘道  字는 士能이요 號는 檀園이니 正宗時 人이요 그의 筆法은 人物, 山水, 折枝 등에 入神치 안님이 업스며 朝鮮의 風俗 즉 당시 사회의 현상을 描寫하엿스니 현대의 實際를 寫生畵家로는 檀園이 비롯이니라. 또 五倫行實을 繪字하얏섯는데 현금 유행하는 本은 原板이 화재에 燒失되엿슴으로 翻刋한 者이라. 失眞한 點이 多하니라

이외에도 傑作을 끼친 이가 물론 잇슬터이나 한갓 姓名이나 年代를 소개함에 지나지 안이하고 또한 작품을 傳하는 것이 업는데 너무도 遺憾이다. 다만 이에 끗치며 이 다음 기회를 기다리고자 한다. ＜131＞
＜129-131＞