잡지명	別乾坤 第12·13號
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	世界絶品 大圓覺師碑와 窣覩婆 (World's Masterpiece: Great Wongaksa Stele and Stupa)
필자	考古生
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

Anyone who visits Seoul will want to see T'apkol Park, and anyone who visits the park will not fail to see the Wongaksa Stele (commonly known as the Turtle Stele) and the marble pagoda inside the park. This Wongaksa Stele is made of marble, with a height of 11 ch'ŏk 5寸 including the dragon head (螭首), and a width of 4 ch'ŏk 5寸. On the surface of the dragon head is the stele plaque, engraved with the six characters "大圓覺寺之碑" (Tae Wongaksa Chi Bi) in seal script (篆字), which is the calligraphy of Kang Hŭimeng, a famous calligrapher during the Yi Dynasty's Songjong period. The stele inscription on the front was written by Kim Suon (Koea), a literary official during the Sejo period, and was personally transcribed by Song Im, who was famous for his writing and calligraphy during the Songjong period. Furthermore, the text on the back was written by Sŏ Kŏjŏng (Saga), and the calligraphy was by Chŏng Nanjong. The carvings of the dragon head and turtle base (龜跌) are exquisite, and because it possesses the handwriting of the aforementioned two great writers and three great calligraphers, it is a precious artifact called the Six Wonders Stele of Chosŏn.

Due to centuries of wind and rain, the letters on this stele have mostly peeled off, making it difficult to see anything other than the seal script on the stele plaque. However, it can be understood well by referring to other old records (for example, the Sok Tongmunson). The Wongaksa Temple was originally the Hŭngboksa Temple during the Koryŏ Dynasty, and it was rebuilt during the Sejo period of the Yi Dynasty and renamed Wongak, taken from the Wongakgyŏng (Perfect Enlightenment Sutra) in Buddhism. The history of the temple can be well understood through the stele inscription below.

In the summer of the 10th year of Sejo, Prince Hyoryŏng (孝寧君) (補) erected a stone bell on the east ridge of the Hoiam Temple (檜巖寺) (Hoiam-sa, in Yangju-gun, Kyŏnggi-do) and placed the sarira of Sakyamuni, then held a Dharma assembly to lecture on the Wongakgyŏng. That evening, the Tathagata appeared in the sky, and auspicious energy spread everywhere, causing the sarira to divide into over 800 grains. On the Kapin day of May, Prince Hyoryŏng recorded the spiritual traces and presented the sarira to the King. The King, along with the Queen, paid homage in the Sŏwŏn Hall, and the court officials submitted memorials to offer congratulations, granting a general amnesty throughout the country. Subsequently, the old site of Hŭngboksa Temple was rebuilt and named Wongaksa Temple, with a circumference of 2,000 paces.

Hŭngboksa Temple was designated as the main temple of the Chogye Order when Taejo established the capital in Hanyang. Following the abolition of the order, the temple was also abandoned and became a government office. On the Ŭlmyo day of June in the 10th year of Sejo, the King personally visited this place and said, "Paegak Mountain镇鎮the north, and Mongmyŏk Mountain 供the south. The location faces Yang, and the land is refreshing and bright, making it suitable for building a great temple." Immediately, he ordered Prince Hyoryŏng to be the director and supervise the project. First, a temporary building was constructed in Chang-u, and the construction of the Buddha hall began. Suddenly, a yellow cloud covered the roof, and auspicious signs of falling 空flowers appeared. Prince Hyoryŏng and others rushed to report to the King. The King, seated in Kŭnjŏng Hall, received the congratulations of the assembled officials and granted amnesty. <134> He bestowed one rank of nobility upon all officials. Furthermore, on the Kapsin day of September, auspicious energy soared above the main hall and reached the Sŏwŏn Hall, so the workers gathered and completed the construction by the Ŭlmyo day of October. The Buddha hall stands majestically in the center, named the Great 光myŏng Hall. To the left is the Zen room called 禪室, and to the right is 雲集. The gate is named 寐光, and the next gate is called Panya (般若). The outer gate is called the 解脫 Gate. There is a bell tower called the 法雷閣, and a supply factory called the 香寂療. To the east, a pond was dug and planted with lotuses (扶渠), and to the west, a garden was opened and planted with flowers. Behind the main hall, the sutras are stored and called the 海藏殿. Furthermore, a 13-story stupa (窣覩婆) (called T'ap (塔) in Sanskrit) was built to enshrine the 分身sarira and the newly translated Wongakgyŏng. The scale of its grandeur and the beauty of its renovation were unmatched.

On April 8th of the following year, the yunsŏk (韻釋) of various mountains were summoned to hold a Dharma assembly and 转落the new Wongakgyŏng. Again, on April 8th of the following year, when the stupa was completed, a Dharma assembly was held, and the King personally attended. Countless monks, nuns, Taoists, and laypeople looked up and paid homage, and upon returning to the palace, they offered songs. The citizens and women of the capital danced and rejoiced.』

According to this, the construction of the temple began in June of the 10th year of Sejo, and the project was completed in October of the same year. The completion ceremony was held on April 8th of the following year. (According to the Sejo Sillok, April 7th of the 11th year, "Wongaksa Temple completed, held a celebration assembly, 128 monks attended the assembly, examined the 御定口訣, translated the Wongak Su T'ara 了義經, fed 20,000 supporting monks, and visited Wongaksa Temple on this day.") Also, regarding the time of the stele's establishment, according to the stele inscription, it was erected on April, 成化 7th year, which corresponds to the 2nd year of King Songjong of Chosŏn, and 1471 in the Western calendar, 456 years ago from now. Originally, this stele was planned to be erected immediately after the creation of Wongaksa Temple, and Sejo had the literary official Kim Suon write the text. However, because the King passed away, the stele could not be erected. Later, during the reign of Songjong, Sŏ Kŏjŏng wrote the 음記, and Kang Hŭimeng, Song Im, and Chŏng Nanjong wrote the stele plaque and the stele inscription, respectively.

Next, regarding the stone pagoda, some people in the world say that it was the pagoda of Yuan Chancellor T'ŏlt'ŏlbogwa (脫脫不花) of the Koryŏ era, created by Yuan people, but that is the talk of the ignorant and not worth paying attention to. According to the aforementioned stele inscription and the Sejo Sillok, it was completed on April 8th of the 12th year of Sejo (1467 AD - 461 years ago from now), and the completion ceremony was held on April 8th of the following 13th year. (The stele inscription says, "又明年 四月八日 (卽 世祖 11년4월 8일) 以 窣覩婆成, 轉法會," and the Sejo Sillok, April 8th of the 13th year, records that "The Wongaksa Temple pagoda was completed, and a lantern lighting ceremony was held to celebrate.") However, the pagoda body, like the Wongaksa Stele, is also made of marble, with a height of about 40 ch'ŏk. The pagoda's foundation is made of three layers of granite. Combining the upper seven stories and the lower three stories, it is also called a 10-story pagoda, and adding the three-story foundation, it is also called a 13-story pagoda. On the four sides of the upper seven stories of the pagoda, Buddha images are carved, and on the four sides of the lower three stories, the diagrams of the 12 assemblies (Yŏngsan, Three Worlds Buddhas, Mita, Yonghwa, Wongak, Hwaŏm, Tabo, Pŏphwa, Chŏndan, Sosae, Yaksi, Nŭngŏm) are carved. There are plaques recording the names of each assembly, and dragons, lions, Sudan, figures, birds, beasts, lotus leaves, grass, trees, arhats, palaces, etc. are engraved on all three layers of the foundation. The ingenuity of the craftsmanship is enough to amaze people. It is a great treasure in the architectural history of the Yi Dynasty and a world-class treasure. <135>

**Named Entities**

孝寧君	Hyoryŏnggun
檜巖寺	Hoiam-sa
金守溫	Kim Suon
乖厓	Koe-a
成任	Sŏng Im
徐居正	Sŏ Kŏjŏng
四佳	Saga
鄭蘭宗	Chŏng Nanjong
姜希孟	Kang Hŭimeng
別乾坤	Pyŏlgŏn'gon
</a>脫脫不花	T'ŏlt'ŏlbogwa
漢陽	Hanyang
白岳	Paegak
木覓	Mongmyŏk
高麗	Koryŏ
李朝	Yi dynasty
曹溪宗	Chogye Order



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제12·13호
발행일	1928년 05월 01일
기사제목	世界絶品 大圓覺師碑와 窣覩婆
필자	考古生
기사형태	논설

世界絶品 大圓覺師碑와 窣覩婆
						考古生
서울의 구경을 하는 사람은 누구나 塔洞公園을 한번 보랴고 할 것이요 그 공원을 구경하는 사람은 또한 그 공원 안에 잇는 圓覺寺碑(俗稱 거북碑)와 大理石塔을 보지 안이치 못할 것이다. 이 圓覺寺碑는대리석으로 맨긴 것이니 룡머리(螭首)까지 합하야 高가 11尺 5寸이요 幅이4尺 5寸이니 룡머리 표면에는 碑額이 잇서서「大圓覺寺之碑」6자를 篆字로 삭엿스니 그것은 李朝 成宗때에 명필 姜希孟의 親筆이요 碑의 前面의 碑文은 世祖때에 文臣 金守溫(乖厓)의 지은 것으로 成宗때에 文章으로 또는 명필로 유명한 成任이 親書하얏스며 또 後面의 文은 徐居正(四佳)이 짓고 字는 鄭蘭宗이 썻스니 룡머리와 거북 바탕(龜跌) 등의 彫刻이 奇妙함은 물론이요 上記한 2大 文章과 3大 名筆의 手蹟이 具備한 까닭에 朝鮮의 6絶碑라 稱하는 貴重品이다.
이 碑는 屢 100年間에 風磨雨洗하야 文字가 모도 剝落되엿슴으로 碑額 篆書 이외에는 잘 볼수가 업스나 다른 녯 기록에 참조하면 잘 알수 잇다. (例 如續東文選) 圓覺寺라는 절은 원래 高麗때의 興福寺로서 李朝 世祖때에 다시 重建하고 이름을 圓覺으로 고친 것이니 佛經의 圓覺經에서 取來한 것이다. 그 寺의 沿革은 이하의 碑文에 의하야 잘 알 것이다.
『世祖 10년 夏4월에 孝寧君(補)이 檜庵(京畿道 楊州郡 檜巖寺)의 東岡에 石鐘을 세우고 釋迦의 舍利를 置한 후 法會를 設하야 圓覺經을 講하니 是夕에 如來가 相을 공중에 現하는데 瑞氣가 彌布하더니 舍利가 800여粒으로 分身함으로 5월 甲寅의 日에 孝寧君은 그 靈跡을 具하고 舍利를 奉하야 上께 聞하니  王은 王妃와 共히 舍元殿에서 頂禮를 하고 百官은 箋을 上하야 賀을 稱하며 中外에 大赦를 行하고 이에 興福寺의 舊刹을 重營하야 이를 圓覺寺라 名하니 周圍가 2,000步이다.
興福寺는 太祖가 都를 漢陽에 定하던 때에 曹溪宗의 本寺로 삼엇더니 宗旨가 革罷됨을 따러 寺도 또한 廢하고 公廨가 되엿다가 世祖 10년 6월 乙卯日에 王이 親히 此에 幸하야 曰 白岳은 北을 鎭하고 木覓은 南에 供하고 位Š” 陽에 面하고 地는 爽塏하니 맛당이 大刹을 建함이 可하다 하고 곳 孝寧君을 命하야 提調를 삼고 그 役을 監莅케 한 후 먼저 假屋을 長隅에 構하고 佛殿을 造하기 始하얏더니 忽然히 黃雲이 屋上을 덥히고 空花繽墮의 瑞象이 잇슴으로 孝寧君 등은 馳하야 王겟 啓하니 王이 勤政殿에 御하야 羣臣의 賀를 受하고 赦를 肆하며＜134＞ 百官에게 爵 1級을 賜하고 또 9월 甲申의 日에는 正殿上에 瑞氣가 騰湧하야 舍元殿에 連瓦함으로 이에 役徒가 坌集하야 10월 乙卯에 이르러 終을 告하얏다. 佛宇는 중에  峙하야 額을 大光明殿이라 賜하고 左를 禪室 右를 雲集이라 하며 門을 寐光이라 하고 次의 門을 般若라 하고 그 外門을 解脫門이라 하얏다. 栖鍾의 宇가 잇스니 法雷閣이라 하고 供辨의 廠이 잇스니 香寂療라 하며 東偏에는 沼를 鑿하야 此에 扶渠(蓮)를 植하고 西에 園苑을 開하야 花卉를 植하며 正殿의 後에는 藏經을 藏하고 海藏殿이라 칭하얏다. 又 窣覩婆(梵書에 稱塔曰 窣覩婆) 13層을 建하야 分身舍利及新譯圓覺經을 安置하니 規模의 壯麗와 輪奐의 美는 其儷가 鮮하얏다.
翌年 4월8일에는 諸山의 韻釋을 召하야 法會를 設하고 新圓覺經을 轉落하고 又 明年 4월8일에는 窣覩婆 成하니 法會를 設하고 王이 또 한 親幸하니 僧尼 道俗의 瞻仰觀拜하는 자가 億萬에 計하고 還宮에 及하야는 歌謠를 獻하고 都人 士女가 *舞踴躍하얏다.』
此에 依하야 보면 寺의 起工은 世祖 10년 6월이오 役을 畢하기는 그 해 10월이고 落成式은 그 익년 4월 8일이다.(世祖實錄 11년 4월 7일 記錄에 「圓覺寺成, 設慶讚會, 赴會僧一百二十八, 披覽御定口訣, 翻圓覺修多羅了義經, 飯外護僧二萬, 是日幸圓覺寺」또 碑를 건립한 시기에 관하야는 그 碑文에 의하면 成化 7년 4월 日立이라 하얏슨 즉 成化는 明의 憲宗의 年號로 朝鮮 成宗 2년에 해당하고 西紀로는 1471년이니 距今 456년 前이다. 원래 이 碑도 圓覺寺를 創建한 즉시에 立하기로 계획하야 世祖가 文臣 金守溫으로 文을 撰케 하얏스나 王이 昇遐하심으로 碑를 立하지 못하고 후에 成宗때에 이르러서 徐居正으로 陰記를 撰하고 姜希孟, 成任, 鄭蘭宗등 3人으로 碑額, 及 碑文을 書케 하야 此를 立한 것이다.
次에 石塔에 관하야는 일부 俗間에서 말하기를 高麗時代의 元承相脫脫不花의 願塔으로 元人의 造作한 것이라 하나 그 것은 沒識者輩의 言이라 족히 齒할바 안이거니와 前述한 碑文이라던지 世祖實錄에 의하면 世祖 12년 4월 8일에 竣工하야(西紀 1467-距今 461年前) 翌 13년 4월 8일에 落成式을 行한 것이다.(상기 碑文에 云하되 又明年 四月八日(卽 世祖 11년4월 8일)以窣覩婆成, 轉法會라 하고 世祖實錄 13년 4월 8일 記事에 圓覺寺塔成, 說燃燈會以落成云云) 然而 이 塔身은 圓覺寺碑와 가티 역시 大理石으로 造成하얏스니 高가 약 40척이오 탑의 基壇은 3層의 花岡石으로 造成하얏는데 상부 7층과 하부 3층을 合하야 10층 塔이라고도 하고 又 此에 3층 基壇까지 느어서 13층탑이라고도 한다. 탑의 상부 7층에는 四面에 佛像을 刻하고 下部 3층에는 四面에 12會(靈山, 三世佛, 彌陀, 龍華, 圓覺, 華嚴, 多寶, 法華, 旃檀, 消災, 樂師, 楞嚴)의 圖를 刻하고 此에 各會명을 記한 匾頗가 잇고 又 基壇에는 3層에 共히 龍, 獅, 收丹, 人物, 鳥獸, 蓮葉, 草木, 羅漢, 宮殿 등을 鐫하얏스니 그 工藝의 巧妙함은 足히 人을 놀낸만하야 李朝 建築史上에 一大 貴重品인 동시에 세계적으로 자랑할만한 가치가 잇다. ＜135＞
＜134-135＞