別건곤 제14호
1928년 07월 01일
歷代叛逆者列傳, 二十四歲靑年으로 自稱 大金皇帝 李澄玉 (Biographies of Past Rebels: Yi Ch’ŏng-ok, a 24-Year-Old Youth Who Called Himself Emperor of the Great Jin)
壽春學人
문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Biographies of Past Rebels: Yi Ch’ŏng-ok, a 24-Year-Old Youth Who Called Himself Emperor of the Great Jin
Such’un Hak’in

Tiger of Tigers

People of the world may admire Hsiang Yu of China, who at the age of 24, crossed the river with 8,000 youths from Kangtung to overthrow the powerful Ch'in dynasty. However, in our Chosŏn, even more remarkably and unexpectedly, a great hero emerged in the year of Hsiang Yu's crossing, gaining fame throughout the land and dreaming of becoming the Emperor of the Great Jin (大金皇帝). He was Yi Ch’ŏng-ok of Yangsan during the reign of King Sejong of the Yi dynasty. (Ch’ŏng-ok is sometimes referred to as Ch’weng-ok, and some say he was from Asan, but considering the Yangsan Ŭpji and that Ch’ŏng-ok's older brother, Ch’ŏng-sŏk, was the Lord of Yangsan, it is undoubtedly that he was from Yangsan). He was the great-grandson of Minister Yi Man-yŏng. From a young age, he possessed the strength of a legendary strongman and was a master archer capable of hitting the target 100 times out of 100. When he shouted while holding a bow, even the fiercest tigers and giant bears would not dare to move and would close their eyes and fall to the ground dead from a single arrow.

It was when he was 14 years old. His older brother, Ch’ŏng-sŏk, was also a strongman, four years older than Ch’ŏng-ok (18 years old). Their mother, wanting to test the strength and archery skills of her two sons, summoned them one day and ordered, "I have never seen a wild boar (山猪). Go together and catch one." Ch’ŏng-ok and his brother listened to the command and immediately went to a large mountain. Ch’ŏng-sŏk caught a large boar that day and returned, but Ch’ŏng-ok came back empty-handed two days later. His mother, feeling strange, said, "Everyone says that Ch’ŏng-ok is superior to Ch’ŏng-sŏk in strength and archery, but today it seems quite different from what I heard. What is the reason for this?" Only then did Ch’ŏng-ok kneel and tell his mother, "I have driven a live boar as it is outside the gate, so please go and see it." When his mother went out, she saw a boar as big as a mountain, with no arrow marks, lying there with its eyes closed, barely breathing. <2>

Originally, Ch’ŏng-ok wanted to show his mother the boar alive, so he neither shot it with an arrow nor struck it with his fist, but just drove it day and night through the mountains and fields until the boar was exhausted, then captured it as it was.

His mother was greatly surprised and also found it extraordinary, loving Ch’ŏng-ok even more and always warning him to be cautious.

He once went to K’imhae to visit and requested an audience with the magistrate (府使), but the magistrate, regarding him as a mere scholar, disdained him and refused the meeting. Unable to do anything, he returned. On the way, he arrived at a place with dense bamboo groves and two or three houses. A beautiful young woman was crying loudly. Ch’ŏng-ok, finding it strange, asked her what was wrong. She said that her husband had just been taken by a tiger, and the tiger was in the bamboo grove across the house, eating her husband. Any ordinary person would be terrified at those words, feeling chills and trembling. However, as he originally caught tigers more easily than a cat catches mice and was full of chivalry, he was enraged by the words. He flexed his arms and rushed into the bamboo grove, grabbing the tiger's neck with one hand and drawing his sword with the other, slicing open the tiger's belly. The human flesh had not yet decayed. Ch’ŏng-ok took all the human flesh from the tiger's intestines and had the woman collect it. He also skinned the tiger and gave the hide to the woman, telling her to report it to the government office. The woman bowed many times in gratitude, and the magistrate was also greatly surprised. He sent someone to apologize for refusing the meeting earlier and requested to meet him again, but he did not listen and returned as he was. <3>

Abandoned by a Proud and Heartless Wife, He Flees into the Darkness

No matter how great a hero one may be, in times of poverty, even one's own wife and concubines, let alone others, look down on them and harbor thoughts of betrayal. This is the sad reality of human nature. When Su Ch’in returned home from Loyang in poverty, his wife did not even get off the loom. Chu Mai-ch’en's wife betrayed him and remarried. Later, when Mai-ch’en became wealthy, she swept the road in his procession and, ashamed, hanged herself. Such things did not only happen in China. Even a great figure like Yi Ch’ŏng-ok had such secret sorrows. His wife was naturally arrogant and always looked down on Ch’ŏng-ok's poverty. Eventually, she betrayed him and fled with another man at night. As he was originally a quick-witted man, he did not make a big deal out of it, but how could he not feel resentment in his heart? Later, when he became the Military Commissioner of Ryŏngnam, he still remembered it. To show his authority and wealth to the woman who had been his wife, he would sometimes deliberately gather all the county magistrates and military officers in front of her former husband's house for a grand joint hunt. He would call her former husband and give him hundreds of captured birds and beasts. The man was initially terrified but later impressed, and people admired his generosity.

Magistrate of Kanggye at Eighteen

At the young age of 18, he passed the military examination and was promoted beyond the ranks, becoming the magistrate of Kanggye. After Kim Chong-sŏ resigned as Military Commissioner of the North and returned, he recommended Ch’ŏng-ok as his successor to King Sejong, who appointed him as the Military Commissioner of the North. King Sejong greatly loved and trusted him. When he left, the king held his hand and said, "I will not call you unless there is a major event in the country, so rest assured and defend the border well."

After Ch’ŏng-ok went to his post, he selected strong men from the Six Garrisons (六鎭) skilled in riding and archery from among the northern barbarians (蕃胡) and assigned them to his command, organizing them into units. The Ts’ŏngnyŏng barbarians (曾寧胡) were in white armor and rode white horses; the Chongsong barbarians (鐘城胡) rode blue camels and wore blue clothing. He distinguished other areas in the same way, training them diligently every day. Within a few years, he had over 3,000 elite troops who were unmatched in the world. Whenever Ch’ŏng-ok inspected each county, they would come out to the county borders to greet and escort him. His dignity was so impressive that he could be called the king of the northern lands. Ch’ŏng-ok crossed the Tuman River, inspecting various places and ruling the indigenous barbarians with both kindness and authority. Those who submitted were allowed to live along the riverbanks, while those who were disobedient were expelled far away. He also made a decree, saying, "Those who violate my orders will be killed." Even those who did not follow the orders slightly were immediately executed. After patrolling the river for more than ten days, no barbarian <4> could be seen.

However, some of the politicians at the time, full of suspicion and distrust, discussed, "If we select the barbarians and include them in the military register and make them soldiers, Ch’ŏng-ok can command and order them well for a time, but it will be difficult for others to do the same. We do not know if it will be a future problem."

They ordered it to be abolished. Ch’ŏng-ok had no choice but to disband them, comforting them with kind words, saying, "Since you have already turned to righteousness and submitted, you are all now people of the country. You only need to settle down and farm, and there will be no land tax or forced labor. If we bind you by law and force you to serve in the military, it would be too much. Therefore, from now on, military service is especially exempt." The barbarians all just disbanded without saying anything, but they always respected and feared Ch’ŏng-ok and responded accordingly.

Declares Himself Emperor of the Great Jin

It was the year Kyech’uk (癸丑) of the first year of King Tanjong. Sejo was planning to usurp the throne of Tanjong, and Han Myŏng-hoe, Kwŏn Ram, Hong Yun-sŏng and their group, who supported him, first killed Kim Chong-sŏ and Hwangbo In, who were the trusted ministers of Tanjong. However, there was another dangerous figure: Yi Ch’ŏng-ok, the Military Commissioner of Hamgyŏng Province, who had been a close confidant of Sejong and successive kings, had a deep friendship with Kim Chong-sŏ, had long been on the border, held immense military power, and whose reputation was renowned both internally and externally. If he was left alone, even if the coup was successful, there would be much concern for the future. Moreover, if he heard the news of the assassination of Kim Chong-sŏ and other important ministers and raised troops to question the crime, no one could know what would become of Sejo's faction. Thus, Sejo and others conspired to assassinate Yi Ch’ŏng-ok, and appointed Pak Ho-mun to replace Ch’ŏng-ok's position. They sent him swiftly with a light cavalry to summon Ch’ŏng-ok. At first, Ch’ŏng-ok was suspicious, handing over the seals and general documents to Ho-mun and setting out for the capital. After traveling for a day and arriving in Kilchu, he suddenly thought again, "The Military Commissioner is an important position in the country, but Ho-mun suddenly came to replace me without any news. Moreover, when the court initially sent me, there was an internal order that they would not call me unless there was a major event in the country. Doing this must mean that there is some conspiracy or plot inside." He returned to Kyŏngsŏng and asked Pak Ho-mun the reason. Ho-mun hesitated and did not answer properly. Ch’ŏng-ok became greatly angry, arrested Ho-mun, made him kneel, sat on the chair, and scolded him, saying, "If you do not confess, I will behead you immediately." Ho-mun could not hide it and confessed everything. Ch’ŏng-ok was enraged and beheaded Ho-mun with one stroke. He then commanded his troops to mobilize that day and head south to Kyŏngsŏng to eliminate the traitors in the government. However, he said again, "How can a great man go to the narrow Kyŏngsŏng to argue right and wrong with children? <5> I have originally made my reputation in the Shanrong. Now, I must cross the river and occupy Oguk-sŏng (五國城), the capital of the Jin, and command the northern regions, declaring myself the Emperor of the Great Jin (大金皇帝)!" He promised to cross the river the next day. How grand and decisive were his words and ambitions!

Alas, When Fortune Fades, What Regret Is There?

However, when the time is not right and fortune is not favorable, even a roc is insulted by a sparrow, and even a fierce beast is killed by a small mouse. At that time, the magistrates of the Six Garrisons (六鎭) were all under Ch’ŏng-ok's command. Among them, Magistrate Chŏng Chong (鄭種) of Chongsong (鍾城) (The Haedong Yagŏn and other records say that the magistrate of Chongsong was Chŏng Ch’ong (鄭悰) or magistrate Chŏng (鄭某) of Hoeryŏng, but according to the Chongsong Ŭpji, magistrate Chŏng Chong was in office at that time, so it is true that it was Chŏng Chong) had originally harbored dissent against Ch’ŏng-ok. Now, with his narrow-mindedness, he wanted to make a name for himself and ingratiate himself with the government. He plotted to betray Ch’ŏng-ok. That day, he was the one who persuaded Ch’ŏng-ok to stay one more day before crossing the river. That night, Chŏng secretly hid two strongmen with long swords in the ceiling of the house where Ch’ŏng-ok was staying, planning to kill him while he slept. At that time, Ch’ŏng-ok was leaning on a chair, feigning sleep. A certain child, sleeping under the chair, suddenly woke up and told Ch’ŏng-ok, "I dreamed that my father's brain blood flowed down to my legs." Ch’ŏng-ok said, "That is a good omen." Before the words were finished, Chŏng Chong entered and gave the military signal. The two strongmen dropped down from the ceiling with long swords and cut off Ch’ŏng-ok's right arm while he was off guard. Ch’ŏng-ok was startled and stood up, drawing his sword and holding it in his left hand. He immediately killed the strongmen and rushed out as a rebel, killing hundreds of Chŏng Chong's followers. He himself died in a hail of arrows, and his sons Cha-wŏn, Yun-wŏn, and Ch’ŏltong were also brutally killed. Alas, the grand ambition of the Emperor of the Great Jin (大金皇帝) vanished like a fleeting dream. Ch’ŏng-ok was only 24 years old at the time. Looking at Yi Ch’ŏng-ok's failure briefly, it may seem like the failure of Yi Ch’ŏng-ok as an individual, but looking at the entire Chosŏn people and examining the history of Chosŏn afterward, Ch’ŏng-ok's failure was the greatest loss for all of Chosŏn. At that time, if he had not been killed by petty figures like Chŏng Chong and had crossed the Tuman River with his grand ambitions and indeed established the Great Jin Kingdom (大金國), it could have become a great power like the old Koguryŏ or Parhae. If he had then subjugated the Ch’ing and connected it with the Chosŏn mainland, it would have become the strongest and largest country in the East, perhaps avoiding the humiliation of the Japanese and Manchu invasions. However, it was also destiny; what could be done? It only leaves heroes a thousand years later unable to suppress their regrets.

Postscript: Ch’ŏng-ok's older brother, Ch’ŏng-sŏk, passed the military examination with top honors and rose to the rank of Vice Minister of the Chungch’ubu. During the reign of Sejo, he was awarded the third-class merit of the Left Wing for suppressing the Yi Si-ae Rebellion and was ennobled as the Lord of Yangsan (梁山君), with the posthumous title of Changgang (莊剛). <6>

**Named Entities**

項羽	Hsiang Yu
江東	Kangtung
秦	Ch'in
朝鮮	Chosŏn
李朝	Yi dynasty
世宗	Sejong
梁山	Yangsan
李澄玉	Yi Ch’ŏng-ok
徵玉	Ch’weng-ok
牙山	Asan
梁山邑誌	Yangsan Ŭpji
澄石	Ch’ŏng-sŏk
梁山君	Lord of Yangsan
李萬英	Yi Man-yŏng
金海	K’imhae
府使	Magistrate
蘇秦	Su Ch’in
洛陽	Loyang
朱買臣	Chu Mai-ch’en
嶺南節度使	Military Commissioner of Ryŏngnam
江界府使	Magistrate of Kanggye
金宗瑞	Kim Chong-sŏ
北道節度使	Military Commissioner of the North
咸吉道都節度使	Military Commissioner of Hamgyŏng Province
朴好問	Pak Ho-mun
吉州	Kilchu
端宗	Tanjong
世祖	Sejo
韓明澮	Han Myŏng-hoe
權擥	Kwŏn Ram
洪允成	Hong Yun-sŏng
皇甫仁	Hwangbo In
六鎭	Six Garrisons
曾寧胡	Ts’ŏngnyŏng barbarians
鐘城胡	Chongsong barbarians
豆滿江	Tuman River
五國城	Oguk-sŏng
鄭種	Chŏng Chong
鍾城府使	Magistrate of Chongsong
鄭悰	Chŏng Ch’ong
海東野言	Haedong Yagŏn
鍾城邑誌	Chongsong Ŭpji
會寧	Hoeryŏng
李施愛亂	Yi Si-ae Rebellion
左翼功	Left Wing
莊剛	Changgang
滋源	Cha-wŏn
潤源	Yun-wŏn
鐵同	Ch’ŏltong
高句麗	Koguryŏ
渤海	Parhae



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제14호
발행일	1928년 07월 01일
기사제목	歷代叛逆者列傳, 二十四歲靑年으로 自稱 大金皇帝 李澄玉
필자	壽春學人
기사형태	문예기타

歷代叛逆者列傳, 二十四歲靑年으로 自稱 大金皇帝 李澄玉
						壽春學人
호랑이의 호랑이

세상 사람들은 支那의 項羽가 24세의 청년으로 江東子弟 8000인을 거나리고 當時 天下莫强의 秦나라를 처바시랴고 渡江而西한 것을 퍽이나 장하게 녁일 것이다. 그러나 우리 朝鮮에는 그보다도 더 엄청나고 엉뚱스럽게 項羽渡江之年甲에 벌서 이름을 천하에 뜰치고 大金皇帝를 꿈뀌인 大豪傑 大英雄兒가 잇섯스니 그는 李朝 世宗 때의 梁山 사람 李澄玉이다. (澄玉은 혹 徵玉이라고도 하고 또 牙山 사람이라고도 하는데, 梁山邑誌라던지, 澄玉의 형 澄石이 梁山君인 것을 보면 梁山 사람인 것이 無疑하다). 그는 판서 李萬英의 증손이니 어렷슬 때부터 힘이 천하장사이고 활이 百步穿楊의 명궁이엿다. 활을 들고 한번 소리를 치면 제 아모리 猛虎巨熊이라도<2> 감히 꿈적을 못하고 두눈을 저절로 감고 땅에 업듸여서 한 활살에 죽엇섯다.
그가 14세때엿다. 그의 형 澄石은 역시 장사로 澄玉보다 4세가 더 만헛섯는데(18세) 그의 어머니는 자기 두 아들의 힘과 활쏘는 재조를 한번 시험하야 보랴고 하루는 澄玉의 형제를 불너서 命令하되 내가 이때까지 산도야지(山猪) 구경을 못하얏스니 너히는 가티 가서 도야지 한 마리를 잡아 오라 하엿더니 澄玉의 형제는 그 명령을 듯고 즉시에 엇던 큰 산으로 갓섯다. 澄石은 당일에 큰 도야지 한 마리를 잡아 가지고 왓스나 澄玉은 2일후에 도라오는 데도 空手로 왓더니 그 어머니는 이상이 녁여 갈오대 세상 사람이 모도 말하기를 澄玉이는 힘이던지 활이 던지 澄石보다 우승하다 하더니 오늘에 보니 듯던 바와는 아주 딴판이니 그것이 무슨 가닭이냐 하니 澄玉이 그제야 꿀어 안저서 그 어머니에게 엿주어 갈오대 문밧게 生도야지를 그대로 모라다 노왓사오니 가서 보시라 함으로 그 어머니가 나아가 본즉 과연 산떰이 카티 큰 도야지가 활 한대도 마진 곳 업시 그대로 눈을 감고 누어서 힐덕거리고 잇섯다.
그것은 원래 澄玉이가 그 어머니에게 살은 도야지를 그대로 뵈여 드리랴고 활로 쏘거나 주먹으로 따리지도 안코 그냥 모라 가지고 산과 들로 밤낫 촟차 다니다가 도야지가 기진맥진한 다음에 그대로 잡아 가지고 온 것이엿다.
그의 어머니는 그것을 보고 크게 놀내며 또한 귀특이 녁이여 澄玉을 더욱 사랑하고 항상 자중하기를 警戒하엿섯다.
그는 일즉이 金海 땅에 놀너 갓다가 府使에게 面會를 請하엿더니 府使는 그를 일개 서생으로 알고 업수히 녁여 면회 사절을 하엿섯다. 그는 할수업시 그대로 도라 오다가 한 곳을 다다르니 죽림이 욱어지고 2,3의 人家가 잇는데 엇던 젊은 어엽분 여자가 放聲大哭을 함으로 澄玉은 怪異히 녁여 물어본 즉 자기의 남편이 方今에 호랑이에게 물녀 갓는데 그 호랑이는 당장 그 집 건너편 죽림 속에 잇서서 자기의 남편을 잡아먹는 중이라 한다. 범상한 사람 가트면 그 말만 드러도 무서워서 그 자리에서 소름이 끼치고 불불 뜰 것이다. 그러나 원래에 호랑이 잡기를 고양이의 쥐잡는 것보다 더 쉽게 잡고 의협심이 풍부한 그는 그 말을 한번 드리매 怒氣가 衝天하야 팔을 뽐내고 죽림 속으로 뛰여드러 한 손으로 호랑이의 멱두시를 잡아 끄으러내고 또 한 손으로 칼을 빼서 호랑이의 배를 갈으니 사람의 고기가 아즉 삭지도 안엇섯다. 澄玉은 호랑이 창자에 잇는 사람의 고기를 모도 꺼내서 그 여자로 하야금 수습케 하고 또 호랑이의 가죽을 벽겨서 여자에제 주고 관가에 報하게 하니 그 여자가 百拜射禮하고 府使 또한 크게 놀내 사람으로 하야금 전일에 면회 사절한 사과를 하고 다시 만나기를 청하얏스나 그는 듯지안코 그대로 도라갓섯다.<3>

驕妻無情暗野逃

아모리 영웅호걸이라도 빈천할 시대에는 다름 사람은 그만두고 자기의 妻妾이라도 업수히 녁이고 反心을 먹는 것이 야박한 우리 인간의 상례이다. 蘇秦이가 洛陽에서 곤궁하야 집에 도라가매 그 처가 벼틀에서 나리지도 안이하고 朱買臣의 처는 買臣을 배반하고 달리 시집을 갓다가 買臣이 귀하게 된뒤에 그의 行次 길을 쓸다가 붓그러워서 목을 매여 죽은 일이 잇섯다. 그러한 일이 엇지 誌那에 뿐만 잇스랴. 이 李澄玉가튼 고걸에게도 남모르게 속을 태우던 그러한 비애가 잇섯다. 그의 처는 본래 성질이 驕傲하야 항상 澄玉의 빈천한 것을 업수리 녁이더니 결국 그를 배반하고 밤을 타서 다른 사람과 가티 도망을 갓섯다. 그는 원래 炔活한 남아인지라 그것을 그다지 문제도 삼지 안엇스나 於心에야 엇지 이즐 수 잇섯스랴. 그는 뒤에 嶺南節度使가 되엿슬 때에도 역시 그것을 잇지 안이하고 자기의 威儀와 귀히 된 것을 그 처되엿던 여자에게 한번 뵈키기 위하야 어는 때에는 일부러 그 본처의 後夫家門前에다 各 郡守 令將官을 모다 모아 聯合大獵을 하고 그 妻의 後夫를 불너 포획한 鳥獸 수백마리를 주니 그 사람이 츠음에는 크게 恐惶하다가 다시 감복하고 세상 사람들도 또 그의 아량을 감탄하엿다.

十八歲에 江界府使

그는 18세의 소년으로 일즉이 무과에 급제하고 18세에는 超遷하야 벌서 江界 府使가 되엿더니 金宗瑞가 北道節度使를 사직하고 도라 온 뒤에 世宗大王께 그 후임자로 薦하야 드듸여 北道 節度가 되니 世宗이 크게 사랑하고 신임하야 떠날 때에 친히 손을 잡고 말슴하되 국가에 큰 일이 잇기 전에는 너를 불으지 안을 것이니 안심하고 변경을 잘 직히라고 하시엿다.
澄玉은 그 任所에 간 뒤로 六鎭蕃胡의 말 잘 타고 활 잘 쏘는 장정을 선발하야 다 부하에 隷屬하고 隊伍를 편성하되 曾寧胡는 白馬, 白衣로 하고 鐘城胡는 靑駝馬, 靑衣로 하며 다른 곳도 그와 가티 各色으로 구분하고 날마나 열심히 교련하니 불과 數年之內에 天下莫能 當할 精兵 3천여명을 가지게 되엿섯다. 그들은 澄玉이 각군을 순시할 때마다 郡境에 나와 모다 迎送을 하니 그 威儀 가 실로 당당하야 북륙의 왕이라 可謂할만 하엿다. 澄玉은 豆滿江을 건너서 각지를 巡歷하며 토착의 胡人을 恩威로 並治하야 歸化하는 자는 江濱에 거주케 하고 불순하는 자는 멀리 축출하며 또 約하야 갈오대 내의 令을 犯하는 자는 죽인다 하고 小毫라도 令에 좃지 안는 자는 즉시 斬刑을 하니 강을 지내가기 십여일에 胡人<4> 影子도 볼 수가 업게 되엿다.
그러나 孤疑가 만코 猜忌가 만흔 당시 일부의 위정자들은 의논하되 蕃胡를 뽑아다가 軍籍에 늣고 군병을 삼으면 澄玉은 일시에 능히 指揮 命令을 잘 할 수 잇스나 다른 사람은 그와 가티 하기가 어려울 터인즉 도로혀 후환이 될는지도 알 수 업다하고.
革罷하기로 명하니 澄玉은 또한 엇지 할 수 업시 그것을 파하고 다만 조흔 言辭로 慰諭하야 갈오대 너희들이 이미 義에 向하야 귀화 하엿슨즉 다 유리의 인민이라 다만 耕作에 安業케 할분이오 土稅와 力役은 업서도 可할지니 만일에 법령에 拘束하야 軍籍에까지 복역케 한다면 너무 과한 구속인즉 이후부터는 병역은 특히 면제한다하니 너무 蕃胡가 다 아모 말도 업시 그저 解兵할 뿐이엿스나 항상 澄玉을 敬慕하고 무서워하야 向應하엿섯다.

自稱大金皇帝

端宗元年癸丑이다. 世祖는 端宗의 왕위 簒奪을 계획하니 그것을 翊贊하는 韓明澮, 權擥, 洪允成의 무리들은 第一의 착수로 먼저 端宗의 顧命重臣인 金宗瑞, 皇甫仁 등을 죽이게 되엿다. 그러나 그밧게 일대 위험의 인물이 잇서스니 그는 물론 世宗 이래 역대의 親臣으로 金宗瑞와 莫若의 誼가 잇고 오래동안 邊境에 잇서서 莫大한 兵權을 가지고 威名이 내외에 혁혁한 咸吉道都節度使 李澄玉이엿다. 그를 그대로 둔다면 아모리 反正의 功을 이를지라도 장래의 염려가 적지 안을 것은 물론이고 당장이라도 金宗瑞가튼 重臣을 살해한 소식을 듯고 問罪의 反兵을 이르키면 世祖 일파의 운명이 如何는할지 알수가 업슬 것이다. 그리하야 世祖이외 某某 인물들은 다시 李澄玉을 살해하기로 음모하고 이에 朴好問으로 澄玉의 職을 代케 하고 輕騎로 疾馳하야 澄玉을 소환하니 츠음에 澄玉은 심상이 녁이고 印綏와 일반 文簿를 다 好問에게 인도하고 京師를 향하야 길을 떠낫섯다. 하루 길을 행하야 吉州까지 오다가 홀연이 다시 생각하되 節度使는 국가의 중직 이어늘 好問이 소식도 업시 졸지에 와서 직을 代하고 또 당초에 조정에서 자기를 보낼 때에 국가에 대사가 업스면 불으시지 안켓다는 內命이 잇섯슴에 불구하고 이와 가티 하는 것은 필경 내면에 무슨 음모 흉계가 잇는 것이라 하고 다시 경성으로 달녀가서 朴好問을 보고 연유를 물은즉 好問이 우물 쭈물하고 대답을 잘하지 안이함으로 澄玉이 크게 노하야 好問을 잡아내서 꿀여안치고 床에 올나안저 크게 꾸지저 갈오되 네가 자서한 말을 하지 안이하면 당장에 목을 베히리라 하니 好問이 敢諱치 못하고 일일이 자백하니 澄玉이 분노하야 一刀之下에 好問을 斬殺하고 이에 군사를 號令하야 당일에 動兵하고 남으로 京師를 향하여 정부에 잇는 奸細輩를 掃淸하겟다고 하다가 다시 말하야 갈오대 대장부가 엇지 區區하게<5> 좁다란 京城에 가서 小兒輩들과 가티 흑백을 가리리오. 내가 본래에 威信이 山戎에 낫타낫스니 이제 맛당이 강을 건너 가서 金의 都城인 五國城을 차지하고 북방에 호령하야 스사로 大金皇帝가 되겟다하고 翌日에 강을 건너가기로 약속하니 그의 말과 포부가 얼마나 壯絶하고 快絶하냐.

鳴呼. 英雄運去恨奈何

그러나 時가 利치 못하고 運이 吉치 못하면 大鵬이라도 뱁새의 무리에게 욕을 보고 맹수라도 小鼠에게 죽는 법이라. 그때에 六鎭의 판관들이 모다 澄玉의 부하에 잇섯는데 그중 鍾城府使 鄭種은 (海東野言과 기타 기록에 鍾城判官 鄭悰 혹은 會寧 判官 鄭某라 하얏스나 鍾城邑誌에 考하면 그때 府使 鄭種이 재임하얏슨 즉 鄭種인 것이 사실이다) 본래부터 澄玉에게 이의를 품고 잇다가 이때에 이르러서 좁다란 소견으로 자기의 공을 세우고 당시 정부에 阿附코자 하야 澄玉을 圖코자 아엿으니 그날에 澄玉이 바로 강을 건너갈 것을 一日간 체류케 한 것도 이 鄭種이가 勸止함이엿다. 當夜에 種은 미리 澄玉의 유숙하는 집의 天井속에 力士 2인으로 장검을 가지고 매복하엿다가 澄玉의 잠든 틈을 타서 害하기로 계획하엿섯다. 그때에 澄玉은 의자에 依하야 假寐를 하더니 某子가 의자 밋헤 엄되려 자다가 홀연이 이러나 澄玉에게 고하야 왈 꿈을 뀐 즉 부친의 뇌혈이 흘너서 다리에까지 이르럿다 하거늘 澄玉이 갈오되 그것은 길몽이라 하더니 말이 맛치지 안어 鄭種이 드러오며 軍號를 하니 두 力士가 天井으로부터 장검을 두르고 나려와서 무심중에 잇는 澄玉을 처서 우편 팔을 끈어르리는 지라. 澄玉이 놀나 이러나서 그 칼을 빼아서 왼손에 들고 당장에서 역사를 처죽이고 역신으로 뛰여나가 鄭種의 도당 수백인을 죽이고 자기도 亂箭중에 죽으며 그의 아들 滋源, 潤源, 鐵同 등도 무참하게 다 피해하니 鳴呼大金皇帝의 雄圖도 그만 일장의 춘몽으로 살아지고 澄玉의 그때 나희는 겨우 24세의 청년이엿다. 그런데 그대에 李澄玉의 실패는 잠간보면 李澄玉 일개인의 실패라 하겟지만은 조선민족의 전체로 보고 또 그후 조선의 역사를 따저본다면 澄玉의 실패는 전조선에 대하야 그러한 손실은 업다. 그때에 그가 鄭種이 가튼 小兒輩에게 죽지안코 그의 웅대한 포부와 가티 豆滿江을 건너가서 과연 大金國을 건설하얏더면 녯날의 高句麗나 渤海가튼 대강국도 될 수 잇슬 것이요 따라서 淸露를 다 복속하고 조선본토와 연결을 한다면 東方莫强莫大國이 되야 후일 임진과 병자의 치욕을 면하얏슬지도 몰낫슬 것이다. 그러나 그는 亦運인데 奈何하랴 다만 千載下 영웅으로 하야금 滿腔의 한을 금치 못할 뿐이엿다.
附記 : 澄玉의 형 澄石은 무과 장원으로 관이 判中樞府事에 이르고 世祖때에 李施愛亂을 평한 공으로 左翼功 3等勳에 梁山君을 봉하고 謚는 莊剛이엿다.<6>
<2-6>