별건곤 제14호
1928년 07월 01일
中國의 僣稱大元帥, 怪傑 張作霖, 馬賊에서 大元帥까지 (The Usurping Grand Marshal of China, Eccentric Chang Tso-lin, From Bandit to Grand Marshal)
燕京僑人 (An Overseas Resident in Yanjing)
문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

Was he a lucky man or an unlucky man in modern China? Chang Tso-lin, who rose from the origins of a mere bandit, wore the false crown of Fengtian and commanded the entirety of the Three Eastern Provinces, and even entered Beijing to wear the glittering golden crown of Grand Marshal, intoxicated by momentary wealth and glory. As the Blue Sky White Sun flag (靑天白日旗) of the Southern Army swept the world, he sang of unfavorable times and, turning his back on the setting sun falling on Mount Wan-shou, retreated like a snail to his home base of Fengtian, only to meet a sudden disaster on the way, tragically passing away at the age of 54. Regardless of his usual conduct and principles, one cannot but call him a hero of his time and lament, "Where is he now?" He was born in the year Eulhae of the Gwangseo era (King Tae of Joseon year 12, 1875) in the humble village of Jangsa-chon in Haeju County, Bongcheon Province. His ancestor was Na Yeom-min, who moved from Gajeon Prefecture, Jikrye Province, across the treacherous passage of Shanhaiguan to Gihaeju County due to a great famine in the early years of the Dogwang era. His biological father was also a rogue without a fixed occupation, always engaging in gambling and sometimes joining groups of bandits to plunder nearby villages, so the villagers always avoided him as an unapproachable figure.

Chang Tso-lin was the second son of that rogue. Because his family was originally extremely poor, he experienced much hardship from a young age. When he was only 10 years old, his licentious father died of illness at the farmhouse of his old acquaintance, Jeon Gillin Governor-General Chang Jak-sang's birthplace, in Geunhyang Uihyeon. Without a penny in his pocket, he couldn't even afford a funeral, so he couldn't return to his hometown for burial and had to make do with a temporary burial by the roadside, thanks to the grace of Chang Jak-sang's birthplace.

After his father died, his mother, who was still young and reputed to be a beauty, could not bear the difficulties of life and, upon the advice of many people, remarried. Tso-lin followed his older brother, Tso-bok (already deceased), to live with his stepfather. However, as the saying goes, "Can a stepdad be a real dad?" He did not receive much love from his stepfather, and feeling sorry for everything, he left home at the age of 16 and went to work as a servant at an inn in a small village called Geunchon Dohwa-bo. Who at that time would have known that he would become the Grand Marshal of China in the future?

He entered the military world at the age of 20, when he was in his prime. Initially, he became a private soldier under Cavalry Captain Cho Deuk-seung, a commander of a mounted troop. He also participated in the Sino-Japanese War, and from that time on, he already demonstrated his genius in martial arts, standing out prominently among the soldiers, which earned him special favor from Cho. However, a good horse is not meant to be constantly whipped by a clumsy groom. No matter how much Cho loved him, he was not content with being a mere soldier. So, before long, he left Cho's command and returned to his hometown to start the family business of selling "cow and horse medicine". However, the signboard said "Cow and Horse Medicine Merchant," but his real profession was gambling. Gambling is a specialty of the Chinese people and a daily routine in the Chinese army. He learned it in the military as well. He worked as a medicine merchant and gambled, traveling around and associating with various rogues. He earned the reputation of being an even worse delinquent than his father. Then, at the age of 22, he finally drifted to Gwangnyeong and joined the Green Forest. At that time, the great leader of the Liaoxi bandits, Dong Mun-ho, was so famous for his courage that he shook all of China, and the government army dared not approach him. He became Mun-ho's adopted son and received extraordinary trust. In that group, where those who were good at murder, arson, and robbery were considered top-notch, he, with his considerable background and skills due to his hereditary family tradition, would naturally have received much affection. Thus, around the year Gwangseo 20, when the Tuanfei Incident erupted, he already had over 30 heroes under his command, engaging in great activities and great exploits.

His first wife, Lady Cho, was a beauty whom he abducted after attacking the wealthy Cho family under Sinmin Prefecture. His beloved son, Chang Hak-ryang, was also born from her. It was also around this time that he formed brotherly bonds with former Gilin Governor-General Chang Jak-sang and former Chahar Military Governor Chang Gyeong-hwe, and became close friends with the current Rehe Military Governor Tang Ok-rin, among others.

As time went by, it became the year Gwangseo 29. At that time, the Prefect of Sinmin Prefecture, Jeung-un, was greatly concerned about the bandits rampaging in all directions, disturbing the people, and decided to pacify the bandits first in order to suppress them. He sent an envoy to Chang Tso-lin, who had the greatest power at the time, to appease him. Chang Tso-lin, even though he was rampaging through the world as a bandit, believed that it was inherently against justice and humanity and could not continue permanently. He suddenly realized his error and, despite the fierce opposition of his close subordinate Chang Gyeong-hwe, resolutely decided to respond to Jeung-un's invitation. He organized a cavalry battalion of over 200 men and became its commander himself, joining the government army. Thus, his eight years of Green Forest life came to an end. Yesterday's bandit leader became a government soldier overnight and even became the commander of a cavalry battalion, at the young age of 29. From then on, he advanced rapidly like the rising sun, becoming the Fengtian General, the Inspector General of the Three Eastern Provinces, and the Governor-General of Mongolia, finally assuming the position of Grand Marshal on June 8 of the 16th year.

Now, Chang Hak-ryang, the eldest son of Chang Tso-lin, who is said to have succeeded him as the Military Governor of Fengtian, is a new figure in the Feng faction. After graduating from Fengtian Military Academy with honors, he became a regimental commander at the age of 20, a division commander at the age of 22, and last year, at the age of 28, he became the commander-in-chief of the Henan Front Army of the Anguk Army, demonstrating his martial prowess. Now, he has become the Fengtian Supervisor-General.

As the saying goes, "A tiger father has no dog son." Following his father's ways, he is originally spirited and intelligent. Tall and fair-skinned with clear and handsome features, anyone who sees him at first glance would consider him a dignified nobleman. Having received a new education, he is fluent in English and also skilled in dancing, earning him the title of "flower boy" in the Fengtian diplomatic circles. On the Double Ten Day, October 10th of the year before last, which is the anniversary of the Republic of China, during the military parade of the Anguk Army stationed in Beijing, he reviewed the troops together with Gu Wi-gyun, a prominent Chinese diplomat and Prime Minister known both domestically and internationally. On that day, his demeanor and actions were praised by both civilian and military officials, who said that he was no less than a seasoned general from any so-called civilized Western country.

However, as a young man, he made a major misstep a few years ago when he was betrayed by Deputy Commander-in-Chief Guo Song-ryeong while he was away, failing in his campaign. He could not escape his beloved father's scolding and was temporarily ordered to be exiled to Tianjin. The world is paying close attention to what his actions will be like in the future and what his fate will be.

**Named Entities**

掌寺村	Changsa-chon
海城縣	Haeju County
羅炎民	Na Yeom-min
直隷城	Jikrye Province
河間府	Gajeon Prefecture
山海關	Shanhaiguan
義縣	Uihyeon
前吉林督瓣張作相	Jeon Gillin Governor-General Chang Jak-sang
掌作相	Chang Jak-sang
作霖	Tso-lin
作福	Tso-bok
近村圖河堡	Geunchon Dohwa-bo
趙得勝	Cho Deuk-seung
日淸戰爭	Il-Ch'ŏng Chŏnjaeng
廣寧	Gwangnyeong
遼西馬賊	Yoseo bandits
董文虎	Dong Mun-ho
趙家	Cho Family
新民府	Sinmin Prefecture
張學良	Chang Hak-ryang
前察哈爾都統張景惠	Former Chahar Military Governor Chang Gyeong-hwe
義兄	Ŭihyŏng
現任熱河都統湯玉麟	Hyeonim Reha Dut'ong T'ang Ok-rin
新民府知府增韞	Sinmin-bu Chibu Chŭngun
奉天	Pongch'ŏn
蒙彊經略使	Monggwang Gyŏngnyaksa
奉天士官學校	Pongch'ŏn Sagwan Hakkyo
安國軍	An'guk Kun
河南方面軍	Hŏnam Pangmyŏn Kun
奉天監軍	Pongch'ŏn Kamgun
天津	T'ianjin
郭松齡	Kwak Song-nyŏng
顧維鈞	Ku Wi-gyun
北京	Peking
萬壽山	Man-su san
奉天省	Pongch'ŏn sŏng
北京城	Peking-sŏng
義父	ŭibu
吉林	Kirin
遼西	Yoseo
熱河	Rehe
支那	China
雙十節	Ssangssipchŏl
國務總理	Kukmu chongri
```


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제14호
발행일	1928년 07월 01일
기사제목	中國의 僣稱大元帥, 怪傑 張作霖, 馬賊에서 大元帥까지
필자	燕京僑人
기사형태	문예기타

中國의 僣稱大元帥, 怪傑 張作霖, 馬賊에서 大元帥까지
						燕京僑人
근대 中國에 幸運兒라 할가 悲運兒라 할가  일개 馬賊의 출신으로 奉天의 假王冠을 쓰고 東三省 一幅을 호령하다가 다시 北京城까지 드러가서 金色 찬란한 大元帥의 榮冠을 쓰고 一時 부귀영화에 도취하던 兩亭張作霖씨는 南軍의 靑天白日旗가 천하를 風靡하는 바람에 時不利兮를 노래하며 萬壽山에 떠러지는 석양을 등지고 가재의 거름과 가티 뒤로 물너서 自家의 本窟인 奉天城으로 도라 오다가 도중 奇禍를 만나 54세를 일기로 하고 애처럽게 영원한 길로 가고 말엇다. 그의 평소의 行事와 主義야 엇더 하엿던지 一世之雄이라 안이 할 수 업고 따라서 於今 安在의 歎을 發하지 안을 수 업다. 그는 光緖 元年 乙亥(李太王 12년 서기 1875)에 奉天省 海城縣의 일개 寒村인 掌寺村에서 고고의 소리를 내엿섯다. 그의 祖先은 道光初年에 큰 흉년을 만나 直隷城 河間府로부터 山海關의 險地를 넘어서 記海城縣으로 이주한 羅炎民이엿다. 그의 實父는 또한 일정한 직업이 업는 무뢰한으로 항상 도박에 종사하고 엇던 때에는 草賊의 무리에 석기여서 부근의 촌락을 약탈하니 동리 사람들이 항상 기탄하야 不可近의 인물로 녁이엿다.
張作霖은 그 무뢰한의 第二子로 집이 본래 극빈한 까닭에 어렷을 때부터 별반의 고초를 다 맛보왓다. 겨우 10세되는 해에 그 란봉의 부친이마나 近鄕義縣의 舊知-前吉林督瓣張作相의 生家의 農家-에서 병이 드러 죽엇섯다. 주머니 속에 낏친 돈이 한 푼도 업는 그는 장사좃차할 도리가 업섯서 고향으로 返葬도 못하고 葬作相의 생가 집 恩澤으로 그럭저럭 路邊에 假葬을 하고 말엇다.
그의 부친이 죽은 뒤에 아즉도 芳年이요 美人의 평판을 듯던 그의 모친은 생활의 곤난을 견듸지 못하는 중에 여러 사람의 권고로 인하야 다름 사람에게 개가를 가게 되엿섯다. 作霖은 그의 兄 作福(巳死)과 가티 모친을 따라서 義父의 집으로 가서 살게 되엿다. 그러나 진소위 청국장이장이며 의붓아비가 아비냐는 말과 가티 그는 義父의 사랑을 잘 밧지 못하매 萬事를 다 슬피보고 16세 때에 표연히 집을 떠나 近村圖河堡라는 조고만 村에 가서 남의 집 여관에서 심부름을 하엿섯다. 당시에 그를 누가 미래 中國의 大元帥가 될 줄 알엇스랴.

그가 軍界에 몸을 던지기는 년령이 方壯한 20세 때엿다. 츠음에는 당시 馬隊管帶官 騎兵 大隊 趙得勝의 從卒이 되엿섯다. 日淸戰爭에도 從軍을 하엿서는데 氏는 그때부터 벌서 天才의 武藝를 發揮하야 여러 軍卒속에서 嶄然히 두각을 낫타 냄으로 趙氏에게 특별한 사랑을 바덧섯다. 그러나 良驥는 원래에 拙僕에게 鞭撻만 밧는 바가 안이다. 아모리 趙씨가 그를 사랑할지라도 구구한 군졸 노릇하기는 마음에 만족지 안엇섯다. 그리하야 얼마되지 안어 趙씨의 幕下를 버리고 다시 고향으로 도라가서 世代家傳之業인 「牛馬藥」의 行商業을 시작하얏섯다. 그러나 간판만<56> 牛馬藥商이지 專業은 도박이엿다. 도박은 支那人의 특기인 동시에 支那軍隊의 일과거리다. 그가 그것을 하게 된 것도 역시 군대에서 배운 것이다. 그는 약상도 하고 도박도 하며 사방으로 도라 다니며 여러 무뢰한과 교유하엿다. 乃父 이상으로 더 불량청년이라는 패호를 드럿섯다. 그리다가 22세의 때에는 결국 廣寧으로 飄浪하야 몸을 綠林에 더지엿다. 당시 遼西馬賊의 大魁 董文虎는 勇名이 支那천하를 震駭하야 官軍이 감히 접근치도 못하던 터이엿다.氏는 文虎의 수양자가 되어 남다른 신임을 바덧섯다. 殺人-放火-掠奪-일반 난폭한 행동을 잘하는 자로 上品 인물을 삼는 그 무리 속에서는 원래 世傳家風으로 리력과 手腕이 상당한 그는 물론 총애를 만히 바덧슬 것이다. 그리하야 光緖 20년경 團匪事件이 勃發할 때에는 벌서 30여명의 豪傑兒 部下를 다리고 대활동 대활약을 하엿섯다.

氏의 第一夫人 趙씨는 그때 그가 新民府下의 富豪 趙家를 습격하고 약취한 美人인데 현재 氏의 愛子인 張學良君도 이 趙娘의 몸에서 나흔 것이엿다. 前吉林督瓣張作相과 前察哈爾都統張景惠와 義兄의 의를 맷고 現任熱河都統湯玉麟 등과 막약의 친구가 된 것도 그때의 일이엿다.
그렁저렁 光緖 29년이 되엿섯다. 때에 新民府知府增韞은 匪賊이 사방에 할극하야 인민을 소란케함을 크게 걱정하고 그것을 取締하기 위하야 먼저 馬賊을 회유하게 되엿다. 누구보다도 당시에 가장 큰 세력을 가지고 잇는 張作霖에게 宣撫使를 보냇섯다. 張趙霖은 비록 馬賊으로 天下를 橫行하는 터이라도 그것은 원래 正義人道에 버서나는 일로 언제이던지 영구하게 진행할 것은 안이라 생각하고 一朝에 익*연히 改悟하고 자기의 부하 심복인 張景惠의 猛烈한 반대가 잇슴에 불구하고 맹연히 결심하고 增韞의 招撫에 응하야 200여명의 부하로 騎兵 일대대를 편성하고 스사로 대장이 되야 官軍에 귀화하니 綠林생활의 8년의 幕도 이에 終을 맛치고 昨日 馬賊의 대장은 一朝에 反히 官軍이 되고 兼하야 騎兵大隊長까지 되니 때에 그의 년 29세의 壯年이엿다. 伊來 氏는 旭日 昇天의 세로 점점 躍進하야 奉天 將軍이 되고 東三省의 巡閱使가 되고 蒙彊經略使가 되엿다가 16년 6월 8일에는 遂히 大元帥까지 就任하엿다.

이제 그의 뒤를 니여서 奉天의 督軍이 되엿다고 傳하는 氏의 長子 張學良君은 奉派 中 新人物이다. 奉天士官學校를 우등으로 졸업한 뒤에 20세에 旅團長, 22세에 師團長, 28세인 작년네는 安國軍의 河南方面軍의 總大將이 되야 武勇을 발휘하고 또 이제는 奉天監軍이 되엿다.
원래 虎父에는 犬子가 업다고 君은 父風을 바더서 元來 精悍하고 機智가 잇는 中 長身白晢에 眉目이 淸秀하야 一見하면 누구나 당당한 貴公子로 복게 되엿다. 신교육을 바든 외 영어를 잘하고 舞蹈도 또 잘하야 奉天派外交界에 花形兒의 칭호를 밧는다. 재작년 10월 10일 즉 支那共和國의 기념일인 雙十節에 北京駐屯安國軍의 閱兵式을 거행할 때에 君은 彼 支那外交家요 國務總理로 內外 名聲이 정정한 顧維鈞과 가티 閱兵을 하엿는데 당일에 君의 태도 행동은 내외 文武官이 다 讚嘖稱歎하야 소위 文明하얏다는 서양 어느 나라의 노련한 대장보다 지지안는다고 하엿다.
그러나 청년이 원래 청년인지라 몃해 전에 자기가 외출한 중에 副總司令 郭松齡에게 실패를 본 것은 出身以來 大失策으로 자기의 愛父에게도 怒責을 免치 못하고 天津으로 一時 逐出의 命을 당하엿다. 이 뒤에 君의 행동은 과연 엇더하며 또 장래 운명은 엇더할는지 세인은 크게 주목하는 바이다.<57>
<56-57>