잡지명	別乾坤 제14호
발행일	1928년 07월 01일
기사제목	全朝鮮女子庭球大會評判記, 第六回大會를 보고 (A Critique of the All-Joseon Women's Tennis Tournament, Report on the 6th Tournament)
필자	李吉用
기사형태	소식 (News)

A Critique of the All-Joseon Women's Tennis Tournament, Report on the 6th Tournament
						李吉用

It was a mere six years ago that the athletic world of Joseon could be seen as having emerged from its crippled state. Since the establishment of the "Joseon Sports Association" (朝鮮體育會) nine years ago, in the year of <i>gimi</i> (己未, 1919), it has made steady efforts and activities for the athletic community of our peninsula. However, it was unfortunate that this was limited to encouragement for men only, and the feeling of being crippled was unavoidable. After three years of this, six years ago, the "Dong-A Ilbo" (東亞日報社) began holding the All-Joseon Women's Tennis Tournament, which was the first tournament. It is easy to imagine now how timely this project was and how much effort and hardship was put into creating it. This is because the tournament was the pioneering new origin of the women's sports world in Joseon. The above few words are, so to speak, the history of the Joseon Women's Tennis Tournament, and the 6th tournament of this kind of women's tennis tournament was held on the "Ground" on May 26, which I will briefly introduce. Now, I would like to first briefly write about the tournament record, including the miscellaneous views of the 6th tournament, and use it as a reference.

At the time of the 1st tournament, only schools in Gyeongseong (京城), Gaeseong Hosudon Girls' High School (開城好壽敦女子高等普通學校), and Gongju Yeongmyeong Girls' School (公州永明女學校) participated from the provinces, and there were several Japanese schools, but it was said that it was difficult for Japanese and Korean female students to compete in skills together, so they had no choice but to divide the tournament into Division 1 and Division 2. The Jinmyeong Girls' High School (進明女子高等普通學校) team and the 1st Girls' High School (第一高等女學校) team each enjoyed the glory of winning the first tournament, and from the 2nd tournament, the same number of schools as the previous year participated, with the addition of the Ewha Girls' High School (梨花女子高等普通學校) team. As a result of the competition, the Gyeongseong Girls' High School team won in Division 1 and the 1st Girls' High School team won in Division 2. <125> What about the 3rd tournament? From this tournament, one more local school was added, which was the Wonsan Lucy Girls' High School (遠山루씨女子高等普通學校) team from afar. In this way, while adding one school from the provinces, the Sukmyeong Girls' High School (淑明女子高等普通學校) team in Gyeongseong could not participate due to unavoidable circumstances, and the school was in a state of forbearance for about three years until the 5th tournament.

In the midst of this, in the same year, the Gyeongseong Girls' High School team, the winner of the previous year in Division 1, won again, and in Division 2, the 1st Girls' High School team lost the championship to the 2nd Girls' High School team for two years in a row, swallowing tears of resentment. From the 4th tournament, Jinju Ilsin Girls' High School (晋州一新女子高等普通學校) in Gyeongnam (慶南) and Pyongyang Jeongui Girls' High School (平壤의 貞義女子高等普通學校) newly participated, giving a truly All-Joseon feel. No, it truly achieved the All-Joseon Women's Tennis Tournament in name and reality. Moreover, the championship in Division 1 of the same year went to the Gaeseong Hosudon Girls' High School team, and the dazzling championship flag that had only revolved around Gyeongseong shone in Songdo (松都), and the spirit of the Hosudon team became immeasurable. The championship in Division 2 went to the Japanese Girls' High School in Wonsan (元山), and it was in this year that the championship flags of different races all returned to the provinces. From the 5th tournament, they had the skills to compete with Japanese girls' schools, and as a result of discussions at the meeting of the Dong-A Ilbo (東亞日報) and participating schools, the tournament was finally held together, which was last year's 5th tournament. This tournament, in which Korean and Japanese women competed for supremacy for the first time, aroused considerable social interest and anticipation. The result of the tournament was the final between the Gaeseong Hosudon team, the winner of Division 1 of the previous year, and the Gyeongseong 2nd Girls' High School team, the winner of Division 2, further highlighting the significance of the first tournament in which Divisions 1 and 2 were combined. However, due to unfavorable timing, the Gaeseong Hosudon team regrettably passed the laurel wreath to the 2nd Girls' High School team. I believe that even readers who do not know the past of this tournament will know its outline by now. In other words, I believe this will be helpful in writing my review of this year's 6th tournament and reading this article.

Now! Let's get into the main text. As in the previous year, this year's 6th tournament also decided to compete without discrimination between Japanese and Korean women. However, due to the absence of a public holiday like a festival day, Saturday, May 26, was chosen, taking into account the circumstances of religious schools. As a result, the host and other participating schools, as well as general tennis fans, felt regretful that they could not see the participation of each public school. Anyway, the schools participating in this year's tournament are:
Jinmyeong Girls' High School (進明女子高等普通學校), Jeongsin Girls' School (貞信女學校), Ewha Girls' High School (梨花女子高等普通學校), Gaeseong Hosudon Girls' High School (開城好壽敦女子高等普通學校), Sukmyeong Girls' High School (淑明女子高等普通學校), <126> Gongju Yeongmyeong Girls' School (公州永明女學校), Jinju Ilsin Girls' High School (晋州一新女子高等普通學校), Yonggok Girls' School (龍谷女學校), Gyeongseong Practical Girls' School (京城實踐女學校), etc., were nine schools. Among these, the participation of Gyeongseong Sukmyeong team, which had been in a state of forbearance for three years for some reason, and the newly established Gyeongseong Practical team will catch the eye. According to the general reviews of the previous year that I have heard, Jinmyeong team was the most likely to win this year, followed by Ewha team and Hosudon team. Also, Gongju Yeongmyeong Girls' School team participated after a year of rest, but the "fine play" that attracted the attention of the audience at the 4th tournament was more likely to be excluded from the candidates for winning this year's tournament. The tournament, which attracted the focus of society's popularity, finally opened its solemn curtain at the Gyeongseong Training Center Ground (京城 訓練院) around 9:30 a.m. on May 26. Nearly a hundred talented players, who had secretly honed their skills, gathered from the south and the north, each holding a racket in their hands, and on the day of the tournament, the Gyeongseong Ground court was the site of a solemn entrance ceremony. Thanks to the generosity of Shin *In (愼*寅), who was founding the Joseon Aviation School, the congratulatory flight plane "Aborro" type "Tyre" (아보로식 타이어) circled the sky of Gyeongseong twice in the morning of the tournament, and then spun around above the court and dropped a maiden ball tied with a bouquet of flowers, and the game that would determine the fate of the tournament began by receiving this. As if a goddess sent from heaven had arrived, the venue was solemn and tense, and in the midst of this, the match between Gaeseong Hosudon team and Gyeongseong Ewha team began, and the battle between the two teams dressed like fairies produced a white-hot battle from the beginning of the tournament that was said to be the championship match. Hosudon's 1st team, Song Hyo-bo (宋孝普) and Lee Hong-jeom (李紅點), defeated Ewha's deputy team, Jeon Jeong-seon (全貞善) and Choi Geum-sun (崔今順), 4-1, and then easily defeated the Jin Jeom-deuk (秦點得) and Kim So-nam (金小南) team, thus Hosudon's 1st team won the championship. Only Ewha's captain, Kim Bok-rim (金福林) and Lee Gyeong-suk (李敬淑), appeared in a corner of the court to make up for the 기울어진편 of the enemy, but the Hosudon team with the spirit of triumph could not let their guard down and calmly responded to this. However, the battle between the two captains ended with Ewha team winning 4-1, so they had a match with Hosudon's 3rd team, Go Yeong-sun (高永順) and Kim Ok-sun (金玉順). Ewha had to fight hard because there were still 優退조 (best players) left, and Hosudon had a strategy to easily perform a war of attrition because even if the 3rd team lost, there were still 優退조 left, but perhaps because it was helpless against Ewha's captain Kim Bok-rim, who was like an iron wall, they lost again 4-0. In this way, the final Song Lee team (宋李조) came to the court, but it seemed that the Hosudon's Song Lee team had lost the precious vigor that they had to win with spirit. As a result, leaving a score of 4-1, the winner of the previous year, Hosudon team, headed to Songdo with a grudge, which can be seen as a major breakthrough for the Ewha team from the beginning. In the second match, the Ewha team faced the powerful Jinmyeong team, so <127> the waves were getting rougher and rougher for the Ewha team, and it was not easy for Jinmyeong either. Jinmyeong team's 1st team, Park Jeong-sun (朴鼎順) and Kim Im-suk (金壬淑), defeated Ewha's Choi Jeon team (崔全조) 4-1, and then had a match with the Qin Kim team (秦金조). Perhaps because the Qin Kim team was much better than in the first match, they lost leaving a score of 3-4, and the Jinmyeong 1st team won. Although they are recognized as mighty generals, how could Kim Bok-rim and Lee Gyeong-suk, the captains of Ewha, defeat the three teams of Jinmyeong? The center of interest was focused here, and Ewha's captain Kim Lee team (金李조) defeated Jinmyeong's 2nd team 4-2 and Jinmyeong's captain Park Bok-nam (朴福男) and Jeong Ri-suk (鄭利淑) team 4-2, so the situation was unfavorable and the trend had already 기울어 젓섯다 (tilted).

Only the remaining 優退組 (best players) Park Kim team (朴金조) even lost 4-0, so the Jinmyeong team retreated with a thousand years of regret. The weeping of Jinmyeong was drowned in the flowered Ewha camp, which was a dramatic scene that vividly showed the contrast of the world. It is natural to see the new participation of the newly established Gyeongseong Practical team, but the new skills of the newly participating schools were also spectacular. In the match against the Jeongsin team, Hong Yeong-sun (洪永順) and Kim Byeong-sun (金炳順) of the first team against Park Kim-nyeo (朴金女) and Park Bok-dong (朴福童) of Jeongsin, they put on a battle that was more intense than expected and lost 2-4, but they deeply resolved to avenge themselves next year. The second team, Bae Ok-dong (裵玉童) and Min Nyeon-sun (閔年順), also lost 2-4, so Jeongsin's 1st team made them 優退 (best players). The 3rd team, Ryu Bo-bu (劉寶富) and Min Yeong-ok (閔泳玉), suffered a crushing defeat 1-4 to Jeongsin's 2nd team, Kim Bok-sun (金福順) and Kim Im-sul (金壬述), so the new Practical team promised next year and 물너낫스며 (retreated), and the Jeongsin team entered the semi-finals. Jinju Ilsin team faced Sukmyeong team, and Ilsin's first team defeated Sukmyeong's first team, An Eui-gyeong (安宜瓊) and Yuk Ho-gil (陸好吉), 4-0, and the second team, Kim Han-gyu (金漢圭) and Kim Jong-su (金鍾洙), lost 1-4, so the situation was the most 막상막하 (neck and neck) in this tournament. However, Ilsin's captain team, Kim U-sang-dal (金又上達) and Kim Ga-mae (金加梅), defeated Sukmyeong's 2nd and 3rd teams 4-0, so the Ilsin team, who traveled a thousand miles from the south, won without a team and received cheers from the audience. Due to the forfeiture of the Yonggok team, the Gongju Yeongmyeong team entered the semi-finals without fighting. The situation was gradually getting closer to the finals, and as a result of the semi-final draw, the Ilsin and Yeongmyeong teams from the provinces faced the Ewha and Jeongsin teams from Gyeongseong, so this was ideal, and the excitement in the venue was naturally 열광되엇슴이 (overheated). The match between Ilsin, who defeated Sukmyeong, and Jeongsin, who defeated Practical, was truly a good opponent. Ilsin's 1st team defeated Jeongsin's 1st and 2nd teams 4-0 and 4-2 and 우퇴한 후 (after), the 2nd team lost 2-4 to Jeongsin's captain team, Byeon Bok-ryong (卞福龍) and Han Sin-saeng (韓新生), and faced Ilsin's captain, Kim U-sang-dal and Kim Ga-mae, so who could have predicted the victory?

With a score of 1 win and 1 loss, Jeongsin team shed tears in a moment of 앗기는 (saving) one ball, and the Ilsin team entered the finals for the first time in 3 years since participating in the tournament and competed for the championship. This is something that no one could have imagined. On the other hand, the semi-final match between Ewha and Yeongmyeong was a peaceful game like a brotherly fight between schools of the same 교파 (denomination). Yeongmyeong's first and second teams lost 분하게 (resentfully), and the captain Lee Jeong-u (李貞雨) and Lee Seon-ae (李善愛) team defeated Ewha's second team 4-2 and lost 4-1 to the captain team, but Lee Jeong-u's ghostly skill in the front and rear of the Yeongmyeong captain could not be admired. In this way, the tournament finally went through various 파란 (vicissitudes) and battles, and the final was held between Ewha and Ilsin.
Ewha's 1st team, Choi Jeong-seon (崔貞善) and Kim Geum-sun (金今順), had their first fight with Ilsin's Hwang Bok-sun (黃卜順) and Jang Chung-hui (張忠禧) team. Ewha won both the 1st match 5-3 and the 2nd match 4-2, but Ilsin's Hwang Jang team (黃張조) did not give in at all and gave the Ewha team a "two-game" to 주섯고 (give order). From then on, they won with "deuce" repeatedly in the 4th match 4-1, the 5th match 5-3, and the 6th match 6-4, and Ewha's 2nd team, Qin Jeom-deuk and Kim So-nam, rejected this. The score was 1-4 once, but they won 4-2 in all other matches. In this way, the 2nd teams of the two teams faced each other, so the final was really like a final, and everyone had a lot of support for the Ilsin team because they were 고군 (old soldiers) who came to Seoul (京) and the mystery of their skill was not only in one team, but all three teams had similar 장뎜 (strengths), so they were given 예상 (unexpected) 경이 (astonishment). Ilsin's 2nd team, Jeong Ok-bong (鄭玉奉) and Ryu Won-sun (柳元順), easily defeated the Ewha 2nd team, who had 힘이 다 한 (exhausted) from defeating their team's 1st team. Now! <129> From now on, Ewha's only remaining captain! More than that, the captain who defeated the three strong teams of Hosudon alone in this day! The captain who defeated the three strong teams of the powerful candidate Jinmyeong in the second match and the Yeongmyeong in the semi-final with all her might! Ewha's captain, who had 힘을 (strenuously) defeated a total of seven teams! However, Kim Bok-rim's spirit did not seem to be intimidated at all. Ilsin's Jeong Ok-bong and Ryu Won-sun team lost twice 2-4 and 1-4 in this game, and then won once 4-1 and lost 3-5 and 2-4. However, in the middle of this, the 후위 (rear) of the team had cramps in her leg, wasting about ten minutes from the scheduled time, which was also 불가항력 (irresistible), and in such a case, it was the spirit of "sports" to end it and endure it. The time to determine this year's championship is getting more and more 절박 (desperate). When the Ewha captain had to have the final showdown with Ilsin's captain, Kim 또上達 (also reached) and Kim 가梅 (plum), it was already 7:40, 7 minutes before sunset. I knew that the fading twilight made it difficult to match the 접전 (battle) that could fully demonstrate the complete skills and abilities of this final, but because the 쥐 (mouse) that came up from Jinju 괴롭게 (tormented) the cute player's legs in the fourth game, wasting more than ten minutes, this time was even more behind schedule, so the 심판자 (judge) at the time decided to do as many points as possible.

In the 1st set, the Ilsin team raised the spirit first with 2-4, and the Ewha captain 표하얏다 (expressed) the 고정 (fixation) that the ball was invisible. However, in order to decide whether to proceed by listening to the opinions of both sides, I asked for Ilsin's opinion, but the Ilsin side also admitted that they could not complete it, so the game entered the 2nd set with the opinion to continue until it was visible. The Ewha captain was in a very unfavorable situation, such as doing a double on the serve 연하야 (incessantly), and the Ilsin side was not able to show their full potential, and the Ilsin side was more likely to gain 기운 (spirit) than 긔세 (momentum). Then, when the ball count became "deuce" and the Ilsin team took the lead by one point (the time was 7:52, the sunset on the day was 7:47), the Ewha side coach, Oh Sin-geon (吳信健), demanded the suspension 지급히 (urgently), which was 비신사뎍 태도에 갓가웟섯다 (close to unsportsmanlike attitude) across the wire netting. However, the 심판부 (judge) did not have the 여디 (room) to look back on the coach's 신사 (gentlemanly) or 비신사 (ungentlemanly), but only 안중에 두고 (put in mind) the game itself rather than the 량 (two) players in the game and declared the suspension of the game with the 양해 (understanding) of Ilsin.
The time was 절박하엿스나 (desperate), but it can be seen as the most 아름다운 (beautiful) 발로 (manifestation) of sportsmanship in this tournament that Ilsin's deputy endured for more than ten minutes in an 불가항력 (irresistible) case where his leg had cramps, and that Ewha's captain 양해 (understood) the suspension when they could not fully demonstrate their abilities and decide the victory due to darkness. Ilsin's 모든 (all) 양보뎍 (concessions) 협섭 (negotiations) made this tournament 원만히 (smoothly) done, but that is the 충돌 (conflict) of 택일 (choosing a day) after that. On the one hand, the road to return to 천리원뎡 (a thousand-mile journey) was 급한지라 (urgent), so they wanted to continue the next day, Sunday, but the other side, the Ewha team, had various 상반되엇스나 (conflicting) things due to being a religious school, but in the end, the 결승전 (final) of the 남어잇는 부분 (remaining part) was held at that 장소 (place) at 10 a.m. on this 28th (Monday) with the 모든 (all) 양해 (understanding) of Ilsin. Every ball that brushed past the net and went over, and every ball that "lobbed" as if soaring into the sky, did not 편케 (comfort) people's hearts.
Sometimes "smash", sometimes "throwing", like this, the 攻守 (attack and defense) 마음대로 (freely) 가진 (having) 묘긔 (tricks) 금 잡어 (caught gold)종횡하얏다 (traversed) on the line 금그어진 (gold-drawn) on the court 우에 (above). In this 결승전 (final), the Ewha team 울리니 (rang) the 승리 (victory) song with 6-4, 4-1, 5-3, 4-2, and after 5 years of 와신상담 (lying on firewood and tasting gall), the 월계관 (laurel wreath) of 우승 (championship) was 찬란하게 (brilliantly) 꿈엿다 (dreamed) for the first time since Ewha was founded on the Ewha garden 우흘 (above). On the other hand, the 숨은 (hidden) 눈물 (tears) of 진주 (pearl) Ilsin were 방울방울마다 (drop by drop) 분함 (resentment)도 분함 (resentment)이려니와 (and) 참으랴 참을 수도 업는 (unable to endure) 앗가운 (precious) 그 무엇의 (something) 결정톄이엇든 (the decisive point) 것이다 (is). The 순정미 (pure beauty) of the Ewha team 선수 (players) that washes away Ilsin's 눈물 (tears) is also a 적도 업는 (unmatched) 텬녀의 (goddess) 나라가튼 (country-like) 장면을 (scene) 닐우엇다 (reached). I know that Ilsin's 눈물 (tears) are 눈물 (tears) that 긔약 (promise) next year. Is not 일승일패 (one win one loss) 병가 (soldier)의 상사 (custom)? I would like to lastly 부긔 (add) a few things that I 느낀 (felt) through the tournament and 말랴한다 (want to end).
The improvement of skills, among them, the captains of Ilsin and Yeongmyeong showed the skills that they had hidden in the provinces on the main stage 여실히 (clearly), so I had great 경이 (wonder) and 감탄 (admiration) that they were by no means 손색 (inferior) to the 세군 (three teams) of Gyeongseong, and even more, Ilsin team's 떳떳한 (righteous) spirit and 신사뎍 (gentlemanly) 태도 (attitude)! And the 정미 (beauty) of washing away the 눈물 (tears) with a humble 태도 (attitude) to the other team, even though they 이겻스나 (won)! It is one of the 미풍 (good customs) 얻든 (gained) in this tournament. <131>

**Named Entities**

東亞日報	Dong-A Ilbo
朝鮮體育會	Joseon Sports Association
京城	Gyeongseong
開城好壽敦女子高等普通學校	Gaeseong Hosudon Women's High School
公州永明女學校	Gongju Yeongmyeong Women's School
進明女子高等普通學校	Jinmyeong Women's High School
第一高等女學校	Jeil Women's High School
梨花女子高等普通學校	Ihwa Women's High School
遠山루씨女子高等普通學校	Wonsan Lucy Women's High School
淑明女子高等普通學校	Sukmyeong Women's High School
松都	Songdo
慶南	Gyeongnam
晋州一新女子高等普通學校	Jinju Ilsin Women's High School
平壤貞義女子高等普通學校	Pyeongyang Jeongui Women's High School
元山	Wonsan
慎*寅	Sin *In
京城訓練院	Gyeongseong Training Center
宋孝普	Song Hyo-bo
李紅點	I Hong-jeom
全貞善	Jeon Jeong-seon
崔今順	Choe Geum-sun
秦點得	Jin Jeom-deuk
金小南	Kim So-nam
金福林	Kim Bok-rim
李敬淑	I Gyeong-suk
高永順	Ko Yeong-sun
金玉順	Kim Ok-sun
朴鼎順	Pak Chŏng-sun
金壬淑	Kim Im-suk
崔全	Choe Chŏn
朴福男	Pak Pong-nam
鄭利淑	Chŏng I-suk
朴金	Pak Kim
洪永順	Hong Yŏng-sun
金炳順	Kim Pyŏng-sun
朴金女	Pak Kim-nyŏ
朴福童	Pak Pok-tong
裴玉童	Pae Ok-tong
閔年順	Min Nyŏn-sun
劉寶富	Ryu Po-bu
閔泳玉	Min Yŏng-ok
金福順	Kim Pok-sun
金壬述	Kim Im-sul
安宜瓊	An Ŭi-gyŏng
陸好吉	Yuk Ho-gil
金漢圭	Kim Han-gyu
金鍾洙	Kim Chong-su
金又上達	Kim U-sangdal
金加梅	Kim Ka-mae
李貞雨	I Chŏng-u
李善愛	I Sŏn-ae
卞福龍	Pyŏn Pong-nyong
韓新生	Han Sin-saeng
黃卜順	Hwang Pok-sun
張忠禧	Chang Ch’ung-hŭi
鄭玉奉	Chŏng Ok-bong
柳元順	Ryu Wŏn-sun
吳信健	O Sin-gŏn



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제14호
발행일	1928년 07월 01일
기사제목	全朝鮮女子庭球大會評判記, 第六回大會를 보고
필자	李吉用
기사형태	소식

全朝鮮女子庭球大會評判記, 第六回大會를 보고
						李吉用
조선의 운동경긔계가 병신의 상태를 버서낫다고 볼 수 잇기는 거금 륙년 전의 일이다. 「조선톄육회」가 아홉해전 긔미년에 싹이 터가지고 생긴 후로 우리 반도의 톄육계를 위하야 꾸준한 노력과 활동을 하야왓다. 그러나 이것이 불행히도 남자에만 국한된 장려뿐이어서 병신의 늣김이 업지 안핫섯다. 이리하기를 삼년을 지난 거금 륙년 전에 비롯오 「동아일보사」가 전조선녀자정구대회를 열게 되니 이것이 곳 뎨1회 대회이다. 이것이 얼마나 때에 알맛는 사업이엇스며 또 이것을 비저내기 까지에는 물론 여간 한 고심과 노력이 한결가티 안핫슬 것은 지금 상상하기에도 족하다. 마치도 이 대회가 조선의 여자 운동경긔계의 창시뎍 신긔원이엇든 때문이다. 이상의 몃마듸는 말하자면 조선의 여자정구대회가 생긴 내력담이니와 이 가튼 여자정구대희 뎨6회 대회는 지나간 5월 26일 『그라운드』에서 열린 것을 말하랴는데 잠간 이것을 소개함에 불과하다. 그런데 뎨6회 대회의 잡관을 석근 대회긔를 먼저하야 대회 이래의 경과를 간략히 쓰어 참고거리로 삼으랴 한다.
뎨일회 당시에는 경성 시내의 학교를 제외하고는 지방으로 겨우 개성호수돈녀자고등보통학교와 공주영명녀학교가 참가하얏슬 뿐이엇고 일본인학교로 몃 학교가 잇섯는데 도저히 일본인 녀학생과 조선인 녀학생이 합하야 긔술을 견우기에 어렵다 하야 엇찌할 수 업시 뎨1 뎨2로 부를 난호아 대회를 행한 바 진명녀자고등보통학교군과 뎨일고등녀학교군이 각각 첫 번 대회의 영예의 우승권을 누렷고 데2회대회부터는 전년과 가튼 수의 학교가 참가한데다가 리화녀자고등보통학교군을 새로히 더하야 경긔를 행한 결과 경성녀자고등보통학교군이 뎨1부에서 뎨일녀자고등학교군이 뎨2부에서 각각 우승을 하얏다.<125> 뎨3회 대회는 어떠한가 이 대회부터 디방학교의 한단톄를 더하게 되엿스니 그것은 멀리 원산루씨녀자고등보통학교군 내정이엿다. 이리하야 디방의 한 학교를 더한 반면에 경성 시내의 숙명녀자고등보통학교군이 동교의 부득이한 사정으로 출장치 못하게 되니 동교는 이로써 뎨5회 대회에 니르기까지 약 삼년간은 隱忍하게 되엿섯다.

이러한 가운데 동년의 우승젼은 뎨1부에서 전년 우승자 경성녀자고등보통학교군이 또 이것을 뎨2부에서는 뎨일고등녀학교군이 이년을 넌다라 우승권을 뎨2고등학교군에게 빼앗기어 분한 눈물을 먹음엇다. 뎨4회 대회부터 경남 진주의 일신녀자고등보통학교와 평양의 졍의녀자고등보통학교군이 새로히 참가하여 자못 전조선뎍인 늣김이 잇섯다. 아니 과연 명실상부의 전조선녀자정구대회를 니루엇다. 그뿐이랴 동년의 뎨1부 우승은 개성의 호수돈녀자고등보통학교군에 도라가니 경성에만 돌든 광희찬란한 우승긔는 송도에 성을 빗치우게 되어 호수돈군의 의긔는 끗칠배를 모르게 되엇고 뎨2부의 우승은 원산의 일본인 고등녀학교에 도라가니 이 해야 말로 이종의 우승긔가 모다 모다 디방으로 돌아가데 되엇다. 뎨5희 대회부터는 일본인녀학교와 합하야 경긔를 할 만한 실력이 능하게 되어 이것이 주최측인 동아일보와 참가학교의 토의회에서 의론된 결과 드듸어 한데 합하야 대회를 열기로 되엇스니 곳 작년 데5회 대회이다. 처음으로 대희에서 조선 여자와 일본인 여자가 서로 패권을 견우게 된 이번 대회야 말로 적지 안흔 사회의 흥취와 촉망을 자아내엇섯는데 동대회의 결과는 결국 전년의 뎨1부 우승자 개성 호수돈군과 데2부 우승자이엇든 경성 뎨2고녀군과의 결승전을 보게 되어 1,2부가 합한 첫 번 대회의 의의를 더욱 나타내게 되엇다. 그러나 때가 리롭지 못하야 개성 호수돈군이 앗가웁게도 뎨2고녀군에 월계관을 빗겨두데 되엇다. 이만하면 독자 졔씨 중에서 본 대회의 과거를 모르시는 분이라도 그 개요만은 알 줄로 밋는다. 이것은 다시 말하자면 금년 뎨6회 대회에 소견긔를 쓰는데 또 이 글을 읽으시는데 참고가 될 줄로 밋는다.
자! 이만하면 본문으로 들어가랴 한다. 역시 금년의 뎨6회 대회도 전년과 가티 일본인 녀자니 조선인 녀자니 하는 차별을 업시하야 피차에 실력을 견우어 보기로 하얏다. 그러나 「옹이에 마듸」로 봄씨-슨 중에는 축제일 가튼 공휘일이 업서서 부득이 종교학교 사정을 참작하야 일요일을 피한다는 것이 토요일 곳 5월 26일로 택하게 되엇다. 이관게로 각 관립학교의 출젼을 보지 못하게 된 것은 주최측은 물론이겟지만 일반 정구「팬」이며 참가 출전한 다른 학교가 한 가지로 유감되히 녁이든 것이다. 어쨌든 금년 대회의 출전 학교를 들면
進明女子高等普通學校, 貞信女學校, 梨花女子高等普通學校, 開城好壽敦女子高等普通學校, 淑明女子高等普通學校,<126> 公州永明女學校, 晋州一新女子高等普通學校, 龍谷女學校, 京城實踐女學校 등 아홉학교이엿다. 이중에 뎜검을 하고 보면 삼년간 무슨 사정으로 은인상태에 잇든 경성숙명군과 새로히 생긴 경성실천군의 출전이 얼른 눈에 띄일 것이다. 전년의 일반 평을 필자가 들은 바를 종합하야 보면 금년 우승 후보 학교는 진명군이 가장 유력하얏고 그 다음에는 리화군과 호수돈이엇다. 그러고 공주영명녀학교군이 일년을 쉬이고 출전하게 되엇스나 뎨4회 당시에 리화군에게 지기는 젓스나 만장한 관중들의 시선을 잇끌은 「빠인플레이」는 오히려 금년 대회의 우승 후보에 빼이기를 앗기는 편이엇다. 이와 가튼 사회의 인긔의 초뎜을 잇끈대회는 필경 5월 26일 오전 9시 반 경에 경성의 훈련원 경성 그라운드에서 장엄한 막을 열게 된 것이다. 남모르게 고이고이 닥근 각각 자긔의 긔술을 발휘식힐 근백명의 명장들은 남에서 북에서 제각긔 손에 「락케트」를 쥐이고 모여 들어 시련의 날인 대회 당일에 젼디인 경성 그라운드 코-트에는 장엄한 입장식이 거행되엇다. 조선 비행학교를 창입 중인 愼*寅군의 후의로 대회 당일 아츰에 축하비행귀 「아보로」식 「타이어」호는 경성의 상공을 두어번 종회 하더니 코-트의 상공에 구비저 돌다가 꼿다발에 매이고 단 처녀구를 떠러트리니 이것을 바더서 대회의 운명을 좌우할 경긔는 개시되엇다. 참으로 하날로부터 나려온 녀신이 님한 것가티도 장내는 엄숙 또 긴장하얏스며 이런 한가운데 개성의 호수돈군 대 경성의 리화군의 싸홈이 열리니 텬녀가티 단장한 량군의 접전은 대희의 벽두부터 우승전의 평이 잇는 백열전을 연출한 것이나 호수돈의 뎨1조 宋孝普, 李紅點은 리화의 부장격인 全貞善, 崔今順조를 4대1로 이긔고 그 다음 秦點得, 金小南조를 힘안드리고 이긔니 이로써 호수돈 뎨1조는 우승은 하얏다. 오직 남어 잇는 리화의 대장 金福林, 李敬淑조가 적군의 기우러진 편를 만회하고저 코-트 한 모퉁이에 그 자태가 나타나자 득의의 긔세를 가진 호수돈군도 역시 방심은 하지 못할 형편이어서 끗끗내 침착하게 이에 대응하얏스나 량대장의 접전은 4대1로 리화군이 이긔어 호수돈 뎨3조 高永順, 金玉順조와 대전을 하니 리화로서는 력전을 하여야 아직도 優退조가 남어잇고 호수돈으로는 설령 3군이 패한다 하드라도 優退조가 남어 잇스니까 질심잢고 지구전을 손쉬웁게 연출하여야 할 책전이엇것만 원악 공주가 철벽 가튼 리화 대장의 후의 金福林에게는 어찌할 수 업슴인지 4대 0으로 또 패하고 말엇다. 이리하야 최종의 宋李조가 코-트에 나섯스나 비할데 업시 氣로 이겨야 할 귀중한 원긔를 일혼 듯한 늣김이 호수돈의 宋李조에 잇서 보엿다. 결국 4대 1이란 스코어를 남기고 년전의 우승자 호수돈군이 뎨1회전에 한품은 자태를 송도로 향케 되니 이것이 리화군의 의긔를 벽두부터 들게 한 큰 難關突破이라고 보지 안흘 수 업다. 뎨이회 전에 니르러 리화군은 유력한 우승후보틤 진명군과 대진케 되니 리화군으로서는 <127>갈수록 파도가 험한 판이엇스며 진명으로도 역시 난관이 안인 것은 안이엇다. 진명군의 뎨1조 朴鼎順, 金壬淑조가 리화 崔全조를 4대1로 이긔고, 뎨2의 秦金조와 대전케 되니 秦金조의 뎨1회전보타 훨신 나허젓슴인지 3대4란 접전의 스코어를 남기고 패하야 진명 뎨1조가 이기고 나갓다. 제 아모리 맹장으로 정평잇는 金福林, 李敬淑조이지만 진명의 강진의 3조를 어떠케 이길 것인가? 하는 흥미의 중심이 이곳으로 집중된 리화대장 金李조는 과연 진명 뎨2조를 4대 2로 또 진명대장 朴福男, 鄭利淑조를 4대 2로 이긔니 전세 불리하야 이미 대세는 기우러 젓섯다.
오직 남어잇는 優退組 朴金조마자 4대 0으로 패하니 이로써 진명군은 천추의 한을 품ㅅ고 물러섯다. 우승에 꼿핀 리화진의 측면에는 진명의 울음이 잠겨잇스니 세사의 대조를 여실히 나타낸 극뎍 [씬」이엇다. 새로히 창립된 경성 실천군의 새로운 참가를 보게 됨도 당연한 일이지만 새로히 참가한 학교틤의 새로운 술도 또한 기그럴 듯 하엿다. 정신군을 대하야 뎨일의 洪永順, 金炳順 조 대 貞信의 朴金女, 朴福童 조전에는 예상 이상의 접전을 연출하야 2대 4로 패하기는 하얏스나 명년의 설욕을 깁히 맘먹게 하얏스니 뎨2의 裵玉童, 閔年順 조도 또 2대 4로 패하야 정신 뎨1조로 하야금 優退케 하얏다. 뎨3조 劉寶富, 閔泳玉 조는 貞信 뎨2의 金福順, 金壬述조에게 1대 4로<128> 참패케 하니 신진의 실천군은 명년을 긔약하고 물너낫스며 정신군은 준결승에 들어가게 되엇다. 진주 일신군이 숙명군과 대전케 되여, 일신의 뎨일조가 숙명 뎨일의 安宜瓊, 陸好吉를 4대 0으로 이기고 동 뎨2조에 金漢圭, 金鍾洙가 1대 4로 패하니 전세는 이번 대회 초유의 막상막하의 세이엇다. 그러나 일신의 金又上達, 金加梅의 대장조가 숙명의 뎨2 뎨3 량조를 4대 0으로 모다 이기니 멀리 남으로부터 천리원정에 오른 일신군은 부전 1조를 내이고 승첩하야 만장 관중의 환호를 바덧다. 룡곡군의 기권으로 인하야 공주 영명군은 싸호지 안흔 채로 준결승에 들어가게 되엇다. 대세는 점점 결승으로 갓가워 가서 준결승의 추첨의 결과가 디방의 일신 영명 량군이 경성의 리화 정신 량군에 각각 대전케 되니 이것부터 리상뎍으로 되어 잇서 장내의 흥미는 곡도로 열광되엇슴이 오히려 당연한 배엿섯다. 숙명을 이긴 일신이며 실천을 이긴 정신의 접전은 실로 조흔 대적이엇다. 일신 뎨1조가 정신 뎨1 뎨2 량조를 4대 0과 4대 2로 이기어 우퇴한 후 뎨2조가 정신 뎨2의 대장 卞福龍, 韓新生조에게 2대 4로 패하고 일신의 대장 金又上達, 金加梅조와 마조서니 과연 승부를 누가 헤아릴 수 잇섯스랴.
1승1패 이 가튼 세로 공 한아를 앗기는 찰나에 세불여의 되어 정신군이 눈물을 먹음으니 일신군은 본 대회 참가 이래 3년간 비롯오 결승권 내에 들어가서 우승을 견우게 되엇다. 이것은 누구의 마음에라도 상상치 못하얏든 바일 것이다. 또 한편의 리화 대 영명 준결승전은 모두가 가튼 교파의 학교로 형뎨의 싸흠가티 평화스러운 경긔가 열린 바 영명의 뎨일 뎨이 량조가 분하게 지고 대장 李貞雨, 李善愛조가 리화 뎨2조를 4대 2로 이긔고 대장조와 걸려 4대 1로 패하기는 하얏스나 영명 대장의 전후위 그 중에 후위 李貞雨 양의 귀신가튼 묘긔는 실로 감탄하지 안흘 수가 업섯다. 이리하야 대회는 필경 가진 파란과 격전을 지나서 최후의 결승을 리화 대 일신 사이에 행하게 된 것이다.
리화 뎨1조 崔貞善, 金今順 양은 일신의 黃卜順, 張忠禧조와 첫싸흠이 열린 바 뎨1전에 5대 3 뎨2전에 4대 2로 량戰을 리화가 이겻스나 일신의 黃張조는 조금도 굽힘이업시 그 의긔양양한 리화의 동조를 「투께임」으로 명을 주섯고 이로부터 뎨4戰에 4대 1, 뎨5戰에 5대 3, 뎨6戰에 6대 4로 「듀스」를 거듭하야가며 이기니 리화의 뎨2조인 秦點得, 金小南양는 쾌연히 이것을 물리첫다. 그 스코어는 1대 4로 한번 진외에는 모다 4대 2로 이겻다. 이리하야 량군의 뎨2조끼리 마주치게 되니 정말 결승전은 결승전다웟스며 누구나 일신군에 만흔 응원을 갓게 된 것은 원로에 상경한 고군이며 또 그 긔술의 묘함이 결코 어느 한 조에만 잇는 것이 안이라 세조가 모다 비슷한 장뎜이 잇서 예상이외의 경이를 바든 때문이다. 일신의 뎨2조 鄭玉奉, 柳元順은 자긔 편 뎨1조를 이기기에 힘이 다 한 리화 뎨2조를 힘 안드리고 쉬웁게 이겻다. 자!<129> 이제부터 리화의 오직 남은 대장! 그보다도 이 날 하로에 호수돈 강장삼조를 혼자서 물리치고 뎨2회전에 유력한 후보 진명의 강틤 3조를 한 힘으로 격파하고 또 준결승전에 영명을 이긴 대장! 도합 칠조를 이기기에 력진한 리화의 대장! 그러나 동 金福林양의 의긔만은 조금도 겁냄이 업서 보엿다. 일신의 鄭玉奉, 柳元順조는 이 께임에 잇서서 2대4 1대4로 두 번 진 뒤에 4대 1로 한번 이기고 3대 5, 2대 4로 아조 지고 말앗다. 그러나 이 중간에 동 후위는 다리에 쥐가 올나 예뎡한 시간에서 약 십여분을 허비케 되엿스니 이 또한 불가항력이며 이리한 경우에 잇서 끗내고 십흐나 참는 것도 「스포-쓰」의 정신이엇든 것이다. 금년도의 우승권을 좌우할 때는 각각으로 절박 또 절박하야 온다. 리화 대장은 일신의 대장 金또上達, 金加梅조를 마저 최후의 일대결전을 행하야고 할 때는 이미 7시 40분 일몰 시간에서 7분 전이엇다. 지터가는 황혼이 도저히 이 결승의 완전한 긔술과 실력을 발휘할 수 잇는 접전 알에 맛치기 어려움을 모름도 안이엇스나 대체가 넷재번 께임 때에 진주서 올라온 쥐란 놈이 귀여운 선수의 다리를 괴롭게 하야 십여분을 헛되이 보낸 때문에 이 시각이 더욱 예산에 뒤흔들린 것임으로 할 수 잇는 포인트까지 하야 보랸것이 당시 심판자의 복안이엇다.
뎨1셋트에 2대 4로 일신군이 우선 긔세를 올려뵈니 리화의 대장은 뽈의 보이지 안는다는 고정을 표하얏다. 그러나 량 방의 의견을 들어 진행여부를 결할 차로 일신의 의견을 물엇스나 일신측 역시 완료치 못할 것은 시인하는지 보일 때까지 더 게속하자는 의견이 엇슴으로 경긔는 뎨2셋트에 들어가서 리화 대장은 연하야 써브에 따블을 하는 등 형세 자못 불리하얏고 일신측 역시 충분한 실력을 내이지는 못하얏스며 다못 일신측에는 긔세보다 긔운이 득의할지음이엇다. 그리하야 뽈카운트 「듀스」가 되고 또 한 포인트를 일신군 리-드하얏슬지음에 (때는 7시 52분 당일 일몰은 7시 47분)리화편 코-취 吳信健군은 중지의 요구를 지급히 한다는 것이 철망을 넘어 비신사뎍 태도에 갓가웟섯다. 그러나 심판부는 코-취의 신사 비신사를 돌아볼 여디가 업는 것이오 다만 경긔중의 량 풀레이를 상대로 보다도 께임 그것을 상대로 안중에 두고 일신의 량해를 어더 께임의 중지를 선언하얏다.
시간이 절박하엿스나 일신군의 부장이 다리에 쥐가 올라 불가항력인 경우에 십여분을 참는 것이나 또 리화 대장의 어둠으로 피차에 충분한 실력을 발휘하야 승부를 결할 수 업는 때에 떳떳하게 중지를 량해하는 등은 이번 대회에 가장 아릿다운 운동정신의 발로하고 보지 안흘 수 업다. 일신군의 모-든 양보뎍 교섭은 가장 이번 대회를 원만히 마치게 하야스나 그것은 그 후 택일의 충돌이다. 한편은 천리원뎡에 돌아갈 길이 급한지라 익일 즉 일요일에 게속 거행하자는 것이엇스며 상대 측인 리화군은 종교학교인 관게로 여러 가지 상반되엇스나 결국 일신의 모-든 량해로 이 28일(월)<130> 오전 10시에 그 장소에서 남어잇는 부분의 결승전을 행하게 되엇다. 넷트 우흘 스치어 넘어가는 공 한 개마다 때로는 하날을 솟는 듯이 「로빙」하는 뽈 한 개 마다 사람의 마음을 편케 못하얏다.
때로는 「스매싀」,때로는 『쓰로빙」이러케 攻守가 마음대로 가진 묘긔는 코-트 우에 금그어진 선을 금 잡어 종횡하얏다. 이러한 결승전은 6대 4, 4대1, 5대 3, 4대2로 리화군이 개선가를 울리니 와신상담 5년만에 리화 개교이래 처음으로 우승의 월게관은 리화동산 우흘 찬란하게 꿈엿다. 이 반면에 숨은 진주 일신의 눈물은 방울방울마다 분함도 분함이려니와 참으랴 참을 수도 업는 앗가운 그 무엇의 결정톄이엇든 것이다. 일신의 눈물을 씻기는 리화군 선수들의 순정미는 이 또한 적도 업는 텬녀의 나라가튼 장면을 닐우엇다. 응당 일신의 눈물은 명년을 긔약하는 눈물일 줄 안다. 일승일패는 병가의 상사가 안인가. 대회를 통하야 는긴 바 몃가지를 마지막으로 부긔하고 말랴한다.
긔술의 향상 그 중에도 일신과 영명의 대장은 디방에서 숨겨잇든 그 긔술을 본 무대에 여실히 나타내엇슬 만큼 결코 경성의 세군보다 손색이 업슴에 큰 경이와 감탄을 가젓스며 더욱 일신군의 떳떳한 정신과 신사뎍 태도! 그리고 이겻스나 어대까지 상대군에 겸손한 태도로 눈물을 씻기는 정미! 오즉 이번 대회에서 어든 미풍의 하나이다.<131>
<125-131>