별건곤 제10호
1927년 12월 20일
山川祭 咸南村 군대군대, 地方色 (Mountain Shrine Festival in Hamnam Village, Here and There, Local Color)
元山 李靜龜 (Lee Jeong-gu of Wonsan)
문예기타 (Miscellaneous Literature)

Mountain Shrine Festival in Hamnam Village, Here and There, Local Color
						Lee Jeong-gu of Wonsan

Mountain Shrine Festival! The very name of this game is good, and the game itself, like its name, involves looking at the nearby mountains and rivers and offering sacrifices!

"No, it's a great event to offer sacrifices to the deities," they reply as if it's the most outstanding local custom! Friends in Seoul would laugh their heads off at this. However, even in Hamnam Province, in relatively developed areas like Wonsan or Hamheung, they only do it formally, slaughtering a cow or catching fish to eat. But in the countryside, it's celebrated as a grand affair, even more so than a son or daughter's wedding! Shhh! Shhh! My Seoul friends will laugh again. Shall I tell you about how I went to Tancheon Village on August 9th and ended up eating at a mountain shrine festival?

From the day before, Mr. O of Tancheon kept urging me to come to the mountain shrine festival on August 9th and see his newly built house... Because I had received such earnest requests, I had no choice but to go, spending several tens of jeon on transportation to reach the village. It was during the busy farming season, and everywhere I looked, people were busily preparing food for the mountain shrine festival (山川祭飮食).

The sun was setting as soon as I entered his house. I, being someone who enjoys talking, immediately asked upon entering,

"The sun is setting, but haven't you held the mountain shrine festival yet?"

Mr. O: "What do you mean 'not yet'? It has to be pitch black."

I: "Around what time do you hold the ceremony?"

Mr. O: "Probably around ten o'clock."

I: "By the way, where do you hold the mountain shrine festival?"

Mr. O: "Isn't there a Nabjaksan Mountain right here? We do it there."

I: "Why do you hold it?" Even though I knew.

Mr. O: "It's the custom to hold it once a year for the mountain deity (山神靈님)."

He wouldn't be wrong! So I casually said, "Let me help you with your work. Let me watch the feast preparation." and watched the table setting.

Looking at the items placed, from apples, pears, and dates to dried pollack, salmon, flounder, herring, and other oily fish, as well as three or four kinds of rice cakes, pancakes, and seasoned vegetables, all sorts of food were prepared, as if they had gathered everything without missing a thing, even though it was the countryside!

Then, when it got dark, a command was issued, "Mr. O, come up!" Following that command, people from every house carried the food they had prepared to the mountain shrine festival site, and I followed along as well.

They lit pine firewood at the foot of the mountain, and the fellow who arranged the feast table one by one seemed to be related to the mountain shrine festival. After all the dishes were set, that fellow wrote the names of each household's offerings on paper, called them out once, and then burned them for some unknown reason. After that was done, things became simple. They made a fuss about mixing beef broth and beef <160>, and in the meantime, the chief of the mountain shrine festival (山川祭大將) was reading some kind of paper.

As soon as he finished reading, they scattered, shouting "Beef broth!" and "Beef!" If you look at them closely, it's more like a village festival (村民祭) than a mountain shrine festival! I was wondering what was going on, looking for something to eat without any sincerity, and then they all dispersed! Shush! This sound! I barely made it out of embarrassment. Shush! <161>

**Named Entities**

元山	Wŏnsan
咸南	Hamnam
咸興	Hamhŭng
灘箭村	T'anch'ŏn-ch'on
납작山	Napjaksan



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제10호
발행일	1927년 12월 20일
기사제목	山川祭 咸南村 군대군대, 地方色
필자	元山 李靜龜
기사형태	문예기타

山川祭 咸南村 군대군대, 地方色
						元山 李靜龜
山川祭! 이 노름은 이름부터 좃코 노름도 또한 그 일홈과 가티 近方 山川을 보고 제사를 올니는 노릇!
「아니 神靈님을 위해 祭祀를 드리는 大事임니다.」 하고 가장 優秀한 地方色처럼 對答한다나! 서울친구들은 단통침 뱃고 웃을 노릇이 이 노릇이야. 그러나 咸南地方도 元山이나 咸興 가튼 그래도 좀 열린 곳은 그저 形式的으로만 대강 소나 잡고 고기나 논화먹지만 싀골노 가면 참 아들 딸, 장가 싀집잔치 이상의 大事처럼 훌륭훌륭 大훌륭하게 채린다나. 쉬쉬! 쉬! 서울친구들 또 웃겟다. 내가 이 바로 8월 9일 灘箭村에 가서 山川祭 어더먹든 이약이나 한치 끼워 해볼가?.
그 전날부터  灘箭내 O님이 8월 9일날은 山川祭날이니 아목케도 오라고 새로 진 집 구경도 하라고... ... 이러한 懇曲한 付托을 바든 일이 잇섯기에 不得已 가야겟스니 車費 몃 十錢 업세고 그 村을 차저갓다. 한참 밥분통이라 여긔저긔서 山川祭飮食을 분주히 만든다.
내가 그집에 들어가자말자 해가 진다. 나는 원래 말하기 조화하는 놈이라 들어안ㅅ자말자 물어본다.
「해가 지는대 아직 山川祭를 못 지냇나요.」
O님 「아직이 무어야. 캄캄해야지.」
나 「몃시쯤이나 祭祀를 지내나요.」
O님「아마 한 열시쯤 되어야지.」
나 「아니 그런대 山祭는 어데서 지내나요.」
O님 「요게 왜 납작山 밋이 안잇데. 그곳서 하지.」
나 「그것은 왜 지내나요?」 알면서도
O님 「山神靈님을 위해서 해마다 한번식 지내는 法이야.」
하나 틀니지 안켓지! 그레서 쓱 「어서 일하시우다. 잔치상 구경이나 좀 하게.」 하고 상 채리는 구경을 햇다.
채린 物件을 시으니 사과, 배, 대추로부터 明太, 연어, 가제미, 청어 등의 지름진 고기를 지내 떡은 한 서너 가지 지짐이니 나물이니 하고 온갓 飮食物은 싀골이건만 어듸서 장만해 논는지 빼지안코 거더왓겟지!
그러고나서 컴컴할나니까 「O님 올나오시오.」 하고 號令이 내린다. 그 호령에 따라 이집저집서 모다 채려논 음식을 가지고 山川祭터로 가기에 나도 역시 좃차갓다.
산 밋헤다 솔광불을 피우고 차레차레 잔치상을 노화주는 놈이 아마 山川祭와 關係잇는 놈 갓햇다. 상 올나온 것이 끗이나드니 그 놈이 집집 상 차려논대로 일홈쓴 조희놋코 한번 부르고는 영문도 모르게 불에 태우고 태우고 한다. 이게 끗나더니 이번엔 簡單하더라. 소 잡은 국물을 난혼다 고기를<160> 난혼다 야단법석들이고 그새에 山川祭大將가튼 놈은 무슨 글쪼각을 읽고만 잇섯다.
읽고 끗나자 『소국물』 이니 『소고기』 니 하고 散亂하게 解散된다.
그 놈들 가만히 보면 山川祭가 아니라 村民祭 가튼데! 우야 하고 잇다가 정성도 업게 먹을 것 찻고 우야 하고 解散들! 싀싀! 이 소리! 붓그러워 겨우 햇다. 쉬쉬!<161>
<160-161>