別건곤 第10號 (Byeolgeongon No. 10)

1927년 12월 20일 (December 20, 1927)

京城 各女學校聯合音樂會를 보고 (Review of the Gyeongseong Girls' Schools Joint Concert)

又隱生 (Uheunsaeng)

문예평론 (Literary Review)

Review of the Gyeongseong Girls' Schools Joint Concert

Uheunsaeng

The Gyeongseong Girls' Schools Joint Concert, sponsored annually by the Gyeongseong branch of the Osaka Asahi, was held this year on November 19th at 2 PM in the Hasegawa-cho Public Hall.

It was my first outing since returning home, and eager not to be late, I hurried there after lunch. Even before the appointed time, the hall was packed, with crowds overflowing onto the steps outside. I squeezed my way inside, and it seemed that more than half the audience consisted of students from the eleven participating girls' schools, presenting a colorful scene from the outset.

The opening was delayed by ten minutes. The first act of Part 1 was a joint grand chorus by all the schools, titled "Music Concert." There were many performers, and the stage was narrow, so they lined up down to the floor below the stage. However, it took 20 minutes just for them to get on stage, which deviated somewhat from the audience's expectations and dampened the mood. Couldn't they have been organized without such fuss? It was especially disappointing and unpleasant that the Korean female students were even slower and more disorganized. They seemed no different from people who had received no school training at all... The performance began under the direction of Mr. Oba of the First Higher Girls' School, and despite the likely lack of sufficient practice, the results were better than expected. However, it was regrettable that here too, the Korean female students showed almost complete indifference to the conductor.

When singing in a chorus (especially in circumstances like today), the conductor is vitally important. Performers – when a conductor is present – should never forget to pay close attention to the conductor. The fact that the students, especially the Korean students, seemed so indifferent to the conductor on this day exposed their lack of experience with being conducted, which was extremely disappointing.

Geunhwa

Next was the Geunhwa School's chorus. The song "Highland Mary" was of ordinary melody, and the poor performance was due to the unevenness of the students' voices and their lack of refinement. Furthermore, the unpleasant feeling it gave to the listeners was due to insufficient practice. Only I, among many, had high expectations because this school has a special music department, but the result was greatly disappointing. Some students may have been intimidated on stage, but I believe that if they had put in effort normally, it would not have been like that. I especially hope for passionate effort from the teachers.

Jinmyeong

Next, Jinmyeong's unison singing of "Sunrise" was good because all the performers were young and their voices were well-matched. The selection of the song was not difficult, and overall there were no difficulties. The later chorus, "Mountain Weaving," was even better. They well expressed the feeling when singing the song. It was not an outstanding success, but it was generally good. Here, I could see the extraordinary effort of the teachers hidden behind the students, which made me happy.

Dongdeok

Dongdeok School had Ms. Seo's solo performance and a chorus in Part 2. Ms. Seo's solo was the most outstanding performance of the day. "Four-Leaf Clover" was a somewhat difficult song, but Ms. Seo's calm performance was a great success. Her voice quality was quite good, and her demeanor was calm, showing no fear despite it being her first performance, which further improved the performance. "Autumn Star" was also wonderful. I thank the performer and the conductor. However, I was disappointed that the chorus was far inferior to the solo. "Sound of Geese" is a good melody. The song has many fortes and pianos, making it pleasant to listen to, but it would be somewhat difficult for the performers to sing with expression.
However, for some reason, the accompaniment and melody diverged in the middle, causing a major mistake.

The next chorus was a little better, but the intonation was off and the voices were uneven. The intonation errors and mistakes were probably due to fear of performing for the first time, and it seems that the overall sound was not well-matched and that practice was insufficient. I hope for much effort from both the students and the guiding teachers.

Sukmyeong

The most outstanding among the Korean schools on this day was Sukmyeong's chorus. The students' voices were the most evenly matched, the vocalization was good overall, and the practice was sufficient. Looking at the well-chosen songs, I could see that the teacher had put in a particularly great effort. "Temple Bell Sound" was also good, and "Blacksmith's Song" is a beloved song well-known to anyone who enjoys music, so it was the most popular in the hall. It made me realize once again that song selection is very important. As an unnecessary comment, if I may add, it seems that this school does not have a selection of Korean pieces among those usually learned. If that is the case, it is a regrettable matter.

Next was the Girls' Vocational School, and the appearance of the vocational school was considered unusual. It was not very well done, but since they are not Korean, I don't think it is necessary to say much here. <72>

Jeongsin

Ms. Han's solo and a chorus in Part 2 were performed, but the solo was extremely lacking. The song "Blame Those Clouds," composed by teacher Mr. Kim, was not only a plain piece of music, but the performer's voice quality did not seem very good, and it seemed that there was also a lack of normal effort. If there were a foundation built from normal learning, the intonation would not be so off, no matter how nervous they were on stage.
The chorus, "Maidens' Dance," is a famous song originally from a picnic feast, and it was actually better than the solo. The voices seemed well-matched, and there seemed to be a lot of practice, so the results were generally good. However, the song was beyond their level, so it seemed like an unreasonable effort. This is a point where I cannot help but hope for the teacher's consideration.

Next, there was a unison singing by the First Higher Girls' School (Japanese) and a piano solo in Part 2, but although there seemed to be a lot of practice, the results were not very good. There is no need to say more about this.
Next was the Second Higher Girls' School (Japanese), and overall, their performance was the best of the day. Whether in song selection, vocalization, or anything else, I couldn't help but give them first place, but I will omit lengthy comments about this as well.

Yeogo

Hwang's solo was performed at the Gyeongseong Girls' High School in Jae-dong. It was a difficult song beyond her level, but she showed a considerable foundation and seemed to have practiced a lot, so she managed it without much difficulty. However, she paid too much attention and was fussy, unable to use her voice naturally, and therefore the expression was not good either. The results on this day were disappointing.
The two choruses also achieved considerable results. Overall, I could see that the teacher had put in a lot of effort.

Baehwa

The voices were also well-matched. It was generally well done, but the song was a little difficult for their level. Seeing that a school that was not very good at music in the past did this much, I can see that the teacher's effort and the students' practice were extremely great, but I believe that if they had put that much effort into an easier song, they could have achieved even better results.

Ihwa

Finally, there is Ihwa School, which I greatly anticipate – and which the general public probably also anticipated greatly. There was a chorus and a piano solo. The chorus did not have any major mistakes, but it was far different from what I had believed. If you ask what I had so much expectation for, it is difficult to answer, but Ihwa has a lot of specialized music research, and the students also have good and convenient points for practicing compared to other schools, so I thought there would be something most worth seeing. Strangely, it turned out wrong. The song title is "I Love to Sing." It's not an easy song, but it's a smaller song compared to Jeongsin's big song. The vocalization was good overall, and whether looking at the song selection or the practice, the teacher's great effort was evident. However, perhaps it is because of my preconceived notions, but I don't know why there is a religious smell in the way they sing. <73>
The young girl playing the piano was young and did it normally, and her innocent, childlike demeanor was better than her technique, so she was also popular.

Overall Impression

Looking at the overall results of the day, the places most lacking in the chorus were Geunhwa and Dongdeok, and the place that seemed most accustomed to performing was Ihwa. And unexpectedly, the place with good results was Sukmyeong, and the place with the best solo performance was Dongdeok School.
Overall, it is a good discovery from this concert that the voices of the Korean female students have improved. However, I would like to ask the teachers of each school not to choose difficult songs that exceed the students' level. I believe that if you choose a plain song instead of forcing the students with a difficult song out of the teacher's greed, you will get better results with that much effort.
Finally, I wrote this at the request of the editor, and I wrote it not with a professional's attitude, but as a general, if possible, as one of the ordinary audience members, so I have avoided professional detailed reviews. At the same time, I apologize for the fault of reckless criticism and stop here. <26>

**Named Entities**

大阪朝日	Osaka Asahi
長谷川町	Hasegawa-cho
大場氏	Oba-ssi
徐孃	Seo-nyang
金氏	Kim-ssi
齋洞	Jaedong
黃孃	Hwang-nyang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제10호
발행일	1927년 12월 20일
기사제목	京城 各女學校聯合音樂會를 보고
필자	又隱生
기사형태	문예평론

京城 各女學校聯合音樂會를 보고
						又隱生
大阪朝日의 京城支局主催로 해마다 열니는 京城各女學校聯合音樂會가 금년에는 11월 19일 오후 2시 長谷川町 公會堂에서 열렷다.
歸國 後의 첫구경으로 點心後의 거름을 느질가하야 급히 가닛가 時間前이것만은 會衆이 꽉 차고도 또 넘처서 문밧게 층계에까지 갓득하엿다. 억제로 베집고 들어가 보니 출연할 11女學校의 學生들로 반이나 넘어찬 것 갓하야 미리부터 異彩를 보엿다.
定刻보다 10분이나 느저서 開會, 제1부 제일 첫順이 『音樂會』라는 題의 各校聯合大合唱이 엿난대 出演者는 만코 演壇은 좁고하야 壇下에까지 느러스느라고 그랫지만 登壇에만 20분이 걸린 것은 저윽이 會衆의 期待에 버서나서 氣分까지 변하게 하얏다. 그럿케까지 어릿거리지 안코는 고만 整理도 될 수 업슬가. 그 중에도 朝鮮女學生들이 더 느리게 굴고 어릿거리는 것은 더욱 섭섭하고 不快한 일이엿다. 學校訓練은 조곰도 밧아보지 못한 사람과 조곰도 다를 것이 업지 안헛는가... ... 第一高女 大場氏의 指揮로 演奏는 始作되엿는데 成績은 練習이 만히 업섯슬터임에 不拘하고 생각튼이보다 조왓다. 그러나 여긔서도 한가지 朝鮮女學生들이 거의 모다 指揮에 대하야 無關心한 것을 보인 것이 遺憾이엿다.
合唱을 할 때에는 (더구나 오늘 갓흔 境遇에는 더) 그 重要한 生命이 指揮에 잇는 것인즉 出演者는 - 指揮者가 잇슬 때에는 - 指揮者를 향하야 만흔 注意를 하여야 할 것을 닛지 말아야할 것인데 이날 學生들이 특히 朝鮮學生들이 넘어도 指揮에 無關心한 것은 平素에 指揮를 밧아보지 못한 것을 暴露식힌 것이라 大端히 자미업섯다.

槿花

그 다음에 槿花學校의 合唱이 잇섯는데 하일랜드매리-라는 曲은 平凡한 曲調엿는데 조흔 成績을 엇지 못한 것은, 學生들의 소리가 고르지<71> 못하고 그나마 洗練되지 못한 까닭이엿다. 더구나 부르기까지 잘못하야 듯는 이에게 不快한 感을 준 것은 練習이 不足하엿던 것이다. 이 學校에는 特設音樂科가 잇서서 만흔 期待를 가지고 드른 이는 나 하나뿐이 아니엿슬터인데 結果는 너머도 어그러저서 落望하엿다. 多少學生들이 壇上에서 겁을 먹기도 하엿슬 것이나 그러나 平素의 努力이 잇섯드면 그럿틋은 안엇슬 줄 안다. 특히 선생님의 熱이 잇는 努力을 바래기 마지 안는다.

進明

그 다음 進明의 齊唱 『日出』은 出演者가 모도 어린 사람뿐인데 목소리가 고루 모힌 것이 조왓다. 選曲도 어렵지 안흔 것이요 전톄로 難이 업섯다. 나종에 한 合唱 『山의 機織』은 더욱 조왓다. 노래를 부를 때의 氣分 가튼 것도 잘 나타내엿다. 뛰여나는 成功은 못 되엿스나 대톄로 조왓다. 여긔는 學生도 學生이려니와 거긔에 숨은 선생님의 남다른 努力을 엿볼 수 잇서서 깃벗다.

同德

同德校는 徐孃의 獨唱이 잇고 2부에 合唱이 잇섯는데 徐孃의 獨唱은 이날에 제일 뛰여나게 조왓다. 『네닙의 구로바-』는 조곰 어려운 듯한 曲인데 불구하고 徐孃의 沈着한 演奏는 훌륭히 成功하엿다. 聲質이 상당히 좃코 態度가 沈着하야 첫出演이라는데 겁이 업시하야 演奏를 더욱 좃케 하엿다. 다음 『가을별』도 훌륭하엿다. 演者와 指揮者께 感謝한다. 그러나 合唱은 獨唱에 비하야 넘어도 떠러지는 데에 落望하엿다. 『기럭이 소리』는 조흔 曲調이다. 曲中에 强弱이 만허서 듯기에 조흔만큼 演奏하는 이는 表現과 함께 부르기에 多少 힘이 들 것이다.
그런데 엇지된 일인지 中間에 伴奏와 멜로듸-가 어긋나서 크게 실수되엿다.
그 다음 合唱은 조곰 나엇스나 音程이 틀니고 소리가 고루지 못한데 音程이 틀니거가 실수를 하는 것은 처음 出演에 겁을 먹어서 그러한 것이라 하고 原體 소리가 고르게 모히지 못 햇고 練習이 넘어 不足한 것 갓다. 學生들은 勿論이요 指導하는 선생님의 만흔 努力을 바란다.

淑明

이날 朝鮮學校쪽으로 제일 뛰여난 것이 淑明의 合唱이다. 제일 學生이 고르게 모엿고 發聲이 골고로 좃코 練習도 充分한데 曲譜選擇도 잘한 것을 보면 선생님의 努力이 特別히 만헛든 것을 볼 수 잇다. 『절간의 鍾소리』도 조왓고 『대장간의 노래』는 음악을 즐긴다는 사람은 누구나 잘 아는 사랑밧는 曲譜인만큼 場內의 人氣가 제일 조왓다. 曲譜選擇이 重要한 關係가 잇는 것을 다시 늣기게 하엿다. 군더덕이 갓흐나 한마듸 添附하라면 이 學校에서는 平素에 배호는 것 중에서 朝鮮것을 골나낼 것을 가지지 못한 것 갓다. 事實이면 섭섭한 일이다.

그 다음에는 女子實業學校인데 實業校의 出演은 珍奇하게 生覺되엿다. 그리 잘된 것도 업스나 朝鮮사람이 아니니 여긔서 길게 말할 必要가 업슬 줄 안다.<72>

貞信

韓孃의 獨唱과 제2부에 合唱이 잇섯는데 獨唱은 大端히 不足한 것이엿다. 『저구름 탓』이라는 것으로 선생님 金氏의 作曲이라는데 曲譜도 平凡한 것이지만은 演奏하는 이의 聲質도 그리 조와 보이지 안코 平素의 努力도 不足한 것 갓햇다. 平素에 배와 가진 基礎가 잇다면 아모리 登壇에 겁을 먹어도 그다지 音程이 틀니지는 안흘 것이다.
合唱 『娘子의 群』은 原 郊宴의 歌라 하는 유명한 曲인데 도리혀 獨唱보다 조왓다. 소리도 골고로 모힌 모양이요 練習도 만흔 모양이라 成績도 普通으로 잘 되엿는데 曲譜가 程度에 넘는 것이라, 無理의 努力이라고 보엿다. 선생님의 考慮를 바라지 안을 수 업는 點이다.

그 다음에는 第一高女(日)의 齊唱이 잇고 제2부의 피아노 獨奏가 잇섯는데 練習은 만흔 모양이나 그리 成績이 좃치는 못 햇다. 이것도 더 말할 必要는 업겟다.
그 다음 第二高女(日)인데 全體로 보아 이날 首位를 차지할 成績이엿다. 曲譜選擇으로나 發聲으로나 무얼로나 제1위를 아니 줄 수 업섯스나 이것도 긴말은 略한다.

女高

齋洞의 京城女子高普, 黃孃의 獨唱이 잇는데 程度에 넘는 難曲인데 基礎는 相當하고 練習도 만히한 모양이 보여 그리 難업시하여 넘겻는데 넘어 注意를 甚히하야 껄끔거렷고 목소리를 저대로 쓰지 못 하엿고 따라서 表現도 좃치 못 하엿다. 이날 成績은 앗갑게 되엿다.
合唱 두 가지도 상당한 成績을 어덧다. 大體로 선생님의 努力이 만흔 것을 알겟다.

培花

소리도 고루 모엿다. 보통으로 잘 되엿는데 曲譜가 조곰 程度에 어렵다. 前日에 音樂으로 그리 보잘 것 업던 學校가 이만큼이라도 한 것을 보면 선생님의 努力과 學生들의 練習이 非常히 만헛슴을 알겟는데 平易한 曲譜로 그만한 努力을 하엿더면 더 조흔 成績을 어들 수 잇섯슬 줄 안다.

梨花

끗흐로 내가 만히 期待하는 - 또 一般이 만흔 期待를 가지고 기다렷슬 - 梨花學校이다. 合唱과 피아노 獨奏가 잇섯는데 合唱도 큰 실수는 업섯스나 밋든 바와는 넘어도 틀렷다. 무얼 가지고 期待가 만헛섯느냐고 무르면 對答하기는 困難하나 梨花에는 音樂專門硏究가 만히 잇고 學生들도 다른 學校에 비하야 練習하기 좃코 便한 點이 잇는 만큼 가장 볼만한 것이 잇스리라 하엿섯던 것이 妙하게 어그러저 버리고 말앗다. 曲名은 『내가 노래키 조와해』 쉬운 曲은 아니나 貞信의 큰 曲에 비하야는 적은 曲이다. 發聲도 大體로 좃코 選曲으로 보던지 練習으로 보던지 선생님의 만흔 努力이 보엿다. 그러나 나의 先入見 때문인지는 모르나 어덴지 모르게 노래를 부르는 데에 宗敎냄새가 나는 것은 읏전 까닭인지 모르겟다.<73>
피아노 타는 少女는 어린 사람인데 보통으로는 되엿고 技術보다도 演者의 邪氣업는 어린 態度가 조와서 人氣도 조왓다.

總觀

이날 大體成績으로 보아 合唱에 제일 빠진 곳이 槿花와 同德이엿고 出演에 닉어 보이는 곳은 梨花이엿섯다. 그리고 뜻밧게 成績 조흔 곳이 淑明이요 獨唱으로 제일 나흔 곳이 同德學校엿섯다.
전체적으로 朝鮮女學生들의 소리가 조와진 것은 이 音樂會에서 엇은 조흔 發見이다. 그런데 各學校 敎員 여러분께 學生들의 程度에 지나치는 어려운 曲을 擇하지 말라고 附托하고 십흐니 선생의 慾心으로 大曲을 擇하야 無理로 學生을 울리지 말고 平凡한 曲을 擇하면 그만한 努力으로도 더 조흔 成績을 엇을 것을 밋는 까닭이다.
끗흐로 나는 이것을 編者의 要求에 依하야 쓴 것이요 쓰되 專門家的 態度로가 아니라 一般的 될 수 잇스면 普通聽衆의 한 사람으로서 쓴 것인 故로 專門的 細評을 避한 것을 말해두고 동시에 妄評의 허물을 謝하고 그만둔다.<26>
<71-73, 26>