잡지명 別乾坤 제10호
발행일 1927년 12월 20일
기사제목 靑巾御筆論(現代支那珍聞), 隨感隨想, 요새 이때에 생각되는 일 (A Discussion on the Blue Turban Imperial Brush (Modern Chinese Anecdotes), Random Thoughts and Reflections, Thoughts on These Times)
필자 安往居(代惜惺子作) (Anwanggeo (pen name Daesokseongjaja))
기사형태 세태비평 (Critique of the Times)

I want to express my sympathy to Seongseongja (惺惺子). What words should I use to express my sympathy in the most "passionate, resentful, appreciative, tearful" way? Perhaps "misery loves company (同病相憐)," perhaps "shared pain (痛癢相關)," perhaps "orchids burned, sweet herbs sighed at (蘭焚蕙嗟)," perhaps "the fox's death brings sorrow to the rabbit (狐死兎悲)," perhaps "night rain in Bashan (巴山夜雨)," perhaps "the empty beams and the setting moon (空樑落月)," perhaps "frosty morning and night rain (霜晨夜雨)," perhaps "flower morning and moonlit evening (花朝月夕)," perhaps "entering the forest arm in arm (入林把臂)," perhaps "looking at each other by the lamplight (剔燈相看)," perhaps "Seongseong pities Seongseong (惺惺惜惺惺)." Among these various expressions, the phrase "Seongseong pities Seongseong" contains the most "passionate, resentful, appreciative, tearful" meaning. However, if Seongseongja has not closely interacted with Seongseongja, then that heart of pity will also be weak.

Looking back on the eight characters emblazoned on the "Sinhai Gimsa Magazine (辛亥唫社雜誌)," "ten thousand ri double eyes, four seas one collar (萬里雙眸, 四海一衿)," if I recall that meaning even now, the feeling lies in close interaction, and even if scattered at the ends of the earth, Seongseongja will cherish Seongseongja. For the most part, if a person's life curses their misfortune and ultimately wanders in their final years, their situation in the vast ocean is like one grain of millet. It will be difficult for the wanderer to guess whether the observer on the other side of the ocean views it with coldness or passion. However, Sokseongja says that if the wandering person curses their misfortune and wanders in their final years as a person who "cannot read a single character (目不識丁), and lacks a single coin (囊乏一錢)," then they will ultimately be overlooked with coldness, but if the wandering person wanders while embracing "one goodness, one skill, one art, one technique (一善一能, 一藝一術)," then they will be viewed with passion.

Regardless of country or era, the position of the emperor should only be discussed in terms of "politics and strategy (政治上, 度略上)," and there is no need to discuss art. However, emperors at the end of their reigns are often born into luxurious and comfortable lives, spending many years indulging in singing and music, and then one day offering the foundation of their ancestors to another with both hands, enjoying the wealth of Chen Shubao in the tune of "Backyard Flowers."

Speaking of the last emperor of China, the deposed Emperor Xuantong (宣統), at the young age of 45 <84>, he does not have the leisure to know what politics is or what strategy is. Then, does he merely consider it fortunate to have avoided starvation with "several courtiers, several eunuchs, and several red sleeves" in the Jehol Cold Palace (熱河冷宮), spending his days singing and making music? Or does he curse his misfortune and lament his fate?

Sokseongja happened to browse the China Yishi Daily (中華益世報) and could not help but shed endless tears of nameless emotion for the deposed Emperor Xuantong of China.

Xuantong has a certain fondness, and that fondness is for writing. In the past, he wielded his brush and wrote over 70 pairs of couplets, and wearing tattered clothes and a broken hat, accompanied by a single eunuch, he went to various shops in the guise of a poor scholar from the countryside, selling the couplets. The next day, Xuantong ordered the eunuch to buy back the couplets he had sold for 100 silver dollars per pair. Only 4 or 5 of the 70-odd couplets remained intact in the shops. The shop owners who possessed the 4 or 5 couplets were momentarily astonished, and there was a comment that "the price increased a hundredfold before the ink was dry (墨跡未乾에 價增百倍)." At the end of the couplets, there was a seal engraved with the two characters "Blue Turban (靑巾)." The shop owners asked the eunuch about the owner of the seal. The eunuch replied that the character "Blue (靑)" is half of the character "Qing (淸)," and the character "Turban (巾)" is half of the character "Emperor (帝)." This fact was momentarily spread throughout the Chinese calligraphy world.

Sokseongja says that the deposed Emperor Xuantong's selling of couplets may have been a temporary farce, but it is enough to evoke a certain sentiment in us Koreans. Suppose there was a seal with the characters "Yang Turban (羊巾)" in a Korean bookstore... Continuing with a quatrain:

The man who sells books in quail clothes and a broken hat. Has already protected the country and the people. Tell the grieving Emperor of Jiangdong, Why not learn from the Blue Turban? <85>

**Named Entities**

宣統	Seontong
陳叔寶	Chin Sukpo
熱河冷宮	Yeolheo Naenggung
中華益世報	Junghwa Iksebo
辛亥唫社雜誌	Sinhai Gimsa 잡지



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제10호
발행일	1927년 12월 20일
기사제목	靑巾御筆論(現代支那珍聞), 隨感隨想, 요새 이때에 생각되는 일
필자	安往居(代惜惺子作)
기사형태	세태비평

靑巾御筆論(現代支那珍聞), 隨感隨想, 요새 이때에 생각되는 일
						安往居(代惜惺子作)
惺惺子는 惺惺子의게 同情을 表하고자 한다. 同情을 表하는 言詞에 대하야는 무삼 言詞를 使用하여야 가장 「多情的, 多恨的, 多靑眼的, 多熱淚的」, 同情의 言詞가 되겟나냐 혹 「同病相憐」, 혹 「痛癢相關」, 혹 「蘭焚蕙嗟」, 혹 「狐死兎悲」, 혹 「巴山夜雨」, 혹 「空樑落月」, 혹 「霜晨夜雨」, 혹 「花朝月夕」, 혹 「入林把臂」, 혹 「剔燈相看」, 혹 「惺惺惜惺惺」 이라는 諸般表情詞이 잇지마는 그 중에 제일 「惺惺惜惺惺」 이라는 句語가 「多情, 多恨, 多靑眼, 多熱淚」 인 意味를 含有하엿도다. 그러나 惺惺子이 惺惺子를 親近히 接觸치 못한 時는 또한 그 惜惺心이 薄弱할 것이다.
向來 「辛亥唫社雜誌」에 標榜한 8個字, 「萬里雙眸, 四海一衿」 이라는 그 意味를 至今까지 回想할지면 그 感想이 親近接觸에 在할뿐 아니라 비록 天涯地角에 散在할지라도 惺惺子는 惺惺子를 愛惜한다할 거이다. 大抵 人生의 一生이 末運을 呪咀하다가 畢竟 末路에 彷徨할지면 茫茫한 滄海에 그 身勢난 一粒粟과 如하도다. 滄海의 彼岸에 在한 觀望者는 그 觀念이 冷情으로 視할넌지 熱情으로 視할넌지 彷徨者의 推測으로는 알기 어려울 것이다. 그러나 惜惺子는 말하되 彼彷徨子가 「目不識丁, 囊乏一錢」 한 人格으로써 末運을 呪咀하다가 末路에 彷徨할지면 終是冷情으로 看過하겟지마는 만일 그 彷徨子가 「一善一能, 一藝一術」 을 抱有하고저가티 彷徨할지면 熱情으로 看過하겟다 하노라.
母論何國何代하고 帝王의 身分은 「政治上, 度略上」을 論할 뿐이요 藝術을 論할 必要는 업다할지나 每常末路帝王이 紈袴膏梁에 生長하여 朝歌夜絃으로 許久한 세월을 消遣하다가 一朝一夕에 祖宗의 基業을 제2인의게 雙手로 奉獻하고 後庭花한 曲調에 陳叔寶의 富貴를 安樂하는도다.
最近末路帝王의 支那廢帝宣統으로 말할진댄 冲年45세에<84> 政治가 무엇닌지 度略이 무어인지 알를 餘裕가 업도다. 그러면 熱河冷宮에 「幾個侍臣, 幾個閹者, 幾個紅袖」를 다리고 松柏餓魂을 免得한 것만 多幸히 알고 朝歌夜絃으로 세월을 消遣하는가 또는, 그러치 아니하고 末運을 呪咀하고 末路를 悲歎하는가.
惜惺子는 우연히 中華益世報를 閱覽하다가 支那廢帝宣統을 위하야 無名業淚가 한업시 흘으는 것을 禁치 못하엿다.
宣統은 一種好癖이 有한대 그 好癖은 書癖이라 向者에 柱聯 70여幅을 揮灑하여 가지고 獘衣破帽로 閹者一人을 帶同하고 鄕曲窮措大貌樣으로 各店鋪에 다니면서 柱聯을 行賣하엿다. 그 翌日에 宣統은 閹者를 命하여 行賣한 柱聯을 一對에 대하여 洋銀百圓으로 買收케 하엿다. 70여幅인 柱聯이 店鋪에 完存한 것이 4, 5幅에 지나지 못하엿다. 4, 5幅을 保有한 店主는 一時驚怪하야 墨跡未乾에 價增百倍」 라는 評論이 잇섯다. 그 柱聯紙尾에는 靑巾二字로 刻한 篆文圖章이 잇섯다. 店主는 閹者의게 圖章主人을 무럿다. 閹者는 答하되 靑字는 淸字半部이요. 巾字는 帝字半部라고 말하엿다. 그 事實이 全支那書墨界에 一時宣傳되엿다.
惜惺子는 말하되 宣統廢帝의 柱聯行賣는 一時活劇的에 母過하다 할지나 우리 高麗人에 대하야는 一種感想을 惹할만하다. 假令 高麗人書店에 羊巾이라는 圖章...... 繼吟一絶曰
鶉衣破帽鬻書人. 已把山河護國民. 寄語江東懷愍帝 靑衣何不學靑巾.<85>
<84-85>