잡지명	별건곤 제10호
발행일	1927년 12월 20일
기사제목	名男名女 숨은 장끼 歲暮 餘興競技大會 (Hidden Talents of Famous Men and Women: Year-End Entertainment Competition)
필자	主催 觀相者 後援 探報軍
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellany)

Hidden Talents of Famous Men and Women: Year-End Entertainment Competition
						Organized by: Spectators, Supported by: Reconnaissance Corps
1. Women's Section

Since Kwon Aera began dreaming sweet dreams about married life, we haven't been able to hear the Kaesong Nanbongga song at all. Since the vocalist Yun Simdeok danced the airplane dance on the high waves of the Korean Strait, only the sorrowful "In Praise of Death" remains on the record. It's already been quite some time since Woo Bong-woon left the warm embrace of her husband, Gi Seok-ho, but the song "The Grief of Love" which was influenced by Gi Seok-ho's teachings ("In a lonely world - in a fierce sea, only love is you, allow me to only taste a perfect life in your warm embrace") makes the eardrums of many people at any venue resonate, making listeners wonder how such a clear sound can come from that small and dark mouth, often surprising them. And her performance of the Sosang Eight Views ballad is not exactly new. Jo Won-suk's Gangwon-do long Nanbongga, "Slowly, a persistent rain in the east wind, enjoying the view with my lover in the Seohwa year wind," isn't too awkward with her janggu accompaniment. Kang Jeong-hee - formerly known as Kang Ageunniya -'s Internationale is worth listening to, but it's a great pity that she can't do it as she pleases because of the authorities' restrictions, but her lively Russian dance receives a lot of welcome from many people. It's a shame that Hwang Shin-deok can't even sing a single Susimga song, given that she was born in Pyongyang, but as her mother's youngest daughter, she's good at acting cute and is good at conversation, which is indispensable at any gathering. Park Won-hee doesn't have anything special to show off in terms of entertainment, but seeing her always carrying her beloved daughter who has no father, everyone believes she must know how to sing a sorrowful "lullaby" in her room: "Baby! Baby - don't cry - your father has gone to the Land of Ghosts. He will come when the beans sprout under the bean plant." Shim Jeong-suk's recitation of poetry sounds like a bumblebee flying in the spring breeze, but Jeong Jong-myeong's "Yangsan-do" song matches her face; she is like a yanggeum (dulcimer). After Lee Hyeon-gyeong was ridiculed several times at a gathering of ordinary women for mistakenly singing a mokchimdori song, she was greatly motivated and is trying hard to learn a Sosang Eight Views song from In Dong-cheol, but since she hasn't made a public appearance yet, we can't just say anything about it. Judging from the fact that Jeong Chil-seong used to have a fragrant name in the previous era for her gayageum, danga, and other southern songs, it seems like she would always win first prize at any gathering, but just like a famous calligrapher doesn't write the "Ipchun" (Beginning of Spring) characters well, she doesn't show off her talent easily and seems to be only enthusiastic about sewing, as she has acquired a new nickname of Sewing Teacher. Judging from Shim Eun-suk's demure attitude, everyone thinks she can't even sing a song, but according to what one of her childhood friends in her hometown says, she used to sing the Chuncheon Arirang very well when she was young: "Mt. Bongui of Chuncheon, stay well. The boat landing of Sinyeon River says goodbye." I wonder if she is still the same as before. Choi Eun-hee, <132> born in Haeseo (Hwanghae Province), likes Namdo songs and southern style, and even though she can't do it herself, when she hears someone else singing a short song, her shoulders naturally form the Chinese character for mountain (山), and her fingers wear out as she keeps time, and sometimes when she gets excited, she plays the kkwaengmae to liven up the atmosphere. Her close friend Park Gyeong-sik is good at playing male actor roles because her voice is male, so if her alumni association puts on an amateur play, they will definitely recommend her as a male actor. When you hear Moon In-soon playing the dulcimer, "Dangdang-dungjidang-jingdang-darochim," people exclaim, "When did the Ewha Hakdang teacher learn that!" Kim Hwal-ran's hymns are originally famous, but Heo Young-sook's "Pounding Taryeong" would make even a Pyongyang playboy shed tears and run away.
If Yoo Young-joon doesn't do as well as Jeong Chil-seong, but if he were to sing a Seodo (Northwestern provinces) boat song, even the most strong-hearted person would shed a tear. However, recently he often makes his classmates laugh with clumsy Chinese songs. Yoo Gwak-gyeong's hymns are beautiful, but no matter how loudly she sings, she is small, so her voice is also small, so someone like the idiotic Kim Mi-ri just stares blankly and complains, wondering why she is standing on the entertainment stage. As a penalty for not being able to entertain, let Son Jeong-gyu do her specialty *ppongina* (flax spinning), and let Joo Se-juk do 『Tteurampu』(Trampu) and since Han Sin-gwang has a lot of eloquence, let's recommend him as the Entertainment Event Emcee.

2. Men's Section

No matter how much we talk about women's liberation and respect for women's rights, it would be unfair if we only had women's entertainment and not men's entertainment, and there would be controversy. But since we're short on time, let's just do a rough overview of the entertainment in the men's world. As Seok-ju Ahn has been involved in the Christian church for many years, he is very good at imitating praying. It is also worth seeing a Westerner imitate praying in broken Korean, and especially when imitating Yu Seong-jun, clenching his fists and gritting his teeth, saying, "You are here today to do what business," even the person with the strongest umbilical cord will have their navel torn. If Lee Dong-baek were to see In Dong-cheol of the Labor Union singing a danga, he would rush to shake his hand, saying, "Hey comrade - let's unite all our famous singers." As lawyer Kim Byeong-ro was born in Jeolla-do, the birthplace of entertainers, he is good at all Namdo songs, but especially the farewell song from Chunhyangga, if Song Man-gap of Gurye were to hear it, he would try hard to make him his chief disciple, and Kim Yong-moo's short song is also quite impressive. Judging by his name, Kang Geo-bok should be good at the turtle dance, but his Hwanghae Province Susimga is considerable. Lee Hang-jong, the branch manager of Hanil Bank,s hunchback dance and Lee Doo-seong, the former publisher of Gaebyeok,s turtle dance can be called the twin peaks of the entertainment venue. Kim Seong-soo, the former president of the Dong-A Ilbo,s six-character poem is not so bad, but Kim Joon-yeon, the editor-in-chief,s German dance adds a unique flair. Min Tae-won of the Jung-Oe Ilbo was born in Seosan, the hometown of Korean sijo poetry, so his mokchimdolrim sijo is as good as anyone else's, but he can also do other 잡가 (miscellaneous songs) for entertainment. It would be a mistake to only know Kim Gi-jeon, the head of the Cheondogyo Youth Party, as a scholar. If he sings "Gangchocchilsilhwanchusaeng" in the Cheongbuk Sorrowful Song style, everyone will be surprised. Kim Gi-jin of the Jung-Oe Ilbo's "Moshimoshi Kanyo" singing style looks innocently childlike like a young elementary school student. I heard from his close friend that Lee Gi-yeong is good at singing "Cheongdae Soybean Taryeong," but it is a pity that the organizers did not hear it. As Kwon Gu-hyeon occasionally publishes his own sijo creations, he is also good at sijo, and when he gets drunk, he sometimes sings danga. It's already late - it's a pity, but let's postpone the men's entertainment to some opportunity in the New Year and close the meeting. Ding-dong, thank you, thank you.<133>

**Named Entities**

權愛羅	Kwon Aera
開城	Kaesŏng
尹心悳	Yun Simdeok
禹鳳雲	Woo Bong-woon
奇석호	Gi Seok-ho
趙元淑	Cho Won-suk
江原道	Kangwŏn-do
姜貞熙	Kang Chŏng-hŭi
黃信德	Hwang Sin-dŏk
平壤	P’yŏngyang
朴元熙	Pak Wŏn-hŭi
沈貞淑	Sim Chŏng-suk
鄭鍾鳴	Chŏng Chong-myŏng
李賢卿	I Hyŏn-gyŏng
印東哲	In Tong-ch’ŏl
丁七星	Chŏng Ch’il-sŏng
沈恩淑	Sim Ŭn-suk
春川	Ch’unch’ŏn
鳳儀山	Pongŭisan
崔恩喜	Ch’oe Ŭn-hŭi
海西	Haesŏ
朴敬植	Pak Kyŏng-sik
文仁順	Mun In-sun
梨花學堂	Ihwa Haktang
金活蘭	Kim Hwal-lan
許英肅	Hŏ Yŏng-suk
劉英俊	Yu Yŏng-jun
兪珏卿	Yu Kwak-kyŏng
金美理	Kim Mi-ri
孫貞圭	Son Chŏng-gyu
朱世竹	Chu Se-juk
韓晨光	Han Sin-gwang
安碩柱	An Sŏk-chu
兪星濬	Yu Sŏng-jun
李東伯	I Tong-baek
金炳魯	Kim Pyŏng-no
全羅道	Chŏlla-do
宋萬甲	Song Man-gap
求禮	Kurye
金用茂	Kim Yong-mu
康巨福	Kang Kŏ-bok
黃海道	Hwanghae-do
李恒鍾	I Hang-jong
李斗星	I Tu-sŏng
開闢	Kaebyŏk
金性洙	Kim Sŏng-su
東亞日報	Tonga Ilbo
金俊淵	Kim Chun-yŏn
閔泰瑗	Min T’ae-wŏn
中外日報	Chungoe Ilbo
瑞山	Sŏsan
金起田	Kim Ki-jŏn
天道敎靑年黨	Ch'ŏndogyo Ch'ŏngnyŏn-tang
金基鎭	Kim Ki-jin
李箕永	I Ki-yŏng
權九鉉	Kwon Ku-hyŏn



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제10호
발행일	1927년 12월 20일
기사제목	名男名女 숨은 장끼 歲暮 餘興競技大會
필자	主催 觀相者 後援 探報軍
기사형태	잡저

名男名女 숨은 장끼 歲暮 餘興競技大會
						主催 觀相者 後援 探報軍
1. 女子部

權愛羅氏가 살님사리에 단꿈을 뀐 뒤로는 開城난봉가 소리를 아주 드러볼 수가 업고. 성악가 尹心悳氏가 현해탄 고래등에서 비행긔 춤을 춘 뒤에는 애닯흔 「死의 讚美」만 레코트판에 남어 잇슬 뿐이다. 禹鳳雲氏가 그의 夫君 奇석호氏의 따뜻한 품속을 떠난 지는 벌서 오라지만은 奇氏의 훈도(薰陶)를 바든 「쓸쓸한 세상-흉흉한 바다에 오즉 사랑은 너 한아 뿐이니, 따듯한 품에서-완전한 생활만 맛보게 하여주」하는 「恨의 임」이라는 노래는 어느 會場이든지 여러 사람의 고막을 울니여서 듯는 사람으로 하야금 그 깜앗코 깜앗코 깨마중이 가튼 입 속에서 엇지 저러한 청아한 소리가 나오나 하고 각금 각금 놀나게 한다. 그리고 그의 潚湘八景의 단가도 그리 新入生은 안이다. 「슬슬 동풍에 구진 비오고 서화년풍에 임석겨 논다」라는 趙元淑氏의 江原道 긴 난봉가는 그의 장구소리와 함끠 과히 어색지는 안타. 姜貞熙氏-前生姜아근니야氏의 國際歌는 한마듸 드를만하지만은 당국의 저촉이되야 마음대로 못하는 것이 큰 遺憾이지만은 활발한 로시아 딴스는 여러 사람의 환영을 만히 밧는다. 黃信德氏는 그의 出生地가 平壤인것 보와서는 수심가 한마듸도 못하는 것이 유감이나 그 어머니의 망내딸이니만큼 어리광을 잘 피우고 좌담(座談)을 잘하는 것이 어느 會席에서든지 빠지지 못할 일이다. 朴元熙氏는 餘興에 이럿타고 내노흘 것은 업지만은 아버지 업는 그 사랑하는 따님을 항상 업고 다니는 것을 보면 그의 집 방 속에서 남몰내 「아강! 아강-우지마라-네 아버지 귀셰갓다. 살광 밋헤 살문 팟이 싹 나거든 오마드라」라는 구슬푼 「자장歌」 한마듸는 의레히 할 줄로 누구나 밋는다. 沈貞淑氏의 詩唱의 細唱은 봄바람에 날려가는 참벌의 소리갓지만은 鄭鍾鳴氏의 「양산도」쳥은 얼골을 보와서 양금채이다. 李賢卿氏가 일반녀자의 集會席에서 목침도리의 노래 한아를 잘못해서 조롱을 몃 번 드른 뒤로는 아주 奮發하야 印東哲氏에게 潚湘八景 한마듸를 배우랴고 각금 애를 쓴다는 일은 드럿지만은 아즉 公開出演을 안이 하엿스니 이럿타고 함부로 말할 수는 업다. 丁七星氏가 前日時代에 가야금, 단가 기타 남도소리로 향그러운 이름을 날니든 것을 보와서는 어느 회석이든지 의레히 일등상은 독차지할 것 갓지만은 진소위 名筆은 「立春」 글시를 잘 안이 쓰는 격으로 여간해서는 그의 재조는 잘 뵈이지 안코 裁縫先生님의 새雅號를 어드니만큼 裁縫에만 熱心을 하는 모양이다. 沈恩淑氏는 그의 새침한 태도를 보와서는 누구나 노래 한마듸도 못할 줄 알지만은 그의 故鄕에 잇는 엇든 그의 동모의 말을 드르면 어렷슬 때에 「春川의 鳳儀山아 너 잘 잇거라. 新延江 배터가 하직이다.」라는 春川아리랑을 곳잘 하엿다고 하난대 지금도 如前한지 궁금하다. 崔恩喜氏는<132> 海西胎生으로서는 남도소리 南國風流를 조와하야 자긔가 할 줄은 몰나도 다른 사람의 短歌하는 소리를 드르면 억개가 저절로 멧山字가 되야 장단을 치너라도 저갈짝이 다 불어지고 엇던 때에 흥이 나면 꽹맥이를 처서 일반의 흥을 도든다. 그의 단짝 동모 朴敬植氏는 목청이 男聲이니만치 男俳優 노릇을 잘 하는데 그의 同窓會素人劇을 한다면 의레히 그를 男俳優로 추천한다. 文仁順氏의 「당당-둥지당-징당-다로침」하고 洋琴치는 소리를 드르면 梨花學堂 선생님이 어느 결을에 저것을 배웟노!하고 일반이 놀내며 金活蘭氏의 讚美歌도 원래 유명하지만은 許英肅氏의 「방아타령」은 平壤날탕패가 왓다가도 눈물을 짓고 달아날 것이다.
劉英俊氏는 그가 丁七星氏 모양으로 잘 하지를 안어 그럿치 만일에 西道뱃따락이를 한다면 제아모리 剛膓者라도 한줄기 눈물을 흘일 터이다. 그러나 근래에는 스투른 中國노래로 동모들을 각금 웃긴다. 兪珏卿氏의 讚美歌 소리는 곱기는 곱지만은 아모리 高聲大唱을 한다하야도 體小하니만콤 목쳥도 적으닛가 이롱증 잇는 金美理士 가튼 이는 멀그머니 치여다만보고 저이는 엇지하야 餘興場에 나와 섯기만하나하고 괘사만 부릴 것이다. 孫貞圭氏는 餘興 못하는 罰로 한구석에서 그의 長技인 *뽕이나 하고 朱世竹氏도 『뜨람푸』나 하게 하며 韓晨光氏는 辯才가 만흐니 餘興係式辭部長으로 추천하자.

2. 男子部

아모리 女性해방이니 女權尊重이니하야도 女子의 餘興만 하고 男子의 여흥을 안이하면 不公平하다고 是非가 날 것이다. 그러나 시간이 밧부닛가 男子界의 여흥은 대강대강하자. 夕影安碩柱氏가 多年 예수교회에 관계가 만히 잇는 이 만큼 긔도하는 흉내를 썩 잘한다. 서양사람의 반벙어리 조선말로 긔도하는 흉내내는 것도 볼만하거니와 특히 兪星濬氏의 흉내를 낼 때에 주먹을 꽉쥐며 이를 악물고서 「여러분이 오늘날 잇서 무슨 사업을」라고 하는 데에는 제아모리 배곱줄이 튼튼한 사람이라도 배곱이 찌여질 것이다. 勞總의 印東哲氏의 단가는 李東伯이가 보면 「여보 동무-우리 名唱은 다가티 團結합시다.」하고 손을 잡으러 덤빌 터이다. 辯護士 金炳魯氏는 광대의 모자리판인 全羅道胎生이니만콤 南道소리를 다 잘 하지만은 특히 春香歌中의 리별歌 일절은 求禮宋萬甲이가 드르면 首弟子를 삼으랴고 애를 쓸 것이요 金用茂氏의 短歌도 行勢거리는 된다. 康巨福氏는 이름으로 보와서 거북춤을 잘 출 것 갓지만은 黃海道 수심歌가 상당하다. 韓銀支配人 李恒鍾氏의 등곱쟁이춤과 前開闢發行人 李斗星氏의 거북춤은 餘興會場의 雙璧이라 하겟다. 前東亞日報社長 金性洙氏의 六字백이도 조박은 免하얏지만은 編輯局長 金俊淵氏의 獨逸춤은 한 異彩를 더한다. 中外日報 閔泰瑗氏는 조선詩調鄕인 瑞山出生이니만큼 목침돌림의 詩調 한 장은 과이 남부럽지 안치만은 다른 잡가도 여흥일석은 할만한다. 天道敎靑年黨頭 金起田氏를 學者님으로만 알어서는 失敗이다. 淸北愁心歌調로 「江草日日喚愁生」 한마듸를 부르면 누구나 括目상대할 것이다. 中外日報 金基鎭氏의 「モシモシカンヨ」하는 唱歌하는 태도는 어린 小學生과 가티 天眞란만스럽게 뵈인다. 李箕永氏가 「청대콩타령」을 잘한다는 말은 그의 각가운 친구에게 드럿스나 主催者가 드러보지 못한 것이 遺憾이다. 權九鉉氏는 時調의 創作을 각금 내놋는니만큼 時調도 곳잘하고 醉興이 나는 때에는 단가도 각금 나온다. 익크 時間이 벌서 느젓다-遺憾이지만은 男子의 餘興은 新年 어느 機會로 밀고 구만 閉會하자. 딸랑딸랑 多謝多謝.<133>
<132-133>