잡지명	別건곤 第10號
발행일	1927년 12월 20일
기사제목	萬事都監, 記者競爭 一頁記事 (Jack-of-all-trades, A Page of Reporter Competition)
필자	乭伊
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellaneous Essay)

萬事都監, 記者競爭 一頁記事
						乭伊

Question to Mr. Reporter. I have a question. Looking at the newspapers from the countryside, that person's name appears almost daily in both big and small matters. What kind of person is he? What is his character like? What is his knowledge like? What is his efficiency at work like? And what is his background?

Answer Are you talking about him? Well, he is a truly excellent gentleman. To list all his titles on his name card, you would need at least a quarto-sized name card. And if you were to write an epitaph for him after he dies, you would need at least a whole bolt of long silk. He is a truly remarkable elder. If you asked me to write his epitaph, I would write it like this:

Former Official of the Munmyo in OO County (前OO郡文廟直員)
Former Secretary of OO Department (前OO部主事)
Former Chief Writer of OO Newspaper (前OO新聞社主筆)
Former Head of OO Friendship Association (前OO親睦OO長)
Former Student of O University for One Year During OO Sports Era (前OO運動時O大學一年修業)
Former Temporary President (前OO臨時社長)
Former Founder of the People's University (前民立大學發起人)
Former Executive of the Local Products Promotion O (前物産獎勵O幹事)
Former Founder of the All-Joseon Reporters' Assembly O (前全鮮記者大O發起人)
Former Executive of Our Friendship O (前우리親睦O幹事)
Former Committee Member of Flood Relief O (前水害救濟O委員)
Former Preparatory Committee Member for Welcoming An Ch'ang-nam O (前安昌男歡迎O準備委員)
Former Preparatory Committee Member for Welcoming Indian Youth O (前印度靑年歡迎O準備委員)
Former Committee Member of the Education Association O (前敎育協O委員)
Former Critic of the All-Joseon Middle School Students' Eloquence Contest O (前全鮮中學生雄辯大O批評人)
Former Congratulatory Speaker at the OO School Graduation Ceremony (前OO學校卒業式祝辭人)
Former Initiator of Welcoming Furuya Fuse O (前古屋布施歡迎O發起人)
Head of the OO Family (OO이집家長)
OOOO Committee Member (OOOO委員)
OOOO Member (OOOO員)
Alias: Jack-of-all-trades (萬事都監)
Nature: Neither strong nor weak (無强無柔)
Knowledge: No special skills besides some Chinese characters (漢字) (若干의 漢字外에 別無特長)
Eloquence: Only good enough to give a congratulatory speech at an elementary school graduation (口辯은 小學校卒業式祝辭나 할만하고)
Writing: Only good enough to write a small Korean-Chinese manuscript (文筆은 國漢體小原稿나 쓸만하고)
Home: A rented room with monthly rent (집은 單間朔月貰집이고)
Clothing: Wears Western clothes occasionally in addition to Korean clothes (朝鮮옷) (옷은 朝鮮옷外에 洋服을 番次例하고)
Wife: Has a Seoul wife in addition to a primary wife in the countryside (안해는 서울宅外에 시골에 本妻가 잇다).

He is such a remarkable and great elder. That's why his name appears so often in the newspapers. There are many such magnificent gentlemen in Joseon. In other words, there are many jacks-of-all-trades (萬事都監). Wouldn't you like to have one of these Jack-of-all-trades calling cards? <140>

**Named Entities**

安昌男	An Ch'ang-nam
古屋布施	Furuya Fuse
朝鮮	Chosŏn



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제10호
발행일	1927년 12월 20일
기사제목	萬事都監, 記者競爭 一頁記事
필자	乭伊
기사형태	잡저

萬事都監, 記者競爭 一頁記事
						乭伊
問 記者先生님. 한가지 궁금한 일이 잇슴니다. 시골 안저서 新聞紙를 通해 본다면 그이(?) 일홈이 大小事間 거의 날마다 나다십히 되니 그이가 대개 엇던 이 임닛가? 人格은 엇덧코 學識은 엇덧코 일에 대한 能率은 엇더함닛가?. 그리고 出身은 어대 出身인가요?
答 그이(?) 말슴임닛가. 참- 훌늉한 양반이이지오. 그이 名啣에, 肩書를 느러노을랴면 적어도 四六版形의 名啣ꞅ紙는 要할 것임니다. 그리고 죽은 다음 銘㫌을 쓰랴면, 적어도 長尺 비단 全匹을 要하야 될 것임니다. 참- 굉장한 어룬이지오. 장차 그 銘㫌을 나더러 써 달나면 이럿케 쓸 것임니다.
前OO郡文廟直員
前OO部主事
前OO新聞社主筆
前OO親睦OO長
前OO運動時O大學一年修業
前OO臨時社長
前民立大學發起人
前物産獎勵O幹事
前全鮮記者大O發起人
前우리親睦O幹事
前水害救濟O委員
前安昌男歡迎O準備委員
前印度靑年歡迎O準備委員
前敎育協O委員
前全鮮中學生雄辯大O批評人
前OO學校卒業式祝辭人
前古屋布施歡迎O發起人
OO이집家長
OOOO委員
OOOO員
別名은 萬事都監
性質은 無强無柔
學識은 若干의 漢字外에 別無特長
口辯은 小學校卒業式祝辭나 할만하고
文筆은 國漢體小原稿나 쓸만하고
집은 單間朔月貰집이고
옷은 朝鮮옷外에 洋服을 番次例하고
안해는 서울宅外에 시골에 本妻가 잇다.

그이는 이럿케 훌늉 굉장한 어룬임니다. 그러닛가 新聞紙上에 작구 날 밧게요. 朝鮮에는 이럿케 宏壯한 양반이 만습니다. 즉 萬事都監이 얼마든지 잇슴니다. 당신은 이 都監帖紙 한 장 안 가지시럄닛가?<140>
<140-140>