Magazine Title:	동광 제15호
Publication Date:	1927-07-05
Article Title:	朝鮮上古文化의 硏究, 朝鮮古代宗敎의 宗敎的 土俗的 硏究(4) (A Study of Korea's Ancient Culture, A Religious and Folkloric Study of Korea's Ancient Religion (4))
Author:	文學士 孫晉泰 (Son Chin-t'ae, Bachelor of Arts)
Article Type:	논설 (Editorial/Article)

A Study of Korea's Ancient Culture, A Religious and Folkloric Study of Korea's Ancient Religion
						By Son Chin-t'ae, Bachelor of Arts

Chapter 3: Spirits and the Exorcism of Evil Spirits
Section 1: Types of Shamanistic Spirits (Nature, Abode, Form)

As already stated in Chapter 1, "Shamanism" in religious studies is the ideology of worshipping evil spirits, and while "shaman" means *mudang* or *paksu* (巫覡), religious studies demand that its meaning be limited to a sorcerer (魔術者) who exorcises evil spirits. Therefore, attempting to include all ideas and deities related to *mudang* and *paksu* within "Shamanism" or the religion of *mudang* and *paksu* is unacceptable from the perspective of religious studies. From this standpoint, in this chapter, I will discuss only evil spirits (惡精靈), intending to speak of polytheistic deities (多神敎的 諸神) in Chapter 5. Of course, polytheistic deities also inflict disasters and illnesses upon people, but this only occurs when humans incur the wrath of the gods (神); their inherent divine nature is that of benevolent gods (善神). Furthermore, the attitude of *mudang*, *paksu*, and other shamans towards the gods is religious, never magical (魔術的). Therefore, in such cases, the *mudang* or *paksu* should be regarded and treated as priests (僧侶).

Classifying the types of evil spirits believed in by Korean folk belief, within the scope of my research:

(1) Those originating from human spirits (死靈):
1. Those who left lingering attachments to this world
2. Ancestors (祖先), Relatives (親族)
3. Those who died while traveling (客死鬼)
4. Suicides (自殺者)
5. Homicide victims (他殺者)
6. Drowning victims (水殺鬼)
7. The unmarried (몽달鬼 - Mongdal Kwi)
8. Those without descendants (無後鬼)
9. Enemies (仇敵)
10. Goblins (독개비 - Tokkaebi)

(2) Those originating from the spirits or souls of dead animals and monstrous beasts (妖獸):
1. Snakes that were killed
2. Cats that were killed
3. Other animals brutally killed
4. Malevolent spirits (妖精) of foxes (狐), wolves, tigers (虎), and leopards (豹)

(3) Those arising from cursed objects (邪物):
1. Treasures like gold (金) and silver (銀) buried unused for a long time
2. Old clothing (古衣類), old items (古物), old utensils (古器物) hidden away <23>
3. Old houses (古家) or abandoned houses (廢家)
4. Neglected old wells (古井), filled-in old wells

(4) Monsters from the sea (물ㅅ鬼神 - Mulsingwisin, water gods/spirits)

These are the kinds. To subdivide these various types of spirits further and explain each case in detail would merely become tedious, so I intend to provide only a very broad description below, drawing examples from literature.

First, a word regarding the spirits of ancestors and relatives. Volume 6 of Sŏ Ch'ŏng's (西淸) *Heilongjiang Waiji* (黑龍江外記) states:
『When the Dahur (達呼爾) fall ill, they inevitably say the ancestors are causing trouble... The Shaman (蕯瑪) says, if the ancestors want a horse, then kill a horse and offer it. If they want an ox, then slaughter an ox and offer it. As for the color, mare or stallion, it is all according to their command. Often, countless animals are killed, yet the patient dies, and the household is ruined. Still, if someone else falls ill, and they have no oxen or horses, they will still slaughter a mountain goat and offer it. They never dare to defy the Shaman's command.』
"Dahur" refers to the Daur (다우르) people living along the Amur River (黑龍江) in northern Manchuria (滿洲). It seems they commonly attribute the cause of illness to the ancestors' interference, and the reason ancestors possess or trouble them appears to be their desire for cattle, horses, sheep, other foods, or livestock. Although Korean ancestors do not demand livestock—because they are not a pastoral people—the belief that they cause illness in their descendants for reasons such as wanting clothes they wore when alive, wanting food, finding ancestral rite food unclean, water seeping into their dwelling place (the grave), or other reasons, is similar to the beliefs of the Manchurian people.

Ancestors and relatives often harbor lingering attachments to this life and protect and love their families, but this can sometimes become a cause of disaster or illness for the living. Folk belief says that if a spirit, whether with good or ill intent, attaches itself to a person, disaster or illness will arise. Among these, the spirit with the strongest attachment to this world is the soul of a mother who left behind children. If she touches the child's head out of affection, it causes a headache; if she touches the limbs, it causes pain in the limbs. A similar example can be found in Sŏng Hyŏn's (成俔) *Yongjae ch'onghwa* (慵齋叢話), Volume 4:
『There was also the case of Yi Sa-mun (李斯文), who served as a Hojo Chŏngnang (戶曹正郞). Suddenly, a ghostly entity (鬼物) came into his house and caused mischief. Listening to its voice, it was his paternal aunt (叔姑) who had died ten years prior. She directed household tasks and production, demanding not only morning and evening meals but also whatever she desired to eat. If slightly displeased, she would fly into a rage. Although she couldn't be seen holding a spoon or lifting food, the side dishes and rice naturally diminished. Her upper body was invisible, but below the waist, she wore a skirt made of stretched paper, and her two legs were withered and thin like lacquered wood, just bone without flesh. When asked why human feet would be like this, she replied, "How could a person long dead underground be otherwise?" A hundred attempts were made to appease her, but to no avail. Before long, Sa-mun fell ill and died.』
This seems to describe a folk rumor current at the time (15th century), but the point is that Yi Sa-mun fell ill and died because of the possessing spirit of his well-intentioned paternal aunt. <24> This ghost also seems interpretable as having lingering attachments to this world.

Above all, the spirits with the most attachments are those related to love. It is said that the spirits of those who died harboring unrequited love or unfulfilled desires either become snakes or bluebirds, or become vengeful spirits (怨魂) that inevitably possess or seek revenge on the object of their affection. For example, *Yongjae ch'onghwa*, Volume 4, says the following:
『When Hong Chae-ch'u (洪宰樞) was of humble station, he encountered rain on the road and rushed into a small village. In the village was a dwelling where a nun, aged seventeen or eighteen and of attractive appearance, sat alone solemnly. The official asked why she lived alone. The nun replied, "Three nuns live together; the other two have gone down to the village to beg for food." The official then engaged her in pleasant conversation and made a promise, saying, "On such-and-such date of such-and-such month, I will welcome you to my home." The nun believed him and waited expectantly for the appointed time. The date passed, but there was no sign of him. Eventually, she developed a sickness of the heart and died. Later, the official became a military commander (節度使) in the south. While stationed there, one day, a small creature resembling a lizard (蜥蝪) walked across his mattress. The official ordered his subordinate to throw it outside. The subordinate then killed it. The next day, a small snake entered the room. The subordinate killed it again. The day after, the snake entered the room once more. He began to suspect it was the nun's possession, but trusting in his authority and might, he wished to annihilate it and ordered it killed immediately. From then on, it came every day, growing larger each day until it finally became a giant python (蟒). The official gathered the soldiers of the garrison, all holding knives and swords, surrounding it on all sides. The python broke through the encirclement and entered. The soldiers vied to strike it. They also built firewood pyres on all sides, and whenever they saw the python, they competed to throw it in. Still, it did not cease. Consequently, the official began, at night, to wrap the python in bedding and place it in his bedroom, and during the day, stored it in a chest (櫝). When patrolling the borders, he had someone carry the chest ahead of him. The official's spirit gradually weakened, his complexion grew haggard, and eventually, he contracted an illness and died.』
Of course, this was likely not factual, but even today, there are many such legends among our folk. This is a case involving a female spirit and unrequited love, but there are also instances where a male, unable to forget his beloved wife from his lifetime, becomes a snake. *Yongjae ch'onghwa*, Volume 5, relates:
『When my father-in-law, Official An (安公), was serving as the governor of Imch'ŏn (林川), there was a certain Great Zen Master (大禪師) among the monks of Pogwangsa Temple (普光寺) who frequently came to pay his respects. He was someone one could converse with, and they became quite familiar. The monk had once married a village woman and secretly visited her. One day, the monk died and transformed into a snake. It entered his wife's room. By day, it stayed in an earthenware jar (甕); by night, it entered his wife's embrace, coiling around her waist, resting its head on her chest. On its tail was a fleshy protuberance resembling a phallus. Its affection was exactly as it had been in the past. My father-in-law heard of this and ordered the wife to bring the snake jar halfway. Then, my father-in-law called the monk's name. The snake poked its head out. My father-in-law scolded it, saying, "Becoming a snake out of longing for your wife? Is this truly the way of a monk?" The snake retracted its head and went back inside. My father-in-law secretly had someone make a small box (函) and instructed the wife to lure the snake, saying, "The magistrate presents you with a new box to house your body comfortably. Come out quickly." She then spread her skirt inside the box. The snake came out of the jar and moved to lie in the box. Several strong officials quickly nailed the lid shut. The snake leaped and writhed, trying to get out, but could not. Furthermore, they wrote the monk's name on a funeral banner (銘旌) to lead the way. Dozens of monks followed, beating drums and bowls, chanting scriptures. They floated it down the river and sent it off. The wife ultimately remained unharmed.』
This too is likely mostly a product of imagination, but it seems a single snake caused quite a commotion. Today, folk call such a snake a "love-longing snake" (相思배암). Usually, a love-longing snake is not a large serpent but a "thread snake" (실배암). It's also said that its tail is in the vagina (玉門) while its head rests on the thigh (택). Although such a love snake (戀蛇) is not technically a spirit, since it is a spirit transformed into a snake, it is treated here within the category of spirits. Furthermore, love spirits (戀精) do not necessarily only become snakes; like the legend of General Sin Rip (申砬將軍), they can become vengeful spirits (怨魂) that never leave one's side. Because Sin Rip, in his youth, rejected the affection of a certain woman, that woman's vengeful spirit constantly lingered around Sin Rip, offering various pieces of advice beneficial to General Sin. Thus, the General trusted her without doubt. When the Imjin War (壬辰倭亂) occurred, and the General was defending the strategic pass of Choryŏng (鳥嶺), the woman appeared in his dream and advised, 『With the General's martial prowess, why fear the Japanese enemy? If you abandon Choryŏng and fight decisively on the Mun'gyŏng Plain (聞慶平野), victory is certain.』 Sin Rip believed her words, fought as advised, and was killed by the enemy, according to the legend. There are countless tales like this. <25>

Returning to the main point, while the psychological explanation for possessions by vengeful spirits, relatives, ancestors, etc., can be resolved by the "Dream Theory" (蒙幻說), how did the idea that vengeful spirits transform into snakes arise? Professor Tylor (타일러-) speculated as follows regarding the primitive belief that humans reincarnate as snakes: For people like the Zulu (줄루), who believe ancestral spirits reincarnate as non-venomous snakes, this belief originates from simple observations, such as snakes seeking the warmth of the hearth, just like ancestors in their old age, crawling inside huts, and, when given food, docilely accepting it, much like an old person receiving food from descendants (1). Whether the theory of reincarnation can be explained by this speculative theory is uncertain, and it's difficult to readily accept. However, primitive people must have keenly observed the similarities between a snake's movements and those of humans. And in the world of "Shamanism," since their surroundings are filled more with evil spirits than benevolent ones, a snake entering the house is unlikely to have given them a favorable impression.

Moreover, venomous snakes, in particular, bring death to humans, and snakes generally do not die easily unless cut into pieces and resist humans fiercely. Due to these points, primitive people likely considered snakes venomous, monstrous, and vengeful animals. Then, when they discovered a snake that had silently entered a room and was observing a person's face, they would likely recall a snake they had killed previously and feel fear that the killed snake had come seeking revenge. Thus, primitive people would have concluded that snakes are animals with fierce vengeful spirits. Consequently, humans who are deeply attached and vindictive would have been analogized to snakes, leading to the thought that vengeful spirits (怨魂) and love spirits (戀魂) could also transform into snakes to seek revenge.

The case of killed snakes seeking revenge is similar to the stories mentioned above, so the explanation is omitted. However, it is said that if the father, brother, or family member of a firstborn child kills a snake, the baby's skin will develop spots like a snake's skin. This is said to be an illness caused by the anger of the birth goddess (産神), but viewed from another angle, it could also be seen as possession by a snake spirit (蛇精). Folk belief also states that if the father of a newborn kills a dog, pig, cow, or horse, or even witnesses such animals being killed, it incurs the wrath of the birth goddess, and the baby will make the sounds of that animal. This too can be seen as possession by the spirits of those animals.

Continuing with animals, it is said that animals like foxes, wolves, tigers, and leopards sometimes steal the souls (魂) of travelers. Foxes, especially, are called monstrous beasts (妖獸). Omitting tedious tales, the gist is that these various animals cause the traveler's mind to become confused before eating the person, and the resulting fainting is attributed to the animal stealing the soul. <26> Furthermore, illnesses arising from such fainting or collapse are attributed to having one's soul stolen by the beast or possession by a beast spirit (獸精). Attributing such fainting to the loss of the soul is self-explanatory, as the "soul" (넋), the owner of the body and unifier of the mind, has been taken. Primitive people explained the occasional shouting and delirious speech (*語) of such patients as the beast spirit not yet having departed from the patient's body. (My frequent use of "primitive people" signifies that such reasoning is primitive and that such primitive reasoning still remains in folk beliefs. It does not mean that the people holding such primitive reasoning are primitive peoples. Such phenomena can, of course, be found abundantly in European folklore as well, signifying that it is a vestigial idea continuing from primitive times.) According to this theory, no matter how pursued by an animal, as long as one keeps their wits about them—firmly holds onto their soul within their body—there should be no reason to faint, be eaten, or fall ill because of it. Therefore, our folk say, "Even if bitten by a tiger, if you keep your wits, you can live," and that animals never eat conscious people. While this is not necessarily true, it likely arose from the belief that a body possessing a soul does not die, combined with the fact that beasts generally do not attack travelers head-on.

Next, the spirits of those who died while traveling (旅死者), suicides (自殺者), homicide victims (他殺者), drowning victims (水死者), the unmarried (未婚者), and those without descendants (無後者) are collectively referred to by our folk as miscellaneous ghosts (雜鬼). It is said that these miscellaneous ghosts cannot go where they are supposed to go and constantly wander the earth. Those who died while traveling, away from home, drowned, or were without descendants often could not be properly buried (葬送). Therefore, the deceased could not obtain the resources necessary for life in the afterlife, such as a dwelling, livestock, vehicles, horses, utensils, and clothing, and lacked even the travel expenses to depart for the next life. Thus, they had no choice but to wander the earth. This idea must have arisen long ago and been transmitted to the present day. Consequently, the idea arose in later times that such deceased persons must be given a proper funeral, that even if the body cannot be found, the soul must be retrieved (收魂) and buried, and that an heir must be appointed for those without descendants.

Suicides and homicide victims, because their deaths were unnatural, likely instilled fear and aversion in primitive people. Reasoning that they would also arouse aversion among people in the otherworld, it was concluded that such deceased persons had nowhere to go and thus wandered the earth.

The idea that the unmarried cannot go to the otherworld might partly stem from the influence of esoteric Buddhism (密敎), but the following folk legend seems to explain it as due to lingering attachment to sexuality. According to Mr. Yu Ch'un-sŏp (柳春燮) of Chŏnju (全州):
『Once upon a time, a traveler urinated by the roadside. That night, a beautiful young girl appeared in his dream and said, "Today I saw the precious thing you possess. My lifelong regret has now been resolved, and I shall now depart for the afterlife," and then suddenly vanished. Therefore, after that, the graves of the unmarried came to be made level with the ground (平土葬). The place where the traveler urinated was the grave site of the girl who appeared in the dream, but the traveler, of course, did not know it was a grave and committed an act of disrespect. However, that disrespect inadvertently saved a pitiful, vengeful spirit.』
Whether the bodies of the unmarried are indeed buried level with the ground (平土葬) today as in this story is hard to guarantee, <27> but it is true that there is a folk custom of performing wedding ceremonies between deceased unmarried men and women, just like ordinary weddings. It cannot be said that this is necessarily an influence from China (支那). One must find a spouse who died around the same time or recently and perform a wedding between the deceased - using spirit tablets (位牌) - to avoid becoming a *mongdal* ghost (몽달귀신), and the parents of the deceased consider each other in-laws (査頓).

Another reason why drowning victims are said to be unable to go to the otherworld is that the drowned often cannot be buried, and therefore cannot go to the underworld (地下界) – the concept of the underworld arising from burial practices. Thus, the family must retrieve the deceased's soul and spirit (魂魄) – through a shamaness (巫女) – and bury at least the soul and spirit.

The various spirits mentioned above are, so to speak, unemployed, propertyless wanderers, so they have no choice but to attack travelers for their sustenance. In the human world, they are like robbers or mountain bandits. Therefore, if caught by a wandering ghost (客鬼), one prepares to exorcise it with food offerings from the start. Since travelers are mostly afflicted by chills and fevers (寒感), the wandering ghost is predestined to be assessed as a cold-and-flu demon (感氣鬼神).

The reason for possession by enemies (仇敵) was described in Chapter 2, Section 3.

The *tokkaebi* (독개비) is a type of miscellaneous ghost, usually considered to be ghost fire (鬼火), that is, phosphorescence (燐火), as its true form. It is said that its lower limbs cannot be seen, and its mouth and nose are merged, making them difficult to distinguish. In many cases, it is hard to differentiate from apparitions (헛것, 헛갭이). In folktales, it loves playing pranks and sometimes even brings real money, in which case it has characteristics more like a fairy than a spirit or ghost. For example, *Yongjae ch'onghwa*, Volume 3, contains this:
『My maternal uncle, Magistrate An (安府尹), in his youth, was heading to his villa in Sŏwŏn (瑞原), riding a worn-out horse, accompanied by a single young servant. It was about ten *li* from the villa. Night was approaching, and there was no one around. Looking east towards the county seat (縣城), there was a scene of torches and clamor, seemingly a hunting party. The commotion drew nearer, surrounding him left and right, stretching for five *li* without a break. It was all ghost fire (鬼火). The official was in a dilemma, not knowing what to do. He just spurred his horse forward for seven or eight *li*. The ghost fires all dispersed. The sky was overcast and damp with rain, making the road even harder. But he privately rejoiced at escaping the ghosts, his fear somewhat subsided. He crossed another mountain pass, turned back, and descended. The ghost fires he had seen before densely blocked the road ahead. The official, seeing no way out, drew his sword, shouted loudly, and charged in. The fires scattered all at once, plunging into the forest and thicket, clapping their hands and laughing loudly. The official reached the villa, his heart still pounding. Leaning against the window, he dozed off. A maidservant, holding a pine torch (松明), was sitting and spinning. The official saw the flickering light and shouted, "Have those ghosts come again?" He then struck at it with his sword. The utensils left and right were all shattered. The maidservant barely escaped.』
This humorous anecdote is probably based on a real experience, but even Confucian scholars like him believed phosphorescence to be ghosts (鬼神). If one falls ill in such a situation, folk belief attributes it to having one's soul stolen by a *tokkaebi* or possession by a *tokkaebi*.

As an example of an apparition (헛갭이), *Yongjae ch'onghwa*, Volume 8, relates:
『When I was young, I saw off a guest at Namgang (南江). Returning, I reached Namhyŏn Hill (南峴) south of the Chŏnsaengsŏ (典牲署 - Office for Sacrificial Animals). There was a light rain. My horse snorted and refused to move forward. Suddenly, I felt a wave of warmth hit my face like fire, accompanied by an unbearable stench. Looking towards the eastern valley <28> along the road, I saw a person wearing a straw raincoat (蓑笠), several tens of *chang* tall, with a face like a platter and eyes like torches, an extraordinarily bizarre appearance. I silently thought to myself, "If I lose my composure, I will surely fall into its trap." So I held my horse steady and did not move. After a long while staring fixedly at it, the person turned their head towards the sky, gradually faded away, and ascended into the air. Truly, if one remains determined, strange phenomena cannot penetrate.』
This is a self-congratulatory tale. Unless one is as composed (沈着) as Sŏng Hyŏn (成俔), in such a situation, one's soul is stolen by the apparition (헛개비), and illness ensues. Such spirits born of illusion (幻覺) existed even for scholars like Sŏng Hyŏn.

The third type of spirit, arising from cursed objects (邪物), is, of course, neither human nor animal, but originates from old items. It is said that if gold and silver treasures, old clothes, old items, or old utensils are hidden away or buried unused (死藏) for a long time, a curse (邪) arises from them. This curse is, of course, a kind of evil spirit. Its form is unclear, but in stories where it interacts with humans, it becomes anthropomorphized. This is a natural product of the primitive psyche; whether a physical object or a mental entity, unless it assumes human form, it cannot converse with humans or be active. The idea that cursed objects arise from hidden items is said to be because they do not receive light and are left neglected in darkness (幽暗) for a long time. In the minds of primitive people, spirits always existed in dark places (幽暗). (See below). This is likely how the concept of *sa* (邪) - arising from physical objects - was inferred. Numerous tales are omitted here.

It is also said that curses or spirits arise in old houses (古家, 廢家) and old wells (古井, 廢井). This too was a product of the same psychological process as the case of cursed objects. Regarding abandoned wells and houses, it is sometimes said that if a house is built over an abandoned well, the house presses down on the well spirit's (井神) chest, causing the well spirit to inflict disaster and illness on the family. Abandoned houses are not only dark (幽暗), but entering such a place evokes a sense of unease in anyone. This is because, in deserted and gloomy places like abandoned houses, one cannot clearly perceive all the objects within, leading to an instinctive impulse—a feeling born from the possibility that an enemy might be hiding inside. Therefore, primitive people thought that evil spirits must surely have made their nests in abandoned houses. For example, *Yongjae ch'onghwa*, Volume 4, contains this:
『In my neighborhood lived Ki Chae-ch'u (奇宰樞), a renowned worthy of his time. When I was young, I played horse-and-bamboo games with Ki's grandson, Yu (裕). After the Chancellor (宰樞) passed away, both Yu and I began our official careers, and Yu took up residence in that house repeatedly. Before long, the house became inauspicious, and people could not enter. Yu also moved elsewhere. Living nearby, I heard the story: A servant boy was standing outside the gate when suddenly something attached itself to his back, so heavy he couldn't bear it. He rushed inside in distress, but searching revealed no object. After a long while, the weight lifted. He was drenched in sweat. Thereafter, many strange things occurred. If someone cooked rice, the lid would lift off as usual, but the pot would be full of feces, and the rice scattered in the courtyard. Sometimes, plates and bowls were taken and thrown into the air. Sometimes, a large cauldron was taken, spun around in the air, and struck, making a sound like a great bell. Sometimes, the vegetables in the garden were seen all uprooted and planted upside down, withering shortly after. Sometimes, in the unmanned kitchen, a fire would suddenly flare up, as if someone were holding it, and come touch the porch eaves, burning them down completely. For this reason, the house had been abandoned and neglected for many years. Yu indignantly said, "How can neglecting the ancestral home, long unrepaired, be the act of a filial son? How can a true man fear ghosts?" He immediately moved in. The strange occurrences resumed. Sometimes the rice bowls were moved, sometimes people's faces were smeared with filth. If Yu scolded it, a voice would call from the air, "How dare Vice-Magistrate Ki (奇都事) act like this?" Before long, Yu fell ill and died. Everyone said it was because Yu's maternal cousin, Yu Kye-ryang (柳繼亮), who had plotted rebellion and been executed, had his spirit attached to the house, causing trouble.』
This tale of ghostly mischief, similar to today's stories of *tokkaebi* pranks, is an absurd ghost story, but it serves as a most fitting example of the belief that evil spirits arise in abandoned houses.

Sea monsters, or water gods/spirits (물ㅅ鬼神), are sometimes thought to be the souls of drowning victims, or sometimes monsters that originally existed in the sea or water. <29> Water spirits lure human souls or destroy ships to obtain human souls. Therefore, sailors and voyagers should carry topknot pins (동곳) made of gold or silver. A red coral (赤珊瑚) topknot pin is even better. Water spirits fear metal and coral, so if they try to grab one's topknot, they get scared, let go, and flee, it is said.

Besides these, countless other spirits possess humans depending on the time and situation. To cite a few bizarre examples, Yi Yuk's (李陸) *Ch'ŏngp'a kŭkdam* (靑坡劇談) (collected in *Taedong yasŭng*, 大東野乘) includes:
『In Kwangju (廣州), there was an old man over eighty. He said he had never seen anything strange in his life, except for two extremely bizarre incidents. A neighbor used to playfully wear a mask (假面). One day, someone in his family fell ill with a beam-related sickness (梁病?). A shaman said, "It is possession by the wooden mask (木假面)." He immediately threw it out into the fields. The illness indeed subsided. Et cetera.』
Here, even a wooden mask causes possession. And Ch'a Ch'ŏn-no's (車天輅) *Osan sŏllim ch'ogo* (五山說林草藁) (*Yasŭng*) relates:
『King Kwangjong (光廟 - likely Sejo), after returning from visiting the shrine of Munsŏnwang (文宣王 - Confucius), became unwell. Queen Dowager Chŏnghŭi (貞熹王大妃) worried and consulted shamans. They all said, "The spirit of the Confucian shrine (孔廟神) is causing the trouble." Queen Dowager Chŏnghŭi ordered palace attendants to lead various shamans and perform lewd rites (淫祀) in the courtyard of the Taesŏngjŏn (大成殿 - Great Sage Hall). The various shamans danced wildly, and various musicians played chaotically. Among the scholars residing in the hall (館中), one with righteous spirit took the lead, urging the other scholars to drive out the shamans. They smashed the waist drums and other musical instruments. The palace attendants scattered in alarm and ran to report to the Queen Dowager. The Queen Dowager became furious... King Sŏngjong (成廟) struck his pillow, leaped up, and exclaimed, "My Confucian students (太學生徒)! Are they truly so righteous and principled?..." He bestowed a banquet upon them at the Kŭnjŏngjŏn Hall (勤政殿). Et cetera.』
It seems even the spirit of Confucius was thought capable of possessing people.

The Abode of Spirits

Our folk belief, like the beliefs of all other peoples, considers spirits to be beings of darkness (幽暗的 存在). It is said that if objects are hidden away in darkness, spirits arise, and spirits originating from dead souls also live in a state of darkness. Ghost fire or apparitions invariably appear against the backdrop of a dark night, and it is thought that spirits always lurk in dark forests, caves, abandoned houses, and gloomy back corners of toilets. The dark night is the world of spirits. Spirits are thought to be able to appear and disappear freely in the world of the dark night. Therefore, it is said that the space of the dark night is overrun by evil spirits, but it is not necessarily filled with them. Those walking on a dark night must carry a lantern (燈籠). Ghosts fear fire (불) or light. When turning a corner around a wall, entering a toilet, or entering an empty house, one must cough three times to drive away evil ghosts (惡鬼). Ghosts fear sound (音).

The inference that evil spirits reside in dark places stems from their "Dream Illusion Theory" (蒙幻說). The light in dreams was always dim (幽暗). And ghosts were not seen in broad daylight (白晝). However, at night or in dark places, their illusions (幻覺) always saw ghosts and spirits. In bright places, all objects could be clearly perceived, so spirit-like enemies could not be found, nor could they be imagined. But in dark places, the instinctive feeling that an enemy might be present was activated. Therefore, spirits existed in such places. For primitive people, "anything thinkable existed."

Thus, while human spirits (死靈), as described in Chapter 2, go to the underworld (地下界, 他界) or dwell in darkness (暗中), the notion that they also arise or dwell in graves (墓地) naturally arose. Although theoretically contradictory to the idea of going to the otherworld, for primitive people <30> it was clear logic. For example, *Yongjae ch'onghwa*, Volume 8, relates:
『Chancellor Kwŏn (權姓宰樞), who achieved prominence in court as a civil official, upon his father's death, intended to exhume someone's grave (塚) and bury his father there. The grave's owner said, "This is my father's grave. Although my father's rank was low, he was stern and resolute in spirit, not an ordinary person. Be careful not to dig it up. Harm will surely come." The Chancellor did not listen and proceeded to dig up the grave, break open the coffin, and discard the corpse. The son, caressing the corpse, wept bitterly, saying, "If your heroic spirit (英靈) still exists, will you not avenge this wrong?" That night, the geomancer (風水李官) dreamt of a man with a purple beard (紫髥丈夫), furiously scolding him, saying, "Why did you seize my peaceful dwelling (安宅) and give it to another? The root of this disaster truly lies with you." He then struck the geomancer's chest with his fist. The geomancer felt pain, bled from the chest, and died shortly after. Before long, the Chancellor was also executed, and his family line was exterminated. People all said it was the consequence of digging up the grave.』
It's utter fabrication how anyone could know the dead geomancer's dream to concoct this story, but the idea of considering the grave the deceased's home and believing the deceased lives within it was a thought that would naturally arise along with the custom of burial (埋葬). The structure of ancient tombs often imitated dwellings, and among peoples surrounding us, the custom of building a structure on the grave mound (塚上作屋) is common. This is, of course, because the grave is thought of as the deceased's residence. For example, the *Sui Shu* (隋書), Chapter 84, "Account of the Turks" (突厥傳), relates:
『... Then they choose a day, place the corpse on a horse and cremate it. They collect the ashes and bury them. They mark the grave with wood, erect a house (屋) within it. Et cetera.』
And the *Wei Shu* (魏書), Volume 100, "Account of the Wuji" (勿吉傳), states:
『If their parents die in spring or summer, they bury them immediately. They build a house (屋) on the grave mound (塚上), not letting rain wet it.』
According to Miss Czaplicka (2), the Vogul (보굴) and Ostyak (오쓰티야크) people make roof-shaped covers over graves, similar to the *kŏnp'yŏm* (건폄 - grave hut) of Hwanghae Province (黃海道). Moreover, the Wuji (勿吉, Malgal 靺鞨) tribe's practice of building houses on graves seems to exist even today; according to Mr. Ravenstein (3), the Goldi (골디) and Mangun (망군) peoples living in northeastern Manchuria and the lower Amur River place the body in a rough coffin made of logs or planks and build a small hut (小屋) over it, constructing a somewhat grander house over the grave of a shaman. The Ainu (아이누) people also seem to build small huts on graves (4). The *Hou Han Shu* (後漢書), Volume 115, "Account of the Ye" (濊傳), states:
『They have many taboos. When illness or death occurs, they invariably abandon the old house and build a new one.』
Folklorists tend to interpret this custom of abandoning the dwellings of the sick and dead as arising from ideas of avoiding the sick (病者忌避) and avoiding corpses (死軆忌避). Economists, especially, interpret the abandonment of a house where someone died as stemming from the economic concepts of primitive people who extremely feared violating ownership rights, considering the house the property of the deceased. Both are reasonable points, but considered from another angle, the inference might also hold that abandoning the deceased's house arose from the notion of gifting it to the deceased for their residence.

The Form of Spirits

Finally, a word on the form of spirits. Our folk belief describes the form of various spirits originating from dead souls as being like shadows (影子), as mentioned in Chapter 2. However, it is specifically said that those who died decapitated or with severed limbs retain their headless (無頸) or limbless (無手足) form even after death. The soul of a child remains a child forever, the soul of an old person continues life after death as an old person, a woman as a woman, a thief as a thief. This too can be explained by the principle of existence based on illusion (幻覺) in the "Dream Illusion Theory" (蒙幻說). In the dreams or illusions of primitive people, someone who died decapitated always appeared headless; the soul of a child always appeared in the form of a child. Those with violent natures always appeared violent. Thus, even decades after death, it was impossible for primitive people to imagine a child's spirit in the form of an adult. Since what remained in their impression was always the child, they could not make it into an adult. (The idea of eternal youth and immortality (長生不老) likely evolved from such primitive psychology, and the idea that in Heaven (天堂) and Paradise (極樂) there is neither death nor rebirth likely also developed through fission from such cellular ideas.) <31>

**Summary**

This article by Son Chin-t'ae delves into Korean folk beliefs about evil spirits (악정령, akchŏngnyŏng) within the framework of shamanism, carefully distinguishing this from broader polytheistic worship. Son categorizes these spirits based on origin: human dead (with various reasons for becoming malevolent, like lingering attachments, unnatural deaths, or lack of descendants), animal spirits (especially vengeful ones like snakes or souls stolen by predatory beasts), spirits arising from neglected objects or places (treasures, old houses, wells), and sea monsters. He uses examples from classical Korean texts like *Yongjae ch'onghwa* and Chinese records, alongside contemporary folk beliefs, to illustrate the perceived nature, behavior (causing illness, misfortune), favored locations (darkness, graves), and forms (shadowy, retaining features from life or death) of these spirits. The author links these beliefs to primitive psychological processes like dream interpretation and fear of the unknown or unnatural.

From a colonial history perspective, the article is interesting as it represents a Korean intellectual systematically studying and documenting Korean folklore and traditional beliefs using Western academic frameworks (referencing Tylor, discussing "Shamanism" as a category) during a period of Japanese rule often characterized by suppression or denigration of Korean culture. Son's work demonstrates an effort to preserve and analyze indigenous Korean culture, asserting its distinct characteristics (e.g., Korean ancestors don't demand livestock like Manchurian ones) while also placing it within a comparative context (referencing Zulu, Daur, Vogul, Ostyak, Ainu beliefs). Historians might find value in its documentation of specific folk beliefs and legends from the 1920s, the author's analytical approach blending traditional knowledge with modern scholarship, and its implicit assertion of Korean cultural identity.

**Named Entities**

孫晉泰	손진태	Son Chin-t'ae
西淸	서청	Sŏ Ch'ŏng
黑龍江外記	흑룡강외기	Hŭngnyonggang Oegi
達呼爾	달호이	Talhoŭl (Daur)
滿洲	만주	Manju (Manchuria)
黑龍江	흑룡강	Hŭngnyonggang (Amur River)
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
成俔	성현	Sŏng Hyŏn
慵齋叢話	용재총화	Yongjae ch'onghwa
李斯文	이사문	Yi Sa-mun
戶曹正郞	호조정랑	Hojo Chŏngnang
洪宰樞	홍재추	Hong Chae-ch'u
林川	임천	Imch'ŏn
普光寺	보광사	Pogwangsa
安公	안공	An Kong (Official An)
申砬	신립	Sin Rip
壬辰倭亂	임진왜란	Imjin Waeran
鳥嶺	조령	Choryŏng
聞慶	문경	Mun'gyŏng
타일러-	타일러	T'aillŏ (Tylor)
줄루	줄루	Chullu (Zulu)
柳春燮	유춘섭	Yu Ch'un-sŏp
全州	전주	Chŏnju
支那	지나	China
安府尹	안부윤	An Pu-yun (Magistrate An)
瑞原	서원	Sŏwŏn
南江	남강	Namgang
典牲署	전생서	Chŏnsaengsŏ
南峴	남현	Namhyŏn
奇宰樞	기재추	Ki Chae-ch'u
奇裕	기유	Ki Yu
奇都事	기도사	Ki Tosa (Vice-Magistrate Ki)
柳繼亮	유계량	Yu Kye-ryang
李陸	이륙	Yi Yuk
靑坡劇談	청파극담	Ch'ŏngp'a kŭkdam
大東野乘	대동야승	Taedong yasŭng
廣州	광주	Kwangju
車天輅	차천로	Ch'a Ch'ŏn-no
五山說林草藁	오산설림초고	Osan sŏllim ch'ogo
光廟	광묘	Kwangmyo (King Gwangjong or Sejo)
文宣王	문선왕	Munsŏnwang (Confucius)
貞熹王大妃	정희왕대비	Chŏnghŭi Wangdaebi (Queen Dowager Jeonghui)
孔廟	공묘	Kongmyo (Confucian Shrine)
大成殿	대성전	Taesŏngjŏn
成廟	성묘	Sŏngmyo (King Seongjong)
勤政殿	근정전	Kŭnjŏngjŏn
權姓宰樞	권성재추	Kwŏn Sŏng Chae-ch'u (Chancellor Kwŏn)
李官	이관	Yi Kwan (Official Yi, the geomancer)
隋書	수서	Suso (Book of Sui)
突厥	돌궐	Tolgwŏl (Turks)
魏書	위서	Wiso (Book of Wei)
勿吉	물길	Mulgil (Wuji)
Czaplicka	차플리츠카	Czaplicka
보굴	보굴	Pogul (Vogul)
오쓰티야크	오스티야크	Ossŭt'iyak'ŭ (Ostyak)
黃海道	황해도	Hwanghae-do (Hwanghae Province)
靺鞨	말갈	Malgal (Mohe)
Raventein	라벤타인	Rabent'ain (Ravenstein)
골디	골디	Koldi (Goldi)
망군	망군	Mangkun (Mangun)
아이누	아이누	Ainu
後漢書	후한서	Huhan sŏ (Book of the Later Han)
濊	예	Ye (an ancient Koreanic people)

**Glossary**

샤-만	샤만	Shaman (Author specifically defines this as an exorcist of evil spirits)
샤-만이즘	샤머니즘	Shamanism (Author defines this as the worship/ideology related to evil spirits)
巫覡	무격	Shaman, specifically Korean *mudang* (female) or *paksu* (male)
惡精	악정	Evil spirit (short form of 惡精靈)
驅禳	구양	To exorcise, drive away evil spirits
多神敎的	다신교적	Polytheistic
諸神	제신	Various gods, deities
災病	재병	Disaster and illness
善神	선신	Benevolent god(s)
僧侶	승려	Buddhist monk/priest (used here metaphorically for religious functionary)
死靈	사령	Spirit of the dead
客死鬼	객사귀	Ghost of someone who died away from home
水殺鬼	수살귀	Ghost of a drowning victim (older term)
몽달鬼	몽달귀	Ghost of an unmarried man (folk term)
無後鬼	무후귀	Ghost of someone without descendants
독개비	도깨비	Goblin (Korean folk creature)
妖獸	요수	Monstrous beast, supernatural beast
邪物	사물	Cursed object, object harboring evil
물ㅅ鬼神	물귀신	Water ghost/spirit (note the older 'ㅅ' spelling)
崇憑	숭빙	To possess (spirit possession)
慵齋叢話	용재총화	Yongjae ch'onghwa (Title of a famous collection of anecdotes by Sŏng Hyŏn)
鬼物	귀물	Ghostly entity, demonic thing
怨魂	원혼	Vengeful spirit, resentful ghost
蜥蝪	석척	Lizard (Hanja term)
蟒	망	Python, large serpent (Hanja term)
相思배암	상사뱀	Love-longing snake (folk term)
실배암	실뱀	Thread snake, thin snake
戀蛇	연사	Love snake (Literary term)
戀精	연정	Love spirit
産神	산신	Birth goddess
獸精	수정	Beast spirit
雜鬼	잡귀	Miscellaneous ghosts/spirits (lower category)
葬送	장송	Funeral rites, burial
收魂	수혼	Ritual retrieval of a lost or wandering soul
巫女	무녀	Shamaness, priestess (*mudang*)
鬼火	귀화	Ghost fire, will-o'-the-wisp
燐火	인화	Phosphorescence, same as 鬼火
헛것	헛것	Apparition, illusion, something unreal seen
헛갭이	헛깨비	Apparition, variant of 헛것
假面	가면	Mask
木假面	목가면	Wooden mask
淫祀	음사	Lewd rites, improper sacrifices
幽暗	유암	Darkness, gloom
燈籠	등롱	Lantern
蒙幻說	몽환설	Dream Illusion Theory (author's term for explaining spirit beliefs via dreams/illusions)
他界	타계	The otherworld, afterlife
墓地	묘지	Grave site, cemetery
塚	총	Mound, grave mound, tomb
風水	풍수	Geomancy (Feng shui)
塚上作屋	총상작옥	Building a house/structure on a grave mound
影子	영자	Shadow, silhouette (used for the form of spirits)


---------------------------


잡지명	동광 제15호
발행일	1927년 07월 05일
기사제목	朝鮮上古文化의 硏究, 朝鮮古代宗敎의 宗敎的 土俗的 硏究(4)
필자	文學士 孫晉泰
기사형태	논설

朝鮮上古文化의 硏究, 朝鮮古代宗敎의 宗敎的 土俗的 硏究
						文學士 孫晉泰
第三章 精靈과 惡精驅禳
第一節 샤-만敎的 諸精靈의 種類(性質, 居所, 形相)
第一章에서 旣述한 바와 같이 「샤-만이즘」은 宗敎學上 惡精靈崇拜思想이요, 「샤-만」이란 것은 巫覡의 意味지만, 宗敎學上에서는 惡精을 驅禳하는 魔術者라고 의미를 한정함을 요청한다. 함으로, 巫覡의 관계하는 모든 思想과 諸神을 「샤-만이즘」 혹은 巫覡宗敎 내에 포함코저 함은 宗敎學上 용납하지 못할 일이다. 이러한 立地로서 나는 이 章에서는 오직 惡精靈에 대하여서만 論述하고 多神敎的 諸神은 5장에서 말하고저 한다. 다신교적 諸神도 물론 사람에게 災病을 주기도 하지마는 그것은 사람이 神의 怒에 觸하였을 때만 일어나는 일이요 본래의 神性은 善神이었다. 뿐 아니라 巫覡 기타 샤-만의 神에 대하는 態度도 宗敎的이요 결코 魔術的이 아니다. 함으로 이러한 경우의 巫覡은 僧侶로 간주 取扱할 것이다.
朝鮮 民間信仰이 생각하는 惡精靈의 종류를 나의 조사한 범위 내에서 分類하면
(一) 사람의 死靈으로 된 것.
1. 現世에 미련을 남긴 자
2. 祖先, 親族
3. 旅死者(客死鬼)
4. 自殺者
5. 他殺者
6. 水死者(水殺鬼)
7. 未婚者(몽달鬼)
8. 無後者(無後鬼)
9. 仇敵
10. 독개비
(二) 動物 及 妖獸의 死婚, 精靈으로 된 것
1. 배암의 살해된 者
2. 고양이의 살해된 者
3. 기타 動物의 慘殺된 者
4. 狐, 늑대, 虎豹의 妖精
(三) 邪物에 發生하는 것
1. 金銀과 같은 보물의 오래동안 死藏된 것에
2. 古衣類, 古物, 古器物의 閉藏된 것에＜23＞
3. 古家 또는 廢家에
4. 방치된 古井, 매몰된 古井
(四) 海中의 괴물(물ㅅ鬼神)
같은 것들이다. 이러한 諸種의 精靈을 다시 세분하여 일일의 경우를 細說하자면 공연히 煩雜하기만 하겠기에 다음에 文獻 상에서 例를 끄을면서 극히 大略만을 記述하고저 한다.
먼저 祖先과 親族의 死靈에 관하여 一言하면 西淸의 「黑龍江外記」 券六에는
『達呼爾, 病必曰祖宗見怪...蕯瑪曰, 祖宗要馬則. 殺馬以祭. 要牛則. 椎牛以祭. 至於驪黃牝牡. 一如其命. 往往有殺無算. 而病人死. 家亦敗者. 然續有人病. 無牛馬. 猶宰山羊而祭. 蕯瑪之令. 終不敢遠.』
라는 것이 있다. 達呼爾는 북부 滿洲의 黑龍江 沿岸에 사는 「다우르」(Daur)族을 가르침이다. 그들은 보통으로 病因을 祖先의 탈이라고 하는 모양이며 祖先이 崇憑하는 理由는 牛 馬 羊 기타의 食物 家畜을 얻고저 함에 있는 모양이다. 朝鮮의 祖先들은 家畜을 요구하지는 않지만-牧畜民族이 아닌 까닭에-生前의 衣服이 가지고 싶다던지 飮食이 먹고 싶다던지 祭祀飮食이 불결하다던지 그들의 주거인 墓地에 물이 난다던지 또 혹은 기타의 이유로 子孫에게 病을 준다는 信仰은 滿洲族의 信仰과 類似하다.
祖先과 親族은 왕왕 此生에 미련을 가지고 가족들을 보호하고 사랑한다는 것이 現世人에게는 災病이 되는 경우가 있다. 精靈이란 好意로서던지 惡意로서던지 사람에게 붙기만 하면 災病이 생기는 것이라고 民間信仰은 말한다. 其中에도 現世에 제일 未練을 가진 것은 자녀를 두고 간 어머니의 死魂이다. 그가 귀엽은 맘으로 아이의 머리를 만지면 두통이 생기고 手足을 만지면 手足痛을 일으키게 하는 것이다. 이와 유사한 一例를 들면 成俔의 「慵齋叢話」 券四는
『又有李斯文社. 爲戶曹正郞家中怱有鬼物來作惡. 聽其語音. 乃其叔姑死己十年者也. 生産作業. 一一指揮. 非徒晨夕供飯. 凡欲有所食皆需之. 稍不如意. 則勃怒. 雖不見其執匙揚飯. 而饌飯自然消減. 腰以上則不見. 而腰以下. 則張紙爲裳. 兩足枯瘦如漆. 無肉但骨而己. 人間足何若是. 答云, 死久地下之人. 安得不如是乎. 百計禳之不得. 未幾, 斯文得病而死.』
라고 한다. 이것은 당시(15世紀)의 民間에 있던 風說을 기술한 모양이나 요하건대 善意로 崇憑한 叔姑의 死魂 까닭에＜24＞ 李斯文은 得病致死하였다고 함이다. 이 귀신도 現世에 미련을 가지고 있었던 것 같이 해석되지만
무엇보다도 미련을 가진 死魂은 연애에 관한 者이었다. 짝사랑을 하던지 혹은 戀欲에 불만을 가진 채 죽은 死魂은 배암이나 靑鳥가 되던지 혹은 怨魂이 되어 반듯이 상대자에게 崇憑하던지 復讎를 한다고 한다. 一例를 들면 「慵齋叢話」 券四는 다음과 같이 말한다.
『洪宰樞. 微時路逢雨. 趨入小洞. 洞中有舍. 有一尼年十七八. 有姿色. 儼然獨坐. 公問何獨居. 尼云, 三尼同居. 二尼丐粮下村耳. 公遂與叙歡. 約曰, 某年月. 迎汝歸家. 尼信之. 每待某期. 期過而竟無影嚮. 遂成心疾而死. 公後爲南方節度使. 在鎭. 一日, 有小物如蜥蝪. 行公褥上. 公命吏擲外. 吏遂殺之. 翌日有小蛇入房. 吏又殺之. 又明日蛇復入房. 始訝爲尼所崇. 然恃其威武. 欲殲絶之. 卽命殺之. 自後無日不至. 至則隨日而漸大. 竟爲巨蟒. 公聚營中軍卒. 咸執刀劒圍四面. 蟒穿圍而入. 軍卒爭斫之. 又設柴火於四面. 見蟒則爭投之. 猶不絶. 公於是, 夜則以櫝裩. 裏蟒置寢房. 晝則貯藏於櫝. 行巡邊徼. 則令人負櫝前行. 公精神漸耗. 顔色憔悴. 竟搆疾而卒.』
물론 사실은 아니었었겠지마는 지금도 우리 民間에는 이러한 傳說이 많히 있다. 이것은 여성의 死魂인 경우며 片戀한 경우지마는 男性이 생전의 愛婦를 잊지 못하여 배암이 되는 수도 있다. 「慵齋叢話」 券五는
『我外舅安公. 爲林川守時. 普光寺僧有大禪師某者. 頻來謁. 可與話. 相見甚熟. 僧嘗娶村女爲妻. 潛往來焉. 一日, 僧死化爲蛇. 來入妻室. 晝則入甕. 夜則入妻懷. 繞其腰. 以頭倚胸. 尾間有疣肉. 如陽莖. 其繾綣, 宛如平昔. 外舅聞之. 令妻持蛇瓮而半至. 則外舅呼僧名. 蛇出頭. 外舅叱之曰. 戀妻爲蛇. 僧道果如是乎. 蛇縮頭而入. 外舅密令人作小函. 令妻誘蛇云. 使君贈汝新函. 以安其身. 可速出來. 遂以裙鋪函中. 蛇出自瓮. 移臥函裏. 健吏數人. 盖板釘之. 蛇踊躍碾轉. 欲出不得. 又於銘旌. 書僧名前導. 僧徒數十. 鳴鼓鉢誦經隨行. 浮于江水而送之. 妻竟無恙.』
이것도 물론 대부분은 想像的 産物이겠지마는 하여간 배암 한 머리 까닭에 대소동을 일으킨 모양이다. 이러한 배암을 금일 民間에서는 「相思배암」이라고 한다. 그러고 相思배암은 大蛇가 아니요 「실배암」이라는 것이 보통이다. 꼬리는 玉門에, 머리로서는 택을 고이고 있다고도 한다. 이러한 戀蛇는 精靈은 아니지마는 精靈이 배암으로 化한 것임으로 여긔서는 精靈 내에서 취급한 바다. 또 戀精으로는 반듯이 배암만 되는 것이 아뉀ˆ라 申砬將軍의 傳說과 같이 怨魂이 되어 신변을 떠나지 아니하는 것도 있다. 申砬이 少年시에 어떤 여성의 戀精을 거절하였음으로 그 여성의 怨魂은 항상 申砬의 주위를 떠나지 않고 여러 가지로 申將軍에게 이익되는 助言을 하였다. 해서 將軍은 그 여성을 信之無疑하였던 것이 마침 壬辰倭亂을 당하여 將軍이 鳥嶺의 險을 지키고 있었을 때, 꿈에 그 여성이 나타나며 『將軍의 武威를 가지고 웨 倭敵을 무섭어 하심니까. 鳥嶺을 버리고 聞慶平野에서 당당히 決戰을 하면 勝算無疑임니다』 라고 충고하였다. 申砬은 그 말을 믿고 충고대로 싸우다가 적에게 피살되었다고 하는 傳說이다. 이따위 說話는 한없이 있다.＜25＞
却說, 怨魂이나 親戚, 祖先 등의 所崇하는 心理學的 설명은 「蒙幼說」(Dream Theory)로서 해결되지마는 배암으로 怨魂이 化한다는 것은 어떻게 추리되였을까? 「타일러-」(tylor)敎授는 사람이 배암으로 轉生한다는 原始信仰에 대하여 다음과 같이 상상하였다. 「줄루」(Zulu)사람과 같이 祖先의 靈이 無毒한 배암으로 轉生한다고 생각하는 것은 배암이 마치 祖先들의 老時와 같이 爐邊의 온기를 찾아 들어와서 幕舍 내에 匍匐하며 食物을 주면 恰似히 老人과 子孫에게 먹을 것을 받은 것처럼 온순히 그것을 取하는 것 같은 단순한 관찰 상에 기인한 것이라(1)고 하였다. 想像說로서 轉生說이 설명될는지는 알 수 없으나 遽然히 믿기는 어렵은 말이다. 하지만 배암의 동작이 사람의 그것과 흡사하였음은 原始人들도 잘 관찰하였을 것이다. 하고 「샤-만이즘」의 세계에서는 그들의 주위에 善한 것보다는 惡精靈이 충만하여 있음으로 배암의 家內에 들어오는 것이 그들에게 好感을 주었을 理는 없다.
더구나 毒蛇같은 것은 사람에게 죽음을 주며 蛇類는 대체로 그것을 寸斷하지 아니하면 잘 죽지 않으며 사람에게 맹렬히 저항하는 점 등으로 원시인들은 蛇類를 毒物, 妖物 復讎的 동물이라고 생각하였을 것이다. 거긔다 아무 소리 없이 실내에 들어와서 사람의 얼굴을 살피는 배암을 발견하였을 때 그들은 전날 죽인 배암을 연상하고 그 죽인 배암이 復讎코저 온 것이 아닌가 하는 恐怖心을 일으키었을 것이다. 그래서 원시인들은 蛇類를 復讐心의 猛烈한 동물이라고 결론하였을 것이다. 딸아서, 사람도 미련 많고 복수 좋아하는 자는 배암과 類推하였을 것이며 怨魂, 戀魂도 배암으로 化하여 復讎할 수 있다고 생각한 것이 아닌가 한다.
살해된 蛇類가 復讎하는 경우도 上記한 說話와 유사함으로 설명을 생략하나 初産兒의 父兄이나 家族이 배암을 죽이면 산아의 피부가 배암의 피부와 같이 斑點을 가지게 된다고 한다. 이것은 産神의 怒함으로 인하여 일어나는 病이라 하나 일면으로 생각하면 蛇精의 所崇이라고도 할 수 있다. 또 産兒의 父가 犬, 豚, 牛, 馬를 죽이던지 그러한 동물의 죽이는 것을 보더라도 産神의 怒함에 觸하여 그 動物의 소리를 産兒가 낸다고 民間信仰은 말한다. 이것도 그러한 동물들의 所崇이라고 볼 수 있다.
계속하여 動物에 관한 말을 하면 여호, 늑대, 범, 표범 같은 동물은 때때로 旅行者의 魂을 뺀다고 한다. 더욱이 여호는 妖獸라고 한다. 煩雜한 說話를 생략하나 요하건대 이러한 諸 動物은 旅行者의 넋을 혼미하게 한 뒤에 그 사람을 먹는다고 하며 그때에 기절함을 동물에게 魂을 빼았긴 까닭이라고＜26＞ 한다. 또 그러한 昏倒氣絶로 인하여 일어난 병을 獸類에게 魂을 빼앗긴 까닭, 또는 獸精의 所崇이라고 한다. 그렇게 昏倒한 자를 魂의 빼앗긴 탓이라고 함은 설명할 여지도 없이 육체의 소유주요 정신의 統一者인 「넋」을 빼앗기었음으로 인함이지마는 그러한 病人이 때때로 고함을 치며 *語를 發하는 것을 원시인들은 아직 獸精이 병자의 體內로붙어 떠나지 아니한 까닭이라고 설명하였다.(내가 종종 원시인이라고 씀은 그러한 추리가 原始的임을 意味함이요 그러한 원시적 推理가 아직 民間에 남아 있음을 意味함이다. 함으로 그러한 原始的 推理를 가진 民族이 原始民이라는 의미는 아니다. 歐羅巴人의 民間에도 물론 許多히 볼 수 있는 현상이요 그것은 原始時代로붙어 계속하여 오는 遺痕的 思想임을 의미함이다.) 이러한 理論에 의하면 아무리 동물에 追跡을 당하더라도 精神만 차리면-魂을 강하게 體內에 把持하기만 하면-그것으로 인하여 기절한다던지 잡아 먹힌다던지 발병할 理由는 없을 것이다. 함으로 우리 民間에서는 「범에게 물리어도 精神만 차리면 산다」고 하며, 동물은 결ㅎ고 意識있는 사람은 먹지 아니한다고 하는 것이다. 반듯이 그러할 理는 없지마는 그것은 魂을 把持한 육체는 죽지 안는다는 信仰과 獸類가 일반으로 突進的으로 旅行者를 襲擊하지 아니하는 事實로 인하여 推論되었을 것이다.
다음에 旅死者, 自殺者, 他殺者, 水死者, 未婚者, 無後者의 死婚을 槪括하여 우리 민간에서는 그것을 雜鬼라고 한다. 그러고 雜鬼는 갈 곳으로 가지 못하고 항상 地上에 방황한다고 한다. 旅死者, 客死者, 溺死者, 無後者 등은 그것을 適法으로 葬送할 수 없는 경우가 많다. 함으로 死者가 後世에서 생활할 資料인 住居, 家畜, 車馬, 器物, 衣服등을 얻을 수 없으며 後生길을 떠남에 旅費좇아 없었다. 해서 그들은 地上에 彷徨하는 수밖에 없었다. 이것은 오랜 옛날에 일어난 思想으로 지금까지 전해 오는 바일 것이다. 그럼으로 如斯한 死者에게는 적당한 葬式을 하여 주어야 되며 死軆를 발견하지 못하는 경우에는 收魂을 하여서라도 埋葬을 하여 주어야 되며 無後者에게는 養子를 세우어 주어야 된다는 思想이 後世에 일어나게 된 것일 것이다.
自殺者, 他殺者는 그것이 自然의 죽음이 아닌 까닭에 原始人에게 恐怖 憎惡의 感을 주었을 것이다. 해서 他界에 가서도 他界사람들에게 憎惡感을 줄 것이라고 추리하여 그러한 死者는 갈 곳이 없음으로 지상에 방황하는 것이라고 결론한 것이 아닌가 한다.
未婚者가 他界에 못 간다는 것은 密敎의 感化인 성도 바르나 다음의 民間傳說은 그것이 性에 미련을 가진 까닭이라고 설명하는 것 같다. 全州 柳春燮君의 이야기를 들어면
『옛날 어떤 나그내가 路傍에서 소변을 하였다. 그날 밤 꿈에 어떤 美少女가 보이며 나는 오늘 당신의 가지신 귀한 것을 보았음니다. 나의 此生의 한도 인저는 풀리게 되었으니 지금으로 나는 後生 길을 떠나겠음니다 하고 因忽不見이 되었다고 한다. 그럼으로 그 뒤붙어는 未婚者의 墓는 平土葬으로 하게 되었다. 나그내가 소변한 곳은 꿈에 보인 처녀의 墓地였으나, 나그내는 물론 墓인줄 알지 못하고 無禮를 한 것이었다. 하나 그 무례는 돌이어 가엾은 怨魂을 구하게 된 것이었다.』
라고 한다. 지금 民間에서 정말 이 이야기와 같이 未婚者의 死軆를 반듯이 平土葬으로 하는지는 보증하기 어렵으나＜27＞ 민간에서 미혼남녀의 死者를 위하여 死者間의 결혼식을 마치 보통 婚禮式과 같이 거행하는 風習이 있는 것은 사실이요. 그것이 반듯이 支那의 感化일 것이라고도 할 수 없다. 동시 혹은 최근에 죽은 配匹을 구하여 死者 간의 결혼을 - 位牌로서 -行하여 주어야 몽달귀신을 면한다고 하며 死者의 부모들은 互相 査頓이라고 생각한다.
溺死者가 他界로 가지 못한다는 理由의 또 한가지는 水死者는 왕왕 埋葬을 할 수 없음으로 地下界에 갈 수가 없다.-地下界는 埋葬에서 나아온 思想임으로 해서 가족은 死者의 魂魄을 건지어서-巫女에 의하여-魂魄만이라고 매장하여야 된다고 한다.
上述한 諸 精靈은 말하자면 放浪生活을 하는 無職, 無産者임으로 그들의 飮食을 위하여는 旅行者를 습격할 수밖에 없다. 사람 세상 같으면 强盜, 山賊의 類다. 함으로 客鬼에 붙들니면 발서 음식으로 退鬼할 각오를 하며 旅者는 대개 寒感에 붙들니는 까닭에 客鬼는 感氣鬼神으로 평가가 예정되어 있다.
仇敵의 所崇理由는 二章 三節에 기술하였다.
독개비는 雜鬼의 일종으로 보통으로는 鬼火 즉 燐火가 그 본체라고 한다. 下肢는 볼 수 없으나, 입과 코가 한곳에 붙어 구별하기 어렵다고도 하며 혹은 「헛것」 「헛갭이」 등과 구별하기 어렵은 경우도 많다. 童話 중에서는 작난하기를 좋아하며 혹시로는 實貨를 가지고 오는 수도 있어 이러한 경우에는 spirit, ghost보다 fairy의 성질을 가지었다고 할 수 있다. 例하면 「慵齋叢話」 券三에는
『外叔安府尹. 少時向瑞原別墅. 乘嬴馬. 率一小僮. 去墅十里許. 時夜向黑. 四顧無人. 東望縣城. 有火炬喧呼之狀. 似若遊獵. 其勢漸近. 周擁左右. 五里不絶. 皆鬼火也. 公進退維谷. 罔知所措. 但策馬, 前行七八里. 鬼火皆散. 天陰雨濕. 道路益鞎. 然私喜去鬼. 恐怖稍定. 又踰一嶺. 綠回而下. 前所見鬼火. 疊塞前路. 公計無所出. 拔劒大呼突入. 其火一時皆散. 投入林莽. 抵掌大笑. 公到墅. 心猶惶駭. 憑窓假寐. 婢僕張松明. 方坐績. 公見火光明滅. 大呼曰, 此鬼復來邪. 仍擧劒擊之. 左右器皿. 皆被破碎. 婢僕僅免.』
이라는 笑話가 보인다. 이것은 아마 事實譚이겠지마는 儒者들도 이렇게 燐火를 鬼神이라고 믿었다. 이러한 경우에 병을 얻게 되면 그것을 민간에서는 독개비에게 魂을 빼앗기었다던지 독개비의 所崇이라고 한다.
헛갭이의 一例를 들면, 「慵齋叢話」 券八에는
『余少時. 送客南江. 回至典牲署南峴. 是是微雨. 馬噴沫不能進. 忽覺暖氣. 射面如火. 又有醜氣不可堪. 見路上東谷.＜28＞ 有人着簑笠. 長數十丈. 面如盤. 目如炬. 詭狀非常. 余黙自念曰. 我若失心. 必墮彼計. 遂空馬不發. 良久縱目視之. 其人便回首向天. 漸漸消滅. 騰空而去. 信乎, 必定則怪不入也.』
라는 自慢談이 있다. 成俔과 같이 沈着한 者가 아니면 이러한 경우에 「헛개비」에게 魂을 빼았기고 病이 생기는 것이다. 이러한 幻覺上의 精靈이 成俔과 같은 學者에게도 존재하였던 것이다.
第三種의 邪物 발생하는 精靈은 물론 人的도 아니오 動物的도 아니며 古物에서 생기는 것이다. 金銀寶物, 古衣類, 古物, 古器 등을 오랫동안 閉藏, 死藏하여 두면 거긔서 邪가 발생한다고 한다. 邪란 것은 물론 일종의 惡精靈이며 그 形相은 불명하나 說話 상에서 사람과 交涉을 가질 때에는 擬人化된다. 그것은 原始 心理의 당연한 所産이요 물체이나 心的 存在일찌라도 그것이 人相을 取하지 아니하면 사람과 會話를 할 수 없으며 活動도 할 수 없는 까닭이다. 閉藏된 물체에 邪物이 발생한다는 것은 그것이 광선을 取하지 못하고 장구한 동안 幽暗중에 방치된 까닭이라고 한다. 原始人들의 생각으로서는 幽暗한 곳에는 반듯이 精靈이 존재하였다.(下述). 그렇게 해서 邪-物體에 발생하는-라는 槪念이 추리되었을 것이다. 허다한 說話를 생략한다.
古家(癈家), 古井(癈井)에도 邪나 精靈이 발생한다고 한다. 이것도 邪物의 경우와 동일한 심리상의 所産이었다. 癈井 癈家같은 것은 그러하지만 癈井 상에 집을 지으면 井神의 가삼을 집이 누질레게 된다는 意味로 井神이 가족에게 災病을 준다고 하기도 한다. 癈家같은 것은 幽暗하기도 하지마는 그러한 집에 들어갈려면 누구에게던지 일종 불안의 感이 난다. 그것은 癈家와 같이 인적이 없고 沈陰한 장소에서는 그 중에 있는 모든 물체를 명료히 認識할 수 없음으로 혹 敵이 그 중에 潛伏하여 있지 아니하나 하는 本能的 衝動에서 나아오는 감정이다. 함으로 原始人들은 癈家에는 반듯이 惡精靈들이 巢窟을 맨들고 있을 것이라고 생각하였다. 一例를 들면 「慵齋叢話」 券四 중에는
『吾隣有奇宰樞. 乃一時名賢也. 吾少時與奇之孫裕. 竹馬相交戱. 宰樞損世. 余與裕俱筮仕. 而裕幹疊居其宅. 末幾宅凶. 人不得入. 裕亦從他焉. 吾從其隣. 聽其說. 則有僮立門外. 忽有物附其背. 重不能堪. 狼狽而入. 覓之不見物. 良久而釋. 流汗被軆. 自後多怪事. 人若炊飯. 則昇蓋如舊. 而糞滿其中. 飯散于庭. 或取盤盂. 擲于空或取大釜. 環空中而擊之. 聲如洪種. 或見圃中菜蔬. 皆堀而倒植之. 須臾而枯. 或見無人竈問. 火光忽起. 如有人捧之者. 來觸廊廡. 廊廡盡燒. 以故棄而不收者己多年裕憤然曰. 先祖家室. 久未修葺. 豈人子奉先之意乎. 大丈夫豈有畏鬼之理乎. 卽入居. 怪亦復作. 或移飯鉢. 或以糞穢塗人面. 裕若叱之. 則空中唱云. 奇都事敢如是乎未幾, 裕得病而卒. 人皆云, 裕之表弟柳繼亮, 謀亂被誅而其神, 依家作崇也.』
라고 있다. 鬼物의 한 짓은 금일의 독가비의 작난하는 이야기와 유사하여 荒唐한 妖怪說話이지마는 癈家에서 惡精靈이 발생한다는 信仰의 例로서는 가장 적절하다.
바다의 怪物 즉 물ㅅ鬼神은 水死者의 魂으로 된 것이라고 생각되는 경우도 있으며 혹은 원래붙어 海中, 水中에 있는＜29＞ 怪物인 경우도 있다. 물ㅅ鬼神은 사람의 魂을 유인하기도 하며 船舶을 破하여서 사람의 魂을 구하기도 한다. 함으로 船員이나 航海者는 金銀의 「동곳」을 가지어야 된다. 그것이 赤珊瑚의 동곳이면 더욱 좋다. 물ㅅ귀신은 金屬이나 珊瑚를 무섭어함으로 상투를 쥐다 가는 무섭어서 놓고 달아난다고 한다.
이밖에도 사람에게 崇付한 精靈은 때와 경우를 딸아 한없시 있다. 기괴한 數例를 들면 李陸의 「靑坡劇談」(大東野乘所收) 중에
「廣州有老人. 年八十餘. 自言平生未嘗見異事. 有二事, 至甚奇怪. 隣有一人. 嘗戱假面一日其家有梁病. 巫云, 木假面所崇. 卽投之於田野. 病氣果寢. 云云』
이라 하는 木假面의 所崇도 있으며 車天輅의 「五山說林草藁」(野乘)에는
『光廟, 謁文宣王廟歸. 因不豫, 貞熹王大妃憂之. 問諸巫. 皆曰孔廟神爲崇. 貞熹王大妃, 命宮人率諸巫. 行淫祀於大成殿庭中. 諸巫雜畓. 衆伎亂作. 館中諸生有士氣者爲之唱. 領諸生驅逐諸巫. 椎破腰鼓雜樂. 宮人驚散. 走入秦之大妃. 大妃大怒曰... 成廟椎枕蹶然而起曰. 吾太學生徒. 如此其有義節耶... 賜宴于勤政殿. 云云』
이라 하여 孔子의 神도 사람에게 崇付한다고 생각한 모양이다.

精靈의 居所
우리 民間에서는 모든 他 民族의 信仰과 마찬가지로 精靈을 幽暗的 存在라고 생각한다. 물체를 暗處에 閉藏하여 두면 精靈이 생긴다 하며 死魂으로 된 精靈도 幽暗한 상태에서 生活한다고 한다. 鬼火라던지 「헛개비」같은 것도 반듯이 그 무대는 暗夜이며 어둡은 森林 중이나 洞穴 중 癈家 중 暗沈한 뒤깐 구석에는 항상 精靈이 潛伏하여 있는 것 같이 생각한다. 闇夜는 精靈의 세계다. 精靈들은 自由自在히 闇夜의 세계에서는 출몰할 수 있다고 생각한다. 함으로 暗夜의 空間에는 惡精靈이 橫行한다고 하지마는 惡精靈이 충만하여 있는 것은 아니다. 어둔 밤에 보행하는 자는 반듯이 燈籠을 가지어야 한다. 귀신은 「불」이나 光을 무섭어 하는 것이다. 담모통이를 놀 때나 뒤깐에 들어갈 때 뷘 집에 들어갈 때는 세 번 기침을 하여 惡鬼를 쫓아야 한다. 鬼神은 소리(音)를 무섭어 하는 것이다.
惡精靈이 幽暗한 곳에 있다고 하는 추리는 그들의 「蒙幻說」에서 나아온 것이다. 꿈의 빛은 항상 幽暗하였다. 그러고 白晝에는 귀신이 보이지 아니 하였다. 하지만 밤이 되던지 幽暗한 곳에서는 그들의 幻覺은 항상 귀신과 精靈을 보았다. 光明한 곳에서는 모든 물체를 명료히 인식할 수 있음으로 精靈的 敵을 발견할 수 없었으며 그것을 상상할 수도 없었다. 하지만 幽暗한 곳에는 敵이 있으리라는 本能的 감정이 발동하였다. 함으로 精靈은 그러한 곳에 존재하였다. 原始人에게는 『생각할 수 있는 것은 모도 존재하였다.』
이렇게 사람의 死靈은 2章 所述과 같이 地下界(他界)로 가는 것과 暗中에 棲息하는 것이 있지마는 이 밖에도 墓地에 發生 혹은 棲息한다는 관념도 자연히 일어났었다. 他界로 간다는 思想과는 理論上 모순되는 듯 하지마는 原始人게는＜30＞ 그것이 명료한 論理이었다. 例하면 「慵齋叢話」 券八에는
『權姓宰樞. 以文官顯於朝. 父死, 將堀人塚而墓之. 塚主曰, 此吾父墓也. 吾父官踓卑. 意氣嚴毅. 非尋常人. 愼勿堀之. 將必有害. 宰樞不聽. 竟堀其墓. 剖棺棄尸. 其子撫尸痛哭曰. 英靈若在. 其無報寃乎. 其夜風水李官. 夢紫髥丈夫, 憤怒叱之曰. 汝何奪我安宅. 移給他人. 禍根實在於汝. 卽以拳椹其胸. 李痛胸流血. 須臾而死. 未幾宰樞亦被誅. 家門殄絶. 人皆云, 堀塚之過也.』
란 것이 있다. 죽은 風水의 꿈을 누구가 알아서 이런 말이 조작되었는지 턱없는 거짓말이겠지마는 墓地를 死者의 집이라고 하며 死者가 그 중에서 생활한다고 생각한 것은 埋葬의 風習과 함께 당연히 일어날 思想이었다. 古代 墓地의 구조는 많이 住家를 模倣하였으며 우리 주위 民族사이에는 塚上作屋의 풍습이 많이 있다. 그것은 물론 墓가 死者의 주거로 생각되는 까닭이다. 例하면 「隋書」八四 突厥傳은
『... 於是擇日. 置屍馬上而焚之. 取灰而葬. 表木爲塋. 立屋其中. 云云』
이라 전하며 「魏書」券百 勿吉傳은
『其父母春夏死. 立埋之. 塚上作屋. 不令雨濕』
이라 하며 Czaplicka孃(2)에 의하면 「보굴」(Vogul)人과 「오쓰티야크」(Ostyak)人들은 塚上에 屋蓋形의 덮이를 맨든다고 하는 것은 黃平道의 「건폄」과 유사한 모양이다. 그러고 勿吉(靺鞨)族의 塚上作屋은 現今도 있는 모양으로 Raventein氏에 의하면 東北部 滿洲와 黑龍江 下流에 사는 「골디」(Goldi), 「망군」(Mangun)族들은 幹木이나 板木으로 맨든 粗踈한 棺에 死體를 넣고 그 우에 小屋을 지으며 巫覡의 墓 우에는 좀 더 훌륭한 집을 짓는 모양이다(3). 그러고 「아이누」(Ainu)族들도 墓上에 小屋을 짓는 모양이다(4). 「後漢書」 百十五 濊傳이
『多所忌諱. 疾病死亡. 輒損棄舊宅. 更造新居.』
라 하는 病者와 死者의 주거를 放棄하는 풍습을 土俗學者들은 病者忌避 死軆忌避思想으로 해석하고저 하며 經濟學者들은 특히 死者의 생긴 家屋은 死者의 所有임으로 所有權 侵害를 극단으로 무섭어 하던 原始人의 經濟觀念에서 발생된 것이라고 해석한다. 모도 지당한 말이지마는 한편으로 생각하면 死者家 放棄는 死者의 주거를 위하여 그것을 死者에게 贈與한다는 觀念으로붙어 생긴 것이 아닌가 하는 推論도 성립될 것 같다.

精靈의 形相
최후로 精靈의 형상에 관하여 一言하면 우리 민간에서는 死魂으로 된 諸 精靈의 형상을 二章 所述과 같이 影子와 같다고 한다. 한데 특히 목이 떨어지어 죽은 자, 手足이 切傷되어 죽은 死魂은 死後에도 無頸, 無手足의 형상을 가진다고 하며 小兒의 死魂은 언제까지던지 小兒이며 老人의 死魂은 死後에도 老人으로 繼生하며 婦人은 婦人, 盜者는 盜者로 繼生한다고 한다. 이것도 「蒙幻說」의 幻覺 즉 存在의 원리로 설명할 수 있다. 原始人의 꿈이나 환각 중에는 목 떨어지어 죽은 者는 항상 목이 떨어지어 보이었으며 小兒의 死魂은 항상 小兒의 形으로 출현하였다. 性質의 强暴한 者는 항상 强暴하게 출현하였다. 그러소 小兒는 死後 數十年 後 일찌라도 그것을 壯年의 형상으로 상상하기는 원시인에게는 不可能하였다. 그들의 印象에 남아있는 것은 항상 小兒임으로 그것을 壯年化할 수는 없었다. (長生不老의 思想도 이러한 原始 心理에서 進化된 것일 것이며 天堂과 極樂에는 죽음도 업고 新生도 업다. 이는 思想도 이러한 細胞思想에서 分裂發達된 것일 것이다) ＜31＞
＜23-31＞