잡지명	개벽 제72호
발행일	1926년 08월 01일
기사제목	時評 (Commentary on Current Events)
기사형태	세태비평 (Social Criticism)

時評

學校盟休何其多
制度의 不備와 環境의 必然
In recent years, school disturbances in Chosŏn have followed one after another as if manifesting some characteristic of the times, but even just considering the school disturbances that arose during the recent months of June and July, there were incidents starting with the large dispute at Suwŏn Higher Agricultural School, followed by Kyŏngsŏng Medical College, Chŏnju Higher Common School, Haeju Higher Common School, Koch'ang Higher Common School (*asterisk obscures the first character, assumed Koch'ang*), Ch'ungnam Agricultural School (Yesan), and Cheju Agricultural School, which could not but cause great pain to the public. Of course, besides these, there were also very many incidents of *maenghyu* (school strikes) at common schools in various regions, but those listed above were all disturbances at schools of middle school level or higher. Just as common school *maenghyu* would not be without sufficient reason, it is unbelievable that *maenghyu* at schools of middle level or higher would break out without any reason. Therefore, although there might be points to criticize regarding the particular rashness and reckless actions of some teachers or students among them, the first thing we, who do not discuss the rights and wrongs of each incident individually, cannot help but feel is the deficiency of the current educational system and methods. <29>
At a time when trends of freedom, equality, and liberation permeate society, and students are certainly not unaware of them, trying to uphold the traditional Eastern-style distinction between teacher and student (師弟之分) is the first mistake. Also, under the educational policy that emphasizes XX-style infusionism (注入主義), claiming it is education for an XX land (XX地), the unreasonable selection of subjects, discriminatory treatment of students based on ethnicity, and the support for teachers' arbitrary (武斷式) and bureaucratic attitudes constitute the second mistake. Ultimately, none of the causes of all the *maenghyu* incidents arising in Chosŏn's academic circles deviate from such malpractices. As the guidance and instruction of the parties concerned depart from affection and intimacy, relying solely on official authority and the articles of regulations, feelings and conflicts constantly arise between them. Should this be called the students' reckless action? Should it be called poisoning by liberation ideology? Should it be called the deficiency of the system? Or should it be called the obstinacy (頑冥) of the teachers? Or perhaps an inevitable phenomenon of the colonial educational world?

In short, students are humans in their formative years, generally individuals whose aspirations are unsettled and who lack experience, so their assertions and outcries cannot all be correct, but even so, it is certainly not right to completely ignore the students' opinions. Why is that? Because the object of education is neither the school nor the teacher, but the student. Education cannot happen without teachers, but it is even more impossible without students. Therefore, educators should always reflect on the fundamental purpose of education rather than on conventional customs, official authority, or the articles of educational regulations. The world of education, regardless of the country, is said to be a kind of perfect refuge isolated from the consciousness of modern humans, but the environment and circumstances of Chosŏn have caused Chosŏn's educational world <30> to have an even stronger sense of such escapism. Thus, Chosŏn's educators and political authorities need to pay great attention to this.

萬歲學生處罰令
行政處分의 反動的 發作
Here is another issue concerning students: regarding those students involved in the recent Manse Incident (萬歲事件) who were prosecuted, it was decided not only to punish those students at the schools they currently attend but also to absolutely refuse their admission into universities or preparatory courses even after they complete their judicial sentences. Just as we were about to speak of the harshness and denounce the unreasonableness upon seeing such a decision, the educational authorities (學務當局) issued a new order to the relevant schools, more reckless than harsh: even for students whose prosecution was suspended, or more severely, even for those not prosecuted, they commanded punishments such as expulsion or indefinite or fixed-term suspension.

Originally, power is irresistible, and politics is omnipotent. The orders issued by the political authorities could not but be followed verbatim by each school, resulting in numerous victims. Though they couldn't help but expel them and have already done so, just because they have been expelled, how can the debate about the rights and wrongs concerning it be obliterated?

We first want to ask the educational authorities. What is the true intention <31> behind the educational authorities punishing students whom the judicial authorities did not punish? Was it that their crimes did not warrant judicial punishment, but definitely warranted administrative punishment? That is not impossible. However, the Manse Incident, in its nature, is vastly different from ordinary crimes. The cause leading to its outbreak lies less in the inherent wickedness of the individual students and more in the social and political facts of Chosŏn that drove these students to such an outbreak. That is, the educational authorities regarded a societal defect as an individual defect. While it may be an unavoidable fact that in today's Chosŏn, there are differences between the views of such government officials and ours, the problem ultimately is that such outbreaks cannot be stopped unless one removes such social defects or makes individuals conform to those social defects—these two methods are the only options.

Then, will the sacrifice of students due to the harsh orders (酷令) of the educational authorities effectively quell such outbreaks? Or what changes will occur in the psychology of those students, and what corrections will there be in their behavior?

No. The harsh orders of the educational authorities only harm the administrative authorities' governing policies towards Koreans; they inflict not the slightest pain or itch (痛痒) upon Koreans themselves, or upon the students themselves. They fail to bring about even the slightest benefit or harm. Why is that? Because if they had had a deep attachment to orderly studies, such an outbreak would have been impossible, and also because no one would think their feelings towards the political authorities would be so favorable when subjected to sacrifice by the order of the educational authorities. Is that all? It is also a fact that because they were sacrificed by that order, <32> their perspective in observing their social reality will not be overturned, turning wrong into right, suffering into pleasure, or irrationality into rationality.

Therefore, we had said that the merciful and lenient disposition by the judicial authorities was a wise political move (政略) by the authorities, blessing the future studies of those students, rather than simply stating that it was necessary as a political move by the authorities. In short, that punishment order is certainly a reactionary policy by the authorities towards the students. One lenient measure has lost its vitality due to another harsh reaction, thus exposing the contradictions of that inorganic ruling spirit in practice. From the position of XXX, saying XXXXX, what sort of gain or loss should we feel, and what sort of pain or itch should we feel?

科學人蠻行事件
米人許時模의 知慧로운 私刑
Next, an incident that recently stirred considerable public debate in Chosŏn society is the barbaric act (蠻行事件) of that Mr. Hŏ Simo. Whether to gain respect from Koreans or to look down on them, Mr. Hŏ Simo (許時模), one of the resident American missionaries who endlessly boasts of their civilization and endlessly proclaims their virtue, discovered a 12-year-old schoolboy named Kim Myŏngsŏp from Sunan, P'yŏngwŏn County, trespassing in his private orchard. Catching him on the spot, he tied him askew to a tree, <33> summoned his mother, and demanded 5 won as compensation for the fruit. When she stated she couldn't afford it, he used a potent chemical agent called sulfuric acid water (硫酸水) to write the two characters "Thief" (盜賊) on Myŏngsŏp's two cheeks, damaging even the inner skin so severely that now, after a year has passed, it has become very difficult to heal even with medicine.

Although it was the act of a young schoolboy, trespassing in someone else's orchard was wrong, and intending to discipline him is something anyone might do. However, regarding the fact that Hŏ Simo, who crossed the vast Pacific Ocean to speak of love or something similar, ruined the child's entire life destiny by branding him with such a simple yet indelible mark on his face, no one, however magnanimous their thoughts, can view it as ordinary. We, who are neither police officials nor judicial authorities, can only speak of how extremely cruel the barbarity of the crime was.

Hŏ Simo's intention in carving the characters "Thief" (盜賊) into the flesh (肉刻) of the face must have been to utterly make the child a morally dead person. Such a barbaric act could not be committed if one were not civilized. Just as the means of crime become more ingenious as one becomes more civilized, Hŏ Simo's barbaric act, not being the barbarism of a savage, possesses a much deeper, unseen cruelty. Furthermore, he is a missionary and a doctor. Thinking about how many hundreds, thousands of Koreans might have been deceived, poisoned, captivated, and misled during the years he continued his feigned actions and hypocritical sermons stemming from such a cruel heart concealed by such packaging, we truly cannot suppress a shudder. Some might say <34> that treatment and preaching are professional, so the cruelty of his barbaric act should not be compared to them, but as long as a person's character is not twofold, the psychology of a perpetrator of barbarism cannot be seen as the psychology of a non-perpetrator. Unless it was something done while intoxicated or in an extraordinary situation, it is an instinctive act of barbarism that cannot be excused no matter how one tries.

In any case, this barbaric act incident by Hŏ Simo, although the deed of Hŏ Simo as an individual, cannot but be a major blow to the American missionary enterprise in Chosŏn; this is one of the great difficulties that collective enterprises occasionally encounter. Even without such barbaric incidents, recently in the Chosŏn Christian world, voices hating the arrogance of missionaries have grown louder in various places, and movements to reject them are flourishing today. This single barbaric act surely can be seen, without being unreasonable, as exposing a part of that packaged mentality before our very eyes.

The fact that Americans' contempt and violation towards Black people was severe is already a well-known fact to the world. There is no need to mention it anew here, but the dispatch of those missionaries to various Eastern countries, while perhaps not entirely devoid of the desire to proclaim the so-called "Gospel of Christianity" to humanity, was more likely driven almost entirely by a great sense of superiority and arrogance, intending to teach human decency to the supposedly inferior and immoral colored races, armed with the authority of racial superiority—a fact well proven by their actions in Chosŏn. However, on the other hand, the reason they have not yet received the baptism of active rejection is that their methods are too insidious, seamlessly stitching (*縫) up the outer layer with disguised sermons and benevolent medicine bottles, while at the same time, the intelligence of the populace has not yet become bright enough to see through it. <35>
Ah! What we fear more than anything is the barbarity (蠻性) possessed by civilized people, scientific people.

Ah! What we fear more than anything is the barbarity possessed by civilized people, scientific people.

色다른 義憤
不純한 政略을 排斥한다
Regarding this barbaric act incident of Hŏ Simo, it appears that quite a number of people on the Japanese side are indignant. We heard that there were meetings for denunciation and criticism in Kyŏngsŏng, P'yŏngyang, and even far away in Tokyo, Japan.

This Hŏ Simo incident is a great evil unforgivable from a humanitarian perspective, a fact deserving active denunciation by anyone. It is a fact that could provoke public anger from the French, a fact that could arouse righteous indignation in the Portuguese. What could be wrong with Japanese people denouncing this evil? However, when it comes to the alliance between the so-called *rōnin* faction (浪人派), the Tōyama Mitsuru clique that supports the Japanese XXXXXXX, and the Sōaikai (相愛會) clique that adheres to the principle of commercial Japanese-Korean harmony (日鮮融和主義), raising the banner of "Subjects of the Great Japanese Empire" (大日本帝國臣民) and expressing their XXX righteous indignation, we cannot help but feel it is a different kind of cheering section.

Putting aside the direct gains and losses between Americans and Koreans, it is an undeniable fact that Japanese people in Chosŏn view the advancement of Americans with jealous eyes. Whether Americans deliberately adopt such attitudes to win the favor of Koreans is unknown, but in any case, whenever Korean national or political movements arise, the past since Japanese political power extended to Chosŏn in recent decades proves that Americans were suspected of instigation and incitement regarding them. It is also true that there is an intention to denounce them whenever the opportunity arises, but this is all driven by political maneuvering (政略) stemming from self-interest. Despite the almost continuous emergence, layer upon layer, of inhumane evils and unjust tyranny since XXXXXXXXX, while efforts were made to resolve these solely through Korean mouths or intentions, loudly expressing fury over this Hŏ Simo incident makes it difficult to judge its truth or falsehood, righteousness or hypocrisy.

Denunciation driven by impure motives! Righteous indignation as a political strategy forces a bitter smile from us. If this provides an opportunity for a masquerade parade proclaiming self-interest as a sense of justice, we cannot help but feel that the mother-in-law who tries to stop the fight is more hateful than the husband who beats his wife. <37>

難解의 協同派 出現
勞資協同이냐? 官民協同이냐?
We only learned through newspaper reports in July that on May 24th in Tokyo, some fortunate Chosŏn students studying abroad organized the Cooperative Movement Society (協同運動社) to strive for the cooperative movement. As it is the launch of a movement unheard of before, we cannot know what kind of response they expect from the Chosŏn populace, but since June has passed and more than half of July has gone by without any news being heard, not only within Chosŏn but also in Tokyo, perhaps their battle formation is not yet arranged for deployment.

The members of this Cooperative group (協同派) number over 140, comprising students from various universities and professional schools in Tokyo such as Meiji Theological Seminary (明治神學), Fine Arts (美術), Higher Normal School (高師), Higher Technical School (高工), Sophia University (上智), University of Commerce (商大), Tokyo University (東大), Risshō University (立正), Rikkyō University (立敎), Senshū University (專修), Hōsei University (法大), Keio University (慶大), Waseda University (早大), Imperial University (帝大), Chūō University (中大), Nihon University (日大), Meiji University (明大), etc. Their platform is as follows:
1. We aim for (*함) popular industrial management and popular cultivation of knowledge through a cooperative and autonomous spirit.
2. To achieve the above objectives, we aim for the promotion of the cooperative spirit and the actual management of cooperatives.

Since the society's name is Cooperative Movement Society (協同運動社), it seems certain to be an organization that promotes cooperation. What they intend to cooperate on is beyond our conjecture, but given that the members of this non-research society seem to encompass a miscellany of students from almost all universities and professional schools in Tokyo, it is certain that it is not an association formed based on any particular ideological lineage. Therefore, we even suspect it might just be an alumni association federation formed by various school alumni groups coming together. Although we cannot hastily conclude its significance based on conjecture here, the phrase mentioning popular industrial management perhaps suggests they might be talking about the uniquely British Cooperative Movement (組合主義). Or perhaps it seems they intend to undertake cooperative industrial movements based on the Industrial Cooperative Ordinance (産業組合令) and Agricultural Association Ordinance (農會令) enacted and promulgated by the Government-General under its industry-first policy (産業第一主義). If our conjecture is indeed correct, then this seems to be the time for their activity. Not only that, since those who oppose said cooperatives are all brought to public trial and sentenced to imprisonment, we believe their objective can also be achieved without difficulty. <38>
This is our brief conjecture; we intend to offer a detailed critique later, after its true nature becomes clearer.

民興會란 무엇인가?
Recently in Chosŏn, an amusing plan with a novel slogan, unheard of before, conceived by some clever idle individuals (有閑者), has begun to emerge. Whether it will become a plan, a delusion, or some kind of advertisement cannot yet be predicted, but the gathering called the Chosŏn People's Promotion Society (朝鮮民興會), which aims to form a unified national front out of regret that there is no central national body to representatively voice the grievances of the Chosŏn nation, should have arisen much earlier if it were possible, given Chosŏn's circumstances. That it arises now truly invites sighs of belatedness.

We hear the plan is to encompass the entire nation, irrespective of any sector or class, making it undeniably a very large-scale and grand endeavor. According to the scope of the meeting they listed, it aims to encompass all fields of activity, including business, religion, education, labor, peasantry, journalism, women, youth, Hyeongpyeong (equality for Paekchŏng), students, and ideology. If it's the entire nation, they can be seen as the conquered people. And if listing all spheres of the Chosŏn people, then doctors, lawyers, restaurant owners, and prostitutes, being Chosŏn people, are surely not without national resentment, so wouldn't including them in the list be more indiscriminate? At this time, when it is only words on paper and its concrete policies and plans have not manifested in actual action, commenting on what this meeting is might be accused of haste. However, even before seeing the launch of such a Chosŏn People's Promotion Society, similar discussions were already frequent, and the arguments against it are so clear that even if the concrete plans for the meeting emerge, we are confident enough to predict its future with a single word.

Do they know why the Minuhoe (民友會), the Chosŏn Youth Federation (朝鮮靑年聯合會), the Association for the Promotion of Chosŏn Products (朝鮮物産獎勵會), or the propaganda paper of Tongmyŏng (東明), which were launched at times far more favorable than now for their plan, lost their existence, or even if they exist, have become obscure, their voices silenced? Even if the Youth Federation was not aimed at uniting the entire nation, the other organizations <39> did indeed target the entire nation. It cannot be argued that the unified front failed because they didn't specifically include ideology, youth, Hyeongpyeong, labor, and peasants, unlike the newly launched Minhŭnghoe. The meaning of a unified national front was not absent then either, but wasn't their history very short?

And speaking of a unified national front doesn't mean uniting several fronts of nationalist activists, but that the entire nation should unite and fight together. Should this be called the delusion of nationalist activists or an insult to social movement activists? If we speak of ideology, Hyeongpyeong, women, labor, and peasants, the objectives of their movements are already clear. The movement did not arise for the sake of the objective; the movement came to exist for the sake of the objective. The targets of the movement have clearly emerged, and it is the current reality that they cannot deviate from its norms. Although the entire proletariat of Chosŏn may not yet be awakened to class consciousness, at a time when the central force flowing through society is already tilting towards social movements, for some idle individuals to newly propose national grand unity truly invites ridicule. Moreover, does the target of national resentment also become the target of class struggle? If so, no further words are needed. Perhaps if it were long ago, before the capitalist economy developed, before economic class feelings became acute, or before the consciousness of class struggle intensified, it might be different. But today, when tragic incidents of bloodshed frequently follow one another in labor and tenant disputes, when capitalists employ every scheme to eradicate the proletarian youth movement, when there is reaction against Hyeongpyeong, and when opposition to the women's movement is fierce, the call for XXXXX by these idle elements (有閑者輩) sounds too discordant compared to the reality.

The sole morality of the capitalist is the defense of capital. Their alignment with imperialism to defend capital is an undeniable global fact. Even if Chosŏn's capitalists do not openly praise it, it is an undeniable fact that they fear and dislike social change. Some propertyless intellectuals (無産有識階級) align themselves with capitalists as a means of livelihood, just to eat. Ultimately, the impossibility of a unified national front does not lie solely with the proletariat. Capitalists and landlords will certainly not enter its sphere either, busy fighting for their economic interests and having no time to devote effort to other fights. Those advocating grand unity are likely the unoccupied intellectuals (無職業有識階級) trying to play a detached role for the capitalist class, and thus <40> the meeting will end up being their solitary front alone; they should count themselves lucky if the leftovers (殘飯) from the capitalist class come their way.

In short, who among the Chosŏn people lacks national resentment? However, the consciousness to fight based on class resentment is three or four times stronger than the consciousness to fight for that national cause. Ultimately, their desire for the creation of a unified national front will come to naught.

And since their assertion is a cry of negation of the current situation, we cannot but acknowledge that it might provide some degree of aid (*助) to the class movement, whatever happens afterward. However, if no Chosŏn person lacks national resentment, then their grievances and demands for liberation are already known. Unless there is a special XXXXX to propagate doctrines and ideologies as in the class movement, creating a permanent institution there just to shout grievances seems nothing more than the rhetoric of the extreme right wing. Perhaps campaigning for the formation of a Chosŏn National Assembly would be the most essential effort for their objectives. There is still much room to clarify regarding the meeting, but we intend to take up the pen again after seeing their actions.

Attached to this, I will mention the article "The Significance of a Unified National Movement" (單一的 民族運動의 意義) published on the first page of issue 56 of the weekly report "Chosŏn chi Kwang" (朝鮮之光). Although "Chosŏn chi Kwang" is not a publication flying the banner of propaganda for any particular class movement, considering the identities of its contributors, one cannot figure out what kind of tune they are playing.

Firstly, the title itself: Does it affirm the significance of a unified national movement? Perhaps if it questioned the significance, how it exists, or its presence or absence, it would be different, but merely mentioning "significance" can only be seen as affirmation. The social movement in Chosŏn did not arise before the national movement; it is an undeniable fact that it emerged after, or rather from within, the national movement. Despite this, discussing the significance of a unified national movement now, without any judgment, is a miracle in the world of class movement activists.

According to the discussion, on one hand, it says, "The nation as a unit can cooperate on external issues, but internally, there is always opposition," while on the other hand, "...among classes that are not like that, one sees them rather aligning with such imperialism." While stating that cooperation is impossible even on external issues, it speaks of the significance of a unified national movement. And <41> it states that if the middle class awakens, it can stand on a common front with the proletariat, and that unified action can be taken during the preparatory period for the life movement (生活運動), implying there will be no distinction between national and class lines. It also says that if a split occurs there, it will divide into left and right. If this leads to affirming the significance of a unified national movement, then that "unified" aspect cannot but be a unification excluding capitalists. And if the middle class and the proletariat form a common front, the consciousness of the middle class will transform into the consciousness of the proletariat. This is not a matter concerning the national question but a matter concerning the class question, so what relation does it have to the consciousness of a unified national movement? Ultimately, it seems to speak of the possibility of a unified national movement, yet it only points out arguments for its impossibility. Is there not a need to explain more clearly where the author's true intention lies?

蠶繭專賣特許事件
平南道當局 利權移動策의 一面
Where there is monopoly, there is arbitrary power (專斷), and where there is no competition, there is tyranny (橫暴)—this, though not entirely proper, is a common occurrence. During the silkworm cocoon (蠶繭) harvest season each year, popular grievances regarding the joint sale of cocoons have become almost an annual event, never failing to appear. However, this year, the dispute between about 200 cocoon merchants (蠶繭商) in P'yŏngan Namdo (平南道) and the Yamajū-gumi (山十組 - likely reading), a Japanese entity that gained the right to solely purchase all cocoons in the P'yŏngan Namdo province, concerning joint sales versus free sales, stirred considerable public controversy.

However, as the fundamental purpose for implementing the joint cocoon sales system, they would cite opening up sales channels for cocoons, ensuring swift transactions, and preventing price inequity and fraudulent practices. In theory, there might be such benefits, but when the sericulturists' (蠶業者) complaints increase and their cries of loss intensify, what is the point of the objective, and why implement the system? Furthermore, no matter how strong the power of large capital, making the Yamajū-gumi gain monopolistic profits <42> at the expense of the livelihoods (生道) of those 200 cocoon merchants is tyranny by the government office, relying on the power of capital.

Is such joint selling, where name and reality do not match, limited only to cocoons? For all goods handled by local government offices, purchasers through exclusive bidding on the sales side and suppliers through exclusive orders on the procurement side are actors motivated by profit. It is an unavoidable fact of reason that as they monopolize the concessions, they will produce corrupt practices. Is the Yamajū-gumi's handling of cocoons ultimately an aspect of industrial policy like the rice production increase plan (産米增殖計劃)? Given that there are sometimes complaints even about the Government Monopoly Bureau (官營專賣局), who could possibly think that the monopolistic buying behavior of a private merchant like Yamajū-gumi would be fair? We would like to delve deeply into the inside relationship between the permitting authorities and Yamajū-gumi.

暴力團相愛會의 妄動
The Sōaikai (相愛會), a detached unit of the Japanese ruling group that invariably calls itself a labor organization, recently staged a series of 3-4 violent acts. The attack on the striking workers of Matsuhama Instruments (松濱樂器 - assumed reading), the attack on the Chosŏn Labour Federation in Japan (在日本 朝鮮勞動總同盟), the brawl at the railway construction site in Yamanashi Prefecture (山梨縣)—none of these fail to be reckless actions (妄動) unimaginable for humans. It is even more bizarre that such an organization exists involving Koreans. Though the power of rule is strong and the power of capital is mighty, we cannot help but feel renewed astonishment that the power of instigation by the ruling group is that strong.

Throughout Chosŏn and Japan, the pressure (威壓 - assumed based on 威*) from the Japanese capitalist ruling class is quite severe (*이며 - assumed based on context, possibly 판이며, meaning 'situation'), suppressing the rise of new forces with all sorts of laws and control regulations. Yet, as if that were not enough, the fact that they mobilize direct violent groups like the Sōaikai as a vanguard can be amply proven by these riots. Have the ruling groups lost all sense of shame? While they harshly prohibit the direct actions of nationalist and labor movement organizations by applying all laws, they unhesitatingly adopt a see-no-evil attitude towards the pistol-and-club violence of the Sōaikai and similar groups. Seeing the function of the ruling group's rule of law reach such a state (** - assumed 지경, chigyŏng), one cannot help but feel pity. <43>

組織的 反衡平運動
江陵의 反衡平의 獸肉販賣團出現
It is said that when the Kangnŭng branch of the Hyeongpyeongsa (江陵衡平分社) held its first-anniversary ceremony in Kangnŭng, a member identified as Mr. Mo stated something to the effect that "We Paekchŏng have received excessively harsh contempt from general society in the past, but from now on, as we have gained self-awareness as human beings, we will not accept that contempt under any circumstances." Additionally, others spoke of having suffered violations of human rights, economic exploitation, and educational oppression. Several attendees who harbored resentment towards these statements and actions reportedly initiated an organized anti-Hyeongpyeong movement.

Specifically, intending to take away the occupations of Hyeongpyeong members and economically boycott them, they organized a Meat Retailers' Association (獸肉販賣組合), seeking to employ not temporary but ongoing boycott measures. This we call an organized anti-Hyeongpyeong movement.

On what grounds and with what kind of sentiment do they intend to vehemently oppose those who cry out and strive desperately for Hyeongpyeong (equality), saying Hyeongpyeong should not happen? Considering the persecution and discrimination they endured for hundreds of years in the past, the shouts and cries at their anniversary ceremony feel, if anything, rather weak. To imagine that they do not grasp that their resentment (憤恨) must be bone-deep seems too callous, comparable to wood or stone. Furthermore, reacting against it and resolving to fight permanently for inequality (不衡平) truly makes one feel unable to trust human thought. Not only that, but isn't taking away the Paekchŏng's occupation and taking it up themselves, out of an obstinate adherence to inequality (頑冥), actually practicing Hyeongpyeong in fact, which they do not permit in concept? They too would surely be angered by the discrimination they themselves receive; should they be called a prime example of selfish humans? <44>

**Summary**

This lengthy commentary from 1926 critiques various facets of Korean society under Japanese rule. It laments the frequent student strikes (*maenghyu*), attributing them primarily to flawed colonial education policies (discriminatory treatment, bureaucratic teachers, suppression of student opinion) rather than just student recklessness. It harshly criticizes the administrative punishment of students involved in the June 10th Movement, seeing it as a counterproductive, reactionary measure that ignores the socio-political roots of the protest. The article fiercely condemns the brutality of an American missionary (Hŏ Simo) who branded a boy, viewing it as hypocrisy masked by claims of civilization and religion, and links it to systemic racism. It expresses suspicion towards Japanese groups feigning indignation over the Hŏ Simo case for political gain, skepticism about the viability and motives of newly proposed "cooperative" (Hyŏptong Undongsa) and "unified national front" (Minhŭnghoe) movements, highlighting class divisions as a major obstacle. Finally, it condemns the economic exploitation inherent in a cocoon monopoly granted to a Japanese firm (Yamajū-gumi) and the violent anti-Hyeongpyeong (Paekchŏng equality) movement, exposing deep-seated social prejudices and the collusion between capital/power and reactionary forces like the Sōaikai.

For historians, this article is valuable for its contemporaneous critical perspective on the failures and contradictions of Japanese colonial governance in education, justice, and economic policy. It vividly portrays the rising student activism, the complex interplay between nationalism and emerging class consciousness, the tensions surrounding Western missionaries, the activities of pro-Japanese organizations (Sōaikai), and the persistent social discrimination against the Paekchŏng class, offering insights into the diverse social and political currents of 1920s Korea. The explicit critique of both colonial power and certain Korean initiatives provides a nuanced view of the period's internal debates.

**Named Entities**

水原高農	수원고농	Suwŏn Konong (Suwon Higher Agricultural and Forestry School)
京城醫專	경성의전	Kyŏngsŏng Ŭijŏn (Keijō Medical College)
全州高普	전주고보	Chŏnju Kobo (Jeonju Higher Common School)
海州高普	해주고보	Haeju Kobo (Haeju Higher Common School)
高*高普	고창고보 (추정)	Koch'ang Kobo (Gochang Higher Common School - assumed)
忠南農校	충남농교	Ch'ungnam Nonggyo (Chungnam Agricultural School)
禮山	예산	Yesan
濟州農校	제주농교	Cheju Nonggyo (Jeju Agricultural School)
許時模	허시모	Hŏ Simo
平原郡	평원군	P'yŏngwŏn-gun
順安	순안	Sunan
金明燮	김명섭	Kim Myŏngsŏp
東京	동경	Tokyo
明治神學	명치신학	Meiji Theological Seminary (likely Meiji Gakuin's Theology Dept.)
美術	미술	Fine Arts (likely Tokyo School of Fine Arts)
高師	고사	Higher Normal School (likely Tokyo Higher Normal School)
高工	고공	Higher Technical School (likely Tokyo Institute of Technology)
上智	상지	Sophia University (Jōchi Daigaku)
商大	상대	University of Commerce (likely Tokyo University of Commerce - Hitotsubashi)
東大	동대	Tokyo University (likely Tokyo Imperial University)
立正	입정	Risshō University
立敎	입교	Rikkyō University (St. Paul's University)
專修	전수	Senshū University
法大	법대	Hōsei University
慶大	경대	Keio University
早大	조대	Waseda University
帝大	제대	Imperial University (likely Tokyo Imperial University)
中大	중대	Chūō University
日大	일대	Nihon University
明大	명대	Meiji University
協同運動社	협동운동사	Hyŏptong Undongsa (Cooperative Movement Society)
民友會	민우회	Minuhoe
朝鮮靑年聯合會	조선청년연합회	Chosŏn Ch'ŏngnyŏn Yŏnhaphoe (Korean Youth Federation)
朝鮮物産獎勵會	조선물산장려회	Chosŏn Mulssan Changnyŏhoe (Association for Promotion of Korean Products)
東明	동명	Tongmyŏng (Name of a publication/group)
朝鮮民興會	조선민흥회	Chosŏn Minhŭnghoe (Korean People's Promotion Society)
朝鮮之光	조선지광	Chosŏn chi Kwang (Light of Korea - publication name)
平南道	평남도	P'yŏngan Namdo (South Pyeongan Province)
山十組	산십조	Yamajū-gumi (Company name, likely Japanese)
松濱樂器	송빈악기	Matsuhama Gakki (Matsuhama Instruments - assumed reading)
在日本 朝鮮勞動總同盟	재일본 조선노동총동맹	Chae Ilbon Chosŏn Nodong Ch'ongdongmaeng (Federation of Korean Labour Unions in Japan)
山梨縣	산리현	Yamanashi-ken (Yamanashi Prefecture)
相愛會	상애회	Sōaikai (Pro-Japanese organization)
江陵	강릉	Kangnŭng
江陵衡平分社	강릉형평분사	Kangnŭng Hyŏngp'yŏng Punsa (Kangnŭng Branch of the Hyeongpyeong Society)
頭山滿	두산만	Tōyama Mitsuru (Japanese ultranationalist)
浪人派	낭인파	Nanginp'a (Rōnin faction - Japanese nationalist groups)

**Glossary**

時評	시평	Commentary on current events
盟休	맹휴	School strike; collective refusal to attend classes
不備	불비	Deficiency; inadequacy
必然	필연	Inevitability; necessity
風潮	풍조	Trend; tendency
師弟之分	사제지분	The distinction/relationship between teacher and student
注入主義	주입주의	Infusionism (rote learning, cramming)
武斷式	무단식	Arbitrary; high-handed (often associated with military rule style)
頑冥	완명	Obstinate; stubborn; bigoted
萬歲事件	만세사건	Manse Incident (refers to the June 10th Movement of 1926)
苛酷	가혹	Harshness; severity
酷令	혹령	Harsh order; cruel decree
痛痒	통양	Pain and itch; feeling of concern or impact
蠻行	만행	Barbaric act; atrocity
肉刻	육각	Carving into flesh; branding
義憤	의분	Righteous indignation
政略	정략	Political strategy; political maneuvering
協同派	협동파	Cooperative faction/group
民興會	민흥회	People's Promotion Society (name of an organization)
有閑者	유한자	Person of leisure; idle person
物産獎勵	물산장려	Promotion of local products
單一戰線	단일전선	Unified front
階級鬪爭	계급투쟁	Class struggle
無産階級	무산계급	Proletariat; propertyless class
蠶繭	잠견	Silkworm cocoon
專賣	전매	Monopoly sale
專斷	전단	Arbitrary decision; despotism
橫暴	횡포	Tyranny; oppression; high-handedness
生道	생도	Way of living; livelihood
衡平	형평	Equality; fairness (specifically refers to the movement for Paekchŏng rights)
獸肉	수육	Meat (literally beast meat, often associated with Paekchŏng occupation)
닐어 낫섯지마는	일어났었지마는	Although it arose (older spelling/form of 일어나다)
업지 안켓거던	없지 않겠거든	As it would not be without (older spelling/form)
늣기지	느끼지	Feel (older spelling of 느끼다)
밧남이 업슬	벗어남이 없을	Will not deviate from (older spelling/form of 벗어나다, 없다)
하야곰	하여금	Causes (someone) to do (older causative form)
맛친	마친	Finished; completed (older spelling of 마치다)
되얏스니	되었으니	As it became (older spelling/form of 되다)
어듸에	어디에	Where (older spelling)
가튼	같은	Same; like (older spelling)
잇슬	있을	Will be; likely to be (older spelling)
조고만한	자그마한/조그마한	Tiny; very small (older form)
몃해를	몇 해를	For several years (older spelling of 몇)
거긔에	거기에	There (older spelling)
속히여	속히어/속아	Being deceived (older passive/causative form related to 속다)
밧지 안는	받지 않는	Does not receive (older spelling/form)
잇스랴마는	있으랴마는	Although there might be (older spelling/form)
드러서	들어서	Entering; upon entering (older spelling of 들다)
듯건대	듣건대	According to what I hear (older spelling/form)
넛는	넣는	Putting in; including (older spelling of 넣다)
업스리요마는	없으리오마는	Although there likely isn't (older spelling/form)
잇스려	있으려	Intend to be; likely to be (older spelling/form)
실닌	실린	Published; carried (older spelling of 실리다)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제72호
발행일	1926년 08월 01일
기사제목	時評
기사형태	세태비평

時評
學校盟休何其多
制度의 不備와 環境의 必然
근년 조선의 학교소동은 殆히 무슨 시대적 특색이나 나타내는 듯이 꼬리를 물고 닐어 낫섯지마는 더욱이 최근 6,7 兩月 동안에 닐어난 학교소동만 해도 水原高農의 큰 분규를 위시하야 京城醫專, 全州高普, 海州高普, 高*高普, 忠南農校(禮山), 濟州農校 등의 세인의 痛心을 금치 못하게 한 사건이 잇섯다. 물론 이 이외에도 각지 보통학교의 盟休事件도 매우 만핫섯지마는 이상에 열거한 者는 다 중등정도 以上校의 소동이라. 보통학교의 盟休에도 그만한 이유가 업지 안켓거던 중등정도 以上校의 盟休가 아무 이유 업시 發作될 것으로는 밋지 안는다. 그럼으로 그 중에는 혹 선생 혹 학생들의 특별한 輕擧와 妄動을 비난할 점도 업슬 것은 아니지마는 그 각 사건의 시비를 일일히 말하지 안는 우리로써 첫재로 늣기지 아니할 수 업는 것은 이 현행 교육제도 방식의 不備일 것이다.＜29＞
자유, 평등, 해방의 풍조가 사회를 풍미하야 학생들도 아주 들음이 업지 아니한 이때에 동양식 책 고대로의 師弟之分을 직히랴는 것이 첫제의 잘못이오 또 XX地의 교육이라 하야 XX的 注入主義를 高調하는 교육방침에서 과목의 무리한 채택, 학생의 민족별적 차별대우, 선생의 武斷式, 관료식적 태도를 支持하는 것 등이 그 둘재의 잘못이라 할 것이니 결국 조선학계에서 닐어나는 모든 盟休事件의 그 因由는 하나도 이러한 폐단에서 밧남이 업슬 것이다. 그 당사자의 지휘와 敎導가 애정과 친밀을 떠나서 오직 직권에만 의하고 법규의 條文에만 의하게 됨으로 그 사이에는 늘 감정과 충돌이 不絶하는 것이니 이를 학생의 妄動이라 할가 해방사상의 중독이라 할가 제도의 不備이라 할가 또는 선생의 頑冥이라 할가 식민지 교육계의 필연한 현상이라 할가.
요컨대 학생들은 敎養期중의 인간이라 일반적으로 志氣가 未定한 者들이오 경험이 부족한 者들이니 그들의 주장과 부르지즘이 다 올흘 수는 업는 것이지마는 그러타 하야 또한 학생들의 의사를 아주 무시할 것은 물론 아니다. 웨 그러냐 하면 교육의 목적체가 그 학교도 아니며 선생도 아니오 학생인 까닭이다. 교육은 선생이 업서서는 될 수 업는 것이지마는 학생이 업서서는 더욱 안될 일이다. 그럼으로 교육자는 늘 재래의 인습관념보다도 직권보다도 교육법규의 條文보다도 그 교육의 근본목적을 想考하여야 될 것이라 한다. 교육계라는 것은 어느 나라의 그것을 물론하고 현대 인간의 意識界를 벗어난 일종의 완전한 도피장소이라 하지마는 조선의 환경 조선의 처지는 조선의 育界로 하敎야곰＜30＞ 더욱 그러한 도피적 기분을 농후케 한 것이니 조선의 교육자 정치당국자들은 여긔에 크게 주의할 필요가 잇는가 한다.

萬歲學生處罰令
行政處分의 反動的 發作 여긔에 또 한가지 학생들을 상대한 문제가 잇스니 즉 去番 萬歲事件에 관계된 학생으로서 기소된 者이면 현재 學한 학교에서만 그 학생들에게 처벌할 뿐 아니라 그 司法刑期를 맛친 후에도 저 대학이나 同豫科에는 입학을 절대로 거절하기로 결정한 것이엿다. 이러한 결정을 보고 苛酷을 말하고 無理를 규탄하려 할 지음에 또다시 學務當局에서는 苛酷보다도 無謀至極의 새로운 명령을 각 관계학교에 내리우게 되얏스니 즉 기소유예된 학생 좀더 심하게 불기소의 학생에게까지 관공사립을 물론하고 퇴학 又는 무기정학, 유기정학의 처벌을 명령한 것이다.
원래 권력에는 불가항력이오 정치에는 無不萬能이라. 정치당국자의 내리운 명령은 각 학교에서 문자고대로 遵行하지 아니할 수 업서 다수한 희생자를 내고 말앗다. 그 내지 아니할 수 업서 이미 내기는 하엿지마는 이미 내인 것이라고 엇지 거긔에 대한 시비까지 몰각할 수 잇스랴.
우리는 먼저 學務當局者에게 뭇고저 한다. 사법당국의 처벌하지 아니하는＜31＞ 학생들에게 學務當局에서 처벌하는 그 본의가 어듸에 잇는가? 사법의 처벌할 죄상은 아니엿든 것이지마는 행정의 처벌할 죄상은 확실히 되든 것인가. 그럴 수도 업는 것은 아니다. 그러나 그 萬歲事件은 그 성질에 잇서 보통의 범행과는 판이한 것이다. 그 發作의부터 닐어난 결함이 그 학생 개인들의 열악한 근성에 잇다는 것보다 그 학생들로 하야곰 이러한 發作에 이르게 한 조선의 사회적 及 정치적 사실에 잇는 것이니 즉 學務當局에서는 사회의 결함을 개성의 결함으로 간주한 것이다. 금일의 조선에서 그와 가튼 위정자와 우리의 견해에 다름이 잇슬 것은 불가피의 사실이라 하겟지마는 문제는 결국 그리한 사회적 결함을 제거하거나 또는 개성으로 하야곰 그러한 사회적 결함에 따르게 하는 두 가 방도 이외에는 그러한 發作을 업시 할 수 업슬 것이다.
그러면 學務當局의 酷令에 의한 학생의 희생이면 능히 그러한 發作은 停熄될 것인가? 또는 그들 학생들의 심리에는 엇더한 변동이 잇슬 것이며 행동에는 엇더한 고침이 잇슬 것인가?
아니다. 學務當局의 그 酷令은 오직 행정당국의 조선인 통치방침을 害할 뿐이오 조선인 자신에게는 또는 학생 자신에게는 조고만한 痛痒도 주지 못하는 것이다. 조고만한 利害도 닐으키게 하지 못하는 것이다. 웨 그러냐 하면 그들이 질서 잇는 修學에 애착이 깁헛다 하면 그러한 發作이 잇섯슬 리가 만무하고 또한 學務當局의 명령에 의한 희생을 당할 때에 그들의 정치당국에 대한 감정이 그리 조왓스리라고는 누구도 생각치 못하겟는 까닭이다. 엇지 그 뿐이랴. 그 명령에 희생되얏기 때문에＜32＞ 非를 是로 고통을 쾌락으로 불합리를 합리로 그들의 사회사실을 관찰하는 목표가 轉倒되지도 아니할 것이 사실이다.
그럼으로 우리는 사법당국의 은혜의 관대한 처분을 당국자의 명민한 政略이라 하야 그들 학생들의 修學할 장래를 축복한다는 것보다 당국자의 政略으로서 반드시 그리한 것을 말하얏섯든 것이다. 요컨대 그 처벌명령은 확실히 학생에 대한 당국의 反動的 정책이라 一의 관대한 처치도 타의 가혹한 反動으로 말미암아 그 生色을 發치 못하게 되고 말앗스니 이러한 兩個의 배치되는 처치는 그 無機的 統治情神의 모순을 사실로 폭로하는 것이라. XXX의 지위에서 XXXXX다 하는 우리들이 何等의 利害를 늣길 것이며 何等의 痛痒을 늣길 것인가.

科學人蠻行事件
米人許時模의 知慧로운 私刑 다음에 요사이의 조선사회에서 상당히 物論을 닐으킨 사건은 저 許時模의 蠻行事件이다. 조선사람들에게 존대를 밧기 위함인지 조선사람을 下待하려 함인지 자기네들의 문명을 끗업시 자랑하고 후덕함을 한업시 선전하는 재류미국인선교사의 一人, 許時模라는 자가 그 近隣에 잇는 平原郡 順安 金明燮이라는 당년 12세의 學童이 自家一果樹園에 잠입한 것을 발견하고 현장에서 잡아다가 나무에 빗그러 매여놋코＜33＞ 그 모친을 불너서 果實갑으로 돈 5원을 가지오라다가 할 수 업슴을 말함에 硫酸水라는 劇劑의 약품으로 『盜賊』이라는 두 글자를 明燮의 두 뺨에 써서 아주 內皮까지 상하얏슴으로 1년이나 지내인 이제 이르러서는 의약으로도 고치기가 매우 어렵게 되얏다는 사실이다.
비록 유년학동의 일이라 할지라도 남의 果園에 잠입한 것은 잘못된 일이니 그를 징계하랴는 것은 누구나 잇슬 수 잇는 일이다. 그러나 愛인지 무엇인지를 말하기 위하야 저 머ㅡㄹ니 태평양을 건너온 許時模가 그 간단하고도 씻지 못할 낙인을 面部에다 찍어서써 유아의 일생운명을 망처주엇다는 사실에 대하야는 누구의 寬厚한 생각으로도 尋常視할 수 업슬 것이니 경찰의 책임자도 아니오 사법의 당국자도 아닌 우리는 오직 그 범행의 잔인성이 얼마나 酷甚한 것인가를 말할 뿐이다.
『盜賊』이라는 두 글자를 面部에 肉刻한 許時模의 본의는 그 아희로 하야곰 아주 도덕적 死亡者를 만들려 한 곳에 잇슬 것이다. 文明한 者가 아니면 그러한 만행은 될 수 업는 일이다. 문명할스* 범죄의 수단은 더욱 교묘해진다는 것과 갓치 許時模의 만행은 야만인의 만행이 아닌 것만치 속깁히 보이지 아니하는 잔학성이 훨신 더 심한 것이다. 더욱 그는 선교사이오 의사이라. 그러한 잔학성을 포장한 자로서 그 잔학의 마음에서 우러나오는 가식의 행동, 표리부동의 설교가 몃해를 계속하는 동안에 幾百幾千의 조선사람이 거긔에 속히여 중독되고 취하야 미혹하얏슬가를 생각할 때에 우리는 참으로 전율을 금치 못한다. 혹은 치료와 설교는 직업적이라 그 만행의 잔학성을 거긔에 비겨 말할 바 아니라 하겟지마는＜34＞ 사람의 인격이 둘이 아닌 이상에는 만행자의 심리를 비만행자의 심리로는 볼 수 업는 것이다. 그것이 취중의 일이라던지 또 비상시의 일이 아닌 이상에는 掩護할내야 업호할 수 업는 본능의 만행이다.
엇잿든 이 許時模의 만행사건은 許時模 개인의 所爲이지마는 조선에 잇는 미국인 선교사업계에 큰 타격이 아니랄 수 업슬 것이니 이것이 집단사업의 때때로 봉착하게 되는 큰 난관의 하나인 것이다. 비록 이러한 만행사건이 아니라도 최근에 이르러서 조선기독교계에는 각지에서 선교사의 오만을 증오하는 소리가 놉하지고 배척하는 운동이 熾盛하는 오날에 그 만행의 一事는 확실히 그 포장한 심성의 일부를 우리의 眼前에 폭로식힌 것으로 보는 것도 결코 무리가 아닐 것이다.
저 미국인의 흑인에 대한 모멸 유린의 심하얏든 사실은 이미 세계인의 周知하는 사실이라. 이에 새삼스럽게 말할 필요가 업는 바이지마는 저들 선교사들이 東洋諸國에 파견되는 것은 彼等의 所謂 『기독교의 복음』을 인류에게 선포하랴는 願望도 업지 안핫섯겟지마는 그보다도 차라리 인종적 우월의 권위를 가지고 저 劣等無道한 유색인종에게 인간다운 도리를 가르처 주리라 하는 대우월감 대오만성이 그 동기의 거의 전부를 점령한 것도 그들의 조선에서의 행동이 잘 증명하는 것이다. 그러나 他面으로 그들이 아직까지 적극적 배척의 세례를 밧지 안는 것은 그들의 수단이 너무나 음성적이어서 假裝의 설교와 施惠의 약병으로써 그 表皮를 감족가티 *縫하야 나가는 동시에 민중의 총명이 아직 그를 투시할만치 밝아지지 못한 까닭이다.＜35＞
아! 우리의 무엇보다 무서운 것은 문명인, 과학인의 소유한 蠻性이다.

아! 우리의 무엇보다 무서운 것은 문명인 과학인의 소유한 만성이다

色다른 義憤
不純한 政略을 排斥한다 이 許時模의 만행사건에 대하야 일부 일본인 측에 분개하는 자가 상당히 만흔 모양이다. 京城에서 平壤에서 또는 멀니 일본 東京에서 성토비판의 회합이 잇다는 것을 들엇다.
이 許時模의 사건은 人道上으로 용서치 못할 大害惡이니 누구를 물론하고 적극적으로 규탄할만한 사실이다. 佛蘭西人도 公憤을 낼 수 잇는 사실이오 葡萄牙人도 의분을 가질 만한 사실이다. 그 해악을 일본인이 규탄한다고 무슨 不可함이 잇스랴마는 일본의 XXXXXXX를 지지하는 소위 浪人派라는 頭山滿일파와 商品의 日鮮融和主義를 신봉하는 相愛會일파와의 提携事件으로 『大日本帝國臣民』이라는 간판을 내세우고 그 XXX의 의분을 말하게 되는 곳에서는 우리는 그의 색다른 성원이라는 늣김을 금치 못한다.
미국인과 조선인과의 직접의 이해득실은 別問題로 하고 조선에서의 일본인이 미국인의 발전을 시기의 눈으로 질시하는 것만은 엄연한 사실이다. 미국인이 조선사람 환심을 사기위하야 그 태도를 일부러 그리 취하는 탓인지는 알 수 업지마는 엇젰든 조선의 민족적 운동 정치적 운동이 닐어날 때에는 그에 대한 敎陖와 선동의 策을 미국인이 밧게된 것은 최근 수십 년간 일본인의 정치적 권력이 조선에 밋친 이래의 과거가 증명하는 바이다. 그 기회잇는 대로 규탄할 의사가 업지 아니할 것도 사실이지마는 이는 다 자체의 이해관에서 發作되는 政略의 所使이라. XXXXXXXXX된 이래에 거의 끈힘업시 層生疊出한 비인도적 해악과 不正義的 暴虐이 잇섯슴에도 불구하고 오직 이 조선인의 닙으로 또는 의사로 해결하기를 힘쓰 이 許時模 사건에서 그 憤激을 呼號함에서는 그 眞假와 義僞를 판단하기 어렵다.
불순한 기회의 규탄! 政略으로의 義憤은 우리의 苦笑를 금치 못하는 것이다. 그 利害觀을 正義觀으로 선전하는 가장행렬의 기회를 제공한다 하면 우리는 차라리 따리는 남편보다 말리는 시어미가 더 미웁다는 생각을 금치 못한다.＜37＞

難解의 協同派 出現
勞資協同이냐? 官民協同이냐? 지낸 5월 24일에 東京에서 팔자조흔 일부 조선유학생들이 協同組合運動에 노력하기 위하야 協同運動社를 조직하엿다는 것을 7월에 드러서 비로소 신문의 보도를 통하야 알게 되얏다. 종래에 듯지 못하든 운동의 새로운 발기인 것만치 조선의 민중에게 엇더한 嚮應잇기를 기대하는지는 알 수 업지마는 발서 6월 지내고 7월이 반 넘어 지내도록 조선내지에는 물론이오 東京에서도 아무러한 소식이 들니지 아니하니 아직도 그 출전할만한 陳容이 정돈되지 안엇는가.
그 協同派 단체의 成員은 실로 140여명의 다수인데 明治神學, 美術, 高師, 高工, 上智, 商大, 東大, 立正, 立敎, 專修, 法大, 慶大, 早大, 帝大, 中大, 日大, 明大 등의 각 專門 정도 이상의 유학생이라 하며 그 강령이 이러한 것이다.
1. 우리는 협동자율적 정신으로 민중적 산업관리와 민중적 교양을 *함.
2. 우리는 이상의 목적을 관철하기 위하야 조합정신의 고취와 조합의 실지경영을 기함.
그 社名이 協同運動社이니 협동을 운동하는 단체일 것은 확실할 듯 하다. 그리고 무엇을 협동하랴는 것인가는 이에 우리의 추측력이 不及하는 바이지마는 연구단체가 아닌 同社의 成員이 東京에 잇는 모든 대학 모든 專門의 유학생을 총망라한 觀이 업지 안으리만치 잡종학생으로 되얏스니 그것이 엇더한 사상적 계통에 의하야 모히게 된 결합체가 아닌 것만은 확실하다. 그럼으로 우리는 각 학교의 동창회가 모히여 同窓會聯合會를 조직한 것이나 아닌가 하는 의심까지 업지 안타. 그 意義의 엇더한 것을 이에 추측으로써 속단할 수는 업지마는 그 민중적 산업관리 등을 말한 一句를 보면 혹 英國特産의 組合主義를 말하는 듯도 십다. 또는 총독부에서 産業第一主義의 정책으로 制定發布한 産業組合令及農會令에 의하야 조합적 산업운동을 하야보랴는 것인 듯도 십흐니 과연 우리의 추측에 相違가 업다하면 그들의 활동할 시기는 이때인가 한다. 뿐만 아니라 該組合을 반대하는 자는 모조리 공판에 붓치여 징역을 선고하는 터이니 그 목적도 무난하게 도달할 수 잇슬줄 밋는다.＜38＞
이는 우리의 간단한 추측이니 이후에 그 정체가 또럿이 드러난 뒤에 우리의 상세한 논평이 잇스려 한다.

民興會란 무엇인가?
요사이 조선에는 일부 영리한 有閑者들의 재래에 듯지 못하든 새 표어를 가진 웃어운 계획 하나가 그 두각을 나타내게 되얏다. 그가 계획이 될는지 망상이 될는지 또는 무슨 광고가 될는지는 아직 豫斷할 수는 업는 일이라 하겟지마는 조선민족의 불평을 대표적으로 부르지저줄 만한 민족적 중심기관이 업슴을 유감으로 아는 여러분들이 민족적 단일전선의 작성을 목표로 하야 조직한다는 朝鮮民興會라는 회합은 그것이 가능할 것이라면 조선의 사정으로 보아 발서 닐어낫서야 할 것이다. 지금에 닐어난다는 데에서는 참으로 晩時之歎이 업지 안타.
듯건대 엇더한 부문 엇더한 계급을 막론하고 전 민족을 망라하려는 계획이라 하니 매우 대규모적이오 굉장한 企圖이라 아니할 수 업다. 그 회합의 범위로 열거한 바에 의하면 실업, 종교, 교육, 노동, 농민, 언론, 여자, 청년, 형평, 학생, 사상 등 운동의 각계를 총망라하는 것이라 한다. 이미 전 민족이라 하면 피정복자로 볼 수 잇다. 그리고 또 모든 방면의 조선민족을 열거하기로 한다면 의사, 변호사, 요리업자, 매춘부들도 조선사람인 이상에는 민족적 적개심이 업지 아니할 것이니 그들까지도 열거범위에 넛는 것이 보다 무차별적이 되지 안을 것인가. 아직 지면의 말뿐이오 그 구체적 방침과 계획이 실제행동에 나타나지 아니한 이때에 그 회합의 무엇을 논평한다는 것은 早計의 嫌을 말할는지는 모르지마는 우리는 이미 그러한 朝鮮民興會의 발기를 보기 전부터 이미 그에 유사한 논의가 빈번하얏고 그에 대한 이론이 너무나 明明白白하기 때문에 비록 미래의 사실이나마 그 회합의 구체적 방침이 난다 할지라도 그 장래에 대하야 우리는 一言으로써 무난히 推斷할 만한 자신을 가젓다.
그들의 계획을 위하야는 지금보다는 훨신 유리한 때에 발기되얏든 民友會, 朝鮮靑年聯合會, 朝鮮物産獎勵會 또는 東明의 선전지 등이 무슨 까닭에 그 존재를 일허버리고 또는 존재한다 할지라도 有耶無耶하야 그 聲息이 끈어젓는가를 아는가. 저 靑年聯合會만은 전 민족을 목표한 단합체가 아니라 할지라도 기타 단체는＜39＞ 민족전체를 대상삼앗든 것이 사실이니 그것이 이제 발기하는 民興會와 가티 특별히 사상 청년 형평 노동 농민을 넛지 아니하얏는 까닭에  그 단일전선이 작성되지 아니한 것으로는 볼 수 업슬 것이다. 그 때에도 민족적 단일전선이라는 의미가 포함되지 아니한 것이 아니엿지마는 그 역사가 매우 쩌르고 만 것이 아닌가.
그러고 민족적 단일전선을 말한 것은 민족운동자에게 수개의 전선을 합동하자는 것이 아니라 민족은 전체가 가티 단합하야 싸우자는 말일 것이니 이를 민족운동자의 망상이라 할가 사회운동자의 모욕이라 할가. 이미 사상 형평 여성 노동 농민이라면 그 운동의 목적이 또럿이 나타낫다. 그 운동을 위하야 목적이 나타난 것이 아니오 목적을 위하야 운동이 존재하게 된 것이라. 그 운동의 대상체가 또럿이 드러나서 그 규범을 버서날 수 업슴이 이 금일의 현상이라. 비록 조선의 無産階級 전체가 계급적 의식에 각성되지는 아니하얏다 할지라도 이미 사회에 유동하는 중심세력이 사회운동의 방면으로 기울어저 잇는 금일에 일부 有閑者의 민족적 대동단합을 새로 말한다는 데에서는 실로 냉소를 不禁하는 바이다. 뿐만 아니라 민족적 적개심의 대상이 또한 계급투쟁의 대상도 된다는 말인가. 그러타면 再言을 不要하는 사실이다. 혹 오래 전 즉 자본제도의 경제가 발달되기 전이나 경제계급의 감정이 예민하기 전이나 階級爭鬪의 의식이 격렬화하기 전이면 모르지마는 금일과 가티 노동쟁의와 소작쟁의에서 유혈의 참담한 사실이 꼬리를 니어 빈발하고 자본가가 無産靑年運動을 拔滅하랴고 모든 술책을 다하는 이때에, 형평에 反動이 잇고, 婦人運動에 배척이 격렬한 이때에, 이 有閑者輩의 XXXXX의 叫號는 그 情實에 비겨서 너무 현격한 소리이다.
자본가의 유일한 도덕은 자본의 옹호이다. 그들이 자본을 옹호하기 위하야 제국주의와 영합하는 것은 엄연한 세계적 사실이다. 조선의 그들도 비록 그를 謳歌하지 안는다 할지라도 사회의 변동을 무서워하고 실여하는 것만은 掩諱하지 못할 사실이오 일부의 無産有識階級은 먹기위하야 생활의 수단으로 자본가에 영합하게 된다. 결국 민족적 단일전선의 불가능성은 무산계급에게만 잇는 것이 아니다. 자본가 지주들도 그 권내에 드러서지 아니할 것이 확실하야 그 경제적 이익을 위하야 싸우기에 분주할 뿐이오 다른 싸홈에 盡力할 겨를이 업슬 것이니 그 대동단합을 말하는 자는 자본계급의 別動的 役割을 다하려는 無職業有識階級일 것이오 따라서＜40＞ 그 회합은 그들만의 단독전선이 되고 말 것이니 그들에게 자본계급의 殘飯이 도라오면 다행할 뿐일 것이다.
요컨대 조선사람의 누구에게 민족적 적개심이 업스리요마는 그를 위하야 싸울 의식보다는 계급적 적개심에 의하야 싸울 의식은 3배 4배의 강렬한 정도에 잇스니 결국 그들이 민족적 단일전선 作成에 대한 要望은 수포에 도라가고 말 것이다.
그리고 우리는 그들의 주장이 이 현상부정의 叫號인 이상 그 뒷일은 엇더케 되는지 그 계급운동에 어느 정도의 *助가 될 것을 認치 아니할 수가 업슬 것이다. 그러나 조선사람으로써 이미 민족적 적개심의 업는 자가 업다하면 그 불평도 해방의 요구도 다 알고 잇는 처지이라. 저 계급운동에 잇서 주의와 사상을 보급식히랴는 특별한 XXXXX가 업는 이상에는 거긔에서 불평을 부르짓는 상설기관을 만든다는 것은 이 극우파의 所謂로 밧게 볼 수 업는가 하나니 차라리 朝鮮國民議會의 조성을 운동하는 것이 그들의 목적을 위하야는 가장 肝要한 노력일가 한다. 아직도 그 회합에 대하야 해명할 여지는 얼마라도 잇지마는 그들의 동작을 본 뒤에 다시 붓을 잡으려 한다.
이에 附帶하야 말할 것은 저 週報 『朝鮮之光』 제 56호의 첫 頁에 실닌 『單一的 民族運動의 意義』에 대한 말이다. 『朝鮮之光』이 무슨 계급운동의 선전지라는 간판을 이마에 붓치고 나선 간행물은 아니지마는 그 집필자들이 누구누구이라는 그들의 신분을 도라보아 말한다 하면 도무지 엇지된 세음판인지를 알 수 업다.
첫재 제목부터 단일적 민족운동이라는 것의 의의를 시인한다는 것인가. 혹 의의의 如何, 有無이면 모르지마는 단순한 의의만으로는 시인하는 것으로 밧게 볼 수 업다. 조선에 민족운동이 잇기 전에 사회운동이 발생된 것이 아니라 이미 민족운동이 잇슨 이후에 아니 그 내부에서 사회운동이 나타난 것이 엄연한 사실임에 불구하고 단일적 민족운동의 의의를 이제 새삼스럽게 아무 판단도 업시 논의한다는 것은 階級運動者界에 잇서 일대 기적이다.
그 논의에 의하면 『민족이라는 것은 단위로 하야 對外問題에서는 협동되는 수 잇스나 對內하야서는 언제나 반발하는 것이다』 하는 한편으로 『...그럿치 아니한 계급간에 잇서서는 도리여 그러한 제국주의에 영합하는 것을 본다』하얏다. 그 對外問題에도 협동할 수 업슴을 말하면셔 단일적 민족운동의 의의를 말한 것이오 또＜41＞ 中産階級이 각성하면 無産階級과 공동전선에 立한 수가 잇슴을 말하야 生活運動의 준비시대에는 일치한 행동을 취할 수가 잇다 하야 민족적 계급적이라는 사이에 아무 구별이 업게 될 것을 말하고 또 거긔 분열이 생긴다 하면 左와 右로 갈닐 것이라 하얏스니 이것으로 단일적 민족운동의 의의를 시인하게 된다 하면 그 단일적이라는 것은 자본가를 제외한 단일적이 아니될 수 업슬 것이오 또 中産階級과 無産階級이 공동전선을 作成한다 하면 中産階級의 의식 無産階級의 의식으로 轉化되는 것일지니 그는 민족문제에 관한 사실이 아니라 계급문제에 관한 사실이니 그 단일적 민족운동의 의식에 무슨 관계가 잇는 것인가. 결국 단일적 민족운동의 가능을 말한 것인 듯 한데 그 불가능의 논의만을 지적하얏스니 그 집필의 본의가 那邊에 잇는지 좀더 상세히 설명하야 보일 필요를 늣기지 안는가.

蠶繭專賣特許事件
平南道當局 利權移動策의 一面 독점이 잇는 곳에 專斷이 잇고 경쟁이 업는 곳에 횡포가 잇는 것은 비록 온당한 것은 아니나마 흔히 잇는 사실이다. 매년의 蠶繭收穫期에는 반드시 蠶繭共同販賣에 대한 民怨이 殆히 연중행사와 가티 되야 잇지 아닌 때가 업섯지마는 금년의 平南一道의 全蠶繭을 山十組라는 일본인이 단독으로 매수하게 됨으로 말미암아 잇게 된 平南管內 200여명의 蠶繭商 대 山十組의 공동판매 대 자유판매에 대한 係爭問題는 세간에 상당한 물의를 닐으켯섯다.
그러나 蠶繭共同販賣制度를 실시하는 그 근본목적으로 그들은 蠶繭의 판로를 열고 매매의 신속을 기하고 가격의 공평 부정사실의 방지를 말할 것이다. 그 정당한 사실에서는 그 만한 이익이 업슬 것도 아니지마는 蠶業者의 불평이 더 만하지고 손실을 부르즘이 더 심함에서야 그 목적은 잇서 무엇하는 것이며 제도는 실시해서 무엇하는 것인가. 뿐만 아니라 아무리 대자본의 힘이 굿세이지마는 그 200여명 蠶商의 生道를 일케하고까지＜42＞ 山十組로 하야곰 독점적 이익을 엇게 하는 것은 이는 자본의 힘을 밋는 관청의 횡포이라 할 것이다.
이러케 名實이 相符치 안는 공동판매가 엇지 蠶繭에 한한 것이랴. 지방관청의 주관하는 모든 물품에 잇서 판매방면으로는 獨入札의 구매자, 구입방면으로는 獨注文의 用達者들은 그 利를 위하야 動하는 자들이라 그 이권을 독점함을 따라 부정행위를 作出할 것은 理의 피치 못할 사실이라 할 것이다. 결국 山十組의 그와가티 蠶繭産米增殖計劃과 가튼 산업정책의 일면인가. 官營專賣局에 대하야서도 때로 불평이 업지 안커든 山十組 개인의 商買인 專買行爲가 공평하리라고는 누구도 생각의 밋치지 못할 바가 아닌가. 우리는 그 認許當局者와 山十組와의 裡面關係의 엇더한 것을 한번 속깁히 알아보고 십다.

暴力團相愛會의 妄動
言必稱 노동단체라는 相愛會라는 日本支配群의 別動隊가 近者에 3, 4차의 폭행을 계속연출하얏다. 松濱樂器罷業團의 습격, 在日本 朝鮮勞動總同盟의 습격, 山梨縣 鐵道工事場의 난투 그 어느 것도 인간으로의 상상할 수도 업는 妄動아님이 업다. 조선인으로써 이러한 조직이 잇슴은 더욱 기구한 일이다. 지배의 힘이 굿세고 자본의 힘이 강하다 하지마는 그 支配群의 使嗾의 힘이 그까지 굿세임에서는 우리는 새삼스럽게 경이를 不禁하겟다.
조선과 일본을 통하야 일본자본주의적 지배계급의 威*도 상당히 심한 *이며 모든 법령과 取締規則으로 신흥세력의 대두를 禁壓하면서 그것이 오히려 부족하야 직접의 폭력단을 전위로 別動케하는 사실을 이 相愛會의 폭동으로도 능히 입증할 수 잇스니 支配群은 체면도 도라볼 수가 업게된 것인가. 민족운동단체와 노동운동단체의 직접행동에는 모든 법률을 적용하야 가혹히 禁制하는 그들로서 그 相愛會 또는 그와 유사한 단체의 권총 곤봉의 폭행에는 視若不見의 태도를 기탄업시 취하고 잇스니 支配群의 법치적 作用도 이러한 **에 이르러서는 도리여 연민의 정을 不禁하겟다.＜43＞

組織的 反衡平運動
江陵의 反衡平의 獸肉販賣團出現 江陵에서 江陵衡平分社의 창립 1주년 기념식을 거행할 때에 사원 모씨가 『우리 백정들은 과거에 너무도 가혹한 천대를 일반사회에서 바다왓지마는 지금부터는 우리도 사람이라는 자각을 가진 이상에는 어듸까지라도 그 천대를 밧지 안켓다』는 의미의 말 하얏고 또 기타에도 인권유린을 바덧느니 경제적 착취를 당하얏느니 교육적 압박을 바덧느니 하는 등을 말을 하얏다고 그에 참석하얏든 몃 사람이 그 언동에 반감을 닐으키여 組織的 反衡平運動이 닐어나게 되얏다 한다.
즉 衡平社員들의 직업을 빼앗고 경제적으로 배척하랴는 의미에서 獸肉販賣組合을 조직하야 일시적이 아닌 배척의 수단을 취하려 함이니 이를 이름하야 우리는 組織的 反衡平運動이라 한다.
衡平을 위하야 극력으로 부르짓고 극력으로 노력하는 것을 衡平하야서는 안된다고 극력으로 반대하랴는 것은 무엇에 근거한 엇지된 심정인가. 그들의 기념식 석상에서 부르짓고 叫號한 바는 그들의 과거 累百年 동안 바다온 박해 차별을 들아 보아 오히려 약하얏다는 감이 업지 안타. 그들의 憤恨이 골수에 사모첫슬 것을 그들이 아니라고 짐작치 못한다는 것은 너무나 냉혹하야 木石으로 비할 자인가 한다. 더욱 그에 反動을 닐으키여 不衡平을 위하야 영구히 싸우랴는 심사에서는 참으로 인간의 생각을 미들 수가 업다는 늣김이 업지 안타. 그뿐만 아니라 不衡平을 고집하는 頑冥으로써 백정의 직업을 빼앗서 자기네들이 취직한다는 것은 관념으로 허락하지 안는 衡平을 사실로 衡平하는 것이 아닐가? 그들도 자기네의 밧는 차별에는 반드시 분노할 것이니 그들이야말로 이기적 인간의 好典型이라 할가.＜44＞
＜29-44＞