Magazine Title: 개벽 제72호
Publication Date: 1926년 08월 01일
Article Title: 再興國의 新人物 (New Figures of Revived Nations)
Author: 靑吾 (Cheong'o)
Article Type: 소식 (News/Report)

New Figures of Revived Nations

The cannon fire of the Great European War suddenly awakened the slumbering dreams of the world's weak and small nations, which had long groaned under the bonds (*絆) of the great powers. As if by mutual agreement, acting in concert without prior planning (不謨自同), they echoed each other from East and West, raising the flags of revolution. Crying out that, being human like others, they too must live well, they are either building new nations on the ruins of defeated homelands, reforming the corrupt politics and systems of existing states to restore declining national fortunes, or, even if facing immediate failure, continuing their movements to prepare for a comeback (捲土重來). Within the former territories of the Russian and Austro-Hungarian Empires alone, more than ten nations have already emerged, and the waves have spread fiercely across Asia and Africa, reaching a point where the political map of the Eastern Hemisphere requires constant revision, yet it remains difficult to draw accurate boundaries. However, in all these national movements, there is invariably organizational structure, order, meticulous planning, swift action, and within their inner circles (帷幄), there is always a central figure leading them. Since these movements for the rebirth of all weak and small nations are already well-known (周知) to the world, there is no need to speak of them anew. Instead, I wish to briefly introduce the central figures of the revolutionary movements in Poland, Persia, and Morocco that have arisen since this spring (今春), for the reader's perusal (一覽). (靑吾)＜52＞

Reza Khan, the New King, the God (神) of Persia's Rebuilding (再造)

It was April 25th, when the leaves of the coconut palms (椰子), boasting of the southern spring, unfurled their fresh green curtains. In Persia's capital (首郡), Teheran, the magnificent coronation ceremony (大官式) of Reza Khan, a former groom from the cavalry (騎兵隊), who had become the new king (新王), was held. Last October, a peaceful revolution without bloodshed occurred in that country, and the National Assembly (Majlis) resolved (決議), under the pretext (名義) of "the people's (國民) welfare (福利)," to abolish (廢止) the Qajar dynasty (王朝) and accept the abdication (退位) of the seventh king (國王), Sultan Ahmad Shah Qajar (사-루단·아-마쓰도·싸). On December 13th, they recommended (推薦) the Army Commander-in-Chief (陸軍摠指揮官), Reza Khan, who held all the real power (實權) and prestige (聲望) of Persia, as the hereditary (世襲) king.

The new king, Reza Khan, is the most outstanding (傑出) figure (人物) Persia has produced (產) in the past half-century (半世紀). Born 49 years ago in 1877 into a lower-class (下流階級) family (家) in the Mazandaran region (마산데란 지방), he was a promising child (英馨兒). At the age of 16, he joined (投) the military register (軍籍) of the Persian Cossack Brigade and became a groom (馬夫). Originally possessing extraordinary (非凡) aptitude (資質), he accumulated numerous (許多) merits (公積) and, at the age of 46, finally (遂히) leaped forward (躍進) to the position of honor (榮位) of Sardar Sepah (사-따·지쓰파), that is, Army Commander-in-Chief, even earning the title (稱號) "Second Genghis Khan" from the general public (一般國民). As Commander-in-Chief, he interfered (干涉) not only in the army but also in general politics, arbitrarily (任意) changing the cabinet (內閣) numerous times. How did he come to possess such power (權力)? Of course, it was greatly related (關係) to the strength (力) of his own individuality (個性)—his brave (勇敢) and active (實行) character (性格), his enthusiasm (熱誠) that impressed (感服) the public, and his will (意志) as firm as steel (鋼鐵)—but what directly (直接) gave him the opportunity (機會) to soar (雄飛) was the British and Russian aggression (侵略) in Persia. From the end (末期) of the 19th century (世紀), British aggression against Persia showed its sharp edge (銳鋒) blatantly (露骨). In 1901, they compelled (強要) the Persian government (政府) to establish (設立) the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (英波石油會社), extending their evil hand (魔手) to the oil (石油) of South Persia (南波斯). Greatly surprised and angered (大驚且怒) upon hearing of the establishment of this company was Tsarist Russia (帝政露西亞). Russia, the fierce beast (獰態) of the northern wilderness (北國曠原), applied sharp (辛辣) oppression (抑壓), not inferior (不下) to that of Britain, the fierce lion (猛獅子) of the North Sea (北海), to North Persia (北波斯). Pitiful (可憐) weak Persia, while receiving (受) the unreasonable (無理) pressure (壓迫) of the two great powers (兩大強國), had no strength (力) whatsoever (何等) to resist (反抗), ＜53＞ and could only shed tears (眼淚) of sorrow (悲哀). The Anglo-Russian struggle (抗爭) continued (繼續) until 1907, when the so-called (所謂) Anglo-Russian Entente (英露協商) was established (成立). Britain recognized (認) North Persia as Russia's sphere of influence (勢力範圍), and Russia recognized South Persia as Britain's sphere of influence, reaching a compromise (妥協). The situation (形勢) continued like this until 1914, when the World War (世界大戰) broke out (勃發). If this war had not occurred, all of Persia's resources (全 富源) would likely have been exploited (搾取) by both Britain and Russia (兩國). During the war, in 1917, the Great Labor-Peasant Revolution (勞農大革命) occurred in Russia, destroying (破壞) the old empire (舊帝國), and the wilderness beast, which boasted incomparable stubbornness (强頑無比) at the time (當時), was forced to exit (退場) the stage (舞臺) of international diplomacy (國際外交).

Accordingly (從하야), it was forced to abandon (抛棄) its sphere of influence in Persia. However, Britain (一方) still (依然) continued to apply pressure to Persia during the war. Taking advantage of Russia's withdrawal (退縮), it attempted to make all of Persia a British dependency (屬領) and coerced (強要) the conclusion (締結) of the Anglo-Persian Treaty (英波條約). No matter how weak Persia was, the Majlis absolutely (絕對) refused (拒絕) this. At this time (時期), Labor-Peasant Russia (勞農露國) routed (蹴破) Denikin, Wrangel, and other White Guards (白衛軍) and presented a new formation (新陣容) on Persia's northern border (北境). Due to this (此로 因하야), Britain also hesitated (主著) to apply blatant pressure, and Persia, which had faced (臨) an imminent crisis (一髮危機), gained (得) further (更히) momentum (氣運) for independence (獨立).

At that time (當時), Reza Khan was the commander (隊長) of the Cossack Brigade defending (守禦) the northern border, and his prestige was quite (滋못) high among the public. Indignant (激憤) at the British and Russian oppression of his fatherland (祖國), in the spring of 1921, he led (率) his personal troops (手兵) and rushed into (馳入) the capital (首都) Teheran to call the government to account (問責), overthrowing (倒壞) the existing cabinet. He recommended (推薦) Zia'eddin Tabatabaee (쩨이엣도, 지아유덴), who held relatively (比較的) progressive ideas (新進思想), as Prime Minister (首相), and became Army Commander-in-Chief himself (自身). However, because that prime minister adopted (採*함으로) a policy (政策) receiving (受) British protection (保護), Reza Khan soon after (未久) took back (奪還) the prime ministerial position (印綬) and assumed (臨) the position (地位) of Prime Minister himself. Reza Khan's foreign policy (外交政策) was to utilize (利用) Russia's strength (力) to thwart (挫折) Britain's ambition (野望). Soviet Russia's foreign policy towards weak and small nations was somewhat more sympathetic (同情的) than Britain's attitude (態度). Not only that, but Persia's trade (貿易) was mainly (主로) conducted (行) with Russia. Persia, where transportation facilities (交通機關) were not yet developed (發達), had an extremely (極히) meager (僅少) volume of trade (貿易額) with Britain. Moreover (加之), Reza Khan himself had received military training (軍事教鍊) from Russian officers (士官) ＜54＞ and, due to personal connections (個人的 關係) like being proficient (能通) in the Russian language (露西語), naturally (自然) adopted (就) a pro-Russian policy (親露政策).

Having become Prime Minister, Reza Khan implemented (施) extremely (極히) strict (嚴格) policies in internal affairs (内政), transforming Persia, which had fallen into (陷) instability (動搖) and chaos (混沌), into a Persia of stability (安定) and order (秩序) through military (兵力) and legal (法力) power. He suppressed (定) the rebellion (叛亂) of the Chaldeans (칼데아 人) and made the Arabs and Muslims (모하메터 교도) within the country (國內) submit (服從) to the central (中央) Teheran government, thus unifying (統一) Persia.

Although he hadn't received any systematic (系統的) education (教育) from childhood (幼時), he possessed considerably (相當) progressive (進步的) ideas (思想). During his time (時代) as Army Commander-in-Chief, he had already (벌서) seen through (看破) the fact that Persia's decline (衰微) was entirely (全혀) caused (原因) by the powerless (實力 업는) monarchical politics (王政政治) and held the intention (意圖) that republican politics (共和政治) must be realized (實現).
That intention was welcomed (歡迎) not only in press circles (新聞界) but also by the general public, especially (特히) merchants (商人). If he hadn't made one major mistake (大過失), the Majlis would have already declared the abolition of the Qajar dynasty (가지아- 투 왕조) in the spring of 1924 and created a state with a republican system (共和制度).

So, what indeed (果然) was his mistake? It was disregarding (無視) the views (意向) of the Muslims (回敎徒). The Muslims, fearing (恐怖) persecution (迫害) similar to what Turkish Muslims had previously (前日) suffered under Kemal Pasha (케말·파샤) in Turkey (土耳其), opposed (反對) the republican system and called out (叫號) for the exclusion (排斥) of Reza Khan and anti-republican politics, leading the situation (事態) to a rather dangerous (危險) state (境). Observing (觀察) this situation (情勢), the intelligent (英敏) Reza Khan realized (깨닷고) that such (如斯) strong contention (强爭) was a foolish act (愚事), harmful and useless (有害無益) for both the country and himself. He threw away the position of honor (榮位) of Prime Minister like worn-out shoes (弊屣) and suddenly (飄然이) returned to his hometown (鄕里). However, at that time, state affairs (國政) in Persia required (渴望) Reza Khan's skill (手腕) in all matters (萬事). Thus, soon after (未久), he returned to the capital Teheran amidst the welcome of all people (萬人). Then, in the autumn (秋期) of last year, a political upheaval (政變) occurred, and he became a hereditary king, akin to (似而非) being in a republic (共和國).

Becoming the ruler (支配者) of a nation, he wielded (揮) his swift (敏活) skills.
First (먼저), he established (結) friendly relations (親交) with surrounding (周圍) nations (諸國) like Turkey (土耳其) and Afghanistan (阿富汗). Domestically, he extremely (極히) encouraged (獎勵) the spinning industry (紡績業) and completely renewed and reformed (一新 改革) the education system (教育制度), bringing vitality (活氣) back to Persia, which had declined (衰微) for a long time (長久間). Ah, Reza Khan, the lifeblood (活命液) of the Persian people! What a great (偉大) figure he is!

Marshal Piłsudski, the Hero of Turbulent Times (風雲兒) of the Polish Revolution

Poland, which produced (產出) the great composer (樂聖) Chopin (쇼판) and the genius (天才) of the scientific world (理學界) Marie Curie (아담·기유- 리-), had its zenith (全盛) in the 17th century (世紀). ＜55＞ Afterwards (其後), it gradually (漸次) declined step by step (一步一步), and during the era (時代) of King Stanisław Poniatowski (스다니스라스·토니아도우스키王), from 1773 for a period of 23 years (年間), it was partitioned (分割) by the three great powers (三大強國): Austria (墺), Russia (露), and Germany (獨). Later (其後), after the Napoleonic Wars (戰爭), the kingdom (王國) was revived (復活) at the Congress of Vienna (우인會議), but it remained a protectorate (保護國) of Russia (露西亞) under the name (名義) of the Congress Kingdom (고레구레스王國). The people (人民) of Poland, anguished (苦惱) and indignant (憤慨) under the oppression and harsh rule (學政) of Tsarist Russia (帝政露西亞), always (언제던지) prayed for (祈願) and planned (期圖) their country's (自國) independence. Even during the Russo-Japanese War (日露戰爭), thinking a good opportunity (好機會) had arrived (到來) to break (罷) Russia's bonds (覊絆), they started (起) an independence movement, but it ended (歸) in failure (失敗), leaving only (但히) the miserable (悲慘) bloodstains (血痕) of numerous (許多) patriots (愛國志士) remaining (殘存) in Russian prisons (幽獄). However, the Polish independence movement still (依然) continued (繼續), gradually becoming concrete (具體化) while the world's people (世人) were unaware (不知). Facing (臨) the beginning (初) of the World War, all Polish people who had waited expectantly (高待) for an opportunity for many years (積年間) were stimulated (刺戟) at once (一時), and the atmosphere (氣分) of the independence movement filled (彌滿) the entire country (全國).

The Great European War and Marshal Piłsudski's Activities However (然面 - likely 然而), within the Polish independence party (獨立黨), there were (有) two factions (兩黨). One (一) argued (論) for directly fighting an independence war with Russia. The other argued for aiding (援助) Russia while simultaneously (同時) demanding (要求) complete independence (完全獨立). The central figure (中心人物) of these proponents of aid (援助論者) was Marshal Piłsudski (필 元帥). This Marshal Piłsudski was not only a hero (英傑) who rose in the world (出世) but also a passionate (熱血) patriot (愛國者). From his youth (弱冠時代), around age 18, he struggled hard (奮鬪) in the movement to restore the fatherland (祖國回復運動) and repeatedly (屢次) received the baptism (洗禮) of assassins (刺客). Facing (臨) this opportunity (此機), he rejected (排除) public opinion (衆議), rapidly (急速) led (率) a part (一部) of his legions (軍團), advanced (進) to the border (國境), grasped (扼) the throat (咽喉) of Russia, which was in (在) a hard fight (苦戰), and aided (援助) Russia, simultaneously demanding recognition (承認) of Poland's independence as compensation (代償), thus succeeding (成功) in the first step (第一步) towards independence. Meanwhile, Germany and Austria (獨墺兩國), facing (際) a crisis (危機) of being surrounded by enemies (四面楚歌), saw through (看破) the disadvantage (不利) of making even weak (未弱 - likely 微弱) Poland an enemy (敵) and also declared (宣言) recognition of Polish independence to gain its favor (歡心). However, in reality (事實), contrary (正反對) to the declaration, they dispatched (出) troops (軍隊) to Poland and attempted to coercively (強壓的) check (牽制) Poland's favorable disposition towards Russia (對露好意). As a result (結果), Marshal Piłsudski, the commander-in-chief (總司令官) of the secret army (秘密軍隊) P.O.W., was arrested (逮捕) and imprisoned (收監) in the Magdeburg (마루데뿌루꾸) prison (獄舍) in Germany (獨逸), being released (釋放) simultaneously with the end (終熄) of the Great War.

Poland's Establishment of a Republic and the Second Revolution His fatherland welcomed (歡迎) him with the courtesy (禮) due to a king (王者). Thus, upon returning to his country (歸國), he established (建設) the independent republic (獨立共和國) of Poland, which had been fervently desired (熱望) for many years (積年). By the tacit approval (默認) of the general public, he became the first (第一回) president (大統領), but soon after (未久), he yielded (讓) that position (其位) to the great musician (大音樂家) famous (有名) Paderewski (＜56＞ 파데루우스키) and withdrew (退) from the political world (政界).
However, as Paderewski was assassinated (暗殺) soon after, he became president again (再次) and devoted himself (盡瘁) to the difficult (多難) state affairs (國政) after independence until 1922. Afterwards (其後), he again yielded the president's chair (椅子) to Wojciechowski (우이슈쵸푸스키) and retired from office (下野), indirectly (間接) urging on (鞭韃) the newly rising (新興) Poland. However, to handle (收拾) the situation (現象) which was like tangled hemp (亂麻) and unify (統一 - typo 統治?) state affairs, he thought it necessary (必要) above all else (何) to carry out (行) dictatorial politics (獨裁政治) and planned (祈圖) a second (再次) revolution (革命).

It was May 12th of this year (本年). Troops (軍隊) in the Rembertów (레베투드) region, north (北方) of the capital Warsaw (왈소) in that country (同國), suddenly (突然이) declared (宣言) "Opposition to the new Witos (新우이도스) cabinet, support (擁立) for former president (前大統領) Marshal Piłsudski," opening (開) the start (火蓋) of the revolution. With Marshal Piłsudski as commander-in-chief (總指揮官), they closed in on (肉薄) the capital Warsaw. As the event (事) originally (原來) broke out (突發) unexpectedly (意外) like a bolt from the blue (靑天霹靂), the government (政府), having no preparation (豫備) whatsoever (何等), could not mount much of a considerable (相當) counterattack (應戰). After continuing (繼續) street fighting (市街戰) for merely (僅) two days (日間), the prime minister's official residence (首相官邸) and other (其他) public buildings (公共建物) were all occupied (占領) by the revolutionary army's hands (手). President Wojciechowski (우이슈쵸푸스키-) and Prime Minister Witos (우이도스 수상), leading (率) the remnants of the defeated government troops (敗殘 官軍), made a last (最後) defense (守禦) of the Belweder Palace (베루뷔에데루 궁전), the presidential residence (大統領官邸), but were finally (遂히) routed (敗潰). The president and prime minister escaped (逃避) to the south (南方), and the entire city streets (全市街) were completely (完全) occupied (占領) by the revolutionary army. Accordingly (從하야), on May 16th, Marshal Piłsudski became provisional president (臨時大統領), and Mr. Bartel (빠루델씨) became prime minister. However, the next day (其翊日), the Marshal selected (選) his trusted subordinate (心腹), the Speaker of the National Assembly (國會議長) Rataj (라다지- 씨), as provisional president. This was a measure (手段) to have Rataj convene (召集) a new National Assembly (新國會) to hold an election (選擧) for the official president (正式大統領), but of course (勿論), it was nothing other than (不外) Marshal Piłsudski's own (自身) desire (慾望) to be elected (被選) president. On one hand (一方), this seems like Marshal Piłsudski's ambition (野心), but in reality (實), it was his self-confidence (自信) that Poland's current situation (現狀) required him personally to take charge (當局) and rectify and save (匡救) it. In his heart (心中), there was only his fatherland (祖國), and he disregarded (不拘) others' (他人) temporary (一時的) praise and blame (是非毀譽). ＜57＞

Poland's Future Politics Poland's politics operates under a two-chamber (二院) universal suffrage system (普通選擧制). Political parties (政黨) are divided (分立) into 17 small parties (小黨), headed (首腦) by the National Peasant Party (國民農民黨) led by Mr. Witos (우어도스씨), who was excluded (排斥) this time (今囘). Consequently, the lifespan (命數) of successive cabinets (歷代內閣) has been extremely (極히) short (短促). Moreover (加之), the sharp drop (暴落) in the Złoty (쓰로데이) exchange rate (價 爲替時勢) has always (常) been a cause (原因) provoking (惹起) political upheaval (政變). The crash in the Złoty price, which can be called (云하기 可한) a serious problem (危癌) for the political world (政界), is the result (結果) of poor rice production (產米不振). Since the surrounding (周圍) nations (諸國) are all excellent (優秀) industrial countries (產業國), Poland's industry is incessantly (不絕) overwhelmed (壓倒). Will the new revolutionary government (新政府) centered (中心) around Marshal Piłsudski indeed (果然) conquer (征服) this serious problem (此危癌)? That is still (아즉까지) a question (疑問). How (如何히) will the hero of turbulent times (風雲兒), Marshal Piłsudski, act (活躍) henceforth (今後)?

Abd el-Krim, Leader of the Rif Independence Army, After Eight Years (八個星霜) of Bloody Fight and Hard Struggle (血戰苦鬪)

Morocco's Environment Morocco (마록코), at the northern tip (北端) of Africa, facing (面) the Mediterranean Sea (地中海) - Morocco, which turns into a scorching hot (焦熱) desert (沙漠) in summer and a swamp (沼池) where mud (泥濘) rises above the knees(?) (무*을 넘치는) due to incessant (間斷 업눈) rainfall (降雨) in winter (겨울). Against the background (背景) of this rugged terrain (險地), Abd el-Krim (압델·크림씨), leader of the Rif people, who raised (起) the independence army (獨立軍) of the Rif tribe in August 1921 and fought bloody battles and struggled hard against the armies of both Spain (西班牙) and France (佛蘭西 兩國軍), was reported by various newspapers (各新聞에서 보도한 후) to have unconditionally surrendered (投降하얏다고) to the French army (佛蘭西으 軍門에) on May 26th of this year (本年). Since then (以來), news (消息) has been vague (漠然). Then, a telegram (電) from Paris (巴里) on July 3rd last (去) reported that Abd el-Krim and his entire family (其 家族 일동) were to be exiled (流配키로) to the island (島) of Madagascar (마다카스카) in Africa (애프리카洲), and moreover (且), within that island (島內), regardless of (如何를 불구하고) his (氏) past actions (過去 행위), methods (方法) for very favorable treatment (十分優遇) would be devised (講究한다 전하며) (Madagascar Island is a French dependency island (佛領屬島) located (在) in the Eastern Indian Ocean (東方印度洋) east of Africa). Subsequently (繼하야), a telegram from Rabat (라버트電) on July 4th reported: "As rumors (風說) are circulating (流行) among his kinsmen (同族間에) that the Rif leader Abd el-Krim has not yet been arrested (逮捕되지 아니하고) and has escaped (逃避하얏다는) into the mountains (山間에), the French army (佛軍) has decided (決定하얏다고) to parade (引廻하기로) the said general (同將軍을) among the Omorat (?) tribe (오모라트 족 간에) before executing him by firing squad (총살하기 전에)." Whether he (氏) will indeed be executed by firing squad or exiled to an island (流島가 될지), this (此) is still difficult (難) to know for sure (確知키). However, that he was captured by the French army can possibly (可히) be ascertained (確知하겟다) based on (依하야) reports of the facts before and after (前後 사실 보도에).

This Morocco is an absolute monarchy (君主專制國) located (在) in the desert lands (地) of northwestern (西北部) Africa. Facing (臨) the Mediterranean Sea, it lies opposite (相對) Europe's (歐洲) Iberian Peninsula (아이빠라아 반도) and forms (成) the gateway (關門) of the Strait of Gibraltar (지불롤타 해협). From the beginning (初頭) of the 20th century, ＜58＞ it became a political point of dispute (政治的 係爭點) for its opposite shore (對岸) neighbors (隣國), Spain (西班牙) and France (佛蘭西), who competed (角逐) for it. During a civil war in that country (同國內亂 際에), France (佛國) first (先) intervened (干涉) and occupied (占領) its southern (其 南部) region (地方). Next (次하야), Spain occupied the coastal region (海岸地方). Then, recently (最近), at the time (時) of the Versailles Peace Treaty (벨사이유 講和條約), the majority (大部分) of its territory (國土) became a complete dependency (完全屬地) of France, several northern parts (北部 몃 부분) became Spanish dependencies (屬地), and the Tangier (란지엘) region (地方) came under international administration (國際管理).
The total area (總面積) is about 313,000 square ri (方里); the inhabitants (住民) are Moors (무아인), numbering about 8 million (萬 名). Among them (其 中), the Rif people (리프족) were originally (元來) of the white race (白人種) (total population approx. 500,000), but due to residing (居住하는 관계) in the scorching (灼熱) desert, their skin (皮膚) has turned (變하엿다) brown (茶褐色). As is common practice (通例) for inhabitants of tropical regions (熱帶地方 住民), this tribe (此族) also has (有) the custom (風) of early marriage (早婚). They usually (普通) marry (結婚) at the age (歲) of 8 (時). There is a strange custom (奇習) where the woman (女子) stays (在) at her family home (本家 - context suggests wife's home) until she gives birth (生) to children (子女), and the groom (新郞) regularly visits (通行) the wife's family home (妻家).

The Uprising (蹶起) of the Rif Independence Army The Rif people of Spanish Morocco (西班牙領 마록코) raised (擧) the flag (旗) of independence 8 years ago (距今 8년 전). This was, of course (勿論), because the fervor for independence (獨立熱) among weak and small nations (弱小民族) reached (達) its peak (極度) after the World War (世界大戰後). At that time (當時), the Spanish army (西班軍), combining the standing army (常備軍) and the expeditionary force (征討軍), reached (至) 60,000-70,000 men (萬). Their weapons (武器) were also (亦) incomparably sophisticated (精巧無比), so they thought (思하얏섯스나) they could eradicate (撲滅) the Rif army (리프군) in one move (一擧). However, they suffered successive defeats (連敗) against the fierce and agile (精悍) Rif army (리군), and by December 1923 (年 12月), the entire army (全軍) had withdrawn (引退) to the coast (海岸). There, they were also (亦) pursued and encircled (追擊包圍 當하야) by the Rif army, temporarily (一時) falling into (陷하얏다) dire straits (困急 窮地). Receiving (接) this report (此報), France (佛蘭西), harboring (抱) the so-called (所謂) groundless anxiety (杞憂) of "if the lips are gone, the teeth will be cold" (脣亡齒寒), feared that the crushing defeat (慘敗) of the Spanish army (西軍) would affect (影響이 及할 것이라) its own territory (自國領地). Thus, it directly (直接) aided (援助) the Spanish army, blocked (扼) the Rif people's rear (背後), and cut off (斷絕) their supply route (糧道).
The Rif people, whose coastal transport (海岸의 교통) was cut off (杜絕) by the Spanish army (西軍으로 인하야), had been supplying (供給) most (大部分) of their food supplies (其 食糧) from fertile (肥沃) French Morocco (佛領 마록코). When this was suddenly (一朝) cut off (斷絕을 당하니) by the French army (佛軍에게), even the incomparably brave and fierce (勇悍無比) Rif army could not help but feel (感치 안이치 못하엿다) the difficulty (困難) in this (此에는). Thus, in April of the year before last (재작년 4월), they reduced (縮小) the battlefront (戰線) against the Spanish army (對西班牙軍) and concentrated (集中) their entire military force (全 兵力) on the border (國境), beginning (開始) to plunder (＜59＞ 掠奪) villages (村落) in French Morocco.
Sandwiched (挾在하야) between the 110,000 Spanish troops (西班牙軍) invading (攻入) from the coastal front (海岸戰線) and the 150,000 French troops (佛蘭西軍) fiercely attacking (猛襲) from the southern border (南部國境), the Rif people fought bloody battles (血戰) aiming (目標) for national independence (民族獨立). Although those holding (持) weapons (武器) numbered merely (饉히 - likely 僅히) 40,000-50,000 (萬에 불과하나), the Rif army always (常) held (占) superiority (優勢) in battle (戰鬪), repeatedly defeating (屢度擊破) the French and Spanish armies (兩佛 兩軍 - likely 佛西兩軍), who possessed elite (精銳) weapons and the latest (最新式) airplanes and bombs (飛行機 爆彈 등).

The Incomparably Fierce Rif People (無悍無比한 리프族 - likely 勇悍無比) So why (엇지하야) were the Rif people so fierce and tough (强悍)? Regarding this (此에 대하야), the French Eastern Commander (東部司令官) in Morocco, General Boichut (뽀아슈-장군), proclaimed (揚言하였다): "It's not that the rebel general (叛將) Abd el-Krim is strong (强한 것이 안이라), but that nature (天然) has created (作하얏다) a terrain (勢) difficult to defeat (難破)." This is, of course (勿論), the general's (將軍) excuse (口實). However, in reality (實際로), the border (國境) between French (佛領) and Spanish (西領) territory, although not very high ground (高地는 안이나), is a mountain range (山脈) stretching continuously (連亙) with rugged and winding (險曲) sawtooth-like (鉅齒와 가티) peaks. Besides (外에) this, in summer (녀름이면) it's a scorching (焦熱) desert (沙漠), and in winter (겨울이면), due to the always (常時) falling rain (오는 비로 인하야), the entire land (全土가) transforms (變함으로) into a swamp (沼池) of mud (泥濘). Therefore, while the march (行進) of lightly equipped (輕裝) infantry (步兵) is not excessively (過히) difficult (困難치 안이하나), things like (가튼 것은) pulling (曳한다던지) mountain artillery (山砲) or transporting (運搬) provisions (糧食) are extremely (非常) difficult (困難). Moreover (加之), the Rif army, accustomed (慣熟된) to the terrain's difficulty and ease (土地險易에), appears and disappears (出沒하며) here and there (左右로) in the mountains (山間의), sniping (狙擊하야) and attacking and seizing (襲奪함으로) supply units (糧食隊). Consequently, the generals (將軍) and weapons (武器) that gained great fame (大名을 垂한) during the Great European War (歐洲大戰 당시에) were indeed (果然) unable (不能하얏다) to defeat (擊破) the Rif army. Detailed (詳細) war reports (戰報) afterwards (其 後) are difficult (難) to know (知키), but Abd el-Krim's surrender (投降) this time (今回에) also seems (듯 하다) to be due to (인함인) a lack (缺乏) of military supplies (軍需品), food (食糧), and medicine (醫藥), rather than being defeated (敗한 것이 안이라) in battle (戰鬪에).

What Kind of Person (人物) is Abd el-Krim? Besides this (此 外), other reasons (原因) for the Rif people's strength (强한) are said to be (傳하나) the presence of German (獨逸) officers (士官) in the Rif army's camp (陣營에), participating in planning (參畫) at headquarters (帷幄에), the supply (供給) of German weapons, aid (援助) from Russia's (露西亞) Third International (第三 인터나쇼날), and other (其他) considerable (多大) backing (後援) from weak and small nations (弱小民族) throughout the world (世界中). But more than that, what truly (實로) earned the Rif army the name of being fierce and agile (精悍) was the presence of their leader (首領), Abd el-Krim.

Abd el-Krim was a fine man (快男兒), currently 45 years old (當年 45세), born (生) into the family (家) of a qadi (judge) (계지) in the port (港) village (村) of Melilla (메리라) at the northern tip of Africa. During his youth (青年時代), he studied abroad (遊學) in Spain. Immediately (卽時) after returning home (歸國 後), he was imprisoned (投獄되엿다가) on suspicion (嫌疑로) of participating (參加) in the Rif independence movement. Since (以來) escaping from prison (脫獄한), he busied himself (奔走) even more (더욱) with the movement (運動). His fame (名聲) became worldwide (世界的に 놉하지기) starting (始하얏다) from the time (時) he defeated (擊破) the Spanish expeditionary force (遠征隊) in 1921. Afterwards (其後), he repeatedly (屢次) won battles (勝戰하야) and gained (得) the trust and respect (信望) of the entire nation (全 民族). After annihilating (全滅한 후로) the Spanish army at the Battle of Melilla (메리라戰에서), ＜60＞ he suddenly leaped (一躍하야) to become the supreme leader (總首領) of the independence army.
Abd el-Krim is by no means (決코) an uneducated and illiterate (無學文盲) rustic warrior (野武士).
Until two years before starting the independence war (獨立戰 開始하기 2년 전까지), he was in Madrid (마도릿드) as a guest (賓客) of the Spanish government (政府), conducting deep (깁히) research (研究). After returning home (歸國 後), he invited (招聘) foreigners (外國人) to teach (敎授) modern-style (近代式) tactics (戰術) to the Rif people. Installing (架設) telephone lines (電話線) over a vast (廣大) area (地域) during this war (今番의 전쟁) to establish swift (敏活) military (軍事上) communication (連絡) was also (亦是) his achievement (功). Appearing (出現) like (갓티) the morning star (明星) in the dark night (暗夜) and becoming the Sultan (사루단 - king), during his leisure time (餘暇) from devoting himself (盡瘁) to the battle against France and Spain (對佛西戰鬪에), he decisively carried out (斷行) internal reforms (内政改革), abolishing (廢止) the Rif's tribal chief system (族長制度) and chieftain system (酋長制度) social structure (社會制度), organizing the entire nation (全 民族) into an army (軍隊), and decisively carrying out (斷行) the liberation (解放) of slaves (奴隷) and the prohibition (禁止) of tobacco (煙草).
His younger brother (弟), Muhammad (마멧도), was also (亦是) a student who studied abroad (留學生) in Spain and became a leader (領袖) of the independence army. In terms of fierceness and agility (精悍한 점), he surpassed (勝한 바가 多하야) his older brother (兄) in many aspects (바), earning (得하얏다) the title (稱號) "Knight (騎士) of the White Horse (白馬)." Now (이제), Abd el-Krim has become a prisoner of war (捕虜) of the French army (佛軍). His grand plan (雄圖) for the establishment of his ideal (理想) Rif Republic (共和國 建設) has also been thwarted (沮止) halfway (中道). However, Abd el-Krim's passion (熱血) will eternally (永遠히) flow (흘너서) in the minds (頭腦 속에) of the Rif people, and they will achieve (貫徹) the great ambition (大志) they yearn for (渴望하는) in the not-too-distant (不遠한) future (將來). Alas (鳴呼)! The future path (前途) of Abd el-Krim, the fighter (鬪士) for humanity (人道) and justice (正義)! What (如何) will it indeed (果然) be?

His Written Appeal (글월) to World Humanity (世界人類) On January 27th of this year (今 年 1월 27일), he issued (發布하얏다) a written statement (글발) appealing (訴하는) his people's (自己民族) indignant (痛憤) grievances (寃情) to the world (世界에) through the newspapers (新聞에) of various countries (各 국). The content (内容) of the letter is roughly (大略) as follows (坐와 갓다):
We, the Rif people, wish to rely on (의뢰하야) the newspapers of all advanced countries (先進國) to convey the true (眞實) news (消息) of our home country (本國) and make our true situation (眞相) known worldwide (世界적으로). Currently (目下), those who are enemies (敵) of humanity (人道), regard peace (平和) as an enemy (仇讎視), and engage in reckless warmongering (窮兵瀆武하는 자들은) (pointing to (指) France (佛國)) are spreading (流布하야) groundless (根據가 無한) false statements (僞言) to foreign countries (外國에 向하야) to mislead (誘惑케 함으로) public sentiment (人心) all under heaven (萬天下). Therefore (이에), we simply (簡單히) declare (宣布) our position (主張), and hope (바란다) that all comrades (동무) who love (사랑하는) truth (眞理) will listen.
The responsibility (責任) we seek to recover (回復코자 하는) is precisely (바로) to proceed (나아가서) on the path (길) of peace (平和). Everything we plan (꾀하는 바가) advocates (主張) nothing but justice (正義) and seeks (엇고저 안이하는 것이 업스되) nothing but peace. However, our enemies (敵人들은), through political machinations (政治의 작용으로), fabricate (做出) many (만히) false (虛僞) reports (報告). But this poses not the slightest (小毫도) obstacle (障害) to us. They have already (旣히) been conducting (하여 왓섯다) such (갓튼) deceptive propaganda (誣惑의 선전) since (부터) we began (開始할 때) the war (戰爭) to reclaim (찻기 위하야) our lost (喪失한) rights (權利). We repeatedly (屢次) held peace talks (平和의 說法을 하얏스나) with the ministers (長官) of both France and Spain (佛西兩國), but they (彼等은) treated (對하야) us with an arrogant (傲慢한) attitude (態度), always (常) contradicting (背馳되엿섯고) their true intentions (眞意와). Thinking (思하엿든) that we, being a weak nation (?) (弱小**이엿든 우리가), would not be able (못하리라고) to declare war (宣戰), they (彼等을), upon seeing (見하고) our guns and swords (銃釰), resisted (＜61＞ 對抗하다가) us with barbaric (野蠻的) and cruel (殘忍한) actions (行動). Finally (及其 終局에), when we again (再次) demanded (要求한즉) that they fairly (公平하게) adjudicate (處斷하자고) the rights (權利) we should considerably (相當히) possess (차질 - reclaim?), they (彼等은) further (更히) ridiculed (嘲笑함으로) us as effete (文弱이라고). After hesitating undecided (猶豫未決하다가) for some time (幾分間), we finally (最後에) mutually encouraged ourselves (서로 自强自勉하게 되엿다) with the old Arab saying (「아리마아」의 古語로써), "The sword (칼은) is truer (더욱히 진실하다) than the pen (글자보다)."

Other than (以外에는) our true (眞正) will (意志) and the sense (感覺) of our conscience (良心上), we have not exchanged a single letter (書信 한 장도 하지 안이하고) nor spoken a single word (말 한 마듸도 안이하얏다) with the enemy (敵人과).
We know nothing (다 모른다) of political stratagems (政略도), conspiracies (陰謀도), or trickery (譎計도). However, the masters (主人公은) of all political stratagems, conspiracies, and trickery are none other than (뿐이다) our enemies (敵人들). Therefore (그럼으로), representing (代表하야) our people (民族을), I appeal (訴하노니) to all nations of the world (世界萬邦에): We have no other demand (다른 요구가 업고) than (以外에는) just (곳) seeking (찻는) the rights (權利) we ought (應當) to possess (가저야 할), and we undertake no other defense (다른 防衛는 하지 안는다) than (以外에는) the defense (防禦) we must perform (行하여야 할) as part of our duty (職責上에). The sole (唯一한) principle (宗旨가) of all our actions (一節行動은) lies only (잇슬 뿐이다) in peace (平和에). Therefore (그럼으로), if the enemy (敵이) grants (드러준다 하면) what we demand (요구하는 것을), after that (그 뒤로는) we shall rightly (맛당이) reconcile (和解할 것이다) with each other (서로). This demand (要求) is because (까닭이다) our people (民族이) possess (잇슴으로) characteristics (特性) and abilities (能力) that qualify (資格이 잇는) us to become an independent state (獨立國家가 될만한) like (가티) other nations (다른 나라와). After this demand for freedom (自由) and rights (權利) is heard (듯게 된 뒤에는), we will open (開放하야) the doors (門戶) of our country (우리 나라의) and will be warmly welcoming (歡待하고 잇슬 터이니) free entry (自由入國을) to people of any nationality (何國民을 물론하고) from all nations of the present world (現今 세계 萬國의). We hope (바란다) that brethren of the world (天下同胞) who love (愛好하는) justice (正義를) and humanity (人道를) will aid (援助하여 주기를) us in this (이에서).
＜62＞ Also, people of the enemy countries (敵國人들은) spread rumors (流言을 하나) that Russia and Germany (露獨兩國이) aid (援助하고) us and are in contact (連絡이 잇다고) with us, but that is originally (元來) groundless (根據가 업는) slander (誣言이오), and furthermore (또), it is nothing more than (不過한 것이다) a malicious (惡辣한) means (手段) by which they (彼等이) attempt (하고자 하는) to trifle with (翻弄코자) those who protect (保護하는 자를) the rights (權利) of weak nations (弱小國의) through unjust (不義의) propaganda (宣傳으로). However, even if the enemy country (敵國이) occupies (차지하고) a part (一部分) of our country (我國의) and (且) occupies (차지할지라도) other parts (다른 부분을) in the future (將來에), we will never (決코) be discouraged (落心치 안코) by this (此로써) and will advance (나아갈 것이다), adhering (固執하고) to our final assertion (最期主張을) with even more (더욱) firm (굿센) determination (決心으로써).

It is a fact (事實이다) that due to (因하야) our past (過去) bloody fight and hard struggle (血戰苦鬪), our gains (所得이) during that time (其間) were many (만핫섯고), and conversely (반대로), the enemy country's (敵國은) losses (所失이) were many (만흔 것이). This is sufficient (족히) to prevent our hearts (마음) from wavering (動搖치 안케 한 것이니), and therefore (이에) we cannot contain (自勝치 못한다) our joy (喜悅함을). We will only (오즉) advance (나아갈 뿐이니) with patience (忍耐心으로써), and we hope for (期待한다) the time (時期가) when the great (偉大한) truth (眞理) destroys (破滅하는) all errors (모든 誤謬를) to return (도라오기를) even one day (一日이라도) sooner (早速이). O, newspapers of the world (天下新聞이여!) that proceed (나가는) aiming for (目標로 하고) humanity and justice (人道正義를)! Please widely spread (廣布하야) this will (이 뜻을) of ours, showing (보히여) it to the public eyes of the world (天下公眼에), so that those with sympathy (뜻잇는 이로 하야금) may feel (잇게 하여 주기를) tearful (눈물겨운) compassion (同情이). We hope (바란다). ＜62＞

**Summary**

This 1926 article from the Korean magazine *Gaebyeok* introduces readers to key figures leading national revival and independence movements in the post-WWI era: Reza Khan of Persia, Marshal Piłsudski of Poland, and Abd el-Krim of the Rif in Morocco. It details their backgrounds, rise to power, political and military strategies (often navigating between larger powers like Britain, Russia, France, and Spain), internal reforms, and the struggles faced by their respective nations. The article concludes with a lengthy appeal purportedly written by Abd el-Krim, outlining the Rif people's desire for independence, justice, and international support against French and Spanish colonialism. For historians studying colonial Korea, this article is significant as it demonstrates Korean awareness of and interest in contemporary global anti-colonial and nationalist movements. It reflects an engagement with international affairs and highlights models of leadership and national struggle that might have resonated with Koreans under Japanese rule, particularly the themes of reviving national fortunes, challenging imperial powers, and appealing to international justice, even if the specific political contexts (monarchy, republic, dictatorship) varied.

**Named Entities**

歐洲大戰	유럽대전	European Great War (WWI)
强大列國	강대열국	Great Powers
露	로	Russia
墺	오	Austria
亞細亞	아시아	Asia
阿弗利加	아프리카	Africa
東半球	동반구	Eastern Hemisphere
波蘭	파란	Poland
波斯	파스	Persia
마록코	마록코	Morocco
諸民族	제민족	Various Peoples/Nations
靑吾	청오	Cheong'o (Author)
리싸·칸	리사 칸	Reza Khan
데헤란	데헤란	Teheran
騎兵隊	기병대	Cavalry Unit
메지리스	메지리스	Majlis (Persian Parliament)
가지알 왕조	가지알 왕조	Qajar Dynasty
사-루단·아-마쓰도·싸	사르단 아흐마드 샤	Sultan Ahmad Shah Qajar
陸軍摠指揮官	육군총지휘관	Army Commander-in-Chief
마산데란	마산데란	Mazandaran
成吉思汗	성길사한	Genghis Khan
英國	영국	Britain
露西亞	러시아	Russia
英波石油會社	영파석유회사	Anglo-Persian Oil Company
帝政露西亞	제정러시아	Tsarist Russia
北國曠原	북국광원	Northern Wilderness (refers to Russia)
北海	북해	North Sea
英露協商	영로협상	Anglo-Russian Entente (1907)
世界大戰	세계대전	World War
勞農大革命	노농대혁명	Labor-Peasant Great Revolution (Russian Revolution)
舊帝國	구제국	Old Empire (Tsarist Russia)
勞農露國	노농노국	Labor-Peasant Russia (Soviet Russia)
데니긴	데니긴	Denikin
우란겔	우란겔	Wrangel
白衛軍	백위군	White Guard/Army
英波條約	영파조약	Anglo-Persian Treaty (1919)
코사크騎兵隊	코사크기병대	Cossack Brigade
쩨이엣도, 지아유덴	지에엣도 지아유덴	Zia'eddin Tabatabaee
칼데아 人	칼데아인	Chaldeans
모하메터 교도	모하메트 교도	Mohammedans (Muslims)
共和政治	공화정치	Republican Politics
土耳其	터키	Turkey
케말·파샤	케말 파샤	Kemal Pasha
共和國	공화국	Republic
阿富汗	아프간	Afghanistan
필스도스키 元帥	필수드스키 원수	Marshal Piłsudski
쇼판	쇼팽	Chopin
아담·기유- 리-	아담 퀴리	Adam Curie (likely error for Marie Curie)
스다니스라스·토니아도우스키王	스타니슬라스 포니아토프스키 왕	King Stanisław Poniatowski
獨	독	Germany
우인會議	우인회의	Congress of Vienna (Wiin = Vienna)
고레구레스王國	고레구레스 왕국	Congress Kingdom (of Poland)
日露戰爭	일로전쟁	Russo-Japanese War
獨立黨	독립당	Independence Party
P·O·W	피오더블유	P.O.W. (Polska Organizacja Wojskowa - Polish Military Organization)
獨逸	독일	Germany
마루데뿌루꾸	마그데부르크	Magdeburg
파데루우스키	파데레프스키	Paderewski
우이슈쵸푸스키	보이치에호프스키	Wojciechowski
왈소	왈소	Warsaw
레베투드	레베르투프	Rembertów
新우이도스 내각	신비토스 내각	New Witos Cabinet
베루뷔에데루 궁전	벨베데르 궁전	Belweder Palace
우이도스 수상	비토스 수상	Prime Minister Witos
빠루델씨	바르텔 씨	Mr. Bartel
라다지- 씨	라타이 씨	Mr. Rataj
國民農民黨	국민농민당	National Peasant Party (likely Piast)
쓰로데이	즈워티	Złoty (Polish currency)
압델·크림씨	압델 크림 씨	Mr. Abd el-Krim
리프獨立軍	리프독립군	Rif Independence Army
地中海	지중해	Mediterranean Sea
西班牙	서반아	Spain
佛蘭西	프랑스	France
巴里	파리	Paris
마다카스카島	마다카스카르 섬	Madagascar Island
印度洋	인도양	Indian Ocean
佛領屬島	불령속도	French Dependency Island
라버트	라바트	Rabat
오모라트 족	오모라트 족	Omorat tribe (?)
아이빠라아 반도	이베리아 반도	Iberian Peninsula
지불롤타 해협	지브롤터 해협	Strait of Gibraltar
벨사이유 講和條約	베르사유 강화조약	Versailles Peace Treaty
란지엘	탄지에르	Tangier
무아인	무어인	Moors
리프족	리프족	Rif people
西班軍	서반군	Spanish Army
西軍	서군	Spanish Army (abbrev.)
佛軍	불군	French Army
뽀아슈- 장군	부아슈 장군	General Boichut
第三 인터나쇼날	제삼 인터내셔널	Third International (Comintern)
메리라	멜리야	Melilla
마도릿드	마드리드	Madrid
마멧도	마메트	Muhammad (Abd el-Krim's brother)
佛西兩國	불서양국	France and Spain

**Glossary**

再興國	재흥국	Revived nation
新人物	신인물	New figures, prominent individuals
絆	반	Bonds, fetters (used with Hanja)
昏夢	혼몽	Slumbering dream, stupor
不謨自同	부모자동	Acting in concert without prior agreement (Hanja phrase)
東西呼應	동서호응	Echoing each other from East and West (Hanja phrase)
긔발	깃발	Flag (older spelling)
울리도다	울리도다	Resound, cry out (archaic form)
잘 살어야만	잘 살아야만	Must live well (older spelling)
폐허	폐허	Ruins
旣設	기설	Already established
國運	국운	National fortune
挽回	만회	Restore, recover
捲土重來	권토중래	Staging a comeback after defeat (Hanja idiom)
舊版圖	구판도	Former territory
波動	파동	Waves, repercussions
訂正	정정	Revision, correction
帷幄	휘악	Headquarters, inner circle (often military)
갱생운동	갱생운동	Rebirth movement, regeneration movement
하얏다	하였다	Did (older spelling)
잇고	있고	And there is (older spelling)
업거니와	없거니와	Although there isn't (older spelling)
供코자	공하고자	Wish to provide (older spelling)
再造	재조	Rebuilding, reconstruction
首郡	수군	Capital city (older term)
열리엿섯다	열렸었다	Was held (older spelling)
업는	없는	Without (older spelling)
福利	복리	Welfare, benefit
聲望	성망	Reputation, prestige
모라 가지고	몰아 가지고	Gathering, monopolizing (older spelling)
반세기간	반세기 간	For half a century
英馨兒	영형아	Promising child (unusual term, likely intended 영재아 etc.)
되엿섯다	되었었다	Became (older spelling)
싸서	쌓아 서	Accumulating (older spelling)
드럿다	들었다	Heard, earned (older spelling)
엇지하야	어찌하여	How, why (older spelling)
되엿슬가	되었을까	Did it become? (older spelling)
식히는	시키는	Making someone do/feel (older spelling)
가티	같이	Like, as (older spelling)
만켓지만은	많겠지만은	Although there may be many (older spelling)
하야금	하여금	Making someone do (causative particle)
英露	영로	Britain and Russia
업슴으로	없으므로	Because there isn't (older spelling)
밧고	받고	Receiving (older spelling)
닐어나서	일어나서	Arising, occurring (older spelling)
안이치 못하게 되엿다	아니치 못하게 되었다	Was forced to, could not avoid (older circumlocution)
從하야	종하여	Accordingly (older form)
안이치 못하게 되엿다	아니치 못하게 되었다	Was forced to (older circumlocution)
의연이	의연히	Still, as before
하랴고	하려고	Intending to do (older spelling)
마침	마침	Just then, coincidentally
此로 因하야	차로 인하여	Due to this (using Hanja 此)
주저하고	주저하고	Hesitating
更히	거듭 히	Again, further (older form of 거듭)
자못	자못	Quite, very
만헛섯다	많았었다	Were many (older spelling)
문책하기 위하야	문책하기 위하여	In order to call to account
가젓섯다	가졌었다	Had, possessed (older spelling)
벌서	벌써	Already (older spelling)
全혀	전혀	Entirely, completely (older spelling)
깨닷고	깨닫고	Realizing (older spelling)
갓섯다	갔었다	Went (older spelling)
드러 왓섯다	들어왔었다	Came in (older spelling)
되엿다	되었다	Became (older spelling)
먼저	먼저	First (common spelling, but distinct from modern 먼저)
一新	일신	Complete renewal
띄게 하엿다	띄게 하였다	Made it have/show (older spelling)
얼마나	얼마나	How (adverb)
風雲兒	풍운아	Hero of turbulent times
理學界	이학계	Scientific world (older term)
產出	산출	Produce, yield
몃	몇	Several (older spelling)
幽獄	유옥	Prison (literary term)
혈흔	혈흔	Bloodstain
세인	세인	People of the world
不知	부지	Unaware (Hanja term)
彌滿	미만	Fill, pervade
弱冠時代	약관시대	Youth (around age 20)
刺客	자객	Assassin
洗禮	세례	Baptism (here, figurative for attack)
衆議	중의	Public opinion, consensus
咽喉	인후	Throat (often figurative)
扼	액	Grasp, control, block
代償	대상	Compensation, price
四面楚歌	사면초가	Surrounded by enemies (idiom)
未弱	미약	Weak (likely 微弱)
牽制	견제	Check, restrain
獄舍	옥사	Prison building
收監	수감	Imprisonment
下野	하야	Retire from office
鞭韃	편달	Whip, urge on
亂麻	난마	Tangled hemp; confusion (idiom)
收拾	수습	Handle, resolve, put in order
如何히	여하히	How (older adverbial form)
火蓋	화개	Opening shot, start of hostilities
肉薄	육박	Close in on, press hard
豫備	예비	Preparation
官軍	관군	Government troops
敗潰	패궤	Collapse, be routed
逃避	도피	Escape, flee
心腹	심복	Trusted subordinate
被選	피선	Be elected
匡救	광구	Rectify and save
是非毀譽	시비훼예	Right and wrong, praise and blame
短促	단촉	Short, brief (often for time)
惹起	야기	Cause, provoke
危癌	위암	Dangerous cancer; serious problem (figurative)
征服	정복	Conquer
녀름	여름	Summer (older spelling)
焦熱	초열	Scorching heat
泥濘	이능	Mud, mire
險地	험지	Rugged terrain, dangerous place
星霜	성상	Years (lit. stars and frost)
投降	투항	Surrender
漠然	막연	Vague, indistinct
流配	유배	Exile
講究	강구	Devise, consider, work out
銃殺	총살	Execution by firing squad
引廻	인회	Parade (a prisoner), take around
專制國	전제국	Autocratic state
海峽	해협	Strait
角逐	각축	Compete, vie for
屬地	속지	Dependency, colony
方里	방리	Square ri (unit of area, size varied)
灼熱	작열	Scorching heat
茶褐色	다갈색	Brown color
早婚	조혼	Early marriage
奇習	기습	Strange custom
蹶起	궐기	Rise up, revolt
撲滅	박멸	Eradicate, exterminate
精悍	정한	Fierce and agile, valiant
連敗	연패	Suffer successive defeats
引退	인퇴	Withdraw, retire
追擊	추격	Pursuit
包圍	포위	Encirclement
困急	곤급	Dire straits, extremity
窮地	궁지	Predicament, desperate situation
脣亡齒寒	순망치한	If the lips are gone, the teeth will be cold (idiom for interdependence)
杞憂	기우	Groundless anxiety (idiom)
背後	배후	Rear, behind
糧道	양도	Supply route
斷絕	단절	Cut off, sever
杜絕	두절	Cut off, block
肥沃	비옥	Fertile
掠奪	약탈	Plunder, pillage
挾在	협재	Be sandwiched between
屢度擊破	누도격파	Repeatedly defeat
揚言	양언	Declare, proclaim
口實	구실	Excuse, pretext
鉅齒	거치	Sawtooth
連亙	연긍	Stretch continuously
沼池	소지	Swamp, marsh
輕裝	경장	Lightly equipped
曳	예	Pull, drag
運搬	운반	Transport, carry
慣熟	관숙	Accustomed to, familiar with
出沒	출몰	Appear and disappear
狙擊	저격	Snipe
襲奪	습탈	Attack and seize
軍需品	군수품	Military supplies
缺乏	결핍	Lack, shortage
듯 하다	듯하다	Seems like (older spacing)
參畫	참화	Participate in planning (military staff work)
後援	후원	Support, backing
快男兒	쾌남아	Fine man, spirited man
嫌疑	혐의	Suspicion
奔走	분주	Busy oneself, work hard for
놉하지기	높아지기	Become high (older spelling)
一躍	일약	Suddenly leap, rise rapidly
總首領	총수령	Supreme leader
野武士	야무사	Rustic warrior, unrefined warrior
賓客	빈객	Guest (formal)
깁히	깊이	Deeply (older spelling)
架設	가설	Install, set up (wires, bridges)
餘暇	여가	Leisure time
斷行	단행	Carry out decisively
酋長	추장	Chieftain
沮止	저지	Obstruct, thwart
雄圖	웅도	Grand plan, ambition
貫徹	관철	Carry through, achieve
鳴呼	명호	Alas! (interjection)
訴願	소원	Appeal, petition
글월	글월	Writing, letter (slightly archaic)
寃情	원정	Grievance, unjust situation
仇讎視	구수시	Regard as an enemy
窮兵瀆武	궁병독무	Reckless warmongering (idiom)
僞言	위언	False statement, lie
流布	유포	Spread, circulate
동무	동무	Comrade, friend (also used in North Korea)
꾀하는 바	꾀하는 바	What is planned/intended
업스되	없으되	Although there is not (older spelling)
做出	주출	Fabricate, make up
小毫	소호	Slightest bit
障害	장해	Obstacle, hindrance (older form of 장애)
업다	없다	Not exist (older spelling)
찻기	찾기	Finding, seeking (older spelling)
갓튼	같은	Like, such as (older spelling)
誣惑	무혹	Deception, slander
說法	설법	Persuasion, preaching (can also mean Buddhist sermon)
傲慢	오만	Arrogant
背馳	배치	Contradict, run counter to
銃釰	총검	Guns and swords
野蠻的	야만적	Barbaric
猶豫未決	유예미결	Hesitate and undecided (idiom)
自强自勉	자강자면	Strive hard for self-strengthening (idiom)
마듸	마디	Word, joint (older spelling)
政略	정략	Political stratagem
陰謀	음모	Conspiracy
譎計	휼계	Trickery, stratagem
곳	곧	Just, precisely (here)
응당	응당	Ought to, properly
가저야 할	가져야 할	Should have/possess (older spelling)
防禦	방어	Defense
宗旨	종지	Purpose, principle, creed
잇슬 뿐이다	있을 뿐이다	Only exists (older spelling)
맛당이	마땅히	Rightly, properly (older spelling)
和解	화해	Reconcile, make peace
듯게	듣게	Be heard (older spelling)
門戶	문호	Door, gateway (often figurative for opening country)
歡待	환대	Warm welcome
잇슬 터이니	있을 터이니	Will be (future projection, older spelling)
愛好	애호	Love, cherish
流言	유언	Rumor
誣言	무언	Slander, false accusation
翻弄	번롱	Make sport of, trifle with, mock
惡辣	악랄	Vicious, malicious
굿센	굳센	Strong, firm, resolute (older spelling)
固執	고집	Adhere to, persist in
所得	소득	Gain, profit
만핫섯고	많았었고	Were many (older spelling)
만흔 것	많은 것	Many things (older spelling)
족히	족히	Sufficiently, enough
안케 한 것	않게 한 것	Thing that prevented (older spelling)
오즉	오직	Only, solely (older spelling)
誤謬	오류	Error, fallacy
破滅	파멸	Destruction, ruin
早速	조속	Quickly, promptly
도라오기를	돌아오기를	Returning (older spelling)
廣布	광포	Widely spread, disseminate
보히여	보여	Showing (older spelling)
뜻잇는 이	뜻있는 이	Person with will/sympathy (older spelling)
눈물겨운	눈물겨운	Tearful, moving
同情	동정	Sympathy, compassion
잇게 하여 주기를	있게 하여 주기를	Let there be, make it possible to have (older spelling)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제72호
발행일	1926년 08월 01일
기사제목	再興國의 新人物
기사형태	소식

再興國의 新人物
歐洲大戰의 대포소리는 强大列國의 *絆 밋헤서 오래동안 신음하던 세계 약소민족의 昏夢을 一朝에 각성케 하얏다. 그들은 서로 약속한 것과 가티 不謨自同으로 東西呼應하야 혁명의 긔발을 날니며 울리도다. 가튼 사람인 以上에는 남과 가티 잘 살어야만 되겟다고 절규하야 혹은 敗殘한 고국의 폐허에 신국가를 건설하고 혹은 旣設한 국가의 부패한 정치와 제도를 개혁하야 쇠퇴의 國運을 挽回하며 혹은 목전에 실패는 하얏슬지라도 어듸까지 운동을 계속하야 捲土重來를 기도하는 중에 잇다. 露墺 兩帝國의 舊版圖 內로만 말하야도 이미 10여의 국가가 신흥하얏고 亞細亞 阿弗利加 諸洲에까지 其 波動이 심히 격렬하야 東半球의 政治地圖는 訂正에 訂正을 가하야도 尙히 정확한 界線을 畵하기 곤란한 境에 至하얏다. 그런데 그 모든 민족의 운동에는 반드시 단체의 조직이 잇고 질서가 잇고 계획이 周密하고 행동이 敏活하며 且 其 帷幄의 중에는 또한 반드시 此를 지도하는 중심의 인물이 잇다. 이 모든 약소민족의 갱생운동은 이미 世人이 周知하는 바이닛가 이제 별로 새삼스러이 말할 바 업거니와 나는 특히 今 春 이래 발생한 波蘭 波斯 마록코 諸民族 革命運動의 중심인물을 잠간 소개하야 독자의 一覽에 供코자 한다.(靑吾)＜52＞

波斯再造의 神인 리싸칸 新王
南國의 봄을 자랑하는 椰子의 입이 파릇파릇하게 새로운 장막을 드리던 4월 25일이엿다. 波斯의 首郡 「데헤란」에서는 騎兵隊의 한 마부 출신으로 신왕국이 된 「리싸·칸」의 장엄한 대관식이 열리엿섯다. 작년 10월에 同國에는 유혈의 참사가 업는 평화적 혁명이 일어나 국회 (메지리스)는 「국민의 福利」를 위한다는 名義 下에 「가지알」왕조의 폐지와 제 7대의 국왕 「사-루단·아-마쓰도·싸」의 퇴위를 결의하고 12월 13일에는 全 波斯의 실권과 聲望을 한 몸에다 모라 가지고 잇는 陸軍摠指揮官 「리싸·칸」을 세습의 국왕으로 추천하엿다.
신국왕 「리싸·칸」은 과거 반세기간에 波斯가 産한 걸출의 인물이다. 그는 49년 전 1877년에 「마산데란」지방의 하류계급의 家에서 生한 英馨兒로 16세의 때에 波斯騎兵隊의 軍籍에 投하야 一馬夫가 되엿섯다. 원래에 자질이 비범한 그는 許多의 공적을 쌋코 싸서 46세의 때에는 遂히 「사-따·지쓰파」 즉 陸軍摠指揮官의 榮位에 躍進하야 일반국민에게 第2成吉思汗이라는 칭호까지 드럿다. 육군의 총지휘관인 그는 육군뿐만 안이라 일반 정치에도 간섭하야 임의로 내각을 누차 변경하엿다. 그러면 엇지하야 그가 그와 가튼 권력을 가지게 되엿슬가? 그것은 물론 그의 勇敢 實行하는 성격과 일반을 感服식히는 열성과 鋼鐵과 가티 구든 의지 등 자기 개성의 力에 관계가 만켓지만은 그로 하야금 직접으로 雄飛할 기회를 준 것은 波斯에 한 英露의 침략이엿다. 19세기의 말기로부터 英國의 波斯에 대한 침략은 露骨로 銳鋒을 現하야 1901년에는 波斯政府를 강요하야 英波石油會社를 설립하고 南波斯의 석유에 그 魔手를 벌엿섯다. 이 英波石油會社의 설립을 듯고 大驚且怒한 자는 帝政露西亞엿다. 北國曠原의 獰態인 露西亞는 北海의 猛獅子인 英國에 不下한 신랄한 억압을 北波斯에 가하엿다. 가련한 약소국의 波斯는 양대 강국의 무리한 압박을 受하면서도 하등의 반항할 힘이 업슴으로＜53＞ 다만 비애의 눈물만 뿌릴 뿐이엿다. 英露의 항쟁은 1907년까지 계속한 바 仝年에 소위 英露協商이 성립되야 英國은 北波斯를 露西亞의 세력범위로 認하고 露西亞는 南波斯를 英國의 세력범위로 認하기로 타협하얏다. 이와 가튼 형세로 1914년까지 至하다가 세계대전이 발발되엿다. 만일에 이 대전이 업섯스면 波斯의 全 富源은 英露 양국에게다 착취되엿슊� 것이다. 露西亞는 대전 중 1917년에 勞農大革命이 닐어나서 舊帝國이 파괴하매 당시 强頑無比를 자랑하던 曠原의 態도 일반 국제외교의  무대 상에 퇴장치 안이치 못하게 되엿다.
從하야 波斯에 대한 세력 범위도 포기치 안이치 못하게 되엿다. 그러나 一方으로 영국은 대전 중에도 의연이 波斯에 대하야 압박을 가하얏다. 露西亞의 退縮을 기회로 하야 全 波斯를 英國의 屬領으로 하랴고 英波條約의 체결을 강요하얏다. 아모리 약소한 波斯라도 여긔에 대하야는 국회에서 절대 거절하엿다. 이 시기에 마침 勞農露國은 데니긴, 우란겔 기타 白衛軍을 蹴破하고 新陣容을 波斯의 北境에 現하엿다. 이로 인하야 英國도 露骨의 압박을 주저하고 一髮危機에 임하엿던 波斯도 更히 독립의 기운을 得하게 되엿다.
당시 「리싸·칸」은 北境을 守禦하는 코사크騎兵隊의 대장이 되야 일반의 聲望이 자못 만헛섯다. 英露의 조국 압박에 격분한 그는 1921년 春에 정부에 문책하기 위하야 手兵을 率하고 수도 「뎨헤란」으로 馳入하야 당시 내각을 倒壞하고 比較的 新進思想을 가진 「쩨이엣도, 지아유덴」을 首相으로 추천하고 자기는 陸軍摠指揮官이 되엿섯다. 그러나 그 수상은 英國의 보호를 受하는 정책을 採*함으로 未久에 수상의 印綬를 奪還하고 「리싸·칸」 자신이 수상의 지위에 臨하엿다. 「리싸·칸」의 외교정책은 露西亞의 力을 이용하야 英國의 야망을 좌절함에 잇섯다. 勞農露西亞의 약소민족에 대한 외교정책은 다소나마 英國의 태도보다는 同情적이엿다. 그뿐만 안이라 波斯의 무역은 주로 露西亞 간에 행하얏다. 교통기관이 아즉 발달되지 못한 波斯는 英國과 무역액은 극히 근소하엿다. 加之 「리싸·칸」 자신은 露西亞 士官에게 군사교련을 밧고＜54＞ 또 露西語를 能通하는 개인적 관계로서도 자연 親露政策을 취하게 되엿다.
수상이 된 「리싸·칸」은 내정에 극히 엄격한 정치를 施하야 兵力과 法力으로 동요 혼돈에 陷한 波斯를 안정과 질서가 잇는 波斯로 化成하엿다. 「칼데아」人의 반란을 定하고 국내의 아라비아인과 모하메터 교도로 하야금 다 중앙의 데헤란 정부에 복종케 하야 波斯를 통일하얏다.
그는 幼時로부터 무슨 계통적 교육을 밧지는 안엇스나 상당한 진보적 사상을 가젓섯다. 陸軍摠指揮官時代에 그는 벌서 波斯의 衰微는 全혀 실력이 업는 왕조정치에 원인이 잇는 것을 간파하고 共和政治를 실현치 안이하면 될 수 업다는 意圖를 가젓섯다.
그 意圖는 新聞界 뿐 안이라 일반의 국민 특히 상인에게 환영되엿다. 만일에 그가 일차 대과실이 업섯던들 벌서 1924년 春에 국회는 「가지아- 투」왕조의 폐지를 선언하고 共和制度의 국가를 만드럿슬 것이다.
그러면 그의 과실은 과연 무엇일가. 그것은 즉 回敎徒의 의향을 무시한 것이다. 회교도는 前日 土耳其의 회교도가 「케말·파샤」에게 박해를 당한 것과 가튼 박해가 잇슬가 恐怖하야 共和制를 반대하고 「리싸칸」 배척, 反共和政治를 叫號하야 사태가 자못 위험한 境에 至하엿다. 이 정세를 관찰한 영민한 그는 如斯의 强爭을 함은 국가로나 개인으로나 有害無益한 愚事인 것을 깨닷고 수상의 榮位를 弊屣와 가티 버리고 飄然이 향리로 도라 갓섯다. 그러나 당시 波斯의 국정은 萬事가 다 「리사·칸」의 수완을 갈망하게 되얏다. 그리하야 未久에 그는 다시 만인의 환영 속에서 수도 「뎨헤란」으로 드러 왓섯다. 그리자 작년 秋期에 정변이 닐어나서 共和國과 似而非한 세습 국왕이 되엿다.
일국의 지배자가 된 그는 그의 敏活한 수완을 揮하야
먼저 土耳其, 阿富汗 등 주위의 諸國과 친교를 結하고 내정으로는 紡績業을 극히 장려하며 교육제도를 一新 改革하야 長久間 衰微하엿던 波斯로 하야금 다시 활기를 띄게 하엿다. 아- 波斯人의 活命液인 「리싸·칸」 그 얼마나 위대한 인물인가

波蘭革命의 風雲兒 필스도스키 元帥
樂聖 「쇼판」을 産出하고 理學界의 천재 「아담·기유- 리- 」를 탄생한 波蘭은 17세기가 其 全盛의 시기엿다.＜55＞ 其後로는 一步一步 점차 衰退하야 「스다니스라스·토니아도우스키王」의 시대 즉 1773년으로부터 23개 년 간에는 墺, 露, 獨 3대 강국에게 분할이 되엿다가 其 後 나폴레온 전쟁 후 우인會議에서 다시 왕국을 부활하얏스나 역시 고레구레스王國의 명의로 露西亞의 보호국이 되어 잇섯다. 帝政露西亞의 압박과 학정에 고뇌 분개하는 波蘭의 인민은 언제던지 자국의 독립을 祈願하고 期圖하야 日露戰爭 당시에도 露國의 覊絆을 罷할 好機會가 도래하얏다 생각하고 독립운동을 起하다가 실패에 歸하고 但히 露西亞의 幽獄에 허다한 애국지사의 비참한 혈흔만 잔존하엿슬 뿐이엿다. 그러나 波蘭의 독립운동은 의연 계속하야 세인이 不知하는 間에 漸次 구체화하게 되야 세계대전의 초에 임하야는 積年間 기회를 고대하던 全 波蘭人이 일시 자극이 되야 독립운동의 氣分은 전국에 彌滿하게 되얏다.

歐洲大戰과 필元帥의 活躍 然面 波蘭의 獨立黨 중에는 兩黨이 有하얏스니 一은 직접으로 露西亞와 독립전쟁을 하자는 論이오. 一은 露西亞를 원조하는 동시에 완전독립을 요구하자는 論이엿다. 此 援助論者의 중심인물은 즉 필 元帥엿다. 이 필 元帥는 출세의 英傑인 동시에 열혈의 애국자엿다. 18세의 弱冠시대로부터 조국 회복 운동에 분투하다가 누차 자객의 세례를 바덧섯다. 그는 此機를 臨하야 衆議를 배제하고 급속히 일부 軍團을 率하고 국경에 進하야 苦戰 중에 在한 露西亞의 咽喉를 扼하고 露國을 원조하는 동시에 그 代償으로 波蘭의 독립을 승인할 事를 요구하야 독립의 第一步에 성공하얏섯다. 一方으로 獨墺 兩國에서도 사면초가의 위기를 際하야 비록 미약한 波蘭이나마 적으로 삼는 것은 自國의 不利로 간파하고 역시 波蘭의 독립 승인을 선언하야 환심을 得하랴고 하얏섯다. 그러나 사실은 선언과 정반대로 군대를 波蘭에 出하야 波蘭의 對露好意를 강압적으로 견제코자 하얏다. 그 결과로 비밀군대 P·O·W의 총사령관인 필 元帥는 체포되야 獨逸의 「마루데뿌루꾸」 獄舍에 수감되엿다가 大戰이 종식되는 동시에 석방되얏다.

波蘭의 共和國建設과 再次革命 그의 조국에서는 그를 王者의 禮로 歡迎하얏섯다. 그리하야 귀국하는 동시에 積年 열망하던 波蘭의 獨立共和國을 건설하고 일반 국민의 묵인에 의하야 제1회 대통령이 되엿다가 未久에 其 位를 大音樂家로 유명한＜56＞ 「파데루우스키」에게 讓하고 정계를 退하얏다.
그러나 「파데루우스키」가 未久에 암살됨으로 그는 재차 대통령이 되야 1922년까지 독립 후 多難한 국정에 盡瘁하엿다. 其 後에 그는 또 「우이슈쵸푸스키」에게 대통령의 椅子를 讓하고 하야하야 간접으로 新興의 波蘭을 鞭韃하얏스나 亂麻와 如한 현상을 수습하고 국정을 통일하는데는 무엇보다도 독재정치를 행함이 필요하게 생각하야 재차의 혁명을 기도하얏다.
本年 5월 12일이엿다. 同國 수상 「왈소」의 북방 「레베투드」지방의 군대는 돌연이 「新우이도스 내각 반대 前대통령 필스드스키 원수옹립」을 선언하야 혁명의 火蓋를 開하고 필 元帥를 총지휘관으로 하야 수도 「왈소」를 육박하얏다. 事가 원래 청천벽력과 가티 의외에 돌발하얏슴으로 하등의 예비가 업는 정부는 상당한 응전도 별로 하지 못하고 僅히 2일간의 市街戰을 계속하다가 수상 관저와 기타 공공건물이 모도 혁명군의 手에 점령하게 되고 「우이슈쵸푸스키- 대통령과 우이도스 수상 등은 패잔의 관군을 率하고 「베루뷔에데루 궁전인 대통령의 관저를 최후로 守禦하다가 遂히 敗潰하야 대통령, 수상 등은 남방으로 도피하고 全 市街는 혁명군이 완전 점령하게 되얏스며 從하야 5월 16일에는 필스드스키 元帥가 임시대통령, 빠루델씨가 수상이 되얏다. 그러나 其 翊日에 元帥는 그의 심복인 국회의장 라다지- 씨를 임시대통령으로 選하얏스니 그것은 라다지-씨로 하야금 신국회를 소집하야 정식대통령을 선거케 하는 수단인 바 물론 필 元帥 자신이 대통령에 被選하랴는 욕망이 有함에 不外한 것이엿다. 이것은 一方으로 보면 필 元帥의 야심인 듯 하나 실은 波蘭의 현상은 필 元帥 자기가 當局하야 匡救치 안으면 안될 줄로 자신함이엿다. 그의 심중에는 조국만 有할 뿐이오 타인의 일시적 是非毁譽는 不拘함이엿다.＜57＞

今後 波蘭의 政治 波蘭의 정치는 二院의 普通選擧制로 정당은 금회 배척된 우어도스씨의 總理인 國民農民黨을 首腦로 한 17의 小黨이 분립되여 잇슴으로 역대 內閣의 명수가 極히 短促하엿고 加之 「쓰로데이」價의 爲朁時 勢의 폭락은 항상 정변을 야기하는 원인이 되엿다. 정계의 危癌이라 云하기 可한 「쓰로데이」價의 폭락은 産米不振의 결과인 바 주위의 諸國이 다 우수한 산업국인 까닭에 波蘭의 산업은 不絶히 압도된다. 필 元帥를 중심으로 한 혁명의 신정부는 과연 此危癌을 정복할는지 그것은 아즉까지 한 의문이다. 혁명의 풍운아 필 元帥는 今後에 과연 如何히 활약하랴는가.

血戰苦鬪 八個星霜의 리프獨立軍 首領 압델·크림씨
마록코의 環境 애프리카의 北端으로 地中海를 面한 마록코(Marocco)- 녀름은 焦熱한 사막 겨울은 間斷이  업눈 降雨로 인하야 泥濘이 무*을 넘치는 沼池로 변하는 마록코의 險地를 배경으로 하고 1921년 8월부터 리프족의 독립군을 起하야 西班牙와 佛蘭西 兩國軍과 血戰苦鬪하던 리프족의 수령 압델·크림씨는 本年 5월 26일에 佛蘭西으 軍門에 무조건으로 투항하얏다고 각 신문에서 보도한 후 이래 소식이 막연하더니 去 7월 3일 巴里의 電에는 압델·크림씨와 其 家族 일동을 애프리카洲의 「마다카스카」島에 유배키로 하고 且 其 島內에서는 氏의 과거 행위 여하를 불구하고 十分優遇의 방법을 강구한다 전하며 (마다카스카島는 애프리카의 東方印度洋  중에 在한 佛領屬島) 繼하야 7월 4일 라버트電에는 「리프족 수령 압델·크림은 아즉 체포되지 아니하고 산간에 도피하얏다는 風說이 동족간에 流行함으로 佛軍은 同將軍을 총살하기 전에 「오모라트」족 간에 引廻하기로 결정하얏다고 전한다. 氏가 과연 총살을 당할지 혹은 流島가 될지 此는 아즉 確知키 難하거니와 氏가 佛軍에게 체포된 것은 전후 사실 보도에 의하야 可히 確知하겟다.

이 마록코는 애프리카 서북부 사막의 地에 在한 君主專制國으로 地中海를 臨하야 歐洲의 아이빠라아 반도와 相對하고 지불롤타 해협의 관문을 成함으로 20세기 初頭로부터＜58＞ 其 對岸의 隣國인 西班牙 及 佛蘭西의 정치적 係爭點이 되야 양국이 각축하다가 同國內亂의 際에 佛國이 先히 간섭하야 其 南部의 지방을 점령하고 次하야 西班牙는 해안지방을 점령하엿더니 최근 「벨사이유」 講和條約 時에 국토의 대부분은 佛國의 完全屬地가 되고 북부 몃 부분은 西班牙의 屬地가 되고 「란지엘」지방은 國際管理가 되엿다.
총면적은 약 313,000方里요 주민은 「무아」인으로 약 800만 명인데 其 中 리프족은 원래 백인종이엿스나(총인구 약 50만) 灼熱한 사막에 거주하는 관계로 피부가 다갈색으로 변하엿다. 열대지방 주민의 通例로 此族도 早婚의 風이 有하야 8세의 時에 보통 결혼을 하고 여자는 자녀를 生하기까지 本家에 在하고 신랑이 처가를 통행하는 奇習이 잇다.

리프獨立軍의 蹶起 西班牙領 마록코의 리프족이 독립의 旗를 擧하기는 距今 8년 전이엿다. 그것은 물론 세계대전 후 약소민족의 獨立熱이 극도에 달한 所以엿다. 당시 西班牙軍은 마록코 常備軍과 征討軍을 합하야 6,7만에 至하고 무기가 또한 精巧無比함으로 일거에 리프군을 박멸할 줄로 생각하얏섯스나 精悍한 리군에게 연패하야 1923년 12월에는 全軍이 해안으로 引退하얏다가 또한 리프군의 추격포위를 당하야 일시 困急의 궁지에까지 陷하얏다. 此報를 접한 佛蘭西는 소위 脣亡齒寒의 杞憂를 抱하고 西軍의 참패는 자국 영지에까지 영향이 及할 것이라 하야 직접으로 西軍을 원조하고 리프족의 배후를 扼하야 糧道를 단절하얏다.
西軍으로 인하야 해안의 교통이 두절된 리프족은 其 食糧을 대부분 비옥한 佛領 마록코에서 공급하다가 一朝 佛軍에게 단절을 당하니 아모리 勇悍無比의 리프군이라도 此에는 곤란을 感치 안이치 못하엿다. 그리하야 재작년 4월에는 對西班牙軍의 전선을 축소하고 전 병력을 국경에 집중하야 佛領 마록코 촌락의＜59＞ 약탈을 개시하얏다. 海岸戰線으로 攻入하는 11만의 西班牙軍과 남부국경으로부터 猛襲하는 15만의 佛蘭西軍의 間에 挾在하야 민족독립을 목표로 하고 血戰하는 리프족은 무기를 持한 자- 饉히 4,5만에 불과하나 전투에는 항상 리프군이 우세를 점하야 정예한 무기와 최신식 비행기 폭탄 등을 持한 兩佛 兩軍을 屢度擊破하얏다.

無悍無比한 리프族 그러면 엇지하야 리프족이 그다지 强悍하엿는가? 此에 대하야 佛蘭西의 마록코 東部司令官 뽀아슈-장군은 「叛將 압델·크림이 강한 것이 안이라 天然이 難破의 勢를 作하얏다」고 揚言하였다. 이것은 물론 장군의 구실일 것이다. 그러나 실제로 佛領과 西領의 국경은 그다지 高地는 안이나 鉅齒와 가티 險曲한 산맥이 連亙한 외에 녀름이면 焦熱한 사막 겨울이면 항시 오는 비로 인하야 全土가 泥濘의 沼池로 변함으로 輕裝한 보병의 행진은 과히 곤란치 안이하나 山砲를 曳한다던지 양식을 운반함과 가튼 것은 매우 곤란하고 加之 土地險易에 慣熟된 리프군은 산간의 좌우로 출몰하며 저격하야 糧食隊를 襲奪함으로 歐洲大戰 당시에 大名을 垂한 장군도 무기도 리프군을 격파하기 과연 不能하얏다. 其 後 상세한 戰報는 知키 難하나 今回에 압델·크림씨의 투항한 것도 전투에 패한 것이 안이라 군수품, 식량, 의약 결핍으로 인함인 듯 하다.

압델·크림씨는 엇더한 人物인가 此 外 리프족의 강한 원인은 리프군의 진영에 獨逸의 사관이 잇서서 帷幄에 叅畫함과 獨逸의 무기를 공급함과 露西亞 제3인터나쇼날의 원조와 기타 세계 중 약소민족의 후원이 多大함이라 전하나 그보다도 리프족군으로 하야금 精悍의 名을 得케 한 것은 실로 그의 수령 압델·크림씨가 잇는 까닭이엿다.

압델·크림은 애프리카 북단의 港 메리라村의 계지(재판관)의 家에서 生한 당년 45세의 快男兒엿다. 청년시대에는 西班牙에 遊學하고 귀국 후 즉시 리프족 독립운동에 참가한 혐의로 투옥되엿다가 탈옥한 이래 더욱 운동에 분주하얏다. 그의 명성이 세계적으로 놉하지기는 1921년에 西班牙의 원정대를 격파한 時로부터 始하얏다. 其後 누차 승전하야 전 민족의 信望을 得하다가 메리라戰에서 西班牙軍을 전멸한 후로＜60＞ 一躍하야 독립군의 총수령이 되엿다.
압델·크림은 결코 無學文盲의 野武士가 안이다.
獨立戰을 개시하기 2년 전까지 西班牙政府의 賓客으로 「마도릿드」에 잇서서 모든 연구를 깁히 하고 귀국 후에는 외국인을 초빙하야 리프족에게 근대식 전술을 敎授하얏다. 금번의 전쟁에 廣大한 지역에 전화선을 架設하야 군사상 敏活한 연락을 취케 한 것도 역시 그의 공이엇다. 暗夜의 明星과 가티 출현하야 「사루단」(왕)이 된 그는 對佛西戰鬪에 盡瘁한 餘暇에는 내정개혁을 단행하야 리프족의 族長制度, 酋長制度인 사회제도를 폐지하고 전 민족으로 군대를 조직하며 노예의 해방, 煙草의 금지를 단행하얏다.
그의 弟 「마멧도」도 역시 西班牙 유학생으로 독립군의 領袖가 되얏다. 精悍한 점은 그의 형보다 勝한 바가 多하야 「白馬의 騎士」라는 칭호를 得하얏다. 이제 압델, 크림은 佛軍의 포로가 되얏다. 그의 理想하는 리프족 共和國 建設의 雄鬪도 중도에 저지되얏다. 그러나 압델씨의 熱血은 리프족의 두뇌 속에 영원히 흘너서 그들의 갈망하는 大志를 不遠한 장래에 관철할 것이다. 鳴呼 人道 正義의 투사인 압델씨의 前途! 과연 如何

世界人類에 訴願하는 그의 글월 그는 금년 1월 27일에 자기민족의 痛憤한 寃情을 세계에 訴하는 글발을 각 국의 신문에 發布하얏다. 그 글의 내용은 대략 坐와 갓다.
우리 리프족은 본국의 진실한 소식을 모든 선진국의 신문에 의뢰하야 전 세계적으로 우리의 진상을 알게 하고자 한다. 目下 人道의 적이 되고 평화를 仇讎視하야 窮兵瀆武하는 자들은(指 佛國) 외국에 향하야 근거가 無한 僞言을 유포하야 만천하 인심을 유혹케 함으로 이에 간단히 우리의 주장을 선포하노니 모든 진리를 사랑하는 동무는 들어주기를 바란다.
우리의 회복코자 하는 책임은 바로 평화의 길로 나아가서 그 꾀하는 바가 어느 것이 정의를 주장치 안이함이 업스며 평화를 엇고저 안이하는 것이 업스되 저의 敵人들은 정치의 작용으로 허위의 보고를 만히 做出한다. 그러나 우리들에게는 小毫도 障害됨이 업다. 우리가 우리의 상실한 권리를 찻기 위하야 전쟁을 개시할 때부터 旣히 그와 가튼 誣惑의 선전을 하여 왓섯다. 우리는 누차 佛西 양국의 장관과 평화의 說法을 하얏스나 彼等은 오만한 태도로 우리를 대하야 眞意와 항상 배치되엿섯고 약소**이엿든 우리가 능히 宣戰을 못하리라고 思하엿든 彼等을 우리의 銃釰을 見하고 야만적 잔인한 행동으로＜61＞ 우리를 대항하다가 及其 終局에 우리가 彼等에 향하야 상당히 차질 권리를 공평하게 처단하자고 재차 요구한즉 彼等은 更히 文弱이라고 우리를 조소함으로 우리는 幾分間 猶豫未決하다가 최후에 「칼은 글자보다 더욱히 진실하다」는 「아리마아」의 古語로써 서로 自强自勉하게 되엿다.

우리는 진정한 의지와 양심상 감각 이외에는 敵人과 서신 한 장도 하지 안이하고 말 한 마듸도 안이하얏다.
우리는 정략도 음모도 譎計도 다 모른다. 그러나 모든 정략, 음모, 譎計의 주인공은 우리의 敵人들 뿐이다. 그럼으로 나는 우리 민족을 대표하야 세계 만방에 訴하노니 우리는 곳 우리의 응당 가저야 할 권리를 찻는 이외에는 다른 요구가 업고 직책상에 행하여야 할 방어 이외에는 다른 防衛는 하지 안는다. 우리의 일절 행동은 그 유일한 宗旨가 평화에 잇슬 뿐이다. 그럼으로 우리가 요구하는 것을 敵이 드러준다 하면 그 뒤로는 맛당이 서로 화해할 것이다. 이 요구는 우리 민족이 특성과 능력이 잇슴으로 다른 나라와 가티 독립국가가 될만한 자격이 잇는 까닭이다. 이 자유와 이 권리의 요구가 듯게 된 뒤에는 우리는 우리 나라의 문호를 개방하야 現今 세계 萬國의 何國民을 물론하고 자유입국을 환대하고 잇슬 터이니 正義를 사랑하고 人道를 애호하는 천하동포는 이에서 우리를 원조하야 주기를 바란다.
또 敵國人들은 露獨 양국이 우리를 원조하고 우리와 연락이 잇다고 流言을 하나 그것은 원래 근거가 업는 誣言이오 또 彼等이 不義의 宣傳으로 약소국의 권리를 보호하는 자를 翻弄코자 하는 악랄한 수단에 불과한 것이다. 그러나 敵國이 我國의 일부분을 차지하고 且 將來에 다른 부분을 차지할지라도 우리는 결코 此로써 낙심치 안코 더욱 굿센 결심으로써 우리의 최후 주장을 고집하고 나아갈 것이다.

우리는 과거의 血戰苦鬪로 인하야 其間 소득이 만핫섯고 그와 반대로 敵國은 所失이 만흔 것이 사실이다. 이것이 족히 우리의 마음을 동요치 안케 한 것이니 이에 우리는 喜悅함을 自勝치 못한다. 우리는 오즉 인내심으로 나아갈 뿐이니 위대한 진리는 모든 오류를 파멸하는 시기가 1일이라도 조속이 도라오기를 기대한다. 人道正義를 목표로 하고 나가는 천하 신문이여! 우리의 이 뜻을 廣布하야 천하 公眼에 보히여 뜻잇는 이로 하야금 눈물겨운 동정이 잇게 하여 주기를 바란다. ＜62＞
＜52-62＞