잡지명	개벽 제72호
발행일	1926년 08월 01일
기사제목	復興會 (Revival Meeting)
필자	李箕永
기사형태	소설 (Fiction)

復興會
						李箕永
1
The holy Sabbath (安息日) arrived.
As the morning bell rang, clang! clang!, men and women believers, tucking Bibles (聖經) and hymnbooks under their arms, began to gather inside the church. They were the holy people of the heavenly kingdom, specially called by God from this world overflowing with sin. They came today, on the Lord's Day, to offer living sacrifices in this holy temple (聖殿) to give thanks for the abundant grace of God they had received during the week.
However, just as there are always exceptions (例外) in any place deemed sacred (神聖) in this world, there were believers lacking faith in this church as well. Perhaps tempted by some devil, they too committed the great sin today of violating one of the Ten Commandments by breaking the Sabbath (主日).
How sorrowful the pastor must have been at this time! He silently offered prayers for them, asking that their faith, like reeds swayed by the wind, might quickly become firm as rock. — But the reason they often didn't come to church was this: — they disliked hearing the pastor's preaching voice, which sounded like rinsing rice water; they disliked kneeling on the wooden floor; and they disliked the look in the preacher's eyes—these were people like Sundeŏk's family, Makdong's mother, and a young man named Ch'unsik.
The preacher was famous, nicknamed the 'Bow-down Preacher', because it was his habit to invariably start prayers with the word <25> "Bow down!" It's said that once when a certain lady came to see the church for the first time, he said this, and the lady trembled violently. — Was he going to pull down her pants and spank her bottom! Why bow down?—
But on this Sunday, coincidentally, everyone except Sundeŏk's family, who disliked bowing down, was present, creating a turnout (盛況) not seen recently. Thus, the pastor's mouth stretched into a wide grin. After the usual Bible study, the sacred service began with a prayer by the Bow-down Preacher. The female teacher played the harmonium, and the pastor's eldest daughter, Hyesuk (惠淑)—dressed up as if appearing before a boy she fancied—came out and sang a solo. — Glancing sideways at Mr. Pak again and again... After Mr. Pak read the scripture, Pastor Kim, dressed in a frock coat, stepped forward onto the pulpit with a solemn demeanor and began his sermon (說敎). —
This Pastor Kim, clad in his dignified attire, was a spiritual pastor who had believed for over thirty years. Tall like a Westerner, with a large nose, and a praying voice that twisted and turned like a screw—smooth-looking on the outside, appearing respectable, indeed like a scholar pastor (학구라이 목사).
Although a rather unfavorable rumor had surfaced about him in his middle years due to some incident (事件), causing his position to slightly decline, that was only a brief temptation by the devil... Now, he had completely repented (悔改), and even when standing on the pulpit, he looked straight ahead with composure, solemnly acting as God's spokesperson (代言). Occasionally... usually when many young women were present, he would glance sideways at the women's section, but he claimed it was his eyes doing it, not his heart's intention. — So, whenever that happened, he reflected (反省) thus: — Everyone has sin. Is there truly anyone in this world without even a speck of sin? It is because of sin that we believe in Jesus, and through the merit (功勞) of Jesus atoning (代贖) for our sins, we obtain salvation. Therefore, a physician is useless to the healthy. Also, it is because we sin that we repent. <26> If we did not sin, would there be anything to repent for? Sin is committed by falling into the devil's temptation, so if we repent in Jesus' name, the Holy Spirit (聖神) forgives it. Thus, sin and repent, repent and sin again...
However, for today's service, he had chosen a particular topic. — Having recently heard talk in newspapers and magazines—or that young people were increasingly leaning that way—about some 'ism', a question arose in his mind. At that time, extrapolating from this doubt arising within himself, he not only absolutely denied the commonly held notion that the minds (頭腦) of the elderly (老人) are stubborn but also thought his own mind was very sharp (明晳). —
— It was the thought: truly, among people who are all the same, how is it that some become rich and live well, while others become poor and live poorly? — So, he spent a long time and energy (精力) thinking about and researching this problem. Finally, slapping his knee, he had an insight, and he intended to speak specifically about what he grasped then in today's sermon. Of course, while researching this important issue, he prayed more diligently than usual, putting in all his effort to receive the inspiration (感化) of the Holy Spirit. Thus, that he could so easily grasp and understand it was indeed the work of the Holy Spirit (聖神), the power of God, and he offered thankful prayers again. —
"—Everyone!" the pastor called out in a solemn voice. —
"Do you know why, among us humans, all children of the same God, the disparity between rich (貧) and poor (富) arises in this world? Until now, we have lived without giving it much thought, but if we think about it carefully again, we realize this is a very strange thing. Think about it. Isn't that so?" —
And he gave a slight smile. Like someone smiling with self-satisfied pride (自矜) after making some rare (珍奇) discovery (發見) unknown to the audience (聽衆)...
"— So I thought about what the reason could be." <27>
The pastor emphasized this point.
"Ah — Today it doesn't seem like the usual watery stuff!" Makdong's mother was inwardly surprised and pricked up her ears. Ch'unsik kept glaring at the preacher's eyes as if annoyed, like a cat eyeing a dog. —
"As you all know, don't we raise chickens at our house? It's the duty (敎弟) of the church helper to feed them every morning, and the helper truly takes care to distribute the chicken feed evenly."
The pastor gestured, mimicking the act of scattering feed.
"— But while the other chickens all rush frantically to peck at the feed, ah! one hen, for some reason, twists its head aside, keeps its eyes shut tight, dripping yellow liquid from its beak, drop! drop!, acting as if it's falling asleep. But then, if it hears the sound of feed falling right in front of its beak, it snaps its eyes open, pecks up just that one grain, and then goes back to how it was before. Isn't that right? At that time, the helper thought, 'Why is that chicken acting like that?' and found it very strange, then suddenly had a moment of great realization (黃然大覺)!"
At this point, the pastor suddenly clapped his hands together with a loud smack! The sound startled the entire congregation...
"Indeed, it is so. Just as feed is given to those chickens, God has abundantly prepared all things in creation and provided for us humans to eat, use, and have plenty left over, wanting us all to live well without partiality. But, just like the hen in the analogy I just mentioned, those who work diligently become well-off, and those who are lazy become poor beggars unable to make a living. Isn't that so? Look! Out there—in the fields, isn't there fertile land yielding thirtyfold, even seventyfold harvests of grains? Aren't the seas teeming with countless fish, and aren't treasures of gold, silver, copper, and iron stored within this earth, providing abundant resources for our daily use (日用) with plenty to spare? Then why? Why are people poor? Having the same eyes, ears, mouth, and nose as others, why can't they live like others? Whose fault is poverty? Oh, indeed! There are many poor people in this world. But it's nothing to blame others for; it's all the sin of laziness! The sin of laziness like that hen I mentioned earlier. —" <28>
And he pounded the table with his fist, shouting at the top of his lungs that poverty was the sin of laziness, loud enough to shake the church. At this, Makdong's mother suddenly became furious, her face flushing and paling!
"So! If you're just diligent, you'll live well? What about when there's no work to be diligent at? That chicken must have been sick! What an idiot... And that's supposed to be a pastor? God must have terrible luck! Ah! He's dishing out watery stuff again! Dishing out watery stuff!"
Muttering this under her breath, her nostrils flaring, she stormed out before the service was even over. However, the pastor, thinking everyone had listened to his sermon today with admiration (感心), felt quite satisfied (滿足) but was suddenly dismayed by this turn of events. He glared daggers at Makdong's mother's retreating back as she slammed the door shut, then cried out once more, "Oh! God the Father!" just as an old Buddhist master might invoke the name of Amitabha Buddha. —

2
For some reason, it seems that Jesus' love is mostly received by women. This thought arises from observing that in any church, there are more female believers (信者) than male, or seeing that schools affiliated with churches are usually girls' schools.
This is something they themselves—those who know the Old and New Testaments as food for the soul—would know better, but isn't it said that woman was made by taking a rib from the man's left side, and because she resembled a person, woman (女子) is also called 'like a person' (如人)? And wasn't it also a woman named Eve who committed the sin of eating the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil (善惡果) in the Garden of Eden? Thus, it's as if women aren't considered people at all, and they must absolutely obey (服從) men's words as if they were God's commands—it is truly strange that women flock more to the Christian church, which so thoroughly insults women's dignity (人格). Perhaps this strange phenomenon is where the miracle of Jesus lies. Therefore, the birth of God's only begotten son from the body of Mary, a virgin <29> who wasn't even married, should be seen as a great miracle. And the fact that women who believe in Jesus strive even harder, paradoxically advocating for gender equality, should also be seen as a miracle, not merely as a contradiction (矛盾) like a temperance campaign team (禁酒宣傳隊) loading a car full of anti-drinking flyers, distributing them all day long, and then, as evening falls, saying,
"Hey, I'm feeling peckish, let's have a drink!"
and heading into a bar.
Anyway, this church also had more female believers, and the affiliated school was indeed a girls' school. And mentioning that the teacher (敎師) at this girls' school was the aforementioned Mr. Pak is enough.
Whether this too is some kind of miracle is unknown, but when it comes to Mr. Pak, all believers, male and female, seem extremely fond of him. Among them, the young women—or rather, the pastor's wife and his eldest daughter (from his previous marriage)—liking him the most is also strange. Perhaps this strangeness lies in the miracle of Mr. Pak being a handsome man.
The pastor was nearing 50, but his wife was only in her early thirties this year and looked much younger than her age, seemingly still possessing the unextinguished flame of youth. As soon as she married Pastor Kim as his second wife, she became pregnant right away. People whispered that the child was conceived on the first night. Her first child was the elder daughter, Hyeŭn, and fortunately, last year's first son, Rodŭgi, was born. This son was a gift (禮物) the pastor cherished dearly, a primary reason for his gratitude (感謝) to God. This morning, when only the Hyesuk siblings were present—Hyesuk was quite upset after arguing with her stepmother—Hyesuk pointed at Rodŭgi sleeping soundly in the warmest part of the room and asked Hyeŭn,
"Do you know who that kid resembles?"
Hyeŭn, taken aback by the unexpected question, looked intently at the sleeping child with a very serious expression, as if genuinely wondering who he resembled, then asked,
"Well, who does he resemble? Does he resemble Father?" <30>
She turned back to Hyesuk and asked.
"Doesn't he resemble Mr. Pak! Where does Father have a nose like that?"
"Why do you say he resembles Mr. Pak?"
"How should I know! Ask Mother later!"
Hyesuk pouted and replied in a sulky voice, then abruptly turned and went outside. Just then, her mother returned, and Hyeŭn ran out after her, shouting her mother's name, saying: —
"Mother! Mother! Why does Rodŭgi's nose resemble Mr. Pak's nose?"
"What? Who... Who said that?" —
"Big sister..."
Unexpectedly, her mother's mouth dropped open, and she stared frighteningly, causing Hyeŭn's whining to abruptly stop, her words trailing off thinly.
"So what! What's wrong with resembling the teacher?"
After a moment, the mother finally regained her usual expression and spoke in a gentle tone. Hyeŭn felt relieved. Then the mother urged her daughters, saying time was late, let's hurry to the service, and took them to the church. Hyesuk was sixteen this year.

3
After the service ended that day—though the pastor's wife wanted to postpone it, the pastor insisted strongly—a few church officers gathered at the house. It was something they did occasionally, hosting these members to treat them. Today's gathering was also of this sort, essentially a luncheon (午餐會) similar to a fellowship meeting (懇親會). <31>
So, the preacher, the preacher's wife, assistants, section leaders (속장), managers (유사), and even the male and female teachers from the girls' school who had received invitations gathered sequentially at the pastor's house. The only one with a traditional topknot—why only he was invited is unknown—was Makdong's mother. Now, everyone invited had arrived and was seated, except for Mr. Pak. So, just as they were wondering,
"What's happened to Mr. Pak?"
"Well, why hasn't Mr. Pak come!"
muttering amongst themselves, Mr. Pak suddenly entered. At this, everyone simultaneously exclaimed,
"Ah! Mr. Pak!"
in pleased voices. Mr. Pak came in, smiling broadly, and first picked up Rodŭgi, praising the pastor for having such a fine son using various beautiful nouns. (He happened to take a seat next to where Hyesuk and her sister were sitting). Everyone else followed Mr. Pak's lead, adding their own words of praise. The pastor's mouth stretched into a wide grin.
Meanwhile, Hyeŭn looked like she wanted to say something, but across from her, her mother's fearsome eyes glared like a snake eyeing a frog. Hyesuk pretended not to notice, smiling faintly while playing with the baby.
"Ah—na! Ah—na! Our baby Rodŭgi"...
Suddenly, the mother called loudly for the housekeeper and urged her to bring the table quickly. Then she herself stood up abruptly.
"Hyesuk! Hyeŭn!"
She called her daughters out. Hyesuk scratched her head with one hand and lazily got up. Hyeŭn stood up, glancing back and forth between her mother and Hyesuk—Indeed, shortly after, the dining table was brought in.—
The food was something resembling Western cuisine, with items that would have gone well as side dishes for drinks. Thinking this, the preacher inwardly wished for a drink. <32>
In the gathering, there were three or four women and about the same number of men. Laughter escaped from everyone's lips, and their voices were unusually affectionate.— Even the voice of the preacher, known for being somber and blunt, flowed out softly, like ripples sparkling in the sunlight.
As the pastor led prayer in his solemn voice, the hearts of those bowing with heads facing each other, or the chests of those sitting up looking at each other while singing hymns in chorus, indeed held some... something truly contrary to the reverence, solemnity, and dignity—something seemed to flicker back and forth between them. Perhaps this is what is called the love of Jesus.—
After being busy eating for a while, their mouths became busy trading words again.
"Pastor! How about holding a revival meeting?"
The first person to bring this up was the plump section leader's wife.
"Yes, let's have a revival meeting!"
"It's really been a long time since we had a revival meeting..."
As suggestions arose from here and there,
"If everyone desires it, we can certainly hold one soon!"
the pastor replied with a gentle smile.
"It's really been several years since I attended a revival meeting!"
The Bow-down Preacher, rolling his pale eyes, also chimed in.
"Indeed, I've only been sinning and haven't confessed—let's have one soon! So I can confess my sins!"
This was the remark of Elisabeth, known for her kindness.
"Is confessing sins what happens at a revival meeting?"
Mr. Pak, who had been sitting silently with just a gentle smile until now, finally asked this. <33>
"That's right. If sins aren't confessed, what's the point of having a revival meeting!"
This was the pastor's firm reply.
"But how can one confess their sins in front of everyone?"
"That's why it's not something the human heart can do. The Holy Spirit must descend upon the revival meeting and make everyone's heart burn with holy fire (聖火)."
"Absolutely. One must receive the inspiration (感化) of the Holy Spirit (聖神); can it be done by human strength?"
"Then let's start soon. I've never attended a revival meeting before."
To this remark by Mr. Pak,
"What? You've never attended a revival meeting before?"
the section leader's wife looked at Mr. Pak with contemptuous eyes and laughed.—
"Faith grows well only after attending a revival meeting. Pastor! Then let's invite Pastor Thomas!"
the preacher's wife urged, glancing at the pastor.
"Ah! Pastor Thomas! Truly spiritual. Yes, if you all desire it so, that is something to be thankful to God for. I will inquire with the District Superintendent (監理司) as early as tomorrow!"
The pastor, thus enthused, agreed. So, by the time they parted, it seemed the decision to hold a revival meeting was passed by unanimous consent (可謂 萬場一致 可決), and they knelt once more, offering earnest prayers—asking that the planned event proceed well, that the revival meeting be successful, that everything be done solely according to God's will and certainly not according to human will, praying fervently, fervently in Jesus' name.
Thus, stirred by a certain curiosity they hadn't felt before, they all urged the pastor to hold it as soon as possible.—
After the pastor also left with them, saying he was going to visit someone, only the pastor's wife and Hyesuk remained in the room. The house, which had been bustling <34> like after a shaman ritual, suddenly became quiet. But Hyeŭn, who had slipped out unnoticed sometime earlier, came bounding back in from outside, panting breathlessly.
"Sister! Why does—uh—Sunhaeng resemble Father? And also?..."
Immediately after, Hyesuk said,
"So what's wrong with resembling the teacher?" —
"Why is Father a teacher? He's a pastor!"
"A pastor teaches the Bible too, so he's the same as a teacher!"
"Oh—right! That makes sense!"
Hyeŭn's doubts seemed finally resolved; her large, chest-level eyes blinked, blink! blink!, and she tilted her head once.
Meanwhile, the mother, leaning against the warmest part of the floor nursing Rodŭgi, seemed to have fallen asleep at some point; the sound of her snoring echoed off the ceiling, drrrreung! drrrreung!

4
Yangsŏp, serving as bell-ringer (鍾手) 겸 attendant 겸 janitor, was currently busy giving the inside of the church a thorough cleaning. He had already spent three days sweeping the inside and outside of the church, even mopping the wooden floors, and was now wiping the glass windows. Mr. Pak, having finished his school hours, stood idly beside him, watching him work as if supervising something. With church officials bustling inside and out preparing for the revival meeting starting tomorrow night, he too was caught up in the mood (氣分) and didn't feel like sitting cooped up in his room.
"Have you experienced a revival meeting before?"
"Of course! The year before you came, Mr. Pak, they held one at the church across the stream!"
Yangsŏp replied to Mr. Pak's question while standing on the window frame wiping the glass. <35>
"So, did everyone confess their sins?"
"Sins?"
Yangsŏp was startled.
"Yes! Sins. They say everyone confesses their own sins at revival meetings!"
"Who says that? That they confess sins!"
Yangsŏp chuckled again.
"Everyone says so! The pastor, the preacher—"
"They might confess sins that are okay to confess. Since we're talking about it, I used to think so too. — When they said confess sins, I thought they really confessed sins — the pastor too, the preacher too..."
"What? So it's a lie? You mentioned the pastor and the preacher too? —"
"If you call it a lie, it's a lie; if you call it the truth, it's the truth!"
"What? What kind of talk is that?"
"Why? Because they pretend to confess and pretend to repent. But those who know the inside story—"
"Those who know the inside story, what about them? So the pastor and the preacher also have unconfessed sins! Huh?"
Mr. Pak took a step closer.
"Who would know that?..."
Yangsŏp looked meaningfully at Mr. Pak, smiling faintly.
"Well, that may be, but I asked because it would be good if I knew!"
"What good would it do? If knowing such hidden sins does good... doesn't Mr. Pak have them too!"
As Yangsŏp finished speaking, his face flushed red, and he grinned.
"What! Me too?" <36>
Mr. Pak pretended to shout in surprise.
"Of course! Why try to hide it? I already know everything. Ha! Ha! Ha... I've been around the church for almost 10 years myself. Why don't you try confessing once like that person back then, Mr. Pak!"
Then Yangsŏp burst out laughing.
"That... who was that person? Huh!"
Mr. Pak's face also turned red. —
"Haven't you heard that story yet, Teacher? The only person who truly confessed back then was her. But instead, people criticize her. It was indeed laughable and awkward, enough to make the listeners' faces flush." —
"What was said! Then?"
"It was so funny back then, I just ran out the door. Even now, that person—getting up shakily, standing there wringing her trembling hands, in a foolish voice... Ah! Hahaha! Listen, Mr. Pak—She said, 'That one time, with my husband's sixth cousin's elder brother-in-law... out there—in the bean field furrow... He kept insisting we go there!... That's the only sin I have—' then plop! she sat down and cried 'Eoi! Eoi!' Ah! Ha! Ha!"
Before Yangsŏp could even finish his sentence, he burst into laughter again, and laughter erupted from Mr. Pak's mouth too.
"Alright, I'll confess too, so you listen to what I say— Then I'll make them all confess their sins."
"How will you make them confess?"
"Don't worry about that. If you just tell me everyone's sins, I have a way to do it!"
"Are you trying to make people unable to stay in the church again!" <37>
Yangsŏp laughed nervously, saying, "Singgle! Singgle!"
"No! Is that even likely? I'll absolutely keep it secret."
"Then you mustn't tell anyone!"
"Of course! Is that all?"
Mr. Pak spoke reassuringly, making a promise.
"Then come to the pine grove on the back hill later this evening!"
"Alright, it's a promise then! Huh!"
"Yes! Would I lie to you, Teacher?"
Indeed, that evening, Yangsŏp met Mr. Pak at the agreed place as promised. They talked secretively for a long time.

5
The next night, the long-awaited revival meeting began. The renowned spiritual leader, Pastor Thomas, was invited, along with other pastors from nearby areas.
The revival meeting drew large crowds (盛況) every night. News of the revival spread, attracting many newcomers, young and old, male and female, who came out of curiosity. The believers, all wearing tense expressions, sang hymns with enthusiasm and prayed energetically. Daily dawn prayers were held, and some even spent the night praying in the church.
Pastor Thomas preached with increasing fervor as the days passed, piercing the listeners' hearts as if with a sharp object. Thus, everyone began to anticipate (豫感) that the Holy Spirit might indeed descend abundantly during this revival, and consequently, they prayed even more earnestly. Accordingly, the pastor urged the believers even more strongly—whether the Holy Spirit's inspiration occurred in this revival or not, whether our church would be reborn or not, depended solely on your prayers. <38>
Thus, the revival meeting approached its final night, nearly two weeks having passed. During this time, although many believers had confessed various sins, those known for their strong faith in Jesus, the so-called ones with a divine calling (天職), had not yet confessed. Whether they truly had no sins to confess was unknown, but pastors and preachers, while praying frequently about their many sins and asking for repentance, never specified what those sins were.
Mr. Pak, of course, attended the revival every night. He seemed to be growing warmer in faith, beginning to pray with unprecedented fervor in his voice. The pastor was immensely pleased, thinking that perhaps Mr. Pak, more than anyone, was being reborn. This thought alone brought him considerable joy. Until recently, Mr. Pak had tried his best to skip services, made excuses when asked to pray, saying he couldn't, and once, when everyone was kneeling in prayer, he was caught wide-eyed, playing peek-a-boo with Hyesuk... To think that such a Mr. Pak might be undergoing rebirth filled him with unavoidable joy. Other church members also praised Mr. Pak, saying he was receiving the Holy Spirit this time.
On this final night, Pastor Thomas exerted all his energy, preaching powerfully. The topic for the night's sermon was "Confess Your Sins and Repent!" He used various examples (實例) to elaborate with great eloquence (長廣舌), explaining that failing to confess sins would lead to eternal damnation, while repenting and confessing would bring eternal salvation.—
After the sermon ended, the collection (收錢) was taken as usual, and the believers knelt again, each offering individual prayers aloud. Thin voices gradually grew thicker, trembling voices turned into weeping, and eventually, some pounded their chests, some writhed, some women stretched out their legs and wailed out narratives, and some men bellowed like oxen, 'Teong! Eong!', turning the church into chaos. The sanctuary, hitherto sacred, suddenly seemed like a den of demons boiling over, a pit of devils.
"Oh... God the Father! Please just forgive this woman's countless sins, pouring out like beans from a water-soaked gourd..." <39>
"Oh... Lord! May the Holy Spirit descend upon this place and burn away all my sins!"
"Oh... Lord! Please quickly take me, who is alone after my husband died, to heaven..."
"Most high and supreme, omniscient and omnipotent, omnipresent, knowing everything down to our bones! flesh! and hair tips!, Ek-kwe!... And ruler of all creation, God the Father! Thank you, thank you!..."
"Holy, holy God! My husband is caught in the snare of that concubine-devil, a white-haired old man still floundering. Please, by God's power, pull his wrist and help him escape that pit...!"
In the midst of this, Mr. Pak suddenly jumped up. Spreading his arms wide, he danced joyfully, his smiling mouth opening wide like a catfish's, and sang a hymn at the top of his lungs, loud enough to shake the church! Everyone was startled and stared at him. But he, even more energized, leaped and skipped through the kneeling crowd, whirling around, then climbed onto the pulpit and continued for a while longer. Finally, he began to pray in a solemn and fervent voice. The pastors, assuming he had received the Holy Spirit, yielded their places and came down to sit below the pulpit.
"Oh— God! Thank you. I thank you, thank you for hearing my prayer at this time and for the special working of the Holy Spirit. May the Holy Spirit descend equally upon the multitude kneeling here now, make them confess all their sins, and grant them clean repentance..."
At this resonant prayer, the crowd dared not lift their heads, all quietly murmuring "A-men". Hyesuk, too, kept her head bowed, wondering,
"Is he really acting like that because he received the Holy Spirit?..." yet feeling her heart flutter inexplicably.
"— God has sent the Holy Spirit to this place. The Holy Spirit has now descended upon my head in the form of a dove!... He is waiting for you to repent! Now! Confess quickly! Quickly! Confess your sins! Confess your si—i—ins— Oh— Lord! Please wait just a little longer for them! Oh! Lord! Do you truly have no sin? <40> No sin to confess? Oh..."
He stamped the floor,쾅! 쾅!, shouting like thunder, his mouth twitching fiercely, his eyes bulging like dragonfly eyes. The audience's hearts jumped, umjjil! umjjil! Finally, he began calling out names one by one, "So-and-so! So-and-so!" The hearts of the congregation trembled violently.
"Elisabeth! Do you truly have no sin? No sin to confess? —"
"Ah! God the Father— please just forgive me! A foolish human, I fell into the devil's temptation... I was just wrong."
As her name was called, she walked towards the front of the pulpit as if dragged by the scruff of her neck, speaking thus.
"Kim Sinho— you, posing as a preacher, secretly go around drinking!... Huh! Aren't you afraid of God?"
The Bow-down Preacher also shot up, standing with clasped hands.
"Ah! Lord! Please forgive me! Indeed, tempted by the devil, I drank alcohol!... And..." Then suddenly, he struck his chest once with his fist, 쾅!, collapsed onto the spot, and let out a guttural sob. "Oh! Lord! Oh! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah! Ah!"
Following this, people started stirring uneasily from all sides, umjjul! umjjul!, the atmosphere in the hall growing tenser by the moment (刻刻). Everyone seemed hesitant, wondering whether to stand up or not. Finally, people began to rise sporadically, "Bulgun! Bulgun".
"I, tempted by the devil... committed the sin of jealousy (猜忌)! An old woman committed the sin of envy!"
The section leader's wife stood up, her bulging stomach protruding, trembling uncontrollably.
"I, tempted by the devil, committed the sin of theft!..."
"I too, tempted by the devil, that!... "
As Suni's mother stood up first, Ch'unhak's wife, who had been hesitating for a while, quickly followed suit, standing close behind her and speaking thus. <41>
"Oh— What sin of theft?"
Mr. Pak began the interrogation in a newly solemn voice.
"That time I went across the village to do personal evangelism, I took three yards of cotton cloth (짓당목) hanging on a line... The devil tempted me then... Hee! Hee! Hee—"
As Suni's mother spoke,
"I also committed such a sin like that... The devil tempted me then! Hee! Hee! Hee—"
This time, Ch'unhak's wife quickly sat down first, collapsing prostrate and weeping. Suni's mother writhed as she cried.
"I, tempted by the devil, committed the sin of adultery (간음죄)... "
The preacher's wife shakily stood up, her voice trembling, barely managing to utter these words.
"Oh! With whom?"
As if compelled by something behind her, unable to speak yet forced to, she stammered,
"Pa-! Pa-! Pa-..."
making a sound dragging up from her throat. The Bow-down Preacher, who had been weeping loudly, 'Eong! Eong!', stared blankly at his wife.
"I also committed the sin of adultery..."
This time, the pastor's wife stood up.
"Oh! With whom?"
Mr. Pak asked in an even more solemn tone (口調).
"Tha—! Tha-! Tha-! Tha-!..."
She glanced at Mr. Pak, repeating only this sound, then
suddenly collapsed with a thud, bursting into tears. <42>
Right after,
"I also committed a sin similar to that!"
shouted Hyesuk fiercely in a high-pitched voice, jumping up abruptly, her face bright red.
"Oh— How was the sin similar?"
"Me too, Tha-! Tha-! Tha-! Tha-! Tha-! Ki...Ki...ss..."
Unable to get the words out, Hyesuk stared directly at Mr. Pak, repeating only this sound. At that moment, Yangsŏp kicked the door open and ran out, making a dying sound, whether crying or something else. Meanwhile, Pastor Kim remained kneeling, deeply bowed, repeating incessantly, without other words,
"Oh— Lord! Please forgive me! Please forgive me."
Beads of sweat formed, "songgol! songgol!", on his balding head, front and back.
Finally, Pastor Thomas stood up. He stood with a dignified posture, hands clasped, and said in a choked voice,
"I too have committed sin. It is a regrettable matter! It is no other sin! It is that I skimmed little by little from the salary (月給) for ministers (敎役者) sent from America (美國)! Ha! That is regrettable. But from now on, I swear before God and resolve never to commit such a sin again!"
He then clenched his fist, shaking his arm as if showing his resolve, and quietly returned to his seat. His sunken, pale blue eyes glistened, 'pŏntchŏk! pŏntchŏk!', wet with tears. At this, from the mouths of the crowd, a unified
"Amen!"
resounded. The church hall echoed loudly. —

6
Mr. Pak ordered the congregation to resume individual prayers aloud. So they all knelt again, praying even more fervently than before. Thus the revival meeting became spiritually charged, and as the night deepened, the sounds of weeping and confession of sins <43> grew louder. However, Mr. Pak seemed to have vanished (*) sometime during this; when they finished praying and stood up, he was nowhere to be found. The congregation stared wide-eyed.
Pastor Kim, eyes wide with shock, rushed up to the pulpit. Pastor Thomas followed him up. Others also crowded around—
But there was no trace of Mr. Pak. Instead, on the table lay an unfamiliar piece of paper. Pastor Kim picked it up and unfolded it.
"Hey, you crazy useless kids (미친 실업애아들놈들아)! With the money you diligently offered to God as travel funds, I am leaving well. Truly, truly, I say to you, farewell! A-men! —Mr. Pak— "
Pastor Kim suddenly cried out,
"Uh!"
and dropped the paper listlessly to the floor. Pastor Thomas then picked it up.
"He—ey— cra-zy use-less ki— crazy useless kids! Crazy useless kids! What does this mean?"
Pastor Thomas puzzled over this for a moment, then looked at Pastor Kim and asked. But Pastor Kim gave no answer, just stood with his mouth agape. So he started reading it again.
"Hey you crazy useless bastard kids!... You guys... with the money... using it as travel funds, I am leaving well... Truly, truly I say... Ah! Men —Mr. Pak!"
Having finished reading, Pastor Thomas exclaimed,
"Ah! Ha—"
He grasped his head with both hands and spun around once, 'pping! pping!'
Realizing they had been duped by Mr. Pak, they stared at each other's faces, frozen in place for a while, like Lot's wife turning into a pillar of salt upon looking back.
At that moment— from the pine grove on the back hill, the hooting sound of an owl (부흥이), "Puhŭng! Puhŭng!", could be heard. <44>

**Summary**

This 1926 short story by Yi Kiyŏng satirizes a Korean Protestant church community preparing for and holding a revival meeting (Puhŭnghoe). It highlights the perceived hypocrisy among the clergy and congregation, including the pastor, his family, church officials, and a charismatic teacher, Mr. Pak. Initial descriptions focus on superficial piety contrasted with hidden flaws and desires. The climax occurs during the revival's final night when Mr. Pak, seemingly filled with the Holy Spirit, induces dramatic, often embarrassing, public confessions of sins (adultery, theft, jealousy, skimming church funds) from key members, including himself facilitating confessions about affairs potentially involving him. The story ends cynically as Mr. Pak disappears, leaving a note mocking the congregation as "crazy useless kids" and revealing he used their collection money to leave, while the sound of an owl (puchŏngi, whose call sounds like 'puhŭng') echoes ironically.

From a historical perspective, the story offers a critical lens on the social dynamics and perceived moral failings within the growing Protestant Christian movement in colonial Korea. It reflects contemporary debates or skepticism about religious institutions, touching upon issues like hypocrisy, the influence of charismatic figures, gender dynamics within the church (especially concerning the pastor's wife and daughter's interactions with Mr. Pak), and the tension between proclaimed faith and actual behavior. The specific sins confessed, including the pastor skimming funds sent from America, add layers of social commentary relevant to the period. Historians might find the story valuable for its portrayal of religious life, social critique, and the exploration of doubt and cynicism in a colonial context.

**Named Entities**

李箕永	이기영	Yi Kiyŏng
惠淑	혜숙	Hyesuk
박선생	박선생	Pak Sŏnsaeng
김목사	김목사	Kim Moksa
헤은	혜은	Hyeŭn
로득이	로득이	Rodŭgi
엘니사베쓰	엘리사베스	Elisabeth
김신호	김신호	Kim Sinho
도마쓰 목사	토마스 목사	Tomasŭ Moksa (Pastor Thomas)
美國	미국	Miguk (America)
양섭	양섭	Yangsŏp
춘식	춘식	Ch'unsik
순덕	순덕	Sundŏk
막동이 어머니	막동이 어머니	Makdong's mother
순이 어머니	순이 어머니	Suni's mother
춘학이 처	춘학이 처	Ch'unhak's wife

**Glossary**

안식일(安息日)	안식일	Sabbath Day
례배당	예배당	Church building (older spelling '례')
성경(聖經)	성경	Bible
한우님	하느님	God (older term/spelling, now usually 하나님 'Hananim')
미듬	믿음	Faith, belief (older spelling)
긔도	기도	Prayer (older spelling)
업드려	엎드려	Bow down, prostrate oneself (imperative form)
목사	목사	Pastor, minister
전도사	전도사	Preacher, evangelist (often an assistant or lower-rank clergy)
혜숙(惠淑)	혜숙	Hyesuk (female given name)
설교(說敎)	설교	Sermon
회개(悔改)	회개	Repentance
성신(聖神)	성신	Holy Spirit (older term, now 성령 'Sŏngnyŏng')
빈부(貧富)	빈부	Rich and poor, wealth and poverty
자긍(自矜)	자긍	Self-pride, conceit
황연대각(黃然大覺)	황연대각	Sudden great enlightenment/realization
오곡백곡	오곡백과	All kinds of grains and fruits; abundance
속장	속장	Section leader (a lay leader position in some denominations)
부흥회	부흥회	Revival meeting
자복	자복	Confession (of sins)
감화(感化)	감화	Inspiration, influence (often spiritual)
월급	월급	Monthly salary
실업애	실업애	Unemployed/useless child/person (appears derogatory in context); '실업아' (sirŏba) might be intended, meaning unemployed child/person. The final note uses `실업애아들놈들아` a strong insult combining 'useless kids' with 'sons of bitches' or similar.
부흥이	부엉이	Owl (Eurasian eagle-owl); its cry '부흥' (puhŭng) puns with 'revival' (부흥).
짓당목	짓당목	Cotton cloth (likely refers to a standard length or type)
간음죄(姦淫罪)	간음죄	Sin of adultery
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제72호
발행일	1926년 08월 01일
기사제목	復興會
필자	李箕永
기사형태	소설

復興會
						李箕永
1
거륵한 안식일(安息日)이 되엿다.
아츰 종소리가 땡강! 땡강! 울려나오자 성경(聖經)과 찬송책을 엽헤 낀 신남신녀들이 례배당 안으로 모혀들기 시작하엿다. 죄악이 관영한 이 세샹에서 특별히 한우님의 부르심을 바든 거ㅡ륵한 천국 백성들이다. 그들은 한 일헤동안을 두고 풍성하게 바든 한우님의 은혜를 감사하기 위하야 오날 쥬일에도 이 성전(聖殿) 안으로 산제사를 드리러 온 것이엿다.
그러나 이 세상에는 엇더한 신성(神聖)하다는 곳에도 반드시 례외(例外)가 잇는 것과 가티 이 례배당에도 미듬이 부족한 신자가 잇섯다. 그래 그들은 오날도 무슨 마귀의 꾀임을 바덧는지 이런 주일(主日)을 범(犯)하는 십계명의 하나되는 큰 죄를 짓고 말앗다.
이 때 목사는 얼마나 슯허하엿슬가? 바람에 불리는 갈때와 가튼 그들의 미듬을 어서 반석과 가티 굿게하여 줍시사고 묵묵한 가온대 그들을 위하야 긔도를 올려 주엇다.ㅡ 마는 그들의 례배당에 잘 오지 안는 까닭은 이러하엿다.ㅡ 쉰뜨물 켜는 듯한 목사의 전도하는 소리가 듯기 실타는 것과 마루방에 꾸러 업드리기 실타는 것과 그리고 전도사의 눈딱지가 보기 실타는ㅡ 순덱이네와 막동이 어머니커니 또는 춘식이라는 청년이엿다.
전도사는 업드려전도사로도 별명을 가진 유명한 전도사인데 그것은 긔도를 시작할 때에는 의래히＜25＞ 『업드려!』
하는 말버릇이 잇는 까닭이엿다. 언제인가 한번은 처음으로 례배당 구경을 온 엇던 부인이 왓슬 때에도 이 소리를 하여서 그 부인은 그때 벌! 벌! 떠럿다 한다.ㅡ 꽁문이를 까고 볼기를 칠나나! 업드리기는 웨 업드리느냐고?ㅡ
그런데 오날 주일에는 공교히 업드리기 실타는 순덕이네만 빠지고 그 외에는 모다 출석을 하여서 근래 처음보는 성황(盛況)을 이루엇다. 그래 목사의 입은 벙글! 벙글! 하도록 우숨으로 버러젓다. 전과 가티 성경공부를 한 뒤에 업드려 전도사의 긔도로 신령한 례배는 시작되엿다. 녀교사가 풍금을 치고 목사의 큰 딸 혜숙(惠淑)이가ㅡ 마치 반한 산애 압헤 나설 때와 가티 치장을 차리고 나와서 독창을 하엿다.ㅡ 박선생을 할기죽! 할기죽! 겻눈질하면서. ... 그 박선생이 성경낭독을 한 뒤에 후로 코-트를 입은 김목사는 정중한 태도로 강단 압헤 나서서 설교(說敎)하기를 시작하엇다.ㅡ
이ㅡ 당당한 복장을 차림 김목사는 발서 삼십여 년을 미더나려오는 신령한 목사님이엿다. 서양사람 가티 키가 크고 코가 크고 또 긔도하는 목소리도 마치 나사못 가티 꼬불! 꼬불! 하게 비틀려 나오는ㅡ 외양도 밋근둥하고 허울조케 생긴 과연 학구라이 목사 가튼 이다.
그는 중년에 엇더한 사건(事件)으로 조치 못한 소문이 좀 나서 그 까닭으로 지위도 좀 떠러진 세음이다마는 그것은 때 잠깐 마귀의 꾀임으로 그랫지... 지금은 아주 회개(悔改)하여서 강단에 올너서도 점잔케 정면(正面)을 바라보고는 한우님 말슴을 가장 엄숙하게 대언(代言)하엿다. 엇던 때는 더러... 그것은 대개 젊은 부인들이 만히 왓슬 때에 부인석을 흘금! 흘금! 겻눈질하는 일이 잇섯지마는 그것은 눈이 그랫지 무슨 자긔의 마음이 그러케 식인 것은 안이라 하엿다.ㅡ 그래 그럴 때마다 그는 이러케 반성(反省)하엿다.ㅡ 사람은 누구나 죄가 잇는 것이다. 참으로 털끗만치도 죄가 업는 사람이 이 세상에 어대 잇슬가? 죄가 잇는 까닭으로 예수도 밋는 것이요 그래 예수께서 우리의 죄를 대속(代贖)하여 주신 공로(功勞)로 구원도 엇게 되는 것이다. 그럼으로 성한 사람은 의원이 쓸대업지 안은가. 또한 죄를 짓는 까닭으로 회개도 하는 것이다.＜26＞ 만일 죄를 짓지 안으면 회개할 것도 아모 것도 업지 안은가? 죄는 마귀의 꼬임에 빠저서 짓는 것이니까 예수의 일흠으로 회개하면 성신(聖神)은 그것을 용서하시는 것이다. 그래 죄짓고 회개하고 회개하고 또 죄짓고...
그런데 그는 오날 례배에는 특별히 이런 문제를 선택하엿다.ㅡ 그는 이마죽에 신문잡지에서 한참 떠드는ㅡ 또는 청년들이 그 방면으로 만히 물드러간다는ㅡ 무슨 주의란 말을 듯게 되자 비로소 그의 머리 속에서도 한 가지의 의심이 닐어낫다. 그때 그는 자긔에게도 이런 의심이 생긴 것을 미루어서 사람들이 항용 말하는ㅡ 로인(老人)의 두뢰(頭腦)는 완고하다는 말을 절대(絶對)로 부정하게 되엿슬 뿐 안이라 자긔의 두뢰는 매우 명석(明晳)하다고 생각하엿다.ㅡ
ㅡ 그것은 참으로 다가튼 사람으로서 어찌하야 누구는 부자로 잘살게 되고 누구는 가난뱅이로 못살게 되는가? 하는 생각이엿다.ㅡ 그래 그는 오래동안을 시간과 정력(精力)을 허비하야 이 문뎨를 생각하고 연구해 보앗다. 마침내 그는 무릅을 탁 치고 깨달은 바이 잇섯는데 그때 트득한 그것을 특별히 오날 전도에 말하자는 것이엿다. 물론 그가 이 중대한 문뎨를 연구할 동안에는 다른 때보다도 더욱 긔도를 힘쓰고 잇는 정성을 다 드려서 아모조록 성신의 감화(感化)를 바더지라고 하엿다. 그래 이러케 쉽사리도 그것을 깨달아 알게 된 것은 과연 성신(聖神)의 역사한 한우님의 권능이라고 다시 그는 감사한 긔도를 올니엇다.ㅡ
『ㅡ여러분이시여!』 하고 목사는 장중한 목소리로 부르지젓다.ㅡ
사람은 누구나 다가튼 한우님의 자손으로서 무슨 까닭으로 이 세상에 빈부(貧富)의 차별이 생긴지 아심닛가? 우리는 여태까지 그것을 아모러치도 안케 생각하고 살어 왓슴니다마는 다시 가만이 생각해보면 이게 매우 이상한 일인줄 암니다. 생각해 보십시요. 그러치 안은가?』ㅡ
하고 그는 한번 씽끗! 우섯다. 마치 청중(聽衆)의 모르는 무슨 진긔(珍奇)한 발견(發見)을 하고 나서 자긍(自矜)의 만족한 우슴을 웃는 것처럼...
『ㅡ 그래서 나는 그게 무슨 까닭인가? 그것을 생각해 보앗슴니다.』＜27＞
이 말에다 목사는 힘을 주엇다.
『얘ㅡ 오날은 뜨물이 안인가 보다!』하고 막동이 어머니는 은근히 놀라며 두 귀를 기우려 밧다. 춘식이는 각금 전도사의 눈을 역쯩이 난드시 흘겨본다. 마치 고양이가 개를 노리고 잇는 눈동자와 가티.ㅡ
『여러분이 다 아시는 바와 가티 우리 집에는 닭을 치지 안슴닛가? 식전마다 모이를 주는 것이 교제(敎弟)의 직책인데 교제는 참으로 정신으로 차려서 골고루 닭의 모이를 주엇슴니다.』
목사는 손짓을 하여가며 모이주는 흉내를 내엿다.
『ㅡ 그런데 다른 닭들은 모다 정신업시 드러덤벼서 모이를 찍어먹는데 아! 암닭 한 놈이 웬일인지 고개를 외로 비틀고 두 눈을 딱 감고서 입뿌리로 노랑물을 똑! 똑! 떠러트리며 마치 잠오는 것처럼 하고 잇겟지요. 그리다가도 제 주둥이 압헤 모이 떠러지는 소리가 날나치면 그때는 눈을 번쩍! 뜨고 겨우 그놈을 쪼아먹고는 또 그전가티 하고 잇지 안켓슴닛가? 교제는 그때 저 닭이 웨 저럴가? 하고 매우 이상스레 생각하다가 언뜻 황연대각한 일이 잇섯슴니다.!』
이때 목사는 별안간 두 손빠닥을 한데다 철썩! 부드첫다. 그 소리에 청중이 모다 깜짝 놀내도록...
『과연 그럿슴니다. 한우님께서도 마치 그 닭들에게 모이를 주드시 이 천지만물을 풍성히 예비하시고 우리 사람들로 하야곰 먹고 쓰고 남도록 다가티 잘살나고 후박이 업시 마련해 주섯지마는 지금 말슴한 닭의 비유와 가티 부지런히 일하는 사람은 잘 살게 되는 것이요 게으르듸 게으른 사람은 가난방이로 못살게 되는 것이다. 안닌가 보십시요! 저ㅡ 들에는 오곡백곡을 삼십 배도 하고 칠십 배도 하는 기름진 땅이 잇지 안슴닛가? 바다에는 무수한 생선이 드리고 잇고 이 땅 속에는 금은동철의 보화가 드리쟁여서 우리가 일용(日用)하고도 오히려 남저지가 잇도록 왼갓 물건이 풍부하지 안습닛가? 그런데 웨? 가난함닛가. 남과 가튼 이목구비를 가지고서 웨? 남과 가티 못사느냐 말임닛가? 안이 가난이 뉘탓임닛가? 오라오! 이 세상에는 과연 가난한 사람이 만키는 만치요. 그러나 그것은 수원수구할 것이 안이라 모다 게으른 죄외다! 앗가 그 암닭과 가튼 게으른 죄외다.ㅡ』＜28＞
하고 그는 주먹으로 탁상을 치며 가난한 것은 게으른 죄라고 례배당이 떠나가도록 소리를 고래고래 질넛다, 그래 막동이 어머니는 별안간 성이 나서 얼골이 푸루락! 붉으락! 하며
『그래! 부지런하기만 하면 잘사는가? 부지런할애도 부지런할 일이 업는 것은 엇쩌구? 무얼 그 닭은 병드럿든게지! 저런 멍텅구리가... 저게 그래도 목사라고? 한우님도 팔자 사납지! 에아! 또 뜨물을 켯군! 뜨물을 켯서!』
그는 이러케 입속으로 부르짓고 코를 벌늠거리다가 례배도 파하기 전에 고만 달아나와 버렷다. 그러나 목사는 자긔의 오날 전도는 모다 감심(感心)하고 드른 줄 알고 아조 만족을 늣기고 잇다가 고만 이 바람에 낙망이 되고 말앗다. 그는 막동이 어머니가 문을 탁 다치고 나가는 뒤모양을 독기눈으로 한참 흘겨보다가 『오! 한우님 아버지시여!』를 또 한번 부루지젓다. 마치 로장중이 나무아미타불을 불느드시ㅡ

2
이게 무슨 까닭인지는 모르지마는 예수의 사랑은 대개 녀자들이 만히 밧는 것갓다. 그것은 어느 교회이던지 남자보다는 녀자의 신자(信者)가 만흔 것을 보던지 례배당에 부속한 학교는 의례히 녀학교가 차지하고 잇는 것을 보아도 혹시 그러치 아은가 십흐게 생각되니 말이다.
이런 것은 도로혀 그들이ㅡ 신구약성경을 령혼의 량식으로 아는 그네들이ㅡ 더 잘 알 노릇이다마는 산애의 외인편 갈비때를 뻬여서 맨드러 내논 것이 녀자라 하고 그래 그것이 사람 갓다 해서 녀자(女子)를 여인(如人)이라고도 한다는 말과 아울너 저ㅡ 에덴 동산에서 선악과(善惡果)를 따먹은 죄를 진 것도 역시 이화라는 녀자라고 하지 안엇는가? 그래서 녀자라는 것은 도모지 사람으로 치지도 안는 것처럼 남자의 말은 한우님의 명령가티 절대로 복종(服從)해야 된다는ㅡ 이러케도 녀자의 인격(人格)을 여지업시 모욕한 예수교회에 도로혀 녀자가 더 만히 모혀드는 것은 생각할수록 이상한 일이다마는 이런 이상한 일이 잇기예말로 예수의 긔적이 잇는가 십흐다. 그림으로 독생성자라는 한우님의 아드님이 마리아라는 시집도 안간＜29＞ 처녀의 몸에서 태여난 것도 위대한 긔적으로 볼 것이요 예수밋는 녀자들이 더욱 긔를 써가며 도로혀 남녀동등을 부르짓는 것도 역시 긔적으로 볼 것이지 그것을 결코 엇던 금주선전대(禁酒宣傳隊)가 자동차에다 금주선전 삐라를 하나 갓득 실코 왼종일 뿌리고 도라다니가다 저녁때 해질 무리에
『여보게 출출한데 한잔하세!』
하고 술집으로 드러가는 것 가튼 그런 모순(矛盾)으로 볼 것은 안이란 말이다.
그야 엇더턴지 이 례배당에도 녀자의 신자가 더 만코 이 교회의 부속학교도 역시 녀학교란 말이요 그런데 이 녀학교 교사(敎師)가 앗가 잠깐 소개한 그 박선생이란 말만 하면 고만이다.
이것도 무슨 긔적인지는 모르지마는 박선생이라면 남녀신자들이 모다 조아라고 야단들인데 그 중에도 젊은 녀자들이ㅡ 라는 것보다도 목사부인과 그의 큰딸이(전실딸) 제일 조아하는 것도 역시 이상한 일이다. 그 이상한 것이 역시 박선생의 미남자라는 긔적에 잇는지는 모르지마는.
목사는 지금 50이 불원하엿스나 목사부인은 올에 설흔댓밧게 안 먹은 데다가 더구나 나이보다는 훨신 애뙤여 보이는 아즉도 청춘의 불김이 꺼지지 안은 것 갓다. 그는 이 김목사에게로 재취시집을 오자마자 바로 태긔가 잇서서 남들이 모다 첫날밤에 배인 애라고 수군거리든 것이 큰딸 헤은이를 초산으로 난 것인데 다행히 작년생의 첫아들 로득이가 이섯다. 이 아들이야말로 목사가 끔직이 사랑하는 례물(禮物)로서 한우님께 제일 감사(感謝)를 드리는 조건인데 오날 아츰에 혜숙이 형제만 잇슬 때에ㅡ 그때 혜숙이는 모친과 싸우고서 골이 잔득! 낫슬 참이다. 혜숙이는 혜은이 보고 아래목에서 삭! 삭! 자는 로득이를 손가락질하며 하는 말이
『너 저애가 누구 달문지 아늬?』
하엿다. 그때 혜은이는 별안간 생각지 안은 뭇는 말에 아조 뎡즁한 모양으로 참말로 누구를 달멋는가? 하는드시 말끄름이 자는 애를 처다보다가
『글세 누구 달멋디늬? 아버지를 달멋나?』＜30＞
하고 됩다 혜숙이를 보고 무럿다.
『박선생 담지 안엇늬! 아버지 코가 어대 저러케 생겻늬?』
『엇째서 박선생을 달멋다늬?』
『내가 아늬! 잇다 어머니한데 무러보럄!』
혜숙이는 샐쭉해지며 볼먹은 소리로 대답을 하고는 홱! 도라서서 밧그로 나갓다. 그런데 그때 마참 모친이 도라오자 헤은이는 한다름에 쪼처 나오며 소리소리 질너 모친을 부르며 하는 말이엿다.ㅡ
『어머니! 어머니! 로득이 코가 엇째 박선생 코를 달멋나우?』
『머이 누가?... 누가 그라데?ㅡ』
『언니가... 』
뜻밧게 어머니는 입을 딱 벌리고 무섭게 처다보는 바람에 혜은이는 고만 응석이 쑥 드러가고 말끗이 가늘게 떨녀 나왓다.
『그럼! 선생님 담는게 무슨 흉이냐?』
한동안 잇다가 모친은 비로소 상시(常時)와 가튼 표정을 짓고는 상냥한 말씨로 이러케 말하엿다. 그래 혜은이도 안심을 하게 되엿다. 그리자 모친은 시간이 느젓스니 어서 례배보러 가자고 딸들을 재촉하여 가지고 례배당으로 간 것이다. 혜숙이는 올에 열여섯살이엿다.

3 이날 례배를 파한 뒤에ㅡ 하기는 목사부인은 이담 날로 미루고저 하엿스나 목사가 한사하고 욱여서ㅡ 몃몃 직원들만 집으로 모히게 하엿다. 그것은 그 전에도 각금 이런 모임을 베푸러서 그들을 대접하는 일이 잇섯는데 오날 모임도 역시 이러한 종류로서 일을 터이면 간친회(懇親會) 비슷한 오찬회(午餐會)가튼 것이엇다.＜31＞
그래 전도사 전도부인 전사 속장이니 유사이니 하는 이들과 녀학교의 남녀교사까지 초대를 바든 그들은 차례로 목사 집으로 모혀들게 되엿는데 맨상투 빠람이라고는ㅡ 엇째서 그만을 불럿는지는 모르지마는ㅡ 막동이 어머니뿐이엿다. 인제는 청한 사람으로는 박선생 하나만 빼노코 모다들 와 안젓다. 그래 그들은
『박선생이 웬일인가?』
『글세 박선생이 웨 안오까!』
하고 모다 한마듸씩 짓거리고 잇슬 판에 그 박선생이 불쑥 드러왓다. 이때에 여러 사람들은 일제히
『아! 박선생!』
하고 반가운 소리를 질넛다. 박선생은 벙글벙글하며 드러오더니만 위선 로득이를 빼서 가지고는 목사님은 참 아들을 잘 두섯다고 여러 가지 아름다운 명사로 층찬해 주엇다. (그는 하필 혜숙이 형제가 안진 엽헤 가 자리를 잡고 안젓다) 여러 사람들도 박선생의 말을 따라서 한마듸씩 층찬하엿다. 그래 목사의 입은 우숨으로 떡ㅡ 버러젓다.
그런데 혜은이가 무슨 말을 할뜻! 할뜻! 하며 잇는 것을 마진 편에서 모친의 무서운 눈이 마치 개코리를 노리는 뱀의 눈가티 쏘아보고 잇다. 이때 혜숙이는 어린애를 얼우넌 체 하며 그것을 못 본 체하고 뱅그레 웃고 잇다.
아ㅡ 나! 아ㅡ 나! 우리 애기 로득아』...
별안간 모친은 행낭어멈을 소리처 불으며 어서 상을 보라고 재촉하엿다. 그러더니 자긔도 벌떡 닐어서며
『혜숙아! 혜은아!』
하고 딸들을 불너 내엿다. 혜숙이는 한 손으로 머리를 극죽어리며 게을리 몸을 니르켯다. 혜은이는 모친과 혜숙이의 눈치를 번가라 보며 닐어섯다ㅡ 과연 조곰 잇다 먹이상은 드러왓다.ㅡ
음식은 무슨 서양요리 비슷한 것으로 술안주햇스면 조흘 것도 잇섯다. 그러타니 말이지 전도사는 속심으로 한잔햇스면 조켓다는 생각이 숨어나왓다.＜32＞
좌중에는 녀자가 서넛되고 남자가 역시 그만콤이엿다. 여러 사람의 입에서는 우슴이 새여나오고 목소리도 유달리 다정하엿다.ㅡ 그것은 그늘지고 뚝뚝하기로 유명한 전도사의 목소리까지 마치 햇빗에 희롱치는 잔물쌀가티 부드럽게 떠나왓다.
목사의 엄숙한 목소리로 긔도를 드릴 때 고개를 마주 향하고 업드린 여러 사람의 마음이나 또는 닐어나 안저서 합창으로 찬송을 부를 때에 서로 얼골을 처다보는 그들의 가슴속에는 과연 엇던 무엇이... 그것은 참으로 경건하고 엄숙하고 장중한 그 속에도 그와는 아조 정반대인 무엇이ㅡ 그들의 사이를 오락가락하는 것 갓하엿다. 이것을 이른바 예수의 사랑이라는 것인지는 모르지마는.ㅡ
한동안 음식을 먹기에 밧부든 입들은 다시 말품을 팔기에 밧부게 되엿다.
『목사님! 부흥회를 한번 하지 안으시람닛가?』
이 말을 맨처음으로 끄내기는 몸집이 난 속장부인이엿다.
『챰 부흥회 한번 하지요?』
『부흥회 한지도 참 퍽 오래인데... 』
예서 제서 닐어케 들고 이러나는 바람에
『만일 여러분이 모다 원하신다면 속히라도 할 수가 잇지요!』
하고 목사가 빙그레 우스며 대답하엿다.
『참 부흥회에 참례한 지가 몃 해나 되는지!』
업드려 전도사도 그 헤멀건 눈을 뒤룩어리며 말참례를 하러 드럿다.
『참 죄를 짓기만 하고 자복을 못하여서ㅡ 어서 좀 해요! 죄 좀 자복하게요!』
이것은 자상하기로 유명한 엘니사베쓰의 말이엿다.
『부흥회에서는 죄를 자복하는 법인가요?』
이때까지 아모 말이 업시 다만 빙그레 웃고만 안젓든 박선생도 비로소 이러케 무러 보앗다.＜33＞
『그러치요. 죄를 자복하지 안을 것 갓흐면 부흥회는 해서 무엇하나요!』
이것은 확실한 목사의 대답이엿다.
『그러나 자긔 죄를 여러 사람 압헤서 엇더케 자복할 수 잇슬가요?』
『그러키에 사람의 마음으로는 못할 노릇이지요. 부흥회에 성신이 내려서 여러 사람의 마음을 성화(聖火)로 뜨겁게 해야 되겟지요.』
『그러코 말고요. 성신(聖神)의 감화(感化)를 바더야 되는 법이지 사람의 힘으로야 할 수 잇는 일인가요?』
『그럼 속히 좀 시작해 보시지요. 저는 여태까지 부흥회에 참례해 보지 못하엿슴니다.』
이 박선생의 말에
『안이 여태까지 부흥회에 한번도 못 참례해 보섯서요?』
하고 속장부인은 멸시하는 눈매로 박선생을 처다보고 우섯다.ㅡ
『부흥희를 참례해 봐야 미듬이 잘 자라난담니다. 목사님! 그러면 도마쓰 목사를 청해오시지요!』
하고 전도부인도 목사를 할끗 처다보며 충동하엿다.
『아! 도마쓰 목사! 참 신령하지. 안이 여러분이 그러케 원하신다면 그것은 한우님께 감사할 일이올시다. 래일이라도 속히 감리사(監理司)께 엿주어 보지요!』
목사도 이러케 신이 나서 하엿다. 그래 헤여질 무렵에는 부흥회하기를 가위(可謂) 만장일치로 가결(可決)하다 십히 하고 다시 한번 꾸러 업드려서 정성된 마음으로 긔도를 올니기를ㅡ 압흐로 경영하는 일이 잘 되여서 아모조록 부흥회가 잘 되도록 하여 주시고 모든 것을 오즉 한우님의 뜻대로 하시지 결코 사람의 뜻대로 되지 말게 하여줍시사고 예수의 일흠으로 간절히 간절히 비러 올니엿다.
그래 그들은 이제까지 맛보지 못하던 엇던 호기심에 들뛰여서 그러면 할 수 잇는대로 속히 열어보자고 모다 목사를 충동이엿다.ㅡ
목사도 누구를 심방간다고 그들을 따러 나간 뒤에 방안에는 다만 목사부인과 혜숙이만 잇서서 그야말로＜34＞ 굿하고 난 집안가티 한참 떠들석하던 집안이 별안간 괴괴해젓다. 그런데 어느 틈에 나갓는지 모르는 혜은이가 깡충! 깡충! 밧게서 뛰여 드러오더니만 헐러벌덱이는 숨찬 목소리로
『언니야! 저ㅡ 순행이는 엇째 아버지를 달멋다늬? 또?... 』
뒤미처 혜숙이는
『그럼 선생님을 담는게 무슨 흉이냐?』 하엿다.ㅡ
『아버지가 왜 선생님이냐? 목사지!』
『목사도 성경을 가르치닛가 선생님이나 만차가지란다!』
『오ㅡ 참! 그러쿠먼!』
혜은이는 비로소 의심이 풀니는 드시 그의 가슴치레한 눈을 까막! 까막! 하면서 고개를 한번 깻딱 하엿다.
그런데 아래목에 기대 안저서 로득이에게 젓을 물니고 잇던 모친은 어느 틈에 잠이 드럿는지 생코고는 소리가 반자가 울니도록 드르릉! 드르릉! 하엿다.

4
종수(鍾手) 겸 하인 겸으로 잇는 양섭이는 지금 례배당 안을 대청결하느라고 한참 밧븐 판이다. 그는 발서 사흘채나 례배당 안팟을 깨끗이 씰고 마루에 걸네질까지 처노코 지금은 유리창을 닥고 잇는데 학교시간을 마친 박선생은 무슨 일 감독이나 하는 것처럼 그의 일하는 엽헤 와서 우두커니 서서 보고 잇다. 래일 밤부터는 부흥회를 한다고 교회직원들이 안팟그로 분주한 바람에 그도 그 긔분(氣分)에 싸히여서 방안에 드러안젓고 십지기 안엇다.
『너도 부흥회를 치러 보앗늬?』
『그럼 못봐.! 박선생님 오시던 그 전 해에 건물너 례배당에서 하엿는데요!』
박선생의 뭇는 말에 양섭이는 문중방에 올너서서 유리창을 닥다가 이러케 대답하엿다.＜35＞
『그래 모다 죄를 자복하던?』
『죄를요?』
양섭이는 깜짝 놀낸다.
『응! 죄를 부흥회에서는 모다 제각기 지은 죄를 자복한다든데!』
『누가 그래요? 죄를 자복한다고!』
하고 양섭이는 또 코우숨을 한다.
『모다들 그러더라! 목사님이랑 전도사님이랑ㅡ』
『자복해도 괜치 안을 죄는 자복하겟지요. 말이 낫스니 말이지 저도 그 전에는 그러케 알앗담니다.ㅡ 죄를 자복한다기에 참으로 죄를 자복하는 줄 알고ㅡ 목사님도 전도사님도... 』
『안이 그럼 그게 그짓말이냐? 목사님과 전도사님도라니?ㅡ』
『그짓말이라면 거짓말이고 참말이라면 참말이지요!』
『뭐? 그런 말이 어듸 잇늬?』
『웨요? 엇더턴지 자복하는 체하고 회개하는 체 하닛가 말이지요. 그러나 그 속을 아는 사람은ㅡ』
『그 속을 아는 사람은 엇데야? 안이 목사님과 전도사님도 자백하지 안은 죄가 잇는 게로구나! 응?』
박선생은 한거름을 다가섯다.
『그게야 누가 아나요?... 』
양섭이는 빙글! 빙글! 우스며 박선생을 의미잇게 처다보는데.
『그야 그러치마는 그것을 알앗스면 조흘 일이 잇기에 말이다!』
『무슨 조흔 일이요? 그런 숨은 죄를 알아서 조흔 일이 잇다면... 그것은 박선생님에게도 잇지 안으서요!』
양섭이는 말끗을 마추자 고만 얼골이 빨개지며 빙글! 빙글! 웃는다.
『뭐! 내게도?』＜36＞
박선생은 소리처 놀내는 체 하엿다.
그럼언요! 뭘 속이러 드서요? 나도 발서 다 아는데요. 하! 하! 하... 저도 례배당 물을 먹은 지가 근 10년이람이다. 그때 그이가티 박선생님도 한번 자백해 보시지요!』
하더니 양섭이는 드립더 우서제킨다.
『그... 그이가 누구야? 응!』
하는 박선생의 얼골도 붉어젓다.ㅡ
『여태 선생님은 그 이야기도 못 드르섯나요? 그때 진정으로 자백한 이는 그이 하나뿐이엿담니다. 그런데 도로혀 그이를 흉보겟지요. 하기는 우숩고도 난중스러워서 듯는 사람의 얼골도 확근거릴 말이지만요.ㅡ』
『무슨 말이야! 그러탐?』
『그때는 참 엇더케 우숩던지 고만 문밧그로 뛰여나왓구먼요. 지금도 그이가ㅡ 부수수 닐어나서 벌벌 떨니는 손목을 마주잡고 서서 등신가튼 목소리로... 아! 하하하! 박선생님 드러보십시요ㅡ 저는 그 언제인가 사돈댁의 륙촌 시아주버니하고 저ㅡ 콩밧 고랑에서... 그이가 작구 그리로 가자구 햇대유!... 저는 그 죄밧게는 업서요ㅡ 하더니 털썩! 주저안지며 「어이! 어이!」 울겟지요! 아! 하! 하!』
샹섭이는 말끗을 채 마추기도 전에 또 한참을 우서대는데 박선생의 입에서도 우슴이 탁 터젓다.
『그래 나도 자복을 할 터이니 너도 그 말을 들너다고ㅡ 그러면 내가 모조리 그들의 죄를 자복을 식혀늘 터이니.』
『엇더케 자복을 식혀요?』
『안이 그것은 걱정마라. 네가 누구의 죄이던지 죄다 말하기만 하면 나는 그러케 할 도리가 잇스니 말이다!』
『또 남을 례배당에도 잇지 못하게 만들랴고요!』＜37＞
하고 양섭이는 싱글! 싱글! 불안한 우숨을 웃는데.
『안이야! 그것은 될 뻔이나 한 말이냐. 절때로 비밀을 직히지.』
『그럼 아모 보고도 그 말을 하지 말어야 해요!』
『암 그다 일을 뿐이냐!』
하고 박선생은 아주 밋거라고 다짐까지 두어 말햇다.
『그럼 잇다가 저녁 때에 뒤ㅅ동산 솔밧속으로 오시지요!』
『그럼 졍말이다! 응!』
『녜! 선생님을 속일리야 잇슴닛가.』
과연 그날 저녁때 양셥이는 약조한 대로 박선생을 그곳에서 맛나주엇다. 그들은 무슨 이야기를 하는지 한참동안을 속은거리고 잇섯다.

5
이튼날 밤에 기다리고 기다리던 부흥회는 시작되엿다. 신령한 목사로 소문난 그 도마쓰 목사를 청하여 오고 그외에도 근처에 잇는 목사를 청하여 왓다.
부흥회는 밤마다 성황(盛況)을 니루웟다. 부흥회한다는 소문이 퍼저서 새로 구경하러 온 남녀로소도 만핫섯다. 이때에 신자들은 모다 긴장한 표정으로 찬송도 신이 나서 부르고 긔도도 긔운차게 하엿다. 날마다 새벽긔도를 올니고 엇던 이는 례배당에서 밤을 새워가며 긔도하는 이도 잇섯다.
도마쓰 목사는 날이 갈수록 더욱 열렬하게 부르지저서 듯는 사람의 가슴을 찔니는 것 가티 압흐게 하엿다. 그례서 이번 부흥회야말로 성신이 충만(充滿)하게 강림하나보다 하는 누구나 예감(豫感)을 갓게 되고 따라서 그들은 더욱 긔도를 힘써 하엿다. 그리는 대로 목사는 더욱더 신자들에게 권고하엿다.ㅡ 이번 부흥회에 성신의 감화가 잇고 업고 우리 교회가 거듭나고 못나는 것은 오즉 여러분의 긔도하기에 달녓다고.＜38＞
이리하야 부흥회는 어느듯 2주일이 다가는 마지막 날 밤이 되엿다. 그 동안에도 물론 여러 신자들의 자복한 죄가 만히 잇섯스나 예수를 그 즁 잘 밋는다는 소위 천직(天職)을 가진 이들은 아즉까지 자복을 하지 안엇다. 그들은 참으로 자복할 죄가 업는지는 모르지마는 목사나 전도사들은 긔도할 때마다 죄가 만흐니 회개케 하여 달나고는 하면서도 그 죄가 무슨 죄라고는 집어내지 안엇다.
이 부흥회에는 박선생도 물론 밤마다 참례를 하엿는뎨 그는 차차 미듬이 뜨거워지는 모양으로 전에 업던 열렬한 목소리로 긔도하기를 시작하엿다. 그래 목사는 누구보다도 이 박선생이 거듭나는가 해서 그런 생각만 해도 여간 깁부지 안엇다. 그것은 요전까지의 박선생은 할 수 잇는대로 례배를 안보랴고 살살 빠지러 들고 긔도를 식혀봐도 못한다고 핑게만 할 뿐더러 그 언제인가 한번은 뭇 사람이 꾸러업대어 긔도할 때에 혼저 눈을 빠꼼이 뜨고 안저서 혜숙이하고 눈빡국질하는 것을 보앗섯다. ... 그러턴 박선생이 이러케 거듭나는가 생각해보니 깃부지 안을내야 안을 수 업섯다. 그것은 다른 교인들도 박선생* 이번에 성신을 밧는다고 칭찬이 버러젓다.
이 마지막 날 밤에는 도마쓰 목사도 정력을 잇는대로 다 하여서 긔운차게 전도하엿다. 이날 밤에 설교할 문제는 「죄를 자복하고 회개하라!」라는 것이엿다. 그래 그는 여러 가지로 실례(實例)를 들어서 죄를 자복하지 안으면 영영히 멸망할 것과 회개하고 자복하면 영원히 구원을 엇는다고 구변을 다 하여서 장광설(長廣舌)을 휘둘넛다.ㅡ
이 설교가 끗난 뒤에 전례대로 연보(收錢)를 하고 여러 신자들은 다시 업드려서 제각긔 통상긔도를 올니게 되엿다. 그래 가늘던 목소리가 차차 굴거지고 떨려나오든 목소리가 울음소리로 변하여지는데 나종에는 주먹으로 가슴을 치는 축에 몸부림을 치는 축에 두 다리를 쭉 뻣고 사설을 하여가며 우는 녀자도 잇고 황소가 티엉! 엉! 우는 남자도 잇서서 례배당 안은 한바탕 야단이 낫다. 그래 잇때가지 거륵하던 성전 안은 별안간 악마구리 끌텃하는 마치 마귀의 굴혈이 된 것 가티.
『오... 한우님 아바지시여! 물무든 바가지에 깨붓듯한 이년의 만흔 죄를 그저 용서하여 주시옵소서... 』＜39＞
『오... 주여! 성신님께서 이 자리에 강림하여 주서서 저의 죄를 모다 불살너 업시 해 주십소서!』
『오...주님이시여! 영감자식 다 잡어먹고 홀로 잇는 저를 어서 천당으로 나가게 하여 주소서... 』
『지존막대하시고 전지전능하시고 무소부지하시고 또 우리의 뼈 속! 살 속! 머리 끗까지 죄다 아시고, 액꿰!... 그리고 이 천지만물을 주장하시는 한우님 아바지시여! 감사감사함니다!... 』
『거륵하시고 거륵하신 한우님이시여! 그저 우리 그이가 첩마귀의 구렁텅이에 빠저서 머리가 허여케 센 늙은이가 지금까지 허위적어림니다. 그저 한우님의 권능으로 어서 그 구녕에서 헤여나오게로 손목을 당기어 주옵소서... !』
한참 이럴 판에 별안간 박선생이 벌떡 닐어나더니 두 활개를 쩍 벌리 춤을 덩실덩실 추면서 씽긋벙긋하는 입을 메기입 벌리듯 하고는 찬송가를 한바탕! 례배당이 떠나가도록 불은다. 그래 여러 사람들은 일시에 깜짝 놀내서 모다 그를 처다 보앗다. 그러나 그는 더욱 신이 나서 펄! 펄! 뛰며 여러 사람의 부복한 사이로 한박 휘둘휘돌더니만 다시 강단 위로 올너가서 또 한참을 그러케 하다가 나종에는 엄숙하고 열렬한 목소리로 긔도를 드리는데 그가 성신바든 줄 안 목사들은 자리를 피하야 모다 강단 아래로 내려와 안젓다.
『오ㅡ 한우님이시여! 감사함니다. 이때에 저의 긔도를 드르시고 특별히 성신의 역사하심을 감사감사하옵나이다. 지금 이 자리에 부복한 여러 무리에게도 한결가티 성신이 내리고 저들의 죄를 모다 자복하게 하시와 깨끗이 회개하게 하여 주옵소서... 』
이 낭낭한 긔도 소리에 여러 사람들은 감히 고개도 들지 못하고 모다 정숙(靜肅)히 「아! 멘」을 부르지젓다. 혜숙이도 고개를 숙인 채로
『저이가 참으로 성신을 바더서 저라나?... 』하면서도 공연히 가슴이 울넝거리엿다.
『ㅡ 한우님은 이 자리에 성신을 나리섯다. 성신님은 지금 이 머리 위에 비둘기 모양을 하시고 강림하섯다.!... 너희들이 회개하기를 기다리고 계시다.! 자! 어서 자복하여라! 어서! 죄를 자복해! 죄를 자복 하ㅡ거ㅡ라ㅡ 오ㅡ 주여! 저들을 잠깐만 더 기다려 주옵소서! 오! 주여! 너희는 참으로 죄가 업느냐?＜40＞ 자복할 죄가 업느냐? 오... 』
하고 그는 마루를 쾅! 쾅! 구르며 소리를 벽력가티 지르는데 그의 입은 무섭게 실눅어리고 눈은 땅빵울 가티 부르떠젓다. 그러는 대로 청중의 가슴은 움찔! 움찔! 하엿다. 나종에는 그는 「아모개야! 아모개야!』하고 차례차례로 일흠을 불너내엿다. 그래 청중의 마음은 모다 무섭게 떨니엇다.
『엘니사베쓰야! 너는 참으로 죄가 업느냐? 자복할 죄가 업느냐?ㅡ』
『아! 한우님 아버지ㅡ 그저 용서하여 주옵소서! 미련한 인간이라 마귀의 꾀임에 빠저서... 그저 잘못하엿슴니다.』
일홈을 불니우자 그는 무엇에 덜미잡이를 하여 오는 것처럼 강단 압흐로 거러나와서 이러케 말한다.
『김신호야ㅡ 너는 또 명색이 전도사로서 몰내 단이며 술을 먹고!... 어! 한우님이 무섭지 안으냐?』
업드려 전도사도 벌떡 닐어서더니 두손을 맛잡고 서서
『아! 주여! 용서하여 주옵소서! 과연 저는 마귀의 꾀임으로 술을 먹엇슴니다!... 그리고... 』하더니만 그는 별안간 주먹으로 가슴을 한번 쾅! 지찌며 그 자리에 업드려서 갈범울음을 내놋는다. 『오! 주여! 오! 아! 아! 아! 아! 아!』
이 일이 잇자 사방에서는 움쭐! 움쭐! 하며 장내의 공긔는 각각(刻刻)으로 긴장해젓다. 모다 닐어설까? 말까? 하는 것 갓다. 마츰내 예서 제서 「불군! 불군」 닐어나기를 시작하는데.
『저는, 마귀의 꾀임에 빠저서... 시긔(猜忌)죄를 범하엿슴니다! 늙은 년이 투기의 죄를 범하엿슴니다!』
하고 속장부인이 그의 불눅한 배를 내밀고 벌넝벌넝 떨며 닐어섯다.
『저는 마귀의 꾀임에 빠저서 절도죄를 저질넛서요!... 』
『저도 마귀의 꼬임에 빠저서 그!... 』
순이 어머니가 먼저 이러스는 바람에 앗가부터 망상망상하던 춘학이 처는 그 뒤에 밧삭! 부터서 가티 닐어서며 이러케 말하엿다.＜41＞
『오ㅡ 무슨 절도죄?』
하고 박선생은 비로소 엄숙한 목소리로 수죄하기 시작하엿다.
『저 건너말로 언제 개인전도하러 갓다가 줄에 너른 짓당목석자를 거더 왓서요... 그때 마귀가 꾀여서... 이! 히! 히ㅡ』
이러케 순이 어머니의 하는 말에
『저도 그런 죄를 그러케... 그때 마귀가 꾀여서! 이! 히! 히ㅡ』
하더니 이번에는 춘학이 처가 먼저 날늠 주저안더니만 납쪽 업드려 운다. 순이 어머니는 몸부림을 치며 운다.
『저는 마귀가 꾀여서 간음죄를... 』
하고 전도사부인이 부수수 닐어나서 덜! 덜! 떨니는 목소리로 이 말을 간신히 끄내엿다.
『오! 누구와?』
그는 참아 말이 안나오는 것을 뒤에서 무엇이 식히는 바람에 억지로 하는 것처럼
『목! 목! 목... 』
하고 목구녕에서 끄러다리는 소리를 하고 섯는데 이때까지 엉! 엉! 울고 잇든 업드려 전도사는 눈이 멀거니 자긔 부인을 처다보고 잇다.
『저도 간음죄를... 』
이번에는 목사부인이 닐어섯다.
『오! 누구와?』
박선생은 더욱 엄숙한 구조(口調)로 무럿다.
『저ㅡ 당! 당! 당! 당!... 』
그는 박선생의 눈치를 보며 점두록 이 소리만 하더니
고만 털펴덕 주저안지며 울음을 내놋는다.＜42＞
그러자 바로
『저도 그와 비슷한 죄를 지엇서요!』
하고 노ㅡ 란 목소리로 열쌔게 부르짓고 발끈 닐어서는 것은 얼골이 새빨개진 혜숙이엿다.
『오ㅡ 엇더케 비슷한 죄를?』
『나도 당! 당! 당! 당! 당! 키...키...쓰...』
혜숙이는 입이 안 떠러저서 박선생을 똑바로 처다보며 이 소리만 하고 섯는데 이때 양섭이는 문을 차고 뛰여나가서 우는지 엇저는지 자지러지게 죽는 소리를 질넛다. 그런데 김목사는 무릅을 꿀코 잔뜩 꾸러 업드라서 다른 말은 업시 다만
『오ㅡ 주여! 용서하여 주옵소서! 용서하여 주옵소서.』
하는 말만 정신업시 부르짓고 잇는데 그의 압뒤로 버서진 머리 알에는 진땀이 「송골! 송골!」내도덧다.
마지막으로 도마쓰 목사가 닐어낫다. 그는 정중한 태도로 량수거지를 하고 서서 울엉울엉한 목소리로
『나도 죄를 범햇슴니다. 그것은 섭섭한 일이올시다! 다른 죄가 안이올시다! 미국써 나오는 교역자(敎役者)의 월급을 조곰식 조곰식 떼먹은 것이올시다! 하! 그것은 섭섭함니다. 그러나 지금부터는 한우님 압헤 맹세하고 다시는 그런 죄를 *지 안키로 작정하엿슴니다!』
하더니 주먹을 쥐여서 한번 그러타는 결심을 보이는 드시 팔을 내젓고는 조용히 자긔의 자리에 가 다시 안는데 그의 쑥 드러가고 시퍼런 눈알이 눈물에 어리여서 번쩍! 번쩍! 빗낫다. 이때 여러 사람의 입에서는 일제히
『아멘!』 소리가 울어나왓다. 례배당 안이 쩌렁! 하고 울렷다.ㅡ

6
박선생은 청중에게 다시 통상긔도하기를 명령하엿다. 그래 그들은 또 모다 꾸러 업드려서 앗까보다도 더욱 열렬하게 긔도를 올니게 되엿다. 이러케 부흥회는 신령하게 되여 이 밤이 깁허 갈수록 죄를 자복하는 통곡소리는＜43＞ 더 커가는데 그런데 박선생은 어느 틈에 업*젓는지 그들이 긔도를 다 올니고 닐어나서 보니 어듸로 갓는지 온데간데 업서저 버렷다. 그래 청중은 눈이 휘둥그래젓다.
김목사는 눈이 휘둥그레저서 강단으로 뛰여 올나가 봐ㅅ다. 도마쓰 목사도 그 뒤를 따러 올너왓다. 다른 이들도 우ㅡ 몰려갓다.ㅡ
그러나 박선생은 흔적도 업고 탁상 위에는 난듸 업는 웬 조희조각이 하나가 노히엿다. 김목사는 펴보앗다.
『예이 미친 실업애아들놈들아! 너희들이 한우님에게 정성껏 바친 돈으로 노자해 가지고 나는 잘 간다. 내가 진실로 진실로 너희게 이르노니 너희는 잘 잇슬지어다! 아! 멘! ㅡ박선생ㅡ 』
김목사는 별안간
『어!』
소리를 지르고 그것을 땅바닥에 힘업시 떠러트리엿다. 그래 도마쓰 목사가 그것을 또 집어보앗다.
『예ㅡ이ㅡ 미친 실 업 애ㅡ 미친 실업애! 미친 실업애! 이게 무슨 말이요?』
도마쓰 목사는 한참 동안을 이러케 뜨더보다가 김목사를 처다보고 무럿다. 그러나 김목사는 아모 대답이 업시 입만 딱 버리고 잇슴으로 그는 다시 보기를 시작하엿다.
『예이 미친 실업 애 아들놈들아!... 너희들이... 돈으로 노자해 가지고 나는 잘 간다... 내가 진실로 진실로... 아! 멘 ㅡ박선생!』
보기를 다한 도마쓰 목사는
『아! 하ㅡ』
그는 두 손으로 머리를 쥐고 한박휘를 삥! 삥! 돌앗다.
비로소 박선생에게 속은 줄을 안 그들은 마치 놋의 안해가 뒤를 도라가 보다가 금시로 소곰기둥이 되야 그 자리에 어러부튼 것처럼 서로 얼골들을 처다보고 한동안을 고대로 백혀 잇섯다.
이때ㅡ 뒷동산 솔밧 속에서는 부흥! 부흥! 하는 부흥이 우는 소리가 들리엿다.＜44＞
＜25-44＞