Magazine Title: 동광 제25호
Publication Date: 1931-09-04
Article Title: 産兒調節의 意義와 現勢, 東光大學 제7강 社會問題篇 (The Significance and Current Status of Birth Control, Tonggwang University Lecture 7: Social Issues Section)
Article Type: 논설 (Editorial/ 논설)

**The Significance and Current Status of Birth Control, Tonggwang University Lecture 7: Social Issues Section**

1. What is Birth Control?

Birth limitation (産兒制限) does not mean uniformly restricting childbirth to two or three children and prohibiting having more. If one believes that having a child is good for the child, the family, and society, then one should not hesitate to have many children consecutively, break the world record (43 children from one mother, this was in America), and become a world-renowned mother (母性). However, if one is likely to give birth to a disabled child (病身), or if having a child means there is nothing to feed and raise it, and the entire family cannot survive, then it is better not to conceive the child in the first place. "Who doesn't know that? If only it were possible! But can a married couple avoid sleeping together?" There is a way to sleep together and use contraception (피임법) to avoid conception. This is called birth limitation. It means having children when you want to and not having them when it is not good to do so. That's why nowadays, the term birth control (산아조절) is commonly used. This birth control, which allows having children when desired and preventing conception when it's not advisable, is absolutely necessary, of course, but opinions on this are divided. Now, I wish to briefly outline the arguments for and against it, along with the actual status of the movement in various countries around the world.

2. Arguments Against Birth Control and Their Critique

It is relatively easy to shatter and dismantle the feudalistic objections of moralists and religious figures who, ignorant of science and reality, make it their sole purpose to blindly oppose, or the patriotic objections of the bourgeoisie (뿌르조아). However, it is not easy to distinguish the flawed birth control arguments of the proletariat (푸로레타리아트), who advocate for birth control but lack sufficient understanding and have incorrect grounds for their claims, from the bourgeois birth control arguments based on entirely different standpoints, and to clearly separate them from the correct perspective. "Birth control is birth control, right? Is there a bourgeois and proletarian difference even in birth control? Are capitalists' and workers' reproductive organs different? What utter nonsense—" One should be careful with words. Nonsense? Of course, the reproductive organs of capitalists, landlords, workers, and peasants are all the same. Therefore, the benefits humanity gains from birth control are the same for all. However, because capitalists and landlords are the classes that exploit workers and peasants, and workers and peasants are the emerging classes aiming to destroy and abolish (揚棄) this exploitation and build a society without exploitation, their perspectives and thoughts on birth control are markedly different. "So, does proletarian birth control reject bourgeois birth control? They won't use the contraceptive methods <87> invented by the bourgeoisie, then?" This is utterly stubborn. Why wouldn't they use those contraceptive methods? Even the theories advocated by the bourgeoisie are fine if the incorrect parts are discarded. The proletariat simply excludes the flawed parts, takes all the correct points, thinks from the proletarian standpoint, and acts for the liberation of the proletariat. Therefore, it's not that all bourgeois birth control theories are wrong. If we exclude Neo-Malthusianism and all other errors, and view it from a class perspective, it can be considered the proletarian birth control theory. "Never mind talk of class and liberation, just tell us the contraceptive methods already!" Don't rush like that; let's proceed in order, starting with the

Arguments Against Birth Control.

Even those who oppose birth limitation (control) do not advocate for people with leprosy or gonorrhea to have children. It seems they cannot oppose limiting births due to bad diseases or hereditary issues. The reasons they generally oppose birth limitation can be broadly divided into three categories. Let's briefly outline their claims and the rebuttals.

1. Violation of Great Nature's Will

It is the law of Great Nature (大自然) and the sacred will of God (하누님) for men and women to unite, propagate descendants, and perpetuate their lives. Our duty and God's will is to give birth as much as possible, spread as much as possible, and fill the earth with the human race (人種) like stars in the sky. For humans to arbitrarily limit births and try to avoid temporary suffering signifies the suicide of humanity; it is a violation of God's will (神意) and an insult to Great Nature. Birth limitation is absolutely unacceptable.

"Worry is Useless"

Those who oppose this view say the following: Birth limitation does not signify the suicide of humanity but rather its improvement (向上). "Rather than suffering from ignorantly having children as they come, selecting the timing for sperm and egg to meet based on biological knowledge (i.e., appropriately using contraceptive methods) is the parents' duty (義務) to ensure the child to be born is healthier and that the environment (環境) the child will grow up in is brighter (光明)." Indeed, rather than giving birth to a disabled or weak child, or being unable to raise a child properly to fulfill their role after birth, it is immeasurably better for the child and society as a whole not to have the child in the first place. For those without food and clothing to have many children and become poorer, or to have a child but provide insufficient nourishment, making them weak, or being unable to give medicine when they are sick, leading to death – how much more humane is it not to have the child from the beginning? Furthermore, having children several years apart, rather than frequently, reduces the infant mortality rate. Limiting births considering living conditions, health, and eugenics (우생학) can be said to contribute to the progress and development of humanity. Arguing that limiting births by human effort (人力), which naturally occur according to the laws of Great Nature, violates God's will (神意) and insults Great Nature is the talk of thoughtless people. It goes without saying that not giving birth to disabled children or those who cannot be raised does not go against God's will (!), nor does controlling births through human effort insult or violate Great Nature. If it were an insult or violation, then using any civilized tool based on natural science would be a punishable offense. But that is not the case. We conquer and utilize nature to promote the happiness (幸福) of our humanity. If nearsighted, we don't just see as we are, but wear glasses. When traveling, we don't just walk with the legs nature gave us, but also take trams, trains, and airplanes. When someone in P'yŏngyang wants to speak to someone in Seoul, they don't just shout loudly, but use long-distance telephones to compensate for the inadequacy (不足) of our voice and hearing. Similarly, assisting our reproductive organs and functions artificially for our happiness and appropriately limiting births is more than natural (當然); it is something only humans can do. Only then can "science fulfill its mission as the science of life."

2. Opposition from a National and Ethnic Perspective <88>

Birth limitation reduces the population, causing the nation to decline and the ethnicity to perish. Birth limitation! Preventing people from having people is a sign of ruin. How will industry (産業) prosper, and who will fight wars (戰爭)? The more population a country has, the better. Give birth, give birth, keep giving birth as much as possible.
Of course, if one can give birth well and raise them well, it would be good to give birth and give birth again until the entire globe (地球) is full and we can even launch an expedition (遠征) to Mars (火星). However... there are two opposing standpoints:
(a) The progressive bourgeois (뿌르조아) standpoint. This position aligns with the proletarian standpoint up to the point that birth limitation does not reduce the population but rather improves the race (人種). "Moreover," these people consciously or unconsciously base their arguments on Malthus's population theory, embellishing the flaws (缺點) of capitalism (資本主義) and clamoring as if birth limitation alone can achieve proletarian liberation (解放) and human peace (平和), which is where the error lies. One such proponent, Mr. Abe Isoo (安部磯雄), a master of the Japanese birth limitation movement, says: "Birth limitation personally saves many people from poverty (貧窮) and, especially for beloved children, allows them to escape a miserable life (生活). Nationally, it keeps population growth at an appropriate level (程度) and prevents useless international conflicts (國際的 紛擾)." (Population Problems and Birth Limitation) It is utterly impossible for poverty to be eliminated and wars to cease through birth limitation. What should be noted here is not that Mr. Abe's entire argument is wrong. However, his fundamental thinking is flawed. For instance, the statement, "A child has the right to refuse to come into this world if its parents do not desire it or greet it coldly, even though they may eagerly await its arrival," is correct. Also, the phrase "personally saves many people from poverty" has some truth in the sense that it can alleviate poverty. But his fundamental thinking is flawed. The idea that life improves somewhat by limiting births is entirely different from the notion that poverty arises from having many children and can be escaped by limiting births. The reasons for poverty lie elsewhere. This person advocates limiting births not for physiological or hygienic reasons, but artificially, based on the idea that a large population causes poverty and war. And he thinks that if the population is limited, all will be peaceful. This is the fundamental error, the exposure of which will be deferred to the critique of Malthus's population theory later.
In any case, even according to the arguments of the Abe-types, only superior citizens remain in the country, and wars between nations disappear, so the theory holds that it is actually beneficial from a national and ethnic perspective.
(b) Rebuttal from the proletarian standpoint. This perspective can demolish the opposition fearing national extinction simply by stating, as mentioned above, that birth limitation not only does not cause population decline but also promotes racial improvement. Beyond that, regarding the bourgeois viewpoints on nation, industry, war, etc., there is hardly any need for further comment. However, keeping in mind that an industrial reserve army (産業豫備軍) arises even if the population does not increase, the words of Mr. Ōya Sōichi (大宅壯一) can also serve as a rebuttal. "Imperialist nations (帝國主義 諸國家), in order to have as abundant an industrial reserve army and human bullets (肉彈) for emergencies as possible, consider birth limitation a dangerous idea and try their utmost to obstruct (沮止) it."
(c) Opposition from a moral standpoint. This can be divided into two: one is to practice birth limitation morally, i.e., through abstinence (禁慾) (or late marriage (晩婚)), and the other is that while birth limitation itself might be acceptable, the popularization of contraceptive methods will lead to promiscuous relations between men and women, so it cannot be permitted.
That abstinence and late marriage cannot limit sexual relations is affirmed by anyone observing the sexual relations in contemporary society, and even if it were possible to some extent, the fact that it is unreasonable needs no lengthy explanation (see Tonggwang August issue, "Theory of Sexual Liberation").
The moralists' concern (憂慮) that the popularization of contraceptive methods will lead to sexual chaos is also unfounded. Regarding this, Mr. Abe cites the example of Holland (和蘭), where the government even encourages the dissemination of contraceptive methods, yet the country's atmosphere is not promiscuous at all; rather, it is a respectable moral nation without public or private prostitution. However, we <89> don't even need such examples to know this is a groundless fear. Why? Because those who would engage in sexual debauchery upon learning about contraception would do so even without knowing it, and such individuals already know about contraception now. In reality, the people demanding contraception and birth limitation are the working masses (勞働大衆) whose practical lives desperately require it. The thought of using contraception for sexual indulgence does not even cross their minds. The cause (原因) of sexual debauchery lies elsewhere; the spread of contraception will not increase the degree of debauchery (see Tonggwang August issue, "Theory of Sexual Liberation" for the cause of sexual debauchery).

3. Arguments for Birth Control

From our examination of the arguments against birth control above, we have grasped the general outline of the arguments for it. However, even among proponents of birth control, we can distinguish two main lines based on differing class standpoints. Nevertheless, common to both is the hygienic (衛生學) and eugenic (優生學的) standpoint, primarily focused on human improvement and the health (健康) of mother and child (子母). Besides this, Ms. Sanger's (쌍가여사) view from the perspective of women's liberation is also noteworthy, but we will omit (略) that here. Instead, we will first clarify the arguments from the hygienic and eugenic standpoint by mentioning the declaration of the C.B.C. and the circumstances under which Ms. Sanger stated birth limitation should occur.
1. The C.B.C. (Society for Constructive Birth Control and Racial Progress in England) flyer titled "What is Constructive Birth Control?"
"The wise mission (賢明 使命) of birth control, that is, pregnancy control (妊娠 調節), is to provide the best possible opportunities for the children newly born in our country and to enable the birth of children who should be healthy and are wanted.
Some Neo-Malthusians (新말사스主義者) practice birth limitation for population reduction, but we... never hinder the birth of healthy and wanted children.
The situation where poor and weak people keep having unwanted children, suffering as a result (結果), and causing personal and economic waste (經濟的 浪費), must be fundamentally (根本的) rectified. On the other hand, it is pitiful that families capable of raising noble and healthy citizens (高潔 市民 養育 家庭) feel emptiness (空虚) and loneliness (寂寞) due to the absence of children."
2. Ms. Sanger roughly divides the circumstances for birth limitation into five categories:
(a) Birth Interval (産兒年數). A mother needs 2-3 years to recover her health sufficiently to bear another child, so it is advisable to practice contraception (피임) for 2-3 years postpartum.
(b) Illness (疾病). When the father or mother has defects (欠陷) such as tuberculosis (結核病), gonorrhea (淋病), syphilis (徵毒), cancer (癌), mental illness (精神病), or severe intoxication (大醉泥醉), or when the mother has heart disease (心臟病) or pelvic abnormalities (骨盤 異常), appropriate contraceptive methods (適當 方法) should be used.
(c) Heredity (遺傳). Even if both parents (兩親) are healthy, if a child has physical (肉體上) or mental (精神上) defects (欠陷), they should not have more children.
(d) Age (年齡). Women under 22 are physically and mentally underdeveloped (發育 不充分), so contraception is recommended. However, this can vary by individual and race (人種), and opinions differ (異) regarding age limits. But it is generally agreed (中論 一致) that for several months (數個月) immediately after marriage, as the woman's constitution (體質) undergoes many changes (變化), caution is advised not only regarding contraception but also sexual intercourse (性交).
(e) Environment (環境). Cases where there is no ability (能力) to properly raise (保育) a child.
Up to this point, there is little disagreement (理論) between the bourgeois and proletarian standpoints. However, attitudes diverge starting from (e) Environment. While it is true that limiting births can alleviate poverty (貧困 緩和) when a family is poor (貧寒) and cannot sustain itself if more children are born, the bourgeois view regards this alleviation – the birth limitation that enables it – as a savior (救世主) that eliminates poverty. In contrast, the proletarian standpoint is to utilize this alleviation to strive for the liberation of their own class (階級). No, it's not just about alleviating poverty; contraception is unavoidable because they literally cannot afford to eat and live, and furthermore, the struggle (鬪爭) for their class liberation demands (要請) contraception. Thus, Yamadamura Shirō (山田村四郞) says: "During strikes (스트라익), workers (勞働者) with many children often betray the struggle (爭議 背反). <91> For the proletariat to confront the capitalists, strike, and achieve a dignified victory (勝利 獲得), fighters (鬪士) should not have many children." It is certain that the birth limitation movement that initially arose in Japan (around 1922) was recognized from this perspective. It wasn't from a eugenic viewpoint, nor from a population problem perspective. This movement originated from the class standpoint of the proletariat aiming to achieve victory in the class struggle. (Yasuda Tokutarō 安田德太郞)" Thus, the proletariat views everything from the standpoint of class struggle. In the future society, birth limitation will be advocated for hygienic and eugenic reasons, but it is crucial to note that it will never be advocated for solving population problems.
Thinking like Mr. Abe Isoo (安部機雄), that birth limitation can save people from poverty and that stopping population growth at an appropriate level can prevent useless international conflicts, is a foolish delusion (몽상). This is the theory (理論) of Neo-Malthusianism (新 말사스주의), and its true nature (正體) can be understood by examining its foundation, Malthus's population theory (人口論).
According to Malthus (Thomas Robert Malthus 1766-1834), the human population increases geometrically like 2, 4, 8, 16, while food supplies (食料品) increase arithmetically like 2, 4, 6, 8. As a result (結果), humans always lack sufficient means of living (生活資料), leading to poverty (貧窮) and vice (罪惡). Poverty and vice cause murder (殺入), adultery (間通), abortion (墮胎), disease (疾病), and war (戰爭), which in turn limit overpopulation. However, as long as the tendency for population to increase relative to the means of living persists, poverty and vice in human society are unavoidable facts (事實). According to his logic (論法), rescuing people suffering from poverty and starvation (飢餓) actually supports overpopulation, thereby promoting (助成) poverty and vice; charity (慈善) thus becomes a crime (犯罪). Raising workers' wages (賃金 引上), improving living conditions (條件 改善), and ensuring life (生命 保障) causes population increase and becomes the root cause (根本) of societal ruin. The conclusion (歸結) of his argument is that capitalists thoroughly exploiting (搾取 徹底) workers to the point of death (死) is the means (所謂) to enhance the happiness of human society. Doing so would reduce the population and increase production (生産). This shows the considerable merit (功勞 大端) of Malthus in defending the position of the emerging bourgeoisie (新興 뿌르조아지) of his time. In the second edition (第2版) of his population theory, he barely discovered moral restraint (道德的 抑制) as a remedy (救濟策) for population growth, prescribing the method (方文) of refraining from marriage (結婚) until one could afford a decent living. If people followed his advice, millions of single ghosts (獨身 鬼神) would inevitably be trembling, clutching their passions (熱情). It's inconceivable they could ever achieve financial stability (生活 安定) and marry.
Neo-Malthusianism, the viewpoint of the Abe-types, faithfully adheres (準奉) to this Malthusian population limitation theory, merely substituting artificial contraception (人工避妊法) for sexual restraint.
It goes without saying that Malthus's population theory was a biased theory defending the emerging bourgeoisie of his time, but using his population limitation theory as the basis for advocating birth control is utterly absurd (天不當 萬不當).
Even assuming the statistics (統計) Malthus used at the time were generally accurate (正確), his failure to recognize that science (科學) could develop geometrically (幾何學的 發達) and provide means of living for humanity was a major error (過失). If we apply our skills—science and technology!—to fly in the sky and crawl on the earth, developing the great nature of the entire globe, we probably wouldn't feel a shortage of living space and food for many thousands of years (멫 千年). (This calculation is left to scientists, but unless scientists scientifically calculate and report overpopulation, we need not worry about population limitation. That will become a practical social issue only many thousands of years later.)
The claim that food is scarce and the population is excessive is by no means because food is actually scarce and the population excessive. On one hand, one person accumulates food and clothing like a mountain, while on the other, there are people who haven't eaten even that morning. Is this because food is scarce and the population excessive? One person owns assets worth millions and hundreds of thousands of p'yŏng of land, while others wander without a place to live. Is this because living space is scarce? As long as this global contradiction of capital accumulation, poverty, and bitterness exists, even if only two people remained on earth, they would feel overpopulation. The fundamental reason <91> is none other than the capitalist system (資本主義制度), which allows the bourgeoisie to monopolize wealth by exploiting the proletariat. As long as this system exists, poverty, vice, and war are unavoidable gifts (禮物). Claims that limiting births will reduce the population, leading to peace and the end of war, are mere sleep-talking (잠고대). Advocating birth control is good, but even among those who discuss proletarian birth control, some seek "Proletarian comrades with the Yamato spirit (大和魂)" (p. 7), revere (崇奉) Lindsey's companionate marriage, and look for pseudo-"Proletarian Birth Control" (by Nakao Otokichi 中尾音吉著). Thus, we need to clarify the differences in arguments even within the same birth control movement.

4. Current Status in Various Countries and Contraceptive Methods

The era of debating whether birth limitation is right or wrong is already past (過去); we have now entered the era of practice (實踐時代), as evidenced by the current situation in various countries.
In Holland (和蘭), contraceptive methods are officially sanctioned (公許) by the state. The Neo-Malthusian Association was established 40-50 years ago, operating nursing association offices (看護婦會事務所) and birth control clinics (산아제한상담소), holding workshops (講習會), and distributing pamphlets (팜플레트) to provide training (訓練) in contraceptive methods. Additionally, there are 43 private practitioners directly affiliated with this league, allowing anyone who wishes to obtain practical knowledge (實際的 知識). Furthermore, those without money can receive necessary items (必要品) for free (無料).
In England (영국), over 50 years ago, in 1876, Ms. Bradlaugh (부랏트라푸) and Ms. Besant (베산트) distributed (散布) pamphlets on contraceptive methods, leading to a trial (裁判). Now, books (書籍) and devices (用具) related to contraception are openly available on the streets. The state simply does not actively promote it.
A group contributing (貢獻) to the birth control movement in England is the Society for Constructive Birth Control and Racial Progress (약칭 C.B.C.), centered around Mrs. Stopes (스톱스부인, Marie Carmichael). They operate a "Mothers' Health Clinic" (어머니의 건강상담소) and publish a birth control newspaper (新聞 發行) to disseminate knowledge (知識 普及) about contraception and childbirth, and arrange for necessary items.
Additionally, there is the New Generation League (신시대동맹) run by Neo-Malthusians. Centered around Dr. Drysdale (드라스델박사), they publish the magazine "New Generation" (잡지 「신시대」) and pamphlets to broaden knowledge about contraception while also providing practical assistance (實際的 便益) to the poor (貧民).
In the United States (미국), conditions vary by state (洲), but since contraception was banned (禁止) in 1770 due to obstinate religious figures (頑固 宗教家), the publication and lecturing on contraceptive methods have been prohibited until now. However, behind the scenes (事實 裏面), contraception is widespread (盛行). Judge Lindsey (린제이판사), famous for "Companionate Marriage" (우애결혼), argues for openly acknowledging this stark reality. That contraception is rare among wealthy Americans who don't practice it can be proven by this fact alone. The "Voluntary Parenthood League" (自主張親性聯盟) is engaged in political activity (政治的 活動) aiming for the repeal (撤廢) of anti-contraception laws (避姙敢締法), and advocates for making the knowledge of birth control—contraceptive methods, currently accessible only to the wealthy—available to the general public (一般 大衆). The desperate need for contraception among the masses due to practical life reasons is evident from the fact that when Mrs. Sanger (쌍가부인) first returned from Holland (和蘭) and opened a clinic (相談所) in Brooklyn, a large number of 480 people visited in just ten days. After ten days, the clinic was closed (閉鎖), and Mrs. Sanger was accused (告訴 當) of violating the law prohibiting contraception. However, because she was a nurse (看護婦), she was acquitted. The law stipulated that "only physicians (醫事) may teach methods of birth control to women when they are ill (病)." Utilizing this law, Mrs. Sanger founded the
American Birth Control League (104 Fifth Ave, New York) and promoted contraceptive knowledge through practice and publications (實際와 책자). Her book "Woman and the New Race" (부인과 신인종) has been translated (번譯) into seven languages, selling 250,000 copies (25萬部), and the "Birth Control Review" (산아제한 평론) is distributed in 35 countries (35個國). Additionally, in 1924, The Committee on Maternal Health of New York (紐育母性健康委員會) was established (設立). Under the guidance (指導) of Mr. Robert L. Dickinson (로바트.엘.라이킨스씨), it conducts academic research (學術的 研究) on contraceptive methods and enables major hospitals (大病院) to actually teach (傳授) them.
In Japan (日本), from around 1922, the Central Birth Control Consultation Center (中央産兒調節相談所) existed in the Kantō (關東) region, primarily serving the middle class (中産階級). In Osaka (大阪), the Birth Control Research Society (산아제한연구회) targeted workers and peasants (勞働者 農民), actively promoting contraceptive methods. How vigorous (猛烈) the movement was at the time is well described in an editorial (社說) in the Osaka Asahi (大阪朝日): <92>
"While the movement in the Tokyo (東京) area mainly targets the middle class and above, the Kansai (關西) side focuses on the proletariat (無産階級), conducting simple yet intense propaganda. As a result, members in Osaka alone have surpassed 1,000 since early spring, and the situation is booming, with no day passing without at least 50 applicants (申込者). Furthermore, they are now consolidating the movement's structure, planning to distribute 20,000 pamphlets and 50,000 posters, and showing the spirit to hold speeches and lectures everywhere. (March 13, 1923)" Later, Yamamoto Senji (山本宣治) became the chief editor (周刊) at this research society and published the "Birth Control Review" (산아조절평론). Last year, on April 1st, the Eugenics Consultation Center (우생아 상담소) of the Japan Birth Control Association (일본 산아제한협회) was established in Osaka, reportedly working on birth control targeting the working class.
In Korea (조선)—there is nothing in Korea. But countless people are struggling, wanting to practice it. "Just tell us the contraceptive methods already!" Apologies, but I do not have the freedom (自由) to publish that here. Discussing it privately (個人的) is fine, but publicly announcing contraceptive methods is not yet permitted (許諾) by Japanese law (日本 法律). I will only mention what little is possible. To avoid going off track, I will quote entirely from other books (他 書 引用).
"The extremely safe and most complete method is the application of protective devices (保護具 應用). This means using condoms (곤돔 - ルデ サック - rude sakku), but it causes an unpleasant sensation (不快 感), etc." (Nakao Otokichi 中尾音吉著, Proletarian Birth Control, p. 114)
"Since the period before and after menstruation is when pregnancy is most likely, the 'half-month avoidance method' (半月 避交法), avoiding this period, is said to be effective (効果). This involves avoiding intercourse (交接) from 1-2 days before menstruation until ten-odd days after menstruation." (Ibid.)
Douching (洗滌法), suppositories (坐藥), pessaries (베싸리), etc., have been widely tested. And even contraceptive pins (避妊針), exactly as illustrated (插畵) in Mrs. Sanger's pamphlet, came into use... What methods are practiced by the masses (大衆的 施行)? Firstly, douching (洗滌) with boric acid (붕산), quinine (키니네), or cold water (冷水) was practiced. Policemen (巡査) welcomed douching with vinegar (酢). Secondly, suppositories (坐藥) made of quinine (키니네) and cocoa butter (카카오脂) were used. Because they didn't dissolve well, there are amusing anecdotes (痛快 揷話) among union members (組合員). Some succeeded, some failed. Many people, despite using medication, unfortunately became pregnant (不幸 姙娠) and worriedly sent inquiry letters (質問狀 發) to Yamamoto (Senji 山本宣治), asking what would happen if they gave birth to a disabled child. Yamamoto wrote a standard reply (定 回答). "A sperm (情虫) that breaks through such obstacles (障害物 突破), enters the cervix (子宮口 突入), and splendidly fulfills the mission of conception (受胎 使命) is a tenacious sperm (頑强 精虫) with considerable resistance (相當 抵抗力). I can say with 100% confidence (100% 自身) that the baby you will bear will surely be a strong person (必 强健 人)." (Chūō Kōron 中央公論 January issue, pp. 66-7, Yasuda Tokutarō 安田德太郞)
"The following items are referenced from Mrs. Stopes' publications.
A. Without using chemical substances or devices.
(a) Actions taken by the woman
2. Positioning her body to prevent the penis (陰莖) from contacting the cervix (子宮頸 接觸 防止).
3. Immediately after ejaculation (射精終了 後), standing upright (直立), sneezing forcefully (세게 자채기), or performing certain movements for pelvic muscle contraction (骨盤筋肉 收縮 動作).
4. Extending the nursing period (授乳期 延長) for infants or toddlers (嬰兒 幼兒).
(b) Actions taken by the man
5. Coitus sine immissione vaginae (질外性交 without normal insertion 행위).
6. Achieving vaginal stimulation (질刺戟) and withdrawing (取出) before ejaculation outside the vagina (질 外 射精).
B. Actions or methods involving inserting chemical substances to eliminate sperm motility (정자 활동력). (Chemicals are inserted into the vagina 질 內 엿는다)
16. OO acid (OO酸) combined in various forms.
17. Cold O (冷O) used as a douching method (洗滌法).
C. Use of devices to prevent contact between male sperm and female ovum (난자 접촉 방지 기구 사용).
(a) For men
18. Condom (콘돔) (OOO sack type 삭구의 類)
19. Pin (핀) or a type of plug (栓).
(b) For women
21. Flexible plug (柔軟栓)
25. Metallic cap (金屬性 키OO푸).
28. Occlusive spring diaphragm cap (閉塞用 바네 緩半圓形 키OO푸) (Dutch cap 탓치기OO푸)
30. "Mensinga" pessary (「마도니사루스」베싸리)." (Nakao 中尾著, Ibid., pp. 117-120)
What we can generally see in magazines (雜誌) or books (書籍) does not exceed <93> what is written above. Advertisements (廣告) in publications about contraceptive methods and such are nothing more than fraudulent schemes (詐欺手段) to make money (돈).
Among those listed above, the only ones we can readily use are 1 and 2, and even those cannot be asserted with 100 percent certainty (確實性). Furthermore, the use of chemical agents (化學的 藥品 使用) is impossible based solely on descriptions in print (紙上 說明); guidance from a medical specialist (專門醫 指示) is absolutely necessary. Consulting a specialist is obvious, but even when following the same instructions, the effectiveness (效果) is said to differ depending on the user's skill (使用技術). Why? Because conception occurs at the moment sperm and ovum unite, and without knowing the subtle physiological structure (미묘 生理的 構造) and properties (性質), one cannot achieve the physical or chemical effect (物理的 乃至 化學的 效果) of preventing sperm from contacting the ovum or causing ejaculated sperm to lose its reproductive function (生殖 機能). Therefore, at present, "the practice of contraception requires at least a general preparatory knowledge (大綱 準備知識) of the anatomy and physiology (解剖生理) of the human sexual organs." (Yamamoto Senji 山宣)
"So only people with money and education can do it?" That's right. Therefore, simple contraceptive methods anyone can use must be left to future research (연구). According to the investigation (調査) by the New York Committee on Maternal Health (紐育 健康委員會), there are 24 methods currently practiced (實行) in Europe and America (歐米 各國), but not a single one is 100 percent effective (確實). Some people reportedly achieve practical results (實效) by cleverly combining a couple of these methods. However, "in Japan, many readily available contraceptive methods are uncertain in effect, while those with relatively certain efficacy (奏効) are not as easily accessible as in Western countries due to difficulties in purchasing devices and materials (裝置 材料 購入), or due to customs and habits (風俗習慣 關係)." (Yamamoto Senji 山宣) How much more so in Korea (朝鮮)! Not just Japan, but especially in Korea, many doctors (醫師) are completely ignorant about contraception. Assuming a doctor knows might lead to trouble (봉변 當). Why? Because if asked, saying "I don't know" is embarrassing (창피), so they prescribe medicine they don't understand, take money, and the person seeking contraception not only fails but also loses money and suffers harm (해 받는다).
In conclusion (結局), contraceptive methods are still in the early stages of development (發達 初期). However, using preparatory knowledge, devices (器具), and chemicals (藥品), it is possible to achieve relatively reliable effects without diminishing pleasure (快感 減). But methods easy for the masses (大衆) to use lack certain efficacy (効効). And in Korea, even with money, it's hard to find reliable information—as doctors often don't know—so the general public (一般 大衆) has absolutely no way (方策) to practice it.
"What's to be done? So, you wrote this lengthy article (論文) just to say you don't know in the end? How tedious. Comrades (동무들아)! To survive, we cannot avoid contraception. What should we do? It's the same for us. Is there anything money can't achieve?" Therefore, shrewd doctors (영리 醫師) might soon set up birth control clinics (産兒調節 相談所) to make money. To counter this, to disseminate practical, albeit imperfect, methods for the propertyless masses (無産大衆), to distribute devices even for free (無料 配給), and to conduct research (調査研究) on birth control, we must establish a "Korea Birth Control Research Institute" (조선산아조절연구소). We eagerly await the activity of concerned individuals (有志) and revolutionary doctors (혁명적 醫師) who care about the masses. At that time, the slogans must include at least these three:
1. Absolute opposition (絶對 反對) to money-grubbing doctors!
2. Absolute opposition to abusers (惡用) of contraceptive methods!
3. Long live the popularization (大衆化 萬歲) of contraceptive methods! <94>

**Summary**

This 1931 article argues strongly for the necessity of birth control (산아조절), distinguishing it from simple limitation. It refutes religious, naturalist, and nationalist objections, framing them as outdated or bourgeois. The author analyzes birth control through a class lens, contrasting the "bourgeois" approach (linked to Malthusianism, national strength, potentially masking capitalist flaws) with the "proletarian" approach, which views birth control as necessary for individual well-being (avoiding poverty, improving health/eugenics) and, crucially, as a tool for class struggle (enabling workers to participate more effectively in strikes). The article surveys the situation in Holland, Britain, the US, and Japan, noting varying degrees of acceptance and accessibility, before lamenting the complete lack of resources and knowledge in Korea. It concludes by calling for the establishment of a "Korea Birth Control Research Institute" to research and popularize reliable, accessible methods for the masses, explicitly opposing commercial exploitation and misuse.

From a colonial history perspective, the article is highly revealing. Its adoption of Marxist class analysis (proletariat vs. bourgeoisie) reflects the significant influence of socialist thought among Korean intellectuals in the 1920s and 30s. The critique of bourgeois nationalism and Malthusianism can be read partly as a critique of Japanese imperialist ideology or potentially certain strands of Korean nationalism. The explicit call for a *Korean* institute (조선산아조절연구소) underscores a desire for agency and solutions tailored to Korean circumstances, even while operating under Japanese legal restrictions (acknowledged regarding the publication of specific methods). The focus on the "propertyless masses" (무산대중) and linking birth control to workers' ability to strike highlights the social conditions and political consciousness of the period.

**Named Entities**

美國	미국	America
安部磯雄	안베 이소오	Abe Isoo
말더스	말더스	Malthus
大宅壯一	오오야 소오이치	Ōya Sōichi
和蘭	화란	Holland
C.B.C (영국에 잇는 건설적 산아조절 及 인종 향상협회)	(영국에 있는 건설적 산아조절 및 인종 향상협회)	Society for Constructive Birth Control and Racial Progress (in England)
쌍가여사	쌍가 여사	Ms. Sanger (Margaret Sanger)
山田村四郞	야마다무라 시로(?)	Yamadamura Shirō (?)
安田德太郞	야스다 도쿠타로	Yasuda Tokutarō
부랏트라푸	브래들로	Bradlaugh (Charles Bradlaugh)
베산트	베산트	Besant (Annie Besant)
스톱스부인	스톱스 부인	Mrs. Stopes (Marie Stopes)
드라스델박사	드라이즈데일 박사	Dr. Drysdale (Charles Vickery Drysdale?)
린제이판사	린지 판사	Judge Lindsey (Ben Lindsey)
自主張親性聯盟	자주장친성 연맹	Voluntary Parenthood League
미국산아조절연맹	미국 산아조절 연맹	American Birth Control League
紐育母性健康委員會	뉴욕 모성 건강 위원회	The Committee on Maternal Health of New York
로바트.엘.라이킨스씨	로버트 엘 라이킨스 씨	Mr. Robert L. Dickinson
日本	일본	Japan
關東	관동	Kantō
中央産兒調節相談所	중앙 산아조절 상담소	Central Birth Control Consultation Center
大阪	오사카	Ōsaka
산아제한연구회	산아제한 연구회	Birth Control Research Society
大阪朝日	오사카 아사히	Osaka Asahi
東京	도쿄	Tōkyō
關西	관서	Kansai
山本宣治	야마모토 센지	Yamamoto Senji
山宣	야마센	Yamasen (Abbreviation for Yamamoto Senji)
일본 산아제한협회	일본 산아제한 협회	Japan Birth Control Association
우생아 상담소	우생아 상담소	Eugenics Consultation Center
조선	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
中尾音吉	나카오 오토키치	Nakao Otokichi
中央公論	주오코론	Chūō Kōron (Japanese Magazine)
조선산아조절연구소	조선 산아조절 연구소	Korea Birth Control Research Institute

**Glossary**

産兒調節	산아조절	Birth control (lit. childbirth adjustment)
意義	의의	Significance, meaning
現勢	현세	Current situation/status
産兒制限	산아제한	Birth limitation
피임법	피임법	Contraception method
뿌르조아	부르주아	Bourgeoisie (loanword)
푸로레타리아트	프롤레타리아트	Proletariat (loanword)
揚棄	양기	To sublate, abolish and transcend (philosophical term, often used in Marxist contexts)
峻別	준별	To distinguish strictly/clearly
神意	신의	Divine will, God's will
向上	향상	Improvement, progress
優生學	우생학	Eugenics
人力	인력	Human power/effort
缺點	결점	Flaw, defect, shortcoming
紛擾	분요	Disturbance, dispute, conflict
産業豫備軍	산업예비군	Industrial reserve army (Marxist term)
帝國主義	제국주의	Imperialism
肉彈	육탄	Human bullet, cannon fodder
禁慾	금욕	Abstinence, asceticism
晩婚	만혼	Late marriage
階級的	계급적	Class-based, pertaining to social class
子母	자모	Mother and child
建設的	건설적	Constructive
妊娠	임신	Pregnancy
欠陷	결함	Defect, flaw, shortcoming (older form of 결함)
兩親	양친	Both parents
鬪爭	투쟁	Struggle, fight
말더스론	말더스론	Malthusianism
等比級數的	등비급수적	Geometrical progression
等差級數的	등차급수적	Arithmetical progression
食料品	식료품	Foodstuffs, provisions
罪惡	죄악	Vice, sin, evil
墮胎	타태	Abortion
救濟	구제	Relief, aid, rescue
慈善	자선	Charity, philanthropy
賃金	임금	Wages
搾取	착취	Exploitation
公許	공허	Official permission, license
小冊子	소책자	Pamphlet, booklet
散布	산포	Distribution, scattering
貢獻	공헌	Contribution
撤廢	철폐	Abolition, repeal
敢締法	감체법	Law prohibiting/regulating something strongly (seems specific context here to anti-contraception law)
周刊	주간	Chief editor (also means weekly publication, but context points to editor role here)
優生兒	우생아	Eugenic child
곤돔	콘돔	Condom (loanword, also uses Japanese loan ルデ サック 'rude sakku')
月經	월경	Menstruation
洗滌法	세척법	Douching method
坐藥	좌약	Suppository
베싸리	페서리	Pessary (loanword)
插畵	삽화	Illustration
OO酸	OO산	OO acid (censored, likely 붕산 Boric acid)
OOO 삭구	OOO 삭구	OOO sack (censored, likely 고무 삭구 Rubber sack, i.e., condom)
키OO푸	키OO프	Cap (censored, medical device)
탓치기OO푸	더치캡	Dutch cap (censored, type of diaphragm)
專門醫	전문의	Medical specialist
봉변	봉변	Getting into trouble, suffering misfortune/humiliation
無産大衆	무산대중	Propertyless masses, proletariat
有志	유지	Volunteer, interested person, person with志 (will/purpose)
萬歲	만세	Hurrah, long live (Banzai)
잇다	있다	To exist, to have (older spelling)
하야	하여	Doing, as (older spelling/form of 하여)
위하야	위하여	For the sake of (older spelling)
멕여	먹여	To feed (older spelling)
섯다	썼다	Wrote (older form of 썼다)
곳	곧	Immediately, namely (older spelling)
멫	몇	How many, several (older spelling)


---------------------------


잡지명	동광 제25호
발행일	1931년 09월 04일
기사제목	産兒調節의 意義와 現勢, 東光大學 제7강 社會問題篇
기사형태	논설

産兒調節의 意義와 現勢, 東光大學 제7강 社會問題篇
1. 산아조절은 무엇인가
산아제한이라는 것은 아이를 둘이나 셋까지는 낳을 수 잇고 그 이상을 낳서는 안된다고 천변일률로 제한하는 것이 아니다. 아이를 낳는 것이 그 아이를 위하야, 그 집안을 위하야, 그 사회를 위하야 좋다고 생각만 하면 누구나 서슴치 말고 연속 다산하야 세계적 최고기록(한 어머니 배에 43명, 이것은 미국)을 돌파하고 일약 세계적 母性이 되어볼 일이다. 그러나 만일 병신을 낳고 또는 어린 것을 낳아야 멕여 기를 것이 없고 일가가 살아나갈 수가 없는 경우에는 처음부터 어린 애를 배지 않는 것만같지 못하다. 「그것이야 누구가 몰라, 할 수만 잇엇으면! 그러나 부부가 한 자리에 자지 않을 수야 잇나.」 한 자리에 자고도 피임법을 서서 애를 배지 않게 하는 수가 잇다. 이것이 산아제한이라고 하는 것이다. 어린 애를 낳고 싶은 때에는 낳고 낳는 것이 좋지 못할 경우에는 낳지 않게 한다. 그래서 요새는 흔히 산아조절이라는 말을 쓴다. 어린 것을 낳고 싶은 때에는 낳고 낳는 것이 좋지 못할 경우에는 낳지 않게 하는 이 산아조절이 절대로 필요한 것은 물론이지마는 여기에 대하야도 의논이 분분하다. 이제 그 시비론과 아울러 세계 각국의 실제 운동의 현상을 약술하고저 한다.

2. 산아조절의 반대론과 그 비판
과학도 모르고 현실도 모르고 눈을 싸매고 반대하기로만 목덕을 삼는 도덕가 종교가류의 봉건적 반대론이나 뿌르조아의 애국적 반대론을 격파 분쇄하기는 비교적 쉬운 일이나 같이 산아조절을 주장하면서도 인식이 부족하야 주장하는 근거가 틀린 푸로레타리아트의 산아조절론, 그 주장하는 입장이 전연 다른 뿌르조아의 산아조절론을 정당한 그것과 峻別하는 것은 쉬운 일이 아니다. 「산아조절이면 산아조절이지 산아조절에도 뿌르조아 푸로레타리아트가 다르고 피임법에도 뿌르조아와 푸로레타리아가 다른가? 생식기도 자본가와 노동자가 다르겟군! 별 개수작을 다-」언어는 삼가는 것이 좋다. 개수작이라니? 물론 생식기는 자본가 지주나 노동자 농민이나 다 같다. 그러기에 산아조절에서 얻는 인류의 이익은 다 같지마는, 자본가, 지주는 노동자, 농민을 착취하는 계급이고, 노동자 농민은 이 착취를 격멸하고 揚棄하야 무착취 사회를 건설할랴는 신흥계급인 까닭에 산아조절에 잇어서도 그 보는 바와 생각하는 바가 판이하다. 「그러면 푸로레타리아의 산아조절은 뿌르조아의 산아조절을 배격하는가. 뿌르조아가 발명하는 피임법을＜87＞ 쓰지 않겟네.」 완고하기 짝이 없다. 왜 그 피임법을 안써? 뿌르조아가 주장하는 이론도 틀린 것만 내놓으면 다 좋다. 다만 푸로레타리아트는 그 틀린 것만 제외하고는 모든 옳은 점을 취하야 푸로레타리아트 입장에서 생각하고 푸로레타리아트의 해방을 위하야 행동할 뿐이다. 그런 고로 뿌르조아 산아조절론이 다 틀렷다는 것은 아니다. 新말더스론과 그밖의 모든 오류를 제외하면 그러고 계급적 입장에서 보면 그것이 곳 푸로레타리아트의 산아조절론이라고 할 수 잇다. 「계급이니 해방이니 하 는 말은 두엇다 하고 어서 피임법이나 말해라」그러케 덤빌 것이 아니라 순서를 차자서
산아조절의 반대론
부터 이야기하기로 하자. 산아제한(조절)을 반대하는 사람도 문둥병이나 림질 잇는 사람이 자식을 낳라고는 하지 않는다. 나뿐 병이나 유전의 관계로 산아를 제한하는데까지는 반대를 못하는 모양이다. 그들이 일반적으로 산아제한에 반대하는 이유는 大別하야 세 가지로 볼 수 잇으니 이제 그들의 주장과 거기에 대한 반박을 약술하여보자.

1. 대자연 의사에 위반
남녀가 서로 합하야 자손을 번식하고 자기의 생명을 영원케 하는 것은 대자연의 법칙이고 하누님의 거륵한 뜻이다. 사람이 낳을 대로 낳고 퍼칠 대로 퍼처서 하늘에 별과 같이 대지의 인종을 퍼치는 것이 우리의 할 일이요 하누님의 뜻이다. 인간이 마음대로 산아를 제한하고 일시의 고통을 면하려고 하는 것은 인류의 자살을 의미하는 것이니 神意에 위반하는 대자연의 모독이다. 산아제한은 절대로 용납할 수 없다.

「걱정은 무용」
여기에 반대하는 사람은 이러케 말한다. 산아제한은 인류의 자살을 의미하는 것이 아니라 인류의 향상을 의미하는 것이다. 「무지하게 나오는대로 어린애를 낳고 해를 받는 것보다 생물학의 지식을 기초로 하야 정자 난자가 합하는 시기를 선택하는 것은 (즉 적당히 피임법을 사용하는 것은) 나올 아이를 더 건장하게 하고 그 아이가 자라날 환경을 광명잇게 하기 위한 부모의 의무다.」 사실 병신이나 허약한 아이를 낳는 것보다, 아이를 낳서도 한 사람 구실을 하게 잘 기르지 못하는 것보다 처음부터 낳지 않는 것이 그 아이를 위하야 사회 전반을 위하야 얼마나 나을지 모르겟다. 먹고 입을 것이 없는 사람이 아이를 많이 낳서 더 못살게 되던가 어린 것을 낳서도 양육이 부족하야 허약하게 하고 또는 앓을 때에 약도 멕이지 못하다가 죽어버리게 하는 것보다 처음부터 낳지 않는 것이 얼마나 인도적인지 모르겟다. 그 뿐 아니라 어린애를 자조 낳는 것보다 여러 해를 건너 낳면 어린애 때에 죽는 사망률이 적어진다. 생활상태와 건강과 우생학을 고려하야 산아를 제한하는 것은 인류의 향상 발전을 기하는 것이라고 할 수 잇다. 대자연의 법칙에 의하야 산아하는 것을 인력으로 제한하는 것은 神意에 위반이요 대자연의 모독이라고 하지마는 이것은 생각이 없는 사람의 말이다. 병신과 기르지 못할 아이를 낳지 않는 것이 神意(!)에 어그러지지 않을 것은 물론, 인력으로 산아를 조절하는 것이 대자연의 모독될 것도 위반될 것도 없다. 만일 그것이 모독, 위반이라 할 것 같으면 우리는 자연과학을 이용한 모든 문명기구를 사용하는 것이 모도다 벌받을 일이 될 것이다. 그러나 그러치 않다. 우리는 자연을 정복하고 이용하야 우리 인류의 행복읊� 도모한다. 근시가 되면 근시 그대로 보는 것이 아니라 안경을 끼고 보고, 길을 갈 때는 자연으로 타고난 다리만 가지고 거러가는 것이 아니라 전차도 타고 기차도 타며 비행기도 탄다. 평양 잇는 사람이 서울 잇는 사람에게 말을 할 때에는 목소리를 크게 하야 고함을 치는 것이 아니라 원거리 전화를 이용하야 우리의 음성과 청각의 부족한 것을 보충한다. 그것과 마찬가지로 吾人의 행복을 위하야 인위적으로 생식기의 기관 官能을 보조하야 적당히 산아를 제한하는 것은 당연 이상의 당연이고 사람만 오직 할 수 잇는 자연스러운 일이다. 이 때에 비로서 「과학은 생명의 과학으로 그 사명을 다 할 수 잇다.」

2. 국가적 민족적 견지로 본 반대＜88＞

산아제한을 하면 인구가 감소하니 나라가 쇠퇴하고 민족이 망한다. 산아제한을 하다니! 사람이 사람을 못낳게 하니 망할 징조다. 산업은 어떠케 흥성케 하며 전쟁은 누구가 하는가? 나라엔 인구가 많으면 많을스록 좋다. 낳고 낳고 낳을 수 잇는대로 자꼬만 낳아라.
물론 잘 낳아서 잘 기를 수만 잇으면 낳고 낳고 또 낳서 전 지구에 가득 차고 화성에 원정을 갈 수 잇게까지 하는 것이 좋겟다. 그러나... 하고 반대하는 두 가지 입장이 잇으니
(가)진보적 뿌르조아의 입장. 이것은 산아제한을 하여도 인구가 감소하지 않을 뿐 아니라 인종이 우수하야진다는 점까지는 푸로레타리아의 입장하고 같다. 「그 뿐 아니라」하고 이 사람들이 의식적 무의식적으로 「말더스」의 인구론을 근거로, 자본주의의 결함을 장식하고 푸로레타리아트의 해방과 인류의 평화를 산아제한만으로 될 듯이 떠드는데 오류가 잇다. 이런 주장의 한 사람으로 일본 산아제한 운동의 대가인 安部磯雄씨는 曰 『산아제한은 개인적으로는 많은 사람을 빈궁에서 구하고 특히 사랑스러운 자녀들에게는 비참한 생활을 면하게 한다. 국가적으로는 인구의 증가를 적당한 정도에 멈추고 무익한 국제적 紛擾를 방지하는 것이 된다.」(인구문제와 산아제한) 산아제한으로 빈궁이 소멸하고 전쟁이 이러나지 않을 리 만무하다. 여기에 주의할 것은 安部씨의 주장 전부가 다 틀렷다는 것은 아니다. 그러나 그의 근본적 생각이 틀렷다. 가령 「어린 애는 나오면 하고 기다릴 때는 나오기를 즐겨하나 그 양친이 원하지 않을 때 또는 냉냉하게 접할 경우는 이 세상에 나오라는 것을 거절할 권리가 잇다.」하는 것은 옳다. 그러고 「개인적으로는 많은 사람을 빈궁에서 구하고」하는 것도 빈궁을 완화할 수 잇다는 의미에서 일부의 진리가 없는 것은 아니다. 그러나 그 근본적 생각이 틀렷다. 산아를 제한하야 생활이 좀 나진다는 것은 아이가 많아서 빈궁하게 되고 산아를 제한하면 빈궁에서 버서날 수 잇다는 것과는 판이하다. 빈궁해지는 이유는 다른데 잇다. 이 사람은 생리학적, 위생학적, 이유로 산아를 조절하라는 것이 아니라 인구가 많으면 빈궁이 생기고, 인구가 많으면 전쟁이 생긴다고 인위적으로 인구를 제한하라는 것슝�다. 그러고 인구가 제한되면 만사 태평할 줄로 생각하고 잇다. 이것이 근본적 오류니 이 오류의 적발은 뒤에 말사스 인구론을 비판할 때에 미루기로 한다.
여하간 이러한 安部씨류의 주장으로 하야도 국가에는 우수한 국민만 남고 나라 새에는 전쟁이 없어지게 되니 국가적 민족적으로 보아도 도리어 유익하다는 이론이 선다.
(나)푸로레타리아 입장에서의 반박. 이것은 우에서 말한-산아제한은 인구의 감소를 초래하지 않을 뿐 아니라 인종의 향상을 기하는 것이라고 하는 것만 가지고도 민족의 멸망을 우려하는 반대론을 격파할 수 잇다. 그 이상 국가이니 산업이니 전쟁이니 하는 뿌르조아적 견해에 대하야서는 새삼스러이 더 말할 필요도 없으나 인구가 증가하지 않아도 산업예비군이 생긴다는 注意만 가지면, 大宅壯一씨의 말도 그 반박이 될 수 잇다. 「제국주의 諸국가는 막대한 산업예비군과 위급한 경우의 육탄을 될 잇는대로 풍부히 하기 위하야 산아제한을 위험사상이라 하고 극력 저지할려고 한다.」
(다)도덕적 입장에선 반대론. 이것은 두 가지로 노눌 수 잇으니 하나는 산아제한을 하되 도덕적으로 하라는 것 즉 금욕을 하라는 것. (혹은 晩婚을 하라는 것)과, 산아제한은 하여도 괜챤은 데 피임법이 유행되면 그것을 이용하야 남녀의 관계가 물란해 질 것이니 가히 허락할 수 없다는 것이다.
금욕과 晩婚으로 남녀의 관계를 제한하지 못할 것은 현실사회의 성적 관계를 보는 사람이면 누구나 다 긍정하는 바이고 假使 그것이 어떤 정도로 가능하다 하여도 그것이 무리인 것은 구구히 말할 필요도 없다.(동광 8월호, 성애해방론 참조)
피임법이 일반에게 보급되면 성적 관계가 혼란하야지겟다는 도덕가적 우려도 기우에 불과하다. 여기 대하야 安部씨는 和蘭의 예를 들어서 和蘭은 나라에서 피임법의 보급을 장려까지 하나 그 나라의 풍기는 조금도 물란하지 않을 뿐 아니라 公娼 내지 私娼제도도 없는 훌륭한 도덕국이라고 한다. 그러나 우리는 이러한 예를 들을＜89＞ 필요도 없이 이것이 공연한 기우라는 것을 알 수 잇다. 왜 그런고 하면 피임법을 알아서 성적 방탕을 할 자이면 피임법을 몰라도 할 것이고, 또한 그런 자이면 지금 벌서 피임법을 알고 잇다. 실제로 피임법과 산아제한을 요구하는 사람은 실생활이 그것을 절실히 요구하는 노동대중이다. 그들은 피임법을 알아 성적 방탕을 누리겟다는 생각은 염두에도 가지지 못한다. 성적 방탕의 원인은 다른데 잇으니 피임법이 보급된다고 방탕의 도를 더할 것은 아니다.(성적 방탕의 원인은 동광 8월호, 성적 해방론 참조)

3. 산아조절론의 주장
우리는 우에서 산아조절의 반대론을 검토함으로 산아조절론의 윤곽을 짐작하엿지마는 산아조절을 주장하는데도 계급적 입장을 달리함을 따라 두 가지로 갈라볼 수 잇다. 그러나. 그 두 가지에 다 공통하는 것은 인류의 향상과 子母의 건강을 주로 하는 위생학 及 우생학적 입장이라고 할 수 잇겟다. 이밖에 부인의 해방이라는 입장으로 보는 쌍가여사의 견해도 주의할 만하지마는 이것은 略하고 여기는 C.B.C.의 선언과 쌍가여사이 말한 산아제한할 경우를 말하야 먼저 위생학 及 우생학적 입장에서 하는 주장을 밝히고저 한다.
1. C.B.C(영국에 잇는 건설적 산아조절 及 인종 향상협회)의 「건설적 산아조절은 무엇인가」하는 삐라.
「우리나라에 새로 나오는 어린이에게 될 수 잇는대로 좋은 기회를 줄 수 잇도록 그러고 마땅히 건전하야할 어린이, 낳고 싶어하는 어린이를 날 수 잇도록, 하는는 것이 산아조절, 즉 임신조절의 현명한 사명이다.
일부의 新말사스주의자는 산아제한을 인구의 감소로 위하야 하지마는 우리는...건전한, 그러고 낳고 싶어 낳는 것을 결코 방해하지 않는다.
가난하고 허약한 사람이 낳고 싶어하지 않는 아이를 자꾸만 낳고, 그 결과 괴로움을 받고 인생과 경제적 낭비를 하는 것은 근본적으로 고치지 않으면 안된다. 그런 한편에 고결하고 건강한 시민을 양육할만한 가정에서 어린이가 없어서 공허와 적막을 느끼는 것은 가엾은 일이다.」
2. 쌍가여사는 산아제한을 할 경우를 대강 다섯 까지로 노나서 말하니
(가)산아년수. 산모는 2, 3년을 지나야 또 어린애를 날만한 건강을 회복할 수 잇으니 산후 2, 3년간은 피임하는 것이 좋다.
(나)질병. 아버지나 또는 어머니가 결핵병, 淋病, 徵毒, 암, 정신병 또는 大醉泥醉 등의 欠陷이 잇을 때, 어머니가 심장병, 골반의 이상이 잇을 때에는 적당한 방법으로 피임할 것.
(다)유전. 양친이 건강하야도 아이가 육체상 내지 정신상에 欠陷이 잇으면 그 이상 더 낳지 말 것.
(라)연령. 22세가 되지 못한 부인은 육체상 정신상 발육이 불충분하니 피임하는 것이 좋다 한다. 그러나 이것은 사람을 따라서 인종을 따라서 다를 것이고 연령 제한에 대하야는 각기 그 주장에 다름이 잇다. 그러나 결혼한 직후 수개월은 여자의 체질에 많은 변화를 일으키는 고로 피임은 물론 성교에도 주의하는 것이 좋다는 것은 중론이 일치하는 점이다.
(마)환경. 어린이를 적당히 보육시킬 능력이 없는 경우.
이상까지는 뿌르조아의 입장에서나 푸로레타리아 입장에서나 별로 이론이 없으나 (마)환경에서부터 태도가 달라진다. 집안이 빈한하야 어린애를 더 낳면 생활을 유지할 수 없는 경우에 산아를 제한하면 빈곤을 완화할 수 잇는 것은 사실이나 그 완화를-완화하게 하는 산아제한을 빈궁을 소멸시키는 구세주와 같이 생각하는 것이 뿌르조아의 생각이고 그 완화를 이용하야 자기 계급의 해방을 기할려고 하는 것이 푸로레타리아트의 입장이다. 아니, 빈궁을 완화할려는 것이 아니라 실제로 먹고 살 수 없으니 피임을 않할 수 없고, 그 뿐 아니라 자기 계급 해방을 위한 투쟁이 피임을 요청하는 것이다. 그리하야 山田村四郞은 이러케 말한다. 「스트라익을 하면 자녀를 많이 가진 노동자가 쟁의을 배반하는 경우가 많다.＜91＞ 푸로레타리아트가 자본가와 직면하야 스트라익을 하고 당당한 승리를 획득할라면 투사는 어린애를 많이 낳면 안된다.」 일본에서 처음에(1922년) 산아제한운동이 일어난 것은 확실히 이 방면에서 인식된 것이다. 우생학의 관점으로도 아니고, 인구문제의 관점으로도 아니엇다. 계급투쟁에 승리를 얻겟다는 푸로레타리아트의 계급적 입장으로 이 운동은 출발되엇든 것이다.」(安田德太郞) 이러케 푸로레타리아트는 모든 것을 계급투쟁의 입장에서 본다. 장래할 사회에서도 위생학적 우생학적 이유로 산아제한을 주장할 것이지마는 결코 인구문제의 해결을 위하야 이것을 주장하지 않는 것은 특히 주의할 필요가 잇다.
安部機雄씨같이 산아제한으로 빈궁을 구할 수 잇고 인구의 증가를 적당한 정도에 멈추면 무익한 국제적 紛擾를 방지할 수 잇다고 생각하는 것은 어리석은 몽상이다. 이것은 新 말사스주의의 이론이니 그 근본이 되는 말더스의 인구론이 무엇인지를 보면 그 정체를 알 수 잇다.
말더쓰(Thomas Robert Malthus 1766-1834)의 인구론에 의하면 사람의 수는 2, 4, 8, 16과 같이 등비급수적으로 증가하는데 반하야 식료품은 2, 4, 6, 8과 같이 등차급수적으로 증가하는 결과 사람은 항상 생활자료가 부족하고 따라서 빈궁이 생기고 죄악이 생긴다. 빈궁과 죄악으로 말미아마 살인, 간통, 墮胎, 질병, 전쟁같은 것이 생기고 그 결과 인구이 과잉은 제한되나 이 생활자료에 비한 인구증가의 경향이 없어지지 않는 이상 인간사회의 빈궁과 죄악은 피하지 못할 사실이다. 그의 논법에 의하면 빈궁하야 기아에 헤매이는 사람을 구제하는 것은 도리어 인구과잉을 보조하여 빈궁과 죄악을 助成하는 것이 되고 자선은 드디어 범죄가 되는 것이다. 노동자의 임금을 인상하야 생활조건을 개선하고 생명을 보장하는 것은 인구의 증가를 초래하야 사회를 망케 하는 근본이 되는 것이다. 그의 論의 귀결하는 바는 자본가가 착취를 철저히 하야 노동자로하여금 死에 이르게 하는 것이 인류 사회의 행복을 증진하는 所謂가 된다. 그러케 하면 인구는 줄고 생산은 많아지겟으니. 이만하면 당시의 신흥 뿌르조아지의 입장을 옹호한 말더스의 공로도 대단하다. 그는 인구론 제2판에서 겨우 인구증가의 구제책으로 도덕적 억제를 발견하고, 상당한 생활을 할 수 잇을 때까지 결혼를 말라는 方文을 내리엇다. 만일 그의 말대로 할다하면 수백만명의 독신 귀신이 열정을 부둥켜 안고 부들부들 떨고 잇지 않을 수 없다. 그들이 생활의 안정을 얻고 결혼할 수 잇엇을 리는 만무하니.
이 말더스의 인구제한론을 그대로 준봉하고 다만 성욕억제 대신에 인공피임법을 쓰자는 것이 新말더스주의의 주장이고 安部씨류의 주장이다.
말더스의 인구론이 당시의 신흥 뿌르조아지를 옹호한 편벽한 이론인 것은 구구히 말할 필요도 없으나 그 인구제한론을 가지고 산아제한론의 근거를 삼는 것은 천부당 만부당한 일이다.
말더스가 당시에 취한 통계가 일반적으로 정확하다고 가정하여도 그가 과학도 기하학적으로 발달하야 인류의 생활자료를 제공할 수 잇다는 것을 알지 못한 것은 큰 과실이다. 우리가 만일 하눌에 날고 땅에 기는 재조를-과학과 기술을! 응용하야 전지구의 대자연을 개척하면 멫 천년을 至하야 住地와 식료의 부족을 感하지 않으리라. (이 계산은 과학자에게 맡기나 과학자가 과학으로 계산하야 인구과잉을 보고하지 앗는 이상 우리는 인구제한을 염려할 필요는 없다. 그것은 맺 천년 후에야 실제적 사회문제가 될 것이다.)
식료품이 부족하고 인구가 과잉하다고 하는 것은 결코 식료품이 부족하고 인구가 과잉하여서 그런 것이 아니다. 한 사람이 먹을 것과 입을 것을 산같이 쌓아두고 잇는 한편에 그 날 아츰도 먹지 못하는 사람이 잇으니 이것이 식료가 부족하고 인구가 과잉한 까닭인가. 한 사람이 수백만의 자산과 멫백만평의 토지를 가지고 잇는데 반하야 의지할 집이 없어서 헤매이는 사람이 잇으니 이것이 住地가 부족한 까닭인가. 이러한 자본의 적축과 빈한과 쓰라림이란 세계적 모순이 잇는 이상, 이 근본원인을 파멸치 않으면 지구상에 두 사람만 잇어도 인구의 과잉을 느낄 것이다. 이 근본적＜91＞ 이유야 말로 뿌르조아지가 푸로레타리아트를 착취하야 부를 독점케 하는 자본주의제도다. 이 제도가 잇는 이상 빈궁과 죄악과 전쟁은 면할 수 없는 선물이 된다. 산아제한으로 인구가 감소하면 나라가 태평하고 전쟁이 없어지고 운운하는 것은 잠고대에 불과하다. 산아조절을 주장하는 것은 좋으나 자칭 푸로레타리아의 산아제한을 운운하면서도 「大和魂을 가진 푸로레타리아 諸君」(7頁)을 찾으며, 린제이의 우애결혼을 崇奉하고 사이비 「푸로레타리아의 산아조절-中尾音吉著」을 찾는 자도 잇으니 우리는 같은 산아제한에서도 그 주장이 다름이 잇음을 명백히 할 필요가 잇다.

4. 각국의 현상과 피임법
산아제한이 옳다 긇다 하는 이론시대는 이미 과거가 되고 지금은 벌서 실천시대에 들어가 잇는 것이 각국의 현상이다.
和蘭에서는 나라에서 피임법을 公許하고, 新말더스주의자 협회는 이미 4,50년전에 설립되어 看護婦會事務所와 산아제한상담소를 두고 혹은 강습회를 개최하고 혹은 팜플레트를 배부하야 피임법의 훈련을 시킨다한다. 그밖에 이 연맹에 직속하는 개업의는 43이나 되고 원하는 사람은 누구나 실제적 지식을 얻을 수 잇을 뿐 아니라 돈이 없는 사람도 무료로 필요품을 얻을 수 잇다.
영국에서는 이미 50여 년 전 1876년에 「부랏트라푸」와 「베산트」여사가 피임법에 관한 소책자를 散布하야 재판까지 낫섯다고 한다. 지금은 피임법에 관한 책자와 피임용구가 공공연하게 거리에 나돈다. 다만 나라에서 적극적으로 활동을 하지 않을 따름이다.
영국에서 산아조절운동에 공헌하고 잇는 단체로는 스톱스부인(Stopes, Marie Carmichael)을 중심으로 하는 건설적 산아조절 及 인종향상협회(Society for Constructive Birth Control and Racial Progress 약칭 C.B.C.)가 잇다. 여기서는 「어머니의 건강상담소」를 두고 또는 산아제한신문을 발행하야 피임과 산아에 관한 지식을 보급하고 필요품을 주선한다.
이밖에 新말더스파에서 하는 신시대동맹이 잇다. 드라스델박사가 중심이 되어서 잡지 「신시대」와 소책자를 발행하야 피임에 관한 지식을 넓히는 동시에 빈민을 상대로 하야 실제적 편의를 돕고 잇다.
미국에서는 각 洲가 상이하나 1770년에 완고한 종교가들로 말미아마 피임이 금지된 이후로 지금까지 다 피임법에 관한 책자의 발행과 강연이 금지되어 잇다. 그러나 사실 이면에는 피임이 성행하고 「우애결혼」으로 유명한 린제이판사는 이 엄연한 사실을 공공연하게 하자고 주장한다. 미국에서 돈잇는 사람으로 피임을 안하는 사람이 드문 것은 이것으로도 증명할 수 잇다. 「自主張親性聯盟」은 避姙敢締法의 철폐를 기하야 정치적 활동하고 잇으며 돈잇는 사람만 할 수 잇는 산아제한의 지식-피임법을 일반 대중에게도 알리라고 주장한다. 대중이 실생활상의 절실한 이유로 피임을 요망하는 것은 쌍가부인이 처음에 和蘭에서 도라와서 「부룩린」에 상담소를 세웟을 때에 겨우 열흘에 480명의 다수가 찾아온 것을 보아도 알 수 잇다. 열흘만에 이 상담소는 폐쇄되고 쌍가부인은 피임을 금지한 법률에 위반한 죄로 고소를 당하엿으나 그가 간호부엿든 까닭에 죄를 면하엿다. 법률은 「의사에 한하야 부인이 병이 들엇을 때에 산아제한의 실행법을 가르처줄 수가 잇다」하는 것을 규정하엿든 까닭이다. 이 법률을 이용하야 쌍가 부인은
미국산아조절연맹(American Birthscontrol League 104 Fifth ave, New york)을 만들고 피임의 지식을 실제와 책자로 선전하얏다. 그의 「부인과 신인종」은 일곱 나라 말로 번역되어 25만부가 나가고 「산아제한 평론」은 35개국에 퍼진다한다. 이밖에 1924년에는 紐育母性健康委員會(The Comnitee on Maternal Health of New York)가 설립되고 로바트.엘.라이킨스씨 지도하에 피임법을 학술적으로 연구하며 大病院으로 하야금 실지로 피임법을 전수케 한다.
일본에는 1922년경부터 關東에 중앙산아조절상담소가 잇어 중산계급을 위주로 상대하엿고 大阪에는 산아제한연구회가 잇어서 노동자 농민을 목표로 하야 피임법을 실제로 선전하엿다. 당시의 운동이 어떠케 맹렬하엿는지는 大阪朝日 사설이 잘 말하고 잇다.＜92＞
「東京방면의 운동은 주로 중산계급 이상을 목표로 하고 잇는데 대하야 關西측은 무산계급을 엿보아 簡易 격렬한 선전을 한 결과, 회원은 大阪만 하야도 신춘 이래 1천명을 넘고, 매일 申込者가 50명 안되는 날이 없는 성황이다. 그러고 이 때에 일층 운동의 진용을 정비하야 目下 계획하는 팜플레트만 2만, 포스타 5만을 살포하고 연설회, 강연회를 隨處에 개회할 기세라고 하니 운운.」(1923년 3월 13일)그 후에 이 연구회에서는 山本宣治가 주간이 되어가지고 「산아조절평론」을 발간하얏다. 작년 4월 1일에는 일본 산아제한협회의 우생아 상담소가 大阪에 설립되어 노동자 계급을 상대로 산아조절에 노력한다 한다.
조선에서는-조선에는 아무 것도 없다. 그러나 하고 싶어 애쓰는 사람은 부지기수다. 「어서 피임법이나 말해라」미안하지마는 그것은 여기에 발표할 자유가 없다. 개인적으로 말하는 것은 상관없지마는 피임법을 공표하는 것은 일본 법률이 아직 허락치 않는다. 다만 잇는 정도로 말할려고 한다. 탈선하지 않기 위하야 전부 다른 책에서 인용하기로 한다.
「극히 안전하고 가장 완전한 방법은 보호구의 응용이다. 이것은 즉 곤돔(루데 삭구)을 사용하는 것인데 불쾌한 감을 가지게 하니 운운.」(中尾音吉著 푸로레타리아의 산아제한, 114頁)
「월경 전후의 기간이 가장 임신할 가능성이 많은 까닭에 이 기간을 피한 半月 避交法이 효과가 잇다고 한다. 이것은 월경하기 1, 2일 전부터 월경 후 십 수일간 교접을 피하는 것이다.」(同上)
세척법, 좌약, 베싸리 등등이 많이 시험되엇다 그러고 쌍가 부인의 팜플레트에 잇는 삽화 그대로 피임침까지 사용되게 되엇다... 어떠한 방법이 대중적으로 시행되는가? 제일에 붕산이나, 키니네나 냉수의 洗滌가 실행되엇다. 순사들은 酢의 洗滌를 환영하엿다. 제2에 「키니네」와 「카카오脂」의 좌약이 사용되엇다. 잘 용해하지 아는 까닭에 조합원 사이에는 통쾌한 揷話가 잇다. 성공한 사람도 실패한 사람도 잇엇다. 약품을 사용하엿는데 불구하고 불행히 임신하야, 만일 병신이나 낳면 어떠케 하나 하고 근심하야 山本(宣治)에게 質問狀을 발한 사람도 많앗다. 山本은 정해둔 회답을 썻다. 「그러한 장해물을 돌파하야 자궁구에 돌입하고 훌륭이 수태의 사명을 다 한 情虫은 상당한 저항력을 가진 완강한 精虫이다. 당신이 낳을 어린 애기는 반드시 강건한 사람이 될 것을 100퍼센트의 자신을 가지고 말합니다.」(中央公論 1월호, 66-7, 安田德太郞)
「左의 항목은 스롭스여사의 발표에 의한 것을 참조한 것이다.
A. 화학적 물질 또는 기구를 않쓰는 것.
(가)여성이 하는 행위
2. 음경이 子宮頸에 접촉하는 것을 방지할 위치에 제 몸을 놓는 것.
3. 사정종료 후 곳 직립하야 세게 자채기를 하고 또는 골반근육 수축을 위하야 어떤 동작을 하는 것.
4. 영아 또는 유아의 수유기를 연장하는 것.
(나)남성의 행위
5. 통상의 삽입 행위를 하지 않은 질외성교.
6. 질자극을 얻고 질 외에 取出하야 사정하는 것.
B. 정자의 활동력을 없이 하기 위하야 화학적 물질을 삽입하는 행위 또는 방법.(약품은 질 내에 엿는다)
16. 각종의 형식으로 조합된 OO酸
17. 세척법으로의 冷O.
C. 남자 정자와 난자의 접촉을 방지하는 기구의 사용.
(가)남자용
18. 콘돔(OOO 삭구의 類)
19. 핀 또는 일종의 栓.
(나)여자용
21. 柔軟栓
25. 금속성의 키OO푸.
28. 閉塞用의 바네 緩半圓形 키OO푸(탓치기OO푸)
30. 「마도니사루스」베싸리.」(中尾著 同上書 117-120)
우리가 잡지나 책자에서 볼 수 잇는 것은 대개 이상에 쓴 것에 지나지＜93＞ 못한다. 피임법이니 무엇이니하야 지상에 광고를 하는 것은 돈 먹을려는 사기수단에 불과하다.
이상에 列記한 중에 우리가 곳 사용할 수 잇는 것은 1,2에 불과하며 그것조차 100퍼센트의 확실성이 잇다고는 단언하지 못하는 상태에 잇다. 더구나 화학적 약품의 사용은 지상에 설명같은 것을 가지고는 불가능하니 반드시 전문의의 지시가 필요하다. 전문의와 의논할 것은 물론이지마는 그 지시대로 같은 방법을 써도 그 효과에 잇어서는 그 사용기술을 따라 다르다고 한다. 왜 그런고하면 아이를 배게되는 것은 정자와 난자와 합할 순간에 되는 것인데 그 미묘한 생리적 구조와 성질을 모르면 정자가 난자와 접촉을 못하게 하고 또는 사정된 정자가 생식의 기능을 잃게 하는 물리적 내지 화학적 효과를 나타내지 못하는 까닭이다. 그런 고로 지금에 잇어서는 「피임실행은 최소한도로 인체 성기관의 해부생리와 大綱한 준비지식을 필요한다.」(山宣)
「그러면 돈 잇고 글 잇는 사람이나 할 수 잇게?」 그러타. 그러기에 간단이 누구나 할 수 잇는 피임법은 장래의 연구에 맡기지 않을 수 없다. 紐育 건강위원회의 조사에 의하면 현재 歐米 각국에 실행되는 방법이 24종인데 그 효과가 100퍼센트로 확실한 것은 하나도 없다고 한다. 어떤 사람은 그 중에 두어 가지 방법을 합하야 교묘하게 사용함으로 그 실효를 내고 잇다 한다. 그러나 「일본에서는 실행이 가능한 피임법은 효과가 불확실한 것이 많고, 奏効가 비교적 확실한 것은 장치 재료의 구입, 또는 풍속습관의 관계상, 서양 각국과 같이 잘 안된다」(山宣) 하믈며 조선에 잇어서! 일본도 그러치마는 더욱이 조선에 잇어서는 피임을 전연 모르는 의사가 많다. 의사라고 다 알 줄 알다가는 봉변 당한다. 왜 그런고 하면 의사보고 무러보면 모른다고 하는 것이 창피해서 자기도 모르는 약을 쓰고 돈만 받으니 피임을 배우러 갓든 사람은 피임을 못할뿐 아니라 돈을 떼우고 해를 받는다.
결국 말하면 피임법은 아직 발달의 초기에 잇다. 그러나 준비 지식과 기구, 약품을 사용하면 쾌감을 減하지 않고 비교적 확실한 효과를 낼 수 잇는데 대중이 사용하기 쉬운 방법은 効効가 확실지 못하다. 그러고 조선에서는 돈이 잇어고 잘 알 수 없고-의사도 잘 모르니- 일반 대중은 전연 실행할 방책을 모른다.
「무엇이 어찌해. 그러면 결국 모른다는 소리를 하누라고 이 논문을 썻니? 지리하게. 동무들아 우리는 사라나갈내면 피임을 안할 수 없다. 이것을 어찌해? 우리도 그러타. 돈이 잇고도 못하는 일이 잇어?」 그런고로 영리한 의사는 돈을 벌기 위하야 산아조절 상담소를 곳 채려 놓을지도 모르겟다. 無産大衆을 위하야 불완전하나마 실제적 방법을 알리기 위하야 이것에 대항하야 우리는 피임의 지식을 보급시키기 위하야 기구를 무료로라도 배급하기 위하야 산아조절에 대한 조사연구를 하기 위하야 「조선산아조절연구소」을 세우지 않으면 안되겟다. 여기에 관심을 가진 有志와 대중을 생각하는 혁명적 의사의 활동을 기대하야 마지 않는다. 그 때에 슬로간은 적어도 이 세 가지를 빼어서는 아니된다.
1. 돈만 아는 의사 절대 반대.
2. 피임법 악용(惡用)자 절대 반대.
3. 피임법 대중화 만세.＜94＞
＜87-94＞