Magazine Title: 삼천리 제12권 제5호
Publication Date: 1940-05-01
Article Title: 戱曲 벽공 (一幕) (Play: Blue Sky (One Act))
Author: 咸世德
Article Type: 희곡·시나리오 (Play/Scenario)

Play: Blue Sky (One Act)
						Ham Se-dŏk

Characters
Kŭnhŭi          (22 years old)
Sukhŭi          Her younger sister
Professor Sin   Kŭnhŭi's husband
Namsil          Art student (25 years old)
Doctor
Old Janitor at the girls' school
Hospital Attendant

Late Autumn.
A simple Western-style two-story house, a bedroom.
Stairs and corridor to the left. Simple interior decoration. Kŭnhŭi lies in a bed by the south-facing window, nursed by her sister Sukhŭi, who wears a uniform. Beyond the window, there's a small empty lot, and behind it, the rear wall of a girls' school building is visible. Ivy vines climb thickly on the red brick wall, but they have mostly shed their leaves in the autumn wind; only ten or so leaves cling desperately to the bare branches.<312>
From the schoolyard behind the building, the cheerful singing of "Pyŏkkong" (Blue Sky) by girl students doing a big clean-up sounds unseasonably bright.

- Scene 1 -

Sukhŭi - Sister, the girls singing now are from my class.
Kŭnhŭi - That song is better in spring.
Sukhŭi - Namsil liked it a lot, didn't he?
Kŭnhŭi - Yes.
Sukhŭi - He said he likes "Pyŏkkong" better than Beethoven's symphonies. He said when he feels down, he goes to a cafe (다방) to listen to it once before coming out, right?
Kŭnhŭi - (Deep sigh) What could he be doing now?
Sukhŭi - They say he came back from Tokyo (동경).
Kŭnhŭi - (Startled) Oh, why?
Sukhŭi - He said he's quitting painting and getting a job.
Kŭnhŭi - Quitting painting?
Sukhŭi - Yes. He said it's tedious, he can't paint anymore.
Kŭnhŭi - Then is he staying at his house?
Sukhŭi - He's in Seoul (서울).
Kŭnhŭi - When did you meet him?
Sukhŭi - Yesterday, in front of Tonhwa-mun (돈화문).
Kŭnhŭi - What did he say?
Sukhŭi - What could he say? Nothing much. Gosh, he looked so thin.
Kŭnhŭi - Did he mention me?
Sukhŭi - No. When I tried to bring you up, he kept changing the subject, avoiding it. So I caught on and stopped.
Kŭnhŭi - Is he boarding somewhere?
Sukhŭi - He's staying temporarily (기우) at a friend's place. His clothes were not good at all. And he's grown a beard.
Kŭnhŭi - (Barely audible) It's because of me.
Sukhŭi - You just realized? Like swollen breasts, the slightest sad word seemed like it would make him burst into tears immediately.
Kŭnhŭi - So where was he going?
Sukhŭi - He said he was going to the police station.
Kŭnhŭi - Why?
Sukhŭi - He said he was going to hand in his travel permit (여행권).
Kŭnhŭi - If he's getting a job, why a travel permit?
Sukhŭi - Not in Seoul, he's going to Tianjin (천진) to work. His younger sibling runs a sign shop (간판점) there and told him to come since he's not doing anything. For some reason, he says he finds every day in Seoul unbearable and can't stand being here.
(Kŭnhŭi coughs repeatedly, shortly.)
Sukhŭi - Sister, let's close the window. It's because you're getting the breeze.
Kŭnhŭi - Leave it open.
Sukhŭi - Didn't the doctor specifically ask you not to get any wind <313> when he left?
Kŭnhŭi - (Almost desperately) How many more days would I live anyway? What does it matter?
Sukhŭi - Why are you so pessimistic? Haven't you heard that illness is half medicine, half state of mind?
(At this moment, an ivy leaf flutters down from the vine on the school's brick wall.)
Kŭnhŭi - Fifteen.
(Sukhŭi's eyes well up with tears. Soon, another leaf falls.)
Kŭnhŭi - (As if waiting for it) Fourteen.
Sukhŭi - (Annoyed) What do you mean, fourteen? Let's close the window.
Kŭnhŭi - (Pleadingly) Please, just leave it.
Sukhŭi - You need peace of mind to get better, don't you? The doctor told you not to even read books, so what are you counting all night? Do you only think of yourself? Seeing how hard Husband (아재) is trying, you should be thinking of getting well quickly.
Kŭnhŭi - (Ignoring her words, as if following three leaves falling together) Thirteen, twelve, oh dear, eleven.
At this moment, the sound of a car stopping outside.
A little later, the sound of shoes coming up the stairs.
Sukhŭi - Looks like the doctor is here.
(The Doctor and Professor Sin (30 years old) enter.)
Sukhŭi - Welcome.
Kŭnhŭi - You keep coming even though you're busy.
Doctor - (Stopping the patient from trying to sit up) Please remain lying down. It's best to move your body as little as possible. (Looking at Sukhŭi) Did you record the temperature?
Sukhŭi - Yes, it was 39.5 degrees this morning. And I checked every hour, it just fluctuated above and below 39 degrees. (Takes the thermometer from Kŭnhŭi's armpit, looks at it, then shakes it down) This time it's 39.3 degrees.
Professor Sin - Isn't there any way to bring the fever down a bit?
Doctor - How can it go down when you leave the window open like this and let the wind in?
Sukhŭi - Sister, let's close the window.
Kŭnhŭi - Leave it.
Sukhŭi - Can't you see outside if we just don't draw the curtains?
(Closes the window.)
Professor Sin - Is she getting any better?
Doctor - Yes. She has improved quite a lot.
Professor Sin - Thank you.
Doctor - Since she has become very weak, I'll give you some medicine today to help build up her blood.
Professor Sin - Shall I go with you then?
Kŭnhŭi - (Seeing another leaf fall) Ten.
Doctor - No, no need to come. I'll send the errand boy. <314> When he brings it, have her take one packet after each meal.
Kŭnhŭi - Nine.
(Suddenly buries her face in the bedding and seems to sob.)
Doctor - (Puzzled) What are you counting like that?
Kŭnhŭi - It's nothing. Oh, eight.
Doctor - Counting numbers in a bath might help endure the heat, but for this illness, it's best to tax your mind as little as possible.
Professor Sin - (Seeing the doctor finishing the examination and about to stand up) Are you leaving?
Doctor - Yes. There's now ample hope for a full recovery.
(Sukhŭi and Professor Sin follow the doctor out to the corridor. The doctor stops.)
Doctor - What is your sister counting like that?
Sukhŭi - She's just counting things outside the window because she's bored.
Doctor - Since when?
Sukhŭi - For about two weeks now.
Doctor - Outside the window, there's only a narrow empty lot?
Sukhŭi - Isn't there a school behind it? She's counting the ivy leaves stuck like barnacles to its stone wall.
Doctor - If that's the case, it's fortunate. I was quite worried, wondering if your sister might be doing the same thing as a tuberculosis (폐병) patient I once saw admitted to our hospital, a woman who was counting the hours until her death.
Sukhŭi - (Voice tinged with tears) That's what my sister is doing too.
Doctor - (Shocked) What?
Sukhŭi - She says that when all the remaining nine leaves fall, she too will go like those fallen leaves.
Professor Sin - Doctor, couldn't it be because the patient has become extremely weak?
Doctor - A moment ago, in front of the patient, I said she was improving, but in reality...
Professor Sin - Then?
Doctor - The chance of survival is only one in ten.
Professor Sin - Isn't there any way to save her?
Doctor - That one-in-ten chance depends on the patient having the hope that she must live.
Professor Sin - Of course, isn't the patient herself trying to get better as soon as possible?
Doctor - Why would someone struggling to get well run home barefoot if admitted to the hospital? It seems she has given up, close to despair, thinking, "How many days would I live anyway?" Now that she thinks she'll go when the ivy leaves fall, how is that different from waiting for death?
Sukhŭi - Sister keeps saying she doesn't want to live.<315>
Doctor - So, no matter how much medicine we use, how can it be effective?
Professor Sin - Is there absolutely no way for her to survive?
Doctor - As I just said, the patient needs to cast aside pessimism and gain the hope that she must get better quickly. For example, if she had expectations like wanting to go skiing somewhere this winter, wanting to see a certain movie, or wanting to meet someone, her attachment to life would strengthen.
Professor Sin - Until now, materially and mentally, I've done everything she wanted.
Doctor - Is there anything you haven't been able to provide?
Sukhŭi - Ever since she got married, sister asked you to buy her a piano, saying she wanted to live playing "Pyŏkkong."
Doctor - Pyŏkkong? Meaning hope, then.
Professor Sin - With my meager salary (박봉) as a girls' school teacher, it was a bit beyond my means, so I kept putting it off despite her asking for a while. But now, if it can give the patient the hope to live, why wouldn't I buy it, even if I have to make a huge loan?
Doctor - If that's the case, I too will do my utmost with my medical skills. If she places her hope on the piano, I can guarantee the chance of survival is not one in ten, but nine. Well then, I must be going...
Sukhŭi - Goodbye.
(The doctor goes down the stairs. A moment later, the sound of a car speeding away from the front gate and disappearing.)
Kŭnhŭi - Sukhŭi.
Sukhŭi - Yes.
Professor Sin - Just a moment. (Stops Sukhŭi who is about to enter the room) It's embarrassing to ask this... but does your sister still... think about that man from before?
Sukhŭi - Which man?
Professor Sin - Uh... that... the one she loved...
Sukhŭi - Well. How would I know?
Professor Sin - It's because every night in her sleep talk, she calls out the name Namsil.
Sukhŭi - I suppose one can't say she doesn't think of him at all.
Professor Sin - Then still...
Sukhŭi - When you first proposed to sister, didn't you know she had someone she loved?
Professor Sin - Yes, but now I grieve that I cannot overcome my jealousy.
Sukhŭi - When you got married, you didn't go through the common love triangle conflict, so I thought the only one hurt was Namsil.<316>
Professor Sin - I too feel I did something truly regrettable to him.
Sukhŭi - The day sister married in Seoul and came here for her first outing (나드리) with you, he was watching from the crowd at the station. He cried, saying if only he could go to Tokyo, he could forget this pain to some extent, but he couldn't even do that because he lacked the travel money (노비). There are people like that, so what's troubling you?
Kŭnhŭi - Sukhŭi. Give me that canned food (칸쓰메?) from earlier.
Professor Sin - Please go in.
Sukhŭi and Professor Sin enter the room.
Kŭnhŭi - My throat is so dry I can't stand it.
Sukhŭi - It's time for your medicine.
Kŭnhŭi - Please just give it to me.
Professor Sin - The doctor strictly forbade snacks when it's time for medicine.
Kŭnhŭi - I'll stop taking medicine too now.
Professor Sin - "Won't go to the hospital, won't take medicine," what on earth are you trying to do?
Kŭnhŭi - Even if I die, I'll die like this, I won't take it.
Professor Sin - What childish talk is this?
Sukhŭi - (Giving her the medicine packet) Here, hurry and take it.
Kŭnhŭi - Can't you get away from me?
Sukhŭi - Who are you throwing a tantrum at because you're sick?
Kŭnhŭi - I said I won't take it.
Professor Sin - Hurry and give it to her.
Kŭnhŭi - If I'm meant to live, I'll live even without taking that. If I'm meant to die, taking that won't stop me from dying.
Professor Sin - Honey, the doctor said...
Kŭnhŭi - (Crying) It's all useless talk. I only have six hours left to live.
Professor Sin - Why are you being so weak-willed?
Kŭnhŭi - (As if whispering) They started falling faster and faster. Two weeks ago, there were about two hundred. Oh, my head hurts. Counting them makes my head throb. But it's okay now. Ah, another one fell. Only five left now.
Sukhŭi - (Throwing down the cup (곱브?)) What do you mean, five?
Kŭnhŭi - The leaves, the leaves attached to the ivy vine.
Sukhŭi - Why are you sitting there counting those instead of taking your medicine, tormenting others?
Kŭnhŭi - When the last leaf falls, I'll go too, so even if it's painful, it's only for a moment. I've been looking into the afterlife for three days now.
(Sukhŭi cries out in agitation.)
Professor Sin - Honey, why are you saying such superstitious things that even country women wouldn't believe?
Kŭnhŭi - Can science see into life and death? But <317> I can see it.
Professor Sin - What connection could there possibly be between your illness and ivy leaves? Didn't the doctor just say you've improved a lot?
Sukhŭi - The chance of survival is one in ten... (flustered by the slip) no, ten in one, he said.
Professor Sin - Look... listen, I'm planning to buy a piano today. You know, you've been saying you wanted to play "Pyŏkkong." So hurry up and get well so you can play. And play my favorite "Romanza Andaluza" too, okay? Don't you want to reminisce about that moonlit night on Chak'yakto (작약도) where we first met? Weren't there white rabbits hopping around?
Kŭnhŭi - The piano is useless now too. (Stares out the window) Another one fell. (Hysterical voice) Forget the piano, forget "Pyŏkkong." Only four leaves left now. Oh, I wish they would all fall quickly before night comes. Then I could go too. (Coughs)
Professor Sin - Lower that window blind.
(Sukhŭi lowers the shade.)
Kŭnhŭi - (Screaming) Ah, it's so dark! Leave the window open!
Professor Sin - (Turns on the switch) See, isn't it fine if we turn on the electric light?
(The clock strikes 6.)
Professor Sin - (To Sukhŭi) I'll go ask Mr. Hŏ to cover my night duty (숙직), then go to Ponjŏng to buy the piano right away. Please look after her alone for a while, though it might be difficult.
Sukhŭi - Please come back as soon as possible (오찍).
Professor Sin - Yes. (Opens the door and exits. Sound of footsteps descending the stairs. Silence returns.)
Kŭnhŭi - Will he be long?
Sukhŭi - What, he'll probably be back within an hour.
Kŭnhŭi - Then look under my dresser. There should be a painting there.
Sukhŭi - Under the dresser?
Kŭnhŭi - Yes, it should be at the very bottom. (Sukhŭi finds the painting and brings it to Kŭnhŭi.)
Sukhŭi - Namsil's older brother painted this.
Kŭnhŭi - Yes.
Sukhŭi - The mountains look like the Alps. Could there be mountains like this in Korea (조선)?
Kŭnhŭi - He painted it after seeing "The Return Home" by a Frenchman named Segantini (세간치니).
Sukhŭi - Why is the work so gloomy?
Kŭnhŭi - Their child died after being abandoned in a foreign land. In France, there's a custom that if a death occurs away from home, the body must be brought back to the hometown for burial. The one holding the horse's bridle is the father. The one weeping over the black coffin on the cart is the mother.<318> And see the sheep following behind? Segantini died like me, of pneumonia, in an inn in the Alps. As he was dying, his last words, both a request and a plea, were "Open the window so I can see the Alps."
Sukhŭi - So you're asking to open the window to see the ivy vine.
Kŭnhŭi - Think about it. (Suddenly sobbing) Professor Sin, unlike this father, will drag me to the crematorium.
Sukhŭi - Oh, sister.
Kŭnhŭi - But unlike this mother, there's no one to cry for me, clinging to my coffin.
Sukhŭi - (Trembling with a sense of foreboding) Husband went to buy a piano to comfort you, yet instead of thinking about getting up quickly, what are you talking about?
Kŭnhŭi - Namsil will probably feel relieved when he hears I died.
Sukhŭi - He's the one who would cry like this mother.
Kŭnhŭi - (Becoming animated) Would he really cry?
Sukhŭi - Of course, he would cry!
Kŭnhŭi - This tainted body of mine, would he...
Sukhŭi - Since you're married, you might have forgotten the past, but he's always been lonely, so he can't push aside past events, can he? They say heartbroken people forget their pain with alcohol. But can Namsil drink? Can he smoke?
Kŭnhŭi - Even now, if I just close my eyes, I can see us walking side by side across the bridge, both wearing black durumagi coats. (Tracing distant memories, word by word) There was no moon, it was pitch dark, only the lighthouse light blinked. And we could only hear the creaking sound of boatmen raising sails in the night water. It was so cold. Namsil kept telling me to lie down because of the seashells and just look at the stars. Later, when we stood up to leave, I hated leaving so much. Right beside the stone embankment. He held me there for the first time. Since it was my first time ever, I said "Stop it, stop it," and pulled away from his embrace. On the way back, I told him the story of "Vanina Vanini" I read during my school days. My hair kept getting tangled in my face by the wind, I'd brush it away, it would get tangled, brush it away, tangled. The harbor lights reflecting on the water looked like Naples (나포리) I'd seen in photos.
Sukhŭi - Which way did you come back?
Kŭnhŭi - The railway park. The willow forest was pitch black. He said we were like a pair of seagulls flying to the lake following the moonlight.
Sukhŭi - Thinking about it is just counting dead children.
Kŭnhŭi - (Pleadingly) Sukhŭi. Couldn't I meet him just once?
Sukhŭi - If you felt that way, why did you marry Professor Sin?<319>
Kŭnhŭi - It was because of my older brother, wasn't it?
Sukhŭi - No matter how much brother tried to push you and Professor Sin together, if you truly loved Namsil, you wouldn't have married him, right?
Kŭnhŭi - Every holiday, he'd stop me from going down to Inch'ŏn and suggest going to the theater with Professor Sin, or boating on the Han River, or picnicking at Pogaksa Temple...
Sukhŭi - You could have just not gone with him. You went because you liked it too, didn't you?
Kŭnhŭi - What? Because I liked it too?
Sukhŭi - Yes. Even to me, it looked like you were smitten with Professor Sin. Weren't you writing letters every night? When the express mail arrived from brother saying to stop by on your way down on Saturday, didn't you go even if Mother forbade it? So what's the fuss?
Kŭnhŭi - I thought if my heart was firm, that was enough, so for brother's sake, I let myself be dragged along even though I disliked it. They say women are weak, and it's true. In the end, I lost to love. But even so, not a single day, not a single moment has passed until today that I forgot Namsil.
Sukhŭi - That doesn't make sense.
Kŭnhŭi - Whether it makes sense or not, please let me meet him once. You know his address, right?
Sukhŭi - Wouldn't it be better not to see him?
Kŭnhŭi - Send a messenger just once. Pretend you're sending it.
Sukhŭi - I don't think he'll come.
Kŭnhŭi - If he doesn't come, he doesn't come.
Sukhŭi goes outside.
A hospital attendant enters with medicine.
Attendant - I've brought the medicine.
Kŭnhŭi - Leave it there and go.
(The attendant places the medicine on the cupboard and leaves.)
Kŭnhŭi - Excuse me.
Attendant - (Turning back) Me?
Kŭnhŭi - Yes! Please put on that record (레코-드) before you go.
The attendant puts on the record. The melody of "Pyŏkkong."
Attendant - Oh, this is the one the nurses at our hospital play every night.
Kŭnhŭi - Is that so?
Attendant - Yes.
The attendant exits again.
Kŭnhŭi - (As if whispering) Boulanger and Hummel. Pyŏkkong. He must have finished that painting. The one of the milkmaid following the woodcutter boys over the mountain pass. He said he wanted to breathe the melody of Pyŏkkong onto the canvas like vapor.
Sukhŭi runs quickly up the stairs.
Sukhŭi - Sister, I met him.
Kŭnhŭi - Where?<320>
Sukhŭi - At the messenger office. Namsil happened to come in just then to send something too.
Kŭnhŭi - So, did you come together (가치)?
Sukhŭi - He didn't want to come, but I practically forced him.
Kŭnhŭi - What should I say when he comes in?
(She smooths her messy hair and tidies the bedside.)
Sukhŭi - (Calling downwards) Please come up.
Namsil comes up carrying painting tools and a trunk. He listens briefly to the flowing record music.
Namsil - I'll stand here, please go in and hear what she has to say, then come out.
Sukhŭi - Since you've come this far, please just go in for a moment before leaving.
Namsil - (Looking troubled) Then let's go in together.
Sukhŭi - Oh, really, you're too much.
Namsil reluctantly enters the room.
Sukhŭi remains standing in the corridor.
Kŭnhŭi - Namsil.
Namsil - You seem to be suffering?
Kŭnhŭi - Thank you for coming all this way...
Namsil - (Silent)
Kŭnhŭi - Please sit down.
Namsil - I don't have time to sit or anything.
Kŭnhŭi - (Swallowing her shame) Are you that busy?
Namsil - Yes.
Kŭnhŭi - Still... uh... your bag looks heavy, please put it down.
Namsil - Sukhŭi said you had something to say...
Kŭnhŭi - There's nothing particular to say, but...
Namsil - Then I'll be going.
Kŭnhŭi - Just a moment.
Namsil - The boat departure time will be late.
Kŭnhŭi - Boat time?
Namsil - I have to take the 7:20 train to Inch'ŏn to catch the boat.
Kŭnhŭi - To where?
Namsil - To Tianjin.
Kŭnhŭi - Why don't you continue painting...
Namsil - Are you worrying about my future?
Kŭnhŭi - It's not that...
Namsil - Then it's none of your concern, is it?
Kŭnhŭi - (Screams hysterically) But... but... I don't know. I don't know!
Namsil - You wouldn't know, would you? Does Professor Sin work at that school?
Kŭnhŭi - Yes.
Namsil - A girls' school professor, a high-level cultural life, a mature age. Your older brother's friend.<321>
Kŭnhŭi - Namsil, I...
Namsil - Don't add 'ssi' (씨 - Mr./Ms.).
Kŭnhŭi - I... I...
Namsil - Professor Sin is said to have refined taste. Why plant desolate ivy vines in the schoolyard instead of, say, juniper trees?
Kŭnhŭi - They were already there.
Namsil - It's a bit disappointing there's no piano.
Kŭnhŭi - (Silent)
Namsil - Just last year, I fantasized about having an atelier like this.
Kŭnhŭi - Namsil, you have genius. Please don't let that genius go to waste. I believe you will surely paint works that will shake the art world. When that happens, you'll be able to build a studio of marble. You have a bright future, Namsil. But for me, there's nothing to look forward to but a grave on Pukmangsan mountain.
Namsil - Listening to you, Kŭnhŭi, the anger I've suppressed and consoled myself with all this time feels about to burst.
Kŭnhŭi - Do you hate me that much?
Namsil - More than hate, I find you disgusting.
Kŭnhŭi - What? (Cries)
Namsil - The longer I stay, the more I find myself unable to look at your face, Kŭnhŭi.
Kŭnhŭi - If people could see into each other's hearts, how beautiful and happy the world would be.
Namsil - Are you still complaining, even after seizing all the happiness?
Kŭnhŭi - What happiness do I have?
Namsil - If you're not happy even after trampling on one person's life, that's a sin. Are you saying you're not happy even after marrying Professor Sin? You're still better off than me, surely. Better than me, who has lost life's purpose and is heading to Tianjin, far removed from the art world?
Kŭnhŭi - Namsil, I am a woman deserving punishment.
Namsil - This feels unpleasantly like we're mimicking a love scene from a movie or novel.
Kŭnhŭi - Namsil, couldn't you go back to Tokyo again?
Namsil - Even if I go, I probably can't finish school. Painting won't succeed through self-study, and my temperament won't let me become a mediocre painter even if I hang myself. So I quit.
Kŭnhŭi - I have a little money; it should be enough for about a year at art school.
Namsil - Where did that money come from? Do you think I would learn sacred painting with Professor Sin's money?<322>
Kŭnhŭi - It's money my mother gave me on my wedding day, telling me to use it in an emergency.
Namsil - Why couldn't someone who thinks of me so much buy even one print of "Pyŏkkong," which won special selection at the exhibition (선전 - Sŏnjŏn, the Chōsen Art Exhibition)?
Kŭnhŭi - (Startled) "Pyŏkkong" at the exhibition? That painting...
Namsil - After that, with support from seniors and friends, I even held a solo exhibition at the Hwasin Gallery (화신갸라리). But that day, Kŭnhŭi, you got off the elevator with Professor Sin and went straight into the restaurant. Ah, the disillusionment I felt then. Still, I held onto a shred of hope and drew illustrations set against Silla (신라) palace ruins for the Chosŏn Ilbo (조선 일보). But looking today, I see you read the Maeil Sinbo (매일 신보) at home. How can I love art in this situation? If Kŭnhŭi had looked at my paintings and thought of me even the slightest bit through them, I would have truly dedicated my life to it.
Kŭnhŭi - I didn't know at all.
Namsil - There's a scene where a playwright stages his past experience of being rejected by his first love, and his former lover watches from a corner with her husband, secretly wiping tears as she recalls the past. If the world is all like this... Ah, what am I saying now?
Kŭnhŭi - (Unable to suppress her surging affection) Namsil, please come closer to me. Let me show you that I truly, truly love you, Namsil.
Namsil - Stop it.
Kŭnhŭi - Then hold me one last time before you go. Please, please?
Namsil - Do you think I'm still the Namsil who wore a black durumagi and walked around the island?
(Slams the door shut and goes out into the corridor. Kŭnhŭi screams "Namsil!" "Namsil!" then collapses backward, exhausted. She sobs quietly again. Outside, Sukhŭi leans her face against the door and cries.)
Namsil - (Seeing Sukhŭi) I'm sorry.
Sukhŭi - If I'd known it would be like this, I wouldn't have asked you to come...
Namsil - I didn't intend for this when I came either, but...
Sukhŭi - When sister pleaded with me to let her meet you, I tried to dissuade her.
Namsil - Facing her, the dream shatters. It seems happiness lies in not seeing each other.
Sukhŭi - Even these days, sister calls Namsil's name in her sleep all night. The reason she only plays "Pyŏkkong" day and night is all because she's thinking of Namsil.
Namsil - Could that be true?
Sukhŭi - "What could Namsil be doing now?" Day and night, awake or asleep, that's all she says. "When he becomes a great painter, how much he'll despise me." And then <323> she says, "I don't want to live, I don't want to live." Even now, she refuses all medicine and is just waiting for death.
Namsil - Is she that critically ill?
Sukhŭi - They say it's doubtful she'll make it through tonight.
Namsil - I didn't realize she was that critical...
Sukhŭi - The doctor said the chance of survival is one in ten, and that one chance is gaining the will to live. But sister thinks she'll go when all the ivy leaves fall from the vine, and she's just waiting for that last leaf to fall.
Namsil - She thinks she'll go when the ivy leaf falls? What foolishness.
Sukhŭi - When I first heard it, I thought it was laughable too, but it doesn't seem like something to be dismissed lightly. Sister is focusing her entire mind on that leaf. Her fever is high, her nerves are frayed, and it's clear that when that leaf falls, her mind and body, like a taut bowstring snapping, will go completely limp. Now that even Namsil, her only hope before death, has acted like this... sister will die from sorrow alone.
Namsil - What should I do?
Sukhŭi - Please just say one word to sister, that you love her, before you go.
Namsil - Isn't your sister Professor Sin's wife (안해)?
Sukhŭi - Professor Sin has gone to buy a piano now. But I now know for sure that it won't bring sister the slightest joy.
Namsil - If I were the Creator, I would have made a spring breeze blow so the leaf wouldn't fall, but I can't do that either.
Sukhŭi - I prayed to God all night, but well... it will probably fall completely tonight anyway.
Namsil - I have no choice but to leave like this.
Sukhŭi - Even if you go, just one word to sister...
Namsil - I'd bite my tongue off before I could say that. I'll see you again if there's a chance.
(Goes down the stairs.)
Kŭnhŭi - Sukhŭi.
Sukhŭi - Yes.
(Sukhŭi enters the room.)
Kŭnhŭi - Has he gone?
Sukhŭi - Yes.
Kŭnhŭi - He won't come back again now, will he?
Sukhŭi - He said he'd come again if there's a chance.
Kŭnhŭi - Will I still be alive then? It's all over now.
Outside, the wind begins to rise.
Autumn rain starts to fall drizzlingly.<324>
Kŭnhŭi - Open it, let me see.
Sukhŭi - No. I'll stand guard in front of the window all night tonight.
Kŭnhŭi - With the wind blowing like that, how could the four remaining leaves possibly hold on? That sound of rain... Namsil must be getting wet. Tonight, he leaves Korea in the rain, and I leave too, then that's it, it's all over.
(Outside, the sound of the wind grows louder.)

- Scene 2 -

The next morning.
The sound of a tofu seller's handbell.
Far off, a factory siren sounds.
The wind and rain have cleared, and the sky is even higher and bluer. Inside the room, a newly bought piano.
Professor Sin - Ahh- (Stretches and gets up.) Honey, honey, your sister isn't here.
Kŭnhŭi - I don't know.
Professor Sin - What do you mean, you don't know? Did she go home?
Kŭnhŭi - Does the wind seem calmer?
Professor Sin - Shall I open the window?
Kŭnhŭi - (Trying frantically to stop him) Don't open it!
Professor Sin - It would be good to let some fresh air in.
Kŭnhŭi - I'm scared.
Professor Sin - What are you scared of?
Kŭnhŭi - After the wind and rain battered so hard all night yesterday, how could that leaf still be attached?
Professor Sin - Oh dear, are you still thinking about that?
Kŭnhŭi - Sukhŭi, Sukhŭi.
Professor Sin - Maybe she went for a walk on the back hill.
Knocking sound.
The doctor comes up.
Professor Sin - Oh my, how come you're here so early in the morning...
Doctor - I stopped by on my way. Did the patient get some sleep?
Kŭnhŭi - Welcome.
Doctor - Yes! Please stay lying down.
Professor Sin - But how could you, since dawn...
Doctor - Yes, there's a child with measles just nearby. They called frantically asking me to come right away as the child seemed about to stop breathing.
Professor Sin - So, was the child alright?
Doctor - I gave an injection, so they should be fine.
(Sees the new piano in the room)
You bought the piano?
Professor Sin - Yes.
Doctor - Which make is it?<325>
Professor Sin - It's a Hwaje.
Doctor - Nice. Kŭnhŭi, why don't you get up and try playing it?
Kŭnhŭi - I'll play it later.
Doctor - Ah, you went to the trouble of buying it, please try playing it once. Sukhŭi said you wanted to play "Pyŏkkong." Please open the window too.
Professor Sin - She's afraid the remaining leaf must have fallen in last night's rain and won't even let me open the window.
Doctor - It hasn't fallen.
Kŭnhŭi - What?
Professor Sin - Did you see it?
Doctor - I saw it just now on my way here. I was also quite worried because Kŭnhŭi was focusing her mind on it, wondering what might have happened if it had fallen, but when I looked, a single leaf was clinging tightly to the very top, not moving at all.
Kŭnhŭi - Is that really true?
Doctor - Open the window and see.
(Professor Sin opens the window.)
Professor Sin - It's a miracle!
Kŭnhŭi - How could it? (Suddenly cries) But soon...
Doctor - Ah, why would it fall on such a nice day? It's just like a spring day. If warm days like today continue for about ten days, it will stay attached during that time, won't it? If so, Kŭnhŭi's illness will surely get better in the meantime.
Professor Sin - Come on, get up. Hurry.
Doctor - You haven't taken the medicine I gave you yesterday yet?
Professor Sin - Hurry up and get your spirits up.
Kŭnhŭi - It seems it wasn't my time to be called away yet.
Doctor - If human life were so flimsy, medicine would be useless.
Kŭnhŭi - Give me that medicine.
Professor Sin - Here.
Kŭnhŭi - (Takes the medicine and drinks) Ah, bitter.
Doctor - If you just keep your spirits strong, the illness will retreat on its own.
At this moment, the old school janitor runs up.
Old Janitor - Teacher, Professor Sin!
Professor Sin - (Opening the door) Why?
Old Janitor - It seems a thief got into the school grounds last night.
Professor Sin - A thief?
Old Janitor - Yes.
Professor Sin - Where? The office?
Old Janitor - The school building doors are still locked just as they were yesterday.
Professor Sin - Then?
Old Janitor - The warehouse door was open, and the ladder that was definitely put away yesterday is missing. So the night duty teacher and I walked around the schoolyard (교정) <326> and found it leaning against the brick wall behind the school building. Nothing seems to be missing, but still...
Professor Sin - Let's go see together.
(To the doctor) Please sit for a moment.
Doctor - Not at all, I should be going too.
Professor Sin and the doctor follow the Old Janitor out.
Sukhŭi enters.
Sukhŭi - (Standing at the door) Sister, did you see?
Kŭnhŭi - Yes, I was sure it had fallen.
Sukhŭi - Look closely at that leaf.
Kŭnhŭi - It's so amazing, I looked very, very closely.
Sukhŭi - Doesn't it seem filled with some great life force?
Kŭnhŭi - Looking at it that way, it does seem so.
Sukhŭi - That is Namsil's final masterpiece.
Kŭnhŭi - What did you say?
Sukhŭi - Last night, I was so worried I couldn't sleep, so I got up and quietly opened the window to look. And there was Namsil, climbing up a ladder, holding a lantern and a palette (파랫드) in one hand, painting a leaf on the wall. Standing there in that awful rain. Look! Even when the wind blows, it won't move or fall. That truly is immortal life. It's not just a painting; it's a guiding light. It feels like Namsil's soul. He painted not for art's sake, but for you, sister.
Kŭnhŭi - (Crying) Has he gone?
Sukhŭi - Yes. After painting that, he left for Tianjin.
Kŭnhŭi twists her body, gets up, almost crawls to the piano, and quietly plays "Pyŏkkong."
Sukhŭi - So, sister, you have to live, even if just for Namsil's sake.
Kŭnhŭi slams down onto the keys (키-) and quietly sobs.<327>

**Summary**

Set in late autumn 1940, the play "Pyŏkkong" (Blue Sky) depicts Kŭnhŭi, a young woman dying of illness (likely tuberculosis), who believes she will die when the last ivy leaf falls from a nearby wall. Her despair stems not only from her illness but also from her past unfulfilled love for the artist Namsil, whom she feels she betrayed by marrying Professor Sin. Her husband tries conventional means (doctor, buying a piano) to save her, while her sister Sukhŭi understands the deeper emotional roots of her illness. A final, bitter encounter with the disillusioned Namsil seems to seal Kŭnhŭi's fate. However, Namsil secretly paints a single, lifelike ivy leaf onto the wall during a storm. Seeing this "miracle" leaf the next morning, Kŭnhŭi finds the will to live, realizing it's Namsil's final artistic act, born out of love for her. She ends the play by playing "Pyŏkkong," symbolizing renewed hope.

For historians, the play offers insights into Korean society under Japanese rule in 1940. It portrays the tension between traditional expectations (arranged marriage influences) and modern desires (love matches, Western cultural elements like piano music, Western art references), the psychological toll of repressed emotions and societal pressures on women, the struggles of artists in a potentially restrictive environment, the prevalence of diseases like TB, and hints of the broader geopolitical context (travel to Tianjin, a city within Japan's sphere of influence). The contrast between the husband's practical but emotionally distant approach and the artist's symbolic, life-giving gesture highlights differing values regarding art, love, and healing.

**Named Entities**

槿姬	근희	Kŭnhŭi
淑姬	숙희	Sukhŭi
申敎授	신교수	Sin Kyosu
남실	남실	Namsil
베-토-벤	베토벤	Beethoven
동경	동경	Tonggyŏng
서울	서울	Sŏul
돈화문	돈화문	Tonhwa-mun
천진	천진	Ch'ŏnjin
작약도	작약도	Chak'yakto
세간치니	세간치니	Segantini
알프스	알프스	Alps
인천	인천	Inch'ŏn
조선	조선	Chosŏn
나포리	나포리	Napoli
신라	신라	Silla
조선 일보	조선 일보	Chosŏn Ilbo
매일 신보	매일 신보	Maeil Sinbo
화신갸라리	화신 갤러리	Hwasin Gallery

**Glossary**

벽공 (碧空)	벽공	Blue sky; used metaphorically for hope.
畵生	화생	Art student.
小使	소사	Janitor, school attendant (older term).
웨	왜	Why (older spelling/pronunciation).
했서	했어	Did (older spelling/form of past tense).
하겠다구 하겠지	하겠다고 하겠지	He probably said he would do it (older grammatical construction).
다방	다방	Tea room, coffee shop, cafe.
기우 (寄寓)	기우	To lodge temporarily, stay with someone.
여행권 (旅行券)	여행권	Travel permit; likely refers to documents needed for travel outside Korea, e.g., to Manchuria or China, during the colonial period.
간판점 (看板店)	간판점	Sign shop.
폐병 (肺病)	폐병	Tuberculosis (consumption).
아재	아제	Term used by a wife for her husband, sometimes implying 'master' (older usage/dialect).
낳지	낫지	Get better, heal (older spelling).
박봉 (薄俸)	박봉	Meager salary.
나드리	나들이	Outing, excursion (older spelling).
노비 (路費)	노비	Travel expenses.
곱브	컵	Cup (likely transliteration, possibly 'goblet' or 'cup').
레코-드	레코드	Record (phonograph).
숙직 (宿直)	숙직	Night duty.
오찍	오직	Only, merely; here used idiomatically perhaps meaning 'as soon as possible' or 'quickly'.
가치	같이	Together (older spelling).
뵈요	보여요	(I) see, it is visible (older spelling/polite form).
맨드실	만드실	Will make (older spelling/honorific).
안해	아내	Wife (older form/dialect).
선전 (鮮展)	선전	Abbreviation for the Chōsen Art Exhibition (조선미술전람회), the main government-sponsored art exhibition in colonial Korea.
파랫드	팔레트	Palette (artist's tool, transliteration).
키-	키	Key (piano key, transliteration).
교정 (校庭)	교정	Schoolyard, campus.
느러질	늘어질	To become limp, slacken (older spelling).


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제12권 제5호
발행일	1940년 05월 01일
기사제목	戱曲 벽공 (一幕)
필자	咸世德
기사형태	희곡·시나리오

戱曲 벽공 (一幕)
						咸世德
인물
槿姬          (22세)
淑姬          그의 동생
申敎授        槿姬의 남편
남실          畵生 (25세)
의사
여학교 老小使
병원 급사

晩秋.
간소한 양옥 2층의 침실.
左邊이 계단과 복도. 질소한 실내 장식. 槿姬는 남향의 창가에 있는 침대에 누워 있고 제복을 입은 淑姬가 간호를 하고 있다. 창 넘어로 조그만 공지가 있고 그 뒤로 모 여학교 교사 後壁이 보인다. 붉은 벽돌담에는 담쟁이 넝쿨이 무성히 뻗어 올라가 있으나 가을 바람에 다 지고 앙상한 가지에 여나문 잎이 물어뜯을 듯이 붙어 있을 뿐.<312>
校舍 후원에서 大除掃를 하는 여학생들이 부르는 「空壁」의 노래가 계절에 어울리지 않게 명랑이 들려 온다.

-1장-

淑姬 - 언니, 지금 불른 애들 우리반 애들이야.
槿姬 - 그 곡은 봄에 해야 좋아.
淑姬 - 남실씨가 퍽 좋아했지?
槿姬 - 응.
淑姬 - 베-토-벤의 심포니- 보다 자기에겐 벽공이 더 좋대. 우울할 땐 다방에 가서 한 번씩 듣고 나온다고 하겠지?
槿姬 - (깊은 한숨) 지금 뭘하고 있을가?
淑姬 - 동경서 나왔다든데.
槿姬 - (놀라며) 아아니 웨.
淑姬 - 그림 집어치구 취직하겠다구 하겠지.
槿姬 - 그림 집어치구?
淑姬 - 응. 시시해서 못 그리겠대.
槿姬 - 그럼 자기 집에 와 있나?
淑姬 - 서울 와 있대.
槿姬 - 너 언제 만났드랬냐?
淑姬 - 어저께 돈화문 앞에서.
槿姬 - 뭐라고 하지?
淑姬 - 뭐라고 하긴 뭐. 별 말 없었서. 참 퍽 말랐드군.
槿姬 - 내 얘긴?
淑姬 - 안 했서. 내가 언니 얘길 좀 끌어낼냐고 하면 자꾸 딴 말을 끌어내서 피하겠지. 그래서 나도 눈치를 채고 그만 뒀서.
槿姬 - 하숙하고 있다든?
淑姬 - 동모네서 기우하고 있대. 옷도 말 아니드군. 그러고 수염이 다 났서.
槿姬 - (들릴낙 말락한 소리로) 나 때문이야.
淑姬 - 인제 알았수? 부른 젖처럼 조금만 슬픈 말끝이 나오면 금시에 눈물이 터질 듯 했었어.
槿姬 - 그래 어디로 가든?
淑姬 - 경찰서에 간다든데.
槿姬 - 웨?
淑姬 - 여행권 맡으로 간대.
槿姬 - 쥐직 한다면서 여행권은 웨?
淑姬 - 서울서가 아니라 천진 가서 한 대. 자기 동*생이 거기서 간판점을 하는데 노느니 오라구 했다구. 웨 그런지 서울엔 하루가 지긋지긋해 못 있겠대.
(槿姬 연겊어 밭은 기침을 한다.)
淑姬 - 언니 창문 닫지. 바람을 쐬니까 그렇지 않어.
槿姬 - 그대로 둬.
淑姬 - 의사가 바람 쐬지 말라구 신신 부탁 하시다<313> 싶이 하구 가지 않았서?
槿姬 - (거진 절망적으로) 살면 몇일이나 살라구 뭐?
淑姬 - 웨 그렇게 비관을 하우? 병은 약 반 마음 반이란 말도 못 들었우?
(이때 校舍 벽돌 담에 담쟁에 넝쿨담이 후루루 날러 떨어진다.)
槿姬 - 열 다섯.
(淑姬는 눈물이 글성 글성 해 진다. 이윽고 또 한 잎이 떨어진다.)
槿姬 - (기대리었다는 듯이) 열 넷.
淑姬 - (짜증을 내며) 뭣이 열 넷이란 말이우? 문 닫읍시다.
槿姬 - (애걸하듯이) 그대루 둬 글세.
淑姬 - 마음을 안정해야 병이 낳지 않우? 의사가 책두 보지 말라든데 뭘 밤새두룩 세구 있수? 언닌 언니 생각만 하우? 아재 애쓰구 다니는 걸 봐서라두 하루 바삐 낳을 생각을 해야지.
槿姬 - (그 말은 듯지도 않고 동시에 세 잎이 후루루 떨어지는 것을 쫓는 듯이) 열 셋, 열 둘, 애구 열 하나.
이때 戶外에 자동차가 정지한 소리.
조금 후 계단을 올라오는 구두 소리.
淑姬 - 의사 오셨나보우.
(의사와 申敎授(30세) 들어 온다.)
淑姬 - 오셨습니까?
槿姬 - 바쁘신데 자꾸 오서서.
의사 - (일어날랴는 환자를 制하며) 그대로 누워 계십쇼. 될 수 있는 대로 몸을 움지기지 않도록 하시는 게 좋읍니다. (淑姬를 보고) 체온 적으셨읍니까?
淑姬 - 네, 아침엔 39도 5부 였서요. 그리고 한시간 걸러쿰 쟀었는데 모두 39도를 올라갔다 내려갔다 하기만 했서요. (槿姬의 겨드랑에서 끄내서 본 후 수은을 흔들며) 이번은 39도 3부예요.
申敎授 - 열이 좀 내릴 도리가 없을까요?
의사 - 문을 이렇게 열어 놓고 바람을 쐬시는데 내리 겠습니까?
淑姬 - 언니 문 닫지.
槿姬 - 그대로 둬.
淑姬 - 카-텐만 안 치면 밖은 뵈지 않어?
(창을 닫는다.)
申敎授 - 좀 나아가는 편입니까?
의사 - 네. 퍽 많이 쾌차해졌습니다.
申敎授 - 감사합니다.
의사 - 몸이 몹시 쇠약해 지셨으니까, 오늘은 좀 보혈이 될 약을 디리지요.
申敎授 - 그럼 제가 따라 갈가요?
槿姬 - (또 한 잎 떨어지는 것을 보고) 열.
의사 - 아아니 오실 것 없습니다. 심부름 하는 애를 시킬테니<314> 갖어 오거든 식 후 한봉씩 잡숫게 하십쇼.
槿姬 - 아홉.
(별안간 얼굴을 침구에 파 묻고 우는 듯이 떠든다.)
의사 - (의아하야) 무얼 그렇게 세십니까?
槿姬 - 아무 것도 아니에요. 아이 여덟.
의사 - 목욕탕에서 수를 세는 것은 뜨건기를 덜 할 도음이 되겠지만 이 병엔 될 수 있는 대로 정신을 안 쓰는 게 좋겠습니다.
申敎授 - (진찰을 마치고 니러 슬려는 의사를 보고) 가시겠습니까?
의사 - 네. 인젠 전쾌될 가망이 충분합니다.
(의사를 따라 淑姬와 申敎授 복도로 나간다. 의사 발을 멈추고)
의사 - 언닌 무얼 그렇게 세시는 겁니까?
淑姬 - 공연히 심심하니까 창 밖에 있는 걸 세고 있어요.
의사 - 언제부터요?
淑姬 - 한 보름 전부터요.
의사 - 창 밖이래야 좁은 공지 밖에 없는데요?
淑姬 - 그 뒤에 학교가 있지 않어요? 그 돌담에 굴딱지 같이 붙어 있는 담쟁이 잎파리를 세고 있어요.
의사 - 그렇다면 다행입니다. 난 언젠가 우리 병원에 입원한 페병 환자 여인이 죽을 시간을 세고 있는 것을 봤기에 혹시 언니도 그러시는 거나 아닌가하고 퍽 걱정했었습니다.
淑姬 - (우름 섞인 소래로) 언니도 그거에요.
의사 - (경악하며) 네?
淑姬 - 지금 모두 아홉 장 남은 잎파리가 다 떨어지구 나면 자기도 그 낙엽처럼 갈 거라고 그래요.
申敎授 - 선생님, 병자가 대단 쇠약해 져서 그런 것이 아닐까요?
의사 - 아깐 환자 앞이라, 나아간다고 했었지만 기실은...
申敎授 - 그럼?
의사 - 살 가망이 열에 하나 밖엔 없습니다.
申敎授 - 어떻게 살릴 길이 없을까요?
의사 - 그 열에 하나라는 것은 환자가 살아야 하겠다는 히망을 갔는 것입니다.
申敎授 - 그야 물론 당자도 하루 바삐 날랴구 하고 있을 게 아닙니까?
의사 - 날라구 애를 쓰는 사람이 어째서 입원을 하면 맨 발바닥으로 집으로 돌아가겠습니까. 「살면 몇 일이나 살랴」하고 절망에 가까운 단념을 하고 있는 듯 합니다. 지금 담쟁이 넝쿨잎이 떨어지면 자기도 갈 거라고 생각을 하고 있다니 마치 죽엄을 기대리고 있는 것과 뭣이 다릅니까?
淑姬 - 언닌 말 끝마다 살고 싶지가 않대요.<315>
의사 - 그러니 암만 약을 썼댔자 효험이 있을 리가 있습니까?
申敎授 - 영 살아날 길이 없을까요?
의사 - 지금 말한 바와 같이 환자가 비관을 집어치고 하루 바삐 낳야겠다는 히망을 갖는 것입니다. 가령 이번 겨을엔 어디로 스키-를 하러 가겠다든가 무슨 영화를 보고 싶다든가 혹은 누구를 만나 보고 싶다든가 이런 기대가 있으면 생에 대한 애착이 강해질 것이니까요.
申敎授 - 입때까지 자기 하고 싶다는 것은 물질적으로나 정신적으로나 공이 다 해 왔었어요.
의사 - 못해 주신 건 없으십니까?
淑姬 - 언닌 시집갈 때부터 피아노 한 대 사주시래서 「벽공」을 치면서 살고 싶다고 했어요.
의사 - 벽공? 즉 희망이군요.
申敎授 - 저도 여학교 교원으로 받는 박봉으로서는 좀 힘에 부처 벌써부터 조르는 것을 차일 피일 밀어 왔었지요. 그러나 이제 그것이 환자에게 살려는 희망을 줄 수 있다면 대돈변을 내선들 못 사주겠습니까.
의사 - 그렇다면 저도 힘자라는 데까지 의술의 최선을 다해 보겠습니다. 피아노에다가 기대를 두게만 되면 살 가망은 열에 하나가 아니라 아홉이라고 장담해도 좋습니다. 그럼 난 그만...
淑姬 - 안녕이 가십쇼.
(의사 계단을 내려간다. 조곰 후 자동차가 門前을 질주해 사라지는 소래)
槿姬 - 숙히야.
淑姬 - 응.
申敎授 - 잠간만 (실내로 들어갈랴는 淑姬를 붓들고) 저 이린 말슴 묻는 건 부끄럽지만... 언닌 아직도... 예전 그이를 생각하구 있는지요?
淑姬 - 그이라니요?
申敎授 - 저... 그... 사랑하던...
淑姬 - 글세요. 전들 어떻게 알 리가 있겠어요?
申敎授 - 밤마다 잠꼬대 가운데 남실이란 사람을 불르기에 말입니다.
淑姬 - 전연 생각지 않는다구 할 수는 없겠지요.
申敎授 - 그럼 아직도...
淑姬 - 처음 아제가 언니와 결혼 하자고 하실 때 언니에겐 사랑하는 사람이 있다는 것을 다아 아시고 한 게 아니에요?
申敎授 - 그렇지만 이제 와선 질투심을 벗어나지 못하는 것을 슬퍼합니다.
淑姬 - 결혼하실 때도 세간에 흔이 있는 삼각 관계의 갈등을 겪으신 것도 아니니까 쓰린 사람은 남실이란 사람 한 분일 줄 알어요.<316>
申敎授 - 저두 그이에게는 참으로 미안한 일을 했다구 생각합니다.
淑姬 - 언니가 서울 가서 결혼하구 아재와 첫나드리 오든 날 그이는 정거장에서 사람들 틈에 끼어서 보구 있었어요. 동경만 가게 되면 이런 고통을 어느 정도까지 잊겠지만 노비가 없어 그것도 못 한다구 하면서 울었어요. 그런 사람도 있는데 아잰 뭘 그러세요?
槿姬 - 숙히야. 아까 그 간쓰메 좀 다우.
申敎授 - 들어가 보시지요.
淑姬와 申敎授 실내로 들어간다.
槿姬 - 목이 칼칼해 못 견디겠다.
淑姬 - 약 먹을 시간 됐어.
槿姬 - 좀 줘 글세.
申敎授 - 약 먹을 때 간식은 절대루 말랬어.
槿姬 - 약두 인젠 그만 먹겠어요.
申敎授 - 「입원도 않 하겠다 약도 안 먹겠다」니 대체 어떻게 할랴는 거요?
槿姬 - 죽어두 이대루 죽지, 안 먹겠어요.
申敎授 - 철부지 같이 이게 무슨 소리야?
淑姬 - (약봉지를 주며) 자 어서 먹우.
槿姬 - 저리 비키지 못 하겠냐?
淑姬 - 언닌 자기 아픈 걸 누구한테 떼를 쓰는 거유?
槿姬 - 안 먹는대두 그래.
申敎授 - 얼른 디렸디려요.
槿姬 - 살랴면 그것 안 먹어두 살 꺼요 죽을랴면 그것 먹었다구 안 죽겠어요.
申敎授 - 여보, 의사가 그러는데...
槿姬 - (울며) 다 공연한 소리에요. 나는 살 시간이 여섯 밖에 없어요.
申敎授 - 웨 맘을 그렇게 약하게 먹어.
槿姬 - (속사기는 듯이) 점점 빨리 떨어지기 시작했어요. 보름 전에는 한 이백개 달렸었는데. 아이 골치야. 세고 있으니까 골이 쑤시는군. 그렇지만 인젠 괜찮어요. 아 또 하나 떨어졌군. 모두 다섯 밖에 안 남았어요.
淑姬 - (곱브를 내동댕이) 뭣이 다섯이란 말이유.
槿姬 - 잎파리가, 담쟁이 넝쿨에 붙은 잎파리가.
淑姬 - 약도 안 먹고 고건 웨 세고 앉어서 남을 괴롭게 구는 거유?
槿姬 - 마지막 한 잎이 떨어지면 나도 갈 테니까, 괴로워도 장깜이야. 난 사을 전부터 저승을 드려다 보고 있는 걸.
(淑姬 격하여 울어버린다.)
申敎授 - 여보 웨 그런 시골 여자들도 믿지 않을 미신같은 소리를 하고 있어.
槿姬 - 과학으로서 생명을 드려다 볼 수 있어요? 그러나<317> 내게는 그게 뵈요.
申敎授 - 글세 당신 병과 담쟁이 넝쿨 잎이 무슨 관계가 있단 말이야? 선생님도 아까 많이 났다구 하시지 않었어?
淑姬 - 날 가망은 열에 하나... (헛 나온 말에 당황하며)가 아니라 하나에 열이라구 하셨어.
申敎授 - 저... 이거 봐 내 오늘 피아노를 사 올려구 하는데. 웨 당신이 벌써부터 벽공 치고 싶다구 했지. 그럴테니 하루 바삐 나서 치도록 해. 그리고 나 좋아하는 로-만자안달자-도 들려주구 응 웨 우리가 처음 만나든 작약도(芍藥島) 달밤을 추억하고 싶지 않어. 하-얀 토끼들이 뛰어 다니지 않었어 웨.
槿姬 - 피아노두 인젠 소용 없어요. (창 밖을 응시하다가) 또 떨어졌군. (히스테리칼한 소래로) 피아노두 벽공두 다 그만둬요. 인제 네 잎 남았어. 아이 밤이 오기 전에 어서 마저 떨어졌으면. 그럼 나도 가게 될 텐데. (기침)
申敎授 - 그 들창문을 내리세요.
(淑姬 쇠이드를 내린다.)
槿姬 - (악을 쓰며) 아이 깡깜해. 문 열어 놔.
申敎授 - (스윗지를 틀며) 자 전기 켜면 되지 않어.
(시계 6시를 친다.)
申敎授 - (淑姬에게) 난 허선생한테 가서 숙직을 좀 교대해 달라구 부탁하구 본정가서 곧 피아노를 사올테니 그 동안 괴로우시지만 혼자 좀 돌보아 주세요.
淑姬 - 오찍 오시두룩 하세요.
申敎授 - 네. (또어를 열고 申敎授 나간다. 계단을 내려 가는 소리. 다시금 조용해진다.)
槿姬 - 오래 걸릴까?
淑姬 - 뭘 한시간내로 오시겠지.
槿姬 - 그럼 저 내 단스 밑에 찾어봐. 그림 한 장 들었을테니.
淑姬 - 단스 밑에?
槿姬 - 응, 제일 밑에 있을꺼야. (淑姬 그림을 찾어 들고 와 槿姬에게 주다.)
淑姬 - 남선실씨 오빠가 그린거군.
槿姬 - 응.
淑姬 - 산은 알푸스 같으지. 조선에 이런 산이 있을까?
槿姬 - 세간치니-란 불란서 사람이 그린 「歸鄕」을 보고 그린거야.
淑姬 - 웨 이렇게 작품이 어둠침침해.
槿姬 - 타향으로 버리갔다가 자식이 죽었거든. 불란서선 이 역에서 초상이 생기면 꼭 시체를 고향으로 가지고 와서 묻는 풍습이 있대. 말곱비 붙들고 가는 게 아버지야. 마차 우에 검은 관을 붙들고 우는 게 어머니고.<318> 그리고 그 뒤에 양 한 마리가 따르고 있지? 세간치닌 알프스 산속 주막에서 나처럼 페염으로 죽었대. 죽을 때 「알프스를 보게 문을 열어다구」 한 마디 유언 겸 애원을 하고 죽었대.
淑姬 - 그러니 언닌 담쟁이 넝쿨을 보게 문을 열어 달라는 거요.
槿姬 - 생각해서 하란 말이야. (돌연 鳴*하며) 신선생은 여기 이 아버지와 반대로 나를 화장터로 끌고 가겠지.
淑姬 - 아이 언니도.
槿姬 - 그렇지만 이 어머니처럼 관을 붙들구 울어줄 사람이 내게는 없어.
淑姬 - (불길한 예감에 전신을 떨며) 아재는 언니 위로해 줄려구 피아노 사러 가셨는데 한시 바삐 일어날 생각은 않구 무슨 소릴 하구 있는 거유?
槿姬 - 남실씨가 나 죽었단 소리 들으면 시원해 할 껄?
淑姬 - 그이야 말루 이 어머니처럼 울 껄.
槿姬 - (상기가 되여) 정말 울까?
淑姬 - 그럼 안 울구?
槿姬 - 내 이 더러운 몸을 그이가...
淑姬 - 언닌 결혼했으니까 과거는 다아 잊어버렸겠지만 그인 늘 고독 가운데 있으니까 지난 일을 멀리 할 수가 없지 않겠수? 실연한 사람은 술루 고통을 잊는다구. 하지만 남실씨야 술을 먹수? 담밸 먹수?
槿姬 - 지금두 눈만 감으면 나하구 둘이 나란히 검정 두루막일 입구 다리를 건너가든 것이 눈 앞에 뵈. (먼- 추억을 더듬으며 한 마디 한 마디) 달도 없고 깡깜한데 등대불만 깜박 깜박 했었어. 그리구 밤 물에 배내는 사공들이 돗 올리는 삐걱 삐걱하는 소리만 들렸구. 어떻게 춘지. 남실씬 자꾸 날더러 조개 껍질 땜에 드러눠서 별만 보라는 구나 글세. 나종에 갈랴고 일어스는데 가기가 싫여서 혼났어. 바로 돌축대 옆이야. 거기서 나를 처음 안았어. 나는 그때 생전 처음이라 「가만 있어 가만 있어」하고 품에서 빠져 나왔 드랬어. 오면서 내가 학창 때 읽은 「봐니나 봐니니」 이야기를 했었지. 바람에 머리가 자꾸 얼굴에 감겨서 간즈르면 흩으러지고 간즈르면 흩으러지고. 항구에 전등불이 물에 비치는데 사진에 본 나포리 같겠지.
淑姬 - 어느 길로 왔었수?
槿姬 - 철도 공원. 버드 나무 숲이 캉캄했었어. 그이가 우리들은 달빛따라 호수로 날러 간 갈매기쌍 같다구.
淑姬 - 생각했자 죽은 자식이나 헤여 보기야.
槿姬 - (애원하듯) 숙히야. 한번 만나 볼 수 없을까.
淑姬 - 그럴 걸 웨 신선생하구 결혼을 했수?<319>
槿姬 - 오빠때문이었지 뭐냐?
淑姬 - 오빠가 아무리 신선생하구 언니를 가깝게 하랴구 하셨드라도 언니가 정말 남선이 오빠를 사랑했으면 결혼했을 리가 없지 않어?
槿姬 - 공일마다 인천을 못 내려 가게 하고 신선생하구 극장엘 가자, 한강 보-트를 타러 가자, 보각사로 픽크닉을 가자...
淑姬 - 언니가 안 따라 다녔으면 그만이지. 좋았길래 언니도 따라 다녔지?
槿姬 - 뭐? 나도 좋았길래?
淑姬 - 그럼. 나 보기에도 신선생한테 정신이 팔렸든데 뭐. 밤마다 편지 쓰지 않았어? 오빠한테서 토요일날 내려가는 길에 들르라고 속달만 오면 어머니가 못 가게 해도 가구서 뭘 그래.
槿姬 - 내 맘만 든든하면 그만이지 하구 오빠를 봐서 싫으면서두 끌려다녔었어. 약한 잔 여자라드니 참말이야. 나종엔 내가 사랑에 지구 말었어. 그렇지만 오늘까지 하루 한신들 남선이 오빨 잊은 적은 없었어.
淑姬 - 그건 말이 안 돼.
槿姬 - 되구 안 되구 한 번 만나게 해다우. 너 주소 알지?
淑姬 - 안 보는게 좋지 않을까?
槿姬 - 멧쎈쟈- 한번 보내봐. 네가 보내는 것처럼 하구.
淑姬 - 올 것 같지 않은데.
槿姬 - 안 오면 그만이야.
淑姬 밖으르 나간다.
병원 급사 약을 가지고 들어온다.
급사 - 약 가지고 왔습니다.
槿姬 - 거기 놓고 가요.
(급사 찬장 우에다 약을 놓고 나간다.)
槿姬 - 이거 보세요.
급사 - (돌아스며) 저 말이에요?
槿姬 - 네! 거기 그 레코-드 좀 틀어 놓구 가 주세요.
급사 레코-드를 튼다. 벽공의 음률.
급사 - 이거 우리집 간호부들이 매일 밤 트는 거군요?
槿姬 - 그래요?
급사 - 네.
급사 다시금 나간다.
槿姬 - (속사기는 듯이) 불라와 힘멜. 벽공. 그이는 그 그림을 다 그렸겠지. 양젖 짜든 계집애가 나무꾼 아이들 따라 고개를 넘어가는 그림을. 화면에 다는 벽공의 멜로디-를 입김처럼 불어너보구 싶다드니.
淑姬 층대를 빨리 뛰어 올라온다.
槿姬 - 언니, 그이 만났어.
槿姬 - 어데서?<320>
淑姬 - 멧쎈쟈- 집에서. 남실씨두 마침 뭘 보낼랴구 들어 왔겠지.
槿姬 - 그래 가치 오셨냐?
淑姬 - 안 오시겠다는 걸 억지루 모시구 왔어.
槿姬 - 들오시면 무슨 말을 하나?
(흩어진 머리를 가다듬으면 머리 맡을 정돈한다.)
淑姬 - (아래를 향하여) 올라오세요.
南實 *구와 트렁크를 들고 올라온다. 흘러나오는 레코-드에 잠시 귀를 기우린다.
南實 - 여기 섰을테니 들어가셔서 무슨 말인지 듣구 나오십쇼.
淑姬 - 기왕 예까지 오셨으니 잠간 들어갔다 가세요.
南實 - (난처한 표정) 그럼 가치 들어가시지요.
淑姬 - 아이 참 너무하시는 군요.
남실 마지못해 실내로 들어간다.
淑姬는 복도에 서 있다.
槿姬 - 남실씨.
南實 - 고생하시는 군요?
槿姬 - 먼 길을 와 주셔서...
南實 - (무언)
槿姬 - 좀 앉이세요.
南實 - 앉구 뭐하구 할 시간이 없어요.
槿姬 - (수치심을 무릅쓰고) 그렇게 바쁘세요?
南實 - 네.
槿姬 - 그래도... 저... 무거우신데 가방이나 좀 내려 놓세요.
南實 - 숙히씨 말이 할 말이 있으시다든데...
槿姬 - 할 말은 별로 없지만...
南實 - 그럼 전 가겠어요.
槿姬 - 잠간만.
南實 - 배 시간이 늦게 됩니다.
槿姬 - 배 시간이라니요?
南實 - 7시 20분자로 인천을 가야 배를 타게 되니까요.
槿姬 - 어데로?
南實 - 천진으로요.
槿姬 - 웨 그림을 더 계속하시지 않고...
南實 - 내 장래를 걱정하시고 그러세요?
槿姬 - 런그게 아니라...
南實 - 그럼 상관할 게 없지 않아요.
槿姬 - (히스테리칼한 소리로 呌喚을 친다.) 그렇지만... 그렇지만... 물라요. 난 물라요.
南實 - 물으시겠지요. 신선생은 저 학교에 근무하시나요?
槿姬 - 네.
南實 - 여학교 교수, 고도의 문화 생활, 지긋한 나이. 오빠 친구.<321>
槿姬 - 남실씨, 저...
南實 - 씨자 넣지 마세요.
槿姬 - 저... 저...
南實 - 신선생은 고상한 취미를 가지셨다든데 교정에 상나무라도 심지 웨 해필 살풍한 담쟁이 넝쿨을 으셨을까요?
槿姬 - 먼저부터 있었대요.
南實 - 피아노가 없는 게 좀 서운하군요.
槿姬 - (무언)
南實 - 작년만해도 이런 아트리에를 하나 갖었으면 좋겠다고 공상을 했었어요.
槿姬 - 남실씨에겐 천재가 있으세요. 그 천재를 헛되히 하시지 마세요. 전 반듯이 화단을 뒤흔드실 작품을 그리실 것을 믿고 있어요. 그렇게 되면 대리석으로 화실을 맨드실 수도 있을 꺼얘요. 남실씨에겐 칭청한 미래가 있어요. 그렇지만 나에겐 북망산 모결 밖에 기대리는 게 없어요.
南實 - 전 근히씨 이야기를 듣고 있으면 입대 나 혼자 달래고 얼르고 해 왔든 분노가 터질 것만 같습니다.
槿姬 - 제가 그렇게 미우세요?
南實 - 미운 것보다 징그러요.
槿姬 - 네? (운다.)
南實 - 오래 있으면 있을수록 난 자꾸 근히씨 얼굴이 다시 쳐다 뵈집니다.
槿姬 - 사람이 사람의 마음을 드려다 볼 수 있다면 얼마나 세상은 아름답고 행복할까요?
南實 - 그래도 행복을 다 차지하지 못 해서 불평이세요?
槿姬 - 나에게 무슨 행복이 있어요.
南實 - 한 사람의 일생을 짓밟어 놓고도 행복을 차지 못 했다면 그건 죄악입니다. 신선생과 결혼하고도 행복하지가 않다는 거얘요? 나보다는 그래도 낫겠지요. 생활에 목표를 잃고 화단과 동 떨어진 천진으로 가는 나 보담은 낫겠지요?
槿姬 - 남실씨 저는 죄 받을 년이얘요.
南實 - 이거 우리가 영화나 소설에 나오는 연애 장면 흉내를 내고 있는 것 같어 불쾌합니다.
槿姬 - 남실씨 다시 동경으로 가실 수 없을까요?
南實 - 가야 학교도 못 댄길 것, 고학으론 그림이 대성될 리 없고 또 내 성미로 중간치기 화가는 목을 매고 죽어도 되기 싫고 그래서 그만 뒀어요.
槿姬 - 제 돈이 조금 있는데 한 일년 미술 학교 다니시겐 될 듯 합니다.
南實 - 그 돈이 어데서 나온 거내요? 내가 신선생 돈으로 신성한 그림을 배울 것 같어요?<322>
槿姬 - 시집 오든 날 어머니가 급할 때 쓰라고 준 거얘요.
南實 - 웨 그렇게 나를 생각하는 사람이 선전에 특선한 「벽공」 한 장을 못 샀어요.
槿姬 - (놀라며) 벽공이 선전에? 그 그림이...
南實 - 그 후 선배와 동무들 후원으로 화신갸라리-서 개인전을 연 적도 있었어요. 그러나 그 날 근히씨는 신선생과 승강기서 내리자 식당으로 들어가드군요. 아 그 때에 내가 느낀 환멸. 그래도 나는 한 가닥 히망을 갖고 조선 일보에다 신라 궁실을 배경한 삽화를 그렸었어요. 그러나 오늘 보니 댁에서는 매일 신보를 보시드군요. 이런데 내가 예술을 사랑하게 되겠어요? 근히씨가 내 그림을 보아주고 그림을 통해서 나를 털끝만치라도 생각해 주었다면 난 일생을 참말 거기다 바쳤을 거에요.
槿姬 - 전 전연 몰랐었어요.
南實 - 어느 극작가가 첫사랑에 버림받든 과거를 써서 무대에 상연한 날 그의 옛날 연인이 남편과 구석에서 구경을 하며 지난 일을 생각코 몰-래 눈물을 닦는 장면이 있드군요. 세상이 다 이렇다면... 아이 내가 지금 무슨 말을 하고 있을까.
槿姬 - (솟는 애정을 막지 못하고) 남실씨 내 앞으로 좀 와 주세요. 참말 참말 제가 남실씨를 사랑하고 있다는 것을 보여드리지요.
南實 - 그만두세요.
槿姬 - 그럼 마지막 저를 한번 안아 주고 가세요. 네 네?
南實 - 내가 검정 두루매기 입고 섬둘레에 가든 남실인 줄 아세요.
(「쾅」하고 문을 닫고 북도로 나간다. 槿姬 「남실씨」 「남실씨」 절규하다 기진하여 뒤로 덜컥 자빠진다. 다시금 조용히 느껴운다. 밖에서는 淑姬가 「또어-」에 얼굴을 대고 운다.)
南實 - (淑姬를 보고) 미안합니다.
淑姬 - 이런 줄 알았드면 와 주시라구두 안 했을 걸...
南實 - 나두 올 땐 이럴라구 오지는 안 했지만...
淑姬 - 언니가 만나 뵙게 해 달라구 졸를 때 나는 말렸었어요.
南實 - 대하구보니 꿈이 깨지는군요. 서로 안 보는데 행복이 있을 것 같어요.
淑姬 - 요새두 언닌 밤새 잠결에 남실씨 이름을 불러요. 밤낮 「벽공」만 틀구 있는 것두 다 남실씨 생각하구 그래요.
南實 - 그럴까요?
淑姬 - 「지금 남실씨 뭘 하구 있을까?」 밤낮 자나깨나 하는 소린 이 소리 밖에 없어요.「훌륭한 화가가 돼 가지구 나오시면 날 얼마나 경멸할까?」 그러구다<323> 「살기가 싫다 살기가 싫다」 해요. 지금두 약을 통 아니 먹고 죽엄을 기대리고 있어요.
南實 - 그렇게 위중해요?
淑姬 - 오늘밤 넘기기가 어렵대요.
南實 - 난 그래도 그렇게 위중한 줄은 몰으로...
淑姬 - 살 가망은 열에 하난데 그 하나라는 것은 살려는 히망을 갖는 것이라고 의사가 그랬어요. 그런데 언니는 담쟁이 잎팔이 넝쿨에서 다 떨어지면 자기도 갈 꺼라고 그 마지막 잎팔 떨어지기만 기대리고 있어요.
南實 - 담쟁이 잎파리가 떨어지면 자기도 갈 꺼라구요. 그런 못난 소리가.
淑姬 - 나도 처음 들을 땐 웃읍게 여겼지만 일소에 부칠 일이 아닐 것 같어요. 언닌 그 잎파리에다 전 신경을 쓰고 있거든요. 열은 높은데 신경은 예민해저서 그 잎파리가 떨어지면 캥겼든 활줄이 끊어진 듯 심신이 축 느러질 것은 분명해요. 죽기 전 단 한 가지 기대이든 남실씨 마저 이러젔으니... 언닌 슬퍼서도 죽을 꺼에요.
南實 - 저는 어떻게 했으면 좋을지요.
淑姬 - 언니에게 사랑한다는 말을 한 마디 하시구 가 주세요.
南實 - 언닌 신성생의 안해가 아닙니까?
淑姬 - 신선생은 지금 피아노를 사러 가셨어요. 그렇지만 그것이 언니의 마음을 조금도 기쁘게 해 주지 못할 것을 저는 지금 확실히 알았어요.
南實 - 내가 조물주랴면 봄바람을 불어 잎이지지 않도록만 해 놨으로 하지만 그럴 수도 없고.
淑姬 - 밤새 내가 하느님께 기도를 했는데요. 뭐 오늘밤 안으론 다 질 꺼에요.
南實 - 난 이대로 떠날 수 밖에 없습니다.
淑姬 - 가셔도 언니에게 한마디...
南實 - 난 혀를 깨물되 그 소린 못하겠어요. 다시 기회 있으면 봐웁지요.
(계단을 내려간다.)
槿姬 - 숙히야.
淑姬 - 응.
(淑姬 실내로 들어간다.)
槿姬 - 가셨냐?
淑姬 - 응.
槿姬 - 인젠 다시 안 오시겠지?
淑姬 - 기회 있으면 다시 오겠다구 했어.
槿姬 - 그때까지 내가 살아있나? 인젠 다 끝장이 났어.
밖에선 바람이 일기 시작한다.
가을비가 섞여서 부슬 부슬 내린다.<324>
槿姬 - 열어줘, 좀 보게.
淑姬 - 안돼. 내 오늘밤 창 앞에 서서 잘걸.
槿姬 - 바람이 저렇게 부는데 넉장 남은 게 붙어 있을 리가 있나? 저 비소리... 남실씨 비 맞났겠네. 그이는 오늘밤 비 속에 조선 떠나고, 나도 떠나고, 그럼 그만이야, 모두 끝장이야.
(戶外에선 바람 소리 점점 높아간다.)

-2장-

翌日 아침.
두부 장수의 手鈴 소리.
멀-리 공장의 싸이렌 소리.
비바람은 개이고, 하늘이 한층 높고 푸르다. 실내에는 갖 사온 피아노.
申敎授 - 아- (기지개를 피며 일어난다.) 여보, 여보 아주머니가 안 기신데.
槿姬 - 몰라요.
申敎授 - 몰라요가 뭐요? 집엘 가셨나?
槿姬 - 바람이 좀 잔 모양이에요?
申敎授 - 문 열까?
槿姬 - (미칠 듯이 말리며) 열지 마세요.
申敎授 - 새로 맑은 공기를 넣는 게 졸텐데.
槿姬 - 무서워요.
申敎授 - 아니 뭐이 무섭단 말이요?
槿姬 - 어제 밤새 비바람이 그렇게 첬는데 그 잎이 붙어 있을 리가 있어요?
申敎授 - 아아니 그걸 또 생각하고 있소?
槿姬 - 숙히야, 숙히야.
申敎授 - 뒷 산에 산보 가섰나.
녹크 소리.
의사 올라온다.
申敎授 - 아이구 어떻게 아침부터 이렇게...
의사 - 지나가는 길에 들렀지요. 환잔 좀 주무셨나요?
槿姬 - 오셨습니까?
의사 - 네! 누워 계십쇼.
申敎授 - 그런게 어델 새벽부터...
의사 - 네, 요 앞에 홍역하는 아이가 있어서요. 지금 숨 넘어 갈 듯하니 곧 좀 와 달라고 어떻게 전화를 하는지.
申敎授 - 그래 무사했습니까?
의사 - 주사를 놨으니 괜찮겠지요.
(실내에 새로 놓인 피아노를 보고)
피아노를 사 오셨군요?
申敎授 - 네.
의사 - 어디 제에요.<325>
申敎授 - 화제에요.
의사 - 좋군요. 근히씨 일어나셔서 한번 처 보시지요.
槿姬 - 뒀다 치지요.
의사 - 아 일껏 사오셨는데 한번 처보시지요. 숙히씨 말이 벽공을 치고 싶다구 하셨다든데. 창문도 좀 열어노시구.
申敎授 - 어제밤 비에 남어지 잎이 떨어졌을 꺼라구 무섭다구 문도 못 열게 한답니다.
의사 - 안 떨어졌든데요?
槿姬 - 네?
申敎授 - 보셨어요?
의사 - 지금 오다가 본 걸요. 근히씨가 거기에다 신경을 쓰고 계시는게 저도 여간 걱정이 돼서 떨어졌으면 어떻가나 하고 보니까 맨꼭대기에 한 잎이 까딱도 않고 붙어 있든데요.
槿姬 - 정말이에요?
의사 - 창문 열어 보세요.
(申敎授 창문을 연다.)
申敎授 - 기적이군요.
槿姬 - 어쩌면? (돌연 울며) 그렇지만 오래잖아...
의사 - 아 날이 이렇게 존데 떨어지겠어요? 마치 봄날 같은데. 오늘같이 따뜻한 날이 한 열흘 계속된다면 그 동안은 붙어 있을 것이 아닙니까? 그렇다면 그 사이에 근히씨 병은 쾌차해질 것입니다.
申敎授 - 자 일어나요. 어서.
의사 - 어저께 드린 약을 아직 안 잡수섯군요?
申敎授 - 어서 기운을 내요.
槿姬 - 아직 나를 불러가실 때가 못 되셨나 보지요.
의사 - 사람 목숨이 그렇게 허술하다면 의학은 쓸 데가 없게 됩니다.
槿姬 - 그 약 이리 줘요.
申敎授 - 자.
槿姬 - (약을 받아 마시고) 아이 써.
의사 - 맘만 든든히 가지시면 병은 제절로 물러가는 겁니다.
이 때 학교 늙을 소사 뛰여 올라온다.
老小使 - 선생님, 신선생님.
申敎授 - (또어-를 열고) 웨?
老小使 - 어제밤에 교내에 도적이 들어 온 모양입니다.
申敎授 - 도적이?
老小使 - 네.
申敎授 - 어디? 사무실로?
老小使 - 교사문은 어제 잠근 채 그대로 있는데요.
申敎授 - 그런데?
老小使 - 창고 문이 열렸고 어저께 분명히 너둔 사닥다리가 없어젔어요. 그래서 숙직 선생님과 교정을 한 바퀴<326> 돌아보니까 그게 교사 뒤 벽돌 담 밑에 가 있군요. 잊어버린 건 없지만 그래도...
申敎授 - 가치 가보세.
(의사를 보고) 잠간 앉어 계십쇼.
의사 - 뭘요, 저도 가야겠습니다.
老小使를 따라 申敎授 의사 나간다.
淑姬 들어 온다.
淑姬 - (또어- 앞에 선 채) 언니 봤수?
槿姬 - 응, 난 꼭 떨어진 줄 알았드니.
淑姬 - 저 잎파리 자세히 봐.
槿姬 - 하두 신기해서 자세자세 봤어.
淑姬 - 무슨 커-다란 생명이 꽉 차 있는 것 같지 않어?
槿姬 - 그렇게 보니까 그렇기도 한데.
淑姬 - 저것이 남실씨 최후의 걸작이야.
槿姬 - 뭐라구?
淑姬 - 어제 밤에 난 어떻게 걱정이 되는지 자다 일어나 살몃이 창문을 열어 봤었어. 그랬드니 남실씨가 사닥다리를 타고 올라가서 한 손에 등불과 파랫드를 들고 벽에다 잎파리를 그리고 있었어. 그 궂은 비를 줄줄 맞아가면서. 봐! 바람이 불어도 움지기지도 않고 떨어지지도 않을테니. 저거야 말로 불멸의 생명이야. 저건 그림이 아니라 등불이야. 남실씨의 혼인 것 같어. 그이는 예술을 위해 그림을 그렸다기 보다 언니를 위해 그림을 그려왔어.
槿姬 - (울며) 가셨냐?
淑姬 - 응, 저걸 그려 놓고 천진으로 가셨어.
槿姬 몸을 틀고 일어나 피아노 앞으로 기어가다 싶이 하여 조용히 「벽공」을 친다.
槿姬 - 그러니 언닌 남실씨를 위해서라도 살아야 해.
槿姬 쾅 하고 키-에가 엎더저 조용히 느껴운다.<327>
<312-327>