잡지명	別乾坤 第22號
발행일	1929년 08월 01일
기사제목	痛快無雙奇人篇, 갓으로 밥짓고 박아지로 航海, 天下大奇人 李士亭先生, -奇人篇其三- (A Delightfully Unmatched Eccentric, Cooking Rice in a Hat and Sailing with Gourds, The World's Greatest Eccentric, Master Yi Sajung, -Eccentrics Part Three-)
필자	虫靑生
기사형태	소식 (News)

A Delightfully Unmatched Eccentric, Cooking Rice in a Hat and Sailing with Gourds, The World's Greatest Eccentric, Master Yi Sajung, -Eccentrics Part Three-
						Ch'ungch'ŏngsaeng

T'ojŏng! Yi T'ojŏng! There is no Korean man or woman, young or old, who does not know Master T'ojŏng. Every New Year, everyone seeks out our Master T'ojŏng—just from the fact that they try to decipher the T'ojŏng Secrets (土亭秘訣), created by him—at the end of their wishes to somehow spend the year well, to somehow live more happily and abundantly than last year=than all past life. Doesn't this show what a great eccentric (奇人) he was!

This is a kind of superstition (迷信), so it cannot be said to be a particularly great thing. Rather, the fact that this kind of thing is so widespread in the world creates the fear that, on the one hand, it makes him great, but on the other hand, it makes him a ridiculous and worthless person. How could this be his true intention, or the reward for later generations revering (推仰) him? <9>

However, here, it is merely a brief introduction to the fact that he was such a great figure and prodigy (奇傑), since he is so deeply embedded in the minds of people in the world, even in this superstitious way.

Like the aforementioned T'ojŏng Secrets—something he playfully did when he was bored, which spread widely in the world—his fundamental spirit and the great aspects of his life's conduct (行狀) are separate. I will introduce even a fragment (片鱗) of that here.

T'ojŏng! When did that admirable Master Yi Chiham (之菡) live? And where did he live? He lived three hundred years ago (Jungjong 12th year, Jŏngch'uk - Seonjo 11th year, Kyeyu), outside of Seodaemun in Kyŏngsŏng, in Samp'o (麻浦). He was originally from Hansan (韓山), Ch'ungch'ŏng Province, and moved to Seoul in middle age. He was a descendant of Yi Mogŭn (李牧隱), who was compared to Chŏng P'oŭn (鄭圃隱) in the late Goryeo period. His elder brother was Sŏngam (省庵=Chibŏn), and Yi Sanhae (李山海) was his nephew.

The Reason Why He Became T'ojŏng

To speak of T'ojŏng's studies first, he was truly, literally, a man of wide learning and knowledge (多聞博識). Not to mention moral philosophy and literary composition (道學文章), there was nothing he was not versed in, even astronomy and geography (天文地理), medicine and divination (醫藥卜筮), and yin-yang arts (陰陽術數). And his view of society (社會觀) and his view of life (人生觀) were, in every respect, superhuman (超人間的). No, more than that, he ridiculed and satirized (諷刺) the world at that time, and regarded the powerful statesmen and Confucian scholars of the time as worms crawling on the road.

So, finding it disgusting to be caught and live among such worm-like people, when he lived in Samp'o (麻浦), he went near Tongmak (東幕) and made a mud room (土室) out of the clay of the Han River, about a hundred feet high, with his own hands, like a sauna (汗蒸), and during the day he played on the flat roof of the house, and at night he came down into that room to sleep. Because of this, the house was named T'ojŏng (土亭), and eventually his pen name became T'ojŏng, and even now, the neighborhood is called T'ojŏng-ri (土亭里).

A Surprise at His Wife's Home

This is a story from T'ojŏng's early days. His wife's family was also in Samp'o. His father-in-law was a man named Mo Sansu (毛山守). A few days after the wedding, it was the dead of winter, and the wife's family had made him a new set of clothes to wear on top of his underclothes. He slipped out wearing them and did not return until sunset. What was going on? As they wondered, he came in trembling at night. He had taken off his overcoat (道袍), and when they asked him why, he said,

"I had some business and went to Hongjewŏn (洪濟院) and was returning when <10> I saw three beggar children shivering at the bridge. How could I just come back wearing cotton clothes? So, I tore the overcoat into three strips and gave them to the three children to wear."

From his youth, he had a nature of benevolence (人俠) to save the unfortunate, forgetting that he himself was cold.

Usually an Iron Crown, When Cooking Rice an Iron Pot

Although he was so famous for his moral philosophy and literary composition that there was no one in the world who did not know him, he was also known throughout the world for his unique eccentric (奇行) behavior. He always wore coarse hemp clothes and straw sandals, and sometimes he wrapped himself in tattered rags, wore a broken bamboo hat, and carried a torn carrying strap (견대) on his shoulder, so that anyone would see him as a beggar. But even in this guise, he would casually enter the noble houses (高臺廣室) of aristocrats and mingle with silk-clad ministers and councilors, which was also a famous eccentric act and a topic of conversation.

At first, he lived in a mud room (土室生活), but he thought even that was bothersome, so he abandoned it like discarding an old shoe. Now, with great ambition in his heart, he set out to travel the beautiful mountains and rivers of the eight provinces of Korea. He made a hat out of iron (鐵冠) and wore it. One more strange act was added. Who wouldn't laugh at that sight! While wandering around like that, if he happened to get some money, rice, or scoops of rice, he would take off his hat, hang it up, wash the rice, and cook rice on the roadside, like a traveling peddler making a quick meal. After trying this once, he was very proud and danced and jumped around, saying, "Ah! Look at this! This is what it means to kill two birds with one stone (一擧兩得)!" In this manner, he traveled around the beautiful mountains and rivers of the Korean peninsula for several years, and his ideals (理想) and ambitions (抱負) grew enormously and grandly.

Earning Money to Relieve the Poor

He also had an extraordinary talent for making money. He would steer a small boat freely around the vast sea, go to islands, cultivate virgin land (處女地), teach the islanders how to farm, and teach them how to trade. This was how he made a lot of money. In those days, there were still uninhabited islands (無人島). He discovered the most fertile-looking island in the middle of the sea in Ch'ungch'ŏng Province and planted beans and squash there. Even without fertilizing or weeding, they grew so lushly that he harvested hundreds of bags of beans and thousands of squash in the fall and loaded them onto dozens of large ships to sell for money. This was no small sum, but he never brought that money into his own house; he gave it all away to the poor.<11>

Then he crossed over to Jeju Island (濟州島), sailing in his incomplete, small boat, with several large gourds attached to the four corners of the boat to ensure that he could cross over to Jeju Island safely and peacefully without the slightest danger in any storm. From the day after he arrived, he actually engaged in trade and taught the locals the principles of commerce. After several years, he returned with tens of thousands of gold coins (數萬金), which he gave away to people living difficult and hard lives. Then, when he went home, he found that his own family was having trouble making ends meet, so he couldn't stay at home for long. Again, empty-handed, he went to an island in the middle of the West Sea (西海) and farmed beans, squash, and melons. That fall, he made a lot of money again, so this time he sent the ships back to Samp'o, Kyŏngsŏng, and distributed the money to the poor people along the Yŏn River (沿江). He continued to wander in and out, wearing tattered clothes and a broken hat, like a beggar.

Even Being Beaten Was a Lifelong Wish

His personality became more and more eccentric. Although he was from a prestigious family (名門巨族) and a leading scholar of his time, he hated associating with people of high status and especially pretended to be poor, preferring to play with laborers. And because he had a personality that made him want to experience any difficult thing himself, he saw laborers and merchants fighting and beating each other, and he thought, "What does it taste like to be beaten? I'll get beaten once." He deliberately burst into someone else's room and sat comfortably next to a young woman, and the whole house was in an uproar. The master of the house rushed in, shouting, "You rascal! Do you want to die? You crazy bastard, get beaten once!" He grabbed him by the collar and dragged him outside to beat him, but because of his age, he didn't beat him, but just cursed him and chased him away. Kicked out, he looked up at the sky and laughed as if disappointed, saying, "Is getting beaten also a matter of fate? I can't even do that!"

Once, he saw a magistrate (守令) beating the commoners in the countryside, and he thought, "Well, I was born into this world, so I'll get beaten on the buttocks once!" He rushed in front of the magistrate's procession and blocked the road. The magistrate was furious and ordered his servants to seize him, threw him down in the courtyard of the magistrate's office, and interrogated him. But his appearance and his speech were so strange that the magistrate became uneasy and sent him back without doing anything. Therefore, he could not fulfill his lifelong wish of being beaten or whipped.

Also, in order to experience things that are most difficult for people to endure, such as cold, heat, hunger, and thirst, he once spent the twelfth lunar month naked in the freezing wind (雪寒風), and he also endured the summer heat (여름) by wearing thick cotton clothes.<12> Sometimes he deliberately went without food for more than ten days, and sometimes he went without water for several days. So, he experienced everything that others find difficult to endure.

What Kind of Tricks Did Confucius and Mencius Use?

He sometimes visited Yi Yulgok's (李栗谷) house. Once, when he went to visit, the whole room was full of guests. Aristocrats and scholars from all over the world were gathered there. At that time, Yulgok was serving as a Daegan (臺諫) and was pretending to be ill because of complaints that his words were not being heeded, and he was about to resign from his post.

This became a topic of conversation, and after discussing matters of state and expressing pessimism, the conclusion was that it was a false illness and that he should resign from the Daegan post. Master T'ojŏng, who had been listening from one side, suddenly burst out laughing, "Huh! The ancient sages (聖人) were just full of formalities and left behind a lot of bad habits (後弊)!" The whole room was dumbfounded, wondering what he meant. The host, Yulgok, asked, "What other strange story do you have, Master...?" He smiled and said, "Confucius (孔子) said he was ill and did not see Yubi (孺悲), and Mencius (孟子) also did not go when King Seon of Qi (齊宣王) set fire, saying he was ill. Isn't it really ridiculous that later so-called scholars tell lies that they have a public illness and deliberately imitate them? Making excuses that one is sick is the habit of a lazy servant in someone else's house, so how can a scholar do such a thing? You might say that Confucius and Mencius did it all, so what does it matter if we do it? But what kind of tricks did Confucius and Mencius use to inflict such great harm on posterity with these dirty formalities?" At once, the people in the room burst out laughing.

A Magistrate Who Only Eats Mixed Grain Rice and Radish Leaf Soup

In his later years, he became an official, unable to resist the persuasion of his friends. His first position was as the magistrate of P'och'ŏn (抱川縣監). He still wore hemp clothes, straw shoes, and a tattered hat when he took office. That evening, they prepared a splendid meal, saying it was a welcoming dinner, with all the delicacies (珍味) from the region. But he didn't say a word, didn't even touch his spoon, and sent it back. The officials thought that perhaps the side dishes were not good enough, so they were very apologetic and hastily prepared an even better meal and presented it a second time. But he still didn't even look at it and sent it back. The officials were even more sorry and had no choice but to prostrate themselves in the courtyard and beg, "Our region is different from Seoul, and we cannot prepare anything better than this, so please just kill us!" He said with a gentle face, "Don't you have mixed grain rice (雜穀) in your region? I've never eaten such good food, so I was afraid! Look at the state of our Chosŏn... Isn't the reason we are not so well off because we are too extravagant with things like this food and clothing? I only need mixed grain rice and vegetable soup. From now on, I will never eat such good food."

A few days after taking office, he gathered the gentry and officials of the town, as well as various influential figures, and supposedly treated them to a feast, but when the meal was served, there was only a bowl of radish leaf soup (씨락국) on each rice table. No one who saw that sight was not astonished. Everyone just stared blankly with their mouths wide open. The host, the magistrate, was the first to pick up his spoon and eat the soup most deliciously. The guests couldn't not eat it, so they reluctantly tasted it, but they felt nauseous and couldn't stand it. During his two or three years as the magistrate of P'och'ŏn, he managed the people well in this manner. When he was transferred to Asan (牙山) as the magistrate and set out on the road, the people of the whole town blocked the road and begged him to stay, crying and unable to forget him.

Dying from Eating Centipede Juice

This happened when he was in Asan. There was an old official in the town who was so monstrous and squeezed the blood and fat out of the people. He had been trying to supervise him, but he never listened. So, once he said, "You are old, but your heart is always like a child, so I have no choice but to treat you like a child." He took off the official's hat, braided his white hair like a bachelor's, and made him hold an inkstone and stand by his side all day like a servant. After receiving this shameful punishment, he harbored a grudge in his heart. T'ojŏng always made centipede juice (蜈蚣汁) and drank a bowl of it every day, and he ate raw chestnuts (生栗) to detoxify the centipede venom. One day, when he was drinking the medicine, he bit down on a raw chestnut and found that it was a fake raw chestnut, carved out of willow wood. There was no time to detoxify, and he died miserably on the spot from the centipede venom. The old official, of course, had carved the fake chestnut.

He lived for fifty-eight years (쉰 여덜살), passing through this world like a bubble. I am writing this, lamenting that there was no one at that time who recognized his admirable actions—his strange behavior, his sharp criticism of the contradictory world, his righteous deeds that seemed to cut away flesh, and his implementation of the work of a thorough socialist—and that no one listened to his words. He was a person who admonished the foolish people of the world and the dark government officials.<14>

**Named Entities**

李士亭	Yi Sajung
虫靑生	Ch'ungch'ŏngsaeng
토뎡	T'ojŏng
土亭秘訣	T'ojŏng pigyŏl
李之菡	Yi Chiham
中宗	Chungjong
宣祖	Sŏnjo
麻浦	Map'o
韓山	Hansan
鄭圃隱	Chŏng P'oŭn
李牧隱	Yi Mogŭn
省庵	Sŏngam
李山海	Yi Sanhae
毛山守	Mo Sansu
洪濟院	Hongjewŏn
抱川	P'och'ŏn
牙山	Asan
李栗谷	Yi Yulgok
儒悲	Yubi
齊宣王	Ch'i Sŏnjowang



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제22호
발행일	1929년 08월 01일
기사제목	痛快無雙奇人篇, 갓으로 밥짓고 박아지로 航海, 天下大奇人 李士亭先生, -奇人篇其三-
필자	虫靑生
기사형태	소식

痛快無雙奇人篇, 갓으로 밥짓고 박아지로 航海, 天下大奇人 李士亭先生, -奇人篇其三-
						虫靑生
토뎡! 리토뎡! 조선 사람으로서 남녀로소 할 것 업시 토뎡 선생을 알지 못하는 이는 업슬 것이다. 정초가 되면 금년 동안 어떼케 잘 지내볼가 엇떠케 하면 작년보담=과거 모든 생활보담 좀 더 행복스럽게 좀 더 풍족하게 살어볼ㅅ가 하는 바람의 끄테는 누구나 반듯이 우리 토뎡선생을 찻게 되는 것만 보아도= 그가 맨드러노흔 토뎡비결(土亭秘訣)을 풀어보게 되는 것만 보아도 그가 얼마나 한 긔인(奇人)이 엿든 것을 알수 잇지 안은가!
이런 것은 미신(迷信)의 일종이니까 그다지 거록한 일이라 할 수 업다. 안이다 오히려 이런 종류의 것이 세상에 널리 퍼진 것은 그를 위대(偉大)하게 만드러 노은 그 반면(反面)에 그를 도리여 우수깡스러운 아무 갑시 업는 사람을 만드러 뻐릴 념려가 잇다. 이것이 엇지 그의 본 뜻이며 후세 사람이 그를 추앙(推仰)하는 보람이겟느냐?<9>
그러나 여긔는 그가 이러케 미신 방면으로라도 이다지도 널리 세상 사람의 머리속에 깁히깁히 드러가 잇느니 만치 그의 위대한 인물이며 긔걸(奇傑)이엿섯다는 것만 잠간 소개 한데 지나지 못하는 것이다.
우에 말한 토뎡비결가튼=그가 심심할 때에 시럽시 한번 작란처 보든 것이 도리어 넓게 세상에 퍼진 것이지만 그의 근본 정신이라든지 그의 일생 행장(行狀)의 위대한 뎜은 따로 잇다. 나는 여긔다가 조각비눌(片鱗)일지라도 그것을 소개해 보려는 것이다.
토뎡! 그러케 갸륵한 리지함(之菡) 선생은 어느 때의 사람이든가? 또 어대서 살엇는가? 지금으로부터 삼백 년 전 녯날(중종12년 정축-선조11년 계유)사람으로서 경성 서대문 밧게 삼개(麻浦)서 살엇다. 그는 애초에 충청도 한산(韓山)사람으로서 중년에 서울로 이사를 와서 살엇는대 고려 말년에 뎡포은(鄭圃隱)과 억개를 견주든 리목은(李牧隱)의 자손으로 그의 형님은 성암(省庵=之蕃)이요 리산해(李山海)는 그의 족하이다.

土亭의 土亭된 까닭

토뎡의 공부를 먼저 말하자면 그는 정말로 글ㅅ자 그대로의 다문박식(多聞博識)이엿다. 도학문장(道學文章)은 말할 것도 업고 텬문디리(天文地理)와 의약복서(醫藥卜筮)와 음양술수(陰陽術數)까지라도 통달치 못한 것은 업섯다. 그리고 그의 사회관(社會觀)과 인생관(人生觀)이란 어대까지든지 초인간뎍(超人間的)이엿다. 안이 그 보담도 그 때 그 세상을 비웃고 풍자(諷刺)하엿스며 그 때 세도 재상이나 한학뎍으로 된 도학군자들을 길가에 기어단이는 버레와 가티 보앗섯다.
그래서 버레가튼 사람틈에 에서 써잡혀 살기는 더럽다고 삼개(麻浦) 살 적에는 동막(東幕) 근처에 가서 한강가의 진흙을 익여서 자긔의 손으로 놉히가 백여 척이나 되는 토실(土室)을 한증(汗蒸)막처름 만드러서 나제는 평면으로 된 집응에서 놀고 밤이면 그 방안으로 나려와서 잠을 잣다고 하는데 인하야 그 집을 토뎡(土亭)이라 일홈하고 나종에 그의 별호까지 토뎡이 되고 말엇스며 지금까지도 그 동리는 토뎡리(土亭里)가 되고 말엇다.

妻家에서 깜작 놀라

토뎡의 초립동이 시절의 일이다. 그의 처가도 역시 삼개엿는대 그의 장인은 모산수(毛山守)라는 사람이다. 장가간지 몃칠만에 때는 엄동설한 치운 때 인대 처가에서 우알에 말속하게 새옷을 해 입혓더니 입은 채로 슬몃이 나아가고는 해가 지도록 도라오지 안키에 이게 웬일인고? 궁금히 녁이든 차에 밤에야 벌벌 떨면서 드러오는데 보니까 도포(道袍)를 버섯는지라 그까닭을 무른 즉
『볼 일이 잇서서 홍제원(洪濟院)까지 갓다가 도라 오는데<10> 다리목에서 거지 아희 셋이서 떨고 잇는 꼴을 보앗스니 그냥 나만 솜옷을 입고 올 수가 잇는 가요. 그래서 도포를 버서 셋 폭으로 찌저서 세 아희에게 갈러 입히고 왓슴니다.』
청소년시대로부터 벌서 자긔가 치운 것은 니저버리고 불상한 사람을 구제하려는 인협(人俠)의 텬성이엿다.

平時에는 鐵冠 밥질때는 鐵솟

그는 도학과 문장으로도 세상에서 모를 사람이 엄스리만치 명망이 놉핫지만은 그는 그의 일류인 긔행(奇行)으로 세상에서 또한 모를 사람은 하나도 업섯다. 그는 언제든지 몸에는 굵은 베옷 발에는 넷날 집신으로 지내는대 간혹 어느 때는 아주 떠러진 헌 누덕이를 감고 다 부서진 패랑이를 쓰고 해여진 큰 견대를 억개에 엇메고 어슬렁어슬렁 단이는 꼴은 누가 보든지 거지로 밧게 볼 수 업섯지만 그 몰골을 해가지고도 비위조케 고대광실(高臺廣室)의 귀족집으로 거침엄시 드러가서 비단옷 입은 정승판서들하고 뒤석겨 노는 것이 또한 유명한 긔행이 엿스며 이약이 거리엿섯다.
처음에는 토실생활(土室生活)을 해왓지만 그것 조차 귀치안타고 생각햇든지 헌신짝 버서 팽개치듯 집어 내버리고서는 인제는 가슴에 큰 뜻을 품고 조선팔도강산을 편답하려 길에 떠날적에 그 옷 그 신에다가 쇠로써 갓(鐵冠)을 만드러 그것을 쓰고 단이엿다. 긔괴한 행동이 한 가지 더 느럿다. 그 몰골을 보고서야 누가 웃지 안엇스랴! 그러케 꿈여 가지고 과객질을 단이다가 이따금 어듸서 돈량이나 쌀되박이나 생기면 등짐장사 단지밥 해 먹듯 길가에서 그 갓을 벗어 잿처 걸고 쌀을 씻처 밥을 지어 먹는다. 이러케 한번 시험해 보고서는 아주 의긔양양해서 『애! 이것봐라! 일거량득(一擧兩得)이란 이게로구나!』하면서 혼자 조와라고 춤추고 뛰어 놀엇다. 이러한 됴자로 몃해 동안에 산 놉고 물 고흔 조선반도의 금수강산을 두로 밟어보고 그의 리상(理想)과 그의 포부(抱負)는 굉장이 놉한젓다 거룩하게 커젓다.

돈 벌어 貧民救濟

그는 돈 맨드는 재간이 또한 비상하엿다. 다시 그는 조고만 배를 저어 자유자재로 망망대해를 순방하다가 섬에 드러 가서 처녀디(處女地)를 개척하야 곡식을 심기 섬백성에게 장사하는 법을 가르치기 이러한 방법으로 큰 돈을 잘 만드는 것이엿다. 그 때만해도 사람 업는 섬(無人島)이 더러 잇섯슬 때이다. 충청남도의 바다 가운대에 가장 기름저 보히는 섬을 발결하야 거긔다가 콩과 참호박을 심어 두엇더니 거름하고 매 각구지 안어도 넘우 무성해서 가을 추수 때에는 콩을 수백 석 호박을 수천 덩어리 거두어서 큰 배 수십 척에 실어 내다가 돈을 사니 이것이 적지 안은 거액이 엿스나 그는 절대로 그 돈을 자긔 집으로 드려가는 법이 업시 죄다 빈민에게<11> 갈너 주어 뻐리엇다.
그리고 나서 다시 제주도(濟州島)로 건너가는대 그 불완전한 조고마한 조각배를 저어 가는대도 배ㅅ전 네 귀에다가 큰 박아지를 몃개씩 매달어서 어떠한 풍랑에도 털끗만치도 위험이 업시 무사평온하게 제주도에 건너갓다. 건너가는 그 이튼날부터 그는 실디로 장사를 하면 취리도 하고 그 곳 사람들에게 장사하는 리치도 가르치곤 하엿다. 이러케 수년동안 지나는데 수만금(數萬金)의 큰돈을 잡어가지고 도라와서는 세상에 어렵게 고생스러운 생활을 하는 사람들에게 전부 헤처 논하주어 뻐리고 말엇다. 그리고 나서 집이라고 드러가고 보니 정작 자긔 집에서는 끼니를 못끌이고 잇는지라 그 꼴을 보니 오래 집에 붓허 잇슬수가 업는고로 다시 알몸둥이 빈주먹으로 서해(西海) 가운대 어느 섬으로 드러가서 또한 콩과 박과 참외의 농사를 지엇더니 그 해 가을에 가서 역시 큰 돈이 되는지라 이번에는 배를 경성 삼개로 돌려 연강(沿江) 일대의 빈민들에게 헛터주고 나서 자긔는 여전히 떠러진 옷 부서진 갓으로 문안 문밧그로 오락가락 거지의 행색을 계속하엿다.

매마저 보기가 平生所願

그의 성격은 점점 갈수록 이상스럽게만 발로된다. 그는 명문거족(名門巨族)이 엿스며 당대에 유수한 학자이건만은 디위 놉흔 사람과 상종하기를 실혀하고 특별히 빈천한 사람으로 자처하야 로동자와 가티 놀기를 조와 한다. 그리고 또 어떠한 어려운 일이라도 자긔가 몸소 한 번 격거 보고야마는 성격이 잇는고로 로동자와 시정배들이 항상 서로 때리고 맛고 싸우는 것을 보고서 마지면 어떠한 맛이 잇는가 내가 한 번 마저보리라. 이러케 생각한 그는 일부러 남의 집 안방에 툭 튀여 드러가서 젊은 부인 겻헤 읏식 안저보앗더니 과연 온 집안이 왓작 소동이 나며 밧간주인이 달려드러 『너 이놈! 죽고 십흐냐? 이 경칠 놈 한 번 마저 보아라!』하며 그의 끄뎅이를 끌고 밧그로 나아가 때리려다가 나이가 만흔 까닭으로 때리지는 안코 욕설만 실컨해서 쪼차 보내는지라 쫒겨나아온 그는 실망한 것처럼 『그것 참 매 맛는 것도 팔잔가? 그것도 안되네 그려!』 한울을 치어다 보며 웃엇다고 한다.
또 한번은 시골서 보면 원님(守令)이 백성을 잡어다가 볼기를 때리는 지라 『에라! 나도 세상에 낫다가 볼기나 한번 마저 보리라!』하고 원님 행차 압헤 와락 뛰어 달려드러 길을 가로 막엇더니 원님이 대로하야 사령을 식혀 잡어 가지고 동헌 마당에 업처노코 문초를 하다가 그의 용모와 그의 말씨가 엇지나 이상턴지 도로 원님이 뒤가 켕겨서 그냥 우물쭈물 돌리어 보내엿다. 그럼으로 그는 평생 소원인 뭇매 맛기 볼기 맛기까지도 소원을 일우어 보지 못하고 말엇다.
또 그는 사람으로 가장 격거내기 어려운 추위와 더위 배곱흐고 목말은 것을 한번식 톄험(體驗)해 보려고 동지섯달 설한풍에 벌거벗고 지내도 보앗스며 녀름은 얼마나 더운 것인가<12> 솜옷을 퉁퉁 입고 견듸여도 보앗다. 어떤 때는 십여 일 동안이나 밥을 먹지 안코 일부러 굶어도 보앗스며 물을 몃칠식 먹지 안코 지내도 보앗다. 그래서 남이 모다 참고 견대기 어렵다는 것은 무엇이던지 죄다 한 번식은 톄험해 보앗다.

孔孟은 무슨 心術로?

이따금 리률곡(李栗谷)집에 놀라 가는데 한번은 놀러가 보니 온 방안으로 손님이 하나 갓득차서잇다. 귀족 도학자도 온 텬하의 명사들은 죄다 모히여 안젓는대 그 때 률곡 선생이 대간(臺諫) 벼슬로 잇스면서 말을 들어주지 안는다는 불평으로 병드럿다고 칭탁하고 그 벼슬을 사임하려는 그 때이다.
이것이 모다 이약이거리가 되어 가지고 국가대사를 의론도 하고 혹은 비관도 하고 하든 끄테 결국 거짓병이라고 해서 대간을 내노아야 하겟다는 결론이 되는 것을 한 엽헤서 듯고만 잇는 토뎡선생 별안간 코우슴을 치면서 『흥! 녯적 성인(聖人)이란 형식덩어리라 잔뜩 후폐(後弊)만 남겨 노코 말엇군!』 온 방안은 무슨 말인지 몰라서 덩들하는 가운대 주인 률곡은 『또 무슨 긔담이 게시오? 선생께서...』 그는 빙그레 웃으면서 『공자(孔子)는 병이라고 일커러 유비(孺悲)를 보지 안엇고 맹자(孟子)는 제선왕(齊宣王)이 불을 때에 역시 병들엇다고 가지 안엇는대 후세에 소위 선비라는 것들은 얼핏하면 공중병이 잇다고 거짓말을 해서 일부러 그를 본밧는 것이야말로 정말 우습지 안은가. 병드럿다고 핑게하는 것은 남의 집 게으른 종놈의 행습이어늘 엇지 선비로서야 참아 이 따위 짓을 한단 말인가? 공자 맹자가튼이도 다-햇는데 우리가 그리기로서니 무슨 관계가 잇스랴 하겟지만 공자 맹자는 또한 무슨 심술로 후인들에게 이 따위 더러운 형식을 이러케 큰 폐해만 끼치엇든고?』 하니 좌중이 한거번에 우슴보가 탁 터젓다.

雜穀밥과 씨락국만 먹는 원님

그가 말년에는 친구들의 권고에 못닉어어 관리가 되는대 뎨일 처음으로 포천현감(抱川縣監)이 되엿섯다. 그는 여전히 베옷 집신 해진 갓으로 부임하엿다. 그날 저녁에 도임상이라고 그 고을에서 나는 가진 진미(珍味)를 갓추어 굉장한 진지상을 올렷더니 그는 아무 말도 업시 수저도 들어 보지 안코서 도로 내물린다. 아전들은 아마 반찬이 시원찬어서 그런가 하고 황송황송 불야불야 다시 그 보담도 훨신 더-잘 차려서 두 번재 올렷더니 그래도 여전이 걸더 떠보지도 안하고 그만 도로 물리는고로 아전들은 더욱더욱 죄송하여 할 수 업시 뜰알에 업듸려 『저의 고을은 서울과 달라서 그 이상은 도저히 더 잘 차릴 수 업스니 그저 죽여줍소사!』고 빌엇다. 그는 온화스러운 얼골로 『너의 고을에는 잡곡(雜穀)밥 업늬? 나는 그런 조흔 음식은 먹어 본 일이 업서서 무서워 그랫다! 보아라! 우리 조선 형편된 꼴을... 우리가 이러케 넉넉지<13> 못하게 된 까닭은 이런 음식가튼 것 의복가튼 것을 넘우 사치하기 때문이 안이냐. 나는 오직 잡곡밥과 나물국만이면 구만이다. 이후로는 그런 조흔 음식은 결코 먹지 안켓다』고 하엿다.
도임한 지 몃칠만에 그 고을 량반 아전 할 것업시 군내 여러 유지 신사를 모아노코 한턱내인다는 것이 나종에 상이라고 내오는데 보니까 밥상우에 씨락국 한 그릇식만 노엿는지라 그 날 모인 손님들은 그 꼴을 보고서 긔막히지 안은 사람은 업다. 모다 눈을 멍하고 입을 딱 벌리고 만잇다. 주인 사또는 맨 먼저 술가락을 들고 후루룩 우루룩 가장 맛잇게 먹으니 손님이 되여서 안 먹는 것도 무엇하고 하니까 할 수 업시 떠 먹어본 즉 그만 구역질이 나서 견댈 수가 업섯다. 포천 원님으로 이삼 년 잇는 동안에 매사를 이러한 됴자로 백성을 잘 다사리다가 거긔서 아산(牙山) 현감으로 뎐근이 되여 길을 떠나오는대 온 고을 벅성들이 길을 막어 류임을 간청하다 안 된다고 울며불며 못내 닛지 안엇다.

蜈蚣汁 먹다가 세상을 버려

아산 고을에 잇슬 때의 일인대 그 고을에는 늙은 아전 하나가 엇지나 흉물스럽고 백성의 피기름을 짜아내는지 항상 감독을 해나려오나 종시 듯지 안는고로 한번은 『너가튼 놈은 몸은 늙엇스나 마음은 항상 어린애인즉 어린애 대접을 할 수 밧게 업다』하고는 아전의 갓을 벗기어 흰머리를 총각머리로 따아 나리고 벼로를 들리어 통인처름 종일 겻헤 세워 두엇다. 이런 북그러운 징벌을 밧고 나서 속에다 앙긔를 잔득 먹고 잇뎌니 토뎡은 언제나 지네(蜈蚣)의 생집을 내여서 그것을 하로에 한 그릇식 마시고 지네의 독(毒)을 제독하라고 지네집 그릇을 뚝 떼며 바로 날밤(生栗)을 먹는 긔괴한 약을 먹는데 하로는 그 약을 마실 때에 날밤을 딱 깨물고 보니 버들나무로 감짝가티 깍거노은 거짓말 날밤이라 밋처 제독을 핢겨를이 업서서 지네독으로 제자리에서 무참히도 죽어 뻐리엿다. 날밤처럼 깍거드린 것은 물론 그 늙은 아전의 짓이엿다.
그는 쉬인 여덜살(58세)을 한 평생으로 물겁품처럼 이 세상을 단여가는 동안에 긔이한 행실 모순된 세상을 비웃는 살을 베여내는 듯한 바른 짓거리 텰뎌한 사회주의자의 일을 실행한 그턴 갸륵한 행동만하야 어리석은 세상사람과 컴컴한 정부자(政府者)들을 훈게한 사람이엿것만 그 때에 잇서서는 이것을 알어주는 사람 그의 말을 들어주는 사람이 업섯슴을 통탄하고 붓을 떼인다.<14>
<9-14>