잡지명: 別乾坤 第22號

발행일: 1929년 08월 01일
기사제목: 京義線京釜線 南北隊競爭探訪記事 (Gyeongui Line and Gyeongbu Line, North and South Teams' Competitive Exploration Report)
기사형태: 소식 (News)

The North and South Teams' Competitive Exploration Report on the Gyeongui and Gyeongbu Lines

As foreshadowed in the previous issue, on the morning of June 29th, the reporters of the North and South teams began their rapid exploration of the thousand-ri journey, collecting various unique articles from ten cities in the North and South over five days.

The forty-odd pages included above are the result. The time allotted for each city was barely a day, and the manuscript paper was only twenty sheets. After deducting the time to run to the city and send the manuscript, there were only about ten hours left. It was an exploration report while running around according to the train schedule. In this short amount of time, there was hardship in finding incidents in a place first visited, and there are also readers.

Sweepstakes

After reading through the North and South teams' articles published in this book, if you vote for "which side did better," the side with the most votes will be considered the winner. Among those who voted for the winning side, one person will be chosen by drawing to receive "a full bag of high-quality white rice" (or the equivalent in money for readers in distant places), and ninety-nine other people will receive lovely prizes.

○ Use only the paper at the edge of this page (cut it out with scissors and use it).
○ Deadline is August 31st (please write your address and name clearly).

The results of the previous issue's quiz will be announced in the next issue.

<105>

**Named Entities**

京義線	Gyeongui Line
京釜線	Gyeongbu Line



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제22호
발행일	1929년 08월 01일
기사제목	京義線京釜線 南北隊競爭探訪記事
기사형태	소식

京義線京釜線 南北隊競爭探訪記事
前號에 豫告한 그대로 六月二十九日午前 南北隊兩記者는 千里遠程에 急行探訪을 始作하야 五日間 南北十都市의 가지가지 特色잇는 記事를 거두엇다.
以上揭載하는 四十餘頁이 그것인바 一都市에 許諾된 時間이 겨우 「日間 原稿紙가 겨우 二十枚 이中에서 都市지 다라날 時間 原稿쏘보낼 時間을 除하면 겨우 十時間內外니 汽車時間대여서 다라나면서의 探訪記이라 이 은 時間에 처음 밟는 地方에서 事件을 求해내인데에 苦心이잇고  讀者도잇는 것이다.
懸賞
이冊에 揭載한 南北隊記事를 通讀하고나서 『어느 便이 잘하엿다』고 投票하면 投票數만흔 便을 닉인편으로하고 닉인便에 投票한 이 中에서 제비아 特選一人에게 『上等白米한가만이』를 드리고 (먼 地方讀者면 代金으로) 其他九十九名는 어엽븐 賞品을 보내드림니다
○用紙는 此頁端에 잇는 用紙에 限함(가위로오려쓰시요)
○期限은 八月三十一日지(住所氏名은 히)
前號隨賞찾기 結果는 次號에 發表함니다

＜105＞