Magazine Title	別건곤 제22호
발행일	1929년 08월 01일
기사제목	京城號! 京城號次號特輯京城號 (Kyŏngsŏng Issue! Kyŏngsŏng Issue Next Issue Special Kyŏngsŏng Issue)
기사형태	소식 (News)

Kyŏngsŏng Issue! Kyŏngsŏng Issue Next Issue Special Kyŏngsŏng Issue
The Entire Picture of Kyŏngsŏng Living!
If you want to know Kyŏngsŏng, learn everything inside and outside of Kyŏngsŏng with this book.
Those coming to Kyŏngsŏng, of course, and those living in Kyŏngsŏng must read it!!

Large Kyŏngsŏng Gat (갓, traditional Korean hat) Headshot Exhibition… Moving Photo Album
◇ Kyŏngsŏng Before Becoming the Capital… The Original History of Kyŏngsŏng
◇ 500 Years of Kyŏngsŏng's History… Turbulent and Layered 500-Year History
◇ Famous Sites and Historical Remains of Kyŏngsŏng… Things Kyŏngsŏng People Should Know
◇ Origin History Translation of Kyŏngsŏng's Eight Great Gates… Various Historical Tales
◇ Kyŏngsŏng's Fortress Wall Pilgrimage… Much History on the Fortress Walls
◇ A Study of Kyŏngsŏng's Old and New Neighborhood Names… Something Even Seoul People Don't Know
◇ Kyŏngsŏng Twenty Years Ago, Kyŏngsŏng Today… A Tearful Story

Large Kyŏngsŏng Life Inside and Out… If you have this, the Great Kyŏngsŏng will be in your belly!
Large Kyŏngsŏng Temptation
Consolation of the Screen…
Temptation of the Cafe…
Chinburi, Chongburi…
Attraction of the Night Market…
The Taste of Stepping on Asphalt…
Chongno Intersection and Others…
Order in advance.
One book fifty-two jeon (錢).
Hurry before it disappears <136>

Large Kyŏngsŏng Rhapsody in Three Movements… Various Aspects of Kyŏngsŏng! More Than Activity Photos
Scary Large Kyŏngsŏng
The Hand of Temptation From Inside the Car… Know it before coming from the countryside
Suri (Thief) and Robber Prevention Method… Various Evil Methods
Be Careful of T'apdong Park… A Big Trouble if you don't know this
Kyŏngsŏng Ghoul's Beauty Trap… Beauty Trap to Watch Out For!
The Scariest Place in Seoul… A Place as Scary as Yŏhogul
A Den of Devils Waiting for Country Guests… The Greatest of All Devil's Dens

The Tale of Kyŏngsŏng's Seven Wonders… Kyŏngsŏng's Seven Wonders! You must know them
What do Kyŏngsŏng people eat to live… The best way to know Kyŏngsŏng
Reputation Record of People in Various Fields of Kyŏngsŏng… Kyŏngsŏng's Food Investigation
Things to See and Learn and Take from Seoul… The Best Things to See in Kyŏngsŏng
A Method to See Kyŏngsŏng Thoroughly in Two Days… Look carefully before seeing Kyŏngsŏng
The Joy and Sorrow of Kyŏngsŏng People… See the inner Kyŏngsŏng with this
The Story of the Most Changed Place in Kyŏngsŏng… Know this and go sightseeing
Kyŏngsŏng's Secret Comfort… You can't find it anywhere else!

Large Kyŏngsŏng Five Great Dens of Devils… Secret Exposure
Full of Inside Articles that can only be handled by the Pyŏlgŏn'gon Magazine
A Total Collection of Kyŏngsŏng Records that Cannot be Compared to More Than Ten Other Books <137>

Named Entities

塔洞公園	T'apdong Kongwŏn
鐘路	Chongno
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
汝狐窟	Yŏhogul
別乾坤雜誌	Pyŏlgŏn'gon Chapchi



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제22호
발행일	1929년 08월 01일
기사제목	京城號! 京城號次號特輯京城號
기사형태	소식

京城號! 京城號次號特輯京城號
京城! 京城살님의 全容
京城을 알녀면 이 冊으로 京城의 안팟글다 알라
京城에 오는이는 勿論 京城사는이도 닑으랴!!

大京城假頭寫眞展覽會…………………·움죽이는 寫眞集
◇國都되기 前의 京城………………··京城의 原始來歷
◇京城의 五百年歷史……………………波澖重壘五百年史
◇京城이가진 名勝과 古跡……………··京城人도알어둘것
◇京城八大門由來史譯…………………·가지가지歷史談
◇京城의 城壁巡禮記……………………城壁에는 歷史多大
◇京城의 今昔洞名考……………………서울사람도모르는것
◇二十年前京城오늘京城………………·눈물나는이약이

大京城것살림속살림……………………·이것하나면 大京城이 배ㅅ속에 드러간다!
大京城誘惑
스크린의 慰安……………
카폐-의 誘惑……………
진부리ㆍ종부리……………
夜市場의 引力……………
아스팔트밟는맛……………
鐘路네거리其他……………
注文을미리해두라
一冊五十二錢
업서지기 前에 速히＜136＞

大京城狂騷三部曲………………………·京城의 가지가지!活動寫眞以上
무서운 大京城
誘惑의 손은 汽車속에서부터…………··시골서부터알고올것
스리 盜賊豫防法…………………………가지가지 惡手段들
塔洞公園을 注意하라……………………이것모르면큰逢變
京城餓鬼의 美人計………………………注意할 美人計!
서울서 第一무서운곳……………………여호굴가티무서운곳
시골손님기다리는 魔窟…………………魔窟中의 大魔窟

大京城七大怪이약이……………………·京城의 七大怪!반듯이 알어둘것
京城사람은 무얼먹고사는가……………京城을 第一잘알것
京城의 各方面人物評判記………………京城의 食口調査다
서울에서보고배워가지고갈 것…………京城에서 第一잘볼것
二日동안에 京城구경골고로하는法……京城보기 前에 볼것
京城사는사람의 깃븜과서름……………속京城은 이걸볼것
京城의 第一만히 變한곳이약이………·이걸알고 求景할것
京城의 秘密卿慰■卿……………………다른데서 못 求할것!

大京城五大魔窟…………………………·秘密大暴露
別乾坤雜誌안이면 取扱하지못할 裏面記事滿載
京城記錄의 總集다른 冊十餘冊으로도못比할것＜137＞
＜136-137＞