잡지명	別乾坤 第27號
발행일	1930년 03월 01일
기사제목	尾行當하든 이약이, 도리어 身勢도 입어 (A story of being followed, but rather gaining favor)
필자	方小波
기사형태	회고·수기 (Reminiscence/Memoir)

"The guest is looking for you."

When the landlady comes up to the second floor and shouts like this from downstairs to inform me that a guest has arrived, it is definitely a detective who has come.

"No, I just wanted to know if he's in or not, so there's no need to come all the way down." The detective would invariably be flustered like this, which I would hear from the second floor. In his own mind, he's just trying to find out from the landlady whether I've come home and am sitting inside or whether I've gone out somewhere, but the quick-witted woman, just by looking at his face, immediately notifies me on the second floor, so he's flustered.

Generally, what need is there to assign two detectives to someone as incompetent as me, who hasn't gone to Hibiya Park (日比谷公園) even once in the three years I've been in Tokyo (東京), and who just stays home unless I go to school or the library? I couldn't understand it, but there was nothing I could do to stop them from following me around. <48> I heard that other people often enjoy making fun of their tailing detectives, but I don't like that kind of prank, and even if I were doing something in secret, it wouldn't be revealed to them just because they were following me, and since I don't go many places, there's no reason for me to feel particularly inconvenienced, so I just let them follow me if they wanted to.

Because I didn't treat them rudely, they seemed to appreciate it, and not only did they not bother me, but they even did errands for me.

One was a young man who attended the Department of Law at Chuo University (中央大學法科) at night, and he wasn't dismissive or uptight, so I sometimes invited him up to my room while I was reading and talked to him. In other words, I treated him well. The other was an old man. When I saw him standing outside in the alley on a rainy, chilly day, I would invite him up and offer him tea, saying, "I'm not going anywhere today and will just be reading at home, so you can relax and just keep an eye on me like that." He would be relieved, saying, "Thank you. Then I'll go home and rest without disturbing your studies. You're sure you're not going out? I'll trust you and report that." And then he would leave.

If I went in through the front door and slipped out through the back door, he wouldn't know I had gone out the back and would stand guard in front of the front door all day in vain, only to be scolded at the station. On rainy days, I would deliberately walk in the rain without taking the streetcar, believing that it was okay for my student uniform to get wet, and he, wearing his only silk suit, would suffer like a drowned rat trying to follow me. Or, if I were walking along the street and suddenly jumped on a streetcar, he would lose me no matter how hard he tried. But <49> I never did such a thing. It's because I'm not the type to play pranks, and also because there was no need for me to do so.

Tokyo (東京) is a place where it rains a lot, and often it's not a downpour but a drizzle that stops and starts. Often the day is clear when you go to school in the morning, but when you come home from school, it's raining, and you don't have rain gear, so you stand at the school gate and feel helpless. In such cases, my old tail would already have gone to my lodging house to fetch my umbrella and high wooden clogs and come to pick me up. Even though he was tailing me, I was very grateful at times like this. On other days, he would sit in the guard's room by the school gate waiting for me to come out of school, but on rainy days, he would go to my house while I was studying, bring my rain gear, and wait for the end of school. It's something that someone who hasn't experienced it wouldn't believe. Perhaps it was because I didn't mistreat him usually, but it's probably true that even though he was old and had no wealth or children to rely on, and had to work as a detective to avoid starving, he wasn't a bad person at heart.

When buying Japanese fabrics or household goods, if you appeared to be an unskilled Korean or Chinese person, they would often cheat you on the price or overcharge you. In such cases, I would ask my tailing detective to buy them for me. When I asked him, he would invariably buy good items cheaply, taking it upon himself to do so. When I said I was going to see the flowers, he would always lead the way and secure a good spot for my party, pushing through countless people.

The most unpleasant experience was when traveling. When returning home, a detective would follow me from Tokyo Station (東京驛) to Gyeongseong Station (京城驛), all the way until I entered my house after getting off in Gyeongseong (京城). But instead of one detective following me all the way from Tokyo (東京) to Gyeongseong (京城), they divided the entire line into several sections <50> and the detective in one section would go to the next section and hand me over to the detective there. Although it was interesting, it was a very unpleasant experience.

If they knew what time I was taking which train from Tokyo (東京), they would telegraph or call each police station in each section from Tokyo (東京) to Gyeongseong (京城), saying, "A person of interest is on the train departing from Tokyo (東京) at such and such time, so prepare to take over."

If the Tokyo (東京) detective went as far as Yokohama (橫濱), a detective from the Yokohama Station (橫濱署) would be waiting in advance, and they would meet, exchange signals, and hand over and receive the "item of interest," which was me. Of course, they wouldn't do it in front of me, but they would stand at the train entrance, pointing at me from a distance and whispering. "The man with the Western-style clothes and the short haircut sitting in seat so-and-so is the one. The two leather bags on the luggage rack above his head are his belongings, and the person sitting next to him is not traveling with him, but seems to know him." They probably said something like that. And then the person taking over would hand over their name card to the detective handing me over, writing something on it.

"Received the item of interest so-and-so and so many of his belongings in good order." That's probably what they wrote. Taking that, he would get off the train with a light step, as if saying, "Now that I've handed him over safely, my responsibility is over."

To them, the existence of "me" was like a crate being loaded onto a freight train, nothing more. I was a piece of luggage with a receipt attached and a shipping manager following me, so even if I pretended to be crazy and wanted to get lost, I couldn't be completely lost, and I couldn't become an unidentified corpse anywhere.

Having traveled between Tokyo (東京) and Gyeongseong (京城) so many times, I knew which stops were the transfer points for the tailing detectives, so I made it a habit to stick my head out the train window whenever the train entered those stops and watch them <51> exchange. In this way, I made it a pleasure during the tedious train journey to know in advance, "This is the next tail," before he nonchalantly handed me over. Because the districts were wide, and the officers of different stations, hundreds of miles apart, were meeting and handing over, they didn't know who each other was, so they took off their hats and put them on the end of their short canes, raising them high as a signal. When they didn't raise their hats, they tied handkerchiefs to the tops of their short canes and raised them high. In this way, they easily identified the new tail in any situation.

However, the Japanese detectives between Busan (釜山) and Tokyo (東京) mostly came to my seat and greeted me. "Are you Mr. So-and-so? I am Mr. So-and-so from the OO Police Station. I am responsible for escorting you from here to Hiroshima (廣島). I am obliged to do this as a formality, so please don't feel uncomfortable and feel free to ask me to do errands for you." And they would sit next to me in a friendly manner.

Greeting me and sitting close to me was to see what book I was reading on the train, to peek into my bag, and to eavesdrop on what I was talking about with the person sitting next to me, but it was much better than coming behind me without greeting me and peering over my shoulder.

Once I crossed over to Korean soil, whether it was the person following me from Busan (釜山) or the person who took over from Daejeon (大田), they acted like noblemen, glaring at me with unfriendly eyes, and wouldn't show a welcoming face even if I went up to them and greeted them. When I set foot on Korean soil, my head was refreshed after seeing my clean compatriots for a long time, but I became endlessly unpleasant because of this kind of tailing.

In which year was it? It was a busy spring when the Peace Exposition (平和博覽會) was held in Tokyo (東京) and the British Crown Prince was visiting Tokyo (東京). In early April, I had to leave urgently to attend a certain meeting in Gyeongseong (京城) as a representative of several people in Tokyo (東京) due to urgent official business, but because of the exposition, it was impossible to get on the train, let alone set foot in the station area, so it was impossible to even think about buying a ticket without some courage.

It was at times like these that tailing became helpful. I gave my blanket and bag to my tail in advance and asked him to go in early and secure a good seat next to the dining car, and I asked another tail to buy a ticket in advance. In this way, I was able to ride in a good seat on a crowded train where many passengers were standing for 400 or 500 miles. But when the train passed Hiroshima (廣島), the tail who got on at the Hiroshima Station (廣島署) (the person who was going to Shimonoseki (下關)) walked around me without greeting me, looking over the books I was reading. He was very sensitive and unpleasant, trying to listen to my conversations.

When he did that, I came up with a mischievous idea. I deliberately bought beer and offered him a glass among the many fellow passengers. He was shocked as if he had been struck by lightning. His face turned bright red.

As a detective from a rural station, he probably thought that there was a command from Tokyo (東京) that "a person of interest is on such-and-such train, so be vigilant," and he thought that the person of interest was a very dangerous person, an extremely vicious villain, but in his eyes, the person "me" probably looked very menacing and like a criminal who would do anything, and he might have thought that my bag contained a six-hole gun (六穴砲) or a bomb (爆彈). When that villain suddenly offered him a glass of beer, it wouldn't be an exaggeration to say that he was scared out of his wits, but he was certainly very surprised.

When I said, "Have a drink. It's still more than two hours to Shimonoseki (下關)," he said, "No, I don't drink," <53> in a flustered manner.

When I pressed him, saying, "Aren't you traveling with me from Hiroshima (廣島)?" he burst out laughing and said, "No, I didn't get on at Hiroshima (廣島)."

Somehow or other, the train pulled into Shimonoseki (下關), the final stop, but before the train arrived, I handed my bag to the redcaps (赤帽) who jumped on from the middle to carry the luggage, saying, "Take it to the Busan (釜山) connecting ship," but they said, "The Busan (釜山) connecting ship is already full." When I asked why it was already full, they said, "Because of the tourist groups returning from the exposition, it's full every day, so you have to stay overnight in Shimonoseki (下關) and take the ship early tomorrow."

The problem was not the loss of 5 won for staying overnight in Shimonoseki (下關), but the fact that I would not be able to attend the important meeting. However, since there was no other way to deal with the full ship, I resigned myself to staying in Shimonoseki (下關) even though I didn't want to. But at that time, there were two fellow travelers whom I happened to meet on the train: one was aviator Kim Yongseop (金容燮), a disciple of An Changnam (安昌男), and the other was Park Jeonggeun (朴正根), who was graduating from the Imperial University (帝大). Park (朴) and Kim (金) said, "We should still run to the connecting ship and try to negotiate. There's no need to give up in advance just by listening to the redcap. Let's run as fast as we can." As soon as the train stopped, they jumped out and ran as fast as they could. The second person to be surprised was the detective from the Hiroshima Station (廣島署). When the dangerous person started running with his fists clenched, he thought he was escaping, and if he missed him, his head would be on the line, so he seemed to be chasing after me with all his might.

Running and running, we arrived at the connecting ship, panting and exhausted. There was a sign that said "Full" hung on the boarding entrance, and nearly 100 passengers who couldn't board were gathered in front of it. Just when I was about to turn around, thinking that it was completely hopeless, the loyal tail from Hiroshima (廣島) was standing right behind me, panting. When I tapped him on the shoulder and said, "Hey," he had his third shock.

When I said, "Aren't you a police officer from Hiroshima (廣島)?" he finally said, "Ah!!" "I'm returning home on urgent official business, but I can't get on the ship, so it's a big problem. Can't you arrange for me to board specially?" He said, "Well, I'm from Hiroshima (廣島), so I don't know the officers here, and I certainly don't know anyone on the ship." So I said, "Then please introduce me to an officer from the Shimonoseki Station (下關署)." He happily ran off and brought the detective who would be tailing me from Shimonoseki (下關) to Busan (釜山).

So I asked him to arrange for me to board, and when he agreed to let only me board, I insisted that all three of us be allowed to board. And we crossed over to Korea not long after.

I often relied on the tails for this kind of convenience, but after finishing my student life, when I traveled again 7 or 8 years later, at the end of last year, I couldn't find the tails who were obviously there, so it seems that their signals had changed. <54>

**Named Entities**

日比谷公園	Hibiya Park
東京	Tokyo
中央大學法科	Chungang Taehak Popkwa
京城	Gyeongseong
東京驛	Tokyo Station
京城驛	Gyeongseong Station
橫濱	Yokohama
橫濱署	Yokohama Seo
釜山	Busan
大田	Daejeon
平和博覽會	Pyeonghwa Bakramhoe
安昌男	An Changnam
金容燮	Kim Yongseop
帝大	Taehak
朴正根	Park Jeonggeun
廣島	Hiroshima
廣島署	Hiroshima Seo
下關	Shimonoseki
</a>


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제27호
발행일	1930년 03월 01일
기사제목	尾行當하든 이약이, 도리어 身勢도 입어
필자	方小波
기사형태	회고·수기

尾行當하든 이약이, 도리어 身勢도 입어
						方小波
「호상 오갹상데스요-」
반듯이 2층에까지 올너와서 손님 오섯다고 전해주는 주인여자가 이러케 아래층에 서서 소리만 올녀보내는 때는 뎡해노코 형사가 온 것이다.
「아니요 계신지 안계신지만 알려고 그런것인데 청해나리기까지 할 것 업슴니다.」하고 의례히 형사는 쩔쩔매면서 창황히 구는 것을 나는 2층에서 듯는다. 자긔깐에는 내가 집에 들어 안젓는지 어데나가고 업는지 그것만 주인에게 알아보려고 하는 노릇인데 눈치빠른 여인이 그의 얼골만 보면 2층으로 통지먼저 하닛가 창황히 구는 것이다.
대톄 나에게 나가티 무능한 사람에게 동경잇슨지 3년이 되도록 日比谷公園에 한번 안가고 학교와 도서관에 안가면 집에만 들어 안저 잇는 나에게 무슨 필요로 두사람씩 형사를 달어두는가. 도모지 이래할 수 업는 일이엿스나 그러나 작고 따러다니는 것을 나로서는 금할 수도 업는 일이엿다.＜48＞ 드르면 다른 사람들은 혹시 미행형사가 따르면 자랑삼아 골려주기를 잘 한다 하지만은 나는 그런 작란을 조와하는 성미도 못되거니와 내가 비밀히 하는 일이 업고 잇다하드래도 따러다닌다고 그에게 알녀질 것도 아니지만 별로 오고가는데가 업스닛가 대단한 불편도 늣길 까닭이 업서서 따러오면 따러오나부다 하고 지냇슬 분이다.
내가 그들에게 사납게 굴지 아니하닛가 그들도 고맙게 녁이는 모양인지 나를 괴롭게 굴지 안을 분아니라 나의 심브림을 잘해 주엇다.
한사람은 젊은 사람으로서 밤에 中央大學法科에 다니는 者이라 그러케 무시하지 안코 빡빡하지 안어서 나도 독서하는 겨를에 갓금 방에 올녀 안치고 이약이를 하엿다. 말하면 조케 대접해 준 것이다. 또 한사람은 늙은이엿다. 비오는날 으시시 치운때 골목 밧게 서서 직히느라고 고생하는 것을 볼때는 불러올녀서 차도 대접하고 「오늘은 아모데도 나가지 안코 집에서 책만 보고 잇슬것이니 안심하고 가서 수이다가 그러케 보고만하라.」고 일너주면 그는 구원된 것처럼 「고맙슴니다. 그러면 공부하시는데 방해되게 할 것 업시 집에 가서 수이겟슴니다. 꼭 외출 아니하시지요? 그럿케 밋고 보고해 버리겟슴니다.」하고는 가는 것이엿다.

압문으로 드러가서 뒤문으로 슬쩍 빠전가 버리면 그는 뒤문으로 나간 줄은 모르고 그 집압문 압헤서 왼종일 헛직히고 잇다가 서에 가서 꾸지람을 밧는다. 비오는 날 나는 학생양복임으로 저저도 괜찬흘 것을 밋고 일부러 전차를 안타고 雨中行人으로 거러다니거나하면 그는 한벌 밧게 업는 비단옷을 닙고 생쥐처럼 저저서 따러다니노라고 개가튼 욕을 본다. 그러치안으면 차길엽흐로 거러가다가 나혼자 돌연히 전차에 飛昇을 해버리면 그가 아모리 눈이 뒤집혀 야단하여도 나를 노치고 만다. 그러나＜49＞ 나는 한번도 그런 일을 한적이 업섯다. 내가 작난을 하지 못하는 재질이요. 또 그리할 필요가 업섯든 까닭이다.

東京은 비가 만히 오는 곳이라 싀원하게 쏘다지지도 못하면서 흐리다가는 찔끔찔끔 긋치는 듯하다가는 또 찔끔찔끔 아츰 등교할때 깨긋하던 날이 下學되여 나스려면 비가 오는 중이여서 雨備가 업서서 교문에 서서 쩔쩔매는 날에 퍽 만타. 이런때 나의 늙은 미행은 발서 내 하숙에 가서 나의 우산과 놉흔 나막신를 차저들고 마중 와준다. 미행이라해도 이런때는 퍽 고맙게 생각되엿다. 다른날 가트면 교문엽 수위실에 드러안저서 하학되여 나오기를 기다릭 안젓를 그가 비오는 날이면 나 공부하고 잇는 틈에 내 집에 가서 우비를 가지고 와서 하학시간을 기다려 주기는 참말 당해 보지안흔 시람이면 고지들니지 안흘 것이다. 내가 평소에 그를 구박하지 안은 덕이라면 덕일넌지 모르나 다 늙어진 몸이 밋을 財産업고 의지할 자식이 업서 굶어 죽지 못해서 형사 노릇을 할 망정 마음까지 낫버지래 낫버지지 못하는 사람인 것이 사실일 것이다.

일본 옷감이나 자취살림 기구를 사려면 서툴니 朝鮮사람이나 支那사람으로 보여지면 물건을 속히거나 정가를 속히는 일이 만타. 이런때 나는 정해 놋코 미행형사를 식여서 사다달나 하엿다. 그를 식히면 반듯이 자기생색으로 조흔 물건을 갑사게 사왓다. 꼿때 꼿구경을 가겟다하면 반듯이 압장서가서 실로 수만흔 사람의 틈을 베집고 나의 일행을 위하야 조흔 자리를 잡아주고 하엿다.

제일 불쾌한 꼴을 보기는 여행을 할 때엿다. 귀국을 하려면 동경역에서 경성역에까지 경성에 나려서 집에 들기까지 꼭 니여서 부터다니는데 동경에서 경성까지 한사람형사가 줄창 부터오는 것이 아니라 全線을 몃구역에＜50＞ 난호아 가지고 이 구역형사가 다음구역까지 가서 그곳 형사에게 넘겨주고 넘겨밧고 하는 고로 滋味도 잇지만 몹시 불쾌한 꼴을 보게 되는 것이엿다.
동경서 몃 시발 제 몃호 열차에 타는 줄 알면 동경에서 경성까지의 여러구역의 각적임경찰서에 일일히 전보를 치는지 전화로 하는지 「某日某時 동경발 某열차에 주의인물이 타고 가니 바더넘길 준비를 하라」고 豫通하는 모양이엿다.
동경형사가 橫濱까지부터 가면 橫濱署형사가 미리나와 기다리고 잇다가 서로 군호를 하야 맛나서는 「나」라는 注意品을 넘기고 밧고한다. 물론 내가 보는데서는 아니하고 열차 입구에 서서 멀니 나를 가르키면서 수군거리는 것이다. 「저-긔 몃재자리에 양복 닙고 안즌 상고머리로 깍근 남자가 그것이다. 그 머리우 선반에 언즌 가죽가방 두개가 그의 소지품이요 그엽헤 안즌 사람하고는 동행은 아니나 아는 사람인 모양이다」 아마 이런 말을 하는 모양이엿다. 그리고는 반듯이 넘겨 밧는 者가 자기 名啣을 내여서 무엇인지를 적어서 넘기는 형사에게 준다.
「注意品某와 그 소지품 몃개 正正領受候也」라고 쓰는 것일 것이다. 그것을 바더가지고는 「이제는 무사히 갓다 넘겻스니 내 책임은 버섯다.」하는 듯키 가벼운 거름으로 기차에서 내려가버린다.
그들께 잇서서는 「나」라는 이 존재가 화물차에 실어 넘기는 괴짝 한개 폭밧게 못되는 셈이다. 영수증이 부터다니고 운송책임자가 따러다니는 집짝이니 미친체하고 분실되고 십허도 완전히 분실되여 질 수 업는 물건이요 아모데서 죽어도 신분 모를 行旅屍는 될 수 업는 물건인 것이다.

하도 여러번 東京-京城間을 왕래하여서 미행형사가 교체하는 정차장이 어데 어데인줄을 아는 고로 나는 차가 그 정차장에 드러갈때마다 차창밧그로 고개를 내밀고 그들이＜51＞ 교체하는 꼴을 주의해 보는 것이 버릇이 되엿다. 그리하야 그가 나를 넌즛이 넘겨 맛기 전에 내 편에서 「이번 미행은 저 者」로구나 하는 것을 먼저 알고잇기를 지리한 기차여행중의 한 滋味를 삼게 되엿다. 구역이 넓은 만큼 몃백리 밧게 떠러저 잇는 署員끼리 서로 맛나서 넘기고 밧고 하는 것이라 서로 누구가 그것인지 모르는 고로 좌우편이 모자를 버서서 短杖끗헤 언저서 놉직히 들어 서로 군호를 삼는다. 모자를 들지 안는 때는 속 수건을 短杖 꼭지에 매여서 놉히 든다. 그리하야 서로 맛나서 열차입구에 올나서서 눈으로 나를 가르키면서 수군거린다. 그래서 아모런 경우에도 새로운 미행을 용이히 발견하는 것이다.

그러나 부산-동경 간의 일본형사는 대개 내자리에 차저와서 인사를 한다. 「당신이 호-상 이심닛가. 저는 OO경찰서에서 나온 XX올시다. 여긔서 廣島까지는 제가 모시고 가는 책임니다. 형식상 부득이 하는 일이니 거북하게 생각마시고 불편한 일이 잇스면 심브림이라도 식혀 주십시요.」하고 친근히 내엽헤 안는다.
인사를 부치고 갓갑게와 안는것은 내가 차중에서 닑는 책이 무슨 책인가를 보려는 것이요. 내 가방을 엿보자는 것이요. 니웃에 안즌 사람과 부슨 이약이를 하는가 엿듯자는 것이지만은 인사업시 등뒤에 와서 어름어름 넘겨다 보는 짓보다는 한결 낫다.
일단 조선땅에 건너 오면 부산에서 따르는 사람이나 大田서 밧궈 따르는 사람이나 엇더케 兩班노릇을 하는지 不良하기 짝이 업는 눈으로 기웃기웃 흘기면서 이편에서 쪼차가서 인사를 한다해도 조와하는 얼골을 한보일 멥시다. 조선땅에 나리면 깻끗한 한을을 오래간만에 보아서 머리속까지 산뜻해지다가도 이따위 미행 때믄에 한업시 불쾌해진다.

어느해이던가 공경에 平和博覽會＜52＞가 열니고 영국황태자의 東京行次가 잇고하야 꽤 복작거리던 봄이엿섯다. 4월 상순 급한 공무로 동경잇는 여러사람들을 대표하야 경성의 某會合에 참석하려고 급히 떠나게 되엿는대 박람회통이라 기차를 탈 수 잇기는 고사하고 도저히 정차장구역에 발을 드려노을 수가 업서서 여간 용기쯤으로는 표를 살 생각도 못할 형편이엿다.
이런때 미행이 고마운 것이라고 나는 미리 내 미행에게 담뇨와 가방을 주어 시간전에 미리 드러가 식당차 엽간에 조흔 자리를 잡아노으라하고 또 한사람 미행에게 부탁하야 미리 차표를 구해 오게 하엿다. 이리하야 4,5백리를 안지 못하고 서서 가는 승객이 만흔 복잡한 차중에서 나는 조흔 자리에 타고 떠낫섯다. 그런대 그 차가 廣島를 지날때 廣島署에서 오른 미행이(下關까지 갈 사람)와서 인사하는 법 업시 내자리 전후로 빙빙 돌면서 내가 닑는 책을 넘겨다 본다. 이약이하는 말에 귀를 기우린다하야 몹시 민하게 불쾌하게 굴엇다.
저 편에서 그리하면 이 편에서도 얌전치 안흔 꾀가 나서 일부러 맥주를 사서 하고만흔 동승객중에 그에게 한잔 권하엿다. 그는 벼락을 마즌 사람처럼 자즈러젓다. 얼골이 샛빨게 젓다.
시골署의 한 형사로서 생각할때 동경서브터 「아모車에 주의인물이 타고 가니 경계하라」는 명령이 잇는 것을 보면 주의도 주의 굉장히 위험한 인물 極兇한 惡漢이 타고 오는줄 自量하고 잇섯슬 것이나 그의 눈에 「나」라는 이 인물이 몹시 험상스럽고 아모런 짓이라도 감행할 凶賊으로 보엿슬 것이요 내가 가진 가방속에는 六穴砲ㅅ개나 爆彈개나 들어 잇는 줄로 녁엿슬넌지 모르는 일이다. 그 兇漢이 자기에게 麥酒盞을 쑥 내밀어 노앗스니 魂飛魄散이라면 조곰 誇張이겟지만 大端 놀난 것은 사실이엿다.
「한잔 잡수오 下關까지 가려면 인제도 두시간도 더 남엇소」하닛가
「아니요 안먹슴니다」하고＜53＞ 창황해하는 것을
「老兄 廣島서브터 나하고 동행되지 안엇소?」하고 드리쏘으닛가 참말 껄껄대면서 「아니요 광도서 타지 안엇슴니다.」한다.

그냥저냥 차가 下關종점에 드러가게 되엿난대 차가 도착되기도 전에 날늘 짐을 마트려고 중간에서브터 뛰여 올른 아가뽀(赤帽)에게 가방을 내여 맛기면서 「부산행연락선으로 가저가라」하닛가 「부산연락선은 발서 만원입니다.」하는 고로 읏재 발서 만원이 되엿느냐고 무럿더니 「박람회 다녀가는 관광단 때믄에 매일 만원이니 下關서 하로밤 자고 내일 일즉타서야 합니다」한다.
탈난 것은 下關一泊에 5원돈이 손해나는 것보다도 大會議에 참석 못하게 되는 것이엿다. 그러나 만원된 것을 別道理업는 터이닛가 실혀도 不得己 下關서 잘 밧게 업다고 나는 단념하엿다. 그러나 그때 차중에서 우연히 맛난 동행 2인이 잇섯스니 한사람은 安昌男군의 제자인 비행가 金容燮군, 또 한사람은 帝大를 졸업하고 나오는 朴正根군 이엿섯다. 朴과 金이 「그래도 연락선까지 뛰여가서 떼를 써 보아야지 赤帽의 말만 듯고 미리 落望할 것 잇슴니가. 다름박질을 하야 뛰여가 봅시다.」하는 바람에 차가 닷자마자 후다딱 뛰여나러 긔운껏 다름질을 하엿다, 이통에 두번째 놀난것은 廣島署의 형사엿다. 위험인물이 두 주먹을 쥐고 뛰닛가 도망가는 줄 알고 노치면 목이 다라나는 판이라 하고 그야말로 결사적 추격을 해오시는 모양이엿다.
뛰여서 뛰여서 허덕지덕 연락선압헤 당도하니 승선구에는 만원간판이 덩드럿케 달녀 잇고 그 압헤 타지 못한 승객이 근 100명이나 몰켜서 잇다. 이제는 아조 틀녓다하고 도라스려하닛가 바로 나의 바로 등뒤에 헐덕헐덕하면서 충실한 미행 廣島형사가 서 잇는지라 그의 억개를 툭치면서 「기미」하닛가 그는 세번째 驚風하엿다.
「그대는 廣島에서온 警官이 아닌가」하닛가 그제야 「핫!!」한다. 「내가 급한 공무로 귀국하난대 배를 못타게 되여서 큰일낫스니 특별히 탈 수 잇도록 주선해 줄 수 업겟는가.」하닛가 「글세요 나는 廣島에 잇는고로 이곳 署員을 모르고 배에는 더군다나 아는 사람이 업슴니다.」하는지라 「그럼 이곳 下關署員을 만나게 해달나.」하엿더니 흥녀케 뛰여가서 下關서 부산까지 미행할 형사를 다려다 준다.
그래 그에게 주선을 부탁하야 나하나만 승선식혀주마고 승락된 것을 떼를 써서 同行 3인이 다 올나타고. 늣지안케 조선으로 건너왓섯다.
이때위 便宜일망정 미행의 신세를 종종지여 왓스나 학생생활을 마친후 7,8년이 지난 작년 연말에 길을 다시 갈때는 뻔히는 잇는 미행을 발견하지 못하엿스니 그들의 군호가 변한 것이 사실인듯 십다.＜54＞
＜48-54＞