잡지명 別乾坤 제27호
발행일 1930년 03월 01일
기사제목 家庭應急治療, 誌上病院 (Home Emergency Treatment, Magazine Hospital)
기사형태 논설 (Essay)

Home Emergency Treatment, Magazine Hospital

Nerve weakness
(Cause) It usually arises from mental overwork (過勞). People who read a lot, people who use their eyes a lot, people who worry a lot, people in urban areas that are affected by the development of transportation, and some people who use gas are generally prone to this disease. In addition, there are cases caused by illness, such as hemorrhoids (痔疾), women's diseases (婦人病), stomach diseases (胃腸病), people with bad teeth (齒), people with nose (鼻) diseases, people with cold hands and feet, and people with weak pleura (肋膜) and lungs (肺).

(Symptoms) Symptoms include a heavy head, feeling tired all over the body, feeling bored with everything, impaired memory, unnecessary emotions, and a lack of appetite.

(Prevention) For the prevention of neurasthenia, first, do not worry. It is true that you cannot arbitrarily control worry, but you should try to correct the habit of constantly worrying about even minor things. After reading, close your eyes for about twenty minutes and have a quiet, empty mind to rest your tired nerves, and continue light, deep breathing for two or three minutes. Also, when your shoulders feel heavy, do arm exercises, and taking a walk to change your mood is also a good method.

Hysteria
(Cause) This disease is a mental nervous disorder, and the person themselves is prone to hysteria due to nervous diseases, mental illnesses, alcohol poisoning, tuberculosis, syphilis, etc. Direct causes include mental and physical overwork, poor food, lack of exercise, sexual repression, uterine disease, various infectious diseases, alcohol poisoning, constipation, blood diseases, injuries, or sudden shock or fear that causes mental changes can be a significant cause.

(Symptoms) Symptoms of hysteria include impairments in the functions of sensation (感覺), movement, and mental processes. Sensory abnormalities include headaches and neuralgia, and even touching a part of the body causes pain, and lukewarm water feels hot. Conversely, sensation can become dull or completely disappear. Decreased or lost sexual sensation (性感), decreased vision (視力), etc., are examples. One becomes particularly selective about sounds (音響) and the smell of food.
<169>
Motor impairments include epilepsy (간질/地랄병) and severe systemic convulsions, increased respiratory rate, frequent yawning, and sometimes a feeling that a bead-like object rises from the lower abdomen (下腹) to the neck. Crying and laughing cannot be controlled at will. Conversely, paralysis may occur, making it impossible to stand or speak.
In terms of mental state, the characteristic is that emotions are easily fluctuating. In severe cases, one becomes self-centered, makes rash criticisms and judgments, is moved by fantasies, suspects people for no reason, has many prejudices, wants to be respected, and interprets everything to their advantage. Sometimes consciousness becomes confused, memory loss occurs, and sudden anxiety arises within oneself, causing one to run away from their place. Generally, the symptoms described above are observed.

(Prevention) It is often hereditary, so it is necessary to thoroughly investigate the family history when getting married. People with hysterical tendencies and those who are prone to fantasizing and emotional changes should avoid mental overwork as much as possible and not watch novels or plays that excite their emotions. Keeping the body healthy, striving to strengthen willpower, and living happily is the best prevention, that is, receiving less mental stimulation and living stably.

(Treatment) The cause of the disease must be discovered. For example, if it is caused by family circumstances, they should leave home and forget about the situation. If they have a disease that could be the cause, that disease should be cured. As a doctor, one should especially receive examination from someone who the patient trusts absolutely. Next, exercise to the extent that it does not cause overwork, and continue cold water friction. Besides that, doing what you want to do, such as handicrafts, knitting, sewing, and cooking, is also good.
In short, it is necessary to prioritize mental stability, sleep well, exercise appropriately, and promote appetite to ensure sufficient nutrition. In addition, various physical pains should be examined by a doctor.

Fever
(Caution) When the body has a high fever (熱), it can only be assumed that it is an infection of bacteria (細菌), whether it is a simple cold or a dangerous infectious disease. When sudden chills and shivering occur, and one feels nauseous, it is easy for serious acute illnesses such as pneumonia (肺炎) or erysipelas (丹毒) to develop. If antipyretics (열을 업시하는 약) are ineffective, be careful as typhoid fever (염병) or latent <170> pulmonary tuberculosis can often occur.

(Treatment) Lie down quietly and cool your head with an ice pack or ice pillow, and eat digestible food appropriately. It is a misconception that you should not eat when you have a fever (熱).

Headache
(Cause) It is often caused by a cold or diseases of the teeth (齒) and throat (목구멍). In women, gynecological diseases are the cause, or it can be caused by constipation.

(Treatment) Because it is not a separate, independent disease, using temporary painkillers (압흔것 멈추는 약) is not very effective. Generally, lie comfortably in a well-ventilated room and cool your head with ice or cold water.

(Caution) Headaches have complex causes, so if it does not get better no matter what, you should get examined by a doctor, and if children occasionally lose energy and experience headaches, they are prone to tuberculous meningitis (結核性腦膜炎), so pay special attention.

Cold
(Cause) It occurs when people with weak skin and mucous membranes (粘膜) suddenly receive stimulation.

(Prevention) It is necessary to train the skin on a regular basis. Continue cold water friction (wringing a towel in cold water and rubbing the whole body), dry friction (rubbing with a dry towel), 5 minutes of exercise, and deep breathing (숨을 깁히 드리쉬이는 것) every day, and people with weak constitutions should pay attention to nutrition and strengthen their resistance.

(Treatment) Lie comfortably in a warm room, drink hot water, and take 0.5 of aspirin O.5 as medicine, and go to sleep to sweat sufficiently. Wipe off sweat immediately and change into dry clothes.

(Caution) If there is no complete recovery, there is concern for lung disease or pleurisy, so get examined by a doctor.

Insomnia
(Cause) It is common in nervous and hysterical people, and the condition worsens due to overwork and worry.

(Prevention) Take a bath before going to bed to change your mood. Avoid books or conversations that may be exciting before going to bed and do not use stimulating drinks.

(Treatment) Those who like alcohol may drink a little whiskey before going to bed, but do not use sleeping pills (잠오는 약). Any medicine becomes a habit, so get guidance from a doctor when you can't help it, but don't develop a medicine habit. Have faith that you have to sleep, unless there is a particular painful spot.

(Caution) It is said that insomnia and neurasthenia progress with civilization, but people with strong will will never <171> be affected by this disease.

Stomach disease
(Cause) There are two conditions here. One is that people with weak constitutions and slender bodies have gastroptosis (胃腸下垂症). The other is caused by irregular life, mostly as a result of eating and drinking recklessly. This includes hyperacidity (胃酸過多) and gastric ulcer (胃潰瘍).

(Prevention) Be careful about food. Do not develop the habit of only eating what you like, whether it is vegetables or meat. Chew food thoroughly, and people with bad teeth (齒) should fix their teeth. People over middle age should not overeat.

(Treatment) If you get sick, always get enough nutrition, and using medicine recklessly is not effective, so get guidance from a specialist doctor for fundamental treatment. If you feel mildly uncomfortable, take baking soda (重曹). If you are suffering from overeating, it is good to put your finger in your throat and vomit.

Constipation
(Cause) Harmful substances clumped in the intestines (腸內) are constantly absorbed from the intestinal walls (腸壁), eventually leading to toxic results, so be careful. Constipation is common in women because they usually have bowel movements (排便) within two hours of waking up in the morning, but women are busy cooking and caring for children during this time, so they cannot go to the bathroom at the appropriate time. The general cause of constipation is caused by food and lifestyle.

(Prevention) People with constipation can usually cure it by drinking a cup or two of salt water or milk every morning before meals. Eat plant-based (植物性) foods, and women should pay attention to going to the bathroom at a set time.

(Caution) Headaches and other problems caused by constipation will all disappear as it gets better, and there are many cases where even things that seemed like serious illnesses become much better as a result.

Diarrhea
(Cause) People with gastroptosis (胃腸下垂症) may experience alternating diarrhea and constipation. In addition, there is diarrhea caused by serious illnesses such as acute infectious diseases and intestinal tuberculosis (腸結核), and there is also diarrhea caused by simple overeating.

(Prevention) Chew food thoroughly, never overeat, and be careful about what you eat. Children are prone to getting sick because they sleep cold, so parents should pay attention.

(Treatment) Fast for a day or eat only liquids such as rice porridge. Take 10-20 grams of "Sols" or 20-40 grams of castor oil (皮麻子油) as medicine to <172> sweep away the remaining rotting material in the intestines. If you have abdominal pain, use a compress or a pocket warmer (懷爐) to warm your stomach.

(Caution) When acute infectious diseases such as cholera or dysentery (赤痢) are prevalent, get examined by a doctor quickly.

Fainting
(Cause) Cerebral hemorrhage (腦溢血) can be hereditary, but it is easy to occur due to arteriosclerosis (動脈硬化) and hypertension (血壓亢進症).

(Prevention) Eat food regularly and absolutely abstain from alcohol, cigarettes, and other stimulating drinks. Be careful not to get constipated, and avoid excessive physical and mental fatigue, and in some cases, changing your current business is also a method.

(Treatment) When fainting, lay comfortably in a well-ventilated room, loosen your belt and clothes to allow freedom, keep the patient's surroundings quiet, and then get examined by a doctor quickly.

Measles
(Cause) The source of the disease is not certain, but it is usually a disease that everyone gets once.

(Prevention) Temporary serum (血淸) from people who have recovered from this disease is effective for prevention and treatment, but it is not practical. Be especially careful as children are prone to other illnesses when they get it at a young age, and keep patients with this disease separate and do not go to crowded places when the disease is prevalent.

(Treatment) A high fever continues for several days, so lie quietly. Even if you have a fever, do not use antipyretics recklessly, and cooling with ice or cold water is not good either. When the fever (熱) goes down, rest peacefully for a long time and get enough nutrition.

(Caution) As aftereffects (餘病), there is concern about causing pulmonary apex (肺尖), whooping cough, pleurisy, and lung disease, so get examined by a doctor once.

Heart disease
(Prevention) The first thing is to promote vitality through regular training. Exercise, as long as it is not excessive, makes the heart healthy.

(Treatment) Absolute rest is necessary for heart disease caused by rheumatism due to cold (寒冷) and humidity. After valvular disease (辨膜症) has already occurred, continue extremely gradual exercise and be very careful to restore your ability. People who are short of breath and have swelling due to heart disease should absolutely stay stable.

Kidney disease
(Treatment) This is a disease where protein (蛋白) appears in the urine. It is not very harmful if it is caused by vigorous exercise in youth or depending on the position of the body, but if the swelling is severe and protein is mixed in the urine, rest stably and be careful about food, especially taking in less salt <173> and not eating foods with a lot of extract, such as meat, but eating bread, vegetables, and milk.

Beriberi
(Cause) This disease is caused by a lack of quantity and quality of food, especially by a deficiency of vitamins, and it also occurs depending on the constitution.

(Prevention) When there is beriberi, eat brown rice or barley rice, take adequate nutrients, and eat fruits.

(Treatment) Absolutely avoid vigorous exercise and do not eat only one type of food.

Abdominal pain
(Treatment) When you suddenly have a severe, sharp pain in the lower right side of your abdomen, you are prone to acute appendicitis (急性盲腸炎). In such cases, absolutely stabilize and cool the painful area with ice and wait for the doctor. Do not take laxatives (설사하는 약). If acute appendicitis is treated with surgery within 24 hours, there are no aftereffects, but if not, it is treated stably at first and then surgery is performed again.
If the upper right side of the abdomen suddenly hurts and you have a fever, the best thing to do is to warm the painful area. In addition, when the abdomen suddenly hurts, there are times when the intestines are twisted, which can only be treated with surgery.

When burned
(Treatment) When the skin is burned, turns red, swells, and stings, apply zinc oxide ointment (亞鉛華油). Alternatively, sprinkle zinc oxide starch (亞鉛華澱粉) or cool with cold water or ice. If water accumulates and swells, disinfect with oxyful (過酸化水素水), pierce with a needle or knife disinfected with alcohol, drain the water, apply zinc oxide ointment, and apply a cold water or ice compress on top. When burned by acids, wash with soapy water or lye.

Wound
(Treatment) When there is a wound to an internal organ, stabilize the patient and get examined by a doctor. For skin wounds, if pieces of wood, stones, or sand are stuck on the wound, remove them with tweezers, wash the wound thoroughly with oxyful, disinfect the area around it with tincture of iodine, apply gauze to the wound, cover it with sterile gauze, and wrap it with a bandage.

Toothache
(Treatment) Thoroughly disinfect the decayed tooth, plug it with cotton soaked in creosote or clove oil (丁香油), and then plug it with a small cotton ball on top to endure it for a while. At that time, applying a warm or cold compress to the cheek will reduce the pain. <174>

Hemorrhoids
(Hemorrhoids) Watch the rear well and always be careful not to get cold. Applying a hot compress when it hurts makes it easier to endure. It is of course important to receive treatment from a specialist doctor, but I will introduce a few folk remedies. Cut kelp (昆布) appropriately into two-inch squares, put it in rice water, boil it, and when the kelp swells and becomes hot, apply it to the affected area. When it cools down, apply another hot one, and if you continue doing this twice in the morning and evening for a few weeks, it is said to be effective. It is also said that extracting oil by boiling egg yolk in a pot and applying it is also effective.

Food poisoning
(Treatment) If you know you have been poisoned by food, put your hand in your throat or dissolve soapy water and vomit. Then ask a doctor to wash out your stomach. When you have eaten poison, call a doctor, but make them vomit as soon as possible. As emergency treatment:
1. For poisoning from rat poison, feed 1 gram of copper sulfate (硫酸銅) to induce vomiting.
2. For poisoning from corrosive sublimate (昇汞水), feed plenty of milk and egg whites.
3. For potassium cyanide (靑酸加里), feed a spoonful of 103% hydrogen peroxide solution (oxyful) several times.
4. For silver nitrate (硝酸銀) poisoning, feed arrowroot starch (葛粉) or agar (寒天).
5. For hydrochloric morphine poisoning, feed 1-3% hydrogen peroxide solution (oxyful).
If you provide quick care when you have eaten poison, you can usually save a life with gastric lavage (胃洗滌).

Acute infectious diseases
(Caution) Cholera, typhoid fever, and dysentery (赤痢) are terribly contagious, so never hide them. Diphtheria is common in children and white coating appears inside the throat and nose. If the fever (熱) is high, energy is lost, and treatment is delayed, life is in danger. An early injection of immune serum (免疫血淸注射) will cure it quickly.
(Disinfection) Thoroughly disinfect utensils and objects near the patient with hot water, lime water (石灰水), bleaching powder (漂白粉), lime oil (石灰油), and lysol. Things that cannot be disinfected should be burned, and even if they are exposed to sunlight, the bacteria will die, but the shaded parts cannot be disinfected completely, so complete disinfection is difficult.

Other
(Treatment) 1. If a fish bone gets stuck in your throat, if you can't remove it with your fingers or tweezers, tickle or lay the patient face down and put a pillow on their stomach and lower their head, then pat their back. <175>
2. If dust gets in your eyes, don't panic, close your eyes calmly and wait for it to flow out with tears, and never rub them. Then wash with boric acid water (硼酸水).
3. If a bug gets in your ear, put any kind of oil in your ear, such as olive oil, sesame oil, or hair oil, to kill the bug, and then take it out with tweezers.
4. Things that enter the nose will then pass to the throat.

Equipment and medicines to prepare at home
Thermometer (to check temperature), enema device (浣腸器), ice pillow (빙침/氷枕), ice pack (빙낭/氷囊), hot water bottle (유단보/湯たんぽ, a tin container filled with hot water to keep warm), pocket warmer (懷爐), inhaler, bandages, gauze, cotton, tweezers are the above equipment.
As for medicines, castor oil (피마자油, laxative), glycerin (浣腸劑), olive oil (오리-부油, for emergency treatment of burns), alcohol (used as a disinfectant and also for alcohol lamps), tincture of iodine (to kill germs), oxyful (used to disinfect wounds), lysol (disinfectant), boric acid powder (used for compresses, gargling, inhalation, and eye washing (洗眼)), Picsigo (고약, drawing ointment), band-aid (used instead of bandages, but should not be applied alone to the wound), carbolic acid (disinfectant), zinc oxide (亞鉛華, applied to burns), liniment (applied when bitten by bugs, bees, bedbugs, mosquitoes) <176>

**Named Entities**

ソルツ	Sŏlssŭ



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제27호
발행일	1930년 03월 01일
기사제목	家庭應急治療, 誌上病院
기사형태	논설

家庭應急治療, 誌上病院
신경쇠약
(원인) 대개는 정신의 과로(過勞)로 부터 생김니다. 독서를 만히 하는 사람, 눈을 만히 쓰는 사람, 심려 만히 하는 사람, 교통기관이 발달되여 그의 영향을 밧는 도회지의 사람 까스를 사용하는 일부의 사람들이 대개로 이 병에 걸니기 쉬웁슴니다. 그 밧게 병으로 인하야 생기는 례도 잇는대 치질(痔疾), 부인병(婦人病), 위장병(胃腸病), 니(齒)가 조치 못한 사람 코(鼻)ㅅ병이 잇는 사람 수족이 랭(冷)한 사람 륵막(肋膜)과 폐(肺)가 약한 사람들이 걸니는 일이 잇슴니다.
(증세) 그 증세로는 머리가 묵업고 온몸에 권태(倦怠)를 늣기며 무엇에든지 실증이 나고 기억력이 둔하여지고 공연히 감정이 생기며 식욕이 늘지 안는 것임니다.
(예방) 신경쇠약의 예방으로는 첫재로 심려를 하지 말것인데 근심이라는 것은 임의로 할 수 업는 것은 사실이나 될수 잇는 대로 사소한 일에까지 늘 근심하는 습관을 힘써 곳칠 것임니다. 그리고 독서한 후에는 이십분가량 눈을 감고 조용히 뷔인 마음을 가저서 피로된 신경을 쉬이게 할 것이고 가비얍게 깁게 이삼분동안 호흡을 게속할 것임니다. 그리고 엇개가 묵어울때에는 팔운동을 하고 기분을 전환식히기 위하야 산보를 하는 것도 조흔 방법임니다.

히스데리
(원인) 본병은 정신뎍 신경병으로 신경병 정신병 알콜의 중독 결핵 매독등으로 인하야 그 자신이 히스데리의 소질을 가지기 쉬웁게 되는 것임니다. 직접원인으로는 심신의 과로 조치 못한 음식물 운동부족 성욕억제 자궁병 여러가지 전염병 술의 중독 변비 혈액병 상처 등과 또는 급격히 놀나든가 무섭든가 하여서 정신의 변동을 닐으킨 것이 중한 원인이 되는 때도 잇슴니다.
(증세) 히스데리의 증세로는 감각(感覺)운동 분필정신등의 작용에 장해를 니으키는 것인대 감각의 이상으로서는 두통과 신경통이 생기고 신톄 한부분을＜169＞ 누르기만해도 압흐고 다시근한 물도 뜨거워서 쩔쩔매고 이갓치 감각이 과민한 반대로 감각이 둔하여 전혀 업서지는 일도 잇슴니다. 성감(性感)의 감퇴 소실등과 시력(視力)감퇴 등이 그것임니다. 음향(音響)과 음식물의 내음새에 대하야 특별하게 조코 납분것을 가리게 됨니다.
운동의 장해로서는 간질(지랄병)과 가흔 전신경련을 니르키고 호흡수가 격증하고 하품이 련발하고 때로는 아랫배(下腹)에서 구슬갓흔 것이 낫타나서는 점점 목에까지 올나오는 듯한 생각도 들어가고 울고 웃고하는 것을 임의대로 억제할 수 업는 일이 만슴니다. 이와반대로 마비가 되여서 니러설 수도 소리를 내일수도 업게되는 때도 잇슴니다.
정신상태로는 감정이 격변하기 쉬운것이 특증임니다. 심하면 자기 본위로 경솔한 비평과 판단을 하고 공상에 감격하고 공연히 사람을 의시하며 편견이 만코 자기가 존경을 밧고 십허하고 자기에게 리롭게만 해석함니다. 때로는 의식이 혼란하여지고 건망증이 생기며 갑작이 자기정신내부에 불안을 니르키여서 그 자리를 뛰여나가는등 대개 이상 말한 바와 갓흔 증세를 뵈이는 것임니다.
(예방) 유전으로 생기는 일이 만흠으로 결혼할때에는 저편의 혈통을 충분히 조사할 필요가 잇슴니다. 히스데리성의 소질을 가진 사람과 공상 잘하고 감정의 변화가 만흔 사람에게는 될 수 잇는대로 정신의 과로를 피하고 감정이 흥분될 소설이나 연극을 보지 안을 것임니다. 신톄를 건강하게 하고 의지의 단련에 힘쓰며 유쾌하게 지낼 것이니 즉 정신의 자극을 적게 밧고 안정하게 지내는 것이 제일의 예방임니다.
(치료) 그 병을 유인한 원인을 발견하여야할 것임니다. 가령 가정상 관게로 니러낫다면 그가 집을 떠나서 그 사정을 니저버리게 할 것이고 원일될만한 질병을 가지고 잇다면 그 병을 곳칠 것임니다. 의사로서는 환자가 절대 신용하는 자에게 특히 진찰을 바들 것임니다. 다음으로 과로하지 안을 뎡도에서 운동을 하고 랭수마찰을 계속할 것임니다. 그 밧게 수공 편물재봉 밥짓는 것 등 자기가 하고 십흔 대로 하는 것도 조흡니다.
요컨데 정신의 안정을 주로하야 잠잘자고 뎍당한 운동을 하며 식욕을 증진케하야 영양을 충분히 하는 것이 필요함니다. 그 밧게 육톄뎍 고통의 여러가지는 의사에게 진찰을 바들 것임니다.

身熱
(주의) 몸에 열(熱)이 놉흘때에는 단순한 감기든지 무서운 전염병이든지 하여튼 세균(細菌)의 감염이라고 생각할 수 밧게 업슴니다. 급작히 오한이 나고 떨니며 속이 사나울때에는 폐염(肺炎)이나 단독(丹毒)가튼 급성의 중한병이 생기기가 쉬웁슴니다. 만일 독산열제(열을 업시하는 약)를 써 효과가 업슬때는 장질부사(염병)나 오래 잠잠하고 잇든＜170＞ 폐결성이 생기는 때가 만흐니 주의 할 것임니다.
(치료) 안정하게 누어서 어름 주머니나 어름 벼개로서 머리를 식히고 소화 잘 될만한 음식을 뎍당하게 먹을 것임니다. 열(熱)이 잇서서 음식을 먹어서는 안된다는 것은 잘못된 생각임니다.

두통
(원인) 흔이는 감기로 인하든지 니(齒)와 인후(목구멍)의 병으로 니러나는 것임니다. 부인은 부인과뎍 병이 원인이 되거나 혹은 편비 때문에도 니러남니다.
(치료) 따로 떠러진 독립한 병이 안이기 때문에 일시의 진통제(압흔것 멈추는 약)를 쓰는 것은 별 효과가 업슴니다. 대개로는 바람이 잘 통하는 방에 편안히 누어서 어름이나 랭수로 머리를 차게 할 것임니다.
(주의) 두통은 원인이 복잡함으로 아모리하야도 낫지 안을때에는 의사에게 진찰을 밧들 것이고 어린이들이 잇다금 원기가 업서지고 두통을 니르키면 결핵성노막염(結核性腦膜炎)에 걸니기 쉬우니 특별히 주의할 것임니다.

감긔
(원인) 피부와 첨막(粘膜)이 약한 사람이 갑작이 자극을 바들때에 생기는 것임니다.
(예방) 평소에 피부를 단련식힐 필요가 잇슴니다. 랭수마찰(찬물에 수건을 꼭 짜서 전신을 문지르는 것) 건부마찰(마른 수건으로 문지르는 것) 5분간 톄조 심호흡(숨을 깁히 드리쉬이는 것)을 매일 계속하고 톄질이 약한 사람은 영양에 주의하고 뎌항력을 강하게 할 것임니다.
(치료) 더운방에 편안히 누을 것이며 뜨거운 장물 갓흔 것을 마시고 약으로는 아세삐링O·5를 먹이고 잠들어서 충분히 땀을 내일 것임니다. 땀이 나면 곳 훔치고 마른 의복을 밧구어 입을 것임니다.
(주의) 그럿케하여서 전쾌가 되지 안는다면 폐병이나 륵막염이 렴려가 잇스니 의사의 진찰을 바들 것임니다.

불면증
(원인) 신경질 히스데리질의 사람에게 만코 과로와 근심이 원인이 되여서 병세가 더하는 것임니다.
(예방) 취침하기 전에 목욕을 하여 기분을 전환 식히도록 할 것임니다. 취침전에 흥분될만한 서책이나 담화를 피하고 자극을 주는 음료를 사용치 말것임니다.
(치료) 술을 조와하는 분은 자기전에 위스키 갓흔 것을 조곰 마시는 것은 조흐나 수면제(잠오는 약)를 써서는 안됨니다. 엇떠한 약이든지 습관이 되는 고로 할 수 업슬때에는 의사의 지도를 바들지언정 약의 습관을 짓치말것임니다. 별달니 압흔 곳이 잇스면 별문제로하고 사람은 자야만한다는 신렴을 가질 것임니다.
(주의) 불면증과 신경쇠약은 문명과 함께 진행되는 것이라고 하지마는 의지가 강한 사람은 결코 이 병의 경향에＜171＞ 밋치지 안을 것임니다.

위장병
(원인) 여기에는 두가지 상태가 잇슴니다. 하나는 톄질이 약하고 호리호리한 사람에게 위장하수증(胃腸下垂症)이 잇는 것. 또 하나는 생활이 불규측함으로 생기는데 대개 함부로 먹고 마시는 결과에 만슴니다. 위산과다(胃酸過多) 위궤장(胃潰瘍)이 라는 것입니다.
(예방) 음식에 주의할 것. 즉 나물이거나 고기갓흔 것을 자기가 즐겨하는 것만을 치우처 먹는 습관을 짓지말 것이며 음식은 충분히 저작하고 니(齒)가 조치 못한 사람은 니를 곳칠 것이며 중년이 지난 이는 넘우 포식하지 말것임니다.
(치료) 병이 생기면은 항상 영양을 충분히 하고 약을 함부로 쓰는 것은 아모 효과도 업는 것이니 근본뎍으로 치료를 하기 위하야 전문의사의 지도를 바들 것임니다. 대단하지 안케 속이 답답하면 중소(重曹)를 먹으면 낫슴니다. 과식을 하여서 괴로울때에는 목에 손가락을 너어서 토하는게 좃슴니다.

변비
(원인) 장내(腸內)에 뭉켜잇는 해로운 물질이 쉬지 안코 장벽(腸壁)으로부터 흡수됨으로 나종에는 중독즤 결과까지 보게되는 것이니 주의할 것임니다. 부인에게 편비증이 만흔것은 일반으로 아츰 니러나서 두시간 내외에 배변(排便)하는 것인데 이 시간을 부인들은 밥짓고 어린이들 시종하고 분주하게 지내기 때문에 뎍당한 시간에 변소에 갈 수 업게 됨으로 생기는 일이 만슴니다. 일반 변비의 원인은 음식물과 생활상태로 인하야 생기는 것임니다.
(예방) 변비증이 잇는 이는 매일 아츰 식전에 소금물이나 우유를 컵으로 한두잔식 마시면 대개 나흘 수 잇고 음식은 식물성(植物性)의 것을 취할 것이고 부인들은 일정한 시간에 편소에 가도록 주의할 것임니다.
(주의) 변비로 인한 두통이나 그 밧게 장해는 그것이 나음을 딸아 모다 업서질 것이니 증한병처럼 생각되든 것도 이로 말미암아 아조 기분이 조와지는 례가 적지 안슴니다.

설사
(원인) 위장하수증이 잇는 이는 설사와 변비가 번갈어 생기는 수가 잇슴니다. 그 밧게 급성전염병과 장결핵(腸結核) 갓흔 증대한 병으로 인하야 니러나는 설사도 잇고 단순한 과식으로 인한 설사도 잇슴니다.
(예방) 음식을 충분히 저작할 것 절대로 과식하지 말것 음식물을 주의하여 먹을 것임니다. 어린이들은 차게 자기 때문에 걸니기 쉬우니 부모되시는 분은 주의 할 것임니다.
(치료) 하로동안 단식을 하거나 미음죽갓흔 류동물 이외에는 먹지 말것. 약으로 「쏠스」10-20그람이나 피마자기름(皮麻子油) 20-40그람을 먹어서＜172＞ 장내에 남은 부패물을 쓸어버릴 것임니다. 만일 복통이 잇슬때에는 찜질이나 회로(懷爐)를 사용하여서 배를 더웁게 할 것임니다.
(주움˜) 급성전염병 호열자 적리(赤痢) 갓흔 병이 류행할때에는 속히 의사의 진찰을 바들 것임니다.

졸도
(원인) 노일혈(腦溢血)은 유뎐뎍으로 생기기도 하지만은 동맥경화(動脈硬化) 혈압항진증(血壓亢進症)등으로 인하야 니러나기가 쉬운 것임니다.
(예방) 음식을 절차 잇게 먹고 술 담배 그 밧게 자극뎍 음료는 절대로 금할 것임니다. 변비가 생기지안케 주의할 것이며 심신이 과도히 피로치 안케하고 경우에 따라서는 현재의 사업을 뎐환하는 것도 한 방법임니다.
(치료) 조도한때에는 바람이 자 통하는 방에 편안하게 누이고 허리띄와 옷고름을 풀어 자유롭게하고 환자의 주위을 정숙하게 한 후 급히 의사의 진찰을 바들 것임니다.

마진
(원인) 병의 근원은 확실하게 알 수 업스나 대개는 한번식 다 걸니는 병임니다.
(예방) 이 병에 걸닌 사람의 회복할 림시의 혈청(血淸)이 예방과 치료에 효과는 잇지만은 실용뎍은 못되는 것임니다. 어릴때에 걸니면 다른 병이 생기기 쉬우니 특히 주의할 것이고 이병 환자를 따로 두고 병이 류행할 때에는 사람 만히 모힌 곳에 가지 말 것임니다.
(치료) 수일간은 신열이 계속되는 것이니 안정하게 뉘일것. 신열이 잇드래도 함부로 산열제를 사용하지 말고 어름이나 랭수로 식히는 것도 조치안슴니다. 열(熱)이 내리면 오래동안평안이 쉬이게 하고 영양을 충분히 취할 것임니다.
(주의) 여병(餘病)으로는 폐첨(肺尖) 백일해 륵막염 폐병등을 니르킬 념려가 잇스니 의사에게 한번 진찰을 바들 것임니다.

심장병
(예방) 규측뎍 단련으로 원기를 증진 식힐 것이 첫재임니다. 운동은 과격하지 안은 한도에서는 심장을 건전케 하는 것임니다.
(치료) 한랭(寒冷)하고 습기로 인하야 류마치스로부터 생긴 심장병은 절대 안정이 필요함니다. 임이 변막증(辨膜症)을 니르킨 후라면 극히 점진뎍 운동을 계속할 것이고 능력이 회복하도록은 대단히 주의할 것임니다. 심장병으로 인하야 숨이차고 부증이 생기는 사람은 절대로 안정하세 잇슬 것임니다.

신장병
(치료) 오줌에 단백(蛋白)이 생긴때의 병인대 청년기에 과격한 운동을 한 때문이라든지 신톄의 위치에 따라 생긴 것은 그다지 해는 업스나 부증이 심하고 오줌에 단백이 석겨나올떄는 안정하게한 후 음식에 주의하되 특히 염분이＜173＞ 적은 것을 취하고 고기와 가튼 엑키스분이 만흔 것을 먹지 말고 빵 야채 우유 갓흔 것을 먹을 것임니다.

기각
(원인) 식물의 량과 질이 부족하기 때문에 생기는 병인대 특히 비타민이 결핍함으로 인하야 생기고 또 톄질에 따라서도 생김니다.
(예방) 각기의 병세가 잇슬때에는 현미나 보리밥을 먹고 상당한 영양물을 취하고 과실을 먹을 것임니다.
(치료) 과격한 운동은 절대로 피하고 음식물은 한가지만을 치우처 먹지 말것임니다.

복통
(치료) 갑작히 맹렬하게 명끗히나 바른편 한쪽 배가 압흘때는 급성맹장염(急性盲腸炎)이 걸니기 쉬은 것임니다. 이러한 때에는 절대로 안정한 후 어름으로 압흔 곳을 식히고 의사를기다릴 것임니다. 하제(설사하는 약)를 먹여서는 안이됨니다. 급성맹장염은 24시간내에 외과수술을 바드면 후환이 업스나 그럿치 못한때에는 처음에는 안정하게 곳친후 다시 외과수술을 밧는 것임니다.
웃배바른편이 갑작이 압흐고 신열이 잇슬때에는 압흔 곳을 더웁게 하는 것이 제일임니다. 그밧게 배가 갑작이 압흘때에는 창자가 꾀이는 때가 잇스니 이것은 수술 할 수 밧게는 업슴니다.

데인때
(치료) 불에 데여서 피부가 빨갓케 붓고 쓰릴때에는 아연화유(亞鉛華油)를 바름니다. 또는 아연화뎐분(亞鉛華澱粉)을 뿌리든지 랭수 어름 갓흔 것으로 식힐 것임니다. 물이 괴이고 부풀너 오르면 옥시풀(過酸化水素水)로 소독하고 알콜노 소독한 바늘이나 칼노 터처서 물을 뽑은 후에 아연화유를 바르고 그 우에 랭수나 어름으로 짐질을 할 것임니다. 산(酸)류에 데엿슬때에는 비누물이나 재물로 씻슬것임니다.

상처
(치료) 내장기관에 상처를 입엇슬때에는 환자를 안정하게 하고 의사의 진찰을 바들수 밧게는 업슴니다. 피부에 상처는 그 상처부에 나무나 돌조각 모래가흔것이 붓허 잇슬때에는 핀세트로 집어내이고 옥시풀로 상처부분을 정하게 씨슨후 그 주의에 옥도정기를 발나서 충분히 소독한 다음에 카제를 상처부에 붓치고 그 우에 소독 카제를 씨우고 붕대를 감는 것임니다.

치통
(치료) 버레먹은 니는 충분히 소독하고 크레오소트나 혹은 정향유(丁香油)를 배인 약솜으로 막고 그 우에 다시 적은 솜뭉치를 막어두면 일시는 견딀수가 잇슴니다. 그때에 뺨에는 더운 것이나 찬것으로 찜질을 하면 압흔 것이 감하여짐니다.＜174＞

치질
(치질) 뒤를 잘 보고 항상 차지 안케 주의할 것임니다. 압흘때에는 뜨거운 찜질을 하면 견듸기가 쉬웁슴니다. 전문의사의 치료를 바들것은 물론이지만은 민간약으로 몃가지를 소개하겟슴니다. 즉 다시마(昆布)를 뎍당하게 사방두치(二寸)나 되게 잘너서 쌀씻슨 뜨물에다 넛코 끄려서 다시마가 무에 붓고 뜨거워진 다음에 환부에 붓치고 식으면 또 다른 뜨거운 것을 갈어 붓치고 이 갓치 아침저뎍 두번식을 하여 몃주일 동안 게속하면 효과를 본다고 함니다. 또 게란의 노랑자우를 남비에 너코 닥거서 기름을 내여서 발너도 효과가 잇다고 함니다.

식물의중독
(치료) 식물에 중독된 것을 알면 목에 손을 넛커나 혹은 비누물을 풀어서 토할 것임니다. 그리고 의사에게 부탁하여 위를 씨서내일 것임니다. 독약을 먹엇슬때에는 의사를 청할것이지마은 될수 잇스면 속히 토하게 할 것이니 응급치료로서는
1. 쥐잡는 약의 중독에는 류산동(硫酸銅) 1그람을 먹여서 토하게 할 것.
1. 승공수(昇汞水) 중독에는 우유와 계란의 흰자우를 만히 먹일 것.
1. 청산가리(靑酸加里)는 103파센트의 과산화수소수(옥시풀)를 한술식 여러번 먹일것.
1. 초산은(硝酸銀) 중독에는 갈분(葛粉) 우무(寒天)를 먹일 것.
1. 염산모루히네 중독에는 1-3파센트의 과산화수소수(옥시풀)을 먹일것.
독물을 먹엇슬때에 속히 간호만하면 위세조(胃洗滌)로 대개는 생명을 구할 수가 잇슴니다.

급성전염병
(주의) 호렬사 장질부사 적리등은 무섭게 전염하는 것인고로 결코 숨겨서는 안됨니다. 지푸데리는 어린이에게 만코 목과 코안에 백태가 쓰는 것임니다. 열(熱)이 놉고 원기가 업서저서 치료를 늣게하면 생명이 위독함니다. 빨니 면역혈청주사(免疫血淸注射)를 마지면 곳 낫는 것임니다.
(소독) 환자주위에 갓갑게 잇는 식긔긔물들은 뜨거운 물 석회수(石灰水) 표백분(漂白粉) 석회유(石灰油) 리졸 등으로 충분히 소독할 것임니다. 할 수 업는 것은 태워버릴 것이며 해빗에 쪼여도 균이 죽기는 하지만은 그늘에 잇든 부분은 할 수 업스니 완전한 소독을 하기는 어러운 것임니다.

기타
(치료) 1. 목에 가시가 걸녓슬때에는 손가락과 핀셋트로도 꺼낼 수 업스면 질하든가 환자를 업드러트리고 배에다 벼개를 괴이고 머리를 낫게한 후 등을 뚜두릴 것.＜175＞
1. 눈에 틔가들러갓슬때에는 당황해하지 말고 종용히 눈을 감고 눈물과 가티 흘너 나오기를 기다리는 것이 제일이며 결코 부벼서는 안됨니다. 그후에 붕산수(硼酸水)로 씨슬것.
1. 귀에 버레가 드러갓슬때에는 오리-부油를 참기름 머리에 바르는 기름 등 엇떤 기름이든지 귀에 너어서 버레를 죽인 후에 핀셋트로 집어내일 것.
1. 코로 들어간 것은 다음에 목으로 넘어옴니다.

가정에 준비하여둘 기구와 약품
검온기(테온을 검사하여 보는 것) 완장기(浣腸器) 빙침(어름벼개) 빙낭(어름넛는 주머니) 유단보(함석으로 만든통에 더운물을 너어서 다스웁게하는 것) 회로(懷爐) 흡입기 붕대 카제 약솜 핀셋트 이상은 기물임니다.
약품으로는 피마자油(설사하는 약) 구리세링(浣腸劑) 오리-부油(데인때 응급치료하는 것) 알콜(소독제로도 쓰고 알콜람푸에도 씀) 옥도정기(균을 죽이기 위하야 바르는 것) 옥시풀(상처를 소독하는데 씀) 리즐(소독약) 가루붕산(찜질에도 쓰고 양추질 흡입용 세안용(洗眼) 핏크씨깽고(독빼는 고약) 반창고(붕대 대신으로 사용하는대 상처부에 그것만을 붓처서는 안됨니다) 석탄산(소독제) 아연화(데엿슬때 바르는 것) 리멘트(버러지 벌 빈대 모기 쏠새기에게 쐬엿슬때에 바르는 것)＜176＞
＜169-176＞