잡지명	別乾坤 제27호
발행일	1930년 03월 01일
기사제목	編輯落書 (Editorial Notes)
기사형태	사고·편집후기 (Notice · Editor's Postscript)

Editorial Notes

The 10th-anniversary commemorative grand lecture, the world political situation grand lecture, and the talk and fairy tale convention that the company had planned to hold for three days recently were unfortunately not permitted by the authorities due to the times, and were postponed indefinitely. Of course, we will hold it again next time, but I would like to express my apologies to those who were looking forward to it. (方)

Some people seem to misunderstand that the background of the creative novel "Pyŏngjo and Yŏngbok" published in the previous issue occurred at the C printing house. That's like people from Namwŏn misunderstanding Ch’unhyangjŏn as something that happened in their family. However, if there is any misunderstanding, I cannot help but feel sorry. (車)

This time, I tried to collect relatively substantial articles for the women's section, but due to unavoidable circumstances, most of them could not be published, resulting in a poor outcome. However, I will try even harder in the next issue. (金)

It is said that only cripples gather at Onyang Hot Springs, but for some reason, many teachers in our editorial department are suffering from ailments. Mr. Ch’ae is suffering from a toothache, Mr. Sŏng from a stomachache, and Mr. I Chŏngho is limping like a beggar because he sprained his left foot. Even though they are sick, the three of them are suffering from upper, middle, and lower pains, so they probably don't have any complaints. (徐給仕)

When Mr. Pak No’ŏl went to his wife's hometown, another teacher said that he was going home to wear new clothes, so I wondered why he was going all the way to Kyŏngju to have new clothes made instead of having them made in Seoul even if he had to pay for the sewing. But when I saw the letter he wrote on paper, I realized that he was going because he had heard the urgent news of his mother's illness, and the other teacher was teasing him. However, in another letter he wrote a few days ago, he said that her condition is improving, so it seems that he will actually be wearing his spring clothes in Seoul. Haha. ... ... (朴給仕) <178>

Named Entities

朴露兒	Pak No’ŏl
蔡先生	Ch’ae Sŏnsaeng
成先生	Sŏng Sŏnsaeng
李定鎬	I Chŏngho
溫陽溫泉	Onyang Onch’ŏn
南原	Namwŏn
慶州	Kyŏngju



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제27호
발행일	1930년 03월 01일
기사제목	編輯落書
기사형태	사고·편집후기

編輯落書
요전에 開催하랴던 本社10周年 紀念大講演會 世界政局大講演 野談及童話大會 凡3일간 계획는 또한 시절이 시절인 까닭으로 當局에서 不許可가 되야 無期延期가 되엿다. 다음기횡 물론 다시 開催하겟지만은 그동안 기대하던 여러분에게 미안한 말슴을 드린다.(方)

前號에 揭載한 창작소설「병조와 영복이」의 배경이 C인쇄소에서 발생된 것으로 오해하는 사람이 혹 잇는 것갓다. 그것은 맛치 춘향전을 보고 南原사람들이 자기집안 일로 오해하는 것과 다름이 엄다. 그러나 만일 오해라도 잇다면 미안이 또한 업지 안타.(車)

이번에는 女性欄記事를 비교뎍 충실하게 蒐輯하엿더니 부득이한 사정으로 多部分 기재되지 모하야 도로아미타불로 빈약하게 되엿다. 그러나 來號에는 一層 더 분발하랴 한다.(金)

온양온천에는 전다리만 모힌다더니 우리 편집국에는 엇전 까닭인지 여러 선생님들이 알키들을 잘하신다. 蔡先生님은 치통 成先生님은 위통으로 고생을 하시더니 李定鎬선생님은 또 왼발을 접질너서 각설이꾼처럼 적뚝절뚝하고 다니신다. 병을 알으서도 의론하신 것갓치 세분이 상중하 三痛으로 골고르 알으시니 서로 불평은 업스실것 갓슴니다.(徐給仕)

朴露兒선생임은 시골댁을 가시는데 다른 선생님이 말슴하기를 댁으로 새옷입으러 가신다고 하기에 나는 멋도 모르고 혼자 생각에 새옷을 입으시랴면 바누질 삭을 주어서라도 서울에서 해 입으시지 왜 車삭까지 주시고 경주까지 가시누 하얏더니 종에 편지하신 것을 보니 어머니 病患急報를 듣고 가시는 것을 다른 선생님이 嘲弄으로 그러신 것이 엿슴니다. 그런데 日前에 또 편지하신 것을 보니 병환이 차도가 게시다니 실상 春服은 서울에 오서서 입게 되실 모양임니다. 하하. ... ...(朴給仕)＜178＞
＜178＞