잡지명	별건곤 제32호
발행일	1930년 09월 01일
기사제목	새로운 世界的 不安, 風雲漸急 第二世界大戰爭?! (New Global Anxiety, Approaching Storm: World War II?!)
기사형태	설문 (Questionnaire)

Taking on the Question... Editor

Trotsky expressed the previous World War in a simple phrase: "the clash between the expanded productive power of capitalist powers and their respective national border barriers." No one can deny that this expression came from an accurate observation of the facts to the extent possible.

Indeed, the activities of the emerging German Empire, centered on the unification of the federation through Bismarck and Wilhelm III's iron-blood policies (鐵血政策), with Austria, Hungary, and the aging Turkish Empire as one force, towards the red Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, and the Far East, inevitably led England and France, along with Japan and Italy, and eventually even the United States, to confront it. This was, of course, due to the aggressive policies of Germany and Austria-Hungary (Turkey had only a passive meaning), which aimed to monopolize raw materials and commodity markets worldwide by seizing political and military power in the aforementioned regions, in response to the remaining powers—especially England—seeking to protect their vested interests or explore new territories, driven by their expanded productive power.＜2＞

Thus, the capitalism of the world powers reached the climax of its development through the Great War.

Before the Great War, the capitalism of the world powers was in a constant upward trajectory. As it continued to rise without ceasing, reaching a point where such a clash was inevitable, they must have gained some result from that clash. So, what was the result?

Firstly, they divided and took the territories of the defeated side. As a result, the victorious side temporarily saw vitality in production, filling the demand in the domestic market, which had been sluggish due to the war, and the demand in overseas markets by crossing the easy borders of the defeated countries or through newly acquired territories. However, it was obvious that their newly acquired territories or domestic market demand could not continue indefinitely.

Now, they had no measures to digest their productive power, whether domestically or overseas. If there was no room for productive power to be digested, it meant that capitalism itself had turned from a rising phase of development to a declining phase.

Secondly, one significant result was that the center of the world economy, which had been moving around Europe—especially England—until the Great War, had shifted to the United States. The United States, which greatly profited during the Great War, had become the financial king (大王 格) of the international scene, wielding influence over the entire world's economy.

Thirdly, the liberation movements of the world's minor nations rose like wildfire, along with social unrest and a conscious or unconscious boycott of goods from the suzerain states due to the development of industrial capitalism within those nations themselves.

Fourthly, there was the construction of Soviet Russia, marking a new era in human history.

Thus, capitalism, in its declining phase, was struggling with a severe chronic economic crisis, resorting to various means due to sluggish production. Domestically, there was industrial rationalization; externally, there was the erection of high tariff barriers at every border. This, of course, was their immediate solution, but it only served to exacerbate social unrest, with an army of unemployed that could be counted in the tens of millions wandering the streets worldwide, and labor-management struggles becoming increasingly acute as a result.

The perpetual boom that the United States had boasted of was gone, and the winds of the depression were sweeping across the land, which would undoubtedly spread worldwide. England, unable to focus on its domestic crisis, was tormented by its inability to manage its dwindling resources. The dormant Annam rose up, and Egypt demanded independence.

There would be no end to citing specific facts in addition to these. However, all of them are sufficient to describe the rapidly collapsing state of the world's capitalist powers. In response, Stalin, at the 16th Congress of the Russian Federation Communist Party, pointed out the economic decline domestically and the intensification of conflicts with colonies abroad, predicting the imminence of a second world war.＜3＞

Of course, capitalist powers are trying to avoid war as much as they can. Thus, they talk about disarmament. Some people see this and speak of world peace, but originally, disarmament is by no means a prelude to peace. No matter how much disarmament is done, from the moment the first shot is fired, cannons and warships can be produced as much as needed, as we witnessed during the previous World War.

While the powers are struggling with the economic crisis and social unrest mentioned above—a precarious anxiety as if holding a bomb about to explode—a new international movement is visible: the European Economic Union (歐洲經濟聯盟).

This Economic Union, with England whispering in its ear, and while making excuses to the United States, who is frowning, seems to be gradually forming its entity with France and Germany at its center.

Indeed, as this alliance has "Europe" written on its head, it cannot but be seen as confronting the United States (England still has some power), which economically reigns over Europe, at least passively.

The Worker-Peasant Russia (勞農露西亞) is paying great attention to this European Economic Union from one corner of the world. Worker-Peasant Russia observes this alliance as an attempt by European capitalism to confront Russia.

Whether inspired by this or not, rumors of an alliance between Russia, Turkey, and Italy (露土伊 三國의 연맹설) have recently been heard.

If this happens, will the world naturally be divided into three major forces?

Isn't this a major threat to the capitalist powers?

As mentioned above, those powers will try to avoid it in every possible way. But will they be able to avoid it as they wish? Or will they inevitably fail in the end?

This is something we want to think about and is by no means meaningless. (The following in order of manuscript arrival)

They will try to avoid it

Song Chin-u

The problem is too broad to discuss.

If something were to happen, would it be a class war? But a class war cannot occur because the international political form for it to happen does not reach that far.

Besides, even when talking about capitalist powers, although the current situation is not dissimilar to that before the previous Great War, there are also many differences.＜4＞

Most of all, before the Great War, they were eager to wage war against each other, making an explosion easy, but now, having learned a great lesson from the Great War, they try to avoid it as much as possible.

Even if they win the war, they cannot gain new territory and will either become extremely devastated or see a transformation like Russia.

The European Economic Union will gradually mature and thus confront the power of England and the United States. However, that alone cannot lead to a conflict—a second world war.

The League of Nations and disarmament, though not sufficient, are all manifestations of efforts to avoid war and maintain peace.

However, one thing to note is China. Although the communist forces have seized a force and emerged during the current struggle between Chiang Kai-shek (蔣介石) and Yen Ping (閻憑), it is impossible for all of China to be communized at this time. This is because of the domestic reactionary forces and the vigilance of the powers.

However, China cannot be said to become an absolutely independent country from now on and will remain a market for the interests of the powers for a long time. In that case, it cannot be said that there will be no conflict between the powers within it. The activities and conflicts of the powers in China may be the spark for a second world war, but they will also try to avoid it.

In any case, based on the current situation alone, it is impossible to conclude that a second world war will come soon.

Difficult to Assert

Kim Ki-t'aek

The term "Second World War" somehow doesn't resonate with me as intensely or excitingly. Of course, it may be due to my lack of constant attention to that aspect...

The European Economic Union is gradually maturing, and England and the United States are paying attention to it. It seems that Russia views the European Economic Union as an attempt to oppose them. Perhaps that's why, but a newspaper recently reported on an alliance between Russia, Turkey, and Italy. If England, the United States, France, Germany, Russia, Turkey, and Italy were to each confront each other, it would be a considerable problem. Since the previous World War, so to speak, ended without achieving a final result, it seems likely that another major war will occur, but I don't yet feel that it is imminent.

People view the Second World War as a class war, but it doesn't seem that way.

At least, if a class war were to break out internationally, Russia alone could not handle it.＜5＞ Even if countries like China or England were to organize a Soviet state in the future, it would not immediately become an alliance and actively try to wage war against the remaining capitalist powers.

No matter how much a state's organization is based on the same ideology, it would use diplomacy for the time being—though it would be different from the current capitalism—and would pursue interests based on the nation.

In the end, it seems unbelievable that a class war will break out globally.

As a Class War

Han Yong-un

The devastation of the defeated countries since the World War is, of course, ongoing. However, it is also true that countries like Japan and the United States, which greatly benefited from the war and were called war profiteering nations (戰爭成金國), indulged in a temporary boom and pursued extremely reckless policies in their politics and economy, which seems to be a major cause of the chronic depression we face today.

Moreover, the depression currently sweeping through capitalist countries is different in nature from the depressions before and after the war (1920-21), now that capitalism has matured so much. Thus, the depression will inevitably expand its scope to agricultural depression, and the influx of large capital has eliminated regional buffer zones. Colonies and other commodity markets have become fixed, making it impossible to export the recklessly produced mass-produced goods. Although it is a cyclical phenomenon, it is clear that it cannot be remedied in the short term, unlike the previous days (before and after the war) in the development process of capitalism.

However, according to newspaper reports, a European Economic Union is being proposed by Foreign Minister Briand in Europe. Although it is not yet known whether it will be established, it is undoubtedly the last gasp and cry of capitalism that has reached its decline. Since it means the consolidation of European capitalist countries, unemployment will further increase, and it will undoubtedly become a threat and opposing force to Labor-Peasant Russia directly and indirectly. The Soviet Russia will never silently stand by.

In that case, it is inevitable that a decisive confrontation and antagonism will arise between socialist states and capitalist states. The sharp increase in unemployment within capitalist states will accelerate the momentum of domestic revolution. Accordingly, the latent power of the communist parties that are corroding domestically will gradually become apparent. The support of the Soviet Union for this will challenge the capitalist states on the path of rise and fall, and a global class war will inevitably break out. Whether capitalist countries will gain new commodity markets or follow the historical process and forever collapse, leading to the global emergence of socialist states for the liberation of the proletariat.＜6＞ The imminent Second World War is something that interests us greatly.

The Opportunity is Ripening

Choe Rin

In our human society, there is no greater disaster than war, no matter what kind of disaster it may be. As the most recent example, if we calculate the losses suffered by humanity during the European War in numbers, the war expenses alone amounted to 372 billion won in direct war expenses and 302 billion won in indirect war expenses, totaling 674 billion won. The total number of mobilized troops was about 60 million, of which 33 million were injured and 10 million died, which is slightly more than half of the population of our Joseon. If we break this down by country again, it is as follows:

Country British Empire France Russia Italy Germany

War Expenses 70.6 billion won 48.6 billion won 45.1 billion won 24.8 billion won 74 billion won

War Deaths 3 million 4.5 million 9 million Unknown 6 million

Country Austria-Hungary Turkey-Bulgaria United States

War Expenses 41.2 billion won 2.5 billion won

War Deaths Unknown Unknown 300,000

In addition, the number of non-combatants who died from sudden deaths, disease, starvation, etc., was about five times that of combatants. Even if we infer from this, everyone knows well how miserable war is. I am a person who hopes that war will disappear from this world as soon as possible and that the world will be permanently peaceful, so that so-called All the Seas One Family (四海 一家) and All Races Returning to One (萬族 歸一) will be achieved, from the perspective of our Cheondogyo's Innaecheon (人乃天) principle and general humanitarianism, so I think it is a great pity that the issue of the so-called Second World War is even brought up. However, the world's general trend is still not like that. Although it seems peaceful on the surface, the world powers are secretly and urgently preparing for battle, so, like the Mountain Rain is Coming, Wind Fills the Tower (山雨欲來風滿樓), I cannot help but shudder at the future calamity of our humanity, as we do not know from which sky a storm will blow or torrential rain will fall.

In general, there are various causes for war, but the main cause of modern war is the mutual conflict between imperialism and imperialism. If we talk simply about the content of this imperialism,

One is the population problem = in other words, the food problem, and two is the economic problem, that is, the struggle for the market for commercial goods and the utilization of capital. With these two problems, countries compete with each other for colonies and commercial markets. Measures to defend against this war are so-called alliances, pacts, disarmament conferences, etc., in which each country balances its power with national commitments, but the so-called balance has no permanent preservation and is bound to fail, and when that failure occurs, war breaks out.

Just as in physics, force always flows into the place with the weakest resistance, war also occurs when the balance of power between countries is lost. Many scholars and debaters in this world often shout for world peace and promote formal peace in international relations, such as so-called peace conferences, but in reality, if we look at the rate of population growth around the world, it increases by 23 million every year, and out of 13.2 billion jeongbo of land around the world, only 5.3 billion jeongbo is arable. How can there be no conflict and no struggle to accommodate the infinitely growing population with this finite land? There is no need to explain again that this population growth problem will be a major cause of world war. As everyone generally assumes, the future war stage will not be centered on the Atlantic Ocean, as in the European War, but will be centered on the Pacific Ocean, which is closest to us. In other words, among the issues centered on the East Asian problem, the Chinese problem seems to be the problem of problems. World powers advocate so-called peace on the surface, but in reality, they are preparing for war openly with so-called Bodhisattva Speech and Yaksha Heart (菩薩口氣에 夜叉心臟). Even if we look at the scene of the so-called Disarmament Conference held in London this time, both Japan and the United States are endlessly arguing over the issue of their military strength, and if we look at the public opinion between the people of both countries at that time, their tone is all based on the premise that there will be war first, and there is not the slightest sign that they have the sincerity to eliminate war fundamentally. The current world is like a dormant volcano (熄火山), so even though the surface seems to be nothing, we do not know when it will erupt.

China was temporarily unified when Chiang Kai-shek seized the power of the Southern Government, but the warlord factions who opposed this rebelled again and established the so-called Northern Government. Recently, taking advantage of the weak central power, the communist forces occupied the Changsha area as if it were no man's land, and China fell into a state of chaos again. I do not know whether Chiang Kai-shek or any other person will emerge again to resolve this crisis, but in my opinion, China will be difficult to unify no matter what person or system it uses until the transportation system is fundamentally completed. There is no country without civil war, but the reason why the central government immediately suppresses and pacifies it is because the transportation system is perfect as well as military power. For example, even if a riot breaks out in Gapji (甲地), troops from all over the country immediately concentrate on the riot area under the government's command and suppress it. On the contrary, China's transportation system is very incomplete, so if a person establishes a base and causes rebellion in one region, it takes a long time for the suppression forces to go, and in the meantime, they can prepare well for defense and other things. How can it be easily suppressed? Therefore, when Sun Yat-sen succeeded in the first revolution in the old days, he advocated the construction of railways throughout the country before anything else. This was a great insight that no one dared to imagine at the time. I have always been impressed by his great insight. Because China is not unified in this way, the powers are always watching for China's interests with the ambition to gain the benefit of the fisherman. Above all, the competition for commercial markets becomes fierce. Among them, the conflict between Japan and the United States is the fiercest. If there is no mutual concession like this, there will be no choice but to fight with weapons in the end. It is difficult for me to say here when and what the outcome will be, but you, who are wiser than me, know and assume it well, so I will end that word. (Responsibility for the text rests with the reporter)

America's Defensive Offensive

Chu Yo-han

Since the First World War, so to speak, ended without reaching a decisive result, a Second World War may break out sooner or later.

However, now that the powers are different from the time of the First World War, they are trying to avoid war as much as possible - holding disarmament conferences several times already (even though they have not yet achieved very effective results) is all about trying to avoid war by taking the First World War as a mirror.

I understand that the European Economic Union has failed. Doesn't England already oppose it?

Also, some people talk about class war, but it is still too early for it to break out internationally. If it breaks out, it will still be an imperialist war. Even so, the countries that are in a different situation now do not have the power to wage war. Only the United States will take an offensive and come forward. The United States' offensive will not be an offensive for the sake of attack, but a defensive offensive.

The center will, of course, be the East Asian region.

However, the problem is too broad to speak in detail.

With the Pacific as the Center

Kim Kyo˘ng-jae

1

I have to say what everyone knows. The current world situation is that the three countries of England, the United States, and Japan are controlling the situation, and among them, the United States occupies most of the civilization. Occupying civilization does not mean that the source of civilization is in the United States, but that the United States has more of various tools of civilization and the pleasures resulting from them than others.

2

It is true that they hate war. So, there have been various meetings to avoid the war. It has already appeared in the form of several disarmament conferences. But war is not something that happens by will. Surrounding circumstances, mainly economic conditions, incubate and produce war. Although I do not specifically point out this and that here and exemplify it concretely, it is true that there are many problems in Europe that cannot be solved without war. However, I do not think that war will break out between now and tomorrow. Once, a British politician said that there would be a Japanese war in 1931. If there is a big war like the previous European war in the future, I think the Pacific China problem will be the main factor.＜9＞

**Named Entities**

삐스막크	P'issŭmark'ŭ
윌헬름3세	Willhelrŭm 3-se
墺地利	O˘jilli
匂牙利	Hyangari
老大 土耳其	Noda T'ŏrk'i
小亞細亞	Soaseria
英佛	Yo˘ngbul
이태리	It'aeri
美國	Miguk
트로츠키	T'ŭroch'ŭk'i
英國	Yo˘ngguk
安南	Annam
埃及	Aegŭp'tŭ
스탈린	Sŭt'allin
露西亞聯邦	Rosia Yo˘nbang
共産黨大會	Kongsandang Taehoe
宋鎭禹	Song Chin-u
蔣介石	Chiang Kai-shek
閻憑	Yo˘m Pyo˘ng
金起田	Kim Ki-t'aek
露土伊	Notoi
韓龍雲	Han Yong-un
 뿌리앙 外相	Ppuriang Oesang
歐洲經濟聯盟	O˘ju Kyo˘ngje Yo˘nmaeng
崔麟	Choe Rin
倫敦	Ro˘ndon
孫逸仙	Son Ilsŏn
朱요한	Chu Yohan
金璟載	Kim Kyo˘ngjae


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제32호
발행일	1930년 09월 01일
기사제목	새로운 世界的 不安, 風雲漸急 第二世界大戰爭?!
기사형태	설문

새로운 世界的 不安, 風雲漸急 第二世界大戰爭?!
問題를 取扱하면서...편집자
트로츠키-는 前來의 세계대전을 「자본주의 열강의 팽창한 생산력과 각기 국경 장벽과의 충돌이다」는 간단한 일언으로 표현을 하엿다. 이 표현이 어데까지든지 사실을 정확하게 시찰 한데서 나온 것이라는 것은 누구나 거부하지 못할 것이다.
과연 삐스막크와 윌헬름3세의 鐵血政策으로써 연방 통일을 달성한 獨逸의 신흥 제국을 중심으로 墺地利, 匂牙利와 老大 土耳其 제국을 일단으로 한 일대 세력의 빨칸 메소포타미아 小亞細亞 極東 등 방면으로의 활약은 英佛을 중심으로 일본과 이태리 그리고 필경은 미국까지 합하야 그에 대항을 아니치 못할 사태에 빠트리고 말은 것이다. 그것은 물론 前記 地方에 정치적 군사적 세력을 잡음으로써 전 세계 적으로 원료와 상품 시장을 독점하려는 獨逸과 墺地利.匂牙利(土耳其는 消極的 의미 밧게는 가지지 못 하엿섯다)의 팽창한 생산력을 등에 질머진 침략 정책에 대하야 其餘의-특히 英國 열강이 기득권을 혹은 新地境을 개척하려는 데서  나온 것이다.＜2＞
이리하야 세계 열강의 자본주의는 大戰으로써 그 발전의 클라이막스에 다달으고 만 것이다.
大戰전의 세계 열강의 자본주의는 부단의 상승 과정에 잇섯다. 끈이지 아니하고 상승 되여 오다가 피하려나 피할 수 업는 곳에 다달음애 그와 가튼 충돌이 생긴 만큼 그들은 그 충돌에서 어든바 결과가 반듯이 잇서야 할 것이다. 그러면 그 결과는 무엇인가?
첫재로 그들은 패전 측의 영토를 분할하여 가젓다. 그리하야 그등 승전 측에서는 전쟁으로 부진 되엿든 국내 시장의 需要와 새로 어든 영토로 또는 패전국의 만만한 국경을 넘어 해외 시장의 수요를 채우느라고 일시적이나마 생산의 활기를 보지 아니 한 것도 어니엇섯다. 그러나 그들의 어든 바 새로운 영토나 국내 시장의 수요가 무제한코 계속 될 수 업는 것은 일목요연한 사실 이엇섯다.
인제야말로 국내로나 해외로나 향하야 그들의 가진 바 생산력을 소화식힐 아모런 대책도 그들에게 업시 되엿다. 생산력이 소화가 될 여지가 업다면 그것은 자본주의가 발전의 상승기로부터 一轉하야 하강기에 들어섯다는 것을 스사로 말하는 것이다.
둘재로 한가지 중대한 결과는 大戰 전까지 세계의 경제가 歐羅巴를-그 중에도 영국을-중심으로 움즉이고 잇든 것이 미국으로 옴기어 갓다는 것이다. 大戰 당시에 크나큰 利를 본 미국은 전 세계의 경제를 좌우할 만큼 국제 금융의 大王 格이 되여잇다.
셋재로는 세계 약소민족의 해방운동이 요원의 불길과 갓치 일어나는 그 사회적 불안과 아울러 그 자체 내에 공업 자본주의 발달로 인한 종주국 상품에 대하야의 의식적 혹은 무의식적 뽀이코트가 일어난 것이다.
넷채로는 人類史 上의 신기원을 지은 소비에트 露西亞의 건설이다.
이리하야 하강기에 잇는 자본주의는 심각한 만성적 경제 공항으로 생산의 부진으로 가지각색의 수단을 다 부리며 헤매이고 잇다. 국내적으로는 산업의 합리화 대외적으로는 국경  마다 관세 장벽의 高築....이것은 물론 그들의 당면의 타개책이겟스나 그것은 도리어 사회적 불안을 조장식히는데 불과한 것이니 이천만으로 헤일 수 잇는 실업군이 전 세계에 퍼지어 街頭에서 헤매인다는 것과 그로 인하야 勞資鬪爭이 각각으로 첨예화하여 간다는 것이다.
미국이 자랑하든 만년 경기도 간 곳 업고 공황의 바람이 휩쓸어 일어나며 잇고 그것이 전세계에 파급 할 것은 물론이다. 영국은 역시 국내의 공황에 염두를 못 내이면서 한편 밧삭 말은 간듸 하나를 엇지 하지 못하여 속을 조이고 잇다. 잠자든 安南이 일어나며 埃及도 독립을 요구한다.
이 외에 구체적 사실을 들자면 한이 업슬 것이다. 그러나 그것들은 전부가 急轉 直下的으로 몰락되여 가는 세계자본주의 열강의 현상이라 하기에 족하다. 이에 대하야 스탈린은 제16회  露西亞聯邦 共産黨大會에서 열강의 국내적으로는 경제적 쇠퇴를 들고 국외적으로는 식민지와의 충돌의 첨예화를 지적하야 제2의 세계대전이＜3＞ 불원함을 예언한 바가 잇다.

자본주의 열강은 물론 힘이 밋치는데 까지는 전쟁을 謀避하려고 하는 것이 사실이다. 그리하야 그들은 군비축소를 말한다. 이것을 보고 세계 평화를 말하는 사람이 잇스나 원래 군축이라는 것은 결코 오려는 평화의 전조가 아니다. 아모리 군축을 한다 하더래도 첫 번 총소리가 터지면서부터 시작하야 대포든지 군함이든지야 얼마든지 만들어 내일 수 잇는 것이니 그 실례는 전년의 世界大戰에서 우리가 보고도 남은 바이다.
열강이 上記와 가튼 경제적 공황과 사회적 불안-터지려는 폭발물을 안은 듯이 아슬아슬한 불안-에 싸여 허덕이면서 국제적으로 새로운 기운 하나가 보이는 것이 잇스니 歐洲經濟聯盟이 그것이다.
이 經濟聯盟은 영국의 쏘삭거림을 바더 이맛살을 찌푸리는 미국에게 아유구용을 하여가면서 獨佛이 중심이 되야 점차 그 정체가 형성되여 가는 기색이 보인다.
과연 이 연맹이 「歐洲」라는 두 글자를 머리에 쓰고 잇는 만큼 경제적으로써 歐羅巴에 군림하고 잇는 미국(英國도 다소의 세력은 남어 잇다.)에 대립 한 것이 소극적으로나마 아닌 것이 아니지 못할 것이다.
이 歐洲經濟聯盟에 대하야는 세계의 달은 一隅에서 크나큰 주목을 밧고 잇게 되엿스니 勞農露西亞가 그것이다. 勞農露西亞에서는 이 聯盟을 毆羅巴 資本主義 露西亞에 대항하려는 것이라고 관찰을 한다.
여긔서 자극을 바듬 인지 최근에는 露土伊 三國의 연맹설까지도 들니게 된다.
이와 갓치 된다면 전세계는 자연 삼대세력으로 정립이 되지 아니할가?
이거야말로 자본주의 열강에 대하야의 일대 위협이 아닐가?
우에도 말하엿거니와 그들 열강은 물론 피할 수 잇는 모든 방향으로 피하려고 할 것이다. 그러면 그것이 如意하게 피하여질 것인가? 또는 결국에 가서 피치 못하고 말 것인가?
이것이 우리로써는 한번 생각하여 보고 십흔 일이요 겸하야 무의미한 일이 아닐 것이다.(以下原稿着順)

避하려 들겟지요

宋鎭禹

문제가 넘우 광범하여서 어터게 이약이 할 수가 업슴니다.
일어난다고 하면 계급 전쟁이나 일어날가요. 그러나 계급 전쟁은 그것이 일어날 만한 국제적 정치형태가 거긔까지 밋치지 못햇스니까요.
그밧게 자본주의 열강을 말하더래도 현재의 정세가 前年의 大戰전과 흡사하지 아니한 것은 아니나 달은 점도＜4＞만히 잇슴니다.
무어보담도 大戰 전에는 피차에들 전쟁을 하려고들 든 때이기 때문에 폭발이 용이 하엿지만 지금 와서는 大戰에서 한번 큰 교훈을 바덧기 때문에 돨수 잇스면 피하려고 들음니다.
싸워서 전승을 한대야 新領地는 더 어더 드리지 못하고 극단으로 피폐하지 아니면 露西亞와 가튼 변화를 보게 되니까요.
歐洲經濟聯盟이 점점 성숙이 되어 가고 따러서 英米의 세력에 대항을 하여 가게는 되겟지요. 그러나 그것만 가지고는 충돌-제2의 세계대전을 말할 수는 업는 것 임니다.
國際聯盟이라든가 또 충분하다고 할 수는 업스나 군축이라든가 하는 것은 그것이 전부 전쟁을 피하고 평화를 유지하자는 노력의 발로 임니다.
그런데 한가지 주의가 되는 것은 中國임니다. 中國이 방금 蔣介石이와 閻憑이 항쟁하는 차에 공산군이 한 세력을 잡고 대두를 하기는 하엿스나 그것으로써 전 中國이 今時에 赤化가 될 수는 엄슴니다. 그것은 국내의 반동 세력도 세력이려니와 열강의 주시도 잇스나까요.
그런데 지금 中國이 압흐로 절대 자주국이 되겟다고 할 수는 업고 오랫동안 열강의 利權시장이 되겟는데 그러느라면 그 속에서 열강간의 충돌이 전연 업스리라고는 할 수 업겟지요. 이 中國을 무대로 한 열강의 활동과 그 충돌이 제2대전의 도화선이 될지도 모르겟스나 그것 역시 피하려 들겟지요.
하여간 지금의 정세만 가지고는 제2의 세계대전이 未久에 오리라는 단정은 나이지 못하겟슴니다.

斷言키 어렵다
金起田

제2세계대전이라는 그 말이 엇전지 그다지 자극성잇고 긴장미잇게 귀에 울니지가 아니 함니다. 물론 그 방면에 대하야 부단의 주의를 하지 아니한 소치인지는 몰으겟스나...
歐洲經濟聯盟이 점점 成熟化 하여가고 거긔 대해서 英米가 주의를 하고 잇스며 또 露西亞에서는 歐洲經濟聯盟을 자기네에 대립식히자는 것이라고 보는 모양입니다. 그래서 그러한지는 몰으겟스나 일전 신문에는 露土伊의 연맹설까지도 보도가 되엿는데 만일 그와 갓치 英米와 獨佛과 露土伊가 각기 대립하게 된다면 상당한 문제 거리도 되겟지요. 연전의 世界大戰이 말하자면 종국적 결과를 맷지 못하고 끗치 난 것이니까 다시 한번 대전이 일어날 것도 갓기는 함니다 만은, 나에게는 아직 그럿케 迫頭하는 듯한 늣김은 일어나지 아니 함니다.
사람들은 제2의 세계대전을 階級戰으로 관측하나 그것은 그러치 아니한 듯 함니다.
적어도 계급전쟁이 국제적으로 일어나자면 현재의 露西亞 하나로서는 도저히 감당하지 못할 것이요＜5＞ 또 압흐로-가령 中國이나 혹은 英國가튼 나라가 소비에트 국가를 조직한다  하더래도 그것이 즉시로 연맹이 되야 自餘의 자본주의 열강과 적극적으로 전쟁을 하려고 나서게는 못 될 것임니다.
아모리 국가 조직이 가튼 주의에 입각한 것이라 하더래도 당분간은 현 자본주의 그것과는 달으겟지만 역시 외교정책을 쓸 것이고 민족을 단위로 한 이해를 따지게 될 것이니까요.
결국 계급전쟁이 세계적으로 일어난다는 것은 미들 수 엄는 것인가 함니다.

階級戰爭으로
韓龍雲

世界大戰 이후 패전국의 피폐가 오늘날까지 미처 온 것은 물론 이어니와 전쟁으로 말미암아 多大한 이득을 보아서 소위 戰爭成金國의 칭을 밧게 되엿든 일본이나 米國가튼 나라에서도 한때의 호경기에 심취 되야 一國의 정치와 경제에 잇서 심히 방만한 정책을 써온 것은 사실이엿스니 그것이 오늘날 만성적 대공황을 招致한 중대한 원인이 될 것 갓다.
그리고 現下 세계 자본주의 국가를 風靡하고 잇는 공황은 자본주의가 원숙히 발달한 이만치 戰前戰後(1920-21)의 공황과는 그 성질이 달을 것이다. 그리하야 공황은 필연적으로 그 범위가 확대되야 농업 공황에까지 미치게 되고 대자본의 유입으로 말미암아 지방적 완충지대를 일허 바렷고, 식민지며 기타의 상품시장이 일정불변하야 무절제하게 생산된 대량상품을 수출할 길을 일케 되니 비록 주기적 현상이라고 하나 자본주의의 발달과정에 잇든 前日(戰前前後)과 갓치 도저히 단기적으로 구원할 수 엄는 것은 명확한 사실인 것이다.
그런데 신문지상으로 보도되는 것을 보면 歐洲에서는 뿌리앙 外相의 제안으로 歐洲經濟聯盟이란 것이 제창되고 잇스니 아즉 그 성립 여하는 알 수 업스나 그것이 몰락기에 당도한 자본주의의 최후의 발악이요, 비명인 것은 다시 말할 것도 업다. 그것이 毆洲 자본주의 국가의 鞏固한 단결을 의미하는 것인 이상 그로 말미암아 실업군은 더욱 증가할 것이며, 또한 직접 간접으로 勞農露西亞에 대한 위협이요 대립적 세력이 될 것은 물론이니 소벳트, 露西亞에서도 결코 묵묵히 방관하고만 잇지는 안을 것이다.
그러고 보면 여긔 필연적으로 사회주의 국가 대 자본주의 국가의 결정적 대립과 반목이 생길 것은 사실이며 자본주의 국가 내의 실업군의 격증으로 말미암아 국내 혁명의 기운이 촉진 될 것이고, 그러함에 따라 국내에 부식하고 잇든 각 국 공산당의 潛勢力은 점점 표면화 할 것이니 거긔 대한 소벳트 露國의 성원은 흥망의 도정에 잇는 자본주의 국가에 도전하는 의미가 되야 불가피적으로 세계적 계급전쟁이 일어나고야 말 것이다. 그리 하야 자본주의 국가가 새로운 상품시장을 엇게 되든지 역사적 과정을 밟어 영영 몰락 되여서 無産者 해방의 사회주의국가가 세계적으로 출현될는지＜6＞닥처 옴즉한 제2세계 대전 이야말로 吾人에게 多大한 흥미를 가지게 하는 바이다.

機會는 익어간다
崔麟

우리 인류사회에 잇서서 무슨 참화니 무슨 참화니 하야도 전쟁보다 더 큰 참화는 업슬 것이다. 가장 각가운 예로 歐洲大戰 때에 인류가 입은 손해를 數字로 따저 보면 爲先 戰費만 하야도 直接 戰費가 삼천 칠백 이십억 원, 間接 戰費가 삼천 이십억 원, 共計 육천 칠백 사십억 원에 달하고 총 동원 수는 약 육천만으로 其中 부상자가 삼천 삼백 만 명이오, 사망자가 우리 조선 인구의 略半分 이상이나 되는 일천만 人에 이르엇다. 此를 다시 국별로 하면 左記와 갓다.

國別       英國          佛國             露國            伊太利           獨逸

戰費    칠백육억원   사백팔십육억원   사백오십일억원   이백사십팔억원   칠백사십억원

戰亡者  삼백만명    사백오십만명       구백만명         미상             육백만명

國別       墺匈          土勃          米國

戰費    사백십이억원   이십오억원

戰亡者      未詳          未詳       삼십만명

此外에 비전투원의 급살 병역, 飢餓 등등의 원인으로 사망한 자가 전투원의 약 오배 이상이나 된다. 이것으로 미루워 본다 하야도 전쟁이 如何히 비참한 일인 것은 누구나 잘 알 것이다. 나는 우리 천도교의 인내천주의로나 일반 인도주의로 보아서 언제이나 이 세상에 전쟁이 하루라도 속히 업서지고 세계가 영구히 평화하야 소위 四海 一家에 萬族 歸一 되기를 희망하는 사람임으로 소위 제2세계대전 운운의 문제는 화두에 올이게 되는 것까지 큰 유감으로 생각한다. 그러나 세계의 대세는 아즉도 그럿치 못하야 표면상 비록 평화스러운 듯 하나 세계 열강은 암암리에 전투 준비를 급급히 하고 잇서서 소위 山雨欲來風滿樓 격으로 어느 날 어느 하늘에서 폭풍이 불지 폭우가 떠러질지 모를 만한 현상에 잇스니 우리 인류의 장래 전화에 대하야 실로 전율함을 마지 못하겟다.

大凡 전쟁이 이러나는 데는 여러 가지의 원인이 잇지만은 근대 소위 전쟁의 주요한 원인은 제국주의와 제국주의의 互相衝突에서 이러나는 것이다. 이 제국주의의 내용에 잇서서 간단이 말하자면
一은 인구문제=다시 말하면 식량문제요 二는 경제문제, 즉 상공품 시장의 쟁탈과 자본의 활용이다. 이 두 문제를 가지고 국가와 국가 간에는 서로 식민지의 쟁탈전과 상공품 시장의 쟁탈전이 생기는 것이다. 이 전쟁을 방어하는 대책은 소위 동맹이니, 협약이니, 군축회의 등등의 국가적 결약으로써 각 국이 그 세력을 서로 균형식히는데 잇스나 그 소위 균형이란 것은 결코 영구적 보존성이 업고 반드시 파탄이 생기고 그 파탄이 생기면 곳 전쟁이 이러나는 것이다.
물리학상 원칙에 力이란 것은 항상 저항이 약한 곳으로＜7＞ 유입하는 것과 갓치 전쟁도 국가와 국가 간에 세력이 균형을 일는 때 생기는 것이다. 이 세상에 여러 학자와 논객들은 흔히 세계평화를 불으짓고 또 국제 간에도 소위 평화회의니 무엇이니 하는 형식적 평화를 云爲 하고 잇스나 실제로 전 세계 인구의 증식 율을 보면 매년 이천 삼백만식 증가되고 전 세계 地積은 일백 삼십이억 町步 內에 가히 경작을 할 만한 地積은 僅히 오십 삼억 町步에 불과하다. 이 유한한 地積으로 무한히 증식하는 인구를 수용하랴면 엇지 충돌이 업고 쟁탈이 엄스랴 이 인구의 증식 문제가 세계대전에 큰 원인이 될 것은 다시 설명 할 필요도 엄다. 누구나 대개 짐작하는 바와 갓치 금후의 전쟁 무대는 歐洲大戰 때와 가치 저 太西洋을 중심으로 하야 잇지 안코 우리와 가장 각가운 太平洋을 중심으로 이러날 것이다. 즉 동양문제를 중심으로 하야 이러나는 중에도 특히 中國 문제가 문제의 문제일 것 갓다. 세계 열국들은 표면상 소위 평화를 주창하지만은 그 실은 所謂 菩薩口氣에 夜叉心臟으로 공공연하게 전쟁을 준비하고 잇다. 이번에 倫敦에서 열인 所謂 군축회의의 광경을 보더라도 日米 양국이 공히 그 병량의 문제로 무한한 爭詰을 하고 그때 양국 국민간 여론을 보더라도 그 논조가 모다 전쟁이 잇을 것을 먼저 전제로 하는 것이 현저하고 근본적으로 전쟁을 업시 할 성의가 一毫도 뵈히는 것 갓지 안타. 지금의 세계는 맛치 熄火山과 갓터서 비록 표면은 아모럿치 안은 것 가트나 어느날 어느 때에 爆發이 될지 알 수 업는 것이다.

중국은 蔣介石이 남방정부의 專權을 잡으면서 일시적으로 남북을 통일하얏스나 此를 반대하는 군벌파들이 다시 跋扈하야 소위 북방정부를 설립하게 되고 또 근일에는 중앙세력의 미약한 틈을 타서 공산군이 無人의 境과 갓치 長沙 일대를 점령하게 되니 中國은 다시 亂麻의 형태에 빠지고 마럿다. 蔣介石이나 혹은 기타 엇더한 인물이 다시 출마하야 이 난국을 수습할지 알 수 업스나 내가 보기에는 中國은 여하한 인물과 여하한 제도를 쓰던지 근본적으로 교통 기관이 완성되기 전에는 도저히 통일하기 어려울 것이다. 어느 나라던지 내란이 업는 나라가 업지만은 중앙정부가 즉시에 토벌 진정하게 되는 것은 병력도 병력이지만은 第一은 교통기관이 완전한 까닭에, 가령 甲地에서 무슨 暴亂이 이러나도 정부의 명령 일하에 각지 군병이 즉시 그 暴亂地로 집중하야 초벌을 하게 되나 中國은 그와 반대로 교통기관이 아주 불완전하야 한 지방에서 엇던 인물이 근거를 잡고 난을 이르키면 장구한 시일를 가저야 토벌군이 가게 되고 그동안에 적은 방어, 기타 준비를 잘하게 되니 엇지 용이히 평정할 수가 잇스랴. 그럼으로 왕년에 孫逸仙이 제1회 혁명을 성공하얏슬 때에  무엇보다도 먼저 전국에 철도 부설을 주창한 것이다. 이것은 무엇보다도 큰 高見으로서 당시에 누구나 감히 生意도 못하던 것이다. 나는 그의 고견에 대하야 항상 感心하얏다. 中國이 이와 갓치 통일이 되지 못하는 까닭으로 열강은 漁父의 利를 어들 야욕으로 언제이나 中國의 이권을 엿보고 잇다. 무엇보다도 상공품 시장의 쟁탈전이 격렬하게 된다. 그 중에는 日本과 米國의 충돌이 제일 격렬하다. 이와 가치 互相 양보가 업는 이상에는 결국 은 兵火로 相交하는 수 밧게는 업슬 것이다. 그 시기 여하와 결과 여하는 내가 여긔에 말하기도 어렵거니와 나보다도 현명한 여러분이 잘 알고 짐작할 터이니 그 말만은＜8＞ 긋치고 만다.(文責在記者)

米國의 守勢的 攻勢
朱요한
제1차의 世界大戰이 말하자면 결정적 결과를 짓지 못하고 끗치난 것이니까 오라지 아니하여 제2의 세계대전이 일어나기도 하겟지요.
그러나 지금은 열강들이 第一次 世界大戰 때와 달너서 될 수만 잇스면 전쟁을 피하랴고 하니까요-발서 멧 번재 군축회의를 연다든가(아즉 그닥지 유효한 결과는 엇지 못하엿다 하더래도) 하는 것은 모도가 第一次世界大戰을 거울 삼어 전쟁을 피하랴는 것이겟지요.
歐洲經濟聯盟가튼 것은 실패한 줄 암니다. 英國이 발서 반대를 하지 아니 함니까.
또 계급전쟁을 말하는 사람이 잇스나 그것이 국제적으로 일어나기는 아즉 시기가 일슴니다. 일어난다면 아모리 하여도 제국주의 전쟁이겟지요. 그것도 지금 형편이 달은 나라는 전쟁을 할 힘이 업고 다만 米國이 공세를 취하고 나서겟는 것은 米國의 공세라 하는 것도 공격을 위한 공격이 아니라 守勢的 공세이겟슴니다.
중심은 물론 東洋방면이 되겟지요.
그러나 문제가 넘우 광범해서 자세하게 말을 할 수가 업슴니다.

太平洋 中心으로
金璟載

1
누구나 다-아는 소리를 작구 하라니까 또 해야겟소. 지금 세계의 정세는 英國 米國 日本의 삼개국이 좌우하고 잇는 형세이고, 그 중에도 문명의 대부분을 米國이 차지한 감이 업지 안소이다. 문명을 차지햇다는 것은 문명의 淵源이 米國에 잇다는 것은 아니고 각종 문명의 利器며 그로 인한 향락을 米國이 남달니 만히 가젓다는 것임니다.

2
전쟁을 시려하는 것만은 사실임니다. 그래서 엇저던지 그 전쟁을 피하려고 각종의 회합이 잇섯슴니다. 그가 벌서 여러 차레의 군축회의란 형식으로 낫타낫슴니다. 그러나 전쟁이란 원해서 되는 것은 아임니다. 四圍의 事情 주로 경제적 조건이 전쟁을 배태하고 그를 産出함니다. 지금 여기에 잇것 저것 지적하야 구체적으로 예증치 안으나 歐洲에는 전쟁으로써 해결하지 안으면 아니될 幾多의 문제가 잇는 것은 사실임니다. 그럿타 해서 今明間으로 전쟁이 곳 잇겟다고는 보지 안슴니다. 일즉이 英國의 어느 정치가는 1931년에는 日本戰爭이 잇다고 말한 일이 잇슴니다. 압흐로 先年의 歐洲전쟁, 그와 가튼 큰 전쟁이 잇다면 太平洋 中國문제가 그 요인이 되지 안을가 함니다.＜9＞
＜2-9＞