別건곤 第32號
발행일 1930년 09월 01일
기사제목 安南民族의 解放運動
필자 李學仲
기사형태 논설

Annam People's Liberation Movement
Lee Hak-jung

1
The liberation movement in India has been further aggravated by the arrest of Gandhi. This Indian problem is a major source of agony for England, and the world's attention is focused on India. The Indian problem is being treated as a major issue that will become a turning point for world change. However, national independence movements are not only prevalent in India. In Turkey and Persia, national movements have already arisen, achieving the goal of building excellent new nations. National movements are also catching fire in Afghanistan and Tibet. In so-called French Indochina (Annam or Vietnam), India's eastern neighbor, a fierce liberation movement is now underway. French Indochina consists of five countries: Tonkin (東京), Laos (老榲/哀牢), Cambodia (束蒲塞/高棉), Annam, and Cochinchina. Except for Cochinchina, which is entirely a French colony, all are French protectorates. The people of that country collectively call it Vietnam, with a total area of 700,000 square kilometers and a population of 30 million. The area is quite large compared to Korea, but the population is somewhat smaller. It is not as large as China to the north or India to the west, but it is much larger than Thailand to the south.
<20>
In the past, overshadowed by India and not well seen by the world, and with the French side also trying to hide it, the Annam liberation movement was not well reported in the newspapers.

2
The French interest in the Annam region began in 1664 with the establishment of the French East India Company, stimulated by the activities of Portugal, Spain, England, and other countries. In 1684, they dispatched a man named Chapellier to Tonkin, which was the beginning.
Two years later, another man named Verre was dispatched to Cochinchina. As a result, Côn Sơn Island was selected as the best place to establish a trading post, but due to a civil war in the home country, it had to be stopped. After 60 years, in 1749, a botanist named Poivre came to collect spices. His research report, along with missionary Thomas's report on the situation in Tonkin, stirred the interest of French politicians in Annam. At the time, the Anglo-French rivalry in India had resulted in a victory for the British side, so the French were looking to Indochina to find a new base. Coincidentally, in Annam, there was a conflict between the new and old Nguyễn clans, descendants of the Nguyễn clan. The old Nguyễn lord, Nguyễn Phúc Ánh, was defeated by the new Nguyễn lord, Nguyễn Văn Huệ, and fled to Saigon. He was further pursued by the new Nguyễn lord and fled to Phú Quốc Island. As the power of the old Nguyễn lord waned, he went to Thailand to seek assistance. However, Thailand was hesitant to start a war with the new Nguyễn lord. Meanwhile, Jesuit monks in Bangkok were trying to expand their missionary and political influence in Annam, hoping to achieve their goals by using Nguyễn Phúc Ánh.
The chief architect of this plan was Bishop Pigneau de Behaine.
According to records, Pigneau, who called himself a Catholic priest, had blue, sunken eyes and a face covered in beard, with a demeanor that was enough to recognize him as a cunning and ambitious man at first glance. In any case, it is true that he was not an ordinary figure. He came to Bangkok in 1765 as a priest for Eastern missions by recommendation of the French Church, but when a civil war broke out in Annam, he thought he should not miss the opportunity. He skillfully approached Nguyễn Phúc Ánh and said that it would be good to seek French assistance, recommending and urging him to employ French navy officer Manuel. When Nguyễn Phúc Ánh was first in Bangkok, diplomats from various countries, including Englishmen and Portuguese, also proposed to help with their own soldiers, but Pigneau opposed this and refused, urging him to seek assistance only from the French. Pigneau said:
The Saxon race speaks of benevolence and righteousness outwardly, but inwardly harbors deceit and practices cunning under the guise of morality. Their purpose is to exploit the land, and if you invite them into the country, there will surely be future troubles. If Your Majesty must obtain foreign aid, there will be none other than France. In general, the French practice the teachings of Christ's salvation. Among all the countries in the world, the French are the most respectful of humanity and love others as themselves. So, if Your Majesty does not need to seek foreign aid, that is one thing, but if you do, there is no better place than France.
<21>
In December 1784, he entrusted a national letter to Pigneau with full authority and accompanied the six-year-old Prince Cảnh to Pondicherry in India to request troops from the French Governor-General. With the Governor-General's introduction, he further went to Paris in June 1787 with the prince, had an audience with French Emperor Louis XVI, and presented Nguyễn's national letter. Finally, on November 28 of the same year, the Franco-Annamese Secret Treaty (法越密約) was concluded at the Palace of Versailles between him and French Foreign Minister Montmorin.
The contents of the treaty were that France would supply Annam with 1,200 infantry, 200 artillery, and 250 other personnel, totaling 1,650 soldiers, as well as 4 warships and several transport ships, in exchange for:
1. Annam would lease Đà Nẵng Island to France after the success and cede Côn Sơn Island to France.
2. France would be able to exercise all sovereignty over Côn Sơn Island.
3. France would have special privileges for trade and missionary work within Annam's territory.
However, the French Revolution broke out at the time, and Louis XVI was eventually beheaded, so the plan for Annam's relief was not carried out, and this secret treaty became a dead letter.
<22>
From the beginning, Pigneau could not let the grand plan he had in his heart pass by as a mere dream. He returned empty-handed to Pondicherry and again negotiated for troops with the governor-general, but failing to achieve his goal, he had no choice but to return to Saigon with two merchant ships carrying a few French officers, whom he recommended to Nguyễn's court.
Bishop Pigneau died of illness on October 9, 1799, in Quy Nhơn, but Nguyễn Phúc Ánh's army, with the support of the French volunteer corps, gradually succeeded, eventually bringing all of Annam under the control of the old Nguyễn clan. So, in August 1802, Nguyễn Phúc Ánh unified Annam and ascended the throne, calling himself Gia Long King. He was the first king of the current Annam dynasty, and in December of that year, he sent an envoy to the Qing Dynasty to be sealed as the King of Vietnam.

3

King Gia Long valued Bishop Pigneau, but after his death, he treated his followers very poorly. By the time Prince Cảnh died in 1810, he increasingly wanted to expel foreign missionaries.
Later, during the reigns of Phúc Chiểu (2nd King Minh Mạng) and Phúc Chiểu (3rd King Thiệu Trị), the policy toward French missionaries became even more harsh. At that time, France was relieved by the end of the Crimean War, and Emperor Napoleon III harbored great ambitions for Eastern invasion. In September 1856, he sent an envoy to Annam to demand the cession of Đà Nẵng Island and to seek protection for missionaries, but these demands were not fully met. Since some of the missionaries were Spanish, France and Spain sought to form an allied army. France mobilized troops dispatched to China, and Spain mobilized troops garrisoned in Manila. After fighting Annam for more than three years, in June 1862, Nguyễn Phúc Thì (4th King Tự Đức), lacking strength, requested peace, and on June 5 of the same month, the Saigon Treaty of Peace was concluded with Annam. According to this treaty, Annam gave France the three southern provinces (Biên Hòa, Gia Định, Định Tường) and Côn Sơn Island, opened Đà Nẵng and two other ports for France and Spain, and agreed to pay four million francs in war expenses.
<23>
Next, Cambodia, which belonged to both Thailand and Annam, recognized French suzerainty under the treaty of 1864. France further planned to extend its economic development into Annam and succeeded in ascending the Red River, obtaining commercial privileges from the Annam Governor-General and seeking to import salt, which was a national prohibition in Annam. King Tự Đức was furious at this and immediately demanded the departure of the French, leading to the resumption of hostilities between the two countries.
This war did not result in the victory that France had expected, but under the treaty concluded on March 15, 1874, France acquired suzerainty over Annam, guaranteed Annam's independence, and promised to dispatch naval and land forces whenever necessary. Annam, inevitably, ceded the French-occupied territories as compensation, paid war reparations, and recognized special privileges for domestic missionary work.
As a result of the above treaties, France placed white-style troops in Hanoi and Haiphong for the first time. However, when remnants of the Chinese Taiping rebels, led by Liu Yongfu, formed the Black Flag Army and demanded transit taxes on the French ascending the Red River, 450 additional marines were dispatched to occupy Hanoi. As a result, a clash occurred between the French army and the Black Flag Army, turning Tonkin into a battleground. In 1883, Admiral Courbet shifted the battle and captured the fort of Thuận An Bay. At this time, the King of Annam (6th King Hiệp Hòa) suddenly came out and requested peace, and on August 25 of the same year, a new protection treaty was concluded. The main points of its content were as follows:
1. Annam recognizes French protectorate rights and cannot communicate with other countries without the consent of the French supervisor stationed in Huế.
2. Annam will cede the territory of Bình Thuận to France.
3. Annam's customs duties will be placed under French administrative control.
In addition, France acquired various rights, including the stationing of troops along the Red River, the development of telegraph lines between Saigon and Hanoi, <24> and the accommodation of Annam warships.
However, the war in the Tonkin area did not end. Qing sent a large army to help Liu Yongfu, and the anti-foreign faction in Huế killed King Hiệp Hòa, installed Nguyễn Phúc Hạo (7th King Kiến Phúc), and massacred Christians. In June 1884, the French army was defeated by the Qing army while trying to occupy Lạng Sơn, and the Annam issue took a turn, creating conflict between Qing and France. France demanded a prize of 12 million francs, but Qing did not respond. Admiral Courbet led the fleet up the Min River, destroyed the Fujian fleet on August 23, declared a blockade of Taiwanese ports on October 23, and occupied Penghu Island on March 31 of the following year. In March 1885, Qing General Ping Zicai drove the French army out of Lạng Sơn, and French public opinion also opposed the expedition, leading to the replacement of the Ferry cabinet. In June, Li Hongzhang met with French Minister Patenôtre in Tianjin and concluded a peace agreement. France abandoned its demand for a prize, Qing ceded Lạng Sơn and Lao Cai to France, recognized French suzerainty over Annam, and agreed to border trade. The dispute between Qing and France was resolved. In 1887, France combined Cochinchina, Tonkin, and Cambodia and called it French Indochina, placing a single governor-general to統輯 (tongsip - oversee). The Kingdom of Vietnam became entirely有名無實 (yumyŏngmusil - nominal).

4

Recently, the ethnic movements of colored peoples in Asia and Africa are, in short, the failure of the colonial policies of European powers. To understand the Annam independence movement, one must study France's colonial policy in Indochina. French colonial policy in Algeria, Africa, is scientifically boasted as a model for the world. However, the policy in Annam is entirely the opposite. France promoted the 科擧文字의 學 (kwagŏ munja ŭi hak - study of literary examinations) in Vietnam. They made people immerse themselves in 八股文 (p’algumun - eight-legged essay), 詩賦 (sibu - poetry), 訓話 (hunhwa - admonition), 詞章 (sajang - rhetoric) and other studies with 一意專心 (iliyŏnshim - single-minded devotion) from the age of six. It seemed like they were greatly encouraging literature <25> and taking a cultural policy, but that was not the case. They gathered many beggars and held examinations once every three years, giving everyone the title of 鎭使 (chinsa - garrison commander). This was a kind of castration disguised as the promotion of literature. After some time, French authorities recognized that the harm of examination addiction had become too great, and in 1919, at the request of the Vietnamese people, they gradually abolished it. The European War was a major cause of this abolition of the examination system. When France was at war with Germany, it inevitably had to receive practical assistance from its colonial territories. A large number of Vietnamese people participated in the war, with 60,000 going to the front lines and 180,000 belonging to rear service. French authorities regretted that they could have obtained a better Vietnamese army if they had abolished the examination system sooner.
And what kind of national education was established in place of the abolished examination system? There was no physical education or singing in elementary schools, and the textbooks only praised the merits of France.
What about the laws? In 1917, the Vietnamese New Law was enacted for the first time, but it was only enforced in some parts of Tonkin (北圻), and most other areas were still governed by old barbaric laws. What is the content of this New Law? Article 2 of the Criminal Law states: "The classification of felonies is seven types: death penalty, life imprisonment, exile, imprisonment with hard labor, imprisonment, penal servitude, and deportation." Article 9 states: "Men sentenced to hard labor shall be subjected to the most difficult labor." This is mainly intended to put those engaged in national movements in the press to death, placing those who are difficult to execute under the law in a deadly situation. It is said that it is difficult to know the exact number of Vietnamese patriots who died under hard labor sentences, but it must be several thousand. Article 87 of the Criminal Procedure Law states: "The prison shall be managed by one French military officer, and one French police officer shall be appointed to supervise the prisoners." Annam people do not have any supervisory authority. Article 90 states: "If a prisoner dies, the relevant chief officer shall be reported," without saying anything about the cause of death to others. Article 40 states: "If a felony or misdemeanor has been committed and the perpetrator has died and cannot be punished, only restitution or compensation for the damage shall be made. The victim may claim this from the successor of the perpetrator." This law is most often used when French capitalists in Vietnam want to defraud Vietnamese people of their money. However, if a French person forces a Vietnamese person to die, Article 213 states: "A person who abuses power and brutally causes a person to commit suicide shall be subject to imprisonment for not less than six months and not more than five years and a fine of not less than 20 won and not more than 100 won." The crime is expiated with a mere six months of imprisonment and a fine of 20 won.
<26>
The execution for so-called sedition conspiracy is the most severe. Article 63 states: "Anyone who devises a scheme with the purpose of overthrowing the government..." Article 65 states: "Anyone who harbors a spy who has come from abroad for the purpose of causing sedition shall be sentenced to exile." Article 67 states: "If two or more people discuss the act, it shall be considered a conspiracy and sentenced to放遂 (bangsu - banishment)." Article 69 states: "The severe punishment for sedition conspiracy shall also include the confiscation of all family property." Each of the above provisions sets a trap in advance and makes the Vietnamese people fall into it. Ambiguous and indefinite phrases such as 設爲機謀 (sŏlwi kimou - devising a scheme) or 圖하다 (tohata - plotting) are extremely easy to fabricate false accusations. Even if no evidence is obtained, it is still a crime. Furthermore, there is nothing to criticize about the statement that "if two people discuss it, it is called a conspiracy." The severity of苛斂誅求 (garyŏmch’uch’u - excessive taxation and exaction) is also difficult to describe. High taxes are imposed uniformly on both the rich and the poor. Taxes are imposed on weddings, funerals, banquets, and livestock. Even if three or more people gather and talk, it is considered a meeting, and domestic travel of more than 50 li is not allowed. The Governor-General's largest income is from monopoly revenue, which is the result of forcing unappetizing monopoly liquor on each household and not prohibiting opium, which increases the number of addicts. By imposing high tariffs and adopting a policy of national isolation, they instill extreme fear in the people of coming into contact with foreign air. Vietnamese intellectuals call this French rule a policy of strangulation.

5

However, the Vietnamese people could not just weep and bear the oppression of France forever. The ideal of somehow breaking free from its shackles arose in the hearts of enlightened people. The first to rise up was Ch'o Nam-ja P'an Si-han, who, at the old age of 64, was being watched under the castle of Sunhwa.
When the final curtain of Annam's downfall was lowered under the protection treaty with France, he was a passionate young man of 19. He organized a loyal army of young aristocrats to somehow restore the Nguyễn Dynasty era and discussed 大事 (taesa - major events), but as French oppression grew, his father fell ill and his comrades were arrested, leading to a tragic situation where he would rather commit suicide. For a while, there was no other way but to蟄伏 (ch’ŏlbok - lie low).
<27>
After more than ten years, when P'an Si-han became a mature man in his thirties, he heard from his friend and comrade Tŭng Ch'ae-gon that there was a leader of the loyal army party named Nguyễn Thành in the South and wanted to meet him. When the two sides met, they discussed major events as if they had known each other for a long time, and Nguyễn Thành decided on the most important of the major events. The kings of the 5th Nguyễn Dynasty era had only held nominal positions, so the 5th was deposed, the 6th was killed after being deposed, the 7th was also killed, the 8th was deposed and confined in Algeria, and only the 9th was able to get by somehow, but the 10th was also in the hands of France. At this point, the only way for the loyal army party to rely on was to推載 (t’ujae - support) the direct descendant 畿外候疆𣏚 (kiŏihugangchŏl - Prince K'i-oe Hou-kang) of the 1st King Gia Long's heir Prince Kyeong and to carry out the major events.
At that time, in China, Kang Youwei's reformation and self-strengthening movement was taking place in Beijing, and Tang Caichang, Shi Jianru, and Sun Yat-sen's revolutionary movement was taking place in Jiangnan. In the Philippines, there was Li Xi-lu's independence movement, and in South Africa, there was Gold-Kruger's resistance against England. The spirit of national independence was gradually becoming stronger, and Vietnam must have been influenced by it as well.
In 1903, patriot P'an Si-han visited 彊𣏚殿下 (Kanghyangjeonha - Prince Kanghyang) in the palace of Sunhwa. At that time, Kanghyang was only 19 years old, but since the age of 13 or 14, he had harbored a great ambition for independence. While living in the innermost depths of the kingdom, he had been seeking contact with civilian patriots. Unable to contain his joy, he joined forces with P'an and decided to form the Vietnam National Party, taking the position of leader himself. The 30 years of hardship in the life of K'i-oe Hou-kang began from this.
Japan's victory in the Russo-Japanese War made the hearts of all Asians throb, and independence and revolutionary movements arose in China, India, Turkey, Egypt, and other countries. Annam also joined in. As a result, many countries were oppressed by independent countries, but many more called for liberation.
P'an Si-han, following the party's orders, escaped abroad and crossed over to Japan. In Tokyo, P'an associated with Chinese revolutionary patriots and realized that the prior problem for the restoration of the homeland was to educate and revolutionize the spirit of the people. Following P'an, many young patriots from Annam went to Japan. Sun Yat-sen, Huang Xing, Song Jiaoren, Tan Renfeng, Zhang Taiyan, and other patriots from China were also in exile in Japan, so Tokyo at that time felt like the source of Asian revolution.
侯Kang-hŭi also escaped from the strict surveillance of France and left Sunhwa Castle behind, seeking refuge in Japan. This was in 1906, when he was a young man of 22 years old. Seeing that the situation was not easy, France used the Franco-Japanese Treaty concluded in 1907 as a shield and demanded Japan to hand over the revolutionary patriots. The safety of many Annam patriots, including Kang-hŭi and P'an Si-han, was threatened, so they decided to escape from Japan.
侯Kang-hŭi, accompanied by two young comrades, miraculously arrived in Shanghai on a certain day in 1909. At this time, the ship was already surrounded by 60 French policemen. After barely disguising himself and escaping the tiger's mouth, <28> he either organized a restoration army with comrades in Guangdong or boldly disguised himself as a boatman and secretly entered Saigon, the enemy's den, which was trying to capture him. He stayed there, shocking the French government, for three months. He traveled through Europe and returned to Beijing, constantly working for the restoration of his homeland, with no peaceful days.

6

Later, when the European War broke out, France was in a hurry due to the war on the home front, and the rule of Annam naturally became疏隔 (sogyeok - neglected), but it was not negligent in the征發 (chŏngbal - conscription) of national funds and military supplies. However, the Annam National Party also had no intention of losing this opportunity. The cry for independence arose everywhere, and 폭동 (poktong - riots) occurred frequently. Finally, in August 1915, the French government detected the independence plot in Sunhwa, and the 불끗츤 (bulkkutchn - spark) fell on the head of the 10th 侯維新王 (Hu Weshinwang) (1908-1916). The king was deposed the following year and exiled as a single 17-year-old boy to the isolated island of Réunion in the South Indian Ocean. He has been幽居 (yugu - living in seclusion) there for the past 12 years, and although he is a 29-year-old young man, he is given only 500 francs per year, which is not enough to cover living expenses. Through the help of sympathetic people, he entered a middle school as a music teacher, but even with that, his income was insufficient, so he is said to play the violin on the street to receive the sympathy of passersby.
Despite the situation of the deposed king, the spirit of Annam's independence was brewing, and its spiritual unity became even more intense in Paris, the only place for Annam students to study abroad. The Annam Independence Party, with P'an Ju-jeong as the backbone, was also formed in Paris. After returning from France in 1923, he passed away the following October without achieving his great ambition. At this time, a huge amount of money was donated by the people, and a large temple was built in Saigon. And at the memorial memorial service held in the same place on February 2, tens of thousands of people participated, raising the spirit of independence.
In addition, since the European War, the 혁명운동 (hyeokmyeongundong - revolutionary movement) of 양옥손 (yangoksoneun), the Battle of 망가이평료 (manggaipyeongnyo), the襲擊事件 (seupgyeoksageon - attack incident) of manghongtae against the Governor-General, the폭거 (pokgeo - violence) of 5,000 farmers in 남정 (namjeong), and the 罷工 示威 (pagongsawi - strike demonstration) of 1,000 people at the saigon binh cong chang, shook the hearts of French officials.
From this year (1930), the spirit seems to have become even more ripe. From February to March, a rebellion broke out within the army, merging with revolutionary party members and making the government army unable to withstand it. The progress is listed below.
According to the plan previously discussed, Annam revolutionary party members infiltrated Hanoi City on the night of February 10 at 10 p.m., and carried out large-scale explosions at the city's court, police station, and military police隊 (tae - unit) at once. Surprised by the unexpected, French officials immediately stretched out an emergency line, but there was no gain. The soldiers guarding the 大鐵橋 (daech'eolgyo - Great Iron Bridge) in the same place, the 홍하 (Hongha - Red River) Also, many were 살육 (salyuk - massacred) by the revolutionary army, but the 혁軍 (hyeokgun - revolutionary army) The car was also captured by the military government, and the interception of intelligence and documents resulted in the severance of contact between comrades.
Due to this sudden explosion, the French were 경악낭패 (gyeong'aknangpae - astonished and embarrassed) and did not know what to do, and most of them fled far away to their homeland. The residents in the city and so on made a promise to wait for the artillery fire and evacuate to the city, and after 8 p.m., going out was absolutely forbidden, and so on, their nerves were extremely sensitive. One隊 (tae - unit) of the revolutionary army, 북 (buk - north) away from 야하내 (yahanae) 28 kilometers, assaulted the French garrison in 안패시 (anpaesi), causing many casualties. The 안남 (annam) Among the soldiers in the French army, those who 투 (tu - invest) in 혁軍 (hyeokgun - revolutionary army) There were a lot of casualties, and some ran away乘 (seung - ride) on 암야 (amya - dark night), and eventually 점령 (jeomryeong - occupied). On the French side, 루 (lu - Lou), including the captain. Daeman (daman), 대위 (daewi - captain) 4 people 중위 (jungwi - lieutenant), 소위 (sowi - second lieutenant) Each 1 person was 전사 (jeonsa - killed in action), and 루노텔 (runotel), 로란트 (roranteu) Two captains were seriously injured. The next day, 혁軍 (hyeokgun - revolutionary army) 乘勢 (seungse - taking advantage of the momentum), 안패시 (anpaesi) Facing the French army at a point 5 kilometers south, the French army commanded 마리붸 (maribwe) The captain, 럿커스 (reotkeoseu), 봐렌누 (bwarennu) Two captains are 극력 (geukryeok - extremely) Efforts to 防戰 (bangjeon - defense war).
혁명 (hyeokmyeong - revolution) 폭발 (pokbal - explosion) from 안패시 (anpaesi) Each other 連絡策動 (yeonrakchaektong - liaison and coordination) 1隊 (tae - unit) The Tokyo central 黑河 (heukha) Occupied the ferry terminal and immediately 迫 (bak - urgent) in 흥화 (heunghwa). The French army 산쳇슈 (sanchwesyu) Commander-in-chief 督 (dok - supervise) The garrison captain 로 (ro) - 렌 (ren) This was prevented, but 革軍 (hyeokgun - revolutionary army) 교묘히 (gyomyohi - skillfully) 장치 (jangchi - equipment) With 폭탄 (poktan - bombs) 파괴 (pagwae - destruction) As a result, the French army 遁走 (dunjju - retreat) with his family and 革軍 (hyeokgun - revolutionary army) This was 점령 (jeomryeong - occupied). Again 함락 (hamrak - capture) The 길노 (gilno - road) In 람다오 (ramdao) and In 비녕 (binyeong) 니르러 (nireureo - reaching) 토칵김 (tokakgim) 知事邸 (jisa邸 - Governor's residence) 襲 (seup - attack) in This 방화 (banghwa - arson) And 자동차 (dongcha - car) More than 10 cars were 파괴 (pagwae - destroyed), and 革命旗 (gomyeonggi - revolution flag) In 게양 (gyeyang - raised) in 근교 (geungyo - suburb) of 인민 (inmin - people) 革軍 (hyeokgun - revolutionary army) Those who 투 (tu - invest) in Unknown其數 (unknowngisu - unknown number)
<29>
From 후 (hu) - 드 (deu) - 시 (si) The 20th, the French army 쇼벳트 (syobetteu) 司令 (saryeong - commander) 1隊 (tae - unit) 혁軍 (hyeokgun - revolutionary army) The 不意 (bulyi - unexpected) を 襲 (seup - attack) in 交戰 (gyojeon - battle) During 시餘 (siyeo - remaining time) This was 퇴각식혓 (toegaksighyet - retreat). 革命軍 (gomyeonggun - revolution army) 大 (dae - large) 隊長 (daejang - chief of staff) 련각쓰 (ryeongakseu) (22 years old) This 戰 (jeon - battle) に 重傷 (jungryang - severe injuries) To 捕虜 (poryo - prisoner) To The 翌 (yuk - next) 21st に 死去 (saggeo - deceased) to.
February 16th, 夜河淸市 (yahacheongsi) 及其 (geupgi - and its) In 부근 (bugeun - vicinity) に 一大 (ilda - great) 폭발 (pokbal - explosion) が 있서 (isseo - exists) The French army 交戰 (gyojeon - battle) Several hours に 互 (go - each other) 혔 (hyeot - had to) The 翌 (yuk - next) 17th に 佛軍 (bulgun - French army) 側 (cheuk - side) from 비행기 (bihaenggi - plane) By 比 (bi - comparing)를 擊破식혓음 (gyeokpasighyet - broke) as 촌락 (chonrak - village)이 燒却 (soyag - incinerate) 되 (doe - becomes) や 無辜 (mogo - innocent) 한 민중 (minjung - people) 만 다수 (dasu - majority) 가 살육 (salyuk - massacre) を 당 (dang - right) The end and.
其外 (gigeuoe - in addition) 諒山 (nyangsan), 山西 (sanso), 南定 (namjeong) 등 여러 (deung yeoreo - etc. many) 곳 (got - place) 에서 폭동 (pokdong - riot) が 起 (gi - start) 하다 (hada - do) Had, 극히 (geukhi - extremely) 단편적 (danpyeonjeok - fragmentary)이고 連繫 (yeongye - connected) が 심히 (simhi - very) 薄 (bak - thin) 하 (ha - under) や 所期 (sogi - expectation) の 목적 (mokjeok - purpose) を 達 (dal - reach) 하다 (hada - do) Had.
20th に 至 (ji - to) る 安沛市 (Anpaesi) の 革命軍 (혁명군 - Revolutionary Army) 은 산간 (sangan - mountains) に 総 (chong - total) 退却 (taegak - retreat) に 봇 (bot - clothes) ぎ 밖 (bak - outside) に 総督 (sotdok - governor-general) 은 安沛市 (Anpaesi) の 戰跡 (jeonjeok - battle site) 巡閲 (sunyeol - tour) に 赴 (bu - go) き た が (ta ga - but) 爆弾 (poktan - bomb) を 投下 (togha - drop) ぎ た (ta - tea). 随員 (suwiwon - aide) 2, 3 명 (myeong - name) の 희생 (huisaeng - sacrifice) を 내 (nae - out) 열슬 (yeolseul - be fierce) 뿐 위험 (ppun wiheom - only danger) を 면하 (myeonha - avoid) 엿 (yeot - years).
佛軍 (bulgun - French army) では 今 (geum - now) 回 (hoe - times) 動亂 (dongnan - turmoil) の 首謀者 (sumoja - ringleader) を 체포 (chepo - arrest) 혹은 居所 (geoso - residence) を 探報 (tambo - report) する 者 (ja - person) の げ (ge - lower) 상금 (sanggeum - reward) 1,000 원 (won - won) を 주 겠다고 (ju getdago - give) 공고 (gonggo - announce) き た (ta - tea) 가 (ga - price) 한사람 (hansaram - one person) 도 밀고 (milgo - inform) する 者 (ja - person) が 엿 (yeot - years). 河內 (hane) 探偵局 (tamjeongguk - detective bureau) では 安南 (Annam) 国民党員 (gukmintangwon - Nationalist Party member) を 수색 (susaek - search) する (suru - do) 厳重 (eomjung - severe) に 하다 (hada - do) 等 (deung - etc.) 関係 (gwankye - relationship) あ 人民 (inmin - people) まで 拘引 (guin - detain) 投獄 (tougok - imprisonment) ぎ た (ta - tea) 者 (ja - person) 無 (mu - no) 려 1,000 여명 (yeomyeong - 1,000+ people) に 達 (dal - reach) び (bi - beauty) 옥내 (ognae - inside prison) 挾隘 (hyeopae - narrow) 로 노천 (nocheon - open air) に 蹲踞 (zoungeo - squat) する 惨状 (chamjong - horror) を 呈 (jeong - present) げた. 父子 (busa - father and son) 兄弟 (gyeongje - brothers) は 서로 (seoro - each other) 눈물 (nunmul - tears) 만 먹음 (meogeum - eat) 母姉 (mosae - mother, sister) 幼妹 (youmae - young girl) は 獄前 (ogjeon - prison front) に 只 (ji - only) 騒然 (soujeon - disturb) げ に  속수무책 (soksumuchaek - helpless) に 잇 (it - teeth).
尔来 (irye - henceforth) The time is 平靜 (pyeongjeong - quiet) ぎ 過ぎ (sugi - pass) 밖 (bak - outside) に 내부에 (naeibue - inside) 隠忍 (unin - patience) ぎ 機会 (gihoe - chance) 熟成 (sukseong - ripen) こと (koto - things) に The 4th 月 (geol - month) に びび (bibi - beauty) 各


---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제32호
발행일	1930년 09월 01일
기사제목	安南民族의 解放運動
필자	李學仲
기사형태	논설

安南民族의 解放運動
						李學仲
1
印度의 해방운동은 깐듸씨의 체포로 말미암아 일층 더 악화하야젓다. 이 印度문제는 英國에 잇서서 큰 癌痛과 가름으로 세계의 이목은 일제히 印度로 향하게 되고 印度문제는 장차 세계변혁의 한 機端으로 될 大問題로써 취급되여 잇다. 그러나 민족적 독립운동은 반듯이 印度에서만 熾盛하고 잇는 것은 아니니 土耳其와 뻬루샤에서도 이미 국민운동이 일어난 결과 훌늉한 新國家 건설의 목적을 달성하얏다. 그리고 阿富汗斯坦과 西藏에서도 또한 국민운동의 불이 붓고 잇다.印度의 東鄰인 소위 佛領印度支那(安南 又는 越南)란 나라에서도 지금 맹렬한 해방운동이 이러나 잇다. 佛領 印度支那를 綿密히 논하 노흐면 東京, 老榲(哀牢),束蒲塞(高棉), 安南 及 交趾支那의 五國으로 되야 잇는데 交趾支那가 순전히 佛蘭西의 식민지인 이외에는 전부 佛國의 보호국으로 되야잇다. 그 나라 사람들은 그것을 총괄하야 越南이라고 부르는데 그 총면적이 70만 평방 키로메-톨 인구 삼천만으로 算하는데 면적은 우리 朝鮮에 비하야 여간 크지 아니하나 인구는 얼마만치 못하다. 北隣의 中國과 西方의 印度에는 밋지 못하나 南隣의 遲羅에 비하면 퍽 크다.
종래 印度의 그늘에 가리여 세계의 眼目에 그리 빗치우지 못하고 佛國측이 또한 숨겨나려 왓슴으로 安南의 해방운동은 신문지상에도 잘 보도되지 아니하야섯다.＜20＞

2
佛國이 安南지방에 着眼한 것은 1664년에 창립된 佛蘭西 東印度會社가 葡萄牙, 西班牙, 英吉利 등의 諸國의 활동에 자극되야 1684년 샤뻬레란 사람을 東京(통킨)에 派遣한 것이 嚆矢이다.
그다음 2년 후에 또 붸레-란 자를 交趾支那에 派遣한 결과, 崑崙島를 商館設置의 최적지라고 하야 선정하얏스나 때맛츰 本國에 내란이 잇서 중지치 아니하면 아니되게 되엿다. 其後 60여년을 지나 1749년 植物學者 뾰아불 이란 자가 향료를 채취키 위하야 渡來 하얏는데 그 조사보고는 선교사 도-마의 東京事情 報告와 공히 佛蘭西 爲政家의 安南에 대한 食指를 動하게 한 것이다. 당시 印度에 잇서 英佛 양국의 爭覇戰은 遂히 英國측의 승리에 도라가고 말앗슴으로 佛蘭西는 이에 대한 新根據地를 구할여고 印度支那를 노리고 잇섯다. 맛츰 安南에는 洯氏의 후를 니은 新舊 兩阮氏의 닷툼이 잇서 舊阮王 阮福映은 新阮王 阮文惠의게 패하야 새이콘으로 도망가고 更히 新阮王에게 追跡되야 富國島로 다라낫다. 舊阮王의 세력이 점점 궁하야짐에 遂히 원조를 求키 위하야 遲羅로 갓스나 遲羅에서는 新阮王을 적으로 삼아 戰端을 開하기를 주저하고 잇는 중에 盤谷에 在한 제쓰잇트 派의 僧侶는 그 布敎와 공히 정치적 세력을 安南에 신장 식힐 것을 기도하고 阮福映을 이용하야 그 목적을 달할여고 하얏다.
그런데 그런 計畵의 首謨者는 아트란 僧正悲柔多巴離란 사람이엿섯다.
기록에 의하면 자칭 천주교 신부라고 하는 悲柔는 눈이 푸르고도 쑥 드러가고 滿面에 수염이 덥히여 한번 바라봄에 그 狡黠한 野心家인 것을 알기에 족한 풍모의 사나히엿다라고 하얏다. 하여튼 그 사람이 심상한 인물이 아니엿든 것은 사실이다. 그가 1765년 佛蘭西 교회의 推擧에 의하야 동양 선교의 신부로 되야 盤谷에 왓스나 때맛츰 安南에 내란이 잇슴에 機를 失하면 아니 되겟다고 하고 교묘히 阮福映에게 접근하야 말하되 佛蘭西의 원조를 求하는 것이 좃타고 하고 佛蘭西 海軍軍人 慢槐를 추천하야 등용하기를 權히얏다. 처음 阮福映이 盤谷에 잇슬때에 同地에 와＜21＞ 잇는 각국 외교관, 英國人 葡萄牙人 등도 역시 自國兵으로써 도와 주겟다는 것을 자조 提議 하얏스나 悲柔는 여기에 반대하야 사절하게 하고 혼자 佛蘭西人의 원조를 求하도록 하얏다. 悲柔 曰
삭손 人種은 외면으로 仁義를 말하면서 內로는 간계를 품고 도덕을 빙자하여 그 간사함을 行한다. 그들의 목적은 士地를 이용할여고 하는데 잇스니 이것을 請하야 나라에 드러오게 한면 반듯이 後患이 잇슬 것이다. 大王이 만일 外援을 어들 것 갓트면 佛國을 除한 외에는 업슬 것이다. 대개 佛國人은 基督의 救世의 가라침을 실행한다. 세계 諸國中 가장 人道를 존경하고 愛他如己하는 것은 佛國人 밧게  업슬 것이다. 그러니 大王이 外援을 求하지 안코도 될 것 갓트면 몰으지만 만일 求한다면 佛蘭西만 할 데가 업슬 것임니다.
하얏다. 이에 1784년 12월에 國書를 닥가 悲柔의게 全權을 막기고 6세의 왕자 景叡을 동반케 하야 印度의 뽄티세리-에 니르러 佛蘭西 總督에게 援兵을 請하고 同 總督의 소개로 更히 1787년 6월 巴里에 赴하야 왕자와 갓티 佛蘭西 皇帝 루이16세의게 謁見하고 阮王의 國書를 奉呈하야 遂히 同年 11월 28일 벨샤유 궁전에서 佛外相 몬모렌 伯과의 間에 佛安密約(法越密約)이 성립 되얏다.
該密約의 내용은 佛蘭西는 安南에 步兵 1200 抱病 200외에 250 합계 1650명의 兵員과 軍艦 4척 운송선 수 척을 공급하는 報酬로써
1, 安南은 成事後 沱瀑島를 佛國에 貸與하고 又 崑崙島를 佛國에 割讓할 事.
2, 佛蘭西는 崑崙島에 잇서 모든 주권을 행사함을 得함.
3, 佛蘭西는 安南領士 내에서 通商, 布敎의 특권을 持함.
등이다. 然而 당시 佛蘭西에 대혁명이 발발하야 루이16세는 遂히 단두대 상의 이슬이 되고 말앗슴으로 安南 救援의 議는 실행되지 못하고 이 밀약은 遂히 空文으로 도라가고 말앗다.＜22＞
처음부터 悲柔는 그 심중에 품고 잇는 大計畵를 일개의 夢事로 넉여 지나 보내고 말지는 못하게 되얏다. 그는 空手로 뽄티세리-에 도라와서 再次 同地 총독의게 援兵의 交涉를 하얏스나 그 목적을 達치 못하야 할 수 업시 商船 2척에 약간의 佛蘭西 將校를 싯고 사이콘에 도라와 阮王에게 薦하야 帷幕에 두게 하얏다.
悲柔僧正은 1799년 10월 9일 병을 어더 歸仁州에서 死去하얏스나 阮福映의 군대는 佛蘭西 의용대의 응원으로 착착 성공하야 遂히 安南의 땅 전부를 들어 舊阮王의 勢力之下에 歸服 식히도록 되얏다. 그래서 1802년 8월에 阮福映은 安南을 통일하고 왕위에 올나 嘉隆王이라고 칭하얏다. 그는 現 安南王朝의 제1세인데 그 해 12월에 사신을 淸朝에 보내여 越南國王에 封함을 바덧다.

3

嘉隆王은 悲柔僧正을 중용하얏스나 그 사후에 그 무리를 대우하기를 매우 薄하게 하야 1810년 왕자 景叡의 薨去함에 밋처는 점점 외국 선교사를 放逐할여고 하는 의사가 낫다.
其後 福皎(2세 明命王) 福皎(3세 紹治王)의 世에 일으러는 佛國 선교사에 대한 방침은 더욱 苛烈함을 極하야 섯다. 때에 佛蘭西는 크리미야 전쟁이 쉬여 歐羅巴도 겨우 무사하게 되얏슴으로 황제 나포레온 3세는 크게 동양 침략의 야망을 품고 遂히 1856년 9월에 使를 安南에 派하야 沱瀑島의 割讓을 요구하고 且 선교사의 보호를 求하얏스나 다 드러주지 아니 하얏다, 그런데 선교사 중에는 西班牙人도 잇섯슴으로 佛西 양국은 이에서 동맹군 조직을 기도하고 佛蘭西는 中國 派遣軍을 西班牙는 마니라 수비군을 각각 動하야 가지고 安南과 싸혼지 3년 有餘인 1862년 6월에 이르러 阮福塒(4세 嗣德王) 힘이 모자람에 和를 請하야 同月 5일부로 安南과의 간에 사이콘 講和條約이 체결되얏다. 이 조약에 의하야 安南은 佛國에 南邊 3주(邊如, 嘉定, 定祥)와 崑崙島를 주고 又 佛西 양국을 위하야 츠-로 外 2港을 개방하고 戰費 사백만 法을 지불하기로 되얏다.＜23＞
다음 遲羅, 安南 양국에 속하얏든 束蒲塞도 1864년의 조약으로 佛國의 종주권을 승인하얏다. 佛蘭西는 更히 경제적 발전의 손을 安南에 펴치기를 計畵하고 紅河의 溯上에 성공하야 安南 총독으로부터 통상의 특권을 得하야 安南의 國禁으로 되야 잇는 精鹽의 수입을 기도하야슴으로 이것을 본 嗣德王은 대노하야 즉시 當該 佛國人의 退去를 요구하얏스나 佛國측이 거절함에 미처는 양국 간에는 재차 戰端이 개시되얏다.
이 전쟁은 佛國측의 豫期하얏든 승리를 거두지는 못하얏스나 그러나 1874년 3월 15일에 체결된 조약에 의하야 佛國은 安南에 대한 종주권을 획득하고 安南의 독립을 보장하야 何時든지 필요한 동시에는 해륙군대의 파견을 약속하고 安南도 또한 할 수 업시 그 보수로써 佛軍의 占領諸地를 割讓하고 전비를 배상하고 국내 포교에 대한 특전을 승인하얏다.
이상과 가튼 조약으로 말미암아 佛國은 처음으로 河內海防등에 白人式의 군대를 置하얏스나 당연 中國 長髮賊의 殘軍 劉永福이 黑旗兵을 편성하고 紅河溯江 중의 佛人에 대하야 통과세를 요구 함에 니르러는 450의 해병을 增遣하야 河內를 점령케 하얏다. 그럼으로 佛軍과 黑旗軍과의 間에 충돌이 이러남에 東京은 激戰地로 되얏스나 1883년 海將 쿨-베-는 轉戰하야 順化灣의 砲台를 功陷케 하얏다. 이때에 安南王(6세 協和王)은 돌연히 나와 和를 請하야 同年 8월 25일 新保護條約이 성립 되얏는데 그 내용의 대요는 아래와 갓다.
1, 安南은 佛蘭西의 促護權을 승인하고 順化駐剳 佛國監督官의 동의를 엇지 아니하고는 타국과 교통치 못함.
2, 安南領 빈츠암을 佛蘭西에 割讓할 것.
3, 安南의 관세를 佛國의 行政權下에 置 할 것.
其外 佛蘭西는 紅河 연안에 잇서 군대주둔, 사이콘-河內間 道路의 電線의 開發 ＜24＞安南 軍艦의 收容 등의 諸權利를 획득하얏다.
그러나 東京 방면의 전쟁은 끗치지 아니 하얏다. 淸에서는 대병을 派하야 劉永福을 도와 順化의 攘夷派는 協和王을 죽이고 阮福昊(7세 建福王)를 立하고 기독교도를 殺戮 하얏다. 1884년 6월 佛軍이 諒山을 占領하려고 하다가 淸軍의게 격파되야 安南 문제는 一轉하야 淸佛의 갈등을 釀成하얏다. 佛國은 1200萬法의 상금을 요구하얏스나 淸國이 이에 응치 아니함으로 쿨-베-제독은 艦隊를 率하고 閩江을 溯上하야 8월 23일 福建艦隊를 격파하고 10월 23일 台灣諸港의 封鎖를 선언하고 翌年 3월 31일 澎湖島를 점령하얏다. 1885년 3월에 淸將 憑子材는 佛軍을 諒山으로부터 격퇴 식혀 佛本國의 여론이 또한 원정을 불가타고 하야 후리에- 내각이 更迭되고 6월에 李鴻章이 佛國公使 바드노-틀과 天津에서 회견하고 和議를 結하야 佛蘭西는 상금의 요구를 그만두고 淸國은 諒山, 老開의 兩地를 佛蘭西에 양도하고 안남에 대한 佛蘭西의 종주권을 인정하고 국경무역에 동의하기로 되야 淸佛 間의 繫爭問題는 落着 되얏다. 1887년에 이르러 佛蘭西는 交趾支那, 東京, 柬蒲塞를 합하야 佛領 印度支那라고 칭하고 한사람의 총독을 두어 統輯하기로 되야 越南國은 全然히 有名無實로 되고 말엇다.

4

近時 亞細亞, 亞弗利加에서 발흥하고 잇는 유색인 諸國의 민족운동은 간단히 말하면 歐羅巴 列國의 식민정책의 破綻이다. 安南獨立運動을 알고져 할진댄 맛츰 佛蘭西의 印度支那에 대한 統治政策을 연구해 보지 아니하면 아니된다 가튼 불란서의 식민정책이라도 亞弗利加의 알체리아에 잇서의 통치는 과학적으로 세계의 모범인 것을 자랑한다. 그러나 安南의 통치정책은 全然히 이와 반대이다. 佛國은 越南에 잇서 科擧文字의 學을 장려하얏다. 八股文, 詩賦, 訓話, 詞章등 이런 학문에 6세 이후 一意專心으로 몰두케 하얏다. 크게 문학을 장려하는 것 가티＜25＞ 들니여 문화정책을 취한 것 가트나 그러치도 안타. 乞人 따위들을 만히 모와 가지고 3년마다 1次式 試驗을 행하야 擧皆 鎭使의 명목을 주엇다. 이것은 문학 장려의 가면을 쓴 엇더한 去勢術이 엿든 것이다. 佛蘭西 당국도 얼마 후에는 과거 중독의 弊害가 너무 커진 것을 도라보고 1919년 越南國民의 청원에 의하야 점차 이것을 폐지하얏다. 이 과거제도폐지에 就하야는 歐洲大戰이 한가지 유력한 원인이 되얏섯다. 佛國이 獨逸과 전쟁을 수행함에 當하야는 엇져는 수 업시 식민지 諸領의 실제적 원조를 밧지 아니하면 아니 되엿다. 越南國民도 戰線에 나아간 者 6萬人, 後方勤務에 속하얏든 者 18萬人의 다수이엿섯다. 佛蘭西 당국도 좀더 빨니 과거제도를 폐하얏드라면 보다 더 우량한 越南의 군대를 어더썻스리라는 것을 후회 한 것이다.
그리고 폐지된 과거제도의 代로 엇던 국민 교육이 施設되얏느냐 하면 小學校에는 體操도 업고 唱歌도 업고 교과서란 것은 다만 佛蘭西의 공덕을 찬송한 것뿐이다.
다음 법률은 엇더케 된 것인가 하면 1917년에 처음으로 越南新法의 제정이 잇섯스나 이것은  다만 東京地方(北圻)의 일부에만 시행된 것이고 其外 대부분은 의연히 옛날부터의 蠻法에 빗추워 行하고 잇는 것이다. 그런데 이 新法의 내용은 如何한가 하면 刑法 제2조에는 『중죄의 구분은 사형, 無期苦役, 流罪, 有期苦役, 禁錮, 徒役, 追放의 七種』이라 하고 제9조에는 『무릇 苦役에 處케 된 남자는 最苦의 役을 受할 것으로 함』 이라고 定하야 잇다. 이것은 主로 하야 언론상으로 국민운동에 종사하는 者를 삼아 법률에 비추어 사형에 處키 難한 者를 반듯이 죽이고저 하야 死地에 두어 두는 것이다. 越南 志士로써 苦役刑으로 하야 죽은 者 자못 幾千人이 될는지 그 자세한 數字를 알기 어렵다고 한다. 刑事訴訟法 제87조에 『형무소는 佛蘭西 武官 1명이 이것을 관리하고 又 佛蘭西 경찰관 1명을 수인 감시에 任함』이라고 하야 安南人은 본시 감시권도 업는 것이다. 제90조에 『수인이 만일 사망하면 곳 관계 주임관에게＜26＞보고함』이라고 하야 한마듸도 그 사인을 他에 말치 못하는 것이다. 제40조에는 『무릇 중죄 혹은 경죄를 범하고 범인이 이미 사망하야 처벌치 못하게 된 동시에는 다만 그 손해의 還償 又는 賠償를 하게 한다. 즉 피해자는 이것을 該 범인의 後續者에게 청구함을 得함』 이라고 잇다. 이 법률은 越南에 잇는 佛國 자본가가 越南人의 금전을 騙取하고저 할 때에 가장 만히 이용된다. 그던데 佛人이 越人을 逼迫하야 죽게 한 동시에는 제213조에 『무릇 권력을 남용하야 殘暴하게 사람을 자살함에 이르게 한 者는 6개월 이상 5년 이하의 拘禁에 處하고 20원 이상 100원 이하의 벌금을 課함』 이라는 조문에 의하야 겨우 6개월의 ꊵ�금과 20원의 벌금으로써 죄가 속하게 되는 것이다.
소위 내란 음모죄에 대한 처형은 가장 가혹한 것으로써 제63조에 『무릇 機謀를 設爲하야 그 목적이 정부의 전복...』 제65조에 『무릇 내란을 이르킬 목적으로 밧그로부터 드러 온 間諜을 自家에 藏匱식힌 者는 流刑에 處함』 제67에 『2인 이상이 그 行爲를 相議하면 이것을 음모로 하야 放遂의 刑에 처함』 제69조에 『내란음모에 관한 중벌은 다시 家産 전부를 몰수함』 이라고 하얏다. 이상의 조문은 어느 것이나 미리 陷穽을 設하고 越南人民을 그 가운대 빠지게 한 것이 아님이 업다. 대개 設爲機謀 하든가 음모를 圖하다는 등 曖昧不定한 문구는 극히 誣言을 구성하기 쉽다. 하등의 근거될 證憑을 엇지 못한 동시에라도 곳 죄가 되는 것이고 더구나 『2인이 相議하면 이것을 음모라고 云한』다 함에 일으러는 자못 評言할 나위가 업는 것이다. 苛斂誅求의 심함도 또한 형언키 難하야 부자던 빈자던 일률로 高稅를 부과한다. 결혼식에 과세, 장례에 과세, 연회에 과세, 가축류에 과세, 3인 이상이 모여 이약이를 하야도 집회라고 看做되고 50리 이상은 국내의 여행이라도 아니 된다. 총독부 최다의 수입은 전매수입인데 이것은 맛업는 專賣酒를 各戶에 억지로 팔고 아편을 禁치 아니함으로 *者가 만히 증가되는 결과이다. 高率의 관세를 課하야 鎖國主義를 取하야 국민으로 하야금 외국의 공기에 觸하는 것을 극도로 공포한다. 越南의 식자들은 이런 佛國의 통치를 絞殺政策이라고 불은다.

5

그런데 越南國民도 어늬 때까지던지 울며 게자 먹기로 佛國의 압박을 울며 밧고 잇슬 것은 아니여섯다. 엇더케 하든지 그 羈絆으로부터 버서 나겟다는 이상이 선각자의 가슴속에 떠오른 덧이다. 그리 하야 第1着으로 奮起한 것이 금년 64세의 노령으로써 順化城下에 감시되고 잇는 巢南子潘是漢氏이다.
佛國과의 보호조약에 의하야 安南 망국의 最後幕이 나리여진 때 氏는 열혈이 넘치는 19세의 청년이여섯다. 엇더케 하든지 阮朝時代에 회복 식히겟다고 士族靑年의 勤王隊를 조직하고 大事를 講하얏스나 佛國의 압박이 점점 심하야저서 부친은 重患에 빠지고 동지는 체포되야 자살이라도 하겟다는 悲境에 이르러 얼마 동안은 蟄伏해 잇슬 도리 밧게는 업섯다.＜27＞其後 십여 星霜을 지나 潘是漢氏가 30여세의 장년이 되엿슬 때 學友요 동지인 鄧蔡坤으로부터 南方에 阮誠이란 勤王黨 首領이 잇다는 것을 듯고 同氏를 면회코저 동행하얏다. 그리하야 쌍방이 서로 만남에 一見이 如舊로 대사를 논하는 중에 阮誠은 大事中의 大事을 타개해 내인 것이다. 그것은 阮朝 제5세 以隆 歷代의 왕은 다만 虛位를 가지고 나려온데 불과하니 5세는 폐위되고 6세는 폐왕되자 독살되고 7세도 독살, 8세는 폐왕의 後 알체리야에 幽閉되고 9세 뿐만은 엇전 셈인지 무난하얏스나 10세는 또한 佛國의 掌中에 들어 잇다. 此際에 勤王黨이 依賴할 데는 다만 1세 嘉隆王의 嫡嗣東宮 景叡王의 直系 畿外候疆𣏚를 推載하야 大事를 결행하는 것이 잇슬 뿐이라는 것이다.
당시 中國에는 北京에서 康有爲의 變法自疆運動이 잇고 江南에서는 唐才常史堅如, 孫文諸氏의 혁명운동이 잇섯다. 그리고 比律賓에 잇서 리시-루의 독립운동, 南阿에 잇서 굴-케-루 등의 對英反抗等, 민족적 독립의 기운이 점차 농후하야 졋슴으로 越南도 또한 스스로 그 영향을 受하얏슴이 틀님업다.
1903년에 志士 潘是漢氏는 順化의 궁전에 彊𣏚殿下를 訪謁하얏다. 당시 彊𣏚는 年이 아직 19세에 지나지 못하얏스나 13,4세 경부터 독립의 大志를 抱하고 九重深處의 왕국 속에서 居하면서도 民間志士와의 연락을 바라고 잇던 次임으로 깃붐을 이기지 못하야 곳 潘氏와 提携하야 越南國民黨을 결성하기로 되야 스사로 그 수령인 지위에 就하얏스니 畿外候疆의 30년의 고난생활은 이에서 비롯한 것이다.
日露戰爭에 잇서 日本의 승리는 全 亞細亞의 심장을 고동 식혀서 中國, 印度, 土耳其, 埃及等 諸國에서 독립운동과 혁명운동이 이러낫스니 安南도 거기에 한 목 끼이게 되얏다. 그로 말미암아 독립국이 압박을 밧게도 되얏스나 그러나 이상과 가티 해방을 부르짓게 된 나라이 만타.
潘是漢氏는 黨命을 奉하야 국외로 탈출하야 漂然히 日本으로 건너갓다. 潘氏는 東京에 잇서 中國革命의 지사들고 交遊하야 가는 가운데 故國光復의 선결문제가 교육을 식혀 국민의 정신부터 혁명하는데 잇다는 것을 깨닷게 된 것이다. 潘氏의 뒤를 니어 安南으로부터 만흔 청년지사가 渡日 하얏다. 中國의 孫文, 黃興, 宋敎仁, 譚人鳳, 章太炎 등의 자사도 日本에 망명중이엿슴으로 당시의 東京은 亞細亞 革命의 策源地인 感이 잇섯다.
彊𣏚候도 또한 佛國의 嚴戒를 버서나 順化城을 뒤로 두고 도망하야 日本에 몸을 부첫스니 때는 1906년 그가 나이 22세인 청년시대이엿섯다. 사태가 용이치 안타고 본 佛國은 1907년에 체결되는 日佛條約을 방패로 삼아 日本에 대하야 革命志士의 인도를 요구함에 니르러 彊𣏚候, 潘是漢氏를 비롯하야 만흔 安南志士의 신변은 위급을 告하게 되얏슴으로 遂히 일본을 탈출하기로 되얏다.
彊𣏚候가 동지의 청년 2인을 동반하고 천신만고로 上海에 遁着하기는 1909년의 엇던 날이엿다. 이때에 배(船)는 발서 60명의 佛國 경관의게 포위되야 잇슴으로 겨우 변장하고 虎口를 버서난 그는＜28＞혹은 廣東에서 동지와 가티 광복군을 조직하고 혹은 대담하게도 船夫로 몸을 變하야 그를 잡으려고 하는 적의 소굴인 塞貢에 몰으게 드러가 佛蘭西 政廳을 震駭하면서 留하기를 3개월, 혹은 그곳에서 뛰여 歐洲를 돌아 다시 北京에 오는 等 한뜻으로 고국광복을 위하야 寧日이 업섯던 것이다.

6

其後 歐洲大戰이 起함에 佛國은 本國方面에 잇서 전쟁이 급함으로 安南 통치는 자연히 疏隔하게 되얏스나 다만 국대와 군비의 징발에는 게을니 아니하얏다. 그런데 일방의 安南國民黨도 또한 이런 호기를 失할 것은 아니엿섯다. 독립을 부르짓는 소리가 도처에서 이러남과 공히 폭동이 頻하야 드듸여 1915년 8월 順化에서 독립 음모는 佛國政府의 探知한 바 되야 그 불끗츤 제10세 維新王(1908년 1916년간)의 머리 위에 나려저 왕은 翌年에 폐위 되야 17세의 소년 한 몸으로써 단신으로 南印度洋의 孤島 레유우에 유배되야 爾來幽居 12년의 星霜을 자나 同年 29세의 청년인데 年額 僅히 500法 밧게 아니 줌으로 생활비가 부족되야 살님이 여간 궁하지 안타. 동정하는 인사의 힘으로써 어느 중학생의 음악교사로 드러 갓스나 그래도 수입 부족이 되야 街頭에서 빠이오린을 타서 행인의 동정을 밧는다 한다.
安南獨立의 기운은 폐왕의 신상이 그러함에도 불구하고 釀成되야 安南 學生의 유일의 유학지인 巴里에서 그 정신적 결합이 일층 왕성하게 되얏다. 潘周楨氏를 中堅으로 한 安南獨立黨이 결성된 것도 巴里에 잇서서이다. 氏는 1923년 佛國으로부터 귀국한 후 翌年 10월에 壯志를 達치 못하고 遂히 逝去함에 이때에 국민으로부터 거액의 금전이 醵出되야 사이콘에 크다란 廟가 건립 되얏다. 그리고 同年 2월2일 同地에서 개최된 기념추도회에는 수만의 군중이 참가하야 독립의 기세를 올님에 이르럿다.
또 安南에는 歐洲大戰 이래, 梁玉損의 혁명운동과 芒街平遼의 役과 茫鴻泰의 총독에 한 襲擊사건과 南定 농민 五千의 폭거와 塞貢兵工廠 千人의 罷工 示威 等이 속출하야 佛國官憲의 심장을 서늘케 하얏다.
금년(1930년)에 드러서부터는 그 기운이 일층 숙성하야진 것 갓다. 2월로 3월에 걸쳐 군대내에 반란이 起하야 혁명당원과 병합하야 관군를 못견듸게 하얏스니 지금 그 경과를 열거하면 아래와 갓다.
安南革命黨員은 미리 의논하얏든 計畵에 의하야 2월 10일 밤 10시 河內市에 잠입하야 同市 裁判所, 警察署 憲兵隊에 니르러 일시에 대폭파를 行하얏다. 不意에 놀난 佛國官憲은 즉시 非常線을 느리웟스나 하등의 소득이 업섯다. 同地 紅河에 가설한 토-메-루大鐵橋의 수비병도 또한 동시에 혁명군의게 殺戮한 배 되얏스나 革軍 자동차가 亦官軍의게 포획하배 되야 첩보, 문서를 압수됨으로 말미암아 동지와의 사이에 연락이 단절되야 頓挫된 感이 잇셧다.
이 돌연 폭발로 말미암아 佛蘭西人은 警愕狼狽하야 措處할 바를 아지 못하고 곳 멀니 난을 피하야 고국으로 다라난 者 대다수이오, 市中 在留民 等은 放砲를 기다려 城內에 피난할 약속을 하고 밤은 오후 8시＜29＞ 이후에는 외출을 절대 禁하는 等 극도로 신경이 예민하얏졋다. 혁명군의 1隊는 夜河內를 距하기 북으로 28키로메틀인 安沛市에 佛國 주둔군을 襲하야 다수의 희생을 내이여섯는데 佛軍 중의 安南 병사가 革軍에 投하는 者 속출하야 或 暗夜를 乘하야 도주하는 者도 잇고 하야 遂히 此를 점령하얏다. 佛軍 측에는 루.다만 대장을 비롯하야 대위 4명 中尉, 小尉 각1명이 전사하고 루노-텔, 로란트 兩 大尉는 중상을 당하얏다. 익일 革軍은 乘勢하야 安沛市 남방 5키로메틀의 지점에서 佛軍과 대치하얏는데 佛軍은 마리붸 대장, 럿커스, 봐렌누 兩大尉를 지휘하야 極力으로 防戰에 노력하얏다.
安沛市에서 爆發된 혁명은 互相 連絡策動하야 1隊는 東京 중부 黑河의 渡船場을 점령하고 즉시 興化에 迫하얏다. 佛軍의 산쳇슈- 司令官은 守備隊長 로-렌을 督하야 能히 이것을 막엇스나 革軍은 교묘히 폭탄을 장치하야 파괴하얏슴으로 佛軍은 가족을 데리고 遁走하고 革軍은 此를 점령하얏다. 다시 그 길노 람다오를 함락식히고 比寗에 니르러 토칵김 知事邸를 襲하야 此에 방화하고 자동차 10여대를 파괴하고 革命旗를 게양함에 근교의 인민이 革軍에 投하는 者 不知其數이엿섯다,
후-드-시에서는 2월 20일 佛軍 쇼벳트 司令 1隊로써 革軍의 不意를 襲하야 交戰時餘에 此를 퇴각식혓다. 革命軍大 隊長 련각쓰-(22세)는 此戰에 重傷하야 捕虜되야 翌 21일에 死去 하엿다.
2월 16일, 夜河淸市 及其 부근에 一大 폭발이 잇서 佛軍과의 교전 수시간에 互하얏섯는데 翌 17일에 일으러 佛軍 측에서는 비행기로써 比를 擊破식혓슴으로 촌락이 燒却되야 無辜한 민중만 다수가 살육을 當하고 말앗다.
其外 諒山, 山西, 南定 等 여러 곳에서 폭동이 起하얏스나 극히 단편적이고 連繫가 심히 薄하야 所期의 목적을 達치 못하얏섯다.
20일에 至하야서는 安沛市의 革命軍은 산간으로 총퇴각하얏슴에 밧기에 총독은 安沛市의 戰跡巡閱에 赴하얏섯는데 그때에 폭탄을 투하하얏다. 그러나 隨員 2,3명의 희생을 내이엿슬뿐으로 위험을 면하야섯다.
佛軍에서는 今回 動亂의 首謨者를 체포 혹은 居所를 探報하는 者의게는 상금 1,000원을 주겟다고 공고 하얏스나 한사람도 밀고하는 者가 업섯섯다. 河內 探偵局 에서는 安南國民黨員을 수색하기를 엄중히 하야 하등 관계업는 인민까지 拘引 투옥한 者 무려 1,000여명에 達하야 옥내 挾隘로 노천에 蹲踞하는 참상을 呈하얏다. 父子兄弟는 서로 눈물만 먹음고 母姉幼妹는 獄前에 다다라 다만 騷然하게 속수무책으로 잇섯다.
爾來 얼마 동안은 平靜히 지나 왓스나 내부에 隱忍하야 기회가 숙성함을 기다린 것인데 4월에 至하야 다시 각지에 동란이 일어 佛蘭西官憲 측에서도 수습하기 不能한 상태로 악화하고 잇다. 지나간 4월 10일 朝에 河內市中 80여개소의 地中에 대폭탄을 埋置 하고 일거에 도시 점령을 기도 하얏스나 事 未然에 발각되고 말앗다. 동시에 官憲은 의심나는 민가는 물론 시중 전부에 互하야 대 수사를 行하얏섯는데 의외에도 수 십 개소로부터 피스틀, 霰彈, 탄약, ¸°관총 等 무수히 藏匿된 것을 발견하얏다. 그리고 최근 즉 6월 27일 巴里 電報에 據할 것 갓트면 佛國 의회에서 安南問題가 登程되야 신구파 의원간에 격렬한 논쟁이 잇다가 필경 45인의 差로 管轄委員 설치안이 否決되얏다고 한다. 이리하야 佛國의 安南問題는 英國 對 印度 米國 對 比律賓 問題와 공히 세계의＜30＞주목을 끄을고 잇다.

7

去 3월 24일, 오전 河內上審院에서 南定共産黨 사건의 재판이 잇섯슬 때 顧問官 포-레스氏를 主席判事로 하야 安南獨立運動에 관한 조직의 보고 발표가 잇섯다.
佛國의 印度支那 통치에 반대하는 反對黨은 國家, 君主, 共和, 社會, 共産 等 各 主義로 분파되야 잇스나 이 여러 黨이 越南으로 하야금 佛國의 통치로부터 이탈케 하야 新政體樹立을 기도하는데 잇서서는 완전히 一致協力하고 잇다.
각 黨의 업적을 皮相으로부터 관철하면 尋常한 聯合協調會 혹은 합법적 罷業會와 가트나 이면으로부터 보면 심히 전율할 내용을 가지고 잇다는 旨를 발표하얏다.
이제 佛國官邊의 조사에 의한 혁명 각 파는 大體 左의 5당으로 分하야 잇다.

1. 革命黨(畿外候彊𣏚에 屬한 者)
이 黨은 국외에 탈출하야 잇는 뭇 혁명자의 단체로서 당 본부를 廣東에 置하고 孫文의 三民主義를 준거하는데 국가와 계급과를 중히 역이고 당원은 다 越南에 1個의 自治政府를 건설하고 君主 혹은 民主立憲政體를 조직하야 佛國의 통치로부터 독립할여고 하는 것이다.

2. 越南國民黨(阮泰黨의 創立한 것으로써 彊𣏚와 깁흔 關係를 가지고 잇다.)
이 黨은 1926년의 조직인데 1929년 바잔氏 암살된 후 당내에 대 타격을 受하야 殘部黨員의 다수는 해를 입지 아니한 다른 急迫黨에 가입하얏다. 이 黨員에는 순수적 민주주의에 又 일부에는 과격주의의 兩派가 잇다.

3. 越南靑年革命同志會
이 黨은 민주주의의 경향이 잇스나 공산주의자가 우세이다. 총본부를 廣東에 두고 同所에 정치학교를 設하야 다수의 安南人으로 정치경제학을 연구케 하고 각 단체 동지간에 혁명운동의 조직방법, 전술 等을 宣傳廣布하고 잇다. 黨員으로서 黃浦軍官學校에 재학중인 者 적지 안타. 1929년 5월 1일에 香港에서 靑年同志會 총회를 開하야섯는데 성적이 그리 좃치 못하얏다.

4. 東洋共産黨
아직 제3 인테내쇼낼에 가입은 아니 하얏스나 공산의 성질을 띈 것은 명백하다. 越南靑年同志會와 相異한 점은 前者는 입당자의 자격을 관대히 하지만 東洋共産黨은 당규 조례를 엄히 하야 절대 복종케 한다. 此를 犯하는 者는 조사위원회에 附하야 대개 死刑에 처한다. 黨員을 正黨員. 準黨員의 두 가지로 分하얏다.

5. 越南共産黨
1929년 5월 1일 東洋共産黨 總本部會議의 직후 새로히 黨內 조직을 변경하야 黨員 中으로부터 제5당을 조직하야 越南共産黨이라고 稱하얏다. 공산당 일체의 문서와 각종 그 회의 인쇄물에는 斧와 鎌의 票를 附하는 것은 一手오 각 農民聯合會는 다 가티 별(星)의 徽章을 사용하고 잇다.
右 발표와 가티 安南獨立運動者는 5派로 分하야 잇는데 更히 此를 요약하야 보면 제1이 安南王을 밧드러 立憲君主國으로 할여는 것, 제2가 土耳其와 가티 대통령을 선거하야 立憲民主國으로 할여는 것, 제3이 쏘비에트. 러시아와 가티 共産主義의 국가로 할여는 것이다. 그 중 제1에 속한 越南國民黨은 새로히 主義政綱을 발표하고 王道革命을 표방하야 그 목표에 邁進하고 잇다.
吾人은 印度獨立運動의 진전에 주목함과 共히 印度의 그늘에 잇서 意外의 숙성을 보이고 잇는 安南獨立運動도 주의해 보지 아니하면 아니 될 것을 말하야 두고 이에 擱筆한다.＜31＞
＜20-31＞