잡지명: 別乾坤 第32號
발행일: 1930년 09월 01일
기사제목: 獄中滿悤 (Prison News)
기사형태: 소식 (News)

Prison News
Yu Chin-hui

Yu Chin-hui, who received a four-year heavy sentence for the first communist party incident and has since been living behind bars. Contrary to our imagination outside, he is said to be very healthy and, like an old fisherman (楚江漁父) by the Ch'o River, he weaves nets every day. Recently, he became a general worker at the net factory. It is said that being a general worker provides good meals, the work is easy, and he supervises several prisoners in the factory, so prison inmates consider it a more favorable position than a bank executive in outside society (榮役). In the midst of this, he was elected not by the prison management (官選) but by a public election (公選) of general political prisoners and ideological offenders within the factory, so the guards and prisoners nicknamed him "Chairman of the Prison Soviet Net Department." He read a lot of economics books when he was awaiting trial, but recently he has been reading a lot of natural science, especially focusing on astronomy and geography. He wears glasses better than when he was outside, so the guards gave him the title "Mr. Megane." His release is expected around mid-February next year.

Kang Taryŏng

He received a long-term sentence of six years as the secretary-general (總祕書) in the same party incident. Even if six months of his detention before the trial are included, he will barely see the bright sun of this world in September of the year after next (Shōwa 7, 1932). He suffered from a nerve disease since his detention before the trial, and it became more severe after the sentence. At one point, he even developed mental abnormalities, and he would often laugh while talking to someone and say, "There is another world different from this human world (別有天地非人間)." He also said various absurd things, such as that there was a ghost in his head and he had to catch it, so he was admitted to the hospital ward for treatment for a while. However, since it was ineffective, the prison decided to suspend the execution and notified his family, so his wife even came to Seoul (上京). Fortunately or unfortunately, his condition unexpectedly improved, so the suspension was canceled, and he remained in prison. He seems a little better than before, but it seems difficult for him to resume his previous activities even if he is released unless he receives considerable treatment. His work is still net weaving, and he reads Chinese classics (漢文) and Buddhist and Christian books.

Kim Yongsuk

He is quick-witted and clever in everything when he is outside, so he is also doing well in prison life with his quick senses. He is always famous for playing with the guards well, but even when he meets fellow prisoners, he always salutes them instead of just using eye gestures or lip movements like others. Still, somehow, he does it so cleverly that he has never been caught by the guards. His work is also net weaving, and he reads more natural science than economics or political science. His face is not much different from when he was outside, but all his front teeth have fallen out, and he has new gold teeth (金齒), which is a completely different matter. If anyone wants to know his release date, they only need to remember the six letters, that is, June 6, 1931. Wu Pong'un (禹鳳雲), who has been diligent in bringing clothes and other supplies for him since he was imprisoned, will remember it better than anyone else. <122>

Kim Chaebong

Because he received a six-year sentence, he will see the spring of this world again in April of the year after next (Shōwa 7, 1932). He goes to the factory every day and does the hard work (網絲), but his old-fashioned love of Chinese studies (舊風) remains, and he hums as he composes Chinese poems (漢詩). It is a pity that his poems have not yet been published, but it is said that there are many masterpieces. His body is fine, but his emotions are so sensitive that he feels very disappointed if his relatives and friends outside do not send him a letter or a book, and sometimes he gets excited and scolds alone, and then he becomes sad. It seems that even a letter of condolence (一字慰問) from those who are close to him, as well as other comrades, would be very comforting to him.

Yi Chuntae

He is usually taciturn, and he is the same in prison, so he rarely talks to anyone. He doesn't read much either, and his work is still net weaving. He has a five-year sentence, and after counting six months of his detention before trial and receiving an amnesty (賜), his release date seems to be around mid-May next year.

Chin Pyŏnggi

He went to the wood factory (木工場) from the beginning of his imprisonment and became a cleaner (掃除夫), so he is said to be the easiest to live in prison among those imprisoned in the case. Therefore, he is healthy, so he will spend his four-year sentence safely.

Pak Hyŏngbyŏng

He received a four-year sentence and is in Pyongyang Prison. If one and a half years of his detention before trial are deducted, he will be released around November 1932. Originally, he has a smooth and gentle personality, so he endures hard labor well and is healthy. He reads an English book called "History of World Culture (世界文化史大系)" carefully without missing a single word since his detention before the trial, and he works at the weaving/gas plant (織造=가스리 공장).

Yi Pyŏngŭi

He is said to be released around October of the same year. His body is not healthy, and he is suffering from a swelling in his neck in this heat, and his lungs are also weak, so he is taking medicine. He is absorbed in the Study of Suun's Mind Method (水雲 心法講義) of Ch'ŏndogyo and the history of Western philosophy (西洋哲學史), and his work is the same as Mr. Pak's.

Sŏ T'aesŏk

His health is good, he is studying Russian (露語), and he will be released in October next year.

Yi Yŏng

He will be out in July next year, his body is healthier than when he was outside, he doesn't read much, and his work is also weaving (織造).

Chŏn Il

He will barely be out in Shōwa 10 (1935), and he is living comfortably and safely because he has previous prison experience. His body is healthy, and he is studying Russian (露語).

Hŏ Hŏn

His body is very healthy, he always eats well from the supplies (差入), and he is worried about the New Korea Society (新幹會) even in prison. At the same time, he is convening a general meeting to ask to be relieved of his responsibilities, asking people who visit him or in writing, etc.

Kim Chun'yŏn

His verdict is not far off, so he cannot receive long books and reads short books such as "Household Daily (家庭每日)". His body is much healthier than last year, and while other people interrupt the private food supplies (私食) they receive due to illness or other taste issues for 10 or 20 days, he eats every day without fail. In addition, Hong Myŏnghŭi (洪命熹), Cho Pyŏngok (趙炳玉), Yi Wŏnhyŏk (李源赫), and Yi Kwan'yong (李灌鎔) are all said to be in good health. <123>

Named Entities

兪鎭熙	Yu Chin-hui
楚江漁父	Ch'o River Fisherman
姜達永	Kang Taryŏng
金若水	Kim Yongsuk
禹鳳雲	Wu Pong'un
金在鳳	Kim Chaebong
李準泰	Yi Chuntae
陳秉基	Chin Pyŏnggi
朴衡秉	Pak Hyŏngbyŏng
平壤監獄	P'yŏngyang kamok (P'yŏngyang Prison)
李丙儀	Yi Pyŏngŭi
徐邰錫	Sŏ T'aesŏk
李英	Yi Yŏng
全一	Chŏn Il
許憲	Hŏ Hŏn
金俊淵	Kim Chun'yŏn
洪命熹	Hong Myŏnghŭi
趙炳玉	Cho Pyŏngok
李源赫	Yi Wŏnhyŏk
李灌鎔	Yi Kwan'yong



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제32호
발행일	1930년 09월 01일
기사제목	獄中滿悤
기사형태	소식

獄中滿悤
兪鎭熙
第一次 공산당 사건으로 4箇年 重刑을 밧고 爾來 鐵窓生活을 하는 兪鎭熙. 박게 잇는 우리의 상상 이외로 신체가 매우 건강하야 楚江漁父 모양으로 날마다 그물(網)만 뜨더니, 요새에는 또 그 그물공장의 잡역이 되엿다 한다. 잡역은 밥도 잘 어더 먹거니와 일도 편하고 그 공장내의 여러 죄수를 감독하다 십히 하는 복역인 까닭에 감옥 죄수로서는 박게 사회에서 은행회사 중역보다 더 조케 녁이는 榮役이다. 그런 중에 그는 감옥 관리의 選出 卽 官選이 안이요 그 공장내 일반 정치범 및 사상범인의 公選에 의하야 피선되엿슴으로 일반 간수와 죄수들은 그를 별명하야 曰 감옥 쏘빼트 그물部 위원장이라고 한단다. 독서는 未決 때에는 經濟學書類를 만히 읽더니, 근래에는 자연과학을 만히 읽는 중, 특히 天文地理學 가튼 것에 치중한다고 하고 안경은 박게 잇슬 때보다도 더 잘 써서 간수들이 『메가네』선생이라고 稱號를 지엿다 한다. 滿期는 명년 2월 중순경.

姜達永
역시 其黨 사건에 總祕書로 6箇年 장기형을 바든 그는 미결기 6箇月 통산을 하야도 來來明年(昭和7년)9월에야 겨우 이 세상의 광명한 일월을 보게 된다. 그는 未決時부터 신경병으로 신음하다가 旣決에는 더욱 심하게 되야 一時에는 정신에 이상까지 생겨서 누구와 말을 하다가는 픽 웃고는 「別有天地非人間」이란 소리를 잘 하며 또 자기 머리 속에는 귀신이 잇는데 그 귀신을 잡아내야만 되겟다는 等, 여러 가지의 황당한 소리를 함으로 病監에 드러가 한동안 치료를 박게 되엿섯다. 그러나 역시 효과가 업슴으로 감옥에서도 최후 집행정지를 하기로 결정하고 그의 가족에게 통지하야 부인이 상경까지 하엿더니 幸인지 불행인지 그의 병이 의외로 차도가 잇슴으로 다시 정지처분을 中止 식히고 그양 在監하게 되얏다 한다. 지금은 前比하야 좀 나흔 듯 하나 여간 치료가 안이고서는 비록 출옥을 한다 하야도 전일과 가튼 활동을 다시 하기는 어러울 듯하다고 한다. 그의 하는 일도 예의 그물뜨기요, 독서는 한문 이외 佛敎 및 基督敎書類라 한다.

金若水
그는 박에 잇슬 때에도 약속 빠르고 매사에 약은이만큼 감옥생활도 또한 눈치빠르게 잘 한단다. 언제이나 간수를 잘 놀이기도 유명하지만은 동지의 죄수를 만날 때에도 남처럼 눈짓이나 입짓만으로 하지 안코 반드시 거수경례를 한다. 그래도 엇지 눈치 잇게 잘 하는지 한번도 간수에게 들키지를 안는‹¤고 한다. 그도 일은 역시 그물뜨기요, 독서는 경제학이나 정치학보다 자연과학을 만히 읽고 얼골은 在外時나 별로 다를 것이 업스나 前齒가 모도 몰락이 되고 金齒를 새로 해 박은 것이 전과 딴판의 일입니다. 그의 出獄期를 알고 십흐면 누구나 6字 석자만 잘 기억하면 될 터이니 卽 1931년 6월 6일이다. 그가 入監의後로 가진 정성을 다하야 의복, 기타 물품 차입을 잘 하던 禹鳳雲씨야 누구보다도 잘 기억하겟지.＜122＞

金在鳳
그는 6년의 형을 바든 까닭에 來來明年(昭和7년) 4월에나 다시 이 세상 봄 구경을 할 것이다. 날마다 공장에 드러 가서 그 괴로운 일을 하면서도(網絲) 한학자인 舊風이 그저 남어서 한시를 짓너라고 흥얼흥얼 한다고 한다. 그의 시를 아즉 발표치 못 함이 유감이나 佳作도 만히 잇다고 한다. 신체는 별 고장이 업스나 감정이 너무 예민하게 되야 박게 잇는 친지간에 편지 한 장이나 서적 한 冊 차입 식혀 졀¼지 안는 것을 퍽 이나 섭섭하게 생각하고 엇던 때에는 흥분이 되야 혼자 怒叱하다가 또 비애를 한다고 한다. 평소에 그와 친한 이들은 물론이고 다른 동지간이라도 一字慰問의 편지라도 하는 것이 그에 대하야 퍽이나 위안이 될 듯하다.

李準泰
평소에도 沈黙寡言한 그는 재감 중에도 역시 一樣인 까닭에 누구와 무슨 이약이하는 일도 별로 업다고 한다. 독서도 별로 하는 것이 업고 일은 예의 그물뜨기라는데 형기 5년에 미결기 6箇月 통산을 하고 賜까지 먹고 보니 出監期는 명년 5월 중순경인 듯.

陳秉基
그는 入監초부터 木工場에 드러가서 掃除夫가 된 까닭에 감옥 생활을 편이 잘 하기로는 그 사건 입감자 중에 제일이라고 한다. 따라서 신체도 건강하닛가 형기 4년간은 무사히 잘 지내리라고.

朴衡秉
은 4箇年의 役을 밧고 平壤監獄에 잇는데 미결 1년 반 통산움„ 제하면 1932년 11월경에 출감 된다. 원래에 성격이 원만하고 柔한 까닭에 고역도 잘 견듸며 건강하다고 한다. 독서는 「世界文化史大系」란 영문책 한 권을 미결때부터 이잡덧이 한자도 빼지 안코 精讀하며 하는 일은 織造=가스리 공장.

李丙儀
는 同年 10월경에 출감된다고 한다. 신체가 不健한 中 목에 腫處가 나서 이 더위 중에 고생이 적지 안코 폐가 또한 약하야 服藥중이란다. 글은 天道敎의 水雲 心法講義와 서양철학사를 耽讀하고 하는 일은 朴씨와 同.

徐邰錫
건강은 양호하고 공부는 露語, 출옥은 명년 10월.

李英
명년 7월에 나오는데, 신체는 在外時보다도 건강하고 독서는 별로 업고 일은 역시 織造란다.

全一
그는 昭和10년이라야 겨우 나오게 되는데 전날 감옥경험이 잇는 이만치 안심하고 잘 지내며 신체도 건강하고 공부는 露語라고,

許憲
身體는 매우 건강하야 差入의 식사도 항상 잘 하며 獄중에서도 新幹會 일을 걱정하는 동시 大會를 소집하야 자기 책임을 免하여 달나고 면회하는 사람에게나 또는 書面으로 부탁 云云.

金俊淵
은 판결도 멀지 안엇슴으로 장편서적은 차입할 수가 업서 短篇 책인 가정매일을 본다고 하며 신체는 작년보다 매우 건강하고 다른 사람들은 차입하는 사식을 身病이나 기타 口味 관계로 10일 20일 式中絶을 하지마는 氏는 하로도 빼지 안코 한결가티 식사를 한다고 한다. 此外에 洪命熹, 趙炳玉, 李源赫, 李灌鎔도 신체는 모도 건강한다고 한다.＜123＞
＜122-123＞