잡지명 別건곤 제5호
발행일 1927년 03월 01일
기사제목 文壇 風聞記 (Literary World Rumors)
기사형태 소식 (News)

Literary World Rumors

It seems that Mr. Ch'oe Sŭng-il goes to the Tongbuin and the "Radio Broadcasting Station" every day. Although he can now avoid being a moocher (콩나물 죽은 면하엿다 할수 잇지만), he has no time to read books or write, and he has no time to visit friends (although his friends mostly understand), but he says that he has a headache from the sound of "Naniwa-bushi" (「나니와부시」) and "Samisen" (「삼미선」).

It hasn't even been a year since Mr. Ch'oe Sŏ-hae moved to Sungsam-dong, but he had a young child. An old woman in the neighborhood said that the Ch'oe's house is small, but the site is originally harmonious, so they had a child. Since the two of them are affectionate and have a child, what could be more joyful? Even if a rich family does not have a young child, sadness is always present, and even if a family eats only nine meals in thirty days (三旬 九食), if there is a young child, laughter will never cease. The Ch'oe's, though poor, will never stop laughing from now on, according to someone who is happy about other people's affairs.

Mr. Kwŏn Ku-hyŏn is a new writer, originally a man of many talents and regrets (多才多恨). He writes novels, composes sijo poems, writes essays, writes miscellaneous pieces, does literary criticism, sings ballads, plays instruments, does illustrations, draws cartoons, draws signboards, and also draws backgrounds for store displays. He also has many friends, is good at discussions, and is good at drinking. He once said that he doesn't know the taste of alcohol, but he can drink as much as he wants. However, last time, even thieves struggled to steal his short-brimmed hat (단거리 帽子), and someone who couldn't buy him a new one was worried about him. Now, there are people who are eagerly waiting for a masterpiece from him.

Mr. Yi Ik-sang lived with a Japanese woman and had a daughter. After his wife's whereabouts became unknown, he drank alcohol and sang of loneliness. Recently, he has been flashing a gold ring on his finger. And during the New Year season, he wrapped himself in "habutae" (「하부다이」) and came to Myŏngwŏl-gwan... I think I heard someone say seriously that he has now turned his back on the world and is resting in a flower garden. <142>

Mr. Hong Sa-gaek - many people may have forgotten him. He was a person who spent money among the members of the White Tide (白潮) and was the son of a wealthy family in Suwŏn. He had been stuck in the countryside, but now he has come to Seoul and is busily running around doing something. However, if he is going to revive a magazine like White Tide, it would be better if he didn't do it at all - a meddlesome person who doesn't know him well was worrying in advance.

Recently, Mr. No Cha-yŏng, who is famous for writing romance novels and having a dark complexion, flaunted his fame in some newspaper. When someone asked a certain writer, "It seems he's running again, are you going to let it go?" his answer was, "It has to be a fair fight! The person who refutes him is among those kinds of people."

Mr. Pak Wŏl-t'an, who was the richest among the members of White Tide, and whose writings could still be seen in other magazines from time to time, but cannot be seen these days. Someone said that he treated some boring friends to a meal at a restaurant, and they spent about 20 won all night. But when he was told that it was actually almost 100 won, he ran home in a fright. However, he was eventually caught and his father ordered him not to make friends or write. Since then, he has cut ties with the world. Recently, for some reason, he is calling his friends again and drinking. Perhaps he is thinking of cutting ties with his father. This is also what some mischievous person said.

Mr. Yi Kwang-su, who was the first to advocate and implement even a difficult divorce, his every move has always been a source of trouble. He has received a lot of criticism even in the middle of the night, but now he is building a house like a Nine-layered Palace (九重宮闕) next to the Sasae River (泗泚水), like the old Puyo Fortress (부여성), in Sungsam-dong, with his unique song-like personality. He is now eagerly awaiting the birth of his second child... All the past myriad hardships are gone, and now he is lying comfortably, wondering whether it will be a son or a daughter. How happy that time must be, but he has many minor illnesses, and many people, including his disciples, are worried. This is what I heard from a certain source. Someone wants to urge him to recover from his illness soon and welcome the joy in the near future. (I will convey the rest as the opportunity arises). <143>

Named Entities

崔承一	Ch'oe Sŭng-il
東部人	Tongbuin
崔曙海	Ch'oe Sŏ-hae
崇三洞	Sungsam-dong
權九玄	Kwŏn Ku-hyŏn
李益相	Yi Ik-sang
明月館	Myŏngwŏl-gwan
洪思客	Hong Sa-gaek
白潮	Paekcho
水原	Suwŏn
盧子泳	No Cha-yŏng
朴月灘	Pak Wŏl-t'an
李光洙	Yi Kwang-su
泗泚水	Sasae-su
扶餘城	Puyo-sŏng



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제5호
발행일	1927년 03월 01일
기사제목	文壇 風聞記
기사형태	소식

文壇 風聞記
崔承一씨는 동부인과 「라듸오방송국」에 매일 출동하는 모양인데 그런타스로 요사히는 콩나물 죽은 면하엿다 할수 잇지만 책볼시간과 글쓸 시간이 엄슬뿐 아니라 친구심방할 틈이 업서서(친우들은 대개 이해하여주지만) 걱정인데도 그「나니와부시」와「삼미선」소리에 골머리가 압흐다고 하드라고.

崔曙海씨가 숭삼동으로 떠난 지 일년도 못되여서 어린 아기를 나헛는데 그 동리노파 한분의 말은 최씨댁이 집은 적으나 원래 그 터세가 조화서 아기를 나 것이라고...원톄 두 분이 다정한터에 아기까지 나핫스니, 그 우헤 더 깃븜이 잇슬가, 돈 만흔 집에라도 어린아기가 엄스면 항상 슯흠이 떠날 새가 엄고 三旬 九食을 하는 집에라도 어린아기만 잇스면 우숨이 끗칠날이 엄다는 셈으로 최씨댁은 비록 가난하나, 이제부터 우숨이 끗날 날이 엄슬터이라고 남의일에 깃버하는 사람의 말.

權九玄씨는 신진문사요 원래 多才多恨한 이로 소설도 쓰고 시조도 짓고 論文도 쓰고 雜文도 쓰고 文藝批評도 하고 단가며, 추심가며 揷畵며 漫畵며 看板畵며, 商店 陳列窓 背景도 그리며 친구도 만코 좌담도 잘하고 술도 잘하는데 그이의 말인즉 나는 술맛은 몰라도 먹는대로 얼마던지 먹는다고 한 일이 잇다고, 그런데 즈어번에는 단거리 帽子를 盜賊마저서 한참 애를 쓰드라더니 새것을 사 쓰기나 하엿는지 사주지는 못하고 걱정만 하는 사람이 잇더니 이번에는 그에게서 대작이, 하나 나오기를 고대하면서 도라 다니는 사람도 생겻다.

李益相씨는 일본여자하고 동거하다가, 아달까지 낫코서, 그 부인은 부지거처가 된 뒤로부터, 술을 마시고 고독을 노래하더니 근자에는 손에서 금반지가 번적번적하더라고, 그리고 구정월에는 설비음에 「하부다이」로 몸을 칭칭감으시고 명월관에 오섯드라고...이제는 세상을 등지고 꼿동산에서 쉬시는지 모르겟다는 그 엇던 실엄슨 사람의 말을 드른듯십다.<142>

洪思客氏- 이를 이즌 이도 만흘 것이다. 白潮同人중에서 돈쓰던 사람으로서, 수원부호집 귀공자이신데 시골서 꾹 박혀 잇더니만 이번에 서울을 와서 그 무엇인지 분주히 다닌다고 한다. 그러나, 백조가튼 잡지를 다시 창간할터이면 아예 말엇스면 좃켓다고-그를 잘모르는 엇던 승거운 사람하나히 미리 걱정하고 도라다니드라든가.

요사히 또 연애소설 잘짓고 얼골 검기로 유명한 盧子泳씨가 엇던 신문에 그 명문을 휘드르섯다. 그 누가, 그 엇던 문사의게,「또 출마를 한 모양인데 가만두시우?」하니까 그의 대답인 즉 「거리가 돼야지! 거긔에 논박하는 사람은 그 종류 사람중에 잇스니-까 」하드라고.

朴月灘氏도, 백조 동인중에 제일 돈 만흔 이로서, 그 뒤에도 갓금 다른 雜誌에서, 그의 글을 볼 수가 잇섯더니 요사히는 볼수가 업는데 그 누구의 말인즉, 시럽슨 친구들의 졸림으로 어느 요리집으로 가서 한턱을 내엿섯는데 밤새도록 논 것이 한 20원 쯤되리fi고 그것만 내여 주엇더니 근 백원이 라는 말에 고만 다름질로 집에가 누엇스나 긔어코 물리고 마러서 그의 부친의 명령으로 친구도 사귀지 말고 글도 쓰지 말라고 꾸지람 한때부터 세상과 발을 끈헛다는데, 근일은 무슨 때문인지 다시 친구들을 불러서 한잔 드러본다고 이제는 부친과 絶倫할 생각이 잇는지도 모른다고 이것도 엇던 짓꾸진 사람의 말.

李光洙氏 이분은 원래 허기 어려운 離婚까지 솔선하야 주창 실행한 이로 그의 일동 일정은 늘 말성거리가 되어 안인 밤중에 글동동이도 만히 밧어본 일도 잇지만 이제는 그의 노래ㅅ격으로 녯날 부여성 泗泚水갓흔 숭삼동 실개천 엽헤 九重宮闕갓흔 집을 지흐시고 지내는 중 요사히는 제이세가 誕生하기만 고대하신다고... 전일에 만리풍파는 다시 나가고 이제는 편히 누호서서 아들일가 딸일가 생각하는 그것이 얼마나 행복된 시간이리요만은 그가 잔 병환이 만흐서서 그와 수제자이하로 울얼어 근심하는 사람이 만타고 엇던 소식통의 말을 드른 듯 십다. 어서 병환이 나시고 불원의 깃붐을 마지 하시라고 누가 당부하고자 하는 사람이 잇다고. (이하는 기회잇는대로 또 전달하기로하쟈)<143>
<142-143>