별건곤 제5호
1927년 03월 01일
女客(創作) (Female Guest [Fiction])
廉想涉
소설 (Fiction)

Tired from writing, I opened the *mijiji* (美닫이, sliding door) next to my desk to rest my head and went out to the veranda (廊下) and leaned against the railing. It felt like the autumn rain had suddenly started yesterday and today. Even the sound of the bamboo (竹) leaves planted in a corner of the small yard rustling and shaking made it feel like autumn had arrived.

The rather large house was silent, and the ticking of the clock in the downstairs hallway (玄關) especially irritated my parched nerves. I was mindlessly staring at the clear, high blue sky when I heard a voice from one of the rooms saying,

"What time is it? Let me see."

Suddenly, a rather sharp voice answered, "Ten minutes before two!" I pricked up my ears and turned my head toward the sound.

"Then, is it time for me to retreat (退却)?" <153> This was the voice of the person who first asked the time in Japanese. Now, this person was also speaking in Korean.

"It seems so!" someone replied with a laugh.

"With such spirit, 'It seems so' is all you can say? ... Please consider the fate of the guy being kicked out! Not even a word of pity? Huh!" he said jokingly, making a noise as if he were slamming a book shut or placing something heavily on the desk. Meanwhile, someone was quietly chuckling.

I stood there, waiting to see who would come out, looking toward the opposite side where the sound was coming from. But there was no sign of anyone coming. I was curious, wondering which room it was, and slowly walked around the L-shaped veranda to the opposite side. Only a pair of slippers were neatly placed in front of the room diagonally across from mine, slightly recessed, while there were almost no slippers in front of the other rooms. I glanced at the number plate on the door and walked past, standing in the sunny spot at the far corner.

Yesterday, when I came to this boarding house to look for a room, I knew that there were two Koreans from the nameplates at the gate. I left at night, so I didn't have a chance to meet them, and I could have met them this morning if I wanted to, but I didn't feel like bothering to ask the maid to lead the way. Since all thirty or so rooms upstairs were full, it was impossible for the guests to know each other, and only the owner who took my lodging fee knew that I was Korean. The two young men in that room probably didn't know that a new Korean had moved into my room.

"Are you combing your hair again?"

"You worry too much." This was said with mutual displeasure, and the person being kicked out seemed to be teasing his friend. "So, there must be a woman coming to visit." I thought to myself, intrigued, and continued to eavesdrop.

"Aren't you catching a cold today? You should lie down and rest."

"Hey, you crazy person! If I'm leaving, please hurry up and get out! Anyone would wither and die from your sharp tongue."

"Crazy? Do you think I caught it from you? My temperature is a steady 37 degrees (度)!" "Does anyone ever go higher than that?"

"Have you ever gone below 40 degrees (度), whether you have a cold or not!" the one being kicked out said with a hearty laugh. <154>

The conversation paused for a moment.

I thought I heard a faint splashing sound from the lower yard, so I looked down at the yard. In the middle of the enclosed yard was a pond that was quite large for the size of the yard. Goldfish of all colors, red and black spotted, were teeming in the dark blue water. Among them, a rather small carp about the size of a child's palm was leaping and frolicking. The owner, who was plump with oily flesh, was sitting on the edge of the veranda, throwing something black into the pond.

"Stop squeezing. But can you really just rub it with your palm when it's red! You should at least use *nikibi tori bigansui* (にきびこり美顔水, acne treatment beauty water)!"

"You'll turn gray if you keep doing that." This conversation came from that room again. I imagined him looking at the red acne scars in the mirror on the desk and rubbing them with his palm. I smiled to myself, remembering how I had struggled with acne when I was younger.

"But she's not coming today." The person who was supposedly leaving hadn't left yet and seemed to be planning to subtly provoke the other, continuing the conversation.

"...If you had turned on the lights when she came the other night, it would have been better! She came from afar on a rainy night, and you missed your chance because you had certain conditions, and now you're all alone, sighing and regretting it. If you had called me then, I would have noticed and quickly left."

"You talk too much! ...Well, we'll see. She's not that kind of girl anyway." The younger-sounding voice replied, sounding quite displeased.

"Who said anything? A sacred love was broken the other night because of me, so I'm just saying I'm sorry." He said with a sarcastic tone typical of Korean young men, laughing loudly and finally getting ready to leave, making rustling sounds as he put on his clothes.

"Alright, I'm leaving now, with mixed feelings. But she's not coming today. ...Instead of that, let's go for a walk together. ...Let's go to Inogashira (井ノ頭), we might meet her there."

"Why wouldn't she come!"

"Why would she come on such a nice holiday? Think about it. Some guy has already taken her to Inogashira or Tsurumi (鶴見).... If you wait all day and she doesn't show up, what a sight that would be!" <155> He laughed again.

"You go on ahead. I have something to look up at the library anyway..." The other one also got up and seemed to be putting on his clothes.

"Huh. Just like a Japanese girl, are you saying you'll only renew our rotten relationship when you become a doctor (博士)? Hahaha, that's a real laugh!" The one going to the library laughed along. There was another moment of silence.

"Hurry up and leave. I'll accompany you to the library or wherever."

"I can't leave until you leave."

"Hmph..." he chuckled. "Are you suddenly going to put on a suit to go to the library! ...But it would be a bit hard to sit alone, waiting in a new suit." He giggled and opened the door.

I avoided him by heading toward my room, glancing at him sideways. Like his voice, the somewhat older student was wearing a dark blue suit and a gray soft hat. His smiling face looked like a harmless prankster.

"Hey, wait a minute..." The person in the room called the departing person back and whispered something. I heard the sound of bean-curd being banged in the yard.

"...What's with you suddenly? It's completely different from the Ondal story. Do you think my words make sense?" The student who was about to leave looked back sarcastically, then changed to a more serious tone.

"Instead of that, let's go out together now. Even if she does come, what's wrong with making her walk a little further? You just stand your ground and tease her a lot, then catch her when she can't move, and your value will only go up, and there's no chance of losing her! ...But even at first glance, that girl doesn't seem easy to handle. You won't be able to handle her until you learn a thousand-character classic and try to charm her. Before you even stick out your belly, she'll beat you today, just you watch...."

"Well, let's just wait and see if she comes, stop talking..."

The one who was eagerly waiting for the Z girl was certain that she would come, even trying to make his friend leave, but if she didn't come, he would be sorry and frustrated, and he also wanted to go out with his friend, but he was afraid that he would lose everything if he lost his friend too, so he seemed to be wavering back and forth.

"Alright. Let's wait and see. But if she comes, I'll bet my hand on it!" The one who was supposed to leave said, almost wishing that Z wouldn't come, with a voice full of spite, and sat down heavily. "That son of a bitch! What's there to get so excited about that he has to roll up his sleeves like that?" <156> I laughed to myself and stood in front of my room as before.

"...When a girl's heart is suddenly moved, you have to seize that moment, or it's all over... Even if she wants to come today as promised, she might not come, or if she said she would come at two o'clock, she might come two or three hours late! Not that all girls are like that, but that's just how Z is. First, you have to hold out a bit, second, you have to avenge being chased away in the rain the other night, and third..."

"Is anyone supposed to be listening to this story? So, what's the third thing?" The other one interrupted, sounding annoyed.

"...You don't want to listen? The third thing is that she can't be satisfied with your 40-degree fever. She's confident that she can make any guy have a 40-degree fever, and she can spend ten won a month, so she's going to pick someone with more bulging eyes!" "When will that guy's mouth finally stiffen up and smell like dirt?" The other one chuckled helplessly.

"You're going to curse me... It'll stiffen up when the smell of earth is savory, but anyway, it must be well past 2:10. What should we do?" he urged. The other one muttered something,

"Are you saying I should follow the fat one? Let's take separate actions. I'm waiting for someone too. ...But where should I go? It's not good to wander around the streets... Isn't there anything lying around on the street? Hehehe..."

"Some blind girl!" The other one countered, sneering in frustration.

"Are you saying that again! Have you ever seen a girl who loves with her eyes open? A girl uses her two ears and two lips to whisper sweet love, sour love, bitter love, love like a red rose, love like a yellow sunflower... chattering about love in the inner room, the outer room, the servants' quarters, the back room! Do you understand?..." He laughed again.

"Then what does a guy use?"

"A guy? ... If a guy has two eyes, ten fingers, and one tongue, he can get by anywhere."

"What do you use ten fingers for?"

"What do you mean?! Do you open your wallet with your elbows?" He chuckled to himself.

"Hey, you crazy person!" The other one laughed along.

"Crazy person? Not at all. Before you even use your ten fingers, you're trembling, and you're just rushing in with your two eyes and useless two ears, so you're just getting hit with elbows. When a girl is babbling with her two lips, a playboy only opens half of his ears and instead wags his tongue like a propeller! When a girl is running away like a caught rabbit, with bewildered eyes and shaking ears, you should spew out all the knowledge and eloquence you have!'"He'll burst out, "Ah, I am Cleopatra! You are Antony!..." But this unromantic, stubborn friend is just listening with donkey-like ears to Z's thin lips babbling about coming at two o'clock or three o'clock, making people miserable and driving them away. Besides, you're always saying, "I love you. I respect you as an angel..." That kind of dull tongue that only drools is useless. Even a junk shop wouldn't buy it. These days, girls think that canary songs are more high-class than parrot sounds, so it can't be helped!... Does that make sense? Or not?"

"It's mostly right! It's certain that no girl falls for you with that much talent, either the girl is blind or, as you said, the rabbit's ears are deaf! Poor thing, go out and pick one up off the street." The other one said with a snicker.

"You're going to hold me back and then tell me to go out alone? Well, sleep well!" The student came out to the veranda and heard the sound of the glass door opening from downstairs, then turned back and shouted into the room,

"Hey, hey, she's here!" He shouted and ran down the stairs.

Following behind, a young man with a gold watch chain tucked into his vest hurriedly ran out, adjusting his tie, and peered down the stairs. Seeing the student sitting downstairs, putting on his shoes, he said,

"Why are you acting like that!" He smiled awkwardly, glancing at my room with the door open, and went into his own room.

I turned away, laughing to myself, "This could be a novel!" and went into my room.

Two or three hours must have passed. The sunlight, which had been fluttering in a corner of the west window frame, had completely disappeared, and the maids were going back and forth, wiping the veranda. I was lying sprawled in the middle of the room, wondering if I should really turn what I had seen into a novel, when

"Yi-ssang (李樣), you look very refreshed today," I heard the maid say with a laugh. I turned over and peeked out through the slightly open door. The student, with his face flushed as if he had had a drink, was stomping up the stairs. <158>

"Mit-jjang was nagging me so much, I got angry and had a drink today!" he said, grabbing the nose of the maid Mit-jjang, who was standing on the stairs with a rag, and shaking it, then went to his room, laughing loudly. The maid, who was screaming "Ouch, ouch," also said,

"I'm honored that you drank your anger away like that!" and went downstairs with a bucket. "...I wonder what kind of stories I'll hear next?" I said, opening the door a little wider and lying down with my head near the window. "Did she come?" The student who had just entered asked in a loud voice.

"Hold out your hand. Let's burn it with this cigarette." The other one replied, gathering his energy.

"Hmph, big talk. Let's see if I can smell any women." The conversation paused for a moment.

It seemed like he was smelling the suit of the young man who had been cooped up in the room until now.

"...I only smell a bachelor (bachelor's) in your nose." After a while, he said,

"If a woman had visited a bachelor's room even once, this musty smell would have disappeared." and sat down heavily.

"You, you drank?"

"Don't say such nonsense. How could I be drinking and wandering around at this critical moment when it comes to love!"

"Thank you, for worrying so much about me!"

"But how was it, waiting three or four hours without being able to sit comfortably, afraid of ruining your suit? ...Instead, you should have followed me to A Cafe and enjoyed good wine and delicacies with beautiful women in front and behind you!"

After a while, the student started again, in a tone that would provoke the other.

"Congratulations. I'm jealous. ...That kind of low-class (低劣) hobby of wandering around the corners of cafes and touching dirty girls' hands is perfect for you!" The young man declared indignantly.

"Our great poet (詩人大家) has suddenly become so refined. ...But listen to me, this is really serious..."

"I don't want to listen." "Even if you don't want to listen, just listen... As I was coming, I was thinking that Z only wears a summer suit, right? So, if I were to buy her a new one, it would be hard for you with your tuition of 60 or 70 won, and if you were to buy a 50-won suit on a ten-month installment plan (十朔月賦), you'd have to pay 5 won a month, but that's not a realistic thing to do, so I was looking at the show windows of ready-made suit (旣成洋服) stores..."

"Are you teasing me? If you're drunk, go to sleep!" The other one seemed to be grabbing the student, and the student also got up, making a noise,

"Let's see what you can do! After all my efforts..." and started to brawl. I was startled, thinking they were fighting, and went out to the dark veranda.

But after brawling for a while, saying "Let go, let go! You awful, ruined thing!" they both laughed and sat back down in their places.

"...Why are you acting like that? A fall suit for Z is needed to make your refined love even more refined, so what's wrong with someone with low-class (低劣) hobbies taking on the role of Z as a virtual (假想的) - no, a virtual lover and going to a suit store for ladies and gentlemen to get a taste of that refined smell? An adult suffered a mishap! ...But the alcohol I drank to make an effort has worn off. Listen, you and I are both angry and lonely, so let's go back to A Cafe with the money we would have spent on the suit. The girls are all asking why you haven't come. In reality, they don't want to see you that much, but... Are you not going? You can't go because it's too low-class (低劣)!"

"Say whatever you want-"

"Who's saying anything? Whether you spend a few days with refined love with a 50-won suit or spend 50 jeon and have an eye-love affair (눈련애) for a few hours, there's only a difference between the love of a poet and the love of a proletarian, hahaha." The student shouted the last words in Japanese as if giving a speech.

"Why aren't the Korean virgins inside Korea, who are groping around blindly, being caught by the Japanese students studying abroad?" I thought, then snorted to myself and went back into my room, turned on the light, and sat down at my desk to revise the manuscript.

A little later,

"Kim-ssang (金樣), you have a visitor," I heard from the opposite veranda.

"Hmph, she really came!" I peeked out through the glass window.

"Oh, who is it?" I heard from the room,

"It's a lady," the maid said with a laugh. Whenever a woman visits a lodger like this, the maids get excited and giggle and fuss. But the person in the room seemed to be hesitating for some reason.

"What kind of woman is it that's causing such a commotion? I'll go out first." I pretended to go to the bathroom and went out to the veranda.

"Please go out quickly," the maid said, looking into the room and laughing. The person in the room seemed to be rushing to get dressed.

"Why did you take off your tie! Hurry and put on your jacket - I'll help you," the drunken student said, standing in the middle of the dimly lit room, holding out Kim's suit jacket.

"You're going out wearing your slippers backwards. ...You look like a royal inspector meeting a deposed official." The student said, putting on his friend's jacket and laughing, then put on his hat and came out, shouting, "Chunhyang's husband is leaving!" The maid laughed along, not knowing what he meant. I couldn't go to the bathroom, so I went to the front of the stairs, afraid of running into the two young men, and stood there awkwardly.

But the student with the hat, who was following the maid, stepped aside at the stairs, shaking his shoulders and laughing so loudly that it was embarrassing to those who heard, then looked down at the person coming up and

"Ah, you're here now?" he asked in a very friendly tone. The woman following behind Kim didn't say anything that I could hear clearly, but the young man Kim, who was coming up ahead, was red-faced and sulky. The young man Lee with the hat was still laughing.

However, the woman, who barely appeared behind Kim at the middle of the stairs, could be seen to be short and stout even from here. Her face was red like a boiled eggshell from laughing so hard or from being embarrassed. Indeed, the bulging curves of her large, round face, like an eggshell, were even more clearly visible to my eyes in the dim light. Her neck was stuck to her large head, and two short legs, like the props of a collapsing shack, were hanging from her barrel-like body, rolling along.

I unconsciously chuckled. I thought it was understandable that Kim was making such a face.

"Anyway, I'm glad you came. I wasn't expecting you to come today, but the two of us have been waiting all day," the young man Lee, who was following behind the woman, said, laughing again.

"Like a fish escaped from the net!" he said, as if talking to the young man ahead.

"You're saying too much. There's nothing to expect, but why did you tell me to come?" she said in a flirtatious voice, changing the subject. The student standing behind her was sticking out his tongue and becoming a turtle's neck, as if he couldn't stand laughing. She seemed to have heard "Like a fish escaped from the net" as "A street with no fish." But I couldn't figure out where that thin voice was coming from in that stout body.

"But who told you to come?" <161>

The young man who went in last closed the door and asked.

"I went to visit Z today. Lee-seonsaeng (李先生) told me to go, so..." As she said in her thin voice, Lee's voice quickly interjected.

"Oh, oh, that's right, I asked Kim-gun (金君) to ask Z-ssi (Z氏) to do me a favor if she came, but I completely forgot. Thank you, Kim-gun (金君). Thank you for not forgetting to ask." It seemed like he was making up an excuse, but Kim-gun (金君) didn't seem to be answering.

"But you should have come with Z-ssi (Z氏). Kim-gun (金君) said that Z-ssi (Z氏) had promised to come today, so he couldn't go out all day and has been waiting until now..." The young man Lee laughed.

"Z didn't say anything about that! It seems like she couldn't get away because of the crowd of guests!"

"What kind of guests?" Young man Lee seemed to be mischievously asking while "Kim-gun (金君)" was listening.

"Three college students came and were talking and arguing. I had never met any of them before, so I sat down for a moment and then came straight here... But what are you talking about? ... I have to go before it gets dark..."

"Yes, we'll talk about it later. You came so far, so why don't you stay and have dinner and play for a while."

After these conversations were quickly exchanged, the conversation paused for a moment. I was curious to hear more, but I thought it would be embarrassing to stand there like a crazy person, so I went back to my room and sat alone at the lonely dinner table that had just been set. As I reluctantly put the gritty rice in my mouth, I sat there blankly, not thinking about anything, when I heard the sound of the two young men's door opening wide and

"Hey, what's the rush? You're not going to Z now, are you..." I heard Lee's voice from the room.

"Hey, why don't you come in and have dinner together and take a walk together? Hen for pheasant (Hen for Pheasant) is not good!" The young man in the room laughed cheerfully. I couldn't hear what he was saying clearly, so I strained my ears again and looked out through the glass window with the rice bowl in my hand.

"Hen for pheasant?" The person who was wearing a hat and standing on the veranda, lit by the light in the room, tilted his head and seemed to be thinking.

"Hey, you've been studying English for years and you don't know that great saying!" The one in the room laughed again. The person standing outside also laughed, as if he understood.

"Hey, you crazy person, sleep well!" he said, repeating the words that young man Lee had said when he left earlier, and quickly left. I also said to myself, "Hen for pheasant - 'A chicken instead of a pheasant' (꽁 대신 닭)," Indeed, it's just like a drama!" and laughed to myself. The thought of the stout woman sitting there, not knowing what was going on and feeling embarrassed, made me feel sorry for her and my heart cooled down. But even so, the sweet laughter of the two men and women continued to flow from that room. (February 23rd, in Tokyo) <162>

Named Entities

李樣	Yi-ssang
井ノ頭	Inogashira
鶴見	Tsurumi
金君	Kim-gun
李先生	Lee-seonsaeng
Z氏	Z-ssi
東京	Tōkyō



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제5호
발행일	1927년 03월 01일
기사제목	女客(創作)
필자	廉想涉
기사형태	소설

女客(創作)
						廉想涉


집필에 피로한 머리를 쉬이라고 책상을 노흔 편 *미다지를 열고 루마루 (廊下)로 나와서 란간에 기대여 섯섯다. 어제 오늘로 급작시리 가을빗이 지터진 것 갓다. 손바닥만한 마당 한 구석에 심긴 대(竹)ㅅ닙이 우수수하고 흔들거리는 소리에도 가을은 온 것 갓다.
꽤 넓은 집안은 괴괴하고 알읫층 현관(玄關)에서 똑닥똑닥하는 시계ㅅ소리가 밧작 조 (燥)하야진 나의 신경을 유난히 끄을 뿐이다. 나는 맑게 치처 올라간 푸른 한울을 무심히 치어 다 보며 섯스려니까
『몃 시 되엇나. 좀 보게 .』하는 소리가 어느 방에서인지 들리더니
『두시 십분 전! 』하고 별안간 조건 말소리가 난다. -나는 귀가 번적 띄이며 소리나는 데로 얼굴을 돌리엇다.
『그럼, 나는 퇴각 (退却)할 시간이 되엇나?』 <153> 이것은 먼저 일본말로 시간을 뭇든 사람의 목소리이다. 이번에는 이 사람도 조선 말로 한다.
『아마 그런가 보이!』하며 웃는 소리가 들린다.
『뱃심 조케, 아마 그런가 보이-가 무엇인가. ... 참, 쫏겨나가는 놈의 팔ㅅ자도 좀 생각해 보게 ! 불상하다는 인사 한마대도 업단 말인가? 응!』 하는 롱담의ㅅ 소리를 하며 보든 책을 덥허 놋는지, 무엇을 책상 우에 텅 놋는 소리를 내인다. 한편은 우흐흐... 코웃음을 치며 잠잣고 잇다.
나는 나오는 사람을 보리라 하고 소리가 나는 마즌 편을 노러보며 섯섯다. 그러나 오는 긔척도 업다. 나는 궁금증이 나서 어느 방인구? 하는 생각으로 입구(口)ㅅ자로 된 루마루를 슬슬 돌아서 마즌편으로 가 보앗다. 내 방에서 비스듬히 마즌편으로 조금 옴속 드러간 방 압헤만 슬립퍼 두 켜레가 나란히 노혀 잇고 다른 방에는 거의 비엇는지 슬립퍼가 노혀잇지 안핫다. 나는 그 방문 우에 부터 잇는 번호패를 슬적 치어다 보며 지나나와서 저편 모통이 양지에 가서 섯다.
어제 이 하숙에 방을 보랴 왓슬제 조선 사람이 둘이나 잇는 것은 대문간의 문패를 보고 안 일이엇다. 그러나 밤에 떠나와서 미처 만나볼 틈도 업섯스려니와 오늘 아침에라도 만나보랴면야 만나보앗겟지만은 부전부전히 하녀를 압장 세우고 차저가볼 맛도 업고 하기에 그만 내버려둔 것이엇다. 알의 우ㅅ칭의 수삼십개나 되는 방이 꼭꼭 찻다니까 한 집에 잇스면서도 누가 누구인지 손님끼리 알 리도 업거니와 내가 조선 사람인 것을 숙박긔를 하랴 왓든 주인이나 알앗지 하녀들도 아즉 모를 것이니 저 방의 두 청년도 나 잇는 방에 조선 사람이 새로 들엇다는 것은 좀처럼 모를 것이다.
『머리를 또 빗나?』
『걱정은 퍽 하네.』이런 대화가 또 들린다. 피차에 못 맛당해서 하는 소리요 쫏겨나간다는 사람은 친구를 놀리는 말눈치다. -녀자라도 차저올 약조가 잇는게로군 』나는 혼자 이런 생각을 하며 호긔심에 끌리어서 그대로 귀를 기우리고 섯다.
『오늘은 감긔들 리지 안엇나? 어서 자리 펴고 눕게 그려』
『예이 미친 사람! 나갈테거든, 어서 쐑 쐑 나가주게 ! 자네의 그 독설 (毒舌)에는 여간 놈은 다 말라죽을껄세.』
『미치다니? 나도 자네게서 뎐염된 줄 아나? 내 톄온(體溫)은 에불업는 삼십칠도(度)세.』『누구는 그 이상가든가? 』
『자네야 감긔를 드나 안드나 사십도에서 나려가 본 적이잇든가! 』하며 쫏겨나간다는 자가 껄걸 웃는다. <154>
이약이가 잠간 끄니엇다.
무엇이 알의ㅅ뜰에서 찰삭찰삭 불쭉불쭉하는 소리를 들릴 둥 말둥하게 내기에 나는 마당을 나려다 보앗다. 사방이 막힌 마당 한 가운데에는 뜰 넓히 보아서는 제법 큼짓한 연못이 헤버러져잇다. 검푸른 물 속을 휘젓고 다니는 금붕어들이 발간 놈 검은 점 박힌 놈 할 것 업시 옥을옥을한다. 그 중에도 제법 어린 아이 손바닥만한 링어색기란 놈이 물우로 쭈르를 솟아 올라와서는 펄쩍펄쩍 뛰며 재조를 피인다. 기름살이 유들유들하게 찐 주인은 마루끄테 나와안저서 무엇인지 까만 머이를 던지고 안젓는 모양이다.
『고만 짜게. 그러나 벌거케 된 것을 손바닥으로만 문지르면 되겟나! 허다 못해 니기비도리미안수(にきびこり美顔水)라도 발라야지! 』
『자네 그러다가 머리 세(白)이리.』이런 대화가 또 그 방에서 들린다. 벌건 여드름 짠 자곡을 책상우에 버틔어 논 거울속에 빗초여 보며 손바닥으로 문지르고 안젓는 양이 내 눈압헤 떠올은다. 나는 어려슬 제 여드름으로 애를 쓰든 생각을 하며 혼자 속으로 웃엇다.
『허지만 오늘 아니오네.』하며 나간다는 사람은 나가지는 안코 남을 슬몃이 골을 올리고 안젓슬 작정인지 또 이런 소리를 끄내여 뒤를 닛는다.
『... 그적게 밤에 왓슬제 불 올렷더면 조홧지! 비오는 날 밤에 불원천리하고 왓슬 제야 다 -조건이 잇서서 그런걸 공연히 노쳐버리고 닭쫏든 개만도 못하게 인제야 혼자 씨근벌떡하며 랭가슴만 알을까 무어란 말인가. 그때 불러 올리면 나도 다- 알아차리고 얼른 피하야 주엇지. 』
『잔소리 무던히는 허네! ...글세 두고봐요. 그런 계집아기가 아니래도 그러네.』매오 못 맛당해 하는 듯한 좀 앳된 소리가 이러케 댓구를 한다.
『누가 엇더타를가.신성한 런애가 그젯밤에 나 때문에 깨어젓스니 미안하다는 말이지.』 조선 청년스러운 비꼬는 수작으로 또 껄걸 웃으며 인제야 나갈 차비를 차리는지 버스럭버스럭 옷입는 소리를 내인다.
『자-, 시원섭섭하게 인제는 나가네. 하지만 오늘은 아니 오네. ...그러지 말고 어서 가티 산ㅅ보나 나가세. ...우리 이노가시라(井ノ頭)가세 거기 가면 혹 만날 지 모르니. 』
『안 오긴 웨 안와! 』
『이런 날 조흔 공일에 무엇하자고 자네가 오겟나. 생각을 해보게 그려. 벌서 엇던 놈이든지 채가지고 『이노가시라』든 쓰루미 (鶴見)든 갓슬게 아닌가.... 웬종일 눈이 빠지게 기다리다가 헛다방이면 그 꼴이야. 가관일<155>껄! 』하며 한편은 또 실실 웃는다.
『어서 자네만 가게. 난 어차피에 도서관에 가서 무얼 참고해 가지고 올 것도 잇고 하니까...』하며 한편도 닐어나서 옷을 닙는 모양이다.
『흥. 일본 계집애 모양으로 Z도 자네가 박사(博士)가 되어야 썩은 인연을 다시 맷겟다든가? 허허허,요절을 할 노릇이군!』도서관에 간다는 자도 따라 웃는다. 잠간 또 잠잠하야젓다.
『어서 나가세나 그려. 도서관이고 어대고 내가 배종(陪從)합세』
『자네가 나가야 나가겟네.』
『흐흥...』하며 한편은 웃다가 『도서관 가는데 별안간 세비로 양복 끄내 입겟나! ...허지만 새 양복 끄내입고 혼자 안저 기다리기는 좀 고되겟네.』하며 낄낄대고 방문을 연다.
나는 내 방편으로 피하야 오며 슬몃이 겻눈으로 거들떠 보앗다. 목소리와 가티 좀 걸늙은 학생이 금단초 양복에 회색 쏘프트를 썻다. 빙글빙글 웃는 얼골이 악의(惡意)업는 작난군으로 생기엇다.
『여보게 잠간 기다리게...』하며 방안의 사람이 나가는 사람을 다시 불러드리더니, 무어라고 숙은숙은하는 소리가 들린다. 알에에서 두뎜을 땅땅친다.
『...별안간 웬일인가? 꼭 온달제와는 딴 판일세그려. 자네 생각에도 내 말이 그럴 듯 한가? 』하며 나가려든 학생이 비꼬아 보다가 다시 의론성스러운 말소리로 고쳐서
『그러지 말고 가티 나갈테거든 지금 나가세. 설사 온다손 치더라도 그 계집애 햇거름 한번 더 치게 하면 엇던가? 자네는 자네대로 떡 버틔고 계집애 속을 무척 달려노코서 나종에 꼼짝 못하게 잡아채치면 자네는 갑섯치만 더 올러가고 노칠리는 한아도 업지 안흔가! ...하지만 그 계집애가 잠간 보기에도 여간 내기는 아니겟데. 자네 따위는 천자ㅅ권이나 배워가지고 얼너보기 전에는 셈평안 될가 보데, 자네가 배를 내밀기 전에 그 계집애가 오늘 한손 압지를 것이니 두고보게....  』
『글세 오든 안 오든 잠간만 기다려보게, 잔소리 고만하고...』
Z라는 가하는 계집아이를 몸이달아 기다리는 자는 꼭 온다고 장담을 하고 친구를 피하야 나가게 까지 하얏다가 아니 오고 보면 미안하고 열적기도 하며 또 놀라나가도 십흔데 친구마자 노치면 계도 구럭도 다 일케 될가 보아서 갈팡질팡하는 모양이다.
『어대. 기다려보세. 하지만 오거든 내 손에 장을 짓게!』하며 나간다든 자는 Z가 아니오기를 축수나 하듯 이 거진 악의를 품은 소리로 한마대하고 털석 안는다. -실어배아들놈! 저러케까지 팔을 것고 나서도록 <156> 흥분 될거야 무에 잇누. 』하며 나는 혼자 웃으며 여전히 내 방 압헤 서 잇섯다.
『...계집이란 마음이 팟득 동하얏들 때, 고 순간을 붓들어야지 그 때를 노치면 다 -식은 걸세...약조대로 오늘 오고십허도 아니 오거나 두시라고 하얏스면 두세시간 청처짐해서 오느니! 계집이란 다 그러타는 게 아니라, Z의 생김이 그러타는 말일세. 첫재 좀 버틔어 봐야하고 둘재 그적께 밤중에 비를 맛고 왓다가 쫏겨간 앙가품을 해야 하겟고 셋재... 』
『이거 누가 듯자는 이약인가? 그래 셋재 어떠탄 말인가? 』한편은 듯기 실흔 듯이 잠간 새치기를 한다.
『...듯기 실흔가? 셋재는 자네의 사십도쯤 되는 열도로는 만족할 수가 업스니까 그러케 된다는 것일세. 어느 놈을 붓드러도 사십도씩은 만드러 노흘 자신이 잇고 게다가 한달에 돈 십원씩들은 내 노흘만들 하니까 좀더 눈알이 벌개진 놈을 골라 잡으랴고 하지 안켓나! 』『조 놈의 입이 언제나 저대로 뺏두러진 채 구더버리랴누? 』하며 한편은 하는 수 업시 헛웃음을 친다.
『그러다가 악담하겟네... 땅냄새가 구수하야질 때 구더버리겟지만 그는 하여간 두시 십분은 넉넉히 되엇겟네. 엇더케 하랴나?』하고 재촉을 한다. 한편이 무어라고 대답을 하는지 숙설숙설하니까,
『살찐 놈따라 부으란 말인가? 별개 행동을 취하세. 이래뵈두 나두 기다리는 사람이 잇다네. ...하지만 자 -어댈 간다? 길ㅅ바닥으로 공연히 싸질으긴 멋업고... 어대 길거리에 떠러긴 암것은 업슬까? 허허허... 』
『엇던 눈 감은 년이나!』하며 한편은 분푸리 삼아 비웃으며 대거리를 한다.
『다시 헐 말인가! 자네 눈 뜨고 련애하는 계집 보앗나? 암것이란 두 귀하고 두 입술로 달큼한 사랑, 새큼한 사랑, 쌉쌉한 사랑, 붉은 장미꼿 가튼 사랑, 누른 향일화 가튼 사랑, ...안방 건넌방 행랑 뒷간 사랑하고 조잘대는 걸세! 자네 알앗나?...』하며 또 껄껄 웃는다.
『그럼 숫것은 무얼루 하나? 』
『숫것? ... 숫것이야말로 두 눈과 열 손가락과 혀ㅅ바닥 한개만 하면 어댈 가든지 행세를 하는 걸세. 』
『열 손가락은 무얼 한단 말인가? 』
『무얼 하다니?! 자네는 지갑을 열발구락으로 열려나? 』하고 혼자 실실 웃는다.
『예이, 미친 사람! 』하며 한 편도 따라 웃는다.
『무친 사람? 뚱치지도 안엇네. 자네 따위야 열손가락을 놀리기 전부터 벌벌 떨고 두눈과 쓸데도 업는 두 귀만 가지고 헐러벌떡 덤벼들랴니까 팔꿈치로 죄질러만 맛지 아켓나. 계집이 두 입술로 나발거릴제 놈팽이는 두 귀를 반쪽만 터 노코 그 대신에 혓바닥을 푸로페라 모양으<157>로 잘 놀려야 하느니! 계집이 다라나다가 붓들린 암토기 모양으로 말똥한 눈에 헛영채가 밧작 솟아서 하둥거리며 두귀를 살래살래 흔드를 제 자넬랑은 업는 지식 잇는 웅변 다 -토하야 노아보게 그려! 』단통 『아 나는 크레오파토라! 당신은 안토니!... 』하고 덤빌 것이니! - 그런 걸 이 멋업는 고지식한 친구는 당나귀가튼 귀를 설설 내들으며 Z의 얇다란 입술이 나볼거리는 대로 진국으로 고지 들어가지고 두시에 오느니 세시에 오느니 하면서 사람을 몸 괴롭게 등ㅅ줄기를 몰아내쫏는 다는 말일세. 더구나 자네가티 만날가야 밤낫. -나는 당신을 사랑함니다. 나는 당신을 텬사로 존경함니다. ...고 하는 소리밧게 못하고 침만 질질 흘리는 그 따위 무되빠진 혀ㅅ바닥은 당헐이 아닐세. 고물상에 가지고 가도 사지는 안흘 걸세. 요새 계집 아이들이란 앵무새 우는 소리보다도 캐나리아의 노래라야 하이칼라라니까 그것도 허는 수 업지. !...그럴 듯 한가? 안 그런가?』
『대톄는 무던하이! 그만한 입힘이 잇는데, 반해주는 년이 업는 것은 확실히 계집이 눈이 삐엇거나 자네 말맛다나 살래살래 흔드는 토끼의 귀가 먹은 걸세! 가엽스이 어서 나가서 길거리에 떠러젓나 주서보게. 』 이런 소리를 하며 한편이 선웃음을 치니까
『긔껏 붓드러 두엇다가 혼자 나가란 말이야? 자-, 자미 만히 보시교! 』하며 학생은 루마루로 나오다가 알의ㅅ칭에서 류리창 대문이 열리는 소리가 나는 것을 듯더니 다시 들처서며 방에다 대이고
『여보게, 여보게, 왓네 왓서! 』하며 소리를 치고 쭈르를 칭계로 나려간다.
뒤마처서 족기에 금시계줄을 늘인 청년 한 아이 넥타이를 런해 매만지며 황망히 뛰어나와서 칭계알에 꿉으리고 한 참 나려다 보다가 알에서 꿉으리고 돌아 안저서 구두를 신는 학생을 보고
『사람이 웨 그 모양이야! 』하며 열적은 듯이 픽 웃다가 문을 열어노흔 내 방편을 힐끈 돌려다보고, 자긔 방으로 드러가 버렷다.
나는 외면을 하며 혼자 속으로 웃다가 - 소설이 되겟다! 하며 방으로 들어왓다.



두세 시간이나 지낫슬까, 서창 틀에 날름날름 하며 한구통이에 비초이 엇든 햇발이 홀딱 넘어가고 하녀들이 마루 닥느라고 오락가락할 때다. 나는 방 한가운대에 버둥버둥 누어서 아까 본 것을 정말 소설로 만드러볼까? 하는 혼자ㅅ구리를 하고 잇스려니까
『리상 (李樣), 오늘 신색시 조흔걸요.』하며, 하녀의 웃는 소리가 나기에 나는 몸을 뒤치면서 방문을 방긋이 뻐개고 내다보앗다. 한 잔 하얏는지 벌건상을 하고 아까 <158> 그 학생이 퉁탕거리고 칭계를 올러온다.
『밋짱이 하도 구박을 하니까 오늘은 화가 나서 한잔 먹엇다! 』하며 걸래를 들고 칭계우에 섯는 밋짱이란 하녀의 코를 덥석 잡아서 흔드러 노코, 자긔방 편으로 껄걸 대이며 간다. 아야 아야소리를 째지게 치든 하녀도
『화푸리ㅅ술을 그러케 잡숫게 해서 황송함니다! 』하고 웃으며 물통을 들고 나려간다. ...나는 또 무슨 이약이를 들을하누? 하며 문을 좀 더 열어노코 머리를 창미트로 두고 누엇섯다. 『왓든가』지금 들어간 학생이 커단 소리로 뭇는다.
『자네 손을 내밀게. 이 담배ㅅ불로 지저보세. 』하며 한편은 긔운을 도사서 응한다.
『흐-ㅇ 코큰 소리 한다. 어듸 분때 냄새라도 나나 보세. 』하며 잠간 말이 끈친다.
이 때까지 방안에 쭉치고 들어 안젓든 청년의 양복이라도 마타보는 모양이다.
『...내 코엔 호래비ㅅ냄새밧게 안 마치네. 』조금 잇다가 이런 소리를 하며
『호래비 방에 녀자가 단 여갓스면야 위선 이런 누리퀴퀴한 냄새부터 스러젓슬걸세. 』하고 털석 안는 소리가 난다.
『자네, 술먹엇네 그려? 』
『그런 정신업는 소리 말게. 남은 런애니 사랑이니 하는 이런 위급존망지추에 나혼자 안연히 술먹고 돌아단이겟나! 』
『고마우이, 그만큼 열심으로 걱정을 해 주니! 』
『한데 그래 세시간씩 네시간씩 양복금이 국일까보아 편히 안지도 못하고 기다리는 맛이 엇더튼가? ...그러지말고 날 따라 나섯드면 A카페-에 가서 미주진효(美酒珍肴)에 가인을 압 뒤에 세우고 한바탕 떵떵거리고 잘 놀앗지! 』
한 참 잇다가 학생은 주긔가 잇는 소리로 또 남 부화가 끌을 소리를 끄낸다.
『감축하이. 부러우이. ...카페 구석으로 돌아단이며 더러운 계집애 손이나 만저보는 그 따위 뎌럴(低劣) 한 취미는 자네게 꼭 마첫느니! 』하며 한 청년은 분연히 선언을 한다.
『이 시인대가(詩人大家) 가 금시로 고상하여 젓나보다. ...참 그런데 여보게 내말 좀 듯게, 이것은 참 정말 진담일세... 』
『글세 듯기 실혀요.』『듯기 실혀도 좀 듯게... 지금 오면서 가만히 생각하니까 Z가 그저 여름 양복을 입고 단니다고 하지 안헛나? 그래서 새로 작만해 주자면 륙칠십원 학비로는 자네 형편에 고된일이요, 오십원짜리를 열달 월부(十朔月賦) 로 마친다면 한달에 오원씩 꺼 가면 되겟지만 그거야 될 <159>법도 하지 안흔 일이겟기에 긔성 양복 (旣成洋服) 파는 집의 쇼윈도어를 여기저기 더듬어 보지 안엇나... 』
『누구를 놀리나? 술 취햇거던 어서 자요! 』하며 한편은 학생을 쥐어질으는지 학생도 마조 닐어서는 긔척이 나며
『어듸 해 보자! 남의 애 쓴 보람도 업시...』하며 쿵쾅거린다. 나는 깜짝 놀라며 긔에 쌈질을 하는구나! 하고 닐어나서 어둑한 마루로 나섯다.
그러나 한참 툭탁어리며 『놔, 놔요! 어구, 무지 스런 망한 것! 』하고 부산하다가 둘이다 깔깔 웃으며 제자리에 안는 모양이다.
『...누가 뭐랫기에 그 지랄을 버릇나? 자네의 그 고상한 련애에는 Z의 가을 양복이 한벌 잇서야 더 고상해진다기에 뎌열(低劣)한 취미의 소유자가 고상한 냄새라도 마타보랴고 가상뎍(假想的) -아니 가상애인으로 Z를 잡고 부인양인 양복뎜에를 드러가 보앗다기로 그다지 셈을 낼게 무언가? 온 참 어른이 봉변을 하얏군! ... 그러나 애를 써 먹은 술이 다 깨엇다. 여보게 자네나 내나 화나고 쓸쓸하긴 일반이니 그 양복 사줄 돈으로 A카페 -에 다시 가세. 게집애들도 자네 웨 아니오느냐고들 련해 뭇데. 실상은 그리 보구도 십지는 안타데만은... 안 가려나? 뎌렬해서 못 가겟나! 』
『맘대로 떠들어 보게-』
『떠들긴 누가 떠든단 말인가. 오십원 짜리 양복으로 몃칠동안 고상한 련애를 하거나 오십전 턱주고 몃시간동안 눈련애를 하거나 다만 시인의 련애와 오인 (吾人) 푸로 레타리아 련애의 차이점이 잇슬 따름이라는 말일세 허허허. 』하며 학생은 뒤ㅅ말을 일본말로 연설하듯 커다케 부르짓는다.
-눈감고 걸리는 대로 붓들랴도 못 붓들고 헤매이는 조선 안의로 처녀들은 웨 일본 류학들을 아니 오누? 』하는 생각을 하다가 혼자 코웃음을 치며 나는 방으로 다시 들어와서 불을 켜고 책상 압헤 안저서 원고를 수정하고 잇섯다.
조금 잇다가
『긴상(金樣) 손님 오섯슴니다. 』하는 목소리가 마즌편 마루에서 들린다.
-흐흥, 참 정말 왓군! 』 하며 나는 류리창을 거들떠 내어다 보앗다.
『응, 누구야? 』하는 소리가 그 방안에서 나니까,
『부인네세요.』하고 하녀의 웃는 소리도 들린다. 누구에게 든지 이런 하숙 손님에게 녀자가 차자오면 공연히 하녀들도 잠간 달뜬 긔분으로 낄낄대이며 허둥거린다. 그러고 방안의ㅅ 사람은 웬일인지 멈웃거리고 좀처럼 아니 나오는 모양이엇다.
-엇던 녀자이길래 그 야단들인구? 어듸 내가 먼저 <160>나가보리라. 』 하고 나는 변소에 가는 척하고 또 마루로 나섯다.
『어서 나가보세요. 』하며 하녀는 방 속을 드려다보고 웃는다. 방안사람은 치장을 차리느라고 허둥대이는 모양이엇다.
『넥타이는 웨 끌럿드란 말인가! 어서 팔만 뀌게 -내 입혀 줄게. 』하며 술 취한 학생은 아즉 불을 켜지 안흔 어스므레한 방 한가온대에 김이란 사람의 양복 저고리를 벌려 들고 섯다.
『슬립퍼 걱구로 신고 나가리. ...헐일 업는 어사 (御使)만난 사도님 가트이그려. 』하며 학생은 친구의 웃옷을 입혀 주고 웃다가 뒤따라서 모자를 쓰고 나오면서 『춘향이 서방 나간다! 』하고 커다케 웃는다. 하녀는 멋도 모르고 따라서 생긋 웃는다. 나는 변소로 갈 수도 업고 칭계 압흐로 갓다가 두 청년과 마다닥 드릴까봐서 공연히 서성거리며 잇섯다.
그러나 하녀의 뒤로 따라 나가든 모자쓴 학생은 칭계엽헤 웃득 비켜서며 듯는 사람이 면구스럽도록 억개를 흔들며 깔깔 웃더니 올러오든 사람을 나려다보고
『아, 인제 오섯세요?』하며 매오 친숙한 말씨로 뭇는다. 김가라는 청년의 뒤에 딸은 녀자는 무에라고 대답을 하는지 자세 들리지 안흐나 압서 올려오는 김 청년은 얼굴이 빨개져 뿌리퉁하다 못해 곳을 상이다. 리가라는 모자 쓴 청년은 여전히 웃는다.
그러나 칭계중턱에서 겨오 김 청년의 뒤로 간신이 나타난 녀자는 힐끈 보기에도 뚱뚱하고 작달만한 몸집인 것을 여기서도 알 수 잇섯다. 얼굴은 톄면 업시 웃는 바람. 부끄러웟든지 살마논 계딱지가티 벌거타. 아닌게 아니라 계딱지가티 커다란 둥근 상판의 울근불근한 곡선이 흐릿한 광선에 한칭 더 분명히 내 눈에도 띄이엇다. 그 큰 머리에 짓눌린 모가지는 짝 달라붓고 절구통 가튼 몸집에는 쓰러저가는 오막사리 집의 버팀가튼 짧은 두 다리가 매어달려서 듸굴듸굴 뒹굴어 오는 모양이다.
나는 무심코 실소를 하얏다. 김 청년이 울상을 할만 하다고 생각하얏다.
『하여간 잘 오섯소. 난 오늘쯤 오시려니하고 그리지 안아두 우리 둘이서 종일 기다려섯지. 』하며 녀자의 뒤로 따라와 술 먹은 리청년은 또 웃다가
『어망홍리(魚網鴻離)라니 ! 』하고 압선 청년에게 말을 거는 듯이 혼자 소리를 한다.
『별 말슴을 다-하심니다. 그리 멀거야 업지만은 그런데 웨 오라고 하섯세요? 』하고 간드러진 목소리로 딴청을 한다. 뒤에 선 학생은 웃으어서 못 견딜 듯이 혀를 날름 내밀며 자라목이 된다. 『어망홍리』라는 말을 『어방 업는 거리 』라고 들은 모양이다. 그러나 대관절 그 간엷힌 목소리가 그 뚱뚱한 집의 어느 구석에서 새어나는지 알수가 업섯다.
『그런데 누가 오시라고 하얏다고 전해요? 』<161>
나종 드러간 청년은 방문을 다치며 뭇는다.
『오늘 Z한테 놀라갓드니. 리선생이 그러시드라고 하며 가보라고 하기에 ...』 여전히 그 간엷힌 목소리로 팔을 끄내니까 리 청년의 목소리가 얼른 뒤바드며.
『응, 응, 참, 저번에 김군더러 Z씨가 오시거든 그런 부탁을 좀 하야달라고 내가 허구서 깜박 니저버렷네. 김군 고마우이. 그런 부탁을 닛지 안코 하야주어서. 』하고 꾸며대는 수작을 얼쭘얼쭘 하는 눈치이엇스나 김군이란 자는 아모 대답도 업는 모양이다.
『그런데 Z씨하고 가티 오시지요. 김군은 오늘 Z씨가 오마고 약조하얏다고 해서 종일 출입도 못하고 이때껏 기다렷는데... 』하며 리 청년이 웃는다.
『Z는 그 때ㅅ말 업는데요! 손님들이 몰려와서 몸을 빼져나오지를 못한 게로군! 』
『엇던 손님들이요? 』리 청년은 『김군』이 듯는데 짓구지 무러보는 눈치엿다.
『어느 대학생들인지 셋이나 와서 떠들고 들안젓드군요. 나는 모두 낫 서투른 사람들뿐이기에 잠간 안젓다가 곳 나와서 이리 오는 길인데... 그런데 무슨 말슴인지? ... 점을기 전에 어서 가야 하겟는데요...』
『네, 차차 이약이 하지요. 멋처럼 오섯는데 천천히 저녁이나 잡숫고 놀다가 가세요.』
이러한 대화가 총총히 교환된 뒤에 이약이가 잠간 끄니엇다. 나는 좀 더 들어보고 십흔 호긔심도 잇스나 미친 놈 모양으로 우득헌니 섯기도 열적은 생각이 나서 방으로 들어와 막 갓다가 놋는 쓸쓸한 밥상을 혼자 소리업시 대하고 안젓다. 모래알 가티 오들거리는 밥을 마지못해 입에 트러너흐며 무슨 생각을 하는 것도 아니면서 멀거니 안젓스려니까 그 두 청년의 방문이 활작 열리는 소리가 나면서
『이 사람. 무슨 그러케 급한 볼 일이 잇나? 설마 지금 Z에게 가는 건 아닐텐데... 』하며 리청년의 소리가 방안에서 난다.
『여보게, 그러지 말고 들어와서 저녁가티 먹고 셋이 산보가세그려. 핸 포어 피잰드(Hen for Pheasant) 는 못 쓰나! 』하며 방안의 청년은 유쾌한 듯이 웃는다. 나는 무슨 소리인지 채 자세히 못 드러서 다시 귀를 기우리며 밥그릇을 든 채 류리창으로 비치어서 내어다 보앗다.
『핸 포어 피잰트? 』방안의 불빗을 바드면서 모자를 쓰고 마루에 나선 사람은 이러케 노이면서 고개를 기웃하고 생각을 하는 눈치다.
『이 사람. 영어를 몃해 베호고도 그 훌륭한 격언을 몰으나! 』하고 방안에서는 또 웃는다. 밧게 섯든 사람도 알앗다는 듯이 픽 웃으며
『예이 미친 사람, 자미 만히 보시고! 』하고 아까 리 청년이 나갈제 하든 말을 되노이며 훌적 나가버린다. 나도 속으로 『핸 포어 피잰트 』-『꽁 대신 닭 』아닌게 아니라 꼭 드러마첫다! 하며 혼자 웃다가 무슨 영문인지를 모르고 어리둥절하야 두리번 두리번 하며 안젓슬 그 뚱뚱한 녀자의 열적어 할 것을 생각하면 가엽슨 증이 나서 마음이 식어버리엇다. 그러나 그 방에서는 그래도 두 남녀의 자미ㅅ다란 웃음소리가 끈히지 안코 흘너나왓다. (二月 二十三日 東京에서)<162>
<153-162>