Magazine Title: 개벽 제58호
Publication Date: 1925년 04월 01일
Article Title: 忠北踏査記 (Record of a Survey Trip to Ch'ungbuk)
Author: 特派員 車相瓚 (Special Correspondent Ch'a Sang-ch'an)
Article Type: 기행문 (Travelogue)

忠北踏査記
						特派員 車相瓚 (Special Correspondent Ch'a Sang-ch'an)

Before Writing the Survey Record

Last January, I surveyed South Ch'ungch'ŏng Province (忠淸南道), and this January, I came to survey North Ch'ungch'ŏng Province (忠淸北道). Although the provinces are different, North and South, and the years are different, last year and this, surveying the same Ch'ungch'ŏng Province in the same month of January seems like a strange coincidence. However, having been disappointed in many ways during my survey of Ch'ungnam last year, I felt no particular excitement from the moment I set out for Ch'ungbuk. Furthermore, knowing beforehand that North Ch'ungch'ŏng Province is the smallest province in all of Korea (全鮮), a mountainous region without even an inch of coastline, with poor transportation, meager products, and lagging behind other provinces in contemporary culture, I had little courage even to want to survey it. And indeed, having surveyed it in person, I found no gains, neither spiritually nor materially. It is even more desolate than Ch'ungnam. Ch'ungbuk is truly a world of a blank slate (白板). The mountains and fields crawl with the harmful insects (害虫) of the so-called yangban of former days, turning them into barren red earth (赤地), and society still retains the putrid bacteria (腐菌) of Confucian scholars (儒生), preventing any new pulse from circulating. The cities and fertile lands have all been encroached upon by parasites from overseas (舶來의 寄生虫), leaving the general populace merely naked (赤身), without any spirit or vitality, weeping in hunger (飢餓) and wandering the desolate fields (荒野). The entire province feels like a city ravaged by the fires of war (兵火), a desert after a storm. Consequently, there is no special material for an article. If I were to write anything, it would be nothing but negative criticism (惡評). However, how could I, the writer, possibly enjoy negative criticism? As I intend to record the facts as they are, it naturally becomes what the world calls negative criticism. After the Ch'ungnam issue was published last year, some yangban from Ch'ungnam complained that their province had been insulted, and I even heard rumors that some stubborn old man instructed his descendants not to purchase Kaebyŏk, which speaks ill of yangban. Ah, what ignorant, self-destructive behavior is that! Of course, it is human nature (人情) to feel upset if a blind person is called blind, and a cripple will not like being called a cripple. However, if an ugly woman avoids a bright mirror (明鏡), her appearance will only become uglier, and if a sick person dislikes good medicine (良藥), only they themselves will become more endangered. How could I dare presume that my words are a bright mirror or good medicine? Yet, just as even the words of a madman (狂夫) can sometimes be helpful, how can one say they are entirely without benefit? Within those words called negative criticism, there must be infinite pain and bitterness. I cannot know what kind of criticism will arise when this Ch'ungbuk issue is published. Whether it is called negative or positive criticism, I leave it entirely to the discerning eyes (公眼) of the readers and only ask that they read it well. Furthermore, it is a great regret, about which I have no words for the brothers there, that due to unavoidable circumstances, I could not visit the three counties of Tanyang (丹陽), Chech'ŏn (堤川), and Poŭn (報恩), which are scenic spots in Ch'ungbuk. However, there will be another opportunity in the future, which serves as a small consolation. Finally, I thank the many brothers in Ch'ungbuk for the great care and protection (愛護) they showed me during my survey.

Map of North Ch'ungch'ŏng Province Jurisdiction (충청북도 管內圖)

General Remarks (總論)

Its Location and Area, the Smallest in the Country
This province is located slightly south of the central part of Korea (朝鮮), bordered by Kangwŏn Province (江原道) to the north, Kyŏnggi Province (京畿道) to the northwest, South Ch'ungch'ŏng Province (忠淸南道) to the west, North Chŏlla Province (全羅北道) to the south, and North Kyŏngsang Province (慶尙北道) to the east. Its area is the smallest in the country. (East Longitude 120° 20' - 128° 38', North Latitude 35° 52' - 37° 20', East-West approx. 360-odd ri, North-South approx. 400-odd ri, Area 489 square ri (方里))

Its Topography, Lacking Even an Inch of Coastline
The terrain is elliptical east to west, forming a semi-bay shape. It is surrounded by steep mountain ranges on three sides and lacks even an inch of coastline. Mountains overlap everywhere within the province, and plains are scarce. To the north, starting with the Ch'ungju Plain (忠州平野) in the Han River (漢江) basin, there are numerous fertile small valleys (小沃野). To the south, in the Kŭm River (錦江) basin, lie the fertile plains of Ch'ŏngju (淸州), Chinch'ŏn (鎭川), Yŏngdong (永同), and Poŭn (報恩). Furthermore, the Han River offers the convenience of boat transport (舟楫), making transportation and shipping convenient since old times. In the Choryŏng (鳥嶺) and Chungnyŏng (竹嶺) mountain ranges stretching to the east, there are endless minerals and forests. The Japanese compare the topography of this province to Japan's Kai (甲斐) and Shinano (信濃) provinces. However, the mountains and rivers of this province can be divided by two major mountain ranges and two major rivers. That is, the Choryŏng range runs from southwest to northeast, and the Chungnyŏng range runs from southeast to northwest, winding and bending until they meet in the Tŏkchu-san (德周山) area of Ch'ungju, forming a imposing barrier to the southeast. They continue to become the Sobaek-san range (小白山胍) of Tanyang, the Songni-san range (俗離山胍) of Poŭn, Samdobong (三道峯) and Paekhwa-san (白華山) of Yŏngdong, Wŏrak-san (月岳), Paegun-san (白雲), and Kŭmsu-san (錦繡山) of Chech'ŏn, and Ch'ilbo-san (七寶山) of Koesan (槐山). Thus, the major and minor mountain ranges of Ch'ungbuk province are generally branches of these two main ranges. As for rivers, the Han River and Kŭm River are the largest. The Han River originates in Kangwŏn Province, gathers various streams from Tanyang, Chech'ŏn, Ch'ungju, Koesan, and Ŭmsŏng (陰城) areas, and flows into Kyŏnggi Province. Notable tributaries belonging to it include the Koesan Stream (槐山川), which joins below Taewŏn-san (大元山) in Koesan; the Kayŏp Stream (迦葉川) in Ŭmsŏng; the Talch'ŏn (達川) in Ch'ungju; the Chup'o Stream (周浦川) originating from Ch'iak-san (雉岳山) <65> in Wŏnju (原州), Kangwŏn Province; and Kwangt'an (廣灘). The Kŭm River gathers southwestern streams and enters Ch'ungnam. Its most prominent tributaries are the P'algyŏl Stream (八結川) and Mihocheon (美湖川), which combine waters from Chinch'ŏn, Ŭmsŏng, and Ch'ŏngju counties, and the Yŏngdong Stream (永同川), Songgang (松江), and Sŏkch'ŏn (石川), which join downstream from Pugang (芙江).

Its History, Having Endured Bloody Winds and Rains (腥風血雨)
In ancient times, this province was the borderland of the Three Kingdoms. Ch'ŏngju, Munŭi (文義), and Hoein (懷仁) belonged to Paekche (百濟), based in Ch'ungnam. Okch'ŏn (沃川), Yŏngdong, Hwanggan (黃澗), Ch'ŏngsan (靑山), and Poŭn belonged to Silla (新羅), based in Kyŏngbuk. Chinch'ŏn, Ch'ŏng'an (淸安), Ŭmsŏng, Koesan, Ch'ungju, Yŏnp'ung (延豐), Tanyang, Ch'ŏngp'ung (淸風), Chech'ŏn, and Yŏngch'un (永春) areas belonged to Koguryŏ (高句麗) in the north. The Three Kingdoms built fortresses against each other and contested every inch of mountain and land. For instance, Ch'ŏngju has the remains of Paekche's Sangdang Fortress (上黨城). South of Poŭn town lies Silla's Samnyŏn Fortress (三年城). Other sites like Torak Fortress (道樂城) in Tanyang, Kam'am Mountain Fortress (紺岩山城) in Chech'ŏn, and Sŏngji Old Fortress (城池古城) in Yŏngch'un are all relics of Koguryŏ.
After Paekche and Koguryŏ fell and Silla unified the peninsula, this province also entered Silla's territory. It passed through the Koryŏ (高麗) period, and upon entering the Yi Dynasty (李朝), the entire province was temporarily turned into a battlefield. During the Imjin War (壬辰亂), Katō Kiyomasa (加藤淸正) plundered Kyŏngju (慶州), Andong (安東), and P'unggi (豊基) before crossing Chungnyŏng Pass. Konishi Yukinaga (小西行長) passed through Sangju (尙州) and Mun'gyŏng (聞慶) over Choryŏng Pass. The two armies met at Ch'ungju. Along with General Sin Rip's (申砬) defeat at T'an'gŭmdae (彈琴臺), the towns near Ch'ungju were trampled by their troops. Also, a contingent of Konishi's forces attempted to advance north via the so-called Samnam middle road (三南中道) through Ch'up'ungnyŏng Pass (秋風嶺) but engaged with Chang Chi-hyŏn's (張智賢) defending troops at Hwanggan, temporarily turning the area into scorched earth (焦土) (at that time, Commander Chang was defeated and died heroically). Furthermore, at Hwach'ŏngnyŏng Pass (華淸嶺) (Kuksa-bong - 國士峯) west of Ch'ŏngju, Cho Chung-bong (趙重峯 - pen name of Cho Hŏn) greatly defeated the Japanese soldiers at that time, and his monument stands tall to this day (Originally outside the West Gate, now moved to the Provincial Office grounds). After the Imjin War, the Chosŏn government, learning from the past, strengthened defenses against southern invaders (南寇), stationing Tohobu Moksa (都護府 牧師 - military governor) cum Pangsŏsa (防禦使 - defense commander) in Ch'ungju and Ch'ŏngju, and further placing a Pyŏngma Chŏltosa (兵馬節度使 - military commander) in Ch'ŏngju to guard it. Later, in the 503rd year of the dynasty's founding (開國 503年), Kwanch'alsa (觀察使 - provincial governor) positions were established, dividing jurisdiction between Kongju (公州) and Ch'ungju. <66> The eight counties of Okch'ŏn, Munŭi, Poŭn, Hoein, Yŏngdong, Hwanggan, Ch'ŏngsan, and Ch'ŏngju belonged to Kongju. The ten counties of Chech'ŏn, Yŏngch'un, Chinch'ŏn, Ch'ŏng'an, Ŭmsŏng, Koesan, Yŏnp'ung, Ch'ungju, Tanyang, and Ch'ŏngp'ung belonged to Ch'ungju. Then, in the year Ŭlmi (乙未 - 1895) under King Kojong (李太王), Ch'ungju was made the capital (首府) of Ch'ungbuk, governing the entire province. In the 2nd year of Yung-hui (隆熙 - 1908), the Provincial Office (道廳) was moved again to Ch'ŏngju. In the 4th year (1910), simultaneous with the Japan-Korea annexation (日韓合倂), the Kwanch'alsa was changed to Provincial Governor (道長官). In the 2nd year of Taishō (大正 - 1914), county mergers and abolitions (郡廢合) were carried out, resulting in the ten counties of Ch'ŏngju, Poŭn, Okch'ŏn, Yŏngdong, Chinch'ŏn, Koesan, Ŭmsŏng, Ch'ungju, Chech'ŏn, and Tanyang.

Fewer than 150,000 Households and Nearly 780,000 People
According to the survey at the end of Taishō 11 (1922), the total number of households in this province was 148,901, and the total population was 779,628. This is detailed by county in the table below.
Current Households

Current Population

Current Population by Occupation
<67>

Its Land, with Many Mountains and Few Plains
As mentioned above, the total area of this province reaches 489 square ri, but mountains are many and fertile plains are few. Classifying this, there are: Forestland, 532,649 chōngbo (町步) 0 tanbo (反步); Paddy fields, 69,342 chōngbo 4 tanbo; Dry fields, 88,495 chōngbo 2 tanbo; Building sites (垈), 5,956 chōngbo 1 tanbo; Miscellaneous (ponds, etc. - 池治), 157 chōngbo 8 tanbo; Total 696,600 chōngbo 5 tanbo. That is, forestland accounts for over 75% of the total area, paddy fields just under 10%, and dry fields just over 12%. Among these, about 7,000 chōngbo of uncultivated land and about 26,000 chōngbo of forestland with slopes less than 15 degrees suitable for reclamation began to be reclaimed from Taishō 8 (1919) with a planned deadline of Taishō 17 (1928). Thus, after Taishō 17, there will be about 190,000 chōngbo of arable land. The soil quality is often micaceous and tends to lack somewhat in organic matter. It is not particularly barren soil, and the Ch'ŏngju plain has long been known, along with the Sosa and Asan plains, as a famous fertile area in Ch'ungch'ŏng Province.

Its Unimpressive Industry (産業)
As this province is a mountainous region without an inch of coastline, there are few products besides some land-based ones. Also, due to historically poor transportation, commerce and industry have not developed. Nevertheless, classifying them:
Agriculture: This is the main occupation of the people of this province. On arable land area of over 69,000 chōngbo of paddy fields and over 88,000 chōngbo of dry fields, there are over 132,700 farming households, accounting for 90% of all households in the province. The annual production value reaches over 40 million Wŏn (圓). Among these, rice (over 692,000 sŏk - 石), barley (over 558,000 sŏk), beans (over 250,000 sŏk), and millet (over 94,000 sŏk) are the most important. As for specific products, cotton amounts to 3,046,700 kŭn (斤) (value 250,000 Wŏn); Ch'ungju yellow tobacco (value over 1.3 million Wŏn); Ch'ŏngju Shandong tobacco (production area Sŏsŏng-myŏn, Ch'ŏngju County; Sin Suk-chu (申叔舟) brought seeds from China; this year's quota is 200,000 kwan (貫), estimated value 180,000 Wŏn); for fruits, jujubes (大棗) from Ch'ŏngsan and Poŭn, and persimmons (杮) from Hwanggan have long been famous. Also, recently, apples (129,173 kwan) and pears (61,224 kwan) from various places show increasing production each year. Sericulture (蠶農) has seen some effort from farming households lately, resulting in an annual cocoon production of over 7,100 sŏk. Next, livestock farming (牧畜農) is mostly just a side business for farmers, so there is nothing particular to note.
Forestry: Occupying 75% of the province's total area with 532,649 chōngbo of forestland, this province naturally <68> holds the potential to be a great forestry nation. However, as a result of years of excessive logging (濫伐), mountains everywhere are bare and red (赤禿), suffering disastrous floods annually. Although the authorities encourage annual tree planting (植林), forestry is still not impressive. The only thing to boast about is the roughly 30,000 chōngbo Choryŏng forest. This forest has been specially protected as a so-called Hwanggung Pongsan (黃腸封山 - royal timber reserve) since the time of the Korean government and remains so today. The red pine (赤松) within it is famous for its beautiful wood quality. The annual logging amount reaches approximately 20,000 cubic ch'ŏk (尺締), and miscellaneous wood also amounts to around 10,000 cubic ch'ŏk. Additionally, charcoal and other products are abundant.
Mining: As this province is a mountainous region, mineral veins are abundant everywhere. Among them, Ch'ŏngju, Yŏngdong, Ch'ungju, and Ŭmsŏng have much gold ore. Tungsten (重石) is also abundant in Ch'ungju; during the Great European War, there was a temporary mining rush, but recently, due to a sharp drop in prices, it has reached the sad state of closure. Also, between Talch'ŏn and Taesowŏn in the same county, there is a large iron mine owned by the Meiji Mining Company (明治鑛業會社). In Ch'ŏngsan-myŏn, Okch'ŏn county, there are the famous large graphite mines (黑鉛鑛) of Komiya (小宮) and Yamano (山野). According to the Taishō 11 (1922) survey, the total area of mining districts in this province is 41,379,148 p'yŏng (坪), the number of mining districts is 138, and the production value is 75,362 Wŏn.
Commerce and Industry: Commerce and industry are also in a rudimentary state. The only factory is the Suzuki Cotton Ginning Factory (鈴木繰棉工場) run by Japanese in Yŏngdong. There are some rice milling, cotton cloth, paper making, and pottery businesses, but nothing worth noting. Papermaking, in particular, has traditionally been famous in this province, with Chech'ŏn, Ch'ungju, and Tanyang as centers, producing renowned types. These are the widely known Ogôji (五庫紙), Ch'angji (窓紙 - window paper), Yŏnbangji (燕方紙), Ch'ŏngp'ungji (淸風紙), Paegunji (白雲紙), etc. (Annual production 5,381 kwae (塊 - reams), value 18,858.5 Wŏn). Commerce mostly relies on market transactions (市場取引), with some goods imported or exported by rail. Trading partners are major cities in Korea and Japan. Next, religion and education lack anything special to note, so they are omitted. <69>

The Spotless Ch'ŏngju County (淸州郡)
They say, "When water is too clear, there are no fish; when a person is too discerning, they have no followers." Perhaps if the character 'Ch'ŏng' (淸 - clear, clean) is in the county name, there's nothing there. Ch'ŏngju is truly spotless. The mountains are spotless, the water is spotless, the streets are spotless, the products and people are all spotless. People often say that among the provincial capitals in all of Korea, Ch'unch'ŏn (春川) in Kangwŏn Province is the premier mountain town and the most culturally backward place. However, in reality, Ch'ŏngju is several times more backward than Ch'unch'ŏn. First, looking at the landscape, the sleek Wa'u-san (臥牛山 - Lying Cow Mountain, a famous mountain northeast of Ch'ŏngju town) cannot compare to the beautiful and striking Pongŭi-san (鳳儀山 - Phoenix Mountain, the guardian mountain behind Ch'unch'ŏn town). The feeble Musimch'ŏn (無心川 - Indifferent Stream, a large river flowing around Ch'ŏngju city) cannot compare to the vast and wide Soyang River (昭陽江). The desolate Ch'ŏngju Plain cannot compare to the fertile Udu Plain (牛頭平野) or Chukchŏn Plain (竹田平野). Also, speaking of pavilions and scenic views, Kit'aek-ru (祺北樓), of which only the foundation remains, Mangsŏn-ru (望仙樓), which has become an appendage of the Cheondang-gun Shrine, and the East Park (東公園 - Tangmi-san area), West Park (西公園 - old Sajik-san), and Cherry Blossom Horse Track (櫻馬場 - in front of East Park), reeking of Japan, cannot possibly match the brilliantly decorated Soyang Pavilion (昭陽亭) or the scenic splendors of Ponghwangdae (鳳凰臺) and Paengnuju (白鶩洲). Next, speaking of buildings, the dilapidated Provincial Office, County Office, Chahye Hospital (慈惠病院), and the makeshift-looking Higher Common School (高等普通學校), Normal School (師範學校), etc., also cannot be mentioned in the same breath as the magnificent buildings of Ch'unch'ŏn.
Not only that, the spiritual world is also like that, and the world of thought is also like that. Before the labor movement could even be conceived, some degenerate from the official world used the pretense of organizing the movement to instead exploit the blood and sweat (膏血) of the workers, making it disappear without a trace. As for the Youth Association (靑年會), there's no one even to take down the sign, so Ch'ŏngju's sole fighter, Mr. Kim T'ae-hŭi (金泰熙), guards it like the Dong-A Ilbo branch sign, being chased here and there (There have been revival movements). The people's hearts are also, as they say, "Let's see about Ch'ŏngju," extremely callous (野薄), lacking the simple kindness (淳厚) found in Ch'unch'ŏn. The only slightly better things are that the electric lights are bright (Ch'unch'ŏn also recently installed electric lights) and the train runs (though the train often runs empty as there are few passengers or freight). Ch'ŏngju is truly a static city, a city of darkness, a city of virgins. The entire city is asleep, looking like a desert, appearing like a wilderness. The populace has no strength or spirit for resistance, wandering here and there like a flock of gentle sheep (柔羊) (Excuse the expression). In the city center, one cannot even see drunkards. There are no people fighting (Not that I approve of drunkenness and fighting). One can't even <70> witness a dog fight, nor hear the bellowing of a bull. The only sounds heard day and night are: the cries of anguish from the poor slum of Taesŏng-chŏng (大成町) asking for rations; the clanking swords of policemen who sing praises of peace and tranquility while only drinking and roaming around; the sounds of village farmers begging and pleading with the so-called wealthy families of Min Yŏng-ŭn (閔泳殷) and Pang In-hyŏk (龐寅赫) to return their tenancy deposits (還實); the sounds of coquettish laughter from numerous beauties at the Provincial Governor's residence (Governor Pak (朴知事) keeps three concubines (笑妾), and also keeps two Japanese and Russian maids (日蘇下女), yet still calls for kisaeng (妓生) sometimes); the sounds of Japanese moneylenders making a fuss about executing seizures on Koreans. So, was this Ch'ŏngju always such a feeble city? No. In the past, its victories were considerable, and its personages were also significant. Since the time of the Three Han kingdoms' struggles, Ch'ŏngju was called "a strategic point where southeast routes converge" (東南走集에 要害之地). Paekche established Nangbi Fortress (狼臂城) here (Originally Sangdang-hyŏn, also called Nangja-gok), Silla established Sŏwŏn-gyŏng (西原京) and stationed military commanders to guard the border. During Koryŏ and Yi Dynasties, it housed a Mokpu (牧府 - regional military command) or Kwanch'albu (觀察府 - Provincial Governor's Office, established temporarily during King Sejong's reign) and also had a military garrison (兵營), making it a central place for national defense. During the Imjin War, Cho Chung-bong defeated Japanese troops coming via Ch'up'ungnyŏng Pass at Kuksa-bong south of this county (There is a monument to Master Cho's victory in the Provincial Office front yard). In the year Musin (戊申 - 1728) of King Yŏngjo's reign, Yi In-jwa's (李麟佐) rebellion also arose here (At that time, military commander Yi Pong-sang (李鳳祥) and camp commanders Nam Yŏn-nyŏn (南延年) and Hong Im (洪霖) died fighting; there is now a Samch'ungsa Monument - 三忠祠碑).
Koryŏ's T'aejo (高麗太祖 - Wang Kŏn) once commented on Ch'ŏngju, saying, "The land is greatly fertile, and the people are mostly heroic and outstanding" (土地大饒하고 人多豪傑), so one can know that many figures came from here. Speaking of the Koryŏ Dynasty, there were scholars and writers like Wang Ka-do (王可道), Kwak Wŏn (郭元), Kwak Sang (郭尙), Kwak Yŏ (郭輿), Yi Kong-sŭng (李公升), and generals like Kyŏng Tae-sŭng (慶大升). In the Yi Dynasty, though he was a pro-peace minister, there was Ch'oe Hwalchŏng (崔活亭 - Ch'oe Myŏng-gil - 崔鳴吉). Also, among recent great men, Master Son Ŭi-am (孫義菴先生 - Song Pyŏng-hŭi) was born here. The patriot Sin Kyu-gwan (申睨觀) (originally from Munŭi) was also from here. However, today there are few notable active figures. There are writers like Sin Ch'ae-ho (申采浩), ideologues like Sin Paeg-u (申伯雨), Sin Yŏng-u (申英雨), and a few other youths, but they reside either abroad or in Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul), and there are no active youths actually in Ch'ŏngju. As for education, like rotational honorary posts (돌림 加資), there are the usual government-established Higher Common, Normal, and Agricultural schools located in the provincial capital. Privately established schools include the Ch'ŏngnam School (淸南學校) managed by the Presbyterian Church (耶蘇敎) (at the old Mangsŏn-ru site), the Taesŏng Common School (大成普通學校) run by local notable Mr. Kim Wŏn-gŭn (金元根), and some private common schools and lecture halls (講習所) in villages. However, Ch'ŏngnam School is said to be incomplete and soon to be closed down. Taesŏng School has relatively good results, but it is maintained forcibly, like bean-curd dregs given as charity (勸에 비지처럼), so how can it be called complete? I hope Mr. Kim puts in more effort to expand it. Speaking of religion, although Christianity (耶蘇敎) entered 17 years ago, believers are not many, and its activities are also lacking, so it cannot be said to have developed. The central figures of that church would be Pastor Ham T'ae-yŏng (咸台永) and Elder Kim T'ae-hŭi (金泰熙氏). Ch'ŏndogyo (天道敎) is also <71> similar, but there are dedicated youths like Sŏ Ch'ang-su (徐昌壽), Kim Yŏng-sik (金英植), Chi Chŏng-ha (池晶夏) (all three are council members of Taesŏng School) who strive greatly for both the church and society. Other industries also offer little to see.
However, speaking of historic sites (古跡), there are some to boast about: Nam Sŏkkyo (南石橋 - South Stone Bridge; located over Musimch'ŏn, width 2 kan, length several tens of kan, built with granite, very grand; constructed in the first year of King Hyŏkkŏse of Silla, i.e., the first year of Emperor Xuan's Wufeng era - 漢宣帝五鳳元年); Ch'ŏltang (鐵幢 - Iron Flagpole; also called Tongbae (銅■) [Hanja unclear]; built in the 13th year of King Kwangjong of Koryŏ; originally 30 sections, now only 20 remain, height 43 ch'ŏk, diameter 1 ch'ŏk 4 ch'on; the third section has an inscription; currently in the backyard of the Ch'ŏngju Police Station); Samch'ungsa (三忠祠 - Shrine of the Three Loyal Subjects; mentioned above); Tongbong Chŏnch'ŏppi (東峯戰捷碑 - East Peak Victory Monument; mentioned above); Ap Kaks u (鴨脚樹 - Ginkgo Tree; located within the Provincial Office grounds, circumference 36 ch'ŏk; during King Kongmin of Koryŏ's reign, when Yi Saek (李牧隱穡) and Yi Sung-in (李陶隱崇仁) were wrongly imprisoned due to Sin Ton's (信旽) slander, a great thunderstorm struck, flooding the city; the jailers and prisoners barely survived by climbing this tree. The King heard of this, was amazed, and released them. Yangch'on Kwŏn Kŭn's (陽村權近) poem refers to this: "流言不幸及周公 忽有嘉禾偃大風 聞道西原洪水漲 足知天道古今同" - Unfortunate rumors reached the Duke of Zhou / Suddenly auspicious grain bent before a great wind / Hearing that the Sŏwŏn floodwaters rose / One fully knows Heaven's Way is the same, past and present); Mangsŏn-ru (望仙樓 - Pavilion for Gazing at Immortals; originally named Ch'wigyŏng-ru (聚景樓); Koryŏ period school). Besides these, there are also some other famous places, starting with Ch'ojŏng Mineral Spring (椒井) (detailed in a separate section), but they are omitted here.

Chinch'ŏn County (鎭川郡), Only an Empty Shell Remains
"Live in Chinch'ŏn (鎭川), die in Yongin (龍仁)" was a common saying among people from the Kyŏnggi-Hoseo region who liked Ansŏng (安城). (Because Chinch'ŏn has good housing sites (宅地), and Yongin has good burial sites (墓地)). This Chinch'ŏn is a small county located in the northwestern corner of North Ch'ungch'ŏng Province. It borders Ch'ŏngju and Koesan to the east, Ŭmsŏng and Ansŏng of Kyŏnggi Province to the north. Its extent is 5 ri east-west, 7 ri 2-3 chŏng north-south, with an area not exceeding 26 square ri. In ancient Koguryŏ times, it was Manno-gun (萬弩郡) (also called Kŭmmulla - 今勿奴). After Silla annexed it, it was called Hŭgyang (黑壤). Following several changes thereafter, it now consists of seven myŏn (面 - townships). Its alternative names include Suji (首知), Sinji (新知), Hwangyang (黃壤), Kangju (降州), Chinch'ŏn (鎭川), Ch'angŭi (彰義), Ŭinyŏng (義寧), and Sangsan (常山). It began to be called Chinch'ŏn from the 13th year of King T'aejong of the Yi Dynasty (李朝太宗十三年).
This Chinch'ŏn originally had beautiful scenery and fertile land, earning it the name "paradise of Ch'ungbuk" or "paradise near the capital." Therefore, in former days, the so-called yangban, wealthy merchants, and knowledgeable classes all gathered here. Consequently, culture developed relatively well, and considerable figures were produced. In the old Silla period, the famous Kim Yu-sin (金庾信) was born here. During the Koryŏ period, there was Mr. Song Ŏn-gi (宋彦琦), who dominated the era with his writing and diplomacy (During King Kojong of Koryŏ's reign, Mr. Song traveled to Mongolia four times as a peace envoy and achieved great merit). In the Yi Dynasty, there were also not a few famous scholars and virtuous men. ××××××××××××××××× There was also a monster like Chŏng An-rip (鄭安立). Also, emerging <72> figures include Chŏng Chae-dal (鄭在達), Pak Pong-sŏ (朴鵬緖), Cho Myŏng-hŭi (趙明熙), Hong Ch'ŏn-sik (洪璔植), Hong [X]-sik (洪■植 - Hanja unclear), Pak Ch'an-hŭi (朴瓚熙), and other youths who are quite active in Kyŏngsŏng. Mr. Yi Sŭng-u (李升雨), known as someone in the lawyer community, is also from this Chinch'ŏn. The number of students currently studying domestically and abroad reaches nearly 70-80, so it could be said that the spread of culture ranks first in Ch'ungbuk. However, after graduation, they mostly wander in cities seeking employment and do not engage in activities for the development of their hometown, Chinch'ŏn. Chinch'ŏn in reality is desolate beyond comparison. The youth movement is also very weak, and other ideological movements show no shadow. The so-called wealthy squander their entire fortunes trying to make a quick profit (一攫千金) and live idly by speculating on the Inch'ŏn rice and bean market (仁川米豆場), ending up destitute and lying low like invalids (Last year too, many went bankrupt from rice and bean speculation, reducing wealth by about 5,000 sŏk). The three major yangban families of Chinch'ŏn – the Sin (申), Chŏng (鄭), and Yi (李) families – who used to boast and act tyrannically, plundering the people's property, are also powerless today. They are barely breathing (奄奄) and unable to maintain their family traditions. The auspiciously named Kilsang-san (吉祥山) has become completely barren, a mountain of bones (骨相山). Feng shui practitioners say that because Chinch'ŏn town has the shape of a Golden Rooster Brooding Eggs (金鷄抱卵形), all the rocks in the county became round, and also that wealthy people have been numerous since old times. They also say that because there is a pass called Yijae (駕峴 - Carriage Pass) near the town, they disliked it and established an inner market (內市場) (Chinch'ŏn town has an inner and outer market). However, the Golden Rooster's eggs have already been broken; the yolk and albumen have all flown away on the evening wind (飛去夕陽風), leaving only the empty shell. The fertile vast lands have fallen into the possession of Min Yŏng-hwi (閔泳徽), Han Kyu-sŏl (韓圭卨), Yi Yong-mun (李容汶), and other wealthy individuals from Kyŏngsŏng. Commercial power has been lost to Japanese and Chinese merchants. The people of Chinch'ŏn are merely tied to tenant farming (小作農) and pursued by hunger and cold year after year. It is questionable whether Chinch'ŏn, once called a paradise, will be a paradise in the future. County Magistrate Yi Hae-yong (李海用君) pays special attention to the people's suffering. He mediated the issue of advance selling of green paddies (靑畓豫賣), which can be called a major evil of Chinch'ŏn (Last year, over 2,000 poor people of Chinch'ŏn, due to debt, pre-sold about 2,000 sŏk of rice still in the paddies, expected to be worth 17 to 18 Wŏn per sŏk after harvest, to creditors for 6 to 10 Wŏn. The magistrate specially negotiated with the creditors and curbed their profiteering, resulting in a benefit of roughly over 7,000 Wŏn for the poor). Also, tobacco cultivation rights, previously absolutely forbidden to the people in this county, were negotiated with the Monopoly Bureau (專賣局) and granted. Other industries and education are especially encouraged, earning considerable praise from the people. However, before the general populace awakens and resolves fundamental problems, even if industry and education are encouraged, what great effect will it have on the general propertyless masses? Nevertheless, even this much, under the current circumstances, cannot but be appreciated for Chinch'ŏn's sake. One more thing to introduce is the Anglican Church's (聖公會) work. The Aein <73> Hospital (愛人病院), headed by the Englishman "Ada Ross" (아다-로-스氏), is larger in scale and better equipped than the Ch'ŏngju Chahye Hospital. Patients number several hundred on average daily. Besides the doctors being kind and meticulous, there is much free treatment, so it can truly be called a hospital of grace (恩院) for the general poor. Next, speaking of famous places, U T'aek (牛澤) and Ch'op'yŏng (草坪) can be counted on one hand (also having the scenic spots of P'yŏngsa Nag'an-bong - 平沙落雁峯, Ch'wijŏk-tae - 吹笛臺, Ch'ŏnggye Paengna-dong - 靑鷄白羅洞, Hoean Pansŏk Nag'iam - 會安盤石落妓岩, Ssangch'ŏng'am - 双淸岩). As for historical sites, there are Todang Mountain Fortress (都堂山城) and Taemo Mountain Fortress (大母山城), but they are all dilapidated ruins. The shrine to Kim Hŏn-sin (金獻信祠 - likely error for Kim Yu-sin) on Kilsang-san is left for another section and omitted here.

Ŭmsŏng County (陰城郡), with Dilapidated Town and Exhausted People
If you open the map of North Ch'ungch'ŏng Province, in the northwest, there is a tiny, bag-shaped county. It borders Ch'ungju County to the east, Koesan County to the south, Chinch'ŏn County to the southwest, and Ich'ŏn (利川), Ansŏng, and Yŏju (驪州) counties of Kyŏnggi Province to the northwest. This is Ŭmsŏng County, famous in Ch'ungbuk for its dilapidated town (邑殘) and exhausted people (民疲). The old names of this Ŭmsŏng are Inghol (仍忽), Sŏlsŏng (雪城), or Ingunnae (仍斤內). Originally a small prefecture (小縣) consisting of only Ŭmsŏng and Wŏnnam two myŏn, due to its proximity to Ch'ungju, it suffered particularly severe damage during the Imjin War and became completely廃縣 (abolished prefecture), attached to Ch'ŏng'an County. It barely recovered its prefecture status in the 10th year of King Kwanghae's reign (光海朝十年). Poems from that time, like one by Inspector Yi An-nŭl (李安訥) containing the lines "壬辰幷邑久 戊午設官新, 縣吏縫三戶 鄕儒未十人" (Since Imjin the town merged long ago / In Muchin the office newly set up / The county clerks serve three households / Village Confucians not yet ten men) and one by Governor Hong Su-ju (洪受疇) with the lines "職愧二千石 縣無三百困" (Ashamed of my 2,000-sŏk post / The county lacks 300 households) and the old Ch'ungbuk saying that the Ŭmsŏng county magistrate weeps upon arrival and also upon departure, allow one to infer how dilapidated and exhausted the county was. (Because Ŭmsŏng was a poor town, in the former magistrate era, even the arrival meal table (到任床) was served on a dog-leg table (개다리소반), but hidden emoluments (隱結) were relatively plentiful, making the magistrate's private income substantial, hence the saying that the magistrate wept upon arrival and upon departure). Recently, seven myŏn from Ch'ungju County - Kŭmang (金旺), Maengdong (孟洞), Saenggŭk (笙極), Samsŏng (三成), Taeso (大所), Kamgok (甘谷) (all transferred in September, 10th year of Kwangmu - 光武十年九月移屬), Soi (蘇伊) (incorporated December, 13th year of Taishō - 大正十三年十二月編入) - were transferred, making a total of nine myŏn and 112 ri-dong (里洞 - villages), with an area reaching 33 square ri. Products include rice, with annual production reaching over 77,000 sŏk, and other grains like barley and beans are produced in considerable amounts. Special crops like upland cotton (陸地棉) and yellow tobacco (黃色煙草) also increase production annually. The gold mines and persimmons of Wŏnnam-myŏn, the gold mines of Kŭmang, and the persimmons of Isŏng-myŏn have also become famous products of this county. Transportation is relatively convenient with the Ch'ungbuk Line second-class road and the Changhowŏn-Ch'ungju first-class road passing through the county. Other schools, financial institutions, markets, etc., are also established <74> not inferior to neighboring counties, giving a sense of remarkable change compared to the past. However, this is entirely development in form and statistics only.
The actual living standard of the people is extremely poor and miserable compared to the past. Of the county's total rice production of over 70,000 sŏk, more than 50,000 sŏk entirely enter the warehouses of Kyŏngsŏng's wealthy (Min Yŏng-hwi - 閔泳徵 and Min Pyŏng-sŏk - 閔丙奭 own the most land). The remaining 20,000 sŏk are supposed to feed the 64,490-plus people in 12,294 households, but even that cannot all be eaten. It's taken by the Japanese, taken by the Chinese, taken for taxes, taken for the construction and renovation costs of myŏn offices, police substations, schools, etc., leaving nothing for the people to eat. The wealthy within the entire county mostly have autumn harvests of less than 300 sŏk, so what more needs to be said about the remaining poor? Even the place called the town center (邑內) has only 338 households, mostly small thatched houses (草家). The slightly sturdier places with spacious grounds are all occupied by Japanese (36 households) and Chinese. Even the government office buildings look quite meager. Only the Myŏn Office, the people's object of resentment (人民怨府), stands splendidly in the middle of the street, like a naked man wearing a long sword (It was newly built with a burden of 7,000 Wŏn on the people; it's the finest Myŏn Office building in Ch'ungbuk, but popular resentment is severe). The citizens' occupations are either running eateries (飮食店) or horse-cart (馬車) / ox-cart (牛車) businesses. Since life has traditionally been poor like this, how could there be leisure to seek knowledge, and consequently, what kind of thought could arise? After the March First Movement (己未年), youth associations sprang up like bamboo shoots after rain everywhere else, but this place is completely quiet. The tyranny of landlords (地主) and masters (舍音) is said to be the worst in Ch'ungbuk, yet let alone tenant farmer movements (小作人運動), there isn't even anyone who looks a landlord or master straight in the face. The only thing to introduce is the Youth Corps (少年軍) that arose in Chungdo-ri, Soi-myŏn, amidst this gloom and desolation (within Chinmyŏng Lecture Hall - 進明講習所). Although its own strength is weak and support is little, may it grow up bravely and well, becoming a flower in the desert, a torch in the darkness. There are no notable historical sites or famous places either. There have also been few notable figures traditionally. However, if one must mention some, Ch'ae Chŏng (蔡靖), Vice Director of the Privy Council (樞密副使) in ancient Koryŏ; Pak Sun (朴淳), Nam Yŏn-nyŏn (南延年), Ch'oe Kŭp (崔及), Pak Chang-saeng (朴長生), Pak Suk-chin (朴叔蓁) of the Yi Dynasty were famous. As for recent emerging figures, perhaps because the author is unaware, but apart from Mr. Chŏng Kwang-jo (鄭廣朝) residing in Kyŏngsŏng, there seem to be no others engaged in any activity. Next, speaking of topography, branches of the T'aebaek Mountain range (太白山) meander and curve in the east, south, and west, while the northwest opens into plains. Between them, tributaries of the Talch'ŏn flow east, tributaries of the Mihocheon flow west, and tributaries of the Ch'ŏngmich'ŏn flow north, interspersed with arable land. Kagyŏp-san (迦葉山) stands tall in the north of the county, serving as the town's guardian mountain (鎭山). Also, the Chagi Stone (自起石 - Self-Rising Stone) located 30 ri west of the town is worth noting as a curiosity, and the site of Ŭisong Pavilion (倚松亭) remains only as an empty lot, so perhaps it can be called a historical site (Located east of the old guest house - 客■東 [Hanja unclear]). <75>

Ch'ungju County (忠州郡), Hanging its Neck on Yellow Tobacco
In the desolate plain, shabby thatched houses like makeshift huts (치집) are scattered sparsely. Through the middle of the town, like a parting in thinning hair, only a large road runs clearly. Intermittently, the sound of the pastor beating his bento box (the sound of the church bell in Ch'ungju is called the sound of the pastor beating his bento box - 牧師님의 벤도그롯듸리논 소리) and the sounds wishing for the ruin of village rich men (drum sounds from restaurants - 料理屋長鼓聲) can be heard. Two-story drying rooms like melon sheds (참외막) stand prominently here and there, and bundles of tobacco like dried pollack (明太) are carried in and out. This is, without asking, Ch'ungju County, which lives hanging its neck on yellow tobacco (黃色煙草) (Yellow tobacco is detailed in a separate section). This Ch'ungju County was once a paradise (樂境) in central Korea, with green tiles and red railings shining with golden light (碧瓦朱欄에 金光燐然). Silla's King Chinhŭng (新羅眞興王) established a secondary capital (小京) here (also called Miŭlsŏng - 未乙省 or Manjangsŏng - 萬長城), moved noble relatives' children and powerful clansmen from the six divisions (六部豪氏), and made it a place of song, dance, and pleasure (歌舞歡樂). Later, called variously Chungwŏn Fortress (中原城), Kugwŏn Prefecture (國原府), or Yaksŏng (藥城 - Medicine Fortress; this name arose after Koryŏ's King Ch'ungnyŏl rebuilt Ch'ungju Fortress and carved lotus flowers on the walls), it temporarily housed a military garrison (鎭營), divisional command (盤司營), or provincial governor's office (觀察府). After the office (府) was moved to Ch'ŏngju in the 3rd year of Yung-hŭi (隆熙三年 - 1909), it passed through winds of spring and autumn rains to reach the present day. It was first called Ch'ungju in the 23rd year of Koryŏ's T'aejo (高麗太祖二十三年). This county connects to Kyŏngsang Province (慶尙道) to the southeast and borders Kyŏnggi and Kangwŏn provinces to the northwest. Not only is land and water transport convenient, but it is also a militarily important location backing Hansŏng (漢城 - Seoul). Therefore, generation after generation, the calamities of war (兵禍) were incessant. The most notable were the Mongol invasions during Koryŏ's King Kojong (高麗高宗時蒙古亂) (at that time, warehouse official Ch'oe Su greatly defeated Mongol troops at Kŭmdanghyŏn, now Tongjang-myŏn - 倉正崔守大破蒙兵于金堂峴 今東長面) and the Japanese invasions during the Yi Dynasty's Imjin War (李朝壬辰時倭亂). Also, in recent times, it suffered particularly severe calamities during the Kapo Tonghak Rebellion (甲午東學亂), the Pyŏngsin (丙申 - 1896, First Righteous Army - 第一回義兵), and Chŏngmi (丁未 - 1907, Disbanded Army Rebellion - 解散軍隊亂) Righteous Army uprisings. The history of Ch'ungju is truly a history of blood and tears. The mountains and rivers still bear the scars (㾗跡) of bullets and cannon smoke. In the fields and plains, on cloudy and rainy days, the cries of ghosts (鬼哭) seem to wail mournfully (啾啾). The city of yesterday's wealth and splendor has transformed into today's bleak and desolate poor village (寒村). When the setting moon reflects on T'an'gŭmdae and the spring cuckoo cries on Choryŏng Pass, thinking of past events, who could possibly hold back a handful of tears (一掬의 淚)? Ch'ungju is desolate and dark. The poor of Yongsan-ri (龍山里) weep daily from hunger and cold. Village farmers hang their necks on yellow tobacco and suffer abuse from inspectors at the Monopoly Bureau's gate (專賣局門간). The entire city land and houses have become the property of Japanese (Only 11 Korean-owned properties remain within the city walls). Ch'ungju fell to Japanese soldiers during the Imjin War; today, it has been completely annihilated again by Japanese merchants. Yet, the populace only sleeps and shows no activity. Writers like Im Kang-su (任强首) cannot be seen <76>, nor warriors like Ŏ Yu-so (魚有沼), nor musicians like Urŭk (于勒). Sages like Kwŏn Kŭn (權近), Chŏng In-ji (鄭麟趾), and Son Mu-hyo (孫舞孝) slumber eternally underground (The tombs of all three sages are in Ch'ungju). The heroic spirit of Im Ch'ungmin (任忠愍 - Im Kyŏng-ŏp) wanders in the void. The Central Pagoda (中央塔) stands silently, speaking of your history. Kaech'ŏn Temple (開天寺) (Housing monuments to Great Masters Hongbŏp and Pŏpkyŏng; located in Hach'ŏn-ri, Tongnyang-myŏn - 有弘法, 法鏡兩大師碑 在東良面荷天里), Yŏngjak Temple (靈鵲寺), Kŭmsaeng Temple (金生寺) (Located on Pukchin Cliff - 在北津崖) are already ruined, and the sound of temple bells cannot be heard. Posang Pagoda (寶相塔) (Pagoda for Great Master Hongbŏp's wishes; originally at Kaech'ŏn Temple) has been moved to Kyŏngbok Palace (景福宮). The Mad Buddha (狂佛) is imprisoned in the County Office (郡廳). (Inside the County Office compound, there is an Iron Buddha;俗■ [Hanja unclear] it's said that if you pray sincerely, virulent diseases spread, and if a hall is built, fire breaks out, hence called the Mad Buddha. Originally in a field east of town, recently moved to the County Office). Even Ch'ungju's ancient art has all sunk into oblivion. Only the convenience of transportation is something to boast about. In the future, when the Ch'ungbuk Line railway opens, it will become even more convenient. However, it is doubtful whether the people of Ch'ungju, with their current knowledge and economic power, can utilize this to compete effectively with foreigners in various fields. Lastly, one thing to mention is the few youths who guard this isolated fortress of Ch'ungju and fight fiercely amid adversity. Yi Sŏn-gyu (李善圭), O Ŏn-yŏng (吳彦泳), Sŏ Sang-gyŏng (徐相庚), Sŏ Ch'ŏn-sun (徐天淳), Sim Ki-t'aek (沈琦澤), and other youths endure difficulties in hundreds of ways, engaging in youth movements, labor movements, or cultural movements (like organizing the Mansŏng Reading Society - 晩聲解社組織). I only hope they strive diligently and fight well.

Koesan County (槐山郡), Gradually Declining
This county is located slightly centrally in North Ch'ungch'ŏng Province. It borders Mun'gyŏng County (聞慶郡) of North Kyŏngsang Province to the east, Ch'ungju and Chinch'ŏn counties to the southwest, and Ŭmsŏng, Ch'ungju, and Chech'ŏn counties to the north. Topographically, the Songni (俗離) and Choryŏng (鳥嶺) mountain ranges coil in the southeast, forming peaks like Kongjŏng (公正), Hŭiyang (㬢陽), Mabon (馬本), Paktal (朴達), Kyerip (鷄立), etc. Also, ranges like Ch'ilbo (七寶), Tuwŏn (頭院), Ch'uksŏng (杻城), Kŭmdaeya (金大也), San'gu (産龜) connect in the northwest. The three rivers Pant'an (磻灘), Kyech'ŏn (鷄川), and Ihwa (伊火) flow together between them, entering Ch'ungju County to the north and becoming the upper reaches of the Han River. Generally, mountains are many and plains are few, making transportation very inconvenient. However, the lower reaches of Koesan Stream (槐川) have long offered boat transport convenience with Kyŏngsŏng. Also, recently, regular automobile service between Koesan town and Chŭngp'yŏng (曾坪) provides a connection to the Ch'ungbuk Line train. The Chakch'ŏn basin (鵲川流域) (upper Kŭm River) has many plains and is famous as a rice-producing area. Regarding its history, this county was originally Koguryŏ's Ingunnae-gun (仍斤內郡). In the Silla period, it was Koeyang (槐壤); in Koryŏ, Koeju (槐州); and from the early Yi Dynasty, it was called Koesan (槐山). When the four myŏn were merged and abolished, Yŏnp'ung (延豊) and Ch'ŏng'an (■安 - Hanja unclear) counties were incorporated. Goods from the southern region (南鮮) and the central-northern region (中北鮮) all converged in this county, making the town quite prosperous (殷盛) and culture developed, earning it the name "mountain city" (山間都會) until a few years ago. <77> However, the opening of the Kyŏngbu Line (京釜線) and the Ch'ungbuk Line dealt a major blow to this county. The market situation shows a trend of gradual decline. Also, the so-called wealthy families move annually to Kyŏngsŏng or other cities to avoid excessive financial burdens (負擔金). Commerce has become the monopoly of Chinese merchants. Thus, in just a few years, the mountain town's splendor, once boasted of, seems likely to become a fleeting dream (槐花一夢). The youths among them are mostly full from fine clothes and food (錦衣玉食), guarding only their own inner rooms. Therefore, although there is a nominal Youth Association, apart from running one lecture hall and a newspaper branch office, there is no activity whatsoever. Even that seems less the work of the Youth Association and more the work of Mr. Chŏng Chin-sŏk (鄭震錫) and a few teachers. They endure hunger and cold, toiling day and night, while the propertied youths merely hold officer titles, nap behind folding screens (屛風), and go to restaurants to fight over houses with automobile drivers and madams every night (the so-called advisors - 顧問). Alas, pull yourselves together! As for products, yellow tobacco and charcoal could be called specialities. Besides these, apart from the usual rice, there is nothing countable. Famous places include Hwayang-dong (華陽洞) in Ch'ŏngch'ŏn-myŏn, considered sacred ground by pseudo-Ming Confucian scholars (假明人儒者) (Hwayang-dong is detailed in a separate article), the inscription "Ŭmbyŏng" (陰屛) on the upper stream of Yit'an (梨灘) in Kammul-myŏn, said to be the calligraphy of Ming envoy Zhu Zhi-fan (朱之番) (On a black rock face, the two characters 陰屛 are written, about 1.5 ch'on high, about 2 ch'ŏk wide; according to legend, the original writing reached over 30 ch'ŏk), Suanbo Hot Spring (水安堡溫泉) (also detailed elsewhere), and the notoriously rugged Choryŏng Pass (This place was originally the border between Silla and Koguryŏ, and a crucial point on the Kyŏngsŏng-Pusan route, so for military defense purposes, a fortress was built in ancient times, and First, Second, and Third Gates were established. The Third Gate belongs to this county; the others belong to Mun'gyŏng). These are the most notable. Also, for ancient artifacts, the Stone Buddha (石佛) in Mirŭk-ri, Sangmo-myŏn, Choryŏng Valley, deserves first mention (Height 3 chang 5 ch'ŏk, circumference 2 chang 5 ch'ŏk; a relic from about 2000 years ago, the largest Buddha in Ch'ungbuk). And finally, I briefly introduce that Mr. Hong Myŏng-hŭi (洪命憙) of the Dong-A Ilbo is from this Koesan, and conclude my writing.

Yŏngdong County (永同郡), Full of Issues
Located 147 ri south of Pusan (釜山) and 134 ri north of Kyŏngsŏng, occupying a spot roughly central on the Kyŏngbu Line and being the southernmost tip of North Ch'ungch'ŏng Province, Yŏngdong County was the place with the most issues in all of Ch'ungbuk. The tenant farmer movement was also, at one time, the most intense in the entire province (Chang Chun (張埈), Kim Haeng-ha (金行夏), Kim Kŭk-su (金極洙), and other youths were central figures). The youth movement also had the most vitality (Currently operating Kyesan Academy - 稽山學院). Ch'ungbuk's only <78> large factory, the cotton ginning factory (繰綿工場) run by the large Ōsaka merchant Suzuki Shōten (鈴木商店), is also located here (Details of this factory are in a separate section). The inexhaustible Wŏlmyŏng-dong (月明洞) graphite (黑鉛) (in Ch'ŏngsan-myŏn, Okch'ŏn County) managed by Yamano Shūichi (山野秀一) is also exported via this place (the so-called Yŏngdong graphite). The great scholar Master Sŭng'ae Kim Su-on (乘厓先生 金守溫) was once born here, and the great musician Master Nan'gye Pak Yŏn (蘭溪朴堧先生) also resided here.
The famously named Puyong Fortress (芙蓉城) and Nakhwa Terrace (落花臺), the high-altitude Ch'up'ungnyŏng Pass (秋風嶺) (highest point in South Korea - 南鮮最高地), the magnificent Okkil Falls (玉吉瀑布) (in Oksan, west of Simch'ŏn Station, height 60 ch'ŏk), the scenic Eight Views of Hwanggan (黃澗八景) (Sagun-bong - 使君峰, Sanyang-byŏk - 山羊壁, Yonggan-dae - 龍澗臺, Naengch'ŏn-jŏng - 冷泉亭, Hwagangok - 花江獄, Ch'ŏnghak-kul - 靑鶴窟, Pŏpchon-am - 法尊菴) – are all here. The ancient battlefields of Silla and Paekche (Located in Yangsan-myŏn. Silla's King Muyŏl (武烈王), wishing to attack Paekche, made General Kim Un (金運將) set up camp at Yangsan and attack Ch'ŏnsŏng Fortress. The fortress soldiers launched a fierce night raid. Un fought fiercely and finally died. People lamented him and composed the Yangsan Song (陽山曲) to mourn him. The Yangsan ballad (陽山謠) popular today originates from this) (양산도 始終此)
The Imjin War battlefield (壬辰古戰場) (Located near Ch'up'ungnyŏng Station; has the monument to the martyrdom of Samgoedang Chang Chi-hyŏn - 三槐堂張智賢殉節碑) is also here.
Furthermore, even last year's drought was the most severe in the entire province (Especially severe near Ch'up'ungnyŏng and Yangsan; the county office's relief measures include the usual free lending of sewing machines and also undertaking construction of the Hwanggan-Yŏngdong first-class road, water utilization association reclamation projects, etc.). This Yŏngdong County, with its many issues, was originally Silla's Kiltong-gun (吉同郡). Later called Yŏngdong or Kyesan (稽山), it underwent constant changes. In the 10th year of Kwangmu (光武十年 - 1906), three myŏn from Okch'ŏn - Yangnae (陽內) (now Yangsan-myŏn), Yangnae Ilso (陽內一所) (now Haksan-myŏn), Yangnam Iso (陽南二所) (now Yonghwa-myŏn) - were transferred. In the 3rd year of Taishō (大正三年 - 1914), Hwanggan County (黃㵎郡) was also merged, dividing it into eleven myŏn and 131 tong. It borders Muju (茂朱) and Kŭmsan (錦山) counties of North Chŏlla to the southwest, Sangju (尙州) and Kimch'ŏn (金泉) of North Kyŏngsang to the east, and Okch'ŏn to the northwest. Within its borders, the high mountain range of Ch'up'ungnyŏng traverses southwest, resulting in many ridges and scarce arable land. However, minerals and forest products are abundant everywhere. Also, the railway crosses the center of the county, with four stations: Yŏngdong, Hwanggan, Simch'ŏn (深川), and Ch'up'ungnyŏng. Other roads radiate in all directions, making transportation convenient. The upper reaches of the Kŭm River flow through the territory, providing convenient irrigation along its basin. The soil quality is generally fertile (膏腴), suitable for farming. Products, besides rice and soybeans, include upland cotton and minerals in particular abundance, but details are omitted here.

Okch'ŏn County (沃川郡), with Fertile Soil and Abundant Grain
This county was Kosan-gun (古戶山郡) in the old Silla period, temporarily called Kwansŏng (管城). It was first named Okch'ŏn in the 5th year of Koryŏ's King Ch'ungsŏn (高麗忠宣王五年). In the 3rd year of Taishō (1914), Ch'ŏngsan County (靑山郡), famous for its jujube production, was merged, dividing it into eleven myŏn. In Sŏ Kŏ-jŏng's (徐居正) "Record of Chŏktŭng Pavilion" (赤登樓記), it says, "In the state of Ok, the mountains are steep <79>, the water clear, the land fertile, and the five grains abundant" (沃之州山峻水淸土地肥沃, 五穀이 豊槐). And in Nam Su-mun's (南秀文) "Record of the Hyanggyo" (鄕校記), it says, "Among the famous scenic spots south of the Han River, Ok is supreme" (邑之據漢南者名勝多牟惟沃爲最). Seeing these, the name Okch'ŏn seems to signify the fertility of the land, and one can know it has possessed beautiful scenery since old times. Even today, with times changed (物換星移), Okch'ŏn remains scenically beautiful, and its customs are simple and honest (淳厚), making it the sole paradise (樂地) in Ch'ungbuk. Therefore, while the wealthy in other regions keep dispersing, uniquely in Okch'ŏn, wealthy people from other regions gather instead. Currently, Mr. O Yun-muk (吳允黙君), who can be called not just the wealthiest in Okch'ŏn but a plutocrat (巨富) of Ch'ungbuk, also moved here from Kyŏngsŏng (Mr. O is originally from Hamgyŏng Province and became suddenly rich during Yi Yong-ik's (李容翊) era). Recently, Mr. Kim Ki-t'ae (金琪邰君), a wealthy man from Chinju (晋州) involved in many issues between Kyŏngsŏng and the provinces, is also preparing to move here. He purchased a vast plot of land for over 7,000 Wŏn and is gathering over 40 famous master craftsmen from Kyŏngsŏng to build a magnificent new Aphanggung Palace (新阿房宮) with a budget of 80,000 or 100,000 Wŏn. Whether this will be a blessing or a curse for the future people of Okch'ŏn is unknown, but it is a fact that wealthy people from all directions keep gathering. Also, this county is the birthplace and burial place of the loyal minister of the Imjin War, Master Cho Chung-bong Hŏn (趙重峯憲先生) (at Chuksan Pass, Annae-myŏn - 在安邑杻山嶺). It is also the birthplace of the famous great Confucian scholar Master Song Uam Si-yŏl (宋尤菴時烈氏) and scholar Nam Su-mun (南學士秀文氏), adherents of modern Sadaejuui (事大主義 - flunkeyism). Therefore, Confucian scholars (儒者) were very numerous, and in the old era, it was called Yuhyang (儒鄕 - Confucian hometown) or Munhyang (文鄕 - literary hometown). However, due to the negative legacy of that, the people have all become docile (柔弱) and stubborn (頑固), completely falling behind in the current era. There is still no youth organization in the entire county (There is talk of recently starting a youth association in Ch'ŏngsan-myŏn). Ideological figures are also hard to find. Life seems a bit more comfortable compared to other counties, but the important areas near Simch'ŏn Station, the site of the new county office, have all become the property of Japanese. Commercial power has also been seized by either Japanese or Chinese. How many more days can that life be maintained? Speaking of products, rice (over 56,000 sŏk) and soybeans (over 14,800 sŏk) are the most abundant. Other special products include nuruk (麯子 - yeast starter for alcohol; annual production 150,780 pieces, 38,807 Wŏn), jujubes (大棗) (from old Ch'ŏngsan), raw silk cocoons (生繭) (from Iwŏn - 伊院), cotton, graphite (黑鉛) (Wŏlmyŏng-dong, Ch'ŏngsan-myŏn), and other minerals are important items. For transportation, the Kyŏngbu Railway passes through the county, having the Okch'ŏn and Iwŏn stations. Besides this, automobiles travel to neighboring counties, so except for remote mountainous areas, it is generally convenient. Finally, briefly mentioning its location and topography: This county is located at the southern end of North Ch'ungch'ŏng Province, bordering Yŏngdong County and Sangju County of North Kyŏngsang to the east, Kŭmsan County of North Chŏlla to the south, Taejŏn County (太田郡) of South Ch'ungch'ŏng to the west, <80> and Poŭn County to the north. It is about 12 ri east-west and 11 ri north-south, with a total area of over 35 square ri. Mountains surround it on all four sides, and plains are few. Rivers: Various waters coming from Muju, Chinan (鎭安), and Kŭmsan areas of North Chŏlla join in Yangsan-myŏn of Yŏngdong County to become Tangt'an-jin ferry crossing (唐灘津). In Inae-myŏn of this county, they further join a stream coming from Sangju County to become the famous Chŏktŭng-jin ferry crossing (赤登津). In Tongi-myŏn of this county, they join a river coming from Poŭn and Ch'ŏngsan of this county to become Tong-jin (東津). Flowing north, they further join a tributary coming from Chinsan of North Chŏlla and enter Poŭn County; this is precisely the upper reaches of the Kŭm River (錦江). Also, for famous places and historical sites, there are Chŏktŭng Pavilion (赤登樓), Hwansŏn Pavilion (喚仙樓), Kangsŏn Pavilion (降仙樓), Samji Terrace (三止臺), Mani Mountain Fortress (摩尼山城), but they are all dilapidated, with only the old sites remaining. The Tiger Hole Cave (虎穴巖窟) and Owl Rock (鵂岩) south of the old Ch'ŏngsan town are said to be great spectacles, but not having seen them is a regret.

(Continuation from page 94)
The young women of Ch'ŏngsan and Poŭn eat lots of jujubes, so their mouths are puckered (from spitting out jujube seeds), and when it rains during the Three Hottest Days (三伏), they constantly cry, so their eyes are swollen (fearing a bad jujube harvest means they can't get married). Hwanggan girls eat lots of soft persimmons, so their cheeks are plump. Yŏngdong girls handle lots of cotton, so their hair is white. Okch'ŏn girls smell lots of nuruk, so they often get headaches. Ch'ŏngju girls drink lots of Ch'ojŏng mineral water, so they have no stomach ailments. Chinch'ŏn girls eat lots of rice, so their faces are fair and clear. Ŭmsŏng girls are hounded by debt, so their bodies are pale. Koesan girls handle lots of charcoal, so their hands and feet are black. Ch'ungju girls handle lots of tobacco, so the tips of their noses are yellow. Tanyang and Chech'ŏn girls walk the mountains a lot, so the soles of their feet are calloused. However, this is all just joking; how could it really be so? Truly, during this trip to Ch'ungbuk, as for women, thanks to friends in Ch'ŏngju, Chinch'ŏn, and Ch'ungju, I couldn't meet any besides a few tavern hostesses and kisaeng. Therefore, let alone knowing what young women look like, I couldn't even tell what a hen looks like. Ch'ungbuk seems to be a society of widowers; women are nowhere to be seen. It is truly a desolate and lonely place. <81>
<65-81>

**Summary**

This 1925 travelogue by Ch'a Sang-ch'an paints a deeply critical and pessimistic portrait of North Ch'ungch'ŏng Province (Ch'ungbuk). The author finds the province lagging behind others in culture and development, economically impoverished, and lacking vitality. He laments the decline from past significance, criticizes the lingering negative influence of the traditional elite (yangban and Confucian scholars), and points out the encroachment of Japanese economic power ("parasites from overseas"). Each county visited—Ch'ŏngju, Chinch'ŏn, Ŭmsŏng, Ch'ungju, Koesan, Yŏngdong, and Okch'ŏn—is described with its specific issues, ranging from general stagnation and loss of land/commerce to Japanese interests, to the particular struggles related to cash crops like tobacco or the impacts of new infrastructure like railways. Despite occasional mentions of historical figures, scenic spots, or minor positive developments (like a helpful magistrate or fledgling youth/church activities), the overwhelming tone is one of disappointment and concern for the province's future under prevailing conditions.

From a colonial history perspective, the article is revealing for its candid expression of disillusionment and critique during the Japanese occupation. The author's explicit references to Japanese economic dominance (land ownership, factories, trade), the comparison of Ch'ungju's fate under Japanese merchants to its fall during the Imjin War, and the description of farmers exploited through the tobacco monopoly system highlight the tangible impacts of colonialism on the region's economy and society. Furthermore, the critique of the traditional Korean elite alongside the general apathy and hardship of the populace reflects the complex social dynamics and intellectual currents of the period, where traditional structures were seen as failing alongside the pressures of colonization. Historians might find the detailed descriptions of each county's specific economic activities (agriculture, mining, forestry, nascent industry), social problems (poverty, debt, land tenancy, lack of activism), and the perceived cultural stagnation valuable for understanding regional conditions and the lived experience in rural Korea during the 1920s. The author's unabashedly negative assessment provides a stark counterpoint to official colonial narratives of progress.

**Named Entities**

忠淸南道	충청남도	Ch'ungch'ŏngnam-do (South Ch'ungch'ŏng Province)
忠淸北道	충청북도	Ch'ungch'ŏngbuk-do (North Ch'ungch'ŏng Province)
全鮮	전선	Chŏnson (All of Korea)
忠南	충남	Ch'ungnam (Abbr. for South Ch'ungch'ŏng)
忠北	충북	Ch'ungbuk (Abbr. for North Ch'ungch'ŏng)
開闢	개벽	Kaebyŏk (Magazine Name)
丹陽	단양	Tanyang
堤川	제천	Chech'ŏn
報恩	보은	Poŭn
江原道	강원도	Kangwŏn-do (Kangwŏn Province)
京畿道	경기도	Kyŏnggi-do (Kyŏnggi Province)
全羅北道	전라북도	Chŏllabuk-do (North Chŏlla Province)
慶尙北道	경상북도	Kyŏngsangbuk-do (North Kyŏngsang Province)
漢江	한강	Han River (Han-gang)
忠州平野	충주평야	Ch'ungju Plain (Ch'ungjup'yŏngya)
錦江	금강	Kŭm River (Kŭmgang)
淸州	청주	Ch'ŏngju
鎭川	진천	Chinch'ŏn
永同	영동	Yŏngdong
鳥嶺	조령	Choryŏng (Pass)
竹嶺	죽령	Chungnyŏng (Pass)
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
甲斐	갑비	Kapi (Kai Province, Japan)
信濃	신농	Sinnong (Shinano Province, Japan)
德周山	덕주산	Tŏkchu-san (Mountain)
小白山胍	소백산맥	Sobaek-sanmaek (Sobaek Mountain Range)
俗離山胍	속리산맥	Songni-sanmaek (Songni Mountain Range)
三道峯	삼도봉	Samdo-bong (Peak)
白華山	백화산	Paekhwa-san (Mountain)
月岳	월악	Wŏrak-san (Mountain)
白雲	백운	Paegun-san (Mountain)
錦繡	금수	Kŭmsu-san (Mountain)
槐山	괴산	Koesan
七寶山	칠보산	Ch'ilbo-san (Mountain)
槐山川	괴산천	Koesan Stream (Koesanch'ŏn)
大元山	대원산	Taewŏn-san (Mountain)
陰城	음성	Ŭmsŏng
迦葉川	가섭천	Kayŏp Stream (Kayŏpch'ŏn)
忠州	충주	Ch'ungju
達川	달천	Talch'ŏn
原州	원주	Wŏnju
雉岳山	치악산	Ch'iak-san (Mountain)
周浦川	주포천	Chup'o Stream (Chup'och'ŏn)
廣灘	광탄	Kwangt'an
八結川	팔결천	P'algyŏl Stream (P'algyŏlch'ŏn)
美湖川	미호천	Miho Stream (Mihoch'ŏn)
芙江	부강	Pugang
永同川	영동천	Yŏngdong Stream (Yŏngdongch'ŏn)
松江	송강	Songgang (River)
石川	석천	Sŏkch'ŏn (Stream)
三國	삼국	Samguk (Three Kingdoms)
文義	문의	Munŭi
懷仁	회인	Hoein
百濟	백제	Paekche (Kingdom)
沃川	옥천	Okch'ŏn
黃澗	황간	Hwanggan
靑山	청산	Ch'ŏngsan
新羅	신라	Silla (Kingdom)
淸安	청안	Ch'ŏng'an
延豐	연풍	Yŏnp'ung
淸風	청풍	Ch'ŏngp'ung
永春	영춘	Yŏngch'un
高句麗	고구려	Koguryŏ (Kingdom)
上黨城	상당성	Sangdang Fortress (Sangdangsŏng)
三年城	삼년성	Samnyŏn Fortress (Samnyŏnsŏng)
道樂城	도락성	Torak Fortress (Toraksŏng)
紺岩山城	감암산성	Kam'am Mountain Fortress (Kam'amsansŏng)
城池古城	성지고성	Sŏngji Old Fortress (Sŏngjigosŏng)
高麗	고려	Koryŏ (Dynasty)
李朝	이조	Yi Dynasty (Ijo)
壬辰亂	임진란	Imjin War (Imjinnan)
加藤淸正	가등청정	Katō Kiyomasa
慶州	경주	Kyŏngju
安東	안동	Andong
豊基	풍기	P'unggi
小西行長	소서행장	Konishi Yukinaga
尙州	상주	Sangju
聞慶	문경	Mun'gyŏng
申砬	신립	Sin Rip
彈琴臺	탄금대	T'an'gŭmdae
秋風嶺	추풍령	Ch'up'ungnyŏng (Pass)
張智賢	장지현	Chang Chi-hyŏn
華淸嶺	화청령	Hwach'ŏngnyŏng (Pass)
國士峯	국사봉	Kuksa-bong (Peak)
趙重峯	조중봉	Cho Chung-bong (Cho Hŏn)
朝鮮政府	조선정부	Chosŏn Government (Chosŏn Chŏngbu)
公州	공주	Kongju
李太王	이태왕	King Kojong (Yi T'aewang)
乙未	을미	Ŭlmi (Year 1895)
隆熙	융희	Yung-hŭi (Era Name 1907-1910)
日韓合倂	일한합병	Japan-Korea Annexation (Ilhan Hapbyŏng)
大正	대정	Taishō (Era Name 1912-1926)
素砂	소사	Sosa (Plain)
牙山平野	아산평야	Asan Plain (Asanp'yŏngya)
申叔舟	신숙주	Sin Suk-chu
中國	중국	Chunguk (China)
鳥嶺森林	조령삼림	Choryŏng Forest (Choryŏng Sallim)
黃腸封山	황장봉산	Hwanggung Pongsan (Royal Timber Reserve)
明治鑛業會社	명치광업회사	Meiji Mining Company (Myŏngch'i Kwang'ŏp Hoesa)
小宮	소궁	Komiya (Japanese name)
山野	산야	Yamano (Japanese name)
鈴木繰棉工場	영목조면공장	Suzuki Cotton Ginning Factory
春川	춘천	Ch'unch'ŏn
臥牛山	와우산	Wa'u-san (Mountain)
鳳儀山	봉의산	Pongŭi-san (Mountain)
無心川	무심천	Musimch'ŏn (Stream)
昭陽江	소양강	Soyang River (Soyanggang)
牛頭平野	우두평야	Udu Plain (Udup'yŏngya)
竹田平野	죽전평야	Chukchŏn Plain (Chukchŏnp'yŏngya)
祺北樓	기북루	Kit'aek-ru (Pavilion)
天堂群	천당군	Cheondang-gun (Shrine/Place Name)
望仙樓	망선루	Mangsŏn-ru (Pavilion)
東公園	동공원	Tong Park (East Park)
唐美山	당미산	Tangmi-san (Mountain)
西公園	서공원	Sŏ Park (West Park)
社稷山	사직산	Sajik-san (Mountain)
櫻馬場	앵마장	Cherry Blossom Horse Track (Aengmajang)
昭陽亭	소양정	Soyang Pavilion (Soyangjŏng)
鳳凰臺	봉황대	Ponghwangdae (Pavilion/Terrace)
白鶩洲	백로주	Paengnuju (Islet)
慈惠病院	자혜병원	Chahye Hospital
高等普通學校	고등보통학교	Higher Common School (Kodŭng Pot'ong Hakkyo)
師範學校	사범학교	Normal School (Sabŏm Hakkyo)
金泰熙	김태희	Kim T'ae-hŭi
東亞支局	동아지국	Dong-A Ilbo Branch Office
大成町	대성정	Taesŏng-chŏng (District/Neighborhood Name)
閔泳殷	민영은	Min Yŏng-ŭn
龐寅赫	방인혁	Pang In-hyŏk
朴知事	박지사	Governor Pak
耶蘇敎	야소교	Yasogyo (Protestant Christianity)
淸南學校	청남학교	Ch'ŏngnam School
金元根	김원근	Kim Wŏn-gŭn
大成普通學校	대성보통학교	Taesŏng Common School
咸台永	함태영	Ham T'ae-yŏng
天道敎	천도교	Ch'ŏndogyo (Religion)
徐昌壽	서창수	Sŏ Ch'ang-su
金英植	김영식	Kim Yŏng-sik
池晶夏	지정하	Chi Chŏng-ha
南石橋	남석교	Nam Sŏkkyo (South Stone Bridge)
漢宣帝	한선제	Emperor Xuan of Han
五鳳	오봉	Wufeng (Era Name)
鐵幢	철당	Ch'ŏltang (Iron Flagpole)
高麗光宗	고려광종	King Kwangjong of Koryŏ
三忠祠	삼충사	Samch'ungsa (Shrine of the Three Loyal Subjects)
東峯戰捷碑	동봉전첩비	Tongbong Victory Monument
鴨脚樹	압각수	Apkaksu (Ginkgo Tree)
高麗恭愍王	고려공민왕	King Kongmin of Koryŏ
信旽	신돈	Sin Ton
李牧隱穡	이목은색	Yi Mogŭn Saek (Yi Saek)
李陶隱崇仁	이도은숭인	Yi Toŭn Sungin (Yi Sung-in)
陽村權近	양촌권근	Yangch'on Kwŏn Kŭn
聚景樓	취경루	Ch'wigyŏng-ru (Pavilion Name)
椒井	초정	Ch'ojŏng (Mineral Spring)
龍仁	용인	Yongin
安城	안성	Ansŏng
萬弩郡	만노군	Manno-gun (Old name for Chinch'ŏn)
今勿奴	금물노	Kŭmmulla (Old name for Chinch'ŏn)
黑壤	흑양	Hŭgyang (Old name for Chinch'ŏn)
李朝太宗	이조태종	King T'aejong of the Yi Dynasty
金庾信	김유신	Kim Yu-sin
宋彦琦	송언기	Song Ŏn-gi
高麗高宗	고려고종	King Kojong of Koryŏ
蒙古	몽고	Monggo (Mongolia/Mongols)
鄭安立	정안립	Chŏng An-rip
鄭在達	정재달	Chŏng Chae-dal
朴鵬緖	박붕서	Pak Pong-sŏ
趙明熙	조명희	Cho Myŏng-hŭi
洪璔植	홍선식	Hong Ch'ŏn-sik
洪■植	홍X식	Hong X-sik [Hanja unclear]
朴瓚熙	박찬희	Pak Ch'an-hŭi
李升雨	이승우	Yi Sŭng-u
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Old name for Seoul)
仁川米豆場	인천미두장	Inch'ŏn Rice and Bean Market
申	신	Sin (Family Name)
鄭	정	Chŏng (Family Name)
李	이	Yi (Family Name)
吉祥山	길상산	Kilsang-san (Mountain)
駕峴	가현	Kahyon (Yijae Pass)
閔泳徽	민영휘	Min Yŏng-hwi
韓圭卨	한규설	Han Kyu-sŏl
李容汶	이용문	Yi Yong-mun
李海用	이해용	Yi Hae-yong
專賣局	전매국	Monopoly Bureau (Chŏnmaeguk)
聖公會	성공회	Anglican Church (Sŏnggonghoe)
아다-로-스	아다 로스	Ada Ross (Englishman's Name)
愛人病院	애인병원	Aein Hospital
牛澤	우택	U T'aek (Place Name)
草坪	초평	Ch'op'yŏng (Place Name)
平沙落雁峯	평사낙안봉	P'yŏngsa Nag'an-bong (Peak Name)
吹笛臺	취적대	Ch'wijŏk-tae (Terrace Name)
靑鷄白羅洞	청계백라동	Ch'ŏnggye Paengna-dong (Valley Name)
會安盤石落妓岩	회안반석낙기암	Hoean Pansŏk Nag'iam (Rock Name)
双淸岩	쌍청암	Ssangch'ŏng'am (Rock Name)
都堂山城	도당산성	Todang Mountain Fortress
大母山城	대모산성	Taemo Mountain Fortress
金獻信祠	김헌신사	Shrine to Kim Hŏn-sin (likely error for Kim Yu-sin)
仍忽	잉홀	Inghol (Old name for Ŭmsŏng)
雪城	설성	Sŏlsŏng (Old name for Ŭmsŏng)
仍斤內	잉근내	Ingŭnnae (Old name for Ŭmsŏng/Koesan)
遠南	원남	Wŏnnam (Myŏn Name)
光海朝	광해조	Reign of King Kwanghae
李安訥	이안눌	Yi An-nŭl
洪受疇	홍수주	Hong Su-ju
金旺	금왕	Kŭmang (Myŏn Name)
孟洞	맹동	Maengdong (Myŏn Name)
笙極	생극	Saenggŭk (Myŏn Name)
三成	삼성	Samsŏng (Myŏn Name)
大所	대소	Taeso (Myŏn Name)
甘谷	감곡	Kamgok (Myŏn Name)
光武	광무	Kwangmu (Era Name 1897-1907)
蘇伊	소이	Soi (Myŏn Name)
長湖院	장호원	Changhowŏn
閔泳徵	민영징	Min Yŏng-hwi (likely same as Min Yŏng-hwi)
閔丙奭	민병석	Min Pyŏng-sŏk
進明講習所	진명강습소	Chinmyŏng Lecture Hall
蔡靖	채정	Ch'ae Chŏng
朴淳	박순	Pak Sun
南延年	남연년	Nam Yŏn-nyŏn
崔及	최급	Ch'oe Kŭp
朴長生	박장생	Pak Chang-saeng
朴叔蓁	박숙진	Pak Suk-chin
鄭廣朝	정광조	Chŏng Kwang-jo
太白山	태백산	T'aebaek-san (Mountain)
淸渼川	청미천	Ch'ŏngmich'ŏn (Stream)
迦葉山	가섭산	Kagyŏp-san (Mountain)
自起石	자기석	Chagi Stone (Self-Rising Stone)
倚松亭	의송정	Ŭisong Pavilion
新羅眞興王	신라진흥왕	King Chinhŭng of Silla
未乙省	미을성	Miŭlsŏng (Old name for Ch'ungju)
萬長城	만장성	Manjangsŏng (Old name for Ch'ungju)
中原城	중원성	Chungwŏn Fortress
國原府	국원부	Kugwŏn Prefecture
藥城	약성	Yaksŏng (Medicine Fortress - old name for Ch'ungju)
高麗忠烈王	고려충렬왕	King Ch'ungnyŏl of Koryŏ
高麗太祖	고려태조	King T'aejo of Koryŏ (Wang Kŏn)
漢城	한성	Hansŏng (Old name for Seoul)
崔守	최수	Ch'oe Su
金堂峴	금당현	Kŭmdanghyŏn (Pass Name)
東長面	동장면	Tongjang-myŏn (Township Name)
甲午東學亂	갑오동학란	Kapo Tonghak Rebellion (1894)
丙申	병신	Pyŏngsin (Year 1896)
丁未	정미	Chŏngmi (Year 1907)
龍山里	용산리	Yongsan-ri (Village Name)
任强首	임강수	Im Kang-su
魚有沼	어유소	Ŏ Yu-so
于勒	우륵	Urŭk
權近	권근	Kwŏn Kŭn
鄭麟趾	정인지	Chŏng In-ji
孫舞孝	손무효	Son Mu-hyo
任忠愍	임충민	Im Ch'ungmin (Im Kyŏng-ŏp)
中央塔	중앙탑	Chung'angt'ap (Central Pagoda)
開天寺	개천사	Kaech'ŏn Temple
弘法	홍법	Hongbŏp (Monk's Name)
法鏡	법경	Pŏpkyŏng (Monk's Name)
東良面	동량면	Tongnyang-myŏn (Township Name)
荷天里	하천리	Hach'ŏn-ri (Village Name)
靈鵲寺	영작사	Yŏngjak Temple
金生寺	금생사	Kŭmsaeng Temple
北津崖	북진애	Pukchin Cliff
寶相塔	보상탑	Posang Pagoda
景福宮	경복궁	Kyŏngbok Palace
狂佛	광불	Kwangbul (Mad Buddha)
李善圭	이선규	Yi Sŏn-gyu
吳彦泳	오언영	O Ŏn-yŏng
徐相庚	서상경	Sŏ Sang-gyŏng
徐天淳	서천순	Sŏ Ch'ŏn-sun
沈琦澤	심기택	Sim Ki-t'aek
晩聲解社	만성해사	Mansŏng Reading Society
公正	공정	Kongjŏng (Peak Name)
㬢陽	희양	Hŭiyang (Peak Name)
馬本	마본	Mabon (Peak Name)
朴達	박달	Paktal (Peak Name)
鷄立	계립	Kyerip (Peak Name)
頭院	두원	Tuwŏn (Range Name)
杻城	축성	Ch'uksŏng (Range Name)
金大也	금대야	Kŭmdaeya (Range Name)
産龜	산구	San'gu (Range Name)
磻灘	반탄	Pant'an (River Name)
鷄川	계천	Kyech'ŏn (River Name)
伊火	이화	Ihwa (River Name)
槐川	괴천	Koesan Stream
曾坪	증평	Chŭngp'yŏng
鵲川	작천	Chakch'ŏn (Basin/River Name)
槐壤	괴양	Koeyang (Old name for Koesan)
槐州	괴주	Koeju (Old name for Koesan)
■安	X안	Ch'ŏng'an? [Hanja unclear]
京釜線	경부선	Kyŏngbu Line (Railway)
忠北線	충북선	Ch'ungbuk Line (Railway)
鄭震錫	정진석	Chŏng Chin-sŏk
靑川面	청천면	Ch'ŏngch'ŏn-myŏn (Township Name)
華陽洞	화양동	Hwayang-dong (Valley Name)
甘勿面	감물면	Kammul-myŏn (Township Name)
梨灘	이탄	Yit'an (Rapids Name)
朱之番	주지번	Ju Ji-beon (Zhu Zhi-fan - Chinese Envoy)
水安堡溫泉	수안보온천	Suanbo Hot Spring
上芼面	상모면	Sangmo-myŏn (Township Name)
彌勒里	미륵리	Mirŭk-ri (Village Name)
洪命憙	홍명희	Hong Myŏng-hŭi
釜山	부산	Pusan
張埈	장준	Chang Chun
金行夏	김행하	Kim Haeng-ha
金極洙	김극수	Kim Kŭk-su
稽山學院	계산학원	Kyesan Academy
鈴木商店	영목상점	Suzuki Shōten (Suzuki Store/Company)
山野秀一	산야수일	Yamano Shūichi
月明洞	월명동	Wŏlmyŏng-dong (Place name - graphite mine)
乘厓先生金守溫	승애선생김수온	Master Sŭng'ae Kim Su-on
蘭溪朴堧先生	난계박연선생	Master Nan'gye Pak Yŏn
芙蓉城	부용성	Puyong Fortress (Puyongsŏng)
落花臺	낙화대	Nakhwa Terrace (Nakhwadae)
玉吉瀑布	옥길폭포	Okkil Falls (Okkilp'okp'o)
深川驛	심천역	Simch'ŏn Station
黃澗八景	황간팔경	Eight Views of Hwanggan (Hwanganp'algyŏng)
陽山面	양산면	Yangsan-myŏn (Township Name)
新羅武烈王	신라무열왕	King Muyŏl of Silla
金運將	김운장	General Kim Un
陽山曲	양산곡	Yangsan Song
陽山謠	양산요	Yangsan Ballad
三槐堂張智賢	삼괴당장지현	Samgoedang Chang Chi-hyŏn
吉同郡	길동군	Kiltong-gun (Old name for Yŏngdong)
稽山	계산	Kyesan (Old name for Yŏngdong)
陽內	양내	Yangnae (Old name for Yangsan-myŏn)
鶴山面	학산면	Haksan-myŏn (Township Name)
龍化面	용화면	Yonghwa-myŏn (Township Name)
黃㵎郡	황간군	Hwanggan County
茂朱	무주	Muju
錦山	금산	Kŭmsan
金泉	김천	Kimch'ŏn
古戶山郡	고호산군	Kohosan-gun (Old name for Okch'ŏn)
管城	관성	Kwansŏng (Old name for Okch'ŏn)
高麗忠宣王	고려충선왕	King Ch'ungsŏn of Koryŏ
徐居正	서거정	Sŏ Kŏ-jŏng
赤登樓	적등루	Chŏktŭng Pavilion (Chŏktŭngnu)
南秀文	남수문	Nam Su-mun
吳允黙	오윤묵	O Yun-muk
咸鏡道	함경도	Hamgyŏng-do (Province)
李容翊	이용익	Yi Yong-ik
晋州	진주	Chinju
金琪邰	김기태	Kim Ki-t'ae
趙憲	조헌	Cho Hŏn
安邑	안읍	Annae-myŏn (Township Name)
杻山嶺	축산령	Ch'uksan Pass (Ch'uksallyŏng)
宋時烈	송시열	Song Si-yŏl
伊院	이원	Iwŏn (Place Name)
太田郡	태전군	Taejŏn County
鎭安	진안	Chinan
唐灘津	당탄진	Tangt'an-jin (Ferry Crossing)
伊內面	이내면	Inae-myŏn (Township Name)
赤登津	적등진	Chŏktŭng-jin (Ferry Crossing)
東二面	동이면	Tongi-myŏn (Township Name)
東津	동진	Tong-jin (Ferry Crossing/Place Name)
珍山	진산	Chinsan
喚仙樓	환선루	Hwansŏn Pavilion (Hwansŏllu)
降仙樓	강선루	Kangsŏn Pavilion (Kangsŏllu)
三止臺	삼지대	Samji Terrace (Samjidae)
摩尼山城	마니산성	Mani Mountain Fortress (Manisansŏng)
虎穴巖窟	호혈암굴	Tiger Hole Cave (Hohyŏl Amgul)
鵂岩	휴암	Owl Rock (Hyuam)

**Glossary**

踏査記	답사기	Survey record, travelogue
하엿더니	하였더니	(I) did, and then... (Older form of 하였다가)
되얏다	되었다	Became (Older form of 되었다)
십다	싶다	To want to, seem like (Older spelling of 싶다)
업섯다	없었다	Did not exist, lacked (Older form of 없었다)
업다	없다	To not exist, lack (Older form of 없다)
잇다	있다	To exist, have (Older spelling of 있다)
가티	같이	Like, as (Older spelling of 같이)
엇지	어찌	How, why (Older spelling of 어찌)
만	만	Only, just (Used similarly to modern 만)
달나고	달라고	Asking to, requesting to (Slightly older form of 달라고)
잇스닛가	있으니까	Because there is (Older form of 있으니까)
만히	많이	Many, much (Older spelling of 많이)
稍南	초남	Slightly south
界하얏스니	경계하였으니	As it borders... (Older grammatical form)
無하니	무하니	Lacking, having none (Older form, similar to 없으니)
有하고	유하고	Having, possessing (Older form, similar to 있고)
可得할지니	가득할지니	It can be obtained/distinguished (Older grammatical form)
即	즉	Namely, that is
其	기	Its, that (Pronoun/determiner common in older texts)
水田	수전	Paddy field (Rice field)
田	전	Dry field
垈	대	Building site (land)
町步	정(정보)	chōngbo (unit of area, approx. 1 ha)
反步	반(단보)	tanbo (unit of area, approx. 0.1 ha)
方里	방리	Square ri (unit of area)
割	할	Unit of proportion (tenth, 10%)
强	강	Strong, slightly more than
弱	약	Weak, slightly less than
此中	차중	Among this
라서	따라서	Therefore, consequently (Older spelling of 따라서)
年額	연액	Annual amount/value
石	석	Sŏk (unit of volume, approx. 180L)
斤	근	Kŭn (unit of weight, approx. 600g)
貫	관	Kwan (unit of weight, approx. 3.75kg)
圓	원	Wŏn (Currency unit, Yen at the time)
尺締	척체	Cubic ch'ŏk (unit of volume for timber)
亦	역	Also
鑛業	광업	Mining industry
坪	평	P'yŏng (unit of area, approx. 3.3 sq m)
塊	괴	Kwae (ream/bundle, unit for paper)
路하고만다	생략하고 만다	(I) omit it (Older expression)
말숙하다	말쑥하다	Spotless, neat, clean
몃	몇	How many, several (Older spelling of 몇)
러젓다	떨어졌다	Fell behind, lagged (Older spelling of 떨어졌다)
첫	첫째	Firstly (Older expression/spelling)
만못하다	만 못하다	Cannot compare to, not as good as
	뿐	Only, merely (Older spelling of 뿐)
到底히	도저히	By no means, possibly (Older spelling of 도저히)
못를	못 따를	Cannot follow/match (Older spelling of 못 따를)
建物	건물	Building
헷假家	헛가(가)	Makeshift house, temporary structure (Older term)
밧는다	받는다	Receives (Older spelling of 받는다)
뵈인다	보인다	Is seen, appears (Older spelling of 보인다)
갓다	같다	Is like, seems (Older spelling of 같다)
니러낫다	일어났다	Arose, happened (Older spelling of 일어났다)
만흔	많은	Many, much (Older spelling of 많은)
몃몃	몇몇	Several, a few (Older spelling of 몇몇)
잇스나	있으나	Although there is/are (Older spelling of 있으나)
놉흔	높은	High (Older spelling of 높은)
낫잠	낮잠	Nap
아모것도	아무것도	Nothing at all
아모	아무	Any (Older spelling of 아무)
엇더한	어떠한	What kind of
엇더하게	어떠하게	How, in what way
닭	까닭	Reason, cause (Older spelling of 까닭)
죽하다	삐죽하다	To be puckered, pointed
하다	퉁퉁하다	To be swollen
알코	앓고	Suffering from (sickness)
놀으고	노르(누렇)고	Being yellowish
젓다	짜졌다	Became calloused/hardened (Dialectal/Older form?)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제58호
발행일	1925년 04월 01일
기사제목	忠北踏査記
필자	特派員 車相瓚
기사형태	기행문

忠北踏査記
						特派員 車相瓚
踏査記를 쓰기 前에
나는 작년 1월에 忠淸南道를 답사하엿더니 금년 1월에 또 忠淸北道를 답사하게 되얏다. 道는 비록 南北이 다르고 해는 역시 昨今이 다를지라도 가튼 1월에 가튼 忠淸道를 답사하게 된 것은 한奇緣인 듯 십다. 그러나 작년 忠南을 답사할 때에 여러 가지로 落望을 한 나는 忠北을 떠날 때부터 아모 흥미를 가지지 못하엿다. 더욱이 忠淸北道는 全鮮 중 最小의 道로 해안선이 一寸도 無한 山國이오 교통도 불편하고 産物도 빈약하고 시대의 문화도 他道보다 낙오된 것을 미리 짐작한 까닭에 답사하고 십푼 용기까지도 별로 업섯다. 그런대 實地 답사를 하고 보니 과연 情神上으로나 物質上으로나 아모 소득이 업다. 忠南보다도 더 허무하다. 忠北은 참 白板의 세계다. 山野는 前日 소위 양반의 害虫이 다글거리어서 赤地가 되고 사회는 儒生의 腐菌이 아즉까지 잔존하야 新氣脉이 돌지 못하며 都會와 沃地는 舶來의 寄生虫이 모다 侵蝕하야 一般民衆은 다만 赤身으로 아모 精神과 活氣가 업시 飢餓에 悲泣하고 荒野에 방황할 뿐이다. 全道가 마치 兵火를 치든 都會, 暴風을 지낸 사막과 가튼 感이 잇다. 따러서 記事에도 특별한 재료가 업다. 그런대로 말하자면 惡評 외에는 別로 업다. 그러나 필자인들 엇지 惡評을 好하랴. 사실을 사실대로 기록하랴닛가 자연  世人의 云하는 바 惡評이 되고 만다. 작년 忠南道號를 발표한 뒤에 忠南의 일부 양반들은 자기 道를 侮辱하얏다고 불평을 부르지지며 심지어 엇던  頑固는 자기 자손에게 양반 욕하는 開闢을 購讀치 말나는 敎訓까지 하얏다는 傳言을 드럿다. 아- 그것이 무슨 몰상식한 自滅의 짓이냐. 물론 盲者를 보고도 눈먼 사람이라면 설어하고 躄者를 보고 절눙발이라면 조와하지 안을 것은 사람의 帊�情이다. 그러나 醜女가 明鏡을 멀니하면 自貌가 점점 더 추해지고 病者가 良藥을 실혀하면 자신만 더 위태할 뿐이다. 필자의 言이 엇지 明鏡이 되며 良藥이 되리라 감히 自處하리요만은 狂夫의 言도 一助도 잇는 것가티 엇지 無益하다고만 하랴. 소위 惡評이라고 하는 그 말 속에는 無限한 아픔과 쓰림이 잇슬 것이다. 今番에 忠北道號를 발표하면 또 엇더한 비평이 잇슬지 알 수 업다. 惡評이라 하던지 善評이라 하던지 그것은 全然 독자의 公眼에 막기거니와 아모조록 잘 보와달나고 부탁할 뿐이다. 그리고 忠北의 山水勝地인 丹陽 堤川 報恩 3郡은 부득이한 사정에 의함이나 빼놋코 가지 못한 것은 그곳 兄弟에 대하야 무엇이라고 말슴할 수 업는 큰 遺憾이다. 그러나 이 다음의 기회가 또 잇스닛가 그것으로 적은 위안이 된다. 최후에 또 忠北에 게신 여러 兄弟에게 답사 중 만히 愛護하야 주신 것을 謝하고 만다.

충청북도 管內圖

總論
全國 中 最小한 그의 位置와 面積
本道는 朝鮮 中央部의 稍南에 位하야 北은 江原道, 西北은 京畿道, 西는 忠淸南道, 南은 全羅北道, 東은 慶尙北道를 界하얏스니 면적이 전국 중 最小하다.(東經 120度 20分-128度 38分, 北緯 35度 52分-37度 20分, 東西 약 360여 리, 南北 약400여 리 면적 489方里)

尺寸의 海岸線이 無한 그의 地勢
지형은 東西로 橢曲하야 半灣形을 成하얏스니 3面에 峻嶺이 包圍하고 尺寸의 해안선이 無하니 道內에는 도처에 山岳이 重疊하고 평야가 乏하다. 北은 漢江의 流域의 忠州平野를 始하야 幾多의 豊饒한 小沃野가 有하고 南은 錦江 流域에 淸州, 鎭川, 永同, 報恩의 沃野가 有하며 且 漢江은 舟楫의 便이 有하야 自來 運輸交通이 편리하고 東方에 運亙한 鳥嶺 竹嶺 兩大山胍에는 無盡의 鑛物과 森林이 有하니 日本人은 此道의 地勢를 日本의 甲斐信濃과 彷佛하다 稱한다. 然而 本道의 山川은 二大山胍과 二大河流로 구분함을 可得할지니 즉 鳥嶺山胍은 南西로부터 東北으로 走하고 竹嶺山胍은 東南으로부터 西北에 향하야 蜿蜒屈曲하다가 忠州 德周山 地方에 會하야 儼然이 東南의 一障壁을 成하고 繼하야 丹陽의 小白山胍, 報恩의 俗離山胍, 永同의 三道峯 白華山, 堤川의 月岳, 白雲, 錦繡 諸山과 槐山의 七寶山이 되얏스니 忠北一道의 大小山胍은 대개 此 二大山胍의 支系라 하겟고 又 河流는 漢江, 錦江이 大宗이니 즉 漢江은 其 水源을 江原道에서 發하야 丹陽, 堤川, 忠州, 槐山, 陰城 지방의 諸流를 合하야 京畿道로 入하는 바 此에 속한 著名한 支流는 槐山 大元山下에서 合流하는 槐山川, 陰城의 迦葉川 忠州의 達川 江原道 原州＜65＞ 雉岳山에서 發하는 周浦川, 廣灘이오 錦江은 西南諸流를 합하야 忠南에 入하니 其 最著한 者는 鎭川, 陰城, 淸州 諸郡의 水를 합한 八結川, 美湖川, 芙江下流에서 합하는 永同川, 松江, 石川 등이다.

腥風血雨를 經한 그의 歷史
本道는 古昔 三國의 接壤之地로 淸州, 文義, 懷仁은 忠南을 근거로 한 百濟. 沃川, 永同, 黃澗, 靑山, 報恩은 慶北을 근거로 한 新羅. 鎭川, 淸安, 陰城, 槐山, 忠州, 延豐, 丹陽, 淸風, 堤川, 永春 지방은 北方 高句麗에 속하야 三國이 서로 城疊을 築하고 寸山尺土의 쟁탈을 是事하얏스니 즉 淸州에는 百濟의 上黨城 古址가 잇고. 報恩邑 南方에는 新羅의 三年城이 잇고 기타 丹陽의 道樂城, 堤川의 紺岩山城, 永春의 城池古城은 다 高句麗의 유물이다.
濟麗가 망하고 新羅가 統一함애 本道도 역시 新羅의 版圖에 入하얏다가 高麗를 歷하고 李朝에 入하야는 全道가 또한 일시 戰地로 化하얏스니 즉 壬辰亂에 加藤淸正은 慶州 安東 豊基를 掠하야 竹嶺을 踰하고 小西行長은 尙州 聞慶으로 鳥嶺을 過하야 兩軍이 忠州에 會合함에 申砬장군의 彈琴臺 戰敗와 共히 忠州 附近 列邑이 其 兵馬에 蹂躙되고 又 小西의 一枝帶는 秋風嶺을 經하야 소위 三南中道로 북진코자 하다가 黃澗에서 張智賢의 방어병과 交戰하야 同地가 일시 焦土로 化하고(其時 張公 戰敗 殉節) 또 淸州 西外 華淸嶺은 (國士峯) 趙重峯이 당시 日兵을 대파하얏슴으로 그의 碑가 지금까지 屹立하얏다. (元在 西門外 今移于道廳構內) 壬辰 후 朝鮮政府는 前事를 鑑하고 南寇의 防備를 엄히 하야 忠州 及 淸州에 都護府 牧師 겸 防禦使를 배치하고 更히 淸州에 兵馬節度使를 置하야 鎭守케 하얏다. 其後 開國 503년에 觀察使를 置하야 公州 及 忠州 2府를 分領케 하얏스니＜66＞ 沃川, 文義, 報恩, 懷仁, 永同, 黃澗, 靑山, 淸州 8郡은 公州에 屬하고. 堤川, 永春, 鎭川, 淸安, 陰城, 槐山, 延豐, 忠州, 丹陽, 淸風 10郡은 忠州에 속하얏다. 그러다가 李太王 乙未에 忠州를 忠北首府로 하야 全道를 관할하다가 隆熙 2년에 更히 道廳을 淸州에 移하고 同 4년 日韓合倂 동시에 觀察使를 道長官으로 변하고 大正 2년에 更히 郡廢合을 행하야 淸州, 報恩, 沃川, 永同, 鎭川, 槐山, 陰城, 忠州, 堤川, 丹陽 10郡이 되얏다.

15萬未滿의 戶數와 近 78萬의 人口
大正 11년도 末 조사에 의하면 本道의 總戶數는 14萬 8,901戶오 總人口는 77萬 9천628人이니 此를 다시 군별로 詳示하면 左表와 如하다.
現住戶數

現住人口

現住人口職業別
＜67＞

山多野少한 그 土地
本道의 총면적은 上述함과 가티 廣袤가 489方里에 달하나 山岳이 多하고 沃野가 少하니 此를 種別하면 山林, 53만2천649町 0反步, 水田 6만9천342 4反步, 田, 8만8천495 2反步, 垈, 5천956, 1反步, 雜(池治), 157, 8反步, 計 69만6천600 5反步, 인데 즉 산림은 총면적의 7割 5分强 畓은 1割弱, 田은 1割 2分强에 상당하고 此中 未墾地 약 7천町步와 경사 15도 이내로 개간하기 가능한 임야 2만 6천여 町步는 大正 8년부터 同 17년까지의 예정기한으로 개간에 착수하얏슨 즉 大正 17년 이후는 약 19만町步의 耕地가 될 것이다. 地味는 雲母質의 토양이 多하고 다소 유기물이 乏한 嫌이 有하다. 그다지 瘠土는 안이오 淸州의 평야는 古來 素砂, 牙山平野와 공히 忠淸道에서 저명한 沃野다.

□보잘것업는그의 産業
本道는 尺寸의 海岸線이 無한 山國인 故로 若干의 陸産物以外에는 産物이 別로업고 自來交通이 不便하야 商工業도 發展이되지 못하얏다 그런대로 分類하야말하자면
農業 本道人民의 主業으로 耕地面積畓六萬九千餘町步 田八萬八千餘町步에 耕作農家十三萬二千七百餘卽全道戶口의 九割을 占하야 其生産額이 年四千餘萬圓에 達하니 其中米六十九萬二千餘石과 麥五十五萬八千餘石 豆類二十五萬餘石, 粟九萬四千餘石이 最重要한 者이오 各産物로는 棉化三百四萬六千七百斤(價格二十五萬圓)忠州黃色烟草,(價格一百三十餘萬圓)淸州山東烟草, (生産地淸州郡所城面 昔申叔舟使中國持種子來今年額二十萬貫 價格十八萬圓假量)果物로는 自來靑山報恩의 大棗와 黃澗의 杮가 著名하고 且近日에는 各地의 苹果(一二九,一七三貫), 生梨(六一,二二四貫)等이 每年增産된다 그리고 蠶農은 近來農家에서 多少힘을쓰는 結果年額七千百餘石의 産繭이 有하고 그다음에 牧畜農은 大槪農家副業에 不過한 故로 特記할것이업다
林業 全道面積의 七割五分을 占하야 五十三萬二千六百四十九町步의 林野들 有한 本道는 當然히 大森林國이＜68＞될만한 地位를 가지고잇다 그러나 積年濫伐의 結果는 到處에 山岳이 赤禿하야 每年洪水의 慘害를 受하는바 當局에서 例年植林을 獎勵하나 아즉지 林業의 可觀할 者가업다 다만 자랑할 것은 三萬餘町步되는 鳥嶺森林이다 이 森林은 自來韓國政府時代부터 所謂黃膓封山으로 特別保護하야 今日에지 至한것이니 其中赤松은 材質이 美麗하기로 有名하며 每年伐採量은 約二萬尺締에 至하고 其中雜木도 亦一萬尺締內外가되며 木炭其外産物이 甚多하다
鑛業 本道는 山國인 故로 到處에 鑛脈이 豊富하니 其中淸州, 永同, 忠州, 陰城은 金鑛이 多하고 又重石은 忠州에 多産하야 歐洲大戰當時에는 一時採掘熱하더니 近來價格의 暴落으로 休業의 悲境에 至하고 且同郡의 達川大召院間에 明治鑛業會社의 大鐵鑛이 有하며 沃川靑山面에는 著名한 小宮, 山野兩人의 二大黑鉛鑛이 有한바 大正十一年度調査에 依하면 本道의 鑛區總面積은 四一,三七九,一四八坪이오 鑛區數는 一三八, 産額價格은 七五,三六二圓이다
商工業 商工業은 한 幼稚狀態에 在하니 工場은 永同의 日本人鈴木繰棉工場이 惟一이오 其外若干의 精米, 棉巾, 製紙, 製陶等이 有하나 可記할것이업고 特히 製紙業은 自來本道著名한 者로 堤川, 忠州, 丹陽이 中心地가 되야 名數製造하니 彼世人이 膾煑하는 五庫紙, 窓紙, 燕方紙, 淸風紙, 白雲紙等이 是다(年産五三八一塊價格一八八五,八五圓)且商業은 大槪市場取引을 主로하고 鐵道로 若干의 貨物을 輸移入或輸移出하니 其取引地는 朝鮮의 重要都會와 及日本이다 次에 宗敎及敎育은 別로 特記할 者가 無하기 路하고만다＜69＞

말숙한 淸州郡
水至淸則無魚하고 人至察則無徒이라더니 郡名에도 淸字가들면 아모것도 업는모양이다 淸州야말로 참말숙하다 山도말숙 물도말숙 市街도말숙 産物도 人物도다말숙하다 世上사람들은 흔히 말하기를 朝鮮全國中道廳所在地로는 江原道의 春川의 第一峽邑이오 文化가 러진곳이라한다 그러나 實際에보면 淸州는 春川보다도 몃倍러젓다 첫 山水로볼지라도 늘신한 臥牛山은(淸州邑東北에 在한 名山)秀麗奇拔한 鳳儀山(春川邑後鎭山)만못하고 힘업는 無心川은(淸州市街를 回流하는 大川)浩洋廣大한 昭陽江만못하며 荒凉한 淸州平野는 膏沃한 牛頭平野나 竹田平野만못하다 樓臺景勝으로말하야도 터만남은 祺北樓 天堂群의 附屬品된 望仙樓와 日本냄새나는 東公園(唐美山一帶)西公園(舊社稷山) 櫻馬場(東公場前)은 到底히 金碧燦爛한 昭陽亭과 景槪絶勝한 鳳凰臺 白鶩洲를 못를 것이다 그다음에 建物로말하야도 다 쓰러저가는 道廳, 郡廳, 慈惠病院과 헷假家가튼 高等普通學校, 師範學校等은 亦是雄大한 春川의 建物과 同日에 語치못할 것이다
그아냐 精神界도 그러하고 思想界도한그러하다 勞動運動은 胎生도되기 前에 엇던 官界의 退廢物이 그 運動을 한다 憑藉하고 反히 勞動者의 膏血을 搾取하야먹고는 有耶無耶에 싹도업게만드러놋코 靑年會는 門牌를 랴도사람이 업서서 淸州의 唯一鬪士인 金泰熙君이 東亞支局看板과가티 保管하야가지고 이리도 기고 저리로 긴다(從來復興運動은잇다)人心도 所謂잇다보자 淸州라고 甚히 野薄하야 春川처럼 淳厚한맛이업다 其中에 좀나흔 것은 電燈이밝고(春川도 近間電燈架設)汽車가 通行하는것이다(汽車도 乘客貨物이 別로업서 空車가 普通만타)淸州는 참 靜的都會요 暗黑의 都會요 處女의 都會다 全市街가 睡眠中에잇서서 沙漠과 가티 도뵈고 荒野가티도뵈인다 民衆은 아모 反抗의 氣力과 情神이업서 柔羊의무리모양으로 이리 彷徨저리 彷徨한다(失禮지만)市中에는 酒酊軍도볼수업다 爭鬪하는 사람도업다(酒酊과 爭鬪를 贊成은 안이나)하다못하야＜70＞ 개(犬) 싸우는구경도할수업고 황소영각하는 소리도 드를수업다 오즉 晝夜로들니는 것은 大成町貧民屈에서 배급흐다고 哀號하는소리 無事泰平을 謳歌하며 술만먹고 들아단이는 巡査의 칼소리 閔泳殷 龐寅赫所謂富豪家에 村農民들이 小作田畓還實해달나고 伏乞哀乞하는소리 道知事官舍에서 多數한 美人의 奸惡피우는 우숨소리(朴知事가 笑妾三을 두고 日蘇下女二美人을 두고도 妓生을 각금불는다) 日本人高利貸金業者가 朝鮮人에게 執行한다고 야단법석하는 소리이다 그러면 이 淸州는 本來부터이러케 微弱한 都會인가 안이다 過去에는 勝吏도 相當하고 人物도 相當하얏다 往昔三韓의 爭奪當時부터 淸州는 所謂「東南走集에 要害之地」라 稱하야 百濟는 狼臂城을置하고(元上黨縣又名狼子谷) 新羅는 西原京을 設하야 武將으로 邊境을 鎭하고 高麗와 李朝에도 牧府 或觀察府(李朝世宗時一時觀察府를 置함)를 置하고 兵營을 設하야 國防中樞之地가되엿다 壬亂時에 趙重峯은 本郡南國士峯에서 秋風嶺을 經由하야 來하는 日兵을 大破하얏고(道廳前庭有趙先生勝捷碑)英祖戊申에 李麟佐의 革命亂이 한 이곳에서 니러낫다(當時兵使李鳳祥及營將南延年裨將洪霖節死今有三忠祠碑)
高麗太祖는 일즉이 淸州를 評하야 曰「土地大饒하고 人多豪傑」이라하야스니 自來人物이만흔것도 알수잇다 麗朝로말하야도 王可道, 郭元, 郭尙, 郭輿, 李公升, 가튼 文章, 學士와 慶大升가튼 將軍도잇섯고 李朝에도 主和臣이나마 崔活亭(鳴吉)도 잇고 且近來偉人에 孫義菴先生도 이곳에서낫다 愛國者申睨觀(元文義人)도 이곳사람이다 그러나 今日에는 이럿타할 活動的人物이 別로업다 文士로 申采浩, 主義者로 申伯雨 申英雨外몃몃 靑年이잇스나 或은 外地或은 京城에 在留하고 實地淸州에는 活躍하는 靑年이업다 敎育이라야 돌림 加資모양으로 道廳所在地에 依例設立하는 官公立의 高等, 普通 師範, 農業學校等이잇고 民立으로는 耶蘇敎所管淸南學校(舊望仙樓)當地有志家金元根君의 經營하는 大成普通學校其他村의 私立普通學校講習所가 或잇스나 淸南學校는 不完全한 中未久에 廢地한다 云하고 大成學校는 比較的成績이 良好하나 勸에 비지처럼 억지로 維持하는 것이엇지 完全하다하랴나는 金氏가 힘을 좀 더써서 擴張하기를 企待한다 宗敎로말하야도 耶蘇敎가 流入한지 十七年이나 되얏스나 信者가 多치못하고 事業이 한업는 것을 보면 發展되얏다할수업다 그런데 그 敎의 中心人物은 牧師咸台永 長老金泰熙氏라하겟고 天道敎도 亦＜71＞ 그러할인데 徐昌壽, 金英植, 池晶夏(三氏는 皆大成學校議員) 等爲志靑年이잇서 敎會로나 社會로나 만흔 努力을한다 其外産業도 別로볼것업다
그런데 古跡으로말하면 자랑할것이더러잇스니 曰南石橋(在無心用上 幅二間 長數十間 以花崗石架設 甚雄大新羅訪居世元年即漢宣帝五鳳元年架設)曰鐵幢(一云銅■, 高麗光宗十三年所築元三十段今只存二十段高四三尺經一尺四寸其第三段有記銘現在淸州警察署後庭)曰三忠祠(上記)曰東峯戰捷碑(上記)曰鴨脚樹(在道㕔構內周圍三六尺間高麗恭愍王信■囚李牧隱穡及李陶隱崇仁忽雷大作洪水汎濫城中獄吏及囚者僅登此樹而生王聞之驚異釋放 陽村權近詩所謂流言不幸及周公忽有嘉禾偃大風 聞道西原洪水漲足知天道古今同是也) 曰望仙樓(元名聚景樓高麗校)等이오其外名所도椒井(別項에詳載함)을爲始하야한多少잇스나 玆에略하고만다

空殼만남은 鎭川郡
■■서 鎭川이오 죽어서 龍仁이라는 말은 安城을 조와하는 畿湖사람들의 普通하는 말이엿다 (鎭川은 宅地가 좃코 龍仁은 墓地가 조흔 닭에)이 鎭川은 忠淸北道西北隅位한 小郡으로 東은 淸州及槐山北은 陰城及京畿의 安城을 界하야 廣衮가 東西五里, 南北七里二三町, 面積二六方里餘에 不過하니 古昔高句麗時의 萬弩郡으로(一名今勿奴) 新羅가 合倂하야 黑壤이라 稱하다가 其後屢度의 變遷을 經하야 今에 七面으로 成하얏다 別名은 首知, 新知黃壤, 降州, 鎭川, 彰義, 義寧, 常山이니 鎭川이라 稱하기는 李朝太宗十三年부터 始하얏다
이 鎭川은 元來山水가 秀麗하고 土地가 膏沃하야 忠北의 樂地는 近畿의 樂地라 稱하는 故로 前日에 所謂 兩班, 富豪識者階級들이모다 責任하얏고 라서 文化도 比較的發展되고 人物도 相當히 産出하얏다 녯적 新羅時에는 彼有名한 金庾信가튼이가낫섯고 高麗時에는 文章과 外交로 一世를 風靡하던 宋彦琦氏가잇스며(高麗高宗時에 宋氏가 講和使로 蒙古에 四次來往하야 功勞가 甚多함)李朝에도 名人達士가 한 不少하얏다×××××××××××××××××鄭安立가튼 怪物도잇도 新進＜72＞人物로는 鄭在達, 朴鵬緖, 趙明熙, 洪璔植, 洪■植, 朴瓚熙, 外某靑年이잇서서 京城에서 相當한 活動을하고 外某某靑年 辯護士界에 曰 누구라하는 李升雨君도 이 鎭川외 사람이다 現在內外國의 留學生도 近七八十人에 達하야 文化의 普及이 忠北으로는 首位에 간다 可謂하겟다 그러나 그네들은 卒業한 後에 大槪職業을 爲하야 都會에서 彷徨할이오 鄕村인 鎭川의 啓發을 爲하아는 活動하지안는다 實際의 鎭川은 寂寞하기가 짝이업다 靑年運動도 아주 微弱하고 其他思想運動은 影子도볼수업다 所謂富豪者들은 一擢千金하야 不勞臥食하랴고 仁川米豆場出入만하다가 全財産을 蕩盡하고 氣脉이업서서 얼병알이처럼 墊伏하야잇고(昨年中에도 米豆로 敗한 者가 多하야 約五千石의 富力이 減少되얏다)前日에 내로라고 橫暴를 恣行하야 人民의 財産을 掠奪하던 鎭川의 三大班이라는 申鄭李三家도 今日에는 氣忘이다 奄奄하야 自禮를 維持하기 不能하게되얏다 이름조흔 吉祥山은 全部가 童濯하야 骨相山이되엿다 風水들은 말하기를 鎭川邑이 金鷄抱卵形인 故로 郡內의 巖石이다 뭉글게되고 富者가 自來로 만타고하며 邑附近에리재(駕峴)가잇슴으로 그것을 忌諱하야 內市場을 設立하얏다한다(鎭川邑에 內市場과 外市場에 有함)그러나 그 金鷄의 卵은 벌서 破壞되야 卵黃과 蛋白質은 모다 飛去夕陽風하고 空殼만남어잇슬이다 膏沃한 大土地는 閔泳徽, 韓圭卨, 李容汶其他某某京城富豪의 所有에 歸하고 商權은 日本人中國人에게 沒落되얏다 鎭川의 人民은다만 小作農에 목을매고 年年이 飢寒에 긴다 前日에 樂地라고 稱하던 鎭川은 以後에도 樂地가될지 疑問이다 郡守李海用君은 特히 民間의 疾苦를 살펴서 鎭川의 一大弊害라 可謂할 靑畓豫賣의 事件을 調和하고(昨年度에 鎭川貧民二千餘人이 債務로 因하야 秋收後一石十七圓乃至十八圓價格이 될 在沓稻約二千餘石을 六圓乃至十圓에 債權者에게 豫賣하얏는데 郡守가 債權者와 特別交涉하야 其暴利를 制止한 結果貧民의 利益이 畧七千餘圓에 達함)同郡에서는 自來人民에게 絶大不許하던 煙草耕作權을 專賣局에 交涉하야 許與하게되고 其他産業敎育을 格別獎勵하야 人民의 稱頌이자못만타 그러나 一般人民이 覺醒하야 根本問題를 解決하기 以前에는 비록 産業을 獎勵하고 敎育을 獎勵한들 一般無産者에게 무슨 큰 效果가날가보냐 何如間그것만이라도 現在形便에 잇서서는 鎭川을 爲하야 感謝하다안이할수업다 한가지 紹介할 것은 聖公會事業으로 英人「아다-로-스」氏를 院長으로 한 愛人＜73＞病院은 淸州慈惠病院보다 規模도 宏大하고 施設이 完全하야 患者가 每日平均數百餘人에 達하고  醫師가 親切叮嚀한 外에 無料施術이 多한즉 一般貧民이 恩院이라 可謂하겟다 그다음에 名所로 말하면 牛澤, 草坪은 一指可屈하겟고(兼有平沙落雁峯, 吹笛臺, 靑鷄白羅洞, 會安盤石落妓岩, 双淸岩之勝)古蹟으로는 都堂山城, 大母山城이 有하나다 頹廢에 ■하고  吉祥山에 在한 金黃信祠는 他項記事에 讓하고 玆에 畧한다

邑殘民疲한 陰城郡
忠淸北道의 地圖를펴서보면 西北部에 蕞爾한 囊狀形을 成한 一郡이잇서서 東은 忠州郡, 南은 槐山郡, 西南은 鎭川郡, 西北은 京畿道의 利川, 安城, 驪州等郡과 界하얏스니 이것은 忠北에서 邑殘民疲하기로 有名한 陰城郡이다 이 陰城의 古號는 仍忽, 雪城又는 仍斤內니 本來陰城, 遠南二面에 不過한 小縣인中 忠州와 接近한 關係로 壬辰亂時에 特히 慘禍를 被하야 아주 廢縣이되야 淸安郡에 屬하얏다가 光海朝十年에 僅히 縣을 復하얏스니 當時巡察使李安訥詩에 「壬辰幷邑久戊午設官新, 縣吏縫三戶鄕儒未十人」이라는 句와 觀察使 洪受疇詩에 「職愧二千石縣無三百困」이라는 句를 보고 前日忠北俗言에 陰城郡守는 到任時에 도울고 邈任時에도운다는 말을 들으면 其郡의 殘疲가 如何한 것은 可히 推知할 것이다(陰城이 貧邑인 故로 前日郡守時代에 到任床지도개다리소반을 씻스나 隱結은 比較的만하서 郡守의 私俸이 厚함으로 郡守가 올울고갈운다는말이잇섯다)近來에 至하야는 忠州郡의 金旺, 孟洞, 笙極, 三成, 大所, 甘谷, (以上은 光武十年九月移屬)蘇伊(大正十三年十二月編入)等七面을 移屬하야 合計九面一一二里洞이되고 廣衰三十三方里에 至하며 産物로도 米가 年産額七萬七千餘名에 達하고 其他麥豆類도 相當히 産出되고 特用作物의 陸地棉, 黃色煙草도 每年增産되며 遠南面의 金鑛 柿, 金旺의 金鑛, 二成面의 柿는 亦本郡의 著名産物이되얏다 그리고 交通도 忠北線의 二等道路와 長湖院忠州間의 一等道路가 郡內를 貫通하야 比較的便利하며 其他學校, 金融機關市場等도 隣郡에 不讓하게＜74＞ 施設되야 前日에 比하면 額히 括目의 感이잇다 그러나 그것은 全혀 形式의 發展과 統計의 發展에 不過한이오
實地人民의 生活程度는 前日보다도 極히 貧弱하고 悲慘하다 全郡의 産米七萬餘石中五萬餘石은 全部가 京城富豪들의 倉庫로드러가고(閔泳徵 閔丙奭의 土地가 最多함)殘餘二萬石으로 一萬二千二百九十四戶의 六萬四千四百九十餘人口가먹게되는데 그서이나마 다먹지못하고 日本人에게 기고 支那人에게 기고 稅納에 기고 面所駐在所 學校等增築改築費에다 기니 人民의 먹을 것은 아도것도업다 全郡內의 富者라야 秋敗가 大槪三百石以內에 不過하니 其餘貧民이야 다시 말할것이 무엇잇스랴 邑內라하는곳도 三百三十八戶에 不過하는데 모다 矮小한 草家이오 其中좀 하고 基地가 廣濶한곳은 日本人이 三十六戶, 支那人이다 占領하얏다 官公署의 建物지도 퍽 貧弱하야뵈인다 오즉 人民怨府인 面所한아가 赤身에 長刀찬 格으로 市街中에 華麗하게소사잇다(人民負擔七千偉圓으로 新建한것인데 面所집으로는 忠北의 第一이나 民怨이 甚多하다)市民의 職業은 飮食店 營業이안이면 馬車, 牛車業이다 生活이 이와가티 自來로 貧弱하니 何暇에 智識을 求하며 라서 무슨 思想이 날것이냐 己未年以後各地에 靑年會기 雨後竹筍가티니러나되 이곳은 아주 從容하고 地主와 舍音의 橫暴가 忠北에서 第一甚하다하겟스되 小作人運動은 그만두고 地主나 舍音의 얼골한번을 바로치여다보는사람이업다 다만한가지 紹介할 것은 이 暗澹하고 寂寞한 中에 蘇伊面忠道里에서 니리난 少年軍이다(進明講習所內)비록 自力이 微弱하고 後援이적으나 씩씩하게 잘자라고 充實이커서 沙漠의 花가되고 昏衝의 炬火가되여라 古蹟名所라야이럿타할것이언고 自來人物도 한 別로업다 그러나 말하자면 古代高麗의 樞密副使蔡靖, 李朝의 朴淳 南延年, 崔及, 朴長生, 朴叔蓁가튼이가 著名하얏고 近來新進人物로는 筆者가 周知치못하는 닭인지알수업스나 京城에 在留하는 鄭廣朝氏以外에 何等活動하는이가업는것갓다 다음에 地勢로말하면 東南部三面에 太白山餘脉이 蜿蜓屈曲하고 西北部는 平野가 開하야 其間에 達川支流는 東美湖川支流는 西, 淸渼川支流는 北으로 貫流하야 耕地가 介在하고 郡北에 迦葉山이 屹立하야 邑의 鎭山이되얏다 且邑西三十里에잇는 自起石은 奇觀으로한아적어들만하고 倚松亭은빈터만남엇스니 古蹟이라 말할지 (在舊客■東)＜75＞

黃煙에 목을매인 忠州郡
荒凉한 平野에 치집가튼 草家가 零星드뭇하게흐려져잇고 다진머리에 가름자모양으로 큰길만훤하게 닌 市街속에 牧師님의 벤도그롯듸리논 소리와(忠州에서 耶蘇敎會鍾치는소리를 牧師의 벤도그릇치는소리라한다)村富者의 敗家祝願소리(料理屋長鼓聲)가 間間이들니며 참외막가튼 二層乾燥室이 웃둑웃둑소사잇고 明太가튼담배짐이 들낙날낙하는 곳은 不問可知黃色煙草(黃色煙草는 別項에 詳記함)에 목을 매고사는 忠州郡이다 이 忠州郡은 往昔中部朝鮮의 樂境으로 碧瓦朱欄에 金光燐然(一名未乙省又는 萬長城)新羅眞興王은 小京을 置하야 貴戚子弟와 六部豪氏을 移하고 歌舞歡樂의 場을 삼엇섯다 其後或은 中原城或은 國原府或은 藥城(高麗忠烈王이 忠州城을 改築하고 城壁에 蓮花를 離刻한 後로 此名이 有함)이라 稱하야 一時鎭營, 盤司營又는 觀察府가되얏다가 隆熙三年에 府를 淸州로 移轉한 後春風秋雨를 經하야 今日에 至하얏스니 忠州라 始稱하기는 高麗太祖二十三年이다 本郡은 東南으로 慶尙道를 通하고 西北으로 京畿江原道를 接하야 水陸交通이 便利할안이라 漢城을 背景으로 한 軍事上重要之地인 故로 代代로 兵禍가 不絶하얏스니 其最著한 것은 高麗高宗時蒙古亂과(當時倉正崔守大破蒙兵于金堂峴今東長面)李朝壬辰時倭亂이다 近來의 甲午東學亂, 丙申(第一回義兵)丁未(解散軍隊亂)兩義兵亂에도 特히 慘禍를 만이입엇다 忠州의 歷史는 참피의 歷史오 눈물의 歷史다 山河는 아즉지 彈雨炮烟의 㾗跡이 남어잇고 原野에는 天陰雨濕한때에 鬼哭이 宛然히 啾啾한다 昨日富貴繁華의 都會는 今日蕭條寂寞한 寒村으로 化하얏다 彈琴臺에 落月이바치고 鳥嶺에 春鵑이울에 往事를생각하면 그누가 一掬의 淚를能히 禁하랴 忠州는 荒凉하고 暗擔하다 龍山里의 貧民은 朝夕으로 飢寒에 울고 村農民들은 黃色煙草에 목을매고 專賣局門간에서 檢査員에게 虐待를밧는다 全市街地와 家屋은 全部日本人의 所有가되얏다(城內朝鮮所有가 僅十一戶)忠州는 壬辰亂時에 日兵에게 陷落이되엿더니 今日에는 日商에게 全滅되얏다 그래도 民衆은 睡眠만할이오 活動이업다 任强首가튼 文章도 볼수업고 魚＜76＞有沼가튼 武士도업고 于勒가튼 音樂家도업다 權近, 鄭麟趾, 孫舞孝諸賢은 地下에서 永眠하고(三賢墳墓皆在忠州)任忠愍의 英靈은 虛空에 徘徊한다 中央塔은 黙黙이서서 네 歷史를 말하고 開天寺(有弘法, 法鏡兩大師碑在東良面荷天里)靈鵲寺, 金生寺(在北津崖)는이미 荒廢하야 쇠북소리를 드를수업다 寶相塔(弘■大師願塔元在開天寺)은 景福宮으로 移遷되고 狂佛은 郡廳에 被囚되얏다(郡■構內有鐵佛俗■致誠則惡病流行, 設堂宇■火起故謂之狂佛元在邑東野中海來移子郡㕔)忠州는 古代藝術지도 다 陷沒되얏다 다만 交通의 便利한 것이 한자랑거리다 未來에 忠北線鐵道가 開通되면 더욱 便利할 것이다 그러나 現在忠州人의 智識과 經濟力으로 此를 利用하야 能히 外人과 各方面으로 競爭을할지 疑問이다 最後에 한가지말할 것은 이 忠州의 孤城을직히고 惡戰苦鬪하는 靑年몃이다 李善圭, 吳彦泳, 徐相庚, 徐天淳, 沈琦澤諸氏外某某靑年은 百方의 困難을 忍耐하면서 或은 靑年運動或은 勞動運動或은 文化運動(如晩聲解社組織)을한다 아모조록 充實하게만 努力하야잘싸우기를 바랄이다

漸次衰退하는 槐山郡
本郡은 忠淸北道의 稍中央에 位하얏스니 束은 慶尙北道聞慶郡, 西南은 忠州鎭川兩郡, 北은 陰城, 忠州堤川三郡을 接壤하얏다 地勢는 俗離, 鳥嶺兩山脉이 東南部에 蟠屈하야 公正, 㬢陽, 馬本, 朴達, 鷄立等 諸峯을 成학 又七寶, 頭院 杻城 金大也, 産龜의 諸嶺이 西北에 連한바 磻灘, 鷄川, 伊火의 三川이 其間에 齊流하야 北으로 忠州郡에 入하야 漢江의 上流가되니 大槪山岳이 多하고 平地가 少함으로 交通이 甚히 不便하다 그러나 槐川의 下流는 京城과 自來舟楫의 便이 有하고 近日에 槐山邑과 曾坪間에는 定期自動車가 有하야 忠北線汽車의 連絡이 有하며 鵲川流域(錦江上流)은 平地가 多하야 米産地로 著名하다 沿革으로 말하면 本郡은 元高句麗의 仍斤內郡으로 新羅時槐壤, 高麗時에 槐州, 李朝初부터 槐山이라 稱하얏스니 凡四面이 廢合時에 延豊, ■安兩郡을 合倂하얏스니 南鮮一帶의 物貨와 中北鮮의 物貨가다 此郡에 集中하야 市街가자못殷盛하고 文化가 發展되야 幾年前지 山間都會＜77＞라는 名稱이잇섯다 그러나 京釜線의 開通과 忠北線의 開通은 本郡에 一大打擊을 與하야 市況이 漸次衰退의 傾向이잇고 所謂富豪家들은 過多한 負擔金을 免키 爲하야 京城其他都會地로 每年移住하며 商業은 中國人의 專業이되고 말앗슨즉 不過幾年에 前日에 자랑하던 山中의 繁華鄕은 槐花一夢이 것갓다 其中에 靑年들은 大槪錦衣玉食에배가불러 自己의 안방만지키고 잇는 故로 名色靑年會가잇스나 一個講習所와 新聞支局을 經營하는 外에 何等活動이업다 그것도 靑年會의 事業이라 云함보다 鄭震錫君外機個敎員의 事業이라 云함이 可할것갓다 그들은 飢寒을 참어가며 晝夜로 苦勞하나 有産의 靑年들은 任員名義만 고 屛風안에서 낫잠만자고 飮食店에가서 自動車運轉轉手와 每夜에게 집 爭奪戰만한다(所謂顧問) 아서라 좀 精神들차러라 産物로는 黃色煙草, 木炭이 特産이라하겟고 其外에는 例의 米穀外에 可數할것이업다 名所로는 假明人儒者들의 神聖地로치는 靑川面의 華陽洞과(華陽洞은 ■記事에 詳戰함)明使朱之番의 遺墨이라는 甘勿面梨灘의 上流基谷下에잇는 陰屛과(黑色岩壁上에 陰屛二字를 書하얏는데 大가 約一寸五分, 最約이 二尺 傳說에 依하면 元書가 約三十尺以上에 達하얏다한다)水安堡溫泉과(此도 他項에 詳就함)險地로 有名한 鳥嶺이(此地는 元新羅高句麗境界線이오 京釜通路의 要地인 故로 軍防上必要로 古代에 城을 築하고 又第一第二第三의 開門을 設하앗스니 本郡에 屬한 者는 第三門이오 其外는 聞慶에 屬하얏다)最著하고 古物로는 上芼面彌勒里鳥嶺谷에 在한 石佛이 第一指를 屈할 것이다(高三丈五尺周圍二丈五尺, 이니 約二千年前 遺物로 忠北最大의 佛이다)그리고 最終에 東亞日報의 洪命憙君이 이 槐山사람인 것을 잠간 紹介하고 獨筆한다

問題만흔 永同郡
南으로 釜山을 距하기 百四十七十里, 北으로 京城을 距하기 百三十四里되는 地点을 據하야 京釜線의 稍中央이되고 忠淸北道의 最南端되는 永同郡은 忠北全道中 第一問題만흔 곳이엿다 小作運動도 一時全道中第一激烈하얏고(張埈, 金行夏, 金極洙 諸靑年이 中心이됨)靑年連動도 第一活氣가 잇섯다(現在稽山學院經營)忠北에 唯一한＜78＞ 大工場이라는 新戶巨商鈴木商店의 經營하는 繰綿工場도 이곳에잇고(이 工場狀沖은 別項에 詳載함)山野秀一의 經營하는 無盡藏의 月明洞(沃川郡靑山面)黑鉛도 이곳을 經由하야 輸出된다(所謂永同黑鉛)大文章家乘厓先生金守溫도 일즉이곳에서 出生하얏스며 大音樂家蘭溪朴堧先生도 이곳에 寓居하야섯다
이름조흔 芙蓉城落花臺며 地帶놉흔 秋風嶺(南鮮最高地)壯快한 玉吉瀑布(在深川驛西玉山中高六十尺)景槪조흔 黃澗八景(使君峰, 山羊壁, 龍澗臺, 冷泉亭, 花幹獄, 靑鶴窟, 法尊菴)이다-여긔에잇다 新羅百濟의 古戰場과(在陽山面新羅武烈玉欲伐百濟以金運將爲陣陽山, 進攻川城, 城兵夜襲甚急, 運激戰遂死人惜之作陽山曲而吊之今俗間流行之陽山謠)(양산도 始終此)
壬辰古戰場(壬辰古戰場在秋風嶺驛附近有三槐堂張智賢殉節碑)도 한이곳에 잇다
及其也昨年旱災지도 全道中第一甚하얏다(秋風嶺及陽山附近이 尤甚한데 郡■에서는 救濟策으로 例의 裁縫機械를 無料料貸興하고黃澗永同間氣等道路修築工事, 水利組合開懇工事를한다 云함)이여러가지의 問題가 잇는 永同郡은 元來新羅의 吉同郡으로 其後或永同或稽山이라 稱하야 變遷이 無常하다가 光武十年에 沃川의 陽內(今陽山面)陽內一所(今鶴山面)陽南二所(今龍化面)三面을 移管하는 大正三年에 黃㵎郡을 合倂하야 十一面百三十一洞에 分하얏스니 西南은 全北茂朱, 錦山兩郡과 接하고 東은 慶北尙州及金泉과 界하고 西北은 沃川에 隣하얏다 境內에는 秋風嶺의 高山脉이 西南으로 縱橫하야 山嶺이 多함으로 耕地가 乏少하나 到處에 鑛物林産이 豊富하고 且鐵道는 郡의 中央을 橫貫하야 永同, 黃澗, 深川, 秋風嶺四停車場이잇고 其他道路가 四通八達하야 交通이 便利하며 錦江의 上流가 境內에 貫流하야 其流城에는 灌漑가 한 便利하고 地味는 一般으로 膏腴하야 農作에 適宜하다 産物은 米, 大豆外에 陸地棉과 鑛物이 特多하나 詳細한 것은 玆에 略한다

土肥穀豐한 沃川郡
本郡은 往昔新羅時代의 古戶山郡으로 一時管城이라 稱하다가 高麗忠宣王五年에 비로소 沃川이라 稱하고 大正三年에 大棗産地로 有名한 靑山郡을 合倂하야 十一面으로 區分하얏다 徐居正赤登樓記에 「沃之州山峻＜79＞水淸土地肥沃, 五穀이 豊槐」이라 云한것과 南秀文鄕校記에 「邑之據漢南者名勝多牟惟沃爲最」라 云한 것을 見하면 沃川이란 名稱은 土地의 肥沃함을 意味함인듯하고 自來로 山水奇麗한 것을 可知하겟다 物換星移한 今日에도 沃川은 依然이 山水奇麗하고 民俗이 淳厚하야 忠北에서 惟一한 樂地가되얏다 그럼으로다른 地方은 富豪들이 작고 移散하되 惟獨沃川은 他地方의 富豪들이 反對로모혀든다 現在에 沃川의 首富안이 忠北의 巨富라 可謂할 吳允黙君도 京城에서 移來하얏고(吳氏는 元咸鏡道人으로 李容翊時代에 猝富가되얏다)近日에도 晋州富豪로 京鄕間에 問題가 多한 金琪邰君이 亦是移住하려고 七千餘圓의 巨金으로 廣大한 基地를 買收하고 京城의 名工明匠四十餘人을 募集하야 가지고 八萬圓인가 十萬圓豫算으로 宏傑할 新阿房宮을 建築하는 中이다 이것이 將來沃川人의 福이될지 禍가될지 不知하거니와 四方의 富豪들이 작고모혀 드는 것은 事實이다 그리고 本郡은 壬亂忠臣趙重峯憲先生의 胎生地인 同時에 幽宅之地오(在安邑杻山嶺)近代事大主義者로 有名한 巨儒宋尤菴時烈氏와 南學士秀文氏의 出生之地인 故로 儒者가 甚多하야 舊時代에는 儒鄕又는 文鄕이라 稱하얏다 그러나 그 餘弊로 人民이모다 柔弱하고 頑固하야 現時代에는 아주 落伍者들이되얏다 全郡에 아즉지 靑年團體도업고(靑山面에서 近日靑年會를 發起한다는 말은잇다)主義人物도보기어렵다 生活은 他郡에 比하야 좀 餘裕가잇는듯하나 新郡廳所在地인 深川驛附近重要地는 全部日本人의 所有가되얏고 商權도 日本人이안이면 支那人이다-占奪하얏스니 그 生活인들 몃칠이나 더 保持하랴 生産物로말하면 米穀五萬六千餘石大豆一萬四千八百餘石이 最多하고 其外特産으로는 麯子(年産一五○, 七八○個, 三八, 八○七圓)大棗(舊靑山)生繭(伊院)棉, 黑鉛(靑山面月明洞)其他鑛物이 重要한 者이며 交通은 京釜鐵道가 郡內를 貫通하야 沃川伊院兩驛을 有한 外에 自動車가 隣郡을 通行하는 故로 山間奧地를 除한 外에는 大槪便利하다 最後에 位置와 地勢를 잠간말하자면 本郡은 忠淸北道南端에 位하야 東은 永同郡及慶北의 尙州郡, 南은 全北의 錦山郡, 西는 忠南의 太田郡, ＜80＞北은 報恩郡과 接하얏스니 東西約十二里南北約十一里全面的三十五方里餘로 四圍山岳이 圍繞하고 平地가 少하며 河川은 全北의 茂朱, 鎭安, 錦山方面으로부터 來하는 諸水가 永同郡陽山面에서 合하야 唐灘津이되고 本郡伊內面에서 更히 尙州郡으로 來하는 一流를 合하야 有名한 赤登津이되고 本郡東二面에서 報恩及本郡靑山으로 來하는 一川을 合하야 東津이되고 北流하야 更히 全北珍山으로 來하는 支流와 合하야 報恩郡에 入하니이것이 곳 錦山의 上流다 名所古蹟으로 赤登樓, 喚仙樓, 降仙樓, 三止臺, 摩尼山城이잇스나 다頹廢하야 古址만 殘存할이오 舊靑山의 邑南의 虎穴巖窟과 鵂岩이 一大奇觀이라하나 보지못한 것이 一遺憾이다

(九四頁의 續)
靑山報恩處女들은 大棗를 만히먹는 닭에 입이 죽하고(大棗씨뱃노라고), 三伏에비가오면작고 울어서눈이 하며(三伏에비가오면 大棗凶年이 저서시집을 못갈가하야) 黃澗處女는 軟柿를만히먹어서 두볼이불룩하고, 永同處女는 棉花를 만히만저서 毛髮이희고, 沃川處女는 麯子냄새를 만히맛타서 頭痛을 잘알코 淸州處女는 椒井藥水를 만히먹어속 病이 업고, 鎭川處女는 쌀밥을 만히먹어얼골이 해말숙하고 陰城處女는 빗에 녀서 몸이파리하고 槐山處女는 숫을만히만저서 手足이 검고 忠州處女는 담배를 만히만저서 코이놀으고 丹陽堤川處女는 山을 만히단녀서 발바당이 젓다 그러나 이것은 다 우슴의 말이지 엇지 그러하랴정말 이번 忠北旅行中에는 女子라고는 淸州, 鎭川, 忠州에서 親舊님의 德分에 술집마누라와 妓生몃 以外에는 對面을못하얏다 그러고보니 處女가 엇더하게생긴거커녕 암평아리가 엇지생긴것도 알수업섯다 忠北은 홀아비 社會인지 女子는 볼수업다 참 寂寞하고 孤獨한 地方이다＜81＞
＜65-81＞