Magazine Title: 개벽 제48호
Publication Date: 1924년 06월 01일
Article Title: 在京城 各敎會의 本部를 歷訪하고 (Visiting the Headquarters of Various Churches in Kyŏngsŏng)
Author: 起瀍 (Ki Ch'an)
Article Type: 소식 (News/Report)

Visiting the Headquarters of Various Churches in Kyŏngsŏng
						Ki Ch'an
Self-serving Shamanistic Beliefs – Northern Methodists Centered in Seoul – Truly Autonomous Northern Presbyterians – Southern Methodists Now Aiming for Self-Reliance – Quietly Spreading Catholicism – Anglican Church Building a New Cathedral – Russian Orthodox Church as a White Russian Refuge – Congregational Church, Successor to the Kumiai Church – Buddhist Kyomuwon Reorganizing its Ranks – Steadily Maturing Ch’ŏndogyo – Two Lineages of Sich’ŏn’gyo – Poch’ŏn’gyo with Only an Office Established – Clamoring Sungsingyohoe –

In the minds of native Seoulites, who for 500 years lived centered around a single Royal House, concerned only with the gain or loss of honor and power, there is truly no reason for pious faith to exist. The solemn majesty of Samgak Mountain, the verdant beauty of Namsan, the ringing bells of Chongno, the deep blue of the Han River—all were too powerless to stir the souls of Seoul people. How much less could imported or transplanted artificial religions do so? Nevertheless, if there are religions that have established some degree of influence in today's Seoul, it is primarily due to the considerable amount of money spent, or in other words, the establishment of corresponding institutions.

Speaking of the religious scene in Seoul as a whole, one could say that the Christian-affiliated groups and the Tonghak-affiliated groups stand in opposition. Within the Christian sphere, there are the Northern Methodist Church (Puk Kamni Kyohoe, 北監理敎會), headquartered in Chŏngdong (貞洞) (the Northern Methodists are particularly prominent among the churches due to their focus on missionary work in Kyŏngsŏng), the Northern Presbyterian Church (Puk Changno Kyohoe, 北長老敎會) centered in Yŏndong (蓮洞), the Southern Methodist Church (Nam Kamni Kyohoe, 南監理敎會) centered around the Chonggyo <71> Chapel, the Catholic Church (Ch’ŏnju Kyohoe, 天主敎會) in Chonghyŏn (鍾峴), the Anglican Church (Sŏnggonghoe, 聖公會) and the Russian Orthodox Church (Noguk Chŏnggyohoe, 露國 正敎會) in Chŏngdong, the Congregational Church (Hoejung Kyohoe, 會衆敎會) in Ch’ŏngjin-dong (淸進洞), the Oriental Missionary Society (Tongyang Sŏn’gyohoe, 東洋宣敎會) in Mugyo-chŏng (武橋町), and the Salvation Army Church (Kusegun Kyohoe, 救世軍敎會) in Saemunan (새문안). Within the Tonghak sphere, there are the Ch’ŏndogyo Church (天道敎會) in Kyŏngun-dong (慶雲洞), the Sich’ŏn’gyo Church (侍天敎會) (centered around Mr. Kim Yŏn’guk 金演局) in Chaedong (齋洞), and the Sich’ŏn’gyo Church (侍天敎會) (centered around Count Song Pyŏngjun 宋秉畯) in Kyŏnji-dong (堅志洞) (besides these, there are 2 or 3 other sects like Ch’ŏngnimgyo 靑林敎, Paekpaekkyo 白白敎, etc., but nothing worth noting). Apart from these two systems, there are Buddhism (佛敎) and Poch’ŏn’gyo (普天敎), but they have hardly any adherents among Kyŏngsŏng residents.

Looking at the recent state of propagation, the Northern Methodist and Northern Presbyterian churches are comparatively active, while the Catholic Church and Southern Methodist Church are merely maintaining their current state. Others like Buddhism and Ch’ŏndogyo only have their administrative offices in Seoul, with their main propagation efforts focused entirely in the provinces, so there is little to say about them here or there. Now, I will briefly record the current state and figures of each church within Kyŏngsŏng.

Northern Methodist Church Centered in Seoul
The Korean Northern Methodist Church, managed by the American Northern Methodist Foreign Mission Board, has its base of operations in Kyŏngsŏng from the start, hence its influence is the most vigorous. As of last year, out of over 43,000 members throughout Korea, the adherents in the Kyŏngsŏng district (including the Kyŏngsŏng vicinity) numbered 5,377, accounting for about one-eighth of the total membership.
This church first entered Kyŏngsŏng in 1884 (40 years ago) when Pastors Appenzeller (아펜설나) and Scranton (스크랜돈) settled at the current site of Paejae Haktang (培材學堂). The episcopal system was implemented from 1887, and after 13 successions, it has reached the current Bishop Welch (웰취). Church projects include the sole management of Paejae Haktang and Ewha Haktang (梨花學堂) in Kyŏngsŏng, as well as joint management of Yŏnhŭi (延禧) and Severance (세부란스) professional schools. In P’yŏngyang, there are Kwangsŏng School (光成學校) and Kihol Hospital (긔홀병원). Clergy (pastors only), as of the end of last year (referring to the entire church), excluding the one Bishop, consisted of 22 Westerners and 115 Koreans (including probationers and resident pastors). Among the Korean pastors, individuals like Pae Hyŏngsik (裵亨湜), Ch’oe Sŏngmo (崔聖模), Kim Chongu (金鍾宇), Hyŏn Sŏkch’il (玄錫七), Hong Sunjo (洪淳倬), O Kison (吳起善), Kim Yusun (金裕舜), Yi Ikmo (李益模), Chang Nakto (張樂道), and among the Westerners, Noble (노불), Moon Yohan (문요한), Paek Adŏk (白雅德) are all prominent figures in the church. Mr. Hyŏn Sun (玄楯) and Mr. Son Chŏngdo (孫貞道) overseas, as well as Mr. No Chŏngil (盧正一) of Yŏnjŏn (Yŏnhŭi Professional School) and Mr. Sin Hŭngu (申興雨) of the Central YMCA, are also all members of the Northern Methodist Church. For reference, the propagation status by region is as follows:
Kyŏngsŏng District 5,377 members, Suwŏn District 1,717, Inch’ŏn District 5,890, Kangnŭng District 1,335, Ch’ŏnan District 1,251,
Kongju District 3,221 <72>, Haeju District 3,751, P’yŏngyang District 12,239, Yŏngbyŏn District 2,954, Ich’ŏn District 2,500.
The above figures are as of the end of 1922. During this year, two new districts, Manchuria and Hongsŏng (洪城), were established. The term "so-and-so district" here refers to the mission territory encompassing the nearby towns and fortresses.

Truly Autonomous Northern Presbyterian Church
As the Northern Presbyterian Church is based in the P’yŏngyang region, its influence in Kyŏngsŏng is generally weak. It first entered Kyŏngsŏng on April 5, 1885, when the late Pastor Underwood (元杜尤) organized the American Northern Presbyterian Mission Council with Drs. Allen (안렌) and Heron (헤론). Through the efforts of those few, especially Mr. Underwood, the Saemunannae Church (新門內敎會) was first established. Next, Pastor Gale (奇一) founded the Yŏndong Church (蓮洞敎會), followed by the establishment of churches in Sŭngdong (勝洞), Nammun-an (南門 안), Myodong (廟洞), Andong (安洞), Hagyo (河橋), and so on, up to the present day. Adherents within Kyŏngsŏng, including catechumens, do not exceed 2,000. In terms of projects, they solely manage Kyŏngsin School (儆新學校) and Chŏngsin Girls’ School (貞信女學校) in Kyŏngsŏng. In P’yŏngyang, there are Sungsil School (崇實學校), Sungin Girls’ School (崇仁女學校), and Sungdŏk School (崇德學校), among which Sungdŏk School is purely managed by Korean church members. Regarding clergy, across all four Presbyterian denominations, there are 234 Korean pastors and 79 Western missionaries. Among the missionaries, Moffett (마포삼열 馬布三悅) in P’yŏngyang, and Gale (기일 奇一) and Avison (어비신 魚丕信) in Kyŏngsŏng are particularly famous. Among Korean pastors, speaking of Kyŏngsŏng rather than the entire country, figures like Yi Myŏnghyŏk (李明赫) of Yŏndong, Kim Yŏnggu (金永耈) of Sŭngdong, and Ch’a Chaemyŏng (車載明) of Saemunannae are relatively prominent. Elders like Yi Sangjae (李商在), Yu Sŏngjun (兪星濬), and Pak Sŭngbong (朴勝鳳) are all members of this church.
Currently, there are about 400 foreign missionaries of various Christian denominations spread throughout Korea. The funds sent from their respective home country's foreign mission boards for propagation expenses in 1921 were as follows:
American Churches:
Northern Methodist Church ₩584,820, Southern Methodist ₩761,561, Northern Presbyterian ₩572,790, Southern Presbyterian ₩327,685
Oriental Missionary Society ₩128,000, Seventh-day Adventist Church ₩105,000
British Protestant Churches:
Canadian Presbyterian Church ₩413,191, Australian Presbyterian Church ₩149,946, Bible Society ₩127,049
British Anglican Church ₩61,432 <73>, Salvation Army ₩49,221
French Church:
Catholic Church 235,169 Francs (1 Franc is approx. ₩0.14)
In addition to the above, the amount disbursed by Korean adherents (for Methodist and Presbyterian denominations alone) is said to be over ₩1,419,000. It seems quite natural that Korean Christianity today, while spending such amounts of money, achieves its current level of influence. There are four types of Presbyterian Churches in Korea: Northern Presbyterian, Southern Presbyterian, Australian Presbyterian, and Canadian Presbyterian. The total number of adherents across these, counting only baptized members as of the end of last year, was 51,139. A particular merit of the Presbyterian Church is that although missionary expenses come from the American Northern Presbyterian Mission Board, all expenses consumed by the Korean church are borne by Korean adherents, making it self-reliant to that extent. On the downside, the regrettable aspect is that while Christian thought itself is already lagging behind the times today, the Presbyterian Church has a particularly strong conservative inclination.

Southern Methodist Church Now Aiming for Self-Reliance
It began in October 1895 when Bishop Hendrix (헨트럭싀) and Dr. Reid (리더 박사) entered Kyŏngsŏng and started missionary work outside Sŏdaemun (西大門). Currently, across six districts—Seoul, Kaesŏng North and South, Ch’unch’ŏn North and South, and Wŏnsan—there are about 6,000 adherents in total. Within Kyŏngsŏng, there are about 1,000 adherents in six locations across five circuits: Chonggyo (宗橋), Chagyŏ (紫橋), Sup’yo (水標), Sugumun (水口門), Sŏkkyo (石橋), and Kyŏnggyo (京橋). Like the Northern Methodists, the Southern Methodists also have an episcopal system, but the formal dispatch of a Bishop is said to have begun last year with the inauguration of the current Bishop Boaz (보애사).
Since September of last year, a Mission Bureau (傳道局) was newly established within this church, undertaking considerable activity under the general affairs leadership of Pastor Yang Chusam (梁柱三). The focus of this activity lies entirely in achieving church autonomy (自治實現). It is said that after continuing like this for some time, they will eventually achieve self-governance like the Presbyterian Church. (However, currently, more than half of the evangelists' stipends and more than two-thirds of church establishment costs are subsidized by the American Mission Board). The church's influence flourished most in 1911, then gradually decreased. After the 1919 March First Movement (己未運動), the number of adherents increased somewhat, but it is reportedly now in a rather stagnant phase. For reference, the pastors working within Kyŏngsŏng are: O Hwayŏng (吳華英) at Chonggyo Chapel, Paek Hyŏnggi (白亨基) at Chagyŏ, Hong Chongsuk (洪鍾肅) at Sup'yogyo, Yun Sanghwan (尹相煥) at Sugumun, Yi Suman (李壽萬) at Sŏkkyo, Yi Ch'angjik (李昌稷) at Kyŏnggyo. Mr. Yun Ch'iho (尹致昊) is also one of the adherents of this church.
Note: The centers of the Southern Methodist Church are in the Ch’unch’ŏn and Kaesŏng regions.

Quietly Spreading Catholicism (Catholic Faith)
In Korea, when people say "Yesugyo" (耶蘇敎, Christianity), they usually think of the Presbyterian or Methodist churches. Consequently, <74> when it is said that there are 200,000 Christian adherents in Korea, it is generally assumed that these adherents belong mostly to the Presbyterian or Methodist churches. However, the reality is quite the opposite: the influence of the Catholic Church (天主敎), i.e., the Old Church (舊敎), accounts for nearly half of that number. According to statistics published by the Church itself (as of last year), the total number of adherents was over 96,000, with more than 5,000 adherents in Kyŏngsŏng city alone. This shows how inclined the Korean mindset, until recently, was towards ritualistic religions (those fashioned to seem like something profound). We cannot help but feel a renewed sense of astonishment here. Especially when considering how problematic the issue of the Greek Orthodox Church became during the recent revolution in Russia, one cannot help but have such feelings.
It goes without saying what tragedies (repeated massacres of Catholics) the arrival of Catholicism in Korea caused in modern Yi Dynasty history. Briefly recounting its history: in 1631, the Korean envoy Chŏng Tuwŏn (鄭斗源) entered Beijing and brought back the Christian Old Testament. Later, in 1784, Yi Tŏkcho (李德祚), Kwŏn Ch'ŏlsin (權哲身), and Chŏng Yagyong (丁若鍾) secretly entered the mountains to study Catholic doctrine. In December of the same year, Yi Tŏkcho's son, Yi Sŭnghun (李承薰), followed envoy Yi Tonguk (李東郁) to Beijing, was subsequently baptized, and returned, marking the beginning. From 1794, clandestine propagation was carried out with the Chinese priest Zhou Wenmo (周神父). In 1831, with the arrival of the French Bishop Bruguière (蘇主敎) in Kyŏngsŏng, the church was formally established. It endured four major persecutions (referring to the Sinyu 辛酉, Kyehae 癸亥, Pyŏngo 丙午, and Pyŏngin 丙寅 persecutions where believers were massacred) to reach the present day. As for the church's situation last year, there were 96,411 adherents across the three dioceses of Kyŏngsŏng, Taegu, and Wŏnsan. There were 48 Western priests (神父, roughly equivalent to Pastor; French and German) and 38 Korean priests. Notably, the current Bishop of the Kyŏngsŏng Diocese, Gustave Mutel (구스다부·뮈뗄), who secretly entered Korea in 1877 and essentially built the Catholic Church in Korea, is a 71-year-old elder highly respected for both his virtue and influence. Among the Korean priests, figures like Kang Toyŏng (姜道永), Han Kigŭn (韓基根), Kim Wŏnyŏng (金元永), Chŏng Kyuha (鄭圭夏), and Kim Sŏnghak (金聖學) have all made significant contributions to the church. Church activities include schools for boys and girls, orphanages, and clinics, but they are not prominent. Direct church works include the establishment of a Seminary (神學校), a Monastery (修士院, for men), and a Convent (修女院, for women) (collectively called 修道院, Sudowŏn). Notably, there is a Catholic Youth Association (President Kim Ch'unsik 金春植, General Secretary Pak Chunho 朴準鎬, Treasurer Kim Hansu 金翰洙, et al.) driven by the activities of the church's youth, but since Catholicism is fundamentally different from Protestantism, being extremely devotional (敬神的) and conservative (保守的), youth activities are very sluggish. Finally, one more point: although Korean Catholicism is under the jurisdiction of the Paris Foreign Missions Society (佛國 巴里 外方傳敎會), the Wŏnsan diocese is managed by the German St. Benedictine Order (德國 聖芬道會), and the planned <75> P'yŏngyang diocese will be assigned to the American Maryknoll Missioners (米國 紐育 聖마리놀傳敎會). However, all are uniformly under the control of the Roman Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith (羅馬布敎省).
Note: Adherent breakdown: Taegu Diocese (Chŏlla and Kyŏngsangbuk-do provinces) 31,457; Wŏnsan Diocese (Hamgyŏng and P'yŏngan West provinces) 10,875; Kyŏngsŏng Diocese (Kyŏnggi, Kangwŏn, Ch'ungch'ŏng, Hwanghae, four provinces) 54,079. A P'yŏngyang Diocese is reportedly being newly established. Also, the absolute conditions for becoming a priest, monk, or nun in this church are vows of (1) Chastity (淨潔, meaning being a virgin boy or girl), (2) Poverty (甘貧), and (3) Obedience (順命, absolute obedience to the commands of superiors). Furthermore, Bishops and priests uniformly do not use honorific language towards lay members, instead employing the tone a father uses towards his son in secular life.

Anglican Church of Korea Building a New Cathedral
This is also a branch of Christianity, specifically Catholicism, but it is somewhat more liberal in all aspects and is not under the dominion of the Roman Pope. This church was first established in 1890 with the arrival of Bishop Corfe (高요한, British) in Kyŏngsŏng. After two changes, the current Bishop Mark Trollope (趙碼可, British) is the responsible leader of the church. There are 4,905 adherents (as of the end of last year) across the seven mission districts in Korea: Kyŏngsŏng, Suwŏn, Kanghwa, Ch’ŏnan, Chinch’ŏn, Umsŏng, and Yŏnbaek. Among these, the Kyŏngsŏng mission district has 330 Korean adherents, about 200 Japanese, and 18 British adherents. There are 6 Korean priests (司祭, sajae, i.e., 神父, sinbu) and 9 Western priests. At the Kyŏngsŏng Chŏngdong headquarters, the Korean clergy are Priest Yi Wŏnch’ang (李源昶) and Deacon Cho Yongho (趙鏞昊). Currently, it is under the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canterbury in England and receives support from the SPG (Society for the Propagation of the Gospel) Mission Society. Church projects include managing several convents, primary schools, and orphanages, though they are certainly not flourishing. Recently, they have been constructing a lofty Cathedral (聖殿) at the Chŏngdong headquarters.

Russian Orthodox Church as a White Russian Refuge
As one heads into the Chŏngdong alley inside Sŏdaemun, one will suddenly see the sign for the Russian Orthodox Church (露國 正敎會) on the right side of the road. This church was originally established as an appendage to the Russian Legation when it was set up in Kyŏngsŏng during the Korean Empire period, intended for all ceremonies within the Legation. Later, it gradually expanded, conducting missionary work targeting Russians residing in Kyŏngsŏng as well as Koreans. This Orthodox Church, being the state religion of Russia, was managed with funds disbursed from the national treasury. However, after the Great War in Europe, the proletarian revolution occurred in Russia, separating state and church, which led to the cutoff of funding. Currently, it barely maintains its existence by renting out property. Recently, several White Russian (白軍) exiles have been coming and going, it is said. There are about 400 adherents throughout Korea, with about 150 in Kyŏngsŏng alone. There are three branches in P’aju (坡州), Changdan (長端), and Koyang (高陽). The current head of the church is Archimandrite Feodosii (페오도 씨 大神父). Before the revolution, it was under the jurisdiction of the Vladivostok <76> Ecclesiastical Authority, but since last year, it has been temporarily placed under the jurisdiction of the Orthodox Archbishop (also Russian, of course) in Japan. It is said that there is only one Korean priest, Mr. Kang Hant’ak (姜漢倬). A unique characteristic of this Russian Orthodox Church is that when a believer dies, memorial rites (祭祀, chesa) are invariably performed as part of the religious ceremony. This is a major difference compared to other denominations belonging to Christianity (耶蘇敎).

Congregational Christian Church, Successor to the Kumiai Church
Commonly known as the Kumiai Church (組合敎會) in Japan, it began establishing its denomination in Korea under the name Hoejung Church (會衆敎會) from 1920. Initially, the Japanese Kumiai Church tried hard, spending some money, to propagate among Koreans, but seeing no results, they decided to withdraw. The Hoejung Church is what inherited those adherents and church buildings at that time. The central figure of this church is Mr. Yu Ilson (柳一宣). It has its headquarters in Ch’ŏngjin-dong, about 10 branch churches in the provinces, and claims to have about 3,000 adherents. It is said that there are about 300 adherents on the rolls in Kyŏngsŏng.

Buddhist Central Ecclesiastical Affairs Board Reorganizing its Ranks
It has not even been several decades since Buddhist monks (승려) began to hold their heads high and enter Kyŏngsŏng city. The Yi Dynasty abhorred Buddhism to such an extent that not a single temple was allowed to be built within the Seoul city walls. Consequently, there was no room to even speak of the presence or absence of Buddhist influence within Seoul. As times changed (物換星移) and monks' entry into Kyŏngsŏng became free, the Wŏnjong Chongmuwŏn (圓宗 宗務院) was first established outside the East Gate in the first year of Yung-hŭi (隆熙 元年, 1907), centered around Mr. Yi Hoegwang (李晦光). After some activity, the so-called Temple Ordinance (寺刹令) was promulgated in September of Sinhae (辛亥, 1911), the year following the Japan-Korea annexation. The following year, the Council Office of the Abbots of the 30 Head Temples (30本山 住持會議所) was established. In Taishō 4 (大正4年, 1915), it was renamed the Joint Office of the 30 Head Temples (30本山 聯合事務所), with Mr. Kang Taeryŏn (姜大連) becoming the first chairman. As things proceeded, ill feelings arose among members, leading to a split in Taishō 11 (大正11年, 1922) into the General Affairs Board (總務院, Ch’ongmuwŏn) and the Ecclesiastical Affairs Board (敎務院, Kyomuwon). The conflict between the two sides, with Kwak Pŏpkyŏng (郭法鏡) in the Ch’ongmuwŏn and Yi Hoegwang in the Kyomuwon, dragged on for years without resolution. Finally, in March of this year, a settlement was reached, and the two boards merged, completing the establishment of a Foundation (財團法人) worth ₩600,000. As a first step, they began managing Posŏng High Common School (普成高普) and plan to gradually undertake propagation and other activities. The current directors (理事) are Kwak Pŏpkyŏng, Na Ch’ŏngho (羅晴湖), Kim Wŏljae (金月齋), Kim Kuha (金九河), Kim Ilun (金一雲), Yu Hoam (柳護菴), and O Isan (吳梨山) (7 in total). Mr. Yi Hoegwang and Mr. Kang Taeryŏn, who were previously recognized as the central forces of the old factions, have retired to mere councilor (評議員) positions. Other Buddhist organizations in Kyŏngsŏng include the Chosŏn Pulgyohoe (朝鮮佛敎會), centered around Pak Hanyŏng (朴漢永), aimed at publishing Buddhist scriptures; the Chosŏn Pulgyo Youth Association (朝鮮佛敎靑年會), attempting internal reform of Buddhism (President Han Yongun 韓龍雲, General Secretary Yi Chongch’ŏn 李鍾天); the Buddhist Women's Youth Association (佛敎女子靑年會) (President U Pongun 禹鳳雲) <77>; the Sŏnwŏn (禪學院), dedicated purely to the propagation of Zen (禪旨) teachings (figures like Kim Namch’ŏn 金南泉 and Kang Tobong 姜道峯 would be prominent among them); the Chosŏn Pulgyo Taehoe (朝鮮佛敎大會), aimed at fostering harmony in faith between Japanese and Koreans (General Secretary Kobayashi Genroku 小林源六, Vice President Yi Wŏnsŏk 李元錫); and Mr. Yi Hoegwang's Buddhist Mission Center (佛敎 布敎所) in Chŏngdong.
Throughout Korea, there are 30 head temples (本山), over 900 branch temples (末寺), about 6,000 monks, and roughly 100,000 adherents (figures uncertain). Due to livelihood difficulties and other reasons, many monks are returning to secular life (還俗), and the number of monks is said to be decreasing year by year. And regarding recent Buddhism, the person considered foremost in Zen studies (禪學) is said to be Master Pang Hanam (方寒岩 禪師).

Steadily Maturing Ch’ŏndogyo
Today's Ch’ŏndogyo (天道敎) is the old Tonghak (東學). After the Kapo Tonghak Rebellion (甲午 東學亂), and especially after the Musul Incident (戊戌遭變, the execution of the second Tonghak leader Ch'oe Sihyŏng 崔時亨師 in Kyŏngsŏng in June 1898), Tonghak followers frequently visited Kyŏngsŏng. However, they formally hung out their sign and appeared in Kyŏngsŏng from September of Kapchin (甲辰, 1904), when the entire Tonghak group organized the Chinbohoe (進步會). Later, Song Pyŏngjun’s (宋秉畯) faction, the Ilchinhoe (一進會), merged with the Chinbohoe. In November of Ŭlsa (乙巳, 1905), due to the actions of Song Pyŏngjun, Yi Yonggu (李容九), and others, the so-called "Independence Protection" (獨立保護) was declared (at this time, Son Ŭiam 孫義菴 returned to Korea, summoned them, and after arguing, asked, "You punk, what does 'Independence Protection' mean? Can you be independent while receiving protection?" The two replied, "No sir, it's not 'Protected Independence' (保護獨立), it's 'Independence Protection' (獨立保護)" etc.). Son Ŭiam, hearing this news from afar in Japan, was utterly astonished. On December 1st, he formally announced the name Ch’ŏndogyo to the world, distinguishing its banner from the Ilchinhoe. He returned to Korea in January of Pyŏngo (丙午, 1906) and established the Ch’ŏndogyo Central Headquarters (中央總部) in Tadong (茶洞) with the general adherents. This was the first time the name Ch’ŏndogyo appeared in Kyŏngsŏng (18 years ago). In October of that year (Pyŏngo), Song Pyŏngjun, Yi Yonggu, and 59 others were expelled (黜敎), completely separating Ilchinhoe and Ch’ŏndogyo, a situation that continues to this day. The subsequent history, including the emergence of the March First Movement (己未運動) and the death of Son Ŭiam, need not be recounted here. Briefly recording the current state of the church in Kyŏngsŏng: this church originally placed its entire foundation in the provinces, merely maintaining a central organ in Kyŏngsŏng for the spiritual and administrative unity of the church. The number of adherents within Kyŏngsŏng is only about 450. The current central body (Ch’ŏndogyo Chungang Chongniwŏn 天道敎 中央宗理院) includes six Lecturers (講師, akin to elders): O Sech’ang (吳世昌), Kwŏn Tongjin (權東鎭), Yi Chonghun (李鍾勳), Na Yonghwan (羅龍煥), O Yŏngch’ang (吳榮昌), Hong Pyŏnggi (洪秉箕); and 12 Administrators (宗理師, akin to executive committee members): Ch’oe Rin (崔麟), Yi Insuk (李仁淑), Ch’oe Sŏgyŏn (崔碩連), etc. Besides these, there are the Ch’ŏndogyo Youth Party (靑年黨), directly aiming for the construction of Heaven on Earth (地上天國) (Standing Committee: Cho Kigan 趙基栞, Pak Raehong 朴來弘); the Ch’ŏndogyo Women's Group (內修團) (Committee: Chu Okkyŏng 朱鈺卿, Yi Chŏnghŭi 李貞熙 <78>, and several others); the Ch’ŏndogyo Boys' Association (少年會) (Committee: Hong Ilch’ang 洪一昌, Kye Yŏnjip 桂淵集); and the Ch’ŏndogyo Student Association (學生會), all quietly but diligently preparing for the creation of a new world (새 天地의 개벽).

Two Lineages of Sich’ŏn’gyo
There are two branches of Sich’ŏn’gyo (侍天敎). Namely, the Kyŏnji-dong (堅志洞) Sich’ŏn’gyo, centered around Song Pyŏngjun (宋秉畯) and Yi Yonggu (李容九, already deceased), and the Chaedong (齋洞) Sich’ŏn’gyo, centered around Kim Kuguam (金龜菴). Initially, the Song Pyŏngjun and Yi Yonggu faction, having declared the so-called "Independence Protection" and been expelled from Ch’ŏndogyo centered around Son Ŭiam, promptly established a separate religious gate called Sich’ŏn’gyo (during Pyŏngo year, 1906). The following year, Chŏngmi (丁未, 1907), they welcomed the faction of Mr. Kim Yŏn’guk (金演局, Kuguam 龜菴), which had also split off from Ch’ŏndogyo, and their influence expanded considerably. Later, in Kyech’uk year (癸丑, 1913), due to disagreements, the Song Pyŏngjun side and the Kim Kuguam side separated again. The former established its central classroom in Kyŏnji-dong, the latter in Chaedong, and so it has remained to this day. Adherent records for both are incomplete, so exact numbers are unknown, but the adherents in Kyŏngsŏng number only a few dozen. Currently, the key people working in these churches are: in Chaedong Sich’ŏn’gyo, Great Leader Kuguam (龜菴 大敎主) and below him Kim Nakpong (金洛鳳), Wŏn Yongil (元容馹), Hŏ Kyun (許均), and a few others; in Kyŏnji-dong Sich’ŏn’gyo, Pak Hyŏngch’ae (朴衡釆), Ch’oe Yŏnggu (崔榮九), Yu Chihun (柳志薰), and a few others. Minister Song Pyŏngjun (宋秉畯 大監) was the leader (敎主) of the Kyŏnji-dong Sich’ŏn’gyo until recent years, but he has now resigned from that position and, at the same time, reportedly stopped the financial contributions he had regularly provided for some time.
Besides these, there are several other groups in Kyŏngsŏng with characteristics of a church, but there is no need to enumerate them separately, so I will omit them here. Poch’ŏn’gyo (普天敎), which has recently become a topic of conversation, also established a Chinjŏngwŏn (眞正院) in Kyŏngsŏng in Taishō 10 (大正10年, 1921), but there seem to be hardly any adherents in Kyŏngsŏng. The Head of Chinjŏngwŏn, Yi Chongik (李鍾翊), and Sŏnhwasa (宣化司) Ko Yonghwan (高龍煥), are quietly holding their positions there.

Most Flourishing of All: Sungsingyohoe
I mentioned at the beginning that Seoulites lack pious faith. However, in place of such pious faith, there is an abundance of messy, primitive, self-serving superstition (迷信). Above all, the women of Seoul can be called the favored daughters of this superstition. If we look just at the superstitious organizations—especially the shaman (巫女, munyŏ) organizations—within Kyŏngsŏng, the one called Hwangjo Kyŏngsin Sungsingyohoe (皇祖敬神崇神敎會, established Taishō 9, 1920) has affiliated shamans numbering over 3,000, with 554 shamans located just within Kyŏngsŏng city. Next is the Sungs'inin Chohap (崇神人組合) (this was formed by Japanese changing their names to Korean ones, also established Taishō 9, 1920); the shamans belonging to this group number 450 just in the Kyŏngsŏng headquarters, over 2,000 in Kyŏnggi Province, and over 4,000 throughout Korea. Besides these, another group called Kyŏngsin Kyohoe (敬神敎會) is reportedly being established. Who could have known that the inner reality of Kyŏngsŏng, nay, the inner reality of Korea, was so corrupted (傷敗)? The authorities, apparently thinking it a good phenomenon (그것 됴흔 현상이다), leave it be. What are being newly built everywhere are shaman ritual halls (巫女致誠堂). <79>
<71-79>

**Summary**

This 1924 article surveys the headquarters of various religious organizations present in Seoul (Kyŏngsŏng). The author, Ki Ch'an, contrasts the perceived lack of deep, pious faith among Seoulites with the established institutional presence of numerous groups. These include various Christian denominations (Northern/Southern Methodist, Northern Presbyterian, Catholic, Anglican, Russian Orthodox, Congregational), Tonghak offshoots (Ch'ŏndogyo, two Sich'ŏn'gyo factions), Buddhism, and the emerging Poch'ŏn'gyo. The article details their histories in Korea, key leaders (Korean and foreign), institutions (schools, hospitals), claimed adherent numbers, funding sources (including foreign mission boards and Korean contributions), and current activities or states of influence. It highlights the relative dynamism of Northern Methodists and Presbyterians, the quiet but significant growth of Catholicism, Buddhism's recent organizational consolidation, and criticizes the flourishing of organized Shamanism (Sungsingyohoe), noting official indifference.

From a historical perspective, the article is valuable for its detailed snapshot of Seoul's diverse religious landscape under Japanese colonial rule. Historians might find particular interest in the specific data on mission funding versus Korean self-support efforts within Protestant churches, the explicit references to political divisions within the Tonghak lineage (Ilchinhoe vs. Ch'ŏndogyo), the commentary comparing conservative Presbyterianism with the numerical strength of Catholicism, and the sharp critique of organized shamanism (Sungsingyohoe, Sungs'inin Chohap) alongside the observation about perceived government tolerance towards it. The lists of key personnel and adherent statistics, though sometimes approximate, provide a useful baseline for understanding religious demographics and leadership in the 1920s.

**Named Entities**

京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng
北監理敎會	북감리교회	Northern Methodist Church
北長老敎會	북장로교회	Northern Presbyterian Church
南監理敎會	남감리교회	Southern Methodist Church
天主敎	천주교	Catholic Church
聖公會	성공회	Anglican Church
露國 正敎會	노국 정교회	Russian Orthodox Church
會衆敎	회중교	Congregational Church
佛敎 敎務院	불교 교무원	Buddhist Ecclesiastical Affairs Board
天道敎	천도교	Ch'ŏndogyo
侍天敎	시천교	Sich'ŏn'gyo
普天敎	보천교	Poch'ŏn'gyo
崇神敎會	숭신교회	Sungsingyohoe
三角	삼각	Samgak (Mountain)
南山	남산	Namsan (Mountain)
鍾路	종로	Chongno
漢江	한강	Han River
基督系	기독계	Christian-affiliated
東學系	동학계	Tonghak-affiliated
貞洞	정동	Chŏngdong
蓮洞	연동	Yŏndong
鍾峴	종현	Chonghyŏn
淸進洞	청진동	Ch’ŏngjin-dong
武橋町	무교정	Mugyo-chŏng (Mugyo-dong)
새문안	새문안	Saemunan
救世軍敎會	구세군교회	Salvation Army Church
慶雲洞	경운동	Kyŏngun-dong
齋洞	재동	Chaedong
金演局	김연국	Kim Yŏn’guk
堅志洞	견지동	Kyŏnji-dong
宋秉畯	송병준	Song Pyŏngjun
靑林敎	청림교	Ch'ŏngnimgyo
白白敎	백백교	Paekpaekkyo
米國 北監理 외국 선교부	미국 북감리 외국 선교부	American Northern Methodist Foreign Mission Board
아펜설나	아펜설러	Appenzeller (Henry G.)
스크랜돈	스크랜턴	Scranton (William B. or Mary F.)
培材學堂	배재학당	Paejae Haktang
梨花學堂	이화학당	Ewha Haktang
延禧	연희	Yŏnhŭi (Professional School)
세부란스	세브란스	Severance (Union Medical College/Hospital)
平壤	평양	P’yŏngyang
光成學校	광성학교	Kwangsŏng School
긔홀병원	기홀병원	Kihol Hospital (Hall Memorial Hospital?)
웰취	웰치	Welch (Herbert)
裵亨湜	배형식	Pae Hyŏngsik
崔聖模	최성모	Ch'oe Sŏngmo
金鍾宇	김종우	Kim Chongu
玄錫七	현석칠	Hyŏn Sŏkch'il
洪淳倬	홍순탁	Hong Sunt'ak (Hong Sunjo in text body)
吳起善	오기선	O Kison
金裕舜	김유순	Kim Yusun
李益模	이익모	Yi Ikmo
張樂道	장낙도	Chang Nakto
노불	노블	Noble (William Arthur)
문요한	문요한	Moon Yohan (Possibly Moore, J.Z.?)
白雅德	백아덕	Paek Adŏk (Possibly Becker or Baker?)
玄楯	현순	Hyŏn Sun
孫貞道	손정도	Son Chŏngdo
盧正一	노정일	No Chŏngil
中央靑年會	중앙청년회	Central YMCA (Chungang Ch'ŏngnyŏnhoe)
申興雨	신흥우	Sin Hŭngu
水原	수원	Suwŏn
仁川	인천	Inch'ŏn
江陵	강릉	Kangnŭng
天安	천안	Ch'ŏnan
公州	공주	Kongju
海州	해주	Haeju
寧邊	영변	Yŏngbyŏn
利川	이천	Ich'ŏn
滿洲	만주	Manchuria
洪城	홍성	Hongsŏng
元杜尤	원두우	Wŏn Tu'u (Horace G. Underwood)
안렌	알렌	Allen (Horace N.)
헤론	헤론	Heron (John W.)
米國 北長老敎會宣敎會	미국 북장로교회선교회	American Northern Presbyterian Mission Council
新門內敎會	신문내교회	Saemunannae Church
奇一	기일	Ki Il (James S. Gale)
蓮洞敎會	연동교회	Yŏndong Church
勝洞	승동	Sŭngdong
南門 안	남문 안	Nammun-an (Inside South Gate)
廟洞	묘동	Myodong
安洞	안동	Andong
河橋	하교	Hagyo
儆新學校	경신학교	Kyŏngsin School
貞信女學校	정신여학교	Chŏngsin Girls' School
崇實學校	숭실학교	Sungsil School
崇仁女學校	숭인여학교	Sungin Girls' School
崇德學校	숭덕학교	Sungdŏk School
馬布三悅	마포삼열	Map'o Samyŏl (Samuel A. Moffett)
魚丕信	어비신	Ŏ Pisin (Oliver R. Avison)
李明赫	이명혁	Yi Myŏnghyŏk
金永耈	김영구	Kim Yŏnggu
車載明	차재명	Ch'a Chaemyŏng
李商在	이상재	Yi Sangjae
兪星濬	유성준	Yu Sŏngjun
朴勝鳳	박승봉	Pak Sŭngbong
南長老	남장로	Southern Presbyterian
東洋宣敎會	동양선교회	Oriental Missionary Society
第七日安息日 耶蘇再臨敎	제칠일안식일 예수재림교	Seventh-day Adventist Church
加奈佗長老敎會	가나다장로교회	Canadian Presbyterian Church
濠洲長老敎會	호주장로교회	Australian Presbyterian Church
聖書公會	성서공회	Bible Society
英國聖公會	영국성공회	British Anglican Church
救世軍	구세군	Salvation Army
佛國人	불국인	French people
佛國	불국	France
法	법	Franc (currency)
헨트럭싀	헨드릭스	Hendrix (Eugene Russell)
리더 박사	리드 박사	Dr. Reid (C. F. Reid)
西大門	서대문	Sŏdaemun
開城	개성	Kaesŏng
春川	춘천	Ch'unch'ŏn
元山	원산	Wŏnsan
宗橋	종교	Chonggyo
紫橋	자교	Chagyŏ
水標	수표	Sup'yo (Bridge)
水口門	수구문	Sugumun
石橋	석교	Sŏkkyo
京橋	경교	Kyŏnggyo
보애사	보아스	Boaz (Hiram A.)
傳道局	전도국	Mission Bureau
梁柱三	양주삼	Yang Chusam
吳華英	오화영	O Hwayŏng
白亨基	백형기	Paek Hyŏnggi
洪鍾肅	홍종숙	Hong Chongsuk
尹相煥	윤상환	Yun Sanghwan
李壽萬	이수만	Yi Suman
李昌稷	이창직	Yi Ch'angjik
尹致昊	윤치호	Yun Ch'iho
耶蘇敎	야소교	Yesugyo (Common term for Protestant Christianity)
舊敎	구교	Old Church (Catholicism)
露西亞	노서아	Russia
希臘 正敎	희랍 정교	Greek Orthodox Church
李朝	이조	Yi Dynasty
鄭斗源	정두원	Chŏng Tuwŏn
北京	북경	Beijing
李德祚	이덕조	Yi Tŏkcho
權哲身	권철신	Kwŏn Ch'ŏlsin
丁若鍾	정약종	Chŏng Yakchong (brother of Chŏng Yagyong)
李承薰	이승훈	Yi Sŭnghun
李東郁	이동욱	Yi Tonguk
周神父	주 신부	Father Zhou (Zhou Wenmo 周文謨)
蘇主敎	소 주교	Bishop So (Laurent-Joseph-Marius Imbert, posthumously named; likely refers to Bishop Bruguière initially)
辛酉	신유	Sinyu (Persecution, 1801)
癸亥	계해	Kyehae (Persecution, 1803 - part of Sinyu?) / (Likely refers to Kihae Persecution 己亥, 1839)
丙午	병오	Pyŏngo (Persecution, 1846)
丙寅	병인	Pyŏngin (Persecution, 1866)
大邱	대구	Taegu
神父	신부	Sinbu (Catholic Priest)
구스다부·뮈뗄	구스타브 뮈텔	Gustave Mutel
姜道永	강도영	Kang Toyŏng
韓基根	한기근	Han Kigŭn
金元永	김원영	Kim Wŏnyŏng
鄭圭夏	정규하	Chŏng Kyuha
金聖學	김성학	Kim Sŏnghak
神學校	신학교	Seminary
修士院	수사원	Monastery
修女院	수녀원	Convent
修道院	수도원	Sudowŏn (Monastery/Convent complex)
天主敎 靑年會	천주교 청년회	Catholic Youth Association
金春植	김춘식	Kim Ch'unsik
朴準鎬	박준호	Pak Chunho
金翰洙	김한수	Kim Hansu
佛國 巴里 外方傳敎會	불국 파리 외방전교회	Paris Foreign Missions Society (France)
德國 聖芬道會	독국 성분도회	German St. Benedictine Order (St. Ottilien)
米國 紐育 聖마리놀傳敎會	미국 뉴욕 성 마리놀 전교회	American New York St. Maryknoll Mission Society (Maryknoll Fathers and Brothers)
羅馬布敎省	나마포교성	Roman Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith
全羅	전라	Chŏlla (Province)
慶尙北道	경상북도	Kyŏngsangbuk-do (Province)
咸鏡	함경	Hamgyŏng (Province)
平安西道	평안서도	P'yŏngan West Province (Possibly just P'yŏngan Province)
京畿	경기	Kyŏnggi (Province)
江原	강원	Kangwŏn (Province)
忠淸	충청	Ch'ungch'ŏng (Province)
黃海	황해	Hwanghae (Province)
羅馬法皇	나마법황	Roman Pope
高요한	고요한	Bishop Corfe (Charles John)
英人	영인	British person
趙碼可	조마가	Bishop Trollope (Mark Napier)
江華	강화	Kanghwa
鎭川	진천	Chinch'ŏn
陰城	음성	Umsŏng
延白	연백	Yŏnbaek
司祭	사제	Sajae (Priest - Anglican/Catholic)
李源昶	이원창	Yi Wŏnch'ang
次副祭	차부제	Ch'abuje (Subdeacon? Likely Deacon)
趙鏞昊	조용호	Cho Yongho
英國 캔터바리 大主敎	영국 캔터베리 대주교	Archbishop of Canterbury, England
SPG宣敎會	SPG선교회	SPG Mission Society (Society for the Propagation of the Gospel)
韓國	한국	Han'guk (Korean Empire)
露西亞 公舘	노서아 공관	Russian Legation
國庫金	국고금	National Treasury Funds
歐洲大戰	구주대전	European Great War (WWI)
白軍	백군	White Army (White Russians)
坡州	파주	P'aju
長端	장단	Changdan
高陽	고양	Koyang
페오도 씨 大神父	페오도시오스 대신부	Archimandrite Feodosii (Theodosius)
海參威敎務院	해삼위교무원	Vladivostok Ecclesiastical Authority (Eparchy)
日本	일본	Japan
姜漢倬	강한탁	Kang Hant'ak
組合敎會	조합교회	Kumiai Church (Congregational)
柳一宣	유일선	Yu Ilson
隆熙 元年	융희 원년	First Year of Yung-hŭi (1907)
東大門	동대문	East Gate (Tongdaemun)
圓宗 宗務院	원종 종무원	Wŏnjong Chongmuwŏn
李晦光	이회광	Yi Hoegwang
日韓合邦	일한합방	Japan-Korea Annexation (1910)
辛亥	신해	Sinhae year (1911)
寺刹令	사찰령	Temple Ordinance
30本山 住持會議所	30본산 주지회의소	Council Office of the Abbots of the 30 Head Temples
大正	대정	Taishō era (1912-1926)
30本山 聯合事務所	30본산 연합사무소	Joint Office of the 30 Head Temples
姜大連	강대련	Kang Taeryŏn
總務院	총무원	General Affairs Board
敎務院	교무원	Ecclesiastical Affairs Board
郭法鏡	곽법경	Kwak Pŏpkyŏng
財團法人	재단법인	Foundation (Juridical Person)
普成高普	보성고보	Posŏng High Common School
羅晴湖	나청호	Na Ch'ŏngho
金月齋	김월재	Kim Wŏljae
金九河	김구하	Kim Kuha
金一雲	김일운	Kim Ilun
柳護菴	유호암	Yu Hoam
吳梨山	오리산	O Isan
評議員	평의원	Councilor
朝鮮佛敎會	조선불교회	Chosŏn Buddhist Association
朴漢永	박한영	Pak Hanyŏng
朝鮮佛敎靑年會	조선불교청년회	Chosŏn Buddhist Youth Association
韓龍雲	한용운	Han Yongun
李鍾天	이종천	Yi Chongch'ŏn
佛敎女子靑年會	불교여자청년회	Buddhist Women's Youth Association
禹鳳雲	우봉운	U Pongun
禪學院	선학원	Sŏnwŏn (Zen Academy)
金南泉	김남천	Kim Namch'ŏn
姜道峯	강도봉	Kang Tobong
朝鮮佛敎大會	조선불교대회	Chosŏn Buddhist Convention
小林源六	고바야시 겐로쿠	Kobayashi Genroku
李元錫	이원석	Yi Wŏnsŏk
佛敎 布敎所	불교 포교소	Buddhist Mission Center
方寒岩 禪師	방한암 선사	Zen Master Pang Hanam
東學	동학	Tonghak
甲午 東學亂	갑오 동학란	Kapo Tonghak Rebellion (1894)
戊戌遭變	무술조변	Musul Incident (1898)
崔時亨	최시형	Ch'oe Sihyŏng
甲辰	갑진	Kapchin year (1904)
進步會	진보회	Chinbohoe (Progressive Society)
一進會	일진회	Ilchinhoe (Advancement Society)
乙巳	을사	Ŭlsa year (1905)
李容九	이용구	Yi Yonggu
獨立保護	독립보호	Independence Protection
孫義菴	손의암	Son Ŭiam (Son Pyŏnghŭi 孫秉熙)
丙午	병오	Pyŏngo year (1906)
茶洞	다동	Tadong
己未運動	기미운동	Kimi Movement (March First Movement, 1919)
中央宗理院	중앙종리원	Central Administrative Council (Ch'ŏndogyo)
吳世昌	오세창	O Sech'ang
權東鎭	권동진	Kwŏn Tongjin
李鍾勳	이종훈	Yi Chonghun
羅龍煥	나용환	Na Yonghwan
吳榮昌	오영창	O Yŏngch'ang
洪秉箕	홍병기	Hong Pyŏnggi
講師	강사	Kangsa (Lecturer - Ch'ŏndogyo)
崔麟	최린	Ch'oe Rin
李仁淑	이인숙	Yi Insuk
崔碩連	최석련	Ch'oe Sŏgyŏn
宗理師	종리사	Chongnisa (Administrator - Ch'ŏndogyo)
天道敎 靑年黨	천도교 청년당	Ch'ŏndogyo Youth Party
趙基栞	조기栞	Cho Kigan
朴來弘	박래홍	Pak Raehong
天道敎 內修團	천도교 내수단	Ch'ŏndogyo Women's Group
朱鈺卿	주옥경	Chu Okkyŏng
李貞熙	이정희	Yi Chŏnghŭi
天道敎 少年會	천도교 소년회	Ch'ŏndogyo Boys' Association
洪一昌	홍일창	Hong Ilch'ang
桂淵集	계연집	Kye Yŏnjip
天道敎 學生會	천도교 학생회	Ch'ŏndogyo Student Association
金龜菴	김구암	Kim Kuguam (Style name of Kim Yŏn'guk)
大敎主	대교주	Tae Kyoju (Great Leader/Patriarch)
丁未	정미	Chŏngmi year (1907)
癸丑	계축	Kyech'uk year (1913)
金洛鳳	김낙봉	Kim Nakpong
元容馹	원용일	Wŏn Yongil
許均	허균	Hŏ Kyun
朴衡釆	박형채	Pak Hyŏngch'ae
崔榮九	최영구	Ch'oe Yŏnggu
柳志薰	유지훈	Yu Chihun
眞正院	진정원	Chinjŏngwŏn (Poch'ŏn'gyo office)
李鍾翊	이종익	Yi Chongik
宣化司	선화사	Sŏnhwasa (Poch'ŏn'gyo title)
高龍煥	고용환	Ko Yonghwan
巫女	무녀	Munyŏ (Shamaness, Mudang)
皇祖敬神崇神敎會	황조경신숭신교회	Hwangjo Kyŏngsin Sungsingyohoe
崇神人組合	숭신인조합	Sungs'inin Chohap (Shaman Worshippers' Union)
敬神敎會	경신교회	Kyŏngsin Kyohoe

**Glossary**

在京城	재경성	In Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul)
各敎會	각교회	Various churches/religious groups
本部	본부	Headquarters
歷訪	역방	To visit in succession, tour
利己爲主	이기위주	Self-serving, ego-centric
巫卜信仰	무복신앙	Shamanistic and divination beliefs
自治的	자치적	Autonomous, self-governing
自立	자립	Self-reliance, independence
密密히	밀밀히	Secretly, quietly, densely
번쳐가다	번쳐가다	To spread out (older form of 번져가다)
聖殿	성전	Holy temple, cathedral
新築	신축	New construction
白軍	백군	White Army (anti-Bolshevik forces in Russian Civil War)
避身所	피신소	Refuge, shelter
組合	조합	Association, union (here refers to 組合敎會, Kumiai Church)
後身	후신	Successor body, later form
陣容新整	진용신정	Realigning ranks, reorganizing formation
가만히	가만히	Quietly, stealthily, steadily
영글어가다	영글어가다	To ripen, mature
系統	계통	Lineage, system, faction
機關	기관	Organ, institution, office
뚱당거리다	뚱땅거리다	To make noise, clamor, bustle about (onomatopoeic)
王室	왕실	Royal family, Royal House
名譽	명예	Honor, reputation
權力	권력	Power, authority
得喪	득상	Gain and loss
사라오다	살아오다	To have lived (older spelling of 살아오다)
경건하다	경건하다	Pious, devout
信仰	신앙	Faith, belief
잇다	있다	To exist, have (older spelling of 있다)
업다	없다	To not exist, not have (older spelling of 없다)
崇嚴	숭엄	Sublimity, majesty
翠美	취미	Verdant beauty
心靈	심령	Spirit, soul
無力	무력	Powerless
輸入	수입	Import
移入	이입	Transplant, introduction
人造	인조	Artificial, man-made
종교	종교	Religion
若干	약간	Some, a certain amount
세력	세력	Influence, power
扶植	부식	To foster, establish, plant
金錢	금전	Money
消費	소비	Consumption, spending
탓	탓	Reason, cause, fault (often implies consequence)
設施	시설	Establishment, facilities, institution
都트러	도틀어	Overall, encompassing all (older form?)
對立	대립	Opposition, confrontation
本據	본거	Base, stronghold
布敎	포교	Missionary work, propagation
形勢	형세	Situation, condition, influence
第一이다	제일이다	Is the first, is number one
 예배당	예배당	Chapel, church building
밧게	밖에	Outside (older spelling of 밖에)
밋다	믿다	To believe (older spelling)
갓다	같다	To be like, same as (older spelling of 같다)
聖書	성서	Bible, holy scriptures
洗禮	세례	Baptism
밧다	받다	To receive (older spelling of 받다)
美点	미점	Merit, strong point
宣敎師	선교사	Missionary
便	편	Side, party (as in 'missionary side')
經費	경비	Expenses, costs
一切	일체	All, everything, entirely
負擔	부담	Burden, responsibility, charge
反面	반면	On the other hand, flip side
섭셥하다	섭섭하다	Regrettable, disappointing (older spelling of 섭섭하다)
思想	사상	Thought, ideology
원체로	원체로	Originally, fundamentally (older form of 원래)
뒤떠러지다	뒤떨어지다	To lag behind, fall behind (older spelling)
保守	보수	Conservative
濃厚	농후	Strong, thick, pronounced
行하다	행하다	To perform, carry out
始作	시작	Start, beginning
總務	총무	General affairs manager/secretary
實現	실현	Realization, actualization
結局	결국	Eventually, in the end
但	단	However, but, provided that
報酬	보수	Remuneration, pay, reward
贊助	찬조	Support, assistance, sponsorship
漸減	점감	Gradual decrease
己未運動	기미운동	Kimi Undong (March First Movement of 1919)
稍增	초증	Slight increase
不振	부진	Slump, stagnation, sluggishness
通常	통상	Usually, generally
推斷	추단	Inference, deduction
正反對	정반대	Exact opposite
其半	기반	Its half
統計	통계	Statistics
總	총	Total
儀式	의식	Ritual, ceremony
偏傾	편경	Inclination, bias, leaning
驚愕	경악	Astonishment, shock
難題	난제	Difficult problem, quandary
慘劇	참극	Tragedy, disaster
虐殺	학살	Massacre
累次	누차	Repeatedly, on several occasions
近世史	근세사	Modern history (esp. late Yi Dynasty)
니르키다	일으키다	To cause, provoke, start (older form of 일으키다)
年歷	연혁	History, development
研究	연구	Research, study
仍	잉	Subsequently, therefore
神父	신부	Catholic priest
密密히	밀밀히	Secretly, clandestinely
共히	공히	Together with
成立	성립	Establishment, formation
窘難	군난	Persecution, hardship (older term, used for Catholic persecutions)
更迭	경질	Change, replacement (of personnel)
建設	건설	Construction, establishment
俱高	구고	Both high (talent and virtue)
功勞	공로	Merit, contribution
事業	사업	Work, project, enterprise
顯著	현저	Remarkable, prominent
直接	직접	Direct
修士	수사	Monk, brother (Catholic)
修女	수녀	Nun, sister (Catholic)
通稱	통칭	Commonly called, generic name
修道院	수도원	Monastery, convent
活動	활동	Activity
本히	본히	Fundamentally, originally (older form of 본디)
判異	판이	Completely different
敬神的	경신적	Devotional, reverent towards God
所管	소관	Jurisdiction
分擔	분담	To divide responsibility, share
一般	일반	General, universal, common
絕對條件	절대조건	Absolute condition
淨潔	정결	Purity, chastity
貞童 貞女	정동 정녀	Virgin boy, virgin girl
甘貧	감빈	Willing poverty
順命	순명	Obedience
盟誓	맹세	Vow, oath
語套	어투	Tone of speech, manner of speaking
行用	행용	To use, employ (in practice)
自由的	자유적	Liberal, free
擔責者	담책자	Person in charge, responsible party
司祭	사제	Priest (Anglican, Catholic)
次副祭	차부제	Subdeacon / Deacon
補助	보조	Assistance, subsidy
盛치 못하다	성치 못하다	Not prosperous, not flourishing
公舘	공관	Legation
附屬	부속	Attached, affiliated
儀式	의식	Ceremony, ritual
擴大	확대	Expansion
對象	대상	Target, object
國敎	국교	State religion
國庫金	국고금	National treasury funds
支出	지출	Expenditure, disbursement
無産者	무산자	Proletariat
政敎分離	정교분리	Separation of church and state
斷絕	단절	Severance, cutoff
僅僅	근근	Barely, narrowly
維持	유지	Maintenance, preservation
亡命	망명	Exile, defection
大神父	대신부	Archimandrite (Orthodox senior priest)
臨時	임시	Temporary
特點	특색	Characteristic, distinctive feature (appears as 특색 in text body)
祭祀	제사	Ancestral rites, memorial service
撤歸	철귀	Withdrawal, retreat
引受	인수	Takeover, acceptance
中央機關	중앙기관	Central organ/institution
精神	정신	Spirit, mind
事務	사무	Affairs, administration
統一	통일	Unification, unity
講師	강사	Lecturer (Ch'ŏndogyo leadership role)
長老格	장로격	Equivalent to an elder
宗理師	종리사	Administrator (Ch'ŏndogyo executive role)
執行委員	집행위원	Executive committee member
建設	건설	Construction, building
目的	목적	Purpose, goal
內修團	내수단	Women's Group (Ch'ŏndogyo)
少年會	소년회	Boys' Association
學生會	학생회	Student Association
緊着	긴착	Diligence, attentiveness (?) (Possibly 緊切 earnest, urgent, or 착실 faithfulness)
準備	준비	Preparation
除名	제명	Expulsion, removal from register
別立	별립	Separate establishment
頗張	파장	Considerable expansion
意思	의사	Intention, opinion
不合	불합	Disagreement, discord
敎主	교주	Religious leader, head of a religion
辭하다	사하다	To resign, decline
經常的	경상적	Regular, constant
補助	보조	Subsidy, aid
枚擧	매거	To enumerate, list one by one
畧	략	Omission, abbreviation
話題	화제	Topic of conversation
繁昌	번창	Prosperity, flourishing
迷信	미신	Superstition
團軆	단체	Group, organization (older form of 단체)
巫女	무녀	Female shaman, mudang
所屬	소속	Affiliation, belonging to
變名	변명	Changing one's name
內面	내면	Inner side, internal reality
傷敗	상패	Corruption, decay, degeneration
當局	당국	The authorities
放任	방임	Neglect, letting alone, non-interference
四方	사방	All directions, everywhere
致誠堂	치성당	Ritual hall (for shamanic rites)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제48호
발행일	1924년 06월 01일
기사제목	在京城 各敎會의 本部를 歷訪하고
필자	起瀍
기사형태	소식

在京城 各敎會의 本部를 歷訪하고
						起瀍
利己爲主의 巫卜信仰-서울을 중심삼는 北監理-졍말 自治的인 北長老-이제 自立하려는 南監理-密密히 번쳐가는 天主敎-聖殿 新築의 聖公會-白軍 避身所인 露國 正敎會-組合 後身인 會衆敎-陣容新整의 佛敎 敎務院-가만히 영글어가는 天道敎-두 系統의 侍天敎-機關만 설치한 普天敎-뚱당거리는 崇神敎會-

500년 동안에 王室 하나를 중심 삼고, 오즉 名譽 權力의 得喪을 문제로 하야 사라오든 純 서울 사람의 머리에는, 사실, 경건한 신앙이 잇슬 理가 업는 것이다. 三角의 崇嚴, 南山의 翠美, 鍾路의 鳴鍾, 漢江의 深碧도 서울 사람의 心靈을 건드리기에는 너무 無力하엿다. 하물며 輸入 또는 移入된 人造의 종교이랴. 그런 중에도 오늘의 서울에 잇서, 若干한 세력을 扶植한 종교가 잇다 하면, 그것은 무엇보다도 그만한 金錢을 소비한 탓, 달니 말하면 그만한 기관을 設施한 까닭이라 할 것이다.
서울의 종교계를 都트러 말하면 基督系의 것과 東學系의 것이 대립하엿다 할 수 잇스며, 基督系에는 貞洞에 本據를 둔 北監理敎會(北監理敎에는 특히 布敎의 중심을 京城에 둔 관계상, 其 形勢가 諸敎會에 第一이다)와 蓮洞을 중심 삼은 北長老敎會, 종교＜71＞ 예배당을 중심한 南監理敎會, 鍾峴의 天主敎會, 貞洞의 聖公會 또는 露國 正敎會, 淸進洞의 會衆敎會, 武橋町의 東洋宣敎會, 새문안의 救世軍敎會가 잇스며, 東學系에는 慶雲洞의 天道敎會, 齋洞의 侍天敎會(金演局 씨 중심), 堅志洞의 侍天敎會(宋秉畯伯 중심) (右 외에도 靑林敎, 白白敎 등 2,3의 宗派가 잇스나 별로 記入할 것이 업다)가 잇스며, 以上 兩系의 교회 외에 佛敎, 普天敎가 잇스나 별로 京城人 信徒를 가지지 못하엿다.
근래에 포교되는 상황으로 보면 北監理 北長老의 兩 교회가 비교적 활발하며, 天主敎會, 南監理敎會는 現狀만 유지하며, 以外의 佛敎, 天道敎 가튼 것은 다못 事務機關을 서울에 두엇슬 뿐이오, 포교의 主力을 전혀 지방에 두는 관계상, 이러타 저러타 할 것이 업다. 이제 京城 內의 각 교회의 現狀 及 人物을 簡記하면

서울 中心의 北監理敎會
米國 北監理 외국 선교부의 경영에 係한 朝鮮 北監理敎會는 처음부터 활동의 本營을 京城에 둔 관계상, 其 勢가 제일 왕성하다. 작년 현재로 全 朝鮮을 통한 敎徒 43,000여인 중, 京城地方(京城 부근을 포함)의 信徒가 5,377인, 즉 全 信徒 數의 약 8분지1을 占하엿다.
이 교회가 쳐음 京城에 드러오기는 1884년(距今 40년 전)에 아펜설나, 스크랜돈 兩 牧師가, 지금 培材學堂 자리에 定住함으로부터 시작되얏스며, 1887년부터 감독제가 실시되야, 그간 13인의 更迭을 지내여 現 監督 웰취 氏에 이르럿다. 교회사업으로는 爲先 京城에 培材學堂, 梨花學堂의 단독 경영이 잇는 외에 延禧, 세부란스의 두 전문학교에 대한 연합경영이 잇스며 平壤에는 光成學校, 긔홀병원 가튼 것이며, 敎役者(牧師만)는 작년 말 현재(물론 全 敎會를 통해서 하는 말이다)로 감독 一人를 除한 외에 西人이 22인, 朝鮮人 115인(學習人과 在住牧師까지)인 중, 朝鮮人 牧師 중 裵亨湜, 崔聖模, 金鍾宇, 玄錫七, 洪淳倬, 吳起善, 金裕舜, 李益模, 張樂道 가튼 이와 西人 중의 노불, 문요한, 白雅德 가튼 이는 모다 그 교회에 有數한 이들이며 해외에 잇는 玄楯, 孫貞道 씨와 延專의 盧正一, 中央靑年會의 申興雨 씨도 역시 모다 北監理敎會의 사람들이다. 참고로 이 교회의 지방별 포교상황을 말하면
京城地方 5,기377인 水原地方 1,717인 仁川地方 5,890 江陵地方 1,335 天安地方 1,251
公州地方 3,221＜72＞ 海州地方 3,751 平壤地方 12,239 寧邊地方 2,954 利川地方 2,500
右는 1922년 말 현재인 바 금년 중에 滿洲 洪城의 두 지방이 신설되엿스며, 여긔에 말하는 所謂 某某地方이라 함은 그 부근 邑城까지를 통한 傳敎區域을 지칭함이다.

졍말 自治的인 北長老敎會
北長老敎會는 平壤地方을 근거지로 삼는 관계상, 京城에서는 其勢가 대체로 不振하며, 京城에 처음 드러오기는 1885년 4월 5일에 故 元杜尤 牧師가 醫士 안렌 及 헤론 氏와 가티 米國 北長老敎會宣敎會를 조직한 때에서부터라고 할지니, 그 몃사람, 그 중에도 특히 원두우 氏의 노력으로 처음으로 新門內敎會를 세우고, 그 다음으로 奇一 牧師가 蓮洞敎會를 세우고, 그 다음으로 勝洞, 南門 안, 廟洞, 安洞, 河橋 등 교회가 세워지며 오늘까지에 니르렷는대, 京城 內의 信徒는 學習願入까지를 합하야 2천 명에 넘지 못하며, 사업으로는 京城에 儆新學校, 貞信女學校의 단독 경영이 잇는 외에 平壤에는 崇實學校, 崇仁女學校, 崇德學校가 잇는 중, 崇德學校는 순전히 朝鮮敎徒의 경영에 係한 것이며, 敎役者는 4長老敎의 全 교회를 통하야 朝鮮人 목사가 234인, 西人 선교사가 79인 중, 平壤의 馬布三悅, 京城의 奇一, 魚丕信 가튼 선교사는 그 중에도 유명하며, 朝鮮人측 목사로는 全鮮을 통해서는 말할 수가 업스나 京城을 말하면, 蓮洞의 李明赫 勝洞의 金永耈, 新門內의 車載明 씨 가튼 이가 비교적 有數할지며, 李商在, 兪星濬, 朴勝鳳 가튼 노인은 모다 이 교회의 신도들이다.
지금 왼 朝鮮에 퍼저 잇는 基督敎 各派의 外人宣敎師는 약 400명인대, 1921년도 布敎費로 각 本國의 外國傳道局으로부터 送來된 금액은 아레와 갓다.
美國人 諸敎會
北監理敎會 584,820圓  南監理 761,561  北長老 572,790  南長老 327,685
東洋宣敎會 128,000  第七日安息日 耶蘇再臨敎 105,000
英國人 新敎會
加奈佗長老敎會 413,191圓  濠洲長老敎會 149,946  聖書公會 127,049
英國聖公會 61,432＜73＞  救世軍 49,221
佛國人 敎會
天主敎會 235,169法(1法은 약 14錢)
尙右에 대하야 朝鮮人 信徒의 지출한 금액은 監理 及 長老派만으로 1,419,000여 원이라 하는 바, 今日의 朝鮮 基督敎가 그만한 돈을 업새여 가면서 그만한 敎况을 엇는 것은 너무나 당연한 일이라 하겟다. 朝鮮의 長老敎會는 北長老, 南長老, 오스트리아長老, 가나타長老의 4種 敎會가 잇는대, 이를 통한 信徒는 작년 말 현재로 洗禮 밧은 사람만 51,139인이며, 특히 長老敎會의 美点은 宣敎師 便의 소비는 米國 北長老會 傳道局에서 나올지라도, 朝鮮人 敎會에서 소비되는 경비의 일체는 朝鮮人 信徒가 부담하야 어대까지 自立的이 된 것이며, 反面으로 섭셥한 것은 基督敎의 思想이 오늘에 잇서는 원체로 시대에 뒤떠러진 중, 長老敎會에는 별로 保守의 기분이 濃厚하다는 그것이라.

이제 自立하려는 南監理敎會
1895년 10월에 헨트럭싀 감독과 리더 박사가 入京하야, 西大門 밧게서 傳道를 행함에 시작되얏는대, 지금은 서울지방, 開城 南北地方, 春川 南北地方, 元山地方의 6지방에 全 敎徒가 약 6천 명을 算하는 중, 京城 內에는 宗橋, 紫橋, 水標, 水口門, 石橋, 京橋 등의 6개소, 5구역에 약 천명의 신도가 잇스며, 南監理도 北監理와 가티 역시 監督制인대, 正式의 監督派送을 밧기는, 작년에 現 監督 보애사 씨의 취임으로부터 시작이라고 한다.
이 교회 안에는 작년 9월부터 傳道局이 신설되며 梁柱三 목사의 總務 下에 상당한 활동을 行하는대 활동의 내용은 전혀 교회의 自治實現에 잇스며, 그러케 해서 얼마를 지내면, 長老敎會와 가티 결국 自治를 하게 되리라 한다.(但 현재는 傳道人 報酬는 米國 宣敎部에서 半 이상을, 교회 설립에는 3분지2 이상의 贊助를 밧는 형편이다) 그리고 이 교회의 形勢는 1911년에 가장 번창하엿다가, 그 후 漸減되든 중, 1919년 즉 己未運動 이후에 다시 敎徒가 稍增하다가 지금은 자못 不振중에 잇다는 말이다. 참고로 京城 內에서 일하는 목사만을 記하면 宗橋禮拜堂 吳華英, 紫橋 白亨基 水標橋 洪鍾肅, 水口門 尹相煥, 石橋 李壽萬, 京橋 李昌稷 氏이며, 尹致昊 씨도 이 교회 신도 중의 一人이다.
注意 南監理敎會의 中心地는 春川, 開城地方에 잇다.

密密傳播의 天主公敎
朝鮮에서 耶蘇敎라 하면 보통은 長老敎나 監理敎를 연상한다. 따라서 朝鮮에서＜74＞ 基督敎 信徒가 20萬이라 하면 그 신도는 대개로 長老敎會나 監理敎會의 신도이리라 推斷한다. 그러나 사실은 이와 정반대로 天主敎 즉 舊敎徒의 세력이 거히 其半을 占하엿다. 즉 同 敎會에서 발표한 통계(작년 현재)에 의하면 總 敎徒가 9만 6천여 인 중, 京城府內에 잇는 信徒만이 5천여 명이다. 이로써 보면 朝鮮人의 최근까지의 사상 정도가 얼마나 儀式(무엇이 잇는 듯키 꾸며 노흔)的 종교에 偏傾하리 만큼 되여 잇섯던 것을 알 수가 잇다. 우리는 여긔에 새삼스러운 驚愕을 가지지 아늘 수 업다. 더욱히 露西亞의 최근 혁명에 잇서 希臘 正敎의 문제가 얼마나 難題가 되엿던 것을 생각할 때에 이러한 느낌을 아니 가질 수가 업슬가 한다.
天主敎가 처음으로 朝鮮에 올 때에 李朝 近代史上 얼마나한 慘劇(累次의 天主敎徒 虐殺)을 니르켯는가 함은 더 말할 것도 업고, 잠간 연혁을 니야기 하면 1631년에 朝鮮 使臣 鄭斗源이 北京에 드러가 基督敎 舊約聖書를 가지고 나왓는대, 後 1784년에 李德祚, 權哲身, 丁若鍾 3인이 가만히 山에 드러가 天主敎理를 연구하고 同年 12월에 李德祚의 아들 李承薰이 使臣 李東郁을 쪼차 北京에 드러가, 仍히 洗禮를 바다 가지고 도라옴에서부터 시작되야, 1794년부터 中國人 周神父와 가티 密密히 布敎가 行하고, 1831년에 佛人 蘇主敎의 入京과 共히 정식으로 교회가 성립되야, 辛酉, 癸亥, 丙午, 丙寅의 凡 4次의 窘難 敎徒 학살된 사건을 말함)을 지내여 今日에 니르럿는대, 작년 현재의 敎况으로 말하면 京城, 大邱, 元山의 3敎區에 신도가 96,411인이며, 神父(牧師와 略同)는 西人(佛人과 獨人)이 48인, 朝鮮人이 38인인, 중 특히 京城敎區의 現 主敎 구스다부·뮈뗄 씨는 1877년에 朝鮮에 潛入하야 거희 朝鮮의 天主敎會를 건설하엿다 할 만한 今年 71才의 老人으로 人德이 俱高하며, 朝鮮人 神父 중의 姜道永, 韓基根, 金元永, 鄭圭夏, 金聖學 씨와 가튼 이는 모다 그 교회에 공로가 만흔 사람이다. 교회의 사업은 남녀학교, 고아원, 施藥所 가튼 것이 잇스나, 현저하지 못하며, 교회의 직접사업인 神學校, 修士院, 修女院(修士院은 남자, 修女院은 여자인대 통칭하면 修道院이 된다)의 설립이 잇고, 특히 仝敎 靑年의 활동으로 天主敎 靑年會(회장 金春植, 총무 朴準鎬, 경리부 金翰洙 이하 畧)가 잇스나, 本히 天主敎 는 新敎와 判異하야, 어대까지 敬神的이오 保守的인 바 청년 편의 활동은 심히 不振하며, 최후로 一言할 것은 朝鮮의 天主敎는 佛國 巴里 外方傳敎會의 所管이나, 但 元山敎區는 德國 聖芬道會에서, 신설할＜75＞ 平壤敎區는 米國 紐育 聖마리놀傳敎會에서 분담한다는 그것이다. 그러나 이것저것 할 것 업시 羅馬布敎省 지배 下에서기는 일반이다.
비고 信徒別은 大邱敎區(全羅慶尙北道)에 31,457인, 元山敎區(咸鏡平安西道)에 10,875인, 京城敎區(京畿, 江原, 忠淸, 黃海, 四道)에 54,079인이며 方히 平壤敎區가 신설된다고 하며, 그리고 이 교회의 神父나 또는 修士 修女가 되는 절대조건은 (1)淨潔 즉 貞童 貞女가 될 事, (2)甘貧, (3)順命 웃사람의 명령에는 절대 순종하겟다는 盟誓를 하는 것이며, 尙又 主敎나 神父는 일반 敎徒에 대하야 일체로 敬語를 不用하고 俗에 父가 子에 대한 語套로 行用한다고 한다.

聖殿 新築의 朝鮮聖公會
이 亦 基督敎 즉 天主敎의 一이나 天主敎보다는 모든 것이 조콤 자유적이며 또는 羅馬法皇의 지배를 밧지 안는다. 이 교회는 1890년에 主敎 高요한(英人)씨의 入京과 共히 始設立되야 제3차의 변동으로 現 主敎 趙碼可(英人)씨가 그 교회의 擔責者가 되는대, 信徒는, 京城, 水原, 江華, 天安, 鎭川, 陰城, 延白의 全鮮 七 傳道區에 4,905인이(작년 말 현재)잇스며, 그 중 京城傳道區에는 330인의 朝鮮人 信徒와 200여 인의 日本人과 18인의 英人 信徒가 잇스며, 司祭(즉 神父)는 朝鮮人 6명, 西人 9명이 잇는대, 京城 貞洞 본부에 朝鮮人 敎役者로 司祭 李源昶 氏와 次副祭 趙鏞昊 氏가 잇다. 현재는 英國 캔터바리 大主敎의 지배를 밧고, SPG宣敎會의 보조를 바드며, 교회의 사업으로 修女院, 小學校, 고아원 가튼 것의 몃 곳 경영이 잇스나 물론 盛치는 못하며, 근래에 貞洞본부에 놉다라한 聖殿을 짓고 잇다.

白軍 避亂所인 露國正敎會
우리가 西大門 안 貞洞 골목을 향해서 드러 가노라면, 문득 길 右便에 露國 正敎會의 간판을 볼 것이다. 이 교회는 元 韓國時節 露西亞 公舘이 京城에 設立되엿슬 때에 公舘 附屬 즉 公舘 內의 모든 의식을 위하야서 설립된 것이 후에 점차 확대되야, 在京 露西亞人 또는 朝鮮人을 상대로 포교를 行하게 되엿는대, 이 正敎會는 물론 露國의 國敎로서 國庫金의 지출을 바다 경영을 햇스나 歐洲大戰 후, 露西亞에 無産者 혁명이 생기며 政敎를 분리하게 되매, 經費의 지출이 단절되야, 지금은 집貰를 노아서 僅僅 現狀을 유지하며, 근래에 망명의 白軍들이 몃 명 왓다갓다 한다고 한다. 信徒는 全 朝鮮을 통하야서 약 400여 명, 京城에만은 약 150명이며, 坡州, 長端, 高陽의 3支會가 잇다. 現 敎會長은 페오도 씨 大神父인대, 혁명 전에는 海參威敎務院의＜76＞ 지배를 바다스나 작년보터는 임시로 日本에 잇는 正敎會 大敎主(물론 露人)의 지배를 밧게 되엿스며, 朝鮮人 神父로는 姜漢倬 씨 一人이 잇슬 뿐이라 한다. 그런대 이 露國 正敎의 특색은 信徒가 죽으면 종교의 儀式上 반다시 祭祀를 지낸다는 것이다. 가튼 耶蘇敎 所屬으로는 크게 다른 점이다.

組合敎會 後身인 會衆基督敎
日本에서 通稱 組合敎會라 하는대 朝鮮에서는 會衆敎會라 하야 敎門을 始設하기는 1920년부터이다. 처음 日本組合敎會에서 朝鮮人間에 포교하기 위하야 약간의 돈分을 업새여 가면서 한참 힘써 보앗스나 성적이 나지 못함으로 이를 撤歸할 때에 그 信徒와 그 敎會堂을 引受한 것이 즉 會衆敎會이며, 이 교회의 中心人이 즉 柳一宣 氏이다. 본부를 淸進洞에, 支敎會를 지방 10여 處에 두어 信徒 약 3천 명을 가젓다 하며 京城에는 名簿上으로 약 3백의 信徒가 잇다고 한다.

陣容新整의 佛敎中央敎務院
승려가 머리 들고 京城 안에 드러 오기 시작한 것이 도대체 몃 10년을 지내지 못하엿다. 李朝에서는 그와 가티 佛敎를 厭忌한 동시에 서울城 안에는 한 개의 사찰도 세우지 못하게 하얏다. 따라서 서울 안에는 불교의 세력 有無를 말할 餘地가 업섯다. 物換星移하며 승려의 京城 출입이 자유롭게 됨을 따라, 隆熙 元年에 처음 東大門 밧게 圓宗 宗務院을 두고 李晦光 씨가 중심이 되야 이럭저럭하다가 日韓合邦의 翌年 辛亥 9월에 소위 寺刹令이란 것이 發布되며 그 翌年에 30本山 住持會議所를 設하고, 大正4년에 30本 聯合事務所로 變名하야 姜大連 씨가 제1회 위원장이 되야 이럭저럭 내려오다가 상호간의 감정이 됴치 못하야 大正11년에 總務院과 敎務院으로 분립되며, 總務院에 郭法鏡, 敎務院에 李晦光 등 兩便의 싸움이 해를 두고 끗츨 못 막다가 今年 3월에 비로소 해결되야, 兩院 합동으로 60만 원의 財團法人을 완성하야, 제1着으로 普成高普를 경영하며 점차로 포교 기타의 사업에 착수하게 되엿다. 현재의 理事는 郭法鏡, 羅晴湖, 金月齋, 金九河, 金一雲, 柳護菴, 吳梨山 7인이며, 曾前舊派의 중심세력으로 인정되던 李晦光, 姜大連 兩氏는 그저 評議員으로 讓退하고 마럿다. 이 밧게도 京城 佛敎의 기관으로 佛經出版을 目的하는 朴漢永 중심의 朝鮮佛敎會가 잇고, 佛敎의 내용 혁신을 企圖하는 朝鮮佛敎靑年會(總裁 韓龍雲, 總務 李鍾天)와 佛敎女子靑年(會長 禹鳳雲)가＜77＞ 잇고, 純然히 禪旨의 傳布를 목적하는 禪學院(金南泉, 姜道峯 씨와 가튼 이는 其中에도  有數한 사람이겟다)이 잇고, 日鮮人의 信仰上 융화를 목적하는 朝鮮佛敎大會(總務 小林源六, 副會長 李元錫)와 李晦光 씨의 경영인 佛敎 布敎所(貞洞)가 잇다.
全 朝鮮을 통하야 30本山, 900여 末寺에 6천여 명의 승려와 10만 가량인 信徒(물론 未詳)가 잇스며, 生活難 기타로 因한 승려의 還俗이 多하야, 승려의 數가 逐年 減少된다고 한다. 그리고 근래의 佛敎에 잇서 禪學에 第一 치는 사람은 方寒岩 禪師이라고.

가만히 영글어가는 天道敎
今之天道敎는 古之東學이라, 甲午 東學亂 이후, 더욱히 戊戌遭變(戊戌 6월에 東學 제2세 敎祖 崔時亨師가 京城에서 處絞된 그 일) 이후로는 東學군의 京城 출입이 사실 繁頻하엿다. 그러나 정식으로 門牌를 걸고 京城에 나타나기는 甲辰 9월, 즉 東學군 전체가 進步會를 조직한 그 때부터 이엿다. 그 후 宋秉畯 一派의 一進會가 進步會에 來合하며 乙巳 11월에 宋秉畯, 李容九 등의 用事로 所謂 獨立保護(이 때에 孫義菴이 歸國하야, 그들을 불너 노코 말말하여 가다가 「이놈아 獨立保護란 말이 무슨 말이냐, 보호 밧고도 독립되는 수가 잇너냐」한 즉, 그 兩人의 대답이 「아니올시다. 保護獨立이 아니라, 獨立保護올시다」云云)를 선언하매, 멀니 日本에 잇서 이 소식을 접한 孫義菴은 驚愕千萬하야, 12월 1일로 문득 天道敎란 일홈을 정식으로 세상에 發布하야 一進會와의 旗幟를 난호고 丙午 1월에 還國하야, 일반 敎徒와 더부러 茶洞에 天道敎 中央總部를 두엇스니, 이것이 天道敎란 일홈으로 처음 京城에 나타난 일(18년 전)이엿다. 이 해(丙午) 10월에 宋秉畯
李容九 등 59인을 黜敎하며 一進會와 天道敎를 아조 분석하야, 금일까지에 至하는 중, 己未運動이 출현되고 孫義菴이 逝去한 등 其間의 연혁은 여긔에 말할 것이 업겟고, 오즉 現下의 京城 敎况을 暫記하면 이 교회는 본대 全 기반을 지방에 두엇고, 京城에는 單히 교회의 精神 及 事務統一을 위한 中央機關을 두엇슬 뿐인데, 京城 안에 잇는 信徒는 其數가 450여 명에 불과하며 現 중앙기관(天道敎 中央宗理院)에는 吳世昌, 權東鎭, 李鍾勳, 羅龍煥, 吳榮昌 , 洪秉箕 씨 등 6인의 講師(말하면 長老格)와 崔麟, 李仁淑
崔碩連 씨 등 12인의 宗理師(말하면 執行委員)가 잇스며, 이 밧게 직접으로 地上天國의 건설을 목적하는 天道敎 靑年黨(常務委員 趙基栞, 朴來弘)과 天道敎 內修團(위원은 朱鈺卿, 李貞熙＜78＞ 외 數人)과 天道敎 少年會(위원은 洪一昌, 桂淵集)와 天道敎 學生會가 잇서, 떠들지 아니하나 緊着한 주의로써 새 天地의 개벽을 준비하고 잇다.

두 系統의 侍天敎
侍天敎에는 두 갈내의 교회가 잇다. 즉 宋秉畯, 李容九(己作故人)를 중심 삼은 堅志洞 侍天敎와 金龜菴을 중심삼은 齋洞 侍天敎의 두 派가 잇다. 처음 宋秉畯, 李容九 一派가 所謂 獨立保護를 선언하야, 孫義菴을 중심으로 한 天道敎로보터 除名됨에, 그들은 곳 侍天敎라는 敎門을 別立(丙午年 중)하고, 翌年 丁未에는 다시 天道敎로브터 분리되여 나오는 金演局(龜菴)씨 一派를 迎하야, 其勢-頗張하다가, 그 후 癸丑年에는 又復 意思의 不合으로 宋秉畯 편과 金龜菴 편이 서로 분리하야, 前者는 堅志洞에, 後者는 齋洞에 각히 중앙 교실을 두어 今日에 니르럿다. 信徒는 모다 敎籍이 不完하야 其 정확한 數字를 알 수가 업는대 京城에 잇는 信徒는 더욱히 몃 십 명에 지나지 못하여, 現에 그 교회에서 主要히 종사하는 사람을 들면, 齋洞侍 天敎에는 龜菴 大敎主 이하 金洛鳳, 元容馹, 許均 씨 외 몃 사람이 잇스며, 堅志洞 侍天敎에는 朴衡釆, 崔榮九, 柳志薰 씨 외 몃 사람이 잇다. 宋秉畯 大監은 近年까지는 堅志洞 侍天敎의 敎主이엿스나 이제는 그를 辭한 동시에 언제브터 經常的으로 輔助하던 經費도 지출을 중지하엿다고 한다.
이 밧게도 京城에서 교회의 성질을 가진 종류가 얼마큼 잇스나 별로 枚擧할 필요가 업슴으로 이만 畧하고, 근래의 화제에 오르는 普天敎에서도 大正10년에 京城에 眞正院을 設하엿스나, 京城에는 敎徒가 별로 업는 듯하며, 眞正院長 李鍾翊, 宣化司 高龍煥 씨 등이 고요히 그 자리를 직히고 잇다.

무엇보다도 繁昌한 崇神敎會
서울사람에게 敎虔한 신앙이 업다 함은 처음에 一言한 바이거니와, 그와 가티 경건한 신앙이 업는 代에, 너저분한 원시적 이기적의 미신은 만타. 제일 서울의 婦女는 이 미신의 寵女이라고 말할 수가 잇다. 試하야 京城 內의 迷信團軆-특히 巫女團軆만을 보면, 所謂 皇祖敬神崇神敎會(大正9년 설립)라 하는 데에는 所屬 巫女가 3천여명에 달한 중 京城시내에만 잇는 巫女가 554명이며, 그 다음 崇神人組合(요것은 日本人이 朝鮮人으로 變名하야 꾸민 것으로 역시 大正9년에 설립)으로, 여긔 소속된 巫女가 京城本部에만 450인, 京畿 全道에 2천여 명 朝鮮 全道에 4천여 명이며, 이 밧게 또 敬神敎會라는 것이 설립된다는 바, 京城 內面, 아니 朝鮮의 內面이 이러케 傷敗하엿슬 줄이야 누가 아럿슬가. 당국에서는 그것 됴흔 현상이다 하야 그대로 放任하는 바, 四方에서 신축되는 것은 巫女致誠堂.＜79＞
＜71-79＞