Magazine Title: 개벽 신간 제4호
Publication Date: 1935년 03월 01일
Article Title: 新聞에 對한 各界 人士의 不平 希望 (Complaints and Hopes Regarding Newspapers from People in Various Fields)
Author: 李萬珪 (Yi Man-gyu), 李石薰 (Yi Sŏk-hun), 劉相奎 (Yu Sang-gyu), 申O澈 (Sin O-ch'ŏl), 鄭薰模 (Chŏng Hŭn-mo)
Article Type: 설문 (Survey/Questionnaire)

Complaints and Hopes Regarding Newspapers from People in Various Fields

From the Position of an Educator - Paehwa Women's School - Yi Man-gyu
You ask me to speak of my complaints and hopes regarding current Chosŏn newspapers from the perspective of an educator.
Well, let me see. As I am also a Chosŏn person, I naturally have many complaints and hopes about Chosŏn newspapers. However, listing them all one by one is a bit difficult, and due to my personal circumstances, I will just briefly mention a few things that usually cross my mind.
First, what I find most regrettable is that, for instance, if an incident involving a graduate of our school occurs, regardless of the nature of the incident, it would be best to come to the school authorities first and inquire in detail. But somehow, even when such incidents happen, they write extensively about it without saying anything to the school authorities, which is quite unpleasant in many ways. It would be understandable if the person definitely graduated from that school or attended it for even a few months, but to make a fuss about someone being from that school when they don't even know where the school is located is, no matter how I think about it, quite reckless, and the trouble it causes the school authorities is considerable.

Second, take the recent fundraising for flood relief. Since we were all born in Chosŏn and are all compatriots, wouldn't entrusting donations to any newspaper be the same? Yet, newspaper employees deliberately come to schools, preaching that we should participate in their company's collection drive or that their company is safer than others. This is also unpleasant. In the future, in such cases, please leave it to individual freedom. If not, it might cause general misunderstanding.

Finally, I will mention one more thing. The so-called literacy movement. That too is similar. Instead of making a fuss and recommending participation in one's own company's campaign as being more honorable, how about leaving it to the student's<76> freedom?

Also, it seems newspapers these days are making a lot of noise about the issue of student discipline. However, in my opinion, discipline has not deteriorated to the extent that the newspapers are clamoring about. Making a fuss in the newspapers over trivial matters unnecessarily risks provoking the psychology of innocent students who lack self-criticism, and therefore, such articles could paradoxically be interpreted as one motive for disrupting discipline in the student world. Thus, while the newspaper companies have their responsibilities, matters are originally not that simple, so I hope they will first approach things with a more cautious attitude.

From the Position of a Writer - Kyŏngsŏng Broadcasting Station - Yi Sŏk-hun
Complaints and dissatisfaction about newspapers – this is the task assigned by the editor. This is interpreted not as a critique of modern journalism in a broad sense, but as a narrow issue concerning Chosŏn-language newspapers. Setting aside the merits of journalism for a moment, I intend to freely vent various complaints and dissatisfactions. Oh, newspaper companies! Don't be too angry. (Furthermore, these complaints and dissatisfactions might just be my own "twisted view" [ひねくれ] or "self-conceit" [ひとりよがり], but anyway, I will play freely from the most unrestrained position.)
What I consider most dissatisfying are:

One. The Guiding Principle is Vague
It is. We do not want to regard Chosŏn newspapers as merely profit-making enterprises (companies). More than goodwill, there is also a certain expectation attached. Because we are a populace without a single political party or a single XXXX, this expectation is all the more desperate. Of course, the newspapers themselves probably possess some "pride" as "leaders." Judging by their consistently "proud" attitude towards the populace, they certainly seem to consider themselves the "leaders" of the Chosŏn people. It's not that considering themselves as such is bad. Of course, it's certainly not good either. It is merely a question of whether the guiding principle—which would enable the populace, facing epochal anxiety, to grasp the principles of life and thus advance toward a single goal—is indeed being clearly presented.<77> If newspapers are the *voice* [probably supposed to be 喉舌, throat and tongue, meaning mouthpiece or organ] of the people.

Two. The Yawning Editorial Column
The editorial columns of all newspapers are yawning. Especially that of the XX Daily News (XX日報) is dozing off. Setting aside renowned arguments and brilliant theories that could sweep the era, it is hard to even find an editorial that isn't off-point ("pintŭ" [ピン]). If one blames it simply on censorship, that might be the end of it, but editorials lack proactivity and their fighting spirit is weak. There is no burning passion, no charm in the writing. It's all monotonous, abstract, and conceptual. They merely fulfill a perfunctory obligation ["oaisō" (おあいそう)], yawning while maintaining only the form. Thus, the lack of proactivity in editorials is evidence that their culturalism (which they champion as their mission) also lacks positiveness.

Three. The Stench of a Merchant
It is unpleasant for a newspaper to emit the stench of a merchant. That said, I don't possess the cruel inhumanity to wish they always hover in a deficit ("mainŏsŭ" [マイナス]) state. In terms of lofty principles, it is a matter for celebration that Chosŏn newspapers are "breaking even." However, the merchant-like attitude shown by some newspapers, for instance, in their management of subsidiary magazine businesses, should certainly be repented. The Tonga Ilbo Sa (東亞日報社), while making an annual profit of 6,000-7,000 won from "Sin Tonga" (新東亞) and "Sin Kajŏng" (新家庭), still expresses dissatisfaction, saying "excluding advertising revenue," which is excessively merchant-like! (Of course, considering the current price trends, "Sin Tonga" and "Sin Kajŏng" themselves cannot be called expensive. But this is a separate issue.) Wouldn't undertaking more active cultural projects be both financially viable and more meaningful? Should the great Tonga Ilbo be overtly "profit-oriented"? Even if they were to publish something like a "literary magazine," if done with their usual rapid-fire, full-page advertising technique, it would certainly not lose money. I declare it!.

Four. Off-Point ("Pintŭ") Denunciation of Writers
This is a tremendous complaint against the Tonga Ilbo (東亞日報)! It is cowardly to fail to do what must be done and instead attack the weak. Generally, denouncing writers over issues of integrity was excessively off-point ("pintŭ"), and some pieces were no better than the compositions of a third-year middle school student, written merely out of desperation to fill the editorial column. It is a well-known fact that the goblin called "Nazis" persecutes the Jews (猶太人). They are actually cowards who cannot lay a finger on the "capitalist Jews." They torment the weaker artists and scholars but are powerless against the "capitalist Jews" who truly harm Germany (獨逸). That fellow "Hitler" is also a comical figure! How is the Tonga Ilbo's denunciation of writers any different from this? It's probably like "taking out frustration over the mother-in-law on the dog's belly."

Five. Lack of Clear Individuality

The unique characteristics that can only be seen in that particular newspaper – Chosŏn newspapers lack individuality.<78> In other words, they lack uniqueness or originality.
Whether it's newspaper A, B, or C... apart from the different titles, where is the individuality of A as A, B as B...? Therefore, a reader subscribing to just newspaper A feels like they are reading newspapers A, B, and C, and even if they switch from A to B, they feel no lingering attachment to A. A friend says, "I read Chosŏn-language newspapers out of obligation. One 'Taejo' [likely referring to a Japanese newspaper like the Dai-Osaka Mainichi or Dai-Tokyo Nichi Nichi, often abbreviated] is enough for the Chosŏn edition too."
The most urgent task is for each company to fully express its unique individuality. Next, they need to make the newspaper indispensable, something like "If not this newspaper...", so they don't hear dismissive remarks like "reading out of obligation."

Six. Chaotic Misuse of Assorted Proper Nouns

As I once wrote in "Pyŏlgŏngon" (別乾坤), proper nouns ("foreign personal names, place names") should be standardized as soon as possible. Even within the same newspaper, the morning and evening editions often differ. For example, take the recent case of "Chal" (잘), "Sal" (살), "Cha-rŭ" (자-르), etc. Since it's "Saar," wouldn't "Cha-rŭ" (자-르) or "Chaaru" (자아르) be closest to the original sound? German ones in German, English-speaking countries' ones in English! Because people insist on reading everything—German, Italian (伊太利), etc.—in English, even a single newspaper becomes so confusing.

Seven. Lack of Variety ("Paraiet'ŭi" [バライエティ])

Chosŏn-language newspapers often cannot escape the criticism of being meaningless and dry. If they say, "We still lack money and skill...", that settles it, but the reader retorts, "Do I get the newspaper for free?" Readers are very demanding, like cranky old mothers-in-law, voicing complaints as they please. Of course, listening to all of them would lead to chaos, like "too many sailors pull the boat up the mountain," but in any case, Chosŏn-language newspapers lack variety ("paraiet'ŭi" [バライエティ]) and are extremely monotonous.

Eight. Misinformation, Mistranslations, Poor Translations, etc.

1.  Occasionally, one finds significant misinformation. Sometime ago, the political section of XX Daily News (XX日報) carried an article about "Soviet" (쏘베-트) affairs, where at the beginning, "Charyaa" (자랴아 - Zarya), a Russian-language paper published in Harbin (하르빈), was confidently treated as a "Soviet Russia" (쏘베-트, 로시야) newspaper. It is common knowledge that there are Red and White Russians (露西亞人), and it is also common knowledge that Harbin's "Charyaa" paper is an anti-Soviet newspaper of White Russians (白系露人). Yet, it was reported untruthfully as "According to reports from a Soviet Russian newspaper, the economic destitution within Russia (露國) has reached extreme levels, etc.," which must have been no small matter for them.
2.  Many mistranslations are found, especially in the political section.
    XX Daily News (XX日報) recently rendered "関の山" (seki no yama - the best one can do, the limit) nonsensically as "難關" (nankwan - difficult barrier), making the context unintelligible. Terms like "ありかすれ" (arikasure - wear and tear?) and "出来秋" (dekiaki - autumn harvest)<79> are often seen mistranslated. This is just one example. Poor translations of foreign news articles greatly undermine the newspaper's authority. Readers long for more refined ("rŭip'aindoen" [릐파인된]) translations.

Nine. Exaggerated, Murderous Reporting (Killing Reputation)

My colleague X had a family dispute. Family disputes are everyday occurrences (恒茶飯事) that everyone experiences. However, X's wife, in a moment of excitement, took "Nekoirazu" (ネコイラズ - rat poison). XX newspaper reported this incident prominently using their real names, utterly destroying their social standing. This is essentially murderous reporting! Reporting such cases extensively is questionable in itself, but moreover (况目), using real names shows a complete lack of magnanimity, doesn't it? What great "news value" (뉴-스, 밸류-) does it have, and what social problem does it constitute? To say "don't report" would be like telling them to quit the newspaper business, but in such cases, pseudonyms should be used. For the sake of my colleague, I protest against XX newspaper and such unmagnanimous actions.
Besides these:
Lack of self-reflection and criticism within the newspaper
Suppression of poets' and writers' literary activities
Degenerate muckraking (邪道)
Arrogance of excessive self-promotional advertising
Inferior quality of photoengraving (製版技術)
Poor editing skills (編輯術), operational efficiency, and scope of activity
The impression that the literacy movement is used as a tool for self-promotion
Childishness of local news sections
Numerous misprints (誤植)
Weak sense of justice (正義感)
Cheap sentimentalism (쎈틔멘탈리즘) on the society pages

From the Position of a Doctor - Medical College Hospital (醫專病院) - Yu Sang-gyu
Iron Hammer for Unscrupulous Doctors; Refusing Medicine to the Poor - Delaying Treatment for the Rich -
It is said that recently, due to the prevalence of unscrupulous doctors, the damage caused is not insignificant. Examples include routinely refusing examinations and medication to patients without money, thereby sealing their fate in a way unconscionable from a humanitarian perspective, or, for wealthy patients, prolonging illnesses that could be cured in a short time to extend hospitalization dates, or deliberately prescribing ineffective medicine to drag out time—their behavior is reportedly beyond imagination.
If these unscrupulous doctors are left unchecked, they will casually commit such inhumane acts as described above,<80> so the Police Bureau (警務局) has reportedly established a strict policy for future crackdowns." (Published in Tonga Ilbo [東亞日報] No. 4640, November 1, Shōwa 8 [1933])
The same paper, in its "Hwengsŏl Kinsŏl" (橫說緊說 - Rambling Talk) column, "endorsed and sealed" (裏書捺印) this, saying:
"The profession is called 'benevolent art' (仁術), advocating broad charity and saving the masses (博施濟衆), the legacy of Shennong (神農). That it cannot remain as it was in antiquity, given the changed ways of the world and people's hearts, is also a natural consequence of the times (事勢當然). Harsh criticism is unfair, but if one uses 'natural consequence of the times' as a shield to pursue unreasonable profit, this is not merely an issue of unjust enrichment. It is a humanitarian issue transcending profit and loss. Esteemed doctors, what say you? Is there or is there not a bad habit of diagnosing wealth before diagnosing the cause of illness? Is there or is there not the vice of treating patients as a source of medicine costs, extending treatment to increase income? There must not be—if this exists, it's absurd. If this is tolerable, what is not (是可忍也 熟不可忍)? (Omission) For the dignity of the 'benevolent art,' esteemed doctors, speak up! To refute the authorities' suspicions, esteemed doctors, present evidence!" (Tonga Ilbo [東亞日報] No. 4641)

Did the rooster crow at the sound of Paegun-jang's new drum? How much did the collarbone hurt during the Paekch'ŏn power struggle? "Given the changed ways of the world and people's hearts in these times, it is also a natural consequence of the times. Harsh criticism is unfair, but..." the fact that most of the one million won entertainment expenses did not come from your pockets—"For the dignity of the newspaper, esteemed journalists, speak up! To refute the readers' suspicions, esteemed journalists, present evidence!"
Alas—how many days has it been since you held a roundtable discussion on the "student discipline problem," and how many times have you written editorials warning about the youth's future? Taking up my pen against you, I find it hard to restrain my condemnation (赦彦).

But what facts—facts, mind you—facts did you point out to issue the challenge, "speak up"? We have long known and admired how loyal you are to XXXX, but read the article "Iron Hammer for Unscrupulous Doctors" etc., once more. "For example," who are you referring to? Not under the regimental banner of your "authorities' announcement." Isn't this so-called "bad habit," "vice" of listing unverifiable, imaginary, fabricated facts your own possession? I return this to you, but the cowardly act of hiding under the crotch of the "authorities," saying "To refute the authorities' suspicions"! I believe this interest payment called "cowardice" (卑劣) should also rightfully be claimed as your possession.
The next day, you published another such article:
Body Not Released Due to Unpaid Treatment Fees; Found After a Day and a Half; Parents Petition Sŏdaemun Police Station
"Losing a beloved daughter and being unable to quickly retrieve her body because money was the enemy—could there be a more lamentable situation?" This plea for redress<81> was made at the Sŏdaemun Police Station around 1 PM on the 12th. The petitioner was Han Kyŏng-sŏp (한경섭, 46) of Kyobuk-tong (교북동) 70-74. His daughter Sun-ja (順子, 5) had been suffering from a cold, which suddenly worsened from the dawn of the 10th. Having no choice, he took her to Severance Hospital (세부란쓰 병원). There, he was asked to pay 37 won for treatment costs upfront. He pleaded, "I will pay, just save her," and though she received one injection, she eventually died. When he asked for the body, he was told that because it was an infectious disease, it needed disinfection, and the body could not be released until the treatment fees were brought. He had a Japanese man named Togashi (富樫) act as a guarantor to get a death certificate and received burial permission from the Prefectural Office (府廳), but release was still refused pending payment. Finally, through the guarantee of an acquaintance who frequented the hospital, he was able to retrieve the body after a full day and a half, on the afternoon of the 11th, and had it cremated. Regarding this, the Sŏdaemun Police Station (서대문 경찰서), being particularly sensitive about doctors' conduct at the time, stated they would thoroughly investigate the responsibility and take firm action.

"Couldn't Release Due to Infectious Disease," Says Severance Authority
Regarding this issue, the Severance Hospital (세부란쓰병원) authorities stated the following:
"Such an incident did occur. It happened because the illness was originally diphtheria, an infectious disease. We could have foregone the treatment costs, but we couldn't do that [release the body immediately]. When he offered to bring just 10 won of the 37 won injection fee, we agreed, but he said he'd bring it and left, then didn't return, which caused the delay."
- (Tonga Ilbo [東亞日報] 4642, November 13, Shōwa 8 [1933])
Your profession has no connection with medicine, so some among you might not know what an infectious disease is. Furthermore, even if you don't know how to handle a patient with an infectious disease or a corpse dead from one, I know that's not something to blame you for. However, the central issue of this article is the corpse, and isn't the corpse in question one that died from an infectious disease? Now read the headline (midasi) again. If, fortunately (?), Sun-ja had not died from an infection, and Severance Hospital had simply "not released the body because the treatment fee wasn't paid," then even for you, who can only report on corpses like weather forecasts from the broadcasting station signaling the arrival of high pressure, it would have been enough to incite readers to resent Severance Hospital. What do you think?
Your lack of common sense may be your parents' fault. It may be society's fault. Or it may be the fault of misfortune (薄捀). But your sinister and base (陋劣) mentality—if only Friar Mendel (멘델 僧正) were alive, I would ask him—why are you so eager only to insult?

When misfortune (?) befalls the Chosŏn people, you seem to take the lead in feeling righteous indignation and shedding tears. Did your body feel hot?<82> That must have been a cold. Did you shed tears of blood? That must have been ink.
You might say—even if the amount donated for the Samnam (三南) flood disaster was small, it came from sincere feelings for our "kinsmen," whereas the large amount for the Kansai (關西) storm and flood disaster was merely a formality. Oh, you people! If it's a formality with such content, please abandon that "sincere feeling for kinsmen" quickly! Since the discrepancy between words and reality is like this, the abuses you heap upon doctors, supposedly for the sake of the poor or the sick, are in fact nothing more than your own chanting (念푸리). Why is that so?

Major Fire in Nagwŏn-dong Last Night; Infant Critically Burned; Poor Couple Sought Help, But Hospitals Rejected Them
(Previous part omitted) After the fire was extinguished, they pulled Young-sik out, but by then he had already suffered burns all over his body and was in critical condition. The couple, half out of their minds with the child hovering near death, (Omission) knocked on the doors of hospitals in the Insa-dong (인사동) and Nagwŏn-dong (락원동) areas, begging for emergency treatment, but all the doors remained firmly shut, and no place would accept him. (Latter part omitted) (Tonga Ilbo [東亞日報] No. 4864, December 13, Shōwa 9 [1934])
Immoral, Inhumane!
Poor Burned Child Turned Away from Nagwŏn-dong Hospital, Finally Dies; Whither the Face of "Benevolent Art"?
(Sanitation Chief's statement & Passersby's discussion omitted) (Chosŏn Ilbo [朝鮮日報] No. 4865, December 14, Shōwa 9 [1934])
Author—When I held this newspaper, goosebumps ran all over my body. It wasn't so much because the doctors were wicked, nor because I hated your malicious habits towards doctors, but because I thought, "Has the world become this frightening?" Readers must have imagined it too: the couple, holding a half-burned child, desperately flustered before the firmly shut hospital door.
While deeply mourning Young-sik's death, why did your mouths, like the mouth of poor Young-sik who died, close shut and refuse to open again after he breathed his last? If you truly pitied Young-sik's death and cried out for "morality," sought "humanity," and cursed the "benevolent art," why don't you name and denounce the doctor who allegedly "expelled" him while he was still there? What does it mean that each newspaper gives different hospital names? Young-sik is no longer a child of this world. Even if you possess brains wired such that turning the "Doctor" switch only churns out slander, given that years ago you exhausted your words praising the plan for the Municipal Hospital (府民病院案)<83> and subsequently promoted its opening with all your flair, couldn't you at least think that if not the main hospital, even a branch clinic located right in Nagwŏn-dong would have been helpful? According to your publicity, last year (the year Young-sik was burned), over 100,000 patients received treatment at the Municipal Hospital (府民病院). Was it so unfortunate that among those 100,000, there was no room to accommodate our little Young-sik? Promote the Municipal Hospital more! If you push just once more, perhaps this year the rate of paying patients, which was barely 70% last year, might reach 100%. If that happens, maybe Dr. Chŏng (鄭博士) and Dr. O (吳博士), let alone your company president, might bow deeply even if a delivery boy comes?

"For someone engaged in the medical profession (醫業) to refuse a request for consultation at a hospital is worse than the professional consciousness of a prostitute (娼婦). And to do so based on doubts about the ability to pay the medical fees is worse even than the world of prostitutes, who, once a glamorous patron has 'already gone upstairs' (旣히 登樓한 華容), will treat them as patrons (華客) even if they might later sue for unpaid services (無錢遊興)." (Maeil Sinbo [每日申報] Editorial, No. 9789, December 18, Shōwa 9 [1934])
I don't know if editorials have quality grades, but when it comes to comparing doctors to prostitutes (娼婦), there's nothing more to say. One can only wonder why doctors ever came into existence for us Chosŏn people; if all Chosŏn people were like you, wouldn't this truly be "casting pearls before swine"? Truly, you must find paying a prostitute's fee (花代) more pleasant than paying a house call fee (往診料). In your view, since "benevolent art" (仁術) departed from doctors long ago, wouldn't it be better not to let it lie idle but to dedicate it to prostitutes? There are mountains of unpaid medicine and treatment fees to sue over, but I just hope you will reconsider this matter on this occasion.
"Today's doctors' primary goal is not to alleviate the suffering of the masses (衆人), but rather to sell their skills (技術を賣喫). What they focus on is solely selling their skills at a high price (高價で賣售) and avoiding difficulties in collecting payment (代價の難捧を避). As long as payment is not made (代價を支拂치 안이하는 限), or if the ability to pay is doubtful (支拂할 능력이 疑問視되는 한), no matter how much one pleads of illness (如何히 病苦を訴) and begs for treatment (診療を哀願), they won't bat an eyelid (一眉を動치 아니하며). But if the payment is generous (代價が厚) and the assets are abundant (資産が豊富), they only regret the delay in being summoned (下命の遲). To call this 'benevolent art' (仁術) is too much of an insult (冒瀆) to the term itself, isn't it?" (Maeil Sinbo [每日申報] Editorial, Ibid.)
-(2 lines omitted here unavoidably)-
When you set out to criticize doctors, you invariably invoke "benevolent art" (言必稱仁術), at every turn mentioning "benevolent art" (動輒則曰 仁術). Was the term "benevolent art" created just for use during criticism? Or, if, according to your meaning, not taking money is "benevolent art" and taking money is not, then what in the world wouldn't be "benevolent art"?
Saving a life without taking money would be "adding flowers to brocade" (錦上添花) for benevolent art; it doesn't become benevolent art only then. Therefore, if a doctor fails to cure a curable illness, that might be insulting<84> benevolent art, but you must understand that seeking remuneration after curing an illness is by no means an insult. No matter how tamed by capitalists you may be, how can you blame the doctor for the poverty of someone too poor to receive treatment? And shouldn't you know what needs to be done to enable poor patients to receive treatment?
The statement "if the payment is generous and the assets are abundant, they only regret the delay in being summoned" may be close to the truth, but it's no reason to blame the doctor. Unless all doctors are sons of millionaires and possess benevolent hearts, demanding that doctors lag behind the general trend is rather rude.

Isn't there a saying, "When one paulownia leaf falls, you know autumn has come"? Try going to a "Personal Consultation Office" (人事相談所) experimentally and asking for lodging. Are there people who follow? If there are, are those people, among so many, relatively sensible? Among doctors too, there's a growing trend year by year of people wanting to open practices in areas with many Japanese residents. According to them, "A poor Japanese person is better than a rich Chosŏn person."
Whether the era of Shennong (神農氏) was good, whether doctors at the time the term "benevolent art" (仁術) emerged were all good, I don't know, but longing is longing, not reality. Wake up—indiscriminately slinging mud is not your mission.
(In the above, "you" refers to the newspapers)

As a Branch Office Manager - OO Daily News OO Branch - Sin O-ch'ŏl
"Oスグオクレ オクラヌト カミトメル" (Send money immediately; if not sent, paper stops)
There is hardly anyone who has managed a newspaper branch office in the provinces who hasn't received such a telegram. The day such a telegram is received is tantamount to a death sentence for that branch office. The person in charge frantically scrambles to raise funds.
Originally, managing a newspaper branch office in the provinces, except perhaps in large cities, is not a profitable business in market towns with only 2,000-3,000 households.
On the surface, with newspaper companies offering commissions of 40%, 50%, or even up to 60% of the paper price, it seems like the accounts should balance somehow. But no matter how cheap (安價) the cost price is, what can be done if subscribers don't pay their bills? Even in recent years, when subscription fee collection rates are said to have significantly improved, it's common to rack up losses of over 500-600 won a year with just over a hundred copies. Unless the branch manager is wealthy and has an unconditionally sacrificial spirit towards the newspaper business, isn't it an unavoidable<85> consequence that payments will be delayed since collections are poor?
Whether the head office knows these circumstances or not, if the payment is even slightly delayed, they routinely dispatch the kind of telegram mentioned above. Then, one must immediately borrow money from Peter to pay Paul and send the funds; otherwise, the very next day, the delivery person who went to pick up the newspapers will inevitably return empty-handed and dejected.
Being dumbfounded is secondary; the branch manager first has to hide to avoid the readers demanding their newspapers. Previously, even if readers pressed, one could get away with it for a day by pretending the papers were confiscated. But now, when confiscations are rare, there's no excuse. Hiding is the only viable strategy.
Regarding sending money, it might have been understandable back when the company's financial foundation was weak, but now they are respectable joint-stock companies worth tens of thousands of won. Also, regardless of others, thanks to advertising revenue coming from Tokyo (東京) and Osaka (大阪), even if they can't distribute dividends, they are at least not losing money. Isn't it too harsh to publicly humiliate their own affiliates in front of everyone over a mere few tens of won, using methods harsher than those of high-interest moneylenders? Furthermore, isn't it bizarre that this has become worse since the foundation became more solid recently, compared to when it was weak before?
Besides this, branch managers face difficulties due to the head office's harsh treatment regarding news articles, but since everyone can guess this, I'll stop here. Recently, another new difficulty has arisen: the issue of advertising for the head office's own businesses. Even for self-promotion, there should be limits. Isn't it too shameless to misuse a full or half page several times a month? If it were done as a separate supplement, it wouldn't matter, but they sacrifice the household section or arts section for advertising. This might benefit the head office by increasing the advertising effect and selling more magazines, but the ones who suffer the most are the poor branch offices. Receiving complaints is the lesser evil; some readers even stop subscribing because they find it unsightly. Yet, there's no reason to blame the readers. If it were an advertisement for another magazine, readers might overlook it, knowing it's done to receive advertising fees. But this is advertising for their own products, unsolicited by the readers, while making the readers bear the subscription cost. Who wouldn't complain?
But even more difficult is the publication of phony ("inchiki" [インチキ]) advertisements. Countless readers have surely been deceived by phony ads published in the newspaper, but the ones who bear the brunt of these readers' anger are again the poor branch offices. Perhaps because they seem easily approachable, or perhaps because the head office is far away and the branch office is close, readers inevitably confront the branch office. Dealing with such readers is truly distressing. We can't compensate for their losses, nor can we turn a blind eye after having pleaded with them to read our good newspaper. Sometimes, I even lament my fate, thinking it was my folly to manage a newspaper branch office. Whether they know this or not,<86> the head office continues to publish phony advertisements. No matter how blinded by money they are, don't they have the conscience to stop this, if not for the readers, then at least for the branch offices in the provinces?

As One of the Readers - Kyŏngsŏng City - Chŏng Hŭn-mo
"To inform, to know" – this could be said of newspapers and readers. Newspapers, published daily as public instruments and friends of the people, strive to "inform" about everything, while general readers try to "know" something from every page. From this standpoint, although it's always the case, the state of mind of newspapers and readers can be clearly seen when some sudden incident occurs. The newspaper strives to inform in more detail, and the reader waits anxiously to know more, don't they?
Also, while everyone who reads a newspaper is called a reader, analyzing the readership of one newspaper reveals readers of the political section, economic section, society section, household section, arts section, etc. – readers for each section. Thus, readers of each section, upon encountering the newspaper daily, first skim the section they are interested in and look for something there.
It is quite dissatisfying when newspapers, which have readers striving to know like this and which themselves strive to inform, sometimes forget they are public instruments and friends of the people, fail to provide readers seeking knowledge with all the new "news," and instead waste entire pages boasting about their newspaper's wealth or insert advertisements to sell 20-chŏn magazines. How much does this disregard the readership? Newspaper managers should deeply consider this point.
Regarding complaints or hopes for each section: first, in the political section, publishing a photograph every time an article about a certain figure appears daily tends to bore the reader. Instead, it would be better to provide brief "Explanations of Political Issues" daily to help readers gain common knowledge.
Next, the society section could be called the miscellaneous news section, but in Chosŏn, it can be called Chosŏn's political section. This is because the lives of Chosŏn people and social trends are recorded in this section. Articles in the society section generally carry tidbits obtained from the police station. For minor issues, it might be acceptable, but for issues concerning the "prestige" of social organizations and individuals, I think it would be better not to just print what was obtained from the police station but to investigate more thoroughly before publishing. To discuss the past achievements of that organization and that individual, and then carelessly publish -(Continued on page 69)-
(Continuation from page 87)
-without investigation over a minor issue today, is an act of self-insult. If newspapers were to publish any wrongdoing without distinction, why do they fail to exert that power under capitalists and instead become mere "slaves," unable to publish due to a single phone call? How many such ugly incidents are there? And how many unbecoming incidents involve important figures within the newspaper companies themselves? If it is truly a public instrument, then both public and private matters should be exposed entirely before the readers.
Regarding the local news section, I hope that local branches will provide regular introductions to the local situation in addition to the "news" occurring locally. Lastly, concerning the household section, my hope is that the editors, instead of publishing unsuitable "makeup methods" they themselves don't understand and have merely translated, or introducing useless trendy items that stir the hearts of housewives, will provide guidance on improving household life, childcare methods, and child guidance principles, and expand the children's section to include more reading material for children (兒童讀物). Besides these, there are many other complaints and hopes, but due to space limitations, I will end here. (End) <69>
<87>

**Summary**

This 1935 article compiles critiques of Chosŏn (Korean) newspapers from an educator, writer, doctor, branch manager, and reader. Common complaints include inaccurate and sensationalist reporting (especially regarding individuals and sensitive events like suicides or crimes involving school affiliates), excessive commercialism (prioritizing profit, aggressive advertising, promoting own ventures), lack of clear editorial principles and individuality between papers, poor translation quality, biased reporting influenced by powerful interests (like capitalists), unfair treatment of provincial branch offices, and trivial or unhelpful content in sections like household pages. Hopes center on greater accuracy, sensitivity, ethical responsibility, journalistic integrity, distinctiveness, better content (political analysis, helpful household advice), and fair treatment of affiliates. The article offers valuable insights into the colonial Korean media landscape, highlighting tensions between journalistic ideals, commercial pressures, perceived obligations to the populace, and the realities of operating under likely (though unstated) censorship. The specific examples involving schools, hospitals (Severance), police interactions, fundraising, and the literacy movement provide concrete details about institutional dynamics and social issues of the time, making it interesting for historians studying media history, social conditions, and institutional practices in 1930s Korea.

**Named Entities**

培花女學校	배화여학교	Paehwa Yŏhakkyo (Paehwa Women's School)
李萬珪	이만규	Yi Man-gyu
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
京城放送局	경성방송국	Kyŏngsŏng Pangsongguk (Keijō Broadcasting Station)
李石薰	이석훈	Yi Sŏk-hun
XX日報	XX일보	XX Ilbo (XX Daily News)
東亞日報社	동아일보사	Tonga Ilbo Sa (Dong-A Ilbo Company)
新東亞	신동아	Sin Tonga
新家庭	신가정	Sin Kajŏng
大東亞日報	대동아일보	Tae Tonga Ilbo (Great Dong-A Ilbo)
獨逸	독일	Togil (Germany)
猶太人	유태인	Yutaein (Jewish people)
히틀러-	히틀러	Hit'ŭllŏ (Hitler)
東亞日報	동아일보	Tonga Ilbo (Dong-A Ilbo)
別乾坤	별건곤	Pyŏlgŏngon (Magazine Name)
伊太利	이태리	It'ari (Italy)
하르빈	하얼빈	Harbin
자랴아	자랴아	Charyaa (Zarya - Russian Newspaper)
쏘베-트	소비에트	Ssobe-t'ŭ (Soviet)
로시야	러시아	Rossiya (Russia)
露西亞人	러시아인	Rossiyain (Russian people)
白系露人	백계노인	Paekkye Noin (White Russian)
露國	노국	Noguk (Russia)
朝鮮日報	조선일보	Chosŏn Ilbo
醫專病院	의전병원	Ŭijŏn Pyŏngwŏn (Medical College Hospital)
劉相奎	유상규	Yu Sang-gyu
警務局	경무국	Kyŏngmuguk (Police Bureau)
昭和	쇼와	Shōwa (Japanese Era Name)
神農	신농	Sinnong (Shennong - Mythical Chinese Ruler)
白雲莊	백운장	Paegun-jang (Place name?)
白川	백천	Paekch'ŏn (Place name?)
記者諸公	기자제공	Kija chegong (Esteemed journalists)
讀者	독자	Tokcha (Readers)
한경섭	한경섭	Han Kyŏng-sŏp
順子	순자	Sun-ja
교북동	교북동	Kyobuk-tong (Neighborhood in Seoul)
세부란쓰 병원	세브란스 병원	Sebransŭ Pyŏngwŏn (Severance Hospital)
富樫	토가시	Togashi (Japanese Surname)
府廳	부청	Puch'ŏng (Prefectural Office)
서대문 경찰서	서대문 경찰서	Sŏdaemun Kyŏngch'alsŏ (Seodaemun Police Station)
멘델 僧正	멘델 승정	Mendel Sŭngjŏng (Friar Mendel)
三南	삼남	Samnam (Southern three provinces of Korea)
關西	간사이	Kansai (Region in Japan)
樂園洞	낙원동	Nagwŏn-dong (Neighborhood in Seoul)
인사동	인사동	Insa-dong (Neighborhood in Seoul)
衛生主任	위생주임	Wisaeng chuim (Sanitation Chief)
府民病院	부민병원	Pumin Pyŏngwŏn (Municipal Hospital)
鄭博士	정박사	Chŏng Paksa (Dr. Chŏng)
吳博士	오박사	O Paksa (Dr. O)
每日申報	매일신보	Maeil Sinbo (Newspaper Name)
神農氏	신농씨	Sinnongssi (Mr. Shennong)
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
OO日報 OO支局	OO일보 OO지국	OO Ilbo OO Chiguk (OO Daily News OO Branch)
申O澈	신O철	Sin O-ch'ŏl
東京	도쿄	Tokyo
大阪	오사카	Osaka
京城市內	경성시내	Kyŏngsŏng sinae (Within Seoul City)
鄭薰模	정훈모	Chŏng Hŭn-mo

**Glossary**

만습니다	많습니다	(are) many (older spelling)
잇는	있는	existing, being (older spelling)
몃가지	몇 가지	a few things (older spelling)
조흘	좋을	good, fine (older spelling/form)
엇더케	어떻게	how (older spelling)
자미	재미	interest, fun, pleasantness (older spelling)
햇스면	했으면	if one had done (older spelling)
갓다가	갔다가	having gone (colloquial/older form)
낏치는	끼치는	causing, inflicting (older spelling)
다가치	다 같이	all together (older spelling)
맛찬가지가	마찬가지가	being the same (older spelling)
맛기도록	맡기도록	to entrust (older spelling)
그럿치	그렇지	like that, so (older spelling)
안흐면	않으면	if not (older spelling)
살는지도	살지도	might buy/incur (older spelling)
마즈막	마지막	last, final (older spelling)
자긔	자기	oneself, self (older spelling)
엇덜까요	어떨까요	how about...? (older spelling)
갓해서는	같아서는	as it seems, in my opinion (older spelling)
안햇다고	않했다고	did not do (older spelling contraction)
조고만	조그만	small, trivial (older spelling)
잇스며	있으며	while there is, and also (older spelling)
도리혀	도리어	rather, instead (older spelling)
위선	우선	first of all, for now (older spelling/form)
녁이는	여기는	considering, regarding as (older spelling)
하낫	하나의	one, a single (older spelling/form)
看做하고	간주하고	regarding as, considering as
붙어다	붙는다	is attached, follows (older form)
리-더-	리더	leader (loanword)
프라이드	프라이드	pride (loanword)
프라우드	프라우드	proud (loanword)
自處하고	자처하고	considering oneself as, posing as
안이다	아니다	is not (older spelling)
잇는가를	있는가를	whether there is (older spelling)
모-든	모든	all, every
조을고	졸고	dozing, nodding off
姑捨하고	고사하고	setting aside, leaving aside
업고	없고	not having, without (older spelling)
갗우고	갖추고	being equipped with, having (older spelling)
證據다	증거다	it is evidence
發散하는	발산하는	emitting, giving off
갖지지	가지지	having, possessing (older spelling)
맞어	맞아	being correct, fitting, breaking even (older spelling)
빗싸다고는	비싸다고는	as for being expensive (older spelling)
안이겟는가	아니겠는가	would it not be? (older spelling)
밋지지는	밑지지지는	suffer a loss, go into deficit (older spelling)
어그러진	어그러진	distorted, warped, off-point
거드는	거드는	helping, supporting, siding with
엇으며	없으며	not having, without (older spelling)
독갑이	도깨비	goblin
헌테는	한테는	to (someone), towards (colloquial/older form)
무엇인가	무엇인가	what is it?
안이면	아니면	if not, or (older spelling)
어듸에	어디에	where (older spelling)
잇는가	있는가	is there? (older spelling)
購讀하면	구독하면	if one subscribes
세음이	셈이	calculation, count, equivalent (older spelling)
듯지	듣지	hearing (older spelling)
하리만큼	하리만큼	to the extent that one would do
쓴 일이 잇거니와	쓴 일이 있거니와	although I wrote about it once (older spelling)
하로바삐	하루바삐	as soon as possible, quickly
자-르	자르	Saar (loanword rendering)
近似하지	근사하지	being close, approximate
읽으려 뎀비는	읽으려 덤비는	pouncing on to read, insisting on reading
그가티	그같이	like that (older spelling)
바라이에틔	버라이어티	variety (loanword)
稀薄한	희박한	scarce, thin, weak
흖이	흔히	commonly, often (older spelling)
免치	면치	avoiding, escaping (older contraction)
어듸	어디	where (older spelling)
거저	거저	for free, without reason
까다롭기	까다롭기	being picky, demanding
기우리다가는	기울이다가는	if one listens to, pays attention to
뒤죽빡죽이	뒤죽박죽이	messy, jumbled (older spelling)
何如튼	하여튼	anyway, in any case
쏘베-트	소비에트	Soviet (loanword)
甚極에	심극에	to the extreme
없시	없이	without (older spelling)
릐파인된	리파인된	refined (loanword, older spelling)
僚友	요우	colleague, comrade, friend
家庭爭議	가정쟁의	family dispute
恒茶飯事	항다반사	everyday occurrence, commonplace event
네꼬이라즈	네코이라즈	Nekoirazu (Japanese rat poison brand name)
况目	하물며	moreover, furthermore (used like 하물며)
안일까	아닐까	isn't it?, perhaps not? (older spelling)
뉴-스, 밸류-	뉴스 밸류	news value (loanword)
邪道	사도	evil way, wrong path, heresy
誇大한	과대한	exaggerated, grandiose
製版技術	제판기술	photoengraving technology
低劣	저열	inferior, low quality
編輯術	편집술	editing skill/technique
低小	저소	low and small, inferior
供하는	공하는	offering, supplying, using for
幼稚한	유치한	childish, immature
誤植	오식	misprint, typo
薄弱한	박약한	weak, feeble
쎈틔멘탈리즘	센티멘털리즘	sentimentalism (loanword)
鐵槌	철퇴	iron hammer, severe blow/punishment
拒絶	거절	refusal, rejection
遷延	천연	delay, postponement
전긔와	전기와	like the previous description (older spelling)
감행하겟음으로	감행하겠으므로	because one will dare to do (older spelling)
세웟다한다	세웠다 한다	it is said that (they) established (older spelling)
裏書捺印	이서날인	endorsement and seal; approval
잇을 수 없음은	있을 수 없음은	the fact that it cannot exist (older spelling)
이 또한	이 또한	this also
꾀할진대	꾀할진대	if one intends to plot/seek
안이라	아니라	is not (older spelling)
어떻다 하는뇨	어떻다 하느뇨	what do you say? (archaic interrogative)
잇는가	있는가	is there? (older spelling)
느리는	늘이는	increasing, stretching (older spelling)
잇고야	있고야	if there is indeed (older spelling)
熟不可忍	숙불가인	what is unbearable? (Classical Chinese phrase)
위하야	위하여	for the sake of (older spelling)
잇을지어다	있을지어다	let there be, speak up! (imperative/hortative ending)
들니든가	들리던가	was it heard? (older spelling)
앞으든고	아프던고	was it painful? (older spelling/interrogative)
그대네	그대네	your (plural, informal/older form)
나옴이	나옴이	coming out (older spelling)
안이라는	아니라는	the fact that it is not (older spelling)
멫	몇	how many (older spelling)
무릇	무릇	generally, approximately
던고	던고	(past interrogative suffix, archaic)
도도혀	도도히	proudly, haughtily; thoroughly (older spelling)
赦彦함을	사언함을	(meaning unclear, possibly 'condemnation' or related to speech)
禁키	금키	to forbid, prohibit (older contraction)
指摘하엿길내	지적하였길래	because (you) pointed out (older spelling/form)
임이	이미	already (older spelling)
알어	알아	knowing (older spelling)
이야말노	이야말로	indeed, truly (older spelling)
안일가	아닐까	isn't it?, perhaps not? (older spelling)
돌녀	돌려	returning (older spelling)
안낸다고	안 낸다고	saying one doesn't pay
찾어	찾아	finding, visiting (older spelling)
달내도	달래도	even if one asks for (older spelling)
찾어가지	찾아가지	go to find/retrieve (older spelling)
잇겟소	있겠소	will there be? (polite, older form)
달나는	달라는	asking for (older spelling)
앓다가	앓다가	suffering from illness
더함으로	더하므로	because it worsens (older spelling)
갓든	갔던	went (older spelling)
살려만 달나고	살려만 달라고	asking only to save (her) (older spelling)
하엿으나	하였으나	although (one) did (older spelling)
말엇다	말았다	ended up (dying) (older spelling contraction)
내달나고	내달라고	asking to give/release (older spelling)
안는	않는	not doing (older spelling)
받엇으나	받았으나	although received (older spelling)
내주기를	내주기를	giving/releasing (older spelling)
내어다	내어다	taking out/retrieving (older spelling)
하엿다는	하였다는	the fact that (one) did (older spelling)
잇음으로	있으므로	because there is (older spelling)
밝히어	밝히어	clarifying, revealing
하리라	하리라	will do (older form)
잇엇음니다	있었습니다	there was (older polite spelling)
안받어도	안 받아도	even without receiving (older spelling)
없음니다	없습니다	there is not (older polite spelling)
가저온다기에	가져온다기에	because (he) said he would bring (older spelling)
햇드니	했더니	when (I) did (older spelling)
가저오고	가져오고	bringing (older spelling)
느진	늦은	being late (older spelling)
것임니다	것입니다	it is (older polite spelling)
안일	아닐	not being (older spelling)
뻣게	밖에	only, nothing but (older spelling)
하엿으리라	하였으리라	would have done (older spelling)
써어찌타	서어찌타	how could it be? (emphatic/archaic)
잇으리라	있으리라	there must be (older spelling)
陋劣한	누열한	base, mean, vile
살엇으면	살았으면	if (he) were alive (older spelling)
물어볼가	물어볼까	shall I ask? (older spelling)
흘니는	흘리는	shedding (tears) (older spelling)
뜨거워지든가	뜨거워지던가	did it become hot? (older spelling)
엿으리라	였으리라	must have been (older spelling)
나든가	나던가	did it come out? (older spelling)
오-그대들이여	오-그대들이여	Oh, you people!
速키	속히	quickly (older spelling)
버려 주소서	버려 주소서	please abandon (deferential request)
이러하매	이러하매	since it is like this
念푸리에	염불에	in chanting (Buddhist prayer); here figurative for empty repetition/talk
어째	어찌	why, how (older spelling)
끄집어	끄집어	pulling out
왓는데	왔는데	came, but (older spelling)
임이	이미	already (older spelling)
엇다	었다	got, suffered (older spelling contraction)
넘어저	넘어져	falling down, collapsing (older spelling)
어린것을	어린 것을	the young child (older spelling)
빠저서	빠져서	falling into, being lost (older spelling)
두다리고	두드리고	knocking, pounding (older spelling)
비럿스나	빌었으나	begged, pleaded, but (older spelling)
모다	모두	all, entirely (older spelling)
닷고	닫고	closing (older spelling)
받어주는	받아주는	accepting (older spelling)
없엇다	없었다	there was not (older spelling)
낓엇섯다	끼쳤었다	caused, gave (goosebumps) (older spelling)
미워서보다도	미워서보다도	rather than hating
젓는가	졌는가	has become? (older spelling contraction)
타진	타진	being burned
안고	안고	holding
쩔쩔매는	쩔쩔매는	being flustered, frantic
죽엄을	죽음을	death (older spelling)
슲어	슬퍼	being sad, mourning (older spelling)
가치	같이	like, as (older spelling)
벌리려	벌리려	trying to open
녁여서	여겨서	considering, feeling (older spelling)
엇지하여	어찌하여	why, how come (older spelling)
안는가	않는가	does not? (older spelling)
일흠이	이름이	name (older spelling)
區區한	구구한	varied, inconsistent, trivial
안이오	아니오	is not (older spelling)
쓰러나오게	쓸려 나오게	to be churned out (lit. swept out)
다하야	다하여	exhausting, doing completely (older spelling)
府民病院案	부민병원안	Municipal Hospital plan
讚美하엿고	찬미하였고	praised (older spelling)
생기매	생기매	when it arose/was established
해왓슨	해왔은	has done (older spelling)
잇섯으면	있었으면	if there were (older spelling)
못내	못내	unable to, cannot help but
듯건댄	듣건대	according to what I hear (older spelling)
영식兒	영식아	Young-sik (suffix '兒' for child)
容納할	용납할	accommodating, accepting
없엇든가	없었든가	was there not? (older spelling)
못되엇지만	못되었지만	although it was less than (older spelling)
찰지도	찰지도	might fill up
모르리라	모르리라	will probably not know
그만두고	그만두고	let alone, setting aside
와도	와도	even if (someone) comes
모르지만	모르지만	although (I) don't know
旣히	기히	already
遊興으로	유흥으로	for entertainment/pleasure
處遇를	처우를	treatment
加하는	가하는	inflicting, applying
不及하는	불급하는	not reaching, being inferior to
할 수 잇다	할 수 있다	can do (older spelling)
譬하는데	비하는데	comparing to, likening to
이르러서는	이르러서는	when it comes to
생겨낫든지	생겨났든지	whether (it) came into being (older spelling)
갓다고	같다고	being like (older spelling)
안일가	아닐까	isn't it?, perhaps not? (older spelling)
낼적	낼 적	when paying
조치안을가	좋지 않을까	wouldn't it be good? (older spelling)
바랄뿐이다	바랄 뿐이다	only hope/wish for
賣喫함이	매끽함이	selling (skills/wares, older term)
賣售하고	매수하고	selling
避하려는	피하려는	trying to avoid
支拂치	지불치	paying (older contraction)
안이하는	아니하는	not doing (older spelling)
疑問視되는	의문시되는	being regarded as doubtful
如何히	여하히	however much
動치	동치	moving (older contraction)
아니하며	아니하며	and not doing
者인	자인	person who is
下命의	하명의	order, command (from superior/client)
遲함을	지함을	being slow, delayed
恨할	한할	regretting, resenting
뿐인	뿐인	only being
謂할	위할	calling, terming
안일가	아닐까	isn't it?, perhaps not? (older spelling)
들때이면	들 때이면	when setting out to
으動첩則曰	으동첩즉왈	(meaning unclear, likely related to 'at every turn')
지어낸	지어낸	made up, fabricated
안이라	아니라	is not (older spelling)
안일	아닐	not being (older spelling)
어대	어디	where (older spelling)
잇겟는가	있겠는가	will there be? (older spelling)
안이	아니	not (older spelling)
살녀주면	살려주면	if one saves (a life) (older spelling)
겟지	겠지	it would be (colloquial ending)
안이다	아니다	is not (older spelling)
안임을	아님을	the fact that it is not (older spelling)
알어야	알아야	must know (older spelling)
아모리	아무리	no matter how (older spelling)
길이 들엇다	길이 들었다	being tamed, accustomed to (older spelling)
돌니려	돌리려	trying to turn/blame (older spelling)
하여야	하여야	must do
알만하지	알만하지	should know well enough
안은가	않은가	is it not? (older spelling)
갓가울지나	가까울지나	although it may be close (older spelling)
責할	책할	blaming, reproaching
者가	자가	person who is
아닌	아닌	not being
遲行하기를	지행하기를	acting slowly, lagging behind
도로혀	도리어	rather, instead (older spelling)
떠러지매	떨어지매	as it falls (older spelling)
잇지	있지	there is, isn't there? (older spelling)
안잠자기를	안 잠자기를	seeking lodging (older form?)
잇으며	있으며	and there is (older spelling)
잇다면	있다면	if there is (older spelling)
그많은	그 많은	those many
開業하고저	개업하고자	wanting to open a business (older spelling)
드르면	들으면	if one hears (older spelling)
낫다	낫다	is better
좋앗든지는	좋았든지는	whether it was good (older spelling)
생겨날 적	생겨날 적	when it arose/was created
안이다	아니다	is not (older spelling)
몰으지만	모르지만	although (I) don't know (older spelling)
장ㅅ거리에서는	장삿거리에서는	in a market town (older spelling)
웬간하면	웬만하면	if it's passable/mediocre (older spelling)
맞을 것 같지만	맞을 것 같지만	although it seems it would fit/balance
아모리	아무리	no matter how (older spelling)
홀가	헐가	cheap price (older spelling/form)
독자가	독자가	subscriber, reader
지불치	지불치	paying (older contraction)
않는데야	않는데야	when (they) don't... (older spelling)
어찌하랴	어찌하랴	what can be done? (rhetorical)
좋와젔다는	좋아졌다는	that it has improved (older spelling)
갖이고도	가지고도	even with (older spelling)
지워놓기는	지워놓기는	erasing, incurring (debt) (older spelling)
않되니	안되니	because it doesn't work/go well (older spelling)
늦어질	늦어질	will be delayed
않인가	아닌가	is it not? (older spelling)
몰으는지	모르는지	whether (they) know or not (older spelling)
늦어저도	늦어져도	even if it is delayed (older spelling)
해야 망정이지	해야 망정이지	it's fortunate if one does, otherwise...
이튼날은	이튿날은	the next day (older spelling)
갔든	갔던	went (older spelling)
븬손을	빈손을	empty hands (older spelling)
긔맥히는	기막히는	being dumbfounded, aghast (older spelling)
몰으겟지만	모르겠지만	although I don't know (older spelling)
몇십만원의	몇십만 원의	of several tens of thousands of won
남이야 아무랬건	남이야 아무랬건	whatever happens to others
손해만을	손해만은	only loss (older spelling)
않보고	안 보고	not seeing/incurring (older spelling)
몇십원에	몇십 원에	for a few tens of won
식힘은	시킴은	making someone do, causing (humiliation) (older spelling)
甚하지	심하지	being severe, harsh (older spelling)
甚하니	심하니	because it is severe/harsh (older spelling)
무슨	무슨	what kind of
안일가	아닐까	isn't it?, perhaps not? (older spelling)
하겠기에	하겠기에	because (I) will do/say
생겼으니	생겼으니	because it has arisen/occurred
한아	하나	one (older spelling)
안일가	아닐까	isn't it?, perhaps not? (older spelling)
몰으나	모르나	although (I) don't know (older spelling)
애꾸진	애꿎은	innocent, unrelated (older spelling)
듯는	듣는	hearing (older spelling)
나물할	나무랄	blaming, scolding (older spelling)
이유가	이유가	reason
몰으지만	모르지만	although (I) don't know (older spelling)
식히면서	시키면서	while making (someone) bear (older spelling)
請치도	청치도	requesting (older contraction)
않는	않는	not doing (older spelling)
것인가	것인가	is it?
インチキ	인치키	phony, fake (Japanese loanword)
굀¸만두고라도	그만두고라도	even setting aside
있을가	있을까	will there be? (older spelling)
알니고자	알리고자	wanting to inform (older spelling)
알고자	알고자	wanting to know
하겟습니다	하겠습니다	will do/say (older polite spelling)
페지페지에서	페이지 페이지에서	from page to page
엇더한	어떠한	some kind of, certain (older spelling)
초조한	초조한	anxious, impatient
안임니가	아닙니까	is it not? (older polite spelling)
그러고	그리고	and, also (older form)
독자라고	독자라고	called a reader
독자를	독자를	reader
훌터	훑어	skimming, looking through (older spelling)
되여	되어	becoming (older spelling)
찻고	찾고	looking for (older spelling)
가티	같이	like, as (older spelling)
안코	않고	not doing (older spelling)
자긔	자기	oneself, self (older spelling)
팔고저	팔고자	wanting to sell (older spelling)
집어넛는	집어넣는	inserting (older spelling)
안임니다	아닙니다	is not (older polite spelling)
행동이겟슴니까	행동이겠습니까	is it behavior? (older polite spelling)
첫재로	첫째로	firstly (older spelling)
잇서서	있어서	regarding, in (older spelling)
대하야	대하여	regarding, about (older spelling)
넛는	넣는	putting in, inserting (older spelling)
실증을	싫증을	boredom, weariness (older spelling: 실증 instead of 싫증)
엇도록	얻도록	so as to obtain (older spelling)
주웟스면	주었으면	if (you) gave (older spelling)
하겟습니다만은	하겠습니다만은	although I will say (older polite spelling)
잇서서는	있어서는	in, regarding (older spelling)
말할 수 잇습니다	말할 수 있습니다	can say (older spelling)
어든	얻은	obtained (older spelling)
실니게	실리게	to be published (older spelling)
실린다는	실린다는	that it is published
잇다면	있다면	if there is
실니는	실리는	being published (older spelling)
만습니가	많습니까	are there many? (older polite spelling)
압헤	앞에	before, in front of (older spelling)
식혀야	시켜야	must make happen, expose
소개해 주웟스면	소개해 주었으면	if (you) introduced (older spelling)
맛지도	맞지도	not even fitting/correct (older spelling)
안는	않는	not doing (older spelling)
업는	없는	non-existent, useless (older spelling)
노치	놓지	placing, leaving (older spelling contraction)
만히	많이	many, much (older spelling)
주웟스면	주었으면	if (you) gave (older spelling)
이외도	이외에도	besides this
만습니다 마는	많습니다만은	although there are many (older polite spelling)
끗치고저	끝내고자	wanting to end (older spelling)


---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 신간 제4호
발행일	1935년 03월 01일
기사제목	新聞에 對한 各界 人士의 不平 希望
기사형태	설문

新聞에 對한 各界 人士의 不平 希望
敎育家의 立場으로서 -培花女學校- 李萬珪
교육가의 입장에서 현재의 朝鮮 신문에 대한 불평과 희망을 말하라고요.
글세올시다. 나도 朝鮮 사람인 이상 물론 朝鮮신문에 대한 불평과 희망은 만습니다. 그러나 그것을 일일히 열거할 수는 좀 어려운 일이고 또 내 事情도 事情이고 해서 다만 平常 때 내 念頭에 떠돌고 잇는 몃가지만 간단이 말해 볼까 합니다.
爲先 내가 제일 유감은로 생각하는 것은 가령 우리학교를 졸업한 사람에 關聯한 사건이 이러나면 사건의 如何를 불문하고 좌우간 한번 學校 當局者에게 와서 좀 자세히 照會해 보는 것이 제일 조흘 것입니다. 그런데 엇더케 된 셈인지 그런 사건이 이러나도 學校 當局에겐 아무 말도 없이 大書特書해 노니 좀 여러 가지로 자미 적은 일이 잇습니다. 그것도 확실이 그 학교를 졸업햇다든지 다만 몇 개월이라도 그 학교에 단엿다든지 햇스면 모르겟습니다만은 그 학교 졸업허니 그 학교가 어느곳에 잇는지도 모르는 사람을 갓다가 그 學校出身이니 무엇이니 하고 떠드러대는 것은 암만 생각해도 좀 輕率하다고 할 수 잇스며 그 學校當局者에게 낏치는 迷惑도 여간 큰 것이 아닙니다.
그리고 둘째론 이번 水害救濟金 募集만 해도 그럿쵸. 다가치 조선에 태어난 사람이고 다 가튼 동포인이상 아무 신문에 寄託을 해도 다 맛찬가지가 아니겟습니까. 그런데도 일부러 新聞社員이 학교에까지 나와서 우리社의 모집에 참가하라는 둥 우리社가 다른社보다 안전하다는 둥 說敎하드시 떠드니 이것도 역시 자미 업는 일입니다. 以後라도 그런 경우엔 제-발 개인의 자유에 맛기도록 하십시요. 만일 그럿치 안흐면 혹시 一般의 誤解를 살는지도 모를 것입니다.
또 마즈막으로 하나 더 말하겟습니다. 所謂 文字普及運動 말입니다. 그것도 역시 그럿습니다. 자긔 社에 참가하는 것이 보담 더 名譽스러운 일이라고 떠들며 勸告하는 것보다 역시 그 학생의＜76＞ 자유에 맛기는 것이 엇덜까요.
그리고 요사이 신문지상으로 學生風紀 問題에 관해서 만히 떠들고 잇는 것 갓습니다만은 내 생각 갓해서는 신문이 떠들고 잇는 것 가티 그러케까지는 風紀가 紊亂하지 안햇다고 斷定합니다. 조고만 일을 가지고 쓸데없이 신문으로 떠드는 것은 自己批判을 모르는 순진 그대로의 학생들의 심리를 刺戟할 念慮가 잇스며 따라서 그 기사가 도리혀 學生界의 風紀를 紊亂케 하는 一動機가 된다고도 해석할 수 잇습니다. 그러니 신문사의 책임도 책임이려니와 事物이란 원래 그러케 단순한 것은 아니니까 위선 좀 愼重한 태도로서 대하기를 바라는 바입니다.

作家의 立場으로서 -京城放送局- 李石薰
신문에 대한 불평, 불만-이것이 編輯氏로 붙어의 課題다. 이것은 廣汎한 의미의 현대 쩌-널리즘에 대한 비판이 안이고 朝鮮文新聞에 대한 협위의 문제라고 해석된다. 잠시 쩌-널리즘의 장점은 덮어두고 불평, 불만의 가지가지를 긔탄없이 쏘다 놓으려고 하는데 신문사여! 과히 怒하지는 말지어다. (더욱 이 불평, 불만이, 나 한사람만의 「ひねくれ」 혹은 「ひとりよがり」 일넌지는 모르겟으나 여하튼 가장 자유로운 입장에서 내멋대로 놀아 보겟다)
무엇보다 불만으로 녁이는 점은
一. 指導原理가 模糊한 것
이다. 우리는 朝鮮의 신문을 하낫 營利(회사)에 불과한 것으로 看做하고 십지는 않다. 호의란 것 보다도 어떠한 期待도 붙어다. 한 개의 政黨도 없고 한 개의 XXXX도 없는 民衆이기 때문에 이 期待는 더욱 절실한 바이다. 물론 신문 自體는 어떤 「리-더-」로서의 「프라이드」를 갖고 잇스리라. 그들이 항상 民衆에게 대하야 「프라우드」한 태도로 보면 확실히 朝鮮민중의 「리-더-」로 自處하고 잇는 모양이다. 그렇게 自處하는 것이 나쁘다는 것이 안이다. 물론 좋다는 것은 더욱 안이다. 다못 世紀的不安에 處한 民衆으로 하여금 생활원리를 갖게하며 그러하야 한가지 목표에로 邁進케 할 指導原理가 과연 명확히 表示되면서＜77＞ 잇는가를 문제할 따름이다. -신문이 民衆의 *澤이라 하면.

二. 하품하고 잇는 社說欄
모-든 신문의 社說欄이 하품을 하고 잇다. 특히 XX日報의 그것은 조을고 잇다. 一世를 風靡할 만한 名論卓說은 姑捨하고 적어도 「핀트」가 비뚜러지지 않은 社說조차 얻어 보기 힘든다. 一言으로 檢閱關係라면 그만이겟지만 社說에 能動性이 없고 鬪爭性이 稀薄하다. 정열의 燃燒도 업고 문장의 魅力도 업다. 千篇一律이요 抽象的이며 觀念的이다. 다-만 義務的 「おあいそう」로 하품을 하면서 형식만 갗우고 잇슬 뿐이다. 이와 같이 社說에 能動性이 없다는 것은 (그들의 使命으로 標榜하는) 文化主義에도 積極性이 없는 證據다.

三. 장사치的 臭氣
신문으로서 장사치的 臭氣를 發散하는 것은 不快한 일이다. 그렇다고 「마이너스」 狀態에서 언제나 徘徊하기를 바라는 苛酷한 沒人情은 갖지지 안는다. 大義名分으로 말하자면 朝鮮의 신문도 「收支가 맞어 가는」 것은 慶賀로운 일이다. 그러나 어떤 신문 같은 것은 그들이 附帶事業으로 하는 잡지경영에서 보이는 바 장사치的 태도는 당연히 悔改해야 할 바이다. 東亞日報社는 「新東亞」 및 「新家庭」에서 年 6,7천원의 이익을 내이면서도 오히려 「廣告料를 計入치 않은 限에서」라고 부족해 하는 태도는 너무나 장사치的이다! (물론 物價의 現時勢에 잇서 「新東亞」나 「新家庭」 그 차체만을 생각한다면 결코 빗싸다고는 할 수 없겠다. (그러나 이는 別問題다) 보다 더 積極的으로 문화적 사업을 한다면 收支도 맞으려니와 더 意義 깊은 일이 안이겟는가? 大東亞日報의 체면으로 「營利的」이면서 活然할 것인가? 한 개의 「文學誌」 쯤 發行한다더라도 例의 速射砲的 全面廣告術로써 한다면 결코 밋지지는 않을 것이라. 단언한다!.

四. 핀트가 어그러진 文人唾罵
東亞日報에 대한 絶大한 불평이다! 해야만 할 일을 감히 못하고 공연히 약자를 거드는 것은 卑怯한 짓이다. 대개 節操問題로써 文人을 唾罵한 것은 「핀트」가 어그러저도 정도가 지나친 바이엇으며 다못 社說欄을 채우기에 汲汲한 나머지의 中學 3년생의 작문정도를 지나지 못한 것이 잇다. 저- 「나치스」란 독갑이가 猶太人을 迫害하는 것은 周知의 사실이다. 그들은 其實 「資本家쥬-」에게는 一指도 못대는 卑怯漢들인 것이다. 약자인 藝術家, 學者만을 못살게 굴며 정말 獨逸을 해치는 「資本家쥬-」 헌테는 꼼짝도 못하니 「히틀러-」란 친구도 滑稽로운 者다!  東亞日報의 文人唾罵도 이와 다를 것이 무엇인가? 「싀어미역증에개뱃대기차」는 따위일게다.

五. 個性의 不鮮明한 것

그 신문이 안이면 볼 수 없는 특색- 朝鮮의 신문에는 個性이＜78＞ 없다. 즉 다시 말하면 獨自性 乃至 獨創性이 없다는 말이다.
A신문이나 B신문이나 C신문이나... 題號만 다를뿐이지 어듸에 A는 A로의 B는 B로의... 個性이 잇는가? 고로 讀者는 A신문 하나만 購讀하면 A, B, C 세 신문을 보는 세음이 되고 또 A를 보다 말고 B로 옮기더라도 조곰도 A에게의 未練이 없는 것이다. 어떤 친구는 말한다. 「朝鮮文신문이야 義理로 보아주는 셈이지. 「大朝」한가지면 朝鮮版도 훌늉허니까」라고.
무엇보다 急務는 各社 특이한 個性을 충분히 發揮할 것, 그 다음 「義理로 보아준다 云云」의 히떠운 소리를 듯지 않도록 「이 신문이 아니고는...」하리만큼 만들 일이다.

六. 雜同散異的 固有名詞의 亂用

「別乾坤」에도 한번 쓴 일이 잇거니와 하로바삐 고유명사 「외국의 인명, 지명」를 통일해야 할 것이다. 한 신문에서도 朝夕刊이 相異한 경우가 많다. 가령 최근의 예를 들면 「잘」 「살」 「자-르」 등이다. 이것은 “Saar”니까 「자-르」나 「자아르」가 가장 原音에 近似하지 않을까? 獨逸 것은 獨逸語로, 英語 사용의 국가의 것은 英語로! 獨逸 것이나 伊太利 것이나... 모-든 것을 구지 英語로 읽으려 뎀비는 사람들 때문에 한 신문이것만 그가티 混亂스럽다.

七. 바라이에틔가 稀薄한 것

朝鮮文 신문은 흖이 無意味乾燥하다는 평을 免치 못한다. 「아직은 돈도 없고 기술도 부족하고...」 이렇게 말해너으면 고만이겟지만 讀者야 「어듸 거저 신문을 본다던가」한다. 讀者란 매우 까다롭기 노망 싀어미 가타서 자기 마음대로 불평을 외친다. 물론 그 전부에 귀를 기우리다가는 「사공이 만흐면 배를 山우로 끓어 간다」는 格으로 도리혀 뒤죽빡죽이 되겟지만 何如튼 朝鮮文신문은 바라이에틔가 稀蓮해서 大端히 단조롭다.

八. 誤報, 誤譯, 拙譯 etc

1. 大端한 誤報를 발견할 적이 가끔 잇다. 언젠가 XX日報 政治欄에 「쏘베-트」 事情이 記載되엿섯는데 그 글 첫머리에 「하르빈」서 발행되는 「자랴아」라는 露語紙를 당당하게 「쏘베-트, 로시야」 신문으로 取扱한 것을 보앗다. 露西亞人에 赤系, 白系가 잇는 것은 常識이하의 사실이며 「하르빈」의 「자랴아」紙는 白系露人의 反蘇신문이란 것도 한 개의 常識에 속하는 사실이다. 그것을 가지고 「쏘베-트, 로시야신문의 보도에 의하면 露國 內의 經濟的 窮乏은 甚極에 達하야 云云」으로 眞實性없시 記載되엿으니 그들에게는 적지 않은 문제이엇을게다.
2. 政治面 같은 데서 많은 誤譯을 發見한다.
XX日報서는 日前에 「關の山」를 「難關」이란 엉뚱한 誤譯으로 文脈을 通치 않게 해놓앗섯고 「ありかすれ」 「出來秋」＜79＞ 等 用語는 가끔 誤譯됨을 보앗다. 이것은 한 例에 지나지 않는다. 外報記事의 拙譯은 그 신문의 權威를 失墜케 함이 크다. 讀者로서는 좀 더 릐파인된 譯文이 그립다.

九. 小棒大式 殺人的 報導

僚友 X君의 家庭爭議를 하엿다. 家庭爭議란 누구나 다 하는 恒茶飯事다. 헌데 X君 부인이 일시적 興奮으로 「네꼬이라즈」를 먹엇다. 이 사건을 XX신문에서는 本名으로써 크게 報導한 까닭에 그들의 사회적 지위를 여지없이 失墜케 하엿다. 곳 殺人的 報導다! 이런 경우에 대대적으로 報導하는 것도 어떨까 하는데 况目 本名을 사용한다 함은 너무도 雅量이 없는 짓이 안일까? 그것이 무슨 그리 큰 「뉴-스, 밸류-」가 잇으며 또 사회적 문제가 되는가? 報導하지 말라 하면 新聞業을 말라 하는 말이겟으나 이런때는 가명을 써야 할 것이다. 僚友를 위해서 XX신문及 이러케도 雅量이 없는 짓에 抗議한다.
이밖에도
신문 자신의 반성과 비판이 업는 것
詩人作家의 文壇的 활동의 封鎖
邪道에 빠진 暴露主義
誇大한 自家營業廣告의 專橫
寫眞 製版技術의 低劣
編輯術, 活動能率 及 活動範圍의 低小
文字普及運動을 自家宣傳의 具에 供하는 느낌을 주는 것
地方欄 記事가 幼稚한 것
誤植이 많은 것
正義感이 薄弱한 것
社會面的 安價한 쎈틔멘탈리즘

醫師의 立場으로서 -醫專病院- 劉相奎
惡德醫師에 鐵槌貧者에 投藥을 拒絶-富者엔 治療遷延-
최근 경향을 통하야 악덕의사의 발호가 심한 까닭에 그 피해가 적지 않다고 한다. 그 예를 들면 돈이 없는 환자에게는 진찰과 투약을 의례히 거절하야 인도상으로 참아 하지 못할 운명을 짓게 하는 것이나 또는 돈이 있는 환자에게는 단시일에 완치할 병도 불쿠어 입원일자를 끄는 것이나 약을 일부러 맞지 않게 써서 시일을 길게 하는 등 그 태도는 참아 상상도 못할 일이 잇다 한다.
이것들의 악덕의사를 그대로 내버려 두면 예사로이 전긔와＜80＞ 같은 비인도적 일을 감행하겟음으로 경무국에서는 이 앞으로의 취체방침을 엄혹이 세웟다한다」 (昭和8년 11월 1일 東亞日報 제4640호 所載)
이것을 同紙가 「橫說緊說」에서 「裏書捺印」하여 曰
「이름이 仁術이라 博施濟衆을 標榜하는 神農의 遺業을 世道人心이 往古와 다른 지금에 그대로 잇을 수 없음은 이 또한 事勢當然이라. 酷評은 不當이러니와 事勢當然을 방패로 事理에 不當한 營利를 꾀할진대 이는 부당이득이 문제가 안이라. 이해를 떠난 人道上 문제 醫師諸公은 어떻다 하는뇨? 病因을 診斷하기 전에 貧富를 診斷하는 악습이 잇는가 없는가? 병자를 藥代의 원천을 삼아 치료의 遷延으로 收入을 느리는 악덕이 잇는가? 없는가? 없을 것이다-이것이 잇고야 語不成說 是可忍也론 熟不可忍? (中略) 仁術의 존엄을 위하야 醫師諸公은 一言이 잇을지어다. 當局의 의심을 反駁키 위하야 醫師諸公은 一證을 表할지어다」 (東亞日報 제4641호)

白雲莊 새장구 소리에 닭 우는 소리 들니든가? 白川行轉覇에 鎖骨은 얼마나 앞으든고? 「世道人心이 往古와 다른 지금에 또한 事勢當然이라. 酷評은 不當이려니와」 백만원 花代의 대부분이 그대네 폭케트에서 나옴이 안이라는 사실을 「신문의 尊嚴을 위하야 記者諸公은 一言이 잇을지어다. 讀者의 의심을 反駁키 위하야 記者諸公은 一證을 表할지어다」
嗚呼-「學生風紀問題」로 좌담회를 연지 대체 멫 날이며 청년의 장래를 警戒하여 사설을 쓰기 무릇 幾回던고-그대들을 향하야 붓을 드는내 도도혀 赦彦함을 禁키 어렵노라.

그런데 그대들은 무슨 事實-事實말이다-事實을 指摘하엿길내 「一言이 잇을지어다」고 挑戰을 하엿든가? 그대들이 얼마나 XXX에 충성스러운 것은 임이 알어 가상스럽게 생각하고 탄복하는지 오래거니와 다시 한번 「惡德醫師에 鐵槌」 云云의 기사를 읽어 보라. 「그 예를 들면」 누구드란 말인가. 「當局의 發表」라는 그대들의 聯隊旗下에 안이라. 증명할 수 없는 想像的 虛構의 사실을 羅列케 하는 그대들 所謂 「惡習」 「惡德」 이야말노 그대들의 所有가 안일가? 이에 그대들에게 돌녀 보내거니와 「當局의 의심을 反駁키 위하야」하고 「當局」의 跨下로 숨어버리는 비열한 행동! 이 「卑劣」이란 利子도 당연히 그대들의 所有라고 主張해야 可할 줄 믿는다.
다음날 그대들은 또 이러한 기사를 내엇다.
治療費 안낸다고 屍體를 안줘 하로반 만에 겨우 찾어 西大門署에 父母 歎願
사랑한 딸을 잃고 그 시체를 달내도 돈이 원수로 속히 찾어가지 못햇으니 이런 원통한 일이 또 잇겟소 하며 설원해 달나는 애소를＜81＞ 12일 오후 1시경에 서대문 경찰서에 찾어 와서 한 일이 잇다. 그는 교북동 70의 74호 한경섭(46)으로 딸 順子(5)가 우연히 감긔로 앓다가 10일 새벽부터 갑자기 더함으로 하는 수 없이 세부란쓰 병원에 데려갓든 바 위선 치료비를 37원 내라고 하여서 낼테니 살려만 달나고 애원하야 주사 한 대를 놓기는 하엿으나 드디어 죽고 말엇다 한다. 그래서 시체를 내달나고 하엿으나 전염병이라는 것으로 소독을 한 후 치료비를 가저 오지 안는 날에는 내줄 수 없다 하여 일본인 富樫을 보증인으로 세워 진단서를 받아 부청에서 매장 허가는 받엇으나 역시 치료비를 전제로 내주기를 거절하므로 할 수 없이 면식이 잇는 동병원에 출입하는 이의 담보로 드디어 만 하로 만인 11일 오후에 내어다 화장을 하엿다는 사실이라 한다. 이에 대하야 서대문 경찰서에서는 때마침 의사의 행위에 신경을 날카롭게 하고 잇음으로 충분이 그 책임의 소재를 밝히어 단호한 처단을 하리라 한다.

傳染病으로 不得已 못준 것 世富란스 當局 談
세부란쓰병원 當局에서는 이 문제에 대하야 다음과 같이 말하엿다.
「그런 일은 잇엇음니다. 병이 원래 지푸테리아라는 전염병인 관계로 그리 되엿고 치료비는 안받어도 좋지만은 그리 할 수는 없음니다. 37원 주사대금에 10원만 가저온다기에 그러라고 햇드니 가저온다 하고 가서는 아니 가저오고 하기에 그리 느진 것임니다」
-(8년 11월 13일 東亞日報 4642호)
그대들의 직업이 의사와는 因緣이 없는 일임에 個中에는 傳染病이 무엇인지 모를 사람도 잇을이라. 더욱이 傳染病患者 또는 傳染病으로 죽은 屍體를 어떻게 處置하는 것인지를 모른다고 하여도 그것은 허물할 일이 안일 줄 안다. 그러나 이 기사의 중심문제가 屍體에 잇고 문제되는 屍體가 傳染病으로 죽은 屍體가 안인가 말이다. 이제 다시 제목(미다시)을 읽어 보라. 만일에 다행(?)이 순자가 傳染으로 죽지를 안이하엿고 그러고 세부란쓰병원에서 단순히 「치료비 안낸다고 屍體를 안내줫다」면 아모리 僵屍를 放送局의 氣象通報式 高氣壓 襲來의 信號만으로 박게 報導할 수 없는 그대들의 일이라 할지라도 讀者들을 충동시키어 세브란쓰병원을 원망하게 하기에 충분하엿으리라. 써어찌타 생각하느뇨.
그대들의 沒常識은 부모의 탓도 잇으리라. 사회의 탓도 잇으리라. 또는 薄捀의 탓도 잇으리라. 그러나 그대들의 그 陰險하고도 陋劣한 心事 멘델 僧正이나 살엇으면 물어볼가? 왜 辱하기에만 급급한고?

조선 민중에게 불행(?)한 일이 발생되면 그대들은 率先하야 義憤을 感하고 눈물을 흘니는 듯하다. 몸이 뜨거워지든가?＜82＞ 그것은 감긔엿으리라. 피눈물이 나든가? 그것은 잉크엿으리라.
그대들은 말하리라-三南水災에 義捐한 금액이 비록 적다고 할지라도 그것은 「同族」을 위한 진정에서 나온 것이오. 關西風水害에 대한 그것이 많음은 형식에 지나지 못하는 것이라고. 오-그대들이여! 그러한 내용을 가진 형식일진대 하로라도 速키 「同族을 위하는 眞情」을 버려 주소서! 言實의 不同이 이러하매 그대들의 이른바 貧者를 위하야 혹은 病者를 위하야 함부로 퍼붓는 의사에 향한 惡談도 其實은 그대들 자신의 念푸리에 지나지 안는 것이다. 어째 그런고?

作夜 樂園洞에 大災 嬰兒가 火傷危篤 가난한 두 부부는 구원 청햇으나 病院마다 마저안줘
(前略) 진화된 뒤에야 영식이를 끄집어 왓는데 그때에는 임이 화상을 몸에 입어 생명이 위독한 지경이엇다. 두 내외는 숨이 넘어저 갈려고 하는 어린것을 반쯤 정신이 빠저서 (中略) 인사동과 락원동 일대의 병원의 문을 집집이 두다리고 응급수당을 비럿스나 모다 문을 굿게 닷고 받어주는 곳이 없엇다. (下略) (昭和9년 12월 13일 東亞日報 제4864호)
不道義, 沒人情!
「仁術」 面目安在 樂園洞病院에서 逐出 當한 火傷 可憐兒 遂絶命
(衛生主任談 及 通行人謀談 略) (朝鮮日報 제4865호 昭和9년 12월 14일)
筆者-이 신문을 손에 들 때 전신에 소름이 쪽 낓엇섯다. 그것은 의사가 고약하다는데서 보다도 또는 그대들의 의사에 대한 惡習을 미워서보다도 「세상이 이렇게도 무서워젓는가-」하는데서엿다. 讀者들도 상상하엿으리라. 굿게 다친 병원문 앞에 한 절반 타진 어린애를 안고 쩔쩔매는 두 내외의 모양을.
영식이의 죽엄을 못내 슲어 하거니와 그대들의 입은 어찌하여 저 가련한 영식이가 絶命하자 죽어버리고 만 영식이의 입과도 가치 다시 벌리려 하지 않는가? 그대들의 만일 眞情으로 영식이의 죽엄을 가련히 녁여서 「道義」를 부르짖고 「人情」을 찾으며 「仁術」을 咀呪하엿을진대 엇지하여 잇으면서 「逐出」하엿다는 의사를 指名紏彈하지 안는가? 신문마다 병원의 일흠이 區區한 것은 무엇을 의미하는가? 영식이는 임이 이 세상 어린이가 안이오. 설혹 「醫師」라는 스위치를 틀면 惡談만 쓰러나오게 된 두뇌의 所有者인 그대들이라 할지라도 年前에 筆說을 다하야 府民病院案을 讚美하엿고＜83＞ 其後 該病院이 생기매 가진 줄 風流로 宣傳을 해왓슨 즉 本院은 그만두고 分院만이라도 樂園洞 바로 잇섯으면 하는 생각은 못내 보겟는가? 그대들의 宣傳을 듯건댄 昨年(영식兒 火傷當한 해) 1년에 府民病院의 치료를 받은 환자가 10만 以上이라 하니 不幸할 사 그 10만 중에 우리 어린 영식君 하나 더 容納할 餘裕가 없엇든가? 좀더 그대들은 府民病院을 宣傳하라. 이제 한번만 더 힘을 주면 작년에는 有料患者가 겨우 7割밖에 못되엇지만 금년에는 10割에 찰지도 모르리라. 그리되면 鄭博士 吳博士가 그대네 社長은 그만두고 配達夫가 와도 底頭平身할지도 모르니?.

「醫業에 종사하는 者로서 병원의 求診을 거절함은 娼婦의 職業意識에도 不如한 바이며 또 그가 醫療代의 支拂能力을 疑懼함에 依한것이라 함은 旣히 登樓한 華容인 이상 無錢遊興으로 告訴할지언정 華客으로서의 處遇를 加하는 娼婦界에도 不及하는 바이라 할 수 잇다」 (每日申報社說 昭和9년 12월 18일 제9789호)
社說에도 품질에 등급이 잇는지는 모르지만 의사를 娼婦에 譬하는데 이르러서는 더 할 말이 없다. 다만 우리 朝鮮 사람에게 어찌하여 의사가 생겨낫든지 朝鮮 민중이 모다 그대들 갓다고 할진대 이것이야말노 「도야지에게 眞珠」를 던진 것이 안일가 한다. 참말 그대들은 往診料 낼적 보다 娼婦의 花代 낼 적이 더 유쾌하리라. 그대들의 생각같아서는 의사에게서 「仁術」이 떠난지 벌서 오랫스니 그것을 그냥 굴리지 말고 娼婦에게 獻納하는게 조치안을가 거저 잘난 藥價治療費 告訴할 것이 泰山같으나 이 기회에 그대들이 다시 한번 생각해 주기를 바랄뿐이다.
「今日의 의사는 衆人의 고통을 拔去하려함 보다는 기술을 賣喫함이 전적목표이어서 고심전념하는 바는 다만 기술을 高價로 賣售하고 代價의 難捧을 避하려는 그뿐이다. 代價를 支拂치 안이하는 限 또는 支拂할 능력이 疑問視되는 한 如何히 病苦를 訴하고 진료를 애원한다 할지라도 一眉를 動치 아니하며 代價가 厚하고 資産이 풍부한 者인 限 다만 下命의 遲함을 恨할 뿐인 상태이다. 此를 仁術이라 稱함은 너무나 仁術冒瀆하는 바이 甚한 者라 謂할 바 아닐가」 (每申社說 同上)
-(此間 2行 不得已 略)-
그대들은 의사를 욕하려고 들때이면 言必稱仁術이 으動첩則曰 仁術이니 대체 仁術이란 말은 욕할 때에 쓰자고 지어낸 말인가? 또는 그대들의 말하는 의미대로 돈을 안받으면 仁術이오 돈을 받으면 仁術이 안이라 하면 세상에 仁術 안일 것이 어대 잇겟는가?
돈을 안이 받고 목슴을 살녀주면 그것은 仁術에 「錦上添花」겟지 비로소 仁術이 되는 것은 안이다. 그러므로 의사로서 고칠 병을 고치지 못하면 그것은 仁術을 冒瀆하는＜84＞ 것이 될지 모르나 병을 고치고 報酬를 바라는 것은 결코 冒瀆이 안임을 그대들은 알어야 한다. 아모리 그대들이 資本家에게 길이 들엇다 할지라도 치료를 받을 수 없이 貧困한 사람의 그 貧困한 탓을 어찌 의사에게 돌니려 하며 貧困한 병자로 치료를 받도록 하면 어떻게 하여야 할 것도 알만하지 안은가?
「代價가 厚하고 資産이 豊한 者인 限 다만 下命이 遲함을」 云云의 말은 사실에 갓가울지나 의사를 責할 이유는 못된다. 의사가 모다 백만장자의 아들이오. 그러고 仁心을 가진 者가 아닌 이상 의사에게 大勢에 遲行하기를 요구하는 것은 도로혀 無禮한 일이다.

梧洞입 하나이 떠러지매 가을이 온 줄을 안다는 말이 잇지 안은가. 試驗的으로라도 「人事相談所」에 가서 안잠자기를 求해 보라. 따라서는 사람이 잇으며 따라서는 사람이 잇다면 그 사람이 그많은 사람 중에서 비교적이나마 똑똑한 사람인가? 의사로도 日本사람 많이 사는 지방으로 가서 開業하고저 하는 사람이 해마다 많아지는 경향이 잇다. 그들의 말을 드르면 「가난한 일본사람이 돈 많은 朝鮮사람보다 낫다」는 것이다.
神農氏 시대가 좋앗든지는 모르나 「仁術」이란 문자가 생겨날 적 時節의 의사는 모다 좋앗든지는 모르나 憧憬은 憧憬이오 현실이 안이다. 깨라-더퍼 놓고 惡談만 하는 것이 그대들의 使命이 안이다.
(以上에 「그대들」이라 함은 신문을 가르킴)

支局經營者로서 -OO日報 OO支局- 申O澈
「Oスグオクレ オクラヌト カミトメル」
지방에서 新聞支局을 경영해 본 사람으로서 이런 電報를 接해보지 않은 사람을 거의 없을 것이다. 이런 電報를 받는 날 그 支局은 사형선고를 당한 것이나 달음없다. 책임자는 金策 때문에 갈팡질팡하게 된다.
원래 지방의 新聞支局 경영이란 대도시는 몰으지만 戶數 불과 2,3천의 장ㅅ거리에서는 타산이 서지 않는 장사다.
겉허울이야 紙代의 4할5할 내지 6할까지 해주는 신문사까지 있으니 웬간하면 珠盤이 맞을 것 같지만 아모리 본전이 홀가(安價)인들 독자가 대금을 지불치 않는데야 어찌하랴. 그전보다 紙代收金의 성적이 훨신 좋와젔다는 近年에도 불과 百餘되는 部數를 갖이고도 일년에 5,6백원 以上을 지워놓기는 보통이다. 支局을 경영하는 사람이 財力이 넉넉하고 또 신문사업에 대한 無條件한 犧牲的 정신이 있기 전에야 代金 收金이＜85＞ 잘 않되니 送金이 늦어질 것은 부득이한 事勢가 않인가?
本社에서는 이런 사정을 아는지 몰으는지 送金이 조금만 늦어저도 依例히 上記와 같은 電報를 날려 보낸다. 그리하야 卽時로 없는 돈에 東貸西取해서라도 送金을 해야 망정이지 만일 그렇지 못하는 날이면 그 이튼날은 기필코 신문찾으러 갔든 配達夫가 븬손을 들고 풀이 죽어서 돌아온다.
긔맥히는 것은 둘째 문제요 支局責任者는 讀者들의 신문督促 때문에 爲先 避身을 해야 한다. 그 전에는 讀者의 催促이 있어도 押收를 당한 모양이라고 하로쯤은 얼렁뚱땅하고 모면할 수가 있엇지만 只今 같이 押收가 듬으러진 때에는 아무런 핑게꺼리가 없다. 그저 避身밖에 上策이 없다.
送金도 그전같이 社의 물질적 기초가 빈약할 때에는 몰으겟지만 지금은 그래도 몇십만원의 당당한 주식회사들이요. 또 남이야 아무랬건 東京, 大阪서 건너오는 廣告料 덕에 이익배당까지는 못해도 손해만을 않보고 있는 형편에 단돈 몇십원에 高利貸金業者 以上의 그 苛酷手段으로 그래도 自己社의 關係者를 衆人앞에 망신을 식힘은 너무나 甚하지 않은가. 더욱이 그것이 전에 기초가 微弱할 때 보다 近來의 기초가 鞏固해진 후 붙어가 더 甚하니 이 무슨 怪異한 일일가?
支局經營者로서 本社의 苛酷된 處理 때문에 곤란을 당하는 것이야 이밖에도 또 기사문제가 있지만 이것은 누구나가 다 짐작하겠기에 그만두고 요새에 또 새로운 難事가 한아 더 생겼으니 그것은 本社經營*業의 광고문제다. 아무리 自家의 宣傳이라도 정도가 있는 것이지 한달에 全頁 혹은 半頁를 몇 回식 濫用하는 것은 너무 염치없는 일이 안일가. 그것도 別頁로 한다면 無關이겟지만은 家庭欄이나 學藝欄을 희생하야 광고를 하니 本社에서는 그렇게 해갖이고 광고에 效果가 나서 잡지가 많이 팔려 좋을런지는 몰으나 제일 곤란을 당하기는 애꾸진 支局뿐이다. 責妄을 듯는 것쯤은 좀 낳은 편이요. 심지어는 그 꼴이 보기 싫다고 購讀을 중지하는 독자까지 있다. 그렇다고 독자들을 나물할 아무 이유가 없다. 그것도 딴 잡지의 광고같으면 廣告料를 받기 위하여 하는 노릇이닛가 독자들도 黙過할런지 몰으지만 이건 購讀料는 독자에게 負擔식히면서 請치도 않는 自家商品의 광고다. 어느 누가 불평이 없을 것인가.
그러나 그것보다 더 곤란한 것은 インチキ광고의 揭載다. 신문에 揭載한 インチキ광고 때문에 見欺當한 독자야 不知其數겟지만 그런 독자의 분푸리를 당하는 것도 애꾸진 支局뿐이다. 만만하다는 것보다도 本社는 멀리 있고 支局은 갓가히 있으니 쉰히 支局을 상대하는 수 밖에 그런 독자를 대할쩍 마다 如干 딱하지 않다. 損害를 물어줄 수도 없고 우리 신문이 좋으니 읽어 달라고 懇願한 터수에 視而不見할 수도 없고 어떤 때는 내가 新聞支局을 경영하는 것만 不察이지 하고 八字 恨歎까지 나온다. 이런줄을 그야말로 아는지 몰으는지＜86＞ 本社에서는 여전히 インチキ 광고를 揭載하고 있다. 아무리 돈에 눈이 띄운다 하기로 독자는 굀¸만두고라도 지방에 있는 支局을 위해서라도 그것만은 고만둘 良心이 없을가?

讀者의 一人으로서 -京城市內- 鄭薰模
「알니고자, 알고자」하는 것은 신문과 독자라 하겟습니다. 社會公器로 민중의 親友로써 매일 발행하는 신문은 무엇이든지 「알니고저」 노력하며 일반독자들은 페지페지에서 무엇이든지 「알고자」하고 잇는 것입니다. 이러한 立場에서 평상시에도 그러켓지만 엇더한 突發事件이 발생할 때는 명백히 신문과 독자 心境을 엿볼 수가 잇는 것입니다. 신문으로써는 좀더 자세히 알니고저 힘쓰고 잇스며 독자는 좀더 알고저 초조한 마음으로 기다리고 잇는 것이 안임니가?.
그러고 신문을 보는 사람을 통트러 독자라고 하지만 한 신문의 독자를 分析해 보면 政治面 독자, 經濟面 독자, 社會面 독자, 家庭面, 學藝面 等等 各面의 독자가 잇습니다. 그래서 各面의 독자는 날마다 신문을 대할 때에 먼저 자기가 취미를 부친 면을 훌터 보게 되여 거긔에서 무엇을 찻고 잇는 것입니다.
이와 가티 알고저 애쓰는 독자를 가진 알니고저 노력하는 신문에서 때때로 사회의 公器인 것과 민중의 親友이라는 것도 忘却하며 알고저 하는 독자에게 모든 새로운 「뉴쓰」를 제공하지 안코 全面을 허비해 가면서 자긔 신문의 돈자랑을 하며 또는 20錢짜리 잡지를 팔고저 잡지광고를 집어넛는 것은 여간 불평이 안임니다. 이 얼마나 讀者層을 무시하는 행동이겟슴니까? 이 점을 신문경영자로는 깁히 생각할 바라 하겟습니다.
그리고 各面에 잇서 불평이라면 불평, 희망이라면 희망은 첫재로 政治面에 잇서서 한 인물에 대하야 기사가 매일 記載될 때에 번번이 寫眞을 집어 넛는 것은 도리여 독자에게 실증을 줍니다. 차라리 날마다 독자에게 常識을 엇도록 「政治問題解說」을 간단이 써 주웟스면 합니다.
다음으로 社會面은 雜報面이라고 하겟습니다만은 朝鮮에 잇서서는 朝鮮의 政治面이라고 말할 수 잇습니다. 왜 그러냐 하면 朝鮮人의 생활이며 사회의 動向을 이 面에 記載하게 되는 까닭이라 하겟습니다. 社會面의 기사는 大槪로 警察署에서 어든 바 미끼를 실니게 되는데 적은 문제는 모르겟지만 社會團體와 社會人에 대한 「위신」문제까지 이르게 되는 문제는 警察署에서 어든 바만을 그대로 記載치 말고 좀 자세히 조사를 하여서 記載하는 것이 조흘 줄 생각합니다. 과거에 잇서서 그 團體와 그 인물의 業績을 論功하고 오늘날 소소한 문제로 조사 -(제69頁로 續)-
(제87頁의 續)
하지 안코 경솔하게 실린다는 것은 자체가 자체를 모욕하는 일이라 하겟습니다. 만일 너나할 것 없이 그릇된 일이 잇다면 記載하는 신문이라면 왜 자본가 밑에서는 그 위력을 발휘하지 못하고 도리여 한갓 『노예』가 되여 전화 한 마듸로 못 실니는 추악한 일이 얼마나 만습니가. 그러고 신문사 중요인물에 대한 아름답지 못한 일은 얼마나 만습니가. 만일 어듸까지 사회의 公器라면 공사를 가리지 말고 전부 다 독자 압헤 폭로 식혀야 할 것입니다.
그러고 지방면에 잇서서는 지방에서 발생하는 『뉴쓰』 이외에 지방지국에서는 지방정세를 時時로 소개해 주웟스면 합니다. 끗흐로 가정면에 잇서 희망할 바는 가정면 편집자로써는 자기도 알지 못하며 번역해서 발표하는 맛지도 안는 『화장법』이라든지 또는 쓸데 업는 유행품을 소개하야 가정부인의 마음 흔드러 노치 말고 가정생활의 개선이라든지 보육법과 아동 지도방침을 지시해 주며 아동란을 확장하야 兒童讀物을 만히 실어 주웟스면 합니다. 그러고 이외도 여러 가지로 불평도 잇스며 희망할 점도 만습니다 마는 지면관계로 여긔에 끗치고저 합니다. (끝)＜69＞
＜87＞
＜76-87, 69＞