Magazine Title: 삼천리 제13권 제7호
Publication Date: 1941년 07월 01일
Article Title: 漢陽附近名山紀行 (Travelogue of Famous Mountains near Hanyang)
Author: 車相瓚 (Cha Sangch'an); 李秉岐 (Yi Pyŏnggi); 柳光烈 (Yu Kwangnyŏl); 崔鳳則 (Ch'oe Pongch'ik)
Article Type: 기행문 (Travelogue)

A Travelogue of Famous Mountains near Hanyang
A Record of Puk'ansan

Cha Sangch'an

Since ancient times, it has been famously said, "Namhan in Spring, Puk'an in Autumn." This is because Namhansan is renowned for its spring scenery, and Puk'ansan for its autumn scenery. More than anything, this is because Namhan is famous for azaleas (躑躅花) in spring, and Puk'an is famous for its autumn foliage.<114> However, Puk'an is not only about autumn foliage; its various famous flowers and unusual birds in spring, its secluded valleys, clear springs and rocks in summer, its magnificent snowy landscape in winter, and its famous temples and ancient relics are all well-equipped. It is by no means comparable to Namhan, which, as a solitary fortress, has inflicted upon us the shame of ages.

Puk'an has quite a few large and small mountains, but the representative one among them is Samgak, the guardian mountain of the 500-year capital of the Chosŏn dynasty, Hanyang. The name Samgak (Three Horns) comes from the fact that the three peaks, Insu, Paegun, and Man'gyŏng, stand majestically facing each other like three horns. It is also called Hwasan or Hwaak. Insupong is the primary peak of Samgaksan. Its four sides seem carved purely from stone, soaring steeply into the air. On its northeast side, a rock rests upon the peak's back, resembling a person carrying a child, hence its nickname Puaak (Child-Carrying Peak). There's also a geomantic theory (風水說) that because of this, scholars preparing for the state examinations during the 500 years of Chosŏn carried their bundles (褓짐) on their backs. This is also the very place where, in the early Three Kingdoms period, King Onjo, the founder of Paekche, together with his older brother Piryu, came south to Hansan, climbed Puaak, and surveyed the land for a suitable place to live. Paegunbong is west of Insupong and is the highest peak of Puk'ansan. Before ascending the throne, Yi T'aejo once climbed this peak and composed an imperial poem:
"Pulling myself up by vines onto the green peak, / A hermitage (or relying on a pavilion) lies high amidst the white clouds. / If I were to take all within my sight as my land, / How could Ch'u, Yüeh, and Chiangnan not be contained?"
Because of this, the high platform was subsequently named Paegundae (White Cloud Terrace). Man'gyŏngdae is south of Paegundae. Since Yi T'aejo ordered the monk Muhak to climb this peak and observe the physiognomy of Hanyang as the capital, it was renamed Kukmangbong (Capital-Viewing Peak). Also, west of Man'gyŏngdae (Kukmangbong) is a high peak called Nojŏkpong. It is named so because the peak's shape resembles a grain stack (露積덤이). In the writings of Yi Chŏnggwi, a famous prime minister and great writer of King Sŏnjo's time:
"Climbing to the very top of Nojŏkpong and looking out, the Southwest Sea stretches far and blue, and in the floating clouds and setting sun, the silver boundary is vast, and even when one strains one's eyes, the view is boundless. Among the identifiable features are the mountains Surak, Ach'a, Kwanak, Ch'ŏnggye, Ch'ŏnma, Song'ak, and Sŏnggŏ, all clustered around like hills and mounds. Through the opening of Wŏlgyehap (Moon Stream Gorge), turbulent waters surge westward, and the entire area of the Hansu (Han River) winds like unfurled white silk, embracing the royal capital (王都). Distant peaks and scattered islets (嶼) hide and reappear among the clouds. The million houses of the capital city are close<115> but not clearly visible; only the smoke from cooking fires seen beneath one's feet (脚底) unfolds like a living painting. What appears like tiny snail horns (螺鬢) through the clouds is likely Chungnam Mountain. (Abridged = Paraphrase of a passage from Master Wŏlsa's original text)"
... This account of climbing the peak describes the scene viewed from atop Nojŏkpong. This peak was once much higher than it is now, but its height was significantly reduced after collapsing twice, once in the 2nd year of King Yejong of Koryŏ and again in the 2nd year of King Kongmin. It is said that in the 34th year of King Sŏnjo, it also rumbled loudly for a time, alarming the residents of the capital. Other notable peaks include Pohyŏnbong, Munjubong, and Pibong. Pohyŏnbong is said to be where King Sejo tested his courage by racing with his royal brothers. Munjubong, west of Pohyŏnbong, has the famous Munjugul (Munju Cave) and Munjuam (Munju Hermitage) below it. In the cave, there are inscriptions by *Su and the loyal minister Nam Chŏngnyŏn (After Duke Nam died for his country, the monk Posim carved the characters, and Master of the Academy Yi Ch'ŏnbo wrote the record). Munjuam presents a grand spectacle with a stone statue of Munsu (Manjushri) and displays of the Five Hundred Arhats. Pibong got its name because King Chinhŭng of Silla erected a boundary stele there during his northern tour (16th year of his reign). The line "King Hŭng's northern hunt, mountains and rivers quiet" in a poem about Namsan by the modern poet Hwang Nokch'a refers to this fact.

Anyone discussing Puk'ansan cannot omit the Puk'ansan Fortress. This fortress was originally the Puk'ansan County of Koguryŏ. King Onjo, the founder of Paekche, seized it and first built a fortress (14th year of his reign, Pyŏngjin = 2nd year of Jianping era of Emperor Ai of Han), calling it Namp'yŏngyang Fortress. Later, during the reign of King Kŭnch'ogo (26th year, Sinmi), the capital was moved there. However, in the 21st year of King Kaero (Ŭlmyo), King Changsu of Koguryŏ besieged and attacked it. The situation became dire, so the king abandoned the fortress and fled, only to be caught and killed by the Koryŏ army. Thereafter, it remained a ruined fortress for a long time.
Later, during the reign of King Hyojong of the Chosŏn Dynasty, the king planned the so-called Northern Expedition to avenge the humiliation suffered at Namhan. He issued a decree to Song Siyŏl (pen name Uam), a famous minister at the time, to build this fortress as a secure place for national defense and also to build fortifications up to the entrance of Chojisŏdong (now the village beyond Segŏmjŏng). However, due to lack of financial resources and manpower, they could not dare to start. Later, during the reign of King Sukchong, discussions between the king and his ministers were frequent from the early years. Finally, in the 2nd month of the 37th year of his reign (Sinmyo), the decision was made. Construction began in the 4th month of that year and was completed in the 9th month. The materials used during the construction included 16,381 sŏk of rice, 767 tong,<116> 12 p'il of cotton cloth (木), 34,799 ryang of coins (錢), 2,785 kŭn of quality iron (正鐵), 229,180 kŭn of raw iron (薪鐵), 9,638 sŏk of coal (석탄), 14,859 sŏk of charcoal (목탄), 2,002 tong of raw arrowroot vine (生葛), 4 tong of fine hemp cloth (升布), and 900 small hats (小帽子). Converting this to current prices would amount to a considerable sum.
The circumference of the fortress wall is 7,620 po. From the north side of the water gate to Yong'am (Dragon Rock), 2,292 po were built by the Hullyŏn Togam (Military Training Command). From the south side of Yong'am to Pohyŏnbong, 2,821 po were built by the Kŭmwiyŏng (Forbidden Guard Division). From the south side of the water gate to Pohyŏnbong, 2,507 po were built by the Ŏyŏngch'ŏng (Royal Guard Command).
The height of the wall is 14 ch'ŏk at its highest on flat ground and 10 ch'ŏk at its highest on the mountain. There are 14 gates, 3 command posts (將臺), 143 battlements (城廓), 26 ponds (城池), 99 wells (城井). The temporary palace (行宮) has 28 kan (rooms) in the inner quarters (內殿) and 28 kan in the outer quarters (外殿). Besides these, warehouses (倉庫) and barracks (留營) were all fully equipped. Within the fortress, 11 temples were established: Chung'hŭng, Nojŏk, Sŏam, Kyŏnghŭng, Kungnyŏng, Wŏn'gak, Puwang, Pogwang, Poguk, and Yong'am. These temples housed monk commanders (僧將, including one Great General who also served as the Supreme Commander of the Eight Provinces, 八道都摠攝), namely a Great General, Central Army Commander, Left and Right Special Generals, Thousand-man Commanders, Left and Right Military Affairs officers, Training Officers, Flag Officers, Warehouse Supervisors, and other monk officials, as well as 11 head monks (首僧, in addition to the 11 monk commanders) and 350 righteous monks (義僧), who were responsible for defending the fortress.

A Trip to Tobongsan

Yi Pyŏnggi

Fearing I would be late for the promised time, I hurried with Sŏngnam to Tonggyŏngsŏng Station, but no one else had arrived. As we waited, Mr. Ku, Ch'ŏngjŏng, In'gok, Tugye, and Ch'ŏllae arrived. The departure time was already imminent. Still hoping more might come, we lingered in the waiting room until two minutes before.<117> We expected the train car to be very crowded due to the recent increase in passengers, but it was rather sparse. We occupied one car to ourselves. I gazed blankly at the suburban scenery for a while, then was drawn by Ch'ŏllae into reading excerpts from the Veritable Records that had been censored, marking punctuation. In no time, we reached Ŭijŏngbu. We all disembarked.
First, we went to a restaurant and satisfied our hunger for lunch (點心療飢) with ribs (갈비) and medicinal wine (藥酒). The ribs were tough but tasty. Indeed, its reputation is well-deserved. Even those who couldn't drink alcohol didn't refuse a glass because of the ribs. We all emerged with flushed faces. 3:30 PM. The sky was quite overcast with a threat of rain. Worried about getting wet, we walked along the path through the fields, chatting. We crossed a dry stream filled only with sand, passed through a village, went over a hill, saw a mountain spirit shrine (山神堂), found the path again, and entered a valley.
The deep, winding valley had fine water and fine stones – stones gleaming like jade, gurgling waterfalls and rapids, deep blue pools (쏘). And on both sides, dense green shade and fragrant grass – walking here, I felt reluctant to lift each footstep. Turning a narrow corner, we saw a dilapidated tiled house among old trees. This was Hoeryongsa Temple. In front was the stream, surrounded by mountains, and right on the slope of the peak rising behind it were the cave where Yi T'aejo is said to have prayed and the cave where Master Muhak lived. This is legend, but when T'aejong, T'aejo's fifth son, plotted against the crown prince Pang Sŏk at the time and killed the meritorious subject Chŏng Tojŏn, T'aejo became greatly angered, abdicated the throne to his second son, Chŏngjong, and left for his old residence in Hamhŭng. T'aejong, immediately after receiving the abdication from Chŏngjong, frequently sent envoys to T'aejo, requesting his return. When T'aejo suddenly shot them dead, he finally returned due to the earnest pleas of Pak Sun and Sŏng Sŏngnin. The entire government went out to meet T'aejo as far as the place now called Ŭijŏngbu. The name Ŭijŏngbu is said to have originated from this event, and Hoeryongsa Temple is said to have become T'aejo's designated prayer temple at that time. However, besides this legend, not much is known about the history of this temple, except for one poem by Chang Hon from the *P'ung'yo Samsŏn* (Three Selections of Folk Ballads):
"The pond moon casts cold light on the trees, / The mountain bell tolls, closing the gate early. / The old, detached monk, / Rests all evening at the cloud's root."
This scene is different from what we see now. A thorny fence surrounds it, a sign prohibiting entry is posted, and a middle-aged novice monk (僧竪子) acts as the abbot. He was busy conducting a Buddhist ceremony (齋) and didn't even notice us entering. We sat on a rock in the front yard and rested for about half an hour.<118>
We crossed the stream in front, went along the bank, crossed again to the right, and entered a secluded valley. Then crossed again to the left and climbed up a valley lush with miscellaneous trees. Rain started to fall. It grew heavier. Not a single mountain bird flew, mountain grasses tangled above our knees, and the slope became increasingly steep. Our breath grew short, and our legs heavy. We barely reached the ridge crest. We took out wet snacks, ate them, rested our legs a bit, and then climbed onto the ridge, where a small pass appeared. There are two paths from Hoeryongsa: the one we just took, and another that follows the ridge crest up to this pass. I came that way six years ago too. The guide then was the 78-year-old Elder Yŏn'ŭn. While the entire group struggled, the old master was composed and boasted of his health. I recall that time again. There was no rain like this then. We moved through the dim pine forest, the smell of decaying leaves filling the air. Everyone was silent. We traversed a slope and descended, reaching a lettuce patch, and beyond it was Mangwŏlsa Temple. We entered through the back gate. How quiet it was. We put down our luggage on the veranda of the main hall (法堂) and sat down. A student monk (學人) came out of a room. The day was ending, and the rain kept falling steadily. We asked if we could stay the night. The student monk said the abbot was away, the kitchen manager (供養主) had run off, so it was impossible, and told us to go elsewhere. We endured and pleaded again, but he wouldn't listen. We gathered in front of the hearth fire of the guest room to the right, drying our clothes, and discussed. Finally, Ch'ŏllae presented his name card and negotiated, successfully obtaining consent. We entered the meditation room (禪房) to the left. We unpacked our bags (囊橐), brewed and drank grain tea (穀茶), and had our meal (供養) in the main hall. They said the meditation room hadn't been used until today and had over-stoked the fire. It was stiflingly hot, but we didn't catch colds.
We awoke to the chirping of birds. Clouds billowed up from the mountain foot, and a light rain drizzled down. If it had cleared, we could have seen the Han River and the sunrise, I thought, stepping into the courtyard. It wasn't just the towering peaks behind, the firmly embracing Blue Dragon and White Tiger ridges, the ancient pines and strange rocks scattered here and there, or the ever-changing clouds and mist that made Tobong's scenery superb. Among the mountains near the capital (京山), there could be no place like this. Sŭngga, Sammok, and Taesŏng offer wide views but lack this beauty; Chin'gwan and Pong'ŭn are secluded but not this elegant. I felt a poetic mood stir within me for no reason and wandered about. After breakfast, Sŏngnam copied from a Jiaqing era edition (嘉慶板) of the *Chillyŏn Chip* (Collection of True Words), while we chatted idly. The rain stopped only around lunchtime. Groups of hikers started arriving, mostly young men and women. They caroused loudly with beer and popular songs.<119> We took a photo in front of the main hall, crossed the pass to the right, saw the stone pagoda of Hyegŏ, said to be the temple's founder (開祖), and crossed another pass through the forest. We saw the Mandŏl Pojŏn (Full Moon Treasure Hall), a cave hermitage clinging precariously beneath the imposing Manjangbong peak. A man who looked like an errand boy worked in the kitchen, two girls fetched water, one woman decocted medicine, another woman peered at us through a glass window, and up on a rock, lady's slipper orchids (개부랄꽃, Cypripedium), a type of orchid (蘭科植物, 敦盛草), bloomed dark red. We asked for water, drank it, and turned back. Crossing the pass we had looked down from earlier, a woman with a child was gathering wild greens (나무를 뜯으며), remarking that even the 취나물 (a type of aster) wasn't growing well this year, glancing at us occasionally. In'gok and I dug up some humus (浮黑土) for planting orchids and carried it as we sought out Ch'ŏnjuksa Temple. Nearby, two or three women loitered, picking flowers, while a monk shaved his head (面刀) in the main hall. This temple is said to have been built using materials from the dismantled Yŏngguksa Temple, but it is quite dilapidated. The arrowroot vines (다래넌출) that used to twine in front are gone, and only a couple of magnolia trees (木蓮) remain, their still clear and lovely flowers emitting a unique fragrance. The site of this temple is too narrow, but it is still a pure realm (淨界). With steep peaks (峻峯) behind and cliffs (斷崖) in front, it is indeed a place difficult to violate. However, because Ch'ŏnjuk and Mangwŏl are perched high on the mountainside, making them hard to climb, it seems few poets and scholars of old visited them, so their names rarely appear in traditional poetry and prose collections. Before I came, I too had heard that Ch'ŏnjuk and Mangwŏl were very rugged and difficult to ascend. In times when people feared such paths, Mangwŏl and Ch'ŏnjuk had no choice but to remain hidden. Even now, the reason these temples are cherished is that they are somewhat distant from Seoul. If they had been closer to Seoul, they would have long since become secularized.
We descended a steep path (峻急) for a while; the evening star slanted over the mountain peak. Following the valley continuously, we reached gradually gentler terrain. Two valley streams merged and flowed together. To the left was a secluded basin (都局) where pillar bases (柱礎) and an earthen platform (土壇) remained at the edge of a rice field – this was the site of Tobong Sŏwŏn (道峯書院). Originally the site of Ningguksa Temple, the academy was built in the 6th year of King Sŏnjo and named Yŏnggok Sŏwŏn (靈谷書院), later changed to Tobong Sŏwŏn. This academy enshrined Cho Chŏngam (靜庵) and Song Uam (尤庵). It was abolished (毁廢) in the 8th year of King Kojong. To the northeast is the ancestral burial mountain (墓山) of the Sŏnjo-era poet Yu Hŭigyŏng (pen name Ch'on'ŭn, 村隱). Because the water and rocks (水石) were beautiful, Ch'on'ŭn frequently visited, composed many poems, and intended to live here but couldn't. Instead, he commissioned the painter Yi Chŭng to paint the *Imjangdo* (Painting of the Forest Villa) and received poems and prefaces from various gentlemen of the time, creating a large scroll.
"Evening mist in the empty forest, green and hazy, / The sound of a gorge stream reaches the stone gate. / Mountain rain just stopped, the mossy path slippery, / Helped home drunk amidst magnolia blossoms."<120>
This is Ch'on'ŭn's poem about Ninggukdong. This scene is just like what we see now. We went to a place with fine water and rocks, where the seven characters "光風霽月泉翁書" (Written by Kwangp'ung Chewŏl Ch'ŏn'ong - Yi Chae, pen name Toam, 陶庵) were inscribed, washed our feet, gathered rotten branches to cook rice and grill meat, and finished the cherished bottles (of liquor). Though not as drunk as Ch'on'ŭn, we were extremely cheerful.
Below this is a village with stone walls (石壁) and pools (쏘). The villa Ch'imsedaejŏng (枕瀨亭) belonging to Cho Simam (趙心庵 - Cho Tusun, 趙斗淳) used to be there, but now it has become someone's garden (園林). A new road has been diverted, and a wire fence (鐵絲) erected. Isn't this also ruining the scenery (殺風景)? We passed through the village, took the fork in the road, and headed towards Ch'angdong Station. It was already about 8 PM.

The Beacon Hill, Kobongsan

Yu Kwangnyŏl

The time is early summer. The old poem line, "Green shade and fragrant grass surpass the time of flowers," refers to this season. Near Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul), there are quite a few places suitable for strolling. Many places call to strollers, either as famous scenic spots or historical sites.
Since other places are already quite "popular" (포퓰라), I intend to introduce one place that has not yet come to light.
It is Kobongsan, reachable by taking the Kyŏngŭi Line for about 45 minutes (regular train), getting off at Ilsan Station, and climbing for 20 to 30 minutes.
On top of the mountain, the ground is leveled flat and covered with fine turf, suitable for sitting and relaxing. To the south, the Han River flows like a white ribbon, and to the northwest, countless lesser peaks and foothills bow towards Song'ak mountain as a boundary. In the fields, farmers in white clothes leisurely plow the paddies, and on the ridges of dry fields, women wearing scarves can be seen gathering wild greens. It's pleasant to spread a mat on the fine turf and pour a cup of wine brought along, or to unpack prepared tea and snacks and set up a small feast.
Not only is the scenery thus beautiful,<121> but there are also considerable historical traces. This vicinity was the Talsŏng County of the Koguryŏ period. At that time, the peninsula had the three kingdoms of Koguryŏ, Paekche, and Silla contending for supremacy. It is said that King Anjang of Koguryŏ, in his youth, whispered sweet nothings with a beauty of the Han clan. The beauty raised a beacon fire on this mountain top to welcome King Anjang. Due to this origin, it was first called Kobongsan (高烽山, High Beacon Mountain) and later came to be called Kobongsan (高峰山, High Peak Mountain).
Also, according to tales passed down by elders, troops under Katō Kiyomasa (淸正) camped on this mountain during the Imjin War (壬辰兵亂), but no written records remain. However, the flattened shape on the mountaintop clearly shows traces of a beacon platform (烽燧臺).
A beacon platform served the combined function of modern lookout posts (哨戒) and signal transmission (傳信). To constantly guard against foreign enemies, the peninsula built such beacon platforms on mountaintops. When foreign enemies invaded or some major national event occurred, torches (홰불) were lit on the mountain to issue an alarm (警報), similar to how a lookout blows a siren today. Reflecting on how many times the warning fires (警火) for grave national crises were lit on this mountaintop, one cannot help but feel moved.
After enjoying the mountaintop, if you cross over to the other side, there is a small temple called Man'gyŏngsa at the foot of the mountain. The saying from old texts, "Desolate smoke rises from an old temple, the evening bell tolls mournfully," manifests itself right before your eyes. Strollers who lack lunch preparations (中火準備) may ask for a meal at this temple.
In Koyang, at Pyŏkchegwan, is the site where Kobayakawa Takakage and Tachibana Muneshige routed the Ming army during the Bunroku Campaign (文祿役). Nearby is the tomb of Ch'oe Yŏng, who met his unfortunate end harboring immense resentment after attempting continental expansion in late Koryŏ. Haengju is famous for Kwŏn Yul's victory site (勝戰蹟). Similarly, this Kobongsan is not only suitable for a day's stroll, but also, having climbed this mountain many times during my boyhood, I draft this introduction by tracing back memories from 30 years ago.<122>

A Visit to Kwanaksan Mountain

Ch'oe Pongch'ik

"Kwach'ŏn's Kwanaksan" is a place famed even in folk songs. There's a story about a Chosŏn king whose fish dish arrived too burnt. He called the royal cook (숙수) and scolded him (꾸중),
"Hey! Look here! You should grill the side dish over a distant fire; isn't this too burnt!"
The next morning, the fish on the breakfast table was completely raw. The king, dumbfounded, asked,
"Hey! Look here! Last night the fish was too burnt, but why is it so raw this time!"
"Yes, Your Majesty! Since you said it should be cooked over a distant fire, I cooked it all night over the fire on Kwanaksan Mountain!"
Kwanaksan, famous even through such wordplay (何如턴 말속), must be a considerably fine mountain to be talked about (膾煮) through songs and stories, past and present.
One morning, with several old friends, I got off at the tram terminus across Nodŭl Ferry. It was a trip to Kwanaksan, frequented by hikers (踏至) in all four seasons. To the west, on the low summit of Ch'oasan Mountain, whose neck was severed by the absolute authority of the new road (新作路) and transportation network, the tombs of the Six Martyred Ministers (死六臣墓), who served loyally during the reign of the young King Tanjong, lie desolate. Without even a single shrine hall remaining, only small stelae (碣) mark the graves on the bleak grassy mounds – the tombs of contemporary eminent scholars (碩士) like Yi Kae, Pak P'aengnyŏn, Sŏng Sammun, and others come to mind. Along with them, a couple of their sijo poems:
"If this body dies and dies again, what shall it become? / On Pongnae Mountain's highest peak, a tall, flourishing pine. / When white snow fills heaven and earth, I shall stand green alone."
(Sŏng Sammun)
"The candle burning inside the window, from whom did it part, / That it sheds tears down its side, unaware its core is burning? / That candle is like me, unaware its core is burning."
(Yi Kae)
Crossing the pass over the Six Ministers' tombs, the Norangjin Ch'ungsa (Loyalty Shrine), still standing and gazing upon the sorrowful Han River, also comes to mind. This shrine commemorates Pak T'aebo. During the reign of the fickle King Sukchong, when he favored Chang Hŭibin and deposed the innocent Queen Min (閔中殿), Pak T'aebo offered loyal remonstrance (忠諫), suffered cruel punishment (酷刑), and was banished. Passing Nodŭl, he encountered a virtuous female servant (婢子) with whom he had spent only one night in his youth following his father's command ("A great man does not incur the resentment of women and children"). A few steps later, he died (殉職허였던) in his sedan chair from the effects of the torture. Later, the remorseful (悔悟) King Sukchong, on the day he reinstated Queen Min, asked, "Where has T'aebo gone? If T'aebo were alive,<123> how happy he would have been today?" Deeply regretting his past mistake, he investigated Pak T'aebo's secret burial (暗葬), ordered a grand reburial (厚葬), and erected that loyalty shrine (祀堂) there. The shrine remains steadfastly, evoking events from 300 years ago. As a side note (一言), on the morning after Pak T'aebo's shrine was completed (落成), a beautiful woman (一美人) was found hanging from the end of a rafter. This was the servant girl from the one-night encounter (一夕同衾), who had appealed (呼召) to the Blue Heaven (靑天) for T'aebo's vindication (怨풀림). When her wish was granted, she took her own life (殉死). How can this noble death (갸륵한 그 주검) not be a part of an anecdote (逸話)?
On long days like these, leaving early in the morning, one can cross the Han River, stop by the story-laden summit of Ch'oasan, just one *majang* (about 109 meters) from the Norangjin tram terminus, and still have ample time for the Kwanaksan trip without hindrance.
Descending past the Six Ministers' Stele standing tall on the roadside hill, crossing the new road between Yŏngdŭngp'o, turning towards Moktongjŏng, passing Sangdojŏng, going above Pak Chegung's village, one passes through Pongch'ŏnni T'aptong. Years ago (왕년에), visiting T'aptong by chance, I observed a five-story pagoda, missing a couple of stories, sitting majestically (鎭座) in front of a thatched house. Noticing the inscription "Kang Kamch'an Nangsongdae" (姜邯瓚落星臺) on the pagoda's surface (塔面), I was startled and asked a village elder (村老) about its history (來歷). He said this was the birthplace of the famous general (名將) Kang Kamch'an, who, during the reign of King Hyŏnjong of Koryŏ (麗朝), routed the invading Khitans (契丹) all the way to Ningju in one breath, achieving a great victory (大勝捿). I felt ashamed (스사로 브끄리었다) of my dull historical eye (無識한 歷史眼) for not knowing such a historical site existed. Perhaps Kwanak's fame lies not only in its rugged, majestic, and beautiful mountain form (險峻偉秀) but also because it produced a renowned general for the ages (萬古名將) at its base.
Passing T'aptong and going another 2 or 3 *majang*, one begins to ascend a proper mountain slope (山坂). Climbing another couple of *majang*, one reaches a steep rocky stream bank (石間溪邊). From here, like a valiant warrior, bend deeply, vigorously drink the clear stream water (石溪淸流), turn your body, and sit on a rock face (岩面). Puk'aksan Mountain comes directly into view, and Yŏŭido Airfield lies beneath your nose (코아레). As sweat cools unexpectedly (어니듯), the body feels lighter. Hastening our steps up the 35-degree angle, where the climb (登陟) ends, we reach the main ridge (本領) of Kwanak's northern foot (北麓). The view opens up in all directions, and the entire vicinity of the capital spreads out like a Go board (碁局) before our eyes. Following the spine (脊粱) of Kwanak's northern foot southward for a couple of kilometers, crossing a pass, descending diagonally down a mountain slope, a site of an ancient temple (古刹) facing east, flanked by Blue Dragon (左靑龍) and White Tiger (右白虎) ridges, appears. This is the former site (舊趾) of Ŭisangsa Temple, founded (創建) by Master Ŭisang during the reign of King Munmu of Silla. Turning westward and tilting one's chin far back, one can gaze with wonder (奇異) and astonishment (驚嘆) at Yŏnjudae hermitage clinging to the dizzying cliff face (懸岩面). Not only that, but boys and girls who have already climbed that peak shout with joy,<124> seemingly urging our steps onward.
Again, heading southwest over the ridge for about 30 steps, gazing at the elegantly situated Yŏnjuam hermitage through the pine forest, we climb step by step (거름거름 攀上) up the right-hand mountain slope to reach Yŏnjudae Peak, Kwanak's highest summit at 629 meters (米突) above sea level. To the west, the Inch'ŏn sea lies spread out (橫臥) before our eyes. To the south, today's Sihŭng County (始興郡屬), formerly Kwach'ŏn township (昔日果川邑), rests peacefully (안윽이) within view. Considering it was the sole strategic point (要衝) on the route to the three southern provinces (三南通路), who wouldn't feel the passage of time (昔今) in this age of speeding iron horses (鐵馬)?
Across Kwach'ŏn, the powerfully encircling mountain range (둘리인 山脈) is the equally famous Ch'ŏnggyesan Mountain. It's a major range running vigorously south to form Kwanggyosan behind Suwŏn. Turning northeast, across the Han River—which flows broadly past Ttuksŏm, curving below the fields of Chamsilli and the foot of Tongsongni's Sanbigyŏng Hill (山飛頃 아레로)—the myriad houses of Kyŏngsŏng's Changan (萬戶長安) lie beneath one's knees (膝下). Towards Kwach'ŏn, precariously crossing Malpaŭi (Horse Back Rock), stands the hermitage (庵子) formerly known as Ŭisangdae, now Yŏnjudae—supported by a stone embankment (石築) over a fathom (丈餘) high on the cliff (懸崖), appearing quite miraculous (絶妙). This is the very Yŏnjudae we looked up at earlier. A mountain monk says:
"When the Koryŏ Dynasty's fortune was waning, three loyal scholars (忠義士) from among the 70 men of Tumundong—Kang Tŭngnyong, Sŏ Kyŏn, and Nam Ŭljin—came to reside at Ŭisangsa Temple below. Every morning, they climbed to Ŭisangdae on this peak, looked north towards Songgyŏng (Kaesŏng) within their sight (眼界), shed hot tears (熱淚) of loyal sorrow (忠恨), bowed three times daily (日恒三拜) towards the royal court (王公朝), and then descended. After doing this for a couple of years, Nam Ŭljin and Sŏ Kyŏn returned to Tumundong. Kang Tŭngnyong alone continued his daily ascent to this peak, weeping towards Songgyŏng (松京向哭) just as before, until his strength failed. His grave mound (墓土) lies on some southern mountain slope to this day, his solitary soul in the green mountains (靑山孤魂) still upholding his old loyalty (옛節). But then,
During the events surrounding King Tanjong of the Chosŏn Dynasty, Grand Prince Hyonyŏng, who had maintained his integrity (淸節) and taken monastic vows (落髮爲僧) at Hoeryongsa Temple in Ŭijŏngbu, came here. Hearing the story (來歷) of these three loyalists of the Koryŏ Dynasty, he moved Ŭisangsa Temple over the mountain in their memory, had Ŭisangdae rebuilt (重修), and because they thought of the king every morning, he renamed Ŭisangsa as Yŏnjuam (Thinking-of-the-Lord Hermitage) and Ŭisangdae as Yŏnjudae (Thinking-of-the-Lord Terrace)." etcetera (云云).<125>

**Summary**

This article compiles four travelogues from 1941 detailing hikes to famous mountains near Seoul (Hanyang): Puk'ansan, Tobongsan, Kobongsan, and Kwanaksan. The authors describe the natural beauty of each mountain through different seasons, recounting historical anecdotes, legends associated with kings (T'aejo, Sejo, Sukchong, Tanjong), scholars (Yi Chŏnggwi, Song Siyŏl, Pak T'aebo, Six Martyred Ministers), generals (Kang Kamch'an), and monks (Muhak, Ŭisang), and visiting significant sites like fortresses, temples (Hoeryongsa, Mangwŏlsa, Ch'ŏnjuksa, Man'gyŏngsa, Yŏnjuam), historical markers (Pibong, Nangsongdae), and tombs. The pieces reflect personal experiences, blending appreciation for traditional landscapes and history with observations of contemporary life, including train travel, interactions with monks and fellow hikers, and infrastructural changes. From a colonial history perspective, the articles are interesting for their focus on Korean historical figures, sites, and legends, suggesting a quiet assertion of national identity and heritage amidst Japanese rule. Historians might find value in the detailed descriptions of historical sites (some preserved, others dilapidated or repurposed), the blend of traditional reverence and modern leisure activities, and the social observations embedded within the nature writing.

**Named Entities**

漢陽	한양	Hanyang
北漢山	북한산	Puk'ansan
車相瓚	차상찬	Cha Sangch'an
南漢山	남한산	Namhansan
三角	삼각	Samgak
仁壽	인수	Insu (Peak)
白雲	백운	Paegun (Peak)
萬景	만경	Man'gyŏng (Peak)
華山	화산	Hwasan
華嶽	화악	Hwaak
仁壽峯	인수봉	Insupong
負兒岳	부아악	Puaak
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
百濟	백제	Paekche
溫祚王	온조왕	Onjo Wang
沸流	비류	Piryu
漢山	한산	Hansan
白雲峯	백운봉	Paegunbong
李太祖	이태조	Yi T'aejo
白雲臺	백운대	Paegundae
萬景臺	만경대	Man'gyŏngdae
無學	무학	Muhak (Monk)
國望峯	국망봉	Kukmangbong
露積峯	노적봉	Nojŏkpong
宣祖	선조	Sŏnjo
李廷龜	이정귀	Yi Chŏnggwi (Wŏlsa)
水落	수락	Surak (Mountain)
峨嵯	아차	Ach'a (Mountain)
冠岳	관악	Kwanak (Mountain)
淸溪	청계	Ch'ŏnggye (Mountain)
天摩	천마	Ch'ŏnma (Mountain)
松岳	송악	Song'ak (Mountain)
聖居	성거	Sŏnggŏ (Mountain)
月溪峽	월계협	Wŏlgyehap
漢水	한수	Hansu (Han River)
漢江	한강	Han River
王都	왕도	Wangdo (Royal Capital)
終南山	종남산	Chungnam San
高麗	고려	Koryŏ
睿宗	예종	Yejong
恭愍	공민	Kongmin (King)
普賢峯	보현봉	Pohyŏnbong
文殊峯	문수봉	Munjubong
碑峯	비봉	Pibong
世祖大王	세조대왕	Sejo Taewang
文殊窟	문수굴	Munjugul
文殊菴	문수암	Munjuam
南廷年	남정년	Nam Chŏngnyŏn
普心	보심	Posim (Monk)
李天輔	이천보	Yi Ch'ŏnbo
新羅	신라	Silla
眞興王	진흥왕	Chinhŭng Wang
黃綠次	황녹차	Hwang Nokch'a
南山	남산	Namsan
高句麗	고구려	Koguryŏ
北漢山郡	북한산군	Puk'ansan County
近肖王	근초고왕	Kŭnch'ogo Wang
蓋鹵王	개로왕	Kaero Wang
長壽王	장수왕	Changsu Wang
李朝	이조	Yi Cho (Chosŏn Dynasty)
孝宗	효종	Hyojong
宋時烈	송시열	Song Siyŏl (Uam)
尤菴	우암	Uam (pen name of Song Siyŏl)
洗劒亭	세검정	Segŏmjŏng
肅宗	숙종	Sukchong
訓練都監	훈련도감	Hullyŏn Togam
龍巖	용암	Yong'am
禁衛營	금위영	Kŭmwiyŏng
御營廳	어영청	Ŏyŏngch'ŏng
重興	중흥	Chung'hŭng (Temple)
露積	노적	Nojŏk (Temple)
西巖	서암	Sŏam (Temple)
慶興	경흥	Kyŏnghŭng (Temple)
國寧	국녕	Kungnyŏng (Temple)
圓覺	원각	Wŏn'gak (Temple)
扶旺	부왕	Puwang (Temple)
普光	보광	Pogwang (Temple)
保國	보국	Poguk (Temple)
鎔巖	용암	Yong'am (Temple)
道峯山	도봉산	Tobongsan
李秉岐	이병기	Yi Pyŏnggi
石南	석남	Sŏngnam
東京城驛	동경성역	Tonggyŏngsŏng Yŏk (Station)
具君	구군	Ku Kun (Mr. Ku)
靑汀	청정	Ch'ŏngjŏng
仁谷	인곡	In'gok
斗溪	두계	Tugye
天籟	천뢰	Ch'ŏllae
議政府	의정부	Ŭijŏngbu
回龍寺	회룡사	Hoeryongsa
太宗	태종	T'aejong
芳碩	방석	Pang Sŏk
鄭道傳	정도전	Chŏng Tojŏn
定宗	정종	Chŏngjong
咸興	함흥	Hamhŭng
朴淳	박순	Pak Sun
成石磷	성석린	Sŏng Sŏngnin
張混	장혼	Chang Hon
蓮隱老長	연은노장	Yŏn'ŭn Nojang (Elder Yŏn'ŭn)
望月寺	망월사	Mangwŏlsa
僧伽	승가	Sŭngga (Mountain/Temple?)
三幕	삼막	Sammok (Mountain/Temple?)
大聖	대성	Taesŏng (Mountain/Temple?)
津寬	진관	Chin'gwan (Temple)
奉恩	봉은	Pong'ŭn (Temple)
慧炬	혜거	Hyegŏ (Monk)
萬丈峯	만장봉	Manjangbong
滿月寶殿	만월보전	Mandŏl Pojŏn
天竺寺	천축사	Ch'ŏnjuksa
寧國寺	영국사	Yŏngguksa
道峯書院	도봉서원	Tobong Sŏwŏn
趙靜庵	조정암	Cho Chŏngam (pen name of Cho Kwangjo)
宋尤庵	송우암	Song Uam (Song Siyŏl)
高宗	고종	Kojong
劉希慶	유희경	Yu Hŭigyŏng (Ch'on'ŭn)
村隱	촌은	Ch'on'ŭn (pen name of Yu Hŭigyŏng)
李澄	이징	Yi Chŭng
李縡	이재	Yi Chae (Toam)
陶庵	도암	Toam (pen name of Yi Chae)
趙斗淳	조두순	Cho Tusun (Simam)
心庵	심암	Simam (pen name of Cho Tusun)
枕瀨亭	침뢰정	Ch'imsedaejŏng
倉洞驛	창동역	Ch'angdong Yŏk (Station)
高峯山	고봉산	Kobongsan
柳光烈	유광렬	Yu Kwangnyŏl
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul)
京義線	경의선	Kyŏngŭi Line
一山驛	일산역	Ilsan Yŏk (Station)
達己省縣	달기성현	Talsŏng Hyŏn (County)
安藏王	안장왕	Anjang Wang
淸正	청정	Ch'ŏngjŏng (Katō Kiyomasa)
萬景寺	만경사	Man'gyŏngsa
高陽	고양	Koyang
碧蹄館	벽제관	Pyŏkchegwan
小早川隆景	소조천륭경	Kobayakawa Takakage
立花宗茂	입화종무	Tachibana Muneshige
明軍	명군	Myŏnggun (Ming Army)
崔瑩	최영	Ch'oe Yŏng
幸州	행주	Haengju
權慄	권율	Kwŏn Yul
冠岳山	관악산	Kwanaksan
崔鳳則	최봉칙	Ch'oe Pongch'ik
果川	과천	Kwach'ŏn
嵯峨山	차아산	Ch'oasan
端宗	단종	Tanjong
死六臣	사육신	Sayuksin (Six Martyred Ministers)
李塏	이개	Yi Kae
朴彭年	박팽년	Pak P'aengnyŏn
成三問	성삼문	Sŏng Sammun
蓬萊山	봉래산	Pongnaesan (Mount P'englai)
鷺梁津	노량진	Norangjin
忠祠	충사	Ch'ungsa (Loyalty Shrine)
張嬉嬪	장희빈	Chang Hŭibin
閔中殿	민중전	Min Chungjŏn (Queen Min)
朴泰輔	박태보	Pak T'aebo
永登浦	영등포	Yŏngdŭngp'o
木洞町	목동정	Moktongjŏng
上道町	상도정	Sangdojŏng
朴齊宮	박제궁	Pak Chegung
奉天里	봉천리	Pongch'ŏnni
塔洞	탑동	T'aptong
姜邯瓚	강감찬	Kang Kamch'an
落星臺	낙성대	Nangsongdae
顯宗	현종	Hyŏnjong
契丹	계단	Kitan (Khitan)
寧州	영주	Ningju
義湘大師	의상대사	Ŭisang Taesa (Master Ŭisang)
義湘寺	의상사	Ŭisangsa
文武王	문무왕	Munmu Wang
戀主臺	연주대	Yŏnjudae
戀主庵	연주암	Yŏnjuam
仁川	인천	Inch'ŏn
始興郡	시흥군	Sihŭng County
淸溪山	청계산	Ch'ŏnggyesan
水原	수원	Suwŏn
光敎山	광교산	Kwanggyosan
纛島	독도	Ttuksŏm
蠶室里	잠실리	Chamsilli
銅省里	동성리	Tongsongni
杜門洞	두문동	Tumundong
姜得龍	강득룡	Kang Tŭngnyong
徐甄	서견	Sŏ Kyŏn
南乙珍	남을진	Nam Ŭljin
松京	송경	Songgyŏng (Kaesŏng)
孝寧大君	효령대군	Hyonyŏng Taegun (Grand Prince Hyoryŏng)

**Glossary**

漢陽	한양	Former name for Seoul
附近	부근	Vicinity, neighborhood
名山	명산	Famous mountain
紀行	기행	Travelogue
躑躅花	척촉화	Azalea
著名	저명	Famous, renowned
非獨	비독	Not only
幽*	유	Secluded, deep (*Original text might have missing character here, context suggests 'secluded')
淸冽	청렬	Clear and cold (water)
泉石	천석	Springs and rocks; scenery
名刹	명찰	Famous temple
古蹟	고적	Historical site, ancient remains
鎭山	진산	Guardian mountain (protecting a city or region)
屹然	흘연	Majestically, toweringly
相對	상대	Facing each other
純然	순연	Purely, entirely
깍어질은 듯이	깎아지른 듯이	As if steeply carved, precipitous (Older spelling)
우뚝이	우뚝이	Tall, prominently (Often '우뚝')
소서있다	솟아있다	To soar, rise up (Older spelling)
엎여있다	엎혀있다	To be carried on the back (Older spelling)
아희	아이	Child (Older spelling)
風水說	풍수설	Geomancy theory (Feng Shui)
褓짐	보짐	Bundle wrapped in cloth, often carried on the back
可居의 地	가거지지	Suitable land for residence
察相	찰상	To survey, observe physiognomy (of land)
御製詩	어제시	Poem composed by a king
因해	인해	Because of, due to (Older form of '인하여')
道僧	도승	Virtuous monk; accomplished monk
望察	망찰	To observe from afar
露積덤이	노적더미	Stack of grain outdoors
穀食	곡식	Grain
丘垤	구질	Hills and mounds
울멍줄멍하게	울멍줄멍하게	Unevenly, with bumps and hollows
쏘다저	쏟아져	Pouring, gushing (Older spelling)
감도라	감돌아	Winding around (Older spelling)
嶼	서	Islet, small island
逼近	핍근	Very close
뵈이는	보이는	Visible, seen (Older spelling)
螺鬢	나빈	Snail horns (poetic term for distant mountains)
下畧	하략	Omitted below
鳴動	명동	To rumble, make a loud sound
驚怪	경괴	To be surprised and find strange
試	시	To test, try
窟	굴	Cave
題名	제명	Inscribed name
殉節	순절	To die for one's country or principles
大司成	대사성	Chief Master of the National Academy (Sungkyunkwan)
羅漢	나한	Arhat (Buddhist saint)
呈	정	To present, display
興王	흥왕	King Chinhŭng
北巡	북순	Northern tour (by a king)
定界碑	정계비	Boundary stele
가르침이다	가리킴이다	It points to, indicates (Older spelling)
빼앗서서	빼앗아서	Having seized/taken (Older spelling)
쌓서	쌓아서	Having built/stacked (Older spelling)
廢城	폐성	Ruined fortress
快雪	쾌설	To avenge a humiliation, vent one's anger
敎諭	교유	Royal decree, instruction
保障	보장	Guarantee, security
安地	안지	Safe place
防築	방축	To build defensive embankments
하섰으나	하셨으나	Although he did (honorific, older spelling)
生意	생의	Intention, will (here contextually: 'to dare to start')
訖役	訖役	Completion of work/construction
드러간	들어간	Entered, used (materials) (Older spelling)
石	석	Sŏk (unit of volume, approx. 180L)
同	동	Tong (unit for bundles of cloth)
疋	필	P'il (unit for bolts of cloth)
兩	량	Ryang (unit of currency)
斤	근	Kŭn (unit of weight, approx. 600g)
薪鐵	신철	Raw iron, pig iron
生葛	생갈	Raw arrowroot vine (칡, ch'ik)
升布	승포	Fine hemp cloth
立	립	Rip (unit for hats)
步	보	Po (unit of distance, approx. 1.8m)
尺	척	Ch'ŏk (unit of length, approx. 30.3cm)
將臺	장대	Command post (in a fortress)
城廓	성곽	Battlement, parapet (can also mean fortress wall)
城池	성지	Pond within a fortress
城井	성정	Well within a fortress
行宮	행궁	Temporary royal palace
間	간	Kan (unit for room size based on pillars)
倉庫	창고	Warehouse
留營	유영	Barracks, encampment
寺	사	Temple
僧將	승장	Monk commander
都摠攝	도총섭	Supreme Commander (esp. of monk soldiers)
中軍	중군	Central Army Commander
別將	별장	Special General/Commander
千摠	천총	Thousand-man Commander
兵房	병방	Military affairs section/officer
敎鍊官	교련관	Training officer
旗牌官	기패관	Flag officer
倉監官	창감관	Warehouse supervisor
首僧	수승	Head monk
義僧	의승	Righteous monks (often militia)
守城	수성	Defense of a fortress
點心療飢	점심료기	Satisfying hunger with lunch (점심 = lunch, 료기 = cure hunger)
藥酒	약주	Medicinal wine
念慮	염려	Worry, concern
밭가운대ㅅ길	밭가운데 길	Path through the middle of a field
乾川	건천	Dry stream
山神堂	산신당	Shrine for a mountain spirit
溪谷	계곡	Valley
瀑布	폭포	Waterfall
여흘	여울	Rapids, shallow ford
紺碧	감벽	Deep blue, azure
쏘	소	Deep pool in a stream
頹落	퇴락	Dilapidated, ruined
瓦屋	와옥	Tiled house
祈禱	기도	Prayer
禪位	선위	Abdication (of the throne)
舊邸	구저	Old residence
回鑾	회란	Return of the emperor/king to the capital
懇請	간청	Earnest request
願刹	원찰	Temple designated for royal prayers
事蹟	사적	Historical facts, deeds
風謠	풍요	Folk song, ballad
潭月	담월	Moon reflected in a pond
釋子	석자	Buddhist monk (son of Sakyamuni)
憩	게	To rest
雲根	운근	Root of the clouds (poetic term for mountain base/hermitage)
가시울타리	가시울타리	Thorny fence
嚴禁	엄금	Strictly forbidden
僧竪子	승수자	Novice monk, young monk (sometimes derogatory)
住持	주지	Abbot
齋	재	Buddhist ceremony, ritual meal
빙에	빙애	Along the edge/bank (possibly dialect or older form for '벼랑에' - cliff edge, or '변두리에' - edge)
으늑한	으늑한	Secluded, cozy (archaic form of '으슥한')
雜木	잡목	Miscellaneous trees
茂盛	무성	Lush, overgrown
듯기 시작한다	듣기 시작한다	Starts to fall (rain) (Older spelling)
山ㅅ새	산새	Mountain bird
句配	구배	Slope, gradient
歇脚	헐각	To rest one's legs
등성이	등성이	Ridge
날ㅅ등	날등	Ridge crest (like a blade edge)
泰然	태연	Composed, calm
침침한	침침한	Dim, gloomy
닢사귀	잎사귀	Leaf (Older spelling)
비탈	비탈	Slope
상취밭	상추밭	Lettuce patch
넘어이	너머의	Beyond (Older spelling for '너머에')
寂寂	적적	Quiet, silent
法堂	법당	Main hall of a Buddhist temple
學人	학인	Student monk, scholar
供養主	공양주	Person in charge of meals/offerings at a temple
다러났으니	달아났으니	Because (he) ran away (Older spelling)
堪忍	감인	To endure patiently
懇請	간청	Earnest plea
名啣	명함	Name card
肯諾	긍낙	Consent, approval
囊橐	낭탁	Bag, pouch
穀茶	곡차	Grain tea
供養	공양	Meal offering (in a temple); meal
禪房	선방	Meditation room
煩熱	번열	Stifling heat
하였으되	하였으되	Although it was (Older form of '하였으되' or '했지만')
感氣	감기	A cold (illness)
짖어귀는	지저귀는	Chirping (birds) (Older spelling)
뭉게 뭉게	뭉게뭉게	Billowing (clouds)
피여오르고	피어오르고	Rising up (Older spelling)
부슬부슬	부슬부슬	Drizzling (rain)
나린다	내린다	Falls (rain, snow) (Older spelling)
개었드라면	개었더라면	If it had cleared up (Older spelling)
보았을걸	보았을걸	Would have seen (regretful) (Older spelling)
擁衛	옹위	To guard, escort
靑龍白虎	청룡백호	Blue Dragon and White Tiger (geomantic terms for ridges flanking a site)
버려있는	벌여있는	Spread out, arranged (Older spelling)
奇岩	기암	Strange or fantastic rock
雲霧	운무	Clouds and mist
絶勝	절승	Superb scenery
秀麗	수려	Beautiful, graceful (scenery)
幽雅	유아	Secluded and elegant
無端	무단	Without reason, gratuitously
詩情	시정	Poetic sentiment
이르키며	일으키며	Stirring up, evoking (Older spelling)
嘉慶板	가경판	Jiaqing era edition (Chinese Qing dynasty reign, 1796-1820)
眞言集	진언집	Collection of True Words (Mantras)
閒談	한담	Idle chat
패패이	패패이	In groups, in droves (Possibly '패를 지어' - forming groups)
流行歌	유행가	Popular song
질탕히	질탕히	Riotously, boisterously
撮影	촬영	Photography
開祖	개조	Founder (of a temple or sect)
石塔	석탑	Stone pagoda
어마어마한	어마어마한	Immense, imposing
岩窟	암굴	Rock cave
매달린	매달린	Hanging, clinging
심부림군	심부름꾼	Errand boy
계집애	계집애	Girl (can be derogatory)
깃고	긷고	Drawing (water)
다리고	달이고	Decocting (medicine)
琉璃窓	유리창	Glass window
내다보고	내다보고	Looking out at
개부랄꽃	개부랄꽃	Lady's slipper orchid (Cypripedium)
蘭科植物	난과식물	Orchidaceae plant
敦盛草	돈성초	Alternate name for Lady's slipper orchid
달래어	달래어	Asking for
나려보이든	내려보이던	That was looked down upon (Older spelling)
넘으니	넘으니	Crossing (a pass)
뜯으며	뜯으며	Picking (greens, flowers)
취	취	A type of edible aster (Chwinamul)
흘긋흘긋	흘끔흘끔	Glancing sideways
처다본다	쳐다본다	Looks up at (Older spelling)
蘭	란	Orchid
浮黑土	부흑토	Humus, rich dark soil
캐어	캐어	Digging up
들매	들매	Upon entering (Older form of '들자')
어정거리고	어정거리고	Loitering, lingering
和尙	화상	Buddhist monk
面刀	면도	Shaving (head or face)
헐어다	헐어다	Having dismantled and brought (Older spelling)
頹落	퇴락	Dilapidated
다래넌출	다래넌출	Actinidia vine (hardy kiwi vine)
木蓮	목련	Magnolia
淸楚	청초	Clear and lovely, neat and charming
유다른	유다른	Unusual, unique
狹窄	협착	Narrow, cramped
淨界	정계	Pure realm, sacred place
峻峯	준봉	Steep peak
斷崖	단애	Cliff, precipice
險峻	험준	Rugged and steep
墨客	묵객	Literati, men of letters
從來	종래	Traditionally, in the past
別樣	별양	Particularly, especially (Older form)
나타나지 못하였다	나타나지 못하였다	Could not appear (Older spelling structure)
겁을 내든 때	겁을 내던 때	Time when (people) were afraid (Older spelling)
숨을 수밖에 없었다	숨을 수밖에 없었다	Had no choice but to hide
귀여운 건	귀한 건	The precious thing is (using '귀엽다' for 'precious/rare' is archaic/dialectal)
떠러져	떨어져	Being distant/separated (Older spelling)
가차이	가까이	Near, close by (Older spelling)
있었드라면	있었더라면	If it had been (Older spelling)
俗化	속화	Secularization
峻急	준급	Steep and urgent (path)
나려오매	내려오매	While descending (Older spelling)
비껴 든다	비껴 든다	Slants in (light)
연신	연신	Continuously
따러오면	따라오면	Following along (Older spelling)
平緩	평완	Gentle, gradual (slope)
나서고	나서고	Appears, emerges
합해	합해	Merging, joining
안옥한	안옥한	Cozy, secluded (Possibly dialectal or older form of '아늑한')
都局	도국	Basin, enclosed area (geomantic term)
논머리	논머리	Edge of a rice paddy
柱礎	주초	Pillar base, plinth
土壇	토단	Earthen platform
書院	서원	Confucian academy (Joseon era)
靈谷	영곡	Yŏnggok (Place name)
위하다	위하다	To enshrine, honor (Here context is enshrinement)
毁廢	훼폐	To abolish, demolish
墓山	묘산	Ancestral burial mountain
水石	수석	Water and rocks; landscape features, scholar's rocks
왕래	왕래	Coming and going, visiting
林莊圖	임장도	Painting of a Forest Villa
序	서	Preface
軸	축	Scroll
空林	공림	Empty forest
夕氣	석기	Evening mist/air
翠霏霏	취비비	Green and hazy (mist)
一壑	일학	One gorge/valley
泉聲	천성	Sound of a spring/stream
石扉	석비	Stone gate
乍收	사수	Just stopped
苔逕	태경	Mossy path
滑	활	Slippery
醉扶歸	취부귀	Returning home drunk and supported
光風霽月	광풍제월	Clear wind and bright moon after rain (metaphor for noble character)
泉翁	천옹	Old man of the spring (pen name element)
書	서	Written by
싯고	씻고	Washing (Older spelling)
석은	썩은	Rotten
지지고	지지고	Grilling, frying (Older spelling)
아끼든	아끼던	Cherished (Older spelling)
거울렀다	기울였다	Tilted, poured out (finished liquor) (Older spelling/form)
極	극	Extremely
愉快	유쾌	Cheerful, pleasant
石壁	석벽	Stone wall, cliff face
別莊	별장	Villa, country house
뉘집	뉘집	Whose house (Older form of '누구 집')
園林	원림	Garden, park
물려	물려	Being diverted, rerouted
鐵絲	철사	Iron wire, wire fence
殺風景	살풍경	Spoiling the scenery, unaesthetic
쌍갈무니	쌍갈무니	Fork in the road ('갈림길')
初夏	초하	Early summer
綠陰	녹음	Green shade
芳草	방초	Fragrant grass
勝	승	To surpass
散策	산책	Stroll, walk
포퓰라	포퓰라	Popular (loanword)
들어나지	드러나지	Not revealed, not known (Older spelling)
紹介	소개	Introduction
普通汽車	보통기차	Regular train
내리어	내리어	Getting off (Older spelling)
등산	등산	Mountain climbing, hiking
도달	도달	To reach, arrive at
잔듸	잔디	Turf, grass
깔리어	깔리어	Spread out, covered (Older spelling)
適當	적당	Suitable, appropriate
띄	띠	Belt, ribbon
殘山短麓	잔산단록	Remaining mountains and short foothills
田野	전야	Fields
한가로히	한가로이	Leisurely (Older spelling)
밭이랑	밭이랑	Ridge of a dry field
婦人네	부인네	Womenfolk
携帶	휴대	Carrying
一盃酒	일배주	One cup of wine
기우리는	기울이는	Tilting, pouring (a cup)
茶菓	다과	Tea and sweets
排設	배설	To set up, arrange
佳麗	가려	Beautiful (scenery)
古跡	고적	Historical site
綠由	유유	Origin, reason (usually spelled '유래' or '연유')
兵亂	병란	War disturbance (specifically Imjin War here)
文獻	문헌	Written records, documents
形跡	형적	Traces, signs
顯著	현저	Clear, evident
烽燧臺	봉수대	Beacon platform
哨戒	초계	Lookout duty, patrol
傳信	전신	Signal transmission
防備	방비	Defense, guarding
홰불	횃불	Torch
警報	경보	Alarm, warning
發	발	To issue, emit
警火	경화	Warning fire, alarm fire
구을러	굴러	Reflecting on, pondering (Used idiomatically '머리를 굴려')
感慨	감개	Deep emotion, feeling moved
山麓	산록	Foot of a mountain
荒烟	황연	Desolate smoke/mist
暮鐘	모종	Evening bell
眼前	안전	Before one's eyes
中火準備	중화준비	Lunch preparation (中火 is an old term for lunch)
부탁하여도	부탁하여도	Even if one requests
文祿役	문록역	Bunroku Campaign (Japanese name for the first phase of Imjin War, 1592-93)
大破	대파	To defeat decisively
大陸發展	대륙발전	Continental expansion
萬斛	만곡	Myriad measures (of grain); immense amount
遇害	우해	To meet misfortune, be killed
勝戰蹟	승전적	Victory site/monument
하로	하루	One day (Older spelling)
만히	많이	Many, much (Older spelling)
記憶	기억	Memory
더듬어서	더듬어서	Tracing back, groping for
草	초	To draft, write (a document)
民謠	민요	Folk song
수라상	수라상	Royal meal table
탓으므로	탔으므로	Because it was burnt (Older spelling)
숙수	숙수	Royal cook
꾸중	꾸중	Scolding, reprimand
나리시었더니	내리시었더니	As His Majesty gave (a scolding) (Honorific, older spelling)
이튼날	이튿날	The next day (Older spelling)
아조	아주	Completely (Older spelling)
올랐는지라	올랐는지라	As it was served/put on (Older ending)
기가 막히시어	기가 막히시어	Being dumbfounded (Honorific)
엇저녁	어젯저녁	Last evening (Older spelling)
웨 이리	왜 이리	Why is it so (Older spelling)
쬐여야	쬐어야	Should be exposed to (fire/sun) (Older spelling)
한답시기로	한답시기로	Because (you) said to do (Older quoting form)
밤새도록	밤새도록	All night long
쬐였습니다	쬐었습니다	Exposed it (to fire) (Older spelling)
何如턴	하여튼	Anyway, at any rate (Colloquial, older spelling)
말속	말속	Wordplay, implied meaning in speech
어지간이	어지간히	Considerably, quite (Older spelling)
膾煮	회자	To be on everyone's lips, talked about
踏至	답지	To arrive, tread upon (formal)
四節	사절	Four seasons
登山客	등산객	Hiker, mountaineer
西	서	West
新作路	신작로	Newly built road
交通網	교통망	Transportation network
절대	절대	Absolute
권위	권위	Authority
잘리인	잘린	Cut off (Older spelling passive form)
나지막한	나지막한	Low (hill, voice)
어리신	어리신	Young (honorific for king)
忠命	충명	Loyal life, devotion to duty
다한	다한	Exhausted, completed
祀堂	사당	Shrine
荒凉	황량	Desolate, bleak
草丘	초구	Grassy mound
碣	갈	Stele, memorial stone
하나식으로	하나씩으로	As one each (Older spelling)
당대	당대	That time, contemporary
당당하던	당당하던	Prominent, dignified (at that time)
碩士	석사	Eminent scholar
時調	시조	Sijo (Korean poetic form)
혔는 촉불	켠 는 촛불	Lit candle (Older spelling)
눌과	누구와	With whom (Older spelling)
이별하였관대	이별하였기에	Because (it) parted (Older rhetorical question form)
곁으로	겉으로	Outwardly, on the surface (vs. '옆으로' - sideways)
눌물지고	눈물짓고	Shedding tears (Older spelling)
속타는 줄	속타는 줄	That the inside (core) is burning
몰으는고	모르는고	Does not know? (Archaic interrogative)
몰으더라	모르더라	Does not know (Archaic declarative)
재넘어	재 넘어	Over the pass
한많은	한많은	Sorrowful, full of resentment
依舊히	의구히	As before, still (Older spelling)
섰는	서는	Standing (Older spelling)
變德	변덕	Fickleness, caprice
寵愛	총애	Favor, patronage
無辜	무고	Innocent
廢出	폐출	To depose, expel
忠諫	충간	Loyal remonstrance
酷刑	혹형	Cruel punishment
배출하던제음	배출하던 즈음	Around the time of being banished (Older spelling '제음' for '즈음')
少年時	소년시	Boyhood days
父命	부명	Father's command
大丈夫	대장부	Great man, true man
兒女子	아녀자	Women and children (often dismissive)
怨心	원심	Resentment, grudge
말슴에	말씀에	In the words (Older spelling)
同過	동과	To pass together (spend time together) (Older spelling, usually 동거)
하었던	하였던	Had done (Older spelling)
志操	지조	Integrity, fidelity
婢子	비자	Female servant
거름	걸음	Step
刑毒	형독	Poison/effect of torture
轎子	교자	Sedan chair
殉職허였던	순직하였던	Who died in the line of duty (Older spelling)
後日	후일	Later day, in the future
悔悟	회오	Remorse, repentance
復位	복위	Restoration to the throne
살었던 들	살았던들	If (he) had lived (Older spelling)
뉘우치시면서	뉘우치시면서	While regretting (Honorific)
暗葬	암장	Secret burial
調査	조사	Investigation
厚葬	후장	Grand burial
케 하고	케 하고	Make/let (do) and... (Older causative form)
세우섰든	세우셨던	Which (he) had built (Honorific, older spelling)
우두먼이	우두머니	Steadfastly, motionlessly (Older spelling '우두커니')
남아 있어	남아 있어	Remains
자아내게 한다	자아내게 한다	Evokes, brings forth
一言	일언	One word, a brief note
付記	부기	Addendum, postscript
落成	낙성	Completion (of a building)
翌朝	익조	The next morning
석가래	서까래	Rafter
一美人	일미인	A beautiful woman
목달려있었나니	목달려 있었나니	Was hanging by the neck (Older narrative ending)
一夕同衾	일석동금	Sharing a bed for one night
怨풀림	원풀림	Vindication, resolution of resentment
靑天	청천	Blue Heaven
呼召	호소	Appeal, call out to
이루어지매	이루어지매	As (it) was achieved/fulfilled (Older causal ending)
殉死	순사	To follow someone in death, commit suicide upon someone's death
갸륵한	갸륵한	Admirable, praiseworthy
주검	주검	Corpse, dead body
逸話	일화	Anecdote
일즈막이	일찌감치	Early (Older spelling)
아니되는	아니되는	Not even (distance) (Older negative form)
서리운	서리운	Laden with, imbued with (poetic)
들려가드라도	들러가더라도	Even if one stops by (Older spelling)
넉넉히	넉넉히	Ample, sufficient
支障	지장	Hindrance, obstacle
路邊	노변	Roadside
橫斷	횡단	Crossing
돌리어	돌리어	Turning (Older spelling)
윗	윗	Upper
지나게 된다	지나게 된다	Comes to pass through
왕년에	왕년에	In former years, once upon a time
우연이	우연히	By chance (Older spelling)
五層塔	오층탑	Five-story pagoda
鎭座	진좌	To be enshrined, sit majestically
살피다가	살피다가	While observing
塔面	탑면	Surface of a pagoda
刻字	각자	Engraved characters
깜작 놀라	깜짝 놀라	Being startled
村老	촌로	Village elder
來歷	내력	History, origin
麗朝	여조	Koryŏ Dynasty
顯宗	현종	Hyŏnjong (King of Koryŏ)
침입하는	침입하는	Invading
뭇즐러	무찔러	Defeating, routing (Older spelling)
大勝捿	대승첩	Great victory report
名將	명장	Famous general
출생지	출생지	Birthplace
無識	무식	Ignorant, unaware (here self-deprecating)
스사로	스스로	Oneself (Older spelling)
브끄리었다	부끄러웠다	Was ashamed (Older spelling)
모르긴 하거니와	모르긴 하거니와	Although I don't know for sure, but...
山勢	산세	Mountain's shape/topography
險峻偉秀	험준위수	Rugged, majestic, and beautiful
山下	산하	Below the mountain
萬古名將	만고명장	Great general for all ages
출산케 하였으므로	출산케 하였으므로	Because it caused to be born (Older causative)
더욱이	더욱이	Moreover, even more
않었는가	않았는가	Isn't it? (Older negative interrogative)
山坂	산판	Mountain slope (also used for logging sites)
오르게 된다	오르게 된다	Comes to climb
石間溪邊	석간계변	Bank of a rocky stream
勇士	용사	Valiant warrior
허리	허리	Waist, back
굽혀	굽혀	Bending
기운차게	기운차게	Vigorously
石溪淸流	석계청류	Clear stream flowing among rocks
氣끝	기껏	To the utmost, fully (Used here unusually with '들어 마시고' - drink deeply?)
들어케고	들이켜고	Drinking deeply, gulping down (Older spelling)
틀어	틀어	Turning
岩面	암면	Rock face
一座	일좌	To take a seat (formal)
바로	바로	Directly
정면	정면	Front
코아레	코 아래	Below the nose (very close)
놓인다	놓인다	Is placed, lies
어니듯	어느덧	Before one knows it, unexpectedly (Older spelling)
식는 땀	식는 땀	Cooling sweat
경쾌하여	경쾌하여	Being light and nimble
거름	걸음	Step
재촉해	재촉해	Hurrying
登陟	등척	Climbing, ascent
本領	본령	Main ridge, essential part
北麓	북록	Northern foot (of a mountain)
등성이	등성이	Ridge
올라선다	올라선다	Stands upon climbing
眼界	안계	Field of vision
近畿	근기	Vicinity of the capital
碁局	기국	Go board (used metaphorically for landscape)
버린다	벌인다	Spreads out (landscape) (Older spelling '벌어지다')
脊粱	척량	Spine, ridge
비스듬이	비스듬히	Diagonally, slantwise
나리다가	내리다가	While descending (Older spelling)
左靑龍 右白虎	좌청룡 우백호	Left Blue Dragon, Right White Tiger (geomantic features)
東向	동향	Facing east
古刹	고찰	Ancient temple
터전	터전	Site, grounds
나서니	나서니	Appears
여게가	여기가	Here is (Older spelling)
創建	창건	Founding, establishment
舊趾	구지	Former site
西向	서향	Facing west
턱	턱	Chin
활신	훨씬	Much, far (Older spelling)
저치면	젖히면	Tilting back
야즈라진	아찔한	Dizzying, sheer (Older spelling/dialect)
懸岩面	현암면	Cliff face
달린	달린	Hanging, attached
戀主臺	연주대	Thinking-of-the-Lord Terrace
奇異	기이	Strange, wondrous
驚嘆	경탄	Astonishment, admiration
바라볼 수 있다	바라볼 수 있다	Can be gazed upon
뿐이랴	뿐이랴	Is it only...? (Rhetorical)
발서	벌써	Already (Older spelling)
좋와랏고	좋아라고	Shouting with joy (Older spelling)
떠드는	떠드는	Making noise, chattering
재재거린다	재잘거린다	Chattering, twittering (Older spelling)
서남향	서남향	Southwest direction
약	약	Approximately
淸雅	청아	Clear and elegant
자리잡은	자리잡은	Situated, located
一路	일로	One path; straight
右便	우편	Right side
거름거름	걸음걸음	Step by step
攀上	반상	To climb up (using hands)
海拔	해발	Above sea level
米突	미돌	Meter (loanword, older transliteration)
最高峯	최고봉	Highest peak
橫臥	횡와	To lie horizontally, stretch out
南	남	South
今日	금일	Today
屬	속	Belonging to, affiliated with
昔日	석일	Former days
邑	읍	Township
안윽이	아늑히	Peacefully, cozily (Older spelling)
眼界	안계	Field of vision
잠든다	잠든다	Sleeps, lies dormant
三南通路	삼남통로	Route to the three southern provinces (Chungcheong, Jeolla, Gyeongsang)
唯一	유일	Only, sole
要衝	요충	Strategic point
이었거니 하매	이었거니 하매	Considering it was...
鐵馬	철마	Iron horse (train)
금일	금일	Today
昔今의 感	석금지감	Feeling of change between past and present
뉘	뉘	Who (Archaic)
없으랴	없으랴	Would there not be? (Rhetorical)
둘리인	둘린	Encircled (Older spelling)
山脈	산맥	Mountain range
역시	역시	Also, indeed
이름있는	이름있는	Famous
달리어	달리어	Running (Older spelling)
뒤의	뒤의	Behind
이룩한	이룩한	Formed, created
大山脈	대산맥	Major mountain range
동북	동북	Northeast
굽이쳐	굽이쳐	Winding, meandering
벌	벌	Field, plain
아레로	아래로	Below (Older spelling)
누였이	누엿이	Broadly, expansively (Possibly dialectal or related to '넓게')
흘러나리는	흘러내리는	Flowing down (Older spelling)
일대	일대	Entire area
萬戶長安	만호장안	Myriad houses of Changan (metaphor for a large capital city)
膝下	슬하	Below the knees (in one's presence/view)
노인다	놓인다	Lies, is placed
便	편	Direction, side
말등바위	말등바위	Horse Back Rock
위태위태	위태위태	Precariously
넘어서면	넘어서면	Crossing over
義湘臺	의상대	Ŭisang Terrace
懸崖	현애	Cliff
丈餘	장여	Over one *jang* (approx. 3 meters)
石築	석축	Stone embankment
바치인	받친	Supported (Older spelling passive)
庵子	암자	Hermitage
絶妙	절묘	Exquisite, superb
서 있다	서 있다	Is standing
바루	바로	Right, exactly (Older spelling)
처다보이던	쳐다보이던	That was looked up at (Older spelling)
山僧	산승	Mountain monk
麗朝	여조	Koryŏ Dynasty
國運	국운	National fortune
杜門洞	두문동	Tumundong (Place associated with loyalists who refused to serve Chosŏn)
人中	인 중	Among people
忠義士	충의사	Loyal and righteous scholar/person
아레	아래	Below (Older spelling)
居하매	거하매	While residing (Older causal ending)
아침마다	아침마다	Every morning
峯	봉	Peak
北	북	North
닷는	닿는	Reaching (Older spelling)
忠恨	충한	Loyal sorrow, resentment for the fallen dynasty
솟는	솟는	Rising, welling up
熱淚	열루	Hot tears
뿌리며	뿌리며	Shedding (tears)
王公朝	왕공조	Royal court (King and officials)
向하여	향하여	Towards
日恒三拜	일항삼배	Bowing three times daily
나려오곤 하였다	내려오곤 하였다	Used to descend (Older spelling)
이러기를	이러기를	Doing this
두어해	두어 해	A couple of years
後	후	After
다시	다시	Again
돌아가고	돌아가고	Returning
혼자만이	혼자만이	Only alone
每朝	매조	Every morning
松京向哭	송경향곡	Weeping towards Songgyŏng (Kaesŏng)
하루같이	하루같이	Like every day, consistently
기력	기력	Strength, energy
다하는 날	다하는 날	The day (it) runs out
하였는데	하였는데	Did so, but...
남향	남향	South-facing
山麓	산록	Mountain foot
墓土	묘토	Grave mound
오늘날까지	오늘날까지	Until today
靑山孤魂	청산고혼	Solitary soul in the green mountains
옛節	옛 절	Old loyalty/integrity
지키고 있다오	지키고 있다오	Is upholding (Familiar narrative ending '-오')
한데	한데	But then, however
事變	사변	Incident, affair (referring to Tanjong's usurpation)
淸節	청절	Pure integrity
落髮爲僧	낙발위승	To shave one's head and become a monk
여기왔다가	여기 왔다가	Having come here
來歷	내력	Story, background
들으시고	들으시고	Upon hearing (Honorific)
記念	기념	Commemoration
옴기고	옮기고	Moving (Older spelling)
重修	중수	Rebuilding, repairing
케 한 후	케 한 후	After having caused to do (Older causative)
매일	매일	Every day
임금	임금	King
생각했다고 해서	생각했다고 해서	Because (they) said (he) thought of...
題號	제호	Title, name (of a place/building)
고치었습넨다요	고치셨습니다요	Changed (Deferential, slightly archaic/dialectal ending)
云云	운운	Etcetera, and so on


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제13권 제7호
발행일	1941년 07월 01일
기사제목	漢陽附近名山紀行
기사형태	기행문

漢陽附近名山紀行
北漢山記

車相瓚

春南漢 秋北漢이라고 옛날부터 南漢山은 봄경치가 좋기로 유명하고 北漢山은 가을경치가 좋기로 유명하다. 그것은 무엇보다도 남한은 봄철에 躑躅花가 著名하고 北漢은 가을철에 단풍이<114> 著名한 까닭이다. 그러나 北漢은 非獨 가을단풍뿐 아니라 봄철의 各種名花, 異鳥, 여름의 幽*한 계곡, 淸冽한 泉石과 겨울의 장엄한 雪景 그 외 名刹古蹟  등 모든 것이 구비하야 결코 一片孤城으로 萬古恥辱을 우리에게 끼처준 南漢에 비할 바 아니다.

北漢은 大小群山이 퍽 많지만은 其中 대표적인 산은 漢陽朝五百年國都의 鎭山인 三角이다. 三角이란 말은 仁壽, 白雲, 萬景 三峯이 마치 세 뿔과 같이 屹然이 상대하야있음으로 그렇게 이름지은 것이니 一名은 華山, 또 一名은 華嶽이다. 仁壽峯은 三角山의 第一峯으로 사면이 純然한 돌르만 깍어질은 듯이 공중에 우뚝이 소서있고 동북편에 바위 하나가 峯背에 엎여있어서 어찌보면 사람이 어린아희를 엎고 있는 것과 같음으로 별명을 負兒岳이라 하고 또 그 까닭으로 朝鮮五百年 동안에 과거보러 다니는 선비들이 褓짐을 지고 다니게 되였다는 風水說도 있다. 그리고 옛날 三國初에 百濟始祖 溫祚王이 其兄 沸流와 같이 南으로 漢山에 이르러서 負兒岳에 올나 可居의 地를 察相하였다는 곳도 바로 그곳이요, 白雲峯은 仁壽峯 西편에 있으니 北漢山의 최고봉으로 옛날에 李太祖가 등극하기 전에 일즉이 이 峯에 올나서
引手攀蘿上碧峯, 一菴(一云倚樓)高臥白雲中. 若將眼界爲吾土, 楚越江南豈不容.
이란 御製詩를 지였기 때문에 그 뒤 因해 그 高臺를 白雲臺라 칭하게 되였다. 그리고 萬景臺는 白雲臺 南方에 있으니 李太祖가 道僧 無學을 명하야 此峯에 올나 漢陽國都의 相을 望察케 하였음으로 國望峯이라 개칭하게 되였다. 또 萬景臺 즉 國望峯 西使에는 露積峯이란 높은 峯이 있으니 그것은 峯의 형상이 마치 露積덤이(穀食쌓은 것)과 같음으로 그렇게 이름지은 것이니 宣祖時 名宰相 또 대문장으로 유명한 月沙李廷龜先生記에
露積峯最高頂에 올나서 바라보면 西南大海가 멀리 푸르게 둘너있는데 浮雲落日에 銀界가 茫茫하야 目力이 다하야도 望勢는 한이 없다. 그 중 가히 알 수 있는 것은 水落, 峨嵯, 冠岳, 淸溪, 天摩, 松岳, 聖居의 諸山으로 모도 丘垤같이 울멍줄멍하게 둘너있으며, 月溪峽이 터진 곳으로 놀난 물결이 서편으로 쏘다저 漢水(漢江) 일대가 흰 비단을 펴 놓은 듯이 굽이굽이 감도라 王都를 둘너 흘으고 먼 峯과 허터진 섬(嶼)이 구름새에 숨었다 나왔다 하며 도성의 百萬人家는 逼近하나 잘 볼 수 없고<115> 다맛 다리 밑에서(脚底) 뵈이는 밥짓는 연기가 一幅의 活畫를 펴처놓은 것 같으며 구름새이로 조고마한 달팽이의 뿔(螺鬢)같이 드러난 것은 짐작건대 終南山인 듯하다(下畧 = 月沙先生原文一節意譯)
...이라한 登峯記는 그 露積峯에 올나 사방을 바라보는 광경을 그대로 묘사한 것이였다. 이 峯은 옛날에는 지금보다 훨신 높던 것이 高麗 睿宗 2년과 또 恭愍 2년에 두 차려나 스사로 붕괴되야 其高가 퍽 減下되고 宣祖 34년에도 또한 일시 크게 鳴動하야 도성의 주민까지 驚怪한 일이 있었다 한다. 그리고 그 외 저명한 것은 普賢峯, 文殊峯, 碑峯 등이니 普賢峯은 옛날에 世祖大王이 여러 大君兄弟와 같이 그곳에서 뜀박질을 하야 담력을 試하던 곳이라하고 文殊峯은 普賢峯 西에 있는 것으로 峯下에는 유명한 文殊窟과 文殊菴이 있으니 窟中에는 *水와 忠壯公南廷年의 題名이 있고 (南公殉節後, 僧普心이 字를 刻하고 大司成 李天輔가 記함) 文殊菴에는 文殊의 석상과 五百羅漢을 진열하야 一大奇觀을 呈한다. 또 碑峯은 옛날 新羅眞興王(同王16년)이 北巡하다가 此峯에 이르러 定界碑를 세웠기 때문에 그 이름이 생긴 것이니 근대시인 黃綠次의 南山詩에 興王北狩山河靜이라 함이 곧 그 사실을 가르침이다.

北漢山을 말하는 사람은 북한산성을 또한 빼놓지 못할 것이다. 이 산성은 원래 高句麗 北漢山郡으로 百濟始祖 溫祚王이 빼아서서 처음으로 성을 쌓서(同王14년 丙辰 = 漢哀帝建平二年) 南平壤城이라 칭하고 그 후 近肖王시대(同王 26년 辛未)에는 國都까지 그곳으로 옮기였다가 蓋鹵王乙卯(21년)에 高句麗 長壽王이 包圍來功하야 형세가 크게 불리함으로 왕이 성을 버리고 도망하다가 麗軍에게 遇害한 후 遂히 오래동안 廢城이 되고 말었다.
그러다가 李朝 孝宗時代에 이르러 왕은 남한의 恥辱을 한번 快雪하랴고 이른바 북벌의 계획을 하는데 당시 유명하던 相臣宋尤菴時烈에게 敎諭를 나려 國家保障의 安地로 이 성을 쌓고 또 造紙署洞口(지금 洗劒亭 넘어 洞里)까지 防築하게 하섰으나 재력, 인력의 부족으로 감히 生意를 못하고 그 후 肅宗시대에도 초년부터 그것으로 君臣間 論議가 퍽 많다가 同王 37년 辛卯 2월에 비로소 議를 決하고 그 해 4월에 시공하야 同 9월에 訖役하였는데 築城時 드러간 물자로 말하면 米 16,381石, 木(綿布) 767同,<116> 12疋, 錢이 34,799兩, 正鐵 2,785斤, 薪鐵 229,180斤, 석탄 9,638石, 목탄 14,859石, 生葛(츩) 2,002同, 4升布 4同, 小帽子 900立에 달하였다하니 지금 물가로 환산한다면 상당한 거액일 것이다.
城周는 7,620步로 水門北邊에서 龍巖까지 2,292步는 訓練都監에서 쌓고, 龍巖南邊으로부터 普賢峯까지 2,821步는 禁衛營에서 쌓고, 水門南邊에서 普賢峯까지 2,507步는 御營廳에서 쌓었다.
그리고 城高는 平地最高14尺, 山上最高10尺, 門은 14, 將臺3, 城廓143, 城池26, 城井99, 行宮은 內殿28間, 外殿28間이요, 그외 倉庫, 留營 등이 모두 具備設置되고 또 城內에는 重興, 露積, 西巖, 慶興, 國寧, 圓覺, 扶旺, 普光, 保國, 鎔巖 등 11寺를 두고 寺에는 僧將(其中大將 1인은 八道都摠攝兼任) 즉 大將, 中軍, 左右別將, 千摠, 左右兵房과 敎鍊官, 旗牌官, 倉監官 등 各僧官과 首僧11人(僧將11人外) 義僧350人이 있어서 守城의 책임을 지게 하였다.

道峯山行

李秉岐

서로 언약한 시간보다 늦을가 하여 나는 부리나케 石南과 함께 東京城驛으로 나가니 하나도 안왔다. 기다리고 있으니까 具君과 靑汀, 仁谷, 斗溪, 天籟가 온다. 벌써 發車時刻은 臨迫하였다. 그래도 한 사람이라도 더 올가 싶어 그 2분 전까지 待合室에서 躕躇하였다.<117> 요마적 乘客이 많아 車ㅅ속이 매우 비좁으리라든 것이 오히려 零星하다. 우리가 車 한간을 독차지하고 앉어 나는 막연히 郊外의 風景을 바라보다가 天籟에게 끌려 䟽通에 당한 實錄抄를 보며 句節을 뜨이었다. 霎時間 議政府에 다달렀다. 우리는 다 나렸다.
먼첨 음식점으로 들어 點心療飢는 갈비와 藥酒로 하다. 갈비는 질기기는 해도 맛있다. 과연 名不虛得이다. 술을 못자시는 분도 갈비 때문에 잔을 사양치 않는다. 우리는 누구나 얼굴에 다 붉은 빛을 띠고 나섰다. 오후 3시 반. 하늘이 퍽 흐리고 雨氣가 있다. 우리는 비맞날걸 念慮하며 談話를 주고받고 하며 밭가운대ㅅ길로 걷다. 모래만 수북한 乾川으로 건너 마을을 지내오다 고개를 넘어 山神堂도 보고 길을 다시 찾어 한 溪谷으로 들었다.
요리조리 돌아드는 깊숙한 골짜기 물도 좋고 돌도 좋다. - 玉같이 빛나는 돌, 콸콸 울리는 瀑布와 여흘, 紺碧한 쏘. 그리고 좌우로 짙은 綠陰과 芳草 - 이곳을 나는 걸어가면서도 한 발자옥 한 발자옥 띠어놓기를 아까워하였다. 한 좁은 모롱이를 도니 古木속으로 頹落한 瓦屋이 보인다. 이게 回龍寺. 앞엔 시내, 주위로는 山인 바 바루 그 뒤 솟은 봉의 중턱에는 李太祖가 祈禱하셨다는 窟과 無學大師가 살었다는 窟이 있다. 이건 傳說이지만 太宗이 太祖의 第五子로서 그때 世子인 芳碩을 謀害하고 功臣 鄭道傳을 죽이매 太祖께서 크게 怒하여 第二子인 定宗에게 禪位하고 떠나 咸興舊邸로 가, 게시었다. 太宗은 그 뒤 바루 定宗의 禪位를 받고 太祖께 자주 使臣을 보내어 回鑾하심을 請한 즉 그를 문득 射殺하시다가 朴淳, 成石磷의 懇請으로 마츰내 돌아오시는데 온 政府가 뒤끌어 마중을 지금 議政府라는 곳에까지 나가 太祖를 뵈었다. 議政府라는 이름도 이 때문에 얻은 것이라 하고 이 回龍寺도 그때 太祖의 願刹로 된 것이라 한다. 허나 이 절의 事蹟은 이 전설밖에 그다지 들리는 것이 없고 風謠三選의 張混의 作인
潭月寒生樹, 山鐘早閉門, 無心老釋子, 終夕憩雲根
이라는 詩一首가 있다. 이건 지금 우리가 보는 景과는 다르다. 뺑둘러 가시울타리를 하고 入門嚴禁함을 써부치고 中年이나 넘은 僧竪子가 住持로 있으며 바야흐로 齋를 지내노라고 우리가 들오는 줄도 모른다. 우리는 그 앞마당 바위에 앉어 半時間이나 쉬었다.<118>
그 앞시내를 건너 빙에로 가다 또 右편으로 건너 으늑한 골짜기로 들다. 또 左편으로 건너 雜木이 茂盛한 溪谷으로 오르다. 비가 듯기 시작한다. 점점 더 한다. 山ㅅ새 한마리 아니 나르고 山草들은 무릎 위까지 휘휘 감기고 句配는 점점 급하다. 숨이 잦고 다리는 무거워진다. 간신히 마루턱을 당하였다. 젖은 菓子를 끄내어 먹으며 좀 歇脚을 하고 그 등성이로 오르니 잘크막한 고개가 나선다. 回龍寺서 오는 길이 둘이 있으니 지금 우리가 온 길과 또는 그 위로 날ㅅ등을 타고 이 고개로 오는 길이다. 그 길도 6년 전에 내가 와 보았다. 그 때 引路는 78세된 蓮隱老長이었다. 一行이 다 허덕이는데 그 老長은 泰然하며 健康을 자랑하였다. 나는 그때가 다시 생각힌다. 이런 비는 없었다. 우리는 침침한 松林 속으로 썩은 닢사귀냄새를 풍기며 발을 옮겼다. 모다 침묵하였다. 비탈을 잡어 돌다 나리니 상취밭이 나서고 그 넘어이 望月寺다. 그 뒷문으로 들었다. 寂寂도 하다. 法堂마루에 짐들을 벗어놓고 걸어앉었노라니 學人 하나이 방에서 나온다. 날은 다 저물고 비는 그저 줄줄 온다. 우리는 자고 가기를 말하였다. 學人은 住持는 出他하고 供養主는 다러났으니 못하겠다 하고 다른데로 우리를 가라한다. 우리는 堪忍하고 또 懇請하였으나 듣지 않는다. 우리는 그 右편 客室 불때는 아궁이 앞에 옷을 말리며 모여 서서 의논을 하다가 필경 天籟가 名啣를 내보이고 談判하는 바람에 快히 肯諾으로 얻군 그 左편 禪房으로 들었다. 서로 囊橐을 끄르고 穀茶를 내어 마시고 供養은 法堂에서 하였다. 禪房은 아니 쓰다가 이날 쓴다하며 불을 너무 때었다. 煩熱은 하였으되 感氣는 들지 않었다.
새들이 짖어귀는 소리에 잠을 깨었다. 구름이 山기슭으로 뭉게 뭉게 피여오르고 이슬비가 부슬부슬 나린다. 개었드라면 漢江도 보고 日出도 보았을걸 하고 뜰에 나섰다. 뒤에 우쭉우쭉한 峯巒과 굳게 擁衛한 靑龍白虎와 여기저기 버려있는 老松, 奇岩과 때로 변화하는 雲霧가 道峯의 絶勝뿐 아니다. 京山으로는 이만한 곳이 없으리라. 僧伽, 三幕, 大聖도 眼界는 넓으나 이처럼 秀麗하지 못하고 津寬, 奉恩도 으늑은 하나 이처럼 幽雅하지 못하다. 나는 무단히 詩情을 이르키며 이리저리 거닐었다. 朝飯 후 石南은 嘉慶板眞言集을 박이고 우리는 閒談하였다. 點心 때에야 비가 개었다. 登山하는 이들이 패패이 올라온다. 대개는 靑年男女다. 麥酒에 流行歌에<119> 질탕히 군다. 우리는 法堂 앞에서 撮影을 하고 右편 고개를 넘어 이 절의 開祖라는 慧炬의 石塔을 보고 樹林 속으로 또 고개를 넘다. 어마어마한 萬丈峯 밑으로 기어올라 매달린 岩窟 - 滿月寶殿을 보았다. 심부림군같은 남자가 부엌에서 일하고 두 계집애는 물을 깃고 한 마누라는 藥을 다리고 또 한 마누라는 琉璃窓으로 우리를 내다보고 한편 바위 우에는 개부랄꽃(蘭科植物, 敦盛草)이 검붉게 피어있다. 우리는 물을 달래어 마시고 돌아섰다. 나려보이든 고개하나를 넘으니 한 여자가 아이를 데리고 나무를 뜯으며 올해는 취도 그리 나지 않았다 하고 우리를 흘긋흘긋 처다본다. 나와 仁谷은 蘭을 심을 浮黑土를 캐어 지고 天竺寺를 찾어 들매 한 옆에서는 여자 2, 3인이 꽃을 꺾으며 어정거리고 한 和尙은 法堂에서 面刀를 하고 있다. 이 절은 寧國寺를 헐어다 지었다 하나 퍽 頹落하였다. 앞에 서렸든 다래넌출도 없어지고 木蓮만 두어株 남어 아직도 淸楚한 꽃이 유다른 香을 피운다. 이 절은 터이 너무 狹窄하나 역시 淨界다. 뒤에는 峻峯, 앞에는 斷崖로 과연 비일 수 없는 곳이다. 그러나 天竺이나 望月이 높은 山턱에 달려있으매 오르기가 어려우므로 예전의 詩人墨客도 와본 이가 적었든 모양이라 從來 詩文集에도 별양 이름이 나타나지 못하였다. 나도 와보기 전에 天竺, 望月은 퍽 險峻하여 오르기 어렵다는 말을 들었다. 이런 길을 겁을 내든 때에는 望月, 天竺도 숨을 수밖에 없었다. 지금도 이런 절이 귀여운 건 서울을 좀 떠러져 있기 때문이다. 만약 서울 가차이 있었드라면 벌써 俗化하였을 것이다.
우리는 峻急한 길로 한참 나려오매 봉머리로는 저녁별이 비껴 든다. 연신 계곡을 따러오면 점점 平緩한 지대가 나서고 두 골물이 합해 흐르고 왼쪽으로는 안옥한 都局이 있어 논머리에 柱礎와 土壇이 남었으니 예는 道峯書院터. 본시 寧國寺基址로 宣祖6년에 書院을 짓고 靈谷書院이라 하였다가 그 뒤 道峯書院이라 하였으며 이 書院에는 趙靜庵先生과 宋尤庵先生을 위하다 高宗8년에 毁廢가 되었다. 그 東北에는 宣祖 때 詩人 劉村隱(希慶)의 墓山이 있고 水石이 좋으므로 村隱이 자주 왕래하며 詩도 만히 짓고 예를 와 살려하다 못하고는 畵家李澄을 시켜 林莊圖를 그리고 그때 諸公에게 詩와 序를 받어 큰 軸을 이루었다.
空林夕氣翠霏霏, 一壑泉聲逵石扉
山雨乍收苔逕滑, 木蓮花裏醉扶歸<120>
이는 村隱이 寧國洞을 읊은 것이다. 이 光景이 지금 우리가 보는 그것과 같다. 우리는 그 앞의 光風霽月泉翁(李陶庵縡)書七字를 사신 水石이 좋은 곳으로 가서 발도 싯고 석은 가지로 주어 밥도 짓고 고기도 지지고 하여 아끼든 병으로 다 거울렀다. 그리고 村隱처럼 醉하지는 못하였으나 극히 유쾌하였다.
그 아래는 마을이 있고 石壁과 쏘이 있고 趙心庵(斗淳)의 別莊인 枕瀨亭이 있더니 지금은 뉘집 園林이 되어 길을 물려 새로 내고 鐵絲로 울을 하였다. 이 또한 殺風景이 아닌가 하며 우리는 그 마을을 지나, 쌍갈무니로 하여 倉洞驛으로 오다. 오후 8시나 되었다.

烽燧臺高峯山

柳光烈

때는 初夏이다. 옛 詩의 「綠陰芳草勝花時」라 함은 이때를 가르찬 말이다. 京城附近에는 散策할 만한 곳이 적지 않다. 혹 名勝으로 또는 古蹟으로 散策人士를 부르는 곳이 많이 있다.
다른 곳은 이미 상당히 「포퓰라」하였음으로 나는 이때까지 세상에 들어나지 아니한 곳 하나를 紹介하려 한다.
그것은 京義線으로 약 45분(普通汽車)을 가다가 一山驛에서 내리어 20분 내지 30분의 등산을 하면 도달할 수 있는 高峯山이다.
山 우에는 平地로 터를 닦아놓고 금잔듸가 깔리어 앉어서 놀기에 적당하다. 南편으로 흰띄같은 漢江이 흐르고 서북으로는 松嶽을 경계로 무수한 殘山短麓이 와서 절을 한다. 田野에는 흰옷 입은 農夫들이 한가로히 논을 갈고 밭이랑에는 수건 쓴 婦人네들의 나물캐는 광경이 보힌다. 금잔듸에 자리를 정하고 携帶하고 간 一盃酒를 기우리는 것도 좋고 또는 준비한 茶菓를 풀어 小宴을 排設하여도 좋다.
風景만 이렇게 佳麗할 뿐 아니라<121> 古跡도 상당히 있다. 이 부근은 옛날 高句麗時代의 達己省縣이다. 그 때에는 半島에 高句麗, 百濟, 新羅 三國이 있어 爭覇를 하였었는데 高句麗의 安藏王은 少時 때에 漢氏美女와 綿綿의 정을 속삭이어 美女는 이 山上에서 烽火를 들어 安藏王을 맞었다는 綠由로 처음에는 高烽山이라 하였던 것을 後世에 高峯山이라고 부르게 되었다 한다.
또 古老들이 전하는 말을 들으면 壬辰兵亂에 淸正部下의 軍이 이 山上에 진을 치고 있었다하나 文獻은 남지 아니하였다. 다만 이 山上에 평평하게 닦어놓은 모양은 烽燧臺가 있었던 形跡이 현저하다.
烽燧臺라 함은 지금의 哨戒, 傳信을 겸하는 것이니 半島는 항시 외래의 敵을 防備하기 위하야 山上에 이런 烽燧臺를 만들고 外敵이 들어오든지 또는 國家에 무슨 큰 일이 있으면 山上에 홰불을 집히어 警報를 發한 것이니 지금으로 치면 哨戒를 하다가 警笛을 부는 것과 일반이다. 이 山上에서 몇번이나 國家重大事變의 警火를 들었는가 하면 구을러 感慨가 없지 아니하다.
이 山上에서 놀다가 저편으로 넘어가면 山麓에 萬景寺라는 조고마한 절이 있다. 옛글에 이른바 古寺에 荒烟이 오르고 暮鐘이 구슬프게 울린다 함이 그대로 眼前에 나타난다. 散策人士로서 만일 中火準備가 없으면 이 절에 가서 점심을 부탁하여도 좋을 것이다.
高陽에는 碧蹄館에 文祿役에 小早川隆景, 立花宗茂가 明軍을 대파한 곳이 있고 그 부근에는 高麗 末年에 大陸發展을 하려다가 萬斛의 한을 품고 遇害한 崔瑩의 墓가 있으며 幸州에 權慄의 勝戰蹟의 있어 世에 유명하거니와 이 高峯山도 하로 散策에는 적당할 뿐 아니라 筆者의 소년시대에 만히 이 산에 올라 본 일이 있어서 30년전 옛 記憶을 더듬어서 이 소개를 草한다.<122>

冠岳山遊記

崔鳳則

「果川冠岳山」이라면 民謠로도 이름 높은 곳이요, 李朝 어느 임금님 수라상에 생선이 올랐는데 너무도 까맣게 탓으므로 숙수를 불러
「얘! 여바! 반찬을 먼 불에 굽지, 이것 너무 타지 않었느냐!」
꾸중을 나리시었더니, 이튼날 아침 수라상에는 아조 날생선이 올랐는지라 임금께서 기가 막히시어
「얘! 여바라. 엇저녁에는 생선이 너무 탓더니 이번에는 웨 이리 생생하냐!」
「네, 상감마님께서 먼 불에 쬐여야 한답시기로 어제밤 冠岳山불에 밤새도록 쬐였습니다」라고.
何如턴 말속을 통하여도 이름난 冠岳山은 어지간이 좋은 山이기에 노래에로, 이야기에로 古今을 통하여 膾煮될 것이 아니다.
어느날 아침이다. 몇몇 古友와 같이 노들 건너 電車終點에서 나렸다. 四節 登山客이 踏至하는 冠岳山行인 것이다. 西으로 新作路, 交通網이란 절대한 권위앞에 목을 잘리인 嵯峨山 나지막한 山머리에는 어리신 端宗朝에 忠命을 다한 死六臣墓가 祀堂 한 간 남기지 못한 채 荒凉한 草丘에 조그만 碣하나식으로 당대에 당당하던 碩士 李凱, 朴彭年, 成三問 등등의 墓가 머리속에 떠오른다. 따라 그들의 時調 두어 首
이 몸이 죽고 죽어 무엇이 될고 하니,
蓬萊山 第一峯에 落落長松되었다가
白雪이 滿乾坤할제 獨也靑靑하리라.
(成三問)
窓안에 혔는 촉불 눌과 이별하였관대,
곁으로 눌물지고 속타는 줄 몰으는고?
저 촉불 날과 같아야 속타는 줄 몰으더라.
(李塏)
六臣墓 재넘어 한많은 漢江水를 依舊히 바라보고 섰는 鷺梁津忠祠가 또한 생각난다. 이는 變德많으시던 肅宗께서 張嬉嬪을 寵愛하시어 無辜하신 閔中殿을 廢出하실 때에 忠諫하다가 酷刑을 받고 배출하던제음 노들을 지나다가 少年時 父命으로 「大丈夫는 兒女子의 怨心을 사는 것이 아니니라」는 말슴에 단지 一夕만을 同過하었던 志操높은 婢子를 만난 두어 거름 후 刑毒으로 해서 轎子안에서 그만 殉職허였던 朴泰輔를 후일 悔悟하시는 肅宗께서 閔中殿을 復位하시던 날에 「泰輔가 어데 갔느냐? 泰輔가 살었던 들 오늘을<123> 얼마나 기뻐했겠느냐?」고 전일 당신의 잘못을 깊이 뉘우치시면서 朴泰輔의 暗葬으로 調査하여 厚葬케 하고 거기에 祀堂을 세우섰든 그 忠祠가 우두먼이 남아 있어 300년전 옛일을 지금도 자아내게 한다. 一言을 付記해 둠은 朴泰輔의 祀字가 落成되든 翌朝 그 석가래 끝에는 一美人이 목달려있었나니 이는 一夕同衾의 婢子가 泰輔의 怨풀림을 靑天에 呼召하다가 그 願이 이루어지매 殉死한 갸륵한 그 주검, 어찌 逸話의 一節이 아닐 수 있으랴!
요사이와 같이 긴긴 해에는 아침 일즈막이 떠나면 漢江건너 鷺梁津電車終點에서 한 馬場밖에 아니되는 이야기 서리운 한낮 嵯峨山 머리를 들려가드라도 넉넉히 冠岳行에 支障이 없으리라.
路邊 언덕 위에 우뚝 선 六臣碑 앞으로 나려 永登浦間 신작로를 橫斷하여 木洞町으로 돌리어 上道町 넘어 朴齊宮 윗 마을로 奉天里塔洞을 지나게 된다. 왕년에 우연이 塔洞에 들렸다가 두어층 떠러진 五層塔이 一草家庭前에 鎭座해 있음을 살피다가 塔面에 「姜邯瓚落星臺」라는 刻字를 발견하고 깜작 놀라 村老에게 來歷을 물으니 麗朝 顯宗때에 북으로 침입하는 契丹을 단숨에 寧州까지 뭇즐러 大勝捿을 한 名將 姜邯瓚 將軍의 출생지가 바로 여기라 한다. 이 같은 史跡있음을 몰라본 무디인 歷史眼을 스사로 브끄리었다. 모르긴 하거니와 冠岳이 유명함은 그 산세의 險峻偉秀한 점에도 있겠지마는 그 山下에 萬古名將을 출산케 하였으므로 더욱이 이름높지 않었는가 생각된다.
塔洞을 지나 2, 3 馬場 지나면 제법 山坂에 오르게 된다. 다시 두어 마장 오르면 急角度의 石間溪邊에 이른다. 이에서 勇士답게 허리를 굽혀 기운차게 石溪淸流를 氣끝 들어케고 몸을 틀어 岩面에 一座하면 北岳山이 바로 정면에 오고 汝矣島飛行場이 코아레 놓인다. 어니듯 식는 땀에 몸이 경쾌하여 거름을 재촉해 35度角, 登陟이 끝나는 곳에 冠岳本領인 北麓등성이에 올라선다. 사방으로 眼界가 넓어져 近畿一帶가 碁局처럼 눈앞에 버린다. 冠岳北麓의 脊粱을 타고 南으로 두어킬로 나아가면 재넘어 山坂으로 비스듬이 나리다가 左靑龍, 右白虎로 東向한 古刹의 터전이 나서니, 여게가 바로 新羅文武王時義湘大師의 創建인 義湘寺舊趾다. 西向뒤로 몸을 틀며 턱을 활신 뒤로 저치면 야즈라진 懸岩面에 달린 戀主臺를 奇異와 驚嘆속에 바라볼 수 있다. 그뿐이랴 발서 저 峯머리에 올라 좋와랏고 떠드는<124> 少年少女들! 더욱이 우리의 발거름을 재촉이나 하는 듯 재재거린다.
다시 서남향으로 등넘어 약 30步에 淸雅하게 자리잡은 戀主庵을 松林 사이로 바라보면서 一路右便山坂을 거름거름 攀上하면 海拔 629米突이나 되는 冠岳의 最高峯 戀主峯에 올라선다. 西으로 仁川海가 눈앞에 橫臥하고 南으로 今日始興郡屬 昔日果川邑이 안윽이 眼界에 잠든다. 三南通路의 유일한 要衝이었거니 하매 鐵馬가 달리는 금일에 있어 昔今의 感이 뉘 없으랴!
果川건너 氣勢차게 둘리인 山脈은 역시 이름있는 淸溪山이다. 南으로 氣차게 달리어 水原 뒤의 光敎山을 이룩한 大山脈인 것이다. 몸을 동북으로 틀면 纛島 앞으로 굽이쳐 蠶室里벌과 銅省里 山飛頃 아레로 누였이 흘러나리는 일대의 漢江水 건너 京城의 萬戶長安이 膝下에 노인다. 果川便으로 말등바위(馬背岩)를 위태위태 넘어서면 옛날 義湘臺, 今日戀主臺, 懸崖에다 丈餘의 石築을 바치인 庵子가 絶妙하게도 서 있다. 바루 아까 처다보이던 戀主臺다. 山僧은 말한다.
「麗朝가 國運이 다할 때에 杜門洞70人中 姜得龍, 徐甄, 南乙珍 세 분의 忠義士가 아레 義湘寺에 와 居하매 아침마다 이 峯 義湘臺에 올라 北으로 眼界에 닷는 松京을 바라보고 忠恨의 솟는 熱淚를 뿌리며 王公朝를 향하여 日恒三拜하고 나려오곤 하였다. 이러기를 두어해 후에 南乙珍과 徐甄은 다시 杜門洞으로 돌아가고 姜得龍 혼자만이 每朝 이 峯에 올라 松京向哭을 하루같이 하기를 기력이 다하는 날까지 하였는데 저 남향 어느 山麓에 그의 墓土가 오늘날까지 있어 靑山孤魂이 아직도 옛節을 지키고 있다오. 한데
李朝端宗事變에 淸節을 지키어 議政府回龍寺에서 落髮爲僧한 孝寧大君이 여기왔다가 麗朝의 이 三義士의 來歷을 들으시고 그를 기념으로 義湘寺를 山넘어로 옴기고 義湘臺를 重修케 한 후 매일 아침 임금을 생각했다고 해서 義湘寺는 戀主庵, 義湘臺는 戀主臺라고 題號를 고치었습넨다요」云云.<125>
<114-125>