잡지명	개벽 제43호
발행일	1924년 01월 01일
기사제목	支配階級敎化 被支配階級敎化 (Cultivation of the Ruling Class, Cultivation of the Ruled Class)
필자	八峰山人
기사형태	논설 (Editorial/Argumentative Essay)

Cultivation of the Ruling Class, Cultivation of the Ruled Class
						P'al Pong San In

I have translated the terms "bourgeois cult" and "proletariat cult" here for convenience as "Cultivation of the Ruling Class, Cultivation of the Ruled Class" (支配階級敎化, 被支配階級敎化). Today's ruling class, regardless of the country, is the bourgeoisie, and today's ruled class is entirely the proletariat. Therefore, it would have the same meaning as "Cultivation of the Propertied Class" or "Cultivation of the Propertied Class."

1. A Strange True Form

For today's propertyless class—poor peasants, professional vagrants, and a small number of laborers—there are no institutions for cultivation. At the same time, even if there are occasional cultivation movements for these people, they are almost half destroyed into nothingness due to oppression close to violence. Instead, the cultivation institutions of those people, the ruling class, proceed on a large scale, systematically, achieving great, infinite effects. When Chosŏn (朝鮮) was still unable to evolve from the aristocratic state class and remained stagnant, there was only an underground cultivation movement seeking to foster nationalistic rebellious spirit against the new ruling class that covered us. At the time when the astonishing thought newly arises that there was nothing like a cultivation movement for the Fourth Estate, the master of the new era, we have now reached a situation where we are doubly surprised by the fact that the "bourgeois cult" (뿌르즈와컬트) for the survival of their ruling class and the complete annihilation of the lower society of the oppressed class is unlimitedly, mysteriously, achieving great results within the heads of all the people of Chosŏn, using the complete organization and methods of the new ruling class's capitalism. The cultivation movement of those people, the bourgeoisie, the current ruling class, which schemes for the social survival of themselves, the ruling class, and the scarecrows among the ruled class who have sold their entire souls and follow them, its organization, is focused with all its power on eradicating the souls of all the <13> populace and creating spiritless, dream-crazed patients of capitalist society. Boys, who could be said to possess strong rebellious consciousness and pure souls, are almost remodeled within the poison jar called the elementary school (小學校), and in just 4 or 5 years, they are transformed into machines filled with the indelible bourgeois consciousness and the poisonous liquid of imperialism.

Thus, the need to examine the true form of this strange "bourgeois cult" (支配階級敎化), to dissect the strange and unpredictable bourgeois cult we face, is something everyone feels keenly without needing to state it.

In Chosŏn, the bourgeois cult has descended in a manner even more complex than in any other country, largely because its circumstances are unique. That is, the orderly, systematic cultivation institutions of those people who are the ruling class today, and the traditional yet formless cultivation effect of the so-called Yangban (兩班) class, which was the ruling class of yesterday, have, as if by agreement, created a bourgeois cult with the same objective.

When we remove the outer skin to dissect this strange true form, we discover here two things: tradition, the lingering ghost of the past, and the bourgeois cult, the monster of today. After clarifying the essence of tradition—the unorganized bourgeois cult that stands behind the overtly revealed ruling class cultivation institutions at all times, promoting them from the shadows—we will sequentially dissect the vast enemy in front. Tradition is the ghost of ancestors; now, we stand upon the fate of having to eliminate this ghost.

2. The Lingering Ghost of Tradition

The lingering ghost of tradition, which plays a considerable role as a worker within today's bourgeois cult organization, carries out its assigned duties within the family and achieves considerable results. At the first step of life, our younger generation immediately becomes captive to the lingering ghost of tradition. The more enthusiastic our fathers and elder brothers are about children's education, the more they interfere in the lives of the young, restricting their entire being, stamping them again into the mold of convention and tradition.

The true nature of Chosŏn, the direct descendant of the culture from 2,000 years ago of the Republic of China (中華民國), is revealed here. The phrase "serving the great with the small" (以小事大), which we have heard until our ears ache, is so painful to our hearts that using it here again is nauseating. The ideology of Confucianism (儒敎) conquered all of Chosŏn, <14> and Chosŏn today exhibits the phenomenon of struggling within the life of this ideology. The old garb of the aristocratic state system, founded on Confucian thought (儒敎思想), is passed down with a kind of mysterious power even to the heads of the children of today's Yangban class, and it indirectly makes today's bourgeois cult more effective.

To explain this a bit more detail, Chosŏn, since Tan'gun (檀君), was a theocratic state. It gradually developed, imported Chinese culture and artifacts, and after Buddhism (佛敎) spread, it transformed into an aristocratic state. What is the evidence of this time? The class-based classification of occupations is one example: Scholar-official, Farmer, Artisan, Merchant (士農工商). It's needless to say how much power the civil (文) and military (武) officials held over the common people (Saengwŏn-nim (생원님) is an antique term from that time!). Furthermore, the objects of reverence for the common people were none other than these civil and military officials. The same can be said regarding Japan (日本); its warrior class (武士) retained its power from the Nara (奈良) period through the Tokugawa (德川) era, and even after the Meiji (明治) Restoration, the situation remained unchanged.

Chosŏn's Yangban are similar to Japan's warriors, but their diversity is unique to Chosŏn. If a Yangban passed the military examination, he was a Hoban (胡班); if his family had lived in the countryside for 3 or 4 generations, they were Toban (土班); besides these, there were Noron (老論), Soron (少論), Namin (南), Pugin (北), etc., etc. That is, the remnants of this aristocratic state system clothe their children in the garments of tradition from a young age, fitting them into the rigid category (규범 - category) of Confucianism, a type of ideology based on the fundamental precepts of Neo-Confucianism like the Five Relationships and Three Bonds (五倫三綱). Consciously or unconsciously, they form the internal part of the bourgeois cult.

The ideology of revering those with special privileges, like a Prime Minister (政丞) of a country or a Grand Marshal (大元師) of a country, has transformed today into the form of dreaming of becoming a County Magistrate (郡守), Provincial Governor (道長官), etc., officials belonging to the Government-General (總督府). This is the entirety of home education within the family. Parents, using the current state organization and especially Japan's social structure as a model and foundation, pour capitalism and the ideology of money worship (金權崇拜思想) into their children from the very first step of their lives. Our tradition! Tradition! which we boast has a half-ten-thousand-year history! This is the scarecrow and lingering ghost that grips our lives today, and at the same time, it holds the duty of powerfully fostering the bourgeois cult of today's ruling class.

3. The Mechanization of Spirituality <15>

The bourgeois cult, in the form of tradition, consciously or unconsciously, before children enter the place called elementary school, establishes a foundation in the home, turning today's children into possessors of deceptive morality, exclusive emotions, and will. Then, it truly, formally, and openly places them onto the first stage of the bourgeois cult's project. Children's parents, whether yangban or commoner (상놈), think their children won't amount to anything if they don't enroll their sons and daughters in the place called elementary school. - And truthfully, even if they don't send them to elementary school, within their homes and the circumstances of Chosŏn's customs (conventions - 因襲), they will naturally undergo as much cultivation as they would in school. There's no helping it, perhaps - Or, they have the anxious feeling that if they don't enroll them in elementary school, graduate them, and have them study further in middle school (中學), professional school (專門學), or even university (大學), they won't be able to make a living. Thus, they make sure to enroll not just their sons but also their daughters in this place called elementary school. I repeat, even if they weren't enrolled in elementary school, it goes without saying that they would inevitably be pressed into the mold of tradition and convention; I state this twice here.

So, what kind of education is provided in this place called elementary school, which bears such heavy and great responsibility and duty? We are witnessing right before our eyes how, with enormous expense, orderly organization, and limitless time and effort, it is properly and grandly becoming a bourgeois cult. From the first grade, one must know "XXX." The reader promoting the military spirit of Momotarō (桃太郞) gets embedded in the children's brains. The song "XXXXXX" becomes almost a habit for elementary school children to sing. There is another example here that we must not forget. It is the fable "The Tortoise and the Hare" (兎と龜). The spirit it teaches is the diligence spirit of the bourgeoisie. The Japanese proverb "Poverty cannot keep up with earning" (稼ぐに追ひ付く貧乏なシ - Kasegu ni oitsuku binbō nashi) represents the essence of this spirit. But what about the fact that truly honest and diligent people struggle in poverty their whole lives and die? What about the fact that the more they work, the more they are exploited like cattle and horses, only increasing the welfare of others? The problem lies solely in the flaws of the organization. Thus, thinking that they occasionally teach something useful is, on the contrary, no less harmful than "Momotarō." "Momotarō" injects the military spirit, "The Tortoise and the Hare" injects the spirit of willingly accepting one's situation even as a slave and being diligent in even more slavish tasks. Next, they receive training in uninteresting military-style physical exercises (軆操), are made to develop feelings of respect for Army Generals (陸軍大將) and Navy Admirals (海軍大將) - OOOO, OOOOO -, cultivate the saving mentality of bourgeois society, are made to respect the authorities (當者), and are made to submit falsehood and ostentation to discipline and rules <16> and are made to learn from the elementary school ethics textbook (修身敎科書) and various other subjects filled with the spirit of the virtues of endurance (忍從), gratitude (謝恩), and obedience (服從). That is, history praising the rulers and non-artistic readers (Classical Chinese - 漢文, Korean - 韓鮮文, Japanese - 日本文) are those things.

At this point, the innate spirituality (靈性) of life becomes a kind of machine that praises bourgeois society, unnatural, having forgotten spirituality! Thus, these young ghosts (?) who have forgotten their individuality fill our Chosŏn (though not only Chosŏn). These young ghosts praising capitalism complete the first stage of the bourgeois cult. The majority, just as they learned in elementary school to be diligent like slaves, end up obeying hard labor at the lowest stratum of the bourgeois social organization, selling pieces of their hearts. A remaining portion enters the countryside, becoming human waste (人間的 廢物) who frequently spout "Baka (바가 - idiot), Kora (고라 - hey!), Chikushō (칙쇼- damn it!)", and when they gather among themselves, they become people who only boast like flimsy greens about the bourgeois education they received over 4-5 years. Then, a smaller portion proceeds to middle school, professional school, or university, receiving the retail sale of bourgeois knowledge belonging to the highest level. Thus, the esteemed readers must remember that the first stage of the bourgeois cult has ended.

4. Learning for Official Use

Having finished the first stage, elementary school, they have now moved on to the even uglier middle school, professional school, or university, which expresses the characteristics of capitalism. Here, education becomes a privilege, and the masses are excluded. The sellers of learning (學文賣買業者), in order to maintain their status, life, and property within today's social organization, constantly flatter the bourgeoisie (propertied class - ruling class) to gain their protection. (I include universities when I say this because, although there is still no institution called a university within Chosŏn, I am speaking based on the many people who have studied in mainland Japan (日本內地) for many years. How could the situation in mainland Japan and Chosŏn be different?) If my words are incorrect, I hope even one person among the so-called middle school teachers (中等學校敎員) will step forward and say, "We are not people who flatter the bourgeoisie and receive their protection to maintain our lives and property (living expenses) within today's social organization." The same applies to university professors (大學敎授) in Japan.

These people receive the benevolent aid of the bourgeoisie, constantly using hypocrisy to obscure their true nature, making it unknown to others, <17> and engage in the retail sale of the learning they happened to acquire. Some manage to barely survive this way, while others accumulate money. These petit bourgeoisie (小有産階級 - petty propertied class) are absorbed in studying lofty principles and methods of acquisition, meticulous and sharp tactics, strategies for rising into the ruling class, and the ethics of self-deception. The propertyless (無産者) have no means to enroll in such highest-level institutions and are already being exploited of their own labor due to the facilities and costs used for this purpose – that is, I am referring to the entirety of taxes paid into the national treasury (國庫金).

Recently, we see many private schools (講習所 - training centers) of middle school level springing up like mushrooms after rain in Chosŏn. Are these people truly starting such endeavors out of a will to engage in cultivation movements in the true sense? Absolutely, truly, decidedly not. I assert that there was no other accompanying factor than the cause of wanting to engage in the retail sale of established knowledge (旣成知識) by flattering the prevailing trends (風潮). While engaging in the retail sale of established knowledge, on the one hand, they enjoy the good name of being called an education enterprise (敎育事業), and on the other hand, it is merely a scheme to make some money. And what is the work these people do? In the end, it becomes a bourgeois cult.

Generally, the goal is the cultivation of character as a member of the privileged class (特權階級), and consequently, it is devoted to researching the means to stand on the upper structure—the surface—of the social organization as a member of the privileged class and exploit the lower structure. At this time, here, the tears, blood, and sweat of the propertyless flow.

5. Benevolent Cultivation

What has been discussed above refers to the formal, legitimate, systematic cultivation institutions. Education, which has sucked the tears, blood, and sweat of the propertyless, creates new, sharp machines of exploitation and sends them back again to the side of the propertyless. – That is to say, the machines that have received the retail sale of learning for official use (御用學問), graduates of any educational institution, whether they become government officials (官吏) in public offices (官廳) or do some other private work, are nothing more than a type of exploitation machine, blindly becoming the fingertips, the strings of the ruling class. They approve the survival of the bourgeois social organization and possess a service morality towards the privileged class.

However, if only such formal cultivation institutions existed, one could perhaps say it wasn't thoroughly prepared, but the systematic <18> thinking of those people does not stop at just this. Occasionally, there are benevolent cultivation projects (恩惠的 敎化事業). Their names are varied, but examples include Industrial Promotion Associations (産業獎勵會), Sericulture Training Courses (蠶絲講習會), Teacher Training Courses (敎員講習會), and various other associations scattered throughout the local counties (郡). All of these bear the responsibility of this bourgeois cult. Using magic lanterns (幻燈) or statistical tables (統計表), they skillfully propagate, eradicating from the roots the vitality of the rural youth that remained, however little, and plant in its place an indelible bourgeois consciousness. Then, pointing to such projects, they say, "It is benevolent (恩惠的)!"

As Chosŏn increasingly resembles Japan, lectures by conscientious individuals (有志者), which appear sporadically like beans sprouting in a drought, are extremely suppressed. In contrast, lecture meetings by sellers of learning for official use thrive under the protection of the authorities, carrying out considerable cultivation effects. A specific example is the lecture meetings of religious figures (宗敎家) serving the bourgeoisie (뿌르즈와御用). There, revolution is cursed, people's vibrant nature is broken and confined within the ideology of idols (偶像), and curses against socialism (社會主義) are bestowed. Does this kind of thing only happen at the lecture meetings of such people? It's regrettable to say, but absolutely not. In all institutions besides benevolent education, at every opportunity, we witness the existence of the roc's wings (鵬翼 - enormous influence) of the tremendous bourgeois cult.

6. Bourgeois Cult

That is, all institutions under the control of today's ruling class are not idle in exerting extreme measures of containment against socialism (社會主義), the counterpart to capitalist society. To prevent the people's proper awakening (自覺), they attach all sorts of wicked, evil names (惡名) to this kind of ideology, making the people dislike it themselves as much as possible. For example, Bolshevism (뽈세비-슴) has been propagated so shockingly as "Radical Faction" (過激派) that even children are made to think of the Radical Faction as non-human beasts. Consequently, even young people who are elementary school teachers, upon seeing even a sprout of this bright red ideology, feel a mental excitement close to loyalty (忠心) and, as much as possible, cut off that sprout or crush and eliminate it, then become triumphant (得意揚揚). From the Ministers (大臣) and above, all officials (官吏), down to the school staff (通學校職員) who should be close to the populace, and even the semi-official, semi-private scarecrows, with one heart and all their strength, throwing their entire selves into it, become dikes blocking the tide of this bright red ideology. <19>

In Chosŏn, the dissemination of the Japanese language is gradually becoming sufficient, reaching a level where by the 2nd or 3rd year of middle school, students can read most difficult books in Japanese. Furthermore, regarding the phenomenon of extensive reading of literary works (文學書類), what is extremely noteworthy is that Japanese literature, especially creative works, contains many sermons that affirm the continuation of bourgeois society and flatter it. Although the newly emerging literary circle (新興文團) can be said to have gained some influence today, generally, the authors of the literary works read by middle school students in Chosŏn are possessors of outdated, anachronistic ideas even in present-day Japan. Broadly classifying the literary works that middle school students are reading now, they include the writings of the Shirakaba school's (白樺派) petit-bourgeois humanitarian thought, the Human School's (人間派) shallow literature of infatuation (痴情文學), and the miscellaneous works of the mainstream and branch streams of the existing Japanese literary scene—prostitution literature (賣淫文學), the humming of masturbatory poets (手淫詩人), fin-de-siècle decadent school (惡魔派), and writings like the sleep-talking of individuals with abnormal sexual desires (變態性欲病者).

The effect of such literature is to pathologically develop something called literature, make people indifferent to systems and organizations, build flimsy ivory towers upon reality, compose verses of masturbatory self-consolation (手淫的 自慰), create song fragments comparable to lamentations of ancient East Asian women, and indirectly lead to degeneration into sentimentalism (俗情主義) that affirms reality.

Thus, present-day art (藝術), present-day religion (宗敎), present-day education (敎育), even down to the lowest-ranking officials (尾官末職), consciously or unconsciously, carry out this tremendous function of the bourgeois cult. And here, the lingering ghost of Chosŏn's ancient tradition makes the bourgeois cult even more effective.

This great, magnificent, bustling organization truly inspires nothing but astonishment. The school, the central force of ruling class cultivation, in its mechanical educational methods and its mass-produced way of life, is no different from the capitalist production organization. Due to difficulties in admission (入學難), academic unemployed individuals loiter everywhere, consequently forced into unintentional idleness (怠惰) and vagrancy (浮浪), similar to today's economic situation.

The school teachers (學校敎師) themselves, forced to do it to earn a living, repeat and reiterate dry doctrines (敎義). Lacking even a shred of love, passion for truth, or emotion, they themselves are already corpses (송장), scarecrows (허수아비), their lives constrained by their own containers. It goes without saying that their educational effect is numb and weak. However, the students receiving the doctrines, the educated (被敎育者), know their teachers' deception (欺瞞) and hypocrisy (僞善). But what about the students themselves? Because they know there is too much falsehood (虛僞) in reality <20> and have seen too much of this society's deception and irrationality, they, through methods different from their teachers' teaching methods, gain through their experience a scientific common sense of deception. They come to possess an even more stubborn (頑冥), narrow (偏狹), exclusive egoism (利己主義), and a more thorough ideology of money worship (金權崇拜思想) than their teachers. Consequently, these individuals, worse than the teachers who taught them, become capable of doing anything for the rice they eat to live. Regardless of what harm they inflict upon the second and third generations of the nation, they act as if it doesn't matter, carrying out the bourgeois cult and constituting the branches and leaves of the bourgeois cult with their own selves. That is, the philosophy of life (處世의 哲理) these people obtained from their teachers consists only of such deceptive morality, cowardly compromise (妥協), blind exploitation (搾取), falsehood, and hypocrisy.

The bourgeois cult, in this way, is organized through limitless time and space, develops, and ultimately reaches the realm of completion leading to collapse.

7. The Purpose of Proletariat Cult

Now, as recorded above, we have understood the organization and essence of the bourgeois cult. Currently, the bourgeois social organization, which had spread worldwide, is experiencing a fatal tremor at its very foundation. The defeat of bourgeois society signifies the defeat of the bourgeois cult.

We are now facing a worldwide tremor. The premise that this tremendous cultivation effect, which had developed magnificently and bustlingly, will disappear in the near future is visible wherever our eyes turn. This is because it itself is untruth (非眞理), irrationality (不合理), a lump of contradictions (矛盾), and has nurtured the seeds of its own destruction (敗滅) within itself.

A small number of sensitive people, people with sensibility (感受性), people boiling with a sense of justice (正義感), even after passing through the "poison jar" (독안이) of that bourgeois cult, still possess abundantly the vibrant life (生命) proper to a human being. Now that we point out its errors and know its irrationality, now that we have the strong, hot wind of the sense of justice remaining in our hearts, we absolutely cannot endure it any longer. We cannot but charge head-on against the bourgeois cult, which mechanizes humanity's spirituality (靈性), teaches irrational exploitation, and violates truth (眞理) through unjust saving (貯蓄) and unfair privilege (特權). <21> Yes, solely for the liberation of spirituality, the sole truth, to achieve the XXXX of unjust exploitation, saving, inheritance (相續), deceptive morality, and hypocritical ways of life (處世法), solely with the sole truth as our banner, we XXXXX the front of this strange, multifaceted, outwardly splendid but inwardly empty bourgeois cult. What XX is there to fear? What hesitation (遠慮) could there be? We will merely rescue our souls from under the claws of capitalism (資本主義); that is all. We will only make it grow. We will only carve out the innate path of life (生) before us.

The purpose of proletariat cultivation (프로레타리아 敎化) is to liberate all humanity from the distorted, crumpled, bent poisonous fangs of capitalism. This is the purpose of the proletariat cult (뿌로렛트·컬트). The bourgeois cult, today's ruling class cultivation in Chosŏn, takes perfectly healthy people and makes them live decadent lives without ideals (無理想), makes them trample on justice (正義) and stand upon it, makes them become XXXX and pillars (干城) of the capitalist state. It is incomparably tragic.

It is natural for us to teach justice and truth to our brothers, our sisters, to the unfortunate men and women of equal status within Chosŏn, let alone the whole world. Facing the capitalist organization, which now possesses internal organizational collapse worldwide, we must work for truth with all our might. But what are we to do when all current educational institutions are in those people's hands? There is a way available to us wherever our eyes turn. A method to rescue our brothers and sisters from erroneous organizations, policies, and upbringing resides within the sanctuary of our hearts. Cultivation institutions a hundred times more effective than the empty deception of our opponents exist wherever our eyes turn. They are on the streets (行길). They are in the single rooms where farmhands (머슴) gather in rural villages (農村). They are in the ridges between rice paddies (논고랑), the edges of fields (밧두덕), the grassy fields (풀밧), factories (工場), rickshaw stands (人力車병문), taverns (선술집), everywhere. They are wherever the eye turns; there is nowhere they are not. If only we have passion (情熱), sincerity (誠意), courage (勇氣), and patience (忍耐) in our hearts, from the sanctuary of our hearts, we will achieve results a hundred times greater than those people.

All concepts (槪念), ideas (觀念), forms (形式), norms (規範), rules (規律)—it is not the terms transformation (變革) and reform (改革) upon them.

However, liberalism (自由主義) also has stages (階級). We must not forget the stages of our work. If we forget these stages, our principle of construction (建設) will transform into a principle of collapse (崩壞). <22>

We must examine the stages. We must never ascend presumptuously. Perhaps it might be a natural course for that individual, but for the project we intend to construct, it is poison (害毒). For the proletariat in the constructive initial phase, the individual "I" (나) must not be used. The plural "we" (우리) is our goal. Otherwise, if one pushes forward alone, one might reach a state where, like someone, they end up writing a theory of direction change (方向轉換論).

Then let us advance! Following the example of the Russian intelligentsia of 60 years ago, the children of aristocrats, who cried out "V Narod!" (우, 나로-드 - To the People!), for the liberation of the spirituality of all humankind, to establish the value of our lives, be courageous (勇往)! Press forward (邁進)! Carry the sole, clear truth...

8. To Local Common School Teachers (地方普通學校敎員)

We understand you well. Your situation is perhaps more pitiable than that of tenant farmers (小作人). We know that you, having barely managed to afford tuition, forced your way through graduation from Higher Common School (高等普通學校), and after benevolently (!) finishing the Teacher Training Institute (敎員養成所) (Normal Course - 師範科), which is their perfect cultivation institution, you are doing this job inevitably for the rice you need to eat. It is comparable to the situation of a small portion of today's XXXX. We know that most of you, though perhaps a small part is different, are conscious that you are potent machines of the bourgeois cult. If you think without sleeping for just one night, you will realize what truth truly is. If I speak like this, you will surely reply thus: "Who doesn't know that! I know, but what can I do! Do we have power? What can I do? Stop that kind of mere lip service (입만 깐소리)."

But I know. If there is fervor (熱識) for truth, it is not about deceiving oneself (눈가리고 아옹하는 것); I know that it is entirely possible. First, even under the current education system (現下 敎育制度), you can guide the children as you think best. OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO. As long as it doesn't smell suspicious, it is possible. OOOOOOOOO (Censored passage) Thus, you must protect the children's individuality (個性), <23> and rescue their spirituality from becoming mechanized by today's bourgeois cult. That is, starting with yourselves, you must participate in the proletariat movement aiming to liberate the spirituality of all humankind. To make your lives meaningful (意義).

9. To Local Youth Association Leaders (地方靑年會指導者)

We know you are freer than teachers. At the same time, we do not doubt that you, like teachers, are the intelligentsia (知識階級) of your locality (鄕黨). We do not hesitate to say that you must have realized that, as the intelligentsia of the region where you are, you bear the entire responsibility (全責任) for that region. The duty (任務) of the intelligentsia—this must be considered.

I will not write many more words here. Generally, repetitive sentences are nauseating to read. Though it may seem presumptuous, you must cultivate yourselves much more. You who intend to advance (實進) against the vast organization of today, like a pale night ghost (白面夜鬼), must know meticulous observation (觀察) of the enemy and the tactics (戰術) to counter them. To obtain such things, there is no way but to read (讀書). What you need first is a circulating library (順廻文庫). You must desperately promote reading. Only then can you recover the entirety of the spirituality that has been stolen until now by the bourgeois cult. Then you will recover the forgotten spirituality, gain a critical eye (批判眼) on modern social organization, and be able to learn the tactics as people standing in the front line (第一隊) of the proletariat front (プロレタリア 戰線).

Second, what I ask of you, the intelligentsia, is the education of the peasants (農民). Among urgent matters, the most urgent is this peasant education movement (農民敎育運動). You must cultivate them through language (言語), writing (文字), fables (偶話), old tales (古談), in every possible way. The most important thing is the awakening of class consciousness (階級意識). The second most urgent thing is the dissemination of the national script (國文), that is, Ŏnmun (諺文 - Hangul).

After this, a systematic cultivation movement can be established. This task is burdened upon the shoulders of you, the intelligentsia of the locality. Do not think it bothersome; you should rejoice that your body is participating in the sacred liberation movement of all humankind.

Regarding the method, it is fine even if I don't speak of it. During the peasants' relatively idle times, gather under a name that won't arouse suspicion, <24> and carry out this movement with emotion (感激) and passion (情熱). Then, in the ridges of rice paddies, in the edges of fields, whenever you have time, practice this movement through conversation (談話).

10. To Youth Leaders (少年指導者)

Starting with the Youth Department (少年部) of the Ch'ŏndogyo Youth Association (天道敎靑年會), it is said that not a few youth associations (少年會) have arisen throughout Chosŏn. It is known by everyone, even without my saying so, how extremely important and great youth guidance (少年指導) is. The task of rescuing souls, which are blank slates (白紙), from the lingering ghost of tradition in our family life lies here.

However, do not use our youth guidance to create the Japanese Boy Scouts (少年團) or the conventional kindergartens (幼稚園). I hope you understand well where the meaning lies when I say this. That is, although magazines containing children's songs (童謠), children's stories (童話), and scientific knowledge (科學知識) are said to have a fixed price of only 5 chŏn (錢), and although joy is derived from the fact that these magazines sell out, look at how many children cannot afford even that 5-chŏn magazine. Teaching fantastical (空想的), illusory (幻想的) children's songs, teaching legendary fairy tales that foster idol worship (偶像崇拜) and fictional imagination (架空的 想像), and repeating sentimental (哀傷的) fairy tales—this, I cry out, is bourgeois-style youth guidance (뿌르즈와式 少年指導). The meaning of not showing the form of creating conventional kindergartens lies here. If you continue youth guidance as you are doing now, if it is guidance for children aimed at the bourgeoisie (though the degree of bourgeoisie is shallower than in other countries), I warn you that you are fated to be remodeled within a few years. Youth guidance must also proceed in the same form as peasant-soldier cultivation (農軍敎化). Eliminate legendary fairy tales! That ultimately binds the children rescued from family tradition back to the tradition of legends.

It is the dissemination of astute scientific common sense (科學的 常識). The nature of fairy tales must not be mythological (神話的). The vibrant spirituality of humans possesses creativity (創造性).

Writing must not be sentimental (哀傷的). The children of Chosŏn are already dull enough; the geology (地質) and climate (風土) already encourage sentimental feelings. What need is there to lay the foundation for sentimentalism with such writing?

It is the fostering of scientific, astute brains (頭腦). It is the development of the spirituality of creation (創造). It is the eradication (撲滅) of petit-bourgeois children's emotions (小뿌르즈와적 兒童感情). <25>

11. The Secondary Value of Literature

After XX, there is education.
Before XX, there is also education.
After XX, true literature begins.
Before XX, there is also literature of genuine need. (Who dares say otherwise?)

Education before XX is the Proletariat-Art-Cult education movement. Literature before XX is the literature of the Proletariat-Cult. Here, the secondary value (第二義的 價値) of literature arises.

Now, as the page count increases, and since writing more wouldn't differ much from what I've written so far, I will not write a literary theory here. I will merely add a few words of explanation regarding the phrase "secondary value of literature."

Today's literature is literature that has emerged transcending Decadence (떼카단쓰) literature. (It must be literature.) Emotion about life, active passion, the driving song of strength, philosophy regarding life (生命)—these are the elements of today's literature. Today's proletarian literature, which arose in opposition to the bourgeois literature based on a flawed aesthetic consciousness (美意識) determined by past social organization, stands upon proletarian aesthetics (美學) and simultaneously exists for the reason of being proletarian literature. The true literature that will exist after XX and the literature of genuine need that will exist before XX differ only in terms of value theory (價値論). That is, the literature that will exist after XX will exist with primary value (第一義的 價値) as literature itself, while the literature that will exist before XX has reason to exist with secondary value (第二義的 價値) for the sake of XX.

Speaking thus, I can say I have roughly sketched the outline of my thoughts. Then, the literary figures (?) in today's Chosŏn must participate in this sacred movement. For the liberation of spirituality, for the reform of flawed organization, for the shattering of flawed aesthetic concepts, <26> the literary movement—broadly speaking, the art movement—must cooperate (提携) with the social movement aimed at XXXX, keeping pace together. There is no need to speak longer, nor is there paper. For the purpose of the entire proletarian movement, which seeks to liberate the spirituality of all humankind, grasp the philosophy of life, and proceeds with emotion about life; for the liberation of our art, which has been oppressed and bound; towards the sole goal of truth; gathering the passion that seeks to overflow to the ends of the earth, let us fulfill our duty for the sake of XX. This is the duty of the literary figure, the duty of the intelligentsia, part of the duty of the artist.

The reason for the existence of the secondary value of literature lies here.

12. Cooperative Front

Philosophers (哲學家), literary figures (文學家), artists (藝術家), socialists (社會主義者), all other intelligentsia, all people, have formed a single circle (圓) for this sole truth. It is cooperation (協同).

Then let us firmly plant our feet on the ground. There are no other words. Go forth! Flow out like a great tsunami (海溢) breaking the dikes! Flow over the whole world! Wash the ground clean! Make the cooperative front (協同戰線) stronger. Be courageous! Press forward! Leap forward (飛躍)! Go forth carrying the sole, clear truth. Life has been pioneered before us.
(1923. 11. 19) <27>
<13-27>

**Summary**

This 1924 editorial by "P'al Pong San In" argues that the ruling class in colonial Korea (identified as bourgeois capitalists, implicitly including the Japanese colonial power) implements a "bourgeois cultivation" (뿌르즈와·컬트) through formal education (schools), traditional Korean hierarchies (Yangban system, Confucianism), and cultural institutions (literature, religion). This system aims to create obedient, materialistic subjects stripped of their innate spirituality (靈性) and critical consciousness, thereby perpetuating exploitation. The author contrasts this with the need for "proletariat cultivation" (프로렛트·컬트), a counter-movement focused on awakening class consciousness, promoting socialist ideals, disseminating practical knowledge (like Hangul literacy for peasants), and fostering a revolutionary spirit through genuine education and art aligned with proletarian liberation. The article calls upon Korean intellectuals, teachers, youth leaders, and writers to reject the existing system and actively participate in this counter-cultivation effort, working cooperatively towards the liberation of the Korean people and all humanity from capitalist oppression.

Historically, this article is significant as it reflects the strong influence of socialist and nationalist thought among Korean intellectuals during the Japanese colonial period. It explicitly critiques both the colonial education system and lingering elements of Korea's own feudal past (tradition, Yangban hierarchy) as tools serving the capitalist ruling class, demonstrating a class-based analysis of Korea's situation. The call for "proletariat cultivation," emphasizing grassroots education, Hangul promotion, and the role of literature and art in social change, highlights the strategies envisioned by leftist intellectuals for national liberation and social transformation. The direct address to teachers and youth leaders, acknowledging their difficult position while urging them towards covert resistance and revolutionary education, provides insight into the expected role of intellectuals in the anti-colonial and socialist movements. The censorship (XXXX) also underscores the repressive environment under which such ideas were discussed.

**Named Entities**

八峰山人	팔봉산인	P'al Pong San In
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
中華民國	중화민국	Republic of China
檀君	단군	Tan'gun
日本	일본	Ilbon
奈良	나라	Nara (Japan)
德川	덕천	Tokugawa (Japan)
明治	명치	Meiji (Japan)
兩班	양반	Yangban
胡班	호반	Hoban
土班	토반	Toban
老論	노론	Noron
少論	소론	Soron
南	남	Namin (Political Faction)
北	북	Pugin (Political Faction)
總督府	총독부	Government-General
桃太郞	도태랑	Momotarō
陸軍大將	육군대장	Army General
海軍大將	해군대장	Navy Admiral
日本內地	일본내지	Mainland Japan
白樺派	백화파	Shirakaba School (Japanese literary group)
人間派	인간파	Human School (Likely refers to a Japanese literary trend)
露西亞	노서아	Rosia (Russia)
天道敎靑年會	천도교청년회	Ch'ŏndogyo Youth Association

**Glossary**

뿌르즈와	부르주아	Bourgeois (Older transliteration)
프르렛트	프롤레타리아	Proletariat (Older transliteration)
敎化	교화	Cultivation, enlightenment, education (in the sense of shaping consciousness)
被支配階級	피지배계급	Ruled class, oppressed class
有産階級	유산계급	Propertied class
無産階級	무산계급	Propertyless class, proletariat
업다	없다	To not exist, to lack (Older spelling of 없다)
잇다	있다	To exist, to have (Older spelling of 있다)
갓가운	가까운	Near, close (Older spelling/form of 가까운)
덥허오다	덮어오다	To cover over, descend upon
밧다	받다	To receive (Older spelling of 받다)
맨들어	만들어	To make (Older spelling/form of 만들어)
식히다	시키다	To make/cause someone to do (Causative suffix, often written as 식히다 in older texts)
니저버리다	잊어버리다	To forget (Older spelling of 잊어버리다)
엇더케	어떻게	How (Older spelling of 어떻게)
兩班	양반	Yangban (Traditional Korean gentry/aristocracy)
儒敎	유교	Confucianism
以小事大	이소사대	Serving the great (powerful) with the small (weak) (A historical policy/attitude)
生員	생원	Saengwŏn (Holder of the lowest degree in the traditional state examination)
亡靈	망령	Lingering ghost, apparition; senility
正軆	정체	True form, identity
抹殺	말살	Obliteration, erasure
因襲	인습	Convention, custom (often with negative connotation of being outdated)
子姪	자질	Sons and nephews; children, descendants
御用	어용	For government/official use; co-opted, servile
靈性	영성	Spirituality, spiritual nature
軆操	체조	Physical exercise, gymnastics (Older Hanja for 체)
修身	수신	Moral cultivation, ethics (Subject in older education system)
當者	당자	The authorities, the party concerned
恩惠的	은혜적	Benevolent, gracious (often used ironically for colonial policies)
過激派	과격파	Radical faction (Term used for Bolsheviks/communists)
뽈세비-슴	볼셰비즘	Bolshevism (Older transliteration)
賣淫文學	매음문학	Prostitution literature
手淫詩人	수음시인	Masturbatory poet (Derogatory term)
處世	처세	Conduct of life, social survival skills
未久	미구	Soon, before long
鄕黨	향당	One's locality, native place
諺文	언문	Ŏnmun (Vernacular Korean script, Hangul - often used slightly disparagingly in the past compared to Hanja)
第二義的	제의적	Secondary (in importance or value)
提携	제휴	Cooperation, alliance, tie-up
邁進	매진	Striving forward, pressing onward
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제43호
발행일	1924년 01월 01일
기사제목	支配階級敎化 被支配階級敎化
필자	八峰山人
기사형태	논설

支配階級敎化 被支配階級敎化
						八峰山人
뿌르즈와, 컬트, 프르렛트, 컬트라는 말을 나는 여긔에서 便宜上 「支配階級敎化, 被支配階級敎化」라고 譯하엿다. 오늘의 支配階級 그것은 어느나라를 물론하고 뿌르즈와이며 오늘의 被支配階級 그것은 모다가 프로렛타리아다. 그러면 無産階級敎化나 有産階級敎化라는 말과는 똑가튼 의미일 것이다.

1. 奇怪한 正軆
今日의 無産階級-貧農과 직업적 유랑민과 소수의 노동자들-에게 아모 敎化機關이 업는 동시에, 또는 간혹, 이 사람들을 위한 敎化運動이 잇다하드래도 그것이 거지 반 폭력에 갓가운 압박으로 인해서 有耶無耶에 敗滅되는 대신에, 저 사람들 支配階級의 敎化機關은, 대규모의 형식으로, 조직적으로, 多大한, 무한대의 효과를 거두어 가면서 진행된다. 朝鮮이 아즉 貴族國家의 계급에서 進化되지 못하고 머물러 잇슬 때, 우리의 우에 덥허온 새로운 支配階級에 대해서, 민족적 반역심을 助長코저 하는 暗中의 敎化運動이 잇섯슬 뿐이요, 新時代의 主人인 第 4階級에 대한 敎化運動이라는 것은 아모것도 업섯다는 사실에 새삼스럽게 놀나운 생각이 일어나는 때, 우리는 지금 동시에 新支配階級의 資本主義의 완전한 조직과 방법으로써 자기네 支配階級의 存續과 被虐待階級의 下部社會의 全滅을 위한 뿌르즈와컬트가 무제한하게, 神妙하게, 全朝鮮백성의 머리 속에서 多大한 效績을 收得하고 잇다는 사실에 두 번 놀나게 된 처지에 이르럿다. 支配階級인 자기네들과, 被支配階級者 중에서 영혼의 전부를 賣却하고서 자기네들에게 추종하는 허수아비들과의, 사회적 存續을 圖謀하는 지금의 支配階級인 뿌르즈와, 저 사람들의 敎化運動은, 그 조직은, 모든＜13＞ 민중의 영혼을 抹殺식히고, 기운업는, 資本主義社會의 夢狂病人을 맨들어 버리는데 全力이 集注되여잇다. 反逆意識이 강한, 순진한 영혼을 가젓다고 할 만한 소년들은, 小學校라는 독안이 속에서 거지반 개조를 당한 뒤에, 겨우 4,5년 동안에, 不拔의 뿌르즈와의식과 帝國主義의 毒液을 담은 一個의 기계로 변해 버렷다.
이와가티, 奇怪한 뿌르즈와·컬트(支配階級敎化)의 正軆를 보아두어야만 할, 직면한 奇怪不測의 뿌르즈와컬트를 解剖할, 필요는 말하지 안이하야도 누구나 다 절실히 늣기는 바일 것이다.
朝鮮에서 뿌르즈와·컬트는, 엇던 다른 나라보다도 一層 복잡하게 되어니려 왓스니, 대개는 그 사정이 특이한 까닭이라 하겟다. 즉 今日 支配階級인 저 사람들의 秩序整然한, 조직적 敎化機關과, 去日의 支配階級이든 소위 兩班級의 전통적인 동시에 무형적 敎化作用과의 2개가, 期約한거와 가티 동일한 목적의 뿌르즈와·컬트를 작성한 것이다.
이 奇怪한 正軆를 解剖하기 위해서 그 表皮를 제거하는 때 우리는 여기서 과거의 亡靈이든 전통과, 今日의 妖物인 뿌르즈와·컬트의 두 개를 발견하엿다. 어느 때를 물론하고, 정면에 드러난 支配階級敎化機關의 背面에 서서, 暗中으로 이것을 助長하는 비조직적 뿌르즈와·컬트인 전통의 본질을 명료하게 한 뒤에, 우리는 宏大한 정면의 적을 순서적으로 解剖하겟다. -전통은 조상의 유령이다, 지금에 이르러 우리는 이 유령을 업새야만 할 운명 우에 섯다.

2. 傳統의 亡靈
今日의 뿌르즈와·컬트조직 안에서 상당한 일꾼역을 맛흔 전통의 망령은, 가정 안에서 각각 그 맛흔 바의 소임을 실행하고 상당한 效績을 엇게 된다. 인생생활의 第一步에서, 우리의 영거·제네레-숀은 닷자곳자로 전통의 망령의 捕虜가 되여버렷다. 우리의 父兄이 아동교육에 열심이면 일수록 소년의 생활에 간섭을 하여서, 因襲과 전통에 다시 판박드시, 소년의 전부를 제한해 바렷다.
中華民國 2,000년전 문화의 直系者 朝鮮의 本性이 여기에서 發揮된다. 우리가 귀가 압흐게 들어 내려온 「以小事大」라는 말을, 두 번 이곳에서 쓰기는 게옥질이 날만콤, 우리의 마음은 압흔 것이다. 儒敎의 관념은 全朝鮮을 정복하고,＜14＞ 朝鮮은 오늘까지 이 관념의 생활 속에 헙위적어리는 현상을 갓게 되엿다. 儒敎思想에 發足된 귀족적 국가제도의 舊衣가 오늘날 兩班級의 자녀의 머리에까지 一種神秘한 힘으로 유전되어 내려오고, 그것이 간접으로 今日의 뿌르즈와컬트를 더 효과잇게 만든다.
이 우에 지금 말한 말을 조곰 더 자세하게 설명해 볼 것 갓흐면, 朝鮮은 檀君이후로 神權制國家엿스며, 점차 발달되여서, 중국의 문물을 수입하며, 불교가 傳播된 뒤로, 貴族國家로 변하엿든 것이다. 이 때의 증거가 무엇이냐 하면 직업의 계급적 분류가 一例이니, 曰 士農工商이다. 文, 武가 일반인민의 우에 얼마나 권력을 가젓섯더냐 하는 것은 말할 필요도 업거니와 (생원님은 그때의 골동품적 名辭이다!) 또한 일반인의 崇仰의 표적은 이 文과 武외에는 다른 것이 업섯다. 이와 가튼 말은 日本에 향해서도 말할 수 잇스니, 그의 武士는 나라(奈良)朝이후로 德川時代까지 또는 明治의 維新以後에 까지도 그 세력이 如舊하엿다는 사실이다.
朝鮮의 양반은 日本의 武士와 가튼 것이나, 오히려 그 多種多樣함이 朝鮮獨異라고 말할 만한 것이다. 양반도 武科出身이면 胡班, 落鄕 3,4대만 되면 土班, 그 외에도 老論, 少論, 南, 北, 등등등. 즉 이와가튼 貴族制國家의 亡種들이 그 子姪을 어렷슬 때부터 전통의 옷을 몸에 걸치게 하고, 五倫三綱이란 理學의 근본요체가 된 유교라는 일종 관념의 딱딱한 -카테고리-(규범)에 잡어느어 가지고 有意識無意識간에, 뿌르즈와·컬트의 내용적 部門을 작성하는 것이다.
一國의 政丞, 一國의 大元師, 이와 가튼 特權者 숭배의 사상이 오늘날 와서는 郡守, 道長官, 등 總督府官屬을 꿈꾸는 형태로 변하게 되엿다. 이것이 가정에 잇서서 가정교육의 전부다. 父兄된 사람은 現今의 국가조직과 더구나 日本의 사회조직을 표본으로 토대로 하여가지고, 그 子姪들에게 資本主義, 金權崇拜思想을 어린이의 인생생활의 第一步부터 부어늣는 것이다. 반만년 역사라고 떠드는 우리네의 전통! 전통! 이것이 오늘날 우리의 생활을 붓잡은 허수아비이며 亡靈이며, 동시에 今日의 支配階級의 뿌르즈외·컬트를 유력하게 조장하는 所任을 가지고 잇는 것이다.

3. 靈性의 機械化＜15＞

뿌르즈와·컬트는 전통의 형식으로, 有意識無意識간에, 初等學校라는 곳에 들어오기 전에, 오늘날 어린이들을 가정에서 터를 잡어가지고 欺瞞의 도덕과, 排他的 감정과 意志의 所持者로 맨들어 버린 후에, 지금은 졍말 정식으로 공공연하게 뿌르즈와·컬트의 사업의 第一階級우에 세워놋는다. 어린이의 父兄은, 양반이고 상놈이고 간에, 初等學校라는 곳에 자기의 子姪을 女兒를 입학식히지 안으면 사람갑에 못가는 줄 알고, -또 실상말이지, 初等學校를 안보년다드래도 자기네의 가정과 朝鮮의 風俗(因襲)사정 속에서는, 자연히 학교에서 敎化되는 이만콤 敎化를 당할 것이요. 별수 업겟지만- 또는, 初等學校라는 곳에를 입학식히여서 졸업식히고 그 위로 中學, 專門學 혹은 大學까지 배호지 못하면 먹고 살수가 업스리라는 불안한 심정을 가지고서, 이 初等學校라는 곳에를 자녀를 물론하고 입학하게 맨들어 버렷다. 거듭 말하지마는, 이 初等學校에 입학을 안하게 하드래도 결국은 전통과 因襲의 다식판에 끼여서 하는 수 업슬 것은 물론이라는 말을 나는 여기에서 두 번 말해둔다.
그러면 이 初等學校라는 至重且大한 책임과 의무를 가진 곳에서는 엇더한 교육을 하느냐. 우리는 지금 막대한 비용과, 整然한 조직과 無限際한 시간과 勞力을 가지고서 本式으로 당당하게 뿌르즈와·컬트가 되어가는 것을 눈압헤 하고 잇다. 第一學年부터 「XXX」를 몰으면 안된다. 『桃太郞』軍國精神宣傳의 讀本이 어린이들의 腦膸속에 박히게 된다. 『XXXXXX』이라는 노래는 小學兒童의 입버릇이 되다 십히 노래를 불느게 되는 것이다. 여기서 우리가 니저서는 안될 또 한 개의 例가 잇다. 그것은 무어냐 하면 『兎と龜』라는 偶話이다. 그 가르치는 정신은 뿌르즈와의 勤勉精神이다. 『稼ぐに追ひ付く貧乏なシ』라는 日本의 격언이 이 정신의 眞髓를 대표한 것이다. 그러나 참말로 정직하게 勤勉하는 사람은 평생을 빈곤속에서 허덕허덕하다가 죽는 것을 엇더케 하느냐. 일하면 일할수록, 牛馬가티 使役되면 될수록 타인의 福利만 증진식혀주는 것을 엇더케 하느냐. 문제는 조직에 誤謬가 잇슬 뿐이다. -이와가티 간혹 쓸만한 것을 가라치는 줄 아는 것은 도리혀 그 害가 『桃太郞』보다 작지 안이한 것이다. 『桃太郞』이 軍國精神을 부어늣코 『兎と龜』가 노예의 경우에 잇서도 오히려 그 경우를 甘受하고 더 일층 노예적 行使에 勤勉하라는 정신을 부어늣코, 다음으로는 無趣味한 軍隊式 軆操를 敎鍊밧고, 陸軍大將, 海軍大將-OOOO, OOOOO-을 尊敬하는 마음이 일어나도록 맨들고, 뿌르즈와사회의 貯蓄心을 길느게 되고, 當者를 존경하게 맨들고, 허위와 허식을 규율 及 규칙에＜16＞ 복종식히게 맨들며, 忍從의 미덕과 謝恩과 복종이라는 정신을 가득히 담은 初等學校의 修身敎科書와 기타 각종 學科에서 배호도록 만든다. 즉, 支配者讚美의 역 사와 非藝術的 讀本(漢文, 韓鮮文, 日本文)이 그것이다.
이때에 이르러 生의 本然한 靈性이 뿌르즈와사회를 讚美하는 부자연한, 靈性을 니저버린 一種의 기계가 되어 버리는 것이다! 이와가티 個性을 니저버린 少年幽靈(?)이 우리 朝鮮에 (朝鮮뿐만도 안이지만)가득하게 된다, 資本主義讚美의 少年幽靈이 뿌르즈와·컬트의 第一階段을 맛치고서 대다수는 각각 뿌르즈와사회조직의 최하층에서, 노예와 가티 勤勉하라는 初等學校에서 배혼대로, 자기의 心臟을 베혀팔면서 勞役에 복종하게 되고, 남어지 일부는 田園에 들어가서 건듯하면 『바가, 고라,, 칙쇼-』를 連發하는 인간적 廢物이 되여버리고서 자기네끼리 모히게 되면 4,5년 동안 어든 뿌르즈와교육의 푸성개가튼 자랑만 하는 백성이 되고 말으며, 다음으로의 小部分은 中學校, 專門學校, 혹은 大學校로, 最高部門에 속한 뿌르즈와지식의 散賣를 바드러 올너가게 된다. 이러면 뿌르즈와·컬트의 第一階段이 끗낫다는 것을 諸賢은 기억하여야만 한다.

4. 御用의 學問
第一階段인 初等學校에서 끗나가지고 지금은 더 一層 醜惡한, 資本主義의 특질을 표명한, 中等學校, 專門學校, 혹은 大學校로 옴기게 되엿다. 여기서는, 교육은 특권이 되고, 민중은 除外 되여바렷다. 學文賣買業者는 今日의 사회조직안에서 자기의 지위와 생명과 재산을 유지하기 위해서 뿌르즈와(有産階級-支配階級)에게 끈일새 업는 阿諛로써 그네들의 庇護를 엇고 잇다. (여기서 大學을 합해가지고 내가 이런 말을 하는 것은, 朝鮮안에는 아즉 大學이라는 기관이 업스나, 잇대껏 여러해를 두고 만흔 사람이 日本內地에 가서 공부한 것을 들어가지고 말하는 것이다. 사정이 日本內地와 朝鮮이 다를 것이 어대잇스랴.) 만일 나의 말이 正合하지 못하 것이거든, 지금 소위 中等學校敎員 중에서 한 사람이라도 조흐니 『우리는 오늘의 사회조직안에서, 우리의 생명과 재산(生活費)을 유지하고자 뿌르즈와에게 阿諛를 하여가며 그의 庇護를 밧는 사람은 안이다』하고 나오기를 바란다. 日本의 大學敎授도 맛챤가지다.
이 사람네들은 뿌르즈와의 恩惠的 援助를 바더가면서, 끈임업는 僞善으로 그 正軆를 희미하게, 남이 알지 못하게＜17＞맨들어 놋코서, 자기들이 엇자다 어더드른 학문의 散賣를 한다. 그래가지고서 겨우 살어나가는 사람도 잇고, 혹은 돈을 모으는 사람도 잇다. 이 사람들 프티뿌르즈와(小有産階級)는, 高遠한, 取의 원리와 방법 及 緻密銳利한 수단, 또는 支配階級으로 立身할 戰術, 그러구는 자기 欺瞞의 도덕학 연구에 몰두하고 잇다. 無産者들은 이와가튼 最高部門에 登學할 여유도 업시, 이것 때문에 사용되는 설비와 비용 때문에, 임의 자신의 노동에서 搾取를 당하고 잇는 것이다. -즉 國庫金으로 납입되는 納稅의 전부를 가르처 말하는 것이다.
근래에 이르러 朝鮮에도 中等정도 私立學校(講習所)가 비오고 난뒤에 버슷나듯키 쑬쑬히 만히 생긴 것을 보게된다. 과연 이 사람네들이 진실한 의미의 敎化運動을 하고자 하는 意志에서 출발되여 가지고, 이와가튼 일을 하느냐 하면 결단코, 참말로 단연코 그러치 안타. 風潮에 阿諛하여 가지고서 旣成知識의 散賣를 하고자 하는 원인이외에는 何等의 附隨件이 업섯스리라는 말을 나는 斷言한다. 旣成知識의 散賣를 하면서 一便으로는 일홈이 조와서 敎育事業이라는 말을 듯고. 一便으로는 돈 좀 모으자는 수작에 지나지 못한다. 그리하여 가지고 이 사람들이 하는 일은 무엇이냐하면 결국은 뿌르즈와·컬트가 되고 만다.
대개 特權階級者로서의 인격양성이 그 목표이며, 딸하서 特權階級者로서 사회조직의 상부구조-표면에 서서 하부구조 착취할 수단연구에 終事된다. 이때에, 여기에서, 無産者의 눈물과 피와 땀이 흘으는 것이다.

5. 恩惠的 敎化
이 우에 지금 말한 것은 本式의 정통인 조직적 敎化機關을 말한 것이다. 그와 가티 無産者의 눈물과 피와 땀을 빠러 마서가지고 된 교육은, 새로운 예리한 搾取의 기계를 맨들어 내어 가지고서 그것을 또다시 無産者의 身邊으로 보내게 된다. -즉 말하면 御用學問의 散賣를 바든, 교육기관의 엇던 것이든지 하나를 졸업한 기계들은, 官廳의 官吏가 되거나 혹은 사사로 무슨 다른짓을 하드래도, 일종의 착취기계에 불과한 인종이여서 盲目的으로 支配階級의 손끗, 끄나풀이 되고 마는 것이다. 뿌르즈와사회조직의 存續을 승인하고, 特權階級에 대한 봉사도덕을 갓게 되는 것이다.
그러나 오히려 이와가튼 正統의 형식하에 잇는 敎化機關만 잇슬 것 가트면 오히려 用意周到라고는 못하겟지만, 따는＜18＞ 조직적인 저 사람들의 생각은 이것 뿐만에 긋치지 안는다. 때때로 恩惠的 敎化事業이 잇다. 그 일홈은 여러 가지로 난호여 잇지만, 예를 들면, 産業獎勵會이니, 蠶絲講習會니, 교원강습회이니, 그 외에 지방 各郡에 산재해 잇는 色色이의 모든 會가 모도다 이 뿌르즈와·컬트의 소임을 가지고 잇는 것이다. 幻燈을 가지고서, 혹은 통계표를 가지고서 교묘하게 선전하야써 그 다소래도 남어잇든 농촌청년들의 生氣를 뿌리서부터 제거해 버리고서, 그 대신으로 不拔의 뿌르즈와의식을 심어 놋는다. 그러구서 이와가튼 사업을 指目해서 일으되 曰『恩惠的이다!』
朝鮮도 점점 日本을 닮어 가는 故로, 때때로 감을에 콩나듯기 드문드문하게 보이는 有志者의 강연은 극도로 압박을 당하는 대신에, 御用學問賣買業者의 강연회는 당국의 보호아래에서 상당하게 敎化作用을 하여간다. 그 특수한 예는 뿌르즈와御用의 宗敎家들의 강연회라는 것이다. 거기에서는 혁명을 저주하고, 사람의 潑剌한 성품을 꺽거서 偶像의 관념에 가두어 노으며, 社會主義의 저주의 주문을 下賜해 버린다. 이와가튼 일이 단지 이러한 사람들의 강연회에서만 되어가느냐 하면 섭섭한 말이나, 결단코 그러치 안타. 恩惠的 교육외에 모든 기관에서, 온갓 기회에서, 우리는 엄창나는 뿌르즈와·컬트의 鵬翼의 존재를 보게된다.

6. 뿌르즈와 컬트
즉, 오늘의 지배계급의 手下에 잇는 모든 기관은, 資本主義社會의 對方인 社會主義에 대한 극도의 견제의 수단을 발휘하는데에 게을느지 안이하다. 민중의 정당한 自覺, 그것을 막기 위해서, 이와가튼 사상에 가진 못된 惡名을 씨워가지고서 될 수 잇는대로는 민중이 제스스로 실혀하도록 맨드는 것이다. 일례를 들면, 뽈세비-슴을 過激派라고 엇더케 기막히게 선전을 하여노앗든지, 어린이들도 過激派라면 사람안인 즘승으로 생각하도록 만드러 노은 것이다. 그리하야 초등학교의 선생이라는 청년들까지도, 이 새빩안 사상의 싹만 보이면, 일종의 忠心에 갓가운 심적 흥분을 늣기면서 될 수 잇는대 까지 그 싹을 잘너내버리든지, 그러치 안으면 진뭉개 업새버리고서는 得意揚揚하는 것이다. 위로 大臣 이상 各 官吏로부터, 아래로 민중에 갓가워야 만할 通學校職員들까지, 그 외에도 半官半民의 허수아비들까지 一心全力으로, 자기의 全軆를 들어서, 이 새빩안 사상의 潮流를 막는 방천이 되고 만다.＜19＞
朝鮮도 차차 日本말 보급이 충분해저서 중학 2,3년만 되면 대개의 어려운 서적이라도 日本말로 독서하는 정도에 이르럿다. 더구나 文學書類의 독서가 甚多한 현상에 잇서서 극히 주의할 것은, 그 日本의 문학, 특히 창작류에는 뿌르즈와사회의 존속을 긍정하는 一方으로 阿諛하는 설법이 만흔 것이다. 오늘날 와서는 신흥문단이 조곰 세력을 잡엇다고 말할 수 잇스나, 대개 朝鮮서 중학생들이 읽는 文學書類의 저자는 지금의 日本서도 케케묵은 시대착오사상의 소지자뿐이다. 지금, 중학생들이 본다는 文學書類를 대강 분류적으로 말해보면, 白化派의 小뿌르즈와적 人道思想의 저서와 人間派의 천박한 痴情文學과, 그외의 日本在來문단의 主流, 支流의 有象無象의 賣淫文學, 手淫詩人의 코ㅅ노래, 세기말적 惡魔派, 변태성욕병자의 잠꼬대가튼 書類이다.
이와가튼 문학의 효과는, 문학이라는 것을 병적으로 발달식히고 제도와 조직에 무관심하게 맨들고, 현실우에다 날거빠진 상아의 탑을 세우게 만들고, 手淫的 自慰의 辭를 짓게 하고, 동양고대의 아녀자를 懸象식힐 만콤된 노래ㅅ조각이나 짓게하고, 간접으로 현실을 긍정하는 俗情主義에 까지 墮落식히게 맨드는 것이다.
이와가티 現今의 예술, 現今의 종교, 現今의 교육, 심지어 尾官末職까지래도, 有意識無意識간에, 이 엄창나는 뿌르즈와·컬트의 작용을 하여가며, 여기에서 朝鮮古來의 전통의 망령이 일층 더 뿌르즈와·컬트를 효과잇게 맨든다는 것이다.
이 위대한 굉장 뻑적지근한 조직에는, 참말로 驚嘆할 수 밧게는 업다, 지배계급 敎化의 중심세력인 학교는, 그 교육방법의 기계적인 것이며, 또는 대량적 생활을 하는 점에 잇서서 자본주의 생산조직과 조곰도 틀닐곳이 업다. 入學難으로 말미암아 도처에 학문적 실업자가 우물우물하고, 따라서 본의안인 怠惰와 浮浪을 하도록 하는 것이 今日의 경제상태와 近似하다.
학교교사 자신은, 밥먹기 위해서 할 수 업시 乾燥한 敎義를 되푸러하고, 또 되푸리하는 것이여서 다만 一片의 사랑도 업시, 진리에 대한 열정도 업시, 감격도 업시, 그 자체가 발서 송장이오. 허수아비요, 제 옹인 생활체임으로, 그 교육작용의 無神經하고, 효과의 薄弱한 것은 말할 것까지도 업스나, 그 敎義를 밧는 학생들은, 被敎育者들은, 그들의 선생의 欺瞞을 알고 잇스며, 위선을 알고 잇스나 그러나, 학생들 자신은 엇더냐 하면, 그들은, 넘어도 현실에＜20＞ 虛僞가 만흔 것을 알며, 넘어도 이 사회의 欺瞞과 불합리를 보고 내려온 까닭으로, 교사들의 가라치는 방법과는 달는 방법으로써, 그들의 경험은 欺瞞의 과학적 상식이요, 그 교사들 보다 더 일층 頑冥한, 偏狹한 배타적 利己主義, 더 철저한 金權崇拜思想을 갓게 된다. 그리하여가지고, 이네들은, 자기네들을 가라치든 교사보다 더 심한, 먹고 사는 쌀을 위해서는 못할 것 업시 다할만한, 엇더한 害毒을 제2세, 3세의 국민에게 낏치든지 그것은 상관없다는드시, 뿌르즈와·컬트를 행위하며, 자기들 자신을 가지고써 뿌르즈와·컬트의 枝葉을 작성하고 마는 것이다. 즉, 이 사람들이 교사로부터 엇은 處世의 哲理는 이와가튼, 欺瞞의 도덕과, 비굴한 타협과, 맹목적 착취와, 허위와, 위선뿐이다.
뿌르즈와·컬트, 그것은 이와가티, 무제한한 시간과 공간으로 조직되여 내려가고, 발달되여 내려가며, 乃終에는 붕괴에 이르를 완성의 域까지 이루게 되고 마는 것이다.

7. 프로렛트 컬트의 目的
그러면 우리는 이 우에 기록한 바와 가티, 뿔르즈와·컬트의 조직과 본질을 다 알앗다. 지금이야 전세계적으로 만연되엿든 뿌르즈와의 사회조직에서, 그 근본에서, 치명적 동요가 일어나게 되엿다. 뿌르즈와 사회의 패배은 뿌르즈와·컬트의, 패배을 의미하는 것이다.
지금 우리는 전세계적 동요를 압헤하고 잇다. 굉장 뻑적지근 하게 되여내려오든 이 엄창나는 敎化作用이 未久에 업서지리라는 前提가, 우리의 눈이 가는 곳마다 보히여 잇다. 그것은 그것 자체가 非眞理요, 불합리요, 모순덩어리요, 敗滅의 種子를 그 자체속에서 양성해 네려온 까닭이다.
소수의 민감한 사람, 감수성이 잇는 사람, 정의감이 끌코 잇는 사람은, 저 뿌르즈와·컬트의 「독안이」속에 들단여 나왓서도 오히려 그 사람으로서의 발랄한 생명을 多分으로 가지고 잇다. 지금에 그 오류를 指個하고, 그 불합리를 알고 잇는 이상에, 우리는 우리의 가슴속에 오히려 남어잇는 정의감의 굿세인 熱風이 잇는 이상에, 지금에 와서는 도저히 참을 수 업는 것이다. 人類의 靈性을 機械化맨들고, 불합리의 착취를 가라치고, 不正한 저축과, 부당한 특권으로써＜21＞ 진리에 위반되여 잇는 뿌르즈와·컬트의 정면을 향해서 돌진하여 마지 안이하는 바이다. 그럿타, 오즉 유일의 진리, 靈性의 해방을 위해서, 부정당한 착취와 저축과 相續, 欺瞞의 도덕과 위선적 處世法의 XXX을 期하기 위해서, 오즉 유일의 진리을 旗때로 하여가지고서, 이 奇怪百面의 外華內虛한 뿌르즈와·컬트의 정면을 XXXXX. 무슨 XX함이 잇슬까브냐. 무슨 遠慮함이 잇슬까브냐. 우리는 우리의 영혼을 資本主義의 손틉아래에서, 오즉 구해내올 뿐이다, 그 하야 이것을 성장식힐 뿐이다. 生의 本然한 길을 우리의 압헤 개척할 뿐이다.
프로레타리아 敎化의 목적은, 이그러진, 쭈그러진, 꾸부정한, 資本主義의 毒牙에서 전인류를 해방식히는 것이다. 이것이 뿌로렛트·컬트의 목적이다. 뿌르즈와·컬트가, 금일 朝鮮의 지배계급교화가, 멀정한 생사람을 잡어서 無理想의 퇴폐적 생활을 하게하고, 正義를 짓발고 그 우에 서게하며, XXXX가 되여가지고서 資本主義國家의 干城이 되도록 하게 맨든다. 비참하기가 짝이 업는 것이다.
우리는 우리의 형제에게, 우리의 자매에게, 전세계는 고사하고 朝鮮 안에 잇는 불상한 동등의 남녀에게, 정의와 진리를 가라치는 것이 당연하다. 지금에 전세계적으로 내부조직의 붕괴를 가지고 잇는 資本主義 組織압헤서, 우리는 전력을 다하야 진리를 위해서 일하여야 하겟다. 그러나 모든 지금의 교육기관이 저사람네들 수중에 잇는 것을 엇더케 하느냐. 될 수 잇는 수가 우리의 압헤, 눈가는 곳마다 낫 하나 잇다. 그릇된 조직과 방책과, 교양에서 우리의 형제자매를 구하여내는 방법이 우리의 가슴속 殿堂안에 잇다. 우리의 反對派의 공허의 기만에 百倍될 만한 교화기관이 우리의 눈이 가는 곳마다 잇다. 行길에 잇다. 농촌의 머슴들 모히는 一間房에 잇다. 논고랑. 밧두덕, 풀밧, 공장, 人力車병문, 선술집, 모든 곳에 잇다, 눈가는 곳마다 잇다, 업는데가 업다. 우리의 가슴속에 정열과 성의와, 용기와 인내만 잇스면 우리의 가슴속 殿堂에서는, 저 사람들 百倍의 효과를 엇을 것이다.
모든 개념, 관념, 형식, 규범, 규율, 그 우에 변혁과 개혁이라는 名辭가 안이다.
그러나 自由主義에도 계단이 잇다. 우리는 우리의 하는 일의 계단을 이저서는 안된다. 만일에 우리가 이 계단을 니저버리는 때에는 우리의 건설원리는 붕괴의 원리로 化해 버린다.＜22＞
계단을 살펴야 한다. 결단코 상승해서는 안이된다. 혹시 그것이 그 사람 개인으로는 당연한 일일는지는 몰으거니와 우리가 건설하고자 하는 사업에 대해서는 害毒이다. 건설적 초기에 잇는 푸로레타리아에게는 『나』라는 개인을 사용하면 안이된다. 『우리』라는 複數가 우리의 목표이다. 그러치 안타가는, 저혼자 實進하다가는 누구모양으로 方向轉換論을 쓰게 될는지도 알수 업는 형편에 이르를 넌지도 몰은다.
그러면 나아가자, 60년전의 露西亞의 지식계급이, 귀족의 자녀가, 우, 나로-드(V Narod)를 부르짓든 것을 본바다서, 전인류의 靈性의 해방을 위해서, 우리의 生의 가치를 세우기 위해서, 勇往하여라, 邁進하여라, 유일의 명백한 진리를 뀌여들고서….

8. 地方普通學校敎員에셔
우리는 당신네들을 잘 이해한다. 당신네들의 처지는 오히려 소작인보다도 불상한 것이다. 당신네들이 겨우 학비의 여유를 엇어가지고서 高等普通學校를 억지로 졸업하고, 저 사람들의 완전한 敎化機關인 敎員養成所(師範科)를 은혜적(!)으로 맛치고 나서, 당신네들은 먹고 사는 쌀을 위해서, 헐 수 할 수 업시 이 노릇을 하는 것인줄을 우리는 알고 잇다. 그것은 맛치 今日의 XXXX의 小部分과 똑가튼 사정이라고 할 만한 것이다. 당신네들은, 小部分은 엇덜넌지 몰으나, 당신네의 대부분은 , 당신네가 뿔르즈와 컬트의 유력한 기계인 것을 의식하고 잇는 줄까지도 안다. 당신네들은 하로밤만 자지안코 생각하면 과연 엇던 것이 진리인 것을 깨달을 것이다. 내가 이와갓티 말하면. 당신네들은 반다시, 이와가티 말할 것이다. 『누가 그것을 몰은다나! 알기는 알지만 엇더케해! 우리에게 힘이 잇서? 엇더케해? 그 따위 입만 깐소리를 마르라』고.
그러나 나는 안다. 진리를 위해서의 熱識이 잇슬 것 가트면, 눈가리고 아옹하는 것이라는 것이라는 것이 안이라, 얼마든지 될수 잇는 것이라는 것을 안다. 第一 쳣재, 당신네들이 現下 교육제도 아래에서도 어린이들을, 당신들이 생각하는 대로 인도할 수 잇는 것이다. OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO. 냄새만 안나게 하는 것이면 가능한 일이요, OOOOOOOOO (中削) 그리하야 당신들은 어린이들의 개성을 보호하며,＜23＞ 靈性이 기계화되는 것을 今日의 뿌르즈와 컬트에서 구해내와야 한다. 즉 당신네부터, 전인류의 靈性을 해방하고자 하는 프로레타리아 운동에 참가하야한다. 당신의 生을 의의잇게 맨들기 위해서.

9. 地方靑年會指導者에게
당신네들은 敎員보다 자유의 몸인 것을 우리는 안다. 동시에, 당신네들도 敎員가 함가지로 鄕黨의 지식계급인 것을 우리는 의심치 안는다. 당신들은 당신이 잇는 지방의 지식계급으로 그 지방에 대한 全責任을 가지고 잇는 것을 자각하엿스리라는 말을 서슴지 안코 우리는 말하겟다. 지식계급의 임무, 이것을 생각해야만 한다.
나는, 여기에서 더 만흔 말을 쓰지 안켓다. 대개 중복되는 문장은 보기 게옥질 나는 것이닛가. 다만 주저넘은 말갓지만, 당신네들은 더 만히 수양하여야 하겟다. 白面夜鬼와 갓흔 宏大한 今日의 조직을 향해서, 實進하고자 하는 당신네들은 적에 대한 용의주도한 치밀한 관찰과, 그에 대항할 戰術을 알어야만 한다. 이와가튼 것을 엇고자 하면 독서하는 수 밧게는 업다. 당신네들의게 몬저 필요한 것은 順廻文庫다. 독서의 장려를 필사적으로 해야만 한다. 그리하여야 입때것 뿌르즈와컬트로 인해서 빼앗겨 바렷든 靈性의 전부를 차저올 수가 잇는 것이다, 그러면 당신네들은 니젓든 靈性을 차저오게되며, 현대사회조직에 대한 批判眼을 어들 것이요, 프로레타리아 戰線 第一隊에서 잇는 사람으로서의 전술을 배흘 수 잇는 것이다.
둘재로 당신네들 지식계급에게 부탁할 것은, 농민의 교육이다. 급한 중에도 제일 급한 것이 이 농민교육윤동이다. 언어로, 문자로, 偶話로, 古談으로, 온 갓짓으로 敎化하여야 한다. 가장 중요한 것은 계급의식의 각성이다. 둘재로 급한 것은 國文 즉 諺文의 보급이다.
이러한 뒤에 조직적 교화운동이 세워지는 것이다. 이러한 임무가 당신네들 鄕黨의 지식계급자의 억개우에 질머진 것이다. 귀찬타고 생각지 말어라, 성스러운 전인류의 해방운동의 部隊속에 내 몸이 참가되여 잇는 것을 깃거워할 것이다.
그 방법에 잇서서는 내가 말하지 안이하야도 조켓다. 농민의 비교적 한가한 때에, 냄새가 들어나지 안을 만한 일홈아래에서＜24＞ 모히여가지고, 감격과 정열을 가지고 그저 이 운동을 해야만 한다. 그러고는 논뚜랑에서, 밧고랑에서, 당신네들의 틈잇는대로, 담화로, 이 운동의 실천을 삼어야 한다.

10. 少年指導者에게
天道敎靑年會의 少年部를 처음으로 하여가지고, 全朝鮮에 봉기된 少年회가 적지 안타고 한다. 少年指導가 얼마콤 至重且大한 것이라는 것은 내가 말하지 안이하야도, 누구나 다 알고 잇는 것이다. 우리의 가정생활에서, 白紙인 영혼을 전통의 망령으로붓허 건저내는 임무가 여기에 잇다.

그러나, 우리의 少年指導를 가지고서 日本의 少年團이나, 재래의 幼稚園을 맨들지 말어라. 내가 이러한 말을 하는 것은 그 의미가 어대잇는지를 잘 알어 두기 바란다. 즉, 童謠, 童話, 과학지식이라는 것을 실은 잡지가 불과 5錢 定價라고 말하지만은, 또 그 잡지가 賣盡된다는 사실로써 깃븜을 엇지만은, 그 5錢짜러 잡지도 못사보는 아동이 얼마나 만흔가를 살펴보아라, 공상적, 환상적 동요를 가르치고, 偶像崇拜의 架空的 상상을 가즌 전설의 동화를 가르치고, 애상적 동화를 되푸리 식히는 것은, 이것은 뿌르즈와式 少年指導라 나는 부르짓는다. 재래의 幼稚園을 맨들어내는 꼴을 보이지 말라는 의미가 여기에 잇다. 당신들이 지금 해나아가듯키 少年指導를 해나아간다면 뿌르즈와 (그 뿌르즈와의 정도는 다른 나라보다 얏지만은)를 위한 아동의 지도일 것 가트면, 몃해 지나지 안이하여서 改造를 당한 운명우에 잇다는 말을 경고한다, 少年指導도 農軍敎化와 가튼 형식으로 되여 내려가야만 한다. 전설의 동화를 업새버려라, 그것은 결국은 가정의 전통서에 구해내온 아동을 또다시 전설의 전통에다 붓잡어 매는 것이다.
明敏한 과학적 상식의 보급이다. 동화의 성질이 신화적이여서는 안된다. 사람의 潑剌한 靈性은 창조성을 가진 것이다.
애상적 문장이여서는 안된다. 갓득이나 둔감한 朝鮮의 어린이들이, 그러치 안어도 地質과 風土가 애상적 감정을 助長식히는데, 더구나 그와가튼 문장으로써 센티멘탈이슴의 근거를 지여놀 것이 무엇이냐.
과학적, 明敏한 두뇌의 助長이다. 창조의 靈性의 발육이다. 小뿌르즈와적 兒童感情의 撲滅이다.＜25＞

11. 文學의 第二義的 價値
XX後에 교육이 잇다.
XX前에도 교육이 잇다.
XX後에 本然한 문학이 게다.
XX前에도 本然한 요구의 문학이 잇다.(누구냐? 감히 그러치 안타고 하는 者가?)
XX前의 교육은 프로렛트아트컬 교육운동이다. XX前의 문학은 프르렛트컬트의 문학이다. 여기에 문학의 第二義的 가치가 발생되는 것이다.
나는 지금, 紙數도 만어지고, 또한 쓴대야 내가 입대것 쓴 말과 별로 틀닐곳이 업슬 터이닛가 여기다 문학론은 쓰지 안켓다. 다만 문학의 第二義的 가치라는 말에 대해서, 몃마듸 설명을 붓칠 뿐이다.
今日의 문학은 떼카단쓰문학으로서 초탈해 나온 문학이다. (문학이 안이면 안된다.) 인생에 대한 감격, 적극적 정열, 힌의 驅歌, 생명에 대한 철학, 이것이 今日의 문학의 요소이다. 과거의 사회조직에서 결정된 생명의식에서 출발된 그릇된 美意識우에 입각한 뿌르즈와의 문학에 대항해서 일어난 오늘의 프로레타리아의 문학은, 프로레타리아의 美學우에서 잇는 동시에 그 문학은, 프로레타리아의 문학으로서의 이유로 존재해 잇는 것이다. XX後에 잇슬 本然한 문학과, XX前에 잇슬 本然한 요구의 문학은, 다만 價値論에 잇서서만 들니는 것이다. 즉, XX後에 잇슬 문학은 그 문학 자체로서 第一義的 가치로 존재할 것이요, XX前에 잇슬 문학은 XX을 위한 第二義的 가치로서 존재할 이유를 갓는다.
이와 갓티 말하면 대강은 나의 생각의 윤곽을 그린 것이라고 말할 수 잇다. 그러면 오늘의 朝鮮에 잇는 문학가(?)는 이 성스러운 운동에 참가하여야만 하겟다. 靈性의 해방을 위해서, 그릇된 조직의 개혁을 위해서, 그릇된 美學의 개념을＜26＞ 부시기 위해서 이르키는 문학운동, 널니 말하면 예술운동과, XXXX을 목적하는 사회운동과 提携하야써 그 보조를 갓티 해야 한다. 더 길게 말할 필요도 업고 조희도 업다. 전인류의 靈性을 해방식히고자 하는, 생명의 철학을 붓잡고자하는, 인생에 대한 감격을 가지고써 나아가는  全프로레타리아의 운동과 목적을 위해서. 학대밧어오든, 구속밧어오든 우리의 예술의 해방을 위해서, 유일의 진리의 목표를 향해서, 전세계의 극한까지 넘처흘으고자 하는 정열을 모라가지고서, XX을 위한 소임을 다하자. 이것이 문학가의 임무, 지식계급의 임무, 예술가의 의무의 일부다.
문학의 第二義的 가치의 존재의 이유가 여기에 잇다.

12. 協同戰線
철학가, 문학가, 예술가, 社會主義者, 그 외의 모든 지식계급, 모든 백성들이, 이 유일의 진리를 위해서 일개의 圓을 지엿다. 협동이다.
그러면 발을 땅에다 곡 붓치자. 다른 말이 업다. 나아가거라, 방천을 끈는 위대한 海溢과 갓티 흘너 나가거라, 전세계의 우에로 흘너덥혀라, 땅바닥을 씨서 버려라, 협동의 전선을 더 굿게 맨들어라. 勇往하여라. 邁進하여라. 飛躍하여라. 유일의 명백한 진리를 꾀여들고서 나아가거라. 우러의 압헤 생명이 개척되엿다.
(1923. 11. 19)＜27＞
＜13-27＞