Magazine Title:	개벽 第50號
Publication Date:	1924년 08월 01일 (August 1, 1924)
Article Title:	各地의 녀름과 그 通信 (Summer in Various Places and Their Correspondence)
Author:	Ch'ŏng'o (P'yŏngyang), Kim Ch'un'gang (Wŏnsan), Samch'ŏngilgak (Inch'ŏn), Hwang Kisu (Pusan), Ch'oe Mungt'uri (Ŭiju), Songdo Hanin (Songdo), Taegu Isang (Taegu), Ch'unp'a (Han River)
Article Type:	소식 (News/Correspondence)

各地의 녀름과 그 通信 (Summer in Various Places and Their Correspondence)

From Moranbong Hill

Comrade Ch'unp'a, how is the heat in Kyŏngsŏng these days? The heat here in P'yŏngyang is probably a little worse than Kyŏngsŏng, certainly not less. Today, the thermometer hanging on the pillar of the inn's porch has already reached 100 degrees. (2 PM) Moreover, the streets of P'yŏngyang city are so dusty that one cannot open one's eyes if even a slight wind blows. All 100,000 citizens are struggling, becoming clumps of dust mixed with sweat. However, just as Mt. Himalaya has glistening white snow even in the summer heat of tropical places like India, this Moranbong Hill is exceptionally cool amidst the heat of P'yŏngyang. This Moranbong Hill becomes beautiful with summer, and it is the most famous high mountain near P'yŏngyang city. To the southeast, the silk-like Taedong River flows **[illegible]**, and above it stand the world-famous pavilions Pubyŏngnu and Yŏn'gwangjŏng, towering majestically. To the northwest lies the vast P'ot'ong Plain, through the center of which the P'ot'ong River flows gracefully like a long serpent. In front is the green shade of Ŭlmiltae, and behind is the fragrant forest of *[illegible]san Mountain, truly a place receiving wind from all four directions. Even in this steaming heat, just going to the top of Moranbong Hill cools one's entire insides. The tall pines of Ch'ŏngnyubyŏk occasionally carry the melody of a kŏmungo (琴) on the wind, and the sound of water from Paegŭn*[illegible] tirelessly beats nature's drum. Just looking down at **[illegible]do Island, famous for watermelons, quenches a parched throat, and the Taedong River railway bridge, like a rainbow (*) appearing after a shower, looks cooler the more one gazes at it. When hearing the lingering bell sound from Yŏngmyŏngsa Temple, whose anxieties (*) do not fade away? When seeing the *[illegible] returning to Panwŏldo Island, whose heart (*) does not feel refreshed? Comrade Ch'unp'a, even if they say the mountains and rivers of **[illegible] are good, I heard a sorrowful song from a friend in Kyŏngsŏng the other day saying, "If the beloved is not there, it is a desolate landscape," and indeed it is true. Even on this cool and pleasant Moranbong Hill, without cheerful and robust comrades like Ch'unp'a, it feels stifling. If only I had come with Ch'unp'a, instead of accompanying scholarly comrades like Soch'un who know nothing of smoking a cigarette or drinking a cup of wine, on a day like today, we could have prepared the famous P'yŏngyang paeksoju (white distilled liquor) and steamed chicken (鷄*) atop Moranbong Hill. Even if we couldn't call for the famous P'yŏngyang kisaeng, you and I could pour drinks, eat, shout, dance, and have a great time. How delightful that would have been! However, when I see the pitiful poor compatriots living outside Ch'ilsŏngmun Gate and the earthen fortress, unable to get even a bowl of thin rice gruel (p'ijuk) properly on such a hot day, carrying gourd dippers and tattered sacks, begging from house to house, and then collapsing exhausted, sweating, and sleeping stretched out in the shade of trees<78>, thoughts of soju and steamed chicken all flee somewhere. Wherever I go, day after day, I see the miserable lives of these compatriots. When will we ever be able to fully resolve their life problems? Comrade Ch'unp'a, because this Moranbong Hill is a vital area of P'yŏngyang, it is famous in the world, and thus it has also suffered many disturbances of war (*亂峰). Truly, Moranbong Hill is a peak of turmoil. From the Koryŏ period, beacon mounds (烽燧臺) were installed on the peak to prepare (*備) for enemies coming from all directions, not to mention experiencing Myoch'ŏng's *[illegible] rebellion (‚œ) in the Koryŏ dynasty and, in the Yi dynasty, enduring the infamous Imjin War (壬辰亂) and the recent Sino-Japanese War. Especially during the Sino-Japanese War, the Qing army occupied Moranbong Hill, built artillery batteries (砲臺), and fought with all their might to defend against the Japanese soldiers, but were eventually captured and defeated by the Japanese Wŏnsan and Saknyŏng detachments. Even now, many traces of baptism by Japanese cannonballs remain between the stone walls and earthen ramparts. Truly, as the saying goes, "an adult's nose gets broken in a children's fight." Why did Chosŏn P'yŏngyang's Moranbong Hill have to suffer such misfortune because Qing China and Japan were fighting? Although it is a past event, the more I think about it, the more indignation erupts. Furthermore, nowadays, perhaps to cool off from the heat, or perhaps to intimidate the citizens of P'yŏngyang, airplanes from Japan's 6th Army Air Wing circle around the sky near Moranbong Hill every day, like old kites searching for rotten mice. Seeing them behave like this even in peacetime, I wonder if there will be a day when artillery fire falls upon this Moranbong Hill again. Comrade Ch'unp'a, as I am about to put down my brush after writing this Moranbong correspondence, another story about Moranbong Hill comes to mind. As Ch'unp'a also knows well from before, this Moranbong Hill has two peaks, north and south. The former is called Munbong (文峰, Literary Peak) and the latter Mubong (武峰, Martial Peak). According to popular legend (俗傳), because Munbong was higher in P'yŏngyang, many scholars (文士) emerged from the outer city in the past. The military officers (武士) within the city walls wanted to suppress the scholars' energy and elevate themselves, so they tried to raise Mubong. However, suppressed by the scholars' influence, they couldn't raise it as they wished. Taking advantage of the darkness of night, they secretly dug the ground, buried hundreds of sacks of beans, and poured water over them. Overnight, the beans swelled, and the peak rose. Therefore, the scholars considered this the work of heaven (天의 조화) and did not try to raise Munbong further. To this day, Mubong remains higher, and consequently, the military influence in P'yŏngyang became strong. Although this story sounds similar to the tales of superstitious geomancers (風水), one can guess what kind of friction (軋轢) existed between the civil (文) and military (武) factions throughout Chosŏn, both in the capital and the provinces. Also, because Moranbong Hill is a famous mountain, there have been many poems (題詠) written about it by poets over time. In my view, the most elegant and refined seems to be the poem by the modern P'yŏngyang poet Kim Irwong (金一翁): 「靑黎山 杖皂紗巾, 萬仞山頭曲一身, 此時若有丹峰畵儂作誰家障*[illegible]人」 ("On Ch'ŏngnyeosan Mountain with a staff and silk hat, bending my body atop the ten-thousand-仞 peak. If there were a painting of Tanbong (Moranbong) at this moment, whose folding screen *[illegible] would I become?"). Another person who comes to mind is comrade Ch'ŏng'u. As we all know, Ch'ŏng'u sings the Moranbong song the best. If Ch'unp'a wants to know what Moranbong is like, listen to comrade Ch'ŏng'u's Moranbong song once. His hearty voice from that plump neck and large vocal cords singing "Moranbong-a Moranbong-a, you are my love" still rings clearly in this comrade's ears, 550 ri away. Please convey some news for this comrade.
Kapcha Year (1924). 7. 12. From P'yŏngyang
Ch'ŏng'o

Myŏngsasimni of Wŏnsan
Wŏnsan Branch, Kim Ch'un'gang

The green pines on white sand are like a painting
The calm navy waves sound like wind music

Before speaking of Myŏngsasimni (明沙十里, Ten Ri of Bright Sand), I wish to briefly describe the scenery of Wŏnsan first. Where the earth veins (地脉) of Kŭmgangsan (Diamond Mountains), which has earned the name of the world's most exquisite place, flow northward, the scenery of Wŏnsan unfolds. Climbing Nam-san hill, which rises prominently in the center of Wŏnsan city, and gazing towards the northeast, what appears like a spread-out watercolor painting <79> is Myŏngsasimni, famous as a summer resort for Westerners. The Kalma Peninsula connected from there, and the Hodo Peninsula, stand tall, spreading their arms as if embracing each other. Within this attempted embrace lies the Wŏnsan harbor, a vast expanse of **[illegible] water (一面*). Small islands dot the misty waves (煙波間), presenting a beautiful scene like floating blue *[illegible] (靑*), while the cool sea breeze blows – the pleasure of this scenery is beyond words.

Ah, Myŏngsasimni! The green pines on the white sand are like a painting, and the calm navy waves are like wind music! Stepping crunch-crunch on the glistening white sand under the scorching sun, as one approaches the shore, the half-blooming rugosa roses (海棠花) greet people. Before you, the vast blue waves (滄波) stretch endlessly, connecting to the sky; this is the so-called unity of sky and water, a vast expanse of blue (上下天光이 一碧萬頃). Can the heat and sweat even dare approach? One feels like flying up to the ninth heaven (九*), and joyful songs inevitably burst forth.
Hwangt'odo Island (famous for a million *[illegible]) stands prominently on the sea, seemingly ready to answer if called from here. To the left, the Kalma Peninsula stretches out, and to the right, Sŏngbukp'o inlet curves along one side. Far across the sea, large and small islands face each other, rows of peaks (連*疊峰) – the distant ones like whispers of kingfisher green (翠*語), the near ones like faint smiles (淡治笑). The misty waves stretch vast (煙波가 洋洋하야), water and sky merging (**). Adding to this, the white-crested waves (碧浪水*) fly high, drawing a line across the horizon, appearing as if transforming into white clouds.

Embracing the transparent clear waves coolly,
I want to drift away forever into that paradise.

The mirror-like clear waves rush towards the shore, only to crash against rugged rocks, making sounds like beating drums, then shattering into pieces like white jade. Alas! In the moment of witnessing this magnificent sight, the hot blood (鮮血) throughout my body seems to scatter, perhaps assimilating into this sky, this water. I want to dash in, embrace the monochromatic blue glass (碧琉璃) with all my might, and vanish forever into that paradise. Who wouldn't feel this way!
Ah—Myŏngsasimni! Ah—my love!

Inch'ŏn's Wŏlmido Island
Samch'ŏngilgak

Looking west from Inch'ŏn harbor, the small island crouching like a jade rabbit is Wŏlmido (月尾島), as the world knows. Wŏlmido is not just the pride of Inch'ŏn city; it has become a beautiful lady (佳人) loved equally by both Kyŏngsŏng and Inch'ŏn. Carrying the city of Inch'ŏn on her back, using the Yŏngjong Islands (永宗諸島) as a fence in front, and embracing Inch'ŏn Bay in the middle, she is a sea beauty (海美人) living a maritime life throughout the four seasons. Being famous for cherry blossoms (사구라꼿) in spring is a special feature, but being loved for sea bathing (海水浴) in summer is an even greater specialty. The talented men and beautiful women (才子佳人) nestled within the large cities of Kyŏngsŏng and Inch'ŏn immerse their white and clear jade-like skin in the bathing area, enjoying themselves in pairs like water ducks. It evokes the feeling of dragon princesses (龍女) from the Water Palace King's (水宮龍王) court meeting immortals (仙人) from Penglai and Fangzhang (蓬萊方丈) and savoring celestial romance. Wŏlmido's points of pride vary depending on the viewer's eye – some say this is good, others say that – but my <80> beloved characteristic of Wŏlmido is entirely different from their opinions. Whenever I see Wŏlmido, what I feel and long for is the beautiful color of Yŏngjongdo Island (永宗島). Yŏngjongdo is truly Wŏlmido's lover. If you remove the color of Yŏngjongdo from Wŏlmido's characteristics, it would be merely a hill (丘陵) devoid of any natural beauty. And as for Wŏlmido's pleasures, sipping beer or cider on the second floor of a Western-style house while gazing at the sea might be a certain *[illegible] taste (*치), but that is aristocratic and bourgeois (부르죠아식). It's not a time to enjoy together with the masses (民衆). My beloved pleasure of Wŏlmido is not found in such blue towers and high pavilions (靑樓高閣). On the north-sloping side of Wŏlmido, dozens of crab-shell-like huts (*屋) cling to the crevices between rocks. Among them is a single T'akchu (濁酒, unfiltered rice wine) house with a pavilion quietly covered by straw mats. This pavilion was not built by a carpenter's hand but is a resting place (休憩處) for drinkers (飮客) made by the old woman (老婆) of the tavern herself. Climbing onto that pavilion and drinking a cup of T'akchu, a refreshing breeze (淸風) arises from under the armpits (雨腋), creating a feeling of exhilaration, as if flying far away towards the vast sky (萬里天空). This is the most distinctive summer *[illegible] taste (*치) of Wŏlmido, and it is no coincidence that I have known this myself throughout my life. <81>

Pusan's Scenic Views
						Hwang Kisu
Pusan's main mountain (主山) resembles a cauldron (釜). To the right, it connects to Chŏkchi (赤峙) to become Morundae (沒雲臺), further forming the two harbors of Sŏp'yŏng (西平) and Tadae (多大). To the left, Haeun-san (海雲山) enters to form Haeunp'o (海雲浦), and further down the coast, Yongdang (龍塘) and Tongbaek (冬栢) islands face each other east and west. In front of it, Chŏryŏngdo Island (絶影島) shields the view, creating a natural harbor gate (港門). This is the renowned Pusan Port (釜山名港), the gateway (關門) of Chosŏn.
Ahead, Chŏryŏngdo Island lies horizontally, blocking the view (遮面). The area within its perimeter of forty ri has dense trees (樹木) and sheer cliffs (岩崖), with scenery (景槪) throughout the four seasons seemingly detached from the mundane world (俗). Because the island's shadow (島影) does not reflect (映射) on the mirror-like (明鏡) wave surface (波面) following the sun and moon, it is called Chŏryŏngdo (Island of No Shadow). To the southwest, Yŏngsan mountain (靈山) is rugged (崎嶇), peeling off in layers (層層이 剝落). Where the white waves (白浪) surge to the sky (掀天) at the highest point is T'aejongdae (太宗臺). It is said that King T'aejong Muyŏl (太宗 武烈王) of Silla once climbed this platform (臺) and gazed at the southeast cloud energy (東南雲氣), hence this name exists. Entry and exit to the harbor (港內) are through the sea gate (海門) where the two islands Yongdang and Tongbaek stand opposite each other to the west of the island. Nearby,
there are the Oryukdo Islands (五六島). These are six natural rocks (岩) standing tall (兀立). At high tide (漲潮), only five islands (五島) are exposed (露立), and at low tide (落潮), six islands (六島) stand in a row (羅立). On the hazy, boundless sea surface (糢糊渺茫한 海面), the five or six solitary islands standing distinctly tall (特立突兀) are indeed a wondrous sight (奇觀) created by nature (天作), what else could they be? Beyond this,
there is Songdo (松島). Being close to the port (港埠) and the seabed being shallow, it is the only suitable place (惟一한 適當處) for sea bathing (海水浴場). Since about three years ago, a park (公園) was built, and during summer, several thousand visitors (遊客) tread [illegible character ■] daily, creating a great bustle (大盛況). Following the coast west for twenty nautical miles (海角), one reaches
Morundae (沒雲臺). The mountain form (山容) is majestic (雄偉), and the water's force (水勢) is vast (浩蕩). During the Imjin War (壬辰戰役) of King Sŏnjo's reign, General Chŏng Un (鄭雲 氏), who repelled invaders (禦侮將軍), commanded the naval forces (舟師) and deployed them in formation with their backs to the mountain (背山陣). Failing to achieve victory, he threw himself (一身) like a goose feather (鴻毛) into the blue waves (碧波) before the platform, fulfilling the duty of martyrdom for his country (殉國의 義). A single fragmented stone monument (一片短碣) transmits his undying fame (茫名) for a hundred generations. The misty waves and sailing boats (烟波風帆) vast and boundless (渺渺茫茫) before one's eyes also make one suddenly aware (頓覺) of the vastness (廣闊) of heaven and earth. To the northeast,
there is Pusanjin (釜山鎭). The strange shape resembling an overturned cauldron (覆釜) shows that Pusan's name is not baseless (虛傳). The high fortress (高城) with a circumference of 1,689 ch'ŏk (尺) and height of thirteen ch'ŏk, which strictly guarded the coastal defense (開防) during the prosperous past era, the site (形址) of the Naval Commander's headquarters (水軍節制使鎭) is clearly visible as if it were yesterday. Nearby, standing tall to the southeast, is Yŏnggadae (永嘉臺). During the Imjin War of King Sŏnjo's reign, Vice-Magistrate Chŏng Pal (僉使 鄭撥 氏), with troops exhausted and arrows depleted (兵窮矢盡), repaid the loyalty between lord and subject (君臣의 義) with his death, leaving only the awe-inspiring [illegible character ■] title (畏服的 ■稱) "Black-Robed General" (黑衣將軍) to posterity. Do the ten thousand waves of the encircling lake (惠湖萬浪) that strike the base of the platform day and night with mournful sounds (嗚咽) still lament (尙嗚) the righteous spirit (義氣) of that time? Does the ancient altar (古壇), still standing alone (依然獨立) under the old trees and setting sun (老樹斜陽), represent (表) the steadfast integrity (勁節) of Lord Chŏng? Further east, following the remaining mountains (殘山) for fifteen ri (十五里), penetrating into the sea (海中으로 斗入),
there is Haeundae (海雲臺). Though the height is lofty (高峙), it is flat and level (平坦), creating a natural area <81> for climbing and viewing (登臨■). It was a place where Master Ko Un, Ch'oe Ch'iwŏn (孤雲崔致遠先生), once strolled (逍遙). Thus, appreciating poets and scholars (騷人損士) have not been lonely (寂寞) for a thousand years. Green pines (蒼松), green bamboo (綠竹), camellias (冬栢), and rhododendrons (杜冲等樹) are densely lush (森森鬱密) all around (四圍), bearing the color of eternal spring (四時長春). Below one's gaze (眠底), the vast blue waves (萬頃蒼波) are boundless (浩■無際), giving rise to a feeling (感) of the sky being high and the earth vast (天高地廻). A poem says:
"紅塵甘載久開君, 一■■峰眼忽靑. (Having long endured the red dust, opening up to you, lord; The peak suddenly turns blue before my eyes.)
不用燃犀窺海恠, 應須皷瑟憾湘震. (No need to burn rhino horn to spy sea monsters; Should play the se zither to move the Xiang river spirits.)
雲開驚鶴歸三島, 天濶鵾鵬簛九溟. (Clouds open, startled cranes return to the three isles; Sky vast, Kun Peng fish fly over the nine seas.)
東望安期知不遠, 丹城何日揷修翎." (Looking east, Anqi is known to be not far; When will Danseong plant its long feathers?)
This poem by Master Cho Maegye (曹梅溪先生) can be said to depict (描寫) the position and scenery (地位景物) of Haeundae. Behind the platform (臺後), a medicinal spring (藥泉) gushes out (湧出). Being a spiritual liquid (靈液) containing the essence (精氣) of mountain and sea, it has many miraculous effects (神效) for indigestion (消化不良) and other myriad illnesses (萬病). Patients seeking cures (療養客) from near and far flock here (絡繹) without interruption (間斷). Further north, the beautiful scenery (勝景) of Pongnaesan Mountain (蓬萊山) is lovely (佳麗).

Kŭmjŏngsan Mountain (金井山) is a remaining branch (餘幹) of Yangsan's Ch'wijŏpsan Mountain (梁山鷲捷山). It winds and coils (蜿蜓盤㨿) north of Tongnae county (東萊郡), gathering auspicious energy (淑氣를 鍾毓). It is both spiritual (靈異) and bright and beautiful (明麗), monopolizing the claim to being a scenic spot (勝地). To the north,
Pŏmŏsa Temple (梵魚寺) was founded (剏健) by Great Master Wŏnhyo (元曉大師) during the reign of King Hŭngdŏk (興德王) of Silla. In the grand Buddhist sanctuary (宏然한 梵宮), several hundred monks (僧侶) reside. It is comparable to Yŏndosa Temple (蓮度寺) in Yangsan. The Thousand-Armed Buddha statue (千手佛像) and the seating arrangement (列坐) of the Five Hundred Arhats (五百羅漢) are like the construction (築造) of a majestic Pure Land (莊嚴한 佛土). At its very summit (最上頂),
Mirŭgam Hermitage (彌勒庵) has a spiritual spring (靈泉) gushing out (湧出) from within a stone coffer (石函). When prayers (祈禱) are offered, water tasting like rice gruel (米紺水) gushes out first. Moreover, the spring water (水液) tastes sweet (味甘) and is extremely cold (極冷), not needing replacement with ice crystals (不換氷晶). It is truly the spiritual essence (精靈) of the mountain spirit (山氣). To the east, Mangwŏltae (望月臺) and Chŏkchwijŏng Pavilion (積翠亭) encircle Maan-nyŏng Pass (馬鞍嶺). Further,
near the hot springs (溫泉) of Tongnae (東萊),

Haksodae (鶴巢臺) connects with Nongjusan Mountain (弄珠山). Below it, T'ohwadong Valley (桃花洞) opens separately. Amidst the interplay (交暎) of green pines (蒼松) and emerald bamboo (翠竹), if one encounters fragrant spring again, the red-adorned peach blossoms (紅粧의 桃花) give the impression (觀) of entering an immortal spring (仙源). A thatched pavilion (一茅亭) is built in the valley (洞中), where poets and scholars (騷人韻士) recite spring-viewing poems (賞春詩) in spring and chant cool-breeze verses (納凉句) in summer, refreshing diseased lungs (病肺) in the fresh air (新鮮한 空氣). To the south,
Hamsŏngji Pond (涵星池) has lotus flowers (芙蓉) filling the pond, intermingling (交暎) with lush reeds (蒼蒼한 蒹葭). In the gentle breeze and light mist (微風淡煙), it presents a naturally pure appearance (天然의 凈態). About five ri away,
Kŭmnyŏnbong Peak (金蓮峰) is near Mahagosa Temple (摩訶叩刹). The sound of the evening bell in the setting sun (斜陽鍾聲) instantly awakens one from worldly dreams (塵夢). On the willow-lined bank (楊柳岸) of Namch'ŏn stream (南川流),
Isŏphonggyo Bridge (利涉虹橋) was constructed (結構) by Master Isŏn (利先禪師) using yin-yang stones (陰陽石). Even after passing a thousand years, its original form (本形) is still preserved (尙保). Further east,
Chŏnggwajŏng Pavilion (鄭苽亭) was built by Mr. Chŏng Sŏ (鄭叙氏) of the Koryŏ period after being banished (放逐) due to slander (譖言). He built a pavilion (亭) here, planted gourds (苽), played the kŭm (琴), and composed songs (歌). The lyrics (歌詞) were extremely sorrowful (悽惋) and were included in the court music (樂府) of the time. Even now, if one consults the Koryŏ court music records (高麗樂府), the lyrics still exist (尙存). The above are collectively celebrated (盛稱) as the Eight Views of Pongnae (蓬萊八景) since ancient times. To the north, below Kŭmjŏngsan Mountain,
a hot spring (溫泉) gushes out, possessing much spiritual power (靈驗) and miraculous efficacy (神效). Therefore, patients seeking cures (療養客) gather (雲集) from all directions, coming and going (往來) continuously (陸續). Grand inns (宏大한 旅館) and splendid parks (華麗한 公園) spread out like a separate world (別乾坤) beneath the mountain. Pointed and squatting (尖尖蹲蹲) green peaks (翠黛綠鼠[?]) stretch continuously (連亘) for twenty ri to become Tongnae Fortress (東萊城). The vast ancient history (滄茫한 古歷史) makes the era (年代) of the ancient state of Changsan (萇山古國) difficult to ascertain (可䅲[?]) clearly. Since Silla, names like Kŏch'ilsan (居漆山), Changsan (萇山), Pongnae (蓬萊), etc., convey its evolution (沿革). During the Yi dynasty <82>, the Tongnae Prefecture (東萊府) was established, and it was an important gateway (關門重地) administered (管鎭) by a Prefect (府使).
Ch'ungnyŏlsa Shrine (忠烈祠) is where the former Prefect Song Sanghyŏn (宋象賢氏) is enshrined (享祀). During the Imjin War in the 25th year of King Sŏnjo's reign (宣祖二十五年壬辰役), Lord Song was serving as the Tongnae Prefect (東萊府使) at the time, defending (備禦) the national border. When the entire fortress fell overnight (一夜에 全城이 陷落됨을 當하야), he sent a report (遺報) to his esteemed father (嚴父) with the four phrases: "孤城月暈. 列鎭高枕. 君臣義重. 父子恩輕." ("Isolated fortress, moon haloed. Neighboring garrisons sleep soundly. Duty to lord and country is heavy. Filial piety to father and son is light.") Then, with resolute death (毅然한 一死), he established the great integrity (大節) of martyrdom (殉國). Later, the royal court (朝廷) bestowed the posthumous title (諡) Ch'ungnyŏl (忠烈, Loyal and Fierce) and built this shrine (祠) here, offering blood sacrifices (血祀) in spring and autumn (春秋). Is this not enough for the scenery of Pusan!

The World's Most Exquisite Scenery, Ŭiju's T'onggunjŏng Pavilion
						Ŭiju, Ch'oe Mungt'uri
More urgent than polite greetings is this statement: "Regarding summer scenery, though people worldwide may boast of their own treasures, all must bow down (鳳伏) before Ŭiju's T'onggunjŏng Pavilion (義州統軍亭)!" Isn't that so? It's not an exaggeration just because it's my place. Anyone, please come and see for yourself just once! How is it? It's number one for scenery, number one for history, and probably number one in the world for magnificence (雄壯).
Isn't this T'onggunjŏng Pavilion, standing transcendently (超然히 元立) in the northeast of the rear capital town (臣邑) at a corner of the nation's border (國慶一隅)? Facing the three-thousand-ri winding [illegible characters 綿■■] peninsula (三千里半島) and with its back to the great Manchurian plain (滿洲大原), hasn't it wept and laughed with the people of the world for thousands of years?
Ŭiju T'onggunjŏng Pavilion

Everyone, it's so breathtakingly beautiful (氣막키게조흔닛가) that words cannot fully express it. Unless you see it directly (直接), you cannot truly speak of this world's most exquisite place (天下絶處), T'onggunjŏng Pavilion. Come once, even if you think you're being deceived! At sunrise in the morning or sunset in the evening, climb T'onggunjŏng Pavilion with a pot of wine (一壺酒) and Mr. Chang (張氏). Look out over the three-thousand-ri peninsula before you, gaze back at the South Manchurian plain behind you, and look down upon the vast and endlessly powerful Yalu River (鴨綠江). How is it? There's no other way but to come and see for yourself, covering your eyes [metaphorically, meaning come without prejudice]. It is only regrettable (遺憾) that my tongue is thick and my brush dull (鎎), unable to describe and introduce it charmingly (아기자기 形容).

Summer in Songdo
						Songdo Hanin (Idle Person of Songdo)
Summer in Songdo (松都)! It was Songdo. The pine wind (松風) murmurs softly. The mountains are green, the water is clear, and the sand is white! Kwandŏkchŏng Pavilion (觀德亭) is also a place for a stroll (逍遙處), Sŏnjukkyo Bridge (善竹橋) is a place for a drink (한잔마실곳), and Manwŏldae Palace site (滿月臺) is a place to recite a verse (한句읇을 곳). However, for summer scenery (景致), Ch'aehadong Valley (彩霞洞) and Pusandong Valley (扶山洞) are better. Let's briefly pass Sŏnjukkyo, dip our feet (濯足) in Ch'aehadong, and stroll through Pusandong.
Having crossed Sŏnjukkyo, let's recite a poem from the time of P'oŭn Seja (圃隱世子, referring to Chŏng Mongju).
Crow, fighting crow, white heron, do not go there. The angry crow envies your white *[illegible](힌).
I fear you might dirty the body well-washed in the blue waves (靑波).
= Mother of Chŏng P'oŭn (鄭圃隱母堂) =
Though this body dies and dies, a hundred times over,
My white bones become dust and soil, whether my soul exists or not,
How could this single piece of loyal heart (一片丹心) towards my lord (任-) ever change?
= Master Chŏng P'oŭn (鄭圃隱先生) =

◇ Charming Ch'aehadong Valley
From the entrance of the valley (洞口), the lush green shade (綠陰) seems like a continuous green sunshade. The murmuring sound of flowing water and the songs of birds seem to wholeheartedly welcome (한깃맛는 틋하다) the arriving guests (客). Sitting in the hexagonal pavilion (六角亭) and viewing the lotus pond (蓮塘求景) is nice, but going deeper into the corner to the first waterfall (第一瀑布) and dipping one's feet (濯足) is also a cool activity. Clear water falls from several yards up through rock crevices, and an old pine tree (一樹老松) twists and turns, covering the sky above the playground.
Even if some rain falls, it's perfectly peaceful (天下太平) under the tree. It truly is a playground with such ambiance. However, this charming playground is not for everyone; it has become the private property (私有專用物) of the Kaesŏng petit bourgeois (小불아) Mr. Pak Uhyŏn (朴宇鉉君). His Japanese-style and Western-style villas (別莊) are here. Recently, for some reason (細音), a dispute (닷름) arose between that busybody Cho Chungŭng's son (無事奔走趙重應子) and him over whether Ch'aehadong belonged to one or the other, eventually ending in splitting it half and half, they say. Who knows? Who can understand the doings (作亂) of the bourgeois (불조아)? Leave it be. It's not as good as Pusandong, so let's move on.

◇ Water Playground Pusandong
The green shade is dense (욱어젓다). Clear water flows beneath the floor of the Ch'ŏnch'ogak Pavilion (千初閣亭子), and clouds like Tang dynasty styles (당태가튼 구름) float above the pavilion roof (亭子집웅닥이). Foot-washing parties (濯足會) are held frequently (番番히열이여서), making it difficult (어렵다) to rent this playground for just any occasion. Along the Pusandong stream, there are countless water ponds (물 池塘). Thus, families (一家族), or whole villages (一洞里), or groups of friends (知友들리) prepare various foods (飮食) and fruits (果實) (sometimes even calling kisaeng - 妓生), go there, bathe (沐浴), sing songs, beat drums (長鼓), and play pipes (피리) to spend the hot summer days coolly. Consequently, this stream area is bustling (야단법석) with drum sounds and song sounds. It's not just men who play like this; women also organize water parties (물노리) in various ways amongst themselves (自己네리). Thus, the water ponds are strictly divided (儼然히 區別) into men's water ponds (男물 池塘) and women's water ponds (女물 池塘). Summer in Songdo truly lies in these water ponds! Leave it be. Without fine wine and delicacies (美酒佳肴), let's depart empty-handed (空手去).
Kaesŏng Sŏnjukkyo Bridge

Taegu's Talsŏng Park
						Taegu Isang (Mr. Yi of Taegu)
Gentlemen of the Editorial Office. In this scorching heat, how much effort you must be putting in to prepare the August cool-breeze issue for our readers! If only I were nearby, I would have offered you a block of ice (어름)—but I cannot do that—.
Well now—I am sending you one picture of Taegu scenery, Kwanp'ungnu Pavilion (觀風樓), and one sheet illustrating the eight famous sights of Talsŏng (達城八景), a specialty of Taegu. Please enjoy a cool breeze (逍風) while fanning yourselves (붓채질남아).
As you gentlemen also know, apart from Talsŏng Park (達城公園), there is no other scenery in Taegu. Summer in Taegu is spent solely with this Talsŏng Park. Now, let me briefly tell you the history (來歷) of this Talsŏng Park.
It is a hilly area (丘陵) with a circumference of two ri, located about three ri (Korean ri) northwest of Taegu city center <84>, shaped like a winnowing basket (삼태기), high in the northwest and low in the southeast. Originally (本來-), it is said there were three ponds and nine wells (三池九井) here. In the Silla period, it was Talsŏng Fortress (達弗城), and in the Koryŏ period, T'aegu County (太丘縣). The fortress name came down as Talsŏng (達城)—. It is said that because many famous people emerged from here, the title Talsŏnggun (達城君, Lord of Talsŏng) was conferred. The Pae (裵氏) and Sŏ (徐氏) clans were prominent families among them. Now, I will show you the Ten Views of Talsŏng (達城十景) praised by Master Sŏ Sajŏn Kŏjŏng (徐四建居正先生).
Taegu Talsŏng Park

Namsŏ Hwahwa (南沼荷花, Lotus Flowers of the South Pond), Pukpyŏk Hyangnim (北壁香林, Fragrant Forest of the North Cliff), Nowŏn Songgaek (櫓院送客, Seeing Off Guests at Nowŏn), Tongsa Kwisŭng (桐寺歸僧, Monks Returning to Tongsa Temple), Kusup'o Ch'unjin (龜峀春震, Spring Thunder at Turtle Gulf[?]), Ŭnam Mojong (隱庵暮鍾, Evening Bell at Ŭnam Hermitage), Kŭmho Pŏmju (琴湖泛舟, Boating on Kŭmho River), Ch'imsan Nakcho (砧山落照, Setting Sun at Ch'imsan Mountain), Hangnu Myŏngwŏl (鶴樓明月, Bright Moon at Hangnu Pavilion), Ipsaek Chogwi (笠澤釣龜, Fishing for Turtles at Ipsaek Marsh).
These are they. However, among the ten views, scenes like Namsŏ (南沼), Hangnu (鶴樓), and Ipsaek (笠澤) no longer exist today. The place called Nowŏn (櫓院) is about one ri from the city center, said to be where old and new governors (監司) were welcomed and farewelled (送迎處) in the past. Tongsa Temple (桐寺) is about five ri from the city center, directly one of the main mountain temples (大本山). Kusup'o (龜岫) is only about ten-odd chō (町) outside the city center, the place called Turtle Rock (자래바위). Ŭnam (隱庵) is Ŭnjŏgam Hermitage (隱寂庵) in Pisŭlsan Mountain (琵瑟山) in front of Taegu. Kŭmho (琴湖) is Taegu's famous Kŭmho River (琴湖江).
Perhaps! If you have leisure, how about visiting these Ten Views of Talsŏng, the famous sights of Taegu, directly? With this much, I convey the summer news.

From the Han River
						Ch'unp'a
Brother Ch'ŏng'o. I enjoyed reading the Moranbong correspondence with my comrades. It felt like sitting inside a steaming basket (시루), boiling and scorching, but the breeze from Moranbong, 500 ri away, sent a chill through my body, making me feel as if I myself had leaped onto the summit of Moranbong.
However, being in the middle of Seoul, which is like the inside of a brazier (䁔爐), felt like being steamed again and again (再湯三湯), and I also felt a hidden longing (憧憬) for Moranbong. So, saying, "Ah, to hell with everything!" (에라 百事라도 無可奈라), I immediately rushed (여) out to the Han River (漢江).
Brother Ch'ŏng'o. Ch'ŏngnyangni is nice, Se'geomjŏng is nice, Changch'ungdan is nice, but why did I head straight for the Han River? Was it to see Sangdusan Mountain (象頭山) as a substitute for Moranbong, to see the Han River as a substitute for the Taedong River (大同江), and to see Yuldo Island (栗島) as a substitute for Nŭngnado Island (綾羅島)? That's right. And as you know, brother, even considering various places (이고져곳), Seoul's representative famous place, especially the representative scenic spot (勝地) for summer, is the Han River, isn't it? Good mountains, good water, good breeze—.
Brother Ch'ŏng'o. Right now, it is exactly 7:30 PM on July 16th, and I, along with comrades Sopa and Soch'ŏn, am standing stretched out on the Han River Railway Bridge (漢江鐵橋), watching the sunset over Usan Mountain (牛山落照). Again, the image of you, brother, yearning for this distant Ch'unp'a from the top of Moranbong—your figure like an old sparrow (老雀)—comes clearly to my eyes. And I can almost see some P'yŏngyang rascal (平壤날탕이) passing by your side, picking fault with brother Soch'un's upper garment strings (웃고름).
Brother Ch'ŏng'o. Is there also that so-called "チョットオマッチ" (Chotto omachi - Japanese for "Wait a moment") sign on the Taedong River Railway Bridge? Though I see it often and it's mundane, today, perhaps because I had a few cups of makgeolli (막걸네잔) and felt excited (興分), and also because I was thinking of you, brother, from afar on the hundred-chang (百丈) railway bridge while watching the setting sun (夕陽), my thoughts <85> wandered here and there, eventually drawn to the "transience of life" (人生의 無常), making me yearn secretly for the boundless water and sky (萬里水天)! But this is just a passing thought. There's nothing to worry about.
Han River Pedestrian Bridge

Brother Ch'ŏng'o. We were going to go to Sangdusan Mountain but got the feeling "it's not a pretty sight (안이운)," so saying "Ekh! Let's turn back," we turned our steps back towards the Chang'an (長安) of Hong *[illegible] (洪■). Passing the first railway bridge and heading towards the second railway bridge (第二鐵橋), a completely forgotten bright moon (一輪明月) suddenly bursts forth (불치미는구려) over the peak of Namsan Mountain (終南山)! "Ah! I forgot! The night moon of the Han River! The Han River of the night moon!" Feeling this anew, we turned back again. We ended up going back to the first railway bridge.
Kisaeng (妓生), pimps (蝎甫), ruffians (亂棒), gangsters (乾達) floating aimlessly (둥둥) on the river (江上). For some wicked reason (웬 心術), I felt "I can't see the moonlight or the water color (月色이고 水色이고 不見이라)," and my heart thumped (가슴이 북눅거려서), so I ended up turning right back again.
Brother Ch'ŏng'o. Is this my own ill-natured discontent (不平)? Seeing others playing boisterously (豪氣잇게노는) and getting pointlessly irritated (空然히 불둑거리는 것이)——.
Perhaps that's it. Generally, people feel discontented about things they cannot do themselves, right? But maybe it's not that either?
Brother Ch'ŏng'o. Moranbong appears again. Kŭmgangsan (金剛山) also appears. Especially Haegŭmgang (海金剛, Sea Kŭmgang) appears! Just thinking about it feels cool!
Brother Ch'ŏng'o. Others, the *[illegible] bourgeois (죠아), talk about escaping the heat (避暑) or enjoying the cool air (納凉) and go to Kŭmgangsan. They say they go through Sambang (三防) and Sŏgwang(sa Temple?) (釋王) and around Haegŭmgang to escape the heat. But we are always like this! Brother, you can at least see Pongsonnu Pavilion (峰仙樓) and Paeksangnu Pavilion (百祥樓), right? Ah—I…….
Hanging Bell Rock (懸鍾岩) of Haegŭmgang

<86>

**Summary**

This collection of correspondence from various locations across Korea in the summer of 1924 paints vivid pictures of scenic spots like P'yŏngyang's Moranbong, Wŏnsan's Myŏngsasimni beach, Inch'ŏn's Wŏlmido, Pusan's Haeundae and T'aejongdae, Ŭiju's T'onggunjŏng, Songdo's valleys, Taegu's Talsŏng Park, and Seoul's Han River. The authors describe the natural beauty, local specialties, historical significance (referencing wars, legends, and famous figures), and recreational activities (bathing, boating, poetry, drinking). Interspersed with appreciation for nature are laments about poverty, social disparity (contrasting leisure spots with the struggles of the poor), subtle critiques of the bourgeois, and expressions of national sentiment, including resentment over past conflicts like the Sino-Japanese War fought on Korean soil and unease at the contemporary Japanese military presence (like aircraft over P'yŏngyang).

From a colonial history perspective, the article is interesting for several reasons. It reveals how Koreans perceived and utilized their landscape for leisure and identity formation during Japanese rule, highlighting famous scenic locations as sources of national pride and historical memory. The poignant observation of poverty juxtaposed with descriptions of beautiful scenery and leisure activities underscores the social stratification and hardships faced by many Koreans. Furthermore, the mention of the Sino-Japanese War's impact on Moranbong and the unease caused by Japanese military aircraft reflects the underlying tension and consciousness of colonial subjugation, even amidst seemingly apolitical descriptions of summer landscapes.

**Named Entities**

各地	각지	Various Places
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul)
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
印度	인도	India
희말늬야	히말라야	Himalaya
牧丹峰	목단봉	Moranbong Hill
大同江	대동강	Taedong River
浮碧(樓)	부벽(루)	Pubyŏngnu Pavilion
練光(亭)	연광(정)	Yŏn'gwangjŏng Pavilion
普通大野	보통대야	P'ot'ong Plain
普通江	보통강	P'ot'ong River
乙密臺	을밀대	Ŭlmiltae
淸流壁	청류벽	Ch'ŏngnyubyŏk
永明寺	영명사	Yŏngmyŏngsa Temple
半月島	반월도	Panwŏldo Island
愁心歌	수심가	Susimga (Sorrowful Song)
小春	소춘	Soch'un (Person's name/pseudonym)
平壤白燒酒	평양백소주	P'yŏngyang Paeksoju (Liquor)
平壤名技	평양명기	Famous P'yŏngyang Kisaeng
七星門	칠성문	Ch'ilsŏngmun Gate
高句麗	고구려	Koguryŏ
高麗	고려	Koryŏ
妙淸	묘청	Myoch'ŏng
李朝	이조	Yi Dynasty (Chosŏn)
壬辰亂	임진란	Imjin War (Japanese Invasions of 1592-1598)
日淸戰爭	일청전쟁	Sino-Japanese War (1894-1895)
淸軍	청군	Qing Army
日兵	일병	Japanese Soldiers
元山	원산	Wŏnsan
朔寧	삭녕	Saknyŏng
淸國	청국	Qing China
日本	일본	Japan
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
文峰	문봉	Munbong (Literary Peak)
武峰	무봉	Mubong (Martial Peak)
金一翁	김일옹	Kim Irwong (Poet's name)
靑友	청우	Ch'ŏng'u (Person's name/pseudonym)
元山支社	원산지사	Wŏnsan Branch Office
金春岡	김춘강	Kim Ch'un'gang (Author's name)
金剛山	금강산	Kŭmgangsan (Diamond Mountains)
南山	남산	Namsan Hill (in Wŏnsan)
明沙十里	명사십리	Myŏngsasimni
葛麻半島	갈마반도	Kalma Peninsula
虎島半島	호도반도	Hodo Peninsula
元山渡	원산도	Wŏnsan Harbor/Crossing
黃土島	황토도	Hwangt'odo Island
城北浦	성북포	Sŏngbukp'o Inlet
仁川	인천	Inch'ŏn
月尾島	월미도	Wŏlmido Island
三靑一客	삼청일객	Samch'ŏngilgak (Author's name)
仁川港	인천항	Inch'ŏn Harbor
仁川府	인천부	Inch'ŏn Prefecture
永宗諸島	영종제도	Yŏngjong Islands
仁川灣	인천만	Inch'ŏn Bay
永宗島	영종도	Yŏngjongdo Island
朴宇鉉	박우현	Pak Uhyŏn (Person's name)
趙重應	조중응	Cho Chungŭng (Person's name)
釜山	부산	Pusan
黃紀秀	황기수	Hwang Kisu (Author's name)
赤峙	적치	Chŏkchi
沒雲臺	몰운대	Morundae
西平	서평	Sŏp'yŏng
多大	다대	Tadae
海雲山	해운산	Haeun-san Mountain
海雲浦	해운포	Haeunp'o
龍塘島	용당도	Yongdang Island
冬栢島	동백도	Tongbaek Island (Dongbaekseom)
絶影島	절영도	Chŏryŏngdo Island (Yeongdo)
靈山	영산	Yŏngsan Mountain
太宗臺	태종대	T'aejongdae
新羅	신라	Silla
太宗 武烈王	태종 무열왕	King T'aejong Muyŏl
五六島	오륙도	Oryukdo Islands
松島	송도	Songdo (in Pusan)
鄭雲	정운	Chŏng Un (General)
宣祖	선조	King Sŏnjo
釜山鎭	부산진	Pusanjin
永嘉臺	영가대	Yŏnggadae
鄭撥	정발	Chŏng Pal (Official)
黑衣將軍	흑의장군	Black-Robed General
海雲臺	해운대	Haeundae
孤雲崔致遠	고운 최치원	Ko Un, Ch'oe Ch'iwŏn (Scholar)
曹梅溪	조매계	Cho Maegye (Poet)
蓬萊山	봉래산	Pongnaesan Mountain
金井山	금정산	Kŭmjŏngsan Mountain
梁山	양산	Yangsan
鷲捷山	취첩산	Ch'wijŏpsan Mountain
東萊郡	동래군	Tongnae County
梵魚寺	범어사	Pŏmŏsa Temple
興德王	흥덕왕	King Hŭngdŏk
元曉大師	원효대사	Great Master Wŏnhyo
蓮度寺	연도사	Yŏndosa Temple
彌勒庵	미륵암	Mirŭgam Hermitage
望月臺	망월대	Mangwŏltae
積翠亭	적취정	Chŏkchwijŏng Pavilion
馬鞍嶺	마안령	Maan-nyŏng Pass
東萊	동래	Tongnae
鶴巢臺	학소대	Haksodae
弄珠山	농주산	Nongjusan Mountain
桃花洞	도화동	T'ohwadong Valley
涵星池	함성지	Hamsŏngji Pond
金蓮峰	금련봉	Kŭmnyŏnbong Peak
摩訶叩刹	마하고사	Mahagosa Temple
南川	남천	Namch'ŏn Stream
利涉虹橋	이섭홍교	Isŏphonggyo Bridge
利先禪師	이선선사	Master Isŏn
鄭苽亭	정과정	Chŏnggwajŏng Pavilion
鄭叙	정서	Chŏng Sŏ (Official/Poet)
高麗樂府	고려악부	Koryŏ Akpu (Court Music Records)
蓬萊八景	봉래팔경	Eight Views of Pongnae
東萊城	동래성	Tongnae Fortress
萇山古國	장산고국	Ancient State of Changsan
居漆山	거칠산	Kŏch'ilsan Mountain
忠烈祠	충렬사	Ch'ungnyŏlsa Shrine
宋象賢	송상현	Song Sanghyŏn (Official)
義州	의주	Ŭiju
崔뭉툴이	최뭉툴이	Ch'oe Mungt'uri (Author's name)
統軍亭	통군정	T'onggunjŏng Pavilion
滿洲大原	만주대원	Great Manchurian Plain
鴨綠江	압록강	Yalu River (Amnokkang)
松都	송도	Songdo (Kaesŏng)
松都閑人	송도한인	Songdo Hanin (Author's name)
觀德亭	관덕정	Kwandŏkchŏng Pavilion
善竹橋	선죽교	Sŏnjukkyo Bridge
滿月臺	만월대	Manwŏldae Palace Site
彩霞洞	채하동	Ch'aehadong Valley
扶山洞	부산동	Pusandong Valley
鄭圃隱	정포은	Chŏng P'oŭn (Chŏng Mongju)
千初閣	천초각	Ch'ŏnch'ogak Pavilion
開城	개성	Kaesŏng
大邱	대구	Taegu
李生	이생	Isang (Mr. Yi of Taegu)
觀風樓	관풍루	Kwanp'ungnu Pavilion
達城公園	달성공원	Talsŏng Park
達弗城	달불성	Talbulsŏng Fortress
太丘縣	태구현	T'aegu County
達城君	달성군	Talsŏnggun (Title)
裵氏	배씨	Pae Clan
徐氏	서씨	Sŏ Clan
徐四建居正	서사건거정	Sŏ Sajŏn Kŏjŏng (Sŏ Kŏjŏng)
南沼	남소	Namsŏ (South Pond)
北壁	북벽	Pukpyŏk (North Cliff)
櫓院	노원	Nowŏn
桐寺	동사	Tongsa Temple
龜峀	구수	Kusup'o
隱庵	은암	Ŭnam Hermitage
琴湖	금호	Kŭmho River
砧山	침산	Ch'imsan Mountain
鶴樓	학루	Hangnu Pavilion
笠澤	입택	Ipsaek Marsh
大本山	대본산	Taebonsan (Main Mountain Temple)
琵瑟山	비슬산	Pisŭlsan Mountain
隱寂庵	은적암	Ŭnjŏgam Hermitage
琴湖江	금호강	Kŭmho River
漢江	한강	Han River
春坡	춘파	Ch'unp'a (Author's name)
靑吾	청오	Ch'ŏng'o (Person's name/pseudonym)
淸凉里	청량리	Ch'ŏngnyangni
洗劔亭	세검정	Se'gŏmjŏng
獎忠壇	장충단	Changch'ungdan Altar
象頭山	상두산	Sangdusan Mountain
綾羅島	능라도	Nŭngnado Island
栗島	율도	Yuldo Island
小波	소파	Sopa (Person's name/pseudonym)
小川	소천	Soch'ŏn (Person's name/pseudonym)
漢江鐵橋	한강철교	Han River Railway Bridge
牛山	우산	Usan Mountain
終南山	종남산	Chongnamsan (Namsan in Seoul)
海金剛	해금강	Haegŭmgang (Sea Kŭmgang)
三防	삼방	Sambang (Place in Kŭmgangsan)
釋王(寺)	석왕(사)	Sŏgwang(sa) (Temple?)
峰仙樓	봉선루	Pongsonnu Pavilion
百祥樓	백상루	Paeksangnu Pavilion
懸鍾岩	현종암	Hyŏnjong'am (Hanging Bell Rock)

**Glossary**

동모	동무	Comrade; Friend (Older term, now primarily used in North Korea or specific contexts)
녀름	여름	Summer (Older spelling)
엇더함닛가	어떠합니까	How is it? (Older polite interrogative ending)
-ㅁ니다/-슴니다	-ㅂ니다/-습니다	Polite declarative ending (Older spelling variation)
하얏지	하였지	Did; Was (Contraction of 하였다 + -지)
업슴니다	없습니다	There is not; Does not exist (Older spelling)
조곰	조금	A little; Slightly (Older spelling)
만히	많이	Many; Much; A lot (Older spelling)
갓슴니다	같습니다	Is like; Seems (Older spelling)
놉흔	높은	High; Tall (Older spelling)
흐르고	흐르고	Flows and...
임하엿스며	임하였으며	Presided over; Stood majestically and... (Older form)
잇고	있고	There is/are and...
잇스니	있으니	Because there is/are
외다	이다	Is; Am; Are (Older copula ending)
찌는	찌는	Steaming (as in heat)
꼭댁이	꼭대기	Top; Summit; Peak (Older spelling)
오장	오장	Five viscera (Internal organs); Insides
안코	않고	Not doing and... (Contraction of 아니하고)
졀로	절로	By itself; Naturally (Older spelling)
틔워지고	트이고	Becomes clear; Opens up (Throat); (Older form/spelling)
끗헤	끝에	At the end of
드를	들을	To hear (Future/potential modifier form, older spelling)
살아지지	사라지지	Does not disappear
안이하며	아니하며	And does not...; While not...
하오릿가	하겠습니까	Would one do?; Will one do? (Older humble/polite interrogative)
좃타	좋다	Good; Fine (Older spelling)
업스면	없으면	If there is not
치구	친구	Friend (Common term)
밧게	밖에	Outside; Except for
어더 먹지	얻어먹지	To obtain and eat; To manage to eat
유리걸식	유리걸식	Wandering and begging
다러나고	달아나고	Runs away; Flees
까닭	까닭	Reason; Cause
이약이	이야기	Story; Talk (Older spelling)
놉히고자	높이고자	Intending to raise
무든	묻은	Buried
놉하진	높아진	Became high/tall
젓다	졌다	Became; Resulted in (Older form)
븟	붓	Writing brush
십흐다	싶다	Want to (Older spelling)
웃득	우뚝	Prominently; Loftily
펼쳐	펼쳐	Spread out; Unfold
셤	섬	Island (Older spelling)
젹은	작은	Small (Older spelling)
-갓고	-같고	Like... and...
볏	볕	Sunlight; Sun's rays (Older spelling)
반작거리는	반짝거리는	Glistening; Sparkling
밟아	밟아	Stepping on
갓가이	가까이	Near; Close (Older spelling)
벗겨	벗겨	Peeled; Uncovered; Spread out (Here: Open view)
한울	하늘	Sky (Older spelling/dialect)
날어	날아	Flying
안이나올	아니 나올	Will not come out
뛰여	뛰어	Jumping; Dashing
닥이	꼭대기	Top; Summit (Dialectal/Older spelling)
불조아	부르주아	Bourgeois (Loanword, older transliteration)
붓채질	부채질	Fanning
남아	남아	Surplus; Remainder (Here: While doing something else)
치루어감니다	치러 갑니다	Go through; Experience; Manage (Older form)
는	찌는	Steaming (hot)
삼는듯	삶는 듯	As if boiling
시루	시루	Earthenware steamer
안즌듯	앉은 듯	As if sitting
여	떨쳐	Shaking off; Rushing out
낫	낮	Daytime
밤낫	밤낮	Night and day; Always
	꼴	Appearance; Sight; State (Sometimes derogatory)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제50호
발행일	1924년 08월 01일
기사제목	各地의 녀름과 그 通信
기사형태	소식

各地의 녀름과 그 通信
牧丹峰에서
春坡동모 京城의 더위는 요좀 엇더함닛가. 이 平壤의 더위도 京城보다 조금 더하면 더하얏지 아마 못지는 안을 것 갓슴니다. 오날도 여관집 마루기둥에 걸닌 寒暖計가 벌서 100도까지 올낫슴니다. (오후 2시) 더구나 平壤시가는 도로에 먼지가 만이 잇서서 바람이 조곰만 불면 눈을 뜰 수가 업슴니다. 10만의 전시민은 모도 땀으로 반죽한 먼지 덩이가 되야 허덕허덕함니다. 그러나 印度가튼 열대의 녀름에도 희말늬야由에는 白雪이 皚皚한 것과 가티 이 뜨거운 平壤의 녀름에도 牧丹峰은 특별히 시원함니다. 이 牧丹峰은 녀름과 함께 어엽부기도 하려니와 平壤市 부근에는 제일 놉흔 명산이외다. 동남으로 비단결가튼 大同江이 **이 흐르고 그우에는 浮碧 練光의 天下名樓勝亭이 暴然이 임하엿스며 서북에는 광범한 普通大野가 잇고 그 중앙에 普通江이 長蛇形으로 완연이 흐르며 압헤는 乙密臺의 녹음뒤에는 *山의 芳林이 잇스니 실로 四而受風之地외다. 이갓치 찌는 더위에도 牧丹峰 꼭댁이에만을 나가면 오장이 다 시원함니다. 淸流壁의 落落長松은 때때로 바람便에 검은고(琴) 곡조를 아리우고 白銀*의 물소리는 쉬지 안코 자연의 북을 침니다. 수박의 명산지 **島는 나리다만 보와도 컬컬한 목이 졀로 틔워지고 소낙비 끗헤 나타난 무지개(*)가튼 大同江철교는 바라볼수록 서늘하외다. 永明寺의 느진 종소리를 드를 때에 누가 *念이 살아지지 안이하며 半月島에 돌아오는 듯(*)을 볼 때에 누가 *衿이 상쾌치 안이하오릿가. 春坡등도 **江山이 좃타 하야도 님곳 업스면 적막강산이라는 愁心歌를 前日 京城에서 엇던 치구에게 드럿더니 참 과연이외다. 이 시원하고 조흔 牧丹峰에서도 春坡가튼 快漢壯漢의 동모가 업고 보니 도로히 답답하외다. 담배 한대 술 한잔을 먹을 줄 모르는 小春가튼 학자님 동모와 동행을 하지 말고 春坡와 가티 왓더면 오날 가튼 날에 牧丹峰우에서 유명한 平壤白燒酒와 닭찜(鷄*)을 준비하야 놋코 平壤名技까지는 부르지 못할지라도 형과 내가 부어라, 먹자하고, 소리도 하며 춤도 추고 잘 노랏스면 그 얼마나 유쾌하겟슴닛가. 그러나 七星門과 토성밧게 사는 가련한 빈민동포들이, 이와 가티 더운 날에 피죽 한그릇을 잘 어더 먹지 못하고 박아지쪽과 오망자루를 둘러 메고 이집저집으로 유리걸식하다가 기진맥진하야 땀을 흘리고 나무그늘에서＜78＞ 느러저 자는 것을 보면 소주생각도 닭찜 생각도 다 어듸로 다러나고 맘니다. 간 곳마다, 날마다 뵈이는 이 비참한 동포들의 생활문제를 어늬 날에나 원만히 해결할가. 春坡동모 이 牧丹峰은 平壤의 중요지대인 까닭에 이 세상에 이름이 놉흔 이만치 經亂도 또한 만이 하얏슴니다. 과연 牧丹峰은 *亂峰이올시다. 高句麗時부터 烽燧臺를 峰上에다 설치하고 사방으로 오는 적을 *備함은 물론이고 高麗時에 妙淸의 ‚œ을 격고 李朝에도 彼유명한 壬辰亂과 최근의 日淸戰爭을 다 져것슴니다. 特히 日淸戰爭시에는 淸軍이 이 牧丹峰을 점거하야 포대를 築하고 사력을 다하야 日兵을 방어하다가 日兵의 元山, 朔寧 兩支隊에게 占奪되고 패전하얏슴니다. 지금까지도 석벽과 토대간에 日軍砲丸에 세례를 바든 흔적이 만히 잇슴니다. 眞 소위 아해들 싸홈에 어룬의 코가 터진다고 淸國과 日本이 싸우는 바람에 얼토당토안은 朝鮮平壤의 牧丹峰이 엇지하야 그 禍를 당하얏슴닛가. 비록 과거의 事라도 생각할사록 분통이 터짐니다. 더군다나 금일에는 日本의 육군 제 6 항공대의 비행기가 더위에 消風을 하너라고 그러는지 平 壤시민을 脅威하너라고 그러는지 날마다 늙은 솔개의 씩은 쥐 구하러 단이듯이 牧丹峰부근 공중으로 빙빙 돌아단님니다. 평시에도 이와 갓치하는 양을 보면 이 牧丹峰우에 또 포화가 떠러질 날이 잇슬는지 모르겟슴니다. 春坡동모 牧丹峰 통신을 쓰고 븟을 더지랴 하니 牧丹峰 이약이가 또 한가지 생각남니다. 春坡도 전일부터 잘 아시는 바와 가티 이 牧丹峰은 남북 두 峰이 잇는데 전자는 文峰이라 하고 후자는 武峰이라 함니다. 俗傳에 平壤은 文峰이 놉흔 까닭으로 전일 外城에 文士가 배출하얏는데 성내 무사들이 文士의 기운을 抑制하고 자기들이 잘 되게 하랴고 武峰을 놉히고자 하얏스나 文士의 세력에 눌녀서 마음대로 놉히지 못하고 暗夜에 틈을 타서 땅을 파고 콩을 수백석 무든 뒤에 물을 부엇더니 밤새에 콩이 부러 峰이 놉하진 고로 文士들이 이것을 天의 조화라 하야 다시 文峰을 더 놉히지 못하고 지금까지 武峰이 놉흐며 따러서 平壤에 무사세력이 강대하야 젓다 함니다.
이 말이 비록 미신쟁이 풍수의 말과 비슷하나 전일 우리 朝鮮에서 京鄕을 물론하고 문무의 軋轢이 여하한 것을 가히 추측할 수 잇슴니다. 그리고 牧丹峰은 명산인 고로 自來 시인의 題詠이 만히 잇는데 나보기에 제일 운치 잇고 청아하기는 근대 平壤시인 金一翁의 「靑黎山 杖皂紗巾, 萬仞山頭曲一身, 此時若有丹峰畵儂作誰家障*人」 云云의 詩인 듯함니다. 또 한가지 생각나는 이는 靑友동모올시다. 靑友는 우리새에 다 아는 바와 가티 牧丹峰歌를 제일 잘 하지오. 春坡가 만일 牧丹峰의 여하한 것을 아시고 십거던 靑友동모의 牧丹峰歌를 한번 드르시오. 그 뚱뚱한 목과 큰 성대로 「牧丹峰아 牧丹峰아 네가 내 사랑이로구나」하는 시원한 소리는 550리 밧게 잇는 이 동모의 귀에 아즉까지 쟁쟁함니다. 이 동모를 위하야 소식 좀 전하야 주시오.
甲子. 7. 12. 平壤에서
靑吾

元山의 明沙十里
元山支社 金春岡

白沙의 靑松은 그림과 갓고
紺碧의 靜波는 風樂聲인 듯 明沙十里를 말하기 전에 나는 먼져 元山의 풍광을 간략히라도 말하야 두고 십흐다.세계의 絶勝地라는 명칭을 엇은 金剛山의 地脉이 북방으로 흘너다 한 곳에는 元山의 풍광이 展閔되여 잇다. 元山市街地 중앙에 웃득 솟은 압 남산우에 올나 眠眸를 동북간으로 放하면 1幅의 水彩畵를 펼쳐 노흔 듯한 그것이 서양인의 피서지로 저명한＜79＞ 明沙十里이다. 그 곳에서 連亘된 葛麻반도는, 虎島半島와 서로 끼여 안을 듯이 두 팔을 펼치고 웃둑이 셔셔 잇다. 그와 갓치 합하랴는 그 안에 **의 一面*가 元山渡인데 煙波間에 젹은 셤 셤이 点点하야 맛치 靑*가 떠- 잇는 듯한 美景을 呈하는 중에 해풍이 서늘하게 불어오는 그 快味는 더 -말할 수 업는 풍광이다.

아 明沙十里白沙의 靑松은 그림과 갓고 紺碧의 靜波는 풍악과 갓고나! 내려 쬬이는 볏해, 반작거리는 白沙를 삽박삽박 밟아 해안갓가이 이르면 반쯤 웃는 海棠花는 사람을 반기는데 압헤 茫漠히 벗겨 잇는 洋洋한 滄波가 한울에 連하얏슴에, 이, 이론바 上下天光이 一碧萬頃이다. 더위와 땀이 감히 범접이나 할가나. 몸이 날어 九*에 소슬 듯 누구나 흥겨운 노래가 안이나올 수 업다.
여기서 불으면, 져기셔 대답할 듯한 黃土島(백만킬로 유명한) 가 바다, 우에 웃득 셧고, 좌로는 葛麻반도가 뻐더 잇스며, 右로는 城北浦가 한편을 끼여셔 흐른다. 해상전면으로 멀리 大小島의 상대한 連*疊峰, 머-ㄴ 것은 翠*語와 갓고 갓가운 것은 淡治笑와 갓치 煙波가 洋洋하야 水天이 **한데, 게다가 碧浪水* 놉히 날아, 수평선을 그어서 가는, 그 모양은 , 적이 白雲으로 化하는 듯하다.
투명한 淸波를 시원하게 끼여 안고
져 낙원으로 영영 잠겨가고 십흐다.
거울것치 투명한 淸波가 해안으로 몰려오다가 모진 암석에 부드치여 장고를 치는 듯한 소리를 내이고는 白玉가치 산산이 부서져 버리고는 한다. 슯으다. 이 장관을 보는 그 찰나, 나의 만신에! -ㅈ鮮血은 그만 蕩散되여, 이 한울, 이 물에 同化가 됨인지, 한 다름에 뛰여 들어 일색의 碧琉璃를 내힘 끗끼여 안고, 져-낙원으로 영영, 가버리고 십흐다. 누가 안이 그려랴!
아-明沙十里! 아- 내 사랑!

仁川月尾島
三靑一客

仁川港에서 서쪽으로 건너다 보면 玉톡기 모양으로 쬬구리고 잇는 조고만한 셤이 곳 月尾島인 것은 세상이 다- 아는 바이다. 月尾島는 仁川府의 자랑거리뿐 안이오. 京城과 仁川을 아울너 한가지로 사랑을 밧는 어엿뿐 佳人이 되야 잇다. 그는 등에다 仁川의 도회를 지고 압헤다 永宗諸島를 울타리 하고 가운데는 仁川灣을 바다드려 四時長節 해상생활을 하고 잇는 海美人이다. 봄에 사구라꼿으로 유명한 것도 특색이지만은 녀름에는 해수욕으로 사랑을 밧는 것은 더욱 특색이다. 京城과 仁川이 큰 도회안에 끼여 잇는 才子佳人들이 히고도 맑근 옥 갓흔 살을 해수욕장에다 담거 노코 물오리 모양으로 쌍쌍히 즐기는 것은 맛치 水宮龍王의 龍女들이 蓬萊方丈의 仙人을 마져 천상의 연애를 늣기는 감상이 잇다. 月尾島의 자랑거리는 보는 사람의 눈에 쪼차 이것이 죠타 져것이 죠타 각각 소견이 달을 것이지만은 나의＜80＞ 사랑하는 月尾島의 특색은 왼통 그들의 소견과는 다르다. 나는 언제든지 月尾島를 볼 때에 늣기고 동경하는 것은 永宗島의 고흔 빗치다. 永宗島는 실로 月尾島의 愛人이다. 月尾島의 특색으로부터 永宗島의 색채를 제하고 보면 그는 아모 자연미가 업는 일개 구릉일 것이다. 그리고 月尾의 요리로는 맥주, 사이다를 2층 양옥우에서 거울으며 바다를 구경하는 것도 *치이겟지만 그러나 그는 귀족적이며 부르죠아식이다. 민중과 한가지로 즐길 때가 못된다. 내의 사랑하는 月尾島의 요리는 그와 갓흔 靑樓高閣에 잇지 안이하고 月尾島 北傾쪽에 게딱지모양으로 수십개의 *屋이 바위틈에부터 잇는 그 속에 한채의 濁酒屋이 가만이로 녕을 덥흔 정자 하나이 그것이다. 그 정자는 목수의 손으로 지은 것이 안이오. 술집 老婆가 자긊� 손으로 맨드러 노흔 飮客에 休憩處인데 그 정자에 올나 한잔의 濁酒를 마시고 나면 雨腋에서 習習한 청풍이 니러나 萬里天空을 향하야 멀리 날어가는 쾌감이 생긴다. 이것이 月尾島의 녀름 *치중-가장 특색 잇는 것인데 평생에 我自知하는 것도 또한 우연이 안이다.＜81＞
釜山의 勝景
						黃紀秀
釜山의 主山은 釜와 如하다 右로는 赤峙를 連하야 沒雲臺가되고 다시 西平 多大의 二浦를 成하고 左로는 海雲山이 入하야 海雲浦를 成하고 다시 岸下로 龍塘 冬栢 二島가 東西로 對峙하얏다 그 前面에 絶影島가 遮面하야 天然의 港門을 作하얏스니 이가 곳 朝鮮의 關門인 釜山名港이다.
압흐로 絶影島가 橫在하야 面을 遮하니 그 以內가 四十里의 周圍로 樹木이 繁茂하고 岩崖가 絶落하야 四時景槪가 恰然히 俗을 脫한듯하며 明鏡과 如한 波面에 島影이 日月을 隨하야 映射함이 업슴으로 絶影島라 稱하얏다 西南으로 靈山이 崎嶇하고 層層이 剝落하야 白浪이 掀天하는 最高處는 太宗臺라하니 新羅 太宗 武烈王이 曾히 此臺에 登하야 東南雲氣를 望하엿슴으로 是名이 有한 것이다 港內의 出入은 島西에 龍塘 冬栢 二島가 對立한 海門으로 由하는대 그 近傍에는
五六島가 有하니 이는 天然的 六個의 岩이 兀立하야 漲潮의 時에는 五島만 露立하고 落潮의 時에는 六島가 羅立하는데 糢糊渺茫한 海面에 五六孤島가 特立突兀함은 果是天作의 奇觀이 안이고 무엇이냐 이밧게
松島가 잇스니 이는 港埠에 近하야 海底가 淺함에 라 海水浴場의 惟一한 適當處다 距金 三年前부터 公園을 建築하고 夏間으로는 每日 數千名의 遊客이 踏■하야 大盛況을 成하며 港西로 二十海角을 綠하야
沒雲臺가 되엿스니 山容도 雄偉하거니와 水勢도 浩蕩하도다 宣祖 壬辰戰役에 禦侮將軍 鄭雲 氏가 舟師를 指揮하야 背山陣을 布列타가 勝利를 得치못하고 一身을 鴻毛가티 臺前碧波에 投하야 殉國의 義를 盡하던 處이니 一片短碣은 百世의 茫名을 遺傳함이요 烟波風帆이 眼前에 渺渺茫茫함은 한 天地의 廣闊함을 頓覺하며 東北으로
釜山鎭이 有하니 覆釜와 如한 奇形은 釜山의 名이 虛傳이 안이요 周圍 一千六百八十九尺高 十三尺의 高城은 開防을 嚴守하던 往背盛時에 水軍節制使鎭의 形址가 宛然히 昨日과 如하고 그 近傍 東南으로 屹立한 것은 永嘉臺라 하나니 宣祖 壬辰轉役에 僉使 鄭撥 氏가 兵窮矢盡하야 一死로 君臣의 義를 報하고 다만 黑衣將軍이라하는 畏服的 ■稱을 後世에 遺하던 地이니 日夕嗚咽하야 臺下를 衝激하는 惠湖萬浪은 當年의 義氣를 尙嗚함인가 하고 老樹斜陽에 依然獨立한 古壇은 鄭公의 勁節을 表함이며 東으로 殘山을 綠하야 十五里를 海中으로 斗入하면
海雲臺가 有하니 高치는 굿하나 平坦하야 一區＜81＞의 登臨■를 天作하니 曾히 孤雲崔致遠先生이 逍遙하던 處로 遊賞하는 騷人損士가 千載에 寂寞치아니하며 蒼松綠竹과 冬栢杜冲等樹가 四圍에 森森鬱密하야 四時長春의 色을 帶하고 眠底에는 萬頃蒼波가 浩■無際하야 天高地廻한 感이 生하나니 詩에 曰
紅塵甘載久開君, 一■■峰眼忽靑.
不用燃犀窺海恠, 應須皷瑟憾湘震.
雲開驚鶴歸三島, 天濶鵾鵬簛九溟.
東望安期知不遠, 丹城何日揷修翎.
이라 曹梅溪先生의 詩는 海雲臺의 地位景物을 描寫하엿다할거이오 그 臺後에는 藥泉이 湧出하니 山海의 精氣를 含蓄한 靈液임으로 消化不良其他萬病에 神效가 多하야 遠近의 療養客이 絡繹하야 間斷함이업고다시 北으로 蓬萊山勝景이 佳麗하니

金井山은 梁山鷲捷山의 餘幹으로 東萊郡北에 蜿蜓盤㨿하야 淑氣를 鍾毓하니 靈異도한것이나 明麗한것이니 그의 勝地딈을 專擅하는도다 北으로
梵魚寺는 新羅興德王時元曉大師의 剏健한 것으로 宏然한 梵宮에 數百의 僧侶는 梁山의 蓮度寺와 兄弟를 論할만한곳에 千手佛像과 五百羅漢의 列坐함은 莊嚴한 佛土를 築造함과 如하며 그 最上頂에
彌勒庵은 靈泉이 石函中에서 湧出하야 祈禱가 有할 時면 米紺水가 先湧하고 且水液이 味甘極冷하야 不換氷晶하니 果是山氣의 精靈이라하지며 東으로 望月臺와 積翠亭은 馬鞍嶺에 環繞하고다시
東萊의 溫泉近郊

鶴巢臺가되여 弄珠山과 相連하고 그 下는 桃花洞이 別開하야 蒼松翠竹이 交暎한 中間에 芳春을 更逢이면 紅粧의 桃花는 仙源에 入한 觀이 有하며 그 洞中에 一茅亭을 建築하야 騷人韻士가 봄이되면 賞春詩를 詠하고 夏節이면 納凉句를 唱하야 新鮮한 空氣中에 病肺를 爽然케하며 南으로
涵星池는 滿池芙蓉이 蒼蒼한 蒹葭와 交暎하야 微風淡煙에 天然의 凈態를 粧出하며 來案五里許
金蓮峰은 摩訶叩刹이 近하야 斜陽鍾聲은 塵夢을 頓醒케하며 南川流楊柳岸에
利涉虹橋는 利先禪師가 陰陽石으로 結構한것인데 千年을 經過한 今日에도 本形을 尙保하엿스며 東으로
鄭苽亭은 高麗時鄭叙氏가 譖言으로 放逐을 被하야 此地에 亭을 築하하 苽를 植하며 琴을 彈하고 歌를 作하니 그 歌詞가 極히 悽惋하야 當時樂府에 登하엿스니 今애도 高麗樂府를 考하면 그 歌詞가 尙存하엿스니 以上은 古來로 蓬萊八景이라 盛稱하는것이요 北으로 金井山下에
溫泉이 湧出하야 靈驗과 神效가 多함으로 療養客이 四方에서 雲集하야 往來가 陸續하며 宏大한 旅館과 華麗한 公園은 山下別乾坤을 排鋪함과 如하고 尖尖蹲蹲한 翠黛綠鼠이 二十里를 連亘하야 東萊城이되니 滄茫한 古歷史는 萇山古國의 年代를 可䅲한곳이 昭然치못하고 新羅以降居漆山萇山蓬萊等名稱이 그 沿革을 傳하야 李朝에서는 東＜82＞萊府를 設하야 府使가 管鎭하든 關門重地로
忠烈祠는 故府使宋象賢氏를 享祀하는 處이니 宣祖二十五年壬辰役에 宋公이 當時東萊府使로 在任하야 國境을 備禦라가 一夜에 全城이 陷落됨을 當하야
孤城月暈. 列鎭高枕. 君臣義重. 父子恩輕. 이라는 四句語를 그 嚴父 遺報하고 毅然한 一死로 殉國의 大節을 立하니 그 後에 朝廷에서 忠烈의 諡를 贈하고 此에 祠를 建하야 春秋의 血祀를 奉하는 것이다 이만하면 釜山의 景이엇던고!
天下絶勝義州統軍亭
						義州 崔뭉툴이
나는 人事엣말보다도 이말이 急함니다 「녀름에 對한 風景으로는 天下의 人이 天下의것으로 다-자랑 할지라도 義州統軍亭압헤는 다-鳳伏하리라고요」그텃치안슴닛가 나의 곳것이라고 誇張이안이랴 누구든지 한번식와서보서요 엇던가요 風景으로는 第一이요 歷史로도 第一이요 雄壯하기로도 天下第一일것이외다
國慶一隅義州뒤 臣邑의 東北에 超然히 元立하야 압흐로 三千里綿■■을 排列하고 뒤로 滿洲大原을 등지고안저 幾千幾百年에 天下人과더부러울고웃든 이 統軍亭이안입닛가
義州統軍亭

여러분 넘우 氣막키게조흔닛가 말로는디-그러낼수가업슴니다 누구든지 直接으로 보기검에는 이 天下絶處인 統軍亭니약이논못할줄압니다 속는셈치고 한번오서서 해듯는아츰이거니 바람도라가는저녁에 一壺酒張氏로 統軍亭上이올나서서 압흐로 三千里半島를 내미러보고 뒤로 南滿洲大原을 드리미러보고 洋洋히 勢無窮한 鴨綠江을 굽어보시오 엇던가요 덥허놋코 오셧서 볼밧게는 他道가업슴니다 혀가두텁고 붓이 鎎하야 아기자기 形容해 紹介치 못함만 遺憾임니다
松都의 녀름
						松都閑人
松都의 녀름! 松都엿다 松風이스르르돈다 山은 푸르고 물은 맑고 모래는 희고나! 觀德亭도한번 逍遙處요 善竹橋도 한잔마실곳이요 滿月臺도 한句읇을 곳이다 그러나 녀름의 景致로는 彩霞洞 扶山洞만다-못하다 善竹橋잠간것처 彩霞洞에 濯足하고 扶山洞에거니려보자
善竹橋를 녀스니  圃隱世子의 時나 읇고가자
가마귀사우는데 白鷺야가지마라, 성낸가마귀힌을세우나니,＜83＞
靑波에 조히씨츤몸더럽힐가하노라.
=鄭圃隱母堂=
이몸이죽고죽어 一百番곳처죽어
白骨이 塵土되어녁시야잇고업고
任-向한 一片丹心이야가실줄이잇스랴
=鄭圃隱先生=
◇운치조흔 彩霞洞
洞口에서부터욱이진 綠陰은 푸른 遮日을 連해처 노흔것갓고 졸졸 흐르는 물소래와 새의 노래는 놀라오는손(客)을 한깃맛는 틋하다 六角亭에안저서 蓮塘求景하는 것도 조커니와 좀 더구석으로 드러가 第一瀑布로가서 濯足하는 것도시원한일이다 맑은 물은 멧길되는 대서바위틈을라서내려러지며 一樹老松은 불불부러저서 노리티의한울을 덥히주엇다
如干비가와도나무 아래에는 天下太平이다 참으로 그럴한 노리터이다. 그러나 이 운치 조흔 놀이터는 뭇사람의 것이안이고 開城小불아 朴宇鉉君의 私有專用物이되고말앗다 이곳에는 仝君의 和式洋式의 別莊이잇다 近者에는 엇지된 細音인지저 無事奔走趙重應子와 彩霞洞이 네것이니 내것이니 닷름이이러나서 結局半分하고 말엇다한다 모른다 불조아들의 作亂이야뉘알배리요 두어라 扶山洞만못하니거름을 옴기자
◇물노리터 扶山洞
綠陰은 욱어젓다 千初閣亭子마루아래로는 맑은 물이흐르고 亭子집웅닥이로는 당태가튼 구름이흐른다 濯足會가 番番히열이여서 웬만하여서는 이노리터를 빌어놀기가어렵다 扶山洞줄기로 물 池塘이 無數히잇다 그리하야 一家族 는 一洞里 는 知友들리가진 飮食과 가진 果實을 갓추어가지고(或妓生도부른다)가서 沐浴도하며 노래도부르며 長鼓도두들기며 피리도불어 녀름의 거운 날올시원하게 보내고논다 그리하야 이 줄기로가면 長鼓소래 노래소래로 야단법석이다 男子만이러케 노는 것이안이라 女子들도 自己네리여러가지 모양으로 물노리를 차려가지고논다 그리하야 물 池塘은 반다시 男물 池塘女물 池塘이 儼然히 區別되여잇다 松都의 녀름은 果然이 물池塘에 잇고나! 두어라 美酒佳肴업스니 空手去하자
開城善竹橋

大邱의 達城公園
						大邱李生
編輯室諸位先生. 는 듯한 더위에 우리 讀者를 爲하야 八月納凉號準備하시기에 얼마나 애를 쓰심닛가각가하게시면 어름이라도 한덩이드렷스면-하나 그럿치는 못하고―.
자-이제 大邱風景觀風樓一枚와 大邱의 名物達城八景一張을 보내드리오니붓채질남아에 한번 逍風이나해보십시오
先生들도 아시다십히 大邱風景이란 達城公園外에는 다시업슴니다 大邱의 녀름이란 이 達城公園한아로써치루어감니다 그런데 이 達城公園의 來歷을잠간말하면
大邱市街의 西北三里(朝鮮里)許에 二里周圍의 丘陵으로삼태기가티 西北은 高하고 東＜84＞南은 低한곳이외다 本來-이곳에 三池九井이잇섯다하며 新羅時達弗城 高麗時太丘縣으로 城名은 達城―이러케내려왓는데 이곳에서 名人이 多出하얏다하야 達城君을 封하얏다함니다 裵氏徐氏는 그中名族이엿슴니다 이제 徐四建居正先生의 稱道한 達城十景을보여드리겟슴니다
大邱達城公園

南沼荷花 北壁香林 櫓院送客 桐寺歸僧 龜峀春震 隱庵暮鍾 琴湖泛舟 砧山落照 鶴樓明月 笠澤釣龜
이것이외다 그런데 十景中에 남南沼, 鶴樓, 笠澤等景致는 只今은업서젓슴니다 櫓院이란 곳은 市內에서 約一里되는곳인데 往時新舊監司送迎處라하며 桐寺는 市內에서 約五里나되는데 바로 大本山의 한이며 龜岫는 市內에서 約十餘町밧게안되는데 자래바위라는 곳이며 隱庵은 大邱압 山琵瑟山中의 隱寂庵이고 琴湖는 大邱名江琴湖江이외다
或! 餘暇잇스면 이 大邱의 名勝 達城十景을 直接차자주심이엇덜가요 이만 것으로 녀 消息을 傳함니다
漢江에서
						春坡
靑吾兄. 牧丹峰通信은 동무들과가티 자미잇게보앗슴니다 는 듯 삼는듯시루안에드러안즌듯하더니 五百里밧 牧丹峰바람에 몸이으스스 바로 이몸이 牧丹峰댁이에 낭큼을나선듯하얏소이다
그러나 䁔爐속가튼서울의 복판에잇는이름은 今時곳 再湯三湯이나 겹집어삼는 듯 한 牧丹峰이 은근히 憧憬되야서 「에라 百事라도 無可奈라」하고 곳여 漢江을내다럿슴니다.
靑吾兄. 淸凉里도조코 洗劔亭도조코 獎忠壇도 조흔데 왜 漢江直行이 되얏겟슴닛가 그는 牧丹峰代로 象頭山을 보기 爲함이며 大同江代로 漢江을보기 爲함이며 綾羅島代로 栗島를 보기 爲함이안일가요 그럿치요 그리코 兄도아시다십히 이고져곳하야도 서울의 代表的名地 더구나 녀름으로의 代表的勝地는 漢江이안임닛가 山조코물조코바람조코―.
靑吾兄. 只今이바로 七月十六日下午七時三十分이은데 이몸은 小波小川두동모와가티 漢江鐵橋에쳐고서서 牛山落照를바라보는 中이외다 다시 牧丹峰댁이에서 멀니이 春坡를 그리우는 兄님의 그-老雀가튼 姿態가눈에훨하게 그리워짐니다 그리고 엇던 平壤날탕이 兄님네겻들지내면서 小春兄의 웃고름 是非를 하는양어보이는 듯하구려.
靑吾兄. 大同江鐵橋에도 그 所謂「チョットオマッチ」라는 標가잇슴니? 늘보아 尋常하지만 오늘은 特히막걸네잔이나하고 興分된김에 한 夕陽의 落照를보며 百丈鐵橋에서 멀니 兄님을 생각하든 次이라 그런지 생＜85＞각이이리저리굴다가「人生의 無常」이라는데 녀 萬里水天이 은근히 憧憬되는구려! 그러나 이것은 그런듯하단말이외다 念慮할 것은 업슴니다.
漢江의 人道橋

靑吾兄. 우리는 象頭山을 가려하다가 「안이운」이라는 生覺이 치밀이서 「엑기도라서자」하고 거름을 다시 洪■의 長安으로 向하얏슴니다. 第一鐵橋를지내여 第二鐵橋로 닛가 아조이저버럿든 一輪明月이 終南山 닥이로 불치미는구려!「앗차 이젓다 漢江의 夜月 夜月의 漢江!」하고새삼스럽게 다시 늣기면서 도로거름을 도리켯슴니다 다시 第一鐵橋로가게되얏슴니다.
妓生 蝎甫 亂棒 乾達 江上에 둥둥는데웬 心術인지 「月色이고 水色이고 不見이라」고 가슴이 북눅거려서 곳도리서고 말게 되얏슴니다.
靑吾兄. 이것이 저 못생긴 不平일가요 남의 豪氣잇게노는을보고 空然히 불둑거리는 것이―-.
아마 그럿치요 사람놈들의 大槪는 제가 못하는 것이면 不平이지요? 그러나 그런것도 안이겟지요?
靑吾兄. 牧丹峰이 보입니다 金剛山도 보임니다 더욱 海金剛이 보이는구려! 생각만하야도 서늘하구려!
靑吾兄. 남들은 죠 아들은 避暑니 納凉이니 하고 金剛山에 간다함니다 三防, 釋王을것쳐서 海金剛을 고도라서 避暑를간다함니다. 그런데 우리는 밤낫 요모양이구려! 兄님은 그나마 峰仙樓도 볼수잇고 百祥樓도 볼수잇오겟지요?아—나는……….
海金剛의 懸鍾岩

＜86＞
＜78-86＞