Magazine Title: 삼천리 제7권 제9호
Publication Date: 1935년 10월 01일
Article Title: 大戰急來와 極東形勢 =座談會= (The Imminent Great War and the Far Eastern Situation =Roundtable Discussion=)
Article Type: 대담·좌담 (Interview/Roundtable Discussion)

**The Imminent Great War and the Far Eastern Situation =Roundtable Discussion=**
(Attending Gentlemen) Sin Hŭngu
An Chaehong
Yi Kwangsu
Sŏ Ch'un
Kim Kyŏngjae
Yi In
Chu Yohan
(Our Company Side) Kim Tonghwan
Pak Sanghŭi
From noon on September 24th, at the Poagŭrang building in Kyŏngsŏng's Chongno district, overlooking the urgent times, our company hosted a roundtable discussion, which concluded at 3:30 PM.

**Will Italy and Ethiopia really end up going to war?**

Kim Tonghwan - Thank you for coming despite your busy schedules. Actually, seeing the declaration of war (의전포고), I intended to hold this meeting and waited for a week, but while war seems imminent, we haven't heard the cannons roar yet. However, it seems a world war will inevitably arise, originating somewhere among Italy, Germany, France, X-Soviet (X蘇), X-America (X米), so we've opened this roundtable. Judging by the situation up to today, first, do you think war will break out between Italy and Ethiopia?

Sin Hŭngu - On my way to Europe, I often passed near East Africa while crossing the Indian Ocean and entering the Mediterranean Sea, but I've never set foot on the continent, so I've never walked on Ethiopian soil. However, judging from the knowledge I've gathered, Ethiopia's population is less than Korea's,<27> at 8 million. Its capital, Addis Ababa (아베바), doesn't even have trams yet; gas, water, and electricity are only in some royal or noble houses; there are only 15 airplanes in the entire country. In many respects, it's a backward, uncivilized country (後進未開國). Why are the European powers trying so hard, unable to swallow this landmass of just desert and mountains? It's said there are world-class oil fields there. Britain and America (英米), which already monopolize half the world's oil fields, are greedy for Ethiopia's resources. Britain wants to maintain its vested rights (기득권), and Italy seeks to newly participate in this division (분할). That seems to be the reason. There might also be colonial policy relations – in that case, Ethiopia, a weak, small independent nation, is ultimately fated to become prey for Britain, France, and Italy (英佛利). Until the ownership of this prey is completely decided, a war must be fought, so it's probably correct to see the outbreak of war as eight or nine times out of ten likely.
And if it becomes a separate war (單獨開戰) with Italy, although they have naturally advantageous terrain (天險의 地利), there's absolutely no way they can withstand Italy, which is fully equipped with modern military preparations (軍備).

Yi Kwangsu - That's right. As Dr. Sin said, if it's a separate war, Ethiopia won't be an issue. Will it really go to war? Looking at the complicated European political situation (錯雜한 歐羅巴 政局), it's nothing but interesting. War is a natural phenomenon like a weather forecast; even a clear day can suddenly cloud over and rain. We don't know the future; Italy, which had only been growling, might, prompted by a small incident, actually draw the sword it was looking for. (Photo shows the US President calmly observing the situation)
However, this much can be said. Italy isn't afraid of Ethiopia, but of Britain sitting behind it. Since France, its most trusted ally with whom it had already concluded the Rome Agreement, is backing away (뒷거름 치는 이상), Italy alone cannot overcome Britain and France.<28> So, based on the current situation, it doesn't seem likely to become a war.

Sŏ Ch'un - I see it this way. Because of geographical relations requiring large troop movements, and because powers with interests in Ethiopia are watching closely, they can't easily strike and are just growling like a tiger on a mountain. Originally, if Italy wanted to undertake this action (擧事), it should have occupied Ethiopia in one stroke (一擧占領) when the Walwal incident (왈-왓사건) occurred after concluding the Rome Agreement with France, but they weren't prepared back then. So, they prepared in the meantime and have come forward this time.

Yi In - I heard that Italian maps have shown Ethiopia as their territory (영토) without borders for several decades already, so one can imagine their audacity.

Chu Yohan - Their audacity might be so, but I still don't think Italy will go to war.

Kim Kyŏngjae - That's right. From the psychology of us Korean people, hoping for a breakthrough (타개) due to livelihood difficulties and other reasons—just like wishing for rain on a summer day, we wish a war would break out. So, with this Italian incident, people are nervously thinking war will break out immediately, but a large-scale conflict between capitalist nations, each embracing contradictions, doesn't seem likely to arise from this event. Nevertheless, Italy's imperialist policy (帝國主義 政策) will be carried out to some extent, and the fate of the weak nation (弱國) Ethiopia will eventually decline from its current semi-colonial status to a complete colony.

An Chaehong - I share the same opinion. As I'll discuss later,<29> if you ask whether this World War will happen, given the contradictory relations among nations, I believe the World War will be postponed for the time being.

Sŏ Ch'un - In principle, that might be so, but war doesn't arise solely from calculations of gain and loss. For example, even if someone is wearing a 100-won jewel, if they get angry, they might smash it against a nearby stone. If hostility explodes strongly, we might see the start of war. If they easily begin an advance (進軍) overnight and just ignite the spark (불끗) of conflict between the two armies, the fight could break out instantly. Italy has gone too far for war not to happen. There's an 80% possibility of war breaking out.

Yi In - If it's going to happen, it'll happen easily. I saw something in Tōkyō: in front of Hibiya Park, a cyclist hit a child, and this incident (動機) led to hundreds gathering and a huge brawl. International relations might be the same. The starting point (發端)!

**The International Relations Surrounding Italy-Ethiopia and Will This War Lead to a World War?**

Kim Tonghwan - Then please tell us about the international relations surrounding Italy-Ethiopia. And based on that, please give your observation on whether the Italy-Ethiopia war outbreak will extend to a World War.

An Chaehong - I said earlier that the World War would be temporarily postponed but would inevitably happen eventually. Under that premise, let me explain Italy's motives for acting this time and its relations with the powers to establish my theory. Basically, Italy's attempt to swallow Ethiopia this time is purely due to imperialist policy (帝國主義的 政策). First, they needed land to relocate their annually expanding domestic population. The Far East was too far and disadvantageous, so they gave up (단념하고) and began to covet East Africa, relatively close to their homeland, aiming to occupy (점령하려는 것이지요) Ethiopia. Second, they desired Ethiopia for the development of economic resources (經濟資源) and to acquire markets for exporting rayon (人絹) and other goods. Besides this, there's a domestic issue: Mussolini's plan<30> to maintain the Fascist regime (파시스트 정권 유지). There was an intention to deal with meritorious party members who contributed to the Fascist regime filling the country and to unify the diverging domestic sentiment by melting it in the furnace (鎔爐台) of war. That is, Italy acted due to three domestic reasons: population disposal, new market monopoly, and unification (統一) of domestic public opinion. Looking at foreign issues, having concluded the Rome Agreement with France to prevent Germany from annexing (합병하는 것을 막기 위하여) Austria, they firmly believed France would support Italy's actions as compensation (代價). With France providing aid (원조) from behind, they became confident that no European nation would easily try to block Italy's national policy (國策). Furthermore, since the authority (權威) of the League of Nations (國際聯盟) had completely fallen after the Manchurian Incident, they assumed (넘겨 집고) the League couldn't actively interfere (積極的으로 干涉못하리란) even if Italy started executing its national policy, and thus embarked on (捉囚한 터이지요) the military occupation of Ethiopia this time.

Yi Kwangsu - Those reasons exist, but I think these reasons also exist. Generally, although established, being situated among the European powers, they had always lived suppressed as a weak nation. When Mussolini unified the nation again through Fascism, this Fascism became hated by Britain, which revered democracy (떼모꾸라시). So, it can also be seen as a clash between Fascism and Democracy. Dictatorship (獨裁主義) and Liberalism (自由主義) are incompatible like water and fire, so this difference (相異) in mutual beliefs and sense of justice (正義感) is also a cause of this war. Moreover, modern states (近代國家), that is, states founded<31> not long ago, often fight due to imperialistic national concepts like interests, but old states (老大國家), venerable states with long histories, often fight due to national sentiment (민족적 감정). In the minds of the Italian people, just as we Koreans always yearn for (사모하드시) the golden age (全盛時代) of Koguryŏ, they long for the past Roman era. Its brilliant civilization and vast territory (版圖) – they are boiling with the fervent desire (열망) to restore (회복하고) this. The word "Irredenta" (이레덴데) that Italians shout today means "Restoration of Italy," signifying the recovery of the glory of the old Roman era. Thus, motivated by this, they aim to internationally display "Italy's strength." Economically, as someone briefly mentioned earlier, Ethiopia is said to have much oil and cotton (면화). If they get Ethiopian cotton, they can suppress the American South's cotton, which is globally dominant today. The day they get this cotton in their hands, they will grasp hegemony (覇權) in European spinning (紡續上), becoming economically advantageous. So they acted for this reason, meaning the main cause of the Anglo-Italian conflict seems to lie here.

Sŏ Ch'un - However, it doesn't seem that modern wars arise from simple patriotism. Nowadays, ten out of ten wars happen due to conflicts of interest. They happen due to economic greed. Fights between individuals are like that, and fights between nations are too. This Italy-Ethiopia issue also started because a conflict of interest arose between Italy and Britain. Basically, Italy isn't fighting Ethiopia now, but considers itself fighting Britain, and in reality, it is fighting Britain. The conflict of interest is this: Britain's source of wealth (富源) is essentially in the Nile River basin (나일강 流域). That's why British Egypt (英領埃及) became a rich country thanks to the Nile. Sudan (스탄) is the same. But where does this Nile flow from? It flows from Ethiopia's Lake Tana (타나湖). Around Lake Tana, in the Blue Nile River (靑나일강) basin, inexhaustible (무진장) minerals like gold, silver, copper, and iron are buried underground, and coffee and cotton are also abundant. Now, if Italy occupies Ethiopia and<32> completely blocks the water flow from Lake Tana to the Nile or diverts it elsewhere, the British Empire will lose the better half of its wealth. Ethiopia is this important to Britain, which is why they dispatched a fleet of 140 ships to the Mediterranean Sea to restrain (제지하며) Italy's occupation of Ethiopia. Also, didn't they threaten (威嚇) and roar (怒號) at the League of Nations, saying they would withdraw from the continent if their words weren't heard, thereby forcing France, trembling in fear of Germany, to side with them? So? Although they speak of justice and humanity, if you look underneath, war arises entirely due to conflicts of interest.

Kim Tonghwan - Yes, I understand that relationship. Then, what are the attitudes of Soviet Russia (쏘비엣 露西亞) and Germany regarding the Italy-Ethiopia conflict?

Kim Kyŏngjae - What maintains even this level of world peace today is the Treaty of Versailles (벨사유條約) acting as a "force" in Europe, preventing conflict among the European powers, while in the East, the Washington Treaty (華盛噸條約) has maintained order in the Pacific (太平洋) region. However, the Treaty of Versailles is faltering (휘둥지둥하고), pressured by the vigor (기세) of the newly emerged Germany led by Hitler, and the Washington Treaty has become nominal (유명무실하게) after the Manchurian Incident, destabilizing world peace entirely. In this situation, the Soviet Union fears German aggression (獨逸의 침략) in Europe and XX's [likely Japan's] active policy (積極政策) in Asia (亞細亞), so Russia has no choice but to support Britain and France, the stabilizing forces in Europe. In that sense, aren't they expressing the strongest opinions at forums like the League of Nations General Assembly to suppress Italy's actions?

Chu Yohan - Germany hopes for war to break out in a corner of Europe or Asia, and while Britain, France, Italy, etc., are caught in the vortex, it intends to finally annex (합병하고 말터이니) Austria, its long-standing goal. Once this annexation is complete, the opportunity for Germany to dominate Europe again will arise! In other words, it is in the best position<33> to gain the fisherman's profit (漁父의 利). Therefore, look at Germany's attitude these days. It keeps its mouth shut (緘口不言) about foreign storms and devotes all its energy (전력하고) only to domestic unification.

**So, ultimately, can we say Britain holds the key to the Great War?**

Kim Tonghwan - Synthesizing all the points made so far, it seems that Britain holds the key to the outbreak of the Italy-Ethiopia war, and further, the World War. Please tell us about Britain's position and foreign policy.

Sin Hŭngu - Viewing it that way would be correct. Depending on Britain's direction (英의 向背), the Second World War could break out as early as tomorrow. However, I understand Britain's position is currently very difficult (곤난한). If Ethiopia wins the Italy-Ethiopia war, the colored races (有色人種) will gain a sense of superiority (우월감) over the white races (백색인종), leading peoples in various British colonies to follow Ethiopia's example (본바더). India might turn its arrows towards the British homeland, Egypt might stage an armed uprising (武裝蜂起), and British Somaliland (英領 소마리랜드), etc., might all rise up. If this happens, the crisis (위기) of the British Empire's collapse (붕괴) will arrive like a great wave with fierce momentum. Conversely, if Italy prevails and gives the impression that "Britain couldn't do anything even when Italy swallowed Ethiopia," it would foster contempt (멸시하는 관념) for the British Empire, also inflicting a great wound (創荑) on the governance of colored peoples. Because of this racial issue, Britain seems trapped in a dilemma. Furthermore, if Anglo-French cooperation (英佛의 협조) proves unsatisfactory (시언치 못하여) and Britain also withdraws its hand from the League of Nations, Germany will be free to act. Then, all treaties and agreements like the Treaty of Versailles, Disarmament Agreements (軍縮協定), etc., will shatter, creating the possibility of war centered around Germany. Therefore, at this juncture, Britain's direction truly determines world peace.

Sŏ Ch'un - That's why India's Gandhi is already shouting loudly<35> that Ethiopia, an independent nation of colored people, must be saved. This statement is his self-justification (自己辨明) and expresses his stance to some extent. Depending on Britain's attitude, such statements and actions could potentially arise not just from India but also from Egypt, Somaliland (소라미랜드), or anywhere else. Therefore, from Britain's perspective, it's unacceptable for Ethiopia to win using its natural defenses, like in the war with Italy 40 years ago [Battle of Adwa], nor can it allow Ethiopia to lose.
From Britain's standpoint, if Italy's ambition (야심) towards Ethiopia is blocked, those flames (불길) might leap to the Mediterranean Sea. The Mediterranean is where Britain, France, and Italy constantly growl (으르렁거리는 곳) at each other for naval supremacy (制海權). If Italy directs its flames towards Malta (마르다島) in the Mediterranean, the crisis for all of Europe will truly arrive. On the other hand, if they tacitly approve (묵인하여) Italy's free hand in East Africa, allowing its strong final mechanized corps (最後機械兵團) and air force (航空隊) to crush the black empire (黑人帝國) and seize suzerainty (宗主權) over Ethiopia, neither Britain nor France could possibly remain idle. From the viewpoint (見地) of defending vested rights (기득권 옹호), a World War seems inevitable here.
However, judging by recent overseas telegrams, the League of Nations'<35> compromise proposal (妥協試案) seems to approve all of Italy's demands as long as British and French vested rights are untouched. So, Ethiopia's redivision (再分割) will inevitably become just a matter of time.

An Chaehong - In any case, the European war is gradually becoming more realistic. If a Great War breaks out, they will completely lose the way out of economic distress (經濟的 窮迫), and ultimately, we will see a further rise (臺頭) of the emerging Japanese Empire's power, inevitably leading to a reorganization (再編成) of the power structure among nations worldwide.

**From our standpoint, should we view Ethiopia or Italy as right?**

Kim Tonghwan - What do you think? Is there no inclination to support Ethiopia out of sympathy for a weak/small nation (弱少民族) or in the sense of defending colored people (有色人種)?

Yi In - Sacrificing the only remaining Black Empire in Africa due to imperialist policy is something one cannot help but be indignant (분개아니 할 수 업서요) about. Of course, even now, most domestic rights (國內利權) are being taken by British and American financial groups (英米 財團), but even so, I want to preserve (보존식히고 십허요) at least the name (名義) of the Empire.

Yi Kwangsu - I think both Italy and Ethiopia are right. Firstly, regarding Italy, Mussolini, after a long time, has become a Napoleon, unifying the country, cultivating power, and gaining the support of the entire nation possessing intense patriotism. He sought to vent the frustration of having been despised in Europe—in other words, they reached a stage (階梯) of wanting to extend national prestige overseas and gather wealth from colonies. In this instance, when Italy acted, Britain panicked and sent a large fleet to the Mediterranean, and the whole world became agitated. Internationally, Italy's status has risen significantly, so politically, Italy has achieved victory. On top of this, even if they don't undertake a long-distance expedition (懸軍萬里하여 遠征), achieving some level of compromise can be considered a success. So,<36> in a word, Italy, through the Mussolini regime, completed domestic unification and, using strong patriotism as a weapon, raised the nation's global status—thus it must be seen as a success. On the other hand, what about Ethiopia? Towards Ethiopia, one wants to support them out of humanitarian sympathy for the weak, but things turning out this way is reaping what they sowed (自作之얼이지요). History shows that some chief (酋長) sold the port of Massawa (마삭구港口) to the Italians for a few hundred dollars, which became the beginning, later leading to the loss of the entire vast Italian Eritrea. The parts that became British possessions also started mostly from similar traitorous acts (賣國奴의 行事). Thus, the fact that half their land is lost today and they suffer foreign contempt (外侮) is all their own fault. However, their history spans 4,000 years, and Old Christianity entered in the 7th century AD, so they had tremendous opportunities for civilization long ago. But looking at the current situation, they are isolated from global transportation, the slave trade (인신매매) and slavery system (노예제도) still remain, cultural facilities are poor. Thus, they need to undergo more trials (시련), and after 120 years [perhaps a reference to Italy's perceived timeline or a metaphorical duration?], they have no choice but to wait for the opportunity nationally and state-wise.

Kim Kyŏngjae - Others speak of Ethiopia's strong patriotism, but I doubt whether in an uncivilized country (未開國家) like Ethiopia, the entire nation would unite and fight just because the autocratic monarch (專制君主) arbitrarily declares war. In that sense, Ethiopia definitely has weaknesses. Also, some say Italy wants to fight out of a desire for revenge (복수심) for the Battle of Adwa 40 years ago, but I don't think so; it seems to be due to conflicts of interest. How could a major event like war, which gambles (賭하는) a nation's fate, be moved by emotions like revenge?

Sŏ Ch'un - That's right. It's solely based on calculation of interests (利害打算). Mussolini needs to heighten the people's hostility (적개심), so as a matter of policy, he shouts about needing an Adwa revenge war (에드와드 復讐戰), "Better to live one day as a lion than 100 years as a donkey!" In fact, the Battle of Adwa (에드와드戰) was<37> apparently quite brutal. They captured about 200 Italian prisoners of war, castrated (去勢) them, and used them as slaves (노예). For Italy, it's indeed something to grind their teeth (切齒할) about, but—

**How will the Far Eastern situation unfold? What will be the movements of Japan and the US?**

Kim Tonghwan - How much merchandise goes from Japan to Ethiopia?

Yi In - I heard it's about 10 million won per year. Cotton cloth (錦布) 8 million won, miscellaneous goods (잡화) over 1 million won, so about half of their imports come from Japan.

Kim Tonghwan - A 10 million won market isn't that large yet, but if the Great War breaks out, the Suez Canal (스에스運河) will likely be blockaded (봉쇄될 터이니) by the British fleet. If so, European goods won't be able to enter the entire East Asian market east of the Indian Ocean. This would allow Japan to completely occupy the entire East Asian market economically, leading to an economic boom (호경기가 오리라고 보여지는데). What do you think?

An Chaehong - If war breaks out in Europe, the Far East market will surely prosper (윤택이 잇슬 것은), as can be predicted from the boom during the First World War. This would lead to great strides (대약진할 것이외다) by the world's two major industrial nations, Japan and the US. So, overall, I think this: If war breaks out among Britain, France, and Italy, Germany will likely remain an observer for a while, looking for opportunities. Soviet Russia, though theoretically obliged to help weak/small nations, will also likely remain an observer due to various circumstances.
The US, as long as freedom of the seas isn't hindered, also doesn't seem likely to participate in the war (參戰할 것 갓지 안코). Japan's industries, especially munitions (軍需工業), will make great strides, dominating the world market.
Consequently, I think some kind of active political policy (積極政策) will advance across the entire Far East (極東全面).
And if the Great War is postponed (연기된다면), Ethiopia will ultimately be sacrificed.

Sŏ Ch'un - Politically, that's roughly<38> how it might be. But economically, if a Great War breaks out in Europe, will it necessarily bring a boom like the First World War, where, even speaking of the Korean market, land (土地) and building (建物) prices soared daily, money became plentiful, agricultural product (농산물) prices rose, and business thrived? While it might improve somewhat, I don't think an explosive boom (폭발적 호경기는) like that time will come. Why? Because during the First World War, Japan was in the process (途程에 잇섯지) of becoming an industrial nation, not yet a fully industrialized country, so its facilities like factories and raw materials were rudimentary (유치하엿지요). However, in the nearly 20 years since then, it has shown rapid development (장족의 발달). Looking at the current situation, the production capacity of the US and Japan alone is sufficient to support (養할 수 잇게 되엇스니까) the entire world. So, it will merely be mobilizing already prepared capacity, not a rapid, leaping boom (비약적 호경기는) like before.

Kim Tonghwan - A certain member of the British House of Commons pointed out Japan's pursuit of an active policy during the Great War. Please talk about such political relationships. Regarding the fate of Far Eastern peoples like India, China, the Philippines (印度, 中國, 比律賓 등).

Chu Yohan - It's probably better not to talk about it. By the way, related to the World War, the anti-war movement (反戰運動) comes to mind. What about the anti-imperialist (反帝), anti-war movement centered around the Soviets? I'd like to ask Mr. Kim Kyŏngjae.

Kim Kyŏngjae - Just from the fact that the Soviets support the League of Nations, we can see they hold a foreign policy opposing war among capitalist nations. Regarding anti-war sentiment (反戰主義), let's judge based on our common sense. Even a long explanation would likely be difficult to publish.

Kim Tonghwan - So, ultimately, will war break out? If it does, will a World War be unavoidable?

Yi In - Viewing it that way seems correct. It's highly unlikely they'll sheathe a drawn sword. If Italy simply brings back its expeditionary force, there's a risk of civil unrest (內亂). Some people say the financial state of world nations makes them completely unprepared for war, but in a country like Italy where a Fascist (팟쇼) regime is firmly established,<39> they could likely issue excessive amounts of inconvertible paper money (不換紙幣라도 亂發하여) to prepare for war.

Sŏ Ch'un - Also, some believe that because the horrors (참화) of the First World War were so terrible, a Great War won't easily occur again. But the young men (壯丁) in Europe now are mostly youths who don't know the Great War. Those who experienced it are mostly old and decrepit (老杇한) people in their 50s and 60s, so I don't think that reason holds. Therefore, ultimately, looking at today's situation, it's correct to predict (관측하는 것이 올켓지요) that there's up to an 80% chance a World War will break out.

Kim Tonghwan - Thank you for speaking for such a long time. (Meeting adjourned at 3:30 PM) <40>

**Summary**

This 1935 roundtable discussion among Korean intellectuals in Seoul analyzes the impending Italo-Ethiopian War. Participants debate the likelihood of war, Italy's motives (imperialism, resources, domestic politics, national pride), the role of Britain (Nile interests, colonial stability, fear of Germany), the weakness of the League of Nations, and the stances of other powers like France, Germany, and the Soviet Union. They predict Ethiopia's likely fall but disagree on whether the conflict will escalate into a full World War, though most lean towards war being probable. The discussion also touches upon the potential economic impact on the Far East, particularly Japan's opportunity to dominate markets if European powers are entangled in war, though one participant doubts a repeat of the WWI boom. Sympathy for Ethiopia as a weak nation is expressed, but its internal weaknesses and past actions are also cited as contributing factors to its plight.

From the perspective of Korean colonial history, the article is interesting as it shows prominent Korean intellectuals under Japanese rule openly discussing global power politics, imperialism, and war. Their analysis, while focused on Europe and Africa, implicitly reflects their own situation as subjects of an empire, particularly in discussions of weak nations, national prestige, resource competition, and the potential shifts in global power that could affect the Far East, including Japan's anticipated "active policy" (積極政策) in the region during a European war. Historians might find value in the participants' nuanced views on imperialism (both condemning Italian actions and criticizing Ethiopian weakness), their assessment of international relations on the brink of major conflict, and their calculations regarding the war's potential impact on Asia.

**Named Entities**

申興雨	신흥우	Sin Hŭngu
安在鴻	안재홍	An Chaehong
李光洙	이광수	Yi Kwangsu
徐椿	서춘	Sŏ Ch'un
金璟載	김경재	Kim Kyŏngjae
李仁	이인	Yi In
朱耀翰	주요한	Chu Yohan
本社	본사	Our Company (Samch'ŏlli Magazine)
金東煥	김동환	Kim Tonghwan
朴相羲	박상희	Pak Sanghŭi
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng
鍾路	종로	Chongno
보아그랑	보아그랑	Poagŭrang
伊太利	이태리	It'aeri (Italy)
에치오피아	에치오피아	Ech'iop'ia (Ethiopia)
歐羅巴	구라파	Ouropa (Europe)
印度洋	인도양	Indoyō (Indian Ocean)
地中海	지중해	Chichūkai (Mediterranean Sea)
東阿弗利加	동아프리카	Tong Apŭrik'a (East Africa)
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
아베바	아베바	Abeba (Addis Ababa)
英米	영미	Yŏng-Mi (Britain-America)
英吉利	영길리	Yŏnggilli (England/Britain)
佛蘭西	불란서	Pŭllansŏ (France)
獨逸	독일	Togil (Germany)
蘇聯	소련	Soryŏn (Soviet Union - inferred from X蘇)
米國	미국	Miguk (USA)
羅馬	로마	Roma (Rome)
왈-왓사건	왈왈 사건	Wal-Wal sakŏn (Walwal Incident)
東京	동경	Tōkyō
日比谷	히비야	Hibiya
쏘비엣 露西亞	소비에트 러시아	Sobiet'ŭ Rŏsia (Soviet Russia)
亞細亞	아세아	Asea (Asia)
墺太利	오지리	Ochiri (Austria - older Korean name)
滿洲	만주	Manju (Manchuria)
國際聯盟	국제연맹	Kukche Yŏnmaeng (League of Nations)
華盛噸	워싱턴	Wŏsingt'ŏn (Washington)
太平洋	태평양	T'aep'yŏngyang (Pacific Ocean)
힛틀러	히틀러	Hit'ŭllŏ (Hitler)
埃及	애급	Aegŭp (Egypt)
소마리랜드	소말리랜드	Somalliraendŭ (Somaliland)
나일강	나일강	Nailgang (Nile River)
타나湖	타나 호	T'ana Ho (Lake Tana)
靑나일강	청나일강	Ch'ŏng Nailgang (Blue Nile)
스탄	수단	Sudan (Sudan - inferred)
간듸	간디	Kandi (Gandhi)
마르다島	마르다 섬	Marŭda Sŏm (Malta Island - likely)
日本	일본	Ilbon (Japan)
中國	중국	Chungguk (China)
比律賓	비율빈	Piyulbin (Philippines - older name)
스에스運河	수에즈 운하	Suejŭ Unha (Suez Canal)
英國下院	영국 하원	Yŏngguk Hawŏn (British House of Commons)

**Glossary**

밧부신	바쁘신	Busy (older spelling of 바쁘신)
오서 주서서	오셔 주셔서	Thank you for coming (older spelling/phrasing)
감사함니다	감사합니다	Thank you (older spelling)
기다렷스나	기다렸으나	Waited, but... (older spelling)
들니지 안슴니다그려	들리지 않습니다그려	Is not heard (older spelling/ending)
보여지기에	보이기에	As it seems/appears (older spelling)
갓슴니까	같습니까	Is it like...? / Does it seem...? (older spelling)
업슴니다만은	없습니다만은	Although there isn't... (older spelling)
어더드른	얻어들은	Overheard / Picked up (knowledge) (older spelling)
잇다고 해요	있다고 해요	It is said that there is...
갓습데다	같습니다	It seems like... (older spelling)
박게	밖에	Other than / Besides (older spelling)
잇겟스나	있겠으나	Although there might be... (older spelling)
노여잇지요	놓여 있지요	Is placed / Is situated
올흘걸요	옳을걸요	It is probably right (older spelling)
잇다하지만	있다 하지만	Although there is...
업겟지요	없겠지요	There probably isn't... (older spelling)
압헷일을	앞엣일을	The matter ahead / The future (older spelling)
올느기만하든	으르렁거리기만 하던	Used to only growl (older spelling/term for 으르렁거리다)
밋든	믿던	Trusted / Believed in (older spelling)
안저서는	앉아서는	Being / From the position of (older spelling)
업스니	없으니	Since there isn't... (older spelling)
안트구만요	않더구먼요	It doesn't seem to be... (older dialectal/colloquial ending)
안젓스니까	앉았으니까	Because they are sitting/positioned (older spelling)
이러낫슬 적에	일어났을 적에	At the time when it arose/happened (older spelling)
업섯지	없었지	There wasn't... (older spelling)
나선 겟이지요	나선 것이지요	It is that they came forward... (older spelling)
업시하엿더라니	없이 하였더라니	Had done without (borders) / Had erased (borders)
뱃장	배짱	Guts / Audacity
조켓다하여	좋겠다 하여	Saying it would be good... (older spelling)
잇지마은	있지만은	Although there is... (older spelling)
이러날 것 갓지 안어요	일어날 것 같지 않아요	It doesn't seem likely to happen (older spelling)
이약이	이야기	Story / Talk (older spelling)
되어지는 것으로 봄니다	되어지는 것으로 봅니다	Is seen as becoming / Is considered to be postponed (older spelling)
이러나는	일어나는	Arising / Happening (older spelling)
멧다처서	메다쳐서	By throwing/slamming down (older spelling)
바수어 버리드시	부수어 버리듯이	Like smashing it (older spelling)
질러 노흐면	질러 놓으면	If one ignites/sets off (older spelling)
싸홈은	싸움은	The fight/battle (older spelling)
나가버렷지요	나가버렸지요	Has gone too far (older spelling)
잇지요	있지요	There is (certainly)
날나면	나려면	If it is to break out (war) (older spelling)
압헤서	앞에서	In front of (older spelling)
엇든	어떤	Some / A certain (older spelling)
이러나드군요	일어나더군요	It arose / Happened (recounting observation) (older spelling)
말슴하여 주세요	말씀하여 주세요	Please speak / Please tell (older spelling)
앗가	아까	A little while ago (older spelling)
이러나고야 만다고 햇서요	일어나고야 만다고 했어요	Said it will inevitably happen (older spelling)
식혀	시켜	Make / Cause to be (older spelling)
첫재	첫째	Firstly (older spelling)
그네의	그들의	Their (older form)
눈압헤는	눈앞에는	Before their eyes (older spelling)
옴겨노흘	옮겨놓을	To relocate / Move (older spelling)
갓가운	가까운	Near / Close (older spelling)
춤 흘니게 되어	침 흘리게 되어	Came to drool over / Covet (older spelling)
둘재	둘째	Secondly (older spelling)
밧게	밖에	Besides / Other than (older spelling)
뭇소리니가	무솔리니가	Mussolini (older spelling/transcription)
잇섯지요	있었지요	There was (older spelling)
밋엇섯기에	믿었었기에	Because they had believed (older spelling)
업스리란	없으리란	That there wouldn't be (older spelling)
떠러젓슴으로	떨어졌으므로	Because it had fallen (older spelling)
못하리란	못하리란	That (they) couldn't (interfere)
捉囚한 터이지요	착수한 터이지요	Embarked upon / Started (using older Hanja reading 捉囚 for 착수)
노앗지만	놓았지만	Although established/completed (older spelling)
끼워잇서서는	끼어 있어서는	Being inserted/situated among (older spelling)
눌니워 지내 오다가	눌리어 지내 오다가	Having lived suppressed (older spelling)
잇게되자	있게 되자	As it came to be
밧게 되엇스니까	받게 되었으니까	Because it came to receive (hate) (older spelling)
팟시즘과	파시즘과	Fascism and... (older spelling)
떼모꾸라시	데모크라시	Democracy (older transliteration)
밋는	믿는	Believing / Trusting (older spelling)
만치만	많지만	Although there are many
너르나 너른	넓으나 넓은	Vast, vast (older spelling)
십흔	싶은	Wanting (older spelling)
끌코 잇슴니다	끓고 있습니다	Is boiling (with desire) (older spelling)
녯날의	옛날의	Of old days / Ancient (older spelling)
만타니까	많다니까	Because it is said there is much (older spelling)
너흐면	넣으면	If one puts in / obtains (older spelling)
넛는	넣는	Putting in / Obtaining (older spelling)
보여저요	보여요	It seems / It appears (older spelling)
생겻스니까	생겼으니까	Because it arose (older spelling)
잇는 셈인데	있는 셈인데	It amounts to being... / Is essentially...
됏지오	되었지요	Became (older spelling)
마천가지지요	마찬가지지요	Is the same (older spelling)
더듸서	어디서	From where (older spelling/dialect?)
무처잇고	묻혀 있고	Is buried (older spelling)
만히	많이	Much / Many (older spelling)
흐리는	흐르는	Flowing (older spelling)
막아버리거나	막아 버리거나	Or completely blocks
딴데	딴 데	Elsewhere / Another place (older spelling)
둘려노아 버리면	돌려놓아 버리면	If one diverts (older spelling)
일케됨니다	잃게 됩니다	Comes to lose (older spelling)
식혀	시켜	Cause to / Make (dispatch)
아녀요?	아니에요?	Isn't it? (older spelling/form)
그러니가?	그러니까?	So? / Therefore? (questioning tone, older spelling)
따저보면	따져보면	If one investigates / considers closely (older spelling)
엇더함니까	어떠합니까	How is it? / What is it like? (older spelling)
직혀오든데	지켜오던데	Used to protect/maintain, but... (older spelling)
눌니워	눌리어	Being pressed/suppressed (older spelling)
업겟지요	없겠지요	There won't be (older spelling)
안흘	않을	Not (older spelling)
안슴니가	않습니까	Isn't it? (older spelling)
어들	얻을	To obtain / Gain (older spelling)
조흔	좋은	Good (older spelling)
노여잇지요	놓여 있지요	Is placed / Is situated
잇지 안슴니까	있지 않습니까	Isn't there? (older spelling)
보건데	보건대	Judging by / Seeing that
올켓지요	옳겠지요	It would be correct (older spelling)
곳	곧	Soon / Immediately (older spelling)
터저질는지	터질는지	Whether it will break out (older spelling)
알어요	알아요	I know / Understand
익이는	이기는	Winning (older spelling)
본바더	본받아	Following the example of
보낼 것이요	보낼 것이요	Will send / Will direct (older form)
가치	같이	Like / As (older spelling)
기삀¸로	기세로	With momentum / Vigor (unclear character, likely 기세)
오고 말지오	오고 말지요	Will inevitably come
다 먹건만은	다 먹건만은	Even though (they) eat/take all
꼼작 못하는구나	꼼짝 못하는구나	Cannot budge / Cannot do anything
밧지요	받지요	Receives (damage)
빠저	빠져	Falling into (a dilemma) (older spelling)
끈고	끊고	Cutting off / Withdrawing (older spelling)
도라지는	돌아지는	Turning back / Returning (older spelling)
다을 줄 알어요	될 줄 알아요	Think it will be (a reason) (older spelling/meaning shift?)
놉히	높이	Highly / Loudly (older spelling)
안슴니까	않습니까	Isn't it? (older spelling)
올치요	옳지요	Is right / Is correct (older spelling)
익여도	이겨도	Even if (they) win (older spelling)
그러타고	그렇다고	Even so / That being said (older spelling)
티어 갈 걸요	튀어 갈 걸요	Will likely splash/spread to (older spelling)
엇기에	얻기에	To obtain / Get
밤낫	밤낮	Night and day (older spelling)
드는 날	드는 날	The day it enters/reaches
닥처 지고야 말지요	닥쳐 지고야 말지요	Will inevitably arrive (older spelling)
잇슬 수 업스니	있을 수 없으니	Cannot possibly be idle (older spelling)
하엿슨 즉	하였은즉	Since it was said / Since it was done (older spelling)
떠러지고 말걸요	떨어지고 말걸요	Will inevitably fall to / Become (a matter of time) (older spelling)
엇잿든	어쨌든	Anyway / In any case (older spelling)
버서날	벗어날	To escape from (older spelling)
일어서	잃어서	Losing (older spelling)
업슬걸요	없을걸요	There probably won't be (older spelling)
엇더함니가	어떠합니까	How is it? / What about...? (older spelling)
십흔	싶은	Wanting (older spelling)
업슴니까	없습니까	Isn't there? (older spelling)
식힌다는 것은	시킨다는 것은	Sacrificing (them)
업서요	없어요	There isn't / Cannot (be indignant) (older spelling)
그러터래도	그러더라도	Even so (older spelling)
십허요	싶어요	Want to (older spelling)
올코	옳고	Is right and... (older spelling)
노앗고	놓았고	Established and... (older spelling)
어덧스매	얻었으매	Having obtained (support) (older form)
뻐치고	뻗치고	Extending / Spreading
드리려는	들이려는	Intending to bring in (older spelling)
올너갓슨즉	올라갔은즉	Since it has risen (older spelling)
아니한대도	아니한대도	Even if not doing (an expedition)
어더도	얻어도	Even if obtaining (a compromise) (older spelling)
밧게 업고	밖에 없고	Nothing but / Only (success) (older spelling)
엇던고 하면	어떤고 하면	As for what it is like... (older phrasing)
싸주고 십지만	싸주고 싶지만	Want to fight for / support, but... (older spelling)
밧고	받고	Receiving (money) (older spelling)
뒷날	뒷날	Later days / Subsequently
그너른	그 넓은	That vast (older spelling)
빼앗겻고	빼앗겼고	Was taken away / Lost (older spelling)
가튼	같은	Same / Similar (older spelling)
되엇다니	되었다니	That it became... (expressing surprise/recounting)
밧게된도	받게 된 것도	The fact that (they) came to receive (contempt) (older spelling)
가젓섯스나	가졌었으나	Although (they) had possessed (older spelling)
나머잇고	남아 있고	Remains (older spelling)
이러키에	이러기에	Because of this (older spelling)
업시되엇지요	없이 되었지요	Became without / Had no choice but (to wait) (older spelling)
가치	같이	Like (an uncivilized country) (older spelling)
알어요	알아요	Think / Consider (it doubtful)
안코	않고	Not (like that) (older spelling)
가튼	같은	Like (war)
움지겨 날 수 잇겟슴니까	움직여 날 수 있겠습니까	Can it arise moved by...? (older spelling)
그러치요	그렇지요	That's right (older spelling)
해야한다	해야 한다	Must do
하로를	하루를	One day (older spelling)
햇든	했던	That was (brutal) (older spelling)
모양이든군요	모양이었던군요	It seems it was... (recounting shape/manner) (older spelling)
잡어다가	잡아다가	Catching and bringing (them) (older spelling)
식혀	시켜	Making (them) castrated (older spelling)
썻다니	썼다니	That they used (them as slaves) (expressing surprise/recounting)
됨니까	됩니까	Does it become? / Amount to? (older spelling)
합데다	합니다	It is said / They say (older spelling)
하여서	하여서	Amounting to / Totalling
드러오는	들어오는	Coming in / Imported (older spelling)
아니나	아니나	Although not (large)
못드러올 터이니까	못 들어올 터이니까	Since (they) likely cannot enter (older spelling)
이리되면	이렇게 되면	If it becomes like this
보여지는데	보이는데	It seems / It appears, but... (older spelling)
엇더함니까	어떠합니까	How is it? / What do you think? (older spelling)
잇슬 것은	있을 것은	That there will be (prosperity) (older spelling)
떼의	때의	Of the time (WWI) (older spelling)
생각함니다	생각합니다	I think (older spelling)
이러나면	일어나면	If it arises/breaks out (older spelling)
하겟고	하겠고	Will likely do (observe) (older spelling)
하겟스나	하겠으나	Will likely have to, but... (older spelling)
안코	않고	Not (likely to participate) (older spelling)
안을가고	않을까 하고	Wondering if it won't... (advance) (older spelling)
될가?	될까?	Will it become?
말할지라도	말할지라도	Even speaking of
갑이	값이	Price (older spelling)
나어지겟지만	나아지겠지만	Although it might get better (older spelling)
안으리라고	않으리라고	That it won't (come) (older spelling)
엇재 그러냐 하면	어찌 그러냐 하면	Why is that, you ask? / The reason is...
잇섯지	있었지	Was (in the process) (older spelling)
아니되어서	아니 되어서	Not having become yet
잇는	있는	Existing / Current
녜전과	예전과	With the past / Before (older spelling)
가튼	같은	Like / Same as (older spelling)
안으리라고 봄니다	않으리라고 봅니다	I see it as not coming (older spelling)
잇섯는데	있었는데	There was (pointing out)
말슴하여 주세요	말씀하여 주세요	Please speak / tell (older spelling)
조흘걸요	좋을걸요	It would probably be good (not to speak) (older spelling)
잇는 것을 알겟서요	있는 것을 알겠어요	I understand that they hold (a policy) (older spelling)
합시다	합시다	Let's do it
한대두	한대도	Even if explaining (older spelling)
남니까	납니까	Does it break out? (war) (older spelling)
못할 것임니까	못할 것입니까	Will it be unavoidable? (older spelling)
그러케	그렇게	Like that / So (older spelling)
너흘	넣을	To put back / Sheathe (older spelling)
잇지요	있지요	There is (a risk)
잇지 못하다고 하지만	있지 못하다고 하지만	Although they say (they) are not prepared
가튼	같은	Like (Italy) (older spelling)
잇슬 것이외다	있을 것이외다	Will likely be able (to prepare) (older form)
잇기게	있기에	Because there is (experience) (older spelling)
아니 다을 줄 알어요	아니 될 줄 알아요	I think it won't be (a reason) (older spelling/meaning shift?)
주서서	주셔서	Giving (your words) (older spelling)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제7권 제9호
발행일	1935년 10월 01일
기사제목	大戰急來와 極東形勢 =座談會=
기사형태	대담·좌담

大戰急來와 極東形勢 =座談會=
(出席諸氏) 申興雨
安在鴻
李光洙
徐椿
金璟載
李仁
朱耀翰
(本社側) 金東煥
朴相羲
9월 24일 정오부터 京城 鍾路 「보아그랑」 樓上에서 급박한 시국을 바라보면서 本社 주최로 座談會를 開하야 下午 3시 반 閉會하다.

伊太利, 에치오피아는 과연 전쟁까지 하고 말 것이냐?
金東煥-밧부신 중 오서 주서서 감사함니다. 실상은 의전포고를 보고 이 會合을 열려고 일주일 동안이나 기다렷스나 전쟁이 날듯날듯하면서 아직까지 대포 소리가 들니지 안슴니다그려. 그러나 어차피 伊에나 獨 佛 X蘇 X米 중 어듸선가 發端이 되어 세계대전이 必起하리라고 보여지기에 이 座談會를 연터이외다. 오늘까지의 형세를 가지고 판단한다면 爲先 伊太利, 에치오피아 사이에 전쟁이 나고 말 것 갓슴니까.
申興雨-나는 歐羅巴 가는 길에 여러번 印度洋을 거처 地中海로 드러설 적마다 東阿弗利加 근해를 지나면서도 한번도 대륙에 내려본 적이 업서서 에치오피아 國土를 발버본 적이라고는 업슴니다만은 대개 어더드른 智識으로 판단컨대 에치오피아란, 人口가 朝鮮보다도 더 적은＜27＞ 800萬이요, 首府 아베바에는 電車도 아직 안노엿고, 瓦斯, 수도, 전기도 일부 王候族의 집에나 잇스며, 비행기라야 전국을 통터러 15대일 뿐, 여러 가지 점으로 보아 後進未開國인데, 사막과 산악 뿐인 이 땅덩어리를 가지고 엇재서 歐羅巴 列强이 서로 먹지 못해서, 애쓰는가 하면, 거기에는 세계적으로 有數한 유전이 잇다고 해요. 세계의 유전을 반이나 獨占하고 안즌 英米가 에國에 더더 욕심을 내어 英吉利는 이 기득권을 유지하려들고, 伊太利는 이 분할에 새로 참여코저 하여 그런 것 갓습데다. 그 박게 植民政策關係도 잇겟스나- 그러한즉 결국은 에치오피아라 하는 弱少 獨立國家는 英佛利의 餌食이 될 운명에 노여잇지요. 이 餌食이 그 소속을 완전히 결정되기까지에는 한바탕 전쟁을 치려야할 터이니 開戰하기가 十中八九라고 보는 것이 올흘걸요.
그리고 伊太利와 單獨開戰이 되면 天險의 地利가 잇다하지만 근대적 軍備를 충분히 하여가지고 안즌 伊太利를 당해낸다는수야 절대로 업겟지요.
李光洙-올해요. 申博士 말슴대로, 單獨開戰이 되면 에치오피아는 문제가 안되겟지요. 정말 전쟁까지 갈 것이냐하면 錯雜한 歐羅巴 政局을 바라볼 때에 흥미잇다할 박게 업지. 전쟁이란 일종 天氣豫報가튼 자연현상이어서 청청하게 개엿든 날세도 갑작이 흐리면서 비 되는 수가 잇스니까요. 압헷일을 모르지, 올느기만하든 伊太利도 조고만한 일을 動機 삼어서 정말 찻든 칼을 뻘는지도 모르니까요.(寫眞은 超然히 大勢觀望 중의 米大統領)
그러나 이 점만은 말할 수 잇슬걸요. 伊太利는 에치로피아가 무서운 것이 아니라 그 배후에 안젓는 英國이 무서우니까, 이미 羅馬協定까지 매젓든 가장 밋든 佛蘭西가 뒷거름 치는 이상, 伊太利로 안저서는 단독 힘으로 英佛을 해여낸다는＜28＞ 수는 업스니, 지금 현상을 가지고는, 전쟁될 것 갓지 안트구만요.
徐椿-나는 이러케 보아요. 다만 地理關係로 大軍을 움지겨야 하고, 또 에國에는 利害關係 잇는 列强들이 쭉 지키고 안젓스니까 얼는 손을 못빼고 山上猛虎格으로 연해 을느기만 하지요. 원래 伊太利가 擧事하자면 佛蘭西와 羅馬協定을 매즌 뒤 왈-왓사건이 이러낫슬 적에 에치오피아를 一擧占領해 버릴 것인데 그때는 미리 준비가 업섯지. 그래서 그 동안 준비를 해가지고 이번에 나선 겟이지요.
李仁-드른 즉 伊太利地圖에는 에치오피아를 벌서 수십년 전부터 자기 영토라고 국경선을 업시하엿더라니 그 뱃장이야 짐작 할 수 잇지.
朱耀翰-뱃장은 그런지 모르지만 암만해도 伊太利가 전쟁할 것 갓지는 안해요.
金璟載-그래요. 우리들 朝鮮사람 심리로는 생활난 기타 관계로 현상 打開을 희망하는 나머지에-마치 여름날 비 왓스면 하는 생각으로 전쟁이라도 툭 터젓스면 조켓다하여, 이번 伊에 사건에도 금시 전쟁이 난다고 신경들을 날카롭게 하여가지고 잇지마은 서로 모순을 싸안고 잇는 資本主義 國家間의 대규모의 충돌은 이번 일로는 이러날 것 갓지 안어요. 그러면서도 伊太利의 제국주의 정책은 어느 정도로 수행되고 弱國인 에치오피아의 운명은 결국 현재의 半植民地에서 완전한 植民地로 전락하고 말걸요.
安在鴻-나도 그와 同意見이여요. 나종에 이약이 하겟지만,＜29＞ 이번 世界大戰이 나느냐 한다면 列國의 모순관계로 보아 世界大戰은 당분 연기되어지는 것으로 봄니다.
徐椿-원칙적으로 보면 그러하지만, 그러나 전쟁이란 이해타산에서만 이러나는 것이 아니니까, 가령 100원짜리 보석을 끼고 안젓다가도 화가 나면 겻헤 잇느 돌맹이에 멧다처서 바수어 버리드시 적개심이 강하게 폭발하는 날 開戰을 보고 말겟지요. 손쉽게 一夜 사이에 進軍을 시작하여 兩國軍隊 충돌의 불끗만 질러 노흐면 금시에라도 싸홈은 탁 터지고 말걸요. 전쟁이 안나기에는 伊太利가 너무 「나가버렷지요」 8割은 開戰可能性이 잇지요.
李仁-날나면 쉽게 날걸. 東京서 본 일인데 日比谷공원 압헤서 엇든 자전거 탄 사람이 지나다가 어린애를 다친 것이 動機가 되여 수백명이 모아들어 大亂鬪가 이러나드군요. 국제관계도 그와 마찬가지겟지요. 發端이란!

伊에를 싸고도는 國際關係와 이번 戰爭이 世界大戰까지 갈 것이냐
金東煥-그러면 伊에를 사고도는 國際關係를 말슴하여 주세요. 그래서 伊에 開戰이 世界大戰에까지 미칠 與否에 대하야 관찰을 내려주세요.
安在鴻-나는 앗가 世界大戰은 一時 연기가 되나 필연코 이러나기는 이러나고야 만다고 햇서요. 그 전제하에서 伊太利가 이번 이러선 동기와 列强과의 관계를 설명하여 내 이론을 성립식혀 보지요. 대체 이번에 伊太利가 에치오피아를 먹으려든 것은 꼭 帝國主義的 政策때문에 그리햇지요. 첫재 그네의 눈압헤는 年年히 팽창하는 국내 인구를 옴겨노흘 땅을 필요로 하엿는데 極東方面에는 너무 멀고 불리하여 단념하고 비교적 본국과 갓가운 東阿에 춤 흘니게 되어 에치오피아를 점령하려는 것이지요. 둘재 經濟資源의 개발과 人絹 其他를 수출할 시장획득때문에 에國에 욕심을 낸 것인데 이 밧게 한가지 국내문제로 뭇소리니가 생각하는 ＜30＞ 것에 파시스트 정권 유지을 위한 계획이 잇지요. 국내에 充滿하여 잇는 파시즘 정권에 功이 잇든 有功黨員의 處置와 분리하려는 국내 인심을 전쟁이란 鎔爐台에 삶어서 다시 통일하려는 의도가 잇섯지요. 卽 人口處置와 新市場獨占과 國內民心 統一이란 세 가지 國內 이유로 伊太利가 이러섯다고 보아지고 국외문제로 볼 때에는 獨逸이 오스트리아를 합병하는 것을 막기 위하여 佛蘭西와 로마協定을 체결하여 두엇슨 즉 그 代價 伊太利의 행동에는 佛蘭西가 지지할 것을 튼튼히 밋엇섯기에 佛蘭西가 배후에서 원조하는 이상 歐羅巴에선 伊太利國策을 용이히 막자고 달려들 국가가 업스리란 뱃장이 생긴 것과 그 다음 滿洲事變以來 國際聯盟의 권위가 아조 떠러젓슴으로 伊太利가 國策遂行을 시작한대도 적극적으로 干涉못하리란 것을 넘겨 집고 에國軍事 점령을 이번에 捉囚한 터이지요.
李光洙-그러한 이유로 잇겟지만 또 이러한 이유도 잇다고 보아요. 대체로 완성하여 노앗지만 歐州 列强 속에 끼워잇서서는 언제든지 弱國으로 눌니워 지내 오다가 뭇소리니가 파시즘을 통하야 다시 국가를 통일하고 잇게되자 떼모꾸라시를 숭상하는 英吉利로부터 이 파시즘은 미움을 밧게 되엇스니까 팟시즘과 떼모꾸라시가 서로 충돌한 것이라고도 볼 수 잇지요. 獨裁主義와 自由主義는 상극하는 水火의 사이니까 이러한 서로 밋는 主義와 正義感의 相異도 이번 전쟁의 一因이라고 봄니다. 더구나 近代國家 즉 建國된 지＜31＞ 얼마 아니된 近代國家는 利害關係가튼 帝國主義的 國家觀念으로 싸우는 일이 만치만 늙은 국가 즉 역사가 오랜 老大國家에서는 민족적 감정으로 싸우는 일이 만치요. 伊太利 국민의 염두에는 우리 조선사람들이 항상 高句麗 全盛時代를 사모하드시 전성기에 잇든 저 로-마 시대를 그리워 한담니다. 그 찬란한 문명과 너르나 너른 版圖- 이것을 다시 회복하고 십흔 열망에 끌코 잇슴니다. 오늘날 伊太利 사람들이 부르짓는 「이레덴데」란 말은 「伊太利의 恢復」이란 말인데 이 말이 녯날의 羅馬 時代의 영광을 다시 회복하자는 뜻이외다. 이래서 이것을 동기로 국제적으로 「伊太利의 굿셈」을 보이자 하는데 잇지요. 그리고 경제적으로는 앗가도 어는 분이 잠간 말삼 합데다만은 에치오피아에는 석유와 면화가 만타니까 에國 면화만 손에 너흐면 오늘날 세계적으로 치는 米國南方의 면화를 누를 수 잇다한 즉 이 면화를 수중에 넛는 날 歐羅巴의 紡續上 覇權을 쥐게 되어 경제적으로 유리하여지니까 이러선 것인즉 英伊衝突의 主因은 여긔 잇다고도 보여저요.
徐椿-그러나 단순한 애국심으로 근대의 전쟁이 이러난다고는 보여지지 안어요. 지금의 전쟁은 열이면 열이다 利害關係 때문에 나지요. 경제적 利慾 때문에 나지요. 개인 개인간 싸홈도 그리코 국가 대 국가간의 싸홈도 그러치요. 이번 伊에 문제도 伊太利와 英吉利와 사이에 이해 충돌이 생겻스니까 시작된 것이지요. 대체 伊太利는 지금 에치오피아와 싸운다고 하는 것이 아니라 英國과 싸우거니 하고 또 실제에 잇서 英國과 싸우고 잇는 것이지요. 그 利害關係는 이러치요. 즉 英吉利의 富源은 나일강 流域에 잇는 셈인데 그러기에 英領埃及도 나일강 덕택에 富國이 됏지오. 스탄도 마천가지지요. 그린데 이 나일강이 더듸서 흐르느냐 하면 에國 타나湖에서 흐르지요. 타나湖를 중심으로 靑나일강 유역 일대에 金銀銅鐵가튼 광물이 지하에 무진장으로 무처잇고 珈琲나 면화도 만히 나는데 이제 만일 伊太利가 에치오피아를 점령하여 타나湖로부터＜32＞ 나일강에 흐리는 물줄기를 딱 막아버리거나 딴데 둘려노아 버리면 英帝國의 富의 太半은 여긔서 일케됨니다. 英國에 대하여는 에치오피아가 이러케도 중대한 것이니까 地中海에 140 隻의 함대을 출동식혀 伊太利의 에國 점령을 제지하며 또 國際聯盟에는 내 말 아니 드르면 대륙에서 손을 떼겟다는 威嚇과 怒號를 하여 獨逸을 무서워 전전긍긍하는 佛蘭西로 하여곰 제편이 되게한 것이 아녀요? 그러니까? 입으로는 正義니 人道니 하지만 그 속을 따저보면 모다 利害關係 때문에 전쟁이란 이러나는 것이지요.
金東煥-네 그 관계는 알겟는데 그러면 伊에 충돌에 대하야 쏘비엣 露西亞와 獨逸의 태도는 엇더함니까.
金璟載-오늘날 이만한 정도의 세계평화라도 유지하는 것은 歐羅巴에 잇서선 벨사유條約이 「힘」이 되어 羅巴 列强간의 충돌을 방지하고 東洋에 잇서선 歐華盛噸條約이 太平洋 방면의 질서를 직혀오든데 벨사유條約은 힛틀러를 盟主한 新興獨逸의 기세에 눌니워 휘둥지둥하고 華盛噸條約은 滿洲事變後 유명무실하게 되어 세계평화 전체가 안정을 일은 셈이지요. 이리되면 쏘비엣은 歐羅巴에 잇서 獨逸의 침략을 두려워하고 亞細亞에 잇서 XX의 적극정책을 두려워하니까 로서아로서는 歐洲의 안정 세력인 英佛을 지지하지 안흘 수 업겟지요. 그런 의미에서 伊太利의 행동을 누르려고 國際聯盟總會 갓흔 데서도 가장 굿센 의견을 토하고 잇지 안슴니가.
朱耀翰-獨逸은 歐羅巴의 한모퉁이거나 亞細亞의 一角에서 전쟁 만나서 英佛伊 등이 그 渦中에 드는 틈을 타서 年來의 宿案이든 墺太利를 합병하고 말터이니 이 합병이 완성되는 날 다시 歐羅巴에서 제가 制覇할 기회가 생길 터이니까! 말하자면 漁父의 利를 어들 가장 조흔 地位에＜33＞ 노여잇지요. 그러기에 요지간에 獨逸態度를 보시구려. 國外風雲에는 緘口不言하고 國內統一에만 전력하고 잇지 안슴니까.

그러면 結局 大戰의 鍵은 英國이 가젓다고 볼가? 金東煥-지금까지의 모든 말슴을 종합하여 보건데 결국 伊에 開戰, 나아가서 世界大戰의 열쇠는 英吉利가 가지고 잇다고 보여지는데 그러면 英國의 입장과 外交政策을 말슴하여 주세요.
申興雨-그러케 보는 것이 올켓지요. 英의 向背에 따라 第二 世界大戰은 내일이라도 곳 터저질는지 모르지요. 그런데 英吉利의 입장은 지금 매우 곤난한 처지에 잇는 줄 알어요. 伊에 전쟁의 결과 만일 에치오피아가 익이는 날이면 유색인종이 백색인종을 익엿다는 우월감을 英領諸植民地 人民들이 가지게 되어 에치오피아를 본바더 印度도 英本國에 화살을 보낼 것이요 埃及도 武裝蜂起를 할 것이요 英領 소마리랜드 등등이 모다 이러날 터이니까 이리 되면 英帝國의 붕괴의 위기가 큰 물결가치 맹렬한 기삀¸로 오고 말지오. 그래서 만일 伊太利가 『에치오피아를 다 먹건만은 英吉利는 꼼작 못하는구나』하는 英帝國을 멸시하는 관념을 주어 亦 유색인종 통치에큰 創荑를 밧지요. 이 인종문제 때문에 英國은 일종띄렘마에 빠저 잇다고 보여저요. 그런대 금후 英佛의 협조가 시언치 못하여 英國 또한 國際聯盟에서 손을 끈고 도라지는 날이면 獨逸이 자유행동을 취하게 될터이니까 벨사유條約 軍縮協定 등- 모든 條約과 協定이 산산히 부서질 터이니 그리되면 獨을 중심으로 전쟁이 일 가능성이 또 잇지요. 그러기에 此際는 英吉利의 向背가 세계의 평화를 좌우한다 하겟지요.
徐椿-그리기에 벌서 印度 간듸-가 有色人種으로 된 독립국가인 에國을 구원하여야 된다고 소리놉히 부르짓지＜35＞ 안슴니까. 이 말은 自己辨明이요 자기입장을 어느 정도까지 표명한 바이지요. 英吉利의 태도에 따라서는 이와 가튼 성명과 행동은 印度 뿐 아니라 埃及, 소라미랜드 어듸에서든지 날 가능성이 잇다고 보는 것이 올치요. 그러기에 英吉利의 입장은 에國이 天險의 이용하여 저 40년 전에 도와 전쟁 모양으로 익여도 안되고 그러타고 에國이 저도 안되지요.
英吉利의 입장으로 보면 伊太利가 에치오피아에 향하는 그 야심을 막어 놋는다면 그 불길은 地中海에 티어 갈 걸요. 地中海라면 英佛伊 三œ‹이 서로 制海權을 엇기에 밤낫 으르렁거리는 곳인데 地中海 마르다島에 伊太利가 불길을 드는 날 全歐의 危機는 정말 다 닥처 지고야 말지요. 그러타고 伊太利에게 東阿에 대한 自由行動을 묵인하여 그 굿센 最後機械兵團과 航空隊를 모라 黑人帝國을 분쇄하여 버리고서 에치오피아 宗主權을 잡는 날이면 英인들 佛인들 도저히 가만 잇슬 수 업스니 기득권 옹호의 見地로써 여기에서 필연적으로 世界大戰이 날 듯 하지요.
그런데 요지간 오는 海外電報로 판단컨대 國際聯盟의＜35＞ 妥協試案이란 것이 英佛의 기득권에만 손을 대지 안느다면 伊太利의 요구를 다 승인하겟다고 하엿슨 즉 어차피 에치오피아 再分割은 시간문제로 떠러지고 말걸요.
安在鴻-엇잿든 歐羅巴 전쟁이란 점차로 현실성을 띄어 오는데 大戰만 일면 경제적 窮迫에서 버서날 길을 영영 일어서 결국은 新興하는 日本帝國의 세력의 臺頭를 일층 보게되어 전세계의 국가간 勢力陳은 再編成을 보게 된다고 아니할 수 업슬걸요.

우리 見地로서 에를 올케볼가 伊太利를 올케볼가?
金東煥-엇더함니가. 弱少民族을 동정한다는 의미라든가 有色人種을 옹호한다는 의미로 에치오피아를 지지하고 십흔 心思가 업슴니까.
李仁-亞弗利加에 잇서 겨우 한낫 남은 黑人帝國을 帝國主義 政策 때문에 희생 식힌다는 것은 분개아니 할 수 업서요. 그야 현재로도 英米 財團에 國內利權의 대부분은 빼앗기고 잇지만 그러터래도 名義만이라도 帝國의 일홈만은 보존식히고 십허요.
李光洙-나는 伊太利도 올코 에치오피아도 올타고 보아요. 첫재 伊太利로 말하면 오랫만에 뭇소리니는 나포레옹이 다 되어 國內를 통일하여 노앗고 실력을 양성하여 그 우에 강렬한 애국심까지 가진 전국민의 후원을 어덧스매 歐羅巴에서 멸시을 밧아오든 그 분푸리를 할려고- 말하자면 國威를 海外에 뻐치고 富를 諸植民地로부터 모아드리려는 욕심낼 階梯를 밟게 되엇는데 이번 기회에 잇서서 伊太利가 동한다 하매 英吉利가 창황히 地中海에 大艦隊를 보냇고 전세계가 들셩거리게 되엇스니 국제적으로 伊太利 지위가 훨신 올너갓슨즉 정치적 의미로는 伊太利를 승리케 한 것이지요. 이 우에 비록 懸軍萬里하여 遠征을 아니한대도 어느 정도로 타협을 어더도 성공이라할 수 잇지요. 그러니까＜36＞ 一言으로 말하면 伊太利는 뭇소리니 정권을 통하야 국내통일을 완성한 것, 강열한 애국심을 무기로 하여 조국의 세계적 지위를 놉힌 것- 그러니 성공이라 볼 박게 업고 다른 한편 그러면 에치오피아는 엇던고 하면 에치오피아에 대하여는 弱者에게 동정하는 그런 人道的 의미로 싸주고 십지만 다 이러케 되는 것이 自作之얼이지요. 역사를 보면 엇든 酋長하나가 「마삭구港口」를 몃백弗인가 밧고 伊太利 사람에게 팔아 먹은 것이 시초가 되어 뒷날 그너른 伊領「에레토리아」 전부를 빼앗겻고 英領이 된 것도 다 거지반 가튼 賣國奴의 行事에서 시작되엇다니 오늘날 국토가 半滅되고 外侮를 밧게된도 다 제 잘못이엇지요. 그러나 역사는 4천년이요 舊敎가 드러가기를 紀元 7세기라 하엿스니 굉장히 문명할 기회를 녯날부터 가젓섯스나 오늘날 現狀을 보면 세계 교통에서 隔絶된 곳에 노여잇고 인신매매의 노예제도가 아직 그냥 나머잇고 문화슋�설이 빈약하고 이러키에 아직 좀 더 시련을 밧어 120년을 지난 뒤에 민족적으로 국가적으********* 기회를 기다릴밧게 업시되엇지요.
金璟載-남들은 에치오피아에 애국심이 강열한 것을 말합데다만은 에치오피아 가치 未開國家에서 專制君主인 국왕이 마음대로 선전포고를 한다고 전국민이 일치하여 싸워주겟느냐 하는 것은 의문으로 알어요. 그런 의미에서 에치오피아에는 암만하여도 약점이 잇지요. 그러고 伊太利가 싸우자 하는 것이 40년 전의 에도와戰 복수심때문이라고 말하는 분이 잇는데 나보기에는 그런 것 갓지 안코 利害關係에서 그러함인 듯해요. 전쟁가튼 일국의 운명을 賭하는 大事變이 복수가튼 감정으로야 움지겨 날 수 잇겟슴니까.
徐椿-그러치요. 오직 利害打算에서지요. 뭇소리니는 국민의 적개심을 고조할 필요에서 정책상 에드와드 復讐戰을 해야한다. 「나귀가 되어 100년을 살기보다 사자가 되여 하로를 살자!」부르짓는 것이지요. 사실 에드와드戰이란＜37＞ 상당히 참혹햇든 모양이든군요. 200명인가 되는 伊太利 捕虜兵을 잡어다가 去勢를 식혀 노예로 썻다니 伊太利로서는 切齒할 노릇이기도 하지만은-

極東形勢는 엇더케 될가? 日米의 動向은 엇더케 될가?
金東煥-日本으로부터 에치오피아에 가는 상품이 얼마나 됨니까.
李仁-1년에 약 1천만원 가량 된다고 합데다. 錦布 800만원 잡화 100여 만원 하여서 그래서 수입의 5할 가량이 日本으로부터 드러오는 것이라드군요.
金東煥-1천만원의 시장이라면 아직은 그러케 큰 것은 아니나 大戰이 나면 英艦隊 손으로 스에스運河가 봉쇄될 터이니 그리되면 印度洋 以東의 全東洋시장에 歐羅巴商品이 못드러올 터이니까 이리되면 日本이 경제적으로 全東洋시장을 완전히 점령하게 되여 호경기가 오리라고 보여지는데 엇더함니까.
安在鴻-歐羅巴에 전쟁이 나면 極東시장에 윤택이 잇슬 것은 第一次 大戰떼의 호경기로 보아 예상할 수 잇겟지요. 이리되면 세계의 二大 공업국인 日本과 米國이 대약진할 것이외다. 그러니 전체로 보아 나는 이러케 생각함니다. 英佛伊에 간에 전쟁이 이러나면 獨逸은 기회를 보느라고 당분간 방관하겟고 쏘비엣露西亞는 이론상으로는 弱少民族을 도와야 하겟스나 諸般情勢로 보아 그 亦 방관하겟고.
米國은 海洋自由를 방해하지 안는한 亦 參戰할 것 갓지 안코 日本은 軍需工業을 주로 모든 산업이 대약진하야 세계시장에서 制覇할 터이며
따라서 極東全面에 잇서 정치적으로 엇더한 적극정책이 진전되지 안을가고 생각됨니다.
그리고 만일 大戰이 연기된다면 결국 에치오피아는 희생되고야 말 것이겟지요.
徐椿-정치적으로 보아서는＜38＞ 대개 그려켓는데 경제적으로 보아서 歐羅巴에 大戰이 난다고 곳 第1次 大戰때가튼 호경기가 와서 조선시장을 말할지라도 土地 建物갑이 朝夕으로 오르고 돈이 흔해지고 농산물갑이 오르고 장사가 잘되고 하겟느냐하면 多少야 나어지겟지만 그때와 같은 폭발적 호경기는 오지 안으리라고 보아요. 엇재 그러냐 하면 第一次 大戰때의 日本으로 말하면 工業立國의 途程에 잇섯지, 아직 완전한 工業國家가 아니되어서 공장, 원료 등 시설이 유치하엿지요. 그러나 그 동안 근 20년 사이에 장족의 발달을 보여서 지금 형세로 보면 미국와 일본의 생산능력만 가지고도 넉넉히 전세계를 養할 수 잇게 되엇스니까 이미 준비되어 잇는 능력을 움지길 뿐이지 녜전과 가튼 비약적 호경기는 오지 안으리라고 봄니다.
金東煥-英國下院 某氏는 大戰기간 중 日本의 積極政策 遂行을 지적한 바 잇섯는데 그러한 정치상 관계를 말슴하여 주세요. 印度, 中國, 比律賓 등 極東諸民族間의 운명에 대해서요.
朱耀翰-말치 안는 것이 조흘걸요. 그런데 世界大戰에 連하야 想起됨은 反戰運動인데 쏘비엣트를 주로한 反帝 反戰運動은 엇더함니까. 金璟載氏에 뭇고 십슴니다.
金璟載-쏘비엣이 國際聯盟을 지지하는 一点으로 보아로 資本主義 列國間의 전쟁을 반대하는 外交政策을 품고 잇는 것을 알겟서요. 反戰主義에 대하여는 피차 우리 상식에 쪼차서 판단키로 합시다. 길게 설명한대두 발표되기도 어려울 터이니까.
金東煥-그러니 결국 전쟁은 남니까. 나기만 하면 世界大戰은 면치 못할 것임니까.
李仁-그러케 보는 것이 올켓지요. 이미 빼엇든 칼을 도로 집어 너흘 리가 만무하니까요. 만일 伊太利가 出征軍人을 그냥 回軍한다면 內亂의 염려가 잇지요. 혹 엇든 사람은 세계각국의 財政狀態가 도저히 전쟁을 치를 준비가 되어 잇지 못하다고 하지만 팟쇼政勸이 확립한 伊太利＜39＞ 가튼 나라에서는 不換紙幣라도 亂發하여 戰爭準備를 할 수 잇슬 것이외다.
徐椿-또 엇든 분은 第1次 大戰의 참화가 너무도 지독하엿든 과거의 경험이 잇기게 大戰이 容易히 이러나지 안으리라고 보지만 지금 歐羅巴의 壯丁들이란 대개는 大戰을 모르는 靑少年들이요. 그를 경험한 이는 5, 60의 老杇한 사람들 뿐이니 그는 이유가 아니 다을 줄 알어요. 그러니 결국 오늘 형세로 보건대 8할까지는 世界大戰이 난다고 관측하는 것이 올켓지요.
金東煥-오랜 시간을 두고 말슴하여 주서서 감사함니다. (오후 3시 반 閉會)＜40＞
＜26-40＞