잡지명	別乾坤 第4號
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	첫 收入밧든 때 이약이 (Stories of When I Received My First Income)
필자	李相協, 閔泰瑗, 玄鎭健, 韓基岳
기사형태	회고·수기 (Reminiscence/Essay)

Stories of When I Received My First Income
						李相協, 閔泰瑗, 玄鎭健, 韓基岳

I Earned My First Income of Forty Won by Reading Three Books and Writing a Novel

李相協

Are you talking about when I received my first income? It was so long ago that I don't remember it very well. It was when I was nineteen, so it must have been seventeen years ago. At that time, I graduated from Poseong Middle School (普成中學校) and entered the law school (now the Faculty of Law), but I quit and went to Japan to take the entrance exam at Keio University (慶應大學). However, due to financial reasons, I couldn't continue and soon returned home and spent my time idly. Living under my widowed mother's care, I felt bad just idling around, and I also longed to continue my studies, so I tried various ways to earn my tuition. But I couldn't do anything. At that time, for some reason, I became interested in writing novels. However, I didn't have any books, so I was worried. Once, I went to Sinmachi (新町) via Jingogae. I found a place on the street where they rented out novels. So I decided to borrow and read a few books, paying three jeon for each book. After that, I became so engrossed in it that I borrowed and read books every day. Here, I developed an interest in writing novels and put in some effort. Finally, I wrote something called "Reunion in Spring (再逢春)" with my own hands. I wrote about four hundred pages in eleven days. It was quite audacious. So I took it and tried to sell the copyright. At that time, Kim Sang-gi (金相基), who was at the Sinmungwan, saw it and praised it, saying it was worth publishing, and introduced me to Min Jun-ho (閔濬鎬) of the Dongyang Seowon. Finally, I negotiated and sold the copyright for forty won. This was my first income. At that time, I was young and very worried about tuition and book expenses, so when I received forty won, I was very happy. So I gave half to my mother <48> and spent the other half myself. I didn't spend it on clothes or alcohol, but I bought seventeen won worth of books. This was my first income, and at the same time, I also became a solicitor for a certain life insurance company. In twenty-one days, I visited nearly three hundred people and got reservations for about two thousand won, including one thousand won from the deceased Cho Byeong-taek (趙秉澤) and three hundred won from someone in Seogang and five hundred won from someone else. In the end, I received thirty won as a commission from the company. This was my first professional income. I also gave half of the thirty won to my mother and bought books with the other half. I also bought a pair of shoes. Shoes were very cheap back then. They were three won a pair. At that time, a bolt of ramie cloth was five won, and a bag of rice was six won. It's already been seventeen years!

When Deducted, Twenty Won

閔泰瑗

I received my first income thirteen years ago, when I was twenty-one years old. To tell a brief old story, I graduated from Gyeongseong Gwanrip Higher Common School (京城官立高等普通學校) and immediately went to Japan with the intention of studying medicine, taking the exam at Okayama Medical School (岡山醫學). However, due to financial difficulties, I only took the exam and returned home that summer. How dissatisfied would I have been to go to study and not be able to? So, full of dissatisfaction, I came back to Seoul and tried to find a job here and there. Eventually, through someone's introduction, I got a job at the Maeil Shinbo (每日申報). At that time, I was young and had no experience in society, so I couldn't do external work and stayed inside, mainly doing foreign news translations. And I was in charge of religion or education. After a month of working, about twenty-three or four days, I received an envelope that they said was my salary. After deducting, it was twenty won. At that time, twenty won was a considerable amount of money, equivalent to about eighty won now. I didn't have any particular feelings. Of course, I was happy because it was my first income. But I also had a sense of dissatisfaction, thinking, "I was going to study, but what is this for a twenty-year-old?" So I wasn't that happy. As for how I spent it, since I wasn't living at home in Seoul at that time, I spent some on personal expenses and sent the rest home. And at that time, everything was much cheaper than it is now, so you could live comfortably with twenty won. A bag of rice was around four won. But now it's four or five times that, isn't it fifteen or even twenty won? Anyway, twenty won back then is like eighty won now. <49>

The End of November, Seven Years Ago

玄鎭健

Are you talking about when I received my first income? I can't remember very well. I think it was seven or six years ago, but anyway, I remember joining the Chosun Ilbo (朝鮮日報) as a reporter in the winter when I was twenty years old. That was my first job, and that income was my first income. It must have been the end of November. They gave me an envelope, and I thought it was my salary. When I opened it, there were six ten-won bills. It was quite a lot for an entry-level position. I was so happy. So I took that money and sent about twenty won or so to my hometown, bought about ten won worth of books, and had a good time with my friends in celebration. But I don't remember much else. Anyway, a reporter's life doesn't pay much. It's the same now as it was then. If I had worked in a government office or a bank for six or seven years, it wouldn't be like this... haha...

Thirty-Two Won and Fifty Jeon for Half a Month

韓基岳

Are you talking about my feelings when I received my first income? I don't have much to say. On March 16th, Taisho 9 (大正九年), I received 32 won and 50 jeon for half a month from the editorial department of the Dong-A Ilbo (東亞日報) in Hwadongjeon, and that was my first income. At that time, we were preparing for the launch of the Dong-A Ilbo, expecting it to be a month early.
So, with an average of 65 won per person, we were paid half a month's salary first on March 16th. Of course, I was happy because it was the first money I had earned myself.
However, it was right after the March 1st Movement (己未運動), and the ideological world was in turmoil, and it was also the early days of the newspaper, so I don't have a very happy memory of receiving a few won in the midst of the excitement of the environment. As for how I spent the money, I probably contributed it to the household expenses. At that time, the economy was more vibrant than it is now, so I didn't have much attachment to money. Unlike today, when the economic situation is tight, and we see our jobs as a means to eat, and we inevitably have to do so, back then, we didn't care much about income and were only busy making the newspaper. <50>

**Named Entities**

普成中學校	Poseong Middle School
慶應大學	Keiō Daigaku
金相基	Kim Sang-gi
新文館	Sinmungwan
閔濬鎬	Min Jun-ho
東洋書院	Dongyang Seowon
趙秉澤	Cho Byeong-taek
每日申報	Maeil Shinbo
京城官立高等普通學校	Kyŏngsŏng Kwanrip Kodŭng Pot'ong Hakkyo
岡山醫學	Okayama Igaku
玄鎭健	Hyŏn Chin-kŏn
朝鮮日報	Chosŏn Ilbo
韓基岳	Han Ki-ak
大正九年	Taishō 9
花洞前	Hwadongjeon
東亞日報	Tong-A Ilbo
己未運動	Kimi Undong



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	첫 收入밧든 때 이약이
필자	李相協, 閔泰瑗, 玄鎭健, 韓基岳
기사형태	회고·수기

첫 收入밧든 때 이약이
						李相協, 閔泰瑗, 玄鎭健, 韓基岳
세 冊보고 小說지여 生後 첫 收入 四十圓

李相協

내가 첫 수입을 바다들든 그때 말임닛가. 하두 오래닛가 막연하야 자세히 모르겟슴니다. 내가 십구세때닛가 십칠년 전인가 봄니다. 그때 나는 普成中學校를 졸업하고 법학교(今法學)에 입학하얏다가 그만두고 日本으로 가서 慶應大學에 입학시험을 치럿슴니다. 그러나 학비관계로 또한 이를 맛추지 못하고 곳 도라와 이렁저렁 놀게 되얏슴니다. 편모 侍下에 그저 놀기도 무엇하고 또는 공부 계속할 생각도 간절하야 엇더케든지 학비를 변출해 보려고 하다 못해 書冊費라도 어더 보랴고 각 방면으로 애를 써 보앗슴니다. 그러나 아모것도 할 것이 업섯슴니다. 그런데 그때 엇더케 된 까닭인지 나는 소설방면에 着味를 햇섯슴니다. 그러나 책이 업서서 심려를 하든 차인데 한번은 진고개로 해서 新町을 갓섯슴니다. 길ㅅ가에서 소설貰 주는 집을 발견하얏슴니다. 그래 드러가 몃 冊式 보기로 약정하고 삼전을 주고 한 책 어더다 보앗슴니다. 그 다음은 자미를 뭇처서 날마다 어더다 보앗슴니다. 여긔서 소설 쓰기에 일종 흥미를 가지고 다소 노력을 해 보앗슴니다. 마츰내 「再逢春」이란 것을 내 손으로 썻슴니다. 십일동안에 한 사백페지 썻슴니다. 대담한 즛이엿지으. 그래 그것을 써 가지고 어대 판권을 팔려고 주선해 보앗슴니다. 그때 마츰 新文館에 잇든 金相基군이 이것을 보고 출판할 만하다고 한참 칭찬을 하더니 곳 東洋書院 閔濬鎬씨에게 소개하야 주엇슴니다. 마츰내 사십원에 흥정을 해 가지고 판권을 파럿슴니다. 이것이 나의 첫 수입임니다. 당시는 나희도 어리고 또한 학비 及 書冊代를 몹시 걱정하든 때라 그런지 사십원을 턱 바드닛가 몹시도 기봅듸다. 그래 절반은 어머니께<48> 드리고 절반은 내가 썻슴니다. 의복이나 酒草나 그런 잡용은 업섯고 십칠원치의 書冊을 작만하얏슴니다. 이것이 나의 첫 수입이구요 동시에 또 말하랴면 그때 곳 나는 모생명보험회사 권유원이 되얏슴니다. 이십일일간 근 삼백명이나 방문하얏는데 예약자라고는 죽은 趙秉澤씨 천원하고 西江 누구 삼백원하고 또 누구 오백원하고 약 이천원 가량 예약을 어덧슴니다. 결국 회사로서 삼십원 수당을 바덧슴니다. 이것이 직업적 수입으로의 처음입니다. 그 삼십원도 바더서 절반은 어머니께 드리고 절반은 책을 삿슴니다. 구두도 한나 해 신구요.그때 구두야말로 뭇척 쌋슴니다. 한커레에 삼원이엿슴니다. 그때 모시 한 필에 오원이던가요. 쌀 한가마니엔 육원이구요. 발서 십칠년이 되야구려!

떼고보니 二十金

閔泰瑗

내가 첫 수입을 밧든 때는 십삼년전 이십일세때 임니다. 잠간 고전 니약이를 하면 京城官立高等普通學校를 졸업하고 곳 의학을 목적하고 日本에 가서 岡山醫學에 시험을 치럿슴니다. 그러나 학비곤란으로 해서 시험만 치르고 그해 녀름에 도라 나오게 되얏슴니다. 공부를 갓다가 못하고 니여 도라오게 되니 불평이 얼마나 하얏겟슴닛가. 그래 불평불만 중에서 다시 서울로 와서 이렁저렁 직업을 어더 보앗슴니다. 마츰 엇던이 소개로 每日申報에 드러가게 되얏슴니다. 그때 나는 나희도 어리고 사회에 대한 경력도 엄서서 外動은 못하고 내부에 잇서서 外報翻譯을 주로 하얏슴니다. 그리고 종교 혹은 교육방면을 마텃댓슴니다. 한달을 視務하고 나니 이십삼일인가 사일인가 하야 봉급이라고 봉투 한 개를 줍듸다. 뚝 떼고보니 이십원입듸다. 그때 이십원이면 상당한 돈이엿지오 지금 팔십원과 비등하겟슴니다. 감상은 별로 업섯슴니다. 첫 수입이닛가 毋論 깃벗섯지오. 그러나 공부를 하랴다 못하고 이십 청년에 이것이 뭐냐? 하는 불평이 잇서서 그닥 깃븐 생각도 업섯슴니다. 용도로 말하면그때는 서울서 가정생활을 안하는 때닛가 다소 용돈을 쓰고는 집으로 붓치고 마럿슴니다. 그리고 그때는 모든 물가가 지금과는 판이하게 싸닛가 이십원 가지고도 여간 살림은 넉넉키 하게 되얏슴니다. 쌀 한가마니에 사원내외 엿슴니다. 그런데 사배 오배가 되야 지금은 십오원 안이 이십원이나 하지 안슴닛가. 엇잿든 그때 이십원이 지금 팔십원임니다.<49>

七年前 十一月 末日

玄鎭健

내가 첫 수입을 바다들 때 말임닛가. 생각이 잘 안나는데요. 칠년 전인가 육년 전인가 어잿든 내가 스물살 나든 때 겨울에 朝鮮日報에 기자로 드러간 것이 생각남니다. 그것이 나의 첫 취직인 동시에 그때 그 수입이 첫 수입임니다. 卽 십일월 말일인가 봄니다. 封筒을 한 장 내 주기에 월급인가 보다 하고 도라서 뜨더 보닛가 십원자리 여섯장이 드러슴니다. 초급하고는 꽤 만엇슴니다. 엇지도 깃브든지요. 그래 그 돈을 가지고 나와 이십원인가 얼만가 시골집에 보내고 책 한 십원어치 사고 그리고 깃븐 김에 동무들과 가티 한잔 톡톡히 한듯 함니다. 그런데 뭐-별로 기억나는 것이 업는데요. 엇재든 기자생활이란 수입으로는 보잘 것이 업서요. 그때나 지금이나 마찬가짐니다. 관청이나 은행회사 방면에 육칠년 다녓스면 그러치는 안켓지오...하하....

半個月에 三十二圓半

韓基岳

첫 수입 당시의 감상 말임닛가. 별로 업는데요. 大正구년 삼월 십육일 花洞前 東亞日報 편집국에서 반개월분 32원 50전 바더 들든 때가 나로서는 첫 수입임니다. 그때 우리는 東亞日報가 창간전 一朔預期로 창립준비를 하얏슴니다.
그래 매인 평균 육십오원식으로 하야 삼월 십육일에 먼저 반개월분을 분급하얏슴니다. 생전 처음 自手로 수입시킨 돈이라 毋論 깃벗슴니다.
그러나 己未運動 직후이요 思想界가 흥분되얏고 또한 창간초닛가 환경의 환희에서 돈 몃분 바든 것은 그닥 깃븐 기억이 업섯슴니다. 그 돈의 용도로는 아마 가정살림에 보탠 듯 함니다. 그때는 지금보다 오히려 경제계가 활기를 띄엿든 때라 금전에 대하야는 그닥 애착미도 업섯슴니다. 오늘과 가티 경제상황이 궁박한 때에 잇서서는 물론 일한다는 것보다도 먹기 위하야서 직업적으로 알고 또는 필연적으로 그러케 아니 될 수가 업지만 그때만 하여도 오히려 넷일이라 도대체 수입방면에는 그닥 着念이 업섯고 다만 신문 만들기에만 분주하얏슬 뿐임니다.<50>
<48-50>