잡지명	별건곤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	(번역) 눈나라의 「사랑」 (Translation: "Love in the Land of Snow"; Article Type: Novel)
필자	李亮
기사형태	소설

Love in the Land of Snow
						李亮

It was in 1924 when I was in Russia. It was a story I saw one day in April in the newspaper "Gazetta Izvestia" published in Moscow.

Odessa is one of the largest commercial ports and naval bases in Russia.

It was not the fluttering ice floes of the north, but the spring of southern Russia (南露), where groups long weary of war and revolution began a life of desire along with sweet dreams of the Resurrection Festival (復活祭 - differing perceptions after the revolution) in the warm green of April.

Electricity that had been cut off began to flow, grain piled up in the threshing grounds, and when the bright electric lights in the village clubs and libraries where goblins used to play worked day and night, there were two young men and women coming out of the library, which was full day and night. Both were young people around twenty years old. The woman was beautiful at first glance. Her neck, plump flesh, and the curved beauty (曲線美) of her round face with eyes, nose, and mouth drawn so prettily were worth a fortune (千金價値), even if someone saw her from behind, not from the front (正面). But the man was slovenly, with a sweaty headband, a rubashka, and trousers with baggy knees, and his face was flat enough to make you sick, with small, close-set eyes and a crumpled face. However, the two were just undergoing the trials (試鍊) of "love."

Who would tell them these words!

- One is the child (子息) of accumulated resentment (鬱憤) and sorrowful tears in his heart, from ancestors who, since long ago, could not live without various underhanded dealings (下積-멋헤깔리움), brazenness (厚顏), brutality (凶暴), and shamelessness (破廉恥) under a false legal system and history! <146>

The other is a bud (꼿봉오리), a heap of blood (血堆積) of a worker, beautifully raised in greed, selfishness (利己), and honor, wow!

- Russia has brought such incongruity (不合) and inequality (不平) from a new battle, drawing profit-seeking commercial transactions (利慾的商業取引) into human relationships (人間的關係).

The story begins now.

These two people are a man named "Alnusa" and a maiden named "Naja." Both are members of the Communist Youth League with their registration (籍) in the Lenin Street district of Odessa.

If this love story were in this Joseon land, it would be a big event, but in Russia, it happens almost every day.

Every morning, how can Alnusa, a dockworker who goes out to the pier early and carries coal while shouting "Yare, gora," love Naja, the daughter of a navy rear admiral (海軍少將)?

However, after the revolution in Russia, there were not a few storms and hardships for a while, but now everywhere is busy with construction projects (建設事業) and building a new world. Moreover, the labor of young people is even greater. They are busy with library visits as much as they have time besides working for several hours during the day, and with various committees and report meetings almost every night. But not only these things, but also sexual issues (性的問題) commonly seen in youth - love - and they get to choose their beautiful partners according to their own hearts and ideals, without any intervention from any parents' dictatorship (獨斷) or any legal system (法制上). For this reason, interesting love stories often arise.

Right, this "Alnusa," despite his ugly face, boldly loves "Naja," the beautiful daughter of the navy rear admiral. Whenever there is something to do, Alnusa goes to the Youth Hall, or passes by Naja's door every morning, or if he doesn't see Naja even for a day, he has lovelorn thoughts as if he's going to catch an illness (질알병).

But Naja never loved the ugly, hateful, and dull-witted "Alnusa." Naja goes to school or comes to the hall, and handsome, eloquent, and pretty young men always gather around Naja. If Naja meets Alnusa and talks to him, it would only be as a normal greeting between members of the Youth League, or if there is an unavoidable meeting (會合) due to some matter (所事) of a meeting (會). Naja would never even dream of such a thing. Moreover, Naja unconsciously thinks, "What if my brother were as ugly as him? How much more embarrassed would this younger sister be!"

So sometimes, she sometimes wonders, "Can that Alnusa get married? If he does, what kind of girl will go to that Alnusa?" With such curiosity and sympathy, she sometimes glances at the pimply (여드럼 만히 난) "Alnusa." But Alnusa thinks, "Whether you know me or not, I feel like I live because of you." So whenever there is a meeting or an opportunity, he wants to sit next to Naja as much as possible and tries to see her face and hear her voice, which is a joy for Alnusa like the joy of an adventurer (冒險者) who has worked hard to discover a gold mine (金鑛), and his heart flutters (후닥닥). Indeed, Alnusa missed people. Moreover, he missed women.

If this beautiful (어업분) "Naja" were to see Alnusa here and say, "I love you," Alnusa might become crazy with joy. Until the age of twenty, no one had given Alnusa kind words or that thing from a woman. If there was anyone, it would only be the giggles and words of Alnusa's mother and younger sister in their bellies. But even that, compared to the looks of other women, would be 04.5 below zero (零下). In such a situation, how could it compare to Naja's beautiful face and the flames of longing!

Because it was such a pity, Alnusa sent love letters (戀文) several times, barely using AB, but there was no reply.

Thinking, "Maybe my letter was wrong," he bought a bottle of vodka (酒) for a young man among the workers who was good at reading newspapers and speaking well, and asked him to write a famous piece (名文) as if begging, but there was still no reply. So Alnusa waited for a day, two days - almost a month - and, looking for signs (동정), he saw that there was no sign, so he could not help but shake his head at the bold direct action (直接行動). So, unable to bear even two more hours until the end of work (終業), he made the lame excuse of "stomach ache" and, with a body that felt hot, returned early, washed his face with soap until it peeled off as if trying to make his curly hair neat, and spent nearly half an hour trying to part it neatly before running to the library.

That's where Naja is always reading books. Just as Alnusa entered the library, Naja came out. So <148> Alnusa rubbed his panting chest and accepted Naja's greeting of "Dorassuichi!" with his right hand outstretched. But Alnusa's heart, like a lump of fire, could not be satisfied with this ordinary greeting and handshake. No matter what, his heart longs to find that - the deepest palace of nectar (甘露深宮).

"Why don't you reply? Comrade (다와루씨)! I waited a lot."
......
"Did you receive that letter? Or didn't you?"

Alnusa suddenly asked in such a startled voice. Then Naja smiled,
"I read all the letters. Hohoho. Maybe there were ten or twenty of them? All done. Comrade (다와루씨)!" She answered like this and smiled sweetly. Alnusa thought to himself, "It's hateful of her to receive someone's letters and have such a cold attitude without a single reply, whether it's sweet or bitter," and Naja's smiling face looked very hateful. But even this hatred would be buried in another smile.

"Well, Alnusa! I also thought it was rude not to reply, but I thought it would be better to stay quiet than to send a rejection reply to a comrade who speaks like that and cause pain. And I also wanted to meet Comrade (다와루씨) and ask you something. Hohoho."

At Naja's words that she would meet him, Alnusa's trumpet nose smiled "Hitjuk."

"Naja! Naja. In fact, the reason I came back early from work now is to see you."

"Is that so, Comrade (다와루씨)!" Naja said, and together with Alnusa, they left the library door and went to the park, talking to each other.

"Naja! I am an ugly person. But what can I do with this burning heart? What do I do!"

"Well, Comrade (다와루씨), it is also a pity. But what can you do if 'love,' even more so than Buddha, is not an agreement (合致) between two people? It's a pity, isn't it?"

"Why! If only you accept me, that's all. Of course, I have an ugly face. But with these arms and this body, I can form a family with you where there is no worry about food and clothing."

"Well, forming a family isn't a big problem, so it's not that you have to have a family, but-"

"Still, isn't it true that what people in the world trust most is not the face or talent, but the heart, the sincerity (誠心)?"

"That's right. It's not like I'm disabled, so there's no need to receive state protection (國家保護), and I'll do my own work, but <149> a couple is based above all on love (사랑의 기조), so how can you allow something without love, how can you reply?"

"Then, Comrade (다와루씨), where do you find love? Is it the face, is it knowledge?"

"Well, it's not that the face doesn't matter at all, and it's not that knowledge doesn't matter at all, but what can I do if I just don't like Comrade (다와루씨)?" At the words "what can I do if I just don't like," Alnusa's face turned red, and his mouth trembled like he had tetanus (痙攣症).

"So, Comrade (다와루씨) just doesn't like me. This is a word to prevent (防止) me."
......
"What is the reason for just not liking me? Is it the face, or the heart, or the actions?"

Alnusa always brings up his face whenever he speaks, because his ugly face is a key point.

But Naja secretly thought that Alnusa's face, more than his heart, status (地位), or actions, was the most unlovable and disliked condition. But Naja, who is very smart, would never say such words in this place.

"I can't say, 'You have an ugly face, so you can't be someone I love.'" And Naja tilted her head as if it were difficult to answer, and said again.

"Well, that is, whether people look at the face or the heart, it's up to them, but in my current situation, not only is it out of the question to allow it, but I don't have even a fingernail's worth of desire to marry without love (사랑업는 시집갈 마음)." And Naja clearly shut it off. Then, Alnusa, in a hurried attitude,

"Then, Comrade (다와루씨) is saying that there is no love for me! You're saying it's not possible!"

"Hohoho. That's right." Naja stretched as if this place was boring. Alnusa, as if he had discovered something, said with threatening eyes shining.

"Then, the problem is very simple. Comrade (다와루씨)! I will give up (斷念), so let's put the love problem aside and listen to my request! Request!"

"What request?" Naja was surprised. Her eyes widened.

"That request. That request is for a ten-minute! five-minute! request of sexual (性) favor." Alnusa trembled. His eyes seemed to shoot out lightning.

Naja was so angry that her face turned blue.

"Comrade (다와루씨)! What, what rude words are those? What are you saying?"

"Why, what's rude?"

"What else could it be but rude!"

"It's not rude. Even if you say you can't love me, what's wrong with not granting that request?" <150>

"I can't! I can't!"
......
"I didn't know you were that kind of person, Comrade (다와루씨)." Naja was so upset by the unexpected incident that tears welled up in her eyes, as if she was about to cry.

"Then, you have a bourgeois psychology (心理)! You are a comrade who still has her father's heart (아버지 속)! You are not a member of the Communist Youth League!" Alnusa said, rushing in with anger. Naja was also so angry at the words "bourgeois psychology (心理)" that her voice was loud and trembling, as if she was about to cry.

"So, you say such insulting words because I don't love you. Hey, Alnusa!"
......
"I will report your rudeness to the Executive Committee (執行委員會) tomorrow."

"Report?"-

"Then, what is that if not bourgeois psychology? Listen to me. If Comrade (다와루씨) has delicious snacks or food, will you give it to someone who comes and asks for it? Or will you not give it?"
......
"If you don't give it, what is that if not bourgeois possessiveness (所有欲)? Answer me."

Alnusa's attitude was oratorical (演說式) and like a lion's roar (獅子吼).

"That is not right. You must not confuse chastity (貞操) with objects (物件). And it is also harmful to hygiene (衛生上)."

"Oh, chastity is a woman's life ( 목슴), her whole body (全身)."

"Comrade (다와루씨)! Comrade (다와루씨)! It is a waste to say that you are a Communist youth. Why! The words 'chastity (貞操)' is a woman's whole body or life are words made up by those bourgeois. People who are poor in reason would never think that way. If they thought about it, look at the Americans or British society. They only have the thought, but in reality, they are falsely in a state of prostitution (賣淫狀態)."
......
"Look here. In this world, speaking of a woman's chastity or saying that chastity is a woman's life are words made up by those bourgeois. Why? - The most beautiful and lovely woman in this world, either as a wife or as a concubine, they keep two, three, or even five or six people to fill themselves alone. That is their beautiful name (美名), their lie (虛僞), their excuse (口實), is there anything else? If it is harmful to hygiene (衛生), as you say, I don't know?"
......<151>
......
"Then, I'll go get a doctor's certificate (醫師診斷書) now! A health certificate!"

And in Alnusa's head, the unfulfilled desire was rapidly turning like a slideshow, with one scene after another, taking off clothes, touching flesh, and the soft, sweet smell of flesh floating on the screen (스쿠리-ㄴ). So, without waiting for Naja's answer, Alnusa stood up from the bench with the thought of an express train "to the doctor's house!" Naja also followed to escape in this gap.

"It won't work. Wait here until I come."

And he grabbed the arm of Naja, who stood up.

"Why? I'm going home too."

"I can't grant that request. Even if it's an order to leave the party (出黨의 命令) right away, not a certificate!"

Alnusa's chest was pounding like a hammer. The teeth of a wolf hungry for meat do not choose a place. What about a night park (夜公園) surrounded by mixed forests (雜林)?! Alnusa's crooked arms, like stakes, embraced Naja's thin waist tightly, as if he would pull even the earth (地球) with his warm breath. "Help! Save a person!"

Naja was so surprised that she screamed. People coming and going on the park road gathered, one, two, over ten people. Among them were several members of the Youth League.

"What's going on?"

"By the way, Alnusa! What's going on?"

"Comrade (다와루씨) Naja! What's going on."

Many people asked this and that with this mouth and that mouth. But the two of them stood silently, just panting.

"Well! Since you two are members of our Youth League, you have an obligation to be investigated tomorrow night by the Executive Committee or tonight by the investigation committee about what happened. Let our committee decide what the truth is." One Youth League member, who noticed what had happened here, said this. Other members also expressed their agreement. They dragged the reluctant Alnusa and went home.

Alnusa came home, but there was no way he could have an appetite, and there was no reason for him to fall asleep.

Without even hearing his mother's words to "eat dinner," he sat blankly and spent that night.

The next morning, after the investigator visited the houses of "Naja" and "Alnusa," Alnusa thought that the next day was so tedious that the sun that rose in the east seemed to go back to the east, and the meeting that opened at seven o'clock at night was very tedious. It was Alnusa's naive theory (持論) that hope and faith (信念) that a victory decision (勝利決定) would surely come to him. Of course, Naja also spent that night in agony to some extent.

When the sound of the flour mill's (製粉所) noon whistle "Ttyo-" was heard, waiting for one hour, two hours, was very painful. Unable to wait, Alnusa went to the Youth Hall before four o'clock. Alnusa's heart is impatient. His chest "jjori jjori" as if waiting for a trial day, like a prisoner who has committed a great crime.

People gathered while Alnusa was waiting for the time to come and was about to go crazy (發狂). Among them, Naja also came.

"Well! Let's open the meeting." At the declaration of the temporary chairman, Alnusa and Naja, under the guidance (引導) of a member, sat side by side in seats close to the executive committee seat. For some reason, the two avoided each other's eyes. But the eyes of all the members were focused on one place. As usual, when a new executive committee was elected, the newly elected chairman stood up in a solemn attitude and raised his hand to tell Alnusa and Naja to stand up.

The two stood up. Other members also stood up accordingly. The chairman said in a solemn voice,

"Well! Of course, this incident tonight will be disclosed to you, but our executive committee, based on the already investigated report, only says 'love' incident, under the reason of respecting the opinions of the two, and will not say more about the content.

"Well! Everyone, sit down."

The chairman continued to speak again.

"Alu-ssi! You two! Listen to my words. Loving is absolute (絶對), and not being able to love is also absolute. But if love arises between the two of you and you have a child, what will you do! Since neither of you has an economic base (經濟的基礎) yet, if you have a child, you will not have any responsibility for raising them (何等養育責任), but the state (國家) cannot help but raise that child. As you both know well, does today's Russian Republic have enough nurseries (褓母園)? Are the orphanages (養兒院) fully equipped (完備)? As you all know, we are under construction. We are still fighting. Moreover, you two are the founders of the new history called the Communist Youth. Until this great project prospers in this world, our individual demands (各自要求) cannot be fulfilled as we please. We are in a position where we cannot help but sacrifice our thoughts and demands for this great project until a certain date. If the childcare costs of a child coming from the two of you could be subsidized even a little and benefit our project, how happy would that be? This is our mission and the 'path' taught by Comrade Lenin.

"Is that so? Or isn't it?" The chairman's tone (語調) was solemn. The hall (場內) was tense. The two stood blankly, thinking that some kind of decision would be made, then unconsciously

"That's right," they rushed at each other and replaced Alnusa's "love" with a powerful embrace. The sound of applause filled the hall.

The International anthem (인테루나소날 노래) sung passionately from the mouths of the members leaving the hall shook the entire city of Odessa. -(End)-<153>

**Named Entities**

Газетта Известия	Gazetta Izvestia
Одесса	Odessa
Алнуса	Alnusa
Ная	Naja
야레, 고라	Yare, gora
Ленинская	Leninskaya



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제4호
발행일	1927년 02월 01일
기사제목	(번역) 눈나라의 「사랑」
필자	李亮
기사형태	소설

(번역) 눈나라의 「사랑」
						李亮
일천구백이십사년, 내가 로서아에 잇슬때다. 사월 그 어느날인가 모스코바에서 발행하는 까젯다 이스베지야서 본 이야기다.
오뎃사라 하면, 로시아에서 일, 이의 큰 상항이요 군항지(軍港地)다.
사나운 수리개가, 너펄거리고 잇는 북족의 어름벌판이 아니요, 오래 전쟁과 혁명에 시달리던 무리들이 땃듯한 사월 신록(新綠)에 부활제(復活祭-혁명후 인식이 다름) 단 꿈과 아울러 탐욕의 생활(貪慾의 生活)을 시작한 남로(南露)의 봄이엿다.
끈치엿던 뎐류(電流)가 흐르고, 타곡장(打穀場)에 곡물(穀物)이 싸희고, 둑개비가 놀던 촌구락부와 도서관 안에 황황(煌煌)한 뎐등이 밤낫으로 일하던 그때, 밤이나 낫이나 긋득긋득찬 도서관에서 나오는 두 청년 남녀가 잇서다. 둘이 다 이십전후의 청년들이엿다. 녀자는 얼는 보아도 어엽분 녀자이엿다. 그의 목이며, 토실토실한 살끼며, 그 동그스럼한 얼골에 눈, 코, 입, 곱게곱게 그리여낸 곡선미(曲線美)는 정면(正面)이 아니라 누가 후면(後面)으로 본다 하여도 천금의 가치(千金價値)가 잇섯다. 그러나 그 남자는 땀밴, 루바-시가에 무릅나온 네루마지의 꼴이 최최하기 끗업는데다가, 그 얼골은 구토할 만치 넙적코, 귀밀눈, 찌그러진 얼골의 소유자이엿다. 그러나 두 사람은 방금 『사랑』의 시련(試鍊)을 밧고 잇는 자리다.
누가 그 두 사람을 가르처 이런 말을 하랴!.
-한 사람은 오래 그릇된 법측과 역사에 그 조상때부터 <146> 여러 가지의 하적(下積-멋헤깔리움)과 후안(厚顔)과 흉포(凶暴)와 파염치(破廉恥)가 아니면, 도모지 살어갈 수 업는, 그 가슴의 울분(鬱憤)과, 서러운 눈물의 자식(子息)!
또 한사람은, 욕심과, 리긔(利己)와, 명예 속에서 곱게 자라난 로동자의 피퇴적(血堆積), 그 꼿봉오리, 와자랑!
-로시아는, 이런 불합(不合)과 이런 불평(不平)을 새싸홈에서, 리욕적 상업 취인(利慾的商業取引)을 인간적관게(人間的關係)에 끄러내인 것이다.
이야기는 지금부터, 시작함니다.
이 두사람은, 『알누사』라는 남자와 『나자』라는 처녀임니다. 둘이 다 오뎃사市 레닌쓰가야街구역에 적(籍)을 둔 공산청년회원임니다.
이 연애의 이야기가 이 朝鮮땅 가트면 큰 변이 날 이야기임니다마는 저 로시야에는 매일 행사나 다름엄시 일어나는 일이외다.
매일 아츰마다, 일즉이 배 닷는 부두에 나가서 석탄(石炭)섬을 걸머지고 『야레, 고라』소리를 치며, 일하는 인부아해가 엇더케 저 해군소장(海軍少將)의 딸, 『나자』를 사랑하겟슴니까?
그러나 로서아는 혁명이 일어나자 얼마동안 적지안은 풍파와 괴로움이 잇섯스나 지금은 어대던지 건설사업(建設事業)과 새 세상을 짓노라고 분주함니다. 더욱, 젊은 사람들이 로력이 더 큼니다. 그들에게는, 낫에 몃시동안 로동외에 시간잇는대로 도서관 출입과, 매일밤 잇다십히 무슨 위원회, 무슨 보고회-그들의 생할은 참말 분주하외다. 그러나 이러한 일뿐이 아니고, 젊어서 흔히 볼 수 잇는 성적문뎨(性的問題)-연애의, 열매가 어느 부모의 독단(獨斷)이거나 엇더한 법제상(法制上) 아모 간섬이 업시 그들 마음대로, 리상대로, 그 꼿다운 배우들을 구하게 됨니다. 그 까닭에 각금 가다가 자미스러운 연애이야기가 만히 생김니다.
바로 이 『알누사』가 그러한 자긔의 못난 얼골이면서도 대담히 그 어엽분 해군소장의 딸 『나자』를 사랑함니다. 알누사는 무슨 일이 잇서 청년회관으로 가나, 매일 아츰 『나자』의 문 압흘 지나거나, 하로라도 『나자』를 보지 못하면, 질알병이 날 듯 상사(相思)의 어엽분 생각을 품고 잇섯슴니다.
그러나 『나자』는 못나고, 미웁고, 멍텅이가튼 『알누사』를 사랑한 일이 업섯슴니다. 『나자』는 학교로 가나 회관으로 오나, 어대던지 얼골 잘나고, 말 잘하고, 어염분 말숙한 청년들이, 만히 『나자』의 주위(周圍)에 모히는 까닭이외다. 만약에 『나자』가 『알누사』를 맛나게 되고, 말하거 된다면, 그것은 한 청년회원의 보통신사나, 그러치 안으면, 모슨 모힘(會) 소사(所事)로 피치못할 회합(會合<147>)이 잇섯슬 따름이외다. 『나자』야 꿈인들 그러한 일을 생각할 일이 업섯슬 것이외다. 더욱, 『나자』의 생각에는 『우리 오라버니가 저러케 못낫다면, 엇지 하얏슬가? 이 동생까지 얼마나 붓그러울 일이랴!』 이런 생각이 무의식적으로 생각하엿슬 것이외다.
그래서 어느 때에는, 각금 『저 알누사도 장가를 갈 수 잇슬가? 만약에 간다면, 엇더한 겨집애가 저 알누사에게 갈 것인고?』 이러한 호기심과 동정이 떠 올나서 각금 그 여드럼 만히 난 『알누사』를 흘터본 일이 잇섯슴니다. 그러나 『알누사』는 『네야 엇더케 나를 알던지, 나는 네 때문에 살어 가는 것 갓다고』생각햇슴니다. 그래서 무슨 모임이 잇거나 무슨 긔회가 생기거나, 잇슬때마다, 할 수 잇는대로 『나자』의 겻테 안기를 원하고 애써 왓스며, 그이의 얼골을 보고, 그이의 말소리를 들는 것이 『알누사』에게는 애써 금광(金鑛)을 발견한 모험자(冒險者)의 깃붐이요 『후닥닥』거리는 가슴이엿슴니다. 참말, 『알누사』는 사람이 그리웟슴니다. 더욱, 녀자가 그리웟슴니다.
만약에 이 어업분 『나사』가 이 자리에서 『알누사』를 보고,
『나는 당신을 사랑함니다』 한다듸만 하엿드면 『알누사』는 넘우도 깃버서 미친사람이 되엿슬지도 모름니다. 나희 이십이 다 되도록 『알누사』에게 부드러운 말과, 녀자의 그-무엇을 준 사람은 하나도 업섯슴니다. 만약에 잇다면, 그것은 오직, 『알누사』의 어머니와 누의동생이 각금 가다가 배두른 자리에 『흐득』거린 우슴과 말이 잇설슬 것이외다. 그러나 그것도 다른 녀자의 용모에 비교한다면, 아주 령하(零下)의 O4·5일 것이외다. 이러케 된 처지에, 『나자』의 어엽분 얼골이며 그 상사의 불꼿이겟슴니까!
이러케 딱한 일임으로 알누사는 겨우 쓰는 AB로 여러번, 연문(戀文)을 보냇스나 아모 회답이 업섯슴니다.
『아마, 내 편지가 잘못 되여서, 그러한 것인가』하고 그 다음에는 그 일군동무들 가운대서 신문 잘 보고, 말 잘하는 청년에게 워드까(酒)한 병을 사주고, 빌다십히 써보낸 명문(名文)까지도 아모 회답이 업섯슴니다. 그래서 알누사는 하로, 이틀-근 달포를 두고 기다리고, 동정을 보아야, 아모 긔척이 업는 까닭에 그는 할 수 업시 대담한 직접행동(直接行動)이 그 머리를 흔드러 노앗슴니다. 그래서 이제 두시간만 더 잇스면 종업(終業)될 것도 참지 못하고, 『배가 압푸다』는 헷핑계를 하고 확근확근 다는 몸으로, 일즉 도라와서, 얼골이 버서지다 십히 비누세수를 하고 그 고수머리를 맵시잇게 가르노라고, 근 반시간이나 애를 쓰다가, 도서관으로 뛰여 갓슴니다.
그 곳에는 『나자』가 늘 책을 보고 잇는 까닭이외다. 막 알누사가 도서관을 드러서자, 『나자』가 나옴니다. 그래서 <148> 알누사는, 헐덕거리는 가슴을 문지르며, 오른손을 내미터 『도라스위치!』하는 나자의 인사를 바덧슴니다. 그러나 알누사의 불덩어리가튼 가슴이야, 이 보통인사와 악수에 만족할 리가 업슴니다. 그는 아모리하여도 저-감로의 심궁(甘露深宮)을 찻기에 애타는 가슴이외다.
『웨, 회답을 아니해 주심니까? 다와루씨! 나는 퍽 기라렷슴니다.』
......
『그 편지를 바덧슴니까? 못바덧슴니까?』
알누사는 급작히 이러케 겁찬 소리로 무러 보앗슴니다. 그리자 나자도 방그레 우스며,
「편지는 다 보앗슴니다. 호호호 아마 그것이 열녁장이지요? 한다쓰와 둘! 다와루씨!』 이러케 대답을 하고, 싱글싱글 우섯슴니다. 알누사는 속으로 『남의 편지를 밧고도, 쓰다달다, 아모 회답 한 장 업시 냉냉(冷冷)한 태도를 가지는 것은 얄미운 년』이라고, 그 빙글빙글 웃는 나자의 태도가 보기에 무척 얄미웟슴니다. 그러나 이 미움도 또 한번 엇더한 우슴에 사러지고 말것이외다.
『그런데요, 알누사! 나도 회답을 안 쓰는 것이 미안하다고, 생각을 하면서도, 그처럼 말슴 하시는 동무에게 그저거절의 회답을 보내서 고통을 주는 것보다, 그저 가만히 있는 것이 상책이라고 생각한 것이지요. 그러구 나도 다와루씨를 맛나서 엿줄 말슴이 잇섯슴니다. 호호호」
『나자』가 한번 차저 준다는 말에 알누사도 『힛죽」그 나팔코에 우슴이 떠 올랏슴니다.
『나자! 나자. 참말인즉 내가 지금 일터에서 일즉 도라온 것도 당신을 뵈울려고 온 것이요.』
『그럿슴니까. 다와루씨!』하고 나자는 알누사와 함께 도서관 문을 나와서 이야기를 주고 바드며, 공원으로 갓슴니다.
『나자! 나는 못난 사람이외다. 그러나 이 뜨거운 가슴을 엇지 함니까? 엇지해요!』
『글세요. 다와루씨 일도 딱함니다. 그러나 「사랑」이란 것이 더욱 부처라는 것이 두 사람 사이의 합치(合致)가 아니면, 엇지 함니까. 참말 딱한 일이 아니얘요.』
「웨요! 당신만 드러주신다면, 그만이 안임니까. 물론 내가 못날 얼골이지요. 그러나, 이 팔둑, 이 몸덩이면 당신과 함께 먹을 것, 입을 것, 아모 걱정업는 가정을 이루겟지요.
『글세 가정 이루는 것이 큰 문뎨가 아니니까, 가정이 잇서야 된다는 것이 아니지마는-』
『그래도, 세상사람이란 것은, 얼골이나 재조보다, 그 마음, 그 성심(誠心)이 가장 이 세상에 미들 것이 안임니까?』
『그것이야 그러치요. 내 몸도 병신이 안인이상 국가보호(國家保護)를 바들 일이 업고 이 몸의 일은 내가 할 일이지마는, <149> 부부라는 것은, 무엇보다도 사랑의 기조(基調)이니까, 사랑이 업는 허락을 엇지해요, 회답을 엇지함니까.』
『그러면, 다와루씨는, 사랑을 어대서 구합니까? 얼골입니까, 지식임니까?』
「그것이야 얼골도 관게업고, 지식도 관게업다는 것이 전혀 아니지마는, 그저, 다와루씨가 실흔 것을 엇더케 해요』 그저, 실흔 것을 엇더케해요 하는 말에 알누사는 낫이 학근다러지고, 입은 경란증(痙攣症)모양으로 부르르 떨리엿다.
『그럼언요, 다와루씨는, 이 알누사가, 그저 슬타는 것이지요. 이것이 나를 방지(防止)하는 말이지요.』
......
『그저 슬타는 리유가 어대 잇슴니까. 그 얼골임니까, 또는 그 마음입니까, 행동임니까?』
알누사는 언제나 그 못난 자긔의 얼골이 키여, 무슨 말을 하게되면, 그 얼골타령이 나온다.
그러나 나자는 속으로, 알누사의 마음이나, 지위(地位)나, 행동보다도 그 얼골이, 제일 『사랑』못할 조건이요 실헛던 것이엿다. 그러나 똑똑하기 끗이 업는 나자가 이 자리에 이러한 말을 할 일이 만무하다.
『너는 얼골이 미우니까, 내가 사랑할 사람이 못된다」고 할 수는 업는 일이다. 그러고, 나자는 대답하기가 괴로운 듯이 고개를 갸웃둥거리며, 또 이러케 말햇다.
『그, 그것이야, 사람을 따라 얼골을 보거나 그 마음을 보거나, 각각 자유겟지요마는, 내 지금 처지로는 허락은 고사하고, 사랑업는 시집갈 마음은, 손톱만치도 업슴니다.』 하고 나자는 딱, 자버띄엿슴니다. 그리자, 알누사는 초급(焦急)한 태도로,
『그러면, 다와루씨가 내에게 사랑이 업다는 말이지요! 안된다는 말이요!』
『호호호 그럿치요.』 이 자리가 지루하다는 듯이 나자는 기지개를 켯다. 알누사는, 무엇을 발견한 듯이 빗나는 위협의 눈으로 이러케 말햇다.
『그럿타면, 문뎨는 아주 단순함니다. 다와루씨! 나는 단렴(斷念)할 터이니, 사랑문뎨는, 둘재로 하고, 나의 요구를 드러주시오! 요구요!』
『그 요구라니요?』 나자는 놀냇다. 눈은 둥그래젓다.
『그 요구 말이지요. 그 요구는 십분! 오분! 동안 성의(性)의 요구임니다.』알누사는 덜덜 떠럿다. 그이의 눈은 번개불이 쏘아 나오는 듯 하엿다.
나자는 넘우도 분해서 낫빗이 파랏케 되엿다.
『다와루씨! 그, 그것 무슨 무례한 말슴이요? 그 무슨 말이요.』
『웨요, 무엇이 무례예요』
『무례가 아니고 무엇이요!』
『무례가 아니지요. 당신 뜻대로 사랑은 못한다 하여도 그 요구야 못 드러줄 것이 무엇잇소?』<150>
『못해요! 못해요!』
......
『다와루씨가 그런 사람인줄 나는 몰낫소.』 나자는 넘우도 의외인 일에 분해서 울음이 날 듯 눈물이 눈구네에 핑그르-ㅅ도랏다.
『그럿타면, 당신은 불조아 심리(心理)요. 그냥, 아버지 속을 그대로 가지고 잇는 동무요! 공산청년회원은 아니요!』 알누사는 열이 나서 밧작 달려들며 말햇다. 나자도 『뿔조아 심리(心理)란 말에 넘우도 분해서 울 듯이 말소리가 크고도, 떨리엿다.
『그래, 사랑 아니 한다구, 그런 모욕의 말을 해요. 여보 알누사!』
......
『나는 래일 집행위원회(執行委員會)에 당신의 무리를 보고하겟소』
『보고얘요』-
『그러면, 그것이 뿔조아심리가 아니고 무엇이요? 내 말을 드르시오. 만약에 다와루씨가, 맛나는 과자나 음식을 가젓슬 때, 누가 와서 그것을 좀 달라면 줄 터이요? 아니 줄터이요?』
......
『만약에 아니 준다면 그것이 뿔조아소유욕(所有欲)이 아니고, 무엇이요. 어듸 대답하시오』
알누사의 태도는 연설식(演說式)이며, 사자효(獅子吼)이엿다.
『그것은 안되는 말이요. 정조(貞操)와 물건(物件)을 혼동(混同)해서는 안되는 일이요. 그러고, 더욱 위생상(衛生上)에 해로운 것이니까.』
『어욱 정조는 녀자의 목슴이요, 전신(全身)이니까』
『다와루씨! 다와루씨! 동무는 공산청년이란 말이 앗가우오. 웨! 『정조』라는 것이 녀자의 전신이라거나, 생명이란 말은 저 뿔조아들이 지어낸 말이요. 어대 이성상에 가난(貧)한 사람들이 그러케 생각할 일이 업소. 만약, 생각은 하엿더래도, 저 아머리카 사람이나 영국사회를 보시오. 생각만 가지고, 사실은 헛되게, 매음상태(賣淫狀態)에 잇지요.』
......
『자-보시지요. 이 세상에 녀자의 정조를 말하거나, 정조는 녀자의 목슴이라고 하는 것은 저 뿔조아들이 지어낸 말이지요. 웨?-이 세상에 가장 어엽부고 고흔 녀자를, 혹은 처로 혹은 첩으로, 두사람, 세사람 심지어 오륙명식 두고 저들이 혼자-을 채우고 잇는, 저들 미명(美名)이요, 허위(虛僞)요, 구실(口實)이지, 다른 것이 잇답듸까? 만약 그것이 동무 말처럼, 위생(衛生)에 해롭다면 모르거니와?』
......<151>
......
『그럿타면, 내가 지금가서 의사진단서(醫師診斷書)를 가지고 오리다! 건강의 진단서를!』
그러고, 알누사의 머리에는 아직, 맛보지 못한, 그 욕구의 -은 급격이(急激) 도라가는 활동사진처럼, 일장면(一場面)으로 일장면에, 의복을 벗자, 살을 대이자, 부드럽고, 달큼한 살냄새가 스쿠리-ㄴ우에 떠도랏다. 그래서 알누사는 나자의 대답도 업시, 『의사의 집으로! 급행열차의 생각을 가지고』 벤찌우에서 웃득 일어섯다. 나자도 이 틈을 타서 도망칠려고 따라섯다.
『안되는 일이요. 내가 올 때까지 이곳에 기다리시오』
하고 일어선 나자의 팔을 꽉 붓드럿다.
『웨요. 나도 집에 가요』
『나는 그 요구를 못드러요. 진단서가 아니라, 금방 출당의 명령(出黨의 命令)이라도!』
알누사의 가슴은 방맹이질을 햇다. 고기에 주린, 이리의 어금니는, 장소(場所)를 가지리 안는 법(法)이다. 더욱 잡림(雜林)이 둘러싼 밤공원(夜公園)이랴?! 알누사의 말둑가티 꾸부러진 두 팔은 더운 입김과 아울러 지구(地球)라도, 자바끌 듯, 나자의 가는 허리를 꽉, 끄러 안엇다. 『이것보! 사람 살리우!』
나자는 넘우도 놀내서 비명(悲鳴)을 질넛다. 공원겻길로 래왕하던 사람들이 하나, 둘, 십여 명이 모혀드럿다. 그 중에 청년회원도 몃사람 잇섯다.
『이것이 웬 일이요?』
『그런데, 알누사! 웬일인가?』
『다와루씨 나자! 무슨 일이요.』
여러 사람은 이 입으로 저 입으로 이러케 무러 보앗다. 그러나 두 사람은 아모 말 업시 선채로 씩씩거리기만 햇다.
『자! 두 분은 우리 청년회원이니, 엇지 된 세음인지 내일밤 집행위원회나 오늘밤 조사위원에게 조사바들 의무가 잇소. 그 가부가 엇지된 사실인지 우리 위원회에서 결정을 지읍시다.』 이 자리가 엇더케 된 것을 눈치 채운 한 청년회원은 이러케 말햇다. 다른 회원들도 동의를 표햇다. 잘 것지 안는 알누사를 들미리르 해 가지고 각히 집으로 도라갓다.
알누사는 집으로 왓스나, 밥맛이 잇슬 일이 만무하고 잠이 올 까닭이 업다.
어머니가 『저녁 먹으라』는 말도 못 드른체, 우두커니 안저서 그날밤을 새웟다.
그 이튼날 아츰 조사위원이 『나자』와 『알누사』의 집을 방문한 후, 알누사의 생각에는, 그 이튼날이 엇지도 지루한지 동쪽으로 뜬 해가 도로 동쪽으로 가는 듯 밤 일곱시에 열일 위원회가 퍽도 지루햇다. 그것은, 알누사의 순박한 지론(持論)이 자긔에게 반드시 승리의 결정(勝利決定)이 오리라는 희망과 신렴(信念)이엿다. 물론 나자도 <152> 어느 한도까지는 고민으로 그날밤을 지냇슬 것이다.
제분소(製粉所)의 오정고등소리가 『뚸-』들리자, 한시, 두시, 기다리기가 퍽도 괴로웟다. 기다리다 못해, 알누사는 넉뎜도 못되여서 청년회관으로 갓다. 알누사의 마음은 조급하다. 마치 큰 죄를 범한 죄수모양으로 재판날이 기달키우는 듯 가슴이 『쪼리쪼리』햇다.
알누사가 시간되기를 기다리다 못해 발광이 날 지경(地境)에 사람들이 모히여 드럿다. 그 가운데 나자도 왓다.
『자! 개회합시다.』 림시의장의 선언이 잇자, 어느 위원의 인도(引導)로 알누사와 나자는, 집행위원석에서 갓가운 자리에 나란이 안젓다. 웬일인지, 두 사람은 서로 눈을 피햇다. 그러나 여러 회원의 눈은 다 한데로 쏠리엿다. 다른 때와 가티 새로 집행위원회가 선거되자, 새로 된 의장은 엄숙한 태도로 일어서서 알누사와, 나자를 일어서라고, 손을 드럿다.
두 사람은 일어섯다. 다른 회원들도 따라서 일어섯다. 의장은 엄숙한 말로,
『자! 오늘밤 이 사건은 물론 공개하여 드릴 일임니다마는 우리 집행위원회에서는, 이미 조사된 보고에 의지하여, 두분의 의견을 존중히 녁이는 리유아래에서, 오직 『연애』사건이라는, 말만 하고, 그 내용은 더 말치 안켓슴니다.
『자! 여러분은 안즈시오』
의장은 또 다시 이어서 말한다.
『알루씨! 두분! 내의 말을 드르시오. 사랑하자는 것도 절대(絶對)요, 사랑 못하겟다는 것도 절대임니다. 그러나 만약에 두분 새에 사랑이 생기여서,  어린 것을 나케 된다며는 엇지 함니까! 어느 분이나 다 아직, 경제적 긔초(經濟的基礎)가 업는 이상, 만약 자식을 낫는다면, 두분에게는, 하등 양육의 책임(何等養育責任)이 업지요마는, 국가(國家)로서는, 그 아희를 양육 아니할 수 업는 것이지요. 두분이 잘 아시듯 오늘 로시아공화국이, 어대 보모원(褓母園)이 충분함니까?  양아원(養兒院)이 완비(完備)되엿슴니까? 여러분이 다 아다십히 우리는 건설중임니다. 아직, 싸홈 중임니다. 더욱, 두분은 공산청년이라는 새 역사의 창설자임니다. 아직, 이 큰 사업이 이 텬지에 왕성되기 전에는 우리의 각자요구(各自要求)가 마음대로 못됨니다. 우리는 저 큰 사업을 위해 어느 시일까지 우리의 생각과 요구를 희생(犧牲)아니할 수 업는 처지외다. 만약, 두분 가운데서 나오는 자식의 양육비가 얼마라도 보조가 되여서 우리 사업에 리익이 된다면, 얼마나 깃거운 일이겟슴니까? 이것이야말로 우리의 임무요 저 례닌 동무가 가르친 『길』이외다.
『그럿슴니까? 아니 그럿슴니까? 의장의 어조(語調)는 엄숙하엿다. 장내(場內)는 긴장되엿다. 두사람은 각히 무슨 결정이 나리리라 하고 무심히 섯다가, 무의식적(無意識的)으로
『그럿슴니다』하고 와락 달려드러 힘 잇는 포옹으로 알누사의 『사랑』을 대신 하엿다. 장내는 손벽치는 파도소리가 일엇다.
회문(會門)을 나오는 회원들의 입에서는 열중(熱中)된 인테루나소날 노래가 전 오뎃사 시가를 흔드럿다.-(끗)-<153>
<146-153>