Magazine Title: 개벽 제49호
Publication Date: 1924년 07월 01일
Article Title: 夏休 中 歸鄕하는 學生 諸君에게 (To the Students Returning Home During Summer Vacation)
Author: 李敦化 (Yi Ton-hwa), OOO, 起田 (Ki-jŏn), 朴達成 (Pak Tal-sŏng), 車相瓚 (Ch'a Sang-ch'an), 方定煥 (Pang Chŏng-hwan), 李鍾麟 (Yi Chong-nin), 趙斗燮 (Cho Tu-sŏp), 金泰壎 (Kim T'ae-hun)
Article Type: 문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

To the Students Returning Home During Summer Vacation

The annual summer vacation designated for students has come around again. Students in general have briefly bid farewell to the school gates and are heading off to their respective destinations. Whether to their hometowns, the mountains, or the seaside, they are each returning according to their desires.

Should one return to one's hometown (鄕里) to visit parents (覲親)? Should one travel to a secluded place (別境) for self-cultivation? Or else, should one remain where one's school register (學籍) is located and just review one's studies? This is a big question each student faces during the summer vacation period. And then, if one goes to their hometown, how to spend the time there is another question. Should one just take plenty of naps? Should one wander around here and there? Should one go fishing and hunting with Kim and Yi amidst the green waters and blue mountains? Or else, should one gather the village men and women (村夫 村婦) and try giving agricultural lectures? Student gentlemen, the summer vacation has come around again. You will each shoulder your travel gear and head to your regions; when you get there, how will you spend your time before returning? By what method will you spend this summer vacation most meaningfully and valuably? Truly, our elders (父老兄弟) residing in the villages and towns have various hopes and expectations, wondering if they might hear some new news or receive some new comfort when you students return. Thus, as a result of meeting you, they may become excited, or they may be disappointed (落望), and in severe cases, they might even halt your studies abroad, or in other cases, they might be moved to send new students abroad.

For students entering their longed-for hometown mountains and rivers to see their beloved parents and siblings, what issues could there be besides joy (歡喜)? However, our situation today is strangely different from others, so in reality—many difficult problems are attached. Therefore, intending this as a reference for the students returning home during summer vacation, we have decided to introduce the opinions and requests of several people.

Ally Yourselves with the Children
Yi Ton-hwa

Regarding what kind of work you gentlemen might undertake utilizing the summer vacation that would be beneficial for your future or for society, I have had a considered thought that I deeply wish to request of you as a definite plan. What is it? It is solely this: ally yourselves with the "children" (어린이). The future of Chosŏn lies only with the "children," with the youth. It lies in the hands of the youth who are younger in age and shallower (淺短) in knowledge than you gentlemen. <56> What aspirations you gentlemen hold is a separate matter. However, the only place to implement the aspirations you hold in your hearts, starting now, is nowhere but among the youth. You gentlemen say it is regrettable that you cannot fulfill your filial duty to your parents, or you think it is regrettable that you cannot show reverence to all your elders; rather, you gentlemen should first know that it is regrettable you cannot gain the interest of the youth younger than yourselves. To gain true companions who will share joys and sorrows (苦樂) together and face the storms (風雲) jointly with you in the future, you too must create every opportunity and means to ally yourselves with the "children." The best way for you gentlemen to utilize the summer lies solely in this.

First, Make Preparations Like These
OOO

What would be most advantageous for students to do during the summer break (夏期放學)? Well, this is quite a vast (廣漠) question. However, this
Firstly, will likely differ according to the land where the student is currently studying abroad and the school they attend. That is, it will be different for someone studying in Japan (日本) versus someone studying in Kyŏngsŏng (京城), and different for a student in Kyŏngsŏng versus one in P'yŏngyang (平壤); furthermore, even within the same Japan or the same Kyŏngsŏng, it will differ somewhat depending on whether the enrolled school is a university, a professional school, or a middle school. Why is this? Because the parents and brothers (父兄) in the provinces have different expectations, saying, "So-and-so came back from studying in Japan," or "So-and-so came back from attending a professional school in Seoul..."
Secondly, what one should do will also differ depending on the student's hometown. For example, what someone going to P'yŏngan Province (平安道) or Hamgyŏng Province (咸鏡道) should do will be slightly different from someone going to Chŏlla Province (全羅道) or Kyŏngsang Province (慶尙道). This is because there are differences in the degree of cultural development and divergences in ideological tendencies.
Thirdly, there are also things to consider differently depending on the student's family circumstances. For example, it will be different for a student involved with a certain church (敎會) versus one not involved; it will differ according to the student's affiliated class (階級) (e.g., descendants of *paekchŏng* (白丁) versus descendants of *panin* (班人, yangban lineage), descendants of commoners (細民) versus descendants of the propertied class (有産級)). And concerning what to actually do,
(1) There are things to do for oneself, and (2) things to do for one's surroundings.
First, for oneself, exploring famous mountains and great rivers (名山大川之探勝) is good, collecting legends and children's songs (전설, 동요) is good, investigating customs and habits (風俗習慣之査考) is good; <57> besides these, there might be other things, but one common thing to consider here is that the vacation period is, in any case, a time to come into contact with the world, so as much as possible, it would be good to strive to get closer to the actual state of society and, consciously or unconsciously (不知不覺), gain much common sense and high ideals.
Second, for the surroundings, in recent years it has become common (恒庸) to organize lecture groups, drama troupes, and the like, providing both amusement and practical benefit (實益) to the local people (鄕土人), which is of course good. If possible, it would be best (最可) to target specific individuals and produce concrete results. For example, opening discussion meetings (談話會) every night with the children of that village (洞里) to help them organize a youth association (少年會), or gathering only those in the village who do not know the Korean script (諺文) and, during the vacation, enabling those few people to read one book in the Korean script (especially, short-term lectures or evening talks for propertyless children (無産兒童) are needed), or if there are unresolved disputes (분쟁) within the family among siblings, or between parents and relatives, or between regions and local people that occurred while one was away, mediating (중재) them (for instance, students from Pukch'ŏng (北靑) or Hamhŭng (咸興) should mediate the dispute arising from the recent athletic event), or establishing a youth association in a place where there isn't one, or if there is someone among one's acquaintances (親知) currently going astray, guiding even just that one person completely—such things would be quite good. Thinking like this, depending on the person and the region, there are countless tasks that can be completed during that time.
Finally, I will add one word: it would be good to prepare various things before returning home for vacation. For example, if you have close friends (親友) or teachers (師長) you can consult, first go to them, confess your hometown and family situation, and inquire what would be best to do. Also, if there are several people studying who came from the same hometown, those people should meet beforehand to discuss what to do upon returning. Or, if you want to interact with children, you should buy storybooks or similar materials to take with you. Especially for those studying in outlying regions or places like Kyŏngsŏng, it is good to systematically understand the situation of the outlying region or Kyŏngsŏng beforehand. What people in the provinces most want to hear is this. Don't just run off the moment exams are finished; think about things a bit and prepare what needs preparing before going. <58>

Get a Whiff of the Smell of People; Seek the Source of the Money You Spend Like Water

Ki-jŏn

University students, professional school students, middle school students, 99 out of 100 of you are likely descendants of the propertied class (有産級) or the middle class of present-day Chosŏn. (Above all, you must know your social standing.) Your attending middle school, professional school, or university now is not like village children going to a village school (서당) to learn the Thousand Character Classic (千字文) just to learn their names for daily convenience (日用之便), nor is it like propertyless children (無産兒童) in the city working at a tobacco company or sock factory to supplement their family's actual livelihood (實生活). To speak frankly, it is for the future honor (榮譽) of yourselves and your families. To put it concretely, it is to become officials of *ch'okim* rank (奏任官), officials of *p'annim* rank (判任官), or bank employees (銀行會社員); it is to become great writers (文豪), wealthy merchants (豪商), gentlemanly class (紳士級), or factory owners (工場主). In other words, it is to become rulers of others and exploiters of others, swaggering about and living in luxury (豪奢). Not only are your minds like this, but the minds of your parents who finance your studies are like this, and what present society expects of you is also thus (亦如是). (Of course, there might be exceptions here.) Your mindset while studying is thus pleasure-seeking (享樂的) and selfish (利己的). Yet, to proceed with your studies motivated by such aims, how much money do you consume each month, and where do you recognize that consumed money comes from? If your parents and brothers (父兄) are landowners (地主), or moneylenders (貸金業者), or bureaucrats (官僚), or merchants (商人), where do you recognize that money came from? I don't know for sure, but that money must have passed over the pitifully thin arms and legs (手足) of many unfortunate commoners (細民), their desolate pawned goods (典執物), and such miserable shadows (陰影). With that money, you are again studying for the honor of suppressing and sucking the life out of those unfortunate masses, putting on airs and living luxuriously above them. With that money, you first buy Western clothes, musical instruments, cameras, and even pink envelopes and commemorative rings. Everyone, can we, as human beings, especially as pure and innocent (純潔無垢) young students, be complacent and self-satisfied (恬然自安) about this?

Therefore, I say. When the summer vacation arrives, and you <59> each return to your regions, use this opportunity to seek out the source (淵源) of the money you spend daily and monthly, the producers of that money. In other words, actually make contact with the commoners (細民), gaze intently (凝視) at their lives, grasp (軆得) their circumstances, and then, ask your conscience whether you can truly continue studying for pleasure with the same motives as before, using the money that comes from them in such a way. If you truly do this, then you—no, perhaps not all of you, but at least a few among you—will realize for the first time that being human is not about separating oneself from one's surrounding environment and standing out alone; true distinction is not that. Only when one moves forward breathing in unison with one's surroundings can one truly feel the greatness (偉大) of humanity. At the same time, you will confirm that the highest desire of humans lies not in commanding others, nor in exploiting others, but solely on the common line where one finds oneself in others and others in oneself—working together, eating together, and enjoying together.
Everyone—this vacation, when you go to the provinces, even if you cannot do anything else, if you do as mentioned above, truly go beside the commoners and become conscious of genuine humanity, then from that moment on, you are people who have established principles (主義), people involved in the workings of heaven and earth (天地之運化), people taking on a role in the construction of a new world.

Become Farmers
Pak Tal-sŏng

If students studying abroad go to the provinces utilizing their vacation, what should they do? How should they spend their time? Should they lie in the master's quarters (舍廊房) and sleep off naps to their heart's content? Should they leisurely roam (逍遙) the South River and North Mountain? Should they visit neighbors (隣里) and relatives to dissolve the feelings of separation (隔阻)? Should they seek out famous mountains and scenic spots (名山勝區) to gather materials for their studies? Should they conduct night schools (夜學) for farmers? Should they conduct labor training (勞動講習)? What should they do and how should they spend their time?
Depending on the individual's interest (趣味) or circumstances, the methods may differ, but as much as possible, it would be good if a unified approach could be taken under a fixed principle (主義).
So, what is the fixed principle and what is the unified approach? It is the Farmer Principle (農民主義), and it is the approach of seeking out the fields and paddies (田畓) morning and evening.
Don't act arrogantly, just putting on airs thinking, "I am a student," "I am someone who went to Seoul," <60> "I am a famous high-collar (하이카라) who went to Tokyo," "I am an idle person," "I am the child of a rich man." Don't just smoke rolled cigarettes (卷煙個), lie around in the master's quarters making small talk (閑談), stroll around aimlessly with your hands clasped behind your back, only hearing from the village elders (鄕村 父老) that you are a ruined child, a finished child. Don't just provoke the pure hearts of the farmers. From the day you arrive, become farmer-ized (農民化). Weed together, feed the cows together, work together, sing together, I say.
How much comfort would it be to the farmers themselves if students, bodies accustomed to study, take up hoes and go out to the farm? Or, if they take up sickles and mix with the fodder-gatherers (꼴군), how happy would they be? How pleased they would be if you tell them stories (니약이) of Seoul and Tokyo, and how pleased they would be if you make the paddy ridges and field banks resound with songs (唱歌) or dances (舞蹈)? When the farmers exclaim in admiration, "Indeed, today's students are completely different from those of the past!", how joyful would your hearts be?
Do so. Become farmer-ized. Walk the paddy ridges and field banks. In doing so, give comfort to the farmers. Especially, give comfort to the tenant farmers (小作人). Give comfort by actually working together with them, and also give comfort through stories. Stories of the North (北方) are good, and stories of the South (南方) are good too. Introduce Lenin (레닌) to them, and introduce Gandhi (깐듸) too. They will like it. If you carelessly talk about things like Communism (共産) or leveling (平均), you might face unpleasant consequences, so be careful about that. In any case, just tell them that uniform happiness will come in the not-too-distant future (不遠), and that it lies with the farmers. And tell them about the sanctity of labor (勞動 神聖), tell them "He who does not work, shall not eat" (不勞者不得), and tell them of the equality of all people (萬民平等) and the coexistence of all people (萬民共存). Speak while weeding along the furrows, speak while resting under the trees, speak while coming and going, speak at home and in the neighborhood, speak to every person you meet wherever you encounter them. Speak while working together yourself. If you speak while idling around sleekly, or while watching others work, smoking a cigarette with your hands clasped behind your back, then a thousand words and ten thousand talks (千言萬談) will be in vain (虛것). No, rather, you will only earn ill feelings (惡感). Only words spoken while actually working yourself have real effect (實效). The general farmers will feel reassured. They will strive to pioneer a new life with good hope.
I request once more. Oh, tens of thousands of students studying abroad! When you go to the provinces, become farmer-ized. And tread the paddy ridges and field banks. Go out bearing hoes and sickles. And inform the general farmers well about the times (時代), inform them about the changing world (換板), inform them about class consciousness (階級意識) and farmer consciousness (農民意識), thereby instilling new comfort and hope. Ah—how wonderful it would be if tens of thousands of our students did this in province after province! <61>

Humans are Not "Frogs"
Ch'a Sang-ch'an

The animal called frog (개고리, 蛙) is named *Kaegori* (皆古里, meaning 'all go back to old place') because it always goes only to the place it was before. However, humans are different; they are by no means meant to just remain dormant (蟄伏) in their hometown or one place. They should perhaps go to great mountains to catch tigers, go to deep seas to catch flood dragons (鮫龍), and fly in the vast sky to kick apart the stars and clouds (星雲). Like Ma Wŏn's (馬援) words, one must have the resolve to have one's corpse wrapped in horsehide (馬革) even in death. However, we Chosŏn people have particularly strong familistic notions and consequently strong attachment to our hometowns (향토적 관념). Even when undertaking endeavors, they are often for one's own home or individual, with few for the society or nation as a whole. Returning to one's hometown after achieving success is called *kŭmŭihwanhyang* (錦衣還鄕, returning home in embroidered clothes). When composing poetry, much relates to longing for home (思鄕), gazing towards home (望鄕), or returning home (歸鄕). When singing songs, too, thoughts of home naturally arise, or yearning for home is intense, expressing entirely sentiments tied to the homeland. Therefore, students too, whenever winter or summer vacation comes, just go straight to their hometowns (鄕里). Of course, going to the hometown one has missed for a year or several months to pay respects (歸省) to longed-for parents and meet beloved siblings and relatives is not a bad thing. However, today's Chosŏn people are not the Chosŏn people of yesterday, and students are also different from students in peaceful and uneventful (泰平無事) foreign countries. No matter that it is the student era, one must realize oneself to be a fighter (鬪士) of this society, not be bound by petty (苟苟) customs and etiquette, transcend the homeland, see the human feelings (人情) and customs (風俗) of various places, and actually study social conditions to prepare materials for reform (改造) and revolution (革新). Therefore, even by traveling without money (無錢旅行), it would be good for students from Northern Chosŏn to go to Southern Chosŏn, and students from Southern Chosŏn to go to Northern Chosŏn, or even to various parts of Chosŏn or foreign lands. Even if one must go to one's home village (鄕村), it would be better not to stay only in one's own village (洞里) but to wander around neighboring areas (隣方 近地), observe rural life (農村生活), and understand rural tastes (農村趣味). To put it comprehensively, my request is that students, during vacation, do not just go only to their hometowns like frogs (*Kaegori*).

General Mobilization of Tens of Thousands of New Advance Troops - Let's Start Work from the Very Bottom
Pang Chŏng-hwan <62>

From July 11th or 12th until the 20th, whenever you look, Kyŏngsŏng Station is packed tight with students returning home. It's like that in the morning, like that during the day, and like that again in the evening...
When I see tens of thousands of students spreading out like this at one time, I feel a terrifyingly large "power" (힘) in them. This is because they are the new lives sprouting in the Chosŏn that seeks rebirth (新生), and at the same time, the most reliable advance troops (役軍). Moreover, when I think that they go not only along the railway lines (沿邊) where lecture groups or newspapers and magazines can reach, but to every nook and cranny where Chosŏn people live, I feel an even greater power.
Vacation is, of course, a break from studies (休業). However, in our current situation, these 40 days during which so many students spread out all at once and gather back all at once must absolutely not be spent meaninglessly. It must absolutely not pass merely as idle rest (閑休).
A general mobilization of tens of thousands of new advance troops! That's right. If each of you returning students does not lose sight of the point, your summer return home is indeed a general mobilization of tens of thousands of new advance troops arising upon our movement.
If these workers spreading thoroughly into every nook and cranny plant one seed each in their own village, their own valley, and initiate one task each before returning, how formidable and great would that work become! Moreover, can success be achieved today unless the work involves planting seeds in the farming villages (農村) and initiating work with the farmers (農民)? We must fix our thoughts on this.
"What can a young middle school student do!" is often said, but work is ruined by thinking like that. People caught in subservience to the great (*Sadaejuŭi*, 事大主義) think of bi-ig work first when they work, so failure precedes the start. Recently, we have had various efforts and movements, but the reason they have only made loud noises outwardly, without building real great power internally or moving the great spirit, is that the work has not become the work of the masses (even while aiming for the masses) and remains merely the effort of a portion of people.
We must return to the lowest (最下), the bottommost (最底), and start from there. We must return to the lowest stratum, the lowest class, the very- bottom, and make a new start from there.
The general mobilization of the student army (學生軍) this summer! All must go forth and commence work at the very- bottom. The previous kind of circuit lectures (巡廻講演) is outdated. Circuit plays (巡廻演劇) are not urgent. Rather than lofty knowledge, shallow knowledge needs to be spread widely and generally. <63>
Students returning home! I earnestly request that this summer, tens of thousands of advance troops pledge (盟誓) to teach just one thing, the Korean script (諺文), to the farmers neighboring your homes before returning. Today, all our various endeavors (諸般事爲) are empty deeds (虛事) unless they start from there. Professional school students, middle school students, elementary school students, female students—all alike, let's return to the farming villages, centering on our own homes, and teach just the Korean script to the neighbors. Even if one person teaches just ten people, during this 40-day vacation, more than 200,000 people in Chosŏn will have their eyes newly opened. It absolutely does not require lofty knowledge. If all Chosŏn people overcome illiteracy (文盲), we can breathe together, connect our vital energies (氣脉), and finally, the entire populace can clasp wrists and move forward together.
There's no need to make a fuss about "lecture centers" (講習所) or whatnot. There's no need to labor (勞心) gathering many people. First, start with your own home; there will be young people and children in your own home who don't know the Korean script, begin with them. Then, neighbors, a few people—ten is good, five is good; if none, even just your wife or your younger sibling is fine. Over 40 days, 2 hours a day, or maybe 3-4 hours, morning or evening, or at lunchtime, it can be done. Guiding just one 'person' onto a good path through the power of another 'person' is already an extremely noble task; when we consider that doing so is the precious first step of our great movement, how noble and supremely important (至重) a task it is!
Work does not lie in making noise. Success does not lie in scattering about. We must return to the very- bottom, the very- base, embrace the seeds within, strike roots in reality (實際), grasp hands with the masses (farmers), and rise up. Do the actions of the Russian youth before the revolution not teach us much?
"Let's go to the bottom. Let's rise from there!"
If the new advance troops, like worn-out figures, also run wild with subservience to the great (*Sadaejuŭi*) and desire for fame, or if, like the work up to today, they just clamor towards the open air, we will eternally fail to find the path to rebirth (新生).
"This summer, let's pledge to teach the Korean script to our neighbors and return!"
General mobilization of tens of thousands of new advance troops! I hope you will consider your current situation, your future, and your duties (務責) regarding them. - June 23rd, Night - <64>

My Request
Yi Chong-nin

Students, struggling against the tedious time of four or perhaps six years with that heart-wrenching money, the lack of which could instantly jeopardize the livelihood of the entire family—unaware of exhaustion despite being exhausted, unaware of hunger despite being hungry, racing against every moment—you finally get a chance to breathe deeply through this opportunity called vacation. If our situation were even slightly better, how could we bear to burden you weary gentlemen with any task? But looking back at our destitute reality where mountains end and waters run dry (山窮水盡), there is no time to consider decorum and sentiment. The anguish of me, who intends to entrust a burden to you now, and the anguish of you gentlemen who receive my burden, will likely have not the slightest difference.
If we continue in our current state (現狀) as is, without any change, for just 6 or 7 more years, Chosŏn students will probably see their final curtain call with you, the current generation. No matter how much one wants to learn, with what can one learn? No matter how much one wants to teach, with what can one teach? Do you know where the 30 or 40 *wŏn* per month you gentlemen now spend comes from? Eight or nine times out of ten, it must have come either from the Development Company (拓殖會社) or the Industrial Bank (殖産銀行).
If one farms in the countryside, even with shouting and effort, the annual yield wouldn't exceed 70 or 80 *sŏk* (석, unit of grain); if one engages in commerce, the capital would max out at 4,000 or 5,000 *wŏn*. With this income, after bearing all taxes, miscellaneous expenses like farewell/welcome party fees (送迎費) for township officials (面職員), and even the cost of coal (石炭價) for police substations, what is left to send for your school expenses? There is likely no other way than to mortgage (典當) the paddies or sell off (放賣) the fields. Looking at it this way, how many more years can our remaining assets sustain us? Now, regarding the education issue, because it has been so clamorously debated, even those as cunning as thieves seem unable to utter a word. However, I dare to speak without reservation what I wish to say.
Wherever I go, when I see a large school, I suddenly get the feeling, isn't that a training center for non-productive consumers (不生産消費者)? When even a single pencil, a single sheet of half-sized paper (*panji*, 半紙) comes from money obtained by mortgaging paddies and selling fields, can so many students possibly all graduate? Let's assume, hypothetically, that one in a thousand or ten thousand completely finishes their studies. Will that person be able to find a place to utilize what they learned? Let's assume one or two people struggle through. With an income of 100 *wŏn* or 70-80 *wŏn* per month, will they be able to recover the mortgaged and sold-off lands and houses of the many students, and will they be able to rescue (救處) all those idle rich (遊衣遊食之民)? <65> What will become of the others—those who started learning but couldn't finish, and those who learned but have no use for it? It is a current fact that those who have held a pencil case for even 2 or 3 months, if they starve, they starve, but men typically do not take up a hoe handle again, and women do not carry a water jar on their head again. It is also a fact that those who have experienced middle school education or higher commit crimes like divorce and fraud comparatively more often than others. How could this be the fault of learning itself? However, if things continue in this manner without any other change, there will be no one who doesn't become a student, and as students increase, non-productive consumers will increase further. Consequently, the foundation of life, already tilted by the pursuit of learning, gets completely uprooted by playing the gentleman after learning. At that point, with what will we teach and learn again? The concern (杞憂) that the statement "Chosŏn students will probably see their final curtain call with you, the current generation" might unfortunately not be an empty word (虛言) threatens to burst my heart.
Student gentlemen, while you yourselves are students, telling you not to learn from others, not to teach others, is something I cannot bear to do. However, when you return home this time, please, as much as possible, inform your relatives and friends in detail about this situation, so that henceforth, anyone intending to pursue school life must absolutely consider their standard of living; let there be no more reckless actions like the present, where people think, "Others are learning, so I must learn too," "Others are teaching, so I must teach too," just for show (行世꺼리), regardless of the final outcome. Students themselves, too, if their living standard is such that they cannot complete their studies, even if regrettable, perhaps the wise course (得策) is to take off the Western suit and weed, or sell school supplies to buy silkworm-raising tools (蠶具). Humans seek knowledge not simply to eat, but to act as proper humans, yet acting as proper humans is also something done after eating and living. Furthermore, since ancient times, all great knowledge in politics, philosophy, and religion often emerged from bean patches and taro fields (荳田芋畝) or amidst pastures and orchards (牧場果圃); it does not necessarily come only from under chalkboards or within books. Even if you yourselves unfortunately harbor regrets (遺恨), if the already tilted foundation of life becomes solid (鞏固) again, your children and descendants (子弟) will be able to be raised into complete persons according to your wishes. Is this not a greater success than making the entire family tumble into a ditch (溝壑) for the sake of one's own self? If you gentlemen, by some fortune, do not discard this request, I, though humble (微劣), will strive along with you gentlemen to adopt a different method in the education world, akin to the military colony system (*t'unbyŏngjedo*, 屯兵制度). <66>

During the Summer Vacation
Pŏpchŏn (Law Professional School) Cho Tu-sŏp

Every year around the end of June, the thought of how to spend the 40-odd days of summer vacation distracts my brain (腦), already busy preparing for semester exams (學期試驗). I believe this is true not just for me, but for anyone who is a student. Since most students are from the provinces studying abroad in Kyŏngsŏng, they almost all return to their hometowns as soon as vacation starts. I, too, being a person from the Northwest region (西北地方), invariably go down home on the day exams end or the day after. Going home like this, since it's the home I missed during the semester, it's naturally welcoming, comfortable, and above all, most refreshing. Perhaps because of that, somehow studying doesn't go well at home. If I take three books, I've never read more than two; if six books, never more than four. So, I just come back having caused useless trouble (作亂). However, in the last 2 or 3 years, I have tried things like athletic competitions, circuit lectures, and amateur plays (素人劇). I don't know how much effect they had, but I did experience some enjoyment (滋味). This also takes considerable effort, and firstly, there are so many squabbles (말썽), making it very difficult to do. This summer vacation, I intend to try doing this:
Being a student, I cannot forget about studying, so I intend to read books as diligently as possible. And I intend to frequently engage in sports, discussions, or lectures. Can these be called any special calculation for success (成算)? Especially, if possible, I intend to primarily gather farmers (農人) and try opening something like a "Summer Lecture Series" (夏期講座). I know it's difficult to teach others when I am still learning, but I believe this is the best thing to do, and I intend to learn together what we don't know. And although this might be difficult for one person, since there is an association (會) formed by students studying abroad, I think it won't be too difficult. However, what kind of storms (風波) we will encounter and how much effect there will be remains a question (疑問).
Also, I intend to travel around the neighboring regions as much as possible. Of course, the whole country (全國) would be good, and foreign countries (外國) would be good too, but that's impossible due to time constraints and, especially, economic constraints. Thus, firstly, getting to know well everything about my own region seems to be a very good thing above all else. <67>

Every Single Word, Every Single Letter, Only Through Actual Practice
Konong (Agricultural Professional School) Kim T'ae-hun

Who among our people can be said to be better off? Nowadays, the people of our region, except for a few, are dumbfounded (어안이 벙벙하야) and don't know what to do. They may not know Schopenhauer's volitional pessimism or Hobbes' ethical pessimism, but the mood of pessimism (厭世) has filled them completely. No, they are in a near-death state (瀕死之境), bitterly awaiting (苦待) death. What is the reason for this? Of course, the reasons are many, but the fundamental reason needs no mention. Secondly, following that, it seems that the vast majority, unable to understand the new civilization (新文明) and recklessly using the so-called implements of civilization (所謂 文明利器) installed by others' hands, were caught off guard in a thick fog (五里霧中), unaware of their encroachment (蠶食), and fumbling about (엄벙점벙하다가), arrived at this current state. Because of this, those most greatly affected are our region's small farmer class (小農階級) and working class (勞動階級). Consequently, they are now in a situation where they have no room even to hope for a hand of salvation from the line of death (死之線). Therefore, some try to resolve it by calling for fundamental destruction (근본적 打破), while others demand economic reform (經濟的 改造). I don't know which should be adopted, but it is true that it will not be easy (容易치 안을 것). Just clamoring about something not easy will not solve it. Unless one possesses the talent (才操) to leap up at once to the summit (絶頂) of a mountain like Paektu Mountain (白頭山), one cannot help but climb the steps one by one (一步一步), day by day (今日, 今日). Therefore, I believe that personally teaching, little by little (작고작고), one word, one letter at a time is the primary requirement (第一의 요건). But look! Those among us who know even a little something deliberately avoid places where many farmers or laborers are seated, even at train stations, and go sit where only Japanese (日人) or clean-looking people are. They seem afraid that a country person might strike up a conversation. And then they chatter away, thinking themselves superior. Years ago (年前), I was among the audience when a lecture group (講演團) organized by students toured the provinces during summer vacation. At that time, the audience was almost entirely from the uneducated class (無識階級), yet one speaker (演士), upon ascending the stage (登壇), talked about "energy" (에나-지) this, Newton (뉴-톤) that, electrons (電子) whatnot, rambling on for a while. Then another speaker talked about Karl Marx (칼 맑쓰) this, Morris Carpenter (모리쓰 카-펜타) that, using terms like "what-ism" (무슨主義) and "what-ic" (무슨的), employing all the theories (學說) and new jargon (新熟語) they knew. The audience's eyes went blank (눈이 뻔하여지면서도), how could they possibly understand? Soon enough, almost everyone succumbed to drowsiness. <68> I don't know the purpose (趣旨) for which that lecture group toured, but they seemed to think that the provinces were filled only with knowledgeable people like themselves. Not that the provinces consist solely of uneducated people, but I think chattering on about new ideas (新思想) and new theories (新學說), especially when one barely understands the concepts oneself, has little value in our region. Therefore, rather than doing this, I think it would be better to understand the region, grasp the level of the local people, and teach things suitable for common sense or practical use (實用). Hence, I dare to make this request to my fellow students returning home this summer vacation. No, in my own thought, it seems it would be good to do this. What is it? Understanding the region well, thoroughly investigating (洞察) its situation, not sparing oneself, and although it might be somewhat troublesome to associate (相從) with them, it would be good to teach, whether in groups or individually, practically (實地로), even just one letter (한字), one phrase (한마듸), to the local children or farmers. Also, recently among our general students, many seem to enjoy literature (文學) and devour literary books (文學書類). I wish they wouldn't indulge too much in books (冊子), and even when writing, not just write about love (사랑) or whatnot, focusing only on romantic lyricism (戀愛 抒情文), but turn that passionate sentiment (뜨거운 情緖) elsewhere, that is, shift it towards the nation (民族), and instead write meaningful folk songs (民謠) or children's songs (童謠) to inspire (鼓吹) the region. Even if many such pieces are published in newspapers or magazines, widespread propaganda (普遍的 宣傳) reaching the farming villages in the provinces will be difficult. This is because it wouldn't be an exaggeration (過言) to say these are reading materials confined mostly to the middle class and above (中流 以上) intellectual class. Lastly, one more thing I'd like to say to our fellow students is to reflect on how our situation differs from that of students in other countries. While students in other countries are busy seeking cool places for summer retreat (避暑) during summer vacation, let us not grieve that we cannot experience that, but instead find supreme joy (無上한 환희) in pioneering our regions, or speaking more grandly, in enhancing the culture (文化向上) of our country. <69>

**Summary**

This collection of short essays from the July 1924 issue of *Gaebyeok* magazine offers advice to Korean students returning home for summer vacation during the Japanese colonial period. The authors, representing various viewpoints (intellectuals, students from law and agriculture schools), urge students not to waste their vacation idly but to engage meaningfully with their home communities, particularly the rural populace and children. Common themes include understanding the plight of farmers and laborers, realizing the problematic source of tuition funds often derived from their exploitation, bridging the gap between intellectuals and the masses, promoting literacy (especially teaching Hangul), fostering national consciousness and social awareness, and contributing practically to community upliftment rather than engaging in superficial activities or maintaining elitist attitudes. The writers emphasize concrete actions like teaching, mediating disputes, organizing youth groups, participating in farm labor ("farmerization"), and understanding the socio-economic realities of colonial Chosŏn, framing the vacation as a crucial period for social action and national strengthening from the grassroots level.

Historically, this article is significant as it reflects the activist and nationalist intellectual currents among Korean youth and thinkers in the mid-1920s. It highlights the deep concern with rural poverty, class disparity exacerbated by colonial structures (like the Oriental Development Company and Industrial Bank funding), the perceived disconnect between the educated elite and the masses, and the urgent need for practical, grassroots action (like Hangul promotion, inspired by movements like the V Narod movement in Russia mentioned by Pang Chŏng-hwan) as a means of national empowerment and social change under restrictive colonial rule. The emphasis on self-awareness of class background and the critique of unproductive, elitist education offer valuable insights into the social consciousness and strategic thinking within the Korean independence movement milieu.

**Named Entities**

李敦化	이돈화	Yi Ton-hwa
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn
日本	일본	Ilbon
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
平安道	평안도	P'yŏngan-do
咸鏡道	함경도	Hamgyŏng-do
全羅道	전라도	Chŏlla-do
慶尙道	경상도	Kyŏngsang-do
北靑	북청	Pukch'ŏng
咸興	함흥	Hamhŭng
起田	기전	Ki-jŏn
朴達成	박달성	Pak Tal-sŏng
레닌	레닌	Lenin
깐듸	깐디	Gandhi
車相瓚	차상찬	Ch'a Sang-ch'an
馬援	마원	Ma Wŏn
方定煥	방정환	Pang Chŏng-hwan
露西亞	노서아/러시아	Rosia (Russia)
李鍾麟	이종린	Yi Chong-nin
拓殖會社	척식회사	T'akshik Hoesa (Oriental Development Company)
殖産銀行	식산은행	Shiksan Ŭnhaeng (Chosen Industrial Bank)
趙斗燮	조두섭	Cho Tu-sŏp
法專	법전	Pŏpchŏn (Abbreviation for Law Professional School)
金泰壎	김태훈	Kim T'ae-hun
高農	고농	Konong (Abbreviation for Agricultural Professional School)
뉴-톤	뉴턴	Newton
칼 맑쓰	칼 마르크스	Karl Marx
모리쓰 카-펜타	모리스 카펜터	Morisŭ K'ap'ent'a (Morris Carpenter - likely Edward Carpenter)
白頭山	백두산	Paektu-san
日人	일인	Il-in (Japanese person)

**Glossary**

諸君	제군	Gentlemen; You (plural, formal)
夏休	하휴	Summer vacation (abbreviation of 하기휴가)
歸鄕	귀향	Returning home; Homecoming
學生	학생	Student
鄕里	향리	Hometown; Native place
覲親	근친	Visiting one's parents
別境	별경	Secluded place; Different environment
學籍	학적	School register; Enrollment
父老兄弟	부로형제	Elders and brothers (referring to respected community members)
落望	낙망	Disappointment; Despair (modern: 실망)
結托	결탁	To ally with; To conspire with
어린이	어린이	Children (term popularized by Pang Chŏng-hwan)
淺短	천단	Shallow and brief; Superficial (knowledge)
放學	방학	School vacation (modern: 방학)
階級	계급	Social class
白丁	백정	Paekchŏng (Korea's historical untouchable outcast group)
班人	반인	Person of yangban lineage (aristocratic class)
細民	세민	Commoners; Poor people
有産級	유산급	Propertied class
探勝	탐승	Visiting scenic spots; Sightseeing
風俗習慣	풍속습관	Customs and habits
査考	사고	Investigation; Examination
不知不覺	부지불각	Unconsciously; Imperceptibly
恒庸	항용	Commonly; Usually
實益	실익	Practical benefit; Real profit
諺文	언문	Eonmun (former name for Hangul, the Korean script, often used pejoratively but here neutrally)
無産兒童	무산아동	Proletarian children; Children without property
親知	친지	Acquaintances; Friends and relatives
干與	간여	Involvement; Intervention
淵源	연원	Source; Origin
奏任官	주임관	Ch'okimkan (lower-middle rank official in Japanese colonial bureaucracy)
判任官	판임관	P'annimkan (lowest rank official in Japanese colonial bureaucracy)
銀行會社員	은행회사원	Bank employee
文豪	문호	Great writer; Literary master
豪商	호상	Wealthy merchant
紳士級	신사급	Gentlemanly class
工場主	공장주	Factory owner
貸金業者	대금업자	Moneylender
官僚	관료	Bureaucrat; Official
手足	수족	Hands and feet; Limbs (metaphorically, labor)
典執物	전집물	Pawned articles
陰影	음영	Shadow; Gloom
恬然自安	념연자안	Being complacent and self-satisfied (modern: 염연자안)
凝視	응시	To gaze intently; To stare
軆得	체득	To grasp; To learn through experience (modern: 체득)
質正	질정	To question closely; To inquire
運化	운화	Workings (of nature/universe); Transformations
農民主義	농민주의	Farmer-ism; Agrarianism
田畓	전답	Fields and paddies; Farmland
逍遙	소요	Strolling leisurely; Roaming
隔阻	격조	Separation; Estrangement
卷煙個	권연개	Rolled cigarette
閑談	한담	Idle chat; Small talk
農民化	농민화	Becoming like a farmer; Farmer-ization
小作人	소작인	Tenant farmer
勞動 神聖	노동 신성	Sanctity of labor
不勞者不得	불로자부득	He who does not work, shall not eat
萬民平等	만민평등	Equality of all people
萬民共存	만민공존	Coexistence of all people
共産	공산	Communism
平均	평균	Equality; Average; Leveling
時代	시대	Era; Times
換板	환판	Changing situation; Turning point (lit. changing the printing plate)
階級意識	계급의식	Class consciousness
農民意識	농민의식	Farmer consciousness
皆古里	개고리	Frog (archaism/folk etymology related to 'returning')
蟄伏	칩복	Hibernation; Remaining dormant or inactive
鮫龍	교룡	Flood dragon; Mythical water serpent
星雲	성운	Stars and clouds; Nebula
馬革	마혁	Horsehide
裹	과	To wrap; To bind
錦衣還鄕	금의환향	Returning home in embroidered clothes (i.e., in glory)
思鄕	사향	Longing for home
望鄕	망향	Gazing towards home
歸鄕	귀향	Returning home
泰平無事	태평무사	Peaceful and uneventful
苟苟	구구	Petty; Trifling
人情	인정	Human feelings; Empathy; Local customs
風俗	풍속	Customs; Manners
無錢旅行	무전여행	Penniless travel; Traveling without money
洞里	동리	Village (modern: 동네)
總動員	총동원	General mobilization
役軍	역군	Worker; Soldier; Active participant (in a movement)
沿邊	연변	Along the border/edge; Along the line (e.g., railway line)
休業	휴업	Suspension of business/studies; Break
閑休	한휴	Idle rest; Leisurely break
事大主義	사대주의	Sadaejuui (Flunkeyism; Serving the great - historical deference to China, here generalized)
實際	실제	Reality; Actuality
最下	최하	Lowest
最底	최저	Bottommost
盟誓	맹세	Oath; Pledge
勞心	노심	Mental toil; Worry; Effort
至重	지중	Extremely important; Most weighty
杞憂	기우	Groundless worry (from the story of Qi worrying the sky would fall)
不生産消費者	불생산소비자	Non-productive consumer
典當	전당	Mortgage; Pawn
放賣	방매	Selling off (property)
面職員	면직원	Township official
送迎費	송영비	Farewell and welcome party expenses
石炭價	석탄가	Price of coal
遊衣遊食之民	유의유식지민	People who idle time away in fine clothes and food; Idle rich
救處	구처	Rescue; Relief; Finding a position for someone
溝壑	구학	Ditch; Gully (metaphor for ruin)
鞏固	공고	Solid; Firm; Strong
子弟	자제	Children; Sons and younger brothers; Descendants
屯兵制度	둔병제도	Military colony system (where soldiers farm land)
腦	뇌	Brain
學期試驗	학기시험	Semester examination
西北地方	서북지방	Northwestern region (of Korea)
素人劇	소인극	Amateur play (Japanese loanword: shiroutogeki)
말썽	말썽	Trouble; Discord; Squabble
夏期講座	하기강좌	Summer lecture series
成算	성산	Prospect of success; Calculation
瀕死	빈사	Near death; Moribund
苦待	고대	Waiting impatiently or bitterly
文明利器	문명이기	Implements of civilization; Beneficial tools of civilization
蠶食	잠식	Encroachment (like a silkworm eating leaves)
小農階級	소농계급	Small farmer class
勞動階級	노동계급	Working class
근본적 타파	근본적 타파	Fundamental destruction/overthrow
經濟的 改造	경제적 개조	Economic reform/reorganization
才操	재조	Talent; Skill
絶頂	절정	Summit; Peak
一步一步	일보일보	Step by step
第一의 요건	제1의 요건	Primary requirement; First condition
講演團	강연단	Lecture group/troupe
演士	연사	Speaker; Orator
登壇	등단	Ascending the platform/stage
에나-지	에너지	Energy (loanword)
電子	전자	Electron
學說	학설	Theory
新熟語	신숙어	New jargon; Newly coined phrase
趣旨	취지	Purpose; Aim; Point
實用	실용	Practical use
相從	상종	To associate with; To keep company with
實地로	실지로	In practice; Actually; On the ground
文學	문학	Literature
書籍	서적	Books
冊子	책자	Booklet; Book
戀愛	연애	Romantic love
抒情文	서정문	Lyrical writing
民族	민족	Nation; People; Ethnic group
民謠	민요	Folk song
童謠	동요	Children's song
鼓吹	고취	To inspire; To encourage; To advocate
普遍的 宣傳	보편적 선전	Universal propaganda; Widespread publicity
中流 以上	중류 이상	Middle class and above
過言	과언	Exaggeration
避暑	피서	Summering; Escaping the heat
無上	무상	Supreme; Unsurpassed
文化向上	문화향상	Cultural improvement/enhancement
됴코	좋고	Good (and) (older spelling of 좋고)
업다	없다	To not exist; To lack (older spelling of 없다)
잇다	있다	To exist; To have (older spelling of 있다)
도라왓다	돌아왔다	Returned (older spelling of 돌아왔다)
니약이	이야기	Story; Talk (older spelling of 이야기)
녀름	여름	Summer (older spelling of 여름)
리웃	이웃	Neighbor (older spelling of 이웃)
깨처주고	깨우쳐주고	Teaching/Enlightening (and giving) (older spelling/form)
모다	모두	All; Everyone (older spelling of 모두)
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제49호
발행일	1924년 07월 01일
기사제목	夏休 中 歸鄕하는 學生 諸君에게
기사형태	문예기타

夏休 中 歸鄕하는 學生 諸君에게
해마다 정해둔 학생에 대한 夏期休暇는 또 다시 도라왓다. 일반의 학생은 잠간 교문을 하직하고 各히 갈 곳을 가게 되얏다. 혹은 鄕里로 혹은 山中으로 혹은 해변으로 소망을 따라 各히 도라가게 되얏다.
覲親을 위하야 鄕里로 도라갈가. 수양을 위하야 別境에 여행을 갈가. 그러치 안으면 學籍 둔 그곳에서 복습이나 하고 잇슬가. 이것은 夏休期에 立한 학생 諸君의 각각 가진 큰 문제이다. 그리고 또 鄕里로 가면 엇더케 지낼 것이 문제이다. 낫잠이나 슬켓 자고 올가. 이리져리 휘휘 도라단녀 볼가. 金之李之와 綠水靑山에 漁獵이나 하다 올가. 그러치 안으면 村夫 村婦를 모아 놋코 농사강습이나 식켜볼가. 학생 제군아 夏期休暇는 또다시 도라왓다. 各히 行具를 둘너메고 지방에 향할 터이니 지방에 가면 엇더케 지내다 오겟는가. 엇더한 방법으로 이 하기휴가를 가장 意義잇게 또 가치잇게 지내겟는가. 실로 향촌에 게신 우리의 父老兄弟는 학생 제군이 도라오면 무슨 새 소식이나 드를가 무슨 새 위안이나 바들가 여러 가지로 희망과 기대를 가지고 잇다. 그리하야 諸君을 맛난 결과에 혹은 흥분도 하고 혹은 落望도 하고 심한 경우에는 諸君의 유학을 정지도 식히며 또 혹 경우에는 새로운 유학생을 派送도 하게 된다.
사랑하는 부모형제를 보기 위하야 그립든 고향산천에 드는 학생 諸君에게 歡喜 외에 무슨 문제가 잇스랴만은 今日의 우리 경우는 이상하게도 남다른 처지닛가 실상-어려운 문제가 만히 붓는다. 그래서 우리는 하기휴가에 귀향하는 학생 제군의 한 참고가 되게 할가 하야 이제 멧 사람의 의견과 또 부탁을 소개하기로 하얏다.

어린들이과 結托하라
李敦化

諸君이 하기휴가를 이용하야 엇더한 일을 하야봄이 諸君의 장래 혹은 사회를 위하야 유익한 일이 될가함에 대하야 나는 한 가지 斷案을 제군에게 깁히 부탁하고저 하는 熟考가 잇섯다. 그는 무엇이냐 하면 「어린이」이와 결탁할 그것뿐이다. 朝鮮의 장래는 오즉 「어린이」에게 소년에게 잇다. 제군보다 나희도 어리고 지식도 淺短한 소년들의 손에 잇다. 제군이＜56＞ 엇더한 포부를 가젓는지는 별문제이다. 다만 제군의 흉중에 가지고 잇는 포부를 지금부터 施設할 곳도 소년을 벼리고는 한 곳도 업다. 제군은 부모의게 효심을 다하지 못함이 유감이라 하니 보다 또는 제군의 모든 웃사람의게 공경을 표하지 못함이 유감이라 생각하니 보다 제군은 먼저 제군보다 나히 어린 소년의게 관심을 사지 못함을 유감으로 알나. 장래에 제군과 갓치 苦樂을 한 가지로 하고 風雲을 공동히 할 진실한 동무를 엇기 위하야 제군도 「어린이」이와 결탁할 모든 기회와 기관을 지으라. 제군의 夏期 이용할 善한 방법은 오즉 이에 잇다.

먼져 이와 가튼 準備를 하시오
OOO

학생들이 夏期放學동안에 무엇을 함이 가장 유리하겟느냐. 글세 이것은 자못 廣漠한 문제이다. 그러나 이것은
첫재 학생이 현재 유학하는 땅과 또 유학하는 학교에 의하야 다름이 잇슬 것이다. 즉 日本에 유학하는 사람과 京城에 유학하는 사람과 다를 것이오 또는 京城에 잇는 학생과 平壤에 잇는 학생이 다를 것이며 또는 가튼 日本이오 가튼 京城이라 할지라도 그 在籍한 학교가 대학교나 전문학교 또는 중학교임에 의하야 다소에 다를 것이다. 웨 그러냐 하면 지방의 父兄은 「아모개는 日本에 유학하다가 왓는데」 혹은 「아모개는 서울서 전문학교를 다니다가 왓는데...」하야 그 기대가 各異한 故이다.
둘재 학생이 고향이 다름에 딸하 역시 그 할 바가 다를 것이다. 例하면 平安道나 咸鏡道에 가는 사람과 全羅道나 慶尙道에 가는 사람이 그 할 바가 족음식 다를 것이다. 즉 문화정도의 관계 사상경향의 異同이 잇는 故이다.
셋재 그 학생이 속한 가정의 如何에 의하야 또한 생각을 달리 할 것이 잇다. 例하면 엇던 敎會에 干與한 학생과 아니 간여한 학생이 다를 것이요 그 학생이 소속된 階級如何(例하면 白丁의 자손과 班人의 자손 細民의 자손과 有産級의 자손 등에 딸하 다를 것이다. 그리고 실제에 무엇을 할가 하는 데에 잇서는
(1) 자기를 위해서 할 것과 (2) 주위를 위해서 할 것과 두 가지가 잇겟는대
첫재, 자기를 위하야는 名山大川의 探勝도 조코, 전설, 동요의 모집도 됴코, 風俗習慣의 査考도 됴코＜57＞ 기타에도 무엇무엇 잇슬 것이나, 여긔에 공통해서 한 가지 생각할 것은, 방학간에는 엇잿던 세상과 접촉하는 期이니 될 수 잇는대로는 사회의 실정과 접근하야 不知不覺 중에 만흔 상식과 놉흔 이상을 엇도록 힘쓰는 것이 됴흘지며,
둘재, 주위를 위하야는 近年 恒庸으로 강연단, 연극단 가튼 것을 주최하야 鄕土人에게 취미와 實益을 아울너 줌이 잇는 바, 그것도 물론 조코, 할 수만 잇스면 그보다 엇던 特定人을 상대로 하야 구체의 성적을 내히는 것이 最可할지니 例하면 每夜의 그 洞里의 어린이들과 談話會를 열어 少年會를 조직케 하거나, 혹은 그 洞里의 諺文 모르는 사람만을 모아, 방학 동안 그 몃 사람에게 諺文冊 하나를 보게 하여 준다거나, (특히 無産兒童을 위한 短期 강습 혹은 야간담화가 필요하다) 또는 家內의 형제 간, 혹은 부모친척 간, 또는 지방과 지방인 간에, 자기 업는 동안에 무슨 맷처서 풀니지 못한 분쟁이 잇거든, 그것을 중재한다던가 (가령 北靑이나 咸興 학생이면 이번 운동선수로 인한 분쟁을 화해케 할 것). 또는 청년회 업는 지방에 청년회를 이르키던가, 자기 아는 親知 중에 현재에 빗두루 가는 사람이 잇거던 그 사람 하나일망정, 완전히 인도해 주던가 하는 등 事가 퍽 됴흘 것이다. 이와 가티 생각해 보면, 사람에 따라 지방에 따라, 그 동안에 끗흘 낼만한 일은 얼마라도 잇슬 것이다.
내종으로 一言을 부가할 것은, 방학 때 귀향하기 前期하야, 무엇무엇을 예비하는 것이 됴흘 것이다. 例하면 자기의 의논할만한 親友나 혹 師長이 잇스면, 몬저 그에게 가서, 자기의 고향 及 가정형편을 고백하야, 엇지엇지함이 됴흘 것을 문의하고, 또한 고향에서 와 공부하는 사람이 여럿이면, 그 사람끼리 미리 會合하야, 도라가서 할 일을 토의하고, 또는 자기가 어린이를 상대하고 십흐면, 동화책가튼 이악이 거리책이라도 사 가지고 갈 것이오, 제일 外地이나, 京城 가튼 곳에 공부하는 사람은 外地면 外地, 京城이면 京城의 형편을 체계적으로 미리 아러 가지고 가는 것이 됴타. 제일 지방에서 듯고 십허하는 것은 이것이다. 시험만 맛추면 그 시간으로 다라날 것이 아니라, 무엇을 좀 생각해서 준비할 것을 준비해 가지고 가는 것이 됴타.＜58＞

사람 냄새를 좀 맛타 보아라 당신들이 물 쓰듯 하는 돈의 淵源을 차져서

起田

대학생, 전문학생, 중학생 여러분, 당신들의 100의 99는 現 朝鮮의 有産級이 아니면, 모다 中産級의 자손들일 것이다. (당신들은 무엇보다도 몬저 당신의 신분을 알어야 한다) 당신들이 지금 중학교 혹은 전문학교 또는 대학교를 다니는 그것은, 가령 시골 아동들이 서당에 가서 千字文을 배우는 것과 가티 자기의 記姓名이라 하야, 日用의 편을 圖하쟈 함도 아니오, 또는 도시의 無産兒童이 烟草會社나 양말공장에를 다니는 것과 가티, 자기 家內의 실생활을 補하자 함도 아니오, 솔직히 말하자면, 자기 及 가문의 장래 영예를 위하야 하는 것이다. 구체적으로 말하면 奏任官, 判任官, 銀行會社員 되기 위하야 하고, 文豪, 豪商, 紳士級, 工場主 되기 위하야 하는 것이다. 달니 말하면 남의 지배자 되고 남의 착취자 되야, 거들넝거리며, 豪奢할 양으로 하는 것이다. 당신의 마음만 그러한 것이 아니라, 당신들을 공부식히는 부모의 마음이 그러하고, 現 사회의 당신에게 기대하는 바가 亦 如是하다. (물론 여긔에 예외가 업지는 아늘 것이다) 여러분의 공부하는 심정은 이와 가티 향락적이며 이기적이다. 그런대 여러분은 그러한 동기에서의 공부를 진행하기 위하야, 매월 얼마나한 금전을 소비하며, 그 소비하는 금전은 또한 어대서 나온 것이라 認하는가. 여러분의 父兄이 만일 지주이라 하면 또는 貸金業者, 또는 官僚 또는 商人이라 하면, 그 돈이 어대서 나왓슬 것이라 認하는가. 모르거니와 그 돈은 반다시 여러 불상한 細民의간열핀 手足, 쓸쓸한 典執物, 그 따위의 비참한 陰影 위를 거쳐서 왓슬 것이다. 여러분은 그 돈을 가지고 또 다시 그 불상한 민중을 누르고 빠라먹고, 그 우에서 위풍을 부리고 豪奢를 할 영예의 공부를 하는 것이다. 그 돈슝� 가지고 爲先 양복을 사고 악기를 사고, 사진기를 사고, 내지 분홍봉투, 기념반지까지를 사는 것이다. 여러분, 이것이 우리 사람으로서, 특히 純潔無垢한 청년학생으로서 恬然自安할 바일가.

그러닛가 말이다. 夏期의 방학이 되야, 여러분이 각각＜59＞ 지방으로 도라갈 것이니, 이 기회를 이용하야, 여러분이 날마다 달마도 쓰는 그 돈의 淵源을 그 돈의 제조자를 좀 차저보라는 말이다. 다시 말하면 실제의 細民과 접촉해서 그의 생활을 凝視하며, 그의 情景을 軆得한 然後, 비로소 그들에게서 그러케 하야 나오는 돈을 가지고, 종래와 가튼 동기에서 향락을 공부를 과연 할 수가 잇겟는가 업겟는가를 양심에 도리켜 質正헤 보라는 말이다. 여러분이 진실로 이와 가티 한다 하면, 여러분은, 아니, 여러분 전부는 못된다 할지라도 그 중의 몃 분은 비로소 사람이란 자기의 주위환경을 떠나서, 자기 혼자만이 따로 特出하는 것이 정말로 특출한 것이 아니오, 자기의 주위와 호흡을 가티해서 나아가는 때, 그 때에야말로 인간의 偉大를 實感할 수 잇겟다는 靈感을 갓는 동시에, 사람의 최고의 욕망은 남을 호령하는 데에도 잇지 안코 남을 짜 먹는 데에도 잇지 안코, 오즉 저에서 나를 찻고, 나에게서 저를 찻는 共通線上에서, 가티 일하고 가티 먹고 가티 즐기는 데에 잇는 것을 확인할 것이다.
여러분- 이번 방학에 지방에 가서, 비록 다른 것은 다-못한다 할지라도, 右에 말한 바와 가티, 정말로 細民의 겻헤 가서, 진정한 인간을 의식하게 된다 하면, 여러분은 그 순간으로부터 主義가 서는 사람이며, 천지의 運化에 간여하는 사람이며, 새 세상의 건설에 한 목을 맛는 사람이다.

農民化하라
朴達成

유학생으로서 휴가를 이용하야 지방에를 간다 하면 무엇을 하고 올가. 엇더케 지내고 올가. 舍廊房에 누어서 낫잠이나 슬컷 자고 올가. 南江北山에 유유히 逍遙나 하다 올가. 隣里 친척을 방문하야 隔阻의 정이나 풀다 올가. 名山勝區를 차자 學科의 재료나 어더 올가. 농민 야학이나 하다 올가. 노동강습이나 하다 올가. 무엇을 하며 엇더케 지내다 올가.
當者의 취미 또는 경우에 따라 그 방법이 각각 다르겟지만 될 수 잇는 대로는 일정한 主義 下에서 일치한 방식을 취해스면 조켓다.
그러면 일정한 主義는 무엇이며 일치한 방식은 무엇일가. 그것은 農民主義며 그것은 아츰 저녁으로 논밧(田畓) 찻는 방식이다.
나는 학생이거니 나는 서울 갓든 사람이거니 나는＜60＞ 東京 갓던 유명한 하이카라거니 나는 노는 사람이거니 나는 부자의 자식이거니 하야 검방지게 것모양만 내고 卷煙個나 빨면서 舍廊에 누어 閑談이나 하고 뒤짐을 지고 이리저리 흔들거리면서 鄕村 父老에게 버린 자식 다된 자식 소리만 듯지 말고 純實한 농민의 심정만 건드리지 말고 가는 그날로 곳 農民化가 되야 가티 김 매고 가티 소 멱이고 가티 일하고 가티 노래하란 말이다.
유학생의 몸으로 호미를 들고 농장에 나셔면 농민 그들이 얼마나 위안이 되겟는가. 또는 낫을 차고 꼴군과 가티 석기면 그들이 얼마나 깃버하겟는가. 서울 니약이 東京 니약이로 그들에게 들녀 주면 얼마나 조와하며 또 唱歌나 舞蹈 갓흔 것으로 논두렁 밧두렁을 울녀주면 얼마나 조와하겟는가. 농민들은 『지금의 학생들은 과연 녯날과 딴판이로구나!』 감탄이 나올 때에 그대들의 마음은 얼마나 즐겁겟느냐.
그리하여라. 農民化가 되야라. 논두렁 밧두렁을 거러라. 그리하야 농민에게 위안을 주라. 더구나 소작인에게 위안을 주라. 실지로 그대네가 가티 노동함으로써 위안을 주고 또 니약이로써 위안을 주라. 北方의 니약이도 좃코 南方의 니약이도 좃타. 레닌도 소개해 주고 깐듸도 소개해 주라. 그리면 그들은 조와한다. 共産이니 평균이니 그런 말을 함부로 하다가는 조치 못한 꼴도 당할 것이니 그는 주의하고 엇잿든 不遠한 장래에 균일한 행복이 올 터인데 그는 농민에게 잇다고만 해 주라. 그리고 노동 神聖을 말해주어 不勞者不得을 말해주며 萬民平等 萬民共存을 말해 주라. 밧고랑을 타고 김매가면서도 말하고 樹下에 누어 쉬일 때에도 말하고 오면서도 말하고 가면서도 말하고 집에서도 이웃에서도 當하는 곳 맛나는 사람마다 말해 주라. 자기가 가티 일하면서 말하라. 자기는 뻔들뻔들 놀면서 또는 남의 일을 구경하면서 담배 피어 물면서 뒤짐 지면서 말하면 千言萬談이 도리여 虛것이다. 안이 도리여 惡感만 산다. 자기 실지로 일하면서 하는 말이라야 實效가 잇다. 일반 농민은 안심된다. 조흔 희망을 가지고 새 생명을 개척하기로 노력할 터이다.
다시금 부탁한다. 멧千 멧萬의 유학생 諸君아. 지방으로 가거든 농민화가 되야라. 그리고 논두렁 밧두렁을 밟아라. 호미와 낫을 차고 나셔라. 그리고 일반 농민에게 時代를 잘 알켜 주고 換板을 알켜 주고 계급의식 농민의식을 알켜 주어써 새로운 위안과 희망을 너어 주라. 아- 數萬名의 우리 학생이 지방 지방에서＜61＞ 이러케 해주면 얼마나 조켓느냐.

사람은 「개고리」가 안이다
車相瓚

개고리(蛙)라는 동물은 항상 저 잇던 곳으로만 가는 故로 皆古里라고 이름하얏다. 그러나 사람은 그와 달너서 결코 자기의 고향이나 또는 한 곳에서만 蟄伏할 것이 안이다. 혹은 큰산에 가서 호랑이도 잡고 깁흔 바다에 가서 鮫龍도 낙그며 창공에 비행하야 星雲도 蹴破할 것이다. 馬援이의 말과 가티 즉어도 자기의 시체를 馬革에 裹할 각오를 가지지 안으면 안 될 것이다. 그런데 우리 朝鮮사람은 특히 가족적 관념이 심하고 따러서 향토적 관념이 강대하다. 사업을 하야도 자기 집이나 개인을 위하고 사회 국가의 전체를 위하는 일이 적다. 잘 되야서 고향에 가는 것을 謂之 錦衣還鄕이라 하고 詩를 지여도 思鄕, 望鄕, 歸鄕에 관한 것이 만코 노래를 하야도 고향 생각이 절로 나너니, 고향 생각이 간졀하니 하고 전혀 향토적 思想을 표현할 뿐이다. 그럼으로 학생도 冬期나 夏期에 휴가만 되면 곳 자기 鄕里로만 간다. 물론 1년이나 몃달동안을 그리우던 고향에 가서 사모하던 부모도 歸省하고 사랑하는 형제 친척을 만나보는 것도 조흔 일이 안인 것은 안이다. 그러나 今日의 우리 朝鮮사람은 前日의 朝鮮사람이 안이오 학생도 泰平無事한 외국의 학생과 다르다. 아모리 학생시대일지라도 자기가 이 사회의 투사인 것을 覺得하야 苟苟한 관습 예절의 구속을 밧지 말고 향토를 초월하야 각지의 人情 風俗도 구경하며 실지로 사회사정을 연구하야 개조, 혁신의 자료를 준비하지 안으면 안될 것이다. 그러면 無錢旅行을 하야서도 北朝鮮의 학생이 南朝鮮에도 가고 南朝鮮의 학생이 北朝鮮에도 가며 또는 朝鮮 각지 혹은 外地까지도 가는 것이 조흘 것이다. 不得己 鄕村에 갈지라도 자기 洞里에만 잇지 말고 隣方 近地로 돌아단이며 농촌생활도 구ꊲ�하고 농촌 취미도 알도록 하는 것이 좃켓다. 總合하야 말하면 학생이 방학 중에 皆古里처럼 자기 고향으로만 가지 말나는 부탁이다.

數萬名 新進役軍의 總動員 - 일은 맨미톄 돌아가 始作하자
方定煥＜62＞

7월 11,2일부터 20일까지는 아모 때 보아도 京城驛이 귀향하는 학생으로 빡빡 참니다. 아츰이 그럿코 낫이 그럿코 저녁이 또 그럿코...
이럿케 한 때에 쫙 퍼저 나려가는 수만명의 학생을 볼 때에 나는 거긔에 무섭게 큰 『힘』을 늣김니다. 그네가 新生하려는 朝鮮에서 싹 돗아난 새생명인 동시에 가장 밋버운 役軍들인 까닭임니다. 더구나 그들은 講演團이나 신문 잡지가 갈 수 잇는 철도沿邊뿐이 아니고 방방곡곡이 朝鮮사람 사는 곳에 안 가는 곳이 업는 것을 생각할 때에 더 큰 힘을 늣기게 됨니다.
방학은 물론 休業일 것임니다. 그러나 지금 우리 형편에 잇서서는 그럿케 만흔 학생이 일시에 쫙 퍼저 일시에 쫙 모여드는 40일간이 결코 무의미하게 소비되여서는 안될 것임니다. 閑休 뿐만 지나서는 결코 안될 것임니다.
수만명 新進役軍의 총동원! 그럿슴니다. 귀향하는 학생 여러분 각자각자가 스스로 요령을 닐치 아니하엿스면 여러분의 夏期귀향은 확실히 우리의 운동 우에 니러나는 수만명 新進役軍의 총동원임니다.
방방곡곡에 삿삿치 퍼저헤지는 일꾼이 자기 마을, 자기 골마다 한 가지씩의 씨를 심으고 한 가지씩의 일을 니르켜 놋코 온다하면 엇더케 그 일이 무섭고 큰일이 되겟슴닛가. 더구나 현대의 일은 농촌에 씨를 심으고 농민과 일을 니르키는 데뿐 成事를 볼 수 잇는 것이 아님닛가. 우리는 생각을 여긔에 두지 아니하면 안됨니다.
어린 중학생이 무슨 일을 하랴! 고 흔히 말하지만 일은 그럿케 생각하는 대서 망치는 것임니다. 事大主義에 붓잡힌 사람은 일하면 벌서 커-다란 일 먼저 생각하는 고로 시작보다 낭패가 압서는 것임니다. 최근 우리게는 여러 가지의 노력과 운동이 잇서 왓지마는 그것이 것흐로 큰소리만 내엿슬 뿐이요 안으로 실제의 큰힘을 짓지 못하고 큰 긔운을 움즉이지 못하는 것은 그 일이 다수 민중의 일이 못 되고(다수 민중을 목적하면서도) 일부의 사람의 노력에 불과하는 까닭임니다.
最下 最底로 도라가 거긔서부터 출발해 나가지 아니하면 아니됨니다. 최하층 최저급 맨- 밋바닥으로 도라가서 거긔서부터 새로 출발하지 안흐면 아니됨니다.
금번 夏期의 學生軍의 총동원! 다- 나아가 맨- 밋바닥에서 착수하여야 됨니다. 종전의 類의 순회강연도 지낫슴니다. 순회연극도 급하지 안슴니다. 놉흔 지식보다도 엿흔 지식이 일반적으로 넓히 퍼저가야＜63＞ 됨니다.
고향에 도라가는 학생 여러분! 간절히 부탁하노니 수만명 역군이 금년 녀름에는 盟誓코 당신宅 리웃 농민에게 諺文 한 가지씩 깨처주고 오십시요. 今日 우리의 諸般事爲는 거긔서 출발하지 아니하면 虛事임니다. 전문학생이고 중학생이고 소학생이고 여학생이고 다- 가티 농촌에 도라가 자기 집을 중심으로 하고 리웃집 사람들에게 諺文 한 가지만 깨우처 주고 오자. 그러면 한 사람이 열 사람씩에게만 배워준다 하드래도 금년 방학 40일간에 朝鮮 안에서 20만 이상의 사람이 새로 눈이 띄우는 것임니다. 결코 놉흔 지식만을 요하는 것은 아님니다. 朝鮮사람 모다가 文盲을 면한다 하면 우리는 서로 호흡을 가티 할 수가 잇스며 氣脉을 통할 수 잇게되야 비로소 민중 전체가 손목을 맛잡고 가티 움즉여 나갈 수 잇게 될 것임니다.
講習所니 무어니 하고 떠들 것도 업슴니다. 사람을 만히 모으기에 勞心할 것도 업슴니다. 우선 자기 집 자기 집에도 젊은이 어린이로 諺文 모르는 이가 잇슬 것이니 그로부터 비롯하야 리웃집 몃 사람씩 열 사람도 좃코, 다섯 사람도 좃코, 업스면 자기 안해나 자기 동생 단 한 사람에게라도 조흐니 40일 동안 두고 1일 2시간 혹 3, 4시간 마츰 저녁으로나 점심때로나 할 수 잇는 것임니다. 가튼 『사람』의 힘으로 한 『사람』을 조흔 길로 지도한다는 것만도 임의 지극히 고귀한 일이려던 그리 하는 일이 우리의 큰 운동의 귀중한 첫 거름인 것을 생각하면 그 얼마나 존귀하고도 至重한 일임닛가.
결코 떠드는 데 일이 잇지 안슴니다. 흣날니는 데 성공이 잇지 안슴니다. 맨- 밋흐로 맨- 바닥으로 도라와 속으로 씨를 품고 실제에 뿌리를 박아 민중(농민)과 맛잡고 니러나지 아니하면 안됨니다. 혁명 전의 露西亞청년들의 일이 우리에게 가르킴이 만치 안슴닛가.
『밋흐로 가자. 거긔서 니러나자!』
허러진 인물처럼 新進役軍도 事大主義와 명예욕에 날뛴다 하면 또는 오늘까지의 일처럼 공중을 향하야 떠들기만 하면 우리는 영구히 新生의 길을 엇지 못할 것임니다.
『금년 녀름에는 盟誓코 리웃사람에게 諺文을 깨워 주고 오자!』
수만명 新役軍의 총동원! 바라건대 여러분은 여러분 今日의 처지와 또 장래와 그에 대한 여러분의 務責가 엇더한 것을 생각하소서. -6, 23, 夜-＜64＞

나의 付托
李鍾麟

깟댁하면 전가족의 생활이 엇지될 줄을 모르는 그 안타가운 금전을 가지고 4년이나 혹 6년간의 진절이치는 그 시간과 싸오너라고 치워도 치운 줄을 모르며 배곱하도 배곱흔 줄을 모르고 一刻을 다투던 학생 諸君은 방학이라는 이 기회를 엇어서 즈윽히 숨을 도르게 되는 것이다. 우리의 사정이 웬만만 하면 이와 가티 피곤한 諸君의게 엇지 참아 무슨 짐을 지우랴만은 山窮水盡한 우리의 現狀을 도라보면 체면과 인정을 도라볼 여가가 업다. 이제 諸君의게 짐을 맛기랴는 나는 고민과 나의 짐을 맛는 諸君의 고민이 족음도 차이가 업슬 것이다.
우리가 現狀 이대로 가서 무슨 변통이 업시 6,7년만 지낸다면 朝鮮학생은 아마 현재 諸君으로써 終幕을 막고 말 것이다. 아모리 배우고 십흔들 무엇을 가지고 배우며 아모리 가라치고 십흔들 무엇을 가지고 가라치랴. 이제 諸君의 매월 3,40원式 쓰는 그 돈이 어대로부터 온 것임을 아는가. 10의 8,9는 반다시 拓殖會社에서 나오는 것이 아니면 殖産銀行에서 온 것이다.
시골서 농사를 짓는다면 소리치고 하여야 년 7,80석에 지내지 못할 것이며 장사를 한대야 그 자금은 4,500원이 한끗일 것이다. 이 수입을 가지고 일절 세금, 기타 面職員의 送迎費, 경관 파출소의 石炭價까지 부담하고 나니 무엇을 가지고 諸君의 학비를 보내것느냐. 옴치고 뛸 수 업시 논을 典當하거나 밧을 放賣하는 외에는 다른 도리가 업슬 것이다. 그리고 보면 우리의 남은 것이 몃 해나 支撑할 것이냐. 이제 교육문제에 잇서서는 하도 떠드러내인닛가 도적가티 영학한 사람들도 입을 벙끗하지 못하는 모양이다. 그러나 나는 감히 하고 십흔 말은 기탄업시 말하랴 한다.
나는 어대를 가던지 커다런 학교를 볼 대에는 문득 져것이 不生産消費者의 양성소가 아닌가 하는 늣김을 가지게 된다. 연필 한 개, 半紙 한 장이이라도 논을 잡히고 밧을 판돈인대 져러케 만흔 학생이 능히 다 졸업을 할 것인가. 假使 千百의 十一이라도 그 業을 완전히 마친다 하자. 그 사람이 능히 그 배운 것을 써먹을 곳이 잇슬가. 한두 사람이 싸운다 하자. 月 100원이나 7,80원의 수입을 가지고 여러 학생의 잡히고 파라먹은 그 토지 가옥을 차져 줄 터이며 그만한 遊衣遊食之民을＜65＞ 다 救處하여 줄 터인가. 기타 배우다가 채 배우지도 못하고 배워 가지고도 소용업는 그 사람들은 다 엇더케 될 터인가. 2,3개월이라도 연필대를 갑어본 사람이면 굴므면 굴머도 남자는 다시 호메자루를 잡지 아니하고 여자는 다시 물동의를 이지 아니하는 것이 보통이며 중학 이상의 정도를 맛본 사람이면 이혼 사기 등의 죄악을 범하는 것이 다른 사람보다 비교적 만흔 것은 現下의 사실이다. 이것이 엇지 배운 그것의 죄랴만은 엇저던 다른 변통이 업시 이 모양으로만 나아간다 하면 학생이 아니될 사람이 업슬 것이며 학생이 만하여질사록 不生産消費者가 더욱 만하여질 것이다. 그리고 보면 배우너라고 기우러진 생활의 근본을 배워 가지고는 신사 노릇 하너라고 마저 뽑아바리게 되니 그 때는 다시 무엇을 가지고 가라치며 배우겟는가. 朝鮮학생은 아마 현재 諸君으로써 終幕을 막는다는 말이 불행히 虛言이 되지 아니할가 하는 杞憂가 나의 가삼을 텃티랴 한다.
학생 제군, 제군 자신이 학생이면서 남을 배우지 말나, 남을 가라치지 말나 하는 것은 참아 할 수 업는 일이나 이번에 집에 도라가거든 될 수 잇는 대로 친척 친구의 간에 이러한 현상을 자세히 알녀주어서 今後로는 누구던지 학교생활을 하랴면 반다시 그 생활정도를 보와서 할 것이요 결코 지금과 가티 한 行世꺼리로 乃終은 엇지 되얏던지 남이 배우니 나도 배워야 하겟다 남이 가라치니 나도 가라처야 하겟다는 無謀한 일이 업도록 하여쥬며 학생 자신부터도 암만 그 생활정도가 그 業을 마추지 못할 경우이면 유감이여도 양복을 벗고 김을 매거나 학용품을 파라서 蠶具를 사는 것이 得策일가 한다. 사람이 지식를 구하는 것은 단순히 먹자고만 하는 것이 아니요 사람 노릇하자는 것이나 사람 노릇도 먹고 산 然後事이다. 그리고 古來로 대정치 대철학 대종교의 모든 큰 지식은 흔니 荳田芋畝의 間이나 牧場果圃의 中으로 나오는 것이요 반다시 칠판 밋치나 서책 속으로만 나오는 것이 아니다. 불행히 諸君 자기는 遺恨을 抱하게 되야도 임의 기우러젓던 생활의 기초가 다시 鞏固하야진다하면 그 子弟는 자기 마음대로 완전한 사람을 만드러 줄 것이다. 이것이 자기 一身을 위하야 전 가족을 溝壑에  굴게 하는 것보다 큰 성공이 아닌가 한다. 諸君이 何幸으로 이 부탁을 저바리지 안는다 하면 나로 微劣하나마 諸君과 가티 敎育界에도 屯兵制度와 가튼 別방식을 취하도록 노력하랴 한다.＜66＞

夏期休暇 동안에는
法專 趙斗燮

年年히 6월 금음게만 되면 40여 일이나 되는 夏期休暇 동안을 엇더케 지낼가 하는 생각이 학기시험준비에 밧분 腦를 어수선하게 함니다. 이것은 나뿐만 안이라 학생된 이로서는 누구나 다 그럴 줄 암니다. 그런데 학생들의 대부분은 지방사람으로서 京城 와서 유학하는 이들이닛가 그들은 방학만 하면 거의 자기 고향으로 도라가지요. 나 역시 西北地方의 한 사람이닛가 시험이 끗나는 날 아니면 그 이튼 날은 반듯이 집으로 나려가지요. 이가티 가고보면 한 학기 동안 그리웁든 집이닛가 물론 반갑고 편안하고 또 그보다도 제일 시원하지요. 그래서 그런지는 모르지만 엇재든 집에서는 공부가 잘 되지 안슴니다. 책 세 권을 가지고 가면 두 권, 여섯 권을 가지고 가면 네 권을 더 본 적이 업슴니다. 그러닛가 쓸데업시 作亂만 하다 올나오지요. 그러나 최근 2, 3년 동안에는 운동경기, 순회강연, 素人劇 가튼 것도 하여 보앗지요. 얼마나한 효과가 잇섯는지는 모르지요만은 다소의 滋味도 보앗음니다. 이것도 여간 힘이 들지 안코 첫재 말상이 하도 만흐닛가 하기가 심히 어럽슴니다. 금년 夏休 동안에는 이럿케 하여 보려고 함니다.
학생이 되여서 공부하는 것을 이질 수는 업는 일이닛가 될 수 잇는 대로 힘써 책를 보려고 함니다. 그리고 운동과 토론 혹은 강연 가튼 것도 자조 하려고 함니다. 이런 것이야 무슨 특별한 成算이라 하겟슴닛가. 특히 될 수만 잇스면 주로 農人들을 모와 가지고 「夏期講座」 가튼 것을 열어 보랴고 함니다. 아직 배우는 것이 되여서 남을 가라치기가 어려운 것도 알지요만은 이것이 가장 조흔 일인 줄 알고 모르는 것을 가티 알어 보랴고 함니다. 그러고 이것이 한 사람으로는 어려울 것이지요만은 유학생으로 된 모임(會)이 잇스닛가 그다지 어럽지 안을 줄 암니다. 그러나 엇더한 풍파를 격그며 얼마나한 효과가 잇을난지는 의문임니다.
또한 될 수 잇는 대로 인근지방을 도라단여 보려고 함니다. 그야 물론 全國도 좃코 외국도 좃치요만은 그는 시간상 더욱이 경제상으로 할 수 업게 되지요. 그리하야 첫재 내 지방의 모든 것을 잘 아는 것도 무엇보다 매우 조흔 일인가 함니다.＜67＞

한 마듸, 한 자라도 오직 實地로
高農 金泰壎

우리 민족으로 누가 낫다구 말하리요마는 이즘 우리 지방 인민은 소수를 제한 외에는 어안이 벙벙하야 엇질 줄을 몰은다. 소펜하워의 의욕적 염세주의도 몰낫고 홉푸쓰의 윤리적 염세관도 몰낫것마는 염세의 기분은 가득하여젓다. 안이 瀕死의 境에서 死를 苦待한다. 이 웬 셈이요? 이유는 물론 만켓지만 그 근본이유는 말할 것도 업고 둘재로는 거긔에 따라 거이 대부분이 신문명을 이해치도 못하며 타인의 손으로 시설된 所謂 文明利器라는 것을 함부로 이용한 까닭에 五里霧中에서 彼等의 蠶食을 깨달을 새도 업시 엄벙점벙하다가 이 현상에 니른 것이 안인가 한다. 이래서 이 영향을 더욱 크게 닙은 것은 우리 지방 小農階級과 노동계급이다. 말미암아 이들은 지금 死의 線에서 구원의 手를 기대릴 餘地도 업시 되엿다. 함으로 엇던 이는 근본적 打破를 부르지저 해결코저 하며 또 엇던 이는 경제적 개조를 요구한다. 그 어느 것을 취하여야 될넌지 나는 모르지만 하여간 容易치 안을 것은 사실이다. 그리 용이치 안을 것을 함부로 떠든다고 해결이 될 것은 안이다. 한 번 닌큼 뛰여 白頭山가튼 山의 絶頂에 올나서는 才操를 못 가진 이상에는 今日, 今日로 一步一步 계단을 밟지 안을 수 업다함으로 나는 한 마듸 한 자를 작고작고 친히 가르치는 것이 第一의 요건이 될 줄 안다. 한데 보라! 우리 무엇 조곰 안다는 이들은 기차간에서라도 농민이나 노동자이 만이 안즌 데는 일삼어 피하고 日人이나 깨끗한 사람들만이 잇는 곳으로 가서 안는다. 촌사람이 말을 부칠가 보아서 겁이 나는 모양이다. 그리고는 혼자 잘난 듯이 떠든다. 年前 나는 엇던 학생으로 조직된 講演團이 夏期休暇를 이용하야 지방을 巡演할 때 청중의 一人으로 되여 본 일이  잇다. 그 적에 청중은 거의 無識階級인데도 불구하고 한 演士는 登壇하더니 「에나-지」가 엇더니 뉴-톤이 엇더니 電子가 무엇이니 하고 한참 떠들은 후에 또 한 演士는 칼 맑쓰가 엇잿느니 모리쓰 카-펜타가 엇잿느니 하고 무슨主義 무슨的 하면서 아는 學說 아는 新熟語는 모주리 내다 쓰면서 이야기를 하자 하니 청중이 눈이 뻔하여지면서도 알어들을 수가 잇서야지 그만 얼마만에 다- 졸음을 청하고＜68＞ 말엇라. 그 講演團은 무슨 취지로 巡演하엿넌지는 모르지만 지방에도 다- 자기네와 가튼 有識한 이들만 잇는 줄 아는 모양인 것 가텃다. 그러타고 지방에는 다- 無識한 이들만 잇다는 것은 안이지만 그런 新思想 新學說 그나마 개념도 잘 모르는 것을 가지고 떠드는 것은 우리 지방에는 별로히 가치가 업을 줄 안다. 그림으로 나는 이러케 하는 것보다는 차라리 그 지방을 이해하고 그 지방민의 정도를 잘 알아 상식에 또는 실용에 적당한 것을 가르치면 조흘 줄 안다. 함으로 나는 이번 夏期休暇에 집에 도라가시는 나의 동모 여러분께 감히 이러케 부탁하고 십다. 안이 내 생각만으로는 이러케 하엿으면 조흘 것 갓다. 무엇인가? 그 지방을 잘 이해하고 그 사정을 자세히 洞察하여 몸을 앗기지 말고 좀 相從하기 괴롭지만 지방 아동에게나 또는 농민에게나 실지로 모둠을 짓거나 개인의게나를 물론하고 한字 한마듸라도 가르켜 주면 조켓다는 것이다. 또 근래 우리 일반학생들 가운데는 문학을 즐기여 文學書類를 耽讀하는 이들이 만은 모양인데 책자에 넘우 耽溺하지 말고 또 글을 쓴다구 하여도 넘우 사랑이니 무엇이 하고 연애 서정문만 쓰지 말고 그 뜨겁은 정서를 다른 편으로 돌녀 즉 민족에게로 옴기여 차라리 民謠 가튼 것 童謠 가튊� 것을 의미잇게 써서 지방에 鼓吹하도록 하엿으면 엇절넌지 하는 것이다. 신문지나 잡지에 그것을 만이 실넌다고 하여도 지방에 농촌에까지 보편적 선전은 어려울 것이다. 이것은 中流 以上 지식계급에만 한하여의 讀物이라고 하여도 過言이 안이기 때문이다. 마즈막으로 나는 우리 동모들게 한 가지 더 말슴드리는 것은 우리는 다른 나라 학생들의 처지와는 다릇다는 것을 생각하여 보시라는 말이다. 다른 나라 학생들은 夏期休暇가 되면 서늘한 곳을 따라 피서하누라고 분주하지만 우리는 그를 맛보지 못함을 슬퍼하지 말음과 함개 지방 개척 다시 크게 말하면 우리 나라 문화향상식힘에 無上한 환희를 맛보자는 것이다.＜69＞