Magazine Title: 개벽 제49호
Publication Date: 1924년 07월 01일 (July 1, 1924)
Article Title: 開闢創刊四周年記念號附錄, 重要術語辭典 (Appendix to the 4th Anniversary Issue of Gaebyeok, Dictionary of Important Terminology)
Author: 朴英熙 編 (Compiled by Pak Yŏnghŭi)
Article Type: 잡저 (Miscellaneous Writing/Essay)

開闢創刊四周年記念號附錄, 重要術語辭典
						朴英熙 編
文學部 80語 「第1回」
目次
擬古主義 (Classicism)
自然主義 (Naturalism)
遊戱本能 (Play Instinct)
世紀末 (Fin de siècle)
데카단 (Decadent)
病的狀態 (Morbid State)
瞹眛說 (Theory of Obscurity)
暗面描寫 (Depiction of the Dark Side)
三一至說 (Theory of Three Unities)
浪漫主義 (Romanticism)
浪漫主義者 (Romanticist)
浪漫的 (Romantic)
少年獨逸派 (Young Germany School)
第三帝國 (The Third Empire)
新浪漫主義 (Neo-Romanticism)
新浪漫主義者 (Neo-Romanticist)
耽美派 (Aesthetic School)
利己主義 (Egoism)
新理想主義 (Neo-idealism)
人道主義 (Humanism)
個人主義 (Individualism)
新英雄主義 (Neo-Heroism)
異敎主義 (Paganism)
人生派 (Artist of Human [Life])
神秘主義 (Mysticism)
享樂主義 (Hedonism)
惡의 華 (Flowers of Evil)
人工樂園 (Artificial Paradise)
唯美主義 (Aestheticism)
惡魔主義 (Satanism)
象徵主義 (Symbolism)
人形의 家 (A Doll's House)
寫實主義 (Realism)
虛無主義 (Nihilism)
後期印象派 (Post-Impressionism)
神曲 (Divine Comedy)
哀傷主義 (Sentimentalism)
라파엘前派 (Pre-Raphaelites)
印象主義 (Impressionism)
藝術衝動 (Art Impulse)
未來主義 (Futurism)
表現主義 (Expressionism)
立軆主義 (Cubism)
다다이슴 (Dadaism)
古典文學 (Classical Literature)
審美 (Aesthetics)
世紀病 (Mal du siècle / Century Sickness)
都會病 (Urban Malaise)
感情移入 (Empathy)
希臘義主 (Hellenism)
鄕土藝術 (Homeland Art / Heimatkunst)
입센이슴 (Ibsenism)
에루테루이슴 (Wertherism)
想像主義 (Imaginationism - likely referring to Blake's concept)
유토피아 (Utopia)
詩 (Poetry)
散文 (Prose)
散文詩 (Prose Poem)
客觀的 批評 (Objective Criticism)
主觀的 批評 (Subjective Criticism)
裁判的 批評 (Judicial Criticism)
歸納的 批評 (Inductive Criticism)
科學的 批評 (Scientific Criticism)
鑑賞的 批評 (Appreciative Criticism)
倫理的 批評 (Ethical Criticism)
文藝復與 (Renaissance)
獨創 (Originality)
剽竊文學 (Plagiarized Literature)
希伯來主義 (Hebraism)
高踏派 (Parnassians)
懷疑文學 (Skeptical Literature)
狂*興挬起의 詩人 (Sturm und Drang Poets)
象牙搭 (Ivory Tower)
桂冠詩人 (Poet Laureate)
偶像破壞 (Iconoclasm)
옵부로모비슴 (Oblomovism)
幻滅期文學 (Literature of the Disillusionment Period)
外面描寫 (External Description)
幻覺 (Hallucination)
憧憬 (Yearning/Longing)
軟文學 (Soft Literature)
自然描寫 (Nature Description)
地方色 (Local Color)
黃金率 (Golden Section)
黃金律 (Golden Rule)
靈感 (Inspiration)
自由詩 (Free Verse)
쩌내리슴 (Journalism)
機械的人生觀 (Mechanistic View of Life)
肉의宗敎 (Religion of the Flesh)
美의宗敎 (Religion of Beauty)
「이상은 철학과 사상을 除한 分」 (The above excludes Philosophy and Thought)

略字 (Abbreviations)
「文」......文學 (Literature)
「美」......美學 혹은 繪畵 (Aesthetics or Painting)
「哲」......哲學 (Philosophy)
「倫」......倫理 (Ethics)
「詩」......詩歌 (Poetry)
「佛」......佛蘭西 (France)
「思」......思想 (Thought)
「評」......批評 혹은 評論 (Criticism or Review)
「獨」......獨逸 (Germany)
「露」......露西亞 (Russia)
「英」......英國 (England)＜2＞

In this issue, we have gathered several literary terms, excluding those from philosophy and thought. Since literature has evolved over the long centuries, thousands of years after the Christian era, i.e., since literary movements began, the terminology is countless, difficult to calculate in hundreds or thousands. However, removing minor details, we have first gathered only the terms most necessary to know and most prevalent today as the first installment. Furthermore, even a single term can be difficult to explain sufficiently in hundreds of pages of text, so here we have tried to make it as plain and simple as possible to understand in a short time, but whether this is successful is hard to say until the reader has read it. Due to time constraints, this was done in a short period without much leisure, so even if it is somewhat incomplete, please understand that there will be opportunities for revision and addition later. Although there are so-called literary dictionaries even in Japanese, many contain only useless, obsolete characters and are often uselessly lengthy without practical substance. Therefore, we attempted to gather only the essence of trending terms from Japanese books, Western books, and other dictionaries as much as possible. We plan to publish the philosophy and thought section in the next issue if possible. Also, it should be noted again that unnecessary nouns like color names have been omitted, and only those derived from thought and contemplation have been gathered. Terms from fine arts related to literature are also included.
-Compiler's Note-

擬古主義(Classicism) 「文」 This is a literary term that existed before the rise of the Naturalism movement. (1) In other words, the 18th century was the age of Classicism. (2) The first half of the 19th century was the Romantic era, and (3) from the mid-19th century onwards was the Naturalism era. The art of that principle and European literature during the 17th and 18th centuries was a type centered on France (佛蘭西), based on the styles of Greece (希臘) and Latin (拉典). People of this era were generally very conventional in their lives. There were fixed standard laws in morality, politics, and religion, and one had to obey them. In other words, it was a principle that adhered to old models and was bound by form. Along with loving form, they loved unity, balance, clarity, and discipline, and valued intellectuality, using intellect as something precious in artistic creation. Therefore, they only engaged in imitation, and individuality or passion was not seen.

失樂園(Paradise Lost) 「詩」 This is the title of a collection of poems by the English poet John Milton (1608-1674). It is an epic poem about how the ancestors of humankind, Adam and Eve (이뿌), lost their paradise because they did not observe God's commandment.＜3＞

自然主義(Naturalism) 「文」 A literary movement that arose again as Classicism (擬古主義) declined from the mid-19th century, it was a reaction against the formal constraints of Classicism, and it also leaped out from Romanticism (浪漫主義). In other words, it vaguely represents the phrases "nature as it is" or "as it is." (1) The objective world is called nature. (2) Compared to the world of the mind, the spiritual world, the material world is called nature. (3) Sometimes nature is referred to in contrast to the Ideal. (4) Compared to technique, the naked phenomenon without any artificial processing is called nature. (5) The innate character of things, i.e., their natural disposition as it is, is called nature. (6) The normal state, in contrast to the ideal, is called nature. As the word "nature" has various meanings like this, the term "Naturalism" is also used in various ways.
「哲」 Philosophical Naturalism's fundamental idea is to view mental phenomena as continuous with material phenomena. That is, mental phenomena arise from material phenomena, and there is no spirit apart from matter. The functions of the mind only arise after the body exists. In other words, it is Materialism.—The Materialist view, which sees all phenomena as results of matter and its motion, is philosophical Naturalism.
「倫」 Ethical Naturalism also has various forms. If the word nature is interpreted to mean materialistic, then hedonism and eudaimonism, which make material happiness the goal of morality, are also a type of ethics. Nietzsche's (Fridrich Wilhelm Nitzsche 1844-1900) moral theory is also a type. Furthermore, if the word nature is interpreted only in the sense of naturalness, then Rousseau's (Rousseau, 1670-1741 (佛)) moral theory, which said, "Return to nature, follow human nature," is also a type. Nietzsche's moral theory, which insists on being faithful to instinct to the very end, can clearly be called ethical Naturalism if one accepts that instinct is human nature.

自然主義文學 (Naturalist Literature) 「文」 Works written under Naturalism employ purely objective observation and description. In contrast to ancient literature which focused on Beauty (美), it strived to capture Truth (眞). The general aim, subject matter, method, and attitude of Naturalism can be understood by knowing the path between Romanticism and Naturalism. ＜4＞
(1) From fantasy to reality (2) From passion to reason (理智), (3) From subjective to objective (4) From spirit to matter (5) From technique to artlessness (無技巧) (6) From art for art's sake to art for life's sake (7) From playfulness to solemnity (8) From verse to prose (9) From the ideal to the ordinary—such distinctions can be made.— For its description, refer to 「暗面描寫」 (Depiction of the Dark Side).

自然主義者(Naturalist) 「文」 Refers to a person who writes Naturalist works. Maupassant (G. d. Maupassant, 1850-1890), Zola (E Zola 1840-1902), Flaubert (Flaubert 1821-1880), etc., are representative French (佛蘭西) writers.

遊戲本能(Play-impulse) 「文」 The play impulse is a theory advocated starting with Germany's Kant (Kant, 1724-1804) and Schiller (Schiller, 1759-1805), and later by England's Spencer (Spencer 1820-1902) among others. It posits that the motive for the origin of art is the play impulse. Thus, the play impulse is a variation of "surplus energy." The conclusion of this assertion is that art has no relation whatsoever to the utilitarian purposes of real life and is nothing more than the play impulse.

世紀末(Fin de siècle) 「文」 This means "end of the century." It signifies the very end of the 19th century. It refers to the vague anxiety and turmoil of life during the chaotic period at the end of the 19th century. It was a time when people lost all faith, all authority, and also the ideas that could unify everything, leaving only anxiety, disappointment, discouragement, and despair shaking people's minds. Therefore, it refers to a chaotic era filled with the fear of life and despair.

데카단(Decadant)頹廢派 「文」 A type of principle or noun that arose at the fin de siècle. When disappointment and discouragement resulted in only despair and sorrow dominating people's minds, everyone stopped hoping for tomorrow, stopped hoping for next month, and thought, "Let's just enjoy today. Let's just revel as much as we can while we are alive. Let's just enjoy the present! Let's indulge!" For them, the world consisted only of women and drinking. And so, moment by moment, breathing the painful gasps of the sick, they decayed in despair. Refer to 「惡魔主義」 (Satanism).

病的狀態 (Morbid State) 「文」 The scientific spirit, an element of the modern spirit, gave birth to Materialism, and this Materialism gave birth to material civilization. Consequently, modern people's lives came to revolve around this material life. In other words, the <5> scientification of life simultaneously became the materialization of life. Therefore, the desire for material possessions grew strong in people's hearts. However, on the other hand, due to population growth and the miserable state of the struggle for existence, these desires could not be fulfilled. Furthermore, the struggle for existence became fiercer day by day. Consequently, people's minds could not help but groan in deep pitfalls. Nerves and bodies were suffering from the "mal du siècle" (世紀病). It refers to a state of illness stemming from mental fatigue: inactivity, hopelessness, stagnation, melancholy.

瞹昧說(Theorie de L' obscurite') 「文」 This assertion starts from the premise that language is originally imperfect and ambiguous. Therefore, it cannot express one's profound thoughts and complex emotions. Language can only hint at some meaning. Proponents include Maeterlinck (매터랑크), Baudelaire (뽀드레르), Mallarmé (마라메), and other Symbolist poets who are representative figures.

暗面描寫 (Depiction of the Dark Side) 「文」 Being scientific can also be said to be realistic. Being realistic can readily be called "naked" (赤裸). Therefore, the descriptions of Naturalists valued reality above all else and did not reveal or conceal based on the goodness or badness of taste. If it is the "Truth" (眞) of life or realistic, then everything becomes "naked." In other words, one observes the entirety of life, combining good and evil. Consequently, the hidden dark side of life, the ugly, sordid dark side of life, came to be revealed. Naturalists, loving reality and Truth, depicted the dark side of life. Therefore, compared to Romanticism, which only praised the Beauty (美) of life, Naturalism considered the depiction of the dark side an important point. Among the dark aspects, those related to "sexual desire" (성욕) were numerous. Before Naturalism, sexual desire was avoided as much as possible. It was considered dirty, immoral, something shameful even to write about. However, as long as sexual desire strongly dominates human life, one cannot depict true life by excluding it. From the standpoint of Truth—Reality—Science, it is a fact that sexual desire becomes important in Naturalist literature. In Naturalism, not only sexual desire but also the material aspects of humanity became important, as is often said. Instead of thinking of humans as spiritual beings, humans are seen as nothing more than animals like dogs and cats. To put it extremely, humans too are choosing a life of struggle. The world is becoming uglier. It is not being forcibly made ugly, but its entirety is naturally becoming uglier; this is modern life. <6> Therefore, they bravely exposed the ugly face of life. Maupassant's "Bel-Ami" (뻴암이) and "A Woman's Life" (女의 일생), Zola's "The Beast in Man" (野獸의 喜劇 - likely refers to La Bête humaine), D'Annunzio's (다눈시오) "The Triumph of Death" (死의 승리), etc., exposed all the dark sides of life—what are commonly called greed, avarice, depravity, immorality. In other words, the depiction of the dark side is a crucial aspect of Naturalist works. Refer to 「自然主義」 (Naturalism).

三一致說(ThreeUnities) 「戱」 Aristotle's (아리스토틀) assertion, referring to the unity of Time, Place, and Action, as found in the plays of Euripides (유리피데스) (485-406 BC) and Sophocles (쏘포클) (495-405 BC).

浪漫主義(Romanticism) 「文」 Readily put, compared to Classicism (擬古主義) which was bound by convention, Romanticism valued freedom above all, breaking the old shell of convention. Compared to Classicism which was imitative, Romanticism valued originality above all. In contrast to Classicism's intellectuality (知巧), Romanticism valued natural human emotion. Whereas Classicism used reality as material, Romanticism was art that freely employed imagination, taking supra-realistic material.
See the table below.
Romanticism is the unbearable cry of people living under Classicism. The self-awareness awakened by the Renaissance movement—the spirit of free inquiry and free faith—was liberated from the bondage of Christianity, only to be confined again by the Classics. However, people whose eyes had once been opened to self-awareness could not tolerate this situation. They could not suppress their individuality, which had been bound by standards and laws handed down from antiquity. "Discard the standards! Discard the laws! Smash all conventions and liberate the self!" they clamored. The person who said, "Return to nature!" was Rousseau (룻소), the forerunner of Romanticism. This is the simple reason for the rise of Romanticism.

낭만주의자(Romanticist) 「文」 Refers to writers or artists who advocate Romanticism. Rousseau, 1670-1741. <7>
German              German
Goethe, 1749-1832. H. Heine, 1797-1856.
German               English
Schiller, 1759-1805. Shelley, 1792-1822.
English               English
Byron 1788-1824. Keats, 1795-1821.
These individuals were representative figures.
(Remainder omitted in original)

浪漫的(Romantic) 「文」 The adjective form of Romanticism; it came to be used in daily language for things similar to freedom from restraint, imaginative beauty, interpretive mood, transcendent pleasure, etc.

少年獨逸派 (Young Germany School) 「文」 After Goethe (께데) and Schiller (시루레루), the famous poet was the lyric poet Heine (Heine, 1797-1856). His poetry rarely had a solemn and grand flavor but was rich in delicate and beautiful sentiment (幽婉纖美). His famous poems often contained mockery and mercilessly reviled the culture of the time. His skeptical tendency clearly showed modern thought. At that time, Napoleon (Napoleon) I had fallen, the German people's hopes for national revival had turned to naught, and people were suffering under the oppressive politics of the federal system. When people's discontent became unbearable, all that suffering appeared in the "literary sphere," leading to a literary movement focused on destruction and skepticism, namely the "Young Germany School" (少年獨逸派) movement in Germany (獨逸). This movement was a bridge leading from Romanticism. In his later years, Heine certainly acknowledged the ideas of this "Young Germany School." Same as 「主情派」 (Sentimental School).

第三帝國(The third Empire) 「文」 Life cannot be lived solely according to instinct. One cannot live only in a world of carnal desire like animals, or only in an ugly material world. Consequently, one cannot live solely in the utopia (理想鄕) of God and Spirit either. The empire of spirit-flesh unity (靈肉一致) is this Third Empire.

新浪漫主義(Neo-Romanticism) 「文」 Naturalist literature, which valued reality and focused on objectivity, was predominant for a time due to reaction, but before long, people began to feel weary of Naturalism. Consequently, Naturalism declined, and the literary movement that arose next was Neo-Romanticism. Needless to say, Naturalism was a literary movement that valued reality and objectivity. However, the recent world of thought had undergone a complete change. People could no longer rely solely on direct experience within the limitations of reality. They began to value the spiritual over the material, and mystical intuition over scientific research. This was not limited to the literary sphere; Neo-Subjectivism and Neo-Idealism also flourished in philosophy. New thought cried out for the "awakening of the spirit" (靈의 각성). Therefore, Neo-Romanticism can simply be called literature that departed from the <8> awakening of the spirit. The English critic and poet A. Symons said, "As people's thoughts change, literature also changes greatly in its essence. The world, long preoccupied with the observation and manipulation of matter, has starved its spiritual side. But now the return of the spirit has come, and thus new literature has arisen. That is, new literature where the visible world is not reality and the invisible world is not a dream—".
Neo-Romanticism values intuition over research and emotion over knowledge. Neo-Romanticism is not satisfied with merely knowing facts as facts but seeks to grasp something (Something) within those facts. The lineage of Neo-Romanticism is as follows: From Classicism to Romanticism, from Romanticism to Naturalism, from Naturalism to Neo-Romanticism.

新浪漫主義者((Neo-Romanticist) 「文」 Writers working under Neo-Romanticism include Ibsen (Ibsen H.). His trilogy "Emperor and Galilean" (consisting of "Caesar's Apostasy" [途上 - lit. On the Road?] and "The Emperor Julian" [大寺院 - lit. Great Temple? 라파? These titles seem incorrect/unconventional references to Emperor and Galilean]), depicts the human spirit moving from the crudest materialism towards the faith of a higher spiritual world. Also, "Pillars of Society" (社會柱), "A Doll's House" (人形의 家), "Ghosts" (幽靈) etc., depict the profound flaws of contemporary society and the ugliness of real life. Hauptmann's (Hauptmann G) "Before Sunrise" (日出前), "The Weavers" (시레시야의 織工), etc., were thoroughly Naturalistic, but later works like "Hannele's Ascension" (한네의 昇天) and "The Sunken Bell" (沉鍾) became very mystical and approached Neo-Romanticism. Besides them, there are Andreyev (앤듀리에푸, L), Gorky (나골키 M.), and D'Annunzio (따눈시오), among others.

耽美派 (Aesthetic School) 「文」 Same as the Aesthetes (唯美派); they make Beauty (美) alone the object of consideration in life and work. Writers like Oscar Wilde (Wilde Oscar) are good examples. Refer to 「唯美主義」 (Aestheticism).

利己主義 (Egoism) 「文」 Same as Individualism; doing everything selfishly for the sake of the self. Ibsen (입센), Nietzsche (니이찌에), etc., are good examples. Refer to 「個人主義」 (Individualism).

新理想主義(Neo-idealism) 「文」 Like the art of Hedonism, it is an art of new Subjectivism, and is similar in being subjective and emotional (主觀的 情意的), but its direction is different. The difference is because it is the literature of Neo-idealism, expressed by terms like Humanism (人生主義) or Humanitarianism (人道主義). If the art of Hedonism is "art for art's sake," then the art of Neo-idealism is entirely close to "art for life's sake." In this sense, it has points in common with Naturalism. However, <9> whereas Naturalism has behind it a passive Pessimism arising from a mechanistic view of life, Neo-idealism is always actively affirming life, loving life, and stems from the will to find a better path through effort. While Naturalism is observational, Neo-idealism is affirmative effort. Speaking of artists of Neo-idealism or Humanism, there is Russia's Tolstoy (Tolstoy. L). If one looks at Tolstoy's art from its realistic or factual aspect, there could be no greater Naturalist work. Of course, instead of being grounded in the Materialism of Naturalism, his thought was grounded in spiritual demands. In his descriptions, while he did not completely discard scientific methods and objective attitudes, he concealed ardent subjectivity behind them. Tolstoy was not satisfied with merely depicting reality as it is. He went further, seeking to improve and enhance that reality. Therefore, in the end, he abandoned art and entered religion. His art was truly a good model of Neo-idealism and art, and also a representative work of "art for life's sake." In other words, while Naturalism lacks ideals, Neo-idealism possesses clear ideals. In short, art that responds to the demand to live life better in every way by newly and firmly grasping the ideals discarded by Naturalism—that is the Neo-idealism of recent literature. Life, Love, Humanity are its elements.
Same as 「人道主義」 (Humanism).

人道主義(Humanism) 「文」 Same as Neo-idealism.

個人主義(Individualism) 「文」 A principle that makes the liberation and development of the self its primary subject. It is a movement to liberate the self from all constraints. According to the theories of Individualists, all things in the world exist for me, and all events happen for me. "I" am the origin of all things. Therefore, "I" become "God" and the "Creator." God, Morality, Society, Humanity—all these things exist only after the existence of "I." Therefore, the value of the self is "Absolute." Consequently, they say, "In heaven and earth, I alone am the honored one" (天上天下의 唯我獨存). Accordingly, they reject general concepts and legends, disobey all authority, advocate atheism, and foster the selfish self. Extreme Individualism rejects even freedom and equality. <10> In other words, since there is nothing besides the self, they disregard the state and society. They say there is no reason for someone who disregards society to call for freedom and equality. Nietzsche (Nitzsche) said, "Return to instinct," and Rousseau (Rousseau) said, "Return to nature." The center of action is instinct. Humans must live according to the command of instinct, they say. Therefore, they ridicule morality. Morality suppresses instinct, forces compassion for others, makes reason dominate all actions, and thus makes people morbidly inactive. Christian morality is especially severe. Philanthropy turns humans into slaves. Therefore, morality is something demanded by the weak, they say.
"What is good? It is everything that enhances the feeling of power, the will to power. It is the Power that humans possess," he said. Let's also look at a passage from Ibsen's (Ibsen. H) "A Doll's House" (人形의 家).
"Helmer: Before all else, you are a wife and mother.
Nora: That I no longer believe. I believe that before all else I am a human being, just as much as you are—or at least I will try to become one. I know that most people will agree with you, Helmer, and that opinions like yours are found in books. But I can no longer be satisfied with what most people say, and what is written in books. I must think things out for myself and try to understand them."
Nora, who leaves her husband and children and departs the house, is the most fitting example of Individualism.

新英雄主義(Neo-Heroism) 「文」 Among the ideas of recent principles that arose following Naturalism, the one showing the most vivid colors is the Neo-Heroism of the contemporary French writer Romain Rolland (Rollald, Romain). His slogan is, "Open the windows. Let the free air of heaven enter! Gather under the inspiration of heroic deeds!" He defined the life of heroes—great men—as nothing more than the quest for the heroic (The Heroic). There are cheap optimists in the world. They avoid painful experiences as much as possible and live in a dream-like, clear fantasy world. There are also lazy pessimists in the world. They negate and try to evade life without any reason. <11> They are all small individualists afraid of the terror of life. "But there is only one courage in the world. There are heroes. It is to observe life as it happens—and to love it," he said. Life, in short, is a battlefield. It is constant struggle. It is a fight for life. Here lies Romain Rolland's philosophy. Romain Rolland, like Bergson (벨구손), is a philosopher of the "Life School" (生命派). His God says, "I am the life that fights against Nothingness," and "I am the free will that fights eternally." He said that "oneself" is a soldier fighting for this eternally fighting will, a part of God. "Oneself" is always "oneself." But it is not "oneself for oneself." It is "oneself for God." In other words, "God is the life that fights nothingness. He is the Life that fights death. He is the love that fights hatred." Thus, he is the eternally fighting free will. Therefore, only the soldier who participates in this war of God and fights most bravely is truly a hero. This is the essence of Heroism.

異敎主義(Paganism) 「文」 Refers to paganism in contrast to Christianity (基督主義), i.e., Hebraism (希伯來主義); specifically refers to Hellenism (希臘主義). (Refer to Hellenism).

人生派(Artist of human) 「文」 In contrast to art for art's sake, this refers to writers of art for life's sake (Refer to Humanism).
神秘主義(Mysticism)「文」·「詩」 Emerging from Zola's (소라) Naturalism, it entered the realm of Symbolism and Mysticism. The emphasis shifted from Realism to Symbolism, from Reality to Subjectivity, from Matter to Spirit, from Scientific Judgment to Spiritual Intuition. The most outstanding writer of Mysticism was Maeterlinck (매터링크) (Maeter;omcj M. 1892-). His mystical theory was as follows: Fate (運命) lies hidden in the secrets of the soul (心靈). The power to sense that Fate is true "Wisdom" (智). In other words, we possess something greater than our surface personality. That is, we possess something inexplicable that forms the foundation (根低) of personality. The true "Self" (自我) also lies within it. In the world, the incompetent prosper while the powerful fail. This is considered abnormal. But that is because one does not know this something (Something) hidden in the foundation of the personality of the true "Self". Therefore, the life that appears externally is born from the something hidden in the foundation of the personality of the true "Self". For example, external life is said to be like bubbles floating on the surface of deep water. Internal life transcends time and space. Therefore, if only this Life is sound, we will be fortunate. Also, the Wisdom that governs our Fate is within it. Thus, one can see the true mystery in the leap of this invisible internal life. Therefore, the mystery of Fate is decidedly not external to us, but internal. If we firmly grasp the soul (魂), that is, if the internal life is awakened, then "Wisdom" arises there, and one can also freely control Fate. Consequently, he said, one can attain happiness. Mystery is the great, blissful realm of the soul.

"The Hothouses" (溫室) (Poetry Collection), "The Blue Bird" (靑鳥) (Children's Play), "The Death of Tintagiles" (단다지-르의 죽엄) (Play), "The Blind" (群肓) (ditto), "The Intruder" (闖入者), "The Seven Princesses" (七人의 公主), "Monna Vanna" (몬나, 안나)…………etc., dozens of outstanding plays exist. Poets like England's W. B. Yeats (Yeats W B) are also famous Mystics.
享樂主義(Hedonism)「文」. Hedonism, as well as Mysticism or Symbolism, are all arts leaning towards Decadent (데카단) tendencies. Simultaneously, the Decadent French poets all belonged to the Hedonist school. It is a reactionary activity arising from unhealthy states such as pessimistic thoughts and nervous hypersensitivity. They had no interest in worldly affairs, nor any desire for immediate practical demands, but only anxiously sought to solve the incomprehensibility of life's problems. Therefore, unable to find solutions, they gave up, cursed life, and only melancholy and sorrow over human suffering remained for them. Consequently, instead of spending their remaining short lives hopelessly in agony and despair, they tried to enjoy life as much as possible. They tried to seek pleasure (享樂). Thus, nerves struck by pleasure became increasingly numb (麻庫), and they troubled their senses with progressively stronger intoxicants. Let's look at a passage from "Modernism and Romance" (Scott J著).
"In modern times, the spread of science first shattered religious beliefs, leading people to seek everything in the material and sensory aspects. This influence led even the pious Thomas Hardy (Hatdy. T) to observe human misery and the shallowness of human bestiality. Consequently, all his outstanding characters were weary figures suffering from the afflictions <13> of this world. He did not deny God's existence. But at the same time, God was neither merciful nor good. Rather, he thought life was far more affectionate and kind. This tendency gradually progressed, and while doubting God's morality, people also came to doubt all human-established morality. This is precisely the Decadent School (頹廢派). People of this school, doubting everything in this way, finally discovered pleasure (快樂) and made it their refuge in life. To them, modern society was tasteless, ugly, and filled with unbearable unpleasantness. Therefore, they sought only to indulge their own bodies." Thus, poets like Verlaine (르네느), Baudelaire (드레르), Wilde (와일트), Keats (깃쓰), Symons (시몬스) etc., (Vcrlaine. P. Etc,.) were busy creating artificial paradises, staying up all night with opium, hashish (하쉬잇쉬), and poisonous liquors.
惡의華(Les Flcurs du Mal)「詩」. The title of the famous poetry collection by Baudelaire (드레르), the leader of the Satanist school (惡魔派), published in 1857.
人工樂園(Les Paradis Artificiels)「詩」. This is also the title of a famous poetry collection by Baudelaire (드레르), published in 1860. It describes the artificial paradise obtained through opium and all intoxicants.
唯美主義(Aestheticism)「文」. Having the same essence as Hedonism, this was a principle particularly advocated and practiced by England's Wilde (Wide, O 1856-). Not just a principle and theory, it extended even directly to the body, to daily clothing and makeup, making everything beautiful in various ways. A passage from his assertion is as follows: All philosophy, thought, and science change their claims and are also ephemeral aspects of human life. However, "Beauty is the only thing unharmed by human life. Philosophy crumbles like sand dunes, and its beliefs change one after another like fallen leaves in autumn, but only Beauty possesses the eternity of the four seasons." Also, Swinburne's (스위-」이) statement, "The artist must necessarily be perfect in artifice," is also a statement aiming to create the utmost beauty for Aestheticism. Therefore, it is the pleasure-seeking principle of the Decadent poets. Among them, Wilde is the representative figure. His most Aesthetic work is the play "Salome" (사토매).<14>
惡魔主義(Satanism)「詩」. A principle of the Decadent school. Good is something learned in school, while Evil is the innate essence of human life, they say. Therefore, the famous French Satanist Baudelaire (Bandelaire C) stated that human sin is Original Sin (原罪), existing from the root. Originally, it can also be considered a principle of a faction within literary Romanticism. In other words, the lives of the Decadents, whose nerves were numbed (麻庳) by pleasure, involved singing amidst the strange, eerie, dark, and black, enjoying their entire lives with absinthe (압센드) (liquor name) and opium. Baudelaire's poetry collection "Les Fleurs du Mal" (惡의 華), called the Bible of Evil, is a renowned collection that speaks to the essence of the Satanist school. It sings of corpses, decaying women, darkness, terror, poisonous liquor, hell, evil monks… etc. Though criticized as ugly and immoral, the collection succeeded in constructing the essence of hell on earth. Therefore, it is said that the poet Dante (단데) entered hell, while Baudelaire came out of hell. Thus, the Satanist poets departed from realistic frivolity and sang poems of somber Symbolism. Verlaine (르레느) and others, the entirety of the Decadents, are included. Consequently, strong in their egos, quick in sensitivity due to nervous hypersensitivity, and weak in will, they failed to organize the unity of their own lives and inevitably occupied the position of misfits in contemporary social life. Accordingly, their pessimistic tendencies grew stronger, and their minds and bodies developed pathologically. The Hedonist school, Aesthetic school, Decadents—a faction of Naturalism—all belonged to the Satanist school.
象徵主義(Symbolism)「詩·文」. Before the term Symbolism developed to a certain extent, its meaning was conveyed through words like metaphor (暗喩) and allegory (隱喩). Thus, even the fables in "Aesop's Fables" (Aesop,s Fablc) and books like "The Pilgrim's Progress" used the meaning of symbol. That is, it means representing something with something else. For example, red is the representation of passion, gray is the representation of despair, and dark black is the representation of death. However, considered from a modern perspective, this meaning cannot be deemed complete. Let's look it up in a dictionary again. Johnson's Dictionary states, "A symbol is something that can be understood in itself among other expressions," and "A metaphor is a word represented in a form different from what is contained in the meaning possessed by the letters." Also, modern dictionaries define it as "a moral representation or sign made by natural quality or image." However, that too cannot be <15> complete. Then, starting from the Symbolist poetry movement of the Decadent school in the 19th century and onwards, the subtle meaning of the definition was obtained. Let's first listen to the representative declarations of the Symbolist poets: "Until we obtain some representation in sound, color, form, our emotions cannot exist among us, cannot gain recognition, and also cannot act" (from "Symbolism in Poetry" by W. B. Yeats). Looking at this statement, one can first understand their necessity. The nerves of the Hedonist school could not seek their art in reality. Reality was too simple. Therefore, they did not try to find reality in reality but attempted to abstractly savor reality within some subtle mood-form invisible to the eye. Thus, Symbolism became something special, departing from metaphor. In the world of moods invisible to the eye, there is the palace of Symbolism. Looking at a passage from Baudelaire's poetry—
"A man looking out of an open door cannot see as many things as a man looking in through a closed window."……This means that leaving the open door of reality and entering the door of the unseen world of Symbolism allows one to see infinitely many things. Again, then, what is Symbolism?
(Symbolism said things which Could not be said eo Perfectly in any Other Way, and Needed but a right instinct for its understanding; While Allegory Said Things which Could be Said As well, or better,st in another way, and Needed a right Knowledge for its Understanding.)
"Symbolism can say things that cannot be said in other ways, and requires a correct instinct for its understanding. Allegory can say the same things in other ways, or better, and requires knowledge for its understanding," said Yeats. Looking at this, one can most easily separate Symbolism from metaphor. In short, Symbolism gives voice to the voiceless and substance to the unsubstantial. Accordingly, metaphor seeks to create a more complete form using what is seen and heard. Therefore, it requires knowledge. The world of Symbolism, escaping from the incomplete forms of reality unseen in reality, demands the utmost extreme of Beauty and thus seeks to explore subtle emotions. The Decadent school, Hedonist school, Satanist school, Aesthetic school were all Symbolists. Symbolism in fine arts also originated from similar <16> theories.
人形의 家(A Doll's house)英譯「文」. The title of a famous play by Ibsen (입센), one of the Individualists. It refers to the declaration made by the female protagonist Nora to her husband Helmer; her home, lacking love and understanding, seems like "A Doll's House" to her awakened self.
寫實主義(Realism)「文」. A principle that depicts reality as it is, facts as they are, departing from ideas or ideals. The period from 1850 to 1870 was the era of Realism in the German literary world. Among the members of the "Young Germany School" (少年獨逸派) who leaned towards realistic tendencies, there were many works by people like Gutzkow (굿스-고). Works depicting rural life, village life, by Gotthelf (곳도헤루), Auerbach (오에투밥바), and several others also existed. This village novel literature can also be included in the Realist school. In drama, Hebbel (헷베루) was also a famous Realist.
虛無主義(Nihiliam)「文」. The Russian literary giant Turgenev (Ivan Turgenev-1818 1883) is said to have first used the word "Nihil" (Nihil). Russia (路西亞) in the 18th and subsequent 19th centuries was in a dark period due to social unrest and the terror of life. Hatred towards the aristocracy, the awakening of the peasants, class discontent... all these things made people's lives melancholic and troubled. At that time, there was not the slightest ray of light in society, and their lives held no hope whatsoever. Consequently, they believed in nothing and relied on nothing. It meant abandoning all traditional beliefs or ideals and destroying all idols. To them, everything in life was meaningless and void (虛無). This idea of Nihilism appeared in the depths of Russian life at the time with a destructive mood. Therefore, to them, literature was like "smoke" (煙氣), and no amount of scholarship could influence their lives, so they also became infinitely disappointed in science. Let's examine a passage from Turgenev's famous Nihilist novel "Fathers and Sons" (아버지와 아들).
———Rather, we do not recognize any basis for action other than utility. Currently, the most useful thing is denial. Therefore, we deny everything.
———Deny everything?
———Yes, we deny everything.
———What? Do you deny poetry and art too? It's hard for me to say.<17>
———I say again, "I deny everything—" said Bazarov (라소). Readily put, skepticism, melancholy, and destruction combined can easily be called Nihilism.
後期印象派(Poatimpressionism)「詩·文」. A new school of painting style that emerged in the English art scene from the late 19th century. This school arose after the Naturalist and Impressionist schools, and because it imitated the Impressionists only in terms of technique (技功), it bears the name Post-Impressionism. In contrast to Impressionism, which primarily aimed to reproduce impressions as seen, Post-Impressionism sought to avoid objective substance and express subjective thoughts and emotions. In other words, it lies in merging and harmonizing subjective representation and objectivity. Among these, the emphasis was placed on subjective realism. Furthermore, in contrast to the earlier Impressionists who were immersed in depicting light effects, atmosphere, color decomposition, etc., the Post-Impressionists emphasized the power of line and form. Cézanne (세산느), Gauguin (코구안), Van Gogh (곱보), etc., are representative figures of this school.
神曲(Divine Comcdy)「詩」. The title of the masterpiece by the Italian poet Dante (Dantt A, 1265-1321).
哀傷主義(Sentimentalism)「文」. Also called 감상주의 (Gamsangjuui - Sentimentalism). It was a tendency in literature and can also be called a type of Romanticism. Romanticism takes passion as its spirit and leans strongly towards the subjective and imaginative. Accordingly, Sentimentalism also arises from a kind of emotionalism or subjectivism (主情主義). It is a principle that depicts delicate, weak feelings of sentimentality, lacking grandeur and profundity. Even in love, rather than the majestic and mysterious, it takes as its main theme the sorrow of sighing in grief and languishing in sentiment. Naturally, it takes emotional elements over intellectual ones.
라파엘前派(Pre Raphaelites)「美」. A movement that arose in the 19th-century English painting world. Its founders and leaders were John Everett Millais (쓴, 애데데트, 1929-1896), William Holman Hunt (홀맨, 헌트, 1827-1910), and Dante Gabriel Rossetti (단데, 카부리엘 로셋틔, 1828-1882). They thought that Raphael (라파엘), who was the idol of the art world, was entirely imperfect. Therefore, they thought they had to completely break away from him. "Raphael's technique appears limitlessly in the 'Transfiguration of Christ' (基督敎變容). To find works of sound and satisfactory production, we must return far back to ancient times. Therefore, rejecting the modern painting methods that blindly <18> worship Raphael, let us find our path in 'Nature' itself; we must seek inspiration from Nature," they thought. That was their idea. Thus, to enlist other painters into the ranks of their rebellious movement against convention (傳習性), they named their group the Pre-Raphaelites. And so, these young painters, aiming for new research, always gathered, producing one "Black and White Drawing" (黑白線畵) each monthly for circulation. Let's look again at a passage from John Ruskin's (터스, 1819-1900) critique of the Pre-Raphaelites.
"The principles that have been the foundation of art education for three hundred years are fundamentally mistaken, therefore they must be rejected, and we must return to the time before Raphael," he said. It was a major revolution not only in the painting world but in the art world.
印象主義(Impressionism)「文·美」. Impressionism aims to express directly in the work the personal impressions perceived by the artist. Accordingly, it refers to people of the principle that values the impression a thing gives to a person more than the thing itself. It aims to meticulously analyze the nerve life arising from mental functions and also to describe impressions of sound, color, etc., using corresponding new language. Introduced through the paintings of Edouard Manet (마-네, 1833-1883) which appeared in the 1870s, it later spread to literature, music, and sculpture. Furthermore, Impressionism in painting strives to depict the momentary phenomenon of nature as a whole, emphasizing the colored surface. According to Monet's (모-네) assertion, "Depict nature as it is, but everything must be as impressed upon the artist's eye." Accordingly, their characteristic is to depict the various adjustments resulting from changes in light and air according to the time of morning or evening. Furthermore, when depicting objects, they choose wide open spaces to receive sufficient light and convey the true aspect of nature with it. While conventional painters chose the subtle beauty of sunset, Impressionists favored midday sunlight and thus opposed indoor production. The protagonist Claude (크로드) in Zola's novel "The Masterpiece" (制作) cries out, "Sun, air, and light are what new painting demands of us! Let the sun in, and depict objects under the bright sunlight!" he shouted.
Impressionism in literature was also a tendency that respected descriptive methods evoking sensory impressions <19> rather than realistic depiction. Accordingly, the attitude of observing things phenomenally, the attitude of observing life also as a part of nature, produced this kind of new literature. Therefore, Impressionist literature is objective literature. Thus, in recent French literature, there are two streams of the Naturalist school. One is the Impressionist school, the second is original Naturalism. Representatives of the former are Flaubert (로베루) and the Goncourt (공크르) brothers, and of the latter are Zola (소라), Maupassant (모판산), etc. (Refer to Naturalist).
Impressionism in music respects the effect of timbre (音色) more than formal beauty, i.e., the development of the main melody (主旋律). Particularly representative figures of this school are Wagner (왁네르) and Grieg (구릿구).
藝術衝動(Art-impulse)「文」. The question of the origin of literature can be explained in two major ways. The first explains it from a psychological perspective, and the second involves research into the practical aspects of art's genesis. The former is the study of the so-called art impulse. There are several kinds of psychological studies of the art impulse: the play impulse theory, the imitation impulse theory, the attraction impulse theory (attracting through pleasure), or the self-expression impulse theory (arising from the desire to express oneself), etc.
未來主義(Futuriam)「美·文」. The Futurist movement arose in 1909. Its beginning, of course, started in painting. However, the person who first declared it was Marinetti (마리넷틔) (E. T. Mnraetti). Through him, manifestos were distributed everywhere, even in the newspaper "Le Figaro" (후이가로), under the strange title "Let's Kill the Moonlight" (Tuonsleclain de lune). And the manifesto for the painting world was declared the following year (1910) in April under the title "Manifesto of Futurist Painters" (Manilesle des Peintresf turisme), co-signed by five people: Boccioni, Carra, Russolo, Balla, Severini (Sevcuini). Now let's examine the central ideas of Futurism.
Marinetti, with a strongly rebellious attitude, denied everything in established art and placed the new model in the "Future." This could be thought of as a type of idealistic or romantic tendency. However, Futurism decidedly did not try to choose the lax concept of the ideal like previous idealists. Nor could it. But Marinetti's fanatical attitude contained elements of realism beyond mere romanticism at its core. That is, it was sensory rather than emotional. Here lies their important attitude. One focus within his fanaticism was Science. <20> It was philosophy based on that Science. And penetrating through it, within the violent emotions, there was also will (意思). Simply put, he said something like this: "What we intend to express above all is dynamic sensation." Therefore, what he tries to depict is "Movement" itself. Previously, no painter tried to draw the state of "Movement" itself. But the Futurist assertion was to view ordinary things from the perspective of movement. This is an experiment to liberate painting, a spatial art, from its constraints. Ordinary things existing in "Time" are all changing, all existing within flow, they say. In the Futurist subject, memory and perception exist simultaneously. Sensation and intellect exist simultaneously. Therefore, what they dislike is "Stasis" (靜止). Their principle lies within the center of all movement that expresses the perception of this reality which moves ceaselessly. It is the speed that flies away in an instant. Even a stationary object in motion is not considered "fixed" (定形) as such. Therefore, the synthesis of these moving parts is what they assert. Thus, the paintings of Futurist painters, if depicting, say, a running horse (馬), do not draw four legs, but draw the sixteen movements of legs that arise during running, i.e., appearing in the visual sensation. This is because running legs appear that way.
表現主義(Exprcssionism)「文·美」. Impressionism liberated vision from convention. Thus, it opened the way for a new observation of color. However, what they pioneered was based on the reaction of phenomena in the physical eye, neglecting the mind's eye. In other words, Nature reacted only to vision, not to individuality. To put the Impressionist assertion another way, the question of how to most completely represent the effect of sunlight is a case of the "reproduction" (再現) of Nature or objects. The value of an Impressionist work is determined by comparing the effect of sunlight with the effect of the color tones on the canvas, whether the latter approaches the former or not. That is, the depicted object and the depicted result are in a relative position. However, whether the depicted object resembles the depicted result or not is not the issue; rather, using some external object as a trigger, the emotion arising within the individual's mind is directly activated into painting or literature. Therefore, being indifferent to whether it resembles the external object or not is the main point of the Expressionist school. <21> That is, the depicted "Result" is already a reality independent from what was depicted—a new creation produced by the author's personal emotion. Since this is in an "absolute" realm, in such cases, the act of depiction is called expression. In other words, it is not about "reproducing" Nature, but means expressing a unique creation personalized by that Nature. Furthermore, in post-WWI Germany, "expression" rather than reproduction flourished. Looking at literary works, everything expressed, within a mood of melancholy and terror, the tragic results of life, difficult for human power to resist, concerning cosmic creation. They tried to reproduce everything with the development and greatness of science, but they became tragic under the dominion of some great power. Accordingly, their art tried to express everything within the personalization of that "power." Works like Georg Kaiser's (-지, 가이세루) "From Morn to Midnight" (아침부터저녁지) or Carol Meanse's [name/work attribution uncertain] (멘서) "Winter" (冬) are representative works of the Expressionist school.
立體主義(Cudisn)「美」. A principle of a painting school that recently arose in France. Its first exhibition was held in Paris in 1911. This school, originating with Cézanne (Paul Cozanne’ 1839-1906), rebelled against the various schools of the traditional art world and modern Realism, Impressionism, etc., advocating new artistic perception and methods of expression. Traditional painting valued only vision, or the Impressionists were satisfied with light rays and colors. However, that is merely what is projected onto the retina from our vision, and not what truly achieves perception. To achieve true perception, one must rely on intellect (知力). Therefore, the true world revealed in this way is not our everyday visual world, but emerges from the collection of volumes of all objects, they say. Accordingly, inner perception beyond the retina can be obtained. To express the intuition of objects thus aggregated by volume, the unitary space that can best express the sense of volume is comparatively appropriate. In other words, the synthesis and organization of simple geometric planes and solids is merely a means to express the image of reality. Therefore, the peculiar picture surface is not the result of external realism but the result of internal realism. Cubism has two types: one that expresses a visual tendency, unwilling to represent non-visual aspects but seeking to express the sense of volume, and one that takes a subjective attitude, trying to express the artist's subjective content received from the object using cubist means. <22> The former is the art of Picasso (피카소), and the latter is the art of Metzinger (매짐게루) and Gleizes (구떼스).
다다이슴(Dadaism)「文·美」. If you look up Dada (다다) in a French dictionary, it means "Horse or Hobbyhorse." It has nothing profound, nor any deep meaning. It is merely a reactionary new literary movement by those numbed by many principles and theories. Among the descriptions of the speech styles of the late followers of Greek thought in Merezhkovsky's (메테지오스키) "The Death of the Gods," it says— "The subject of the speech is not important. For the speaker, agreeing or disagreeing about an event means nothing. Meaning also means nothing. The only important thing is the orchestral expression of speech sounds. Only the melody. The musical rhyme of phrases. ———Even a lover who doesn't know Greek feels the exquisite beauty of the language." The essence of this statement is the mood of Dadaism. It is not very necessary in art, but it exists as the name of a rebellious movement against nervous fatigue disease. It can be called negative Decadence. It is a principle that destroys all form, all meaning, and lays out the artist's deranged state as it is in bizarre forms. The poetry of Japan's Shinkichi (新吉) or France's Tristan Tzara (도리스탄, 스아라) are representative figures.
古典文學(Olassieism)「文」. Refer to Classicism (擬古文學).
審美(Aesthetie)「美」. A term used in Aesthetics. Regarding its general meaning, I will quote a passage from Mr. Takayama Chogyū's (高山樗雨氏) aesthetics theory. "The main reason aesthetic things please us is that they remove our selfishness and immerse us in the great world of 'selflessness' (無心論). At least as long as the concept of 'self' exists in the chest, we, by human nature, never forget ourselves, and numerous desires torment us like poisonous snakes. Fulfilling one desire brings another hope. Thus, even for a moment, an instant, one cannot escape one's hopes. ———(Omitted)—Whether looking at mountains or streams, one cannot escape the thought of how to benefit oneself. Seeing a beautiful person or encountering a beautiful object, one cannot escape the desire to make it one's own possession. However, the pleasure we derive from aesthetic things comes from forgetting this self and <23> guiding us into the ideal of beauty. Therefore, when truly encountering beauty, we lose consciousness, and only pure perception exists. Thus, only the object exists, and one does not realize oneself. Just like the human eye sees other things but cannot see itself.… Readily put, it refers to the beauty of selfless ecstasy (無我歡悅), the aesthetic pleasure obtained only by sacrificing one's entire self to an object. Sorrow, sublimity, emotion, tears and laughter, humor… all these are also aesthetic elements.
世紀病「文」Or also called "Mal du siècle" (世紀의 痼疾). The world-weariness (Weltshmerz) born from skeptical philosophy descending from the 18th into the 19th century, or the cry of sorrow arising from humanity. Doubting religion, finding morality ineffective, life being dark, thought afflicted with great sorrow and sighs. Hauptmann's (흡트만) "The Sunken Bell" (沈鍾) or Ibsen's (입센) tragedies all spoke of the infinite suffering of pessimistic sorrow. Furthermore, the melancholy and sorrow of the Decadent school are fitting examples of the "mal du siècle."
都會病「文」. The affliction of modern people lies in the city (都會). In cities developing alongside science, due to various inventions of machinery, the prosperity of industry and commerce, agriculture gradually declines, and everyone flocks to the cities. Consequently, population increase and the hardships of life intensify. Therefore, the life of modern people becomes intertwined with city life, and as it becomes ever more prosperous, city dwellers, receiving excessive stimulation, become extremely fatigued, yet on the other hand, become agitated trying not to lose in the struggle for existence. Amidst this, people's nerves weaken, and their psychology becomes pathological. Thus, people's minds gradually drift away from nature, their nerves weaken, favoring the extremely delicate, flowing too much into sentimentality, and becoming deranged like madmen; this is called the urban malaise (都會病). The literature of such city dwellers is urban literature.
鄕土藝術(Heimatkunst)「文」. A reactionary movement born out of hatred for Naturalism, which depicted city life and leaned only towards materialist tendencies, becoming decadent or pessimistic. It rejects decadent and complex urban literature and seeks to discover new, healthy art within the nature of the homeland (鄕土). In other words, it is pastoral literature (田園文學). It is literature that depicts the charm of the countryside, the lives of peasants, etc. This literary movement was prominent in Germany (獨逸).
입센이즘(Ibsenism).「文」Refers to Individualism, meaning <24> Ibsen's principle. Refer to 「個人主義」 (Individualism).
에루테루이즘(Werterism)「文」. A word derived from the masterpiece novel "The Sorrows of Young Werther" (에루테루의 悲哀) by the German poet Goethe (데, W. J. V. 1749-1832). Used in the sense of being overly sentimental, tearful, melancholic due to misfortune.
感傷主義(Imaginaton)「文·詩」. [Note: Title likely error, should be 想像主義 (Imaginationism), content matches Blake] A principle advocated by the English poet William Blake (윌리암 렉크 - died 1827). His imagination was a grand principle combining symbolism and mystery. Looking at one of his opinions—"The World of Imagination is the World of Eternity. It is the divine bosom where we shall go after this Vegetation of the Body is dead. The World of Imagination is Infinite & Eternal whereas the World of Generation or Vegetation is Finite & Temporal.……" he said. Thus, he discovered eternal truth and the infinite world within the human world of generation.
Through this imagination, symbolism achieves perfection. All his poems were profound and eternal, rich in intellectual elements.
유토피아(Utopia)「文」. Meaning ideal land, fantasy world, etc. The title of a novel written in 1516 by the English statesman Thomas More (도마스, 모어, 1478-1535).
詩(Poety)「詩」. Poetry, departing from dry description when depicting nature or natural objects, aims to express grand emotion and thought in concise phrases through splendid imagination and subtle emotion. It is the development of song, thus having various forms. Furthermore, to add flavor, there is rhyme (韻) (English poetry), with many types like head rhyme, end rhyme, assonance, etc. From poetry comes rhythm (韻律), and accordingly, there are feet (詩脚). Because of feet, English poetry has forms like The Iambus (○-), The Trochee (-○), The Anapest (○○-), The Dactyl (-○○), etc. However, in modern times, free verse (破格詩) is also popular. Some say "Poetry is the language of passion," and Symons said, "Poetry is the music that comes through poetic forms rooted deeper in the human heart than limited by classical theories." Poetry must possess an aesthetic charm unobtainable elsewhere.
散文(Prese)「文」. Prose is simple, ordinary writing without poetic form or flavor; novels, essays, etc., are all prose.
散文詩(Prese Polm)「詩」Not completely poetry, nor completely prose. It is somewhat refined prose, or poetry that has broken <25> form. Readily put, it refers to prose that nevertheless contains poetic rhythm; Turgenev's prose poems are a good example.
客觀的批評(Objective Critieism)「評」. Also called formal criticism or standard criticism. Its method involves setting a fixed standard and criticizing according to it. Because there is a fixed standard, there is accordingly a fixed law of criticism. Their standard was Aristotle's (아리스토틀) "Poetics" (詩學). Therefore, judging the merits and demerits of a work was not so easy. Regarding this, I will quote Moulton's (몰톤) points on conventional criticism.
(一) This criticism is based on Aristotle's theories. However, Aristotle merely abstracted his theories and principles from Greek literature.
(二) During the Renaissance, it was thought that this Aristotelian popular criticism was a principle common to all literature. Therefore, criticism was entirely separated from the trends of medieval and modern poetry.
(三) Criticism following Aristotelian principles in this way A) forgot the unity of literature, B) forgot the natural evolution of literature, and C) being preoccupied with principles, consequently excluded inductive observation of literature. This type of criticism constitutes the elements of so-called objective criticism. Objective criticism, in other words, is conventional criticism.
主觀的批評(Subjective Critieism)「評」. Modern criticism is mostly subjective criticism. That is, criticism based on the critic's subjectivity. This is because the essential criticism of literature and art inherently requires emotion or mood. Centering on emotion is considered most appropriate. Since the rise of so-called Romantic literature in the early 19th century, after the power of "emotion" in art was emphasized, it became clear that all subsequent criticism was subjective criticism. That is, without a fixed standard, it places importance on the "impression" entering the critic's subjectivity or on "personality" to the utmost degree.
裁判的批評(Judieial Critieism)「評」As the name suggests, this is criticism that immediately passes judgment on the value of the author or work; it is "Fault-Finding" and judging (To Judgo) criticism. Accordingly, the critical attitude generally involves the critic placing themselves on a higher level than the author or work, adopting an arrogant attitude like a judge. <26>
歸納的批評(Indnelive Geritieism)「評」. A method similar to induction in logic. It is criticism that attempts to induce a critique from as much material as possible, the exact opposite of judicial criticism. While judicial criticism seeks to discuss the value of a work under some standard, inductive criticism does not set any superficial standard but rather evaluates the work by gathering from many materials. This inductive criticism can be further divided into three main parts.
(一) It is identical to the object work being criticized; its purpose is solely to examine the work in detail and describe its content, decidedly not attempting to determine the work's value. Moulton's (Maulton) "Shakespeare as a Dramatic Artist" (戱曲家의 스패야) is a good example.
(二) When evaluating the target work, it does not focus solely on the work itself but studies and considers it broadly in connection with its surroundings. Its purpose is to investigate the work's position by comparing it with other works of its time.
科學的批評(Scientifie Critieism)「評」. This criticism was advocated by France's Taine (Taine, 1827-1893). His critical method applied scientific research methods to criticism. He thought that the genesis of art follows the same sequence as the genesis of plants. Accordingly, he thought art research must also follow the same sequence as botanical research, considering art as a pure science. "Aesthetics is like botany. Just as the orange tree, laurel, pine, and cypress hold the same interest, so does art, and thus aesthetics is merely the application of botanical research methods to human authors," said Taine. Imitating botanical research methods, he divided literature and art into three parts for study: Race, belonging to the creator of the work; Environment or Milieu surrounding the work or author; and Epoch, the era in which the work or author existed. Taine considered these three aspects as unavoidable elements or influences in the formation of literature and art.
鑑賞批評(Appreciative Criticism)「評」. Appreciative criticism focuses on "appreciation" (鑑賞) of the presented work. Looking up its meaning in the Standard Dictionary yields: (一) Appropriate recognition or evaluation of the various properties, merits, value, etc., of an object, i.e., sympathetic recognition of the beauties of the object. <27> (二) Sensitivity or feeling for subtle distinctions. (三) Assigning a certain similar evaluation to a person or thing.…… Looking at such explanations, one can understand the meaning of appreciation. Appreciative criticism is the exact opposite of fault-finding judicial criticism and stands alongside scientific criticism as the most meaningful type. Great modern English critics like Matthew Arnold (Mathew Arnold, 1822-1888), starting with him, Walter Pater (페터, 1839-1894), and Arthur Symons (시몬쓰, 1865-) etc., although differing from each other in detailed points, are generally appreciative critics. Let's quote a passage from Arnold's "Essays in Criticism" (批評論集). The rule for the critic's attitude can be summed up in one word: "Disinterestedness." How then can a critic adopt such an attitude? It is achieved by no other method than staying far away from the Practical View of things. Towards every object that touches the mind, one must simply follow the direction the touched mind takes. In other words, one must let the mind engage in the so-called Free Play of Mind. One must be completely separated from external, political, practical considerations regarding the object of criticism. The function of criticism is simply to know the best that is known and thought in the world, and by making it known generally, to create truly fresh currents of thought in this world," he said. He prioritized his own standard (自己本位). That is, a disinterested, selfless attitude. Simply put, it is an attitude of praising the beauties—the various properties, merits, value, etc.—of the object as much as possible. Calling their criticism appreciative criticism is due to such assertions.
倫理的批評(Ethical Critieism)「評」. Closely related to scientific criticism is ethical criticism. It is also similar to judicial criticism. That is, it criticizes works based on a firm, unshakable ideal from a moral or religious standpoint. Therefore, the critic's attitude is high-handed or arrogant, judging the work right or wrong from above, like a judge. Representative figures include French critics like Taine (테느) and Brunetière (루느틔어, 1849-1906), and Tolstoy (톨스토이), among others.
文藝復興(Renaissance)「文」. Historians generally divide the period from antiquity to the present <28> into three major divisions: Ancient, Medieval, and Modern. Modern refers to the movement that arose from the 14th to 15th centuries onwards, after Martin Luther's (Luther Martin, 1483-1546) Reformation; all of modern literature was influenced by it. The Renaissance was a major movement in world civilization history, so its timing and meaning are complex, but it generally signifies the movement of human self-awareness and awakening that occurred in Europe for about a hundred years after the fall of the Eastern Roman Empire in 1453, which marked its beginning. During the Middle Ages, Christianity dominated all of Europe, everyone submitted to its doctrines, and there was no dissent. Therefore, they sought truth only within it. The same applied to literature. Everything was bound by rigid dogma under great authority, blindly obeyed, and continued a miserable existence. However, after the fall of the Eastern Roman Empire in 1453, when its scholars fled to Italy (伊太利) with ancient Latin literature, they gradually began to awaken. The spirits that had groaned under painful and miserable bondage now sought to open up a world of freedom with cries of joy. Thus, the first voice of human awakening was raised. Within this lay the seeds of modern spirit, such as secularism, materialism, individualism, etc. In other words, it was the Romantic movement reacting against Classicism. Awakening emotionally anew from Classicism, which was bound by typical knowledge, they sought to attain the world of emotion from the intellectual world. This movement occurred not only in literature but also in religion, society... various fields. France's Rousseau (릇소), the first Romanticist and also the first Naturalist, provided the impetus for the French Revolution with the ideas in his "Social Contract" (民約論) and "Discourse on the Origin of Inequality" (人類不平原因論). The foundation of his thought was the slogan "Return to nature!" This "natural" aspect was a common element in Romanticism and Naturalism. Also, his educational theory advocated rejecting human artifice as much as possible and leaving things to nature. This is surely the joyous cry of the soul breaking free from the confines of Classicism. Thus, the free literature and thought of the dead human spirit gained the light of revival.
Dante Alighieri's (단테, 1265-1321) "Divine Comedy" (神曲) also inspired Renaissance thought. Poets and painters from the 14th century onwards, such as Pico della Mirandola (미랜라), Botticelli (틔세<29>리), Leonardo da Vinci (옌시), Michelangelo (미케란제로), and the School of Giorgione (지오르지온 派), are good examples of figures from this period.
感情移入(Finfiihlung)「美」. Refers to the conscious process where subjective feeling is projected into the object of perception or imagination, resulting in the unification of the object and the subject. To put it more simply, when watching a tragedy or comedy performed on stage, the spectator's subjectivity and the object, the main character performing, become one, so that when the actor cries, the spectator cries, and when the actor laughs, the spectator also laughs. In short, it refers to a certain subject being transferred into the subjectivity within the objective object. Therefore, in such cases, the relationship between the two (object and feeling) is extremely close, and they also merge. It resembles a state of intuitive unity. It's definitely not that the two are separate yet coexist side-by-side. The psychology of empathy (感情移入), viewed externally, seems different from the association process, but upon closer observation, it ultimately aligns with the general psychological process of association. There are two types of empathy: (一) Ordinary empathy (普通感情移入) (二) Symbolic empathy (象徵的感情移入). The former involves intuitively grasping the internal mental state from a person's facial expressions, gestures, and voice; the latter is the feeling arising towards mountains, rivers, plants, trees, metals, stones, tools, etc. The person who classified it this way is [Name unclear: 켈루드(■……■)] 's assertion. The function of empathy is not limited to aesthetic consciousness. It arises constantly in our daily lives. It is especially prominent in the appreciation and creation of art. Lipps' (럽쓰, 1851-1915) aesthetics is organized with empathy as its central idea.
希臘主義(Hellenism)「文」. Anti-Christian thought opposing Christianity. Contrasting with Christian worship, Hellenism enjoys drinking and pleasure. While Christianity yearns for Heaven and longs for the ideal, Hellenism seeks to cling to earthly reality—the liberation of the flesh. Its characteristic features are demanding self-satisfaction and the fulfillment of individual life. Accordingly, rather than praising peace, it often sang of war and admired heroes. Not the supernatural, but autonomy valuing human instinct was their principle. On the beautiful Greek peninsula, there was a brilliant civilization. Therefore, their antiquity had rich thought and art that moved the masses for generations. However, Greek civilization suddenly collapsed and was occupied by other nations. That <30> was for no other reason. They were insatiable in seeking carnal pleasure and unrestrained in indulging passion. For that reason, Hellenistic thought—secular, individualistic, naturalistic—when introduced into the life of the intemperate Romans, resulted in Rome too inevitably meeting the end of decline. Thus, they declined. But what arose behind them was Christian ideology, which praised the spirit. And so, for a time, they were ruled by Christian ideology. However, modern life, weary of Christian ideology, could not find salvation solely in praising the spirit. Accordingly, they decided to retreat from the palace of the spirit to the kingdom of the flesh. Thus Hellenism reached a point of revival again; the thought of German writers like Winckelmann (윙게루만), Goethe (데), Nietzsche (나이에), etc., is a fitting example.
希伯來主義(Hedrewism)「文」. The exact opposite principle to Hellenism; i.e., Christian ideology (基督敎主義). In the late Roman Empire, people were sated with flesh and pleasure, their lives became fatigued, decadent, and thoroughly corrupt, and they suddenly sought some new solace. At that time, a guiding light appeared in the blue sky of Bethlehem in the East. To the people weary of carnal secularism, it explained the apocalypse, showed the way to Heaven, encouraged asceticism and altruism, satisfying their spiritual and religious desires—this was Christian ideology, i.e., Hebraism (해부루이슴). Thus Christianity gained victory over Hellenism, suddenly stirring the hearts of the Roman people and leading them into a new spiritual life. Hellenism's secular thought, which had swept the era, also saw the dawn of new pioneering with the birth of Christ. Looking at a famous legend, it is said that on the night Christ was born, a traveler passing the Tarentum (타렌텀) cape heard this mournful song. However, Hellenism, which had formed the foundation of European civilization from its beginning, occupied power for almost several hundred years, and was based on the natural carnal desires of human beings, could not be conquered so easily, even with the power of Christianity. That is, for two or three centuries after the Christian era, as historians say, the clash between Paganism and Christianity, Hellenism versus Hebraism, Secularism versus Heavenly Kingdom-ism, in other words, the era of the spirit's struggle against the flesh, is the essence of this Hebraism. <31>
高踏派(Parnassians)「詩」. A poetic style of a new movement in the French poetry scene in the mid-19th century. Its characteristic feature was emphasizing technique (技功) and neglecting emotion. The name Parnassian began with the premier poetry collection (Parnasse Contem-Porain) of Gautier (고에), Leconte de Lisle (곤도) and other poets of the same school in 1866. The main principle of the Parnassians was to value accuracy and rigor over unrestrained, wild poetic styles, favoring the Naturalist school over the passionate school, objectivity over subjectivism. They belittled emotion and imagination, adopting realism, objective beauty, and "impassivity" (無感) as their standards.
懷疑文學(Scepticism)「文」. Interpreted most broadly, it means being dissatisfied with conventional thought or interpretations regarding theory or practice. The Romantic movement, sparked by France's Rousseau (룻소), fundamentally transformed the social systems that had governed Europe since ancient times, broke down everything in religion and morality, and most strongly expressed ideas of liberty and equality, but compared to the destruction of the Romantic movement, there was no new construction. The spirit that emerged from the weary old shell, unable to find a new home, began to harbor skeptical thoughts about this. Accordingly, lacking any hope, the tendency towards world-weariness (厭世) also grew strong. The phrase "mal du siècle" (世紀의 痼疾) troubled the minds of people across Europe from the early 19th century, combined with skepticism and world-weariness. The fundamental sentiment of the modern spirit became this skepticism—losing faith led to doubting everything, becoming weary of life, and cursing existence itself. The minds of people awakened after the revolution were fatigued. They had clamored for freedom and revolution until now, but in the end, what they truly gained was nothing, just emptiness (虛無). Here, skepticism began.
狂飆興悖起의 詩人(Sturm und Drang).「文」. Appeared in the German Romantic movement. In England, there are representative works like Byron's (바이론) "Manfred" (만푸레드). Its principle, going a step further than Romanticism which cast off old bonds and destroyed conventional life, sang of skepticism and world-weariness, reciting melancholic dirges. German poets like Heine (하이네) and Goethe (데) were influenced by it; Goethe's novel "The Sorrows of Young Werther" (에루태루의 悲哀) is a renowned example of the pessimistic literature of the time. Japanese literature's Sentimental School (主情派) also showed much of this influence.
象牙塔(Ivory tower(英), Tour d’voire(佛))「文」. Has the same meaning as the English poet Tennyson's (테니손) so-called "Palace of Art." <32> Modern people following the fluent poetic spirit of "art for art's sake" were dissatisfied with the crude, dry, tasteless, practical life created by modern material civilization. Accordingly, the mood of wanting to escape from modern life grew stronger daily. Therefore, to forget the real world, they separately constructed a lonely realm of poetic beauty, the "Ivory Tower," meaning to forget modern life within it.
桂冠詩人(Laureate)「詩」. Translated as 詩宗 (Sijong - Poetry Patriarch). In ancient times, to recognize the achievements of poets or distinguished individuals, the King personally bestowed a crown made of laurel leaves. Thus, the poet resided within the royal palace and wrote songs and poems for the King's birthday, state celebrations, or other palace affairs; it is the title for a salaried court poet. The 18th-century English Poet Laureate Alfred Tennyson (앨푸레드 텐이손, 1850) is a representative figure.
偶像破壞(Iconoclasm)「文」. From skeptical thought, people devoted themselves eagerly to scientific research. However, the more they knew, the deeper their doubts became. Therefore, the scientific spirit turned back into skeptical thought. Thereafter, the scientific spirit and skeptical thought became mutual causes and effects, and through the interplay of these two thoughts, Individualism was nurtured. However, as the standards of all principles were lost, Individualism also came to destroy those standards. Individualism, the scientific spirit, skeptical thought—these became intertwined, and the result finally became "Iconoclasm." Destroying previously held beliefs and smashing old morality meant destroying the idols that people had虚無하게 (hŏmu hage - emptily/nihilistically?) worshipped in their hearts until then.
옵부로모슴(Oblomovism)「文」. Has become a trendy term in literary circles. The title of a novel by the Russian writer Goncharov (곤로, 1812-91), it fully expressed the temperament of the Russian people before the Russian Revolution. It refers to a state where everything is unsatisfactory, mind and body are lazy, the will is weak, one cannot focus on tasks, filled with skepticism and world-weariness. The novel's protagonist Oblomov (옵부로모) was born into the nobility. After completing a certain education, he reluctantly worked at some agricultural bureau. However, after his parents died, he became the master of 350 serfs. He spent all day doing nothing, eating then sleeping, sleeping then eating. Only laziness and boredom dominated him. He was also deeply skeptical. He even doubted Olga (오리가), who had come to love him. <33> The reason was none other than... "The idea that Olga loved him was doubtful. Why would she love me for no reason?" was his doubt. In this way, it skillfully depicted the mentality of the Russian people at the time. Thereafter, Oblomovism became popular as a substitute term for laziness, skepticism, boredom, etc.
幻滅期(The age of Tehekoff)「路·文」. Refers to the era that began with Chekhov (체호). Readily put, it was a time when people had emerged from the shell of society but were lost, having failed to find a newly established kingdom. After Alexander III ascended the throne in the post-18th century [Note: Alexander III reigned 1881-1894, fitting the timeline given later], there was absolutely no active, brilliant activity. It was the initial awakening period in Russia, marked by severe class divisions and discrimination. The passionate cries of the youth, "Become friends of the peasants!" were shattered without hope. The period from 1881 to 1904 can be called the age of Chekhov in literature. In other words, it was an era when a trend of indifference towards society, morality, and other aspects arrived, like the evening sun in autumn; characterized by exhaustion, fatigue, indecisiveness, weak will, lack of vitality in everything, unable to find a new land of long sighs and sorrow.
外面描寫「文」. In novel writing, description that does not depict psychology or inner aspects but only appearance, attitude, or actions.
幻覺「文」. A pathological state of perception, where things that do not actually exist are seen by the eye or heard by the ear; a phenomenon that occurs when the spirit is weakened and nerves are fatigued. The hallucinations sung by the French Symbolist poets. Also called 錯角 (ch'akak - illusion/misperception).
好奇心「文」. [Note: Term is 好奇心 (hogisim - curiosity), but definition better fits 憧憬 (tonggyŏng - yearning)] Refers to the mental activity of being interested in facts not yet known or novel facts, having one's mind captivated by them.
憧憬「文」. Said to be a coinage by Japan's Takayama Chogyū (高山樗牛) and Anesaki Chōfū (姉崎嘲風). Having curiosity about something unknown, troubling the mind with thoughts about it. The mental agony of striving to attain a new ideal in an unseen world.
獨創「文」. That which lacks imitation; creating something new through one's own ability.
剽竊文學(Plagiarism)「文」. The exact opposite of originality; stealing another's work to create one's own work. <34>
軟文學「文」. Soft literature refers to pure-hearted literature that departs from profound thought or melancholic meditation, flowing with emotion and soft with love.
自然描寫「文」. A descriptive method in novel writing; refers to the description of nature (天然) or mountains and rivers, i.e., the description of the protagonist's surroundings.
心理描寫「文」. In novel writing, the detailed depiction of the protagonist's psychological state; Dostoevsky's (스도에후스키) "Crime and Punishment" (罰과 罪) is a good example of a work with psychological description.
地方色(Local Colour)「文」. A translation of the European term. Refers to the special flavor arising according to different regions; refers to the unique atmosphere depending on the place.
黃金率(Golden Section). Refers to a proportional relationship in quantity like (a:b=b:a+b). The German aesthetician Zeising (쓰아어쓰잉크) theorized that all natural objects and the formal beauty of art arise according to this proportion. For example, it's the theory that when dividing any form into two parts, the aesthetic feeling arises only when the ratio of the smaller part to the larger part is the same as the ratio of the larger part to the whole.
黃金律(Golden Rule). A saying from the New Testament, Matthew 7:12: "Therefore, whatever you wish that others would do to you, do also to them." It means not just wanting to receive from others, but first treating others that way.
靈感(Inspiration)「文」. Can also be called divine revelation (神의 啓示). Refers to the wondrous ability possessed by the human spirit; the mind's eye, unobtainable in ordinary daily life or from material things; refers to the mysterious ability or function that communicates between object and spirit, spirit and spirit; this mysterious ability can guide reality. In other words, it means the spirit senses (靈이 感觸한다). It is said that John (요한), who recorded the Book of Revelation among the writers of the Bible, also wrote it receiving God's inspiration.
自由詩(Free Verse)「詩」. In Korea (朝鮮), when one speaks of poetry, older people naturally easily refer to classical Chinese poetry (漢詩). Therefore, the new poetry movement in Korea would naturally be free verse, but in the West, poetry has been bound by the various forms mentioned above until now. However, in modern times, there was a movement to break those forms and fully express only the thought. A good example figure is the American poet Whitman (Wbitman W.). His poetry is profound, solemn poetry of the masses. But it broke free from all forms. <35>
내리슴(Journalism)「文」. Translated as newspaper literature (新聞文學) or newspaper article-style literature (新文記事式文學). Advocated prioritizing beautiful writing, departing from elegant rhetoric or strict forms, favoring a simple, plain structure; refers to what is called newspaper article-style literature.
機械的人生觀「文」. Being dominated by the scientific spirit. Individualism, which shattered all idols and broke free from classical morality, ultimately did not have a very large effect. Individualism, asserting the absolute power of the self, did not grant great pleasure to humanity. This is because it possessed a mechanistic view of life. Because it was based on the scientific spirit. A major cause of modern agony surely arises from the clash between this Individualism and the mechanistic view of life.
As mentioned above, one element of the modern spirit emerged from Materialism, which started from the scientific spirit. The modern spirit consequently views all phenomena as the motion of mere matter according to science. All matter operates according to mechanical laws, it is said.
肉의 帝國「文」. General term for the era when Hellenism flourished; refer to Hellenism.
美의 宗敎(The relkgion of Beauty)「文」. Artists worshipping their aesthetic conception as a religion; refers to the Religion of the Flesh of the Aesthetic School, Hedonist School, such as Oscar Wilde (오스카 와일드), Pater (페터), D'Annunzio (눈시오).
()＜36＞

**Summary**

This article, an appendix to the 4th-anniversary issue of the magazine *Gaebyeok* (개벽), presents the first installment of a "Dictionary of Important Terminology" compiled by Pak Yŏnghŭi, focusing on 80 literary terms (excluding philosophy and thought). The compiler aims to provide simple definitions of currently prevalent Western literary concepts like Classicism, Naturalism, Romanticism, Symbolism, Decadence, Individualism, and various critical approaches, often including representative authors and works. The text acknowledges the limitations of brevity and plans future installments, including philosophical terms.

From a historical perspective, this dictionary is significant as it showcases the active reception and dissemination of Western literary and aesthetic concepts among Korean intellectuals during the Japanese colonial period (1924). The selection of terms, heavily featuring concepts related to modernism, individualism, social critique (Naturalism, Realism), and psychological states (Decadence, Nihilism, Morbid State), reflects the intellectual ferment and the search for new literary paradigms in Korea, often mediated through Japanese sources (as hinted by the compiler's mention of Japanese dictionaries). Historians might find the specific definitions, the choice of terms, and the compiler's framing comments revealing about how these Western ideas were understood, adapted, and potentially employed in the context of colonial modernity and the development of modern Korean literature.

**Named Entities**

朴英熙	박영희	Pak Yŏnghŭi
希臘	희랍	Hŭirap (Greece)
佛蘭西	불란서	Pullansŏ (France)
拉典	라틴	Latin
英國	영국	Yŏngguk (England)
밀톤	밀턴	Milton, John
아담	아담	Adam
이뿌	이브	Eve
獨逸	독일	Togil (Germany)
칸트	칸트	Kant, Immanuel
시러-	실러	Schiller, Friedrich
스펜서	스펜서	Spencer, Herbert
니이찌에	니체	Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm
룻소	루소	Rousseau, Jean-Jacques
모파산	모파상	Maupassant, Guy de
소라	졸라	Zola, Émile
푸로베르	플로베르	Flaubert, Gustave
매터랑크	마테를링크	Maeterlinck, Maurice
뽀드레르	보들레르	Baudelaire, Charles
마라메	말라르메	Mallarmé, Stéphane
다눈시오	다눈치오	D'Annunzio, Gabriele
아리스토틀	아리스토텔레스	Aristotle
유리피데스	에우리피데스	Euripides
쏘포클	소포클레스	Sophocles
께데	괴테	Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von
하이네	하이네	Heine, Heinrich
시루레루	실러	Schiller, Friedrich (variant spelling used)
쉘리	셸리	Shelley, Percy Bysshe
바이론	바이런	Byron, Lord George Gordon
킷쓰	키츠	Keats, John
나포레온	나폴레옹	Napoleon I
입센	입센	Ibsen, Henrik
홉트만	하웁트만	Hauptmann, Gerhart
앤듀리에푸	안드레예프	Andreyev, Leonid
나골키	고리키	Gorky, Maxim (likely intended)
오스카, 와일드	오스카 와일드	Wilde, Oscar
톨스토이	톨스토이	Tolstoy, Leo
헬마	헬메르	Helmer (character name)
노라	노라	Nora (character name)
로만 로란	로맹 롤랑	Rolland, Romain
벨구손	베르그송	Bergson, Henri
잇쓰	예이츠	Yeats, W. B.
하데이	하디	Hardy, Thomas
르네느	베를렌	Verlaine, Paul (unusual transliteration)
단테	단테	Dante Alighieri
스위-」이	스윈번	Swinburne, Algernon Charles (unusual transliteration)
세산느	세잔	Cézanne, Paul
코구안	고갱	Gauguin, Paul
곱보	고흐	Gogh, Vincent van
터스	러스킨	Ruskin, John
마-네	마네	Manet, Édouard
모-네	모네	Monet, Claude
크로드	클로드	Claude (character name)
공크르	공쿠르	Goncourt brothers (Edmond and Jules)
왁네르	바그너	Wagner, Richard
구릿구	그리그	Grieg, Edvard
마리넷틔	마리네티	Marinetti, F. T.
후이가로	르 피가로	Le Figaro (Newspaper)
-지, 가이세루	게오르크 카이저	Kaiser, Georg
멘서	멘서	Meanse, Carol (attribution uncertain)
피카소	피카소	Picasso, Pablo
매짐게루	메챙제	Metzinger, Jean
구떼스	글레즈	Gleizes, Albert
메테지오스키	메레시콥스키	Merezhkovsky, Dmitry
新吉	신키치	Shinkichi (likely Takahashi Shinkichi)
도리스탄, 스아라	트리스탄 차라	Tzara, Tristan
高山樗雨氏	고야마 조우씨	Mr. Takayama Chogyū
굿스-고	구츠코	Gutzkow, Karl
곳도헤루	고트헬프	Gotthelf, Jeremias
오에투밥바	아우어바흐	Auerbach, Berthold
헷베루	헤벨	Hebbel, Friedrich
투-게네	투르게네프	Turgenev, Ivan
라소	바자로프	Bazarov (character name)
몰톤	몰턴	Moulton, Richard Green
테느	텐	Taine, Hippolyte
루느틔어	브뤼네티에르	Brunetière, Ferdinand
루터루	루터	Luther, Martin
伊太利	이태리	It'ali (Italy)
미랜라	미란돌라	Pico della Mirandola
틔세리	보티첼리	Botticelli, Sandro
옌시	다빈치	da Vinci, Leonardo
미케란제로	미켈란젤로	Michelangelo
지오르지온 派	조르조네 파	School of Giorgione
켈루드(■……■)	[Name Unclear]	[Name Unclear]
럽쓰	립스	Lipps, Theodor
윙게루만	빙켈만	Winckelmann, Johann Joachim
나이에	니체	Nietzsche, Friedrich (variant spelling used)
타렌텀	타렌툼	Tarentum (Taranto)
고에	고티에	Gautier, Théophile
곤도	르콩트 드 릴	Leconte de Lisle (likely intended)
테니손	테니슨	Tennyson, Alfred
곤로	곤차로프	Goncharov, Ivan
옵부로모	오블로모프	Oblomov (character name)
오리가	올가	Olga (character name)
체호	체호프	Chekhov, Anton
알렉산더三世	알렉산드르 3세	Alexander III (Tsar of Russia)
姉崎嘲風	아네사키 조후	Anesaki Chōfū
윌리암 렉크	윌리엄 블레이크	Blake, William
도마스, 모어	토머스 모어	More, Thomas
스도에후스키	도스토옙스키	Dostoevsky, Fyodor
쓰아어쓰잉크	차이징	Zeising, Adolf
요한	요한	John (biblical figure)
휫트맨	휘트먼	Whitman, Walt
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)

**Glossary**

잡지명	잡지명	Magazine title
발행일	발행일	Publication date
기사제목	기사제목	Article title
필자	필자	Author/Writer
기사형태	기사형태	Article type
잡저	잡저	Miscellaneous writing/essay
術語	술어	Terminology
辭典	사전	Dictionary
文學部	문학부	Literature section
目次	목차	Table of Contents
擬古主義	의고주의	Classicism (lit. Following the Ancient Principle)
自然主義	자연주의	Naturalism
遊戱本能	유희본능	Play instinct
世紀末	세기말	Fin de siècle (End of the century)
데카단	데카당	Decadent
病的狀態	병적상태	Morbid state
瞹眛說	애매설	Theory of Obscurity/Ambiguity
暗面描寫	암면묘사	Depiction of the Dark Side
三一至說	삼일치설	Theory of Three Unities
浪漫主義	낭만주의	Romanticism
新浪漫主義	신낭만주의	Neo-Romanticism
耽美派	탐미파	Aesthetic School
利己主義	이기주의	Egoism
新理想主義	신이상주의	Neo-idealism
人道主義	인도주의	Humanism/Humanitarianism
個人主義	개인주의	Individualism
新英雄主義	신영웅주의	Neo-Heroism
異敎主義	이교주의	Paganism
人生派	인생파	Life School (Art for life's sake)
神秘主義	신비주의	Mysticism
享樂主義	향락주의	Hedonism
唯美主義	유미주의	Aestheticism
惡魔主義	악마주의	Satanism
象徵主義	상징주의	Symbolism
寫實主義	사실주의	Realism
虛無主義	허무주의	Nihilism
後期印象派	후기인상파	Post-Impressionism
哀傷主義	애상주의	Sentimentalism
印象主義	인상주의	Impressionism
藝術衝動	예술충동	Art impulse
未來主義	미래주의	Futurism
表現主義	표현주의	Expressionism
立軆主義	입체주의	Cubism (older term: 입체주의)
다다이슴	다다이즘	Dadaism
古典文學	고전문학	Classical Literature
審美	심미	Aesthetics (judging beauty)
世紀病	세기병	Mal du siècle (Century Sickness)
都會病	도회병	Urban malaise
感情移入	감정이입	Empathy (lit. Emotion Transfer Input)
希臘義主	희랍주의	Hellenism
鄕土藝術	향토예술	Homeland Art (Heimatkunst)
想像主義	상상주의	Imaginationism
유토피아	유토피아	Utopia
詩	시	Poetry
散文	산문	Prose
散文詩	산문시	Prose Poem
批評	비평	Criticism
客觀的	객관적	Objective
主觀的	주관적	Subjective
裁判的	재판적	Judicial
歸納的	귀납적	Inductive
科學的	과학적	Scientific
鑑賞的	감상적	Appreciative
倫理的	윤리적	Ethical
文藝復興	문예부흥	Renaissance (lit. Arts Revival)
獨創	독창	Originality
剽竊文學	표절문학	Plagiarized Literature
希伯來主義	히브리주의	Hebraism
高踏派	고답파	Parnassians (lit. High-Stepping School)
懷疑文學	회의문학	Skeptical Literature
象牙塔	상아탑	Ivory Tower
桂冠詩人	계관시인	Poet Laureate
偶像破壞	우상파괴	Iconoclasm
幻滅期	환멸기	Period of Disillusionment
外面描寫	외면묘사	External Description
幻覺	환각	Hallucination
憧憬	동경	Yearning/Longing
軟文學	연문학	Soft Literature
自然描寫	자연묘사	Nature Description
心理描寫	심리묘사	Psychological Description
地方色	지방색	Local Color
黃金率	황금률	Golden Section (older term: 黃金率)
黃金律	황금률	Golden Rule
靈感	영감	Inspiration
自由詩	자유시	Free Verse
쩌내리슴	저널리즘	Journalism (older phonetic spelling)
機械的人生觀	기계적 인생관	Mechanistic View of Life
肉의宗敎	육의 종교	Religion of the Flesh
美의宗敎	미의 종교	Religion of Beauty
除한	제외한	Excluding (older form of 제외하다)
爲先	우선	First of all (older form)
모두엇다	모았다	Gathered (older form of 모으다)
잇슴으로	있으므로	Because there is (older spelling/form)
업지 안이하니	없지 아니하니	As there is not none (double negative for 'there is')
밋흐로	밑으로	Underneath/Below (older spelling)
업섯다	없었다	Did not exist / Was not (older spelling)
갓치	같이	Like/As (older spelling)
밧는	받는	Receiving (older spelling)
깨닷게	깨닫게	To realize/become aware (older spelling)
직각적	직관적	Intuitive (using 直覺 rather than 直角 'right angle' interpretation)
부르지젓다	부르짖었다	Cried out/Shouted (older spelling)
갓가왓다	가까웠다	Was close/near (older spelling)
아해들	아이들	Children (older form)
밧음으로	받음으로	By receiving (older spelling)
潛伏하여잇다	잠복하여있다	Is latent/hidden (older spelling/form)
닭이다	까닭이다	Is the reason/cause (older spelling)
麻庫되여	마비되어	Being paralyzed/numbed (older spelling/form)
배호는것이고	배우는 것이고	Is something learned (older spelling)
는	좇는	Following/Pursuing (older form/spelling)
차저보면	찾아보면	If one looks for/finds (older spelling)
맛취우	매튜	Matthew (older phonetic spelling)
시몬쓰	시몬스	Symons (older phonetic spelling)
차가는	쫓아가는	Chasing/Following (older spelling)
틔세리	보티첼리	Botticelli (older phonetic spelling)
옌시	다빈치	da Vinci (older phonetic spelling)
미케란제로	미켈란젤로	Michelangelo (older phonetic spelling)
지오르지온	조르조네	Giorgione (older phonetic spelling)
씨워주엇다	씌워주었다	Bestowed/Put on (a crown) (older spelling)
내리슴	저널리즘	Journalism (older spelling)
	끝	The End
-e 

---------------------------


잡지명	개벽 제49호
발행일	1924년 07월 01일
기사제목	開闢創刊四周年記念號附錄, 重要術語辭典
필자	朴英熙 編
기사형태	잡저

開闢創刊四周年記念號附錄, 重要術語辭典
						朴英熙 編
文學部 80語 「第1回」
目次
擬古主義
自然主義
遊戱本能
世紀末
데카단
病的狀態
瞹眛說
暗面描寫
三一至說
浪漫主義
浪漫主義者
浪漫的
少年獨逸派
第三帝國
新浪漫主義
新浪漫主義者
耽美派
利己主義
新理想主義
人道主義
個人主義
新英雄主義
異敎主義
人生派
神秘主義
享樂主義
惡의 華
人工樂園
唯美主義
惡魔主義
象徵主義
人形의 家
寫實主義
虛無主義
後期印象派
神曲
哀傷主義
라파엘前派
印象主義
藝術衝動
未來主義
表現主義
立軆主義
다다이슴
古典文學
審美
世紀病
都會病
感情移入
希臘義主
鄕土藝術
입센이슴
에루테루이슴
想像主義
유토피아
詩
散文
散文詩
客觀的 批評
主觀的 批評
裁判的 批評
歸納的 批評
科學的 批評
鑑賞的 批評
倫理的 批評
文藝復與
獨創
剽竊文學
希伯來主義
高踏派
懷疑文學
狂*興挬起의 詩人
象牙搭
桂冠詩人
偶像破壞
옵부로모비슴
幻滅期文學
外面描寫
幻覺
憧憬
軟文學
自然描寫
地方色
黃金率
黃金律
靈感
自由詩
쩌내리슴
機械的人生觀
肉의宗敎
美의宗敎
「이상은 철학과 사상을 除한 分」

略字
「文」......文學
「美」......美學 혹은 繪畵
「哲」......哲學
「倫」......倫理
「詩」......詩歌
「佛」......佛蘭西
「思」......思想
「評」......批評 혹은 評論
「獨」......獨逸
「露」......露西亞
「英」......英國＜2＞

이번 호에는 철학과 사상의 術語를 除한 문학의 용어만을 멧 가지 모아 보앗다. 원래 西歷 기원 후, 즉 문학이 운동이 잇슨 후, 수천년의 장구한 세기를 통해 온 것이라 용어도 百千으로 계산키가 어렵다. 그러나 세세한 短處를 제거하고 현재에 가장 아러야 하고 또 만히 유행되는 용어만을 爲先 제1회로 모두엇다. 또한 용어 하나에만 하드래도 그것이 수백페지의 서책으로 능히 해설하기 어려운 것이 잇슴으로 이 곳에서는 가장 평이하게 가장 간단해서 단시간에 알도록 힘써 보앗스나, 그것은 독자가 읽은 후라야 알 것이니 말하기 어렵다. 그것도 시간 문제로 여유업는 단시간에 하게 된 일이라 좀 불완전하드래도 다음 기회에 다시 수정 증가의 기회가 업지 안이하니 양해 잇기도 바란다. 세상에는 日文으로도 文藝辭典이라는 것이 잇스나 모도 不用廢字 뿐이 만코 실제 업는 無用의 長物이 만음으로 日語서적, 서양 서적, 기타 사전에서 할 수 잇는대로는 유행어의 진수 뿐을 모듸려 하엿든 것이 이것이다. 철학 사상의 部는 할 수 잇는대로는 次號에 발표하려 한다. 또 다시 말할 것은 쓸대업는 명사 色名 가튼 것은 생략하고 사색적으로 나온 것만을 모듸엿다. 문학에 관계잇는 미술의 용어도 포함하엿다.
-編者 씀-

擬古主義(Classicism) 「文」 自然主義의 운동이 일어나기 전에 잇든 문학상 용어다. (1) 즉 말하면 18세기는 擬古主義의 시대이엿다. (2) 19세기 전반는 낭만시대엿고 (3) 19세기 중엽부터는 自然主義 時代엿다. 그 주의의 예술과 십칠팔세기 동안, 歐洲의 문예는 佛蘭西를 중심으로 希臘, 拉典의 風格을 기초로 한 일종의 典型이다. 이 시대의 사람들은 일반 생활상에도 매우 인습적이엿다. 도덕이나 정치나 종교상에도 일정한 표준법칙이 잇서 그것에 복종치 안으면 안이 되엿다. 다시 말하면 古型을 준수하고 형식에 속박되엿든 主義다. 형식을 사랑하는데 따라서 통일과 均齊와 명석과 규율을 사랑하엿고, 知巧的으로 知를 가주고 예술 제작상 귀중한 것을 삼엇다. 그런고로 그들은 모방 뿐을 서로 일삼엇고 개성이나 열정이 보이지 안엇다.

失樂園(Paradise Lost) 「詩」 이는 英國 시인 밀톤(Tom Milton, 1608-1674)의 시집의 일홈이니 태초에 인류의 선조인 아담과 이뿌가 上帝의 戒命을＜3＞ 준수치 안음으로 그들의 낙원을 일어버렷다는 서사시이다.

自然主義(Naturalism) 「文」 19세기 중엽으로부터 擬古主義가 쇠패하면서 다시 일어난 문학상 운동이니 擬古主義에서 형식에 속박되엿든 것에 반항적으로 浪漫主義, 또 그것에서 다시 뛰여나온 것이다. 다시 말하면 「자연 그대로」 혹은 「잇는 그대로」라는 말을 막연히 표시하는 것이다. (1) 객관의 세계를 자연이라구 부른다, (2) 마음의 세계 즉 정신의 세계에 대해서 물질계를 자연이라고 부른다. (3) 理想에 대해서 자연이라구 부르는 때가 잇다. (4) 기교에 대해서 족음도 인위적 가공을 더하지 안은 赤裸의 事象을 자연이라구 부른다. (5) 사물의 천성, 즉 천연 그대로의 성질을 자연이라구 부른다. (6) 이상에 대한 정상을 자연이라구 부른다. 이와 가티 자연이란 말은 그 의미가 여러 가지인 고로 自然主義라는 말도 그 써지는 방면이 여러 가지인 것이다.
「哲」 철학상의 自然主義는 그 근본사상은, 정신현상을 물질현상의 연속으로 보는 것이다. 즉 정신 현상은 물질현상에서 나온 것이고 물질 이외에는 정신이 잇지 안이하다. 마음의 작용은 신체가 잇슨 후에 비로소 생기는 것이다. 즉 말하는 唯物論이다.―모든 현상을 물질과 그 동작의 결과라고 보는 唯物觀이 철학상 自然主義인 것이다.
「倫」 윤리학상의 自然主義도 여려가지가 잇다. 자연이란 말을 물질적이라는 데까지 해석하면 물질적 행복을 도덕의 목적으로 삼는 쾌락설 행복설도 윤리학의 일종이다. 니이찌에(Fridrich Wilhelm Nitzsche 1844-1900)의 道德論이 또한 일종이다 또한 자연이라는 말을 천연이라는 뜻으로만 해석할 것이면 「자연으로 도라가거라, 사람의 본성을 따러라.」 한, 룻소(Rousseau, 1670-1741(佛))의 道德論도 또한 일종이다. 어듸까지든지 본능에 충실하라는 니이찌에의 道德論도 그 본능이라는 것을 사람의 본성이라고 시인하는 것으로부터 보면 밝히 그것은 윤리학상 自然主義라고 하겟다.

自然主義文學 「文」 自然主義 아래서 쓰는 작품이니 관찰묘사는 순객관적으로 하는 것이다. 古文藝에서 美를 요점으로 하엿든데에 반대로 眞을 잡을려고 애섯다. 가장 自然主義의 목적 제재와 방법 태도의 일반은 전에 낭만주의와 自然主義새이에 徑路를 알면 自然主義文學의 본질을 알 것이다. ＜4＞
(1) 공상에서 실현에 (2) 열정에서 理智에, (3) 주관적에서 객관적에 (4) 정신에서 물질에 (5) 기교에서 무기교에 (6) 예술을 위한 예술에서 인생을 위한 예술에 (7) 유희에서 엄숙에 (8) 운문에서 산문에 (9) 이상에서 평범에―등의 구별을 할 수가 잇다.―. 그의 대한 묘사는 「暗面描寫」 참조.

自然主義者(Naturalist) 「文」 自然主義의 작품을 쓰는 사람을 일음이니 (G. d. Maupassant, 1850-1890)모파산. (E Zola 1840-1902)소라. (Flaubert 1821-1880)푸로베르. 등 佛蘭西의 대표적 작가이다.

遊戲本能(Play-impulse) 「文」 遊戲本能은 獨逸 칸트(Kant, 1724-1804)와, 시러―(Schiller, 1759-1805)를 시작해서 英國에 스펜서(Spencer 1820-1902)등의 주장하든 학설이니, 예술의 발생하는 동기는 遊戱本能이다. 그래서 그 遊戲本能은 「정신의 過剩」의 一變形이라는 것이다. 그 주장의 귀착점은, 예술은 실생활의 공리적 목적과는 아무러한 관계도 업고 오즉 遊戲本能에 지내가지 안는다 한다.

世紀末(Fin de siecle) 「文」 이것은 「세기의 끗」이라는 말이다. 즉 19세기의 최종을 뜻한 것이다. 19세기의 말엽의 분란착잡하엿든 시대의 막연한 생의 불안과 동요를 가르친 말이다. 모든 신앙을 일어바리고 모든 권위를 일어버리고 또한 모든 것을 통일시킬만한 사상을 일어버려서 불안, 실망, 낙담, 自棄―이 모든 것뿐이 사람의 마음을 흔들든 때다. 그럼으로 생의 공포와 절망이 가득차서 혼돈 시대를 일음이다.

데카단(Decadant)頹廢派 「文」 세기말에 생긴 일종의 主義 名詞니, 실망, 낙담, 의 결과 절망과 비애뿐만이 사람의 마음을 지배할 때에 모든 사람의 마음은 明日에 희망을 갓지 안이하고 來月에 희망을 갓지 안한 고로 다만 오날 뿐만을 즐기자. 다만 우리의 생명이 잇는데까지 힘것 환락이나 마음것 하자. 다만 현재 뿐만을 즐기자! 향락하자! 세상에는 여자와 음주 뿐이다. 그리해서 그들은 일순간 일순간 병자의 괴로운 숨을 쉬이면서 절망 속에서 퇴폐하여서 갓다. 「惡魔主義」 참조.

病的狀態 「文」 근대 정신의 한 요소인 과학적 정신은 物質主義를 출생하고 이 物質主義는 물질문명을 출생케 하엿다. 따러서 근대인의 생활은 이 물질생활을 중심으로 하고 살게 되엿다. 다시 말하면 인생의＜5＞ 과학화는 동시에 인생의 물질화가 되엿다. 그럼으로 사람과 사람의 마음에는 물욕의 요구가 심하엿다. 그러나 한 편으로는 인구의 증진, 생존경쟁의 비참한 상태에서 그 요구를 충만케 할 수가 업다. 그 외에 생존경쟁은 날로 심하엿다. 이에 사람의 마음은 깁흔 함정에서 신음하지 안으면 안이되엿다. 신경과 육체는 세기병에 걸여서 알코서 잇섯다. 不活潑, 無希望, 沉滯, 鬱悶의 心的 피로로부터 나온 병의 상태를 말함이다.

瞹昧說(Theorie de L' obscurite') 「文」 이 주장은, 언어는 원래부터 불완전하고 애매한 것이다. 그런 고로 자기들의 심원한 사상 복잡한 감정을 표시할 수는 업는 것이라고 한 것이 그들의 출발점이다. 다만 언어는 엇더한 의미를 암시만 할 뿐이다. 주장자는 매터랑크, 뽀드레르, 마라메 등 象徵派 시인들이 대표적 인물이다.

暗面描寫 「文」 과학적이라는 것은 동시에 현실적이라 할 수 잇다. 현실적이라는 것은 얼는 말하면 「赤裸」라고도 할 수 잇다. 그런고로는 自然主義者의 묘사는 어대까지든지 실제를 중하엿고 그 취미의 선악으로 발현 혹은 은폐하지는 안엇다. 인생의 眞이라든지 혹은 현실적이라면 모든 것이 「赤裸」가 되는 것이다. 다시 말하면 선악을 합해 된 인생의 전부를 관찰하게 되는 것이다. 따라서 잇때것 감추어 잇는 인생의 暗面, 인생의 醜汚한 暗面이 나타나게 되엿다. 현실과 眞을 사랑하는 自然主義者는 인생의 暗面을 묘사하는 것이다. 그런고로 人生美만을 찬송하든 浪漫主義에 비해서 自然主義는 暗面 묘사를 중요한 점으로 삼엇다. 暗面에는 더욱이 「성욕」에 대한 것이 만엇다. 自然主義 이전에는 성욕이라는 것은 할 수 잇는대로 멀리 하엿다. 더러운 것, 非倫의 것, 붓으로 쓰기에도 붓그러운 일이라구 하엿다. 그러나 성욕이 인간 생활을 강하게 지배하는 이상, 그것을 배척하고는 참된 인생을 묘사할 수가 업다. 眞―現實―科學的이라는 곳에서 自然主義의 문학에는 성욕이 중요하게 된다는 것은 사실이다. 자연주의에서 성욕뿐만 안이라 인간의 물질적 방면이 自然主義에서 중요시하게 된 것은 늘 말하는 것이다. 인간을 영적이라고 생각하는 대신에 인간도 犬猫와 가튼 동물에 더 지내지 안는다는 것이다. 극단으로 말하면 인간도 戰的 생활을 선택하고 잇다. 세계는 醜化하여 간다. 억지로 醜化시키는 것이 안이라 자연히 그 전체가 醜化되여 가는 것이 현대의 생활이다. ＜6＞ 그런고로 그들은 인생의 醜面을 용감이 發露시키고 말엇다. 묘파산의
「뻴암이女의 일생」 소라의 「野獸의 喜劇」 다눈시오(D’annunzio)의 「死의 승리」 등 소위 世人이 말하는 貪婪, 强慾, 敗倫, 不德인 모든 인생의 暗面을 폭로시켯다. 다시 말하면 暗面描寫는 自然主義 작품의 중대한 것이다.
「自然主義」 참조.

三一致說(ThreeUnities) 「戱」 아리스토틀 (Aristotle)의 주장이니, 유리피데스(기원전 485-406)나, 쏘포클(Sopho-cle) 기원전 495-405)등의 희곡에 잇는 것과 가티 時와 處와 所作, 3개의 일치를 말함이다.

浪漫主義(Romanticism) 「文」 얼는 말하면 擬古主義가 인습에 구속되엿는데 비해서 낭만주의는 어듸까지든지 자유를 귀중이 역이고 인습의 古殼을 깨트리고 擬古主義가 모방인데 비해서 어대까지든지 독창을 귀중이 역이고 擬古主義가 知巧라는데 반대로 낭만주의는 인간 자연의 정서를 귀중이 하며 擬古主義가 현실를 재료로 하는 데에 낭만주의는 공상을 마음것 해서 초현실적 재료를 취하는 예술이엿다.
아래에 표를 보라.
낭만주의는 擬古主義에서 사는 사람들의 참을 수 업는 부르지즘이다. 文藝復興運動으로부터 각성된 자각. 자유로 연구하고 자유로 신앙하려는 정신은 基督敎의 속박에서 해방되는 동시에 다시 古典에 갓치 여지엿다. 그러나 한 번 자각한 눈을 뜬 사람들은 이 경지를 참을 수가 업섯다. 古時로부터 전해온 표준과 법칙에 속박되엿든 자기의 개성을 줄일 수는 업섯든 것이다. 표준을 버려라! 법칙을 버려라! 모든 인습을 타파하고 자아를 해방하여라! 하고 떠들엇다. 「자연으로 도라가거라!」한 사람은 낭만주의의 선구인 룻소엿다. 이것이 낭만주의의 일어난 간단한 원인이다.

낭만주의자(Romanticist) 「文」 낭만주의를 주장하는 작가 혹은 예술가를 일음이다. Rousseau, 1670-1741. ＜7＞
獨                獨
Goethe, 1749-1832. H. Heine, 1797-1856.
獨                 英
Schiller, 1759-1805. Shelley, 1792-1822.
英               英
Byron 1788-1824. Keats, 1795-1821.
등 諸人이 대표적 인물이엿다.
(이하 생략-원문)

浪漫的(Romantic) 「文」 낭만주의의 형용사니 구속에서 자유에, 공상적 美. 해석적 기분, 초월적 快味 등에 유사한 일용어에 쓰게 되엿다.

少年獨逸派 「文」 께데, 시루레루 이후 유명한 시인은 서정시인 하이네(Heine, 1797-1856)엿다.
그의 시는 장중 웅대한 맛은 稀少하나 幽婉纖美한 情調가 풍부하엿다. 그의 유명한 시편은 늘 조소하는 것이 만엇고 기탄 업시 당시의 문화를 罵詈하엿다. 그 회의적인 경향에는 근대 사상이 명백히 보인다. 당시 나포레온(Napoleon) 1세는 勃落하고 獨逸 國民의 조국 재흥의 희망도 수포로 도라가고 연방 조직의 압제 정치에 괴로움을 밧는 때 사람들의 불평은 참을 수 업시 될 때 곳 「문학 방면」에 그 모든 고통이 나타나서 破壤와 회의를 일삼은 文學運動이 즉 獨逸 「少年獨逸派」의 운동이엿다. 이 운동은 낭만주의에서로 가는 교량이엿다. 하이네의 만년에는 확실이 이 「少年獨逸派」의 사상을 시인하엿다. 「主情派」 同

第三帝國(The third Empire) 「文」 인생의 生이 본능 그대로는 살 수가 업다. 동물과 가티 肉慾의 세계뿐이나 추악한 물질적 세계에만은 살 수가 업다. 따러서 神과 靈의 理想鄕에서만도 살 수가 업다. 靈肉一致의 제국이 이 第三帝國이다.

新浪漫主義(Neo-Romanticism) 「文」 현실를 귀중이 역이고 객관을 주지로 한 自然主義 문학은 한 때는 반동적으로 전성 시대에 잇섯스나 얼마 안이가서 自然主義에 권태를 깨닷게 되엿다. 그리해서 自然主義가 쇠패하고 그 다음에 일어난 문학상 운동이, 즉 新浪漫主義다. 더 말할 것 업시 自然主義는 현실을 귀중이 역이며 객관을 귀중이 역이든 문학움´다. 그러나 輓近 사상계는 일변하고 말엇든 것이다. 사람들은 현실―그 제한에서 직접 경험 뿐만으로는 의뢰할 수 업섯다. 다시 물질보다도 심령, 과학적 연구보다도 신비적 직각적 방면을 귀중이 역이게 되엿섯다. 그것은 문학방면뿐만이 안이라 철학방면에도 新主觀主義 新唯心論이 盛起하엿섯다. 新思想은 「靈의 각성」을 부르지젓다. 그런고로 新浪漫主義는 쉽게 말하면 「靈의＜8＞ 각성에서 출발한 문학이라고 할 것이다. 英國 비평가 겸 시인인 시몬스(A. Symons)는 말하기를 「사람 사람의 사상이 변화함을 따라서 문학에도 또한 그 眞髓에 잇서서 만히 변화하엿다. 물질의 고찰과 조제에 세계는 오래동안 그 영적 방면은 주리고 잇섯다.
그러나 이제야 靈의 복귀가 온 고로 이에 신문학도 일어낫다. 즉 눈에 보이는 세계가 현실이 안이고 보이지 안는 세계가 꿈이 안인 新文學―」이라고 하엿다.
新浪邊主義는 연구보다도 직각을 중요시하고 지식보다도 정의를 중요시하는 것이다. 新浪漫主義는 사실을 다만 사실로 알매 만족할 뿐 안이라 그 사실 속에서 무슨 물건(Something)을 차지려는 것이다. 新浪漫義의 유래는 이러하다. 擬古主義에서 낭만주의에 낭만주의에서 自然主義에 自然主義에서 新浪漫主義에 이르럿다.

新浪漫主義者((Neo-Romanticist) 「文」 新浪漫主義 아래서 쓰는 작가들이니, 입센(Ibsen H.)의 3부작 「途上」 「大寺院」, 「라파」는 사람의 靈이 가장 조잡한 물질주의에서 놉흔 靈界의 신앙을 향하고 나아가는 것을 그린 것이다. 또한 「社會柱」 「人形의 家」 「幽靈」들도 심각한 현사회의 결함을 묘사하고 현실 생활의 醜를 그린 것이다. 홉트만(Hauptmann G)의 「日出前」 「시레시야의 織工」 등은 철저한 自然主義엿스나 다음에 나온 한네의 昇天 「沉鍾」은 매우 신비적이며 또 新浪漫主義에 갓가왓다. 그 외에도 앤듀리에푸(Andreiyff, L) 나골키(Golky M.)나, 따눈시오(D'anunzio)등이 잇다.

耽美派 「文」 唯美派와 가티니 생활이나 작품에 오즉 美만으로 相大物를 삼으니 오스카, 와일드(Wilde Oscar) 등 작가가 그 好例이다. 「唯美主義」 참조.

利己主義 「文」 個人主義와 가트니 모든 것을 자아만을 위해서 이기적으로 하는 것이니 입센, 니이찌에 등이 그 好例다. 「個人主義」 참조.

新理想主義(Neo-idealism) 「文」 享樂主義의 예술과 한가지, 새로운 主觀主義의 예술이고 主觀的 情意的이라는 점은 가트나 그 方行은 다른 것이다. 그 다른 것은 人生主義나 人道主義라는 말로 표시하는 新理想主義의 문학인 까닭이다. 享樂主義의 예술이 「예술을 위한 예술」이라면, 新理想主義의 예술은 전혀 「인생을 위한 예술」에 갓가운 것이다. 이 의미에서는 自然主義와 상통하는 점도 잇다. 그러나 自然主義는＜9＞ 그 배후에 기계적 인생관으로 하여금 생기는 소극적 悲觀主義가 잇는 대신에, 新理想主義는 어듸까지든지 적극적으로 인생을 긍정하고, 생명을 사랑하며, 노력함으로 더 조흔 길을 차지려는 의지로부터 생긴 것이다. 自然主義는 방관적인데에 대해서 新理想主義는 긍정적 노력인 것이다. 新理想主義 내지 人道主義의 예술가를 말하면 露西亞의 (Tolstoy. L)톨스토이다. 톨스토이 예술을, 그의 현실적 내지 사실적이라는 일면에서 볼 것이면 自然主義 작품이라도 이 이상은 업슬 것이다. 물론 그는 自然主義의 物質主義에 根抵를 두는 대신으로 그의 사상은 정신적 요구에 根抵를 두엇다. 그 묘사하는데도 과학적 수단과 객관적 태도를 전혀 내여 버리지는 안으나 그 후면에 熾烈한 주관을 감추어 잇다. 톨스토이는 잇는 그대로의 현실을 묘사함으로 모든 것을 만족하지 안엇다. 그 현실을 더욱 더욱 개량 증진하는 데에까지 이르럿다. 그럼으로 그는 종말에 예술을 버리고 종교에 드러갓섯다. 그의 예술이 참으로 新理想主義와 예술의 好標本이엿고 또한 「인생을 위한 예술의 대표적 작품이다. 다시 말하면 自然主義는 無理想인데 비해서 新理想主義에는 확실한 이상이 잇다. 約言하면 自然主義에서 내여버린 이상을 새로히 굿세게 잡어 가지고 어듸까짊�든지 인생을 잘 지내게 하는 요구에 응하는 예술―그것이 輓近 문예의 新思想主義다. 生命, 愛, 人道가 그것의 요소다.
「人道主義」 同.

人道主義(Humanism) 「文」 新理想主義와 同.

個人主義(Individualism) 「文」 자아의 해방, 자아의 발전을 가장 주제로 삼은 主義다. 자아라는 것 자아라는 것을 모든 속박에서 해방시키는 운동이다. 個人主義者의 학설을 들으면 세상의 모든 물건은 나를 위해서 생겻고, 모든 일은 나를 위해서 되여 간다고 한다. 「나」는 만물의 근원이 되는 것이다. 그런고로 「나」라는 것이 곳 「神」이 되고 「創造者」가 된다. 神, 道德, 社會, 人道, 이 모든 것이 「나」라는 존재가 잇는 후라야 잇게 되는 것이다. 그런고로 자아의 低價는 「絶對」인 것이다. 그런고로 그들은 「天上天下의 唯我獨存」이라고 한다. 따라서  일반관념, 일반전설을 배척하고 일체 권력에 불복하며 무신론을 주창하며 이기적 자아를 자라게 하는 것이다. 극단에 個人主義에는 자유와 평등까지 배척한다.＜10＞ 다시 말하면 자기 이외에는 아무 것도 업슴을 따라 국가 사회를 不顧한다. 사회를 不顧하는 사람이 자유 평등을 부를 새이가 업다고 한다. 니이찌에(Nitzsche)는 「본능으로 도라가거라」하고 룻소(Rousseau)는 「자연으로 도라가거라」하엿다. 행위의 중심은 본능이다. 사람은 반다시 본능의 명령을 밧어서 생활할 것이라 한다. 그런고로 도덕을 조소한다. 도덕이라는 것은 본능을 억제하고, 타인에게 동정을 억제로 하며 이성으로 모든 행위를 지배하게 되여 사람을 병적으로 불활발케 한다는 것이다. 더욱이 基督敎의 도덕에는, 더욱 심하다. 박애하는 것이 인간을 노예로 만들고 만은 것이다. 그런고로 도덕은 약자의 요구하는 것이라고 한다.
「善이라는 것은 무엇이냐? 그것은 위력을 깨닷고, 위력을 요구하는 마음을 고상케 하는 모든 것이다. 인간이 가지고 잇는 力 그것이다」라고 하엿다. 또한 입센(Ibsen. H)의 「人形의 家」의 일절을 보자.
「헬마. 무엇보다도 너는 남의 처가 되는 몸이요, 또한 어머니의 책임을 가지고 잇다.
노라. 그런 것을 나는 밋지 안어요. 무엇보다도, 나는 한 인간이고, 그것은 당신도 갓틈니다.―적어도 그럿케 되려고 함니다. 흔이 사람들이 당신의 의견과 가튼 것은 나암니다. 서적에도 그러케 써서 잇서요. 그러나 이제부터는 나는 남이 하는 말이나 책에 쓴 것으로는 여간해서 만족할 수 업서요. 자기가 스스로 생각하고 자기가 그것을 밝힐려 함니다.
하고 남편과 아해들은 바리고 집을 떠난 노라는 個人主義의 가장 적절한 例라 할 것이다.

新英雄主義(Neo-Heroism) 「文」 自然主義에 계속해서 일어난 輓近主義의 사상에 가장, 선명한 색채를 보인 것은 佛蘭西 현대작가 로만 로란(Rollald, Romain)의 新英雄主義인 것이다. 그의 표어는, 「창을 열어라. 한울의 자유스런 공기를 들어오게 하여라! 영웅적 사업의 靈感의 밋흐로 모듸여라!」 는 것이다. 그는 영웅―위인의 생활을 정의하기를 (The Heroic)영웅적인 것을 탐구하는 것에 더 지나가지 안는다. 세상에는 安價의 樂天主義者가 잇다. 그는 할 수 잇는 대로 고통스런 경험에서 피해서 꿈과 가티 맑은 공상 세계에서 산나. 또한 세상에는 怠惰한 厭世主義者가 잇다. 그는 아무 이유도 업시 인생을＜11＞ 부정하고 회피하려는 것이다. 엇던 것을 물론하고 생활의 공포를 두려워하는 小個人主義者들이다. 「그러나 세상에는 다만 한아인 용기가 잇다. 영웅이 잇다. 그것은 되어 가는 대로 인생을 관찰하고―그리고 그것을 사랑하는 것이다」라고 하엿다. 인생은 얼는 말하면 戰場이다. 不斷의 爭鬪인 것이다. 그것은 생명을 위한 싸홈이다. 이 곳에 로만 로란의 철학이 잇는 것이다. 로만로란도 벨구손과 가티 「生命派」의 철학자이다. 그의 신은 「나는 虛無와 싸호는 생명이다」하며, 「영원이 싸호는 자유 의지다」라고 하엿다. 영원히 싸호는 의지인 신의 일부분으로, 그것을 위해 싸호는 한 병졸이 즉 「자기」라고 하엿다. 「자기」는 어듸까지던지 「자기」인 것이다. 그러나 「자기를 위한 자기는 안이다. 「神을 위한 자기」인 것이다. 다시 말하면 「神는 허무의 싸호는 생명이다. 죽엄과 싸호는 生인 것이다. 憎惡과 싸호는 사랑이니라」 이러케 영원히 싸호는 자유 의지인 것이다. 그럼으로 이 신의 전쟁에 참가해서 가장 용감히 싸호는 전사라야 참으로 영웅인 겊�이다. 이것이 영웅주의의 眞髓인 것이다.

異敎主義(Paganism) 「文」 基督主義, 즉 希伯來主義에 대한 異敎를 말함이니 즉 希臘主義를 말함이다. (希臘主義 참조).

人生派(Artist of human) 「文」 이 派는 예술을 위한 예술의 반대로 인생을 위한 예술의 작가들을 일음이니(人道主義 참조).
神秘主義(Mysticism) 「文」·「詩」 소라(Zola)의 自然主義에서 나와서 象徵主義·神秘主義의 지경으로 들어오게 되엿다. 寫實에서 象徵에, 現實에서 主觀的에, 物質에서 心靈에, 科學的判斷에서 精神的直覺에 重要한 重點을두엇다. 神秘主義에 가장 特秀한 作家는 매터링크(Maeter;omcj M. 1892-)이엇다. 그의 神秘說은 이러하엿다. 心靈의 秘密 그것에 運命이 潜伏하여잇다. 그 運命을 感得할수 잇는 힘이 참으로 「智」인 것이다. 다시말하면 그곳에 우리 表面의 出現되는 人格보다도 더욱 偉大한 것을 가지고 잇다. 말하면 人格의 根低를 만드는 무슨 不可解의 것을 가지고 잇다. 참된 「自我」가 한 그 가운데에 잇다. 世上에는 無能者가 繁昌하고, 有力한 것이 도로혀 失敗하는 일이엿다. 그것을 異常하다고 한다. 그러나 그것은 이 참된 「自我」의 人格의 根柢에 감초＜12＞인 무슨물건(Something)을 모르는 닭이다. 그런 故ㄹ 外界에 나타난 生活은, 참된 「自我」의 人格의 根柢에 감초인(Something)으로하여금 出生하는 것이다. 例를 들면 外部生活은 深水의 表面에  水泡와가튼것이라한다. 內部生命은 時間과 空間을 超越한 것이다. 그런 故로 우리는 이 生命만이 健全하면 多幸일 것이다. 한 우리의 運命을 支配하는 智도 그 中에 잇는 것이다. 그런 故로 이보이지안는 內部生命의 躍助하는데의 참된 神秘를 볼수가 잇다는 것이다. 그런 故로 運命神秘는 決코 우리 外部에 잇는 것이 아니라 우리 內部에 잇는 것이다. 우리가 단단히 魂만을 잡고 잇스면, 다시말하면 內部生命이 여만잇스면, 그곳에는 「智」가 生기고, 한 運命을 自由로 支配할 수가 잇다. 라서 우리의 幸福도어들수가잇다고 그는 말하엿다. 神秘는 心靈의 偉大한 幸福스런 나라이다.

溫室(詩集) 靑鳥(童話劇) 단다지-르의 죽엄(劇)群肓(仝)「闖入者」「七人의 公主」「몬나, 안나」…………等數十種의 特秀한 脚本이잇다. 英國의 (Yeats W B)잇스와가튼 詩人노 有名한 神秘主義者이다.
享樂主義(Hedonism)「文」. 享樂主義나 한 神秘主義乃至象徵主義는 다한가지 데카단的傾向에 기우러진 藝術이다. 同時에데카단의佛蘭西詩人들은 다가티 享樂派에 屬하엿다. 厭世思想과 神經過敏等不健全한가운데서일어나는 反動的活動이다. 그들은 現世의 事物에 對해서 아무 興味를 갓지 안이하고 한 眼前에 實際要求에 對한 慾望도 업시 다만 人生問題의 不可解를 解決하려고 焦心하엿다. 라서 解決치 못하는그들은 自棄하여서 生을 咀呪하고 鬱憫과 人間苦에 對한 悲哀만이 그들에게 잇섯다. 그런 故로 그들은 남어잇는 그들의 분 生을 苦憫과 絶望에서 所望업시지내는 대신에 그들은 할수잇는대로 生을 즐기려하엿다. 享樂하려하엿다. 그럼으로 享樂에부닥긴 神經은 점점 麻庫되여 점점 强한 痲醉劑로 그들의 感覺을 수고롭게하엿다. 「現代主義와 로맨스」라는데 一節을보자(Scott J著).
「近代에서 科學普及은 먼저 宗敎上의 信念을 粉碎하고, 物質方面, 感覺方面에서 모든 것을 求하게 되엿다. 이 影向은 敬虔한 노마스, 하데이(Hatdy. T)지, 人間의 悲憺과 人間獸性의 淺薄한 것을 觀察하엿다. 라서 그는 猫出한 人物은 모도가 現世의 苦＜13＞憫에 苦憫을 밧는 疲勞한 人物이엿다. 그는 神의 存在를 否定치안엇다. 그러나 同時에 神는 慈悲만흔것도안이고, 善良한것도안이엿다. 오히려 人生이 훨신 情이깁고 親切하다고 생각하엿다. 이 傾向이 점점 向上해서 神의 道德을 의심하는 同時에, 人間이 定한 모든 道德도 의심하게 되엿다. 이것이 卽頹廢派인 것이다. 이 派의 사람은 모든 것을 아와가티 의심하는 에 快樂이라는 것을 結末에 發見하여서 그곳에 人生의 安心所를 만들엇다. 그들에게는 現代의 社會는 無趣味이고 醜惡하고, 참을수업는 不快가 充滿하엿다. 그런 故로 모든 것을 自己몸만을 享樂하려하엿다」그런 故로르네느. 드레르. 와일트. 깃쓰. 시몬스等. (Vcrlaine. P. Etc,.)의 詩人들은 阿片과 하쉬잇쉬(Hashish)와 毒酒로 밤을새이며 人工樂園을 만들기에 多忙하엿다.
惡의華(Les Flcurs du Mal)「詩」. 惡魔派의 巨頭인 드레르(Bandelaire. C)의 有名한 詩集의 일홈이니 一八五七年에 出版하엿다.
人工樂園(Les Paradis Artificiels)「詩」. 이것도 드레르 名詩集의일홈이니 一八六○年에 出版하엿다. 阿片과 모든 痲醉劑로엇든 人工的樂園을을푼 것이다
唯美主義(Aestheticism)「文」. 享樂主義와 그 本質을 同一하게가진것이니 英國의 와일드(Wide, O 1856-)의 特別히 主張하고 試行하든 主義니 主義와 學說만이안이라 直接肉體에지 日常衣服化粧에지여러가지로 아름답게하엿다. 그가 主張하는 말의 一節을 이러하엿다. 모든 哲學이나 思想이나 科學은 다그 主張도 變하고 人生生活의 永久치못한 것이다. 그러나 「美는 人生生活에 傷함이업는 唯一한 것이다. 哲學은 沙丘와 가티문어지고 그 信條는 秋節에 凋落하는 落葉과가티 서로조차 變하되 四時를두고 永遠히가지고잇는 것은 오즉 美이다」라고하엿다. 한 스위-」이(Swinburne)말하기를 「藝術家는 반다시 人工에 完全하여라」한말도 唯美主義를 위해서 가장 아름답게 만들나는 말이다. 그런 故로 데카단派詩人들의 享樂하는 主義다. 그 中에 와일드가 代表人物이다 그의 作品의 가장 唯美的으로 된 것은(Salome)사토매라는 戱曲이다.＜14＞
惡魔主義(Satanism)「詩」. 데카단派의 一主義다. 善이라는 것은 學校에서 배호는것이고 惡은 人生의 타고난 本質이라고한다. 그런故로 惡魔派의 有名한 佛蘭西의 드레르(Bandelaire C)는 사람의 罪惡은 根本부터잇는 原罪(Original Sin)라고하엿다. 元來文藝上에 浪漫主義의 一派의 主義라구도할수잇다. 다시말하면 享樂에 神經이 麻庳된 데카단派들의 生活은 怪異, 陰奇㤥愴. 暗黑한가운데서 노래를 부르며 압센드(酒名)와 阿片으로 一生을 즐기엿든 것이다. 惡의 聖書라구말하는 드레르의 詩集「惡의 華」(Les Fleursdu Mal)은 惡魔派의 本質을 말하는 名詩集이엿다. 死體, 腐女, 暗黑, 恐怖, 毒酒, 地獄惡僧…等을 노래한 것이다. 醜機하고 不道德하다는 評을바드나 그 詩集으로말미암아 地上에 地獄의 本質을 建築함에 成功하엿다. 그런故로 詩人단데(Dantte)는 地獄으로들어가고 드레르는 地獄에서나왓다고한다 그런故로 惡魔派의 詩人은 現實的浮氣에서 나 沈鬱한 象徵主義의 詩를 노래하엿다 르레느(Verlaine)等 데카단의 全部를 일음이다. 그런故로 그들은 自我에 强하고 神經過敏으로 感受性에 르고 意志가 薄弱하야, 自己生活의 統一을 整頓하지안함으로 現社會生活에는 不適者의 地位에잇지안으면 안되엿다. 라서 厭世的傾向은 점점더하여지고 身心은 病的으로 發達하엿든 것이다. 享樂派, 唯美派, 데카단-自然主義의 一派가다 惡魔派에 屬하엿다.
象徵主義(Symbolism)「詩·文」. 象徵이란 말이엇더한 程度에지 發達되기 前에는 그 을 暗喩. 隱喩라는 말에써지엿다. 그리해서「이솝의 이야기」(Aesop,s Fablc)에나「巡禮者의 前進」(The Pilgrim's Progress)等의 書冊의 寓話도 象徵이란 을썻섯다. 卽말하면무엇은 무엇으로 表象한다는 이다. 卽 赤色은 熱情의 表象이요 灰色은 絶望의 表象이요. 暗黑色은 죽엄의 表象이라고 지하엿다. 그러나 現代에서 생각하면 그 이 完全하다구는 못하겟다. 다시 辭典에서 차저서보자. 존손辭典에서보면 「象徵은 다른 表現가운대서 自體를 理解할수잇는것이고」「比喩는 文字가가지고잇는 말에 包含된것보다도 다른 形式안에서 表象되는말」이라고 하엿다. 한 現代辭典에는 自然的의 性質或은 像으로되는 道義的表象或은 記號」라고하엿다. 그러나 그것도 完全할＜15＞수는업다. 그리다가 十九世紀以下 데카단派의 象徵詩運動으로비롯해서 그 定義의 妙意를 엇게되엿다. 먼저 象徵派詩人들의 代表的宣言을 들어보자 「音響, 色彩, 形式, 안에서 무슨 表象을 어들지는 우리中에서 우리의 情調가 存在하지못하고 認識을어들수업고 한 活動할수업다」(Symbolism in Poetry by W. B. Yests에서)이말을 보면 첫재 그들의 必要를 생각할수잇다. 享樂派의 神經으로는 그들의 藝術을 現實에서 求하려하지못하엿다. 現實은 너무나 單純하엿든 것이다. 그런故로 現實을 現實에서 차지려지안코 엇더한 눈에 보이지안는 微妙한 氣分形式안에서 現實을 抽象的으로 맛보려하엿다. 그런故로 象徵은 比喩를 나 特殊한 것이되엿다. 눈에보이지안는 氣分世界에는 象徵의 宮殿이잇다. 드레르의 詩의 一節을 보면―
「열어노은 門으로 내여다보는 사람은 닷처노은 窓안에서보는 사람처럼 그러케만흔 物件을 볼수가업다」……열어노은 現實의 門을 나 보이지안은 象徵의 世界의 문으로 드러가면 無窮하게 만흔 物件을본다는 말이다. 다시 그러면 象徵이엇더한것인가?
(Symbolism said things which Could not be said eo Perfectly in any Other Way, and Needed but a right instinct for its understanding; While Allegory Said Things which Could be Said As well, or better,st in another way, and Needed a right Knowledge for its Understanding.)
「象徵主義는, 다른 方式안에서 말할수업는 것을 말할수잇스며 그것을 理解함에는 正當한 本能을 要求한다. 比喩는 다른 方式으로도 同一한 것을 말할수잇고 더낫게 말할수잇는 것이다. 그것을 理解하는데는 智識을 要求한다.」라고 Yeats 말하엿다 이것을보면 가장위웁게 比喩라는데서 象徵을 獨立식힐수잇는 것이다. 卽다시말하면 象徵은 소리업는것을 소리잇게하고, 物體업는것을 物體잇게하는 것이다. 라서 比喩는 보고드른것을 가지고 더 完全한 形式을 만들려는 것이다. 그런故로 智識을 要求하는 것이다. 象徵의 世界에는 現實에서 볼수업는 現實의 不完全한 形式으로부터버서나 가장 極端의 美를 要求하며 라서 微妙한 情調를더드려는 것이다. 데카단派, 享樂派, 惡魔派, 唯美派가, 다한가지 象徵主義者이엿다. 美術의 象徵主義도이와＜16＞가튼 理論下에서 生킨 것이다.
人形의 家(A Doll's house)英譯「文」. 個人主義者의 一人인 입센의 名作戱曲에 일흠이니 그 女主人公노라가 그의 남편헬마에게 對한 宣言이니 사랑이업고 理解가업든 그의 家庭은 覺醒한 그에게는 「人形의 家」와가타다한다.
寫實主義(Realism)「文」. 觀念이나 理想을 나 現實그대로 事實그대로를 描寫하는 主義니 一八五○年으로부터 一八七○年동안은 獨逸文壇은 寫實主義의 時代이엿다.「少年獨逸派」의 사람들이 寫實的傾向에기우러젓든中굿스-고와가튼사람의만흔 作品이잇다 시골의 生活을 그린 村落生活을 그린 곳도헤루오에투밥바等맷사람의 손으로된것이잇섯다. 그 村落小說文藝도 寫實主義派에 加入할만한 것이다 戱曲에는 헷베루도 한 有名한 寫實主義者이엿다.
虛無主義(Nihiliam)「文」. 路西亞文豪투-게네(Ivan Turgenev-1818 1883)가 처음으로(Nihil)이란 말을썻다한다. 十八世紀以下十九世紀의 路西亞는 社會的不安과 生活의 恐怖로 暗黑期에잇섯다. 貴族에 對한 噲惡, 農民의 覺醒, 階級의 不平……이모든 것은 사람의 生活을 憂鬱하게 만들고 煩憫하게 하엿다. 當時社會에는 少毫의 光明도업섯고 그들의 生活에는 아무러한 希望도업섯다. 러서 아모것도 밋지안이하엿고  무엇을 依賴도하지안엇다. 從來의 나려오든 信仰或은 理想等의 모든 것을버려버리고 모든 偶像을 破壞하여버리자는 것이다. 그들의 生活에는 모든 것이 無意味하엿고 虛無하엿다. 當時러시아의 生活의 深府에는 이 虛無라는 思想이 破壞的氣分을 가지고 나타나왓다. 그런故로 그들에게는 文學도 「煙氣」와갓고 모든 學問이 아모리만허도 그들의 生活을 左右하지 못함으로  그들은 科學에도 無限한 程度에서 失望하고 말엇다. 투게네의虛無主義小說로 有名한「아버지와 아들」이란데에 一節을살펴서보자.
—―――오히려 우리는 有用하다는 것 以外에 行動의 土臺를 是認하지안음니다. 現在에잇서서 가장 有用한 것은 否認하는것임니다. 그런故로 우리가 모든 것을 否認함니다.
—―――모든 것을 否認함니?
—―――네, 모든 것을 否認함니다.
—―――무엇이요? 詩와 藝術도 否認함니? 나는 말하기어럽습니다.＜17＞
—―――나는 다시 말함니다.「모든 것을 否認한다고――」하고라소가말하엿다. 얼는 말하면 懷疑와 鬱憫과 破壞가 合한 것이 쉬울게말하면 虛無主義라고하겟다.
後期印象派(Poatimpressionism)「詩·文」. 十九世紀末葉으로부터 英國畵壇에 生긴 새로운 畵風의 一派니 이 派는 自然派 印象派後에 生겨섯스니 技功方面은 印象派를 模倣한 故로 後期印象派의 일홈이잇다. 印象派는 다만 본대로의 印象을 主要하게 再現하려하는 것에 反對로 後期印象派는 客觀的實質을 避하고 主觀의 思想과 情緖를 表現하려는 것이다. 다시말하면 主觀의 表象과 客觀을 融合調和하는대 잇다. 그 中에도 主觀的寫實에 要點을 두엇다. 더욱이 以前 印象派의 사람들이 光緖, 大氣의 描寫, 色의 分解等의 沈沒한 反對로, 이 後期印象派의 사람들은 線, 形의 勢力을 重要하게 描寫하엿다. 세산느, 코구안, 곱보等이 그 派의 代表的人物이다.
神曲(Divine Comcdy)「詩」. 伊太利詩人단터(Dantt A, 1265-1321)의 名作의 일홈이다.
哀傷主義(Sentimentalism)「文」. 感傷主義라구도한다. 文藝上의 한 傾向이엿고 浪漫主義 一種이라구도할수잇다. 浪漫主義는 情熱을 精神으로하고, 主觀的, 想像的으로 强하게 기우러진 것이다. 라서 哀傷主義도 一種의 情緖主義或은 主情主義에서나오는 것이다. 雄大와 深刻한 것이 缺乏되고 多情多感의 纎細微弱한 感情을 描出하는 主義다. 戀愛에도 雄壯神秘한것보다도 哀에한숨하고 情에 落漠하는 悲哀으을 主旨로한다. 勿論智的要素보다도 情的을 要素로한다.
라파엘前派(Pre Raphaelites)「美」. 十九世紀英國畵界에 일어난 運動이니, 그 創作者, 指導者는 쓴, 애데데트,(Johe Everett Millais, 1929-1896)과, 홀맨, 헌트,(William Holman Hunt, 1827-1910)와 단데, 카부리엘 로셋틔(Dantegabriel Rossetti, 1828-1882)의 三人이엿다. 그들은, 藝術界의 偶像이엿든 라파엘은 全然히 不完全한 것이다. 그런故로 우리는 그곳에서 全然히 脫出하여나와야겟다고 생가가엿다. 「라파엘은 그 手法이를 임업시「基督敎變容」이나타난다. 우리는 健全한 滿足한 制作의 作品을 차지려 다시 遠久한 옛날로 遠歸하지 안으면 안이된다. 그러함으로 盲目的으로 라파＜18＞엘를 崇拜하는 現代의 畵法을 拒絶하고, 「自然」그곳에서 우리의 길을 차저내자, 우리는 自然으로부터 靈感을 求하지안으면안이된다.」고 하엿다. 그것이 그들의 思想이엿다. 그래서 傳習性에 對한 그들의 反逆運動의 軍兵에 다른 畵家들을 誘入하기위해서 그들의 團體의 일홈을 라파엘前派라고하엿다. 그리하야 그들의 젊은 畵家들은 새로운 硏究를 目的하고 늘 모히여서 每月一回式「黑白線畵」(Black and White)을 一枚式내노아서 回覽하엿섯다. 다시 라파엘前派에 對한 터스(John Buskin, 1819-1900)의 評論의 一節을보자.
「三百年以來藝術敎育의 根底가 된 原理는 根本的으로틀닌것인故로 이것을 排斥하고 라파엘의 時代以前으로 復歸하지안으면안이된다」라고하엿다. 畵界만이안이라 藝術界에 一大革命인 것이다.
印象主義(Impressionism)「文·美」. 印象主義는 藝術家가 直接으로 感知한 個人的印象을 그대로 作品에 表顯하려는 것이다. 라서 엇더한 事物보다도 그 事物이 사람에게주는 印象을 貴重이역이는 主義의 사람들을 일음이다. 心的作用에서 일어나는 神經生活을 彼細하게 分析하고 한 그것에 相應한 新語를 가지고, 音響, 色彩等의 印象을 描寫하려는 것이다. 一八七○年代에 나타난 마-네(Edouard Manet, 1833-1883)의 繪畵로해서 紹介되엿고 그 後, 文學, 音樂, 彫刻에지 普及되엿다. 더욱이 繪畵에 印象主義는 自然의 一瞬問의 現象을 곳 全體로 描寫히러고 努力하고, 더욱이 色彩的表面을 重要視한다. 모-네의 主張을보면 「自然을, 그대로 描寫하여라, 그러나 모든 것을 作家의 눈에 印象된 것이 안이면안된다」하엿다. 라서 朝夕의 를 라 光과 空氣의 變化로부터 오는 여러 가지 調節을 描寫하는 것을 그들의 特色으로하며 더욱이 物件을 描寫할에 廣濶한 空中을 選擇해서 充分한 光線을 바든대로 그것을 가지고 自然의 眞相을 傳하려는 것이다. 從來의 畵家는 落照의 幽麗한 것을 擇하는데, 印象派의 사람들은 日中의 日光을 조화하며 라서 畵室內에 製作을 反對하엿다. 소라의 小說「制作」가운데에 主人公크로드(Claude)는 부르지지기를 「太陽과 空氣와 光明과를 새로운 繪畵에서는 우리에게 要求하는 것이다 太陽을 드러오게하여라. 그리고 物件을 日光의 밝은 아래서 描出하게하여라」하고 들엇다.
文學上印象主義에도 現實的潘寫보다도 官覺的印＜19＞象을 惹起하는 寫描法을 尊重이역이는 傾向이엇다. 라서 物件을 現象的으로 觀察한다는 態度, 人生도 自然의 一部分이라고 觀察하는 態度는 이와가튼 新文藝를 産出시킨 것이다. 故로印象主義文學은 客觀的文學이다. 故로 佛蘭西最近文學에는 自然主義派의 二流가잇다. 一은 印象派, 二는 本來自然主義다. 前者의 代表者는 로베루와 공크르 兄弟이고, 後者는 소라, 모판산等이다. (自然主義者參照).
音樂上의 印象主義는 形式美卽主旋律의 開展보다도 音色의 效果를 尊重이역이는 것이다. 特이 이 派의 代表人物은 왁네르와 구릿구諸人이다.
藝術衝動(Art-impulse)「文」. 文學의 起源問題는 二大方面으로 說明할수잇다. 其一은 心理學的方面으로 說하고, 其二는 藝術發生學上의 實際方面의 硏究가 잇다. 前者가 所謂藝術衝動의 硏究이다. 心理學的으로 藝術衝動을 硏究하는데 數種이잇다. 遊戱本能說, 模倣本能說, 快樂을주어서 吸引케하는 吸引本能說, 或은 自己表現하려는데서나온 自己表現本能說等이잇다.
未來主義(Futuriam)「美·文」. 未來派의 運動은 一千九百九年에 일어낫섯다. 그 始初는 勿論 繪畵上으로부터 비롯되여섯다. 그러나 먼저 宣言한사람은 마리넷틔(E. T. Mnraetti)엿다. 그이로하여금 「후이가로」新聞紙上에지 「月光을 殺戮함-」(Tuonsleclain de lune)이라는 奇妙한 標題아래에서 宣言書를 各處로 分配하엿다. 그리고 畵繪界의 宣言書는 翌年(一九一○)四月에(Manilesle des Peintresf turisme)이라는 題目에서(Boccioni, Carra, Russolo, Balla, Sevcuini)等五人이 連署하여서 宣言하엿다. 그러면 未來派主義의 中心思想을 살피여보자.
마리넷틔가 强勢한 反抗的態度를 가지고 旣成藝術의모든 것을 否定하고 새로운 典型을 그 「未來」에 두엇다. 그것은 一種의 理想的乃至浪漫的傾向의 一種과가티생각할수도 잇다. 그러나 未來主義는 決코 從來의 理想主義者와가티 怠弛한 理想의 槪念을 選擇하려고는 안이하엿다. 한 못할것도업다. 그러나 마리넷틔의 狂信的態度는 浪漫的이라는 것보다도 그 以上의 實感의 要素를 根底에 包藏하고잇다. 卽情緖的이라는 것보다도 感覺的인 것이다. 이곳에 그들의 重要한 態度가잇다. 그의 狂信中에 一中心을 삼은 것은 科學이다＜20＞ 그 科學을 基礎로한 哲學이다. 그리고 그것을 貫通하는데 强暴한 感情안에는 한 意思가잇다. 쉬웁게 말하면 그는 이러한 말을하엿다. 「우리는 무엇보다도 表現시키려고 생각하는 것은 動的感覺이다」라고하엿다. 그런故로 그가 描出하려는 것은 「運動」그것을 말하는 것이다. 以前에는 엇더한 畵家든지 「運動」그것의 狀態를 그럴려고는하지안엇다. 그러나 未來派의 主張은, 一般의 事物을 運動方向에서 보려하엿다. 이것이 空間藝術인 繪畵의 羈絆에서 解放하려는 試驗이다. 「時間」우에잇는 一般事物은 모든 것이 變化이고 모든 것이 流動하는가운데잇다한다. 未來派主觀에는 記憶과 認識이 同時에 存在한다. 感覺과 理智가 同時에 在在하게된다 그런故로 그들이 시려하는 것은 「靜止」인 것이다. 動하고 치지안는 이 實在의 智覺을 表現하는 모든 運動의 中心속에 그들의 主義가잇다. 그것은 候忽的을로 飛去하는 速力인 것이다. 運動을 靜止한 物体라도 그것은 그럿타구 「定形」이된 것은 안이다. 그런故로 이 運動하는 分體의 綜合이 그들의 主張하는 것이다. 그런故로 未來派畵家의 繪畵는 가령 다라나는 말(馬)을 描出한다하면 四個의 발을 그리는 것이 안이라, 달려날에 일어나는, 卽視感上에 나타난발, 十六個의 運動을 그린다. 다라나는발은 그러케보이는 닭이다.
表現主義(Exprcssionism)「文·美」. 印象派는 視覺을 傳習性에서 解放하엿다. 그래서 새로운 色彩觀照의 길을 열엇다. 그러나 그들의 開拓한 것은, 肉眼에잇는 事象의 反應을 根據로한것이고 마음의 눈을 閑却시키엿다. 밧구어말하면 自然은 視覺에만 反應하고 個性에 反應하지는 안엇다. 다시 印象派의 主張을 말하면, 太陽의 光의 效果를 엇더케하면 가장 完全하게 나타낼수가 잇느냐고하는 것은 그것은 自然或은 物像의 「再現」되는 境遇이다. 印象派의 作品의 價値는 太陽의 光의 效果와 畵面色調의 效果를 比較해서 後者가 前者의 갓가운가 안인가를 決定한다. 卽描出한 物象과 描出한 結果가 相對的地位에 잇는 것이다. 그러나 描出한 物象이 描出한 結果와 相似하냐, 안이하냐하는 것은 問題가 되지안코, 엇더한 外界의 物象을 機因삼어가지고 個人의 마음속에 生긴 感情을 그대로 繪畵或은 文藝로 發動시키는 境遇에잇는 故로 그것이 外界의 物象과 相似不相似에는 無關心인 것이 表現派의 大旨인것이＜21＞다. 卽描出된「結果 」는 임이 描出된것으로부터 獨立한 實在 다-作者의 個人的情感이 産出시키는 새로운 創造物-인 것이다. 이것은 「絶對的」의 境地에 잇는 故로 이와가튼 境遇에는 그 描寫한다는 것을 表現이라고한다. 다시 말하면 自然을 「再現」시킨다는 것이안이라. 그 自然의 個性化한 獨特한 創造物을 表現시킨다는 意味인 것이다. 더욱이 大戰後의 獨逸에는 再現보다도 表現이라는 것이 盛旺하엿다. 文藝上作品을보면 모든 것이 다-宇宙創造에 對한, 사람의 힘으로 抗對하기어려운 人生의 悲慘한 結果를 鬱悶과 恐怖의 氣分안에서 表現하엿다. 그들은 科學의 發達과 偉大한 것으로 모든 것을 다 再現하려하엿스나 엇더한 偉大한 힘의 支配아래서 그들의 悲擔하게되엿다. 라서 그들의 藝術은 그 「힘」의 個性化한가운데서 모든 것을 表現하려하엿다. -지, 가이세루, (Geory Kaiser)의 「아침부터저녁지」가튼 作品이나 멘서(Carol Meanse)의 「冬」가튼 作品이 그 表現派의 代表的作品이다.
立體主義(Cudisn)「美」. 最近에 佛蘭西에서 일어난 畵派의 一主義다. 一九一一年 巴里에서 最初로 展覽會가 잇섯다. 이 一派는 센산느(Paul Cozanne’ 1839-1906)를 元祖로하야, 從來의 畵壇의 各派와 近代의 寫實主義, 印象派等을 反抗하고, 새로운 藝術的認識과 表現의 方法을 主張하엿다. 從來의 繪畵에는 視覺을 貴重이역이고, 혹은 印象派는 光線色彩에대해서 滿足하엿다. 그러나 그것은 우리와 視覺으로부터 網膜에 映像되는 것이고, 참으로 認識을어드려는 것은 안이다. 참된 認識을 어드려면 知力에 依賴하지 안으면 안이된다. 그런 故로 이와가티되여서 나타나는 참된 世界는 우리의 日常의 視覺的世界가안이고, 모든 物象의 體積의 集合에서 現出되는 것이라고 한다. 라서 網膜以上의 內的認識을 어들수잇다. 이와가티 體積의 集合된 物象의 直覺을 表現하려는데는 比較的 體積感을 가쟝 잘 表現시킬 單位的空間인 것이다. 다시말하면 幾何學圖形的인 單純한 平面. 立體의 總合, 組織은 實在의 像을 表現시키려는 手段에 不過하다. 故로 特異한 畵面은 外的寫實의 結果가안이고 內的寫實의 結果인것이다. 立體派에는 視覺的傾向을 表示하고, 안이하는 것을 不願하고 體積感을 表示하려는 것과, 立體的手段＜22＞을 가지고 對象으로부터 受入되는 作家의 主觀內容을 表現하려는 主觀的態度를 取하는 것의 二種이 잇다. 前者는 피카소(Pieasso)의 藝術이고 後者는 매짐게루(Metzinger)구떼스(Glezes)의 藝術들이다.
다다이슴(Dadaism)「文·美」. 다다(Dada)란 말을 佛語辭典에서 볼것갓트면 「馬或은 遊戱馬」라는 意味다. 무슨 深刻한 것도 업고 한 深遠한 意味도업다. 만흔 主義와 學說에 痲痺된 者의 反動的文學上의 새 運動이다. 메테지오스키의「神들의죽엄」가운데 나오는 希臘思想의 末流者들의 演說形式을 말한 中에-「말의 主題가튼 것은 重要한 것이안이다. 演說하는 사람에게는 한 事件에 對」해서 賛成或은 不賛成을한다는 것은 아모것도 안이다. 한 意味라는 것도, 아모것도 안이다. 다만 重要한 것은 語音의 管絃樂的 表現이다. 메르듸이다. 辭句의 音樂的踏韻이다.—―――希臘말을 모르는 戀人지도 言語의 絶妙한 美를맛는다」라고 한말의 本質이 다다이슴의 氣分이다. 藝術上에는 그리 必要치는 안으나 다만 神經倦怠病의 反抗的運動으로일홈이잇다. 消極的테카탄이라하고 할수잇다. 모든 形式, 모든 意味를 破壞하고 作家의 亂心한 그대로를 奇怪한 形式으로 벌려 놋는 主義다. 日本의 新吉의 詩나 佛蘭西의 도리스탄, 스아라(Tristan Tanrn)等이 代表人物이다.
古典文學(Olassieism)「文」. 擬古文學參照
審美(Aesthetie)「美」. 美學에서 쓰는 用語니 그 大意에 대해서 高山樗雨氏의 美學論에서 一節을 引用하겟다. 「審美的事物이 우리를 快樂케하는 것은 가쟝 主點을 말하면 우리의 利己心을 番去해서 無心論」의 大世界속에 우리를 埋沒케하는 닭이다. 적어도 「自己」라는 觀念이 胸裏에 存在할 동안에는, 우리는 人間의 天性으로 決코 自己를 忘하지안이하고 許多한 慾望이 毒蛇와가티 우리를 괴롭게한다. 慾心을채우면 다른 希望이온다. 그리함으로 一驛間, 一彈指의 새이에도, 自己의 希望을 버서나지 못한다.—―――中畧—―――山을 보든지 내몰보든지 엇더케하면 自己를 利롭게할가하는 생각을 버서나지 못한다. 美人을 보거나 美物에接하거나 늘 自己의 所有를 만들려는 慾望을버서나지못한다. 그러나 審美的事物이 우리에게 快感이잇는것은이自己를感却하고, 우＜23＞리를 美의 理想속으로 引導하는 닭이다 故로 참으로 美의 接할에는 우리는 意識을 일어버리고 純然한 知覺이 存在하게되는 것이다. 그런故로 다만 物體만이잇고 自己를 닷지못하는 것이다. 恰然히 사람의 눈과가티 他物을보나. 自己를보지 못한다.…얼는 말하면 無我歡悅의 美를 말함이고, 엇더한 物體에 全自己를 犠牲하면서 비로소 엇는 美的快感을일음니다. 悲哀, 悲壯, 感動, 泣笑, 滑稽……等의 모든 것이 한 審美的要素이다.
世紀病「文」或은 「世紀의 痼疾」이라고도한다. 十八世紀以下十九世紀에나려도면서 懹疑哲學에서 生킨 世界苦, 或은 人間에서부터나온 悲哀의 부르지짐이니 宗敎를 疑心하고 道德이 無效하엿고 生活이 暗黑하엿고 思想에는 큰 悲哀와 歎息으로 病를 엇든 것이다. 흡트만(Hauptnann)「沈鍾」이나 입센의 悲劇가튼것이모도다 厭世的悲哀의 無限한 苦痛을말하엿다. 더욱이 데카단派의 鬱悶과 悲哀가 適切한 世紀病이다.
都會病「文」. 近代人의 疫勞는 都會에잇다. 科學과 한가지로 發達되여가는 都市에는 여러 가지의 機械의 發明, 工業, 商業의 繁昌으로 農業은 漸次로 衰敗해지며 모든 사람은 都市로모히여든다. 라서 人口의 增加, 生活의 苦難이 盛旺하여진다. 그런故로 近代人의 生活은 都市의 生活과 二重이되여 더욱 繁昌하게 됨을 라 都市의 사람은 過度한 剌戟을바듬으로말미암아 몹시 疲勞하면서도 한편으로는 生存競爭에 지지안으령으로 昻奮한다. 그러하는가운데서 사람의 神經은 衰弱하여지며 心理는 病的으로되고만는 것이다. 그런故로 사람의 마음은 漸漸自然을 나고 그 神經은 衰弱해저서 직纎細한 것을 조화하고, 哀傷에 너무 흐르며 狂人과가티 亂心하는 것이 이 都會病이라한다. 그러한 都會人의 文學이 都會文學이다.
鄕土藝術(Heimatkunst)「文」. 自然主義가 都市生活을그리고 物質的傾向으로만 기우려저서 頹廢的或厭世的인 것을 憎惡함으로 反動的運動이니 頹廢複雜한 都市文藝를 排斥하고 鄕土의 自然속에서 새로운 健全한 藝術을 發見하려는 것이다. 다시말하면 田園文學이다. 田園의 趣味農民의 生活等을 描出하는 文學이다. 獨逸에서 그 文學運動의 現著하엿다.
입센이즘(Ibsenism).「文」個人主義를 일음이니, 입＜24＞센의 主義를 말함이다. 「個人主義」參照.
에루테루이즘(Werterism)「文」. 獨逸詩人, 데(Goethe, W. J. V. 1749-1832)의 名作「에루테루의 悲哀」라는 小說로부터 나온말이니, 多情多歎, 多泣 不幸의 哀傷的意味에 쓴다.
感傷主義(Imaginaton)「文·詩」. 英國詩人 윌리암 렉크(William Blake-1827死)가 主張하든 主義다. 그의 想像은 象徵과 神秘를 兼한 偉大한 主義엿섯다. 그의 意見中에 한아를볼것가트면-「想像의 世界는, 永遠의 世界다. 그 世界는, 우리의 植物性肉體가 죽은 後에 將來갈 神聖한가슴이다. 想像이 世界는 無限하고 永遠한데 라서 人間의 世界가 植物性의 世界는 有限하고 한 現世的인 것이다.……」이라고하엿다. 그리함으로 그는 人間의 現世的世界에서 永遠한 眞實과 無窮한 世界를 發見하엿다.
그는 이 想像을 通해서 象徵의 完全하게 되는 것이다. 그의모든 詩는 深遠하고 永遠하며 智的要素가 豊富하엿다.
유토피아(Utopia)「文」. 理想鄕, 空想世界等의 意味이니 英國政治家 도마스, 모어(Thomas More, 1478-1535)가 一千五百十六年에 著作한 小說의 名.
詩(Poety)「詩」. 詩는 自然或自然物를 描寫함에 無味乾燥한 記述을 나 華麗莊嚴한 想像과 多情微妙한 感情으로 簡短한 文句에 偉大한 情調와 思想을 發揮하려는 歌의 發達한것이니 라서 여려가지 形式이잇다. 더욱이 美味를 加하기 爲하야 韻(Rhyme)(英詩)잇스니 頭韻, 尾韻, 押韻等에 多種이잇스며, 詩에서나오는 韻律(Rhytnm)잇스니, 라서 詩脚(■■)잇다. 詩脚이잇슴으로해서(The Jambus, ○-)(The trochse, -○-)(The Auapest, ○○-)(The Daetyl, -○○)等의 英詩에는 形式이잇다. 그러나 現代에서는 破格詩도 流行된다. 「詩는 熱情의말」이라는 사람도잇고「古典學說이 制限한것보다 더깁히 人生의 마음가운데에 리를 박은 詩形을 通해나오는 音樂이 詩다」라고 시몬스가 말하엿다. 詩에는 다른데서 어들수업는 審美的情趣가 잇서야한다.
散文(Prese)「文」. 散文은 詩形이나 詩趣가업는 簡易平凡한 文章이니 小說, 論文等이 다 散文이다.
散文詩(Prese Polm)「詩」完全한 詩도안이고 完全한 散文도안이다. 散文의 좀 純化된것이고 詩의 破＜25＞格된 文章이다. 얼는 말하면 散文은 散文이면서도 그 中에 詩的韻律이 잇는 것을 일음이니 투르게네푸의 散文詩가 그 好例의 한아이다.
客觀的批評(Objective Critieism)「評」. 一名形式的批評或은 標準批評이라구도한다. 그 評하는 法이 一定한 標準을 定하고 그것에 조차서 批評하는 것이다. 一定한 標準이 잇는 故로 라서 評法의 一定한 法則이 잇다. 그들의 標準이 엿든 것은 아리스토틀(Aristotle)의 「詩學」이엿다. 그런故로 作品의 善惡의 制斷이 그리 容易하지는 안엇다. 이에 對하여서는 몰톤(Mouton)의 因襲批評의 對한 것을 引用하겟다.
(一)이 批評은 아리스토틀의 學說에 根柢를 두엇다. 그러나 아리스토틀은 다만 希臘文學에서 그 學說과 原理를 抽象해가저온 것이다
(二)文藝復興時에도 이 아리스토틀流行批評이 모든 文學에 共通된 原理라고 생각하엿다. 그런故로 批評은 中世及近代의 詩歌의 傾向과는 全혀 分離되엿다.
(三)이와가튼 아리스토틀의 原理에 는 批評은 A文學의 統一을 忘却하고, B, 自然的文學의 進化를 忘却하고, C, 原理에 先占되는데에 라서 文學의 歸納的觀察을 排除하게된 것이다. 이와가튼 批評이 所謂客觀的批評의 要素이다. 客觀批評은, 다시말하면 因襲的批評인 것이다.
主觀的批評(Subjective Critieism)「評」. 近代의 批評은 거진다 主觀的批評이다. 卽말하면 批評家의 主觀을 가지고 批評하는 批評이다. 文學, 藝術 그것의 本質的批評이라는 것은 本質的으로 感情或은 情調를 要求하는 닭이다. 感情을 中心으로하는 것이 가쟝 適當하다는 것이다. 十九世紀初頭에 所謂浪漫主義의 文學이 生긴 以來로 藝術에는 「感情」의 힘을 力說한 後부터 生긴 批評은 모도 主觀的批評인 것을 알게되엿다. 卽一定한 標準업시 어대지든지 批評家의 主觀에 드러오는 「印象」或은 「人格에 重要한 点」을 두는 것이다.
裁判的批評(Judieial Critieism)「評」이것은 名稱과 가티 作家乃至作品에 對해서 곳 價値의 判斷을 내리는 批評이니, 「缺點搜索」(FauIt-Finding)과, 判斷(To Judgo)하는 批評이다. 라서 批評하는 態度는 批評家가 自己自身을 作家乃至作品보다 一段高尙한 地位잇서서 洽然히 裁判官과가튼 豪慢한 態度로하는 것이 一般常則이다.＜26＞
歸納的批評(Indnelive Geritieism)「評」. 論理學上의 歸納과가튼 方法이다. 한아의 批評을 할수잇는대로 만흔 材料로부터 歸納하려는 批評이니 裁判批評과는 正反對의것이다. 裁判批評은 엇더한 한 標準아래서 作品의 價値를 論하려는데 歸納的批評은 무슨 表面上의 標準을 定하지안코 오히려 만흔 材料로부터 取해가지고 作品을 評하려는 法이다 이 歸納的批評에는 三大部分으로 大別할수잇다.
(一)모든 批評하려고하는 對象의 作品과 同一한 것이니 그 目的는 다만 作品을 仔細히 檢査하고 그 內容을 記述함에 決코 그 作品의 價値를 定하려고 努力하지안는 方法이다. 몰톤(Maulton)의 「戱曲家의 스패야」(Shakespare as a dramatie Artist)가 그 好例이다.
(二)그 批評하려는 對象의 作物을 評하려할 다만그 作品에만 沒頭하지안코 널리그 周圍와 連關해서 硏究考察하는 方法이니 그 目的하는바는, 그 作品을 그 時代의 作品과 比較해서 어한 地位에 둘 것을 攻究하는 것이다.
科學的批評(Scientifie Critieism)「評」. 批評은 佛蘭西테느(Taine, 1827-1893)의 主張하든 것 엿다 그 批評法은 科學의 硏究法을 批評에 應用한 것이다 그는 藝術의 發生하는 것은 植物의 發生과 同一한 順序를 經由하는 것이라고 생각하엿다. 라서 藝術硏究도 한 植物學의 硏究의 가티 順序를 取하지안으면안이된다고 생각해서 藝術도 一個의 純粹科學이라고 생각하엿다. 「美學은 植物學과가튼 것이다. 橙木이나 桂樹나 松栢도 同一한 興味를 가지고 잇스나, 藝術도 한 그와갓고 라서 美學은 植物學的硏究法을 人間의 著者의 應用한것에 不過하다.」라고 테느가 말하엿다. 그는 植物學의 硏究法에 模倣해서 文學과 藝術을 三部로난호와가주고 硏究하엿다. 卽 그 作品의 製作者에 屬한 人種, 한 그 作品乃至作家를 包圍한 環境乃至周團, 한 그 作品乃至作家가 生存해잇는時代, 이 三方面에서 硏究하려는 것이다. 테느에게는 이세가지가 文學藝術의 成立上에 避치 못할 要素乃至影響이라고 생각하엿다.
鑑賞批評(Appreciative Criticism)「評」. 鑑賞批評은 나타난 作品에 對해서 「鑑賞을 主로삼는 批評이다. 그 意味를 스탄다-드字典」에서 차저보면 이러하다. (一)物象이 諸性質, 功績, 價値等의 異, 는 適當한 認識又는 評價, 卽物體의 美點의 同情的認識.＜27＞(二)微細한 區別에 對해서 感受性又는 感覺的인 것. (三)人物或은 事物에 一種의 가튼 評價를나리는 것.……이와가튼 說明을보면 鑑賞이란 말의 意味를 알 것이다 鑑賞批評은, 缺點을 찾는 裁判批判과는 正反對이고 科學的批評과 竝立해서 가장 意味깁흔 批評이다. 英國近代의 大批評家(Mathew Arnold, 1822-1888) 마틔우, 아놀드,를 始作해서 페터(Walter, Pater 1839-1894)와 시몬쓰「Atrhur Symons, 1865-」等은 그 細密한 点에이르러서는 서로 相遠한 点이잇스나 一般으로는다-鑑賞批評이다. 이에 아놀드「批評論集」에서 一節를 引用하자. 批評家의 取할 態度의 方則은 한마듸에다 말할수잇다. 所謂 沒利害(Disinterestedness)라는 말이다. 그러면엇더케 批評家가 이러한 態度를 取할수잇슬가. 그것은 다튼 方法에 잇지안이하고 事物의 實際的觀察(Praetieal View of things)이라는데로부터 멀리 나는 것이다. 마음의 接觸되는 모든 對象에 對해서 다만그 觸感되는마음의 가는대로 그대로 向하는 것이다. 다시말하면 마음으로하여금 所謂마음의 自由스런 遊戱(Fre Play of Mind)를 시키는 것이다. 그 批評의 對象의 關한 外的. 政治的, 實際的考察로부터 全然히 分離하는 것이다. 批評의 職能은 다만 이 世上에서 알게 생각한 最善의 것을알고, 그것을 一般에서 알게하는 것으로 참된 淸新한 여러 思潮를 이 世上에서 創造할수잇는 것이다」라고 말하엿다. 그는 自己本位를 主要로하엿다. 卽沒利害的, 無我的態度이엿다. 말을쉬웁게하면, 할수잇는대로 對象의 諸性質, 功績, 價値等의
美點만을 稱讚하려는 態度인 것이다. 그들의 批評에, 鑑賞批評이라고하는 것도 이와가튼 主張이 잇는 닭이다.
倫理的批評(Ethical Critieism)「評」. 科學的批評과 가장갓가운 對象이되는 것이 이 倫理的批評이다 裁判的批評과 相似한 것이다. 卽道德上或은 宗敎上에 一個의 確乎不拔한 理想을 標準으로해서 作品을 批評하는 것이다. 그런故로 批評家의 態度는 高壓的或은 高慢한 態度우에서 裁判的으로 作品을 是非하는 것이니 그 代表人物들은 테느(Taine)와 한가지 루느틔어(Bruaetiere, 1849-1906) 等의 佛蘭西批評家와, 톨스토이(Tolatoy)等이잇다.
文藝復興(Renaissance)「文」. 古代에서 現今에 이＜28＞르기지에 年代를 歷史家들은 大畧三大區分으로 分別한다. 卽古代, 中世, 近世가이것이다. 近代라는 것는. 루터루(Luther Martin, 1483-1546)의 宗敎改革以後十四世紀로부터 十五世紀以下에 일어난 運動이니 近代文藝의 全部가 그 影響을 밧든 것이다. 文藝復興은 世界文明史上의 一大運動인 故로 그 時間과 그 意味가 錯雜하엿스나 大體一四五三年 東羅馬帝國을 그 開幕으로하고 其後百年間歐洲에 일어난 人間의 自覺的 覺醒的運動을 意味한 것이다. 中世時代는 基督敎가 全歐洲를 支配해서 누구든지 그 敎理에 服從하고 한 異意도업섯다. 그런故로 그들은 그것에만큰 眞理를 차지려고하엿다. 라서 文學에도 그러하엿다. 모든 것을 다만 偉大한 權威아래서 頑固한 敎義에 束縛을 바다 盲目的으로 服從하며 悲憺한 生活을 繼續하엿섯다. 그러나 一四五三年東羅馬帝國이 滅亡하고 그들의 學者가 古代拉丁文學을 가지고 伊太利逃亡해온 後부터 그들은 漸漸覺醒하기를 始作하엿다. 苦憫하며 悲憺한 束縛아래서 呻吟하든 靈은 이에 歡喜의부르지짐으로 自由의 天地를 開拓하려하엿든 것이다 이리하여서 人間覺醒의 第一聲을부르지지게되엿다. 그中에는 現世主義, 物質主義, 個人主義等의 現代의 精神의 萌芽를 包含하고잇다. 다시말하면 擬古主義의 反動的運動으로 浪漫主義의 運動이엿든 것이다. 典型的知識에 束縛을 밧든 擬古主義로부터 다시새로히 感情的으로 覺醒해서 主智的으로부터 感情의 世界를 어드려하엿다. 이 運動은 文學上에만 잇든것이안이라, 宗敎社會……各方面에서 일어낫섯다. 浪漫主義者의 第一人이고 自然主義者의 第一人이엿든 佛蘭西의 릇소는 佛蘭西革命의 動機를 이룬 것은 實로 그의 「民約論」及「人類不平原因論」의 思想이엿다. 그의 思想의 根本은 「自然으로도라가거라!」하는 標語이엿다. 이 自然的이라는 것은 浪漫主義와 自然主義에 相通하는 要素이엿다. 한 그의 敎育論에도 어대지든지 人爲를 排斥하고 自然에 坊任하라는 것이엿다 이것은 確實히 擬古主義에 가쳣든 魂의 부르지지는 歡喜의 高喊이다. 그러하야서 죽엇든 人間의 自由스런 文藝와 思想은 이에 復活하는 光明을 어댓다.
단테(Dantte Ahghieri, 1265-1321)의 「神曲」도 文藝復興의 思想을 䜵吹시킨 것이다. 十四世紀以後로(P. D. Mirandola)미랜라와(S. Botticell)틔세＜29＞리, (L. Da vunei)옌시(Mlcbelanaelo)미케란제로와(The School of Gigrgione)지오르지온 派等의詩人과 畵家가 그 好例의 人物들이다.
感情移入(Finfiihlung)「美」. 智覺 는 想像의 對象가운데에 主觀的感情을 投入해서 그 對象과 主觀이 統一되는 意識作用을 말함니다. 다시 쉬웁게말하면 舞臺우에서 演出하는 엇더한 悲劇이나 或은 喜劇을 볼에 觀客의 主觀과 演劇하는 主人公의 對象物이 一致되여서 俳優가울면 觀客과 울고 俳優가 우스면 觀客도 라서 웃는 것이다. 卽말하면 엇더한 主觀이 對象의 客觀속에잇는 主觀과 한가지 移入되는 것을 말함이다. 故로 이러한 境遇에 兩者(對象과 感情)의 關係는 極히 密接한 關係를 갓고 서로 融化되는 것이다. 恰似히 直觀的一體의 形狀을 가지고 잇다. 汝코 兩者隔離하엿스나 竝立的關係를 가지고 잇다. 感情移入의 心理는 普通外面으로보면 聯想作用과 相異한 것가트나 精細하게 觀察하면 結局一致되는 卽一般心理의 聯合作用에 歸着하고 만는 것이다. 感情移入에는 二種이잇다. (一)普通感情移入(二)象徵的感情移入이니 前者는 人間의 容貌, 擧動, 音聲으로 內部의 精神狀態를 直感하는 것이고 後者는 山川, 草木, 金石, 器具等에 對해서 出生하는 感情이다. 이와가티 分類한 사람은 켈루드(■……■)의 主張이다. 感情移入의 作用은 美意識에만 限하는 것이안이다 우리의 日常生活의 가운데도 치지 안코 生기는 것이다 더욱이 藝術의 鑑賞乃至創作에는 顯著한 것이다 럽쓰(Lipps, 1851-1915)의 美學은 感情移入을 中樞思想으로 組織된 것이다.
希臘主義(Hellenism)「文」. 基督敎에 對한 反基督敎의 思想이다. 基督敎崇拜에 反하야 希臘主義는 飮酒와 歡樂을 즐겨하는 것이다. 基督敎는 天國을 思慕하고 理想에 憧憬하는 反對로 希臘主義는 地上의 現實에 執着하려는 肉의 解放이다. 自我의 滿足과 個人生活의 充實을 要求하는 것이 特徵이다. 라서 平和를 讚頌하는 것보다도 오히려 戰爭을 노래하고 英雄을 嘆美하엿다. 超自然이안이라 人間의 本能을 貴重이하는 自主야말로 그들의 主義엿다. 山水明媚한 希臘半島에는 光芒燦爛한 文物이잇섯다. 그런故로 그들의 古代에는 豊富한 思想과 藝術이잇서 百代의 民衆을 흔들엇섯다. 그러나 希臘文明은 忽然히 滅亡하고 他國에서 占領하엿다. 그＜30＞는 다른 닭이 안이엿다. 그들은 肉의 歡樂을 求함에 飽滿함이업고 情熱에 放縱함에 冷却하지안엇다 그러한 닭에, 現世的個人的自然主義的의 希臘思想이 한 節制업는 維馬人의, 生活에 移入된 結果羅馬도 滅亡하는 末路를 가지안으면 안이되엇섯다. 이와가타 그들은 衰敗하고 말엇다. 그러나 그 後面에 일어나는 것은 靈을 讚美하는 基督敎主義이엿다. 그리하야 얼마동안은 基督敎主義에 支配를 바덧섯다. 그러나 基督敎主義의 倦怠를 가진 現代人의 生活은 靈의 讚美만으로는 救助를 밧지 못하엿다 라서 靈의 宮殿으로부터 肉의 王國으로 隱遁所를 定하게 되엿다. 이에 希臘主義는 다시 復興하는데이르럿스니, 윙게루만(Winekelmann)데(Goetbe) 나이에(Nietzsche) 等, 獨逸作家들의 思想이 그 適當한 好例인 것이다.
希伯來主義(Hedrewism)「文」. 希臘主義와는 正反對되는 主義니 卽基督敎主義다. 羅馬帝政의 末年, 사람은 肉과 歡樂에 飽滿해서 그 生活은 疲勞하고 頹廢하며 糜爛을다하게되매 문득 새로운 무슨 慰安을엇드려하엿든이다. 그에 東方 베들레헴의 靑天에는 한 暏光이 나타낫다. 肉的現世主義에 倦怠를 가진 사람들에게 黙示를 說明하고 天國을 敎示하며 禁欲과 愛他主義를 獎獎勵해서 그 靈的宗敎的欲求에 滿足케하든 것이 이 基督主義 卽希伯來主義(해부루이슴)이엿다. 이에 基督主義는 希臘主義로부터 勝利를 어더 忽然히 羅馬人民의 마음을 動搖시키며 라 그들은 靈的新生活로 들게하엿다. 一代를 風靡하든 希臘主義의 現世的思想도 基督의 降誔으로 아울러 新開拓의 曙光을 어덧다.이에 有名한 傳說을보건대, 基督降誔하든밤 타렌텀(Tarcutum)海岬을지내가든 한 旅人이 이러한 凄愴한 노래를들엇다한다. 그러나 歐洲文明의 最初로부터 그 基礎가되여 거의 幾百年동안 勢力을 占領하고 人間의 自然 그대로의 肉的欲求에 基礎를 가젓든 希臘主義는, 아모리 基督敎의 힘을 가지고라도 그리쉬웁게 征服하지는 못하엿다. 卽西歷紀元後二三世紀동안은 所謂歷史家의 말하는 것과가티 異敎對基督敎, 希臘主義對希伯來主義, 現世主義對天國主義의 衝突, 다시말하면 肉에 대한 靈의 抗爭時代가 卽이 希伯來主義의 本質인 것이다.＜31＞
高踏派(Parnassians)「詩」. 十九世紀中葉佛蘭西詩壇의 新運動의 詩風이니 그 詩의 特徵은 技功에 重要点을 두고 感情을 等閑히하엿다. 高踏派의 일홈은 一八六六年 고에, 곤도等同泒의 最高詩集(Parnasse Contem-Porain)에서 始作되엿다. 高派의 主旨는 情熱泒보다도 自然泒에, 主觀主義보다도 客觀에, 不羈奔放의 詩風보다도 正確嚴正한 것을 貴重이 여겻다. 感情과 想像을 輕滅이하고 寫實과 客觀美와 「無感」을 標蔑으로하엿다.
懷疑文學(Scepticism)「文」. 가장 廣義로 解釋하면 理論上又는 實踐上에 對해서 從來의 思想乃至解釋에 滿足치못하는 것이다. 佛蘭西의 룻소 噢起된 浪漫的運動은 古來로 歐洲를 支配하엿든 社會制度를 根本으로 變革하고 宗敎와 道德方面에도 모든 것을 打破하고 自由平等의 思想을 가쟝 强하게 發揮하엿섯스나, 浪漫的運動의 破壞에 比해서 새로운 建築이업섯다. 倦怠롭든 古殼에서 버서나온 意氣는 새로운 집을 찾지못함으로, 이것에 對하야 懷疑의 思想을 갓게되엿다. 라서 아무 希望도업서 厭世의 傾向이 한 컷섯다. 「世紀의 痼疾」이란말이 十九世紀初頭로부터 歐洲各國의 사람 마음가운대 懷疑厭世로 한가지 苦憫하게 하엿다. 近世精神의 根本情調를 이른 것이 卽이 懷疑—―信仰을 일허버림으로 모든 것을 疑心하고 人生에 倦怠를 가저 生이라는 것을 咀呪하엿다. 革命以後에 覺醒한 사람들의 마음은 疲勞하엿다. 지금지 自由에 革命에하고 들엇스나 結局眞實로 어든 것은 한아도 업시 虛無하엿다. 이에 懷疑가 비롯하엿다.
狂飆興悖起의 詩人(Sturm und Drang).「文」. 獨逸의 浪漫主義運動에 나타난 것이다. 英國에도 바이론(Byron)의 만푸레드(Manfred)와 가튼 代表作이잇다. 그 主義는 舊來의 羈絆을 벗고 因襲生活을 破壞하는 浪漫主義에서 좀나아가 懷疑厭世를 노래하며 哀傷悲曲을 읇헛다. 獨逸詩人 하이네나데가 그 影響을 바더스니 데의 「에루태루의 悲哀」라는 小說이 當時厭世文學에 顯名한 好例이다. 日本文學에도 主情派는 이 影響이만엇다.
象牙塔(Ivory tower(英), Tour d’voire(佛))「文」. 英國詩人 테니손(Tennyson)의 所謂「藝術의 宮」(Palace of Art)와 가튼 이잇다. 由來의 詩的精神＜32＞에 流暢한 「藝術을 위한 藝術」을 차가는 近代사람들에게는 近代의 物質文明이 創造해내는 雜粗한 乾燥無味의 實我的生活에 對해서는 不滿이잇섯다. 라서 現代生活에서 脫離하려는 情調가날로 甚하엿다. 그런故로 現實世界를 잇기위해서 로히 寂寞한 詩美의 나라, 卽「象牙의 塔」을 建設하고 그속에서 現代生活을 이저버린다는 이다.
桂冠詩人(Laureate)「詩」. 詩宗이라고 飜譯한다. 古時에는, 詩人或은 顯著한 사람에게 그 功績은 表賞하기 爲해서 王으로부터 親이 月桂樹로만든 冠을씨워주엇다. 그리해서 그 詩人은 王宮안에 잇서 王의 誕日, 或은 國家의 慶事 其他宮內事에 對해서 노래를 고 詩를 쓰는 詩人의 일흠이니 宮內有給詩人이다. 一八世紀 英國의 桂冠詩人은 앨푸레드 텐이손(Alfred Tennyson, 1850)이 代表人物이다.
偶像破壞(Iconoclasm)「文」. 懷疑的思想에서, 科學硏究에 熱心을다하엿다. 그러나 알어질스록 疑心은 더욱 甚하엿다. 故로 다시 科學的精神은 懷疑的思想으로 變하엿다. 그 後로는 科學的精神과 懷疑的思想, 이두가지가 서로 原因이 되고 結果가 되어서 그두 思想의 相助로말미암어서 個人主義를 養育하엿다. 그러나 모든 主義의 標準을 喪失함에 라 個人主義도 그  標準을 破壞하게되엿다. 個人主義, 科學的精神, 懷疑的思想, 이것들이 서로 錯亂해서 비로소 그 結果가 「偶像破壞」로 되엿다 前에가젓든 信仰을 破壞하고 舊道德을 打破한다는 것이 卽 잇대것 사람마음가운대 虛無하ㅔ 섬기고 잇는 偶像을 破壞한 것이다.
옵부로모슴(Oblomovism)「文」. 文壇의 한 流行語가 되고 말엇다. 露西亞作家 곤로(Gpmcbarpff, 1812-91)의 小說의 일홈이니 露西亞革命以前의 露西亞國民의 氣質을 遺憾업시 發揮하엿든 것이다 萬事가 不如意로써 心身이 怠惰하고 意志가 薄弱하야 事業에 着心치못하고 懷疑와 厭世의 無分을 말함이다. 그 小說의 主人公 옵부로모는 貴族에 태여낫섯다. 一定한 敎育을 맛친 後에 어느 農務局에 실흔 것을 抑制하고단이엿다. 그러나 그 兩親이 죽은 後에 그는 三百五十人의 農奴의 主人이 되엿다 終日할일이업시 먹고는 자고 자고는 먹엇다. 怠惰와 倦怠이 그를 支配하엿다. 한그는 懷疑에 甚하엿다. 自己를 사랑하게된, 오리가에게지 疑＜33＞心을 하엿다. 그 닭은 다른 것이안이라.……「오리가, 自己를 사랑한다는 것이 疑問이엿다. 무슨 닭으로 아모 理由도업시 나를 사랑할수잇슬」하는 疑心이엿다. 이와가티 當時 露西亞民族의 心質을 잘 描寫하엿다. 그後로부터는 怠惰, 懷疑, 倦怠等의 代用語가 옵부로모슴 이라고 流行이되엿다.
幻滅期(The age of Tehekoff)「路·文」.체호를 始作해서 일어난 時代를 일음이다. 얼는 말하면 社會에 對한 高殼에서 버서나왓스나 新設의 王國을 엇지 못해서 迷路하든 이다. 一八世紀以後에 알렉산더三世가 卽位하고 라서 積極的活動, 華麗한 活動이 조금도 업섯다. 階級이 甚하고 差別이만흔 露西亞의 初段의 覺悟期다. 靑年들은 「農民의 벗이 되어라」하고 熱烈히 들은 意志도 所望업시 粉碎되고 말엇다. 一八八一年부터 一九○四年동안을 文藝上에 체호의 時代라고할수잇다. 다시말하면, 社會, 道德 其他方面에는 冷淡의 風潮가 오고 秋節의 夕照와 가티, 疲弊困憊, 優柔不斷, 薄志弱行 무엇에드지 活動力이 缺乏되고 長歎哀愁의 새로운 나라를 찾지못하든 時代이다.
外面描寫「文」. 小說에서 人物을 妙思함에 心理나 或은 內面에 對한 것을 描寫하지안이하고 다만 容貌라든지 態度라든지 動作을 描寫하는 것을 일음이다.
幻覺「文」. 知覺이 病的狀態에 잇는 것이니, 實際에 업는 것이 눈우에보이며 或은 귀에들리는 病的狀態를 말함이니, 精神이 衰弱하고 神經이 疲困할에 일어나는 現象이다. 佛蘭西의 象徵派詩人들의 노래하든 幻覺이다. 或은 錯角이라구도 한다.
好奇心「文」. 이즉 알지못하는 事實에, 或은 新奇한 事實에 對해서 興味를 가지고 그곳에 마음을 앗기는 心的活動을 일음이다.
憧憬「文」. 日本의 高山樗牛와 姉崎嘲風의 製作語라한다. 무엇인지 모르는데에 好奇心을 가지고. 마음을 수고롭게 생각하는 것이다. 보이자 안는 世界의 새로운 理想을 어드려고 努力하는 心的苦憫이다.
獨創「文」. 模倣업는 것이니 自己自身의 能力으로 새것을 創造하는 것이다.
剽竊文學(Plagiarism)「文」. 獨創의 正反對로, 남의 作品을 盜賊하여 自己作品을 만드는 것을 얼음이다.＜34＞
軟文學「文」. 軟文學은, 深刻한 思想이나 或은 心鬱한 瞑想을 나, 情에 흐르고 愛에 軟한 純情文學을 말함이다.
自然描寫「文」. 小說을 쓰는 데에 한 描寫法이니 自然(天然)이나 山川, 卽主人公의 對한 周圍描寫를 말함이다.
心理描寫「文」. 小說을 쓰는 데에, 主人公의 心理狀態를 細密하게 描出하는 것이니 스도에후스키의 「罰과 罪」가 心理描寫으 作品으로 好例다.
地方色(Local Colour)「文」. 歐洲語의 譯語다. 地方地方에 러 生기는 特殊한 趣味를 말함이니 地方에 라 獨特한 雰圍氣를 말함이다.
黃金率(Golden Section). (a:b=b:a+b)이와가튼 數量上의 比例를 말하는 것이니, 獨逸의 美學者 쓰아어쓰잉크는 모든 自然物及 藝術形式美를 이 比例에 라서 生긴다는 說法이다. 가령 말하면 엇다한 形體를 二等分할에는 그 小部分과 大部分의 比가 大部分과 全體에 對한 比와가튼에 美感이 비로소 生긴다는 學說이다.
黃金律(Golden Rule). 新約全書馬太七章十二節에 잇는 말이니 「그런 故로 무엇이던지 남에게 대접을 밧고저하는대로 너희도 남을대접하여라」하는 말이다. 自己가 남에게 밧고 저만하지말고 그만큼 먼저 남을 대접하라는 이다.
靈感(Inspiration)「文」. 或은 來, 神의 啓示라구도 할수잇다. 사람의 精神이 가지고 잇는 靈妙한 能力을 일음이니, 普通日常生活에나 或은 物質에서는 求得하지못하는 마음의눈을 일음이니 物體와 靈과, 靈과 靈새이에 交通하는 神秘的能力或은 機能을 말함이니 그 神秘的能力이곳 現實을 引導할수잇는 것이다. 다시말하면 靈이 感觸한다는 말이다 聖書를 쓴이 中에 黙示錄을 記錄한 요한(John)도 神의 靈感을바다서 썻다한다.
自由詩(Free Verse)「詩」. 朝鮮에서 詩라하면 勿論年老한 사람들은 손쉬웁게 漢詩를 말한다. 그런故로 朝鮮의 新詩歌運動이라면 勿論自由가 될것이나 西洋에는 지금지도 우에 말한 여러가지의 詩形의 拘束을 바더서왓다. 그러나 現代에이르러서는 그 形式을 打破하고 思想만 完全히 發揮하자는 運動이잇섯다. 그 好例의 人物은 米國詩人휫트맨(Wbitman W.)이다. 그 詩는 深刻莊嚴한 民衆詩이다. 그러나 모든 形式으로버서나왓다.＜35＞
내리슴(Journalism)「文」. 或新聞文學, 新文記事式文學이라고 譯하니, 文章의 美麗를 主하야 古雅한 修辭나 嚴正한 形式을 나 簡易平坦한 構造로된 것을 主唱한것이니, 이에 말하는 新聞記事式文學을말함이다.
機械的人生觀「文」. 科學的精神에 支配를 밧는 것이다 모든 偶像을 트리고 古典的道德으로부터 어나온 個人主義는 結局 그리큰 效力이 밋치지못하엿다. 自我의 絶對的威力을 主張하는 個人主義는 人生에게 그리 偉大한 快樂을 주지못하엿다. 그것은 機械的人生觀을 가진 닭이다. 科學的精神에 基礎를둔 닭이다. 近代의 苦憫의 一大原因은 確實히 이 個人主義와 機械的人生觀의 衝突에서 나온 것이다.
우에말한바와가티 近代精神의 一要素는 科學的精神으로해서 始作된 物質主義로부터나왓다. 近代에 精神는 라서 科學에서 모든 現狀을 唯物質의 動作으로본다. 모든 物質은 機械的法則에서 動作하고 잇다고는 하는 것이다.
肉의 帝國「文」. 希臘主義의 盛旺하든 時代를 總稱이니 希臘主義參照
美의 宗敎(The relkgion of Beauty)「文」. 藝術家들의 美的觀念을 한 宗敎로 崇拜하는것이니 오스카 와일드. 페터. 눈시오. 等唯美派, 享樂派의 肉의 宗敎를 일음이다.
()＜36＞
＜2-36＞