별건곤 제8호
1927년 08월 17일
夢見 李商在, 『先生은 偉人인가요?』 『...』 (Dreaming of Yi Sang-jae, "Sir, are you a great man?" [...])
金振九
문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

"Hey, did you see Yi Sang-jae's biography (李商在 實記) that came out?"

"I glanced at it at a friend's house..."

"Hey, based on that, there's nothing, not even a penny's worth, that would cause such a commotion with a public funeral (社會葬) and all that... really..."

"Of course. What did he even do? He just gained favor with students in his later years and was involved with media organizations, religious groups, and ideological organizations... What... Still, some people are saying the book is flawed."

"Then, besides what's in the book, did he do anything else significant? Hey, what kind of person was he, anyway? I really don't know..."

"What else could he have done?... Looking at his life, he was someone who avoided the rain..."

"Shh—you guys! What's the point of criticizing others here? Let's just drink and leave..."

This was the advice of Mr. J, who was having a drink with H and me at a tavern in 0-dong, as we were raising our glasses one after another, spouting torrents of passionate arguments (萬丈의 氣熖).

"Right, that's right! You're right."

"Hey, how many glasses is that?"

"Yes—it's eighty-one glasses of wine in total, and nineteen servings of snacks!"

"Hey, look at this! We're really heroes (好漢), aren't we? Look at how much the three of us drank! Uh-huh-huh... Heh-heh-heh... Heh." <22>

After making such a fuss, we left the tavern, and after saying goodbye to H and J, I staggered past Donggwan Intersection (동관 네거리) and entered my house, it seemed past midnight. The house was as quiet as a mouse, with only the electric light (뎐긔ㅅ불) shining brightly in the main room (대텽). Knowing that my elders were there, I carefully took off my suit and hung it up, and still wanting to write the draft I had been putting off, I plopped down at the desk in a corner of the main room (대텽) and began rummaging through this book and that when suddenly my eyes lit up, and it felt like wings sprouted from my armpits, my feet barely touching the ground, and I drifted off, directionless.

I soared over vast plains (平原曠野), and trudged along mountain paths and seashores. After wandering aimlessly for a long time, I arrived at a place where towering buildings (高樓巨閣) seemed to reach the sky, their multicolored paint brilliant, and the auspicious air (瑞氣) sparkling, the sound of jade pendants tinkling. Overcome with curiosity, I strode through the gate and peeked inside.

In the center of the hall (堂上), an old man (一位 노인) with a tall hat (峩冠) and wide belt (博帶), white hair and beard fluttering, dignified demeanor, and imposing presence was seated, surrounded by Westerners (西洋 사람) with deep-set eyes and high noses and Asians (東洋 사람) with short bodies and yellow faces, wearing crosses on their chests and singing hymns, their voices trembling:

"Cha-n song Ha-bu-shi-da!"

I thought to myself:

"Hey! Look at this! I toured hell last spring, but this is an unexpected tour of heaven. Well, since I'm here, I'll take a good look around."

Thinking this, I quietly entered and saw that they were idly sitting around, with rare flowers (奇花), jade plants (瑤草), and figs laid out before them, doing nothing but singing hymns all day long. However, it wasn't as interesting as the tour of hell. This spring, Mr. Dol-i (돌이君) boasted so much about how wonderful heaven was after visiting it, so I wondered if it was really like that, but seeing it with my own eyes, I couldn't figure out what was so wonderful or great about it. Even if a person is gentle and refined, they should also be firm and brave when the time calls for it. But looking at this heaven, it seems to be filled with powerless and inactive people (無能無爲輩) who have lived their whole lives doing nothing, being moralists (道德君子然), and succumbing to non-resistance.

<23>

Heavenly Interrogation (天堂問答)

As a person covered in worldly dust (俗塵) and a lifetime of sins, I was qualified to attend hell last spring and observed the judgment well, but am I qualified to visit this heaven? I'll have to test it out. Thinking this, I coughed once and took a big step forward, and the air in the heaven, which had been as still and quiet as if everyone was asleep, suddenly stirred and became noisy, and the eyes of the many sons of God widened.

"Oh—what's this? A vulgar earthly guest (俗世塵客) has entered and defiled the sanctity of heaven!?"

A stern command rang out. One of them, who had been staring at me, suddenly stood up and grabbed my wrist.

"Hey, what's going on? How did you get in here?"

He asked. Looking closely, it was Mr. Wolnam (月南) Yi Sang-jae (李商在) whom I had always admired and respected. I was so surprised that

"Ah! Teacher!! Are you here?"

I was happy and also overwhelmed. But looking at his complexion again, he looked much more haggard than when I had seen him at the OO Daily News (OO日報社) last winter, and a shadow of worry filled some corner of his face.

"A person like you cannot stay in such a sacred place for long, so let's go to the detached room (別堂) outside the gate." He patted me on the back and pushed me out the gate. I thought to myself, "Hey, look at this. I'm a failure in heaven!" and without a word, I was pushed into the detached room (別堂). After sitting down, I said, "I came here by chance and unexpectedly met you, Teacher, and I am immeasurably happy and overwhelmed, but I would like to ask you a few questions that I have always wanted to ask you, if you would be willing to answer them?"

The teacher rolled his big eyes around and said,

"What else? Why? Are you going to insult me again?"

"Ah—what do you mean? When have I ever insulted you?"

"Wasn't it you who insulted me by calling me someone who avoided the rain (소낙비를 피해 단이든 사람)?"

"Yes—I did say that. But, Teacher! Are you greatly offended (觸怒)?"

The teacher's stern demeanor suddenly softened, and he said,

"Heh-heh... Offended (觸怒)? What offense?! I deserved to hear such things... Well... I'm actually very uneasy and feel excessively honored, and rather sorry and ashamed, because of all the commotion these days with the public funeral (社會葬), biography (實記), memorial collection (기념집), and bereaved family (유족)! Really..."

"Teacher, you are originally of a clean and upright (廉直) character, so you think that way, but why be so humble? The world calls you a great man (偉人), a giant star (巨星), a great mountain (泰山喬嶽), an elder of the people (민중의 원로), a model for youth (청년의 사표), and it's all very impressive."

"That's terrible! What am I to be an elder (원로) for, <24> and what am I to be a model (사표) for? Until the day I die, I will always call Minister Min OO (閔OO대감) 'small man (小人)' and bow three times to him, and when Marquis Yi OO (李OO후작) passed away, I was the first to pay my respects, so I received a lot of criticism! Elder (원로)? Model (사표)? Unworthy..."

"Teacher! Really... You're saying all sorts of things. Those are just small matters and private interactions, so there's not much of a problem, but I know that your life has been the most ordinary in a world as harsh as it has been. At the same time, I have always been dissatisfied with you."

"That's right! If it's ordinary, it's ordinary! I haven't done anything particularly noteworthy—so how can I endure being insulted by someone like you who says I avoided the rain (소낙비를 피해단이든 사람)?"

"Well, Teacher, think about it. Where else is there a world with as much turbulence and hardship as Korea (朝鮮) in the last 60 years? You've experienced it all, so you know it well, but I'll briefly go over it again, so listen. Starting with the Byeongin Western Disturbance (丙寅洋亂) 62 years ago, there was Daewongun's (大院君) seclusionist tyranny, the power of in-law families (외척의 跋扈專橫), the Imo Military Rebellion (壬午軍亂), Daewongun's capture (大院君被虜), the Gapsin Coup (甲申改革亂), the violence of the Qing Dynasty (暴淸의 亂行), the aggression of Russia (强露) and other Western powers (洋夷), the Gabo Peasant War (甲午東學亂), the Sino-Japanese War (日淸전쟁), the Eulmi Incident (乙未정변), the conflict between Russia and Japan (日露) and partisan strife (偏黨의 軋轢), the Russo-Japanese War (日露전쟁), the OO Treaty (OO조약) (weren't you a councilor (議政府參贊) at that time?), the OO Uprising (OO봉기), the XX Secret Envoy Incident (XX밀사사건), the OO Problem (OO문제), the XX Disbandment (XX해산)—wasn't it all a raging storm (怒濤狂瀾) and tempest (폭풍우)? Have you ever even gotten a drop of rain in such a terrible storm (소낙비) that someone with guts (씰개) couldn't possibly endure, whether it was during the recent Great OOO (대OOO) or when our OO was OOOOOOOO at the time, or during the OOO anti-OO (OO운동) movement recently?"

The teacher, with a slightly embarrassed look on his face, said, "Yes! Looking at it that way, your words are not an exaggeration! That's why I myself have felt ashamed and lamented my incompetence (무능) so many times!

Even in OO year, when the court annoyed me for no reason, I even said (I regret that those people left me out as an old man 老物), which was a self-deprecating lamentation of my incompetence (無能) and mediocrity (庸才). At that time, even Son 00 (孫00) had secretly OOO OOO OOO OOO OOO until OOOO OOO OOOOO OO, but I was the only one who was left out! That's really..."

"Why! Isn't the issue of the public funeral (社會葬) bothering you, but aren't your lifelong words and deeds clean and upright (廉潔剛直), and aren't you admirable just in spirit? When the entourage of the American minister (美國 公使) stood, you prevented the interference of the Qing minister (淸公使) and prevented the defilement of the national dignity (國體), and there were many loyal admonishments (忠諫直行) during your time in the cabinet (內閣) or in the wilderness (在野시대), and you fought staunchly against the opposing party (敵黨) during the Independence Association (獨立協會)—aren't all of those difficult things?"

<25>

The teacher waved his hand, saying,

"Hey, you guys! Don't even mention those things! Who couldn't have done that much in that era, in that position, with my spirit and guts? What's the point of making such a fuss with a public funeral (社會葬) and all that for such things? Hey, don't say those things again. My face is burning."

"Ah! They say that the Teacher's Biography (先生實記) is flawed these days, and one side is making a fuss. I saw in the newspaper that Mr. OO (OO씨) at your residence (宅) is very angry and is going to take absolute action!?"

"That guy is presumptuous... After I spent 80 years in that tumultuous (波瀾風霜) Korean land (朝鮮 땅), what business or traces did I leave behind that he's coming out and making a fuss about? Anyone else would be different! But as a blood relative (血屬者), shouldn't he be more cautious? He's just an immature child (아해)! Even if that book is for profit, as a social object (社會物) at least, if there's something wrong, society will fix it. Why! Is it his private property? The world calls me a great man (偉人), a giant star (巨星), an elder (원로), a model (사표), so he seems to think that his XXX is a great person... Hey—"

"Teacher, you're saying all sorts of things. Then, if a descendant doesn't say anything when their ancestor's biography (實記) is different from the truth, does that fulfill the duty of a descendant? And they say you became like a freeloader (取食客)."

"Really! What freeloader? Anyone, when they're young and mischievous, has done even more extravagant things than that. Even if I did some mischief when I was young and living a wandering life (방랑생활), how could that damage my character!? Hey— That's a foolish idea!"

"So! They say the book is incomplete, or something, and they're going to denounce (聲討) it? Some people are making a fuss about it now."

"Those people don't know my original intentions (素志) and are making such a fuss, so I'm having a hard time these days. Those people are making a commotion for no reason, praising me excessively when others don't even want that praise, and making the world noisy, and there's some money left over from the funeral expenses (葬費) (1500?), so they're sending it to my bereaved family (유족), and there's all sorts of talk about the OO Collection (OO集)... What's the point of all that? Hey— Our people are still not awake (들깨엇서)! Whether the content is complete or incomplete, that's not the problem at all! What have I done that the content should be complete! Well..."

"If you're so humble, won't you disappoint <26> the people who are enthusiastically worshiping you now?"

"Disappoint? What disappointment? The way to evaluate a person is to evaluate them appropriately, and you can't just keep praising them excessively! If you call me a poor scholar (淸貧寒士), I don't think that's an inappropriate assessment when looking back on my past, but are those words 'great man (偉人) great mountain (喬嶽)' meant for me?"

"Still, many people in the world believe that you are a model for youth (청년의 사표) and a prototype for the people (민중의 전형)."

"That's terrible! If someone keeps shouting something, our society is still in a state of 망둥期 because they praise and belittle it based on emotion without even studying the history and reality of the thing! Well, you guys, if you worship a person who has lived a plain life, swimming well and avoiding any trouble, just getting through the times, then our future will be bleak. It will lead to a dire outcome. Among the many flowers, the nation that likes crape myrtles (백일홍) that wither and fade for a long time has no future!"

"Teacher, you must have contributed a lot to religion during your lifetime, right?"

"What? Religion too...? Many people in our Christianity (기독교) don't even know my name— Anyway, a public funeral (社會葬) is not for the person themselves, but for the work they did, and it's not for the director or the president, but for the 평일's project is to respect and thank you, that is, the society! Because I am 워낙 身老而心不老, no matter how old I am, my heart is always young, so I like to be in contact with young students, and I thought about how not to spend my later years bored, so I just lent my name here and there... So those people have nothing to do, so they're making such a fuss. But that's all my OOO!"

"But looking at it now, isn't it a pity that there isn't even a person left in Korea (朝鮮) who is worthy of a public funeral (社會葬)? But the world is wide, and while one side worships you so much, the other side criticizes you as a jack-of-all-trades (팔방미인)."

"Hey, young man, are you senile? A jack-of-all-trades...?"

"Ah—After the Japan-Korea Annexation (日韓합병), when the Japanese parliamentarians asked something, you just answered, 'Yes, yes (좃소좃소),' and when you went to Japan (日本) on an inspection tour, you said at the invitation dinner of Tokyo Youji (東京有志), 'Seeing my stepmother's house makes me miss my dead mother (새어머니 집을 보니까 죽은 어머니 생각이 간절하다),' but the world doesn't see that as a joke. Who would joke on a diplomatic occasion? They say that's all a jack-of-all-trades' (팔방미인) clever way of handling things."

<27>

The teacher sat there for a while without saying anything, then suddenly slammed the table with his fist and said,

"That's why those people praise me excessively for no reason and make me so embarrassed! I have lived a lifetime without committing any sins or doing anything great, and I have come and gone quietly, but they make a fuss for no reason and make it unbearable... Hey... That's why you've come up to this heaven today and can't stay still, right? You're making a fuss without any sense, and a bad element (악분자) like you is showing up!"

"Teacher! If you call me a bad element (악분자), that's too much of a rebuke. I don't know how to hem and haw in front of anyone and speak directly, so that's how it turned out, but anyway, I'm overwhelmed. But while we're on the subject of worries, I'll ask you one more thing. People in the world call you a stubborn old man (頑迷한 노인) who is no different from a narrow-minded (固陋淺見) villager (촌부)."

"What are you talking about? I don't really know anything clearly between the old and the new, but my heart is always that of a new youth..."

"Teacher! Seven or eight years ago, Kwon Deok-gyu (權悳奎) wrote an editorial in the Dong-A Ilbo (東亞日報) called "A Call to the Korean Elders (朝鮮父老에게 고함)" and "A Blow to the Heads of Fake Scholars (假明人 두상에 一棒)," right?"

"There was such a thing... So the Confucian scholars (儒林) all refuted it and made a fuss..."

"Yes—At that time, you wrote an article called "Warning to the Ignorant Writers of the Dong-A Ilbo (경고 東亞日報 집필 智愚者)," right?"

"Yes—there was. There was— So how did that come up?"

"Yes—it came up. At that time, those who knew knew, and those who didn't know didn't know, but these days, no one who sees it doesn't burst out laughing."

"Why? What's so funny about the words in it?"

"The entire text is full of old-fashioned and ridiculous words, but if you take one phrase, "(Even if the elders are not perfectly good or perfectly beautiful, who is the writer, whose son and whose grandson (父老가 設或 不盡善-不盡美하다 할지라도 필자 其人은 誰의 子이며 誰의 손인가.)" is a common phrase used by uneducated old men (촌로), so there's nothing more to say,"

"What else?"

"Song Yu-am (宋尤庵) built two imperial shrines (兩 皇帝廟) for the emperors Sinjong (神宗) and Yijong (毅宗) of the Ming Dynasty (明나라), and he was criticized for inciting the people with his pro-Ming ideology in order to fulfill his ambition of holding the emperor hostage to command the nobles (挾天子以令諸侯的 야욕). Regarding the criticism, if you look at a section of your warning letter (경고문), "(That's one time, and this is another time. Morality is common to the world, so there is no distinction between boundaries (彼一時며 此一時이다. 도덕이란 천하의 公共한 것인 고로 畛域을 不分이다.)," there are many such phrases, but I don't know why you said that even though you enshrined the emperor of another country in the middle of our country and raised the spirits of Zunjuism (尊周주의) and Emperor Ming Worship (皇明崇拜熱) by offering sacrifices every spring and autumn. Then does that mean that it's okay to promote pro-Mingism and be content with slave life, and that it's okay to put another country's emperor above your own sovereign and say, 'I'm a loyal subject of the Ming Dynasty (皇明遺臣) and a disciple of Seongju (聖朱), so if you touch me, you're a rebel against civilization (斯文亂賊)?' I, a dull 후생, cannot understand why you are calling that morality..."

<28>

The teacher shook his head, saying,

"Hey, don't say anything! I can't stand the shame! I thought it was the right thing to do at the time, but listening to your words, it seems like it could be."

"And Teacher! There's a phrase that says, "(The writer should first give a blow to his own head instead of giving a blow to the heads of fake Ming scholars (假明人 두상에 一棒할 것을 필자 자기 두상에 먼저 一棒하라)," If you still don't know that it was wrong even after coming to heaven today, I think it would be nice if I could give you that first blow that you said to give to the writer's head to your head, even though I'm saying it with great respect."

The teacher opened his eyes wide and opened his mouth wide, and then laughed heartily,

"Heh-heh-heh-heh... That's because of my lack of fixed views... That's why I've been worried a lot by God even after coming here— Well, I've now realized all my mistakes, so don't be so harsh— Well, you guys, we've met after a long time, so you're not saying a single word to comfort me and just keep pushing me around..."

"Yes—I really did wrong. After you left, there was no old man wearing a nambawi (남바위) on Jongno intersection (종로 네거리) in Seoul (서울), wearing a hat on top of that, wearing leggings (행전), and wearing wooden shoes (놉드란 나묵신), so the cartoonists are worried that they don't have any cartoon material."

"Eck- hey, you guys! You're like unemployed people... Ah—those people shouldn't be making such a fuss after I die, but should have made my life a little easier... When I died, I didn't have a OO, so I died laying on a cushion that XXXXXXX-i had given me, so who else has such a fate?"

The teacher had a sad look on his face and said these words in a trembling voice. I felt so sorry and sad that tears welled up in my eyes. I cried out loud. Someone was gently patting my back,

"Hey! Why are you sleeping here? Are you so 서러워서 that you're crying like this?"

I was startled by the voice and looked up, and it was my aunt's voice. I had been wandering in the world of dreams while leaning on the desk. (End)

<29>

**Named Entities**

李商在	Yi Sang-jae
閔OO대감	Min OO
李OO후작	Yi OO
OO日報社	OO Ilbosa
돌이君	Tor-i
月南	Wŏllam
丙寅洋亂	Pyŏngin yangnan
大院君	Taewŏn’gun
壬午軍亂	Im’o kunnan
甲申改革亂	Kapsin kaehyŏngnan
乙未정변	Ŭlmi chŏngbyŏn
日露전쟁	Illo chŏnjaeng
權悳奎	Kwŏn Tŏk-kyu
東亞日報	Tonga Ilbo
宋尤庵	Song Yuam
神宗	Sinjong
毅宗	Ŭijong
東京	Tōkyō



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제8호
발행일	1927년 08월 17일
기사제목	夢見 李商在, 『先生은 偉人인가요?』 『...』
필자	金振九
기사형태	문예기타

夢見 李商在, 『先生은 偉人인가요?』 『...』
						金振九
『여보게 이 사람! 자네 李商在 實記 나온 것 보앗나?』
『나도 어느 동무집에서 대강 흘터 보앗네만은...』
『여보게 그걸로 보아서는 나원! 社會葬이니 무엇이니 세상에서 뒤떠들 것 한푼어치도 업는 것 갓데... 원...』
『워낙 그러치. 그가 해논 일이야 무엇 잇나. 만년에 와서 학생들에게 환심을 사고 잇섯든 것이며 언론기관이니 종교단체 사상단체. 이런 데 관계가 잇섯기 때문에 그러케 되엿지... 무얼... 그래두 지금 한편에서는 그 책이 잘못되엿다고 말성이라네.』
『그럼 그 책에 실린 외에 또 무슨 굉장 뻑적직은한 일을 해논 것이 잇단 말인가? 여게 이 사람! 도대톄 그는 무엇하던 사람이며 어떠한 인물인가? 나 원 도모지 몰으겟스니...』
『그 외에 해논 일이 어데 잇서?... 그 일생을 노코 보면 소낙비를 피해 다니든 사람일세...』
『쉬- 이 사람들아 이런 데서 남의 비평할 것 무엇 잇나. 술이나 먹고 갓스면 구만이지...』
이것은 0동 선술집에서 H군과 나와 일배일배 復 일배로 메돌을 올리면서 한참 이리 萬丈의 氣熖를 토하는 판에 한잔 들 마신 J군의 충고이엿다.
『올치 그럿치! 자네말도 올은 말일세.』
『여보 모두 멧 잔이오?』
『네- 약주가 모두 여든한 잔이고요. 안주 더 잡수신 게 열아홉 잔 안주올시다!』
『얘 이것봐라! 우리가 好漢은 과연 호한이로구나? 사람 셋이 먹은 것 봐라! 어-허허허... 킥킥킥...킥』＜22＞
이러케 뒤떠드러대면서 그 집을 나와서 H, J를 작별하고 비틀비틀 동관 네거리를 지나 집으로 드러가니 자정이 지냇든 모양이다. 집안은 쥐죽은 듯 대텽에는 뎐긔ㅅ불만 휘황하다. 어른이 계신지라. 조심조심 양복을 버서 걸고 그 중에도 쓰다둔 원고나 써보겟다고 대텽 한귀퉁이 책상 압헤 털퍽 주저안저 이책 저책 쑥쑥 빼여 뒤적뒤적 뒤적일제 별안간 눈압히 환해지며 양쪽 겨드랑에 나래가 붓혼 것 처름 두발이 땅에 부틀듯 말ㅅ듯 어대로인지 향방업시 떠나간다.
平原曠野 너른 벌판을 훨훨 나라가기도 하고 산ㅅ길 바닷가를 우중충충 거러가기도 하엿다. 이러케 한참동안 아무 방향 업시 거러가다가 한 곳을 당도하니 高樓巨閣은 한울에 다은 듯 오색단청 찬란한 데 瑞氣는 영롱하며 옥패소래 쟁쟁하다. 호기심이 와락 나서 대문으로 썩 드러서 내부를 엿보앗다.
堂上 한복판에는 峩冠博帶에 白髮白鬚가 흔날리며 氣宇가 당당하고 위풍이 늠름한 一位 노인이 안저잇고 그를 중심으로 좌우에는 深目高準의 서양 사람이며 身短面黃의 동양 사람들이 죽 느러안저서 가슴에는 십자표를 달고 입으로는
『차-ㄴ송 하-부시다!』
의 벌벌벌 떠는 소리로 찬송가를 부른다. 나는 속마음으로
『얘! 이것 봐라!! 내가 금년 봄에 지옥은 한번 구경하고 왓지만은 천당구경은 의외이다. 에라 이왕 온 김에 한번 톡톡이 구경을 하고 갈 일이다.』
이러케 생각하고서 가만가만 드러가니 奇花瑤草와 무화과를 압헤다 벌려노코 아모하는 일도 업시 느러 안저서 종일토록 찬송가만 부르고 잇는 모양이다. 엇쨋던지 지옥 구경만치 자미는 업다. 올봄에 돌이君이 천당 참관을 하고 와서는 훌륭뻑은 하더라고 하도 자랑이 야단이기에 정말로 그런가 하얏더니 실지에 내 눈으로 보고 나니 무엇이 훌륭한지 어데가 뻑은한지 도모지 모르겟다. 사람이란 유순하고 점잔을 데 점잔터라도 剛愎하며 용맹스러울 때는 용맹스러워야 하는 것이다. 그런데 이 천당에는 와서 보니까 일평생 아무일 하나 해 논 것 업시 도덕군자然하야 무저항주의에 저진 무능무위배들만 모혀 잇는 것 가트다.

天堂問答
온몸에 俗塵 투성이며 일생에 죄악 떵어리인 나로서 올ㅅ 봄에 지옥에는 참석할 자격이 충분히 잇서서 그 심판을 잘 구경하고 왓지만은 여긔 천당에도 참관할 자격이 잇는가? 한번 시험을 해 볼 일이다. 하는 생각으로 기침을 한번 컥 하고서 대활보로 한발작씩 나서니까 이때까지 자는 듯이 고요하게 잠잠하게 안저 잇든＜23＞ 천당 안은 별안간 공기가 파동되며 요란하야 여러하나님 아달들은 눈이 뚱그래진다.
『어- 이거 엇잔 俗世塵客이 드러와서 천당의 신성을 더럽히는고!?』
하는 호령이 추상가티 닐어난다. 그 중으로서 나를 물끄럼이 바라보고 잇다가 불끈 닐어나서 내 손목을 턱 붓잠는 이가 잇다.
『여보 이게 웬 일이요 여긔를 엇더케 드러왓던 말이요?』
한다. 자세이 살펴보니 나의 항상 동경하며 어느 편으로의 경의를 가지고잇는 月南선생 李商在옹이엿다. 나는 엇지나 의외이던지
『아! 선생님!! 여긔 와서 계심닛가?』
반갑기도 하고 일변 황송하기도 하엿다. 그런데 선생의 신색을 다시 한번 살펴보니 작년 겨을에 OO日報社에서 뵈일때보담 아조 形容이 초췌하고 얼골 어느 구석에인지 근심ㅅ빗이 넘처보힌다.
『君가튼 사람으로는 이런 신성한 데 오래 잇슬 수 업슨즉 저 문 밧게 별당으로 갑시다.』 하며 나의 등을 툭툭 두드리며 문 밧그로 모라낸다. 나는 『얘 이것 보아라. 천당에서는 落第꾹이로구나!』 이러케 속말을 하면서 아무말 업시 몰려서 별당으로 드러가 안즌 후에 나는 『엇지엇지 하다가 여긔를 드러와서 의외에 선생님을 만나보니까 반갑기도 층량업스며 황송하온 말슴이오나 평일에 선생님께 엿주어 보고십헛든 몃몃가지를 이 기회에 엿주어 보겟사오니 말슴해 주시겟슴니까?』
선생은 그 큰 눈방울을 구리구리 둥굴리면서
『무엇을 또 왜? 무슨 욕을 하려구?』
『아- ㅅ그게 무슨 말슴임니까? 제가 언제 욕을 햇다고 그리심니까?』
『나더러 소낙비를 피해 단이든 사람이라고 욕을 한 것이 君이 아니고 누구여...』
『녜- 그런 말은 햇슴니다. 그런데 선생님! 대단이 觸怒가 되섯슴니까?』
선생은 이때껏 엄격하던 위용이 별안간 서그러지면서
『허허...헛 觸怒야 무슨 촉노?! 그런 소리를 듯게도 되엿지...뭐... 나도 실상 요새 社會葬이니 實記니 기념집이니 유족 무어니 뒤떠드러대는데 내 양심에 하소연해서 매우 편편치 안코 과분의 영광이여서 도리여 죄송하고 붓그러워 못 견대겟네! 원...』
『선생님은 원래 廉直하신 성격이신 고로 그러케 생각하시지만 뭣 그러케 겸손하실 것 잇슴니까. 세상에서는 선생님더러 위인이다 巨星이다 泰山喬嶽이다 민중의 원로이다 청년의 사표이다 하야 굉장합니다.』
『그런 것이 못슬 짓이야! 내가 원로될 것은 무엇이며＜24＞ 사표될 것이 무엇인가? 내가 죽는 날까지 閔OO대감한테 小人- 하면서 꼭 세배만 단겻고 李OO후작이 도라갓슬 때에도 뎨일 먼저 조상을 간 까닭으로 남에게 욕도 만이 먹은 사람일세! 원로라니 사표라니 불감당이지...』
『선생님! 원... 별 말슴을 다하심니다. 그런 것이야 조고만 일이고 사적 교제이니까 별로 큰 말성이야 잇겟슴니까만은 도대톄 저는 선생님 일평생처름 험악한 세상은 업섯는데 그 중에서 선생님 일생의 생활처름 평범한 생활은 업섯는 줄 아는 동시에 항상 선생님에게 대한 불만이 만습니다.』
『그러치! 평범하다면 평범하지! 별로 볼 만한 일은 해 논 것이 업서- 그러키로 君처름 소낙비를 피해단이든 사람이라고 욕을 해서야 어대 견대여 내겟나?』
『글세 선생님 생각해보세요. 朝鮮 최근 60년처름 파란과 風霜만은 세상이 어대 잇슴니까. 선생님도 다- 격거 오섯스니까 잘 아시겟지요만은 제가 다시 한번 대강 처볼 것이니 드러보십시요. 62년 전에 丙寅洋亂을 비롯하야 大院君의 쇄국폭정, 외척의 跋扈專橫, 壬午軍亂, 大院君被虜 甲申改革亂, 暴淸의 亂行, 强露 기타 洋夷의 침략정책, 甲午東學亂, 日淸전쟁, 乙未정변, 日露及偏黨의 軋轢, 日露전쟁, OO조약(이 때는 議政府參贊으로 게섯지요?』 OO봉기 XX밀사사건 OO문제 XX해산 무엇무엇할 것 업시 怒濤狂瀾이며 폭풍우 안인 것이 잇슴니까? 최후로 대OOO이며 우리 OO이 OOOOOOOO 당시던지 최근에 와서 OOO적 대OO이던 OO운동 당시에던지 이런 야단 굉장하야 씰개 잇는 사람으로는 도뎌히 견대어 낼 수 업는 소낙비에 선생님이 한방울 마저 보신 일이 잇슴니까?』
선생은 조곰 붓그러운 듯한 빗이 얼골에 나타나면서 『그려! 그러케 치고 보니까 君의 말도 過言은 안일세 그려! 그러기에 나도 스스로 붓그럽고 나의 무능을 한탄한 때가 만엇섯네!』
OO년에도 재판소에서 공연이 귀찬케 하기에 나는 (그 사람들이 나를 老物이라고 빼논 것이 유감이라) 고까지 한 것은 나의 無能庸才한 것을 스스로 탄식한 것일세. 그 때 孫00만 해도 미리 내용으로 OOO OOO OOO OOO OOO까지 모두 OOOO OOO OOOOO OO 햇스나 유독 나에게만 빼노앗데 그려! 그것참』
『왜! 선생님도 社會葬 문제까지가 붓틀지 그게 문제이지 평생에 廉潔剛直의 언행이시엿고 정신만으로야 갸륵하시지 안음니까? 米國 公使의 수행원이 섯슬 때에 淸公使의 간섭을 방지하야 國體를 汚損하지 안으섯다거나 내각에 게시나 在野시대에나 忠諫直行이＜25＞ 만으섯고 獨立協會 당시에 敵黨과 꿋꿋하게 싸우신 일이 다- 어려운 일이시지만은...』
선생은 손을 홰홰 내어 저으며
『여보게 이 사람! 그런 말 당초에 말게! 그게야 그 시대에 그 지위에 안저서 내 정신 내 씰개 가진 사람으로 고만한 일이야 누가 못하겟나? 그까짓 일로 무슨 社會葬이니 무어니 뒤떠들께 무엇잇나? 여보게 이 사람 그런 말 다시 말게. 내가 낫이 확끈확끈하예.』
『아! 요새 와서 先生實記가 잘못됏다고 한쪽에서 야단이라고요. 선생님 宅의 OO씨가 대단이 분개해서 절대행동을 취하겟다고 신문에 굉장 뻑은하게 낫던데요!?』
『그 놈 주제 넘은 놈이지... 내가 80년동안 그 일만코 波瀾風霜만흔 朝鮮 땅에 가서 留하고 잇다가 올쩍에 무슨 사업 무슨 흔적을 남겨노코 왓다고 제가 나와서 떠드러대누... 남가트면 몰라! 그러치만 血屬者인 저로서는 좀 신중한 태도로 잇는 게 아니라 에-ㅇ 철 업는 아해로군! 그 책은 암만 영리적일지라도 적어도 社會物인 이상에야 잘못된 게 잇스면 사회에서 어련히 정정할라고. 왜! 제 사유물인가? 세상에서 위인이니 巨星이니 원로니 사표니 하면서 떠드니까 제 XXX가 굉장한 인물인 줄 아는 모양이지... 에-ㅇ』
『선생님은 별 말슴을 다하심니다. 그럼 자손이 되어서 그 조상의 實記가 사실과 틀리면 아모 말도 안해서야 자손된 도리가 됨니까? 그리고 선생님이 取食客처름 되엇다고 야단을 햇담니다.』
『원! 그게 무슨 取食客이여? 아모라도 청소년 시대에 한참 작란할 때는 그보담 더 휘황난칙한 일도 햇는데. 내가 젊어서 방랑생활을 할 적에 그까짓 작란을 햇기로서니 그까짓 일이 나의 인격에 무슨 흠이 된담!? 에-ㅇ 고루한 생각이로군!』
『그래! 그 책이 내용이 불충실하다고 그리는지 뭣 聲討를 한다든가요? 한편짝에서는 지금 야단덜이람니다.』
『그 사람들 나의 素志도 몰으고서 그리덜 날뛰어서 내가 요새 아주 말을 디경일세. 그 사람들이 공연이 뒤떠드러서 남의 마음에도 엄는 과분의 찬양을 해서 세상을 요란케하고 또 葬費에서 돈이 좀(1500?) 남엇기로 그것을 내 유족에게 보낸다 또 OO集을 가지고서 별별 말성이 잇는 모양인데... 도대톄 그럴 일들이 무에 잇단 말인고? 에-ㅇ 아직도 우리 민중이 들깨엇서-! 내용이 충실하니 불충실하니 그런 것은 애초에 문제가 되지를 안해! 내가 무엇 해 논게 잇서야 내용이 충실하지! 글세...』
『선생님이 넘우 그러케 겸손만 하시면 지금 한참 열광적으로 선생님을 숭배하는 사람들에게 실망을＜26＞ 주시지 안슴니까?』
『실망은 무슨 실망? 원래 사람을 평하는 법이 그 사람에게 적합하게 평해야지 넘우 축혀 세우기만 하면 될 수 잇나? 나더러 淸貧寒士라고 하면 그것은 나의 과거를 회고해서 과히 부적합한 평이라고는 생각되지 안치만은 偉人喬嶽이 내게 당한 말인가?』
『그레두 지금 세상에서는 청년의 사표이며 민중의 전형으로만 밋고 잇는 이가 만슴니다.』
『그게 못쓸 짓이야 누가 한 사람이 줄기차게 떠들면 그 사물의 역사와 정체를 연구해 볼 새도 업시 덥허노코 기분적으로 칭송하고 貶削하기 때문에 우리 사회는 아직 망둥期에 잇서! 글세 이 사람들아 내 일평생을 평범하게 가장 눈치 잇게 游泳을 잘해오고 별 탈업시 그 때만 지나고 말고한 사람을 그러케 숭배한다면 우리의 장래는 처연할 것일세. 한심한 결과를 초래할 것일세. 끗 중에도 백일홍 가티 시들부들 오래만 가는 꼿을 조와 하는 그 민족은 장래가 업는 것이야!』
『선생님 생전에 종교에는 아마 퍽 공헌해 노신 것이 만으시지요?』
『무엇? 종교에도... 우리 기독교 안에서도 내 일음도 몰으는 이가 만엇서- 하여간 社會葬이란 그 인물을 社會葬 하는 것이 아니라 그 사업을 사회장하는 것이며 사장이니 회장이니 하는 것을 사회장하는 것이 아니라 그 平日의 사업을 崇敬하며 감사의 예를 다하는 것이 즉 사회장일세! 내가 워낙 身老而心不老라고 암만 늙어도 마음은 언제든지 청춘임으로 청년학생들과 접촉하기를 조와해서 서울 학생늘이 나를 조와할 것이며 만년을 엇지하면 심심히 안보낼가하고 그저 여긔저긔 일음은 잘 빌려주엇지... 그랫더니 그 사람들이 일이 업스니까 그러케 야단법석들이야. 그러나 그것도 다- 나의 OOO이여!』
『그러치만 지금으로 보아서는 朝鮮땅 안에 남어 잇는 사람으로는 社會葬이란 문제라도 날만한 인물조차 업슨즉 그것도 한심한 일이 안임니까? 그러나 세상이란 넓기도 하지만은 선생님을 한편에서 그러케 숭배하는 반면으로 또 한편에서는 선생님더러 팔방미인이라고 비평합니다.』
『이 사람. 젊은이도 망녕을 피우나? 팔방미인이라니...?』
『아- 日韓합병 후에 日本의원단더러 무슨 말을 뭇든지 덥허노코(좃소좃소)로만 대답하섯다든가 또 日本시찰 가섯슬 때 東京有志의 초대연에서 (새어머니 집을 보니까 죽은 어머니 생각이 간절하다)는 말슴은 도뎌히 세상에서 농담으로 보지 안슴니다. 누가 외교석상에서 농담을 하겟슴니까? 그런 것이 다- 팔방미인의 교묘한 처세술이라고 합니다.』＜27＞
선생은 아모 말 업시 한참동안 안저 잇더니 별안간 주먹으로 책상을 탁 치면서
『그러기에 그 사람들이 공연히 대중 업시 축혀 세워서 남을 이러케 창피하게 해 논는단 말여! 나는 한평생 아무 죄악 짓지 안코 무슨 큰일 하나 저질러노치 안코 조용이 갓다가 조용이 온 사람을 공연이 들쑤성거려서 견댈 수가 업게 만드러 노아...에-ㅇ...그러기에 君이 지금 보다 십히 이런 천당에 올라와서 가만이 잇지 안나? 주책 업시 뒤떠들더니 君가튼 악분자가 다-나타나게 되네 그려!』
『선생님! 악분자라시면 넘우나 과중하신 책망이심니다. 저는 누구 압헤서든지 우물주물할 줄을 모르고 단도직입으로 말슴하기 때문에 그러케 되엿는데 하여턴지 황송합니다. 그러나 긔왕 걱정들은 김에 남은 말슴 한 마듸 마저 엿줍겟슴니다. 세상 사람들은 선생님더러 아조 固陋淺見의 촌부와 다름업는 頑迷한 노인이라고 합니다.』
『그건 웬소리이여? 내가 본래 新舊간에 무엇하나 똑똑하게 아는 것도 업지만은 내 맘껏은 신진청년이엿는데...』
『선생님! 칠팔년전 東亞日報 사설에 (朝鮮父老에게 고함)과 (假明人 두상에 一棒)이라고 權悳奎군이 쓴 일이 잇섯지요?』
『그런 일이 잇섯지... 그래 그 때 儒林 측에서 온통 반박들을 하고 야단덜이더니...』
『네- 그 때 선생님께서 (경고 東亞日報 집필 智愚者)라는 글을 쓰신 일이 게시지요?』
『응- 잇섯지. 잇섯서-. 그래 그게 엇재 나왓나?』
『녜-나왓슴니다. 그 때는 아는 이는 알고 몰으는 이는 몰랏는데 요새 그것을 보고서 포복절도 안하는 사람이 업슴니다.』
『왜? 그 속에 말이 어떠타고?』
『그 全文이 다 고루 하고 우서운 말슴 뿐이지만은 한 구절을 들고 보면 (父老가 設或 不盡善-不盡美하다 할지라도 필자 其人은 誰의 子이며 誰의 손인가.) 가튼 구절은 상식 업는 촌로의 恒用語인즉 더-말슴할 것 업스며』
『또 무엇인가?』
『宋尤庵이 明나라 神宗 毅宗의 兩 皇帝廟를 건설해 노코 挾天子以令諸侯的 야욕을 채우려고 사대사상을 민중에게 고취하든 비행을 지적해서 평론한데 대하야 선생님 경고문의 일절을 드러보면 (彼一時며 此一時이다. 도덕이란 천하의 公共한 것인 고로 畛域을 不分이다.) 이런 문구가 만흐신데 남의 나라의 황제를 우리 강산 한 복판에다 모서다 노코 춘추로 祭享을 올려가면서 尊周주의와 皇明崇拜熱을 고취하는 것이＜28＞ 엇지하야 피일시 차일시라고 말슴하섯는지 모르겟슴니다. 그럼 그 때는 사대주의를 선전하며 노예생활에 甘心해도 조타는 말슴이며 남의 황제를 자긔의 주권자 우에 올려 안치고 皇明遺臣이니 聖朱門徒니까 나를 건드리면 斯文亂賊이다 하는 얼투당투 안한 도리를 부치는 것이 엇지해서 도덕이란 말슴이신지 둔재인 後生으로는 도모지 알 수가 업슴니다...』
선생은 머리를 홰홰 내두르면서
『여보게 도모지 말말게! 창피해 못견대겟네! 나는 그때 그것이 올은 일인줄 알고서 한 짓인데 君의 말을 들으면 그럴 뜻도 하이.』
『그리고 선생님! (假明人 두상에 一棒할 것을 필자 자기 두상에 먼저 一棒하라) 그런 문구가 잇는데요. 선생님이 오늘날 천당에 와서도 그 때 그것이 잘못된 줄 모르신다면 저는 황송한 말슴이오나 필자 두상의 먼저 일봉하라신 그 일봉을 선생님 두상에 일봉하섯스면 조켓다고 생각함니다.』
선생은 눈을 번쩍 뜨고 입을 딱 벌려 한번 너털 우숨을 껄껄 웃으면서
『허허허허... 그것이야 나의 無定見한 所致이지... 그러기에 여긔 와서도 하나님께 걱정을 만이 들어서-인저 글세 나의 잘못된 것은 이제와서 다 깨달엇슨즉 넘우 窮迫하지 말어- 글세 이 사람아 모처름 맛낫스니 무엇 나에게 위로될 말은 한 마듸도 안해주고 남을 온통 모라세기만해...』
『녜- 과연 잘못햇습니다. 선생님이 한번 떠나신 후에는 서울 종로 네거리에 남바위 쓰고 그 우에 모자 쓰고 행전치고 놉드란 나묵신 신은 노인이 업서저서 만화 그리는 화가들이 만화ㅅ재료가 업서젓다고 걱정덜이야요.』
『엑-기 사람! 실업신 사람가트니...아-참 그사람들 죽은 뒤에 그 야단들 하지 말고 나 살아서 몸이나 좀 편하게 해줄 것이지...내가 죽을 적에는 OO업서서 XXXXXXX이가 해다준 방석을 깔고 죽엇스니 그런 팔자가 어대 잇소?』
선생은 얼굴에 悲悵한 빗을 띄우고 벌벌벌벌 떨리는 소리로 이런 말슴을 한다. 나는 엇지나 칙은하고 애석한지 눈에서 눈물이 펑펑 쏘다진다. 소리를 내서 우럿다. 누구인지 내 등을 직은직은 하면서
『원! 엇잔 잠을 이런데서 자고 잇늬? 너-뭬? 스러워서 이러케 슬ㅅ게 우늬?』
하는 소리에 놀라서 머리를 번쩍 들고 보니 나의 숙모의 목소리엿다. 그만 책상에 업대린 채로 醉夢세계를 漫遊한 것이엿다.(끗)＜29＞
＜22-29＞