잡지명 別건곤 제8호
발행일 1927년 08월 17일
기사제목 改作 東國通鑑, 首陽大君의 亞細亞 征服記 (Rewriting of the Dongguk Tonggam, Grand Prince Suyang's Conquest of Asia)
필자 洪承耈
기사형태 문예기타 (Literature etc.)

Rewriting of the Dongguk Tonggam, Grand Prince Suyang's Conquest of Asia
						Hong Seung-go

In the early days of the nation, there was a prime minister from Naju named Hong Yun-seong. With extraordinary valor and strategy, he gained the trust of Sejo from his days in the prince's residence and joined his ranks. After the successful plots of the Kim Jong-seo massacre and the usurpation of the throne, he rose through the ranks to become Chief State Councilor (領議政), and the Lord of Insan (仁山府院君), reaching the pinnacle of officialdom and wielding power that swayed the times.

Relying on his achievements and indulging in arrogance and recklessness, he killed people as if cutting grass and committed many illegal acts. However, from the monarch above to the officials below, no one could suppress him, and his influence was immense. A close friend of his often advised him, "Even if you can suppress public opinion for a time, what will you do about the historical record in the future? You should reflect and restrain yourself." He listened and retorted with a laugh, "You foolish scholar! Who will read the Dongguk Tonggam? Are you saying I should not carry out what I have already obtained because I fear the historical record?"

Whether the Dongguk Tonggam is as worthless as Prime Minister Hong said, with no readers at all, or whether the historical record is powerless and not worth considering, there is no need to delve into the merits and demerits here. I, the long-winded writer, do not have the leisure to carefully examine such questions. If I were to say it frankly, it would be nothing more than an ignorant fool's incomprehensible consideration.

Nevertheless, let us trace back fairly with the calmest head. One cannot but acknowledge that the Dongguk Tonggam, especially the history of the Joseon Dynasty, is not something to be proudly displayed. Do not misunderstand. The writer is by no means trying to belittle or despise our ancestors, but when making a historical judgment based on reason, setting aside emotional likes and dislikes, the spine-chilling record of intense factional strife and literati purges (黨爭士禍), the babbling of addicts who consumed Sinocentrism (漢土崇拜) and Zhu Xi's Neo-Confucianism (程朱學說) raw, the ghastly tragedy of royal infighting where blood washed blood, the clinging to life with makeshift diplomatic rhetoric without the strength to defend oneself amidst powerful nations, the rampage of in-laws and powerful retainers, and the antics of corrupt officials and sly servants—when enumerating these, even if one were not Hong Yun-seong, one would not want to read the Joseon Tonggam, and one would lament one's misfortune in seeing and reading such records due to the burden of literacy. This is my unvarnished, straightforward confession.

However, only within this context, Sejong the Great, with his heavenly wisdom and title of Eastern Sage, the six loyal ministers (六臣) who did not hesitate to die and bore the burden of the six-foot orphan, moving even ghosts and gods with their devotion, Yi I (栗谷 李珥), who harbored the great ambition of Yao and Shun, mastering both learning of heaven and man and the talent of a royal advisor, Yi Sun-sin (李舜臣), who with innate courage and wisdom, devoted himself to national sacrifice, intimidating powerful enemies in countless battles, and rebuilding the Three Hans, and the Donghak Party (東學黨) faction who, shedding tears of righteous indignation at the plight of the people suffering from the tyrannical misrule of corrupt officials, rose up in revolt—only these manage to somewhat satisfy the human heart. If the Joseon Dynasty had no Sejong the Great, there would be tyrants, mediocre rulers, and incompetent rulers, and perhaps occasionally wise and virtuous rulers, but no sage ruler. If there were no six loyal ministers, the sins of rebellious and treacherous subjects would be covered up. If there were no Yulgok, the corrupt and pedantic scholars would be slightly more respectable. If there were no Admiral Yi Chungmu, we would never have seen a figure of strong defense against enemies, and if there were no pioneers of the righteous army from Choe Je-u onwards, it would not have been shown that even the blood of Joseon people contains fierce public indignation. I dare say that there would be no dissenting voices if I were to assert this.

Although the country of Joseon was weak and the history of the Joseon Dynasty was not very glorious, it is a grand record of 500 years during which 20 million people lived. Even if there were few great figures, there must have been talent necessary for the livelihood of the time besides the aforementioned gentlemen. I am not unilaterally admiring some and looking down on others. There must have been prudent adults. There must have been ingenious talents.

There were incorruptible officials. There were wise officials. There were great Confucian scholars. There were brave generals. But... ...
I do not know about Kim Taek-yeong, who wrote the book "The Key to Korean History" (韓史綮) and deliberately cursed and insulted the Joseon Dynasty as if he were a wholesale merchant of the grudges of the people of Gaeseong, but if not, what would be the hesitation in calling these people representative figures of the glorious parts of Joseon history?

Especially concerning Sejong the Great, he was not only the most meritorious sage ruler among the 27 kings of the Joseon Dynasty's 500 years, but also in the entire history of Dongguk, there are few who can compare to such an benevolent, wise, and courageous ruler. In over 5,000 years since recorded history, he was the first and most complete person as a Joseon individual and also the unparalleled eight-character fortune (八字). Not to mention the ancient mythological era when there were no rulers, even in countries where the head of state is publicly elected like today, he was an ideal figure to represent Joseon. And not just Joseon, how easily could there have been a leader with such virtue in the East and West, past and present?

Sejong the Great was indeed a great and ideal sage ruler who was unmatched in ancient and modern times. He possessed innate intelligence and wisdom, but he did not boast about it <147>. From his young age until his ascension, he was tirelessly devoted to learning, never letting books out of his hand, day and night. Conscious of the divine duty of the emperor, he aimed to sacrifice himself for the people and wholeheartedly focused on benefiting the people and removing harm, and on knowing people and assigning them to their responsibilities, ensuring they fulfilled their duties as trusted aides. I do not know if it is due to my limited knowledge, but I only see our Sejong the Great as the king who thoroughly understood, embodied, practiced, and realized the three principles of uprightness, utilization, and enrichment, which were called the imperial path of Yao, Shun, and the Three Dynasties (堯舜三代). Founding monarchs are unskilled in maintaining, and maintaining monarchs lack the drive for advancement; this was consistent in both East and West. Even so, there were not a few who were diligent in their early years but became senile in their old age, and those who were wise but lacked virtue. Examples are numerous.

However, in the case of Sejong the Great, he never lacked virtue in his entire life and showed the same color from beginning to end. Moreover, in his old age, he showed even more mature progress, and no one has ever completed the duties of an emperor like him. He had no fondness for dogs, horses, music, or women, had no favorites or sycophants, and devoted himself to employing virtuous and capable individuals and enacting benevolent rule of the king.

The development of the Six Garrisons (六鎭開拓) was done under him, and the celestial globe, the self-striking clock, and the rain gauge were made during his reign. The conquest of Tsushima Island (對馬島征伐) and the pacification of the Jurchens (野人懷柔) were also done during his reign, and the tributes of Ryukyu (琉球) and Siam (暹羅) were also received then. Creating court music (雅樂) was also at that time, and casting the Jeonghaeja (丁亥字) and Gyeongjaja (庚子字) typefaces to print books with movable type was also done during that time. Buddhist scriptures were also translated and published, and great literary works such as Sajeongjeon Hunnui (思政殿訓義), Goryeosa (高麗史), Samgang Haengsil (三綱行實), Nongsa Jikseol (農事直說), Myeonghwang Gye-gam (明皇誡鑑), Chipyeong Yoram (治平要覽), Daejeongchu (大政籌), Oryeui (五禮儀), Muwonnokju (無寃綠註), Gyeongseo Eumhae (經書音解), Yeoksangjip (曆象集), Yullin Jeonseo (糸綸全書), Dusi Ju (杜詩註), Gukjo Bogam (國朝寶鑑), and Yongbi Eocheonga (龍飛御天歌) were created, translated, and annotated at that time. Not only that, but the great creation of Hunminjeongeum (訓民正音) was also conceived by this wise man's creative intelligence. Thus, even folk tales, novels, and anecdotal histories were translated into Korean, and popular culture began, accomplishing a great revolution in peninsular literature.

In the court, the scholars of the Jiphyeonjeon (集賢殿) were abundant, and governance was enlightened. In the fields, the people, enjoying their livelihoods, beat their bellies and sang. Outside, the smoke of war ceased, and inside, the reality of wealth and strength was raised. It was said that the golden age of Dongguk had emerged.

Not only that, but even looking at his personal fortune, without relying on Guo Pu (郭璞) or Li Chunfeng (李淳風), there would be no other Joseon person who possessed as much as he did. Starting with great ancestors like Taejo and Taejong, he had wise elder brothers like Yangnyeong and Hyoryeong, and he had benevolent and wise sons like Munjong and Sejo. He enjoyed the blessings of peace and prosperity for over 30 years in the position of the Son of Heaven (萬乘九五). The Joseon people, who had been trampled and tormented by over a hundred years of war, famine, and drought since the end of the Wang Dynasty, seemed to be living a human life at this time, with no regrets in raising their children and supporting their parents.

Although I should not repeat "if it had been" in the style of the July issue of Byeolgeongon magazine, if Sejong the Great were in the position of the head of state, and loyal and devoted subjects like Yulgok, the Six Martyrs, and Admiral Yi Chungmu were in command as generals, spreading their ambitions, and the people's fervent sense of righteous indignation was used to resist corrupt officials and raise the flag of revolution, switching directions to patriotic public service and an active spirit of national advancement, and there was unity and cooperation between superiors and inferiors, then recovering the old territories of the ancient Korean people like Siberia and Manchuria to form a great nation in the Far East would not have been difficult <148>. Internal stability and external defense would have been achieved, and the disasters of the Imjin and Byeongja invasions, where there was no room for self-preservation, would not have occurred. I do not doubt that steamships, trains, and electricity would have been invented in our hands, and we would have been the first to discover the new lands of the Western Hemisphere before the white people. Even if one thinks this way, it is by no means a fool's dream.

Nevertheless, Sejong the Great passed away after 32 years on the throne at the age of 54, failing to fully realize his great plans as emperor. His heir, King Munjong, also possessed virtue and learning no less than Sejong, but he also passed away prematurely at less than 40 years old, only two years after ascending the throne. Grand Prince Danjong, who had been in the Eastern Palace since the age of 12, ascended the throne, and Chief State Councilor Hwangbo In and Left State Councilor Kim Jong-seo, along with veteran statesmen, received Munjong's mandate and protected the young lord. This was in the year Imsin, 416 years before now, and the year when Taejo the Great took over the state of Goryeo to turn a family into a nation, marking a full cycle of the zodiac (一週甲). Although 61 years is not very short, who would have known that at the first full cycle of the reign of the hero who founded the royal enterprise, when the tears of resentment of the former dynasty's subjects had not yet dried, the 12-year-old young lord would become a sacrifice to satisfy the power lust of his ambitious uncle, resulting in the greatest tragedy in the history of the peninsula's dynasties?

月白夜蜀魄啾 合愁情依樓頭
爾啼悲我悶苦 無爾聲無我愁
寄語世上苦勞人 愼莫登春三月子規樓
(The cuckoo cries on a moonlit night, its sorrow merging with the feelings of the tower.
You weep sadly, and I am tormented. Without your voice, there is no my sorrow.
Tell the toiling people of the world: beware of climbing the cuckoo tower in the third month of spring.)

一自寃禽出帝宮 孤身隻影碧山中
假眼夜夜眼無假 窮恨年年恨不窮
(Since the wronged bird left the imperial palace, it has been alone in the green mountains.
Fake tears, night after night, are not fake; endless sorrow, year after year, is endless.)

聲斷曉岑殘月白 血流春谷落花紅
天聾尙未聞哀訴 何奈愁人耳獨穩
(The sound ceases on the morning peak, the remaining moon is white; blood flows in the spring valley, the falling flowers are red.
Even the deaf heavens have not heard the lament, what can be done to comfort the sorrowful ears?)

Ah! The senior officials who received the mandate of the late king were executed one by one, and not long after losing the great treasure, he was again exiled to the poor valley of Yeongwol, suffering the bitterness of banishment. Imprisoned in the Jeongsacheongnyongpo (淸冷浦) exile, where the peaks soared and the river roared, he eventually faced the final tragedy in that place. While the loyal subjects of the time wrung their wrists and wept, even those who read the historical records today cover their books and sigh, shedding tears of sorrow and indignation for this unfortunate young lord. At the same time, the royal enterprise of the Yi clan, which had been consolidated by Sejong's enlightened rule, started from this tragedy and never rose again, ending in its present demise after 400 years of spring breezes and autumn rains.

春風杜宇長入詩人之句 麥飯寒食空呑野老之隱
(The cuckoo in the spring breeze has long entered the verses of poets; the old man swallows his humble meal on Hansik in vain.)

This is a passage that anyone would resent when reading the sad history of King No. If I were to write about the tragedy of Danjong, there would be no limit, and it is not the writer's intention, so I will end the digression here. However, in any case, I always have some regret for King Sejo, the protagonist of this throne usurpation drama, and for those such as Jeong In-ji, Shin Suk-ju, Han Myeong-hoe, and Kwon Ram, who became his wings, killed the former king, and received eternal infamy, and for the people like Hong Yun-seong mentioned at the beginning.

Even a tiny life is cherished, how much more a human being? Even a gentleman is easily tempted by power and wealth, how much more so the people who are not gentlemen? I do not want to blame them, who abandoned their lives and coveted wealth, forgetting the former king and attaching themselves to Sejo, thereby committing eternal villainy, with the loyalty of the Six Martyrs. However, they were by no means just villainous and wicked figures. No, whether looking at the points they were expected to have in their 평일에, or the work they left behind afterward, I will not hesitate to acknowledge that their talents were definitely above the horizon, but even if they had served Danjong with the sincerity they showed to Sejo, they would have naturally attained that much power and wealth, and the royal enterprise of the Yi Dynasty would have been even greater. Also, even in the case of Sejo, he was already in the position of regent as the guardian of the young king. In fact, he could arbitrarily carry out the emperor's business, so he could have fulfilled his desires without doing such a thing. Therefore, if they had turned their minds at that time and sincerely strived only to expand Sejong's legacy, I do not doubt that they would have completed the great work that Sejong had started, making Joseon globally great, and completing Sejong's unfinished work. It is regrettable for them that they could not test their extraordinary weapons on others and instead misused them on themselves. If they had acted with such caution at that time, they would have easily accomplished the following projects. Let us dream once more.

In the last years of Sejong, the Ming Dynasty's Emperor Zhengtong personally led the Northern Expeditionary Force and fought a battle with Esen (也先) at Datong Prefecture (大同府), where the entire army was annihilated, and Commander-in-Chief Zhang Fu and others were killed in battle, and the emperor was captured and taken north. The Prince of Cheng (郕王), who was in charge of the country, ascended the throne, known as the Jingtai Emperor (景秦皇帝). Esen, taking advantage of the victory, again launched a large-scale attack the following year, besieging Beijing, causing great panic throughout the world. Thereupon, the Ming Dynasty's commander Yu Qian requested reinforcements from Joseon, and the Joseon court decided to dispatch troops to aid Ming. Grand Prince Suyang was appointed as the commander-in-chief, and Kim Jong-seo was appointed as the chief of staff, with staff members Shin Suk-ju, Han Myeong-hoe, Yun Pil-sang, Yi Cheong-ok, Eo Yu-so, Nam I, Kang Sun, Yu Eung-bu, and others advancing by land, and separately, Choe Yun-deok and Heo Jong landing at Dengzhou with a naval force. Thereupon, they first defeated the Beijing besieging forces, and Tuo Tuo Bu-hwa (脫脫不花) and Esen were all captured alive by the Joseon army. The Ming-Han allied forces were then organized, annihilating the fleeing enemy army at Zijingguan (紫荊關), and further advancing to destroy the base of the Oirat (瓦刺), and escorting the Ming Emperor back. The Ming Dynasty greatly appreciated Joseon, establishing an eternal bond of brotherhood, forming a defensive alliance, ceding all of Siberia and Manchuria to Joseon, recognizing Joseon as a completely independent country, and bestowing the title of Emperor. Thereupon, the new territory of Joseon extended from the Maritime Province in the east to Lake Baikal in the north, and to Lushun in the south. The country's name was determined to be Great Joseon, and the Military and State Council (軍國會議所) was newly established to establish a constitution for governing the country, with the positions of President, Councilor, and Participant established to establish fundamental policies.

President: Grand Prince Yangnyeong

Vice President: Grand Prince Suyang

Associate: Grand Prince Anpyeong <150>

Councilor: Kim Jong-seo

Associate: Jeong In-ji

Associate: Nam Ji

Associate: Shin Suk-ju

Associate: Seong Sam-mun

Associate: Park Paeng-nyeon

Associate: Ha Wi-ji

Associate: Han Myeong-hoe

Associate: Heo Hu

Associate: Yi In-son

Associate: Yu Eung-bu

Associate: Heo Jong

Associate: Gu Chi-gwan

Associate: Kang Sun

Associate: Park Won-hyeong

Associate: Kwon Ram

Associate: Han Hwak

Participant: Hong Il-dong

Associate: Yi Seok-hyeong

Associate: No Sa-sin

Associate: Yun Pil-sang

Associate: Yi Hye

Associate: Im Won-jun

Associate: Yi Geuk-bae

Associate: Kim Ha

Advisor: Hwang Hui

Associate: Hwangbo In

Associate: Jeong Gap-son

Associate: Ha Yeon

This was to gather the wise men of an era to establish the scale of a newly emerging empire.

The matters to be discussed in the council were the reform of the bureaucratic system, the reform of military affairs and finance, the improvement of academic governance, the unified reorganization of land reclamation affairs, and the establishment of a new penal code, which were the main issues. On the other hand, to govern the new territories, Kim Jong-seo, who was well-known for his prestige in suppressing the Jurchens, was appointed as the Governor-General of Manchuria, and Ha Gyeong-bok was appointed as the Governor-General of Siberia, busily managing the administrative affairs. Yi Cheong-ok and Eo Yu-so were stationed in Harbin and Fengtian as commanders of the garrison army, Heo Jong was appointed as the ambassador to Ming, and Shin Suk-ju was specially dispatched to Japan to resolve the issues of Japanese pirates and the conquest of Tsushima Island and to negotiate the aftermath.

Before the program deliberation of the Council was finished, Sejong passed away, and in the year following Munjong's ascension, the new system was promulgated and implemented three years later. During this time, Shin Suk-ju's party, who had been dispatched to Japan, encountered a storm at sea after leaving Kobe, Japan, and drifted for several days, landing in America after escaping death. After nine deaths and ten lives, they discovered a new world, and two years later, they returned. The specimens of plants and animals of the New Continent and other experimental reports surprised not only Joseon but the world.

Munjong passed away in the second year of his reign without seeing the implementation of the new system. Danjong succeeded to the throne, but because he was young, he could not take over all affairs of state, and his uncle, Grand Prince Suyang, decided to implement state affairs in cooperation with Kim Jong-seo and other senior statesmen as regent. At this time, as the implementation period of the new system was approaching, the following new cabinet was organized.

Prime Minister and Minister of Land Reclamation: Kim Jong-seo

Minister of the Interior and Minister of Education: Jeong In-ji

Minister of Foreign Affairs: Shin Suk-ju

Minister of Finance: Yi In-son

Minister of the Army: Kang Sun

Minister of the Navy: Eo Yu-so

Minister of Justice: Jeong Gap-son

Minister of Agriculture and Forestry: Heo Hu

Minister of Commerce and Industry: Gu Chi-gwan

Minister of Communications: Park Won-hyeong

And the following important civil and military officials were also appointed.

Minister of the Palace: Park Paeng-nyeon

Lord Chamberlain: Seong Sam-mun

Chairman of the Privy Council: Nam Ji

Chief Aide: Jeong Chong

Grand Master of the Queen's Household: Song Hyeon-su

Chief Military Aide: Yu Eung-bu

Chief of the General Staff: Gu Seong-gun Jun

Deputy Chief: Heo Jong

Governor-General of Siberia: Yi Cheong-ok

Governor-General of Manchuria: Nam I

Governor-General of America: Hwang Su-sin

Ambassador to Ming: Han Hwak

Ambassador to Japan: Kim Ha

Commander-in-Chief of the Capital Defense and Commander of the Guard: Seong Seung

Commander of the 1st Army Corps (Pyongyang): Ha Gyeong-bok

Commander of the 2nd Army Corps (Shenyang): Yi Si-ae

Commander of the 3rd Army Corps (Ningguta): Kim Seung-gyu

Commander of the 4th Army Corps (Vladivostok): Hong Yun-seong

Commander of the 5th Army Corps (Manzhouli): Bong Seok-ju

Commander of the 6th Army Corps (Harbin)

Director-General of Maritime Defense (Lushun): Jo Geuk-gwan

Commander of the Joint Fleet: Choe Yun-deok

Chief Justice of the Supreme Court: Min Sin

Prosecutor General: Yi Hye

President of the Seoul Imperial University: Yun Sang

President of the Manchuria First University: Kim Mal

President of the Manchuria Third University: Kim Gu <152>

Director of the Invention Bureau: Jang Sa-gyeong

Director of the National Court Music Institute: Park Yeon

In this way, the national power continued to rise, and the culture progressed and developed day by day. After 10 years, when Danjong began to rule in person, Kim Si-seup, who was particularly close as a lecturer, became Prime Minister by special appointment. Jeong In-ji became the Chairman of the Privy Council, Kim Jong-seo became a veteran, and Grand Prince Suyang, who had been regent for 10 years, was given the title of Prince and became the Governor-General of Siberia.

During this time, Kim Jeok, Jeong Chang-son, and Yu Ja-gwang plotted to overthrow the government, falsely accusing Prince Suyang of having different ambitions and conspiring with Seong Sam-mun and Park Paeng-nyeon internally and externally. However, since there was no truth to the accusations, they were falsely accused and punished. Prince Suyang returned his title, claiming responsibility for the incident as his own lack of virtue, but he received an edict of grace and remained in retirement. Since Danjong was past his prime but had no heir, as a result of the imperial family conference, the great-grandson of Prince Suyang, Jasan-gun, was designated as the Crown Prince, who later became King Seongjong.

At this time, a major event occurred: After the discovery of America, the number of immigrants from the West and the Ming Dynasty increased year by year, causing conflicts of interest with our immigrants. Also, countries that used to be tributaries of China, such as Tibet, India, Siam, and Vietnam, could not withstand the invasion of white people and requested protection from us. Thereupon, the court decided to rescue them. First, it concluded a three-nation alliance with the Ming Dynasty and Japan. The Korean-Japanese Allied Forces defeated the British Navy in the Pacific Ocean, and the Korean-Ming Allied Forces annihilated the Anglo-French-Spanish Allied Forces in India, demonstrating the martial power of the yellow race to the world. In the end, the white people begged for peace, and a peace conference was held in Beijing, with Prime Minister Kim Si-seup personally attending as the plenipotentiary of Korea, where a treaty was established. Thereupon, Korea became the Chairman of the World Peace Conference and, on the other hand, the leader of the Asian Alliance, seizing world hegemony and ensuring peace and happiness for humanity. The world decided to use Jeong-eum and court music, conquering the globe with culture. Even if this happened, I still wouldn't read the Dongguk Tonggam. (Written in the Samcheong Study in the summer of Dingmao, after reading the epitaph of Jangneung, a sudden feeling of desolation) <153>

**Named Entities**

洪允成	Hong Yun-seong
羅州	Naju
世祖	Sejo
金宗瑞	Kim Jong-seo
領議政	Yeonguijeong
仁山府院君	Insan Buwongun
東國通鑑	Tongguk Tonggam
李朝	Ijo
栗谷 李珥	Yulgok Yi I
忠武公 李舜臣	Chungmu-gong Yi Sun-sin
崔濟愚	Choe Je-u
韓史綮	Han Sa Kyeong
金澤榮	Kim Taek-yeong
開城	Gaeseong
太祖	Taejo
太宗	Taejong
讓寧	Yangnyeong
孝寧	Hyoryeong
文宗	Munjong
端宗	Tanjong
皇甫仁	Hwangbo In
寧越	Nyeongwol
淸冷浦	Cheongnyongpo
鄭麟趾	Jeong In-ji
申叔舟	Sin Suk-ju
韓明澮	Han Myeong-hoe
權擥	Kwon Ram
讓寧大君	Yangnyeong Daegun
安平大君	Anpyeong Daegun
南智	Nam Ji
成三問	Seong Sam-mun
朴彭年	Pak Paengnyeon
河緯地	Ha Wi-ji
許詡	Heo Hu
李仁孫	Yi In-son
兪應孚	Yu Eung-bu
許琮	Heo Jong
具致寬	Gu Chi-gwan
康純	Kang Sun
朴元亨	Pak Won-hyeong
韓確	Han Hwak
洪逸童	Hong Il-tong
李石亨	Yi Seok-hyeong
盧思愼	No Sa-sin
尹弼商	Yun Pil-sang
李塏	Yi Hye
任元濬	Im Won-jun
李克培	Yi Geuk-bae
金何	Kim Ha
黃喜	Hwang Hui
鄭甲孫	Jeong Gap-son
河演	Ha Yeon
蔣思敬	Jang Sa-gyeong
朴堧	Pak Yeon
龜城君浚	Guseong-gun Jun
黃守身	Hwang Su-sin
金末	Kim Mal
金鉤	Kim Gu
金時習	Kim Si-seup
西伯利	Sibeolli
正統皇帝	Jeongtong Hwangje
也先	Ya Seon
大同府	Taedongbu
張輔	Jang Bo
郕王	Seongwang
景秦皇帝	Gyeongjin Hwangje
北京	Bukgyeong
于謙	U Gyeom
瓦剌	Wara
脫脫不花	Taltal Bulhwa
紫荊關	Jageonggwan
海蔘威	Haesamwi
貝爾加湖	Bae-eulga-ho
旅順	Ryo sun
平壤	Pyeongyang
瀋陽	Simyang
寧古塔	Nyanggota
海蔘威	Haesamwi
滿洲里	Manjurri
哈爾濱	Harbin
趙克寬	Jo Geuk-gwan
閔伸	Min Sin
尹祥	Yun Sang
西藏	Seo Jang
印度	Indo
暹羅	Siam
越南	Wiet Nam
金礩	Kim Jeok
鄭昌孫	Jeong Chang-son
柳子光	Yu Ja-gwang
成宗	Seongjong
者山君	Jasan-gun
英國	Yongguk



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제8호
발행일	1927년 08월 17일
기사제목	改作 東國通鑑, 首陽大君의 亞細亞 征服記
필자	洪承耈
기사형태	문예기타

改作 東國通鑑, 首陽大君의 亞細亞 征服記
						洪承耈
國初에 洪允成이라고 부르는 羅州 出身의 宰相이 잇섯다. 勇力과 機謀가 함께 絶倫하야 世祖의 潛邸 때부터 信任을 밧어 가지고 幕下에 投入하얏다가 金宗瑞誅戮과 王位 禪受等 陰謀가 成功한 뒤에는 領議政, 仁山府院君으로 累進하야 位가 人臣을 極하고 權이 一時를 傾하든 사람이다.
功을 恃하고 驕恣放縱하든 그는 사람 죽이기를 草芥버히듯 하고 作事에 不法이 만헛다. 그러나 上으로 君主부터 下으로 有司에 니르기까지 그를 抑壓할 사람이 업섯든이 만큼 勢熖이 赫赫하얏섯다. 그의 親友某가 恒常 規諫하기를 一時 公議는 누를 수가 잇스되 後日 史筆은 엇지 할 수 업스니 公은 反省自制하라고 하얏다. 듯기를 맛친 그는 笑罵하되 『迂腐한 君의 말이여 東國通鑑을 누가 읽을 것이라고 史筆이 무서워서 已得를 行치 못할 것이냐』고
東國通鑑이란 것이 洪宰相의 말과 갓치 讀者가 하나도 업슬만큼 無價値한 것인지 또 史筆이란 것이 顧忌할 것 업시 無權威한 것인지 그런 可否와 是非는 이에 穿鑿할 必要도 업스며 長夏浪浪한 筆者로도 그런 問題를 애써 檢討할 餘裕를 갓지 못하얏다. 굿태여 말하자면 『無識漢』의 沒分曉한 酬酌이라 할는지.
그럿치만은 가장 冷靜한 머리를 갓고 公平하게 追遡하야 보자. 東國通鑑 特히 李朝史 그것이 무슨 떳떳하게 誇示할 記錄이 안인 것을 承認치 안으랴 하야도 不能하다. 誤解치 말라. 筆者는 決코 우리 先人들을 歇看하거나 侮蔑하자는 것은 안이로되 感情의 愛憎을 떠나서 理性의 史的 判斷을 나리게 되면 그 몸써리칠 劇烈한 黨爭士禍의 記錄 고리탑은 한 漢土崇拜와 밋 程朱學說을 生食한 中毒患者들의 譫語, 血로써 血을 洗한 王室의 骨肉相殘하는 陰慘한 悲劇, 强國間에 介在하야 自守의 力이 업시 苟且한 外交辭令으로 一時를 糊塗하든 따라지 목숨 外戚과 權奸의 跋扈, 貧吏와＜146＞ 猾官의 跳梁, 이럿케 數來할 때에 비록 洪允成이가 안일지라도 李朝通鑑쯤은 읽기도 願치 안을 것이오 識字憂患으로 니런 記錄을 보고 읽는 自己의 不幸을 喞嘆하는 것이 些毫의 隱諱 업시 赤裡裡한 나의 告白이다.
그러나 오즉 此間에 잇서 叡智出天하야 東方聖人의稱이 잇는 世宗大王과 萬死를 辭치 안코 6尺 遺孤의 託을 負치 안튼 壯烈의 鬼神을 泣케 하는 6臣의 精忠大節과 堯舜君民의 大志를 품고 學이 天人을 貫하고 才가 王佐를 兼하든 栗谷 李珥와 天賦의 勇智로 殉國의 誠忠을 다하야 層溟百戰에 强寇로 破膽케 하고 三韓을 再造하는 忠武公 李舜臣과 貧官汚吏의 暴虐한 惡政에 塗炭魚肉의 慘苦를 격는 民衆의 處地에 義憤의 눈물을 뿌리고 蹶起하든 東學黨一派가 잇서 겨우 人意를 差强케 할 뿐이다. 萬一 李朝史로 하야곰 世宗大王이 업시하면 暴君, 庸君, 昏君과 或 가다가 明君과 賢君은 잇슬는지 모르나 聖君은 잇지 안을 것이다. 6臣이 잇서 亂臣과 奸臣도 罪朔이 덥히고 栗谷이 잇서 腐儒와 迂士가 져윽이 生色이 낫고 李忠武가 잇서 敵愾悍難하는 干城人物을 처음 보앗스며 崔濟愚 以下 義民의 先鋒이 잇서 비로소 朝鮮사람 血管에도 强熱한 公憤이 잠겨 잇는 것을 表示하얏다고 斷言할지라도 아마 異議者가 업슬 것이다.
朝鮮이란 나라가 비록 弱小하고 李朝의 歷史가 그대지 光彩는 업섯다 할지라도 2,000萬 民衆이 사러오든 500年동안의 大記錄이다. 人物이 아무리 업섯다 할지라도 前記諸君子 外에도 그 때 그 때의 살님사리에 必要한 人材는 應當 잇섯슬 것인즉 나는 一槪로이 멧 사람만을 特仰하고 다른 사람을 劣視하는 것은 안이다. 謹厚한 大人도 잇섯슬 것이다. 玲瓏한 才士도 잇섯슬 것이다.
廉吏도 잇섯다. 賢官도 잇섯다. 鴻儒도 잇섯다. 猛將도 잇섯다. 그러치만은... ...
韓史綮이라는 冊子를 지어가지고 開城사람의 怨恨은 自家가 都賣商이나 된 듯이 李朝事라고 하면 故意로 漫罵하며 侮辱한 金澤榮이면 모르거니와 그럿치 안으면 이들을 가릇처 李朝史의 光彩 잇는 部分을 代表한 人物이라 함에 무엇을 躊躇할 것이랴.
特히 世宗大王에 니르러서는 李朝 500年間 27代 君王中에 가장 功德이 놉흔 聖君이 되실뿐 안이라 東國史를 通하야 볼지라도 이런 仁明英武한 守成之主는 얼는 比類가 적을 것이오 有史 以來 5,000餘 年에 朝鮮사람으로는 第一 完全한 人格을 具備한 어룬이오 八字 조키도 無雙할 것이며 初無君長하든 上古神話時代는 勿論이오 近日처럼 一國의 元首를 公選하는 나라에서라도 朝鮮의 代表者로 理想的 人物이섯다. 엇지 朝鮮뿐이랴. 東西古今에 이만한 賢德을 가초운 元首가 엇지 그리 容易하게 잇섯스랴.
世宗大王은 果然 古今 不世出의 理想的 大聖君이엿다. 生知의 聰明叡智를 가젓스나 그것을 自負치 안엇고＜147＞ 冲齡으로부터 昇遐에 니르시기까지 好學不倦하야 手不釋卷으로 晝宵勉勵한 어룬이다. 帝王의 天職을 自覺하야 民國에 犧牲됨을 期하고 一心 孜孜한 것이 오즉 百姓을 爲하야 興利除害한 것과 知人擇任하야 股肱의 責을 盡케 한 것이다. 堯舜三代의 帝王大道라 하든 正德, 利用, 厚生三者를 徹頭徹尾로 理解하고 體得하고 躬行하고 實踐한 帝王이 果然 幾人이나 되는지 筆者의 寡聞인지는 모르나 오즉 우리 世宗大王을 볼뿐이다. 創業한 人君은 守成에 짜르고 守成한 人君은 進取에 乏한 것이 東西가 一轍이엿다. 그남어도 初年에 勤政하다가 老來에 耄荒한이와 英明하면서도 失德한이도 적지 안엇섯다. 그 例를 들냐면 汗牛充棟이다.
그러나 世宗大王에 이르러서는 平生에 失德이 업섯고 前後의 異色이 업시 始終如一뿐 안이라 老來에 더욱 圓熟한 進境을 示하야 帝王의 職分을 畢한 이가 업다. 狗馬聲色의 玩好가 업섯고, 倖妄과 嬖臣이 업섯고 賢能을 任使하야 王者의 仁政을 베풀기에만 힘썻다.
六鎭開拓도 그 손에 되고 渾天儀와 自鳴鍾과 測雨器가 그 때에 되고 對馬島 征伐과 野人懷柔도 그 때에 햇고 琉球와 暹羅의 朝貢도 그 때에 밧엇다. 雅樂을 創作하기도 그 때이오 丁亥者와 庚子字를 鑄造하야 活版으로 書籍을 印刷하기도 그 때이다. 佛書의 內典도 譯刊하얏스며 思政殿訓義, 高麗史, 三綱行實, 農事直說, 明皇誡鑑, 治平要覽, 大政籌, 五禮儀, 無寃綠註, 經書音解, 曆象集, 糸綸全書, 杜詩註, 國朝寶鑑, 龍飛御天歌 等의 大文獻이 그 때에 創作도 되고 譯述도 되고 集註도 되엿다. 그 뿐 안이라 訓民正音의 大製作이 또한 이 어룬의 創造的叡智에 依하야 案出된 것이다. 그리하야 稗史, 小說, 野談에 니르기까지 國文으로 譯解하야 民衆文藝가 始作되여 半島文學의 大革命을 遂하얏다.
朝廷에는 集賢殿 學士가 濟濟蹌蹌하야 治敎가 休明하고 野에는 樂業하는 民生이 鼓腹擊壤하고 外에 兵塵이 끈이고 內에 富强의 實을 擧하야 니른바 東國의 黃金時代를 現出하얏섯다.
그 뿐 아니라 個人의 八字로 보아도 郭璞이나 李淳風을 기대리지 안어도 朝鮮사람으로는 이만큼 具備한이가 둘도 업슬 것이다. 太祖, 太宗 가튼 英祖英父를 비롯하야 讓寧, 孝寧가튼 賢兄이 잇섯고 文宗과 世祖가튼 仁君英主를 아들로 두고 30餘 年을 萬乘九五의 位에 잇서 治平의 福祿을 누리엿다. 王氏朝廷의 末路로부터 百餘年 兵革과 水旱에 짓발피고 씨달니든 朝鮮民衆도 이 때에야 사람다운 生活을 하고 仰事俯育에 遺憾이 업섯든 模樣이다.
別乾坤雜誌의 7月號式으로 『하얏드면』을 되풀이하는 것은 안이지만은 이와 가튼 世宗大王으로 하야금 元首의 地位에 잇고 栗谷과 六臣과 李忠武 갓튼 忠亮死節의 臣下가 將相에 處하야 抱負를 展布하고 民衆의 熱烈한 義憤心으로 貧官汚吏에 反抗하야 革命의 旗를 들든 것을 方面을＜148＞ 전환해서 義勇奉公도 되고 적극 進取의 興國心이 되여 상하가 합치하야 서로 戮力함이 잇섯다하면 西伯利와 滿洲 갓튼 古代朝鮮族의 舊疆을 회복하야 極東의 大國을 형성할 것이 難事가 안이오 內修와 外攘이 俱至하야 壬辰丙子에 禍亂으로 自保의 餘地가 업시 되지도 안엇슬 것이오 汽船火車電氣의 類가 우리의 手中에서 發明되엿슬 것을 疑치 안으며 西半球의 新土地가 白人에게 發見되든 先鞭도 붓첫슬 것이다. 이럿케 생각한다 하야도 決코 痴人의 夢想이 안이다.
그럼에 不拘하고 世宗大王은 在位 32年만에 54歲의 春秋로 昇遐해서 그 帝王의 大經綸을 전부 실현치 못하섯고 嗣子이시든 文宗大王이 또한 世宗께 지지안는 德量과 學問을 갓초웟스되 겨우 嗣位 2年만에 40 未滿으로 夭陟하매 12歲에 冲齡으로 東宮에 잇든 端宗大王이 踐祚하고 領議政 皇甫仁과 左議政 金宗瑞 以下 元老舊臣이 文宗의 顧命을 밧고 幼主를 輔護하게 되엿다. 이해가 只今부터 416年 前 壬申이오 太祖大王이 高麗의 社稷을 밧어 化家爲國한 一週甲되든 해이다. 61年의 歲月이 그대지 짜르지도 안치만은 王業을 創始한 英雄의 卽位 1週甲에 前朝臣民의 亡國恨淚가 아즉 사러지지 못한 때에 12歲 幼主가 野心滿滿한 叔父의 政權慾滿足하랴는 犧牲이 되여 半島王朝史의 最大 悲劇을 일을 쥴이야 엇지 알엇스리요.
月白夜蜀魄啾 合愁情依樓頭 爾啼悲我悶苦 無爾聲無我愁 寄語世上苦勞人 愼莫登春三月子規樓 一自寃禽出帝宮 孤身隻影碧山中 假眼夜夜眼無假 窮恨年年恨不窮 聲斷曉岑殘月白 血流春谷落花紅 天聾尙未聞哀訴 何奈愁人耳獨穩 아- 父王의 遺託 밧은 重臣은 次第로 誅戮되고 大寶를 빼앗긴지 未幾에 또다시 寧越窮峽으로 遷謫의 苦楚를 밧어가며 萬峰은 攢天하고 江聲이 嗚咽하는 淸冷浦謫舍에 囚禁되엿다가 因하야 그 따에서 最終의 悲劇을 보앗다. 當時의 忠臣義士가 扼腕流涕한 것은 물론 今日에 史錄을 읽는 자까지도 掩卷太息하야 이 不幸한 幼主에게 悲憤의 눈물을 뿌리는 同時에 世宗의 至治로 因하야 基礎가 固安하게 되여 가든 李氏의 王業도 이 悲劇으로부터 出發하야 다시는 興起振作치 못하고 春風秋雨 400年에 今日 末路를 고하고 말엇다.
春風杜宇長入詩人之句 麥飯寒食空呑野老之隱 魯陵哀史를 읽을 때에 누구이나 痛憤할 句節이다. 端宗 悲話를 쓰자하면 限量 업슬 뿐더러 또한 筆者의 본의가 안인 때문에 餘談은 此程度에 긋치거니와 何如間 筆者는 恒常 이 君位纂奪劇의 主人公되시는 世祖大王에게와 밋 그의 羽翼이 되여서 舊君을 죽이고 萬古의 惡名을 밧는 저 鄭麟趾, 申叔舟, 韓明澮, 權擥과 밋 篇頭에 씨여 잇눀” 洪允成 等 諸人에게 不尠한 遺憾을 가지게 된 것을 一言한다.
생명이란 微物도 愛惜하거든 허물며 사람이리오. 權勢와 富貴는 君子라도 貪戀하기 쉬운 것이어늘 허물며＜149＞ 君子가 못되는 以上 諸人이리오. 그들이 身命을 앗기고 富貴를 貧하야 先王을 이저버리고 世祖에게 依附하야 萬古의 惡逆에 犯入하게 된 것을 나는 君子 안인 그들에게 六臣의 忠義로써 責치 안코저 한다. 그러나 그들도 決코 惡逆一味의 兇悖한 인물뿐은 안이엿다. 否라 그 평일에 기대 밧든 점으로 보든지 日後에 남기고 간 事業으로 보든지 確實히 그 才智가 水平線上의 人物인 것을 躊躇치 안코 承認할 것이나 그들로 하야금 世祖에게 盡忠하든 誠力을 端宗께 奉仕하얏슬지라도 그만한 權勢 富貴는 自然히 왓슬 것이오 李朝의 王業도 一層 偉大하얏슬 것이다. 또 世祖로 말할지라도 旣히 幼王의 後見人으로 攝政의 地位에 잇섯다. 事實 帝王의 事業을 任意로 할 수 잇섯거늘 굿태여 그런 짓을 안이할지라도 自己의 慾望을 채울만 하얏섯다. 그럼으로 그들이 그 때에 心機를 一轉하야 성심성의로 世宗遺業을 擴大하기에만 努力하얏슬진대 世宗이 發端하야 노은 偉業을 大成하야서 朝鮮을 세계적으로 크게 하고 世宗 未了의 志業을 完就하얏슬 것은 疑心치 안는다. 못처럼 남다른 武器를 가지고 他에게 試치 못하고 自己에게 亂用한 것을 그들을 위하야 恨惜하는 바이다. 만일 그들이 그때에 前述과 갓치 用心處事하얏드면 아래와 갓튼 事業찜은 용이하게 성취하얏슬 것이다. 또 한 번 꿈을 꾸어보자.
世宗 末年에 明나라 正統皇帝가 北伐軍을 親率하고 也先과 大同府에서 會戰하야 全師가 陷沒하고 總司令官 張輔 以下가 전사하고 帝는 被擒北行하고 監國郕王이 즉위하니 이른바 景秦皇帝라. 也先은 더욱 乘勝하야 翌年에 다시 大擧하야 北京을 攻圍하니 天下가 크게 震恐하얏다. 이에 明國總帥 于謙은 朝鮮에 援兵을 청하고 朝議는 援明師를 派遣하기로 하얏다. 總司令官은 王子 首陽大君이 此에 當하고 總參謀長은 金宗瑞로 任하야 參謀 申叔舟, 韓明澮, 尹弼商, 李澄玉, 魚有沼, 南怡, 康純, 兪應孚 等은 陸路로 進出하고 別로히 崔潤德, 許琮이 舟師로 登州에 上陸하얏다. 그리하야 몬저 北京攻圍軍을 擊破하야 脫脫不花也先 等이 모다 朝鮮軍에게 生擒되고 다시 明韓聯合軍이 組織도 되여 潰走되는 敵軍을 紫荊關에서 殲滅하고 더욱 深入하야 瓦刺의 근거를 破하고 明帝를 奉還하얏다. 明國은 크게 朝鮮을 德하야 영원히 형제의 誼를 結하야 攻守同盟을 締定하고 西伯利와 滿洲地方을 全部割讓하야 朝鮮에 歸屬케 하며 朝鮮을 完全한 獨立國으로 承認하고 皇帝位號를 贈稱하기로 하얏다. 於是에 東은 海蔘威로 北은 貝爾加湖로 南은 旅順에 니르기까지 朝鮮의 新 領土가 되엿다. 國號는 大朝鮮으로 定하고 治國憲章을 制定키 爲하야 軍國會議所를 신설하고 總裁, 議定官, 參與 등 職을 설치하야 근본책을 樹立케 하얏다.
總裁 讓寧大君
副總裁 首陽大君
同 安平大君＜150＞
議定官 金宗瑞
同 鄭麟趾
同 南智
同 申叔舟
同 成三問
同 朴彭年
同 河緯地
同 韓明澮
同 許詡
同 李仁孫
同 兪應孚
同 許琮
同 具致寬
同 康純
同 朴元亨
同 權擥
同 韓確
參與 洪逸童
同 李石亨
同 盧思愼
同 尹弼商
同 李塏
同 任元濬
同 李克培
同 金何
顧問 黃喜
同 皇甫仁
同 鄭甲孫
同 河演
이와 가튼 一代의 賢俊을 網羅하야 新興大帝國의 규모를 세우기로 하얏다.
會議所에서 議定할 것은 官制 變更, 軍政과 財政의 改革, 學政改良, 拓殖事務의 統一整理, 新 刑律의 制定 等이 主要한 것이엿다. 그러는 一方에도 新 領土의 管轄統治를 위하야 野人鎭撫에 威信이 素著한 金宗瑞는 滿洲 總督으로 河敬復은 西伯利 總督으로 잇서 統治事務에 鞅掌하고 李澄玉과 魚有沼는 駐屯軍司令官으로 哈爾濱과 奉天에 駐箚하얏고 許琮은 駐明使臣으로 申叔舟는 日本과 海寇事件의 해결 及 對馬島征伐 問題의 善後 交涉을 위하야 日本에 特派되엿것다.
會議所의 節目議定이 끗나기 前에 世宗은 賓天하시고 文宗이 卽位한 翌年에 비로소 新制는 發布되여 3年 後에 實施하얏다. 이 동안에 日本에 出使하얏든 申叔舟의 일행이 回航 도중에 日本神戶를 떠난 海上에서 風浪을 만나 漂流하다가 수십일만에 米洲에 漂着하야 九死十生의 餘에 新天地를 發見하고 2年만에 도라왓다. 그리하야 新大陸의＜152＞ 動植物 標本과 기타 實驗報告는 單히 朝鮮뿐 아니라 세계의 耳目을 놀내게 하얏다.
文宗이 在位 2年에 新制 實施를 보지 못하고 崩御하니 端宗이 嗣位하얏스나 幼冲함으로 萬機를 總攬치 못하고 仲父首陽大君이 攝政으로써 金宗瑞 等 顧命元老와 協心하야 國政을 施行하기로 하얏다. 이 때에 新制度 施行期가 迫至하얏슴으로 아래와 가튼 新 內閣이 組織되엿다.
總理大臣兼拓殖務大臣 金宗瑞
內務大臣兼文部大臣 鄭麟趾
外務大臣 申叔舟
大藏大臣 李仁孫
陸軍大臣 康純
海軍大臣 魚有沼
司法大臣 鄭甲孫
農林大臣 許詡
商工大臣 具致寬
遞信大臣 朴元亨
그리고 중요한 文武大官이 또 니럿케 就任하얏다.
宮內大臣 朴彭年
內大臣 成三問
樞密院議長 南智
侍從長 鄭悰
皇后宮大夫 宋玹壽
侍從武官長 兪應孚
參謀總長 龜城君浚
同次長 許琮
西伯利亞總督 李澄玉
滿洲總督 南怡
米洲總督 黃守身
駐明使臣 韓確
駐日使臣 金何
京師防禦總督兼近衛軍團長 成勝
陸軍第一軍團長(平壤) 河敬復
同第二軍團長(瀋陽) 李施愛
同第三軍團長(寧古塔) 金承珪
同第四軍團長(海蔘威) 洪允成
同第五軍團長(滿洲里) 奉石柱
同第六軍團長(哈爾濱)
海防總監(旅順) 趙克寬
聯合艦隊司令官 崔潤德
大審院長 閔伸
檢事總長 李塏
漢城皇國大學總長 尹祥
滿洲第一大學總長 金末
同第三大學總長 金鉤＜152＞
發明局總裁 蔣思敬
國立雅樂院長 朴堧
이와 가티 하야 國勢는 더욱 蒸蒸 向上되고 文化는 날로 進步 發展되엿다. 그리다가 後 10年에 端宗이 親政하게 되매 侍講官으로 特히 親任이 깁든 金時習이 特簡에 의하야 總理大臣이 되고 鄭麟趾는 樞府議長으로 金宗瑞는 元老가 되고 輔政 10年한 首陽大君은 親王을 封하야 西伯利總督이 되엿다.
그 동안에 金礩과 鄭昌孫과 柳子光 等이 政府顚覆의 陰謀를 가지고 首陽王이 異志가 잇서 成三問 朴彭年과 內外和應하랴 한다고 密告하얏스나 事實이 업슴으로 誣告로 反坐되엿고 首陽王은 이 事件의 責任을 己의 不德이라 하야 爵位 返還을 䟽請하얏스나 優詔를 拜하고 仍하야 隱退하얏다. 그리고 端宗은 壯齡을 지나섯스나 皇儲가 업슴으로 皇族會議의 결과로 首陽王의 次孫者山君을 冊하야 東宮을 封하니 後日 成宗이 되엿다.
이 때에 큰 事件이 생겻스니 米洲가 발견된 뒤로 泰西人과 明人의 移住者가 逐年 증가하야 우리의 移民과 利害가 충돌된 것과 西藏, 印度, 暹羅, 越南 等 支那의 外藩이라든 列國이 白人의 침략에 견듸지 못하야 우리에게 보호를 청한 것이다. 이에 조정은 이를 구원하기로 결의하고 몬저 明國과 日本으로 더부러 三國同盟을 締定하야 韓日聯合軍은 太平洋 海上에서 英國水軍을 擊破하고 韓明聯合軍은 印度에서 英, 佛, 西 三國聯合軍을 全滅 식히여 황색인종의 武威를 세계에 드러내엿다. 終局은 白人에 乞和로 북경에서 講和會議를 開하고 韓國全權으로는 首相 金時習이 親히 出馬하야 條約을 定하얏다. 그리하야 韓國은 世界平和會議의 議長으로 一方 亞細亞 總 聯盟의 孟主로 잇게 되여 세계의 覇權을 잡고 인류의 평화와 행복을 保隣하얏스며 正音과 雅樂을 세계가 사용하기로 하야 文化로 地球를 征服하고 말엇다. 이럿케 되여도 東國通鑑을 안 읽을 터이야.(丁卯 榴夏三淸書屋에서 莊陵誌 읽다가 偶感荒草)＜153＞
＜146-153＞