잡지명	別건곤 제8호
발행일	1927년 08월 17일
기사제목	葉書通信, 投書歡迎 限葉書 (Postcard Communication, Submissions Welcome, Postcards Only)
기사형태	잡저 (Miscellaneous Writings)

Postcard Communication, Submissions Welcome, Postcards Only
釘道令, Anju Cheolraesaeng
What I heard when I was hospitalized at the Pyongyang Gihyul Hospital (it was a Kim OO, either a pastor or a missionary there) is this:
In the Jeonggamnok, Jeong Doryeong does not actually mean Jeong Doryeong coming, but it refers to the Second Coming of Jesus. Jeong Doryeong means Nail Doryeong (Jesus died nailed (釘) to the cross, and also Jesus was never married, so he is Doryeong). So, don't look for a non-existent Jeong Doryeong, but believe in the Second Coming Jesus, i.e., Nail Doryeong." He gives a passionate speech. They say he had considerable success with this speech among the ignorant believers. It seems he is doing this trick because everyone in the hospital room is like a villager.

Lee Dong-hwi Seen as a Child, Pyeongtaek - A Reader
I see that you have created a "Postcard Communication" section in your esteemed magazine and are opening it to readers with absolute freedom, so I thought I would write about a recollection from my childhood. I was 7 years old. I used to attend Hapil School in Ganghwa, my hometown, but I would make excuses to go to school with my book bag every day and would usually go out to the mountains or fields with my friends. When I was learning "Elementary School," I would hide it under the eaves of someone's outhouse or on the roof of a pigsty and run away every day. One day, I was caught by my uncle, who was the principal of the school, and he spanked me a lot. When he asked, "If I hit you a few more times, will you stop doing that?" I would always say, "Please hit me three more times." This has become a story to tell to this day. When Lee Dong-hwi, who is now in Russia, was the principal of Bochang School in Ganghwa, I impudently asked him what he was wearing his hair cut and dressed in black, and I was severely scolded. A few days later, he praised me for being manly and brave and gave me two pencils as a reward. I remember that.

A Summer Worry, Songgyeong Dapdapsaeng
Omnipotent and infinitely loving Head Elder! How do you feel about last year's heat? Where are you spending this year's summer? Who is your adopted daughter? Oh! I want to know. And are you drinking sake? Yes!! Of course, it must be for loving those closest to you first. Fan Ju used the distant friendship and close attack strategy, so is the Elder using the close friendship and distant attack strategy? You are so full of love, Elder!! It seems that you are watching Jesus, who is locked in the closet, through the crack in the door. Amen.

As a Newspaper Reader, Pyongyang Seolam-ri Kim Chun-gang
If you don't have the ability to add more reporters, wouldn't it be better to just reduce the newspaper pages? ... If you keep doing it like you are now, the arts and culture pages, children's sections, and family sections of each newspaper are actually unwelcome. There are few reporters and they are busy, and they have to fill the designated blank pages within that time, so they just throw in any submission in a hurry. But there are too many articles that make you think, "I wish they had read it even once before publishing it."
Not to mention the scribbles of the riffraff who attack others with words that have no logic, but in the so-called family section, they only pick and write things that are necessary for Japanese women, and in the children's section, they either copy other people's children's songs, or, if not, they recklessly publish historical fairy tales (without knowing how scary it is) such as Chinese soldiers invading the east coast of Gangwon Province by someone who doesn't know history. If you want to create such a wastebasket and give wrong information under the excuse of being busy or having a shortage of reporters, it would be better to reduce the newspaper pages or lower the newspaper price.

Another World, Sinchon Vagrant
At Sinchon, the station after Gyeongseong Station, while waiting for the train, I sat among two or three old men and three women. On the station wall, there was a promotional poster from the Gyeongseong Ilbo for the Tokyo "Joseon Exposition." The poster depicted a gisaeng wearing a "flowered coronet (花冠)" and a "hwarot (활옷, bridal robe)." The conversation that the three women had while looking at the depicted gisaeng was strange.
"Oh, how could a bride who is getting married show her face and have her picture taken like that?"
"I know, I know. Oh, how pitiful. What kind of look is that for a bride?"
"I heard that a bride was riding in a car the other day when a photographer suddenly took a picture of her on the street..."
"Anyway, it's a good world. They take pictures of brides like that and put them up..."
Feeling sorry for them, I was about to say, "Excuse me, that's not a picture of a bride, it's a gisaeng's picture," but I thought they wouldn't believe me, so I stopped.

Reading the July Issue, Songhwa Lim Seok-hyo
The "Deuyeonrok (드연록)" and "Questions and Answers with Shin Il-seon" in the July issue of Byeolgeonkon were very interesting. I hope you will publish more articles like that in the future... ... Another thing I hope is that you have a readers' literature section?

Hope for Byeolgeonkon, Uiju Song Jeong-gyu
From now on, it would be nice if you would write more in Korean. Everyone knows that Byeolgeonkon is a magazine for men and women of all ages, but historical stories in the content are not something that can be understood with an average level of knowledge, so it would be appreciated if you could use Korean for the entire content from now on.

Hope for Byeolgeonkon, Gaeseong No Ryang-geun
Your esteemed magazine, which cultivates the driving force of life by combining hobby and knowledge and beautifies life, has not been published for two months, which is really lonely and boring. Accordingly, I roughly knew the news from newspapers, but waiting for the publication of your esteemed magazine for even a day was truly not a lie, and I tasted more anxiety than waiting for a beloved person. However, how happy and joyful I am to see the July issue again, which is the culmination of the blood and sweat of all of your staff!? As the issues are repeated, I can't bear to put down your esteemed magazine even for a moment!! I can't help but be surprised at the hard work and originality of your company's editors, and I can't help but give the praise of "Byeolgeonkon," which can be read by anyone of any class or society, regardless of gender or age. Please continue to strive even harder to make it truly a new world, a separate universe. Finally, I would like to make a few requests: please create a readers' column, put effort into the literature column, create a submission box like the Jungoe Ilbo, and put the voting slips in separately.

Inside the Spectacle, Gyeongseong Seo Jeong-gwon
"Come see, come see. A person with a neck that stretches out!" I paid 10 jeon and went inside. It wasn't as long as the advertisement picture, but when a woman in Japanese clothes knelt down and raised her face, her powdered neck stretched out more than a foot long.
"Oh, it's true. How can it stretch out so long?"
"I don't know. How can it stretch out like that... ... It's so strange."
The women who were standing close in front and watching were also amazed. Taking advantage of the fact that the owner was away, the woman whose neck was stretching out started talking to the customers.
"It's not that my neck is stretching out like this, but I'm putting rubber under my chin and just sticking my face out on top of it. My body is behind this black curtain."
Then the owner came in and the woman stopped talking, but there were tears in her eyes. <157>

**Named Entities**

安州	Anju
鐵雷生	Ch'eollaesaeng
平壤	P'yŏngyang
金OO	Kim OO
鄭鑑錄	Chŏnggamnok
鄭道令	Chŏng Doryŏng
釘道令	Ting Doryŏng
李東輝	Yi Tong-hwi
平澤	P'yŏngt'aek
江華	Kanghwa
露嶺	Noryŏng
普昌學校	Poch'ang Hakkyo
松京	Songgyŏng
范雎	Pŏm Ch'wi
平壤	P'yŏngyang
薛岩里	Sŏram-ri
金春崗	Kim Ch'un-gang
京城驛	Kyŏngsŏng Yŏk
新村	Sinch'on
京城日報社	Kyŏngsŏng Ilbosa
東京	Tōkyō
朝鮮博覽會	Chosŏn Pangnamhoe
松禾	Songhwa
林錫孝	Im Sŏk-hyo
申一仙	Sin Il-sŏn
義州	Ŭiju
宋正奎	Song Chŏng-gyu
開城	Kaesŏng
盧良根	No Ryang-gŭn
中外日報	Chungoe Ilbo
京城	Kyŏngsŏng
徐廷權	Sŏ Chŏng-gwŏn



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제8호
발행일	1927년 08월 17일
기사제목	葉書通信, 投書歡迎 限葉書
기사형태	잡저

葉書通信, 投書歡迎 限葉書
釘道令, 安州 鐵雷生
내가 이것은 平壤 기휼病院에서 入院하야슬 때 들은 말이다.(그곳 牧師인지 傳道師인지 한 金OO이다)
鄭鑑錄에 鄭道令이란 것은 사실 鄭道令이 오는 것이 아니라 예수의 再臨을 일음이다. 鄭道令이란 釘道令이다.(예수는 十字架에서 못(釘)에 박혀 죽고 또 예수는 장가든 일이 업스니까 道令이다) 그러니 업는 鄭道令을 찻지 말고 再臨할 예수 卽 釘道令을 밋으라 熱辯을 吐한다. 그는 이 말로  愚敎徒에게 상당히 성공하얏다고 한다. 病室에 잇는 사람이 모다 村사람 갓흐니까 이런 수작을 하는 模樣이다.

어릴 때 본 李東輝씨, 平澤 一讀者
貴誌에 『葉書通信欄』을 設하시고 讀者들의게 絶對自由主義로 開放하신다니 저의 어렷슬 때 回想한 節(追憶)이나 하나 써 볼가함니다. 제 나히 7살적임니다. 고향인 江華셔 合一學枝를 단엿섯는대 伐齊爲名格으로 每日 冊褓끼고 學校에 간다고 핑계하고는 의례히 동모들과 山이나 들 밧게로 놀러감니다. 「初等小學」을 배울 때인데 누구의 집 便所 추녀 밋이나 도야지 우리 집웅에 갓다 감초우고 날마다 도망질만 치다가 하로는 學校校長인 伯父의게 붓들려 종아리를 톡톡이 마젓는데 『이놈 몃 개나 더 마지면 다시 그런 짓을 안 할테냐』고 하시면 의례히 『세개만 더 따려 줍시요』하야 只今까지 한 逸話거리가 되엿슴니다. 只今 露嶺 계신 李東輝氏가 江華 普昌學校에 校長으로 게실 때 唐突히도 當身 무슨 名色으로 머리 깍고 검정옷 입엇느냐고 質問을 하고 단단히 혼을 낫든 일이 잇섯는데 몃 칠 후 그 분으로서 男子답고 勇敢하다고 鉛筆 두 자루를 賞탄 일이 생각남니다.

녀름의 한 걱정, 松京 답답生
전지전능하시고 사랑에 앗득하신 0長老師님! 昨年의 뎃터 生覺이 엇덥시며 今年의 避署는 어데이며 수양딸님은 누구심닛가? 아이고! 알고 십허요. 그리고 질은 마셔오? 네!! 勿論 갓가운데부터 사랑하시기 爲함이겟지요. 范雎는 遠交近攻策을 썻더니 長老님은 近交遠攻策을 씀인가요? 참말로 사랑이 만흐셔요. 長老님!! 골방에 집어친 예수님은 문틈오로 보시는 듯 아맨

新聞讀者로서, 平壤 薛岩里 金春崗
萬一 記者를 더 增員할 實力이 업스면 차라리 新聞의 페지를 주려버리는 것이 엇덜가... ... 只今처럼만 한다면 各 新聞의 學藝페지 少年欄, 家庭欄은 사실로 반갑지 못한 것이다. 記者는 적고 밧브기는 하고 그 시간 안에 所定의 白紙를 채워놋키는 해야겟스닛가 급한대로 아모런 投書나 집어넛코 마는 것이겟지만은 더러는 『단 한 번 닑어보기나 하고 揭載하엿스면』하게 되는 記事가 넘어 만히 잇다.
아모 理論도 서지 못하는 말로 남을 攻迫하는 雜輩의 붓작란은 말도 말고 소위 가뎡란에는 일본부녀에게 필요한 소리만 골라서 써 놋키가 일수요 소년란에는 남의 童謠 벗겨온 것이나 그럿치 안흐면 中國軍兵이 江原道 東海岸으로 侵入해 왓다는 等 歷史 모르는 이의 歷史童話가(무서운 줄 모르고) 함부로 揭載된다. 밧브다는 핑계로 記者의 손이 모자라는 핑계로 이따위 휴지통을 만들어 잘못된 지식을 너어주려면 차라리 新聞페지를 주리고 新聞갑이나 싸게 하는 것이 잘하는 짓일 것 갓다.

딴세상, 新村過客
京城驛 다음 新村이라는 停車場에서 男子로＜156＞ 老人이 2, 3人이 잇고 女子 세 사람이 잇는 틈에 석겨 안저서 汽車를 기다리고 잇슬 때인대 停車場壁에 京城日報社에서 開催한 東京 『朝鮮博覽會』 宣傳紙가 붓고 그 宣傳紙에는 『花冠쪽도리』를 쓰고 『활옷』을 입은 妓生 하나를 그리여 잇섯슴니다. 그런데 그 그린 妓生을 보고 세 女子의 주고 밧는 이약이가 희한함니다.
『아이고 엇던 싀집가는 새악씨가 얼골을 내어 노코 잇다가 저러케 떨걱 사진을 박히게 하엿슬가』
『그리게나 말이지 아이고 가엽서라 새새악씨가 저게 무슨 꼴이야?』
『저그번에도 새새악씨가 自動車를 타고 가다가 길에서 사진장이가 지나가는 것을 떨걱 박이어 갓다는데... ...』
『아모튼지 조흔 세상이야. 새새악씨 사진을 저러케 박이어다가 내여 거르니... ...』
하도 딱하야 엽헤서 듯다가 『여보십시요. 그것이 새새악씨 사진이 아니라 기생 그림임니다』하려다가 고지 듯지 안을 것 갓해서 고만두엇슴니다.

7월호 닑고, 松禾 林錫孝
別乾坤 7月號의 「드연錄」과 「申一仙량의 問答記」는 퍽 자미잇섯슴니다. 以後로 그런 記事를 만히 내주시기를 바라며... ... 또 한 가지 바라는 것은 讀者 문예란을 두심이 엇덜른지요?

別乾坤에 對한 希望, 義州 宋正奎
금후부터는 朝鮮 國文을 만히 써 주시면 조켓습니다. 別乾坤이 남녀노소를 위한 잡지라는 것은 일반이 다 아는 바이려니와 내용 중에 歷史譚 가튼 것은 왼만한 정도 가지고는 알수 없사오니 금후부터는 내용 전부를 국문으로 사용해 주시면 감사하겟습니다.

別乾坤에 對한 希望, 開城 盧良根
趣味와 知識을 아울러서 生活의 原動力을 길러주며 생활을 美化식히든 貴誌가 2개 월 동안이나 世上에 나오지 안으매 실로 쓸쓸하며 無味하기 짝이 업더이다. 따라서 신문지로 대강 消息은 알고 잇섯스나 하로밧게 貴誌의 發刊을 고대하기는 실로 거짓말이 아니라 정든님 기다리는 이상의 안탁가움을 맛보앗나이다. 그러나 이제 다시 貴社員一動의 血汗의 結晶體인 7월호를 다시 對하게 되니 얼마나 반갑고 깃븐지요!? 號가 거듭할수록 점점 잠시라도 貴誌를 노코는 못백이게 됨니다 그려!! 참으로 貴社의 編輯에 대한 苦心과 奇拔한데는 한 번 놀라지 안을 수 업스며, 그야말로 男女老少 어느 계급, 어느 사회, 누구나 다 닑을 수 잇는 別의 「別乾坤」이라는 찬사를 아니 올릴 수 업습니다. 走馬加鞭으로 더욱 더욱 奮鬪努力하시사 그야말로 別天地 別乾坤이 되도록 하야주사이다. 끗흐로 바라는 몃 말슴은 讀者欄을 내여주시며, 文藝欄에 힘을 써 주시며 中外日報와 갓치 투서함을 두어 주시며 현상투표지는 따로 너허주시요.

구경속, 京城 徐廷權
『뚜로시요. 뚜로시요. 목아지 느러나는 사람이요』 소리에 10錢을 더러내고 드러가 보닛가 광고 그림갓치 그럿케 길다랏치는 아니하나 일본옷 입은 녀자가 꿀어안저서 얼골을 들기만 하면 분바른 목아지가 한 자(一尺) 이상이나 길닷케 느러난다.
『아이그 참말이로구나. 엇저면 저럿케 길게느러나니』
『글세말이다. 엇재서 저럿케 느러날가... ... 이상하기도 하다』
압헤 갓갑게나 서서 구경하는 부인네들도 신긔해하는데 맛츰 주인 업는 틈을 타서 그 목아지 느러나는 녀자가 손님에게 이약이를 시작하얏다.
『내 목아지가 이러케 느러나는 것이 아니라 내 턱 밋에 고무를 대고 그 우에 내 얼골만 내밀고 안젓는 것이야요. 내 몸둥이는 이 검은 휘장 뒤에 잇서요』
그러자 주인놈이 들어와서 말이 끈첫스나 그 녀자 눈에는 눈물이 고여 잇섯다.＜157＞
＜156-157＞