別건곤 제34호
1930년 11월 01일
吸煙室 (Smoking Room)
잡저 (Miscellany)

The so-called countermeasures meeting for the rice price crash is held daily by civilians or government officials, but there is no effect until the end, and the rice price continues to fall. At this rate, those countermeasures meetings will likely become useless talk after death (成服後藥공론) eight or nine times out of ten.

Looking at the people who are said to be devising these so-called countermeasures, most of them are either big landowners or salaried workers who sit comfortably. Since they are not small farmers who directly suffer the pain of death, why would they be so anxious? Even useless talk after death (成服後藥공론) would be a little better in appearance than going to a funeral home and singing songs.

Speaking of the rice price crash, while the rice price is crashing like that, other prices remain the same. How about launching a movement to raise other prices at the same time as the rice price increase movement?

The British airship R-101, which was visiting India, exploded near Beauvais in the Oise department of France, killing 49 people, including Air Minister Thomson. It seems there was an Indian bomb squad conducting an anti-British movement in the French sky as well.

It was reported in a certain day's newspaper that a "short stick girl" (스틕) appeared in front of the Joseon Bank (朝鮮銀行) in Gyeongseong (京城). Under the electric advertising tower, a flirtatious modern girl (어염모) spraying perfume on her lips said, "Moshi moshi anata" (『モシモシアナタ』) and touched the arms of passers-by. I wish I was born a woman in the Great Japanese Empire (大和國) to avoid worrying about unemployment.

According to a recent announcement, the ratio of the total population to the number of police officers in Gyeongseong (京城) is 900 people per police officer. Compared to the one-police-officer-per-person principle, the future is still far away, so I am rather嘆.

The Water Disaster Relief Fund Raising Dance Party personally sponsored by Madame U Bong-ji (于鳳至女史), the wife of Zhang Xueliang (張學良) in Bongcheon (奉天) on October 5, raised 30,000 won in one night. Don't be surprised, the Joseon (朝鮮) Flood Relief Fund initiated by the Joseon (朝鮮) Social Work Association (社會事業協會) with the support of the authorities is only 400 won (until October 8) in four months. I don't know if it's because Joseon (朝鮮) is poor or because the association lacks sincerity, but aren't they ashamed of themselves compared to that one young woman?

Recently, Otsuka Toshihiko (大塚壽彥), a private of the 75th Infantry Regiment of the 19th Division who participated in the training exercise, stayed in Dochorae Township (都草面), Munchon County (文川郡) and deserted at night with his weapons. The war exercise is an exercise, but shouldn't there also be an escape exercise so that one can survive in times of need?

Dr. Schmidt (슈미트), the German expert on anti-aging methods who was advertising worldwide that he could prevent aging by surgically tying off a person's vas deferens, committed suicide due to financial difficulties. If you commit suicide before you get old, there's no way you can get old. <41>

**Named Entities**

京城	Kyŏngsŏng
朝鮮銀行	Joseon Bank
モシモシアナタ	Moshi moshi anata
大和國	Great Japanese Empire
于鳳至女史	U Bong-ji
張學良	Chang Hyŏk-ryang
奉天	Pongch’ŏn
朝鮮社會事業協會	Joseon Social Work Association
文川郡	Munch’ŏn-gun
都草面	Toch’o-myŏn
大塚壽彥	Ōtsuka Toshihiko



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제34호
발행일	1930년 11월 01일
기사제목	吸煙室
기사형태	잡저

吸煙室
所謂米價暴落對策會議란 것은 民間으로 는 官廳邊으로 날마다 열이다 십히하야도아죽지 아모런 效果가업고 米價만 작구러지니 그러다가는 그 對策會議들도 成服後藥공론갓치되기가 十常八九다.
××
그런데 그 所謂對策을 講究한다는 人物들을 저보면 대개가 큰 地主가안이면 편이안저먹는 月給쟁이들이오 直接으로 죽을 苦痛을밧는 細農들이안이닛가 元來에 그럿케안탑갑게 할것이야 무엇잇나 成服後藥공론이라도 하는 것이 喪廳에 吊問을가서 노래가락부르는 것보다는 體面上으로라도 조금낫겟지.
××
米價暴落말이낫스니말이지 米價는 그럿케 暴落이되는데 다른 物價는 그대로 잇스니 米價引上運의 動을 하는 同時他物價引上運動도 함이 如何
××
印訪問하는 英國飛行船R一○一號가 佛國오아스 縣보붸이 附近에서 爆發되야 燒死者四十九名에 達하얏는데 그中에는 航空相톰쏜卿도가티죽엇다고 아마 佛國空中에도 反英運動하는 印度人의 爆烈團이잇던 모양이지.
××
某日字新聞에 報道되엿스되 京城朝鮮銀行압헤도 스틕(短杖女)이생겨서 電氣廣告塔밋테서 입설에 香水린어염모이『モシモシアナタ』하고 行人의 팔에 손을 건다고 願生大和國하되 女子로대여 낫스면 失業八字걱정은 免하겟구면은
××
最近發表에 依하면 京城의 全人口數와 警官輸의 比는 警官一人에 對人民九百이라고한다 一人一警主義에 比하면 前途가아즉도 遙途하니도로혀 爲之慨歎이로군.
十月五日奉天張學良의 부인인 于鳳至女史의 個人主催인 水害救濟基金募集舞蹈會는 一夜에 一金三萬圓也가것치엿다는데 當局을 背景으로한 朝鮮社會事業協會에서 發起한 朝鮮水害救濟金은 놀나지마시오 四個月동안에 겨우 一金四百圓(十月八日지)也란다 朝鮮이 貧弱하야그러한지 그 會의 誠意가업서그런한지 不知하거니와 彼一個兒女子에 對하야 得無愧顏色乎아
××
요전에 十九師團演習에 參加하엿던 會寧步兵七十五聯隊二等卒大塚壽彥은 文川郡都草面에머무러잇다가 夜間에 武裝을 ■棄脫走하얏다 戰爭演習도 演習이지만은 逃亡演習도하여야 앗차할에는 살어날것이안인가.
××
사람의 輸精管을 수술로잡아매여서 늙지안케한다고 世界的으로 宣傳하던 不老法大家獨逸의 슈미트 博士는 生活困難으로 自殺을하야다 늙기前에 自殺하면 늙을 理가 萬無하겟지.＜41＞
＜41＞