별건곤 제34호
1930년 11월 01일
가을거리의 男女風景 (Autumn Street Scenes of Men and Women)
문예기타 (Literature, Other)

Repulsive Men
Ch'oe Ŭisun

Time passes so relentlessly fast.
The green leaves have somehow disappeared, and the autumn foliage is already colored, so autumn has clearly deepened.

However, before the autumn foliage colors the mountains, something else colors the city streets first: the outfits of Western-style men, hastening the arrival of winter.
Where have all the charcoal-colored pora and snow-white asa suits and their crisp boaters gone? If you try to find a summer hat now, all you'll find are tattered boaters (?) on the heads of opium addicts and beggars.
In recent years, in Seoul—or rather, in Korea—you could often see so-called "mobo" (modern boys) wearing winter hats in the sweltering heat, bustling about wiping away sweat.
But no matter how much they boast about being 1930s-style, the extraordinary (?) act of wearing autumn/winter Western clothes with a white boater hasn't yet been staged, for some reason.
As if by some agreement, the entire attire of men changed color all at once, within just two or three days.
From hats to shoes, everything changed from light to dark. I have nothing to say about changing clothes with the seasons, but few Korean men try so hard to dress beyond their means (i.e., not according to their economic status) as these men do.

New Western suits, fancy handkerchiefs dangling from the pocket, the latest winter hat perched precariously to one side, a necktie with red dots on a blue background—as if to say they've achieved enough, swaggering down the street makes me nauseous just to look at.
I can't bear to see them standing blankly in front of department store show windows, gazing as if intoxicated by the display of new ties, and it goes without saying that the sight of pseudo-intellectuals scurrying from one bar to another as if they were mad dogs is even worse.
However, these are by no means the only actors decorating the streets of mid-autumn.
These days, seeing a sincere young man neatly ironing his even faded Western suit in the early morning and heading to his workplace evokes a kind of affection, like finding a pearl in the sand, and more than anything else, it seems to refreshingly decorate the autumn streets. Moreover, the sight of laborers buying a few pennies' worth of steaming roasted chestnuts as the autumn sun coldly sets, and their somehow fresh-looking arms and legs, inspires a kind of trust and seems to enhance the taste of autumn on the streets.
Indeed, they seem like the future protagonists decorating the streets filled with the autumn spirit.

The lines of people enlivened by the autumn breeze, the disgusting frolics of modern boys, the staggering of opium beggars who were once vagrants, the rude steps of hateful middle school students, and the vigorous strides of sturdy laborers—amidst this chaotic march, the autumn city street quietly darkens. (The End)

Country Women's...
Kim Ansŏ

This is a scene from a certain women's drama that you can rarely see on the streets of Seoul, which you see and hear frequently, that appeared in the P'yŏngbuk Chŏngju train station in the countryside.
There is a woman who is about to be thirty years old with taller than average height. Since she originally had a long face, and she did her hair in the P'yŏngan-do style, the so-called "kkodorich'ae" (a type of traditional Korean hairstyle), her face looked even longer, and the "kkodorich'ae" could be said to be an excessive description, even if it were to close the nostrils of God and cause a sneeze. Her jacket was no longer worthy of being called a jacket. The erotic sight of it hanging down to her waist and playing with the passing wind, as if using it as a substitute for a overcoat (周衣代用), was bound to attract special attention. The crookedness of her long legs, buried in short, stylish skirts that barely covered her knees and stark white Western socks, provided a dazzling contrast with her black rubber shoes. She often touched and kneaded her "kkodorich'ae" with her yellowish hands, as if carefully paying attention to her hair.
As she moved her uncoordinated steps to the ticket office, she spoke Japanese overflowing with affection, "P'yongyang one ticket please (平壤一枚頂戴ね)."
I saw the face of 1930s Korea here. And I don't find it particularly strange that I can see women as rural scenery on the streets of Seoul, even if their appearance is different.
I am one person who cannot help but think again about "modernism" in a different sense from the poem "Missing you extremely turns into hating you, why did you even start talking about you (相思極度反相恨, 何似當初莫議君)."＜91＞

Sky High, Woman Fat!
Yi T'aejun

The saying goes, "The sky is high, and the horse is fat (天高馬肥)," but this is a humble saying from the old days, and the sixth meaning of this saying may not refer to women.
Many things get fat in autumn. Horses get fat, and the mackerel in the sea get slabs of fat like the palm of your hand in their bellies.
But the eyes of people on the street, our eyes, don't see horses getting fat in a new way, and the mouths of people on the street, our mouths, don't taste the savory oil from a slice of mackerel in a new way either. We only see the two fat, bulging legs of a woman's stocking that seems about to burst as we stroll in the evening, feeling the fresh autumn breeze on our collars.

New Trends in Women's Scenery
Roa

Chongno in Seoul, a city that doesn't know the sentimentalism of autumn.
The diseased leaves of the roadside trees wriggle one last time, mocking their final moments, and fall on the heads of passersby, but no one knows their sorrow. Has there never been a neurasthenic poet full of resentment who could capture the autumn moon and fallen leaves in this place?
The autumn sunlight is just as thin for city dwellers who have no idea how ripe the rice is in the fields or how red the autumn foliage is in the mountains. Look! Winter hats are flooding the streets all at once. Doesn't the smell of naphthalene emanating from the spring and autumn clothes of salarymen tell us, through our sense of smell, the story of being imprisoned in a warehouse like a pawnshop's vault? Spring hats are only yellowing and decaying on the hungry heads of unfortunate scholars. The skirt colors have changed. Is tan a symbol or harmony of reddish fallen leaves? A quick woman brought out a fur muffler at night. Already... Anyway, autumn is deepening here too.
These days, there has been a stark increase in the comings and goings of new women on the streets of Seoul.
Among them, there are sometimes women of unknown identity who capture the attention of the public with the chaotic colors and patterns of silk damask, exuding an overwhelming "ero" (eroticism) as they pass by—oh, the glory of being able to meet them on the street! There is an elegant taste in not knowing their identity, and faith comes from ignorance anyway.
Flesh-colored high-heeled shoes. Pisco-s silk stockings.
Short hair braided into two strands.
A large ribbon tied high on the back of the head.
Two fawn-like skipping calves.
A large handbag held to the chest.＜91＞
Could she be only seventeen or eighteen years old?
This kind of high-collar miss leans against a roadside tree as if depending on it, whether she is waiting for her lover or waiting for a friend, her actress-like sophisticated expression that perfectly matches her outfit is the technique she has acquired after years of glancing at her reflection in the mirror and practicing affectations. What kind of woman is this young, decadent Western-dressed girl anyway?
The young men in Western suits who pretend to walk past her naturally have a very urgent anxiety and longing in their heads, awakening their sleeping youth and making them suffer needlessly. Meeting four or five of these beautiful girls a day will drive even the most reasonable young man crazy.

A kisaeng (female entertainer) passes by. Art has a magic like Mephistopheles. Who knows what will manifest next. But I will only pick out a new trend in women's scenery.
Rubber shoes as white as snow eating soap bubbles elegantly hold willow leaf-shaped beoseon feet (Korean socks), leaving behind footsteps like the sound of love.
They are the most unrestrained women in Korea. They are the rulers of women's fashion. Look! Now their creation of "eroticism"! They boldly pull up a piece of their skirt, revealing the baggy pants and underwear underneath. Did these sly kisaeng girls invent the logic that the wide crotch of underwear, in which you could grab a mischievous child and make them pee, would become a seduction of the senses?
But as "ero," it is too abstract. It is still a deeply rooted "taegi (retired kisaeng) ero" of Korea.

A school graduate wearing rubber shoes and her hair in a bun, dressed like a woman from a regular household, walks down Chongno with her Western-suited husband in a graceful manner. There is an unabandonable Korean sentiment.
I hope that many such couples will be created.
There is a marvelous beauty who takes a beggar-like girl with her and treats her like a dog, stands in a safety zone, and waits for a streetcar. Her expensive hair, well-nourished with oil, is frizzy and crumbling, and the rising strands of hair are as bushy as weeds, showing a nymphomania like Camille. An even more outstanding outline and line of her face! Whose mistress is she, a Korean Carmen? The streetcar heading to the Han River does not have the glory of carrying her and passes by. The next one heading to Sodaemun and the one heading to Tongdaemun... the streetcar that cannot carry her screams as if it is angry and crawls along as if it doesn't want to go. Then where on earth did this lady set out to go?
After abandoning four or five streetcars, the face of the beauty who suddenly turns around shows a faint melancholy that floats and disappears at a speed of 1/4 of a moment. Perhaps I didn't see the coy smile properly.
Her waist was tightly wrapped in an expensive summer skirt that showed her underwear. The large pattern that mocked the scorching heat of the steamer＜93＞ trembled in the thin autumn sunlight as each one tilted...
The season is also ruthless!

The Pro of the Driver's Seat
Pak Chin

Heroine
Korean type—around 20 years old, bobbed hair, glasses, Kim Sŭng's fur muffler, purple woolen coat, silk socks, patent leather shoes.
Her legs are thin and her body is thin, so you can know her body, and there is no erotic taste at all. The stocking seam is twisted.
Her face is 55 points. The grease on her cheap face only helps to make her uglier. She seems to know only what she knows, and her speech is also cheap. She took off her velvet hat and is holding it. An unidentifiable woman.
Scene
In front of a house with abandoned toys on the south side of Chae-dong Fourth Street
Time
Western calendar 1930
Season
Deepening autumn, 4:10 PM
Part 1
Heroine (holding a rubber ball the size of a watermelon)
How much is this?
X 40 jeon.
Heroine This is too much. Let's make it 35 jeon.
X No sir. It's not expensive.

She buys it for 40 jeon and walks westward.
A man in his 50s and a man in a Western suit in his 40s, both slightly drunk, are also walking westward.
Heroine I'm going first.
Man in his 50s Okay, see you later.
Heroine Tell them to wait for me.
Man in his 50s Ha! I have to have another drink, so don't break your word.
Heroine (looking uneasy, as if her true colors might come out) Don't worry. (She goes ahead.)
Part 2
Continuation of Part 1
Scene
In front of the Hanil Bank Kwanhundong Branch, the heroine is walking. An empty car coming from the Changdok Palace side spots the heroine and stops with a loud screech next to her. The two seem to have made a promise.
Driver (26, 7 years old)
Heroine (wearing a velvet hat)

Heroine Who's this?
Driver What's wrong?
Two or three inaudible words of conversation—children roasting chestnuts gather from left and right. All time is super-speedy(?).

Heroine Where are you going?＜94＞
Driver Over there.
Heroine I'm going there too.
Driver Then get in.
The heroine opened the passenger door. Looking very satisfied, she takes one foot on the stepping stone with a sense of superiority to the gathered children.
Driver (reaching out the window to close the passenger door) Get in here.
Heroine (as if she had been waiting for those words) Should I?
The cushion in the driver's seat warmly embraces the heroine's dry buttocks. The driver's thigh felt a lukewarm female energy.
Heroine Let's go quickly.
Whirr—raising dust, the car departs.
Children (shouting loudly) Hey, look at that bitch. Hooray.
The car turned at Angukdong intersection and headed towards Chongno. The car behind them, "Kyong 929 (京929)," is chasing after them carelessly in the dust.

Western Suit Guys on Chongno Street
P·S·S

The Chongno intersection at sunset is unusually busy.
The Korean clothes crowd is busy, but the Western suit crowd seems busy from their figures.
Colorfully dressed Scotsmen, tan-colored spring outfits like rural myeonsa (township officials), brand new blue puranos that fit snugly, taxi-d, black serus, charcoal-colored o-steads... all decorate the autumn light. Even the policemen in their uniforms look perfect for the occasion.
As I stood watching the neatly dressed Western suit guys, a mischievous thought came to my mind.
Suppose I were the most beautiful woman in the world, and all the Western suit guys coming and going would do exactly what I said. If I were to say in a voice like rolling beads,
"Gentlemen! If any of you paid even a penny less than the value of the Western suit you are now wearing, take off all the Western suits you are wearing and go naked!"
Then the Chongno area would instantly become an era of naked flood, right?

At Andong Intersection
Songhŭi

Early in the morning at Andong Intersection, with a refreshing new spirit.

A purple fedora with sweat stains on the ribbon and the wrinkles on the hat reflect the wrinkled face of a person with a stooped back, carrying a small bundle and squeezing into the crowd of students. She cannot escape being a teacher at some girls' school.

The shiny black serge Western suit with the buttocks sticking out halfway seems even shinier than the morning sun. The X high school student with his hand in his left pants pocket proudly flaunts his shiny buttocks without any hesitation. Hair covered in brilliantine on his shoulders!

A student from XX High School wears a hat with the top of the brim sewn with white thread in the front and back, and a khaki raincoat over his knee-length kogura Western suit is completely out of place. I wonder what his report card was like last semester.

An XX student wearing a white practice uniform slung over his arm is smoking a cigarette, which is not out of place, but the way he scrutinizes every female student he encounters makes me wonder if he is pre-screening them to hire them as nurses when he opens his practice next spring?

Even if it's just Chongno, there are still rickshaws with cramped space and an 18-gallon gentleman sitting on top, which is still quite rare, but even so, it's still too early to see them sticking out. It's more noticeable that they're going in reverse from Chongno towards Andong, which is a residential area.

The Pawnshop is the Reason
Kim Kyŏngsŏn

When autumn gets a little deeper, men wear their winter Western suits that seem to have been folded away neatly, without even smoothing out the wrinkles, all over the streets. I guess the reason is that there aren't any Western suit tailors and there are pawnshops, but the wife who lets her husband go out wearing clothes that are folded like that, or the man who goes out wearing them, must be a terribly bold couple. It's pathetic to see them going out wearing Western suits that are folded up like that and still looking up and down at the women passing by as if they were admiring their possessions. Hasn't anyone else seen this scene?

Strange Woman After Midnight
Paek Rŭng

After midnight.
As I came out to the alley entrance leading to the main road to say goodbye to a guest, a fresh wind suddenly pinched my skin. It's a forecast of the coming winter.
After a car boasted and passed by, people's shadows move dimly in the dim streetlights.
"Goodbye."
"Goodbye."
As I was about to turn around after saying goodbye, a woman caught my eye as she walked past with a rustling sound and stood in front of me, entering the alley.
It's the third time I've seen this woman.＜96＞
Once at the Han River...
While I was taking a boat and getting dressed, there was a woman I had seen somewhere before... She was wearing glasses, her hair was permed, her face was round and flat, and her expression was serious and seemed to change.
The man she was with was a grumpy middle-aged gentleman with a non-aristocratic Chungcheong-do dialect.
The two men and women, without any hesitation to say that they were husband and wife, bought beer, fruit, cider, and cigarettes and rowed out on the boat. I thought they were a pleasant modern couple.
The second time was in front of Café Beby, under the dim eaves.
Perhaps because it was a busy street, the woman looked weak and was trying to go up Sadong Road, while the man (the man who had come to the Han River with her) turned his feet towards Cheondong Road, as if there was something he hadn't finished, and said in an impatient voice, "Are you coming tomorrow?"
The woman said dismissively, receiving the words with the back of her head, "I'll have to see." I thought they were a couple, but it seems they were far from it.
The third time is tonight.
The outline of the plump body covered in a thick coat that was already plump, and the constantly swaying middle half of her body, is a temptation and an eroticism.
I wondered where the man was, and then I became curious about what kind of woman she was.
I couldn't go after her and ask... I'm sure I'll meet her several times in the future, but she's an incomprehensible presence that occupies a corner of my mind in a very disturbing way.
Who is she? What does she do and where does she live?

Woman A and Woman B
Pang Sopo

Around 11 a.m., suppose that a woman named A met a Western-dressed woman named B on a Hyojadong streetcar with few passengers, the reader should think.
A "Oh my, where are you going? It's been so long. How are you raising your baby since you came out alone?"
B "I never thought I'd meet you like this... But aren't you cold wearing only that thin Western suit?"
A "I'm going to stop wearing Western clothes altogether, so I didn't make a winter Western suit..."
A "What will you do about your bobbed hair if you stop wearing Western clothes?"
B After hesitating for a while, "Well... what about it?"

Various Clothes Colors
Pang Ch'unhae

Mid-Autumn Street Women's Scenery - a strange title. It is an easy and difficult title. I can't stand here and look at Chongno intersection to write this, and I don't like looking at women so closely than this, and it is difficult to imagine and write about what I see from time to time, so it is really a difficult problem.
Anyway, let's get down to business.
Artificial silk waves in the autumn sun. It glitters more than the wings of dragonflies that swarm out in the evening after a rainy summer and fly around entrenched in the sky.
- It's an artificial silk flood era -
I haven't seen the faces of women, but I have seen so much shiny artificial silk that my eyes are sore. First of all, my eyes were blinded by the shimmering artificial silk, and my eyesight deteriorated, so I couldn't see the beautiful faces of women.
When I meet a woman wearing neat and tidy cotton clothes that support Korean products, my eyes pop out as I see one red dot in a green bush (萬綠叢中一點紅), and when I look closely at her face, she looks more than several times more beautiful than her own beauty. Therefore, even if you want to flatter a man, attract curiosity, and win his heart, it is better to be extremely frugal with cotton clothes than with artificial silk or luxury.

Now, they dance not only in theaters but also on the streets. Wearing incredibly short skirts, putting on makeup beyond makeup, and walking with a jumping, swaying gait is definitely a dance-like gait. If only a march tune came out from a record player or radio, they would be ready to dance right away.
However, on one side, a new woman who walks with an incredibly long skirt dragging on her heels, as if she came out of a classical play, is definitely more unsightly than a short skirt. Why can't they choose a middle ground that is neither too long nor too short? If I were a woman, I would stop each of them on the street and ask questions, protest, and advise them.
The same goes for jackets. Deformed types are in fashion. There was a jacket like a durumagi (overcoat), and recently, new women? are nonchalantly wearing jackets that barely reach up to their armpits, shorter than their armpits. It seems they are trying to stand out by doing something that others don't do, but if they keep doing that, they will end up not wearing jackets at all like Western women and only wear shoulder-strapped skirts.
Various colors of skirts with female students wearing red and white stripes, various hairstyles, applying white and red powder on their faces, wearing various perfume scents, wearing high-heeled shoes that are ten thousand feet high or flat shoes that are more plain than men's shoes, and Western-dressed beauties wearing ill-fitting clothes - and on the other hand, women with shiny, greasy hair combed back, wearing yellow, white, and black hairpins, and wearing white rubber shoes, black rubber shoes, and yellow rubber shoes, and holding red umbrellas, blue umbrellas, and multicolored umbrellas, this chaotic scenery of women makes the already distracted Korean young men unable to come to their senses.
＜90-98＞

**Named Entities**

崔義順	Ch'oe Ŭisun
金岸曙	Kim Ansŏ
平北定州停車場	P'yŏngbuk Chŏngju Chŏnggŏjang
李泰俊	Yi T'aejun
로아	Roa
鍾路	Chongno
김승	Kim Sŭng
齋洞四街	Chae-dong Sagae
韓一銀行	Hanil Ŭnhaeng
寬勳洞	Kwanhundong
昌德宮	Ch'angdŏk Kung
安國洞	An'guk-tong
鍾路	Chongno
安洞	An-dong
松姬	Songhŭi
典當局	Chŏndang'guk
金景仙	Kim Kyŏngsŏn
白菱	Paek Rŭng
漢江	Han Gang
충청도	Ch'ungch'ŏng-do
寺洞	Sa-dong
典洞	Chŏn-dong
方小波	Pang Sopo
孝子洞	Hyoja-dong
方春海	Pang Ch'unhae



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제34호
발행일	1930년 11월 01일
기사제목	가을거리의 男女風景
기사형태	문예기타

가을거리의 男女風景
口逆질 나는 男性
崔義順

속절업는 세월 빠르기도 하지.
녹음은 어느 듯 어데로 가고 단풍이 이미 물드럿스니 가을이 지텃슴은 분명하고나.

그러나 산속의 단풍이 물들기도 전에 도시의 가로에는 먼저 물드른 것이 잇스니 양장 남성들의 겨울을 재촉하는 복장들이 그것이다.
연탄색 포라나 새하얀 아사 양복에 그 새뜻한 맥고들은 다-어데로 갓는지? 억지로 여름 모자를 차저내랴면 이제는 아편 중독자와 거지의 두상에 언친 밋구녕 빠진 맥고(?)밧게는 업다.
근년에 와서 서울에도-아니조선에도...라 할가-땀훔치노라 분주하면서도 伏中에 겨울 모자 쓰고 다니는 소위 모뽀라는 도련님을 흔히 볼 수 잇섯다.
그러나 제아무리 1930년식이라고 떠들어도 秋冬洋服을 닙고 하얀 맥고를 쓰고 다니는 비범(?)한 것은 아즉 연출되지 안는 모양이니 웬일인지?
무슨 약속이나 한 듯이 겨우 2, 3일을 전후로 하고 일제히 남자들의 복장전체는 물들고 말엇다.
우으로 모자부터 알애로 구두까지 모다가 淡에서 濃으로 변하고 말엇다. 시절딸하 옷갈어 닙는데 시비가 무엇이냐면 할 말업지만 조선남자처럼 분에 넘치게(즉 경제상태에 맛지 안케)까지 철을 차저 닙으려고 애쓰는 이는 적을 것이다.

新調의 양복, 옷포켓에 느러트린 무새손수건 한쪽으로 기우러질 듯하게 가만히 언즌 최신형 겨울 모자 청천바탕에 붉은 점박힌 넥타이 이만하면 되엇다는 듯키 대로로 橫行闊步하는 꼴이야 구역이 나서 못 볼지경이다.
무엇을 차지랴는 듯키 百貨店쇼-윈도 아페 멀건히 서서 새틋한 넥타이 진렬에 취한 것가티 드려다 보는 꼴도 볼 수 업거니와 밤이면 이 술집에서 저 카페로 마치 狂犬과 가티 싸다니는 似而非 인테리겐짜의 꼴은 더 말할 것도 업다.
그러나 이것만이 결코 仲秋의 街頭를＜90＞ 장식하는 출연배우들은 아닐 것이다.
정신이 나는 요사이 아츰결에 비록 퇴색한 양복이나마 반듯하게 다려닙고 자긔의 일터로 향하야 거러가는 성실한 청년의 그 모양은 마치 모래 속의 한알의 진주와 가티 일종의 애착을 늣기게 하며 무엇보다도 가을철 거리를 푸래쉬하게 장식하야 주는 것 갓다. 더욱이 가을해가 쌀쌀하게 저무러갈 때 김이 마락마락나는 군밤 두어푼어치를 사들고 도라가는 로동자들의 모습과 어덴지 싱싱해 보이는 팔과 다리는 그 어떠한 미듬을 갓게 하며 街路의 가을맛을 한층 도두어 주는 듯하다.
과연 이들은 가을 기분으로 가득찬 거리를 장식하는 미래의 주인공가티도 보인다.

秋風에 생기띄운 街頭의 행렬 가증한 모뽀의 亂舞, 부량자의 前身을 가진 아편거지의 비틀거름, 밉살마진 중학생들의 거츠른 거름에 아울너 건장한 노동자의 씩씩한 보조 이 모든 것들의 雜然한 행진측에 가을 도시의 街頭는 고요히 저므로 간다.(끗)


시골 女人의...,
金岸曙

이것은 보고 듯기가 빈번한 서울거리서는 듬울게 구경할 수 잇는 싀골하고도 平北定州停車場에 나타난 엇던 女性劇의 한 장면이외다.
나희는 설흔이 될락말락한 키는 중이상되는 여성이 잇슴니다. 본시부터 긴 얼골에다가 평안도식 머리로 소위 「꼬도리채」를 하엿스니 얼골이 더 길어 보일 뿐 아니고 「꼬도리채」야말로 하늘님 코구멍을 다처 재체기를 니르킬 지경이라 한대도 과한 形容이라 할 수 업는 것이 잇슴니다. 저고리는 저고리로의 평가를 일허 周衣代用이라 할만치 기-막케 허리에 느러저 지내가는 바람과 한가지 희롱을 하는 에로틱한 광경은 암만해도 類다른 주의를 끌만하엿슴니다. 무릅을 가리울가 말가한 짤막한 時體치마와 하이한 洋襪 속에 파무친 기다란 다리의 굽으러진 양은 검은 고무신과는 눈부싀게 별다른 대조를 주엇슴니다. 각금 눌헌 손으로 「꼬로도채」를 이리 만지고 저리주무르는 양은 무던히도 머리에 대한 주의를 小心하는 듯이보엿슴니다.
어울니지 아니하는 步調를 표파는 곳으로 옴기드니 「平壤一枚頂戴ね」愛調가 넘치는 일본말이 교태 잇슴니다.
1930년대의조선 얼골을 이곳에서 나는 보앗슴니다. 그리고 싀골풍경으로의 여성을 모양은 다를망정 서울가두에서 볼 수 잇슴을 별달니 기이히 녀기지 아니함니다.
「相思極度反相恨, 何似當初莫議君」이란 시구를 나는 별다른 의미로의 「모-던이즘」에 대하야 다시금 생각지 안니할 수가 업는 한사람이외다.＜91＞

天高女肥!
李泰俊

天高馬肥라드니 이것은 겸손한 녯사람들의 말이요, 이 말의 第六內容은 게집을 가르친 것이 아닌지도 모른다.
가을에는 살찌는 것이 만타. 말도 살찌고 바다 속의 고등어도 뱃댁이에 손퍽가튼 기름떵이가 붓는 때다.
그러나 거리 사람의 눈 우리 눈에는 새삼스러히 말이 살 오른 것을 보지 못하고 또는 거리 사람의 입, 우리 입으로는 새삼스러히 고등어 토막에서 고소한 기름 맛을 늣겨 보지도 못한다. 오직 우리는 신선한 가을 바람에 옷깃을 날니며 저녁 산보에서 보고 늣기는 것은 그 여자의 스타킹이 터질드시 미여질드시 알는 알는한 굴거진 다리 둘을 구경할 뿐.

새로운 傾向의 女人點景
로아

가을의 센틔멘탈을 몰으는 도시-서울의 鍾路.
가로수 병든 닙사귀가 제 최후를 嘲笑하면서 한번 몸부림치고는 행인의 머리 우에 떠러지건만 그 哀傷을 알어 보는 사람이 업다. 이 곳에 가을달과 낙엽을 옮흘 신경쇠약적 多恨한 시인은 업섯든가!
들에는 벼가 얼마나 영글엇는지 산에는 단풍이 얼마나 붉엇는지 알 까닭이 업는 도시인들에게도 가을 볏흔 만찬가지로 얇엇다. 보아라. 冬帽가 홍수가치 일시에 거리로 진출하지 안엇나, 샐너리맨들의 춘추복에서 발산하는 나푸탄린 내음새가 典當局 도굴가튼 창고 속에서 禁錮당하든 이야기를 후각을 통해서 전해주지 안느냐. 春帽는 오즉 불우한 寒士들의 시장한 머리 우에서 누럿케 병들어 갈 뿐이다. 치마빗이 덜너젓다. 연갈색은 설붉은 낙엽빗의 심볼인가, 조화인가. 性빨른 여인이 밤에 털목도리를 안고 나왓다. 어느새...아모튼지 여긔도 가을은 지터간다.
요즈음 서울의 거리에 신여성의 내왕이 벗적 느럿다.
그 중에도 잇다금 양비단의 홀란한 색채와 紋儀로 시중의 주목을 밋글면서 압도적 『에로』를 放散하고 지나가는 정체모를 여인들 하고 거리에서 마조칠 수 잇는 영광이여! 정체를 모르는데 高雅한 맛이 잇거든 아모튼지 신앙은 무지에서 생긴다.
肉色굽 놉흔 구두. 삐스코-스 실크·스타킹.
두줄로 따어 느린 짤막한 뒷머리.
뒷통수에 밧작 올녀 딴 혹공딴 리본.
암사슴가치 깡충한 두 종아리.
젓가슴에 안은 커다란 핸두빽.＜91＞
나희는 열칠팔세나 되엿슬가 말가.
이러한 하이카라 색씨가 가로수에 등을 긔대는둥만둥 의지해 서서 애인을 긔다라는지 동무를 긔다리는지 그 옷맵씨에 곡 어울니는 女優的 세련된 표정은 멧년동안이나 體鏡 속에 빗친 제영상을 흘겨보고 억친신늉을 다부린 남어지에 戰取한 기술이란 말가. 대체 이 어린 末葉的 洋裝美 처녀가 엇던 류의 여자일고.
그 압흘 천연스럽게 걸어가는 척 하는 양복청년들의 머리 속에는 몹씨 성급한 불안과 동경이 잠자는 청춘을 깨워서 부질업시 괴로워한다. 이런 미소녀들을 하로도 4, 5명씩 맛날 때 왼만한 청춘은 惱殺당하고 말니라.

기생이 지나간다. 아스트는 메피스트훼레스와 가튼 마법을 가젓다. 인제 또 무엇이 현신할넌지 아나. 그러나 나는 새로운 경향적 여인의 點景을 골너내 볼 뿐이다.
비누물 먹은 백설가튼 고무신이 버들닙사귀형의 보선발을 아담하게 담고 삿붓삿붓 사랑의 *聲가튼 발자국 소래를 남기면서 지나간다.
조선에서 가장 구속밧지 안는 자유형의 여인들이다. 여인유행의 지배자들이다. 보아라! 이제 그들이 창작한 「에로틔시즘」을! 치마한자락을 뒤로 활신 칙겨올녀서 아래로 바지와 단속것 가랭이가 내다 보인다. 작난꾼 어린 아희를 잡어넛코 오좀을 쌀 수 잇는 넓다란 속것 가랭이가 너풀거리는 것이 색정의 유혹이 되리라는 논리를 이 앙큼한 기생아씨들이 발명해 낸 것인가부다.
그러나 「에로」로써는 너무나 추상적이다. 아즉도 조선 狊濃濃한 『퇴기·에로』로다.

학교졸업 여성이 고무신을 신고 머리를 쪽지고 여염집 부인가티 차리고는 양복한남편과 동부인하야 유연한 태도로 종로를 걸어간다. 버리지 못할 조선의 정취가 잇다.
못조록은 이러한 동부인이 여러 쌍 생겨나라.
거지색기가튼 게집에 몸종을 개처럼다리고 안전지대에 나서서 전차를 긔다리는 긔막킨 미인이 잇다. 갑나가는 기름이 잘먹어서 맥긴한머리털은 지진 것이 곱실곱슬하게 바스러저서 떠들고 일어난 머리카락이 잡초적으로 수북하야 椿姬와 가튼 淫奔性을 보여준다. 한층 뛰어난 얼골의 윤곽과 선! 누구의 소실인가, 조선의 칼맨인가. 漢江 가는 전차는 그를 태우는 영광을 갓지 못하고 그 압흘 지나갓다. 그 다음 西大門行도 東大門行도...그를 태우지 못하는 전차는 화나는 듯이 삑-소리를 질으고 가기 실흔 걸 가는 듯이 두툴두툴하면서 기여간다. 그러면 이 아씨가 대체 어데로 가시자고 나섯단 말인가.
사오개의 전차를 버리고 난 뒤에 문득 돌여다 보는 佳人의 얼골에 간열푼 愁心빗이 一妙 四分之의 一의 속도로 떠돌앗다가 살어진다. 嬌笑를 잘 못보앗슴일가.
그의 허리는 단속것이 통ㅅ채 내다 보히는 高價한 여름치마가 연연히 둘너싸고 잇섯다. 蒸災의 태양열을 조소하든＜93＞ 大形문의가 하나하나 기우러지는 얇펀한 가을볏에 바르르 떨면서...
節候는 冷情도 하고녀!

運轉臺의 그로
朴珍

히로인
조선껄-20세쯤, 단발, 안경, 김승의 털목도리, 자주빗 우렌-코-트, 비단양말, 漆皮구두.
다리는 가늘고 몸집도 가늘어 그 육체를 알 수가 잇고 도모지 에로틕한 맛이라고는 업다. 양말 줄기가 뒤틀녓다.
얼골 55점 賤格 화장한 얼골에 개기름 흘는 것이 더한충 醜를 도와준다. 지식이라고는 아는 것 밧게 모르겟고 말씨가 또한 賤格이다. 비로도 모자는 버서 들엇다. 정체모를 게집년.
景
齋洞四街 南側 작난감버려 노은 집 압
時代
西曆 1930년
철
짓터가는 가을 오후 4시 10분
제1부
히로인(수박만한 고무공 하나를 들고)
이거 얼마해요
X 40전임니다.
히로인 이까지게 멀. 35전만 합시다.
X 아니올시다. 빗싸지 안슴니다.

40전에 사들고 서쪽을 향하야 거러 간다.
한 50된 남자 한 40된 양복쟁이 술이 半醉 역시 서쪽으로 것는 중이다.
히로인 난 먼저 가요.
50남 그래 잇다가와.
히로인 기다리라구 하시우.
50남 히! 또 한잔 먹어야지 틀니지 말구와.
히로인 (본색이 나올가 보아 불안한 표정) 걱정말어요.(압서서 간다)
제2부
제1부의 연장
景
韓一銀行寬勳洞支店압 히로인은 것는다. 昌德宮쪽에서 다라오는 비인 자동차가 히로인을 발견하고 그 녑헤 와서 끼야 소리 놉히 정차를 한다. 둘이는 마치 약속이나 한 것 갓다.
運轉手 (26, 7세)
히로인 (비로도 모자를 썻다)

히로인 이게 누구요.
運轉手 웬일이요.
들니지 안는 대화 서너마듸-좌우에서 밤굽는 아희들 모혀든다. 모든 시간이 超스피-드적(?)이다.

히로인 어듸로 가우.＜94＞
運轉手 저리로.
히로인 나도 그리 가는데.
運轉手 그럼 타우.
히로인은 객석문을 열엇다. 매우 만족해하며 모여들은 아이들에게 일종의 우월감을 가지고 한다리가 발판을 밥는다.
運轉手 (창으로 손을 내밀어 객석문을 다드며) 이리 타우.
히로인 (그 말을 기다렷든 것 가티) 그럴가.
運轉臺의 쿳숀은 히로인의 마른 궁둥이를 폭 안엇다. 運轉手의 넙적다리에는 미지근한 암기운을 感햇다.
히로인 얼는 갑시다.
주르릉-먼지를 이르키고 차는 떠난다.
아이들 (소리놉히) 야 이년 봐라. 만세.
자동차는 安國洞 네거리를 도라 鍾路를 향햇다. 먼지에서 나슨 차 뒤에는 京929가 멋업시 달녀간다.

鍾路 거리의 洋服쟁이들
P·S·S

해질녁의 종로네거리는 무단히 밧부다.
조선옷자리도 밧부거니와 양복자리는 몸매부터가 밧분 듯하다.
색짓든 스코치 시골 면서기가튼 탄색 스푸링 몸에 착 맛는 새파란 푸라노 택시-드 깜장세루 炭色 오-스테드...모다 가을빗츨 장식한다. 동복을 입은 巡査까지도 제격에 얼녀보인다.
말속말속하게 차린 양복자리들을 보고 섯느라니가 얄구즌 생각이 난다.
가령 내가 절세미인이라고 하고 지금 오고가는 양복자리들은 나의 하는 말을 꼭 그대로 시행한다는 두가지 가정 미테서 내가 지금 구슬을 글니는 듯한 목소리로
「諸君! 諸君 中에 단 한푼이라고도 지금 입고 잇는 양복갑슬 덜 준 사람은 입은 양복을 전부 버서노코 알몸으로 가시요」 한다면?
그러면 종로 일대는 금시에 裸體洪水時代가 될 걸?

安洞六거리에서
松姬

새정신이 나게 싼득거리는 아침 일즉 안洞 네거리에서.

리본위로 땀자국에 배인 자색중절 모자와 모자의 우굴쭈굴한 그 정도로 얼골도 우굴주굴한 발굼치 닷는 스풍ㅅ자리가 엽헤 조고만한 보퉁이를 끼고 쪼작쪼작 학생군의 틈에 ＜95＞ 끼여간다. 어느 여학교의 선생님에서 버서나지 못한다.

감장 사-지 양복이 궁둥이가 반쯤 소사오는 아침 날 이상으로 반들반들거리는 X교생 왼편바지 포켓에 손을 너엇기 때문에 반들거리는 응등이가 아모 기탄업시 正體를 자랑한다. 억개 위로 에리로 가득히 안즌 머리 비눌!

前後로 쭉째진 모자 윗본지리 흰실로 꾸매여 쓴 XX고보학생, 무릅 나온 고구라 洋服에 갈너제친 황토색 레인코트가 非格中非格이다. 지난 학기의 성적표가 궁금하다.

실습을 하러 가는 힌 실습복을 팔에걸친 XX학생, 담배를 피어 물은 것은 非格이 아니나 마주치는 여학생을 일일이 물색하는 것은 아마 명년 봄에 개업을 하면 看護婦로 채용하려고 미리 심사함인지?

종로만 나가도 남작한 인력거 그 우에 안즌 18貫紳士 얄기는 하지만 그래도 아직 외튀는 일으다. 그것보담도 종로 방면에서 주택지인 안동방면으로 역행하는 것이 눈에 걸닌다.

典當局이 原因
金景仙

가을이 조곰 깁흐면 착착 접어 두엇든 듯 십흔 겨울 양복을 주름도 펴지 안코 닙고 다니는 남자가 거리에 수두룩함니다. 양복장이 업는 것하고 典當局하고가 원인이겟지만은 그러케 접힌 옷을 입고 나스게 한 부인아니 닙고 나스는 남자나 끔쯕이 대담한 부부라 할 것임니다. 차곡 차곡 접힌 양복을 그대로 닙고 나서서 그래도 지나가는 여자를 소유물 감상하듯 아래우를 흘터 보는 꼴이란 가련함니다. 다른 이는 이런 풍경을 보신 일이 업슴닛가?

子正뒤의 怪女子
白菱

자정이 지난 뒤.
손님을 작별하느라고 큰 길로 통한 골목 어귀에 나서니 새춤한 바람이 읏슥 살을 죄인다. 오랴는 겨울의 예고다.
자동차가 호기를 부리고 지나간 뒤로 으슴치레한 街燈에 사람의 그림자가 다몬다몬 움직인다.
「잘가게」
「잘가게」
인사를 하고 돌아서랴 하는데 짜박짜박 소리나 나며 선뜻 눈에 띄우는 여자 하나가 휙 엽흘 지나처 압흘서서 골목쟁이로 들어간다.
세 번재 보는 여자다.＜96＞
한번은 漢江에서...
뽀트를 타다가 와서 옷을 입느라니까 어데선지 만히 본듯한 여자인데...안경을 쓰고 머리를 지지고 얼골이 동글납작하고 표정이 엄숙하면서 변화가 잇서 보이는.
가티온 사나히는 귀인성업는 충청도 사투리를 쓰는 까스럽게 생긴 중년 신사.
두남녀는 부부간이 아니라고 할 아무런 거림새도 업시 맥주에 과실에 사이다에 담배에...를 사서 실코 뽀트를 저어 나갓다. 유쾌한 모던 부부라고 생각하엿다.
두 번재는 카페·뻬-비압 어둠침침한 첨아미테서.
번삽한 거리라 그러한지 여자는 비실비실하며 寺洞길로 올나 가려하고 남자는 (漢江에 갓치왓든 그 남자) 典洞길로 발을 돌으키면서 무엇인지 미진한 것이 잇는 듯이 안달은 소리로 「내일와요?」한다.
여자는 던지는 말을 뒷꼭지로 바드며 「봐야 알어요」해 바린다. 부부인 줄 알엇드니 아직 멀은 모양이다.
세 번재가 오늘밤이다.
그러치 아니하여도 풍더분한 육체에 푹덥히는 외투를 입고 압흘 서서 가는 륜곽 더구나 不絶히 동요되는 中半身은 유혹이요, 에로다.
그 남자는 어데 두엇슬가? 하는 궁금쯩이 나매 뒤이어 대관절 엇던 여자가? 하는 호기심이 밧삭 난다.
그러타고 쪼차가서 무러볼 수도 업고...압흐로도 여러 번 맛나게 될 터인데 아주 깨림직하게 마음구석을 차지하고 잇는 불가해한 존재다.
누구일가? 무엇을 하며 어데사는가?

A女子와 B女子
方小波

오전 열한시쯤 승객 적은 孝子洞 전차에서 A라는 여자가 B라는 양장여자와 맛낫다고 독자는 생각하라.
A 『아이그 어데가는 길야-참말 오래간만야-』
B 『아기는 읏저고 혼자 나섯서 애기 잘크우』
A 『참말 이러케 맛날 줄은 몰낫서... 그런데 요새두 그런 얄븐 양복 한벌만 입고 춥지 안어?』
B 『나 양장은 이제 아조 그만두려고 겨울양복은 작만안햇서...』
A 『단발한 것은 엇더커구 양장을 그만 두어』
B 한참 머믓거리다가 『무얼...엇대』

服色에 가지가지
方春海

仲秋의 街頭 여인풍경-묘한 제목이다. 쉽고도 어려운 제목이다. 이것을 쓰랴고 일부러 종로네거리에 가 서서＜97＞ 볼 수도업고 그러타고 여인을 그다지 세밀하게 처다보기를 실혀한다는 이보다 못하는 나로서 또 각금 각금 본 것을 상상해 쓰기도 어렵고 실로 난문제이다.
좌우간 본론으로 돌격 해보자.
가을볏헤 人造絹이 물결친다. 비오다가 개인 여름 석양에 쏘다저 나와 중천에서 진치고 날어 다니는 잠자리들의 날개보다도더 뻔적거린다.
-人造絹汎濫時代다-
나는 여인의 얼골은 못보앗서도 번줄거리는 人造絹은 눈이 시도록 만히 보앗노라. 먼저 인조견 뻔적거리는 바람에 거긔 눈이 부시고 眼力이 상하여 일즉이 정작 여자의 아름다운 얼골이 보히지 안엇노라.
튼튼한 무명옷 조선물산을 깨굿히 얌전히 해 닙은 여자를 맛나면 萬綠叢中一點紅으로 눈이 뻔적 띄워 그 여자의 얼골을 자세히 드려다 볼 때 그 여자는 자기소유의 美 몃배이상으로 아름다워 뵈인다. 그런 고로 남자에게 아양을 부리고 호기심을 끌고 환심을 사랴고 하더라도 인조견보다는 또 사치보다는 무명옷 극도로 검소한 것이 조흠이다.

지금은 딴스(舞踊)를 극장에서만 하지안코 街頭에서도 한다. 엄청나게도 짜른 치마에 온몸을 화장이상의 화장을 하고 겅중겅중 읏슥읏슥하며 걸어가는 것은 꼭 딴스식 거름거리다. 만일 유성기나 라듸오에서 마-취 곡조만 나온다면 당장 춤을 출 기세이다.
그러나 한엽헤서는 고전극에 나오드시 신여성으로 엄청나게 긴 치마를 발꿈치에 칠드럭거리며 철저히 가장나는 모던걸이 아니라고 걸어가는 것은 확실히 짧은 치마 이상으로 보기 실타. 왜 보기조게 길게도 짧게도 중용을 취하지 못하는지. 내가 여자가트면 길에서 일일이 붓잡어세노코 질문, 항의, 권고해 볼 일이다.
저고리도 마찬가지. 기형적 타입이 유행된다. 두루막이가튼 저고리가 잇더니 근자는 데쩍보다도 더 짧은 겨드랑 바로 밋까지 기여올러 가는 저고리를 新女子?가 태연히 입고 다닌다. 남 아니하는 것을 거슬러 눈에 띄우라고 하는 모양인데 그러다가는 아조 洋女처럼 저고리를 닙지안코 억개달은 치마만 닙고 다니게 될 것이다.
가지각색 치마빗에 여학생들은 붉은 줄 힌 줄까지 달고 가지각색 머리를 틀고 흰분 붉은 분을 얼골에 발느고 가지각색 향수냄새를 풍기며 천길만길되는 굽 놉흔 구두에 또는 사니희 구두 이상으로 평퍼짐한 구두에 또 격에 맛지 안는 어더 입은 것가튼 양장미인들--또 왱청다르게 부인네들은 햇ㅅ빗에 거울처럼 뻔적이는 기름바른 반즈르르한 머리에 누런 비녀 흰비녀 검은 비녀를 꼿고 또 아래에는 흰 고무신, 깜장 고무신, 누런 고무신을 신고 거긔다가 빨강 우산, 파랑 우산, 알낙달낙한 우산을 밧고 이 千態萬狀의 여인풍경에 갓득이나 얼빠진 조선청년남자를 정신 못차리게 한다.
＜90-98＞