잡지명	別乾坤 第34號
발행일	1930년 11월 01일
기사제목	醫學上으로 본 産兒制限方法論 (A Study on Methods of Birth Control from a Medical Perspective)
필자	鄭錫泰
기사형태	논설 (Essay)

A Study on Methods of Birth Control from a Medical Perspective
						鄭錫泰

The pros and cons of birth control have been debated in Korean society for quite some time, but a conclusion has yet to be reached. One reason for this is the conventional idea of desiring the prosperity of descendants without regard to economic ruin, and the delusion that eliminating life, which comes from God's providence, is a kind of sin. Another reason is that even those who have transcended such ideas do not know the actual methods or have no way of knowing them, and are troubled by this. Having paid much attention to this issue and studied it, I am writing this article in the simplest way possible, setting aside academic theories, in the hope that it will be of general reference. First, regarding the pros and cons of this issue, there are quite a few opponents. They have argued against it in the Chosun Ilbo, but these are merely individual misperceptions and deviations that do not even merit re-examination. This is very regrettable.

However, if I were to introduce conditions that would be strongly opposed and worth considering, they would be as follows:

1. The most common attack would be a stubborn objection arising from a biased, self-proclaimed righteous sense of moral obligation, arguing that no matter how much we talk about eugenics or economics, birth control cannot be tolerated morally.

2. Or, some may say that it is too early, fearing that if birth control is implemented, it will cause more harm than good because the public's understanding is inferior.

3. Even if there are an excessive number of children, some may argue that they have enough ability and financial resources to provide them with adequate development and education, so there is no need to apply birth control. (This argument is currently held by American capitalists, and the United States does not favor birth control based on this principle.)

If we disregard the actual effects and results of birth control from a subjective point of view, isn't that a very unfair situation? Moreover, poor people and malnourished women have higher pregnancy rates and more miscarriages and premature births. Even if they give birth successfully, their children are weak and die early, and they cannot receive proper education. Whose fault is that? Of course, those who blindly oppose it are inevitably proving that their own situation does not require birth control. However, those who curse their miserable situation and evil fate will likely look up to birth control as a savior.

It is like when a hospital is established, some may oppose it, saying that it encourages the presence of fools and disabled people, and cannot be tolerated. However, patients suffering from misfortune will surely welcome it as a savior. Therefore, we who advocate for birth control are not doing so for the healthy, but for those who are suffering from weakness, poverty, multiple births, and illness. We are treating them as a kind of patient and advocating for the use of artificial science to avoid such hardships. Healthy and fortunate people should not oppose it with unreasonable misunderstandings and delusions. Moreover, there is no need to mention the various tragic circumstances faced by our fellow Koreans. If we compare the birth and death rates with those of other countries, we can naturally guess what the situation is. Here are the figures:

Birth Rate per 1,000 Population
Order    1      2     3    4     5      6      7       8     9
Country  Chosŏn  Japan  Hwaguk  USA  Italy  England  Germany  Belgium  France
Rate     38.41  32.5  26.3  24.7  19.0  18.2  15.2   11.3  8.0
(Based on 1917 figures)

Death Rate per 1,000 Population
Order    1      2     3    4     5      6      7       8     9
Country  Chosŏn  Japan  Germany  Italy  Belgium  France  USA  England  Hwaguk
Rate     23.74   21.4   20.7    18.7   16.3    15.3   14.3     13.4   13.1
(Based on 1917 figures)

Infant (Under 1 Year) Mortality Rate per 1,000 Births
Order    1      2     3    4     5      6      7       8
Country  Chosŏn  Japan  France  Germany  Italy  Hwaguk  England  Belgium
Average   233    174    167    138    128    111     95      88
(Based on 1911 figures) <133>

Based on the above data, we can see that the birth and death rates are the highest among our people in the world. In other words, our people are working hard to mass-produce humans, only to lose more of them than others. We must carefully examine the root cause of this.

Our people are recklessly creating nearly 715,000 lives each year and killing nearly 385,000. This is a truly tragic situation. This should not be interpreted solely as a cause for birth control, but as our people become increasingly impoverished, there is no need to struggle to produce people who will not survive and will die anyway. Even if birth control does not reduce the mortality rate, wouldn't it be better to be ranked fourth or fifth rather than despair? In medical terms, it is reasonable to become pregnant again only three years after giving birth, but there are many who give birth every year. Therefore, the mother gradually becomes weak and ill, unable to live her life as she wishes, and the child becomes disabled due to unhealthy development and is unable to receive proper education. Eventually, this will lead to the destruction of the family and the nation.

However, the purpose of this article is not to argue for the necessity of birth control, but to medically explain the actual methods. I would like to emphasize that this is not intended for those who do not want to use these methods, but only for those who are in a miserable situation and deserve to be treated as patients. Therefore, I hope that those who are not patients will not repeatedly argue for or against it.

However, birth control is still too neglected in our society, and there is no organization to guide it properly. There is not even an association to guide it well, so I cannot disseminate detailed information widely. It is also regrettable that I cannot freely discuss this issue in a publication like this magazine. However, I will explain as much as I am allowed to.

There have been many methods of contraception since ancient times, but they were unhygienic and incomplete.

However, with the progress of science and the improvement of culture, these contraceptive methods have also been improved.

The ideal modern method should not cause any hygienic harm, should be effective, and should not be unpleasant or complicated. There are many such methods, including permanent and temporary contraception. Permanent contraception makes it impossible to become pregnant again for the rest of one's life. Once this method is implemented, it is useless to wait for children later. This method is generally applied to those with malignant hereditary diseases such as leprosy, mental illness, syphilis, and tuberculosis. For men, it includes castration and vasectomy, and for women, it includes tubal ligation, oophorectomy, or destroying the function of the ovaries and testicles with X-rays. Temporary contraception is an ideal method that allows one to freely control the number of births and ensure the proper development of the child. Therefore, birth control methods today mainly use this method, which includes the following types:

1. Coitus Interruptus This method has been used since ancient times <135> and refers to vaginal ejaculation. However, it is an unnatural act that destroys self-control and thinking power, damaging the nervous system of both men and women, and ultimately causing hysteria or neurasthenia. Therefore, it is no longer used today.

2. Relationship between Menstruation and Sexual Intercourse This method involves avoiding sexual intercourse as much as possible during the period when the woman's egg is released. For example, from the 6th day to the 13th day after menstruation, there is a high chance of the egg and sperm combining, so the frequency of pregnancy is high during this period. For the purpose of contraception, sexual intercourse should be avoided as much as possible during this period.

However, as an exception, it should be noted that pregnancy can sometimes occur from the 1st day to the 5th day after menstruation. The safest time is when ovulation and sexual intercourse do not coincide on other days, so it is no exaggeration to say that pregnancy is absolutely impossible. To explain it academically, ovulation in women occurs mainly during the 5 days between 12 and 16 days before the next menstruation. Therefore, the period during which pregnancy occurs due to sexual intercourse during this period is limited to these 5 days of ovulation or the 8 days obtained by adding 3 days to the day before these 5 days. If those who are mindful of contraception understand this point, it is not a difficult condition.

3. "Saggu" Use This method can also be said to be a very simple method that has been used since ancient times, but it is easily broken and fails to achieve its important purpose. The use of "saggu" is generally aimed at preventing venereal disease rather than birth control. However, if we introduce statistics on the extent to which it is effective for birth control, Mary Stopes in England found that it was 100% effective, with no one failing to achieve the goal, while Dr. Norman Hare in England stated that it was only 10% successful. Therefore, it is not considered a reliable method to promote.

4. There are various tools to cover the external opening of the uterus, which prevent sperm from entering the uterus and thus prevent pregnancy. This method is commonly used in Tokyo, and recent rumors say that it is being overused, so the Ministry of Home Affairs is even opposing it.

The types include cervical caps ("sappo-da-," "petcharium"), sea sponge, uterine security, etc., but the operator needs considerable skill and frequent disinfection. Therefore, it cannot be said that the use of these tools is convenient, and since they are not yet available in Korea, this method cannot be recommended.

5. Chemicals for Vaginal Insertion Applying the physiological action that sperm must have alkaline properties to survive and have vigorous movement, the purpose is to kill sperm that enter the uterus from the vagina with acidic chemicals that are the opposite of alkaline, or to deprive them of their viability. This method is actually <135> extremely convenient and has little mental or medical discomfort, but if it is used repeatedly and continuously for a long time, there is a concern that the vaginal mucosa may cause a kind of disease due to the irritation of these chemicals (non-physiological reason), so special attention should be paid. Another concern is that the number of sperm entering the vagina due to one sexual intercourse is a huge number of about 226 million, so if the medicine is not sufficient and the sperm enters in a half-dead state and becomes pregnant, it will of course produce inferior, weak, and inferior children, so special attention must be paid to the use of medicine.

Even with these disadvantages, this method is commonly used in the Orient (compared to the West), and there are many kinds of medicines. I would like to disclose the prescriptions for commonly used medicines and introduce only 2 or 3 kinds for reference.

First Example
Citric acid 2.0

Boric acid 3.0

Cacao butter 5.0

Insert 1 dose into the vagina before each sexual intercourse, 4 doses in total.

Second Example
Quinine bisulfate 0.2

Salicylic acid 0.2

Boric acid 1.8

Cacao butter A little

Use the above 4 doses as above.

Third Example
Quinine bisulfate 0.2

Cacao butter A little

Use the above 1 dose as above.

Fourth Example
Quinine hydrochloride 0.1

Perborax 0.1

Corn starch A little

Vaseline A little

Use the above 1 dose as above

Other over-the-counter drugs include "Sa-na" or "Semori" (made in Germany), etc., but all have their advantages and disadvantages, and it is not known which drug is the best because there are no reports on the actual results.

6. Vaginal Irrigation This method is commonly used in European and American countries, and especially in France, 100% of people use this method, so every bedroom is equipped with a special vaginal irrigator, and French women are known for their skillful irrigation. Especially in the bedrooms of European and American countries, the facilities are complete, so there is not much difficulty in using them, but in Oriental countries, the bedrooms are incomplete and there are no tools, so it is very difficult to implement. However, in Japan, there is a simple device called the "Corona" irrigator, and it is currently being used by many people with much praise. <136>

Then, pure water (水) warmed to body temperature is the most hygienic irrigating solution, but it is also acceptable to substitute this irrigating solution with a kind of medicine. The types of irrigating solutions are:
1. Cresol soap solution: This is made with a solution of 100 to 200 times (10 to 20 drops of cresol in a cup of water).
2. Lysoform solution: 50 to 100 times.
3. Potassium permanganate: 100 to 200 times. This medicine should not be exposed to light.
4. Boric acid water: 25 to 50 times.
5. Salt water: 1 spoonful (large spoon) of salt in 3 cups of water is good.
6. Vinegar (eating vinegar): 50 times. This is because it is acidic.
7. Lemon: Squeeze and use half or a quarter of a lemon into a cup of water.
8. Alum
9. Citric acid solution, etc.

There are many like this, but they are all similar, so it is advisable for the user to choose the one that is easiest to obtain.

I have listed all the currently popular contraceptive methods. Among them, even if there is some inconvenience, the last introduced irrigation method is rational, has no harm, and is effective, so it is advisable to use this method widely.

Finally, as a reference, according to the announcement by Professor Polano of Germany, the causes of contraception can be broadly divided into:
140 people (45%) Unstable life
87 people (28%) Multiple births
41 people (13%) Physical illness
10 people (3%) Relationship to miscarriage

Another thing to know is what is the reason why our people rank first in the world in terms of poverty, multiple births, and infant mortality? Of course, there are many fundamental problems such as hardship of life, economic hardship, difficulty in raising children, and difficulty in education, but fundamental research and determination in each field are necessary for this point. However, in the medical world, I would like to avoid the opinions and advocacy of other fields and emphasize the necessity of birth control as one item in promoting the national improvement plan scientifically through eugenics and physiology.

The above discussion is only a rough explanation of contraception methods, but if there is another opportunity in the future, I would like to explain the harm and loss caused by the causes of multiple births from a medical perspective. For now, I will end here. <137>

**Named Entities**

朝鮮	Chosŏn
日本	Japan
和國	Hwaguk
美國	USA
伊國	Italy
英國	England
獨國	Germany
白國	Belgium
佛國	France
마리 스톱	Mari Stopes
놀만 박사	Nolman Paksa
東京	Tōkyō
內務省	Naimushō
獨乙	Togil
뽀라노-교수	Pporano-kyosu



---------------------------


잡지명	별건곤 제34호
발행일	1930년 11월 01일
기사제목	醫學上으로 본 産兒制限方法論
필자	鄭錫泰
기사형태	논설

醫學上으로 본 産兒制限方法論
						鄭錫泰
조선사회에서도 산아제한에 대한 시시비비가 논의된 지 임이 오래이나 아즉도 거긔 대한 가부의 결론을 엇지 못하고 잇는 것은 부질업시 경제적 파멸도 돌보지 안코 자손의 번창을 바라든 인습적 관념과 하나님의 섭리로 나오는 생명을 미연에 업새여 바리는 것이 일종의 죄악이라는 迷妄에서 완전히 해탈되지 못한 것이 그 이유의 하나이겟고 다음 비록 그러한 관념에서 초탈한 사람이라도 그 실제 방법을 알지 못하며 또한 알 길이 업서서 실행하지 못하고 고민하고 잇는 인사들도 만흘 줄 알고 平日 이 문제에 대하야 만흔 관심을 가지고 考究해 온바 임으로 일반의 참고가 될가 하야 학술적 이론을 떠나 가장 평이하게 이 一文을 草하는 바이다. 그런데 먼저 이 문제의 가부에 대해서 멧마듸 논급해 보면 반대자도 상당히 잇서 去般 朝鮮日報에 논술한 바 잇섯스나 이들은 일개 계급론에 지나지 못하는 개인적 錯見과 탈선인 망론이엿서 굿타여 재삼가부를 가릴만 한 재료도 되지 못하는 것만은 너무나 유감으로 생각되는 바이다.
然이나 절실히 반대될 만한 조건으로서 可否를 고려할 만한 것으로 소개하자면
一. 아모리 優生學이고 經濟論이고, 산아제한이란 도덕상 묵허치 못하리라는 偏癖한 자칭 義士的 杞憂의 義慣으로서 나오게 되는 頑冥한 공격이 제일 만을 것이고.
二. 또는 시기상조라 하여서 민족의 이해정도가 비열하여서 만일 산아제한법이 실시가 된다면 善히 응용이 된다는 것보다 좃치 못한 방면에서 더 만흔 해독을 깃칠가 염려하는 이들이잇슬 것이고.
三. 설혹 정도에 넘치는 허다한 자손이 잇다 할지라도 능히 상당한 발육과 적당한 학식을 배호게 할 만한 능력과 금전의 경제가 충분하니 굿타여＜131＞ 아직 갓타여서는 이가티 산아제한법을 적용할 필요까지는 업다하는 이가 잇는 것이다.(이 주창은 현재 미국자본가들의 의견이여서 방금 米國서는 이리한 主義로 산아제한법을 그리 달가워 하지 안는 현상에 잇다)
그러면 사실에 잇서서 이 산아제한이란 것이 얼마나한 효과와 결과를 보고 잇는가함은 疑視하여서 개인적 편견인 입장에서 馬耳東風格으로 무관히 한다면 너머나 어굴한 사정이 안인가 한다. 더구나 貧苦者과 영양불량인 부인들노서는 임신율이 더욱히 만흐며 流産早産이 따라서 만어지며 다행히 順調대로 생산을 한다할지라도 그 자녀들은 허약과 早死를 면치 못하며 교양이 碌碌치 못할 것은 그 뉘 죄라 할 것일가. 물론 맹목적으로 반대하는 자는 필연코 자기 입장이 산아제한에 대한 요구가 절실치 못함을 증명함이다. 然이나 비참한 입장에서 악한 운명을 저주하는 이들은 산아제한방법을 구세주와 가티 仰慕하고 잇스리라.
맛치 이곳에 병원이 설립됨을 볼 때에 혹자는 이를 반대하되 이는 愚者 不具者가 만히 잇기를 원하는 곳이니 묵인치 못한다는 것과 갓흘 것이나 불행에서 우는 고통을 밧는 환자로서는 실로 구세주와 가티 반겨할 것이 안인가. 然고로 우리 산아제한론을 주창하는 자는 굿타여 건강한 자를 위함이 안이요, 身弱, 貧苦, 多産, 發病 등에 속한 悲境에서 우는 자들을 일종의 환자로 취급하여서 善히 인위적 과학응용으로 이러한 고난을 피하자는 주창에 지나지 못하는 바인즉 건강체인 행운아로서는 굿하여 부당한 착각과 망상으로서 이를 반대할 바 아닐 것이다. 더구나 우리 白衣 동포의 당하고 잇는 비참한 가지가지의 사정이야 구구히 말할 필요가 잇슬야만은 그 중 생산율과 사망율을 들어 세계 각국과 비교해 보면 자연히 엇더함을 짐작할 수가 있으니 순서를 들어 보건대 다음과 갓다.

人口 千名에 대한 出生率
順番     1       2      3     4      5      6      7       8     9
國別    朝鮮   日本   和國   米國   伊國   英國   獨國    白國   佛國
千分率  38.41  32.5    26.3   24.7    19.0   18.2    15.2     11.3    8.0
(1917년 발표에 의함)

人口 千名에 대한 死亡率
順番     1       2      3     4      5      6      7       8     9
國別    朝鮮   日本   獨國   伊國   白國   佛國   米國    英國  和國
千分率  23.74   21.4   20.7    18.7   16.3    15.3   14.3     13.4   13.1
(1917년도 발표에 의함)

乳兒(1年 未滿) 出産千에 대한 死亡率
順番     1       2      3     4      5      6      7       8
國別    朝鮮   日本   佛國   獨國   伊國   和國   英國    白國
平均    233    174    167    138    128    111     95      88
(1911년도 발표에 의함)＜133＞

이상의 발표에 의하건대 出生率이나 死亡率이 세계에서 우리 민족이 제일만흠을 알 수가 잇스니 즉 환언하자면 남보다 우리 민족은 죽을 힘을 다하야 인간을 粗製亂造를 하여서 결국은 남보다 더 만히 우리 민족을 일코서 잇스니 이 최대 원인를 세밀히 통찰치 안을 수가 업다.
즉 우리 민족은 매년 71만 5천에 갓가운 인생을 亂造하여서 매년 38만 5천에 갓가운 인명을 죽이고 잇스니 실로 可慘한 사정에 서 잇다. 이것이 하필 산아제한의 원인으로만 해석코저는 안는다만은 점점 피폐하여 가는 우리 민족이니 기왕이면 살니지 못하고 죽일 인명을 굿타여 힘드려 생산할 필요가 업다하는 이론에 잇는 것이니 설혹 산아제한을 하엿다고 사망률이 줄 리 만무하지만 순번으로 4위나 제5위 망정 절망하는 바가 안인가 한다. 의학상으로서 출생한지 3년만에 다시 임신하여야만 합리적이라 할 수 잇는데 년년히 생산하는 무리가 실노 만타. 然고로 아동보담 兒母는 점차 身弱 病發노서 이 세상을 뜻대로 살지를 못하고 아동으로서는 건실치 못한 허약한 발육으로서 불구자가 되며 또한 교육좃차 변변히 밧지 못하게 되니 결국은 가족파멸, 민족파멸에까지 밋치게 됨을 예측할 수 잇슬 것이다.
然이나 이 논문에 잇서서는 산아제한의 필요를 논고하는 이보담 실제 그 방법 여하를 의학상 발표코저 함에 잇나니 미리 부탁은 이 방법의 이용을 원치 안는 자를 위하여 논고하는 이보담 자기 입장이 비참함에 잇서 일종환자로 취급을 밧을 만한 자에게 한하여 공개함인즉 환자 안인 논객으로서는 一切 可否를 거듭지 안키를 바라는 바이다.
然이나 아직도 우리 사회에서는 산아제한에 대하여 너머나 등한시하여서 일종의 기관도 업슬 뿐더러 善히 지도할 協會좃차 업서 자세한 바는 널니 보급할 수가 업스며 또한 이와 가튼 공간물인 잡지상으로는 기탄업시 논술케 못되는 사정이 만흠은 더구나 유감이겟지만 지금부터 許하게 되는 정도까지는 설명코저 하는 바이다.
이 피임법에 대하여서는 녯날부터 그 수효가 만엇스나 비위생적 방법이요 불완전함이 만엿섯다.
然이나 과학의 진보와 문화의 향상됨을 따라 이 피임법좃차 개량진보된 바가 만타.
현대 이상적 방법으로서는 緯線衛生的障害가 업서야 하겟고 효과에 잇서서는 물론 확실하여야 하겟고 아울너 그 방법이 불쾌를 感하든가 복잡하여서는 안이 될 터이다. 이 방법으로서도 실노 허다히 잇스나 영구적 피임법과 일시적 피임법이 잇스니 이 영구적 피임법으로서는 일생애에서는 또다시 임신은 할 수 업게 하는 방법이다. 한번 이 방법을 실시한 후에는 또다시 후일에 암만 자녀를 기다려도 쓸데업는 것이니 이 방법을 취하게 되는 자들은 대개 악질인 遺傳性 疫患 즉 나병, 정신병, 매독, 결핵병 등 질병이 잇는 자에게 적용이 되나니 남자는 去勢, 輸精管結紮法에 잇고, 여자는 喇叭管結紮法 卵巢摘出 또는 X光線으로서 卵巢 睾丸에다 기능을 파괴식히는 방법이다. 일시적 피임법으로서는 생산의 度數를 마음대로 하여서 유아발육정도를 적합히 할 수 잇는 이상적 방법인고로 금일 산아제한법에는 다 이 방법을 응용함에 잇나니 그 종류는 다음과 갓다.
一. 性交中絶法 昔日부터 응용이 되는＜135＞ 법인데 즉 膣外 射精法을 명칭함이나 이는 자제력과 사고력을 소멸식히는 부자연한 행위로서 남녀간에 신경조직에 손해를 끼치게 하여서 종내는 「히스테리」 또는 신경쇠약 등의 원인이 됨으로 현재에는 사용치 못하게 하는 방법이다.
二. 月經時와 性交의 關係 즉 여자의 난자가 배출되는 시기와 성교시를 가급적 피하는 방법인즉 실제로 예를 들면 월경이 끗나자 제 6일노서부터 제 13일까지 약 8일간은 난자와 정자가 결합되는 기회가 만흔 까닭으로서 임신되는 度數가 이 시기에 만타고 할 수가 잇스니 피임의 목적으로서는 가급적 이 시기에 한하여서는 성교를 피하여야 할 것이다.
然이나 예외로서 간혹 월경이 끗난지 제 1일로부터 제 5일인 약 5일간에도 간간히 임신이 되는 경우가 잇슴을 주의하여야만 할 것이다. 그 중에서도 제일 안심될 시기는 기타 여일에는 배란과 성교는 合治치 못함으로 임신되는 일은 절대로 업다하여도 과언이 안이다. 學理的으로 설명을 하자면 부인들의 배란되는 것이 다음 월경전 12일 내지 16일간이 되는 5일간에만한하게 됨으로 이시기에 성교로 말미암아 임신되는 期日는 즉 이 배란되는 5일간이나 또는 이 5일 前日字에서 더 3일을 가한 8일간에만 한한다고 할 수가 잇스니 피임법에 유의자는 이 점에 대한 이해만 잇다면 그다지 어려운 조건은 안이다.
三. 「삿구」用法 이 방법도 역사를 가진 上古적부터 사용을 하여온 극히 간단한 법이라 할 수가 잇스나 용이하게 파열이 되어 긴요한 목적을 달치 못하는 일이 잇스며 이 「삿구」사용은 일반으로 산아제한을 목적함보다 花柳病을 예방함에 잇다고 할 수밧게 업다. 然이나 산아제한의 목적으로 사용하여서 효과를 얼마나한 정도까지 보게 됨인가 함을 통계로서 소개하자면 英國 마리 스톱여사가 조사한 결과 백「퍼센트」에 효과를 보아 하나도 목적을 不成功한 자가 업섯다하엿고 英醫師 놀만박사는 겨우 1할 밧게 성공이 못됨을 언명하엿스니 그리 확실한 방법이라고 보급식힐 만한 것으로는 생각이 안이된다.
四. 子宮外口를 덥는 형형색색의 도구가 잇스니 이는 정자가 자궁내로 침입함을 방지식히여서 피임케 되는 여러 가지 종류의 도구가 잇다. 현재 東京서는 흔히들 이 방법을 사용하는 형편에 잇스니 근자의 소문에 의하면 너머 남용이된다 하여서 內務省에서 반대까지 잇다고 한다.
그 종별은 子宮帽「싸뽀-다-」「펫차리움」 海線, 子宮보안, 등 여러 가지가 잇스나 어나 것이든지 術者는 상당한 숙련이 필요하고 시시로 소독이, 또한 필요함인즉 이와 가튼 도구사용법이 편리타고는 할 수가 업스며 더구나 아즉은 조선에서는 구할 수 업는 것인즉 굿하야 이 방법은 권할 수가 업는 바이다.
五. 약품은 膣內挿入法 정자의 성질을 살피건대 반드시 「알카리」성질이 잇서야만 생존이 되고 활발한 운동을 가지게 된다는 생리적 작용을 응용하여서 「알카리」성반대인 산성의 약품으로서 膣內에서 子宮을 향하야 진입하는 정자를 전멸을 식히거나 또는 생존력을 奪取식하고저 하는 목적에 잇다. 이 방법이 사실에＜135＞ 잇서서는 극히 輕便하고 정신적, 의학적 不快한 바가 적다하나 그 사용의 度數가 거듭하야 연속적으로 장구한 일시을 두고 사용을 하면은 膣內粘膜이 이 약품의(非生理的이 이유) 자극으로서 일종의 질병을 이르킬가 하는 염려도 잇슬 것이니 특별히 주의할 것이다. 또 한가지 懸念이 되는 바는 일회성교로 인하여 질내에서 침입되는 정자의 수요는 약 2억2천6백만이란 巨數인 까닭에 충분한 약품이 안이여서 불행하게도 정자가 半死半生格으로 침입하여 임신이 된다면 물론 불량 허약 열등한 자녀를 생산케 되니 특히 약재를 주의사용치 안을 수 업다.
이러한 단점이 잇다하여도 동양에서는 (서양에 비하자면) 흔이 이 방법들을 취하고 약품들도 허다함을 볼 수가 잇다. 이제 만히들 씨우는 약품의처방을 공개하여 참고의 재료가 되게 2, 3종만 소개코저 한다.

第一例
枸櫞酸    2.0

硼酸    3.0

카카오脂  5.0

上4회분 每 性交前 1회분식 질내 삽입케 함.

第二例
重硫酸키니-네  0.2

살칠酸         0.2

硼酸         1.8

카카오脂       若干

上4회분 사용법 同上

第三例
重硫酸지니-네  0.2

카카오脂       若干

上1회분 사용법 同上.

第四例
鹽酸지니-네   0.1

뻴보랏크쓰    0.1

콘스단치      若干

와세린        若干

上1회분 사용법 同上

기타 賣藥으로는 「사-나」 또는 「세모리」(獨逸製) 등 허다히 잇스나 다 一長一短이잇서보이며 실제로 엇더한 약품이 최우량함인지는 보고의 발표가 업서서 알 수가 업다.
六. 膣洗滌法 이 방법은 歐米諸國에서 흔히들 쓰게 되며 더욱히 佛國에서는 10할이 다 이방법을 사용함으로 특별한 질세척기가 침실마다 구비하여잇슴을 볼 수가 잇스며 아울너 佛國 부인들은 세척법이 巧能한 것으로 정평이 잇는 바이다. 특히 歐米各國의 거처하는 침방을 보건대 설비가 완전함으로 사용에 그다지 고난이 업슬 것이나 東洋諸國은 침실이 불완전하고 도구가 업슴으로 실행하기에는 매우 곤란한 것이다. 然이나 日本서는 「고로나」세척기라 하는 간편한 것이 잇스니 현재 만흔 호평으로서 대다수가 이 기구를 사용하는 형편에 잇다.＜136＞
그러면 이 세척액은 순전한 물(水)노 따뜻하게 (체온과 가치) 加溫함이 제일 위생적이라 할 수가 잇스나 이 세척액을 일종의 약품으로 대용함도 무관하다. 그 세척액의 종류로서는
一. 크레졸 石鹼液 이는 100배내지 200배의 용액으로 만드러 (한곱푸물에 크레졸 10適 내지 20適)사용하기도 하고,
二. 리조후오름액 50배 내지 100배.
三. 過만간 酸加里 100배 내지 200배. 이 液藥은 광선을 밧지 안토록 할 것.
四. 硼酸水, 25배 내지 50배.
五. 食鹽水, 3合되는 물에 食鹽한 숙갈(大匙)의 분량이면 조흔 것이다.
六. 食酢(먹는 초) 50배. 이는 산성인 까닭.
七. 레몬, 레몬 반분 또는 四半分의 한조각을 한곱보 물에다 짜서(搾取) 사용케 함.
八. 明礬
九. 枸櫞酸液 등
이와 가티 만흐나 다 大同小異함인즉 사용자, 取키 편한 자를 택하여 사용함이 가할 것이다.
이상 피임법으로 현재 유행하는 바를 擧皆列記한 세음이다.그 중 다소불편한 감이 잇다하여도 최후에 소개한 세척법이 합리적이요 조곰의 해독도 업슬 뿐더러 효과확실함으로 이 방법이 널니 사용함이 가할 것이다.
마즈막 참고로서 獨乙 뽀라노-교수의 발표에 의하여 피임법 목적의 원인을 대별한 즉
140人(45%) 生活亂
87人(28%) 多産
41人(13%) 身病
10人(3%) 流産關係
또 한가지 알어 둘 것은 우리 민족이 세계에서 제1위를 차지하고 잇는 赤貧者이고 또는 다산과 유아사망율로도 제1위를 차지하게 된 그 원인이 과연 어데 잇느냐함이다. 그것은 물론 생활난, 경제난, 양육난, 교육난 등이니 이에 대한 근본적 문제가 물론 만히 잇슬 것이나 이 점에 대하여서는 각 방면 斯界의 근본적 연구와 결심이 필요할 것이다. 然而 醫界에선 필자는 타방면의 意思와 主唱을 피하여 오직 과학적으로 優生學, 生理學으로 민족개량방침을 도모함에 잇서서 그 一條目으로 산아제한이 필요타 함을 역설코저 함에 잇다.
이상의 논고가 오직 피임법의 대략의 설명이 되겟스나 후일에 다시금 기회가 잇스면 다산의원인으로 생기는 피해와 손실됨을 의학상으로 설명코저 今般은 위선 이것으로 끗흘 막을 뿐이다. ＜137＞
＜132-137＞