잡지명	삼천리 제8권 제4호
발행일	1936년 04월 01일
기사제목	北滿山河와 人物 (Mountains, Rivers, and People of North Manchuria)
필자	金璟載
기사형태	문예기타 (Literary Miscellaneous)

北滿山河와 人物
						金璟載
Yongjŏng (龍井), opened as a treaty port that was to become Chinese territory as a condition for the laying of the An'an-Pongch'ŏn line, is still undoubtedly a key location in Kando (間島). However, while Tumen (圖們) is bustling with such activity and Yŏngil (延吉) is engrossed in expansion work, Yongjŏng merely maintains its silence. Only the presence of a consulate and two or three newspaper companies serve as pillars supporting the stagnating Yongjŏng. Also, due to existing relationships, the headquarters of large and small shops are all still based in Yongjŏng, thus maintaining the status quo. Even though it lost its political, economic, and military centrality to Yŏngil, and its transportation advantages to Tumen, Yongjŏng's traditional base is not so easily shaken. Just as Ch'ŏngjin Port (淸津港) will undoubtedly retain its important position as a trading port for some time despite the emergence of Najin (羅津) and Unggi (雄基), it is hard to believe that Yongjŏng, being the background of Ch'ŏngjin Port, will change so easily. Furthermore, a commercial base does not simply follow the convenience of transportation infrastructure; once established relationships cannot be easily altered today or tomorrow. A practical example is that one might expect Dairen Port (大連港) to decline and lose its position to North Korea (北鮮) and the Kyŏngt'o Line (京圖線) once the Kyŏngt'o Line opens, due to distance, time, and freight costs. However, in reality, Dairen Port continues to prosper. One reason might be that the South Manchuria Railway (滿鐵) has not abandoned its Dairen-centric policy, but also because the existing commercial structure centered around Dairen is not so easily changed.
Therefore, the reason for operating a direct train from Kyŏngsŏng (京城) via Yongjŏng to Choyangch'ŏn (朝陽川) likely lies here. The reason the South Manchuria Railway operates a route from Ch'ŏngjin via Yongjŏng to Hsinking (新京) is also likely here<144>. (Photo shows a group heading towards North Manchuria)

Kando's Leaping Trade

As already mentioned, Yongjŏng is still the central market in Kando. Currently, the customs clearance ratio among the various customs houses in North Korea and Kando is said to be 1 for both Ch'ŏngjin and Tumen, while Yongjŏng is about half of that (1/2), and Hunch'un (琿春) and Tumen each handle about a quarter (1/4). Looking at this, although there have been changes in customs routes after the establishment of Manchukuo, and the Kyŏngt'o Railway (京圖鐵道) main line has been completed and the T'uga Line (圖佳線) built, the distant future will certainly bring changes, but Yongjŏng still retains its dominant position for now.
In its early days, Kando trade had two main routes: one centered around Kukchagae (局子街), going via Kirin (吉林) to Yingkou (營口), and the other via Hunch'un to Vladivostok (海蔘威). Since the Kando Agreement in Meiji 40 (1907), Kando's traffic with North Korea became frequent. With the closure of Vladivostok as a free port in Meiji 42 (1909), the Vladivostok trade via Hunch'un came to a halt, further increasing the relationship with North Korea. Subsequently, Yongjŏng's development strengthened this connection even more. The outbreak of the Great European War blocked the inflow from European Russia, and the completion of the railway between Hoeryŏng (會擰) and Ch'ŏngjin marked a turning point, allowing North Korean trade to assume the dominant position in Kando trade.<145> After the Tumen Light Railway (圖們輕便鐵道) and the T'ient'u Railway (天圖鐵道) were laid, North Korea came to handle ninety percent of Kando's trade.
Kando trade via North Korea was divided into two systems, Ch'ŏngjin and Unggi, due to transportation and geographical factors. Viewed regionally, the Ch'ŏngjin system primarily handled Yongjŏng trade, while the Unggi system mostly processed Hunch'un trade. However, the construction of new railways since the Manchurian Incident (滿洲事變) and the resulting changes in transportation routes have brought about a landmark transformation in Kando's trade. With the completion of the Kyŏngt'o Railway main line, the conversion of the Chogae Line (朝開線) to standard gauge, and the completion of the T'unyeong Line (圖寧線), Kando's trade system now shows new phenomena: the North Korean system, the Najin Line (拉賓線系 - likely 羅津線系) system, and the T'uga Line (圖佳線系) system. Of course, Kando's position relative to its hinterland is merely that of a transit trade hub. However, with the improvement of transportation infrastructure, closer ties with the interior regions are being formed, and the development of the treasures of North Manchuria (北滿) and East Manchuria (東滿) will inevitably increase its economic importance as a hub for various goods, a fact clear without needing explanation.
This change in the trade system naturally suggests that trade connecting with the interior via Namyang and Tumen, along with the development of Najin, the terminus port of the Kyŏngt'o Line, and its auxiliary port Unggi, will gain a dominant position. That Ch'ŏngjin Port will have to take a step back is an inevitable consequence that cannot but cause fluctuations in Yongjŏng's position. While this change may not materialize immediately before our eyes today or tomorrow, it is nevertheless a predetermined fate.

The Night Streets of T'aeraja

Hwaryong County (和龍縣) is one of the four counties of Kando. It is the region where Koreans first migrated, the place where the most Koreans currently reside, and where their lives are most stable.
Originally, the name Kando originated from an island in the Tuman River (豆滿江) opposite Chongsŏng (鍾城). There was constant dispute over whether this island, named Kando, belonged to Qing China or Chosŏn Korea. Driven by the desire to end the dispute and make it completely their own, Koreans at the time took advantage of a flood one summer some 60 years ago. They blocked the water flow on the Chosŏn side, causing sand to accumulate there, making it completely Chosŏn territory. Later, Koreans from the Kwanbuk (關北) region, driven more by an exploratory spirit than by invasive desire, crossed the Tuman River again and found fertile land there. They secretly crossed the border and began cultivating, leading to today's Kando, now home to over 400,000 Koreans.
Among these areas, Hwaryong County is the closest to Chosŏn and the earliest place of migration. Currently, over 90% of its residents are Korean, and they own over 78% of the land.<146> Koreans also occupy over 70% of the official positions in government offices. During the time when Myŏngan (明安) was the Military Governor of Kirin, he reported to the central government in Beijing (北京) about the increasing influx of Koreans crossing the Tuman River. As a countermeasure, they decided to encourage Qing people to migrate as well, establishing a Ch'ohonguk (招懇局, Settlement Encouragement Bureau) in Hunch'un and a Wŏlhonguk (越懇局, Border Crossing Bureau) in T'aeraja (太拉子). The Ch'ohonguk was primarily for Qing people, while the Wŏlhonguk, ostensibly for the convenience of Korean immigrants, was actually intended to harass them and obstruct their migration. Then the Queue Ordinance (編髮令) was issued, requiring Koreans, like the Qing people, to wear Qing clothing and braid their hair. Koreans, who took pride in their topknots, gat (hats), and white clothes, opposed the Queue Ordinance, abandoned their land and houses, and crossed the Tuman River back to Chosŏn. Those Koreans who obeyed the Queue Ordinance at that time took possession of the abandoned land and houses, becoming wealthy. Many of the current wealthy farmers in Kando emerged during that period.
Thus, T'aeraja was the land where the Wŏlhonguk existed, creating various troublesome conditions for the migrating compatriots. Later, the Chosŏn government sent Yi Pŏm-yun (李範允) to investigate the actual conditions of these migrants and protect them, but instead, he faced persecution from the Qing people and had to flee at night from this very land.
Now, although it is the seat of the Hwaryong County Office, it is a quiet town with only 70-80 households. Despite having a county office, there isn't a single decent restaurant. There are three inns, but they are worse than simple lodges for foot travelers. There is an elementary school, but it's merely a basic school. In this unremarkable T'aeraja, there is a compatriot named Yi Tong-sŏk (李東奭) serving as County Councilor (縣叅事官). He is cheerful and passionate, not just an administrative official or clerk, but possessing abundant traits of a free spirit (浪人). Outwardly, he appears extremely gentle and humble, but he is resolute inwardly (外柔內强), never hesitating to carry out his convictions, and possesses great magnanimity, showing the bearing of a great man. It is natural to have a Korean councilor in this land predominantly inhabited by Koreans, and acquiring a talent like Mr. Yi Tong-sŏk is a great fortune for the immigrants of Hwaryong County.
T'aeraja is extremely tranquil. Though small, it is a kind of utopia. The sound of the Catholic church bell echoes gently; there is neither bloodshed nor struggle here. The most common suffering for Manchurian immigrants is the salt issue, but Mr. Yi's cooperative and associative governance system has safely liberated them from the hardship of salt scarcity, and due to its income, taxes are lower compared to other counties. Thus, it is financially independent. There are five<147> police stations within the county, some of which have Korean police chiefs.
Outside T'aeraja, it is quiet. The moonlight is bright. The distant sound of dogs barking and the sound of ironing from a neighboring house stir the traveler's sentiments.

A Distant View of Myŏngdong Village

Myŏngdong Village (明東村) is the birthplace of Korean culture in Kando. At the end of the Chosŏn Dynasty, discontented individuals crossed the Tuman River and settled in Kando. Yi Tong-hwi (李東輝), Chŏn Yak-yŏn (全躍淵), Im Kye-hak (林啓學), and Chu Pong-u (柱奉禹) were among the first to arrive in Myŏngdong Village, where they established Myŏngdong School (明東學校). This was the pioneer (矯矢) of Korean educational institutions in Kando. In a place called Sohyŏngja (소영자), Kim Ip (金立), Chang Ki-yŏn (張起瑱), and Kim Ha-hyŏn (金河鉉) gathered and founded Kwangsŏng School (光成學校). There was Waryong School (臥龍學校) in Waryongdong (臥龍洞), Yŏngil County, and Chŏngdong School (正洞學校) right across the Tuman River in Hwaryong County. Among these, Myŏngdong School has the longest history, dating back 27 years from now. Later, ten thousand nyang were raised to purchase the land around Myŏngdong, which was also the first instance (矯矢) of Koreans owning land in Kando.
On my way to T'aeraja, I got off at P'ardo Haja Station (八道河子驛) intending to take a car, but the station was utterly deserted. There were a few houses in front of the station, but no decent restaurant to sit in. Told that cars wouldn't be available until the afternoon, I decided to walk. After having breakfast in Namyangp'yŏng (南陽坪), I set off for T'aeraja accompanied by Mr. Chŏng Il-kwang (鄭一光).
The villages seen along the way were all Korean settlements, and everyone I met on the road was Korean. After crossing streams and climbing hills for some distance, we reached a fairly high pass. Upon reaching the top, a plain appeared, and just below the ridge to the right, a cozy village came into view. That was Myŏngdong Village. Looking from afar, a grand brick building, now an elementary school, was the former Myŏngdong Middle School, once our pride. Behind this building, compatriots' houses were scattered. There isn't a person active in Kando today who didn't graduate from Myŏngdong School. Its graduates have been the pillars and beams of Kando society from before, through the March First Movement (己未), until today. In Taishō 9 (1920), the residents of that land sold their land and houses, voluntarily donating funds to construct the vast building we see today. The fact that women stood in line for about 10 weeks at the tile-baking site to transport tiles is sufficient evidence of the immense support and encouragement from the local residents.<148> Later, Myŏngdong School was closed, leaving only the elementary school, and educational institutions became concentrated in Yongjŏng. As numerous educational institutions sprang up in Yongjŏng, Tonghŭng Middle School (東興中學校) was born.
Today, Myŏngdong is desolate like autumn grass, yet countless ancestors' blood, sweat, and tears flowed, accumulated, and are buried there, pricking the hearts of us passing travelers with something poignant. The feeling of "immeasurable emotion" (感慨無量) seems to be the sentiment I hold now. Silently crossing the pass and descending, I saw a Catholic church (聖堂). The location, scale, and structure of the church were also extraordinary. Myŏngdong is Presbyterian, while the Sŏnggyoch'on (聖敎村, Holy Teaching Village) I see now is a Catholic village. The two villages are situated one above the other; one is where Presbyterianism began to take root in Kando, and the other, though not the very first Catholic presence, was established with the specific purpose of missionizing Koreans and holds its own tearful history. In contrast to the modern style of Methodist churches, Presbyterian churches are simple, and Catholic churches are mystical. Just looking at the buildings—the monastery-like Catholic structure, the location of Myŏngdong School and Myŏngdong Village, the many figures it produced, its numerous histories of suffering, its life of hardship—contemplating these things, I crossed the pass, oblivious to the cold. At that time, my companion, Mr. Chŏng Il-kwang, pointed far ahead and said, "Ch'ŏngsalli (靑山理) is beyond that mountain." Sŏ Il (徐一), Chŏng Il-kwang, Kim Kyu-sik (金奎植), and others were conspiring and, during an inspection tour of the southern region, accidentally encountered [enemy forces], leading to a major battle – the famous Battle of Ch'ŏngsalli. Thinking about this, every blade of grass, every handful of soil, every single stone in Hwaryong County is imbued with history for Koreans.

The Lives of Compatriots

Although there are many overseas Korean migrants, none may have personally experienced the hardships (辛酸) like those in Manchuria; their lives were inevitably lived amidst abuse (驅虐) and contempt (侮蔑). In the meantime, they lost hope, lost passion, and fell into poverty (貧窮).
During the Chang Tso-lin (張作霖) era, Manchuria was characterized by exorbitant levies and extortion (苛欽誅求). A 20-chŏn stamp had to be affixed even to school graduation certificates. Couples were forced to buy marriage certificates for two or three won each, and an 80-chŏn stamp had to be attached to each certificate. This is just one example, but upon marriage, one had to register in the civil registry (民籍), requiring a marriage certificate, which also needed a stamp. Even elderly couples were fined if they didn't have this certificate. The methods of exploitation were too blatant and base.<149> Graduation certificates, admission applications, etc., also required a 20-chŏn stamp. Annually, under the pretext of inspecting door plates (門標), they would find fault without reason and sell door signs (門牌). Under the pretext of inspecting salt, they would show salt they carried in their own pockets and extort fines. Wealthy individuals would be detained under fabricated pretexts. Each time they were brought out of detention during interrogation, a "threshold tax" (문턱稅) was extorted. Seeing Koreans gathered, they would arrest them, claiming it was a gathering for subversive plots (不穩), imprison them, and extort money. Koreans in Manchuria could not avoid suffering these malicious exploitations, even knowing they were being wronged. This was particularly severe in Kando, where many Koreans lived. Because there were so many Koreans, even shameless Chinese officials, who might hesitate slightly out of conscience if dealing with their own kind, felt no restraint towards Koreans who lacked protectors, doing whatever they pleased.
Thus, Koreans in Manchuria never dreamed that this land would be their permanent home. They believed, "I have no choice but to live here, but my descendants, no matter what, must live in Chosŏn." Therefore, looking at the dwellings of compatriots in this region, none seem intended as anything but temporary shelters (假住宅).
Despite being such a cold place, there are no proper heating facilities (防寒設備). Entering their homes, one finds absolutely no provisions for amusement (誤樂準備 - likely 娛樂準備). In a place as cold as Manchuria, where winters are long and time spent indoors exceeds time working outside, the complete lack of heating means families constantly shiver from the cold. With no entertainment indoors, they always long for their hometown. Consequently, whenever they manage to save some money, they only dream of returning home, so their lives never truly settle down. Therefore, the life of compatriots in Manchuria, as I see it, is one of hardship (辛酸), disorder, and poverty (貧窮). After 60 or 70 years of migration to Manchuria, the fact that they still haven't settled down, however great the influence of Chang's rule, requires our own self-reflection.
Next, because Manchuria is geographically connected to Chosŏn, many criminals flee from Chosŏn to Manchuria. Their character as human beings has deteriorated. There are many such undesirable elements (不良分子) in Manchurian cities and rural areas. On my way to Hsinking, I witnessed an incident in Kirin where a Korean woman boarded the train alone. At that time, a man claiming to be a high official in Manchukuo threatened and tried to entice her. I intervened, rescued the woman, and traveled with her to Hsinking. She telegraphed her home, asking her husband to come, and he joined her.<150> Her husband ran an opium dealership (阿片賣買所) in Kirin. This is just one example, but one must be aware that there are quite a few such undesirable elements among Koreans. Otherwise, newcomers or travelers to Manchuria are often harmed.
Regardless, the number of us in Manchuria will inevitably increase year by year; a decrease is unthinkable even in dreams. From now on, we must discard the past notion of this place as a temporary lodging (住接) and, under a more permanent plan, modify housing structures to suit the cold climate (寒地相應). We should also add some decorations or recreational facilities indoors, striving to foster the idea that "this is my home, my land," thereby rationalizing our lives. As for the undesirable elements flocking to this region, we must cooperate and unite to be vigilant and expel (驅逐) them. In the past, in remote areas where Korean life was relatively orderly and self-governance was practiced, such undesirable elements could not gain a foothold (着足), whereas they frequented places along the South Manchuria Railway lines, which proves this point.

Alas, Chongmyŏng!

At my inn in Hsinking, I received a telegram informing me that my child, Chongmyŏng (鍾鳴), had died. Even the express train from Yongjŏng to Hsinking takes exactly 12 and a half hours. Furthermore, the East Tumen Line (東圖線) is very shaky, making the journey even more tiring. On the morning I left Yongjŏng on errands for Tonghŭng Middle School, a magpie came and chattered loudly right outside the window where I slept. Morning magpies are said to be auspicious signs (吉兆), so I rejoiced, thinking that since a magpie chirped on the morning of my departure for Hsinking, something good must surely happen. A few days earlier, I had received a telegram stating Chongmyŏng's illness was critical, but I had received such telegrams several times before, often followed by urgent messages saying there was some improvement and not to worry. So, I comforted myself thinking that after the news of Chongmyŏng's critical illness, there would soon be word of his complete recovery, and I felt happy. On the day of departure, I asked Mr. and Mrs. Chang to forward any letters or telegrams for me immediately to Hsinking.
Ah – such expectations and hopes crumbled. Chongmyŏng died.
Today is February 19th, Shōwa 11 (1936). I went with a friend to the Hsinking Public Hall (新京公會堂) to watch moving pictures. They were Chosŏn films: "Suil and Sunae" (守一과 順愛) and "Crossroads of Youth" (청춘의 十字路). I thought it was a good plan in the sense that it refreshed the feelings of homeland (故土情緖) for compatriots living far from home in exile (流離).<151> Whether the titles (藝題) themselves were appropriate or not is a separate issue. When P'yŏngyang's (平壤) Taedong River (大同江), Pubyŏngnu Pavilion (浮碧樓), and Ŭlmiltae Pavilion (乙密臺) appeared, feelings of longing for the homeland arose, thinking "my home is a land of embroidered rivers and mountains" (錦繡江山). In "Crossroads of Youth," rural scenes (農村의 情景) appeared, and at the end, a scene depicting revenge against a hypocrite (위선자) elicited such fervent reaction from the audience that they didn't know what to do.
After watching and feeling moved, I returned to the inn, and Mr. C came to visit. After finishing casual conversation (世上雜談), Mr. C left, and Mr. S arrived. He came in with a very sorrowful expression and said, "Don't be too disheartened," placing three telegrams before me. One read:
KEISAI SUKU KOI SYOMEI KITOKU YŌ SYAKU
(ケイサイスクコイシヨメイキトクヨウシヤク - To Kyeongjae, Urgent, Son Chongmyong Critical, Come Quickly)
Another read:
KEISAI SUKU KOI SYOMEI SINTA
(ケイサイスクコイシヨメイシンタ - To Kyeongjae, Urgent, Son Chongmyong Died)
Looking at the times, the first was sent at 5:27 PM, and the next at 6:47 PM. I was speechless. It felt like facing something utterly unfair. For a moment, I said nothing. My heart just felt cold; I had no other sensation. Gathering my senses again, it was clear the telegrams were real. Sitting there unable to speak, I looked at the third telegram; it was regarding the business arrangements I had come for.
And so, my Chongmyŏng ended his life at the age of six. Since he was already dead, I tried hard to forget. So, I tried to pass the night chatting about worldly matters with Mr. S. S promised to stay up all night with me (通夜) for my sake and didn't leave.
But trying to forget didn't make it easy to forget. Thus, whatever I said was tinged with desolation (寂寞) and sorrow (슬품).
I raised Chongmyŏng; there's an affection from raising him. When he was young, a wet nurse raised him, which must have been hard for him, and I too poured my heart and soul into it, seeing hardship. As he grew to be four, then five, he became endearing, precious, and lovely. I don't know how he appeared in others' eyes, but perhaps like the saying "even a tiger finds its own cub cute," I realized how precious he was to me.
About 10 years ago, after wandering in Manchuria for three years, I returned home, and that autumn my mother passed away. She didn't want to die, clenching her teeth, trying desperately to live longer, until her breath finally stopped. I witnessed that. At that time, it was<152> a source of sorrow and pain for me, but even more so later, when I was living a life of hard labor in Sŏdaemun Prison (서대문감옥). One day, looking through the triple bars at the sun setting over the western hills (西山), I remembered the moment my mother passed away, and my heart felt torn with pain, sorrow, and ache. The sight of the sun setting over the western hills – it was clearly a tragedy. Especially, the feeling of watching that scene from a prison cell was tragically indescribable.
The Manchurian wind is cold. Now even the stove has cooled, and cold air floods the room. S, who had promised to stay up all night with me, has fallen asleep.
Chongmyŏng, you really left.
I try not to think of you, but sitting alone in the empty room, the loud snoring of a tired traveler from the next room sounds noisy. Trying to hold back the flowing tears, I close my eyes, and the scene of me carrying you on my back over Ch'angŭimun Pass (彰義門고개) appears before my eyes. Your image, waiting up for me without sleeping even when I came home late, greeting me happily, appears. The regret (遺恨) I now hold is that while you were alive, I couldn't provide you with the clothes you wanted to wear or the snacks you wanted to eat as much as you desired.
Chongmyŏng drove his father, me, out into the Manchurian wilderness forever and left. As a father, I failed to raise him to adulthood and let him die. With what face can I go back to Seoul where you lived? What great philosophy (經論) do I possess that I was preoccupied with implementing it, unable even to see you off on your final journey?
This long night has dawned. I don't drink alcohol, I don't smoke, and I have no amusements. From now on, as I wander the Manchurian wilderness, what day, what hour, will I ever be able to forget him?
Ah, why did I come to Manchuria? <153>

**Summary**

Kim Kyŏng-jae describes the shifting landscape of Kando (Jiandao) in North Manchuria in 1936. He observes the decline of Yongjŏng's centrality due to the rise of Tumen and Yŏngil, spurred by new railway lines (Kyŏngt'o, T'uga) and the development of ports like Najin, despite Yongjŏng's lingering commercial importance linked to Ch'ŏngjin. He recounts the history of Korean migration to Kando, particularly Hwaryong County, detailing their struggles under Chinese administration (like the Queue Ordinance and exploitation under Chang Tso-lin), the establishment of Korean cultural institutions like Myŏngdong School, and the generally precarious, temporary nature of their lives lacking stability and hope. The author contrasts this with the relative order under Councillor Yi Tong-sŏk in T'aeraja and laments the presence of undesirable Korean elements. The article concludes with a deeply personal and sorrowful account of receiving news of his young son Chongmyŏng's death while in Hsinking, reflecting on his parental regrets and questioning his presence in Manchuria.

From a historical perspective, the article offers a valuable firsthand glimpse into the socio-economic conditions of Korean immigrants in Manchukuo during the mid-1930s. It highlights the impact of Japanese-driven infrastructure development (railways, ports) on regional trade dynamics and the subsequent effects on established Korean communities. Particularly interesting for historians is the description of Korean life under both Chinese warlord rule (Chang Tso-lin) and the early Manchukuo regime, the narrative of cultural persistence through education (Myŏngdong School), the complex internal dynamics within the Korean community (including "undesirable elements"), and the poignant expression of displacement, loss, and enduring connection to Korea, even amidst efforts to build a life in Manchuria. The personal grief narrated at the end underscores the human cost and emotional toll of migration and the political turmoil of the era.

**Named Entities**

北滿	북만	Pukman (North Manchuria)
金璟載	김경재	Kim Kyŏng-jae
安安奉線	안안봉선	An'an-Pongch'ŏn Line
龍井	용정	Yongjŏng
間島	간도	Kando
圖們	도문	Tumen
延吉	연길	Yŏngil
羅津	나진	Najin
雄基	웅기	Unggi
淸津港	청진항	Ch'ŏngjin Port
京圖線	경도선	Kyŏngt'o Line
大連港	대련항	Dairen Port (Dalian)
北鮮	북선	Pukch'ŏn (North Korea)
滿鐵	만철	Manch'ŏl (South Manchuria Railway)
京城	경성	Kyŏngsŏng (Seoul)
朝陽川	조양천	Choyangch'ŏn
新京	신경	Sin'gyŏng (Hsinking / Changchun)
淸津	청진	Ch'ŏngjin
琿春	훈춘	Hunch'un
滿州國	만주국	Manchuguk (Manchukuo)
京圖鐵道	경도철도	Kyŏngt'o Railway
圖佳線	도가선	T'uga Line
局子街	국자개	Kukchagae
吉林	길림	Kirin (Jilin)
營口	영구	Yŏnggu (Yingkou)
海蔘威	해삼위	Haesamwi (Vladivostok)
間島協約	간도협약	Kando Hyŏbyak (Kando Agreement)
會擰	회녕	Hoeryŏng
圖們輕便鐵道	도문경편철도	Tumen Light Railway
天圖鐵道	천도철도	T'ient'u Railway
滿洲事變	만주사변	Manju Sabyŏn (Manchurian Incident)
朝開線	조개선	Chogae Line
圖寧線	도녕선	T'unyŏng Line
拉賓線	납빈선	Nabin Line (Likely 羅津線 Najin Line)
南陽	남양	Namyang
和龍縣	화룡현	Hwaryong County
鍾城	종성	Chongsŏng
豆滿江	두만강	Tuman River (Tumen River)
淸國	청국	Ch'ŏngguk (Qing China)
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
關北	관북	Kwanbuk
北京	북경	Pukkyŏng (Beijing)
招懇局	초간국	Ch'ohonguk
太拉子	태라자	T'aeraja
越懇局	월간국	Wŏlhonguk
編髮令	편발령	P'yŏnbalnyŏng (Queue Ordinance)
李範允	이범윤	Yi Pŏm-yun
明安	명안	Myŏngan
李東奭	이동석	Yi Tong-sŏk
八道河子驛	팔도하자역	P'ardo Haja Station
南陽坪	남양평	Namyangp'yŏng
鄭一光	정일광	Chŏng Il-kwang
明東村	명동촌	Myŏngdong Village
李東輝	이동휘	Yi Tong-hwi
全躍淵	전약연	Chŏn Yak-yŏn
林啓學	임계학	Im Kye-hak
柱奉禹	주봉우	Chu Pong-u
明東學校	명동학교	Myŏngdong School
金立	김립	Kim Ip
張起瑱	장기연	Chang Ki-yŏn
金河鉉	김하현	Kim Ha-hyŏn
光成學校	광성학교	Kwangsŏng School
臥龍洞	와룡동	Waryongdong
臥龍學校	와룡학교	Waryong School
正洞學校	정동학교	Chŏngdong School
東興中學校	동흥중학교	Tonghŭng Middle School
聖敎村	성교촌	Sŏnggyoch'on
靑山理	청산리	Ch'ŏngsalli
徐一	서일	Sŏ Il
金奎植	김규식	Kim Kyu-sik
張作霖	장작림	Chang Tso-lin (Zhang Zuolin)
新京公會堂	신경공회당	Sin'gyŏng Konghoedang (Hsinking Public Hall)
守一	수일	Suil (Character Name)
順愛	순애	Sunae (Character Name)
平壤	평양	P'yŏngyang
大同江	대동강	Taedong River
浮碧樓	부벽루	Pubyŏngnu
乙密臺	을밀대	Ŭlmiltae
鍾鳴	종명	Chongmyŏng
서대문감옥	서대문감옥	Sŏdaemun Prison
彰義門	창의문	Ch'angŭimun

**Glossary**

山河	산하	Mountains and rivers; landscape; territory
人物	인물	Personage; figure; character
敷設	부설	Laying (e.g., railway tracks)
交換條件	교환조건	Exchange condition; quid pro quo
商埠地	상부지	Treaty port; trading port
要地	요지	Key location; strategic point
업스나	없으나	Although there isn't (Older spelling of 없으나)
직키고	지키고	Keeping; guarding; observing (Older spelling of 지키고)
잇서	있어	Being; existing (Older spelling of 있어)
支柱	지주	Pillar; support
從來	종래	Conventional; traditional; heretofore
大小商舖	대소상포	Large and small shops
本店	본점	Main store; headquarters
근거하고	근거하고	Being based on
現狀維持	현상유지	Maintaining the status quo
빼앗기엿고	빼앗겼고	Having been taken away; lost (Older spelling of 빼앗겼고)
地盤	지반	Base; footing; foundation
容易하게	용이하게	Easily
동요되는	동요되는	Being shaken; agitated
그럿케	그렇게	Like that; so (Older spelling of 그렇게)
잇드래도	있더라도	Even if there is/are (Older spelling of 있더라도)
의연히	의연히	Still; as before; resolutely
무역항	무역항	Trading port
당분간	당분간	For the time being; for a while
일치안을	잃지 않을	Will not lose (Older spelling of 잃지 않을)
밋기	믿기	To believe (Older spelling of 믿기)
매저진	맺어진	Formed; established; tied (Older spelling of 맺어진)
오날	오늘	Today (Older spelling of 오늘)
내일노	내일로	Tomorrow (Older spelling/dialectal form of 내일로)
낫타나야	나타나야	Must appear; should emerge (Older spelling of 나타나야)
依然히	의연히	Still; as before
번창하고	번창하고	Prospering; flourishing
포기하지	포기하지	Not abandoning
구성되여	구성되어	Being composed of; structured (Older spelling of 구성되어)
까닭이다	까닭이다	It is the reason
그럼으로	그러므로	Therefore; hence (Older spelling of 그러므로)
經由	경유	Via; through
運轉하는	운전하는	Operating (e.g., a train service)
一群	일군	A group; a party
躍進하는	약진하는	Leaping forward; advancing rapidly
貿易	무역	Trade; commerce
述한 바이나	술한 바이나	As mentioned; as stated before
通關	통관	Customs clearance
비율	비율	Ratio; proportion
성립	성립	Establishment; formation
이루워지고	이루어지고	Being completed; formed (Older spelling of 이루어지고)
徐徐한	서서한	Gradual; slow
將來	장래	Future
王座的 지위	왕좌적 지위	Throne-like status; dominant position
保持하고	보지하고	Maintaining; preserving
초기	초기	Early period; initial stage
경유하야	경유하여	Via; passing through (Older spelling of 경유하여)
出하는	출하는	Exporting to; shipping out to
頻繁하게	빈번하게	Frequently
되엿고	되었고	Became (Older spelling of 되었고)
폐쇄됨으로	폐쇄됨으로	Due to being closed
中止상태	중지상태	State of suspension; halt
이르니	이르니	Reached; arrived at
一層	일층	More; further;一層
강화케	강화케	To strengthen (Older form)
하얏다	하였다	Did (Older spelling of 하였다)
歐州大戰	구주대전	Great European War (WWI)
起하야	기하여	Starting from; based on (Older form)
유입	유입	Inflow
막키고	막히고	Being blocked (Older spelling of 막히고)
敷設	부설	Laying; construction
완성	완성	Completion
轉機	전기	Turning point
君臨케	군림케	To reign; dominate (Older form)
되여섯든	되었던	Had become (Older spelling of 되었던)
九割	구할	Ninety percent
차지하게	차지하게	To occupy; take possession of
輸送經路	수송경로	Transportation route
劃期的	획기적	Epoch-making; landmark
轉換	전환	Change; switch; transition
초래하얏나니	초래하였나니	Brought about; caused (Older spelling of 초래하였나니)
改修되였고	개수되었고	Was repaired; improved; converted (Older spelling of 개수되었고)
廣軌	광궤	Standard gauge (railway)
背後地	배후지	Hinterland
役割	역할	Role; part
지나지 못하나	지나지 못하나	Is nothing more than; only amounts to
整備	정비	Maintenance; improvement;整備
奧地	오지	Interior region; hinterland
密接한	밀접한	Close; intimate
聯繫	연계	Connection; liaison;聯繫
寶庫	보고	Treasury; repository of treasures
開拓	개척	Cultivation; pioneering; development
집산지	집산지	Collection and distribution center
加重할	가중할	Will increase; aggravate
推勢	추세	Trend; tendency
讓步하게	양보하게	To yield; concede
닥처오는	닥쳐오는	Approaching; imminent (Older spelling of 닥쳐오는)
旣定的	기정적	Predetermined; established
밤거리	밤거리	Night street
四縣中	사현 중	Among the four counties
이주한	이주한	Migrated
안정된	안정된	Stabilized; settled
유래	유래	Origin; source
對岸	대안	Opposite bank/shore
섬	섬	Island
잇섯는 바	있었던 바	There was (Older spelling of 있었던 바)
領地	영지	Territory
말성中	말썽 중	In the midst of trouble/dispute
없새이고	없애고	Getting rid of; eliminating (Older spelling of 없애고)
맨들	만들	Make (Older/dialectal spelling of 만들)
욕망	욕망	Desire; ambition
기회로	기회로	As an opportunity
流水	유수	Flowing water; stream
막으니	막으니	Blocking; obstructing
집중되여서	집중되어서	Being concentrated (Older spelling of 집중되어서)
侵略慾	침략욕	Desire for invasion; aggressiveness
探險心	탐험심	Spirit of exploration
건너서	건너서	Crossing
沃土	옥토	Fertile land
남몰래	남몰래	Secretly; stealthily
越境하야	월경하여	Crossing the border (Older spelling of 월경하여)
開墾	개간	Cultivation; reclamation
착수한	착수한	Started; commenced
주민	주민	Resident; inhabitant
토지소유	토지소유	Land ownership
비례	비례	Ratio; proportion
넘고	넘고	Exceeding; over
官廳	관청	Government office
官公吏	관공리	Government official
차지하고	차지하고	Occupying
督軍時代	독군시대	Warlord era (Military Governor era)
작구	자꾸	Repeatedly; frequently (Older spelling of 자꾸)
쓰러드는	쓸어드는	Sweeping in; flooding in (Figurative for large influx)
㥘내서	존내서	Fearing; being intimidated (Potentially 慹낼 낼 낼 낼 낼 낼 내서 - to be intimidated/fearful, or a typo?)
然告하고	연고하고	Reporting; informing (Potentially 련고(聯告) or a typo? Context suggests reporting)
대책	대책	Countermeasure
移住식킨다고	이주시킨다고	Saying they will make (people) migrate
本位	본위	Standard; basis
移住民	이주민	Immigrant; migrant
便通	편통	Convenience; facility (Can also mean bowel movement, but context indicates convenience)
괴롭게	괴롭게	Painfully; troublesomely
구려서	굴어서	Behaving; acting (Often implies annoying/bad behavior)
방해하려는	방해하려는	Intending to obstruct/hinder
나리니	내리니	Was issued; came down (Older spelling of 내리니)
갓치	같이	Like; as; together with (Older spelling of 같이)
淸服	청복	Qing dynasty clothing
머리를 따어	머리를 땋아	Braiding the hair (Older spelling of 땋아)
느리라는	늘이라는	To let hang down (Older form of 늘어뜨리라는)
상투짜고	상투 짜고	Wearing a topknot (Traditional Korean male hairstyle)
갓 쓰고	갓 쓰고	Wearing a gat (traditional Korean hat)
힌 옷	흰 옷	White clothes (Older spelling of 흰)
자랑으로	자랑으로	As a pride
반대하야	반대하여	Opposing (Older spelling of 반대하여)
버리고	버리고	Abandoning; discarding
가옥	가옥	House; dwelling
차저	찾아	Finding; seeking; visiting (Older spelling of 찾아)
복종하였든	복종하였던	Had obeyed (Older spelling of 복종하였던)
富豪	부호	Wealthy person; tycoon
豪農	호농	Wealthy farmer
產出된	산출된	Produced; yielded
만타	많다	Many; much (Older spelling of 많다)
놋튼	놓던	Used to place/set (Older spelling of 놓던)
실상	실상	Actual condition; reality
보호하려다가	보호하려다가	While trying to protect
도리혀	도리어	Rather; instead; on the contrary (Older spelling of 도리어)
迫害	박해	Persecution
夜間逃走	야간도주	Fleeing at night
縣廳所在地	현청소재지	County office location
한적한	한적한	Quiet; secluded
市街	시가	Street; town area
음식점하나	음식점 하나	Even one restaurant
깨끗한	깨끗한	Clean; neat
여관	여관	Inn; hotel
步行客主	보행객주	Inn/lodge for travelers on foot
보잘 것 없고	보잘것없고	Insignificant; trivial; humble
參事官	참사관	Councilor; attaché
쾌활하고	쾌활하고	Cheerful; lively
열정적이여서	열정적이어서	Being passionate (Older spelling of -이어서)
행정관	행정관	Administrative official
사무관	사무관	Clerk; official
어듸까지	어디까지	To whatever extent; thoroughly (Older spelling of 어디까지)
浪人	낭인	Rōnin; masterless samurai; here implies a free-spirited, perhaps unconventional person
氣質	기질	Temperament; disposition
풍부하다	풍부하다	Abundant; rich
外樣	외양	Appearance; exterior
온유하고	온유하고	Gentle; meek
겸손하여	겸손하여	Being humble
뵈이나	보이나	Appears; seems (Older spelling of 보이나)
外柔內强	외유내강	Gentle in appearance, strong in spirit
소신	소신	Belief; conviction
관철함	관철함	Carrying through; accomplishing
조곰도	조금도	Not even a little; not at all (Older spelling of 조금도)
주저하지	주저하지	Not hesitating
도량	도량	Magnanimity; generosity
襟度	금도	Magnanimity; breadth of mind
뵈이고	보이고	Showing (Older spelling of 보이고)
인재	인재	Talented person; person of ability
었게	얻게	To get; obtain; acquire (Older spelling of 얻게)
행복	행복	Happiness; fortune
閑靜하다	한정하다	Quiet; tranquil; secluded
理想鄕	이상향	Utopia; ideal land
天主敎	천주교	Catholicism
종소래	종소리	Sound of a bell (Older spelling of 종소리)
殷殷히	은은히	Gently; faintly; rumblingly
들니난대	들리는데	Where it is heard (Older spelling/dialectal form of 들리는데)
殺伐	살벌	Bloodshed; brutality; violence
투쟁	투쟁	Struggle; fight
共通된	공통된	Common
고통	고통	Pain; suffering; hardship
소곰	소금	Salt (Older spelling of 소금)
協同的	협동적	Cooperative
組合的	조합적	Associative; union-like
政治制度	정치제도	Political system
버서나게	벗어나게	To escape from; get out of
수입	수입	Income; revenue
租稅	조세	Tax; taxation
他縣	타현	Other counties
低下되여	저하되어	Being lowered; decreased (Older spelling of 저하되어)
재정적으로	재정적으로	Financially
獨立되였고	독립되었고	Became independent (Older spelling of 독립되었고)
警察署	경찰서	Police station
署長	서장	Chief (of police station)
밧은	밖은	Outside (Older spelling of 밖은)
고요하다	고요하다	Quiet; calm; serene
月色	월색	Moonlight
明朗하다	명랑하다	Bright; clear
멀니서	멀리서	From afar (Older spelling of 멀리서)
들니여오는	들려오는	Being heard from a distance (Older spelling of 들려오는)
개짓는	개 짖는	Dog barking
소래	소리	Sound (Older spelling of 소리)
다름이질	다리미질	Ironing
旅人	여인	Traveler
情緖	정서	Emotion; feeling; sentiment
도두워준다	돋우어준다	Stirs up; enhances
發祥地	발상지	Birthplace; cradle
末葉	말엽	End period
不平分子	불평분자	Discontented element; malcontent
차저드럿다	찾아들었다	Found their way into; settled in (Older spelling of 찾아들었다)
세웟으니	세웠으니	Having established/founded (Older spelling of 세웠으니)
敎育機關	교육기관	Educational institution
矯矢	교시	Pioneer; the first instance (lit. 'straightening arrow')
모히여서	모여서	Gathering (Older spelling of 모여서)
年祖	연조	Age; seniority; history
오랜	오랜	Long (time)
距今	거금	From the present time; ago
一萬兩	일만냥	Ten thousand nyang (old Korean currency unit)
買收하였으니	매수하였으니	Having purchased (Older spelling of 매수하였으니)
소유하게	소유하게	To come to possess/own
나리여서	내려서	Getting off; descending (Older spelling of 내려서)
자동차	자동차	Automobile; car
햇으나	했으나	Although (I) did (Older spelling of 했으나)
한산하기	한산하기	Being quiet; deserted
짝이 없다	짝이 없다	Beyond comparison; extremely
멧개의	몇 개의	A few (Older spelling of 몇 개의)
드러앉을	들어앉을	To sit down in
徒步로	도보로	On foot
것기로	걷기로	Decided to walk (Older spelling of 걷기로)
朝飯	조반	Breakfast
同伴하야	동반하여	Accompanying (Older spelling of 동반하여)
떠낫다	떠났다	Left; departed (Older spelling of 떠났다)
뵈이는	보이는	Visible; seen (Older spelling of 보이는)
촌락	촌락	Village; hamlet
부락	부락	Village; settlement
맛나는	만나는	Meeting; encountering (Older spelling of 만나는)
넘어서	넘어서	Crossing over (a pass/hill)
것노라니	걷노라니	While walking (Older spelling of 걷노라니)
놉흔	높은	High; tall (Older spelling of 높은)
고개	고개	Hill; pass
올라서니	올라서니	Upon climbing up
평야	평야	Plain; flatland
낫타나고	나타나고	Appearing (Older spelling of 나타나고)
右便	우편	Right side
嶺頭下	영두하	Below the mountain ridge
아담한	아담한	Cozy; neat; elegant
바라다 보니	바라다보니	Looking out at
웅대한	웅대한	Grand; magnificent
벽돌집	벽돌집	Brick house
자랑거리이든	자랑거리이던	Which used to be a source of pride (Older spelling of -이던)
등에 업고서	등에 업고서	With (it) at its back; leaning against
家宅	가택	House; residence
散在해	산재해	Being scattered
잇다	있다	Are; exist (Older spelling of 있다)
도라가는	돌아가는	Active; working (Figurative); returning (Older spelling of 돌아가는)
出身	출신	Origin; graduate
以前	이전	Before
己未	기미	Gimi year (1919, referring to the March First Movement)
기둥	기둥	Pillar
대들뽀도	대들보도	Main beam also (Older spelling of 대들보)
되여	되어	Becoming (Older spelling of 되어)
自願出捐	자원출연	Voluntary donation
광대한	광대한	Vast; extensive
축조하였다하며	축조하였다하며	Saying that they constructed
기와	기와	Roof tile
굽는	굽는	Baking; firing (tiles)
장소	장소	Place; location
약	약	Approximately; about
주간	주간	Week
婦女	부녀	Women
連立하야	연립하여	Standing in line; side by side (Older spelling of 연립하여)
운반했다는	운반했다는	That (they) transported
지지	지지	Support
성원	성원	Support; encouragement
만흔가를	많은가를	How many/much (Older spelling of 많은)
알기에	알기에	To know
족할	족할	Sufficient
閉鎖되고	폐쇄되고	Being closed down
집중케되니	집중케 되니	Became concentrated
무수한	무수한	Countless; innumerable
簇生되는	족생되는	Springing up thickly; growing in clusters
탄생되엇다	탄생되었다	Was born (Older spelling of 되었다)
쓸쓸하야	쓸쓸하여	Being lonely; desolate (Older spelling of 쓸쓸하여)
秋草갓흐나	추초같으나	Like autumn grass (Older spelling of 같으나)
뭇치여서	묻히어서	Being buried (Older spelling of 묻히어서)
지나는	지나는	Passing
가슴에	가슴에	In the heart/chest
찌르는	찌르는	Pricking; piercing
잇거니 하니	있거니 하니	As there is; thinking there is
感慨無量	감개무량	Deep emotion; being filled with感慨無量
감회	감회	Sentiment; feeling
듯십다	듯싶다	Seems like (Older spelling of 듯싶다)
묵묵히	묵묵히	Silently
나려가니	내려가니	Going down (Older spelling of 내려가니)
聖堂	성당	Catholic church; cathedral
위치	위치	Location; position
규모	규모	Scale; size
구조	구조	Structure; construction
尋常치	심상치	Unusual; extraordinary
長老敎會	장로교회	Presbyterian church
아레	아래	Below; under (Older spelling of 아래)
우에	위에	Above; on (Older spelling of 위에)
뿌리를 박기	뿌리를 박기	To take root
드러오면서	들어오면서	While coming in
선교	선교	Missionary work
목적하고	목적하고	Aiming at; having as a purpose
이루워진	이루어진	Formed; established (Older spelling of 이루어진)
눈물겨운	눈물겨운	Tearful; pathetic
歷史的의	역사적의	Historical (Older possessive form)
監理敎	감리교	Methodist church
모단的	모던적	Modern (Using 'modern' phonetically + 的)
反하야	반하여	In contrast to (Older spelling of 반하여)
질박하고	질박하고	Simple; plain; unsophisticated
신비적이다	신비적이다	Mystical
爲先	위선	First of all; primarily
建物	건물	Building
수도원	수도원	Monastery; convent
갓흔	같은	Like; similar to (Older spelling of 같은)
受難史	수난사	History of suffering/passion
고난	고난	Hardship; suffering
이러한	이러한	Such; like this
치운 줄	추운 줄	That it is cold (Older spelling of 추운)
모르고	모르고	Not knowing; unaware
동행하든	동행하던	Who was accompanying (Older spelling of 동행하던)
마즌편을	맞은편을	The opposite side (Older spelling of 맞은편)
가라키면서	가리키면서	Pointing at (Older spelling of 가리키면서)
넘어	넘어	Beyond; over
謀事하야서	모사하여서	Conspiring; plotting (Older spelling of 모사하여서)
巡視途中	순시도중	During an inspection tour
우연히	우연히	Accidentally; by chance
부더처서	부딪혀서	Colliding; encountering (Older spelling of 부딪혀서)
戰鬪	전투	Battle; combat
격게	겪게	To experience; undergo (Older spelling of 겪게)
싸홈이다	싸움이다	Is a fight/battle (Older spelling of 싸움)
포기	포기	Stalk; blade (of grass)
흙	흙	Soil; earth
돌	돌	Stone
生活	생활	Life; living
海外移住者	해외이주자	Overseas emigrant
갓흔	같은	Like; similar to (Older spelling of 같은)
辛酸한	신산한	Bitter; harsh; painful (hardships)
體驗한	체험한	Experienced
없슬지니	없을지니	As there likely aren't any (Older spelling of 없을지니)
驅虐	구학	Cruelty; abuse; oppression
모멸	모멸	Contempt; scorn; insult
情熱	정열	Passion; enthusiasm
貧窮	빈궁	Poverty; destitution
빠지게	빠지게	To fall into
苛欽誅求	가렴주구	Exorbitant levies and exploitation
特	특색	Characteristic feature
엿든이만큼	였던 이만큼	To the extent that it was (Older spelling of 였던)
卒業證書	졸업증서	Graduation certificate
一枚	일매	One sheet/piece
붓치게	붙이게	To make attach/affix (Older spelling of 붙이게)
印紙	인지	Revenue stamp
반듯이	반드시	Necessarily; certainly (Here likely typo for 반드시)
夫婦	부부	Married couple
結婚證書	결혼증서	Marriage certificate
사게 하되	사게 하되	Making (them) buy
매장	매장	Each sheet/certificate (Usage context)
拾錢	습전	Obsolete term, likely refers to money/value (拾 is 'ten') - Here 80 전 (chŏn).
쨔리	짜리	Worth; value (Suffix)
붓치여야	붙여야	Must attach/affix (Older spelling of 붙여야)
지나지 못하나	지나지 못하나	Is nothing more than
民籍	민적	Civil registry
登記하는	등기하는	Registering
부터야	붙어야	Must be attached (Older spelling of 붙어야)
늘근	늙은	Old (person) (Older spelling of 늙은)
夫妻間	부처간	Between husband and wife
벌금	벌금	Fine; penalty
밧엇다	받았다	Received (Older spelling of 받았다)
착취	착취	Exploitation
方法	방법	Method; way
넘우	너무	Too; excessively (Older spelling of 너무)
노골적이요	노골적이요	Blatant; undisguised
低級하다	저급하다	Low-grade; vulgar; base
入學願書	입학원서	Application for admission
門標調査	문표조사	Door plate inspection
공연한	공연한	Needless; pointless; groundless
트집을 잡고	트집을 잡고	Finding fault
門牌	문패	Door plate; nameplate
파러먹기	팔아먹기	Selling (for personal profit/exploitation)
주머니	주머니	Pocket
가지고 다니든	가지고 다니던	Used to carry around (Older spelling of -던)
내어 뵈이고	내어 보이고	Showing; presenting (Older spelling of 보이고)
구실	구실	Pretext; excuse
붓치여서	붙여서	Attaching; fabricating (a reason) (Older spelling of 붙여서)
留置식키고	유치시키고	Detaining; placing in custody (시키고 - causative)
취조한다고	취조한다고	Saying they will interrogate
끄러	끌어	Dragging; pulling (Older spelling of 끌어)
내올 때마다	내올 때마다	Every time (one) brings out
문턱稅	문턱세	Threshold tax (Extorted fee)
빼았기	빼앗기	Having (money) taken away (Older spelling of 빼앗기)
集合	집합	Gathering; assembly
不穩	불온	Subversive; dangerous; disquieting
잡어다	잡아다	Catching and bringing (Older spelling of 잡아다)
가두고	가두고	Imprisoning; locking up
野心的	야심적	Ambitious (often negative); predatory
알면서도	알면서도	Even while knowing
당하지	당하지	Suffer; undergo
심했든	심했던	Was severe (Older spelling of 심했던)
만히	많이	Many; much (Older spelling of 많이)
염치업는	염치없는	Shameless (Older spelling of 없는)
同樣이라면	동양이라면	If (they were) the same kind (i.e., Chinese)
약간의	약간의	Slight; some
양심	양심	Conscience
가책	가책	Pangs of conscience; remorse
주저하지 만흔	주저하지만은	Hesitates, but... (Connective form, older spelling)
背後	배후	Behind; background; backing
보호자	보호자	Protector; guardian
기탄없시	기탄없이	Without reserve; freely; unhesitatingly (Older spelling of 없이)
永久히	영구히	Permanently; forever
꿈에도	꿈에도	Even in a dream
갓지	갖지	Have; possess (Older spelling of 갖지)
않엇다	않았다	Did not (Older spelling of 않았다)
자손만은	자손만은	Only one's descendants
밋어왔다	믿어왔다	Have believed (Older spelling of 믿어왔다)
주택	주택	House; residence
假住宅	가주택	Temporary house/dwelling
防寒設備	방한설비	Winterization; heating facilities
드러가서	들어가서	Entering (Older spelling of 들어가서)
誤樂準備	오락준비	Recreational preparation (誤 in original, likely typo for 娛 or 娯)
겨울	겨울	Winter
만흐니	많으니	As there are many/much (Older spelling of 많으니)
박게	밖에	Outside (Older spelling of 밖에)
드러앉어	들어앉아	Sitting inside (Older spelling of 들어앉아)
만흔	많은	Many; much (Older spelling of 많은)
언제나	언제나	Always
떠러야	떨어야	Must shiver/tremble
오락	오락	Entertainment; amusement
고향	고향	Hometown
그립다	그립다	Miss; long for
여유만	여유만	Only when there is spare (money/time)
도라갈	돌아갈	To return (Older spelling of 돌아갈)
자리가 잡히지	자리가 잡히지	Not settling down; not finding one's place
안엇다	않았다	Did not (Older spelling of 않았다)
무질서하고	무질서하고	Disorderly
빈궁이엿다	빈궁이었다	Was poverty (Older spelling of 이었다)
影響	영향	Influence; effect
컷다	컸다	Was big/great (Older spelling of 컸다)
반성하여야	반성하여야	Must reflect upon
겟다	겠다	Will; must (Older volitional/conjectural ending)
連接하야	연접하여	Being connected; adjoining (Older spelling of 연접하여)
犯罪하고	범죄하고	Committing a crime
도망해온	도망해온	Who fled/escaped
惡해젓다	악해졌다	Became evil/bad (Older spelling of 악해졌다)
都市	도시	City
農村	농촌	Rural village; countryside
類	류	Kind; sort; type
不良分子	불량분자	Undesirable element; delinquent
엇든	어떤	Some; a certain (Older spelling of 어떤)
婦人	부인	Woman; wife
올넛는데	올랐는데	Boarded, but... (Older spelling of 올랐는데)
자칭하야	자칭하여	Calling oneself; claiming to be (Older spelling of 자칭하여)
高等官	고등관	High-ranking official
威脅하기도	위협하기도	Also threatening
誘引도	유인도	Also luring/enticing
목격하고	목격하고	Witnessing
간섭	간섭	Interference; intervention
구해서	구해서	Rescuing; saving
갓치	같이	Together (Older spelling of 같이)
打電하야	타전하여	Sending a telegram (Older spelling of 타전하여)
남편	남편	Husband
동행케	동행케	To make accompany
하엿다	하였다	Did (Older spelling of 하였다)
阿片賣買所	아편매매소	Opium dealership
경영하는	경영하는	Managing; operating
引用	인용	Quotation; citation
알어야	알아야	Must know (Older spelling of 알아야)
그럿치	그렇지	Like that; so (Older spelling of 그렇지)
첫 번	첫번	First time
나오는	나오는	Coming out; appearing
여행하는	여행하는	Traveling
침해	침해	Infringement; violation; harm
당하는	당하는	Suffering; undergoing
아무래도	아무래도	Anyway; in any case; inevitably
年年히	연년히	Year by year; annually
증가할	증가할	Will increase
감소되리라고는	감소되리라고는	That it would decrease
과거	과거	Past
갓흔	같은	Like; similar to (Older spelling of 같은)
임시로	임시로	Temporarily
住接하야	주접하여	Lodging; staying temporarily (住接 is unusual; might mean 接住 'to receive and lodge' or be a typo for 거접(居接) 'lodging')
관념	관념	Notion; concept; idea
청산하고서	청산하고서	Liquidating; clearing away; settling
永久한	영구한	Permanent; eternal
계획하에서	계획 하에서	Under a plan
住屋	주옥	Dwelling; house
寒地相應하게	한지상응하게	Appropriately for a cold region
變改도하고	변개도 하고	Also altering/reforming
장식	장식	Decoration; ornament
시설	시설	Facility; equipment
주력하야서	주력하여서	Focusing efforts on (Older spelling of 하여서)
합리화	합리화	Rationalization
도모해야	도모해야	Must plan; seek; aim for
도약하는	도약하는	Leaping; jumping (here implies flocking/gathering)
서로가	서로가	Each other
협력하고	협력하고	Cooperating
결속하야서	결속하여서	Uniting; binding together (Older spelling of 하여서)
경계하고	경계하고	Being vigilant; guarding against
驅逐하여야	구축하여야	Must expel; drive out
겟다	겠다	Will; must (Older ending)
전에	전에	Before; previously
比較的	비교적	Relatively
질서	질서	Order
자치	자치	Self-governance
시행되는	시행되는	Being implemented/practiced
着足	착족	Setting foot in; gaining a foothold
출몰했든	출몰했던	Appeared and disappeared; frequented (Older spelling of -던)
증명할	증명할	Can prove
嗚呼	오호	Alas! Ah! (Exclamation of grief)
旅舍	여사	Inn; lodging house
죽엇다는	죽었다는	That (someone) died (Older spelling of 죽었다는)
전보	전보	Telegram
밧엇다	받았다	Received (Older spelling of 받았다)
급행차	급행차	Express train
걸닌다	걸린다	Takes (time) (Older spelling of 걸린다)
動搖	동요	Shaking; vibration; fluctuation
심해서	심해서	Being severe/intense
一層	일층	Even more; further
疲困하다	피곤하다	Tired; exhausted
用務	용무	Business; errand
갓고	갖고	Having; taking (Older spelling of 갖고)
떠나든	떠나던	Who was leaving (Older spelling of 떠나던)
아츰에	아침에	In the morning (Older spelling of 아침에)
까치	까치	Magpie
머리	마리	Counter for animals (Older spelling of 마리)
창문	창문	Window
압에서	앞에서	In front of (Older spelling of 앞에서)
식그럽게	시끄럽게	Noisily (Older spelling of 시끄럽게)
짓는다	짖는다	Barks; chatters (animal sound)
吉兆	길조	Auspicious sign; good omen
깁버햇다	기뻐했다	Rejoiced; was happy (Older spelling of 기뻐했다)
멧날	며칠	A few days (Older spelling/dialectal form of 며칠)
위독하다는	위독하다는	That (someone) is critically ill
밧기도	받기도	Also receiving (Older spelling of 받기도)
벌서	벌써	Already (Older spelling of 벌써)
차레이고	차례이고	Times, and... (Older spelling of 차례이고)
多少	다소	Somewhat; a little
差度	차도	Improvement (in illness)
안심하라는	안심하라는	Telling to be relieved/not worry
急報	급보	Urgent report/news
여러 번이	여러 번이	Many times
엿다	였다	Was (Older spelling of 였다)
햇더니	했더니	Said/thought, and then... (Older resultative)
완쾌햇다는	완쾌했다는	That (someone) has fully recovered (Older spelling of 했다는)
통보	통보	Notice; report; communication
잇으려니	있으려니	Assuming there would be
慰安	위안	Comfort; consolation
깁벗섯다	기뻤었다	Had been happy (Older spelling of 기뻤었다)
부부	부부	Husband and wife
還送해	환송해	Sending back; forwarding
달라고	달라고	Asking to give/do
햇다	했다	Did (Older spelling of 했다)
아-	아-	Ah- (Exclamation)
기대	기대	Expectation
희망	희망	Hope
문허지고	무너지고	Collapsing; crumbling (Older spelling of 무너지고)
죽엇다	죽었다	Died (Older spelling of 죽었다)
映畵	영화	Movie; film
流離	유리	Wandering; exile; displacement
故土情緖	고토정서	Sentiment for one's homeland
새롭게	새롭게	Newly
藝題	예제	Title (of artwork/film)
적합한냐	적합하냐	Is it suitable/appropriate? (Older interrogative ending)
別問題	별문제	Separate issue/question
錦繡江山	금수강산	Land of embroidered rivers and mountains (poetic term for Korea)
그립어지고	그리워지고	Becoming missed/longed for
農村	농촌	Rural village
情景	정경	Scene; sight
마즈막에는	마지막에는	At the end (Older spelling of 마지막)
위선자	위선자	Hypocrite
복수하는	복수하는	Taking revenge
장면	장면	Scene
관중	관중	Audience; spectators
열광하야	열광하여	Being enthusiastic; going wild (Older spelling of 하여)
엇지할	어찌할	What to do (Older spelling of 어찌할)
모른다	모른다	Doesn't know
늣기고	느끼고	Feeling (Older spelling of 느끼고)
도라오니	돌아오니	Upon returning (Older spelling of 돌아오니)
차저왓다	찾아왔다	Came to visit (Older spelling of 찾아왔다)
世上雜談	세상잡담	Idle talk about worldly affairs; chit-chat
畢하고	필하고	Finishing; completing
도라가니	돌아가니	Returning; leaving (Older spelling of 돌아가니)
드러오면서	들어오면서	While entering
悲奮한	비분한	Grief-stricken and indignant
표정	표정	Facial expression
넘우	너무	Too; excessively (Older spelling of 너무)
낙심말게	낙심 말게	Don't be discouraged (Older form)
내여	내어	Taking out; presenting (Older spelling of 내어)
놋는다	놓는다	Places; puts down (Older spelling of 놓는다)
억울한	억울한	Unfair; unjust; mortifying
당한다는	당한다는	That one faces/suffers
잠시는	잠시는	For a moment
선듯하는	선뜻하는	Feeling a chill; startled
뿐이지	뿐이지	Only; just
감각	감각	Sensation; feeling
가다듬어	가다듬어	Gathering (one's senses); composing oneself
틀림이 없다	틀림이 없다	There is no mistake; it is certain
안저잇든	앉아 있던	Who was sitting (Older spelling of 앉아 있던)
打合	타합	Arrangement; consultation (打ち合わせ uchiawase)
一期로	일기로	As one life period (i.e., ending life at...)
마럿다	말았다	Ended up (doing); finished (Older spelling of 말았다)
임이	이미	Already (Older spelling of 이미)
구지	굳이	Obstinately; firmly;わざわざ (here implies 'forcefully trying to')
이즈려고	잊으려고	Trying to forget (Older spelling of 잊으려고)
햇다	했다	Did (Older spelling of 했다)
世事나	세사나	Worldly affairs; matters of life
이약이	이야기	Story; talk (Older spelling of 이야기)
지내려고	지내려고	Trying to spend (time)
위하야	위하여	For the sake of (Older spelling of 위하여)
하로 밤	하룻밤	One night (Older spelling of 하룻밤)
通夜	통야	Staying up all night (often for a wake)
약속하고	약속하고	Promising
이저지는	잊어지는	Being forgotten (Older spelling of 잊어지는)
어듸엔가	어디엔가	Somewhere (Older spelling of 어디엔가)
寂寞	적막	Silence; desolation; loneliness
슬품이	슬픔이	Sorrow; sadness (Older spelling of 슬픔)
석기여서	섞여서	Being mixed (Older spelling of 섞여서)
흐르고	흐르고	Flowing
길너서	길러서	Raising; bringing up (Older spelling of 길러서)
정이	정이	Affection; attachment
어리여서는	어려서는	When young (Older spelling of 어려서는)
乳母	유모	Wet nurse
길러내이기에	길러내기에	In raising (Older spelling of -기에)
저도	저도	He also; that child also
고생하엿으려니와	고생하였으려니와	Must have suffered hardships, and also... (Older form)
정성	정성	Sincerity; devotion
기울넛고	기울였고	Poured; devoted (Older spelling of 기울였고)
괴롬도	괴로움도	Pain; suffering also (Older spelling of 괴로움)
보앗다	보았다	Saw (Older spelling of 보았다)
자라서	자라서	Growing up
자냥스럽고	자랑스럽고	Proud; admirable (Or possibly 자애스럽고 'affectionate/loving' based on context, older spelling?)
귀업고	귀엽고	Cute; lovely (Older spelling of 귀엽고)
사랑스러웟다	사랑스러웠다	Lovely; lovable (Older spelling of 사랑스러웠다)
엇더케	어떻게	How (Older spelling of 어떻게)
뵈이엿는지	보였는지	Appeared; seemed (Older spelling of 보였는지)
모루나	모르나	Although (I) don't know (Older spelling of 모르나)
범도	범도	Even a tiger
제색기	제 새끼	Its own cub/young
깨닷고	깨닫고	Realizing (Older spelling of 깨닫고)
잇섯다	있었다	Was; existed (Older spelling of 있었다)
방랑하다가	방랑하다가	While wandering
세상	세상	World; life; (here) passed away
떠낫다	떠났다	Left; passed away (Older spelling of 떠났다)
실혀서	싫어서	Hating; unwilling to (Older spelling of 싫어서)
악물고	악물고	Clenching one's teeth
엇더케	어떻게	Somehow (Older spelling of 어떻게)
애를 다 쓰다가	애를 다 쓰다가	While trying one's best; making every effort
숨길이	숨길이	Breath (길 likely suffix or older form)
끈어 지는	끊어지는	Being cut off; stopping
三重	삼중	Triple
철창	철창	Iron bars (of a prison window)
西山	서산	Western hills/mountain
넘는	넘는	Setting (sun); crossing
태양	태양	Sun
보고	보고	Seeing
作故하시든	작고하시던	Who had passed away (Honorific) (Older spelling of -던)
순간	순간	Moment; instant
생각나서	생각나서	Remembering; thinking of
찌여지듯이	찢어지듯이	As if being torn
압헛든	아팠던	Which hurt; was painful (Older spelling of 아팠던)
기억한다	기억한다	Remember
떠러지는	떨어지는	Falling; setting (sun) (Older spelling of 떨어지는)
광경	광경	Scene; sight
분명히	분명히	Clearly; certainly
비극	비극	Tragedy
더욱이	더욱이	Furthermore; moreover
형무소	형무소	Prison
감방	감방	Prison cell
심정	심정	Feeling; state of mind
형언에 絶하리만큼	형언에 절하리만큼	To the extent that it defies description
바람	바람	Wind
차다	차다	Cold
스틤도	스팀도	Steam (heating?) (Unusual word, possibly 'steam' or a typo for 난로 'stove'?)
식어서	식어서	Having cooled down
찬공기	찬 공기	Cold air
범람한다	범람한다	Floods; overflows
피곤한	피곤한	Tired
나그네	나그네	Traveler; wayfarer
코고는소래가	코고는 소리가	Sound of snoring (Older spelling of 소리)
요란도	요란도	Also noisy/loud
한다	한다	Is
흐르는	흐르는	Flowing
눈물	눈물	Tears
억제하려고	억제하려고	Trying to suppress/control
업고	업고	Carrying on the back
넘든	넘던	Used to cross (Older spelling of 넘던)
비치인다	비친다	Reflects; appears (Older spelling of 비친다)
마저주든	맞아주던	Used to greet/welcome (Older spelling of 맞아주던)
모양이	모양이	Appearance; figure
뵈인다	보인다	Is seen; appears (Older spelling of 보인다)
사라잇는	살아있는	Living; alive (Older spelling of 살아있는)
입고	입고	Wearing
십허하든	싶어하던	Used to want to (Older spelling of 싶어하던)
먹고	먹고	Eating
과자	과자	Snack; confectionery
마음대로	마음대로	As one pleases; freely
멕이지	먹이지	Feed (Causative) (Older spelling of 먹이지)
못한	못한	Could not do
遺恨	유한	Lasting regret; remorse
아비로	아비로	As a father
나서	나서	Being born as; becoming
장년	장년	Adulthood; prime of life
길너주지	길러주지	Raise (for someone) (Older spelling of 길러주지)
죽이엿으니	죽였으니	Killed; let die (Causative implication), so... (Older spelling of -였으니)
면목	면목	Face (in the sense of dignity/honor)
잇서	있어	Having (Older spelling of 있어)
살든	살던	Used to live (Older spelling of 살던)
갈수	갈 수	Can go
잇으랴	있으랴	How could there be? (Rhetorical question ending)
위대한	위대한	Great; grand
經論	경륜	Experience and wisdom; statesmanship; great plan/philosophy
실행하느라고	실행하느라고	Because of implementing/carrying out
마즈막	마지막	Last; final (Older spelling of 마지막)
가는 길	가는 길	The departing way; final journey
보지 못하느냐	보지 못하느냐	Are you unable to see? (Interrogative)
발것다	밝았다	Dawned; became bright (Older spelling of 밝았다)
술	술	Alcohol
먹는	먹는	Drinking
담배	담배	Tobacco; cigarette
피이는	피우는	Smoking (Older spelling of 피우는)
갓지	갖지	Have; possess (Older spelling of 갖지)
못한	못한	Unable to do; lacking
압흐로	앞으로	From now on; in the future (Older spelling of 앞으로)
헤메이는	헤매는	Wandering (Older spelling of 헤매는)
어느	어느	Which; what
時인들	시인들	Hour; time (들 plural/emphatic suffix)
이즐	잊을	Forget (Older spelling of 잊을)
잇을가	있을까	Will there be?; Can I? (Older spelling of 있을까)
무엇하러	무엇하러	Why; for what purpose


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제8권 제4호
발행일	1936년 04월 01일
기사제목	北滿山河와 人物
필자	金璟載
기사형태	문예기타

北滿山河와 人物
						金璟載
安安奉線敷設의 交換條件으로 中領이 될 商埠地로 개방된 龍井은 이제도 間島의 要地임에는 틀림이 업스나 그러나 圖們이 저리도 활기를 띄고 延吉이 擴大工作에 열중하고 잇으되 그저 침묵을 직키고 잇다. 다만 領事館이 잇고 2, 3의 新聞社가 잇서 沈滯해가는 龍井의 支柱가 되고 잇으며 또 從來의 關係子 아즉도 大小商舖의 本店이 전부 龍井에 근거하고 잇는 관게로 現狀維持를 하고 잇다. 정치, 경제, 군사의 중심을 延吉에 빼앗기엿고 교통의 이득을 圖們에 빼앗기엿다 하드라도 龍井의 從來의 地盤이 그럿케 容易하게 동요되는 것은 아니이니 비록
羅津이 생기고 雄基가 잇드래도 淸津港이 의연히 무역항으로 중요한 지위를 당분간은 일치안을 것이요. 그럿타하면 淸津港의 背景이 龍井임으로 그럿케 쉬웁게 變異가 잇으리라고 밋기 어려우며 또 그리고 商業的 地盤이란 단순히 교통기관의 便만 따르는 것이 아니이니 일단 매저진 관계는 그럿케 오날이나 내일노 쉬웁게 변동할 수 잇 것이 아니라. 그의 實例로는 京圖線이 개통되면 大連港은 零落하고 北鮮과 京圖線에 그 지위를 빼앗긴다고 볼 수 잇을지니 그는 거리관계로 그러하고 시간으로나 運賃으로도 그런 결과가 낫타나야 올타. 그러나 실제에는 大連港이 依然히 번창하고 잇나니 그것은 滿鐵이 大連港 中心主義를 포기하지 안는 것도 한 개의 이유이려니와 종래의 상업관계가 大連을 중심으로 하고 구성되여 잇는 관계로 해서 그 구성된 체계가 그럿케 용이하게 변이되는 것이 아 까닭이다.
그럼으로 京城에서 龍井經由 朝陽川行의 직통열차를 轉하는 이유도 여기에 잇을 것이요. 滿鐵이 淸津에서 龍井經由의 新京行을 運轉하는 까닭도 여기에 잇을<144> 것이다.(사진은 北滿洲로 향하는 一群)

躍進하는 間島의 貿易

아즉도 間島에 잇서 龍井이 間島의 중심시장이라는 것은 임이 압헤서 述한 바이나 현재 北鮮과 間島의 각 세관의 通關 비율이 淸津과 圖們을 각 一이라 하면 龍井이 그의 2分之1이요 琿春과 圖們이 각기 4分之1정도라고 한다. 그것으로 보아 滿州國의 성립 후 비록 통관경로의 변화가 잇고 京圖鐵道 本線이 이루워지고 圖佳線이 생기엿다드라도 徐徐한 將來는 물론 변할 것이나 아즉은 의연히 龍井이 王座的 지위를 保持하고 잇다.
間島貿易은 그 초기에 잇서서는 局子街을 중심으로 하야 吉林經由 營口에 出하는 것과 珺春을 경유하야 海蔘威에 出하는 두 가지의 길이 이섯다. 그가 明治 40年 間島協約 以來 間島는 北鮮과 교통이 頻繁하게 되엿고 明治 42年의 海蔘威의 自由港이 폐쇄됨으로 하야 琿春경유의 海蔘威무역은 中止상태에 이르니 北鮮과의 관계가 一層 頻繁하게 되얏고 그후 龍井의 발전은 더욱 그를 강화케 하얏다. 歐州大戰이 起하야 歐露에서의 유입의 길이 막키고 會擰 淸津간의 鐵道敷設의 완성을 一轉機로 하야 北鮮貿易이 間島貿易의 王者的 地位에 君臨케 된 것이엿다.<145> 그가 다시 圖們輕便鐵道, 天圖鐵道가 敷設되고 나니 間島貿易의 九割을 北鮮이 차지하게 되여섯든 것이다.
北鮮經由의 間島貿易은 교통기관, 지리의 관계상 淸津과 雄基의 두 계통으로 구분되여 이섯고 그를 지방적으로 보는 때에는 淸津계통은 주로 龍井貿易이였고 雄基계통은 대부분이 琿春貿易에 의하야 消化되고 잇섯다. 그러나 滿洲事變 이래의 철도의 신설과 그에 따르는 輸送經路의 변화는 間島무역의 劃期的 轉換을 초래하얏나니 京圖鐵道의 本線이 완성되였고 朝開線이 廣軌로 改修되였고 圖寧線이 완성된 오늘날에 있서 間島의 무역계통은 北鮮系, 拉賓線系, 圖佳線系의 새 현상을 보게 된다. 물론 背後地에 대한 間島의 지위란 한 개의 통과무역의 역할에 지나지 못하나 교통기관의 整備에 따라서 奧地方面과의 밀접한 聯繫가 지여지고 北滿 及 東滿의 寶庫開拓에 의하야 각종 물질의 집산지로서 경제적 중요성이 一層 加重할 것은 설명을 기다리지 안코도 명백한 사실이다.
이러한 무역계통의 변화는 京圖線의 終端港인 羅津과 그의 補助港 雄基의 발전과 共히 南陽, 圖們을 경유하야 奧地方面과 聯繫되는 무역이 우세적 지위를 점령할 것은 당연한 추세이요. 淸津港이 一步 讓步하게 된다는 것은 龍井의 지위에 동요가 오지 안을 수 업는 일이다. 이것은 오날이나 내일로 당장에 눈압헤 다 닥처오는 변화는 아니라 할지라도 그러나 旣定的의 운명인 것이다.

太拉子의 밤거리

和龍縣은 間島四縣中의 하나이요. 朝鮮人이 가장 먼저 이주한 지방이요. 그러고 현재에 잇서 가장 만히 사는 곳이고 또 가장 생활이 안정된 곳이다.
원래 間島란 명칭의 유래 鍾城의 對岸豆滿江에 한 개의 섬이 잇섯는 바 그의 일홈이 間島이엿고 그 間島가 淸國領地이냐 朝鮮의 領地이냐가 항상 말성中 이엿섯다가 그의 말성을 없새이고 완전히 내 것을 맨들 것 갓다는 당시의 朝鮮人의 욕망은 60여년전 그 어느해 여름에 홍수가 난 것을 기회로 하야서 朝鮮편의 流水를 막으니 거긔에 모래가 집중되여서 그만 완전히 朝鮮의 領地가 되였고 그 후 侵略慾이라기 보다 探險心이 강한 關北의 朝鮮人을 다시 豆滿江을 건너서 보니 거긔 역시 沃土가 있는지라 남몰래 越境하야 開墾에 착수한 것이 오날의 間島이요. 그 수가 40萬이 넘게 된 것이다.
그 중에도 和龍縣은 가장 朝鮮과 인접한 지역이요. 가장 먼저 이주햐야 온 곳이여서 지금에 와서는 주민의 9할 이상이 朝鮮人이요. 토지소유 비례도 7할 8분이 넘고<146> 官廳의 官公吏도 朝鮮人이 7할 이상을 차지하고 있다. 明安이 吉林督軍時代에 豆滿江을 건너서 작구 쓰러드는 朝鮮人을 㥘내서 北京의 중앙정부에 然告하고 그의 대책으로 그러면 우리 淸族도 移住식킨다고 해서 琿春에 招懇局을 두고 太拉子에는 越懇局을 두었으니 招懇局에서는 淸族本位이였고 越懇局이란 朝鮮人移住民本位이였는바 越懇局은 朝鮮人移懇民에게 便通을 주기위함이람보다 차라리 그들에게 괴롭게 구려서 이주를 방해하려는 것이였다. 그러다가 編髮令이 나리니 그것은 朝鮮人도 淸人가 갓치 淸服을 하고 머리를 따어 느리라는 것이였다. 상투짜고 갓 쓰고 힌 옷 입는 것으로 자랑으로 알고 있든 朝鮮人은 그만 編髮令에 반대하야 토지를 버리고 가옥를 버리고 다시 豆滿江을 건너서 朝鮮에 차저 오게 되니 그때의 編髮令에 복종하였든 朝鮮人은 버리고 가는 토지 가옥을 제가 차지하여서 富豪가 되었으니 현재 間島의 豪農중에는 그때에 産出된 것이 만타.
그리하야 太拉子는 越懇局이 잇서 이주동포에게 상당히 괴로운 조건을 가지가지로 조성해서 내여 놋튼 땅이요. 그후 朝鮮政府에서 李範允을 보내서 이들 이주동포의 실상도 조사하고 또는 보호하려다가 도리혀 淸人의 迫害를 입고 夜間逃走하든 곳도 이 땅이다.
지금은 和龍縣廳所在地라고 하나 겨우 7, 80호의 한적한 市街이여서 縣廳이 있다고 하나 음식점하나 깨끗한 것이 없다. 여관이 三個 있다고 하나 步行客主만도 못하고 보통학교가 있으나 그 역시 簡易學校이다. 이럿케 보잘 것 없고 太拉子에는 李東奭이라는 동포가 잇서 縣叅事官으로 있으니 그는 쾌활하고 열정적이여서 그저 한 개의 행정관이나 사무관이 아니요  어듸까지 浪人的 氣質이 풍부하다. 外樣에는 지극히 온유하고 겸손하여 뵈이나 外柔內强하야서 자기의 소신을 관철함에는 조곰도 주저하지 안으며 도량이 커서 능히 大人의 襟度를 뵈이고 있다. 朝鮮人이 가장 만히 사는 이땅에 朝鮮人參事官을 둔것도 당연하거니와 그 중에도 李東奭군과 같은 인재를 었게 되었다는 것은 和龍縣移住民의 一大 행복이다.
太拉子는 지극히 閑靜하다. 비록 적으나 한 개의 理想鄕이다. 天主敎의 종소래 殷殷히 들니난대 거기에는 殺伐도 없고 투쟁도 없다. 滿洲移住民의 가장 공통된 고통은 소곰 문제인데 그 역시 李參事官의 협동적 조합적 정치제도는 安全히 소곰의 고통에서 버서나게 하였고 그의 수입으로 조세는 他縣에 비하야 低下되여 있다. 그리하야 재정적으로 독립되였고 縣內에는 五個의<147> 警察署가 있는데 그 중에는 朝鮮人 署長도 있다.
太拉子의 밧은 고요하다. 月色도 明朗하다. 멀니서 들니여오는 개짓는 소래, 이웃집의 다름이질 소래가 旅人의 情緖를 도두워준다.

明東村의 遠望

明東村은 間島의 朝鮮人 文化의 發祥地이다. 李朝말엽에 그의 不平分子는 그만 豆滿江을 건너서 間島에 차저드럿다. 李東輝 全躍淵林啓學 柱奉禹의 그들는 제일 먼저 차저온 것이 明東村이엿고 거긔에 明東學校를 세웟으니 그가 間島에 잇서 朝鮮人敎育機關으로 矯矢이었다. 소영자라는 곳에 金立, 張起瑱, 金河鉉등이 모히여서 光成學校를 세웟고 延吉縣 臥龍洞에서 臥龍學校가 잇고는 和龍縣으로 바루 豆滿江對岸에 正洞學校가 잇섯으나 그 중에도 明東學校는 年祖가 오랜 것이여서 距今 27년 전이다. 그 후 一萬兩을 내어서 明東一帶의 토지를 買收하였으니 間島에 잇서 朝鮮人으로서 토지를 소유하게 되기도 그가 矯矢이엿다.
나는 太拉子에 가는 길에 八道河子驛에서 나리여서 자동차를 타고 가려고 햇으나 八道河子驛은 아주 한산하기 짝이 없다. 驛前에 멧개의 가옥이 있으나 드러앉을 만한 음식점도 없다. 자동차는 오후가 되지 않으면 없다함으로 徒步로 것기로 하고 南陽坪에서 朝飯을 먹고 鄭一光氏와 同伴하야 太拉子를 차저서 떠낫다.
가는 길가에 뵈이는 촌락이 모다 朝鮮人의 부락이요 도중에서 맛나는 사람은 전부가 朝鮮人이였다. 개울을 건늬고 고개를 넘어서 얼마를 것노라니 이제는 상당히 놉흔 고개가 있고 그 고개 우에 올라서니 한 개의 평야가 낫타나고 바른 右便의 嶺頭下에 한 개의 아담한 촌락이 뵈인다. 그가 明東村이다. 멀니 바라다 보니 웅대한 벽돌집이 지금은 小學校이나 그가 前日의 우리의 자랑거리이든 明東中學校이요 그 건물을 등에 업고서 동포의 家宅이 散在해 잇다. 지금 間島에 도라가는 사람으로 明東學校 出身 아닌 사람이 없으며 그들 졸업생은 以前에서 己未이후 오날까지 間島사회의 기둥도 되고 대들뽀도 되여 잇다. 大正 9년에 明東學校는 그 후도 그 땅의 주민은 땅을 팔고 집을 파러서 自願出捐하야 오날의 보는 광대한 건물을 축조하였다하며 기와 굽는 장소에서 약 10주간을 婦女들이 連立하야 기와를 운반했다는 것만 보아도 얼마나 그 땅의 주민의 지지와 성원이 만흔가를 알기에 족할 것이다.<148> 그 후 明東學校는 閉鎖되고 小學만 남었으며 교육기관이 龍井으로 집중케되니 龍井에 무수한 교육기관이 簇生되는 때에 東興中學校가 탄생되엇다.
지금에 明東은 쓸쓸하야 秋草갓흐나 그러나 거기에 무수한 先人의 피와 땀이 흐르고 싸이고 뭇치여서 지나는 우리들 旅人의 가슴에 무엇인가 찌르는 것이 잇거니 하니 感慨無量이란 지금에 내가 갓는 感懷 그것인 듯십다. 묵묵히 그 고개를 넘어서 나려가니 天主敎의 聖堂이 잇고 그 敎堂의 위치 규모 구조가 또한 尋常치 안타. 明東은 長老敎會이요 지금의 내가보는 聖敎村은 天主敎會村이니 그 두 촌락이 아레 우에 위치하고 잇서 하나는 長老敎가 間島에 뿌리를 박기 시작한 곳이고 하나는 天主敎가 間島에 드러오면서 제일 먼저는 아니라 하드래도 朝鮮人에게 선교를 목적하고 이루워진 것으로는 또한 눈물겨운 역사적의 것이라고 한다. 監理敎의 敎堂이 모단的 임에  反하야 長老敎는 질박하고 天主敎는 신비적이다. 爲先 建物만 보아도. 수도원 갓흔 天主敎의 건물이며 明東學校 明東村의 위치, 그가 나흔 幾多의 인물 무수한 受難史 고난의 생활, 나는 이러한 것을 생각하면서 치운 줄 모르고 그 고개를 넘엇다. 그 때에 동행하든 鄭一光氏는 멀니 마즌편을 가라키면서 靑山理란 저 산 넘어 이라고 한다. 徐一 鄭一光 金奎植등이 謀事하야서 남부지대 巡視途中에서 우연히 부더처서 一大戰鬪를 격게 되었으니 그가 유명한 靑山里 싸홈이다. 이럿케 생각하니 和龍縣은 한 포기의 풀, 한 줌의 흙, 한 개의 돌, 그 어느 것이나 朝鮮人에게 잇서 歷史아닌 것이 없다.

同胞의 生活

朝鮮人의 해외이주자가 만타 할지라도 滿州의 그들과 갓흔 辛酸한 경험을 몸소 체험한 자가 없슬지니 그들의 생활은 그저 驅虐과 모멸에서 살지 않을 수 없엇다. 그러는 동안에 그들은 희망을 일헛고 情熱을 일헛고 貧窮에 빠지게 되엿다.
張作霖시대의 滿州는 苛欽誅求가 그 정치의 특색이 엿든이만큼 학교의 졸업증서에도 一枚에 20錢 짜리 印紙를 붓치게 하엿고 반듯이 부부에게는 결혼증서를 사게 하되 一枚에 二圓 내지 三圓이엿고 거긔에도 매장에 8拾錢쨔리 印紙를 붓치여야 했다. 이것을 한 개의 예에 지나지 못하나 결혼하면 民籍에 登記하는 바에 결혼증서가 잇서야 하고 그 결혼증서에도 印紙가 부터야 하며 아무리 늘근 夫妻間이라도 그 결혼증서가 없으면 벌금을 밧엇다 하니 착취의 방법도 그가 넘우 노골적이요 低級하다.<149> 졸업증서, 입학원서 등에도 20錢쨔리 印紙가 붓터야 하고 일년이면 門標조사한다고 해서 공연한 트집을 잡고 門牌파러먹기 소곰조사한다고 해서 자기네가 주머니에 가지고 다니든 소곰을 내어 뵈이고 벌금 밧어 먹기 돈이 잇는 사람이면 공연한 구실을 붓치여서 留置식키고 취조한다고 해서 유치장에서 끄러 내올 때마다 문턱稅라고 해서 돈빼았기, 조선인의 集合을 보고는 不穩계획한 집합이라고 해서 잡어다 가두고 돈빼앗기, 이러한 野心的 착취에 조선인은 알면서도 당하지 안을 수 없엇다. 그 중에도 그가 가장 심했든 곳이 間島이엿으니 間島에는 조선인이 만히 사는 관계로 아무리 저들 염치업는 중국인 관리라 할지라도 자기와 同樣이라면 약간의 양심의 가책에 주저하지 만흔 조선인이라면 背後에 보호자가 없으니 그저 기탄없시 아무런 것이라도 할 수 잇섯다.
여기에 滿州의 조선인은 이 땅이 자기의 永久히 살 곳이라는 생각은 꿈에도 갓지 않엇다. 나는 할 수 없시 살지만은 자기의 자손만은 아무런 일이 잇드래도 조선에 가서 사라야 한다고 밋어왔다. 그러므로 이 지방의 동포의 주택을 보면 하나도 假住宅 아닌 것이 없다.
이럿케 치운 곳이 건만 防寒設備가 없고 집안에 드러가서 보면 전혀 誤樂準備가 없다. 滿州와 갓치 치운 곳이요 겨울이 만흐니 박게 나가서 일하는 시간보다 방에 드러앉어 있는 시간이 만흔 이 지방에서 전혀 방한설비가 없으니 언제나 가족이 치위에 떠러야 하고 방안에 드러안저서 아무런 오락이 없으니 늘 고향이 그립다. 여기에서 그들은 언제나 돈의 여유만 생기는 때에는 고향으로 도라갈 꿈만 갓고 있으니 그들의 생활은 언제나 자리가 잡히지 안엇다. 그러므로 내가 보는 滿州의 동포의 생활은 辛酸 그것이요 무질서하고 빈궁이엿다. 滿州移住 6, 70年에 아즉도 자리가 잡히지 안엇다는 것은 아무리 張氏政治의 영향이 컷다 하드래도 우리 자신도 반성하여야 겟다.
다음에는 滿州는 朝鮮과 지리가 連接하야 있는 관계로 朝鮮에서 犯罪하고 도망해온 자가 만타. 그들은 인간으로의 질이 惡해젓다. 滿州의 도시나 농촌에는 그런 類의 不良分子가 만타. 내가 新京으로 가는 도중 吉林에서 엇든 朝鮮 婦人이 혼자 기차에 올넛는데 그때에 자칭하야 제가 滿州國에 高等官이라는 자가 잇서 그 여자를 威脅하기도 하고 誘引도 하는 것을 목격하고 내가 간섭을 하야서 그 여자를 구해서 新京에까지 갓치 간 일이 잇다. 자기 집으로 打電하야 남편을 오라고 해서 동행케 하엿다. 그<150> 남편은 吉林에서 阿片賣買所를 경영하는 사람이엿다. 이것은 한 개의 實例 引用이나 그런 類의 不良分子가 조선인중에는 상당히 만타는 것을 알어야 한다. 그럿치 안으면 滿州에 첫 번 나오는 사람이나 여행하는 사람에게는 침해를 당하는 일이 만타.
아무래도 滿州에는 우리가 年年히 증가할 지언정 감소되리라고는 꿈에도 생각할 수 없는 일이니 이제부터는 과거와 갓흔 임시로 住接하야 사는 곳이라는 그런 관념을 청산하고서 좀 더 永久한 계획하에서 住屋의 구조도 寒地相應하게 變改도하고 그리고 방안에는 약간의 장식이나 오락적 시설도 하야서 이것이 나의 집이요 나의 땅이라는 관념을 갓기에 주력하야서 생활의 합리화를 도모해야 겟고 이 지방에 도약하는 不良分子는 서로가 협력하고 결속하야서 경계하고 驅逐하여야 겟다. 그 전에 奧地에서 조선인의 생활이 비교적 질서가 잇고 자치가 시행되는 지방에는 그런 類의 不良分子가 거긔에는 着足도 못했고 滿鐵沿線等地에서 출몰했든 것이 그것을 증명할 수 잇는 것이다.

嗚呼, 鍾鳴아!

나는 新京의 旅舍에서 나의 아이 鍾鳴이 죽엇다는 전보를 밧엇다. 龍井에서 新京까지 가는 급행차를 타고도 꼭 12시간 반이 걸닌다. 그리고 東圖線은 動搖가 심해서 一層 疲困하다. 내가 東興中學校의 用務를 갓고 龍井을 떠나든 날 아츰에 까치 한 머리가 와서 바루  내가 자는 창문 압에서 식그럽게 짓는다. 아츰 까치는 吉兆라는데 내가 오날 新京에 떠나는 날, 이 아츰에 까치가 지저주니 반듯이 반가운 일이 잇을 것이라고 깁버햇다. 멧날 전에 鍾鳴의 병이 위독하다는 전보는 밧엇으나 그런 전보밧기도 벌서 여러 차레이고 그런 類의 전보가 왓다가도 多少 差度가 잇으니 안심하라는 急報가 오기도 여러 번이 엿다. 그래서 鍾鳴의 병이 위독하다고 햇더니 이제는 완쾌햇다는 통보가 잇으려니 하고 마음에 慰安이 되고 깁벗섯다. 떠나는 날에 張氏 부부에게 내게 오는 편지나 전보는 곳 新京으로 還送해 달라고 햇다.
아- 그런 기대도 희망도 문허지고 鍾鳴이는 죽엇다.
오날은 昭和 11年 2月 19日이다. 나는 엇든 친구와 함께 新京公會堂으로 활동사진을 보러 가섯다. 그것은 朝鮮映畵인데 守一과 順愛와 청춘의 十字路이여서 이럿케 멀니 고향을 등지고 流離의 생활을 하고 잇는 동포에게<151> 잇서 故土情緖를 새롭게 한다는 의미에서 조흔 계획이라고 생각되엿다. 다만 藝題 그것이 적합한냐 아니하냐는 別問題이요 平壤의 大同江이 나오고 浮碧樓, 乙密臺가 나오니 내 고향은 錦繡江山이라 하야 故土가 그립어지고 청춘의 十字路에서 농촌의 情景이 나오고 마즈막에는 위선자에 대한 복수하는 장면이 나오니 관중은 열광하야 엇지할 줄을 모른다.
그것을 보고 늣기고 旅舍에 도라오니 C君이 차저왓다. 그래서 그저 世上雜談이 畢하고 C君이 도라가니 S君이 차저왓다. 그는 드러오면서 아주 悲奮한 표정으로 『자네 넘우 낙심말게』하고 三通의 전보를 내여 놋는다. 한 장은
ケイサイスクコイシヨメイキトクヨウシヤク
라 하얏고 다른 한 장에는
ケイサイスクコイシヨメイシンタ
라고 하엿다. 시간을 보니 첫 장은 오후 5시 27분이요 다음 장은 오후 6시 47분이다. 나는 그저 아무 말이 업섯다. 하두 억울한 일을 당한다는 表*이엿다. 잠시는 아무 말이 업섯다. 그저 가슴이 선듯하는 것 뿐이지 아무 감각이 업섯다. 다시 정신을 가다듬어 보니 분명히 전보는 틀림이 없다. 아무 말을 못하고 안저잇든 나는 다시 다른 한 장의 전보를 보니 그것은 내가 갓고 온 용무에 대한 打合의 전보이엿다.
그리하야 나의 鍾鳴은 그만 6세를 一期로 하고 죽고 마럿다. 임이 죽은 것이니 구지 이즈려고 햇다. 그래서 S君과 世事나 이약이 하면서 이 한밤을 지내려고 햇다. S는 나를 위하야 하로 밤의 通夜를 약속하고 가지 안는다.
그러나 이즈려고 해서 그럿케 쉬웁게 이저지는 것은 아니엿다. 그래서 내가 하는 말에는 어듸엔가 寂寞과 슬품이 석기여서 흐르고 잇다.
鍾鳴이는 내가 길너서 길른 정이 잇다. 어리여서는 乳母가 길러내이기에 저도 고생하엿으려니와 나도 정성을 기울넛고 괴롬도 보앗다. 그것이 자라서 네 살이 되고 다섯 살이 되니 자냥스럽고 귀업고 사랑스러웟다. 남에 눈에는 그가 엇더케 뵈이엿는지 모루나 범도 제색기 귀여운 것은 안다는 격이엿든지 나에게도 그것이 귀여운 것을 깨닷고 잇섯다.
지금부터 10여 년전에 내가 滿洲에서 3년간을 방랑하다가 고향에 도라온 그해 가을에 나의 어머니가 세상을 떠낫다. 그는 죽기가 실혀서 이를 악물고 엇더케 해서든지 더 살려고 가진 애를 다 쓰다가 그만 숨길이 끈어 지는 것을 나는 본 일이 잇다. 그때에 나는 그것의<152> 一個의 슬품이요 괴롬이엿으나 그 보다도 그 후 내가 서대문감옥에서 苦役의 생활을 하든 때에 어느 날 三重의 철창을 통해서 西山에 넘는 태양을 보고 어머니가 作故하시든 그 순간이 생각나서 가슴이 찌여지듯이 괴롭고 슬펏고 압헛든 것을 기억한다. 해가 西山에 떠러지는 광경, 그것은 분명히 비극이엿다. 더욱이 형무소의 감방에서 그 광경을 보는 심정은 형언에 絶하리만큼 비극이엿다.
滿洲의 바람은 차다. 이제는 스틤도 식어서 방안에도 찬공기가 범람한다. 갓치 하로 밤의 通夜를 약속하엿든 S도 그만 잠이 드럿다.
鍾鳴아 너는 기어히 갓구나.
나는 너를 생각지 안으려고 하나 텅 비 방에 혼자안젓니 엽방에서 피곤한 나그네의 코고는소래가 요란도 한다. 흐르는 눈물을 억제하려고 눈을 감으니 내가 너를 업고 彰義門고개를 넘든 광경이 눈에 비치인다. 내가 늣게 집에 가도 자지 안코 잇다가 반가히 마저주든 네 모양이 뵈인다. 네가 사라잇는 동안 네가 입고 십허하든 옷, 먹고 십허하든 과자를 네 마음대로 멕이지 못한 것이 이제 내가 갓는 遺恨이다.
鍾鳴이는 제 아비 나를 영원히 滿州황야에 내여 쪼고 갓다. 내가 남의 아비로 나서 그것은 장년이 되기까지 길너주지 못하고 죽이엿으니 내가 무슨 면목이 잇서 네가 살든 서울을  갈수 잇으랴. 내가 무슨 위대한 經論이 잇서 그것을 실행하느라고 네가 마즈막 가는 길도 보지 못하느냐.
이 한밤도 발것다. 술을 아니 먹는 나이요 담배를 아니 피이는 나이요 아무 오락도 갓지 못한 나이니 이제 압흐로 내가 滿洲황야에 헤메이는 때에 어느 날, 어느 時인들, 능히 그를 이즐 수 잇을가.
아아, 내가 무엇하러 滿洲에 왓나? <153>
<144-153>