Magazine Title 삼천리 第8卷 第4號
Publication Date 1936년 04월 01일
Article Title 朝鮮文學의 世界的 水準觀 (A View on the Global Standard of Korean Literature)
Author 李光洙, 朴英熙, 兪鎭午, 金岸曙, 洪曉民, 月灘, 李軒求, 李鍾洙, 朴八陽, 李無影, 曉, 閔丙徽, 金珖燮, 沈熏, 宋影, 金晋燮, 林和
Article Type 문예평론 (Literary Criticism)

A View on the Global Standard of Korean Literature
Lamenting the Shortness of History

Yi Kwangsu
Looking back on the history of Korean literature, it is short. Passing through the eras of Maewŏltang and Yi Injik, the New Literary Movement finally began, making it barely about 20 years old. Comparing this young 20-year history to the advanced cultural nations like England, France, and Russia, which possess literary histories spanning hundreds or thousands of years, seems almost forced. In other words, our literary world cannot help but inherently feel weak.

Consequently, looking at the ages of the various writers in our literary world, they are all in their 30s, or at most in their 40s. How deeply could writers in their youthful 30s and 40s feel and observe "Life" and "Worldly Affairs"? While it's said that genius transcends age, such cases are special exceptions. Looking at foreign writers, masterpieces that moved the masses were mostly created after reaching maturity. Although Tolstoy wrote several works in his youth, truly mature masterpieces like "Resurrection," <308> "Anna Karenina," and "War and Peace" belong to his later years, in his 60s and 70s. It's the same for Thomas Hardy and Bernard Shaw. Besides them, were there any writers who produced immortal masterpieces in literary history who were not well past their 40s or 50s?
Someone said that literature is the "Symbol of Anguish," and indeed, art arises from truly researching and agonizing over life. Literature created without deep research, deep contemplation, and deep anguish may gain temporary popularity but cannot become a work that flows through hundreds or thousands of generations. I believe this anguish, contemplation, and research are, 8 or 9 times out of 10, accomplished by the hands of those rich in years who have experienced all the tastes and forms of the world.

If so, is the standard of Korean literature incomparably lower than that of England, France, or Russia? I do not see it that way. For instance, even if Kim Tongin's "Whipping (笞刑)" or "Potato (감자)" have childish aspects in technique, I do not think they would necessarily fall behind the works of first-rate writers if translated into English or French and placed in their literary scenes.
Besides these, there are many in the poetry and novel scenes who are not inferior compared to foreign literary scenes. However, these are special examples. If we consider the Korean literary scene as a whole compared to any foreign literary scene, we cannot help but feel that it lags several steps behind in both quality and quantity.

Our Literary Scene, Neither Superior nor Inferior

Pak Yŏnghŭi
I believe the qualitative development of Korean literature shows a relatively slow feeling. Since what I mean by qualitative development is something I wish to discuss more specifically, I cannot answer in detail here. It seems that the talent of Korean writers is, in fact, almost excellent. However, they lack firm conviction in their artistic views. Looking primarily at what has appeared in recent years, Korean literary theory seems to try to follow the global standard. Writers also attempt to follow these theories excessively, and thus some writers proceed with unsystematic and trackless disordered steps.
As someone who has not read all the numerous works of writers from England, America, Russia, Germany, France, Italy, etc., I avoid a definite answer, but speaking based on my perspective, I think that looking individually, Korean <309> writers are by no means inferior to foreign writers. Not all writers from culturally advanced foreign countries are superior. Also, writers from Korea, with its short history, are by no means inferior. Among the works of world-renowned literary figures, there are indeed some that are inferior to the works of Korean writers.
Seeing the world of Saha (娑婆 - Buddhist term for the mundane world) after about a year, the Korean literary scene seems to have undergone some changes. There seem to be many promising new writers. Although there seem to be many established writers walking unsystematic paths, if great masters grounded in a firm artistic view emerge in the future, then truly outstanding writers surpassing the world literary scene will appear. I avoid individual comparisons here, fearing it might become irresponsible criticism of writers.
While Korean literature, in parts, does not fall short of the world literary scene, it is still regrettable that it has not reached a qualitative overall standard, but I believe time will resolve this.
Rather than thinking about the standard of foreign literature, Korean literature should strive during its own construction period."

Reached the Standard of Foreign Works

Yu Chin’o
I answer the question.
I myself have previously told others that the current standard of Korean literature does not fall far behind that of foreign countries. However, this statement has a very different meaning from the intent of this question. That is, I think we cannot yet find writers and works in our Korea comparable to the famous literary giants of foreign countries or their representative masterpieces. Masterpieces do not emerge overnight. Thinking about the great foreign literary figures, even one person did not write many truly good works. While writing 10 or 100 mediocre works, if one masterpiece emerges, isn't it that masterpiece that ranks them among the great literary figures? Therefore, although I also think that the standard of Korean literature does not fall far behind that of foreign countries, this does not mean that Korean literature already possesses masterpieces to boast about to the world, but literally means it has reached their standard, that is, the level of ordinary works. In the past, Korean literature <310> did not even reach this level. However, within a few years, our standard has rapidly improved, now almost catching up to their standard, and I believe the foundation for world-class works to gradually emerge from among us has now been completed. Therefore, while I do not think the standard of Korean literature falls far behind that of foreign countries, I think it is premature (時期尙早) to ask whose work compares to which foreign writer's specific work. I believe producing such good works is the task imposed upon us now.                  End

Using Pyŏnghŏ (Kim An’sŏ) and Tongin's Short Stories as Examples

Kim An’sŏ
Like a hedgehog saying its own young are beautiful (고슴도치 제 자식 참, 하다고 - proverb), people seem to universally like and love their own things and think they are better than anyone else's.
No matter how true that is, one cannot call a deer a horse; it is truly pitiful. Even if Mr. Kang Yonghŭl built a thatched house (草堂) in America and became the center of curiosity (好奇), I cannot recognize it as a so-called artistic work. And although Mr. Chang Hyŏkchu seems quite active in the Tokyo literary scene using Korean-like language (朝鮮말답은 말), from my perspective, it is not about the true value of the work. It is nothing more than a welcome based on curiosity about customs and manners (風土奇習的 歡迎).
Since the works of those known widely as Koreans amount to nothing more than this, talk of the global standard of Korean literature is utterly nonsensical. No matter how much I try to see my own child as beautiful, if I cannot, what can be done (엇지 합닛가)? This is not criticizing Korean literature; it's just stating the fact, so what is there to say? Comparing it to that of other countries, it simply doesn't compare; mere boasting will achieve nothing. Therefore, acknowledging what exists and what doesn't rather preserves one's dignity as a gentleman (신사로의 체면은 상치 아니할 것이외다).
Long-form works are so childish (幼稚) they are hardly worth mentioning, so one can only pick a few short stories. And even then, one ends up seeking them not from those active overseas, but from writers within Korea. It is newly surprising how people, regardless of East or West, take interest in curiosity (好奇).
If asked for my individual opinion, works that reach a desirable level include Kim Tongin's "Russian Poplar (아라사버들)," "Potato (감자)," "Masterpiece Lydia (名畵리듸아),"<311> "Famous Text (明文)," "Mad Flame Sonata (狂焰소니타)," and a few others. Next are Hyŏn Chin’gŏn's "The Dormitory Supervisor and the Love Letter (舍監과 러브레터)," "Hometown (故鄕)," and one or two others. Like beans sprouting in a drought, it's not that there aren't one or two individual works here and there, but even these works are not comparable to the global standard. They are just at a level that one might wish for.
Therefore, I have already put these short stories into Esperanto (에쓰語化식힌 것). I don't know what will happen when good works emerge as time passes, but for now, we should not lift up Korean literature and talk about global standards. If we do, we will indeed get our noses tweaked badly (큰 코를 떼울 터이니), so we should not jump around recklessly (날 뛸 것이 아니외다).
Looking out, what more is there to say? Spring has come to the sky, but it seems the spring of literary fortune (文運) is still distant in this land.

Questioning the Definition of "Global Standard"

Hong Hyomin

Does Korean literature reach the global standard? Or does it not? This seems like a very interesting question, but it is undeniably a thoughtless "nonsense" proposition.
Why? One reason is that since Korea is part of the world, Korean literature can already be included in the world. The next reason stems from what exactly "global standard" refers to.
Global standard! No matter how one interprets it, it is an unsolvable "nonsense." While one can attach designations like English, American, Russian, German, French, Italian, Irish, Indian, and collectively call it world literature, what indeed is the global standard? If we include Korea among the aforementioned England, America, etc., can it not be splendidly included? However, when setting a certain limit called "global standard," it becomes quite "nonsense." Why? It's because it boils down to how one measures the global standard. There is likely no vaguer term than this. Consequently, before saying whether Korean literature reaches the global standard or not, we must first define the "global standard" to establish this discussion. So, how should the measurement of the global standard be determined?<312>

This term "global standard" is extremely vague and vast/vague (麥浪한). For example (假量), calling English literature the global standard wouldn't be wrong, nor would calling American literature the global standard be wrong. It can be said this way or that way. "Global standard" might seem to hold some truth or nobility at first glance, but in reality, its essence is utterly vague and vast/vague. This is considering it generally, but even thinking from a comparative literary history perspective, if English or French literature has clarity and lightness, there is also the gloomy and somber literature like Russia's. So, if one says English literature is the highest standard, one could also say Russian literature is the highest standard.
Given this, establishing what constitutes a "global standard" becomes quite difficult, turning into an impossible theory. Therefore, it would be difficult for anyone to boldly state what the global standard is, and it would be nothing short of reckless courage (蠻勇). Then, can this "global standard" never be determined? That's right! In our view, this "global standard" cannot possibly be determined. Consequently, if we argue differently along these lines, the proposal kindly made by Samch'ŏllisa (삼천리사) will be dismissed here. However, turning this around and forcing a measurement for the "global standard," it should probably be discussed using writers recognized globally, or further, works by people acclaimed as world literary giants. That is, it should be people who are known globally and have produced works worthy of global recognition. For example, it would be an overly presumptuous act not to recognize figures like England's Shakespeare or Russia's Pushkin globally. They must be recognized globally, and even if we don't recognize them globally, the fact that various countries around the world do recognize them leaves no room for disagreement. There is no room for objection. Therefore, what we see as the global standard of literature are the works (literature) created by Shakespeare, Pushkin, and other literary figures whom the world cannot object to. In other words, while "global standard" is a vague and vast/vague term, if we take the works of various world literary giants as the global standard, we find a certain degree of appropriateness (可當하다는). For instance, if we say Shakespeare's works are the global standard, probably no one would object.<313>

Thus, Samch'ŏllisa, in proposing this, added trivial (區區한) supplementary explanations in a note like, "How does today's Korean literature compare in standard to the literature of countries like England, America, Russia, Germany, France, Italy, Ireland, India?" or "More concretely, please discuss the superiority or inferiority of a certain work by a certain writer in our literary scene compared to a certain work from a certain era by a certain foreign writer." Originally, the addition of this trivial explanation makes this a grandiose (거창한) matter. Why? Because it is almost related to world literary history.
People often mention England first, then America, and here too, England and America are included. While America may be comparable (比肩하는) to England politically, economically, and militarily, we cannot say that America's literature today is superior. Here, the vagueness and vastness/vagueness (漠然且麥浪한) of the "global standard" is again exposed (暴落되거니와). Truly, if Korean literature emerged claiming the global standard to that extent, it could not be called such a globally lagging literature. The same applies to today's Italian literature. Then, the supplementary explanation in Item 1 is already unnecessary, and Item 2 possesses a certain degree of considered validity. That is, "More concretely, discuss the superiority or inferiority of a certain work by a certain writer in our literary scene compared to a certain work from a certain era by a certain foreign writer" is seen as the most direct and truthful approach. In other words, it boils down to which work in the Korean literary scene is similar to which foreign work. Therefore, as briefly mentioned earlier, this relates to world literary history and Korean literary history and is not something that can be answered immediately to the question. Of course, there will likely be many bold Korean literary figures who would recklessly commit reckless courage (蠻勇) with an irresponsible attitude. This truly requires careful consideration. For example, if we were to compare Korea's Ch'unwŏn (春園) Yi Kwangsu with a foreign writer, we must first know Ch'unwŏn and also know the foreign writer. Knowing them superficially is not enough. Without knowing the specifics, daring to speak is nothing but prone to making mistakes. Who here has the courage to dare open the lid (火蓋를 뜨일)? Again, who here would utter (토할) such a bold statement as comparing Russia's Gorky's work to our Minch'on (民村) Yi Kiyŏng's work? Even if there are commonalities between Minch'on's work and Gorky's <314> work, one would need to write something like "A Comparative Study of Minch'on vs. Gorky," citing specific examples like which work and which scene. That alone would require consuming at least several tens of manuscript pages. Is this even feasible? Then, is the discussion of the global standard of Korean literature impossible?

Thus, I felt that today is not the time or place to request deliberation (仰議) on the global standard of Korean literature. The reasons were tediously explained (煩說하엿으므로) earlier, so there is no need for further discussion (更論) here, but when proposing such issues, more prudence is needed.
Firstly, although Samch'ŏllisa asked for submissions regardless of length, the deadline is close (期日이 촉박해잇고), and writing this concretely would require at least 40 pages even if finished in one installment (though it cannot be finished in one installment) (by my standard), making it utterly impossible.
Returning to the word "nonsense" mentioned earlier, if the premise of evaluating today's Korean literature on a global scale leads to evaluation through such measures, can we truly believe it will be evaluated?
Even conceding a hundred steps, if we ourselves reach a conclusion that it meets or does not meet the global standard, should we truly believe this evaluation? Anyone would hesitate (躊躇할) to call it a believable evaluation. Why? Because it is too hasty. Whether Korean literature reaches the global standard is truly something difficult for anyone to say, and something that cannot be said. Ultimately, saying it would merely end up pandering to "journalism" (쩌날리즘), isn't this foolish? We think, before discussing whether Korean literature reaches the global standard or not, strive first to produce literature worthy of the name in Korea! Then, Korean literature will reach the global standard without being spoken of. If one wishes to compare whether Korean literature reaches the global standard or not, it might be possible with a sincere attitude by comparing one Korean writer or one work with a foreign writer and work. However, it is utterly impossible through a vague answer to a one-page questionnaire.
Anyway, rather than boldly answering such things, <315> we must first know world literature well, know Korean literature well, and until then, we must refrain from submitting such questions or answering such questions. Such things merely become temporary, empty foam (泡沬 空論) riding on "journalism." (From a room in East Asia)

Only a Sense of Prematurity

Wŏlt'an
1. It seems like a very good suggestion. Before waiting for others' criticism, it might not be entirely useless vanity (쓸데없는 헛짓) for us to look back at ourselves and appreciate (음미하야) our literary value. However, the feeling that it is still premature (時期尙早) strongly pierces my conscience and makes me want to withdraw this suggestion.
2. As briefly stated in the previous point, since we must be in a position to just study diligently (孜孜히) with a humble attitude and faithful pace (步調), we should, as much as possible, set aside (保留하였다가) this issue and wait for the loud declarations (외우침을) of a later day.

Position Different from International Literature

Yi Hŏn'gu
1. Comparing today's Korean literature with the literature of foreign countries, which possesses the tradition and history of its people and society, seems impossible to discuss together (論爲할) merely with the condition of a "handicap." Even if human physiological conditions lead to the same growth and death in terms of lifespan and all material aspects, there are vast differences (懸殊한 차이) in the content, their spiritual life, and material life. In the recent international Olympics, didn't our rapidly advancing skating clearly indicate (明指하고) its world status, regardless of conditions (콘디슌) and so on? If we think the standard of literature has gone that far, we might feel somewhat relieved and have hope and a future. However, it cannot be accurately answered whether the status gained by the Korean sports world in the international Olympics can be identical to the position Korean literature should hold in international literature.
2. Asserting definitively <316> that the position and work of this writer currently compare (比肩되리라고) to a certain writer of a certain era in literary history seems to carry a dullness (不敏性) akin to blindly following the absurd prophetic judgment of a physiognomist about our fate. When Korea has a history long enough to hold a 10th-anniversary memorial for a 70-year-old writer XX Writer after their death, boastfully saying (豪言하여도) that our literature or our writer created art superior to some world writer wouldn't be too late or detrimental, would it? Impatience dreaming of quick success (榮達) might perhaps (容 或) be permitted for those who courageously pursue others from behind. However, I add as a note (附記한다) that this statement truly comes from trusting the excellence of Korean writers.

Mainly Comparison of Short Stories

Yi Chongsu
1. Narrowing the scope of your Question 1, I considered "How does the standard of today's Korean short stories compare to those of England, America, and Ireland?" (I set the scope to England, America, Ireland because I, your humble servant (小生), know absolutely nothing (全然) of literature outside these countries. I limited it to short stories because I have recently read some discussions on short stories from Korea and England, America, Ireland, and also think the overall standard of literature can be guessed (짐작할 수 있다고) from the standard of short stories. (Though in Korea, poetry and drama tend to be weaker than novels)). When comparing Korean short stories with those of England, America, Ireland, the thought arises that English, American, Irish short stories are nothing special—this thought comes when comparing works of non-excellent writers from England, America, Ireland with works of excellent Korean writers. However, looking overall, I think Korean short stories still fail to match (따르지 못하지 안는가) those of England, America, Ireland. I cannot say for sure, but I wonder if Korean writers lack depth in seeing life and mastery of the (Korean) language compared to English/American writers? Isn't the standard of Korean literature still unable to be called global? I think more effort is needed.
2. I am not yet prepared to answer your Question 2. If time permits, I have the thought of studying the works of writers like Ch'unwŏn, Tongin, Minch'on, Hyŏnmin, Hyosŏk, Hyŏkchu, etc. (no particular order) in novels and comparing (겨누어 볼까하는) them with works of contemporary English, American, Irish writers, but I cannot assert anything. However, one thing I can assert is that if the aforementioned writers were born in a land with a literary tradition like England or America, <317> they would have become writers not inferior to the renowned writers of the current English/American literary scene. (End)

Inferior to "Resurrection" and "Les Misérables"

Pak P'aryang
I answer your question briefly.
Being unable to appreciate (음미하지 못하는) literary works from various foreign countries one by one in their original languages, it is difficult to give an accurate (的確한) statement. However, even from the impression (印象) received through English translations or other double translations (二重譯), it is certainly presumed that foreign literary works generally hold a superior (우월한) position compared to those of Korea.
For example, when reading novels like Tolstoy's "Resurrection" or Victor Hugo's "Les Misérables," which have been widely introduced in the Korean literary scene, or works by foreign writers like Heine, Byron, Goethe, Tagore, etc., there is undeniably a feeling that they are much (훨신) superior compared to those of our Korean literary scene.
However, knowing that literary development is not something achieved overnight but progresses over hundreds of years along with the development of the nation (민족) and its culture, I believe there is no need for us here to needlessly underestimate (과소 평가할) our literary achievements.
"Where there is effort, there is development!"
I believe for us, there is only the path of steadfastly (꾸준이) moving forward.

A Certain Amount of Self-Pride Arises

Yi Muyŏng
Your question seems quite easy yet difficult. In the first place (都是), this word "standard" - isn't it difficult to state the degree of this standard using numbers (數字) or stages (段階)? Just as one hesitates when asked about a young person, "Has that person matured or not?", I am at a loss (궁해합니다) to answer your question.
And I am also embarrassed (난처해 합니다) when asked to state the superiority or inferiority by comparing a certain work by one of our writers to "a certain work" by "a certain writer" from a certain foreign era. Standard seems to be a kind of concept (개념인가 합니다) that cannot be expressed in letters. Therefore, I intend to avoid the trouble (번거로움을) of comparing English, French, Italian, Russian... national literature with Korean literature of a certain era, and merely end by stating that Korean writers are also approaching (가까이) the aforementioned global literary standard <318>. We often feel desolation (적막을 느끼는) when reading works acclaimed overseas. Reading works published recently in the Tokyo literary scene, sometimes a certain amount of self-pride (자부심) arises. Similarly, I think there might be cases where foreigners feel desolation when reading works that our literary scene self-acknowledges (自認하는) as having reached the global standard.
To avoid too much of an irrelevant answer, among our writers who have reached the aforementioned standard, I think we can include Minch'on, Hyŏnmin, Hwasŏng, Hyosŏk, and also Ch'unwŏn, Tongin, Sangsŏp, etc.
And finally, one thing I want to add is that due to the short history of our language, the lack of development in our mother tongue prevents opportunities for export to the world literary scene. However, generally speaking, regardless of left or right, I believe the ideology (이데오로기-) of our writers is one step ahead of the Tokyo literary scene. Isn't this an indispensable (없지 못할) condition for our literature to reign over (군림키에) the world literary scene in the future, and something we can be proud of?

Using Minch'on's "Hometown" as an Example

Hyo
Evaluating the global standard or position of our literature ourselves is an extremely meaningful (의의있는) endeavor, yet given the current social situation, we are in too difficult a position to carry out such a task.
This is not only for us; unless the external conditions restricting (制止당하고 있는) the true development of literature are completely eliminated in all other capitalist countries excluding the Soviet Union (싸베-트聯邦 - likely misspelled Soviet Union), I think the situation would be the same.
Firstly, how can the object of evaluation, the global standard, be defined in the current situation? And how can the limping (跛行的) literary phenomena produced under external limitations be encompassed within the concept of a global standard to discuss their superiority or inferiority?
Therefore, rather than committing the rashness (性急을 범할) of needlessly discussing a vaguely defined global standard, we must first have the composure (침착을 가저야) to seek the exploration of our reality reflected in our literature! That is, the degree of tension (緊張度) with which our writers are currently grappling with (육박하고 있는가) objective reality. <319>
Thus, the comparison between the tension of our writers' embodiment grappling with reality and that of writers from other countries will be the highest standard for the global evaluation of our literature.
However, since such a task cannot possibly be performed in the questionnaire format proposed by your company, I find it extremely regrettable that I cannot elucidate it here.
If forced to say, I think works like Mr. Yi Kiyŏng's "Hometown (故鄕)" among our writers are not particularly inferior compared to the works of writers from other countries.
Of course, it cannot be compared to works like Sholokhov's "Virgin Soil Upturned (開拓된 處女地)," which maintains the highest model (典型) of literary achievement in the recent Soviet Union. However, I think the truthfulness of its embodiment (형상화의) of rural reality is by no means inferior to that of writers from countries other than the Soviet Union.
But here, we should not cause (超致하여서는 아니 될 것입니다) a separation between the unavoidable negative influence brought by Korean specificity and the standard of its evaluation.
Why? Because we face even greater external constraints (제약이 있는) on cultural development than the literary figures of England, America, Russia, Germany, France, Italy, Ireland, India, etc.
I answer briefly thus far.

Like a Wren Trying to Follow a Stork

Min Pyŏnghwi
1. This question is too vast, so answering feels a bit awkward.
For the Korean literary scene, which has only 30 years (해ㅅ수) compared to foreign countries with several thousand or hundred years, comparing this standard seems like "a wren trying to follow a stork (촉새가 황새를 따르는 것)," doesn't it?
However, I hear that a Korean named Mr. Kang Yonghŭl is making a name for himself as a writer in America (米洲), and Mr. Chang Hyŏkchu is competing shoulder-to-shoulder (어깨를 견우고 있으니) with Tokyo writers in the Tokyo literary scene. So, I also think there might be points where we surpass those whose literary movements are much longer than ours.
Yet, just because a few individuals with linguistic talent (才操) have published a few works in foreign languages in overseas literary scenes, we absolutely cannot view their standard as having reached the literary standard of that land.<320>
The highness or lowness (高下) of the standard can only be determined after writers of the entire literary scene produce works that can raise issues globally, or after the works of Korean writers fully possess the form and content of literature like foreign writers, and then are compared (比準해 본 뒤에) with works from various countries.
Just because a writer temporarily produces one masterpiece, and comparing (比準해 보고) it with a similar (同似한) foreign writer's work shows it's better, doesn't mean the literary standard becomes the same.
Looking at foreigners, Hugo produced the masterpiece "Les Misérables," Shakespeare wrote "Hamlet," Zola wrote "Nana," and Ibsen wrote "Nora" - but not all works by these people can be masterpieces.
Because a few works produced throughout their lives became masterpieces, they are named famous writers. Thus, the older (年조가 많은) a country is, the more masterpieces can emerge in its literary works, and the more masterpieces there are, the higher the literary standard of that country becomes.
Therefore, Korean literature does not yet have writers who have reached the global standard, and in the current situation (現下의 정세), even if such writers exist, there is absolutely no XX [opportunity/place?] (XX가 없는 것이다) to display their skills. Thus, I still see this as a future issue. And while the passion of the few writers striving to reach that standard is a most welcome phenomenon, I also find the so-called masters who flee at such times hateful.
2. Ch'unwŏn, Tongin, Sangsŏp, etc., started creating works but veered into popular tales (野談), and several mid-level figures (中堅) fail because they focus more on selling works than writing them. However, among them, we can find 2 or 3 writers who have produced works comparable to foreigners: Minch'on Yi Kiyŏng for novels, and Im Hwa for poetry. Of course, depending on different XX [ideological?] (XX적) standpoints, people will have differing views, but reading Minch'on's "Arson? (鼠火)" or "Hometown (故鄕)," and Im Hwa's various poems, everyone comes to pay respect (경의를 표하게 되는) to their sound (건전한) art.
Recently, I read 2 or 3 works by Sholokhov. Reading them, I recalled (연상했던) Minch'on's "Hometown" and "Arson?".
Although issues of different regions and customs will arise, I thought Minch'on's peasant literature wouldn't require much time to reach Sholokhov!
And in poetry, although I don't know well, I think Im Hwa's poetry doesn't fall short of the standard of works by several poets currently discussed in the Tokyo literary scene.<321>

Lamenting the Shortness of Our Literary Scene's History

Kim Kwangsŏp
Strangely (奇異하게도), recently a trend has appeared in a part of the Korean literary scene to discuss the introduction and translation of Korean literature abroad, or its standard (水準 如何) within the lineage of world literature.
Thus, according to the February issue of Samch'ŏlli, there seem to be nearly 20 writers whose works they wish to translate overseas. While I may be ungenerous enough to temporarily withhold applause for this honor, it feels extremely precarious compared to that for marathon and boxing. I find myself newly wishing that literature could also be a type that can be quickly achieved (速成速達될), like boxing or marathon.
The history of boxing is short.
The history of the body is long, but our history of marathon is short.
Yet, world-class athletes emerged.
30 years of the New Literature Movement's history—this is merely the process of importing Western literature through mainland Japan (內地). Who is the champion (챰피온)?
Suppose there are poets who have completed a lyrical poem, and writers who have completed a short story.
And let's look at the standard not in the past of world literature, but in the present.
Shaw (쇼-翁?), H.G. Wells, Joyce (죠이스?), Huxley (헉스레-?), André Gide (안드레·지-드?), Paul Valéry (포올·바레리?), Proust (프루-스트?), Romain Rolland (로만·로-랑?), Gorky (골키?), Tagore (타골翁?), Upton Sinclair (업튼·싱크레이?), Sinclair Lewis (싱크레이·루이스?)… etc. Who among our writers can reach this standard, participate in this meeting?
Due to my arrogance, I cannot bring out (꺼내여서) fourth or fifth-rate poets and novelists of the world to compare them with the first-rate of our literature or literary scene. If you can understand this narrow-minded (偏狹한) shortcoming, you might pity (憐愍히 녁일 수) me, the author, who has no interest in the comparative contrast of superiority/inferiority, merits/demerits, beauty/ugliness asked in your second query—comparing which work by which writer of which era with which work by which of our writers.
Finally, I apologize that this is not an argument but an impressionistic response.

Don't Want to Define the Standard

Sim Hun
1. As someone, your humble servant (小生), not well-versed (精通하지 못한) in the literature of any Western or even Eastern country,<322> I do not dare to define the standard relative to Korean literature.
2. I try to read works by others as much as possible, but I am ashamed of myself for not yet having the qualification to discuss their relative merits. This is because I know I must refrain from both overestimation (過大) and underestimation (過小). End.

Yi Kiyŏng's "Human Training" and Cervantes' "Don Quixote"

Song Yŏng
1. Although today's Korean literature is still in the process of completion, comparing it with the literature of advanced literary foreign countries, I believe it is not at such a low level as to be pessimistic.
Rather (돌오혀), conversely, I believe it possesses a high standard to some extent (어늬 정도까지).
Generally, the creation (생성) of literature in a country and society has a great relationship with its economic and political influence, but even literature of identical capability and value can be evaluated more or less depending on the political connections (연관성으로 말미암아서) of that society.
The reason Korean literature is comparatively not a global issue lies less in the "inherent lack" of Korean literature itself than in the environmental relationship of the Korean society where Korean literature is born. If the language of our works were not the XX-ly [politically?] (XX的으로) powerless Korean language, but English or German, which have a stronger XX-ly [politically?] (XX的으로) powerful background, I think they would surely have spread their fame (떨지였으리라고) much more greatly in the world literary scene.
When reading so-called foreign masterpieces, finding many poor works (拙作) inferior to our Korean works, I cannot help but offer (不禁하는 바임니다) a kind of bitter smile.
However, our literature, which slumbered under a thousand fathoms, will surely have a time to soar (飛翔할) into the vast sky of ten thousand li.
The only issue is that the immediate task before us is just the determination and practice (실천) to illuminate Korean literature through greater, more creative activity, isn't it?
2. It doesn't come to mind suddenly (졸지에), but I want to mention that "Human Training (人間修業)" by my respected friend (畏友) Minch'on, currently serialized in the Central Daily News (中央日報), is similar (흡사하다는) in its expression format to "Don Quixote," the representative work of the Spanish literary giant Cervantes from 400 years ago.<323>
Cervantes depicted Don Quixote setting off on the path of "Knightly Training (武者修業)" in order to satirize (諷刺하노라고), make fun of (戱諧하고), and bitterly attack (痛擊하고) the traditional feudal consciousness that contemporary Spanish society was immersed in (심취되여 있든), namely, the outdated Bushido thought.
Minch'on too depicted Hyŏnho setting off on the path of "Human Training (人間修業)" in order to likewise vehemently denounce (痛罵하고) and satirize (諷刺하노라고) the traditional consciousness held by contemporary Korean society, along with the distorted contemporary partial philosophical thought.
Since this "Human Training" is not yet finished, we don't know how its conclusion (歸結) will turn out, but inferring (推察하면) from the facts developed so far and seeing the rich foreshadowing (伏線) pulsating (躍動되는) beneath the work, I believe its conclusion will surely be imbued with positivity (적극성).
Don Quixote's sincere madness swept away the bad customs (惡風) of that society to some extent, but I think Minch'on's Hyŏnho will not end merely at correcting (矯正만) contemporary "wrong philosophy" but go further to become a motive force (動因) for the rapid rebuilding (再健되게 하는) of a new philosophy.

The Total Collection of Our Literary Scene is Still Poor

Kim Chin’sŏp
Since I believe the standard for determining the level of a literary scene should not be sought among a small number of excellent writers, but rather can only be found among the majority of members constituting the literary scene, it seems most appropriate to temporarily reserve (保留하여) the discussion on the global standard of Korean literature. Thus, when we consider (考量하여 볼 때) the total collection (總集成) of what is called Korean literature as a whole, we are forced to reach the depressing conclusion that the average score (平均점수) the group of Korean writers would receive in the world literary scene would surely not escape failure (落第를 면치 못하리라는). This is, of course, not because there are no excellent elements in the Korean literary scene, but because childish (稚拙한) elements that have not yet reached mastery (一家에 達치 못한) occupy (占하고 잇기) the majority. And of course, it wouldn't only be our Korea that fails. Because although what is called world literature today can only be formed by encompassing (總括하야) all the literature the world can possess, the countries that serve as its pillars (支柱) always present an appearance limited (제한되여 잇는 觀을 呈하야) mainly to the six major cultural nations: England, France, Germany, Russia, Italy, America.<324> All other small countries (羣小國) generally do not have high standards, but gain the rare glory of participating in the world literary scene by occasionally producing a small number of outstanding geniuses. This should not be thought of as difficult; the issue is the same even if we consider the standard of Koreans as world citizens. It's not that there are no Koreans who have reached, or exceeded, the standard as world citizens; I want to say that, looking overall, the average standard of all Koreans has not reached (達치 못한) that of excellent cultural nations. The issue of standard is not an issue of a small number (小數人) of people; it is truly an issue of the whole nation X (全民X). In this respect, not only in literature but in everything, rather than yearning for one person's above-standard achievement, we cannot know how much we demand the improvement of the national X (民X的) standard. Truly, it is only within the improvement of the general standard that individual breakthroughs in standard can be well planned (圖謀될). Therefore, even if I were to present something belonging to the highest standard within Korean literature, I still cannot muster the courage to compare (대비식혀) it with famous overseas works and discuss its superiority or inferiority. We want to be ashamed (부끄러워하고 십소) of the lowest standard we cannot avoid, in order to boast of the highest standard we can possess.
February 7th

A Child Comparing Height with an Adult

Im Hwa
Hereafter, I briefly answer your questions.
1. Firstly, I absolutely cannot bear the heavy burden of the fantasy (幻想) of comparing the artistic and ideological standard of our modern literature to that of various foreign literatures with any pleasure on my two shoulders (억개에).
For those who servilely exaggerate (事大的으로 誇張하는 論者) foreign literature, and also for those who overestimate (놉히금 치는) the standard of our literature beyond its actual value, I believe only the current state of our literature itself will cool their heated heads.
Of course, I believe someone like myself (小生), who lacks specialized knowledge in the literature of any of the diverse foreign countries, will surely not be permitted intervention (容喙을 許하지 안흐리라). However, in my humble opinion (拙見갓해서는), this kind of comparative literary standard discussion seems like a game similar to comparing the height of a still-growing child with an already grown adult.
Why? Because our literature is still in its infancy (幼年期), and moreover, it exists in indescribably harsh circumstances (酷烈한 璟境 - likely typo for 환경 Environment or 처경 Situation), so comparing it to that of developed cultural nations makes the result self-evident (瞭然한). <325>
What satisfaction would there be in saying our literary standard doesn't fall far behind that of China, India, or other backward countries (後進諸國)? Of course, some of the excellent works of modern Korean literature probably wouldn't be said to fall behind those of India or China. That our literature, in a global sense, is not becoming globalized due to X-litical [political?] (X治的) and linguistic characteristics can be said, but this is neither our joy nor our shame.
If we compare insignificant foreign works with our excellent works, of course, we can toy with a sense of superiority. However, to do such things, we probably don't need to become writers or critics.
And sometimes one encounters internationalists who lament the stagnation and underdevelopment of our literature, but this is groundless worry (杞憂임니다).
We have no need whatsoever for pessimism. Think about it. A writing system for one's own land has existed for merely a few hundred years, and so-called artistic literature began less than 20 years ago. What artistic achievement can be expected? Furthermore, what beautiful flower can already be expected from a place like Korea, where the soil of life environment, thought (사상), etc., that gives birth to literature is so miserable (비참한)?
Moreover, at present, when a considerable number (數爻) of writers in the literary world are vigorously (왕성히) departing from this soil, our expectations are further limited.
Only literature that serves for the creation of our better life on the soil of abundant life contains the seed of life that will blossom in the future.
Whether writer or critic, ultimately, there is no other way but to be diligent (勤勉할), satisfied with being fertilizer (肥料일 것에 만족하면서) for the blossoming of true Korean literature in the days to come, without saying a word.
2. Regarding this item, carelessly wielding the brush would make it difficult to maintain critical etiquette (禮儀를 직히기 어려운) towards both our writers and foreign writers. Thus, I decide to omit (割愛키로 함니다) this, simply recognizing that our young literature is still literally adolescent compared to any advanced nations, for the sake of its growth.
Many thanks<326>

**Summary**

This 1936 article from *Samch'ŏlli* magazine gathers opinions from prominent Korean literary figures on whether contemporary Korean literature meets a "global standard," comparing it to literature from nations like England, France, Russia, Germany, and America. Most respondents express caution or skepticism, highlighting the relative youth (around 20 years) of Korea's modern literary movement compared to the centuries-long traditions elsewhere. Writers like Yi Kwangsu emphasize the lack of aged, experienced authors capable of profound works, while others like Pak Yŏnghŭi and Yu Chin’o acknowledge individual talents (citing Kim Tongin) but see the overall quality and quantity as lagging. Some, like Kim An’sŏ, are quite dismissive of claims to global standing, while Hong Hyomin questions the very definition and measurability of a "global standard." Several authors (Yi Kiyŏng, Im Hwa) are singled out for praise, sometimes compared favorably to specific foreign authors (Gorky, Sholokhov, Cervantes). However, the consensus leans towards acknowledging limitations due to historical context, lack of experience, and external constraints (implicitly, Japanese colonial rule, indicated by censored 'XX' marks), urging continued effort and development rather than premature claims of equivalence or superiority.

From a historical perspective, the article is fascinating. It reveals the intense self-consciousness and aspirations of Korean intellectuals under Japanese colonialism, grappling with their cultural identity and position on the world stage. The frequent comparisons to Western and Japanese literature, the debate over whether individual talent can overcome historical limitations, the acknowledgment of external (likely political) restrictions on cultural development (censored words like 'XX的' likely referring to 'political'), and the differing levels of optimism and pessimism about the future provide valuable insight into the cultural psychology and intellectual climate of 1930s Korea. Historians would find the candid assessments, the specific authors and works discussed (both Korean and foreign), and the explicit and implicit references to the colonial situation particularly noteworthy.

**Named Entities**

*Original Form*	*Hangul*	*English Translation/Romanization*
梅月堂	매월당	Maewŏltang
李人稙	이인직	Yi Injik
英	영	England
佛	불	France
露	로	Russia
獨	독	Germany
伊	이	Italy
愛	애	Ireland
印	인	India
米	미	America
朝鮮	조선	Chosŏn (Korea)
李光洙	이광수	Yi Kwangsu
톨스토이	톨스토이	Tolstoy
토-마쓰·하-디	토머스 하디	Thomas Hardy
빠나드쇼-	버나드 쇼	Bernard Shaw
金東仁	김동인	Kim Tongin
朴英熙	박영희	Pak Yŏnghŭi
兪鎭午	유진오	Yu Chin’o
姜鏞屹	강용흘	Kang Yonghŭl
아메리카	아메리카	America
張赫宙	장혁주	Chang Hyŏkchu
동경	동경	Tokyo
金岸曙	김안서	Kim An’sŏ
玄鎭健	현진건	Hyŏn Chin’gŏn
에쓰語	에스어	Esperanto
洪曉民	홍효민	Hong Hyomin
삼천리사	삼천리사	Samch'ŏllisa (Samch'ŏlli Company)
쒝스피어	셰익스피어	Shakespeare
푸쉬킨	푸시킨	Pushkin
春園	춘원	Ch'unwŏn (pen name of Yi Kwangsu)
고리키	고리키	Gorky
民村	민촌	Minch'on (pen name of Yi Kiyŏng)
李箕永	이기영	Yi Kiyŏng
月灘	월탄	Wŏlt'an (likely Pak Chonghwa's pen name)
李軒求	이헌구	Yi Hŏn'gu
李鍾洙	이종수	Yi Chongsu
玄民	현민	Hyŏnmin
孝石	효석	Hyosŏk (likely Yi Hyosŏk)
赫宙	혁주	Hyŏkchu (likely Chang Hyŏkchu)
朴八陽	박팔양	Pak P'aryang
빅톨·유고-	빅토르 위고	Victor Hugo
하이네	하이네	Heine
빠이론	바이런	Byron
꾀-테	괴테	Goethe
타고어	타고르	Tagore
李無影	이무영	Yi Muyŏng
想涉	상섭	Sangsŏp (likely Yŏm Sangsŏp)
花城	화성	Hwasŏng (likely Pak Hwasŏng)
曉	효	Hyo (pen name?)
싸베-트聯邦	소비에트 연방	Soviet Union (misspelled)
쇼로호프	쇼로호프	Sholokhov
閔丙徽	민병휘	Min Pyŏnghwi
林和	임화	Im Hwa
金珖燮	김광섭	Kim Kwangsŏp
쇼-翁	쇼옹	Shaw (Bernard Shaw?)
H·G·웰즈	H. G. 웰스	H.G. Wells
죠이스	조이스	Joyce (James Joyce?)
헉스레-	헉슬리	Huxley (Aldous Huxley?)
안드레·지-드	앙드레 지드	André Gide
포올·바레리	폴 발레리	Paul Valéry
프루-스트	프루스트	Proust (Marcel Proust?)
로만·로-랑	로맹 롤랑	Romain Rolland
타골翁	타고르옹	Tagore
업튼·싱크레이	업튼 싱클레어	Upton Sinclair
싱크레이·루이스	싱클레어 루이스	Sinclair Lewis
沈熏	심훈	Sim Hun
宋影	송영	Song Yŏng
中央日報	중앙일보	Chungang Ilbo (Central Daily News)
셀봔테스	세르반테스	Cervantes
스페인	스페인	Spain
金晋燮	김진섭	Kim Chin’sŏp
中國	중국	China
日本	일본	Japan
內地	내지	Mainland (referring to Japan)

**Glossary**

*Original Form*	*Standard Hangul*	*English Explanation*
짤습니다	짧습니다	Is short (Older polite ending form)
잇섯스니	있었으니	Because there was (Older spelling/form)
늣김	느낌	Feeling (Older spelling)
업습니다	없습니다	There is not / is not (Older spelling)
갓갑습니다	가깝습니다	Is close/near (Older spelling)
春秋	춘추	Age (honorific); Spring and Autumn
몃가지	몇 가지	Several kinds/types (Older spelling)
가튼	같은	Like, such as (Older spelling)
老後	노후	Old age, later years
마천가지지요	마찬가지지요	It's the same (Older spelling/form)
밧게	밖에	Outside of; only
깁히	깊이	Deeply (Older spelling)
거처낸	거쳐낸	Experienced, gone through
10上 8, 9	십상팔구	Eight or nine out of ten; most likely
나즈냐	낮으냐	Is it low? (Older interrogative form)
가령	가령	For example, supposing
幼穉한	유치한	Childish, immature
갓다가	가져다가	Take and... (Contraction)
뒤떠러지리라고	뒤떨어지리라고	(That it) will fall behind (Older spelling)
손색업는	손색없는	Unblemished, impeccable (Older spelling)
드러	들어	Lifting; citing as an example
뒤저 잇슴을	뒤져 있음을	Being behind, lagging (Older spelling/form)
遲遲한	지지한	Slow, sluggish
論코저	논하고자	Intending to discuss (Older spelling/form)
거진	거의	Almost, nearly
確乎한	확고한	Firm, resolute
爲先	우선	First of all, primarily
近間	근간	Recently, lately
좇아가려고	쫓아가려고	Trying to follow, pursuing (Spelling variation)
無體系	무체계	Unsystematic
無軌道	무궤도	Trackless, erratic
亂步	난보	Disordered steps, erratic behavior
擧皆	거개	Mostly, generally; all
떠러지는	떨어지는	Falling short, inferior (Older spelling)
보아서	보아서	Seeing; Because (Connective)
아즉도	아직도	Still, yet (Older spelling)
자체의	자체의	Its own
과히	과히	Excessively, too (Older form of 과히/과하게)
傑作	걸작	Masterpiece
그리	그리	So, to that extent
몯햇습니다	못했습니다	Could not do (Older spelling)
이르럿다는	이르렀다는	(That it) reached (Older spelling/form)
자랑할 만한	자랑할 만한	Worth boasting about
벌서	벌써	Already (Older spelling)
차차로	차차로	Gradually, step by step
時期尙早	시기상조	Premature, too early
고슴도치 제 자식 참, 하다고	고슴도치 제 자식 함함하다고	Proverb: Like a hedgehog praising its own young (implies excessive partiality to one's own)
아모리	아무리	No matter how
가르처	가리켜	Pointing at, indicating (Older spelling)
그럿타 하기로니	그렇다 하기로니	Even so, granted that (Older form)
업는	없는	Non-existent, lacking (Older spelling)
딱한 일이외다	딱한 일이외다	It's pitiful/unfortunate (Older polite ending)
草堂	초당	Thatched house
好奇	호기	Curiosity
朝鮮말답은 말	조선말다운 말	Korean-like language, language that sounds like Korean
엇지 합닛가	어찌 합니까	What can be done? What should one do? (Older polite interrogative)
뽐을 낸다고	뽐을 낸다고	Just by boasting
도로혀	도리어	Rather, on the contrary (Older spelling)
체면은 상치 아니할 것이외다	체면은 상하지 아니할 것이외다	Will not lose face (Older form)
업슬 만치	없을 만치	To the extent that there isn't (Older spelling)
그야발로	그야말로	Indeed, truly (Older spelling)
멧멧 편	몇몇 편	Several pieces/works (Older spelling)
구하게 되니	구하게 되니	End up seeking/finding
새삼스러이	새삼스러이	Newly, feeling something anew
놀낼 일이외다	놀랄 일이외다	It's surprising (Older spelling/ending)
이 압흐로	이 앞으로	From now on (Older spelling)
몰으거니와	모르거니와	Don't know but... / Not only... (Older spelling)
들어메고	들어 메고	Lifting and carrying
떼울 터이니	떼일 터이니	Will likely get (one's nose) tweaked/hit (Older spelling)
날 뛸 것이 아니외다	날뛸 것이 아니외다	Should not jump around recklessly / run wild (Older ending)
바라보니	바라보니	Looking out/at
닷느냐	닿느냐	Does it reach? (Older spelling)
웨냐하면	왜냐하면	Because
지칭하느냐	지칭하느냐	What does it refer to?
풀수 없는	풀 수 없는	Unsolvable
붓치기는	붙이기는	Attaching; naming (Older spelling)
훌융히	훌륭히	Splendidly, excellently (Older spelling)
어떠한	어떠한	Some kind of, what kind of
측정하느냐	측정하느냐	How to measure?
麥浪한	망막한(?)	Vast and vague (Possibly 茫漠; archaic or unusual term)
假量	가령	Supposing, for instance
可當하다는	가당하다는	(That it) is appropriate/reasonable
註	주	Note, annotation
區區한	구구한	Trivial, petty; detailed
거창한	거창한	Grandiose, magnificent
관련된	관련된	Related to
치고	치고	Mentioning first; considering
比肩하는	비견하는	Comparable, ranking with
暴落되거니와	폭로되거니와(?)	Is exposed/revealed, but... (暴落 usually means sharp fall/crash, context suggests exposure)
暫間	잠간	Briefly, for a moment (Older form of 잠깐)
蠻勇	만용	Reckless courage, foolhardiness
火蓋를 뜨일	화개(火蓋)를 뜨일	To open the lid (idiom for starting something difficult or dangerous)
토할	토할	To utter, speak out; vomit
仰議	앙의	Consultation, deliberation (Archaic)
煩說하엿으므로	번설하였으므로	As explained tediously/at length (Older form)
更論	갱론	Further discussion
期日이 촉박해잇고	기일이 촉박해 있고	The deadline is close/pressing (Older spelling)
맛친다고	마친다고	Even if finished (Older spelling)
評定	평정	Evaluation, assessment
躊躇할	주저할	Will hesitate
긋치고 말지니	그치고 말지니	Will end up merely... (Older spelling)
스사로	스스로	Oneself (Older spelling)
음미하야	음미하여	Savoring, appreciating (Older spelling)
쓸데없는 헛짓	쓸데없는 헛짓	Useless vain act/effort
步調	보조	Pace, step
孜孜히	자자히	Diligently, assiduously
保留하였다가	보류하였다가	Setting aside, reserving
외우침을	외침을	Shouting, proclamation (Likely 외침, not 외움 recitation)
「핸디캡」	핸디캡	Handicap
論爲할	논위할	To discuss together (Archaic/Literary)
招致한다	초치한다	Causes, invites, brings about
懸殊한	현수한	Vastly different, disparate
콘디슌	컨디션	Condition (Loanword)
明指하고	명지하고	Clearly indicating/pointing out
豪言하여도	호언하여도	Even if boastfully saying
不敏性	불민성	Dullness, insensitivity, lack of quickness
榮達	영달	Success, prosperity, high position
容 或	용혹	Perhaps, possibly (Archaic)
附記한다	부기한다	Add as a note, append
小生	소생	I, me (Humble term used by males)
全然	전연	Completely, entirely (Older form of 전혀)
짐작할 수 있다고	짐작할 수 있다고	Can guess/surmise
따르지 못하지 안는가	따르지 못하지 않는가	Doesn't it fail to follow/match?
부족하지 않은가	부족하지 않은가	Isn't it insufficient/lacking?
겨누어 볼까하는	겨누어 볼까 하는	Thinking of comparing/aiming at
的確한	적확한	Accurate, precise
음미하지 못하는	음미하지 못하는	Unable to savor/appreciate
二重譯	이중역	Double translation
印象	인상	Impression
우월한	우월한	Superior
훨신	훨씬	Much more (Older spelling)
민족	민족	Nation, people, ethnic group
과소 평가할	과소평가할	To underestimate
꾸준이	꾸준히	Steadfastly, consistently (Older spelling)
오직	오직	Only, solely
都是	도무지/도시	(In this context) In the first place, fundamentally (archaic usage)
數字	숫자	Number, figure
段階	단계	Stage, phase, level
지목하야	지목하여	Pointing out, designating (Older spelling)
궁해합니다	궁해합니다	Am at a loss, perplexed
난처해 합니다	난처해 합니다	Am embarrassed, feel awkward
개념인가 합니다	개념인가 합니다	Seems to be a concept
번거로움을	번거로움을	Trouble, inconvenience, cumbersomeness
가까이	가까이	Close, near
적막을 느끼는	적막을 느끼는	Feel desolation/emptiness/silence
자부심	자부심	Self-pride, self-esteem
自認하는	자인하는	Self-acknowledged, self-admitted
이데오로기-	이데올로기	Ideology (Loanword)
군림키에	군림하기에	To reign over, dominate
없지 못할	없지 못할	Indispensable, essential
평가한다는	평가한다는	Evaluating
의의있는	의의있는	Meaningful, significant
除한	제한	Excluding, except for
制止당하고 있는	제지당하고 있는	Being restricted/controlled
跛行的	파행적	Limping, crippled, abnormal
如何히	여하히	How (Literary/Archaic form of 어떻게)
性急을 범할	성급을 범할	To commit the rashness/hastiness
육박하고 있는가	육박하고 있는가	Is closing in on / grappling with?
緊張度	긴장도	Degree of tension
침착을 가저야	침착을 가져야	Must have composure (Older spelling)
典型	전형	Model, archetype, typical example
保持하고 있는	보지하고 있는	Maintaining, preserving
開拓된 處女地	개척된 처녀지	Virgin Soil Upturned (Novel title)
형상화의	형상화의	Of embodiment/representation/figuration
불가피적인	불가피적인	Unavoidable, inevitable
超致하여서는 아니 될 것입니다	초치하여서는 아니 될 것입니다	Should not be caused/brought about (Archaic/Literary)
제약이 있는	제약이 있는	Having restrictions/constraints
해ㅅ수	햇수	Number of years (Older spelling)
견우고 있으니	견주고 있으니	Are comparing (shoulders) = competing
才操	재조	Talent, skill (Less common term)
比準해 본 뒤에	비준해 본 뒤에	After comparing/collating
高下	고하	High and low; superiority/inferiority
同樣으로	동양으로	Similarly, in the same way
年조가 많은	연조가 많은	Old (in age/experience) (연조 年條)
現下의 정세	현하의 정세	Current situation/state of affairs
中堅	중견	Mid-level figures, backbone
野談	야담	Popular historical tales, anecdotes, gossip
鼠火	서화	Arson? (Lit. rat fire; needs context, possibly novel title)
건전한	건전한	Sound, healthy, wholesome
경의를 표하게 되는	경의를 표하게 되는	Come to pay respect
연상했던	연상했던	Recalled, associated
奇異하게도	기이하게도	Strangely, curiously
速成速達될	속성속달될	Can be quickly achieved / learned quickly
챰피온	챔피언	Champion (Loanword)
꺼내여서	꺼내어서	Bringing out, taking out (Older spelling)
偏狹한	편협한	Narrow-minded, parochial
憐愍히 녁일 수	연민히 여길 수	Can feel pity/compassion (Older spelling/form)
過大, 過小	과대, 과소	Overestimation, underestimation
아울러	아울러	Together, as well, furthermore
삼가야 할 줄	삼가야 할 줄	Know should refrain from / be cautious of
돌오혀	도리어	Rather, on the contrary (Older spelling)
어늬 정도까지	어느 정도까지	To some extent (Older spelling)
생성	생성	Creation, formation, generation
연관성으로 말미암아서	연관성으로 말미암아서	Due to the connection/relation
떨지였으리라고	떨쳤으리라고	Would have spread/made famous (Older spelling)
拙作	졸작	Poor work, mediocre piece
不禁하는 바임니다	불금하는 바입니다	Cannot help but... (Formal)
飛翔할	비상할	Will soar, fly high
실천	실천	Practice, action, implementation
졸지에	졸지에	Suddenly, unexpectedly
畏友	외우	Respected friend (Literary term)
흡사하다는	흡사하다는	(That it) is similar/alike
심취되여 있든	심취되어 있던	Was immersed in / fascinated by (Older spelling)
痛擊하고	통격하고	Bitterly attacking, denouncing
戱諧하고	희해하고	Making fun of, jesting (Archaic/Literary)
諷刺하노라고	풍자하노라고	In order to satirize
歸結	귀결	Conclusion, outcome
伏線	복선	Foreshadowing, hidden plotline
躍動되는	약동되는	Pulsating, throbbing with life
推察하면	추찰하면	If inferred/surmised
적극성	적극성	Positivity, activeness, proactiveness
惡風	악풍	Bad customs, evil practices
矯正만	교정만	Only correcting
再健되게 하는	재건되게 하는	Causing to be rebuilt/reconstructed
動因	동인	Motive force, cause, impetus
總集成	총집성	Total collection, compilation
考量하여 볼 때	고량하여 볼 때	When considering/deliberating
平均점수	평균 점수	Average score
落第를 면치 못하리라는	낙제를 면치 못하리라는	(That it) will not escape failure
達치 못한	달치 못한	Not reached (Older spelling)
占하고 잇기	점하고 있기	Occupying (Older spelling)
支柱	지주	Pillar, support, prop
羣小國	군소국	Group of small countries
圖謀될	도모될	Can be planned/attempted
대비식혀	대비시켜	Comparing (Older spelling)
부끄러워하고 십소	부끄러워하고 싶소	Want to be ashamed of (Older ending 싶소)
全民X	전민(족?)	Whole nation/people (Censored)
幻想	환상	Fantasy, illusion
억개에	어깨에	On the shoulders (Older spelling)
事大的으로	사대적으로	Servilely, worshiping the great (related to Sadaejuui)
놉히금 치는	높이 치는	Overestimating, valuing highly (Unusual phrasing)
容喙을 許하지 안흐리라	용훼를 허하지 않으리라	Will not permit intervention/meddling (Literary/Archaic)
拙見갓해서는	졸견 같아서는	In my humble opinion (Older spelling)
酷烈한 璟境	혹렬한 환경/처경(?)	Extremely harsh circumstances/environment (璟 likely typo for 環 or 處)
瞭然한	요연한	Clear, obvious, evident
後進諸國	후진제국	Backward countries, underdeveloped nations
X治的	정치적(?)	Political? (Censored)
特性	특성	Special characteristic, trait
굿해여	굳이	굳이わざわざ (Older spelling)
杞憂임니다	기우입니다	Is a groundless worry/anxiety
사상	사상	Thought, idea, ideology
토양	토양	Soil, ground (Fig. basis, environment)
비참한	비참한	Miserable, wretched
數爻	수효	Number, count (Archaic/Literary form of 수효 數爻)
왕성히	왕성히	Vigorously, energetically
肥料일 것에 만족하면서	비료일 것에 만족하면서	Being satisfied with being fertilizer
勤勉할	근면할	Be diligent/industrious
輕輕히	경경히	Lightly, carelessly, rashly
禮儀를 직히기 어려운	예의를 지키기 어려운	Difficult to maintain etiquette/manners (Older spelling)
割愛키로 함니다	할애하기로 합니다	Decide to omit / part with reluctantly (Formal)


---------------------------


잡지명	삼천리 제8권 제4호
발행일	1936년 04월 01일
기사제목	朝鮮文學의 世界的 水準觀
기사형태	문예평론

朝鮮文學의 世界的 水準觀
歷史의 짜름을 歎息

李光洙
朝鮮文學의 역사를 회고하여 보면 짤습니다. 梅月堂, 李人稙의 시대를 지나서 비로소 新文藝運動이 잇섯스니 이럭저럭 줄잡어도 약 20년이 될가 말가 합니다. 이 20년의 어린 역사를 가지고 英佛露 등 수백 년 수천 년의 文藝史로 가진 여러 先進文化國家에 비한다 함은 억지에 갓갑습니다. 박구어 말하면 우리 文壇은 연약한 늣김을 自體로 안저서 안가질 수 업습니다.

따라서 우리 文壇에 게신 여러 작가의 春秋를 보면 모다 30대, 나을 먹엇대야 40대의 人들이외다. 30, 40의 젊을 연대에 잇는 작가가 「人生」과 「世事」를 보고 늣기면 얼마나 깁히 늣겻겟슴니까. 천재는 연령을 초월한다는 말도 잇기는 하지만 그런 것은 특수한 예외다. 외국의 작가들을 보아도 만인을 감격케 하든 걸작이란 대개가 老成한 뒤에 된 것이더이다. 톨스토이도 청년시절에 몃가지 작품을 쓰기는 썻지만 정말 성숙한 대작인 「復活」이나<308> 「안나·카레니나」나 「戰爭과 平和」 가튼 것은 6, 70의 老後의 일에 屬하엿습니다. 「토-마쓰·하-디」나 「빠나드쇼-」도 마천가지지요. 그밧게 누구누구하야 文學史上 不朽의 名著를 내보낸 작가들치고 4,50을 훨신 넘지 안은 이가 잇서습니까.
문학은 「苦悶의 象徵」이라고 말한 이도 잇거니와 진실로 인생에 대하야 연구하고 고민하는 거기에서 예술이 생김니다. 깁흔 연구와 깁흔 觀照와 깁흔 고민이 업시 되어진 문학은 일시는 세상의 인기를 어들 수 잇겟지만 수백대, 수천대로 흐를 작품이 못됨니다. 이 고민과 觀照와 연구는 반드시 세상의 온갓 맛 온갓 모습을 거처낸 春秋에 富한 이의 손으로 되기가 10上 8, 9일 줄 생각함니다.

그러타고 朝鮮文學은 英佛露 등에 대비도 할 수 업게 수준이 나즈냐 하면 나는 그러케는 보지 안습니다. 가령 金東仁씨의 「笞刑」이나 「감자]가튼 것은 비록 기교에 잇서 幼穉한 점이 잇다 할지라도 英佛語로 번역되어 저쪽 文壇에 갓다가 노을지라도 일류 작가의 작품에 결코 뒤떠러지리라고 생각지 안습니다.
그 외에도 詩壇, 小說壇에 외국문단에 비하야 손색업는 이가 만습니다. 그러나 이것은 특수한 예지요. 朝鮮文壇 전체를 드러 어느 외국의 문단에 비한다면 아직은 質로나 양에 잇서 數步의 뒤저 잇슴을 늣기지 안을 수 업습니다.

莫上莫下한 我文壇

朴英熙
朝鮮文學의 질적 발전은 비교적 遲遲한 감이 잇다고 봄니다. 내가 지금 질적 발전이라는 것은 좀더 특별히 論코저 하는 바이므로 이곳에서 상세히 답할 수 없읍니다. 朝鮮의 작가들은 거진 그 才分이 사실로 우수하다고 보게 됩니다. 그러나 예술관이 確乎한 신념이 부족합니다. 爲先 近間 數年에 나타난 것으로 본다면 朝鮮의 문학이론은 세계적 수준을 좇아가려고 하는 듯 합니다. 작가들이 또한 이러한 이론을 좇아가려고 무리한 이론을 추종하려 하며 그러므로 무체계 무궤도의 亂步를 진행하는 작가도 잇습니다.
英米露獨佛伊등 諸國의 작가들의 수많은 작품을 전부 읽지 못한 나로서는 確乎한 회답을 피합니다마는 나의 識見을 표준으로 하고 말하면 개별적으로 보아서 朝鮮의<309> 작가도 결코 외국의 작가에 떠러지지 안는다고 생각합니다. 외국의 문화의 선진한 작가라고 擧皆가 우수한 것은 아닙니다. 또한 역사가 얕은 朝鮮의 작가라고 해서 열등한 것은 결코 아닙니다. 세계적 문호의 작품 가운데도 사실로 朝鮮의 작가의 작품보다 떠러지는 것이 있읍니다.
한 1년 만에 裟婆의 세계를 보니 朝鮮文壇에도 다소 변동이 있어 보입니다. 유망한 신진 작가들이 많어 보입니다. 기성작가들도 무체계의 길을 거러가는 이가 많어 보입니다마는 앞으로는 작가로서 確乎한 예술관의 기초 우에서 잇는 巨匠이 많이 나온다면 그 때에는 비로소 세계문단을 너머서는 우수한 작가가 나올 것입니다. 이곳에서 개별적 비교는 피합니다. 그것은 무책임한 작가론이 될까 보아서 두려운 까닭입니다.
부분적으로는 세계문단에 떠러지지 않는 조선문학이, 질적 전체적 수준에 이르지 못함은 아즉도 유감으로 생각하는 바이나 이것도 시간이 해결할 줄 압니다.
외국문학의 수준을 생각하는 것 보다도 자체의 건설기에서 조선문학은 노력할 것입니다.」

外國作品의 水準엔 到達

兪鎭午
질문에 답합니다.
조선문학의 현수준은 외국의 그것에 비해 과히 떠러지지 않엇다는 의미의 말은 과거에 나 자신도 남에게 한 일이 잇습니다. 그러나 이 말은 이번 질문의 취지와는 대단히 의미가 달습니다. 즉 외국의 著名한 文豪나 그의 대표적 걸작에 비견할 만한 작가와 작품은 아즉은 우리 朝鮮서는 찾을 수 업다고 생각합니다. 傑作이란 그렇게 1朝1夕에 나오는 것이 아닙니다. 누구누구하는 외국의 大文豪를 들어 생각해 보아도 한 사람으로서는 정말 조흔 작품은 그리 많이 쓰지 모햇습니다. 10개 100개 凡作을 써가는 동안에 한 개의 걸작이 나오면 그 걸작으로서 그는 大文豪에 列하는 것이 아닐까요. 그러므로 朝鮮文學의 수준이 외국의 그것에 비해 그리 떠러지지 않엇다고는 나도 생각하나 이것은 조선문학이 벌서 세계에 자랑할 만한 걸작을 가젓다는 의미가 아니라 글자 그대로 그의 수준에 다시 말하면 보통작품의 정도에 이르럿다는 의미에서입니다. 과거의 조선문학은<310> 이 정도에도 이르지 몯햇섯습니다. 그러나 수년 내로 우리의 수준은 급격히 향상되어 인제는 그들의 수준에 거의 따러왓스며 인제 와서는 우리 속에서도 차차로 세계적 작품이 나올 만한 기초가 완성되엇다고 생각함니다. 그러므로 나는 조선문학의 수준은 외국의 그것에 과히 떠러젓다고는 생각지 않으나 누구의 작품을 외국의 누구의 어느 작품에 비하랴하는 것은 時期尙早라 생각합니다. 이런 좋은 작품을 낳는 것이 지금 우리에게 부과된 문제라 생각합니다.                  以上

憑虛, 東仁의 短篇을 例로

金岸曙
고슴도치 제 자식 참, 하다고, 사람이란 어듸까지든지 제 것을 조와하고 사랑하고 그것이 누구의 것보다도 낫다는 생각을 가지는가 보외다.
아모리 그럿타 하기로니 사슴을 가르처 말이라 할 수도 업는 일이니 실로 딱한 일이외다. 姜鏞屹씨가 草堂을 아메리카에다 짓고 好奇의 중심이 되엿다 하더라도 나는 그것을 소위 예술로의 작품이라고 인정할 수가 업슴니다. 그러고 張赫宙씨도 동경문단에서 朝鮮말답은 말로 사용하면서 상당히 활동하는 모양이건만은 모도 다 나로 보면 작품의 진정한 가치에 잇는 것이 아니요. 好奇로의 風土奇習的 歡迎에 지내지 아니하는 것이외다.
소위 朝鮮사람으로 넓이 알여젓다는 이들의 작품이 이러한 것에 지내지 못하니 조선문학의 세계적 수준 云云은 얼토당치 아니한 일이외다. 아모리 내 자식을 참, 하게 보랴 하여도 볼 수 업는 것을 엇지 합닛가. 그럿타고 무슨 조선문학을 욕하는 것도 아니요. 사실이 그러하니 엇지하잔 말인가 할 뿐이외다. 다른 나라의 그것에 비해 보랴 하여도 비해지지 아니하는  것을 한갓되이 뽐을 낸다고 될 것이 아니외다. 그런 지라 잇는 것은 잇고 업는 것은 업다고 하는 것이 도로혀 신사로의 체면은 상치 아니할 것이외다.
장편가튼 것은 들어서 말할 것이 업슬 만치  그야발로 유치하고 보니 단편에서나 멧멧 편을 골을 수 밧게 업는데 그것도 도로혀 해외에서 활동하는 이들의 것이 아니고 朝鮮안에서의 작가에게 구하게 되니 새삼스러이 사람이란 東西를 물론하고 엇더케 好奇에 흥미를 가지는지 놀낼 일이외다.
나 一個의 意思를 말하라 하면 이만 햇으면 하는 정도의 작품으로는 金東仁의 「아라사버들」 「감자」 「名畵리듸아」<311> 「明文」 「狂焰소니타」 그 외 멧멧 편이요. 그 다음에는 玄鎭健의 「舍監과 러브레터」 「故鄕」 그 밧게 1,2편이요. 가물에 콩 나듯이 가다가다 개인의 작품에 한두어 편 업지 아니한 것은 아니나마 그럿타고 이 작품들을 세계의 수준 그것에 비할 것은 아니외다. 그저 그만 햇으면 하는 정도의 것이라는 말이외다.
그런 지라 나는 발서 이들의 단편들을 에쓰語化식힌 것이외다. 이 압흐로 時日이 지내가서 조흔 작품이 나온 그 때에는 몰으거니와 아직 우리로서는 조선문학을 들어메고 세계적 수준 운운할 것이 아니외다. 그러다가는 그야말로 큰 코를 떼울 터이니 함부로 날 뛸 것이 아니외다.
이 이상 무엇을 더 말할 것인가 바라보니 봄은 하늘에 왓건만은 이 강산에는 아직 文運의 봄이 먼 듯 하외다.

世界的 水準의 規定疑問

洪曉民


조선문학이 세계적 수준에 닷느냐? 혹은 닷지 안느냐?  이것은 매우 흥미를 끌 듯 싶은 문제이나 이는 확실이 생각업는 『넌센스』의 設問이 아닐 수 없는 것이다.
그것은 웨냐하면 朝鮮이 세계 중에 하나인 이상 벌서 조선문학도 세계 중에 들 수 잇는 것이라는 것이 하나의 이유요. 그 다음은 과연 세계적 수준이란 무엇을 지칭하느냐 하는 데서 기인하는 것이다.
세계적 수준! 이것은 아무리 해석하드라도  이는 한 개의 풀수 없는 『넌센스』인 것이다. 곧 英, 米, 露, 獨, 佛, 伊, 愛, 印이라는 지칭을 붓치기는 할 수 잇스니 이는 총칭 세계문학이라고 할 수 잇으나 더 나아가 세계적 수준이란 과연 무엇인가. 전기 英, 米이하 諸國속에 朝鮮도 집어 넣면 훌융히 집어 넣을 수 잇을 수 잇는 것이 아닌가. 그러나 세계적 수준이라는 어떠한 한계를 정할 때는 이것이 퍽으나 『넌센스』로 되는 것이다. 그는 웨냐하면 이는 곧 세계적 수준이란 과연 무엇으로 측정하느냐 하는 것일 것이다. 이와 같이 막연한 말은 없을 것이다. 따라서 조선문학이 세계적 수준에 닷느냐? 혹은 아니 닷느냐? 하는 것을 말하기 전에 吾人은 먼저 세계적 수준이란 것을 정해 노코서 이 論을 성립시키지 아니면 아니 될 것이다. 그러면 세계적 수준의 측정이란 어떠케 정할 것이냐.<312>



이 세계적 수준이란 극히 막연하고 麥浪한 말이니 假量 英國文學을 세계적 수준의 것이라 하여도 말이 되지 아니하는 것은 아니며 또한 米國文學이 세계적 수준에 닷는 것이라 하여도 말이 되지 아니하는 것은 아니다. 곧 이러케도 말할 수 잇고 저러케도 말할 수 잇는 것으로 세계적 수준이란 얼는 생각하면 무슨 진리가 잇는 것 같이 또는 존귀한 그것 같이 생각되나 其實 그 본질에 이르러서는 한갈같이 막연하고 麥浪한 것이다. 이것은 또한 보편적으로 고찰한 바의 것이나 이를 文藝比較史的으로 생각하드래도 英吉利나 佛蘭西의 문학이 명랑하고 경쾌한 것이 잇다고 생각하면 또는 露西亞와 같은 우울하고 침통한 그러한 것도 잇는 것이다. 그래서 英吉利文學이 최고 수준이라고 하면 또 露西亞文學이 최고 수준이라고도 할 수 잇는 것이다.
이러케 되고 보면 究竟 세계적 수준이라고 하는 것은 퍽으나 성립시키기 어려운 것으로 도저히 될 수 없는 이론이 되고 말게 된다. 따라서 누가 대담하게 세계적 수준이란 이러이러한 것이라고 말하기는 어려울 것이오, 아울러 蠻勇이 아닐 수 없다. 그러면 영원히 이 세계적 수준이란 確定할 수 없는 것일까. 그럿타! 이 세계적 수준이란 것은 吾人의 생각으로는 도저히 確定할 수 없다. 따라서 이대로 논리를 달리 한다고 하면 못처럼 삼천리사에서 제안한 것은 이곳에서 묵살되고 만다. 그러나 이를 다시 돌리어 억지로라도 세계적 수준이라고 하는 것은 측정정도로 한다면 먼저 세계적으로 是認받을 만한 문인, 더 나가서는 세계적 文豪라고 지칭 받는 사람들의 작품을 가지고 논의하는 것이라야 될 줄 안다. 곧 세계적으로 알려젓고 세계적으로 시인할 만한 작품을 내엇다는 그런 사람이라야 될 것이다. 예컨댄 英國의 쒝스피어나 露國의 푸쉬킨같은 사람은 이들을 세계적으로 인정하지 아니하기에는 넘우나 畏濫한 擧措가 아닐 수 없는 것이다. 곧 세계적으로 인정해 주어야 할 것이며 또한 吾人이 세계적으로 인정하지 안트래도 세계 각국에서 인정하고 잇다는 데는 누구나 더 무엇이라고 말할 수 없을 것이다. 곧 반대의 여지가 없다는 것이다. 따라서 吾人이 보는 바 문학의 세계적 수준이란 쒝스피어와 푸쉬킨과 기타 세계인이 반대 못할 文人이 지어낸 작품(문학)이 곧 그것이라고 생각한다. 말하자면 세계적 수준이란 막연하고 麥浪한 말이나 세계상의 諸文豪의 작품을 가지고 세계적 수준이라고 하면 어느 정도로 可當하다는 것을 발견한다는 말이다. 곧 쒝스피어의 작품이 세계적 수준이다 하면 이에 대하야 반대할 사람은 없을 줄로 생각한다.<313>



그래서 提議하는 삼천리사에서도 註로 今日의 조선문학은 英, 米, 露, 獨, 佛, 伊, 愛, 印 등 諸國의 문학에 비하야 그 수준이 어떠함니까』하던가 또는 『좀더 구체적으로 우리 문단의 어느 작가의 어느 작품은 해외 어느 작가의 어느 시대, 어느 작품에 비하야 그 우열을 논하여 주시압』하는 등의 區區한 부속적인 설명을 첨가하엿으나 원래 이 區區한 설명이 첨가된 정도로 이것은 거창한 일이 아니면 아닐 수 없는 것이다. 그는 웨냐하면 거의 세계문학사에 관련된 그것인 까닭이다.
世人이 흔히 英國을 치고 곧 米國을 치는 식으로 이곳에도 英과 米를 넣엇으나 米國이 정치적, 경제적, 군사적으로는 英國과 比肩하는 그것이라고 할 수 잇으나 吾人은 米國의 今日文學은 결코 우수한 것이라고 할 수는 없는 것이다. 이곳에 이 세계적 수준의 漠然且麥浪한 것이 또다시 暴落되거니와 진실로 그러한 정도로 조선문학이 세계적 수준을 잡고 나온다면 그러케 세계적으로 뒤떨어진 문학이라고도 할 수 없는 것이다. 또한 今日의 伊太利文學이라는 것도 그럿타. 그러면 究竟 第1項의 註釋的 첨가는 벌서 필요없는 그것이 되어 잇고, 그 第2項은 어느 정도까지 생각해 낸 妥當性을 가지고 잇다. 곧 『좀 구체적으로 하야 우리 문단의 어느 작가의 어느 작품은 해외 어느 작가의 어느 시대의 어느 작품에 비하야 그 우열을 논하라』한 것이 가장 직접적이오 진실인 것을 볼 수 잇는 것이다. 말하자면 조선문단의 어떤 작품이 외국의 어느 작품과 같으냐 하는데 잇는 것이다. 따라서 이는 먼저도 暫間 말하엿거니와 세계문학사에 관련되고 조선문학사에 관련되어 당장 設問에 답할 그것은 아닌 것이다. 그야 아무러케라도 무책임한 태도로써 蠻勇을 범할 우리의 대담한 조선문인이 많이 잇을 것이다. 이는 진실로 심사숙고하지 아니하면 아니된다. 곧 이는 가령 朝鮮의 春園 李光洙씨를 해외작가와 비교한다고 하면 먼저 春園을 알어야 하고 또 해외 어느 작가를 알지 안으면 아니된다. 알어도 그대로 알어서는 아니된다. 구체적인 것으로서의 것을 알지 아니하면 감히 말한다는 것은 이는 자기의 잘못을 범하기 쉬운 그것 밖에 아무것도 없는 것이다. 이곳에 누가 그것을 감히 火蓋를 뜨일 용맹을 가진 사람이 잇겟는가. 다시 말하면 이곳에 露西亞의 『고리키』작품이 우리의 民村 李箕永씨의 작품과 같다고 할 그러한 대담한 言說을 토할 사람이 누구인가. 만약 民村의 작품과 『고리키』의<314> 작품이 공통되는 것이 잇다고 하드래도 어느 작품 어느 장면이라는 곧 구체적인 실례를 들어서 『民村對 고리키對 比論』같은 것이라도 써야 될 것이니 그것만으로도 적어도 수 십장의 원고지는 소비하여야 할지니 이것이 될 뻔이나 한 일인가. 그러면 조선문학의 세계적 수준론은 불가능한 그것이고 말 것일까?



그리하야 조선문학의 세계적 수준론은 오늘에 잇어서 仰議를 청할 그 시기와 또는 장소가 아니라는 것을 느꼇다. 그 이유는 먼저 煩說하엿으므로 그 更論의 필요를 이곳에 느끼지 않거니와 이러한 문제를 提議함에 잇어서는 좀더 신중히 할 필요가 잇는 것이다.
그것은 첫째로 삼천리사에서 아무리 원고의 長短을 불구하고 써달라고 하엿으나 그 期日이 촉박해잇고 또 이것을 구체적으로 쓴다고 하면 적어도 1회에 맛친다고 하드래도 (1회로 맛칠 수 없는 것이지마는)印刷하여서도 40面은(나의 표준으로) 가저야 할 정도이니 이는 도저히 할 수 없는 일이다.
이곳에서 먼저 말한 『넌센스』라는 말에 다시 돌아가거니와 오늘날 우리 조선문학을 세계적 평가에  올리는 것을 전제로 하고 爲先 評定한다는 것이 이러한 擧措로 나온다면 과연 評定되리라고 믿을 수 잇는 것일까.
假使 百步를 讓하야 이것이 우리들 스스로가 評定한 그것이 세계적 수준에 닷는다든가 아니닷는다든가 하는 결론을 내림이 잇다면 이는 과연 우리들이 믿어야만 할 평정일 것인가? 결코 믿을 評定이라고 하기에는 누구나 躊躇할 것이다. 그것은 웨 그럴까? 너무 경솔한 까닭이다. 조선문학이 세계적 수준에 닷는다는 것은 진실로 누구나 말하기 어려운 바이오. 또 말할 수 없는 것이다. 究竟 이를 말한다면 『쩌날리즘』을 迎合하는 그러한 정도에 긋치고 말지니 이 아니 어리석은 일이 아닌가. 吾人은 생각하노니 조선문학이 세계적 수준에 닷는가 혹은 닷지 안는가를 논하기 전에 먼저 朝鮮에서 문학다운 문학을 생산하기에 힘쓰라! 그러면 그 때는 조선문학이 말하지 아니하는 가운대 세계적 수준에 다을 것이오. 만약에 조선문학이 세계적 수준에 닷는가 혹은 닷지 안는가 비교해 보고저 할진댄 眞摯한 태도로써 朝鮮의 한 작가와 또는 한 작품을 가지고 외국인 작가와 작품에 대비하여 보므로써 가능할 것이다. 그러나 막연하게 1장의 設問紙의 답으로써는 전혀 불가능함인 것을 몰라서는 아니된다.
하여간 우리들은 이러한 것을 대담하게 답하기보다도<315> 먼저 세계문학을 잘 알고, 조선문학을 잘 안 뒤가 아니면 이러한 설문을 제출하는 것이나 또는 이러한 설문에 답하는 것을 謹愼하지 아니하면 아니될 것이다. 이러한 것은 곧 『저날리즘』에 올러앉은 일시적 泡沬 空論밖에 아니되는 까닭이다.    (東亞一室에서)

오직 時期尙早의 感

月灘
1. 대단히 좋은 건의인 듯 싶습니다. 우선 남의 비판을 기다리기 전에 스사로 우리 자신을 한번 돌아 보아 우리의 문학적 가치를 음미하야 보는 것도 아주 쓸데없는 헛짓은 아닐 것이외다. 그러나 아직 時期尙早인 감이 강하게 내 양심을 찌르고 이 건의를 취소케 합니다.
2. 先項에 간략히 말슴한 거와 같으매 우리는 겸손한 태도와 충실한 步調로 다만 孜孜히 工夫할 처지에 있어야만 될 것이매 될 수 있는 한 이 문제를 保留하였다가 뒤날의 큰소리 외우침을 기다릴 수밖에 없을 것입니다.

國際文學과는 地位不同

李軒求
1. 문학이 그 민족 그 사회의 전통을 가지고 역사를 가진 외국의 문학과 오늘의 조선 문학을 비교하기에는 다만 「핸디캡」이라는 조건만으로는 도저히 함께 論爲할 수 없을까 한다. 인간의 생리적 조건으로는 그 수명과 모든 物的 방면에서 동일한 長成 死滅을 招致한다 하더라도 그 내용에 있어서 그의 정신적 생활, 물질적 생활에는 懸殊한 차이가 있는 것이다. 우리가 이번 국제 올림픽에 있어서 저렇듯 長足飛躍한 스케-팅도 모든 콘디슌 云云을 떠나 역력히 그 세계적 지위를 明指하고 있지 안는가? 문학으로의 수준도 그만큼만 갔다고 생각하면 다소 안심도 되고 희망도 미래도 가질 수 있을까 한다. 그러나 확실히 국제 올림픽에서 획득한 조선체육계의 지위가 국제문학에 있어서 조선 문학이 가질 바 지위와 동일할 수 있을까는 정확히 해답할 수 없다.
2. 현재에 있어서 이 작가의 지위와 그 작품은 문학사상에 있어서 正히 어느 시대의 어느 작가와 比肩되리라고<316> 단언하는 것은 좀 더 냉정히 생각한다면 우리가 우리의 운명을 人相家의 황당한 예언자적 판단에 盲從함과 같은 不敏性이 있을 듯 하다. 朝鮮에도 70의 老作家 XX作家 死後 10年祭쯤 하게까지 역사를 가진 때 우리의 문학 또는 우리의 작가는 이만큼 세계적 어느 작가 이상의 예술을 창조하였다고 豪言하여도 그리 늦일 것도 없고 損될 것도 없지 않을까? 속히 榮達을 꿈꾸는 조급성도 남의 뒤를 용맹하게 추격하는 자에게는 容 或容許될 것이다. 그러나 이 一言은 실로 조선 작가의 우수성을 신뢰함에서 하는 말임을 附記한다.

主로 短篇小說의 比較

李鍾洙
1. 貴設問 1의 범위를 좁혀서 「今日의 조선 단편소설은 英, 米, 愛, 단편소설에 비하야 그 수준이 어떠한가? 를 생각해 보았읍니다. (범위를 英, 米, 愛로 설정한 이유는 小生은 英, 米, 愛 이외의 문학은 全然 모르기 때문이오. 단편소설로 한정한 것은 小生이 근래에 조선과 英, 米, 愛의 단편소론을 좀 본 것이 있고 또 단편의 수준으로 문학 전반의 수준은 짐작할 수 있다고 생각하기 때문입니다. (朝鮮에서는 시, 희곡이 소설만 못한 경향도 있지마는) 조선단편소설과 英, 米, 愛, 단편소설을 비교해 볼 때에 英米愛의 단편소설도 별 것이 없다―이러한 생각도 나지마는 이것은 英, 米, 愛의 우수하지 못한 작가의 작품과 朝鮮의 우수한 작가의 작품을 비교할 때에 나는 생각이고 전체적으로 볼 때에는 역시 朝鮮의 단편소설은 英, 米, 愛의 그것을 따르지 못하지 안는가 하고 생각합니다. 確言할 수는 없으나 조선 작가는 인생을 보는 깊이와 (조선) 「말」이 英米作家에 비해서 부족하지 않은가 합니다. 조선 문학의 수준은 아직 세계적이라고는 할 수 없지 않을까요? 더 힘쓸 필요가 있다고 생각합니다.
2. 아직 貴設問 2에 대답할 준비는 없읍니다. 시간이 있으면 소설로는 春園, 東仁, 民村, 玄民, 孝石, 赫宙 등(無順) 諸씨의 작품을 연구해서 英, 米, 愛의 현대작가의 작품하고 겨누어 볼까하는 생각은 가지고 있읍니다마는 무어라고 단언할 수 없읍니다. 그러나 한 가지 단언할 수 있는 것은 이상의 작가가 英米와 같은 문학적 전통이 있는 땅에 낳다고 가정하면<317> 現 英米文壇의 명성있는 작가들에게 지지 안는 작가가 되었으리라고 하는 것입니다. (以上)

「復活」 「레미제라불」에 不及

朴八陽
貴問에 간략히 답합니다.
諸外國의 문학적 작품을 일일이 原書에 의하야 음미하지 못하는 관계로 的確한 말슴은 드리기 어려우나 英譯 其他 등 二重譯을 통하야 받는 印象만으로도 확실히 외국의 諸文學的 작품이 일반적으로 朝鮮의 그것보다 우월한 지위에 있는 줄로 짐작됩니다.
一例를 든다면 조선 문단에도 많이 소개된 『톨스토이』 『復活』 『빅톨·유고-』의 『레·미제라블』같은 소설이나 또는 『하이네』 『빠이론』 『꾀-테』 『타고어』 등등 외국문인의 작품들을 읽을 때 일반적으로 우리 조선 문단의 그것에 비하야 훨신 우수한 느낌이 없지 아니합니다.
그러나 문학의 발전이란 결코 一朝一夕에 되는 것이 아니오 민족과 및 그 문화의 발전에 따라 백년의 時日을 두고 진보되는 것인 줄을 아는 이상 여기에서 우리는 공연히 우리들의 문학적 성과를 과소 평가할 필요는 없을 줄 압니다.
『努力하는 곳에 발전이 있다!』
우리들에게는 꾸준이 오직 나아가는 한길이 있을 뿐인 줄 압니다.

若干의 自負心이 생겨진다

李無影
貴問은 퍽 쉬운 듯 하면서도 어렵습니다. 都是 「수준」이라는 이 말은 數字나 혹은 段階로서 이 수준의 정도를 말하기는 어렵지 않을까 합니다. 어떤 청년을 지목하야 저 사람이 철이 났느냐 못났느냐는 질문을 받을 때 주저하듯이 나는 이 貴問에도 대답에 궁해합니다.
그러고 우리 작가 중 어느 사람의 어느 작품이 외국의 어느 시대의 「어느 작가」의 「어느 작품」과 비하야 그 우열을 말슴하라 하심에도 또한 난처해 합니다. 수준이란 문자로는 표현치 못하는 일종의 개념인가 합니다. 그렇기에 生은 英, 佛, 伊, 露... 國文學과 朝鮮의 어느 시대 문학을 비교하는 번거로움을 피하고 다만 朝鮮의 작가들도 우에 말한 세계적 문학수준에 가까이 올라가고<318> 있다는 것을 말슴하는 정도에서 끝이랴 합니다. 우리는 외국에서 떠드는 작품을 읽고 마음의 적막을 느끼는 경우가 많습니다. 최근에 東京文壇에 발표되고 있는 작품을 읽고 또한 약간의 자부심이 생길 때가 있읍니다. 마챤가지로 우리 문단에서 세계적 수준에 올랐다고 自認하는 작품이 또한 외국인이 읽을 때 적막을 느낄 경우도 있으리라고 생각합니다.
너무 지나친 東問西答을 면키 위하야 우리 작가 중에서 말하는 바 수준에 達한 작가 중에서 民村, 玄民, 花城, 孝石, 그러고 春園, 東仁, 想涉, 등 諸作家를 들 수 있으리라고 생각합니다.
그러고 끝으로 한마디 붙이고 싶은 것은 우리 말은 역사가 짧은 탔으로 母語發達의 부족으로 하야 세계문단에 수출될 기회를 갖지 못하나 대체로 보아 좌우를 막론하고 우리 작가들의 이데오로기-는 東京文壇보다 한거름 더 앞섰다고 봅니다. 이것은 장래 우리의 문학이 세계문단에 군림키에 없지 못할, 그러고 우리의 자랑할 조건이 아닌가도 합니다.

民村의 「故鄕」을 例로 들어

曉
우리 문학의 세계적 수준 혹은 지위를 우리 스스로가 평가한다는 것은 지극히 의의있는 사업이면서도 현실의 사회적 정세에 있어서 우리는 그러한 사업을 履行하기에는 너무나 어러운 지위에 있읍니다.
그것은 비단 우리에게서 뿐만 아니라. 싸베-트聯邦을 除한 다른 모-든 자본주의 국가에 있어서도 문학의 진정한 발전이 制止당하고 있는 외부적 조건이 완전히 소멸되어 버리지 안는 限에 있어서는 동일한 정황일 것이라고 생각됩니다.
첫재 평가의 대상인 세계적 수준을 과연 현실의 정세에 있어서 如何히 규정할 것이며 또 외부적 제한 밑에서 생산되는 跛行的 文學 현상을 如何히 세계적 수준이라는 개념의 속에 총괄하야 그 우열을 논할 수가 있겠읍니까!
그러므로 우리는 부질없이 기준이 막연한 세계적 수준을 논할 性急을 범할 것이 아니라 爲先 우리들의 문학의 우에 반영된 우리 현실의 탐구! 말하자면 우리들의 문학자들이 현재 얼마나한 역량을 가지고 객관적 현실에 육박하고<319> 있는가 하는 그 형상의 緊張度를  찾을 수 있는 침착을 가저야 할 것입니다.
그리하야 우리 작가의 형상의 현실에 육박하는 긴장도와 다른 나라 작가의 그것과의 대조만이 우리 문학의 세계적 평가의 최고의 기준이 될 것입니다.
그러나 이러한 사업은 貴社에서 提言한 바의 설문형식으로는 도저히 이행할 수가 없는 것이므로 여기에서는 해명하지 못하는 것을 지극히 유감으로 생각합니다.
억지로 말한다면 우리 작가들 중의 李箕永씨의 「故鄕」과 같은 작품은 다른 나라 작가의 작품에 비하야 그리 손색없는 작품이라고 생각합니다.
물론 최근 싸베-트聯邦에 있어서 문학적 달성의 최고의 典型을 保持하고 있는 쇼로호프의 『開拓된 處女地』와 같은 작품과는 대비할 수가 없지만 그 농촌현실에 대한 형상화의 진실성은 결코 싸베-트聯邦 이외의 다른 나라의 작가들보다 못하지 않다고 생각합니다.
그러나 여기서 우리는 조선적 특수성이 가저온 불가피적인 악영향과 그의 평가의 기준과의 분리를 超致하여서는 아니 될 것입니다.
웨그러냐 하면 우리는 英, 米, 露, 獨, 佛, 伊, 愛, 印 등 諸國의 문학자들보다도 一層 더 문화발전의 외부적 제약이 있는 까닭입니다.
이만 간단히 답합니다.

「촉새가 황새」 따르는 格

閔丙徽
1. 이 문제는 너무 광대한 문제인 만큼 대답하기에 좀 거북한 감이 있다.
아직 외국에 비하야 그 해ㅅ수를 30년 밖에 갖지 못한 조선문단이 몇 천년 몇 백년의 나이를 먹은 외국과 이 수준을 비하게 된다는 것은 『촉새가 황새』를 따르는 것이 아닌가? 생각한다.
그러나 드르니깐 朝鮮人으로 姜鏞訖씨라는 분이 米洲에서 작가적 이름을 빛내고 있고 東京文壇에서 張赫宙씨 東京의 작가들과 어깨를 견우고 있으니 우리보다 문학운동이 훨신 긴- 그분들에 비하야 오히려 뛰어나는 점이 있지 않을까 생각하기도 한다.
그렇다고 우리는 이 개인 몇 사람이 어학적인 才操를 가지고서 해외문단에 海外文으로 몇 개의 작품을 발표했다고 그 수준이 그 땅의 문학수준에 도달했다고는 도저히 볼 수 없다.<320>
문단 전체로서의 작가들이 세계적으로 문제를 제기할 만한 작품을 쓴다거나 朝鮮人 작가들의 작품이 외국인 작가와 같이 문학의 형식과 내용을 완전히 가춘 뒤에 여러 나라 작품과 比準해 본 뒤에 수준의 高下를 결정할 수 있을 것이다.
다만 일시적으로 한편의 걸작을 내어놓은 작가가 있어서 同似한 외국인의 작가의 작품과 比準해 보고 그보다-나은 것이라고 문학수준이 同樣으로 되는 것이라고는 도저히 말할 수 없다.
외국인을 들어 말해 본다면 『유-고』가 『레미제라블』이란 걸작을 내어 놓았고 『쒝쓰피어』가 『함레트』를 썻으며 『쫄라』가 『난나』를 쓰고 『입센』이 『노라』를 썼다고-이 사람의 작품 전부가 걸작은 될 수는 없다.
그 사람들의 일생을 통해서 나오는 몇 편의 작품이 걸작이 되었으므로-그들을 명작가로 이름하는 것이다- 그만큼-年조가 많은 나라일수록 문학작품에 많은 걸작이 나올 수 있을 것이요 걸작이 많으면 많을수록- 그 나라의 문학수준은 높어 가는 것이다.
그런만큼-아직 조선 문학은 세계적 수준에 도달한 작가가 없고 또는 現下의 정세로서는 그러한 작가가 있어도 도저히 그 기능을 발휘할 XX가 없는 것이다. 그런만큼- 이것을 나는 아직도 미래의 문제라고 본다. 그리고-그 수준에 達하려고 애쓰는 몇 작가들의 정열만은 가장 기쁜 현상으로 보는 동시-이러한 시기에 도망해 버리는 大家라는 이들이 증오스럽기도 하다.
2. 春園, 東仁, 想涉, 등은 작품을 만들다가 野談으로 가버렸고 몇몇 中堅들은 작품을 쓴다느니보다 작품 팔려고 하는 데 失敗가 있다. 그러나 그 중에 우리가 외국인에 비할 작품을 제작한 작가를 2, 3인 찾을 수 있으니 소설로 民村 李箕永이요 시로 林和일 것이다. 물론-XX적 입장이 다름에 따라-서로 相異된 안목을 가지고 있을 것이나 民村의 『鼠火』나 『故鄕』, 林和의 여러 편의 시를 읽고서 그의 건전한 예술에는 누구나 경의를 표하게 되는 것이다.
최근 나는 『쇼-로프』의 2, 3편의 작품을 읽었다- 그것을 읽으면서 民村의 「고향」「鼠火」를 연상했던 것이다.
地方과 風俗이 다른 문제가 붙을 것이온데 民村의 농민문학도-「쇼-로프」에 도달할 날이 그 얼마의 시기를 要하지 않으리라고 생각했다!
그리고 시에 있어서는 잘 모르지만 林和의 시로는 東京文壇에서 문제되는 몇 시인과 그 작품 수준이 떠러지지 않을 것으로 생각한다.<321>

我文壇 歷史 쩌름을 歎

金珖燮
奇異하게도 최근 조선 문단의 일부에는 조선 문학의 외국에의 소개 번역 내지 세계 문학의 계열에서의 水準 如何를 논의하려는 경향이 보인다.
그래서 삼천리 2월호에 의하면 해외에 번역하고 십흔 작품에 따른 작가가 近 20명에 達하는 듯하다. 이 영예에 나는 暫間 박수를 멈추는 아량업는 者일런지는 몰라도 마라손과 권투에 대한 그것보담 극히 위태롭다. 나는 새삼스러히 문학도 권투나 마라손 갓치 速成速達될 수 잇는 一種이기를 祈願해 본다.
뽁싱의 역사는 짤으다.
육체의 역사는 오랫서도 우리의 마라손의 역사는 짤으다.
그래도 능히 세계적 선수가 등장되다.
30년의 新文學運動의 역사-이것은 서양문학을 日本 內地를 통하야 輸入한 경과에 불과하다. 챰피온은 누구냐?
가령 한편의 抒情詩를 완성한 시인이 업지 안코 한편의 단편소설을 완성한 작가가 업지 안타하자.
그리고 세계문학의 과거는 그만두고 현존한 데서 그 수준을 보자.
쇼-翁, H·G·웰즈, 죠이스, 헉스레-, 안드레·지-드, 포올·바레리. 프루-스트, 로만·로-랑, 골키, 타골翁, 업튼·싱크레이, 싱크레이·루이스… 등등 이 수준에 達할, 이 會合에 참여될 우리 작가가 누구인가?
나는 나의 자만심으로 말미아마 세계의 4, 5流의 시인, 소설가를 꺼내여서 우리 문학 내지 문단의 일류와 비교하고저 할 수는 업다. 이 偏狹한 단점을 헤아려 줄 수 잇다면 貴社에서 문의한 제 2의 답안―어느 시대의 어느 작가의 어느 작품이 우리의 어느 작가의 어느 작품과 엇더한가 하는 優劣 長短 美不美의 비교대조에 흥미업는 필자 자신을 憐愍히 녁일 수 잇스리라고 밋는다.
마지막으로 이것은 論이 아니고 感想된 答文임을 謝한다.

水準을 規定하고 십지 안타

沈熏
1. 歐米 諸國은 물론, 동양 어느 한 나라의 문학에도 精通하지<322> 못한 小生으로서는 조선 문학과의 수준을 규정할 엄두가 나지를 않습니다.
2. 될 수 잇는대로 다른 분의 작품도 읽습니다만은 아직 彼此의 우열을 논의할 자격이 없습을 스스로 부끄러히 생각합니다. 過大, 過小, 평가를 아울러 삼가야 할 줄 알기 때문이외다. 以上.

李箕永씨의 『인간수업』과 「셀봔테스」의 『동, 키호데』

宋影
1. 今日의 조선 문학은 아즉 완성 도중에 있아오나 역시 선진 문학의 나라의 외국 문학과 비하야 그리 비관할만치 낮은 수준에 있지는 않다고 봄니다.
나는 돌오혀 그 반대로 어늬 정도까지 높은 수준도 갖엇다고 봄니다.
대개 한 나라 한 사회의 문학의 생성은 그 경제적, 정치적 영향에 큰 관계를 갖엇으나 똑같은 실력과 가치가 있는 문학으로써도 그 사회가 가진 정치적 연관성으로 말미암아서 더 평가가 되고 덜 평가가 되는 수가 있음니다.
朝鮮의 문학이 비교적 세계적으로 문제가 안이되는 점은 조선 문학이 갖인 『自體의 不足』보다도 조선 문학이 탄생되는 조선 사회의 환경관계에 있다고 봄니다. 만일 우리들의 작품이 가진 언어가 XX的으로 무력한 朝鮮말이 아니요 좀더- XX的으로 강대한 배경을 갖인 英語나 獨語이었을 것 같으면 반드시 더-크게 성명을 세계문단에 떨지였으리라고 생각함니다.
소위 걸작이라는 외국작품을 읽을 때 우리 조선 작품만 못한 拙作이 많은 것을 발견할 때에는 一種 苦笑를 不禁하는 바임니다.
그러나 千仞아래에 잠자든 우리문학도 萬里長空에 飛翔할 때도 있겠지요.
다만 문제는 점 더- 큰 위대한 창조적 활동으로써 조선 문학을 빛내여 보겠다는 결심과 실천이 우리들의 당면과제일 뿐이 아닌가 함니다.
2. 졸지에 생각이 나지 않으나 지금 中央日報에 連載되고 있는 畏友 民村의 『人間修業』이 그 표현형식에 있어서 400년전 스페인 文豪 셀봔테스의 대표작 『동키호데』와 흡사하다는 것을 말하고 싶음니다.<323>
셀봔테스는 당대 스페인 사회가 심취되여 있든 전통적 봉건의식, 즉, 시대의 뒤떠러진 武士通思想을 痛擊하고 戱諧하고 諷刺하노라고,
『武者修業』의 길을 떠난 동,키호데를 묘사하였음니다.
民村도 역시 현대 조선 사회가 가지고 있는 전통적 의식, 兼하야 歪曲된 현대 一部的 哲學思想을 역시 痛罵하고 諷刺하노라고 『人間修業』의 길을 떠나 『현호』를 묘사하였음니다.
이 『人間修業』이 아즉 끝나지 않었음으로 그 歸結이 엇지될는지는 몰으나 지금까지 전개된 사실과 또는 스스로 풍부한 伏線이 작품 밑에서 躍動되는 것을 보와서 推察하면 반드시 그 귀결은 적극성 띄워지리라고 생각됨니다.
동,키호데의 진실한 狂態는 그때 사회의 惡風을 어느 정도까지 一掃하였지만 民村의 『현호』는 현대의 『그릇된 哲理』를 矯正만 하는데에 끝이지 않고 점 더 나아서 새로운 哲理가 하로밥븨 再健되게 하는 動因도 되리라고 생각함니다.

我文壇 總集成은 아직 貧弱

金晋燮
한 문단의 수준을 결정하는 표준은 소수의 우수한 작가 속에 구할 것이 아니오. 문단을 구성하고 잇는 대다수의 成員 속에 비로소 구할 수 잇는 것이라고 나는 생각하는 까닭으로 조선 문학의 세계적 수준론은 잠시 保留하여 두는 것이 지극히 맛당할 것 같이 보이오. 이리하야 우리가 전체적으로 조선 문학이란 것의 總集成을 한번 考量하여 볼 때 一團으로서의 조선 문인이 세계문단에서 어들 터인 평균점수는 확실히 落第를 면치 못하리라는 우울한 결론에 우리는 도달할 수 밖에 없소. 이것은 물론 조선 문단에 우수한 分子가 업슴으로서가 아니오. 아즉은 一家에 達치 못한 稚拙한 分子가 大部를 占하고 잇기 때문이겟지요. 그리하야 물론 또 낙제를 당하는 것은 우리 朝鮮만이 아니겟지요. 웨ㄴ하면 오늘날 소위 세계문학이라 하는 것은 세계가 가질 수 잇는 모든 문학을 總括하야 비로소 될 수 잇는 것이지만 그것의 支柱가 되여 잇는 나라는 어데어데냐 하면 그것은 주로 英, 佛, 獨, 露, 伊, 米의 6大 文化國에 항상<324> 제한되여 잇는 觀을 呈하야 그 이외의 모든 羣小國은 一般으로 수준에 잇서서는 놉지 못하나 소수의 우수한 천재를 간혹 출현식힘으로 의하야 세계문단에 참가하는 드문 光榮을 가지는 까닭이다. 이것은 결코 어렵게 생각할 것이 아니오. 세계인으로서의 朝鮮人의 수준을 가지고 생각하여 본다 하여도 문제는 동일하오. 세계인으로서 수준에 도달한, 아니 그 이상의 朝鮮人이 업다는 것이 아니요. 전체로 보아 모든 朝鮮人의 평균수준이 우수한 문화국의 그것에 達치 못한 것을 나는 말하고 십소. 수준의 문제는 小數人의 문제가 아니오. 실로 全民X의 문제인가 하오. 이런 점에서 우리는 문학만이 아니라 모든 것에 잇서서 한사람의 수준이상을 渴望하야 마지안음보담은 얼마나 만히 民X的 수준의 향상을 요구하는지 알 수 업소. 실로 일반적 수준의 향상 속에서라야만 수준의 개인적 突破는 잘 圖謀될 수 잇기 때문이요. 조선 문학 속에서 설사 최고 수준에 속할 무엇을 들고 나선다 하드래도 그러므로 나는 아즉은 해외의 著名한 작품에 대비식혀 그 우열을 논할 용기는 가질 수 업소. 우리는 우리가 가질 수 잇는 최고 수준을 자랑키 위해 우리가 피할 수 업는 최저 수준을 부끄러워하고 십소.
2월 7일

兒童이 成人과 身長 견우기

林和
이하 간단히 貴問에 답함니다.
1. 첫재로 諸外國文學의 예술적 사상적 수준에 대하야 우리 현대 문학의 그것을 견주어 본다는 幻想의 묵어운 짐을 나는 도저히 즐거움을 가지고 두 억개에 질 수는 업슴니다.
외국 문학에 그것을 事大的으로 誇張하는 論者에 잇서서나 또 우리 문학의 수준을 實價 이상으로 놉히금 치는 분에 잇서서나 아마도 그들의 뜨거워진 머리를 식힐 것은 오즉 우리 문학의 現狀 그것이라 밋슴니다.
물론 雜多한 諸國에 문학에 대한 전문적 교양을 그 한곳에도 갓지 못한 小生과 갓흔 者의 감히 容喙을 許하지 안흐리라 밋는 바이오나 拙見갓해서는 이러한 비교문학적 수준론이란 아즉 자라는 兒童과 임의 장성한 成人의 身長을 대어보는 것과 갓흔 노름인가 함니다.
웨그러냐 하면 우리 문학은 아즉 幼年期에 잇는 것이오. 그남아 不可形言에 酷烈한 璟境 가운데 잇는 것이여서 감히<325> 발달한 문화 국가의 그것에 비교하는 것은 그 결과가 스스로瞭然한 때문임니다.
中國, 혹은 印度 기타의 後進諸國에 비하야 우리 문학에 수준이 그리 떠러지지 안는다고 해야 만족할 것이 무엇이겟슴니까. 물론 朝鮮의 현대 문학 중 우수한 者 약간은 印度나 中國 등에 비하야 그리 떠러젓다고야 못 할 것임니다. 세계적 의미에 잇어 우리 문학이란, X治的, 언어적 특성 때문에 세계화되지 못하고 잇다고도 말할 수 잇는 것이나 이것은 우리의 즐거움도 아니오 또 북그러움도 아님이다.
다른 외국에 보잘 것 업는 작품과 우리 우수작을 비교하면 물론 우리는 一種의 우월감을 희롱할 수야 잇는 것임니다. 그러나 이러한 짓을 할야면야 우리는 굿해여 작가나 비평가가 될 필요까지는 업슬가 함니다.
그러고 往往 우리 문학의 不振, 미발달을 痛嘆하는 國際主義者를 때로 대할 수 잇는 것인데 이러한 것은 부질업는 杞憂임니다.
우리는 何等 비관할 필요가 업슴니다. 생각해 보십시오. 제 땅의 문자라고 생긴 지가 불과 幾百歲에 지내지 못하고  그 말쓴 예술 문학이라는 것이 비롯한지 20세 미만에 무슨 예술적 달성을 바라겟슴니까! 더욱이 문학을 나흘 생활환경, 사상 등의 토양이 朝鮮과 갓치 비참한 곳에서 무슨 아름다운 꽃을 발서 바랄 수가 잇슴니까?
하물며 문학계라는 곳에 적지 안흔 數爻의 작가가 왕성히 이 토양으로부터 떠나가고 잇는 현재, 우리의 기대는 一層 局限되는 것임니다.
풍부한 생활의 토양 우에서 우리들의 보다 조흔 생활의 창조를 위하야 봉사하는 문학만이 장래 開花할 생명의 씨를 내포하고 있는 것임니다.
작가이든 비평가이든 결국 아모 소리말고 오는날의 眞正하 조선 문학의 開花를 위한 肥料일 것에 만족하면서 勤勉할 外 他道는 업슴니다.
2. 이 항목에 대하야는 輕輕히 붓을 놀님은 우리 작가나 또 외국 작가에게나 共히 비평의 禮儀를 직히기 어려운 것으로 단지 어린 우리 문학의 성장을 위하야 엇더한 先進諸國에 비하야서도 아즉 문자그대로 소년임을 자각함으로 割愛키로 함니다.
多謝<326>
<308-326>